The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 2 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 2 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  TrafEques  and

Discoveries  of  the  EngHsh  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume  II

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND COMPANY FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIII

PhDiD^rBTiire  hy  Annan  A  B  orb.  Glasgow.

SIR HUGH WILLOUGHBY.

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
TrafRques  &  Discoveries

of  the  EngHsh Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these  1600  Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME II

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMIII

loVS'S'^

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  second  volume

• made  to  the  Northand  Northeast  quarters  ;

with  the  Ambassages,  Treatises,  Priviledges,

Letters,  and  other  observations,  depending

upon  the  Voyages  of  this  second  Volume :

A  Catalogue  of  the  great  Masters  of  Prussia,  .  .  I

The  Oration  or  speach  of  the  Ambassadours  sent  from
Conradus  de  Zolner,  Master  general!  of  the  land  of
Prussia,  unto  Richard  the  second,  king  of  England,  .  l  z

An  agreement  made  by  the  Ambassadours  of  England  and

Prussia,  confirmed  by  king  Richard  the  second, .  i8

7

The  letters  of  Conradus  de  Jungingen,  Master  generall  of

Prussia,  unto  Rich,  the  second, .  .  .  . 25

A  briefe  relation  of  William  Esturmy  and  John  Kington,
concerning  "their  Ambassages  into  Prussia  and  to  the
Hans-townes,  ......  27

Certaine  Articles  of  complaint  exhibited  by  the  Livonians,  3  3

Other  complaints  exhibited  by  the  Cities  of  the  Hans,  .  34.

Compositions  and  Ordinances  concluded  betweene  the
Ambassadours  of  Prussia,  and  the  Chanceller  and
Treasurer  of  England,  Anno 1403, .  .  .  36

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  letters  of  the  Chanceller  and  Treasurer  of  England
unto  Conradus  de  Jungingen,  master  generall  of
Prussia,  .......  38

The  letters  of  king  Henry  the  fourth  unto  Conradus  de
Jungingen,  the  master  generall  of  Prussia  for  enter-
course  of  traffique, .  .  .  .  .  .41

The  letters  of  Conradus  de  Jungingen  unto  king Henry

the  fourth,  ....... 44.

An  agreement  made  betweene  king  Henry  the  fourth,  and

Conradus  de  Jungingen, .....  47

An  agreement  betweene  king  Henry  the  fourth,  and  the

Hans-townes, .  .  .  .  .  .  '55

A  testimonie  out  of  Albertus  Krantzius  concerning  the
surprise  of  Bergen  in  Norway,  wherein  21.  houses  of
the  English  merchants  were  burnt, ...  68

The grievances and offences whereat the merchants of

the  Hans  found  themselves  agrieved, ...  72

A  letter  of  Henry  the  fourth  king  of  England  unto  Con-
radus de  Jungingen,  Master  generall  of  Prussia, .  83

A  letter  of  Werneherus  de  Tettingen  commander  in  Elbing
unto  sir  William  Sturmy  Ambassadour  unto  king  Henry
the  fourth  :  Together  with  an  other  letter  of  king
Henry  the  fourth,  unto  Ulricus  de  Jungingen,  master
of  Prussia, ....... 85

The  letters  of  Ulricus  de  Jungingen  master  generall  of
Prussia,  signifying  unto  king  Henry  the  4.  that  he
was  contented  with  certeine  agreements  concluded
by  his  messengers  at  Hage, .  .  .  .91

The  letters  of  king  Henry  the  fourth  unto  Ulricus  de
Jungingen,  wherein  he  doth  absolutely  approve  the
foresaid  conference  holden  at  Hage, . .  .95

vi

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A new  concord betweene king Henry the fourth, and

Ulricus  de  Jungingen, .....  98

A  Charter  of  king  Henry  the  fourth,  graunted  in  the  fifth
yeere  of  his  raigne  unto  the  English  merchants  resident
in  the  parts  of  Prussia, .  .  .  .  .106

A  note  touching  the  mighty  ships  of  king  Henry  the  fift,
taken  out  of  a  Chronicle  in  the  Trinitie  Church  of
Winchester, .  .  .  .  ,  .  .111

A  branch  of  a  Statute  made  in  the  eight  yeere  of  Henry
the  6.  for  the  trade  to  Norway,  Sweveland,  Den-
marke  and  Finmarke, ,  .  .  .  .111

Another  branch  of  a  Statute  made  in  the  10.  yeere  of
king  Henry  the  sixt  concerning  the  state  of  English
merchants  in  the  dominions  of  the  king  of  Denmarke, 113

Libellus  de  politia conservativa Maris. Or,  The pollicy

of  keeping  the  Sea,  .  .  .  .  .114

A  large  Charter  granted  by  king  Edward  the  fourth,  in  the
second  yere  of  his  raigne,  to  the  English  merchants
residing  in  the  Netherland, .  .  .  .147

A  perswasion  of  Robert  Thome  merchant  of  "Bristol,  and
dwelling  long  in  Sivil  in  Spaine,  to  king  Henry  the
eight  of  noble  memory,  to  set  out  and  further  Dis-
coveries toward  the  North,  .  .  .  .159

The  discourse  of  the  foresaid  Robert  Thome,  written  to
Doctour  Leigh  the  Kings  Ambassadour  in  Spaine
touching  that  matter, .  .  .  .  .164

A briefe treatise of the Emperour of Moscovia his

genealogie, .  .  .  ...  .182

The  excellent  orders  and  instructions  of  Sebastian  Cabot
given  to  sir  Hugh  Willoughby  and  his  Fleete  in
their  voyage  intended  for  Cathay, .  .  . 195

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The names of  the twelve Counsellers appointed in sir

Hugh  Willoughbies  voyage, .... 206

The  letters  of  king  Edward  the  sixt,  written  at  that  time
to  all  the  Kings,  Princes,  and  other  Potentates  of
the  Northeast, ...... 206

The  voyage  of  sir  Hugh  Willoughby  knight,  wherein  he
unfortunately  perished  at  Arzina  Reca  in  Lapland,
Anno 1553,  .  .  .  .  •  .212

The names of  the Ships, Captains, Mariners,  and  other

officers  of  that  first  worthy  enterprise,  .  .  . 212

The  othe  ministred  to  the  Captaine  of  the  Fleete,  . 215

The  othe  ministred  to  the  Masters  of  the  ships, .  . 216

Njhe  voyage  of  Richard  Chanceller  Pilote  major,  the  first
discoverer  by  sea  of  the  kingdome  of  Moscovia,
Anno 1553, 224.

A  testimonie  of  Richard  Eden,  concerning  Clement  Adams

his  discourse  of  Richard  Chancellers  voyage,  .  . 239

The  letters  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia  sent  to  king  Ed-
ward the  sixt,  by  Richard  Chanceller,  .  . 271

The  coynes,  waights  and  measures  used  in  Russia,  . 273

The  letters  of  King Philip and Queene Mary to Ivan

Vasilivich  the  Emperor  of  Russia, .  .  . 278

The Commission given to  the merchants  Agents  resiant

in  Russia, .  .  .  •  .  .  .281

The othe ministred to the servants of the Moscovie
"v.

company, ....... 290

The letter of George Killingworth the first Agent in

Russia,  written  to  the  Company,  .  .  .291

viii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  first  Privileges  graunted  by  the  Emperour  of  Russia,

to  the  English  merchants,  .  .  .  .297

The  Charter  of  the  merchants  of  the  Moscovie  company-
granted  by  Queene  Mary,  .  .  .  .304

Instructions  given  to  the  Pursers  of  the  Moscovie  voyage, 317

The  voyage  of  Stephen  Burrough  toward  the  River  of
Ob,  intending  the  discovery  of  the  Northeast  passage,
Anno 1556,  .  .  .  .  .  . 322

The landing of  Richard Johnson among the Samoeds,

Anno 1556, 345

The strange discourse of Richard Johnson concerning

the  Samoeds,  .  .  .  .  .  .345

A  discourse  of  the  honourable  receiving  into  England
of  the  first  Ambassadour  from  the  Emperour  of
Russia,  .  .  .  .  .  .  '350

The  voyage  of  the  aforesaide  Stephen  Burrough  from
Colmogro  in  Russia  to  Wardhouse,  in  search  of
certaine  English  ships  not  heard-of  the  yeere  before,
Anno 1557, 363

Instructions  given  to  the  Masters  and  Mariners  of  the
ships  of  the  Moscovie  Company,  sayling  towards
the  Bay  of  S.  Nicolas,  Anno 1557, .  .  . 375

A  letter  of  the  Company  of  the  Moscovie  merchants  unto
their  Agents,  George  Killingworth,  Richard  Gray,
and  Henry  Lane  in  Russia, .  .  .  379

A  letter  of  M.  Thomas  Hawtree  to  the  Moscovie  Com-
panies Agent  M. Henry  Lane  at  Colmogro,  .  . 392

A  letter  of  M.  Richard  Gray,  one  of  the  first  Agents  of

the  Moscovie  Company,  to  M.  Henry  Lane  at  Mosco, 394
ix

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  letter  of  Thomas  Alcock  to  M.  Richard  Gray  and
Henry  Lane,  Agents  in  Moscovia  from  Tirwill  in
Poland, 396

A  letter  of  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  upon  his  returne  from

Boghar  to  M, Henry  Lane  resident  in  Vologda, . 400

s,  A letter of  the Moscovie Company to their  Agents in

>v  Russia, M. Henry Lane, Christopher Hudson, and

Thomas  Glover,  sent  in their  seventh  voyage to S

Nicolas, ......

Another  letter  to  the  aforesaid  parties,

The  maner  of  Justice  by  lotts  in Russia,  written by  M
Henry  Lane,  .....

401
407

411

The  voyage  of  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  into  Russia,  wherein
Osep  Napea,  first  Ambassadour  from  the  Emperour
of  Moscovia  to  Queene  Mary,  was  transported  into
his  Countrey,  Anno 1557,  •  •  •  • 413

The  description  of  Russia,  with  the  customes  and  maners

of  the  inhabitants,  .  ,  .  .  .425

The  voyage  of  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  from  the  Citie  of

Mosco  in  Russia  to  Boghar  in Bactria,  Anno 1558, 449

Notes  and  observations gathered by  Richard Johnson of

the  severall  wayes  from  Russia  to Cathay  over-land, 480

A  letter  of  Sigismund king of Polonia 1559. unto the

Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie, ,  .  .485

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir Hugh Willoughby,  .... Frontispiece

From  the  portrait  at  Wollaton  Hall,  by  permission  of
Lord  Middleton.

Map  of  the  World  by  Robert  Thorne, . . 176

From  the  very  rare  Divers  Voyages  touching  the  discoverie
of  America,  published by Richard  Hakluyt, 1582.

Ivan  Vasilowich,  Emperor  of  Russia,  .  . .192

From  an  old  woodcut  in  Early  Voyages  and  Travels  to
Russia  and  Persia.  (By  permission  of  the  Hakluyt
Society.)

King  Edward  VI,  granting  the  Charter  of  Bride-
well Palace  to  the  Citizens  of  London, , 208

From  the  engraving  by  George  Vertue  of  the  picture
in  the  Royal  Bridewell  Free  Hospital  :  the  kneeling
figure  receiving  the  charter  is  Sir  George  Barnes,
one  of  the  first  consuls  of  the  Russia  Company,

Sebastian  Cabot,  ....... 240

From  the  engraving  by  Rawle  of  the  '  Harford '
portrait,  formerly  attributed  to  Holbein,  This
portrait  was  destroyed  by  fire  in  1845.  The
robe  and  chain  worn  by  Cabot  are  supposed  to
be  his  official  dress  as  *  Governour  of  the
mysterie  and  companie  of  the  Marchants  adven-
turers for  the  discoverie  of  Regions,  Dominions,
Islands, and places unknowen,'

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Chart  of  Wardhouse  (Vard5), .  . . .416

From  De  Brfs  Collections  of  Travels  and  Voyages.  Petits
{Eastern)  Voyages,  Part  X.  Frankfort,  161 3.  This
chart  represents  Wardhouse  as  seen  by  John  Huighen
van  Llnschoten,  the  Dutch  traveller,  in  1594-5.

Map  of  Europe, 488

From  the  Theatrum  Orbis  Terrarum  of  Abraham  Qrtelius
1570.

Seal  of  the  Russia  Company, vc^t^^.

From  Early  Voyages  and  Travels  to  Russia  and  Persia,
edited  by  E.  Delmar  Morgan  and  C.  H.  Coote,
(By  permission  of  the  Hakluyt  Society.)

THE SECOND VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  the  North  and  North-east  quarters  of  the

World,  with  the  directions,  letters,  privileges

discourses,  and  observations  incident

to  the  same

A  Catalogue  of  the  great  Masters  of  the  Order
of  the  Dutch  knights,  commonly  called  the
Hospitalaries  of  Jerusalem :  and  what  great
exploites  every  of  the  saide  Masters  hath
atchieved,  either  in  conquering  the  land  of
Prussia,  or  in  taming  and  subduing  the
Infidels,  or  els  in  keeping  them  under  their
obedience  and  subjection,  taken  out  of
Munster.

He  order  of  the  Dutch  knights  had  their
first  original  at  Jerusalem  in  the  yere
of  our  Lorde  1 1 90.  within  the  Hospitall
of  the  blessed  Virgine  :  and  the  first
Master  of  the  saide  order  was  called
Henrie  of  Walpot,  under  whome  many
good  things,  and  much  wealth  and  riches
were  throughout  all  Germanie  and  Italic  procured  unto
the  order :  and  the  saide  Hospitall  was  removed  from
Jerusalem  unto  Ptolemais,  otherwise  called  Aeon,  and
the  foresaid  Order  grew  and  mightily  increased,  whereof
I  will  hereafter  discourse  more  at  large  in  my  Treatise
of  Syria.  Henrie  of  Walpot  deceased  in  the  yeere  of
Christ  1200.  The  2.  Master  was  Otto  of  Kerpen,  and
he  continued  Master  of  the  Order  for  the  space  of  sixe
yeeres.  The  3 .  was  Hermannus  Bart  a  godly  and  devout
person,  who  deceased  in  the  yeere  12 10.  being  interred
at  Aeon,  as  his  predecessors  were.  The  4.  was  Her-
mannus de  Saltza,  who  thirtie  yeeres  together  governed
the saide Order, and managed the first expedition of

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1239.

warre  against  the  infidels  of  Prussia,  and  ordained  another
Master  also  in  Prussia  to  bee  his  Deputie  in  the  same
Ensiferi  region. In  the  yeere  1239.  the  knights  of  the sword,

fratres.  ^^q travelled into Livonia to convert the inhabitants

thereof  unto  Christ,  seeing  they  were  not  of  sufficient
force  to  performe  that  enterprise,  and  that  their  enemies
increased  on  all  sides,  they  united  themselves  unto  the
famous  Order  of  the  Dutch  knights  in  Prussia,  that
their  worthie  attempt  might  bee  defended  and  promoted
by  the  aide  and  assistance  of  the  saide  Duch  knights.
The  first  war  ^^  ^^g  ygj-y  same  time  the  ensigne  of  the  crosse  was  !
ThTprlfsim  ex^lt^^  throughout  all  Germanie  against  the  Prussians,  '
infidels,  anno  and  a  great  armie  of  souldiers  was  gathered  together,
dom.  1239.  the  Burgrave  of  Meidenburg  being  generall  of  the  armie,
who  combining  themselves  unto  the  Dutch  knights,
joyned  battell  with  the  Infidels,  and  slew  about  five
hundred  Gentiles,  who  beforetime  had  made  horrible
invasions  and  in-roades  into  the  dominions  of  Christians,
wasting  all  with  fire  and  sword,  but  especially  the  land
of  Colm,  and  Lubonia,  which  were  the  Provinces  of
[I.  145.]  Conradus  Duke  of  Massovia.  Nowe,  the  foresaide
knights  having  made  so  huge  a  slaughter,  built  the  castle
of  Reden,  betweene  Pomerania  and  the  land  of  Colm,  and
so  by  degrees  they  gotte  footing  in  the  lande,  and  daylie
erected  more  castles,  as  namely,  Crutzburg,  Wissenburg,
Resil,  Bartenstein,  Brunsburg,  and  Heilsburg,  and  fur-
nished them  all  with  garrisons.  The  fift  Master  of  the
Order  was  Conradus  Landgravius,  the  brother  of  Lodo-
vick,  which  was  husband  unto  Ladie  Elizabeth.  This
Conradus,  by  his  fathers  inheritance,  gave  great  riches
and  possessions  unto  the  Order,  and  caused  Ladie
Elizabeth  to  be  interred  at  Marpurg,  within  the  religious
house  of  his  saide  Order.  Under  the  government  of
this  Master,  Aeon  in  the  lande  of  Palestina  was  subdued
unto  the  Saracens.  Moreover,  in  the  yeere  1254.  there
was  another  great  armie  of  Souldiers  prepared  against
Prussia,  by  the  Princes  of  Germanie.  For  Octacer,
alias Odoacer king of Bohemia, Otto Marques of

THE DUTCH KNIGHTS  ad.

1262.

Brandeburg,  the  Duke  of  Austria,  the  Marques  of
Moravia,  the  Bishops  of  Colen  and  of  Olmutz  came
marching  on  with  great  strength  of  their  Nobles  and
common  souldiers,  and  invading  the  lande  of  Prussia  in
the  Winter  season,  they  constrained  the  inhabitants
thereof  to  receive  the  Christian  faith,  and  to  become
obedient  unto  the  knights.  After  which  exploite,  by  the
advice  and  assistance  of  king  Odoacer,  there  was  a  castle
ibuilt  upon  a  certaine  hill  of  Samogitia,  which  immedi-
jately  after  grewe  to  be  a  great  citie,  being  at  this  day  the
jseate  of  the  Prince  of  Prussia :  and  it  was  called  by
(Odoacer  Kunigsberg,  that  is  to  say.  Kings  Mount,  or
(Mount  royall,  being  finished  in  the  yeere  1255.  Out
iof  this  fort  the  knights  did  bridle  and  restraine  the  furie
of  the  Infidels  on  all  sides,  and  compelled  them  to
obedience.  The  sixt  Master  was  called  Boppo  ab
Osterna,  under  whom  the  citie  of  Kunigsberg  was
built.  At  the  very  same  instant  the  knights  beeing
occupied  about  the  warre  of  Curland,  the  Prussians  The  Prussians
conspiring  together,  and  abandoning  the  Christian  faith,  ^-bandon
in  furious  maner  armed  themselves  against  ye  Christians,
defaced  and  burnt  down  Churches,  slew  Priests,  and  to
the  utmost  of  their  abilitie,  banished  all  faithful!  people.
The  report  of  which  misdemeanour  being  published
throughout  all  Germanic,  an  huge  armie  was  levied  and
sent  for  the  defence  and  succour  of  the  knights,  which
marching  into  the  land  of  Natan,  made  many  slaughters,
&  through  the  inconstancie  of  fortune  sometimes
woonne,  and  sometimes  lost  the  victorie.  Also  the
Infidels  besieged  these  three  castles,  namely,  Barsten-
stein,  Crutzberg  and  Kunigsberg,  and  brought  extreame
famine  upon  the  Christians  contained  within  the  saide
fortes.  Againe,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1262.  the
Earle  of  Juliers,  with  other  Princes  and  great  chivalrie
:ame  downe,  and  giving  charge  upon  the  Prussians,  put
three  thousand  of  them  to  the  edge  of  the  sworde.
A-fterward  the  Prussians  banding  themselves  together,
were  determined  to  spoile  the  castle  of  Kunigsberg,  but

3

Christianitie.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1262.

their  confederacie  being  disclosed,  they  had  the  repulse.
And  when  the  knightes  had  prevailed  against  them,  they
laide  in  pledges,  and  yet  for  all  that  were  not  afraid  to
breake  their  fidelitie.  For  upon  a  certaine  time,  after
they  had  given  divers  pledges,  they  slewe  two  noble
knights  of  the  Order,  and  so  by  that  meanes  incensed
the  principall  of  the  saide  order,  insomuch  that  they
caused  two  paire  of  galloues  to  be  set  up  besides  the
castle,  &  thirtie  of  the  Prussians  pledges  to  be  hanged
therupon.  Which  severitie  so  vexed  and  provoked  the
Prussians,  that  in  revenge  of  the  said  injury,  they  renewed
bloody  and  cruel  warres,  slew  many  Christians,  yea,
and  put  40.  knights  with  the  master  of  the  Order,
and  the  Marshal,  unto  the  edge  of  the  sword.  There
was  at  the  same  instant  in  Pomerania  a  Duke  called
Suandepolcus,  professing  the  Christian  faith,  but  being
joyned  in  league  with  the  Prussians,  he  indevoured  for
many  yeeres,  not  onely  to  expell  the  knights,  but  all
Christians  whatsoever  out  of  the  lande  of  Prussia,  in
which  warre  the  foresaide  knights  of  the  Order  suffered
many  abuses.  For  they  lost  almost  all  their  castles,  and
a  great  number  of  themselves  also  were  slaine.  This
Suandepolcus  put  in  practise  many  lewde  attempts  against
religion.  For  albeit  he  was  baptized,  he  did  more  mis-
chiefe  then  the  very  Infidels  themselves,  untill  such  time
as  the  knights  being  assisted  by  the  Princes  of  Germanic,
brought  the  saide  Duke  and  the  Prussians  also  into  such
straights,  that  (maugre  their  heads)  they  were  constrained
to  sue  for  peace.  Afterward  Swandepolcus  lying  at  the
point  of  death,  admonished  his  sonnes  that  they  should
not  doe  any  injurie  unto  the  knights  of  the  order,
affirming  that  himselfe  never  prospered  so  long  as  he
urged  warre  against  them.  Howbeit  his  sonnes  for  a
certaine  time  observed  not  their  fathers  counsel,  untill
at  length  one  of  them  named  Warteslaus,  was  created
one  of  the  Order,  and  the  other  called  Samborus
bestowed  by  legacie  his  goods  and  possessions  upon  the
saide  Order,  receiving  maintenance  and  exhibition  from

THE DUTCH KNIGHTS  ad.

1282.

the  saide  Order,  during  the  terme  of  his  life.  It  for-
tuned also  under  the  government  of  the  foresayde
Master  Boppo,  that  one  Syr  Martine  a  Golin  beeing
accompanied  with  another  knight,  went  into  the  countrey
to  see  howe  the  Prussians  were  imployed.  And  meeting
with  three  Prussians,  they  slew  two,  and  the  thirde
they  reserved  to  guide  them  the  directest  way.  But
this  guide  betrayed  them  into  their  enemies  handes.
Which  when  they  perceived,  they  slewe  the  Traytour.
Then  five  Prussian  horsemen  came  riding  and  tooke  [I.  146.]
them,  delivering  them  bounde  to  the  custodie  of  two.
And  the  other  three  pursued  the  horses  of  the  two,
which  broke  loose  in  the  time  of  the  fraye.  And  they
tarying  somewhat  long,  the  other  two  woulde  have
beheaded  the  two  Knightes  in  the  meane  season.  And  A  memorable
as  one  of  them  was  striking  with  his  drawen  sworde,  ^^'''^^^g^^^-
at  the  necke  of  Sir  Martine,  hee  saide  unto  them  :
Sirs,  you  doe  unwisely  in  that  you  take  not  off  my
garment  before  it  bee  defiled  with  blood.  They  there-
fore loosing  the  cordes  wherewith  hee  was  bounde,  to
take  off  his  garment,  set  his  armes  more  at  libertie.
Which  Syr  Martine  well  perceiving  reached  his  keeper
such  a  boxe,  that  his  sworde  fell  to  the  grounde.
Which  hee  with  all  speede  taking  up,  slewe  both  the
keepers  and  unbounde  his  fellowe  Knight.  Moreover,
seeing  the  other  three  Prussians  comming  furiously  upon
them,  with  stoute  couragious  hearts  they  made  towarde
the  saide  Prussians,  and  slew  them,  and  so  escaped  the
danger  of  death.  The  seventh  great  Master  was  Hanno
de  Sangershusen,  who  deceased  in  the  yeere  one  thousand
two  hundreth  seventie  five.  The  eight  was  Hartmannus
ab  Heldringen  who  deceased  in  the  yeere  1282.  The
ninth  was  Burckardus  a  Schuvenden  beeing  afterwarde
made  knight  of  the  order  of  Saint  Johns.  The  tenth
was  Conradus  a  Feuchtuvang:  under  this  man  the  Citie
3f  Aeon  in  Palestina  was  sacked  by  the  Soldan,  and
manie  people  were  slayne.  The  Templars  which  were
therein  returned home  out  of  Fraunce,  where  they  had

5

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1282.

great  revenewes.  The  Knightes  of  Saint  John,  who  also
had  an  Hospitall  at  Aeon,  changed  their  place,  and  went
into  the  Isle  of  Cyprus,  and  from  thence  departing
unto  Rhodes,  they  subdued  that  Islande  unto  themselves.
Nowe  the  Dutch  Knights  abounded  with  wealth  and
possessions  throughout  all  Germanie,  beeing  Lordes  of
a  good  part  of  Prussia,  Livonia,  and  Curland,  whose
chiefe  house  was  then  at  Marpurg,  till  such  time  as  it
was  remooved  unto  Marieburg,  a  Towne  of  Prussia.
The  eleventh  great  Master  was  Godfrey  Earle  of
Hohenloe.  Under  this  man  the  knights  sustained  a
great overthrowe in Livonia : but having strengthned

4000.  their  armie,  they  slewe  neere  unto  Rye  foure  thousande
of  their  enemies.  The  twelfth  Master  was  Sifridus  a
Feuchtuvang.  Under  this  man,  the  principall  house  of
the  Order  was  translated  from  Martpurg  to  Marieburg,
which  in  the  beginning  was  established  at  Aeon,  and
from  thence  was  remooved  unto  Venice,  and  from  Venice
unto  Martpurg.  This  Sifridus  deceased  in  the  yeere
1 341.  The  thirteenth  Master  was  called  Charles  Beffart
of  Triers.  This  man  built  a  fort  upon  the  river  of
Mimmel,  and  it  was  named  Christmimmel.  The  foure-
teenth  was  Warnerus  ab  Orsele,  whome  a  certaine  knight
of  the  Order  slewe  with  his  sworde.  The  15.  was
Ludolphus  Duke  of  Brunswick,  who  built  the  Towne
of  Ylgenburg,  and  deceased  1352.  The  sixteenth  was
Theodoricus  Earle  of  Aldenborg,  and  hee  built  the
Towne  of  Bartenstein.  The  seventeenth  was  Ludolphus
sirnamed  King.  The  eighteenth  was  Henrie  a  Tusimer.
The  nineteenth  Winricus  a  Knoppenrodt.  In  this  mans
time  the  knights  took  the  king  of  the  Lithuanians
named  Kinstut  captive,  and  kept  him  prisoner  in  Marie
burg  halfe  a  yeere,  but  by  the  helpe  of  a  servaunt,
having  broken  out  of  the  Castle,  hee  escaped  away  by
night.  But  fearing  that  hee  was  layde  waite  for  in  al]
places,  hee  left  his  horse,  and  went  on  foote  through
unknowen  pathes.  In  the  day  time  hee  hidde  himselfe
in secrete places,  and in the  night hee continued hi

6

THE DUTCH KNIGHTS  ad.

141 0.
journey  untill  hee  came  unto  Massovia.  But  all  the
Knightes  joye  was  turned  into  sorrowe,  after  they  had
lost  so  great  an  enemie.  The  twentieth  grand  Master
was  Conradus  Zolner  of  Rotenstein.  The  one  and  twen-
tieth Conradus  Walenrod.  The  two  and  twentieth  ^^"  ^^»  -^^"^
Conradus  a  Jungingen,  who  deceased  in  the  yeere  one  ^"jij^^^j^/^'^f^^
thousand  foure  hundreth  and  seven.  The  three  and  iecond.
twentieth  Ulricus  a  Jungingen.  This  man  dyed  in  battell
in  the  yeere  one  thousand  foure  hundreth  and  tenne  :
which  battell  was  fought  against  Vladislaus  Father  of
Casimire.  Both  partes  had  levied  mightie  and  huge
forces  :  unto  the  Polonians  the  Lithuanians  and  the
Tartars  had  joyned  themselves,  over  whome  one  Vitol-
dus  was  captaine  :  the  Dutch  Knights  had  taken  up
Souldiers  out  of  all  Germanie.  And  when  eache  armie
had  encamped  themselves  one  within  twentie  furlongs
of  another,  (hoping  for  victorie  and  impatient  of  delay)
the  great  Master  of  the  Prussians  sent  an  Herault  to
denounce  warre  unto  the  King,  and  immediately  (alarme
beeing  given)  it  is  reported  that  there  were  in  both
armies  fourtie  thousand  horsemen  in  a  readinesse.  Vladis-
laus commaunded  the  Lithuanians  and  the  Tartars  to
give  the  first  onsette,  and  placed  the  Polonians  in  the
rerewarde  of  the  battell  :  on  the  contrarie  side,  the
Prussians  regarded  least  of  all  to  reserve  any  strong
troupes  behinde,  which  might  rescue  such  as  were  wearie,
and  renewe  the  fight,  if  neede  shoulde  require,  but  set
forwarde  the  flower  and  chivalrie  of  all  his  Souldiers  in
the  verie  forefront  of  the  battell.  The  charge  beeing
given  certaine  unarmed  Tartars  &  Lithuanians  were  slaine  [I.  147.]
handsmooth  :  howbeit  the  multitude  pressed  on,  neither
durst  the  fearefull  Polonians  turne  their  backes,  and  so
a  cruell  battell  was  fought  upon  the  heapes  of  dead
carkases.  The  combate  continued  a  long  time,  terrible
slaughters  were  committed,  and  the  Lithuanians  and
Tartars  were  slaine  like  sheepe.  But  when  newe  and
fresh  enemies  continually  issued  foorth,  the  Dutch  knights
being wearied, began to fight more faintly. Which

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1 410.

Vladislaus  no  sooner  perceived,  but  in  all  haste  hee  sends
forwarde  his  mightie  and  well  armed  bande  of  Polonians,
who  suddenly  breaking  in  renewed  the  skirmish.  The
Dutch  were  not  able  to  withstand  the  furie  of  the  fresh
troupes  (great  oddes  there  is  betweene  the  wearied  Soul-
dier  and  him  that  comes  in  a  fresh)  insomuch  that  the
knights  with  their  people  were  constrained  to  flee.  The
master  of  the  Order  seeing  his  souldiers  give  way  unto
the  enemie,  gathered  a  companie  together,  and  withstoode
him  in  the  face,  howbeit  himselfe  was  slaine  for  his  labour,
the  flight  of  his  people  proved  greater  and  more  dis-
honourable, neither  did  the  Dutch  cease  to  flee,  so  long
as  the  Polonian  continued  the  chase.  There  fell  on
the  Knights  partie  manie  thousands  of  men,  and  the
Polonians  gotte  not  the  victorie  without  great  spoile
and  damage.  This  battell  was  foughten  in  regard  of
the  bounds  of  regions  in  the  yeere  14 10.  All  Prussia
following  the  happie  successe  of  the  Polonian  king
(except  Marieburg  onely)  yeelded  themselves  unto  him
being  Conquerour.  Howbeit  the  Emperour  Sigismund
taking  up  the  quarell,  peace  was  ordained  between  the
knights  and  Polonia,  and  a  league  concluded,  certaine
summes  of  money  also  were  paide  unto  the  Polonian,.
Prussia  was  restored  unto  the  knights,  neither  was  the
saide  order  disturbed  in  the  possession  of  their  lands
untill  the  time  of  Friderick.  The  24.  Master  was
Henrie  Earle  of  Plaen.  This  man  being  deposed  by
the  Chapter,  was  7.  yeres  holden  prisoner  at  Dantzik.
The  25.  Master  was  Michael  Kuchenmeister,  that  is,
master  of  the  Cookes  of  Sternberg.  The  26.  was
Paulus  a  Russdorff;  The  27.  Conradus  ab  EUerichs-
hausen.  This  man,  after  divers  and  sundry  conflicts
betweene  the  Dutch  knights,  and  the  king  of  Polonia,
concluded  a  perpetuall  league  with  the  saide  king.
Howbeit  the  citizens  of  Dantzig  secretely  going  about
to  obteyne  their  freedome,  that  the  foresaide  Order
might  have  no  dominion  over  them,  made  sute  unto
the Polonian king to be their Protector. This

THE DUTCH KNIGHTS  ad.

1455-
Conradus  died  in  the  yeere  1450.  The  28.  was
Lewis  ab  EUerichshausen.  Under  this  man  there  arose
a  dangerous  sedition  in  Prussia  betweene  the  chiefe
cities  and  the  knights  of  the  Order.  The  citizens
demanded  libertie,  complaining  that  they  were  oppressed
with  divers  molestations.  Whereupon  they  privily
made  sute  unto  Casimir  then  king  of  Polonia.  The
Master  of  the  Order  seeing  what  would  come  to  passe
began  to  expostulate  with  the  king,  that  he  kept  not
the  peace  which  had  bene  concluded  betweene  them  to
last  for  ever.  Also  Frederick  the  Emperour  com-
maunded  the  Prussians  to  returne  unto  the  obedience
of  the  knights,  who  by  the  dint  of  their  swordes  had
released  that  province  out  of  the  hands  of  Infidels,
and  had  bought  it  with  the  shedding  of  much  blood.
Notwithstanding  the  popular  sort  persisting  stil  in  their
stubborne  determination,  proceeded  at  length  to  open
warre.  The  cities  adhearing  unto  the  king  usurped
divers  Castles  belonging  to  the  Master,  tooke  certain
Commanders  and  knights,  yea,  and  some  they  slewe
also.  Fiftie  and  five  townes  conspired  together  in  that
rebellion  :  but  thinking  their  estate  and  strength  not
sure  enough  against  their  own  governors  without  forrein
aide,  they  chose  king  Casimir  to  be  their  lord.  Heere-
upon  the  Polonian  king  marched  into  Prussia  with  a
great  armie,  taking  possession  of  such  cities  as  yeelded
themselves  unto  him,  and  proceeding  forward  against
Marieburg,  besieged  the  castle  and  the  towne.  In  the
meane  season  the  Master  having  hired  an  armie  of
Germane  souldiers,  suddenly  surprised  the  king  at  The  great  ma-
unawares  in  his  tents,  and  slewe  about  300.  Polonians,  ^terovenom-
tooke  prisoners  136.  noblemen,  spoiled  their  tents,  tooke  ^f pgi^nia^"^
away  their  horses,  victuals,  and  armour,  insomuch  that
the  king  himselfe  hardly  escaped  upon  one  horse.
These  things  came  to  passe  in  the  yeere  1455.  The
Master  having  thus  obtained  the  victorie,  sent  his  armie
into  the  countrey,  and  recovered  the  castles  and  cities
which  he  had  lost,  to  the  number  of  80.  putting  many

9

A.D.

H55-

The  king  by
treason  over-
ihroweth  the
Master.

[I. 148.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  his  enemies  also  unto  the  sword.  Moreover,  he
recovered  Kunigsberg  being  one  of  the  foure  principall
cities,  which  are  by  name  Thorne,  Elburg,  Kunigsberg,
and  Gdanum,  that  is  to  say,  Dantzig.  And  when
the  warre  was  longer  protracted  then  the  Master  could
well  beare,  and  a  whole  yeres  wages  was  unpaid  unto
his  captains,  those  captaines  which  were  in  the  garison
of  Marieburg  conspired  against  the  Master,  and  for  a
great  summe  of  money  betrayed  the  castle  of  Marie-
burg unto  the  king.  Which  practise  beeing  knowen,
the  Master  fled  to  Kunigsberg,  and  newe  warre  was
begunne,  and  great  spoile  and  desolation  was  wrought
on  both  sides  :  untill  at  length,  after  composition  made,
the  king  retayned  Pomerella,  and  all  the  castles  and
townes  therein,  together  with  Marieburg  and  Elburg  :
and  the  master  injoyed  Samaitia,  Kunigsberg,  &c.  This
composition  was  concluded  in  the  yeere  1466.  The
29.  Master  was  Henrie  Reuss,  first  being  deputie,  and
afterwarde  Master  of  Prussia.  The  30.  was  Henrie  a
Richtenberg,  who  deceased  in  the  yeere  1477.  The
31.  called  Martine  Truchses  died  in  the  yeere  1489.
The  32.  John  a  Tieflen  died  in  the  yeere  1500. The

33.  being  Duke  of  Saxonie,  and  marques  of  Misn,,
deceased  in  the  yeere  15 10.  This  man  began  to  call
in  question,  whether  the  foresaid  composition  con-
cluded betweene  the  king  of  Polonia,  and  the  Order,
were  to  bee  observed  or  no .''  especially  sithence  it
conteined  certaine  articles  against  equitie  and  reason.
Wherupon  he  appealed  unto  the  Bishop  of  Rome,
unto  the  Emperor,  unto  the  princes  and  electors  of
Germany,  and  prevailed  with  them  so  farre  forth,  that
there  was  a  day  of  hearing  appointed  at  Posna  in
Polonia.  And  the  Legates  of  both  parts  meeting
heard  complaints  and  excuses,  &  dispatched  no  other
businesse.  In  the  meane  time  Prince  Frederick  de-
ceased in the tenth yeere of his government. The

34.  Master was Albertus marques of Brandenburg,
whom the King of  Polonia did so grievously molest

THE DUTCH KNIGHTS  ad.

1525.
with  war,  and  oppressed  all  Prussia  with  such  extreme
rigour,  that  the  Prince  of  the  countrey  was  constrained
to  make  a  league  of  foure  yeeres  with  him,  and  to
yeeld  unto  such  conditions,  as  turned  to  the  utter  over-
throwe  of  the  whole  Order.  And  amongst  other
conditions  are  these  which  follow.  Sithence  that  the
originall  of  all  discorde  betweene  Polonia  and  the
order  doeth  from  hence  arise,  for  that  hitherto  in
Prussia,  no  lawfuU  heyre  and  successor  hath  borne
rule  and  authority,  but  divers  and  sundry  have  had  the
government  therof,  by  whose  meanes  the  nations  have
bene  provoked  one  against  another,  much  Christian
blood  hath  bin  shed,  the  lands  and  inhabitants
grievously  spoiled,  and  many  widowes  and  Orphans
made  :  the  Popes,  Emperors,  and  Princes  being  often
soUicited  for  the  establishing  of  that  perpetual  league,
which  Casimir  hath  heretofore  concluded  &c.  Sithence
also  that  the  truce  which  hath  bene  agreed  upon  of
both  parties  is  in  short  time  to  be  expired,  and  that  it
is  to  bee  feared,  that  bloody  warres  will  then  be
renewed,  and  that  all  things  will  prove  worse  and
worse,  unlesse  some  lawfuU  composition  be  made,  and
some  good  and  wholesome  devise  be  put  in  practise,
as  well  for  the  benefit  of  the  King  and  of  his  posteritie,
as  for  the  commoditie  of  the  whole  common  weale  of
Prussia,  especially  considering  that  Albertus  the  Marques
refuseth  not  to  submitte  himselfe  to  the  Councell  of
the  King,  &c.

[The  Oration

A.D.
1388.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Oration  or  speech  of  the  Ambassadours  sent
from  Conradus  de  Zolner  Master  generall  of
the  land  of  Prussia,  unto  Richard  the  second,
King  of  England,  and  France,  &c.  I

The  messengers  which  are  sent  from  the  Master  generall
of  the  land  of  Prussia,  doe  propound  and  declare  the
affaires  and  negotiations  underwritten.

Hereas it is apparant, that divers and
sundrie times  heeretofore, your famous
progenitours and predecessours the
kings of England have alwaies bene
gratious promoters and speciall friends
unto the  generall Masters of  the  land
of Prussia, and of the whole order  :
whereas also they have vouchsafed, by their Barons,
Knights,  and other their nobles of the kingdome  of
The  ancient England,  unto  the  Masters  and  order  aforesaide,  sundry
assistance  of ^j^j  manifolde  favourable  assistances  in  the  conquest of
^EnJand  ^^^ Infidcls  (in whose steppes  your excellent Majestie

insisting,  have,  in  these  your  dayes  shewed  your  selfe
in  like  sort  right  graciously  affected  unto  the  Master
generall  which  nowe  is,  and  unto  his  famous  Pre-
decessour)  in  due  consideration  of  the  premisses,  and
in  regard  also  of  divers  other  affaires,  which  are  at  this
present  to  be  propounded  unto  your  Highnes,  the  fore-
said Master  general  which  now  is  hath  caused  us  his
messengers  to  be  sent  with  letters  of  credence  unto  your
Majestie  :  humbly  praying,  and  earnestly  beseeching
your  roial  clemency,  that  in  times  to  come,  the  said
Master  general,  his  successors,  &  our  whole  Order  may
of  your  bounty  most  graciously  obtaine  the  same  favour,
benevolence,  and  stedfast  amity  &  friendship,  which  hath
bin  continued  from  the  times  of  your  foresaid  pre-
decessors :  in  regard  wherof  we  do  offer  the  said  Master
of  ours,  and  our  whole  company,  unto  your  highnes,
as  your  perpetual  and  devote  friends. Notwithstanding

England

against

infidels.

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad.

1388.
(most  sovereigne  Prince)  certaine  other  things  we  have
to  propound  unto  your  Grace,  in  the  name  &  behalfe
of  our  saide  Master  and  Order,  by  way  of  complaint,
namely,  that  at  certaine  times  past,  and  especially  within
the  space  of  x.  yeres  last  expired,  his  subjects  and
marchants  have  sustained  sundry  damages  and  ablations
of  their  goods,  by  divers  subjects  and  inhabitants  of
your  realme  of  England,  and  that  very  often,  both  by
sea  and  land  :  the  which,  for  the  behalf,  and  by  the
appointment  of  the  Master  general  aforesaid,  &  of  his
predecessor,  are  put  downe  in  registers,  and  recorded
in  the  writings  of  his  cities  in  the  land  of  Prussia.  Of
which  parties  damnified,  some  have  obtained  letters  from
the  Master  general  that  now  is,  &  also  from  his  pre-  [I.  149.]
decessor,  unto  your  renoumed  grandfather  K.  Edward  Edward  the  i.
of  famous  memory,  and  sundry  times  unto  your  high-
nes  also,  to  have  restitution  made  for  their  goods
taken  from  them  :  whereby  they  have  nothing  at  al
prevailed,  but  heaping  losse  upon  losse  have  misspent
their  time  &  their  charges  :  both  because  they  were
not  permitted  to  propound  &  exhibit  their  complaints
&  letters  before  your  majesty,  and  also  for  divers  other
impediments.  Certain  of  them  also  considering  how
others  of  their  countriemen  had  laboured  in  vain,  &
fearing  the  like  successe,  have  troubled  the  Master
general  very  often  with  grievous  and  sundry  complaints,
craving  &  humbly  beseeching  at  his  hands,  that  he
would  vouchsafe  graciously  to  provide  for  them  as  his
faithful  &  loial  subjects,  as  touching  the  restitution  of
their  losses  :  especially  seeing  Y  so  much  wealth  of
the  English  marchants  was  every  yeere  to  be  found  in
Prussia,  as  being  arrested,  they  might  obtaine  some
reasonable  satisfaction  for  their  losses.  Which  thing
the  Master  general  aforesaid  &  his  predecessor  also  have
deferred  unto  this  present  (albeit  to  ye  great  losse  of
their  subjects)  therby  having  meere  &  principal  respect
unto  those  special  curtesies  and  favours  which  your
excellent Majesty & your worthy progenitors have

13

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1388.

right  gratiously  vouchsafed  upon  our  Masters  and
Order  :  neither  yet  for  the  injuries  aforesaid,  was  there
ever  any  maner  of  offence,  or  molestation  offered  unto
any  of  your  subjects  noble  or  ignoble  whatsoever.
Moreover,  in  the  name  &  behalfe  of  our  foresaid
Ma.  general  we  do  propound  unto  your  excellency  by
way  of  complaint,  that  in  the  yere  last  past,  6.  dayes
after  ye  feast  of  the  Ascension,  certain  persons  of  your
realm  of  England,  with  their  ships  &  captains  comming
unto  the  port  of  Flanders,  named  Swen,  &  finding
there,  amongst  sundry  other,  6.  ships  of  Prussia  resident,
which  had  there  arrived  w'  divers  goods  &  marchandises :
and  being  informed  that  they  were  of  Prussia,  &  their
friends,  they  caused  them  &  their  ships  to  remain
next  unto  their  owne  ships,  protesting  unto  them,  that
they  should  in  no  sort  be  molested  or  damnified  by
themselves  or  by  any  other  of  their  company,  &  that
they  would  faithfully  defend  them,  as  if  they  were  their
own  people,  from  ye  hands  of  their  adversaries  :  &
for  their  farther  security  &  trust,  they  delivered  some
of  their  own  men  &  their  standerds  into  our  mens
ships  :  howbeit  a  while  after  being  stirred  up,  &  bent
far  otherwise,  they  took  out  of  ye  foresaid  ships  al
kind  of  armors,  wherwith  they  were  to  gard  &  defend
themselves  from  pirats,  &  they  deteined  the  masters
of  those  ships,  not  suffring  them  to  return  unto  their
own  ships  &  companies,  one  also  of  ye  said  ships
(having  taken  al  the  goods  out  of  her)  they  consumed
with  fire.  And  within  3.  daies  after  they  came  with
one  accord  unto  ye  abovenamed  ships,  and  tooke  away
from  them  all  goods  and  marchandises  which  they  could
find,  and  all  the  armour  and  weapons  of  the  said  ships,
the  chestes  also  of  the  marchants,  of  the  ship-masters,
&  of  other  persons  they  brake  open,  taking  out  money,
jewels,  garments,  &  divers  other  commodities  :  and  so
they  inflicted  upon  them  irrecoverable  losses  and  unkind
grievances.  And  departing  out  of  the  foresaid  haven,
they  caried 2.  of  the  Prussian  ship-masters  with  them,

14

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad.

1388.

as  their  captives  unto  an  haven  of  England  called  Sand-
wich. Who,  being  afterward  released,  were  compelled
to  sweare,  that  they  should  not  declare  ye  injuries
oiFred  unto  them,  either  before  your  roiall  majesty,  or
your  hon.  Councell,  or  your  chancelor  :  neither  were
they  permitted  to  come  on  shore.  And  being  offred
such  hard  measure,  when  they  made  pitiful  mones  &
complaints  unto  your  foresaide  subjects,  amongst  other
matters  they  spake  on  this  wise  unto  them  :  Do  you
complain  of  injuries  &  losses  offered  unto  you  ?  Loe,
in  your  own  countrey  of  Prussia  there  are  English
marchants,  &  goods  sufficient,  go  your  waies  home
therfore,  &  recover  your  losses,  taking  two  for  one  :
and  in  this  maner  they  were  left,  &  so  departed.
Afterward  returning  unto  ye  land  of  Prussia,  they  &
their  friends  repaired  unto  the  Mast,  general,  jointly  &
w*  one  consent  making  their  complaint  unto  him  of  the
losses  which  had  bin  inflicted  upon  them  by  your
subjects.  And  prostrating  themselves  at  his  feet,  they
all  and  every  of  them  made  their  humble  sutes,  y*
he  would  have  compassion  on  them,  as  upon  his
poore  subjects,  regarding  them  selves,  their  wives,  &
children,  and  pitying  their  distres,  and  penury,  and  that
he  would  graciously  procure  some  redresse  for  them.
And  when  he  ofFred  his  letters  unto  them,  wishing
them  to  prosecute  their  cause  before  your  highnes,  they
answered  that  they  were  no  way  able  to  defray  the
expenses,  and  that  others,  who  were  in  like  sort
damnified,  had  laboured  that  way  altogether  in  vain  &
to  no  purpose  :  beseeching  him  again  and  again,  that
he  would  by  another  kind  of  means,  namely  by  arresting
of  your  marchants  and  their  goods,  procure  them  resti-
tution of  their  losses.  At  length  the  Master  general  T^e  arresting
being  moved  by  so  many  and  so  great  complaints,  and  ?^^^^  English
by  the  molestation  of  his  subjects,  caused  (albeeit  full  ^^Jchlnts
sore  against  his  will)  a  certaine  portion  of  English
marchants  goods  to  be  laid  hold  on,  and  to  be  arrested,
in  his  cities  of  Elburg  &  Dantzik,  and  to  be  bestowed

15

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1388.

in  sure  places,  until  such  time  as  he  might  conveniently
by  his  messengers  propound  and  exhibit  all  and  singular  j
the  premisses  unto  your  highnes.  And  forasmuch  as
the  foresaid  Master  general  and  our  Order  do  know
no  just  occasion,  wherby  they  have  deserved  your
majesties  indignation,  but  are  firmely  and  most  un-
doubtedly perswaded,  to  finde  all  curtesie,  favour,  and
friendship  at  your  Highnesse,  according  to  your
wonted  clemencie  :  the  said  Master  p-enerall  therefore
[I.  150.]  maketh  no  doubt,  that  al  the  above  written  damages'
&  molestations,  being  in  such  sort,  against  God  and
justice,  ofired  unto  his  subjects  by  yours,  be  altogether
unknown  unto  your  magnificence,  &  committed  against;
your  mind  :  wherfore  presently  upon  the  foresaid  arrest'
of  your  marchants  goods,  he  dispatched  his  messengers
unto  your  roial  majesty.  Wherof  one  deceased  by  the:
way,  namely  in  the  territory  of  Holland  :  &  the
other  remained  sick  in  those  parts  for  a  long  season  :
&  so  that  ambassapfe  took  none  effect.  Wherfore  the?
said  master  general  was  desirous  to  send  us  now  yb:
second  time  also  unto  your  Highnes.  We  do  make
our  humble  sute  therfore,  in  the  name  &  behalf  of
our  Master  and  Order  aforesaid,  unto  your  kingly
supremacy,  that,  having  God  and  justice  before  youn
eies,  and  also  the  dutifuU  and  obsequious  demeanor  ot'
the  said  master,  and  order  towards  you,  you  would
vouchsafe  to  extend  your  gracious  clemency,  for  the
redresse  of  the  premisses  :  wherby  the  foresaid  losses;
may  be  restored  and  repaied  unto  our  subjects.  All
which  notwithstanding,  that  it  would  please  you  of
your  wisedome  &  providence  to  procure  so  absolute  a
remedy,  by  meanes  whereof,  in  time  to  come,  such
dealings  and  inconveniences  may  be  avoided  on  both
parts,  &  finally  that  your  marchants  may  quietly  be
possessed  of  their  goods  arrested  in  Prussia,  and  our
marchants  may  be  admitted  unto  the  possession  of
their  commodities  attached  in  England,  to  convert  &
apply  them  unto  such  uses,  as  to  themselves  shal  seem

16

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad.

1388.

most  convenient.  Howbeit  (most  gracious  prince  and
lord)  we  are  to  sollicite  your  Highnesse,  not  onely
about  the  articles  to  be  propounded  concerning  the
losses  aforesaide,  but  more  principally,  for  certain
sinister  reports  and  superstitious  slanders,  wherwith
certaine  of  your  subjects,  not  seeking  for  peace,  have
falsly  informed  your  majesty,  &  your  most  honorable
and  discreete  Councel  :  affirming  that  at  the  time  of  ye
aforesaid  arrest  your  marchants  were  barbarously  in-
treated,  that  they  were  cast  into  lothsom  prisons,
j  drenched  in  myre  and  water  up  to  ye  neck,  restrained
from  al  conference  and  company  of  men,  and  also
that  their  meat  was  thrown  unto  them,  as  a  bone  to  a
Idog,  with  many  other  enormities,  which  they  have  most
slanderously  devised  concerning  the  master  general
aforesaid,  and  his  people,  and  have  published  them  in
these  dominions  :  upon  the  occasion  of  which  falshoods
certain  marchants  of  our  parts,  and  of  other  regions
of  Alemain  (who,  of  your  special  benevolence,  were
indued  with  certaine  privileges  and  favours  in  your
citie  of  London,  and  in  other  places)  were,  as  male-
factors, apprehended  and  caried  to  prison,  until  such
time  as  the  trueth  was  more  apparant.  Whereupon,
the  foresaide  master  generall  propoundeth  his  humble
sute  unto  your  majestie,  that  such  enemies  of  trueth
and  concord,  your  Majesty  woulde  vouchsafe  in  such
sort  to  chastise,  that  they  may  be  an  example  unto
others  presuming  to  doe  the  like.

Moreover,  (high  and  mighty  Prince  and  lord)  it  was
reported  unto  our  Master  general,  that  his  former
Legats  required  of  your  majesty  safe  conduct  freely  to
come  into  your  highnesse  Realme.  Which  when  hee
heard,  he  was  exceedingly  offended  therat,  sithence  un-
doubtedly they  did  not  this  at  his  commaundement  or
direction.  We  therefore  humbly  beseech  your  Grace,
as  touching  this  oversight,  to  holde  the  Master  generall
excused,  because  there  is  no  need  of  safe  conduct,
between  so  speciall  friends.

11  17  B

1388.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES  i

i

Furthermore,  sundry  damages  and  complaints  of  the
foresaid  general  Master,  and  his  subjects  are  briefly
exhibited,  and  put  downe  in  the  billes  following.  Also,
all  and  singular  damnified  persons,  besides  other  proofes,
were  compelled  to  verifie  their  losses  by  their  formall
othes,  taken  upon  the  holy  Bible.

Lastly, we  doe  make  our  humble  suite  and petition
unto  the  providence  and  discretion  of  your  Highnes,  and
of  your  honorable  Councell,  that  concerning  the  premisses, ,
and  all  other  matters  propounded,  or  to  be  propounded:
unto  your  Majesty,  we  may  obtaine  a  speedy  answere,  and:
an  effectuall  end. For  it  would  redound  unto  our  great
charges  and  losse  to  make  any  long  delayes.

An  agreement  made  by  the  Ambassadors  of  Eng-
land and  Prussia,  confirmed  by  king  Richard
the  second.

Richard  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England,  and:
France,  and  lorde  of  Ireland,  To  all,  unto  whom!
these  present  letters  shall  come,  greeting.  We  have
seene  and  considered  the  composition,  ordination,  concord, ,
and  treatie,  betweene  our  welbeloved  clearke,  master
Nicholas  Stocket,  licentiat  in  both  lawes,  Walter  Sibel, ,
and  Thomas  Graa,  citizens  of  our  cities  of  London  &
York,  our  messengers  and  ambassadors  on  the  one
part :  and  the  honourable  and  religious  personages,
Conradus  de  Walrode,  great  commander,  Sifridus  Wal-
pode  de  Bassenheim,  chiefe  hospitalary  commander  in
Elburg,  and  Ulricus  Hachenberg  Treasurer,  the  mes-
sengers and  ambassadors  of  the  right  reverend  and
religious  lord,  lord  Conradus  Zolner  de  Rothenstein,
master  generall  of  the  knightly  order  of  the  Dutch
hospital  of  Saint  Mary  at  Jerusalem  on  the  other  part,
lately  concluded  and  agreed  upon  in  these  words.  In  the
name  of  the  supreame  and  indivisible  Trinitie,  the  Father,
the  Sonne,  and  the  holy  Ghost,  Amen.  Forasmuch  as
the  author  of  peace  will  have  peacemakers  to  be  the  sons
of  blessednes,  and the execrable  enemie  of  peace to  be

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad

1390.

expelled  out  of  the  dominions  of  Christians  :  therefore  for  [I.  151.]
the  perpetuall  memorie  of  the  thing,  be  it  knowen  unto
all  men  who  shall  see  or  heare  the  tenour  of  these
presents  :  that  there  being  matter  of  dissension  and
discord  bred  betweene  the  most  renowmed  prince  and
king,  Richard  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England
and  France,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  and  his  subjects  on
the  one  part  :  and  the  right  reverend  and  religious
lord,  lord  Conradus  Zolner  de  Rothinstein,  Master
generall  of  the  knightly  order  of  the  Dutch  hospitall
of  S.  Marie  at  Jerusalem,  and  his  land  of  Prussia,
and  his  subjects  also,  on  the  other  part  :  the  fore-
said lord  and  generall  master,  upon  mature  counsell
and  deliberation  had,  sent  his  honourable  ambassadours
towards  England  unto  the  forenamed  most  soveraigne
prince  and  king,  to  propound  and  make  their  complaint
unto  him  of  violence  and  injuries  offered  (as  it  is  sayd)  by
the  English  unto  the  Prussians  :  in  consideration  whereof
certaine  goods  of  the  marchants  of  England  were  arrested
in  the  land  of  Prussia.  Whose  complaint  the  foresayd
most  gracious  prince  did  courteously  and  friendly  admit,
receive,  and  accept,  and  after  many  speeches  uttered  in
this  treaty,  lovingly  dismissed  them  unto  their  owne
countrey  againe,  promising  by  his  letters  unto  the  foresayd
reverend  Master  generall,  that  hee  would  dispatch  his
ambassadours  unto  the  land  of  Prussia.  Whereupon,  in
the  yeere  1388.  he  sent  the  hono:  and  reverend  person-  1388.
ages  Master  Nicholas  Stocket  licentiate  of  both  lawes,
Thomas  Graa,  and  Walter  Sibill,  citizens  of  London  and
Yorke,  with  sufficient  authority  and  full  commandement,
to  handle,  discusse,  and  finally  to  determine  the  foresaid
busines,  and  with  letters  of  credence  unto  the  right
reverend  lord  and  master  generall  aforesayd.  Which
ambassadours,  together  with  John  Bevis  of  London  their
informer,  and  the  letters  aforesaid,  and  their  ambassage,
the  said  right  reverend  lord  and  Master  generall,  at  his
castle  of  Marienburgh,  the  28.  of  July,  in  the  yeare
aforesaid,  reverently  and  honourably  received  and  enter-

19

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1390.

teined  :  and  in  his  minde  esteemed  them  worthy  to  treate
and  decide  the  causes  aforesayd  :  and  so  unto  the  sayd
ambassadours  he  joyned  in  commission  on  his  behalfe,
three  of  his  owne  counsellers,  namely  the  honourable
and  religious  personages  Conradus  de  Walrode  great
commander,  Seifiridus  Walpode  de  Bassenheim  chiefe
hospitalary  and  commander  in  Elburg,  Wolricus  Hachen-
berger  treasurer,  being  all  of  the  order  aforesaid.  Which  i
ambassadors  so  entreating  about  the  premisses,  and  sundry
conferences  and  consultations  having  passed  between  i
them,  friendly  and  with  one  consent,  concluded  am
agreement  and  concord  in  manner  following  :  That  is  to
say  :

1.  First,  that  all  arrestments,  reprisals,  and  impignorations
of  whatsoever  goods  and  marchandises  in  England  and
Prussia,  made  before  the  date  of  these  presents,  are
from  henceforth  quiet,  free,  and  released,  without  all
fraud  and  dissimulation  :  insomuch  that  the  damages,,
charges  and  expenses  occasioned  on  both  parts  by
reason  of  the  foresayd  goods  arrested,  are  in  no  case
hereafter  to  be  required  or  chalenged  by  any  man  : ;
but  the  demaunds  of  any  man  whatsoever  propounded'
in  this  regard,  are  and  ought  to  be  altogether  frustrate;
and  voide,  and  all  actions  which  may  or  shall  be  com-
menced by  occasion  of  the  sayd  goods  arrested,  are  to)
be  extinct  and  of  none  effect.

2.  Moreover,  it  is  secondly  concluded  and  agreed,  that
all  and  singuler  Prussians  pretending  themselves  to  be;
injuried  by  the  English  at  the  Porte  of  Swen,  or  else-
where, howsoever,  and  whensoever,  before  the  date  ofl
these  presents,  having  received  the  letters  of  the  fore-
saide  right  reverende  lord  and  Master  generall,  and
of  the  cities  of  their  abode,  are  to  repayre  towards
England,  unto  the  sayd  hon:  embassadours  who  are  to
assist  them,  and  to  propound  and  exhibite  their  com-
plaintes,  unto  the  forenamed  lord  and  king.  The  most
gracious  prince  is  bounde  to  doe  his  indevor,  that  the
parties damnified may  have  restitution  of  their goods

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad

1390.

made  unto  them,  or  at  least  complete  justice  and
judgement  without  delay.  Also  in  like  maner  all
English  men  affirming  themselves  to  have  bene  en-
damaged by  Prussians,  wheresoever,  howsoever,  and
whensoever,  are  to  have  recourse  unto  the  often  fore-
named  right  reverend  lorde  the  Master  generall,  with
the  letters  of  their  king  and  of  the  cities  of  their
aboad,  propounding  their  complaints  and  causes  unto
him.  Who  likewise  is  bound  to  doe  his  indevour  that
the  sayd  losses  and  damages  may  be  restored,  or  at
the  least  that  speedie  judgement  may  be,  without  all
delayes,  executed.  This  caveat  being  premised  in  each
clause,  that  it  may  and  shall  be  freely  granted  and
permitted  unto  every  man  that  will  civilly  make  his
suite  and  complaint,  to  doe  it  either  by  himselfe,  or  by
his  procurator  or  procurators.

Also  thirdly  it  is  agreed,  that  whosoever  of  Prussia  is  3.
determined  criminally  to  propound  his  criminal  complaints
in  England  :  namely  that  his  brother  or  kinseman  hath
beene  slaine,  wounded,  or  maimed,  by  English  men,  the
same  partie  is  to  repayre  unto  the  citie  of  London  in
England,  and  unto  the  sayd  ambassadors,  bringing  with
him  the  letters  of  the  sayd  right  reverend  lord  the  master
generall,  and  of  the  cities  of  their  abode  :  which  ambassa-
dors are  to  have  free  and  full  authority,  according  to  the
complaints  of  the  men  of  Prussia,  and  the  answers  of  the
English  men,  to  make  and  ordaine  a  friendly  reconciliation
or  honest  recompence  betweene  such  parties  :  which
reconciliation  the  sayd  parties  reconciled  are  bound  [I.  152.]
undoubtedly  &  without  delay  to  observe.  But  if  there
be  any  English  man  found,  who  shall  rashly  contradict  or
contemne  the  composition  of  the  foresayd  ambassadors  :
then  the  sayd  ambassadours  are  to  bring  the  forenamed
Prussian  plaintifes  before  the  presence  of  the  kings
Majestie  :  and  also  to  make  supplication  on  the  behalfe
of  such  plaintifes,  that  complete  justice  and  judgment  may
without  delayes  bee  administred,  according  as  those  suites
are commenced. Moreover whatsoever English man,

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1390.

against  whom  anie  one  of  Prussia  would  enter  his  action,
shall  absent  himselfe  at  the  terme,  the  sayd  ambassadours
are  to  summon  and  ascite  the  foresayd  English  man  to
appeare  at  the  terme  next  insuing,  that  the  plaintifes  of
Prussia  may  in  no  wise  seeme  to  depart  or  to  returne
home,  without  judgement  or  the  assistance  of  lawe.
Nowe  if  the  sayd  English  man  being  summoned  shall  be
found  stubborne  or  disobedient,  the  forenamed  ambassa-
dours are  to  make  their  appeale  and  supplication  in
manner  aforesayd.  And  in  like  sorte  in  all  respects  shall
the  English  plaintifes  be  dealt  withall  in  Prussia,  namely
in  the  citie  of  Dantzik,  where  the  deputies  of  the  sayd
citie  and  of  the  citie  of  Elburg  shal  take  unto  themselves
two  other  head  boroughs,  one  of  Dantzik,  and  the  other  of
Elburg  :  which  foure  commissioners  are  to  have  in  al
respects,  the  very  like  authority  of  deciding,  discussing,
and  determining  all  criminall  complaints  propounded
criminally,  by  English  men  against  any  Prussian  or
Prussians,  by  friendly  reconciliation,  or  honest  recompense,
if  it  be  possible.  But  if  it  cannot  friendly  be  determined,
or  if  anie  Prussian  shall  not  yeeld  obedience  unto  any
such  order  or  composition,  but  shalbe  found  to  contradict
and  to  contemne  the  same :  from  thenceforth  the  said
foure  deputies  and  headboroughs  are  to  make  their
appeale  and  supplication  unto  the  Master  generall  of  the:
land  aforesayd,  that  unto  the  sayd  English  plaintifes
speedy  judgement  and  complete  justice  may  be  admin-
istred.  But  if  it  shall  so  fall  out  that  any  of  the  principall
offenders  shall  decease,  or  already  are  deceased  in  either
of  the  sayd  countries,  and  then  it  shall  bee  free  and  law-
full  for  the  plaintife  to  prosecute  his  right  against  the
goods  or  heires  of  the  party  deceased.  Also,  for  the
executing  of  the  premisses  the  termes  under  written  are
appointed :  namely  the  first,  from  the  Sunday  whereupon
Quasi  modo  geniti  is  to  be  sung  next  ensuing,  untill  the
seventh  day  following :  The  second  upon  the  feast  of  the
holy  Trinitie  next  to  come,  and  for  seven  dayes  follow-
ing : The third upon the eight day after Saint  John

THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADORS  ad

1390.

Baptist  next  to  come,  &  for  seven  dales  following :  The
fourth,  last,  and  peremptory  terme  shall  be  upon  the
feast  of  S.  Michael  next  to  come,  and  upon  seven  dayes
next  following.  And  from  thenceforth  all  causes  which
concerne  death,  or  the  mayming  of  a  member,  with  all
actions  proceeding  from  them,  are  to  remaine  altogether
voide  and  extinct.  And  if  peradventure  any  one  of  the
foresayd  ambassadours,  shall  in  the  meane  season  dye,  then
the  other  two  shall  have  authoritie  to  chuse  a  third  unto
them.  And  if  after  the  date  of  these  presents  any  cause
great  or  small  doth  arise  or  spring  foorth,  it  must  bee
decided  in  England  and  in  Prussia,  as  it  hath  beene  Jn  ancient
accustomed  in  times  past  and  from  ancient  times.  custome.

Also,  it  is  farther  concluded  and  agreed  upon,  that  all 4.
lawfuU  marchants  of  England  whosoever  shall  have  free The  prlvi-
licence  and  authority,  with  all  kindes  of  shippes,  goods,  i^J-g^^ofthe
and  marchandises,  to  resorte  unto  every  port  of  the  land  (-lartts  in^'^
of  Prussia, and also to transport all such goods and  Prussia.
marchandises  up  farther  unto  any  other  place  in  the  sayde
land  of  Prussia,  and  there  with  all  kindes  of  persons  freely
to  bargaine and make sale,  as heretofore it hath from
auncient times bene  accustomed. Which priviledge  is
granted in all  things  and  by  all circumstances  unto  the
Prussians in England. And  if  after  the date  of  these
presents,  betweene  the sayd  kingdome  of  England,  and
land  of  Prussia  any  dissension  or  discorde  (which  God
forefend) should arise : then the foresayd sovereigne
prince  and  king  of  England,  and  the  sayd  right  reverend
lord  the Master  generall are mutually by their  letters
and  messengers  to  give  certificate  and  intimation  one  unto
another,  concerning  the  matter  and cause of  such dis-
sension and  discord : with intimation,  on  the  behalfe  of
the  foresaid  sovereigne  prince  &  king  of  England,  shall  be
delivered  in  the  forenamed  castle  of  Marienburg :  but  on
the  behalfe  of  the  sayd  right  reverend  lord  the  Master
generall, such intimation shall be given  in  the  citie of
London  aforesayd,  unto  the  Maior  of  the  said  city :  that
then  such  a  denuntiation  or  intimation  being  made,  the

23

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1390.

marchants  of  England  and  the  subjects  of  the  land  of
Prussia  may,  within  the  space  of  one  yeere  next  following,
freely  and  safely  returne  home  with  al  their  goods  &
marchandises :  if  at  the  least,  in  the  mean  while,  some
composition,  &  friendly  league  betweene  the  two  foresayd
countreis  be  not  in  some  sorte  concluded.  And  that  all
the  premisses  may  more  firmely  and  faithfully  be  put  in
due  practise  and  execution  on  both  partes,  for  the  strong
and  inviolable  keeping  of  peace  and  tranquillity :  and
also  for  the  full  confirmation  and  strengthening  oft
all  the  sayde  premisses,  the  three  foresayd  honour-
able and  religious  personages  being  by  the  said  right
reverend  lord  the  Master  general  appointed  as  com-
missioners to  deale  in  the  above  written  ordination  and
composition,  have  caused  their  scales  unto  these  presents
[I,  153.]  to  be  put:  and  the  sayd  ordination  also,  and  letter  in  the
same  tenour  word  for  word,  and  in  all  points  even  as  it  is
inserted  into  these  presents,  they  have  mutually  received
from  the  abovenamed  three  ambassadours  of  the  right
soveraigne  king  of  England  under  their  scales.  Given  at
the  castle  of  Marienburg  in  the  yeare  of  our  lord  afore-
sayd,  upon  the  twentieth  day  of  the  moneth  of  August.
And  we  therefore  doe  accept,  approve,  ratifie,  and  by  the
tenour  of  these  presents  doe  confirm,  the  composition,
ordination,  concorde,  and  treaty  aforesayd.  In  testimony;
whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  to  be  made
patents.  Witnesse  our  selves  a  Westminster  the  22.  of
October,  in  the  thirteenth  yeare  of  our  reigne.

By  the  king  and  his  counsell.

Lincolne.

24

THE PRUSSIAN LETTERS  a.d.

1398.

The  letters  of  Conradus  de  Jungingen,  Master
generall  of  Prussia,  written  unto  Richard  the
second,  king  of  England,  in  the  yeere  1398,
for  the  renouncing  of  a  league  and  composi-
tion concluded  betweene  England  and  Prussia,
in  regard  of  manifold  injuries  offered  unto
the  Prussians.

DUr  humble  commendations,  with  our  earnest  prayers
unto  God  for  your  Majestic,  premised.  Most  re-
owmed  prince  and  mighty  lord,  it  is  not  (we  hope)  out
)f  your  Majesties  remembrance,  how  our  famous  pre-
lecessour  going  immediately  before  us  sent  certaine
etters  of  his  unto  your  highnesse,  effectually  contayning
undry  complaints  of  grievances,  injuries  and  losses,
therewith  the  marchants  of  his  lande  and  Order  being
voont  in  times  past  to  visite  your  kingdome  with  their
^oods  and  marchandises,  have  bene  contrary  to  their
iberties  and  priviledges  annoyed  with  manifold  injuries
ind  wrongs.  Especially  sithens  they  have  beene  molested
n  your  realme,  being  contrary  to  the  friendly  composition
nade  and  celebrated  by  the  hono:  personages,  master
^ficholas  Stocket,  Thomas  Graa  and  Walter  Sibil,  in  the
^eare  1388,  with  the  assistance  of  their  coarbiters  on  our
3art,  and  contrary  to  God  and  all  justice,  oppressed  with
manifold  damages,  losses,  and  grievances :  as  in  certaine
articles  exhibited  unto  our  predecessors  aforesayd  it  doeth
more  manifestly  appeare.  In  consideration  whereof  being
vehemently  moved  by  the  damnified  parties,  he  humbly
besought  your  highnesse  by  his  messengers  and  letters,
for  complement  and  execution  of  justice.  About  the
which  affayres  your  Majestic  returned  your  letters  of
answere  unto  our  sayd  predecessor,  signifying  that  the
sayd  businesse  of  articles  concerned  al  the  communalty  of
your  realme,  and  that  your  highnesse  purposed,  after
consultation  had  in  your  parliament,  to  send  a  more
deliberate answere concerning the premisses, unto our

25

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1398-

predecessour aforesayd. Howbeit he being by death|r
translated  out  of  this  present  world,  and  our  selves  by|
the providence  of God succeeding in his roome,  and||i
also  long  time  expecting  an  effectuall  answere  from  your|(
highnesse,  are  not  yet  informed  as  we  looked  for :  albeit j|(
the  complaints  of  injuries  and losses offered unto  ourji
subjects  doe  continually  increase. But  from  hencefoorthln
to  provide  a  remedie  and  a  caveat  for  the  time  to  come,|i
the  sayd  complaynt  doeth  upon  great  reasons  moove  andi
invite  me. Sithens  therefore  in  regard  of  the  sayd  com-i
position,  neither  you  nor  your  subjects  may  be  judged  in'
the  empire :  and  sithens  plaine  reason  requireth  that  the
one  be  not  inriched  by  the  others  losse :  as  undoubtedly
our  subjects should  sustaine  great  damage  by  the  com-
position aforesayd,  by  vertue  whereof  your  subjects  doe
enjoy  all  commodities  in  our  lande,  and  contrariwise  our
subjects  in  your  realme  have  suffered,  &  as  yet  sundrie
wayes do suffer manifold discommodities, losses and:
injuries. Wherefore  (most  soveraigne  prince  and  mighty |
lord)  being  reasonably  mooved  upon  the  causes  aforesayd,!
we  doe,  by  the  advise  of  our  counsellers,  revoke  and  re-i
peale  the  sayd  composition  concluded  as  is  above  written, ;
together  with the effect thereof,  purely  and simply  re-
nouncing the  same  by  these  presents  :  refusing  hereafter
to  have  either  our  selves  or  our  subjects  in  any  respect  to
stand  bound  by  the  vertue  of  the  sayd  composition  :  but
from  henceforth,  and  for  the  times  heretofore  also,  bee  it
altogether  voide  and  of  none  effect.

Provided  notwithstanding,  that  from  the  time  of  the
notice  of  this  denunciation  given  unto  the  hono:  Maior
of  your  citie  of  London,  for  the  space  of  a  yeare  next
ensuing,  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  all  marchants  of  your
kingdome  whatsoever,  with  their  goods  and  marchandises:
to  returne  home,  according  to  the  forme  in  the  foresayd
composition  expressed:  conditionaly  that  our  subjects  1
may  even  so  in  all  respects  be  permitted  to  depart,  with|
the  safety  of  their  goods  and  lives  out  of  your  dominions:!
this  present  renuntiation,  revocation,  and  retractation  of  the

26

THE ENGLISH AMBASSAGE  ad.

1403.

rder  and  composition  aforesayd,  notwithstanding.  How-
it  in  any  other  afFayres  whatsoever,  devoutly  to  submit
iir  selves  unto  your  highnesse  pleasure  and  command,
th  our  selves,  and  our  whole  order  are  right  willing  and  [I.  1 5+-]
esirous :  and  also  to  benefite  and  promote  your  subjects
e  wil  indevour  to  the  utmost  of  our  ability.  Given  in
ur  castle  of  Marienburg  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1398,
id  upon  the  22.  day  of  February.

Frater  Conradus  de  Jungingen,  master  generall  of
the  Order  of  the  Dutch  knights  of  S.  Maries
hospital  at  Jerusalem.

briefe  relation  of  William  Esturmy,  and  John
Kington  concerning  their  ambassages  into
Prussia,  and  the  Hans-townes.

Nprimis, that in the moneth of  July, and in the 1403.

yeare  of  our  Lord  1403,  and  the  fift  yeare  of  the
igne  of  our  sovereigne  Lord  the  king  that  nowe  is,
ere  came  into  England  the  ambassadours  of  the
flighty  lord  Fr:  Conradus  de  Jungingen,  being  then
faster  general  of  Prussia,  with  his  letters  directed
into  our  foresayd  sovereigne  lord  the  king,  requiring
mends  and  recompense  for  certaine  injuries  unjustly
►iFered  by  English  men  unto  the  subjects  of  the  sayd
faster  generall,  written  in  20.  articles,  which  amounted
into  the  summe  of  19 120.  nobles  and  a  halfe  &c.

Item,  that  the  third  day  of  the  moneth  of  October,
n  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  abovewritten,  and  in  the
ift  yere  of  the  reigne  of  our  soveraigne  lord  the
dng,  between  the  reverend  father  in  God,  Henrie
hen  bishop  of  Lincolne  lord  chancelor,  and  William
ord  de  Roos  high  treasurer  of  England,  on  the  one
jarty  and  the  sayd  ambassadours  on  the  other  party,  it
vas  (according  to  their  petition)  amongst  other  things
brdayned  :  namely  that  the  liege  people  of  our
soveraigne  lord  the  king  should  freely  be  permitted,
antill the feast of  Easter then next after ensuing to

27

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1403.

remaine  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  and  from  thence  wit]
their  goods  &  marchandises  to  returne  unto  their  owi
home  :  and  also,  that  the  subjects  of  the  sayd  Maste
generall  in  the  kingdome  of  England  should  hav(
licence  and  liberty  to  doe  the  like.  Provided  alwayes
that  after  the  time  above  limitted,  neither  the  Englislj
marchants  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  nor  the  Prussia)
marchants  in  the  realme  of  England  should  use  an^
traffique  of  marchandise  at  all,  unlesse  in  the  meani
space  it  were  otherwise  agreed  and  concluded  by  th!
sayd  king  and  the  sayd  Master  general.

Item,  immediately  after  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord  th
king  sent  his  letters  by  John  Browne  marchant  of  Lii
unto  the  foresayd  Master  generall,  for  to  have  mutual,
conversation and intercourse of dealing to continu  |
some  certain  space,  betweene  the  marchants  of  Englan(
and  of  Prussia  : promising  in  the  same  letters,  that  h
would in the meane season send unto the foresay(
Master his ambassadors  to  intreat about the  pretendec
injuries aforesaid  : which letters the foresayd Master
for divers causes, refused to yeelde unto, as in hi
letters sent unto our  lord the king,  bearing date th  j
16. day of  the  moneth of  July,  in  the yeare  of  ou  '
lord 1404.  more  plainely  appeareth.

Item,  that  after  the  receit  of  the  letters  of  th^
Master  aforesaid,  which  are  next  above  mentioned,  ou
sayd  king,  according  to  his  promise,  sent  Willian
Esturmy  knight,  M.  John  Kington  clerke,  and  Willian
Brampton  citizen  of  London,  from  his  court  of  parlia
ment  holden  at  Coventrie,  very  slightly  informed,  as  hi
ambassadours  into  Prussia.

Item,  before  the  arrivall  of  the  sayd  ambassadours  h
Prussia,  all  intercourse  of  traffique  betweene  the  Englis]
and  the  Prussians,  in  the  realme  of  England,  and  ii
the  land  of  Prussia  was  altogether  restrained  and  pro
hibited  :  and  in  the  same  land  it  was  ordayned  and  pu
in  practise,  that  in  whatsoever  porte  of  the  land  of  Prussi
any English marchant had arrived  with his  goods, h

28

THE ENGLISH AMBASSAGE  ad.

1406.
ras  not  permitted  to  conveigh  the  sayd  goods,  out  of
hat  porte,  unto  any  other  place  of  the  land  of  Prussia,
ither  by  water,  or  by  lande,  under  the  payne  of  the
orfeiting  of  the  same  :  but  was  enjoyned  to  sell  them
n  the  very  same  porte,  unto  the  Prussians  onely  and
io  none  other,  to  the  great  prejudice  of  our  English
larchants.

Item,  that  after  the  arrivall  of  the  sayd  English
mbassadours  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  it  was  ordayned,
hat  from  the  eight  day  of  the  moneth  of  October,  in
he  yeare  of  our  lord  1405,  all  English  marchants  what-  1405.
oever  should  have  free  liberty  to  arrive  with  all  kindes
ij  f  their  marchandise  in  whatsoever  port  of  the  land  of
'russia,  and  to  make  sale  of  them  in  the  said  land,  as
ath  heretofore  from  auncient  times  bene  accustomed.
dso  sundry  other  commodious  priviledges  unto  the
salme  of  England  were  then  ordayned  and  established  :
s  in  the  indentures  made  for  this  purpose  it  doth
lore  manifestly  appeare.

Item, the said English ambassadours being arrived
1  the  land of  Prussia, demanded of  the said Master

Ifjenerall,  a  reformation  and  amends,  for  the  damages  and

I  lijuries  offered  by  the  Prussians  unto  the  liege people
f our sovereigne lord and king, written in fifteene

t  I'ticles, which losses amounted unto the summe of

1 1535.  nobles.

Item,  the said Master generall, besides the articles

;[  Ichibited unto our soveraigne lord the king (as it is

1:  bove  mentioned)  delivered  unto  the  sayd  ambassadours
vers  other  articles of  certaine injuries offered (as he  [i.  155.]
jyth) unjustly by English men, unto his subjects,

;  ihich  amounted  unto  the  summe  of  5100.  nobles.

Item,  it  was  afterward  concluded,  that  upon  the  first  1406.
F  May  next  then  insuing,  namely  in  the  yeere  of  our
ord  1406.  or  within  the  space  of  one  yeare  immediatly
lUowing  there  should  bee  made  a  convenient,  just,  and
;asonable  satisfaction,  for  all  molestations  unjustly  offered
1  both  partes,  as  well  on  the  behalfe  of  our  soveraigne

29

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1406,

lord  the  king,  as  of  the  foresayd  Master  general.  Which
satisfaction  not  being  performed,  the  Prussians  with  their
goods  &  marchandises,  within  three  moneths  after  the
end  of  the  sayd  yere  next  following,  were  without
molestation  or  impediment,  enjoined  to  depart  out  of
the  realme  of  England  with  their  ships  and  goods,  and
the  English  men  likewise,  out  of  the  territories  and
dominions  of  the  said  Master  general,  &  both  of  them,
without  any  further  admonition,  to  abstaine  &  separate
themselves,  from  both  the  countreis  aforesayd.  For  the
performance  of  which  premisses,  the  ambassadors  on
both  parts  being  sufficiently  instructed,  were  appointed
to  meete  the  first  day  of  May,  at  the  towne  of
Dordract  in  Holland.

Item,  that  the  sayd  William  Esturmy  and  John
Kington  in  their  returne  homewards  from  Prussia  towards
England  passed  through  the  chiefe  cities  of  the  Hans,
and  treated  in  such  sorte  with  the  Burgomasters  of  them,
that  there  were  sent  messengers  and  agents,  in  the
behalfe  of  the  common  society  of  the  Hans  marchants,
unto  the  towne  of  Dordract,  to  conferre  with  the
ambassadors  of  England,  about  the  redressing  of  injuries
attempted  on  both  parts  :  where  divers  agreements  were
set  downe  betweene  the  sayd  ambassadors,  and  mes-
sengers, as  in  the  indentures  made  for  the  same  purpose
it  doth  more  manifestly  appeare.

Item,  that  the  meeting  appointed  at  the  towne  oi
Dordract,  upon  the  first  of  May,  was  by  the  letters  oi
the  foresayd  ambassadors,  proroged  unto  the  firsi
of  August  then  next  ensuing,  and  afterward  by  vertue
of  the  kings  letters  unto  the  first  day  of  March  nexi
following :  and  there  was  another  day  of  prorogation  also

Item,  that  after  the  prorogations  aforesayd,  th(
ambassadors  of  England,  and  the  messengers  &  com-
missioners of  Prussia  met  together  at  the  towne  oi
Hage  in  Holland,  the  28.  day  of  August,  in  the  yen
of  our  lord  1407.  And  there  was  a  treaty  between  therr
concerning the summe 25934. nobles and an halfe

30

k

THE ENGLISH AMBASSAGE  ad

1407.
demanded  on  the  behalfe  of  the  sayd  Master  generall  for
amends  and  recompense  in  consideration  of  wrongs
offered  unto  himselfe  and  unto  his  subjects  of  Prussia,
as  is  aforesayd.  Also  the  sayd  Master  and  his  Prussians,
besides  the  summe  not  yet  declared  in  the  articles,  which
is  very  small,  are  to  rest  contented  and  satisfied  with  the
summe  of  8957.  nobles,  in  lieu  of  al  the  damages  afore-
said :  no  times  of  paiment  being  then  assigned  or
limited,  but  afterward  to  be  reasonably  limited  and
assigned,  by  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord  the  king.  Inso-
much, that  our  said  soveraigne  lord  the  king  is  to
write  his  ful  intention  &  determination  concerning  this
matter,  in  his  letters  to  be  delivered  the  16.  day  of
March,  unto  the  aldermen  of  the  marchants  of  the
Hans  residing  at  Bruges.  Otherwise,  that  from  thence-
forth all  league  of  friendship  shall  bee  dissolved  betweene
the  realme  of  England  and  the  land  of  Prussia.

Also  it  is  farther  to  be  noted,  that  in  the  appoint-
ment of  the  summe  next  before  written  to  be  disbursed
out  of  England,  this  condition  was  added  in  writing,
namely,  that  if  by  lawful  testimonies  it  may  sufficiently
and  effectually  be  prooved,  concerning  the  chiefe  articles
ibovewritten,  or  any  part  of  them,  that  satisfaction  was
made  unto  any  of  those  parties,  to  whom  it  was  due  :
or  that  the  goods,  of  and  for  the  which  complaint  was
made  on  the  behalfe  of  Prussia,  in  the  sayd  articles,  did
or  doe  pertayne  unto  others,  or  that  any  other  just,  true,
Dr  reasonable  cause  may  lawfully  be  proved  &  alledged,
vvhy  the  foresaid  sums  or  any  of  them  ought  not  to  be
payed  :  that  then  in  the  summes  contained  in  the  articles
ibovementioned,  so  much  only  must  be  cut  off,  or
stopped,  as  shalbe  found,  either  to  have  bene  payd  already,
Dr  to  appertaine  unto  others,  or  by  any  true,  just,  and
-easonable  cause  alleaged,  not  to  be  due.  Neither  is  it
f:o  be  doubted,  but  for  the  greater  part  of  the  summe
iue  unto  the  Prussians,  that  not  our  lord  the  king,  but
others  (which  will  in  time  be  nominated)  are,  by  all
,jquity  and  justice,  to  be  compelled  to  make  satisfaction.

31

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

Also,  at  the  day  and  place  above  mentioned  it  was
appointed  and  agreed  upon,  that  our  lord  the  king  and
his  liege  subjects,  for  the  said  4535.  nobles  demanded  ot
the  English  in  consideration  of  recompense  to  be  made
for  injuries  offered  unto  the  Prussians,  are  to  discharge
&  pay  the  summe  of  764.  nobles,  which  are  not  as  yet
disbursed  :  but  they  have  reserved  a  petition  to  them,
unto  whom  the  sayd  summe  is  due,  or  if  they  please,
there  shalbe  made  satisfaction  :  which  will  be  very  hard
and  extreme  dealing.

Item,  that  in  the  last  assembly  of  the  sayd  ambassadors
of  England  and  messengers  of  Prussia,  holden  at  Hage,
made  as  is  aforesayd,  for  the  behalfe  of  England,  there
were  exhibited  anew  certaine  articles  of  injuries  against
the  Prussians.  The  value  of  which  losses  amounted  unto
the  summe  of  1825.  nobles  and  three  shillings.
[I.  156]  Item, on the contrary part for the behalfe of  the

Prussians  the  summe  of  1355.  nobles,  eight  shillings  and
sixe  pence.

Item,  forasmuch  as  divers  articles  propounded,  as  well
on  the  behalfe  of  England,  as  of  Prussia,  and  of  the  cities
of  the  Hans,  both  heretofore  and  also  at  the  last  conven-
tion holden  at  Hage,  were  so  obscure,  that  in  regard  of
their  obscurity,  there  could  no  resolute  answere  bee  made
unto  them  :  and  other  of  the  sayd  articles  exhibited,  for
want  of  sufficient  proofes,  could  not  clearely  be  determined
upon  :  it  was  appointed  and  concluded,  that  all  obscure
articles  given  up  by  any  of  the  foresayd  parties  whatso-
ever, ought  before  the  end  of  Easter  then  next  ensuing,
and  within  one  whole  yeare  after,  to  be  declared  before
the  Chancelour  of  England,  for  the  time  being  :  and
other  articles  evidently  exhibited,  but  not  sufficiently
proved,  to  be  proved,  under  paine  of  perpetuall  exclusion.
Which  being  done  accordingly,  complete  justice  shall  be
administred  on  both  parts.

Item,  as  concerning  the  eleventh  article,  for  the  behalfe
of  the  Prussians,  first  exhibited,  which  conteined  losses
amounting  unto  the  summe  of  2445.  nobles  :  as  touching

32

THE ENGLISH AMBASSAGE  ad.

1407.

the  first  article  on  the  behalfe  of  England  exhibited  in  the
land  of  Prussia,  conteining  losses  which  amounted  to  the
summe  of  900.  nobles  :  after  many  things  alleadged  on
both  parts,  relation  thereof  shall  be  made  in  the  audience
of  the  king  and  of  the  Master  generall  :  so  that  they  shall
set  downe,  ordaine,  and  determine  such  an  ende  and
conclusion  of  those  matters,  as  shall  seeme  most  expedient
unto  them.

Now  concerning  the  Livonians  who  are  subject
unto  the  great  Master  of  Prussia.

INprimis,  that  the  Master  of  Prussia  demaunded  of  the
sayd  English  ambassadours,  at  their  being  in  Prussia,
on the behalfe  of  them of  Livonia,  who are  the sayd
Master  his  liege  people,  to  have  restitution  of  their  losses,
unjustly  (as  he  sayth)  offered  unto  them  by  the  English,
namely,  for  the  robbing  and  rifling  of  three  ships. The  These  ships
value  of  which  ships  and  of  the  goods  contained  in  them,  '^^re  taken  b'j
according  to  the  computation  of  the  Livonian  marchants, ^^  ofjuh^
doeth  amount  unto  the  summe  of  8037.  pound,  12.  shil- 1^04.
lings  7.  pence,

Howbeit  afterward  the  trueth  being  inquired  by  the
sayd  ambassadors  of  England,  the  losse  of  the  Livonians
exceedeth  not  the  summe  of  7498.  pound,  13.  shillings,
10.  pence  halfepeny  farthing.

Item,  forasmuch  as  in  the  sayd  ships,  on  the  behalfe  of
the  sayd  Master,  and  of  certaine  cities  of  the  Hans,  there
are  alleadged  above  250.  men  very  barbarously  to  be
drowned,  of  whome  some  were  noble,  and  others  honour-
able personages,  and  the  rest  common  marchants  &
mariners,  there  was  demaunded,  in  the  first  dyet  or
convention  holden  at  Dordract,  a  recompense  at  the
handes  of  the  sayd  English  ambassadors  :  albeit  this
complaint  was  exhibited  in  the  very  latter  end  of  al  the
negotiations,  in  forme  of  a  scedule,  the  tenor  whereof  is  in
writing  at  this  present,  &  beginneth  in  maner  following :
Cum  vita  hominum  &c.  Howbeit  in  the  last  convention
holden  at  Hage,  as  is  aforesaid,  it  was  concluded  betweene
II  33  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

the  ambassadours  of  England,  and  the  messengers  and
commissioners  of  the  land  of  Prussia,  and  of  the  cities  of
the  Hans ;  that  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord  the  king,  should,
of  his  great  pietie,  vouchsafe  effectually  to  devise  some
convenient  and  wholesome  remedie  for  the  soules  of  such
persons  as  were  drowned.

Item,  that  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord  the  king  will  signifie
in  writing  his  full  purpose  &  intention  as  touching  this
matter,  unto  the  aldermen  of  the  Hans  marchants  residing
at  Bruges,  upon  the  sixteenth  day  of  March  next  follow-
ing. Otherwise,  that  from  hencefoorth  all  amity  and
friendship,  betweene  the  realme  of  England  and  the  land
of  Prussia  shall  be  dissolved.

Neither  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  that  a  great  part  of  the
sayd  goods,  for  the  which  they  of  Livonia  doe  demaund
restitution,  namely  waxe  and  furres,  redounded  unto  the
use  and  commoditie  of  our  soveraigne  lord  the  king.
And  also  our  said  soveraigne  lord  the  king  gave  com-
mandement  by  his  letters,  that  some  of  the  sayd  goods
should  be  delivered  unto  others.  And  a  great  part  of
them  is  as  yet  reserved  in  the  towne  of  Newcastle.  One
Benteld  also  hath  the  best  of  the  sayd  three  ships  in
possession.  Also  it  is  reported  and  thought  to  be  true,
that  certaine  Furriers  of  London,  which  will  be  detected
in  the  end,  have  had  a  great  part  of  the  sayd  goods,
namely  of  the  Furres.

Now  as  concerning  the  cities  of  the  Hans.

Hamburg.  T  Nprimis  the  Hamburgers  exhibited  nine  articles,  wherein
J.  they  demaunded  restitution  for  certaine  damages
offered,  as  they  sayd,  by  the  English  men,  the  value  of
which  losses  amounted  unto  the  summe  of  91 17.  nobles,
20.  pence.  For  the  which,  after  due  examination,  there
was promised restitution to  the  summe  of  416.  nobles,

[I.  157.]  ^.  shillings.  Besides  the  two  articles  propounded  against
them  of  Scardeburg,  the  summe  wherof  was  231.  pounds,
15.S.  8.d.  concerning  the  which  there  was  sentence  given
in  England  by  the  commissioners  of  our  lord  the  king,  the

34

THE ENGLISH AMBASSAGE  ad.

1407.
execution  wherof  was  promised  unto  the  said  Hamburgers
by  the  ambassadors  of  England :  leave  and  licence  being
reserved  unto  the  sayd  Hamburgers,  of  declaring  or  ex-
planing  certaine  obscure  articles  by  them  exhibited,  which
declaration  was  to  be  made  at  the  feast  of  Easter  then  next
to  come,  or  within  one  yeare  next  ensuing  the  said  feast,
unto  the  chancelor  of  England  for  the  time  being,  and  of
prooving  the  sayd  articles  and  others  also,  which  have  not
as  yet  sufficiently  bene  proved.  Which  being  done  they
are  to  have  full  complement  and  execution  of  justice.

Also  by  the  Hamburgers  there  are  demaunded  445.
nobles  from  certaine  of  the  inhabitants  of  Linne  in
England.  Which  summe,  if  it  shalbe  prooved  to  be  due
unto  any  English  men,  the  Hamburgers  are  to  rest
contented  with  those  goods,  which  they  have  already  in
their  possessions.

Item,  they  of  Breme  propounded  sixe  articles,  wherein  Breme.
the summe conteined amounteth unto 4414. nobles.
And  there  was  no  satisfaction  promised  unto  them. But
the  same  libertie  and  licence  was  reserved  unto  them,  in
like  maner  as  before  unto  the  Hamburgers.

Item,  they  of  Stralessund  propounded  23.  articles,  Strakssund.
wherof  the  summe  amounted  unto  7415.  nobles,  20. d.
for  the  which  there  was  promised  satisfaction  of  253.
nobles,  3.q.  Also  here  is  a  caveat  to  be  observed  :  that
they  of  Stralessund  had  of  English  mens  goods  a  great
summe  particularly  to  be  declared,  which  will  peradventure
suffice  for  a  recompense.  And  some  of  their  articles  are
concerning  injuries  offered  before  20,  22,  23,  24.  yeres
past.  Also  their  articles  are  so  obscure  that  they  will
never,  or  very  hardly  be  able  to  declare  or  prove  them.
Howbeit  there  is  reserved  the  very  same  liberty  unto
them,  that  was  before  unto  the  Hamburgers.

Item, they of Lubec propounded 23. articles, the  Lubec
summe  whereof  extended  unto  8690.  nobles  and  an  halfe  :
whereupon it  was  agreed,  that they  should have paied
unto them 550.  nobles. There  was  reserved  the  same
libertie  unto  them,  which  was  unto  the  men  of  Stralessund .

35

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407-

GripeswoM.  Item,  they  of  Gripeswold  exhibited  5.  articles,  the
summe  whereof  amounted  unto  2092,  nobles  and  an
halfe.  For  the  which  there  was  promised  satisfaction
of  153.  nobles  and  an  half.  And  the  said  men  of
Gripeswold  have  of  the  goods  of  English  men  in
possession,  to  the  value  of  22015.  nobles,  i8.s,  as  it
is  reported  by  them  of  Linne.  And  the  same  libertie
is  reserved  unto  them  that  was  unto  the  Hamburgers.

Campen.  Item,  they of  Campen propounded ten  articles,  the

summe  whereof  extended  unto  1405.  nobles.  There  is
no  satisfaction  promised  unto  them :  but  the  same
liberty  is  reserved  unto  them,  which  was  unto  the
other  above  mentioned.

Item,  the  ambassadors  of  England  demanded  of  the
citizens  of  Rostok  &  Wismer,  for  damages  &  injuries
by  them  committed  against  the  subjects  of  the  foresayd
sovereigne  king  32407.  nobles,  2.s.  10. d.  And  albeit
every  of  the  foresayd  cities  sent  one  of  their  burgo-
masters unto  the  towne  of  Hage  in  Holland,  to  treat
with  the  English  ambassadours,  it  was  in  the  end  found
out,  that  they  had  not  any  authority  of  negotiating  or
concluding  ought  at  al.  And  therfore  they  made  their
faithful!  promises,  that  every  of  the  said  cities  should
send  unto  our  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  one  or  two
procurator  or  procurators  sufficiently  instructed  to  treat
&  conclude  with  our  said  sovereigne  lord  the  king
about  the  damages  and  injuries  aforesaid  at  the  feast  of
the  nativitie  of  Saint  John  the  Baptist.

Compositions  and  ordinances  concluded  betw^een
the  messengers  of  Frater  Conradus  de  Jung-
ingen  master  generall  of  Prussia :  and  the
chancelor  and  treasurer  of  the  realme  of
England  1403.
N  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1403,  upon  the  feast  of
S.  Michael  the  Archangel,  the  right  hono:  Henrie
bishop  of  Lincoln,  chancelor  of  England,  and  the  lord
de  Roos  high  treasurer  of  England,  &  the  ambassadors

36

I

THE ENGLISH COMPOSITIONS  ad.

1403-
of  Prussia,  John  Godek  of  Dantzik,  &  Henry  Monek
of  Elbing,  masters  of  the  same  cities  have  at  West-
minster treated  in  maner  of  composition  about  the
articles  underwritten  :  between  the  most  sovereigne  lord
the  king  of  England,  and  the  right  reverend  &  honor-
able Conradus  de  Jungingen  Master  general  of  Prussia,
as  concerning  the  injuries  offered  unto  the  people  of
Prussia  and  Livonia  upon  the  sea  by  the  English.

First,  that  all  ships  with  their  appurtenances,  &  the
commodities  of  the  mariners,  according  unto  the  con-
dition of  the  things,  and  all  other  goods  taken  away
by  the  English,  which  are  actually  undivided  &  whole,
are  incontinently  &  with  al  speed  to  bee  restored.  And
if  there  bee  any  defect  in  ought,  the  value  of  the  said
defect  is  to  be  accounted,  &  with  other  losses  of  goods
to  be  restored,  at  the  terme  of  the  restitution  to  be
made  and  delivered.

Item,  that  all  ships,  damages,  and  goods  (as  they  are
conteined  in  our  bill  of  accusation)  which  are  not  now
immediately  restored,  are  to  be  restored  and  payd  in  the
land  of  Prussia,  between  this  and  the  terme  appointed, [I.  158.]
with  full  execution  and  complement  of  justice.

Item,  concerning  the  persons  throwen  over  boord  or
slaine  in  the  sea :  it  shall  remayne  to  bee  determined  at
the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  most  mighty  prince  the
king  of  England,  and  of  the  right  reverend  the  Master
of  Prussia.

Item,  betwene  this  and  the  terme  appointed  for  the
restoring  of  the  goods  taken  away,  &  untill  there  be  due
payment  &  restitution  of  the  said  goods  performed,  the
marchants  of  England  and  of  Prussia  are  in  no  wise  to
exercise  any  traffique  of  marchandise  at  all  in  the  fore-
said lands.

Memorandum,  that  the  third day of  the  moneth  of 1403.
October,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1403.  and  in  the  fift
yere  of  the  reigne  of  the  most  mighty  prince  and  lord,
king Henrie  the fourth,  by  the  grace  of  God  king of

37

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1403-

England  and  France  &c.  betweene  the  reverend  father
Henrie  bishop  of  Lincoln,  chancelor,  and  the  right
honorable  William  lord  de  Roos,  high  treasurer  of  Eng-
land, both  of  them  counsellers  unto  the  sayd  soveraigne
king  on  the  one  party,  and  the  right  worshipfuU  John
Godeke,  and  Henrie  Moneke,  sent  as  messengers  by  the
right  reverend  and  religious  personage,  Frater  Conradus
de  Jungingen  Master  generall  of  the  Dutch  knights  of
the  Order  of  S.  Mary  on  the  other  party :  it  was,  at  the
request  and  instancie  of  the  sayd  messengers,  appoynted,
and  mutually  agreed  upon,  that  all  the  liege  people  and
subjects  of  the  sayd  soveraigne  lord  and  king  shall  have
free  licence  and  liberty  untill  the  feast  of  Easter  next
ensuing,  safely  to  travel  unto  the  land  of  Prussia  afore-
sayd,  there  to  remaine,  and  thence,  with  their  ships,
marchandises,  &  other  their  goods  whatsoever,  to  returne
unto  their  owne  home :  which  on  the  other  side,  all  the
subjects  of  the  sayd  Master  general  may,  within  the
terme  prefixed,  likewise  doe,  in  the  foresaid  realme  of
England.  Provided  alwaies,  that  after  the  time  above
limited,  neither  the  sayd  marchants  of  the  realme  of
England  may  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  nor  the  marchants
of  that  land,  in  the  realme  of  England,  exercise  any
traffique  at  al :  unles  it  be  otherwise  ordained  by  some
composition,  betweene  the  foresaid  king  of  England,  &
the  said  Master  general  in  the  meane  time  concluded.
In  witnesse  wherof,  one  part  of  this  present  Indenture
is  to  remaine  in  the  custodie  of  the  foresaid  messeng-ers.
Given  in  the  Chapter-house  of  the  Church  of  S.  Paul  at
London,  the  day  and  yere  above  written.

The  letters  of  the  chancelor  and  treasurer  of
England,  unto  Frater  Conradus  de  Jungingen,
master  generall  of  Prussia 1403.

Right  reverend  and  mighty  lord,  your  honorable
messengers  John  Godeke,  and  Henry  Moneke,  the
bearers  hereof  comming  of  late  before  the  presence  of
our  most  sovereigne  lord the  king  of  England  and of

38

THE ENGLISH LETTERS  ad.

1403.

France,  and  being  welcomed  by  our  said  lord  with  a
chearefuU  and  favourable  countenance,  they  presented
certaine  letters  on  your  behalfe  unto  the  kings  Majestie,
with  that  reverence  which  beseemed  them :  expounding
unto  his  highnes,  sundry  piracies  &  molestations  offered
of  late  upon  the  sea,  by  his  liege  people  &  subjects
unto  yours,  contrary  to  the  leagues  of  peace  and  amitie,
which  hitherto  (by  Gods  grace)  have  bene  maintained
and  continued  on  both  parts.  In  consideration  of  which
piracies  and  molestations,  your  messengers  demanded
full  restitution  and  recompense  to  be  made,  either  unto
the  damnified  parties,  or  unto  their  procurators.  We
therefore  at  that  time,  especially  being  in  the  presence
of  our  soveraigne  (who  with  his  puissant  army  tooke
his  progresse  towards  the  remote  part  of  Wales  being
subject  unto  his  dominion,  to  see  justice  executed
upon  his  people  of  those  parts,  who  very  rashly  have
presumed  to  rebell  against  him  their  sovereigne,  con-
trary to  their  allegeance)  right  well  perceived  that  it
was  his  highnesse  intention,  that  every  one  should  have
due  justice  faithfully  administred  unto  him,  especially
your  subjects,  and  that  with  all  favour,  whom  he  hath
alwayes  in  times  past  right  graciously  intreated,  as  if
they  had  bene  his  owne  liege  subjects  and  native  coun-
trey  men,  whome  also  hee  purposeth  hereafter  friendly  to
protect :  insomuch  that  betweene  him  and  his  subjects
on  the  one  party,  and  betweene  you  and  yours  on  the
other  party,  great  abundance  and  perfection  of  mutuall
amity  may  increase.  And  therefore  we  offered  unto
your  foresayd  messengers,  after  they  had  particularly
declared  unto  us  such  piracies  and  wrongs,  to  sende  the
kings  letters  unto  them  of  whom  complaint  was  made,
firmely  injoyning  them,  under  grievous  penalties,  that
without  delay  they  restore  or  cause  to  bee  restored
unto  the  parties  damnified,  or  unto  their  procuratours,
all  ships,  marchandises,  wares,  and  goods,  by  them  taken
or  violently  stolne  from  your  subjects.  And  that  your
said  messengers  may  partly  attaine  their  desire,  we  have

39

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1403-
I  Name/y  the commaunded certaine  \  ships, marchandises,  wares,  and
shipofEdgard  goods,  found in  certaine  havens,  to be dehvered unto
The^shitoT'  t^^"^- Howbeit, as touching other goods,  which are
Tidman  Dor-  perhaps perished or  wanting by infortunate dissipation
dewantand or  destruction,  and for the  which  the  said messengers
Tidman  War-  of  yours demand satisfaction to be made unto them
aniLeuszvich "^^^^^^ ^ certam time by us hmited : may it please
your honor to understand,  that  in the  absence  of  our
[I.  159.] sayd  sovereigne  lord the king,  being as  yet  farre  dis-
tant from us,  wee  can in no  wise limit  or set  downe
any  such  terme  of  time. Notwithstanding,  at  the  pros-
perous returne  of  our  soveraigne,  we  are  determined  to
commune with him about this matter. Of whose
answere so soone as we be certified,  we purpose to
signifie  his  intention  unto  you  by  our  letters. Sithens
also  (right  reverend  and  mighty  lord)  your  sayd  messen-
gers are  contented,  for  the  present,  to  accept  of  our  offer
aforesayde,  as  indeede  by  all reason  they  ought  thereat
to  rest  content,  especially  whereas by  this meanes  they
shall  the  more  speedily  attaine  unto the  effect  of  their
purposes  (to  the  shorte  and  wished  execution  and  perfor-
mance of  which  offer,  we  will,  by  Gods  helpe,  endevour,
to the utmost  of  our  ability)  may  it  be  your  will and
pleasure, that as in the kingdome of  England, your
marchants  and subjects  are  courteously  intreated  : even
so  the  marchants  and  liege  people  of  our  soveraigne  lord
the king  and of  his kingdomes peaceably  frequenting
your  parts,  either  in  regard  of  traffique  or  of  any  other
just  occasion,  may  there  in  like  manner  friendly  bee  used,
and  with  your  marchants  and  subjects  suffered  to  com-
municate, and  to  have  intercourse of  traffique,  injoying
the commodities of  the ancient league. By  this also
the  fervent  zeale  and  affection  which  you  beare  unto  the
royall crowne of  England shall undoubtedly  appeare  :
albeit  betweene the  famous  houses of  England and of
Prussia,  the  bandes  of  unfained  love  and  friendship  have
bin  successively  confirmed  and  kept  inviolable  in  times
T^ote  well. past. And thus (right reverend and mighty lord)

40

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS  ad.

1404-
wishing  unto  you  increase  of  honour  and  prosperity,  wee
take  our  leaves. Written  at  London  the  fift  of  October,
in  the  yeare  of  our  lord  1403.  H°3-

By  the  chancelor,  the  treasurer,  and  other  lords  of
the  hono:  counsell  of  the  king  of  England  and
France,  being  personally  present  at  London.

The  letters  of  king  Henry  the  4.  unto  Conradus
de  Jungingen  the  master  general  of  Prussia,
for  mutual  conversation  and  intercourse  of
traffique  to  continue  betv^een  the  marchants
of  England  and  of  Prussia,  for  a  certaine  terme
of  time.

Enry  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England  &
France,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  to  the  noble  and
mighty  personage  of  sacred  religion,  Frater  Con-

radus de  Jungingen  Master  generall  of  the  Order  of  the
Dutch  knights  of  S.  Marie  &c.  our  most  deare  and  wel-
beloved  friend,  greeting,  and  continuall  increase  of  our
auncient  and  sincere  amity.  By  the  grievous  complaynts
of  our  liege  subjects  concerning  traffique,  as  it  were
circularwise  too  &  fro  both  our  dominions,  we  have  often
bene  advertised  that  in  regard  of  divers  injuries  and
damages,  which  as  well  our  as  your  marchants  (who  by
their  dealings  in  marchandise  were  woont  peaceably  to
use  mutual  conversation  together,  whereupon  very  many
commodities  are  knowen  to  have  proceeded)  have,  by
occasion  of  pirates,  roving  up  and  downe  the  sea,  some-
times heretofore  sustayned :  both  the  sayd  marchants  of
our  &  of  your  dominions  do  abstaine  themselves  from
their  wonted  mutual  conversation  &  traffique,  as  they
have  likewise  carefully  abstained  at  sometimes  heretofore,
and  especially  from  that  time,  wherein  at  the  instant
request  of  your  messengers,  being  of  late  before  our
presence,  the  free  accesse  of  our  marchants  unto  your
territories  and  dominions,  &  of  your  marchants  unto
our realmes hath bene forbidden. Sithens therefore

41

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1404.

(our  most  deare  friend)  such  injuries  (if  any)  as  have  bene

attempted  against  your subjects,  were  never  committed

by  our  will  and  consent,  as  we  thinke  that  your  selfe  on

the  other  side  have  done  the  like : sithens  also,  so  much

as  in  us  lieth,  wee  are  ready  to  exhibit  full  justice  with

favour  unto  any  of  your  people  being  desirous  to  make

complaint, so that accordingly  justice may  equally be

done  unto  our  marchants  by  you  &  your  subjects,  which

marchants  have  in  like  sort  bene  injuried,  wishing  with

The  auncient all our  heart,  that  the  ancient  friendship  &  love,  which

friendship  be-  |^g^^|^  continued  a  lonp-  time  between  our  realme  and  your  i

tweene  Ens- . -^ ■  jj--  ■.-,

/and  and territories  and  dominions,  may  persevere  in  time  to  come,

Prussia.  a-nd that sweet and acceptable peace, which is to be

embraced  of  al  Christians,  may  according  to  the  good
pleasure  of  the  author  of  peace,  be  nourished  &  mayn-
tained :  we  do  most  heartily  require  the  sayd  friendship,
exhorting  you  in  the  Lord  that  you  would  on  your
behalf  consent  &  ordain  (even  as,  if  you  shall  so  do,  we
for  our  part  wil  consent  likewise)  that  from  this  present
until  the  feast  of  Easter  next  insuing  (al  molestations  &
injuries  which  may  be  offred  ceasing  on  both  parts)  our
subjects  by  your  territories  &  dominions,  &  your  subjects
by  our  realms,  may  peaceably  &  securely  travel,  &  that
according  to  their  wonted  maner,  they  may  friendly  con-
verse &  exercise  mutual  traffick  together :  because  we  are
determined  to  send  unto  you  &  your  counsel  in  the
mean  time  some  of  our  ambassadors,  friendly  to  in  treat
about  the  foresaid  pretended  injuries,  so  far  forth  as  they
shal  concerne  our  subjects. At  whose  arival  we  stand  in

[I.  160.]  good  hope  that  by  the  due  administration  of  justice  on
both  parts,  such  order  (by  Gods  assistance)  shalbe  taken,
that  mutual  peace  and  tranquillity  may  be  established
between  us  in  times  to  come.  Also  our  desire  is  in
particular,  that  our  marchants  &  liege  subjects  may  have
more  free  passage  granted  them  unto  the  parts  of  Sconia,
for  the  providing  of  herrings  and  of  other  fishes  there,
that  they  may  there  remayne,  and  from  thence  also  may
more securely  returne  unto  their  owne  home : and  we

42

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS  a.d.

1404.

beseech  you  in  consideration  of  our  owne  selves,  that  you
would  have  our  marchants  and  liege  subjects  especially
recommended  unto  you,  safely  protecting  them  (if  need
shall  require)  under  the  shadow  of  your  defence  :  even  as
you  would  have  us  to  deale  in  the  like  case  with  your
own  subjects.  Moreover,  whatsoever  you  shall  thinke
good  to  put  in  practise  in  this  behalfe,  may  it  please  you
of  your  friendship,  by  our  faythfuU  subject  John  Browne
the  bearer  hereof  to  give  us  to  understand.  In  the
Sonne  of  the  glorious  virgine  fare  ye  well,  with  continuall
prosperity  and  felicity  according  to  your  owne  hearts  desire.
Given  under  our  privie  scale,  at  our  palace  of  Westmin-
ster, the  fift  day  of  June,  and  in  the  fift  yere  of  our  reigne.

Postscriptum.

Right  reverend  and  our  most  deare  friend :  albeit  our
welbeloved  Arnold  de  Dassele  the  procurator  of
your  foresaid  messengers,  being  desirous  at  this  time  to
make  his  final  returne  unto  your  parts,  by  reason  of  the
affayres,  for  which  he  hath  remained  in  our  realme  of
England,  cannot  as  yet  obtaine  his  wished  expedition :
notwithstanding  you  of  your  sincere  affection  ought  not
to  marvel  or  any  whit  to  be  grieved  thereat :  because
troubles  of  wars  arising,  which  in  some  sort  concerned  our
selves,  and  especially  in  regard  of  the  continuall  assaults
of  the  French  men  &  Britons  against  us  and  our  king-
dome,  for  the  offence  of  whom,  and  our  owne  defence,
our  liege  subjects  (especially  they,  of  whom  your  subjects
damnified  have  made  their  complaints)  have  armed
themselves  to  combate  upon  the  sea :  we  could  not  grant
unto  the  foresayd  Arnold  such  and  so  speedy  an  ex-
pedition, as  he  earnestly  desired  to  have.  Unto  the
which  Arnold  your  procurator  we  have  offered  in  as  short
time  as  may  be,  to  administer  complete  justice  with
favour,  to  ye  end  that  for  this  cause  he  might  dispose
himselfe  to  remaine  in  our  realme  of  England :  &  yet
notwithstanding  wee  would  do  the  very  same  even  in  the
absence  of  the  sayd  procurator. Given  as  above.

43

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1404.

To  the  most  renowmed  prince  and  mighty  Lord,
Henrie  king  of  England  &c.  our  gracious
Lord.

OUr  humble  recommendations,  with  our  most  instant
and  continuall  prayers  for  you  being  graciously  by
your  Majestic  taken  in  good  part  &c.  Most  soveraigne
king,  mighty  prince,  gratious  lord,  and  unto  us  most
unfaynedly  beloved,  we  received  of  late  your  gracious
letters  by  your  Majesties  liege  subject  John  Brown,  the
contents  wherof  seemed  to  be  these  following :  first
that  of  long  time  heretofore,  there  have  bene  between
the  marchants  of  your  realm  &  of  our  lands,  not  only
quiet  &  peaceable  accesse  one  unto  another,  but  also
mutual  participation,  &  common  traffique  of  their  wares,
being  right  commodious  &  availeable  for  them  both :
howbeit,  that  now  the  foresaid  profitable  conversation,
by  reason  of  certain  notorious  robberies,  committed  upon
the  sea  by  pyrates  against  both  parts,  &  the  wonted
accesse  also  of  your  subjects  unto  our  dominions,  were
altogether  forbidden.  Moreover,  you  call  to  remem-
brance the  ancient  amity  &  friendship  betweene  both  our
lands,  with  the  invaluable  commodity  of  sweet  amiable
peace,  which  are  by  al  faithful  Christians,  to  the  utmost
of  their  endevour  to  be  imbraced.  Wherupon  you  of
your  exceeding  clemency,  do  offer  your  Majesties  ful
consent,  that  the  foresaid  prohibition  being  released  until
the  feast  of  Easter  next  ensuing,  the  said  marchants
of  your  dominions  may  in  our  territories,  and  our
marchants  likewise  may  in  your  realms  (al  molestations
ceasing)  exercise  their  woonted  trafiique :  especially
sithens  in  the  mean  season  your  royall  wisdome  hath
determined  to  direct  unto  us  your  hono:  ambassadors  in
friendly  sort  to  treat  and  parle  with  us  as  touching  the
pretended  injuries,  so  far  forth  as  they  may  concerne
your  subjects.  Adding  moreover  in  particular  that  when
your  people  shall  repayre  unto  the  parts  of  Sconia  to
fish for herrings,  having consideration & regard unto

44

THE PRUSSIAN LETTERS  ad.

1404.
your  majestie,  we  would  have  them  especially  recom-
mended unto  our  protection  &c.  Most  soveraigne  lord
&  king,  &  gracious  prince,  wee  doe  with  unfained  and
hearty  affection  embrace  the  oracles  of  your  majesties
most  courteous  &  acceptable  offer  :  wherein  you  have
used  most  diligent  &  effectuall  perswasions,  that  comple-
ment of  justice  should  be  done  unto  the  parties  injuried,
&  that  peace  &  friendship  should  take  place,  making
no  doubt  of  your  own  royall  person,  nor  of  our  selves
or  of  any  appertayning  unto  us,  but  that  our  inclinations
and  desires  in  this  regarde  are  all  one  and  the  same  :
neither  would  we  lightly  transgresse  the  limits  of  your
perswasions  without  some  just,  weighty,  &  reasonable
cause,  forasmuch  as  the  matters  perswaded  are  in  very  [I.  161.]
deede  most  happy  preservatives  of  a  common  weale,  yea
&  of  nature  it  selfe.  Moreover  whereas  your  highnes
hath  farther  requested  us,  that  the  prohibition  of  your
subjects  accesse  unto  our  dominions  might,  untill  the
feast  of  Easter  next  ensuing,  be  released  :  we  answere
(under  correction  of  your  majesties  more  deliberate
counsell)  that  it  is  farre  more  expedient  for  both  parts
to  have  the  sayd  prohibition  continued  then  released,
until  such  time  as  satisfaction  be  performed  on  both  sides
unto  the  parties  endamaged,  not  in  words  only,  but
actually  &  really  in  deeds,  or  by  some  course  of  law
or  friendly  composition.  For  there  is  no  equall  nor
indifferent  kinde  of  consort  or  trade  between  the  im-
poverished party  and  him  that  is  inriched,  betweene  the
partie  which  hath  obtayned  justice  and  him  that  hath
obtayned  none  between  the  offender  and  the  party
offended  :  because  they  are  not  mooved  with  like  affec-
tions. For  the  remembrance  of  injuries  easily  stirreth
up  inconsiderate  motions  of  anger.  Also,  such  a  kind
of  temperature  or  permixtion,  as  it  were,  by  way  of  con-
trariety breedeth  more  bitternes  then  sweetnes,  more  hate
then  love  :  whereupon  more  grievous  complaints  aswel
unto  your  highnes  as  unto  our  selves,  might  be  occa-
sioned. The  lord knoweth,  that  even  now  we  are  too

45

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1404.

much  wearied  and  disquieted  with  the  importunate  and
instant  complaints  of  our  subjects,  insomuch  that  wee
cannot  at  this  present  by  any  convenient  meanes  release
or  dissolve  the  sayd  prohibition,  before  wee  be  sufficiently
informed  by  your  majesties  ambassadors,  of  the  satis-
faction of  our  endamaged  subjects.  Furthermore,  whereas
your  majesties  request,  concerning  your  subjects  that  shal
come  unto  the  parts  of  Sconia,  is  that  we  would  defend
them  under  our  protection  :  be  it  knowen  unto  your
highnes,  that  for  divers  considerations  us  reasonably
Margaret moving,  being provoked by the queene of  Denmarke

queen  of ^j^^ •\^^^ people, being also urged thereunto full sore

Denmarke  •  '■ . /• ^  .^

against  our  wils,  for  the  repelling  and  avoiding  of  in-
juries, we  have  sent  forth  our  armie  against  them.  How-
beit  for  a  certaine  time  a  truce  is  concluded  on  both  parts,
so  that  our  people  are  actually  returned  home.  Farre
be  it  from  us  also,  that  our  subjects  being  occupied  in
warres,  should  in  any  sort  willingly  molest  or  reproch
any  strangers,  of  what  landes  or  nations  soever,  not
being  our  professed  enemies.  For  this  should  be  to
oppresse  the  innocent  in  stead  of  the  guilty,  to  condemne
the  just  for  the  unjust  :  then  which  nothing  can  be
more  cruel,  nor  a  revenge  of  greater  impietie.  In  very
deede  (most  gracious  prince  and  lorde)  we  are  moved
with  right  hearty  sympathy  and  compassion  for  any  in-
convenience which  might  happen  in  your  regiment  :
wishing  from  the  bottome  of  our  hearts,  that  all  affayres
may  right  prosperously  and  happily  succeede,  about  the
royall  person  and  regiment  of  your  most  excellent  Ma-
jestic, and  that  continually.  The  like  whereof  wee  hope
from  you  :  most  humbly  commending  our  selves,  and
our  whole  Order  unto  your  highnes.  Given  at  our  castle
of  Marienburgh,  the  16.  day  the  moneth  of  July,  in  the
yere  of  our  Lord 1404.

46

KING HENRY IV.'S AGREEMENT

An  agreement  made  betweene  king  Henry  the
fourth  and  Conradus  de  Jungingen  Master
generall of  the  land  of Prussia.

His  Indenture  made  between  Sir  William
Esturmy  knight,  John  Kington  clerke,
and  William  Brampton  citizen  of  London
the  ambassadors,  commissioners,  &  mes-
sengers of  the  most  mighty  prince  and
lord,  our  sovereigne  lord  Henrie  by  the
grace  of  God  king  of  England  and
France,  and  lorde  of  Ireland,  for  the  repayring,  refor-
mation, and  amends  of  whatsoever  damages,  grievances,
excesses,  violences,  and  injuries  in  any  sort  unjustly  at-
tempted, done,  or  ojffered,  by  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord
the  king  and  his  liege  people  and  subjects,  unto  the  great
and  mighty  lord  Conradus  de  Jungingen  Master  general
of  the  order  of  the  Dutch  knights  of  S.  Maries  hospitall
of  Jerusalem,  or  his  subjects  :  and  for  the  requiring,
demanding,  and  receiving  of  such  like  reparations,  refor-
mations &  amends,  by  the  foresayd  lord  the  Master
generall,  for  the  behalfe  of  himselfe  or  any  of  his  sub-
jects whatsoever,  from  &  in  the  name  of  our  soveraign
lord  the  king  &  his  subjects,  unto  the  sayd  Master
general,  into  his  land  of  Prussia,  by  our  sovereigne  lord
the  king,  &  appointed  as  ambassadors  on  the  one  party :
And  betweene  the  hono:  Lords  and  religious  personages
Conradus  de  Lichtenstein  great  commander,  Warnherus
de  Tettingen  chiefe  hospitalary  &  commander  in  Elbing,
&  Arnold  de  Hacken  treasurer,  the  procurators  &  com-
missioners of  the  great  &  mighty  lord  the  Master  general,
being  in  like  &  equal  sort  and  in  all  respects,  as  the
ambassadours  of  England  are,  authorized  on  the  contrary
side  by  the  authoritie  and  power  of  the  sayd  Master
general  on  the  other  part,  witnesseth :  That  divers  treaties
&  conferences  being  holden  between  the  said  ambassadors,
messengers,  &  procurators  or  commissioners  of  &  con-

47

A.D.

1405.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405-

cerning  the  reparations,  reformations  &  amends  of  cer-
taine  damages,  grievances,  excesses,  violences  &  injuries
offered  and  attempted  aswel  by  the  Prussians  against  the
[I.  162.]  English  as  by  the  English  against  the  Prussians,  and  of
other  actes  unjustly  committed  on  both  parts :  in  con-
clusion, after  the  sayd  treatise,  the  foresayd  ambassa-
dours,  procurators  and  commissioners  by  vertue  of  the
authority  committed  unto  them  appoynted,  and  with  one
consent  agreed  unto  the  articles  under  written.

Inprimis,  that  for  the  consideration  of  mutuall  love
and  woonted  friendship,  and  of  peace  and  tranquillity  here-
after to  be  continued  and  maintained,  and  also  that  the
articles  underwritten  may  more  prosperously  be  brought
unto  a  wished  effect,  between  our  said  soveraign  lord  the
king  &  his  liege  people  &  subjects,  &  the  subjects,  people,
&  inhabitants  of  the  territories  and  dominions  of  the  fore-
sayd lord  the  Master  generall,  it  is  agreed  and  concluded,
that  all  liege  marchants  of  England  whatsoever,  shall
have  free  licence  and  libertie  to  arrive  with  their  shippes,
goods  and  marchandises  whatsoever,  at  any  Porte  of  the
land  of  Prussia,  and  also  the  sayd  goods  and  marchan-
dises farther  unto  any  place  of  the  sayd  land  of  Prussia
to  transport,  and  there  with  any  person  or  persons  freely
to  contract  and  bargaine,  even  as  heretofore,  and  from
auncient  times  it  hath  bene  accustomed.  Which  liberty
in  all  respects  is  granted  unto  the  Prussians  in  England.

Item  it  is  farther  agreed  betweene  the  sayd  ambassa-
dours,  procurators,  and  commissioners,  that  whereas  of
1403.  late,  namely  in  the  yeare  of  our  lord  1403,  the  sayd
Master  general  by  his  discreet  subjects  John  Godek  of
Dantzik,  and  Henry  Monek  of  Elbing,  his  ambassadors
&  messengers,  for  this  purpose  hath  caused  certain
articles,  (namely  20.  in  number)  containing  in  them
matters  of  damages,  molestations,  violences,  and  injuries
committed  and  offered  against  the  said  Master  generall
&  his  subjects,  by  our  sayd  soveraigne  lord  the  king
his  subjects  &  liege  people,  to  be  exhibited,  given  up
and  delivered unto  our  lord the  king  aforesaid in his

48

KING HENRY IV.'S AGREEMENT  ad

1405-

kingdome  of  England :  it  is  concluded  and  agreed  about
the  sayd  20.  articles,  by  the  aforesaid  ambassadors,  com-
missioners, and  procurators,  as  in  the  acts  &  pleas  had
and  made  before  the  sayd  ambassadors,  commissioners
and  procurators,  and  in  the  records  made  and  written
of  and  about  the  examination  of  such  articles,  it  is  more
at  large  contayned  (unto  the  which  the  sayd  ambassadors,
commissioners,  and  messengers  doe  here  in  this  place
referre  themselves)  of  the  which  articles  also  some  are
received  by  the  commissioners  aforesayd,  and  others  are
proroged  unto  a  certaine  time  under  written,  even  as  in
the  foresayd  registers  it  is  more  fully  contayned  and
put  downe  in  writing.

As  touching  certaine  other  articles  also  exhibited  a  newe
unto  the  sayd  English  ambassadors,  in  the  land  of
Prussia  being  16  in  number  (whereof  one  is  admitted,
&  the  rest  are  proroged  until  a  terme  underwritten)
the  same  course  is  to  be  taken  and  observed,  which  was
before  appoynted  and  agreed  upon,  about  the  articles
delivered  and  exhibited  unto  our  foresayd  sovraigne  lorde
the  king,  as  is  aforesayd.

Moreover,  as  touching  the  articles  exhibited  by  the
English  ambassadours  in  the  name  and  behalfe  of  their
sayd  soveraigne  lord  the  king  of  England,  unto  the
procuratours  and  commissioners  of  the  foresayd  lord  the
Master  generall  (of  the  which  some  are  declared  already,
and  the  declaration  of  the  rest  is  proroged  untill  a
certayne  terme  undernamed,  even  as  in  the  registers
made  of  and  upon  the  examination  of  the  sayd  articles,
it  is  more  manifestly  provided)  the  same  course  is  to  be
taken,  which  must  be  observed  about  the  articles  of  the
sayd  lord  the  Master  generall,  exhibited,  as  well  unto  the
foresayd  soveraigne  prince  in  England,  as  unto  his  ambas-
sadors in  the  land  of  Prussia,  even  as  about  the  sayd
articles  it  is  before  concluded.

And  whereas  on  the  behalfe  of  the  citizens  and  mar-  Thecompldnts
chants  of  the  cities  of  Rij  and  Dorp,  and  of  other  townes  °f,^^^  ^^'^°'
in  the  land  of  Livonia,  many  and  great  complaints  have  "^'^^^'

II  49  D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

bene  by  way  of  articles  exhibited  and  delivered  unto  the
sayd  English  ambassadours  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  which
for  divers  causes,  could  not  as  then  be  ended  :  therefore
it  is  concluded  and  agreed  upon  betweene  the  ambassa-
dours, and  the  commissioners  aforesayd,  that  the  saide
citizens  and  marchants  may  in  the  towne  of  Dordract  in
Holland,  upon  the  first  day  of  the  moneth  of  May  next
ensuing  (at  the  which  time  and  place,  the  continuation
and  prorogation  of  all  other  articles  not  fully  declared  in
the  partes  of  Prussia,  shall  be  put  in  ure)  by  themselves
or  their  lawfuU  procurators,  make  their  appearance,  for  the
obtayning  of  a  convenient,  just,  and  reasonable  reforma-
tion of  all  injuries  attempted  against  them,  then,  or  at
some  other  times  within  one  whole  yere  next  following,
and  not  afterward,  being  effectually  set  downe  and
limited,  at  the  place  aforesaid,  by  the  consent  of  the
ambassadours  and  commissioners  of  either  parte,  all
lawfull  impediments  ceasing.

Provided  alwayes,  that  the  value  and  price  of  all  wares,
goods,  and  marchandises,  whereof  the  said  citizens  and
marchants  of  Livonia,  in  their  articles  received  by  the
sayde  English  ambassadours,  as  is  aforesayd,  doe  make
mention,  shall  be  justly  esteemed,  prized,  and  approoved,
not  by  any  of  England,  or  of  Prussia,  or  of  Livonia,  but
by  some  other  indifferent  marchants  of  good  credite,
valuing  them  at  the  true  rate  of  marchants,  which  such
[I.  163.]  like  marchandise  would  have  amounted  unto,  if,  at  the
time  when  they  were  taken,  they  had  bene  to  be  solde  at
the  town  of  Bruges  in  Flanders.

Forasmuch  also,  as  divers  and  sundry  Prussians  (who
exhibited  manifolde  Articles  of  complaints,  being  received
by  the  said  English  Ambassadours,  at  their  abode  in
Prussia)  made  not  their  personall  appearance,  before  the
saide  English  Ambassadours,  in  the  lande  of  Prussia
aforesaide  :  The  prorogation  above-mentioned  was  made
unto  the  first  day  of  the  moneth  of  May  :  and  also  it  was
agreed  upon  by  the  saide  Ambassadours,  Procurators,  and
Commissioners, that the saide parties which had not

50

KING HENRY IV.'S AGREEMENT  a.d.

1405.

appeared  before  shall  have  libertie  graunted  them,  lawfully
to  make  their  appearance,  upon  the  first  of  May  aforesaide,
at  the  towne  of  Dordract,  either  by  themselves  or  by
their  Procurators,  and  also  to  bring  with  them  the  letters
testimonial,  and  patents,  sealed  with  the  seale  of  the  saide
Lord  the  Master  generall,  (he  having  first  of  all  received
sound  and  sufficient  information  from  the  cities  whereof
the  parties  plaintife  are  citizens,  of  the  damages  and
grievances  any  way  unjustly  inflicted  upon  them  or  any  of
them  by  the  English)  to  the  end  that  they  may  there  by
articles  conveniently  declare  and  prove,  before  the  Ambas-
sadours.  Procurators,  messengers,  and  Commissioners  of
both  partes,  the  rate  and  value  of  their  saide  goods  :  and
that  in  so  doing  they  may  obtaine  convenient,  just,  and
reasonable  restitution,  for  all  acts  unjustly  attempted
against  them,  then,  or  at  some  other  times  effectually  to
bee  set  downe  and  limited  at  the  foresaid  place  by  the
consent  of  the  Ambassadors  and  Commissioners  of  both
parts,  even  as  it  was  above  promised  unto  the  marchants
of  Livonia.

But  if  they  of  Prussia  last  above-mentioned,  shall  not
upon  the  first  of  May,  and  at  the  place  appointed,  for
some  cause,  make  their  appearance,  that  then  it  shalbe
lawfull  for  them,  at  any  time  within  one  whole  yeere  next
following,  to  repaire  unto  the  lord  Chancelor  of  England,
at  the  citie  of  London,  and  to  insinuate  and  declare  unto
him  their  complaints  before  exhibited  unto  the  saide
English  Ambassadours  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  or  which
complaints  should  have  bene  delivered  at  the  foresaid
terme  and  place,  or  els,  the  which  were  not  then  and  there
fully  finished  and  dispatched  :  and  also  by  articles  as  is
aforesaide,  to  declare  and  prove  the  true  worth  and
estimation  of  all  damages  and  grievances  any  wayes
unjustly  offered  by  the  English  unto  them  or  any  of
them  :  to  the  ende  that  they  may  (as  it  is  above  men-
tioned) effectually  receive,  and  also  speedily  and  easily
obtaine  convenient,  just,  and  reasonable  reformation  and
satisfaction,  for  al  acts  unjustly  attempted  against  them,

51

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405-

which  are  contained in  the  complaints  not  as yet  fully-
declared  and  finished.

Moreover,  it  is  appointed  and  agreed  upon  betweene
the  foresaide  Ambassadours  and  Commissioners  :  that  the
forenamed  sovereign  Lord  &  the  said  lord  the  Master
general  are  to  send  and  set  forward  their  Ambassadours,
messengers,  and  Commissioners,  upon  the  first  of  May
unto  the  place  appointed,  to  treate,  parle,  agree,  and
conclude  about  those  affaires,  which  shal  then  and  there
happen  to  be  treated  of  and  handled  among  them.

Furthermore,  betweene  the  often  mentioned  Ambassa-
dours, Procurators,  and  Commissioners,  it  is  enacted  and
concluded  : that  unto all  and  singular  lawful!  statutes,

T<lote  well,  ordinations,  and  prohibitions  framed,  made,  and  ordained,
by  the  saide  lorde  the  Master  generall,  in  his  land  of
Prussia,  or  by  his  Proconsuls  and  Consuls,  and  his  gover-
nours  of  cities,  townes,  villages,  and  of  other  places  in  the
land  of  Prussia,  unto  the  observation  whereof,  aswell  the
subjectes  of  the  said  Master  general,  as  foreners  and
strangers,  are  tyed  and  bound  :  unto  the  very  same
statutes,  ordinations,  and  prohibitions,  al  English  mar-
chants  whatsoever  resorting  unto  the  land  of  Prussia,
must  be  firmely  bounden  and  subject.

Also  it  is  ordained,  that  whatsoever  sale-clothes  are
already  transported,  or  at  any  time  hereafter  to  bee
transported  out  of  England  into  Prussia  by  the  English
marchants,  and  shall  there  be  offered  to  bee  solde,  whether
they  be  whole  cloathes  or  halfe  cloathes,  they  must
containe  both  their  endes.

Lastly,  that  the  matters  above-mentioned  fall  not  short
and  voyde  of  their  wished  effect  ;  the  treaty  and  confer-
ence about  all  and  singular  damages  and  grievances
(whereof  there  is  not  as  yet  done,  but  there  must  be,
by  the  vertue  of  these  presents,  performed,  a  reformation
and  amendment)  must  be  continued  and  proroged  untill
the  first  of  May  next  ensuing  :  as  by  these  presents  they
are  continued  and  proroged  with  the  continuation  of  the
dayes then immediately following, at the towne of

52

KING HENRY IV.'S AGREEMENT  ad.

1405.

Dordract  aforesaide  :  at  the  which  time  and  place,  or  at
other  times  and  places,  in  the  meane  space,  as  occasion
shall  serve,  by  both  parties  to  be  limited  and  assigned,
or  else  within  one  yeere  after  the  said  first  day  of  the
moneth  of  May  next  ensuing  bee  expired  :  the  hurt  and
damaged  parties  generally  before-mentioned,  shall  have
performed  unto  them  a  convenient,  just,  and  reasonable
reformation  on  both  partes.  Provided  alwayes,  if  within
the  terme  of  the  saide  yeere,  some  convenient,  just,  and
reasonable  reformation  bee  not  performed  unto  the  parties
injuried,  and  endamaged,  which  are  generally  above  [I.  164.]
mentioned  :  that  then,  within  three  whole  moneths  after
the  foresaid  yere  shall  expired,  the  Prussians  shall  depart
out  of  the  realmes  and  dominions  of  the  saide  Soveraigne
Lorde  the  king  of  England,  together  with  their  mar-
chandize,  and  with  other  goods  which  they  shal  have
gotten  or  bought,  within  the  space  of  the  foresaide
three  moneths  :  and  that  the  EngUsh  men  also  are
likewise  in  all  respects  bounden  to  avoid  and  (no
lawfull  impediment  hindering  them)  to  withdrawe  them-
selves and  to  depart  out  of  the  territories  and  dominions
of  the  saide  Master  generall,  without  all  molestation,
perturbation,  and  impediment  whatsoever,  none  other
intimation  or  admonition  being  necessarie  in  this  regard.

Howbeit  least  that  by  the  robberies  and  piracies  of
some  insolent  and  perverse  people,  matter  should  be
ministred  unto  the  said  lord  the  Master  generall,  of
swarving  from  the  faithfuU  observation  of  the  foresaide
agreements,  or  (which  God  forbid)  any  occasion  bee  given
him  of  not  observing  them  :  it  is  also  decreed  by  the
often  above  mentioned  Ambassadours  and  messengers,
that  if  the  goods  and  marchandize  of  any  of  the  saide
lorde  Master  generall  his  subjectes  whatsoever  shall  be
from  hencefoorth  unjustly  taken  upon  the  Sea,  by  any
English  Pirates,  and  shalbe  caried  into  the  realme  of
England,  and  there  received,  that  the  Governours  and
keepers  of  portes,  and  of  other  places  (with  whatsoever
names they  be called) at the  which portes and  places

53

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

such  marchandises  and  goods  shall  chaunce  to  arrive,
beeing  onely  informed  of  the  saide  goods  and  mar-
chandises, by  sole  report,  or  (other  proofes  wanting)  by
probable  suspition  are  bound  to  arrest  and  to  keep  them
in  safe  custodie,  favourably  to  be  restored  unto  the
owners  therof,  whensoever  they  shall  be  lawfully  de-
maunded  :  which  if  they  shall  omit  or  deny  to  performe,
from  thenceforth  the  saide  governours  and  keepers  are
bound  to  make  unto  the  parties  endamaged,  a  recom-
pense of  their  losses.

And  for  fault  of  justice  to  be  executed,  by  the  said
governours  and  keepers,  our  soveraign  lord  the  king
above  named,  after  he  shall  conveniently  be  requested
by  the  parties  damnified,  is  bound  within  three  moneths
next  ensuing  (all  lawfuU  impediments  being  excepted)
to  make  correspondent,  just,  and  reasonable  satisfaction,
unto  the  saide  parties  endamaged.  Otherwise,  that  it
shal  be  right  lawfull  for  the  saide  lorde  the  Master
generall,  to  arrest,  and  after  the  arrest  to  keepe  in  safe
custodie  the  goods  of  the  English  marchants  being  in
the  land  of  Prussia,  to  the  condigne  satisfaction  of  such
injuries,  as  have  bene  offered  unto  his  subjects,  untill
his  said  subjects  be  justly  and  reasonably  contented.

Likewise  also  in  all  respects,  the  same  justice  is  to
be  done  unto  the  English  by  the  said  Lord  the  Master
generall  and  his  subjects  in  Prussia,  even  as  it  hath
bene  enacted  and  decreed  in  the  above  written  clause,
beginning,  Casterum  ne  per  &c.  In  English.  Howbeit
least  that  &c.  for  the  said  Master  general,  and  his  sub-
jects by  the  foresaide  ambassadors  of  England,  and  the
commissioners  of  the  said  lord  the  Master  generall,  that
in  like  cases  justice  ought  to  be  administred  on  the
behalfe  of  himselfe,  and  of  his  subjects  in  the  realme
of  England.

And  that  all  and  singular  the  covenants  above  written,
may  in  time  to  come,  by  the  parties  whom  they  con-
cerne,  firmly  and  inviolably  be  observed ;  the  forenamed
ambassadors, messengers, and commissioners, all and

54

HANSE MERCHANTS' AGREEMENT  ad.

1405.

every  of  them,  for  the  full  credite,  probation,  and  tes-
timonie  of  all  the  premisses,  have  unto  these  present
Indentures,  made  for  the  same  purpose,  caused  everie
one  of  their  seales  with  their  owne  hands  to  be  put.
One  part  of  the  which  indentures  remaineth  in  the
custodie  of  the  English  ambassadors,  and  the  other  part
in  the  hands  of  the  commissioners  of  Prussia.  Given
at  the  castle  of  Marienburgh  in  Prussia,  in  the  yeere  of
our  Lorde  1405.  upon  the  8.  day  of  the  moneth  of
October.

An  agreement  made  betweene  King  Henrie  the
fourth  and  the  common  societie  of  the  Mar-
chants  of  the  Hans.

THis  Indenture  made  betweene  the  honourable  Sir
William  Esturmy  knight,  and  John  Kington  clearke,
procurators,  messengers,  and  commissioners  sufficiently
deputed  and  authorized  by  the  most  mighty  Prince,
Lord  Henry,  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England,  &
France,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  for  the  performation  of  ye
things  underwritten,  on  the  one  part  :  &  the  hon.  per-
sonages M.  Henry  Uredeland,  M.  Riman  Salum  chief
notaries,  Thederic  Knesvolt  secretary,  M.  Simon  Clovesten
chief  notary,  and  John  Zotebotter  citizen,  being  suffi-
ciently made  and  ordained  procurators  and  messengers,
on  the  behalfe  of  the  cities  of  Lubec,  Bremen,  Hamburg,
Sund,  and  Gripeswold,  for  the  demanding  &  obtaining
severally,  of  due  reformation,  and  recompense  at  the
hands  of  our  saide  sovereigne  lord  the  king,  and  of  his
messengers  and  commissioners  aforesayde,  for  all  injuries,  [I-  165.]
damages,  grievances,  and  manslaughters,  any  wayes  un-
justly done,  and  offi-ed  severally  by  the  liege  people
and  subjects  of  our  soveraigne  lord  the  king,  unto  the
common  societie  of  the  marchants  of  the  Hans,  and
unto  any  of  the  Citizens,  people  and  inhabitants  of  the
cities  aforesaide  whatsoever  on  the  other  part,  Wit-
nesseth :  That  betweene  all  and  every  of  the  saide
Procurators,  messengers,  and Commissioners,  by  vertue

55

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405-

of  the  authoritie  committed  unto  them,  it  hath  bene  and
is  appointed,  concluded,  and  decreed :  that  the  liege
marchants  and  subjects  of  our  said  soveraigne  lord  the
king,  and  the  marchants  of  the  common  societie  of  the
Dutch  Hans  aforesaide,  from  hencefoorth  for  one  whole
yeere  and  seven  moneths  immediately  next  ensuing  and
following,  shalbe  permitted  and  licenced  friendly,  freely,
and  securely,  to  exercise  mutual  traffike,  and  like  mar-
chants to  buy  &  sell  together,  one  of,  and  unto  another,

1400.  even  as  in  times  past,  namely,  in  the  yeere  1400.  and
before  that  time  also,  they  have  bin  accustomed  to
exercise  mutuall  traffike  and  marchandise,  and  to  buy
and  sell.

Also  the  saide  William  and  John  agreed  and  con-
sented, that  they  themselves,  or  some  other  perhaps  to
be  appointed  in  this  behalfe  by  their  saide  lord  the  king
in  their  stead,  shall  upon  the  first  day  of  the  moneth  of
May  next  to  come,  with  the  continuation  of  the  dayes
following,  at  the  towne  of  Dordract  in  Holland,  or  upon
any  other  terme  or  termes,  then  perhaps  to  bee  limited,
competently  satisfie,  and  performe  convenient  recom-
pence  unto  the  saide  common  societie,  citizens,  people,
and  inhabitants  of  the  cities  aforesaide,  and  also  of  other
cities,  townes,  and  villages  of  the  Hans,  of  and  for  all
injuries,  damages,  grievances,  and  drownings,  or  man-
slaughters done  and  committed,  as  they  alleage,  against
them,  delivered  and  exhibited  in  written  articles,  unto
the  above  named  William  and  John,  or  els  heereafter
to  bee  delivered  and  exhibited,  either  by  the  same
procurators  or  by  some  others,  which  shall  perhaps  be
authorized  in  their  stead,  or  by  the  messengers  procura-
tors and  commissioners  of  other  cities,  townes,  and  places
of  the  Hans,  in  equall  and  like  maner  and  forme,  even
as  at  the  saide  terme  limited,  or  then  perhaps  to  be  pro-
roged,  there  is  appointed  by  the  said  William  and  John,
reparation,  reformation,  and  recompence  unto  the  inhabi-
tants of  Prussia,  and  Livonia,  for  the  injuries,  damages,
and grievances unjustly done and committed against

56

HANSE MERCHANTS' AGREEMENT  ad.

1405.

them  by  the  liege  people  and  subjects  of  the  saide
soveraigne  lord  the  king,  in  the  presence  of  the  mightie
lord  the  Master  general  of  Prussia,  in  his  land  of  Prussia,
as  in  certain  letters  indented,  bearing  date  in  the  castle
of  Marienburgh  in  Prussia  the  eight  day  of  the  moneth
of  October,  in  the  yeere  of  our  lord  1405.  and  being
made  and  written  about  the  reparation,  reformation,  and
recompence  of  such  like  injuries  &c.  (the  tenour
whereof  ought  here  to  be  understood  as  if  it  were
inserted)  it  is  more  manifestly  contained.

It  was  furthermore  promised  by  the  said  William  and
John,  that  they  should  not  inforce  nor  compell  the
citizens,  people,  or  inhabitants  of  the  common  society  of
the  Hans,  or  of  the  above  named  cities,  or  of  any  other
cities  of  the  Hans  aforesaid  (having  received  sufficient
information  of  their  dwelling  and  place  of  abode)  to
more  difficult  or  district  proofes  of  their  Articles  of  com-
plaints alreadie  exhibited,  and  in  the  foresaide  termes  to
come,  to  bee  exhibited,  then  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the
lands  of  Prussia  and  Livonia,  according  to  the  forme  of
the Indentures  above  mentioned.

Moreover  the  saide  William  and  John  doe  promise,
that  so  soone  as  they  shall  come  into  the  kingdome  of
England,  and  before  the  presence  of  their  king,  they
shall  provide,  that  all  and  singular  the  priviledges  graunted
unto  the  marchants  of  the  saide  Hans  by  the  renowmed
kings  of  England,  and  confirmed  by  the  said  Soveraigne
lord  the  king  that  now  is,  must,  according  to  al  their
contents,  be  inviolably  observed  by  the  said  soveraigne
king  and  his  subjects :  and  also,  that  from  henceforth
nothing  is  unjustly  to  be  attempted,  upon  any  occasion,
pretense,  or  colour,  by  the  saide  Soveraigne  Prince,  and
the  inhabitants  of  the  realme  of  England,  to  the  pre-
judice of  the  sayde  priviledges.  They  shall  provide  also,
that  all  things  heretofore  attempted  and  practised  against
the  saide  priviledges,  shall,  by  reasonable  amendement
and  just  reformation,  utterly  be  abolished.

But if  after the date of  these presents (which God

57

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

forfend)  within  the  space  of  the  said  one  yere  and  seven
moneths  prescribed  any  damages,  injuries  or  grievances,
in  ships,  goods,  or  persons,  should,  either  by  the  English
and  the  inhabitants  of  England  be  unjustly  inflicted
upon  the  cities,  and  marchants  of  the  cities,  townes,
and  places  of  the  Hans  aforesaid,  or  by  any  mar-
chants  or  others  of  the  cities  or  townes  of  the  saide
Hans,  either  unto  the  English,  or  unto  any  of  the
inhabitants  of  that  Realme,  upon  any  fained  pretense
whatsoever,  all  and  singular  the  foresaid  messengers,
commissioners,  ambassadours,  and  procurators  have  pro-
mised, that  all  such  damages,  injuries  and  molestations
so  inflicted  by  them  who  shall  ofl^er  and  commit  them,
must  bee  reformed  and  amended,  after  the  very  same
forme  and  manner,  that  in  the  like  case  reformation,
reparation  and  amends  of  injuries,  damages,  and  moles-
tations committed  by  the  English  against  them  of
[I.  166.]  Prussia  is  to  be  performed,  according  unto  a  certaine
clause  contained  in  the  letters  above  mentioned,  which
beginneth :  Caeterum  ne  per  &c.  In  English :  Howbeit
least  that  &c.  continuing  unto  that  clause  :  Et  ut  prae-
scripta  omnia  &c.  In  English  :  And  that  all  the  covenants
above  written  &c.

It  was  also  concluded  betweene  the  foresaide  messen-
gers, commissioners,  and  procurators,  and  with  one
generall  consent  agreed  upon,  that  if  from  the  first  day
of  the  moneth  of  May  next  to  come,  within  one  whole
yeere  following,  some  convenient,  just,  and  reasonable
reformation  be  not  performed  unto  the  parties  injuried
and  damnified  generally  above  mentioned,  in  regard  of
their  damages,  molestations,  and  injuries  :  then,  within
three  moneths  after  the  saide  yeere  bee  expired,  the
marchants  of  the  Hans  cities  aforesaid  are  bound,  without
any  molestation,  perturbation,  and  impediment  whatso-
ever (none  other  intimation  or  admonition  being  necessarie
in  this  behalfe)  to  avoyde  (and  if  no  lawfull  impediment
shall  hinder  them)  to  abstaine  and  depart  from  the
Realmes  and  dominions  of  the  said  Soveraigne king  of

58

HANSE MERCHANTS' AGREEMENT  ad.

1405.

England,  with  their  marchandize  and  other  goods  bought
or  gotten  within  the  space  of  the  saide  three  moneths  :
and  also  the  English  likewise  in  all  respects  shall  avoide,
abstaine,  and  depart  from  the  territories  and  dominions
of  the  Hans  cities  aforesaide.

Also  it  was  promised  by  the  saide  William  and  John,
that  at  the  terme  appointed,  namely  upon  the  first  of  May
next  following,  or  at  some  other  terme  or  termes  then
limited  or  to  bee  limited,  there  must  be  made  a  due
recompense,  and  a  proportionall  satisfaction,  for  all  those
persons  of  the  land  of  Prussia,  Livonia,  and  of  the  cities,
townes,  and  other  places  of  the  Hans,  who  have  unjustly
bene  drowned,  and  slaine  by  the  English  :  and  that
according  to  the  tenour  of  a  certain  schedule  written  con-
cerning a  recompense  to  be  had  in  regarde  of  the  saide
persons  drowned  and  slaine,  and  presented  unto  them  by
Albertus  Rode  consul  of  the  citie  of  Thoren,  and  by  the
forenamed  procurators  and  messengers  of  the  cities  afore-
said, they  must  faithfully  and  effectually,  to  the  utmost
of  their  abilitie  indevour,  for  the  obtaining  of  the  saide
recompense  and  amends.  In  witnesse  whereof  (these
letters  of  Indenture  remaining  in  the  possession  of  the
saide  William  and  John  the  messengers,  procurators,  &
commissioners  of  England  aforesaid,  and  left  in  their
custodie,  by  the  above  named  procurators  and  messengers
Henri  Rimarus,  Thedericus,  Simon,  and  John  Sotebotter,
of  their  certaine  knowledge  and  assurance)  and  for  the  full
confirmation  and  testimonie  of  al  the  premisses,  the  fore-
said procurators  and  messengers  have  put  to  their  scales.
Given  in  the  towne  of  Dordract  the  15,  day  of  December
in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1405.

William  Esturmy  knight,  and  John  Kington  canon  of
Lincolne  (being  in  this  behalfe  sufficiently  authorized  and
deputed  as  Ambassadours,  procurators,  messengers  and
commissioners,  by  our  said  soveraigne  lord  the  king,
namely  in  regard  of  the  molestations,  injuries  and
damages  unjustly  done  and  committed  against  the  liege
people and subjectes of the foresaide most excellent

59

A.D.

J4O5.

Newcastle.

An  English
ship  of  zoo.
iunnes.

Hull.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

Prince  and  lord.  Lord  Henry  by  the  grace  of  God  king
of  England  &  France,  and  Lord  of  Ireland,  by  the
communalties  of  the  cities  of  Wismer  and  Rostok  under-
written, their  common  counsel  being  assembled  for  the
same  purpose,  &  authorized  also,  and  as  well  closely  as
expresly  maintained  and  ratified,  by  the  whole  companie
of  the  common  society  of  the  marchants  of  the  Dutch
Hans)  doe,  in  this  present  diet  at  the  towne  of  Hage
situate  in  the  countrey  of  Holland,  being  appointed  for
the  very  same  occasion,  demaund  of  you  Syr  John  de
Aa  knight,  and  Hermannus  Meyer  deputies  for  the  cities
of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  and  sufficiently  ordeined  by
authority  requisite  in  this  behalfe,  to  be  the  procurators
and  messengers  of  the  said  cities,  that  convenient,  just,
and  reasonable  satisfaction  and  recompense  may  certainely
and  effectually  be  done  unto  the  injuried  and  endamaged
parties,  who  are  specified  in  the  articles  under  written.

Imprimis,  that  about  the  feast  of  Easter,  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1394.  Henry  van  Pomeren,  Godekin
Michael,  Clays  Sheld,  Hans  Howfoote,  Peter  Hawfoote,
Clays  Boniface,  Rainbek,  and  many  others,  with  them  of
Wismer  and  of  Rostok,  being  of  the  societie  of  the  Hans,
tooke,  by  maine  force,  a  ship  of  Newcastle  upon  Tine,
called  Godezere  sailing  upon  the  Sea  towards  Prussia,
being  of  the  burthen  of  two  hundred  tunnes,  and
belonging  unto  Roger  de  Thorneton,  Robert  Gabiford,
John  Paulin,  and  Thomas  de  Chester  :  which  ship,
together  with  the  furniture  thereof  amounteth  unto  the
value  of  foure  hundred  pounds  :  also  the  woollen  cloth,
the  red  wine,  the  golde,  and  the  summes  of  money
contained  in  the  said  ship  amounted  unto  the  value  of
200.  marks  of  English  money  :  moreover  they  unjustly
slew  John  Patanson  and  John  Russell  in  the  surprising  of
the  shippe  and  goods  aforesaid,  and  there  they  imprisoned
the  sayde  parties  taken,  and,  to  their  utter  undoing,
detayned  them  in  prison  for  the  space  of  three  whole
yeeres.

Item,  that  in  the yeere  of  our  Lorde 1394.  certaine

60

HANSE  MERCHANTS'  AGREEMENT ad.

1405.
persons  of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  with  others  of  the  Hans
their  confederates  robbed  one  Richard  Horuse  of  Hull
of  divers  goods  and  marchandizes in a  ship  called the  [I.  167.]
Shipper  Berline  of  Prussia,  beeing  then  valued  at 160.
nobles.

Item,  that  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1395.  Hans  van  Hull.
Wethemonkule,  Clays  Scheld,  Godekin  Mighel,  and  one
called  Strotbeker,  by  force  of  armes,  and  by  the  assistance
of  the  men  of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  and  others  of  the
Hans,  did  upon  the  Sea  neere  unto  Norway,  wickedly
and  unjustly  take  from  John  Tutteburie,  five  pieces  of
waxe,  foure  hundred  of  werke,  and  halfe  a  last  of
osmundes,  and  other  goods,  to  the  value  of  foure
hundred  seventie  sixe  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1396.  one  John  van  Hull.
Derlowe,  Hans  van  Gelder,  and  other  their  complices
of  the  Hans  villainously  and  unjustly  tooke  a  shippe  of
William  Terry  of  Hul  called  the  Cogge,  with  thirtie
wollen  broad  clothes,  and  a  thousand  narrow  clothes,
to  the  value  of  200.  pounds.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1398.  one  John  van  Hull.
Derlowe,  Wilmer,  Hans  van  Gelder,  Clays  Scheld,
Everade  Pilgrimson,  and  divers  others  of  the  Hans,
did  upon  the  Sea  neere  unto  Norway  villainously  and
unjustly  take  a  shippe  of  John  Wisedome  of  Hull  called
the  Trinitie,  with  divers  goods  and  marchandizes,  namely
oyle,  waxe,  and  werke,  to  the  value  of  300.  pounds.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1399.  one  Clays  Hull.
Scheld,  and  others  above  written  of  Wismer  and  Rostok,
with  certaine  others  of  the  Hans,  their  confederates,
wickedly  and  unjustly  took  from  one  William  Pound
marchant  of  Hull,  two  cakes  of  waxe,  to  the  value  of
18.  poundes,  out  of  the  ship  called  the  Hawkin  Derlin
of  Dantzik.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1394.  one  Goddekin  Torke.
Mighel, Clays Scheld, Storbiker, and divers others of
Wismer  and Rostok, and of  the Hans, wickedly  and
unjustly tooke out of  a ship of  Elbing (the master

61

A.D.
1405.

Torke.

London.

London.

Colchester.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

whereof  was  called  Henry  Puys)  of  the  goods  and
marchandizes  of  Henrie  Wyman,  John  Topcliffe,  and
Henry  Lakenswither  of  Yorke,  namely  in  werke,  waxe,
osmundsj  and  bowstaves,  to  the  value  of  1060.  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1394.  certaine  male-
factors of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  with  others  of  the  Hans,
their  confederats,  wickedly  and  unjustly  took  out  of  a
ship  of  Holland  (the  master  whereof  was  called
Hinkensman)  140.  woollen  clothes  (the  price  of  one
of  the  which  clothes  was  eight  nobles)  from  Thomas
Thester  of  Yorke,  and  a  chest,  with  armour,  silver
and  golde  of  the  foresaid  Thomas,  to  the  value  of  9.
pounds.

Item,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1393.  certaine  male-
factors of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  and  others  their  complices
of  the  Hans,  wickedly  and  unjustly  tooke  from  one
Richard  Abel  of  London  woollen  cloth,  greene  cloth,
meale  and  fishes,  to  the  value  of  1 33. li.  6.s.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1405.  about  the  feast
of  S.  Michael,  one  Nicholas  Femeer  of  Wismer  marchant
of  the  Hans,  with  the  assistance  of  other  his  complices
of  the  Hans  aforesaide,  wickedly  and  unjustly  tooke  from
one  Richard  Morley  citizen  of  London  five  lasts  of
herrings,  besides  32.  pounds,  in  the  sea  called  North-
sound.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1398.  about  the
moneth  of  September,  one  Godekin  Wisle,  and  Gerard
Sleyre  of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  with  others  of  the  Hans,
their  confederats  wickedly  and  unjustly  took  out  of  a  ship
of  Prussia  (wherof  the  master  was  named  Rorebek)  from
John  Seburgh  marchant  of  Colchester  two  packs  of
woollen  cloth,  to  the  value  of  an  100.  markes  :  from
Stephan  Flispe,  and  John  Plumer  marchants  of  the  same
town  two  packs  of  woollen  cloth,  to  the  value  of  60.
pounds  :  from  Robert  Wight  marchant  of  the  same
towne,  two  packes  of  woollen  cloth  to  the  value  of  an
100.  marks  :  from  William  Munde  marchant  of  the
same town,  two fardels of  woollen cloth, worth  40. li.

62

HANSE  MERCHANTS'  AGREEMENT ad.

1405.
&  from  John  Dawe,  and  Thomas  Cornwaile  marchants
of  the  same  towne,  three  packs  of  woollen  cloth,  worth
200.  marks.  Moreover  they  tooke  and  imprisoned
certaine  English  men,  which  were  in  the  said  ship,
namely  William  Fubborne  servant  unto  John  Diere,
Thomas  Mersh  servant  unto  Robert  Wight,  which
Thomas  paid  for  his  ransome  20.  nobles  of  English
money,  William  Munde  marchant  of  the  towne  afore-
saide,  which  William,  by  reason  of  the  extremity  of
that  imprisonment,  lost  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  and
Thomas  Cornwaile,  marchant  of  the  foresaide  Towne,
which  Thomas  paide  for  his  raunsome  twentie  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde  1394.  certaine  male-  Termouth.
factors of  Wismer and Rostok, upon the coastes of
Denmarke and Norway,  beneath Scawe,  and  at  Anold,
tooke  Thomas  Adams  and John  Walters marchants of
Yermouth :  and  Robert  Caumbrigge  and  Reginald  Leman
marchants of Norwich,  in  a  certaine shippe of Elbing  Norwich.
in Prussia  (whereof  one  Clays  Goldesmith  was  master)
with  divers  woollen  clothes  of  the  saide  Thomas,  John,
Robert, and Reginald, to the value of  one  thousande
marks  English,  and  carried  the  persons  and  goods  afore-  [I.  168.]
saide, away  with them : and the said Thomas, John,
Robert,  and Reginald  they  imprisoned  at  Courtbuttres-
sow, and there detained them, untill they paide an
hundred  markes  for  their  redemption.

Item in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde 1401.  some  of  the  Termouth.
inhabitants of  Wismer  and of Rostok  wickedly tooke
at  Longsound  in  Norway,  a  certaine  shippe  of  West-Stowe  Longsomd  in
in  Zeland  (the  Master  whereof  was  one  Gerard  Dedissen)  Norway.
laden with diverse goods and marchandises of John
Hughson  of  Yermouth,  namely  with  the  hides  of  oxen
and of sheepe, with butter, masts, sparres, boordes,
questingstones  and  wilde  werke,  to  the  value  of  an  hun-
dred marks,  and do as  yet  detaine the said things in
their  possession, some of the Hans being their  assis-
tants in  the  premisses.

Item, in the yeere of  our Lorde 1402. certaine of  Termouth.

63

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

the  Hans,  of  Rostok,  and  of  Wismer,  tooke  upon  the
coast  of  England,  neere  unto  Plimmouth  a  certaine  barge
called  the  Michael  of  Yarmouth  (whereof  Hugh  ap  Fen
was  the  owner,  and  Robert  Rigweys  the  master)  laden
with  bay  salt,  to  the  quantitie  of  130.  wayes,  and  with
a  thousand  canvasse  clothes  of  Britaine,  and  doe  as  yet
detaine  the  saide  goods  in  their  possession,  the  said  Hugh
being  endamaged,  by  the  losse  of  his  ship,  and  of  his
goods  aforesaid  800.  nobles  and  the  foresaid  Master  and
the  mariners  loosing,  in  regard  of  their  wages,  canvas,,
and  armour,  200.  nobles.

Vermouth.  Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1405.  certaine  male-

factors  of  Wismer wickedly and unjustly tooke,  in a

Maw  in  Nor-  certaine  port  of  Norway  called  Selaw,  a  ship  of  Yarmouth

'^^y-  (the  owner  whereof  was  William  Oxney  and  the  master

Thomas  Smith)  laden  with  salt,  cloth,  and  salmon,  to
the  value  of  40.  pound,  and  doe  as  yet  detaine  the  said
ship  and  goods  in  their  possession,  some  of  the  Hans  their
confederates  ayding  and  assisting  them  at  the  same  time.

^h-  Item,  in  the  yeere of  our  Lord 1395.  one  Godekin

Mighel,  Clays  Scheld,  Stertebeker,  and  other  their  accom-
plices of  the  Hans  tooke  upon  the  sea  a  certain  ship
of  one  John  Dulwer  of  Cley,  called  the  Friday  (whereof
Laurence  Tuk  of  Cley  was  master)  and  conveighed  the
said  ship  unto  Maustrond  in  Norway,  and  the  saide
Master  and  mariners  they  robbed  of  divers  commodities,
namely  of  artillery,  furniture,  and  salt  fishes  being  in
the  same  ship,  to  the  value  of  500.  nobles.

^h-  Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1395.  Godekin  Mighel^

Clays  Scheld,  Stertebeker,  and  other  their  accomplices
of  the  Hans,  unlawfully  tooke  upon  the  sea  a  certaine
ship  of  one  William  Bets  of  Cley  called  the  Margaret
(wherein  Robert  Robines  was  master)  and  conveyed  the
ship  it  self  unto  Mawstrond  in  Norway,  and  there
robbed  the  master  and  his  partners  of  divers  commodities^,
namely  of  artillerie,  furniture,  and  salt  fishes,  to  the  value
of  400.  nobles,  and  one  of  the  said  masters  mates  they
maliciously  drowned.

64

HANSE MERCHANTS' AGREEMENT  ad

1405.

Item,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1395.  about  the  feast  Cley.
of  the  nativitie  of  S.  John  Baptist,  the  forenamed
Godekin  and  Stertebeker,  with  others  their  accomplices
of  the  Hans,  unlawfully  took  upon  the  sea  a  certain
ship  of  Nicholas  Steyhard  and  John  Letis  of  Cley  called
the  Nicholas  (wherof  John  Prest  was  master)  and  con-
veyed the  said  ship  unto  Mawstrond,  and  there  robbed
the  said  master  and  his  companie  of  divers  commodities,
namely  of  furniture  and  salt  fishes,  being  in  the  said
ship,  to  the  value  of  320.  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1395.  about  the  feast  C/^jy.
aforesaid,  the  said  Godekins  and  Stertebeker,  &  their
companions  of  the  Hans  unjustly  took  upon  the  sea  a
certaine  ship  of  Thomas  Peirs  of  Cley  called  the  Isabel
(whereof  William  Noie  was  master)  and  conveyed  it  unto
Mawstrond,  and  there  robbed  the  said  master  and  his
company  of  divers  commodities,  as  namely  of  furniture,
and  salt  fishes,  being  in  the  said  ship,  to  the  value  of
406.  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  next  above  mentioned,  upon  the  Cley.
Saterday,  about  the  foresaid  feast,  the  forenamed  Gode-
kins and  Stertebeker,  and  other  their  accomplices  of  the
Hans  unlawfully  took  upon  the  sea,  a  certain  ship  of  one
Thomas  Lyderpole  of  Cley,  called  the  Helena,  wherein
Robert  Alwey  was  master,  and  also  wickedly  and  unjustly
drowned  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea  divers  commodities,
as  namely  salt fishes,  together  with  the  ship  it  selfe.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1398.  about  the  feast  Ck-j.
of  S.  Michael  the  archangel,  the  foresaid  Godekin  &
Stertebeker,  with  other  their  confederats  of  the  Hans,
took  at  Langsound  in  Norway  a  certain  crayer  of  one
Thomas  Motte  of  Cley,  called  the  Peter,  (wherein  Thomas
Smith  was  master)  &  the  foresaid  crayer  they  wickedly
and  unjustly  caried  away,  being  worth  280.  nobles.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1395.  about  the  feast  Wiveton.
of  the  nativitie  of  S.  John  Baptist,  the  forenamed  Gode-
kins and Stertebeker,  and  others  of  the  Hans  unjustly
tooke a certain ship of Simon Durham, called the
n  65  E

A.D.
14.05.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Wiveton.

Wiveton.

Dogger-ship,  and  the  Peter  of  Wiveton,  laden  with  salt
fishes  (whereof  John  Austen  was  master)  upon  the  coast
of  Denmarke.  And  they  caried  away  the  saide  Dogger,
with  the  furniture  thereof,  and  the  foresaid  salt  fishes,
to  the  value  of  1 70.  pound.  Moreover,  the  master,  and
25.  mariners  in  the  same  ship  they  maliciously  slewe,
[I.  169.]  and  a  certaine  ladde  of  the  saide  Dogger  they  caried
with  them  into  Wismer.

Item,  in  the  foresaid  yeere,  and  about  the  feast  afore
said,  the  forenamed  Godekins  and  Stertebeker,  with  other
their  complices,  unjustly  tooke  upon  the  sea  a  certaine
ship  of  Thomas  Lyderpole,  and  John  Coote  of  Wiveton  :
and  the  master  and  mariners  which  were  in  the  saide
shippe,  they  villanously  slue,  among  whom  they  put  to
death  one  Simon  Andrew,  the  godsonne,  nephew,  and
servant  of  the  foresaid  Simon  Durham.  Which  ship,
with  the  goods  and  furniture  that  were  therein  was  worth
410.  nobles.

Item,  in  the  very  same  yeere,  about  the  feast  afore-
said, the  forenamed  Godekins  and  Stertebeker  &  other
their  complices  wickedly  spoiled  a  certaine  ship  of  the
foresaid  Simon  Durham  called  the  Dogger,  wherein  Ger-
vase  Cat  was  master,  lying  at  an  anker,  while  the
companie  were  occupied  about  fishing,  and  likewise  un-
justly tooke  away  with  them  the  salt  fishes,  and  furniture
of  the  said  ship.  Moreover,  the  master  and  his  company
that  were  in  the  said  Dogger  they  beate  and  wounded,
so  that  they  utterly  lost  their  fishing  for  that  yeere,  the
master  and  his  said  companie  being  endamaged  thereby,
to  the  summe  of  200.  nobles.
Wiveton.  Item,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1396.  the  foresaid
Godekins  and  Stertebeker,  and  other  their  complices
unjustly  tooke  upon  the  sea  a  certain  crayer,  called  the
Buss  of  Zeland,  which  one  John  Ligate  marchant,  and
servant  unto  the  forenamed  Simon  Durham  had  laden
in  Prussia,  on  the  behalfe  of  the  said  Simon,  to  saile
for  England,  and  spoiled  the  said  craier,  and  also  tooke
and  caried  away  with  them  the  goods  and  marchandises

66

HANSE MERCHANTS' AGREEMENT  a.d.

1405.

of  the said Simon,  being in the  foresaid ship,  to the
value  of  66.  pounds.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1397.  certaine  male-  Wiveton.
factors  of  Wismer  and  Rostok,  with  certaine  others  of
the  Hans,  tooke  a  crayer  of  one  Peter  Cole  of  Zeland,
called  the  Bussship,  which  Alan  Barret  the  servant  and
factor  of  the  foresaid  Simon  Durham  had  laden  with
mastes,  sparres,  and  other  marchandize,  for  the  behalfe
of  the  said  Simon,  and  unjustly  tooke  from  thence  the
goods  of  the  said  Simon,  to  the  value  of  24.  pounds,
and caried the  same  away.

Item,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1394.  certaine  male-  Lenne.
factors  of  Wismer  and  others  of  the  Hans  unjustly
tooke  upon  the  sea,  and  caried  away  with  them  a  packe
of  woollen  cloth  of  the  foresaid  Simon,  worth  42.  pounds,
out  of  a  certain  crayer  of  one  Thomas  Fowler  of  Lenne
being  laden  and bound for  Dantzik  in  Prussia.

Item, pitifully complaining the  marchants of Lenne  Lenne.
doe  avouch,  verifie,  &  affirme,  that  about the feast of
S.  George  the  martyr,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1394.
sundry malefactors and robbers  of  Wismer  &  Rostok,
and  others  of  the  Hans,  with  a  great  multitude  of  ships,
arrived  at  the  towne  of  Norbern  in  Norway,  and  tooke
the  said town  by  strong  assault,  and  also  wickedly  and
unjustly  took  al  the  marchants  of  Lenne  there  residing
with  their  goods  and  cattels,  and  burnt  their  houses  and
mansions  in  the  same  place,  and  put  their  persons  unto
great ransoms  : even as by  the  letters of  safeconduct
delivered  unto  the  said  marchants  it  may  more  evidently
appeare,  to  the  great  damage  and  impoverishment  of  the
marchants  of  Lenne  : namely,  Inprimis  they  burnt  there 21.  houses  of
21.  houses belonging unto the  said marchants, to the  English  mar-
value  of  440.  nobles. Item,  they  tooke  from  Edmund  ^^  j^orbem  in
Belyetere,  Thomas  Hunt,  John  Brandon,  and  from  other  Norway.
marchants  of  Lenne,  to  the  value  of  18 15.  pounds.

[Concerning
67

I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

Concerning  this  surprise  Albertus  Krantzius  in
the  sixt  book  of  his  history  of  Norway,  and
the  8. Chapter  writeth  in  maner  following.

N  the  meane  while  Norway  enjoyed  peace  under  the
government  of  a  woman :  until  Albertus  king  of
Suecia,  who  had  now  seven  yeeres  continued  in  captivity
under  Queen  Margaret,  was  to  be  set  at  liberty.  Which,
when  the  common  souldiers  of  Rostok  &  Wismer,  called

TheVitaliaiis.  the  Vitalians  perceived,  (who,  whilest  their  king  was
holden  captive,  in  the  right  of  the  forenamed  cities,  for
the  behalfe  of  their  lord  the  king  being  prince  of
Mekleburg  by  birth,  undertooke  and  waged  warre  al
the  time  of  his  captivitie)  banding  their  forces  together,
they  resolved,  at  their  own  costs  &  charges,  but  in  the
right  of  the  said  cities,  to  saile  into  the  3.  kingdoms,  and
to  take  such  spoiles  as  they  could  lay  hold  on.  These
common  souldiers  therfore,  seeing  an  end  of  their
tyrannical  and  violent  dealing  to  approch,  sailed  into
Norway,  unto  the  towne  of  Norbern,  being  a  mart  town
for  al  the  marchants  of  Germanic :  who  transporting  fishes
from  thence,  doe  bring  thither  marchandises  of  all  kinds,
especially  corne,  unto  the  scarcitie  wherof,  unlesse  it  be
brought  out  of  other  countreys,  that  kingdome  (as  we
have  said)  is  very  much  subject.  Departing  out  of  their
ships  and  going  on  shore,  they  set  upon  the  towne,  and
by  fire  and  sword  they  easily  compelled  the  inhabitants
dwelling  in  weake  wodden  houses,  to  give  place.  Thus
these  Vitalians  entring  and  surprising  the  towne  conveyed
such  spoiles  unto  their  ships  as  them  pleased,  and  having
laden  their  ships  with  those  booties,  they  returned  home
frolike  unto  the  ports  of  their  own  cities. Without  all

[I.  170.]  respect,  they  robbed  and  rifled  the  goods,  aswel  of  the
Germanes,  as  of  the  Noruagians :  and  like  lewde  com-
panions, wasting  and  making  havock  of  all  things,
prooved  themselves  never  the  wealthier.  For  it  is  not
the  guise  of  such  good  fellowes  to  store  up  or  to  preserve

68

HANSE  MERCHANTS'  AGREEMENT a.d.

1405-
ought. The  citizens,  at  the  first,  seemed  to  be  inriched :
howbeit afterward, (no man misdoubting any such
calamitie)  goods  ill  gotten  were  worse  spent. Thus  farre
Krantzius.

Item,  pitifully  complaining,  the  foresaide  marchants  Lenne.
avouch,  verifie,  and  affirme,  that  upon  the  14.  day  after
the  feast  of  S.  George,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  next
above  written,  as  4.  ships  of  Lenne,  laden  with  cloth,
wine,  and  other  marchandises,  were  sailing  upon  the
maine  sea,  with  all  the  goods  and  wares  conteined  in
them,  for  Prussia,  sundry  malefactors  of  Wismer  and
Rostok,  with  others  of  the  Hans,  being  in  divers  ships,
came  upon  them,  and  by  force  of  armes  and  strong  hand
tooke  the  said  ships,  with  the  goods  and  marchandises
contained  in  them :  and  some  of  the  people  which  were
in  the  saide  foure  ships,  they  slew,  some  they  spoyled,
and  others  they  put  unto  extreame  ransomes.  And
carying  away  with  them  those  foure  ships  with  the  com-
modities and  marchandise  therin,  they  parted  stakes
therwith,  as  them  listed,  to  the  great  impoverishment  &
losse  of  the  said  marchants  of  Lenne,  namely  in  cloth  of
William  Silesden,  Tho.  Waterden,  Joh.  Brandon,  Joh.
Wesenham,  &  other  marchants  of  Lenne,  to  the  value  of
3623.^.  5.S.  ii.d.

Item,  pitifully  complaining  the  foresaid  marchants  doe  Lenne.
affirme,  that  one  Henry  Lambolt  and  other  his  adherents,
in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1396.  tooke  upon  the  maine  sea
betweene  Norway  and  Scaw,  one  crayer  laden  with
Osmunds,  and  with  divers  other  marchandises,  perteining
unto  John  Brandon  of  Lenne,  to  the  summe  and  value  of
443. ii.  4.S.  2.d.  Moreover,  they  tooke  from  John
Lakingay  4.  lasts  and  an  halfe  of  osmunds,  to  the  value
of  22o.lib.  10. s.

Item,  the foresaid marchants complaine,  that  certain  Lenne.
malefactors  of  Wismer,  with  other  their  complices  of  the
Hans, in the  yeere of our Lord 1396. tooke from
Thomas  Picket  of  Lenne,  out  of  a  certaine  ship  sailing
upon  the  maine  sea  towards  Sconeland  (whereof  James

69

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1405.

Snycop  was  master)  cloth  and  other  marchandise,  to  the
summe  and  value  of  i3.1ib.  13.S.  4.d.

Lenne.  Item,  the  above-named  marchants  complaine  saying,,
that  certaine  malefactors  of  Wismer,  with  others  of  the
Hans  society,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1397.  wickedly
and  unjustly  took  out  of  a  certaine  ship  of  Dantzik
(whereof  Laurence  van  Russe  was  master)  from  Ralph
Bedingam  of  Lenne,  one  fardel  of  cloth  worth  52.1i.  y.s.
6.d.  Also,  for  the  ransome  of  his  servant,  8.1i.  6.s.  8.d.
Item,  they  tooke  from  Thomas  Earle  divers  goods,  to
the  value  of  24.  pounds.

Lenne.  Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  complaine,  that  certaine
malefactors  of  Wismer  &  Rostok,  with  others  of  the
Hans,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1399.  wickedly  &  un-
justly tooke  one  crayer  pertayning  unto  John  Laking-
lich  of  Lenne,  laden  with  divers  goods  and  marchandise
pertaining  unto  sundry  marchants  of  Lenne,  namely  from
the  forenamed  John  one  fardel  of  cloth,  and  one  chest
full  of  harneis,  and  other  things,  to  the  value  of  90.1ib.
Item,  they  took  out  of  the  foresaid  ship  from  Roger
Hood,  one  fardel  of  cloth,  and  one  chest  with  divers
goods,  to  the  value  of  5 8. lib.  Item,  from  John  Pikeron,
one  fardell  of  cloth,  and  one  chest  with  divers  goods,  to
the  value  of  440.1ib.  Item,  from  Andrew  Purser  one
fardell  of  cloth,  and  one  chest  with  divers  commodities
therein,  to  the  value  of  ten  pounds.

Lenne.  Item,  the  above-named  marchants  complaine  saying,
that  certaine  malefactors  of  Wismer  &  Rostok,  and  others
of  the  Hans,  namely,  Godekin  Mighel,  Henrie  van  Hall
de  Stertebeker,  with  other  of  their  confederates,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  1399.  wickedly  and  unjustly  took
from  John  Priour  of  Lenne,  out  of  the  ship  of  Michael
van  Burgh,  namely  160.  nests  of  masers,  worth  loo.lib.
13.S.  4.d.  Item,  30.  furres  rigges  of  Kaleber  woorth
13.S.  4.d.  a  piece,  the  summe  totall  amounting  to  2o.li.
Item,  20.  furres  wombys  of  Kalebre  worth  &c.  Item,
one  girdle  of  silver,  and  one  dagger  adorned  with  silver
worth  30. s. Item,  two  coates,  and  one  long  jacket,  and

70

HANSE  MERCHANTS'  AGREEMENT ad

1405.
other  goods,  to  the  value  of  30.S. Item,  he  paide  for
his  ransome  4.1ib. 13.S.  4.d.

Unto  all  and  singular  the  articles  above-written,  the
ambassadors  of  England  aforesaid  do  further  adde,  that
the  doers  and  authors  of  the  damages,  injuries,  and
robberies  set  down  in  the  articles  above  written,  (of  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^-
whom  some  are  named  in  particular,  and  others  in  ^'^^y^-f^^-f
general)  performed  and  committed  all  those  outrages,
being  hired  thereunto  at  the  expenses  and  charges  of  the
common  societies  of  the  cities  aforesaid.  And  that  the
inhabitants  of  every  houshold  in  the  foresaide  cities  (ech
man  according  to  his  ability)  wittingly  &  purposely  set
foorth  one,  two,  or  more  men,  for  the  very  same  ex-
pedition, wherein  all  and  singular  the  foresaid  trespasses
were  committed.

The  foresaid  English  ambassadors  doe  exhibite  the
articles  above-written  unto  the  procurators  of  the  cities  of
Wismer  and  Rostok  aforesaid :  leave  and  libertie  being
alwayes  reserved  unto  the  said  ambassadors,  to  enlarge,  or
to  diminish,  or  to  expound  all,  or  every,  or  any  of  the
said  Articles  whatsoever,  so  often  as  it  shall  seeme
expedient  unto  them.

[These
71

A.D.
1407.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[I.  171.]  These  be  the  grievances  and  offences,  whereat  the
marchants  of  the  Hans  of  Almaine,  comming
unto,  and  residing  in  the  Realme  of  England,
doe  finde  themselves  aggrieved,  contrarie  to
the  Articles  and  privileges  of  the  Charter
graunted  unto  them  by  the  worthy  Pro-  i
genitors  of  the  king  of  England  that  now  is,
and  also  by  the  saide  soveraigne  Lord  the
King,  ratified,  and  confirmed.

IMprimis,  whereas  the  foresaide  marchants
have  a  privilege  graunted  unto  them
by  Charter,  that  they  may,  in  cities,
boroughs,  and  in  other  towns  and  villages
throughout  the  whole  realme  of  England,
exercise  traffique  in  grosse,  as  wel  with
the  natural  inhabitants  of  the  kingdome,

as  with  strangers,  and  private  persons :  of  late,  those  that
are  free  denizens  in  the  cities,  boroughs,  and  villages
within  the  foresaid  kingdome,  do  hinder  and  restrain  all
others  that  be  strangers,  foreners,  and  aliens,  that  they
neither  can,  nor  dare  buy  and  sel  with  the  marchants  of
the  Hans  aforesaid,  to  their  great  hinderance  and  losse.

Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  by  vertue  of  their  charter
were  wont  to  have  and  to  hold  Innes  and  mansions,  for
the  reposing  of  themselves  and  of  their  goods,  where-
soever they  pleased  in  any  cities,  boroughs,  or  villages,
throughout  the  whole  kingdome  :  howbeit  of  late  the
foresaide  marchants  are  not  suffered  to  take  up  their
mansions,  contrary  to  the  tenour  of  their  charter.

Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  are  privileged  not  to
undergoe  any  other  burthens  or  impositions,  but  onely
to  pay  certaine  customs,  as  it  doeth  by  their  charter
manifestly  appeare.  Notwithstanding  at  ye  same  time
when  Simon  de  Moreden  was  maior  of  London,  the
foresaid  marchants  were  constrained,  in  the  ward  of
Dove-gate  at London, to pay fifteenths, tallages, and

72

HANSE MERCHANTS' GRIEVANCES  a.d.

1407-
other  subsidies  contrary  to  the  liberties  of  their  charter.
Whereupon  the  saide  marchants  prosecuted  the  matter
before  the  Councel  of  our  soveraign  lord  the  king,
insomuch  that  they  were  released  from  paying  afterward
any  such  tallages,  fifteenths,  and  subsidies.  Which
marchants,  a  while  after,  of  their  owne  accord  and  free
will,  gave  unto  the  gild-hall  of  London  an  hundreth
markes  sterling,  conditionally,  that  they  of  the  citie
aforesaide  should  not  at  any  time  after  exact  or  demaund
of  the  said  marchants,  or  of  their  successors,  any  tallages,
iifteenths,  or  subsidies,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  their
charter,  as  by  records  in  the  foresaid  gild-hall,  it  doth
more  plainly  appeare.  Howbeit  of  late  the  officers  of
our  lord  the  king,  in  the  foresaid  ward  of  Dove-gate,
constrained  the  marchants  aforesaid  to  pay  tallages,
fifteenths,  &  other  subsidies.  And  because  the  saide
marchants  murmured  and  refused  to  pay  any  such  con-
tributions, alleaging  their  privileges,  the  foresaid  officers
arrested  the  goods  of  those  said  marchants  (which  are  as
yet  detained  upon  the  arrest)  notwithstanding  that  they
were  released  before  the  councel  of  our  soveraigne  lord
the  king,  &  also  that  they  gave  unto  the  said  gild-hall
one  hundreth  marks  to  be  released,  as  it  is  aforesaid.
And  also  the  foresaid  marchants  were  constrained  to  pay
i2.d.  in  the  pound,  and  of  late  6.d.  and  other  subsidies,
more  then  their  ancient  customes,  to  the  great  damage
of  those  marchants.

Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  are  privileged  as  touching  The  ancient
customs of  wols by them  bought  within  the  realm  of  <^^^^°jn^^  rf
England,  y'  they  are  not  bound  to  pay,  over  &  besides
their ancient customs, but onely  xl.d. more then the
homeborn marchants of  England were wont to pay.
But now ye  foresaid marchants are compelled to pay
for  every  sack  of  wool  (besides  ye  ancient  custom  &  the
40.d.  aforesaid)  a  certain  imposition  called  Pence  for  the  Pence  for  the
town  of  Gales,  namely  for  every  sack  of  wool  I9.d.  more  ^°Jf^,^  °J
then  the  marchants  of  England  doe  pay,  to  their  great
losse,  &  against  the  liberty  of  their  charter.

73

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  are  privileged  by  their
charter,  that  concerning  the  quantity  of  their  marchandize
brought  into  the  realme  of  England  (in  regard  whereof
they  are  bound  to  pay  3.d.  for  the  worth  of  every  pound
of  silver)  credit  is  to  be  given  unto  them  for  the  letters
of  their  masters  and  of  their  companies,  if  they  were
able  to  shew  them.  And  if  so  be  they  had  no  letters
in  this  behalfe  to  shew,  that  then  credite  should  bee
given  unto  themselves,  and  that  their  othe,  or  the  othe
of  their  atturney  should  be  taken,  without  any  other
proof,  as  touching  the  value  of  their  marchandize  so
brought  in,  &  that  thereupon  they  should  be  bound  to
pay  customs,  namely  the  customes  of  3.d.  justly  for  that
cause  to  be  paid.  But  nowe  the  customers  of  our
soveraigne  lorde  the  king  put  their  goods  to  an  higher
rate  then  they  ought  or  were  woont  to  be :  and  heereupon
they  compell  them  to  pay  custome  for  their  goods,  at
their  pleasure,  scanning  about  their  fraight  and  expenses
particularly  disbursed  in  regard  of  the  said  goods  and
marchandize,  to  the  great  hinderance  of  the  said
marchants,  and  against  the  tenor  of  their  charter.
The  great  Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  by  way  of  pitiful  com-
charter  of  ^r^^ixnt  do  alleap-e,  that  whereas  the  worthy  progenitors  of
our  Lord  the  king  that  now  is,  by  vertue  of  the  saide
great  charter,  graunted  libertie  unto  them  to  pay  the
customes  of  certain  clothes,  namely  of  skarlet,  and  cloth
[I.  172.]  died  in  grayne,  and  of  other  clothes  of  assise,  which  were
by  them  to  be  caried  out  of  the  realme  of  England,  even
as  by  their  foresaid  Charter  it  doeth  more  plainly  appeare  :
and  whereas  our  soveraigne  lord  the  king  that  now  is
(ratifying  and  confirming  the  saide  charter,  and  being
willing^  that  they  shoulde  have  more  especiall  favour
shewed  unto  them)  granted  unto  them  by  their  Charter,
that  the  said  marchants  should  be  exempted  and  freed
from  all  custome  and  imposition  of  small  clothes,  as  in
pieces  and  in  narrow  clothes  which  were  not  of  assise,  and
in  such  other  clothes  of  like  qualitie :  yet  of  late  the
Customers  of  our  Lorde  the  King  that  nowe  is,  not  allow-

74

HANSE MERCHANTS' GRIEVANCES  ad.

1407.
ing  their  saide speciall Charter so graunted unto the  A  speciall
marchants  aforesaid,  do  compel  them  to  pay  for  straight  ^^^''^^''•
clothes  and  for  pieces  of  clothes  which  are  not  of  assise,
(together with other demands particularly  & severally
made)  as  great  custome  as  if  the  clothes  were  full  out  of
assise. Moreover  also  of  late,  the  customers  of  the  smal  The  customers
or  pety  custome  &  of  the  subsidie  doe  demand  of  them  "f^^^  P^^y
custome for kersey-clothes equal unto  the custome of
those  clothes,  that  be  of  ful  assise,  whereas  the  foresaid
marchants  were  not  wont  to pay  for those kerseys by
vertue  of  their  Charter,  but  onely  according  to  the  worth
of ech pound of  silver,  as namely for other goods
which  are of  golde  weight : to  the  great  hinderance  of
the  foresaid parties,  and  against  the  manifest  graunt  of
our  soveraigne  Lord  the  king,  as  it  appeareth  in  the  said
speciall  Charter.

Item,  the  said  marchants  alleage,  that  they  are  privi-
ledged  by  their  Charter,  if  they  pay  custome  and  subsidy
for  their  goods  in  the  behalfe  of  our  lord  the  king,  at  any
port  of  England  where  those  goods  have  arrived,  and
afterward  would  transport  the  saide  goods  or  any  part  of
them  unto  any  other  port  within  the  realme  aforesaid:
that  then  they  should  be  quite  released  from  paying  of
any  other  custome  for  the  same  goods,  if  they  bring  a
warrant  that  they  have  paide  the  saide  custome,  as  is
aforesaide.  Of  late  it  fortuned,  that  a  certaine  man  of
their  societie  named  Nicholas  Crossehaire,  being  a  i4°5"
marchant  of  the  lande  of  Prussia,  immediatly  after  the
concord  was  concluded  betwene  the  English  and  the
Prussians,  brought  unto  the  towne  of  Sandwich  a  shippe
laden  with  bow-staves  and  other  marchandize,  and  there
well  and  truely  paide  the  custome  of  our  lord  the  king
for  all  his  wares  :  and  selling  there  part  of  the  same  goods,
he  afterward  transported  parcel  thereof  in  a  small  barke
unto  London,  there  to  be  solde,  and  caried  a  warrant  also
with  him,  that  he  had  at  Sandwich  paid  the  custome  due
unto  our  lord  the  king :  &  yet  (the  said  warrant  not-
withstanding) the customers of the pety custome &

75

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

subsidy  of  London  came  &  demanded  custome  of  him  at
another  time  contrary  to  reason,  &  against  the  tenor  of
their  charter :  and  the  said  Nicholas  offred  pledges  unto
them,  yea,  even  ready  money  downe  into  their  hands,
until  the  question  were  discussed  and  determined,  whether
he  should  pay  new  custome  or  no :  but  this  they  would
not  doe.  Then  the  said  Nicholas  brought  a  brief  from
our  lord  the  king,  to  get  himselfe  discharged  from  paying
the  said  custome :  and  for  all  that,  the  foresaid  customers
would  not  as  yet  have  regard  unto  him,  but  kept  the  said
goods  within  shipboord,  upon  the  river  of  Thames,  for
the  space  of  15.  dayes,  until  he  had  paid  another  custom,
to  the  great  losse  of  the  said  Nicholas,  for  that  which  he
sold  first  at  Sandwich  to  be  delivered  at  London  for
seven  nobles,  he  could  not  afterward  have  for  it  above
foure  nobles,  and  yet  so  was  it  solde,  by  reason  of  the
harme  which  his  wares  had  taken  by  lying  so  long  upon
the  water,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  their  Charter.

Item,  the  said  marchants  do  alleage,  that  another  of
their  company  called  Peter  Hertson  bought  at  Bristow
certain  clothes,  &  laded  the  same  in  a  ship,  to  be  trans-
ported for  Prussia,  for  the  which  he  truely  paide  at
Bristow,  the  customs  &  subsidies  due  unto  our  soveraign
lord  the  king :  which  ship  with  the  foresaid  goods  arriving
at  London :  the  customers  of  the  pety-custome  and  of
the  subsidie  there  would  not  permit  the  said  ship  with  the
goods  to  passe  unto  the  parts  aforesaid,  until  the  said
Peter  had  paid  another  custome  for  the  same  goods  (the
warrant,  which  he  brought  with  him  notwithstanding)  to
his  great  hinderance,  and  contrary  to  the  tenour  of  their
Charter.

Item,  pitifully  complaining  the  foresaid  marchants  al-
leage, that  wheras  every  marchant,  bringing  wares  into  the
realm,  was  wont  to  have  a  schedule  wherein  his  name  was
written,  for  a  specification  &  certificat  of  the  quantity  of
his  goods  in  the  said  schedule  to  be  found  at  the  arrival
of  the  ship,  without  paying  therfore  ought  at  all,  of  late
the  customers  of  the  pety  custome  do  compel  them  to  pay

76

HANSE MERCHANTS' GRIEVANCES  ad.

1407.
for  ech  mans  name  written  a  peny,  at  ye  arrival  of  their
goods  out  of  every  ship  wherin  the  said  goods  are  found,
what  commodities  &  marchandize  soever  they  be :  whenas
notwithstanding,  if  there  be  a  chest  or  any  other  smal
matter,  there  should  not  therfore  be  any  custome  due
unto  our  lord  the  king,  nor  any  received  unto  his
Majesties  use.  In  like  maner  do  the  customers  of  the  The  customers
subsidy  deale.  Wheras  also  the  foresaid  marchants  were  ofthesubsidte.
not  wont  to  pay  for  a  cocket  for  the  conveyance  &
transportation  of  their  goods  out  of  the  realme  (albeit
many  names  were  written  therein)  more  then  \A.  of  late
the  customers  of  the  pety  custom  do  compel  them  to  pay
for  every  name  contained  in  the  same  cocket,  \A.  and  in
like  sort  do  the  customers  of  the  saide  subsidy  deale.
Which  contribution  in  a  yere  extendeth  it  self  unto  a
great  summe,  to  the  unknown  prejudice  of  our  lord  the
king,  more  then  any  man  could  suppose,  (for  the  [I.  173-]
customers  enjoy  their  fees  and  commodities  from  his
Majestie  that  they  may  doe  him  faithfull  service)  and
likewise  to  the  great  damage  of  the  said  marchants.

Item,  pitifully  complaining  the  said  marchants  do
alleage  that  they  are  constrained  to  pay  for  subsidy,
sometime  I2.d.  and  somtime  6.d.  in  the  pound,  con-
trary to  the  tenor  of  their  charter  :  and  yet  notwith-
standing when  their  marchandize  commeth  to  the  wharf,
the  customers  prolong  &  delay  the  time  3.  or  4.  weeks
before  they  wil  take  custome  for  their  goods,  in  the  which
space  other  marchants  sel  their  goods,  the  customers  not
regarding  whether  the  goods  aforesaid  take  wet  or  no  ;
to  the  great  damage  aswel  of  our  lord  the  king,  as  of  the
said  marchants  :  because,  if  they  had  quicke  dispatch,  they
might  pay  custome  unto  his  Majestie  oftner  then  they
doe.

Item,  the  said  marchants  doe  farther  alleage,  that  the
customers  of  the  petie  custome,  and  of  the  subsidie  in
the  port  of  London  have  appointed  among  themselves
certaine  men  to  seale  up  the  goods  of  the  saide  marchants,
so  soon  as  they  are  arrived  at  the  port  of  safetie,  until  the

77

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

said  goods  be  customed.  By  meanes  of  the  which  sealing,
the  foresaide  parties  doe  compell  the  marchants  above-
named,  (upon  an  use  and  custome  whereof  themselves
have  bene  the  authors)  to  paye  a  certaine  summe  of
money,  to  the  great  hinderance  of  the  sayde  marchants,
and  contrarie  to  justice  and  to  their  charter.  Moreover,
the  saide  customers  have  ordained  betweene  themselves,
that  the  saide  marchants  shall  put  or  make  up  no  cloth
into  fardels,  to  transport  out  of  the  realme,  unlesse
certaine  men  appointed  by  them  for  the  same  purpose
bee  there  present,  to  see  what  maner  of  clothes  they  bee,
under  paine  of  the  forfeiture  of  the  saide  goods.  Also  of
late,  when  the  sayde  marchants  would  have  made  up
such  fardels,  the  foresayde  parties  assigned  to  be  overseers
refused  to  come,  unlesse  they  might  have  for  their
comming  some  certaine  summe  of  money,  delaying  and
procrastinating  from  day  to  day,  so  long  as  themselves
listed,  to  the  great  losse  and  undoing  of  the  foresaide
marchants,  and  contrarie  to  their  liberties  :  because  the
foresaide  customers  are  bound  by  their  office  to  doe  this,
without  any  contribution  therefore  to  bee  paide  unto
them  by  the  saide  marchants  :  for  that  they  doe  enjoy
from  our  soveraigne  Lorde  the  King  their  fees  and
commodities,  to  the  ende  that  they  may  serve  him  and
every  marchant  justly  and  faithfully,  without  any  con-
tribution by  them  to  be  imposed  anewe  upon  the
sayde  marchants,  of  custome.

Item,  the  said  marchants  doe  alleage,  that  the  customers
&  bailifs  of  the  town  of  Southhampton  do  compel  them
to  pay  for  every  last  of  herrings,  pitch,  &  sope  ashes
brought  thither  by  them  2.s.  more  then  the  kings
custome  :  and  for  ech  hundreth  of  bowstaves  &  boords
called  Waghenscot,  2.d.  for  every  hundreth  of  boords
called  Richolt,  4.d.  &  for  al  other  marchandize  brought
by  the  foresaid  marchants  unto  the  same  towne  :  which
contributions  they  never  paid  at  any  time  heeretofore,
being  greatly  to  their  hinderance,  and  contrary  to  the
tenour  of  their  Charter.

78

HANSE MERCHANTS' GRIEVANCES  ad.

1407.

Item,  the  foresaid  marchants  do  alleage,  that  one  of
their  company,  called  Albert  Redewish  of  Prussia,
bringing  divers  goods  &  marchandizes  unto  Newcastle
upon  Tine,  &  there  paying  the  usual  custom  of  3,d.
in  the  pound  for  al  his  wares,  the  bailifs  of  the  saide
towne,  against  all  reason,  exacted  7.  pound  sterling  at  his
hands  more  then  the  custome  :  whereupon  the  foresaide
marchant  got  a  briefe  from  the  kings  majesty,  for  the
recovery  of  the  said  y.li.  according  to  equity  &
reason  :  howbeit,  that  at  the  comming  of  the  said  briefe
the  foresaid  bailifes  would  do  nothing  on  his  behalfe,
but  would  have  slaine  their  foresaid  associate,  contrary
to  their  charter  and  priviledges.

William  Esturmy  knight,  &  John  Kington  canon  of
Lincolne,  being  by  ye  most  mighty  prince  &  lord,  L.
Henry  by  Gods  grace  K.  of  England  &  France  &  lord
of  Ireland,  sufficiently  deputed  and  appointed  to  parle,
treate,  &  agree  w'  the  common  society  of  ye  marchants
of  the  Hans  of  Dutchiand  or  Almain,  concerning  &
about  the  redressing  &  reformation  of  unjust  attempts
happening  between  our  said  soveraign  L.  the  king  his
liege  people  &  subjects  on  the  one  part,  &  between
the  common  society  aforesaid,  the  cities,  towns,  &
particular  persons  therof  on  the  other  part  :  do  (for  the
behalf  of  our  said  sovraign  L.  the  king,  with  a  mind
&  intention  to  have  al  &  singular  ye  things  under-
written to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  said  common
society)  intimate,  declare,  &  make  known  unto  you
(hono.  sirs)  Henr.  WesthoiF  citizen  &  deputy  of  the
city  of  Lubec,  Henry  Fredelaw,  Joh.  van  Berk  citizen
of  Colen,  Mainard  Buxtehude  citizen,  &  deputy  of  the
city  of  Hamburgh,  M.  Simon  Clawsten  clerk,  sir  John
de  Aa  knight  deputie  of  the  citie  of  Rostok,  Herman
Meyer  deputy  of  the  citie  of  Wismar,  being,  as  the
procurators,  messengers,  &  commissioners  of  the  foresaid
cities,  assembled  together  at  the  town  of  Hage  in
Holland,  with  ye  forenamed  Will.  Sz:  John  in  regard  of
the foresaid redres & reformation  : that, even as our

79

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407-

said  soveraign  L.  the  king  his  meaning  is  not  to  disturb

or  hinder  such  priviledges  as  have  bin  heretofore  granted
&  vouchsafed  unto  the  common  society  of  the  marchants
aforesaid,  by  the  renoumed  kings  of  England,  &  the
worthy  progenitors  of  our  L.  the  K.  that  now  is,  &
by  himself  also  under  a  certain  form  confirmed  :  even
[1.  174.]  so  he  is  determined  (without  ye  prejudice  of  forren  lawes)
upon  just,  mature  and  sober  deliberation,  by  his  royall
authoritie  to  withstand  such  priviledges,  as  by  reason  of
the  abuse  thereof,  have  bene  infinitely  prejudicial!  unto
himselfe  and  his  subjects.

Inprimis  the  said  ambassadours  doe  affirme  as  afore,
that  whereas  all  and  every  the  Marchants  of  the  said
company,  as  often  as  they  would,  were,  both  in  the
Realme  of  England,  and  in  other  territories  &  dominions
subject  unto  our  soveraigne  lord  the  king,  admitted  and
suffered  (according  to  the  tenor  of  the  forenamed
priviledges  granted  unto  them)  freely,  friendly  and
securely  to  traffique  and  converse  with  any  of  his
Majesties  liege  people  and  subjects  whatsoever,  or  with
other  people  of  whatsoever  nation  living  in  the  realme
of  England,  or  in  the  dominions  aforesaid  :  the  said
common  society  of  marchants  by  their  publike  &  de-
liberate common  counsel  did  appoint  &  ordain,  y'  no
society  in  any  cities,  townes,  or  places,  neither  yet  any
particular  man  of  any  such  society  (there  being  no  law-
full  or  reasonable  cause  why)  shoulde  in  any  wise  admit
any  marchants  of  the  realm  of  England  resorting  unto
their  cities  or  other  places  for  marchandise,  to  enjoy
intercourse  of  traffike  :  but  that  the  saide  English
marchants  should  bee  altogether  excluded  from  all
traffike  and  mutuall  conversation  among  them,  by  de-
nouncing and  inflicting  grievous  penalties  of  money  as
well  upon  cities  as  other  places,  and  upon  particular
marchants  also  of  the  foresaid  societie  practising  the
contrary.

Item,  that  immediatly  after,  the  foresaid  parties
enacting  and  ordaining  published  their  sayde  statute  and

80

HANSE MERCHANTS' GRIEVANCES  ad.

ordinance,  in  all  kingdomes,  provinces,  partes,  cities,  and
townes,  wherin  any  marchants  of  the  said  societie  were
conversant.

Item,  that  after  that  publication,  the  statute  and
ordinance  aforesaid  by  every  of  the  marchants  of  the
forenamed  society  were  inviolably  observed.

Item,  that  the  said  statute  and  ordinance  hath  bene  so
rigorously  put  in  execution,  that  whereas  immediatly
after  certaine  English  marchants  with  their  ships,
mariners,  and  marchandize  beeing  in  a  certaine  part  of
one  of  the  principall  cities  of  the  foresaide  societie,
utterly  destitute  of  meate,  drinke,  and  money,  publikely
offred  to  sell  their  woUen  clothes  of  England,  onely  to
provide  themselves  of  necessary  victuals  :  yet  the
marchants  of  the  saide  citie,  stoutely  persisting  in  their
statute  and  ordinance  aforesaid,  straightly  prohibited  the
buying  of  such  clothes,  unchristianly  denying  meate  and
drinke  unto  the  said  English  marchants.

Item,  the  foresaid  society  decreed  and  ordained,  that
no  marchant  of  the  saide  company  should  in  any  place
or  countrey  whatsoever,  buy  any  woollen  clothes  of  the
realme  or  dominion  of  England  (albeit  offered  by  others
and  not  by  English  men)  or,  having  bought  any,
should,  after  the  terme  prefixed,  sel  them,  imposing-
grievous  pecuniary  mulcts,  besides  the  forfeiture  of  the
clothes  so  bought  or  sold,  upon  them  that  would  attempt
the  contrary.

Item,  that  after  the  said  statute  and  ordinance,  the
foresaide  societie  decreed,  that  all  marchants  of  the  said
companie,  having  among  their  wares  and  marchandise
any  woollen  clothes  made  in  England,  should  either  sell
the  saide  clothes,  or  within  a  short  space  then  limited
should,  under  penaltie  of  forfeiting  the  said  clothes,
utterly  renounce  the  use  and  commoditie  thereof :  Not-  The  Hans
withstanding  a  grievous  penaltie  of  money  being  imposed  societie  deter-
upon  the  violaters  of  the  same  statute.  mtneth  the

Item,  that  the  statutes  and  ordinances  aforesaid  might  "Ens-Hsk^mar-
with  more speed and  celerity  be put in execution,  the  cka7tts.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

H07-  ^  . .  .

said  authors  and  publishers  thereof  imagining,  according

to  their  desire,  that  by  this  meanes  an  utter  extirpation
and  overthrow  of  English  marchants  might,  yea  &  oi
necessity  must  ensue:  upon  their  serious  &  long  pre-
meditated deliberation,  straitely  commanded  &  injoyned,
under  pain  of  losing  the  benefit  of  all  privileges,  where-
soever, or  by  the  princes  of  what  lands,  or  the  Magis-
trates of  what  Cities  or  townes  soever  vouchsafed  unto
the  said  common  societie,  that  not  only  the  aldermen  of
that  society  in  al  places  throughout  the  realme  of  Eng
land,  but  also  al  other  marchants  of  the  said  company,
after  the  maner  of  marchants  conversing  in  the  saide
Realme,  should,  without  exception  of  persons,  utterly
abstein  from  all  intercourse  of  traffike  with  the  marchants
of  the  realme  aforesaid :  yea,  and  that  they  shoulde
depart  out  of  the  said  kingdome  within  a  very  short
space  limited.  For  the  dispatching  of  al  which  premisses
without  delay,  it  was  according  to  their  commandement
effectually  provided.
Statutes  Item,  that  the  society  aforesaid  hath  approved  divers

against  Eng- ^^j. unreasonable statutes &  ordinances,  made  &  pub-

hsh  marchants ,.,•',1  ,  1 ^ r^i  • ^  -j--

htNorzvayand  hshed  by  the  marchants  ot  the  same  society  residing  in
in  Stiedland.  the  kingdoms  of  Norway  and  Swedland,  to  the  great
prejudice  of  the  kingdome  of  England,  and  the  mar
chants  thereof:  and  as  yet  both  covertly  and  expresly
do  approve  the  same,  unjustly  putting  them  in  daily
execution.

Item,  wheras  in  the  privileges  &  indulgences  granted
by  ye  renoumed  princes  somtimes  kings  of  England,  ye
worthy  progenitors  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  y
now  is,  unto  the  society  aforesaid,  it  is  provided,  y^  the
said  marchants  shal  not  avow  any  man  which  is  not  oj
their  company,  nor  shal  not  colour  his  goods  and  mar-
chandize  under  their  company :  whereas  also  in  the
[I.  175.]  confirmation  of  the  sayd  priviledges  made  by  oui
soveraigne  lord  that  nowe  is,  it  is  manifestly  provided,
that  the  marchants  of  the  Hans  towns,  under  the  coloui
of  their  priviledges  in  England,  shall  not  upon  paine  oi

82

I  KING HENRY IV.'S LETTER  a.d.

1407.

:he  perpetuall  frustration  and  revocation  of  the  fore-
;ayd  priviledges,  receive  any  stranger  of  any  other  towne
n  their  liberties,  by  whom  the  kings  custome  may  in
my  sort  be  withholden  or  diminished :  &  yet  the  con-
:rary  unto  al  these  provisoes  hath  bin  every  yere,  for
:hese  20.  yeres  or  thereabout  notoriously  practised  and
:ommitted,  as  well  joyntly  by  the  generall  counsell,  and
toleration  of  the  foresayd  society,  as  also  severally  by
the  advise  and  permission  of  divers  particular  cities  of
the  foresayd  Hans  company  to  the  great  diminution  of
[lis  majesties  custome,  the  estimation  whereof  the  fore-
sayd ambassadors  are  not  able  at  this  present  fully  to
declare.  But  that  all  occasions  of  the  last  above  men-
tioned diminution  may  bee  prevented  for  the  time  to
:ome,  the  sayd  ambassadors  doe  demand  to  have  from  How  many  ij
the  foresayd  societie  a  declaration  in  writing,  what  and  ^^^'^"-  ^^  ^^^
(vhat  maner  of  territories,  cities,  townes,  villages  or
:ompanies  they  be,  for  which  the  sayd  society  challengeth
ind  pretendeth,  that  they  ought  to  enjoy  the  priviledges
granted  unto  their  marchants,  as  is  above  mentioned.

Moreover,  it  is  required  by  the  foresaid  ambassadors,
if  the  societie  aforesayd  hath  not  decreed  nor  ordayned
the  things  above  written,  that  the  names  of  the  cities  and
places  decreeing  and  ordaining  such  statutes  &  ordinances,
may  by  the  sayd  common  society  either  now  or  at  some
other  times  and  places  convenient  for  the  same  purpose,
be  expressed  and  set  downe  in  writing.

A  letter  of  Henry  the  fourth  king  of  England
&c.  unto  Prater  Conradus  de  Jungingen  the
master  generall  of  Prussia.

HEnrie  &c.  to  the  most  noble  and  mighty  personage
of  sacred  religion  Fr :  Conradus  de  Jungingen
Master  general  of  the  order  of  the  Dutch  knights  of  S.
Marie,  our  most  deare  friend,  greeting,  and  continual
perfection  of  amity.

When  as  your  messengers  and  ambassadors  were  of
late  personally  present in Holland,  and there  expected

83

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

the  arrival  of  our  ambassadors  untill  the  first  day  of  the
moneth  of  November  last  expired,  that  there  might  bee
by  way  of  friendly  conference  a  remedie  provided  in
regard  of  certaine  injuries  pretended  to  be  offered,  byi
both  our  subjects  one  against  another,  for  the  publique;
commoditie  of  both  parts,  we  were  determined  to  have
sent  unto  Dordract,  at  the  foresaid  daye,  our  welbeloved^
and  faithfuU  knight  William  Sturmy,  and  our  welbelovedl
clerke  John  Kington,  upon  our  ambassage-affayres :  hav-|
ing  as  yet  in  our  desires,  for  a  peaceable  ending  of  thel
matter,  (which,  our  foresayd  ambassadors,  by  reason  of|
the  shortnes  of  time,  or  the  finding  out  of  some  otherf
remedie  and  happy  conclusion  of  all  and  singular  thei
foresaid  attempts  concerning  the  principall  busines,  couldj
by  no  meanes  at  that  instant  attaine  unto)  that  upon  somei
other  more  convenient  day  (to  the  end  your  ambassadors|
might  not  returne  home  altogether  frustrate  of  theirj
expectation)  there  might  be,  after  the  wonted  friendlyj
maner,  a  conference  &  agreement  with  your  foresayd]
ambassadors,  even  as  by  other  letters  of  ours  directed^
unto  your  sayd  ambassadors  the  second  day  of  the;
moneth  of  November  aforesayd  wee  have  delivered  our
mind  unto  them.  But  it  fortuned  not  long  before  the!
departure  of  your  ambassadors  into  their  owne  countrey,
that  no  sufficient  shipping  could  be  found  wherein  our
sayd  ambassadors  might  have  secure  and  safe  passage
unto  Dordract,  or  Middleburgh,  neither  was  it  thought
that  they  should  get  any  passage  at  all,  till  the  ships  at
Middleborough  were  returned  into  our  kingdome,  byj'
the  force  whereof  they  might  be  the  more  strongly
wafted  over.  And  so  by  reason  of  the  departure  of
your  ambassadours,  all  matters  remaine  in  suspense  till
such  time  as  the  sayd  ambassadors  shall  againe  meete
with  ours  to  adde  perfection  unto  the  busines  as  yet
imperfect.  Wherefore  (our  friend  unfainedly  beloved)
desiring  from  the  bottome  of  our  heart  that  the  integritie
of  love,  which  hath  from  auncient  times  taken  place
betweene our & your subjects,  may in time to come

THE PRUSSIAN  LETTER  ad.

1407.
Iso  be  kept  inviolable,  we  have  thought  good  once
gain  to  send  one  of  our  foresaid  ambassadors,  namely
A^illiam  Esturmy  knight  to  Dordract,  giving  him  charge
hither  to  make  haste,  and  there  to  stay,  till  some  of
^our  messengers,  at  your  commandement  doe  in  time
onvenient  repayre  unto  that  place,  there  (by  Gods
ssistance)  to  bring  the  matter  unto  an  happy  conclusion.
vlay  it  please  you  therefore  of  your  unfayned  friend-
hip,  without  all  inconvenience  of  delay,  to  returne,  not
into  us,  but  unto  our  forenamed  knight  an  answere  in
writing,  what  your  will  and  determination  is.  Neither
2t  it  seeme  strange  unto  you,  that  we  have  not  at  this
iresent  sent  our  forenamed  John  Kington  clerke  together
nth  the  sayd  William :  for  the  cause  of  his  abode  with
LS  is,  that  he  may  in  the  meane  season  employ  his  care
nd  diligence  about  those  matters  which  must  be  prepara-
ives  for  the  finall  conclusion  of  the  foresayd  busines.
honorable  sir,  and  most  deare  friend,  we  doe  most
eartily  wish  increase  of  prosperity  and  joy  unto  your
lerson.  Given  in  our  palace  of  Westminster  the  14.
ay  of  Feb. in the  yeare  of  our  Lord 1407.  1407.

Po the right noble and valiant knight Sir [I.  176-]
William Sturmy sent  at this present by the
most sovereigne King  of  England &c.  as  his
ambassadour unto Dordract,  his most  sincere
friend.

"  TQnorable  sir,  our  most  entier  friend,  wee  received
lX  the  royall  letters  of  the  most  mighty  prince  and
Drd,  our  lord  the  king  of  England  and  France  and  lord
f  Ireland,  sent  unto  us  under  the  date  of  the  14.  day
f  February  (which  we  received  at  our  castle  of  Marien-
urgh  the  11.  of  April)  containing,  amongst  other
latters,  that  his  Majesties  purpose  was  once  againe  to
snde  one  of  his  ambassadors,  namely  your  selfe  our
ery  sincere  friend  unto  Dordract,  giving  you  in  charge
lat  you  would make  haste  thither  & there  stay,  untill

85

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1407.

some  of  our  subjects  might  at  our  commandement,  in
convenient  time  repaire  unto  the  same  place,  there  (by
Gods  assistance)  to  bring  our  matters  unto  a  happy
conclusion.  And  then  he  requested  that  wee  should
without  delay  write  our  determination  unto  you,  as  the
conclusion  of  the  said  letter  importeth.  Howbeit  (our
most  deare  friend)  the  treaties  &  conferences  about  the
redresse  or  reformation  of  unjust  attempts  committed  by
the  subjects  of  our  sayd  lord  the  king  &  our  subjects,
one  against  another,  are  both  on  our  behalfe,  and  on  the
behalfe  of  the  common  societie  of  the  Hans  marchants,
hitherto  had,  made,  and  continued  common.  And  so
our  commissioners  upon  our  full  and  absolute  com
mandement,  shal,  for  the  managing  of  these  and  of  other
affaires  of  the  foresaid  societie,  many  waies  urgent  and
difficult,  upon  the  feast  of  our  Lords  Ascension  next  to
come,  meet  with  the  said  societie  at  Lubec,  there  to  give
notice  what  they  have  determined  to  conclude  in  this
present  busines  &  in  others  for  their  owne  behalfe.
For  we  wil  give  our  ambassadours  which  are  there  to
appeare,  streightly  in  charge  that  according  to  the  kings
request  aforesayde  they  doe  without  delay  procure  an
answere  to  be  written  unto  your  honour  concerning  the
determination  of  the  foresayd  societie.  Given  at  the  place
and  upon  the  day  above  named,  in  the  yeare  of  our
Lord 1407.

Fr.  Wernherus  de  Tettingen,  commander  in  Elbing
general  vice-master  and  lieutenant  in  the  roome
of  the  Master  generall  of  the  Dutch  knights
of  the  Order  of  S.  Marie  &c.  of  late  deceased.

86

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS  ad.

1408.

The  letters  of  Henry  the  4.  king  of  England  &c.
unto  Ulricus  de  Jungingen  Master  generall  of
Prussia,  1408.  wherein  he  doth  ratifie  and
accept  the  last  agreement  made  at  Hage  in
Holland.

HEnry  &c.  unto  the  honourable  and  religious  per-
sonage Fr.  Ulricus  de  Jungingen  Master  generall
of  the  Dutch  knights  of  S.  Marie  &c.  our  most  deare
friend,  greeting  and  dayly  increase  of  our  accustomed
amity  and  friendship.  We  doe  by  these  presents  give
your  honour  to  understand,  that  our  faithfuU  &  wel-
beloved  William  Esturmy  knight,  and  Master  John
Kington  clerke,  our  ambassadors  and  messengers  sent
of  late  on  our  behalfe,  unto  the  presence  of  your  pre-
decessour  for  the  redressing  of  certaine  grievances  and
damages  being  contrary  to  justice  offered  against  us  and
our  liege  subjects  by  the  people  &  subjects  of  your
predecessors,  &  against  them  also  by  our  subjects  as  it
is  aforesayd,  in  friendly  maner  to  be  procured,  of  late
returning  out  of  the  parts  of  Alemain  made  relation  unto
us  and  to  our  counsell,  that  having  conferred  with  your
forenamed  predecessour  about  the  foresayd  affayres,  the
particulars  following  were  at  length  concluded  :  namely
first  of  all,  that  at  a  certaine  day  and  place  they  should
meete  in  Holland  with  his  ambassadors  and  messengers,
to  hold  a  friendly  conference  between  them  about  the
redressing  and  reformation  of  the  grievances  and  damages
aforesayd :  and  that  they  should  by  the  equall  waight
of  diligent  examination  ponder,  &  in  the  balance  of  justice
discusse  &  define  al  &  singular  the  foresaid  grievances
&  damages  inflicted  on  both  parts.  Howbeit  at  length
after  sundry  prorogations  then  made  &  continued  on  this
behalfe,  our  ambassadors  &  messengers  aforesaid  upon
the  28.  of  August  last  past,  assembling  themselves  for  ^meeting at
our  part  at  the  towne  of  Hage  in  Holland,  the  hon.  &  of  4ugust
discreete  personages  Arnold Heket burgomaster  of  the 1407.

87

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1408.

towne  of  Dantzik,  &  John  Crolowe,  for  the  behalf  of
your  subjects  of  Prussia,  and  Tidman  de  Meule,  &  John
Epenscheid  for  the  behalfe  of  Livonia,  being  assembled
as  messengers  and  commissioners  about  the  redresse  and
reformation  aforesayd,  did  then  and  there  demaund  in
certaine  articles,  of  our  ambassadours  and  messengers
abovenamed  25034.  nobles  &  half  a  noble,  for  the
grievances  &  damages  offered  (as  it  was  then  said)  to
your  subjects  of  Prussia,  and  24082.  nobles,  I2.s.  8d.
[I.  177.]  in  recompense  of  the  damages  offered  unto  those  your
subjects  of  Livonia.  And  when  the  substance  of  those
articles  about  the  grievances  &  losses  aforesayd  was  by
the  sayd  ambassadours  and  messengers  throughly  exa-
mined and  discussed,  by  their  generall  consent  it  was
finally  agreed,  that  your  subjects,  in  consideration  of  all
and  singular  the  foresayd  grievances  and  damages  offered
unto  them  by  our  people,  should  within  three  yeares
after  the  feast  of  Easter  next  ensuing,  at  three  equall
payments  receive  from  us,  namely  they  of  Prussia,  8957.
nobles,  and  they  of  Livonia  22496.  nobles,  sixe  pence,
halfe  peny,  farthing,  and  no  more,  so  that  we  our  selves
thought  good  to  condescend  thereunto.  Howbeit,  for-
asmuch as  certaine  other  articles  of  your  subjects  of
Prussia,  and  also  certaine  articles  in  the  behalfe  of  our
subjects  containing  grievous  complaints  in  them,  being
propounded  before  the  ambassadors  &  messengers  afore-
said, for  the  attaining  of  reformation  in  regard  of  the
damages  &  grievances  offered  on  both  parts,  could  not
as  then,  for  the  great  obscurity  of  divers  of  the  sayd
articles,  and  also  for  want  of  sufficient  proofe  at  the
last  meeting  appointed  and  held  by  the  foresayd  ambas-
sadors at  the  towne  of  Hage  in  Holland,  sufficiently  to
be  examined,  discussed,  and  defined,  it  was  agreed  upon
by  the  ambassadors  and  messengers  of  both  partes,  that
from  the  15.  day  of  October  then  last  expired  unto  the
feast  of  Easter  now  next  ensuing,  and  from  thenceforth
within  one  whole  yere  immediatly  following,  the  plain-
tifes  of  both  parts  should  throughly  declare  before  our

88

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS  ad.

1408.

I  chancelour  of  England  for  the  time  being,  the  foresayd
obscurities  concerning  the  substance  of  their  articles,  and
that  they  should,  for  the  obtaining  of  execution,  and
complement  of  justice  at  our  sayd  chancelours  hands,
peremptorily  minister  necessary  probations,  under  paine
of  perpetuall  exclusion  from  the  petition  of  those  things
which  are  contayned in  the  articles  above  mentioned.

Provided  alwayes,  that  if  at  the  last  it  shall  be  by
lawfuU  proofes  made  manifest  concerning  the  summes
above  written  or  any  part  or  parcell  thereof,  that  due
satisfaction  hath  beene  made  to  him  or  them  unto  whom
it  was  due,  or  that  those  goods  of  and  for  the  which
complaint  hath  bene  made  on  the  behalfe  of  your  sub-
jects have  pertained  or  doe  appertaine  unto  others,  or
any  other  just,  true,  and  reasonable  cause  may  law-
fully bee  alleaged,  why  the  payment  of  all  the  foresayd
summes  or  any  of  them  ought  not  to  be  performed  :
that  then  so  much  only  is  to  be  cut  off  or  deducted
from  the  sayd  summes  as  shall  be  found  to  be  already
payd  or  to  pertaine  unto  others,  or  else  upon  some  true,
just,  and  reasonable  cause  (as  is  aforesayd)  not  to  be  due.
We  therefore  considering  that  the  sayd  friendly  con-
ference, and  the  finall  agreement  ensuing  thereupon  are
agreeable  unto  reason  and  equitie,  doe,  for  our  part  ratifie
and  willingly  accept  the  very  same  conference  and  agree-
ment. And  forasmuch  as  it  hath  bene  alwayes  our
desire,  and  is  as  yet  our  intention,  that  the  league  of
amity  and  the  integritie  of  love,  which  hath  of  olde
time  bene  observed  betweene  our  and  your  subjects,  may
in  times  to  come  perpetually  remaine  inviolable,  and  that
your  and  our  people  may  hereafter,  not  onely  for  the
good  of  our  common  weale  but  also  for  the  commodity
and  peace  of  both  parts,  according  to  their  woonted  maner,
assemble  themselves  and  enjoy  the  faithfull  and  mutuall
conversation  one  of  another  :  we  will  cause  in  our  citie
of  London,  with  the  summe  of  8957.  nobles  satisfaction
to  bee  made  unto  the  Prussians,  and  with  the  summe
of  22496.  nobles,  sixe  pence,  halfe  peny,  farthing,  recom-

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1408.

pense  to  be  performed  unto  the  Livonians,  in  regard  of
the  damages  and  injuries  (which  in  very  deede  proceeded
not  of  our  consent)  by  our  subjects  offered  unto  them,
as  it  is  afore  sayd,  and  within  three  yeares  after  the  feast
of  Easter  next  ensuing  the  sayd  summes  of  money  to
bee  payed  at  three  payments,  and  by  three  equall
portions.  Conditionally  that  unto  our  subjects  which  be
endamaged  correspondent  satisfaction  be  likewise  on  your
part  within  the  terme  of  the  foresayd  three  yeeres  per-
formed, with  paying  the  summes  of  766.  nobles  and  of
4535.  nobles,  demaunded  on  our  behalfe,  and  also  with
the  payment  of  such  summes  as  within  one  yeere  im-
mediately ensuing  the  feast  of  Easter  aforesayd,  shalbe
found  by  sufficient  declarations  and  proofes  to  be  made
on  the  behalfe  of  our  subjects  (as  is  aforesayd)  to  be  due.
Even  as  we  in  like  maner  will  make  satisfaction  unto
your  subjects  within  our  citie  aforesayd.  Now  as  touching
the  request  of  your  ambassadors  and  of  the  Livonians,
whereby  we  were  required  to  procure  some  holesome
remedy  for  the  soules  of  certaine  drowned  persons,  as
conscience  and  religion  seemeth  to  chalenge  (in  regard
of  whom  we  are  moved  with  compassion,  and  do  for
their  sakes  heartily  condole  their  mishaps)  you  are  (our
entier  friend)  of  a  certaintie  to  understand,  that  after
we  shall  be  by  your  letters  advertized  of  the  number,
state,  and  condition  of  the  sayd  parties  drowned,  we  will
cause  suffrages  of  prayers  and  divers  other  holesome
remedies  profitable  for  the  soules  of  the  deceased  and
acceptable  to  God  and  men,  religiously  to  be  ordained
and  provided  :  upon  condition,  that  for  the  soules  of  our
drowned  countrey  men  there  be  the  like  remedie  pro-
vided by  you.  The  almighty  grant  unto  your  selfe  and
unto  your  whole  Order,  that  you  may  prosperously
triumph  over  the  enemies  of  Christ  his  crosse.  Given
under  our  privie  seale  at  our  palace  of  Westminster  the
16.  of  March,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1408.  and  in
the  ninth  yere  of  our  reigne.

90

THE PRUSSIAN LETTERS

A.D.
1408.

The letters of Fr : Ulricus Master of Prussia [I.  178.]
directed  unto  the  king  of  England,  signifying
that he is contented with the agreements
concluded  by  his  messengers  at  Hage.

To  the  most  renowmed  prince  and  mighty  lord
L  Henrie  king  of  England  and  France,  and
lord  of  Ireland,  our  most  gracious  lord.

Nto  your  highnes  pleasure  at  all  assaies
humbly  recommending  my  voluntarie
service  &c.  Most  renowmed  king-,
mighty  prince,  and  gracious  lord,  we  re-
ceived of  late  with  great  reverence  as  it
becommeth  us,  by  our  welbeloved  Arnold
de  Dassel  the  bearer  of  these  presents,
your  Majesties  letters  of  late  directed  unto  us,  making
mention  amongst  other  matters  of  certaine  appointments
first  made  and  concluded  between  the  noble  and  worthy
personages  William  Esturmy  knight,  John  Kington
clerke,  and  William  Brampton  citizen  of  London  your
ambassadours  and  messengers  on  the  one  parte,  and
our  honorable  and  religious  brethren,  namely  Conradus
Lichtensten  great  commander,  Warnherus  de  Tettingen
chiefe  hospitalary  &  commander  in  Elbing,  and  Arnold
de  Hacken  treasurer,  being  the  procuratours  and  com-
missioners of  Fra.  Conradus  de  Jungingen  our  last
predecessour  of  famous  memory  on  the  other  parte,
concerning  the  redressing,  reformation,  and  amendement
of  unjust  attempts  committed  on  both  sides,  at  our
castle  of  Marienburgh,  and  also  very  lately  at  the  towne
of  Hage  in  Holland,  namely  the  twenty  eight  of  the
moneth  August  in  the  yeare  immediately  past,  betweene
your  foresayde  ambassadours  William  Esturmy  knight,
and  John  Kington  clerke,  for  your  part,  and  our  trusty
and  welbeloved  commissioners  and  procurators,  namely
Arnold  Hecht  burgomaster  of  our  citie  of  Dantzik,  and

91

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1408.

John  Crolow  citizen  of  the  same  citie,  for  our  parte.
And  for  our  more  perfect  knowlege  in  this  behalfe,
our  sayd  commissioners  made  relation  unto  us  and  unto
our  whole  counsell,  that  associating  unto  themselves  our
messengers  of  Livonia,  namely,  Tidman  Myeul,  and
John  Epensheid,  together  with  your  foresaid  ambassa-
dours  and  messengers,  they  there  finally  appoynted  and
concluded,  of  and  about  the  above  mentioned  summes
of  money  due  on  both  partes,  of  the  which  mention  is
made  in  your  letters  aforesayd.  With  this  speciall
proviso,  that  in  like  manner  satisfaction  be  made  in
all  points,  both  unto  other  of  our  damnified  subjects
of  Prussia,  namely  such  whose  goods  or  the  true  value
thereof  have  bene  finally  adjudged  by  the  judges  or
professors  of  our  lawes,  and  unto  such  who  having
brought  their  articles  of  complaints  unto  the  audience
of  the  most  dread  and  mighty  prince  and  lorde,  our
Here  relation  lord  Rupertus  king  of  the  Romans  alwayes  most
ts  had  unto  ye  soveraigne,  were  in  conclusion  to  have  the  estimations
Romans.  °^  their  goods to be adjudged by  the  sentence  of  the

sayd  lord,  with  the  advise  of  two  of  his  counsellers,
and  also  unto  other  of  our  subjects  who  have  brought
in  sufficient  proofe  of  damages  unjustly  inflicted  upon
them  by  your  subjects,  over  and  besides  the  premisses.
So  that  in  like  maner  satisfaction  be  made  unto  the
common  societie  of  the  Hans  marchants  :  and  by  the
arbitrament  set  downe  in  the  conferences  had  at  Marien-
burgh,  of  the  which  it  was  above  provided  and  enacted
on  their  behalfe,  namely  if  they  will  rest  contented  with
our  subjects  in  the  courses  and  meanes  then  concluded.
If  not,  we  intend  not  at  all  to  adhere  unto  them  in  this
behalfe.  Afterward  our  messengers  aforesayd,  both  they
of  Prussia  and  of  Livonia  demanded  convenient,  just,
and  speedy  satisfaction,  with  the  payment  of  all  and
singular  the  summes  above  mentioned,  due  unto  both
parts  (so  farre  foorth  as  equity  and  reason  would  yeeld
unto,  for  the  recompense  of  the  parties  injuried  and
endamaged  on  both  sides)  to  be  made  within  one  whole

92

THE PRUSSIAN LETTERS  ad.

1408.
yere  accompting  from  the  feast  of  Easter  now  last  ex-
pired unto  the  very  same  feast  next  to  come  in  the
yere  immediatly  following,  &  that  in  three  several
termes  of  payment,  by  three  portions  of  the  said
summes  equally  to  be  divided,  at  the  towne  of  Bruges
in  Flanders  as  being  a  place  indifferent  for  all  parties,
in  maner  and  forme  as  it  was  before  at  Marienburgh
required  and  stoode  upon :  namely  that  reformation,
reparation,  and  amendement  of  all  unjust  attempts
committed  on  both  parts  ought  to  bee  performed  within
one  yere.  Howbeit  contrariwise  your  ambassadors  afore-
sayd  decreed  that  the  sayd  satisfaction  should  be  per-
formed unto  the  parties  injuried  of  both  parts  within
three  yeeres,  beginning  to  accompt  from  the  feast  of
Easter  last  past.  And  when  your  ambassadours  were
not  contented  with  the  maner  of  satisfaction  set  downe
by  our  men,  nor  our  commissioners  were  willing  in
any  sort  to  consent  unto  that  course  which  was
^thought  convenient  by  your  ambassadors,  the  honor-
able messengers  of  the  sea-townes  of  the  Hans  being
there  at  that  time  present,  made  a  motion  that  the
foresayd  satisfaction  might  be  performed  within  two
yeeres  and  an  halfe,  accompting  from  the  feast  of  Easter
last  past,  often  before  mentioned :  yet  under  a  certaine
protestation,  namely  if  both  parties  should  agree  unto  [I.  179.]
that  forme  of  satisfaction,  and  if  they  should  thinke
good  finally  and  conclusively  to  yeeld  their  consent
unto  it.  Which  kind  of  satisfaction  also  conceived  by
the  messengers,  your  sayd  ambassadours  without  giving
notice  therof  unto  your  royall  Majestie,  refused  finally
to  approve ;  being  rather  desirous  to  make  a  true  &
faithfull  report  of  the  sayd  forme  of  satisfaction  last
above  mentioned  unto  your  kingly  highnesse,  and  that
in  such  sorte,  that  (as  they  hoped)  effectuall  satisfac-
tion and  payment  of  all  and  singuler  the  summes  due
and  to  bee  due  on  both  partes  should  more  conveniently
and  speedily  bee  performed.  Whereupon  we  might  be
put in good hope,  that more speedy and convenient

93

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1408.

appointments  of  termes,  for  the  sayd  satisfaction  friendly
on  both  parts  to  be  performed  in,  would  have  pro-
ceeded from  your  bountifull  and  gracious  clemencie.
And  in  very  deede  (most  mighty  prince)  albeit  it  was
never  the  meaning  of  our  foresayd  predecessor,  so  far
foorth  as  these  affayres  concerned  him,  to  protract  and
delay  the  execution  of  the  sayd  busines  so  many  and
such  long  distances  of  time,  and  that  for  divers  respects,
both  because  restitution  unto  the  parties  robbed  con-
sisted herein,  and  also  because  the  sayd  restitutions
and  satisfactions  are  to  be  made  unto  poore  people,
widowes,  orphanes,  and  other  miserable  creatures,
diversly  and  miserably  slaine  and  oppressed :  notwith-
standing we  being  moved  with  hearty  &  fervent  zeale
and  speciall  affection  unto  your  royall  crowne  of  Eng-
land, and  having  due  regard  and  consideration  of
your  most  excellent  Majestie,  upon  the  advise  of  our
honourable  brethren  our  counsellers,  doe  thankfully
receive,  &  by  the  tenour  of  these  presents  totally
ratifie  and  approve  such  satisfactions  of  the  foresayd
summes  howsoever  due  unto  our  subjects  both  Prussians
and  Livonians,  in  friendly  sorte  to  be  performed  at  such
times  and  seasons  limited  and  prefixed  by  your  highnes
as  are  expressed  in  your  majesties  letters,  and  also  of
other  summes  which  within  one  yeare  immediately  ensu-
ing after  the  feast  of  Easter  last  past,  by  sufficient  proofes
to  be  made  on  their  part  before  your  chancelour  at  your
citie  of  London  shall  be  found  due  unto  them.  Con-
ditionally that  without  inconvenience  of  delay  and
impediment  they  be  performed  as  they  ought  to  be,
according  to  the  premisses.  In  like  maner  also  we
our  selves  within  the  termes  of  payment  above  men-
tioned will  procure  satisfaction  to  be  without  fayle
perfourmed  unto  your  subjects  endamaged,  with  the
summe  of  766.  nobles,  being  in  regard  of  their  losses,
of  the  which  they  have  given  up  sufficient  informa-
tions, due  unto  them :  and  with  other  like  summes
also which are by sufficient proofes, within the yeare

94

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS

A.D.

1408.

aforesayd, and in maner and forme prescribed to be
exhibited  before  our  treasurer  at our  citie of  Dantzik.
The almighty vouchsafe prosperously and long time
to preserve your majesties royal person. Given at  Sept.  27.
our castle of Marienburgh the 27. of  September, in H°8.
the  yeare  of  our  Lord 1408.

Fr.  Ulricus  de  Jungingen  master  generall  of  the
order  of  the  Dutch  knights  of  S.  Maries  hospital
of  Jerusalem.

The  letters  of  king  Henry  the  4.  sent  unto
Fr.  Ulricus  master  general  of  Prussia,  wherein
he  doth  absolutely  approve  the  foresaid  con-
ference holden  at  Hage,  and  treateth  about
a  perpetual  league  and  amitie  to  be  concluded
betweene  England  and  Prussia.

Enry  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  Eng-
land and  France  and  lord  of  Ireland,
unto  the  noble  &  mighty  personage  of
sacred  religion  Ulricus  de  Jungingen
master  generall  of  the  order  of  the
Dutch  knights  of  S.  Maries  hospitall  of
Jerusalem,  our  entirely  beloved  friend,
greeting  and  increase  of  unfained  friendship.  After
divers  conferences  had  in  sundry  places  beyond  the
seas,  betweene  the  ambassadours  and  messengers  of  your
late  predecessor  and  of  your  selfe  also,  on  the  one
parte,  and  betweene  our  especiall  ambassadors  and
messengers  on  the  other  parte,  concerning  reformations,
reparations,  &  restitutions  in  certaine  maner  &  forme
to  be  performed  unto  our  subjects  of  both  parts,  in
regard  of  manifold  injuries  practised  against  them  both,
and  after  that,  in  the  last  conference  holden  by  the
ambassadours  of  us  both  at  the  towne  of  Hage  in
Holland,  there  was  a  motion  made  concerning  a  certaine
forme of satisfaction, by way of  finall conclusion in

95

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1408.

that  behalfe  :  but  not  being  as  then  by  our  ambassadours
condescended  unto,  because  they  durst  not  proceede
unto  the  same  conclusion  without  our  privitie,  relation
thereof  at  length  being  by  them  made  before  us  and
our  counsel  :  we  returned  unto  your  honour  an  answere
in  writing  by  our  letters  under  our  privie  seale,  of  our
full  purpose  and  intention  (unto  the  which  letters  we
doe  at  this  present  referre  our  selves,  as  if  they  were
here  againe  expresly  written)  what  we  thought  good
to  have  done  in  this  behalfe  :  so  that  wee  also  might,
by  your  friendly  letters  be  certaynly  informed  of  your
will  and  expresse  consent,  being  likewise  conformable
unto  your  foresayd  intention.  Nowe  whereas  since  that
[I.  180.]  time  we  have  of  late  received  the  certaintie  of  the
matter  by  your  letters  written  unto  us  from  your  castle
of  Marienburgh,  bearing  date  the  27.  of  September  last
past,  contayning  in  effect  amongst  other  matters,  that
you  being  mooved  with  a  fervent  zeale  and  speciall
affection  (as  you  write)  unto  the  royall  crowne  of  our
realme,  and  having  due  regard  and  consideration  of
our  royall  majestic,  upon  the  advise  of  your  honourable
brethren  your  counsellers,  doe  with  a  thankfuU  mind
accept,  and  by  the  tenour  of  the  said  letters  of  yours
totally  approve  the  concord  of  a  certaine  satisfaction  to
be  performed  with  the  payment  of  certaine  summes  of
money  howsoever  due  unto  your  subjects  as  well  of
Prussia  as  of  Livonia,  expressed  in  our  former  letters,
within  the  termes  prefixed  by  our  consent  and  limited
in  our  said  letters,  and  also  of  other  summes  which
within  one  whole  yeare  immediatly  following  the  feast
of  Easter  last  past,  by  sufficient  proofes  on  their  part
to  bee  made  before  our  chauncelour  at  our  citie  of
London,  shall  be  found  due  unto  them  :  conditionally,
that  without  inconvenience  of  delay  and  impediments,
the  premisses  be  performed  as  they  ought  to  be.  And
that  your  selfe  also  will  without  fayle,  upon  the  termes
appoynted  for  the  said  payments,  procure  satisfaction
to be made accordingly unto our endamaged subjects

96

KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS  ad

1408.

with  the  summes  due  unto  them  by  reason  of  their
losses,  whereof  they  have  sufficient  information.  Where-
fore in  regard  of  those  your  friendly  letters,  and  your
courteous  answere  returned  by  them  unto  us,  as  is
aforesaid,  wee  doe  yeelde  unto  you  right  unfained
thanks.  But  because  it  will  undoubtedly  be  most
acceptable  and  pleasing  both  unto  us  and  unto  our
people,  and  unto  you  and  your  subjects,  that  the  zeale
and  fervencie  of  love  which  hath  from  auncient  times
growen  and  increased  betweene  our  progenitours  for
them  and  their  subjects,  and  your  predecessors  and
their  subjects,  and  which  by  the  insolencie  of  certayne
lewde  persons,  without  any  consent  of  the  principall
lords,  hath  often  bene  violated  betweene  us  and  you
and  mutually  betweene  the  subjects  of  us  both,  may
be  put  in  perpetuall  ure  and  obtaine  full  strength  in  ^  motion  for
time  to  come,  sithens  hereupon  (by  Gods  assistance)  ^  P^^P^^^^^^
it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  unspeakeable  commodity  and
quiet  will  redound  unto  both  parts  :  may  it  seeme
good  unto  your  discretion,  as  it  seemeth  expedient  unto
us,  that  some  messengers  of  yours  sufficiently  authorised
to  parle,  agree,  and  conclude  with  our  deputy,  about
the  mutuall  contraction  of  a  perpetuall  league  and  con-
firmation of  friendship,  may  with  all  convenient  speede
be  sent  unto  our  presence.  At  whose  arrivall,  not  onely
in  this  busines  so  profitable  and  behoovefuU,  but  also
in  certaine  other  affaires  concerning  the  former  treaties
and  conclusions,  they  may,  yea  and  of  necessitie  must
greatly  avayle.  Wherefore  (our  entirely  beloved  friend)
even  as  upon  confidence  of  the  premisses  we  have
thought  good  to  grant  unto  the  marchants  and  subjects
of  our  realme  full  authority  to  resort  unto  your
dominions,  so  we  doe  in  like  maner  graunt  unto  your
marchants  and  subjects  free  jlicence  and  liberty  with
their  marchandises  and  goods  securely  to  come  into
our  realmes  and  dominions,  there  to  stay,  and  at  their
pleasures  thence  to  returne  home.  Moreover,  if  Arnold
Dassel,  who  last  of  all  presented  your  foresayd  letters
II  97  G

A.D.
1408.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

unto  us,  shal  thinke  good  in  the  meane  season  to  make
his  abode  here  in  our  dominions  (as  in  very  deede  it
is  expedient)  he  may  both  by  serious  consideration  and
deliberate  consulting  with  our  comissioners  more  con-
veniently and  prosperously  finde  out  wayes  and  meanes,
for  the  more  speedy  expedition  of  all  the  premisses.
Fare  ye  well  in  Christ.  Given  under  our  privie  seale
at  our  palace  of  Westminster,  the  seventh  of  March,
in  the  yere  of  our  lord  1408.  according  to  the  com-
putation of  the  Church  of  England,  and  in  the  tenth
yere  of  our  reigne.

A  new  concord  concluded  between  king  Henry
the  4.  and  Ulricus  de  Jungingen  Master
generall  of  Prussia,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord
1409.

Y  this  indenture  or  letters  indented  be
it  evidently  knowen  (for  the  perpetual
memory  of  the  matter)  unto  all  faithfull
Christians,  that  the  noble  &  honourable
personages  Richard  Merlowe  Maior  and
citizen  of  London,  Master  John  Kington
clerke,  and  William  Askham  citizen  and
Alderman  of  the  same  citie,  the  commissioners  of  the
most  soveraigne  prince  and  lord,  L.  Henrie  by  the
grace  of  God  king  of  England  and  France,  and  lord
of  Ireland,  and  Tidericus  de  Longenthorpe  knight,
Lefardus  de  Hereford  burgomaster  of  Elbing,  and
John  Crolowe  citizen  of  the  citie  of  Dantzik,  the
procurators,  commissioners,  deputies  and  messengers  of
the  right  noble  and  religious  personage  Fr.  Ulricus
de  Jungingen  Master  general  of  the  order  of  the  Dutch
knights  of  S.  Maries  hospital  of  Jerusalem,  having  in
the  names  of  the  sayd  king  and  Master  by  vertue  of
the  power  on  both  parts  committed  unto  them,  sufficient
authority,  have  appointed  and  with  one  consent  agreed
upon  all  and  singular  the  things  underwritten.

98

A NEW PRUSSIAN CONCORD  a.d.

1409.

Imprimis  for  the  conservation  of  mutuall  love  and  i.
wonted  amitie,  and  for  the  tranquihtie  of  sweete  amiable  [I-  181.]
peace,  it  is  decreed  and  ordained,  that  all  and  singular
the  liege  people  &  subjects  of  the  Realme  of  England
and  the  Marchants  of  the  territories  &  dominions  of
the  said  Realme  and  all  other  persons  of  what  state  or
condition  soever,  shall  and  may  safely  and  securely,  as
well  by  land  as  by  water  enter  into  the  parts  of  Prussia,
and  there  mutually  converse,  and  freely  after  the  maner
of  Marchants  exercise  traffique  aswell  with  the  Prussians
as  with  others,  of  what  nation  or  qualitie  soever,  there
also  make  their  abode,  and  thence  unto  their  owne
homes  and  dwelling  places  returne,  and  depart  unto
any  place  whither  and  so  often  as  they  shall  thinke
good,  as  well  by  land  as  by  water,  with  their  goods,
marchandize,  and  wares  whatsoever  ;  faithfully  paying
in  the  meane  time  all  rights  &  customes  due  in  regard
of  their  said  wares  and  Marchandize.  Reserved  alwaies
unto  the  said  Master  and  his  successours  all  right  and
remedie  ordained,  granted,  and  vouchsafed  in  certaine
obligations  by  our  Lord  the  king,  whereof  mention  shall
ibe  made  in  the  articles  following.

Item  it  is  ordained,  that  all  and  singular  the  subjects  2.
of  the  said  Master  generall  and  of  his  order,  of  what
state  and  condition  soever,  shall  and  may,  as  well  by
water  as  by  land  enter  into  the  kingdome  of  England
and  into  the  territories  and  dominions  thereof,  and
there  mutually  converse,  and  freely  after  the  maner  of
Marchants  exercise  traffique  as  well  with  all  English
people  as  with  others  of  what  nation  or  qualitie  soever,
and  there  also  make  their  abode,  and  thence  returne
unto  their  owne  habitations  and  dwelling  places,  and  to
depart  whither  they  will  and  as  oft  as  they  shall  thinke
good,  as  well  by  land  as  by  water,  with  their  goods,
marchandize  and  wares  whatsoever  :  truely  paying  in
the  meane  time  all  rights  and  customes  due  in  regard
of  their  said  wares  and  Marchandize.  Reserved  alwayes
unto  the  said  soveraigne  king,  his  heires  and  successours,

99

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1409.

all  rights  and  remedies  ordained  and  graunted  unto  them
in  certaine  obligations,  by  the  commissioners  and  pro-
curators of  the  said  Master  generall  above-named,  and
in  the  name  of  the  said '  Master  generall.

3.  Item  it  is  with  one  consent  agreed  upon,  promised,
and  graunted  that  for  all  and  singular  damages,  griev-
ances, and  robberies  howsoever  done  and  committed
before  the  date  of  these  presents  against  the  foresaid
soveraigne  Prince  and  his  subjects  whatsoever,  and  all
others  which  at  the  time  of  the  grievances,  damages,
and  robberies  aforesaid,  were,  or  at  this  present  are  the
said  soveraigne  king  his  subjects  ;  there  are  due  to  be
payed  unto  the  said  king  or  his  successours  by  the
said  Master  generall  or  his  successours,  in  full  satisfaction
and  recompence  of  the  damages,  grievances,  and  robberies
above-written,  certaine  summes  of  English  money  :  even
as  in  the  letters  obligatorie  made  by  the  said  Master
generall  his  procurators,  and  messengers  above-named
in  this  behalfe,  and  sealed  with  their  seales,  and  delivered
unto  the  forenamed  procurators  and  commissioners  of
our  said  Lord  the  king  it  is  expressed  more  at  large,

4.  Item  it  is  covenanted,  graunted,  and  promised,  that
no  subject  of  the  said  Master  generall  or  of  his  suc-
cessours, by  reason  or  occasion  of  the  damages,
grievances,  and  robberies  aforesaid,  shall,  by  the  said
soveraigne  king  or  his  successours,  or  by  their  authoritie
or  commandement,  or  by  any  other  person  whatsoever
who  in  regard  of  the  foresaid  losses,  grievances  and
robberies  hath  bene  molested  and  damnified,  or  at  the
procurement  or  instant  suite  of  any,  be  attached,  arrested,
imprisoned,  or  detained  ;  nor  that  the  goods  of  the  said
Master  generall,  or  of  his  successors,  or  of  any  of  them,
shalbe  laid  hold  on,  arrested,  or  detained.

5.  Item  it  is  covenanted  and  ordained,  that  if  any  of
the  liege  people  and  subjects  of  the  sayde  Master  generall
or  of  his  successors  shall,  contrary  to  the  forme  of  the
concord  and  graunt  next  above-written,  chance  to  be
molested  or  endamaged  :  that  then  the  foresaid  soveraigne

A NEW PRUSSIAN CONCORD  a.d.

1409.

Lord  the  King  and  his  successors  the  kings  of  England
are  bound  to  make  full  satisfaction  for  all  such  losses
as  the  subjects  of  the  said  Master  generall  or  of  his
successours  or  any  of  them  shall  for  that  cause  have
unjustly  sustained,  unto  the  parties  endamaged.  Which
thing,  if  the  foresaide  soveraigne  Prince,  or  his  suc-
cessours in  the  Realme  of  England,  being  conveniently
requested  by  the  letters  of  the  said  Master  generall  or
of  his  successours,  shall  refuse  to  doe,  that  then  after  the
terme  of  sixe  moneths  immediatly  following  the  said
deniall  or  refusall,  it  shalbe  right  lawfull  for  the  Master
generall  that  now  is  and  for  any  of  his  successors  in
time  to  come  (having  first  made  convenient  proofe  that
the  foresaid  request  was  by  him  or  them  exhibited)
to  arrest  so  many  goods  of  the  foresaid  king  his  subjects
found  in  the  land  of  Prussia,  as  may  suffice  for  the
reasonable  satisfaction  and  recompense  of  any  person
or  persons  whatsoever  unjustly  molested  in  this  behalfe ;
and  also  to  detaine  the  said  goods  under  arrestes,  untill
condigne  satisfaction  and  amends  be  made  unto  the  party
or  parties  molested.

Item  by  the  commissioners  and  procuratours  often  6.
above-named  it  is  covenanted,  promised,  and  graunted,
that  for  all  and  singular  the  damages,  molestations,  and
robberies  by  the  foresayde  soveraigne  king  his  liege  [I.  182.]
people  &  subjects  howsoever  before  the  date  of  these
presents  committed  and  offred  against  the  said  Master
general  or  against  any  of  his  subjects  whether  Prussians
or  Livonians,  and  against  all  others  who  at  the  time
of  the  damages,  grievances  &  robberies  aforesaid  were,
or  at  this  present  are  the  subjects  of  the  Master  generall
aforesaid  (except  notwithstanding  certaine  damages  &
grievances  hereafter  to  be  mentioned,  whereof  also  some
provisoes  shalbe  had  in  the  articles  following,  which
damages  were  before  ye  date  of  these  presents  by  ye  said
soveraigne  king  his  liege  people  and  subjects  inflicted
upon  certaine  subjects  of  the  foresaid  general  Master,
especially  them  of  Prussia  which  hereafter  shalbe  named)

1409.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

there  are  certaine  summes  of  money  due  to  be  payed
unto  the  said  Master  general!  or  unto  his  successors
by  the  said  soveraigne  Prince  or  his  successours  for  the
full  satisfaction  of  the  foresaid  damages,  molestations  and
robberies  inflicted  upon  the  Prussians  and  Livonians,
and  the  others  above  mentioned,  even  as  in  the  leters
obligatorie  of  the  said  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  made
in  this  behalfe,  being  given  and  delivered  unto  the  said
Master  generall  his  procuratours  and  messengers,  it  is
declared  more  at  large.

7-  Item,  it  is  covenanted,  graunted  and  promised,  that
none  of  the  liege  people  or  subjects  of  the  foresaid
soveraigne  prince  or  of  his  heires  shall,  by  reason  or
occasion  of  the  damages,  grievances,  and  robberies  afore-
said, by  the  sayd  Master  generall  or  his  successours  or  by
their  authoritie  and  commandement,  or  by  any  other  who
in  respect  of  the  said  damages,  grievances  and  robberies
above  mentioned,  hath  beene  molested  or  damnified,  or
by  any  of  their  procurements  or  instant  suites,  shalbe
attached,  arrested,  imprisoned  or  detained  ;  nor  that  any
goods  of  the  subjects  of  the  said  soveraigne  king  or  his
heires  or  any  of  them,  shall  bee  attached,  arrested,  or
detained.  Reserved  alwayes  unto  the  forenamed  Master
generall  and  his  subjects  all  right  and  remedie  any  way
requisite  or  competent  unto  them  by  meanes  of  the
obligations  aforesaid.

8.  Item  it  is  covenanted  and  agreed  that  if  any  of  the
liege  people  or  subjects  of  the  sayde  soveraigne  prince  or
of  his  heires  and  successours  shall  (contrary  to  the  forme
of  concord  and  graunt  next  above-written)  chaunce  to
bee  molested  or  endamaged  ;  that  then  the  saide  Master
generall  and  his  successours,  for  all  losses  and  hinderances
which  the  liege  people  and  subjects  the  foresayde
soveraigne  prince  or  of  his  heires  or  successours,  shall
by  that  meanes  have  unjustly  sustained,  are  bound  to
make  full  satisfaction  unto  the  partie  endamaged.
Which  if  the  Master  generall  aforesaid  or  his  successours
being  conveniently  requested  by  the  letters  of  the  sayde

102

A NEW PRUSSIAN CONCORD  a.d.

1409-
soveraigne  prince  or  of  his  heires,  shall  refuse  to  doe  ;
that  then,  after  the  space  of  sixe  moneths  next  ensuing
the  time  of  the  foresayde  request,  it  may  bee  right
lawfull  for  the  forenamed  soveraigne  prince  that  nowe
is,  or  that  then  for  that  time  shall  be  (convenient  proofe
being  first  brought,  that  the  foresayd  request  had  con-
veniently beene  exhibited)  to  arrest  so  many  goods  of
the  sayde  Master  generall  his  subjects  founde  in  the
Realme  of  England,  as  may  suffice  for  the  reasonable
satisfaction  and  amends  of  any  person  or  persons  un-
justly molested  in  this  behalfe ;  and  also  to  detaine
the  sayde  goods  under  safe  custodie,  untill  condigne
satisfaction  and  amends  be  made  unto  the  partie  or
parties aggrieved.

Item  it  is  covenanted,  that  besides  the  summes  due  9.
unto  the  sayde  Master  generall  and  his  successours  in
the  behalfe  of  his  subjects  both  of  Prussia  and  of
Livonia  (whereof  mention  is  made  in  the  former  Articles)
there  are  due  to  bee  payed  unto  the  sayde  Master  generall
and  his  successours,  for  sundry  other  damages,  grievances,
and  robberies  against  himselfe  and  divers  other  of  his
subjects  of  Prussia,  namely  Matthewe  Ludekensson,
Arnold  Ashen,  Henri  Culeman,  John  Unkeltop,  John
Halewater,  Egghard  Scoffe  of  Dantzik,  and  Nicolas
Wolmerstene  of  Elbing,  done  and  committed  by  the
sayde  soveraigne  king  his  liege  people  and  subjects  under-
written, even  before  the  date  of  these  presents,  for  the
full  satisfaction  of  the  sayde  damages,  grievances  and
robberies,  certaine  summes  of  nobles  hereafter  following.
Namely  Inprimis  by  Tutburie,  and  Terry  of  Hull,  82.
nobles,  which  are  due  unto  ye  foresaid  Matthew  Lude-
kinson.  Item  by  Nicholas  Scot  of  Caleis  the  sonne  of
Tutbury,  and  Hilg  of  Hull,  256.  nobles,  which  are  due
unto  the  foresayd  Arnold  de  Aschen.  Item  by  the
inhabitants  of  Scardeburgh,  Blakeney,  and  Crowmer  (who
had  one  John  Jolly  of  Blakeney  for  their  captaine)  156.
nobles,  which  are  due  unto  Henrie  Culeman  aforesayd.
Item  by  the  inhabitants  of  Bayon  (Whose  Capitaine  was

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1409.

one  Pideville)  125.  nobles  which  are  due  unto  the  said
John  Unkeltop.  Item  by  the  inhabitants  of  Plymmouth
and  Dertmouth  (whose  Captaines  were  Henry  Pay,  and
William  Gadeling)  600.  nobles  which  are  due  unto  the
foresayde  John  Halewater,  in  respect  of  his  goods  by
them  violently  taken  away.  Item  334.  nobles  to  be
payed  by  the  selfe  same  parties,  being  due  unto  the  sayde
A  ship  of  the  John  Halewater  by  reason  that  they  detained  his  ship
burthen  of  from  him  three  moneths  and  more,  which  ship  was  of  the
burthen  of  three  hundreth  tonnes  of  wine,  and  had  in
it  all  the  foresayde  time  five  and  fourtie  servants  main-
tained at  the  expenses  of  the  sayde  John  Halewater.
[I.  183.]  Item  that  Sir  William  de  Ethingham  knight,  who  was
Vice-admirall  for  the  sea,  must  bee  summoned  to  alleage
a  reasonable  cause  (for  that  the  sayd  Sir  William  with  his
servants  expelled  the  said  John  Halewater  out  of  his  ship
for  the  space  of  fifteene  dayes  together,  and  tooke  of  the
good  and  victuals  of  the  said  John  to  the  summe  of  114.
nobles)  why  he  ought  not  to  pay  the  said  summe  of
114.  nobles  unto  John  Halewater  aforesaid:  which  if
hee  shall  not  bee  willing  nor  able  to  alleage  before  the
first  of  April  next  ensuing,  that  then  by  the  kings
authoritie  hee  must  be  compelled  to  pay  unto  the  fore-
said John  the  said  114  nobles.  Item  by  the  inhabitants
of  Caleis  (whose  captaines  were  Michael  Scot,  Bishop,  and
William  Horneby)  1900.  nobles,  which  are  due  unto  the
foresayde  Eggard  Scoff,  because  the  saide  soveraigne  king
hath  given  them  in  charge  by  the  said  Michael  Scot
and  the  rest  concerning  the  payment  of  the  summe
aforesaid.  Item  by  John  Bilis  neere  unto  Crowmer,  68.
nobles,  which  are  due  unto  Nicholas  Wolmersten  of
Elbing.  Which  summes  of  nobles  must  by  the  kings
authoritie  bee  levied  at  the  hands  of  his  subjects  above-
mentioned,  betweene  the  time  that  nowe  is  and  the  feast
of  the  Purification  of  the  blessed  virgine  which  shall  fall  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  141 1.  effectually  to  bee  delivered
and  payed  unto  the  sayd  Master  generall  or  his  lawfull
procurator,  or  unto  his  successours  or  their  lawfull  pro-

104

A NEW PRUSSIAN CONCORD  ad.

1409.

curatours, at the Citie of London, upon the feast

aforesaid.

Item  it  is  covenanted  that  besides  the  summes  specified
in  the  foresayde  letters  obligatorie  made  in  the  behalfe
of  the  said  soveraigne  prince,  there  are  due  to  be  paied
unto  one  John  Marion  of  Wersingham  lately  deceased
being  in  his  life-time  the  liege  subject  of  the  foresaid
soveraigne  prince  200.  nobles  of  English  money  in  regard
of  certaine  injuries  and  robberies  done  and  committed
before  the  date  of  these  presents  against  the  foresayde
John,  by  one  Eghard  Scoff  subject  unto  the  said  Master
generall,  for  the  full  satisfaction  of  the  saide  damages  and
robberies  to  bee  made  unto  the  said  deceased  John,  his
wife,  children,  heires  or  executors  by  the  said  Egghard,
his  heires,  or  by  the  administrators  of  his  goods  at  the
time  and  place  above-mentioned.

Item  it  is  covenanted,  confirmed,  and  promised,  that  10.
for  all  the  injuries  and  robberies  done  and  committed
against  one  John  Dordewant  of  Elbing,  being  in  his  life
time  subject  unto  the  sayd  Master  generall,  by  the  liege
people  and  subjects  of  the  said  soveraigne  king  the
inhabitants  of  Scardeburgh  before  the  date  of  these
presents  ;  for  the  full  recompense  of  all  such  injuries  and
robberies,  there  must  bee  payed  unto  one  John  Gruk  of
Dantzik  eight  hundred  nobles  of  English  money,  upon
the  feast  of  Easter  next  following  in  the  Citie  of  London
by  them  of  Scardeburgh  being  guiltie  and  culpable  in  this
behalfe ;  who  are  by  definitive  sentence  condemned  unto
the  said  John  in  the  summe  of  800,  nobles  by  reason
of  the  injuries  and  robberies  aforesaid.  Except  the
lawful  expenses  in  this  behalfe  layed  out :  they  are  also
taxed  in  due  time  for  the  issue.  And  therefore  the
foresayde  condemned  parties  (whose  names  are  in  the
sentence  against  them  pronounced  in  this  behalfe,  more
expresly  contained)  must  in  the  meane  season  by  the
kings  authoritie  be  compelled  and  constrained  really  and
-actually  to  obey  the  foresaid  sentence,  namely  by  deliver-
ing and paying unto John Gruk the  summe of  800.

105

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1409.

nobles  at  the  time  and  place  above  mentioned,  with
reasonable  expences,  wherein  also  the  said  parties  stand
condemned,  their  lawfuU  taxation  being  reserved.

Item  it  is  covenanted  and  granted,  that  the  heires  of
Lord  Henrie  de  Percy  the  yonger  after  they  shall  come
unto  lawfull  age,  and  shall  have  attained  unto  the  pos-
sessions and  goods  of  their  inheritance,  must  be  compelled
by  the  kings  authoritie  (justice  going  before)  to  make
satisfaction  unto  the  great  procurator  of  Marienburgh
with  the  summe  of  838.  nobles  in  lieu  of  certaine  corne
and  graine  which  the  foresaid  Lord  Henrie,  in  the  yeere
1403,  bought  and  received  of  the  said  great  procuratour,
for  the  use  of  the  castle  of  Zutberwik.  In  testimonie
and  confirmation  of  all  the  which  premisses,  the  said
Tedericus,  Lefardus,  and  John  Crolow,  of  their  certaine
knowledges  have  put  their  scales  unto  these  present
letters  indented,  in  the  presence  of  the  above-named
Richard  Merlow,  John  Kington,  and  William  Askam,
commissioners  for  the  behalfe  of  England.  Given  at  the
Citie  of  London  in  England  the  fourth  day  of  December,
in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1409.

II  H04- Carta  Henrici  quarti  Anno  ||  quinto  regni  sui  con-
[I.  184.]  cessa  mercatoribus  Anglis  in  partibus  Prussise,,

Daciae,  Norwegi^,  Swethias,  & Germanic,  de
gubernatore  inter  ipsos  ibidem  constituendo.

Enricus  Dei  gratia  Rex  Angliae  &  Franciae  &
Dominus  Hiberniae  omnibus,  ad  quos  praesentes
literae  pervenerint,  salutem.  Sciatis  quod  cum,  ut  accepi-
mus,  ob  defectum  boni  &  sani  regiminis  &  gubernationis,
diversa  damna,  dissensiones,  gravamina,  &  angustiae  inter
mercatores  Regni  nostri  Angliae  in  partibus  Pruciae,
Daciae,  Norwegiae,  Hansae,  &  Swethiae  commorantes
saepius  ante  haec  tempora  mota  fuissent  &  perpetrata,  ac
majora  exinde,  quod  absit,  futuris  temporibus  verisimiliter
evenire  formidantur,  nisi  pro  meliori  gubernatione  inter
eosdem  mercatores  mutuo  habenda  manus  nostras  ad-
jutrices  apponamus:  Nos  damnis  &  periculis  in  hac  parte

106

KING HENRY IV.'S CHARTER  a.d.

1404.

imminentibus  prsecavere,  &  eosdem  Mercatores  &  alios
de  dicto  regno  nostro  ad  partes  praedictas  venturos  juste
&  fideliter  regi  &  pertractari  intime  desiderantes,  volumus
&  tenore  praesentium  concedimus  eisdem  mercatoribus,
quod  ipsi  quoties  &  quando  eis  placuerit  in  quodam  loco
competenti  &  honesto,  ubi  sibi  placuerit,  se  congregare  &
unire,  &  certas  personas  sufficientes  &  idoneas  in  guber-
natores  suos  in  eisdem  partibus  inter  se  ad  eorum  libitum
eligere  &  obtinere  valeant  libere  &  impune:  Dantes
ulterius  &  concedentes  hujusmodi  gubernatoribus  per
praedictos  Mercatores  sic  eligendis,  quantum  in  nobis  est,
potestatem  &  authoritatem  speciales,  omnes  &  singulos
mercatores  Anglicos  ad  partes  prsedictas  de  csetero  veni-
entes  &  declinantes  per  se  vel  sufficientes  loca  sua
tenentes  regendi  &  gubernandi,  ac  eis  &  eorum  cuilibet  in
suis  causis  &  querelis  quibuscunque  inter  eos  in  partibus
praedictis  motis  vel  movendis  plenam  &  celerem  justiciam
faciendi  &  quascunque  quasstiones,  contentiones,  dis-
cordias,  &  debatas  inter  ipsos  mercatores  Anglicos
partium  prasdictarum  motas  seu  movendas  reformandi,
reformationemque  petendi,  redigendi  sedandi,  &  pacifi-
candi,  &  quascunque  transgressiones,  damna,  mes-
prisiones,  excessus,  violencias,  &  injurias  mercatoribus
partium  praedictarum  per  prasdictos  mercatores  Anglicos
factas  seu  faciendas  redigendi,  reparandi,  restaurandi,  &
emendandi,  consimilesque  restitutiones,  reparationes,  re-
staurationes  &  emendationes  de  ipsis  mercatoribus
partium  prasdictarum  seu  deputatis  suis  requirendi,
petendi,  &  recipiendi :  Ac  de  communi  assensu  merca-
torum  Anglicorum  prsdictorum  statuta,  ordinationes,  &
consuetudines,  prout  pro  meliori  gubernatione  status
eorundem  mercatorum  Anglicorum  in  hac  parte  videbitur
expedire,  faciendi  &  stabiliendi,  &  omnes  &  singulos
mercatores  Anglicos  praefatis  gubernatoribus  sic  eligendis
vel  eorum  loca  tenentibus  seu  eorum  alicui,  aut  alicui
statutorum,  ordinationum,  &  consuetudinum  prasdictarum
contrarios,  rebelles,  vel  inobedientes  juxta  quantitatem
delicti  sui  in  hac  parte  rationabiliter  puniendi. Volentes

107

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1404-

insuper  omnia  justa  &  rationabilia  statu ta,  ordinationes  &
consuetudines  per  dictos  gubernatores  sic  eligendos  in
forma praedicta facienda & stabilienda,  nee non  omnes

\\Nota.  justas  &  rationabiles  ordinationes  per  II  nuper  guber-
natores praedictorum  mercatorum  Anglicorum  de  com-
muni  assensu  eorundem  mercatorum  pro  hujusmodi
gubernatione  sua  in  partibus  praedictis  juxta  privilegia  &
authoritates  sibi  per  magistrum  Prucise  seu  alios  dominos
partium  prsedictarum  concessa,  factas  &  stabilitas,  seu  per
prsedictos  gubernatores  nunc  ut  praemittitur  eligendos
juxta  privilegia  prasdicta,  seu  alia  privilegia  eisdem  mer-
catoribus  Anglicis  per  praedictos  magistrum  &  dominos  in
posterum  concedenda,  facienda  &  stabilienda,  rata,  firma
&  accepta  haberi,  &  pro  ratis,  firmis,  &  acceptis  ibidem
firmiter  &  inviolabiliter  observari.  Damus  autem  uni-
versis  &  singulis  mercatoribus  Anglicis  praedictis  tenore
praesentium  firmiter  in  mandatis,  quod  eisdem  guber-
natoribus  sic  eligendis  &  eorum  loca  tenentibus  in  prae-
missis  omnibus  &  singulis  ac  aliis  gubernationem  &
regimen  in  hac  parte  qualitercunque  concernentibus
intendentes  sint,  consulentes,  obedientes  &  auxiliantes,
prout  decet.  Data  in  palatio  nostro  Westmonasterii  sub
magni  sigilli  nostri  testimonio  sexto  die  Junii  Anno  regni
nostri  quinto.

[I.  185.]  A  Charter  of  King  Henry  the  fourth  graunted  in
the  fift  yeere  of  his  reigne  to  the  English
Marchants  resident  in  the  partes  of  Prussia,
Denmarke,  Norway,  Sweden  and  Germanie
for  the  chusing  of  Governours  among  them-
selves.

Enry  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England  and  of
France,  and  Lord  of  Ireland:  to  all  to  whom  these
present  letters  shall  come,  sendeth  greeting.  Know  ye,
that  whereas,  according  as  we  are  informed,  through  want
of  good  and  discreete  rule  and  governement,  sundry
damages,  strifes,  oppressions,  and  wrongs  oftentimes  here-

108

KING HENRY IV.'S CHARTER  ad.

1404.

tofore  have  bene  moved  and  committed  among  the
Marchants  of  our  kingdome  of  England  remaining  in  the
parties  of  Prussia,  Denmarke,  Norway,  the  Hans  steeds,
and  Sweden,  and  greater  hereafter,  which  God  forbid,  are
feared  to  be  like  to  fall  out,  unlesse  we  put  to  our
helping  hands  for  the  procuring  of  better  governement  to
be  maintained  among  the  said  Marchants:  wee  heartily
desiring  to  prevent  the  perrils  and  dangers  which  are  like
to  fall  out  in  this  case,  and  that  the  sayde  Marchants  and
others  which  shall  travaile  out  of  our  said  Realme  into
the  partes  aforesaid  may  justly  and  faithfully  be  ruled
and  intreated,  we  will  and  graunt  by  the  tenour  of  these
presents  to  the  said  Marchants,  that  they  may  freely  and
without  danger  assemble  and  meete  together  as  often
and  whensoever  they  please  in  some  convenient  and
honest  place  where  they  shall  thinke  good,  and  that  they
may  choose  among  themselves  certaine  sufficient  and  fit
persons  for  their  governours  in  those  parts  at  their  good
liking.  And  furthermore  we  give  and  graunt  to  the
said  Governours  which  are  in  such  sort  to  be  chosen
by  the  aforesaid  Marchants,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth,
speciall  power  and  authoritie  to  rule  and  governe  all
and  singular  the  English  Marchants  which  hereafter
shall  come  or  repayre  to  the  parts  aforesaid  by  them-
selves or  their  sufficient  Deputies,  and  to  minister  unto
them  and  every  of  them  in  their  causes  and  quarels
whatsoever,  which  are  sprung  up  or  shall  hereafter
fall  out  among  them  in  the  parts  aforesaid  full  and
speedie  justice,  and  to  reforme  all  maner  of  questions,
contentious  discords,  and  debates  moved  or  to  be
moved  betweene  the  English  Marchants  remayning  in
those  parts,  and  to  seeke  reformation,  to  redresse,
appease,  and  compound  the  same.  And  further  to
redresse,  restore,  repayre  and  satisfie  all  transgressions,
damages,  misprisions,  outrages,  violences,  and  injuries
done  or  to  be  done  by  the  aforesaid  English  Mar-
chants against  the  Marchants  of  those  parts :  And  to
require, demaund and receive the like restitutions,

109

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1404.

reparations,  satisfactions  and  amends  of  the  Marchants
of  those  parts  or  of  their  deputies.  And  by  the
common  consent  of  the  aforesaid  English  Marchants
to  make  and  estabHsh  statutes,  ordinances,  and  customes,
as  shall  seeme  expedient  in  that  behalfe  for  the  better
governement  of  the  state  of  the  said  English  Marchants :
and  to  punish  with  reason  according  to  the  quantitie  j
of  their  fault  in  that  behalfe  all  and  singular  the  English  |
Marchants  which  shall  withstand,  resist  or  disobey  the  \
aforesaid  governours  so  to  be  chosen  or  their  deputies,
or  any  of  them  ;  or  any  of  the  aforesaid  statutes,  ordin-
ances, or  customes.  Moreover  we  doe  ratifie,  confirme,
and  approove,  and  as  ratified,  confirmed,  and  approoved,
wee  command  firmely  and  inviolably  there  to  be  observed
all  just,  and  reasonable  statutes,  ordinances,  and  customes
which  shalbe  made  and  established  by  the  said  governors,
so  to  be  chosen,  in  forme  aforesaid,  and  also  all  just  and
reasonable  ordinances  made  &  established  by  the  late
governours  of  the  aforesaid  English  Marchants  with  the
common  consent  of  the  sayd  Marchants  for  this  their
governement  in  the  parts  aforesayd,  according  to  the
privileges  and  authorities  now  granted  unto  them  by
the  Master  of  Prussia,  or  other  Lords  of  the  partes
aforesayd,  or  which  shall  be  made  and  established  by
the  aforesayd  governours  now  as  is  mentioned  to  be
chosen  according  to  the  aforesaid  privileges  heretofore
graunted,  or  other  privileges  hereafter  to  bee  granted
to  the  sayde  English  Marchants  by  the  aforesayde
Master  and  lords  of  the  Countrey.  And  furthermore
by  the  tenor  of  these  presents  wee  straitely  commaund  all
and  singular  the  aforesaid  English  Marchants,  that  they
attend,  advise,  obey  and  assist,  as  it  becommeth  them,
the  sayde  governours  so  to  bee  chosen,  and  their  deputies
in  all  and  singular  the  premisses,  and  other  things,  which
any  way  may  concerne  in  this  behalfe  their  rule  and
governement.  Given  in  our  Palace  at  Westminster
under  the  testimonie  of  our  great  Scale  the  sixt  day  j
of  June  in  the  fift  yeere  of  our  reigne.

KING HENRY VI.'S STATUTE  a.d.

1430.

A  note  touching  the  mighty  ships  of  King
Henry  the  fift,  mentioned  hereafter  in  the
treatie  of  keeping  the  Sea,  taken  out  of  a
Chronicle  in  the  Trinitie  Church  of  Win-
chester.

quintt.

Odem  Anno  quo  victoria  potitus  est  videlicet
Anno  Domini  141 5.  &  regni  sui  Anno  tertio,
post  bellum  de  Agencourt,  conduct!  a  Francis
venerunt  cum  multis  Navibus  recuperaturi  Harfletum.
Sed  Rex  Angliae  misit  fratrem  suum  Johannem  Ducem
Bedfordias  &  Andegaviae,  qui  pugnavit  cum  eis  &  vicit,  [I.  186.]
&  Naves  cepit,  &  quasdam  submersit  :  caeteri  fugerunt
cum  Hispanis  navibus  qui  venerant  cum  eis  Anno  gratis
141 6.  Sequenti  vero  Anno  redierunt  potentiores,  &
iterum  devicti  perpetuam  pacem  cum  Rege  compo-
suerunt,  &  propter  eorum  naves  fecit  Rex  fieri  naves
quales  non  erant  in  mundo.  De  his  sic  conductis  a
Francis  ita  metrice  scribitur.

Regum  belligero  trito  celeberrimus  arvo  Naves  maxi-

Gallos, Hispanos,  Janos,  devicit,  &  Urget,  ma  Hennd

Vastat ;  turbantur  cstera  regna  metu.
Navali  bello  bis  devicti  quoque  Jani.

A  branch  of  a  Statute  made  in  the  eight  yeere
of  Henry  the  sixt,  for  the  trade  to  Norwey,
Sweveland,  Denmarke,  and  Fynmarke.

ITem  because  that  the  kings  most  deare  Uncle,  the
king  of  Denmarke,  Norway  &  Sweveland,  as  the
same  our  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  of  his  intimation
hath  understood,  considering  the  manifold  &  great
losses,  perils,  hurts  and  damage  which  have  late  hap-
pened aswell  to  him  and  his,  as  to  other  foraines  and
strangers,  and  also  friends  and  speciall  subjects  of  our
said  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  of  his  Realme  of  England,
by  ye  going  in,  entring  &  passage  of  such  forain  &
strange persons into his realme of  Norwey & other

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1430-

dominions,  streits,  territories,  jurisdictions  &  places  sub-
dued and  subject  to  him,  specially  into  his  lies  of
Fynmarke,  and  elswhere,  aswell  in  their  persons  as
their  things  and  goods :  for  eschuing  of  such  losses,
perils,  hurts  &  damages,  and  that  such  like  (which  God
forbid)  should  not  hereafter  happen  :  our  said  soveraigne
Lord  the  king  hath  ordeined  and  statuted,  that  all
and  singular  strangers,  aswell  Englishmen  and  others
willing  to  apply  by  Ship  and  come  into  his  Realme  of
Norwey  and  other  dominions,  streits,  territories,  jurisdic-
tions. Isles  &  places  aforesaid  with  their  ships,  to  the
intent  to  get  or  have  fish  or  any  other  Marchandises,
or  goods,  shall  apply  and  come  to  his  Towne  of  North-
berne,  where  the  said  king  of  Denmarke  hath  specially
ordained  and  stablished  his  staple  for  the  concourses
of  strangers  and  specially  of  Englishmen,  to  the  exercise
of  such  Marchandises  :  granting  to  the  said  Englishmen
that  they  shall  there  injoy  in  and  by  all  things  the  same
favour,  privileges  and  prerogatives  which  they  of  the
Hans  did  enjoy.  Therefore  our  said  soveraigne  Lord
the  king  willing  the  love,  affinitie  and  amities  to  be
firmely  observed,  which  betwixt  his  said  Uncle  and  his
noble  progenitors  of  good  memory,  their  Realmes,  lands,
dominions,  streites,  territories,  jurisdictions  and  their
said  places,  and  the  same  our  soveraigne  Lord  the
king  &  his  noble  progenitours  of  famous  memory,  his
great  men,  subjects,  Realmes,  lands  &  dominions  hath
bene  of  old  times  hitherto  continued,  nor  nothing  by
our  said  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  or  his  people  to  be
attempted  or  done  whereby  such  amities  by  reason  of
any  dissensions,  enemities  or  discords  might  be  broken :
by  the  advise  of  the  Lords  spirituall  &  temporall  &
of  the  commons  of  his  said  Realme  of  England,
assembled  in  this  present  Parliament,  hath  ordained,
prohibiting  that  none  of  his  liege  people  nor  subjects
of  his  Realme  of  England  by  audacitie  of  their  foUie
presume  to  enter  the  Realmes,  lands,  dominions,  straits,
territories,  jurisdictions & places of  the said king  of

KING HENRY VI.'S STATUTE  ad.

1432.
Denmarke  against  ye  ordinance,  prohibition  &  inter-
diction of  ye  same  his  Uncle  above  remembred,  &  in
contempt  of  the  same,  upon  paine  of  forfeiture  of  all
their  moveable  goods  &  imprisonment  of  their  persons
at  the  kings  will.

Another  branch of  a statute made  in  the tenth
yeere of the reigne of Henry  the  sixt  con-
« cerning the state of the English Marchants
" in  the  dominions  of  the  king  of  Denmarke.

ITem  because  that  our  soveraigne  Lord  the  king  at
the  grievous  complaint  to  him  made  in  this  Parlia-
ment by  the  commons  of  his  realme  of  England  being
in  this  Parliament  is  informed,  that  many  of  his  faith-
full  liege  people  be  greatly  impoverished,  undone,  &
in  point  to  be  destroyed  by  the  king  of  Denmarke  &  his
lieges,  which  be  of  the  amitie  of  the  king  our  soveraigne
Lord,  because  that  they  do  daily  take  of  his  said  faithful
subjects  their  goods,  so  that  they  have  taken  of  mar-
chants  of  York  and  Kingston  upon  Hul  goods  &
marchandises  to  the  valour  of  v.M.li.  within  a  yeere,
and  of  other  lieges  &  marchants  of  ye  Realme  of
England  goods  &  cattals  to  the  valour  of  xx.M.li.
wherof  they  have  no  remedie  of  the  said  king  of
Denmarke,  nor  of  none  other,  forasmuch  as  none  of
them  commeth  within  the  Realme  of  England,  nor
nothing  have  in  the  same  Realme  of  England,  &
that  ye  goods  be  taken  out  of  the  same  Realme :  The
king  willing  to  provide  remedy  for  his  said  liege  people,
hath  ordeined  &  established,  that  if  ye  goods  of  any
of  ye  said  his  lieges  be  or  shalbe  taken  by  the  said
king  of  Denmarke  or  any  of  his  said  lieges,  the  keeper
of  the  privie  seale  for  ye  time  being,  shall  have  power
to  make  to  ye  partie  grieved  letters  of  request  under
the  privie  seale,  w'out  any  other  pursuite  to  be  made
to  any  for  restitution  to  be  had  of  ye  goods  so  taken
&  to  be  taken.  And  if  restitution  be  not  made  by  [I.  187.]
11  113  H

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1432.

such  letters,  the  king  our  soveraigne  lord  by  the  advise
of  his  counsel  shal  provide  to  the  partie  grieved  his
covenable  remedy,  according  as  ye  case  requireth.

Here  beginneth  the  Prologue  of  the  processe  of
the  Libel  of  English  policie,  exhorting  all
England  to  keepe  the  sea,  and  namely  the
narrowe  sea :  shewing  what  profite  commeth
thereof,  and  also  what  worship  and  salvation
to  England,  and  to  all  English-men.

Incipit liber  de  'THHe  true  processe  of  English  policie

custodtaUaris J_ Qf  utterward  to  keepe  this  regne  in

^Intrmer ^f  our  England,  that  no  man  may  deny,

Doveram  \3 Ner  say  of  sooth  but  it  is  one  of  the  best,

Galisiam. Is  this,  that  who  seeth  South,  North,  East  and  West,

Cherish  Marchandise,  keepe  the  admiraltie ;

That  we  bee  Masters  of  the  narrowe  see.

Si^smonddted  For  Sigismond  the  great  Emperour,

1438.  Wich  yet  reigneth,  when  he  was  in  this  land

g  With king  Henry  the  fift.  Prince  of  honour,

Videns  imper-  Here  much  glory,  as  him  thought,  he  found,

ator  Sigismun-  A  mightie  land  which  had  take  in  hand

dus  duas  villas  fo  wcrre  in  France,  and  make  mortalitie,

inercaeras  p^^^  gygj.  ^gjj  kept  round  about  the  see.
Anghee  scilicet  ^

Calisiam  13  ^^d  to  the  king  thus  hee  sayd : My  brother,

oveieam,  (When  hee  perceived  two  Townes  Caleis  and  Dover")

ponenssuos  Kr ,1  V  ^ u  r  A ^x.

duos  dintos  ^^  3.11  your i  ownes  to  cnuse  or  one  and  other,

super  duos  suos  To  keepe  the  sea  and  soone  to  come  over
oculos,  ait To  werre  outwards  and  your  regne  to  recover :

regi: rater,  ^qq^q  these  two  Townes  sure,  and  your  Maiestee

custodtte  istas  . ^  '  /  j

duas  villas  ^^  your  tweyne  eyne : so  keepe  the  narrowe  see.

sicut  uos  -p^j.  •£  ^j^jg  gg^  l^^g  j^g  . -^  ^j^g  ^£  werre,

vcsifos  oculos,  ^

' Who  can  heere  passe  without  danger  and  woe  ?
was  coined  b ^^°  ^^7  escape,  who  may  mischiefe  diiferre  ?
Edward  the What  Marchandie  may  forby  bee  agoe  ?
third  Anno For  needs  hem  must  take  trewes  every  foe :

114

THE ENGLISH POLICY

Flanders  and  Spaine,  and  other,  trust  to  mee,
Or  ellis  hindred  all  for  this  Narrow  see.

Therefore  I  cast  mee  by  a  little  writing

To  shewe  at  eye  this  conclusion,

For  conscience  and  for  mine  acquiting

A-gainst  God  and  ageyne  abusion,

A.nd  cowardise,  and  to  our  enemies  confusion.

For  foure  things  our  Noble  sheweth  to  me,

King,  Ship,  and  Swerd,  and  power  of  the  see.

Where  ben  our  ships,  where  ben  our  swerds  become  ?

Our  enemies  bed  for  the  ship  set  a  sheepe.

Alas  our  rule  halteth,  it  is  benome.

Who  dare  well  say  that  lordship  should  take  keepe  ?

I  will  assay,  though  mine  heart  ginne  to  weepe.

To  doe  this  werke,  if  wee  will  ever  thee,

For  very  shame  to  keepe  about  the  see.

jShall  any  Prince,  what  so  be  his  name.
Which  hath  Nobles  moch  leche  ours.
Bee  Lord  of  see :  and  Flemings  to  our  blame.
Stop  us,  take  us,  and  so  make  fade  the  flowers
Of  English  state,  and  disteyne  our  honours  ?
For  cowardise  alas  it  should  so  bee.
Therefore  I  ginne  to  write  nowe  of  the  see.

Of  the  commodities  of  Spaine  and  of  Flanders.
The  first Chapter.

l^Nowe  well  all  men  that  profits  in  certaine
'LI^  Commodities  called  comming  out  of  Spaine
And  Marchandie,  who  so  will  weete  what  it  is.
Bene  Figs, Raisins,  wine  Bastard,  and  Datis,
And  Licoris, Sivill  oyle,  and  graine.
White  Pastill Sope, and  Waxe  is  not  vayne.
Yron,  Wooll,  Wadmolle, Gotefell, Kidfell  also :
For  Poynt-makers  full  needefull  bene  they  tweyn :
Saffron,  Quickesilver,  which  owne  Spaine  Marchandy,
Is  into  Flanders  shipped  full  craftily.
Unto  Bruges  as  to  her  staple  fayre :

115

A.D.

c.  1437-

regni  18.
Quaiuor  con-
siderantur  in
moneta  aurea
Angltca,  qu^e
dicitur  No-
bile  :  scilicet
Rex,  Navis,
gladius,  y
Mare :  Qua
designant  po-
testatem  An-
glicorum  super
Mare. In
quorum  oppro-
brium his
diebus  Bri-
tones  minores
if^Flandrenses
y  alii  dicunt
Anglicis:  Tol-
lite  de  vestro
Nobile  navem
y  imponite
ovem. Inten-
dentes,  quod
sicut  quondam
a  tempore
Edzvardt
tertii  Anglici
erant  domini
Maris,  modo
his  diebus  sunt
vecordes,  victi,
y  ad  bellan-
dum  y  Mare
observandum
velut  oves.
[I.  188.]
Figges,
Raisins,
Wine  Bas-
tard,
Dates,
Lycoras,
Civil  Oyle,
Graynes,

A.D.

c.  1437.
JVhite  Pastel
Sope,
Waxe,
Iron,

Wadmoile,
Gotefell,
Kidfell,
Saffi-on,
Quickesiher.

Flemish  cloth
■made  of  Eng-
lish Wool!.

The  necessarie
conjunction  of
Spaine  and
Flanders.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Haven  of  Scluse  hir  Haven  for  her  repayre
Which  is  cleped  Swyn  tho  shippes  giding :
Where  many  vessels  and  fayre  are  abiding.
But  these  Marchandes  with  their  shippes  great,
And  such  chaffare  as  they  bye  and  get
By  the  weyes  must  nede  take  on  hand
By  the  coasts  to  passe  of  our  England,
Betwixt  Dover  and  Caleis,  this  is  no  doubt.
Who  can  well  els  such  matter  bring  about }

And  when  these  sayd  Marchants  discharged  bee

Of  Marchandie  in  Flanders  nere  the  see.

Then  they  bee  charged  againe  with  Marchandy,

That  to  Flanders  bougeth  full  richly.

Fine  cloth  of  Ypre  that  named  is  better  than  ours,

Cloth  of  Curtrike,  fine  cloth  of  all  colours,

Much  Fustian,  and  also  Linen  cloth.

But  Flemings,  if  yee  bee  not  wroth,

The  great  substance  of  your  cloth  at  the  full

Yee  wot  ye  make  it  of  our  English  woll.

Then  may  it  not  sinke  in  mannis  brayne.
But  that  it  must  this  Marchandy  of  Spaine
Both  out  and  in  by  our  costes  passe  :
Hee  that  sayd  nay  in  witte  was  like  an  asse.
Wee  should  have  peace  with  the  grounds  tweyne
Thus  if  this  see  were  kept,  I  dare  well  sayne.
For  Spaine  and  Flanders  is  as  eche  other  brother.
And  nether  may  well  live  without  other :
They  may  not  liven  to  maintaine  their  degrees.
Without  our  English  commodities :

WoUe  and  Tynne : for  the  woolle  of  England
Susteineth  the  Commons  Flemings  I  understand.
Then  if  England  would  her  wolle  restraine
From  Flanders,  this  followeth  in  certaine,
Flanders  of  nede  must  with  us  have  peace.
Or  els  shee  is  destroyed  without  lees.
Also  if  Flanders  thus  destroyed  bee :
Some  Marchandy  of  Spaine  will  never  ythee :

116

THE ENGLISH POLICY  a.d.

c.  1437.
For  destroyed  it  is,  and  as  in  cheeffe
The  wolle  of  Spaine  it  commeth  not  to  preeffe,
But  if  it  be  costed  and  menged  well
Amongst  the  English  wolle  the  greter  delle.
For  Spanish  wooll  in  Flaunders  draped  is.
And  ever  hath  bee,  that  men  have  minde  of  this :
And  yet  Wooll  is  one  of  the  chiefe  Marchandy  [I-  189.]

That  longeth  to  Spaine  : who  so  will  espie,
It  is  of  little  value,  trust  unto  mee.
With  English  wooll  but  if  it  menged  bee.
Thus  if  the  sea  be  kept,  than  herken  hether.
If  these  two  lands  comen  not  together :
So  that  the  Fleete  of  Flanders  passe  nought
That  in  the  narrowe  see  it  be  not  brought
Into  the  Rochelle  to  fetch  the  fumose  wine,
Ner  into  Bytonuse  Bay  for  salt  so  fine,
What  is  then  Spaine  ? What  is  Flanders  also  ?
As  who  sayd,  nought,  the  thrift  is  agoe.
For  the  little  land  of  Flanders  is
But  a  staple  to  other  lands  ywis :
And  all  that  groweth  in  Flanders  graine  and  seede
May  not  a  Moneth  finde  hem  meate  and  brede.
What  hath  then  Flanders,  bee  Flemings  lieffe  or  loth.
But  a  little  Mader  and  Flemish  Cloth  :
By  Drapering  of  our  wooll  in  substance
Liven  her  commons,  this  is  her  governance.
Without  wich  they  may  not  live  at  ease.
Thus  must  hem  sterve,  or  with  us  must  have  peace.

Of  the  commodities  of  Portugal. The  second
Chapter.

THe  Marchandy  also  of  Portugal
By  divers  lands  turne  into  sale.
Portugalers  with us  have  trouth  in  hand :
Whose  Marchandy  commeth  much  into  England.
They  ben  our  friends,  with  their  commodities.
And  v/ee  English  passen  into  their  countrees.

117

A.D.

c.  1437.

Wine,  Osey,

Waxe,

Graine,  Figs,

Reisens,Hony,

Cordezveyne,

Dates,  Salt,

Hides.

Note  well.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Her  land  hath  wine,  Osey,  Waxe,  and  Graine,

Figges, Reysins,  Hony  and  Cordoweyne :

Dates,  and  Salt,  Hides,  and  such  Marchandy :

And  if  they  would  to  Flanders  passe  for  by.

They  should  not  bee  suffred  ones  ner  twyes,

For  supporting  of  our  cruell  enemies,

That  is  to  say  Flemings  with  her  gyle  :

For  changeable  they  are  in  little  while.

Then  I  conclude  by  reasons  many  moe.

If  we  suffred  neither  friend  nor  foe,

What  so  enemies,  and  so  supporting

Passe  for  by  us  in  time  of  werring,

Seth  our  friends  will  not  ben  in  cause

Of  our  hindring, if  reson  lede  this clause :

Then  nede  from Flanders  peace  bee  to  us  sought,

And  other  lands  should  seeke  peace,  dout  nought :

For  Flanders  is  Staple,  as  men  tell  mee,

To  all  nations  of  Christianitie.

[I.  190.]

The  Britons
great  Rovers
and  The  eves.

The  commodities  of  pety  Britaine,  with  her
Rovers  on  the  sea. The  third  Chapter.

Furthermore  to  write  I  am  faine
Somewhat  speaking  of  the  little  Britayne.
Commoditie  thereof  there,  is  and  was.
Salt, and  wine,  crest  cloth  and  canvas.
And  the  land  of  Flaunders  sickerly
Is  the  staple  of  their Marchandy.
Wich Marchandie  may  not  passe  away
But  by  the  coast  of  England, this  is  no nay.
And  of  this  Britaine,  who  so  trueth  lovis.
Are  the  greatest  rovers  and  the  greatest  theevis,
That  have  bene  in  the  sea  many  one  yeere :
That  our Marchants  have  bought  full  dere.
For  they  have  tooke  notable  goods  of  ours.
On  this  side see, these  false  pelours
Called  of  Saincte  Malo,  and  ellis  where :
Wich  to  their  Duke  none  obeysance  will  here :

118

THE ENGLISH POLICY

With such  colours  wee  have  bee  hindred  sore.

And  fayned  peace  is  called  no  werre  herefore.

Thus  they  have  bene  in  divers  coasts  many

Of  our  England,  more  then  rehearse  can I :

In  Norfolke  coastes,  and  other  places  about,

And  robbed  and  brent  and  slaine  by  many  a  rowte ;

And  they  have  also  ransomed  Towne  by  Towne :

That  into  the  regnes  of  bost  have  run  her  sowne :

Wich  hath  bin  ruth  unto  this Realme  and  shame :

They  that  the  sea  should  keepe  are  much  to  blame.

For  Britayne  is  of  easie  reputation ;

And  Saincte  Malo  turneth  hem  to  reprobation.

A storie  of  Edward  the  third  his  ordinance
for  Britayne.

HEre  bring  I  in  a  storie  to  mee  lent,
That  a  good  Squire  in  time  of  Parliament
Tooke  unto  mee  well  written  in  a  scrowe :
That  I  have  commond  both  with  high  and  lowe.
Of  which  all  men  accorden  into  one,
That  it  was  done  not  many  yeeres  agone.
But  when  noble  King  Edward  the  thrid
Reigned  in  grace,  right  thus  it  betyd.
For  hee  had  a  maner  gelosie
To  his  Marchants  and  loved  them  hartily.
He  feld  the  weyes  to  rule  well  the  see.
Whereby  Marchants  might  have  prosperitee.
That  for  Harflew  Houndflew  did  he  maken ;
And  great  werre  that  time  were  undertaken,
betwixt  the  King  and  the  Duke  of  Britayne :
At  last  to  fall  to  peace  both  were  they  fayne :
Upon  the  wich  made  with  convencion
Our  Marchants  made  hem  readie  bowne
Toward  Britayne  to  loade  their  Marchandie,
Wening  hem  friends  they  went  foorth  boldly :
But  soone  anon  our  Marchants  were  ytake.
And  wee  spedde  never  the  better  for  truce  sake.

119

A.D.

c.  1437-

Historiaesten-
dens  quam
ordinationem
Rex  Ed-
war  dus  tertius
fecit  contra
depr^edatores
marinos  Brit-
annice  min-
oris,  ad  debel-
landum  eos  tsf
subjugandum
Britannos
minores.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c-  1437-

They  lost  her  good,  her  navy  and  spending :
But  their  complaint  came  unto  the  king.
Then  wext  he  wroth,  and  to  the  Duke  he  sent.
And  complained  that  such  harme  was  hent ;
By  convention  and  peace  made  so  refused :
Wich  Duke  sent  againe,  and  him  excused.
Rehearsing  that  the  mount  of  Saincte  Michael,
[I.  191.]  And  Sainct  Malo  would  never  a  dell
Be  subject  unto  his  governance,
Nor  be  under  his  obeysance :
And  so  they  did  withouten  him  that  deede.
But  when  the  king  anon  had  taken  heede :
Hee  in  his  herte  set  a  judgement.
Without  calling  of  any  Parliament,
Or  greate  tarry  to  take  long  advise
To  fortifie  anon  he  did  devise
Of  English  Townes  three,  that  is  to  say,
Dertmouth,  Plymouth,  the  third  it  is  Fowey :
And  gave  hem  helpe  and  notable  puisance
With  insistence  set  them  in  governance
Upon  pety  Bretayne  for  to  werre.
Those  good  sea  men  would  no  more  differre.
But  bete  hem  home  and  made  they  might  not  rowte,
Tooke  prisoners,  and  made  them  for  to  lowte.
And  efte  the  Duke,  an  ensample  wise.
Wrote  to  the  king  as  he  first  did  devise,
Him  excusing : But  our  men  wood
With  great  power  passed  over  the  floode
And  werred  foorth  into  the  Dukes  londe.
And  had  ny  destroyed  free  and  bond.
But  than  the  Duke  knewe  that  the  townes  three
Should  have  lost  all  his  native  Countrie,
He  undertooke  by  suretie  true  not  false.
For  mount  Michael  and  Saincte  Malo  als,
And  other  parties  of  the  litle  Brytaine,
Which  to  obey,  as  sayd  was,  were  not  fayne.
The  Duke  hymselfe  for  all  did  undertake:
With  all  his  herte  a  full  peace  did  hee  make :

THE ENGLISH POLICY  a.d.

c.  1437.
So  that  in  all  the  life  time  of  the  king,
Marchants  had  peace  withouten  werring :

He  made  a  statute  for  Lombards  in  this  land,  StatutumRegis

That  they  should  in  noe  wise  take  on  hande  Edwardttertn

Here  to  inhabite,  here  to  chardge  and  dischardge  "^  ^^

But  fortie  dayes,  no  more  time  had  they  large.
This  good  king  by  witte  of  such  appreiffe
Kept  his  Marchants  and  the  sea  from  mischiefe.

Of  the  commodities  of  Scotland  and  draping  of
her  woUes  in Flanders. The  fourth  Chapiter.

Moreover  of  Scotland  the  commodities
Are  Felles,  Hides,  and  of  Wooll  the  Fleese.
And  all  these  must  passe  by  us  away
Into  Flanders  by  England,  sooth  to  say.
And  all  her  wooUe  was  draped  for  to  sell
In  the  Townes  of  Poperinge  and  of  Bell ;
Which  my  Lord  of  Glocester  with ire

For  her falshed  set  upon  a  fire.  Jnno  Domini

And  yet  they  of  Bell  and  Poperinge  i436./f^«.6.

Could  never  drape  her  wooll  for  any  thing,  ^^'

But  if  they  had  English  woll  withall.
Our  goodly  wooll  which  is  so  generall
Needefull  to  them  in  Spaine  and  Scotland  als,
And  other  costes,  this  sentence  is  not  false :
Yee  worthy  Marchants  I  doe  it  upon  you,

I  have  this  learned  ye  wot  well  where  and  howe :  [I.  192.]

Ye  wotte  the  Staple  of  that  Marchandie,
Of  this  Scotland  is  Flaunders  sekerly.
And  the  Scots  bene  charged  knowen  at  the  eye.
Out  of  Flanders  with  little  Mercerie,
And  great  plentie  of  Haberdashers  Ware,
And  halfe  her  shippes  with  cart  wheeles  bare.
And  with  Barrowes  are  laden  as  in  substance :
Thus  most  rude  ware  are  in  her  chevesance.
So  they  may  not  forbeare  this  Flemish  land.
Therefore  if  wee  would  manly  take  in  hand,

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c-  1437-

To  keepe  this  Sea  from  Flanders  and  from  Spaine,
And  from  Scotland,  like  as  from  pety  Britaine,
Wee  should  right  soone  have  peace  for  all  her  hosts,
For  they  must  needes  passe  by  our  English  costs.

Of  the  commodities  of  Pruce,  and  High  Dutch
men,  and  Easterlings. The  fifth  Chapitle.

NOwe  goe  foorth  to  the  commodities,
That  commeth  from  Pruce  in  two  maner  degrees.
For  two  maner  people  have  such  use.
That  is  to  say.  High  Duch  men  of  Pruse,
And  Esterlings,  which  might  not  be  forborne.
Out  of  Flanders,  but  it  were  verely  lorne.
For  they  bring  in  the  substance  of  the  Beere,
That  they  drinken  feele  too  good  chepe,  not  dere.
Yee  have  heard  that  two  Flemings  togider
Will  undertake  or  they  goe  any  whither.
Or  they  rise  once  to  drinke  a  Ferkin  full.
Of  good  Beerekin  :  so  sore  they  hall  and  pull.
Under  the  board  they  pissen  as  they  sit  :
This  commeth  of  covenant  of  a  worthie  wit.
Without  Caleis  in  their  Butter  they  cakked
When  they  fled  home,  and  when  they  leysure  lacked
To  holde  their  siege,  they  went  like  as  a  Doe  :
Well  was  that  Fleming  that  might  trusse,  and  goe.
For  feare  they  turned  backe  and hyed  fast,
My  Lord  of  Glocester  made  hem  so  agast
With  his  comming,  and  sought hem  in  her  land.
And  brent  and  slowe  as  he  had take  on  hand  :
So  that  our  enemies  durst  not  bide,  nor  stere.
They  fled  to  mewe,  they  durst  no  more  appeare.
Rebuked  sore  for  ever  so  shamefully.
Unto  her  utter  everlasting  villanie.

Nowe  Beere  and  Bakon  bene  fro  Pruse  ybrought
Into  Flanders,  as  loved  and  farre  ysought  ;
Osmond,  Copper,  Bow-staves,  Steele,  and  Wexe,
Peltreware  and  grey  Pitch,  Terre,  Board,  and flexe  :

THE ENGLISH POLICY

And  Colleyne  threed,  Fustian  and  Canvas,

Card,  Bukeram  :  of  olde  time  thus  it  was.

But  the  Flemings  among  these  things  dere,

In  common  loven  best  Bakon  and  Beere.

Also  Pruse  men  maken  her  adventure

Of  Plate  of  silver  of  wedges  good  and  sure

In  great  plentie  which  they  bring  and bye,

Out  of  the  lands  of  Beame  and  Hungarie  :

Which  is  increase  full  great  unto  their  land.

And they  bene  laden,  I understand.

With  wollen  cloth  all  maner  of  colours

By  dyers  crafted  full  divers,  that  ben  ours.

And  they  adventure  full  greatly  unto  the  Bay,

for  salt  that  is  needefull  withouten  nay.

Thus  if  they  would  not  our  friends  bee,

We  might  lightly  stoppe  hem  in  the  see  :

They  should  not  passe  our  streemes  withouten  leve.

It  would  not  be,  but  if  we  should  hem  greve.

r Of  the  commodities  of  the  Genuoys  and her
great Caracks. Chap. 6.

THe  Genuois  comen  in  sundry  wises
Into  this  land  with  divers  marchandises
In  great  Caracks,  arrayed  withouten  lacke
With  cloth  of  gold,  silke,  and  pepper  blacke
They  bring  with  them,  and  of  II  crood  great  plentee,
Woll  Oyle,  Woad  ashen,  by  vessel  in  the  see,
Cotton,  Rochalum,  and  good  gold  of  Genne.
And  then  be  charged  with  woUe  againe  I  wenne,
And  wollen  cloth  of  ours  of  colours  all.
And  they  adventure,  as  ofte  it  doth  befall,
Into  Flanders  with  such  things  as  they  bye,
That  is  their  chefe  staple  sekerly  :
And  if  they  would  be  our  full  enemies.
They  should  not passe  our  stremes  with marchandise.

A.D.

c.  1437-
Pitch,  Tarre,
Board,  Flexe,
Colleinthreed,
Fustian,  Can-
vas, Cardes,
Bokeram,
Silver-plate,
Wedges  of
Silver  and
Mettall.

[I-  I93-]

II  Or,  Woad.

[The

123

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437.

The  comodities  and  nicetees  of  the  Venetians

and  Florentines,  with  their  Gallees.

Chap. 7.

THe  great  Galees  of  Venice  and Florence
Be  well  laden  with  things  of  complacence,
All  spicery  and  of  grossers  ware  :
With  sweete  wines  all  maner  of  chaifare,
Apes,  and  Japes,  and  marmusets  tayled,
Nifles  and  trifles  that  little  have  avayled  :
And  things  with  which  they  fetely  blere  our  eye  :
With  things  not  induring  that  we  bye.
For  much  of  this  chaifare  that  is  wastable
Might  be  forborne  for  dere  and  deceivable.
And  that  I  wene  as  for  infirmities
In  our  England  are  such  commodities
Withouten  helpe  of  any  other  lond
Which  by  witte  and  practise  both  yfound  :
That  all humors  might be  voyded  sure,
Which  that  we  gleder  with  our  English  cure  :
That  we  should  have  no  neede  of  Scamonie,
Turbit,  enforbe,  correct  Diagredie,
Rubarbe,  Sene,  and  yet  they  ben  to  needefull.
But  I  know  things  al  so  speedefull.
That  growen  here,  as  those  things  sayd.
Let  of  this  matter  no  man  be  dismayde  ;
But that  a  man  may  voyde  infirmitie
Without  degrees  fet  fro  beyond  the  sea.
And  yef  they  should  except  be  any  thing
It  were  but  sugre,  trust  to  my  saying  :
He  that  trusteth  not  to  my  saying  and  sentence.
Let  him  better  search  experience.
In  this  matter  I  will  not  ferther  prease.
Who  so  not  beleeveth,  let  him  leave  and  cease.
[I.  194.] Thus  these  galeys  for  this  licking  ware.

And  eating  ware,  bare  hence  our  best  chaifare  :
Cloth,  woll,  and  tinne,  which  as  I  sayd  before,
Out  of  this  lond  worst  might be  forbore,

124

THE ENGLISH POLICY  ad.

c.  1437.
For  ech  other  land  of  necessitie
Have  great  neede  to  buy  some  of  them  three  :
And  we  receive  of  hem  into  this  coste
Ware  and  chafFare  that  lightly  wilbe  loste.
And  would  Jesus,  that  our  Lordis  wold
Consider  this  well both  yong  and  old  :
Namely  old  that have  experience,
That  might  the  yonge  exhort  to  prudence  ;
What harme,  what  hurt,  and  what hinderance
Is  done  to  us,  unto  our  great  grievance.
Of  such  lands,  and  of  such  nations :
As  experte  men  know  by  probations,
By  writings  as  discovered  our  counsailes,
And  false  colour  alwaies  the  countertailes
Of  our  enimies ; that  doth us  hindering
Unto  our  goods,  our  Relme,  and  to  the  king :
As  wise  men  have  shewed  well  at  eye ;
And  all  this  is  couloured  by  marchandye.

An example  of  deceite.

ALso  they  bere  the  gold  out  of  this  land.
And  sucke  the  thrift  away  out  of  our  hand :
As  the  Waspe  souketh  honie  fro  the  bee.
So  minisheth  our  commoditee.
Now  wol  ye  here  how  they  in  Cotteswold
Were  wont  to  borrow  or  they  shold  be  sold
Her  woll  good  as  for  yere  and  yere.
Of  cloth  and  tinne  they  did  in  like  manere :
And  in  her  galies ship  this  marchandie  :
Then  soone  at  Venice  of  them  men  woll  it  bye.
Then  utterne  there  the  chaffare  by  the  peise.
And  lightly  als  there  they  make  her  reise.
And  when  the  goods  beene  at  Venice  sold.
Then  to  carie  her  change  they  this  money  have,
They  will  it  profer,  their  subtiltie  to save.
To  English  marchants  to  yeve  it  out  by  eschange
To  be  payed  againe  they  make  not  strange,

125

^-^-  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437.

At  the  receiving  and  sight  of  a  letter,

Here  in  England,  seeming  for  the  better,

by  foure  pence  lesse  in  the  noble  round  :

That  is  twelve  pence  in  the  golden  pound.

And  if  wee  wol  have  of  payment

A  full  moneth,  than  must  him  needes  assent

To  eight  pence  losse,  that  is  shillings  twaine

In  the  English  pound ; as  eft  soone  againe.

For  two  moneths  twelve  pence  must  he  pay.

In  the  English  pound  what  is  that  to  say,

But  shillings  three? So  that  in  pound  fell

For  hurt  and  harme  hard  is  with  hem  to  dwell.

And  when  English  marchants  have  content

This  eschange  in  England  of  assent.

That  these  sayd  Venecians  have  in  woone

And  Florentines  to  here  her  gold  soone

Over  the  see  into Flanders  as^aine :

And  thus  they  live  in  Flanders,  sooth  to  saine.

And  in  London  with  such  chevisance.

That  men  call  usury,  to  our  losse  and  hinderance.

[I-  I95-]  Another example of  deceite.

'Ow  lesten  well  how  they  made  us  a  valeys
When  they  borrowed  at  the  town  of  Caleis
As  they  were  wont,  their  woll  that  was  hem  lent,
For  yere  and  yere  they  should  make  payment.
And  sometime  als  two  yere  and  two  yeare.
II  Or,  lone. Xhis  was  fayre  II  love :  but  yet  will  ye  heare.
How  they  to  Bruges  would  her  woll  carie.
And  for  hem  take  payment  withouten  tarie.
And  sell  it  fast  for  ready  money  in  hand.
For  fifty  pounds  of  money  of  losse  they  wold  not  wond
In  a  thousand  pound,  and  live  thereby
Till  the  day  of  payment  easily.
Come  againe  in  exchange :  making
Full  like  usury,  as  men  make  undertaking.
Than  whan  this  payment  of  a  thousand  pound
Was  well  content,  they  should  have  chaifare  sound

126

N'

THE ENGLISH POLICY

If  they  wold  fro  the  Staple  full,
Receive  againe  three  thousand  pound  in  woll.
In  Cotteswold  also  they  ride  about,
And  all  England,  and  buy  withouten doubte
What  them  list  with  freedome  and  franchise,
More  then  we  English  may  gitten many  wise.
But  would  God  that  without  lenger  delayes
These  galees  were  unfraught  in  fortie  dayes.
And  in  fortie  dayes  charged  againe.
And  that  they  might  be  put  to  certaine
To  goe  to  oste,  as  we  there  with  hem  doe.
It  were  expedient  that  they  did  right  soe,
As  we  doe  there. If  the  king  would  it :
Ah  what  worship  wold  fall  to  English  wit  ?
What  profite  also  to  our  marchandie
Which  wold  of  nede  be  cherished  hertilie  ?
For  I  would  witte,  why  now  our navie  fayleth,
When  manie  a  foe  us  at  our  doore  assayleth.
Now  in  these  dayes,  that  if  there  come  a  nede,
What  navie  should  we  have  it  is  to  drede.
In  Denmarke  were  full  noble  conquerours
In  time  past, full  worthy  warriours  :
Which  when  they  had  their  marchants  destroyed,
To  poverty  they  fell,  thus  were  they  noyed :
And  so  they  stand  at  mischiefe  at  this  day.
This  learned  I  late  well  writon,  this  no  nay.
Therefore  beware,  I can  no  better  will.
If  grace it  woll,  of  other mennis  perill.
For  if  marchants  were  cherished  to  her  speede.
We  were not  likely  to  fayle  in  any  neede.
If  they  be  rich,  then  in  prosperitee
Shalbe  our  londe,  lords,  and  commontee.
And  in worship. Now  thinke I on  the  sonne
Of  marchandy  Richard  of  Whitingdon  ;
That  load  sterre,  and  chiefe  chosen  floure  :
What  hath  by  him  our  England  of  honour.
And  what profite  hath  bin  of  his  riches.
And  yet  lasteth  dayly  in  worthines }

127

A.D.

c.  1437-

Note  dili-
gently.

A  zuoful  com-
plaint of  lacke
of  navie  if
need  come.
A  storie  of  de-
struction of
Denmarke  for
destruction  of
their  mar-
chants.

The  prayse  of
Richard  of
Whittingdon
marchant.

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437.

That  pen  and  paper  may  not  me  suffice
Him  to  describe : so  high  he  was  of  price
[I.  196.]  Above  marchants,  that  set  him  one  of  the  best  :
I  can  no  more,  but  God  have  him  in  rest.

Now  the  principal  matter.

WHat  reason  is  it  that  we  should  goe  to  oste
In  their  countries,  &  in  this  English  coste
They  should  not  so  ?  but  have  more  liberty
Then  we  our  selves  now  also  motte  I  thee.
I  would  to  gifts  men  should  take  no  heede
That  letteth  our  thing  publicke  for  to  speede.
For  this  we  see  well  every  day  at  eye,
Gifts  and  fests  stopen  our  policie.
Now  see  that  fooles  ben  either  they  or  wee  :
But  ever  we  have  the  worse  in  this  countree.
Therefore  let  hem  unto  oste  go  here.
Or  be  we  free  with  hem in  like  manere
In  their  countrees  : and  if  it  will  not  bee,
Compell  them  unto  oste,  and  yee  shall  see
Moch  avantage,  and  moch  profite  arise,
Moch  more  then  I  can  write  in  any  wise.

Of  our  charge  and  discharge  at  her  marts.

Conceive  wel  here,  that  Englishmen  at  martes
Be  discharged,  for  all  her  craftes  and  artes,
In  Brabant  of  her  marchandy
In  fourteene  dayes,  and  ageine  hastily
In  the  same  dayes  fourteene  acharged  eft.
And  if  they  bide  lenger  all  is  bereft.
Anon  they  should  forfeit  her  goods  all,
Or  marchandy  :  it  should  no  better  fall.
And  we  to  martis  in  Brabant  charged  beene
With English  cloth  full  good  and  fayre  to  scene  :
We  ben  againe  charged  with  mercerie,
Haburdasher  ware,  and  with  grosserie  :
To  which  marts,  that  English  men  call  fayres,
Ech  nation  oft  maketh  her  repayres  :

128

THE ENGLISH POLICY

English,  and  French,  Lombards,  Jennoyes,

Catalones,  thedre  they  take  her  wayes  :

Scots, Spaniards, Irishmen  there  abides,

With  great  plenty  bringing  of  sale  hides.

And  I here  say  that  we  in  Brabant  bye,

Flanders  and  Zeland  more  of  marchandy

In  common  use  then  done  all  other  nations  :

This  have  I  heard  of  marchants  relations  :

And  if  the  English ben  not  in  the  marts

They  ben  feeble,  and  as  nought  bene  her  parts.

For  they  byemore,  and  fro  purse  put  out

More  marchandie  then  all  the  other  rowte.

Kept  then  the  see,  shippes  should  not  bring  ne  fetch,

And  then  the  carreys  wold  not  thidre  stretch  :

And  so  those  marts  wold  full  evill  thee,

If  we  manly  kept  about  the  see.

Of  the  commodities  of  Brabant  and  Zeland  and
Henauld  and  marchandy  carried  by  land  to
the  martes. Cap. 8.

YEt  marchandy  of  Brabant  and  Zeland
The  Madre  and  Woad,  that  dyers  take  on  hand
To  dyen  with. Garlike and  Onions,
And  saltfishe  als  for  husband  and  commons.
But  they  of  Holland  at  Caleis  byen  our  felles,
And  woUes  our, that  Englishmen  hem  selles.
And the  chaifare  that  Englishmen  doe  byen
In  the  marts,  that  noe  man  may  denien.
Is  not  made  in  Brabant  that  cuntree  :
It  commeth  from  out  of  Henauld, not by  see.
But  al  by  land,  by  carts,  and  from France,
Bourgoyne,  Colein, Cameret  in  substance.
Therefore  at  marts  if  there  be  a  restraint.
Men  seyne plainely  that  list  no  fables  paynt.
If  Englishmen  be  withdrawen  away.
Is  great  rebuke  and  losse to her affray :
As  though  we  sent  into  the  land  of  France
Ten thousand  people,  men  of  good  puissance,

II  129  I

A.D.

c.  1437.

Mader,
Woad.

[I-  197.]
Garlicke,
Onions,  salt-
fish.

A.D.

c.  1437.

What  our
marchants  bye
in  that  coste
more  then  all
other.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

To  werre  unto  her  hindring multifarie,

So ben  our  English marchants  necessarie.

If  it  be  thus  assay,  and  we  shall  witten

Of  men  experte, by  whom I  have  this  written.

For  sayd  is  that  this  carted  marchandy

Draweth  in  value  as  much  verily,

As  all the  goods  that  come in  shippes  thider,

Which Englishmen  bye  most  and bring  it  hither.

For  her  marts  ben  febel, shame  to  say.

But  Englishmen  thider  dresse  her  way.

A  conclusion  of  this  depending  of  keeping  of

the  sea.

THan I conclude, if  never  so  much  by  land
Were  by  carres  brought  unto  their  hand,
If  well  the  sea  were  kept  in  governance
They  should  by  sea  have  no  deliverance.
Wee  should  hem  stop,  and  we should  hem  destroy,
As prisoners  we should  hem  bring to annoy.
And  so  we  should  of  our  cruell  enimies
Make  our  friends  for  feare of  marchandies.
If  they  were not  suffered  for  to passe
Into  Flanders. But  we  be  frayle  as  glasse
And  also  brittle,  not  thought  never  abiding ;
But  when  grace  shineth  soone  are  we  sliding  ;
We  will  it  not  receive  in  any  wise :
That  maken  lust,  envie,  and  covetise  :
Expone  me  this  ; and  yee  shall  sooth  it  find,
Bere  it  away,  and  keepe  it  in  your  mind.
Then  shuld  worship unto  our  Noble  bee
In  feate  and  forme  to  lord  and  Majestie  :
Liche  as  the  scale  the  greatest  of  this  land
On  the  one  side  hath,  as  I  understand,
A  prince  riding  with  his  swerd  ydraw,
In  the  other  side  sitting, soth  it  is  in  saw,
Betokening  good  rule  and  punishing
In  very  deede  of  England  by  the  king.

130

THE ENGLISH POLICY

And  it  is  so,  God  blessed  mought  he  bee.
So  in  likewise  I  would  were  on  the  see
By  the  Noble,  that  swerde  should  have  power,
And  the  ships  on  the  sea  about  us  here.
What  needeth  a  garland  which  is  made  of  Ivie
Shewe  a  taverne  winelesse,  also  thrive  I  ?
If  men  were  wise,  the  Frenchmen  and  Fleming
Shuld  bere  no  state  in  sea  by  werring.
Then  Hankin  lyons  shuld  not  be  so  bold
To  stoppe  wine,  and  shippes  for  to  hold
Unto  our  shame. He  had  be  beten  thence.
Alas,  alas,  why  did  we  this  offence.
Fully  to  shend  the  old  English  fames  ;
And  the  profits  of  England,  and  their  names  :
Why  is  this  power  called  of  covetise  ;
With  false  colours  cast  beforn  our  eyes  ?
That  if  good  men  called  werriours
Would  take  in  hand  for  the  commons  succours.
To  purge  the  sea  unto  our  great  avayle,
And  winne  hem  goods,  and  have  up  the  sayle.
And  on  our  enimies  their  lives  to  impart,
So  that  they  might  their  prises  well  departe.
As  reson  wold,  justice  and  equitie  ;
To  make  this  land  have  lordship  of  the  sea.
Then  shall  Lombards  and  other  fained  friends
Make  their  chalenges  by  colour  false  offends.
And  say  their  chaffare  in  the  shippes  is.
And  chalenge  al. Looke  if  this  be  amisse.
For  thus  may  al  that  men  have  bought  to  sore,
Ben  soone  excused,  and  saved  by  false  colour.
Beware  yee  men  that  bere  the  great  in  hand
That  they  destroy  the  policie  of  this  land.
By  gifte  and  good,  and  the  fine  golden  clothis,
And  silke,  and  other  :  say  yee  not  this  soth  is  ?
But  if  we  had  very  experience
That  they  take  meede  with  privie  violence.
Carpets,  and  things  of  price  and  pleasance,
Whereby  stopped  should  be  good  governance  :

131

A.D.

c.  1437.

[I. 198.]

OfHaukin

lions.

Lombards  are
cause  enough
to  hurt  this
land,  although
there  were
none  other
cause.

False  colouiing
of  goods  by
Lombards.
Alas  for
bribes  If^  gift
of  good,  feasts
y  other
means,  that
stoppen  our
policie.
This  is  the
very  state  of
our  time.

A.D.

c.  1437.

//  is  a  mar-
vellous thing
that  so  great  a
sicknes  and
hurt  of  ye  land
may  have  no
remedie  of  so
many  as  take
themselves
wise  men  of
governance.

[I. 199.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

And  if  it  were  as  yee  say  to  mee,

Than  wold  I say,  alas  cupiditie,

That  they  that  have  her  lives  put  in  drede,

Shalbe  soone  out  of  winning,  all  for  meed,

And  lose  her  costes,  and  brought  to  poverty.

That  they  shall  never  have  lust  to  goe  to  sea.

An  exhortation  to  make  an  ordinance  against
colour  of  maintainers  and  excusers  of  folkes
goods.

FOr  this  colour  that  must  be  sayd  alofte
And  be  declared  of  the  great  full  ofte,
That  our  seamen  wol  by  many  wise
Spoile  our  friends  in  steede  of  our  enimies  :
For  which  colour  and  Lombards  maintenance,
The  king  it  needes  to  make  an  ordinance
With  his  Counsayle  that  may  not  fayle,  I  trowe,
That  friends  should  from  enimies  be  knowe.
Our  enimies  taken  and  our  friends  spared :
The  remedy  of  hem  must  be  declared.
Thus  may  the  sea  be  kept  in  no  sell.
For  if  ought  be  spoken,  wot  yee  well,
We  have  the  strokes,  and  enemies  have  the  winning :
But  mayntainers  are  parteners  of  the  finning.
We  live  in  lust  and  bide  in  covetise  :
This  is  our  rule  to  maintaine  marchandise,
And  policie  that  wee  have  on  the  sea.
And,  but  God  helpe,  it  will  no  other  bee.

Of  the  commodities  of  Ireland,  and  policie  and
keeping  thereof,  and  conquering  of  wild
Irish : with  an  incident  of  Wales. Chap. 9.

I  Cast  to  speake  of  Ireland  but  a  litle :
Commodities  of  it  I  will  entitle.
Hides,  and  fish,  Salmon,  Hake,  Herringe,
Irish  wooll,  and  linen  cloth,  faldinge,

132

THE ENGLISH POLICY  ad.

c.  1437.
And  marterns  goode  ben  her  marchandie,

Hertes  Hides,  and  other  of  *  Venerie.  "^  Or,  hunting.

Skinnes  of  Otter,  Squirell  and  Irish  hare,
Of  sheepe,  lambe,  and  Foxe,  is  her  chaffare,
Felles  of  Kiddes,  and  Conies  great  plentie.
So  that  if  Ireland  helpe  us  to  keepe  the  sea,
Because  the  King  cleped  is  Rex  Anghss,
And  is  Dominus  also  Hybernias,
Old  possessed  by  Progenitours  :
The  Irish  men  have  cause  like  to  ours
Our  land  and  hers  together  to  defend,
That  no  enemie  should  hurt  ne  offend,
Ireland  ne  us  : but  as  one  commontie
Should  helpe  well  to  keepe  about  the  sea  :
For  they  have  havens  great,  and  goodly  bayes.
Sure,  wyde  and  deepe,  of  good  assayes.
At  Waterford,  and  costes  many  one.
And  as  men  sayne  in  England  be  there  none
Better havens, ships in  to ride,
No  more  sure  for  enemies  to  abide.
Why  speake  I thus  so  much  of  Ireland  .''
For  all  so  much as  I can  understand.
It  is  fertile  for  things  that  there  doe  growe
And  multiplien,  loke  who  lust  to  knowe.
So  large,  so  good,  and  so  commodious.
That  to  declare  is  strange  and  marvailous.
For  of  silver  and  golde  there  is  the  oore,  Mynes  of

Among  the  wilde  Irish  though  they  be  poore.  silver  and  gold

For  they  are  rude  and  can  thereon  no  skill :
So  that  if  we  had  their  peace  and  good  will
To  myne  and  fine,  and  metal  for  to  pure,
In  wilde  Irish  might  we  finde  the  cure,
As  in  London  saith  a  Juellere,

Which  brought  from  thence  golde  oore  to  us  here.
Whereof  was  fyned  mettal  goode  and  clene.
As  they  touch,  no  better  could  be  seene,
Nowe  here  beware  and  heartily  take  intent,
As  yee  will  answere  at  last  judgement,

133

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437-

That  for  slought  and  for  racheshede
Yee  remember  with  all  your  might  to  hede
To  keepe  Ireland that  it  be  not  lost.
F'or  it  is  a  boterasse  and  a  post,
Under  England,  and  Wales  another :
God  forbid,  but  ech  were  others  brother,
Of  one  ligeance  due  unto  the  king.
But  I  have  pittie  in  good  faith  of  this  thing
That  I  shall  say  with  avisement :
I  am  aferde  that  Ireland  will  be  shent :
It  must  awey,  it  wol  bee  lost  from  us,
But  if  thou  helpe,  thou  Jesu  gracious.
And  give  us  grace  al  slought  to  leve  beside.
[I.  200.]  For  much  thing  in  my  herte  is  hide.

Which  in  another  treatise  I  caste  to  write
Made  al  onely  for  that  soile  and  site.
Of  fertile  Ireland,  wich  might  not  be  forborne,
But  if  England  were  nigh  as  goode  as  gone.
God  forbid  that  a  wild  Irish  wirlinge
Should  be  chosen  for  to  bee  their  kinge.
After  her  conqueste  for  our  last  puissance.
And  hinder  us  by  other  lands  alliance.
Wise  men  seyn,  wich  felin  not,  ne  douten.
That  wild  Irish  so  much  of  ground  have* gotten
There  upon  us,  as  likenesse  may  be
Like  as  England  to  sheeris  two  or  three
Of  this  our  land  is  made  comparable :
So  wild  Irish  have  wonne  on  us  unable
Yet  to  defend,  and  of  none  power.
That  our  ground  is  there  a  litle  corner.
To  all  Ireland  in  true  comparison.
It  needeth  no  more  this  matter  to  expon.
Which  if  it  bee  lost,  as  Christ  Jesu  forbed,
Farewel  Wales,  then  England  commeth  to  dred.
This  is  nozu  to For  aliance  of  Scotland  and  of  Spaine,
be  greatly  And  Other  moe,  as  the  pety  Bretaine,

feare  .  And  SO  have  enemies  environ  round  about.

I  beseech  God,  that  some  prayers  devout

134

THE ENGLISH POLICY

Mutt  let  the  said  apparance  probable
Thus  disposed  without  feyned  fable.
But  all  onely  for  perill  that  I  see
Thus  imminent,  it's  likely  for  to  bee.
And  well  I  wotte,  that  from  hence  to  Rome,
And,  as  men  say,  in  all  Christendome,
Is  no  ground  ne  land  to  Ireland  liche.
So  large,  so  good,  so  plenteous,  so  riche,
That  to  this  worde  Dominus  doe long.
Then  mee  semeth  that  right  were  and  no  wrong.
To  get  the  lande : and  it  were  piteous
To  us  to  lese  this  high  name  Dominus.
And  all  this  word  Dominus  of  name
Shuld  have  the  ground  obeysant  wilde  and  tame.
That  name  and  people  togidre  might  accord
Al  the  ground  subject  to  the  Lord.
And  that  it  is  possible  to  bee  subject.
Unto  the  king  wel  shal  it  bee  detect.
In  the  litle  booke  that  I of  spake.
I  trowe  reson  al  this  wol  undertake.
And  I  knowe  wel  howe  it  stante,
Alas  fortune  beginneth  so  to  scant.
Or  ellis  grace,  that  deade  is  governance.
For  so  minisheth  parties  of  our  puissance.
In  that  land  that  wee  lese  every  yere,
More  ground  and  more,  as  well  as  yee  may  here.
I  herd  a  man  speake  to  mee  full  late.
Which  was  a  lord  of  full  great  estate ;
Than  expense  of  one  yere  done  in  France
Werred  on  men  well  willed  of  puissance
This  said  ground  of  Ireland  to  conquere.
And  yet  because  England  might  not  forbere
These  said  expenses  gadred  in  one  yeere.
But  in  three  yeeres  or  foure  gadred  up  here.
Might  winne Ireland  to  a  finall  conqueste,
In  one  sole  yeere  to  set  us  all  at  reste.
And  how soone  wolde  this  be  paied  ageyne :
Which  were  it  worth  yerely,  if  wee  not  feyne :

135

A.D.

c.  1437-

This  Lorde
was  the  Earle
of  Ortnond
that  told  to  me
this  matter,
that  he  would
undertake  it,
in  pain  of  losse
of  al  his  live-
lihood.

But  this  prof-
fer could  not
be  admitted.
Ergo  mali.
[I.  201.]

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

c.  1437-

I  wol  declare,  who  so  luste  to  looke,

I  trowe  full  plainely  in  my  litle  booke.

But  covetise,  and  singularitie

Of  owne  profite,  envie,  crueltie,

Hath doon  us  harme,  and  doe  us  every  day,

And  musters  made  that  shame  is  to  say :

Our  money  spent  al  to  litle  availe.

And  our enimies  so  greatly  doone  prevaile.

That  what  harme  may  fall  and  overthwerte

I  may  unneth  write  more  for  sore  of  herte.

An  exhortation  to  the  keeping  of  Wales.

BEware  of  Wales,  Christ  Jesu  mutt  us  keepe.
That  it  make  not  our  childers  childe  to  weepe,
Ne  us  also,  so  if  it  goe  his  way.
By  unwarenes :  seth  that  many  a  day
Men  have  bee  ferde  of  her  rebellion.
By  great  tokens  and  ostentation  :
Seche  the  meanes  with  a  discrete  avise,
And  helpe  that  they  rudely  not  arise
For  to  rebell,  that  Christ  it  forbede.
Looke  wel  aboute,  for  God  wote  yee  have  neede,
Unfainingly,  unfeyning  and  unfeynt.
That  conscience  for  slought  you  not  atteynt :
Kepe  well  that  grounde,  for  harme  that  may  ben  used,
Or  afore  God  mutte  yee  ben  accused.

Of  the  commodious  Stockfish  of  Island,  and
keeping  of  the  Sea,  namely  the  Narrow  sea,
with  an  incident  of  the  keeping  of  Caleis.
Chap. lo.

The  trade  of f~\^  Island  to  write  is  litle  nede,
Bristm  to \J  g^^^  ^f  Stock-fish  : Yet  forsooth  in  deed
Out  of  Bristowe,  and  costes  many  one,
Men  have  practised  by  nedle  and  by  stone
Thider  wardes  within  a  litle  while.
Within  twelve  yere,  and  without  perill

136

THE ENGLISH POLICY

Gon  and  come,  as  men  were  wont  of  old
Of  Scarborough  unto  the  costes  cold.
And  nowe  so  fele  shippes  this  yeere  there  ware.
That  moch  losse  for  unfreyght  they  bare :
Island  might  not  make  hem  to  bee  fraught
Unto  the  Hawys : thus  much  harme  they  caught.
Then  here  I  ende  of  the  commoditees
For  which  neede  is  well  to  kepe  the  seas :
Este  and  Weste,  South  and  North  they  bee.
And  chiefly  kepe  the  sharpe  narrow  see,
Betweene  Dover  and  Caleis : and  as  thus
that  foes  passe  none  without  good  will  of  us :
And  they  abide  our  danger  in  the  length.
What  for  our  costis  and Caleis  in  our  strength.

An  exhortation  for  the  sure  keeping  of  Caleis.

ANd  for  the  love  of  God,  and  of  his  blisse
Cherish  yee  Caleis  better  then  it  is.
See  well  thereto,  and  heare  the  grete  complaint
That  true  men  tellen,  that  woll  no  lies  paint,
And  as  yee  know  that  writing  commeth  from  thence :
Doe  not  to  England  for  slought  so  great  offence,
But  that  redressed  it  bee  for  any  thing :
Leste  a  song  of  sorrow  that  wee  sing.
For  litle  wenith  the  foole  who  so  might  chese
What  harme  it  were  good  Caleis  for  to  lese :
What  wo  it  were  for  all  this  English  ground.
Which  wel  conceived  the  Emperour  Sigismound,
That  of  all  joyes  made  it  one  of  the  moste.
That  Caleis  was  subject  unto  English  coste.
Him  thought  it  was  a  jewel  most  of  all,
And  so  the  same  in  Latine  did  it  call.
And  if  yee  wol  more  of  Caleis  heare  and  knowe,
I  cast  to  write  within  a  litle  scrowe.
Like  as  I  have  done  before  by  and  by
In  other  parteis  of  our  policie.
Loke  how  hard  it  was  at  the  first  to  get;
And  by  my  counsell  lightly  doe  not  it  let.

137

A.D.

c.  1437.

The  old  trade
of  Scarborough
to  Island  and
the  North.

[I.  202.]

The  joy  of
Sigismund  the
Emperour  that
Caleis  was
English.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437.

For  if  wee  lese  it  with  shame  of  face
Wilfully,  it  is  for  lacke  of  grace.
Howe  was  Harflew  cried  upon,  and  Rone,
That  they  were  likely  for  shought  to  be  gone ;
Howe  was  it  warned  and  cried  on  in  England,
I  make  record  with  this  pen  in  my  hand.
It  was  warened  plainely  in  Normandie,
And  in  England,  and  I  thereon  did  crie.
The  world  was  defrauded,  it  betyde  right  so.

Harfiew  was Farewell  *  Harflew : lewdly  it  was  a  go.

^'^^^^"^^iJthe ^°^^  w^^^  Caleis, I  can  say  no  better:

zt  of  Henry  ^Y  soule  discharge  I  by  this  present  letter.

the  sixth.

After  the  Chapitles  of  commodities  of  divers
lands,  sheweth  the  conclusion  of  keeping  of
the  sea  environ,  by  a  storie  of  King  Edgar
and  two  incidents  of  King  Edward  the  third,
and  King  Henrie  the  fifth. Chap. 11.

NOwe see  we  well  then  that  this  round  see
To  our  Noble  by  pariformitee

Under  the  ship  shewed  there  the  sayle.

And  our  king  with  royal  apparayle.

With  swerd  drawen  bright  and  extent

For to  chastise  enimies  violent ;

Should  be  lord  of  the  sea  about,

To  keepe  enimies  from  within  and  without ;

To  behold  through  Christianitee

Master  and  lord  environ  of  the  see :

All  living  men  such  a  prince  to  dreed.

Of  such  a  regne  to  bee  aferd  indeed.

Thus  prove  I  well  that  it  was  thus  of  old ;
*Dtdt  Chro-  Which  by  a  *  Chronicle  anon  shalbe  told,
nica,  quod  iste  Right  curious : but  I  will  interprete
Edgaruscunc-  j^  -^^^  English,  as  I did  it  gete:
soribus  suis Cf  king  Edgar : O most  marveilous
fielicior,  nulli Prince  living,  wittie, and  chevalerous :

138

THE ENGLISH POLICY

So  good  that  none  of  his  predecessours
Was  to  him  Kche  in prudence  and  honours.
Hee  was  fortunate  and  more  gracious
Then  other  before,  and  more  glorious :
He  was  beneth no  man in  holines :
Hee  passed  all  in  vertuous  sweetnes.
Of  English  kings  was  none  so  commendable :
To  English  men  no  lesse  memorable,
Then Cyrus  was to  Perse  by  puissance,
And  as  great  Charles  was  to  them  of  France,
And  as  to  the  Romanes  was  great  Romulus,
So  was  to  England  this  worthy  Edgarus.
I  may  not  write  more  of  his  worthines
For  lacke  of  time,  ne  of  his  holines :
But  to  my  matter  I  him  exemplifie.
Of  conditions  tweyne  and  of  his  policie  :
Within  his  land  was  one,  this  is  no  doubt.
And  another  in  the  see  without ;
That  in  time  of  Winter  and  of  werre,
When  boystrous  windes  put  see  men  into  fere ;
Within  his  land  about  by  all  provinces
Hee  passed  through,  perceiving  his  princes,
Lords,  and  others  of  the  commontee.
Who  was  oppressour,  and  who  to  povertee
Was  drawen  and  brought,  and  who  was  clene  in  life,
And  was  by  mischiefe  and  by  strife
With  over  leding  and  extortion  :
And  good  and  badde  of  eche  condition
Hee  aspied : and  his  ministers  als,
Who  did  trought,  and  which  of  hem  was  fals :
Howe  the  right  and  lawes  of  the  land
Were execute, and  who  durst  take in hand
To  disobey  his  statutes  and decrees,
If  they  were  well kept  in  all  countrees :
Of  these  he  made  subtile  investigation
Of  his  owne espie, and  other  mens  relation.
Among other  was  his  great  busines,
Well  to  ben  ware,  that  great  men  of  riches,

139

A.D.

c.  1437-

sanctitate
inferior,  omni-
bus morum
suavitate
prcestantior
fuerit. Luxit
ipse  Anglis
non  minus
memorabilis,
quam  Cyrus
Persis,  Caro-
lus  Francis
Romulus  verb
Romanis.
[I.  203.]

A.D.

c-  1437-

D'lcit  Chro-
nica, pr^epar-
averat  naves
robustissimas
ntimero  tria
m'lllia  sex-
centa  :  in
quibus  re-
deunte  astate
omneminsulam
ad  terrorem
extraneorum,
y  ad  suorum
excitationem
cum  maximo
apparatu  cir-
cumnavigare
consueverat.

[I.  204.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

And men of  might  in  citie  nor  in  towne
Should to  the  poore  doe  non  oppression.
Thus  was  hee  wont  in  this  Winter  tide
On  such  enforchise  busily  to  abide.
This  was his  labour  for  the  publike  thing,
Thus  was hee occupied : a  passing  holy King.
Nowe  to purpose,  in  the  Sommer  faire
Of  lusty  season,  whan  clered  was  the  aire,
He  had redie  shippes  made  before
Great  and  huge,  not  fewe  but  many  a  store :
Full  three  thousand  and  sixe  hundred  also
Stately  inough  on  our  sea  to  goe.

The  Chronicles  say,  these  shippes were  full  boysteous
Such  things  long  to  kings  victorious.
In  Sommer tide  would  hee  have  in  wonne
And  in  custome  to  be  ful  redie  soone.
With  multitude  of  men  of  good  array
And  instruments  of  werre  of  best  assay.
Who  could  hem  well in any  wise  descrive }
It  were  not  light  for  eny  man  alive.
Thus  he  and  his  would  enter  shippes  great
Habiliments  having  and  the  fleete
Of  See  werres, that  joyfull  was  to  see
Such a  navie  and  Lord  of  Majestee,
There present  in  person  hem  among
To saile  and  rowe  environ  all  along.
So  regal  liche  about  the  English  isle ;
To  all  strangers  terrours  and  perile.
Whose  fame  went  about  in  all  the  world  stout.
Unto  great  fere  of  all  that  be  without.
And  exercise  to  Knights  and  his  meynee
To  him  longing  of  his  natall  cuntree.
For  courage  of  nede  must  have  exercise,
Thus  occupied  for  esshewin  of  vice.
This  knew  the  king  that  policie  espied ;
Winter  and  Somer  he  was  thus  occupied.
Thus  conclude  I  by  authoritee
Of  Chronike, that  environ  the  see

140

THE ENGLISH POLICY

Should  bene  our  subjects unto  the  King,
And  hee  bee  Lord  thereof  for  eny  thing :
For  great  worship  and  for  profite  also
To  defend his  land  fro  every  foo.
That  worthy  king  I  leve,  Edgar  by  name,
And  all  the  Chronike  of  his  worthy  fame :
SafFe  onely  this  I  may  not  passe  away,
A  worde  of  mighty  strength  till  that  I  say.
That  graunted  him  God  such  worship  here,
For  his  merites,  hee  was  without  pere.
That  sometime  at  his  great  festivitee
Kings,  and  Erles  of  many  a  countree,
And  princes  fele  were  there  present,
And  many  Lords  came  thider  by  assent,
To  his  worship, : but  in  a  certaine  day
Hee  bad  shippes to  bee  redie  of  aray :
For  to  visit  Saint  Johns Church hee  list
Rowing  unto the  good  holie  Baptist,
Hee  assigned  to  Erles,  Lords, and  knights
Many  ships  right  goodly  to  sights :
And  for  himselfe  and  eight  kings  moo
Subject  to  him  hee  made  kepe  one  of  thoo,
A  good  shippe,  and  entrede  into  it
With  eight  kings,  and  downe  did  they  sit;
And  eche  of  them  an  ore  tooke  in  hand.
At  ore  hales,  as  I  understand.
And  he  himselfe  at  the  shippe  behinde
As  steris  man  it  became  of  kinde.
Such  another  rowing  I  dare  well  say.
Was  not  seene  of  Princes  many  a  day.
Lo  than  how  hee  in waters  got  the  price.
In  lande,  in  see,  that  1 may  not  suffice
To  tell,  O  right,  O  magnanimitee.
That  king  Edgar  had  upon  the  see.

A.D,

c.  1437-

Dicit  Chro-
nica If^c.  ut
non  minus
quantam  ei
etiam  in  hac
vita  bonoTum
operum  merce-
dem  dona-
vbrit :  cum
aliquando  ad
maximam  ejus
festivitatem,
reges,  comites,
multarumque
provinciarum
protectores
convenissent,
^c.

141

[An

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c-  1437-

An  incident of  the  Lord  of  the  sea  King
Edward  the  third.

O'

|F  king  Edward  I passe  and  his  prowes

On  lande, on  sea  yee  knowe  his  worthines :

The  siege  of  Caleis,  ye  know  well  all  the  matter

^  , .  Round  about  by  land,  and  by  the  water,

Calets  wa\ ^t  • ^  ^

yeeldedtoye ^owQ  it  lasted  not  yeeres  many  agoe,

English  1 347.  After the  battell  of  Crecye  was  ydoe :

[I.  205.] Howe  it  was  closed  environ  about,

Olde  men  sawe  it,  which  liven,  this  is no  doubt.

Old  Knights  say  that  the  Duke  of  Burgoyn,

Late  rebuked  for  all  his  golden  coyne ;

Of  ship on see  made  no  besieging there,

For  want of  shippes  that  durst not  come  for  feare.

It  was  nothing  besieged  by  the  see :

Thus  call  they  it  no siege  for  honestee.

Gonnes  assailed,  but  assault  was  there  none.

No  siege,  but  fuge : well  was  he  that  might  be  gone

This  maner  carping  have  knights  ferre  in  age.

Expert  through  age  of  this  maner  language.

But  king  Edward  made  a  siege  royall.

King  Edward  And  wanne  the  towne  :  and  in especiall

pJ^hF '^^^  ^^^  ^^^  kept,  and  thereof  he  was  Lord.

tfw/iAici Thus  made  he  Nobles  coyned  of  record;

English  mart-  In  whose  time  was  no  navie  on  the  see

ners  before That  might  withstand  his  majestie.

Calets.  Battell  of  Scluse  yee  may  rede  every  day.

The  battell  of  Yio^N^  it  was  done  I  leve  and  goe  my  way :
It  was  so  late  done  that  yee  it  knowe.
In  comparison  within a  litle  throwe :
For  which  to  God  give  we  honour  and  glorie  ;
For  Lord  of  see  the  king  was  with  victorie.

142

THE ENGLISH POLICY

A.D.

c.  1437.

Another  incident  of  keeping  of  the  see,  in  the
time  of  the  marveilous  werriour  and  vic-
torious Prince,  King  Henric  the  fifth,  and
of  his  great  shippes.

ANd  if  I  should  conclude  all  by  the  King
Henrie  the  fift,  what  was  his  purposing,
Whan  at  Hampton  he  made  the  great  dromons,
Which  passed  other  great  ships  of  all  the  commons ;
The  Trinitie,  the  Grace  de  Dieu,  the  holy  Ghost,
And  other  moe,  which  as  nowe  bee  lost.
What  hope  ye  was  the  kings  great  intent
Of  thoo  shippes,  and  what  in  minde  hee  meant  ?
It  was  not  ellis,  but  that  hee  cast  to  bee
Lorde  round  about  environ  of  the  see.
And  when  Harflew  had  her  siege  about.
There  came  caracks  horrible  great  and  stoute
In  the  narrow  see  willing  to  abide.
To  stoppe  us  there  with  multitude  of  pride.
My  Lord  of  Bedford  came  on  and  had  the  cure,
Destroyed  they  were  by  that  discomfiture.
This  was  after  the  king  Harflew  had  wonne.
Whan  our  enemies  to  siege  had  begonne ;
That  all  was  slaine  or  take,  by  true  relation,
To  his  worshippe,  and  of  his  English  nation.
There  was  present  the  kings  chamberlaine
At  both  battailes ; which  knoweth  this  in  certaine ;
He  can  it  tell  otherwise  then I :
Aske  him,  and  witte  ; I  passe  foorth  hastily.
What  had  this  king  of  his  magnificence.
Of  great  courage,  of  wisedome,  and  prudence .?
Provision,  forewitte,  audacitee.
Of  fortitude,  justice,  and  agilitee.
Discretion,  subtile  avisednesse,
Attemperance,  Noblesse,  and  worthinesse :
Science,  prowesse,  devotion,  equitie.
Of  most  estate,  with  his  magnanimitie

143

The  great
ships  of  Henry
the  fift,  made
at  Hampton.

Great  caracks
of  Genua
taken  by  the
Duke  of  Bed-
ford.

1416.

The  French
nav'te  thus
overthrowen
was  of  five
hundred  salle.

[I.  206.]

Ghost.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1437.

Liche  to  Edgar,  and  the  saide  Edward,
As  much  of  both  liche  hem  as  in  regard.
Where  was  on  live  a  man  more  victorious.
And  in  so  short  time  prince  so marveilous  ?
By  land  and sea,  so  well  he  him  acquitte,
To  speake  of  him  I stony  in  my  witte.
Thus  here I  leave  the  king with  his  noblesse,
Henry  the  fift,  with  whom  all  my  processe
Of  this  true  booke  of  pure  policie
Of  sea  keeping,  entending  victorie
I  leave  endly : for  about  in  the  see
No  Prince  was  of  better  strenuitee.
And  if  he  had  to this  time  lived  here.
He  had  bene  Prince  named  withouten  pere  :
The  Trinitie,  His  great  ships  should  have  ben  put  in  preefe,

%  ^Ih  M ^^^° ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^  "^^^^  °^  ^"^ cheefe,
auct  For  doubt  it  not  but  that  he  would have  bee

Lord  and  master  about  the  round  see  :

And  kept  it  sure  to stoppe  our  enemies  hence,

And  wonne  us  good,  and  wisely  brought  it  thence :

That  no  passage  should  be  without  danger,

And  his  licence  on see  to  move  and  sterre.

Of  unitie,  shewing  of  our  keeping  of  the  see  :
with  an  endly  or  finall  processe  of  peace  by
authoritie. Chap. 12.

'Ow  than  for  love  of  Christ,  and  of  his  joy,
Bring  it  England out  of  trouble  and  noy :
Take  heart  and  witte,  and  set  a  governance,
Set  many  wits  withouten variance,
Exhortatio To  one  accord  and  unanimitee.
generalisin p^^  ^^ ^^^  ^jjj  f^j.  ^^ keepe  the  see,

totiusJngli^,  First  for  worship  and  profite  also,

per  diligen-  And  to  rebuke  of  eche  evill  willed  foe.

tiam  custodice  Thus  shall  worship  and riches  to  us  long.

circmtus marls  'pj^^^^ ^^ ^.j^^  Noble  shall  we  doe  no  wrong,

circa  littora  ,_ .  ^i ^  • c  j • j j

ejusdem:quce ^o  beare  that  coyne  m  figure  and  m  deede,
debet  esse  per  To  our courage, and  to  our  enemies dreede  :

144

N'

THE ENGLISH POLICY

For  which  they  must  dresse  hem to  peace  in  haste,

Or  ellis  their  thrift  to standen,  and  to  waste.

As  this  processe  hath  proved  by  and  by

All  by  reason  and  expert  policy ;

And  by  stories  which  proved  well  this  parte :

Or  ellis  I  will  my  life  put  in  jeoparte.

But  many  londs  would  seche  her  peace  for  nede,

The  see  wel  kept : it  must  bee  doo  for  drede.

Thus  must  Flanders  for  nede  have  unitee

And  peace  with  us  :  it  will  non  other  bee,

Within  short  while  :  and  ambassadours

Would bene  here  soone  to  treate  for  their  succours.

This  unitee  is  to  God  pleasance  :

And  peace  after  the  werres  variance.

The  ende  of  battaile  is  peace  sikerly,

And  power  causeth  peace  finally.

Kept  than  the  sea  about  in  speciall.

Which  of  England is  the  towne  wall.

As  though  England  were  likened to  a  citie,

And the  wall  environ  were  the  see.

Kepe  then  the  sea  that is  the  wall  of  England  :

And  than  is  England kept by  Goddes  hande  ;

That  as  for  any  thing  that is  without,

England  were  at  ease  withouten  doubt.

And  thus  should  every  lond  one  with  another

Entercommon,  as  brother  with his  brother.

And  live  togither  werrelesse  in  unitie,

Without  rancour in  very  charitie,

In  rest  and  peace,  to  Christes  great  pleasance.

Without  strife,  debate  and  variance.

Which  peace  men  should  enserche  with  businesse.

And knit it  saddely  holding  in  holinesse.

The  Apostle  seith,  if  ye  list  to  see.

Bee  yee  busie  for  to  keepe  unitee

Of  the  spirit in  the  bond  of  peace.

Which  is  nedeful  to  all  withouten  lese.

The  Prophet biddeth  us  peace  for  to  enquire

To  pursue  it,  this  is  holy  desire.

II  I4S  K

A.D.

c.  1437-
tinanimitato'
Consiliario-
rum  jrgis,  iff
hominum
bon<£  volun-
tatis.

Tres  sunt
causae  pradic-
tce  custodiie  :
scilicet,  honor,
commodum
regni,  y
opprobrium
inimicis.
[I.  207.]

Ephes.\.  Solli-
citi  sitis  ser-
vare  unitatem
spiritus  in
vinculo  pacts.

A.D.

c.  1437-

Mattk.  5.
Beati  pacifici,
quoniam  fili'i
Del  vocabun-
iur.

Cum  placue-
rint  Domino
vice  hominis
ejus  inimicos
ad  pacem  con-
vertet.

Urbs  beata
Jerusalem
dicta  pacts
visio.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Our  Lord  Jesu  saith,  Blessed  motte  they  bee

That  maken  peace  ;  that is  tranquillitee.

For  peace  makers,  as  Matthew  writeth  aright,

Should be  called  the  sonnes  of  God  almight.

God  give  us  grace,  the  weyes  for  to  keepe

Of  his  precepts,  and  slugly  not  to  sleepe

In  shame  of  sinne  :  that  our  verry  foo

Might be  to  us  convers,  and  turned  so.

For  in  the  Proverbs  is  a  text  to  this  purpose

Plaine  inough  without  any  glose  :

When  mens  weyes  please  unto  our  Lord,

It  shall  convert  and bring  to  accord

Mans  enemies  unto  peace  verray.

In  unitie,  to  live  to  Goddis  pay.

With  unitie,  peace,  rest  and  charitie.

Hee  that  was  here  cladde  in  humanitie.

That  came  from  heaven,  and  styed  up  with  our  nature,

Or  hee  ascended,  he  yave  to  us  cure.

And  left  with  us  peace,  ageyne  striffe  and  debate,

Mote  give  us  peace,  so  well irradicate

Here  in  this  world  :  that  after  all  this  feste

Wee  may  have  peace  in  the  land  of  beheste,

Jerusalem,  which  of  peace  is  the  sight.

With  his  brightnes  of  eternall  light.

There  glorified in  rest  with  his  tuition.

The  Deitie  to  see  with full fruition  :

Hee  second  person  in  divinenesse  is.

Who  us  assume,  and bring  us  to  the  blis. Amen.

Here  endeth  the  true  processe  of  the  Libel  of
English  policie,  exhorting  all  England  to
keepe  the  sea  environ  :  shewing  what  profit
and  salvation,  with  worship  commeth  thereof
to  the  reigne  of  England.

GOe  furth  Libelle,  and  meekely  shew  thy  face  ; I
Appearing  ever  with  humble  countenance  :  I

And  pray  my  Lords  to  take  in  grace,

146

A.D.

1462.

[I. 208.]

KING EDWARD IV'S CHARTER

In  opposaile  and  cherishing  the  advance.

To  hardines  if  that  not  variance

Thou  hast fro  trought by  full  experience

Authors  and  reasons  : if  ought  faile  in  substance

Remit  to  hem  that  yafe  thee  this  science  ;

That  seth  it  is  soth  in  verray  fayth,

That  the  wise  Lord  Baron  of  Hungerford

Hath  thee  overseene,  and  verely  he  saith

That  thou  art  true,  and  thus  hee  doeth  record,

Next  the  Gospel  : God  wotte  it  was  his  worde,

When  hee  thee  redde  all  over  in  a  night.

Goe  forth trew  booke,  and Christ  defend  thy  right.

Explicit  lihellus  de  Politia  conservativa  maris.

A  large  Charter  granted  by  K.  Edward  the  4  in
the  second  yere  of  his  reigne,  to  the  mar-
chants  of  England  resident  especially  in  the
Netherland,  for  their  chusing  of  a  master  and
governor  among  themselves,  which  governe-
ment  was  first  appointed  unto  one  William
Obray  :  with  expresse  mention,  what  autho-
ritie  he  should have.

Dward  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  1462.
France,  &  of  England,  &  lord  of  Ire-
land, to  al  those  which  shal  see  or  heare
these  letters,  sendeth  greeting,  &  good
wil.  Know  ye,  that  whereas  we  have
understood,  as  well  by  the  report  of  our
loving  and  faithful!  Counsellors,  as  by  the
common  complaint  and  report  of  all  men,  that  many
vexations,  griefs,  debates,  discords,  annoyes,  dissentions,
&  damages,  have  heretofore  bene  done,  moved,  com-
mitted, and  happened,  and  do  daily  fal  out  and  happen
among  the  common  marchants  &  mariners,  our  subjects
of  our  realmes  of  France  &  England,  &  our  lordships  of
Ireland  and  Wales,  &  of  other  our  dominions,  seigneuries,

147

The  wise  lord
of  Hunger-
fords  judge-
ment of  this
booke.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

and  territories,  because  that  good  discretion  and  authority
hath  not  bin  observed  among  our  saide  subjects,  which
abide,  frequent,  converse,  remain,  inhabit,  &  passe,  aswel
by  sea  as  by  land,  into  ye  parts  of  Brabant,  Flanders,
Henault,  Holland,  Zeland,  and  divers  other  countreis  &
seigneuries  belonging  aswell  to  the  high  and  mighty
prince,  our  most  deere  and  loving  cousin  ye  Duke  of
Burgoine,  of  Brabant,  earle  of  Flanders,  &c.  as  being  in
the  obedience  &  dominion  of  other  lords,  which  are  in
friendship,  alliance,  &  good  wil  with  us  :  and  that  it  is  to
be  doubted  that  through  the  saide  inconvenience  and
occasion,  many  discommodities  may  ensue  &  fal  out  in
time  to  come  (which  God  forbid)  unles  we  should  pro-
vide convenient  remedie  in  this  behalfe  for  our  subjects
aforesaid  :  wherefore  we  desiring  most  effectually  and
heartily  to  avoide  the  mischiefe  of  the  saide  inconveni-
ences &  to  provide  convenient  remedy  for  the  same,  to
the  end  that  the  said  common  marchants  and  mariners
and  others  our  subjects  of  our  said  realms  &  dominions,
which  at  this  present  &  hereafter  shal  haunt  and  frequent
ye  said  countreis,  may  be  justly  &  lawfully  ruled,
governed,  and  intreated  by  right  &  equity  in  the  countreis
aforesaid,  and  that  equity,  reason,  &  justice  may  be  minis-
tred  unto  them  and  every  of  them,  according  as  the  cases
shal  require,  we  being  wel  assured  and  having  ful  confi-
dence, in  the  discretion,  faithfulnes,  wisdome,  experience,
&  good  diligence  of  our  most  deare  &  welbeloved  subject
Will.  Obray  our  servant,  &  in  regard  of  the  good,  faith-
full,  and  acceptable  services,  which  he  hath  done  us  in
our  realm  &  among  our  subjects  in  times  past,  &  hoping
that  he  wil  do  also  hereafter,  we  have  made,  ordained,
constituted,  committed,  and  established,  and  by  the
tenour  of  these  presents,  of  our  special  grace,  ful  power,
&  authority  royall,  we  ordaine,  appoint,  commit,  and
establish,  (during  our  pleasure)  to  be  governor,  judge,
warden  of  justice,  and  the  appurtenances  &  appendances
therof,  which  we  have  or  may  have  over  our  said  com-
mon subjects the marchants travailing  hereafter  as  wel

148

KING EDWARD IV.'S CHARTER  ad.

1462.

by  sea  as  by  land,  and  abiding  in  the  said  countries  of
Brabant,  Flanders,  Henault,  Holland,  Zeland,  and  other
countreis  beyond  the  sea,  as  is  aforesaide,  together  with
the  wages,  rights,  profits,  and  emoluments  heretofore
accustomed,  &  as  the  said  Will.  Obray  at  other  times
hath  had  and  received  of  our  said  subjects,  when  he  had,
used,  and  exercised  the  said  office  of  governor,  and  also
with  other  such  rights  and  profits,  as  hereafter  shal  more
plainly  be  declared.  And  furthermore  for  our  parts  we
have  given  him,  and  by  these  presents  do  give  him,  as
much  as  in  us  lieth,  during  our  pleasure,  ful  power,
authority,  and  special  commandement,  to  governe,  rule,
and  cause  to  be  governed  and  ruled  with  good  justice  by
himselfe,  or  by  his  sufficient  lieuetenants  or  deputies,  all
and  every  our  foresaid  subjects  the  common  marchants
&  mariners  comming,  remaining,  frequenting,  passing,  &
repairing  from  henceforth  into  the  said  countreis  of
Brabant,  Flanders,  Henault,  Holland,  Zeland,  and  other  [I-  209.]
countreyes  beyond  the  sea,  as  it  is  said,  and  to  keep  and
cause  to  be  kept,  to  exercise  and  maintein,  for  us  and  in
our  place,  the  said  office  of  governour,  and  to  doe  all
such  things  which  a  faithful!  governour  ought  to  do,  and
to  take  knowledge  and  administration  of  the  causes  of
the  said  common  marchants  and  mariners,  our  subjects,
and  of  every  of  them,  and  of  their  causes  and  quarels
moved,  or  hereafter  to  be  moved  in  the  countreis  afore-
said, or  within  the  limits  &  borders  therof,  and  to  doe
them  full  &  speedy  justice.  And  to  reform e,  cause  refor-
mation, governe,  appease,  and  pacifie  all  contentions,
discords,  questions,  or  debates  between  those  our  said
subjects  moved,  or  to  be  moved :  and  to  right,  redresse,
repaire,  restore,  and  amend  all  transgressions,  domages,
enterprises,  outrages,  violences  and  injuries  committed,
or  to  be  committed :  and  likewise  to  require,  to  aske,
demand,  and  receive,  restitutions,  reparations,  restaura-
tions,  and  amends  of  our  said  subjects  the  common
marchants  &  mariners,  or  of  their  factors  in  the  countreis
aforesaid. And  that,  whensoever  and  as  often  as  it  shal

149

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

please  the  said  governor  or  his  deputies,  they  may  in
some  convenient  and  honest  place  within  the  said  coun-
treis  make  or  cause  to  be  made,  somon,  and  hold  in  our
name  jurisdictions,  courts,  and  assemblies :  and  in  our
said  name  take  administration  and  knowledge  of  causes,
as  it  is  aforesaide,  and  to  hold  and  keepe  pleas,  for  and  in
our  behalfe,  and  to  make  agreements,  mediatours,  and
umpires,  to  judge,  to  make  decrees,  and  to  minister
justice,  to  ordaine,  appoint,  censure,  and  constraine  our
saide  subjects  to  sweare  and  take  all  kind  of  oathes,
which  order  of  justice  and  custome  require  and  aifoorde,
and  to  enjoy  our  authoritie,  and  to  use,  execute  and
accomplish,  by  way  of  equitie  and  justice,  and  to  doe,  or
cause  to  be  done  all  execution  and  exercise  of  law  and
justice ;  and  to  ordain,  appoint,  &  establish  sixe  ser-
geants or  under,  to  doe  the  executions  &  arrests  of  our
said  court,  by  the  commandement  of  the  said  governour
or  of  his  deputies,  or  at  the  request  of  the  partie  or
otherwise,  according  as  the  case  shall  require  by  their
advise,  and  to  discharge  and  displace  the  said  sergeants,
as  shall  seeme  good  unto  him,  as  often  and  whensoever
as  it  shall  please  him,  and  change  them,  and  appoint  and
set  others  in  their  roomes,  and  to  require  returne  and
answere  of  the  court,  whensoever  need  shal  be,  of  all
causes,  quarels,  and  businesses  in  regard  of  the  said
office  belonging  unto  us  and  to  our  said  subjects  the
common  marchants  and  mariners  at  all  times,  and  as
often  as  the  case  shall  permit  and  require :  and  gene-
rally and  specially  to  doe  as  much  for  us  and  in  our  stead,
in  the  cases  before  mentioned,  and  which  hereafter  shalbe
declared,  as  we  could  doe  or  cause  to  be  done,  could  say
or  require,  if  we  were  there  present  in  our  owne  person.
Moreover  wee  will,  and  by  the  tenour  of  these  presents
wee  give  and  graunt  unto  the  saide  governour,  and  to
our  saide  subjects  the  common  marchants  and  mariners,
that  as  oft  and  whensoever  it  please  them,  they  may
meet  and  assemble  in  some  honest  and  convenient  place,
and  by  the  consent  of  the  saide  governour  to  choose  and

150

KING EDWARD IV.'S CHARTER  a.d.

1462.

appoynt  among  them  at  their  pleasure,  freely  and  without

danger,  certaine  sufficient  and  fit  persons  to  the  number

of  twelve or under,  which we  wil  have  to be named

Justicers, unto the which Justicers so elected by  the

saide  governour  and  our  saide  subjects,  as  it  is  said,  and

to  everie of  them,  we  give  and  graunt  especiall power

and  authoritie  to  sitte  and  assist  in  court,  with  the  said

governour  or  his  lieutenants,  for  their  aide  and  assistance,

and  to  heare  the  griefs,  complaints,  and  demands  of  our

said subjects their suites,  pleas,  and the state of  their

causes and  quarels  whatsoever  moved or to be  moved

unto  the  ende  of  their  cause,  and  at  the  request  of  the

saide  governour,  his  lieutenants,  or  any  of  them,  to  say,

propound, and plainely to expresse and declare their

opinions, according to right and conscience,  upon the

causes  brought  before  them  and  by  the  parties  uttered

and  declared,  and  well,  lawfully,  and  faithfully  to  coun-

sell  and  advise  the  saide  governour  or  his  lieutenants,  to

order and  censure,  judge  and  determine,  and  ende  the

same  justly and equally, according as the case shall

permit  and require. And  furthermore  we  wil,  that  all

just and reasonable statutes,  lawes,  ordinances,  decrees,

and constitutions  made  and  established,  or to be  made

and  established,  in  the  countreys  aforesaide,  by  the  consent

of  the  said  governour,  and  of  the  saie  Justicers,  shalbe

corrected,  amended,  and  made,  as  they  shall  see to  bee

expedient  in  this  behalfe,  for  the  better  government  of

the  estate  of  the common marchants  and mariners  our

saide  subjects,  and  shalbe  held  as  ratified,  firme,  acceptable

and approved ; and from henceforth  we accept,  admit,

allow  and  approve  them  for  ratified  and  confirmed,  there

to  be  firmely  and  inviolably  observed,  kept  and  obeyed.

And  also,  of  our  farther  favour  and  grace  wee  will  and

we  grant,  that  by  the  consent  of  our  said  governour,  our

said  subjects the  common  marchants  and mariners  may

make and set downe in the said countreis, by their

common consent, as often as they shall thinke good

for their better  government  and estate,  such  just  and

151

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

reasonable  lawes,  statutes,  ordinances,  decrees,  constitu-
tions, and  customes,  as  they  shal  thinke  expedient  in  this
behalfe :  which  we  command  to  be  kept  as  ratified,  con-
firmed, allowed,  &  approved,  available,  and  established.
Provided  alwaies,  that  they  do  not  nor  seeke  any  thing
prejudicial  to  this  present  power  and  authoritie  given
and  graunted  by  us  to  the  saide  governour,  in  any  poynt
[I.  210.]  or  article  heerein  comprised,  by  any  meanes  or  way
whatsoever :  in  which  case  if  they  shoulde  doe  any  thing,
or  ought  should  happen,  we  wil  that  it  shal  take  no
place,  fierce,  vigour,  strength,  nor  vertue :  neither  that  it
shalbe  of  any  effect,  but  it  shalbe  abolished,  disanuUed,
and  utterly  frustrate  ;  and  as  abolished,  disanuUed,  and
utterly  frustrated,  from  this  time  forward,  wee  holde
and  take  it,  and  will  hereafter  hold  and  take  the  same.
And  so  to  doe,  and  put  in  execution  in  our  name,  we
have  and  doe  give  full  and  absolute  power,  &  speciall
authority  to  our  said  servant  William  Obray,  &  to  his
said  lieutenants.  And  likewise,  to  the  end  that  ye  course
of  marchandise  may  be  kept  in  good  estate,  and  that  by
order  of  justice  a  firme  and  constant  rule  may  be  set
downe  among  those  our  said  subjects  and  marchants,  we
have  ordained  and  do  ordaine,  have  consented  &  doe
consent,  and  by  these  presents  have  given  &  do  give  ful
power  &  especiall  authority  to  our  said  servant  Will.
Obray  governour  aforesaid,  that  at  al  time  and  times
when  he  shal  think  good,  he  may  ordaine,  elect,  chuse,
and  appoint,  in  the  countreis  aforesaid,  such  ministers,
officers,  and  servitours  as  hereafter  shalbe  named,  and
such  others  as  he  shal  think  necessary,  and  to  discharge
them,  and  to  change  them,  &  set  others  in  their  roomes,
at  his  good  will  and  pleasure,  unto  such  a  number  as  he
shall  thinke  good  and  reasonable  for  the  time  being  to  be
employed :  as  namely  correctors  or  brokers  as  many  as  he
shal  thinke  good,  to  make  and  to  witnes  the  bargaines
which  are  made  or  to  be  made,  betweene  our  said  subjects
and  others  with  whom  they  shal  have  to  do  or  to  deale
in  the  foresaid  countreis : and  also  as  many  alnagers  to

^52

KING  EDWARD IV.'S CHARTER  ad.

1462.

alner  and  measure  al  kinds  of  marchandises  which  they
shal  buy  or  sel  by  the  yard :  and  also  as  many  weighers
to  weigh  the  marchandise  which  shalbe  sold  or  bought  by
weight :  and  also  so  many  folders  to  fold  their  clothes,
and  so  many  packers  to  pack  their  packs,  and  to  make
their  fardels,  maunds,  and  baskets,  and  other  things
needefull  for  the  defence  &  preservation  of  their  mar-
chandize.  Al  which  ministers,  officers,  and  servitors,  so
chosen,  elected,  charged,  admitted,  and  established  by  the
saide  governour,  as  is  saide,  may  take  their  wages  for  their
paines  &  attendances  upon  the  said  marchants,  according
to  the  custome  of  the  said  countreis,  and  as  they  have
bene  accustomed  to  take  of  the  said  marchants  before  these
presents  by  us  given  and  graunted.  And  hereupon  we
have  given  and  doe  give  expresse  charge  and  commande-
ment  by  us  and  in  our  names  to  all  our  said  subjects
common  marchants  and  mariners,  and  to  every  of  them
which  shall  frequent,  come,  remaine,  passe,  repaire,  or
inhabite  within  the  countreis  aforesaid,  that  they  shall
not  make  contract  or  bargaine,  sell  or  buy,  nor  shall
not  cause  any  contract  or  bargaine  to  be  made,  nor  in
the  said  countreis  sell  or  buy  any  maner  of  wares,
goods,  or  marchandises,  secretely  nor  openly,  by  way
of  fraude,  barat,  or  deceite  whatsoever,  with  any  person
or  persons,  of  what  estate,  countrey,  or  condition  soever
they  be,  without  he  hath  some  of  the  said  brokers  at
the  bargain  making,  to  present,  report,  and  to  testifie
the  said  contracts  or  bargains  before  the  said  governor
or  others,  if  need  require,  and  strife  or  contention
should  grow  therof  betweene  them  :  nor  to  packe  or
cause  to  be  packed  any  goods  or  marchandises  belonging
unto  them,  in  packs,  bales,  or  fardels,  coffers,  chests,
maunds,  dryfats,  or  rowles,  without  having  some  deputy
present  thereat :  nor  to  take  or  cause  to  be  taken  or
set  on  worke  in  the  said  countreis,  any  other  brokers,
alnagers,  weighers,  folders,  or  packers,  then  the  aforesaid
so  chosen,  admitted,  established,  and  ordained  by  the
saide  governor,  &  hereto  authorized  in  our  name,  as  it  is

153

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

said,  under  paine  of  falling  into,  and  incurring  of  our
displeasure,  and  of  forfeiture,  and  confiscation  of  all
such  goods,  wares,  and  marchandises,  which  shalbe  found
to  have  passed  by  other  hands  or  order,  then  that  or  those
which  are  before  mentioned  :  the  fourth  part  of  which
forfeitures  and  confiscations  shall  be  imployed  to  the
repairing  and  maintenance  of  two  chappels  founded,  to  the
honour  of  Saint  Thomas  of  Canterburie  by  our  saide
subjects,  in  the  townes  of  Bruges  in  Flanders,  and  of
Middleborough  in  Zeland ;  the  other  fourth  part  to
us,  &  our  use ;  the  third  fourth  part  to  our  said
cousin  of  Burgundie,  or  the  natural  Lord  of  the
countrey  wherein  the  saide  goods  shall  be  found  ;  and
the  fourth  fourth  part  to  him  or  them,  which  shall
discover,  detect,  or  finde  out  the  saide  fraude.  And
also  that  none  of  our  said  subjects  shall  unlade  or  cause
to  be  unladen,  under  any  colour  nor  otherwise,  nor
unpacke,  in  the  countreis  abovesaide,  no  kind  of  wares,
goods,  nor  marchandises  whatsoever,  which  they  shall
bring  or  cause  to  bee  brought  into  the  countreyes  afore-
saide,  comming  out  of  our  countreyes,  dominions,  or
obeysance,  without  first  and  beforehand  they  make  the
governour  or  his  deputies  acquainted  with  their  arrivall,
and  crave  leave,  and  deliver,  shewe,  and  declare  their
cockets,  that  it  may  duely  appeare,  that  the  saide  goods
and  marchandises  have  truly  and  lawfully  payde  unto
us  our  rights  and  customes,  and  not  to  unpacke  them
but  in  the  presence  of  the  saide  governour,  his  lieuetenants
or  deputies,  upon  paine  of  forfaiture,  and  confiscation
of  the  saide  goods,  in  maner  and  forme  before  declared
in  the  foresaide  article.  And  if  it  bee  found  by  the
visitation  of  the  saide  governor,  his  lieuetenants  or
deputies,  that  any  goods,  wares,  or  marchandises  what-
soever be  arrived  and  discharged  in  the  countreis
aforesaid,  belonging  to  our  saide  subjectes,  not  lawfully
customed  and  acquited  towarde  us  of  our  right  and
[I.  211.]  custome,  for  which  they  cannot  nor  are  not  able  to
make any due proofe of  our letters  of  coquet, as is

154

KING EDWARD IV.'S CHARTER  ad.

1462,
metionedj  or  if  they  finde  any  other  fraud  :  we  will,
we  ordaine,  and  we  grant,  that  the  sayd  governour,  his
lieutenants  or  deputies  may  seaze  upon  the  sayd  goods
on  our  behalfe,  and  may  confiscate  and  forfeit  the  same,
distributing  the  same  into  foure  parts  in  maner  aforesayd.
And  also  wee  will,  that  every  one  of  the  sayd  packes,
fardels,  baskets,  maunds,  cofers,  tunnes,  bales,  roules,
and  other  furnitures  and  geare,  wherein  the  sayd
marchandises  shalbe  packed,  to  be  sent  out  of  the  said
countreis,  shall  not  be  laden  upon  ships,  carts,  nor
horses,  to  come  into  our  dominion,  without  being  first
sealed  with  a  seale  ordayned  by  us  and  given  by  the
sayd  governour,  upon  paine  to  be  forfayted,  applyed,
and  confiscated  to  us  and  into  our  hand,  if  they  be
found  unsigned  and  not  sealed  with  the  seale.  And
for  every  piece  of  marchandise  which  shall  be  sealed
with  the  sayd  seale,  they  shall  pay  to  the  sayd  sealer
two  pence  of  grosse  money  of  Flanders,  which  shall
goe  to  the  profite  of  the  sayd  governour.  And  foras-
much as  according  to  right  and  conscience,  we  ought
not  to  use  the  labour,  travels,  nor  service  of  any  man,
without  waging,  paying,  and  fully  contenting  him
according  to  reason  and  equity,  especially  when  we  doe
appoint  any  person  or  persons  to  doe  or  cause  to  be
done  so  great  travels,  labours,  busines,  and  executions,
as  these  which  are  contayned  in  this  present  charter,
aswell  for  the  benefit  and  profit  of  us  and  our  selves,
as  for  the  holesome,  perfect,  &  good  government  of
our  sayd  subjects  :  we  by  the  good  advise  and
deliberation  of  the  sayd  lords  of  our  privie  counsell,
have  granted  and  given,  and  as  before,  doe  grant  and
give,  of  our  sayd  grace,  to  the  sayd  William  Obray
our  sayd  servant  and  governour  abovenamed,  during  our
pleasure,  for  part  of  his  wages  and  fee  of  the  sayd  office,
one  pennie  of  our  money  of  England  of  the  value  of
a  liver  of  grosse  money  of  Flanders,  upon  al  and  singuler
the  goods,  wares  and  marchandises  of  our  sayd  subjects
frequenting the  sayd countreis,  to  be  levyed,  gathered,

155

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

received,  and  payed  unto  the  sayd  William  Obray  or  to
his  deputies,  upon  the  sayd  wares  and  marchandises
belonging  unto  our  sayd  subjects  buying  and  selling,
or  which  they  shall  cause  to  sell,  buy,  put  away,  trucke
or  exchange  in  the  countreys  abovesaid,  aswell  of  the
goods  and  marchandises  which  they  shall  bring  or  cause
to  be  brought  into  the  sayd  countries,  as  of  all  other
goods  which  they  shall  lade  and  carie,  or  cause  to  bee
caried  and  conveyed  out  of  those  countreis  into  our
dominion  or  elsewhere  into  any  other  part  whatsoever.
And  to  cause  the  same  to  be  gathered,  received,  leavied
and  payed,  we  have  given,  and  by  these  presents  doe
give  full  power  and  speciall  authoritie  unto  the  sayd
William  Obray,  and  to  his  lieutenants  and  deputies
aforesayd,  to  leavy,  gather,  and  cause  to  bee  leavied
and  received  the  sayd  money,  in  forme  and  maner
above  mentioned,  to  his  profite  and  use,  during  our
pleasure  :  and  to  enjoy  and  use  the  same  as  his  proper
goods,  without  any  contradiction,  constraining  and
arresting  if  neede  bee,  as  well  on  land,  as  on  the
water,  our  said  subjects,  their  sayd  goods,  and  every
of  them,  by  way  of  law  and  justice,  and  to  cause  them
to  yeelde  and  pay  the  sayd  money,  upon  the  said  goods
and  marchandises,  as  is  aforesayd.  For  such  is  our
pleasure,  and  so  will  we  have  it  done  without  con-
tradiction or  impeachment  to  him  and  his,  during  our
pleasure.  And  also  we  will  that  the  sayd  William  Obray,
over  and  above  that  which  is  sayd,  shall  take,  gather,
and  receive  of  our  sayd  subjects  from  henceforth  yearely,
during  our  pleasure,  all  such  and  like  wages  and  profits,
as  he  had  and  received  of  our  sayd  subjects,  in  the
yeare  1458,  when  hee  held  and  exercised  the  said  office
of  governour,  without  diminishing  or  rebating  any  thing
thereof,  notwithstanding  this  present  augmentation  made,
increased,  and  done  unto  him,  of  our  grace  and  favour  :
and  that  hee  shall  gather,  take,  and  receive  the  same
in  such  forme  and  manner,  as  the  other  money  above
mentioned is to be gathered. And to the ende that

156

KING EDWARD IV.'S CHARTER  ad.

1462.
the  sayd  William  Obray  may  have  and  take  possession,
season,  and  enterance  of  the  said  office  of  governour
in  our  name  we  have  and  doe  place  him,  by  the  delivery
of  these  presents,  in  possession,  season,  and  entrance  of
the  said  office,  and  of  the  rights,  profits,  stipends,  wages,
and  moneis  aforesayd,  to  begin  to  exercise  the  sayd  office
of  governour  in  our  name,  the  first  day  of  May  next
ensuing  after  the  date  of  these  presents,  for  the  sayd
William  Obray  to  hold  and  exercise,  practise  and  use
the  same,  during  our  pleasure,  with  the  sayd  wages,
moneys,  rights,  and  profites  above  mentioned,  without
any  contradiction  or  impeachment.  And  all  and  singular
our  subjects  the  common  marchants  and  mariners,  which
shall  be  contrary,  rebellious,  and  disobedient  to  the  said
governour  so  ordayned  by  us,  to  his  said  lieutenants,
to  the  sayd  justicers  so  chosen,  or  to  any  of  them,  or
to  any  of  the  statutes,  lawes,  decrees,  sentences,  ordinances,
and  customes,  offices,  gifts,  and  grants  abovesayd,  let
them  grievously  be  punished  by  the  sayd  governour  or
his  lieutenants,  in  this  behalfe,  according  to  the  quantity
of  their  offences,  and  the  exigencie  of  the  cases.  We
doe  sommon,  commaund,  straitly  and  expresly  enjoine
by  these  presents  all  and  every  our  saide  subjects,
that  unto  the  sayd  governour  so  by  us  ordained,  to  his
lieutenants,  attorneis,  or  deputies,  and  also  to  the  said
justicers,  officers,  and  ministers,  in  all  and  everie  the
things  aforesaid,  and  others  any  waie  concerning  in  this
behalfe  our  said  ordinances,  their  government  and  rule,
the  circumstances  and  dependances  theron  that  they  [I.  212.]
give  their  attendance,  counsayle,  comfort,  obedience,
and  aide,  diligently  without  fault  or  difficulty,  surely,
safely,  fully  and  peaceably :  without  doing,  inferring,  or
inflicting,  or  suffering  to  be  done,  inferred,  or  inflicted
to  them  or  any  of  them  in  body  or  goods,  any  disturbance
or  impeachment,  in  any  maner  whatsoever  :  but  rather  if
any  thing  bee  done  unto  them  contrary  and  to  the
prejudice  of  these  presents,  they  shall  remove  and  cause
the same to be remooved, and that which shall be

157

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1462.

hindered  they  shall  set  at  free  deliverance,  upon  payne
to  fall  into  and  to  incurre  our  high  displeasure.
For  such  is  our  pleasure  and  so  will  wee  have  it,
notwithstanding  anie  letters  falsely  crept  in,  obtayned,
or  to  be  obtayned  contrary  hereunto.  And  you
our  subjects,  the  common  marchants  and  mariners,
so  behave  your  selves,  that  you  may  receive  com-
mendation of  us  for  your  good  obedience,  knowing  that
such  as  shall  be  found  doing  or  to  have  done  the  con-
trary, we  will  see  them  so  punished  without  redemption,
that  they  shall  bee  an  example  to  all  rebellious  persons.
We  pray  and  most  instantly  require  in  the  ayde  of
equitie,  all  others  our  friends,  allies,  and  well-willers,
aswell  princes  and  potentates,  as  their  justicers,  officers,
lieutenants,  deputies,  commissaries,  and  subjects,  and
every  of  them,  in  regard  of  equitie ;  that  they  would
vouchsafe,  and  that  it  would  please  them  to  give,  doe,
and  lend  comfort,  ayde,  assistance,  and  prisons  if  neede
require,  to  our  sayd  governour,  his  lieutenants,  com-
missaries, deputies,  justicers,  &  others  our  officers  and
ministers  aforesayd :  and  herein  wee  pray  them  on  our
behalfe,  and  in  our  owne  name.  And  it  may  please  them
herein  to  doe  so  much,  that  we  may  have  occasion  to
thanke  them,  and  to  accompt  our  selves  beholding  for
the  same :  and  as  they  would  that  we  should  do  for  them
in  the  like  matter,  or  in  a  greater :  which  we  will  willingly
doe,  if  we  be  required  thereunto  by  them.  In  witnesse
whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  to  bee  made
patents.  Witnes  our  selves  at  Westminster,  the  six-
teenth of  April,  in  the  second  yere  our  reigne.

158

ROBERT THORNE'S DECLARATION

A  declaration  of  the  Indies  and  lands  discovered,
and  subdued  unto  the  Emperour,  and  the  king
of  Portingal :  And  also  of  other  partes  of  the
Indies  and  rich  countries  to  be  discovered,
which  the  worshipfull  M.  Robert  Thorne
merchant  of  London  (who  dwelt  long  in  the
citie  of  Sivil  in  Spaine)  exhorted  king  Henrie
the  eight  to  take  in  hand.

MOST  EXCELLENT  PRINCE,

Xperience  prooveth  that  naturally  all
princes  bee  desirous  to  extend  and  en-
large their  dominions  and  kingdomes.
Wherefore  it  is  not  to  be  marveiled,  to
see  them  every  day  procure  the  same,  not
regarding  any  cost,  perill,  and  labour,
that  may  thereby  chance,  but  rather  it  is
to  be  marvelled,  if  there  be  any  prince  content  to  live
quiet  with  his  owne  dominions.  For  surely  the  people
would  thinke  he  lacketh  the  noble  courage  and  spirit
of  all  other.

The  world  knoweth  that  the  desires  of  Princes  have
bene  so  fervent  to  obtaine  their  purpose,  that  they  have
adventured  and  prooved  things  to  mans  conjecture  im-
possible, the  which  they  have  made  possible,  and  also
things  difficult  have  made  facill :  and  thus  to  obtaine
their  purpose,  have  in  maner  turned  up  and  downe  the
whole  world  so  many  times,  that  the  people  inhabiting
in  the  farthest  regions  of  the  Occident  have  pursued  with
great  distresse,  labours  and  perils,  to  penetrate  and  enter
into  the  farthest  regions  of  the  Orient :  and  in  likewise
those  people  of  the  said  parts  of  the  Orient  have  had
no  lesse  labour  and  desire  to  enter  and  penetrate  into
the  farthest  land  of  the  Occident,  and  so  following  their
purchase  have  not  ceased  untill  they  could  passe  no
farther  by  reason  of  the  great  seas.

159

A.D.

1527-

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

This  naturall  inclination  is  cause,  that  scarsely  it  may
be  said,  there  is  any  kingdome  stable,  nor  king  quiet,
but  that  his  owne  imagination,  or  other  princes  his
neighbours  doe  trouble  him.  God  and  nature  hath  pro-
vided to  your  Grace,  and  to  your  gracious  progenitors,
this  Realme  of  England,  and  set  it  in  so  fruitfull  a  place,
and  within  such  limites,  that  it  should  seeme  to  be  a
place  quiet  and  aparted  from  all  the  foresayd  desire.
One  speciall  cause  is,  for  that  it  is  compassed  with  the
Sea :  by  reason  therof  it  seemes,  this  notwithstanding,
their  desires  and  noble  courages  have  beene  most  com-
monly like  unto  others :  and  with  marveilous  great
labours,  costes  and  perils,  they  have  traveiled  and  passed
the  Seas,  making  warre,  not  onely  with  Kings  and
dominions  nigh  neighbours,  but  also  with  them  of  farre
countries,  and  so  have  woonne  and  conquered  many  rich
and  fayre  dominions,  and  amplified  this  your  Graces
Realme  with  great  victory  and  glory.  And  also  now
of  late  your  Grace  having  like  courage  and  desire,
and  not  without  just  cause,  to  enlarge  this  your
kingdome, and demaund your limits and tribute of

[I.  213.]  the  French  king,  which  at  that  present  he  restrained,
your  Grace  in  person  passed  with  a  great  power  into
France,  putting  your  Graces  person  to  great  paine  and
labour,  and  without  doubt  victoriously  you  had  con-
quered the  sayd  Realme  of  France,  as  ye  began,  if  your
adversary  had  not  reconciled  himselfe,  and  knowledged
your  Graces  right  and  title :  and  so  promised  truely  to
pay  tribute  then  due,  &  fulfill  your  request  in  all
things,  and  also  desired  your  Grace  for  peace,  the  which
of  your  clemencie  you  could  not  refuse.

Now  I  considering  this  your  noble  courage  and  desire,
and  also  perceiving  that  your  Grace  may  at  your  pleasure,
to  your  greater  glory,  by  a  godly  meane,  with  little  cost,
perill,  or  labour  to  your  Grace  or  any  of  your  subjects,
amplifie  and  inrich  this  your  sayd  Realme,  I  know  it  is

J  secrete,  my  bounden  duety  to  manifest  this  secret  unto  your
Grace, which hitherto,  as I suppose,  hath beene hid :

160

ROBERT  THORNE'S DECLARATION  ad.

1527-
which  is,  that  with  a  small  number  of  ships  there  may

bee  discovered  divers  New  lands  and  kingdomes,  in  the

which  without  doubt  your  Grace shall  winne  perpetuall

glory, and your subjectes infinite profite. To which

places  there  is  left  one  way  to  discover,  which  is  into  the  The  discovery

North : for  that  of  the  foure  partes of  the  worlde, it  °f^^^  ^'"'^'^•

seemeth three parts are discovered by other Princes.

For out  of  Spaine they  have  discovered all  the  Indies

and  Seas  Occidentall,  and  out  of  Portingall  all  the  Indies

and  Seas  Orientall : so  that  by  this part of  the  Orient

&  Occident,  they  have compassed  the  world. For  the

one  of  them  departing  toward  the  Orient,  and  the  other

toward  the  Occident,  met  againe  in  the  course  or  way  of

the middest  of  the day,  and so  then  was  discovered  a

great  part  of  the  same  Seas  and  coastes  by  the  Spaniards.

So  that  now  rest  to  be  discovered  the  sayd  North  parts,

the  which  it  seemeth  to  mee,  is  onely  your  charge  and

duety. Because the situation of  this  your Realme is

thereunto  neerest  and  aptest  of  all  other : and  also  for

that  you  have  II  already  taken  it  in  hand. And  in  mine  \\By  Sebastian

opinion it  will not seeme well to leave  so great  and  Cabot  and  sir

profitable  an  enterprise,  seeing  it  may  so  easily  and  with  ^^  "the^eijit

so  little  cost,  labour,  and  danger,  be followed and  ob-  yere  of  his

tayned  :  though  heretofore  your  Grace  hath  made  thereof  reigne.

a proofe,  & found  not the  commodity  thereby  as  you  And  this  is  the

trusted,  at this time it shall be no impediment. For  ^"J^S^^P^^f
1  1  -11  T r 1  •  1  of  by  Gonsaho

there may  be now  provided remedies tor things, then  Om^o,  that

lacked,  and  the  inconveniences  and  lets remooved,  that  cametoS.Do-

then  were  cause  that  your  Graces  desire  tooke  no fiill  ""^gf^-

effect,  which  is,  the  courses  to  be  changed,  &  followed

the  foresaid  new  courses. And  concerning  the  mariners,

shippes,  and provision,  an order may be devised and

taken  meete  and  convenient,  much  better  then hitherto.

By reason  wherof,  and  by  Gods  grace,  no doubt  your

purpose  shall  take  effect. Surely  the  cost  herein  will  be

nothing,  in  comparison  to  the  great  profit. The  labour

is  much  lesse,  yea  nothing  at  all,  where  so  great  honour

and  glory  is  hoped  for :  and  considering  well  the  courses,

II  161  L

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527.

truely the danger & way is shorter to us, then toi
Spaine  or  Portingall,  as  by  evident  reasons  appereth.
Note.  And  now  to  declare  something  of  the  commodity  andi

utilitie  of  this  Navigation  and  discoverie :  it  is  very  cleere
and  certaine,  that  the  Seas  that  commonly  men  say,
without  great  danger,  difficulty  and  perill,  yea  rather  it
is  impossible  to  passe,  that  those  same  Seas  be  navigable
and  without  anie  such  danger,  but  that  shippes  may
passe  and  have  in  them  perpetuall  clerenesse  of  the  day
without  any  darkenesse  of  the  night :  which  thing  is  a
great  commoditie  for  the  navigants,  to  see  at  all  times:
round  about  them,  as  well  the  safegards  as  dangers,  and
how  great  difference  it  is  betweene  the  commoditie  and
perils  of  other  which  leese  the  most  part  of  every  foure
and  twentie  houres  the  said  light,  and  goe  in  darkenesse
groping  their  way,  I  thinke  there  is  none  so  ignorant
but  perceiveth  this  more  plainely,  then  it  can  be  ex-
pressed. Yea  what  a  vantage  shal  your  Graces  subjects
have  also  by  this  light  to  discover  the  strange  lands,
countries,  and  coastes  ?  For  if  they  that  be  discovered,
to  saile  by  them  in  darkenesse  is  with  great  danger,  much
more  then  the  coastes  not  discovered  be  daungerous  to
travell  by  night  or  in  darkenesse.  Yet  these  dangers
or  darkenesse  hath  not  letted  the  Spanyards  and  Por-
tingals  and  other,  to  discover  many  unknowen  Realmes
to  their  great  perill.  Which  considered  (and  that  your
Graces  subjects  may  have  the  same  light)  it  will  seeme
your  Graces  subjects  to  be  without  activity  or  courage,
in  leaving  to  doe  this  glorious  and  noble  enterprise.  For
they  being  past  this  litle  way  which  they  named  so
dangerous,  (which  may  be  two  or  three  leagues  before
Navigation  they  come  to  the  Pole,  and  as  much  more  after  they
under  the  Pole,  passe  the  Pole)  it  is  cleere,  that  from  thence  foorth  the
seas  and  landes  are  as  temperate  as  in  these  partes,  and
that  then  it  may  be  at  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the
mariners,  to  choose  whether  they  will  sayle  by  the  coastes,
that  be  colde,  temperate  or  hote.  For  they  being  past  the
Pole,  it  is  plaine,  they  may  decline  to  what  part  they  list.

162

ROBERT  THORNE'S DECLARATION  ad.

1527-
If  they  will goe  toward the Orient,  they  shall  injoy  Tartaria.
the regions of  all the Tartarians that extend toward
the  midday,  and from thence they may goe  and  pro-
ceede to the  land of  the Chinas,  and from thence to  China.
the  land  of  Cathaio  Orientall,  which  is  of  all  the  maine
land most Orientall that can be reckoned from our
habitation. And  if  from  thence  they  doe  continue  their
navigation,  following  the  coasts  that  returne  toward  the
Occident,  they shall  fall in with Malaca, and so with
all the Indies  which we call Orientall, and following  [I.  214.]
the way, may returne hither by the Cape of  Buona
Speransa : and thus they shall compasse the whole
worlde. And if they will take their course after
they  be past  the  Pole,  toward  the  Occident,  they  shall
goe  in  the  backe side  of  the new found land, which  Newfound
of  late  was discovered by your Graces  subjects,  untill  '^^'^  ^^^~
they  come to the backe side and South Seas of  the  ^^gn^j^
Indies Occidentall. And so continuing their voyage
they  may  returne thorow the streight  of Magellan to
this countrey,  and  so  they  compasse  also  the  world  by
that  way : and if  they  goe this third  way, and after
they be past the Pole, goe right toward the Pole
Antarctike, and then decline toward the lands and
Islands situated  between the Tropikes,  and under  the
Equinoctiall,  without doubt they shall finde there the
richest landes and Islands of the world of golde,
precious stones,  balmes,  spices,  and other thinges that
we here esteeme most : which come out of strange
countries,  and  may  returne  the  same  way.

By  this  it  appeareth,  your  Grace  hath  not  onely  a
great  advantage  of  the  riches,  but  also  your  subjects
shall  not  travell  halfe  of  the  way  that  other  doe,  which
goe  round  about  as  aforesayd.

[The
163

A.D.

1527.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  booke  made  by  the  right  worshipful  M.
Robert  Thorne  in  the  yeere  1527.  in  Sivil,
to  Doctour  Ley,  Lord  ambassadour  for  king
Henry  the  eight,  to  Charles  the  Emperour,
being  an  information  of  the  parts  of  the
world,  discovered  by  him  and  the  king  of
Portingal  :  and  also  of  the  way  to  the
Moluccaes  by  the  North.

Ight  noble  and  reverend  in  &c.  I  have
received  your  letters,  and  have  procured
and  sent  to  know  of  your  servant,  who,
your  Lordship  wrote,  should  be  sicke  in
Merchena.  I  cannot  there  or  els  where
heare  of  him,  without  he  be  returned  to
you,  or  gone  to  S.  Lucar,  and  shipt.
I  cannot  judge  but  that  of  some  contagious  sicknesse
hee  died,  so  that  the  owner  of  the  house  for  defaming
his  house  would  bury  him  secretly,  and  not  be  knowen
of  it.  For  such  things  have  often  times  happened  in
this  countrey.

Also  to  write  unto  your  Lordshippe  of  the  new  trade
of  Spicery  of  the  Emperour,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that
the  Islands  are  fertile  of  Cloves,  Nutmegs,  Mace,  and
Cinnamom :  and  that  the  said  Islands,  with  other  there
about,  abound  with  golde.  Rubies,  Diamondes,  Balasses,
Granates,  Jacincts,  and  other  stones  &  pearles,  as  all
other  lands,  that  are  under  and  neere  the  Equinoctial!.
For  we  see,  where  nature  giveth  any  thing,  she  is  no
nigard.  For  as  with  us  and  other,  that  are  aparted
from  the  said  Equinoctiall,  our  mettals  be  Lead,  Tinne,
and  Iron,  so  theirs  be  Gold,  Silver,  and  Copper.  And
as  our  fruits  and  graines  bee  Apples,  Nuts,  and  Corne,
so  theirs  be  Dates,  Nutmegs,  Pepper,  Cloves,  and  other
Spices.  And  as  we  have  Jeat,  Amber,  Cristall,  Jasper,
and  other  like  stones,  so  have  they  Rubies,  Diamonds,

164

ROBERT  THORNE'S  BOOK  a.d.

1527-
BalasseSj  Saphyres,  Jacincts,  and  other  like.  And  though
some  say  that  of  such  precious  mettals,  graines,  or  kind
of  spices,  and  precious  stones,  the  abundance  and  quan-
tity is  nothing  so  great,  as  our  mettals,  fruits  or  stones
above  rehearsed :  yet  if  it  be  well  considered,  how  the
quantitie  of  the  earth  under  the  Equinoctiall  to  both
the  Tropicall  lines,  (in  which  space  is  found  the  sayd
Golde,  spices  and  precious  stones)  is  as  much  in  quantity,
as  almost  all  the  earth  from  the  Tropickes  to  both  the
Poles ;  it  cannot  be  denied  but  there  is  more  quantity  of
the  sayd  mettals,  fruites,  spices,  and  precious  stones,  then
there  is  of  the  other  mettals  and  other  things  before
rehearsed.  And  I  see  that  the  preciousnes  of  these
things  is  measured  after  the  distance  that  is  between  us,
and  the  things  that  we  have  appetite  unto.  For  in  this
navigation  of  the  Spicerie  was  discovered,  that  these
Islands  nothing  set  by  golde,  but  set  more  by  a  knife
and  a  nayle  of  iron,  then  by  his  quantitie  of  Golde  :
and  with  reason,  as  the  thing  more  necessary  for  mans
service.  And  I  doubt  not  but  to  them  should  be  as
precious  our  corne  and  seedes,  if  they  might  have  them,
as  to  us  their  spices :  &  likewise  the  pieces  of  glasse
that  here  we  have  counterfeited  are  as  precious  to  them,
as  to  us  their  stones :  which  by  experience  is  scene  daylie
by  them  that  have  trade  thither.  This  of  the  riches
of  those  countries  is  sufficient.

Touching  that  your  Lordship  wrote,  whether  it  may  Doctor  Leys
bee  profitable  to  the  Emperor  or  no  ?  it  may  be  without  lexers.
doubt  of  great  profite :  if,  as  the  king  of  Portingal  doth,
he  would  become  a  merchant,  and  provide  shippes  and
their  lading,  and  trade  thither  alone,  and  defend  the  trade
of  these  Islands  for  himselfe.  But  other  greater  busi-
nesse  withholdeth  him  from  this.  But  still,  as  now  it  is
begunne  to  be  occupied,  it  would  come  to  much.  For
the  shippes  comming  in  safetie,  there  would  thither  many
every  yere,  of  which  to  the  Emperour  is  due  of  all  the
wares  and  jewels  that  come  from  thence  the  fift  part
for  his  custome cleare  without  any  cost. And  besides

. 165

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527-

[I.  215.]  this  hee  putteth  in  every  flote  a  certaine  quantitie  of
money,  of  which  hee  enjoyeth  of  the  gaines  pound
This  was  the  and  pounds  Hke  as  other  adventurers  doe.  In  a  fleete
fleete  wherein  q£  three  shippes  and  a  Caravel  that  went  from  this  citie
covere/the  ^.rmed  by  the  marchants  of  it,  which  departed  in  Aprill
river  of  Plate,  last  past,  1  and  my  partener  have  one  thousand  foure
1526.  hundred duckets that  we employed  in  the  sayd  fleete,

principally  for  that  two  English  men,  friends  of  mine,
which  are  somewhat  learned  in  Cosmographie,  should
goe  in  the  same  shippes,  to  bring  me  certaine  relation
of  the  situation  of  the  countrey,  and  to  be  expert  in
the  navigation  of  those  seas,  and  there  to  have  informa-
tions of  many  other  things,  and  advise  that  I  desire  to
knowe  especially.  Seeing  in  these  quarters  are  shippes,
and  mariners  of  that  countrey,  and  cardes  by  which
they  saile,  though  much  unlike  ours,  that  they  should
procure  to  have  the  said  cards,  and  learne  how  they
understand  them,  and  especially  to  know  what  naviga-
tion they  have  for  those  Islands  Northwards,  and
Northeastward.
'^ote.  For  if  from  the  sayd  Islands  the  sea  did  extend,  without

interposition  of  land,  to  saile  from  the  North  point  to
the Northeast poynt one thousand seven hundred or
one  thousand  eight  hundred  leagues,  they  should  come
The  Newe to  the  New  found  Islands  that  we  discovered,  and  so  we
found  Islands ghould be neerer to the sayd Spicerie by  almost two

discovered  by ,  . ,  ,  1 t^  1 1  •  r

the  English  thousand  leagues  then  the  Emperour,  or  the  kmg  or
Portingal  are.  And  to  advise  your  Lordship  whether
of  these  Spiceries  of  the  king  of  Portingal  or  the
Emperours  is  neerer,  and  also  of  the  titles  that  either
of  them  hath,  and  howe  our  New  found  lands  are  parted
from  it,  (for  that  by  writing  without  some  demonstration,
it  were  hard  to  give  any  declaration  of  it)  I  have  caused
A  Mappe  of  that  your  Lordship  shall  receive  herewith  a  little  Mappe
the  zvor/d.  ^^  Carde  of  the  world :  the  which,  I  feare  me,  shall  put
your  Lordship  to  more  labour  to  understand,  then  me
to  make  it,  onely  for  that  it  is  made  in  so  litle  roome
that  it  cannot  be  but  obscurely  set  out,  that is  desired

166

ROBERT  THORNE'S  BOOK  ad.

1527-
to  be  seene  in  it,  and  also  for  that  I  am  in  this  science
little  expert :  Yet  to  remedy  in  part  this  difficulty,  it  is
necessary  to  declare  to  your  Lordship  my  intent,  with
which  I  trust  you  shall  perceive  in  this  Card  part  of
your  desire,  if,  for  that  I  cannot  expresse  mine  intent,
with  my  declaration  I  doe  not  make  it  more  obscure.

First,  your  Lordship  knoweth  that  the  Cosmographers
have  divided  the  earth  by  360  degrees  in  latitude,  and
as  many  in  longitude,  under  the  which  is  comprehended
all  the  roundnes  of  the  earth  :  the  latitude  being  divided
into  foure  quarters,  ninetie  degrees  amount  to  every
quarter,  which  they  measure  by  the  altitude  of  the  Poles,
that  is  the  North  and  South  starres,  being  from  the  line
Equinoctiall  till  they  come  right  under  the  North  starre
the  said  ninetie  degrees :  and  as  much  from  the  sayd
line  Equinoctiall  to  the  South  starre  be  other  ninety
degrees.  And  as  much  more  is  also  from  either  of  the
sayd  starres  agayne  to  the  Equinoctiall.  Which  imagined
to  bee  round,  is  soone  perceived  thus,  360  degrees  of
latitude  to  be  consumed  in  the  said  foure  quarters  of
ninetie  degrees  a  quarter :  so  that  this  latitude  is  the
measure  of  the  worlde  from  North  to  South,  and  from
South  to  North.  And  the  longitude,  in  which  are  also
counted  other  360,  is  counted  from  West  to  East,  or
from  East  to  West,  as  in  the  Card  is  set.

The  sayd  latitude  your  Lordship  may  see  marked  To  know  the
and  divided  in  the  ende  of  this  Card  on  the  left  hand :  ^^'^^«'^'^^-
so  that  if  you  would  know  in  what  degrees  of  latitude
any  region  or  coast  standeth,  take  a  compasse,  and  set
the  one  foot  of  the  same  in  the  Equinoctial  line  right
against  the  said  region,  &  apply  the  other  foote  of  the
compasse  to  the  said  region  or  coast,  &  then  set  the
sayd  compasse  at  the  end  of  the  Card,  where  the
degrees  are  divided.  And  the  one  foote  of  the  compasse
standing  in  the  line  Equinoctial,  the  other  will  shew
in  the  scale  the  degrees  of  altitude  or  latitude  that  the
said  region  is  in.  Also  the  longitude  of  the  world  I
have  set  out  in  the  nether  part  of  the  Card,  conteining

167

A.n.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527.

also  360  degrees:  which  begin  to  be  counted  after
Ptoleme  and  other  Cosmographers  from  an  headland
called  Capo  Verde,  which  is  over  against  a  little  crosse
made  in  the  part  Occidental,  where  the  division  of  the
degrees  beginneth,  and  endeth  in  the  same  Capo  Verde.
To  know  the  Now  to  know  in  what  longitude  any  land  is,  your
longtiiides.  Lordship  must  take  a  ruler  or  a  compasse,  and  set  the
one  foot  of  the  compasse  upon  the  land  or  coast  whose
longitude  you  would  know,  and  extend  the  other
foot  of  the  compasse  to  the  next  part  of  one  of  the
transversall  lines  in  the  Orientall  or  Occidental  part  :
which  done,  set  the  one  foot  of  the  compasse  in  the
said  transversal  line  at  the  end  of  the  nether  scale,
the  scale  of  longitude,  and  the  other  foot  sheweth  the
degree  of  longitude  that  the  region  is  in.  And  your
Lordship  must  understand  that  this  Card,  though  little,
conteineth  the  universall  whole  world  betwixt  two
collaterall  lines,  the  one  in  the  Occidentall  part  descendeth
perpendicular  upon  the  175  degree,  &  the  other  in
the  Orientall  on  the  170  degree,  whose  distance
measureth  the  scale  of  longitude.  And  that  which  is
without  the  two  said  transversall  lines,  is  onely  to  shew
how  the  Orientall  part  is  joined  with  the  Occident,  and
Occident  with  the  Orient.  For  that  that  is  set  without
the  line  in  the  Oriental  part,  is  the  same  that  is  set
within  the  other  line  in  the  Occidentall  part :  and  that
that  is  set  without  the  line  in  the  Occidentall  part,  is
the  same  that  is  set  within  the  line  in  the  Orientall
[I.  216.]  part,  to  shew  that  though  this  figure  of  the  world  in
plaine  or  flatte  seemeth  to  have  an  end,  yet  one  imagining
that  this  sayd  Card  were  set  upon  a  round  thing,
where  the  endes  should  touch  by  the  lines,  it  would
plainely  appeare  howe  the  Orient  part  joyneth  with  the
Occident,  as  there  without  the  lines  it  is  described  and
figured.

And  for  more  declaration  of  the  said  Card,  your
Lordship  shall  understand,  that  beginning  on  the  part
Occidental within the line, the first land that is set

168

ROBERT  THORNE'S BOOK  ad.

1527-
out,  is  the  maine  land  and  Islands  of  the  Indies  of
the  Emperour.  Which  maine  land  or  coast  goeth
Northward,  and  finisheth  in  the  land  that  we  found,
which  is  called  here  Terra  de  Labrador.  So  that  it
appeareth  the  sayd  land  that  we  found,  and  the  Indies
to  be  all  one  maine  land.

The  sayd  coast  from  the  sayd  Indies  Southward,  as
by  the  Card  your  Lordshippe  may  see,  commeth  to  a
certaine  straight  Sea,  called  Estrecho  de  todos  Santos :  ^ow  called
by  which  straight  Sea  the  Spaniards  goe  to  the  Spiceries,  ^  straight  of
as  I  shall  declare  more  at  large  :  the  which  straight
Sea  is  right  against  three  hundred  fifteene  degrees  of
longitude,  and  is  of  latitude  or  altitude  from  the  Equi-
noctiall  three  and  fifty  degrees.  The  first  land  from
the  sayd  beginning  of  the  Card  toward  the  Orient  are
certaine  Islands  of  the  Canaries,  and  Islandes  of  Capo
verde.  But  the  first  maine  land  next  to  the  line  Equi-
noctial is  the  sayd  Capo  verde,  and  from  thence  North-
ward by  the  straight  of  this  sea  of  Italie.  And  so
followeth  Spayne,  France,  Flanders,  Almaine,  Denmarke,
and  Norway,  which  is  the  highest  parte  toward  the
North.  And  over  against  Flanders  are  our  Islands  of
England  and  Ireland.  Of  the  landes  and  coastes  within
the  streights  I  have  set  out  onely  the  Regions,  dividing
them  by  lines  of  their  limits,  by  which  plainely  I
thinke  your  Lordship  may  see,  in  what  situation  everie
region  is,  and  of  what  highnesse,  and  with  what  regions
it  is  joyned.  I  doe  thinke  few  are  left  out  of  all  Europe.
In  the  parts  of  Asia  and  AiFrica  I  could  not  so  wel  make
the  sayd  divisions  :  for  that  they  be  not  so  wel  knowen,
nor  need  not  so  much.  This  I  write  because  in  the
said  Card  be  made  the  said  lines  &  strikes,  that  your
Lordship  should  understand  wherefore  they  doe  serve.
Also  returning  to  the  foresaid  Capo  verde,  the  coast
goeth  Southward  to  a  Cape  called  Capo  de  buona
speransa  :  which  is  right  over  against  the  60.  &  6^.
degree  of  longitude.  And  by  this  Cape  go  the  Portingals
to their Spicerie. For from this Cape toward the

169

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527-

Orient,  is  the  land  of  Calicut,  as  your  Lordship
may  see  in  the  headland  over  against  the  130.  degree.
From  the  sayd  Cape  of  Buona  speransa  the  coast
returneth  toward  the  line  Equinoctial,  and  passing  forth
entreth  the  red  sea,  &  returning  out,  entreth  again
into  the  gulfe  of  Persia,  and  returneth  toward  the
Equinoctiall  line,  till  that  it  commeth  to  the  headland
called  Calicut  aforesayd,  and  from  thence  the  coast
making  a  gulfe,  where  is  the  river  of  Ganges,  returneth
toward  the  line  to  a  headland  called  Malaca,  where  is
the  principall  Spicerie :  &  from  this  Cape  returneth
and  maketh  a  great  gulfe,  and  after  the  coast  goeth
right  toward  the  Orient,  and  over  against  this  last  gulfe
and  coast  be  many  Islands,  which  be  Islandes  of  the
Spiceries  of  the  Emperour.  Upon  which  the  Portingals
and  he  be  at  variance.
Note.  The  sayd  coast  goeth  toward  the  Orient,  and  endeth
right  against  the  155.  degrees,  and  after  returneth
toward  the  Occident  Northward :  which  coast  not  yet
plainely  knowen,  I  may  joine  to  the  New  found  lande
found  by  us,  that  I  spake  of  before.  So  that  I  finish
with  this  briefe  declaration  of  the  Card  aforesayd.  Well
I  know  I  should  also  have  declared  how  the  coasts
within  the  straights  of  the  Sea  of  Italie  runne.  It  is
playne  that  passing  the  streights  on  the  North  side  of
that  Sea  after  the  coast  of  Granado,  and  with  that
which  pertaines  to  Spaine,  is  the  coast  of  that  which
France  hath  in  Italie.  And  then  foUoweth  in  one
piece  all  Italie,  which  land  hath  an  arme  of  the  Sea,
with  a  gulfe  which  is  called  Mare  Adriaticum.  And
in  the  bottome  of  this  gulfe  is  the  citie  of  Venice.
And  on  the  other  part  of  the  sayd  gulfe  is  Sclavonia,
and  next  Grecia,  then  the  streits  of  Constantinople,  and
then  the  sea  called  Euxinus,  which  is  within  the  sayd
streights :  and  comming  out  of  the  sayd  streights,
foUoweth  Turcia  major  (though  now  on  both  sides
it  is  called  Turcia.)  And  so  the  coast  runneth  South-
ward to  Syria,  and  over  against  the  sayd  Turcia  are  the

170

ROBERT  THORNE'S  BOOK  ad.

1527-
Islands  of  Rhodes,  Candie,  and  Cyprus.  And  over
against  Italie  are  the  Islands  of  Sicilia  and  Sardinia.
And  over  against  Spaine  is  Majorca  and  Minorca.  In  the
ende  of  the  gulfe  of  Syria  is  Judea.  And  from  thence
returneth  the  coast  toward  the  Occident,  till  it  commeth
to  the  streights  where  we  began,  which  all  is  the  coast
of  Affrike  and  Barbarie.  Also  your  Lordship  shall
understand  that  the  coastes  of  the  Sea  throughout  all
the  world,  I  have  coloured  with  yellow,  for  that  it
may  appeare  that  all  that  is  within  the  line  coloured
yellow,  is  to  be  imagined  to  be  maine  land  or  Islands :
and  all  without  the  line  so  coloured  to  bee  Sea :  whereby
it  is  easie  and  light  to  know  it.  Albeit  in  this  little
roome  any  other  description  would  rather  have  made
it  obscure  then  cleere.  And  the  sayd  coasts  of  the  Sea
are  all  set  justly  after  the  maner  and  forme  as  they  lie,
as  the  navigation  approveth  them  throughout  all  the
Card,  save  onely  the  coastes  and  Isles  of  the  Spicerie
of  the  Emperour  which  is  from  over  against  the  160.
to  the  215.  degrees  of  longitude,  For  these  coastes
and  situations  of  the  Islands,  every  of  the  Cosmo-
graphers  and  pilots  of  Portingal  &  Spayne  do  set  after  [I.  217.]
their  purpose.  The  Spaniards  more  towards  the  Orient,
because  they  should  appeare  to  appertain  to  the  Em-
perour :  &  the  Portingals  more  toward  the  Occident,
for  that  they  should  fal  within  their  jurisdiction.  So
that  the  pilots  and  navigants  thither,  which  in  such
cases  should  declare  the  truth,  by  their  Industrie  do
set  them  falsly  every  one  to  favour  his  prince.  And
for  this  cause  can  be  no  certaine  situation  of  that  coast
and  Islands,  till  this  difference  betwixt  them  be  verified.
Now  to  come  to  the  purpose  of  your  Lordships  demaund  Doctor  Leys
touching  the  difference  between  the  Emperour  and  the  ^^"^^"'^^
king  of  Portingal,  to  understand  it  better,  I  must  declare
the  beginning  of  this  discoverie.  Though  peradventure
your  Lordship  may  say  that  in  that  I  have  written
ought  of  purpose,  I  fall  in  the  proverbe,  A  gemino  ovo
bellum  :  But  your  Lordship  commanded  me  to  be  large,

171

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527-

and  I  take  licence  to  be  prolixious,  and  shalbe  perad-
venture  tedious,  but  your  Lordship  knoweth  that  Nihil
ignorantia  verbosius.

In  the  yeere  1484  the  king  of  Portingal  minded  to
arme  certaine  Carvels  to  discover  this  Spicerie.  Then
forasmuch  as  he  feared  that  being  discovered,  every
other  prince  woulde  sende  and  trade  thither,  so  that
the  cost  and  perill  of  discovering  should  be  his,  and
the  profite  common :  wherefore  first  hee  gave  knowledge
of  this  his  minde  to  all  princes  Christened,  saying  that
hee  would  seeke  amongst  the  infidels  newe  possessions
of  regions,  and  therefore  would  make  a  certaine  armie :
and  that  if  any  of  them  would  helpe  in  the  cost  of
the  sayd  armie,  he  should  enjoy  his  part  of  the  profite
or  honour  that  should  come  of  it.  And  as  then  this
discovering  was  holden  for  a  strange  thing  and  uncertaine.
Nowe  they  say,  that  all  the  Princes  of  Christendome
answered,  that  they  would  be  no  part  of  such  an  armie,
nor  yet  of  the  profit  that  might  come  of  it.  After  the
which  he  gave  knowledge  to  the  Pope  of  his  purpose,  and
of  the  answere  of  all  the  Princes,  desiring  him  that
seeing  that  none  would  helpe  in  the  costes,  that  he  would
judge  all  that  should  bee  found  and  discovered  to  be  of
his  jurisdiction,  and  commannd  that  none  other  princes
The  Pope  re-  should  intermeddle  therewith.  The  Pope  sayd  not  as
prehended.  Christ  saith,  Quis  me  constituit  judicem  inter  vos  .^^  He
did  not  refuse,  but  making  himselfe  as  Lord  and  Judge  of
all,  not  onely  granted  that  all  that  should  be  discovered
from  Orient  to  Occident,  should  be  the  kings  of  Portin-
gal, but  also,  that  upon  great  censures  no  other  Prince
should  discover  but  he.  And  if  they  did,  all  to  bee  the
kings  of  Portingal.  So  he  armed  a  fleete,  and  in  the
yeere  1497  were  discovered  the  Islands  of  Calicut,  from
whence  is  brought  all  the  spice  he  hath.

After  this  in  the  yere  1492  the  king  of  Spaine  willing
to  discover  lands  toward  the  Occident  without  making
any  such  diligence,  or  taking  licence  of  the  king  of  Por-
tingal, armed  certaine  Carvels,  and  then  discovered this

172

ROBEUT  THORNE'S BOOK  a.d.

1527.
India  Occidentall,  especially  two  Islands  of  the  sayd  India,
that  in  this  Card  I  set  forth,  naming  the  one  la  Dominica,
and  the  other  Cuba,  and  brought  certaine  golde  from
thence.  Of  the  which  when  the  king  of  Portingal  had
knowledge,  he  sent  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  requiring  him
to  give  him  the  sayd  Islands.  For  that  by  the  sentence
of  the  Pope  all  that  should  be  discovered  was  his,  and
that  hee  should  not  proceede  further  in  the  discoverie
without  his  licence.  And  at  the  same  time  it  seemeth
that  out  of  Castil  into  Portingal  had  gone  for  feare  of
burning  infinite  number  of  Jewes  that  were  expelled  out
of  Spaine,  for  that  they  would  not  turne  to  be  Christians,
and  carried  with  them  infinite  number  of  golde  and  silver.
So  that  it  seemeth  that  the  king  of  Spaine  answered,  that
it  was  reason  that  the  king  of  Portingal  asked,  and  that
to  be  obedient  to  that  which  the  Pope  had  decreed,  he
would  give  him  the  sayd  Islands  of  the  Indies.  Nowe
for  as  much  as  it  was  decreed  betwixt  the  sayde  kings,
that  none  should  receive  the  others  subjects  fugitives,  nor
their  goods,  therfore  the  king  of  Portingal  should  pay
and  returne  to  the  king  of  Spaine  a  million  of  golde  or
more,  that  the  Jewes  had  caryed  out  of  Spaine  to  Por-
tingal, &  that  in  so  doing  he  would  give  these  Islands,
and  desist  from  any  more  discovering.  And  not  fulfilling
this,  he  would  not  onely  not  give  these  Islands,  but  pro-
cure to  discover  more  where  him  thought  best.  It  seem-
eth that  the  king  of  Portingal  would  not,  or  could  not
with  his  ease  pay  this  money.  And  so  not  paying,  that
he  could  not  let  the  king  of  Spaine  to  discover  :  so  that
he  enterprised  not  toward  the  Orient  where  he  had  begun
&  found  the  Spicerie.  And  consented  to  the  king  of
Spaine,  that  touching  this  discovering  they  should  divide
the  worlde  betweene  them  two.  And  that  all  that  should
be  discovered  from  Cape  Verde,  where  this  Card  begin-
neth  to  be  counted  in  the  degrees  of  longitude,  to  180
of  the  sayd  scale  of  longitude,  which  is  halfe  the  world
toward  the  Orient,  &  finisheth  in  this  Card  right  over
against  a  litle  crosse  made  at  the  said  180  degrees,  to  be

173

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527.

the  king  of  Portingals.  And  all  the  land  from  the  said
Crosse  towarde  the  Occident,  untill  it  joyneth  with  the
other  Crosse  in  the  Orient,  which  conteineth  the  other
hundreth  and  eightie  degrees,  that  is  the  other  halfe  of  the
worlde,  to  be  the  king  of  Spaines.  So  that  from  the  land
over  against  the  said  hundreth  &  eighty  degrees  untill  it
finish  in  the  three  hundred  and  sixtie  on  both  the  ends  of
the  Card,  is  the  jurisdiction  of  the  king  of  Spaine.
So  after  this  maner  they  divided  the  world  betweene:
them.  !

[I.  218.]  Now  for  that  these  Islands  of  Spicery  fall  neere  thei

terme  and  limites  betweene  these  princes  (for  as  by  the
sayd  Card  you  may  see  they  begin  from  one  hundred  and
sixtie  degrees  of  longitude,  and  ende  in  215)  it  seemeth
all  that  falleth  from  160  to  180  degrees,  should  be  of
Portingal  :  and  all  the  rest  of  Spaine.  And  for  that  their
Cosmographers  and  Pilots  coulde  not  agree  in  the  situ-^
ation  of  the  sayde  Islandes  (for  the  Portingals  set  them;
all  within  their  180  degrees,  and  the  Spaniards  set  them
all  without  :)  and  for  that  in  measuring,  all  the  Cosmo-
graphers of  both partes, or  what  other  that  ever  have

The  lon^tudes  bene  cannot  give  certaine  order  to  measure  the  longitude ;

hard  to  be ^f  ^^  worlde,  as  they  doe  of  the  latitude  :  for  that  there

joun ou . .^  ^^  starre  fixed  from  East  to  West,  as  are  the  starres  of
the  Poles  from  North  to  South,  but  all  mooveth  with  the
mooving divine  : no  maner can  bee  founde  howe  cer-  ]
tainely  it  may  bee  measured,  but  by  conjectures,  as  the '
Navigants  have  esteemed  the  way  they  have  gone. But
it  is  manifest  that  Spaine  had  the  situation  of  al  the  lands
from  Cape  Verde,  toward  the  Orient  of  ye  Portingals  to
their  180  degrees. And in  all  their  Cardes  they  never
hitherto  set  the  saide  Islands  within their  limitation  of
the  sayd 180  degrees,  (though  they  knewe  very  well  of
the  Islands,)  till  now  that  the  Spaniards  discovered  them.
And  it  is  knowen  that  the  king  of  Portingal had  trade
to  these  Islands  afore,  but  would  never  suffer  Portingal  to
2:0  thither  from  Calicut  :  for  so  much  as  he  knew  that  it
fell  out  of  his  dominion  : least by  going  thither  there

174

ROBERT THORNE'S BOOK  a.d.

1527.

might  come  some  knowledge  of  those  other  Islands  of
the  king  of  Spaine,  but  bought  the  cloves  of  Marchants
of  that  countrey,  that  brought  them  to  Calicut,  much
deerer  then  they  would  have  cost,  if  he  had  sent  for
them,  thinking  after  this  maner  it  would  abide  alwayes
secret.  And  now  that  it  is  discovered  he  sendes  and
keepes  the  Spaniards  from  the  trade  all  that  he  can.

Also  it  should  seeme  that  when  this  foresaid  consent  of
the  division  of  the  worlde  was  agreed  of  betweene  them,
the  king  of  Portingal  had  already  discovered  certaine
Islandes  that  lie  over  against  Cape  Verde,  and  also
certaine  part  of  the  maine  land  of  India  toward  the  South,
from  whence  he  fette  Brasill,  and  called  it  the  land  of
Brasil.  So  for  that  all  should  come  in  his  terme  and
limites,  hee  tooke  three  hundred  and  seventie  leagues
beyond  Cape  Verde:  and  after  this,  his  180  degrees,
being  his  part  of  the  worlde,  should  begin  in  the  Carde
right  over  against  the  340  degrees,  where  I  have  made  a
little  compasse  with  a  crosse,  and  should  finish  at  the  160
degree,  where  also  I  have  made  another  little  marke.
And  after  this  computation  without  any  controversie,  the
Islands  of  the  spicery  fal  out  of  the  Portingals  domin-
ation. So  that  nowe  the  Spaniards  say  to  the  Portingals,
that  if  they  would  beginne  their  180  degrees  from  the
sayde  Cape  Verde,  to  the  intent  they  should  extende
more  toward  the  Orient,  and  so  to  touch  those  Islandes
of  the  Spicerie  of  the  Emperour,  which  is  al  that  is
betweene  the  two  crosses  made  in  this  Card,  that  then  the
Islands  of  Cape  Verde  and  the  lande  of  Brasil  that  the
Portingals  nowe  obtaine,  is  out  of  the  sayd  limitation,
and  that  they  are  of  the  Emperours.  Or  if  their  180
degrees  they  count  from  the  370  leagues  beyond  the  said
Cape  Verde,  to  include  in  it  the  said  Islands  and  lands  of
Brasil,  then  plainely  appeareth  the  said  180  degrees
should  finish  long  before  they  come  to  these  Islands  of
the  Spicerie  of  the  Emperour  :  As  by  this  Carde  your
Lordship  may  see.  For  their  limits  should  begin  at  the
340  degrees  of  this  Carde,  and  ende  at  the  160  degrees,

175

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527-

where  I have  made  two  little  markes  of  the  compasse
with  crosses  in  them.

So  that  plainely  it  should  appeare  by  reason,  that  the
Portingals  should  leave  these  Islands  of  Cape  Verde  and
land  of  Brasil,  if  they  would  have  part  of  the  Spicerie  of
the  Emperours  :  or  els  holding  these,  they  have  no  part
there.  To  this  the  Portingals  say,  that  they  will  beginne
their  180  degrees  from  the  selfe  same  Cape  Verde  :  for
that  it  may  extende  so  much  more  toward  the  Orient,
and  touch  these  Islandes  of  the  Emperours  :  and  would
winne  these  Islandes  of  Cape  Verde  and  land  of  Brasil
neverthelesse,  as  a  thing  that  they  possessed  before  the
consent  of  this  limitation  was  made.

So  none  can  verely  tell  which  hath  the  best  reason.
They  be  not  yet  agreed,  Quare  sub  Judice  lis  est.

But  without  doubt  (by  all  conjectures  of  reason)  the
sayd  Islands  fall  all  without  the  limitation  of  Portingal,
and  pertaine  to  Spaine,  as  it  appeareth  by  the  most  part
of  all  the  Cardes  made  by  the  Portingals,  save  those
which  they  have  falsified  of  late  purposely.

But  now  touching  that  your  Lordship  wrote,  whether

that  which  we  discovered  toucheth  any  thing  the  foresayd

'Newfound coastes  :  once  it  appeareth  plainely,  that  the  Newefound

land  discove- j^j^^ ^j^^j.  ^g discovered,  is all a  maine land  with the

^Ensishmv I^^dies  Occidentall,  from  whence  the  Emperour  hath  all

the  gold  and  pearles  :  and  so  continueth  of  coast  more

then  5000  leagues  of  length,  as  by  this  Carde  appeareth.

For  from  the  said  New  lands  it  proceedeth  toward  the

Occident to  the  Indies,  and from the Indies  returneth

toward  the  Orient,  and  after  turneth  Southward  up  till  it

come  to  the  Straits  of  Todos  Santos,  which  I  reckon  to  be

more  then  5000  leagues.

Note.  So  that to  the  Indias it  should  seeme  that  we  have

[I.  219.] some  title,  at least that for  our  discovering  we  might

trade  thither  as  other  doe. But  all  this  is  nothing  neere

the  Spicerie.

Tosaileby  Now  then  if  from  the  sayd  New  found  lands  the  Sea  be

the  Pole.  navigable,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  sayling  Northward  and

176

/^RadusiSo.  dcmcrc3tionisPoraigilrafuaterris  ifto  ®  oppofitisincipiunt,actcrminaeiit  infjradu^  i«o.
^^hums  citts  vctdis  oncniem, fccudiini CDirputationcm Hilp.innrum.  Et (ic  infulac Tharfis  Si  OlUr dititli.
Oix videotur  extra  illorum  dcmcrcationcmoadtre.Pottugalcnfes  vcro  tuam  t'cuationcm  a  tcrris  il>o  (i  goo  A
oppoQ[isincipcrcaiunt,XtcrminareingTidusi8o.  hiiiuscarrf,vtvidcinuirprfdiaasin(irlasvtri'iq;aitin
gnc&gradus  iSo.dc.ncrcationis  Hilpaoooiin  a  priorc  ligno  ®  lecundvim  Hifp.iooium  copuiacioncm  Vcl
incipiuncapoflcriorcfeciindum  Porrugalcnfcs  vcrlusocciJejucm,5:  tcrmioanturin  gradus  160.  fecundum
Hilpanos,vcli3o.fccunduraPortugaleafcs.l;t(ic,licctin(iila: Tharfis ScOphirvidentiirattingcrc  Portugalcn-
la,tamcDio(ulc Capo  vcrdedifti, qui inirn  (upradiaadgua  ®  A  cadunr.videturomitteic.Etficclumia-
lulis  Capovcidc  retinae  voluat  Portugaltnfcs ,  ilUs  Thatlis  Sc Offic  uoti  poffunt  amngccc

'*.^is  is  the  forme  of  a  Mappe  fent  1  ?  1 7-  from  Siiiill  in  Spayne  by  maifter  Robert  Thotne
marchaunt.toDoaor  Ley  EinbairadourforkingHenryihcS.  10  Charles  the  Empctour.
Andalthoughiheiameintbisprcfenttimemayrcemerudc,  yet  I  haue fct it  out  >  be-
caufchisbookccouldcnotwellbcvndctftoodvrfthouttbe  fame.  The  imperfeftion  of
which  Mappemay  be  excufed  by  that  tyme.the  knowlcdgeof  Co&nographie  not  ihcnbe-
yng  cDCcedamoogourMarcbauntes,  asnowcicis.

ROBERT  THORNE'S BOOK  a.d.

1527-
passing  the  Pole,  descending  to  the  Equinoctial  line,  we
shall  hit  these  Islands,  and  it  should  be  a  much  shorter
way,  then  either  the  Spaniards  or  the  Portingals  have.
For  we  be  distant  from  the  Pole  but  thirty  and  nine
degrees,  and  from  the  Pole  to  the  Equinoctial!  be  ninetie,
the  which  added  together,  bee  an  hundred  twenty  and
nine  degrees,  leagues  2489.  and  miles  7440:  Where  we
should  find  these  Islands.  And  the  Navigation  of  the
Spaniards  to  the  Spicerie  is,  as  by  this  Carde  you  may
see,  from  Spaine  to  the  Islandes  of  Canarie,  and  from
these  Islandes  they  runne  over  the  line  Equinoctiall
Southwarde  to  the  Cape  of  the  maine  land  of  the  Indians,
called  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine,  and  from  this  Cape
Southwards  to  the  straites  of  Todos  Santos,  in  the  which  Or  the  straites
navigation  to  the  said  straites  is  1700.  or  1800  leagues  ;  V^^S^^»^-
and  from  these  Straites  being  past  them,  they  returne
towarde  the  line  Equinoctiall  to  the  Islands  of  Spicerie,
which  are  distant  from  the  saide  Straites  4200.  or  4300.
leagues.

The  navigation  of  the  Portingals  to  the  said  Islandes  is
departing  from  Portingall  Southward  towarde  the  Cape
Verde,  and  from  thence  to  another  Cape  passing  the  line
Equinoctial  called  Capo  de  bona  speransa,  and  from
Portingal  to  the  Cape  is  1800  leagues,  and  from  this
Cape  to  the  Islands  of  Spicerie  of  the  Emperour  is
2500.  leagues.

So  that  this  navigation  amounteth  all  to  4300.  leagues.
So  that  (as  afore  is  sayd,)  if  between  our  New  found  lands
or  Norway,  or  Island,  the  seas  toward  the  North  be  navig-
able, we  should  goe  to  these  Islands  a  shorter  way  by
more  then  2000.  leagues.

And  though  we  went  not  to  the  sayd  Islandes,  for  that  Note.
they  are  the  Emperours  or  kings  of  Portingal,  wee
shoulde  by  the  way  and  comming  once  to  the  line  Equi-
noctiall, finde  landes  no  lesse  riche  of  golde  and  Spicerie,
as  all  other  landes  are  under  the  sayd  line  Equinoctiall  :
and  also  should,  if  we  may  passe  under  the  North,  enjoy
the  navigation  of  all  Tartarie.  Which  should  be  no  lesse
II  177  M

A.D.
1527.

Benefite  to
England.

Objection.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

¥

Answere.

A  true
opinion.

A  voyage  of
discover'^  by
the  Pole.  M.
Thome  and
M.  Eliot  dis-
coverers of
'Newfound
land.

The  cause
why  the  West
Indies  were
not  ours:
which  also
Sebastian
Cabot  writeth
in  an  Epistle
to  Baptista
Ramusius.

profitable  to  our  commodities  of  cloth,  then  these
Spiceries  to  the  Emperour,  and  king  of  Portingal.

But  it  is  a  generall  opinion  of  all  Cosmographers,  that
passing  the  seventh  clime,  the  sea  is  all  ice,  and  the  colde
so  much  that  none  can  suffer  it.  And  hitherto  they  had
all  the  like  opinion,  that  under  the  line  Equinoctiall  for
much  heate  the  land  was  unhabitable.

Yet  since  (by  experience  is  proved)  no  land  so  much
habitable  nor  more  temperate.  And  to  conclude,  I  thinke
the  same  should  be  found  under  the  North,  if  it  were
experimented.  For  as  all  judge.  Nihil  fit  vacuum  in
rerum  natura  :  So  I  judge,  there  is  no  land  unhabitable,
nor  Sea  innavigable.  If  I  should  write  the  reason  that
presenteth  this  unto  me,  I  should  be  too  prolixe,  and  it
seemeth  not  requisite  for  this  present  matter.  God
knoweth  that  though  by  it  I  should  have  no  great
interest,  yet  I  have  had  and  still  have  no  litle  mind
of  this  businesse  :  So  that  if  I  had  facultie  to  my  will,  it
should  be  the  first  thing  that  I  woulde  understand,  even
to  attempt,  if  our  Seas  Northward  be  navigable  to  the
Pole,  or  no.  I  reason,  that  as  some  sickenesses  are  heredi-
tarious,  and  come  from  the  father  to  the  sonne,  so  this
inclination  or  desire  of  this  discoverie  I  inherited  of  my
father,  which  with  another  marchant  of  Bristow  named
Hugh  Eliot,  were  the  discoverers  of  the  New  found
lands,  of  the  which  there  is  no  doubt,  (as  nowe  plainely
appeareth)  if  the  mariners  would  then  have  bene  ruled,
and  followed  their  Pilots  minde,  the  lands  of  the  West
Indies  (from  whence  all  the  gold  commeth)  had  bene
ours.  For  all  is  one  coast,  as  by  the  Carde  appeareth,  and
is  aforesayd.

Also  in  this  Carde  by  the  coastes  where  you  see  C.
your  Lordship  shall  understand  it  is  set  for  Cape  or  head-
land, where  I.  for  Hand,  where  P.  for  Port,  where  R.  for
River.  Also  in  all  this  little  Carde  I  thinke  nothing  be
erred  touching  the  situation  of  the  land,  save  onely  in
these  Hands  of  Spicerie  :  which,  for  that  (as  afore  is
sayd)  every  one  setteth  them  after  his  minde,  there  can  be

178

ROBERT  THORNE'S BOOK  a.d.

1527-
no  certification  how  they  stand.  I  doe  not  denie,  that
there  lacke  many  things,  that  a  consummate  Carde  should
have,  or  that  a  right  good  demonstration  desireth.  For
there  should  be  expressed  all  the  mountaines  and  Rivers
that  are  principall  of  name  in  the  earth,  with  the  names  of
Portes  of  the  sea,  the  names  of  all  principall  cities,  which
all  I  might  have  set,  but  not  in  this  Carde,  for  the  litle
space  would  not  consent.

Your  Lordship  may  see  that  setting  onely  the  names
almost  of  every  Region,  and  yet  not  of  all,  the  roome  is
occupied.  Many  Islands  are  also  left  out,  for  the  said
lack  of  roome,  the  names  almost  of  all  Portes  put  to
silence,  with  the  roses  of  the  windes  or  points  of  the
compasse  :  For  that  this  is  not  for  Pilots  to  sayle  by,  but
a  summary  declaration  of  that  which  your  Lordship  com-
manded. And  if  by  this  your  Lordship  cannot  wel
perceive  the  meaning  of  this  Card,  of  the  which  I  would
not  marveile,  by  reason  of  the  rude  composition  of  it,  [I.  220.]
will  it  please  your  Lordship  to  advise  mee  to  make  a
bigger  and  a  better  Mappe,  or  els  that  I  may  cause  one  to
be  made.  For  I  know  my  selfe  in  this  and  all  other
nothing  perfect,  but  Licet  semper  discens,  nunquam
tamen  ad  perfectam  scientiam  perveniens.  Also  I  know,
to  set  the  forme  Sphericall  of  the  world  in  Piano  after  the
true  rule  of  Cosmographie,  it  would  have  bene  made
otherwise  then  this  is  :  howbeit  the  demonstration  should
not  have  bene  so  plaine.

And  also  these  degrees  of  longitude,  that  I  set  in  the
lower  part  of  this  card,  should  have  bin  set  along  by  the
line  Equinoctiall,  &  so  then  must  be  imagined.  For  the
degrees  of  longitude  neere  either  of  the  poles  are  nothing
equall  in  bignesse  to  them  in  the  Equinoctiall.  But  these
are  set  so,  for  that  setting  them  a  long  the  Equinoctial,  it
would  have  made  obscure  a  great  part  of  the  map.  Many
other  curiosities  may  be  required,  which  for  the  nonce  I
did  not  set  downe,  as  well  for  that  the  intent  I  had  prin-
cipally was  to  satisfie  your  doubt  touching  the  spicerie,  as
for  that  I  lack  leasure  and  time. I  trust  your  Lordship

179

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1527-

correcting  that  which  is  erred,  will  accept  my  good  will,
which  is  to  doe  any  thing  that  I  may  in  your  Lordships
service.  But  from  henceforth  I  knowe  your  Lordship
will  rather  commaund  me  to  keepe  silence,  then  to  be
large,  when  you  shall  be  wearied  with  the  reading  of  this  1
discourse. Jesus  prosper  your  estate  and  health.

Your  Lordships

Robert  Thorne  1527.

ALso  this  Carde  and  that  which  I  write  touching  the  j
variance  betweene  the  Emperour  and  the  king  of
Portingall,  is  not  to  be  shewed  or  communicated  there
with  many  of  that  court.  For  though  there  is  nothing
in  it  prejudicial!  to  the  Emperour,  yet  it  may  be  a  cause
of  paine  to  the  maker  :  as  well  for  that  none  may  make
these  Cardes,  but  certaine  appointed  and  allowed  for
masters,  as  for  that  peradventure  it  would  not  sound  well
to  them,  that  a  stranger  should  know  or  discover  their
secretes  :  and  would  appeare  worst  of  all,  if  they  under-
stand that  I  write  touching  the  short  way  to  the  spicerie
by  our  Seas.  Though  peradventure  of  troth  it  is  not  to
be  looked  to,  as  a  thing  that  by  all  opinions  is  unpossible,
and  I  thinke  never  will  come  to  effect  :  and  therefore
neither  here  nor  else  where  is  it  to  be  spoken  of.  For  to
move  it  amongst  wise  men,  it  should  bee  had  in  derision.
And  therefore  to  none  I  would  have  written  nor  spoken
of  such  things,  but  to  your  Lordship,  to  whom  boldly  I
commit  in  this  all  my  foolish  fantasie  as  to  my  self.  But
if  it  please  God  that  into  England  I  may  come  with
your  Lordship,  I  will  shew  some  conjectures  of  reason,
though  against  the  generall  opinion  of  Cosmographers,
by  which  shall  appeare  this  that  I  say  not  to  lacke  some
foundation.  And  till  that  time  I  beseeche  your  Lordship
let  it  be  put  to  silence  :  and  in  the  meane  season  it  may
please  God  to  send  our  two  Englishmen,  that  are  gone  to
the  Spicerie,  which  may  also  bring  more  plaine  declaration
of  that  which  in  this  case  might  be  desired.

Also  1  knowe  I  needed  not  to  have  beene  so  prolixe  in

180

ROBERT  THORNE'S  BOOK  a.d.

1527-
the  declaration  of  this  Carde  to  your  Lordship,  if  the
sayd  Carde  had  bene  very  well  made  after  the  rules  of
Cosmographie.  For  your  Lordship  would  soone  under-
stand it  better  then  I,  or  any  other  that  could  have  made
it  :  and  so  it  should  appeare  that  I  shewed  Delphinum
natare.  But  for  that  I  have  made  it  after  my  rude
maner,  it  is  necessary  that  1  be  the  declarer  or  gloser  of
mine  own  worke,  or  els  your  Lordship  should  have  had
much  labour  to  understand  it,  which  now  with  it  also
cannot  be  excused,  it  is  so  grossely  done.  But  I  knew
you  looked  for  no  curious  things  of  mee,  and  therefore  I
trust  your  Lordship  will  accept  this,  and  hold  me  for  ex-
cused. In  other  mens  letters  that  they  write  they  crave
pardon  that  at  this  present  they  write  no  larger  :  but  I
must  finish,  asking  pardon  that  at  this  present  I  write  so
largely.  Jesus  preserve  your  Lordship  with  augmentation
of  dignities.

Your  servant  Robert

Thorne,  1527.

Epitaphium  M. Robert!  Thorni,  sepulti  in
Ecclesia  Templariorum  Londini.

Obertus  jacet  hie  Thorne,  quem  Bristolia  quondam
Prstoris  merito  legit  ad  officium.

-  Huic  etenim  semper  magnas  Respublica  curae,

Charior  &  cunctis  patria  divitiis.
Ferre  inopi  auxilium,  tristes  componere  lites,

Duke  huic  consilio  quosque  juvare  fuit.  [I.  221.]

Qui  pius  exaudis  miserorum  voto  precesque,

Christe  huic  cceli  des  regione  locum.

[A  briefe
181

A.D.

1580.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  briefe  Treatise  of  the  great  Duke  of  Moscovia
his  genealogie,  being  taken  out  of  the  Mos-
covites  manuscript  Chronicles  written  by  a
Polacke.

T  hath  almost  ever  bene  the  custome  of
nations,  in  searching  out  the  infancie  and
first  beginnings  of  their  estate,  to  ascribe
the  same  unto  such  authors  as  lived
among  men  in  great  honour  and  endued
mankinde  v/ith  some  one  or  other  ex-
cellent benefite.  Nowe,  this  inbred
desire  of  all  nations  to  blaze  and  set  foorth  their  owne
petigree  hath  so  much  prevayled  with  the  greater  part,
that  leaving  the  undoubted  trueth,  they  have  betaken
themselves  unto  meere  fables  and  fictions.  Yea  and
the  Chronicles  of  many  nations  written  in  divers  and
sundrie  ages  doe  testifie  the  same.  Even  so  the  Grecians
boasted  that  they  were  either  Autocthones,  that  is  earth-
bredde,  or  els  lineally  descended  from  the  Gods.  And
the  Romans  affirme  that  Mars  was  father  unto  their  first
founder  Romulus.  Right  well  therefore  and  judicially
sayth  Titus  Livius  :  Neither  meane  I  to  avouch
(quoth  he)  ne  to  disable  or  confute  those  thinges  which
before  the  building  and  foundation  of  the  Citie  have
beene  reported,  being  more  adorned  and  fraught  with
Poeticall  fables  then  with  incorrupt  and  sacred  monuments
of  trueth  :  antiquitie  is  it  to  be  pardoned  in  this
behalfe,  namely  in  joyning  together  matters  historicall
and  poeticall,  to  make  the  beginnings  of  cities  to  seeme
the  more  honourable.  For  sith  antiquity  it  selfe  is
accompted  such  a  notable  argument  of  true  nobility,
even  private  men  in  all  ages  have  contended  thereabout.
Wherefore  citizens  of  Rome  being  desirous  to  make
demonstration  of  their  Gentrie,  use  to  have  their  aun-
cestours  armes  painted  along  the  walles  of  their  houses  :
in  which  regarde  they  were  so  puffed  up,  that  oftentimes

DUKE  OF  MOSCOVY'S GENEALOGY  a.d.

1580.

they  would  arrogantly  disdaine  those  men,  which  by
their  owne  vertue  had  attained  unto  honour.  In  like
sorte  Poets,  when  the  originall  of  their  worthines  and
brave  champion  was  either  utterly  unknowen  or  some-
what obscure,  would  ofte  referre  it  unto  their  Gods
themselves.  So  in  these  our  dayes  (to  lette  passe  others)
the  Turkish  Emperour  with  great  presumption  boasteth
himselfe  to  bee  descended  of  the  Trojan  blood.  Like-
wise the  great  duke  of  Moscovie,  to  make  himselfe
and  his  predecessours  seeme  the  more  sovereigne,
deriveth  the  beginnings  of  his  parentage  from  the
Romane  Emperours,  yea  even  from  Augustus  Caesar.
Abeit  therefore  no  man  is  so  fonde  as  to  accept  of
this  report  for  trueth,  yet  will  wee  briefly  set  downe
what  the  Moscovites  have  written  in  their  Chronicles
as  touching  this  matter.

Augustus  (beleeve  it  who  listeth)  had  certaine  brethren
or  kinsfolkes  which  were  appoynted  governours  over
divers  provinces.  Amongst  the  rest  one  Prussus  (of
whome  Prussia  was  named)  had  his  place  of  government
assigned  unto  him  upon  the  shore  of  the  eastern  or
Baltick  sea,  and  upon  the  famous  river  of  Wixel.  This
mans  graund  children  or  nephewes  of  the  fourth  genera-
tion were  Rurek,  Sinaus,  and  Truvor,  who  likewise
inhabited  in  the  very  same  places.  Whereas  therefore
at  the  very  same  time  the  Russians  or  the  Moscovites
without  any  civill  regiment  possessed  large  and  spacious
territories  towards  the  north,  the  foresayd  three  brethren,
upon  the  perswasion  of  one  Gostomislius  the  chiefe
citizen  of  Novogrod,  in  the  yeare  since  the  worldes
creation  (according  to  the  computation  of  the  Greekes)
6370,  which  was  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  572,  were  Russia  became
sent  for,  to  beare  rule.  And  so  joyning  their  kinsman  civill  hy
Olechus  unto  them,  and  dividing  these  huge  countreys  "^^^ J  f^^
among  themselves,  they  laboured  to  reduce  the  barbarous
and  savage  people  unto  a  civill  kinde  of  life.

Sinaus and Truvor deceasing without issue, Rurek
succeeded  and  lefte  a  sonne  behinde  him  named Igor  ;

^83

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

who  not  being  of  sufficient  yeres  to  beare  rule,  was
committed  unto  the  protection  of  his  kinsman  Olechus.
The  sayde  Igor  begate  of  Olha  daughter  unto  a  citizen
of  Plesco  (who,  after  her  husbande  was  slaine  by  his
enemies,  taking  her  journey  to  Constantinople,  was
there  baptized  by  the  name  of  Helena)  a  sonne  called
Stoslaus,  who  fought  many  battels  with  the  neighbour
countreys.  Howbeit  at  length  Stoslaus  was  slayne  by
his  foe,  who  making  a  drinking  cup  of  his  skull,
engraved  therupon  in  golden  letters  this  sentence  :
Seeking  after other mens, he lost  his owne. He  left

[I.  222.]  behind  him  three  sonnes,  namely  Teropolchus,  Olega,
and  Vulodimir.  The  which  Vulodimir  having  slaine
his  two  brethren,  became  sole  governour  of  Russia,  or
(as  the  Moscovites  call  it)  Rosseia,  his  owne  selfe.  This
man  beginning  at  length  to  loath  and  mislike  the  ethnik
religon,  and  the  multitude  of  false  gods,  applyed  his
minde  unto  the  religion  of  Christ,  and  having  taken
to  wife  Anna  sister  unto  Basilius  and  Constantinus
Emperours  of  Constantinople,  was  together  with  his
whole  nation,  in  the  yeare  of  Christ  988.  baptized,  and
imbraced  the  Christian  religion,  with  the  rites  and
ceremonies  of  the  Greeke  Church,  and  his  name  being
changed,  he  was  called  Basilius.

Howbeit  Zonaras  reporteth  that  before  the  time  of
Vulodimir,  Basilius  Emperour  of  Constantinople  sent
a  bishop  unto  the  Russians,  by  whose  meanes  they
were  converted  unto  the  Christian  faith.  He  reporteth
moreover  that  they  would  not  be  perswaded  unlesse
they  might  see  a  miracle  :  whereupon  the  said  bishop
having  made  his  prayers  unto  almighty  God,  threwe
the  booke  of  the  Evangelists  into  the  fire,  which
remained  there  unconsumed.  And  that  by  this  miracle
they  were  mooved  to  give  credite  unto  the  doctrine  of
Christ,  and  to  conforme  themselves  thereunto.

The  sonnes  of  Vulodimir  were  Vuiseslaus,  Isoslaus,
Jaroslaus,  Suatopolcus,  Borissus,  Glebus,  Stoslaus,
Vulzevolodus, Stanislaus, Sudislaus, and Podius who

184

DUKE OF  MOSCOVY'S GENEALOGY  a.d.

1580.

died  in  his  childhood. Amongst  the  residue  all  Russia

was divided  by their father, who not being contented

with  their  portions,  but invading  each  other,  were  most

of  them slaine  by their  mutuall contentions. Borissus

and Glebus in  regard of  their holy conversation were

registred  for  Saints,  whose  feasts  are  every  yeere  celebrated

with  great  solemnitie  upon  the  twelfth  of  November.

At  length  Jaroslaus  only  got  the  Sovereigne  authoritie
into  his  owne  hands,  and  left  behind  him  foure  sonnes,
Vulodimir,  Isoslauus,  Weceslauus,  and  Vuszevolodus.

The  foresaid  Vulodimir  sonne  of  Jaroslaus  kept  his
residence  at  the  ancient  citie  of  Kiow  standing  upon  Kiow.
the  river  of  Boristhenes,  and  after  divers  conflicts  with
his  kinsmen,  having  subdued  all  the  provinces  unto
himselfe,  was  called  Monomachos,  that  is,  the  onely
champoin.  This  man  (for  I  thinke  it  not  amisse  to
report  those  things  which  their  owne  Manuscript
Chronicles  make  mention  of)  waged  warre  against  Con-
stantine  the  Emperour  of  Constantinople,  and  when
he  had  wasted  &  overrun  Thracia,  being  returned
home  with  great  and  rich  spoyles,  and  making  pre-
paration for  new  wars,  Constantine  sent  Neophytus
the  Metropolitane  of  Ephesus  and  two  Bishops,  with
the  governour  of  Antiochia,  and  Eustaphius  the  Abbat
of  Jerusalem,  to  present  rich  and  magnificent  gifts  unto
him  ;  as  namely,  part  of  the  crosse  of  our  Saviour
Christ,  a  crowne  of  gold,  a  drinking  cup  curiously  made
of  Sardonyx  stone,  a  cloake  set  all  over  with  precious
stones,  and  a  golden  chaine  ;  commaunded  them  to
salute  him  by  the  name  of  Czar  (which  name,  as  it
may  be  prooved  by  many  arguments,  signifieth  a  king,
and  not  an  Emperour)  and  concluded  a  most  inviolable
league  of  amity  and  friendship  with  him.

The  foresayd  Vulodimir  begate  Vuszevolodus  the
second.  This  Vuszevolodus  lefte  eight  sonnes  behind
him,  Miscislaus,  Isoslaus,  Stoslaus,  Teropolcus,  Weceslaus,
Romanus,  Georgius,  and  Andrew.  The  sonnes  of  George
were  Roseslaus,  Andrew,  Basilius,  and  Demetrius.

18s

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

1237-  Demetrius  begat  George,  who  in  the  yere  1237.  was
slaine  by  one  Bathy,  a  Tartarian  duke,  which  Bathy
wasted  Moscovia,  and  subdued  the  same  unto  himselfe.
Since  which  time  the  Russians  were  tributary  to  the
Tartars,  and  were  governed  by  such  dukes  as  they
pleased  to  set  over  them.  Howbeit  the  Tartars  so
greatly  abused  that  authoritie,  that  when  they  sent
their  ambassadours  unto  the  prince  of  Moscovie,  he
was  constrained  to  goe  forth  and  meete  with  them,
and  (as  Herbortus  Fulstinius  in  his  Polonian  historic
reporteth)  to  offer  them  a  bason  full  of  mares  milk,
and  if  they  had  spilt  any  whit  thereof  upon  their
horses  maines,  to  licke  it  off  with  his  toung,  and  having
conducted  them  into  his  princely  court,  to  stand  bare-
headed before  them  while  they  sate  downe,  and  with
all  reverence  to  give  eare  and  attendance  unto  them.
But  by  what  meanes  they  shooke  off  at  the  length
this  yoake  of  servitude,  I  will  forthwith  declare.

About  the  same  time  almost  all  Polonia,  and  the
dukedome  of  Silesia  were  overrun  by  the  Tartars  with
fire  and  sword.  Who  having  burnt  Presla  the  chiefe
citie  of  Silesia,  &  being  come  before  the  citie  of  Legnitz,
they  fought  there  a  most  cruel  and  bloody  field,  wherin
was  slain  duke  Henrie  himselfe  being  sonne  unto  the
most  holy  and  devout  lady  Hedvice,  with  many  others,
whose  monuments  and  graves  be  as  yet  extant  in  sundry
places,  and  with  an  infinite  multitude  of  common
souldiers,'  insomuch  that  the  Tartars  filled  nine  great
sackes  with  the  eares  of  them  which  they  had  slaine.
The  Tartars  to  the  end  they  might  obtaine  the  victorie,
presented  unto  the  view  of  our  souldiers  the  portrature
of  a  mans  head  placed  by  arte  magique  upon  a  banner,
wherein  the  letter  X.  was  painted,  which  being  shaken
and  mooved  up  and  downe  breathed  foorth  a  most
loathsome  stench,  &  strooke  such  a  terrour  into  the
hearts  of  our  men,  that  being  as  it  were  astonished
with  the  snaky  visage  of  Medusa,  they  were  utterly
daunted  and  dismayed.

186

DUKE OF  MOSCOVY'S GENEALOGY  ad.

1580.

From  thence Bathy  and  his  company  with  the  same  [I.  223.]
blood thirstie intent marched into Hungarie, and had
almost slaine king Bela  the fourth,  who  together  with
his Sonne escaping by flight did scarcely ridde them-
selves out  of  the  enemies  hand. And  when  the  whole
world almost was exceedingly terrified at the cruell
invasions  of  this  most  barbarous  nation,  at  length  Pope
Innocentius  the  fourth  sending  ambassadours  unto  Bathy  These  ambas-
obtained peace for five yeeres  : but to forsake his  ^^dou^'^  '^^^'^
heathenish  superstitions  and  to  become  a  Christian,  hee  pianoCartinl
would by no meanes bee perswaded. For  he  was  by y  Frier
the instigation of  the Saracens infected with devilish  Benedict  a
opinions of  Mahomet, as being more agreeable unto  P^^^^^^^-
his barbarous rudenes,  which even unto this  day  the
Tartars  do  maintaine,  like  as  the  prophane  Turkes  also.

This  Bathy  had  a  sonne  called  Tamerlan,  whome
the  Moscovites  call  Temirkutla,  who  likewise,  as  it  is
recorded  in  histories,  attained  unto  great  renoume.  For
he  caried  about  with  him  in  a  cage  Bajazet  the  Turkish
Emperour  being  fettered  in  golden  chaines,  and  made
him  a  laughing  stocke  unto  all  men.

Let  us  now  returne  unto  the  Russians. George  being
slaine,  Jaroslaus  his  brother  succeeded  in  his  roome,  and
left behinde him three sonnes, Theodorus, Alexander
and  Andreas. Daniel  the  sonne  of  Alexander  first  estab-
lished his  royall  seate  in  the  citie  of  Mosco,  and  mag-  The  dtie  of
nificently building the castle which before time had  Mosco  first
bene  obscure,  he  tooke  upon  him  the  title  of  the  great  "'^f^he^llaT
Duke  of  Russia. He  had  five  sonnes,  namely,  George,  Duke.
Alexander,  Borissus,  Ophonias,  and  John. This John
succeeded  his  father,  and  because he  continually  caried
a scrippe about with him to bestow almes, he was
sirnamed  Kaleta,  which  word  signifieth  a  scrippe. His
sonnes  were,  Simeon,  John,  and  Andrew. He  gave  unto
his sonne Simeon the provinces of Vulodimiria and
Moscovia : which Simeon deceasing  without issue his
brother John succeeded, who begate a sonne called
Demetrius. This  Demetrius  had  seven  sonnes,  namely

187

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Daniel,  Basilius,  George,  Andrew,  Peter,  John,  &
Constantine.  Basilius  reigned  after  his  fathers  death.
This  man  dishinheriting  his  sonne  which  was  called
after  his  owne  name,  because  he  suspected  his  mother
of  adulterie,  at  his  death  surrendred  his  Dukedome
unto  his  brother  George,  who  kept  his  nephewe  a  long
time  in  prison.  Howbeit  at  his  death,  though  himselfe
had  two  sonnes  namely  Andrew  and  Demetrius,  yet
being  stricken  perhaps  with  remorse  of  conscience,  he
bestowed  the  Dukedome  upon  his  nephew  Basilius.
Against  whom  his  two  cousins  bearing  a  grudge  waged
warre,  and  at  length  having  taken  him  by  a  wyly
stratageme  they  put  out  his  eyes.  Notwithstanding
the  Boiarens  (for  so  the  Moscovites  call  their  nobles)
continued  their  duetifull  alleageance  unto  this  their
blinde  Duke,  whom  for  his  blindnes  they  called  Cziem-
nox,  that  is  to  say,  darke  or  darkened.  He  left  a
Ivan  Vasilo-  sonne  behindc  him  called  Ivan  Vasilowich  who  brought
wich.  the  Russian  common  wealth,  being  before  his  time  but

obscure,  unto  great  excellencie  and  renowme.  Who
that  he  might  the  better  get  all  the  superiority  into
his  owne  hands  put  to  death  so  many  sonnes  and
nephewes  of  the  former  Dukes  as  he  could  lay  hold
on,  and  began  to  take  upon  him  the  title  of  the  great
Duke  of  Vulodimiria,  Moscovia,  and  Novogardia,  and
to  call  himselfe  the  Monarch  or  Czar  of  all  Russia.
The  name  of  f^g  brought  under  his  subjection  two  principall  cities,
the  Moscovites  namely  Plesco being the only  walled citie in  all  Mos-

first  advanced.  ••^i-xt  iiir,i  i-  •  j

covie,  and  Novogrod,  both  or  them  being  m  regard
of  traffike  most  riche  and  flourishing  cities,  and  having
bin  subject  unto  the  Lithuanians  for  the  space  of  50.
yeeres  before.  The  treasure  of  Novogrod  was  so  ex-
ceeding, that  the  great  Duke  is  reported  to  have  carried
home  from  thence  300.  carts  laden  with  gold  and  silver.
He  also  was  the  first  man  that  waged  warre  against
the  Polonians  and  the  Livonians :  against  Polonia  he
pretended  a  quarell,  alleaging  that  his  daughter  Helena
(whome hee had married unto Alexander the great

188

DUKE OF  MOSCOVY'S GENEALOGY  ad

1580.

Duke  of  Lithuania,  which  was  afterward  king  of  Polonia)
was  evil  intreated,  and  was  withdrawen  from  the  Greekish
religion  unto  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  Rome.
But  against  the  Livonians  for  none  other  cause,  but
onely  for  an  incredible  desire  of  enlarging  his  dominions.
Howbeit  what  impulsive  causes  of  litle  or  no  moment
happened  in  the  mean  season,  we  will  in  another  place
more  plainely  declare.  Notwithstanding  he  was  very
often  and  in  divers  battels  vanquished  by  Plettebergius
the  great  master  of  the  Dutch  knights :  but  it  is  not
to  the  purpose  to  stand  any  longer  upon  this  discourse.

He  was  married  first  unto  Marie  the  Duke  of
Tyversky  his  daughter,  and  of  her  hee  begate  John,
unto  whom  in  his  life  time  he  surrendred  his  Duke-
dome,  and  married  him  unto  the  daughter  of  Stephan
the  Palatine  of  Moldavia :  which  John,  after  he  had
begotten  his  sonne  Demetrius,  deceased  before  his  father.

Afterward  Ivan  Vasilowich  aforesaide  married  a  wife
called  Sophia  being  daughter  unto  Thomas  Palselogus,
which  is  reported  to  have  had  her  dowry  out  of  the
Popes  treasury,  because  the  Moscovite  had  promised
to  conforme  himselfe  unto  the  Romish  Church,  This
Sophia  being  a  woman  of  a  princely  and  aspiring  minde,
and  often  complaining  that  she  was  married  unto  the
Tartars  vassal,  at  length  by  her  instant  intreatie  and  [I-  224-]
continual  perswasions,  and  by  a  notable  stratageme  she
cast  off  that  slavish  yoke  very  much  unbeseeming  so
mighty  a  prince.  For  whereas  the  Tartarian  Duke  had
his  procuratours  and  agents  in  the  Moscovites  court,
who  dwelt  in  their  owne  houses  built  within  the  very
castle  of  Mosco,  and  were  eye  witnesses  of  all  affaires
which  were  there  performed :  Sophia  said  she  was  ad-
monished from  heaven  to  builde  a  Temple  in  the  selfe
same  place  where  the  Tartars  house  stoode,  and  to  con-
secrate it  unto  Saint  Nicholas.  Being  therfore  delivered
of  a  Sonne  she  invited  the  Tartarian  Duke  unto  the
solemne  baptizing  of  him,  and  beeing  come,  shee  re-
quested him  to  give  her  his  house,  and obtained it at

A.D.
1580.

The  yoke  of
the  Tartars
shaken  off.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Basilius.

Ivan  Vas'tlo-
wich.

daughter called
Gabriel,  Deme-

his  hands.  Which  house  being  razed  and  those  Tar-
tarian espials  beeing  excluded,  the  Tartars  at  length
were  quite  bereaved  and  utterly  dispossessed  of  their
authoritie  which  they  had  exercised  over  the  Russians
for  many  yeres,  and  could  never  yet  recover  it ;  albeit
they  have  given  sundry  attempts.  Of  his  wife  Sophia
he  begate  sixe  children,  namely,  a
Helena,  &  five  sonnes,  that  is  to  say,
trius,  George,  Simeon,  and  Andrew.

The  Dukedome  of  right  appertayned  unto  Demetrius
the  Sonne  of  John,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Vasilowich
by  his  first  marriage.  Howbeit  Sophia  prevailed  so
with  her  husband,  that  neglecting  his  graund-childe
Demetrius,  hee  bestowed  his  Dukedome  upon  Gabriel
his  Sonne.

Andrew  the  younger  had  a  sonne  called  Vulodimir,
of  whom  Mary  was  borne,  which  in  the  yeere  of  Christ
1573.  was  maried  unto  Magnus  the  Duke  of  Hoist.

Gabriel  having  obtained  the  great  dukedome  of  Russia,
changed  his  name  calling  himselfe  Basilius,  and  applied
his  minde  to  the  atchieving  of  high  and  great  enterprises.
For  hee  reduced  a  great  part  of  the  dukedome  of  Mos-
covie,  which  Vitoldus  the  great  Duke  of  Lithuania  helde
in  possession,  under  his  owne  jurisdiction,  and  wonne
upon  the  river  of  Boristhenes  (which  the  Russians  call
Neiper)  many  cities  and  especially  Smolensco,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  15 14.  Having  divorced  his  first  wife,
hee  begate  of  Helena  daughter  unto  Duke  Glinskie,  Ivan
Vasilowich,  which  now  this  present  1580.  reigneth  as
great  Duke.  Hee  was  borne  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde
1528.  the  25.  of  August,  sixe  houres  after  the  rising  of
the  sonne.  The  great  dukedome  of  Russia  fell  unto  the
said  Ivan  Vasilowich  in  the  fifth  yeere  of  his  age,  having
his  uncle  George  for  his  great  protector:  being  25,  yeeres
of  age,  and  being  of  a  strong  body  and  of  a  couragious
mind  he  subdued  the  Tartars  of  Cazan  and  Astracan
upon  the  river  of  Volgha,  carrying  their  Dukes  and  chief-
taines  into  captivitie.

190

DUKE  OF  MOSCOVY'S  GENEALOGY  ad.

1576.

But  by  what  wayes  and  meanes  (after  the  league  which
by  the  intercession  of  the  most  sacred  Roman  Emperour,
continued  from  the  yeere  1503.  for  the  space  of  fifty
yeereSj  was  expired)  having  renewed  warres  against  Li-
vonia, hee  brought  that  most  flourishing  province  into
extreame  miserie,  using  for  the  same  purpose  a  new  pre-
tense, and  alleadging  that  it  belonged  unto  him  by  right
of  inheritance,  I  tremble  to  recount  :  and  it  requireth  a
large  historic,  which  perhaps  in  time  and  place  convenient
some  more  learned  then  my  selfe  will  take  upon  them  to
addresse.

He  is  exceedingly  addicted  unto  piety  and  devotion,
and  doth  oftentimes  observe  very  strict  fastings  and
abstinence  with  his  monks  :  and  wheras  the  Russes  in
doing  reverence  &  adoration  unto  God  doe  beate  their
foreheads  against  the  ground,  this  Ivan  Vasilowich  with
performing  of  the  same  ceremonie  causeth  his  forehead  to
be  ful  of  boines  and  swellings,  and  sometimes  to  be  black
■and  blew,  and  very  often  to  bleed.  He  is  much  delighted
with  building  of  Churches  &  spareth  no  cost  for  that
purpose.  Whether  therfore  by  nature,  or  (which  hee
pretendeth  to  be  the  cause)  by  reason  of  his  subjects
malice  &  treacherie,  he  be  so  addicted  unto  all  rigour  and
cruelty,  I  dare  not  determine,  especially  sithens  he  hath
not  an  illiberal  or  mishapen  countenance,  as  Attila  is
reported  to  have  had.  Of  his  first  wife  which  was  sister
unto  Mikita  Romanowich,  beeing  nowe  great  steward  of
his  houshold,  he  begate  two  sonnes,  namely  Ivan  and
Theodore.  And  albeit  he  was  five  times  married,  yet  had  Theodore.
he  not  one  childe  more.

Whereas  this  Ivan  Vasilowich  upon  certaine  frivolous
reasons  calleth  himselfe  the  naturall  lord  of  Livonia,  I
thought  it  not  amisse  to  adde  an  Epistle  hereunto,  which
was  written  by  a  certaine  honourable  man  concerning  the
same  matter.

S.  All  wee  which  inhabite  this  Province  with  all  seemely
reverence  and  submission  of  mind,  do  offer  most
humble  thanks  unto  the  Emperors  most  sacred  and  peere-

191

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1576.

lesse  majesty  our  most  gracious  lord,  in  that  according  to
his  fatherly  affection  which  he  beareth  towards  all  Chris-
tendome,  and for  the  good  &  commodity  of  this  our
distressed  and  afflicted  countrey,  which  these  many  yeres
hath  bin  in  stead  of  a  bulwarke  against  the  invasion  of
barbarous  nations,  he  hath  sent  his  ambassadors  unto  the
great  duke  of  Moscovia. In  regard  of  which  his  fatherly
love  and  great benefite  vouchsafed  on  us,  wee  are  ready
when occasion shall serve,  to adventure  our  lives and
goods  :  praying  in  the  meane  season  unto  Almightie  God,
[I.  225.] who  is  the  onely  establisher  and  confounder  of  common
wealths,  to  bring this  excellent  woorke,  the  foundation
whereof is already  laide unto  a  prosperous  conclusion.
But  as  touching  the  title  which  the  Moscovite  maketh  to
this  province,  to  say  the  very  trueth,  we  greatly  wondred
and  were  astonished  at  the  declaration  thereof. For  it is  ;
most  apparant,  not  onely  out  of  all  ancient  and  credible
histories,  but  even  from  the  experience  and  state  of  these
regions,  that  the  said title  and  allegations are  fabulous
and  fained. For  out  of  all  auncient  monuments,  by  what
names  soever  they  bee  called (whereof  there  are  divers
extant  among  us) it  cannot be  proved by  any  mention,
nor yet by any  likelihoode or conjecture, that those
things which the Moscovite affirmeth concerning the
people  which  were  governors  of  these  regions  in  times
past,  and  concerning  the  right  and  title  of  his  ancestors
unto  this  province,  are  grounded  upon  truth.
The  commodi- For  it  is  not  unknowen  by  what  meanes  this  province,
ties  of  traffike  partly  through  the  industry  of  marchants,  and  partly  by
an  ojnaviga-  ^ benefite  of  navigation,  was  first  discovered  :  neither  is-
it  unknowen  howe  the  inhabitants  thereof  beeing  wholly
addicted  unto  heathenish  superstitions  and  idolatrie,  were
by  the  croised  knights  (who  drew  other  knights  professing
the  same  order  in  Prussia  to  aide  and  accompanie  them  in
this  their  enterprise)  and  that  with  great  labour  and  diffi-
cultie,  converted  unto  the  Christian  faith  :  when  as  at  the
same  time  the  Livonians  had  no  knowledge  at  all  of  the
jurisdiction,  religion,  maners,  or  language  of  Moscovie  :

192

DUKE  OF  MOSCOW'S  GENEALOGY  ad.

1576-
who  had  not  onely  no  conversation  nor  dealings  with  the
Moscovites,  but  were  estranged  also  from  all  other  nations
whatsoever :  for  leading  a  miserable,  poore,  barbarous,
and  heathenish  life,  in  savage  maner  among  wilde  beastes,
and  in  the  desert  and  solitary  woods,  they  were  utterly
ignorant  of  God  and  destitute  of  civil  magistrates.  How-
beit  this  kind  of  government  was  peculiar  unto  them,
namely  that  all  of  one  familie  and  society  used  a  kinde  of
reverence  unto  their  elders  more  then  to  any  other,  whom
also,  that  their  authoritie  might  be  the  greater,  they
called  by  the  name  of  kings,  and  (albeit  one  of  their
families  consisted  of  a  100.  persons)  they  obeyed  them  in
al  respects,  and  after  their  rude  and  barbarous  maner  did
them  loyal  service.  At  the  very  same  time  the  Mosco-
vites had  received  the  religion,  and  the  Ecclesiasticall
ceremonies  of  the  Greeke  and  Easterne  Church,  which
religion  they  published  and  dispersed  throughout  all  pro-
vinces subject  to  their  dominion,  using  their  owne  proper
letters  and  characters  for  the  same  purpose.  Of  all  which
things  the  Livonians  which  very  barbarously  inhabited  a
lande  beeing  environed  with  Russia,  Lithuania,  Samogitia,
Prussia,  and  the  Balthic  sea,  never  heard  any  report  at  all.
It  is  moreover  to  be  noted  that  never  at  any  time  hereto-
fore either  within  the  earth,  or  in  other  places  of  Livonia,
there  have  bene  found  any  monuments  at  all  of  the  anti-
quitie  or  letters  of  the  Russes :  which  verily  must  needs
have  come  to  passe,  if  the  Moscovites,  Russes,  or  any
other  nations  which  use  the  foresaid  particulars,  had  borne
rule  and  authority  over  the  Livonians  :  yea  there  had
beene  left  some  remainder  and  token,  either  of  their
religion  and  divine  worship,  or  of  their  lawes  and  cus-
tomes,  or  at  the  least  of  their  maners,  language,  and
letters.  This  indeed  we  can  in  no  wise  deny,  that  even  in
Livonia  it  selfe,  there  have  bin  in  times  past  and  at  this
present  are  many  and  divers  languages  spoken  by  the
people.  Howbeit  no  one  language  of  them  all  hath  any
affinity  either  with  the  Moscovian  tongue,  or  with  the
tongues  of  any  other  nations.  But  whereas  the  Mosco-
"  193  N

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

vite  pretendeth  that  there  hath  bin  usually  paide  a  pension
or  tribute  unto  himselfe  and  his  predecessours  out  of  the
whole  province,  it  is  as  incredible  as  the  former.

About  the  beginning  of  this  tragicall  warre,  the  Mos-  |
covite, to  cloke his  tyranny and  ambition under some!
faire pretense, amongst other of his demaunds, made  I
mention  also  of  a  tribute  which  should  be  due  unto  him
out  of  the  bishop of Dorpat his jurisdiction,  whereof  i
notwithstanding  hee  could  neither  bring  any  just  account,  !
nor  affirm  any  certainty  : howbeit  there  is  no  man  living
to  be  found  which  either  can  tell  of  his  owne  remem-
brance,  or from the relation of others, that  any such
tribute  was  ever  paid  unto  the  Moscovite. What  time
therefore  he  referred  al  this  negotiation  unto  the  master
of  the  Livonian  order,  and  commanded  him  to  get  what
knowledge  hee  could  therof  from  the  men  of  Dorpat,  &
urged  the  tribute,  saying  if  it  were  worth  but  one  haire, ,
that he  would not remit it  : at length it  was found .
recorded  in  the  ancient  Chronicles  of  Dorpat,  that  beyond  ^
the  memory  of  man,  when  the  territory  of  Plesco  con-
tained nothing  but  woods  and  forrests  for  wilde  beastes, ,
that  the  pesaunts  of  the  liberty  of  Dorpat  called  Neuhus, ,
by  the  consent  of  the  Russian  borderers,  enjoyed Bee-
hives  in the  said  woods,  and paid  every  yeere  in  lieu
thereof unto the  Russian governours,  sixe  shillings of
Livonian  coine. But  so  soone  as  the  Russians  had  felled
the  woods  and had built townes  and  villages in their
place,  the  saide  pension  ceased together  with the  trees
which  were  cut  downe. Wherefore  the  saide  sixe  shillings
were never since that time either demanded by the
Russes  or  paid  by  the  Livonians. These  things  which  I
knew concerning the  causes of  the Livonian warres I
thought  good to  signifie  unto  you. Given the  22.  of
May,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1576.

194

SEBASTIAN CABOT'S  ORDINANCES

A.D.

1553-

Ordinances,  instructions,  and  advertisements  of  and  [I-  226.]
for  the  direction  of  the  intended  voyage  for
Cathay,  compiled,  made,  and  delivered  by  the
right  worshipfull  M.  Sebastian  Cabota  Esquier,
governour  of  the  mysterie  and  companie  of
the  Marchants  adventurers  for  the  discoverie  of
Regions,  Dominions,  Islands  and  places  un-
knowen,  the  9.  day  of  May,  in  the  yere  of
our  Lord  God  1553.  and  in  the  7.  yeere  of
the  reigne  of  our  most  dread  soveraigne  Lord
Edward  the  6.  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of
England,  Fraunce  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the
faith,  and  of  the  Church  of  England  and
Ireland,  in  earth  supreame  head.

Irst  the  Captaine  general,  with  the  pilot
major,  the  masters,  marchants  &  other
officers,  to  be  so  knit  and  accorded  in
unitie,  love,  conformitie,  and  obedience
in  every  degree  on  all  sides,  that  no
dissention,  variance,  or  contention  may
rise  or  spring  betwixt  them  and  the
mariners  of  this  companie,  to  the  damage  or  hinderance
of  the  voyage  :  for  that  dissention  (by  many  ex-
periences) hath  overthrown  many  notable  intended  and
likely  enterprises  and  exploits.

2  Item,  for  as  much  as  every  person  hath  given  an
othe  to  be  true,  faithfull,  and  loial  subjects,  and  liege
men  to  the  kings  most  excellent  Majestic,  his  heires
and  successors,  and  for  the  observation  of  all  lawes  &
statutes,  made  for  the  preservation  of  his  most  excellent
Majestic,  &  his  crown  Imperiall  of  his  realmes  of  England
and  Ireland,  and  to  serve  his  grace,  the  Realme,  and  this
present  voyage  truely,  and  not  to  give  up,  intermit,  or
leave  off  the  said  voyage  and  enterprise  untill  it  shalbe
accomplished, so farre  forth as possibilitie and life of

195

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

man  may  serve  or  extend  :  Therfore  it  behoveth  every
person  in  his  degree,  as  well  for  conscience,  as  for  dueties
sake  to  remember  his  said  charge,  and  the  accomplish-
ment thereof.

3  Item,  where  furthermore  every  mariner  or  passenger
in  his  ship  hath  given  like  othe  to  bee  obedient  to  the
Captaine  generall,  and  to  every  Captaine  and  master
in  his  ship,  for  the  observation  of  these  present  orders
contained  in  this  booke,  and  all  other  which  hereafter
shalbe  made  by  the  12.  counsailers  in  this  present  book
named,  or  the  most  part  of  them,  for  the  better  con-
duction, and  preservation  of  the  fleete,  and  atchieving
of  the  voyage,  and  to  be  prompt,  ready  and  obedient
in  all  acts  and  feates  of  honesty,  reason,  and  duetie  to
be  ministred,  shewed  &  executed,  in  advancement  and
preferment  of  the  voyage  and  exploit  :  therfore  it  is
convenient  that  this  present  booke  shall  once  every  weeke
(by  the  discretion  of  the  Captaine)  be  read  to  the  said
companie,  to  the  intent  that  every  man  may  the  better
remember  his  othe,  conscience,  duetie  and  charge.

4  Item,  every  person  by  vertue  of  his  othe,  to  doe
effectually  &  with  good  wil  (as  farre  forth  as  him  shall
complie)  all,  and  every  such  act  and  acts,  deede  and
deeds,  as  shalbe  to  him  or  them  from  time  to  time
commanded,  committed  and  enjoyned  (during  the  voyage)
by  the  Captain  generall,  with  the  assent  of  the  Counsell
and  assistants,  as  well  in  and  during  the  whole  Navigation
and  voyage,  as  also  in  discovering  and  landing,  as  cases
and  occasions  shall  require.

5  Item,  all  courses  in  Navigation  to  be  set  and  kept,
by  the  advice  of  the  Captaine,  Pilot  major,  masters,  &
masters  mates,  with  the  assents  of  the  counsailers  and
the  most  number  of  them,  and  in  voyces  uniformely
agreeing  in  one  to  prevaile,  and  take  place,  so  that  the
Captaine  generall,  shall  in  all  counsailes  and  assemblies
have  a  double  voyce.

6  Item,  that  the  fleete  shal  keep  together,  and  not
separate themselves asunder, as much as by  winde &

196

SEBASTIAN  CABOT'S ORDINANCES  a.d.

1553-

weather  may  be  done  or  permitted,  &  that  the  Captaines,
Pilots  &  masters  shall  speedily  come  aboord  the  Admiral,
when  and  as  often  as  he  shall  seeme  to  have  just  cause
to  assemble  them  for  counsaile  or  consultation  to  be
had  concerning  the  affaires  of  the  fleete  and  voyage.

7  Item,  that  the  marchants,  and  other  skilful  persons
in  writing,  shal  daily  write,  describe,  and  put  in  memorie
the  Navigation  of  every  day  and  night,  with  the  points,
and  observation  of  the  lands,  tides,  elements,  altitude
of  the  sunne,  course  of  the  moon  and  starres,  and  the
same  so  noted  by  the  order  of  the  Master  and  pilot  of
every  ship  to  be  put  in  writing,  the  captaine  generall
assembling  the  masters  together  once  every  weeke  (if
winde  and  weather  shal  serve)  to  conferre  all  the  observa-
tions, and  notes  of  the  said  ships,  to  the  intent  it  may
appeare  wherein  the  notes  do  agree,  and  wherein  they
dissent,  and  upon  good  debatement,  deliberation,  and
conclusion  determined,  to  put  the  same  into  a  common
leger,  to  remain  of  record  for  the  company  :  the  like
order  to  be  kept  in  proportioning  of  the  Gardes,  Astrolabes,
and  other  instruments  prepared  for  the  voyage,  at  the
charge  of  the  companie.

8  Item,  that  all  enterprises  and  exploits  of  discovering
or  landing  to  search  lies,  regions,  and  such  like,  to
be  searched,  attempted,  and  enterprised  by  good  de-
liberation, and  common  assent,  determined  advisedly.
And  that  in  all  enterprises,  notable  ambassages,  suites,
requests,  or  presentment  of  giftes,  or  presents  to  Princes,
to  be  done  and  executed  by  the  captaine  generall  in
person  or  by  such  other,  as  he  by  common  assent  shall  [I.  227.]
appoint  or assigne to  doe or  cause  to  be  done  in  the

same.

9  Item,  the  steward  and  cooke  of  every  ship,  and
their  associats,  to  give  and  render  to  the  captaine  and
other  head  officers  of  their  shippe  weekely  (or  oftner)
if  it  shall  seeme  requisite,  a  just  or  plaine  and  perfect
accompt  of  expenses  of  the  victuals,  as  wel  flesh,  fish,
bisket,  meate,  or  bread,  as  also  of  beere,  wine,  oyle,  or

197

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

vineger,  and  all  other  kinde  of  victualling  under  their
charge,  and  they,  and  every  of  them  so  to  order  and
dispende  the  same,  that  no  waste  or  unprofitable  excesse
be  made  otherwise  then  reason  and  necessitie  shall
command.

10  Item,  when  any  inferiour  or  meane  officer  of  what
degree  or  condition  he  shalbe,  shalbe  tried  untrue,  re-
misse,  negligent,  or  unprofitable  in  or  about  his  office  in
the  voyage,  or  not  to  use  him  selfe  in  his  charge
accordingly,  then  every  such  officer  to  be  punished  or
removed  at  the  discretion  of  the  captaine  and  assistants,

•  or  the  most  part  of  them,  and  the  person  so  removed
not  to  be  reputed,  accepted,  or  taken  from  the  time  of
his  remove,  any  more  for  an  officer,  but  to  remaine  in
such  condition  and  place,  as  hee  shall  be  assigned  unto,
and  none  of  the  companie,  to  resist  such  chastisement
or  worthie  punishment,  as  shalbe  ministred  unto  him
moderately,  according  to  the  fault  or  desert  of  his
offence,  after  the  lawes  and  common  customes  of  the
seas,  in  such  cases  heretofore  used  and  observed.

11  Item,  if  any  Mariner  or  officer  inferiour  shalbe
found  by  his  labour  not  meete  nor  worthie  the  place
that  he  is  presently  shipped  for,  such  person  may  bee
unshipped  and  put  on  lande  at  any  place  within  the  kings
Majesties  realme  &  dominion,  and  one  other  person  more
able  and  worthy  to  be  put  in  his  place,  at  the  discretion  of
the  captaine  and  masters,  &  order  to  be  taken  that  the
partie  dismissed  shalbe  allowed  proportionably  the  value
of  that  he  shall  have  deserved  to  the  time  of  his  dis-
mission or  discharge,  &  he  to  give  order  with  sureties,
pawn,  or  other  assurance,  to  repay  the  overplus  of  that  he
shall  have  received,  which  he  shall  not  have  deserved,
&  such  wages  to  be  made  with  the  partie  newly  placed  as
shalbe  thought  reasonable,  and  he  to  have  the  furniture
of  al  such  necessaries  as  were  prepared  for  the  partie
dismissed,  according  to  right  and  conscience.

12  Item,  that  no  blaspheming  of  God,  or  detestable
swearing be used in any ship, nor communication of

SEBASTIAN  CABOT'S ORDINANCES  ad.

1553-
ribaldrie,  filthy  tales,  or  ungodly  talke  to  be  suffred  in
the  company  of  any  ship,  neither  dicing,  carding,  tabling,
nor  other  divelish  games  to  be  frequented,  whereby
ensueth  not  onely  povertie  to  the  players,  but  also
strife,  variance,  brauling,  fighting,  and  oftentimes  murther
to  the  utter  destruction  of  the  parties,  and  provoking  of
Gods  most  just  wrath,  and  sworde  of  vengeance.  These
and  all  such  like  pestilences,  and  contagions  of  vices,  and
sinnes  to  bee  eschewed,  and  the  offenders  once  monished,
and  not  reforming,  to  bee  punished  at  the  discretion  of
the  captaine  and  master,  as  appertaineth.

13  Item,  that  morning  and  evening  prayer,  with  other  ^  minuter  in
common  services  appointed  by  the  kings  Majestie,  and '^^J'^g^-
lawes  of  this  Realme  to  be  read  and  saide  in  every  ship

daily  by  the  minister  in  the  Admirall,  and  the  marchant  or
some  other  person  learned  in  other  ships,  and  the  Bible
or  paraphrases  to  be  read  devoutly  and  Christianly  to
Gods  honour,  and  for  his  grace  to  be  obtained,  and
had  by  humble  and  heartie  praier  of  the  Navigants
accordingly.

14  Item,  that  every  officer  is  to  be  charged  by
Inventorie  with  the  particulars  of  his  charge,  and  to
render  a  perfect  accompt  of  the  diffraying  of  the  same
together  with  modest  &  temperate  dispending  of
powder,  shot,  and  use  of  all  kinde  of  artillery,  which
is  not  to  be  misused,  but  diligently  to  be  preserved
for  the  necessary  defence  of  the  fleete  and  voyage,
together  with  due  keeping  of  all  instruments  of  your
Navigation,  and  other  requisites.

15  Item,  no  liquor  to  be  spilt  on  the  balast,  nor
filthines  to  be  left  within  boord :  the  cook  room,  and
all  other  places  to  be  kept  cleane  for  the  better  health
of  the  companie,  the  gromals  &  pages  to  bee  brought
up  according  to  the  laudable  order  and  use  of  the  Sea,
as  well  in  learning  of  Navigation,  as  in  exercising  of  that
which  to  them  appertaineth.

16  Item,  the  liveries  in  apparel  given  to  the  mariners
be  to  be  kept  by  the  marchants,  and  not  to  be  worne,

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

but  by  the  order  of  the  captaine,  when  he  shall  see  cause
to  muster  or  shewe  them  in  good  aray,  for  the  advance-
ment and  honour  of  the  voyage,  and  the  liveries  to
bee  redelivered  to  the  keeping  of  the  marchants,  untill
it  shal  be  thought  convenient  for  every  person  to  have
the  ful  use  of  his  garment.

17  Item,  when  any  mariner  or  any  other  passenger
shal  have  neede  of  any  necessarie  furniture  of  apparell
for  his  body,  and  conservation  of  his  health,  the  same
shall  bee  delivered  him  by  the  Marchant,  at  the  assigne-
ment  of  the  captaine  and  Master  of  that  shippe,  wherein
such  needie  person  shall  be,  at  such  reasonable  price  as
the  same  cost,  without  any  gaine  to  be  exacted  by  the
marchants,  the  value  therof  to  be  entred  by  the  marchant
in  his  booke,  and  the  same  to  be  discounted  off  the  parties
wages,  that  so  shal  receive,  and  weare  the  same.

[I.  228.]  18  Item  the  sicke,  diseased,  weake,  and  visited  person
within  boord,  to  be  tendred,  relieved,  comforted,  and
holpen  in  the  time  of  his  infirmitie,  and  every  maner
of  person,  without  respect,  to  beare  anothers  burden,
and  no  man  to  refuse  such  labour  as  shall  be  put  to
him,  for  the  most  benefite,  and  publike  wealth  of  the
voyage,  and  enterprise,  to  be  atchieved  exactly.

19  Item  if  any  person  shal  fortune  to  die,  or  miscary
in  the  voyage,  such  apparell,  and  other  goods,  as  he  shall
have  at  the  time  of  his  death,  is  to  be  kept  by  the  order
of  the  captaine  and  Master  of  the  shippe,  and  an  in-
ventorie  to  be  made  of  it,  and  conserved  to  the  use
of  his  wife,  and  children,  or  otherwise  according  to  his
mind,  and  wil,  and  the  day  of  his  death  to  be  entred
in  the  Marchants  and  Stewards  bookes :  to  the  intent
it  may  be  knowen  what  wages  he  shall  have  deserved
to  his  death,  and  what  shall  rest  due  to  him.

20  Item,  that  the  Marchants  appointed  for  this  present
voyage,  shall  not  make  any  shew  or  sale  of  any  kind  of
marchandizes,  or  open  their  commodities  to  any  forrein
princes,  or  any  of  their  subjects,  without  the  consent,
privitie,  or  agreement  of  the  Captaines,  the  cape Mar-

SEBASTIAN  CABOT'S ORDINANCES  ad.

1553-

chants  and  the  assistants,  or  foure  of  them,  whereof  the
captaine  general!,  the  Pilot  Major,  and  cape  marchant
to  be  three,  and  every  of  the  pettie  marchants  to  shewe
his  reckoning  to  the  cape  marchant,  when  they,  or  any
of  them  shall  be  required :  and  no  commutation  or
trucke  to  be  made  by  any  of  the  petie  marchants,
without  the  assent  abovesaid :  and  all  wares,  and  com-
modities trucked,  bought  or  given  to  the  companie,  by
way  of  marchandise,  trucke,  or  any  other  respect,  to  be
booked  by  the  marchants,  and  to  be  wel  ordred,  packed,
and  conserved  in  one  masse  entirely,  and  not  to  be
broken  or  altered,  until  the  shippes  shall  returne  to
the  right  discharges,  and  inventorie  of  al  goods,  wares,
and  marchandises  so  trucked,  bought,  or  otherwise
dispended,  to  be  presented  to  the  Governor,  Consuls,  ^^^g
and  Assistants  in  London,  in  good  order,  to  the  intent  ■^^^'^'^'"'Y
the  Kings  Majestic  may  be  truly  answered  of  that  which
to  his  grace  by  his  grant  of  corporation  is  limited,  accord-
ing to  our  most  bound  dueties,  and  the  whole  companie
also  to  have  that  which  by  right  unto  them  appertaineth,
and  no  embezelment  shall  be  used,  but  the  truth  of
the  whole  voyage  to  bee  opened,  to  the  common  wealth
and  benefite  of  the  whole  companie,  and  mysterie,  as
appertaineth,  without  guile,  fraude,  or  male  engine.

21  Item,  no  particular  person,  to  hinder  or  prejudicate
the  common  stocke  of  the  company,  in  sale  or  prefer-
ment of  his  own  proper  wares,  and  things,  and  no
particular  emergent  or  purchase  to  be  employed  to  any
severall  profite,  untill  the  common  stocke  of  the  companie
shall  be  furnished,  and  no  person  to  hinder  the  common
benefite  in  such  purchases  or  contingents,  as  shal  fortune
to  any  one  of  them,  by  his  owne  proper  policie,  industrie,
or  chance,  nor  no  contention  to  rise  in  that  behalfe,  by
any  occasion  of  jewel,  stone,  pearles,  precious  mettals,
or  other  things  of  the  region,  where  it  shall  chance
the  same  to  rise,  or  to  be  found,  bought,  trucked,
permuted,  or  given  :  but  every  person  to  be  bounden
in such case, and upon such occasion, by order, and

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

direction,  as  the  generall  captaine,  and  the  Councell  shall
establish  and  determine,  to  whose  order  and  discretion
the  same  is  left :  for  that  of  things  uncertaine,  no  cer-
taine  rules  may  or  can  be  given.

22  Item  not  to  disclose  to  any  nation  the  state  of
our  religion,  but  to  passe  it  over  in  silence,  without
any  declaration  of  it,  seeming  to  beare  with  such  lawes,
and  rites,  as  the  place  hath,  where  you  shall  arrive.

23  Item  for  as  much  as  our  people,  and  shippes  may
appeare  unto  them  strange  and  wonderous,  and  theirs
also  to  ours :  it  is  to  be  considered,  how  they  may  be
used,  learning  much  of  their  natures  and  dispositions,
by  some  one  such  person,  as  you  may  first  either  allure,
or  take  to  be  brought  aboord  your  ships,  and  there  to
learne  as  you  may,  without  violence  or  force,  and  no
woman  to  be  tempted,  or  intreated  to  incontinencie,  or
dishonestie.

24  Item  the  person  so  taken,  to  be  well  entertained,
used,  and  apparelled,  to  be  set  on  land,  to  the  intent
that  he  or  she  may  allure  other  to  draw  nigh  to  shewe
the  commodities :  and  if  the  person  taken  may  be  made
drunke  with  your  beere,  or  wine,  you  shal  know  the
secrets  of  his  heart.

25  Item  our  people  may  not  passe  further  into  a
lande,  then  that  they  may  be  able  to  recover  their  pin-
nesses,  or  ships,  &  not  to  credit  the  faire  words  of  the
strange  people,  which  be  many  times  tried  subtile,  and
false,  nor  to  be  drawen  into  perill  of  losse,  for  the
desire  of  golde,  silver,  or  riches,  and  esteeme  your
owne  commodities  above  al  other,  and  in  countenance
shew  not  much  to  desire  the  forren  commodities :
neverthelesse  take  them  as  for  friendship,  or  by  way  of
permutation.

26  Item  every  nation  and  region  is  to  be  considered
advisedly,  &  not  to  provoke  them  by  any  disdaine,
laughing,  contempt,  or  such  like,  but  to  use  them  with
prudent  circumspection,  with  al  gentlenes,  and  curtesie,
and  not  to  tary  long  in  one  place,  untill  you  shall  have

SEBASTIAN CABOT'S ORDINANCES  ad

1553-
attained the most  worthy  place y' may be found, in
such sort, as you may returne w' victuals sufficient
prosperously.

27  Item  the  names  of  the  people  of  every  Island,
are  to  be  taken  in  writing,  with  the  commodities,  and
incommodities  of  the  same,  their  natures,  qualities,  and
dispositions,  the  site  of  the  same,  and  what  things  they  [I.  229.]
are  most  desirous  of,  &  what  commodities  they  wil  most
willingly  depart  with,  &  what  mettals  they  have  in  hils,
mountaines,  streames,  or  rivers,  in,  or  under  the  earth.

28  Item  if  people  shal  appeare  gathering  of  stones,
gold,  mettall,  or  other  like,  on  the  sand,  your  pinnesses
may  drawe  nigh,  marking  what  things  they  gather,
using  or  playing  upon  the  drumme,  or  such  other
instrum.ents,  as  may  allure  them  to  barkening,  to  fan-
tasie,  or  desire  to  see,  and  heare  your  instruments  and
voyces,  but  keepe  you  out  of  danger,  and  shewe  to
them  no  poynt  or  signe  of  rigour  and  hostilitie.

29  Item  if  you  shall  be  invited  into  any  Lords  or
Rulers  house,  to  dinner,  or  other  parliance,  goe  in  such
order  of  strength,  that  you  may  be  stronger  then  they,
and  be  warie  of  woods  and  ambushes,  and  that  your
weapons  be  not  out  of  your  possessions.

30  Item  if  you  shall  see  them  weare  Lyons  or
Beares  skinnes,  having  long  bowes,  and  arrowes,  be
not  afraid  of  that  sight :  for  such  be  worne  often-
times more  to  feare  strangers,  then  for  any  other  cause.

3 1  Item  there  are  people  that  can  swimme  in  the
sea,  havens,  &  rivers,  naked,  having  bowes  and  shafts,
coveting  to  draw  nigh  your  ships,  which  if  they  shal
finde  not  wel  watched,  or  warded,  they  wil  assault,
desirous  of  the  bodies  of  men,  which  they  covet  for
meate :  if  you  resist  them,  they  dive,  and  so  will  flee,
and  therefore  diligent  watch  is  to  be  kept  both  day
&  night,  in  some  Islands.

32  Item  if  occasion  shal  serve,  that  you  may  give
advertisements  of  your  proceedings  in  such  things  as
may  correspond  to  the  expectation  of  the  company,  and

203

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

likelihood  of  successe  in  the  voyage,  passing  such  dangers

of  the  seas,  perils  of  ice,  intollerable  coldes,  and  other
impediments,  which  by  sundry  authors  &  writers,  have
ministred  matter  of  suspition  in  some  heads,  that  this
voyage  could  not  succede  for  the  extremitie  of  the
North  pole,  lacke  of  passage,  &  such  like,  which  have
caused  wavering  minds,  and  doubtful  heads,  not  onely  to
withdraw  themselves  from  the  adventure  of  this  voyage,
but  also  disswaded  others  from,  the  same,  the  certaintie
wherof,  when  you  shall  have  tried  by  experience,  (most
certaine  Master  of  all  worldly  knowledge)  then  for  declar-
ation of  the  trueth,  which  you  shall  have  experted,  you
may  by  common  assent  of  counsell,  sende  either  by  land,
or  otherwaies,  such  two  or  one  person,  to  bring  the  same
by  credite,  as  you  shal  think  may  passe  in  safetie  :  which
sending  is  not  to  be  done,  but  upon  urgent  causes,  in
likely  successe  of  the  voyage,  in  finding  of  passage,  in
towardlines  of  beneficiall  traffike,  or  such  other  like,
whereby  the  company  being  advertised  of  your  estates
and  proceedings,  may  further  provide,  foresee,  and  deter-
mine that  which  may  seeme  most  good  and  beneficiall  for
the  publike  wealth  of  the  same  :  either  providing  before
hand  such  things,  as  shall  bee  requisite  for  the  continu-
ance of  the  voyage,  or  else  otherwise  to  dispose  as
occasion  shall  serve  :  in  which  things  your  wisedomes  and
discretions  are  to  be  used,  and  shewed,  and  the  contents
of  this  capitule,  by  you  much  to  be  pondred,  for  that  you
be  not  ignorant,  how  many  persons,  as  well  the  kings
Majestic,  the  Lords  of  his  honorable  Counsel,  this  whole
companie,  as  also  your  wives,  children,  kinsfolkes,  allies,
friends  and  familiars,  be  replenished  in  their  hearts  with
ardent  desire  to  learne  and  know  your  estates,  conditions,
and  welfares,  and  in  what  likelihood  you  be  in,  to  obtain
this  notable  enterprise,  which  is  hoped  no  lesse  to  succeed
to  you,  then  the  Orient  or  Occident  Indias  have  to  the
high  benefite  of  the  Emperour,  and  kings  of  Portingal,
whose  subjects  industries,  and  travailes  by  sea,  have
inriched  them,  by  those  lands  and  Islands,  which  were  to

204

SEBASTIAN  CABOT'S  ORDINANCES  ad.

1553-
all  Cosmographers,  and  other  writers  both  unknowne,  and
also  by  apparances  of  reason  voide  of  experience  thought  Re^ison  voide
and reputed unhabitable for extremities of  heates, and  ?/"^^/^"^«^^-
colds,  and  yet  indeed  tried  most  rich,  peopled,  temperate,
and  so  commodious,  as  all  Europe  hath  not  the  like.

'X^2,  Item  no  conspiracies,  parttakings,  factions,  false
tales,  untrue  reports,  which  be  the  very  seedes,  and  fruits
of  contention,  discord,  &  confusion,  by  evill  tongues  to
be  suffered,  but  the  same,  &  all  other  ungodlines  to  be
chastened  charitably  with  brotherly  love,  and  alwaies
obedience  to  be  used  and  practised  by  al  persons  in  their
degrees,  not  only  for  duetie  and  conscience  sake  towards
God,  under  whose  mercifull  hand  navigants  above  all
other  creatures  naturally  bee  most  nigh,  and  vicine,  but
also  for  prudent  and  worldly  pollicie,  and  publike  weale,
considering  and  alwaies  having  present  in  your  mindes
that  you  be  all  one  most  royall  kings  subjects,  and
naturals,  with  daily  remembrance  of  the  great  importance
of  the  voyage,  the  honour,  glorie,  praise,  and  benefite
that  depend  of,  and  upon  the  same,  toward  the  common
wealth  of  this  noble  Realme,  the  advancement  of  you  the
travailers  therein,  your  wives,  and  children,  and  so  to
endevour  your  selves  as  that  you  may  satisfie  the  expec-
tation of  them,  who  at  their  great  costs,  charges,  and
expenses,  have  so  furnished  you  in  good  sort,  and  plentie
of  all  necessaries,  as  the  like  was  never  in  any  realme
seene,  used,  or  knowen  requisite  and  needful  for  such  an
exploit,  which  is  most  likely  to  be  atchieved,  and  brought
to  good  effect,  if  every  person  in  his  vocation  shall
endevour  himselfe  according  to  his  charge,  and  most
bounden  duetie  :  praying  the  living  God,  to  give  you  his
grace,  to  accomplish  your  charge  to  his  glorie,  whose  [I.  230.]
merciful  hand  shal  prosper  your  voyage,  and  preserve  you
from  all  dangers.

In  witnes  whereof  I  Sebastian  Cabota,  Governour
aforesaide,  to  these  present  ordinances,  have  subscribed
my  name,  and  put  my  scale,  the  day  and  yeere  above
written.

205

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  names  of  the  twelve  Counsellors  appointed
in this  voyage.

Ir  Hugh  Willoughby  Knight,  Captaine  generall.
Richard Chancelour Captaine of the Edward
Bonaventure,  and  Pilot  generall  of  the  fleete.

3  George  Burton  Cape  marchant.

4  Master  Richard  Stafford  Minister.

5  Thomas  Langlie  Marchant.

6  James  Dalabere  Gentleman.

7  William Gefferson Master  of  the  Bona  Speranza
Admirall.

8  Stephen  Borrough Master  of  the  Edward Bona-
venture.

Cornelius  Durfurth  Master  of  the  Confidentia.
Roger  Wilson.

9

lO

1 1

12

John  Buckland.
Richard  Ingram.

Masters  mates.

Exemplar  Epistols  seu  literarum  Missivarum,  quas
illustrissimus  Princeps  Eduardus  ejus  nominis
Sextus,  Anglic,  Francis,  &  Hibernise  Rex,
misit  ad  Principes  Septentrionalem,  ac  Orien-
talem  mundi  plagam  inhabitantes  juxta  mare
glaciale,  nee  non  Indiam  Orientalem  ;  Anno
Domini  1553  Regni  sui  anno  septimo,  &
ultimo.

Duardus  sextus,  Angliae,  Francias,  &  Hi-
berniae  Rex,  &c.  Omnibus  Regibus  &
principibus  ac  dominis,  &  cunctis  Judi-
cibus  terras,  &  Ducibus  ejus,  quibus-
cunque  est  excellens  aliqua  dignitas  in  ea,
cunctis  in  locis  quae  sunt  sub  universo
coelo  :  Pax,  tranquillitas,  &  honor  vobis,
terris,  &  regionibus  vestris  quae  imperio  vestro  subjacent,
cuique  vestrum  quemadmodum  convenit  ei. Propterea

206

KING  EDWARD  VI.  S LETTER  ad.

J553-
quod  indidit  Deus  Opt.  Max.  hominibus  prae  cunctis
aliis  viventibus,  cor  &  desiderium  tale,  ut  appetat  quisque
cum  aliis  societatem  inire,  amare,  &  vicissim  amari,  bene-
iiciis  afficere,  &  mutua  accipere  beneficia  studeat,  ideo
cuique  pro  facultate  sua  hoc  desiderium  in  omnibus
quidem  hominibus  beneficiis  fovere  &  conservare  con-
venit,  in  illis  autem  maxime,  qui  hoc  desiderio  adducti,  a
remotis  etiam  regionibus  ad  eos  veniunt.  Quo  enim
longius  iter  ejus  rei  gratia  ingressi  sunt,  eo  ardentius  in
eis  hoc  desiderium  fuisse  declararunt.  Insuper  etiam  ad
hoc,  nos  patrum  rnajorumque  nostrorum  exempla  invitant,
qui  semper  hurrianissime  susceperunt  &  benignissime  trac-
taverunt  illos,  qui  turn  a  locis  propinquis,  tum  a  remotis,
eos  amice  .adibant,  eorum  se  protectioni  commendantes.
Quod  si  omnibus  id  praestare  aequum  est,  certe  mercatori-
bus  imprimis  prasstari  debet,  qui  per  universum  orbem
discurrunt,  mare  circurrilustrantes  &  aridam,  ut  res  bonas
&  utiles,  qu^  Dei  beneficio  in  regione  eorum  inveniuntur,
ad  remotissimas  regiones  &  regna  adferant,  atque  inde
vicissim  referant,  quod  suae  regioni  utile  ibi  repeterint  :
ut  &  populi  ad  quos  eunt,  non  destituantur  commodis
qu£  non  profert  illis  terra  eorum,  &  ipsi  sint  participes
rerum  quibus  illi  abundant.  Nam  Deus  coeli  &  terrae,
humano  generi  maxime  consulens,  noluit  ut  omnia  in
quavis  regione  invenirentur,  quo  regio  ope  alterius  regi-
onis  indigeret,  &  gens  ab  alia  gente  commodum  aliquod
expectaret,  ac  ita  stabiliretur  amicitia  inter  omnes,  singuii-
que  omnibus  benefacere  quaererent.  Hoc  itaque  ineundae
ac  stabiliendae  amicitiae  desiderio  moti  viri  quidam  regni
nostri,  iter  in  remotas  maritimas  regiones  instituerunt,  ut
inter  nostros  &  illos  populos,  viam  mercibus  inferendis  &
efferendis  aperirent,  nosque  rogaverunt  ut  id  illis  conce-
deremus.  Qui  petitioni  illorum  annuentes,  concessimus
viro  honorabili  &  forti,  Hugoni  Wilibeo,  &  aliis  qui  cum
eo  sunt  servis  nostris  fidis  &  charis,  ut  pro  sua  voluntate,
in  regiones  eis  prius  incognitas  eant,  quassituri  ea  quibus
nos  caremus,  &  adducant  illis  ex  nostris  terris  id  quo  illi
carent. Atque  ita  illis  &  nobis  commodum  inde  accedat,

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

sitque  amicitia  perpetua,  &  foedus  indissolubile  inter
illos  &  nos,  dum  permittent  illi  nos  accipere  de  rebus,
[I.  231,]  quibus  superabundant  in  regnis  suis,  &  nos  concedemus
illis  ex  regnis  nostris  res,  quibus  destituuntur.  Rogamus
itaque  vos  Reges  &  Principes,  &  omnes  quibus  aliqua  est
potestas  in  terra,  ut  viris  istis  nostris,  transitum  permit-
tatis  per  regiones  vestras.  Non  enim  tangent  quicquam
ex  rebus  vestris  invitis  vobis.  Cogitate  quod  homines  &
ipsi  sunt.  Et  si  qua  re  carverint,  oramus  pro  vestra
beneficentia,  earn  vos  illis  tribuatis,  accipientes  vicissim  ab
eis  quod  poterunt  rependere  vobis.  Ita  vos  gerite  erga
eos,  quemadmodum  cuperetis  ut  nos,  &  subditi  nostri,
nos  gereremus  erga  servos  vestros,  si  quando  transierint
per  regiones  nostras.  Atque  promittimus  vobis  per
Deum  omnium  quae  coelo,  terra  &  mari  continentur,  per-
que  vitam  nostram,  &  tranquiilitatem  regnorum  nos-
trorum,  nos  pari  benignitate  servos  vestros  accepturos,  si
ad  regna  nostra  aliquando  venerint.  Atque  a  nobis  &
subditis  nostris,  ac  si  nati  fuissent  in  regnis  nostris  ita
benigne  tractabuntur,  ut  rependamus  vobis  benignitatem,
quam  nostris  exhibueritis.  Postquam  vos  Reges,  Prin-
cipes, &c.  rogavimus,  ut  humanitate  &  beneficentia  omni
prosequamini  servos  nostros  nobis  charos,  oramus  omni-
potentem  Deum  nostrum,  ut  vobis  diuturnam  vitam
largiatur,  &  pacem  quae  nullam  habeat  finem.  Scriptum
Londini,  quae  civitas  est  primaria  regni  nostri.  Anno  5515.
a  creato  mundo,  mense  lair,  14.  die  mensis,  anno  septimo
regni  nostri.

208

KING  EDWARD  VI.'S  LETTER  ad.

1553-

The  copie  of  the  letters  missive,  which  the  right
noble  Prince  Edward  the  sixt  sent  to  the
Kings,  Princes,  and  other  Potentates,  in-
habiting the  Northeast  partes  of  the  worlde,
toward  the  mighty  Empire  of  Cathay,  at  such
time  as  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  knight,  and
Richard  Chancelor,  with  their  company,
attempted  their  voyage  thither  in  the  yeere
of  Christ  1553.  and  the  seventh  and  last
yeere  of  his  raigne.

iDward  the  sIxt,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King
of  England,  France,  and  Ireland,  &c.  To
all  Kings,  Princes,  Rulers,  Judges,  and
Governours  of  the  earth,  and  all  other
having  any  excellent  dignitie  on  the  same,
in  all  places  under  the  universall  heaven  :
peace,  tranquillitie,  and  honour  be  unto
you,  and  your  lands  and  regions,  which  are  under  your
dominions,  and  to  every  of  you,  as  is  convenient.

Forasmuch  as  the  great  and  Almightie  God  hath
given  unto  mankinde,  above  all  other  living  creatures,
such  an  heart  and  desire,  that  every  man  desireth  to
joine  friendship  with  other,  to  love,  and  be  loved,  also
to  give  and  receive  mutuall  benefites  :  it  is  therefore
the  duety  of  all  men,  according  to  their  power,  to
maintaine  and  increase  this  desire  in  every  man,  with
well  deserving  to  all  men,  and  especially  to  shew  this
good  affection  to  such,  as  being  moved  with  this  desire,
come  unto  them  from  farre  countreis.  For  how  much
the  longer  voyage  they  have  attempted  for  this  intent,
so  much  the  more  doe  they  thereby  declare  that  this
desire  hath  bene  ardent  in  them.  Furthermore  also,  the
examples  of  our  fathers  and  predecessors  doe  invite  us
hereunto,  forasmuch  as  they  have  ever  gently  and  lovingly
intreated  such  as  of  friendly  mind  came  to  them,  aswell
II  209  o

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1553-

from  Countries  neare  hand,  as  farre  remote,  commending
themselves  to  their  protection.  And  if  it  be  right  and
equity  to  shew  such  humanitie  toward  all  men,  doubtlesse
the  same  ought  chiefly  to  be  shewed  to  marchants,  who
wandering  about  the  world,  search  both  the  land  and
the  sea,  to  carry  such  good  and  profitable  things,  as  are
found  in  their  Countries,  to  remote  regions  and  kingdomes,
and  again  e  to  bring  from  the  same,  such  things  as  they
find  there  commodious  for  their  owne  Countries  :  both
aswell  that  the  people,  to  whom  they  goe,  may  not  be
destitute  of  such  commodities  as  their  Countries  bring
not  foorth  to  them,  as  that  also  they  may  be  partakers
of  such  things,  whereof  they  abound.  ^^  For  the  God  of
heaven  and  earth  greatly  providing  for  mankinde,  would
not  that  all  things  should  be  found  in  one  region,  to
the  ende  that  one  should  have  neede  of  another,  that
by  this  m.eanes  friendship  might  be  established  among
all  men,  and  every  one  seeke  to  gratifie  all.  For  the
establishing  and  furtherance  of  which  universall  amitie, ,
certaine  men  of  our  Realme,  mooved  heereunto  by  the
said  desire,  have  instituted  and  taken  upon  them  a  voyage
by  sea  into  farre  Countreis,  to  the  intent  that  betweene
our  people  and  them,  a  way  may  bee  opened  to  bring
in,  and  cary  out  marchandises,  desiring  us  to  further
their  enterprise.  Who  assenting  to  their  petition,  have '
licensed  the  right  valiant  and  worthy  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby,  knight,  and  other  our  trusty  and  faithful!  i
servants,  which  are  with  him,  according  to  their  desire, ,
to  goe  to  countreis  to  them  heeretofore  unknowen,  aswell '
to  seeke  such  things  as  we  lacke,  as  also  to  cary  unto
them  from  our  regions,  such  things  as  they  lacke.  So
that  hereby  not  onely  commoditie  may  ensue  both  to
them  and  us,  but  also  an  indissoluble  and  perpetuall
league  of  friendship  be  established  betweene  us  both,
[1.  232.]  while  they  permit  us  to  take  of  their  things,  such
whereof  they  have  abundance  in  their  regions,  and  we
againe  grant  them  such  things  of  ours,  whereof  they
are  destitute./  We  therfore  desire  you  kings  &  princes,

KING  EDWARD  VI.'S  LETTER  a.d.

1553-
and  al  other,  to  whom  there  is  any  power  on  the  earth,

to  permit  unto  these  our  servants  free  passage  by  your
regions  and  dominions  :  for  they  shall  not  touch  any
thing  of  yours  unwilling  unto  you.  Consider  you  that
they  also  are  men.  If  therefore  they  shall  stand  in
neede  of  any  thing,  we  desire  you  of  all  humanitie,
and  for  the  nobilitie  which  is  in  you,  to  ayde  and  helpe
them  with  such  things  as  they  lacke,  receiving  againe
of  them  such  things  as  they  shall  bee  able  to  give  you
in  recompense.  Shew  your  selves  so  towards  them,  as
you  would  that  we  and  our  subjects  should  shewe  our-
selves towards  your  servants,  if  at  any  time  they  shall
passe  by  our  regions.

Thus  doing,  we  promise  you  by  the  God  of  all  things
that  are  contained  in  heaven,  earth,  and  the  Sea,  and
by  the  life  and  tranquillitie  of  our  kingdomes,  that  we
will  with  like  humanitie  accept  your  servants,  if  at  any
time  they  shall  come  to  our  kingdomes,  where  they
shall  as  friendly  and  gently  bee  entertained,  as  if  they
were  borne  in  our  Dominions,  that  wee  may  hereby
recompence  the  favour  and  benignitie  which  you  have
shewed  to  our  men.  Thus  after  we  have  desired  you
Kings  and  princes,  &c.  with  all  humanity  and  favour,
to  entertaine  our  welbeloved  servants,  we  will  pray  our
Almighty  God,  to  graunt  you  long  life,  and  peace,  which
never  shall  have  ende.  Written  in  London,  which  is  the
chiefe  Citie  of  our  kingdome,  in  the  yeere  from  the
creation  of  the  world,  5515.  in  the  moneth  of  liar,  liar.  1  would
the  fourteenth  day  of  the  moneth,  and  seventh  yeere  of  ^'^^^^  Mair,

that  is.  In  the
our  reigne.  „ '  ,

o  .  Sarasen  lan-

This letter was written also in Greeke, and divers  g^age,  mixtof
other  languages.  -  Turkish_  and

° °  Aegypitan,

Februarie,  in-
terpreted by
•  them  the

moneth  to  set
ships  to  the

[The  ''''•

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  true  copie  of  a  note  found  written  in  one
of  the  two  ships,  to  wit,  the  Speranza,  which
wintred  in  Lappia,  where  sir  Hugh  Willoughby
and  all  his  companie  died,  being  frozen  to
death. Anno  1553.

he  voiage  intended  for  the  discoverie  of  Cathay,
and  divers  other  regions,  dominions,  Islands,  and
places  unknowen,  set  forth  by  the  right  worshipful,

master  Sebastian  Cabota  Esquire,  and  Governour  of  the
mysterie  and  company  of  the  Marchants  Adventurers
of  the  citie  of  London  :  which  fleete  being  furnished,
did  set  forth  the  tenth  day  of  May,  1553.  and  in  the
seventh  yeere  of  our  most  dread  Soveraigne  Lord,  and
King,  Edward  the  sixt.

The  names  of  the  shippes  of  the  fleete,  and  of  their
burden,  together  with  the  names  of  the  Captaines,
and  Counsellors,  Pilot  Major,  Masters  of  the  ships,
Marchants,  with  other  officers,  and  Mariners,  as
hereafter  followeth.
The  first  ship.  The  Bona  Esperanza,  Admirall  of  the  fleete,  of  120.
tunnes,  having  with  her  a  pinnesse,  and  a  boate.

Sir  Hugh  Willoughby, knight, Captaine generall of
the  fleete.

William  Geiferson,  Master  of  the  shippe.
Roger  Wilson,  his  Mate.

William  Gittons,  Charles  Barret,  Gabriel  Willoughby,
John  Andrews,  Alexander  Woodfoord,  Ralph  Chatterton,
Marchants.

Mariners  and  officers,  according  to  the  custome,  and  use

of  the  Seas,

John  Brook,  Master  Gunner.

Nicholas  Anthony,  Boateswaine.

John  Web,  his  Mate.

Christopher  Banbrucke,  Thomas  Davison,  Robert  Rosse,
Thomas  Simpson,  quarter  Masters.

SIR  HUGH  WILLOUGHBY  ad.

1553-

William  White,  James  Smith,  Thomas  Painter,  John
Smith,  their  Mates.

Richard  Gwinne,  George  Goiswine,  Carpenters.

Robert  Gwinne,  Purser.

Laurence  Edwards,  his  Mate,  and  Couper.

Richard  Morgan,  Cooke.

Thomas  Nashe,  his  Mate.

William  Light,  John  Brande,  Cutbert  Chelsie,  George
Blage,  Thomas  Walker,  Thomas  Allen,  Edward  Smith,
Edward  Hunt,  John  Fawkner,  Rowland  Brooke.

Alexander  Gardiner,  Richard  Molton,  Surgeons,  which
two  were  taken  in  at  Harwich.

Discharged  at  Harwich,  by  reason  of  sicknes,  George  [I.  233.]
Blake,  Nicholas  Anthony.

For  pickerie  ducked  at  the  yards  arme,  and  so  dis-
charged Thomas  Nash.

The  Edward  Bonaventure,  of  1 60.  tunnes,  with  her  a  Th  second
pinnesse,  and  a  boate.  ^  ^^'

Richard  Chancelor,  Captaine,  and  Pilot  major  of  the
fleete.

Stephen  Borowgh,  Master  of  the  ship.

John  Buckland,  his  Mate.

George  Burton,  Arthur  Edwards,  Marchants.

John  Stafford,  Minister.  John  Stafford

James  Dallaber,  Nicholas  Newborrow,  John  Segswike,  Mtmster.
Thomas  Francis,  John  Hasse,  Richard  Johnson,  William
Kempe.

Mariners  and  officers,  according  to  the  custome  and  use

of  the  Seas.

Robert  Stanton,  Master  Gunner.

John  Walker,  his  Mate.

James  Long,  John  Cocks,  Gunners.

Thomas  Walter,  Surgeon.

Peter  Palmer,  Boateswaine.

Richard  Strowde,  his  Mate.

John  Robinson,  John  Carowe,  Thomas  Stone,  Roger
Lishbie,  quarter  Masters.

213

A.D.

1553-

M.  William
Burrough
nowe  comp-
troller of  her
Majesties
navie.

The  third
ship.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

John  Austen,  Steward  : Patricke  Stevens,  his  Mate.

Austen  Jacks,  Cooke.

William  Every,  Cowper.

Griffin  Wagham,  Carpenter.

Thomas  Stelston,  Thomas  Townes,  John  Robinson,
John  White,  William  Laurence,  Miles  Butter,  John
Browne,  William  Morren,  William  Watson,  Thomas
Handcocks,  Edward  Pacie,  Thomas  Browne,  Arthur  Pet,
George  Phibarie,  Edward  Patterson,  William  Beare,  John
Potter,  Nicholas  Lawrence,  William  Burrough,  Roger
Welford,  John  Williams.

The  Bona  Confidentia  of  90.  tunnes,  having  with  her
a  pinnesse,  and  a  boate.

Cornelius  Durfoorth,  Master  of  the  shippe.

Richard  Ingram,  his  Mate.

Thomas  Langlie,  Edward  Kever,  Henrie  Dorset,
Marchants.

Mariners  and  officers,  according  to  the  use  and  custome

of  the  Sea.

Henrie  Tailer,  Master  Gunner.

George  Thurland,  his  Mate.

William  Hamane,  Boateswaine.

John  Edwards,  his  Mate.

Thomas  Kirbie,  Henrie  Dickenson,  John  Haye,
William  Shepwash,  quarter  Masters.

John  Reyne,  Steward.

Thomas  Hante,  Cooke. William  Lassie,  his  Mate.

Nicholas  Knight,  Carpenter.

Peter  Lewike,  Nicholas  Wiggleworth,  John  Moore,
William  Chapman,  Brian  Chester,  William  Barrie,
Richard  Wood,  Clement  Gibson,  John--  Clarocke,
Erasmus  Bently,  John  Duriforth.

214

SIR  HUGH WILLOUGHBY  ad.

1553-

The  Juramentum,  or  othe,  ministred to  the
Captaine.

YOu  shall  sweare  to  be  a  faithfuU,  true,  and  loyal
subject  in  all  points,  and  duties,  that  to  a  subject
appertaineth,  to  our  soveraigne  Lord  the  kings  Majestie,
his  heires,  and  successors  :  and  that  you  shall  wel  and
truely  to  the  uttermost  of  your  capacitie,  wit,  &  know-
ledge, serve  this  present  voiage,  committed  to  your  charge,
and  not  to  give  up,  nor  sooner  intermit  the  same,  until
you  shall  have  atchieved  the  same,  so  farre  foorth,  as
you  may  without  danger  of  your  life,  and  losse  of  the
fleete  :  you  shall  give  good,  true,  and  faithful  counsell
to  the  said  societie,  and  to  such  as  shal  have  the  charge
with  or  under  you,  and  not  to  disclose  the  secrets,  or
privities  of  the  same  to  any  person  by  any  maner  of
meane,  to  the  prejudice,  hurt,  or  damage  of  it.  You
shal  minister  justice  to  all  men  under  your  charge,
without  respect  of  person,  or  any  affection,  that  might
move  you  to  decline  from  the  true  ministration  of
justice.  And  further,  you  shal  observe,  and  cause
to  be  observed,  as  much  as  in  you  lieth,  all  and  singular
rules,  articles,  provisions  hitherto  made,  or  heereafter  to
be  made  for  the  preservation  or  safeconduct  of  the  fleete
and  voyage,  and  benefit  of  the  company.  You  shall
not  permit  nor  suffer  the  stocke  or  goods  of  the  company
to  be  wasted,  imbezeled,  or  consumed,  but  shall  conserve
the  same  whole  and  entire,  without  diminishment,  untill
you  shall  have  delivered,  or  cause  to  be  delivered  the  [i.  234.]
same,  to  the  use  of  the  companie.  And  finally  you
shal  use  your  selfe  in  all  points,  sorts,  and  conditions,
as  to  a  faithfuU  captaine,  and  brother  of  this  companie
shall  belong  and  appertaine  : So  helpe  you  God,  &c.

[The

215

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  othe  ministred  to  the  Maister  of  the
ship,  &c.

Ou  shall  sweare  by  the  holy  contents  in
that  booke,  that  you  according  and  to
the  uttermost  of  your  knowledge,  and
good  understanding  in  mariners  science
and  craft,  shall  in  your  vocation  doe
your  best  to  conduct  the  good  shippe
called  the  N.  &c.  whereof  you  nowe
are  Maister  under  God,  both  unto  and  from  the
portes  of  your  discoverie,  and  so  use  your  indevour
and  faithfuU  diligence,  in  charging,  discharging,  lading
againe,  and  roomaging  of  the  same  shippe,  as  may  be
most  for  the  benefite  and  profite  of  this  right  woorship-
full  fellowship  :  and  you  shall  not  privately  bargein,  buy,
sell,  exchange,  barter,  or  distribute  any  goods,  wares,
merchandize,  or  things  whatsoever  (necessary  tackles  and
victuals  for  the  shippe  onely  excepted)  to  or  for  your
owne  lucre,  gaine  or  profit,  neither  to  nor  for  the  private
lucre,  gaine,  or  profit  of  any  other  person  or  persons
whatsoever.  And  further.  If  you  shall  know  any  boat-
swaine,  mariner,  or  any  other  person  or  persons  what-
soever, to  buy,  sell,  barter,  trucke,  or  exchange  any
goods,  wares,  marchandizes,  or  things  for  private  account,
reckoning,  or  behalfe,  you  shall  doe  your  best  to  with-
stand and  let  the  same  :  and  if  you  cannot  com-
modiously  so  doe,  that  then  before  the  discharge  of
such  goods  bought  for  privat  account,  you  shal  give
knowledge  therof  to  the  cape  marchant  of  this  said
fellowship  for  the  time  being.  And  you  shal  not
receive  nor  take,  nor  suffer  to  be  received  or  taken  into
your  said  ship  during  this  voyage  any  maner  person  or
persons  whatsoever,  going  or  returning,  but  onely  those
mariners  which  without  fraud  or  guile  shall  be  hired
to  be  of  your  company,  and  to  serve  in  mariners  craft
and  science  onely  : So  helpe  you  God,  &c.

2t6

SIR  HUGH  WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-

These  foresaid  shippes  being  fully  furnished  with  their
pinnesses  and  boates,  well  appointed  with  al  maner  of
artillerie,  and  other  things  necessary  for  their  defence
with  al  the  men  aforesaid,  departed  from  RatclifFe,  and
valed  unto  Detford,  the  lo.  day  of  May,  1553.

The  1 1 .  day  about  two  of  the  clocke,  we  departed  from
Detford,  passing  by  Greenwich,  saluting  the  kings
Majesty  then  being  there,  shooting  off  our  ordinance,
&  so  valed  unto  Blackwall,  and  there  remained  until
the  17.  day,  and  that  day  in  the  morning  we  went
from  Blackwall,  and  came  to  Woolwich  by  nine  of  the
clocke,  and  there  remained  one  tide,  and  so  the  same
night  unto  Heyreth.

The  18.  day  from  Heyreth  unto  Gravesend,  and  there
remained  until  the  twentieth  day  :  that  day  being  Sater-
day,  from  Gravesend  unto  Tilberie  Hope,  remaining
there  untill  the  two  and  twentieth  day.  ^^y-

The  22.  day  from  Tilbery  Hope  to  Hollie  haven.

The  23.  day  from  Hollie  Haven,  till  we  came  against
Lee,  and  there  remained  that  night,  by  reason  that  the
winde  was  contrary  to  us.

The  24.  day  the  winde  being  in  the  Southwest  in
the  morning,  we  sailed  along  the  coast  over  the  Spits,
untill  we  came  against  S.  Osyth,  about  sixe  of  the
clocke  at  night,  and  there  came  to  anker,  and  abode  there
all  that  night.

The  25.  day  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  we  departed
from  S.  Osyth,  and  so  sailed  forward  unto  the  Nase,
and  there  abode  that  night  for  winde  and  tide.

The  26.  day  at  five  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  we
weyed  our  anker,  and  sailed  over  the  Nase,  the  winde
being  at  the  Southwest,  untill  wee  came  to  Orwell
wands,  and  there  came  to  an  anker,  and  abode  there
untill  the  28.  day.

The  same  day  being  Trinitie  Sunday  about  7.  of  the
clocke  before  noone  we  weyed  our  ankers,  and  sailed  til
we  came  athwart  Walsursye,  and  there  came  to  an  anker.

The  29. day  from thence  to Holmehead, where  we

217

AD,  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

stayed  that  day,  where  we  consulted  which  way,  and
what  courses  were  best  to  be  holden  for  the  discoverie
of  our  voyage,  and  there  agreed.

The  30.  day  of  May  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  wee  set  saile,  and  came  against  Yermouth  about
three  leagues  into  the  sea,  riding  there  at  anker  all  that
night.

The  last  of  May  into  the  sea  sixe  leagues  Northeast,
and  there  taried that  night,  where  the  winde  blew  very
sore.
June.  The  first  of  June  the  winde  being  at  North  contrary  to

us,  wee  came  backe  againe  to  Orwell,  and  remained  there
untill  the  15.  day,  tarying  for  the  winde,  for  all  this  time
the  winde  was  contrary  to  our  purpose.
[I.  235.]  The  15  day  being  at  Orwel  in  the  latitude  of  52
degrees,  in  the  morning  wee  weyed  our  ankers,  and  went
forth  into  the  wands  about  two  miles  from  the  towne,
and  lay  there  that  night.

The  1 6  day  at  eight  of  the  clocke  we  set  forward,  and
sayled  untill  we  came  athwart  Alburrough,  and  there
stayed  that  night.

The  17  day  about  five  of  the  clocke  before  noone  we
went  backe  unto  Orfordnesse,  and  there  remained  untill
the  19  day.

The  19  day  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we
went  backe  to  Orwel,  and  abode  there  three  dayes  tarying
for  the  winde.

The  23  day  of  June  the  wind  being  faire  in  the  South-
west we  hailed  into  the  seas  to  Orfordnesse,  and  from
thence  into  the  seas  ten  leagues  Northeast  :  then  being
past  the  sands,  we  changed  our  course  sixe  leagues
Northnortheast  :  about  midnight  we  changed  our  course
againe,  and  went  due  North,  continuing  in  the  same  unto
the  27  day.

The  27  day  about  seven  of  the  clocke  Northnorthwest
42  leagues  to  the  ende  to  fall  with  Shotland  :  then  the
wind  veared  to  the  West,  so  that  we  could  lie  but  North
and  by  West,  continuing  in  the  same  course  40  leagues,

218

SIR  HUGH  WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-

whereby  we  could  not  fetch  Shetland :  then  we  sayled
North  1 6  leagues  by  estimation,  after  that  North  and  by
West,  &  Northnorthwest,  then  Southeast,  with  divers
other  courses,  traversing  and  tracing  the  seas,  by  reason
of  sundry  and  manifolde  contrary  windes,  untill  the  14
day  of  July :  and  then  the  sunne  entring  into  Leo,  we  July.
discovered  land  Eastward  of  us,  unto  the  which  we  sayled
that  night  as  much  as  we  might  :  and  after  wee  went  on
shore  with  our  Pinnesse,  &  found  little  houses  to  the
number  of  30,  where  we  knew  that  it  was  inhabited,  but
the  people  were  fled  away,  as  we  judged,  for  feare  of  us.

The  land  was  all  full  of  little  Islands,  and  that  innu-  -^'^  ^^"  ^^^d
merable,  which  were  called  (as  we  learned  afterwards)  '^.^  ^'^^^^''
^geland  and  Halgeland,  which  lieth  from  Orfordnesse
North  and  by  East,  being  in  the  latitude  of  66  degrees.
The  distance  betweene  Orfordnesse  and  vEgeland  250
leagues.  Then  we  sailed  from  thence  12  leagues  North-
west, and  found  many  other  Islandes,  and  there  came  to
anker  the  19  day,  and  manned  our  Pinnesse,  and  went
on  shore  to  the  Islands,  and  found  people  mowing  and
making  of  hay,  which  came  to  the  shore  and  welcomed
us.  In  which  place  were  an  innumerable  sort  of  Islands,
which  were  called  the  Isles  of  Rost,  being  under  the  Rost  Islands.
dominion  of  the  king  of  Denmarke :  which  place  was  in
latitude  66  degrees,  and  30  minutes.  The  winde  being
contrary,  we  remayned  there  three  dayes,  &  there  was  an
innumerable  sort  of  foules  of  divers  kindes,  of  which  we
tooke  very  many.

The  22  day  the  winde  comming  fayre,  we  departed
from  Rost,  sailing  Northnortheast,  keeping  the  sea  untill
the  27  day,  and  then  we  drew  neere  unto  the  land,  which
was  still  East  of  us  :  then  went  foorth  our  Pinnesse  to
seeke  harborow,  &  found  many  good  harbours,  of  the
which  we  entred  into  one  with  our  shippes,  which  was
called  Stanfew,  and  the  land  being  Islands,  were  called  Stanfew
Lewfoot,  or  Lofoot,  which  were  plentifully  inhabited,  and  y^^"^-
very  gentle  people,  being  also  under  the  king  of  Den-
marke : but  we  could  not  learne  how  farre  it  was  from

219

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

the  maine  land :  and  we  remained  there  until  the  30  day,
being  in  latitude  68  degrees,  and  from  the  foresaid  Rost
about  30  leagues  Northnortheast.

The  30  day  of  July  about  noone  we  weyed  our  ankers,
and  went  into  the  Seas,  and  sayled  along  these  Islands
Northnortheast,  keeping  the  land  still  in  sight  untill  the

August.  second  day  of  August : then  hailing  in  close  aboord  the

land,  to  the  entent  to  knowe  what  land  it  was,  there  came
a  skijEFe  of  the  Island  aboord  of  us,  of  whom  we  asked
many  questions,  who  shewed  unto  us,  that  the  Island  was

^eynam  In  70  called  Seynam,  which  is  the  latitude  of  seventy  degrees,
egrees.  ^^^ from Stanfew  thirtie  leagues,  being  also  under  the

king  of  Denmarke,  and  that  there  was  no  merchandise
there,  but  onely  dryed  fish,  and  traine  oyle.  Then  we
being  purposed  to  goe  unto  Finmarke,  inquired  of  him,
if  we  might  have  a  pilot  to  bring  us  unto  Finmarke,  &
he  said,  that  if  we  could  beare  in,  we  should  have  a  good
harbour,  and  on  the  next  day  a  pilot  to  bring  us  to
Finmarke,  unto  the  wardhouse,  which  is  the  strongest
holde  in  Finmarke,  and  most  resorted  to  by  report.  But
when  wee  would  have  entred  into  an  harbour,  the  land
being  very  high  on  every  side,  there  came  such  flawes  of
winde  and  terrible  whirlewinds,  that  we  were  not  able  to
beare  in,  but  by  violence  were  constrained  to  take  the  sea
agayne,  our  Pinnesse  being  unshipt  :  we  sailed  North  and
by  East,  the  wind  increasing  so  sore  that  we  were  not
able  to  beare  any  saile,  but  tooke  them  in,  and  lay  a  drift,
to  the  end  to  let  the  storme  over  passe.  And  that  night
by  violence  of  winde,  and  thickenesse  of  mists,  we  were
not  able  to  keepe  together  within  sight,  and  then  about
midniffht  we  lost  our  oinnesse,  which  was  a  discomfort
unto  us.  Assoone  as  it  was  day,  and  the  fogge  overpast,
we  looked  about,  and  at  the  last  we  descried  one  of  our
shippes  to  Leeward  of  us  :  then  we  spred  an  hullocke  of
our  foresaile,  and  bare  roome  with  her,  which  was  the
Confidence,  but  the  Edward  we  could  not  see.  Then  the
flaw  something  abating,  we  and the  Confidence  hoysed

[I.  236.] up  our  sailes  the  fourth  day,  sayling Northeast  and by

SIR  HUGH  WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-
North,  to  the  end  to  fall  with  the  Wardhouse,  as  we  did
consult  to  doe  before,  in  case  we  should  part  company.
Thus  running  Northeast  and  by  North,  and  Northeast
fiftie  leagues,  then  we  sounded,  and  had  i6o  fadomes,
whereby  we  thought  to  be  farre  from  land,  and  perceived
that  the  land  lay  not  as  the  Globe  made  mention.
Wherfore  we  changed  our  course  the  sixt  day,  and  sailed
Southeast  and  by  South  eight  and  fortie  leagues,  thinking
thereby  to  find  the  Wardhouse.

The  eight  day  much  winde  rising  at  the  Westnorth-
west,  we  not  knowing  how  the  coast  lay,  strook  our
sayles,  and  lay  a  drift,  where  we  sounded  and  found  i6o
fadomes  as  afore.

The  ninth  day,  the  wind  vearing  to  the  South  South-
east, we  sailed  Northeast  25  leagues.

The  tenth  day  we  sounded,  and  could  get  no  ground,
neither  yet  could  see  any  land,  wherat  we  wondered :  then
the  wind  comming  at  the  Northeast,  we  ran  Southeast
about  48  leagues.

The  1 1  day,  the  wind  being  at  South,  we  sounded,
and  found  40  fadoms,  and  faire  sand.

The  12  day  the  winde  being  at  South  and  by  East,  we
lay  with  our  saile  East,  and  East  and  by  North  30  leagues.

The  14  day  early  in  the  morning  we  descried  land,
which  land  we  bare  with  all,  hoising  out  our  boat  to
discover  what  land  it  might  be  :  but  the  boat  could  not
come  to  land  the  water  was  so  shoale,  where  was  very
much  ice  also,  but  there  was  no  similitude  of  habitation,
and  this  land  lyeth  from  Seynam  East  and  by  North  1 60  W'illoughbie
leagues,  being  in  latitude  72  degrees.  Then  we  plyed  to  !^  '  "^
the  Northward  the  15,  16  and  17  day.

The  18  day,  the  winde  comming  at  the  Northeast,
and  the  Confidence  being  troubled  with  bilge  water,  and
stocked,  we  thought  it  good  to  seeke  harbour  for  her
redresse  :  then  we  bare  roome  the  1 8  day  Southsoutheast,
about  70  leagues.

The  21  day  we  sounded,  and  found  10  fadome,  after
that we.  sounded againe,  and found but 7 fadome, so

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

shoalder  and  shoalder  water,  and  yet  could  see  no  land,
where  we  marvelled  greatly  :  to  avoide  this  danger,  we
bare  roomer  into  the  sea  all  that  night  Northwest  and  by
West.

The  next  day  we  sounded,  and  had  20,  fadoms,  then
shaped  our  course,  and  ran  West  Southwest  untill  the  23.
day  :  then  we  descried  Low  land,  unto  which  we  bare  as
nigh  as  we  could,  and  it  appeared  unto  us  unhabitable.
Then  wee  plyed  Westward  along  by  that  lande,  which
lyeth  West  Southwest,  and  East  Northeast,  and  much
winde  blowing  at  the  West,  we  haled  into  the  sea  North
and  by  East  30.  leagues.  Then  the  winde  comming
about  at  the  Northeast,  we  sailed  West  Northwest :  after
that,  the  winde  bearing  to  the  Northwest,  we  lay  with
our  sailes  West  southwest,  about  14.  leagues,  and  then
descried  land,  and  bare  in  with  it,  being  the  28.  day,
finding  shoale  water,  and  bare  it  till  we  came  to  3.
fadome,  then  perceiving  it  to  be  shoale  water,  and  also
seeing  drie  sands,  we  haled  out  againe  Northeast  along
that  land  until  we  came  to  the  point  therof.  That
land  turning  to  the  Westwarde,  we  ran  along  16.  leagues
Northwest  :  then  comming  into  a  faire  bay,  we  went
on  land  with  our  boat,  which  place  was  unhabited,  but
yet  it  appeared  unto  us  that  the  people  had  bin  there,
by  crosses,  and  other  signes  :  from  thence  we  went  all
along  the  coast  Westward.

September.  The  fourth  day  of  September  we  lost  sight  of  land,
by  reason  of  contrary  winds,  and  the  eight  day  we
descried  land  againe.  Within  two  dayes  after  we  lost
the  sight  of  it  :  then  running  West  and  by  South
about  30.  leagues,  we  gat  the  sight  of  land  againe,  and
bare  in  with  it  untill  night  :  then  perceiving  it  to  be  a
lee  shore,  we  gat  us  into  the  sea,  to  the  end  to  have
sea  roome.

The  12.  of  September  we  hailed  to  shoareward  againe,
having  then  indifferent  winde  and  weather  :  then  being
neere  unto  the  shoare,  and  the  tide  almost  spent,  wee
came  to  an  anker  in  30.  fadoms  water.

222

SIR  HUGH  WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-

The 13. day we came along the coast, which lay
Northwest  and  by  West  and  Southeast  and  by  East.

The  14.  day  we  came  to  an  anker  within  two  leagues
of  the shoare, having 60. fadoms.

There  we  went  a  shore  with  our  boat,  &  found  two
or  three  good  harboroughs, the land  being  rocky,  and
high, but  as for people  could we  see none. The 15
day  we ran still along the coast untill the 1 7 day  :
then  the  winde being  contrary  unto  us,  we thought it
best to returne unto the harbor which we had  found
before,  and  so  we  bare  roomer  with  the  same,  howbeit
we could not accomplish our desire that day. The
next day being  the 18 of  September, we entred into
the haven, and there  came  to an anker at 6 fadoms.
This  haven  runneth  into  the  maine,  about  two  leagues,  In  this  haven
and is in bredth halfe a league, wherein were very  ^^^-^  '^^^'^•
many scale fishes, & other  great fishes,  and  upon the
maine we saw beares, great deere, foxes, with divers
strange  beasts,  as  ||  guloines,  and  such  other  which  were  ||  Or,  EUons.
to  us  unknowen,  and  also  wonderfull. Thus  remaining
in this haven the space of  a weeke, seeing the  yeare
farre spent, & also very evill wether, as frost, snow,
and  haile,  as  though  it  had  beene  the  deepe  of  winter,
we  thought best to  winter  there. Wherefore  we sent
out  three  men  Southsouthwest, to  search if  they  could  [I-  237.]
find people, who  went  three dayes  journey, but could  ^^^^^^^"^^
finde  none  : after  that, we sent other three Westward  willomhbie
foure  daies  journey,  which  also  returned  without  finding  his  note,  which
any  people. Then sent  we  three men Southeast  three  ^^f-f  v:ntten
dayes  journey,  who  in  like  sorte  returned  without  finding  J^^^'^"  ""^^^
of  people,  or  any  similitude  of  habitation.

These  two  notes  following  were  written  upon  the
outside  of  this  Pamphlet,  or  Booke.

1  The proceedings of  Sir Hugh Willoughbie after
he  was  separated  from  the  Edward  Bonaventure.

2  Our  shippe  being  at  an  anker  in  the  harbour  called
Sterfier  in  the  Island  Lofoote.

223

A.D.

1553-

II  Duyna.

Note.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  river  or  haven  wherein  Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie
with  the  companie  of  his  two  ships  perished  for  cold,
is  called  Arzina  in  Lapland,  neere  unto  Kegor.  But
it  appeareth  by  a  Will  found  in  the  ship  that  Sir  Hugh
Willoughbie  and  most  of  the  company  were  alive  in
January 1554.

The  booke  of  the  great  and  mighty  Emperor  of
Russia,  and  Duke  of  Moscovia,  and  of  the
dominions  orders  and  commodities  thereunto
belonging  ;  drawen  by  Richard  Chancelour.

Orasmuch  as  it  is  meete  and  necessary
for  all  those  that  minde  to  take  in  hande
the  travell  into  farre  or  strange  countreys,
to  endevour  themselves  not  onely  to
understande  the  orders,  commodities,  and
fruitfulnesse  thereof,  but  also  to  applie
them  to  the  setting  foorth  of  the  same,
whereby  it  may  incourage  others  to  the  like  travaile  :
therefore  have  I  nowe  thought  good  to  make  a  briefe
rehearsall  of  the  orders  of  this  my  travaile  in  Russia
and  Moscovia,  and  other  countreys  thereunto  adjoyning ;
because  it  was  my  chaunce  to  fall  with  the  North  partes
of  Russia  before  I  came  towards  Moscovia,  I  will  partly
declare  my  knowledge  therein.  Russia  is  very  plentifull
both  of  land  and  people,  and  also  welthy  for  such
commodities  as  they  have.  They  be  very  great  fishers
for  Salmons  and  small  Coddes  :  they  have  much  oyle
which  wee  call  treine  oyle,  the  most  whereof  is  made
by  a  river  called  II  Duina.  They  make  it  in  other  places,
but  not  so  much  as  there.  They  have  also  a  great
trade  in  seething  of  salte  water.  To  the  North  parte
of  that  countrey  are  the  places  where  they  have  their
Furres,  as  Sables,  marterns,  greese  Bevers,  Foxes  white,
blacke,  and  redde,  Minkes,  Ermines,  Miniver,  and  Harts,
There  are  also  a  fishes  teeth,  which  fish  is  called  a
Morsse. The takers thereof  dwell in a place called

224

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
Postesora,  which  bring  them  upon  Hartes  to  Lampas
to  sell,  and  from  Lampas  carie  them  to  a  place  called
Colmogro,  where  the  hie  market  is  holden  on  Saint
Nicholas  day.  To  the  West  of  Colmogro  there  is  a
iplace  called  Gratanove,  in  our  language  Novogorode,
where  much  fine  Flaxe  and  Hempe  groweth,  and  also
much  waxe  and  honie.  The  Dutch  marchants  have  a
Staplehouse  there.  There  is  also  great  store  of  hides,
and  at  a  place  called  Plesco  :  and  thereabout  is  great
store  of  Flaxe,  Hempe,  Waxe,  Honie  ;  and  that  towne
is  from  Colmogro 120  miles.

There  is  a  place  called  Vologda  ;  the  commodities
whereof  are  Tallowe,  Waxe,  and  Flaxe  :  but  not  so
great  plenty  as  is  in  Gratanove.  From  Vologda  to
Colmogro  there  runneth  a  river  called  Duyna,  and  from
thence  it  falleth  into  the  sea.  Colmogro  serveth
Gratanowe,  Vologda  and  the  Mosco  with  all  the  countrey
thereabout  with  sake  and  saltfish.  From  Vologda  to
[eraslave  is  two  hundreth  miles  :  which  towne  is  very
^reat.  The  commodities  thereof  are  hides,  and  tallowe,
md  corne  in  great  plenty,  and  some  Waxe,  but  not  so
^lentifuU  as  in  other  places.

The  Mosco  is  from  Jeraslave  two  hundreth  miles.
The  countrey  betwixt  them  is  very  wel  replenished
mth  small  Villages,  which  are  so  well  filled  with  people,
hat  it  is  wonder  to  see  them  :  the  ground  is  well
tored  with  corne  which  they  carie  to  the  citie  of  Mosco
n  such  abundance  that  it  is  wonder  to  see  it.  You
hall  meete  in  a  morning  seven  or  eight  hundred  sleds
omming  or  going  thither,  that  carrie  corne,  and  some
arie  fish.  You  shall  have  some  that  carie  corne  to
he  Mosco,  and  some  that  fetch  corne  from  thence,  that
t  the  least  dwell  a  thousand  miles  off;  and  all  their
ariage  is  on  sleds.  Those  which  come  so  farre  dwell
1  the  North  partes  of  the  Dukes  dominions,  where
he  cold  will  suffer  no  corne  to  grow,  it  is  so  extreme.  [I.  238.]
They  bring  thither  fishes,  furres,  and  beastes  skinnes.
n  those  partes  they  have  but  small  store  of  cattell.
II  225  p

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

The  Mosco  it  selfe  is  great  :  I  take  the  whole  towne
to  bee  greater  then  London  with  the  suburbes  :  but
it  is  very  rude,  and  standeth  without  all  order.  Their
houses  are  all  of  timber  very  dangerous  for  fire.  There
is  a  faire  Castle,  the  walles  whereof  are  of  bricke,  and
very  high  :  they  say  they  are  eighteene  foote  thicke,
but  I  doe  not  beleeve  it,  it  doth  not  so  seeme,  not-
withstanding I  doe  not  certainely  know  it  :  for  no:
stranger  may  come  to  viewe  it.  The  one  side  is  ditched,
and  on  the  other  side  runneth  a  river  called  Moscua
which  runneth  into  Tartarie  and  so  into  the  sea  calledl
Mare  Caspium  :  and  on  the  North  side  there  is  a  base
towne,  the  which  hath  also  a  bricke  wall  about  it,  andj
so  it  joyneth  with  the  Castle  wall.  The  Emperour  liethj
in  the  castle,  wherein  are  nine  fayre  Churches,  and  therin
are  religious  men.  Also  there  is  a  Metropolitane  with
divers  Bishops.  I  will  not  stande  in  description  of  their
buildinges  nor  of  the  strength  thereof  because  we  have
better  in  all  points  in  England.  They  be  well  furnished
with  ordinance  of  all  sortes.

The  Emperours  or  Dukes  house  neither  in  building
nor  in  the  outward  shew, nor  yet  within  the  house  is[l
so  sumptuous  as I  have seene. It is  very  lowe  built  j
in  eight  square,  much  like  the  olde  building  of  England,';
with  small  windowes,  and  so  in  other  poynts.  t

Now to declare my comming before his Majestie  Im
After  I  had  remained  twelve  daies,  the  Secretary  which  n
hath  the  hearing  of  strangers  did  send  for  me,  advertising}  [
me  that  the  Dukes  pleasure  was to  have  me  to  come
before his Ma. with the kings my masters letters  :
whereof  I  was  right  glad,  and  so  I  gave  mine  attendance.
And when the Duke  was  in his place appointed, the
interpretour  came  for  me  into  the  utter  chamber,  where
sate one hundred or moe gentlemen, all in cloth of
golde very sumptuous, and from thence I came into
the  Counsaile chamber, where sate the Duke himselfe
with his nobles, which were a faire company : they
sate  round  about  the  chamber  on  high, yet  so  that  he

226

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

himselfe  sate  much  higher  then  any  of  his  nobles  in  a
chaire  gilt,  and  in  a  long  garment  of  beaten  golde,  with
an  emperial  crowne  upon  his  head,  and  a  staffe  of
Cristall  and  golde  in  his  right  hand,  and  his  other  hand
halfe  leaning  on  his  chaire.  The  Chancelour  stoode
up  with  the  Secretary  before  the  Duke.  After  my
dutie  done  and  my  letter  delivered,  he  bade  me  welcome,
&  enquired  of  me  the  health  of  the  King  my  master,
and  I  answered  that  he  was  in  good  health  at  my
departure  from  his  court,  and  that  my  trust  was  that
he  was  now  in  the  same.  Upon  the  which  he  bade
me  to  dinner.  The  Chancelour  presented  my  present
unto  his  Grace  bareheaded  (for  before  they  were  all
covered)  and  when  his  Grace  had  received  my  letter,  I
was  required  to  depart  :  for  I  had  charge  not  to  speake
to  the  Duke,  but  when  he  spake  to  me.  So  1  departed
unto  the  Secretaries  chamber,  where  I  remayned  two
houres,  and  then  I  was  sent  for  againe  unto  another
palace  which  is  called  the  golden  palace,  but  I  saw  no
cause  why  it  should  be  so  called  ;  for  I  have  seene  many
fayrer  then  it  in  all  poynts  :  and  so  I  came  into  the
hall,  which  was  small  and  not  great  as  is  the  Kings
Majesties  of  England,  and  the  table  was  covered  with
a  tablecloth  ;  and  the  Marshall  sate  at  the  ende  of  the
table  with  a  little  white  rod  in  his  hand,  which  boorde
was  full  of  vessell  of  golde  :  and  on  the  other  side  of
the  hall  did  stand  a  faire  cupborde  of  plate.  From
thence  I  came  into  the  dining  chamber,  where  the  Duke
himselfe  sate  at  his  table  without  cloth  of  estate,  in  a
gowne  of  silver,  with  a  crowne  emperiall  upon  his  head,
he  sate  in  a  chaire  somewhat  hie  :  There  sate  none
neare  him  by  a  great  way.  There  were  long  tables  set
round  about  the  chamber,  which  were  full  set  with  such
as  the  Duke  had  at  dinner  :  they  were  all  in  white.
Also  the  places  where  the  tables  stoode  were  higher
by  two  steppes  then  the  rest  of  the  house.  In  the
middest  of  the  chamber  stoode  a  table  or  cupbord  to
set  plate  on  ;  which  stoode  full  of  cuppes  of  golde  :  and

227

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

amongst  all  the  rest  there  stoode  foure  marvellous  great

pottes  or  crudences  as  they  call  them,  of  golde  and  silver  :
I  thinke  they  were  a  good  yarde  and  a  halfe  hie.  By
the  cupborde  stoode  two  gentlemen  with  napkins  on  their
shoulders,  and  in  their  handes  each  of  them  had  a
cuppe  of  gold  set  with  pearles  and  precious  stones,
which  were  the  Dukes  owne  drinking  cups  :  when  he
was  disposed,  he  drunke  them  off  at  a  draught.  And
for  his  service  at  meate  it  came  in  without  order,  yet
it  was  very  rich  service  :  for  all  were  served  in  gold,
not  onely  he  himselfe,  but  also  all  the  rest  of  us,  and
it  was  very  massie  :  the  cups  also  were  of  golde  and
very  massie.  The  number  that  dined  there  that  day
was  two  hundred  persons,  and  all  were  served  in  golden
vessell.  The  gentlemen  that  waited  were  all  in  cloth
of  gold,  and  they  served  him  with  their  caps  on  their
heads.  Before  the  service  came  in,  the  Duke  sent  to
every  man  a  great  shiver  of  bread,  and  the  bearer  called
the  party  so  sent  to  by  his  name  aloude,  and  sayd,
John  Basilivich  Emperour  of  Russia  and  great  Duke
of  Moscovia  doth  reward  thee  with  bread  :  then  must
all  men  stand  up,  and  doe  at  all  times  when  those  wordes
are  spoken.  And  then  last  of  all  he  giveth  the  Marshall
[I.  239.]  bread,  whereof  he  eateth  before  the  Dukes  Grace,  and
so  doth  reverence  and  departeth.  Then  commeth  the
Dukes  service  of  the  Swannes  all  in  pieces,  and  every
one  in  a  severall  dish  :  the  which  the  Duke  sendeth
as  he  did  the  bread,  and  the  bearer  sayth  the  same
wordes  as  he  sayd  before.  And  as  I  sayd  before,  the
service  of  his  meate  is  in  no  order,  but  commeth  in
dish  by  dish  :  and  then  after  that  the  Duke  sendeth
drinke,  with  the  like  saying  as  before  is  tolde.  Also
before  dinner  hee  changed  his  crowne,  and  in  dinner
time  two  crownes  ;  so  that  I  saw  three  severall  crownes
upon  his  head  in  one  day.  And  thus  when  his  service
was  all  come  in  hee  gave  to  every  one  of  his  gentlemen
waiters  meate  with  his  owne  hand,  &  so  likewise
drinke. His intent thereby is, as I have heard, that

228

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-
every  man  shall  know  perfectly  his  servants.  Thus
when  dinner  is  done  hee  calleth  his  nobles  before  him
name  by  name,  that  it  is  wonder  to  heare  howe  he
could  name  them,  having  so  many  as  he  hath.  Thus
when  dinner  was  done  I  departed  to  my  lodging,  which
was  an  hower  within  night.  I  will  leave  this,  and  speake
no  more  of  him  nor  his  houshold  :  but  I  will  some-
what declare  of  his  land  and  people,  with  their  nature
and  power  in  the  wars.  This  Duke  is  Lord  and
Emperour  of  many  countreis,  &  his  power  is  marveilous
great.  For  he  is  able  to  bring  into  the  field  two  or  three
hundred  thousand  men  :  he  never  goeth  into  the  field
himselfe  with  under  two  hundred  thousand  men  :  And
when  he  goeth  himselfe  he  furnisheth  his  borders  all
with  men  of  warre,  which  are  no  small  number.  He
leaveth  on  the  borders  of  Liefland  fortie  thousand  men,
and  upon  the  borders  of  Letto  60  thousand  men,  and
towarde  the  Nagayan  Tartars  sixtie  thousand,  which  is
wonder  to  heare  of:  yet  doeth  hee  never  take  to  his
warres  neither  husbandman  nor  marchant.  All  his  men
are  horsemen  :  he  useth  no  footmen,  but  such  as  goe
with  the  ordinance  and  labourers,  which  are  thirtie
thousand.  The  horsemen  are  all  archers,  with  such
bowes  as  the  Turkes  have,  and  they  ride  short  as  doe
the  Turkes.  Their  armour  is  a  coate  of  plate,  with  a
skull  on  their  heads.  Some  of  their  coates  are  covered
with  velvet  or  cloth  of  gold  :  their  desire  is  to  be
sumptuous  in  the  field,  and  especially  the  nobles  and
gentlemen  :  as  I  have  heard  their  trimming  is  very  costly,
and  partly  I  have  seene  it,  or  else  I  would  scarcely
have  beleeved  it  :  but  the  Duke  himselfe  is  richly
attired  above  all  measure  :  his  pavilion  is  covered  either
with  cloth  of  gold  or  silver,  and  so  set  with  stones  that
it  is  wonderfull  to  see  it.  I  have  seene  the  Kings
Majesties  of  England  and  the  French  Kings  pavilions,
which  are  fayre,  yet  not  like  unto  his.  And  when  they
bee  sent  into  farre  or  strange  countreys,  or  that  strangers
come  to them,  they  be very  gorgious. Els the Duke

229

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

himselfe  goeth  but  meanly  in  apparell  :  and  when  he
goeth  betwixt  one  place  and  another  hee  is  but  reasonably-
apparelled  over  other  times.  In  the  while  that  I  was
in  Mosco  the  Duke  sent  two  ambassadours  to  the
King  of  Poleland,  which  had  at  the  lest  five  hundred
horses  ;  their  sumptuousnes  was  above  measure,  not
onely  in  themselves,  but  also  in  their  horses,  as  velvet,
cloth  of  golde,  and  cloth  of  silver  set  with  pearles  and
not  scant.  What  shall  I  farther  say  .?  I  never  heard  of
nor  saw  men  so  sumptuous  :  but  it  is  no  dayly  guise,
for  when  they  have  not  occasion,  as  I  sayd  before,  all
their  doing  is  but  meane.  And  now  to  the  effect  of
their  warres  :  They  are  men  without  al  order  in  the
field.  For  they  runne  hurling  on  heapes,  and  for  the
most  part  they  never  give  battell  to  their  enemies  :  but
that  which  they  doe,  they  doe  it  all  by  stelth.  But
I  beleeve  they  be  such  men  for  hard  living  as  are  not
under  the  sun  :  for  no  cold  wil  hurt  them.  Yea  and
though  they  lie  in  the  field  two  moneths,  at  such  time
as  it  shall  freese  more  then  a  yard  thicke,  the  common
souldier  hath  neither  tent  nor  any  thing  else  over  his
head  :  the  most  defence  they  have  against  the  wether
is  a  felte,  which  is  set  against  the  winde  and  weather,
and  when  Snowe  commeth  hee  doth  cast  it  off,  and
maketh  him  a  fire,  and  laieth  him  down  thereby.  Thus
doe  the  most  of  all  his  men,  except  they  bee  gentlemen
which  have  other  provision  of  their  owne.  Their  lying
in  the  fielde  is  not  so  strange  as  is  their  hardnes  :  for
every  man  must  carie  &  make  provision  for  himselfe  &
his  horse  for  a  moneth  or  two,  which  is  very  wonderful.
For  he  himselfe  shal  live  upon  water  &  otemeale
mingled  together  cold,  and  drinke  water  thereto  :  his
horse  shal  eat  green  wood,  &  such  like  baggage,  &  shal
stand  open  in  the  cold  field  without  covert,  &  yet  wil
he  labour  &  serve  him  right  wel.  I  pray  you  amongst
all  our  boasting  warriors  how  many  should  we  find
to  endure  the  field  with  them  but  one  moneth.  I  know
no such region about us that beareth that name for  I

230  i

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
man  &  beast.  Now  what  might  be  made  of  these  men
if  they  were  trained  &  broken  to  order  and  knowledge
of  civill  wars  ?  If  this  Prince  had  within  his  countreys
such  men  as  could  make  them  to  understand  ye  things
aforesaid,  I  do  beleeve  that  2  of  the  best  or  greatest
princes  in  Christendome  were  not  wel  able  to  match
with  him,  considering  the  greatnes  of  his  power  &  the
hardnes  of  his  people  &  straite  living  both  of  people
and  horse,  and  the  small  charges  which  his  warres  stand
him  in  :  for  he  giveth  no  wages,  except  to  strangers.
They  have  a  yerely  stipend  &  not  much.  As  for  his
own  countrey  men  every  one  serveth  of  his  owne
proper  costes  and  charges,  saving  that  he  giveth  to  his
Harcubusiers  certaine  allowance  for  powder  &  shot  :  or
else  no  man  in  all  his  countrey  hath  one  pennie  wages.  [!•  H°-]
But  if  any  man  hath  done  very  good  service  he  giveth
him  a  ferme  or  a  piece  of  lande  ;  for  the  which  hee
is  bound  at  all  times  to  bee  readie  with  so  many  men
as  the  Duke  shall  appoynt  :  who  considereth  in  his
mind  what  that  lande  or  ferme  is  well  able  to  finde  :
and  so  many  shall  he  bee  bound  to  furnish  at  all  and
every  such  time  as  warres  are  holden  in  any  of  the
Dukes  dominions.  For  there  is  no  man  of  living,  but
hee  is  bound  likewise,  whether  the  Duke  call  for  either
souldier  or  labourer,  to  furnish  them  with  all  such
necessaries  as  to  them  belong.

Also,  if  any  gentleman  or  man  of  living  do  die  without
issue  male,  immediately  after  his  death  the  Duke  entreth
his  land,  notwithstanding  he  have  never  so  many  daugh-
ters, and  peradventure  giveth  it  foorthwith  to  another
man,  except  a  small  portion  that  he  spareth  to  marrie
the  daughters  with  all.  Also  if  there  be  a  rich  man,  a
fermour,  or  man  of  living,  which  is  striken  in  age  or
by  chance  is  maimed,  and  be  not  able  to  doe  the  Duke
service,  some  other  gentleman  that  is  not  able  to  live
and  more  able  to  doe  service,  will  come  to  the  Duke
and  complayne,  saying,  your  Grace  hath  such  an  one,
which  is  unmeete  to  doe  service  to  your  Highnes,  who

231

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

hath  great  abundance  of  welth,  and  likewise  your  Grace
hath  many  gentlemen  which  are  poore  and  lacke  living,
and  we  that  lacke  are  well  able  to  doe  good  service,
your  Grace  might  doe  well  to  looke  upon  him,  and
make  him  to  helpe  those  that  want.  Immediately  the
Duke  sendeth  forth  to  inquire  of  his  wealth :  and  if  it
be  so  proved,  he  shall  be  called  before  the  Duke,  and
it  shall  bee  sayd  unto  him,  friend,  you  have  too  much
living,  and  are  unserviceable  to  your  prince,  lesse  will
serve  you,  and  the  rest  will  serve  other  men  that  are
more  able  to  serve,  whereupon  immediately  his  living
shal  be  taken  away  from  him,  saving  a  little  to  find
himselfe  and  his  wife  on,  and  he  may  not  once  repine
thereat :  but  for  answere  he  will  say,  that  he  hath
nothing,  but  it  is  Gods  and  the  Dukes  Graces,  and
cannot  say,  as  we  the  common  people  in  England  say,
if  wee  have  any  thing;  that  it  is  Gods  and  our  owne.
Men  may  say,  that  these  men  are  in  wonderfull  great
awe,  and  obedience,  that  thus  one  must  give  and  grant
his  goods  which  he  hath  bene  scraping  and  scratching
for  all  his  life  to  be  at  his  Princes  pleasure  and  com-
mandement.  Oh  that  our  sturdie  rebels  were  had  in
the  like  subjection  to  knowe  their  duety  towarde  their
Princes.  They  may  not  say  as  some  snudges  in  Eng-
land say,  I  would  find  the  Queene  a  man  to  serve  in
my  place,  or  make  his  friends  tarrie  at  home  if  money
have  the  upper  hand.  No,  no,  it  is  not  so  in  this
countrey:  for  hee  shall  make  humble  sute  to  serve  the
Duke.  And  whom  he  sendeth  most  to  the  warres
he  thinketh  he  is  most  in  his  favour :  and  yet  as  I
before  have  sayde,  he  giveth  no  wages.  If  they  knewe
their  strength  no  man  were  able  to  make  match  with
them :  nor  they  that  dwel  neere  them  should  have  any
rest  of  them.  But  I  thinke  it  is  not  Gods  will :  For
I  may  compare  them  to  a  young  horse  that  knoweth
not  his  strength,  whome  a  little  childe  ruleth  and  guideth
with  a  bridle,  for  all  his  great  strength :  for  if  hee  did,
neither  childe  nor  man  could rule him. Their  warres

232

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
are holden against the Crimme Tartarians and the
Nagaians.

I  will  stand  no  longer  in  the  rehearsall  of  their  power
and  warres.  For  it  were  too  tedious  to  the  reader.
But  I  will  in  part  declare  their  lawes,  and  punishments,
and  the  execution  of  justice.  And  first  I  will  begin
with  the  commons  of  the  countrey,  which  the  gentlemen
have  rule  on  :  And  that  is,  that  every  gentleman  hath
rule  and  justice  upon  his  owne  tenants.  And  if  it  so
fall  out  that  two  gentlemens  servants  or  tenaunts  doe
disagree,  the  two  gentlemen  examine  the  matter,  and
have  the  parties  before  them,  and  soe  give  the  sentence.
And  yet  cannot  they  make  the  ende  betwixt  them  of
the  controversie,  but  either  of  the  gentlemen  must  bring
his  servant  or  tenant  before  the  high  judge  or  justice
of  that  countrey,  and  there  present  them,  and  declare
the  matter  and  case.  The  plaintife  sayth,  I  require  the
law ;  which  is  graunted :  then  commeth  an  officer  and
arresteth  the  party  defendant,  and  useth  him  contrarie
to  the  lawes  of  England.  For  when  they  attach  any
man  they  beate  him  about  the  legges,  untill  such  time
as  he  findeth  suerties  to  answere  the  matter :  And  if
not,  his  handes  and  necke  are  bound  together,  and  he
is  led  about  the  towne  and  beaten  about  the  legges,
with  other  extreme  punishments  till  he  come  to  his
answere :  And  the  Justice  demaundeth  if  it  be  for  debt,
and  sayth :  Owest  thou  this  man  any  such  debt  ^  He
will  perhaps  say  nay.  Then  sayth  the  Judge :  art  thou
able  to  denie  it  ?  Let  us  heare  how  ^  By  othe  sayth  the
defendant.  Then  he  commandeth  to  leave  beating  him
till  further  triall  be  had.

Their  order  in  one  point  is  commendable.  They  have
no  man  of  Lawe  to  pleade  their  causes  in  any  court :  but
every  man  pleadeth  his  owne  cause,  and  giveth  bill  and
answere  in  writing :  contrarie  to  the  order  in  England.
The  complaint  is  in  maner  of  a  supplication,  &  made  to
the  Dukes  Grace,  and  delivered  him  into  his  owne  hand,
requiring  to  have  justice  as  in  his  complaint  is  alleaged.

233

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

[I.  241.]  The  duke  giveth  sentence  himselfe  upon  all  matters
in  the  Law.  Which  is  very  commendable,  that  such  a
Prince  wil  take  paines  to  see  ministration  of  justice.
Yet  notwithstanding  it  is  wonderfully  abused :  and
thereby  the  Duke  is  much  deceived.  But  if  it  fall  out
that  the  officers  be  espied  in  cloking  the  trueth,  they
have  most  condigne  punishment.  And  if  the  plaintife
can  nothing  proove,  then  the  defendant  must  take  his
oth  upon  the  crucifixe  whether  he  bee  in  the  right  or  no.
Then  is  demanded  if  the  plaintife  be  any  thing  able
further  to  make  proofe :  if  hee  bee  not ;  then  sometimes
he  will  say,  1  am  able  to  proove  it  by  my  body  and
hands,  or  by  my  champions  body,  so  requiring  the
Campe.  After  the  other  hath  his  othe,  it  is  graunted
aswell  to  the  one  as  to  the  other.  So  when  they  goe
to  the  field,  they  sweare  upon  the  Crucifixe,  that  they
bee  both  in  the  right,  and  that  the  one  shall  make  the
other  to  confesse  the  trueth  before  they  depart  foorth  of
the  field :  and  so  they  goe  both  to  the  battell  armed  with
such  weapons  as  they  use  in  that  countrey :  they  fight
all  on  foote,  &  seldome  the  parties  themselves  do  fight,
except  they  be  Gentlemen,  for  they  stand  much  upon
their  reputation,  for  they  wil  not  fight,  but  with  such  as
are  come  of  as  good  an  house  as  themselves.  So  that
if  either  partie  require  the  combate,  it  is  granted  unto
them,  and  no  champion  is  to  serve  in  their  roome :
wherein  is  no  deceit :  but  otherwise  by  champions  there
is.  For  although  they  take  great  othes  upon  them  to
doe  the  battell  truely,  yet  is  the  contrary  often  seene :
because  the  common  champions  have  none  other  living.
And  assoone  as  the  one  party  hath  gotten  the  victorie,
hee  demandeth  the  debt,  and  the  other  is  carried  to
prison,  and  there  is  shamefully  used  till  he  take  order.
There  is  also  another  order  in  the  lawe,  that  the  plaintife
may  sweare  in  some  causes  of  debt.  And  if  the  partie
defendant  be  poore,  he  shalbe  set  under  the  Crucifixe,
and  the  partie  plaintife  must  sweare  over  his  head,  and
when hee hath taken his othe,  the Duke  taketh the

234

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-

partie  defendant  home  to  his  house,  and  useth  him  as
his  bond-man,  and  putteth  him  to  labour,  or  letteth  him
for  hier  to  any  such  as  neede  him,  untill  such  time  as
his  friends  make  provision  for  his  redemption :  or  else
hee  remaineth  in  bondage  all  the  dayes  of  his  life.
Againe  there  are  many  that  will  sell  themselves  to
Gentlemen  or  Marchants  to  bee  their  bond-men,  to
have  during  their  life  meate,  drinke  and  cloth,  and  at
their  comming  to  have  a  piece  of  mony.  yea  and  some
will  sell  their  wives  and  children  to  bee  bawdes  and
drudges  to  the  byer.  Also  they  have  a  Lawe  for
Fellons  and  pickers  contrary  to  the  Lawes  of  England.
For  by  their  law  they  can  hang  no  man  for  his  first
offence ;  but  may  keepe  him  long  in  prison,  and  often-
times beate  him  with  whips  and  other  punishment :  and
there  he  shall  remaine  untill  his  friends  be  able  to  bayle
him.  If  he  be  a  picker  or  a  cut-purse,  as  there  be  very
many,  the  second  time  he  is  taken,  he  hath  a  piece  of  his
Nose  cut  off,  and  is  burned  in  the  forehead,  and  kept
in  prison  till  hee  finde  sureties  for  his  good  behaviour.
And  if  he  be  taken  the  third  time,  he  is  hanged.  And  at
the  first  time  he  is  extremely  punished  and  not  released,
except  hee  have  very  good  friends,  or  that  some  Gentle-
man require  to  have  him  to  the  warres :  And  in  so
doing,  he  shall  enter  into  great  bonds  for  him :  by  which
meanes  the  countrey  is  brought  into  good  quietnesse.
But  they  be  naturally  given  to  great  deceit,  except
extreme  beating  did  bridle  them.  They  be  naturally
given  to  hard  living  aswell  in  fare  as  in  lodging.  I
heard  a  Russian  say,  that  it  was  a  great  deale  merrier
living  in  prison  then  foorth,  but  for  the  great  beating.
For  they  have  meate  and  drinke  without  any  labour,
and  get  the  charitie  of  well  disposed  people :  But  being
at  libertie  they  get  nothing.  The  poore  is  very  innumer-
able, and  live  most  miserably :  for  I  have  scene  them
eate  the  pickle  of  Hearring  and  other  stinking  fish :
nor  the  fish  cannot  be  so  stinking  nor  rotten,  but  they
will  eate it and praise it to be more  wholesome then

235

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

other  fish  or  fresh  meate.  In  mine  opinion  there  be
no  such  people  under  the  sunne  for  their  hardnesse  of
living.  Well,  I  will  leave  them  in  this  poynt,  and
will  in  part  declare  their  Religion.  They  doe  observe
the  lawe  of  the  Greekes  with  such  excesse  of  superstition,
as  the  like  hath  not  bene  heard  of.  They  have  no
graven  images  in  their  Churches,  but  all  painted,  to  the
intent  they  will  not  breake  the  commandement :  but  to
their  painted  images  they  use  such  idolatrie,  that  the
like  was  never  heard  of  in  England.  They  will  neither
worship  nor  honour  any  image  that  is  made  forth  of
their  owne  countrey.  For  their  owne  images  (say  they)
have  pictures  to  declare  what  they  be,  and  howe  they  be
of  God,  and  so  be  not  ours :  They  say,  Looke  how  the
Painter  or  Carver  hath  made  them,  so  we  doe  worship
them,  and  they  worship  none  before  they  be  Christened.
They  say  we  be  but  halfe  Christians :  because  we  observe
not  part  of  the  olde  law  with  the  Turks.  Therefore
they  call  themselves  more  holy  then  us.  They  have
none  other  learning  but  their  mother  tongue,  nor  will
suffer  no  other  in  their  countrey  among  them.  All  their
service  in  Churches  is  in  their  mother  tongue.  They
have  the  olde  and  newe  Testament,  which  are  daily  read
among  them :  and  yet  their  superstition  is  no  lesse.  For
when  the  Priests  doe  reade,  they  have  such  tricks  in  their
reading,  that  no  man  can  understand  them,  nor  no  man
giveth  eare  to  them.  For  all  the  while  the  Priest
readeth,  the  people  sit  downe  and  one  talke  with  another.
But  when  the  Priest  is  at  service  no  man  sitteth,  but
gagle  and  ducke  like  so  many  Geese. And  as  for  their

[I.  242.]  prayers  they  have  but  little  skill,  but  use  to  say  As  bodi
pomele  :  As  much  to  say,  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me.  For
the  tenth  man  within  the  land  cannot  say  the  Pater  noster.
And  as  for  the  Creede,  no  man  may  be  so  bolde  as  to
meddle  therewith  but  in  the  Church :  for  they  say  it
shoulde  not  bee  spoken  of,  but  in  the  Churches.  Speake
to  them  of  the  Commandements,  and  they  wil  say  they
were  given  to  Moses  in  the  law,  which  Christ  hath  nowe

236

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
abrogated  by  his  precious  death  and  passion :  therefore,
(say  they)  we  observe  little  or  none  thereof.  And  I  doe
beleeve  them.  For  if  they  were  examined  of  their  Lawe
and  Commaundements  together,  they  shoulde  agree  but
in  fewe  poynts.  They  have  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lords
Supper  in  both  kindes,  and  more  ceremonies  then  wee
have.  They  present  them  in  a  dish  in  both  kindes
together,  and  carrie  them  rounde  about  the  Church  upon
the  Priestes  head,  and  so  doe  minister  at  all  such  times
as  any  shall  require.  They  bee  great  offerers  of  Candles,
and  sometimes  of  money,  which  wee  call  in  England,
Soule  pense,  with  more  ceremonies  then  I  am  able  to
declare.  They  have  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere,  whereof
our  Lent  is  the  greatest.  Looke  as  we  doe  begin  on  the
Wednesday,  so  they  doe  on  the  Munday  before :  And
the  weeke  before  that  they  call  The  Butter  weeke :  And
in  that  weeke  they  eate  nothing  but  Butter  and  milke.
Howbeit  I  beleeve  there  bee  in  no  other  countrey  the
like  people  for  drunkennesse.  The  next  Lent  is  called
Saint  Peters  Lent,  and  beginneth  alwayes  the  Munday
next  after  Trinitie  Sunday,  and  endeth  on  Saint  Peters
even.  If  they  should  breake  that  fast,  their  beliefe  is,
that  they  should  not  come  in  at  heaven  gates.  And  when
any  of  them  die,  they  have  a  testimoniall  with  them  in
the  Coffin,  that  when  the  soule  commeth  to  heaven  gates
it  may  deliver  the  same  to  Saint  Peter,  which  declareth
that  the  partie  is  a  true  and  holy  Russian.  The  third
Lent  beginneth  fifteene  dayes  before  the  later  Lady  day,
and  endeth  on  our  Lady  Eeven.  The  fourth  Lent
beginneth  on  Saint  Martins  day,  and  endeth  on  Christmas
Eeven :  which  Lent  is  fasted  for  Saint  Philip,  Saint
Peter,  Saint  Nicholas,  and  Saint  Clement.  For  they  foure
be  the  principall  and  greatest  Saints  in  that  countrey.
In  these  Lents  they  eate  neither  Butter,  Egges,  Milke,
nor  Cheese ;  but  they  are  very  straitely  kept  with  Fish,
Cabbages,  and  Rootes.  And  out  of  their  Lents,  they
observe  truely  the  Wednesdayes  and  Fridayes  throughout
the yeere : and on the Saturday they doe eate flesh.

237

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

Furthermore  they  have  a  great  number  of  Religious
men :  which  are  blacke  Monks,  and  they  eate  no  flesh
throughout  the  yeere,  but  fish,  milke  and  Butter.  By
their  order  they  should  eate  no  fresh-fish,  and  in  their
Lents  they  eate  nothing  but  Coleworts,  Cabbages,  salt
Cowcumbers,  with  other  rootes,  as  Radish  and  such  like.
Their  drinke  is  like  our  peny  Ale,  and  is  called  Quass.
They  have  service  daily  in  their  Churches  ;  and  use  to
goe  to  service  two  houres  before  day,  and  that  is  ended  by
day  light.  At  nine  of  the  clocke  they  goe  to  Masse :
that  ended,  to  dinner :  and  after  that  to  service  againe :
and  then  to  supper.  You  shall  understand  that  at  every
dinner  and  supper  they  have  declared  the  exposition  of
the  Gospel  that  day :  but  howe  they  wrest  and  twine  the
Scripture  and  that  together  by  report  it  is  wonderfull.
As  for  whoredome  and  drunkennesse  there  be  none  such
living :  and  for  extortion,  they  be  the  most  abhominable
under  the  sunne.  Nowe  judge  of  their  holinesse.  They
have  twise  as  much  land  as  the  Duke  himselfe  hath :  but
yet  he  is  reasonable  eeven  with  them,  as  thus :  When
they  take  bribes  of  any  of  the  poore  and  simple,  he  hath
it  by  an  order.  When  the  Abbot  of  any  of  their  houses
dieth,  then  the  Duke  hath  all  his  goods  moveable  and
unmoveable :  so  that  the  successour  buieth  all  at  the
Dukes  hands :  and  by  this  meane  they  be  the  best
Fermers  the  Duke  hath.  Thus  with  their  Religion  I
make  an  ende,  trusting  hereafter  to know  it  better.

To  the  right  worshipfull  and  my  singular  good  Uncle,
Master  Christopher  Frothingham,  give  these.

Sir,  Reade  and  correct ;
For  great  is  the  defect.

238

RICHARD CHANCELOR

A.D.

1553-

The  Testimonie  of  M. Richard  Eden  in  his
Decades,  concerning  the  Booke  following.

ND  whereas  (saith  he)  I  have  before  made
mention  howe  Moscovie  was  in  our  time
discovered  by  Richard  Chanceler  in  his
voyage  toward  Cathay,  by  the  direction
and  information  of  M.  Sebastian  Cabota,
who  long  before  had  this  secret  in  his
minde :  I  shall  not  neede  here  to  describe
that  voyage,  forasmuch  as  the  same  is  largely  and  faith-
fully written  in  the  Latine  tongue,  by  that  learned  yong
man  Clement  Adams,  schoolemaster  to  the  Queenes
henshmen,  as  he  received  it  at  the  mouth  of  the  said
Richard  Chanceler.

The  newe  Navigation  and  discoverie  of  the  king-  [I.  243.]
dome  of  Moscovia,  by  the  Northeast,  in  the
yeere  1553-  Enterprised  by  Sir  Hugh  Wil-
loughbie  knight,  and  perfourmed  by  Richard
Chancelor  Pilot  major  of  the  voyage  :  Written
in  Latine  by  Clement  Adams.

T  what  time  our  Marchants  perceived  the
commodities  and  wares  of  England  to
bee  in  small  request  with  the  countreys
and  people  about  us,  and  neere  unto  us,
and  that  those  Marchandizes  which
strangers  in  the  time  and  memorie  of  our
auncesters  did  earnestly  seeke  and  desire,
were  nowe  neglected,  and  the  price  thereof  abated,
although  by  us  carried  to  their  owne  portes,  and  all
forreine  Marchandises  in  great  accompt,  and  their  prises
wonderfully  raised :  certaine  grave  Citizens  of  London,
and  men  of  great  wisedome,  and  carefuU  for  the  good  of
their  Countrey,  began  to  thinke  with  themselves,  howe
this mischiefe might bee remedied. Neither  was a

239

Upon  what
occasions,  and
by  whom  this
voyage  was
set  out,  and  of
the  discovene
of  Moscovie
by  the  North.

discoverie.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

remedie  (as  it  then  appeared)  wanting  to  their  desires,  for
the  avoiding  of  so  great  an  inconvenience :  for  seeing
that  the  wealth  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portingales,  by  the
discoverie  and  search  of  newe  trades  and  Countreys  was
marveilously  increased,  supposing  the  same  to  be  a  course
and  meane  for  them  also  to  obteine  the  like,  they  there-
upon resolved  upon  a  newe  and  strange  Navigation.
And  whereas  at  the  same  time  one  Sebastian  Cabota,  a
man  in  those  dayes  very  renowmed,  happened  to  bee
in  London,  they  began  first  of  all  to  deale  and  consult
diligently  with  him,  and  after  much  speech  and  conference
3.  Ships  fur-  together,  it  was  at  last  concluded  that  three  shippes  should
nishedfor  the  y^^^  prepared  and  furnished  out,  for  the  search  and  dis-
coverie  of  the  Northerne  part  of  the  world,  to  open  a  way
and  passage  to  our  men  for  travaile  to  newe  and  un-
knowen kingdomes.

And  whereas  many  things  seemed  necessary  to  bee
regarded  in  this  so  hard  and  difficult  a  matter,  they  first
make  choyse  of  certaine  grave  and  wise  persons  in  maner
of  a  Senate  or  companie,  which  should  lay  their  heads
together,  and  give  their  judgements,  and  provide  things
requisite  and  profitable  for  all  occasions :  by  this  companie
it  was  thought  expedient,  that  a  certaine  summe  of  money
should  publiquely  bee  collected  to  serve  for  the  furnish-
ing of  so  many  shippes.  And  lest  any  private  man
should  bee  too  much  oppressed  and  charged,  a  course  was
taken,  that  every  man  willing  to  be  of  the  societie,  should
disburse  the  portion  of  twentie  and  five  pounds  a  piece :
so  that  in  short  time  by  this  meanes  the  summe  of  sixe
thousand  pounds  being  gathered,  the  three  shippes  were
bought,  the  most  part  whereof  they  provided  to  be  newly
built  and  trimmed.  But  in  this  action,  I  wote  not
whether  I  may  more  admire  the  care  of  the  Marchants,  or
the  diligence  of  the  Shipwrights  :  for  the  Marchants,  they
get  very  strong  and  well  seasoned  plankes  for  the  build-
ing, the  Shippewrights,  they  with  daily  travaile,  and  their
greatest  skill  doe  fitte  them  for  the  dispatch  of  the
shippes  : they  calke  them,  pitch them,  and  among the

240

SEBASTIAN CABOT

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-
rest,  they  make  one  most  stanch  and  firme,  by  an  excel-
lent and  ingenious  invention.  For  they  had  heard  that
in  certaine  parts  of  the  Ocean,  a  kinde  of  wormes  is
bredde,  which  many  times  pearceth  and  eateth  through
the  strongest  oake  that  is :  and  therfore  that  the
Mariners,  and  the  rest  to  bee  imployed  in  this  voyage
might  bee  free  and  safe  from  this  danger,  they  cover  a
piece  of  the  keele  of  the  shippe  with  thinne  sheetes  of
leade :  and  having  thus  built  the  ships,  and  furnished
them  with  armour  and  artillerie,  then  followed  a  second
care  no  lesse  troublesome  and  necessarie  then  the  former,
namely,  the  provision  of  victuals,  which  was  to  be  made  Provision  of
according  to  the  time  and  length  of  the  voyage.  And  ^^<^i»^^^  fif
whereas  they  afore  determined  to  have  the  East  part  of
the  world  sayled  unto,  and  yet  that  the  sea  towards  the
same  was  not  open,  except  they  kept  the  Northren  tract,
whereas  yet  it  was  doubtfuU  whether  there  were  any
passage  yea  or  no,  they  resolved  to  victuall  the  ships  for
eighteene  moneths,  which  they  did  for  this  reason.  For
our  men  being  to  passe  that  huge  and  colde  part  of  the
world,  they  wisely  foreseeing  it,  allowe  them  sixe  moneths
victuall  to  saile  to  the  place,  so  much  more  to  remaine
there  if  the  extremitie  of  the  winter  hindered  their
returne,  and  so  much  more  also  for  the  time  of  their
comming  home.

Nowe  this  provision being  made and caried  aboord,  Choise  of

with  armour  and  munition  of  all  sorts,  sufficient  Captaines  C'^P/^^f^
1  r  ^  ^ •  ana  Pilots.

and governours  or so great  an enterprise  were as  yet

wanting :  to  which  office  and  place,  although  many  men,

(and  some  voyde  of  experience)  offered  themselves,  yet

one  Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie  a  most  valiant Gentleman,  Sir  Hugh

and  well borne,  very earnestly  requested to have that  ^'^^^°'^S^^'^^-

care and  charge  committed  unto  him :  of  whom  before

all  others,  both  by  reason  of  his  goodly  personage  (for

he  was  of  a  tall  stature)  as  also  for  his  singular  skill  in

the services of  warre, the company of  the Marchants

made  greatest  accompt :  so  that  at  the  last  they  concluded

and  made  choyce  of  him  for  the  Generall  of  this  voyage,

II  241  Q

A.D.

1553-

[I.  244.]

Master  Henry
Sidney  his
Oration.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  appoynted  to  him  the  Admirall  with  authoritie  and
commaund  over  all  the  rest.  And  for  the  governement
of  other  ships  although  divers  men  seemed  willing,  and
made  offers  of  themselves  thereunto,  yet  by  a  common
consent  one  Richard  Chanceler,  a  man  of  great  estimation
for  many  good  partes  of  wit  in  him,  was  elected,  in  whom
alone  great  hope  for  the  performance  of  this  businesse
rested.  This  man  was  brought  up  by  one  Master  Henry
Sidney,  a  noble  young  Gentleman  and  very  much  beloved
of  King  Edward,  who  at  this  time  comming  to  the  place
where  the  Marchants  were  gathered  together,  beganne  a
very  eloquent  speech  or  Oration,  and  spake  to  them  after
this  maner  following.

My  very  worshipfull  friends,  I  cannot  but  greatly
commend  your  present  godly  and  vertuous  intention,
in  the  serious  enterprising  (for  the  singular  love  you
beare  to  your  Countrey)  a  matter,  which  (I  hope)  will
proove  profitable  for  this  nation,  and  honourable  to
this  our  land.  Which  intention  of  yours  wee  also  of
the  Nobilitie  are  ready  to  our  power  to  helpe  and
further :  neither  doe  wee  holde  any  thing  so  deare  and
precious  unto  us,  which  wee  will  not  willingly  forgoe,
and  lay  out  in  so  commendable  a  cause.  But  princi-
pally I  rejoyce  in  my  selfe,  that  I  have  nourished  and
maintained  that  witte,  which  is  like  by  some  meanes
and  in  some  measure,  to  profite  and  steede  you  in  this
worthy  action.  But  yet  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant;
of  this  one  thing,  that  I  doe  now  part  with  Chanceler,,
not  because  1  make  little  reckoning  of  the  man,  or  that!
his  maintenance  is  burdenous  and  chargeable  unto  mee, ,
but  that  you  might  conceive  and  understand  my  good  I
will  and  promptitude  for  the  furtherance  of  this  busi-
nesse, and  that  the  authoritie  and  estimation  which  hee
deserveth  may  be  given  him.  You  know  the  man  by
report,  I  by  experience,  you  by  wordes,  I  by  deedes,
you  by  speech  and  companie,  but  I  by  the  daily  triall
of  his  life  have  a  full  and  perfect  knowledge  of  him.
And  you  are  also  to  remember,  into  howe  many  perils

242

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
for  your  sakes,  and his countreys  love,  he  is  nowe to

runne :  whereof  it  is  requisite  that  wee  be  not  unminde-
full,  if  it  please  God  to  send  him  good  successe.  Wee
commit  a  little  money  to  the  chaunce  and  hazard  of
Fortune :  He  commits  his  life  (a  thing  to  a  man  of
all  things  most  deare)  to  the  raging  Sea,  and  the  un-
certainties of  many  dangers.  We  shall  here  live  and
rest  at  home  quietly  with  our  friends,  and  acquaintance :
but  hee  in  the  meane  time  labouring  to  keepe  the
ignorant  and  unruly  Mariners  in  good  order  and  obedi-
ence, with  howe  many  cares  shall  hee  trouble  and  vexe
himselfe  ?  with  how  many  troubles  shall  he  breake
himselfe  ?  and  howe  many  disquietings  shall  hee  bee
forced  to  sustaine  ?  We  shall  keepe  our  owne  coastes
and  countrey  :  Hee  shall  seeke  strange  and  unknowen
kingdomes.  He  shall  commit  his  safetie  to  barbarous
and  cruell  people,  and  shall  hazard  his  life  amongst  the
monstrous  and  terrible  beastes  of  the  Sea.  Wherefore
in  respect  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  dangers,  and  the
excellencie  of  his  charge,  you  are  to  favour  and  love
the  man  thus  departing  from  us :  and  if  it  fall  so
happily  out  that  hee  returne  againe,  it  is  your  part  and
duetie  also,  liberally  to  reward  him.

After  that  this  noble  yong  Gentleman  had  delivered
this  or  some  such  like  speech,  much  more  eloquently
then  I  can  possiblie  report  it,  the  companie  then  present
beganne  one  to  looke  upon  another,  one  to  question
and  conferre  with  another :  and  some  (to  whom  the
vertue  and  sufficiencie  of  the  man  was  knowen)  began
secretly  to  rejoyce  with  themselves,  and  to  conceive  a
speciall  hope,  that  the  man  would  proove  in  time  very
rare  and  excellent,  and  that  his  vertues  already  appear-
ing and  shining  to  the  world  would  growe  to  the  great
honour  and  advancement  of  this  kingdome.

After  all  this,  the  companie  growing  to  some  silence,
it  seemed  good  to  them  that  were  of  greatest  gravity
amongst  them,  to  inquire,  search  and  seeke  what  might
be  learned  &  knowen,  concerning the Easterly  part  or

243

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

tract  of  the  world.  For  which  cause  two  Tartarians,
which  were  then  of  the  kings  Stable,  were  sent  for,  &
an  interpreter  was  gotten  to  be  present,  by  whom  they
were  demaunded  touching  their  Countrey  and  the  maners
of  their  nation.  But  they  were  able  to  answere  nothing
to  the  purpose :  being  in  deede  more  acquainted  (as
one  there  merily  and  openly  said)  to  tosse  pottes,  then
to  learne  the  states  and  dispositions  of  people.  But
after  much  adoe  and  many  things  passed  about  this
matter,  they  grewe  at  last  to  this  issue,  to  set  downe
and  appoynt  a  time  for  the  departure  of  the  shippes :
because  divers  were  of  opinion,  that  a  great  part  of
the  best  time  of  the  yeere  was  already  spent,  and  if
the  delay  grewe  longer,  the  way  would  bee  stopt  and
bard  by  the  force  of  the  Ice,  and  the  colde  climate :
and  therefore  it  was  thought  best  by  the  opinion  of
them  all,  that  by  the  twentieth  day  of  May,  the  Captaines
They  departed  and  Mariners  should  take  shipping,  and  depart  from
fromRatcliffe  Radcliffe  upon  the  ebbe,  if  it  pleased  God.  They
Mtr^^iKxi  having  saluted  their  acquaintance,  one  his  wife,  another  |
his  children,  another  his  kinsfolkes,  and  another  his
friends  deerer  then  his  kinsfolkes,  were  present  and
ready  at  the  day  appoynted :  and  having  wayed  ancre,
they  departed  with  the  turning  of  the  water,  and  sailing
[I.  245.]  easily,  came  first  to  Greenewich.  The  greater  shippes
are  towed  downe  with  boates,  and  oares,  and  the  mariners
being  all  apparelled  in  Watchet  or  skie  coloured  cloth,
rowed  amaine,  and  made  way  with  diligence.  And  being
come  neere  to  Greenewich,  (where  the  Court  then  lay)
presently  upon  the  newes  therof,  the  Courtiers  came
running  out,  and  the  common  people  flockt  together,
standing  very  thicke  upon  the  shoare  :  the  privie
Counsel,  they  lookt  out  at  the  windowes  of  the  Court,
and  the  rest  ranne  up  to  the  toppes  of  the  towers :  the
shippes  hereupon  discharge  their  Ordinance,  and  shoot
off  their  pieces  after  the  maner  of  warre,  and  of  the
sea,  insomuch  that  the  tops  of  the  hilles  sounded  there-
with,  the valleys and the  waters gave an Eccho, and

244

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

the  Mariners,  they  shouted  in  such  sort,  that  the  skie
rang  againe  with  the  noyse  thereof.  One  stoode  in  the
poope  of  the  ship,  and  by  his  gesture  bids  farewell  to
his  friendes  in  the  best  maner  hee  could.  Another
walkes  upon  the  hatches,  another  climbes  the  shrowds,
another  stands  upon  the  maine  yard,  and  another  in  the
top  of  the  shippe.  To  be  short,  it  was  a  very  triumph
(after  a  sort)  in  all  respects  to  the  beholders.  But
(alas)  the  good  King  Edward  (in  respect  of  whom
principally  all  this  was  prepared)  hee  onely  by  reason
of  his  sickenesse  was  absent  from  this  shewe,  and  not
long  after  the  departure  of  these  ships,  the  lamentable
and  most  sorowfuU  accident  of  his  death  followed.

But  to  proceede  in  the  matter.

The  shippes  going  downe  with  the  tyde  came  at  last  to
Woolwich,  where  they  stayed  and  cast  ancre,  with  purpose
to  depart  therehence  againe,  as  soone  as  the  turning  of  the
water,  and  a  better  winde  should  drawe  them  to  set  saile.
After  this  they  departed  and  came  to  Harwich,  in  which
porte  they  stayed  long,  not  without  great  losse  and  con-
suming of  time  :  yet  at  the  last  with  a  good  winde  they
hoysed  up  saile,  and  committed  themselves  to  the  sea,
giving  their  last  adieu  to  their  native  Countrey,  which
they  knewe  not  whether  they  should  ever  returne  to  see
againe  or  not.  Many  of  them  looked  oftentimes  backe,
and  could  not  refraine  from  teares,  considering  into  what
hazards  they  were  to  fall,  and  what  uncertainties  of  the
sea  they  were  to  make  triall  of.

Amongst  the  rest,  Richard  Chanceler  the  Captaine  of
the  Edward  Bonaventure,  was  not  a  little  grieved  with
the  feare  of  wanting  victuals,  part  whereof  was  found  to
be  corrupt  and  putrified  at  Harwich,  and  the  hogges-
heads  of  wine  also  leaked,  and  were  not  stanch :  his
naturall  and  fatherly  affection  also  somewhat  troubled
him,  for  he  left  behinde  him  his  two  little  sonnes,  which
were  in  the  case  of  Orphanes  if  he  spedde  not  well :  the
estate  also  of  his  companie  mooved  him  to  care,  being  in
the  former  respects  after  a sort  unhappie,  and  were to

245

AD  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1553-

abide  with  himselfe  every  good  or  badde  accident :  but  in
the  meane  time  while  his  minde  was  thus  tormented  with
the  multiplicitie  of  sorowes  and  cares,  after  many  dayes
sayling,  they  kenned  land  afarre  off,  whereunto  the  Pilots
directed  the  ships :  and  being  come  to  it,  they  land,  and
finde  it  to  be  Rost  Island,  where  they  stayed  certaine
dayes,  and  afterwards  set  saile  againe,  and  proceeding
towards  the  North,  they  espied  certaine  other  Islands,_
which  were  called  the  Crosse  of  Islands.  From  which
places  when  they  were  a  litle  departed,  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby  the  General,  a  man  of  good  foresight  and
providence  in  all  his  actions,  erected  and  set  out  his
flagge,  by  which  hee  called  together  the  chiefest  men  of
the  other  shippes,  that  by  the  helpe  and  assistance  of  their
counsels,  the  order  of  the  governement,  and  conduction
of  the  shippes  in  the  whole  voyage  might  bee  the  better :
who  being  come  together  accordingly,  they  conclude  and
agree,  that  if  any  great  tempest  should  arise  at  any  time,
and  happen  to  disperse  and  scatter  them,  every  shippe
should  indevour  his  best  to  goe  to  Wardhouse,  a  haven
or  castell  of  some  name  in  the  kingdome  of  Norway,  and
that  they  that  arrived  there  first  in  safetie  should  stay
and  expect  the  comming  of  the  rest.

The  very  same  day  in  the  afternoone,  about  foure  of
the  clocke,  so  great  a  tempest  suddenly  arose,  and  the
Seas  were  so  outragious,  that  the  ships  could  not  keepe
their  intended  course,  but  some  were  perforce  driven  one
way,  and  some  another  way,  to  their  great  perill  and
hazard :  The  generall  with  his  lowdest  voyce  cried  out  to
Richard  Chanceler,  and  earnestly  requested  him  not  to
goe  farre  from  him :  but  hee  neither  would  nor  could
keepe  companie  with  him,  if  he  sailed  still  so  fast :  for
the  Admirall  was  of  better  saile  then  his  shippe.  But
the  said  Admirall  (I  knowe  not  by  what  meanes)  bearing
all  his  sailes,  was  caried  away  with  so  great  force  and
swiftnesse,  that  not  long  after  hee  was  quite  out  of  sight,
and  the  third  ship  also  with  the  same  storme  and  like
rage  was  dispersed  and  lost  us.

246

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
The  shippe  boate  of  the  Admirall  (striking  against  the  They  retume
shippe,)  was  overwhelmed  in  the  sight  and  viewe  of  the  the  next  yeere
Mariners  of  the  Bonaventure : and  as  for  them  that  are  "^^^r^aTfe-
already  returned  and  arrived,  they  know  nothing  of  the  come  of  the
rest  of  the  ships  what  was  become  of  them.  other  2.  ships.

But  if  it  be  so,  that  any  miserable  mishap  have  over-
taken them,  If  the  rage  and  furie  of  the  Sea  have  [I.  246.]
devoured  those  good  men,  or  if  as  yet  they  live,  and
wander  up  and  downe  in  strange  Countreys,  1  must  needs
say  they  were  men  worthy  of  better  fortune,  and  if  they
be  living,  let  us  wish  them  safetie  and  a  good  returne :
but  if  the  crueltie  of  death  hath  taken  holde  of  them,
God  send  them  a  Christian  grave  and  Sepulchre.

Nowe  Richard  Chanceler  with  his  shippe  and  company
being  thus  left  alone,  and  become  very  pensive,  heavie,
and  sorowfull,  by  this  dispersion  of  the  Fleete,  hee
(according  to  the  order  before  taken,)  shapeth  his  course
for  Wardhouse  in  Norway,  there  to  expect  and  abide  the
arrivall  of  the  rest  of  the  shippes.  And  being  come
thither,  and  having  stayed  there  the  space  of  7.  dayes,  and
looked  in  vaine  for  their  comming,  hee  determined  at
length  to  proceede  alone  in  the  purposed  voyage.  And
as  hee  was  preparing  himselfe  to  depart,  it  happened  that
hee  fell  in  company  and  speech  with  certaine  Scottishmen :
who  having  understanding  of  his  intention,  and  wishing
well  to  his  actions,  beganne  earnestly  to  disswade  him
from  the  further  prosecution  of  the  discoverie,  by  ampli-
fying the  dangers  which  hee  was  to  fall  into,  and  omitted
no  reason  that  might  serve  to  that  purpose.  But  hee
holding  nothing  so  ignominious  and  reprochfuU,  as  in-
constancie  and  levitie  of  minde,  and  perswading  himselfe
that  a  man  of  valour  coulde  not  commit  a  more  dis-
honourable part  then  for  feare  of  danger  to  avoyde  and
shunne  great  attempts,  was  nothing  at  all  changed  or
discouraged  with  the  speeches  and  words  of  the  Scots,
remaining  stedfast  and  immutable  in  his  first  resolution :
determining  either  to  bring  that  to  passe  which  was
intended,  or  els  to  die  the  death.

247

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

And  as  for  them  which  were  with  Master  Chanceler  in
his  shippe,  although  they  had  great  cause  of  discomfort
by  the  losse  of  their  companie  (whom  the  foresaid
tempest  had  separated  from  them,)  and  were  not  a  little
troubled  with  cogitations  and  perturbations  of  minde,  in
respect  of  their  doubtfull  course :  yet  notwithstanding,
they  were  of  such  consent  and  agreement  of  minde  with
Master  Chanceler,  that  they  were  resolute,  and  prepared
under  his  direction  and  government,  to  make  proofe  and
triall  of  all  adventures,  without  all  feare  or  mistrust  of
future  dangers.  Which  constancie  of  minde  in  all  the
companie  did  exceedingly  increase  their  Captaines  care-
fulnesse :  for  hee  being  swallowed  up  with  like  good
will  and  love  towards  them,  feared  lest  through  any  errour
of  his,  the  safetie  of  the  companie  should  bee  indangered.
To  conclude,  when  they  sawe  their  desire  and  hope  of  the
arrivall  of  the  rest  of  the  shippes  to  be  every  day  more
and  more  frustrated,  they  provided  to  sea  againe,  and
Master  Chanceler  held  on  his  course  towards  that  un-
knowen  part  of  the  world,  and  sailed  so  farre,  that  hee
came  at  last  to  the  place  where  hee  found  no  night  at  all,
but  a  continuall  light  and  brightnesse  of  the  Sunne
shining  clearely  upon  the  huge  and  mightie  Sea,  And
having  the  benefite  of  this  perpetuall  light  for  certaine
dayes,  at  the  length  it  pleased  God  to  bring  them  into  a
Thcj  arrive  certaine  great  Bay,  which  was  of  one  hundreth  miles  or
In  the  Bay  of  thereabout  over.  Whereinto  they  entred,  and  somewhat
farre  within  it  cast  ancre,  and  looking  every  way  about
them,  it  happened  that  they  espied  a  farre  off  a  certaine
fisher  boate,  which  Master  Chanceler,  accompanied  with  a
fewe  of  his  men,  went  towards  to  common  with  the
fishermen  that  were  in  it,  and  to  knowe  of  them  what
Countrey  it  was,  and  what  people,  and  of  what  maner
of  living  they  were :  but  they  being  amazed  with  the
strange  greatnesse  of  his  shippe,  (for  in  those  partes
before  that  time  they  had  never  scene  the  like)  beganne
presently  to  avoyde  and  to  flee :  but  hee  still  following
them at  last  overtooke  them,  and  being  come  to  them,

248 .

Saint
Nicholas,

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

they  (being  in  great  feare,  as  men  halfe  dead)  prostrated
themselves  before  him,  offering  to  kisse  his  feete :  but  hee
(according  to  his  great  and  singular  courtesie,)  looked
pleasantly  upon  them,  comforting  them  by  signes  and
gestures,  refusing  those  dueties  and  reverences  of  theirs,
and  taking  them  up  in  all  loving  sort  from  the  ground.
And  it  is  strange  to  consider  howe  much  favour  after-
wards in  that  place,  this  humanitie  of  his  did  purchase  to
himselfe.  For  they  being  dismissed  spread  by  and  by  a
report  abroad  of  the  arrivall  of  a  strange  nation,  of  a
singular  gentlenesse  and  courtesie :  whereupon  the  com-
mon people  came  together  offering  to  these  newe-come
ghests  victuals  freely,  and  not  refusing  to  traffique  with
them,  except  they  had  bene  bound  by  a  certaine  religious
use  and  custome,  not  to  buy  any  forreine  commodities,
without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  king.

By  this  time  our  men  had  learned  that  this  Countrey  T^he  discoverie
was  called  Russia,  or  Moscovie,  and  that  Ivan  Vasiliwich  V^^"^'^-
(which  was  at  that  time  their  Kings  name)  ruled  and
governed  farre  and  wide  in  those  places.  And  the  bar-
barous Russes  asked  likewise  of  our  men  whence  they
were,  and  what  they  came  for :  whereunto  answere  was
made,  that  they  were  Englishmen  sent  into  those  coastes,
from  the  most  excellent  King  Edward  the  sixt,  having
from  him  in  commandement  certaine  things  to  deliver  to
their  King,  and  seeking  nothing  els  but  his  amitie  and
friendship,  and  traffique  with  his  people,  whereby  they
doubted  not,  but  that  great  commoditie  and  profit  would
grow  to  the  subjects  of  both  kingdomes.

The Barbarians heard  these things  very  gladly, and  [I.  247.]
promised  their  aide  and  furtherance  to  acquaint  their  king
out  of  hand  with  so  honest  and  a  reasonable  request.

In  the  meane  time  Master  Chanceler  intreated  victuals
for  his  money  of  the  governour  of  that  place  (who
together  with  others  came  aboord  him)  and  required
hostages  of  them  likewise  for  the  more  assurance  of
safetie  to  himselfe  and  his  company.  To  whom  the
Governours  answered,  that  they  knewe  not  in  that  case

249

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

the  will  of  their  king,  but  yet  were  willing  in  such  things
as  they  might  lawfully  doe,  to  pleasure  him :  which  was
as  then  to  affoord  him  the  benefit  of  victuals.

Nowe  while  these  things  were  a  doing,  they  secretly
sent  a  messenger  unto  the  Emperour,  to  certifie  him  of
the  arrivall  of  a  strange  nation,  and  withall  to  knowe  his
pleasure  concerning  them.  Which  message  was  very
welcome  unto  him,  insomuch  that  voluntarily  hee  invited
them  to  come  to  his  Court.  But  if  by  reason  of  the
tediousnesse  of  so  long  a  journey,  they  thought  it  not
best  so  to  doe,  then  hee  graunted  libertie  to  his  subjects
to  bargaine,  and  to  traffique  with  them :  and  further
promised,  that  if  it  would  please  them  to  come  to  him,
hee  himselfe  would  beare  the  whole  charges  of  poste
horses.  In  the  meane  time  the  governours  of  the  place
differred  the  matter  from  day  to  day,  pretending  divers
excuses,  and  saying  one  while  that  the  consent  of  all  the
governours,  and  another  while,  that  the  great  and  waightie
affaires  of  the  kingdome  compelled  them  to  differ  their
answere:  and  this  they  did  of  purpose,  so  long  to
protract  the  time,  untill  the  messenger  (sent  before  to  the
king)  did  returne  with  relation  of  his  will  and  pleasure.

But  Master  Chanceler,  (seeing  himselfe  held  in  this
suspense  with  long  and  vaine  expectation,  and  thinking
that  of  intention  to  delude  him,  they  posted  the  matter
off  so  often,)  was  very  instant  with  them  to  performe
their  promise  :  Which  if  they  would  not  doe,  hee  tolde
them  that  hee  would  depart  and  proceede  in  his  voyage.
So  that  the  Moscovites  (although  as  yet  they  knew  not
the  minde  of  their  king)  yet  fearing  the  departure  in
deede  of  our  men  who  had  such  wares  and  commodities
as  they  greatly  desired,  they  at  last  resolved  to  furnish
our  people  with  all  things  necessarie,  and  to  conduct
them  by  land  to  the  presence  of  their  king.  And  so
Master  Chanceler  beganne  his  journey,  which  was  very
long  and  most  troublesome,  wherein  hee  had  the  use  of
certaine  sleds,  which  in  that  Countrey  are  very  common,
for  they  are  caried themselves  upon  sleds,  and  all their

250

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-

carriages  are in the same sort, the people almost not

knowing  any  other  maner  of  carriage,  the  cause  wherof  is

the  exceeding  hardnesse  of  the  ground  congealed in the

winter  time by  the  force of the  colde,  which in  those

places  is  very  extreme  and  horrible,  whereof  hereafter  we

will  say  something.

But  nowe  they  having  passed  the  greater  part  of  their

journey,  mette  at  last  with  the  Sleddeman  (of  whom I

spake  before) sent  to  the  king  secretly  from  the  Justices

or  governours,  who  by  some  ill  happe  had  lost  his  way,

and had gone to the Sea side,  which is neere to  the

Countrey  of  the  Tartars,  thinking  there  to  have  found

our  ship. But having  long  erred  and  wandered  out  of

his  way,  at  the  last  in  his  direct  returne,  hee  met  (as  hee

was  comming)  our  Captaine  on  the  way. To  whom  hee The  Emper-

by  and by  delivered  the  Emperours  letters,  which  were  ^^"  courteous

written  to  him  with  all  courtesie  and  in  the  most  loving:  ^, ^  /

,  11 1  1 •  1  ^ Chanceler.

maner  that  could be : wherein  expresse  commandement

was  given,  that post horses  should bee  gotten  for  him

and  the  rest  of  his  company  without  any  money. Which

thing  was  of  all  the  Russes  in  the  rest  of  their  journey

so  willingly  done,  that  they  began to  quarrell,  yea,  and

to  fight  also  in  striving  and  contending  which of  them

should  put  their  post  horses  to  the  sledde : so  that  after

much  adoe  and  great  paines  taken  in  this  long  and  wearie

journey, (for they had travailed very neere fifteene

hundred  miles) Master  Chanceler  came  at  last  to  Mosco

the  chiefe  citie  of  the  kingdome,  and the  seate  of  the

king  :  of  which  citie,  and  of  the  Emperour  himselfe,  and

of the principall cities of Moscovie, wee  will speake

immediatly  more  at  large  in  this  discourse.

Of Moscovie,  which is  also  called Russia.

MOscovie,  which  hath  the  name  also  of  Russia  the
white,  is  a  very  large  and  spacious  Countrey,  every
way  bounded  with  divers  nations.  Towards  the  South
and  the  East,  it  is  compassed  with  Tartaria  :  the
Northren  side  of  it  stretcheth  to  the  Scytian  Ocean :  upon

251

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

the  West  part  border  the  Lappians,  a  rude  and  savage
nation,  living  in  woods,  whose  language  is  not  knowen
to  any  other  people  :  next  unto  these,  more  towards  the
South,  is  Swecia,  then  Finlandia,  then  Livonia,  and  last
of  all  Lituania.  This  Countrey  of  Moscovie,  hath  also
very  many  and  great  rivers  in  it,  and  is  marish  ground
in  many  places  :  and  as  for  the  rivers,  the  greatest  and
248.]  most  famous  amongst  all  the  rest,  is  that,  which  the
Russes  in  their  owne  tongue  call  Volga,  but  others  know
it  by  the  name  of  Rha.  Next  unto  it  in  fame  is  Tanais,
which  they  call  Don,  and  the  third  Boristhenes  which  at
this  day  they  call  Neper.  Two  of  these,  to  wit,  Rha,  and
Boristhenes  yssuing  both  out  of  one  fountaine,  runne
very  farre  through  the  land  :  Rha  receiving  many  other
pleasant  rivers  into  it,  &  running  from  the  very  head  or
spring  of  it  towards  the  East,  after  many  crooked
turnings  and  windings,  dischargeth  it  selfe,  and  all  the
other  waters  and  rivers  that  fall  into  it  by  divers
passages  into  the  Caspian  Sea.  Tanais  springing  from  a
fountaine  of  great  name  in  those  partes,  and  growing
great  neere  to  his  head,  spreds  it  selfe  at  length  very
largely,  and  makes  a  great  lake :  and  then  growing
narrowe  againe,  doth  so  runne  for  certaine  miles,  untill  it
fall  into  another  lake,  which  they  call  Ivan :  and  there-
hence  fetching  a  very  crooked  course,  comes  very  neere
to  the  river  Volga :  but  disdaining  as  it  were  the  company
of  any  other  river,  doth  there  turne  it  selfe  againe  from
Volga,  and  runnes  toward  the  South,  and  fals  at  last  into
the  Lake  of  Moeotis.  Boristhenes,  which  comes  from
the  same  head  that  Rha  doth,  (as  wee  sayde  before)
carieth  both  it  selfe,  and  other  waters  that  are  neere  unto
it,  towards  the  South,  not  refusing  the  mixture  of  other
small  rivers :  and  running  by  many  great  and  large
Countreys  fals  at  last  into  Pontus  Euxinus.  Besides
these  rivers,  are  also  in  Moscovie  certaine  lakes,  and
pooles,  the  lakes  breede  fish  by  the  celestiall  influence :
and  amongst  them  all,  the  chiefest  and  most  principall  is
called Bealozera,  which is  very  famous  by  reason  of  a

252

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
very  strong  towre  built  in  it,  wherein  the  kings  of  Mos-
covie reserve and repose their treasure in all time of
warre  and  danger.

Touching  the  Riphean  mountaines,  whereupon  the
snow  lieth  continually,  and  where  hence  in  times  past  it
was  thought  that  Tanais  the  river  did  spring,  and  that  the
rest  of  the  wonders  of  nature,  which  the  Grecians  fained
and  invented  of  olde,  were  there  to  be  seene  :  our  men
which  lately  came  from  thence,  neither  sawe  them,  nor
yet  have  brought  home  any  perfect  relation  of  them,
although  they  remained  there  for  the  space  of  three
moneths,  and  had  gotten  in  that  time  some  intelligence
of  the  language  of  Moscovie.  The  whole  Countrey  is
plaine  and  champion,  and  few  hils  in  it  :  and  towards  the
North  it  hath  very  large  &  spacious  woods,  wherein  is
great  store  of  Firre  trees,  a  wood  very  necessarie,  and  fit
for  the  building  of  houses  :  there  are  also  wilde  beastes
bred  in  those  woods,  as  Buffes,  Beares,  and  blacke
Wolves,  and  another  kinde  of  beast  unknowen  to  us,  but
called  by  them  Rossomakka  :  and  the  nature  of  the  same  is
very  rare  and  wonderfull :  for  when  it  is  great  with  yong,
and  ready  to  bring  foorth,  it  seeketh  out  some  narrow
place  betweene  two  stakes,  and  so  going  through  them,
presseth  it  selfe,  and  by  that  meanes  is  eased  of  her
burden,  which  otherwise  could  not  be  done.  They  hunt
their  buffes  for  the  most  part  a  horsebacke,  but  their
Beares  a  foot,  with  woodden  forkes.  The  north  parts  of
the  Countrey  are  reported  to  be  so  cold,  that  the  very  ice
or  water  which  distilleth  out  of  the  moist  wood  which
they  lay  upon  the  fire  is  presently  congealed  and  frozen  :
the  diversitie  growing  suddenly  to  be  so  great,  that  in  one
and  the  selfe  same  firebrand,  a  man  shall  see  both  fire  and
ice.  When  the  winter  doth  once  begin  there  it  doth  still
more  &  more  increase  by  a  perpetuitie  of  cold  :  neither
doth  that  colde  slake,  untill  the  force  of  the  Sunne
beames  doth  dissolve  the  cold,  and  make  glad  the  earth,
returning  to  it  againe.  Our  mariners  which  we  left  in
the  ship  in  the  meane  time  to  keepe  it,  in  their  going  up

253

I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^553-

The  sharpnes onely  from  their  cabbins  to  the  hatches,  had  their  breath

°-M  "^^^f^ oftentimes  so  suddenly  taken  away,  that they  eftsoones

fell  downe  as  men  very  neere  dead,  so  great  is  the  sharpe-

nesse  of  that  colde  climate  :  but  as  for  the  South  parts  of

the  Countrey,  they  are  somewhat  more  temperate.

Of Mosco  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  kingdome,
and  of  the  Emperour  thereof.

T  remaineth  that  a  larger  discourse  be  made  of  Mosco,
the  principall  Citie  of  that  Countrey,  and  of  the
Prince  also,  as  before  we  have  promised.  The  Empire
and  government  of  the  king  is  very  large,  and  his  wealth
at  this  time  exceeding  great.  And  because  the  citie  of
Mosco  is  the  chiefest  of  al  the  rest,  it  seemeth  of  it  selfe
to  challenge  the  first  place  in  this  discourse.  Our  men
say,  that  in  bignesse  it  is  as  great  as  the  Citie  of  London,
with  the  suburbes  thereof.  There  are  many  and  great
buildings  in  it,  but  for  beautie  and  fairenesse,  nothing
Their  manner  Comparable  to  ours.  There  are  many  Townes  and
of  building.  Villages  also,  but  built  out  of  order,  and  with  no
hansomnesse :  their  streetes  and  wayes  are  not  paved  with
stone  as  ours  are :  the  walles  of  their  houses  are  of
wood :  the  roofes  for  the  most  part  are  covered  with
shingle  boords.  There  is  hard  by  the  Citie  a  very  faire
Castle,  strong,  and  furnished  with  artillerie,  whereunto
[I.  249.]  the  Citie  is  joyned  directly  towards  the  North,  with  a
bricke  wall :  the  walles  also  of  the  Castle  are  built  with
bricke,  and  are  in  breadth  or  thickenesse  eighteene  foote.
This  Castle  hath  on  the  one  side  a  drie  ditch,  on  the
other  side  the  river  Moscua,  whereby  it  is  made  almost
inexpugnable.  The  same  Moscua  trending  towards  the
East  doth  admit  into  it  the  companie  of  the  river  Occa.
In  the  Castle  aforesaide,  there  are  in  number  nine
Churches,  or  Chappels,  not  altogether  unhansome,
which  are  used  and  kept  by  certaine  religious  men,  over
whom  there  is  after  a  sort,  a  Patriarke,  or  Governour,
and  with  him  other  reverend  Fathers,  all  which  for  the
greater  part,  dwell  within  the  Castle. As  for  the  kings

254

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-
Court  and  Palace,  it  is  not  of  the  neatest,  onely  in
forme  it  is  foure  square,  and  of  lowe  building,  much
surpassed  and  excelled  by  the  beautie  and  elegancie  of
the  houses  of  the  kings  of  England.  The  windowes
are  very  narrowly  built,  and  some  of  them  by  glasse,
some  other  by  lettisses  admit  the  light :  and  whereas
the  Palaces  of  our  Princes  are  decked,  and  adorned
with  hangings  of  cloth  of  gold,  there  is  none  such  there :
they  build  and  joyne  to  all  their  wals  benches,  and  that
not  onely  in  the  Court  of  the  Emperour,  but  in  all
private  mens  houses.

Nowe  after  that  they  had  remained  about  twelve  dayes
in  the  Citie,  there  was  then  a  Messenger  sent  unto  them,
to  bring  them  to  the  Kings  house :  and  they  being  after
a  sort  wearied  with  their  long  stay,  were  very  ready,
and  willing  so  to  doe :  and  being  entred  within  the
gates  of  the  Court,  there  sate  a  very  honorable  companie
of  Courtiers,  to  the  number  of  one  hundred,  all  appar-
elled in  cloth  of  golde,  downe  to  their  ankles :  and  there-
hence  being  conducted  into  the  chamber  of  presence,
our  men  beganne  to  wonder  at  the  Majestic  of  the
Emperour :  his  seate  was  aloft,  in  a  very  royall  throne,
having  on  his  head  a  Diademe,  or  Crowne  of  golde,
apparelled  with  a  robe  all  of  Goldsmiths  worke,  and  in
his  hand  hee  held  a  Scepter  garnished,  and  beset  with
precious  stones :  and  besides  all  other  notes  and  appar-
ances  of  honour,  there  was  a  Majestie  in  his  countenance
proportionable  with  the  excellencie  of  his  estate  :  on  the
one  side  of  him  stood  his  chiefe  Secretarie,  on  the  other
side,  the  great  Commander  of  silence,  both  of  them
arayed  also  in  cloth  of  gold :  and  then  there  sate  the
Counsel  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  in  number,  all  in  like
sort  arayed,  and  of  great  state.  This  so  honorable  an
assemblie,  so  great  a  Majestie  of  the  Emperour,  and  of
the  place  might  very  well  have  amazed  our  men,  and
have  dasht  them  out  of  countenance :  but  notwith-
standing Master  Chanceler  being  therewithal!  nothing
dismaied  saluted,  and did  his  duetie  to  the  Emperour,

255

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

after  the  maner  of  England,  and  withall,  delivered  unto
King  him  the  letters  of  our  king,  Edward  the  sixt.  The
Edwards  Emperour  having  taken,  &  read  the  letters,  began  a
delivered  ^^^^  ^^  question  with  them,  and  to  aske  them  of  the
welfare  of  our  king :  whereunto  our  men  answered  him
directly,  &  in  few  words :  hereupon  our  men  presented
some  thing  to  the  Emperour,  by  the  chiefe  Secretary,
which  at  the  delivery  of  it,  put  of  his  hat,  being  before
all  the  time  covered :  and  so  the  Emperour  having
invited  them  to  dinner,  dismissed  them  from  his  pre-
sence :  and  going  into  the  chamber  of  him  that  was
Master  of  the  Requests  to  the  Emperour,  &  having
stayed  there  the  space  of  two  howres,  at  the  last,  the
Messenger  commeth,  and  calleth  them  to  dinner :  they
goe,  and  being  conducted  into  the  golden  Court,  (for
so  they  call  it,  although  not  very  faire)  they  finde  the
Emperour  sitting  upon  an  high  and  stately  seate,  ap-
parelled with  a  robe  of  silver,  and  with  another  Diademe
on  his  head :  our  men  being  placed  over  against  him,
sit  downe :  in  the  middes  of  the  roome  stoode  a
mightie  Cupboord  upon  a  square  foote,  whereupon
stoode  also  a  round  boord,  in  manner  of  a  Diamond,
broade  beneath,  and  towardes  the  toppe  narrowe,  and
every  steppe  rose  up  more  narrowe  then  another.  Upon
this  Cupboorde  was  placed  the  Emperours  plate,  which
was  so  much,  that  the  very  Cupboord  it  selfe  was  scant
able  to  sustaine  the  waight  of  it :  the  better  part  of
all  the  vessels,  and  goblets,  was  made  of  very  fine
gold :  and  amongst  the  rest,  there  were  foure  pots  of
very  large  bignesse,  which  did  adorne  the  rest  of  the
plate  in  great  measure :  for  they  were  so  high,  that
they  thought  them  at  the  least  five  foote  long.  There
were  also  upon  this  Cupbord  certaine  silver  caskes,
not  much  differing  from  the  quantitie  of  our  Fyrkins,
wherein  was  reserved  the  Emperours  drinke :  on  each
side  of  the  Hall  stood  foure  Tables,  each  of  them
layde  and  covered  with  very  cleane  table  clothes,  where-
unto the  company  ascended  by  three  steps  or degrees :

256

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

all which were filled with the assemblie present : the
ghests were all apparelled with linnen without, and
with rich skinnes within, and so did notably set out
this  royall feast. The  Emperour,  when  hee takes  any
bread  or  knife  in  his  hand,  doth  first  of  all  crosse  him-
selfe  upon  his  forehead  :  they  that  are  in  speciall  favour
with the Emperour sit upon the same bench with
him, but somewhat farre from him : and before the
comming in of the meate, the Emperour himselfe,
according  to  an  ancient  custome  of  the  kings  of  Mos-
covy, doth first bestow a  piece of  bread upon every
one of  his ghests, with a loud pronunciation of  his
title, and honour, in this manner : The great Duke
of Moscovie, and chiefe Emperour of  Russia, John
Basiliwich (& then the officer  nameth  the ghest)  doth
give thee bread. Whereupon al the  ghests rise up,  [I.  250.]
and  by  &  by  sit  downe  againe. This  done,  the  Gentle-
man Usher of the Hall comes in, with a notable
company of servants, carying the dishes, and having
done his reverence to the Emperour, puts a yong
Swanne  in  a  golden  platter  upon  the  table,  and  immedi-
atly  takes  it  thence  againe,  delivering  it  to  the  Carver,
and seven other  of  his  fellowes,  to  be  cut up : which
being perfourmed, the meate is then distributed to
the ghests,  with the  like pompe, and ceremonies. In
the meane time, the Gentleman Usher receives his
bread, and tasteth to the Emperour, and afterward,
having done his reverence, he departeth. Touching
the rest of  the dishes, because they  were brought  in
out of  order, our men can report no certaintie : but
this  is  true,  that  all  the  furniture  of  dishes,  and  drink-
ing vessels,  which  were  then  for  the  use  of  a  hundred
ghests,  was  all of  pure  golde, and the tables  were so
laden  with  vessels  of  gold,  that  there  was  no  roome  for
some  to  stand  upon  them.

We may not forget,  that there  were 140. servitors
arayed  in  cloth  of  gold,  that  in  the  dinner  time,  changed
thrise their habit and apparell, which servitors are in
II  257  R

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

like  sort  served  with  bread  from  the  Emperour,  as  th<
rest  of  the  ghests.  Last  of  all,  dinner  being  ended,  anc
candles  brought  in,  (for  by  this  time  night  was  come"
the  Emperour  calleth  all  his  ghests  and  Noble  men  b)
their  names,  in  such  sort,  that  it  seemes  miraculous
that  a  Prince,  otherwise  occupied  in  great  matters  o
estate,  should  so  well  remember  so  many  and  sundr)  m
particular  names.  The  Russes  tolde  our  men,  tha
the  reason  thereof,  as  also  of  the  bestowing  of  breac
in  that  maner,  was  to  the  ende  that  the  Emperoui
might  keepe  the  knowledge  of  his  owne  houshold
and  withal,  that  such  as  are  under  his  displeasure,
might  by  this  meanes  be  knowen.

Of  the  discipline  of  warre among  the Russes.

WHensoever  the  injures  of  their  neighbours  doe
call  the  King  foorth  to  battell,  hee  never  armetfc
a  lesse  number  against  the  enemie,  then  300.  thousand
soldiers,  100.  thousand  whereof  hee  carieth  out  into  the
field  with  him,  and  leaveth  the  rest  in  garison  in  some  fit
places,  for  the  better  safetie  of  his  Empire.  He  presseth
no  husbandman,  nor  Marchant :  for  the  Countrey  is  sc
populous,  that  these  being  left  at  home,  the  youth  of  the
Realme  is  sufficient  for  all  his  wars.  As  many  as  goe  out
to  warfare  doe  provide  all  things  of  their  owne  cost :
they  fight  not  on  foote,  but  altogether  on  horsebacke :
their  armour  is  a  coate  of  maile,  &  a  helmet :  the  coate
of  maile  w'out  is  gilded,  or  els  adorned  with  silke
although  it  pertaine  to  a  common  soldier :  they  have  a
great  pride  in  shewing  their  wealth  :  they  use  bowes,  and
arrowes,  as  the  Turks  do :  they  cary  lances  also  into  the
field.  They  ride  with  a  short  stirrop,  after  the  maner  of
the  Turks :  They  are  a  kinde  of  people  most  sparing  in
diet,  and  most  patient  in  extremitie  of  cold,  above  all
others.  For  when  the  ground  is  covered  with  snowe,
and  is  growen  terrible  and  hard  with  the  frost,  this  Russe
hangs  up  his  mantle,  or  souldiers  coate,  against  that  part
from  whence  the  winde  and  Snowe  drives,  and  so  making

258

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-
a  little  fire,  lieth  downe  with  his  backe  towards  the
weather  :  this  mantle  of  his  serves  him  for  his  bed,  wall,
house  and  all :  his  drinke  is  colde  water  of  the  river,
mingled  with  oatemeale,  and  this  is  all  his  good  cheere,
and  he  thinketh  himselfe  well,  and  daintily  fedde  there-
with, and  so  sitteth  downe  by  his  fire,  and  upon  the  hard
ground,  rosteth  as  it  were  his  wearie  sides  thus  daintily
stuffed  :  the  hard  ground  is  his  feather  bed,  &  some
blocke  or  stone  his  pillow  :  and  as  for  his  horse,  he  is  as
it  were  a  chamberfellow  with  his  master,  faring  both  alike.
How  justly  may  this  barbarous,  and  rude  Russe  condemne
the  daintinesse  and  nicenesse  of  our  Captaines,  who  living
in  a  soile  &  aire  much  more  temperate,  yet  commonly  use
furred  boots,  and  clokes  ?  But  thus  much  of  the  furni-
ture of  their  common  souldiers.  But  those  that  are  of
higher  degrees  come  into  the  field  a  little  better  provided.
As  for  the  furniture  of  the  Emperour  himselfe,  it  is  then
above  all  other  times,  most  notable.  The  coverings  of
his  tent  for  the  most  part,  are  all  of  gold,  adorned  with
stones  of  great  price,  and  with  the  curious  workemanship
of  plumasiers.  As  often  as  they  are  to  skirmish  with  the
enemie,  they  goe  forth  without  any  order  at  all  :  they
make  no  wings,  nor  militarie  divisions  of  their  men,  as  we
doe,  but  lying  for  the  most  part,  in  ambush,  doe  suddenly
set  upon  the  enemie.  Their  horses  can  well  abstaine  two
■whole  daies  from  any  meate.  They  feede  upon  the  barkes
of  trees,  and  the  most  tender  branches,  in  all  the  time  of
warre.  And  this  scant  and  miserable  maner  of  living,
both  the  horse  and  his  Master  can  well  endure,  sometimes
for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  lustie,  and  in  good  state  of
body.  If  any  man  behave  himselfe  valiantly  in  the  fielde,
to  the  contentation  of  the  Emperour,  he  bestoweth  upon
him  in  recompense  of  his  service,  some  farme,  or  so  much
ground  as  he  and  his  may  live  upon,  which  notwithstand-
ing after  his  death,  returneth  againe  to  the  Emperour,  if
he  die  without  a  male  issue.  For  although  his  daughters
be  never  so  many,  yet  no  part  of  that  inheritance  comes
to  them,  except  peradventure  the  Emperour  of  his  good-

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

[I.  251.]  nesse,  give  some  portion  of  the  land  amongst  them,  to
bestowe  them  withall.  As  for  the  man,  whosoever  he
be,  that  is  in  this  sort  rewarded  by  the  Emperours
Hberalitie,  hee  is  bound  in  a  great  summe,  to  maintaine  so
many  souldiers  for  the  warre,  when  need  shall  require,  as
that  land,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Emperour,  is  able  to
maintaine.  And  all  those,  to  whom  any  land  fals  by
inheritance,  are  in  no  better  condition  :  for  if  they  die
without  any  male  issue,  all  their  lands  fall  into  the  hands
of  the  Emperour.  And  moreover,  if  there  be  any  rich  I
man  amongst  them,  who  in  his  owne  person  is  unfit  for
the  warres,  and  yet  hath  such  wealth,  that  thereby  many
Noble  men  and  warriours  might  be  maintained,  if  any  of
the  Courtiers  present  his  name  to  the  Emperour,  the
unhappy  man  is  by  and  by  sent  for,  and  in  that  instant,
deprived  of  all  his  riches,  which  with  great  paines  and  ^
travell  all  his  life  time  he  had  gotten  together  :  except
perhaps  some  small  portion  thereof  be  left  him,  to
maintaine  his  wife,  children  and  familie.  But  all  this  is
done  of  all  the  people  so  willingly  at  the  Emperours
commandement,  that  a  man  would  thinke,  they  rather
make  restitution  of  other  mens  goods,  then  give  that
which  is  their  owne  to  other  men.  Nowe  the  Emperour
having  taken  these  goods  into  his  hands,  bestoweth  them  i
among  his  Courtiers,  according  to  their  deserts  :  and
oftener  that  a  man  is  sent  to  the  warres,  the  more  the
favour  he  thinketh  is  borne  to  him  by  the  Emperour,
although  he  goe  upon  his  owne  charge,  as  I  said  before.
So  great  is  the  obedience  of  all  men  generally  to  their
Prince.

Of  the  Ambassadors  of  the  Emperour  of
Moscovie.

THe  Moscovite,  with  no  lesse  pompe,  and  magnificence,
then  that  which  we  have  spoken  of,  sends  his  Ambas-
sadors to  forren  Princes,  in  the  affaires  of  estate. For^^
while  our  men  were  abiding  in  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  there
were two Ambassadors sent to the King of Poland,

260

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-

accompanied  with  500.  notable  horses,  and  the  greater
part  of  the  men  were  arayed  in  cloth  of  gold,  and  of
silke,  and  the  worst  apparell  was  of  garments  of  blewe
colour,  to  speake  nothing  of  the  trappings  of  the  horses,
which  were  adorned  with  gold  and  silver,  and  very
curiously  embrodered  :  they  had  also  with  them  one
hundred  white  and  faire  spare  horses,  to  use  them  at  such
times,  as  any  wearinesse  came  upon  them.  But  now  the
time  requireth  me  to  speake  briefly  of  other  Cities  of  the
Moscovites,  and  of  the  wares  and  commodities  that
the  Countrey  yeeldeth.

Novogorode.

Ext  unto  Mosco,  the  Citie  of  Novogorode  is  reputed
the  chiefest  of  Russia :  for  although  it  be  in  Majestie
inferior  to  it,  yet  in  greatnesse  it  goeth  beyond  it.  It  is
the  cheifest  and  greatest  Marte  Towne  of  all  Moscovie  :
and  albeit  the  Emperours  seate  is  not  there,  but  at  Mosco,
yet  the  commodiousnesse  of  the  river,  falling  into  that
gulfe,  which  is  called  Sinus  Finnicus,  whereby  it  is  well
frequented  by  Marchants,  makes  it  more  famous  then
Mosco  it  selfe.  This  towne  excels  all  the  rest  in  the
commodities  of  flaxe  and  hempe :  it  yeeldes  also  hides,
honie,  and  waxe.  The  Flemings  there  sometimes  had  a
house  of  Marchandize,  but  by  reason  that  they  used  the
like  ill  dealing  there,  which  they  did  with  us,  they  lost
their  privileges,  a  restitution  whereof  they  earnestly  sued
for  at  the  time  that  our  men  were  there.  But  those  The  knavery
Flemings  hearing  of  the  arrivall  of  our  men  in  those  °f!^^  ^'^"!~
parts,  wrote  their  letters  to  the  Emperour  against  them,  gj^„^gjf
accusing  them  for  pirats  and  rovers,  wishing  him  to
detaine,  and  imprison  them.  Which  things  when  they
were  knowen  of  our  men,  they  conceived  feare,  that  they
should  never  have  returned  home.  But  the  Emperour
beleeving  rather  the  Kings  letters,  which  our  men  brought,
then  the  lying  and  false  suggestions  of  the  Flemings,  used
no  ill  intreatie  towards  them.

[Yeraslave
261

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

Y

Yeraslave.

Eraslave  also  is  a  Towne  of  some  good  fame,  for  the
commodities  of  hides,  tallow,  and  corne,  which  it
yeeldes  in  great  abundance.  Cakes  of  waxc  are  there  also
to  bee  solde,  although  other  places  have  greater  store  :
this  Yeraslave  is  distant  from  Mosco,  about  two  hundred
miles  :  and  betwixt  them  are  many  populous  villages.
Their  fields  yeeld  such  store  of  corne,  that  in  convaying  it
towards  Mosco,  sometimes  in  a  forenoone,  a  man  shall
see  seven  hundred  or  eight  hundred  sleds,  going  and  I
comming,  laden  with  corne  and  salt  fish  :  the  people '
come  a  thousand  miles  to  Mosco,  to  buy  that  corne,  and
then  cary  it  away  upon  sleds  :  and  these  are  those  people
that  dwell  in  the  North  parts,  where  the  colde  is  so
terrible,  that  no  corne  doth  growe  there,  or  if  it  spring  up,
it  never  comes  to  ripenesse.  The  commodities  that  they
bring  with  them,  are  saltfish,  skinnes,  and  hides.

[I.  252.]  Vologda.

'Ologda being from  Mosco, 550.  miles yeeldes  the
commodities  of  Hempe and Flaxe  also  : although
the  greatest  store  of  Flaxe  is  solde  at  Novogrode.

Plesco.

He  Towne  of  Plesco,  is  frequented  of  Marchants  for
the  good  store  of  Honie  and  Waxe  that  it  yeeldeth.

Colmagro.

THe  North  parts  of  Russia  yeelde  very  rare  and
precious  skinnes  :  and  amongst  the  rest,  those
principally,  which  we  call  Sables,  worne  about  the  neckes
of  our  Noble  women  and  Ladies  :  it  hath  also  Martins
skinnes,  white,  blacke,  and  red  Foxe  skinnes,  skinnes  of
Hares,  and  Ermyns,  and  others,  which  they  call  and
terme  barbarously,  as  Bevers,  Minxes,  and  Minivers.
The  sea  adjoyning,  breedes  a  certaine  t^east,  which  they
call  the  Mors,  v/hich  seeketh  his  foode  upon  the  rockes,

262

Y

T

RICHARD CHANCELOR  a.d.

1553-

climing  up  with  the  helpe  of  his  teeth. The  Russes  use

to  take  them,  for  the  great  vertue  that  is  in  their  teeth,

whereof  they  make  as  great  accompt,  as  we  doe  of  the

Elephants tooth. These commodities they cary upon

Deeres  backes  to  the  towne  of  Lampas  :  and  from  thence

to  Colmagro,  and  there  in  the  winter  time,  are  kept  great

Faires  for the sale of  them. This  Citie  of  Colmagro,

serves  all  the  Countrey  about  it  with  salt,  and  salt  fish.

The  Russians  also  of  the  North  parts,  send  thither  oyle,

which they call traine, which they make in a river

called  II  Una,  although it  be  also  made  elsewhere  : and Or,  Dmna

here  they  use  to  boile  the  water  of  the  sea,  whereof  they

make  very  great  store  of  salt.

Of  controversies  in  Lawe,  and  how  they  are \

ended.

HAving  hitherto  spoken  so  much  of  the  chiefest
Cities  of  Russia,  as  the  matter  required  :  it  remaineth
that  we  speake  somewhat  of  the  lawes,  that  the  Moscovits
doe  use,  as  farre  foorth  as  the  same  are  come  to  our
knowledge.  If  any  controversie  arise  among  them,
they  first  make  their  Landlords  Judges  in  the  matter,
and  if  they  cannot  end  it,  then  they  preferre  it  to  the
Magistrate.  The  plaintif  craveth  of  the  said  Magistrate,
that  he  may  have  leave  to  enter  law  against  his  adversarie  :
and  having  obtained  it,  the  officer  fetcheth  the  defendant,
and  beateth  him  on  the  legges,  till  he  bring  forth  a  suretie
for  him  :  but  if  he  be  not  of  such  credite,  as  to  proqure
a  surety,  then  are  his  hands  by  an  officer  tied  to  his
necke,  and  he  is  beaten  all  the  way,  till  he  come  before
the  Judge.  The  Judge  then  asketh  him  (as  for  ex-
ample in  the  matter  of  debt)  whether  he  oweth  any
thing  to  the  plaintife.  If  he  denies  it,  then  saith  the
Judge,  How  canst  thou  deny  it  ^  the  defendant  answereth.
By  an  othe  :  thereupon  the  officer  is  commaunded  to
cease  from  beating  of  him,  untill  the  matter  be  further
tried.  They  have  no  Lawyers,  but  every  man  is  his
owne  Advocate,  and  both  the  complaint  of  the  accuser,

263

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

and  the  answere  of  the  defendant,  are  in  maner  of
petition  delivered  to  the  Emperour,  intreating  justice
.  at  his  hands.  The  Emperour  himselfe  heareth  every
great  controversie,  and  upon  the  hearing  of  it,  giveth
judgement,  and  that  with  great  equitie,  which  I  take  to
be  a  thing  worthy  of  speciall  commendation,  in  the
Majestie  of  a  Prince.  But  although  he  doe  this  with
a  good  purpose  of  mind,  yet  the  corrupt  Magistrates
do  wonderfully  pervert  the  same  :  but  if  the  Emperour
take  them  in  any  fault,  he  doeth  punish  them  most  .
severely.  Now  at  the  last,  when  ech  partie  hath  defended
his  cause  with  his  best  reasons,  the  Judge  demandeth  of
the  accuser,  whether  he  hath  any  more  to  say  for  him-
selfe :  he  answereth,  that  he  will  trie  the  matter  in  fight
by  his  Champion,  or  else  intreateth,  that  in  fight  betwixt
themselves  the  matter  may  be  ended  :  which  being
graunted,  they  both  fight  it  out  :  or  if  both  of  them,  or
either  of  them  seeme  unfit  for  that  kinde  of  triall,  then
they  have  publike  Champions  to  be  hired,  which  live
by  ending  of  quarrels.  These  Champions  are  armed  with
yron  axes,  and  speares,  and  fight  on  foote,  and  he  whose
Champion  is  overcome,  is  by  and  by  taken,  and  im-
prisoned, and  terribly  handled,  untill  he  agree  with  his
adversarie.  But  if  either  of  them  be  of  any  good  calling,
and  degree,  and  doe  challenge  one  another  to  fight,  the
Judge  granteth  it  :  in  which  case  they  may  not  use
publike  Champions.  And  he  that  is  of  any  good  birth,
doth  contemne  the  other,  if  he  be  basely  borne,  and
wil  not  fight  with  him.  If  a  poore  man  happen  to  grow
in  debt,  his  Creditor  takes  him,  &  maketh  him  pay  the
debt,  in  working  either  to  himselfe,  or  to  some  other
man,  whose  wages  he  taketh  up.  And  there  are  some
among  them,  that  use  willingly  to  make  themselves,  their

[I.  253.]  wives,  and  children,  bondslaves  unto  rich  men,  to  have
a  little  money  at  the  first  into  their  hands,  and  so  for
ever  after  content  themselves  with  meate  and  drinke  :
so  little  accompt  doe  they  make  of  libertie.

264

V

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

Of  punishments  upon  theeves.

IF  any  man  be  taken  upon  committing  of  theft,  he
is  imprisoned,  and  often  beaten,  but  not  hanged  for
the  first  offence,  as  the  manner  is  with  us  :  and  this
they  call  the  lawe  of  mercie.  He  that  oifendeth  the
second  time  hath  his  nose  cut  off,  and  is  burnt  in  the
forehead  with  a  hot  yron.  The  third  time,  he  is  hanged.
There  are  many  cutpurses  among  them,  and  if  the
rigour  of  the  Prince  did  not  cut  them  off,  they  could
not  be  avoyded.

Of  their  religion.

THey  maintaine  the  opinions  of  the  Greeke  Church  :
they  suffer  no  graven  images  of  saints  in  their
Churches,  but  their  pictures  painted  in  tables  they  have
in  great  abundance,  which  they  do  adore  and  offer  unto,
and  burne  waxe  candles  before  them,  and  cast  holy  water
upon  them,  without  other  honour.  They  say  that  our
images  which  are  set  up  in  Churches,  and  carved,  have
no  divinitie  in  them.  In  their  private  houses  they  have
images  for  their  houshold  saints,  and  for  the  most  part,
they  are  put  in  the  darkest  place  of  the  house  :  hee
that  comes  into  his  neighbours  house  doth  first  salute
his  saints,  although  he  see  them  not.  If  any  foorme
or  stoole  stand  in  his  way,  hee  oftentimes  beateth  his
browe  upon  the  same,  and  often  ducking  downe  with
his  head,  and  body,  worshippeth  the  chiefe  Image.  The
habite,  and  attire  of  the  Priests,  and  of  the  Lay  men,
doth  nothing  at  all  differ  :  as  for  marriage,  it  is  forbidden
to  no  man  :  onely  this  is  received  and  held  amongst
them  for  a  rule,  and  custome,  that  if  a  Priests  wife  doe
die,  he  may  not  marry  againe,  nor  take  a  second  wife  :
and  therefore  they  of  secular  Priests,  as  they  call  them,
are  made  Monkes,  to  whom  then  chastitie  for  ever  is
commanded.  Their  divine  service  is  all  done  and  said
in  their  owne  language,  that  every  man  may  understand
it  :  they  receive  the  Lords  Supper  with  leavened  bread,

265

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

and  after  the  consecration,  they  carry  it  about  the
Church  in  a  saucer,  and  prohibite  no  man  from  re-
ceiving and  taking  of  it,  that  is  willing  so  to  doe.
They  use  both  the  Olde  and  the  Newe  Testament,  and
read  both  in  their  owne  language,  but  so  confusedly,
that  they  themselves  that  doe  reade,  understand  not
what  themselves  doe  say  :  and  while  any  part  of  either
Testament  is  read,  there  is  libertie  given  by  custome
to  prattle,  talke,  and  make  a  noise  :  but  in  the  time
of  the  rest  of  the  service  they  use  very  great  silence
and  reverence  and  behave  themselves  very  modestly,
and  in  good  sort.  As  touching  the  Lords  praier,  the
tenth  man  amongst  them  knowes  it  not  :  and  for  the
articles  of  our  faith,  and  the  ten  commandements,  no
man,  or  at  the  least  very  fewe  of  them  doe  either
know  them  or  can  say  them  :  their  opinion  is,  that  such
secrete  and  holy  things  as  they  are  should  not  rashly
and  imprudently  be  communicated  with  the  common
people.  They  holde  for  a  Maxime  amongst  them,  that
the  olde  Lawe,  and  the  commandements  also  are
abolished  by  the  death  and  blood  of  Christ  :  all
studies  and  letters  of  humanitie  they  utterly  refuse  :
concerning  the  Latine,  Greeke,  and  Hebrew  tongues,
they  are  altogether  ignorant  in  them.

Every  yeere  they  celebrate  foure  severall  fastes,  which
they  call  according  to  the  names  of  the  Saints  :  the  ;
first  beginnes  with  them,  at  the  time  that  our  Lent
beginnes.  The  second  is  called  amongst  them  the  fast
of  S.  Peter.  The  third  is  taken  from  the  day  of  the
Virgin  Marie.  And  the  fourth  and  last  begins  upon
S.  Philips  day.  But  as  we  begin  our  Lent  upon
Wednesday,  so  they  begin  theirs  upon  the  Sunday.
Upon  the  Saturday  they  eate  flesh  :  whensoever  any  of
those  fasting  feastes  doe  drawe  neere,  looke  what  weeke:
doth  immediatly  goe  before  them,  the  same  weeke  they
live  altogether  upon  white  meates,  and  in  their  common
language  they  call  those  weekes,  the  fast  of  Butter.

In the time of their fasts, the neighbours every

266

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-
where  goe  from  one  to  another,  and  visite  one  another,

and  kisse  one  another  with  kisses  of  peace,  in  token  of
their  mutuall  love  and  Christian  concord  :  and  then
also  they  doe  more  often  then  at  any  other  time  goe
to  the  holy  Communion.  When  seven  dayes  are  past,
from  the  beginning  of  the  fast,  then  they  doe  often
either  goe  to  their  Churches,  or  keepe  themselves  at
home,  and  use  often  prayer  :  and  for  that  sevennight
they  eate  nothing  but  hearbes  :  but  after  that  seven-
nights  fast  is  once  past,  then  they  returne  to  their  old
intemperancie  of  drinking,  for  they  are  notable  tospots.
As  for  the  keeping  of  their  fasting  dayes,  they  doe  it
very  streightly,  neither  doe  they  eate  any  thing  besides
hearbes,  and  salt  fish,  as  long  as  those  fasting  dayes
doe  endure  :  but  upon  every  Wednesday  and  Friday,
in  every  weeke  throughout  the  yeere,  they  fast.

There  are  very  many  Monasteries  of  the  order  of  S.  [I.  254.]
Benedict,  amongst  them,  to  which  many  great  livings,
for  their  maintenance,  doe  belong  :  for  the  Friers  and
the  Monkes  doe  at  the  least  possesse  the  third  part  of
the  livings,  throughout  the  whole  Moscovite  Empire.
To  those  Monkes  that  are  of  this  order,  there  is
amongst  them  a  perpetuall  prohibition,  that  they  may
eate  no  flesh  :  and  therefore  their  meate  is  onely  salt
fish,  milke,  and  butter  :  neither  is  it  permitted  them
by  the  lawes,  and  customes  of  their  religion,  to  eate
any  fresh  fish  at  all  :  and  at  those  foure  fasting  times,
whereof  we  spake  before,  they  eate  no  fish  at  all  :  onely
they  live  with  hearbes,  and  cucumbers,  which  they  doe
continually  for  that  purpose  cause  and  take  order  to
grow  and  spring,  for  their  use  and  diet.

As  for  their  drinke,  it  is  very  weake,  and  small.  For
the  discharge  of  their  office,  they  do  every  day  say
service,  and  that  early  in  the  mornings  before  day  :
and  they  doe  in  such  sort,  and  with  such  observation
begin  their  service,  that  they  will  be  sure  to  make  an
ende  of  it,  before  day  :  and  about  nine  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning  they  celebrate  the  Communion. When

267

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1553-

they  have  so  done,  they  goe  to  dinner,  and  after  dinner
'Note,  they  goe  againe  to  service,  and  the  like  also  after
supper  :  and  in  the  meane  time  while  they  are  at
dinner  there  is  some  exposition  or  interpretation  of  the
Gospel  used.

Whensoever  any  Abbot  of  any  monasterie  dieth,  the
Emperour  taketh  all  his  housholde  stufFe,  beastes,
flockes  of  sheepe,  golde,  silver,  and  all  that  he  hath  :
or  els  hee  that  is  to  succeede  him  in  his  place  and
dignitie  doth  redeeme  all  those  things,  and  buyeth  them
of  the  Emperour  for  money.

Their  churches  are  built  of  timber,  and  the  towers
of  their  churches  for  the  most  part  are  covered  with
shingle  boordes.  At  the  doores  of  their  churches,  they
usually  build  some  entrance  or  porch  as  we  doe,  and
in  their  churchyardes  they  erect  a  certaine  house  of
wood,  wherein  they  set  up  their  bels,  wherein  some-
times they  have  but  one,  in  some  two,  and  in  some
also  three.

There  is  one  use  and  custome  amongst  them,  which
is  strange  and  rare,  but  yet  it  is  very  ridiculous,  and
that  is  this  :  when  any  man  dyeth  amongst  them,  they
take  the  dead  body  and  put  it  in  a  coffine  or  chest,
and  in  the  hand  of  the  corps  they  put  a  litle  scroule,
&  in  the  same  there  are  these  wordes  written,  that  the
same  man  died  a  Russe  of  Russes,  having  received  the
faith,  and  died  in  the  same.  This  writing  or  letter  they
say  they  send  to  S.  Peter,  who  receiving  it  (as  they
affirme)  reades  it,  and  by  and  by  admits  him  into  heaven,
and  that  his  glory  and  place  is  higher  and  greater  then
the  glory  of  the  Christians  of  the  Latine  church,  reputing
themselves  to  be  followers  of  a  more  sincere  faith  and
religion  then  they  :  they  hold  opinion  that  we  are  but
halfe  Christians,  and  themselves  onely  to  be  the  true
and  perfect  church  :  these  are  the  foolish  and  childish
dotages  of  such  ignorant  Babarians.

268

RICHARD CHANCELOR  ad.

1553-

Of  the  Moscovites  that  are  Idolaters,  dweUing
neere  to  Tartaria.

THere  is  a  certaine  part  of  Moscovie  bordering  ^«''^^  vetula,
upon  the  countreys  of  the  Tartars,  wherin  those  °^  ^  °^^  ^^'
Moscovites  that  dwell  are  very  great  idolaters  :  they
have  one  famous  idole  amongst  them,  which  they  call
the  Golden  old  wife  :  &  they  have  a  custome  that
whensoever  any  plague  or  any  calamitie  doth  afflict  the
countrey,  as  hunger,  warre,  or  such  like,  then  they  goe
to  consult  with  their  idol,  which  they  do  after  this
maner  :  they  fall  down  prostrate  before  the  idol,  &
pray  unto  it,  &  put  in  the  presence  of  the  same,  a
cymbal  :  &  about  the  same  certaine  persons  stand,
which  are  chosen  amongst  them  by  lot  :  upon  their
cymball  they  place  a  silver  tode,  and  sound  the  cymball,
and  to  whomsoever  of  those  lotted  persons  that
tode  goeth,  he  is  taken,  and  by  and  by  slaine  :
and  immediately,  I  know  not  by  what  illusions  of
the  devill,  or  idole,  he  is  againe  restored  to  life,
&  then  doth  reveale  and  deliver  the  causes  of  the
present  calamitie.  And  by  this  meanes  knowing  how
to  pacifie  the  idole,  they  are  delivered  from  the  im-
minent danger.

Of  the  forme  of  their  private  houses,  and  of  the
apparell  of  the  people.

THe  common  houses  of  the  countrey  are  every
where  built  of  beames  of  Firre  tree  :  the  lower
beames  doe  so  receive  the  round  holownesse  of  the
uppermost,  that  by  the  meanes  of  the  building  there-
upon, they  resist,  and  expell  all  winds  that  blow,  and
where  the  timber  is  joined  together,  there  they  stop
the  chinks  with  mosse.  The  forme  &  fashion  of  their
houses  in  al  places  is  foure  square,  with  streit  and
narrow  windowes,  whereby  with  a  transparent  casement
made or covered  with skinne like to parchment, they

269

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

receive  the  light.  The  roofes  of  their  houses  are  made
of  boords  covered  without  with  ye  barke  of  trees  :
[I.  255.]  within  their  houses  they  have  benches  or  griezes  hard
by  their  wals,  which  commonly  they  sleepe  upon,  for
the  common  people  knowe  not  the  use  of  beds  :  they
have  stooves  wherein  in  the  morning  they  make  a  fire,
and  the  same  fire  doth  either  moderately  warme,  or
make  very  hote  the  whole  house.

The  apparell  of  the  people  for  the  most  part  is  made
of  wooll,  their  caps  are  picked  like  unto  a  rike  or
diamond,  broad  beneath,  and  sharpe  upward.  In  the
maner  of  making  whereof,  there  is  a  signe  and  represen-
tation of  nobilitie  :  for  the  loftier  or  higher  their  caps
are,  the  greater  is  their  birth  supposed  to  be,  and
the  greater  reverence  is  given  them  by  the  common
people.

The  Conclusion  to  Queene  Marie.

Hese  are  the  things  most  excellent
Queene,  which  your  Subjects  newly
returned  from  Russia  have  brought
home  concerning  the  state  of  that
countrey  :  wherfore  if  your  majestie
shall  be  favourable,  and  grant  a  con-
tinuance of  the  travell,  there  is  no
doubt  but  that  the  honour  and  renowme  of  your
name  will  be  spred  amongst  those  nations,  whereunto
three  onely  noble  personages  from  the  verie  creation
have  had  accesse,  to  whom  no  man  hath  bene  com-
parable.

270

DUKE OF MOSCOVY'S LETTERS

A.D.

1554-

The  copie  of  the  Duke  of  Moscovie  and
Emperour  of  Russia  his  letters,  sent  to  King
Edward  the  sixt,  by  the  hands  of  Richard
Chancelour.

He  Almighty  power  of  God,  and  the  in-  I'van  Vasi-
comprehensible holy Trinitie, rightfull  ^^'^'^'^K  that  Is

Christian  beliefe, &c. We great  Duke °/f-^'°!l
. '  o  the  Sonne  of

Ivan  Vasilivich,  by  the  grace  of  God  Basilius.
great  lord  and  Emperor  of  all  Russia,
great  Duke  of  Volodemer,  Mosco,  and
Novograd,  King  of  Kazan,  King  of
Astracan,  lord  of  Plesko,  and  great  duke  of  Smolensko,
of  Twerria,  Joughoria,  Permia,  Vadska,  Bulghoria,  and
others,  lord  and  great  duke  of  Novograd  in  the  Low
countrey,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotskoy,  Rostove,
Yaruslavely,  Bealozera,  Liefland,  Oudoria,  Obdoria  and
Condensa,  Commander  of  all  Siberia,  and  of  the  North
parts,  and  lord  of  many  other  countries,  greeting.  Before
all,  right  great  and  worthy  of  honour  Edward  King  of
England,  &c.  according  to  our  most  hearty  and  good
zeale,  with  good  intent  and  friendly  desire,  &  according
to  our  holy  Christian  faith,  &  great  governance,  &
being  in  the  light  of  great  understanding,  our  answere
by  this  our  honourable  writing  unto  your  kingly
governance,  at  the  request  of  your  faithfull  servant
Richard  Chancelour,  with  his  company,  as  they  shall
let  you  wisely  know,  is  this.  In  the  strength  of  the
twentieth  yeere  of  our  governance,  be  it  knowen,  that
at  our  sea  coastes  arrived  a  shippe,  with  one  Richard,
and  his  companie,  and  sayd,  that  hee  was  desirous  to
come  into  our  dominions,  and  according  to  his  request,
hath  scene  our  Majestic,  and  I  our  eyes  :  and  hath  ||  That  is,
declared  unto  us  your  Majesties  desire,  as  that  we  '^^^^  *"^°  °^^'
should  grant  unto  your  subjects,  to  goe  and  come,  and  ■^^^■^^'''^^•
in  our  dominions,  and  among  our  subjects,  to  frequent
free Marts,  with  all  sortes  of  marchandizes, and upon

271

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1554-

the  same  to  have  wares  for  their  returne.  And  they
have  also  deHvered  us  your  letters,  which  declare  the
same  request.  And  hereupon  we  have  given  order,
that  wheresoever  your  faithful  servant  Hugh  Willoughbie
land  or  touch  in  our  dominions,  to  be  wel  entertained,
who  as  yet  is  not  arrived,  as  your  servant  Richard  can
declare.

And  we  with  Christian  beliefe  and  faithfulnes,  and
according  to  your  honourable  request,  and  my  honour-
able commandement  will  not  leave  it  undone  :  and  are
furthermore  willing  that  you  send  unto  us  your  ships
and  vessels,  when  and  as  often  as  they  may  have  passage,
with  good  assurance  on  our  part  to  see  them  harmelesse.
And  if  you  send  one  of  your  majesties  counsel  to  treate
with  us  whereby  your  countrey  marchants  may  with  all
kinds  of  wares,  and  where  they  will  make  their  market
in  our  dominions,  they  shall  have  their  free  Marte  with
all  free  liberties  through  my  whole  dominions  with  all
kinde  of  wares  to  come  and  goe  at  their  pleasure^
without  any  let,  damage  or  impediment,  according  to
this  our  letter,  our  word  and  our  scale  which  we  have
commaunded  to  be  under  sealed.  Written  in  our
dominion,  in  our  citie  and  our  palace  in  the  castle  of  I
Mosco,  in  the  yeare  7060,  the  second  moneth  of
February.  |

This  letter  was  written  in the  Moscovian  tongue,  in |
letters much like to the Greeke letters, very faire  1
written in paper, with a broad seale hanging at the '
same,  sealed  in  paper  upon  waxe. This  seale  was  much |
like ye broad seale of  England, having on the one
side the image of  a man on horseback in complete
harnesse  fighting  with  a  dragon. Under  this  letter  was
another  paper  written in  the  Dutch  tongue,  which  was i
the  interpretation  of  the  other  written  in  the  Moscovian ;
letters. These letters were sent the next yere after
the  date  of  king  Edwards  letters, 1554.

272

THE RUSSIAN COINS  a.d.

1554-

The  coines,  weights  and  measures  used  in-Russia,  i^-  256-]
written  by  John  Hasse,  in  the  yere, 1554.

Orasmuch  as  it  is  most  necessary  for  al
marchants  which  seeke  to  have  trajfhque
in  any  strange  regions,  first  to  acquaint
themselves  with  the  coines  of  those
lands  with  which  they  do  intend  to
joyne  in  traffique,  and  how  they  are
called  from  the  valuation  of  the  highest
piece  to  the  lowest,  and  in  what  sort  they  make  their
paiments,  as  also  what  their  common  weights  and
measures  be  :  for  these  causes  I  have  thought  good  to
write  some  thing  thereof  according  to  mine  owne  know-
ledge and  experience,  to  the  end  that  the  marchants  of
that  new  adventure,  may  the  better  understand  how
the  wealth of  that  new  frequented  trade  will  arise.

First,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  Emperour  of  Russia  No  coines  of
hath no other  coines then silver  in  all his  land,  which  goldtn  Russia,
goeth  for  paiment  amongst  merchants,  yet  notwithstand-  ^^,^^  ^
ing there is a coine of  copper,  which serveth for the
reliefe of  the poore in Mosco,  & no where  els,  and
that is but only for quasse,  water and fruit,  as nuts,
apples,  and  such  other  like. The  name  of  which  money
is called Pole or Poles,  of  which Poles there goe  to
the  least  of  the  silver  coines,  18. But  I  will  not  stand
upon this, because it is no currant money among
merchants.

Of  silver  coines  there  be  three  sortes  of  pieces :  the
least  is  a  Poledenga,  the  second  a  Denga,  the  third,
Nowgrote,  which  is  as  much  to  say  in  English  as  halfe-
penie,  penie,  and  twopence,  and  for  other  valued  money
then  this,  there  is  none :  there  are  oftentimes  there
coines  of  gold,  but  they  come  out  of  forrein  countreys,
whereof  there  is  no  ordinarie  valuation,  but  they  passe
according  to  the  agreement  of  merchants.

Their  order  in  summing  of  money  is  this  :  as  we  say
n  273  s

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1554.

in  England,  halfpenie,  penie,  shilling  and  pound,  so  say
they  Poledenga,  Denga,  Altine  and  Rubble :  There
goeth  two  Poledengas  to  a  Denga,  six  Dengaes  to  an
Altine,  and  23  Altines,  and  two  Dengaes  to  a  Rubble.
The  weights  Concerning  the  weights  of  Russia  they  are  these :
tn  Russia.  There  are  two  sorts  of  pounds  in  use  amongst  them,
the  one  great,  ye  other  small :  the  great  pound  is  just
two  small  pounds :  they  call  the  great  weight  by  the
name  of  Beasemar,  and  the  smal  they  call  the  Skalla
weight :  with  this  smal  weight  they  weigh  their  silver
coines,  of  the  which  the  Emperor  hath  commanded  to
put  to  every  small  pound  three  Rubbles  of  silver,  and
with  the  same  weight  they  weigh  all  Grocerie  wares,
and  almost  al  other  wares  which  come  into  the  land,
except  those  which  they  weigh  by  the  Pode,  as  hops,
salt,  iron,  lead,  tinne  &  batrie  with  divers  others,  not-
withstanding they  use  to  weigh  batrie  more  often  by
the  small  weight  then  by  the  great.

Whensoever  you  find  the  prices  of  your  wares  rated
by  the  Pode,  consider  that  to  be  the  great  weight,  and
•  the  pound  to  be  the  small.  Also  they  divide  the  small
pound  into  48  parts,  and  they  call  the  eight  and  fortieth
part  a  Slotnike,  by  the  which  Slotnike  the  retailers  sell
their  wares  out  of  their  shops,  as  Goldsmiths,  Grocers,
Silkesellers  and  such  other  like  as  we  doe  use  to  retaile
by  the  ounce :  and  as  for  their  great  weight  which  they
cal  the  Beasemar,  they  sel  by  pode,  or  shippond.  The
pode  doth  containe  of  the  great  weight,  40  pounds,  and
of  the  smal 80: there  goe 10. podes  to  a  shippond.

Yet  you  must  consider  that  their  great  weight  is  not
full  with  ours  :  for  I  take  not  their  great  pound  to  be
full  13  ounces,  but  above  12  I  thinke  it  be.  But  for
your  just  proofe,  weigh  6  Rubbles  of  Russia  money
with  our  pound  weight,  and  then  shal  you  see  what  it
lacketh :  for  6  Rubbles  of  Russia  is  by  the  Emperors  ijj
standerd,  the  great  pound :  so  that  I  thinke  it  the  next
way  to  know  the  just  waight,  as  well  of  the  great  pound
as  of  the  small.

274

THE RUSSIAN COINS  a.d.

1554-
There  is  another  weight  needfull  to  be  knowen,  which  The  zveight  of
is  the  weight  of  Wardhouse,  for  so  much  as  they  weigh ^'ardhouse.
all their drie fish by weight, which weight is the
Beasemar, as they of  Russia doe use, notwithstanding
there  is  another  sorte  in  it :  the  names  of  those  weights
are  these :  the  marke  pound,  the  great  pound,  the  weie,
and  the  shippond. The  marke  pound  is  to  be  under-
stood as our pound, and their  great pound is 24 of
their  marke pound: the  weie is  3  great  pound,  and 8
weie  is  a  shippound.

Now  concerning  their  measures.  As  they  have  two  The  Russia
sortes  of  weights,  so  they  have  also  two  sortes  of  mea-  measures.
sures:  wherewith  they  measure  cloth  both  linnen  and
wollen :  they  cal  the  one  an  Areshine,  and  the  other  a
Locut:  the  Areshine  I  take  to  bee  as  much  as  the
Flanders  ell,  and  their  Locut  halfe  an  English  yard:
with  their  Areshine  they  may  mete  all  such  sorts  of
clothes  as  come  into  the  land,  and  with  the  Locut  all
such  cloth  both  linnen  and  wollen,  as  they  make  them-
selves. And  whereas  we  use  to  give  yard  and  inch,
or  yard  and  handfull,  they  do  give  nothing  but  bare
measure.

They  have  also  a  measure  wherewith they  doe  mete  [I.  257.]
heir  corne,  which  they  cal  a  Setforth,  and  the  halfe  of
hat  an  Osmine : this  Setforth  I  take  to  bee  three  bushels
Df  London  measure. And  as  for  their  drinke  measure,
:hey  call  it  a  Spanne,  which  is  much  like  a  bucket,  and
Df  that  I never  saw  any true rate,  but that some  was
greater  then  other  some. And  as for the  measures  of  ^^^  measure
kVardhouse  wherewith  they  mete  their  cloth,  there  is  no  °f^^^'<if^°^^^e
lifference between that and the measure of  Danske,  ZeasfreV^'
vhich  is  halfe  an  English  ell.  Danske.

Concerning the tolles & customs of Russia,  it was

eported to me in Moscovia, that the Turkes and  T'he  Turkes

Armenians  pay  the  tenth  penie  custome  of  all  the  wares  ^'l^  ^^*'^-

hey  bring  into  the  Emperors  land,  and  above  that  they  '"'"^f  ^^-^

r n  1  11  • 1  , T-^  ^ custome.

•ay  tor  all  such  goods  as  they  weigh  at  the  Emperours  The  Emperors

eame, two pence of  the Rubble,  which ye buyer or  heame.

275

A.D.

1554-

The  Dutch
nation  lost
their  privi-
ledges,  y
renued  them
with  a  great
summe.

The  commodi-
ties of  Russia.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

seller  must  make  report  to  of  the  Master  of  the  beame :
they  also  pay  a  certaine  horse  toll,  which  is  in  divers
places  of  his  Realme  foure  pence  of  a  horse.

The  Dutch  nation  are  free  of  this :  notwithstanding
for  certaine  offences,  they  had  lost  their  priviledges
which  they  have  recovered  this  Summer  to  their
great  charge.  It  was  reported  to  me  by  a  Justice  i
of  that  countrey,  that  they  paied  for  it  thirtie  thousand
Rubbles,  and  also  that  Rye,  Dorpte  and  Revel  have
yeelded  themselves  under  the  government  of  the  Em-
perour  of  Russia :  whether  this  was  a  bragge  of  the
Russes  or  not,  I  know  not,  but  thus  he  sayd,  and  in
deed  whiles  we  were  there,  there  came  a  great  Am-
bassadour  out  of  Liefland,  for  the  assurance  of  their
priviledges.

To  speake  somewhat  of  the  commodities  of  this
countrey,  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  there  is  a  certaine
place  foure  score  miles  from  the  Sea  called  Colmogro :
to  which  place  there  resorte  all  the  sortes  of  Wares
that  are  in  the  North  parts,  as  Oyles,  Salt,  Stockfish,
Salmon,  Fethers  and  Furres :  their  Salt  they  make  of
saltwater  by  the  sea  side :  their  Oyles  they  make  of
Scales,  whereof  they  have  great  store  which  is  brought
out  of  the  Bay  where  our  shippes  came  in  :  they  make
it  in  the  Spring  of  the  yeere,  and  bring  it  to  Colmogro
to  sell,  and  the  merchants  there  carie  it  to  Novogrode,
and  so  sell  it  to  the  Dutch  nation.  Their  Stockefish
and  Salmon  commeth  from  a  place  called  Mallums,  not
farre  from  Wardhouse :  their  Salmon  and  their  Salt
they  Carrie  to  Mosco,  and  their  drie  fish  they  carrie  to
Novogrode,  and  sell  it  there  to  the  Lieflanders.

The  Furres  and  Fethers  which  come  to  Colmogro,  as
Sables,  Beavers,  Minkes,  Armine,  Lettis,  Graies,  Wool-
verings,  and  white  Foxes,  with  Deere  skinnes,  they  are
brought  thither,  by  the  men  of  Penninge,  Lampas,  and^r
Powstezer,  which  fetch  them  from  the  Samoedes  that
are  counted  savage  people :  and  the  merchants  that  iii(
bring  these  Furres  doe  use  to  trucke  with  the  merchants

276

THE RUSSIAN COINS

1554-

of  Colmogro  for  Cloth,  Tinne,  Batrie,  &  such  other  like,
and  the  merchants  of  Colmogro  carie  them  to  Novo-
grode,  Vologda,  or  Mosco,  &  sell  them  there.  The
Fethers  which  come  from  Penning  they  doe  little
esteeme.

If  our  merchants  do  desire  to  know  the  meetest  place
of  Russia  for  the  standing  house,  in  mine  opinion  I  take
it  to  be  Vologda,  which  is  a  great  towne  standing  in
the  heart  of  Russia,  with  many  great  and  good  towns
about  it.  There  is  great  plentie  of  corne,  victuals,  and  of
all  such  wares  as  are  raised  in  Rusland,  but  specially,
flaxe,  hempe,  tallow  and  bacon  :  there  is  also  great  store
of  waxe,  but  it  commeth  from  the  Mosko.

The  towne  of  Vologda  is  meetest  for  our  marchants,  Vologda  and
because  it  lieth  amongest  all  the  best  towns  of  Russia,  ^^^  ^^^^^
and  there  is  no  towne  in  Russia  but  trades  with  it :  also ^^^°^'
the water is a great commoditie to it. If  they plant
themselves  in  Mosco  or  Novogrode,  their  charge  will  be
great  and  wonderfull,  but  not so in  Vologda  : for  all
things  will  there  be  had  better  cheape  by  the  one  half.
And  for  their  vent,  I  know  no  place  so  meet. It  is  likely
that  some  will  thinke  ye  Mosko  to  be  the  meetest  by  the
reason  of  the  court,  but  by  that  reason  I  take  it  to  be
woorse :  for  the  charge  there  would  be  so  great  by  cravers
and  expenses,  that  the  moitie  of  the  profite  would  bee
wholly  consumed,  which  in  the  other  place  will  bee  saved.
And  yet  notwithstanding  our  marchants  may  bee  there  in
the  Winter  to  serve  the  Emperour  and  his  court. The  The  Emperor
Emperour is a great marchant himselfe of  waxe and  V^ '^^^^'^^^ "
sables,  which with  good  foresight  may  bee  procured  to  ki^nselfe
:heir  hands  :  as  for  other  commodities  there  are  litle  or
lone  in  Moscovia,  besides  those  above  rehearsed  :  if  there
Dee  other,  it  is  brought  thither  by  the  Turkes,  who  will
3e  daintie  to  buy  our  clothes  considering  the  charges  of
:ariage  over  land.

Our  marchants  may  doe  well  to  provide  for  the  Russes

;uch  wares  as  the  Dutch  nation  doeth  serve  them  of,  as

landers  and  Holland  clothes,  which  I  beleeve,  they  shal

277

A.D.

1554-

[I.  258.]

Two  sorts
flaxe.

of

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

serve  better  and  with  lesse  charge  then  they  of  Rye  or
Dorpt,  or  Revel  :  for  it  is  no  smal  adventure  to  bring
their  clothes  out  of  Flanders  to  either  of  these  places,  and
their  charge  not  litle  to  cary  them  over  lande  to  Novo-
grode,  which  is  from  Rye  nine  hundred  Russian  miles.

This  Novogrode  is  a  place  wel  furnished  with  flaxe,
Waxe,  Hides,  tallow  and  many  other  things  :  the  best
flaxe  in  Russia  is  brought  thither  and  there  sold  by  the
hundred  bundles,  which  is  done  also  at  Vologda,  and  they
that  bring  the  flaxe  to  Novogrode,  dwell  as  neere
Vologda,  as  Novogrode,  and  when  they  heare  of  the
utterance  which  they  may  have  with  our  nation,  they  wil
as  willingly  come  to  them  as  goe  to  other.

They  have  in  Russia  two  sorts  of  flaxe,  the  one  is
called  great  flaxe,  and  the  other  small  :  that  which  they
call  great  flaxe  is  better  by  foure  rubbles  in  100.  bundels
then  the  small  :  It  is  much  longer  then  the  other,  and
cleaner  without  wood  :  and  whereas  of  the  small  flaxe
there  goe  27.  or  28  bundles  to  a  shippound,  there  goeth
not  of  the  greater  sort  above  22.  or  24  at  the  most.
There  are  many  other  trifles  in  Russia,  as  sope,  mats,
&c.  but  I  thinke  there  will  bee  no  great  account  made
of  them.

The  letters  of  king  Philip  and  Queene  Marie  to
Ivan  Vasilivich  the  Emperour  of  Russia
written  the  first  of  April  1555  and  in  the
second  voyage.

Hilip  and  Marie  by  the  grace  of  God,  King
and  Queene  of  England,  France,  Naples,
Jerusalem,  and  Ireland,  defenders  of  the
faith.  Princes  of  Spaine  and  Sicilie,  Arch-
dukes of  Austrich,  Dukes  of  Burgundie,
Millaine,  and  Brabant,  Counties  of  Has-
purge,  Flanders,  and  TiroU  :  To  the  right
High,  right  Mightie,  and  right  excellent  Prince,  garnished
with  all  gifts  of  nature,  by  Gods  grace  John  Vasilivich

278

LETTERS OF PHILIP AND MARY

Emperour  of  all  Russia,  great  Duke  of  Volodemer,
Mosco,  and  Novogrod,  King  of  Cazan,  King  of  Astracan,
Lord  of  Plesco,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensko,  of  Tueria,
Joughoria,  Permia,  Vadska,  Bulghoria,  and  others,  Lorde
and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod  of  the  lowe  Countrey,  of
Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotskay,  Rostove,  Yeraslave,  Bealo-
zera,  Liefland,  Oudoria,  Obdoria,  and  Condensa,  Com-
mander of  all  Siberia,  and  of  the  North  partes,  and  lord
of  many  other  countreys,  greeting.  Whereas  by  the
consent  and  licence  of  our  most  deare  and  entirely
beloved  late  brother.  King  Edward  the  sixt,  whose  soule
God  pardon,  sundrie  of  our  subjects  marchants  of  the  citie
of  London  within  this  our  realme  of  England  did  at
their  owne  proper  costs  and  adventure  furnish  three
shippes  to  discover,  serch,  and  find  lands,  Islands,  regions,
and  territories  before  this  adventure  not  knowen,  ne
commonly  haunted  and  frequented  by  seas.  The  one  of
the  which  three  shippes,  named  the  Edward  Bonaventure,
(whereof  our  right  welbeloved  Richard  Chancelour  was
then  governour  and  great  Captaine)  chanced  by  the  grace
of  God,  and  the  good  conduct  of  the  sayd  Chancelour  to
arrive  and  winter  in  the  North  part  of  your  Empire  of
Russia.  Forasmuch  as  we  be  credibly  informed  by  the
report  of  our  trustie  and  welbeloved  subject,  that  your
Majestic  did  not  onely  call  him  and  certaine  of  his
company  to  your  emperiall  presence  and  speech,  enter-
tayned  and  banqueted  them  with  all  humanitie  and
gentlenes  :  but  also  being  thereunto  requested  partly  by
the  letters  of  our  said  brother,  &  partly  by  request  of  the
sayd  Richard  Chancelour,  have  by  your  letters  patents
under  your  scale  among  other  things  granted  :  That  all
such  marchants  as  shall  come  forth  of  anie  of  our  realms
of  England  or  Ireland  with  al  maner  of  wares,  if  they  wil
travel  or  occupie  within  your  dominions,  The  same
marchants  with  their  marchandises  in  al  your  lordship  may
freely,  &  at  their  libertie  travaile  out  and  in  without
hinderance  or  any  maner  of  losse  :  And  of  your  farther
ample  goodnesse  have  promised  that  our  ambassadours,  if

279

1555-

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

wee  send  any,  shall  with  free  good  will  passe  to  and  from
you  without  any  hinderance  or  losse,  with  such  message  as
shall  come  unto  you,  and  to  returne  the  same  to  our
kingdomes  well  answered,  as  by  the  same  your  letters,
written  in  your  lordly  Palace  and  Castle  of  Mosco  in  the
yeere  7063  the  moneth  of  Februarie  more  at  large
appeareth.  Like  as  wee  cannot  but  much  commend  your
princely  favour  and  goodnesse,  and  in  like  manner  thanke
you  for  the  aboundant  grace,  extended  to  the  sayd
Richard  Chancelour,  and  others  our  subjects  marchants  :
Even  so  these  are  to  pray  and  request  you  to  continue
the  same  benevolence  toward  them,  and  other  our
marchants  and  subjects,  which  doe  or  heereafter  shall
resorte  to  your  countrey  :  And  for  the  more  assurance
and  incouragement  to  trade  and  exercise  the  feate  of
marchandise  with  your  subjects  and  all  other  marchants
within  your  dominions,  that  it  may  please  you  at  this  our
contemplation  to  assigne  and  authorise  such  Commissaries
as  you  shall  thinke  meete  to  trade  and  conferre  with  our
welbeloved  subjects  and  marchants,  the  sayd  Richard
Chancelour,  George  Killingworth,  &  Richard  Graie,
bearers  of  these  our  letters  :  who  are  by  us authorised

[I.  259.]  for  that  purpose  :  and  to  confirme  and  graunt  such  other
liberties  and  priviledges  unto  the  Governour,  Consuls,
Assistants,  and  Communaltie  of  the  fellowship  of  the
saide  Marchants,  as  the  said  bearers  in  their  name  propone
and  require  by  you  to  be  granted  for  their  safe  conduct,
good  government,  and  order  to  bee  erected  and  continued
among  them  in  your  saide  dominions  ;  And  this  with
such  your  clemencie  and  expedition,  as  wee,  upon  the
next  arrivall  of  the  saide  Richard  Chancelour  may  bee
enformed  of  your  gracious  disposition  and  answere.
Which  your  benevolences  so  to  bee  extended,  wee  bee
minded  to  requite  towards  any  your  subjects  Marchants,
that  shal  frequent  this  our  realme  at  your  contemplation
therefore  to  be  made.  Thus  right  high,  right  Excellent,
and  right  mightie,  Almightie  God  the  Father,  the  Sonne
and the holy  Ghost have  you  in his blessed keeping.

280

RUSSIA COMPANY'S ARTICLES  ad.

1555-

Given  under  our  scale  at  our  Palace  of  Westminster,  the
first  of  April,  in  the  yere  from  the  blessed  incarnation  of
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  1555.  and  in  the  first  and
second  yeeres  of  our  reignes.

Articles  conceived  and  determined  for  the  Com-
mission of  the  Merchants  of  this  company
resiant  in  Russia,  and  at  the  Warhouse,  for
the  second  voyage,  1555.  the  first  of  May,  as
folio  weth.

Irst,  the  Governour,  Consuls,  Assistants
and  whole  company  assembled  this  day  in
open  court,  committeth  and  authorizeth
Richard  Gray  and  George  Killingworth,
jointly  and  severally  to  be  Agents,  Factors,
j^  and  Atturneis  generall  and  speciall,  for  the
"~^  whole  body  of  this  compani^  to  Buy,  ''sel,
trucke,  change  and  peraiute  al,  and  every  kind  and
kindes  of  war^s,  marchandizes  and  goods  to  the  said
company  appertaining,  now  laden  &  shipped  in  the  good
ship  called  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  appointed  for  Russia,
the  same  to  utter  and  sell  to  the  best  commoditie,  profit
and  advantage  of  the  said  corporation,  be  it  for  ready
money,  wares  &  marchandises,  or  truck,  presently,  or  for
time,  as  occasion  &  benefit  of  the  company  shal  require :
and  all  such  wares  as  they  or  either  of  them  shal  buy,
trucke,  or  provide,  or  cause  to  be  bought  for  the  company
to  lade  them  homeward  in  good  order  and  condition,  as
by  prudent  course  of  marchandises,  shall,  and  ought  to
appertaine,  which  article  extendeth  also  to  John  Brooke
for  the  Wardhouse,  as  in  the  17.  and  18.  articles  of  this
commission  appeareth.

2  Item,  it  is  also  committed,  as  above,  to  the  said
Agents,  to  binde  &  charge  the  said  company  by  debt  for
wares  upon  credit,  as  good  opportunitie  and  occasion  shal
serve,  with  power  to  charge  and  bind  the  said  company,
and  their  successors,  for  the  paiments  of  such  things  as

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

shalbe  taken  up  for  credite,  and  the  said  Agents  to  be
relieved  ab  opere  satis  dandi.

3  Item  full  authoritie  and  power  is  committed  to  the
said  first  named  factors,  together  with  Richard  Chancelor
grand  Pilot  of  this  fleete,  to  repaire  to  the  Emperors
court,  there  to  present  the  king  and  Queenes  Majesties
letters,  written  in  Greeke,  Polish,  and  Italian,  and  to  give
and  exhibite  the  marchants  presents  at  such  time  and
place  as  shalbe  thought  most  expedient,  they,  or  one  of
them to demand,  and humbly  desire of  ye Emperour

^such  further  grants  and  priviiedges  to  be  made  to  this
companie,  as  may  be  beneficial!  for  the  same,  to  continue
in  traffike  with  his  subjects,  according  to  such  instructions
as  bee  in  this  behalfe  devised  and  delivered  to  the  Agents
whereunto  relation  is  to  be  had,  and  some  one  of  these
persons  to  attend  upon  the  court  for  the  obtaining  of  the
same,  as  to  their  discretions  shalbe  thought  good.

4  Item,  that  all  the  saide  Agents  doe  well  consider,
ponder  and  weigh  such  articles  as  bee  delivered  to  them
to  know  the  natures,  dispositions,  lawes,  customes,  maners
and  behaviours  of  the  people  of  the  countreis  where  they
shal  traffike,  as  well  of  the  Nobilitie  as  of  the  Lawyers,
Marchants,  Mariners  and  common  people,  and  to  note
diligently  the  subtilties  of  their  bargaining,  buying  and
selling,  making  as  fewe  debtes  as  possiblie  may  bee,  and  to
bee  circumspect,  that  no  lawe  neither  of  religion  nor
positive  bee  broken  or  transgressed  by  them  or  any
minister  under  them,  ne  yet  by  any  mariner  or  other
person  of  our  nation,  and  to  foresee  that  all  tolles,
customes,  and  such  other  rites  be  so  duely  paid,  that  no
forfeiture  or  confiscation  may  ensue  to  our  goods  either
outward  or  inward,  and  that  al  things  passe  with  quiet,
without  breach  of  the  publike  peace  or  common  tran-
quillitie  of  any  of  the  places  where  they  shall  arrive  or
traffique.

5  Item,  that  provision  bee  made  in  Mosco  or  elswhere,
in  one  or  mo  good  townes,  where  good  trade  shall  be
found  for  a  house  or  houses  for  the  Agents,  and  com-

RUSSIA COMPANY'S ARTICLES  ad.

1555-
panic  to  inhabite  and  dwell  at  your  accustomed  diets,
with  warehouses,  sellers,  and  other  houses  of  offices
requisite,  and  that  none  of  the  inferiour  ministers  of  what
place  or  vocation  soever  he  be,  doe  lie  out  of  the  house
of  the  Agents  without  licence  to  be  given,  and  that  every
inferiour  officer  shalbe  obedient  to  the  orders,  rules  and  [I.  260.]
governments  of  the  said  Agents,  and  in  case  any  dis-
obedient person  shall  be  found  among  any  of  them,  then
such  person  to  be  punished  for  his  misbehaviour,  at  the
discretion  of  the  said  Agents,  or  of  one  of  them  in  the
absence  of  the  other.

6  Item,  if  any  person  of  the  said  ministers  shall  be  of
such  pride  or  obstinacie,  that  after  one  or  two  honest
admonitions,  hee  will  not  bee  reformed  nor  reconciled
from  his  faultes,  then  the  saide  Agents  to  displace  every
such  person  from  the  place  or  roume  to  him  heere
committed,  and  some  other  discreete  person  to  occupie
the  same,  as  to  the  saide  Agents  by  their  discretions  shal
seeme  meete.

7  Item,  if  any  person  shall  bee  found  so  arrogant,  that
he  will  not  be  ordered  nor  reformed  by  the  said  Agents
or  by  one  of  them  in  the  absence  of  the  other,  then  the
sayde  person  to  bee  delivered  to  the  Justice  of  the
countrey,  to  receive  such  punishment,  as  the  lawes  of
the  countrey  doe  require.

8  Item,  that  the  saide  Agents  and  factours  shall  daily
one  houre  in  the  morning  conferre  and  consult  together
what  shall  bee  most  convenient  and  beneficiall  for  the
companie,  and  such  orders  as  they  shall  determine,  to  bee
written  by  the  Secretarie  of  the  companie  in  a  booke  to
bee  provided  for  that  purpose,  and  no  inferiour  person
to  infringe  or  breake  any  such  order  or  devise,  but  to
observe  the  same  exactly,  upon  such  reasonable  paine  as
the  Agents  shall  put  him  to  by  discretion.

9  Item,  that  the  said  Agents  shall  in  the  ende  of  everie
weeke,  or  oftener  as  occasion  shall  require,  peruse,  see
and  trie,  not  onely  the  Casshers,  bookes,  reckonings  and
accounts,  firming  the  same  with their handes,»  but  also

283

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

JC555-

shall  receive  and  take  weekly  the  account  of  every  other
officer,  as  well  of  the  Vendes,  as  of  the  empteous,  and
also  of  the  state  of  the  houshold  expenses,  making  thereof
a  perfect  declaration  as  shall  appertaine,  the  same  accounts
also  to  bee  firmed  by  the  saide  Agents  hands.

10  Item,  that  no  inferiour  minister  shall  take  upon  him
to  make  any  bargaine  or  sale  of  any  wares,  marchandises
or  goods,  but  by  the  Commission  and  Warrantise  of  the
sayde  Agents  under  their  handes,  and  hee  not  to  trans-
gresse  his  Commission  by  any  way,  pretense  or  colour.

1 1  Item,  that  every  inferiour  minister,  that  is  to
understand,  all  Clerks  and  yong  merchants,  being  at  the
order  of  the  saide  Agents,  shall  ride,  goe,  saile  and
travaile  to  all  such  place,  and  places,  as  they  or  hee  shall
be  appointed  unto  by  the  saide  Agents,  and  effectually  to
follow  and  do  all  that  which  to  him  or  them  shall  be
committed,  well  and  truely  to  the  most  benefite  of  the
company,  according  to  the  charge  to  him  or  them  com-
mitted, even  as  by  their  othes,  dueties  and  bondes  of
their  masters  they  be  bounden  and  charged  to  doe.

12  Item,  that  at  every  moneths  end,  all  accounts  and
reckonings  shalbe  brought  into  perfect  order,  into  the
Lidger  or  memoriall,  and  the  decrees,  orders,  and  rules  of
the  Agents  together  with  the  privileges,  and  copies  of
letters,  may  and  shall  be  well  and  truely  written  by  the
secretarie,  in  such  forme  as  shalbe  appointed  for  it,  and
that  copies  of  all  their  doings  may  be  sent  home  with
the  said  ship  at  her  returne.

13  Item,  that  all  the  Agents  doe  diligently  learne  and
observe  all  kinde  of  wares,  as  wel  naturals  as  forrein,  that
be  beneficiall  for  this  Realme,  to  be  sold  for  the  benefit
of  the  company,  and  what  kinde  of  our  commodities  and
other  things  of  these  West  partes  bee  most  vendible  in
those  Realmes  with  profite,  giving  a  perfect  advise  of  all
such  things  requisite.

14  Item,  if  the  Emperour  will  enter  into  bargain  with
you  for  the  whole  masse  of  your  stock,  and  will  have  the
trade  of  it  to  utter  to  his  owne  subjects,  then  debating

284

RUSSIA COMPANY'S ARTICLES

1555-
the  matter  prudently  among  your  selves,  set  such  high
prises  of  your  commodities,  as  you  may  assure  your
selves  to  be  gainers  in  your  owne  wares,  and  yet  to  buy
theirs  at  such  base  prises,  as  you  may  here  also  make  a
commoditie  and  gaine  at  home,  having  in  your  mindes
the  notable  charges  that  the  companie  have  diffrayed  in
advancing  this  voyage  :  and  the  great  charges  that  they
sustaine  dayly  in  wages,  victuals  and  other  things :  all  Note.
which  must  bee  requited  by  the  wise  handling  of  this
voyage,  which  being  the  first  president  shalbe  a  perpetual
president  for  ever :  and  therefore  all  circumspection  is  to
be  used,  and  foreseene  in  this  first  enterprise,  which  God
blesse  and  prosper  under  you,  to  his  glorie,  and  the
publike  wealth  of  this  Realme,  whereof  the  Queenes
Majestic,  and  the  Lords  of  the  Councell  have  conceived
great  hope,  whose  expectations  are  not  to  be  frustrated.

15  Item, it  is  to  be had  in  minde,  that  you  use  all  Inquhiefor
wayes  and  meanes  possible  to  learne  howe  men  may  passe  ^,  '^.^'^  *°
from Russia,  either  by  land or  by  sea to Cathaia,  and

what  may  be  heard  of  our  other  ships,  and  to  what
knowledge  you  may  come,  by  conferring  with  the  learned
or  well  travailed  persons,  either  naturall  or  forrein,  such
as  have  travailed  from  the  North  to  the  South.

16  Item,  it  is  committed  to the said  Agents,  that if  [I.  261.]
they  shall  be  certified  credibly,  that  any  of  our  said  first

ships  be  arrived  in  any  place  whereunto  passage  is  to  be
had  by  water  or  by  land,  that  then  certaine  of  the
company  at  the  discretion  of  the  Agents  shall  bee  ap-
pointed to  be  sent  to  them,  to  learne  their  estate  &
condition,  to  visite,  refresh,  relieve,  and  furnish  them
with  all  necessaries  and  requisites,  at  the  common  charges
of  the  companie,  and  to  imbrace,  accept,  and  intreat  them
as  oure  deare  and  welbeloved  brethren  of  this  our  societie,
to  their  rejoycing  and  comfort,  advertising  Syr  Hugh
Willoughbie  and  others  of  our  carefulnes  of  them  and
their  long  absence,  with  our  desire  to  heare  of  them,  with
all  other  things  done  in  their  absence  for  their  com-
moditie, no  lesse  then  if  they  had  bene  present.

285

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

17  Item,  it  is  decreed,  that  when  the  ships  shal  arrive
at  this  going  foorth  at  the  Wardhouse,  that  their  Agents,
with  master  Chancelor  grand  pilot,  John  Brooke  merchant,
deputed  for  the  Wardhouse,  with  John  Buckland  master
of  the  Edward,  John  Howlet  master,  and  John  Robins

The  Philip  pilot  of  the  Philip  and  Marie,  shall  conferre  and  consult
dvd  Mary,  together,  what  is  most  profitable  to  be  done  therfore  for
the  benefit  of  the  company,  &  to  consider  whether  they
may  bargaine  with  the  captaine  of  the  castle,  and  the
inhabitants  in  that  place,  or  alongst  the  coast  for  a  large
quantity  of  fish,  drie  or  wet,  killed  by  the  naturals,  or  to
be  taken  by  our  men  at  a  price  reasonable  for  trucke  of
cloth,  meale,  salt,  or  beere,  and  what  traine  oyle,  or  other
commodity  is  to  be  had  there  at  this  time,  or  any  other
season  of  the  yeere,  and  whether  there  will  be  had  or
found  sufficient  lading  for  both  the  sayd  shippes,  to  be
bought  there,  and  how  they  may  conferre  with  the
naturals  for  a  continuance  in  banting  the  place,  if  profit
wil  so  arise  to  the  company,  and  to  consider  whether  the
Edv/ard  in  her  returne  may  receive  at  the  Wardhouse
any  kind  of  lading  homeward,  and  what  it  may  amount
unto,  and  whether  it  shall  be  expedient  for  the  Philip  to
abide  at  the  Wardhouse  the  returne  of  the  Edward  out
of  Russia,  or  getting  that  she  may  returne  with  the  first
good  wind  to  England,  without  abiding  for  the  Edward,
and  so  to  conclude  &  accord  certainely  among  themselves
upon  their  arrivall,  that  the  certaintie  may  (upon  good
deliberation)  be  so  ordered  and  determined  betweene  both
ships,  that  the  one  may  be  assured  of  the  other,  and  their
determinations  to  be  put  in  writing  duplicate  to  remaine
with  ech  ship,  according  to  such  order  as  shall  be  taken
betweene  them.

18  Item,  that  John  Brooke  our  marchant  for  the
Wardhouse  take  good  advise  of  the  rest  of  our  Agents,
how  to  use  himselfe  in  al  affaires,  whiles  the  ship  shalbe

Note.  at  the  Wardhouse,  he  to  see  good  order  to  be  kept,  make

bargains  advisedly,  not  crediting  the  people  untill their
natures,  dispositions  &  fidelities  shal  be  well  tried,  make

286

RUSSIA COMPANY'S ARTICLES  a.d.

1555-

no  debts,  but  to  take  ware  for  ware  in  hand,  and  rather
be  trusted  then  to  trust.  Note  diligently  what  be  the  Note.
best  wares  for  those  parts,  and  howe  the  fishe  falleth  on
the  coast,  and  by  what  meane  it  is  to  bee  bought  at  the
most  advantage,  what  kindes  and  diversities  of  sortes  in
fishes  be,  and  whether  it  will  keepe  better  in  bulke  piled,
or  in  caske.

19  Item,  he  to  have  a  diligent  eye  &  circumspection  to
the  beere,  salt,  and  other  liquid  wares,  and  not  to  suffer
any  waste  to  be  made  by  the  companie,  and  he  in  all
contracts  to  require  advise,  counsel,  and  consent  of  the
master  and  pilot,  the  marchant  to  be  our  houswife,  as  our
speciall  trust  is  in  him,  he  to  tender  that  no  lawes  nor
customes  of  the  countrey  be  broken  by  any  of  the  com-
pany, and  to  render  to  the  prince,  and  other  officers,  all
that  which  to  them  doth  appertaine,  the  company  to  be
quiet,  voide  of  all  quarrelling,  fighting,  or  vexation,
absteine  from  all  excesse  of  drinking  as  much  as  may  bee,
and  in  all  to  use  arid  behave  themselves  as  to  quiet
marchants  doeth,  and  ought  to  apperteine.

20  Item,  it  is  decreed  by  the  companie,  that  the
Edward  shall  returne  home  this  yeere  with  as  much  wares
as  may  be  conveniently  &  profitably  provided,  bought,  and
laden  in  Russia,  and  the  rest  to  be  taken  in  at  the  Ward-
house,  as  by  the  Agents  shall  be  accorded.  But  by  all
meanes  it  is  to  be  foreseene  and  noted,  that  the  Edward
returne  home,  and  not  to  winter  in  any  forrein  place,  but
to  come  home,  and  bring  with  her  all  the  whole  advertise-
ments of  the  marchants,  with  such  further  advise  for  the
next  yeeres  provision,  as  they  shall  give.

21  Item,  it  is  further  decreed  and  ordeined,  inviolably
to  be  observed,  that  when  the  good  ships,  or  either  of
them  (by  Gods  grace)  shall  returne  home  to  the  coastes
of  England,  that  neither  of  them  shall  stay  or  touch  in
any  Haven  or  Port  of  England,  otherwise  then  wind  and  .
weather  shall  serve,  but  shall  directly  saile  and  come  to
the  Port  of  the  citie  of  London,  the  place  of  their  right
discharge,  and  that  no  bulke  be  broken,  hatches  opened,

287

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

chest,  fardell,  trusse,  barrel,  fat,  or  whatsoever  thing  it
shall  be,  be  brought  out  of  the  shippe,  untill  the  com-
panie  shall  give  order  for  the  same,  and  appoint  such
persons  of  the  companie  as  shall  be  thought  meet  for
that  purpose,  to  take  viewe,  and  consider  the  shippe  and
her  lading,  and  shall  give  order  for  the  breaking  up  of
the  saide  bulke,  or  give  licence  by  discretion,  for  things
to  be  brought  to  land.  And  that  every  officer  shall
shewe  the  invoise  of  his  charge  to  him first  committed,

[I.  262.J  and  to  examine  the  wastes  and  losses,  and  to  deliver  the
remainder  to  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  company,
according  to  such  order  as  shall  be  appointed  in  that
behalfe.

22  Item,  the  company  exhorteth,  willeth,  and  requireth,
not  onely  all  the  said  Agents,  pilots,  masters,  marchants,
clerkes,  boatswaines,  stewards,  skafemasters,  and  all  other

Note.  officers  and  ministers  of  this  present  voyage,  being  put
in  charge  and  trust  dayly  to  peruse,  reade,  and  studie
such  instructions  as  be  made,  given,  &  delivered  to  them
for  perfect  knowledge  of  the  people  of  Russia,  Moscovia,
Wardhouse,  and  other  places,  their  dispositions,  maners,
customes,  uses,  tolles,  cariages,  coines,  weights,  numbers,
measures,  wares,  merchandises,  commodities,  and  incom-
modities,  the  one  to  be  accepted  and  imbraced,  the  other
to  be  rejected  and  utterly  abandoned,  to  the  intent  that
every  man  taking  charge,  may  be  so  well  taught,  perfited,
and  readily  instructed  in  all  the  premisses,  that  by
^ignorance,  no  losse  or  prejudice  may  grow  or  chance  to
the  company :  assuring  themselves,  that  forasmuch  as
the  company  hath  travelled  and  laboured  so  in  these  their
instructions  to  them  given,  that  every  man  may  bee
perfect,  and  fully  learned  to  eschew  all  losses,  hurts  and
damages  that  may  insue  by  pretense  or  colour  of  none
knowledge,  the  company  entendeth  not  to  allow,  or
*  accept  ignorance  for  any  lawfull  or  just  cause  of  excuse,
in  that  which  shall  be  misordered  by  negligence,  the
burden  whereof  shall  light  upon  the  negligent  offending
person,  especially  upon  such  as  of  their  owne  heads,  or

288

RUSSIA COMPANY'S ARTICLES  a.d.

1555.
temeritie,  will  take  upon  him  or  them  to  doe  or  to  attempt
any  thing,  whereby  prejudice  may  arise,  without  the  com-
mission of  the  Agents  as  above  is  mentioned,  whereunto
relation  must  be  had.

23  Forasmuch  as  it  is  not  possible  to  write  and  indite
such  prescribed  orders,  rules  and  commissions  to  the
Agents  and  factours,  but  that  occasion,  time  and  place,
and  the  pleasures  of  the  princes,  together  with  the  opera-
tion or  successe  of  fortune  shall  change  or  shift  the  same,
although  not  in  the  whole,  yet  in  part,  therefore  the  said
company  doe  commit  to  you  their  deare  and  intire
beloved  Agents  and  factors  to  doe  in  this  behalfe  for  the
commodity  and  wealth  of  this  company,  as  by  your  dis-
cretions, upon  good  advised  deliberations  shalbe  thought
good  and  beneficiall.  Provided  alwayes,  that  the  honour,
good  name,  fame,  credite,  and  estimation  of  the  same
companie  be  conserved  and  preserved :  which  to  confirme
we  beseech  the  living  Lord  to  his  glory,  the  publike
benefite  of  this  realm  e,  our  common  profits,  and  your
praises.

Finally  for  the  service,  and  due  accomplishment  of  all
the  premisses,  every  Agent  and  minister  of  and  for  this
voyage,  hath  not  onely  given  a  corporall  othe  upon  the
Evangelists  to  observe,  and  cause  to  be  observed,  this
commission,  and  every  part,  clause  and  sentence  of  the
same,  as  much  as  in  him  lyeth,  as  well  for  his  owne  part
as  for  any  other  person,  but  also  have  bounde  themselves
and  their  friendes  to  the  companie  in  severall  surames  of
money,  expressed  in  the  actes  and  records  of  this  societie,
for  the  trueth  and  fidelities  of  them,  for  the  better,  and
also  manifester  testification  of  the  trueth,  and  of  their
3thes,  promises,  and  bands  aforesaid,  they  have  to  this
Commission  subscribed  particularly  their  severall  hands,
3,nd  the  company  also  in  confirmation  of  the  same,  have
set  their  seale.  Yeven  the  day,  moneth,  and  yeeres  first
ibove  mentioned.

[The

II  289  T

A.D.

1555-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  othe

ministred  to  the
fellowship.

servants  of  the

E  sweare  by  the  holy  contents  of  that
booke,  that  ye  shal  wel,  faithfully  and
truely,  and  uprightly,  and  with  all  your
indevour,  serve  this  right  worshipfull
company  in  that  order,  which  by  this
fellowships  Agent  or  Agents  in  the
dominions  of  the  Emperours  of  Russia,
&c.  shall  bee  unto  you  committed,  by  commission,  com-
mandement,  or  other  his  direction.  And  that  you  shall
bee  obedient  and  faithfull  to  the  same  our  Agent  or
Agents,  and  that  well,  and  truely  and  uprightly  according
to  the  commission,  charge,  commandement,  or  other
direction  of  the  said  Agent  or  Agents  to  you  from  time
to  time  given  and  to  be  given,  you  shall  prosecute  and
doe  all  that  which  in  you  lieth,  for  the  good  renowme,
commoditie,  benefite  and  profite  of  the  said  fellowship  :
and  you  shall  not  directly  or  indirectly,  openly  or  coverdy
doe,  exercise  or  use  any  trade  or  feate  of  marchandizes
for  your  owne  private  account,  commodity,  gaine  or
profite,  or  for  the  account  of  or  for  any  other  person  or
persons,  without  consent  or  licence  of  this  said  fellowship,
first  obtained  in  writing.  And  if  you  shall  know  or
understand  any  other  person  or  persons  to  use,  exercise
or  doe  any  trade,  traffike  or  feat  of  marchandise,  to  or  for
his  or  their  own  account  or  accounts,  at  any  time  or  times
hereafter,  that  then  ye  shall  truely  and  plainly  disclose,
open,  utter  and  reveale,  and  shew  the  same  unto  this  said
fellowship,  without  fraude,  colour,  covin  or  delay  :  So
helpe  you  God,  &c.

290

GEORGE KILLINGWORTH

A.D.

1555-

The  letter  of  M.  George  Killingworth  the  com-  [i.  263.]
panics  first  Agent  in  Moscovie,  touching  their
interteinement  in  their  second  voyage. Anno
1555. the 27. of  November  in  Mosco.

Ight  worshipfull,  my  duetie  considered,  &c.
It  may  please  your  worship  to  understand,
that  at  the  making  hereof  we  all  be  in
good  health,  thanks  be  to  God,  save  onely
William  our  cooke  as  we  came  from  Col-
mogro  fell  into  the  river  out  of  the  boate,
and  was  drowned.  And  the  1 1 .  day  of
September  wee  came  to  Vologda,  and  there  we  laide  all
our  wares  up,  and  sold  very  litle :  but  one  marchant
would  have  given  us  12.  robles  for  a  broad  cloth,
&  he  said  he  would  have  had  them  all,  and  4.  altines
for  a  pound  of  sugar,  but  we  did  refuse  it  because  he
was  the  first,  and  the  marchants  were  not  come  thither,
nor  would  not  come  before  Winter,  trusting  to  have
more :  but  I  feare  it  will  not  be  much  better.  Yet
notwithstanding  we  did  for  the  best.  And  the  house
that  our  wares  lie  in  costs  from  that  day  until  Easter
ten  robles.  And  the  28.  day  of  September  we  did
determine  with  our  selves  that  it  was  good  for  M.
Gray,  Arthur  Edwards,  Thomas  Hautory,  Christopher
Hudson,  John  Segewicke,  Richard  Johnson,  and  Richard
Judde,  to  tarie  at  Vologda,  and  M.  Chancelor,  Henry
Lane,  Edward  Prise,  Robert  Best  and  I  should  goe  to
Mosco.  And  we  did  lade  the  Emperours  suger,  with
part  of  all  sort  of  wares  to  have  had  to  the  Mosco
with  us,  but  the  way  was  so  deepe,  that  we  were  faine
to  turne  back,  and  leave  it  stil  at  Vologda  till  the
frost.  And  we  went  forth  with  poste  horse,  &  the
charge  of  every  horse  being  stil  ten  in  number,  comes
to  lo.s.  y.d.  halfe  penie,  besides  the  guides.  And  wee
came  to  the  Mosco  the  4.  day  of  October,  and  were
lodged  that  night  in  a  simple  house : but  the  next  day

291

A.D.

1555-

Queene

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

we  were  sent  for  to  the  Emperour  his  secretarie,  and
he  bade  us  welcome  with  a  cheerefull  countenance  and
cheerefuU  wordes,  and  wee  shewed  him  that  we  had  a
letter from our Queenes grace to the Emperour his

Manes  letters  „^^^p ^^^^^ ^j^gj^ j^g desired to see them all, and that

to  tflB  iLnit>6T-  ,  ...  /-

our  of  Russia.  ^^1  flight  remain  with  him,  to  have  them  perfect,
that  the  true  meaning  might  be  declared  to  the  Em-
perour, and  so  we  did  :  and  then  we  were  appointed
to  a  better  house :  and  the  seventh  day  the  secretary
sent  for  us  againe,  &  then  he  shewed  us  that  we  should
have  a  better  house,  for  it  was  the  Emperour  his  will,
that  we  should  have  all  things  that  we  did  lacke,  and
did  send  us  meade  of  two  sorts,  and  two  hens,  our
house  free,  and  every  two  dayes  to  receive  eight  hens,
seven  altines,  and  two  pence  in  money,  and  meade  a
certaine,  and  a  poore  fellow  to  make  cleane  our  house,
&  to  doe  that  wherunto  we  would  set  him.  And  wee
had  given  many  rewards  before,  which  you  shal  perceive
by  other,  and  so  we  gave  the  messengers  a  reward  with
thanks :  and  the  ninth  day  we  were  sent  to  make  us
readie  to  speak  with  the  Emperour  on  the  morow.
And  the  letters  were  sent  us,  that  wee  might  deliver
them  our  selves,  &  we  came  before  him  the  tenth  day :
and  before  we  came  to  his  presence  we  went  thorow  a
great  chamber,  where  stood  many  small  tunnes,  pailes,
Bowles  and  pots  of  silver,  I  meane,  like  washing  bowles,
all  parsel  gilt :  and  within  that  another  chamber,  wherein
sate  (I  thinke)  neere  a  hundred  in  cloth  of  gold,  and
then  into  the  chamber  where  his  grace  sate,  &  there  I
thinke  were  more  then  in  the  other  chamber  also  in
cloth  of  gold,  and  we  did  our  duety,  &  shewed  his
grace  our  Queenes  graces  letters,  with  a  note  of  your
present  which  was  left  in  Vologda :  and  then  his  grace
did  aske  how  our  Queenes  grace  did,  calling  her  cousin,
saying  that  hee  was  glad  that  wee  were  come  in  health
into  his  Realme,  and  we  went  one  by  one  unto  him,
and  tooke  him  by  the  hand,  and  then  his  grace  did
bid  us  goe  in health,  and come to dinner  againe,  and

292

GEORGE KILLINGWOKTH  a.d.

1555-

we  dined  in  his  presence,  and  were  set  with  our  faces
towards  his  grace,  &  none  in  the  chamber  sate  with
their  backes  towards  him,  being  I  thinke  neere  a  hundred
at  dinner  then,  and  all  served  with  golde,  as  platters,
chargers,  pottes,  cuppes,  and  all  not  slender  but  very
massy,  and  yet  a  great  number  of  platters  of  golde,
standing  still  on  the  cupboord,  not  moved :  and  divers
times  in  the  dinner  time  his  grace  sent  us  meat  and
drinke  from  his  owne  table,  and  when  we  had  dined
we  went  up  to  his  grace,  and  received  a  cuppe  with
drinke  at  his  owne  hand,  and  the  same  night  his  grace
sent  certaine  gentlemen  to  us  with  divers  sortes  of  wine
and  mede,  to  whome  wee  gave  a  rewarde.  And  after-
warde  we  were  by  divers  Italians  counselled  to  take  The  Italians
heed  whom  we  did  trust  to  make  the  copie  of  the  ^"^"■J^"  ^^  "^^
priviledges  that  we  would  desire  to  have,  for  feare  it
should  not  be  written  in  the  Russie  tongue,  as  we  did
meane.  So  first  a  Russian  did  write  for  us  a  breviat
to  the  Emperor,  the  tenour  wherof  was,  that  we  did
desire  a  stronger  privilege :  &  when  the  Secretary  saw
it,  he  did  deliver  it  to  his  grace,  and  when  we  came
againe,  his  grace  willed  us  to  write  our  minds,  and  hee
would  see  it,  and  so  we  did.  And  his  grace  is  so
troubled  with  preparations  to  warres,  that  as  yet  wee
have  no  answere :  but  we  have  byn  required  of  his
Secretary,  and  of  the  under  Chancelor,  to  know  what
wares  we  had  brought  into  the  Realme,  and  what  wares  [I.  264.]
we  doe  intend  to  have,  that  are,  or  may  bee  had  in  this
Realme :  and  we  shewed  them,  and  they  shewed  the
Emperor  therof.  And  then  they  said  his  graces  pleasure
was,  that  his  best  marchants  of  the  Mosco  should  be
spoken  to,  to  meet  and  talk  with  us.  And  so  a  day
was  appointed,  and  wee  mette  in  the  Secretarie  his
office,  and  there  was  the  under  Chancelor,  who  was
not  past  two  yeeres  since  the  Emperors  marchant,  and
not  his  Chancelour :  and  then  the  conclusion  of  our
talke  was,  that  the  Chancelour  willed  us  to  bethinke
us,  where  we  would  desire  to  have  a  house  or  houses,

293

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

that  wee  might  come  to  them  as  to  our  owne  house,
and  for  marchandize  to  be  made  preparation  for  us,
and  they  would  know  our  prises  of  our  wares  and
frise :  and  we  answered,  that  for  our  prices  they  must
see  the  wares  before  we  coulde  make  any  price  thereof,
for  the  like  in  goodnesse  hath  not  bene  brought  into
the  Realme,  and  we  did  looke  for  an  example  of  all
sorts  of  our  wares  to  come  from  Vologda,  with  the
jfirst  sledway,  and  then  they  should  see  them,  and  then
we  would  shew  them  the  prices  of  them :  and  likewise
we  could  not  tell  them  what  we  would  give  them
justly,  till  we  did  knowe  as  well  their  just  weights  as
The  diversitie  their  measures :  for  in  all  places  where  we  did  come,
of  weights  iff  al  weights  and  measures  did  vary.  Then  the  Secretary
measures  in  (^^ho  had  made  promise  unto  us  before)  saide,  that  we
should  have  all  the  just  measures  under  seale,  &  he
that  was  found  faulty  in  the  contrary,  to  buy  or  sel
with  any  other  measure  then  that,  the  law  was,  that  he
should  be  punished :  he  said  moreover,  that  if  it  so
happen  that  any  of  our  marchants  do  promise  by
'^  covenant  at  any  time  to  deliver  you  any  certain  sum
of  wares  in  such  a  place,  and  of  such  like  goodnesse,
at  such  a  day,  for  such  a  certaine  price,  that  then  be-
cause of  variance,  we  should  cause  it  to  be  written,
according  as  the  bargain  is,  before  a  justice  or  the  next
ruler  to  the  place :  if  he  did  not  keepe  covenant  &
promise  in  all  points,  according  to  his  covenant,  that
then  looke  what  losse  or  hinderance  we  could  justly
prove  that  we  have  therby,  he  should  make  it  good
if  he  be  worth  so  much:  and  in  like  case  we  must  do
to  them :  and  to  that  we  did  agree,  save  onely  if  it
were  to  come  over  the  sea,  then  if  any  such  fortune
should  bee  (as  God  forbid)  that  the  ship  should  mis-
chance or  be  robbed,  &  the  proofe  to  be  made  that
such  kind  of  wares  were  laden,  the  English  marchants
to  beare  no  losse  to  the  other  marchant.  Then  ye
Chancelor  said,  me  thinks  you  shall  do  best  to  have
your  house  at  Colmogro,  which  is  but  loo.  miles  from

294

GEORGE KILLINGWORTH  ad.

1555-
the  right  discharge  of  the  ships,  and  yet  I  trust  the
ships  shal  come  neerer  hereafter,  because  the  ships  may
not  tary  long  for  their  lading,  which  is  looo.  miles
from  Vologda  by  water,  and  all  our  marchants  shall
bring  all  our  marchandize  to  Colmogro  to  you,  and  so  Colmogt-o.
shall  our  marchants  neither  go  empty  nor  come  empty:
for  if  they  lacke  lading  homeward,  there  is  salt,  which  is
good  ware  here,  that  they  may  come  loden  againe.  So
we  were  very  glad  to  heare  that,  and  did  agree  to  his
saying :  for  we  shal  neverthelesse,  if  we  lust,  have  a
house  at  Vologda,  &  at  the  Mosco,  yea,  &  at  Novo-
grode,  or  where  we  wil  in  Rusland :  ;  But  the  three  &
twentieth  of  this  present  we  were  with  the  secretary,  and
then  among  other  talke,  we  moved,  that  if  we  should
tary  at  Colmogro  with  our  wares,  and  should  not  come#
to  Vologda,  or  further  to  seeke  our  market,  but  tary  stil
at  Colmogro,  and  then  the  marchants  of  the  Mosco
and  others  should  not  come  and  bring  their  wares,  and
so  the  ships  should  come,  and  not  have  their  lading
ready,  that  then  it  were  a  great  losse  and  hinderance
for  us :  then  saide  hee  againe  to  us,  that  the  marchants
had  beene  againe  together  with  him,  and  had  put  the
like  doubt,  that  if  they  should  come  and  bring  their
wares  to  Colmogro,  and  that  they  should  not  find  wares
there  sufficient  to  serve  them,  that  then  they  should  be
at  great  loss  and  hinderance,  they  leaving  their  other
trades  to  fal  to  that :  and  to  that  we  did  answere,  that
after  the  time  that  we  do  appoint  with  them  to  bring
their  wares  to  Colmogro,  God  willing,  they  should  never
come  thither,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  yere,  they
should  find  that  our  marchants  would  have  at  the  least
for  a  thousand  robles,  although  the  ships  were  not  come :
so  that  he  saide,  that  then  wee  must  talke  further  with
the  marchants :  so  that  as  yet  I  know  not,  but  that  we
shall  have  neede  of  one  house  at  Colmogro,  and  another
at  Vologda,  and  if  that  they  bring  not  their  wares  to  Col-  Vologda.
mogro,  then  wee  shalbe  sure  to  buy  some  at  Vologda,  '
and  to  be  out  of  bondage.

295

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555.

And  thus  may  we  continue  three  or  foure  yeeres,
and  in  this  space  we  shall  know  the  countrey  and  the
marchants,  and  which  way  to  save  our  selves  best,  and

*  where  to  plant  our  houses,  and  where  to  seeke  for
wares  : for the Mosco is not best for any kind of

•  wares  for  us  to  buy,  save  onely  waxe,  which  we  cannot
have  under  seven  pence  the  Russe  pound,  and  it  lackes
two  ounces  of  our  pound,  neither  will  it  be  much  better
cheape,  for  I  have  bidden  6.  pence  for  a  pound.  And
I  have  bought  more,  five  hundred  weight  of  yarne,
which  stands  mee  in  eight  pence  farthing  the  Russe
pound  one  with  another.  And  if  wee  had  received
any  store  of  money,  and  were  dispatched  heere  of  that
we  tary  for,  as  I  doubt  not  but  we  shalbe shortly  (you

»know  what  I  meane)  then  as  soone  as  we  have  made
Novogrode.  sale,  I  doe  intend  to  goe  to  Novogrode,  and  to  Plesco,
whence  all  the  great  number  of  the  best  tow  flaxe
commeth,  and  such  wares  as  are  there  I  trust  to  buy
part.  And  feare  you  not  but  we  will  do  that  may  be
done,  if  God  send  us  health,  desiring  you  to  prepare
fully  for  one  ship  to  be  ready  in  the  beginning  of
April  to  depart  off  the  coast  of  England.

Concerning  all  those  things  which  we  have  done  in
the  wares,  you  shal  receive  a  perfect  note  by  the  next
bearer  (God  willing)  for  he  that  carieth  these  from  us
is  a  marchant  of  Terwill  and  he  was  caused  to  cary
these  by  the  commandement  of  the  Emperour  his
secretarie,  whose  name  is  Ivan  Mecallawich  Weskawate,
whom  we  take  to  be  our  very  friend.  And  if  it  please
you  to  send  any  letters  to  Dantiske  to  Robert  Elson,
or  to  William  Watsons  servant  Dunstan  Walton  to  be
conveyed  to  us,  it  may  please  you  to  inclose  ours  in  a
letter  sent  from  you  to  him,  written  in  Polish,  Dutch,
Latine  or  Italian:  so  inclosed,  comming  to  the  Mosco
to  his  hands,  he  wil  convey  our  letters  to  us  wheresoever
we  be.  And  I  have  written  to  Dantiske  already  to  them
for  the  conveyance  of  letters  from  thence.

And  to  certifie  you  of  the  weather  here,  men  say  that

296

[I.  265.]

The  Russian

secretary  his
name.

THE EMPEROR'S PRIVILEGES

these  hundred  yeres  was  never  so  warme  weather  in  this
countrey  at  this  time  of  the  yeere.  But  as  yesternight
wee  received  a  letter  from  Christopher  Hudson  from  a
citie  called  Yeraslave,  who  is  comming  hither  with  cer-
taine  of  our  wares,  but  the  winter  did  deceive  him,  so
that  he  was  faine  to  tarie  by  the  way :  and  he  wrote
that  the  Emperours  present  was  delivered  to  a  gentleman
at  Vologda,  and  the  sled  did  overthrow,  and  the  butte
of  Hollocke  was  lost,  which  made  us  all  very  sory.

I  pray  you  be  not  offended  with  these  my  rude
letters  for  lacke  of  time :  but  assoone  as  sales  be  made,
I  will  finde  the  meanes  to  convey  you  a  letter  with
speed :  for  the  way  is  made  so  doubtful,  that  the  right
messenger  is  so  much  in  doubt,  that  he  would  not  have
any  letters  of  any  effect  sent  by  any  man,  if  he  might,
for  he  knowes  not  of  these :  and  to  say  the  truth,  the  way
is  not  for  him  to  travell  in.  But  I  will  make  another
shift  beside,  which  I  trust  shall  serve  the  turne  till  he
come,  if  sales  be  made  before  he  be  readie,  which  is
and  shall  be  as  pleaseth  God  :  who  ever  preserve  your
worship,  and  send  us  good  sales.  Written  in  haste.
By  yours  to  commaund

George  Killingworth
Draper.

A  copie  of  the  first  Privileges  graunted  by  the
Emperour  of  Russia  to  the  English  Marchants
in  the  yeere 1555.

Ohn  Vasilivich,  by  the  grace  of  God
Emperor  of  Russia,  great  duke  of
Novogrode,  Moscovia,  &c.  To  all
people  that  shal  see,  reade,  heare  or
understand  these  presents,  greeting.
Forasmuch  as  God  hath  planted  al
realmes  and  dominions  in  the  whole
world  with  sundry  commodities,  so  as  the  one  hath
neede  of  the  amity  and  commodities  of  the  other,  and

297

A.D.

1555-

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

by  means  therof  traffike  is  used  from  one  to  another,
and  amity  therby  increased  :  and  for  that  as  amongst
men  nothing  is  more  to  be  desired  then  amity,  without
the  which  no  creature  being  of  a  naturall  good  disposition
can  live  in  quietnes,  so  that  it  is  as  troublesome  to  be
utterly  wanting,  as  it  is  perceived  to  be  grievous  to  the
body  to  lacke  aire,  fire,  or  any  other  necessaries  most
requisite  for  the  conservation  and  maintenance  thereof
in  health  :  considering  also  how  needfull  marchandize
is,  which  furnisheth  men  of  all  that  which  is  convenient
for  their  living  and  nouriture,  for  their  clothing,
trimming,  the  satisfying  of  their  delights,  and  all  other
things  convenient  and  profitable  for  them,  and  that
marchandize  bringeth  the  same  commodities  from  divers
quarters  in  so  great  abundance,  as  by  meanes  thereof
nothing  is  lacking  in  any  part,  and  that  all  things  be
in  every  place  (where  entercourse  of  marchandizes  is
received  and  imbraced)  generally  in  such  sort,  as  amity
thereby  is  entred  into,  and  planted  to  continue,  and
the  injoyers  thereof  be  as  men  living  in  a  golden  world  :
Upon  these  respects  and  other  weighty  and  good  con-
siderations, us  hereunto  moving,  and  chiefly  upon  the
**  contemplation  of  the  gratious  letters,  directed  from  the
right  high,  right  excellent,  and  right  mighty  Queene
Mary,  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,  France,
&c.  in  the  favour  of  her  subjects,  merchants,  the
governour,  consuls,  assistants,  and  communaltie  of  mer-
chants adventurers  for discovery of  lands, &c.

Know  ye  therefore,  that  we  of  our  grace  speciall,
meere  motion,  and  certaine  knowledge,  have  given  and
graunted,  and  by  these  presents  for  us,  our  heires  and
successours,  do  give  and  grant  as  much  as  in  us  is  and
lieth,  unto  Sebastian  Cabota  Governour,  Sir  George
Barnes  knight,  &c.  Consuls  :  Sir  John  Gresham,  &c.
Assistants,  and  to  the  communaltie  of  the  aforenamed
fellowship,  and  to  their  successours  for  ever,  and  to
[I.  266.]  the  successours  of  everie  of  them,  these  articles,  graunts,
immunities,  franchises,  liberties  and  privileges,  and  every

298

THE EMPEROR'S PRIVILEGES  ad

1555-
of them hereafter following, expressed and declared.
Videlicet  :

I  First,  we  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  do  by
these  presents  ''give  and  graunt  free  licence,  facultie,
authority  and  power  unto  the  said  Governour,  Consuls,
Assistants,  and  communalty  of  the  said  fellowship,  and
to  their  successors  for  ever,  that  all  and  singular  the
marchants  of  the  same  company,  their  Agents,  factours,
doers  of  their  businesse,  atturneys,  servants,  and
ministers,  and  every  of  them  may  at  all  times  hereafter
for  ever  more  surely,  freely  and  safely  with  their
shippes,  merchandizes,  goods  and  things  whatsoever
saile,  come  and  enter  into  all  and  singular  our  lands,
countreis,  dominions,  cities,  townes,  villages,  castles,
portes,  jurisdictions  and  destraicts  by  sea,  land  or  fresh
waters,  and  there  tary,  abide  and  sojourne,  and  buy,
sell,  barter  and  change  all  kind  of  merchandizes  with
al  maner  of  marchants  and  people,  of  whatsoever  nation,
rite,  condition,  state  or  degrees  they  be,  and  with  the
same  or  other  ships,  wares,  marchandizes,  goods  &
things  whatsoever  they  be,  unto  other  empires,  king-
domes,  dukedomes,  parts,  and  to  any  other  place  or
places  at  their  pleasure  and  liberty  by  sea,  land  or  fresh
waters  may  depart,  and  exercise  all  kinde  of  merchan-
dizes in  our  empire  and  dominions,  and  every  part
thereof  freely  and  quietly  without  any  restraint,  im-
peachment, price,  exaction,  prest,  straight  custome,  toll,
imposition,  or  subsidie  to  be  demanded,  taxed  or  paid,
or  at  any  time  hereafter  to  be  demanded,  taxed,  set,
levied  or  inferred  upon  them  or  any  of  them,  or  upon
their  goods,  ships,  wares,  marchandizes  and  things,  of,
for  or  upon  any  part  or  parcell  thereof,  or  upon  the
goods,  ships,  wares,  merchandizes,  and  things  of  any
of  them,  so  that  they  shall  not  need  any  other  safe
conduct  or  licence  generall,  ne  speciall  of  us,  our  heires
or  successours,  neither  shall  be  bound  to  aske  any  safe
conduct  or  licence  in  any  of  the  aforesaid  places  subject  i
unto  us.  ^

299

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

2  Item,  we  give  and  graunt  to  the  said  marchants
this  power  and  liberty,  that  they,  ne  any  of  them,  ne
their  goods,  wares,  marchandizes  or  things,  ne  any  part
thereof,  shal  be  by  any  meanes  within  our  dominions,
landes,  countreyes,  castles,  townes,  villages,  or  other
place  or  places  of  our  jurisdiction,  at  any  time  heere-
after  attached,  staied,  arrested  ne  disturbed  for  anie
debt,  duetie  or  other  thing,  for  the  which  they  be  not
principall  debters  or  sureties,  ne  also,  for  any  offence
or  trespasse  committed,  or  that  shall  be committed,  but

-^onely  for  such  as  they  or  any  of  them  shall  actually
commit,  and  the  same  offences  (if  any  such  happen,)
s'hall  bee  by  us  onely  heard,  and  determined.

3  Item,  we  give  and  graunt,  that  the  said  Marchants,
shal and may  have free libertie, power, and authoritie

"^to  name,  choose  and  assigne  brokers,  shippers,  packers,
weighers,  measurers,  wagoners,  and  all  other  meet  and
necessary  laborers  for  to  serve  them  in  their  feat  of
marchandises,  and  minister  and  give  unto  them  and
every  of  them  a  corporall  othe,  to  serve  them  well  and
truely  in  their  offices,  and  finding  them  or  any  of  them
doing contrary to his or their othe, may punish and

""dismisse  them,  and  from  time  to  time  choose,  sweare
and admit other in their place or places, without

^contradiction,  let,  vexation  or  disturbance,  either  of  us,
our  heires  or  successors,  or  of  any  other  our  Justices,
officers,  ministers  or  subjects  whatsoever.

4  Item,  we  give  and  graunt  unto  the  saide  Marchants
and  their  successours,  that  such  person  as  is,  or  shalbe
commended  unto  us,  our  heires  or  successors  by  the
Governour,  Consuls  and  assistants  of  the  said  fellowship
resiant  within  the  citie  of  London  within  the  realme  of
England,  to  be  their  chiefe  Factor  within  this  our  empire
and  dominions,  may  and  shal  have  ful  power  and
authoritie  to  governe  and  rule  all  Englishmen  that  have
had,  or  shall  have  accesse,  or  repaire  in  or  to  this  said
Empire  and  jurisdictions,  or  any  part  thereof,  and  shal
and may  minister unto  them,  and  every  of  them  good

300

THE EMPEROR'S PRIVILEGES  a.d.

1555-
justice  in  all  their  causes,  plaints,  quarrels,  and  disorders
betweene  them  moved,  and  to  be  moved,  and  assemble,
deliberate,  consult,  conclude,  define,  determine  and  make
such  actes,  and  ordinances,  as  he  so  commended  with  his
Assistants  shall  thinke  good  and  meete  for  the  good
order,  government  and  rule  of  the  said  Marchants,  and
all  other  Englishmen  repairing  to  this  our  saide  empire
and  dominions,  or  any  part  thereof,  and  to  set  and  levie
upon  all,  and  every  Englishmen,  offender  or  offenders,
of  such  their  acts  and  ordinances  made,  and  to  be  made,
penalties  and  mulcts  by  fine  or  imprisonment.

5  Item,  if  it  happen  that  any  of  the  saide  Marchants,
or  other  Englishman,  as  one  or  more  doe  rebell  against
such  chiefe  Factor  or  Factors,  or  his  or  their  deputies,
and  will  not  dispose  him  or  themselves  to  obey  them
and  every  of  them  as  shall  appertaine,  if  the  saide  Rebels
or  disobedients  doe  come,  and  bee  founde  in  our  saide
Empire  and  jurisdictions,  or  any  part  and  place  thereof,
then  wee  promise  and  graunt,  that  all  and  every  our
officers,  ministers,  and  subjects  shall  effectually  ayde
and  assist  the  saide  chiefe  Factour  or  Factours,  and
their  deputies,  and  for  their  power  shall  really  woorke,
to  bring  such  rebell  or  disobedient  rebels,  or  disobedients
to  due  obedience :  And  to  that  intent  shall  lende  unto

the  same Factour  or  Factours,  and  their  deputies  upon  [I.  267.]
request  therefore to be  made,  prisons,  and instruments
for  punishments  from  time  to  time.

6  Item,  we  promise  unto  the  saide  Marchants,  and
their  successours  upon  their  request  to  exhibite  and  doe
unto  them  good,  exact  and  favourable  justice,  with
expedition  in  all  their  causes,  and  that  when  they  or
any  of  them  shall  have  accesse,  or  come  to  or  before
any  of  our  Justices,  for  any  their  plaints  mooved,  and  to
bee  mooved  betweene  any  our  subjects  or  other  stranger,
and  them,  or  any  of  them,  that  then  they  shalbe  first
and  forthwith  heard,  as  soon  as  the  party  which  they
shal  find  before  our  Justices  shalbe  depeached,  which
party  being  heard  forthwith,  and  assoone  as  may  be,  the

301

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

said  English  marchants  shall  be  ridde  and  dispatched :
And  if  any  action  shall  be  moved  by  or  against  any  of
the  said  Marchants  being  absent  out  of  our  saide  empire
and  dominions,  then  such  Marchants  may  substitute  an
Atturney  in  all  and  singular  his  causes  to  be  followed
as  need  shall  require,  and  as  shall  seeme  to  him
expedient.

7  Item,  wee  graunt  and  promise  to  the  saide  Mar-
chants, and  to  their  successours,  that  if  the  same  Mar-
chants or  any  of  them  shall  bee  wounded,  or  (which
God  forbid)  slaine  in  any  part  or  place  of  our  Empire
or  dominions,  then  good  information  thereof  given.
Wee  and  our  Justices  and  other  officers  shall  execute
due  correction  and  punishment  without  delay,  according
to  the  exigence  of  the  case :  so  that  it  shall  bee  an
example  to  all  other  not  to  commit  the  like.  And  if
it  shall  chaunce  the  factors,  servants,  or  ministers  of
the  saide  Marchants  or  any  of  them  to  trespasse  or
ofFende,  whereby  they  or  any  of  them  shall  incurre  the
danger  of  death  or  punishment,  the  goods,  wares,  mar-
chandizes,  and  things  of  their  Masters  shall  not  there-
foore  bee  forfaited,  confiscated,  spoiled  ne  seised  by  any
meanes  by  us,  our  heires  or  successours,  or  by  any  our
officers,  ministers  or  subjects,  but  shall  remaine  to  their
use,  franke,  free,  and  discharged  from  all  punishment
and  losse.

8  Item,  we  graunt  that  if  any  of  the  English  nation
be  arrested  for  any  debt,  he  shal  not  be  laid  in  prison,
so  farre  as  he  can  put  in  sufficient  suretie  and  pawne :
neither  shall  any  sergeant,  or  officer  leade  them  or  any
of  them  to  prison,  before  he  shall  have  knowen  whether
the  chiefe  Factor  or  factors,  or  their  deputies  shalbe
sureties,  or  bring  in  pawne  for  such  arrested :  then  the
officers  shal  release  the  partie,  and  shall  set  him  or  them
at  libertie.

9  Moreover,  wee  give,  graunt  and  promise  to  the
saide Marchants, that if  any of  their ships or other

^  vessels  shall  bee  spoyled,  robbed,  or  damnified  in  sayling,

302

THE EMPEROR'S PRIVILEGES  ad.

1555-
anckoring  or  returning  to  or  from  our  saide  Empires
and  Dominions,  or  any  part  thereof,  by  any  Pirats,  /
Marchants,  or  other  person,  whatsoever  hee  or  they
bee,  that  then  and  in  such  case,  wee  will  doe  all  that  in
us  is  to  cause  restitution,  reparation,  and  satisfaction  to
bee  duely  made  to  the  said  English  marchants  by  our
letters  and  otherwise,  as  shall  stand  with  our  honour,
and  be  consonant  to  equitie  and  justice.

lo  Item,  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  wee  doe
promise  and  graunt  to  performe,  mainteine,  corroborate,
autenticate,  and  observe  all  and  singular  the  aforesaide
liberties,  franchises,  and  priviledges,  like  as  presently  we
firmely  doe  intend,  and  will  corroborate,  autentike  and
performe  the  same  by  all  meane  and  way  that  we  can,
as  much  as  may  be  to  the  commoditie  and  profite  of
the  said  English  Marchants,  and  their  successours  for
ever.

And  to  the  intent  that  all  and  singuler  the  saide
giftes,  graunts  and  promises,  may  bee  inviolably  observed
and  performed,  we  the  said  John  Vasilivich  by  the  grace
of  God  Emperor  of  Russia,  great  Duke  of  Novogrode,
Mosco,  &c.  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  by  our
Imperiall  and  lordly  word  in  stead  of  an  othe,  have
and  doe  promise  by  these  presents,  inviolably  to  main-
teyne  and  observe,  and  cause  to  be  inviolably  observed
and  mainteined  all  and  singuler  the  aforesayde  giftes,
graunts  and  promises  from  time  to  time,  and  at  all  and
every  time  and  times  heereafter.  And  for  the  more
corroboration  hereof  have  caused  our  Signet  hereunto
to  be  put :  Dated  in  our  Castle  of  Mosco  the  20.  day
of  in  the  yeere.

[The
303

A.D.
1555.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Charter  of  the  Marchants  of  Russia,
graunted  upon  the  discoverie  of  the  saide
Countrey,  by  King  Philipe  and  Queene  Marie.

Hilip  and  Marie,  by  the  grace  of  God
King  and  Queene,  &c.  To  all  manner
of  officers,  true  Jurie  men,  ministers  and
subjects,  and  to  all  other  people  as  well
within  this  our  Realme  or  elsewhere
under  our  obeysance,  jurisdiction,  and
rule,  or  otherwise  unto  whome  these
our  letters  shall  bee  shewed,  seene,  or  read,  greeting.
Whereas  wee  be  credibly  informed,  that  our  right
[I.  268,]  trustie,  right  faithfull,  and  welbeloved  Counsailors,
William  Marques  of  Winchester  Lord  high  Treasurer
of  this  our  Realme  of  England,  Henrie  Earle  of  Arundel
Lord  Steward  of  our  housholde,  John  Earle  of  Bedford
Lord  keeper  of  our  privie  Seale,  William  Earle  of  Pem-
broke, William  Lorde  Howard  of  Effingham  Lorde  high
Admirall  of  our  saide  Realme  of  England,  &c.  Have
at  their  owne  adventure,  costs  and  charges,  provided,
rigged,  and  tackled  certaine  ships,  pinnesses,  and  other
meete  vessels,  and  the  same  furnished  with  all  things
necessary  have  advanced  and  set  forward,  for  to  discover,
descrie,  and  finde  lies,  landes,  territories.  Dominions,
and  Seigniories  unknowen,  and  by  our  subjects  before
this  not  commonly  by  sea  frequented,  which  by  the
sufferance  and  grace  of  Almightie  God,  it  shall  chaunce
them  sailing  Northwards,  Northeastwards,  and  North-
westwards, or  any  partes  thereof,  in  that  race  or  course
which  other  Christian  Monarches  (being  with  us  in
league  and  amitie)  have  not  heeretofore  by  Seas  traf-
fiqued,  haunted,  or  frequented,  to  finde  and  attaine  by
The  discoverie  their  said  adventure,  as  well  for  the  glorie  of  God,  as
principally  f^j.  ^j^^  illustrating:  of  our  honour  and  dignitie  royall,  in
intended  for , •  c  r\  r  r^  j  11

Gods  slorv ^"^  nicrease  or  the  revenues  or  our  Lrowne,  and  generall

wealth  of  this  and  other  our  Realmes  and  Dominions,

304

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  a.d.

1555-
and  of  our  subjects  of  the  same :  And  to  this  intent
our  subjects  above  specified  and  named,  have  most
humbly  beseeched  us,  that  our  abundant  grace,  favour
and  clemencie  may  be  gratiously  extended  unto  them
in  this  behalfe :  Whereupon  wee  inclined  to  the  petition
of  the  foresaide  our  Counsailours,  subjects  and  marchants,
and  willing  to  animate,  advance,  further  and  nourish
them  in  their  said  godlie,  honest,  and  good  purpose,
and,  as  we  hope,  profitable  adventure,  and  that  they
may  the  more  willingly,  and  readily  atchieve  the  same.
Of  our  especiall  grace,  certaine  knowledge  and  meere
motion,  have  graunted,  and  by  these  presents  doe  graunt,
for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  unto  our  said  right
trustie,  and  right  faithfuU,  and  right  welbeloved  Coun-
sailours, and  the  other  before  nam.ed  persons,  that  they
by  the  name  of  marchants  adventurers  of  England,  for
the  discovery  of  lands,  territories,  lies.  Dominions,  and
Seigniories  unknowen,  and  not  before  that  late  adventure
or  enterprise  by  sea  or  Navigation,  commonly  fre-
quented as  aforesaid,  shalbe  from  henceforth  one  bodie
and  perpetuall  fellowship  and  communaltie  of  them-
selves, both  in  deede  and  in  name,  and  them,  by  the
names  of  Marchants  adventurers  for  the  discoverie  of
lands,  territories,  lies  &  seigniories  unknowen,  and
not  by  the  seas,  and  Navigations,  before  their  saide
late  adventure  or  enterprise  by  sea  or  Navigation
commonly  frequented.  We  doe  incorporate,  name,  and
declare  by  these  presents,  and  that  the  same  fellowship
or  communalty  from  henceforth  shalbe,  and  may  have
one  Governour  of  the  saide  fellowship,  and  com-
munaltie of  Marchants  adventurers.

And  in consideration  that one  Sebastian  Cabota  hath  Sebastian
bin the  chiefest  setter  forth  of  this  journey  or  voyage,  Cabota  first
therefore we make, ordeine, and constitute him the  ^f^eUoslovie
said  Sebastian  to  be  the first  and  present  governour  of  companie.
the  same  fellowship  and  communaltie,  by  these  presents.
To have and enjoy the said office of Governour,
to him the said Sebastian Cabota during his natural!
II  ■  305  u

A.D.
1555.

Sir  George

Barnes,

William

Garret,

Anthony

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

life, without amoving or dimissing from the same
roome.

And  furthermore,  we  graunt  unto  the  same  fellowship
and  communaltie  and  their  successors,  that  they  the
saide  fellowship  and  communaltie,  and  their  successors
after  the  decease  of  the  saide  Sebastian  Cabota,  shall,
and  may  freely  and  lawfully  in  places  convenient  and
honest,  assemble  themselves  together,  or  so  many  of
them  as  will  or  can  assemble  together,  as  well  within
our  citie  of  London,  or  elsewhere,  as  it  shall  please
them,  in  such  sort  and  maner,  as  other  worshipfull
corporations  of  our  saide  citie  have  used  to  assemble,
and  there  yeerely  name,  elect  and  choose  one  Governour
or  two,  of  themselves,  and  their  liberties,  and  also  as
well  yeerely  during  the  natural  life  of  the  said  Sebastian
Cabota  now  Governour,  as  also  at  the  election  of  such
saide  Governour  or  governours  before  his  decease,  to
choose,  name  and  appoint  eight  and  twenty  of  the  most
sad,  discreete,  and  honest  persons  of  the  saide  fellowship,
and  communaltie  of  Marchant  adventurers,  as  is  above
specified,  and  4.  of  the  most  expert  and  skilfull  persons
of  the  same  28.  to  be  named  and  called  Consuls,  andi^
24.  of  the  residue,  to  be  named  and  called  Assistants
to  the  saide  Governour  or  governours,  and  Consuls  for
the  time  being,  which  shal  remaine  and  stand  in  their
authorities  for  one  whole  yeere  then  next  following.
And  if  it  shall  fortune  the  saide  Governour,  Consuls,
and  assistants,  or  any  of  them  so  to  be  elected,  and
chosen  as  is  aforesaid,  to  die  within  the  yeere  after  his
or  their  election,  that  then  and  so  often,  it  shall  and
may  be  lawfull  to  and  for  the  said  fellowship,  and
communalty,  to  elect  and  choose  of  themselves  other
Governour  or  governours,  Consuls  and  assistants,  in
the  place  and  steade  of  such  as  so  shall  happen  to  die,
to  serve  out  the  same  yeere.

And  further  we  do  make,  ordeine,  and  constitute
George  Barnes  knight  and  Alderman  of  our  Citie  of
London,  William Garret  Alderman of  our saide Citie,

306

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  a.d.

1555.
Anthonie  Husie,  and  John  Suthcot,  to  be  the  first  and  Uusie,  JoL
present  4. Consuls  of  the  said  felowship  and  communalty  Suthcot,  the
by these presents, to have and enjoy the said offices  fi^'^^  4-
of  Consuls to them the said George Barnes, William
Garret,  Anthony  Husie, &  John  Suthcot,  for  terme  of  [I.  269.]
one  whole yere  next  after ye date of  these  our  letters
patents  : And  we  doe  likewise make,  ordeine and  con-
stitute Sir John Gresham knight.  Sir Andrew Judde
knight. Sir Thomas White knight. Sir John Yorke
knight,  Thomas  Offley  the  elder,  Thomas  Lodge,  Henry
Herdson,  John  Hopkins,  William  Watson,  Will,  Clifton,
Richard  Pointer,  Richard  Chamberlaine,  William  Mallorie,
Thomas  Pallie  the  elder,  William  Allen,  Henry  Becher,
Geffrey  Walkenden,  Richard  Fowles,  Rowland  Heyward,
George  Eaton,  John  Eliot,  John  Sparke,  Blase  Sanders,
&: Miles Mording, to be the first and present 24.
Assistants to the saide Governour or governours, and
Consuls, and to the said fellowship and communaltie
Dy  these  presents,  to  have  and  enjoy  the  said  offices  of
issistants to them for terme of  one whole yere, next
ifter  the  date  of  these  our  letters  patents. And  further,
^e  for  us,  our  heires  and  successors,  as  much  as  in  us
s, wil & graunt by these presents unto the saide
Sovernour, Consuls, assistans, fellowship & company
)f Marchants adventurers aforesaid, & to their suc-
:essors, that the said governour or governours, 4.
Consuls, & 24.  assistants, that now by these patents
ire nominated and appointed, or that hereafter by
;he saide fellowship & communaltie of  marchants ad-
venturers, or  the  more  part  of  them,  which  shalbe  then
Dresent, so from time to time to be chosen, so that
here  be  15.  at  the  least  wholy  agreed  therof,  the  said
Covernour  or  governors,  or  one  of  them,  and  2.  of  the
;aid Consuls shalbe there, and 12. of  the residue of
he  said  number  of  15.  shall  be  of  the  saide  assistants,
md  in the  absence  of  such  Governour,  that  then  3.  of
he  said  Consuls,  and 12.  of  the  saide  assistants  at  the
east for the time being shal & may have, use and

307

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

exercise  ful  power  and  authority  to  rule  and  governe
all  and  singuler  the  Marchants  of  the  said  fellowship
and  communaltie,  and  to  execute  and  doe  full  and  speedie
justice  to  them,  and  every  of  them,  in  all  their  causes,
differences,  variances,  controversies,  quarrels,  and  com-
plaints, within  any  our  realmes,  dominions  &  jurisdictions
onely  moved,  and  to  be  moved  touching  their  marchandise,
traffikes,  and  occupiers  aforesaid,  or  the  good  order  or
rule  of  them  or  any  of  them.

Also  wee  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  so  much
as  in  us  is,  doe  likewise  by  these  presents  graunt,  that  the
said  Governour,  Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship  and  com-
munaltie,  and  their  successors  shall  and  may  have  per-
petuall  succession,  and  a  common  Scale  which  shall
perpetually  serve  for  the  affaires  and  businesse  of  the
saide  fellowship  and  communaltie.  And  that  they  and
their  successours,  shall  and  may  bee  for  ever  able  persons,
and  capax  in  the  lawe,  for  to  purchase  and  possesse  in
fee  and  perpetuitie,  and  for  terme  of  life  or  lives,  or
for  terme  of  yeeres  or  otherwise,  lands,  tenements,  rents,
reversions,  and  other  possessions,  and  hereditaments  what-
soever they  bee,  by  the  name  of  the  Governour,  Consuls,
assistants,  fellowship  and  communaltie  of  the  Marchants
adventurers  by  Seas  and  Navigations  for  the  discoverie  of
landes,  territories,  lies,  Dominions,  and  Seigniories  un-
knowen,  and  before  the  saide  last  adventure  or  enterprise
by  seas  not  frequented,  as  before  is  specified,  and  by  the
same  names  shall  and  may  lawfully  alien,  graunt,  let  and
set  the  same  or  any  part  thereof  to  any  person  or  persons
able  in  the  lawe  to  take  and  receive  the  same.  So  that
they  doe  not  graunt  nor  alien  the  same,  or  any  part
thereof  into  mortmaine,  without  speciall  licence  of  us,
our  heires  or  successours,  first  had  and  obtained.

Also  wee  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours  have
graunted,  and  by  these  presents  doe  graunt  unto  the
saide  Governours,  Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship  and
communaltie  of  the  saide  Marchants  and  to  their
successours, that they and their successours, shall and

308

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1555-

may  lawfully  purchase  unto  them  and  their  successors
for  ever,  landes,  tenements  and  hereditaments  whatso-
ever, of  the  cleare  yeerely  value  of  threescore  sixe
pounds,  thirteene  shillings  &  foure  pence  of  lawful
money  of  England  and  not  above,  as  well  of  such
lands,  tenements  and  hereditaments,  as  bee  holden  or
shall  be  holden  of  us,  our  heires  or  successours,  as  of
any  other  person  or  persons,  the  statutes  provided  against
alienations  into  mortmaine,  or  any  of  them,  or  any  article
or  clause  in  them  or  any  of  them  contained,  or  any
other  lawe,  custome,  statute  or  provision  to  the  contrary
in  any  wise  notwithstanding.  And  that  they  by  the
name  of  the  Governour,  Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship
and  communaltie  of  Marchants  adventurers,  for  the  dis-
coverie  of  lands  territories.  Isles,  dominions  and  Seign-
iories unknowen  by  the  Seas  and  Navigations,  and  not
before  the  said  late  adventure  or  enterprise  by  seas  fre-
quented as  aforesaid,  shall  and  may  be  able  in  the  law
to  implead,  and  be  impleaded,  to  answere,  and  to  be
answered,  to  defende,  and  to  be  defended  before  whatso-
ever Judge  or  Justice,  temporall  or  spirituall,  or  other
persons  whatsoever,  in  whatsoever  court,  or  courts,
and  in  all  actions  personall,  reall,  and  mixt,  and  in  every
of  them,  and  in  all  plaints  of  novel  disseison,  and  also
in  all  plaints,  suites,  quarels,  affaires,  businesses  and
demaunds  whatsoever  they  bee,  touching  and  concerning
the  saide  fellowship  and  communaltie,  and  the  affaires
and  businesse  of  the  same  onely,  in  as  ample  manner  and
forme,  as  any  other  corporation  of  this  our  Realme
may  doe.

Moreover,  wee  for  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  [I.  270.]
have  given  and  graunted,  and  by  these  presents  doe
give  and  graunt  unto  the  said  Governour,  Consuls,
assistants,  fellowshippe,  and  communaltie  of  Marchants
adventurers  aforesaide,  and  to  their  successours,  that
the  saide  Governour,  or  Governours,  Consuls  and
assistants,  and  their  successors,  in  maner,  forme,  and
number afore rehearsed, shall have full power and

309

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

authoritie  from  time  to  time  hereafter,  to  make,  ordein,
establish  and  erect  all  such  statutes,  actes  and  ordinaunces,
for  the  governement,  good  condition,  and  laudable  rule
of  the  saide  fellowship  and  communaltie  of  Marchants
adventurers  aforesaid,  as  to  them  shall  bee  thought  good,
meete,  convenient  and  necessarie,  and  also  to  admit  unto
the  saide  Corporation  and  fellowship  to  be  free  of  the
same,  such  and  as  many  persons,  as  to  them  shal  bee
thought  good,  meete,  convenient  and  necessarie.  And
that  every  such  person  or  persons,  as  shall  fortune
heereafter  to  bee  admitted  into  the  saide  fellowshippe,
communaltie  and  corporation,  shal  from  the  time  of  his
or  their  admittance,  be  free  of  the  same.  And  also  wee
will,  and  by  these  presents  graunt  for  us,  our  heires  and
successours,  unto  the  saide  Governours,  Consuls,  assis-
tants, fellowship,  communaltie  of  Marchants  adventurers
aforesaid,  and  to  their  successours,  that  the  Governour,  or
governors.  Consuls  and  assistants  of  the  same,  in  maner,
forme,  and  number  afore  rehearsed,  and  their  successours
for  the  time  being,  shall,  and  may  have  full  power  and
authoritie  by  these  presents  from  time  to  time,  as  to
them  shal  seeme  good,  to  limite,  set,  ordeine  and  make,
mulcts,  and  penalties  by  fines,  forfeitures,  &  imprison-
ments, or  any  of  them  upon  any  offender  of  the  saide
fellowship  and  communaltie,  for  any  offence  touching  the
same  fellowship  and  communaltie,  and  also  that  all  acts
and  ordinances  by  them  or  their  successours  to  bee  made,
which  time  shall  thinke  not  necessarie  or  prejudiciall  to
the  saide  fellowship  or  communaltie,  at  al  times  to  revoke,
breake,  frustrate,  annihilate,  repeale  and  dissolve  at  their
pleasure  and  liberty.  And  further,  wee  will,  that  if  any  of
the  saide  fellowship  and  communaltie  shalbe  found  con-
trarious,  rebellious,  or  disobedient  to  the  saide  Governour
or  governours.  Consuls,  and  the  said  assistants  for  the
time  being,  or  to  any  statutes,  acts  or  ordinances  by  them
made  or  to  be  made,  that  then  the  saide  Governour  or
governours.  Consuls,  and  the  saide  assistants,  in  maner,
forme,  and number  above  specified,  for  the  time  being,

310

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1555-

shall  and  may  by  vertue  of  these  presents,  mulct,  and
punish  every  such  offender  or  offenders,  as  the  quality  of
the  offence  requireth,  according  to  their  good  discretions.

And  further,  we  will  that  none  of  the  saide  offender  or
offenders  shall  decline  from  the  power  of  the  saide
Governour,  or  governours.  Consuls  and  assistants,  in
maner,  forme,  and  number  abovesaide  for  the  time  being :
so  alwayes,  that  the  saide  actes,  statutes  and  ordinances,
doe  onely  touch  and  concerne  the  saide  Governour  or
governours,  Consuls,  assistants,  and  the  saide  fellowship
and  communaltie  of  our  before  named  Marchants  adven-
turers, or  the  men  of  the  same  fellowship  and  com-
munaltie, and  none  other ;  And  so  alv/ayes,  that  such
their  acts,  statutes  and  ordinances  bee  not  against  our
prerogative,  lawes,  statutes,  and  customes  of  our  realmes
and  Dominions,  nor  contrary  to  the  severall  duetie  of  any
our  subjects  towards  us,  our  heires  and  successours,  nor
contrarie  to  any  compacts,  treaties  or  leagues,  by  us  or
any  our  progenitours  heretofore  had  or  made,  or  hereafter
by  us,  our  heires  and  successours  to  bee  made,  to  or  with
any  forreine  Prince  or  potentate,  nor  also  to  the  prejudice
of  the  corporation  of  the  Maior,  communalties  and
Citizens  of  our  Citie  of  London,  nor  to  the  prejudice  of
any  person  or  persons,  bodie  politique,  or  corporate,  or
incorporate,  justly  pretending,  clayming,  or  having  any
liberties,  franchises,  priviledges,  rightes  or  preheminences,
by  vertue  or  pretext  of  anie  graunt,  gift,  or  Letters
patents,  by  us,  or  anie  our  Progenitours,  heeretofore
given,  graunted,  or  made.

Moreover,  we  for  us,  our  heires,  and  successours,  will,
and  by  these  presents,  doe  graunt  unto  the  said  Gover-
nors, Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship  and  communaltie  of
our  Marchants  aforesaid,  that  their  said  Governour  or
governours,  Consuls  and  assistants,  and  their  successors
for  the  time  being,  in  maner,  forme  and  number  above
rehearsed,  shal  have  full  power  and  authority  to  assigne,
constitute  and  ordaine  one  officer,  or  divers  officers  as
well  within  our  aforesaide  Citie  of  London,  as  also  in  any

311

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

other  place  or  places  of  this  our  Realme  of  England,  or
else  where  within  our  dominions,  which  officer  or  officers,
wee  will  to  be  named  and  called  by  the  name  of  Sergeant
or  Sergeants  to  the  fellowship  or  communalty  of  the  said
marchants,  and  that  the  said  sergeant  or  sergeants,  shall
and  may  have  full  power  and  authoritie  by  these  presents,
to  take,  levie  and  gather  all  maner  fines,  forfeitures,
penalties  and  mulcts  of  every  person  and  persons,  of  the
saide  fellowship  and  communaltie  convict,  and  that  shalbe
convicted,  upon  or  for  breaking  of  any  statutes,  acts,
ordinances,  to  bee  made  by  the  saide  Governour  or
governours.  Consuls  and  assistants  for  the  time  being.
And  further,  wee  will  and  also  graunt  for  us,  our  heires

[I.  271.]  and  successours,  that  the  saide  officer  or  officers  shall
have  further  power  and  authoritie  for  the  default  of
payment,  or  for  disobedience  in  this  behalfe  (if  neede  be)
to  set  hands  and  arrest  aswell  the  bodie  and  bodies,  as  the
goods  and  chattels  of  such  offender,  and  offenders,  &
transgressers,  in  every  place  and  places  not  franchised.
And  if  it  shall  fortune  any  such  offender  or  offenders,
their  goods  and  chattels  or  any  part  thereof,  to  be  in  any
citie,  borough,  towne  incorporate,  or  other  place  franchised
or  priviledged,  where  the  said  officer  or  officers  may  not
lawfully  intromit  or  intermeddle,  that  then  the  Maior,
shirifes,  baylifes,  and  other  head  officers,  or  ministers,
within  every  such  citie,  borough,  towne  incorporate  or
place  or  places  franchised,  upon  a  precept  to  them,  or  any
of  them,  to  be  directed  from  the  governour  or  governours.
Consuls  and  assistants  of  the  said  fellowship,  in  number
and  forme  aforesaid,  under  the  common  seale  of  the  sayd
fellowship  and  communaltie  for  the  time  being,  shall  and
may  attach  &  arrest  the  body  or  bodies  of  such  offender
or  offenders,  as  also  take,  and  seise  the  goods  and  chattels
of  all  and  every  such  offender  or  offenders,  being  within
any  such  place  or  places  franchised,  and  the  same  body
and  bodies,  goods  and  chattels  of  all  and  every  such
offender  and  offenders,  being  within  any  such  place  or
places  franchised,  and  every  part  therof  so  attached  and

312

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1555-
seazed,  shall  according  to  the  tenor  and  purport  of  the

sayd  precept,  returne,  and  deliver  unto  the  sayd  officer  or

officers  of  the  aforesaid  fellowship,  and  communaltie.

And  further,  we  will  and  grant  for  us,  our  heires  and
successours  by  these  presents,  that  all,  and  every  such
Maior,  shirife,  baylife,  or  other  head  officers  or  ministers
of  any  citie,  borough,  towne  incorporate,  or  other  places
franchised,  shall  not  be  impeached,  molested,  vexed  or
sued  in  any  our  court  or  courts,  for  executing  or  putting
in  execution  of  any  of  the  said  precept  or  precepts.

And  furthermore,  we  of  our  ample  and  abundant  grace,
meere  motion,  &  certaine  knowledge,  for  us,  our  heires,
and  successors,  as  much  as  in  us  is,  have  given  and
granted,  and  by  these  presents  doe  give  and  grant  unto
the  sayd  governour,  Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship,  and
comminaltie  of  Marchants  adventurers,  and  to  their
successors,  and  to  the  Factor  and  Factors,  assigne  and
assignes  of  every  of  them,  ful  and  free  authoritie,  libertie,
facultie  and  licence,  and  power  to  saile  to  all  portes,
regions,  dominions,  territories,  landes.  Isles,  Islands,  and
coastes  of  the  sea,  wheresoever  before  their  late  adventure
or  enterprise  unknowen,  or  by  our  Marchants  and
subjects  by  the  seas  not  heretofore  commonly  frequented,  ^-  P^^^¥  ^^■'^
under  our  banner,  standerd,  flags  and  ensignes,  with  their  Y^^^^j!^ ^  J
shippe,  ships,  barke,  pinnesses,  and  all  other  vessels  of  UsanullPope
whatsoever  portage,  bulke,  quantitie  or  qualitie  they  may  Alexanders
be,  and  with  any  Mariners,  and  men  as  they  will  leade  division.
with  them  in  such  shippe  or  shippes,  or  other  vessels  at
their  owne  and  proper  costs  and  expences,  for  to  traffique,
descrie,  discover  and  finde,  whatsoever  Isle,  Islands,
countreis,  regions,  provinces,  creekes,  armes  of  the  sea,
rivers  &  streames,  as  wel  of  Gentiles,  as  of  any  other
Emperor,  king,  prince,  governor  or  Lord  whatsoever  he
or  they  shalbe,  and  in  whatsoever  part  of  the  world  they
be  situated,  being  before  the  sayd  late  adventure  or
enterprise  unknowen,  and  by  our  Marchants  and  subjects
not  commonly  frequented :  and  to  enter  and  land  in  the
same,  without  any  maner  of  denying,  paine,  penaltie  or

313

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

forfeiture  to  be  had  or  taken  by  anie  our  lawes,  customes
or  statutes  to  our  use,  or  to  the  use  of  our  heires  or
successors  for  the  same.

And  we  have  also  granted,  and  by  these  presents,  for
us,  our  heires  and  successors,  doe  graunt  unto  the  sayd
Governours,  Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship  and  com-
minalty,  and  to  their  successours,  and  to  their  Factors
and  assignes,  and  to  every  of  them,  licence  for  to  reare,
plant,  erect,  and  fasten  our  banners,  standards,  flags,  and
Ensignes,  in  whatsoever  citie,  towne,  village,  castle.  Isle,
or  maine  lande,  which  shall  be  by  them  newly  found,
without  any  the  penalties,  forfeitures,  or  dangers  afore-
sayde,  and  that  the  sayd  fellowship  and  comminalty,  and
their successors.  Factors &  assignes  and  every  of  them

Conquest shall  and  may  subdue,  possesse,  and occupie,  all maner

permitted.  cities,  townes,  Isles,  and  maine  lands  of  infidelitie,  which
is  or  shall  be  by  them,  or  any  of  them  newly  founde  or
descried,  as  our  vassals  and  subjects,  and  for  to  acquire
and  get  the  Dominion,  title,  and  jurisdiction  of  the  same
Cities,  Townes,  Castles,  Villages,  Isles,  and  maine  landes,
which  shall  bee  by  them,  or  any  of  them  newly  discovered
or  found  unto  us,  our  heires  and  successours  for  ever.
And furthermore, whereas by the voyage of  our

^«//o  1554.  subjects  in  this  last  II  yeere  attempted  by  Navigation,
towards  the  discoverie  and  disclosure  of  unknowen
places,  Realmes,  Islandes,  and  Dominions  by  the  seas
not  frequented,  it  hath  pleased  Almighty  God  to  cause
one  of  the  three  shippes  by  them  set  foorth  for  the
voyage,  and  purpose  above  mentioned,  named  the
Edward  Bonaventure,  to  arrive,  abide,  and  winter
within  the  Empire  and  dominions  of  the  high  and
mightie  Prince  our  cousin  and  brother,  Lord  John
Basilivich  Emperour  of  all  Russia,  Volodomer,  great
duke  of  Moscovie,  &c.  Who,  of  his  clemencie,  for  our
love  and  zeale,  did  not  onely  admitte  the  Captaine,  and
marchants  our  subjects  into  his  protection,  and  Princely
presence,  but also received  and intertained them very

[I.  272.] graciously,  and honourably,  granting  unto  them by  his

314

RUSSIA COMPANY'S CHARTER  ad.

1555-
letters addressed unto us, franke accesse into all his  The  Mos-
Seigniories  and  dominions,  with  licence  freely  to  traffique  (^ovttes  pnvt-
in  and  out  with  all his Subjects  in  all kinde  of  Mar-  ^^/^i"^
chandise,  with  divers  other  gracious  priviledges,  liberties
and immunities specified in  his  sayde  letters  under  his
Signet  : Know yee therefore that  wee of our further
royall favour and munificence,  of our meere motion,
certaine knowledge, and speciall grace, for us our
heires and successours,  have given and graunted,  and
by  these presents doe  give and grant unto the same
Governours, Consuls,  assistants,  fellowship,  and  comun-
alty  above  named,  and  to  their  successours,  as  much  as
in us is, that all the mayne landes. Isles, portes,
havens,  creekes,  and  rivers  of  the  said  mighty  Emperour
of  all  Russia,  and  great duke  of  Mosco,  &c. And  all
and singuler other lands, dominions, territories. Isles,
Portes,  havens,  creekes,  rivers,  armes  of  the sea,  of  al
and every other Emperor, king, prince, ruler and
governor,  whatsoever he or they  before the said late
adventure  or  enterprise  not  knowen,  or  by  our  foresayd
marchants and subjects by the seas, not commonly
frequented,  nor by  any part  nor parcell thereof  lying
Northwards,  Northeastwards,  or Northwestwards, as is  The  largenes
aforesayd,  by  sea shall not be  visited, frequented,  nor  ofthepnvi-
hanted by any our subjects,  other then of the sayd  ]^Q^(;omte
company and felowship,  and their successours without  companie.
expresse licence,  agreement and consent  of  the Gover-
nour.  Consuls,  and  Assistants  of  the  said  felowship  and
communaltie above  named,  or  the  more part  of  them,
in manner and number  aforesayd,  for  the time  being,
upon paine of forfeiture and losse, as well of the
shippe and shippes,  with the appurtenances,  as  also of
all  the  goods,  marchandises,  and  things  whatsoever  they
be,  of  those  our  subjects,  not  being  of  the  sayd  felow-
ship and communalty,  which shall attempt or presume
to  saile  to  any  of  those places,  which  bee,  or  hereafter
shall  happen  to  bee  found,  and  traffiked  unto  : the  one
halfe  of  the  same  forfeiture  to  be  to  the  use  of  us,  our

315

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

heires  and  successors,  and  the  other  halfe  to  be  to  the
use  of  the  sayd  fellowship  and  communaltie.  And  if  it
shall  fortune  anie  stranger  or  strangers,  for  to  attempt
to  hurt,  hinder,  or  endamage  the  same  marchants,  their
factors,  deputies  or  assignes,  or  any  of  them  in  sailing,
going  or  returning  at  any  time  in  the  sayd  adventure,
or  for  to  saile  or  trade  to  or  from  any  those  places,
landes  or  coastes,  which  by  the  sayd  marchants,  their
factors,  deputies  and  assignes  have  bene,  or  shall  bee
descried,  discovered  and  found,  or  frequented,  aswell
within  the  coastes  and  limites  of  gentility,  as  within
the  dominions  and  Seigniories  of  the  sayd  mighty
Emperour  and  Duke,  and  of  all  and  every  other
Emperour,  King,  Prince,  Ruler  and  governour  whatso-
ever he  or  they  be,  before  the  sayd  late  adventure  or
enterprise  not  knowen  by  any  our  said  marchants  and
subjects,  by  the  seas  not  commonly  frequented,  and
lying  Northwards,  Northwestwards  or  Northeastwards  as
aforesaid,  then  wee  will  and  grant,  and  by  these  pre-
sents doe  licence,  and  authorise  for  us,  our  heires  and
successors,  the  said  marchants,  their  factors,  deputies,
and  assignes,  and  every  of  them  to  doe  their  best  in
their  defence,  to  resist  the  same  their  enterprises  and
attempts.  Willing  therefore,  and  straightly  commanding
and  charging  al  and  singuler  our  Officers,  Maiors,
Sherifes,  Escheators,  Constables,  Bailifes,  and  all  and
singuler  other  our  ministers  and  liege  men,  and  sub-
jects whatsoever,  to  bee  aiding,  favouring,  helping  &
assisting  unto  the  sayd  governour  or  governours.  Con-
suls, assistants,  fellowship  and  communalty,  and  to  their
successeors  and  deputies,  factors,  servants,  and  assignes,
and  to  the  deputies,  factors  and  assignes  of  every  of
them,  in  executing  and  enjoying  the  premisses,  as  well
on  land  as  in  the  sea,  from  time  to  time,  and  at  all
times  when  you  or  any  of  you  shall  be  thereunto
required.  In  witnesse  whereof,  &c.
Anno  1555.  Apud  Westmonasterium,  6  die  Feb.  Annis  regnorum

nostrorum,  primo  &  secundo.
316

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE PURSEKS

A.D.
1556-

Certaine  instructions  delivered  in  the  third
voyage,  Anno  1556.  for  Russia,  to  every
Purser  and  the  rest  of  the  servants,  taken  for
the  voyage,  which  may  serve  as  good  and
necessary  directions,  to  all  other  like  adven-
turers.

Irst  you  shall  before  the  ship  doth
begin  to  lade,  goe  aboord,  and  shall
there  take,  and  write  one  inventorie,
by  the  advise  of  the  Master,  or  of
some  other  principall  officer  there
aboord,  of  all  the  tackle,  apparell,
cables,  ankers,  ordinance,  chambers,
shot,  powder,  artillerie,  and  of  all  other  necessaries
whatsoever  doth  belong  to  the  sayd  ship  :  and  the
same  justly  taken,  you  shall  write  in  a  booke,  making
the  sayd  Master,  or  such  officer  privie  of  that  which
you  haveso  written,  so  that  the  same  may  not  be
denied,  when  they  shall  call  accompt  thereof:  that
done,  you  shall  write  a  copie  of  the  same  with  your
owne  hand,  which  you  shall  deliver  before  the  shippe  [I.  273.]
shall  depart,  for  the  voyage  to  the  companies  booke
keeper  here  to  be  kept  to  their  behalfe,  to  the  ende
that  they  may  be  justly  answered  the  same,  when  time
shall  require  :  and  this  order  to  be  seene  and  kept
every  voyage  orderly,  by  the  Pursers  of  the  companies
owne  ship,  in  any  wise.

2  Also  v/hen  the  shippe  beginneth  to  lade,  you  shall
be  ready  a  boord  with  your  booke,  to  enter  such  goods
as  shall  be  brought  aboord,  to  be  laden  for  the  com-
pany, packed,  or  unpacked,  taking  the  markes  and
numbers  of  every  packe,  fardell,  trusse,  or  packet,
corovoya,  chest,  fatte,  butte,  pipe,  puncheon,  whole
barrell,  halfe  barrell,  firken,  or  other  caske,  maunde,  or
basket,  or  any  other  thing,  which  may,  or  shall  be
packed  by  any  other  manner  of  waies  or  devise. And

317

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

first,  all  such  packes,  or  trusses,  &c.  as  shal  be  brought
aboord  to  be  laden,  not  marked  by  the  companies
marke,  you  shall  doe  the  best  to  let  that  the  same  be
not  laden,  and  to  enquire  diligently  to  know  the
owners  thereof,  if  you  can,  and  what  commoditie  the
same  is,  that  is  so  brought  aboord  to  be  laden  :  if  you
can  not  know  the  owners  of  such  goods,  learne  what
you  can  thereof,  as  well  making  a  note  in  your  booke,
as  also  to  send  or  bring  word  thereof  to  the  Agent,
and  to  some  one  of  the  foure  Marchants  with  him
adjoined  so  speedily  as  you  can,  if  it  be  here  laden  or
to  be  laden  in  this  river,  being  not  marked  with  the
companies  marke,  as  is  aforesaid  :  and  when  the  sayd
shippe  hath  received  in  all  that  the  companies  Agent
will  have  laden,  you  shal  make  a  just  copie  of  that
which  is  laden,  reciting  the  parcels,  the  markes  and
numbers  of  every  thing  plainely,  which  you  shall
likewise  deliver  to  the  sayd  bookekeeper  to  the  use
aforesayd.

3  Also  when  the  ship  is  ready  to  depart,  you  shall
come  for  your  cockets  and  letters  to  the  Agent,  and
shall  shew  him  all  such  letters  as  you  have  received  of
any  person  or  persons  privately  or  openly,  to  be  delivered
to  any  person  or  persons  in  Russia  or  elsewhere,  and
also  to  declare  if  you  know  any  other  that  shall  passe
in  the  ship  either  master  or  mariner  that  hath  received
any  letters  to  be  privily  delivered  to  any  there,  directed
from  any  person  or  persons,  other  then  from  the  Agent
here  to  the  Agent  there  :  which  letters  so  by  you
received,  you  shall  not  carie  with  you,  without  you  be
licenced  so  to  doe  by  the  Agent  here,  and  some  of  the
foure  merchants,  as  is  aforesayd  :  and  such  others  as  do
passe,  having  received  any  privie  letters  to  be  delivered,
you  shal  all  that  in  you  lieth,  let  the  deliverie  of  them
at  your  arriving  in  Russia  :  and  also  if  you  have  or
do  receive,  or  shal  know  any  other  that  doth  or  hath
received  any  goods  or  ready  money  to  be  imployed  in
Russia, or to bee delivered there to any person or

318

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE PURSERS  a.d.

1556.

persons  from  any  person  or  persons,  other  then  such
as  bee  the  companies  goods,  and  that  under  their
marke,  you  shall  before  the  ship  doeth  depart,  declare
the  same  truely  to  the  sayd  Agent,  and  to  some  of  the
other  merchants  to  him  adjoyned,  as  it  is  before  declared.

4  Also  when  the  shippe  is  ready  to  depart,  and  hath
the  master  and  the  whole  company  aboord,  you  shall
diligently  foresee  and  take  heede,  that  there  passe  not
any  privie  person  or  persons,  other  then  such  as  be
authorized  to  passe  in  the  said  ship,  without  the
licence  and  warrant  of  one  of  the  Governours  and  of
the  assistants,  for  the  same  his  passage,  to  be  first
shewed.  And  if  there  be  any  such  person  or  persons
that  is  to  passe  and  will  passe  without  shewing  the
same  warrant,  you  shall  let  the  passage  of  any  such  to
the  uttermost  of  your  power :  And  for  that  there  may
no  such  privie  person  passe  under  the  cloke  and  colour
of  some  mariner,  you  shall  upon  the  weying  of  your
ships  anker,  call  the  master  and  the  mariners  within
boord  by  their  names  and  that  by  your  bookes,  to  the
ende  that  you  may  see  that  you  have  neither  more
nor  lesse,  but  just  the  number  for  the  voyage.

5  Also  you  must  have  in  remembrance,  that  if  it
shall  chance  the  shippe  to  bee  put  into  anie  harbour  in
this  coast  by  contrary  windes  or  otherwise  in  making
the  voyage,  to  send  word  thereof  from  time  to  time
as  the  case  shall  require,  by  your  letters  in  this  maner.
To  master  I.  B.  Agent  for  the  company  of  the  New
trades  in  S.  in  London  :  If  you  doe  hier  any  to  bring
your  letters,  write  that  which  he  must  have  for  the
portage.  And  for  your  better  knowledge  and  learning,
you  shall  do  very  well  to  keepe  a  dayly  note  of  the
voyage  both  outwards  and  homewards.

6  And  principally  see  that  you  forget  not  dayly  in
all  the  voiage  both  morning  and  evening,  to  call  the
company  within  boord  to  prayer,  in  which  doing  you
shall  please  God,  and  the  voiage  will  have  the  better
successe  thereby,  and  the  company  prosper  the  better.

319

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

7  Also in calme weather and at other times when
you  shall  fortune  to  come  to  anker  in  the  seas  during
the voyage, you shall for the companies profite, and
for the good husbanding of  the  victuals aboord, call
upon the Boateswaine and other of the company to j
use  such  hookes  and  other  engines  as  they  have  aboord j
to  take  fish  with,  that  such  fish  so  taken  may  bee  eaten j
for  the  cause  aforesayd  :  and  if  there  bee  no  such  engines |
aboord,  then  to  provide  some  before  you  goe  from  hence, j

8  And  when  God  shall  send  you  in  safetie  into  the
Bay  of  S.  Nicholas  at  an  anker,  you  shall  goe  a  shore
with the first boate that shall depart from the ship,

[I.  274.]  taking  with  you  such  letters  as  you  have  to  deliver  to
the  Agent  there :  and  if  he  be  not  there  at  your  comming
a  land,  then  send  the  companies  letters  to  Colmogro  to
him  by  some  sure  mariner  or  otherwise,  as  the  master
and  you  shall  thinke  best,  but  goe  not  your  selfe  at
any  hand,  nor  yet  from  aboord  the  ship,  unlesse  it  bee
a  shore  to  treate  with  the  Agent  for  the  lading  of  the
ship  that  you  be  appointed  in,  which  you  shall  applie
diligently  to  have  done  so  speedily  as  may  be.  And
for  the  discharging  of  the  goods  therein  in  the  Bay,
to  be  carried  from  thence,  see  that  you  doe  looke  well
to  the  unlading  thereof,  that  there  be  none  other  goods
sent  a  shore  then  the  companies,  and  according  to  the
notes  entred  in  your  booke  as  is  aforesaid :  if  there  be,
inquire  diligently  for  whom  they  bee,  and  what  goods
they  be,  noting  who  is  the  receiver  of  the  sayd  goods,
in  such  sort  that  the  company  may  have  the  true
knowledge  thereof  at  your  comming  home.

9  Also  there  a  shore,  and  likewise  aboord,  you  shall
spie  and  search  as  secretly  as  you  may,  to  learne  and
know  what  bargaining,  buying  and  selling  there  is  with
the  master  and  the  mariners  of  the  shippe  and  the
Russes,  or  with  the  companies  servants  there  :  and  that
which  you  shall  perceive  and  learne,  you  shall  keepe  a
note  thereof  in  your  booke  secretly  to  your  selfe,  which
you  shall  open  and  disclose  at  your  comming  home  to

320

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE PURSERS  ad.

1556.

the  governours  and  assistants,  in  such  sorte  as  the  trueth
of  their  secret  trades  and  occupyings  may  be  revealed
and  knowen.  You  shal  need  alwayes  to  have  Argos
eyes,  to  spie  their  secret  packing  and  conveyance,  aswell
on  land  as  aboord  the  shippe,  of  and  for  such  furres
and  other  commodities,  as  yeerely  they  doe  use  to  buy,
packe  and  convey  hither.  If  you  will  bee  vigilant  and
secrete  in  this  article,  you  cannot  misse  to  spie  their
privie  packing  one  with  another,  either  on  shore  or
aboord  the  shippe :  worke  herein  wisely,  and  you  shall
deserve  great  thanks  of  the  whole  company.

10  Also  at  the  lading  againe  of  the  shippe,  you
shall  continue  and  abide  abord,  to  the  ende  that  you
may  note  and  write  in  your  booke  all  such  goods  and
marchandises  as  shall  be  brought  and  laden,  which  you
shall  orderly  note  in  all  sortes  as  heretofore,  as  in  the
second  article  partly  it  is  touched :  and  in  any  wise
put  the  Master  and  the  company  in  remembrance,  to
looke  and  foresee  substantially  to  the  roomaging  of  the
shippe,  by  faire  meanes  or  threats,  as  you  shall  see  and
thinke  will  serve  for  the  best.

1 1  Thus  when  the  shippe  is  full  laden  againe,  and
all  things  aboord  in  good  order,  and  that  you  doe
fortune  to  goe  a  shore  to  the  Agent  for  your  letters,
and  dispatch  away :  you  shall  demand  whether  all  the
goods  be  laden  that  were  brought  thither,  and  to  know
the  trueth  therof,  you  shal  repaire  to  the  companies
storehouse  there  at  S.  Nicholas,  to  see  if  there  be  any
goods  left  in  the  sayd  storehouse :  if  there  be,  you  shal
demand  why  they  be  not  laden,  and  note  what  kinde
of  goods  they  be  that  be  so  left :  and  seeing  any  of
the  shippes  there  not  fully  laden,  you  shall  put  the
Agent  in  remembrance  to  lade  those  goods  so  left,  if
any  such  be  to  be  laden,  as  is  aforesayd.  And  thus
God  sending  you  a  faire  wind,  to  make  speede  and
away.

12  Finally,  when  God  shall  send  you  to  arrive  againe
upon  this  coast  in  safetie, either at Harewich,  or  else-

II  321  X

A.D.
1556.

Jpril  23

27

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

where,  goe  not  you  aland,  if  you  may  possiblie,  to  the
ende  that  when  you  be  gone  a  shore,  there  may  no
goods  be  sent  privily  ashore  to  be  solde,  or  else  to  be
solde  aboord  the  ship  in  your  absence,  but  keepe  you
still  aboord,  if  you  can  by  any  meanes,  for  the  causes
aforesaid,  and  write  the  company  a  letter  from  the  shippe
of  your  good  arrivall,  which  you  may  convey  to  them
by  land  by  some  boy  or  mariner  of  the  shippe,  or
otherwise  as  you  shall  thinke  best :  and  likewise  when
God  shall  send  you  and  the  shippe  into  the  river  here,
doe  not  in  any  wise  depart  out  of  the  shippe  that  you
be  in,  until  the  company  doe  send  some  other  aboord
the  shippe,  in  your  steede  and  place,  to  keepe  the
shippe  in  your  absence.

The  Navigation  and  discoverie  toward  the  river
of  Ob,  made  by  Master  Steven  Burrough,
Master  of  the  Pinnesse  called  the  Serchthrift,
with  divers  things  worth  the  noting,  passed
in  the  yere 1556.

E  departed  from  Ratcliffe  to  Blackewall
the  23  of  April.  Satturday  being  S.
Markes  day,  we  departed  from  Blacke-
wall to  Grays.

The  27  being  Munday,  the  right
WorshipfuU  Sebastian  Cabota  came
aboord  our  Pinnesse  at  Gravesende,
accompanied  with  divers  Gentlemen,  and  Gentlewomen,
who  after  that  they  had  viewed  our  Pinnesse,  and
tasted  of  such  cheere  as  we  could  make  them  aboord,
they  went  on  shore,  giving  to  our  mariners  right  liberall
rewards :  and  the  good  olde  Gentleman  Master  Cabota
gave  to  the  poore  most  liberall  almes,  wishing  them
to  pray  for  the  good  fortune,  and  prosperous  successe
of  the  Serchthrift,  our  Pinnesse.  And  then  at  the
signe  of  the  Christopher,  hee  and  his  friends  banketted,
and made me, and them that were in the company

322

STEPHEN BURROUGH  a.d.

1556.

great  cheere :  and  for  very  joy  that  he  had  to  see  the  [I.  275.]

towardnes of  our intended discovery, he entred into

the  dance  himselfe,  amongst  the  rest  of  the  young  and

lusty  company :  which  being  ended,  hee  and  his  friends

departed  most  gently,  commending  us  to  the  governance

of  almighty  God.

Tuesday  we  rode  still  at  Gravesend,  making  provision 28
for  such  things  as  we  wanted.

Wednesday  in  the  morning  we  departed  from  Graves- 29
ende,  the  winde  being  at  Southwest,  that  night  we  came
to  an  anker  thwart  our  Lady  of  Hollands.

Thursday  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  3°
weyed,  and  by  eight  of  the  clocke,  we  were  at  an  anker
in  Orwell  wannes,  and  then  incontinent  I  went  aboord
the  Edward  Bonaventure,  where  the  worshipfull  company
of  marchants  appointed  me  to  be,  untill  the  sayd  good
ship  arrived  at  Wardhouse.  Then  I  returned  againe  ^ofe.
into  the  pinnesse.

Friday  the  15  of  May  we  were  within  7  leagues  May  15.
of  the  shore,  on  the  coast  of  Norway :  the  latitude  at
a  South  sunne,  58  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where  we  saw
three  sailes,  beside  our  owne  company :  and  thus  we
followed  the  shoare  or  land,  which  lieth  Northnorthwest,
North  and  by  West,  and  Northwest  and  by  North,  as
it  doth  appeare  by  the  plat.

Saturday  at  an  East  sunne  we  came  to  S.  Dunstans  16
Island,  which  Island  I  so  named.  It  was  off  us  East
two  leagues  and  a  halfe,  the  wind  being  at  Southeast :
the  latitude  this  day  at  a  South  sunne  59  degrees,  42
minutes.  Also  the  high  round  mountaine  bare  East
of  us,  at  a  south  sunne :  and  when  this  hill  is  East  of
you,  and  being  bound  to  the  Northward,  the  land
lyeth  North  and  halfe  a  point  Westerly,  from  this
sayd  South  sunne,  unto  a  North  sunne  twenty  leagues
Northwest  alongst  the  shoare.

Upon  Sunday  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the 17
farthest  land  that  we  could  see  that  lay  Northnorthwest,
was  East  of  us  three  leagues,  and  then  it  trended  to  the

323

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

Northwards,  and  to  the  Eastwards  of  the  North,  whic
headland  I  judged  to  be  Scoutsnesse. At  seven  of  thtl"
clocke  we  changed  our  course  and  went  North,  the  winf
being  at Southsoutheast,  and it  waxed  very  thick  an
mistie,  and  when  it  cleered,  we  went  Northnortheast. Atli'
a  South  sunne  we  lost  sight  of  the  Serchthrift,  because  c^'i
the  mist,  making  our  way  North. And  when  we  loe
sight of the  shoare  and pinnesse,  we  were  within tw
leagues  &  a  halfe  of  the  shoare  : the  last  land  that  W''
saw  when  this  mist  came  upon  us,  which  is  to  the  North'C«
wards of Scowtsnesse, lay Northnortheast,  and Southtti'
southwest,  and we  made  our  way  North untill  a  we
sunne  five  leagues.

18  From  that  untill  Munday  three  a  clocke  in  the  mornin!
ten  leagues  Northnortheast  : and then  we  went Nortiip
and  by  East,  because  the  winde  came  at  the  Westsouthia
west  with  thicke  miste  : the  latitude  this  day  at  a  Sout
sunne  sixtie  three  degrees  and  a  halfe  truely  taken  : a'n
this season we had sight of  our  Pinnesse  againe.

19  From  that  untill  Tuesday  a  South  sunne  Northnortbve
east fortie  foure  leagues,  and then  Northeast. From  ■^'
South  sunne  untill  eight  of  the  clocke,  fifteene  league
Northeast.

20  From  that  untill  Wednesday  a  South  sunne  North
northeast,  except  the  first  watch  Northeast  :  then  had  w
the  latitude  in  sixtie  seven  degrees,  thirtie  nine  minute:
From  that  unto  a  Northwest  sunne  eighteen  league
Northeast,  &  then  we  were  within  two  leagues  off  th
shore,  and  saw  the  high  land  to  the  Southwards  of  Low
foot  breake  out  through  the  mist,  and  then  we  weria
North  and  by  east.

21  From  the  sayd Northwest  sunne  untill foure  of  thn
clocke  in  the  morning North  and by  East  ten  league
and a  halfe  : and then Northnortheast untill a  Sout
sunne,  the  latitude  being  sixtie  nine  degrees,  and  a  halft
From  that  untill  halfe  an  houre  past  seven  of  the  clock(i
Northnortheast  eleven  leagues  and  a  halfe,  and then  wn(

22  went  Northeast  ten  leagues. From  that  3  leagues  and  t

324

!)r;

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1556.
lalfe  Eastnortheast,  and  then  we  sawe  the  land through
:he  cloudes  and  hazie  thwart  on  the  broad  side  of  us  the
vinde  being  then  at  Southsouthwest.

From  that  untill  Saturday,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  23
:he  morning  Eastnortheast,  and  to  the  Northwards  fortie
nght  leagues,  and  then  the  wind  came  up  at  North,  wee
)eing  aboord  the  shore,  and  thwart  of  the  Chappel,
vhich  I  suppose  is  called  Kedilwike  :  then  we  cast  the  Kedelwike
hippes  head  to  the  seawards,  because  the  winde  was  verie  '^^^PP^^^-
cant  :  and  then  I  caused  the  Pinnesse  to  beare  in  with
he  shore,  to  see  whether  she  might  find  an  harborough
or  the  ships  or  not,  and  that  she  found  and  saw  two
oaders  ride  in  the  sound  :  and  also  they  sawe  houses.
5ut  notwithstanding,  God  be  praysed,  the  winde  enlarged
ipon  us,  that  we  had  not  occasion  to  goe  into  the
larborough  :  and  then  the  Pinnesse  bare  her  Myssen
nast  over  boord  with  flagge  and  all,  and  lost  the  flagge  :
7ith  the  mast  there  fell  two  men  over  boord,  but  God  be
jraised,  they  were  saved :  the  flagge  was  a  token,  whereby
T'e  might  understand  whether  there  were  a  good  harbour
here  or not.

At  a  North  sunne  the  North  cape  (which  I  so  named T^he  'North
he  first  voyage)  was  thwart  of  us,  which  is  nine  leagues  '^^P^  ^'^  named
o the Eastwards of the foresayd Chappel from the  ^urrowe
iastermost  point  of  it.

June.  [I.  276.]

rHe  Sunday  we  weied  in  Corpus  Christi  Bay,  at  a  7
Northeast  and  by  East  sunne  :  the  Bay  is  almost
alfe  a  league  deepe  :  the  headland  which  is  Corpus
xhristi  point,  lyeth  Southeast  and  by  East,  one  league
rom  the  head  of  the  Bay,  where  we  had  a  great  tyde,
ke  a  race  over  the  flood  :  the  Bay  is  at  the  least  two
^agues  over  :  so  doe  I  imagine  from  the  fayre  foreland
D  Corpus  Christi  poynt  ten  leagues  Southeast  and  by
Last  :  It  floweth  in  this  Bay,  at  a  South  and  by  West
loone  full  sea.  From  that  we  went  untill  seven  a  clocke
t  after  noone  twentie  leagues  Southeast  and by  South  :

325

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  then  we  tooke  in  all  our  sailes,  because  it  was  then
very  mistie,  and  also  we  met  with  much  ice  that  ran  out
of  the  Bay,  and  then  wee  went  Southsoutheast  with  our
foresayle  :  at  eight  of  the  clocke,  we  heard  a  piece  of
ordinance,  which  was  out  of  the  Edward,  which  bade  us
farewell,  and  then  we  shot  off  another  piece,  and  bade
her  farewell :  wee  could  not  one  see  the  other,  because  of
the  thicke  miste :  at  a  Northwest  sunne  it  began  some-
what to  cleere,  and  then  we  sawe  a  head  lande,  and  the
shoare  trended  to  the  Southwestward,  which  I  judged  to
be  about  Crosse  Island :  it  was  off  us  at  a  Northnorth-
v/est  sunne,  Westsouthwest.

8  From  this  Northnorthwest  sunne,  untill  Munday,  we
went  Southeast,  and  this  morning  we  came  at  anker
among  the  shoales  that  lie  off  of  point  Looke  out,
at  a  Northeast  and  by  East  sunne,  the  wind  being  at
Eastsoutheast.  At  this  poynt  Looke  out,  a  south  Moone
maketh  a  full  sea.  Cape  good  fortune  lyeth  from  the
Isle  of  Crosses  Southeast,  and  betweene  them  is  tenne
leagues  :  point  Looke  out  lieth  from  Cape  Good  fortune
Eastsoutheast,  and  betweene  them  are  sixe  leagues.  S.
Edmonds  point  lieth  from  point  Looke  out  Eastsouth-
east, and  halfe  a  point  to  the  Southwards,  and  betweene
them  are  sixe  leagues.  There  is  betweene  these  two
points,  a  Bay  that  is  halfe  a  league  deepe,  and  is  full  of
shoales  and  dangers.  At  a  Southeast  sunne  we  weyed,
and  turned  to  the  windwards,  the  winde  being  at  East-
southeast  :  and  at  a  Southeast  sunne,  we  came  to  an
anker,  being  then  a  full  sea,  in  five  fadoms  and  a  halfe
water. It  hieth  at  this  place  where  we  roade,  and  also

9  at  point  Looke  out,  foure  fadome  water.  At  a  West-
northwest  sunne  we  weyed,  and  drived  to  the  windewards,
untill  Tuesday,  a  Northnortheast  sunne,  and  then  being
a  high  water,  we  came  to  an  anker  open  of  the  river  Cola,
in  eight  fadome  water.  Cape  S.  Bernard  lyeth  from  S.
Edmonds  point.  Southeast  and  by  South,  and  betwixt
them  are  sixe  leagues,  and  also  betwixt  them  is  the  River
Cola, into  which River wee  went  this  evening.

326

STEPHEN BURROUGH  a.d.

1556.

Wednesday  we  roade  still  in  the  sayd  river,  the  winde 10
being at the north : we sent our skifFe aland to be
dressed : the  latitude of  the  mouth of  the river Cola  'I'he  latitude
is  sixtie  five  degrees,  fortie  and  eight  minutes.  '^  ^

Thursday  at 6 of  the clocke in the  morning,  there n
came  aboord  of  us  one  of  the  Russe  Lodiaes,  rowing  with  ^  -^a-f^^
twentie  oares,  and there  were  foure  and  twenty  men  in  -^''«^^-
her. The  master  of  the  boate  presented  me  with  a  great
loafe  of  bread,  and  sixe  ringes  of  bread,  which  they  call
Colaches,  and  foure  dryed  pikes,  and  a  pecke  of  fine  ote-
meale,  and  I  gave  unto  the  Master  of  the  boate,  a  combe,
and  a  small  glasse :  and  he  declared  unto  me,  that  he  was
bound  to  Pechora,  and  after  that,  I  made  them  to  drinke,
the  tide  being  somewhat broken,  they  gently  departed.
The  Masters  name  was  Pheodor.

Whereas  the  tenth  day  I  sent  our  Pinnesse  on  shoare
to  be  mended,  because  she  was  leake,  and  weake,  with  the
Carpenter  and  three  men  more  to  helpe  him,  the  weather
chanced  so,  that  it  was  Sunday  before  they  could  get
aboord  our  shippe.  All  that  time  they  were  without
provision  of  victuals,  but  onely  a  little  bread,  which  they
spent  by  Thursday  at  night,  thinking  to  have  come
aboord  when  they  had  listed,  but  winde  and  weather
denied  them :  insomuch  that  they  were  faine  to  eate
grasse,  and  such  weedes  as  they  could  finde  then  above
grounde,  but  fresh  water  they  had  plentie,  but  the  meate
with  some  of  them  could  scant  frame  by  reason  of  their
queazie  stomackes.

From  Thursday at  afternoone, untill Sunday in the 14
morning,  our  barke  did  ride  such  a  road  sted  that  it  was
to  be  marveiled,  without  the  helpe  of  God,  how  she  was
able  to  abide  it.

In  the  bight  of  the  Southeast  shoare  of  the  river  Cola,
there  is  a  good  roade  in  five  fadome,  or  foure  fadome
and  a  halfe,  at  a  lowe  water  :  but  you  shall  have  no  land
Northnortheast  of  you  then.  I  proved  with  our  pinnesse,
that  the  depth  goeth  on  the  Southeast  shoare.

Thursday  we  weyed  our  ankers  in  the  River  Cola,  and 18

327

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

went  into  the  Sea  seven  or  eight  leagues,  where  we  met
with the winde farre Northerly, that of force it con-
strained us  to  goe  againe  backe  into  the  sayd  river,  where
came  aboord  of  us  sundry  of  their  Boates,  which  declared
[I.  277.] unto  me  that  they  were  also  bound  to  the  northwards,
a  fishing  for  Morse,  and  Salmon,  and  gave  me  liberally
of  their  white  and  wheaten  bread.
Lodtas  having ^5  we  roade  in  this  river,  wee  sawe  dayly  comming
24  men  a downe  the  river  many  of  their  Lodias,  and  they  that  had
least,  had  foure  and  twenty  men  in  them,  and  at  the  last
From  Cola  to they  grew  to  thirtie  saile  of  them  :  and  amongst  the  rest,
„  ^ Q  J  * there  was one of  them whose  name  was  Gabriel,  who
]:;i^t" «h«wed  me  very  much  friendshippe,  and  he  declared  unto
mee,  that  all  they  were  bound  to  Pechora,  a  fishing  for
Salmons,  and  Morses : insomuch that hee  shewed  mee
by  demonstrations,  that  with  a  faire  winde  wee  had  seven
or  eight  dayes  sailing  to  the  River  Pechora,  so  that  I  was
glad  of  their  company. This  Gabriel  promised  to  give
mee  warning  of  shoales,  as  hee  did  indeede.

21  Sunday  being  the  one  and  twentieth  day,  Gabriel
gave  me  a  barrell  of  Meade,  and  one  of  his  speciall
friends  gave  me  a  barrell  of  beere,  which  was  caryedi
upon  mens  backs  at  least  2 miles.

22  Munday  we  departed  from  the  river  Cola,  with  all
The curtesie of  ^he  rest  of  the  said  Lodias,  but  sailing  before  the  wind,,

a  ne .  ^hey  were  all  too  good  for  us:  but  according  to  promise,,
this  Gabriel  and  his  friend  did  often  strike  their  sayles,
and  taried  for  us  forsaking  their  owne  company.

23  Tuesday  at  an  Eastnortheast  sunne  we  were  thwart
A  good  y  of  Cape  S.  John.  It  is  to  be  understood,  that  from
necessane ^^^ Q^p^ g_ j^j^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^.-^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ goeth

to  Mezen,  it  is  all  sunke  land,  and  full  of  shoales
and  dangers,  you  shall  have  scant  two  fadome  water,
and  see  no  land.  And  this  present  day  wee  came  to
an  anker  thwart  of  a  creeke,  which  is  4  or  5  leagues
to  the  Northwards  of  the  sayd  Cape,  into  which
creeke  Gabriel  and  his  fellow  rowed,  but  we  could
not get in : and before night there were above 20

328

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1556.

saile that  went into the sayd creeke, the  whid being
at  the  Northeast. We  had  indifferent  good  landfang.

This  afternoone  Gabriel  came  aboord  with  his  skiffe,
and  then  I  rewarded  him  for  the  good  company  that
he  kept  with  us  over  the  shoales  with  two  small
ivory  combes,  and  a  Steele  glasse,  with  two  or  three
trifles  more,  for  which  he  was  not  ungratefull.  But
notwithstanding,  his  first  company  had  gotten  further
to  the  Northwards.

Wednesday being Midsummer day, we sent our 24
skiffe aland to sound the creeke, where they found
it almost drie at a low water. And all the Lodais
within  were  on  ground.

Although  the  harborough  were  evil,  yet  the  stormie
similitude  of  Northerly  winds  tempted  us  to  set  our
sayles,  &  we  let  slip  a  cable  and  an  anker,  and  bare
with  the  harborough,  for  it  was  then  neere  a  high
water :  and  as  alwaies  in  such  journeis  varieties  do
chance,  when  we  came  upon  the  barre  in  the  entrance
of  the  creeke,  the  wind  did  shrink  so  suddenly  upon
us,  that  we  were  not  able  to  lead  it  in,  and  before  we
could  have  flatted  the  shippe  before  the  winde,  we
should  have  bene  on  ground  on  the  lee  shore,  so
that  we  were  constrained  to  let  fall  an  anker  under
our  sailes,  and  rode  in  a  very  breach,  thinking  to
have  warpt  in.  Gabriel  came  out  with  his  skiffe,
and  so  did  sundry  others  also,  shewing  their  good
will  to  helpe  us,  but  all  to  no  purpose,  for  they
were  likely  to  have  bene  drowned  for  their  labour,
in  so  much  that  I  desired  Gabriel  to  lend  me  his
anker,  because  our  owne  ankers  were  two  big  for  our
skiffe  to  lay  out,  who  sent  me  his  owne,  and  bor-
rowed another  also  and  sent  it  us.  Then  we  layd
out  one  of  those  ankers,  with  a  hawser  which  he  had
of  140  fadom  long,  thinking  to  have  warpt  in,  but  it
would  not  be :  for  as  we  shorted  upon  ye  said  warpe
the  anker  came  home,  so  that  we  were  faine  to  beare
the end of the warpe, that we rushed in upon the

329

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

other  small  anker  that  Gabriel  sent  aboord,  and  layd
that  anker  to  seawards :  and  then  betweene  these  two
ankers  we  traversed  the  ships  head  to  seawards,  and
set  our  foresaile  and  maine  sayle,  and  when  the
barke  had  way,  we  cut  the  hawser,  and  so  gate  the
sea  to  our  friend,  and  tryed  out  al  that  day  with
our  maine  corse.

25  The  Thursday  we  went  roome  with  Cape  S.  John,
where  we  found  indifferent  good  rode  for  a  North-
northeast  wind,  and  for  a  neede,  for  a  North  and  by
West  winde.

26  Friday  at  afternoone  we  weyed,  and  departed  from
thence,  the  wether  being  meetly  faire,  &  the  winde
at  Eastsoutheast,  and  plied  for  the  place  where  we  left
our  cable  and  anker,  and  our  hawser :  &  as  soone
as  we  were  at  an  anker,  the  foresaid  Gabriel  came
aboord  of  us,  with  3  or  foure  more  of  their  small
boats,  and  brought  with  them  of  their  Aquavitae  &
Meade,  professing  unto  me  very  much  friendship,  and
rejoiced  to  see  us  againe,  declaring  that  they  earnestly
thought  that  we  had  bene  lost.  This  Gabriel  declared
unto  me,  that  they  had  saved  both  the  ankers  and
our  hauser,  and  after  we  had  thus  communed,  I
caused  4  or  5  of  them  to  goe  into  my  cabbin,  where
I  gave  them  figs,  and  made  them  such  cheere  as  I
could.  While  I  was  thus  banketing  of  them,  there
came  another  of  their  skiffes  aboord  with  one  who
was  a  Keril,  whose  name  afterwards  I  learned,  &  that
he  dwelt  in  Colmogro,  &  Gabriel  dwelled  in  the
towne  of  Cola,  which  is  not  far  from  the  rivers
mouth.  This  foresaid  Keril  said  unto  me  that  one  of
the  ankers  which  I  borowed  was  his,  I  gave  him
thanks for the lone of  it, thinking it had bene suffi-

[I.  278.]  cient.  And  as  I  continued  in  one  accustomed  maner,
that  if  the  present  which  they  brought  were  worth
enterteinment,  they  had  it  accordingly,  he  brought
nothing  with  him,  &  therfore  I  regarded  him  but
litle. And thus we ended, & they took their leave

330

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1556.

and  went  a  shore.  At  their  comming  ashore,  Gabriel
and  Keril  were  at  unconvenient  words,  and  by  the
eares,  as  I  understand :  the  cause  was  because  the
one  had  better  enterteinment  then  the  other :  but
you  shal  understand  that  Gabriel  was  not  able  to
make  his  party  good,  because  there  were  17  lodias
of  the  Kerils  company  who  tooke  his  part,  and  but
2 of  Gabriels  company.

The next high water Gabriel and his company  Twentie  eight
departed from thence, and rowed to their former  Lodtas  belong-
company and neighbours, which were in number 28 ^^^^° "  ^'
at the least, and all of  them belonging to the river
Cola.

And  as  I  understood  Keril  made  reckoning  that  the  27
hawser  which  was  fast  in  his  anker  should  have  bene
his  owne,  and  at  first  would  not  deliver  it  to  our
boat,  insomuch  that  I  sent  him  worde  that  I  would
complaine  upon  him,  whereupon  he  delivered  the
hawser  to  my  company.

The  next  day  being  Saturday,  I  sent  our  boat  on
shore  to  fetch  fresh  water  and  wood,  and  at  their
comming  on  shore  this  Keril  welcomed  our  men
most  gently,  and  also  banketed  them  :  and  in  the
meane  time  caused  some  of  his  men  to  fill  our
baricoes  with  water,  and  to  help  our  men  to  beare
wood  into  their  boat :  and  then  he  put  on  his  best
silke  coate,  and  his  coller  of  pearles,  and  came  aboord
againe,  &  brought  his  present  with  him :  and  thus
having  more  respect  unto  his  present  then  to  his
person,  because  I  perceived  him  to  be  vainglorious,
I  bade  him  welcom.e,  and  gave  him  a  dish  of  figs :
and  then  he  declared  unto  me  that  his  father  was  a
gentleman,  and  that  he  was  able  to  shew  me  pleasure,
and  not  Gabriel,  who  was  but  a  priests  sonne.

After their departure from us  we  weied,  and plyed 28
all the ebbe to the windewards, the winde being
Northerly, & towards night it waxed very stormie,
so that of force we were constrained to go roome

331

A.D.
1556.

The  latitude
of  Cape  S.
John  66
degrees  50
minutes.

Earth  swim-
ming above
water  like
wood.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

with  Cape  S.  John  againe,  in  which  storme  wee  lost
our  skiffe  at  our  sterne,  that  wee  bought  at  Ward-
house,  and  there  we  rode  until  the  fourth  of  July.
The  latitude  of  Cape  S.  John  is  (i(i  degrees  50
minutes.  And  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  land  of
Cape  S.  John  is  of  height  from  the  full  sea  marke,
as  I  judge,  10  fadomes,  being  cleane  without  any
trees  growing,  &  also  without  stones  or  rockes,  and
consists  onely  of  blacke  earth,  which  is  so  rotten,
that  if  any  fall  into  the  sea,  it  will  swimme  as
though  it  were  a  piece  of  wood.  In  which  place,
about  three  leagues  from  the  shore  you  shall  not
have  above  9  fadom  water,  and  clay  ground.

Julie.

SAturday  at  a  North  northwest  sunne  the  wind  came
at  Eastnortheast,  &  then  we  weied,  and  plied  to
the  Northwards,  and  as  we  were  two  leagues  shot
past  the  Cape,  we  saw  a  house  standing  in  a  valley,
which  is  dainty  to  be  scene  in  those  parts,  and  by
and  by  I  saw  three  men  on  the  top  of  the  hil.
Then  I  judged  them,  as  it  afterwards  proved,  that
they  were  men  which  came  from  some  other  place
to  set  traps  to  take  vermin  for  their  furres,  which
trappes  we  did  perceive  very  thicke  alongst  the  shore
as  we  went.

Sunday  at  an  East  sunne  we  were  thwart  off  the
creeke  where  the  Russes  lay,  and  there  came  to  an
anker,  and  perceiving  the  most  part  of  the  Lodias  to
be  gone  we  thought  it  not  good  to  tary  any  longer
there,  but  weyed  and  spent  all  the  ebbe,  plying  to  the
windewards.

Munday  at  a  South  sunne  it  was  high  water.  All
alongst  the  coast  it  floweth  little,  onely  a  South  moone
makes  a  full  sea :  and  as  we  were  a  weying  we  espied
the  Russe  Lodias,  which  we  first  lost.  They  came  out
of  a  creeke  amongst  the  sandy  hilles,  which  hilles
beginne 15  leagues  Northnortheast  from  Cape  S.  John.

332

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1556.

Plying this ebbe to an end,  we came to an  anker 7
6 leagues Northnortheast from the place where we
saw  the Russes  come out  : and there  the Russes har-
boured themselves  within  a  soonke  banke,  but  there  was
not  water  enough  for  us.

At  a  North  sunne  we  weyed  and  plied  to  the  North-
wards, the  land  lying Northnortheast,  and Southsouth-
west, untill a South sunne, and then we were in the  The  latitude
latitude  of  68 degrees  &  a  halfe  :  and  in  this  latitude  ^^  degrees
ende  those sandy  hilles,  and the  land beginneth  to  lie  ^" "'  ^■^^'
North and  by West, South and by  East, and North-
northwest, and to the  Westwards,  and  there  the  water
beginneth  to  waxe  deepe.

At  a  Northwest  sunne  we  came  to  an  anker  within
halfe  a  league  of  the  shore,  where  wee  had  good  plenty  of
fish,  both  Haddocks  and  Cods,  riding  in  10  fadom  water.

Wednesday  we  weyed,  and  plyed  neerer  the  headland^ 8
which is called Caninoz, the wind  being at East and
by  North.

Thursday  the  wind  being  scant  we  turned  to  windwards 9
the  ebbe, to  get  about  Caninoz  : the  latitude  this  day
at  noone  was  68 degrees  40  minutes.

Friday  we  turned  to  the  windward  of  the  ebbe,  but  to  10
no  purpose  :  and  as  we  rode  at  an  anker,  we  saw  the  [I.  279.]
similitude  of  a  storme  rising  at  Northnorthwest,  &  could
not  tell  where  to  get  rode  nor  succor  for  that  winde,  and
harborough  we  knew  none  :  &  that  land  which  we  rode
under  with  that  winde  was  a  lee  shore.  And  as  I  was
musing  what  was  best  to  be  done,  I  saw  a  saile  come  out
of  a  creeke  under  the  foresayd  Caninoz,  which  was  my
friend  Gabriel,  who  forsooke  his  harborough  and  com-
pany, and  came  as  neere  us  as  he  might,  and  pointed
us  to  the  Eastwards,  &  then  we  weyed  and  followed  him,
and  went  East  and  by  South,  the  wind  being  at  West-
northwest,  and  very  mistie.

Saturday  we  went  Eastsoutheast  &  followed  Gabriel, n
and  he  brought  us  into  an  harborough  called  Morgiovets,  Morglovets  an
which  is  30  leagues  from  Caninoz,  &  we  had  upon  the  harbour.

333

A.D.
1556.

Drift  wood.

A  Samoed.

13

14

Dolgoieve  an
Island.

Pechora.

15

16

.  ^1
The  variation

oj  the  Compas.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

barre  going  in  two  fadome  and  a  fourth  part  :  and  after
we  were  past  in  over  the  barre,  it  waxed  deeper,  for  we
had  5  fadoms,  4  and  a  half,  and  3  fadom  &c.  Our  barke
being  mored,  I  sent  some  of  our  men  to  shoare  to  pro-
vide wood,  where  they  had  plenty  of  drift  wood,  but  none
growing  :  and  in  this  place  we  found  plenty  of  young
foule,  as  Guiles,  Seapies,  and  others,  whereof  the  Russes
would  eate  none,  whereof  we  were  nothing  sory,  for  there
came  the  more  to  our  part.

Sunday  our  men  cut  wood  on  shoare,  and  brought  it
aboord,  and  wee  balasted  our  shippe  with  stones.

This  morning  Gabriel  saw  a  smoke  on  ye  way,  who
rowed  unto  it  with  his  skiffe,  which  smoke  was  two
leagues  from  the  place  where  we  road  :  and  at  a  North-
west sunne  he  came  aboord  again,  and  brought  with  him
a  Samoed,  which  was  but  a  young  man  :  his  apparell
was  then  strange  unto  us,  and  he  presented  me  with  three
young  wild  geese,  and  one  young  barnacle.

Munday  I  sent  a  man  to  the  maine  in  Gabriels  boat,
and  he  brought  us  aboord  8  barricoes  of  fresh  water  :
the  latitude  of  the  said  Morgiovets  is  sixtie  eight  degrees
and  a  terce.  It  floweth  there  at  a  Southsouthwest  moone
full  sea,  and  hyeth  two  fadome  and  a  halfe  water.

At  a  Westnorthwest  sunne  we  departed  from  this
place,  and  went  East  25  leagues,  and  then  saw  an
Island  North  and  by  West  of  us  eight  leagues,  which
Island  is  called  Dolgoieve  :  and  from  the  Eastermost
part  of  this  Island,  there  lyeth  a  sand  East  and  by
South  7  leagues  long.

Wednesday  at  a  North  and  by  East  sunne  Swetinoz
was  South  of  us  5  leagues.  This  day  at  afternoone
we  went  in  over  the  dangerous  barre  of  Pechora,  and
had  upon  the  barre  but  one  fadome  water.

Thursday  we  road  still.

Friday  I  went  on  shoare  and  observed  the  variation
of  the  Compasse,  which  was  three  degrees  and  a  halfe
from  the  North  to  the  West  :  the  latitude  this  day  was
sixtie  nine  degrees ten minutes.

334

STEPHEN  BURROUGH  ad.

1556.

From  two  or  three  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of
Swetinoz,  untill  the  entering  of  the  river  Pechora,  it  is
all  sandy  hilles,  and  towards  Pechora  the  sandie  hilles
are  very  low.

It  higheth  on  the  barre  of  Pechora  foure  foote  water,
&  it  floweth  there  at  a  Southwest  moone  a  full  sea.

Munday  at  a  North  &  by  East  sunne,  we  weyed,  and  20
came  out  over  the  sayd  dangerous  barre,  where  wee  had
but  five  foote  water,  insomuch  that  wee  found  a  foote
lesse  water  comming  out  then  wee  did  going  in.  I
thinke  the  reason  was,  because  when  we  went  in  the
winde  was  off  the  sea,  which  caused  the  sands  to  breake
on  either  side  of  us,  and  wee  kept  in  the  smoothest  be-
tweene  the  breaches,  which  we  durst  not  have  done,
except  we  had  seene  the  Russes  to  have  gone  in  before
us  :  and  at  our  comming  out  the  winde  was  off  the
shoare,  and  fayre  weather,  and  then  the  sands  did  not
appeare  with  breaches  as  at  our  going  in  :  we  thanke
God  that  our  ship  did  draw  so  little  water.

When  we  were  a  seaboord  the  barre  the  wind  scanted
upon  us,  and  was  at  Eastsoutheast,  insomuch  that  we
stopped  the  ebbes,  and  plyed  all  the  floods  to  the
windewards,  and  made  our  way  Eastnortheast.

Tuesday  at  a  Northwest  sunne  we  thought  that  we  had 21
seen  land  at  East,  or  East &  by  North of  us  : which
afterwards  prooved  to  be  a  monstrous  heape  of  ice.

Within  a  little  more  then  halfe  an  houre  after,  we  first  Ice.
saw  this  ice,  we  were  inclosed  within  it  before  we  were
aware  of  it,  which  was  a  fearefull  sight  to  see  :  for,  for
the  space  of  sixe  houres,  it  was  as  much  as  we  could  doe
to  keepe  our  shippe  aloofe  from  one  heape  of  ice,  and  beare
roomer  from  another,  with  as  much  wind  as  we  might
beare  a  coarse.  And  when  we  had  past  from  the  danger
of  this  ice,  we  lay  to  the  Eastwards  close  by  the  wind.

The  next  day  we  were  againe  troubled  with  the  ice. 22

Thursday  being calme,  we plyed to the windwards, 23
the  winde  being Northerly. We  had the  latitude  this  Thelat.']ode-
day  at  noone  in 70  degrees 1 1 minutes.  ^'^^^^  ^  ^  *""•

335

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

[I.  280.]  We  had  not  runne  past two houres Northwest, the

wind  being  at  Northnortheast  and  Northeast  and  by
North  a  good  gale,  but  we  met  againe  with  another  heape
of  ice  :  we  wethered  the  head  of  it,  and  lay  a  time  to  the
seawards,  and  made  way  West  6  leagues.

24  Friday  at  a  Southeast  sunne  we  cast  about  to  the
Eastwards,  the  wind  being  at  Northnortheast  :  the
latitude  this  day  at noone  was  70  degrees 15  minutes.

25  On  S.  James  his  day  bolting  to  the  windewardes,  we
had  the  latitude  at  noone  in  seventy  degrees  twentie
minutes.  The  same  day  at  a  Southwest  sunne,  there  was
a  monstrous  Whale  aboord  of  us,  so  neere  to  our  side
that  we  might  have  thrust  a  sworde  or  any  other
weapon  in  him,  which  we  durst  not  doe  for  feare  hee
should  have  overthrowen  our  shippe  :  and  then  I  called
my  company  together,  and  all  of  us  shouted,  &  with
the  crie  that  we  made  he  departed  from  us  :  there  was
as  much  above  water  of  his  backe  as  the  bredth  of
our  pinnesse,  and  at  his  falling  downe,  he  made  such
a  terrible  noyse  in  the  water,  that  a  man  would  greatly
have  marvelled,  except  hee  had  knowen  the  cause  of
it  :  but  God  be  thanked,  we  were  quietly  delivered  of
him.  And  a  little  after  we  spied  certaine  Islands,  with
which  we  bare,  and  found  good  harbor  in  15  or  18
fadome,  and  black  oze  :  we  came  to  an  anker  at  a  North-

5.  James  east sunne, & named the Island S. James his Island,

Island.  where  we  found  fresh  water.

26  Sunday,  much  wind  blowing  we  rode  still.

27  Munday  I  went  on  shoare  and  tooke  the  latitude,
The  variation  ^\(^^  ^^s  yo  degrees  42  minutes  :  the  variation  of  the
7  decrees  and  co^npasse  was  7  degrees  and  a  halfe  from  the  North  to  the
a  halfe.  West.

28  Tuesday  we  plyed  to  the  Westwards  alongst  the  shoare,
The  relation  ^]^g  wind  being  at  Northwest,  and  as  I  was  about  to  come
°J °^  ^  ■  to anker, we saw a sayle comming about the point,

wherunder  we  thought  to  have  ankered.  Then  I  sent  a
skiffe  aboord  of  him,  and  at  their  comming  aboord,  they
tooke  acquaintance  of  them,  and  the  chiefe  man  said  hee

336

STEPHEN  BURROUGH  ad.

1556.

had  bene  in  our  company  in the river Cola,  and also

declared unto them that  we  were past the  way  which  The  way  to

should  bring  us  to  the  Ob. This  land,  sayd  he,  is  called  ^^^  ^'^^^^

Nova  Zembla,  that  is  to  say,  the  New  land  :  and  then  ^

he came aboord himselfe with his skiffe, and at his  ^  mighty  hill

comming  aboord  he  told  mee  the  like,  and  sayd  further,  !^ fj'^

that  in  this  Nova  Zembla  is  the  highest  mountaine  in  the

worlde,  as  he  thought,  &  that  Camen  Boldshay,  which  is

on  the  maine  of  Pechora,  is  not  to  be  compared  to  this

mountaine,  but  I saw  it  not  :  he  made  me  also  certaine

demonstrations  of  the  way  to the Ob, and seemed to

make  haste  on  his  owne  way,  being  very  lothe  to  tarie,

because  the  yeere  was  farre  past,  and  his  neighbour  had

fet  Pechora,  and  not  he  :  so  I  gave  him  a  Steele  glasse,

two  pewter  spoones,  and  a  paire  of  velvet  sheathed  knives  :

and  then  he  seemed  somewhat  the  more  willing  to  tary,

and  shewed  me  as  much  as  he  knew  for  our  purpose  :  he

also  gave  me  1 7  wilde  geese,  and  shewed  me  that  foure  of

their  lodias  were  driven  perforce  from  Caninoze  to  this

Nova  Zembla. This  mans  name  was  Loshak.  Loshak.

Wednesday,  as  we  plied  to  the Eastwards,  we  espied 29
another  saile,  which  was  one  of  this Loshaks  company,
and  we  bare  roome,  and  spake  with  him,  who  in  like  sort
tolde  us  of  the  Ob,  as  the  other  had  done.

Thursday,  we  plied  to  the  Eastwards,  the  winde  being 30
at  Eastnortheast.

Friday,  the  gale  of  winde  began  to  increase,  and  came 3 1
Westerly  withall,  so  that  by  a  Northwest  sunne  we  were
at  an  anker  among  the  Islands  of  Vaigats,  where  we  saw  The  Islands
two  small  lodias,  the  one  of  them  came  aboord  of  us,  and  of^^g^'^^^-
presented  me  with  a  great  loafe  of  bread : and  they  told
me  that  they  were  all  of  Colmogro,  except  one  man  that
dwelt  at  Pechora,  who  seemed  to  be  the  chiefest  among
them  in  killing  of  the  Morse.

There  were  some  of  their  company  on  shoare,  which
did  chase  a  white  beare  over  the  high  clifs  into  the  water,
which  beare  the  lodia  that  was  aboord  of  us  killed  in  our
sight.

II  337  Y

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

This  day  there  was  a  great  gale  of  wind  at  North,  and
we  saw  so  much  ice  driving  a  seaboord,  that  it  was  then
no  going  to  sea.

August.

1  OAturday  I  went  ashore,  and  there  I  saw  three  morses
O  that  they  had  killed  :  they  held  one  tooth  of  a  Morse,
which  was  not  great,  at  a  roble,  and  one  white  beare  skin
at  three  robles  &  two  robles :  they  further  tolde  me,  that

Samoeds.  there  were  people  called  Samoeds  on  the  great  Island,  and

that  they  would  not  abide  them  nor  us,  who  have  no
houses,  but  onely  coverings  made  of  Deersskins,  set  over
them  with  stakes  :  they  are  men  expert  in  shooting,  and
have  great  plenty  of  Deere.

This  night  there  fell  a  cruell  storme,  the  wind  being  at
West.

2  Sunday  we  had  very  much  winde,  with  plenty  of  snow, .
and  we  rode  with  two  ankers  a  head.

3  Munday  we  weyed  and  went  roome  with  another
Island,  which  was  five  leagues  Eastnortheast  from  us  :  and
there  I  met  againe  with  Loshak,  and  went  on  shore  with

[1.  281.]  him,  and  hee  brought  me  to  a  heap  of  the  Samoeds  idols.
The  maners  of  which  were  in  number  above  300,  the  worst  and  the  most
the  hamoeds.  i^martificiall  worke  that  ever  I  saw :  the  eyes  and  mouthes
of  sundrie  of  them  were  bloodie,  they  had  the  shape  of
men,  women  and  children,  very  grosly  wrought,  &  that
which  they  had  made  for  other  parts,  was  also  sprinckled
with  blood.  Some  of  their  idols  were  an  olde  sticke  with
two  or  three  notches,  made  with  a  knife  in  it.  I  saw
much  of  the  footing  of  the  sayd  Samoeds,  and  of  the
sleds  that  they  ride  in.  There  was  one  of  their  sleds
broken,  and  lay  by  the  heape  of  idols,  &  there  I  saw  a
deers  skinne  which  the  foules  had  spoyled :  and  before
certaine  of  their  idols  blocks  were  made  as  high  as  their
mouthes,  being  all  bloody,  I  thought  that  to  be  the  table
wheron  they  offered  their  sacrifice :  I  saw  also  the  instru-j
ments,  whereupon  they  had  roasted  flesh,  and  as  farre  as  I
could  perceive,  they  make  their  fire  directly  under  the  spit.

338

STEPHEN  BURROUGH  a.d.

1556.

Loshak being there present tolde me that these  The  Samoeds
Samoeds  were  not  so  hurtful  as  they  of  Ob  are,  and  that  °f^^^  ^J^  ^^^y

.11  1  • J J T  u ^  1 hurtfull  and

they  have  no houses,  as  indeede 1  saw  none,  but  onely 1 j  ^„^^i,
'  1  • 1 1  1  -1 shrewd  people.

tents  made  or  Deers  skms,  which  they  underproppe  with

stakes  and  poles  : their  boates  are  made  of  Deers  skins,

and  when  they  come  on  shoare  they  cary  their  boates  with

them  upon  their  backes : for  their  cariages  they  have  no

other beastes to serve  them,  but Deere  only. As for

bread  and  corne  they  have  none,  except  the  Russes  bring

it  to  them  : their  knowledge  is  very  base,  for  they  know

no  letter.

Tuesday  we  turned  for  the  harborough  where  Lo-  4
shaks  barke  lay,  whereas  before  we  road  under  an  Island.
And  there  he  came  aboord  of  us  and  said  unto  me :  if
God  sende  winde  and  weather  to  serve,  I  will  goe  to  the
Ob  with  you,  because  the  Morses  were  scant  at  these
Islands  of  Vaigats,  but  if  he  could  not  get  to  the  river
of  Ob,  then  he  sayd  hee  would  goe  to  the  river  of
Naramzay,  where  the  people  were  not  altogether  so  savage  Naramzay.
as  the  Samoyds  of  the  Ob  are :  hee  shewed  me  that  they
will  shoot  at  all  men  to  the  uttermost  of  their  power,  that
cannot  speake  their  speech.

Wednesday  we saw  a terrible heape of  ice approch 5
neere  unto  us,  and  therefore  wee  thought  good  with  al
speed  possible  to  depart  from  thence,  and  so  I  returned  to
the  Westwards  againe,  to  the  Island  where  we  were  the
31.  of  July.

Thursday I  went a shoare, and tooke the  latitude, 6
which  was  70  degrees  25  minutes: and  the  variation  of  The  latitude.
the compasse  was 8 degrees from the North to the r^^^  comtas
West.

Loshak  and  the  two  small  Lodias  of  Pechora  departed
from  this  Island,  while  I  was  on  shoare  taking  the
latitude,  and  went  to  the  Southwards :  I  marvailed  why
he  departed  so  suddenly,  and  went  over  the  shoales
amongst  the  Islands  where  it  was  impossible  for  us  to
follow  them.  But  after  I  perceived  them  to  be  weather-
wise.

339

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

7  Friday  we  road  still,  the  winde  being  at  Northnorth-
east,  with  a  cruell  storme.  The  ice  came  in  so  abundantly
about  us  at  both  ends  of  the  Island  that  we  road  under,
that  it  was  a  fearefull  sight  to  behold :  the  storme  con-
tinued with  snow,  raine,  and  hayle  plenty.

8  Saturday  we  road  still  also,  the  storme  being  somewhat
abated,  but  it  was  altogether  misty,  that  we  were  not  able
to  see  a  cables  length  about  us,  the  winde  being  at
Northeast  and  by  East.

9  Sunday  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we
departed  from  this  Island,  the  winde  being  at  Southeast
and  as  we  were  cleere  a  sea  boord  the  small  Islandes  andl)
shoales,  it  came  so  thick  with  mistes,  that  we  could  not
see  a  base  shotte  from  us.  Then  we  tooke  in  all  our
sailes  to  make  little  way.

At  a  Southeast  sunne  it  waxed  cleere,  and  then  we  set
our  sayles,  and  lay  close  by  the  wind  to  the  Southwards
alongst  the  Islands  of  Vaigats.  At  a  west  sunne  we  tooke
in  our  sayle  againe  because  of  the  great  mist  and  raine,
Wee  sounded  at  this  place,  and  had  five  and  twenty
fadomes  water,  and  soft  blacke  oze,  being  three  league
from  the  shoare,  the  winde  being  at  South  and  by  East.
but  still  m.isty.

10  Munday  at  an  East  sunne  we  sounded,  and  had  4c
fadomes,  and  oze,  still  misty :  at  noone  wee  sounded
againe,  and  had  2^  fadome,  still  misty.

11  Tuesday  at an Eastnortheast sunne  we let fall our
anker  in  three  and twenty  fadome,  the mist still con
tinuing.

12  Wednesday  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  the
mist  brake  up,  the  wind  being  at  Northeast  &  by  East,
and  then  we  saw  part  of  the  Islands  of  Vaigats,  which  we
bare  withall,  and  went  Eastsoutheast  close  by  the  winde  :
at  a  West  sunne  we  were  at  an  anker  under  the  South

Thy  land west  part  of  the  said  Vaigats,  and  then  I  sent  our  skiffe  tc
upon  Faigatz.  shoare  with  three  men  in  her,  to  see  if  they  might  speake

with  any  of  the  Samoeds,  but  could  not :  all  that  day  was

rainie,  but  not  windie.

340

k

STEPHEN  BURROUGH  a.d.

1556.

Thursday  the  wind  came  Westerly,  so  that  we  were  13
Faine  to  seeke  us  another  place  to  ride  in,  because  the
ivind  came  a  seaboord  land,  and  although  it  were  misty,
^et  wee  followed  the  shoare  by  our  lead :  and  as  we
brought  land  in  the  winde  of  us,  we  let  fall  our  anker.
Alt  a  West  sunne  the  mist  brake  up,  so  that  we  might  see  [I.  282.]
ibout  us,  and  then  we  might  perceive  that  we  were  entred
nto  a  sound.

This  afternoone  we  tooke  in  two  or  three  skifFes  lading  The  mcer-
3f  stones to balast our  shippe withall. It hyeth here  teintie  of
x)ure  foot  water,  and floweth  by  fits,  uncertaine to  be  ^""^^.^  ^

11  ^  •'  ^  fiowins,.

ludged.

Friday  we  road  still  in  the  sound,  the  wind  at  South- H
svest,  with  very  much  raine,  and  at  the  end  of  the  raine  it
ivaxed  againe  mistie.

Saturday  there  was much  winde at  West,  and  much 15
raine,  and  then  againe  mistie.

Sunday  was  very  mistie,  and  much  winde.  16

Munday  very  mistie,  the  winde  at  Westnorthwest.  17

Tuesday  was  also mistie,  except  at  noone : then  the 18
sunne  brake out  through  the  mist,  so  that  we  had  the
latitude  in  70  degrees 10  minutes: the  afternoone  was
misty  againe,  the  wind  being  at  Westnorthwest.

Wednesday  at  three  of  the  clocke  afternoone  the  mist  19
Drake  up,  &  the  wind  came  at  Eastnortheast,  and  then
we  weyed,  and  went  South  &  by  East,  until  seven  of  the
:locke,  eight  leagues,  thinking  to  have  had  sight  of  the
sandie  hilles  that  are  to  the  Eastwards  of  the  river
Pechora.  At  a  Northwest  sunne  we  took  in  our  maine
saile,  because  the  wind  increased,  &  went  with  a  foresaile
Westnorthwest,  the  wind  being  at  Eastnortheast :  at  night
:here  grewe  so  terrible  a  storme,  that  we  saw  not  the  like,
dthough  we  had  indured  many  stormes  since  we  came
Dut  of  England.  It  was  wonderfuU  that  our  barke  was
ible  to  brooke  such  monstrous  &  terrible  seas,  without
;he  great  helpe  of  God,  who  never  fayleth  them  at  neede,
hat  put  their  sure  trust  in  him.

Thursday  at  a Southsouthwest sunne, thanks be  to 20

341

A.D.
1556.

The^  were
within  1 5
leases  of
Pechora.

They  returne
the  zz  of

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

God,  the  storme  was  at  the  highest,  &  then  the  winde
began  to  slake,  and  came  Northerly  withall,  &  then  I
reckoned  the  Westermost  point  of  the  river  Pechora  to
be  South  of  us  15  leagues.  At  a  Westsouthwest  sunne
we  set  our  maine  sayle,  and  lay  close  by  the  winde,  the
winde  being  at  Northwest  and  by  North,  making  but  little
way,  because  the  billow  went  so  high  :  at  midnight  wee
cast  about,  and  the  shippe  caped  Northnortheast,  making
little way.

Friday  at  noone  we  had  the  latitude  in  70  degrees
8  minutes,  and  we  sounded,  and  had  29  fadomes  sand,
and  in  maner  stremy  ground.  At  a  West  sunne  we  cast
about  to  the  Westwards,  and  a  little  after  the  wind  came
up  at  West.

Saturday  was  calme  :  the  latitude  this  day  at  noone  was
70  degrees  and  a  terce,  we  sounded  heere,  and  had  nine
and  forty  fadomes  and  oze,  which  oze  signified  that  we
drew  towards  Nova  Zembla.

And  thus  we  being  out  of  al  hope  to  discover  any  more
to  the  Eastward  this  yeere,  wee  thought  it  best  to  returne,
and  that  for  three  causes.

The  first,  the  continuall  Northeast  and  Northerly
winds,  which  have  more  power  after  a  man  is  past  to  the
Eastwards  of  Caninoze,  then  in  any  place  that  I  doe  know
in  these  Northerly  regions.

Second,  because  of  great  and  terrible  abundance  of  ice
which  we  saw  with  our  eies,  and  we  doubt  greater  store
abideth  in  those  parts  :  I  adventured  already  somewhat
too  farre  in  it,  but  I  thanke  God  for  my  safe  deliverance
from  it.

Third,  because  the  nights  waxed  darke,  and  the  winter
began  to  draw  on  with  his  stormes  :  and  therefore  I
resolved  to  take  the  first  best  wind  that  God  should  send,
and  plie  towards  the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas,  and  to  see  if  we
might  do  any  good  there,  if  God  would  permitt  it.

This  present  Saturday  we  saw  very  much  ice,  and  were
within  two  or  three  leagues  of  it  :  it  shewed  unto  us  as
though  it  had  beene  a  firme  land  as  farre  as  we  might  see

342

STEPHEN  BURROUGH  a.d.

1556.

from  Northwest  off  us  to  the  Eastwards  :  and  this  after-

noone  the  Lord  sent  us  a  little  gale  of  wind  at  South,  so

that  we  bare  cleere  off  the  Westermost  part  of  it,  thanks

be to God. And then against night it  waxed calme

againe,  and  the  winde  was  at  Southwest  :  we  made  our

way  untill  Sunday  noone Northwest and  by  West,  and 24

then  we  had  the  latitude  in  70  degrees  and  a  halfe,  the

winde  at  Southwest  : there  was  a  billow,  so  that  we  could

not discerne to take the latitude exactly, but by a

reasonable  gesse.

Munday  there  was  a  pretie  gale  of  wind  at  South,  so  25
that  wee  went  West  and  by  South,  the  latitude  this  day
at  noone  was  70  degrees  10  minutes  :  wee  had  little  winde
all  day  :  at  a  Westnorthwest  sunne  we  sounded,  and  had
29  fadoms  blacke  sandie  oze,  &  then  we  were  Northeast
5  leagues  from  the  Northeast  part  of  the  Island  Colgoieve.

Tuesday  the  wind  all  Westerly  we  plyed  to  the  wind 26
wards.

Wednesday  the  wind  was  all  Westerly,  and  calme  :  wee 27
had  the  latitude  this  day  in 70  degrees 10  minutes,  we
being  within  three  leagues  of  the  North  part  of  the  Island
Colgoieve.

Thursday,  we  went  roome  about  the  Westermost  part 28
of  the  Island,  seeking  where  we  might  finde  a  place  to  [I-  283.]
ride  in  for  a  Northwest  wind,  but  could  find  none,  and
then  we  cast  about  againe  to  the  seawards,  and  the  winde
came  at  Westsouthwest,  and  this  morning  we  had  plenty
of  snow.

Friday,  the  winde  being  at  Southwest  and  by  West,  we 29
plied  to  the  windewards.

Saturday,  the  winde  being  at  South,  we  plyed  to  the
Westwards,  and  at  afternoone  the  mist  brake  up,  and  then
we  might  see  the  land  seven  or  eight  leagues  to  the
Eastwards  of  Caninoz  :  we  sounded  a  litle  before  and  had
2S-  fadoms  and  oze.  And  a  while  after  wee  sounded
againe,  and  had  19.  fadome  and  sand  :  then  we  were
within  three  leagues  and  a  halfe  of  the  shore,  and  towards
night there  came  downe  so  much  winde,  that  we  were

343

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

faine  to  bring  our  ship  a  trie,  and  laide  her  head  to  the
Westwards.

30  Sunday,  the  winde  became  more  calme,  and  then  it
waxed  verie  mystie  :  At  noone  wee  cast  about  to  the
Eastwards,  the  winde  beeing  at  South,  and  ranne  eight
houres  on  that  boorde,  and  then  we  cast  about  and  caped
West  southwest :  we  sounded  and  had  32.  fathomes,  and
tough  oaze  like  clay.

31  Munday,  we  doubled  about  Caninoze,  and  came  at  an
anker  there,  to  the  intent  that  we  might  kill  some  fish  if
God  would  permit  it,  and  there  we  gate  a  great  Nuse,
which  Nuses  were  there  so  plentie,  that  they  would
scarcely  suffer  any  other  fish  to  come  neere  the  hookes  :
the  said  Nuses  caried  away  sundrie  of  our  hookes  and
leads.

A  litle  after  at  a  West  Sunne,  the  winde  began  to  blow
stormie  at  West  southwest,  so  that  we  were  faine  to  wey
and  forsake  our  fishing  ground,  and  went  close  by  the
winde  Southwest,  and  Southwest  and  by  West,  making
our  way  South  southwest.

September.

I  '"T^Uesday  at  a  West  Sunne  we  sounded  and  had  20.
X  fathoms,  and  broken  Wilkeshels  :  I  reckoned
Canonize  to  be  24.  leagues  Northnortheast  from  us.
II  The  eleventh  day  we  arrived  at  Colmogro,  and  there
we  wintered,  expecting  the  approch  of  the  next  Sommer
to  proceede  farther  in  our  intended  discoverie  for  the
Ob  :  which  (by  reason  of  our  imploiments  to  Wardhouse
the  next  spring  for  the  search  of  some  English  ships)  was
not  accordingly  performed.

344

RICHARD JOHNSON

A.D.
1556.

Certaine  notes  unperfectly  written  by  Richard
Johnson  servant  to  Master  Richard  Chan-
celour,  which  was  in  the  discoverie  of
Vaigatz  and  Nova  Zembla,  with  Steven
Burrowe  in  the  Serchthrift  1556.  and  after-  1556
warde  among  the  Samoedes,  whose  devilish
rites  hee  describeth.

Irst,  after  we  departed  out  of  England  we  Norway
fell  with  Norway,  and  on  that  coste  lieth
Northbern  or  Northbergen,  and  this
people  are  under  the  King  of  Denmarke  :
But  they  differ  in  their  speech  from  the
Danes,  for  they  speake  Norsh.  And
North  of  Northbern  lie  the  Isles  of  Roste
and  Lofoot,  and  these  Islands  pertaine  unto  Finmarke,
and  they  keepe  the  lawes  and  speake  the  language  of  the
Islanders.  And  at  the  Eastermost  part  of  that  land  is  a
castle  which  is  called  the  Ward  house,  and  the  King  of
Denmarke  doeth  fortifie  it  with  men  of  warre  :  and  the
Russes  may  not  goe  to  the  Westward  of  that  castle.  And
East  Southeast  from  that  castle  is  a  lande  called  Lappia  :
in  which  lande  be  two  maner  of  people,  that  is  to  say,  the
Lappians,  and  the  Scrickfinnes,  which  Scrickfinnes  are  a
wilde  people  which  neither  know  God,  nor  yet  good
order  :  and  these  people  live  in  tents  made  of  Deares
skinnes  :  and  they  have  no  certaine  habitations,  but
continue  in  heards  and  companies  by  one  hundred  and
two  hundreds.  And  they  are  a  people  of  small  stature,
and  are  clothed  in  Deares  skinnes,  and  drinke  nothing
but  water,  and  eate  no  bread  but  flesh  all  raw.  And  the  The  Lappians.
Lappians  bee  a  people  adjoyning  to  them  &  be  much  like
to  them  in  al  conditions  ;  but  the  Emperour  of  Russia
hath  of  late  overcome  manie  of  them,  and  they  are  in
subjection  to  him.  And  this  people  will  say  that  they
beleeve  in  the  Russes  God.  And  they  live  in  tents  as  the
other doe. And  Southeast  and  by  South from  Lappia

345

Roste  y

Lofoot.

Finmarke.

Wardhouse.

Lappia.

The  Scric-
finnes.

A.D.

1556.

Core  Ha.

The  Russes.

[L  284.]

Tartaria.

Lampasamart
orfaire  of  the
Russes,
Tartars  and
Samoeds.
The  Samoeds
count7-ey .

Or,  Pechora,
Faigatz.

Nova  Zembla.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lyeth  a  province  called  Corelia,  and  these  people  are
called  Kerilli.  And  South  southeast  from  Corelia  lyeth  a
countrey  called  Novogardia.  And  these  three  nations  are
under  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  the  Russes  keepe  the
Lawe  of  the  Greekes  in  their  Churches,  and  write  some-
what like  as  the  Greekes  write,  and  they  speake  their
owne  language,  and  they  abhorre  the  Latine  tongue,
neither  have  they  to  doe  with  the  Pope  of  Rome,  and
they  holde  it  not  good  to  worshippe  any  carved  Image,
yet  they  will  worshippe  paynted  Images  on  tables  or
boordes.  And  in  Russia  their  Churches,  steeples,  and
houses  are  all  of  wood  :  and  their  shippes  that  they  have
are  sowed  with  withes  and  have  no  nayles.  The  Kerilles,
Russians  and  Moscovians  bee  much  alike  in  all  con-
ditions. And  South  from  the  Moscovians  lye  the
Tartarians,  which  bee  Mahumetans,  and  live  in  tentes
and  wagons,  and  keepe  in  heardes  and  companies  :  and
they  holde  it  not  good  to  abide  long  in  one  place,  for
they  will  say,  when  they  will  curse  any  of  their  children-
I  woulde  thou  mightest  tary  so  long  in  a  place  that
thou  mightest  smell  thine  owne  dung,  as  the  Christians
doe  :  and  this  is  the  greatest  curse  that  they  have.
And  East  Northeast  of  Russia  lieth  Lampas,  which  is
a  place  where  the  Russes,  Tartars  and  Samoeds  meete
twise  a  yeere,  and  make  the  faire  to  barter  wares  for
wares.  And  Northeast  from  Lampas  lieth  the  countrey
of  the  Samoeds,  which  be  about  the  river  of  Pechere,
and  these  Samoeds  bee  in  subjection  to  the  Emperour
of  Russia,  and  they  lie  in  tentes  made  of  Deere  skinnes,
and  they  use  much  witchcraft,  and  shoot  well  in  bowes.
And  Northeast  from  the  river  Pechere  lieth  -Vaygatz,
and  there  are  the  wilde  Samoeds  which  will  not  suffer
the  Russes  to  land  out  of  the  Sea,  but  they  will  kill
them  and  eate  them,  as  wee  are  tolde  by  the  Russes  :
and  they  live  in  heards,  and  have  all  their  carriages
with  deere,  for  they  have  no  horses.  Beyond  Vaygatz
lyeth  a  lande  called  Nova  Zembla,  which  is  a  great
lande, but wee sawe no people, and there wee had

346

RICHARD JOHNSON  a.d.

1556.

Foule inough, and there wee sawe white Foxes and  Store  of
white  Beares. And  the  sayde  Samoeds  which  are  about  ^^^!^  Foxes.
the bankes  of  Pechere,  which  are  in  subjection  to  the
Emperour  of  Russia,  when  they  will  remove  from  one
place  to  another,  then  they  will  make  sacrifices  in  manner
following. Everie kinred  doeth sacrifice  in their  owne  Themanerof
tent, and hee that is most auncient is their Priest,  the  Samoeds
And first the Priest doeth beginne to playe upon a  ^^/"^'^f'  .

.  .  about  tfi6  TtvBr

thing like to  a  great  sieve,  with a  skinne on the one  of  Pechere

ende  like a drumme  : and  the sticke that  he playeth

with is  about a spanne  long, and one ende is round

like  a  ball,  covered  with  the  skinne  of  an  Harte. Also

the  Priest  hath  upon  his  head  a  thing  of  white  like a

garlande,  and  his  face  is  covered  with  a  piece  of  a  shirt

of  maile,  with  manie small  ribbes, and  teeth  of  fishes,

and  wilde beastes hanging on the same maile. Then

hee singeth as  wee use heere in Englande to hallow,

whope, or showte at houndes, and the rest of the

company  answere  him  with  this  Owtis,  Igha,  Igha,  Igha,

and then the Priest replieth againe with his voyces.

And they answere him with the selfesame  wordes so

manie  times,  that  in  the  ende  he  becommeth as  it  were

madde, and falling downe as hee were dead, having

nothing on him but a shirt, lying upon his backe I

might  perceive  him  to  breathe. I  asked  them  why  hee

lay  so,  and  they  answered  mee,  Nowe  doeth  our  God  tell

him what wee shall doe, and whither  wee shall goe.

And  when  he had lyen still a litle  while, they cried

thus three times  together, Oghao, Oghao, Oghao, and

as  they  use these three  calles,  hee  riseth  with  his  head

and lieth downe againe, and then hee rose up and

sang  with  like  voyces  as  hee  did  before :  and  his  audience

answered  him,  Igha,  Igha,  Igha. Then  hee  commaunded

them  to  kill  five  Olens  or  great  Deere,  and  continued

singing still  both hee and they as  before. Then hee

tooke  a  sworde  of  a  cubite  and  a spanne  long, (I did

mete  it  my  selfe) and put it into his bellie halfeway

and sometime lesse, but  no  wounde  was  to  bee  seene,

347

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

(they  continuing  in  their  sweete  song  still)  Then  he
put  the  sworde  into  the  fire  till  it  was  warme,  and  so
thrust  it  into  the  slitte  of  his  shirte  and  thrust  it
through  his  bodie,  as  I  thought,  in  at  his  navill  and
out  at  his  fundament  :  the  poynt  beeing  out  of  his
shirt  behinde,  I  layde  my  finger  upon  it,  then  hee
pulled  out  the  sworde  and  sate  downe.  This  beeing
done,  they  set  a  kettle  of  water  over  the  fire  to  heate,
and  when  the  water  doeth  seethe,  the  Priest  beginneth
to  sing  againe  they  answering  him,  for  so  long  as  the
water  was  in  heating,  they  sate  and  sang  not.  Then
they  made  a  thing  being  foure  square,  and  in  height
and  squarenesse  of  a  chaire,  and  covered  with  a  gown
very  close  the  forepart  therof,  for  the  hinder  part  stood
to  the  tents  side.  Their  tents  are  rounde  and  are
called  Chome  in  their  language.  The  water  still  seething
on  the  fire,  and  this  square  seate  being  ready,  the
Priest  put  off  his  shirt,  and  the  thing  like  a  garland
which  was  on  his  head,  with  those  things  which  covered
his  face,  &  he  had  on  yet  all  this  while  a  paire  of
hosen  of  deeres  skins  with  ye  haire  on,  which  came
up  to  his  buttocks.  So  he  went  into  the  square  seat,
and  sate  down  like  a  tailour  and  sang  with  a  strong
voyce  or  halowing.  Then  they  tooke  a  small  line
made  of  deeres  skinnes  of  foure  fathoms  long,  and  with
a  smal  knotte  the  Priest  made  it  fast  about  his  necke,
and  under  his  left  arme,  and  gave  it  unto  two  men
standing  on  both  sides  of  him,  which  held  the  ends
together.  Then  the  kettle  of  hote  water  was  set  before
him  in  the  square  seat,  al  this  time  the  square  seat  was
not  covered,  and  then  it  was  covered  w'  a  gown  of
broad  cloth  without  lining,  such  as  the  Russes  do  weare.
Then  the  2.  men  which  did  hold  ye  ends  of  the  line
stil  standing  there,  began  to  draw,  &  drew  til  they
had  drawn  the  ends  of  the  line  stiffe  and  together,
and  then  I  hearde  a  thing  fall  into  the  kettle  of  water
which  was  before  him  in  the  tent.  Thereupon  I  asked
them that sate by me  what it  was that fell into the

348

RICHARD JOHNSON  A.a

1556.

water  that  stoode  before  him. And  they  answered  me,

that  it  was  his  head,  his  shoulder  and  left  arme,  which

the  line had  cut off,  I meane the knot  which I sawe  [I.  285.]

afterwarde  drawen  hard  together. Then  I  rose  up  and

would have looked whether it were so or not, but

they  laid hold on me, and said, that if  they should

see him with their bodily  eyes, they shoulde  live no

longer. And the most part of  them can speake the

Russe tongue  to  bee understood  : and they  tooke  me

to be a  Russian. Then  they  beganne  to hallow  with

these wordes, Oghaoo, Oghaoo, Oghaoo, many times

together. And  as  they  were  thus  singing  &  out  calling,

I sawe a thing like a finger of a man two times

together thrust through the gowne from the Priest.

I  asked  them  that  sate  next  to  me  what it  was  that  I

sawe,  and they saide, not  his finger  ; for  he was yet

dead :  and  that  which  I  saw  appeare  through  the  gowne

was  a  beast,  but  what  beast  they  knew  not  nor  would

not tell. And I looked upon the gowne, and there

was no hole to bee scene  : and then at the last the

Priest  lifted up  his head  with his shoulder and  arme,

and  all his bodie, and  came forth to the fire. Thus

farre  of  their  service  which  I  sawe  during  the  space  of

certaine  houres  :  but  how  they  doe  worship  their  Moles

that I saw not  : for  they  put up their stuiFe for to

remove from  that  place  where they  lay. And  I  went

to him that served the Priest, and asked him what

their God saide to him when  he  lay as dead. Hee

answered, that his owne people doeth not know  :

neither  is  it  for  them  to  know : for  they  must  doe  as

he  commanded. This I saw the fift day of  Januarie

in  the  yere  of  our  Lord  1556.  after  the  English  account.

[A

349

A.D.
1556.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  discourse  of  the  honourable  receiving  into
England  of  the  first  Ambassador  from  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  in  the  yeere  of  Christ
1556.  and  in  the  third  yeere  of  the  raigne
of  Queene  Marie,  serving  for  the  third  voyage
to  Moscovie.  Registred  by  Master  John
Incent  Protonotarie.

T  is  here  recorded  by  writing  and  autenti-
call  testimonie,  partly  for  memorie  of
things  done,  and  partly  for  the  veritie
to  be  knowen  to  posteritie  in  time  to
come,  that  whereas  the  most  high  and
mightie  Ivan  Vasilivich  Emperour  of  all
Russia,  great  Duke  of  Volodemer,  Mos-
covia  and  Novogrode,  Emperor  of  Cassan,  and  of
Astrachan,  Lord  of  Pleskie,  and  great  Duke  of  Smo-
lenskie,  Tuerskie,  Yowgoriskie,  Permskie,  Viatskie,
Bolgarskie  and  Sibierskie,  Emperour  and  great  Duke
of  many  others,  as  Novogrode  in  the  nether  countries,
Chernigoskie,  Rezanskie,  Polodskie,  Rezewskie,  Bielskie,
Rostoskie,  Yeraslaveskie,  Bealozarskie,  Oudarskie,  Ob-
dorskie,  Condenskie,  and  manie  other  countries,  and
lord  over  all  those  partes,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
God,  folowing  the  account  of  ye  Latin  church,  1556.
sent  by  the  sea  from  the  port  of  S.  Nicholas  in  Russia,
his  right  honorable  ambassador  sirnamed  Osep  Napea,
his  high  officer  in  the  towne  and  countrey  of  Vologda,
to  the  most  famous  and  excellent  princes,  Philip  and
Mary  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  and  Queene  of  England,
Spaine,  France  and  Ireland,  defenders  of  the  faith.  Arch-
dukes of  Austria,  dukes  of  Burgundie,  Millaine,  &
Brabant,  counties  of  Haspurge,  Flanders  and  TyroU,
his  ambassador  &  Orator  with  certaine  letters  tenderly
conceived,  together  with  certain  presents  and  gifts  men-
tioned in  the  foot  of  this  memorial,  as  a  manifest
argument  and  token of  a  mutual amity  and  friendship

350

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  ad.

1556.
to  be  made  and  continued  betweene  their  majesties  &
subjects  respectively,  for  the  commoditie  and  benefit  of
both  the  realmes  and  people  :  which  Orator  was  the
20.  day  of  July  imbarked  and  shipped  in,  and  upon  a
good  English  ship  named  the  Edward  Bonaventure,
belonging  to  the  Governor,  Consuls  and  company  of
English  marchants,  Richard  Chancelor  being  grand  Pilot,
and  John  Buckland  master  of  the  said  ship.  In  which
was  laden  at  the  adventure  of  the  foresaid  Ambas-
sador, and  marchants  at  severall  accounts,  goods  &
merchandizes,  viz.  in  waxe,  trane  oyle,  tallow,  furres,
felts,  yarne  and  such  like,  to  the  summe  of  2oooo.li.
sterling,  together  with  16.  Russies  attendant  upon  the
person  of  the  said  Ambassador.  Over  and  above  ten  Toure  ships.
other  Russies  shipped  within  the  said  Bay  of  S.  Nicholas,
in  one  other  good  ship  to  the  said  company  also  belonging
called  the  Bona  Speranza,  with  goods  of  the  said  Orators
&  marchants  to  the  value  of  6000.  lib.  sterling,  as  by  the
invoises  and  letters  of  lading  of  the  said  several  ships
(wherunto  relation  is  to  be  had)  particularly  appeareth.
Which  good  ships  comming  in  good  order  into  the  seas,
&  traversing  the  same  in  their  journey  towards  the  coast
of  England,  were  by  contrary  windes  and  extreme  tem-
pests of  weather  severed  the  one  from  the  other,  that  is
to  say,  the  saide  Bona  Speranza  with  two  other  English
ships  also  appertaining  to  the  saide  company,  the  one
sirnamed  the  Philip  and  Mary,  the  other  the  Confidentia,
were  driven  on  the  coast  of  Norway,  into  Drenton  water,
where  the  saide  Confidentia  was  scene  to  perish  on  a
Rocke,  and  the  other,  videlicet,  the  Bona  Speranza,  with
her  whole  company,  being  to  the  number  of  foure  and
twentie  persons  seemed  to  winter  there,  whereof  no  cer-
taintie  at  this  present  day  is  knowen.  The  third,  vide-
licet, the  Philip  and  Mary  arrived  in  the  Thames  nigh
London  the  eighteenth  day  of  April,  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  one  thousand  five  hundred  fiftie  and  seven.  The  [I.  286.]
Edward  Bonaventure  traversing  the  seas  foure  moneths.  The  Edward
finally  the  tenth  day  of  November  of  the  aforesaide  yeere  Bonaventure

351

A.D.
1556.

arrived  in
Scotland,  in
the  Bay  of
Pettisiego,
Novemb.  7.
1556.

Rich.  Chance-
lor  drowned.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  our  Lorde  one  thousand  five  hundred,  fiftie  and  sixe,
arrived  within  the  Scottish  coast  in  a  Bay  named  Pettis-
lego,  where  by  outragious  tempests,  and  extreme  stormes,
the  said  ship  being  beaten  from  her  ground  tackles,  was
driven  upon  the  rockes  on  shore,  where  she  brake  and
split  in  pieces  in  such  sort,  as  the  grand  Pilot  using  all
carefulnesse  for  the  safetie  of  the  bodie  of  the  sayde  Am-
bassadour  and  his  trayne,  taking  the  boat  of  the  said  ship,
trusting  to  attaine  the  shore,  and  so  to  save  and  preserve
the  bodie,  and  seven  of  the  companie  or  attendants  of  the
saide  Ambassadour,  the  same  boat  by  rigorous  waves  of
the  seas,  was  by  darke  night  overwhelmed  and  drowned,
wherein  perished  not  only  the  bodie  of  the  said  grand
Pilot,  with  seven  Russes,  but  also  divers  of  the  Mariners
of  the  sayd  ship  :  the  noble  personage  of  the  saide  Ambas-
sadour with  a  fewe  others  (by  Gods  preservation  and
speciall  favour)  onely  with  much  difficultie  saved.  In  which
shipwracke  not  onely  the  saide  shippe  was  broken,  but
also  the  whole  masse  and  bodie  of  the  goods  laden  in  her,
was  by  the  rude  and  ravenous  people  of  the  Countrey
thereunto  adjoyning,  rifled,  spoyled  and  caried  away,  to
the  manifest  losse  and  utter  destruction  of  all  the  lading
of  the  said  ship,  and  together  with  the  ship,  apparell,
ordinance  and  furniture  belonging  to  the  companie,  in
value  of  one  thousand  pounds,  of  all  which  was  not
restored  toward  the  costs  and  charges  to  the  summe  of
five  hundred  pound  sterling.

As  soone  as  by  letters  addressed  to  the  said  companie,
and  in  London  delivered  the  sixt  of  December  last  past,
it  was  to  them  certainely  knowen  of  the  losse  of  their
Pilote,  men,  goods  and  ship,  the  same  merchants  with  all
celeritie  and  expedition,  obteined  not  onely  the  Queenes
majesties  most  gracious  and  favourable  letters  to  the
Ladie  Dowager,  and  lordes  of  the  Councell  of  Scotland
for  the  gentle  comfortment  and  entertainment  of  the  saide
Ambassadour,  his  traine  and  companie,  with  preservation
and  restitution  of  his  goods,  as  in  such  miserable
cases, to Christian pitie, princely honour and meere

352

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  ad.

1556.

Justice  appertaineth,  but  also  addressed  two  Gentlemen
of  good  learning,  gravitie  and  estimation,  videlicet,
Master  Lawrence  Hussie  Doctor  of  the  Civill  Lawe,  and
George  Gilpin  with  money  and  other  requisites  into  the
Realme  of  Scotland,  to  comfort,  ayde,  assist,  and  relieve
him  and  his  there,  and  also  to  conduct  the  Ambassadour
into  England,  sending  with  them  by  poste  a  Talmach  or
Speachman  for  the  better  furniture  of  the  service  of  the
sayde  Ambassadour,  trusting  thereby  to  have  the  more
ample  and  speedie  redresse  of  restitution  :  which  person-
ages using  diligence,  arrived  at  Edenborough  (where  the
Queenes  court  was)  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the
saide  moneth  of  December,  who  first  visiting  the  saide
Ambassadour,  declaring  the  causes  of  their  comming  and
Commission,  shewing  the  letters  addressed  in  his  favour,
the  order  given  them  for  his  solace  and  furniture  of  all
such  things  as  hee  woulde  have,  together  with  their  daily
and  readie  service  to  attend  upon  his  person  and  affaires,
repaired  consequently  unto  the  Dowager  Queene,  deliver-
ing the  letters.

Whereupon  they  received  gentle  answeres,  with  hope
md  comfort  of  speedie  restitution  of  the  goods,  apparell,
ewels  and  letters :  for  the  more  apparance  whereof,  the
Queene  sent  first  certaine  Commissioners  with  an  Harold
Df  armes  to  Pettislego,  the  place  of  the  Shipwracke,  com-
Tiaunding  by  Proclamation  and  other  Edictes,  all  such
persons  (no  degree  excepted)  as  had  any  part  of  such
^oods  as  were  spoyled  and  taken  out  or  from  the  ship  to
Dring  them  in,  and  to  restore  the  same  with  such  further
Drder  as  her  grace  by  advise  of  her  Councel  thought
expedient :  by  reason  whereof  not  without  great  labours,
Daines  and  charges  (after  long  time)  divers  small  parcels
3f  Waxe,  and  other  small  trifling  things  of  no  value,  were
yy  the  poorer  sort  of  the  Scottes  brought  to  the  Com-
nissioners,  but  the  Jewels,  rich  apparell,  presents,  gold,
diver,  costly  furres,  and  such  like,  were  conveyed  away,
:oncealed  and  utterly  embezelled.  Wherupon,  the
i^ueene  at  the  request  of  the  said  Ambassadour,  caused
"  353  z

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

divers  persons  to  the  number  of  180.  or  moe,  to  be
called  personally  before  her  princely  presence,  to  answer
to  ye  said  spoile,  &  really  to  exhibit  and  bring  in  all  such
things  as  were  spoiled  and  violently  taken,  &  caried  out
of  the  same,  whereof  not  onely  good  testimonie  by
writing  was  shewed,  but  also  the  things  themselves  found
in  the  hands  of  the  Scottish  subjects,  who  by  subtile  and
craftie  dealings,  by  connivence  of  the  commissioners,  so
used  or  rather  abused  themselves  towards  the  sama
Orator  &  his  attendants,  that  no  effectuall  restitution  was:
made :  but  he  fatigated  with  daily  attendance  and  charges,-
the  14.  day  of  February  next  ensuing,  distrusting  any
reall  and  effectual  rendring  of  the  saide  goods  and  mar-
chandizes  and  other  the  premisses,  upon  leave  obtained
His  departure  of  the  saide  Queene,  departed  towards  England,  having ,
from  Scotland  attending  upon  him  the  said  two  English  Gentlemen  and
land ^  others  (leaving  neverthelesse  in  Scotland three  English-^

men  to  pursue  the  deliverie  of  such  things  as  weret.
collected  to  have  bene  sent  by  ship  to  him  in  England  ;
[I.  287.]  which  being  in  Aprill  next,  and  not  before  imbarked  fori
London,  was  not  at  this  present  day  here  arrived)  camei
the  18.  day  of  Februarie  to  Barwike  within  the  dominion
and  realme  of  England,  where  he  was  by  the  Queenesj
majesties  letters  and  commandement  honourably  received!
used  and  interteined  by  the  right  honourable  lord
Wharton,  lord  Warden  of  the  East  marches,  with  goodly
conducting  from  place  to  place,  as  the  dayly  journeys
done  ordinarily  did  lie,  in  such  order,  maner  and  forme..',
as  to  a  personage  of  such  estate  appertaineth.  He  prose-,
1557.  cuting  his  voyage  until  the  27.  of  Februarie  approchec

Febr.  27.  ^-q  ^}^g  ^.j^jg  of  London  within  twelve  English  miles,  whert;
he  was  received  with  fourscore  merchants  with  chaines  01
gold  and  goodly  apparell,  as  wel  in  order  of  men  servants
in  one  uniforme  liverie,  as  also  in  and  upon  good  horses
and  geldings,  who  conducting  him  to  a  marchants  houst
foure  miles  from  London,  received  there  a  quantitie  o:
gold,  velvet  and  silke,  with  all  furniture  thereuntc
requisite, wherewith he made him a riding garment

354

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  ad.

1557-
•eposing  himselfe  that  night.  The  next  day  being
Saturday  and  the  last  day  of  Februarie,  he  was  by  the
nerchants  adventuring  for  Russia,  to  the  number  of  one
lundred  and  fortie  persons,  and  so  many  or  more
servants  in  one  liverie,  as  abovesaid,  conducted  towards
:he  citie  of  London,  where  by  the  way  he  had  not  onely
[he  hunting  of  the  Foxe  and  such  like  sport  shewed  him,
)ut  also  by  the  Queenes  majesties  commandement  was
feceived  and  embraced  by  the  right  honourable  Viscount
\4ontague,  sent  by  her  grace  for  his  entertainment :  he
peing  accompanied  with  divers  lustie  knights,  esquiers,  dishonorable
'■entlemen  and  yeomen  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  '^^'^^^'^'J-^g^^to

fhp  rttlP OT

lorses  led  him  to  the  North  partes  of  the  Citie  of  2,o«^o«
^ondon,  where  by  foure  notable  merchants  richly  appa-
elled  was  presented  to  him  a  right  faire  and  large  gelding
ichly  trapped,  together  with  a  footcloth  of  Orient
rimson  velvet,  enriched  with  gold  laces,  all  furnished  in
lost  glorious  fashion,  of  the  present,  and  gift  of  the  sayde
lerchants  :  where  upon  the  Ambassadour  at  instant
.esire  mounted,  riding  on  the  way  towards  Smithfield
arres,  the  first  limites  of  the  liberties  of  the  Citie  of
^ondon.  The  Lord  Maior  accompanied  with  all  the
ddermen  in  their  skarlet  did  receive  him,  and  so  riding
irough  the  Citie  of  London  in  the  middle,  betweene  the
.ord  Maior  and  Viscount  Montague,  a  great  number  of
lerchants  and  notable  personages  riding  before,  and  a
irge  troupe  of  servants  and  apprentises  following,  was
3nducted  through  the  Citie  of  London  (with  great
Imiration  and  plausibilitie  of  the  people  running  plenti-
illy  on  all  sides,  and  replenishing  all  streets  in  such  sort
i  no  man  without  difficultie  might  passe)  into  his
)dging  situate  in  Fant  church  streete,  where  were  pro-
ided  for  him  two  chambers  richly  hanged  and  decked,
Ver  and  above  the  gallant  furniture  of  the  whole  house,
^sgether  with  an  ample  and  rich  cupboord  of  plate  of  all
')rtes,  to  furnish  and  serve  him  at  all  meales,  and  other
rvices  during  his  abode  in  London,  which  was,  as  is
tiderwritten,  until  the  third  day  of  May : during  which

355

1557-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

time  daily  divers  Aldermen  and  the  gravest  personages
of  the  said  companie  did  visite  him,  providing  all  kind
of  victuals  for  his  table  and  his  servants,  with  al  sorts  of
Officers  to  attend  upon  him  in  good  sort  and  condition,
as  to  such  an  ambassadour  of  honour  doeth  and  ought  to
appertaine.

It  is  also  to  be  remembred  that  at  his  first  entrance  into
his  chamber,  there  was  presented  unto  him  on  the
Queenes  Majesties  behalfe  for  a  gift  and  present,  and  his
better  furniture  in  apparel,  one  rich  piece  of  cloth  of
tissue,  a  piece  of  cloth  of  golde,  another  piece  of  cloth
of  golde  raised  with  crimosin  velvet,  a  piece  of  crimosin
velvet  in  graine,  a  piece  of  purple  velvet,  a  piece  of
Damaske  purpled,  a  piece  of  crimosin  damaske,  which  he
most  thankfully  accepted.  In  this  beautifuU  lodging
refreshing  and  preparing  himselfe  and  his  traine  with
things  requisite  he  abode,  expecting  the  kings  majesties
repaire  out  of  Flanders  into  England,  whose  highnessei
arriving  the  one  and  twentie  of  March,  the  same  Am-
bassadour the  five  and  twentieth  of  March  being  the
Annunciation  of  our  Ladie  (the  day  twelvemoneth  he
took  his  leave  from  the  Emperour  his  master)  was  most
honourably  brought  to  the  King  and  Queenes  majesties
court  at  Westminster,  where  accompanied  first  with  the
said  Viscount  and  other  notable  personages,  and  the
merchants,  hee  arriving  at  Westminster  bridge,  was  there
received  with  sixe  lords,  conducted  into  a  stately  chamber
where  by  the  lords.  Chancellor,  Treasurer,  Privie  seale^
Admiral!,  bishop  of  Elie,  and  other  Counsellers,  hee  was
visited  and  saluted :  and  consequently  was  brought  unto
the  Kings  and  Queenes  majesties  presence,  sitting  under  a
stately  cloth  of  honour,  the  chamber  most  richly  decked
and  furnished,  and  most  honourably  presented.  Where,
after  that  hee  had  delivered  his  letters,  made  his  Oration,
given  two  timber  of  Sables,  and  the  report  of  the  same
made  both  in  English  and  Spanish,  in  most  loving  manei
embraced,  was  with  much  honour  and  high  entertaine-
ment,  in  sight  of  a  great  confluence  of  people,  Lordes  and

356

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  a.d.

1557-

Ladies  eftsoones  remitted  by  water  to  his  former  lodging,

to  the  which,  within  two  dayes  after  by  the  assignement

of  the  King  and  Queenes  majesties,  repaired  and  conferred

with  him  secretly  two  grave  Counsellers,  that  is,  the  lord

Bishop of  Elie,  and Sir  William Peter Knight, chiefe

Secretary to their Highnesse, who after divers secret

talkes  and  conferences,  reported  to  their  highnesse  their

proceedings,  the  gravitie,  wisedome,  and  stately  behaviour  [I.  288.]

:>f  the  sayd  Ambassadour,  in  such  sort  as  was  much  to

:heir  majesties  contentations.

Finally  concluding  upon such treaties  and  articles  of  A  league  and

imitie,  as  the  letters  of  the  Kings  and  Queenes  majesties  articles  of ami-

most  graciously  under  the  great  seale  of  England  to  him (^oncmaea
I 1  °  J ''  „  ,  "H, .  ^ ^ ,  o  ana  confirmed

3y  the  sayd  counsellers  delivered,  doth  appeare.  ^^^^^^^.  ^^^

The  three  and  twentieth  of  April,  being  the  feast  of  S.  great  seale  of
George,  wherein  was  celebrated  the  solemnitie  of  the  England.
Noble  order  of  the  Garter  at  Westminster,  the  same  lord
imbassadour  was  eftsoones  required  to  have  audience :
md  therefore  conducted  from  the  sayd  lodging  to  the
:ourt  by  the  right  Noble  the  lords  Talbot  and  Lumley  to
their  majesties  presence :  where,  after  his  Oration  made,
md  thanks  both  given  and  received,  hee  most  honourably
:ooke  his  leave  with  commendations  to  the  Emperour.
Which  being  done,  he  was  with  special  honour  led  into
:he  chappell,  where  before  the  Kings  and  Queens
najesties,  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  Order  of  the  Garter,
ivas  prepared  for  him  a  stately  seate,  wherein  he  accom-
panied with  the  Duke  of  Norfolke,  the  lords  last  above
nentioned,  and  many  other  honorable  personages,  was
Dresent  at  the  whole  service,  in  ceremonies  which  were  to
lim  most  acceptable :  the  divine  service  ended,  he  eft-
soones was  remitted  and  reduced  to  his  barge,  and  so
•epaired  to  his  lodging,  in  like  order  and  gratulation  of
:he  people  universally,  as  before.

The time of  the yeere hasting the profection and  Foure  goodly

leparture of the Ambassador, the merchants having  ^^'^P^f^^^

•^  ^ r  n  i ii •  j i  •  i i merchants

Drepared roure  goodly  and  well trimmed  shippes  laden  provided  for

ivith  all  kinds  of  merchandises  apt  for  Russia,  the  same  Russia,  i$$j.

357

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

Ambassadour  making  provision  for  such  things  as  him
pleased,  the  same  ships  in  good  order  valed  downe  the
River  of  Thames,  from  London  to  Gravesend,  where  the
same  Ambassadour  with  his  traine  and  furniture  was
imbarked  to  wards  his  voyage  homeward,  which  God
prosper  in  all  felicitie.

It  is  also  to  be  remembred,  that  during  the  whole
abode  of  the  sayd  Ambassadour  in  England,  the  Agents
of  the  sayde  marchants  did  not  onely  prosecute  and
pursue  the  matter  of  restitution  in  Scotland,  and  caused
such  things  to  be  laden  in  an  English  shippe  hired  pur-
posely to  convey  the  Ambassadours  goods  to  London,
there  to  be  delivered  to  him,  but  also  during  his  abode  in
London,  did  both  invite  him  to  the  Maior,  and  divers
worshipfull  mens  houses,  feasting  and  banquetting  him
right  friendly,  shewing  unto  him  the  most  notable  and
commendable  sights  of  London,  as  the  kings  palace  and
house,  the  Churches  of  Westminster  and  Powles,  the
Tower  and  Guild  hall  of  London,  and  such  like  memor-
able spectacles.  And  also  the  said  29.  day  of  April,  the  said
merchants  assembling  themselves  together  in  the  house  of
the  Drapers  hal  of  London,  exhibited  and  gave  unto  ye
said  Ambassador,  a  notable  supper  garnished  with  musicke,
Enterludes  and  bankets :  in  the  which  a  cup  of  wine
being  drunke  to  him  in  the  name  and  lieu  of  the  whole
companie,  it  was  signified  to  him  that  the  whole  company
with  most  liberal  and  friendly  hearts,  did  frankly  give  to
him  and  his  all  maner  of  costs  and  charges  in  victuals
riding  from  Scotland  to  London  during  his  abode  there,
and  untill  setting  of  saile  aboord  the  ship,  requesting  him
to  accept  the  same  in  good  part  as  a  testimonie  and  witnes
of  their  good  hearts,  zeale  and  tendernesse  towards  him
and  his  countrey.

It  is  to  be  considered  that  of  the  Bona  Speranza  no
word  nor  knowledge  was  had  at  this  present  day,  nor  yet
of  the  arrivall  of  the  ships  or  goods  from  Scotland.

The  third  of  May  the  Ambassadour  departed  from
London  to  Gravesend,  accompanied  with  divers  Aldermen

358

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  ad.

1557-

md  merchants,  who  in  good  gard  set  him  aboord  the
loble  shippe,  the  Primrose  Admiral  to  the  Fleete,  where
eave  was  taken  on  both  sides  and  parts,  after  many
mbracements  and  divers  farewels  not  without  expressing
of  teares.

Memorandum,  that  the  first  day  of  May  the  Counsellers,  Th  King  and
ndeHcet,  the  Bishop  of  Elye,  and  Sir  William  Peter  on  p^^«^  ^^"'"'^
:he  behalfe  of  the  Kings  and  Queenes  Majesties  repairing  ^mterour  of
:o  the  lorde  Ambassadour  did  not  onely  deliver  unto  him  Russia.
:heir  highnes  letters  of  recommendations  under  the  great
>eale  of  England to the Emperour,  very tenderly  and
friendly  written,  but  also  on  their  majesties  behalfe  gave
ind  delivered  certaine  notable  presents  to  the  Emperours
Derson,  and  also  gifts  for  the  lord  Ambassadours  proper
use  and behoofe, as by the particulars under written
ippeareth, with such further good wordes and com-
mendations, as the  more friendly  have not bin heard,
whereby  it  appeareth  how  well  affected  their  honours  be
to  have  and  continue  amitie  and  traffique  betweene  their
lonours  and  their  subjects :  which  thing  as  the  kings  and
Queenes  majesties  have  shewed  of  their  princely  muni-
ficences &  liberalities,  so  have  likewise  the  merchants  and
fellowship of the Adventurers, for and to Russia,
manifested to the  world  their good  willes,  mindes and
z.eales  borne  to  this  new  commensed  voyage,  as  by  the
discourse  above  mentioned,  and  other  the notable  actes
over  long  to  be  recited  in  this  present  memoriall,  doeth
and  may  most  clearely  appeare,  the  like  whereof  is  not  in  [I.  289.]
any  president  or  historie  to  bee  shewed.

Forasmuch  as  it  may  bee  doubted  how  the  ship  named
the  Edward  Bonaventure  suffered  shipwracke,  what
became  of  the  goods,  howe  much  they  were  spoiled  and
deteined,  how  little  restored,  what  charges  and  expenses
ensued,  what  personages  were  drowned,  how  the  rest  of
the  ships  either  arrived  or  perished,  or  howe  the  disposi-
tion of  almightie  God  hath  wrought  his  pleasure  in  them,
how  the  same  ambassadour  hath  bene  after  the  miserable

359

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

case  of  shipwracke  in  Scotland  unreverently  abused,  and
consequently  into  England  received  and  conducted,  there
intertained,  used,  honoured,  and  finally  in  good  safetie
towards  his  returne,  and  repaire  furnished,  and  with  much
liberalitie  and  franke  handling  friendly  dismissed,  to  the
intent  that  the  trueth  of  the  premisses  may  bee  to  the
most  mightie  Emperour  of  Russia  sincerely  signified  in
eschewment  of  all  events  and  misfortunes  that  may  chance
in  this  voyage  (which  God  defend)  to  the  Ambassadours
person,  traine,  and  goods,  this  present  memoriall  isi
written,  and  autentikely  made,  and  by  the  sayde  Am-
bassadour  his  servants,  whose  names  be  underwritten,  and
traine  in  presence  of  the  Notarie,  and  witnesses  under-
named, recognized,  and  acknowledged.  Given  the  day, ,
moneth,  and  yeere  underwritten,  of  which  instrument  into
every  of  the  sayde  Shippes  one  testimoniall  is  delivered,
and  the  first  remaineth  with  the  sayde  Companie  ini
London.  '

Giftes  sent  to  the  King  and  Queenes  Majesties  of
England  by  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  by  the
report  of  the  Ambassadour,  and  spoyled  by
the  Scots  after  the  Shipwracke.

1  First,  sixe  timber  of  Sables  rich  in  colour  and  haire.

2  Item, twentie entire Sables exceeding beautifull

with  teeth,  eares  and  clawes.

3  Item,  foure  living  Sables  with  chaines  and  collars.

4  Item,  thirtie  Lusarnes  large  and  beautifull.

5  Item,  sixe large and great skinnes very rich and

rare,  worne  onely  by  the  Emperour  for  woorthi-
nesse.

6  Item, a large and faire white Jerfawcon for the

wilde Swanne, Crane,  Goose, and other great

Fowles, together  with  a drumme of  silver, the

hoopes gilt, used for  a lure to call the sayd
Hawke.

360

FIRST AMBASSAGE FROM RUSSIA  a.d.

1557-

Giftes  sent  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia  by  the
King  and  Queenes  Majesties  of  England.

1  First,  two  rich  peices  of  cloth  of  Tissue,

2  Item,  one  fine  piece  of  Scarlet.

3  Item,  one  fine  Violet  in  graine.

4  Item,  one  fine  Azur  cloth.

5  Item,  a  notable  paire  of  Brigandines  with  a  Murrian

covered  with  crimson  velvet  and  gilt  nailes.

6  Item,  a  Male  and  Female  Lions.

Giftes  given  to  the  Ambassadour  at  his  depar-
ture, over  and  above  such  as  were  delivered
unto  him  at  his  first  arrivall.

1  First,  a  chaine  of  golde  of  one  hundred  pound.

2  Item,  a  large  Bason  and  Ewer,  silver  and  gilt.

3  Item,  a  paire  of  pottle  pots  gilt.

4  Item,  a  paire  of  flaggons  gilt.

The  names  of  all  such  Russies  as  were  attendant  [I.  290.]
upon the Ambassadour, at and before his
departure  out  of  England.

Isaak  Fwesscheneke.

Demetre.

Gorbolones.

Symonde.

Yeroffia.

Stephen.

Lowca.

Andria.

Foma.

Memorandum,  the  day  and  yeere  of  our  Lord  above
mentioned,  in  the  house  of  the  worshipfuU  John  Dim-
mocke  Citizen  and  Draper  of  London,  situate  within
the  famous  Citie  of  London  in  the  Realme  of  England,

361

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

the  above  named  honourable  Osep  Gregorywich  Napea
Ambassadour  and  Orator  above  mentioned,  personally
constituted  and  present,  having  declared  unto  him  by
the  mouth  of  the  right  worshipfull  master  Anthonie
Hussie  Esquire,  the  effect  of  the  causes  and  contents,  of,
and  in  this  booke,  at  the  interpretation  of  Robert  Best
his  interpreter  sworne,  recognized,  and  knowledged  in
presence  of  me  the  Notarie  &  personages  underwritten,
the  contents  of  this  booke  to  be  true,  aswell  for  his
owne  person  as  for  his  servants  above  named,  who  did
not  subscribe  their  names  as  is  above  mentioned,  but
onely  recognized  the  same.  In  witnesse  whereof,  I
John  Incent  Notarie  Publike,  at  the  request  of  the
said  master  Anthonie  Hussie,  and  other  of  the  Mar-
chants  have  to  these  presents  underwritten  set  my
accustomed  signe,  with  the  Subscription  of  my  name,
the  day  and  yeere  above  written,  being  present  the
right  Worshipfull,

Andrew  Judde. ^

George  Barne. V  Knights.

William Chester.)  V Aldermen  of  London.

Rafe  Greeneaway.

John  Mersh  Esquier.

John  Dimmock.

Blase  Sanders.

Hubert  Hussie,  and

Robert  Best  above  mentioned.

362

STEPHEN BURROUGH

A.D.

1557-

The  voyage  of  the  foresaid  M.  Stephen  Burrough,
An.  1557.  from  Colmogro  to  Wardhouse,
which  was  sent  to  seeke  the  Bona  Esperanza,
the  Bona  Confidentia,  and  the  Philip  and
Mary,  which  were  not  heard  of  the  yeere
before.

May.

Pon Sunday  the 23,  of  May,  I departed 23
with the Searchthrift from Colmogro,
the  latitude  whereof  is 64.  degrees,  25.

minutes,  and  the  variation  of  the  com-
passe,  5.  degrees,  10  minutes  from  the
North  to  the  East.

Wednesday we came to the Island  26
called Pozanka, which Island is within foure leagues
of  the  barre  Berozova. It  floweth  here  at  an  East  and
by  South  moone  full  sea.

Saturday  in  the  morning  we  departed  from  Pozanka,  29
and  plied  to  the  barre  of  Ber6zova  Gooba,  where-
upon wee  came  to  anker  at  a  lov/e  water,  and  sounded
the  said  Barre  with  our  two  Skiifes,  and  found  in  the
best  upon  the  shoaldest  of  the  barre  13.  foote  water
by  the  rule.  It  higheth  upon  this  barre,  in  spring
streames  3.  foote  water:  and  an  East  Moone  maketh  a
full  sea  upon  this  barre.

Sunday  in  the  morning  wee  departed  from  the  barre  3°
of  Berozova, and plied along by the shoalds in five
fadome,  untill  I  had  sight  of  S.  Nicholas  roade,  and  then
wee cast about to the Northwards,  and went with a
hommocke,  which is halfe a mile to the Eastwards  of
Coya Reca, which hommocke and S. Nicholas abbey  Coia  Reca.
lye Southsouthwest,  and Northnortheast,  and betweene  [I.  291.]
them  are  11.  leagues. Coia  Reca  is  halfe  a  mile  to  the
Eastwards of  Coscaynos. Coscaynos & the  middes  of  Coscaynos.
the Island called Mondeustova ostrove, which is
thwart of  the barre of  Berozova lieth South and by

363

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

East,  North and by West,  and betweene them are  4.
leagues,  or  as  you  may  say  from the Seaboord part  of
the  barre  to  Coscaynos  are  3.  leagues  and  a  halfe.
31 Munday  at  a  Northeast  and  by  East  sunne  we  were
thwart  of  Coscaynos.

Dogs  nose  lieth  from  Coscaynos  Northnorthwest,
and  betweene  them  are  eight  leagues  :  and  Dogs  nose
sheweth  like  a  Gurnerds  head,  if  you  be  inwardly  on
both  sides  of  it :  on  the  lowe  point  of  Dogs  nose  there
standeth  a  crosse  alone.

F'

June.

Rom  Dogs  nose  to  Foxenose  are  three  leagues.  North

and  by  West.
The  2.  day  of  June  I  went  on  shoare  2.  miles  to  the
Northwards  of  Dogs  nose,  and  had  the  latitude  of  that  |
place  in  6^.  degrees,  47.  minutes.  It  floweth  a  shoare
at  this  place,  at  an  East  Moone  full  sea,  and  the  shippe
lay  thwart  to  wende  a  flood,  in  the  off,  at  a  Southsouth-
east  moone.  So  that  it  is  to  be  understoode,  that  when
it  is  a  full  sea  on  the  shoare,  it  is  two  points  to  ebbe,
The  variatton  ^gfoj-g  j^  j^g  ^  lowe  water  in  the  off.  The  variation
iasse  4  ^^  ^^ Compasse at this place is 4.  degrees from the

'degrees.  North  to  the  East.

3  This  day  the  Northnorthwest  winde  put  us  backe
againe  with  Dogs  nose,  where  a  ship  may  ride  thwart
of  a  salt  house,  in  4.  fadome,  or  4.  fadome  and  a  halfe
of  water,  and  have  Landfange  for  a  North  and  by  West
winde :  which  Salt  house  is  halfe  a  mile  to  the  South-
wards of  Dogs  nose.

4  Friday  at  a  Southsouthwest  Sunne,  wee  departed
from  this  Salt  house.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  foure
miles  to  the  Northwards  of  Dogs  nose  there  growe
no  trees  on  the  banke  by  the  water  side :  and  the
bankes  consist  of  fullers  earth.  Over  the  cliffes  there
growe  some  trees :  so  that  Dogs  nose  is  the  better  to
be  knowen  because  it  is  fullers  earth,  and  the  like  I
have  not  seene  in  all  that  Countrey.

364

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad

1557-

A  head  of  Foxe  nose  a  league  from  the  shoare  there  Foxe  nose.
are 15.  fadome : betwixt  Foxe  nose  and  Zolatitsa  there
are  6  leagues,  I  meane  the  Southerly  part  of  Foxe  nose.

Sunday  I  sounded  the barre  of Zolatitsa,  which the  6
Russes  told  me  was  a  good harborow,  but  in  the best
of  it  I  found  but  4. foote  water.

Munday,  I  had  the  latitude  in  66.  degrees,  and  then  7
was  point  Pentecost  sixe  leagues  South  of  us.  ^°y^^  Pente-

Wednesday I went on land at Crosse Island,  and  "^ '
tooke  the  latitude,  which  was 66.  degrees 24 minutes. Crosse  Island.

We  being  one  league  Northeast  of Crosse Island,  I
sawe  the  land  on  the Eastside,  which I judged to be
Cape good fortune,  and it  was then Eastsoutheast  of  Cape  good
us  9.  leagues.  forwie.

Cape  grace  is  7.  leagues  and  a  halfe  Northeast  from  Cape  grace.
Crosse  Island.

There  are  2.  Islands  5.  leagues  Northnortheast  from
Cape  grace,  the  Southermost  of  them  is  a  little  long
Island  almost  a  mile  long,  and  the  Northermost  a  little
round  Island,  and  they  are  both  hard  aboord  the
shore.

Cape  Race  is  from  the  Southermost  Island  North  Cape  Race.
and  by  West,  and  betweene  them  are  two  leagues,
and  from  that  and  halfe  a  league  Northnorthwest,
there  is  another  poynt.  Betweene  which  poynt  and
Cape  Race,  the  Russes  have  a  Stanavish  or  harborow
for  their  Lodias :  and  to  the  Westwards  of  the  sayd
poynt,  there  is  a  shoale  bay.

Three  leagues  and  a  halfe  to  Northwards  of  Cape  10
Race,  we  had  the  latitude  on  the  10.  day  of  this
moneth  in  67.  degrees  10.  minutes.  Riding  within
half  a  league  of  the  shoare  in  this  latitude  I  found  it
to  be  a  full  sea  at  a  North  and  by  East  moone.  I
had  where  we  roade  two  and  twentie  fadoome,  and  the
tallow  which  is  taken  up  is  full  of  great  broken  shels,
and  some  stones  withall  like  unto  small  sand  congealed
together.

From a South sunne that wee weyed, the winde

365

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

being  at  North  and  by  East,  wee  drived  to  the  wind-
wards halfe  the  ebbe,  with  the  ships  head  to  the  East-
wards. And  then  when  we  cast  her  head  to  the
Westwards,  we  sounded,  and  had  22.  fadome  broken
shels,  and  gray  sand ; this  present  day  was  very  mistie,

Frosi  in  June,  with  frost  on  the  shrowds  as  the  mist  fell.

Friday  in  the  morning  at  an  East  sunne,  the  mist
brake  up  a  little,  the  winde  being  at  North  and  by
West  a  stiffe  gale,  our  shrowdes  and  roapes  over
head  being  covered  with  frost,  and  likely  to  be  a
storme :  I  thought  it  good  to  seeke  an  harborow,  and
so  plied  roome  with  the  Islands  which  are  two  leagues
to  the  Southwards  of  Cape  Race,  and  within  these
Islands  (thankes  bee  to  God)  we  found  harborow  for
us. It higheth at these Islands two fadome water :

[I.  292.]  it  floweth  in  the  harborow  at  this  place  at  a  South-
southeast  moone  ful  sea :  and  a  sea  boord  it  floweth
at  a  Southsouthwest  moone  a  full  sea. The  Russes  call

Tri  Ostrove. this  Island,  Tri  Ostrove.

You  may  come  in  betweene  the  little  Island  and  the
great  Island,  and  keepe  you  in  the  mids  of  the  Sound,
and  if  you  borrowe  on  any  side,  let  it  bee  on  the
greatest  Island,  and  you  shall  have  at  a  low  water,
foure  fadome,  and  three  fadome  and  a  halfe,  and  three
fadome,  untill  that  you  be  shot  so  farre  in  as  the
narrowest,  which  is  betweene  the  Northermost  poiijt  of
the  greatest  Island,  and  the  Southerne  point  of  the
maine  which  is  right  against  it,  and  then  hale  to  the
Northwards  with  the  crosse  which  standeth  in  the
maine,  and  you  shall  have  at  a  lowe  water  10.  foote
water,  and  faire  sand.  And  if  you  be  disposed  to  goe
through  the  Sound  to  the  Southwards,  keepe  the
Northwest  shoare  aboorde,  for  on  the  Island  side  after
you  be  shotte  so  farre  in  as  the  crosse,  it  is  a  shoale
of  rockes  halfe  the  sound  over :  which  rockes  do  last
unto  the  Southerly  part  of  the  great  Island,  and  rather
to  the  Southwards.  And  if  you  be  constrained  to  seeke
a  harbor  for  Northerly  windes,  when  you  come  out  of

366

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1557-
the  sea,  hale  in  with  the  Southerly  part  of  the  great
Island,  giving  the  Island  a  faire  birth,  and  as  you
shoote  towards  the  maine,  you  shall  finde  roade  for  all
Northerly  windes,  in  foure  fadome,  five,  sixe  and  seven
fadome,  at  a  lowe  water.

Also  within  this  great  Island  (if  neede  bee)  you  may
have  a  good  place  to  ground  a  ship  in :  the  great
Island  is  almost  a  mile  long  and  a  quarter  of  a  mile
over.

This  storme  of  Northerly  winde  lasted  untill  the  i6. i6
of this moneth,  and then the  winde came Southerly,
but  we  could  not  get out for  Ice. I  went on shore  Ice.
at the crosse, and tooke the latitude, which is 66.
degrees, 58.  minutes,  30.  seconds:  the  variation  of  the  The  variation.
Compasse 3. degrees and a halfe from the North to
the  East.

Thursday  being  faire  weather,  and  the  winde  at  17
North  we  plied  to  the  winde-wards  with  sailes  and
oares :  wee  stopped  the  flood  this  day  three  leagues  to
the  Northwards  of  Cape  Race,  two  miles  from  the  shoare,
and  had  twentie  fadome  water,  faire  gray  and  blacke
sand,  and  broken  shels.  And  when  the  slake  came  wee  18
wayed  and  made  aboord  to  the  shoare-wards,  and  had
within  two  cables  length  of  the  shoare,  eighteene  fadomes
faire  gray  and  blacke  sand :  a  man  may  finde  roade
there  for  a  North  winde,  and  so  to  the  Westwards.

Two  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Corpus  Christi
poynt,  you  may  have  Landfang  for  a  North  and  by
East  winde,  and  from  that  to  the  Westwards  in  23.
fadome  almost  a  mile  from  shoare,  and  faire  sand,  and
amongst  the  sand  little  yong  small  limpets,  or  such
like  as  growe  upon  muscles :  and  within  two  cables
length  and  lesse  of  the  shoare  are  eighteene  fadomes,
and  the  sounding  aforesaid,  but  the  yong  limpets
more  plentiful!.  It  was  a  full  sea  where  we  roade,
almost  a  mile  from  shoare,  at  a  South  and  by  West
moone  :  two  leagues  to  the  Southwards  of  Corpus
Christi point is the uttermost land, which land and

367

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

Cape  Race  lyeth  South  and  halfe  a  point  to  West-
wards, and  North  and  halfe  a  point  to  the  Eastwards,
19  and  betweene  them  are  sixe  leagues.  Riding  this  day
sixe  leagues  to  the  Northwards  of  Cape  Race,  the
winde  at  Northnorthwest,  with  mist  and  frost,  at  noone
the  sunne  appeared  through  the  mist,  so  that  I  had
the  latitude  in  67.  degrees,  29.  minutes.

21  Munday  we  were  thwart  of  Corpus  Christi  point,
CorpusChristi  ^^q  leagues  and  a  halfe  from  shoare,  or  rather  more,
P°y^ ' where we sounded,  and had 36.  fadoms and broken

code  shels,  with  brannie  sand,  but  the  broken  shels
very  thicke.

22  Tuesday  in  the  morning  we  were  shotte  a  head  of
Cape  Gallant.  Cape gallant, which the Russes call Sotinoz. And

as  we  were  shot  almost  halfe  a  league  betwixt  it,
and  Cape  comfort,  the  wind  came  up  at  the  North-
west, and  after  to  the  Northwards,  so  that  we  were
faine  to  beare  roome  to  seeke  a  harbour,  where  we
found  good  harbour  for  all  windes,  and  the  least  7.
fadome  water  betweene  S.  Johns  Islands,  and  the
maine.

After  that  we  came  to  an  ancre,  we  tooke  the  lati-
tude, which  was  68.  degrees  i.  minute,  after  noone,
the  winde  at  North  with  plentie  of  snowe.

At  a  West  sunne  there  came  aboord  us  certaine
Lappians  in  a  boate,  to  the  number  of  sixeteene
persons,  and  amongst  them  there  were  two  wenches,
and  some  of  them  could  speake  the  Russe  tongue :
I  asked  them  where  their  abiding  was,  and  they
tolde  mee  that  there  was  a  companie  or  heard  of
them,  to  the  number  of  100.  men,  besides  women
and  children,  but  a  litle  from  us  in  the river  lekonga.

They  tolde  me  that  they  had  bene  to  seeke  meate
among  the  rockes,  saying,  If  wee  get  no  meate,  wee
eate  none.  I  sawe  them  eate  rocke  weedes  as  hungerly,
as  a  cowe  doeth  grasse  when  shee  is  hungrie.  I  sawe
them  also  eate  foules  egges  ravv^e,  and  the  yong  birdes
also  that  were  in  the  egges.

368

STEPHEN BURROUGH

A.D.

1557-

I observed certaine wordes of their language,  [I-  293-
which I thought good to set downe for
their  use,  that hereafter shall have occasion
to  continue  this  voyage.

COwghtie coteat, what
call  you  this.
Poddythecke, come hither.
Avanchythocke, get the

hence.
Anna,  farewell.
Teyrve,  good  morrowe.
lomme  lemaufes,  I thanke

you.
Passevellie,  a  friend.
Olmvelke,  a  man.
Captella,  a  woman.
Alke,  a  sonne.
Neit,  a  daughter,  or  yong

wench.
Oyvie,  a  head.
Cyelme,  an  eye.
Nenna,  a  nose.
Nealma,  a  mouth.
Pannea,  teeth.
Neughtema,  a  tongue.
Seaman,  a  beard.
Peallee,  an  eare.
Teappat,  the  necke.
Voapt,  the  haire.
Keat,  a  hand.
Soarme,  fingers,
lowlkie,  a  legge.
Peelkie,  the  thombe,  or  great

toe.
Sarke,  woUen  cloth.
Lein,  linnen  cloth.

Payte,  a  shirt.

Tol,  fire.

Keatse,  water.

Murr,  wood.

Vannace,  a  boate.

Arica,  an  oare.

Nurr,  a  roape.

Peyve,  a  day.

Hyr,  a  night.

Peyvezea,  the  Sunne.

Manna,  the  Moone.

Laste,  starres.

Cozam  volka,  whither  goe

you.
Ottapp,  sleepe.
Tallye,  that.
Keiedde  pieve,  a  weeke.
Isckie,  a  yeere.
Kesse,  Sommer.
Talve,  Winter,
lowksam,  colde.
Parox,  warme.
Abrye,  raine.
Youghang,  yce.
Keatykye,  a  stone.
Sellowpe,  silver.
Solda,  golde.
Tennae,  tinne.
Veskue,  copper.
Rowadt,  yron,
Neybx,  a  knife.
Axshe,  a  hatchet.

369

A.D.

1557-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Leabee,  bread.

Owghchte,

9-

laevegoat,  meale.

Locke,

lO.

Pencka,  the  winde.

Ostretumbelocke,

II.

lowte,  A  platter.

Cowghtnumbelocke,

12.

Kemnie,  a  kettle.

Colmenonbelocke,

13-

Keestes,  gloves.
Sapege,  shoes.

Nellynombelocke,
Vittie  nombelocke.

14.
15-

Conde,  a  wilde  Deare.

Cowtenombelocke,

16.

Poatsa,  the  labouring  Deare.

Their  words  of  number

are  these  as  foUoweth.
I^Fte, I.

Keydemnombelocke,
Kafts  nombelocke,
Owght  nombelocke,
Coffteylocke,
Colmelocke,

17-
18.

19.

20.
30-

\-J  Noumpte,
Colme,

2.

3-

Nelly  locke,
Vitte  locke,

40.
50.

Nellye,

4-

Cowtelocke,

60.

Vitte,
Cowte,

5-
6.

Keydemlocke,
Kaffstelocke,

70.
80.

Keydeem,
Kaffts,

7-
8.

Oughcheteloke,
Tewet.

90.

100.

Juana  Creos.
[I.  294.]

25  Friday  in  the  morning  we  departed  from  Saint
Johns  Island  :  to  the  Westwards  thereof,  a  mile  from  the
shoare,  we  sounded,  and  had  36.  fadoms,  and  oazie  sand.

Juana  Creos  is  from  Cape  gallant  Westnorthwest,  and
halfe  a  point  to  the  Northwards,  and  betweene  them  is  7.
leagues.  The  point  of  the  Island,  which  is  Cape  comfort,
lyeth  from  Juana  Creos,  Northwest  and  by  North,  and
almost  the  3.  part  of  a  point  to  the  Westwards,  and
betweene  them  are  3.  leagues.

The  Eastermost  of  S.  Georges  Islands,  or  the  7.
Islands,  lyeth  from  Juana  Creos  Northwest,  &  halfe  a
point  to  the  Northwards,  and  betweene  them  are  14.
leagues  &  a  halfe.  The  uttermost  of  the  7.  Islands,  &
Cape  comfort.  Cape  comfort  lieth  Northwest,  &  by  North,  Southeast,
and  by  South.

Under  the  Southermost  Island  you  shall  finde  good
roade  for  all  Northerly  windes  from  the  Northwest  to  the

370

S.  Georges
Islands.

STEPHEN BURROUGH  a.d.

1557-
Northeast. From  the  Southeast  part  of  the  7. Islands,

unto  the  Northwest  part  of  them,  are  3.  leagues  and  a
halfe.

From  the  Northwest  part  of  the  Islands  aforesaid,  unto  5.  Peters

5.  Peters  Islands,  are 11.  leagues  Northwest.  Islands.

26  S.  Peters  Islands  rise  an  indifferent  low  point,
not  seeming  to  be  an  Island,  and  as  if  it  had  a  castle
upon  it.

S. Pauls Islands lie from S. Peters Islands North-  5.  Pauls
west and to the Westwards, and betweene them are  I^^^^'^^-

6.  leagues.  Within  these  Islands  there  is  a  faire  sandy-
bay,  and  there  may  be  found  a  good  roade  for  Northerly
windes.

Cape  Sower  beere  lyeth  from  S.  Pauls  Islands  North-  C^P^  ^"^^^
west and  by  West,  and betweene  them  are  5.  leagues. ^^^^'

Cape  comfort,  which  is  the  Island  of  Kildina,  lieth  from  Kildina.
Cape  Sower  beere,  6.  leagues  West  Northwest,  and  it  is
altogether a  bay betweene  them  seeming many  Islands
in it.

From  Cape  Bonaventure,  to  Chebe  Navoloche  are  10. Cape  Bona-
leagues  Northwest,  and  a  litle  to  the  Westwards. Chebe  ^'^'^^^^^•
Navoloche  is  a faire  point,  wheron standeth a certaine
blacke,  like  an emptie  butte  standing  a  head.

From Chebe  Navoloch  to  Kegor,  is  9.  leagues  and  a  Kegor.
halfe Northwest,  and halfe  a  poynt to  the Westwards.
Kegor  riseth as  you  come from the  Eastwards  like 2.
round homocks standing together, and a faire saddle
betweene  them.

27  It  floweth  where  we  road  this  Sunday  to  the  East-
wards of  Kegor,  at  a  Southeast  and  by  East  moone,  a  fuU
sea  :  we  roade  in  15.  fadome  water  within  halfe  a  mile  of
the  shoare  :  at  a  Northwest  Sunne  the  mist  came
downe  so  thicke,  that  we  were  faine  to  come  to  an  ancre
within  lesse  then  a  mile  of  the  point  that  turneth  to  Doms  Domskaff.
hafF,  where  we  had  33.  fadome,  and  the  sounding  like  to

the  skurfe  of  a  skalde  head.

28  Munday  at  afternoone,  wee  came  into  the  Sound  of  Wardhouse.
Wardhouse,  although  it  were  very  mistie. Then  I  sent  a

371

A.D.

1557-

]|  Which  were
the  Bona  Es-
peranza,  the
Bona  confi-
dentia  and  the
Philip  and
Marie.
W'^ hereof  the
two  first  were
lost.

\Or,Trondon.

The  Philip
and  Marie.
The  bona
Confidentia
cast  away.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

man  a  shoare  to  know  some  newes,  and  to  see  whether
they  could  heare  any  thing  of  our  II  ships.

29  Tuesday  I  went  on  shoare,  and  dined  with  the
Captaines  deputie,  who  made  mee  great  cheere  :  the
Captaine  himselfe  was  not  as  yet  come  from  Bergen  :  they
looked  for  him  every  houre,  and  they  said  that  he  would
bring'  newes  with  him.

At  a  Northwest  and  by  North  sunne  we  departed  from
Wardhouse,  toward  Colmogro.

30  Wednesday  we  came  to  Kegor,  where  we  met  with
the  winde  at  East  Southeast,  so  that  we  were  faine  to  go
in  to  a  bay  to  the  Westwards  of  the  point  Kegor,  where  a
man  may  moare  2.  or  3.  small  ships,  that  shall  not  draw
past  1 1,  or  12,  foote  water,  for  all  windes,  an  East  North-
east winde  is  the  worst.  It  is  a  ledge  of  rocks,  that
defendeth  the  Northerly  winds  from  the  place  where  they
moare.  When  we  came  into  the  bay  we  saw  there  a
barke  which  was  of  II  Dronton,  &  three  or  foure  Norway
yeaghes,  belonging  to  Northberne  :  so  when  I  came  a
shoare,  I  met  first  with  the  Dutchmen,  amongst  whom
was  the  Borrow-masters  sonne  of  Dronton,  who  tolde  me
that  the  Philip  and  Mary  wintered  at  Dronton,  and
departed  from  thence  for  England  in  March  :  and  withall
he  shewed  me  that  the  Confidence  was  lost,  and  that  hei
had  bought  her  sailes  for  his  ship.  Then  the  Dutch-men
caried  me  to  their  Boothe,  and  made  me  good  cheere,
where  I  sawe  the  Lappians  chepen  of  the  said  Dutchmen,
both  silver  platters  and  dishes,  spoones,  gilt  rings,
ornaments  for  girdles  of  silver  &  gilt,  and  certaine  things
made  to  hang  about  the  necke,  with  silver  chaines
belonging  to  them.

The  Dutchmen  bring  hither  mightie  strong  beere.
I  am  certaine  that  our  English  double  beere  would
not  be  liked  of  the  Kerils  and  Lappians,  as  long  as  thai
would  last.

Here  I  sawe  the  Dutchmen  also  have  course  cloth,  both
blew,  greene  and  redde,  and  sad  horseflesh  colour  :  Anc
hither  they  bring  also  Ottars  cases  and  foxe  cases,  bott

372

STEPHEN BURROUGH  ad.

1557-
blacke  and  redde  :  our  English  foxe  cases  are  but  counter-
faits  unto  them.

They  would  not  let  me  understand  any  of  their  prises,
but  as  I  otherwise  understood  they  bartered  2.  load  of
silver  for  100  of  stockfish,  and  2.  loade  is  a  doller.  And
the  Dutchmen  told  me,  that  they  had  made  a  notable  [I.  295.]
good  yeere  this  present  yeere  1557.  They  tolde  me  that
they  should  be  faine  to  goe  to  Wardhouse  with  one
lading,  and  lay  it  on  land  there,  and  so  come  againe  and
fetch  another.  The  Borrowmasters  sonne  told  me,  that
he  would  go  to  Amsterdam  with  his  lading  of  stockfish,
who  gave  me  a  barrell  of  strong  beere,  and  brought  it  in
aboord  our  ship  himselfe.

After  this  I  went  among  the  Russes  and  Kerils,  who
offered  me  fish  to  sell,  and  likewise  the  Lappians  desired
me  to  looke  upon  their  fish. I  made  them  answere,  that
I  had  nowe  no  wares  nor  money  to  barter  with  them,  and
said that I came only  to see if  I might meete with
our English ships. Then they desired me that I
would come thither the next yeere  : I said to them,
If  I should  come  the  next  yeere,  I thinke  here  would  A  gainefull
not be fish ynough to serve the Dutchmen and us  trade  of  fishing
also. They answered me, that if more ships did  ^ ^^°^'
resort  thither,  there  would  more people  labour to  kill
and make fish  : and further they said, that some of
them came thither a fishing 8. weekes  journey with
jDeere, which Deere will travaile more speedily then
horses  will.

As  I  was  thus  in  talke  with  the  Kerils  and  Lappians,
the  Emperour  of  Russia  his  deputie  (who  was  there  to
gather  the  tribute  of  the  Lappians)  sent  for  me  to  come
to  his  tent,  who  after  familiar  salutations,  made  me  good
cheere.  He  demaunded  of  me,  why  none  of  our  ships
came  thither.  I  answered  him,  because  we  knew  not  the
place  before  now,  neither  yet  heard  of  any  faire  that  was
kept  there.  Then  said  he,  If  you  will  come  hither,  here
would  more  people  resort  to  kill  fish,  I  thinke  it  good
^said  he)  that  you  make  a  beginning. I  tolde  him,  that

373

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

by  the  grace  of  God  the  next  yeere,  one  English  ship
should come  thither.

Because  I  sawe  the  servants  of  the  king  of  Denmarke
there  also  gathering  the  tribute,  I  asked  Vasilie  Pheodor-
vich  the  Russie  deputie,  whether  the  Denmarks  would
not  be  a  let  to  us,  if  we  should  come  to  this  Kegor.
And  he  said,  no,  they  should  not  :  for  this  land  is  my
kings,  and  therefore  be  bolde  to  come  hither.

The  Kerils  and  the  Lappians  solde  no  fish,  untill  the

said  deputie  had  looked  upon  it, and had  given  them

Commodities leave to sell. I asked him what  wares were best for

Jit  for  Kegor. ^g ^^ bring thither, and he said,  silver,  pearles,  cloth,

blewe, red, and greene, meale, strong beere, wine,

pewter,  foxe  cases,  and  gold.

The  Lappians  pay  tribute  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,
to  the  king  of  Denmarke,  and  to  the  king  of  Sweden.
He  tolde  me  that  the  River  Cola  is  little  more  then
20.  leagues  to  the  Southwards  of  Kegor,  where  we  should
have  great  plentie  of  salmon,  if  corne  were  any  thing
cheape  in  Russia  :  for  then  poore  men  would  resort
thither  to  kill  salmon.

The  Dutchmen  tolde  me  that  they  had  made  a  good
yeere  of  this,  but  the  Kerils  complained  of  it,  because
they  could  not  sell  all  their  fish,  and  that  which  they
sold  was  as  pleased  the  Dutchmen,  and  at  their  own
price.  I  asked  the  Kerils  at  what  price  they  sold  their
fish  to  the  Russes,  &  they  said  good  cheape  :  wee  sell
24.  fishes  for  4.  altines.  I  thinke  they  solde  little
above  20.  pence,  the  25.  fishes  this  yeere.

The  Dutchmen  tolde  me  that  the  best  stockfish  is
made  at  Kegor.  I  sawe  at  Vasilies  tent  7.  or  8.
javelins,  and  halfe  a  dozen  of  bowes  bent,  with  their
budgets  of  arrowes,  &  likewise  swords  with  other
weapons  : Otherwise  1 sawe  no  weapons  there.

I  was  also  conveyed  to  their  lodgings,  which  gathered
tribute  for  the  king  of  Denmarke,  where  I  sawe  a  paire
of  bilbowes  :  and  I  asked  whether  they  were  for  the
Lappians  (if  neede  were,)  and  they  said  no, but  onely

374

INSTRUCTIONS TO MASTERS

for  their  owne  company  if  they  should  chance  to  be
unruly.

The  Kerils  and  the  Lappians  are  not  to  be  trusted,
for  they  will  steale  as  well  as  the  Russes,  if  they  may
conveniently  come  by  any  thing.

Concerning  my  voyage,  because  the  winde  was  scant
to  goe  backe  againe  to  Colmogro,  I  tarried  to  the  East-
wards of  the  poynt  Kegor,  and  sent  to  land,  and  baked
two  batches  of  bread  in  the  ovens  that  the  Kerils  have
for  their  provision.

Instructions  given  to  the  Masters  and  Mariners
to  be  observed  in  and  about  this  Fleete,  passing
this  yeere  1557.  tovv^ard  the  Bay  of  S.  Nicolas
in  Russia,  for  this  present  Race  to  be  made  &
returne  of  the  same  by  Gods  grace  to  the
port  of  London,  the  place  of  their  right  dis-
charge, as  in  the  Articles  ensuing  is  deduced.

Irst, it is  accorded  and agreed  betweene
the severall proprietaries and owners,
masters and companies of the foure
ships,  surnamed  the  Primrose,  the  John^'
Evangelist, the Anne and the Trinitie,'
and the Lieutenant, Consuls, assistants
and companie of  the Marchant adven-
turers, that  the  above  named  foure  ships  shall  in  good
order  and  conduct,  saile,  passe,  and  travaile  together  in
one flote, ging, and conserve of  societie, to be kept
indissolubly  and not  to be severed, but united  within
continuall  sight,  so  farre  foorth  as  (by  winde  &  weather)
by possibilitie shall or  may be without any  separation  [I.
or departure  of  one  from  the  other.

2 Item, it is agreed that  the good ship named the
Primerose, shalbe Admirall of this flote, and that
Anthonie  Jenkinson  Gentleman,  shalbe  captaine  thereof :/
and that all other the 3. ships shall ensue  and folow
her in all courses,  and that no  course  nor  waying (in

375

A.D.

1557-

296.]

1557'

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

harborough  especially)  shall  be  made  without  advice,
consent  and  agreement  of  the  sayd  Captaine,  the
Master,  his  mate,  and  two  other  officers  of  the  said
ship,  or  of  three  of  them  at  the  least.

3  Item,  that  the  said  Anthonie  is  and  shalbe  reputed
&  taken  for  Captaine  general  of  the  said  flote  together
with  all  such  orders,  preeminences,  priviledges  and
preferments  as  by  the  order  of  seas  is  due  and  accus-
tomed to  a  Captaine  during  his  abode  and  exercise  of
the  same.

4  It  is  also  ordeined,  that  if  any  one  or  moe  of
the  said  3.  ships  shalbe  out  of  sight  either  before  or
behinde  the  Admirall,  that  then  the  rest  of  the  ships
shall  tacke  or  take  off  their  sailes  in  such  sort  as  they
may  meete  and  come  together,  in  as  good  order  as  may
be,  to  the  intent  to  keepe  the  consortment  exactly  in
all  poynts.

5  It  is  constituted,  that  if  any  ships  shalbe  severed
by  mist  or  darke  weather,  in  such  sort  as  the  one
cannot  have  sight  of  the  other,  then  and  in  such  case
the  Admiral  shall  make  sound  and  noise  by  drumme,
trumpet,  home,  gunne  or  otherwise  or  meanes,  that  the
ships  may  come  as  nigh  together,  as  by  safetie  and  good
order they  may.

6  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  every  day  once  the
other  three  shippes  shall  send  and  come  aboord  the
Admirall,  and  there  consult  and  determine  of  such
matter  and  things  as  shall  be  for  the  assurance  of  their
Navigation,  and  most  expedition of  the  same.

7  Item,  that  notes  &  entries  be  daily  made  of  their
Navigations  put  in  writing  &  memory,  and  that  the
yong  Mariners  and  apprentices  may  be  taught  &  caused
to  learne  and  observe  the  same.

8  It  is  accorded  that  the  said  Captaine  shall  have
the  principall  rule  and  governement  of  the  apprentices  :
And  that  not  onely  they,  but  also  all  other  the  sailers,
shalbe  attendant  and  obedient  to  him,  as  of  duetie  and
reason appertaineth.

376

INSTRUCTIONS TO MASTERS  a.d.

1557-

9  Also  that no beere nor broth,  or  other  liquor  be

spilt  upon  the  balast,  or  other  place  of  the  ship,  whereby
any  anoyance,  stinke,  or  other  unsavorinesse  shall  growe
in  the  shippe  to  the  infection  or  hurt  of  the  persons
in  the  same.

10  Item,  that  the  Captaine  by  discretion  shall  from
time  to  time  disship  any  artificer  or  English  servingman
or  apprentice  out  of  the  Primrose  into  any  of  the  other
three  ships,  and  in  lieu  of  him  or  them,  take  any  such
apprentice  as  he  shall  thinke  convenient  and  most  meete
to  serve  the  benefite  of  the  companie.

1 1  Item,  that  great  respect  be  had  to  the  Gunners
and  Cookes  roomes,  that  all  danger  and  perill  of  powder
and  fire  may  be  eschewed  and  avoyded.

12  Item,  that  singular  care  and  respect  be  had  to
the  ports  of  the  ship,  aswell  in  Navigation  as  in
harborow,  and  especially  in  lading  and  unlading  of  the
shippes,  that  nothing  be  lacking  or  surcharged  :  and  that
the  bookes  may  oftentimes  be  conferred  and  made  to
agree  in  eschuement  of  such  losses,  as  may  ensue.

13  Special  foresight  is  to  be  had,  that  at  the  Ward-
house  no  treacherie,  invasion,  or  other  peril  of
molestation  be  done  or  procured  to  be  attempted  to  our
ships  by  any  kings,  princes,  or  companies,  that  do
mislike  this  new  found  trade  by  seas  to  Russia,  or
would  let  &  hinder  the  same  :  whereof  no  small
boast  hath  bene  made  :  which  giveth  occasion  of  more
circumspection  and  diligence.

14  If  the  winde  and  weather  will  serve,  it  is  thought
good  rather  to  goe  by  the  Wardhouse  then  to  come  in
and  ancre  there,  lest  any  male  engine,  or  danger  may
be  the  rather  attempted  against  us,  our  goods  and  ships
as  above.

15  It  is  thought  good  that  Richard  Johnson,  late
servant  to  M.  Chanceler,  shall  be  sent  home  in  this
next  returne,  to  instruct  the  company  of  the  state  of
the  Countrey,  and  of  such  questions  as  may  be  de-
manded of him, for our better advertisements and

377

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

resolutions,  in  such  doubts  as  shall  arise  here  :  and  that
he  shall  have  the  roome  of  the  Captaine  in  such  sort,
as  Master  Jenkinson  is  in  this  present  cocket  assigned
unto.  And  if  Johnson  can  not,  may  not,  nor  will  not
returne  and  occupie  the  said  place,  then  any  other  person
to  be  preferred  thereunto,  as  by  the  discretion  of  our  said
Captaine,  with  consent  of  our  Agents,  shall  be  thought
meete  and  apt  to  supply  the  same.

1 6  Provided  alway,  that  the  ships  returning  be  not
disfurnished  of  one  such  able  man,  as  shall  occupie  the
Captainship  in  like  order,  as  is,  and  hath  bene  in  such
case appoynted,  as  reason  and  good  order  requireth.

17  Item  that  all  other  former  orders,  rules,  and
devises,  made  and  provided  for  the  good  order  of  our
ships,  wares,  and  goods,  being  not  repugnant,  contrary
or  diverse,  to  these  articles,  and  the  contents  of  the
same,  shall  be,  and  stand  in  full  force  and  effect,  to  be
in  all  respects  observed  and  .kept  of  all  and  every  person
and  persons,  whom  the  same  doth  or  shall  touch  or
concerne.

[I.  297.] In  witnesse  of  the  premisses  faithfully  to  be  observed
and  kept,  the  owners  and  Masters  of  the  said  foure  ships,
together with the said Captaine, to these seventeene
articles, contained in two sheetes of  paper, have sub-
scribed their hands. Given in London, the third of
May,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God 1557.
^  Owners  of  the  Primerose.
Andrewe  Judde.
William  Chester.
Anthony  Hickman.
Edward  Casteline.
^  Owners  of  the  John  Evangelist.
Andrew  Judde.
William  Chester.
^  Owner  of  the  Anne.

John  Dimocke.
^  Owner  of  the  Trinitie.
R.  T.
378

LETTER TO THE AGENTS

A.D.

1557-

A  letter  of  the  Company  of  the  Marchants
adventurers  to  Russia  unto  George  Killing-
worth,  Richard  Gray,  and  Henry  Lane  their
Agents  there,  to  be  delivered  in  Colmogro  or
els  where  : sent  in  the  John  Evangelist.

Fter  our  heartie  commendations  unto  you  1557.
and  to  either  of  you  :  your  generall
letter  and  other  particular  letters  with
two  bookes  of  the  sale  and  remainders  of
our  goods,  and  the  buying  of  ware  there
with  you,  we  received  about  the  ende
of  November  out  of  the  Edward,  with
heavie  newes  of  the  losse  of  the  sayde  good  shippe  and
goods  at  Petslego  in  Scotland,  with  the  death  of  Richard
Chanceler  and  his  Boy,  with  certaine  of  the  Embassadours
servants,  and  he  himselfe  with  nine  of  his  servants  escaped
very  hardly  onely  by  the  power  of  God  :  but  all  his
goods  and  ours  in  maner  were  lost  and  pilfered  away  by
the  Scots,  and  that  that  is  saved  is  not  yet  come  to
our  hands,  but  we  looke  for  it  daily,  and  it  will  skant
pay  the  charges  for  the  recovering  of  it.  No  remedy
but  patience  :  and  to  pray  to  God  to  send  us  better
fortune  hereafter.  As  touching  the  receiving  and  enter-
taining of  the  Embassadour  and  his  retinewe  since  his
comming  to  England  at  the  king  and  Queenes  Majesties
hands,  with  the  Counsell  &  Lords  of  this  Realme,  and
the  Marchants  that  be  free  in  Russia  with  feasting
and  benevolence  given  him,  wee  referre  it  to  his  report
and  others.  The  like  we  thinke  have  not  bene  seene  nor
shewed  here  of  a  long  time  to  any  Ambassadour.  The
Philip  and  Marie  arrived  here  tenne  dayes  past  :  shee
wintered  in  Norway.  The  Confidence  is  lost  there.
And  as  for  the  Bona  Esperanza,  as  yet  we  have  no
newes  of  her.  We  feare  it  is  wrong  with  her.  By
your  billes  of  lading  received  in  your  generall  letters
we  perceive  what  wares  are  laden  in  them  both. Your

379

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

letters have no date nor mention where they were

made,  which  were  written  by  Henry  Lane,  and  firmed
by  you  George  Killingworth,  and  Richard  Gray  :  both
it  and  the  other  Letters  and  Bookes  came  so  sore
spoyled  and  broken  with  water  that  we  cannot  make  our
reckoning  by  them.  You  shall  understand  we  have
fraighted  for  the  parts  of  Russia  foure  good  shippes  to
be  laden  there  by  you  &  your  order  :  That  is  to  say.
The  Primerose  of  the  burthen  of  240.  Tunnes,  Master
under  God  John  Buckland  :  The  John  Evangelist  of
170.  Tunnes,  Master  under  God  Laurence  Roundal  :
The  Anne  of  London  of  the  burthen  of  160.  tunnes.
Master  under  God  David  Philly,  and  the  Trinitie  of
London  of  the  burthen  of  140.  Tunnes,  Master  under
God  John  Robins,  as  by  their  Charter  parties  may
appeare  :  which  you  may  require  to  see  for  divers
causes.  You  shall  receive,  God  willing,  out  of  the
said  good  ships,  God  sending  them  in  safety  for  the  use
of  the  Company,  these  kinds  of  wares  following,  all
marked  with  the  general  marke  of  the  Company  as
IV are 5  sent  foUoweth.  25.  fardels  containing  207.  sorting  clothes,
into  Russia  one  fine  violet  in  graine,  and  one  skarlet,  and  40.  cottons
out  of  England.  ^^^  wrappers,  beginning  with  number  i.  and  ending  with
number  52.  The  sorting  clothes  may  cost  the  first  peny
5.1i.  9.S.  the  cloth,  one  with  the  other.  The  fine  violet
i8.1i.  6.S.  6.d.  The  skarlet  I7.1i.  13.S.  6.d.  the  cottons
at  9.1i.  lo.s.  the  packe,  accompting  7.  cottons  for  a  packe.
more  500.  pieces  of  Hampshire  kersies,  that  is  400.
watchets,  43.  blewes,  ^1.  reds,  15.  greenes,  5.  ginger
colours,  and  2.  yelowes  which  cost  the  first  penny  4.1i.
6.S,  the  piece,  &  3.  packes  containing  21  cottons  at
9.1i.  lo.s.  the  packe  :  and  part  of  the  clothes  is  measured
The  Arshlne  by  Arshines.  More  9.  barrels  of  Pewter  of  Thomas
is  a  Russie  Hasels  making,  &c.  Also  the  wares  bee  packed  and
measure.  laden  as  is  aforesayde,  as  by  an  Invoyce  in  every  Shippe

more  plainely  may  appeare. So  that  when  it  shall  please
[I.  298.] God  to  send  the  said  good  ships  to  you  in  safetie,  you
are  to  receive  our  said  goods,  and  to  procure  the  sales

380

LETTER TO THE AGENTS  ad.

1557-
to  our  most  advantage  either  for  ready  money,  time  or
barter  : having consideration that you doe make  good
debts,  and  give  such  time,  if  you  give  any,  as  you  may
employ  and  returne  the  same  against  the  next  voyage  ;
and  also  foreseeing  that  you  barter  to  a  profit,  and  for^
such wares  as  be  here  most  vendible,  as  wexe,  tallowe,
traine oyle, hempe and  flaxe. Of  furres  we  desire  no*
great  plentie,  because  they  be  dead  wares. And  as  for
Felts,  we  will  in  no  wise  you  send  any. And  whereas
you have provided tarre, and as we suppose, some
hempe  ready  bought,  our  advise  is,  that  in  no  wise  you
send  any  of  them  hither  unwrought,  because  our  fraight*'
is  4.1i.  a  tunne  or  little  lesse  : which  is  so  deare,  as  it
would not beare the charges  : and therefore we have
sent you 7. ropemakers, as by the copies of their  1  .Ropemakers
covenants  here inclosed shall appeare. Whom we  wil  "^^^^  ^!^^°

.  ., ,  ^ ^  ,.  .  .  ,.  c  Russia.

you set to worke with al expedition in making or

cables  & ropes of  al sorts, from the  smallest rope to<^

xii.  inches  :  And  that  such  tarre  and  hempe  as  is  already

brought  to  the  water  side,  they  may  there  make  it  out,

and  after that  you settle their  worke in  Vologhda or

Colmogro  as you shall  thinke  good,  where  their  stufFe

may  be  neerest  to  them  : at  which  place  and  places  you

doe  assigne  them  a  principall  overseer  aswell  to  see  the

deliverie of the stuffe unwrought, as also to take

charge  of  the  stuffe  wrought,  &  to  foresee  that  neither

the  yarne  be  burnt  in  tarring,  nor  the  hempe  rotted  in

the watering  ; and also to furnish them so with

labourers, workemen and stuffe, as hereafter when

these  workmen  shall  come  away,  we  be  not  destitute  of

good  workmen, and that these may dispatch as much

as possibly they  may,  doing it substancially  : for we

esteeme  it  a  principal  commoditie,  and  that  the  Counsel  Cables  and

of England doth well allowe. Let all diligence be''  ^°P^^  ^  P^'^^-

used,  that  at  the  returne of  these shippes  we may  see  ^y <:ommo-

samples  of  all ropes  &  cables  if  it be possible,  and  so

after  to  continue  in  worke,  that  we  may  have  good  store

against  the  next  yeere. Therefore they  have neede to

A.D.

1557-

Danske  the
old  chiefe
place  f 01-
Cables.

Commodities
not  beamig
the  charges
oflongfraight.

Furres  most
vendible.

Steele.

Copper.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

have  a  place  to  worke  in,  in  the  winter  :  and  at  any-
hand  let  them  have  helpe  ynough  to  spinne  their  stuffe  :
for  seeing  you  have  great  plentie  of  hempe  there,  and
at  a  reasonable  price,  we  trust  we  shalbe  able  to  bring
as  good  stufFe  from  thence,  and  better  cheape  then  out
of  Danske  :  if  it  be  diligently  used,  and  have  a  good
overseer.

Let the chiefest lading of these foure shippes be

c  principally  in  wexe,  flaxe,  tallowe  and  traine  oyle.  And
if  there  be  any  more  wares  then  these  ships  be  able  to
take  in,  then  leave  that  which  is  least  in  valew  and
grossest  in  stouage  untill  the  next  shipping :  for  wee
doe  purpose  to  ground  our  selves  chiefly  upon  these
commodities,  as  wexe,  cables  and  ropes,  traine  oyle,  flaxe
and some linen yarne. As for Masts,  Tarre,  Hempe,

s  Feathers,  or  any  such  other  like,  they  would  not  beare
the  charges  to  have  any,  considering  our  deere  fraight.
We  have  sent  you  a  Skinner  to  be  there  at  our  charges
for  meate,  drinke  and  lodging,  to  viewe  and  see  such
furres  as  you  shall  cheape  or  buye,  not  minding  never-
thelesse,  that  you  shall  charge  your  selves  with  many,
except  those  which  bee  most  vendible,  as  good  marterns,

*  minivers,  otherwise  called  Lettis  and  Mynkes.  Of
these  you  may  send  us  plentie,  finding  them  good  and
at a reasonable price. As for Sables and other rich

•  Furres,  they  bee  not  every  mans  money :  therefore  you
may  send  the  fewer,  using  partly  the  discretion  of  the
skinner  in  that  behalfe.

Wee  heare  that  there  is  great  plentie  of  Steele  in
Russia  and  Tartaric,  whereof  wee  would  you  sent  us
part  for  an  example,  and  to  write  your  mindes  in  it
what  store  is  to  be  had :  for  we  heare  say  there  is
great  plentie,  and  that  the  Tartars  Steele  is  better  then
that  in  Russia.  And  likewise  we  be  informed  that  there
is  great  plentie  of  Copper  in  the  Emperours  Dominions :
we  would  be  certified  of  it  what  plentie  there  is,  and
whether  it  be  in  plates  or  in  round  flat  cakes,  and  send
us  some  for  an  example. Also  we  would  have  you  to

382

LETTER TO THE AGENTS  a.d.

1557-
certifie  us  what kinde  of  wollen  cloth  the men  of  Rie  Wollen  doth
and Revel,  and the Poles and Lettoes doe bring to  "/^^^  '^^^
Russia,  and send the skantlings of  them  with part of  pl^i^^j/and
the  lists,  and  a  full  advise  of  the  lengths  and  breadths,  lettowe.
colours and prices, and whether they be strained or
not : and what  number of  them  may be uttered in a
yeere,  to the intent  we may  make provision for them
for  the  like sortes,  and  all other  Flemish  wares  which
they bring thither  and be most  vendible there. And
to  certifie  us  whether  our  set  clothes  be  vendible  there
or  not :  and  whether  they  be  rowed  and  shorne  :  because
ofttimes  they  goe  undrest. Moreover,  we  will  you  send
us  of  every  commoditie  in  that  Countrey  part,  but  no
great quantitie other then such as is before declared.
And  likewise every  kinde of  Lether,  whereof  wee bee,  Russian lether.
informed there is great store bought yeerely by the
Esterlings  and  Duches  for  hie  Almaigne  and  Germanie.

More, that you doe send us for proofe a quantity^^
of  such  earth,  hearbes,  or  what  thing  soever  it  be,  that
the  Russes  do  die  and  colour  any  kinde  of  cloth  linen  Things  good
or  wollen,  Lether  or  any  other  thing  withall : and  also  to  die  with-
part of  that  which the Tartars  and Turkes doe bring  ^^'■'
thither,  and  how  it  must  be  used  in  dying  and  colouring.
Moreover,  that you have a speciall foresight in the
chusing of your Tallowe, and that it m.ay be well
purified  and  tried,  or  els  it  will  in  one  yeere  putrifie  &
consume.

Also that  you certifie us the trueth of  the waights  [I-  299.]
and measures,  and howe they  doe answere  with ours,
and to  send us 3.  robles in money,  that  we may  trie
the  just  value  of  them.

Also we doe send you in these ships ten yong  Ten  yong  men
men that be bound Prentises to the  Companie,  whom  ^^nt  into  Rus-
we  will  you  to  appoynt  every  of  them  as  you  shall  there  "^'
finde most apt and meete, some to keepe accompts,
some  to  buy  and  sell by  your order  and Commission,  •'
and  some  to  send  abroad  into  the  notable  Cities  of  the
Countrey for understanding  and  knowledge. And we

383

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

will  you  send  us  advertisement  from  time  to  time  as
well  of  the  demeanours  of  our  Prentises  which  we  doe
send  now,  as  also  of  such  other  as  bee  already  there
with  you.  And  if  you  finde  any  of  them  remisse,
negligent,  or  otherwise  misuse  themselves  and  will  not
be  ruled,  that  then  you  doe  send  him  home,  and  the
cause  why.

Henry  Lane  And  because  we  doe  perceive  the  Countrey  to  be
large,  and  that  you  have  three  housholds,  we  doe
appoynt  Henry  Lane  to  be  one  of  our  Agents,  and  to
joyne  with  you  in  all  your  doings,  and  to  have  like
authoritie  and  power  as  you  George  Killingworth  and
Richard  Gray  have :  not  doubting  but  you  three  will  so
conferre  together,  as  both  our  Prentises  and  others  may
be  appoynted  and  divided  every  of  them  to  his  office,
and  to  that  he  can  best  skill  of:  and  you  also  so
divide  your  selves  every  of  you  to  an  house,  as  by
advertisement  one  from  another,  our  businesse  and
trafficke  may  take  good  successe.  And  for  divers  con-
siderations, to  avoyde  many  troubles  and  businesse  that
might happen, wee have appoynted that hee which

'^  shall  abide  at  Colmogro  (which  we  doe  thinke  to  bee
most  meetest  Henry  Lane)  shall  have  with  him  there
such  of  our  yong  men,  as  can  best  skill  in  keeping  of
accompts  after  the  maner  of  Marchants,  that  is,  by
Debitor  and  Creditor :  And  that  there  shall  be  the  place,

iwhere  our  bookes  shalbe  kept :  because  it  is  nearer  the
sea side, where our goods shalbe discharged and our

^ships  laden.  And  the  said  Henry  Lane  to  be  charged
with  all  such  goods  as  we  shall  discharge  there  out  of
our ships, according to our Invoyces. Which goods

'^are  to  be  sent  from  Colmogro  to  Vologhda  or  to  Mosco,
or to any  other place  where  you three  or two  of  you

"^do  appoynt  them  to  be  sold,  so  that  Henry  Lane  be
one.  And  so  from  time  to  time  immediatly  as  any
thing  is  sold,  doe  you  certifie  the  same  to  Henry  Lane,
that  he  may  enter  it  into  the  Bookes  as  appertaineth  :
otherwise  he  should  be  too  farre  behinde  in  his  Bookes

384

LETTER TO  THE  AGENTS  ad.

1557-
at  the  comming  of  our  ships,  when  he  should send  us
the  accompt of  the  whole  yeere passed. And  we  will
also that  you George Killingworth and Richard Gray
doe  in the  fine  of  April next  send  either  of  you  unto
Henry Lane a whole, perfit, &  just accompt firmed
with  your  owne  hands  of  all  the  goods  you  have  solde
and bought  untill that time,  and  what remaineth un-
solde : and also the accompt of all maner costs of
wares, and charges of  you and the  yong  men under
you particularly  in  such sort  as  the said  accompt  may
bee  with him in Colmogro  at the  fine  of  May  at  the
furthest : to the intent that hee may make all our  ^
accompts  perfite  against  the  comming  of  our  ships :  and
in any  wise to keepe accompt  of  every  voyage by it
selfe,  and not  mingle one  voyage  with another  at no/
hand. And  as  we  will  have  you  to  keepe  accompt  of
every  voyage by  it  selfe,  even so  wee  would have all
the  whole costes  and charges of  every  yeere put  into
the  voyage of  that  yeere. As the charges of  all the^^
last  yeere must be put to the  accompt of  the third
voyage: and the charges of  this yeere present,  must
in  the  fine  of  April  next,  be  put  to  the  fourth  voyage.  The  fourth
Not doubting but your wisedome is such,  that you  ^"J'^.?'^-
will not take it in evill part,  that wee doe appoynt
Henry  Lane  to  take  the  accompt  of  the  rest. For  we
doe  it  for  none  other  cause,  but  to  keepe  a  good  order
in our bookes,  that  his bookes  and ours may by this
meanes agree : and hee being the yonger man,  may
best  take  paines : and that  you  doe keepe  accompt  of
every  kinde  of  wares  by  it  selfe,  to  the  intent  wee  may
perceive  wherein  is  our  most  gaine. And  also  in  the
making of  your returne, in any wise name in your
billes of  lading,  letters,  and  accompts,  what  wares doe
appertaine  to  the first,  second,  and third voyage : and
that wee may knowe the same by the numbers or
otherwise  as  you  shall  thinke  good  by  your  wisedomes,
putting the  charges of  the saide  wares unto them,  as
nigh as  you  can. And all such money  as shall bee

II  385  2B

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

made  of  your  goods in  any  place,  wee  referre that to
your discretion, where it shall remaine untill it bee
employed, either at Vologhda, Mosco, or els where.
And  likewise  wee  will that Henry  Lane doe  make in
a  readinesse  about  the beginning  of  June every  yeere
*  our  whole  accompt  of  the  voyage  in  that  yeere  passed :
in such sort  that  wee may  receive the same by our
shippes :  and  that  wee  may  plainely  perceive  what  sales
are made, and what remaineth of the first, second,
third,  and  fourth  voyage,  and  what  charges have bene
layde out for the sayd voyages,  and  what wares bee
bought, and laden, and what they cost, and for
what  voyage every  parcell thereof  is : and  to  send  us
a  copie of  the same accompt in every shippe. And
also  forasmuch as at this  time  we have sent  you but
small  store  of  wares  in  comparison  of  that  we  have  hope
will bee uttered in short space,  and yet neverthelesse
much  more  then  you  wrote  for,  whereby  there  shall  not
[I.  300.] be sufficient to  make any  ample returne  : and under-
standing that  there  is  great  quantitie  of  goods  stayed  for
our  trade  there  by  the  Emperour,  wee  have  mooved  the
Embassador  that  you  may  have  credite  for  such  quantitie
as  shall  seeme  good  to  you  to  provide  for  our  benefite.
Which credite if  you may by his meanes obtaine,  or
>^therwise  have,  we  would  you bought  as much Wexe
principally  as  you may  get. For if  there be in that
countrey  so  great  quantitie,  as  we  be  informed  there  is,
it  will  be  the  best  commoditie  we  may  have  :  for  having
,/that wholly in our hands, we may serve our owne
Theoldetraf-  countrey  and others. Therefore seeing the  Emperour
fike  of  Russia  (Joth minde, that such commodities as bee in his
"  d  p'l ^T  ^  'ioi^i^ions  shall  not  passe  to  Rie  and  Revel  and  Poland
turned  to ^.s  they  have  done,  but  bee  reserved  for  us  : therefore
SaintNkkolasy'WQ  must SO  lay  for  it, that  it  may  not  ly  upon their
hands  that  have  it  to  sell,  alwayes  having  consideration
in  the  price and  time  as  our  next dispatch may  corre-
spond. Whereof  you  may  send  a  certaine  advise,  as  well
what  you  shall  receive  of  credit,  and  to  what  quantitie,

386

LETTER TO THE  AGENTS  a.d.

1557-
as  also  what  wares  are  remaining  in  your  hands  :  which
together  well  considered,  you  may  advertise  us  as  well
for  how  many  hundreth  tonnes  we  must  provide  fraight
against the next yeere,  as also what sortes, quantities
and qualities of  wares we shall send you, as well  to
pay  your  credite,  as  also  to  furnish  the  next  adventure
after. Of  this  we  would  be  answered  largely. For  we
trust  by  this  time  you  are  able  to  give  full  instructions
of  the  state  of  the  countrey  : according  to  the  articles  ^^^  articles
of  your  first Commissions, and  what  commodities  doev^/ ^^'•^'■^'^
principally  abound  there  with  their  prices:  and  likewise  p.,-^,^^  i^rr
what of  our commodities have most utterance there,''
and  what  prices  will  be  given  for  them  there  : and  allv
other  things  requisite  and  necessary  to  be  knowen.

Also  we  doe  understand  that  in  the  Countrey  of
Permia  or  about  the  river  of  Pechora  is  great  quantitie
of  Yewe,  and  likewise  in  the  Countrey  of  Ugory,  which'^
we  be  desirous  to  have  knowledge  of,  because  it  is  a
speciall  commoditie  for  our  Realme.  Therefore  wee
have  sent  you  a  yong  man,  whose  name  is  Leonard  Leonard
Brian,  that  hath  some  knowledge  in  the  wood,  to  shew/'^'^^'^^ -^^^^^^^

.  ,  .  , ^  J 1  c'  search  out

you  in  what  sorte  it  must  be  cut  and  cloven, bo  our  y^^g -^  the
minde is if  there  be  any  store,  and that  it bee  found  North  parts  of
to  be  good,  that  there  you  doe  provide  a  good  quantitie  Russia. •
against  the  next  yeere  for  the  comming  of  our  shippes :
and  if  there  can  bee  found  none  that  will  serve  for  our
purpose, then you  may  set  the  sayd  Leonard  Brian  to
any other businesse that you shall finde most fittest
for  him,  untill  the  returne  of  our  ships  the  next  yeere.
For  he is hired by  the yeere onely  for  that purpose.
We  doubt  not  but  that  hee  shall  doe  you  good  service
there. For hee hath  good  knowledge  of  wares  of  that
Countrey  : for his bringing up hath bene most in
Danske, and hath good understanding in making of
Ropes  and  Cables. Also  we  doe  send  you  two  Coopers*^2.  Coopers
to remaine there with you at our finding for meate  ^"^^  "^^°
and drinke and lodging to make in a readinesse all
such caske as shalbe needfull for traine  oyle,  tallowe,

387

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

or  any  thing  else.  One  of  them  may  goe  with  Leonard
Brian  to  cut  and  cleve  such  Yewe  as  he  shall  like
there.  And  because  we  be  not  sure  what  timber  they
shall  finde  there  to  make  Caske,  we  have  laden  in  these
ships  140.  tunnes  emptie  Caske,  that  is  94.  tunnes
shaken  Caske  and  46.  tunnes  whole,  and  ten  thousand
hoopes,  &  480.  wrethes  of  twigs  :  they  may  be  doing
with  that  till  they  can  provide  other  timber,  which  we
would  be  glad  to  heare  of.  They  have  an  example
with  them  of  the  bignesse  of  the  Caske  they  shall  make.
Neverthelesse,  all  such  Buttes  and  Hoggesheads  as  may
be  found  to  serve  we  will  shalbe  filled  with  Traine
Oyle.

Also  we  charge  you  that  you  suffer  no  goods  nor
marchandies  of  any  persons  being  not  free  of  the
Company,  and  of  the  accompt  of  the  Company  to  be
laden  in  any  wise  in  our  ships  either  now  or  at  any
time  hereafter :  except  the  Emperour  or  Embassadour
minde  to  send  any  thing  to  the  King  and  Queenes
Majesties,  or  to  any  noble  man,  or  to  the  Marchants  of
the  Companie :  Nor  likewise  that  you  suffer  any  goods
that  goe  in  these  ships  to  be  brought  on  land  there,
except  the  Ambassadours  goods,  and  the  Physitions  &
Apothecaries,  and  others  that  hee  hath  with  him,  who
carie  no  Marchandise.  And  because  our  ships  be
freighted  by  the  great,  it  shalbe  very  needefull  that  you
do  appoynt  certaine  to  see  the  romaging  of  the  ships,
and  to  give  the  master  or  Boatswaine,  or  him  that  will
take  upon  him  to  romage,  a  good  reward  for  his  labour
to  see  the  goods  well  romaged.  If  it  bee  iii.d.  or  iiii.d.
the  tunne,  it  shall  not  be  amisse.  For  if  it  be  not
substantially  well  looked  unto,  it  may  bee  a  great  deale
of  money  out  of  our  wayes.

Also  because  we  reckon  that  from  the  Mosco  will
bee  alwayes  better  conveyance  of  letters  to  us  by  land :
our  minde  is  that  from  time  to  time  as  occasion  shall
serve,  our  Agents  shall  write  to  him  that  shall  lie  at
Mosco  of  all  things  that  shall  passe,  that  hee  may  give

388

-/

LETTER TO  THE  AGENTS  ad.

1557-
us  large instructions, aswell  what  is  solde  and  bought,
as  also  what  lading  we shall take, and what  quantitie
and kinde of  goods  we shall send. For hitherto  we
have  had  but  a  slender  advise,  more  like  a  bill  to  serve
a Chapman, then for quantitie of wares to serve a  ^
kingdome. For  we  must  procure  to  utter  good  quantitie
of  wares, especially the commodities of our Realme,
although we affbord a  good penyworth, to the intent
to  make  other  that  have  traded  thither, wearie,  and  so
to  bring  our  selves  and  our  commodities  in  estimation,
and  likewise  to  procure  to  have  the  chiefe  commodities
of  that  countrey  in  our  hands,  as  waxe  and  such  others, *^[I.  301.]
that other nations  may bee served by us  and at our  >■■
hands. For wee doe understand that the greatest
quantitie of  waxe that commeth to Danske, Lubeck,
and Hambourgh,  commeth out of  Russia. Therefore
if  wee should buy part, and they  also buy, it would
raise the  price  there,  and  would  bee  litle  woorth here.
And  all  such  letters  of  importance  and secrecie  as  you The  mar  chants
doe  send  by  land  for  any  wares  or  otherwise,  you  must  ^^^^^^^  "f^^'

write  them  in  Cyphers,  after  the  order  of  a  booke  sent  y.'^^ written

_  J  y  '  .  in  ciphers.

you in the shippes : alwayes taking good heede in

placing  of  your  letters  and  cyphers,  that  wee  may  under-
stand them  by  the  same  booke  heere,  and  to  send
them  in  such  sort,  that  we  may  have  them  here  by
Christmas  or  Candlemas,  if  it  be  possible.  And  because
you  cannot  so  certainly  advertise  us  by  letters  of  your
doings,  but  some  doubt  may  arise,  whereof  we  would
most  gladly  be  certified :  our  mind  is  therefore  that
with  these  ships  you  send  us  home  one  such  yong  man  *'
as  is  most  expert  in  knowledge  of  that  countrey,  and
can  best  certifie  us  in  such  questions  as  may  be  demanded,
whome  we  will  remit  unto  you  againe  in  the  next  ships.
We  thinke  Arthur  Edwards  wilbe  fittest  for  that  purpose :
neverthelesse  use  your  discretion  in  that  matter.

As  touching  our  goods  that  were  robbed  and  pilfered
out  of  our  ships  at  Colmogro  and  Vologda  we  trust
by  this  time  they  are  restored  againe,  and  the  malefactors

389

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

so  punished  that  other  may  take  example  for  doing  the

like,  otherwise  it  will  be  an  evill  president. Moreover,

wee doe perceive that  Richard  Gray  doeth buy  mastes

to send into England, they  will not quit the costes,

The  voyag  of except  we  had  a  ship  of  purpose  for  them. And  like-

Steven  Bur- yi\^q  that  Steven  Burrow  is  returned  from  his  discoverie

^ discoverk  of ^^^^  ^^  Serchthrift,  and  wintereth  at  Colmogro,  and  is

the  river  of minded  to  set  forth  in  the  beginning of  June next to

Ob.  seeke  the  river  of  Ob. We  pray  God  to  speede  him

well,  and  trust  to  have  him  here  in  England  this  yeere

to  bring  us  good  newes.

We doe perceive there is a  river found about the

mouth  of  S.  Nicholas  Bay  that  hath  thirteen  foot  upon

the barre at  a  lowe  water, and is  as neere Colmogro

as  S.  Nicholas :  which  will  bee  a  great  pleasure  unto  us.

We  will  that  Steven  Burrowe  doe  proceed  on  his  voiage

M.  Anthonle to discover. Also we have sent you one Anthonie

/^«/Jmo»  ^zV  v^  Jenkinson Gendeman, a man  well  travelled,  whom  we

first  travaile  ^'jni^d  to  use  in  further  travelling,  according  to  a  Com-

tfltP'itu.fd. JQV  •

Catha-j  L  the  mission delivered him, subscribed by  master Anthonie

Caspian  sea Huse  and  Others. Wherefore  we  will  you  deliver  him

and  Boghar. one or more of  such painfull young men as he shal

thinke  meetest  for  his  purpose :  and  likewise  such  money

and  wares  as  he  shal  think  best  to  take  with  him. He

must  have fourty  pounds  a  yeere for foure  yeeres,  to

be  paid  him  by  the  halfe  yeere, or  as  he  wil  demaund

it  of  you,  so  let  him have  it  from Easter  last. Also

the prices  of  wares  here  at  this present  are,  bale  flaxe

twenty  pound  the  packe  and  better,  towe  flaxe  twentie

eight pound the hundred, traine oyle at nine pound

the  tunne,  waxe  at  foure  pound  the  hundred,  tallow  at

sixteene shillings the hundred, cables and ropes  very

deare  :  as  yet  there  are  no  shippes  come  out  of  Danske.

Kept untill the  tenth  day  of  this  present. As this

day  came  the  goods  out  of  Scotland  that  were  recovered

^ , , out of  the Edward Bonaventure  : and nowe we  doe

Liood  caske  •  i  i  i i  i  ^  • •

made  in  perceive  that  the  caske  that  the  trayne  oyle  came  m,  is

Russia.  verie  good,  and  much  better  then  ours. Therefore  our

390

LETTER  TO THE  AGENTS  a.d.

1557-
minde  is,  that  you  shall  lade  it  all  in  such  barrels  of
the  bigger  sort  as  you  laded  in  the  Edward,  and  no
long  barrels  nor  small.  And  that  caske  that  wee  have
sent  may  serve  for  the  Tallowe  or  anie  other  ware  that
is  not  leakage.  Neverthelesse,  this  voyage  you  must
take  such  as  you  can  get.

Also  if  the  Emperour  bee  minded  to  deliver  you  any
summe  of  money,  or  good  Waxe  at  as  reasonable  a
price  as  you  may  buye  for  readie  money,  wee  will  that
you  shall  take  it  and  lade  it  for  our  accomptes,  and
to  come  at  our  adventure,  and  hee  to  bee  payed  at
the  returne  of  the  shippes  in  Velvets,  Sattens,  or  any
other  kinde  of  silke,  or  cloth  of  golde,  cloth  of
tissue,  or  according  as  his  Commission  shall  bee  that
hee  shall  sende  us  in  the  shippes,  and  according  to
such  paternes  as  hee  shall  send.  Wee  doe  not  finde
the  Ambassadour  nowe  at  the  last  so  conformable  to
reason  as  wee  had  thought  wee  shoulde.  Hee  is  very
mistrustfull,  and  thinketh  everie  man  will  beguile  him.
Therefore  you  had  neede  to  take  heede  howe  youi
have  to  doe  with  him  or  with  any  such,  and  to
make  your  bargaines  plaine,  and  to  set  them  downel
in  writing.  For  they  bee  subtill  people,  and  doe  not.
alwaies  speake  the  trueth,  and  thinke  other  men  to
bee  like  themselves.  Therefore  we  would  have  nonei
of  them  to  send  any  goods  in  our  shippes  at  any^
time,  nor  none  to  come  for  passengers,  unlesse  the
Emperour  doe  make  a  bargaine  with  you,  as  is  afore-
said, for  his  owne  person.

Also  we  charge  you  not  to  suffer  any  of  our  nation
to  send  any  wares  to  their  wives  or  friends  in  any
of  our  ships ;  but  to  take  their  money  there  to  be
paied  heere  by  the  companie  and  not  otherwise:  and
to  have  consideration  how  you  doe  take  the  roble.
For  although  we  doe  rate  it  after  sixteene  shillings
eight  pence  of  our  money,  yet  it  is  not  worth  past
12.  or  13.  shillings  sterling.  Moreover,  you  had  neede  [I.  302.]
to sende newe accomptes,  for  them that came  in  the

391

w

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

Edward bee marred and torne,  so that  we  can make

no reckoning by them : and likewise to write us a

perfect  note  of  all the  goodes  which you received the

last voyage out of  the Edward,  and heerein not to

faile.

'Andrew  Judde.
George  Barne.
Anthonie  Huse.
William  Garrard.
William  Chester.

A Letter of Master Thomas Hav^trey to the
w^orshipfuU Master Henrie Lane Agent at
Colmogro, written in Vologda the 31. of
I5S7-  Januarie 1557.

'Orshipfull  Sir,  heartie  commendations  premised.
These  may  bee  to  advertise  you,  that  yesterday
the  thirtieth  of  this  present  came  hither  Robert  Best,
and  brought  with  him  two  hundred  robles,  that  is,
one  hundred  for  this  place,  and  one  hundred  for  you
at  Colmogro.  As  for  hempe  which  is  here  at  two
robles  and  a  halfe  the  bercovite,  master  Gray  hath
John  Sedge-  written  to  buy  no  more  at  that  price :  for  John
wick  at  Sedgewicke  hath  bought  for  sixe  or  seven  hundred
robles  worth  at  Novogrode  for  one  roble  and  a
halfe  the  bercovite,  and  better  cheape :  and  white  Novo-
grode flaxe  is  there  at  three  robles  the  bercovite.  I
trust  hee  will  doe  much  good  by  his  going  thither.
As  I  doe  understand,  Richard  Johnson  is  gone  to
Novogrode  with  money  to  him,  I  doubt  not  but
Master  Gray  hath  advertised  you  of  all  their  doings,
both  at  the  Mosco  and  at  Novogrod.  And  touching
our  doings  heere,  you  shall  perceive  that  wee  have
solde  wares  of  this  fourth  voyage  for  one  hundred  and
fourtie  robles,  besides  fiftie  robles  of  the  second  and
third  voyage  since  the  giving  up  of  my  last  account,
and for  wares of  the Countrey,  you shall understand

392

Novogrode.

LETTER FROM THOMAS HAWTREY  a.d.

1557-
that I have bought tried and untried for 77. robles
foure hundred podes of tried tallowe, besides foure
hundred podes that I have given out money for,
whereof God graunt good receipt when the time
commeth, which is in Lent. And in browne flaxe
and hempe I have bought seventeene bercovites, sixe
podes and sixteene pound, which cost 28. robles,
eleven altines two pence. And as for other kindes
of  wares  I  have bought none  as  yet. And  for  mastes  Masts  of 'i^o.
to bee provided,  you shall understand that  I  wrote  a  y^'''^^-
letter  to  Totma  the  28.  of  this  present  for  fiftie  mastes,
to wit,  for 25. of  fifteene fathoms,  and 25.  of  foure-
teene fathoms,  to be an arshine and a halfe at the
small  ende. And more,  1 have  written for 30. great
trees  to  be  two arshines  and  a  halfe  at  the  small  end.  An  Arshine  is
and for the other  that  were provided the last yeere, 3-  quarters  of
I trust  they shall  be sent  downe  in  the  spring-  of  the  ^  y^^'^  °^
yeere. And  as  concerning the Ropemakers,  you shall
understand  that  their  abiding  place  shall  bee  with  you  at  a  rope  house
Colmogro,  as  I  doe  thinke  Master  Gray  hath  advertised  erected  at
you. For,  as Roger  Bontinge Master  of  the  woorkes  C°^^W>-
doeth  say,  there  is  no  place  more  meete  for  their  pur-
pose then  with  you : and  there it  will be made  with
lesser  cost,  considering that the pale is the one halfe
of  it : which is to set one pale more to  that,  and so
for  to cover it over, which as they say, will be but
little cost. They  doe  pray  that  it  may  bee  made  sixe-
teene foote broade, and one hundred and eightie
fathoms long : and that in the midde way twentie
foote from the  pale towarde the  water  side  there  may
be  a  house  made  to  tarre  in,  standing  alone  by  it  selfe  Atarrehouse.
for  danger  of  fire. The  Tarre  house  that  they  woulde
have made, is to bee fifteene fathoms long, and ten
fathoms  broade,  and  they  would  that  house  should  be
made  first: for  I  thinke  they  will  not  tarre  before  they
come there. And farther they desire that you will
provide  for  as  much tarre as  you may, for  heere  wee
have small store,  but  when the time commeth that it

393

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

shoulde  be  made,  I  will  provide  as  much  as  I  can  here,
that  it  may  bee  sent  downe  when  the  Nasade  commeth.
The  stufFe  that  they  have  readie  spunne  is  about  five
thousand  waight,  and  they  say  that  they  trust  to  have
by  that  time  they  come  downe  yarne  ynough  to  make
20.  cables.  As  concerning  a  copie  of  the  Alphabet  in
Robert  ciphers Master Gray  hath written hither that Robert

Justen.  Austen  had  one,  which  he  willed  that  he  shoulde  deliver

to you. Thus I  surcease,  beseeching God  to  preserve
you  in  health,  and  to  send  you  your  hearts  desire.

By  yours  to  command  to  his  power,
Thomas  Hawtrey.

[I.  303-] A Letter of Master Richard  Gray one of  the
first Agents of the Moscovie companie to  1
Master Henrie Lane at Mosco,  written in  ,

1558.  Colmogro  the 19.  of  Februarie 1558.

'OrshipfuU  Sir,  after  heartie  commendations  &c.
You  shall  understand  that  this  Lent  commeth
Lampas  a  to  Lampas  such  a  number  of  men  of  divers  nations
great  mart  for  ^\\\^  wares,  as  hath  not  bene  scene  these  ten  yeeres.
in  the  North  Thither  come  many  out  of  Ugori  :  therefore  I  would
have  bene  there  my  selfe,  and  also  have  received
such  money  as  is  owing  us  in  wares  by  Kerill  his
brother  and  Osep  Boscovo.  For  as  you  well  know,
thence  they  will  goe  with  their  wares  to  the  Mosco,,
and  make  us  payment  with  delayes,  as  they  have
done  these  other  yeeres  past.  Colobone  and  his
partner  be  departed  towards  Lampas  with  seven  sleddes
laden  with  victuals.  Others  also  are  gone  to  that
Mart.  As  touching  the  bringing  of  money  with  you,
it  will  bee  good,  for  I  assure  you  since  our  comming
to  this  countrey  have  not  so  many  persons  gone  to
the  Sea,  as  will  doe  this  yeere.  Trusting  that  God
will  send  good  store  of  traine  oyle,  I  will  cause  as
much  caske  to  bee  in  a  readinesse  as  I  can,  if  you
shall  thinke  it  meete  to  send  some  money  before. All

394

w

LETTER FROM RICHARD  GRAY  a.d.

1558.

our olde hempe is spunne and wrought in tenne

cables from fifteene ynches to ten the least, and

thirteene Hausers from sixe ynches to three  ynches:

and all may  weigh white eight  and twenty thousande

pounde weight and upwarde. There is in hempe

ockam five thousand pound two hundred weight in

twelve sackes at the  least: the  flaxe that  came  downe

in the Nassadaes with those seven podes that came

last is all spunne with a good part of that hempe

that came last. God send more shortly, for  all that

is here and that is comming in the three other

sleddes, will bee dispatched by the fourth weeke in

Lent. Within  these  few  dayes  I  bought  thirteen  podes,

seven pound of  hempe that cost two robles, twenty

eight altines, foure pence, which together with that

that was bought before, shall bee laide in dipping

and sounding lines, for it is very good. There are

pent above fiftie barrels of  tarre alreadie : you shall  ^f^^t  quanti-

understand that these eight workemen will spinne  t^^ofJiempe%
, ,  ,  /-  1  1  J  J workmen  wtU

and lay above rourescore and tenne thousand pound  ^^^^^  ^-^  ^

of hempe, so it bee dressed readie to their hands,  jeere.

having two to turne the wheeles, and two to  winde

up. Therefore I have agreed with these two boyes

to serve the worshipful! companie foure yeeres a

piece. One of  them windeth up and is very  apt to

spinne : therefore I will have two other young men

Russes to spinne,  if  they  can finde good sureties for

their  trueth. I  have  bene  in  hand  with  these  two  yong

men that  came  out  of  the  Trinitie,  and  they  with  me,

but under  seven pound a yeere they  will not serve,

nor Thomas Bunting that was Roger Bunting his

servant. Therefore  I  would  have  three  Russes  at the

least  to  spinne,  five  of  them  will be as good  as  these

three,  and  will  not  be  so  chargeable  all,  as  one  of  these

would  be. I  thinke  it  were  good  that  our  Nassada  were

somewhat  strengthened  in  her  floore  on  both  sides  with

plankes  of  five  or  sixe  ynches  thicke,  from  the  stemme  to

the Sterne, as I have  written to Thomas Hawtrey  at

395

A.D.
1558.

fVhtte  hawks
iff  white
beares  pro-
hibited with-
out licence.

Master
Grayes  jour-
ney toLampas.

1558.

[I- 304.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Vologda.  Also  if  you  shall  so  thinke  meet,  your  waxe
and  tallowe  shall  bee  laden  in  two  Dosnickes,  for  they
bee  meete  to  goe  aboord  the  shippes :  I  doe  intend  to  set
up  an  house  at  Boroseva  over  against  the  place  whereas
the  shippes  shall  ride,  your  advise  therein  I  expect,  it  shall
not  cost  above  three  robles,  and  yet  if  we  will,  there  shall
be  two  warme  roomes  in  it.  As  for  other  matter  at  this
present  I  have  not  to  trouble  you  withall,  and  if  it  would
please  you  I  would  be  glad  to  heare  some  good  newes  of
Master  Jenkinson.  Thus  Jesus  be  with  you  and  be  his
guide.  _  j

Postscriptum.

As  for  these  our  Hawkes  they  bee  not  white,  but  white
and  mayled,  but  indeede  are  jarfawkons.  These  dayes
past  our  Olen  died.  So  this  yeere  our  Masters  of  the
companie  are  like  to  have  none,  nor  any  white  beares.
Neither  may  any  passe  out  of  the  realme  without  a  special
licence  from  the  Emperour.

I  intend  God  willing  to  goe  to  Lampas,  if  I  doe  I  will
take  foure  or  five  kerseys  with  me,  but  as  for  money  there;
is  small  store  here  to  carie.

Yours, Richard  Gray.

A  letter  of  Thomas  Alcocke  to  the  worshipfall
Richard  Gray,  and  Henrie  Lane  Agents  in
Moscovia  from  Tirwill  in  Polonia,  written  in
Tirwill  the  26. of  Aprill 1558.

MY  duety  premised  unto  your  worships,  with  com-
mendations &c.  It  may  please  you  to  be  adver-
tised, y'  my  last  I  sent  from  Smolensco,  which  I  trust  you
have  received  w'^  other  letters  to  divers  of  our  English
men,  wherein  I  certified  you  of  my  long  retayning  there,
as  also  of  my  departure  from  thence,  and  howe  that  I  had
hired  a  Totar  to  bring  mee  to  Danske.  We  came  to
certaine  village  on  Satterday  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of
Februarie,  and  there  remained  that  night  and  Sunday  to
refresh our horses, intending to have gone away on

396

LETTER FROM THOMAS ALCOCK

Munday  earely.  But  on  Saterday  at  night  one  of  his
neighbours  departed  to  Tirwill,  and  there  declared  to  the
Captaine  howe  that  at  such  a  place  there  was  a  Dutch
man  that  was  come  from  the  Mosco,  and  woulde  ride  to
Danske,  saying,  for  the  one,  I  cannot  tell  what  he  is.
The  Captaine  incontinent  ridde  to  the  King  to  shewe  him
thereof,  so  that  without  any  delay  there  was  sent  out  for
mee  one  of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Kings  house,  and  one
of  the  Mesnickes  of  the  Towne  with  sixe  Officers  to  take
mee.  They  came  thither  in  the  night  about  midnight,
and  there  apprehended  mee  and  tooke  all  that  I  had  from
me :  they  left  mee  nothing  but  my  clothes  to  put  on  my
backe,  and  so  brought  mee  to  Tirwill  to  the  Captaines
house,  where  before  I  dyned,  I  had  a  payre  of  fetters
clapped  on  my  legges,  wherewithall  I  sate  untill  it  was
Munday  in  the  Easterweeke.  On  which  day,  after  long
and  earnest  calling  to  the  Captaine  as  hee  ridde  by  the
windowe,  hee  commaunded  the  Marshall  that  mine  yrons
shoulde  be  taken  oif,  but  no  worde  I  could  heare  when
should  be  delivered  out  of  captivitie  till  it  was  Saint
George  his  day :  on  which  day  I  was  had  before  the
Marshall,  who  declared  unto  me  that  the  Kings  Majestic
had  shewed  his  mercie  and  goodnesse  towardes  mee :  for
his  pleasure  was  that  I  should  be  delivered  out  of  prison
to  depart  into  England,  but  no  way  else.  So  after  I  had
given  thankes  for  the  Kings  Majesties  goodnesse  shewed
unto  me,  I  desired  him  that  he  woulde  be  a  meane  that
I  might  have  the  remaynder  of  such  thinges  as  were
taken  from  me  restored  unto  me  againe.  Hee  made  me
answere,  that  I  might  thanke  God  that  I  escaped  with
my  head,  and  that  if  ever  there  came  any  more  of  us
through  the  land,  they  should  not  so  doe.  The  weeke
before  Easter  they  delivered  mee  my  Corobia  againe  with
all  thinges  that  were  therein.  They  tooke  from  mee  in
money  nine  Hungers  gylderns  in  golde,  five  shillings
foure  pence  in  Lettoes  money,  fourtie  Altines  in  Russe
money,  whereof  twentie  and  more  were  for  tokens,  halfe
an  angell  and  a  quarter  of  Master  Doctour  Standishes,

397

A.D.
1558.

Doctor  Stand-
is  h  theEmper-
ours  Phisition.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

with  his  golde  ring.  Your  two  pieces  of  money  (Master
Gray)  that  you  sent  to  your  wife  and  daughter,  with  my
two  pieces  of  Boghary  money.  Of  all  this  I  had  eight
Hungers  gilderns  delivered  mee  the  thirde  weeke  of  mine
imprisonment  to  paye  for  my  charges,  which  stoode  mee
in  a  DoUer  a  weeke.  So  that  at  the  day  of  my  deliverie
1  had  but  three  gyldernes  left  me.  For  the  rest  I  made
a  supplication  to  the  Captaine  and  had  the  like  answere
given  mee  as  the  Marshall  gave  me.  So  that  all  the  rest
of  the  thinges  before  written  are  lost,  and  no  recoverie
to  bee  had,  which  grieveth  me  more  for  the  tokens  sakes
then  doeth  mine  eight  weeks  imprisonment.  They  have
also  my  sword,  my  bootes,  my  bowe  and  arrowes  that  I
bought  at  Smolensco,  which  cost  me  foure  marks,  my
sled,  my  felt,  the  comhold,  a  booke  of  the  Flowres  of
godly  prayers,  and  my  booke  wherein  my  charges  were
written.  Of  all  these  I  can  get  nothing  againe,  not  so
much  as  my  two  bookes.

After  I  had  remayned  there  five  and  thirtie  dayes,  I
was  had  before  the  Captaine  up  into  a  great  chamber  to
bee  examined  for  letters  and  of  the  cause  of  my  comming
through  the  Countrey.  In  the  Captaines  companie  was
one  of  the  Lordes  of  Danske.  They  demaunded  of  mee
where  my  letters  were,  I  declared  unto  them  that  I  had
none :  your  Officers  (sayd  I)  tooke  me  when  I  was  in
my  bedde,  they  searched  mee  and  tooke  all  that  I  had
from  mee,  if  there  be  any  they  shall  finde  them  among  my
stufFe  which  they  have.  They  asked  mee  then,  for  what
cause  I  went  home  over  lande  ?  I  declared  unto  them,
that  the  Winter  beeing  a  warme  season,  and  having
intelligence  that  The  frozen  Sea  was  not  much  frozen,
and  supposing  this  Sommer  it  would  be  navigable,  I  was
onely  sent  to  provide  a  Shippe  to  bee  sent  to  passe  the
sayde  Seas  to  discover  Cataia :  which  if  God  graunted
wee  might  doe,  it  woulde  not  onely  bee  a  commoditie  to
the  Realme  of  Englande,  but  unto  all  Christian  landes,
by  the  riches  that  might  bee  brought  from  thence,  if  the
histories  bee  true  that  are  written  thereof. Much  other

398

LETTER FROM THOMAS ALCOCK  ad.

1558.
communication  I  had  with  them  concerning  the  same
voyage.  Then  he  demaunded  of  mee  what  wares  wee
brought  into  Russia,  and  what  wee  carried  from  thence.
I  declared  the  same  unto  them.  Then  they  burdened
mee,  that  wee  brought  thither  thousandes  of  ordinance,
as  also  of  harneis,  swordes,  with  other  munitions  of
warre,  artificers,  copper,  with  many  other  things :  I  made
them  answere,  that  wee  had  brought  thither  about  one
hundred  shirtes  of  mayle,  such  olde  thinges  newe
scowred  as  no  man  in  Englande  woulde  weare.  Other
talke  they  had  with  mee  concerning  the  trade  of  Mos-
covia  too  long  to  commit  to  writing.

At  my  comming  hither  heere  were  Ambassadours  from
the  townes  of  Danske,  Lubeck,  and  Hamburgh,  as  also  [I.  305.]
out  of  Liefland  to  desire  this  king  to  bee  their  Captaine
and  head  in  their  intended  voyage,  which  was  to  stoppe  ^ji  attempt  to
all  such  shippes  as  shoulde  goe  out  of  England  for  Mos-  '^"^^'^'"  °^''^

•  •  • t t7'cdc  to  Mos-

covia. Whereunto  the  King  graunted,  and immediatly  ^^^^^  ^ ^^^
they  departed to  prepare their  shippes. So  that 1  am  Hans  townes
afraide  that  either  these  our  enemies,  or  the  great  warres ^  Easter-
that  we  have  with  France  and  Scotland  will  be  an  occasion  "^'S^-
that  you  shall  have  no  shippes  at  Colmogro  this  yeere.

To  conclude,  although  I  have  no  tokens  to  deliver
them,  that  the  tokens  taken  from  me  were  sent  unto,  yet
I  will  declare  unto  them  that  I  had  tokens  for  them,  with
the  mischance.  And  thus  I  commit  you  to  Almightie
God  with  the  rest  of  the  companie,  who  keepe  you  in
lealth  to  his  holy  will  and  pleasure.

By  yours  to  commaund
Thomas  Alcocke.

[A  Letter
399

w

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1559-

A  Letter  of  Master  Anthonie  Jenkinson  upon  his

returne  from  Boghar  to  the  worshipful  Master

Henrie Lane Agent for the Moscovie  com-

panie resident in Vologda, written in the

1559-  Mosco  the 1 8. of  September, 1559.

'Orshipfull Sir, after my heartie commendations
premised  with  most  desire  to  God  of  your  welfare
and prosperous successe in all your affaires. It may
please you to bee  advertised that the fourth of this;
present I arrived with Richard Johnson and Robert!
Master  Jen- Johnson  all  in  health,  thankes  bee  to  God. Wee  have
kensons voyage  bene  as  farre  as  Boghar,  and had  proceeded  farther  on;
C^/1  ^  °^^  voyage  toward  the  lande  of  Cathay,  had  it  not  bene;

for  the  uncessant  and  continuall  warres,  which  are  in  alll
these brutall and wilde countreys, that it is at this
present impossible to passe, neither went there any-
Caravan of  people from Boghar that way  these threes
yeeres. And although our journey hath bene so^
miserable,  dangerous,  and  chargeable  with  losses,  charges
and expenses,  as  my  penne  is  not  able  to  expresse the
same  : yet  shall  wee bee able to satisfie  the  woorship-j
The  discovery  full  Companies  mindes,  as  touching  the  discoverie  of  The^l
of  the  Caspian  Caspian  Sea,  with the  trade  of  merchandise  to  bee  hadlj
in  such  landes  and  countreyes  as  bee  thereabout  adjacent, '
and have brought of the wares and commodities of
those Countries able to answere the principall with;
profite  :  wishing  that there  were utterance for  as  great i
a  quantitie  of  kersies  and  other  wares  as  there  is  profite
to  bee had  in the  sales  of  a small  quantitie,  (all such
evill fortunes beeing  escaped as to us have  chaunced
this present voyage,) for then it woulde be a trade
woorthie to bee followed. Sir, for that I trust you
will  be  here  shortly  (which  I  much  desire)  I  will  deferre
the  discourse  with you at  large untill your comming,
as well touching  my  travel, as of  other things. Sir,
John  Lucke  departed from hence  toward England the

400

LETTER TO  THE  AGENTS  ad.

1560.

seventh  of  this  present,  and  intendeth to  passe  by  the  Passage  to  and
way  of  Sweden,  by  whom  I  sent  a  letter  to  the  worshipfull  f^""^  Moscovta
Companie,  and  have  written  that  I  intend  to  come  downe -^ ^^  ^^'
unto  Colmogro  to  be  readie  there  at  the  next  shipping  to
imbarke  my  selfe  for  England,  declaring  that  my  service
shal  not  be  needfull  here,  for  that  you  are  a  man  able
to serve their worships in greater affaires then they
have  heere  to  doe,  so  farre  as  I  perceive. As  touching
the  Companies  affaires  heere,  I  referre  you  to  Christopher
Hudsons letters, for that I am but newly arrived.
Having here but litle businesse to doe, I send you
Richard Johnson to helpe you there in your affaires.
Thus giving you most heartie thanks for my  wench This  was  a
A.ura Soltana, I commend  you  to  the  tuition  of  God,  yo^sTaj-tar
tvho  send  you  health  with  hearts  desire.  ^  ^^  ^^^

Your  assured  to  command, Queene  after-
Anthonie  Jenkinson.

A.  Letter  of  the  Moscovie  companie  to  their
Agents  in  Russia,  Master  Henrie  Lane,
Christopher  Hudson,  and  Thomas  Glover  sent
in  their  seventh  voyage  to  Saint  Nicholas  with
three  ships,  the  Swallowe,  the  Philip  and
Marie,  and  the  Jesus  the  fifth  of  May, 1560.

Fter our heartie commendations to you. The
twelfth day of the last moneth here arrived in
safety,  thanks  be to God, our two ships, & by them
ive  received  your  letters  &  invoices  very  well  perceiving  [I.  306.]
A^hat  you  have  laden  in  them. The  tallowe  came  evill  Tallowe.
onditioned  and  broken,  by  reason  it  came  in  Corrobias,
A^ee  lose  and  spoyle  more  then  the  Caske  will  cost,  and
nuch of  this tallowe is verie evill, blacke, soft and
Dutrified. Touching  the  Waxe,  as  yet  wee  knowe  not  Waxe.
lowe the  weight  will rise, by reason that some of  it
.vas  lost  in  the  barkes. The  weight  of  the  last  yeeres
A^axe  did  not  rise  so  well  as  the  other  yeeres  before  it
iid. There  had  neede  good  heede  to  bee  taken  in  the

401  2  c

A.D.
1560.

Traine  oyks.

Sables.

Woherings.
Luserns,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

weighing. Also  much  of  this  Waxe  had  a  great foote
and  is  not  so  faire  waxe  as  in  times  past  wee  have  had.
You  must  cause  the  foote  to  bee  taken  off  before  you  doe
weigh  it,  or  else  you  must  seeke  to  have  a  good  allowance
for  it. The  traine  Oyles  which  you  laded  this  yeere  came
well  conditioned,  and  the  caske  was  good  and  of  a  good
sise. But  if  they  were  made  a  little  bigger  it  were  the
better, for  they  be not hogsheads. You have  written
to  us  to  send  you  caske  which  is  not  heere  to  be  had,,
neither  doe  wee  thinke  it  so  best  if  it  were  heere,  con-
sidering it  must  goe  either  shaken  and  bounde  up,  or;
else  emptie,  which  will  bee  pesterable,  and  likewise  will'
shrinke  and  drie,  and  not  be  fitte  to  lade  oyles  in. There-
fore our  minde  is,  you  shall  cause  so  much  caske  to  beet
made  there  of  the  sise  of  hogsheads  as  will  serve  both  forr
your  oyles  and  tallowe,  and  let  them  be  well  trimmedl
with pitch  on  the heads  and seames,  and  stand  full  off
water  three  or  foure  dayes  before  you  put  Oyles  in  them..
Your  Cowper  may  bee  overseer  to  them  that  make  them,
that they be well hooped and cleere tymber  withouti
knottes,  the  woorst  caske  you  may  put  the  tallowe  in.
Hee that seeth the filling of  the oyles had neede to
looke  well  to  it,  for  there  was  much  water  in  this  thatij
came  nowe. Wee  perceive  you  have  bought  and  havef'
in  a  readinesse  one  hundred  and  fourtie  tunnes  of  oyles.  :
and  that  if  neede  be  you  may  have  more  store. Where-
fore we doe minde to send you shipping for three
hundred tunnes  and upwards, because  we  would have
this  next  Sommer  as  great  a  returne  as  you  can  of  the
commodities  of  that  Countrey,  as  also  such  of  our  wares
as  you  have  that  are  not  vendible,  or  will  not  be  solde
or bartered, because  we  would have a ful knowledge
and  state  of  our  accounts. The  Sables  which  you  sent
this  yeere  be  very  base,  among  them  all  we  could not
make one  principall timber  : we  have alwayes  written
unto you to send them that bee good or else none.
The Wolverings were indifferent, and some of the
wolves, the rest  verie base, the Lusernes but meane.

402

LETTER TO THE  AGENTS  a.d.

1560.

:he Lettes not so  large skinnes as we have  had  : the  Lettes.
3est  is,  they  were  of  a  new  death. As  for  the  Ermines,  Ermines.
:hey  cost more  there  with you,  then  we  can  sell  them
'or here. Therefore buy  no more of them, nor of
5quirels,  for  wee  lost  the  one  halfe  in  the  other. The  Squirels.
A^ares that we would have you provide against the
omming of  the shippes are, Waxe, Tallowe, trayne/
Dyles, Flaxe, Cables and Ropes,  and Furres, such as  Flaxe.
we  have  written  to  you  for  in  our last letters by the  Cai>/es  and
ihippes  : and  from  hencefoorth  not  to  make any  great  '°^^^'
provision  of  any  rich  Furres  except  principall Sables  &
ettes  :  for  now  there  is  a  Proclamation made  that  no  A  prodama-
urres shall be worne here, but such as the like is  t^on  against
^rowing  here  within  this  our  Realme. Also  we  perceive  J°'''^^'"' ^'■^'^^•
hat  there  might  be  a  great  deale  of  tallowe  more  provided
n  a  yeere  then  you  send. Therefore  our  minde  is,  you
ihould  enlarge  somewhat  more  in  the  price,  and  to  send
^s if  you can three thousand podes a  yeere  : for we  3000.  podes
ioe most good in it. And likewise the Russes, {{  of  Tallow  a
TOM  would  give  them  a  reasonable  price  for  their  wares,  ^"  '
voulde  be  the  willinger  to  buy  and  sell  with  you,  andV
lot  to  carie  so much to  Novogrode  as they doe, but^
^oulde  rather  bring  it  to  Vologda  to  you,  both  Waxe,  -^
Tallowe, Flaxe, Hempe, and  all kinde of  other wares
itte  for  our  Countrey. Our  minde  is  you  should  pro-
■dde for the next ships five hundred  Losh hides,  of  $00.  Los h
hem  that  be  large  and  faire,  and  thickest  in  hand,  and  '^^^'^•^•
o  be  circumspect  in  the  choosing,  that  you  buy  them  that
)ee  killed  in  season  and  well  dryed  and  whole. If  they
5)ee  good  we  may sell them  here for  sixteene  shillings
nd  better  the  piece,  wee  would  have  the  whole  skinnes,
hat  is,  the  necke  and  legges  withall,  for  these  that  you
ent  now  lacke  their  neckes  and  legges. Neverthelesse  Note.
or  this  time  you  must  sende  them  as  you  may  get  them :
f  you  coulde  finde  the  meanes  that  the  haire  might  bee
lipped  off  them,  they  woulde  not  take  so  much  roome  in
he  shippes  as  they  doe. We  perceive  by  your  letters
hat  the  prices  of  Waxe  doe  rise  there  with  you,  by  reason

403

A.D.
1560.

[I- 307-]

Hope  of  trade
to  be  found  by
master
Antonie
Jenkinson.

Seale  skinnes
tawed.

Small  cables
best  vendible.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  the  Poles  and  Lifelanders  doe  trade  into  Russia  by
licence  :  which,  if  there  shoulde  bee  peace  betweene  them,
woulde bee an occasion that all other commodities in
Russia  woulde  rise  to  a  bigger  price,  and  not  bee  sufficient
to serve  them and us too, and  likewise  woulde  bring
downe  there  the  prices  of  our  commodities. Therefore
we  thinke  it  good  you  shoulde  make  a  supplication  to
the Emperour in the name of  The Companie to re-
turne the trade from  Rye  and Revel to us,  especially
for such wares as wee doe  buy  : promising that  weet
will  bee  bounde to take  them  at  a  reasonable  price,  as;
wee  have  bought  them  in  times  past  :  and  likewise  that;
wee  will  bring  to  them  such  wares  of  ours,  as  are  thought
fitte  for  the  Countrey,  and  to  sell  them  at  such  reasonable
prices  as  wee  have  done. If  this  shoulde  not  come  to:
passe,  wee  might  be  out  of  hope  of  doing  any  good  by
the trade there  : but that  we have a further hope oi
some  good trade to be found  out  by  Master  Antonie
Jenkinson  : by  reason  we  doe  perceive  by  your  letters..'
that raw silke is as plentifuU in Persia, as  flaxe  is  m<
Russia  :  beside  other  commodities  that  may  come  from
thence. Wee understand  by  your  letters that you be
at  a  point  with  the  Russe  for the  Waxe, Tallow, anc(
Traine  oyles  that  he  shipped  the  last  yere  for  311  roblei'
20  al tines,  which  is  well  :  although  much  be  not  gotter'
by it, but because they should not understand ou;
reckonings We much  marvel what  you  mean  to  buj  as
Seale skins and tanne them. All that you have sen
in  times  past  lie  here  unsold,  and  will  yeelde  no  money
If  you  send 100  of  them  tawed  with  the  haire  on,  thej
will  bee  solde,  or  else  not. In  our  shippe  we  will  senc
you  such  things  as  you  write  to  have  for the ropers
and  wee  would  they  should  make  more  store  of  smal
cables  and  ropes,  as  cables  of  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12.  inches
For  these  great  cables  be  not  for  every  man  ; and  th
greatest  cables  bee  not best laded  : and likewise smaj
ropes for shroudes, sholes, and other small tackeling
and  that  you  looke  better  to  the  spinning  of  their  yarn

404

LETTER TO THE  AGENTS  ad.

1560.

that  it  be  even  and  well  tarred.  The  sables  that  you  doe
mind  to  send  us  let  them  be  principall  and  fayre,  and
not  past  foure  or  five  timbars.  For  they  will  not  be
so  commonly  worne  here  as  they  have  bin  with  noble
men :  and  likewise  of  Luserns  send  fewe  and  principal
good.  We  mind  to  send  you  in  our  shippes  100
tunnes  of  salte.  And  because  we  perceive  that  balast  is
hardly  to  be  had  at  our  lading  place  there  with  you,
we  would  you  should  have  in  a  readinesse  100  tunnes
of  the  white  stones  whereof  you  sent  us  home  an  example
two  yeres  past.  And  likewise  to  have  in  a  readinesse  Masts  of  all
mastes  of  all  sortes  for  our  shippes :  for  we  know  not  ^"'^^  ^°  f
svhat  neede  wee  shall  have  of  them.  The  bringer  hereof
is  Thomas  Alcock,  he  could  not  be  suffered  the  last
^eare  to  passe  through  Poland.  And  as  we  wrote  unto
you  in  our  shippes,  hee  is  our  servant  for  yeares :  And
'or  that  we  know  him  to  be  honest,  true  and  painefuU,
Dur  mind  is  he  shalbe  placed  where  he  may  do  best
service.  He  doth  know  the  commodities  and  discom-
modities of  all  kinde  of  wares  which  you  doe  send  us.
Therefore  we  would  you  should  credite  his  sayings
Doth  in  quantitie  of  wares  and  goodnes,  as  also  wherin
s  most  our  profit.  We  see  by  your  letters  that  your
)pinion  is  that  the  ropemakers  should  remaine  there
:wo  yeres  more ;  and  that  you  have  provided  great
)lentie  of  hempe,  which  we  are  content  withall.  But
.s  yet  we  have  solde  none  of  our  cables  nor  halsers,
leither  is  the  proofe  of  them  knowen ;  because  the  first
^ou  sent  us  were  made  of  flaxe,  which  are  worth  no
noney :  for  after  they  be  once  wet  they  will  rotte  and
noulder  away  like  mosse.  And  those  which  you  sent
IS  now  last,  by  misfortune  there  with  you  at  the  lading
v&VQ  wette  and  fretted  in  many  places,  and  have  lost
heir  colour  :  by  meanes  whereof  they  be  not  so  vendible
,s  if  they  had  come  well  conditioned.  Of  an  hard
leginning  we  trust  God  will  send  us  a  good  ending.
A/'e  hope  in  your  next  letters  to  heare  good  newes  of
(he proceedings of Master Antonie Jenkinson. We

405

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1560.
Jstracan  no perceive by  his letters  that Astracan is not  so  good a
great  good Mart  towne  as  the  fame  hath  gone  of  it: and  marvell
much  that  round  pewter  should  be  so  good, and  good
chepe there, and from whence it should come. And
whereas  you  write that  you wil  come for  England in
our  next  shippes,  we  would  gladly  have  you  to  remaine
there  untill  the  next  yere following, for  the  better in-
struction of  our servants there ; who  have  not  had  so
long  time of  continuance  for the  language,  and  know-
ledge  of  the  people, countrey, and  wares  as  you  have
had. Neverthelesse if  you will needs come  away, we
have no doubt, but that you will leave good order
Chrisiopher with our servants there, namely with Christopher
Hodson  and Hodson and Thomas Glover, whom we appoint to
Thomas  remaine there as Agents in your roome, till further

pointed  J sents  ^^^^^  ^^^ taken : not doubting  but that  they  will  use
1560.  themselves  so  discreetely  and  wisely  in  all  their  doings,:

as  shall  be  to  the  worship  and  benefite  of  this  company.
And  as  we  have  a  good  hope  in  them  that  they  will
be  carefull,  diligent  and  true  in  all  their  doings :  so
have  we  no  lesse  hope  in  all  the  rest  of  our  servants
there,  that  they  will  bee  not  onely  obedient  to  them
(considering  what  roome  they  be  in)  but  also  will  be
carefull,  paineful,  diligent,  and  true  every  one  in  his
roome  and  place  for  the  benefite  and  profite  of  the
company :  That  hereafter  in  the  absence  of  others  they
may  be  called  and  placed  in  the  like  roome  there  or
elsewhere.  And  if  you  find  any  to  be  disobedient  and
stubborne,  and  will  not  be  ruled ;  wee  will  you  shall
send  him  home  in  our  shippes :  who  shall  find  such
small  favour  and  friendship  during  the  time  that  he
hath  to  serve,  as  by  his  disobedience  and  evill  service
hee  hath  deserved.  And  whereas  Christopher  Hodson
hath  written  to  come  home,  as  partly  he  hath  good
cause,  considering  the  death  of  his  father  and  mother :
yet  in  regard  that  Sir  George  Barne  and  the  Ladie  his
wife  were  his  special  friends  in  his  absence,  we  doubt
not but that he  wil remain in the roome, which we

406

LETTER TO  THE AGENTS  a.d.

1560.
have  appointed  him,  if  you  doe  not  tarie  and  remaine
there,  till  farther  order  be  taken :  and  for  his  service
and  paines  hee  shall  be  considered,  as  reason  is,  as
friendly  as  if  his  friends  were  living.  Thus  we  trust
you  will  take  such  order  the  one  to  remaine  at  the
Mosco,  and  the  other  at  Colmogro,  or  elsewhere,  as
most  neede  is.  Thomas  Alcocke  is  desirous  to  be  in
the  Mosco :  neverthelesse  you  shall  find  him  reasonable
to  serve  where  he  may  doe  most  good.  The  62  robles  [I.  308.]
which  you  received  of  John  Boucher  we  have  payed
him  here,  and  also  the  8  robles,  which  you  received
the  yere  before  of  Christopher  Rose,  and  the  money
which  you  received  more  of  George  Burton,  for  the
which  we  have  you  our  debtors.  Thus  we  rest,  referring
that  which  is  here  omitted  to  the  report  of  the  bringer :
and  so  God  have  you  in  his  keeping.  Also  we
would  that  you  should  send  us  in  our  shippes  200
horse-clothes  more.  The  things  before  written  wee
would  that  you  should  let  our  servants  see  and  reade,
to  the  intent  they  may  perceive  our  mindes.

Another  letter  to  the  foresaid  parties. 1560.

T^His  letter  before  written  is  the  copie  of  one  sent  you
A by  Thomas  Alcock, trusting  that  hee  was  with  you
long  since. The  26  day  of  the  last  moneth  we  received
a  letter  from him,  dated in  Stockholme  in  Sweden  the  Stockholme.
14 day  of  January, and  we perceive  by  his  letter  that
hee  had  talked  with  a  Dutch  man  that  came  lately  from
rche  Mosco,  who  informed  him that  our  friend  Master
Antony  Jenkinson  was  returned to  the  Mosco  in Sep-
tember last  past,  but  how  farre  he  had  beene, or  what
he  had done, he could not tell. Also he  wrote that
one  John  Lucke  a  Joyner  was  taken  by  the  Liefelanders,  J"^^  Luck
and  put  in prison. As  yet  wee  have  not heard  from  {^^^J^_  Pj^oner
the sayd  John Lucke, nor know not whether he be  ^" ^^P^^^^-
released out of  prison or not. We suppose  that by
tiim  you  wrote  some  letter  which  as  yet  is  not  come  to
Dur  hands : so  that  we  thinke  hee  is  yet  in  prison, or

407

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1560,

otherwise  dispatched  out  of  the  way.  The  fifteenth
day  of  December  wee  received  a  letter  from  Christopher
Hodson,  dated  in  the  Mosco  the  29  of  July,  by  the
way  of  Danske :  which  is  in  effect  a  copie  of  such
another  received  from  him  in  our  shippes.  You  shal
understand  that  we  have  laden  in  three  good  shippes  of
ours these kind of  wares following : to wit, in the

The  Swallow.  Swallowe  of  London,  Master  under  God  Steven  Burrow,
34  fardels  N°  136  broad  short  clothes,  and  foure  fardels
N°  58  Hampshire  Kersies :  and  23  pipes  of  bastards
and  seckes,  and  263  pieces  of  raisins  and  4  hogsheds
N°  154  pieces  of  round  pewter,  and  ten  hogsheds  and
poncheons  of  prunes,  and one dryfatte  with Almonds.  |

The  Philip And  in  the  Philip  and  Marie,  Master  under  God  Thomas

and  Marie,  ^^j^^  ^5  fardels  N°  loo  broad  clothes,  and  three
fardels  N°  42  Hampshire  Kersies,  and  thirtie  pipes  of
seckes  and  bastards,  and 100  pieces  of  raisins. And  in

The  Jesus.  the  Jesus  of  London,  Master  under  God  Arthur  Pette,
10  fardels  N°  40  broade  shorte  clothes,  and  twenty  seven
pipes  of  bastards  and  seckes,  as  by  the  Invoices  herewith
inclosed  may  appeare :  Also  you  shall  receive  such
necessaries  as  you  did  write  to  bee  sent  for  the  rope
makers :  trusting  that  you  shall  have  better  successe
with  them  which  you  shall  send  us  in  these  ships,  then
with  the  rest  which  you  have  sent  us  yet :  for  we  as
yet  have  sold  none  of  them.  And  whereas  we  wrote
unto  you  in  our  former  letter,  that  we  would  send  you
a  hundred  tunnes  of  salte,  by  reason  it  is  so  deare  here
we  doe  send  you  but  nine  tunnes  and  a  halfe,  for  it
cost  here  ten  pence  the  bush  ell  the  first  penie :  namely
in  the  Swallow  6  tunnes  and  a  halfe,  in  the  Philip
and  Marie  one  tunne  and  a  halfe,  and  in  the  Jesus  one
tunne  and  a  halfe.  The  4  hogsheds  of  round  pewter
goe  in  the  Swallow  and  in  the  Philip  and  Marie  N°  154
pieces,  as  is  aforesaid.  We  send  you  three  ships,  trust-
ing that  you  have  provided  according  to  our  former
writing  good  store  of  lading  for  them.  If  yee  have
more  wares then will  lade the ships, let it be  Traine

408

LETTER TO THE  AGENTS  ad.

1560.

oyles  that  you  leave  behinde :  the  price  is  not  here  so
good  as  it  was  :  it  is  worth  here  9  pound  the  tunne.
We  thinke  it  good  you  should  let  the  smaller  ship
bring  as  much  of  the  traine  as  she  can  cary:  And  that
the  masters  of  the  ships  do  looke  wel  to  the  romaging,
for  they  might  bring  away  a  great  deale  more  then
they  doe,  if  they  would  take  paine  in  the  romaging :
and  bestowe  the  traine  by  it  selfe,  and  the  waxe  and
tallowe  by  it  selfe :  for  the  leakage  of  the  traine  doth
fowle  the  other  wares  much.  As  for  Allard  the  skinner,
if  you  thinke  good,  he  may  come  home  in  these  shippes.
We  have  no  doubt  but  that  you  Henrie  Lane,  if  you
minde  to  come  home  now  in  these  ships  as  you  requested,
will  leave  such  good  order  there  with  our  servants  as
shall  bee  for  our  most  profite  and  their  preferment,  if
they  doe  their  dueties  diligently  and  truely.  If  our
friend  Master  Antonie  Jenkinson  bee  returned,  and
meane  to  come  away  in  these  ships  to  declare  his  mind
and  opinion  of  his  travaile,  if  need  require  and  he  be
so  minded  he  may  returne  thither  by  land  and  be  there
by  the  fine  of  Januarie  or  before.  But  as  we  be  un-
certaine  whether  he  be  returned  or  not :  so  we  know
not  what  he  hath  done,  nor  what  benefite  may  rise
hereafter  of  his  travaile.  Therefore  in  this  wee  remit
it  to  his  and  your  good  discretions.  Wee  send  you
Thomas  Hawtrey  which  is  our  servant  for  yeeres :  our  •
minde  is  he  should  be  placed,  where  he  may  doe  best
service.

Also we send you Nicholas Chancelour to remaine 'Nicholas
there, who is  our apprentice for yeeres :  our  minde  is  Chancelour.
hee  should be set  about  such businesse  as he is  most
fit  for : he  hath  been  kept  at  writing  schoole  long : he
lath his Algorisme,  and  hath  understanding  of  keeping
Df  bookes  of  reckonings. We send  you now  but  100
Kersies : but  against  the next  yeere,  if  occasion serve,
wee  will  send  you  a  greater  quantitie,  according  as  you  [I.  309.]
hal  advise  us : One  of  the  pipes  of  seckes  that is  in
:he Swallow,  which hath 2 round compasses  upon  the

409

A.D.
1560.

T^he  salt  of
Russia  is  not
so  good  as
Bay  salte.

Foxe  skinnes
white,  blacke,
and  russet
vendible  in
England.

Mayi^.  1560.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bung,  is  to  be  presented  to  the  Emperour :  for  it  is
special  good.  The  nete  waight  of  the  10  puncheons
of  prunes  is  4300.  2  thirds  i  pound.  It  is  written  par-
ticularly upon  the  head  of  every  puncheon :  and  the
nete  weight  of  the  fatte  of  almonds  is  500  li.  two
quarters.  The  raisins,  prunes,  and  almonds  you  were
best  to  dispatch  away  at  a  reasonable  price,  and  principally
the  raisins,  for  in  keeping  of  them  will  be  great  losse
in  the  waight,  and  the  fruit  will  decay.  We  thinke  it
good  that  you  provide  against  the  next  yeere  for  the
comming  of  our  shippes  20  or  30  bullockes  killed  and
salted,  for  beefe  is  very  deare  here.  Therefore  you
were  best  to  save  some  of  this  salt  that  we  doe  send
you  in  these  ships  for  the  purpose.  The  salte  of  that
countrey  is  not  so  good.  In  this  you  may  take  the
opinion  of  the  masters  of  the  shippes.  Foxe  skins,
white,  blacke,  and  russet  will  be  vendible  here.  The
last  yere  you  sent  none :  but  there  were  mariners  that
bought  many.  If  any  of  the  mariners  doe  buy  any
trifling  furres  or  other  commodities,  we  will  they  shall
be  registred  in  our  pursers  bookes,  to  the  intent  we
may  know  what  they  be.  We  desire  to  know  how  the
Emperour  tooke  the  letter  which  we  sent  in  our  ships,
as  an  answere  to  the  letter  that  came  in  his  name  and
under  his  seale  for  the  sixe  thousand  dallers.  Thus
wee  rest,  committing  you  to  God,  from  London  the  fift
day  of  May 1560.

For  lacke  of  time  the  governours  have  not  firmed
this  letter :  which  is  the  copie  of  the  other  two  letters
firmed  by  them.

Yours,  William  Mericke.

Yours,  Blase  Sanders.

410

JUSTICE BY LOTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1560.

The  maner  of  Justice  by  lots  in  Russia,  written
by  Master  Henrie  Lane,  and  executed  in  a
controversie  betweene  him  and  one  Sheray
Costromitskey  in  Mosco. 1560.

AFter  the  comming  home  into  Russia  of  Joseph  Napea
the  first  ambassadour  to  Queene  Marie,  I  remaining
the  Agent  there,  sundrie  Russian  marchants  by  Josephs
procurement  obtained  letters  from  the  Emperour  to
freight  goods  and  passe  in  our  ships  for  England :  which
thing  upon  good  consideration  I  answered  and  refused.
They  were  then  driven  to  credite  us  and  compound  in
value  untill  the  next  returne.  At  which  time,  notwith-
standing good  accompt  in  the  value  of  600  robles,  there
grewe  question  by  their  double  demand.  So  in  April  Triallbya
Anno  1560.  before  my  comming  from  Mosco  via,  they  ^^^  °'' ^°^'
obtained  trial  by  combat  or  letter  to  have  their  summe
double,  or  as  I  proffered  600  robles.  For  combatte  I
was  provided  of  a  strong  willing  Englishman,  Robert
Best,  one  of  the  companies  servants :  whome  the  Russes
with  their  Champion  refused.  So  that  we  had  the  words
of  our  priviledge  put  in  effect,  which  were  to  draw  lots.
The  day  and  maner  of  triall  appointed  by  the  Emperour
at  his  castle  in  his  palace  and  high  Court  of  Moscovia
was  thus.  The  Emperours  two  Treasurers,  being  also
Chancelours  and  chiefe  Judges,  sate  in  court.  They
appointed  officers  to  bring  me,  mine  interpreter,  &  the
other,  through  the  great  presse  within  the  rayle  or  barre,
and  permitted  me  to  sit  downe  some  distance  from  them :
the  adverse  parties  being  without  at  the  barre.  Both
parties  were  first  perswaded  with  great  curtesie,  to  wit,
I  to  enlarge  mine  offer,  and  the  Russes  to  mitigate  their
challenge.  Notwithstanding  that  I  protested  my  con-
science to  be  cleere,  and  their  gaine  by  accompt  to  bee
sufficient,  yet  of  gentlenes  at  the  magistrates  request  I
made  proffer  of  1 00  robles  more :  which  was  openly
commended,  but  of  the  plaintifes  not  accepted. Then

411

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1560,

sentence  passed  with  our  names  in  two  equall  balles  of
waxe  made  and  holden  up  by  the  Judges,  their  sleeves
stripped  up.  Then  with  standing  up  and  wishing  well
to  the  trueth  attributed  to  him  that  should  be  first
drawen,  by  both  consents  among  the  multitude  they  called
a  tall  gentleman,  saying :  Thou  with  such  a  coate  or  cap,
come  up :  where  roome  with  speede  was  made.  He  was
commanded  to  hold  his  cappe,  wherein  they  put  the
balles,  by  the  crowne  upright  in  sight,  his  arme  not
abasing.  With  like  circumspection,  they  called  at  adven-
ture another  tall  gentleman,  commanding  him  to  strip
up  his  right  sleeve,  and  willed  him  with  his  bare  arme
to  reach  up,  and  in  Gods  name  severally  to  take  out  the
two  balles :  which  he  did,  delivering  to  either  Judge  one.
Then  with  great  admiration  the  lotte  in  ball  first  taken
out  was  mine :  which  was  by  open  sentence  so  pro-
nounced before  all  the  people,  and  to  be  the  right  and
true  parte.  The  chiefe  plaintifes  name  was  Sheray
Costromitsky.  I  was  willed  forthwith  to  pay  the  plaintifes
the  summe  by  me  appointed.  Out  of  which  for  their
wrong  or  sinne,  as  it  was  termed,  they  payd  tenne  in  the
hundred  to  the  Emperor.  Many  dayes  after,  as  their
maner  is,  the  people  took  our  nation  to  be  true  and
upright  dealers,  and  talked  of  this  judgement  to  our
great  credite.

Note.  The former letters dated 1558, 1559,  and 1560,

\}-  3IO-J  should all followe M.  Jenkinsons voyage to

Boghar.

412

ANTHONY  JENKINSON

The  first  voyage  made  by  Master  Anthonie
Jenkinson,  from  the  Citie  of  London  toward
the  land  of  Russia,  begun  the  twelfth  of  May,
in  the  yeere 1557.

Irst  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  day  and
yeere  above  mentioned,  I  departed  from
the  sayd  Citie,  and  the  same  day  at
Gravesend  embarked  my  selfe  in  a  good
shippe,  named  the  Primerose,  being
appointed,  although  unworthy,  chiefe
captaine  of  the  same,  and  also  of  the
other  3  good  ships,  to  say,  the  John  Evangelist,  the
Anne,  and  the  Trinitie,  having  also  the  conduct  of
the  Emperour  of  Russia  his  ambassadour  named  Osep
Nepea  Gregoriwich,  who  passed  with  his  company  in  the
sayde  Primerose.  And  thus  our  foure  tall  shippes  being
well  appointed,  aswell  for  men  as  victuals  as  other
necessarie  furniture,  the  saide  twelfth  day  of  the  moneth
of  May,  we  weyed  our  ankers,  and  departed  from  the
saide  Gravesend,  in  the  after  noone,  and  plying  downe
the  Thames,  the  wind  being  Easterly,  and  fayre  weather,
the  13  day  we  came  a  ground  with  the  Primerose,  upon
a  sand  called  the  blacke  taile,  where  we  sate  fast  untill
the  14  day  in  the  morning,  and  then  God  be  praysed,
she  came  off:  and  that  day  we  plyed  downe  as  farre
as  our  Ladie  of  Holland,  and  there  came  to  an  anker,
the  wind  being  Easterly,  &  there  remayned  untill  the
20  day :  then  we  weyed  and  went  out  at  Goldmore
gate,  and  from  thence  in  at  Balsey  slade,  and  so
into  Orwel  wands,  where  we  came  to  an  anker  :
but  as  we  came  out  at  the  sayd  Goldemore  gate,  the
Trinitie  came  on  ground  on  certaine  rockes,  that  lye
to  the  Northward  of  the  said  gate,  and  was  like  to  be
bilged  and  lost.  But  by  the  aide  of  God,  at  the  last
she  came  off  againe,  being  very  leake :  and  the  2 1  day
the  Primerose  remaining  at  an  anker  in  the  wands,  the

413

A.D.

1557-

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

other  three  shippes  bare  into  Orwel  haven,  where  I  caused
the  sayd  Trinitie  to  be  grounded,  searched,  and  repaired.
So  we  remayned  in  the  said  haven,  untill  the  28  day:
and  then  the  winde  being  Westerly,  the  three  shippes
that  were  in  the  haven,  weyed  and  came  forth,  and  in
comming  forth  the  John  Evangehst  came  on  ground
upon  a  sand,  called  the  Andros,  where  she  remained  one
tide,  and  the  next  full  sea  she  came  off  againe  without
any  great  hurt,  God  be  praised.

The  29  day  in  the  morning  all  foure  ships  weied  in
the  Wands,  and  that  tide  went  as  farre  as  Orfordnesse,
where  we  came  to  an  anker,  because  the  wind  was
Northerly  :  And  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the
wind  vered  to  the  Southwest,  and  we  weyed  anker,  and
bare  cleere  of  the  nesse,  and  then  set  our  course  North-
east &  by  North  untill  midnight,  being  then  cleare  of
Yarmouth  sands.  Then  we  winded  North  and  by  West,
June,  and  Northnorthwest,  untill  the  first  of  June  at  noone,
then  it  waxed  calme,  and  continued  so  untill  the  second
day  at  noone :  then  the  winde  came  at  Northwest,  with
a  tempest,  and  much  raine,  and  we  lay  close  by,  and
caped  Northnortheast,  and  Northeast  and  by  North,  as
the  winde  shifted,  and  so  continued  untill  the  third
day  at  noone :  then  the  wind  vered  Westerly  againe,
and  we  went  North  our  right  course,  and  so  continued
our  way  untill  the  fourth  day,  at  three  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone,  at  which  time  the  wind  vered  to
the  Northwest  againe  and  blew  a  fresh  gale,  and  so
continued  untill  the  seventh  day  in  the  morning,  we
lying  with  all  our  shippes  close  by,  and  caping  to  the
Northwards  :  and  then  the  wind  vering  more  Northerly,
we  were  forced  to  put  roomer  with  the  coast  of  England
againe,  and  fell  overthwart  Newcastle,  but  went  not  into
the  haven,  &  so  plied  upon  the  coast  the  eight  day  &
the  ninth.

The  tenth  day  the  winde  came  to  the  Northnorth-
west, &  we  were  forced  to  beare  roomer  with  Flam-
borow head, where  we came to an anker, and there

414

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

^557-
remained untill the seventeenth  day. Then  the  winde
came faire, and we  weyed, and set our course North
and by  East,  and so continued the same  with  a  mery
winde  untill  the  21 at noone,  at  which  time  we  tooke
the  sunne,  and  had  the  latitude  in  sixty  degrees. Then
we shifted our  course,  and  went  Northnorth  east,  and
Northeast  and  by  North,  until  the 25 day. Then  we
discovered  certaine  Islands,  called  Heilick  Islands,  lying  Heilkkls-
from us Northeast,  being  in the  latitude  of  sixtie  sixe  lands  in  66
degrees, 40 minutes. Then we went north and by  ^^g^^^^  4°
West,  because  we  would not  come too nigh the  land,
and running that  course  foure  houres, we discovered,
and had sight of Rost Islands, joining to the main  Rost  Islands.
land  of  Finmarke. Thus  continuing  our  course  along
the coast of Norway and Finmark, the 27 day we
tooke the Sunne, being  as farre shot as Lofoot, and
had  the  latitude  in  69 degrees. And  the  same day  in
the  afternoone  appeared  over  our  heads  a  rainebow,  like
a  semicircle,  with  both  ends  upwarde. Note  that  there  [I.  311-]
is between the said Rost Islands & Lofoot, a  whirle  Malestrand  a
poole called Malestrand, which from halfe ebbe untill  '^'^2^'  '"^'''^'
halfe  flood,  maketh  such  a  terrible  noise,  that  it  shaketh  ^
the  ringes in the doores of  the inhabitants  houses of
the sayd Islands tenne miles off. Also if  there  com-
meth  any  Whale  within  the  current  of  the  same, they
make  a  pitifull  crie. Moreover,  if  great  trees  be  caried
into  it  by  force  of  streams,  and  after  with the  ebbe  be
cast out againe, the ends and boughs  of  them have
bene  so  beaten,  that  they  are  like  the  stalkes  of  hempe
that  is  bruised. Note,  that  all  the  coaste  of  Finmarke
is  high mountaines  and  hils,  being  covered  all  the  yere
with snow. And hard  aboord  the  shoare  of  this  coast,
there  is  100  or  150  fadomes of  water  in  depth. Thus
proceeding  and sailing  forward,  we  fell  with an  Island
called Zenam, being in the latitude of 70 degrees.  Zenam  Island.
About this Island we saw many Whales, very mon-
strous, about  our  ships,  some  by  estimation  of  60  foot
long : and being  the ingendring  time they  roared  and

415

A.D.

1557-

Kettelwtke
Island.

Inger  sound.

The  'North
Cape.

Wardhouse.

Cattellfed
with  fish.

The  Mon-
astery of
Pechinchow.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

cried terriblie. From thence we fell with an Island,
called  Kettelwicke.

This  coast  from  Rost  unto  Lofoot  lieth  North  and
south,  and  from  Lofoot  to  Zenam  Northeast  and  south-
west, and  from  Zenam  to  Kettelwike  Eastnortheast
and  Westsouthwest.  From  the  said  Kettelwike  we
sailed  East  and  by  North  lo  leagues,  and  fell  with  a
land  called  Inger  sound,  where  we  fished,  being  becalmed,
and  tooke  great  plenty  of  Cods.  Thus  plying  along
the  coast,  we  fell  with  a  Cape,  called  the  North  Cape,
which  is  the  Northermost  land  that  wee  passe  in  our
voyage  to  S.  Nicholas,  and  is  in  the  latitude  of  71
degrees  and  ten  minutes,  and  is  from  Inger  sound
East,  and  to  the  Northwards  15  leagues.  And  being
at  this  North  Cape  the  second  day  of  July,  we  had  the
sunne  at  North  4  degrees  above  the  Horizon.  The
third  day  wee  came  to  Wardhouse,  having  such  mists
that  we  could  not  see  the  land.  This  Wardhouse  is  a
Castle  standing  in  an  Island  2  miles  from  the  maine
of  Finland,  subject  to  the  king  of  Denmarke,  and  the
Eastermost  land  that  he  hath.  There  are  two  other
Islands  neere  adjoining  unto  that,  whereon  the  Castle
of  Wardhouse  standeth.  The  inhabitants  of  those  three
Islands  live  onely  by  fishing,  and  make  much  stocke-
fish,  which  they  dry  with  frost :  their  most  feeding  is
fish ;  bread  and  drinke  they  have  none,  but  such  as
is  brought  them  from  other  places.  They  have  small
store  of  cattell,  which  are  also  fed  with  fish.  From
Wardhouse  we  sailed  Southsoutheast  ten  leagues,  and
fell  with  a  Cape  of  land  called  Kegor,  the  Norther-
most part  of  the  lande  of  Lappia.  And  betweene
Wardhouse,  and  the  said  Cape  is  a  great  Bay,  called
Dommeshaif,  in  the  South  part  whereof  is  a  Monasterie
of  Monkes  of  the  Russes  religion,  called  Pechinchow.
Thus  proceeding  forward  and  sayling  along  the  coast
of  the  said  land  of  Lappia,  winding  Southeast,  the
fourth  day  through  great  mists  and  darkenes  we  lost
the company of the other three ships, and met not

416

f  r  f."  ^'  •■1^  \  ,^^  w  )■  ^ r  s  , ' ;;  ,,>,;  #i

:0

o

<

w

CO

O

O

<
O

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1557-
with them againe, untill the seventh day, when we
fell with a Cape or headland called Swetinoz, which
is the entring into the  Bay of  S. Nicholas. At  this
Cape  lieth  a  great  stone,  to the  which the  barkes  that
passed  thereby,  were  wont to make ofirings  of  butter,
meale, and other victuals, thinking that unlesse they
did  so, their  barkes  or  vessels should  there  perish,  as
it hath bene oftentimes scene : and there it is very
darke and mistie. Note that  the sixt day  we passed  Arzina  reca
by the place where Sir Hugh Willoughbie, with all  ^^^  ''^'^^f
his  company  perished,  which  is  called  Arzina  reca,  that  ^  ^'T  ^. .
is  to  say,  the  river  Arzina.  _  _  hughbie  was

The  land of  Lappia  is  an high land, having snow  frozen,
lying  on  it  commonly  all  the  yere. The  people  of  the
Countrey  are  halfe  Gentiles : they  live  in  the  summer
time neere  the  sea side, and use to take fish, of  the
which  they  make  bread,  and  in  the  winter  they  remove
up into the countrey  into the  woods,  where they use
tiunting,  and kill Deere, Beares,  Woolves,  Foxes,  and
Dther beasts, with  whose flesh  they  be nourished,  and
m\h their skinnes  apparelled in such strange fashion,
:hat  there  is  nothing  scene  of  them  bare  but  their  eies. The  Lappians
rhey  have none other  habitation, but onely in tents,  '^o'^^l'^d.  all^
•emoving  from  place  to  place,  according  to  the season  ^^^^^^
)f  the yeere. They know no arte nor facultie, but
jnely  shooting,  which  they  exercise  dayly,  as  well  men
Ls  women,  and  kill  such  beasts  as  serve  them  for  their
bode. Thus  proceeding  along  the  coast  from  Swetinoz
[foresaid, the ninth day of July wee came to Cape
jrace, being in the latitude of Gd degrees and 45
ninutes,  and is at the entring in of the Bay of  S.
•Nicholas. Aboord  this  land  there  is 20  or  30  fadoms
vater, and sundry grounds good to anker in. The  "^^^  current
urrent  at  this  Cape  runneth Southwest  and  Northeast.  ^^ ape  gt  ace,
i^'rom this Cape  wee proceeded along untill  we came
o  Crosse  Island,  which  is  seven  leagues  from  the  sayd
ape  Southwest :  and  from  this  Island,  wee  set  over  to
he  other  side  of  the  Bay,  and  went  Southwest,  and  fell

H  417  2D

A.D.

1557-

The  entering
of  the  Bay  of
S.  Nicholas  is
seven  leagues
broad  at  the
least.

[I. 312.]

August.

Pinego  river.

The  towne  of
Temps.

Ustiug.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

with  an  headland  called  Foxenose,  which  is  from  the
sayd  Island  25  leagues.  The  entring  of  this  Bay  from
Crosse  Island  to  the  neerest  land  on  the  other  side  is
seven  leagues  over.  From  Foxenose  proceeding  forward
the  twelfth  day  of  the  sayd  moneth  of  July,  all  our
foure  ships  arrived  in  safetie  at  the  road  of  Saint  Nicholas
in  the  land  of  Russia,  where  we  ankered,  and  had  sailed
from  London  unto  the  said  roade  seven  hundred  and
fifty  leagues.  The  Russian  ambassadour  and  his  com-
pany with  great  joy  got  to  shore,  and  our  ships  here
forthwith  discharged  themselves :  and  being  laden  againe,
and  having  a  faire  winde,  departed  toward  England  the
first  of  August.  The  third  of  the  sayd  moneth  I  with
other  of  my  company  came  unto  the  citie  of  Colmogro,
being  an  hundred  verstes  from  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,
and  in  the  latitude  of  64  degrees  25  minutes.  1  tarried
at  the  said  Colmogro  untill  the  fifteenth  day :  and  then
I  departed  in  a  little  boate  up  the  great  river  of  Dwina,
which  runneth  very  swiftly,  and  the  selfe  same  day
passed  by  the  mouth  of  the  river  called  Pinego,  leaving
it  on  our  lefte  hand  fifteene  verstes  from  Colmogro.
On  both  sides  of  the  mouth  of  this  river  Pinego  is
high  land,  great  rockes  of  Alablaster,  great  woods,  and
Pineapple  trees  lying  along  within  the  ground,  which
by  report  have  lien  there  since  Noes  flood.  And  thus
proceeding  forward  the  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning,
I  came  into  a  town  called  Yemps,  an  hundred  verstes
from  Colmogro.  All  this  way  along  they  make  much
tarre,  pitch  and  ashes  of  Aspen  trees.  From  thence  I
came  to  a  place  called  Ustiug,  an  ancient  citie  the  last
day  of  August.  At  this  citie  meete  two  rivers :  the
one  called  Jug,  and  the  other  Sucana,  both  which  fal
into  the  aforesaid  river  of  Dwina.  The  river  Jug  hath
his  spring  in  the  land  of  the  Tartars  called  Chere-
mizzi,  joining  to  the  countrey  of  Permia :  and  Succan;
hath  his  head  from  a  lake  not  farre  from  the  citie  01
Vologda.  Thus  departing  from  Ustiug,  and  passing  bj
the  river  Succana,  we came  to  a towne called Totma

418

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1557-
About  this  place  the  water  is  verie  shallow,  and  stonie,
and  troublesome  for  Barkes  and  boats  of  that  countrey,
which  they  call  Nassades,  and  Dosneckes,  to  passe  that
way :  wherein  marchandise  are  transported  from  the
aforesayd  Colmogro  to  the  citie  of  Vologhda.  These  ^-^^  descrip-
vessels  called  Nassades,  are  very  long  builded,  broade  ^°^  des^''
made,  and  close  above,  flatte  bottomed,  and  draw  not
above  foure  foote  water,  and  will  carrie  two  hundred
tunnes :  they  have  none  iron  appertaining  to  them  but
all  of  timber,  and  when  the  winde  serveth,  they  are
made  to  sayle.  Otherwise  they  have  many  men,  some
to  hale  and  drawe  by  the  neckes  with  long  small  ropes
made  fast  to  the  sayd  boats,  and  some  set  with  long
poles.  There  are  many  of  these  barks  upon  the  river
of  Dwina :  And  the  most  part  of  them  belongeth  unto
the  citie  of  Vologhda :  for  there  dwell  many  marchants,
and  they  occupie  the  said  boates  with  carying  of  sake
from  the  sea  side  unto  the  sayd  Vologhda.  The  twen-
tieth of  September  I  came  unto  Vologhda,  which  is  a
great  citie,  and  the  river  passeth  through  the  midst  of
the  same.  The  houses  are  builded  with  wood  of  Firre
trees,  joyned  one  with  another,  and  round  without:
the  houses  are  foure  square  without  any  iron  or  stone
worke,  covered  with  birch  barkes,  and  wood  over  the
same :  Their  Churches  are  all  of  wood,  two  for  every
iparish,  one  to  be  heated  for  Winter,  and  the  other  for
Summer.

On  the  toppes  of  their  houses  they  laye  much  earth,
'or  feare  of  burning  :  for  they  are  sore  plagued  with  fire.
This  Vologhda  is  in  59  degrees,  eleven  minutes,  and  is
from  Colmogro,  1000  verstes.

All  the  way  I  never  came  in  house,  but  lodged  in  the
mldernesse,  by  the  rivers  side,  and  caried  provision  for
the  way.  And  he  that  will  travell  those  wayes,  must  Good  counsell
;arie  with  him  an  hatchet,  a  tinder  boxe,  and  a  kettle,  -^'"  travellers.
;o  make  fire  and  seethe  meate,  when  he  hath  it :  for
:here  is  small  succour  in  those  parts,  unlesse  it  be  in
:ownes.

419

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1557-

The  first  day  of  December,  I  departed  from  Vologhda
in  poste  in  a  sled,  as  the  maner  is  in  Winter.  And  the
way  to  Moscua  is  as  followeth.  From  Vologhda  to
Commelski,  27  verstes,  so  to  Olmor  25  verstes,  so  to
Teloytske  20  verstes,  so  to  Ure  30  verstes,  so  to  Voshan-
sko  30  verstes,  then  to  Yeraslave  30  verstes,  which
standeth  upon  the  great  river  Volga,  so  to  Rostove,  50
verstes,  then  to  Rogarin  30  verstes,  so  to  Peraslave  10'
verstes,  which  is  a  great  towne,  standing  hard  by  a  faire  1
lake.  From  thence  to  Dowbnay  30  verstes,  so  to  Godo-
roke  30  verstes,  so  to  Owchay  30  verstes,  and  last  to  the
Mosco  25  verstes,  where  I  arrived  the  sixt  day  of
December. December.

There  are  14  postes  called  Yannes  betweene  Vologhda
and  Mosco,  which  are  accompted  500  verstes  asunder.

The  10  day  of  December  I  was  sent  for  to  the
Emperors  Castle  by  the  sayd  Emperour,  and  delivered
my  letters  unto  the  Secretary,  who  talked  with  me  of
divers  matters,  by  the  commandement  of  the  Emperour.
And  after  that  my  letters  were  translated,  I  was  answered
that  I  was  welcome,  and  that  the  Emperour  would  give
me  that  I  desired.

The  25  day,  being  the  day  of  the  nativitie,  I  came  into
the  Emperors  presence,  and  kissed  his  hand,  who  sate
aloft  in  a  goodly  chaire  of  estate,  having  on  his  heade  a
crowne  most  richly  decked,  and  a  staife  of  gold  in  his
hand,  all  apparelled  with  golde,  and  garnished  with
precious  stones.

There sate distant from him about two yardes his
brother,  and  next  unto  him  a  boy  of  twelve  yeares  of  age,
who  was  inheritor  to  ye  Emperor  of  Casan,  conquered  byi
[I.  313.] this Emperor 8 yeares past. Then sate his nobilitiei
round  about  him,  richly  apparelled  with  gold  and  stone.!
And  after  I  had  done  obeisance  to  the  Emperour,  he  with
his own mouth  calling me by my name, bade me to^
dinner,  and  so  I  departed  to  my  lodging  till  dinner  time,
which  was  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  by  candle  light.

The  Emperour  dined  in  a  fayre  great  hall,  in  the  midst

420

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
whereof  was  a  pillar  foure  square,  very  artificially  made,
about  which  were  divers  tables  set,  and  at  the  uppermost
part  of  the  hall,  sate  the  Emperour  himselfe,  &  at  his
table  sate  his  brother,  his  Uncles  sonne,  the  Metropoli-
tane,  the  young  Emperour  of  Casan,  and  divers  of  his
noble  men,  all  of  one  side.  There  were  divers  Ambassa-
dors, &  other  strangers,  as  well  Christians  as  heathens,
diversly  apparelled,  to  the  number  of  600  men,  which
dined  in  the  sayd  hall,  besides  2000  Tartars,  men  of
warre,  which  were  newly  come  to  render  themselves  to
the  Emperour,  and  were  appointed  to  serve  him  in  his
wars  against  the  Lieflanders,  but  they  dined  in  other  hals.
I  was  set  at  a  litle  table,  having  no  stranger  with  me,
directly  before  the  Emperors  face.  Being  thus  set  and
placed,  the  Emperour  sent  me  divers  bowles  of  wine,  and
meade,  &  many  dishes  of  meat  from  his  own  hand,  which
were  brought  me  by  a  Duke,  and  my  table  served  all  in
gold  and  silver,  and  so  likewise  on  other  tables,  there
were  set  bowles  of  gold,  set  with  stone,  worth  by  estima-
tion 400  pounds  sterling  one  cup,  besides  the  plate  which
served  the  tables.

There  was  also  a  Cupbord  of  plate,  most  sumptuous
land  rich,  which  was  not  used  :  among  the  which,  was  a
piece  of  golde  of  two  yardes  long,  wrought  in  the  toppe
with  towers,  and  dragons  heads,  also  divers  barrels  of
igold  and  silver,  with  Castles  on  the  bungs,  richly  and
sartificially  made.  The  Emperour  and  all  the  hall
throughout  was  served  with  Dukes  :  and  when  dinner
was  ended,  the  Emperour  called  me  by  name,  &  gave  me
drinke  with  his  own  hand,  &  so  I  departed  to  my
lodging.

Note,  that  when  the  Emperour  drinketh,  all  the
company  stand  up,  and  at  every  time  he  drinketh  or
tasteth  of  a  dish  of  meate  he  blesseth  himselfe.  Many
other  things  I  sawe  that  day,  not  here  noted.

The  4  of  January,  which  was  Twelftide  with  them,  the
Emperour,  with  his  brother  and  all  his  nobles,  all  most
richly  apparelled  with  gold,  pearles,  precious  stones,  and

421

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

costly  furres,  with  a  crowne  upon  his  head,  of  the
Tartarian  fashion,  went  to  the  Church  in  procession,  with
the  Metropolitan,  and  divers  bishops  and  priests.  That
day  I  was  before  the  Emperour  again  in  Russe  apparell,
and  the  Emperour  asked  if  that  were  not  I,  and  his
Chancelor  answered  yea.  Then  he  bad  me  to  dinner  :
then  came  he  out  of  the  church,  and  went  with  the
procession  upon  the  river,  being  all  frozen,  and  there
standing  bare  headed,  with  all  his  Nobles,  there  was  a
hole  made  in  the  ice,  and  the  Metropolitan  hallowed  the
water  with  great  solemnitie  and  service,  and  did  cast  of
the  sayd  water  upon  the  Emperors  sonne  and  the
Nobility.  That  done,  the  people  with  great  thronging
filled  pots  of  the  said  water  to  carie  home  to  their  houses,
and  divers  children  were  throwen  in,  and  sicke  people,
and  plucked  out  quickly  againe,  and  divers  Tartars
christened  :  all  which  the  Emperour  beheld.  Also  there
were  brought  the  Emperours  best  horses,  to  drink  at  the
sayd  hallowed  water.  All  this  being  ended,  he  returned
to  his  palace  againe,  and  went  to  dinner  by  candle  light,
and  sate  in  a  woodden  house,  very  fairely  gilt.  There
dined  in  the  place,  above  300  strangers,  and  I  sate  alone
as  I  did  before,  directly  before  the  Emperour,  and  had
my  meat,  bread  and  drinke  sent  me  from  the  Emperour.

The  citie  of  Mosco  is  great,  the  houses  for  the  most
part  of  wood,  and  some  of  stone,  with  windowes  of  yron,
which serve  for  summer time. There are  many faire
Churches  of  stone,  but  more  of  wood,  which  are  made
hot  in  the  winter  time. The  Emperors  lodging  is  in  a
faire  and  large  castle,  walled  foure  square  of  bricke,  high,
and  thicke,  situated  upon  a  hill,  2  miles  about,  and  the
river  on  the  Southwest  side  of  it,  and  it  hath  1 6  gates  in  :
the  walles,  &  as  many  bulwarks. His  palace  is  separated  j
from  the  rest  of  the  Castle,  by  a  long  wall  going  north  j
and  south,  to  the  river  side. In  his  palace  are  Churches,
some of  stone and some  of  wood,  with  round  towers
fairely  gilded. In the Church doores and  within the
Churches  are  images  of  golde  :  the  chiefe  markets  for  all

422

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
things,  are  within  the  sayd  Castle,  and  for  sundry  things
sundry  markets,  and  every  science  by  it  selfe.  And  in
the  winter  there  is  a  great  market  without  the  castle,
upon  the  river  being  frozen,  and  there  is  sold  corne,
earthen  pots,  tubs,  sleds,  &c.  The  castle  is  in  circuit
2900  pases.

The  countrey  is  ful  of  marish  ground,  &  plaine,  in
woods  and  rivers  abundant,  but  it  bringeth  forth  good
plenty  of  corne.  This  Emperour  is  of  great  power  :
for  he  hath  conquered  much,  as  wel  of  the  Lieflanders,
Poles,  Lettoes,  and  Swethens,  as  also  of  the  Tartars,  &
Gentiles,  called  Samoeds,  having  thereby  much  inlarged
his  dominions.  He  keepeth  his  people  in  great  subjec-
tion :  all  matters  passe  his  judgement,  be  they  never
so  small. The  law  is  sharpe  for  all  offenders.

The  Metropolitan  dealeth  in  matters  of  religion,  as
himselfe  listeth,  whome  the  Emperour  greatly  honoreth.  [I.  314.]
They  use  the  ceremonies,  and  orders  of  the  Greeke
Church.  They  worship  many  images  painted  on  tables,
and  specially  the  image  of  S.  Nicholas.  Their  Priests
be  maried,  but  their  wives  being  dead,  they  may  not
marie  the  second  time,  and  so  become  Monkes,  whereof
there  are  a  great  number  in  the  land.

They  have  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere,  and  the  weeke
before  Shrofetide,  they  call  the  Butter  weeke,  &c.

They  have  many  sortes  of  meats  and  drinkes,  when
they  banket  and  delight  in  eating  of  grosse  meates,  and
stinking  fishe.  Before  they  drinke  they  use  to  blowe  in
the  cup  :  their  greatest  friendship  is  in  drinking :  they  are
great  talkers  and  lyers,  without  any  faith  or  trust  in  their
words,  flatterers  and  dissemblers.  The  women  be  there
very  obedient  to  their  husbands,  &  are  kept  straightly
from  going  abroad,  but  at  some  seasons.

At  my  being  there,  1  heard  of  men  and  women  that
drunke  away  their  children,  and  all  their  goods  at  the
Emperors  taverne,  and  not  being  able  to  pay,  having
impauned  himselfe,  the  Taverner  bringeth  him  out  to  the
high  way,  and  beates  him  upon  the  legges :  then  they  that

423

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

passe  by,  knowing  the  cause,  and  having  peradventure
compassion  upon  him,  give  the  money,  and  so  he  is  ran-
somed.

In  every  good  towne  there  is  a  drunken  Taverne  called
a  Cursemay,  which  the  Emperour  sometime  letteth  out
to  farme,  &  sometimes  bestoweth  for  a  yeare  or  two  on
some  duke  or  gentleman,  in  recompense  of  his  service :
and  for  that  time  he  is  Lord  of  all  the  towne,  robbing
and  spoiling,  and  doing  what  pleaseth  him :  and  then  he
being  growen  rich,  is  taken  by  the  Emperor,  and  sent  to
the  warres  againe,  where  he  shall  spend  all  that  which  he
hath  gotten  by  ill  meanes :  so  that  the  Emperour  in  his
warres  is  little  charged,  but  all  the  burden  lieth  upon  the
poore  people.

They  use  sadles  made  of  wood  &  sinewes,  with  the
tree  gilded  with  damaske  worke,  &  the  seat  covered  with
cloth,  sometimes  of  golde,  and  the  rest  Saphian  leather,
well  stitched.  They  use  little  drummes  at  their  sadle
bowes,  by  the  sound  whereof  their  horses  use  to  runne
more  swiftly.

The  Russe  is  apparelled  in  this  maner :  his  upper
garment  is  of  cloth  of  golde,  silke,  or  cloth,  long,  downe
to  the  foot,  and  buttoned  with  great  buttons  of  silver,  or
els  laces  of  silke,  set  on  with  brooches,  the  sleeves  thereof
very  long,  which  he  weareth  on  his  arme,  ruffed  up.
Under  that  he  hath  another  long  garment,  buttoned  with
silke  buttons,  with  a  high  coller  standing  up  of  some
colour,  and  that  garment  is  made  straight.  Then  his
shirt  is  very  fine,  and  wrought  with  red  silk,  or  some
gold,  with  a  coller  of  pearle.  Under  his  shirt  he  hath
linnen  breeches,  upon  his  legs,  a  paire  of  hose  without
feete,  and  his  bootes  of  red  or  yellow  leather.  On  his
head  hee  weareth  a  white  Colepecke,  with  buttons  of
silver,  gold,  pearle,  or  stone,  and  under  it  a  blacke  Foxe
cap,  turned  up  very  broad.

When  he  rideth  on  horsebacke  to  the  warres,  or  any
journey,  he  hath  a  sword  of  the  Turkish  fashion,  and  his
bowe  and  arrowes  of  the  same  maner. In  the  towne  he

424

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  a.d.

1557-
weareth no  weapon, but onely  two or three paire of
knives,  having  the  hafts  of  the  tooth  of  a  fish,  called  the
Morse.

In  the  Winter  time,  the  people  travell  with  sleds,  in
towne  and  countrey,  the  way  being  hard,  and  smooth
with  snow :  the  waters  and  rivers  are  all  frozen,  and  one
horse  with  a  sled,  will  draw  a  man  upon  it  400  miles,  in
three  daies :  but  in  the  Summer  time,  the  way  is  deepe
with  mire,  and  travelling  is  very  ill.

The  Russe,  if  he  be  a  man  of  any  abilitie,  never  goeth
out  of  his  house  in  the  winter,  but  upon  his  sled,  and  in
Summer  upon  his  horse :  and  in  his  sled  he  sits  upon  a
carpet,  or  a  white  Beares  skinne :  the  sled  is  drawen  with
a  horse  well  decked,  with  many  Foxes  and  Woolves  tailes
at  his  necke,  &  is  conducted  by  a  litle  boy  upon  his
backe :  his  servants  stand  upon  the  taile  of  the  sled  &c.

The  voyage,  wherein  Osep  Napea  the  Moscovite
Ambassadour  returned  home  into  his  countrey,
with  his  entertainement  at  his  arrivall,  at
Colmogro :  and  a  large  description  of  the
maners  of  the  Countrey.

He  twelfth  of  Maye,  in  the  yeare  of  our
Lorde  1557  there  departed  from  Graves-
end,  foure good shippes  well  appointed
for Marchants, which were presently
bound into the  Baye  of  S.  Nicholas  in
Russia : with which shippes  was  trans-
ported,  or caried  home,  one Osep  Gre-
goriwich Napea, who was sent Messenger from the
Emperour and great Duke of  Moscovia. The foure
ships  were  these,  whose  names  follow,  viz.
The  Primerose  Admirall.
The  John  Evangelist  Viceadmirall.

The  Anne  and  the  Trinitie  Attendants.  [I.  315.]

The  13  of  July,  the  foresayd  foure  shippes  came  to  an
anker  in  the  Baye  of  S.  Nicholas,  befor  an  Abbey,  called

425

A.D.

1557-

Presents  used
in  Russia  are
all  for  the
most  part  of
victuals .

The  citie  of
Boghar.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Abbey  of  S.  Nicholas,  whereas  the  sayde  Messenger,
Osep  Gregoriwich  Napea  went  a  shoare,  and  as  many
English  men  as  came  to  serve  the  Emperour  remained
with  him  at  the  Abbey  for  the  space  of  sixe  daies,  untill
he  had  gotten  all  his  things  a  shoare,  and  laden  the  same
in  barkes,  to  goe  up  the  river  Dwina,  unto  Vologhda,
which  is  by  water  looo  verstes,  and  every  verste  is  about
three  quarters  of  an  English  mile.

The  20  of  July,  we  departed  from  S.  Nicholas,  and
the  24  of  the  same,  we  came  to  Colmogro,  where  we
remained  eight  daies :  and  the  sayd  Messenger  was  there
of  all  his  acquaintance  welcommed  home,  and  had  presents
innumerable  sent  unto  him,  but  it  was  nothing  but  meate
and  drinke.  Some  sent  white  bread,  some  rie  bread,  and
some  buttered  bread  &  pancakes,  beefe,  mutton,  bacon,
egges,  butter,  fishes,  swannes,  geese,  duckes,  hennes,  and
all  maner  of  victuals,  both  fish  and  flesh,  in  the  best
maner,  that  the  rude  people  could  devise :  for  among
them,  these  presents  are  highly  esteemed.

The  29  of  July,  we  departed  from  Colmogro,  and  the
14  of  August  we  came  to  Ustiug,  where  we  remained  one
day,  and  changed  our  barkes  or  boates.

The  27  of  August,  we  came  to  Vologhda,  where  we
remained  4  daies  unlading  the  barkes,  and  lading  our
chestes  and  things  in  small  waggons,  with  one  horse  in  a
piece,  which  in  their  tongue  are  called  Telegos,  and  with
these  Telegoes  they  caried  our  stuffe  from  Vologhda  unto
the  Mosco,  which  is  500  verstes  :  and  we  were  upon  the
same  way  14  daies  :  for  we  went  no  faster  then  the
Telegoes.

There  are  three  great  townes  betweene  the  Mosco  and
Vologhda,  that  is  to  say,  Yeraslave,  Rostave,  and  Pere-
slave.  Upon  one  side  of  Yeraslave  runneth  a  famous
river,  which  is  called  Volga.  It  runneth  into  the  Caspian
sea,  and  it  devideth  it  selfe  before  it  come  into  the  Mare
Caspium,  in  50  parts  or  more,  and  neere  unto  the  same
sea  there  stands  a  great  Citie,  called  Boghar,  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  which  are  called  by  the  same  name.

426

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  a.d.

1557-

The  people  of  the  said  Citie  doe  traffique  unto  the
Citie  of  Mosco  :  their  commodities  are  spices,  muske,
ambergreese,  rubarbe,  with  other  drugs.  They  bring  also
many  furres  which  they  buy  in  Siberia  comming  towards
the  Mosco  :  the  sayd  people  are  of  the  sect  of  Mahomet.

The  12  of  September  we  came  unto  the  citie  of
Mosco,  where  we  were  brought  by  Napea,  and  two  of
the  Emperours  gentlemen  unto  a  large  house,  where
every  one  of  us  had  his  chamber  appointed.

The  14  of  September  we  were  commanded  to  come  They  arrived
unto  the  Emperour,  and  immediatly  after  our  comming  ^t  Mosco.
we  were  brought  into  his  presence,  unto  whom  each  of  us
did  his  duetie  accordingly,  and  kissed  his  right  hand,  his
majestie  sitting  in  his  chaire  of  estate,  with  his  crowne  on
his  head,  and  a  staffe  of  goldsmiths  worke  in  his  left  hand
well  garnished  with  rich  and  costly  stones  :  and  when  we
had  all  kissed  his  hand  and  done  our  dueties,  his  majestie
did  declare  by  his  interpreter  that  we  were  all  welcome
unto  him,  and  into  his  countrey,  &  therupon  willed  us  to
dine  with  him:  that  day  we  gave  thanks  unto  his  majestie,
and  so  departed  untill  the  dinner  was  readie.

When  dinner  time  approched,  we  were  brought  againe
into  the  Emperours  dining  chamber,  where  we  were  set
on  one  side  of  a  table  that  stoode  over  against  the
Emperours  table,  to  the  end  that  he  might  wel  behold  us
al  :  and  when  we  came  into  the  foresayd  chamber,  we
found  there  readie  set  these  tables  following.

First  at  the  upper  end  of  one  table  were  set  the
Emperour  his  majestie,  his  brother,  &  the  Emperour  of
Cazan,  which  is  prisoner.  About  two  yardes  lower  sate
the  Emperour  of  Cazan  his  sonne,  being  a  child  of  five
yeeres  of  age,  and  beneath  him  sate  the  most  part  of
the  Emperors  noble  men.

And  at  another  table  neere  unto  the  Emperours  table,
there  was  set  a  Monke  all  alone,  which  was  in  all  points
as  well  served  as  the  Emperour.  At  another  table  sate
another  kind  of  people  called  Chirkasses,  which  the
Emperour  entertaineth  for  men  of  warre  to  serve  against

427

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

his  enemies. Of  which  people  and  of  their  countrey,  I

will  hereafter  make  mention.

All  the  tables  aforesayde  were  covered  onely  with  salt
and  bread,  and  after  that  we  had  sitten  a  while,  the
Emperour  sent  unto  every  one  of  us  a  piece  of  bread,
which  were  given  and  delivered  unto  every  man  severally
by  these  words :  The  Emperour  and  great  Duke  giveth
the  bread  this  day,  and  in  like  manner  three  or  foure
times  before  dinner  was  ended,  he  sent  unto  every  man
drinke,  which  was  given  by  these  words.  The  Emperour
and  great  Duke  giveth  thee  to  drinke.  All  the  tables
aforesayd  were  served  in  vessels  of  pure  and  fine  golde,
as  well  basons  and  ewers,  platters,  dishes  and  sawcers,  as
also  of  great  pots,  with  an  innumerable  sorte  of  small
drinking  pottes  of  divers  fashions,  whereof  a  great
[I.  316.1  number  were  set  with  stone.  As  for  costly  meates  I
have  many  times  scene  better  :  but  for  change  of  wines,
and  divers  sorts  of  meads,  it  was  wonderfull  :  for  there
was  not  left  at  any  time  so  much  void  roome  on  the
table,  that  one  cuppe  more  might  have  bin  set,  and  as
far  as  I  could  perceive,  all  the  rest  were  in  the  like
maner  served.

In  the  dinner  time  there  came  in  sixe  singers  which
stood  in  the  midst  of  the  chamber,  and  their  faces
towards  the  Emperor,  who  sang  there  before  dinner
was  ended  three  severall  times,  whose  songs  or  voices
delighted  our  eares  little  or  nothing.

The  Emperour  never  putteth  morsell  of  meate  in  his
mouth,  but  he  first  blesseth  it  himselfe,  &  in  like
maner  as  often  as  he  drinketh  :  for  after  his  maner  he
is  very  religious,  &  he  esteemeth  his  religious  men  above
his  noble  men.

This  dinner  continued  about  the  space  of  five  houres,
which  being  ended,  and  the  tables  taken  up,  we  came
into  the  midst  of  the  chamber,  where  we  did  reverence
unto  the  Emperors  majestic,  and  then  he  delivered  unto
every  one  of  us  with  his  own  hands  a  cup  of  mead,
which when every man had received and drunke a

428

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  ad.

1557-
quantity  thereof,  we  were  licenced  to  depart,  &  so  ended
that  dinner.  And  because  the  Emperour  would  have
us  to  be  mery,  he  sent  to  our  lodging  the  same  Evening
three  barrels  of  meade  of  sundry  sortes,  of  the  quantitie
in  all  of  one  hogshed.

The  1 6  day  of  September  the  Emperour  sent  home
unto  our  lodging  for  every  of  us  a  Tartarie  horse  to
ride  from  place  to  place  as  we  had  occasion,  for  that
the  streetes  of  Mosco  are  very  fowle  and  mirie  in  the
Summer.

The 1 8 of  September  there  were  given  unto master  M.  Standish

•  • •  J  f  TH.'

Standish doctor in Phisick, and the rest of  our  men  '^°f^°^  "j  ^"^'

of  our occupations,  certaine  furred  gownes  of  branched

velvet and gold, and some of  red damaske, of  which

master  Doctors  gowne  was furred  with  Sables,  and  the

rest  were furred some with white Ermine, and some

with  gray  Squirel,  and  all  faced  and  edged  round  about

with  blacke  beaver.

The  I  of  October  in  the  morning  we  were  commanded
to  come  unto  the  Emperors  court,  and  when  we  came
thither,  we  were  brought  unto  the  Emperor  unto  whom
we  did  our  duties  accordingly :  wherupon  he  willed
us  to  dine  with  him  that  day,  and  so  with  thanks  unto
his  majestic,  we  departed  untill  dinner  time,  at  which
time  we  came  and  found  the  tables  covered  with  bread
and  salt  as  at  the  first  :  &  after  that  we  were  all  set
upon  one  side  of  the  table,  the  Emperors  majestic
according  to  his  accustomed  maner  sent  unto  every
man  a  piece  of  bread  by  some  of  the  Dukes  which
attended  on  his  highnesse.

And  whereas  the  14  of  September  we  were  served
in  vessels  of  gold,  we  were  now  served  in  vessels  of
silver,  and  yet  not  so  abundantly  as  was  the  first  of
gold  :  they  brought  drinke  unto  the  table  in  silver
boles  which  conteined  at  the  least  sixe  gallons  a  piece,
and  everie  man  had  a  smal  silver  cuppe  to  drinke  in,
&  another  to  dip  or  to  take  his  drinke  out  of  the
great  boll  withall  :  the  dinner  being  ended,  the  Emperour

429

A.D.

1557-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  yerely
triumph.

gave  unto  every  one  of  us  a  cup  with  meade,  which  when
we  had  received,  we  gave  thanks  and  departed.

Moreover,  whensoever  the  Emperors  pleasure  is  that
any  stranger  shall  dine  with  him,  he  doth  send  for  them
in  the  morning,  and  when  they  come  before  him,  he
with  his  owne  mouth  biddeth  them  to  dinner,  and  this
order  he  alwaies  observeth.

The  lo  of  October  the  Emperour  gave  unto  M.
Standish  70  rubles  in  money,  and  to  the  rest  of  our
men  of  occupations  30  rubles  apiece.

The  3  of  November  we  dined  againe  with  the
Emperour,  where  we  were  served  as  before.

The  6  of  December  being  S.  Nicholas  day,  we  dined
againe  at  the  Emperours,  for  that  is  one  of  the  principall
feasts  which  the  Moscovites  hold  :  we  were  served  in
silver  vessels  and  ordered  in  all  points  as  before,  and
dinners,  it  was  past  7  of  the  clocke  at  night  before  dinner  was
ended.

The  Emperors  majestic  useth  every  yeare  in  the
moneth  of  December,  to  have  all  his  ordinance  that  is
in  the  citie  of  Mosco  caried  into  the  field  which  is  without
the  Suburbs  of  the  citie,  and  there  to  have  it  planted
and  bent  upon  two  houses  of  Wood  filled  within  with
earth  :  against  which  two  houses  there  were  two  faire
white  markes  set  up,  at  which  markes  they  discharge
all  their  ordinance,  to  the  ende  the  Emperour  may  see
what  his  Gunners  can  doe.  They  have  faire  ordinance
of  brasse  of  all  sortes,  bases,  faulcons,  minions,  sakers,
culverings,  cannons  double  and  royall,  basiliskes  long
and  large,  they  have  sixe  great  pieces  whose  shot  is
a  yard  of  height,  which  shot  a  man  may  easily  discerne
as  they  flee  :  they  have  also  a  great  many  of  morter
pieces  or  potguns,  out  of  which  pieces  they  shoote
wild  fire.

The  12  of  December  the  Emperors  Majestic  and  all
his  nobility  came  into  the  field  on  horsebacke,  in  most
goodly  order,  having  very  fine  Jennets  &  Turkic  horses
garnished  with  gold  &  silver  abundantly. The  Emperors  j

430

Ordinance  in
Russia.

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  ad.

1557-
majestic  having  on  him  a  gowne  of  rich  tissue,  &  a  cap
of  skarlet  on  his  head,  set  not  only  with  pearles,  but  also
with  a  great  number  of  rich  and  costly  stones  :  his  noble
men  were  all  in  gownes  of  cloth  of  gold,  which  did
ride  before  him  in  good  order  by  3.  &  3.  and  before  them  [I.  317-]
there  went  5000  harquebusiers,  which  went  by  5  and  5  in
a  rank  in  very  good  order,  every  of  them  carying  his  gun
upon  his  left  shoulder,  and  his  match  in  his  right  hand,
and  in  this  order  they  marched  into  the  field  where  as  the
foresayd  ordinance  was  planted.

And  before  the  Emperors  majestic  came  into  the  field,
there  was  a  certainc  stage  made  of  small  poles  which  was  a
quarter  of  a  mile  long,  and  about  threescore  yardes  off
from  the  stage  of  poles  were  certaine  pieces  of  ice  of
two  foot  thicke,  and  sixe  foote  high  set  up,  which  ranke  of
ice  was  as  long  as  the  stage  of  poles,  and  as  soone  as  the
Emperors  majestic  came  into  the  field,  the  harquebusiers
went  upon  the  stage  of  poles  where  they  setled  them-
selves in  order.  And  when  the  Emperors  majestic  was
setled  where  he  would  be,  and  where  he  might  sec  all
the  ordinance  discharged  and  shot  off,  the  harquebusiers
began  to  shoot  off  at  the  banke  of  ice,  as  though  it  had
bin  in  any  skirmish  or  battel,  who  ceased  not  shooting,
untill  they  had  beaten  all  the  ice  flat  on  the  ground.

After  the  handguns,  they  shot  off  their  wild  fire  up
into  the  aire,  which  was  a  goodly  sight  to  behold.  And
after  this,  they  began  to  discharge  the  smal  pieces  of
brasse,  beginning  with  the  smallest  and  so  orderly  bigger
and  bigger,  untill  the  last  and  biggest.  When  they
had  shot  them  all  off,  they  began  to  charge  them  againe,
and  so  shot  them  al  off  3  times  after  the  first  order,
beginning  with  the  smallest,  and  ending  with  the  greatest.
And  note  that  before  they  had  ended  their  shooting,
the  2  houses  that  they  shot  unto  were  beaten  in  pieces,
&  yet  they  were  very  strongly  made  of  Wood  and  filled
with  earth,  being  at  the  least  30  foote  thicke.  This  triumph
being  ended,  the  Emperour  departed  and  rode  home  in
the  same  order  that  he  came  foorth  into  the  field. The

431

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

■ 1557-

ordinance is discharged every  yeare in the  moneth of
December,  according  to  the  order  before  mentioned.

On  Christmas  day  we  were  all  willed  to  dine  with  the
Emperors  Majestie,  where  for  bread,  meat  and  drinke,  we
were  served  as  at  other  times  before  :  but  for  goodly  and
rich  plate,  we  never  saw  the  like  or  so  much  before.
There  dined  that  day  in  the  Emperors  presence  above
500  strangers,  and  two  hundred  Russes,  and  all  they  were
served  in  vessels  of  gold,  and  that  as  much  as  could  stand
one  by  another  upon  the  tables.  Besides  this  there
were  foure  cupbords  garnished  with  goodly  plate  both
of  gold  &  silver.  Among  the  which  there  were  12
barrels  of  silver,  conteining  above  12  gallons  a  piece,
and  at  each  end  of  every  barrell  were  6  hoopes  of  fine
gold  :  this  dinner  continued  about  sixe  houres.
The  hallowing  Every  yeare  upon  the  12  day  they  use  to  blesse  or
ofthe  river  of  sanctifie  the  river  Moscua,  which  runneth  through  the
citie  of  Mosco,  after  this  maner.

First,  they  make  a  square  hole  in  the  ice  about  3
fadoms  large  every  way,  which  is  trimmed  about  the  sides
&  edges  with  white  boords.  Then  about  9  of  the  clocke
they  come  out  of  the  church  with  procession  towards  the
river  in  this  wise.

First  and  foremost  there  goe  certaine  young  men  with
waxe  tapers  burning,  and  one  carying  a  great  lanterne :
then  follow  certaine  banners,  then  the  crosse,  then  the
images  of  our  Lady,  of  S.  Nicholas,  and  of  other  Saints,
which  images  men  carie  upon  their  shoulders  :  after  the
images  follow  certaine  priests  to  the  number  of  100  or
more  :  after  them  the  Metropolitane  who  is  led  be-
tweene  two  priests,  and  after  the  Metropolitan  came
the  Emperour  with  his  crowne  upon  his  head,  and  after
his  majestie  all  his  noble  men  orderly.  Thus  they
followed  the  procession  unto  the  water,  &  when  they
came  unto  the  hole  that  was  made,  the  priests  set
themselves  in  order  round  about  it.  And  at  one  side
of  the  same  poole  there  was  a  scaffold  of  boords  made,
upon which stood a faire chaire in which the Metro-

432

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  ad.

1558.
politan  was  set,  but  the  Emperours  majestic  stood  upon
the  ice.

After  this  the  priests  began  to  sing,  to  blesse  and  to
sense,  and  did  their  service,  and  so  by  that  time  that
they  had  done,  the  water  was  holy,  which  being  sancti-
fied, the  Metropohtane  tooke  a  litle  thereof  in  his  hands,
and  cast  it  on  the  Emperour,  likewise  upon  certaine  of
the  Dukes,  &  then  they  returned  againe  to  the  church
with  the  priests  that  sate  about  the  water :  but  that
preasse  that  there  was  about  the  water  when  the  Em-
peror was  gone,  was  wonderful  to  behold,  for  there
came  above  5000  pots  to  be  filled  of  that  water  :  for
that  Moscovite  which  hath  no  part  of  that  water,  thinks
himselfe  unhappy.

And  very  many  went  naked  into  the  water,  both  men
and  women  and  children  :  after  the  prease  was  a  litle
gone,  the  Emperours  Jennets  and  horses  were  brought
to  drinke  of  the  same  water,  and  likewise  many  other
men  brought  their  horses  thither  to  drinke,  and  by  that
means  they  make  their  horses  as  holy  as  themselves.

All  these  ceremonies  being  ended,  we  went  to  the
Emperour  to  dinner,  where  we  were  served  in  vessels
of  silver,  and  in  all  other  points  as  we  had  bene  before-
time.

The  Russes  begin  their  Lent  alwaies  8  weekes  before  The  Russes
Easter :  the  first  weeke  they  eate  egs,  milke, cheese &  L^^^-
j  butter, and  make great  cheare  with pancakes  and  such
j  other things, one friend  visiting  another,  & from the
:  same  Sunday  until  our  Shrofesunday  there  are  but  few
'  Russes sober, but  they  are drunke  day  by  day,  and  it
lis  accompted  for  no  reproch  or  shame  among  them.
! The next weeke being our first  weeke  of  Lent,  or  [I.  318.]
I  our clensing  weeke, beginning our Shrofesunday, they
imake and  keepe  a  great fast. It  is  reported,  and  the
people do  verily  beleeve  that the Metropolitan  neither
eateth nor  drinketh any  maner of  thing  for the space
of  seven  dayes,  and  they  say  that  there  are  many  religious
men  which  doe  the  like.

11  433  2  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

The  Emperors  Majestic  eateth  but  one  morsel  of
bread,  and  drinketh  but  one  draught  of  drinke  once  in
the  day  during  that  weeke,  and  all  men  that  are  of  any
reputation  come  not  out  of  their  houses  during  that
time,  so  that  the  streetes  are  almost  void  of  company,
saving  a  few  poore  folkes  which  wander  to  and  fro
The  other  sixe  weekes  they  keepe  as  we  do  ours,  but
not  one  of  them  will  eate  either  butter,  cheese,  egs  or
milke.

On  Palme  sunday  they  have  a  very  solemne  pro-
cession in  this  maner  following.

First,  they  have  a  tree  of  a  good  bignesse  which  is
made  fast  upon  two  sleds,  as  though  it  were  growing
there,  and  it  is  hanged  with  apples,  raisins,  figs  and
dates,  and  with  many  other  fruits  abundantly.  In  the
midst  of  ye  same  tree  stand  5  boyes  in  white  vestures,
which  sing  in  the  tree  before  the  procession :  after  this
there  followed  certaine  yong  men  with  waxe  tapers  in
their  hands  burning,  &  a  great  lanterne  that  al  the
light  should  not  go  out :  after  them  followed  two  with
long  banners,  &  sixe  with  round  plates  set  upon  long
staves  :  the  plates  were  of  copper  very  ful  of  holes  and
thin  :  then  followed  6  carying  painted  images  upon
their  shoulders,  after  the  images  followed  certaine  priests
to  the  number  of  100  or  more,  with  goodly  vestures,
wherof  10  or  12  are  of  white  damaske,  set  and  im-
brodered  round  about  with  faire  and  orient  pearles,  as
great  as  pease,  and  among  them  certaine  Sapphires  and
other  stones.  After  them  followed  the  one  halfe  of  the
Emperours  noble  men  :  then  commeth  the  Emperors
majestie  and  the  Metropolitane,  after  this  maner.

First,  there  is  a  horse  covered  with  white  linnen  cloth
down  to  ye  ground,  his  eares  being  made  long  with  the
same  cloth  like  to  an  asses  ears.  Upon  this  horse  the
Metropolitane  sitteth  sidelong  like  a  woman  :  in  his
lappe  lieth  a  faire  booke,  with  a  crucifix  of  Goldsmiths
worke  upon  the  cover,  which  he  holdeth  fast  with  his  left
hand,  and  in  his  right  hand  he  hath  a  crosse  of  gold,  with

434

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  a.d.

1558.

which  crosse  he  ceaseth  not  to  blesse  the  people  as  he
rideth.

There  are  to  the  number  of  30  men  which  spread
abroad  their  garments  before  the  horse,  and  as  soone  as
the  horse  is  past  over  any  of  them,  they  take  them  up
againe  and  run  before,  and  spred  them  againe,  so  that  the
horse  doth  alway  go  on  some  of  them.  They  which
spred  the  garments  are  all  priests  sonnes,  and  for  their
labours  the  Emperour  giveth  unto  them  new  garments.

One  of  the  Emperors  noble  men  leadeth  the  horse  by  T^he  Emperor
the  head,  but  the  Emperour  himselfe  going  on  foote  leadeth  ^^^^^^  3'f
the  horse by the  ende of  the  reine of  his  bridle  with  ^^^^^  £  ^^^_
one  of  his  hands,  and  in  the  other  of  his  hands  he  had  cession.
a  branch  of  a  Palme  tree  :  after  this followed the rest
of  the Emperours Noble men and Gentlemen,  with  a
great  number  of  other  people. In  this  order  they  went
from  one  church  to  another  within  the  castle,  about  the
distance  of  two  flights  shot  :  and  so  returned  againe  to
the Emperours Church, where they made an end  of
their  service. Which  being  done,  the  Emperours  majestie
and  certaine  of  his  noble  men  went  to  the  Metropolitane
his house to  dinner, where  of  delicate  fishes  and  good
drinks  there  was no  lacke.

The  rest  of  this  weeke  untill  Easter  day  they  kept
very  solemnely,  continuing  in  their  houses  for  the  most
part,  and  upon  Munday  or  Thursday  the  Emperour
doth  alwayes  use  to  receive  the  Sacrament,  and  so  doe
most  of  his  nobles.

Upon  good  Friday  they  continue  all  the  day  in  con-
templation and  prayers,  and  they  use  every  yere  on
good  Friday  to  let  loose  a  prisoner  in  the  stead  of  Bar-
rabas.  The  night  following  they  go  to  the  Church  where
they  sleepe  untill  the  next  morning,  &  at  Easter  they
have  the  resurrection,  &  after  every  of  the  Lents  they  eat
flesh  the  next  weeke  following,  Friday,  Saturday  and  all.

They  have  an  order  at  Easter  which  they  alwaies
observe,  and  that  is  this  :  every  yere  against  Easter
to die or colour red with Brazell a  great  number of

435

A.D.

1558.

Kissing  used
in  the  Greeke
church.

[I.  3 1 9-]

With  these
letters  M.
Jenkinson
tooke  his
voyage  the
same  April  to
Boghar,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

egs,  of  which  every  man  and  woman  giveth  one  unto
the  priest  of  their  Parish  upon  Easter  day  in  the  morn-
ing. And  moreover  the  common  people  use  to  carie
in  their  hands  one  of  their  red  egs,  not  onely  upon
Easter  day,  but  also  three  or  foure  dayes  after,
and  gentlemen  and  gentlewomen  have  egs  gilded  which
they  cary  in  like  maner.  They  use  it  as  they  say  for
a  great  love,  and  in  token  of  the  resurrection,  whereof
they  rejoyce.  For  when  two  friends  meete  during  the
Easter  holy  dayes,  they  come  &  take  one  another  by
the  hand  :  the  one  of  them  sayth,  the  Lord  or  Christ
is  risen,  the  other  answereth,  it  is  so  of  a  truth,  and
then  they  kisse  and  exchange  their  egs  both  men  and
women,  continuing  in  kissing  4  dayes  together.

The  12  of  Aprill  being  Tuesday  in  the  Easter  weeke,
master  Jenkinson  and  master  Graie,  "and  certayne  other
of  us  English  men  dined  with  the  Emperor,  where  we
were  served  as  we  had  bin  before  time.  And  after
diner  the  Emperours  majestie  gave  unto  master  Jenkin-
son and  unto  M.  Gray,  and  so  orderly  unto  every  one
of  us  a  cup  of  Mead,  according  to  his  accustomed  maner
which  when  every  man  had  received  and  given  thanks,
M.  Jenkinson  stepped  into  the  midst  of  the  chamber
before  the  Emperours  majestie,  and  gave  thankes  to  his
highnesse  for  his  goodnesse  unto  him  extended,  desiring
his  grace  to  licence  him  to  depart,  and  in  like  maner
did  Master  Gray.  His  majestie  did  not  onely  licence
them  to  depart,  but  also  graunted  unto  master  Jenkinson
his  letters  under  his  great  scale,  unto  all  princes  through
whose  dominions  master  Jenkinson  should  have  occasion
to  passe,  that  he  might  the  sooner  and  quietlier  passe
by  meanes  thereof.  Which  being  granted,  master  Jenkin-
son and  Gray  lowly  submitted  themselves,  thanking
his  majestie.  So  the  Emperour  gave  unto  either  of  them
a  cuppe  of  mead  to  drinke,  and  willed  them  to  depart
at  their  pleasure  in  Gods  peace.

The  14.  of  Aprill  in  the  morning  when  M.  Gray
and I were ready to depart towards Enggland, the

436

OSEP NAPEA'S RETURN HOME  a.d.

1558.
Chancellors  sent  unto  us  and  willed  us  to  come  to  their
office  in  the  Chancerie,  where  at  our  comming  they
shewed  us  a  great  number  of  the  Emperors  jewels,  and
rich  robes,  willing  us  to  marke  and  beholde  them  well,
to  the  end  that  at  our  arrivall  into  England,  we  might
make  report  what  we  had  scene  there.

The  chiefest  was  his  majesties  crowne,  being  close  The  Emper-
under  the  top  very  faire  wrought  :  in  mine  opinion,  ''«'-f^'^^«'"<"^^«
the  workmanship  of  so  much  gold  few  men  can  amend.
It  was  adorned  and  decked  with  rich  and  precious  stones
abundantly,  among  the  which  one  was  a  rubie,  which
stood  a  handfull  higher  then  the  top  of  the  crown  upon
a  small  wier,  it  was  as  big  as  a  good  beane  :  the  same
crown  was  lined  with  a  faire  blacke  Sable,  worth  by
report  40.  robles.

Wee  sawe  all  his  majesties  robes  which  were  very
richly  set  with  stones,  they  shewed  us  manie  other
great  stones  of  divers  kindes,  but  the  most  part  of  them
were  uneven,  in  maner  as  they  came  out  of  the  worke,
for  they  doe  more  esteeme  the  greatnesse  of  stones,
then  the  proportion  of  them.

We  saw  two  goodly  gownes  which  were  as  heavie  as
a  man  could  easily  carrie,  all  set  with  pearles  over  and
over :  the  gards  or  borders  round  about  them  were
garnished  with  saphires  and  other  good  stones  abun-
dantly. One  of  the  same  gownes  was  very  rich,  for  the
pearles  were  very  large,  round  and  orient :  as  for  the
rest  of  his  gownes  and  garments,  they  were  of  rich
tissue  and  cloth  of  gold  and  all  furred  with  very
blacke  Sables.

When  we  had  sufficiently  perused  all  these  things,
they  willed  master  Gray  at  his  arrivall  in  England,  to
iprovide  if  he  could,  such  jewels  and  rich  clothes  as  he
Ihad  scene  there,  and  better  if  he  could,  declaring  that
the  Emperour  would  gladly  bestow  his  money  upon
such  things.

So  we  tooke  our  leave  the  same  time,  and  departed
towards  Vologda  immediatly.

437

A.D.
1558.

"  Or,BasiIius.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  maners,  usages,  and  ceremonies  of  the
Russes.

Of  the  Emperour.

He  Emperours  name  in  their  tongue  is
Ivan  Vasilivich,  that  is  as  much  to  say,
as  John  the  sonne  of  "  Vasihe  and  by  his
princely  state  hee  is  called  Otesara,  as  his
predecessors  have  bene  before,  which  to
interprete,  is  a  king,  that  giveth  not
tribute  to  any  man.  And  this  word
Otesara  his  majesties  interpreters  have  of  late  dayes
interpreted  to  be  Emperour,  so  that  now  hee  is  called
Emperour  and  great  Duke  of  all  Russia,  &c.  Before
his  father  they  were  neither  called  Emperours  nor  kings
but  onely  Ruese  Velike,  that  is  to  say,  great  Duke.
And  as  this  Emperor  which  now  is  Ivan  Vasilivich,
doeth  exceede  his  predecessors  in  name,  that  is,  from  a
Duke  to  an  Emperour,  even  so  much  by  report  he  doeth
exceede  them  in  stoutnesse  of  courage  and  valiantnesse,
and  a  great  deale  more :  for  he  is  no  more  afraid  of  his
enemies  which  are  not  few,  then  the  Hobbie  of  the
larks.

His  enemies  with  whom  he  hath  warres  for  the  most
part  are  these :  Litto,  Poland,  Sweden,  Denmarke,
Lifland,  the  Crimmes,  Nagaians,  and  the  whole  nation
of  the  Tartarians,  which  are  a  stoute  and  a  hardie  people
as  any  under  the  Sunne.

This  Emperour  useth  great  familiaritie,  as  wel  unto
all  his  nobles  and  subjects,  as  also  unto  strangers  which
serve  him  either  in  his  warres,  or  in  occupations :  for
his  pleasure  is  that  they  shall  dine  oftentimes  in  the
yeere  in  his  presence,  and  besides  that  he  is  oftentimes
abroad,  either  at  one  Church  or  another,  and  walking
with  his  noble  men  abroad.  And  by  this  meanes  he  is
not  onely  beloved  of  his  nobles  and  commons,  but  also
had  in  great  dread  and  feare  through  all  his  dominions,

438

A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  ad.

1558.
so  that  I  thinke  no  prince  in  Christendome  is  more
feared  of  his  owne  then  he  is,  nor  yet  better  beloved.
For  if  he  bid  any  of  his  Dukes  goe,  they  will  runne,
if  he  give  any  evil  or  angrie  worde  to  any  of  them,  the
partie  will  not  come  into  his  majesties  presence  againe
of  a  long  time  if  he  be  not  sent  for,  but  will  faine  him  [I.  320-]
to  be  very  sicke,  and  will  let  the  haire  of  his  head
grow  very  long,  without  either  cutting  or  shaving,  which
is  an  evident  token  that  hee  is  in  the  Emperors  dis-
pleasure :  for  when  they  be  in  their  prosperity,  they
account  it  a  shame  to  weare  long  haire,  in  consideration
whereof,  they  use  to  have  their  heads  shaven.

His  majesty  heareth  all  complaints  himselfe,  and  with  Note.
his  owne  mouth  giveth  sentence,  and  judgement  of  all
matters,  and  that  with  expedition  : but  religious  matters
he  medleth  not  withall,  but  referreth  them  wholly  unto
the  Metropolitane.

His  majestie  retaineth  and  well  rewardeth  all  strangers
that  come  to  serve  him,  and  especially  men  of  warre.

Hee  delighteth  not  greatly  in  hawking,  hunting,  or
any  other  pastime,  nor  in  hearing  instruments  or  musicke,
but  setteth  all  his  whole  delight  upon  two  things  :  First,
to  serve  God,  as  undoubtedly  he  is  very  devoute  in  his
religion,  and  the  second,  howe  to  subdue  and  conquere
his  enemies.

He  hath  abundance  of  gold  and  silver  in  his  owne
handes  or  treasurie :  but  the  most  part  of  his  know  not
a  crowne  from  a  counter,  nor  gold  from  copper,  they
are  so  much  cumbred  therewithall,  and  he  that  is  worth
2.  3.  or  4.  grotes,  is  a  rich  man.

Of  their  Religious  men.

THe  Metropolitane  is  next  unto  God,  our  Lady  and
S.  Nicholas  excepted :  for  the  Emperors  majesty
judgeth  &  affirmeth  him  to  be  of  higher  dignitie  then
himselfe ;  for  that,  saith  he,  he  is  Gods  spiritual  officer,
and  I  the  Emperour  am  his  temporall  officer,  and  there-
fore his  majestie  submitteth  himselfe  unto  him  in  many

439

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558-

things  concerning  religious  matters,  as  in  leading  the
Metropolitans  horse  upon  Palme  Sunday,  and  giving  him
leave  to  sitte  on  a  chaire  upon  the  12.  day,  when  the
river  Mosco  was  in  blessing,  his  majestie  standing  on
the  yce.

All  matters  of  religion  are  reformed  by  the  Metro-
politane,  he  heareth  the  causes  and  giveth  sentence  as
himselfe  listeth,  and  is  authorized  so  to  doe,  whether  it
be  to  whip,  hang  or  burne,  his  will  must  needs  be
fulfilled.

They  have  both  monks,  friers  and  nunnes,  with  a
great  number  of  great  &  rich  monasteries :  they  keepe
great  hospitalitie,  and  doe  relieve  much  poore  people
day  by  day.  I  have  bene  in  one  of  the  monasteries
called  Troietes,  which  is  walled  about  with  bricke  very
strongly  like  a  castle,  and  much  ordinance  of  brasse
upon  the  walles  of  the  same.  They  told  me  themselves
that  there  are  seven  hundred  brethren  of  them  which
belong  unto  that  house.  The  most  part  of  the  lands,
towns,  and  villages  which  are  within  40.  miles  of  it,
belong  unto  the  same.  They  shewed  me  the  church,
wherein  were  as  many  images  as  could  hang  about,  or
upon  the  wals  of  the  Church  round  about,  and  even  the
roofe  of  the  church  was  painted  ful  of  images.  The
chiefe  image  was  of  our  Ladie,  which  was  garnished
with  gold,  rubies,  saphirs  and  other  rich  stones  abun-
dantly. In  the  midst  of  the  church  stood  12.  waxe
tapers  of  two  yards  long,  and  a  fathom  about  in  bignesse,
&  there  stands  a  kettle  full  of  waxe  with  about  100.
weight,  wherein  there  is  alwayes  the  wicke  of  a  candle
burning,  as  it  were  a  lampe  which  goeth  not  out  day
nor  night.

They  shewed  me  a  coffin  covered  with  cloth  of  gold
which  stoode  upon  one  side  within  their  church,  in  which
they  told  me  lay  a  holy  man,  who  never  eate  or  dranke,
and  yet  that  he  liveth.  And  they  told  me  (supposing
that  I  had  beleeved  them)  that  he  healeth  many  diseases,
and giveth the blind their sight, with many other

440

A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1558.
miracles,  but I was hard of  belief  because I saw him
worke  no  miracle  whilest  I  was  there.

After  this  they  brought  me  into  their  sellers,  and
made  me  taste  of  divers  kinds  of  drinks,  both  wine  and
beere,  mead  and  quassie,  of  sundry  colours  and  kinds.
Such  abundance  of  drink  as  they  have  in  their  sellers,  I
doe  suppose  few  princes  have  more,  or  so  much  at  once.

Their  barrels  or  vessels  are  of  an  unmeasurable  bignes
&  sise :  some  of  them  are  3.  yards  long  and  more,  and
2.  yards  &  more  broad  in  their  heads :  they  conteine  6.
or  7.  tunnes  a  piece :  they  have  none  in  their  sellers
of  their  owne  making  that  are  lesse  then  a  tunne.  They
have  9.  or  10.  great  vautes  which  are  full  of  those
barrels  which  are  seldome  remooved :  for  they  have
trunks  which  come  downe  through  the  roofe  of  the
vautes  in  sundry  places,  through  which  they  powre
drinke  downe,  having  the  caske  right  under  it  to
receive  the  same,  for  it  should  be  a  great  trouble  to
bring  it  all  downe  the  stayres.

They  give  bread,  meat  and  drinke  unto  all  men  that  The  hospitali-
come  to  them,  not  onely  while  they  are  at  their  abbey,  ^^^  of  their
but  also  when  they  depart,  to  serve  them  by  the  way.  ^°^^^^^^^^^-

There  are  a  great  number  of  such  monasteries  in  the
Realm,  and  the  Emperors  majesty  rideth  oftentimes  from
one  to  another  of  them,  and  lieth  at  them  3.  or  4.  daies
together.

The  same  monkes  are  as  great  merchants  as  any  in  [I.  321.]
the  land  of  Russia,  and  doe  occupy  buying  and  selling
as  much  as  any  other  men,  and  have  boats  which  passe
too  and fro  in  the  rivers  with  merchandize  from  place
to  place  where  any  of  their  countrey  do  traffike.

They  eate  no  flesh  during  their  lives  as  it  is  reported :
but  upon  Sunday,  Munday,  Tuesday,  Thursday  and
Saturday  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  eate  egges,  butter,
cheese  and  milke,  and  at  all  times  to  eate  fish,  and  after
this  sort  they  lead  their  lives.

They  weare  all  blacke  garments,  and  so  doe  none
other  in  all  the  lande,  but  at  that  abbey  onely.

441

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.
Wantofprea- They  have  no  preachers  no  not  one  in  al  the  land  to
chers  cause  of  instruct  the  people,  so  that  there  are  many,  &  the  most
ance  and P^^^  °^  ^^^  poore  in  the  country,  who  if  one  aske  them
idolatry.  how  many  gods there  be,  they  wil say  a  great  many,

meaning  that  every  image  which  they  have  is  a  god :
for  all  the  countrey  and  the  Emperours  majesty  him-
selfe  wil  blesse  and  bowe,  and  knocke  their  heads  before
their  images,  in  so  much  that  they  will  crie  earnestly
unto  their  images  to  helpe  them  to  the  things  which
they  need.  Al  men  are  bound  by  their  law  to  have
those  images  in  their  houses,  and  over  every  gate  in
all  their  townes  and  cities  are  images  set  up,  unto
which  the  people  bow  and  bend,  and  knocke  their
heads  against  the  ground  before  them :  as  often  as  they
come  by  any  church  or  crosse  they  do  in  like  maner.
And  when  they  come  to  any  house,  they  blesse  them-
selves 3.  or  4.  times  before  they  will  salute  any  man
in  the  house.

They  reckon  and  hold  it  for  great  sinne  to  touch  or
handle  any  of  their  images  within  the  circle  of  the  boord
where  the  painting  is,  but  they  keep  them  very  daintily,
and  rich  men  deck  them  over  and  about  with  gold,  silver
and  stones,  and  hang  them  over  and  about  with  cloth
of  gold.

The  priestes  are  married  as  other  men  are,  and  weare
all  their  garments  as  other  men  doe,  except  their  night-
caps, which  is  cloth  of  some  sad  colour,  being  round,
&  reacheth  unto  the  eares :  their  crownes  are  shaven,
but  the  rest  of  their  haire  they  let  grow,  as  long  as
nature  will  permit,  so  that  it  hangeth  beneath  their
eares  upon  their  shoulders :  their  beards  they  never
shave :  if  his  wife  happen  to  die,  it  is  not  lawfull  for
him  to  mary  againe  during  his  life.

They  minister  the  Communion  with  bread  and  wine
after  our  order,  but  he  breaketh  the  bread  and  putteth
it  into  the  cup  unto  the  wine,  and  commonly  some  are
partakers  with  them  :  and  they  take  the  bread  out
againe with  a spoon  together with part of  the wine,

442

A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1558.
and  so  take it themselves, and  give it to others  that
receive  with  them  after  the  same  maner.

Their  ceremonies  are  al  as  they  say,  according  to  the
Greeke  Church  used  at  this  present  day,  and  they  allow
no  other  religion  but  the  Greeks,  and  their  owne :  and
will  not  permit  any  nation  but  the  Greeks  to  be  buried
in  their  sacred  burials,  or  churchyards.

All  their  churches  are  full  of  images,  unto  the  which
the  people  when  they  assemble,  doe  bowe  and  knocke
their  heads,  as  I  have  before  said,  that  some  will  have
knobbes  upon  their  foreheads  with  knocking,  as  great
as  egges.

All their service is in the Russe tongue, and they  Al  their  ser-
and  the  common  people  have  no  other  praiers  but  this,  vice  is  in  their
Ghospodi Jesus Christos esine voze ponuloi nashe.  mother  tongue.
That  is  to say,  O  Lorde  Jesus Christ,  sonne  of  God
have  mercy  upon  us : and  this  is  their  prayer,  so  that
the most part of the unlearned  know neither Pater
noster, nor the Beliefe,  nor Ten  commandements,  nor
scarcely  understand  the  one  halfe  of  their  service  which
is  read  in  their  Churches.

Of  their  Baptisme.

WHen  any  child  is  borne,  it  is  not  baptized  until
the  next  Sunday,  and  if  it  chance  that  it  be  not
baptized  then,  it  must  tary  until  the  second  Sunday  after
the  birth,  and  it  is  lawfuU  for  them  to  take  as  many
Godfathers  and  Godmothers  as  they  will,  the  more  the
better.

When  they  go  to  the  Church,  the  midwife  goeth  for-
most,  carying  the  childe,  &  the  Godfathers  and  God-
mothers follow  into  the  midst  of  the  Church,  where
there  is  a  small  table  ready  set,  and  on  it  an  earthen
pot  ful  of  warme  water,  about  the  which  the  Godfathers
and  Godmothers,  with  the  childe,  settle  themselves :  then
the  clearke  giveth  unto  every  of  them  a  smal  waxe  candle
burning,  then  commeth  the  priest,  and  beginneth  to  say
certaine  words,  which  the Godfathers  and Godmothers

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

must  answere  word  for  word,  among  which  one  is,  that
the  childe  shal  forsake  the  devill,  and  as  that  name
is  pronounced,  they  must  all  spit  at  the  word  as  often
as  it  is  repeated.  Then  he  blesseth  the  water  which  is
in  the  pot,  and  doth  breathe  over  it :  then  he  taketh
al  the  candles  which  the  gosseps  have,  and  holding
them  all  in  one  hand  letteth  part  of  them  drop  into
the  water,  and  then  giveth  every  one  his  candle  againe,
and  when  the  water  is  sanctified,  he  taketh  the  childe
and  holdeth  it  in  a  small  tubbe,  and  one  of  the  God-
fathers taketh  the  pot  with  warme  water,  and  powreth
it  all  upon  the  childs  head.

[I.  322.]  After  this  he  hath  many  more  ceremonies,  as  anoynting
eares  and  eyes  with  spittle,  and  making  certaine  crosses
with  oyle  upon  the  backe,  head,  and  brest  of  the  childe :

,  then taking the childe in his  armes, carieth it  to  the

images  of  S.  Nicholas,  and  our  Ladie,  &c.  and  speaketh
unto  the  images,  desiring  them  to  take  charge  of  the
childe,  that  he  may  live,  and  beleeve  as  a  Christian
man  or  woman  ought  to  doe,  with  many  other  words.
Then  comming  backe  from  the  images,  he  taketh  a
paire  of  sheares  and  clippeth  the  yong  and  tender  haires
of  the  childes  head,  in  three  or  foure  places,  and  then
delivereth  the  childe,  whereunto  every  of  the  Godfathers
&  Godmothers  lay  a  hand :  then  the  priest  chargeth
them,  that  the  childe  be  brought  up  in  the  faith  &  feare
of  God  or  Christ,  and  that  it  be  instructed  to  clinege  and
bow  to  the  images,  and  so  they  make  an  end :  then  one  of
the  Godfathers  must  hang  a  crosse  about  the  necke  of  the
childe,  which  he  must  alwayes  weare,  for  that  Russe  which
hath  not  a  crosse  about  his  necke  they  esteeme  as  no
Christian  man,  and  thereupon  they  say  that  we  are  no
Christians,  because  we  do  not  weare  crosses  as  they  do.

Of  their  Matrimonie.

THeir  matrimonie  is  nothing  solemnized,  but  rather
in  most  points  abhominable,  and  as  neere  as  I  can
learne,  in  this  wise  following.

444

A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1558.

First,  when  there  is  love  betweene  the  parties,  the
man  sendeth  unto  the  woman  a  small  chest  or  boxe,
wherein  is  a  whip,  needles,  threed,  silke,  linnen  cloth,
sheares,  and  such  necessaries  as  shee  shall  occupie  when
she  is  a  wife,  and  perhaps  sendeth  therwithall  raisins,
figs  or  some  such  things,  giving  her  to  understand,  that
if  she  doe  offend,  she  must  be  beaten  with  the  whip,  &
hy  the  needles,  threed,  cloth,  &c.  that  she  should  apply
her  selfe  diligently  to  sowe,  and  do  such  things  as  shee
could  best  doe,  and  by  the  raisins  or  fruites  he  meaneth
if  she  doe  well,  no  good  thing  shalbe  withdrawn  from
her,  nor  be  too  deare  for  her :  and  she  sendeth  unto
him  a  shirt,  handkerchers,  and  some  such  things  of  her
ov/ne  making. And  now  to  the  effect.

When  they  are  agreed,  and  the  day  of  marriage
appointed,  when  they  shall  goe  towardes  the  Church,
the  bride  will  in  no  wise  consent  to  go  out  of  the  house,
but  resisteth  and  striveth  with  them  that  would  have
her  out,  and  faineth  her  selfe  to  weepe,  yet  in  the  end,
two  women  get  her  out,  and  lead  her  towards  the  church,
her  face  being  covered  close,  because  of  her  dissimulation,
that  it  should  not  be  openly  perceived :  for  she  maketh
a  great  noise,  as  though  she  were  sobbing  and  weeping,
until  she  come  at  the  Church,  and  then  her  face  is  un-
covered. The  man  commeth  after  among  other  of  his
friends,  and  they  cary  with  them  to  the  church  a  great
pot  with  wine  or  mead :  then  the  priest  coupleth  them
together  much  after  our  order,  one  promising  to  love
and  serve  the  other  during  their  lives  together,  &c.
which  being  done,  they  begin  to  drinke,  and  first  the
woman  drinketh  to  the  man,  and  when  he  hath  drunke
he  letteth  the  cuppe  fall  to  the  ground,  hasting  imme-
diatly  to  tread  upon  it,  and  so  doth  she,  and  whether
of  them  tread  first  upon  it  must  have  the  victorie  and
be  master  at  all  times  after,  which  commonly  happeneth
to  the  man,  for  he  is  readiest  to  set  his  foot  on  it,
because  he  letteth  it  fall  himselfe,  then  they  goe  home
againe,  the  womans  face  beeing  uncovered. The  boyes

445

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

in  the  streetes  crie  out  and  make  a  noyse  in  the  meane
time,  with  very  dishonest  wordes.

When  they  come  home,  the  wife  is  set  at  the  upper
end  of  the  table,  and  the  husband  next  unto  her :  they
fall  then  to  drinking  till  they  bee  all  drunke,  they  per-
chance have  a  minstrell  or  two,  and  two  naked  men,
which  led  her  from  the  Church  daunce  naked  a  long
time  before  all  the  companie.  When  they  are  wearie
of  drinking,  the  bride  and  the  bridegrome  get  them
to  bed,  for  it  is  in  the  evening  alwayes  when  any  of
them  are  married :  and  when  they  are  going  to  bedde,
the  bridegrome  putteth  certain  money  both  golde  and
silver,  if  he  have  it,  into  one  of  his  boots,  and  then
sitteth  down  in  the  chamber,  crossing  his  legges,  and
then  the  bride  must  plucke  off  one  of  his  boots,  which
she  will,  and  if  she  happen  on  the  boote  wherein  the
money  is,  she  hath  not  onely  the  money  for  her  labor,
but  is  also  at  such  choyse,  as  she  need  not  ever  from
that  day  forth  to  pul  off  his  boots,  but  if  she  misse  the
boot  wherin  the  money  is,  she  doth  not  onely  loose
the  money,  but  is  also  bound  from  that  day  forwards
to  pull  off  his  boots  continually.

Then  they  continue  in  drinking  and  making  good
cheere  three  daies  following,  being  accompanied  with
certaine  of  their  friends,  and  during  the  same  three  daies
he  is  called  a  Duke,  &  shee  a  dutches,  although  they
be  very  poore  persons,  and  this  is  as  much  as  I  have
learned  of  their  matrimony  :  but  one  common  rule  is
amongst  them,  if  the  woman  be  not  beaten  with  the
whip  once  a  weeke,  she  will  not  be  good,  and  therefore
they  looke  for  it  orderly,  &  the  women  say,  that  if
their  husbands  did  not  beate  them,  they  should  not
love  them.

They  use  to marry  there  very  yong,  their  sonnes  at

16. and 18.  yeeres  olde, and the daughters  at 12. or

13.  yeeres or  yonger  : they use  to keepe their wives

[I-  323-]  very  closely, 1 meane  those that  be  of  any  reputation,

so  that  a  man  shall  not  see  one  of  them  but  at  a  chance.

446

A LARGE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  ad.

1558.
when she  goeth  to  church  at  Christmas  or  at  Easter,  or
els  going  to  visite  some  of  her  friends.

The  most  part  of  the  women  use  to  ride  a  stride
in  saddles  with  styrrops,  as  men  do,  and  some  of  them
on  sleds,  which  in  summer  is  not  commendable.

The  husband is  bound  to finde the  wife  colours  to  The  women  of
paint her withall, for they use ordinarily to paynt  Russia  paint
themselves  : it  is  such  a  common  practise  among  them,  t"-etr  faces.
that it is counted for no shame  : they grease their
faces  with  such colours,  that  a  man  may  discerne  them
hanging on their faces almost  a flight shoote off : I
cannot so  well  liken  them  as  to  a  millers  wife, for  they
looke  as  though they  were  beaten  about  the  face  with
a  bagge  of  meale,  but  their  eye  browes  they  colour  as
blacke  as  jeat.

The  best  propertie  that  the  women  have,  is  that
they  can  sowe  well,  and  imbroder  with  silke  and  golde
excellently.

Of  their  buriall.

WHen  any  man  or  woman  dieth,  they  stretch  him
out,  and  put  a  new  paire  of  shooes  on  his  feete,
because  he  hath  a  great  journey  to  goe  :  then  doe
they  winde  him  in  a  sheet,  as  we  doe,  but  they  forget
not  to  put  a  testimonie  in  his  right  hand,  which  the
priest  giveth  him,  to  testifie  unto  S.  Nicholas  that  he
died  a  Christian  man  or  woman.  And  they  put  the
coarse  alwayes  in  a  coffin  of  wood,  although  the  partie
be  very  poore  :  and  when  they  goe  towards  the  Church,
the  friends  and  kinsemen  of  the  partie  departed  carrie
in  their  hands  small  waxe  candles,  and  they  weepe  and
howle,  and  make  much  lamentation.

They  that  be  hanged  or  beheaded,  or  such  like,
have  no  testimonie  with  them  :  how  they  are  received
into  heaven,  it  is  a  wonder,  without  their  pasport.

There  are  a  great  number  of  poore  people  among
them  which  die  daily  for  lacke  of  sustenance,  which  is
a  pitifuU  case  to  beholde  : for  there  hath  beene  buried

447

A.D.
1558.

Bread  made
of  straw.

The  unmerc'i-
fulnesse  of  the
Russes  toward
the  poore.

Stooves  or
baths  us u  all
with  the
Moscovites.

Reported
by  Thomas
Bulky.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in  a  small  time,  within  these  two  yeeres,  above  80.
persons  young  and  old,  which  have  died  onely  for
lacke  of  sustenance  :  for  if  they  had  had  straw  and
water  enough,  they  would  make  shift  to  live  :  for  a
great  many  are  forced  in  the  winter  to  drie  straw  and
stampe  it,  and  to  make  bread  thereof,  or  at  the  least
they  eate  it  in  stead  of  bread.  In  the  summer  they
make  good  shift  with  grasse,  herbes  and  rootes  :  barks
of  trees  are  good  meat  with  them  at  all  times.  There
is  no  people  in  the  world,  as  I  suppose,  that  live  so
miserably  as  do  the  poverty  in  those  parts  :  and  the
most  part  of  them  that  have  sufficient  for  themselves,
and  also  to  relieve  others  that  need,  are  so  unmerciful
that  they  care  not  how  many  they  see  die  of  famine
or  hunger  in  the  streets.

It  is  a  countrey  full  of  diseases,  divers,  and  evill,
and  the  best  remedie  is  for  anie  of  them,  as  they  holde
opinion,  to  goe  often  unto  the  hote  houses,  as  in  a
maner  every  man  hath  one  of  his  owne,  which  hee
heateth  commonly  twise  every  weeke,  and  all  the
housholde  sweate,  and  wash  themselves  therein.

The  names  of  certaine  sortes  of  drinkes  used
in  Russia,  and  commonly  drunke  in  the
Emperours  Court.

THe  first  and  principall  meade  is  made  of  the  juice
or  liccour  taken  from  a  berrie  called  in  Russia,
Malieno,  which  is  of  a  marvellous  sweete  taste,  and  of
a  carmosant  colour,  which  berry  I  have  seene  in  Paris.
The  second  meade  is  called  Visnova,  because  it  is
made  of  a  berry  so  called,  and  is  like  a  black  goose-
berrie  :  but  it  is  like  in  colour  and  taste  to  the  red
wine  of  France.

The  third  meade  is  called  Amarodina  or  Smorodina,
short,  of  a  small  berry  much  like  to  the  small  rezin,
and  groweth  in  great  plentie  in  Russia.

The  fourth  meade  is  called  Cherevnikyna,  which  is
made  of  the  wilde  blacke  cherry.

448

jANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.

The  fift  meade  is  made  of  hony  and  water,  with
other  mixtures.

There  is  also  a  delicate  drinke  drawn  from  the  root
of  the  birch  tree,  called  in  the  Russe  tongue  Berozevites,
which  drinke  the  noble  men  and  others  use  in  Aprill,
May,  and  June,  which  are  the  three  moneths  of  the
spring  time  :  for  after  those  moneths,  the  sappe  of  the
tree  dryeth,  and  then  they  cannot  have  it.

The  voyage  of  Master  Anthony  Jenkinson,  made  [I.  324.]
from the citie of Mosco in Russia,  to the
citie  of  Boghar  in  Bactria,  in  the  yeere  1558  :
written by himselfe to the Merchants of
London  of  the  Moscovie  companie.

He  23.  day  of  April,  in  the  yeere  1558.
(having  obtained  the  Emperor  of  Russia
his  letters,  directed  unto  sundry  kings
and  princes,  by  whose  dominions  I
should  passe)  I  departed  from  Mosco
by  water,  having  with  mee  two  of  your
servants,  namely,  Richard  Johnson,  &
Robert  Johnson,  and  a  Tartar  Tolmach,  with  divers
parcels  of  wares,  as  by  the  inventory  appeareth  :  and
the  28.  day  we  came  to  a  town  called  CoUom,  distant
from  the  Mosco  20.  leagues,  &  passing  one  league
beyond  the  saide  Collom,  we  came  unto  a  river  called
Occa,  into  the  which  the  river  Mosco  falleth,  and  looseth
his  name  :  and  passing  downe  the  said  river  Occa  8.
leagues,  we  came  unto  a  castle  called  Terrevettisko,
which  we  left  upon  our  right  hand,  and  proceeding
forward,  the  second  day  of  May,  we  came  unto  another
casde  called  Peroslave,  distant  8.  leagues,  leaving  it  also
on  our  right  hand.  The  third  day  we  came  unto  the
place  where  olde  Rezan  was  situate,  beeing  now  most
of  it  ruined  and  overgrowen,  and  distant  from  the  said
Peroslave,  6.  leagues  :  the  4.  day  we  passed  by  a  castle
called  Terrecovia,  from  Rezan  12.  leagues,  &  the  6.
II  449  2  F

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

day  we  came  to  another  castle  called  Cassim,  under
the  government  of  a  Tartar  prince  named  Utzar  Zegoline,
sometime  Emperour  of  the  worthy  citie  of  Cazan,  and
now  subject  unto  the  Emperour  of  Russia.  But  leaving
Cassim  on  our  left  hand,  the  8.  day  we  came  unto  a
faire  town  called  Morom,  from  Cassim  20.  leagues,
where  we  took  the  sonne,  and  found  the  latitude  ^6.
degrees  :  and  proceeding  forward  the  1 1 .  day,  we  came
unto  another  faire  town  &  castle  called  Nyse  Novogrod,
situated  at  the  falling  of  the  foresaid  river  Occa  into
the  worthie  river  of  Volga,  distant  from  the  saide
Moron  25.  leagues,  in  the  latitude  of  56.  degrees  18.
minutes.  From  Rezan  to  this  Nyse  Novogrod,  on
both  sides  the  said  river  of  Occa,  is  raised  the  greatest
store  of  waxe  and  hony  in  all  the  land  of  Russia.  We
tarried  at  the  foresaid  Nyse  Novogrod  until  the  19.
day,  for  the  comming  of  a  captain  which  was  sent  by
the  Emperour  to  rule  at  Astracan,  who  beeing  arrived,
and  having  the  number  of  500.  great  boates  under
his  conduct,  some  laden  with  victuals,  souldiers,  and
munition  :  and  other  some  with  merchandise,  departed
altogether  the  said  19.  day  from  the  said  Nyse  Novogrod,
and  the  22.  we  came  unto  a  castle  called  Vasiliagorod,
distant  25.  leagues,  which  we  left  upon  our  right
hand.  This  towne  or  castle  had  his  name  of  this
Emperours  father,  who  was  called  Vasilius,  and  gorod
in  the  Russe  tongue  is  as  much  to  say  as  a  castle,  so
that  Vasiliagorod  is  to  say,  Vasilius  castle  :  and  it  was
the  furthest  place  that  the  said  Emperour  conquered
from  the  Tartars.  But  this  present  Emperour  his
Sonne,  called  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  hath  had  great  good
successe  in  his  warres,  both  against  the  Christians  and
also  the  Mahometists  and  Gentiles,  but  especially  against
the  Tartars,  inlarging  his  Empire  even  to  the  Caspian
sea,  having  conquered  the  famous  river  of  Volga,  with
all  the  countreis  thereabout  adjacent.  Thus  proceeding
on  our  journey  the  25.  day  of  May  aforesaide,  wee
came to another castle called Sabowshare, which wee

45°

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
left  on  our  right  hand,  distant  from  Vasiliagorod  16.
leagues.  The  countrey  heereabout  is  called  JVTordovits,
and  the  habitants  did  professe  the  law  of  the  Gentiles  :
but  nowe  beeing  conquered  by  this  Emperour  of  Russia,
most  of  them  are  christened,  but  lie  in  the  woods  and
wildernesse,  without  towne  or  habitation.

The  27.  day  we  passed  by  another  castle  called
Swyasko,  distant  from  Shabowshare  aforesaid  25.  leagues:
we  left  it  on  our  right  hand,  and  the  29.  came  unto
an  Island  one  league  from  the  citie  of  Cazan,  from  Cazan.
which  falleth  downe  a  river  called  Cazanka  reca,  &
entreth  into  the  foresaide  Volga.  Cazan  is  a  faire
town  after  the  Russe  or  Tartar  fashion,  with  a  strong
castle,  situated  upon  a  high  hill,  and  was  walled  round
about  with  timber  &  earth,  but  now  the  Emperour  of
Russia  hath  given  order  to  plucke  downe  the  old  walles,
and  to  builde  them  againe  of  free  stone.  It  hath  bene
a  citie  of  great  wealth  and  riches,  and  being  in  the
hands  of  the  Tartars  it  was  a  kingdome  of  it  selfe,
'and  did  more  vexe  the  Russes  in  their  warres,  then
lany  other  nation  :  but  9.  yeres  past,  this  Emperour  of
Russia  conquered  it,  and  tooke  the  king  captive,  who
being  but  young  is  nowe  baptised,  and  brought  up
in  his  court  with  two  other  princes,  which  were  also
kings  of  the  said  Cazan,  and  being  ech  of  them  in
time  of  their  raignes  in  danger  of  their  subjects  through
civil  discord,  came  and  rendred  themselves  at  several
times  unto  the  said  Emperor,  so  that  at  this  present
there  are  three  princes  in  the  court  of  Russia,  which
had  bene  Emperours  of  the  said  Cazan,  whom  the
Emperour  useth  with  great  honour.

We  remained  at  Cazan  till  the 13.  day  of  June,  and
then departed from thence  : and  the same  day  passed  [I.  325.]
by  an  Island  called  the  Island  of  merchants,  because  it  was  The  Island  of
woont  to  be  a  place  where  all  merchants,  as  well  Russes  ^archants.
and  Cazanites,  as Nagayans and Crimmes, and divers
other  nations  did  resort  to  keepe  mart for  buying  and
selling, but nowe  it  is  forsaken, and  standeth without

451

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

any  such resort  thither,  or  at Cazan, or at  any place
about  it,  from  Mosco  unto  Mare  Caspium.
The  river  of Thus proceeding forward the 14. day, we passed
Cama.  y^^  ^  goodly  river called  Cama, which we left on our

left  hand.  This  river  falleth  out  of  the  countrey
of  Permia  into  the  river  of  Volga,  and  is  from  Cazan
15.  leagues  :  and  the  countrey  lying  betwixt  the
said  Cazan  and  the  said  riv2r  Cama  on  the  left
hand  of  Volga  is  called  Vachen,  and  the  inhabitants
be  Gentiles,  and  live  in  the  wildernesse  without  house
or  habitation  :  and  the  countrey  on  the  other  side  of
Volga  over  against  the  said  river  Cama  is  called  the
land  of  Cheremizes,  halfe  Gentiles,  halfe  Tartars,  and
all  the  land  on  the  left  hand  of  the  said  Volga  from
the  said  river  unto  Astracan,  and  so  following  the
North  and  Northeast  side  of  the  Caspian  sea,  to  a  land
of  the  Tartars  called  Turkemen,  is  called  the  countrey  of
Nagay  Tar-  Mangat  or  Nagay,  whose  inhabitants  are  of  the  law
^'^"'  of  Mahomet,  and  were  all  destroyed  in  the  yeere  1558,

at  my  being  at  Astracan,  through  civill  warres  among
them,  accompanied  with  famine,  pestilence,  and  such
plagues,  in  such  sort  that  in  the  said  yeere  there  were
consumed  of  the  people,  in  one  sort  and  another,  above
one  hundred  thousand  :  the  like  plague  was  never  seen
in  those  parts,  so  that  the  said  countrey  of  Nagay
being  a  countrey  of  great  pasture,  remaineth  now  un-
replenished  to  the  great  contentation  of  the  Russes,
who  have  had  cruel  warres  a  long  time  together.

The  Nagayans  when  they  flourished,  lived  in  this
maner :  they  were  divided  into  divers  companies  called
Hords,  and  every  Hord  had  a  ruler,  whom  they  obeyed
as  their  king,  and  was  called  a  Murse.  Towne  or
house  they  had  none,  but  lived  in  the  open  fields,
Hords.  every Murse or King having his Hords or people

about  him,  with  their  wives,  children  and  cattell,  who
having  consumed  the  pasture  in  one  place,  remooved
unto  another  :  and  when  they  remoove  they  have  houses
like  tents  set  upon  wagons  or  carts,  which are  drawen

452

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

from  place  to  place  with  camels,  &  therin  their  wives,
children,  and  all  their  riches,  which  is  very  litle,  is
caried  about,  and  every  man  hath  at  the  least  foure
or  five  wives  besides  concubines.  Use  of  money  they
lave  none,  but  doe  barter  their  cattell  for  apparell
and  other  necessaries.  They  delight  in  no  arte  nor
science,  except  the  warres,  wherein  they  are  expert,  but
'or  the  most  part  they  be  pasturing  people,  and  have
great  store  of  cattel,  which  is  all  their  riches.  They  eate
much  flesh,  and  especially  the  horse,  and  they  drinke
mares  milke,  wherewith  they  be  oftentimes  drunke  :  they
are  seditious  &  inclined  to  theft  and  murther.  Corne
they  sowe  not,  neither  doe  eate  any  bread,  mocking  the
Christians  for  the  same,  and  disabling  our  strengths,
saying  we  live  by  eating  the  top  of  a  weede,  and  drinke
a  drinke  made  of  the  same,  allowing  their  great  devouring
of  flesh,  and  drinking  of  milke  to  be  the  increase  of
their  strength.  But  now  to  proceed  forward  to  my
journey.

All  the  countrey  upon  our  right  hand  the  river  Volga,
from  over  against  the  river  Cama  unto  the  towne  of
Astracan,  is  the  land  of  Crimme,  whose  inhabitants  be  ^^^  Crimme
also  of  the  lawe  of  Mahomet,  and  live  for  the  most  part
according  to  the  fashions  of  the  Nagayes,  having  con-
tinual wars  with  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  are  valiant
in  the  fielde,  having  countenance,  and  support  from  the
Dfreat  Turke.

The  16.  day  of  June  we  passed  by  certaine  fishermens
houses  called  Petowse  twenty  leagues  from  the  river
Cama,  where  is  great  fishing  for  sturgeon,  so  continuing
aur  way  untill  the  22.  day,  and  passing  by  another
^reat  river  called  Samar,  which  falleth  out  of  the  afore-  The  river  of
saide  countrey,  and  runneth  through  Nagay,  and  entreth
into  the  saide  river  of  Volga.  The  28.  day  wee  came
anto  a  great  hill,  where  was  in  times  past  a  castle  made
3y  the  Crimmes,  but  now  it  is  ruined,  being  the  just
midway  betweene  the  said  Cazan  and  Astrachan,  which
s 200. leagues or thereabout, in the latitude of  51.

453

Tartars.

Samar.

A.D.
1558.

Licoris  in
great  plentie.

[I.  326.]

Astracan.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

degrees  47.  minutes.  Upon  all  this  shore  groweth
abundance  of  Licoris,  whose  root  runneth  within  the
ground  like  a  vine.

Thus  going  forward  the  sixt  day  of  July  we  came
to  a  place  called  Perovolog,  so  named  because  in  times
past  the  Tartars  caried  their  boates  from  Volga  unto  the
river  Tanais,  otherwise  called  Don,  by  land,  when  they
would  robbe  such  as  passed  downe  the  said  Volga  to
Astracan,  and  also  such  as  passed  downe  by  the  river
Tanais,  to  Asou,  Cajffa,  or  any  other  towne  situated!
upon  Mare  Euxinum,  into  which  sea  Tanais  falleth,
who  hath  his  springs  in  the  countrey  of  Rezan,  out
of  a  plaine  ground.  It  is  at  this  streight  of  Perovolog
from  the  one  river  to  the  other  two  leagues  by  land,
and  is  a  dangerous  place  for  theeves  and  robbers,  but
now  it  is  not  so  evill  as  it  hath  bene,  by  reason  of  the
Emperour  of  Russia  his  conquests.

Departing  from  Perovolog,  having  the  wildernesse
on  both  sides,  wee  sawe  a  great  heard  of  Nagayans,
pasturing,  as  is  abovesaid,  by  estimation  above  a  thousand
Camels  drawing  of  cartes  with  houses  upon  them  like
tents,  of  a  strange  fashion,  seeming  to  bee  a  farre  ofFi
a  towne  :  that  Hord  was  belonging  to  a  great  Murse
called  Smille,  the  greatest  prince  in  all  Nagay,  who  hath
slaine  and  driven  away  all  the  rest,  not  sparing  his
owne  brethren  and  children,  and  having  peace  with  this
Emperour  of  Russia  he  hath  what  he  needeth,  and
ruleth  alone  :  so  that  now  the  Russes  live  in  peace  with
the  Nagayans,  who  were  wont  to  have  mortall  warres
together.

The  14.  day  of  July  passing  by  an  old  castle,  which
was  Old  Astracan,  and  leaving  it  upon  our  right  hand,
we  arrived  at  New  Astracan,  which  this  Emperour  of
Russia  conquered  sixe  yeeres  past,  in  the  yeere  1552.
It  is  from  the  Mosco  unto  Astracan  sixe  hundreth
leagues,  or  thereabout.  The  towne  of  Astracan  is
situated  in  an  Island  upon  a  hill  side,  having  a  castle
within the  same, walled about with earth and timber,

454

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.

neither  faire  nor  strong  :  The  towne  is  also  walled
about  with  earth  :  the  buildings  and  houses  (except  it
be  the  captaines  lodging,  and  certaine  other  gentlemens)
most  base  and  simple.  The  Island  is  most  destitute
and  barren  of  wood  and  pasture,  and  the  'ground  will
beare  no  corne  :  the  aire  is  there  most  infected,  by  reason
(as  I  suppose)  of  much  fish,  and  specially  Sturgion,  by  Store  ofStur-
which  onely  the  inhabitants  live,  having  great  scarsitie  ^°^^'
of  flesh  and  bread.  They  hang  up  their  fish  in  their
streets  and  houses  to  dry  for  their  provision,  which
causeth  such  abundance  of  flies  to  increase  there,  as  the
like  was  never  seene  in  any  land,  to  their  great  plague.
And  at  my  being  at  the  sayd  Astracan,  there  was  a  great
famine  and  plague  among  the  people,  and  specially  among
the  Tartars  called  Nagayans,  who  the  same  time  came
thither  in  great  numbers  to  render  themselves  to  the
Russes  their  enemies,  &  to  seeke  succour  at  their  hands,
their  countrey  being  destroyed,  as  1  said  before  :  but
they  were  but  ill  entertained  or  relieved,  for  there  died  a
great  number  of  them  for  hunger,  which  lay  all  the
Island  through  in  heapes  dead,  and  like  to  beasts  un-
buried,  very  pitifull  to  behold  :  many  of  them  were
also  sold  by  the  Russes,  and  the  rest  were  banished
from  the  Island.  At  that  time  it  had  bene  an  easie
thing  to  have  converted  that  wicked  Nation  to  the
Christian  faith,  if  the  Russes  themselves  had  bene  good
Christians  :  but  how  should  they  shew  compassion  unto
other  Nations,  when  they  are  not  merciful!  unto  their
owne  .''  At  my  being  there  I  could  have  bought  many
goodly  Tartars  children,  if  I  would  have  had  a  thousand,
of  their  owne  fathers  and  mothers,  to  say,  a  boy  or  a
wench  for  a  loafe  of  bread  woorth  sixe  pence  in  England,
but  we  had  more  need  of  victuals  at  that  time  then
of  any  such  merchandise.  This  Astracan  is  the  furthest
hold  that  this  Emperour  of  Russia  hath  conquered  of
the  Tartars  towards  the  Caspian  sea,  which  he  keepeth
very  strong,  sending  thither  every  yere  provision  of  men,
and  victuals,  and  timber  to  build  the  castle.

455

A.D.
1558.

THEIENGLISH VOYAGES

There  is  a  certaine  trade  of  merchandise  there  used
but  as  yet  so  small  and  beggerly,  that  it  is  not  woorth
the  making  mention,  and  yet  there  come  merchants
thither  from  divers  places.  The  chiefest  commodities
that  the  Russes  bring  thither  are  redde  hides,  redde
sheepes  skinnes,  woodden  vessels,  bridles,  and  saddles
knives,  and  other  trifles,  with  corne,  bacon,  and  other
victuals.  The  Tartars  bring  thither  divers  kindes  of
wares  made  of  cotten  wooll,  with  divers  kindes  of
wrought  silkes :  and  they  that  come  out  of  Persia,
namely  from  Shamacki  doe  bring  sowing  silke,  which
is  the  coursest  that  they  use  in  Russeland,  Crasko,  divers
kinds  of  pide  silkes  for  girdles,  shirts  of  male,  bowes,
swords,  and  such  like  things :  and  some  yeeres  corne,
and  wallnuts,  but  all  such  things  in  such  small  quantitie,
the  merchants  being  so  beggerly  and  poore  that  bring
the  same,  that  it  is  not  worth  the  writing,  neither  is
there  any  hope  of  trade  in  all  those  parts  woorth  the
folowing.

The  length  of  This  foresaid  Island  of  Astracan  is  in  length  twelve
^if/f™'^^  leagues,  and  in  bredth  three,  &  lieth  East  and  West  in
the  latitude  of  fortie  seven  degrees,  nine  minutes :  we
taried  there  until  the  sixt  day  of  August,  and  having
bought  and  provided  a  boate  in  company  with  certaine
Tartars  and  Persians,  we  laded  our  goods  and  imbarked
our  selves,  and  the  same  day  departed  I,  with  the  said
two  Johnsons  having  the  whole  charge  of  the  Navigation
downe  the  sayd  river  Volga,  being  very  crooked,  and
full  of  flats  toward  the  mouth  thereof.  We  entred
into  the  Caspian  sea  the  tenth  day  of  August  at  the
Easterly  side  of  the  sayd  river,  being  twentie  leagues
from  Astracan  aforesayd,  in  the  latitude  of  fortie  six
degrees,  twentie  seven  minutes.

Volga  hath  seventie  mouthes  or  fals  into  the  sea  :
and  we  having  a  large  wind,  kept  the  Northeast  shore,
and  the  eleventh  day  we  sailed  seven  leagues  East-
northeast,  and  came  unto  an  Island  having  an  high
hill therein,  called  Accurgar,  a  good  marke  in  the  sea.

456

Astracan.

They  enter
into  the  Cas-
pian sea.

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
From  thence  East  tenne  leagues,  we  fell  with  another
Island  called  Bawhiata,  much  higher  then  the  other.
Within  these  two  Islands  to  the  Northwards,  is  a  great
Baie  called  the  Blew  sea.  From  thence  wee  sailed  East  The  blew  sea.
and  by  North  ten  leagues,  and  having  a  contrary  wind,
we  came  to  an  anker  in  a  fadome  water,  and  so  rid  untill
the  fifteenth  day,  having  a  great  storme  at  Southeast,
being  a  most  contrary  wind,  which  we  rid  out.  Then
the  wind  came  to  the  North,  and  we  weyed,  and  set
our  course  Southeast,  and  that  day  sailed  eight  leagues.

Thus  proceeding  forwards,  the  17.  day  wee  lost  sight  [I.  327.]
of  land, and the same day sailed thirtie leagues,  and
the  18.  day  twentie  leagues  winding  East,  and  fell  with
a land called Baughleata, being 74. leagues from the  Baughkata
mouth  of  the  said  Volga,  in  the  latitude  of  46.  degrees ,^  74-
54.  minutes,  the  coast  lying  neerest  East  and  by  South,  y^i
and West  and by  North. At the point of  this land
lieth  buried  a  holy  Prophet,  as  the  Tartars  call  him,  of
their  law,  where  great  devotion  is  used  of  all  such  Maho-
metists  as  doe  passe  that  way.

The  nineteenth  day  the  winde  being  West,  and  we
winding  Eastsoutheast,  we  sailed  tenne  leagues,  and
passed  by  a  great  river  called  laic,  which  hath  his  spring  laic  river.
in  the  lande  of  Siberia,  nigh  unto  the  foresaid  river  Cama,
and  runneth  through  the  lande  of  Nagay,  falling  into
this  Mare  Caspium.  And  up  this  river  one  dayes
journey  is  a  Towne  called  Serachick,  subject  to  the  Serachick.
aforesaid  Tartar  prince  called  Murse  Smille,  which  is
nowe  in  friendship  with  the  Emperour  of  Russia.  Here
is  no  trade  of  merchandize  used,  for  that  the  people  have
no  use  of  money,  and  are  all  men  of  warre,  and  pasturers
of  cattel,  and  given  much  to  theft  and  murther.  Thus
being  at  an  anker  against  this  river  laic,  and  all  our
men  being  on  land,  saving  I,  who  lay  sore  sicke,  and
five  Tartars,  whereof  one  was  reputed  a  holy  man,  be-
cause he  came  from  Mecka,  there  came  unto  us  a  boate
with  thirtie  men  well  armed  and  appointed,  who  boorded
us,  and began to enter  into  our  barke,  and our holy

457

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

Tartar  called  Azy,  perceiving  that,  asked  them  what  they
would  have,  and  withall  made  a  prayer  :  with  that  these
rovers  staied,  declaring  that  they  were  Gentlemen,
banished  from  their  countrey,  and  out  of  living,  &  came
to  see  if  there  were  any  Russes  or  other  Christians
(which  they  call  Caphars)  in  our  barke  ?  To  whom
this  Azi  most  stoutly  answered,  that  there  were  none,
avowing  the  same  by  great  othes  of  their  lawe,  (which
lighdy  they  will  not  breake)  whom  the  rovers  beleeved,
and  upon  his  words  departed.  And  so  through  the
fidelitie  of  that  Tartar,  I  with  all  my  company  and  goods
were  saved,  and  our  men  being  come  on  boord,  and  the
wind  faire,  we  departed  from  that  place,  and  winding
East  and  Southeast,  that  day  being  the  20.  of  August
sailed 16.  leagues.

The  21.  day  we  passed  over  a  Bay  of  6.  leagues  broad,
and  fell  with  a  Cape  of  land,  having  two  Islands  at  the
Southeast  part  thereof,  being  a  good  marke  in  the  sea  :
&  doubling  that  Cape  the  land  trended  Northeast,  and
maketh  another  Bay,  into  which  falleth  the  great  river  i
The  Countrie  Yem,  springing  out  of  the  land  of  Colmack.
ofColmack.  Yhe  22.  23.  and  24.  dayes,  we  were  at  an  anker. ';}

The  25.  the  winde  came  faire,  and  wee  sailed  that
day  20.  leagues,  and  passed  by  an  Island  of  lowe  land,
and  there  about  are  many  jflats  and  sands  :  and  to  the
Northward  of  this  Island  there  goeth  in  a  great  Bay,
but  we  set  off  from  this  Island,  and  winded  South  to
come  into  deepe  water,  being  much  troubled  with  shoalds
&  flats,  and  ran  that  course  10.  leagues,  then  East
Southeast  20.  leagues,  and  fel  with  the  maine  land,
being  full  of  copped  hils,  and  passing  along  the  coast  I
20.  leagues,  the  further  we  sailed,  the  higher  was  the  |
land.  I

The  27.  day  we  crossed  over  a  Bay,  the  South  shore  1
being  the higher land, and fel with a  high point of
land  : &  being overthwart  the  Cape, there rose such
a  storme  at  the  East,  that  we  thought  verily  we  should
have  perished  : this  storme  continued  3.  dayes. From

458

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

this  Cape  we  passed  to  a  port  called  Manguslave.  The  The  port  of
place  where  we  should  have  arrived  at  the  Southermost  ^^"W-^^^-
part  of  the  Caspian  sea,  is  12.  leagues  within  a  Bay:
but  we  being  sore  tormented  and  tossed  with  this  fore-
said storme,  were  driven  unto  another  land  on  ye  other
side  the  Bay,  overthwart  the  sayd  Manguslave  being  very
lowe  land,  and  a  place  as  well  for  the  ill  commoditie
of  the  haven,  as  of  those  brute  field  people,  where
never  barke  nor  boate  had  before  arrived,  not  liked
of  us.

But  yet  here  we  sent  certaine  of  our  men  to  land
to  talke  with  the  governour  and  people,  as  well  for  our
good  usage  at  their  handes,  as  also  for  provision  of  camels
to  carry  our  goods  from  the  sayd  sea  side  to  a  place
called  Sellyzure,  being  from  the  place  of  our  landing  five
and  twentie  dayes  journey.  Our  messengers  returned
with  comfortable  wordes  and  faire  promises  of  all
things.

Wherefore  the  3.  day  of  September  1558.  we  dis-  They  goe  on
:harged  our  barke,  and  I  with  my  companie  were  gently  '^•
ntertained  of  the  Prince  &  of  his  people.  But  before
our  departure  from  thence,  we  found  them  to  be  very
bad  and  brutish  people,  for  they  ceased  not  daily  to
molest  us,  either  by  fighting,  stealing  or  begging,  raising
the  prise  of  horse  and  camels,  &  victuals,  double  that
t  was  woont  there  to  be,  and  forced  us  to  buy  the  water
:hat  we  did  drinke  :  which  caused  us  to  hasten  away,
md  to  conclude  with  them  as  well  for  the  hire  of  camels,
IS  for  the  prise  of  such  as  wee  bought,  with  other  pro-
vision, according  to  their  owne  demaund  :  So  that  for
jvery  camels  lading,  being  but  400.  waight  of  ours,  we
igreed  to  give  three  hides  of  Russia,  and  foure  woodden
iishes,  and  to  the  Prince  or  governour  of  the  sayd  people,
Dne  ninth,  and  two  sevenths  :  Namely,  nine  severall
hings,  and  twise  seven  severall  things  :  for  money  they
ise  none.

And  thus  being ready,  the  foureteenth  of  September  [I.  328.]
ve departed from that place, being a Caravan of a

459

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

thousand  camels.  And  having  travailed  five  dayes
journey,  we  came  to  another  Princes  Dominion,  and
upon  the  way  there  came  unto  us  certaine  Tartars  on
horseback,  being  well  armed,  and  servants  unto  the  saide
Prince  called  Timor  Soltan,  governour  of  the  said
The  countrey  countrey  of  Manguslave,  where  wee  meant  to  have
ofMangu-  arrived  and  discharged  our  barke,  if  the  great  storm
aforesayd  had  not  disappointed.  These  aforesaid  Tartars
stayd  our  Caravan  in  the  name  of  their  Prince,  and
opened  our  wares,  and  tooke  such  things  as  they  thought
best  for  their  saide  prince  without  money,  but  for  such
things  as  they  tooke  from  me,  which  was  a  ninth  (after
much  dissension)  I  ridde  unto  the  same  Prince,  and
presented  my  selfe  before  him,  requesting  his  favour,
and  pasport  to  travaile  through  his  countrey,  and  not
to  be  robbed  nor  spoiled  of  his  people  :  which  request
he  graunted  me,  and  intertained  me  very  gently,  com-
maunding  me  to  be  well  feasted  with  flesh  and  mares
milke  :  for  bread  they  use  none,  nor  other  drinke  except
water  :  but  money  he  had  none  to  give  mee  for  such
things  as  he  tooke  of  mee,  which  might  be  of  value
in  Russe  money,  fifteene  rubbles,  but  he  gave  me  his
letter,  and  a  horse  woorth  seven  rubbles.  And  so  I
departed  from  him  being  glad  that  I  was  gone  :  for  he
was  reported  to  be  a  very  tyrant,  and  if  I  had  not  gone
unto  him,  I  understoode  his  commaundement  was,  that
I  should  have  beene  robbed  and  destroyed.

This  Soltan  lived  in  the  fieldes  without  Castle  or
towne,  and  sate,  at  my  being  with  him,  in  a  litle  rounde
house  made  of  reedes  covered  without  with  felt,  and
within  with  Carpets.  There  was  with  him  the  great
Metropolitan  of  that  wilde  Country,  esteemed  of  the
people,  as  the  Bishop  of  Rome  is  in  most  parts  of
Europe,  with  divers  other  of  his  chiefe  men.  The
Soltan  with  this  Metropolitan  demanded  of  me  many
questions,  as  wel  touching  our  kingdoms,  lawes,  and
Religion,  as  also  the  cause  of  my  comming  into  those
parts,  with  my  further  pretence. To  whom  I  answered

460

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.

;oncerning all things,  as unto me seemed  best,  which

(j  they  tooke in good  part. So  having  leave  I  departed

md  overtooke  our  Caravan,  and  proceeded  on  our  journey,

md  travailed 20. dayes in the  wildernes from  the  sea  20  dayes  tra-

jide without seeing towne  or habitation, carying pro-  ^^/^^  '^^  ^^^

i^ision  of  victuals with us  for  the  same  time,  and  were  ^"f^''^"^-^-^^'.
J .  ,  .  j~  ,  with  scarcttie

Iriven by  necessity  to eate one or my  camels and a  of  water.
lorse for  our  part,  as other  did  the  like  : and  during
:he  said  20.  daies  we  found no  water,  but such  as we
irew  out  of  old  deepe  welles,  being  very  brackish  and
salt,  and  yet  sometimes  passed  two  or  three  dayes  with-
out the  same. And  the  5.  day  of  October  ensuing,  we
:ame  unto  a  gulfe  of  the  Caspian  sea  againe,  where  we  Another  gulfe
bund the  water  very fresh and sweete : at this gulfe  °^J^^  ^^^'
:he customers of  the king  of  Turkeman  met  us,  who "
00k  custome  of  every  25.  one,  and  7. ninthes  for the
saide  king  and  his brethren,  which  being  received  they
leparted,  and  we  remained  there  a  day  after  to  refresh
3ur  selves.

Note that in times past there did  fal into  this  gulf
:he great river Oxus, which hath his springs in the
nountains of  Paraponisus in India,  & now commeth
lot  so  far,  but  falleth  into  another  river  called  Ardock,  ^'^^^-df
\^hich  runneth  toward  the  North,  &  consumeth  himself ^V'^H  J~

,  J  .  '  scnbeth  this

n  the  ground  passmg  under  ground above  500.  miles,  ftver  of
md then issueth out  againe and  falleth into the  lake  Ardok,  cap.  4.
)f  Kithay.

We  having  refreshed  our  selves  at  the  foresaide  gulfe,
ieparted  thence  the  4.  day  of  October,  and  the  seventh
lay  arrived  at  a  castle  called  Sellizure,  where  ye  king  SelHzure,  or
:alled  Azim  Can,  remained  with  3.  other  of  his  brethren,  ^^^J^^'''^-
md  the  9.  day  I  was  commaunded  to  come  before  his
)resence,  to  whom  I  delivered  the  Emperors  letters  of
Russia :  and  I  also  gave  him  a  present  of  a  ninth,  who
mtertained  me  very  well,  and  caused  me  to  eate  in  his
)resence  as  his  brethren  did,  feasting  me  with  flesh  of
L  wilde  horse,  and  mares  milk  without  bread.  And  the
lext  day  he  sent  for  me  again,  and  asked  of  me  divers

461

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558-

questions,  as  wel  touching  the  affaires  of  the  Emperoul
of  Russia, as of  our countrey and lawes, to  which
answered  as  I  thought  good : so  that at  my  departuri

Letters  of  safe-  he  gave  me  his  letters  of  safe  conduct.

conduct.  This  Castle  of  Sellizure  is  situated  upon  an  high  hill

where  the  King  called  the  Can  lyeth,  whose  palace  i:
built  of  earth  very  basely,  and  not  strong  :  the  peopL
are  but  poore,  and  have  litle  trade  of  marchandise  amond
them.  The  South  part  of  this  Castle  is  lowe  lande|
but  very  fruitfuU,  where  grow  many  good  fruites,  amon^l
which  there  is  one  called  a  Dynie,  of  a  great  bigness(
and  full  of  moysture,  which  the  people  doe  eate  afte;
meate  in  steade  of  drinke.  Also  there  growes  anothe:
fruite  called  a  Carbuse  of  the  bignesse  of  a  grea
cucumber,  yellow  and  sweete  as  sugar:  also  a  certaint
corne  called  legur,  whose  stalke  is  much  like  a  suga:
cane,  and  as  high,  and  the  graine  like  rice,  which  growetl
at  the  toppe  of  the  cane  like  a  cluster  of  grapes;  th(
water  that  serveth  all  that  countrey  is  drawen  by  ditche;!
out  of  the  river  Oxus,  unto  the  great  destruction  o
the  said  river,  for  which  cause  it  falleth  not  into  th<,
Caspian  sea  as  it  hath  done  in  times  past,  and  irj
short  time  all  that  land  is  like  to  be  destroied,  and  tc
become  a  wildernes  for  want  of  water,  when  the  river
of  Oxus  shal  faile.  v|

[I.  329.]  The 14. day of  the moneth  we  departed  from  thi;

Castle  of  Sellizure,  and  the 16.  of  the  same  we  arrivec

Urgence.  at  a  citie  called  Urgence,  where  we  paid  custome  as  we
for  our  own  heads,  as  for  our  camels  and  horses
And  having  there  sojourned  one  moneth,  attending  the
time  of  our  further  travaile,  the  king  of  that  countrejj
called  Aly  Soltan,  brother  to  the  forenamed  Azym  Can!
returned  from  a  towne  called  Corasan,  within  the  bor-|
ders  of  Persia,  which  he  lately  had  conquered  from  thtj
Persians,  with  whom  he  and  the  rest  of  the  kings  o:|
Tartaria  have  continuall  warres.  Before  this  king  alsci
1  was  commanded  to  come,  to  whom  I  likewise  pre-
sented the  Emperors  letters  of  Russia,  and  he  intertainec

462

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
me  wel,  and  demanded  of  me  divers  questions, and  at
my  departure  gave  me  his  letters  of  safeconduct.

This  city  or  towne  of  Urgence  standeth  in  a  plaine
ground,  with  walles  of  the  earth,  by  estimation  4.  miles
about  it.  The  buildings  within  it  are  also  of  earth,
but  ruined  and  out  of  good  order :  it  hath  one  long
street  that  is  covered  above,  which  is  the  place  of  their
market.  It  hath  bene  wonne  and  lost  4.  times  within
7.  yeeres  by  civill  warres,  by  meanes  whereof  there  are
but  few  merchants  in  it,  and  they  very  poore,  and  in
all  that  towne  I  could  not  sell  above  4.  kerseis.  The
chiefest  commodities  there  sold  are  such  wares  as  come
from  Boghar,  and  out  of  Persia,  but  in  most  smal  quantity
not  worth  the  writing.  All  the  land  from  the  Caspian
sea  to  this  Citie  of  Urgence  is  called  the  land  of  Turke-  ^-^^  countrey
man,  &  is  subject  to  the  said  Azim  Can,  and  his  brethren  "^  Turkeman.
which  be  five  in  number,  and  one  of  them  hath  the
name  of  the  chiefe  king  called  Can,  but  he  is  little
obeyed  saving  in  his  owne  Dominion,  and  where  he
dwelleth  :  for  every  one  will  be  King  of  his  owne  por-
tion, and  one  brother  seeketh  alwayes  to  destroy  another,
having  no  natural  love  among  them,  by  reason  that
they  are  begotten  of  divers  women,  and  commonly  they
are  the  children  of  slaves,  either  Christians  or  Gentiles,
which  the  father  doeth  keepe  as  concubines,  and  every
Can  or  Sultan  hath  at  the  least  4.  or  5.  wives,  besides
yong  maidens  and  boyes,  living  most  viciously :  and
when  there  are  warres  betwixt  these  brethren,  (as  they
are  seldome  without)  he  that  is  overcome  if  he  be  not
slaine,  flieth  to  the  field  with  such  companie  of  men
as  will  foUowe  him,  and  there  liveth  in  the  wildernesse
resorting  to  watering  places,  and  so  robbeth  and  spoileth
as  many  Caravans  of  Marchants  and  others  as  they  be
able  to  overcome,  continuing  in  this  sort  his  wicked
life,  until  such  time  as  he  may  get  power  and  aide  to
invade  some  of  his  brethren  againe.  From  the  Caspian
sea  unto  the  Castle  of  Sellizure  aforesaid,  and  all  the
Countreis  about the said Sea,  the people live  without

463

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558-

towne  or  habitation  in  the  wilde  fields,  removing  from
one  place  to  another  in  great  companies  with  their
cattel,  whereof  they  have  great  store,  as  camels,  horses,
and  sheepe  both  tame  and  wilde.  Their  sheepe  are  of
great  stature  with  great  buttocks,  weighing  60.  or  80.
pound  in  weight.  There  are  many  wild  horses  which
the  Tartars  doe  many  times  kil  with  their  hawkes,  andi
that  in  this  order.  ]

The  hawkes  are  lured  to  sease  upon  the  beasts!
neckes  or  heads,  which  with  chafing  of  themselves  andi
sore  beating  of  the  hawkes  are  tired :  then  the  hunter
following  his  game  doeth  slay  the  horse  with  his  arrow
or  sword.  In  all  this  lande  there  groweth  no  grasse,
but  a  certaine  brush  or  heath,  whereon  the  cattell  feed-
ing become  very  fat.

The  Tartars  never  ride  without  their  bow,  arrowes,
and  sword,  although  it  be  on  hawking,  or  at  any
other  pleasure,  and  they  are  good  archers  both  on  horse-:
backe,  and  on  foote  also.  These  people  have  not  the!
use  of  golde,  silver,  or  any  other  coyne,  but  when
they  lacke  apparell  or  other  necessaries,  they  barter
their  cattell  for  the  same.  Bread  they  have  none,  forij
they  neither  till  nor  sow  :  they  be  great  devourers  of
flesh,  which  they  cut  in  smal  pieces,  &  eat  it  by  hand-
fuls  most  greedily,  &  especially  the  horseflesh.  Their
chiefest  drink  is  mares  milke  sowred,  as  I  have  said
before  of  the  Nagayans,  &  they  wilbe  drunk  with  the
same.  They  have  no  rivers  nor  places  of  water  in.
this  countrey,  until  you  come  to  the  foresaid  gulf,  dis-
tant from  the  place  of  our  landing  20.  dayes  journey,
except  it  be  in  wels,  the  water  wherof  is  saltish,  &,
yet  distant  the  one  from  the  other  two  daies  journey
and  more.  They  eate  their  meate  upon  the  ground,
sitting  with  their  legs  double  under  them,  and  so  also
when  they  pray.  Art  or  science  they  have  none,  but
live  most  idlely,  sitting  round  in  great  companies  in  the
fields,  devising,  and  talking  most  vainely.

The 26. day of  November, we departed from the

464

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

towne of  Urgence,  and having travailed by  the river

Oxus, 100. mile, we passed over another great river

called  Ardock,  where  we  paid  a  certaine  pety  custome.

This  river  Ardock  is  great,  and  very  swift,  falling  out  of  ^■^^  «^^^ "/

the  foresaid  Oxus,  and  passing  about  1000.  mile  to  the  -^^^o'^kfalleth

Northward,  it  then  consumeth it selfe in the  ground,  ofxita'i

and  passing  under the same about 500. mile, issueth

out  againe,  and  falleth  into  the  lake  of  Kitay,  as  I  have

3efore  declared.

The  7.  of  December  following,  we  arrived  at  a  Castle  The  castle  of
called  Kait, subject  to  a  Soltan called Saramet Soltan,  ^'^^'•
svho meant to have  robbed  all the Christians  in the
Caravan, had it not  bene  for  feare  of  his  brother the
dng  of  Urgence, as  we  were  informed by  one  of  his
:hiefest  counsellers,  who  willed  us  to  make  him  a  present,  [I,  330.]
which he tooke, and delivered  : besides, we paid at
the said castle for custome, of  every camel one red
lide  of  Russia,  besides  pety  gifts  to  his  officers.

Thus  proceeding  in  our  journey,  the  tenth  day  at
light  being  at  rest,  and  our  watch  set,  there  came  unto
IS  foure  horsemen,  which  we  tooke  as  spies,  from  whom
ivee  tooke  their  weapons  and  bound  them,  and  having
ivell  examined  them,  they  confessed  that  they  had  seene
:he  tract  of  many  horsemen,  and  no  footing  of  camels,
k:  gave  us  to  understand,  that  there  were  rovers  and
:heeves  abroade  :  for  there  travaile  few  people  that  are
:rue  and  peaceable  in  that  Countrey,  but  in  companie
)f  Caravan,  where  there  be  many  camels  :  and  horse-
'eeting  new  without  camels  were  to  be  doubted.  Where-
ipon  we  consulted  &  determined  amongst  our  selves,
md  sent  a  poste  to  the  said  Soltan  of  Kayte,  who
mmediatly  came  himselfe  with  300.  men,  and  mette
;hese  foure  suspected  men  which  we  sent  unto  him,
md  examined  them  so  streightly,  and  threatned  them
n  such  sort,  that  they  confessed,  there  was  a  banished
i'rince  with  40.  men  3.  daies  journey  forward,  who
ay  in  wait  to  destroy  us,  if  he  could,  and  that  they
hemselves  were  of  his  companie.

II  465  2G

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

The  Soltan  therefore  understanding,  that  the  theeve
were  not  many,  appointed  us  80.  men  well  armed  wit]
a  Captaine  to  goe  with  us,  and  conduct  us  in  our  way
And  the  Soltan  himselfe  returned  backe  againe,  taking
the  foure  theeves  with  him.  These  souldiers  travailec
with  us  two  dayes,  consuming  much  of  our  victuals
And  the  3.  day  in  the  morning  very  earely  they  set  ou
before  our  Caravan,  and  having  ranged  the  wilderne
for  the  space  of  foure  houres,  they  mette  us,  commin^
towards  us  as  fast  as  their  horse  could  runne,  anc
declared  that  they  had  founde  the  tract  of  horses  no
farre  from  us,  perceiving  well  that  we  should  meet<
with  enemies,  and  therefore  willed  us  to  appoint  ouj
selves  for  them,  and  asked  us  what  wee  would  give  therr
to  conduct  us  further,  or  els  they  would  returne.  Tc
whom  we  offered  as  we  thought  good,  but  they  refusec
our  offer,  and  would  have  more,  and  so  we  not  agreeing
they  departed  from  us,  and  went  back  to  their  Soltan
who  (as  wee  conjectured)  was  privie  to  the  conspiracie
Divination  by  But  they  being  gone,  certaine  Tartars  of  our  companit
called  holy  men,  (because  they  had  bene  at  Mecha)  causec
the  whole  Caravan  to  stay,  and  would  make  their  prayers
and  devine  howe  wee  should  prosper  in  our  journey  anc
whether  we  should  meet  with  any  ill  company  or  no  i
To  which,  our  whole  Caravan  did  agree.  And  the)
tooke  certaine  sheepe  and  killed  them,  and  tooke  the
blade  bones  of  the  same,  and  first  sodde  them,  and  ther
burnt  them,  and  tooke  of  the  blood  of  the  said  sheepe.
and  mingled  it  with  the  powder  of  the  saide  bones,  and
wrote  certaine  Characters  with  the  saide  blood,  using
many  other  ceremonies  and  wordes,  and  by  the  same
devined  and  found,  that  wee  shoulde  meete  with  enemies
and  theeves  (to  our  great  trouble)  but  should  overcome
them,  to  which  sorcerie,  I  and  my  companie  gave  no
credit,  but  we  found  it  true  :  for  within  3.  houres  after
that  the  souldiers  departed  from  us,  which  was  the  15.
day  of  December,  in  the  morning,  we  escried  farre  off
divers horsemen  which  made  towards  us,  and  we  (per-

466

sorcerie.

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

ceiving  them  to  be  rovers)  gathered  our  selves  together,
being  40.  of  us  wel  appointed,  and  able  to  fight,  and  we
made  our  prayers  together  every  one  after  his  lawe,
professing  to  live  and  die  one  with  another,  and  so  pre-
pared our  selves.  When  the  theeves  were  nigh  unto
us,  we  perceived  them  to  be  in  number  37.  men  well
armed,  and  appointed  with  bowes,  arrowes  and  swords,
and  the  captaine  a  prince  banished  from  his  Countrey.
They  willed  us  to  yeelde  our  selves,  or  els  to  be  slaine,
but  wee  defied  them,  wherewith  they  shotte  at  us  all  at
once,  and  wee  at  them  very  hotly,  and  so  continued
our  fight  from  morning  until  two  houres  within  night,
divers  men,  horses  and  camels  being  wounded  and  slaine
on  both  partes  :  and  had  it  not  bene  for  4.  handgunnes  Handguns
which  I  and  my  companie  had  and  used,  we  had  bene  ^^H  P^w^-
overcome  and  destroyed  :  for  the  theeves  were  better
armed,  and  were  also  better  archers  then  we  ;  But  after
wee  had  slaine  divers  of  their  men  and  horses  with  our
gunnes,  they  durst  not  approch  so  nigh,  which  caused
them  to  come  to  a  truce  with  us  untill  the  next  morning,
i  which  we  accepted,  and  encamped  our  selves  upon  a  hill,
and  made  the  fashion  of  a  Castle,  walling  it  about  with
packes  of  wares,  and  laide  our  horses  and  camels  within
the  same  to  save  them  from  the  shotte  of  arrowes  :
and  the  theeves  also  incamped  within  an  arrowe  shotte
of  us,  but  they  were  betwixt  us  and  the  water,  which  was
to  our  great  discomfort,  because  neither  we  nor  our
camels  had  drunke  in  2.  dayes  before.

Thus  keeping  good  watch,  when  halfe  the  night  was
spent,  the  Prince  of  the  theeves  sent  a  messenger  halfe
way  unto  us,  requiring  to  talke  with  our  Captaine,  in
their  tongue,  the  Caravan  Basha,  who  answered  the
messenger,  I  will  not  depart  from  my  companie  to  goe
into  the  halfe  way  to  talke  with  thee  :  but  if  that  thy
Prince  with  all  his  companie  will  sweare  by  our  Lawe
to  keepe  the  truce,  then  will  I  send  a  man  to  talke
with  thee,  or  els  not.  Which  the  Prince  understanding
as  well himselfe  as  his company, swore  so loude that

467

A.D.
1558.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

we  might  all heare. And then we sent one of our
company  (reputed a holy man)  to  talke  with  the  same
messenger. The  message  was  pronounced  aloude  in  this
order, Our  Prince demaundeth of  the Caravan Basha,
Bussarmans. and  of  all  you  that  be Bussarmans,  (that  is  to  say  cir-
[I.  331O cumcised) not desiring  your bloods, that you deliver
Caphar.  into  his hands as many Caphars, that is, unbeleevers

(meaning  us  the  Christians)  as  are  among  you  with  their
goods,  and  in  so  doing,  hee  will  suffer  you  to  depart  with
your  goods  in  quietnesse,  and  on  the  contrary,  you  shall
be  handled  with  no  lesse  cruelty  then  the  Caphars,  if
hee  overcome  you,  as  he  doubteth  not.  To  the  which
our  Caravan  Basha  answered,  that  he  had  no  Christians
in  his  company,  nor  other  strangers,  but  two  Turkes
which  were  of  their  Law,  and  although  hee  had,  hee
would  rather  die  then  deliver  them,  and  that  we  were
not  afraide  of  his  threatnings,  and  that  should  he  know
when  day  appeared.  And  so  passing  in  talke,  the
theeves  (contrary  to  their  othe)  caried  our  holy  man
away  to  their  Prince,  crying  with  a  lowde  voyce  in  token  1
of  victory.  Olio,  olio.  Wherewith  we  were  much  dis-
comforted, fearing  that  that  holy  man  would  betray  us  :
but  he  being  cruelly  handled  and  much  examined,  would!
not  to  death  confesse  any  thing  which  was  to  us  pre-
judiciall,  neither  touching  us,  nor  yet  what  men  they  had
slaine  and  wounded  of  ours  the  day  before.  When  the
night  was  spent,  in  the  morning  we  prepared  our  selves
to  battel  againe  :  which  the  theeves  perceiving,  required
to  fall  to  agreement  &  asked  much  of  us  :  And  to  be
briefe,  the  most  part  of  our  companie  being  loth  to  go
to  battel  againe,  and  having  litle  to  loose,  &  safeconduct
to  passe,  we  were  compelled  to  agree,  and  to  give  the
theeves  20  ninths  (that  is  to  say)  20  times  9  severall
things,  and  a  camell  to  cary  away  the  same,  which  being
received,  the  theeves  departed  into  the  wildernes  to  their
old  habitation,  and  we  went  on  our  way  forward.  And
The  river  of  that  night  came  to  the  river  Oxus,  where  we  refreshed
Oxus.  Qu^j- selves, having bene 3. dayes without water and

468

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
drinke,  and  tarried  there  all  the  next  day,  making  mery
with  our  slaine horses  and  camels, and then departed
from that  place, & for  feare  of  meeting  with the  said
theeves  againe  or  such  like,  we  left  the  high  way  which
went  along  the  said  river,  and  passed  through  a  wildernes  ^  wlldemes
of  sand, and travelled 4 dayes  in  the  same  before  we  V^^^^^-
came  to  water  :  and  then  came  to  a  wel,  the  water  being
very  brackish,  and  we  then  as  before  were  in  neede  of
water, and  of  other  victuals, being forced  to kill our
horses  and  camels  to  eate.

In  this  wildernes  also  we  had  almost  fallen  into  the
hands  of  theeves  :  for  one  night  being  at  rest,  there
came  certaine  scoutes,  and  caried  away  certaine  of  our
men  which  lay  a  litle  separated  from  the  Caravan,  where-
with there  was  a  great  shoute  and  crie,  and  we  immediatly
laded  our  camels,  and  departed  being  about  midnight
and  very  darke,  and  drove  sore  till  we  came  to  the  river
Oxus  againe,  and  then  we  feared  nothing  being  walled
with  the  said  river  :  &  whether  it  was  for  that  we  had
gotten  the  water,  or  for  that  the  same  theeves  were
far  from  us  when  the  scouts  discovered  us,  we  knowe
not,  but  we  escaped  that  danger.

So  upon  the  23  day  of  December  wee  arrived  at  Boghar  a  citie
the  citie  of  Boghar  in  the  lande  of  Bactria.  This  Boghar  ofBactria.
is  situated  in  the  lowest  part  of  all  the  land,  walled  about
with  a  high  wall  of  earth,  with  divers  gates  into  the
same  :  it  is  divided  into  3  partitions,  whereof  two  parts
are  the  kings,  and  the  3  part  is  for  Marchants  and
markets,  and  every  science  hath  their  dwelling  and
market  by  themselves.  The  Citie  is  very  great,  and
the  houses  for  the  most  part  of  earth,  but  there  are  also
many  houses,  temples  and  monuments  of  stone  sumptu-
ously builded,  and  gilt,  and  specially  bathstoves  so
artificially  built,  that  the  like  thereof  is  not  in  the  world  :
the  maner  whereof  is  too  long  to  rehearse.  There  is
a  little  river  running  through  the  middest  of  the  said
Citie,  but  the  water  there  of  is  most  unholsome,  for
it  breedeth  sometimes in  men  that  drinke  thereof,  and

469

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.
J  strange  especially  in  them  that  be  not  there  borne,  a  worme  of  an
worm  m  mens  ^^  long,  which  lyeth  commonly  in  the  legge  betwixt  the
flesh  and  the  skinne,  and  is  pluckt  out  about  the  ancle
with  great  art  and  cunning,  the  Surgeons  being  much
practised  therein,  and  if  shee  breake  in  plucking  out,  the
partie  dieth,  and  every  day  she  commeth  out  about  an
inch,  which  is  rolled  up,  and  so  worketh  till  she  be  all
out.  And  yet  it  is  there  forbidden  to  drinke  any  other
thing  then  water,  &  mares  milke,  and  whosoever  is  found
to  breake  that  law  is  whipped  and  beaten  most  cruelly
through  the  open  markets,  and  there  are  officers  appointed
for  the  same,  who  have  authoritie  to  goe  into  any  mans
house,  to  search  if  he  have  either  Aquavitae,  wine,  or
brage,  and  finding  the  same,  doe  breake  the  vessels,
spoile  the  drinke,  and  punish  the  masters  of  the  house
most  cruelly,  yea,  and  many  times  if  they  perceive  but
by  the  breath  of  a  man  that  he  hath  drunke,  without
further  examination  he  shall  not  escape  their  hands.

There  is  a  Metropolitane  in  this  Boghar,  who  causeth
this  law  to  bee  so  streightly  kept  :  and  he  is  more  obeyed
then  the  king,  and  will  depose  the  king,  and  place  another
at  his  will  and  pleasure,  as  he  did  by  this  king  that
raigned  at  our  being  there,  and  his  predecessour,  by  the
meanes  of  the  sayd  Metropolitan  :  for  he  betrayed  him,
and  in  the  night  slewe  him  in  his  chamber,  who  was  a
Prince  that  loved  all  Christians  well.

This  Countrey  of  Boghar  was  sometime  subject  to  the
Persians,  &  do  now  speake  the  Persian  tongue,  but  yet
now  it  is  a  kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  hath  most  cruel
warres  continually  with  the  sayd  Persians  about  their
[I.  332.]  religion,  although  they  be  all  Mahometists.  One  occasion
of  their  wars  is,  for  that  the  Persians  will  not  cut  the
haire  of  their  upper  lips,  as  the  Bogharians  and  all
other  Tartars  doe,  which  they  accompt  great  sinne,
and  cal  them  Caphars,  that  is,  unbeleevers,  as  they  doe
the  Christians.

The  king  of  Boghar  hath  no  great  power  or  riches,
his  revenues  are but small,  and he  is  most  mainteined

470

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
by  the  Citie  :  for  he  taketh  the  tenth  penie  of  all  things
that  are  there  solde,  as  well  by  the  craftsmen  as  by  the
marchants,  to  the  great  impoverishment  of  the  people,
whom  he  keepeth  in  great  subjection,  and  when  he  lacketh
money,  he  sendeth  his  officers  to  the  shoppes  of  the  sayd
Marchants  to  take  their  wares  to  pay  his  debts,  and  will
have  credite  of  force,  as  the  like  he  did  to  pay  me  certaine
money  that  he  owed  me  for  1 9  pieces  of  Kersey.  Their  ^-^^  <^oy^^  of
money  is  silver  and  copper,  for  gold  there  is  none  ^"S'^'^^-
currant :  they  have  but  one  piece  of  silver,  &  that  is
worth  11  pence  English,  and  the  copper  money  are  called
Pooles,  and  120  of  them  goeth  the  value  of  the  said
12.  pence,  and  is  more  common  paiment  then  the  silver,
which  the  king  causeth  to  rise  and  fall  to  his  most
advantage  every  other  moneth,  and  sometimes  twise  a
moneth,  not  caring  to  oppresse  his  people,  for  that  he
loketh  not  to  reigne  above  2  or  3  yeres  before  he  be
either  slaine  or  driven  away,  to  the  great  destruction  of
the  countrey  and  merchants.

The  26  day  of  the  moneth  I  was  commanded  to  come
before  the  said  king,  to  whom  I  presented  the  Emperour
of  Russia  his  letters,  who  interteined  us  most  gently,  and
caused  us  to  eate  in  his  presence,  and  divers  times  he
sent  for  me,  and  devised  with  me  familiarly  in  his  secret
chamber,  as  well  of  the  power  of  the  Emperour,  and  the
great  Turke,  as  also  of  our  countries,  lawes,  and  religion,
and  caused  us  to  shoote  in  handguns  before  him,  and  did
himselfe  practise  the  use  thereof.  But  after  all  this  great
intertainement  before  my  departure  he  shewed  himselfe
a  very  Tartar  :  for  he  went  to  the  wars  owing  me  money,
and  saw  me  not  payd  before  his  departure.  And  al-
though indeede  he  gave  order  for  the  same,  yet  was  I
verie  ill  satisfied,  and  forced  to  rebate  part,  and  to  take
wares  as  payment  for  the  rest  contrary  to  my  expectation  :
but  of  a  begger  better  paiment  I  could  not  have,  and
glad  I  was  so  to  be  paid  and  dispatched.

But  yet  I  must  needs  praise  &  commend  this  barbarous
king, who immediately after my arrivall at Boghar,

471

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

having  understoode  our trouble  with  the  theeves,  sent
100  men  well  armed,  and  gave  them  great  charge  not
to  returne before  they  had either slaine  or  taken the
sayd theeves. Who according to their commission
ranged  the  wildernes  in  such sort,  that  they  met  with;
the said  company of  theeves, and  slew  part, and part
fledde,  and  foure  they  tooke  and  brought  unto  the  king,
and  two  of  them were sore  wounded  in  our skirmish  i
with  our  gunnes  :  And  after  the  king  had  sent  for  me:
to  come  to  see  them,  he  caused  them  all  4  to  be  hanged  I
at  his  palace  gate,  because  they  were  Gentlemen,  to  the:
example  of  others. And  of  such  goods  as  were  gotten'
againe, I had part  restored  me, and this good  justice
I  found  at  his  hands.

There  is  yerely  great  resort  of  Marchants  to  this;
Citie  of  Boghar,  which  travaile  in  great  Caravans  from
the  countries  thereabout  adjoining,  as  India,  Persia,  Balgh,.
Russia,  with  divers  others,  and  in  times  past  from  Cathay, ,
when  there  was  passage  :  but  these  Marchants  are  so)
beggerly  and  poore,  and  bring  so  little  quantitie  of  wares, ,
lying  two  or  3  yeeres  to  sell  the  same,  that  there  is
no  hope  of  any  good  trade  there  to  be  had  worthy  the;
following.

The  chiefe  commodities  that  are  brought  thither  outi
of  these  foresayd  Countreys,  are  these  following.
Marchandise  The  Indians  doe  bring  fine  whites,  which  the  Tartars
of  India.  ^Q  ^ji  j-qU  about  their  heads,  &  al  other  kinds  of  whites,,
which  serve  for  apparell  made  of  coton  wooU  and  crasko,,
but  golde,  silver,  precious  stones,  and  spices  they  bring
none.  I  enquired  and  perceived  that  all  such  trade
passeth  to  the  Ocean  sea,  and  the  vaines  where  all  such
things  are  gotten  are  in  the  subjection  of  the  Portingals.
The  Indians  carie  from  Boghar  againe  wrought  silkes,
red  hides,  slaves,  and  horses,  with  such  like,  but  of
Kerseis  and  other  cloth,  they  make  little  accompt.  I
offered  to  barter  with  Marchants  of  those  Countreis,
which  came  from  the  furthest  parts  of  India,  even  from
the  countrey  of  Bengala,  & the  river  Ganges,  to give

472

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
them Kersies for their commodities, but they would
not  barter  for  such  commoditie  as  cloth.

The  Persians  do bring thither  Craska, woUen cloth,  Manhandise
linnen  cloth,  divers  kindes  of  wrought  pide  silkes,  Argo-  °fP^^"^-
macks,  with  such  like,  and  doe  carie  from  thence  redde
hides  with  other  Russe  wares,  and  slaves,  which  are  of
divers  countreies,  but  cloth  they  will  by  none,  for  that
they  bring  thither  themselves,  and  is  brought  unto  them
as  I  have  inquired  from  Aleppo  in  Syria,  and  the  parts
of  Turkie. The  Russes  doe  carie  unto  Boghar,  redde  Merchandise
hides, sheepeskinnes, wollen cloth of divers sorts,  if^^^^^'^-
woodden  vessels,  bridles, saddles, with such like, and
doe carie away from thence divers kindes of wares
made of  cotton  wooll, divers kinds of  silkes, Crasca,
with other things, but there is but smal utterance,  [i.  333.]
From the  Countreis of Cathay  are brought thither in  Manhandise
time  of  peace,  and  when  the  way  is  open,  musk,  rubarbe,  of  Cathay.
satten,  damaske,  with  divers  other  things. At  my  being
at  Boghar,  there  came Caravans out  of  all these fore-
said Countries, except from Cathay  : and the cause
why  there  came  none  from  thence  was  the  great  warres
that  had dured 3 yeres before my comming thither,
and yet dured betwixt  2 great Countries & cities  of
Tartars, that are directly  in  the way betwixt the said
Boghar and the said Cathay, and certaine bar-
barous fielde people,  as  well Gentiles as Mahometists
bordering to the said Cities. The cities are called
Taskent  and  Caskar,  and  the  people  that  warre  against  Taskent  iff
Taskent are called Cassaks of  the law  of  Mahomet :  ^^^^^^'•
and  they  which  warre  with  the  sayd  countrey  of  Caskar
are called Kings, Gentiles & idolaters. These 2 bar-
barous nations  are of  great force  living in the fields
without  house  or towne, & have almost subdued the
foresaid cities, & so stopped up the way, that it is
impossible  for  any  Caravan  to  passe  unspoiled  : so  that
3 yeres  before  our  being  there, no  Caravan had  gone,
or  used  trade  betwixt  the  countries  of  Cathay  and  Boghar,
and  when  the  way  is  cleare,  it  is  9  moneths  journey.

473

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

To  speake  of  the  said  countrey  of  Cathay,  and  of
such  newes  as  I  have  heard  thereof,  I  have  thought  it
best  to  reserve  it  to  our  meeting.  I  having  made  my
solace  at  Boghar  in  the  Winter  time,  and  having  learned
by  much  inquisition,  the  trade  thereof,  as  also  of  all
the  other  countries  thereto  adjoyning,  and  the  time  of  the
yeere  being  come,  for  all  Caravans  to  depart,  and  also  the
king  being  gone  to  the  warres,  and  newes  come  that  he
was  fled,  and  I  advertised  by  the  Metropolitan  himselfe,
that  I  should  depart,  because  the  towne  was  like  to  bee
besieged  :  I  thought  it  good  and  meete,  to  take  my
journey  some  way,  and  determined  to  have  gone  from
thence  into  Persia,  and  to  have  scene  the  trade  of  that
countrey,  although  I  had  enformed  my  selfe  sufficiently
thereof,  as  well  at  Astracan,  as  at  Boghar :  and  per-
ceived well  the  trades  not  to  be  much  unlike  the  trades
of  Tartaria  :  but  when  I  should  have  taken  my  journey
that  way,  it  was  let  by  divers  occasions  :  the  one  was,
the  great  wars  that  did  newly  begin  betwixt  the  Sophie,
and  the  kings  of  Tartaria,  whereby  the  waies  were
destroyed  :  and  there  was  a  Caravan  destroied  with
rovers  &  theeves,  which  came  out  of  India  and  Persia,
by  safe  conduct  :  and  about  ten  daies  journey  from
Boghar,  they  were  robbed,  and  a  great  part  slaine.  Also
the  Metropolitan  of  Boghar,  who  is  greater  then  the
king,  tooke  the  Emperors  letters  of  Russia  from  me,
without  which  I  should  have  bene  taken  slave  in  every
place  :  also  all  such  wares  as  I  had  received  in  barter
for  cloth,  and  as  I  tooke  perforce  of  the  king,  &  other
his  Nobles,  in  paiment  of  money  due  unto  me,  were
not  vendible  in  Persia :  for  which  causes,  and  divers
others,  I  was  constrained  to  come  backe  againe  to  Mare
He  returneth  Caspium,  the  same  way  I  went  :  so  that  the  eight  of
the  eight  of  March  1559,  we  departed  out  of  the  said  Citie  of  Bog-
^^^  ^559-  j^^j.^  being  a  Caravan  of  600  Camels  :  and  if  we  had
not  departed  when  we  did,  I  and  my  company  had
bene  in  danger  to  have  lost  life  and  goods.  For  ten
daies  after  our  departure, the  king  of  Samarcand  came

474

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1559-

with  an  armie,  &  besieged  the  said  Citie  of  Boghar,
the  king  being  absent,  and  gone  to  the  wars  against
another  prince,  his  kinsman,  as  the  like  chanceth  in  those
Countries  once  in  two  or  three  yeres.  For  it  is  mar-
vell,  if  a  King  reigne  there  above  three  or  foure  yeres,
to  the  great  destruction  of  the  Countrey,  and  marchants.

The  25  of  March,  we  came  to  the  foresayd  towne
of  Urgence,  and  escaped  the  danger  of  400  rovers,  which  Urgence.
lay  in  waite  for  us  backe  againe,  being  the  most  of
them  of  kindred  to  that  company  of  theeves,  which  we
met  with  going  foorth,  as  we  perceived  by  foure  spies,
which  were  taken.  There  were  in  my  company,  and
committed  to  my  charge,  two  ambassadors,  the  one  from
the  king  of  Boghar,  the  other  from  the  king  of  Balke,  The  king  of
and  were  sent  unto  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  And  after  j^jl "'
having  taried  at  Urgence,  and  the  Castle  of  Sellysure,  ^  '
eight  daies  for  the  assembling,  and  making  ready  of  our
Caravan,  the  second  of  Aprill  we  departed  from  thence,
having  foure  moe  Ambassadors  in  our  companie,  sent
from  the  king  of  Urgence,  and  other  Soltans,  his  brethren,
unto  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  with  answere  of  such
letters  as  I  brought  them  :  and  the  same  Ambassadors
were  also  committed  unto  my  charge  by  the  sayde  Kings
and  princes  :  to  whome  I  promised  most  faithfully,  and
swore  by  our  law,  that  they  should  be  well  used  in
Rusland,  and  suffered  to  depart  from  thence  againe  in
safetie,  according  as  the  Emperor  had  written  also  in
his  letters  :  for  they  somewhat  doubted,  because  there
had  none  gone  out  of  Tartaria  into  Russia,  of  long  time
before.

The  23  of  Aprill,  we  arrived  at  the  Mare  Caspium
againe,  where  we  found  our  barke  which  we  came  in,
but  neither  anker,  cable,  cocke,  nor  saile  :  neverthelesse
wee  brought  hempe  with  us,  and  spunne  a  cable  our
selves,  with  the  rest  of  our  tackling,  and  made  us  a
saile  of  cloth  of  cotton  wooU,  and  rigged  our  barke  as
well  as  we  could,  but  boate  or  anker  we  had  none.  In
the  meane  time  being  devising  to  make  an  anker  of  wood

475

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1559-

of  a  cart  wheele,  there  arrived  a  barke,  which  came  from
Astracan,  with  Tartars  and  Russes,  which  had  2  ankers,,
with  whom  I  agreed  for  the  one  :  and  thus  being  in  a
readines,  we  set  saile  and  departed,  I,  and  the  two
Johnsons  being  Master  and  Mariners  our  selves,  having;
in  our  barke  the  said  sixe  ambassadors,  and  25  Russes,

[I.  334.]  which  had  bene  slaves  a  long  time  in  Tartaria,  nor  ever:
had  before  my  comming,  libertie,  or  meanes  to  get  home,
and  these  slaves  served  to  rowe  when  neede  was. Thuss
sailing  sometimes along the coast, and sometimes  out!
of  sight  of  lande,  the 13.  day  of  May, having a  con-
trary winde,  wee  came  to  an  anker,  being  three  leagues^
from  the shoare, & there rose a sore storme, which
continued  44.  houres,  and  our  cable  being  of  our  ownee
spinning,  brake,  and  lost  our  anker,  and  being  off  a  leee
shoare,  and having no boate to helpe us, we  hoysed'
our  saile,  and  bare  roomer  with  the  said  shoare, look-
ing for  present  death  :  but  as  God  provided  for  us,  wee
ranne  into  a  creeke  ful  of  oze,  and  so  saved  our  selvess
with  our  barke,  &  lived  in  great  discomfort  for  a  time..
For  although  we  should  have  escaped  with  our  lives  the.^
danger  of  the sea, yet if  our  barke had perished,  wee
knew  we should have bene,  either  destroyed,  or  takeni
slaves  by  the  people  of  that  Countrey,  who  live  wildly
in  the field, like beasts, without house or habitation..
Thus  when  the  storme  was  seased,  we  went  out  of  the
creeke  againe  :  and  having  set  the  land  with  our  Com-
passe,  and taken  certaine markes of  the same, during-
the  time  of  the  tempest,  whilest  we  ridde  at  our  anker,,
we  went  directly  to  the  place  where  we  ridde,  with  our
barke againe, and found our anker which wee lost  :
whereat  the Tartars much marveiled, how we did it.
While  we  were in the creeke, we made  an anker of
wood  of  cart  wheeles,  which  we  had  in  our  barke,  which
we  threw  away,  when wee had found our  yron  anker
againe. Within two dayes after, there arose another
great  storme,  at  the  Northeast,  and  we  lay  a  trie,  being
driven  far  into the sea, and had much ado to  keepe

476

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad

1559-

pur  barke  from  sinking,  the  billowe  was  so  great  :  but
at  the  last,  having  faire  weather,  we  tooke  the  Sunne,
and  knowing  howe  the  land  lay  from  us,  we  fel  with
the  River  Yaik,  according  to  our  desire,  wherof  the
Tartars  were  very  glad,  fearing  that  wee  should  have  bene
driven  to  the  coast  of  Persia,  whose  people  were  unto
them  great  enemies.

Note,  that  during  the  time  of  our  Navigation,  wee  The  English
set  up  the  redde  crosse  of  S.  George  in  our  flagges,  for  '^^  ?
honour  of  the  Christians,  which  I  suppose  was  never
seene  in  the  Caspian  sea  before.  We  passed  in  this
voyage  divers  fortunes  :  notwithstanding  the  28.  of  May
we  arrived  in  safetie  at  Astracan,  and  there  remained  till
the  tenth  of  June  following,  as  well  to  prepare  us  small
boates,  to  goe  up  against  the  streame  of  Volga,  with  our
goods,  as  also  for  the  companie  of  the  Ambassadours  of
Tartarie,  committed  unto  me,  to  bee  brought  to  the
presence  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia.

This  Caspian  sea  (to  say  some  thing  of  it)  is  in  length
about  two  hundred  leagues,  and  in  breadth  150.  with-
out any  issue  to  other  seas  :  to  the  East  part  whereof,
joyneth  the  great  desert  countrey  of  the  Tartars,  called
Turkemen  :  to  the  West,  the  countreyes  of  the  Chyr-
casses,  the  mountaines  of  Caucasus,  and  the  Mare
Euxinum,  which  is  from  the  said  Caspian  Sea  a  hundred
leagues.  To  the  North  is  the  river  Volga,  and  the  land
of  Nagay,  and  to  the  South  part  joyne  the  countrey s
of  Media  and  Persia.  This  sea  is  fresh  water  in  many  A  notable  de-
places,  and  in  other  places  as  salt  as  our  great  Ocean,  scription  of  the
It  hath  many  goodly  Rivers  falling  into  it,  and  it  avoideth  ^^P^^^  ^^'^•
not  it  selfe  except  it  be  under  ground.  The  notable
Rivers  that  fall  into  it,  are  first  the  great  River  of  Volga,
called  in  the  Tartar  tongue  Edell,  which  springeth  out
of  a  lake  in  a  marrish  or  plaine  ground,  not  farre  from
the  Citie  of  Novogrode  in  Russia,  and  it  is  from  the
spring  to  the  Sea,  above  two  thousande  English  miles.
It  hath  divers  other  goodly  Rivers  falling  into  it,  as
out  of  Siberia,  Yaic,  and  Yem  :  Also  out  of  the  moun-

477

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1559-

taines  of  Caucasus,  the  Rivers  of  Cyrus  and  Arash,  and
divers  others.

As  touching  the  trade  of  Shamaky  in  Media  and
Tebris,  with  other  townes  in  Persia,  I  have  enquired,
and  do  well  understand,  that  it  is  even  like  to  the  trades
of  Tartaria,  that  is  little  utterance,  and  small  profite  :
and  I  have  bene  advertised  that  the  chiefe  trade  of
Persia  is  into  Syria,  and  so  transported  into  the  Levant
sea.  The  fewe  shippes  upon  the  Caspian  Seas,  the  want
of  Mart  and  port  Townes,  the  povertie  of  the  people,
and  the  ice,  maketh  that  trade  naught.

At  Astracan  there  were  merchants  of  Shamaky,  with
whom  I  offered  to  barter,  and  to  give  them  kersies  for
their  wares,  but  they  would  not,  saying,  they  had  them
as  good  cheape  in  their  countrey,  as  I  offred  them,
which  was  sixe  rubbles  for  a  kersie,  that  I  asked  :  and
while  I  was  at  Boghar,  there  were  brought  thither  out
of  Persia,  Cloth,  and  divers  commodities  of  our  coun-
tries, which  were  sold  as  good  cheape,  as  I  might  sell
ours.

The  tenth  day  of  June,  we  departed  from  Astracan
towards  the  Mosco,  having  an  hundred  gunners  in  our
company  at  the  Emperors  charges,  for  the  safe  con-
duct of  the  Tartar  Ambassadors  and  me.  And  the  eight
and  twentieth  day  of  July  folowing,  wee  arrived  at  the
citie  of  Cazan,  having  bene  upon  the  way  from  Astracan
thither,  sixe  weekes  and  more,  without  any  refreshing
of  victuals  :  for  in  all  that  way  there  is  no  habitation.

The  seventh  of  August  folowing,  wee  departed  from

Cazan, and transported our goods by  water, as farre

as  the  citie  of  Morum,  and  then  by  land  : so  that  the

[I.  335.] second  of  September,  we  arrived  at  the  citie  of  Mosco,

His  arrival  at  and the fourth day I came before the Emperours

oscot  ei.of  jvjajestie,  kissed his hand, and presented  him  a  white

Cowes  taile  of  Cathay,  and  a  drumme  of  Tartaria,  which

he well accepted. Also I  brought before  him all the

Ambassadors that  were committed to my  charge,  with

all the Russe slaves  : and that day I dined in his

478

ANTHONY  JENKINSON

Majesties  presence,  and  at  dinner,  his  Grace  sent  me
meate  by  a  Duke,  &  asked  me  divers  questions
touching  the  lands  and  countreis  where  I  had  bene.
And  thus  I  remained  at  the  Mosco  about  your  affaires,
until  the  17.  day  of  February  that  your  wares  were
sent  downe  :  and  then  having  licence  of  the  Emperors
Majestie  to  depart,  the  21.  day  I  came  to  your  house
at  Vologhda,  and  there  remained  until  the  breaking
up  of  the  yere  :  and  then  having  seene  all  your  goods
laden  into  your  boates,  I  departed  with  the  same,  and
arrived  withall  in  safetie  at  Colmogro  the  9.  of  May
1560.  And  here  I  cease  for  this  time,  intreating  you
to  beare  with  this  my  large  discourse,  which  by  reason
of  the  varietie  of  matter,  I  could  make  no  shorter,
and  I  beseech  God  to  prosper  all  your  attempts.

A.D.
1560.

The latitudes of certaine principall places
Russia,  and  other  Regions.

'  Mosco  in
Novogrod  the  great
Novogrod  the  lesse
Colmogro
Vologhda
Cazan
Oweke
Astracan
■{  At  the  entrance  into  the

Caspian  sea.
Manguslave  beyond  the

Caspian  sea.
Urgence  in  Tartary  20.

dayes journey from

the  Caspian  sea.
Boghar  a  citie  in  Tartary'

20. dayes journey

from  Urgence.

479

in

Deg

r

■

Min.

55'

'  10"

58

26

56

33

64

10

59

II

55

33

51

40

47

9

46

>

72  ^

45

GO

42

18

39

10

^

^ ^

A.D.

1559-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Certaine  notes  gathered  by  Richard  Johnson
(which  was  at  Boghar  with  M.  Anthony
Jenkinson)  of  the  reports  of  Russes  and  other
strangers,  of  the  wayes  of  Russia  to  Cathaya,
and  of  divers  and  strange  people.

The  first  note  given  by  one  named  Sarnichoke  a
Tartarian  subject  to  the  Prince  of  Boghar,  which
are  also  Tartars  bordering  upon  Kizilbash  or  Persia,
declaring  the  way  from  Astracan,  being  the  furthest
part  of  Russia,  to  Cathaya  as  foloweth.

Irst  from  Astracan  to  Serachick  by  land,  travailing
by  leysure  as  Merchants  use  with  wares,  is  lo.
dayes  journey

*0r,  urgeme. From Serachick to a towne  named *  Urgenshe, 15.,
dayes.

From Urgenshe  to Boghar, 15.  dayes.

From  Boghar  to  Cascar,  30.  dayes.

From  Cascar  to  Cathaya,  30.  dayes  journey.

By  the  same  partie  a  note  of  another  way  more:
sure  to  traveile,  as  he  reporteth.

FRom Astracan to Turkemen by the Caspian sea,,
10.  dayes  with  barkes.

From Turkemen by lande specially with Camels,,
bearing the weight of 15. poodes for their common
burthens,  is 10.  dayes  to  Urgenshe.

From  Urgenshe  to  Boghar, 15.  dayes.

Note.  At  this  Citie  of  Boghar  is  the  marte  or  meeting  \
place betweene the Turkes  and  nations  of  those  parts
and  the  Cathayans.

Also the  toll  there  is  the 40. part to be payed of
Merchandizes  or  goods.
[I.  336.]  From thence  to  Cascar  is  one  moneths  journey,  and

from  Cascar  (being  the  frontier  of  the  great  Can,
having  many  townes  and  fortes  by  the  way)  is  also  a
moneths  travel  for  merchants  by  land  to  Cathay.

480

I

RICHARD  JOHNSON'S NOTES  ad.

1559-
Further,  as  he  hath  heard  (not  having  bene  in  those
parts himselfe) ships may  saile from  the dominions  of
Cathaia  unto  India. But of  other  waies, or how the
seas  lie  by  any  coast  hee  knoweth  not.

The  instruction  of  another  Tartarian  merchant
dwelling  in  the  citie  of  Boghar,  as  he  hath
learned  by  other  his  countreymen  which  have
bene  there.

First  from  Astracan  by  sea  to  Serachick  is 1 5  daies  :
affirming also that a  man may travell the other
way  before  written  by  Turkemen.

From  Serachick  to  Urgence  is 15  dayes.

From  Urgence  to  Boghar  also 15  dayes.

Note.  These  last  30  daies  journey  is  without
habitation  of  houses  :  therefore  travellers  lodge  in  their
owne  tents,  cariyng  with  them  to  eate,  their  severall
provisions  :  and  for  drinesse  there  bee  many  wels  of
faire  water  at  equall  baiting  places  not  farre  distant
dayly  to  be  had.

From  Boghar  to  Taskent  easie  travelling  with  goods,
is 14  dayes  by  land.

From  Taskent  to  Occient  7  dayes.

From  Occient  to  Cascar  20  daies.  This  Cascar  is
the  head  towne  or  citie  of  another  prince,  lying  betweene
Boghar  and  Cathaia,  called  Reshit  can.

From  Cascar  to  Sowchick  30  daies  journey,  which
Sowchick  is  the  first  border  of  Cathay.

From  Sowchick  to  Camchick  5  daies  journey,  and
from  Camchick  to  Cathay  is  2  moneths  journey,  all  the
way  being  inhabited,  temperate,  &  wel  replenished  with
innumerable  fruits,  &  the  chiefe  citie  in  that  whole  land  is
:alled  Cambalu,  which  is  yet  10  daies  journey  from  Cathay.

Beyond  this  land  of  Cathay,  which  they  praise  to  be
:ivill  &  unspeakeably  rich,  is  the  countrey  named  in
the  Tartarian  tongue  Cara-calmack  inhabited  with  blacke
Deople  :  but  in  Cathay,  the  most  part  therof  stretching
to  the  sunne  rising,  are  people  white  and  of  faire
n  481  2  H

A.D.

1559-

Angnni.
Mandev'ille
speaketh
hereof.

Or  Kitay.

Small  people.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

complexion.  Their  religion  also,  as  the  Tartars  report,
is  christian,  or  after  the  maner  of  Christians,  and  their
language  peculiar,  differing  from  the  Tartarian  tongue.

There  are  no  great  and  furious  Beares  in  travelling
through  the  waies  aforesaid,  but  wolves  white  and
blacke.  And  because  that  woods  are  not  of  such
quantitie  there,  as  in  these  parts  of  Russia,  but  in  maner
rather  scant  then  plentiful,  as  is  reported,  the  Beares
breed  not  that  way,  but  some  other  beasts  (as  namely;
one  in  Russe  called  Barse)  are  in  those  coasts.  This
Barse  appeareth  by  a  skinne  of  one  scene  here  to  sell,l
to  be  nere  so  great  as  a  big  lion  spotted  very  faire  and
therefore  we  here  take  it  to  be  a  Leopard  or  Tiger.

Note  that  20  daies  journey  from  Cathay  is  a  countrey
named  Angrim,  where  liveth  the  beast  that  beareth  the
best  Muske,  &  the  principall  therof  is  cut  out  of  the
knee  of  the  male.  The  people  are  taunie,  &  for  that  the
men  are  not  bearded  nor  differ  in  complexion  from
women,  they  have  certaine  tokens  of  iron,  that  is  to
say :  the  men  weare  the  sunne  round  like  a  bosse
upon  their  shoulders,  and  women  on  their  privie  parts.
Their  feeding  is  raw  flesh  in  the  same  land,  and  in
another  called  *  Titay  :  the  Duke  there  is  called  Can.i
They  worship  the  fire,  and  it  is  34  dayes  journey  fromi
great  Cathay,  and  in  the  way  lyeth  the  beautifull  people,
eating  with  knives  of  golde,  and  are  called  Comorom,  and
the  land  of  small  people  is  neerer  the  Mosko  then  Cathay.'

The  instructions  of  one  of  Permia,  who  re-
porteth  he  had  bene  at  Cathay  the  way  before
written,  and  also  another  way  neere  the  sea
coast,  as  foloweth,  which  note  was  sent  out
of  Russia  from  Giles  Holmes.

First  from  the  province  of  Dwina  is  knowen  the  way
to  Pechora,  and  from  Pechora  traveiling  with  Olens

Pechora  but
six  dayes

^ land  or  water  °^  harts,  is  sixe  dayes  journey  by  land,  and  in  the  Sommer
from  Ob. as  much  by  water  to  the  river  of  Ob.

482

RICHARD  JOHNSON'S NOTES  a.d.

1559-

The  Ob  is  a  river  full  of  flats,  the  mouth  of  it  is  70.
Russe  miles  over.  And  from  thence  three  dayes  journey
Dn  the  right  hand  is  a  place  called  Chorno-lese,  to  say  in

nglish,  blacke  woods,  and  from  thence  neere  hand  is  a
Deople  called  Pechey-cony,  wearing  their  haire  by  his
description  after  the  Irish  fashion.

From  Pechey-cony  to  Joult  Calmachey  three  dayes
ourney,  &  from  thence  to  Chorno  Callachay  three  dayes
ending  to  the  Southeast.

These  two  people  are  of  the  Tartarian  faith,  and
ributaries  to  the  great  Can.

Here  follow  certaine  countreys  of  the  Samoeds  [I.  337.]
which  dwell  upon  the  river  Ob,  and  upon  the
sea  coasts  beyond  the  same,  taken  out  of  the
Russe  tongue  word  by  word,  and  travailed
by  a  Russe  borne  in  Colmogro,  whose  name
was  Pheodor  Towtigin,  who  by  report,  was
slaine  in  his  second  voyage  in  one  of  the
said  countreys.

Pon  the  East  part  beyond  the  countrey  of
Ugori,  the  river  Ob  is  the  most  Wester-
most  part  thereof.  Upon  the  sea  coast
dwell  Samoeds,  and  their  countrey  is
called  Molgomsey,  whose  meate  is  flesh
of  Olens,  or  Harts,  and  Fish,  and  doe
eate  one  another  sometimes  among  them-
elves.  And  if  any  Marchants  come  unto  them,  then
hey  kill  one  of  their  children  for  their  sakes  to  feast
hem  withall.  And  if  a  Marchant  chance  to  die  with
hem,  they  burie  him  not,  but  eate  him,  and  so  doe  they
;ate  them  of  their  owne  countrey  likewise.  They  be
;vill  of  sight,  and  have  small  noses,  but  they  be  swift  and
I  hoote  very  well,  and  they  travaile  on  Harts  and  on  Travelling  on
Uogges,  and  their  apparell  is  Sables  and  Harts  skinnes.  dogs  13  harts.
They  have  no  Marchandise  but  Sables  onely.
2  Item, on  the  same coast  or  quarter  beyond  those

483

A.D.

1559-

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

people,  and  by  the  sea  side  also  doth  dwell  another  kinde
of  Samoeds  in  like  maner,  having  another  language.  One
moneth  in  the  yeere  they  live  in  the  sea,  and  doe  not
come  or  dwell  on  the  dry  land  for  that  moneth.

3  Item  beyond  these  people,  on  the  sea  coast,  there  is
another  kinde  of  Samoeds,  their  meate  is  flesh  and  fish,
and  their  merchandise  are  Sables,  white  and  blacke  Foxes
(which  the  Russes  call  Pselts)  and  Harts  skinnes,  and;
Fawnes  skinnes.

The  relation  of  Chaggi  Memet  a  Persians
Marchant,  to  Baptista  Ramusius,  and  other
notable  citizens  of  Venice,  touching  the  way
from  Tauris  the  chiefe  citie  of  Persia,  to;
Campion  a  citie  of  Cathay  over  land  :  im
which  voyage  he  himselfe  had  passed  before:
with  the  Caravans.

FRom  Tauris  to  Soltania.
From  Soltania  to  Casbin.
From  Casbin  to  Veremi.
From  Veremi  to  Eri.
From  Eri  to  Boghara.
From  Boghara  to  Samarchand.
From  Samarchand  to  Cascar.
From  Cascar  to  Acsu.
From  Acsu  to  Cuchi.
From  Cuchi  to  Chialis.
From  Chialis  to  Turfon.
From  Turfon  to  Camul.
From  Camul  to  Succuir.
From  Succuir  to  Gauta.
From  Gauta  to  Campion.

Which  Campion  is  a  citie  of  the  Empire  of  Cathay  in
the  province  of  Tangut,  from  whence  the  greatest
quantitie  of  Rubarbe  commeth.

6

4
6

15

20

5

20  ^  dayes  journey.
20

ID
10

13
15

5
6

484

A LETTER  OF KING SIGISMOND  ad.

1559-

A letter of  Sigismond king of  Polonia, written  1559-
in  the 39.  yeere of  his reigne to Elizabeth
the Queenes most excellent Majestie of
England,  &c.

SIgismudus  Augustus  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of
Polonia,  great  Duke  of  Lituania,  Russia,  Prussia,
Massovia,  and  Samogetia,  &c.  Lord  and  heire  &c.  to  the
most  Noble  Princesse  Ladie  Elizabeth  by  the  same  grace
of  God  Queene  of  England,  France  and  Ireland,  &c.  our
deare  sister  and  kinsewoman,  greeting  and  increase  of  all
felicitie.  Whereas  your  Majestie  writeth  to  us  that  you
have  received  two  of  our  letters,  wee  have  looked  that
you  should  have  answered  to  them  both.  First  to  the  T^^  trade  to
one,  in  which  we  intreated  more  at  large  in  forbidding  ,v.Tf^-v^',

. .  /»  •  'bidden  b\  the

the  voyage  to  Narve,  which  if  it  had  bene  done,  we  had  ^  ^r  p^i^nd
Dene  unburdened  of  so  often  writing  of  one  matter  :  and
might  have  answered  your  Majestie  much  better  to  the
Durpose. Now we thus answere to your  Majestie  to
those  matters of  the  which  you writte to us  the  3 of
October from Windsore. First, forasmuch as your
Majestie  at  the  request  of  our  letters  hath  discharged  the
irrest  of  Marchants  goods,  and  of  the  names  of  the  men
3f  Danske  our  subjects,  which  was  set  upon  them  by  the
:ommandement  of  your  Majestie  :  and  also  have  restored
'he  olde  and  ancient  libertie  of  traffique,  we  acknowledge
^reat  pleasure  done  unto  us  in  the  same  :  and  also  thinke
t  to  bee  done  according  to  common  agreement  made  in  The  ancient
:imes  past. Neither  were  we ever  at  any  time  of  any  -^"^^^"^-f  ?/
Dther opinion touching your Majestie, but that wee  l^^^f^^l,
should  obtaine  right  and  reason  at  your  hands. Foras-  land  y
nuch  as  we  likewise  shall  at  all  times  be  ready  to  grant  Prussia.
0  your  Majestie,  making  any  request  for  your  subjects,  so
arre  as  shall  stand  with  justice,  yet  neither  will  yee  yeeld
iny  thing  to  your  Majestie  in  contention  of  love,  benevo-
ence,  and  mutuall  office,  but  that  we  judge  every  good  [i,  338.]
;urne  of  yours to  be  recompensed  by  us  to  the  utter-

485

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1559-

most :  and  that  shall  we  proove  as  occasion  shall  serve.

Therefore  we  shall  commaund  the  arrests,  if  any  be  made

by  our  subjects  (as  it  is  unknowen  to  us)  of  merchants

The  olde  liber-  goods  and English  names  to  be  discharged  : and  shall

tie  oftrafficke-^  conserve  the  olde  libertie  of  trafficke,  and  all  other  things

which  shall seeme to apperteine to  neighbourhood  be-

tweene  us  and  your  Majesty:  so  that  none  of  the  subjects

■^  of  your  Majesty  hereafter  presume  to  use  the  navigation

to the  Narve forbidden by us,  and  full  of  danger  not

onely  to  our  parts,  but  also  to  the  open  destruction  of  all

The  meanes  of  Christians  and  liberall  nations. The  which  as  we have

increase  of  the  written afore,  SO  now  we  write  againe  to  your  Majesty

Moscovite. ""that  we  know  and  feele  of  a  surety,  the  Moscovite,  enemy

to  all  liberty  under  the  heavens,  dayly  to  grow  mightier

''by  the  increase  of  such  things  as  be  brought  to  the  Narve,,

while  not  onely  wares  but  also  weapons  heeretofore  un-;

knowen to him,  and artificers  &  arts  be  brought  unto

him :  by  meane whereof  he maketh  himselfe  strong  to

vanquish all others. Which things, as long as this

voyage  to  Narve  is  used,  can  not  be  stopped. And  we

perfectly know  your Majesty  can  not  be  ignorant  how

great  the  cruelty  is  of  the  said  enemy,  of  what  force  he  is,^

"what  tyranny  he  useth  on  his  subjects,  and  in  what  servile

sort  they  be  under  him. We  seemed  hitherto  to  vanquish

him  onely  in  this,  that  he  was  rude  of  arts,  and  ignorant

of  policies. If  so  be  that  this  navigation  to  the  Narve

continue,  what  shall  be  unknowen  to  him  ? Therefore

we  that  know  best,  and  border  upon  him,  do  admonish  i

other  Christian  princes  in  time,  that  they  do  not  betray

their  dignity,  liberty  and  life  of  them  and  their  subjects

to  a  most  barbarous  and  cruell  enemy,  as  we  can  no  lesse

do  by  the  duty  of  a  Christian  prince. For  now  we  do

foresee,  except  other princes  take  this admonition, the

"Moscovite  puffed  up  in  pride  with  those  things  that  be

brought  to  the  Narve,  and  made  more  perfect  in  warlike

affaires with engines of  warre and shippes,  will make

'  assault  this  way  on  Christendome,  to  slay  or  make  bound

all  that  shall  withstand  him  :  which  God  defend. With

486  '

A LETTER  OF KING SIGISMOND  ad.

...  ^ .  .  1559-

which our  admonition divers princes already content
themselves, and  abstaine  from  the  Narve. The  others
that will not abstaine from the sayd voyage shalbe  v
impeached  by  our  navie,  and  incurre  the  danger  of  losse
of  life,  liberty,  wife  and  children. Now  therfore  if  the
subjects of  your Majesty  will forbeare  this voyage  to  ^
Narve,  there  shalbe  nothing  denied  to  them  of  us. Let  '
your  Majesty  well weigh and consider the  reasons &
occasions  of  our  stopping  of  ships  going  to  the  Narve.
In  which  stopping,  our  subjects  of  Danske  be  in  no  fault,
as  we  have  already  written  to  your  Majesty,  neither  use
we  their  counsell  in  the  same. In  any  other  matter,  if
there  be  any  fault  in  them  against  your  Majesty  or  your
subjects,  we  will  gladly  do  justice  upon  them,  that  your
Majesty may well understand that  we be carefull of
you and  your  subjects. Neither  thinke  we  it  meet  to
take  Hamburgh,  or  any  other  place  to  judge  the  matter  :
for we have our councell &  judgement seat at Rie,
where  your  Majesty^  &  your  subjects,  or  any  other,  shal
have justice administred unto them, with whom we
have  had ancient  league  and  amity. And thus much
we  have  thought  good  to  let  your  Majesty  understand.
Fare  ye  well. Dated  the  sixt  of  December  the  39  of
our  reigne.

Sigismundus  Augustus  Rex.

END OF VOLUME II.

I

^•bAirr  fl'  J -KJ T) r A E  f A

\^

ri-\y  V  '-''■

H  TP  E  R  7) o  R  E  V;

'^  ttf

rif.

I.T  A  B-  T  a:

^^S^

>-AS\,

1^

■^rf.„

m>^<,

A  S  I^

'i).„.

TTH.CJAE  S  TA'NI

A  E,

^'^iSi

u

^!^*i'H*'?^'

■-^a.

^*

^^

%"a-  '--!^^'"I

i.ju

s^\.

^  i^.^

^^a^^p^' ^EB|1/"'^

^$2^^V5

^^

^"^  ai-ifVi.

--^^

Of  A  'S^E^DE

jlf  A  iS  I  0  fi.

E

liSvim' ®

rrk'Q^-

B  ji  C  H  V  »bi

J^Sotm

•\

C-  AS  PlTJf

Mil.*^

* ^r^^''^'  ^^

*"^

fe

^  '-''•'■•  -a  .''^

Carffa j-„Ja

^Wij/h^ 1

tvJt\c  0

•^"'^^

.{•AlASJ.l

JwfA'\\'-I

•TIATOLIui.

Scrwin

tn^x

i^

'■'Silfeai

rxElJ-I.  ,  CAliSlI-i'NIA.

!ufh,Jf^lhtMi  '  B  A  H  B  A  B  I Aj  .  /  J;r,„  ^l|ji:{>r.-;'jnj ,

A r R I C A E

..|  ,M  ,<!»  T^r,,^  ,,.|  ,„i  j^  „j  ,^i  w  t„\  iffl

•ifV" i^ .p„ul,

'«»^i4fi  .0.. ...

A  R  S.^^

M  E  5 O  P  O

T  ,1  cm:  I  J4

^  I,

CumfT'tuiu^

**^''

W'atS  BINDERY  INC.
ALTHAM,  MASS
SEPT.  19&0

WH1?:2

3  5002  00074  1996

Hakluyt,  Richard  ^ovages

The  principal  navigations  voyage

G  240  . H2  1303  2

Hakluyt,  Richard, 1552?-
1616,

The  principal  naviga1:ions
vovaa€'S__tjraff±.ciMe:®-^^^

h
