The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 12 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 12 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume XII

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE &■  COMPANY LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  English Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within the

compasse  of  these 1600 Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church in  Oxford

VOLUME XII

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the University
New  York : The  Macmillan  Company

MCMV

'NOV  1  9  1940

THE  TABLE

PAGE

Publishers'  Note,  ...... xiii

The  English  Voyages  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  by

Walter  Raleigh, ......  i

General  Index, .  .  .  .  .  ,  .121

Index  to  Ships, .  ...  .  .  .  . 464

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Boston  Library  Consortium  IVIember  Libraries

http://www.archive.org/details/principalnavigat012hal<l

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Plan  of  Westminster,  a.d. 1593,  ... 32

Reproduced  from  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  the
Speculum  Britaniae,  The  first  parte  by  The  travaile
and  vew  of  John  Norden,  Anno  1593.

Letter from Richard Hakluyt to Sir Francis

Walsingham, ist  April, 1584. ... 80

In  the  first  part  of  this  letter  Hakluyt  urges  on  Sir
Francis  Walsingham  the  foundation  of  a  lecture
on  Mathematics  in  Oxford,  and  another,  on  *  the
Arte  of  Navigation '  in  London,  at  a  yearly  stipend
of  Fifty  pounds  each.  '  In  my  simple  judgment,'
writes  Hakluyt,  the  money  so  spent  '  wold  be
the  best  hundred  pounds  bestowed,  that  was
bestowed  these  five  hundred  yeares  in  England.'
The  remainder  of  the  letter  gives  various  items
of  news  which  may  be  of  political  interest  to
Walsingham.  The  letter  was  written  when  Hak-
luyt was  chaplain  to  the  Embassy  in  Paris.  It  is
docquetted  '  primo  Aprilis  1584.  Ffrom  M'-  Hak-
luite  the  preacher  at  Paris '  and  endorsed  in  a
modern  hand  '  This  is  a  private  not  a  diplomatic
letter  from  Hackluyt  to  Walsingham.'  The  repro-
duction is  made,  by  permission,  from  the  original
vii

ILLUSTRATIONS

preserved  in  the  Public  Record  Office.  The  letter
itself  runs  as  follows  :
Right  honorable  :  the  famouse  disputations  in  al  the
partes  of  the  mathematicks  wch  at  this  present
are  held  in  Paris  for  the  gayning  of  the  lecture
wch  was  erected  by  the  worthy  scholer  Petrus
Ramus  to  the  greate  increase  of  those  excellent
sciences,  put  mee  in  mynd  to  sollicite  yo'  honour
agayne  and  agayne  for  the  erection  of  that  lecture
of  the  Arte  of  Navigation,  whereof  I  have  had
some  speach  with  yo'  Honor,  Sir  Ffrancis  Drake,
and  Alderman  Barnes  and  other.  And  that  you
might  meet  with  al  inconveniences  wch  might
frustrate  the  expected  profit  wch  is  hoped  for  by
the  erection  of  the  same,  I  send  yo""  honor  heare
the  testament  of  Petrus  Ramus  newely  put  out
agayne  in  printe  and  sent  unto  mee  by  Monsieur
Bergeron  Ramus  his  executor,  whereby  you  may
see,  first  the  exceeding  zeale  that  man  had  to
benefit  his  countrey,  in  bestowing  500  livres  (wch
as  yo""  honor  knoweth)  is  fiftie  pound  sterling,
uppon  establishing  of  that  lecture,  bequething  not
halfe  soe  much  to  al  the  kinred  and  friends  he
had.  Secondly  you  may  note  that  he  being  one
of  the  most  famouse  clerks  of  Europe  thought
those  sciences  next  after  divinitie  to  be  most
necessarie  for  the  comonwelth,  in  that  he  erected
a  newe  lecture  of  the  same,  wheras  there  was  one
before  erected  and  endued  with  fiftie  pound
stipend  by  the  Kinge  of  Ffrance.  Thirdly  that
most  provident  order  wch  the  good  man  by  his  wil
hath  taken,  is  most  requisite  to  be  put  in
execution  in  England  :  wch  is,  that  every  three
yeares,  there  shalbe  publicke  disputations  signified  to
al  men  by  publicke  writing,  wherein  yt  shalbe  free
for  any  man  for  three  moneths  space  to  dispute
agaynst  the  reader  for  the  tyme  being,  who  yf  he
be  found  negligent,  or  yf  any  one  of  the  competitours
be  found  more  worthy  by  the  opinion  of  certayne
viii

ILLUSTRATIONS

indifferent  men  of  lerninge  chosen  out  of  purpose
to  be  judges,  that  then  the  unworthier  shal  give
place  to  the  more  sufficient  :  who  so  being  placed
is  bound  in  three  yeares  space  to  read  through  the
course  of  the  mathematicks.  Yf  by  yo'  honors  in-
stigation Her  Majestic  might  be  enduced  to  erect
such  a  lecture  in  Oxford,  and  the  like  for  the  Arte
of  navigation  might  by  some  other  meanes  be  estab-
lished at  London,  allowing  to  ech  of  them  fiftie
pounds  yearly  with  the  same  conditions,  in  my
simple  judgment  yt  wold  be  the  best  hundred  pounds
bestowed,  that  was  bestowed  these  five  hundred
yeares  in  England.  Ffor  yt  is  not  unknowne  unto
yo'  wisedome,  howe  necessarie  for  service  of  warres
arithmeticke  and  geometric  are,  and  for  our  newe
discoveries  and  longe  voyages  by  sea  the  arte  of
navigation  is,  wch  is  compounded  of  many  partes
of  the  aforesayd  sciences.  Understanding  heareto-
fore  of  your  honours  greate  aboundance  of  business,
and  yo"^  dangerouse  sicknes,  I  thought  yt  not  meet
to  trouble  yo'  honor  with  such  things  as  I  had
carefully  sought  out  here  in  Ffrance  concerning  the
furtherance  of  the  westerne  discoveries,  but  chose
rather  to  imparte  the  same  wth  M''-  Carlile,  wch
thing  I  also  did.  But  being  lately  advertised  of
yo'  recovery  (for  wch  I  humbly  thanke  almightle
God)  I  was  bold  to  signifie  unto  yo'  honor  my
dealing  with  Horatio  Palavicini  to  become  an
adventurer  in  those  westerne  voyages,  and  among
other  talke  alleadged  yo""  good  disposition  to  the
same,  wch  he  hearing  of  replyed  very  cheerfully,
that  yf  he  were  moved  thereto  by  the  lest  word
from  yo'  honor,  he  wold  put  in  his  hundred  pound
adventure,  or  more.  Yf  Mr.  Carlile  bee  gon,  yet
yt  might  come  in  good  tyme  to  serve  M'-  Ffrobisher's
turne,  yf  yo'  wisedome  shold  like  wel  of  yt,  seing
he  setteth  not  foorth  as  I  understand  until  the
beginning  of  May.

I  understand  that  the  papists  give  out  secretly  in

ILLUSTRATIONS

the  towne  that  there  shall  shortly  come  forth  a
confutation  of  the  defence  of  the  execution  of
justice  in  England,  wch  was  set  foorth  in  English
and  French  in  London.  When  yt  cometh  foorth
I  trust  to  have  yt  with  the  first.

There  is  good  hope  that  the  minister  and  those
that  were  taken  lately  with  him  in  Paris  by  the
abbot  of  St.  Geneveva  shal  very  shortly  be  set  at
libertie.  For  the  King  secretly  seemeth  to  favour
them,  and  they  have  very  discreetly  annswered  for
themselves  that  they  were  not  at  any  communion
or  sermon,  but  that  they  mett  together  to  consult
whether  to  goe  out  of  Paris  to  some  place  lawful
by  the  edicte.  A  friend  of  myne  told  mee  he  heard
a  frier  enveigh  very  exceeding  bitterly  agaynst  them
in  a  sermon  before  a  greate  congregation  of  people.

Wee  have  heard  by  diverse  letters  from  Geneva
that  beside  the  earthquake  wch  was  there  about
the  end  of  Ffebruarie  wch  untyled  many  houses
and  overthrow'd  many  chymneis  in  the  towne,
there  is  beside  a  whole  village  in  the  countrey  of
Wallerye  swallowed  up,  being  foure  dayes  iourney
of  Geneva.

Those  who  favour  the  Spanish  here  in  the  towne
have  spred  al  abroad  these  two  or  three  dayes  that
Monsieur  is  dead  :  wch is  nothing  soe.

Thus  leaving  other  matters  and  advertisements
of  importance  to  those  unto  whom  they  appertayne,
with  remembrance  of  the  continuance  of  my  humble
dutie  to  yo'  honor  and  yo"^  worthy  and  vertuous
Sonne  in  lawe  I  leve  you  to  the  merciful  protection
of  the  Almightie.  Paris  the  first  of  April,  1584.
Don  Antonio  his  captaynes  of  his  fleet  are  not  yet
departed  from  Paris,  but  looke  every  day  to  depart.
Yo'  honors  most  humble

Richard  Hakluyt.

To the right honorable Sir Ffrancis Walsingham
principall  secretarie  to  Her  Ma"^  give  these
at  the  Courte.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Plan  of  London,  circa 1573-

This  plan  is  reproduced  from  a  copy  in  the  British
Museum  of  G.  Braun  and  F.  Hohenberg's  Civiiates
Orbis  Terrarum,  1573.  The  '  stiliards '  or  steelyards
of  the  Hanse  merchants  are  shown  on  the  north  side
of  the  river,  a  little  to  the  west  of  London  Bridge.
On  the  east  of  the  Bridge  and  opposite  the  Tower  is
the  anchorage  for  ships.  Westminster  is  shown  on
the  extreme  west  of  the  plan  with  Lambeth  Palace
on  the  opposite  bank.  Conspicuous  objects  on  the
south  side  of  the  river  are  the  rings  for  the  *  boull '
and  'beare'  baiting.  It  was  on  land  adjacent  to
these  that  the  Globe  Theatre  in  which  Shakespeare
acted  was  afterwards  built.

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Professor  Walter  Raleigh's  Essay,  which  forms  the
first  portion  of  this  volume,  was  printed  in  September,
1904,  and  the  delay  in  issuing  it  is  due  to  the  great
labour  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  Index.

The  Index  of  each  of  the  separate  volumes  was  com-
piled and  checked  by  Madame  Marie  Michon,  while
the  whole  has  been  put  together  into  one  alphabet  by
Miss  Elizabeth  Carmont,  who  has  also  identified  the
names  of  places.  While  the  greater  part  of  the  labour
has  fallen  on  Madame  Michon  and  Miss  Carmont,
the  Publishers  have  also  to  express  their  obligations
for  much  assistance  received  from  various  sources.  The
dates,  with  the  exception  of  those  giving  the  births  and
deaths  of  the  principal  personages,  are  founded  on
Hakluyt's  text.

Under  any  circumstances  the  preparation  of  an  Index
of  such  magnitude  must  have  involved  difficulties,  but
these  have  been  greatly  increased  by  the  variety  of
spellings  which  were  common  in  the  sixteenth  century,
by  the  frequent  references  to  places  under  names  which
are  now  obsolete,  and  to  minor  characters  whom  it  is
now  difficult  to  identify.

The  Publishers  cannot  hope,  notwithstanding  the  care
bestowed  upon  it,  that  the  Index  is  even  now  free  from

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

error,  but  they  trust  that  it  may  be  of  some  service  to
students  of  history,  and  especially  to  those  interested
in  Elizabethan  Voyages.

The  proofs  of  the  whole  work,  including  the  Index,
have  been  read  by  Mr.  S.  Douglas  Jackson,  who  has
also  written  the  biographical  and  descriptive  notes  which
appear  in  the  list  of  illustrations  at  the  beginning  of
each  volume.

Glasgow,
2oth  April, 1905,

THE TWELFTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  TrafEques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Containing an Essay by Walter Raleigh on

the  English  Voyages  of  the  Sixteenth

Century  and  an  Index  to  the

whole  work

The  English  Voyages
of  the  Sixteenth Century

By  Walter  Raleigh
I

*  'nr^HE great prose epic of the modern English  The  Epic
-■- nation  '  is  itself  but  an  incident  or  episode in  a - ^

greater  and  wider  world-drama.  The  discovery  and
settlement  of  America  by  the  western  peoples  of  Europe
is  the  last  act  in  a  play  which  began  in  the  cradle  of
the  Aryans  and  which  unrolls  its  vast  theme  leisurely,
observing  none  of  the  unities.  In  this  historical  pageant
the  hero  is  often  changed ;  one  nation  after  another
presses  to  the  front  and  draws  to  itself  the  eyes  of  all
spectators ;  one  after  another  falls  from  its  pre-eminence
and  yields  its  place  to  a  new-comer.  For  many  ages
the  light  which  permits  us  to  follow  the  fortunes  of
humanity  is  focussed  on  the  Mediterranean ;  we  witness
the  struggle  of  conflicting  civilisations,  the  rise  and  fall
of  the  monarchies  of  the  East,  the  passionate  and  lyrical
intrusion  of  the  Greek  on  the  slowly  unfolding  plot,  the
rivalry  of  Roman  and  Phoenician,  and  the  grouping  of
the  actors  under  the  spell  of  Rome  in  a  towering  world-
polity.  But  the  group  falls  asunder  almost  before  it  is
completed ;  the  interest  of  the  action  shifts  from  the
xn  I  A

Voyages.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

centre  of  the  stage,  and  a  new  purpose  declares  itself.
There  is  confused  fighting  of  Saracen  with  Christian,  the
decorum  of  place  and  time  is  no  longer  observed,  alarums
and  excursions  and  the  breathless  tales  of  messengers
disturb  the  even  development  of  the  story,  until,  as  on
the  stage  which  vexed  the  soul  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney,
'  you  shall  have  Asia  of  the  one  side,  and  Affrick  of  the
other,  and  so  many  other  under-kingdoms,  that  the  Player,
when  he  cometh  in,  must  ever  begin  with  telling  where
he  is ;  or  else  the  tale  will  not  be  conceived.'  When
the  Island  race  makes  its  late  appearance  among  the
heroes  of  this  romantic  drama,  the  tale  it  has  to  tell  is
the  diffused  and  exciting  tale  embodied  in  these  Principal
Navigations,  Voyages^  Traffiques^  and  Discoveries  of  the
English  Nation^  compiled  by  Richard  Hakluyt.

Like  the  drama  to  which  it  belongs,  the  compilation
of  Hakluyt  has  seemed  to  some  critics  to  be  lacking  in
The  Quest  of  form  and  unity.  Here  are  voyages  and  travels  to  all
parts  of  the  world,  prosecuted  through  many  ages,  under-
taken by  all  kinds  of  adventurers,  and  animated  by  the
most  divers  purposes.  Men  have  travelled,  as  they  have
lived,  for  religion,  for  wealth,  for  knowledge,  for  pleasure,
for  power  and  the  overthrow  of  rivals.  Yet  no  very
profound  acquaintance  with  Hakluyt's  book  is  needed
to  discern,  as  he  clearly  discerned,  the  single  thread  of
interest  running  through  all  these  pilgrimages.  The
discovery  of  the  new  Western  World  followed,  as  an
incidental  consequence,  from  the  long  struggle  of  the
nations  of  Europe  for  commercial  supremacy  and  the
control  of  the  traffic  with  the  East.  In  all  the  dreams
of  the  politicians  and  merchants,  sailors  and  geographers,
who  pushed  back  the  limits  of  the  unknown  world,  there

THE VOYAGERS

is  the  same  glitter  of  gold  and  precious  stones,  the  same
odour  of  far-fetched  spices.  While  the  main  trade  routes
to  the  East  still  lay  overland,  the  maritime  states  of
Italy,  Genoa  and  Venice,  held  the  keys  of  that  traffic.  Fenice  and
By  their  rivalry  navigation  was  improved ;  the  mariner's  ^^"°'^*
compass  came  into  general  use  early  in  the  Fifteenth
Century ;  and  although  the  power  of  Genoa  was  broken
by  the  surrender  of  her  fleet  at  Chiozza  in  1380,  her
ancient  enemy  was  not  left  for  long  in  undisputed  posses-
sion. Beyond  the  gates  of  the  Mediterranean  a  new  rival
arose ;  and  during  the  whole  of  the  Fifteenth  Century,
the  Portuguese,  having  learned  their  craft  from  the  Italians,  Portugal
were  steadily  creeping  down  the  western  coast  of  Africa,
rounding  capes,  discovering  islands,  making  maps  and
charts,  always  with  the  same  hope  of  finding  a  new  and
safer  passage  to  the  markets  of  the  East.  In  the  year
1 410  Prince  Henry  the  Navigator,  a  younger  son  of
King  John  1  of  Portugal,  began  his  systematic  explora-
tions. His  aims  and  methods  were  those  which,  in  a
later  age,  Hakluyt  constantly  recommended  to  the
government  of  England.  He  established  a  naval  college,
and  called  to  his  service  the  best  science  of  the  time.
In  1419  Madeira  was  discovered.  In  1439  Cape  Bojador  „
was  rounded,  and,  seven  years  later.  Cape  de  Verde.  Voyagers
In  1448  settlements  were  established  on  the  Azores  or
Hawk  Islands.  So,  step  by  step,  advance  was  made,
until,  in  i486,  Bartholomew  Diaz  doubled  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  and  in  1498,  five  and  a  half  years  after  the
first  voyage  of  Columbus,  Vasco  de  Gama  crossed  the
Indian  Ocean  and  cast  anchor  on  the  coast  of  Malabar.
Thus  the  way  was  opened  by  sea  to  China  and  Japan,
and  the Portuguese,  by  their  own  labours,  and  by  the

3

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Papal  Bull  of  Pope  Martin  V,  granted  in  1444,  came
into  possession  of  all  the  lands  they  had  visited,  as  far
as  the  Indies.

Spain.  To a Spaniard of  the later Fifteenth Century the

politics  of  Europe  must  have  worn  something  the  same
aspect  that  they  wore  for  an  Englishman  of  the  Six-
teenth, The  world  had  been  divided  among  rival
claimants,  and  his  country  had  been  left  portionless.
But  it  was  not  by  the  genius  of  a  Spaniard  that  the
balance  was  redressed.  Christopher  Columbus,  a  Genoese,
who  had  passed  his  youth  in  the  commerce  and  wars
of  the  Mediterranean,  settled  in  Lisbon  about  1470,
married  the  daughter  of  one  of  Prince  Henry's  men,
and  devoted  himself  to  map-making  and  the  study  of
navigation,  diversified  by  occasional  cruises  to  the  coast
of  Guinea.  At  Lisbon,  which  was  the  headquarters
of  the  best  and  latest  school  of  navigation,  he  was  kept
in  touch  with  the  progress  of  Portuguese  discovery,  and
must  have  learned  all  there  was  to  know  concerning
the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the  circumnavigation  of
Africa,  and  the  hopes  that  inspired  the  Portuguese  in
their  unceasing  efforts.  He  was  a  dreamer,  a  grave  and
pious man, of  a simple mind, and great tenacity of

The  Scheme  of  imagination.  To  him  there  came  the  idea  that  Cathay,
0  urn  us.  ^^  ultimate  goal  of  all  Eastern  travel,  and  Cipangu,
*  the  richest  island  in  the  world  for  gold  and  spices,'
might  best  be  reached  by  striking  directly  across  the
trackless  Atlantic.  Memories  of  his  reading,  whether
in  boyhood  at  the  University  of  Pavia,  or  in  the  hours
of  study  stolen  from  an  active  life,  confirmed  him,  by  the
opinions  of  the  Ancients,  and  the  mistakes  of  mediaeval
geographers,  in  his  belief  that  the  width  of  the  Atlantic

4

THE VOYAGERS

was  easily  passable,  and  that  on  the  other  side,  over
against  the  coast  of  Spain,  lay  the  fabled  riches  of  China
and  Japan.  He  planned  his  voyage  to  America  because
he  believed  that  no  such  country  existed  ;  and  he  died
without  being  undeceived.

The  story  of  Columbus  has  been  told  a  hundred  times,
and  need  not  be  repeated  at  length.  His  overtures  Offered  to
to  King  John  II  of  Portugal  came  to  nothing,  from  "<'^^*<?'*^-
causes  readily  intelligible  and  eternally  operative  in  the
affairs  of  this  world.  A  great  man's  ideas  are  too  broad
and  simple  to  be  understood  by  the  trained  official
mind.  The  King  referred  the  proposal  of  Columbus
to  a  council  of  bishops,  astronomers,  and  learned  persons.
The  fame  of  the  Portuguese  school  of  navigation  stood
high  ;  the  exploration  of  the  coast  of  Africa  and  the
use  of  the  astrolabe  at  sea  were  among  its  most  recent
achievements  ;  and  the  school-bred  geographers  and
professors  of  navigation  were  in  no  mind  to  listen
patiently  to  the  projects  of  a  private  visionary.  Never-
theless the  confidence  and  enthusiasm  of  Columbus  made
an  impression  on  some  of  his  judges,  and,  at  the  in-
stigation of  the  bishop  of  Ceuta,  a  caravel  was  surrepti-
tiously equipped  and  despatched  to  attempt  the  adventure.
The  seamen  lost  heart ;  the  attempt  failed  ;  and  when
this  piece  of  sharp  practice  came  to  the  knowledge  of
Columbus  he  left  Portugal,  in  1484,  to  offer  his  services
elsewhere.  For  years  his  scheme  went  a-begging.  It
was  during  this  time,  in  1488,  that  he  sent  his  brother
Bartholomew  into  England  with  an  offer  to  King  Henry  And  to
VII.  Bartholomew  fell  into  the  hands  of  pirates,  and  ^"S^^"'^-
was  long  delayed  in  his  journey,  so  that  when  at  last  he
returned  to  Spain  to  notify  King  Henry's  joyful  accept-

5

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ance  of  the  offer,  he  was  too  late  ;  the  patronage  of
Ferdinand  and  Isabella  had  already  been  obtained,  and
Columbus  had  set  sail  for  the  West.  The  pirates,  in
the  pursuit  of  their  calling,  were  '  the  occasion,'  as
Hakluyt  has  it,  *  why  the  West  Indies  were  not  dis-
covered for  England.'  The  time  of  England  was  not
yet  come.

A  striking  contrast  might  be  drawn  between  the  two
nations,  Spain,  which  gained  the  whole  credit  and  profit
of  the  enterprise  of  Columbus,  and  England,  which  so
The  shipmen  narrowly  missed  it.  A  hundred  years  later,  in  the  defeat
y  ^S^^^  '  Qf  |.|^g  Great  Armada,  the  contrast  was  to  be  pointed,  but
already  it  was  apparent.  'The  English  sailors,'  wrote
Ferdinand's  ambassador  at  the  Court  of  King  Henry
VII,  '  are  generally  savages.'  They  were  unchanged
since  the  days  of  Chaucer,  and  picked  up  a  living,
without  loss  of  temper,  from  a  precarious  coasting  trade
and  adventures  not  easily  distinguishable  from  piracy.
The  character  of  the  English  sailor  is  the  most  inalter-
able and  valuable  of  national  assets  ;  while  the  British
Constitution  has  moved  from  precedent  to  precedent,
he  has  remained  the  same.  His  life  is  a  hard  one,  but
he  takes  it  as  it  comes.  He  is  untouched  by  the  formal
punctilios  of  the  cavalier  and  the  cankered  scruples  of  the
puritan.  He  is  careless  of  the  graces  and  ornaments
of  life.  Though  he  has  a  warm  heart,  he  is  no  humani-
tarian. Danger  is  his  daily  companion,  and  he  has
learned  the  lesson  of  Sir  Edward  Howard,  that  a  seaman
is  useless  unless  he  is  resolute  to  the  degree  of  madness.
Above  all,  he  is  alert  and  serious  in  what  concerns  his
craft.  Of  all  professions,  the  sailor  is  habituated  to
subordinate  himself  most  completely  to the necessities

6

THE VOYAGERS

of  the  work  to  be  done. We  know  little  of  the  English

sailors  of  the  time  of  King  Henry  VII. But  we  know

them  at  an  earlier  time,  and  we  shall  meet  them  again

later,  in  the  day  of  their  triumph.

When  Columbus  arrived  at  Cordova,  in i486,  to  lay

his  propositions  before  the  allied  monarchs  of  Castile  and

Arragon, he found there  a Court and a nation little

disposed to pay  attention to  nautical adventure. The

campaign  against  the  Moors  for  the  conquest  of  Granada

was  being  inaugurated  with  all  the  pomp  and splendour

of  mediaeval  chivalry. Decadent feudalism,  trained  in  The  cavaliers

.  .  •  r  V  Spain.

the stately formalities of  Courts  and the subtleties of

Catholic  theology,  was  to  have  the  task  of  conquering
and  settling  the  West  Indies.  But  the  hidalgos  and
cavaliers  who  thronged  with  their  retinues  to  the  camp
at  Cordova  had  no  foreboding  of  their  destiny.  Many
of  them  were  to  be  lost  at  sea,  or  to  die  miserably  in
remote  islands,  at  the  bidding  of  the  poor  man  in  simple
apparel  who  was  unable  to  gain  a  hearing  from  them.
In  the  meantime  Spain,  with  the  infidel  at  her  gates,
cared  little  for  the  sea.  The  marvel  is  not  that  Columbus
crossed  the  Atlantic,  but  that  by  his  resolute  importunity
he  secured  the  help  of  the  Court  of  Spain.  His  scheme
was  little  understood ;  but  in  Spain  religion  is  under-
stood, and,  by  long  cherishing,  his  belief  in  his  mission
had  acquired  the  intensity  and  the  elevation  of  a  creed.
It  was  this  which  won  him  the  friendship  of  Friar  Juan
Perez,  at  the  convent  of  La  Rabida,  and  it  was  this  which,
in  the  end,  secured  for  him  the  whole-hearted  sympathy
and  support  of  Isabella  of  Castile.  In  October,  1492,
he  landed  at  San  Salvador  in  the  Bahama  Islands.
By  the  conquest  and  settlement  of  Cuba  and  the  West

7

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Indies  Spain  entered  on  her  career  as  a  candidate  for  the
The  Bull  of  dominion  of  the  world.  To  avoid  an  internecine  struggle
between  Spain  and  Portugal,  Pope  Alexander  VI,  who
was  a  Spaniard  by  birth,  issued,  in  1493,  his  famous  Bull,
whereby  the  world  was  divided  by  a  line  running  from
pole  to  pole  a  hundred  leagues  west  of  the  Azores,  and
all  newly  discovered  lands  to  east  and  west  of  this  line
assigned  in  absolute  possession  to  the  crowns  of  Portugal
and  Castile  respectively.  For  the  next  half-century  both
Spain  and  Portugal  were  busy  in  consolidating  and
extending  their  domains,  little  disturbed  by  newer
competitors.

But  the  tale  of  the  nations  was  not  yet  complete.
Venice,  Genoa,  Portugal  and  Spain  were  to  be  followed
by  France  and  England  in  the  race  for  the  Far  East.
Italian  Each  of  these  latter  countries,  like  Spain,  owed  its  earliest
impulse  to  the  genius  of  an  Italian  navigator.  One  land
sent  forth  the  masters  of  the  Old  World  and  the  dis-
coverers of  the  New ;  though  they  were  never  to  enter
into  their  inheritance,  they  saw  it  with  their  eyes ;  and
the  beginnings  of  modern  science,  art,  and  civilisation  are
John  Cabot,  the  debt  of  the  world  to  Italy.  In  1497,  John  Cabot,  a
citizen  of  Venice  who  had  settled  as  a  trader  at  Bristol,
having  obtained  letters  patent  from  King  Henry  VII,
sailed  with  two  ships  out  of  Bristol  and  discovered  the
coast  of  Labrador.  As  his  was  the  first  expedition  to
reach  the  mainland  of  America,  which  Columbus  never
set  eyes  on  till  a  year  later,  much  has  been  made  in  con-
troversy of  the  priority  of  the  English  claim.  But  indeed
in  these  timid  beginnings  nothing  was  further  from  the
purpose  of  England  than  to  enter  on  a  contest  with  other
powers  for  the  possession  of  America. The  success  of

8

THE VOYAGERS

Columbus had set the court of King Henry aflame

with the  promise  that it  offered of  a direct route to

Cathay,  *  insomuch  that  all  men,  with  great  admiration,

affirmed it to be a thing more divine than human,

to sail by  the  West into the East, where the spices

grow,  by  a  way  that  was  never  known before.' Shortly

after  this  it  was  ascertained  that  beyond  America there

lay  a  halcyon  sea,  yielding  direct  access  to  the  promised

land. In 15 13 Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa,  from  a  height  The  Pacific

above  his  colony  at  Darien,  saw  the  Pacific  Ocean ;  and  d"^'^'^^^^^-

in 1520 the Portuguese navigator, Magellan, rounded

South America through the  straits  that  bear his name,

and sailed  across the Pacific to the Philippines,  where

he  met  his  death.

From  this  time  forward,  for  many  years,  the  aim  of
European  navigators  was  not  to  explore  or  settle
America,  rather  to  discover  a  passage  whereby  America
might  be  avoided,  and  a  way  opened  to  the  lands
beyond.  But  the  progress  of  investigation  revealed  no
break  in  that  great  barrier.  The  French  voyagers,  who.  The  French
like  the  English,  followed  the  lead  of  a  native  of  Italy,  °'S^&^^'
were  long  buoyed  up  by  the  hope  of  finding  a  better
route  than  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  which  were  far  south,
dangerous  to  navigate,  and,  moreover,  were  in  the
possession  of  Spain.  In  1523,  Giovanni  Verazzano,
a  Florentine  in  the  service  of  King  Francis  I,  explored
the  coast  of  what  is  now  the  United  States,  from  Georgia
northward,  and  of  great  part  of  Canada.  He  was
followed  by  the  brothers  Parmentier ;  by  Jacques  Cartier,
who  in  1535  sailed  up  the  St.  Lawrence  and  discovered
and  named  Montreal;  by  the  Sieur  de  Roberval ;  and
many  others. To  the  earliest  voyagers,  as  in  the  earliest

9

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

maps, America was known as a chain of  islands, and

The  barner  ^j^gj-g  ^^s  something  inherently  incredible  in  the  idea  of
continent.  .  .

a  great continent  stretching  North  and  South  over  the

tropical and temperate zones. When that idea was

accepted,  there  remained  a  last  hope,  the  discovery  of  a

passage through one of  the innumerable inlets of  the

North,  whereby  the  nations  situated  in  colder  seas  than

those of Spain might redeem their disadvantages,  and

claim  a  share  in  the  spoils  of  the  world. It  is  at  this

point  that  the  story  of  the  English  Voyages  begins.

The  actions  that  move  the  world  have  been  prompted

and inspired by dreams and visions. The search for

the  philosopher's stone  laid  the  foundations  of  modern

chemistry ;  modern  travel  and  geography  owe  their  chief

Cathay. advances  to the  search  for  the  fabled  realm  of  Cathay,

Traditions  and  fantasies  concerning  the  Golden  Age  and

the  Earthly  Paradise  are  interwoven  with  all  the  practical

designs  of  the  early  navigators. The  poets  of  the  ancient

world  are  the  true  fathers  of  later  science. So  early  as

the  sixth century the monk Cosmas, in  his Universal

Christian Topography., states  the object of  many a  later

The  Earthly  quest. '  If  Paradise,' he says, '  were really on the

Paradise. surface  of  this  world,  is  there  not  many  a  man  among

those  who  are  so  keen  to  learn  and  search  out  everything,

that  would  not  let  himself  be  deterred  from  reaching  it }

When  we  see  that  there  are  men  who  will  not  be  deterred

from penetrating  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  in  search  of

silk, and all for the sake of  filthy  lucre,  how  can  we

believe  that  they  would  be  deterred  from  going  to  get

a sight of  Paradise?' All through the Middle Ages

the dream held sway, and  Paradise  was  sought in the

East. Columbus,  seeking  it  by  another  route,  believed

THE VOYAGERS

that  he  was  near  it  when,  on  his  third  voyage,  he  came

to  the  mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  and  found  a  mild  climate,

green hills, fresh foliage,  and a  people  light  in  colour

and  graceful  in  form. The  earth,  he  explains,  is  probably Columbus  on

not spherical,  but elongated like a pear, and on the  ^^^f^  °f^^^

summit of the protuberance is situated the Earthly

Paradise, *  whither no one can go but by God's

permission.' *  I think also,' he goes on, '  that the

water I  have described may proceed from it, though

it  be  far  off,  and  that  stopping  at  the  place  I have  just

left,  it  forms  this  lake. There  are  great  indications  of

this  being  the  terrestrial  paradise,  for its site coincides

with the opinion of the holy and wise theologians

whom I have mentioned ; and moreover, the other

evidences  agree  with  the  supposition,  for  I have  never

either  read  or  heard  of  fresh water  coming  in  so  large

a quantity,  in  close conjunction with  the water  of  the

sea;  the  idea  is also  corroborated by the  blandness of

the temperature ;  and if  the water  of  which I speak,

does  not  proceed  from the  Earthly  Paradise,  it  appears

to  be  still  more  marvellous,  for  I do not believe  that

there is any river in  the  world so large  or so deep.'

Whether  approached  by  the  East  or  by  the  West,  this

Earthly  Paradise  was to be sought,  all  were  agreed,  in

the  neighbourhood  of  Cathay.

This  great  kingdom  of  the  East  had  long  been  dimly
known  as  an  object  of  curiosity  and  wonder.  By  the
revival  of  Christianity  at  the  time  of  St.  Francis  and  St.  Franciscan
Dominic  a  great  impulse  was  given  to  missionary  travel,  ^"^onanes.
and  the  marvellous  tales  brought  back  by  wandering
friars  took  a  firm  hold  on  the  imagination  of  Europe.
Rubruquis,  a  Flemish  Franciscan,  who,  about  the  middle

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

T^he  Fountain
of  Youth.

Marco  Polo.

of  the  thirteenth  century,  was  sent  by  St.  Louis  on  a
mission  to  the  Tartar  chiefs,  brought  back  the  report
that  '  there  is  a  certain  province  on  the  other  side  of
Cathay,  and  whatever  a  man's  age  be  when  he  enters
that  province  he  never  gets  any  older.'  The  friar  is
careful  to  add  that  he  does  not  believe  a  word  of  this
report,  but  it  found  credence  from  others,  and  so  late
as  1 5 12  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  an  old  Spanish  cavalier,
Governor  of  Puerto  Rico,  landed  in  Florida  while  he
was  cruising  in  search  of  a  country  alleged  to  contain
a  miraculous  Fountain  of  Youth.  Besides  Rubruquis
there  were  other  friars  whose  accounts  of  the  East
were  well  known  to  later  explorers.  John  of  Piano
Carpini  in  the  Thirteenth  Century  was  followed  later
by  John  of  Monte  Corvino,  who  passed  many  years
of  his  life  at  the  Court  of  the  Grand  Khan  of  Cathay,

founded a

flourishing

Christian community, built a

church,  and  was  made  Archbishop  of  Cambalu,  or  Pekin.
Odoric  of  Pordenone  was,  like  these,  a  Franciscan ;  his
residence  at  Pekin  belongs  to  the  early  part  of  the
Fourteenth  Century.  The  reports  brought  by  these
travellers  of  the  survival  of  some  remnants  of  Nestorian
Christianity  in  the  East  lent  colour  to  the  legend  of
Prester  John,  the  mythical  Christian  potentate,  who
continued  to  be  an  object  of  research  down  to  the  time
of  the  Portuguese  voyages.  The  greatest  of  all  mediaeval
travellers,  Marco  Polo,  who  spent  a  quarter  of  a  century,
from  1 27 1  to  1295,  in  the  East,  was  a  Venetian  of  a
noble  merchant  family,  and  did  more  perhaps  than  any
other  writer  to  excite  interest  in  the  glories  of  Cathay.
The  accounts  given  by  Marco  Polo  and  Odoric,  long
believed to  be adorned and heightened  by  fables,  have

THE VOYAGERS

come  to  be  recognised  as  veracious  and  exact  narratives,

erring  here  and  there  only  from  natural  misconceptions.

Their descriptions of  the Great Khan's Court,  of  the  KublaKhan.

magnificence  of  his  retinue,  and  the  resources  and  extent

of  his  Empire,  might  well  excite  Western  curiosity  and

stimulate the eiForts  of  voyagers. It  was  not  without

reason that Hakluyt included in his compilation the

stories  of  some  of  these  Eastern  travellers ;  without  them

his epic would lack its true beginning. The travels

of  Marco Polo were too well  known to be inserted,

but they are essential to the completeness of the

book.

The  quest  of  Cathay,  then,  is  the  main  theme
of  this  long  poem  of  adventure  ;  it  is  the  purpose
and  soul  of  centuries  of  travel.  But  the  theme  is
diversified  with  episodes  and  digressions  and  underplots.
The  singleness  of  an  enterprise  is  not  necessarily  re-
flected in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  all  who  take  part  in
it.  Men  who  left  their  homes,  and  sailed  to  an  unknown
world,  were  influenced  by  the  most  diverse  motives,
political  or  religious,  commercial  or  scientific.  In  not
a  few  cases  the  *  good  unsought  discoveries  '  made  by
the  way  caused  the  original  purpose  to  be  forgotten.
The  Letters  of  Columbus,  at  the  outset  of  the  history,
foreshadow  some  later  developments.  Columbus  him-  The  aims  of
self  was  full  of  zeal  for  the  spread  of  Christianity,  and
the  increase  of  knowledge.  But  it  was  necessary  to  show
that  his  expedition  would  pay  its  promoters  in  temporal
coin.  '  I  gave  to  the  subject,'  he  says  in  the  account
of  his  Third  Voyage,  *  six  or  seven  years  of  great
anxiety,  explaining,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  how  great
service  might  be  done  to  our  Lord,  by  this  undertaking,

13

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in  promulgating  His  sacred  name  and  our  holy  faith
among  so  many  nations  ; — an  enterprise  so  exalted  in
itself,  and  so  calculated  to  enhance  the  glory  and
immortalize  the  renown  of  the  greatest  sovereigns.  It
was  also  requisite  to  refer  to  the  temporal  prosperity,
which  was  foretold  in  the  writings  of  so  many  trustworthy
and  wise  historians,  who  related  that  great  riches  were
to  be  found  in  those  parts.  And  at  the  same  time  I
thought  it  desirable  to  bring  to  bear  upon  the  subject,
the  sayings  and  opinions  of  those  who  have  written
upon  the  geography  of  the  world.  And  finally,  your
Highnesses  came  to  the  determination  that  the  under-
The  spread  of  taking  should  be  entered  upon.'  To  add  a  whole  realm
nsianiy.  ^^  Christendom  was  in  the  opinion  of  Columbus  a
sufficient  object  and  reward.  The  people  of  the  West
Indian  islands,  he  says,  '  all  clearly  understand  each
other's  speech,  a  circumstance  very  propitious  for  the
realization  of  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  principal  wish
of  our  most  serene  King,  namely,  the  conversion  of
these  people  to  the  holy  faith  of  Christ.'  And  again, —
'  Let  the  King  and  Queen,  our  Princes  and  their  most
happy  Kingdoms,  and  all  the  other  provinces  of  Christen-
dom, render  thanks  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus
Christ,  who  has  granted  us  so  great  a  victory  and  such
prosperity.  Let  processions  be  made,  and  sacred  feasts
be  held,  and  the  temples  be  adorned  with  festive  boughs.
Let  Christ  rejoice  on  earth,  as  he  rejoices  in  heaven  in
the  prospect  of  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  so  many
nations  hitherto  lost.  Let  us  also  rejoice,  as  well  on
account  of  the  exaltation  of  our  faith,  as  on  account  of
the  increase  of  our  temporal  prosperity,  of  which  not
only  Spain,  but  all  Christendom  will  be  partakers.'

14

THE VOYAGERS

To  reinforce  this  magnanimous  and  generous  motive  The  increase  of

Columbus quotes instances '  of what great princes  ^"^'^^^^S^-

throughout  the  world  have  done  to  increase  their  fame :

as,  for  example,  Solomon,  who  sent  from  Jerusalem  to  the

uttermost parts of  the  East,  to  see  Mount  Sopora,  in

which  expedition his ships  were  detained three years  ;

and  which  mountain your Highnesses now  possess in

the island of Hispaniola  ;  .  .  . Alexander, who sent

to  observe  the  mode  of  Government in the island of

Taprobana,  in  India  ;  and  Cassar Nero,  to explore the

sources of the Nile, and to learn the causes of  its

increase in the Spring, when water is needed  ; and

many  other  mighty  deeds  which  princes  have  done,  and

which it is allotted to princes to achieve.' Lastly,

there is '  the recent noble example of the Kings of  '^^i  example

r of  Portugal
Portugal,  who  have  had the courage  to  explore  as far

as  Guinea,  and  to  make  the  discovery  of  it,  expending
so  much  gold  and  so  many  lives  in  the  undertaking,
that  a  calculation  of  the  population  of  the  kingdom
would  show  that  one  half  of  them  have  died  in  Guinea ;
and  though  it  is  now  a  long  time  since  they  com-
menced these  great  exertions,  the  return  for  their  labour
and  expense  has  hitherto  been  but  trifling  ;  this  people
has  also  dared  to  make  conquests  in  Africa,  and  to
carry  on  their  exploits  to  Ceuta,  Tangier,  Algiers,  and
Alcazar,  repeatedly  giving  battle  to  the  Moors  ;  and  all
this  at  great  expense  ;  simply  because  it  was  an  exploit
worthy  of  a  prince,  undertaken  for  the  service  of  God,
and  to  advance  the  enlargement  of  His  Kingdom.'  In
consonance  with  these  aims,  the  behaviour  of  Columbus  Columbus  and
to  the  natives  of  Hispaniola  was  ordered  by  the  loftiest  ^he  Indians.
code  of  a  Spanish gentleman. '  I gave,' he says, *  to

15

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

all  I  approached  whatever  articles  I  had  about  me,  such
as  cloth  and  many  other  things,  taking  nothing  of  theirs
in  return  :  but  they  are  naturally  timid  and  fearful.
Indian  As  soon  however  as  they  see  that  they  are  safe,  and
Virtues.  have  laid  aside  all  fear,  they  are  very  simple  and
honest,  and  exceedingly  liberal  with  all  they  have  ;
none  of  them  refusing  anything  he  may  possess  when
he  is  asked  for  it,  but  on  the  contrary  inviting  us  to
ask  them.  They  exhibit  great  love  towards  all  others
in  preference  to  themselves  ;  they  also  give  objects  of
great  value  for  trifles,  and  content  themselves  with
very  little  or  nothing  in  return.  I  however  forbade
that  these  trifles  and  articles  of  no  value  (such  as  pieces
of  dishes,  plates,  and  glass,  keys,  and  leather  straps)
should  be  given  to  them,  although  if  they  could  obtain
them,  they  imagined  themselves  to  be  possessed  of
the  most  beautiful  trinkets  in  the  world.  .  .  .  They
bartered,  like  idiots,  cotton  and  gold  for  fragments  of
bows,  glasses,  bottles  and  jars  ;  which  I  forbade,  as
being  unjust,  and  myself  gave  them  many  beautiful  and
acceptable  articles  which  I  had  brought  with  me,  taking
nothing  from  them  in  return  ;  I  did  this  in  order  that
I  might  the  more  easily  conciliate  them,  that  they  might
be  led  to  become  Christians,  and  be  inclined  to  enter-
tain a  regard  for  the  King  and  Queen,  our  Princes,  and
The  fate  of  all  Spaniards.'  With  this  fair  dawn  of  mutual  courtesy,
ispamoa.  gj^^j^gj-j^-y^  ^^(^  ^-^g  traffic  of  honourable  men,  began  a
day  of  pillage  and  cruelty  and  devastation  such  as  the
world  has  seldom  seen.  Twelve  years  after  the  first
landing  of  Columbus  the  five  great  tribes  of  Hispaniola
were  all  but  exterminated.  Many  of  the  Indians
perished by the sword, many  under the lash of  the

16

THE VOYAGERS

Spanish  task-master  ;  others  died  of  hunger  in  the
mountains,  or  took  their  own  and  their  children's  lives,
to  escape  from  the  cruelty  of  Spain.  The  successive
names  of  the  island — Hispaniola,  San  Domingo,  Hayti —
embody  its  miserable  history.  The  generous  and  gentle
designs  of  Queen  Isabella  gave  way  to  a  persecution
worthy  of  the  fierce  St.  Dominic,  and  when  the  Indians
were  dead,  *  by  sundry  kinds  of  death,'  the  island  was
peopled  with  imported  negroes,  under  whose  govern-
ment at  last  it  fell.  In  the  full  Nineteenth  Century,
the  gold-laced  officials  of  the  Black  Republic  have  been
known  to  retire  by  night  to  the  mountains,  to  celebrate
their  magic  rites,  attended  by  human  sacrifice.

Presages  and  omens  of  this  tragedy  are  to  be  found
even  in  the  Letters  of  Columbus.  There  are  oft-repeated  T^^  ^^^I'ch
mentions  of  gold.  '  You  will  say  to  their  Highnesses,'
he  writes  to  Antonio  de  Torres,  '  that  I  should  have
ardently  desired  to  send  them  a  larger  quantity  of
gold,  .  .  .  but  that  the  greater  part  of  the  people  we
employed  fell  suddenly  ill.'  Again, — '  I  think  it  will
be  impossible  to  go  this  year  to  make  discoveries  until
arrangements  have  been  made  to  work  the  two  rivers,
in  which  the  gold  has  been  found,  in  the  most  profit-
able manner  for  their  Highnesses'  interest.'  Again, —
*We  hope,  with  the  aid  of  God  and  with  the  washers  Providence
that  we  have  here  with  us,  when  they  shall  be  restored  washers
to  health,  to  send  a  good  quantity  of  gold  by  the
first  caravels  that  shall  leave  for  Spain.'  And  later, —
'  Though  we  have  not  sent  home  ships  laden  with  gold,
we  have,  nevertheless,  sent  satisfactory  samples,  both  of
gold  and  of  other  valuable  commodities,  by  which  it  may
be  judged that in a short time large profit may be

XII  17  B

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

derived.*  The  pressure  put  on  him  to  get  gold,  no
matter  how,  was  unremitting.  *  With  respect  to  the
gold,'  he  writes  again,  '  which  belongs  to  Quibian,
the  cacique  of  Veragua,  and  other  chiefs  in  the  neigh-
bouring country,  although  it  appears  by  the  accounts  we
have  received  of  it  to  be  very  abundant,  I  do  not  think  it
would  be  well  or  desirable,  on  the  part  of  your  High-
nesses, to  take  possession  of  it  in  the  way  of  plunder :
by  fair  dealing,  scandal  and  disrepute  will  be  avoided,
and  all  the  gold  will  thus  reach  your  Highnesses'  treasury
without  the  loss  of  a  grain.'  In  the  same  letter,  written
in  1503,  he  complains  of  the  class  of  adventurers  whom
y  gold  allures,  and  who  make  the  voyage  only  for  plunder.

Yet Columbus, though he  was disgusted by  the self-
interest  and narrow outlook  of  these  gold-seekers,  did
not  fail  to  appreciate  the  significance  and  importance  of
The  import- a  Store  of  gold. '  Gold,'  he  says,  '  is  the  most  precious
once  oj go  . ^f  ^^jj  commodities;  gold  constitutes  treasure,  and  he  who
possesses it  has  all  he  needs  in  this  world,  as  also  the
means  of  rescuing  souls  from  purgatory, and  restoring
them  to  the  enjoyment  of  paradise.' His  opinion,  so  far
as  it  concerns  this  world,  was  to  be  echoed  later  by  many
a  patriotic  Englishman  who  urged  that  the  strength  of  the
King  of  Spain  lay  in  his  treasure,  and  that  he  could  be
most  effectively  attacked  in  the  New  World.
The  complex So, as the drama proceeds, the plot thickens. He
\heVo-iazes ^^^  would make an epic of  it must follow  a single
strand  of  the  twisted  yarn. But  this  is  work  for  the  poet
rather  than  the  historian. The  late  Mr.  Froude,  with  a
poet's  instinct  for  unity,  chose  to  regard  the  whole  story
of  the English Voyages  as an  aspect of  the Protestant
Reformation. Many other equally promising aspects

18

THE VOYAGERS

invite  a  similar  treatment.  The  fascination  and  the
power  of  gold ;  the  doom  of  the  races  of  America,  met
by  them  with  a  tragic  simplicity ;  the  pathos  of  Christian
missions ;  the  romance  of  map-making ;  or  the  tardy
growth,  when  all  else  had  failed,  of  the  idea  of  coloni-
sation ;  these  and  many  other  things  may  be  severally
disentangled  from  the  complicated  web  of  history,  and
trusted  as  a  clue.  History,  which  takes  for  its  hero  that  The  drama  of
many-sided  creature,  man,  must  reckon  with  all  of  these,  ""'""O'-
and  exhibit  a  stage  where  pirates,  buccaneers,  and  slave-
traders  rub  shoulders  with  saints  and  seers,  where  martyrs
to  science  and  religion  are  associated  with  politicians  and
misers ;  and  where,  to  complete  the  disorder,  most  of  the
actors  play  many  parts.  It  is  permissible,  at  least,  to
simplify  the  problem  by  concentrating  attention  on  the
fortunes  of  a  single  nation.  The  history  of  the  English
Voyages  is  the  most  important  chapter  in  the  history  of
the  English  nation,  and  the  preface  to  the  history  of
the  British  Empire.

Daring  the  half-century  after  the  voyage  of  John
Cabot,  a  period  more  than  covered  by  the  long  life  of
his  son,  Sebastian  Cabot,  English  exploration  made  but
little  progress.  There  were  sundry  expeditions,  fitted
out  at  Bristol,  to  the  New-found-land,  and  some  worthless
commodities,  as  well  as  three  natives  of  the  island,  were
brought  back  and  displayed  to  King  Henry  VII.  The
first  of  these  voyages  was  undertaken  by  Sebastian  Cabot,  The

after the death of  his father, in 1498; he failed to  ^l^^f»g^  rf

Enshsh
penetrate  the  North,  and  coasted  America  southward  to  voya^ng  to

Florida. But  this  southern  tendency,  which  might  bring  '^^  '^'^^'•

England into  conflict with Spain,  was not encouraged

by  the  King; and  when  Henry  VIII  succeeded  to the

19

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

throne,  Sebastian  Cabot  was  relegated  to  the  safer  employ
of  making  charts  of  the  coast  of  France.  In  15 12  he
went  to  Spain,  and  for  the  next  thirty-six  years,  with
one  brief  interval  after  the  death  of  Ferdinand,  he  was
in  the  service  of  the  Spanish  government.  On  the
accession  of  Edward  VI  he  returned  to  England,  at  a
time  when  a  fresh  impulse  was  given  to  English  naviga-
tion. But  in  the  meantime  the  dominion  of  the  New
The  progress  World  had  been  strengthened  in  foreign  hands.  While
J  f^^^-  Mexico  and  Peru  were  being  added  to  the  dominion  of
Spain,  the  voyages  made  by  the  English,  under  King
Henry  VIII,  were  few  and  profitless.  In  1 5 1 7  Sir  Thomas
Pert,  assisted  by  Cabot,  attempted  the  North  West  passage,
without  success.  In  1527  a  nameless  canon  of  St.  Paul's
in  London,  who  was  *  a  great  mathematician,  and  a  man
endowed  with  wealth,'  fitted  out  two  ships  for  Labrador,
where  one  of  them  was  lost.  In  1536  Master  Hore,
a  learned  lawyer,  took  a  company  of  a  hundred  to  the
same  coast,  whence,  their  stores  being  exhausted,  they
returned  in  a  stolen  French  ship.  It  was  to  speak  with
the  only  surviving  witness  of  this  voyage,  one  Master
Thomas  Buts,  that  Hakluyt,  at  a  much  later  date,
travelled  two  hundred  miles  on  horseback.  But  the
most  important  document  of  this  early  period  is  *  the
Book  made  by  the  right  worshipful  Master  Robert
Thome's  Thorne,'  in  the  year  1527,  where  the  true  policy  of
Treatise  on England is  outlined and  discussed  at  length. Thorne,

the  l^orthern  °  .  r-ijr-jrii--i

passage.  who  was  a  native  of  Bristol  and  a  friend  of  the  Cabots,
dwelt  long  in  Seville,  and  his  writings  show  traces  of  the
later  sententious  courtly  style  which  Guevara  brought
to  perfection.  In  1513  he  exhorted  King  Henry  to
take the business  of  discovery in  hand;  fourteen  years

THE VOYAGERS

later, at the request of the English ambassador, he

expounded his ideas at length. The  world, he says,

has been divided  between the Kings of  Spain  and of

Portugal, and he gives an account of the contested

ownership  of  the  Philippines,  which  he  takes  to  be  the

richest prize of  all. For *the preciousness of  these

things is measured after the distance that is between

us  and  the  things  that  we  have  appetite  unto ' ;  moreover,

the inhabitants  of  these spice  islands '  set  more by  a

knife  and  a  nail  of  iron  than by  his  quantity  of  gold.'

But the way to these islands is barred to us. The  The  way  to

Spaniards hold the westward  route, by the Straits of  ^^^  ^^'^^

Magellan ;  the Portuguese  the  eastward,  by  the  Cape  of

Good  Hope. The  English  have  left  to  them  but  one

way  to  discover,  and  that  is  by  the  North. If  the  seas

toward  the  North be navigable, we may  go  to these

spice islands a shorter way by two thousand leagues

than  Spain  and  Portugal,  who  have  each  of  them  more

than four thousand leagues to traverse. 'And,' says

Master  Thorne,  anticipating  an objection which, forty

years  later,  became  a  burning  question  of  practical  politics,

'though  we  went  not  to  the  said  islands,  for  that  they

are  the  Emperor's, or  King's  of  Portingale, we  should

by the way, and  coming once  to the line equinoctial,

find  lands  no  less  rich  of  gold  and  spicery,  as  all  other

lands  are  under  the  said  line  equinoctial ;  and  also  should,

if  we  may pass under  the  North,  enjoy  the  navigation

of  all  Tartary,  which  should  be  no  less  profitable  to  our

commodities  of  cloth,  than  these  spiceries  to  the  Emperor

and King of Portingale.' But the Northern seas, it

may  be  objected,  are  blocked  with  ice  ;  and  the  Northern  pgrils  of  the

lands are too cold for man to dwell in. To which  ^ofth.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

objection  Master  Thorne  replies  in  a  single  sentence,
fit  to  be  inscribed  as  a  head-line  on  the  charter  of
Britannia — There  is  no  land  unhabitable^  nor  sea
innavigable.

It  was  in  this  belief,  and  in  this  heroic  temper,  that
England  set  herself  to  take  possession  of  her  heritage,
the  North.  The  adventures  to  the  North  West  had
been  but  poorly  rewarded ;  and  for  a  time  attention  was
turned  to  the  possibility  of  reaching  Cathay  by  way  of
The  North  the  North  East.  At  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Edward
hast  oyages.  yj  ^  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers  was  formed  '  for
the  discovery  of  Regions,  Dominions,  Islands,  and  places
unknown ' ;  Sebastian  Cabot,  now  in  advanced  old  age,
was  made  its  governor;  and  in  May,  1553,  three  ships,
under  the  leadership  of  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  and
Richard  Chancelor,  were  despatched  for  the  Northern
coasts  of  Asia.  They  carried  with  them  letters  from  King
Edward  VI,  written  in  Latin,  and  opportunely  addressed
*  to  all  Kings,  Princes,  Rulers,  Judges,  and  Governors  of
the  Earth,  and  all  other  having  any  excellent  dignity  on
the  same,  in  all  places  under  the  universal  heaven.'
Willoughby  and  Chancelor  were  separated  by  a  storm,
and  Willoughby,  after  reaching  Nova  Zembla,  put  back
and  landed  with  his  two  ships'  companies  on  the  coast
of  Lapland.  Here  they  wintered,  and  here  they  all
Richard  died  of cold and hunger. Chancelor,  with  his single

anceoj.  ship,  had  better  fortune.  He  too  was  obliged  to  turn
back,  but  he  established  friendly  relations  with  the
fisher  folk  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  White  Sea,
and,  when  news  of  the  visit  of  strangers  reached  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  he  was  invited  with  all  his  com-
pany  to the  Court at Moscow. His account of the

THE VOYAGERS

Kingdom  of  Muscovy  led  the  Merchant  Adventurers  to
concentrate  their  efforts  on  developing  trade  with  Trade  with
Russia,  and  gave  a  motive  to  further  voyaging.  Chan-
celor  himself  was  cast  away  and  drowned  on  the  coast
of  Scotland  in  1556,  as  he  was  bringing  the  first
Russian  ambassador  to  the  Court  of  England,  but  his
work  went  on.  Stephen  Burrough,  who  had  served
under  him,  in  the  same  year  explored  the  coast  of  Nova
Zembla;  and  Anthony  Jenkinson,  in  1558,  went  as  far
as  Bokhara  to  seek  for  an  overland  route  to  Cathay.
The  last  of  the  North  Eastern  voyages  was  undertaken
by  Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman  in  the  year
1580.  They  sailed  as  far  as  the  Sea  of  Kara,  but  the  ice
and  fogs  were  too  much  for  them ;  Jackman  never
reached  home,  and  the  failure  of  the  expedition  cast  grave
doubts  on  the  possibility  of  reaching  Cathay  by  the
North  East.  By  this  time,  moreover,  Frobisher's  voyages
to  the  North  West  had  awakened  hopes  of  gold  to  be
found  in  that  inhospitable  region ;  and  Hawkins  and
Drake,  by  their  exploits  in  the  Spanish  Indies,  had
begun  a  new  era  in  English  navigation,  and  given  a
new  direction  to  English  policy.  In  the  excitement  of
these  later  developments  the  North  East  passage  was
forgotten.

When  the  North  West  attempt,  after  a  lapse  of  many
years,  was  again  taken  up,  it  led  to  far-reaching  conse-
quences. The  only  incidental  gain  of  the  North  Eastern
voyages  was  the  establishment  of  trading  relations  with
Russia.  There  was  no  word  of  treasure  to  be  found
on  the  frozen  Siberian  coast,  no  prospect  of  settlement
there,  and  the  voyagers  came  into  conflict  with  no  rival
nations. The  search  for  gold,  the  beginnings  of  colonisa-

23

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

tion, and the gradual entanglement of  England in a
death-struggle with Spain are developments intimately
The  North connected  with  the  voyages  to  the  North  West. Many
-^  * or  the  seamen,

'  Feared  by  their  breed  and  famous  by  their  birth,'
who  were  to  be  the  terror  of  the  Spaniards  upon  the
high  seas,  had  their  hard  training  in  this  forlorn  hope.
When  England  found  herself  baffled  in  her  efforts  to
escape  from  her  ring-fence  by  way  of  the  North,  she
struck  Southwards ;  timidly  at  first,  then,  surprised  and
elated  by  her  own  success,  with  ever  increasing  vigour,
until,  after  a  few  years,  the  small  barks  that  cruised
to  Greenland  and  Labrador  gave  way  to  armed  fleets,
prepared  to  assert  a  right  of  way  and  a  right  of  conquest
in  all  the  seven  seas.

The  suddenness  and  rapidity  of  this  development
might  well  surprise  the  world.  The  English  naval
power,  like  the  English  drama,  seemed  to  be  the  growth
of  a  single  night.  In  either  case,  hidden  causes  had
been  at  work ;  the  power  that  startled  Europe  had  long
been  nurtured  in  the  quiet.  Yet  these  causes  are  so
obscure,  and  seem  so  inadequate,  that  it  is  difficult  to
put  off  the  language  of  miracle.  Fuller  frankly  invokes
a  special  Providence.  '  Observe,  by  the  way,'  he  says,
in  narrating  the  death  of  Captain  Edward  Fenton,  in
Queen  1603, some days after Queen Elizabeth's, *  how God

Eh-zMbeths  ^^^  ^p  ^  generation  of  military  men,  both  by  sea  and
land,  which  began  and  expired  with  the  reign  of  Queen
Elizabeth,  like  a  suit  of  clothes  made  for  her,  and
worn  out  with  her;  for  Providence  designing  a  peace-
able prince  to  succeed  her  (in  whose  time  martial  men
would  be  rendered  useless),  so  ordered  the  matter,  that

24

men

THE VOYAGERS

they  all  almost  attended their  mistress  before or  after,

within  some  short  distance,  unto her  grave,' However

this may  be,  no  language is extravagant to praise the

deeds of the greatest generation of Englishmen, the

generation  of  Drake  and  Raleigh,  of  Bacon  and  Hooker,

of  Shakespeare  and  Marlowe. If  the  names  of  Queen

Elizabeth's  men,  the  men  born  in  the  early  part  of  her

reign, or  just before it, were struck off  the roll of

fame,  England  would  be  robbed  of  half  her  glory.

It was one of  the eldest-born of  these, Humphrey  SirHumphrey

.  Gilbert.

Gilbert,  the  son  of  a  Devon  gentleman,  who  revived  the

North  West  project. He  had  been  trained,  during the

years of  peace,  in  that  school  of  war,  government,  and

adventure  which  gave  Elizabeth  the  best  of  her  servants.

Under  Sir  Henry  Sidney,  in  Ireland,  he  had  spent  years

of  warfare  with  the  rebels,  and  for  his  achievements  there

was knighted. Thence he had passed to the Low

Countries, where he headed a band of  volunteers to

give help to the people of  the Netherlands in their

struggle  with  Alva  and the power  of  Spain, In  these  The  School  for

rough  experiences  of  Continental  war  and  Irish  govern-  ^^'^^^^ure,

ment Raleigh also was trained, and Grenville ; while

Hawkins  and  Frobisher  were  learning  their  elements  in

trade  and  piracy  on  the  coast  of  Guinea. With  all  its

evil lessons  of  cruelty  and craft,  it was  a school that

fostered  reckless  courage  and  self-confidence  in  its  pupils,

and gave leaders to all kinds of  perilous adventure.

During  his periods  of  active  service,  Gilbert  cherished,

deep in  his  heart,  the  dream  of  Cathay, He  plotted  a

North  East passage  with Jenkinson ; and, when that

scheme  was  thwarted,  bent  his  studies  to  the  West. He

repeatedly importuned  Queen Elizabeth for  assistance  ;

25

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Gilbert's  Dis-
course on  the
North  West
passage.

The  cunning
ignorance  of
Spain.

and  in  a  period  of  enforced  idleness,  about  1574,  he
wrote  the  Discourse  to  prove  a  Passage  by  the  North-west  to
Cathaia  and  the  East  Indies  \  which  was  published  in  1576,
and  begat  the  voyages  of  Frobisher  and  Davis.

Gilbert's  argument  is  so  full  and  reasonable,  so  fair  in
its  treatment  of  objections,  and  so  strong  in  its  appeal  to
tradition  and  authority,  that  it  is  no  wonder  if  many  were
convinced  by  it.  America,  he  says,  is  an  island,  and  was
known  by  report  to  Plato  and  the  ancients,  who  called  it
Atlantis.  If  it  be  joined  at  its  northern  extremity  with
the  continent  of  Asia,  how  comes  it  that  no  civilised  man
has  ever  found  his  way  to  America  by  land,  and  that  the
animals  of  America  differ  wholly  from  the  animals  of
Asia.?  Need  makes  the  old  wife  to  trot,  and  the
Scythians  and  Tartars  would  have  found  their  way  there,
if  any  way  had  been  by  land.  The  current  of  the  sea
is  known  to  run  westward  from  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  on  striking  America  is  deflected  along  the
coast  to  the  North.  If  it  found  no  outlet  there,  it  would
run  eastward  again  to  the  coast  of  Europe,  which  it  does
not  do ;  therefore  there  is  a  fair  and  broad  waterway  from
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  somewhere  between  the  62nd
and  the  72nd  parallels  of  latitude.  But  if  a  passage  had
existed,  it  may  be  said,  it  would  have  been  discovered
long  ago  by  the  navigators  of  Spain  and  Portugal.  This
objection  is  met  in  triumphant  fashion  by  Gilbert.  It  is
against  the  interest  of  these  nations  that  a  passage  should
be  found ;  and  he  repeats  a  tale  of  Ulloa,  that  the  King
of  Portugal  gave  the  Emperor  Charles  V  three  hundred
and  fifty  thousand  crowns  to  leave  the  discovery  un-
attempted.  'It  is  to  be  thought,'  he  adds,  *that  the
King  of  Portugal  would  not  have  given  to  the  Emperor

26

THE  VOYAGERS

such  sums  of  money  for  eggs  in  moonshine.' The  pilots

of  these nations  are now  forbidden,  on pain of  death,

to  explore  to  the  North  West,  lest  they  *  should  beat  the

bush,  and  other  men  catch  the  birds.' The  enterprise  is

reserved  for  the  English,  who  have  most  to  gain  by  it.

And  Gilbert  concludes  with  a  declaration  of  the  antique  Gilbert's

Roman  faith  which  inspired  his  life — '  He  is  not  worthy

to  live  at  all,  that  for  fear  or  danger  of  death  shunneth

his  Country's  service  and  his  own  honour ;  seeing  death

is  inevitable,  and  the  fame  of  virtue  immortal.'

The  influence  of  Gilbert's  Discourse  was  seen  imme-  ^-^^  ^^^^^
diately  in  the  voyages  of  Frobisher  and  Davis.  After  a  Martin
vain  attempt  to  stir  up  the  Muscovy  Company  (as  the  Frobisher.
Merchant  Adventurers  were  now  called)  to  Western
enterprise,  Queen  Elizabeth  granted,  in  1575,  a  licence
to  Martin  Frobisher ;  the  Court  and  the  City  stood  in  with
the  adventure,  which  was  largely  financed  and  controlled
by  Michael  Lock,  a  London  merchant  of  scientific
tastes;  and  in  1576,  with  two  small  barks  of  twenty-five
tons  and  a  pinnace,  Frobisher  set  sail.  The  pinnace  was
wrecked,  and  the  barks  separated,  but  Frobisher  in  the
Gabriel  reached  Meta  Incognita,  or  Cumberland's  Island,
made  acquaintance  with  the  Esquimaux,  and  partly
explored  the  inlet  to  which  he  gave  its  optimistic  name
of  Frobisher's  Straits.  The  expedition  was  without
substantial  results  in  discovery  or  profit,  and  but  for  an
accident,  would  hardly  have  been  repeated.  One  of  the
company  chanced  to  pick  up  and  bring  home  a  piece
of  shining  black  stone,  which  the  assayers  of  London
tested  and  pronounced  to  be  rich  in  gold.  So  Frobisher
was  despatched  again  next  year,  his  small  fleet  reinforced
with  a  vessel  of  two  hundred  tons'  burthen,  lent  by  the

27

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Queen.  The  worthless  stuff  he  brought  home  did  not
extinguish  the  hopes  of  the  promoters,  and  in  1578  he
put  out  once  more,  this  time  in  command  of  no  fewer
than  fourteen  vessels.  But  his  success  was  no  greater
than  before.  His  explorations  were  hampered  by  the
quest  for  gold  ore,  and  the  outcome  of  his  three  voyages
was  the  discovery  of  Hudson's  Straits,  much  recrimination
among  the  undertakers,  and  no  gold.  A  fourth  ex-
pedition was  planned,  but  when  at  last  it  was  ready
for  sea,  the  command  was  given  to  Captain  Fenton,
and  its  purpose  changed  to  piracy  in  the  South  Seas.
The  return  of  Drake  in  1580,  treasure-laden  from  his
voyage  round  the  world,  had  cast  a  pallor  upon  Northern
enterprise.
The  three  The  three  voyages  of  John Davis, in 1585 and  the

jlhn^Davis  ^^°  following  years,  were  the  last  Elizabethan  effort
to  discover  the  North  West  passage.  It  is  a  testimony
to  the  geographical  enthusiasm  of  the  time  that  these
voyages  were  undertaken  in  the  very  years  when  the
Spanish  invasion  of  England  was  imminent.  Like
Frobisher,  Davis  found  a  wealthy  merchant  patron  and
support  in  high  quarters ;  like  Frobisher,  he  was  crippled
in  his  explorations  by  the  necessities  of  gain.  Some  of
his  ships  were  told  off  for  cod-fishing  and  the  fur-trade,
yet  he  explored  Cumberland  Sound,  coasted  the  West
of  Greenland  by  Davis  Straits,  and  reached  Bajffin's  Bay.
By  the  death  of  Sir  Francis  Walsingham  in  1 590  he
lost  his  chief  friend  at  Court,  but  his  heart  was  still
set  on  the  North  West,  and  he  took  service  under
Cavendish  in  the  following  year,  induced  only  by  the
promise  that  he  should  have  the  loan  of  a  vessel  to
search for  the  farther entrance to  the  passage,  on the

28

THE VOYAGERS

back  parts  of  America.  Nor  did  he  give  up  hope  after
the  tragic  failure  of  that  voyage.  In  the  preface  to  f"Jf^^-^
The  Seaman's  Secrets,  his  nautical  handbook  of  1594,  and  av//5  West
still  more  earnestly  and  fully  in  The  Worldes  Hydrographical  P^^^ge-
Description  of  1595,  he  expounds  the  certainty  of  a
North  West  passage,  and  the  gains  that  its  discovery
would  bring  to  England.  Davis  was  a  single-minded
seaman,  whose  life  was  given  to  trade  and  exploration
while  others  fought  with  Spain;  and  the  great  idea  that
dominated  him  sometimes  kindles  his  language  to  an
almost  poetic  fervour.  The  North  Pole,  he  says,  is  the  j-^^  dignity  of
place  of  greatest  dignity  in  the  world ;  and  the  people  the  North
who  dwell  near  it  'have  a  wonderful  excellency,  and
an  exceeding  prerogative  above  all  nations  of  the  earth.'
*  How  blessed  may  we  think  this  nation  to  be :  for  they
are  in  perpetual  light,  and  never  know  what  darkness
meaneth,  by  the  benefit  of  twilight  and  full  moons,  as
the  learned  in  astronomy  do  very  well  know :  which
people,  if  they  have  the  notice  of  their  eternity  by  the
comfortable  light  of  the  Gospel,  then  are  they  blessed
and  of  all  nations  most  blessed.  Why  then  do  we
neglect  the  search  of  this  excellent  discovery,  against
which  there  can  be  nothing  said  to  hinder  the  same.f"
Why  do  we  refuse  to  see  the  dignity  of  God's  creation,
since  it  hath  pleased  his  divine  Majesty  to  place  us  the
nearest  neighbour  thereunto.''  I  know  there  is  no  true
Englishman  that  can  in  conscience  refuse  to  be  a  con-
tributor to  procure  this  so  great  a  happiness  to  his
country,  whereby  not  only  the  Prince  and  mighty  men
of  the  land  shaU  be  highly  renowned,  but  also  the
merchant,  tradesman,  and  artificer  mightily  enriched.'
His eloquence  was in vain : and his later  years were

29

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

spent  as  pilot on the East India route, in the  service
at  first  of  the  Dutch  and afterwards of  the  East  India

Death  of  Company.  He  was  killed  in  1605  by  the  treachery  of
Japanese  pirates,  to  whom  the  Master  of  his  ship,  the
Tiger^  had  offered  hospitality  and  courtesy  while  the  two
vessels  lay  alongside  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca.  The
North  Western  enterprise  which  had  been  the  dream
of  his  life  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Dutch,  who  were
beginning  also,  before  the  century  closed,  to  supplant
the  English  in  the  trade  with  Russia.

The  stalwart  honesty  and  simplicity  of  the  character
and  writings  of  Davis  give  a  singular  charm  to  his
name  and  story.  He  was  a  man  after  Hakluyt's  own
heart,  a  fearless  explorer,  a  trusted  leader,  an  ardent
student  and  professor  of  the  science  of  navigation.
He yields to none in esteem and zeal for his pro-

The  praise  of  fession.  *  Sith  Navigation,'  he  says,  *  is  the  mean
whereby  countries  are  discovered,  and  community
drawn  between  nation  and  nation,  the  word  of  God
published  to  the  blessed  recovery  of  the  foreign  off-
casts from  whence  it  hath  pleased  his  divine  Majesty
as  yet  to  detain  the  brightness  of  his  glory :  and  that
by  Navigation  common-weals  through  mutual  trade
are  not  only  sustained,  but  mightily  enriched ;  with
how  great  esteem  ought  the  painful  Seaman  to  be
embraced,  by  whose  hard  adventures  such  excellent
benefits  are  achieved,  for  by  his  exceeding  great
hazards  the  form  of  the  Earth,  the  quantities  of
countries,  the  diversity  of  nations,  and  the  natures  of
Zones,  Climates,  Countries,  and  people,  are  apparently
made  known  to  us ;  besides  the  great  benefits  mutually
interchanged  between nations of  such  fruits,  commodi-

30

THE VOYAGERS

ties,  and  artificial  practices  wherewith  God  hath  blessed
each  particular  country,  coast  and  nation  according  to
the  nature  and  situation  of  the  place.'  Moreover,
Davis,  almost  alone  among  the  English  navigators  of
his  time,  believed  sincerely  in  the  mission  of  England  The  Christian
to  take  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen.  He  was  a  student  ^'JXkJi
of  the  Bible,  and  quotes  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah
concerning  the  salvation  and  union  of  the  Gentiles.
'  Then  sith  it  is  so  appointed,'  he  goes  on,  '  that
there  shall  be  one  shepherd  and  one  flock,  what
hindereth  us  of  England  (being  by  God's  mercy  for
the  same  purpose  at  this  present  most  aptly  prepared)
not  to  attempt  that  which  God  himself  hath  appointed
to  be  performed  .f*  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  we  of
England  are  this  saved  people,  by  the  eternal  and
infallible  presence  of  the  Lord  predestinated  to  be  sent  *^w^_
unto  these  Gentiles  in  the  sea,  to  those  Isles  and
famous  Kingdoms,  there  to  preach  the  peace  of  the
Lord :  for  are  not  we  only  set  upon  Mount  Zion  to
give  light  to  all  the  rest  of  the  world.''  Have  not  we
the  true  handmaid  of  the  Lord  to  rule  us  unto  whom
the  eternal  majesty  of  God  hath  revealed  his  truth
and  supreme  power  of  Excellency .''  By  whom  then
shall  the  truth  be  preached,  but  by  them  unto  whom
the  truth  shall  be  revealed .?  It  is  only  we,  there-
fore, that  must  be  these  shining  messengers  of  the
Lord,  and  none  but  we  ;  for,  as  the  prophet  saith,  "  O
how  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  the  messenger  that
bringeth  the  message  from  the  mountain,  that  pro-
claimeth  peace,  that  bringeth  the  good  tidings  and
preacheth  health,  and  saith  to  Zion,  Thy  God  is  King."
So that hereby the spiritual benefit arising from  this

31

argument.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

discovery,'  he  concludes,  returning  to  his  fixed  idea,
*  is  most  apparent ;  for  which,  if  there  were  no  other
cause,  we  are  all  bound  to  labour  with  purse  and
mind, for the  discovery  of  this  notable  passage.'

During the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and for many  years
The  after,  this  scheme for  the  evangelisation  of  the  heathen

evangeUcal  j^^j  ^^  history.  It  was  a  stock  weapon  in  the  argu-
mentative armoury  of  determined  explorers,  many  of
whom  allude  to  the  religious  mission  of  England  in
cursory  fashion,  or  plead  for  it  like  sharp  Christian
attorneys,  with  none  of  the  fire  and  sincerity  that
shine  in  the  eloquence  of  Davis.  ^  Hakluyt,  who  had
the  same  object  at  heart,  writing  in  1584,  was  troubled
by  his  inability  to  answer  the  Papist  adversary.  'The
Papists,'  he  says,  '  confirm  themselves,  and  draw  others
to  their  side,  showing  that  they  are  the  true  Catholic
Church  because  they  have  been  the  only  converters  of
many  millions  of  infidels  to  Christianity.  Yea,  I  myself
have  been  demanded  of  them,  how  many  infidels  have
been  by  us  converted.'*  Whereunto,  albeit  I  alleged  the
example  of  the  ministers  which  were  sent  from  Geneva
with  Villegagnon  into  Brazil,  and  these  that  went  with
John  Ribault  into  Florida,  as  also  those  of  our  nation
that  went  with  Frobisher,  Sir  Francis  Drake,  and
Fenton  ;  yet  in  very  deed  I  was  not  able  to  name  any
one infidel by  them converted.'- Hakluyt  was  indeed

^  The  too  familiar  compound  of  avarice,  self-righteousness,  and
hypocrisy  may  be  tasted  in  Sir  George  Peckham's  treatise  of  The
Western  Planting  in  vol.  viii.  of  this  edition  of  Hakluyt.

-  From  A  Discourse  of  Western  Planting.,  written  by  M.  Richard
Hakluyt,  1584.  This  valuable  discourse  was  first  printed,  from  the
MS.  in  the  possession  of  Sir  Thomas  Phillipps,  by  the  Maine
Historical Society in 1877.

32

Catholic
Missions

"'l«^Xwi:w3^IWi.wi^AWi-i»l»l»l»i,X,t,i»iWi»i»I^»I^j

PLAN OF WESTMINSTER

English
chaplains.

THE  VOYAGERS

hard  put  to  it  to  be  driven  to  make  shining  mes-
sengers of  Master  Wolfall,  who  went  with  Frobisher's
third  voyage  as  chaplain  to  the  hundred  of  the
company  that  were  to  gather  ore  for  a  year  on
Cumberland's  Island;  and  of  Master  Francis  Fletcher,
Drake's  chaplain,  whom,  for  his  faint  heart  and  double
dealing,  Drake  solemnly  excommunicated,  causing  a
posy  to  be  bound  about  his  arm — '  Francis  Fletcher,
the  falsest  knave  that  liveth.'  On  these  two  pillars
of  the  cause,  Thwackum  and  Square,  English
evangelical  effort  was  fain  to  rest  for  the  time;  but
it  is  to  be  hoped,  says  Hakluyt,  that  volunteers  will
soon  be  forthcoming.  *  For  those  of  the  clergy  which
by  reason  of  idleness  here  at  home  are  now  always
coining  of  new  opinions,  having  by  this  voyage  to  set
themselves  on  work  reducing  the  savages  to  the  chief
principles  of  our  faith,  will  become  less  contentious,
and  be  contented  with  the  truth  in  religion  already
established  by  authority.'  In  a  later  part  of  the  same
Discourse  Hakluyt  throws  a  curious  side-light  on  this
question  of  religion.  It  is  imperative,  he  says,  that
England  should  seek  some  new  outlet  for  her  trade,
and  some  region  where  she  may  establish  a  monopoly :
— *the  rather  to  avoid  the  wilful  perjury  of  such  of
our  English  nation  as  trade  to  Spain  and  other  of
King  Philip's  dominions.'  Before  being  admitted  to  Thereupon  of
trade  at  any  Spanish  port,  the  English  are  required
to  make  oath,  on  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  that  they
adhere  to  the  faith  of  the  Catholic  Church  of  Rome,
and  they  and  their  companies  must  attend  mass  on
Sundays  and  Holy  d'ays.  This  they  do;  and  thus
*the  covetous  merchant  wilfully  sendeth  headlong
XII  33  c

the  trader.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  hell  from  day  to  day  the  poor  subjects  of  this
realm.  The  merchant  in  England  cometh  here  devoutly
to  the  communion,  and  sendeth  his  son  into  Spain
to  hear  Mass.  These  things  are  kept  secret  by  the
merchants ;  and  such  as  depend  upon  the  trade  of
merchandise are loth to utter the same.'

There  was  no  English  counterpart,  then,  or  counter-
blast, to  the  devoted  work  of  Las  Casas  and  the  Spanish
missionaries.  But  year  by  year,  as  English  trade  to
the  South  increased,  there  was  a  growing  hostility  to
Spain,  and  a  growing  disinclination  to  accept  her  mastery
The  of  the  New  World. The  merchant might feign sub-

Buccaner  ^^^^^^  >  the  buccaneers  and  sea-dogs  avenged  his
disgrace  by  challenging  and  harrying  the  power  they
were  soon  to  overthrow.  And  these  men,  though
there  was  little  of  saintliness  in  their  character,  had  a
religion,  and  fought  and  suffered  for  it.  It  was  a
religion  not  wholly  unlike  that  of  the  later  Orange-
man, a  Protestant  compound,  made  up  of  fervid
patriotism,  a  varied  assortment  of  hates,  a  rough  code
of  morals,  and  an  unshaken  trust  in  the  providence  of
God.  To  the  heathen  they  brought  not  peace  but  a
sword.  To  the  Pope,  whom  they  named  with  the
Turk  and  the  Devil,  they  wished  destruction.  For
Queen  and  Country  they  would  go  anywhere  and
attempt  anything.  Their  mission  was  quite  unlike  his
*  that  bringeth  the  message  from  the  mountain';  they
coveted  the  things  of  the  Gentiles,  and  their  purpose
and  methods  are  set  forth,  in  imperial  language,  by
Michael  Drayton : —

*A  thousand  Kingdoms  will  we  seek  from  far,
As  many  Nations  waste  with  civil  war ;

34

THE VOYAGERS

Where  the  dishevelled  ghastly  sea-nymph  sings,

Our  well-rigged  ships  shall  stretch  their  swelling  wings,

And  drag  their  anchors  through  the  sandy  foam.

About  the  world  in  every  clime  to  roam  ;

And  those  unchristened  countries  call  our  own

Where  scarce  the  name  of  England  hath  been  known.'

The  North  East  and  North  West  voyages  failed  in
their  primary  purpose;  and  the  men  of  peace  gave
place,  in  the  end,  to  the  men  of  war.  But  before  the
Queen  and  her  Ministers  recognised  the  necessity  of  an
armed  conflict  with  Spain,  all  pacific  devices  for  the
readjustment  of  the  balance  had  been  examined  and
patiently  put  to  the  test.  One  more  series  of  these
remains  to  be  chronicled.  The  idea  of  colonisation,  of  Colonisation.
appropriating  some  part  of  America  as  yet  unsettled
by  the  Spaniards,  and  there  establishing  a  prosperous
English  community,  whose  imports  and  exports  might
benefit  the  mother  country,  received  its  first  effective
impulse  from  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert.  Already  in
1555  Richard  Eden  had  outHned  this  idea,  in  the
preface  to  his  translation  of  Peter  Martyr's  Decades.
From  Florida  northward  to  Newfoundland,  says  Eden,  Eden's
there  are  lands  *  not  yet  known  but  only  by  the  sea-
coasts,  neither  inhabited  by  Christian  men.'  His  sug-
gestion that  England  should  take  possession  of  these
was  not  likely  to  bear  fruit  while  Mary  reigned  and
Philip  governed.  In  his  notable  Discourse  of  1576
Gilbert  pointed  not  obscurely  in  the  same  direction.
There  are  *  divers  very  rich  countries,'  he  says,  *  both
civil  and  others,  .  .  .  where  there  is  to  be  found  great
abundance  of  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  cloth  of  gold,
silks,  all  manner  of  spices,  grocery  wares,  and  other
kinds of merchandise of an inestimable price, which

35

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

both  the  Spaniard  and  Portugal,  through  the  length  of
their  journeys,  cannot  well  attain  unto.' What  was  to
tlofi^  be  the  weakness  of  all  early  English  attempts  at  coloni-

sation is  foreshadowed  in  his  further  suggestion  that
*we  might  inhabit  some  part  of  those  countries,  and
setde  there  such  needy  people  of  our  country,  which
now  trouble  the  commonwealth,  and  through  want  here
at  home  are  forced  to  commit  outrageous  offences,
whereby  they  are  daily  consumed  with  the  gallows.'
And  this  scheme  might  be  carried  out,  he  adds,  '  without
injury  done  to  any  Christian  prince,  by  crossing  them
in  any  of  their  used  trades,  whereby  they  might  take
any  just  occasion  of  offence.'  Hakluyt,  writing  in  1584,
makes  the  same  recommendation  and  supports  it  by
the  same  arguments,  which  no  doubt  were  intended  to
appeal  to  the  Queen's  well-known  resolve  to  maintain
peace.  Portugal  and  Spain,  he  says,  have  found  em-
ployment for  all  their  subjects,  so  that  these  two
nations  breed  no  pirates ;  '  whereas  we  and  the  French
are  most  infamous  for  our  outrageous,  common,  and
daily  piracies.'  By  planting  the  coast  of  America,
between  30  and  60  degrees  of  Northern  latitude,  we  may
provide  for  the  unprofitable  members  of  the  common-
wealth, and  greatly  advance  English  trade.

Hakluyt  was  by  profession  a  man  of  peace ;  but
there  is  little  doubt  that  Gilbert  would  have  been  glad
to  be  let  slip  at  the  throat  of  Spain.  In  a  paper  of
1577,  probably  drafted  by  him,  the  Queen  is  advised
to  prepare  a  fleet  of  warships  under  pretence  of  a
voyage  of  discovery,  and  to  attack  the  Spaniards  in
Gilbert's  their  cherished  West  Indies.  When  in  1578  he  suc-
Charter. ceeded in  obtaining  a  charter  *to inhabit and possess

36

THE VOYAGERS

at  his  choice  all  remote  and  heathen  lands  not  in  the
actual  possession  of  any  Christian  prince,'  the  expedi-
tion that  he  fitted  out  was,  in  point  of  fact,  diverted
from  peaceful  purposes.  He  got  together  a  fleet  of
eleven  ships,  and  enlisted  the  assistance  of  many
gentlemen  adventurers,  the  most  notable  among  them
being  his  own  step-brother,  Walter  Raleigh,  who  was
weary  of  land-service,  and  desired  to  try  his  fortunes
by  sea.  Feuds  and  divisions  broke  out  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  voyage ;  four  ships  refused  the  expedition ;
and  Gilbert,  intending  an  attack  on  the  West  Indies,
fell  across  some  Spanish  vessels,  and  was  beaten  in
fight.  The  second  and  more  memorable  adventure  of  His  last
1583,  in  which  he  met  his  death,  was  of  less  ambitious  °-^'^^^'
design.  Five  vessels  were  equipped;  the  Delight^  of
120  tons,  in  which  Gilbert  sailed  as  Admiral,  the  Bark
Raleigh,  of  200  tons,  with  its  owner  as  Vice-admiral,
the  Golden  Hind  and  Swallow,  of  40  tons  each,  and  the
Squirrel,  of  10  tons.  The  purpose  was  to  plant  a
colony  on  some  convenient  site  near  Newfoundland.
The  men  proved  disorderly  and  mutinous;  Raleigh,  Disasters.
who  never  took  kindly  to  a  subordinate  command,
deserted  the  expedition  for  some  reason  unknown ;  the
Swallow  was  employed  by  its  crew  in  piracy,  and  was
ultimately  sent  back  to  England  with  the  sick;  and  the
Delight,  after  the  failure  of  a  three  weeks'  experiment
in  colonisation  at  St.  John's  Harbour,  struck  on  a  rock,
and  was  lost  with  its  men  and  cargo  of  mineral.  But
these  failures  and  disasters  were  destined  to  give  Gilbert
his  undying  fame.  Starting  for  home  with  his  two
remaining  ships,  he  chose  to  sail  in  the  Squirrel,  which
he  had  made  much  use  of  to explore the coast. *I

37

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

will  not,'  he  said,  *  forsake  my  little  company  going
homeward,  with  whom  I  have  passed  so  many  storms
and  perils.'  They  met  foul  weather  and  terrible  seas,
'  breaking  short  and  high,  pyramid- wise.'  But  Gilbert
was  undismayed.  The  last  vivid  scene  has  been  stamped
for  ever  on  the  memory  of  his  countrymen  by  the
T)  fL  f  narrative  of  Edward  Hayes.  *  Monday,  the  ninth  of
Gilbert.  September,  in  the  afternoon,  the  frigate  was  near  cast
away,  oppressed  by  waves,  yet  at  that  time  recovered :
and  giving  forth  signs  of  joy,  the  General,  sitting
abaft  with  a  book  in  his  hand,  cried  out  unto  us  in
the  Hind,  so  oft  as  we  did  approach  within  hearing,
We  are  as  near  to  Heaven  by  sea  as  by  land.''  At  twelve
o'clock  that  night  the  SquirrePs  lights  suddenly  dis-
appeared, and  she  was  seen  no  more.  Gilbert's  last
speech  is  his  sufficient  memorial :  perhaps  it  was  ringing
in  Robert  Burton's  memory,  when,  writing  of  the
remedies  for  discontent,  he  paraphrased  Gilbert's  great
saying,  and  embroidered  it  after  his  own  fashion.  *  So
it  is,  Fortune  favours  some  to  live  at  home  to  their
further  punishment;  'tis  want  of  judgement.  All  places
are  distant  from  Heaven  alike,  the  Sun  shines  haply  as
warm  in  one  city  as  in  another,  and  to  a  wise  man
there  is  no  difference  of  climes :  friends  are  everywhere
to  him  that  behaves  himself  well,  and  a  prophet  is  not
esteemed  in  his  own  country.'  Gilbert,  at  least,  is
esteemed  in  his  own  country  as  the  pioneer  of  North
West  discovery,  and  the  first  who  set  his  hand  to  the
building  up  of  Greater  Britain.
Virginia.  His  work  was  taken  up  immediately  by  Raleigh.
'After  a  night  of  storm  so  ruinous,'  the  scene  rises
on  a  fair  landscape  and  the  innocent  and  gentle  happiness

38

THE VOYAGERS

of  Arcadia.  In  the  spring  of  the  year  after  Gilbert's
disaster,  Raleigh  despatched  two  small  ships,  under  Philip
Amadas  and  Arthur  Barlow,  to  prospect  the  coast  of
America,  from  Florida  northwards,  with  a  view  to  a
permanent  colony.  They  had  a  prosperous  voyage  by
way  of  the  Canary  Islands,  and  reached  the  continent
in  the  latitude  of  North  Carolina.  Here  they  landed
on  the  islands  of  Wocoken  and  Roanoak,  taking  pos-
session of  the  land  in  the  Queen's  name  and  establishing
relations  of  the  most  friendly  kind  with  the  natives.
Their  description  of  the  country,  fertile  and  luxuriant  to
the  water's  edge,  and  of  their  joyous  reception  by  the
Indians,  makes  the  dreams of  pastoral  poets  seem  true.

*  We  found  the  people,'  they  report,  'most  gentle,  loving.  The  people  of
and  faithful,  void  of  all  guile  and  treason,  and  such  as  live  ^-^

after  the  manner  of  the  Golden  Age.'  The  King,  or
chief,  being  absent,  his  brother,  with  a  retinue,  received
the  visitors,  and  showed  them  every  possible  courtesy.
'  When  we  came  to  the  shore  to  him,'  says  Captain
Barlow,  '  with  our  weapons,  he  never  moved  from  his
place,  nor  any  of  the  other  four,  nor  never  mistrusted
any  harm  to  be  offered  from  us ;  but,  sitting  still,  he
beckoned  us  to  come  and  sit  by  him,  which  we  per-
formed ;  and,  being  set,  he  made  all  signs  of  joy  and
welcome,  striking  on  his  head  and  his  breast  and  after-
wards on  ours,  to  shew  we  were  all  one,  smiling  and
making  shew  the  best  he  could  of  love  and  familiarity.'

*  He  was  very  just  of  his  promise ' ;  the  narrator  goes
on,  *  for  many  times  we  delivered  him  merchandise  upon
his  word,  but  ever  he  came  within  the  day  and  performed
his  promise.'  He  loaded  the  voyagers  with  gifts;  and
his  wife,  who  was  equally  hospitable, tended them in

39

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Indian  ^er  house.  *  While  we  were  at  meat  there  came  in  at  the
courtesy,  gates  two  or  three  men  with  their  bows  and  arrows  from
hunting,  whom  when  we  espied,  we  began  to  look  one
towards  another,  and  offered  to  reach  our  weapons :
but  as  soon  as  she  espied  our  mistrust,  she  was  very
much  moved,  and  caused  some  of  her  men  to  run  out,
and  take  away  their  bows  and  arrows  and  break  them,  and
withal  beat  the  poor  fellows  out  of  the  gate  again.  When
we  departed  in  the  evening  and  would  not  tarry  all  night,
she  was  very  sorry,  and  gave  us  into  our  boat  our  supper
half-dressed,  pots  and  all,  and  brought  us  to  our  boat  side,
in  which  we  lay  all  night,  removing  the  same  a  pretty
distance  from  the  shore.  She  perceiving  our  jealousy
was  much  grieved,  and  sent  divers  men  and  thirty
women  to  sit  all  night  on  the  bank-side  by  us,  and
sent  us  into  our  boats  fine  mats  to  cover  us  from  the
rain,  using  very  many  words  to  intreat  us  to  rest  in  their
houses.  But  because  we  were  few  men,  and  if  we  had
miscarried  the  voyage  had  been  in  very  great  danger,  we
durst  not  adventure  anything,  although  there  was  no
cause  of  doubt ;  for  a  more  kind  and  loving  people  there
cannot  be  found  in  the  world,  as  far  as  we  have  hitherto
had  trial.'

Who  does  not  recognise,  in  this  description  of  native
humanity  and  delicate  courtesy,  the  beginning  of  an  oft-
repeated  drama,  played  to  its  bitter  end  in  Hispaniola,  in
North  America,  and  in  many  an  island  of  the  South  Seas  I
The  first The  report  of  the  captains  pleased  Queen  Elizabeth,  who
attempt  to stood  god-mother  to  the  new  colony,  naming  it  Virginia ;
Virginia, ^^d  in 1 58 5 Raleigh  furnished  a  fleet  of  seven  ships  to
go  and  take  efi^ective  possession. There  was  some  ques-
tion  of  entrusting  the  command  of  the  venture to Sir

40

THE VOYAGERS

Philip  Sidney,  who  longed  to  escape  from  the  fetters  of

the  Court ;  but  the  Queen  would  not  relax  her  hold,  and

the  choice  fell  on  Sir  Richard  Grenville,  Raleigh's  cousin,

as  Admiral,  with  Ralph  Lane  as  Governor  of  the  colony.

Had  Sidney  gone,  it  is  possible  that  the  whole  course  of

the  history  of  Virginia  and  of  North  America  might  have

been  changed. But  Sidney  was  to  die,  a  year  later,  at

Zutphen,  and  that  ever-memorable  and  heroic  fire-eater.

Sir  Richard  Grenville,  was  to  work  his  will  on  the  people  Grenville  and

•  1 • Lane.

of  the  Golden  Age. He  spent  the  summer  m  explormg

the  islands, dragooning  the natives, and burning  their

crops  and  houses ;  on  his  way  home  with  the  fleet  he

fought and captured a rich Spanish ship. His right

work  was fighting, not  civilising. Lane,  who  was  left

in  charge,  spent  his  time  in  gold-seeking  and  organising

forced  labour  among  the  Indians. Before  a  year  was  out

they  were  in  open  rebellion,  and  the  business  of  massacre

began. Thenceforward  no  help  was  to  be  had  in  sowing

corn  and  catching  fish ;  and  the  colonists  rejoiced  when

Drake,  on  his  way back  from his  famous  West  Indian

exploits,  lent  them  ships to  go  home  in. A  fortnight

after their departure. Sir Richard Grenville turned up

with  three  ships,  and  put  fifteen  men  in  possession,  who

were  never  seen  again. Raleigh's  last  attempt  was  made

in  1587,  with  a  hundred  and  fifty  colonists,  under  Captain

John  White. White  himself  returned  to England  the  Failure  of  the

same summer, and in the turmoil that followed was °°"-''

unable  to  send  ships to the  relief  of  his  colonists  until

1590,  when  none  of  them  could  be  found. A  few  were

naturalised  among  the  Indians,  and  when  Virginia  was  at

last  planted,  nearly  twenty  years  later,  seven  English  were

found  alive. '  It  is  the  sinfuUest  thing in the  world,'

41

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

says  Bacon,  '  to  forsake  or  destitute  a  plantation  once  in
forwardness :  for  besides  the  dishonour,  it  is  the  guiltiness
of  blood  of  many  commiserable  persons.'  Perhaps  he  is
glancing  at  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  to  whom,  it  cannot  be
denied,  some  part  of  this  guiltiness  attaches.  Raleigh
was  always  impatient  of  the  day  of  small  things,  and
when  his  colony  languished,  made  over  his  patent  to
a  company  of  merchants,  and  turned  his  attention  to
El  Dorado,  the  latest  comer  in  the  gorgeous  pageant
of  his  dreams  of  world-empire.  The  miscarriage  of  the
Virginian  attempt  is  the  least  magnificent  of  the  failures
that  make  up  the  story  of  his  life.
The  long  So  the  voices  that  had  counselled  discovery  and  peaceful

'^^"  settlement  were  silenced, or  were  caught  up  and  went

to  swell  the  clamour  of  war.  For  its  first  thirty  years
the  reign  of  Elizabeth  was,  in  effect,  one  long  preparation
for  the  great  day.  It  is  a  time  singularly  barren,  in  the
English  annals  at  least,  of  notable  political  events.
Events  were  what  the  Queen  and  her  cautious  Ministers,
Burghley  and  Walsingham,  most  dreaded.  Their  business
was  to  hold  on  to  the  reins  of  power,  to  retard  natural
developments,  to  refuse  action,  to  disclaim  responsibility,
to  chasten  the  impulses  of  fervid  patriots,  and  to  avoid
the  open  hostility  of  rival  powers.  The  Government  sat
still,  and  deprecated  all  vigorous  intentions,  and  waited.
The  Queen's  fixed  policy,  her  single  resource  for  many
long  years,  was  to  continue  saying  *  Peace,  Peace,'  when
there  was  no  peace.  Her  subjects  were  not  slow  to  grasp
The  price  of  ^^  situation.  They  were  free  to  serve  the  Crown,
patriotism,  but  it  must  be  at  their  own  risk.  They  might  give
battle  to  the  enemy  of  their  country  and  their  religion,
but  they  must  fight  in  the  character  of  pirates. If  they

42

THE VOYAGERS

won,  the  Crown  would  gladly  accept  a  share  in  the
spoil;  if  they  lost,  they  knew  what  doom  to  expect.
It  is  surely  a  high  tribute  to  Elizabeth,  and  to  the  trust
and  love  she  inspired  in  her  subjects,  that  they  accepted
these  conditions  without  a  murmur.  They  knew  that
the  Queen  had  no  care  but  the  country,  and  that  her
courage  was  without  blemish.  They  were  content  to
let  her  work  in  her  own  way,  so  they  might  work  in
theirs.  A  Prince,  in  the  high  political  doctrine  of  Tudor  Tudor
England,  has  no  friends,  only  servants ;  and  owes  no  '^o^^^^^g^^y-
gratitude,  only  acceptance  or  approval.  When  this
doctrine  was  inherited,  along  with  other  great  things,  by
Stuart  pedantry  from  Tudor  state-craft,  it  made  clumsy
havoc  of  the  happiness  of  a  people,  and  tumbled  the
Crown  in  the  mire.  But  the  hands  that  fashioned  it
knew  how  to  wield  it  for  the  safety  and  glory  of  the
nation.  Towards  the  close  of  her  reign,  when  Elizabeth
was  able  at  last  to  speak  with  kings  in  the  gate,  she
spoke  with  the  voice  of  England.

The  meaning  and  interest  of  English  history,  therefore.  The
during  this  long  period  of  incubation,  is  to  be  found
not  in  the  doings  of  the  Government,  but  in  the  un-
authorised activities  of  the  people.  The  political  history
of  a  country  is  commonly  an  affair  of  great  dignity ;  it
deals  with  the  legitimate  acts  of  the  rightful  government.
But  the  great  deeds  of  Elizabeth's  reign  were  most  of
them  unlawfully  begotten,  and  were  legitimated  when
they  came  of  age.  The  volunteer  efforts  of  the  nation
gathered  yearly  in  strength  and  volume  ;  at  last  the
Queen  threw  off  her  mask  of  indifference,  and  accepted
the  command.  Until  the  time  was  ripe,  she  held
sedulously aloof. The body politic was full of life,

43

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

but  the  brain  was  careful  not  to  know  what  the  hands
were  doing. It  is  not  what  Burghley  and  Walsingham
were writing,  but what Shakespeare  and  Jonson were
saying,  that  makes  the  greatness  of  the  reign ;  not  what
the  Treasurer  of  the  Navy  was  commanded  to  do,  but
what  Drake  and  Hawkins  did  without  waiting  for  the
Royal command. The public acts of  the regularly
constituted Government  were  tame  and few. But  the
Queen  knew what was  going forward. The Catholic
power  of  Spain,  overshadowing  and  threatening  Europe,
was  never  out  of  her  mind. She  is  sometimes  accused,
on  plausible  evidence, of neglecting her Navy. '  In
February  1559,'  says  an  excellent  recent  historian,  *  she
possessed  twenty-two  effective  ships  of  a  hundred  tons
and upwards;  in  March 1603,  twenty-nine;  practically,
therefore, she  did  little  more  than  replace  those  worn
out  by  efflux  of  time,  for  only  two  were  lost  in  warfare.'  ^
But,  as  the  same  writer  justly  points  out,  there  was  great
plenty of  pirates, — some  four hundred were known  in
1563, — and, by a merciful dispensation  of  Providence,
they did far more harm to foreign  commerce than  to
English. Twenty-nine  ships is not  a  large navy ; but
when  the  Armada  came,  a  hundred  and  thirty  vessels  were
waiting  for  it  in  the  narrow  seas. The  history  of  the
Royal  Navy  under  Queen  Elizabeth  is  as  little  adequate
to express the growth of  national sea-power  as  is  the
history  of  the  Royal  Academy  under  Queen  Victoria  to
express  the  progress  of  the  nation  in  the  Fine  Arts.
The  Policy  of The main policy of  the  Queen  was,  at  any  cost,  to
prevent  disunion  among her  subjects,  and  to  win  their

1  M.  Oppenheim,  The  Administration  of  the  Royal  Navy  l^og-lddo.
(1896).

44

THE VOYAGERS

firm allegiance. She foresaw the dangers of internal

religious  disruption,  and  succeeded  in  staving  it  off. Her

strength at  sea depended  on  the loyalty of the irre- .

gulars;  she  kept  in  with  the  police,  and did not fall u„iiy,

out  with  the  thieves. A  wonderful  good  understanding

prevailed  between  the  two  parties. When  Drake  came

back  in 1580,  laden  with pillage,  from  his  voyage  of

circumnavigation,  he  was  nicknamed  by  the  people  *  The

Master Thief of the Unknown World.' His old

friend  and  chief,  John Hawkins,  was  then the  official

head of the Navy. 'The Queen,' says Stow, 'not

yet persuaded to accept and approve his unknown

purchase,  paused  a  while,  and  heard  every  opinion,  which

at  that  time  were  many.' In  the  end she  went  aboard

his  ship  at  Deptford,  and  knighted  him. By  this  act,

with  full  knowledge  of  what  she  was  doing,  she  cast  the

die. Everywhere her over-ruling hand was felt. If

Burghley,  and  others  of  her  statesmen, had  had  their

way, she would have  broken with France. '  For my

own part,'  wrote  Lord Howard  of  Effingham,  in  the

very  year  of  the  Armada,  '  I  have  made  of  the  French

King,  the  Scottish  King,  and  the  King  of  Spain,  a  Trinity

that  I mean  never  to  be  saved  by,  and  I  would  others

were of my opinion.' The Queen was not of his

. .  --,1  TT -^ • • 1  -J. T.  Attitude  to

opmion. She  was  a Unitarian in  her  enmity. It was  fiance

a saying of hers 'Whensoever the last day of the

Kingdom  of  France  cometh,  it  will  undoubtedly  be  the

eve of  the destruction of  England.' The division  of

France  would have  meant  an accession of  strength  to

Spain. The  French  pirates  and  Huguenots  had  shewn

Englishmen  the  way  to trouble  Spain upon the seas ;

and  Elizabeth  approved  their  work. But  the  King  of

45

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

France,  if  he  had  lost  control  of  his  realm,  would  have

been  driven  into  the  arms  of  Spain ;  and  Elizabeth  lent

him her support. She isolated her enemy, and she

united  her  people. She  understood  a  free nation,  and

was  worthy  of  the  seamen  who  served  her.

The  English p^ more important  thing:  than the actual number  of
Sea  Power. ,  • • , nvf  .  ~, .  ~  . .

ships  m  the  Navy  was  its  efficiency  of  organisation,  and

this  was  greatly  improved  during  the  Queen's  reign. By

the  institution  of  the  Navy  Board,  in  1546,  Henry  VIII

had  created  the  means  of  organisation. The  practice  of

piracy  made  for  the  efficiency  of  the  units. Long  before

an armed conflict seemed probable, English ships and

English seamen  were, as Mr. Corbett has  shown, far

superior in warlike qualities to those of  Spain. The

ships  were  smaller,  better  designed,  quicker  in  handling;

and they could sail nearer to the wind. The prime

importance  of  gunnery  had  been  learned  by  the  English,

and  was  to  be  taught  by  them  to  Spain. *  For  the  new

school,'  says  Mr.  Corbett,  '  the  arm  of  the  sailor  was  his

ship. Hitherto  the  oflPensive  force  of  a  war-vessel had

been  measured  mainly  by  the  number  of  boarders  it  could

throw upon  the  deck  of  an  enemy,  and  guns  had  been

valued chiefly as a means of  crippling his power of

The  ship  as  a  eluding this form of  attack. But  now the ship with

gun-carriage, its  guns  was  itself  the  weapon,  the  captain  the  eye,  the

crew  the  muscles  that  played  it. Already  during  Henry's

last  French  war  the  power  that  lay  in  the  broadside  had

begun  to  be  seen by  English  seamen.'^ Meantime the

navigators  of  Spain  had  no  thought  of  war. The  Pope

had  guaranteed  to  them  their  new  possessions,  and  they

took  their  ease  on  the  sea. Their  great  treasure-coffers

^  Drake  and  the Tudor  Navy  (1899)  Vol. I.  p. 137.
46

THE VOYAGERS

were  wafted  lazily  to  and  from  the  Indies,  unprotected
save  by  a  few  inferior  guns.  It  was  the  enterprise  of  the
French  pirates  which  first  awakened  them  to  a  sense  of
danger,  and  caused  them  to  take  precautions.  The  gal-
leons of  the  Indian  Guard,  a  squadron  of  twelve  for  the
protection  of  trade,  were  sent  out  to  the  Indies  for  the
first  time  in  1568,  the  very  year  that  Hawkins  first
brought  the  Spaniards  acquainted  with  English  gunnery
in  the  affair  of  San  Juan  de  Ulloa.

Sir  John Hawkins,  who  more  than  any  other single  ^"^'^

.,  , - , .  - ,  .  .  Hawkins.

man,  was  responsible  ror  the  rise  or  the  war-spirit,  came

of  a  line  of  seamen. His  grandfather  had  served  in  King

Henry  VIII's  Navy. His  father,  William  Hawkins,  had

been the first,  in 1530,  to  carry  on trade  with Brazil.

The  voyage  to  Brazil  was  subsequently  frequented,  about

1540, by several wealthy merchants of  Southampton.

English  traders  were  active  enough  during  the  early  part

of  the  century; it  was  John  Hawkins  who  first  taught

them how arms might signally  help the expansion of

trade. He  served  his  apprenticeship  in  the  usual  voyages  ^^^  trading

1 TTT  A  r  •  1-^1  1 J  Vo-^ages  to  the

to  the  West  Arrican  coast,  and  in 1502  launcned.  on  a  West  Indies.

bolder scheme. By this time negroes  were in great

demand  at  Hispaniola,  and  Hawkins  was  determined  to

supply  them. With  the  help  of  some  city  merchants,  he

equipped  three  vessels,  and  sailed  to  Sierra  Leone,  where,

by  force  and  purchase,  he  obtained  three  hundred  negroes  ;

then,  with the help of  a  Spanish pilot,  he  crossed  the

Atlantic,  and  obtained  '  reasonable  utterance  of  his  living

commodities '  in  the  ports  of  Hispaniola. He  gained  in

exchange  an  enormous  quantity  of  valuable  merchandise ;

some  of  it  he  took  home  with  him,  some  he  sent  to  be

disposed  of  at  Cadiz,  where  it  was  seized  and  confiscated.

47

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Orders  were  at  once  despatched  to  the  Indies  that  no
English  vessel  should  be  allowed  to  trade  there.

Hawkins intended to trade there. In 1564 he

equipped a  fleet of  five  ships, among  them the  Jesus

of  Lubecky  a  ship  of  the  Royal  Navy,  lent  him  by  the

Queen. He  collected  his negroes and  proceeded  with

them, this time, to the ports of  the Spanish Main.

Negro  slaves  were  much  coveted ;  and  by  a  mixture  of

persuasion  and  armed  force  he succeeded  in  disposing

of  them  all. He  brought  back  to  England  a  handsome

profit  for  those  who  had  financed  his  expedition.

The  affair  of f^jg  third  voyage,  begun  in  1567,  is  a  date  in  English

Ulloa.  history. It brought him into open conflict with the

Spanish  galleons ;  it  proved  the  weakness  of  the  Spanish

power ;  it  settled  him  in  his  life-long  enmity  to  Spain ;

and  it  baptised  with  fire  the  greatest  fighting  sailor  of  the

age,  Francis  Drake. The  father  of  Francis  was  Edmund

Drake, a Protestant seaman,  who, after performing a

chaplain's duties in Edward Vl's Navy, took orders

and was given a  Vicarage under Elizabeth. He had

twelve sons ;  *  and  as  it  pleased  God  to give  most of

them  a  living  on  the  water,  so  the  greatest  part  of  them

died  at  sea.' The  eldest  and  most  famous  of  them  had

been  conversant  with  the  sea  from  boyhood,  and  when  his

Hawkins  and cousin,  John  Hawkins,  was  preparing  this  third  expedi-

Drake.  tion,  he  was  entrusted,  at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  with  the

command  of  the  Judith^  a  bark  of  fifty  tons. The  Queen

contributed  two  great  ships,  and  did  her  best  to  allay  the

suspicions of  the Spanish ambassador. Hawkins had

more trouble than formerly in laying hands on his

negroes,  and  much  more  trouble in  disposing  of  them.

The  West  Indian  ports  were  warned  and  closed  against

48

THE  VOYAGERS

him.  At  Rio  de  la  Hacha  Drake  seized  a  Spanish
despatch-boat;  Hawkins  took  the  town  by  assault,  and
held  it  while  he  disposed  of  his  negroes  to  purchasers
who  came  in  secretly  by  night.  Carthagena  was  bom-
barded ;  and  trade  was  forced  on  many  a  lesser  place.
Thus,  'making  their  traffic  with  the  Spaniards  as  they
might,'  Hawkins  and  Drake  found  that  the  season  of
hurricanes  was  near  at  hand.  Lacking  other  shelter,  they
resolved  to  take  refuge  in  the  chief  port  of  Mexico,  San
Juan  de  UUoa.

Hawkins,  it  is  true,  held  that  by  ancient  treaty  and  Elizabethan
the  law  of  nations  the  English  had  a  right  to  trade  ■^'^^^  '^  ^^^'
in  the  Spanish  dominions.  But  the  purpose  of  his
expedition  had  been  laboriously  concealed  from  the
Spanish  ambassador,  and  it  had  assumed  a  piratical  com-
plexion even  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  where  several
Portuguese  slave-ships  were  seized  and  plundered.  There
is  all  the  more  reason,  therefore,  to  admire  the  cool
assurance  of  the  English  captains.  They  sailed  into
the  harbour  of  San  Juan  de  UUoa,  and  anchored  inside
the  island  which  protected  the  roadstead.  Over  against
them,  on  the  landward  side,  was  a  Spanish  treasure-fleet.
How  Hawkins  would  have  dealt  with  this  does  not  appear.
How  Drake  would  have  dealt  with  it,  had  he  been  in
command,  is  fairly  certain.  The  question  did  not  arise.
On  the  morning  after  the  arrival  of  Hawkins  there
appeared  in  the  offing  thirteen  Spanish  ships,  escorting
Don  Martin  Enriquez,  the  new  Viceroy  of  Mexico.
Hawkins  had  guns  mounted  on  the  island,  and  was
well  able  to  hold  the  harbour.  But  he  feared  the
wrath  of  the  Queen,  and  would  not  take  the  responsi-
bility of  unprovoked  war.  So,  after  mutual  defiances,
xii  49  D

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  English  and  the  Spaniards  treated.  It  was  agreed
that  the  two  fleets  should  be  amicably  moored  side  by-
side  ;  the  island  to  remain  in  possession  of  the  English.

The  treachery  To  the  Spanish  commanders  Hawkins  and  his  company

Spaniard.  were  no  better  than  corsairs,  and  a  treacherous  plot
against  them  was  put  in  action.  While  the  crews  were
entertaining  each  other,  the  signal  was  given,  the  English
ashore  were  murdered,  the  guns  on  the  island  seized,
and  the  English  vessels  boarded.  The  Jesus  of  Lubeck
was  taken.  Only  by  extraordinary  promptitude  and  heroic
valour  were  the  Minion,  which  was  also  a  Queen's  ship,
and  the  Judith  drawn  clear  of  the  entanglement,  leaving  the
three  other  ships  to  their  fate.  A  terrific  action  followed,
at  close  quarters,  and  the  damage  inflicted  by  the  English
gunners  on  the  great  ships  of  Spain  was  so  severe,
that  when  at  last  the  two  English  vessels  got  out  of
the  haven,  they  were  not  further  molested,  though  for
two  days  they  took  shelter  close  to  the  port. On  the

Sufferings  of f^j-st day of  their voyage home they were separated ;

^^^  Hawkins,  with  two  hundred  men  on  board  the  Minion^

was  unable  to  provide  for  so  large  a  company,  and
agreed  to  the  proposal  of  a  hundred  of  them,  who
volunteered  to  be  set  on  shore  in  the  Bay  of  Mexico,
to  shift  for  themselves.  The  miseries  and  persecution
that  these  men  suff^ered  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians
and  the  Inquisition  were  narrated,  years  later,  by  the
few  survivors,  and  fanned  the  flame  of  English  hatred
for  Spain.  When  Drake  and  Hawkins  reached  home,
with  their  tale  of  Spanish  treachery,  '  military  and  sea-
faring men,'  says  Camden,  *all  over  England  fretted,
and  desired  war  with  Spain.  .  .  .  But  the  Queen  shut
her  ears  against  them.'

50

THE VOYAGERS

The  Queen  was  not  ready  to  face  the  great  Catholic  Queen

1-,.  •  r  cu  z.  T  ' ^u Elizabeth^

coantion  in  open  warfare,  bhe  was  strugghng  in  the  ^fKi-^ifig^
meshes  of  conspiracy.  While  Hawkins  was  selling  his
negroes  in  the  Indies,  Ridolfi  was  plotting  in  London;
the  Queen  of  Scots  had  arrived  in  England,  to  become
a  centre  of  disaffection ;  Alva  was  inaugurating  his  reign
of  terror  in  the  Netherlands ;  and  the  Guises  were  putting
in  operation  their  scheme  for  extirpating  the  Huguenots
in  France.  The  Queen  did  what  she  could.  She
detained  the  treasure  destined  for  Alva,  which,  con-
veyed in  five  ships  from  Spain,  had  been  driven  by
French  pirates  into  English  ports;  and  she  sent  money
and  munitions  of  war  to  the  Huguenots.  This  policy
of  hers  gave  a  broad  hint  to  her  subjects.  There  was
to  be  no  war ;  but  short  of  war,  acts  of  hostility  and
reprisal  were  the  order  of  the  day.  When  the  efforts
of  the  King  of  Spain  and  Pope  Pius  V  to  stir  up
rebellion  against  Elizabeth  became  known  to  the  mari-
time people  of  England,  *  incredible  it  is,'  says  Camden
again,  'with  how  great  alacrity  they  put  to  sea,  and
how  readily  they  exercised  piracy  against  the  Spaniards.'
Hawkins  was  to  take  no  further  part,  for  the  present,
in  these  forays.  He  was  needed  for  defence  at  home.
But,  as  the  Portuguese  chronicler  justly  remarks,  *  there
was  a  certain  Englishman,  called  Francis  Drake.'  At  Francis
San  Juan  de  UUoa  Drake  had  learned  his  lesson.  The
Spaniards  were  never  to  be  trusted ;  extreme  measures,
such  as  Hawkins  had  shrunk  from,  were  in  the  end
the  safest;  a  well-furnished  English  ship  could  go  any-
where in  the  Spanish  seas.  For  the  next  twenty  years
he  put  the  lesson  into  practice,  waxing  bolder  and  bolder
by  success. When precautions  were  taken against the

51

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

repetition  of  his  exploits,  he  made  precautions  foolish
by  rising  from  height  to  height  of  daring,  until  the
very  wind  of  his  name  cleared  the  seas  before  him.
His  Exploits  In  1570,  the  year  after  his  return  in  the  Judith,
Main  ^^"^^  Drake  was  back  on  the  coast  of  the  Spanish  Main,
where  he  robbed  divers  barks  of  their  merchandise.
In  the  following  year  he  cut  out  a  Spanish  ship  of  a
hundred  and  eighty  tons  from  the  harbour  of  Cartha-
gena.  To  provide  himself  with  a  convenient  retreat,  he
established  a  base  in  the  Gulf  of  Darien,  a  natural
harbour,  far  from  any  Spanish  settlement.  Hither  he
came  in  1572  with  two  ships,  the  larger  only  seventy
tons,  and  with  seventy-three  men.  He  entered  into
friendly  relations  with  the  Maroons,  or  hill-tribes
descended  from  escaped  negroes,  who  shared  his  hatred
of  Spain.  With  his  diminutive  force  he  surprised
the  city  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  and,  if  he  had  not  been
wounded,  would  probably  have  emptied  its  treasure-
house.  He  planned  the  capture  and  sack  of  Carthagena
itself;  then,  finding  that  watch  was  kept  for  him  at  all
the  Spanish  ports,  he  changed  his  plans,  and  transferred
T^  Peruvian  his  operations  from  sea  to  land.  The  yearly  produce
treasure.  ^£  ^j^^ mines of  Peru  was wont to be brought fifty

miles  overland  by  mule-trains  from  Panama  to  Nombre
de  Dios,  and  thence  shipped  to  Spain.  *By  the  abun-
dant treasure  of  that  country,'  wrote  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  '  the  Spanish  King  vexeth  all  the  Princes  of
Europe,  and  is  become  in  a  few  years  from  a  poor
King  of  Castile  the  greatest  monarch  of  this  part  of
the  world.'  It  was  Drake's  purpose  to  surprise  and
capture  the  treasure  as  it  crossed  the  isthmus.  He
made  his  first  attempt  on  the  Panama  side  with  eighteen

52

THE  VOYAGERS

men,  all  that  were  available  of  his  original  company;
but  by  an  accident  the  mule-trains  were  alarmed  and
the  attempt  failed.  Nothing  disheartened,  he  joined
hands  with  a  Huguenot  privateer  and,  aided  by  Maroon
scouts,  succeeded,  near  the  very  gates  of  Nombre  de
Dios,  in  waylaying  and  rifling  the  convoy.  In  order
to  fit  out  pinnaces  for  river-work  he  had  dismantled
his  ships;  his  homeward  voyage  was  made  in  new
Spanish  frigates,  of  the  latest  design,  captured  by  his
pinnaces.  During  his  abode  in  these  parts  he  had  dis-  a  yearns
organised  the  whole  coasting  trade  of  the  Spanish  doings.
Main;  he  had  taken  the  spoils  of  many  vessels,  had
boldly  entered  more  than  one  town,  had  diverted  the
steady  flow  of  the  Peruvian  gold,  and,  as  an  earnest
of  what  was  yet  to  come,  had  seen  the  Pacific  Ocean
and  vowed  that  with  the  help  of  God  he  would  sail
on  that  sea  in  an  English  ship.  He  arrived  in
Plymouth,  after  an  absence  of  about  fifteen  months,
in August, 1573.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  these  early  exploits  of  Hakluyt  and
Drake  are  barely  recorded  in  Hakluyt's  compilation,
and  rest  on  later  authority,^  eked  out  with  Spanish
State  papers.  Hakluyt,  who  was  willing  enough  to
memorise  deeds  of  war,  shows  a  certain  tenderness  of
conscience  with  regard  to  sheer  piracy.  He  was
bound,  moreover,  to  pay  heed  to  the  possible
international  bearings  of  his  publication.  In  his
1589  preface  To  the  Favourable  Reader  he  apologises
for  his  omission  of  the  Voyage  of  Circumnavigation,
and  explains  it  on  the  ground  that  a  collection  of
Drake's  voyages  was  being  made  by  another  hand. He

^  Sir  Francis  Drake  Revived  .  .  .  by  Philip  Nichols,  Preacher.  (1626).

53

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

speaks  somewhat  slightingly  of  Drake's  great  voyage,
and  offers  no  excuse  for  omitting  the  raids  on  the
Drake's  Spanish  Main.  Yet  the  greatness  of  Drake  is  perhaps
achievements,  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  these  early  buccaneerings.  Time  and  again
he  is  within  an  ace  of  irreparable  failure ;  time  and
again  his  incredible  quickness  of  resource  uses  the
material  of  his  broken  plans  for  a  new  and  startling
success.  His  spirits  are  at  their  highest  when  things
seem  most  hopeless.  His  decisions  are  taken  and  his
blows  delivered  like  lightning.  He  makes  a  fine  art
of  surprise,  and  escapes  from  difficulties  by  the  un-
guarded way,  the  way  of  the  impossible.  A  single
purpose  animates  all  his  exploits,  and  the  chart  of  his
movements  is  like  a  cord  laced  and  knotted  round  the
throat  of  the  Spanish  monarchy.  Withal  he  is  an
adept  at  dealing  with  men,  French  Protestants,  English
adventurers,  Negro  Maroons,  or  Spanish  emissaries ;
and  carries  himself  in  the  pirate's  profession  with  a
courtesy,  magnanimity,  and  unfailing  humanity  that
give  to  his  story  the  glamour  of  romance.  Like
Napoleon's  Italian  campaign,  the  achievements  of  Drake
on  the  Spanish  Main  show  a  master  at  work,  unbur-
dened and  unfettered  as  yet  by  responsibility  and
reputation,  adapting  himself  solely  to  his  material,  and
inventing  at  every  stroke.
The  Voyage  Drake's  object  was  to  drive  England  into  war.  The
navigation,  object  of  the  Government  was  to  keep  a  free  hand.
For  some  years  he  was  hindered  from  further  expedi-
tions, and  work  was  found  for  him  in  Ireland.  But
the  Queen  had  a  soft  corner  in  her  heart  for  him,  and
when  the  whirligig  of  time  once  more  cast  into  the  shade
the  hope  of  a  peaceful  understanding with Spain, she

54

THE VOYAGERS

offered  him  secret  encouragement.  In  the  autumn  of
1577  he  started  on  the  greatest  of  his  voyages  in  the
Pelican^  of  a  hundred  tons,  (afterwards  re-named  the
Golden  Hind)^  with  the  Elizabeth^  two  lesser  ships,  and
a  pinnace,  carrying  among  them  a  company  of  about  a
hundred  and  fifty  men.  His  purpose,  as  he  explained
to  the  Queen,  was  to  sail  into  the  Pacific,  and  raid
the  Spanish  possessions  from  the  West.  There  was  no
word,  at  the  outset,  of  sailing  round  the  world.  It  is
more  likely  that  he  intended  to  circumnavigate  America,
and  to  return  by  the  North  West  passage,  which,  earlier
in  the  same  year,  Frobisher  had  gone  for  the  second  time
to  seek.  But  whatever  his  plan,  Drake  was  no  longer
the  obscure  buccaneer.  He  kept  the  state  of  a  King ;
was  served  on  silver  plate  stamped  with  his  own  arms,
and  was  attended  by  musicians  and  painters.  There
dined  with  him  at  table  nine  or  ten  gentlemen  of  good
family,  who  were  in  training  for  similar  adventures,  and
he  offered  them  delicacies,  the  gift  of  Queen  Elizabeth.

The  presence  of  these  gentlemen  was  a  chief  cause  of  Trouble  with

the  ^CfltlBtHBtl

trouble  on  the  outward  voyage.  If  we  are  to  believe  adventurers.
one  of  them,  there  were  fallings  out  and  quarrels,  and
no  one  was  certain  whom  to  obey,  because  there  were
many  who  took  upon  them  to  be  masters.  The
Elizabethan  gentleman  adventurer  was  the  ruin  of  many
an  expedition  on  which  he  embarked ;  he  was  full  of
courage  and  initiative,  but  headstrong,  giddy,  and  in-
subordinate. And  this  was  not  the  worst.  By  the  time
the  ships  had  made  the  coast  of  Brazil,  taking  on  the  way
such  booty  as  they  fell  across,  Drake  found  cause  to
suspect  that  treason  was  at  work,  that  an  attempt  was
being  made  to  induce  some  of  the  crew  to  mutiny  and

55

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Thomas  become  pirates  on  their  own  account.  His  suspicions
executed  ^^  °^  Thomas  Doughty,  a  gentleman  of  good  parts,
whom  he  had  met  in  Ireland,  and  to  whom  he  had  given
a  place  of  trust  and  honour  in  his  enterprise.  The  rights
and  wrongs  of  this  dark  business  are  beyond  our  recovery.
Drake  believed,  not  without  grounds,  that  Doughty  had
betrayed  his  plans  to  Burghley  before  starting,  and  was
doing  what  in  him  lay  to  wreck  the  success  of  the  voyage.
Doughty,  for  his  part,  believed  that  Drake,  being
embarked  on  piracy,  could  claim  no  ultimate  legal
authority  over  his  followers.  At  Port  St.  Julian,  where
Magellan,  almost  sixty  years  before,  had  hanged  one  of
his  captains.  Doughty  was  tried  by  jury  and  condemned
to  death ;  and  Drake,  after  receiving  the  sacrament  with
the  prisoner,  and  dining  with  him  by  way  of  farewell,
executed  the  sentence  with  his  own  hand.  The  speech
that  he  made,  a  few  weeks  thereafter,  still  glows,  in  the
imperfect  report  which  has  come  down  to  us,  with  the
passion  of  that  tragedy.  When  the  men  were  assembled
by  command  in  a  tent  on  shore,  Master  Fletcher,  the
chaplain,  offered  himself  to  make  a  sermon.  '  Nay,  soft,
Drake's  Master  Fletcher,'  quoth  he,  '  I  must  preach  this  day
myself,  although  I  have  small  skill  in  preaching.  Well,
be  all  the  company  here,  yea  or  not  \ '  Answer  was  made
that  they  were  all  there.  Then  he  commanded  every
ship's  company  to  stand  severally  together,  which  was
also  done.  Then  he  said,  '  My  masters,  I  am  a  very
bad  orator,  for  my  bringing  up  hath  not  been  in  learning,
but  what  so  I  shall  here  speak,  let  any  man  take  notice
of  what  I  shall  say,  and  let  him  write  it  down  if  he  list,
for  I  will  speak  nothing  but  I  will  answer  it  in  England,
yea,  and  before  her  Majesty,  and  I  have  it  here  already

56

THE VOYAGERS

set  down. Thus  it  is,  my  masters,  that  we  are  very  far

from  our  country  and  friends,  we  are  compassed  in  on

every  side  with our enemies, wherefore  we  are  not  to

make  small  reckoning  of  a  man, for  we  cannot  have  a

man if  we  would  give  for  him ten thousand pounds.

Wherefore  we  must  have  these  mutinies  and  discords  that

are  grown  amongst  us  redressed,  for  by  the  life  of  God

it  doth  even  take  my  wits  from  me  to  think  of  it ;  here

is  such  controversy  between  the  sailors  and  the  gentlemen,

and  such  stomaching  between  the  gentlemen  and  sailors,

that  it  doth  even  make  me  mad  to  hear it. But, my  ^^"^  ^'^^^^

_  1  • 1 r r T  1  1  1 doctrine  of  the

masters,  1  must  have  it  lert ;  tor  1  must  have  the  gentle-  ^v^^e'v.

man  to  hale  and  draw  with  the  mariner,  and  the  mariner

with the  gentleman. What, let us show ourselves all

to  be  of  a  company,  and  let  us  not  give  occasion  to  the

enemy  to  rejoice  at  our  decay  and  overthrow. I  would

know  him  that  would  refuse  to  set  his  hand  to  a  rope, —

but  I  know  there  is  not  any  such  here ;  and  as  gentlemen

are  very  necessary  for  government's  sake  in  the  voyage  so

have  I  shipped  them  for  that,  and  for  some  farther  intent,

and  yet  though  I  know  sailors  to  be  the  most  envious

people  of  the  world,  and  so  unruly  without  government,

yet  may  not  I  be  without  them. Also,  if  there  be  any

here  willing  to  return  home,  let  me  understand  of  them,

and here is the  Marigold^ a  ship  that  I can  very  well

spare ;  I  will  furnish  her  to  such  as  will  return  with  the

most  credit  I  can  give  them,  either  by  my  letters  or  any

way  else ;  but  let  them  take  heed  that  they  go  homeward,

for  if  I  find  them  in  my  way  I  will  surely  sink  them ;

therefore  you  shall  have time to  consider  hereof  until

to-morrow ;  for,  by  my  troth,  I  must  needs  be  plain  with

you,  I  have  taken  that  in  hand  that  I  know  not  in  the

57

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

world  how  to  go  through  withal ; it  passeth  my  capacity ;
it  hath  even bereaved  me  of  my  wits  to  think  on  it.'
None  of  the  company  was  for  returning. Then  he
asked them whether they had any claim  against him
for wages, or would trust to his good will. They
declared  they  would  trust  to  his  good  will. Then  he
formally  discharged  from  their  command  all  the  captains
of  the ships. Two of  them asked  him what moved
him  so  to  displace  them. He  asked  whether  they  could
give any reason why he should not do so. The
explanation that  he  added  of  the  origin of  his  voyage
The  question  is  of  the  deepest  interest. The  Queen,  he  said,  was  a
commission P^'^ty  to  it ;  and  he  showed  a  bill  of  a  thousand  crowns
from  the which  she  had  given  towards  the  expenses. Walsingham
S^ueen. ^^^  -^  ^^  secret;  but  she  had  straitly  commanded  that
the  Lord  Treasurer,  Burghley,  to  whom Doughty  had
revealed  the  plan  of  the  voyage,  should  have  no  know-
ledge of  it ; and  she  had sworn by  her  crown  that  if
any  one  in  her  realm  should  send  word  to  the  King  of
Spain, they  should lose  their heads. '  And now, my
masters,' quoth he, Met us consider what we have
done. We have now set together by the  ears three
mighty  princes,  as  first  her  Majesty,  the  Kings  of  Spain
and  Portugal,  and if  this  voyage  shall not  have  good
success,  we  shall  not  only  be  a  scorning,  or  a  reproachful
scoffing-stock,  unto  our  enemies,  but  also a  great blot
to  our  whole  country  for  ever;  and  what  triumph  will
it  be  to  Spain  and Portugal : and  never  again  the  like
will be attempted.' So,  after  restoring the captains  to
their  command,  and promising  the  men  that  he  would
pay  their  wages  though  he  should  have  to  sell  his  shirt,
he concluded : *  For,'  quoth he,  *  I have  good reason

58

THE VOYAGERS

to  promise,  and  am  best  able  to  perform  it,  for  I  have
somewhat  of  mine  own  in  England,  and,  besides  that,
I  have  as  much  adventure  in  this  voyage  as  three  of
the  best  whatsoever;  and  if  it  so  be  that  I  never  come
home,  yet  will  her  Majesty  pay  every  man  his  wages,
whom  indeed  you  and  we  all  come  to  serve;  and  for
to  say  you  come  to  serve  me,  I  will  not  give  you  thanks,
for  it  is  only  her  Majesty  that  you  serve,  and  this  voyage
is  only  her  setting  forth.' ^  So,  willing  them  all  to  be
friends  one  with  another,  he  sent  them  to  their
business.

This  speech  deserves  to  be  set  out  in  full  in  any  His  bold
story  of  the  English  Voyages.  It  is  the  speech  of  a  -^''^^•^•
man  not  in  love  with  speech,  whose  thoughts  are  wrung
from  him  at  a  crisis ;  it  throws  a  vivid  light  on  the
situation,  and  on  Drake's  manner  of  dealing  with  it.
The  troubles  with  his  men,  and  the  treachery  of  Doughty,
had  brought  him  to  a  hard  pass.  He  must  either  admit
himself  a  baffled  man,  or  must  take  the  enormous  risk
of  angering  the  Queen  by  declaring  openly  his  full
commission  from  her.  It  is  highly  unlikely  that  he
had  any  such  commission  in  writing.  What  he  counted
on  rather  was  her  approval,  and  support  against  the
Lord  Treasurer's  party,  if  he  should  bring  his  voyage
to  a  successful  issue.  According  to  his  wont,  he  chose
the  bolder  way ;  and  from  this  time  forward  the  failure
of  his  expedition  would  have  meant  his  doom,  whether
from England  or  from Spain.

The dreaded Straits of Magellan were passed in  Drake  driven
safety, and Drake was in the Pacific Ocean. Here

^  Narrative of  John Cooke, in The World  Encompassed (Hakluyt
Society, 1854).

59

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

a  terrific  storm,  or  series  of  storms,  fell  upon  the
ships.  The  Mangold  was  overwhelmed  and  lost;
and  the  Elizabeth^  separated  from  the  Golden  Hind,
waited  for  a  time  at  the  mouth  of  the  Straits
and  then  returned  to  England.  The  two  other  vessels
had  been  broken  up  or  cast  off  on  the  coast  of  Brazil.
Drake's  ship  was  left  alone  to  finish  the  voyage.  The
storm  brought  him  the  discovery  that  Tierra  del  Fuego
was  not  a  continent,  as  had  been  supposed,  but  that
Th  I  t  of  ^^"^^  "^^^  open  sea  to  the  south  of  it.  And  now  his
the  Pacific.  reward  was  near.  The  Pacific  had  been  treated  by  the
Spaniards  as  if  it  were  an  inland  lake ;  their  route  to
it  lay  overland ;  and  the  ships  they  sailed  on  it  were
built  on  its  own  shores.  No  enemy  had  as  yet  entered
it  by  water;  the  ports  were  feebly  guarded;  and
the  crews  of  the  merchant  ships  were  very  small.
The  Golden  Hind  was  well-manned,  and  bristled  with
guns ;  the  Pacific  fell  a  prey  to  her.  Her  voyage  north-
wards along  the  coast  was  a  carnival  of  plunder,  the
richest  prize  of  all  being  the  Cacafuego,  a  treasure-ship
bound  from  Guayaquil  to  Panama.  Drake's  ship  was
now  heavy  with  precious  metals,  and  the  only  question
was  how  to  get  her  home.  He  sailed  northward,  almost
to  Vancouver's  Island,  but  was  deterred  by  the  cold
and  fogs  from  proceeding  further.  Turning  to  the
south  again,  along  the  coast  of  California,  he  put  into
a  bay  near  San  Francisco,  repaired  his  ship,  and  was
solemnly  crowned  by  the  Indians  as  their  king.  He
named  the  district  *  New  Albion,'  and  nailed  a  sixpence
to  a  great  post,  leaving  it,  with  the  Queen's  name
inscribed  above  it,  for  the  Indians  to  worship.  Then
he struck across the Pacific, to the Philippines and

60

Drake
crowned  by
the  Indians.

THE VOYAGERS

Moluccas,  where  he  entered  into  alliance,  amity  and
traffic  with  the  princes  of  those  islands;  and  so  back
by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  September,  1580,
after  an  absence  of  almost  three  years,  the  Golden  Hind
sailed  into  Plymouth  Sound.  Drake's  first  question,
before  he  cast  anchor,  was  whether  the  Queen  was  alive
and  well.

The  Queen  was  alive  and  well,  and  his  anxieties  His  reception
were  soon  ended.  '  She  received  him  graciously,'  says  ^  ^  Mueen.
Camden,  *and  laid  up  the  treasure  he  brought  by  way
of  sequestration,  that  it  might  be  forth-coming  if  the
Spaniards  should  demand  it.'  She  was  by  this  time
storing  a  good  deal  of  treasure  on  trust  for  the  Spaniard.
Drake  was  allowed  to  retain  a  rich  share  of  the  booty
for  himself  and  his  men.  The  thing  that  troubled  him
most,  we  are  told,  was  'that  some  of  the  chief  men
at  Court  refused  to  accept  the  gold  which  he  offered
them,  as  gotten  by  piracy.  Nevertheless  the  common
sort  of  people  admired  and  highly  commended  him,  as
judging  it  no  less  honourable  to  have  enlarged  the
bounds  of  the  English  name  and  glory  than  of  their
Empire.'

The  completion  of  Drake's  voyage  round  the  world  The  mid-point
marks  the  mid-point  of  his  career.  For  fourteen  years  ^^  ^^  ^^
he  had  forced  his  policy  on  the  government ;  and  now
he  had  gained  his  point.  There  was  to  be  no  further
question,  during  his  life-time,  of  conciliating  the  good
graces  of  Spain.  By  the  failure  of  the  royal  line  of
Portugal,  King  Philip  had  acquired,  soon  after  Drake's
return,  a  new  vast  empire,  and  had  more  than  doubled  his
naval  power.  Drake  was  now  a  knight,  and  a  trusted
naval  counsellor. For  fourteen  years  more  he  was  to

61

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Indies work in the  open for the  overthrow  of  Spain. The
I  c8 f^  change  is  well  seen  in  the  equipment  of  his  expedition

of  1585.  In  place  of  the  two  or  three  small  ships
which  had  hitherto  sufficed  him,  he  sailed  from  Ply-
mouth in  command  of  twenty-one  ships  and  eight
pinnaces,  with  a  force  of  more  than  two  thousand  men.
Frobisher  was  Vice-Admiral,  and  their  destination  was
the  West  Indies,  there  to  waylay  the  Plate  fleet  laden
with  the  wealth  of  Peru.

After an armed demonstration off  the harbours of
Portugal the fleet reached Santiago, which was taken
Defects  of  the  and  sacked,  but  yielded  little  treasure. The  same  dis-
s\stem  appointment  awaited  them  in  the  West  Indies. Despising

smaller  game,  they  took  and  held  for  a  time  San
Domingo,  the  oldest  town  in  the  Indies,  and  Carthagena,
the  capital  of  the  Spanish  Main.  The  moral  effect  of
these  exploits  was  no  doubt  great,  but  the  material  profit
was  less  than  had  been  expected,  and  Drake,  in  order  to
indemnify  the  Queen  and  the  other  promoters  of  the
expedition,  exacted  a  large  ransom  in  either  case  for
the  evacuation  of  the  town.  It  had  been  a  part  of  the
original  plan  to  seize  Havana,  but  losses  from  sickness
and  war  caused  the  expedition  to  turn  homeward,  not
without  a  fair  share  of  plunder.  St.  Augustine,  on  the
coast  of  Florida,  was  looted  on  the  way,  and  the  miserable
colonists  of  Virginia  were  visited  and  taken  home.  It  is
difficult  and  presumptuous  to  criticise  Drake's  plan  of
action.  In  his  later  expeditions  he  was  hampered  by  the
instructions  of  the  Government  and  the  opinions  of
others,  as  he  had not  been  hampered  earlier. He  had

Lack  of  a proposed  in  1581  to  seize  Terceira,  and  make  it  a  naval
naval  base. 1  r u  •  j 1 j *  c •  u

base tor harassmg and plundermg bpanish commerce.

62

THE  VOYAGERS

Many  of  his  critics  held,  and  some  still  hold,  that  he
should  have  kept  possession  of  Carthagena  with  the  same
object.  But  the  profit-sharing  system  of  naval  enterprise
made  a  policy  of  this  kind  almost  impossible ;  and  to  the
end  of  his  life  the  buccaneer  in  Drake  held  the  upper
hand  of  the  statesman.  If  the  English  had  established
and  fortified  themselves  on  the  main  trading  route  of
the  Spanish  Indies  the  story  of  the  Armada  might  have
remained  unwritten.

It  is  unnecessary  to  touch,  except  very  briefly,  on  what  The  singeing
followed.  The  founding  of  Colonies  and  the  exploration  phiuJs  beard
of  unknown  lands  had  given  way  to  the  necessities  of
war ;  and  the  history  of  Drake  and  Hawkins  and
Frobisher  henceforward  is  a  part  of  the  history  of
England.  In  1587  Drake  was  despatched  with  another
fleet  to  make  havoc  of  King  Philip's  preparations  for
invading  England.  It  is  from  the  realm  of  the  Indies,
says  an  Elizabethan  sailor,  that  King  Philip  *  has  feathers
to  fly  to  the  top  of  his  high  desires.'  Drake  had  singed
his  feathers ;  he  was  now  to  singe  his  beard.  He  took
and  burned  the  shipping  in  Cadiz  harbour,  seized  Cape
St.  Vincent,  threatened  Lisbon,  and  struck  terror  into  the
heart  of  the  Spanish  commanders.  When  the  great  Thelnvindbk
Armada  at  last  set  sail,  Drake,  if  he  had  had  his  way,
would  have  met  and  fought  with  it  at  the  mouths  of  the
Spanish  harbours.  But  he  was  controlled  by  men  who
feared  the  boldness  of  his  strategy,  and  the  Spanish
preparations  were  permitted  to  proceed  in  quietness.  Let
the  rest  be  told  in  the  grand  style  which  reached  its
maturity  in  English  at  this  very  time,  as  if  it  had  been
designed  for  the  deeds  it  was  to  celebrate.  'This  great
preparation,' says Bacon, *  passed away like a dream.

63

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Expedition  to
Lisbon.

The  last
Voyage  of
Drake  and
Hawkins.

The  Invincible  Navy  neither  took  any  one  barque  of
ours,  neither  yet  once  offered  to  land ;  but  after  they  had
been  well  beaten  and  chased,  made  a  perambulation  about
the  Northern  seas,  ennobling  many  coasts  with  wrecks  of
mighty  ships ;  and  so  returned  home  with  greater  derision
than  they  set  forth  with  expectation.'

The  repulse  of  the  Armada  gave  Drake  no  rest.  The
next  year,  in  joint  command  with  Sir  John  Norris,  he
led  the  expedition  to  Lisbon.  They  failed  in  their  main
purpose ;  their  losses  were  heavy,  and  their  booty  small.
'  But  the  truth  is,'  says  Camden,  *  England  reaped  this
benefit  by  the  voyage,  that  from  this  time  forward  she
feared  nothing  from  Spain,  but  took  greater  heart  and
courage  against  the  Spaniards.'  Drake  fell  into  disgrace,
and  was  restored  to  favour  only  to  share  with  Sir  John
Hawkins  the  command  of  another  expedition,  their
second  and  last.  In  1595,  twenty-eight  years  after  their
fateful  adventure  in  slave-trading,  they  put  out  again  for
the  Indies  with  a  fleet  of  twenty-seven  sail,  and  strong
land-forces.  Sir  John  Hawkins  was  now  over  seventy
years  of  age,  burdened  and  saddened  by  the  long  cares
of  administration ;  and  the  differences  of  temper  and
character  between  the  two  admirals  had  not  been  lessened
by  time.  Thomas  Maynarde,  who  served  in  the  expe-
dition, has  left  a  vivid  account  of  these  differences.^
Of  Drake  he  says, — *  It  may  be  his  self-willed  and
peremptory  command  was  doubted,  and  that  caused  her
Majesty,  as  should  seem,  to  join  Sir  John  Hawkins
in  equal  commission, — a  man  old  and  wary,  entering
into  matters  with  so  leaden  a  foot,  that  the  other's  meat

1  5z>  Francis  Drake,  His  Voyage,  1^95  i  h  Thomas  Maynarde.
Society, 1 849.)

64

(Hakluyt

THE  VOYAGERS

would  be  eaten  before  his  spit  could  come  to  the  fire:
men  of  so  different  natures  and  dispositions,  that  what
the  one  desired  the  other  would  commonly  oppose
against;  and  though  their  wary  carriages  sequestered  it
from  meaner  wits,  yet  was  it  apparently  seen  to  better
judgments  before  our  going  from  Plymouth,  that  whom
the  one  loved,  the  other  smally  esteemed.'  When  they
reached  the  Indies  they  found  the  Spaniards  forewarned
and  forearmed  against  them ;  and  their  voyage  was  an
unbroken  tale  of  ill-success.  The  Spanish  sea-power  its  failure.
was  enormously  increased,  the  towns  guarded,  the  pay-
ment of  ransom  forbidden,  and  the  treasure  concealed,
so  that  even  if  Drake  had  been  permitted  to  follow  his
old  methods,  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  could  have  averted
failure.  Maynarde,  in  conversation,  asked  him  where
were  the  rich  places  he  had  promised  to  his  followers.
*  He  answered  me  with  grief,  protesting  that  he  was  as
ignorant  of  the  Indies  as  myself,  and  that  he  never
thought  any  place  could  be  so  changed,  as  it  were  from  ^^he  ruined
a  delicious  and  pleasant  arbour  into  a  waste  and  desert
wilderness ;  besides  the  variableness  of  the  wind  and
weather,  so  stormy  and  blustrous  as  he  never  saw  it
before.  But  he  most  wondered  that  since  his  coming
out  of  England  he  never  saw  sail  worth  giving  chase
unto ;  yet,  in  the  greatness  of  his  mind  he  would,  in
the  end,  conclude  with  these  words:  "It  matters  not,
man ;  God  hath  many  things  in  store  for  us ;  and  I
know  many  means  to  do  her  Majesty  good  service,  and
to  make  us  rich;  for  we  must  have  gold  before  we  see
England";  when,  good  gentleman,  (in  my  conceit),  it
fared  with  him  as  with  some  careless  living  man  who
prodigally  consumes  his  time,  fondly  persuading  himself

XII  65  £

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  the  nurse  that  fed  him  in  his  childhood  will  likewise
nourish  him  in  his  old  age,  and,  finding  the  dug  dried
and  withered,  enforced  then  to  behold  his  folly,  tormented
in  mind,  dieth  with  a  starved  body.'  To  redeem  his
favour  with  the  Queen,  Drake  had  thought  to  repeat
some  of  his  brilliant  early  exploits.  No  good  thing  can  be
repeated ;  and  this  last  voyage  saw  a  dramatic  reversal  of
his  most  fortunate  achievements. His  forces  were  repulsed

Death  of  at  Las  Palmas  and  at  Puerto  Rico.  Here  Hawkins
sickened  and  died.  They  sacked  and  burned  Rio  de  la
Hacha,  seized  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  thence  sent  forward  a
land  expedition  to  surprise  and  plunder  Panama.  The
isthmus  was  held  in  force  by  Spain,  and  the  English
were  beaten  off.  Drake's  chief  hopes  were  now  shattered,
and  he  did  what  he  had  seldom  done  while  his  star
prevailed;  he  asked  the  advice  of  his  officers.  'Since
our  return  from  Panama,'  says  Maynarde,  '  he  never
carried  mirth  nor  joy  in  his  face ;  yet  no  man  he  loved
must  conjecture  that  he  took  thought  thereof.'  It  was
resolved  to  make  an  attempt  on  Granada,  Leon,  and  the
towns  on  the  Lake  of  Nicaragua.  The  course  was  laid
for  St.  John's  Harbour,  but  the  wind  was  steadily  against
them  ;  sickness  broke  out  in  the  crews,  and  after  some
weeks'  struggle,  Drake  *  resolved  to  depart,  and  to  take
the  wind  as  God  sent  it.'  He  had  been  attacked  by  the
prevalent sickness; on the morning of the 28th of

Death  of  January,  1596,  he  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  sea  oiF
Puerto  Bello.  '  He  was  as  famous,'  says  Stow,  '  in
Europe  and  America,  as  Tamburlaine  in  Asia  and
Africa.'  When  the  news  of  his  death  was  brought,
there  was  joy  in  Spain,  and  the  people  felt  that  the
heavy  hand  of  God  had  at  last  been  lifted from  them.

66

THE VOYAGERS

The  three  great  Vice-Admirals  who  defeated  the  Armada

were  now  dead;  for  Frobisher  had  died  in 1594,  of  a

wound  received  at  the  work  of  dislodging  the  Spaniards

from the  coast  of  Brittany. The  Lord  High  Admiral,  2'^^^

•'  o  ■' Voyagers.

Lord Charles Howard of Effingham, under whose

command  they  had  all  served,  led  a  great  armament  to

Cadiz in the summer of 1596, seized the city, and

inflicted enormous damage on the shipping in the

harbour. He was created Earl of Nottingham, and

lived  on  to  an  advanced  old  age. And  how  many  more

are  there  not,  whose  names  are  less  famous,  and  whose

deeds, recorded or unrecorded by  Hakluyt, served to

raise the name of their country .? John Oxenham,

Drake's follower, the first Englishman  who  launched  a

boat  on  the Pacific ; Captain Thomas Fenner, one of

three  brothers,  each  of  whom  commanded  a  ship  against

the Armada; Captain Edward Fenton, who explored

the  Arctic  Seas,  and  harried  the  ships  of  Spain ;  George

Clifford, Earl of  Cumberland, who made ten  voyages

in  twelve  years ; Sir  William Monson, author of the

Naval  Tracts,  who  began  as  a  common  sailor  on  board

a  merchantman, and  rose  to  be  an  Admiral ;  or James

Lancaster,  who  in  the  years  immediately  after  Hakluyt's

publication opened  a  way  for  English  commerce  to  the

East ; — all these deserve celebration. And the sailors  '^^^

,  J 1  1  •  1  -1  •  1 Elizabethan

who  manned the ships, who ate putrid penguins and

drank  bilge-water  on  strange  seas,  and  who  often,  when

their  service to their country was rendered, pined in

foreign prisons,  or  died  by  hundreds of  starvation  and

cold and plague in the streets of the sea-ports of

England, — they  most  pass  without  other  memorial  than

the  saying  of  the  Lord  High  Admiral,  *  God  send  us

67

manners.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  see such  a  company  together  again,  when  need  is.*

They  were  a  cheerful  race;  and,  as Drake  says, when

they  were  blessed  with  some  little  comfortable  dew of

heaven,  some  crowns,  or  some  reasonable  booties,  they

would  take  good  heart  again,  although  they  were half

^^  ,  dead. Last  of  all, and  among  the most characteristic

GenUemen  _  °

Adventurers,  figures  of  the  Elizabethan  age,  there  are  the  gentlemen

adventurers, the ambitious courtiers like Essex, the

single-minded warriors, like Grenville, the spendthrift

sons  of  fortune, like Cavendish, to whom the world

was their oyster, which with their sword they must

open. Never  was there a set of  men  worse  adapted

for the sober business of establishing a colony, or

governing  a  subject  race ; yet they  too were servants

of  the  Empire,  and  cleared  a  way  for  those  who  came

after them. Long generations of  training and many

hard  blows  were  needed  before  the  British  race  learned

those  lessons  of  justice and tact and tolerance which

every Civil Servant in  India  must  have  by  heart,  now

that  the  round  world  is  mapped  and  settled. Whatever

their  faults, these  Elizabethans  bear the  stamp  of  the

heroic  age ;  they  lived  in  an illimitable  world,  and  had

nothing  about  them  of  tame  civility. They  are  arrogant,

excessive,  indomitable,  inquisitive,  madmen  in  resolution,

and  children  at  heart. The  great fight  of  the  Revenge

was  undertaken  against  all  the  rules  of  orthodox  naval

Zir  Richard tactics, and in defiance of  common sense. Its  hero,

renvi  e. ^^^^ Linschoten, *  was of  so hard a complexion, that

as he continued among the Spanish captains, while

they  were at dinner or supper with him, he would

carouse  three  or  four  glasses  of  wine,  and  in  a  bravery

take  the  glasses  between his  teeth  and crash  them in

68

THE VOYAGERS

pieces  and  swallow  them  down,  so  that  oftentimes  the
blood  ran  out  of  his  mouth.'  In  his  own  age  his
action  off  the  Azores  was  recognised  as  something  out
of  the  beaten  path  of  history,  and  to  be  matched  only
by  poetry  in  its  strongest  and  highest  flights.  *  In
the  year  1591,'  says  Bacon,  'was  that  memorable  The  Last
fight  of  an  English  ship  called  the  Revenge^  under  the  ji%gjigg_
command  of  Sir  Richard  Grenville,  memorable  (I  say)
even  beyond  credit  and  to  the  height  of  some  heroical
fable:  and  though  it  were  a  defeat,  yet  it  exceeded  a
victory;  being  like  the  act  of  Samson,  that  killed  more
men  at  his  death,  than  he  had  done  in  the  time  of  all
his  life.  This  ship,  for  the  space  of  fifteen  hours,  sate
like  a  stag  amongst  hounds  at  bay,  and  was  sieged
and  fought  with,  in  turn,  by  fifteen  great  ships  of
Spain,  part  of  a  navy  of  fifty-five  ships  in  all ;  the  rest  like
abettors  looking  on  afar  off.  And  amongst  the  fifteen
ships  that  fought,  the  great  San  Philippo  was  one;  a
ship  of  fifteen  hundred  ton,  prince  of  the  twelve  Sea-
Apostles^  which  was  right  glad  when  she  was  shifted  off
from  the  Revenge.  This  brave  ship  the  Revenge^  being
manned  only  with  two  hundred  soldiers  and  marines
whereof  eighty  lay  sick,  yet  nevertheless  after  a  fight
maintained  (as  was  said)  of  fifteen  hours,  and  two  ships
of  the  enemy  sunk  by  her  side,  besides  many  more
torn  and  battered,  and  great  slaughter  of  men,  never
came  to  be  entered,  but  was  taken  by  composition ;  the
enemies  themselves  having  in  admiration  the  virtue  of
the  commander  and  the  whole  tragedy  of  that  ship.'

Thomas  Cavendish,  who  served  as  a  volunteer  under  Thomas
Sir  Richard  Grenville  in  the  Virginian  Expedition  of  1 585,  ^'^^^^'^"^'
is  perhaps  the  most  typical  of  the  adventurous  gallants  of

69

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  time. Like  Bassanio,  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice^  he
had

'  disabled  his  estate
By  something  showing  a  more  swelling  port
Than  his  faint  means  would  grant  continuance'  ;

and  in  1586,  encouraged  by  the  success  of  Drake,  he
furnished  three  ships  to  go  in  quest  of  the  golden  fleece.
His  voyage  round  the  world  was  completed  in  a  shorter
time  than  Drake's;  he  returned  in  September,  1588,  soon
after  the  repulse  of  the  Armada.  The  nature  of  his
doings  by  the  way  is  well  set  forth  by  himself  in  a  letter
His  methods,  to  Lord  Hunsdon  : — '  I  navigated  alongst  the  coast  of
Chili,  Peru,  and  Nueva  Espana,  where  I  made  great
spoils  :  I  burnt  and  sunk  nineteen  sails  of  ships,  small
and  great.  All  the  villages  and  towns  that  ever  I  landed
at,  I  burnt  and  spoiled ;  and  had  I  not  been  discovered
upon  the  coast,  I  had  taken  great  quantity  of  treasure.'
This  account  is  not  complete.  He  also  slaughtered  the
Indians,  devastated  crops  and  orchards,  and  wherever  he
could  lay  hands  on  the  symbols  of  ancient  Christianity,
crosses  and  images,  he  destroyed  them  with  great  zest.
His  violent  and  petulant  temper  breaks  forth  in  his  last
melancholy  letter,  written  when  his  second  voyage,  under-
taken in  1 591,  had  failed,  and  he  was  a  broken  man.
His  crew  are  'hell-hounds';  and  John  Davis,  whose
ship  had  been  separated  from  the  others  by  storms,  is
*  that  villain,  that  hath  been  the  death  of  me  and  the
decay  of  this  whole  action.'  Boastful  and  brave,  careless
of  others,  unflinching,  unrelenting,  unforgiving.  Caven-
dish has  yet  that  intensity  and  wholeness  of  purpose
which  is  the  pith  and  marrow  of  great  deeds.

The  greatest  adventurer  of  them  all  lived  on  into  the

70

THE VOYAGERS

next  reign,  to  be  a  monument  of  the  age  that  was  irre-
coverably past,  and,  by  his  death,  to  cast  a  stain  (if  any-
thing so  dark  and  small  can  take  a  stain)  on  the  character
of  James  I.  Of  all  the  notable  Elizabethans,  Sir  Walter  Sir  fVaher
Raleigh  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  to  understand.  He  ^  '
has  the  insolent  imagination  of  Marlowe,  and  the  pro-
found melancholy  of  Donne.  '  The  mind  of  man,'  he
says  in  his  History  of  the  JVorld,  '  hath  two  ports,  the  one
always  frequented  by  the  entrance  of  manifold  vanities ;
the  other  desolate  and  overgrown  with  grass,  by  which
enter  our  charitable  thoughts  and  divine  contemplations.'
Both  gates  of  his  mind  stood  open ;  worldly  hopes  and
braggart  ambitions  crowd  and  jostle  through  one  entrance,
but  the  monitors  of  death  and  eternity  meet  them,  and
whisper  them  in  the  ear.  He  schemes  elaborately,  even
while  he  believes  that  '  the  long  day  of  mankind  draweth
fast  towards  an  evening,  and  the  world's  tragedy  and  time
are  near  at  an  end.'  The  irony  of  human  affairs  pos-
sesses his  contemplation ;  his  thoughts  are  high  and
fanciful ;  he  condescends  to  action,  and  fails,  as  all  those
fail  whose  work  is  done  stooping.  He  is  proud,  sardonic,
and  aloof.  His  own  boast  is  true — *  There  is  none  on
the  face  of  the  earth  that  I  would  be  fastened  unto.'
He  takes  part  with  others  in  no  movement,  and  stakes
little  or  nothing  on  the  strength  of  human  ties.  The
business  of  men  on  this  earth  seems  trivial  and  insignifi-
cant against  the  vast  desert  of  eternity ;  and  great  deeds
alone  are  worth  doing,  for  they,  when  they  perish,  add
pomp  to  the  triumph  of  death  and  oblivion.

His  political  schemes  are  grandiose  and  far-reaching:  His  pride.
the  mere  unfolding  of  them  dwarfs  the  exploits  of  more
practical men. Has Cavendish gained fame by plun-

n

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

dering  the  Spaniard  ?  *  It  became  not  the  former
fortune,'  says  Raleigh,  *  in  which  I  once  lived,  to  go
journeys  of  picory;  it  had  sorted  ill  with  the  offices  of
honour,  which  by  her  Majesty's  grace  I  hold  this  day
in  England,  to  run  from  cape  to  cape,  and  from  place  to
place,  for  the  pillage  of  ordinary  prizes.'  Has  Drake
earned  praise  and  reward  for  his  assaults  on  the  Indies  ?
*  The  King  of  Spain,'  says  Raleigh,  *  is  not  so  impover-
ished by  taking  three  or  four  port  towns  in  America  as
we  suppose,  neither  are  the  riches  of  Peru,  or  Nueva
Espafia,  so  left  by  the  sea  side,  as  it  can  be  easily  washed
away  with  a  great  flood  or  springtide,  or  left  dry  upon
the  sands  on  a  low  ebb.'  So  he  introduces  his  promise
of  El  Dorado,  the  finding  in  Guiana  of  a  better  and  richer
Indies  for  her  Majesty  than  the  Indies  of  the  King  of
Spain.
Bacon  on  The  whole  problem  of  English  policy  is  admirably
ea-poweu  summarised  by  Bacon  in  his  Considerations  touching  a  War
with  Spain.  *  For  money,'  he  says,  *  no  doubt  it  is
the  principal  part  of  the  greatness  of  Spain ;  for  by  that
they  maintain  their  veteran  army ;  and  Spain  is  the  only
State  of  Europe  that  is  a  money  grower.  But  in  this
part,  of  all  others,  is  most  to  be  considered  the  ticklish
and  brittle  state  of  the  greatness  of  Spain.  Their  great-
ness consisteth  in  their  treasure,  their  treasure  in  the
Indies,  and  their  Indies  (if  it  be  well  weighed)  are  indeed
but  an  accession  to  such  as  are  masters  by  sea.  So  as
this  axle-tree,  whereupon  their  greatness  turneth,  is  soon
cut  in  two  by  any  that  shall  be  stronger  than  they  by
sea.'  Drake  and  the  seamen  had  put  this  argument
into  action ;  Raleigh,  though  no  one  better  knew  the
importance  of  sea-power,  must  needs  give  it  an  original

72

THE VOYAGERS

turn. It  Is  useless,  he  says,  to  cripple  the  Spanish  navy ;  Raleigh  on

, ,  . ,  J 1 t;^-  r  o • ihe  Importance

in  a  year  the  losses  are  repaired,  and  the  King  or  bpain  g^^g/^
*beginneth  again  like  a  storm  to  threaten  shipwrack
to  us  all.  ...  It  is  his  Indian  gold  that  endangereth
and  disturbeth  all  the  nations  of  Europe.'  The  way
to  defeat  him  is  to  appropriate  a  richer  source  of  gold
than  any  in  his  dominion.  It  seems  likely  that  Raleigh
was  already  chasing  the  phantom  of  El  Dorado  when
he  urged  the  settlement  of  Virginia.  Then  stories  and
fables  reached  him  from  the  South  American  continent,
and  in  1595  he  led  his  expedition  up  the  Orinoco,  and
recorded  his  adventures  in  his  tract.  The  Discovery  of  the  Guiana.
Large,  Rich  and  Beautiful  Empire  of  Guiana^  printed  in
the  following  year.  The  tract  has  been  condemned  as
being  full  of  impostures  and  deceits.  On  the  contrary,
it  is  soberly  and  veraciously  written ;  the  disappointing
results  of  the  expedition  are  accurately  recorded,  but
so  strong  is  the  author's  belief  in  his  preconceived  idea,
that,  from  the  title  onward,  his  narrative  conveys  the
impression  of  great  things  on  the  verge  of  achievement
and  untold  wealth  ready  at  a  touch  to  fall  into  England's
lap.  It  is  the  work  of  a  poet,  who  bridles  in  his
struggling  Muse  with  pain.  The  will-o'-the-wisp  of
gold,  which  had  led  a  thousand  adventurers  by  devious
paths  about  the  world,  led  Raleigh  to  the  scaifold,
where  he  found  relief  from  *  those  inmost  and  soul-
piercing  wounds  which  are  ever  aching  while  uncured,'
and  expiated  his  pride  and  his  dreams.  His  death  marks  The  last  great
the  end  of  the  heroic  age;  with  him  the  poets  and
architects  who  had  prophesied  and  planned  pass  away,
and  the  accountants  and  builders  begin  their  long  and
tedious  task  of  erecting  the  fabric  of  the  Empire.

73

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

II

Richard  RiCHARD  Hakluyt,  the  recorder  of  all  these  matters,
^  "^^'  desired  no  memorial  save  his  book.  His  relics  lie  buried
under  the  '  star-ypointing  pyramid'  which,  by  his  own
incessant  labour,  he  erected  to  the  honour  of  his  country.
'  Master  of  Arts,'  he  calls  himself,  *  and  sometime
Student  of  Christ  Church  in  Oxford.'  Except  to  show
that  he  is  not  unqualified  for  his  task,  and  to  express
his  gratitude  to  the  learned  foundations  where  he  had
his  training,  he  does  not  speak  of  himself.  He  is  a
Scholar,  Bibliographer,  and  Editor,  and  so  has  a  threefold
title  to  modesty  and  self-renunciation.  On  the  title-page
of  his  first  book,  the  Divers  Voyages  of  1582,  his  name
does  not  appear  ;  in  the  second  and  third  volumes  of
the  Voyages  he  pays  his  tribute  to  the  Church  of  which
he  was  a  minister  by  describing  himself  as  '  Richard
Hakluyt,  Preacher.'  He  was  less  of  a  preacher  than
was  his  disciple,  Samuel  Purchas,  and  his  book  is  the
gainer  by  it.  No  biography  of  him,  in  any  full  sense
of  that  word,  is  possible.  Except  for  a  few  bare  facts
and  dates,  all  that  we  know  of  him  is  told  us  by  himself,
in  his  Prefaces  and  his  few  extant  letters.  No  portrait
of  him  has  been  recovered.  He  was  buried  in  West-
minster Abbey,  but  no  inscription  marks  his  grave,  nor
is  it  known  in  what  part  of  the  Church  he  lies.

His  modesty.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  obscurity  was  of  his
own  choosing ;  and  belonged,  as  of  right,  to  his  character
and  temper.  He  had  many  famous  and  influential
friends,  and  was  constantly  in  traffic  with  them  for  the
enrichment  of  his  book. They  answered  his  questions,

74

RICHARD HAKLUYT

gave  him  their  help,  were  led  to  think  on  the  topics
he  had  broached,  and  thought  nothing  further  of  the
questioner.  He  acknowledges  his  obligations  to  many  His  friends.
'  virtuous  gentlemen,'  who,  partly  from  their  private
affection  to  himself,  but  chiefly  from  their  devotion  to
the  furtherance  of  his  work,  had  lent  him  their  assist-
ance. Sir  John  Hawkins  and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  helped
him  with  the  Western  voyages.  William  Burrough,
Clerk  of  her  Majesty's  Navy,  and  Anthony  Jenkinson,
the  Russian  traveller,  gave  him  the  benefit  of  their
experience  for  the  voyages  to  the  North  East.  The
Lord  Treasurer,  Burghley,  let  him  have  access  to  a
cabinet,  or  museum,  of  curiosities  brought  home  by
travellers.  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  in  1597,  consulted  him
concerning  the  country  of  Guiana,  and  whether  it  were
fit  to  be  planted  by  the  English.  Sir  Philip  Sidney,
Sir  Francis  Walsingham,  and  Lord  Howard  of  Effing-
ham, the  Lord  High  Admiral  of  England,  accepted  his
dedications,  approved  his  purposes,  and  held  converse
with  him.  Mercator,  Ortelius,  Thevet,  and  other  foreign
cosmographers  and  scholars  were  his  friends  and  corres-
pondents. Yet  it  is  vain  to  look  for  traces  of  him
among  the  works  and  memorials  of  the  brilliant  com-
pany that  knew  him  in  life.  He  is  the  silent  man,  His  character.
seated  in  the  dark  corner,  who  is  content  to  listen  and
remember,  and  whose  questions,  interpolated  from  time
to  time,  divert  attention  from  himself,  and  direct  it  to
the  moving  tales  that  come  in  answer  to  them.

His  own  allusions  to  himself,  though  they  are  not
infrequent,  bear  curious  witness  to  his  complete  absorp-
tion in  his  theme.  Where  he  mentions  himself  it  is
to  give  authenticity  to  the  remarks  and  memories  which

75

Personal
Reminiscences.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

he  has  collected  in  conversation.  These  stray  references
reveal  him  to  us  as  indefatigable  in  research,  at  the
Court,  or  on  the  highway,  losing  no  opportunity  of
adding  a  single  fact  or  observation  to  his  store.  We
learn  that  at  Paris  he  talked  twice  with  Don  Antonio,
the  Portuguese  Pretender,  who  showed  him  a  map  of
the  North  West  passage ;  and  with  *  five  or  six  of  his
best  captains  and  pilots,  one  of  whom  was  born  in  East
India.'  We  find  him  *  in  the  Queen's  privy  gallery  at
Westminster,'  or  in  the  King's  Library  at  Paris,  or
introduced  by  his  friend,  the  Bishop  of  Chichester,  to
Lord  Lumley's  stately  library,  examining  globes,  con-
sulting originals,  copying  manuscripts.  Or  he  is  in
conversation  with  Mr.  Jennings  and  Mr.  Smith,
*  the  master  and  master's  mate  of  the  ship  called  the
Tohy.,  belonging  to  Bristol,'  who  bring  him  tales  from
Spain  concerning  the  natives  of  Florida ;  or  with  '  an
English  gentleman.  Captain  MufFett,'  who  has  been  a
prisoner  in  Spain,  and  reports  how  the  King  of  Spain
fears  nothing  so  much  as  the  planting  of  an  English
colony  in  America ;  or  with  a  nameless  sailor,  *  one  of
mine  acquaintance  of  Ratcliffe,'  who  tells  how  the  French
fishers  attacked  the  Spanish  fishers  at  Newfoundland,
and  how  he,  the  English  sailor,  in  the  name  of  fair
play,  defended  the  Spaniards.  So  we  catch  glimpses  of
Richard  Hakluyt  wandering  and  enquiring  without  rest
or  remission.  He  has  friends  among  French  sailors ;
one  of  them,  Stephen  Bellinger  of  Rouen,  gives  him
a  piece  of  supposed  silver  ore,  and  shows  him  beasts'
skins,  dressed  and  painted  by  the  Indians ;  another  shows
him  a  piece  of  the  tree  called  Sassafras,  brought  from
Florida,  and expounds  its  high  medicinal  virtue. Mr.

76

oiSRICHARD HAKLUYT

'-ii«

Pry  house,  of  Guernsey,  meets  him  in  London,  and
gives  him  news  of  the  French  scheme  for  colonising
Canada;  another  friend,  unnamed,  brings  him  an  account
of  the  setting  up  of  a  saw-mill  in  Worcestershire,
which  suggests  to  him  that  saw-mills  might  be  set  up
on  the  Virginian  coast.  Among  all  these,  his  friends  Never-ending
and  fellows,  the  Preacher  moves  like  a  shadow,  giving
his  heart  to  search  out  concerning  all  things  that  are
done  under  heaven,  exercised  with  sore  travail,  and
writing  words  of  truth.  The  English  nation  may  well
be  proud  of  him,  and  glad  that,  while  its  great  destinies
were  still  in  the  making,  there  lived  a  man  quick
enough  to  discern  the  significance  of  the  deeds  done
around  him,  and  steady  enough,  in  purpose  and  perse-
verance, to  encounter  and  overcome  the  difficulties  of
giving  to  them  an  enduring  chronicle.

He  was  born,  probably  in  London,  about  the  year  The  Life  of
1553.  His  family  belonged  to  Eyton,  or  Yatton,  in  ^  ^y -
Herefordshire,  and  from  the  time  of  Edward  II  onward,
supplied  not  a  few  sheriffs  and  members  of  Parliament  to
the  service  of  the  country.  The  family  was  English,  and
the  name,  in  its  accepted  form,  owes  its  alien  suggestion
to  the  preservation  of  archaic  spelling.  It  was  pro-
nounced, and  sometimes  spelt,  Hacklewit.  So  Drayton,
in  his  Ode  to  the  Virginian  Voyage :

*  Thy  Voyages  attend,

Industrious  Hackluit ;
Whose  reading  shall  inflame
Men  to  seek  fame,

And  much  commend

To  after  times  thy  wit.'

Richard  Hakluyt  was  early  left  an  orphan,  and  possibly
was  under  the  guardianship  of  the  cousin  to  whom  he

77

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

owed his initiation and calling. '  He was educated  at

Westminster  Westminster  School,  where he was a  Queen's Scholar.
and  Lnnst  '  ^  ^

Church.  Thence  he  passed  to  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  in  1570,
and  proceeded  in  due  course  to  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of
Arts  in  1574,  and  of  Master  of  Arts  in  1577.  But
before  ever  he  went  to  Oxford  he  had  taken  the  ply  that
shaped  his  whole  life.  There  is  something  of  ritual  and
emphasis  in  the  unusual  detail  with  which  he  tells  Sir
Francis  Walsingham  of  his  chance  visit,  in  his  boyhood,
to  his  cousin,  also  called  Richard  Hakluyt,  of  the  Middle
Temple.  A  map  of  the  world  lay  on  the  table,  and
Master  Richard  Hakluyt  took  occasion  to  give  his  young
cousin  a  lesson  in  geography,  showing  how  knowledge
had  been  recently  advanced ;  explaining  also  (what  seems
to  have  been  his  own  special  study)  the  application  of
geography  to  commerce,  and  enumerating  the  products
and  the  wants  of  each  country.  Then,  although  no  vows
were  uttered,  there  followed  a  kind  of  dedication  of  the
Preacher  to  his  life's  work.  '  From  the  map,'  says
Hakluyt,  '  he  brought  me  to  the  Bible,  and  turning  to
the  107th  Psalm,  directed  me  to  the  twenty-third  and
twenty-fourth  verses,  where  I  read  that  they  which  go  down
to  the  sea  in  ships.,  and  occupy  by  the  great  waters.,  they  see  the
works  of  the  Lord  and  His  wonders  in  the  deep.  Which
words  of  the  Prophet,  together  with  my  cousin's  discourse
(things  of  high  and  rare  delight  to  my  young  nature)
took  in  me  so  deep  an  impression  that  I  constantly
resolved,  if  ever  I  were  preferred  to  the  University,
where  better  time  and  more  convenient  place  might  be
ministered  for  these  studies,  I  would  by  God's  assistance
prosecute  that  knowledge  and  kind  of  literature,  the  doors
whereof  (after  a  sort)  were  so  happily  opened  before  me.'

78

His

ordination

RICHARD HAKLUYT

At  Oxford,  in  the  time  he  could  save  from  prescribed  His  work  at
studies,  he  set  himself  to  read  and  master  all  the  Travels  '^^'^  *
and  Voyages  extant  in  Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  French,
English,  Spanish,  or  Portuguese.  The  first  five  of  these
languages  he  acquired  ;  Spanish  remained  long  unknown  to
him,  if  we  may  judge  from  his  habit  of  quoting  Spanish
treatises  in  Italian,  French  or  English  translations.
Having  taken  his  Master's  degree,  he  lectured,  *  in  the
common  schools,'  on  the  subject  nearest  to  his  heart,  and
was  the  first,  he  says,  to  demonstrate  the  advance  of  geo-
graphy by  comparing  the  new  *  lately  reformed  maps,
globes,  and  spheres '  with  the  old  inaccurate  representa-
tions. He  mentions  these  lectures  but  slightly,  and  we
do  not  know  who  were  his  audience.  Thomas  Lodge,  the
dramatist,  whose  father  was  interested  in  navigation,  and
who  voyaged  with  Cavendish,  may  possibly  have  attended
them.  In  1582  the  first-fruits  of  the  Preacher's  study
appeared,  with  a  dedication  to  Sir  Philip  Sidney.  The  title
of  this  book  (which  has  been  reprinted  by  the  Hakluyt
Society)  gives  a  clue  to  the  patriotic  ambitions  of  its
author.  It  is  called  Divers  voyages  touching  the  discoverie  His  first  book,
of  America  and  the  Hands  adjacent  unto  the  same^  made  first
of  all  by  our  Englishmen  and  afterwards  by  the  Frenchmen
and  Britons.  It  is  in  effect  a  pamphlet  and  collection  of
documents  in  support  of  England's  prior  claim  to  possess
and  settle  the  coast  of  America.  In  the  dedication  the
main  idea  is  expounded.  *  The  time  approacheth,'  says
Hakluyt,  *and  now  is,  that  we  of  England  may  share
and  part  stakes  (if  we  will  ourselves),  both  with  the
Spaniard  and  the  Portingale,  in  part  of  America  and  other
regions  as  yet  undiscovered.'  There  is  good  hope,  he
says,  that,  besides  possessing  America,  we  may  find  out  a

79

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Nautical
Education.

Spanish
Professors.

short  and  easy  passage,  by  the  North  West,  to  more
distant  lands.  And  for  these  purposes  what  is  chiefly
necessary  is  a  good  system  of  technical  education  in
nautical  affairs.

Throughout  his  life  Hakluyt  continued  to  urge  on
the  government  and  public  the  importance  of  sound
nautical  education.  His  scheme,  though  nothing  came
of  it,  was  a  modest  one.  A  lectureship  should  be
established  '  in  London  or  about  Ratcliffe,  in  some  con-
venient place ' ;  and  he  tells  how  Sir  Francis  Drake
offered  twenty  pounds  a  year  to  this  end ;  but  forty
pounds  a  year  was  found  needful  to  secure  a  fit  man,
and,  no  other  donor  presenting  himself,  the  scheme  fell
through.  The  Spaniards,  says  Hakluyt,  maintain  at
the  Contractation  House,  or  Exchange,  in  Seville,  a
learned  Reader  in  the  art  of  Navigation:  and  no-one
is  given  charge  of  ships  for  the  Indies  until  he  has
attended  the  instructions  of  the  Reader  and  has  satisfied
a  board  of  examiners  who  are  joined  with  the  Reader
to  test  theoretical  and  practical  knowledge.  This  Reader-
ship, he  points  out,  has  already  given  to  Spain  the
services  of  learned  writers  on  the  art  of  navigation,  as
for  instance  Geronimo  de  Chavez,  and  Pedro  de  Medina,
whose  works  are  text-books  for  the  navigators  of  all
nations.^  What  Hakluyt  desires,  in  short,  is  a  Nautical
University  or  Faculty,  where  men  may  be  trained  and
graduated  in  all  the  sciences  and  crafts  that  are  necessary
to  furnish  forth  the  complete  navigator,  and  to  make
him  an  efficient  servant  of  his  country. He  returns  to

^  Pedro  de  Medina's  jirte  de  Navegar  (1545)  was  translated  into
English  by  John  Frampton  and  published  in  London  in  1581,  a
year  before  Hakluyt's  Divers  Voyages.

80

Jls'i^'

— f  ^*^*"'*'"'^ _2^«w»^6 ^A,^4<-4 »»»V  o„v «.tr£V»^^ -^ ^»^w^'l♦

S-7

^C^-

'/

r-^vc^C

rcy^vc'ot-  , 4V  ^^'"^

.^  ^y^^,^^.

}r

^

/^  L..^^.^

^tf-5**^-^ ^  ^T)Hr  Cy

^^A 1^9^  ^  f;^  0-/1- ^'-:^^^  ^J^(^  ^^o'sr^  ^a^'^J

ti

-€^'

«r«?'«>  yC-c  ^.jt-  'Zc.^  -y:***  /y'>'' -ja..**^

c  /

J-

9}t*'^-v*^b(e*4''7^A

^lf~B^U^.

h-y-^^ Ccm^  -rS-^^ ^-^ ^»^,fs,<'^-  t^Td^'^e-H C^>-,„>iUcil_ >i»»<— ^?S^  W"

h.„^~^C■^

,.s^

;^^,.-j-

t«^"^.

-^pj aii^  c^j^  ..u^f'>^ .^^^-^w^^-^'^'-  ^^

eJSi

-r'-

y  ho

'•*? >-r>-r

Tr

t)-< htx^'"^

^t'^'

r*^4

RICHARD HAKLUYT

the  subject in  his later  dedications,  pressing  it  on  the

attention  of  the  Lord  High  Admiral  and  of  Sir  Robert

Cecil. His  was  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness ;  and  to

this day the naval and military professions have no

dealings with University education. The man who

should bring these into touch, who should enlist

soldiers and sailors  for the furtherance  of  knowledge,

and  give  to  the  Army  and  Navy  and  Merchant  service

officers wide awake to  the scientific opportunities of

their  calling,  would  be  a  benefactor  to  his  country  and

a  worthy  disciple  of  Hakluyt. One  at  least  of  Hak-

luyt's  ideas  has  had  a  very  recent  fulfilment. In  his  Tropical
. .  .  .  M.edicine.

dedication  of  the  Third  Volume  of  his  Voyages  (1600)

to  Sir  Robert  Cecil  he  speaks  of  a  short  treatise,  which
he  had  lying  by  him,  touching  The  curing  of  hot  diseases
incident  to  travellers  in  long  and  Southern  voyages^  by  one
George  Watson.  He  intended  to  include  it  in  his  book,
but  desisted,  because  it  was  very  defective,  and  a  certain
Doctor  Gilbert  promised  that  the  whole  College  of
Physicians  should  confer,  and  produce  something  autho-
ritative on  the  diseases  of  hot  and  cold  regions.  So  the
founders  of  recent  Schools  of  Tropical  Medicine  are
also  disciples  of  Hakluyt.

Before  the  publication  of  his  first  book,  Hakluyt
must  have  moved  from  Oxford  to  London,  in  what
capacity  we  do  not  know.  Early  in  1582  we  find  him
in  correspondence  with  Sir  Francis  Walsingham,  who
treats  him  as  a  recognised  authority  on  Western  discovery.
It  is  a  strange  thing  that  he,  the  recorder  of  the  Voyages,
should  have  taken  part  in  none  of  them.  We  hear  of
two  Expeditions  which  he  thought  of  accompanying.
One  was  Drake's  West  Indies  voyage  of  1585. The

XII  81  F

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Hakluyt  in
Paris.

His  chief
original  work.

His  great
Book.

Church
preferment.

Other  was  the  fatal  voyage  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  in
1583.  What  detained  him,  or  changed  his  purpose
does  not  appear ;  in  the  year  of  Gilbert's  voyage  he
was  appointed  chaplain  to  Sir  Edward  Stafford,  Queen
Elizabeth's  ambassador  in  Paris,  and  remained  for  five
years  in  France.  Stafford  was  brother-in-law  to  Howard
of  Effingham,  so  that  it  seems  likely  that  in  this  case,
as  in  others,  Hakluyt's  preferment  came  to  him  from
his  interest  in  nautical  affairs.  He  was  on  terms  of
intimacy  with  the  Gilberts  and  Raleigh ;  his  Discourse
of  Western  Planting.,  presented  to  the  Queen  in  the
autumn  of  1584,  was  written  at  the  request  of  Raleigh,
and  was  inspired  by  the  reports  of  Captains  Amadas
and  Barlow.  It  is  the  longest  and  most  valuable  of  his
extant  original  writings,  though  his  unvarying  modesty
prevented  its  inclusion  in  his  Voyages.  In  Paris  he
devoted  himself  with  energy  to  the  preparation  of  the
book  which  was  now  the  goal  of  all  his  efforts — a
collection  of  the  voyages  undertaken  by  Englishmen.
The  first  edition  of  The  Principal  Navigations^  in  one
folio  volume,  appeared  in  1589.  Then  followed  ten
more  years  of  labour,  and  the  second  and  final  edition,
in  three  folio  volumes,  was  given  to  the  world  in  15 98
and  the  two  following  years.

In  the  meantime,  ecclesiastical  preferment  had  come
to  him.  In  1586,  while  he  was  in  France,  he  became
prebendary  of  Bristol,  and  in  1590  rector  of  Wethering-
sett  in  SuflFolk.  The  date  of  his  marriage  is  uncertain ;
in  his  dedication,  to  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  of  his  Third
Volume  (1600),  he  speaks  of  his  profession  of  divinity
and  the  care  of  his  family  as  having  diverted  him,  for
some  years  past,  from  the  main  endeavour  of  his  life. In

82

RICHARD HAKLUYT

1602  he  was  made  prebendary,  and  in  1603  archdeacon,
of  Westminster.  He  was  also  chaplain  of  the  Savoy ;
and  in  1612  obtained  the  rectory  of  Gedney  in  Lincoln-
shire. He  died,  seven  months  after  Shakespeare,  on  the  His  death.
23rd  of  November  1616.  He  left  a  fair  estate  to  an
unthrifty  son,  who  is  said  to  have  squandered  it.  His
unpublished  papers  fell  into  the  hands  of  Samuel  Purchas,
who  scattered  them  about  the  four  volumes  of  his
Pilgrims,  *  after  his  irregular  and  curtailed  or  contracted
manner,'  interspersed  with  remarks  *  often  silly,  and
always  little  to  the  purpose.'  But  the  inestimable  value
of  his  materials  has  given  Purchas  a  secure  place  beside
his  greater  predecessor.

Besides  the  Voyages,  Hakluyt  was  responsible  for  the  Lesser  works.
publication  of  several  other  works.  He  translated  and
published,  in  1587,  Laudonniere's  account  of  Florida;
in  the  same  year  he  set  forth  an  edition  of  the  Decades  of
Peter  Martyr.  In  1601  he  published  The  Discoveries  of
the  World,  a  translation  of  a  treatise  by  Antonio  Galvano,
the  Portuguese  governor  of  Ternate.  His  last  work,
Virginia  richly  valued  by  the  description  of  the  maine  land  of
Florida  her  next  neighbour,  appeared  in  1 609  ;  it  is  trans-
lated from  a  Portuguese  account  of  Soto's  expedition  to
Florida.  Moreover  Hakluyt  took  pains  for  the  con-
tinuance of  the  work  he  had  begun,  and  endeavoured  to
gather  round  him  a  school  of  younger  men.  English
translations  of  accepted  standard  works  on  Africa,  China,
and  Nova  Francia  were  undertaken  and  completed  at
his  suggestion  and  by  his  encouragement.

The  quality  of  Hakluyt which most impressed his  The  apotheosis
contemporaries  was his enormous industry. He often  ^  ^"  ^^  '•^'
speaks  of  this  himself,  and  confesses  that  only  an  ardent

83

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

love  of  his  country  and  care  for  her  good  name  could
have  induced  him  to  undergo  labours  so  tedious  and
exhausting.  *  I  call  the  work  a  burden,'  he  says,  *  in
consideration  that  these  voyages  lay  so  dispersed,
scattered,  and  hidden  in  several  hucksters'  hands,  that
I  now  wonder  at  myself  to  see  how  I  was  able  to
endure  the  delays,  curiosity,  and  backwardness  of  many
from  whom  I  was  to  receive  my  originals.'  And  again :
*What  restless  nights,  what  painful  days,  what  heat,
what  cold  I  have  endured ;  how  many  long  and  charge-
able journeys  I  have  travelled;  how  many  famous
libraries  I  have  searched  into ;  what  variety  of  ancient
and  modern  writers  I  have  perused;  what  a  number  of
old  records,  patents,  privileges,  letters,  etc.,  I  have  re-
deemed from  obscurity  and  perishing ;  into  how  manifold
acquaintance  I  have  entered ;  what  expenses  I  have  not
spared ;  and  yet  what  fair  opportunities  of  private  gain,
preferment  and  ease  I  have  neglected ;  albeit  thyself
canst  hardly  imagine,  yet  I  by  daily  experience  do
find  and  feel,  an4  some  of  my  entire  friends  can  suffi-
ciently testify.'  In  process  of  time,  no  doubt,  his  work
grew  easier,  as  his  purpose  became  known  to  a  wider
circle,  and  travellers  of  their  own  accord  brought  him
Chance  finds,  material.  The  raids  on  the  West  Indies  yielded  him,
as  he  confesses,  some  good  literary  profit.  In  1592,
off  the  Azores,  Robert  Crosse  captured  the  huge  Madre
de  Dios ;  a  Latin  treatise  on  China,  written  in  the  year
1590,  was  found  among  the  spoils,  and  given  to  Hakluyt.
It  was  '  enclosed  in  a  case  of  sweet  cedar-wood,  and
lapped  up  almost  an  hundred  fold  in  fine  calicut-cloth,
as  though  it  had  been  some  incomparable  jewel.'  But
for  all  his treasure-troves,  his  labours  must  have been

84

RICHARD HAKLUYT

unending. His  life  is  a  notable  example  of  how  single-  T'he  moral  of

r  J J  1  •  ^  •  ^  Haklmfs  life.

ness  or  purpose  and  dogged  persistence,  in  a  man  not  -^ -^

endowed,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  with  any  of  the  more
brilliant  attributes  of  genius,  lead  him,  as  if  inevitably,  to
high  achievement  and  lasting  fame.

His main purpose he has himself declared. He  ^-^^

, ,  ,  ,  r 1 •  1  Expansion  of

belongs  to  that  stalwart  race  or  clerics  who,  next  to  England.
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  love  a  fight;  but  fighting  is
the  accident  of  his  book,  not  the  essential.  The  dis-
covery of  the  world  and  the  expansion  of  England  are
what  make  his  heart  beat  faster;  he  is  a  zealot  of  the
map  and  of  the  flag.  He  knows  that  he  lives  in  an  age
of  great  attempts;  the  reproach  of  sluggishness  and  lack
of  enterprise,  which  was  fastened  on  England  during  the
earlier  years  of  discovery,  is  now  clean  wiped  away,  and
the  English  are  at  home  on  every  sea.  *  In  this  most
famous  and  peerless  government  of  her  most  excellent
Majesty,  her  subjects,  through  the  special  assistance  and
blessing  of  God,  in  searching  the  most  opposite  corners
and  quarters  of  the  world,  and,  to  speak  plainly,  in  com-
passing the  vast  globe  of  the  earth  more  than  once,  have
excelled  all  the  nations  and  people  of  the  earth.'  They
started  without  those  advantages  of  science  and  ancient
learning  which  befriended  the  Portuguese;  the  parts  of
the  world  that  were  left  for  them  to  discover  were  more
difficult  and  dangerous  than  *the  mild,  lightsome,
temperate,  and  warm  Atlantic  Ocean,  over  which  the
Spaniards  and  Portugals  have  made  so  many  pleasant,
prosperous  and  golden  voyages.'  Yet  they  redeemed
their  delay,  and  are  become  the  teachers  and  pilots  of
others.  The  Dutch,  says  Hakluyt,  deserve  commenda-  P»pilsof
tion  for  their  Northern  voyages,  *  yet  with  this  proviso ;

85

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  founding
of  Colonies.

Hakluyt  and
Virginia.

that  our  English  nation  led  them  the  dance,  brake  the  ice
before  them,  and  gave  them  good  leave  to  light  their
candle  at  our  torch.'  Again  and  again  his  pride  in  his
country,  and  admiration  for  her  valorous  seamen,  make
themselves  apparent  in  the  warmth  and  eloquence  of
his  speech.

But  the  gain  of  these  last  happy  years  can  be  made
good,  he  holds,  in  one  way  only,  by  claiming  and
settling  the  lands  of  the  New  World.  It  does  not  fall
to  Hakluyt  to  record  any  successful  English  attempt
at  colonisation.  None  the  less,  it  is  this  that  is  the
very  sea-mark  of  his  utmost  sail.  The  history  of  his
active  life  begins  with  the  colonising  schemes  of  Gilbert,
Sidney  and  Raleigh ;  it  ends  with  the  colonisation  of
Virginia  achieved  at  last,  and  the  offer  to  himself  of  the
living  of  James  Town,  which  he  prudently  supplied  by
a  curate.  From  first  to  last  he  preached  the  benefits  of
colonising  for  the  furtherance  of  trade  and  the  honest
employment  of  the  people.  Statesmen  and  economists,
from  Sir  Thomas  More  onwards,  had  complained  of  the
multitude  of  loiterers  and  idle  vagabonds  in  England,
thrown  out  of  work  by  the  enclosure  of  land.  Hakluyt
adds  his  testimony,  and  offers  a  remedy.  *  Our  prisons
are  pestered  and  filled,'  he  says,  'with  able  men  to  serve
their  Country,  which  for  small  robberies  are  daily  hanged
up  in  great  numbers,  even  twenty  at  a  clap,  out  of  one
gaol  (as  was  seen  at  the  last  Assizes  at  Rochester).'
We  should  lead  these  people  forth  into  the  temperate
and  fertile  parts  of  America,  '  which,  being  within  six
weeks  sailing  of  England,  are  yet  unpossessed  of  any
Christians,  and  seem  to  offer  themselves  unto  us,  stretch-
ing  nearer  unto her Majesty's  dominions than to any

86

RICHARD HAKLUYT

other  part  of  Europe.'  And,  with  a  touch  of  learned
rhetoric  very  unusual  in  his  writing,  he  invokes  the
example  of  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians,  and  of  those
*  small,  weak,  and  unreasonable  creatures,'  the  bees,  who
are  led  out  by  their  captains  to  seek  themselves  a  new
dwelling-place.  He  lent  a  hand  in  all  schemes  that
might  lead  to  colonisation,  and  was  one  of  the  Company
of  Merchants  to  whom  Raleigh  assigned  his  Virginian
patent  in  1588.  After  the  premature  death  of  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  the  man  who  more  than  any  other
took  upon  himself  the  toil,  and  earned  the  credit,  of
establishing  England's  first  colony,  was  Richard  Hakluyt.
There  is  no  touch  of  the  fanatic  about  him,  for  all
his  zeal.  His  reflections  and  advice  on  every  subject  His  practical
that  he  handles  are  shrewd,  cool  and  practical.  He  desires,
for  instance,  the  evangelisation  of  the  Indies,  but  he
will  be  no  party  to  hasty  methods.  *The  means,'  he
says,  *  to  send  such  as  shall  labour  eff^ectually  in  this
business  is,  by  planting  one  or  two  colonies  of  our  nation
upon  that  firm,'  {i.e.  mainland)  'where  they  may  remain
in  safety  and  first  learn  the  language  of  the  people  near
adjoining  (the  gift  of  tongues  being  now  taken  away),
and  by  little  and  little  acquaint  themselves  with  their
manner,  and  so  with  discretion  and  mildness  distill  into
their  purged  minds  the  sweet  and  lively  liquor  of  the
gospel.'  He  keeps  an  open  eye  for  all  the  material
advantages  that  may  attend  the  possession  of  a  distant
colony.  Chief  of  these  is  *  the  advancing  of  navigation,  His  zeal  for
the  very  walls  of  this  our  Island.'  Complaints  have  long  ^^  ^
been  rife,  he  says,  of  the  decay  of  our  navy ;  and  the
means  taken  to  encourage  our  people  to  a  sea-faring  life
have  met  with  very  partial  success. Queen Elizabeth,

87 ,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Benefits  of
long  voyages.

Commercial
Geography.

in  1563,  had  ordained  that  Wednesday  should  be  *a  new
fish  day,'  the  eating  of  meat  being  restrained  to  the  end
that  fishermen  and  mariners  should  find  a  market  for
their  takings.  Yet  little  benefit  to  shipping  had  followed
from  indirect  measures  like  this.  *At  this  day,'  says
Hakluyt,  writing  in  1584,  *I  am  assured  that  there  are
scarce  two  ships  of  two  hundred  tons  belonging  to  the
whole  city  of  Bristol,  and  very  few  or  none  of  the  like
burden  along  the  channel  of  the  Severn,  from  Gloucester
to  the  Lands  End  on  the  one  side,  and  Milford  Haven
on  the  other.  Now,  to  remedy  this  great  and  unknown
want,  no  enterprise  possibly  can  be  devised  more  fit  to
increase  our  great  shipping  than  this  Western  fortifying
and  planting.  .  .  .  Moreover,  in  the  judgment  of  those
that  are  expert  in  sea  causes,  it  will  breed  more  skilful,
cunning  and  stout  pilots  and  mariners  than  other  belong-
ing to  this  land.  For  it  is  the  long  voyages  (so  they
be  not  too  excessive  long,  nor  through  intemperate
climates,  as  those  of  the  Portingales  into  their  West
Indies)  that  harden  seamen,  and  open  unto  them  the
secrets  of  navigation.'  Hakluyt,  in  short,  perceived  that
the  supremacy  of  the  sea  could  hardly  be  achieved  by  a
nation  whose  ships  were  mainly  occupied  in  the  coasting
trade.  He  is  no  less  concerned  for  the  welfare  of  trade.
From  his  cousin  of  the  Middle  Temple  he  had  early
learned  the  value  of  what  is  now  called  commercial
geography.  In  his  Voyages  are  printed  many  papers  of
minute  and  careful  instruction  for  factors  and  merchants
visiting  foreign  countries.  The  most  remarkable  of  these.
Remembrances  for  a  Factor  at  Constantinople,  is  written  by
Richard  Hakluyt  the  elder,  and  contains  a  reasoned
defence  of  the  practical  study  of  beasts  and  fowls,  herbs

RICHARD HAKLUYT

and  trees,  their  properties  and  uses.  *If  this  care  had
not  been  heretofore  in  our  ancestors,  then  had  our  life
been  savage  now;  for  then  we  had  not  had  wheat  nor
rye,  pease  nor  beans,  barley  nor  oats,  pear  nor  apple,
vine,  nor  many  other  profitable  and  pleasant  plants ;
bull  nor  cow,  sheep  nor  swine,  horse  nor  mare,  cock
nor  hen,  nor  a  number  of  other  things  that  we  enjoy,
without  which  our  life  were  to  be  said  barbarous;  for
these  things,  and  a  thousand  that  we  use  more,  the  first
inhabitors  of  this  Island  found  not  here.'  By  way  of
example  the  latest  importations  of  strange  commodities
are  cited,  including  some  of  those  commemorated  in  the
popular  rhyme :

'Turkeys,  Carps,  Hops,  Pickerels,  and  Beer,
Came  into  England  all  in  one  year.'

The  Voyages  record  many  great  deeds;  but  their
editor  scorns  nothing  as  trivial,  if  it  is  likely  to  be  of
service  for  the  material  prosperity  of  England.

This  strong  practical  bent  and  concrete  habit  of  The  Method
mind  served  the  Preacher  well  in  the  designing  and  °-^^J  ^^
ordering  of  his  book.  He  is  not  misled  by  any
encyclopaedic  ambitions  or  by  the  lust  of  universality.
It  is  a  credit  to  him,  greater  than  can  be  readily  conceived
by  our  scientific  and  empiric  age,  that  he  sets  himself  to
record  individual  observations  and  particular  experiences.
He  had  been  educated  after  the  fashion  of  the  time,  in  the
vague  generalities  of  the  scholastic  learning ;  and  he  would
have  none  of  them.  It  is  the  story  of  the  travels  of
this  man  and  that  man,  he  says,  which  bring  us  to  a
certain  and  full  knowledge  of  the  world ;  *  not  those
weary  volumes  bearing  the  titles  of  Universal  Cosmo-
graphy, which  some  men  that  I  could  name  have  pub-

89

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lished  as  their  own.'  He  is  careful  to  ascertain  and  record
the  name  of  the  historian  of  each  voyage,  as  well  as  the
name  of  the  voyager,  so  that  every  man  may  *  answer
for  himself,  justify  his  reports,  and  stand  accountable
Arrangement,  for  his  own  doings.'  The  classification  and  arrangement
of  the  voyages  follow  a  like  practical  method.  First,
as  being  the  oldest,  come  the  voyages  to  the  South  and
South  East;  then  the  North  Eastern  voyages,  the
earliest  of  which  were  made  under  our  Saxon  Kings ;
and  lastly,  not  without  a  purposed  climax,  the
voyages  to  the  West  and  '  the  beginnings  and  pro-
ceeding of  the  two  English  Colonies  planted  in  Virginia.'
The  voyages  to  the  South  West  ('whereof  I  think  the
Spaniard  hath  had  some  knowledge')  were  in  fact  by
far  the  most  numerous,  but  they  are  given  a  small  rela-
tive importance  in  Hakluyt's  scheme.  The  West  Indies
have  a  place  in  his  epic  not  unlike  the  place  of  Carthage
in  Virgil's  poem ;  they  are  visited  by  the  founders  of
the  British  Empire  on  the  way  to  a  greater  destiny.

To  estimate  Hakluyt's  labours  as  an  editor,  it  would
be  necessary  to  collate  his  Voyages  in  detail  with  the
printed  and  manuscript  originals,  where  these  are  re-
coverable. A  good  beginning  has  been  made  by  the
Hakluyt  Society;  and  the  complete  task,  however
troublesome,  will  be  no  more  than  a  just  tribute  to
those  great  charges  and  infinite  cares,  watchings,  toils,
travels,  and  wearying  out  of  his  weak  body,  from  which
the  Preacher  long  ago  found  rest.  A  comparison  of
some  of  his  Voyages  with  the  full  originals,  printed  by
the  Hakluyt  Society,  reveals  him  as  a  conscientious
Editor,  wholly  free  from  the  vanity  of  self-assertion.
He  follows  his  authorities  word  for  word  and  takes  few

90

RICHARD HAKLUYT

liberties  with  them.  He  omits  nothing  that  tends  to  His  omissions.
knowledge,  though  he  has  a  ready  pen  to  excise
what  tends  merely  to  edification.  It  was  the  habit  of
his  age  to  begin  even  a  nautical  diary  with  a  few
remarks  on  the  origin  of  the  world,  the  history  of
man,  and  the  opinions  of  Plato.  To  these  excrescences
the  Preacher  gives  short  shrift.  If  he  was  as  severe
a  critic  of  himself  as  of  other  men,  his  sermons  must
have  been  models  of  terse  and  pointed  exhortation.
Master  George  Best's  Discourse  of  the  three  voyages
of  Frobisher  begins,  in  the  original,  with  a  dissertation
on  the  sundry  employments  and  delights  of  men.
'  Man  is  born  ' — so  the  overture  runs — '  not  only  to
serve  his  own  turn  (as  Tully  saith) ;  but  his  kinsfolk,
friends,  and  the  commonwealth  especially,  look  for
some  furtherance  at  his  hands,  and  some  fruits  of  his
labour :  whereupon  sundry  men  finding  themselves  as
it  were  tied  by  this  bond  and  duty  of  human  society,
have  willingly  endeavoured  sundry  ways  to  show  them-
selves profitable  members  of  their  commonweal.'  All
this,  and  much  more,  Hakluyt  omits,  to  get  on  with
the  practical  business  of  the  voyage  : — '  First,  it  may  be
gathered  by  experience  of  our  Englishmen  in  Anno
1553,' and  so  forth. No  doubt,  by  thus  stripping off  Utility  his

•  AC?  Cltltl

the  graces  and  ornaments  of  some  of  his  pilgrims,  he  has
diminished  the  attraction  of  his  book  for  a  student  of
our  older  literature ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has
condensed  within  the  covers  of  his  three  folio  volumes
a  far  larger  amount  of  valuable  practical  information
than  could  have  been  brought  within  the  same  compass
by  a  reverent  modern  editor.  It  was  utility  that  he
valued ; more than the thanks of lovers of elegant

91

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

prose  he  would  have  esteemed  the  profits  of  the  East
India  Company,  which  occupied  some  part  of  his  later
thoughts,  and  which,  according  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
were  increased  by  twenty  thousand  pounds  through
a  careful  study  of  the  *  Books  of  Voyages.'

III.

The  Foyages  Here,  then,  in  this  Book  of  Voyages,  set  down  in
^"^Jjie  Age  matter-of-fact  fashion,  one  after  another,  with  no  striv-
ing  after  beauty  of  form,  and  no  care  for  dramatic
effect,  are  the  records  of  the  deeds  that  made  England
great.  Over  against  the  plays  of  Shakespeare  and  his
fellows,  as  their  natural  counterpart,  must  be  set  the
Voyages  of  Hakluyt ;  he  who  would  understand  the
Elizabethan  age,  and  what  it  meant  for  England,  must
know  them  both.  *  The  word,'  says  Chaucer,  '  should
be  cousin  to  the  deed.'  In  a  wider  sense  than  he  in-
tended, the  word  always  is  cousin  to  the  deed ;  and
the  lives  that  men  live  express  themselves  inevitably  in
the  books  that  they  write.  That  marvellous  summer
time  of  the  imagination,  the  Elizabethan  age,  with  all
its  wealth  of  flowers  and  fruit,  was  the  gift  to  England
of  the  sun  that  bronzed  the  faces  of  the  voyagers  and
of  the  winds  that  carried  them  to  the  four  quarters  of
the  world.  Historians  of  literature  have  been  prone  to
treat  the  imaginative  growth  of  the  Elizabethan  age  as
if  it  were  a  problem  of  skilful  gardening,  an  instance
of  high  success  in  the  mysteries  of  transplanting,  graft-
ing, forcing,  and  the  like.  But  what  nourished  the
pale slips brought from abroad .'' They struck their

92

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

roots  deep  in  a  soil  rich  with  the  matter  of  life,  and
breathed  a  genial  and  stimulating  air.  The  dramatists
and  poets  were  the  children  and  inheritors  of  the
Voyagers.

Man's  imagination  is  limited  by  the  horizon  of  his  The  new
experience.  When  he  attempts  by  guess-work  to  out-  ^^^^
go  the  bounds  assigned,  his  frailty  and  ignorance  stand
apparent;  he  is  like  a  child  explaining  the  world  by  its
doll's  house.  The  irremovable  boundaries  of  knowledge
are  the  same  for  every  age;  human  sense  is  feeble,
human  reason  whimsical  and  vain,  human  life  short
and  troubled.  But  every  now  and  then,  in  the  long
history  of  the  race,  there  is  a  rift  in  the  cloud,  or  a
new  prospect  gained  by  climbing.  These  are  the  great
ages  of  the  world.  Creation  widens  on  the  view,
and  the  air  is  alive  with  a  sense  of  promise  and  expec-
tancy. Thus  it  was  in  the  age  of  Elizabeth.  The
recovery  of  the  classics  opened  a  long  and  fair  vista
backwards ;  the  exploration  of  the  New  World  seemed
to  lift  the  curtain  on  a  glorious  future.  And  the  Eng-
lish, the  little  parochial  people,  who  for  centuries  had
tilled  their  fields  and  tended  their  cattle  in  their  island
home,  cut  off  from  the  great  movements  of  European
policy,  suddenly  found  themselves,  by  virtue  of  their
shipping,  competitors  for  the  dominion  of  the  earth.  It
is  no  wonder  that  their  hearts  distended  with  pride,
and,  hardening  in  their  strength,  gloried.  A  new  sense
of  exaltation  possessed  the  country,  the  exaltation  of
knowledge  and  power.  The  rising  tide  of  national
enthusiasm  flooded  the  literature  of  the  people,  and
surprised  the  dwellers  on  many  a  high  and  dry  inland
creek.

93

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Exotic  ideals,  Charles  Lamb,  who  loved  all  that  is  familiar  and
ancient  and  homely,  somewhere  expresses  regret  that
the  plays  of  Shakespeare  and  some  of  his  brother
dramatists  hardly  ever  choose  as  their  theme  the  simple
daily  life  of  the  England  of  their  own  time,  the  affairs
of  the  shop-keepers  of  Cheapside  or  of  the  countrymen
of  Essex.  Had  the  dramatists  been  of  his  mind,  we
should  have  had  no  great  English  drama,  and  no  Shake-
speare. The  regret  felt  by  Lamb  is  only  natural ;  he
was  a  true  antiquary,  and  the  touch  of  antiquity  has
gilded  the  bucolics  and  citizens  of  Shakespeare's  time.
Vulgarity  and  stupidity  are  amiable  enough  in  dead
men.  But  the  question  at  issue  was  a  live  question  in
the  time  of  Elizabeth.  The  men  of  the  new  school
turned  impatiently  away  from  the  self-satisfied  insularity
and  rustic  ineptitude  of  their  forbears,  and  hastened  to
become  citizens  of  the  world.  The  infection  of  foreign
literatures  and  foreign  travel  changed  customs  and  manners
so  fast  that  many  sober  observers  stood  aghast  at  the
rapidity  of  the  movement,  and  the  country  rang  with  de-
nunciations of  the  innovators.  In  a  single  generation  the
change  was  complete.  At  the  time  of  Hawkins'  earlier
voyages  Gammer  Gurton's  Needle  was  a  comedy  of  the
newest  fashion,  and  the  highest  reach  of  English  tragedy
was  still  to  be  sought  in  the  Miracle- plays  ;  before  he
died  Love's  Labour  s  Lost  and  Doctor  Faustus  had  been
seen  on  the  boards  of  the  London  theatres.  Action
The  voyagers  and  imagination  went  hand  in  hand.  If  the  voyagers
^o/thoush/^^'  explored  new  countries  and  trafficked  with  strange
peoples,  the  poets  and  dramatists  went  abroad  too,  and
rifled  foreign  nations,  returning  with  far-fetched  and
dear-bought wares ; or explored lonely and untried

94

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

recesses  of  the  microcosm  of  man.  One  spirit  of  discovery
and  exultant  power  animated  both  seamen  and  poets.
Shakespeare  and  Marlowe  were,  no  less  than  Drake  and
Cavendish,  circumnavigators  of  the  world.

The  influence  of  the  Voyages  upon  the  great  litera-  Themethods
ture  of  the  time  has  been  little  recognised,  because  the  °-^  ''^'^'
reflection  of  contemporary  events  in  thought  and
imagination  is  always  indirect,  difficult  to  outline,  and
utterly  unlike  common  expectation.  When  exact  his-
torians complain  of  a  poet  that  he  does  not  hold  up
the  mirror  to  his  own  time,  they  are  often  merely  com-
plaining that  he  is  not  a  reporter,  a  retailer  of  names
and  dates,  the  dupe  of  notoriety.  Shakespeare,  it  is
often  said,  tells  us  more  of  Italy  than  of  England ;  yet
in  Shakespeare's  plays  only  the  labels  are  Italian,  while
every  type  of  English  character,  from  a  king  to  a  tinker,
is  drawn  to  the  life.  Othello  is  a  Tudor  gendeman.  Shakespeare
Petruchio,  Bassanio,  and  a  dozen  others  are  adventurous  England  of
Elizabethan  gallants.  Osric  is  a  courtly  gull,  Mercutio  his  time.
a  courtly  wit,  Edgar  in  Lear  is  a  noble  masquerading
as  an  Abram  man,  Autolycus  is  a  cony-catcher.  All
alike  are  heightened  portraits  of  the  men  whom  Shake-
speare had  met  and  talked  to  at  the  Court,  in  the  tavern,
or  by  the  roadside.  It  is  true  that  the  names  of  the
great  men  of  his  own  time  seldom  occur  in  his  plays.
A  living  great  man  is  celebrated  chiefly  by  poetasters;
who,  for  that  matter,  were  not  lacking  to  celebrate
Drake  and  Frobisher  and  Howard.  A  poet  commonly
prefers  to  work  with  human  material  closer  at  hand,
easier  to  come  at,  not  hedged  around  by  popular
favour  or  on  its  guard  against  intimate  research.  He
will  select  at  his  own  liking  from  the  life  around  him,

95

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

build  up  his  own  greatness,  and  borrow  a  name  from
ancient  history  or  fable.  But  whatever  is  most  charac-
teristic and  vital  in  the  life  and  thought  of  an  age  will
find  utterance  in  its  poetry,  none  the  less.  The  im-
pressions recorded  will  perhaps  have  no  very  obvious
connection  with  the  particular  facts  of  history ;  they
will be those rather that strike the eye and fire  the

The  sentiment  imagination  of  a  child. The  romance  of  sea-faring  will
of  the  sea.  . ,  ~  .  _  .  ,

express itselr not in an account or any  one notable

exploit,  with due credit allotted by  name to all  who

took  part  in it, but  in some  such  vague  memory  and

sentiment  as  that  of  the  American  poet :

'  I  remember  the  black  wharves,  and  the  slips,

And  the  sea-tides  tossing  free,
And  the  Spanish  sailors  with  bearded  lips,
And  the  beauty  and  mystery  of  the  ships,
And  the  magic  of  the  sea.'

Poetry  speaks  only  that  which  it  knows,  and  testifies  only
that  which  it  has  seen.  What  did  the  Elizabethan
poets  know  and  see  of  the  world  of  promise  revealed
by  the  navigators.?

Some  direct  and  commendatory  notice  there  was  of
the  most  famous  voyagers  by  name,  and  many  poems,
some  of  them  by  good  poets,  were  addressed  to  the
Warner  on  the  adventurers  on  setting  forth.  The  later  books  oi  Albion's
ojagers.  England  (1602),  for  instance,  by  William  Warner,  are
much  concerned  with  the  achievements  recorded  by
Hakluyt,  and  tribute  is  paid  in  passing  to  Hakluyt
himself.  But  Warner  belongs  to  that  older  school  of
Protestant  poets  who  had  their  education  chiefly  from
the  practice  of  metrical  psalmody.  His  zeal  is  great,
and  he  gives  high  praise  to  many  of  the  travellers,  with
a  full  account,  especially,  of  the  North  Eastern  voyages

96

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

and  the  deeds  of  Willoughby,  Chancelor,  Burrough,
Jenkinson,  Pet,  and  Jackman.  But  his  style  is  less
inspiring  than  his  subject.  Except  as  an  accompani-
ment to  stocking-weaving,  there  are  no  good  uses  to
be  found  for  verse  of  this  kind  :

*  It  is  no  common  labour  to
The  river  Ob  to  sail,
Howbeit  Burrough  did  therein,
Not  dangerless,  prevail.

He  through  the  foresaid  frozen  seas

In  Lapland  did  arrive,
And  thence,  to  expedite  for  Ob,

His  labours  did  revive.'

The  author  gives  advice  which  his  readers  will  gladly  Praise  of
follow  when,  after touching  briefly on the  voyages of
Drake, Hawkins, Gilbert, Frobisher, and the rest,  he
commends  his  audience  to  the  Preacher :

'Omitted  then,  and  named  men
And  lands  (not  here,  indeed.
So  written  of  as  they  deserve)
At  large  in  Hakluit  read.'

Perhaps the best  of  the poems dedicated to single  Chapman^
!•  •  • /->  /^i  ) T^ r^ •  ^ De  Guiana.

expeditions is Lreorge Chapman  s De LrUtana carmen

Epicum  (1596).  It  is  crabbed,  like  almost  all  Chap-
man's verse,  but  it  embodies  the  very  spirit  that  sent
hundreds  of  young  Englishmen  over  sea.  The  dream
of  gold  is  dreamed  again  in  the  description  of  Raleigh's
purposed  colony :

*  Guiana,  whose  rich  feet  are  mines  of  gold,
Whose  forehead  knocks  against  the  roof  of  stars,
Stands  on  her  tip-toes  at  fair  England  looking.
Kissing  her  hand,  bowing  her  mighty  breast.
And  every  sign  of  all  submission  making
To  be  her  sister,  and  the  daughter  both
Of  our  most  sacred  maid.'
XII  97  G

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  faith  of The theme of the poem, however, is not gold,
yagers- j^Qj. ^^ expected miracle of  Virtue rich  ; it is Pat-
riotism, Honour, and the Faith that will risk  all for
these :

'  But  you  patrician  spirits  that  refine
Your  flesh  to  fire,  and  issue  like  a  flame
On  brave  endeavours,  knowing  that  in  them
The  tract  of  heaven  in  morn-like  glory  opens  ;
That  know  you  cannot  be  the  kings  of  earth,
Claiming  the  rights  of  your  creation,
And  let  the  mines  of  earth  be  kings  of  you ;
That  are  so  far  from  doubting  likely  drifts,
That  in  things  hardest  y'are  most  confident :
You  that  know  death  lives  where  power  lives  unused.
Joying  to  shine  in  waves that  bury  you.
And  so  make  way  for  life  even  through  your  graves,
That  will  not  be  content  with  horse  to  hold
A  thread-bare  beaten  way  to  home  affairs  ;  .  . .
You  that  herein  renounce  the  course  of  earth,
And  lift  your  eyes  for  guidance  to  the  stars.
That  live  not  for  yourselves,  but  to  possess
Your  honour'd  country  of  a  general  store  ;  . . .
You  that  are  blest  with  sense  of  all  things  noble,
In  this  attempt  your  complete  worths  redouble.'

The  new  The  poem  closes  with  a  picture  of  the  blissful  com-
golden  world,  jn^nity  that  is  to  live  on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,
and  of  the  new  golden  world,  where  peace  and  plenty-
reign  ;  where  learning  is  cherished  and  valour  needs
no  weapons  ;  where  the  old  debate  between  rich  and
poor  is  closed  for  ever :

*  Where  healthful  recreations  strow  their  meads,
And  make  their  mansions  dance  with  neighbourhood.
That  here  were  drown'd  in  churlish  avarice.'

Visions  like  these  became  familiar  to  the  imagina-
tion of  poets  when  every  year  was  enlarging  hope  and
extending  knowledge :

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

'  Discovering  daily  more  and  more  about,
In  that  immense  and  boundless  ocean
Of  Nature's  riches,  never  yet  found  out.
Nor  fore-clos'd  with  the  wit  of  any man.'

The new-born faith of the English in their national
speech  took  heart  of  grace  from  the  discoveries  of  the
voyagers. Samuel  Daniel,  whose  poem  Musophilus  ( 1 60 1 )
is  a  long  passionate  hymn in praise  of  the  new  ideals, i}f
has  expressed in a single couplet  the two-fold aspira-  i^gal.
ation  of  the  age:

'  What  good  is  like  to  this.
To  do  worthy  the  writing,  and  to  write
Worthy  the  reading,  and  the  world's  delight  ? '

The  re-discovered  glories  of  the  ancients  had  for  a
time  cast  a  damp  upon  national  ambition.  It  seemed
a  paltry  vanity  in  a  writer  of  English  to  hope  to  win
literary  immortality  for  a  speech  shut  up  within  the
limits  of  a  single  island,  and  cut  off  from  close  com-
merce with  the  countries  which  inherited  the  traditions
of  Greece  and  Rome.  By  way  of  answer  to  this  doubt
Daniel  points  prophetically  to  the  New  World.  The
Ancients  civilised  their  world  ;  another  world  has  been
given  to  the  Moderns  to  civilise  ;  the  native  gifts  '^^^  English
of  Southern  eloquence  and  poetry  may  hereafter  be
'  bettered  by  the  patience  of  the  North,'  and  may
achieve  a  yet  greater  fame :

*  And  who,  in  time,  knows  whither  we  may  vent

The  treasure  of  our  tongue  ? To  what  strange  shores

This  gain  of  our  best  glory  shall  be  sent

To  enrich  unknowing  nations  with  our  stores  ?

What  worlds  in  th'  yet  unformed  Occident

May  come  refin'd  with  the  accents  that  are  ours?

Or  who  can  tell  for  what  great  work  in  hand
The  greatness  of  our  style  is  now  ordained  ?

99

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

What  powers  it  shall  bring  in,  what  spirits  command  ?

What  thoughts  let  out,  what  humours  keep  restrained  ?
What  mischief  it  may  powerfully  withstand,

And  what  fair  ends  may  thereby  be  attained  ? '

The  poets  as  Before  the  first  acre  of  land  beyond  the  seas  had
builders.  ^^^^  effectively  added  to  the  dominion  of  England,  the
poets  had  foretold  the  British  Empire.  The  expansion
of  England  was,  in  the  main,  the  work  of  the  Eighteenth
Century;  but  the  soldiers  and  statesmen  who  planted
the  Empire  in  India  and  Canada  and  the  American
Colonies,  were  the  successors  and  pupils  of  Hakluyt's
heroes ;  it  was  theirs  to  build  the  fabric  that  had  been
designed  and  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  that  had  been
uttered  in  the  great  age  of  imagination.
Influence  of  The  chief  influence  of  the  Voyages  on  the  English
on  thousfit.  imagination  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  special  tributes  or
even  in  exalted  prophecies  like  these.  The  new  ferment
wrought  in  a  deep  and  hidden  fashion  on  the  temper
and  habits  of  the  mind.  All  preconceived  notions  and
beliefs  concerning  cosmography,  history,  politics  and
society  were  made  ridiculous  by  the  new  discoveries.
The  widened  The  world  had  been  opened  up  by  the  fanatical  self-
confidence  of  visionaries,  and  had  proved  to  be  wilder
than  their  wildest  fancies.  New  kingdoms  were  to  be
had  for  the  taking.  Powers  and  virtues  unknown  to
the  peoples  of  the  Old  World  had  perhaps  been  pre-
served through  the  ages  in  remote  and  fortunate  islands.
All  things  became  possible ;  credulity  was  wiser  than
experience ;  and  the  wonders  reported  were  reckoned
merely  the  first-fruits  of  greater  things  to  come.  The
society  of  the  Old  World  meanwhile  was  rent  in  twain
by  the  schism  in  the  Christian  Church.  Great  monarchies
were tottering to their fall. The signs and portents

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

of  the times pointed  to  the  beginning  of  a new age,

when  the  riches  and  power  of  the  world  should  be  the

prize  of  bold  adventurers,  and  courage  the  only  passport

to  success.

The  argument  from  the  Voyages  is  set  forth  explicitly  ^P^"^^'' ^
.  r 1  -A  argument.

by  Spenser  in  a  well-known  passage  of  the  Faerie  ^eene.

His  fairy  world,  he  says,  has  been  condemned  by  some

as  the  forgery  of  an  idle  brain.

'  But  let  that  man  with  better  sense  advize,
That  of  the  world  least  part  to  us  is  red ;
And  daily  how  through  hardy  enterprise
Many  great  Regions  are  discovered,
Which  to  late  age  were  never  mentioned.
Who  ever  heard  of  th'  Indian  Peru  ?
Or  who  in  venturous  vessel  measured
The  Amazon  huge  river,  now  found  trew  ?
Or  fruitfuUest  Virginia  who  did  ever  vew  ?

Yet  all  these  were,  when  no  man  did  them  know,
Yet  have  from  wisest  ages  hidden  been  ;
And  later  times  thinges  more  unknowne  shall  show.
Why  then  should  witless  man  so  much  misweene
That  nothing  is  but  that  which  he  hath  seene  ?
What  if  within  the  Moones  fayre  shining  sphere,
What  if  in  every  other  starre  unseene
Of  other  worldes  he  happily  should  heare,
He  wonder  would  much  more  ;  yet  such  to  some  appeare.'

It  is  not  without  significance  that  Hakluyt  himself  Hakluyt's
makes  use  of  exactly  the  same  argument.  *  If  any  ^^&'^^^^-
man  shall  object,'  he  says,  speaking  of  the  Friars,  *that
they  have  certain  incredible  relations,  I  answer,  first,
that  many  true  things  may  to  the  ignorant  seem  in-
credible.' And  again,  in  praise  of  his  own  age  : — '  Which
of  the  kings  of  this  land  before  her  Majesty  had  their
banners  ever  seen  in  the  Caspian  sea  }  Which  of  them
hath  ever  dealt  with  the  Emperor  of  Persia,  as  her
Majesty hath done, and attained for her merchants

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

large  and  loving  privileges  ?  Who  ever  saw,  before  this
regiment,  an  English  Ligier  in  the  stately  porch  of  the
Grand  Signor  at  Constantinople  ?  Who  ever  found
English  consuls  and  agents  at  Tripolis  in  Syria,  at
Aleppo,  at  Babylon,  at  Balsara,  and,  which  is  more,  who
ever  heard  of  Englishmen  at  Goa  before  now  ?  What
English  ships  did  heretofore  ever  anchor  in  the  mighty
river  of  Plate  ? ' — and  so  on,  passing  in  review  the  un-
precedented achievements  of  the  apostles  of  navigation.
Both  Spenser  and  Hakluyt  are  right  in  making  much
of  these  things.  The  boast  of  the  Stoic  is  empty,  that
the  mind  is  its  own  place.  The  mind  lives  by  its
takings,  and  a  fresh  experience  feathers  the  wings  of  the
human  spirit,  and  lends  them  scope  and  power.
The  spirit  of  The  fantastic  adventure  of  the  age  and  its  intimate
T^frkl  connection  with  grave  historical  events  may  be  well
seen  in  the  career  of  the  notorious  Tom  Stukeley.  He
was  a  man  of  small  account,  says  Camden,  '  a  ruffian,  a
riotous  spend-thrift,  and  a  notable  vapourer,'  who  had
been  disappointed  in  his  hope  of  obtaining  a  small
official  post  in  Ireland.  He  offered  his  services  to  the
Pope,  promising  to  drive  the  English  troops  out  of
Ireland,  and  to  fire  the  English  fleet.  To  this  end
he  was  put  in  command  of  some  eight  hundred  Italian
soldiers  levied  at  the  charges  of  Spain.  He  set  sail
from  Civita  Vecchia  and  arrived  at  Lisbon,  where  he
was  to  be  joined  by  Sebastian,  King  of  Portugal.
Sebastian  induced  him,  by  way  of  preface  to  the  Irish
campaign,  to  lend  his  force  against  the  Mahomedan
powers  of  Northern  Africa;  and  in  1578,  at  the  battle
of  Alcazar,  where  Sebastian  and  two  Moorish  kings
fell,  Stukeley  also  was  slain. By  the  death  of  the  King

102

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

of Portugal without a son the way  was opened  for

the  Spanish  claim,  and  the  attention  of  King  Philip  was

for  years  diverted  from  his  intended  invasion  of  England.

Stukeley's  romantic  career was subsequently  dramatised

for  the  London  public  in  Peele's  Battle  of  Alcazar.

A career like this serves to show  how the life of  ^^^  ^/^

'-T-'i i-rr  i_  World  and

the  age  acted  on  its  literature. The  dijfterences  between  Romantic

the  Romantic  drama  of  England  and  the  Classic  drama  literature.
of  France  can  never  be  understood  while  the  question
is  treated  only  as  a  conflict  between  two  literary  schools.
It  is  true  that  France,  by  position,  history,  and  train-
ing, was  from  the  first  more  under  the  influence  of
classic  literature  and  ancient  theory  than  ever  England
had  been.  But  in  England,  too,  when  the  drama  began
its  course,  the  partisans  of  the  classical  doctrine  were
first  in  the  field,  and  made  the  bravest  start.  Then
the  new  interests  arose,  and  overwhelmed  them.  The
echoes  of  ancient  wisdom  and  shadows  of  ancient  beauty
which  held  the  attention  of  France  were  drowned  and
scattered  in  England  by  loud  voices  and  fierce  lights.
Extravagant  deeds  filled  the  popular  imagination,  and
could  not,  by  any  legerdemain  of  pedantry,  be  brought
within  the  prescribed  critical  compass.  If  the  dramatists
refused  allegiance  to  the  rules,  they  were  merely  following
the  lead  of  the  adventurers.  The  fatalism  of  Greek
Tragedy,  where  the  end  is  known  before  the  beginning,
could  give  no  real  pleasure  to  a  people  intoxicated  with
the  delights  of  surprise,  and  intolerant  of  all  limitation.
In  a  world  where  anything  may  happen,  the  fairy-story
or  the  romance  of  adventure  is  the  safest  literary  model.

The best exemplar of the new style is Marlowe,  Marlowe  and
whose Tamburlaine  set the fashion followed by  Greene

103

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  Peele  and  many  others.  Without  the  Voyagers
Marlowe  is  inconceivable.  His  imagination  is  wholly
pre-occupied  with  the  new  marvels  of  the  world  and
his  heart  possessed  by  the  new-found  lust  of  power.  The
tasks  that  Doctor  Faustus  assigns  to  his  serviceable
spirits  might  have  been  studied  from  the  reports  of
travellers  :

'  I'll  have  them  fly  to  India  for  gold,
Ransack  the  Ocean  for  orient  pearl,
And  search  all  corners  of  the new-found  world
For  pleasant  fruits  and  princely  delicates  ; ...
I'll  levy  soldiers  with  the  coin  they  bring.
And  chase  the  Prince  of  Parma from  our  land
And  reign  sole  King  of  all  our  Provinces.'

Gold  again  is  the  theme  of  the  Jew  of  Malta^  and  con-
Tamburlaine.  quest  and  kingship  the  inspiration  of  Tamburlaine.  The
Scythian  conqueror,  like  Shakespeare's  Italian  gentlemen,
is  at  heart  an  Englishman.  When  he  tries  to  tempt  the
Persian  general  into  his  service,  his  persuasions  savour  of
the  nautical  pride  of  the  English  :

'  Both  we  will  walk  upon  the  lofty  cliffs
And Christian  merchants  that  with  Russian  sterns
Plough  up  huge  furrows  in  the  Caspian  Sea
Shall  vail  to  us,  as  lords  of  all  the  lake.'

Historical
parallels.

In  1567  Hawkins  fired  on  a  friendly  Spanish  squadron
in  Plymouth  Sound,  to  compel  the  Admiral  to  lower
his  flag,  and  in  1570  Lord  Charles  Howard  of  Effingham
exacted  a  like  tribute  in  the  open  Channel  from  a  Spanish
fleet  of  a  hundred  and  thirty  sail  which  was  conveying
King  Philip's  bride-elect  from  Holland  to  Spain.  Even
the  name  of  the  Caspian  was  reminiscent  of  English
adventure.  '  Our  nation,'  says  Hakluyt,  writing  in  1598,
*  have  adventured  their  persons,  ships  and  goods,  home-

104

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

wards  and  outwards,  fourteen  times  over  the  unknown
and  dangerous  Caspian  Sea.'  It  is  the  dominion  of  the  The  dominion
sea,  as  well  as  of  the  land,  that  Marlowe's  Tamburlaine
covets,  and  his  eloquence  reaches  its  highest  when  the
sea  is  his  theme.  The  defeat  of  Bajazeth,  Emperor  of
the  Turks,  is  a  means  to  an  end  ;  the  Persian  fleet,
already  in  Tamburlaine's  control,  shall  circumnavigate
the  earth,  and  join  forces  with  the  Turkish  Medi-
terranean squadron  of  men-of-war  and  buccaneers.
Marlowe  was  an  early  friend  of  Raleigh's,  and  it  is
difficult  not  to  read  a  political  meaning  into  these
sounding  lines,  written  just  after  Drake's  expedition  of
1585,  at  a  time  when  Don  Antonio,  the  Portuguese
pretender,  had  taken  refuge  at  the  English  Court,  and
was  being  used  by  Raleigh  as  a  counter  in  the  great
political  game  :

'So  from  the  East  unto  the  furthest  West  Tambur-

Shall  Tamburlaine  extend  his  puissant  arm.  laine's  naval

The  galleys  and  those  pilling  brigandines  policy.

That  yearly  sail  to  the  Venetian  Gulf

And  hover  in  the  Straits  for  Christians'  wrecks,

Shall  lie  at  anchor  in the  isle  Asant,

Until  the  Persian  fleet  and  men-of-war.

Sailing  along  the  oriental  sea.

Have  fetched  about  the  Indian  Continent,

Even  from  Persepolis  to  Mexico,

And  thence  unto  the  Straits  of  Jubalter  ;

Where  they  shall  meet  and  join  their  force  in  one

Keeping  in  awe  the  Bay  of  Portingale,

And  all  the  ocean  by  the  British  shore  ;

And  by  this  means  I'll  win  the  world  at  last.'

As  a  naval  plan of  campaign  this  belongs  to  the  school

of  Raleigh,  who  complained  that  the  Queen  did  things  Topical

by  halves. The immense popular success of  'J'ambur-  success  of

'  T/imhfjr

laine,  which  changed  the  fortunes  of  the  English  drama,  /^,-„^ '

105

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

was  due  not  solely  to  the  resonance  and  splendour  of  the
verse  or  the  magic  of  the  strange  names.  The  audience
listened  to  it  in  a  temper  quite  unlike  the  temper  that
Coleridge's  Kubla  Khan  begets  in  the  modern  reader.
This  drama  of  the  world  at  stake  was  to  them  a
representation  of  real  affairs,  and  the  high  speeches  of
Tamburlaine  voiced  for  them  the  defiance  and  the
pride  of  England.
The  romance  How  entirely  Marlowe's  imagination  had  been  cap-
oj  iscovery.  ^Mx^di  by  the  discoveries  and  exploits  of  the  navigators
is  clearly  shown  in  Tamburlaine's  dying  speech,  which
expresses  all  the  romance  of  geography  and  all  the
ambition  of  empire.  The  Conqueror  feels  his  vital
powers  failing,  and,  with  his  sons  by  his  side,  calls  for
a  map  of  the  world  :

*  Give  me  a  map  ;  then  let  me  see  how  much
Is  left  for  me  to  conquer all  the  world,

That  these,  my  boys,  may  finish  all  my  wants.'

The  map  is  brought,  and  he  traces  on  it  his  victorious
progress  through  Asia  and  Africa,  '  backwards  and  for-
wards near  five  thousand  leagues.'  The  Suez  Canal  is
one  of  his  unfulfilled  schemes  :

*  Here,  not  far  from  Alexandria,
Whereas  the  Terrene  and  the  Red Sea  meet,
Being  distant  less  than  full  a  hundred  leagues,
I  meant  to  cut  a  channel  to  them  both
That  men  might  quickly  sail  to  India.'

The  dream  of  Then, for  a  legacy  to his sons, he  points to  that  part
Empire.  q£  ^^  world,  better  than  all  the  rest,  which  remains to

conquer :

*  Look  here,  my  boys  ;  see  what  a  world  of  ground
Lies  westward  from  the  midst  of  Cancer's line,
Unto  the  rising  of  this  earthly  globe  ;

Whereas  the  sun,  declining  from  our  sight,
io6

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

Begins  the  day  with  our  Antipodes  !
And  shall  I  die,  and  this  unconquered  ?
Lo,  here,  my  sons,  are  all  the  golden  mines,
Inestimable  drugs  and  precious  stones,
More  worth  than  Asia  and  all  the  world  beside  ;
And  from  the  Antarctic  Pole eastward  behold
As  much  more  land,  which  never  was  descried.
Wherein  are  rocks  of  pearl  that  shine  as  bright
As  all  the  lamps  that  beautify  the  sky  !
And  shall  I  die,  and  this  unconquered  ?
Here,  lovely  boys  ;  what  death  forbids  my  life.
That  let  your  lives  command  in  spite  of  death.'

Since the days of Ben Jonson  it  has  been  too  much  Serious

the  habit  of  critics to cast ridicule  or contempt upon  ^^^J^^^.

*  the  Tamerlanes  and  Tamer-Chams  of  the  late  age,  which  /aine.'

had  nothing in  them  but  scenical  strutting  and furious

vociferation to warrant them to the ignorant gaper.'

This  last  speech  of  Tamburlaine's,  like  ■  some  others  that

are  given to  him,  is high  and serious; Hakluyt,  who

knew  the  fascination  of  the  map,  and  Gilbert,  who  gave

his  life  in  the  cause  of  empire,  might  say  Amen to  it.

The  sense  of  liberty  and  power,  and  of  belief  in  the  TAe

jj.  r-  1-1  •!  ju^i Elizabethan

capacity  and  destmy  or  man,  which  was  quickened  by  the  f^^p^^

new  discoveries,  distinguishes  the  literature  of  the  Eliza-
bethan age  from  the  great  backward-looking  periods  of
romance.  It  is  a  literature  of  youth  and  hope,  with  none  of
the  subtle  and  poignant  flavours  that  are  to  be  tasted  in  a
literature  of  regret  and  memory.  If  Marlowe  may  in
some  regards  be  fitly  compared  with  Shelley,  there  is
no  counterpart  in  Elizabethan  literature  to  the  melan-
choly of  Keats.  Many  old  stories,  it  is  true,  were
borrowed ;  mediaeval  and  classical  fables  were  ransacked
for  themes.  But  Spenser's  chivalry  is  a  convention,
and  no  true  revival ; he  portrays  his  own  age,  and his

own  contemporaries,  as they  appeared to him ; he  too

107

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

is  concerned  chiefly  with  the  future. Plays  like  Dekker's
Olde  Fortunatus show the temper that animates Mar-
lowe ;  the  sober  moral  is  almost  forgotten  in  a  maze  of
'^^^  delightful  wonders. But it  would be  wrong  to  regard

Themes  of  ^  great  literature  as  nothing  more  than  the  home  and
poetry.  haunt  of  a  thing  so  evanescent  as  the  spirit  of  the  age.
Poetic  imagination  sits  aloof,  and  studies  enduring
themes.  Thomas  Lodge  wrote  his  gentle  pastoral
romance  of  Rosalynd  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  and
pillage ;  George  Sandys,  being  arrived  off  the  coast  of
Virginia  with  the  colonising  expedition  that  succeeded  at
last,  devoted  his  spare  hours  to  the  translation  of  Ovid.
The  New  World  did  not  obliterate  the  Old,  and  the  new
discoveries  did  not  monopolise  the  thought  of  a  century.

In  the  case,  therefore,  of  the  greatest  poet  of  all,
Shakespeare,  it  is  enough  if  it  can  be  shown  that  his
imagination  was  alive  to  this  new  world  of  speculation
and  opportunity.  A  poet's  predilections  are  often  more
truly  seen  in  his  illustrations  and  digressions  than  in
Raleigh's  his  choice  of  subject.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  for  instance,
meap  ors.  .^  j^.^  long,  dreary  History  of  the  World  is  kept  far
away  from  almost  all  that  had  engaged  his  active  life.
But  when  he  is  moved  to  passion,  his  mind  reverts  to
the  sea.  The  greatest  passages  of  his  book  deal  with
death  and  mutability,  and  continually  illustrate  human
life  from  the  experience  of  voyagers.  'When  we  once
come  in  sight  of  the  port  of  death,  to  which  all  winds
drive  us,  and  when  by  letting  fall  that  fatal  anchor,
which  can  never  be  weighed  again,  the  navigation  of
this  life  takes  end;  then  it  is,  I  say,  that  our  own
cogitations  (those  sad  and  severe  cogitations,  formerly
beaten  from  us  by  our  health  and  felicity)  return  again,

ic8

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

and  pay  us  to  the  uttermost  for  all  the  pleasing  passages

of  our  lives  past.' And  again :  *  For  myself,  if  I  have

in  anything  served  my  country,  and  prized  it  before  my

private; the  general  acceptation  can  yield  me  no  other

profit  at  this time than  doth a  fair  sunshine  day  to  a

seaman  after  shipwrack,  and  the  contrary  no  other  harm

than an outragious tempest after the port attained.'

Images  like  these,  rising  to  the  memory  when  the  thought  His  habitual

is  most  spontaneous  and  sincere,  speak to  the  habitual

workings  of  the mind, and  are more  convincing than

the  most  elaborate  descriptive  sea-piece.

Though  he  was  inland  bred,  it  is  certain  that  Shake-  Shakespeare
speare  knew  and  loved  the  sea.  The  handling  of  the
ship  in  the  Tempest,  and  the  talk  of  the  sailors  in  the
storm-scene  of  Pericles  have  excited  the  admiration  of
experienced  judges.  The  single  grave  charge  brought
against  his  competence  as  a  navigator  is  based  on  the
two  allusions  in  the  Tempest  to  the  'glasses'  formerly
used  as  a  measure  of  time  at  sea,  and  now  superseded
by  bells.  From  a  comparison  of  these  two  passages  it  His  single
seems  that  Shakespeare  believed  that  the  glasses  measured
hours,  whereas  they  measured  half-hours.-*^ He  could  not

j^  The passages are : Act I. Sc.  ii.  1.  240,  where, just after the
wreck,  Prospero  asks  the  time ;

Ariel.  *  Past  the  mid  season.'

Prospero.  *At  least  two  glasses. The  time  'twixt  six  and  now
Must  by  us  both  be  spent  most  preciously,'

and  Act  V.  1. 223, at the close  of  the play,  where  the  Boatswain
reports :

*  Our  ship.
Which  but  three  glasses  since  we  gave  out  split,
Is  tight,  and  yare,  and  bravely  rigged,  as  when
We  first  put  out  to  sea.'
There  is  a  similar  error  in  All^s  Well  that  Ends  Well,  Act  II.  Sc.  i,

109

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

have  made  this  mistake  if  he  had  been  moderately  con-
versant with  life  at  sea.  His  habitual  carelessness,  it  is
true,  may  be  invoked  to  save  his  reputation  as  a  seaman.
But  many  other  passages  of  his  writing  testify  rather  to  a
love  of  the  sea  than  to  a  love  of  navigation.  Venus,
when  Adonis  breaks  away  from  her,  is  compared  to

'  One  on  shore
Gazing  upon  a  late-embarked  friend,
Till  the  wild  waves  will  have  him  seen  no  more,
Whose  ridges  with  the  meeting  clouds  contend :
So  did  the  merciless  and  pitchy  night
Fold  in  the  object  that  did  feed  her  sight.'

And  his  most  famous  descriptions,  like  that  which  occurs
in  King  Henry  IV's  lament  over  the  unattainable  sleep,
exhibit  a  marvellous  power  of  poetic  imagination  and
diction  at  work  upon  the  material  of  common  knowledge.
His  sailors.  The  seamen,  whom  he  sketches  unerringly,  were  to  be
met  on  shore.  A  real  sailor's  chanty,  unlike  any  other
song  in  the  Plays,  is  given  to  Stephano  in  the  Tempest:

'  The  master, the  swabber,  the  boatswain,  and  I,
The  gunner,  and  his  mate.
Loved  Moll,  Meg,  and  Marian,  and  Margery,
But  none  of  us  cared  for  Kate.'

This  little  lyric,  with  its  *  scurvy  tune,'  suggests  life
ashore,  in  the  taverns  of  Deptford  and  Wapping.  There
is  more  technical  knowledge  of  the  sea  than  might  have
been  expected  in  Shakespeare's  plays,  but  no  exact
inference  can  be  drawn  from  it.
Allusions  to  The  extent  to  which  the  sea  and  sea-faring  dominated
the  imagination  of  Shakespeare  may  be  better  judged  in
more  indirect  fashion,  from  his  figures  and  allusions.
It  is  not  merely  that  in  at  least  a  dozen  of  his  plays
there  are  sea-faring  characters,  or  voyages,  or  scenes  laid

the  sea.

Othello:

POETRY AND IMAGINATION

on  the  sea-coast.  There  is  none  of  his  contemporaries
whose  works  are  so  full  of  the  sentiment  of  the  sea.
To  take  one  play  out  of  many  that  would  serve  equally
well,  in  Othello  the  scene  is  laid  at  Venice  and  Cyprus,
so  that  nautical  affairs  bulk  largely  in  it.  But  this  is
not  enough  to  explain  the  frequency  and  the  magnificence
of  Shakespeare's  allusions.  The  height  of  joy  and  of
tragic  passion  constantly  find  their  most  adequate  expres-
sion in  the  language  of  the  sea.  So  in  the  meeting  of
Othello  with  Desdemona  at  Cyprus :

'  O  my  soul's  joy  !
If  after  every  tempest  come  such  calms,
May  the  winds  blow  till  they  have  waken'd  death  ;
And  let  the  labouring  bark  climb  hills  of  seas,
Olympus-high,  and  duck  again  as  low
As  hell's  from  heaven ! If  it  were  now  to  die,
'Twere  now  to  be  most  happy.'

So,  again,  in  Othello's  reply  to  lago's  counsels  of
patience :

'  Never,  lago. Like  to  the  Pontic  sea
Whose  icy  current  and  compulsive  course
Ne'er  feels  retiring  ebb,  but  keeps  due  on
To  the  Propontic  and  the  Hellespont ;
Even  so  my  bloody  thoughts,  with  violent  pace.
Shall  ne'er  look  back,  ne'er  ebb  to  humble  love,
Till  that  a  capable  and  wide  revenge
Swallow  them  up.'

So,  again,  in  Ludovico's  last  apostrophe  to  lago  :

'  O  Spartan  dog
More  fell  than  anguish,  hunger,  or  the  sea.'

In  the  greatness  of  Othello's  passion  there  is  the  lift
and  the  wash  of  the  sea ;  in  the  inhuman  treachery  of
lago  there  is  its  cruelty  and  its  mystery.

There is evidence enough, in well-known passages.  Borrowed
of Shakespeare's acquaintance with the discoveries of

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

the  voyagers.  The  name  Caliban  is  almost  certainly
a  distortion  of  Cannibal,  and  Setebos  is  a  divinity
of  the  Patagonians,  described  by  Master  Francis
Fletcher,  in  his  account  of  Drake's  great  voyage,  as
*  Settaboth,  that  is,  the  Divell,  whom  they  name  their
great  god.'  But  it  was  the  reports  brought  home  by
the Virginian adventurers that set Shakespeare's im-

Virginia.  agination  to  work.  The  colony  was  planted  in  1609;
and  the  first  Governor,  Lord  Delaware,  was  diligent  in
building  towns  and  forts,  and  in  bringing  the  Indians
under  control.  Sir  George  Somers,  deputy-Governor,
was  shipwrecked  on  the  Bermudas,  which  were  in  ill
repute  as  the  haunt  of  wicked  spirits  and  foul  weather,
but  were  found  by  the  castaways  to  be  temperate,
fruitful,  and  pleasant.  The  tale  of  these  adventures,
brought  by  word  of  mouth,  or  published  in  The  Dis-
covery of  the  BarmudaSj  otherwise  called  the  He  of  Divels
(1610), — a  tract  by  Sylvester  Jourdain,  one  of  Sir
George Somers'  company, — ^gave  the  finest  and  subtlest

The  wit  in  the  world  a  theme  for  a  play. The  Tempest  is  a

'Tempest:  fantasy  of  the  New  World.  It  is  too  full  of  the  ether
of  poetry,  and  too  many-sided  to  be  called  a  satire,  yet
Shakespeare,  almost  alone,  saw  the  problem  of  Ameri-
can settlement  in  a  detached  light ;  and  a  spirit  of
humorous  criticism  runs  riot  in  the  lighter  scenes.  The
drunken  butler,  accepting  the  worship  and  allegiance
of  Caliban,  and  swearing  him  in  by  making  him  kiss
the  bottle,  is  a  fair  representative  of  the  idle  and  dis-
solute  men  who  were  shipped  to  the  Virginian  colony.

Miranda.  The  situation  of  Miranda  was  perhaps  suggested  by
the  story  of  Virginia  Dare,  grand-daughter  of  Captain
John  White,  the  first  child  born  in  America  of  English

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

parents.  She  was  born  in  1587  and  christened  along
with  Manteo,  one  of  the  Indians  who  had  visited
England  with  Captains  Amadas  and  Barlow.  That
same  year  she  was  abandoned,  along  with  the  other
colonists.  In  1607,  when  the  settlement  was  next
renewed,  it  was  reported  that  there  were  still  seven
of  the  English  alive  among  the  Indians,  'four  men,
two  boys,  and  one  maid.'  The  strange  girlhood  of  this
one  maid,  if  she  were  Virginia  Dare,  may  well  have
set  Shakespeare's  fancy  working.  And  the  portrait  of
Caliban,  with  his  affectionate  loyalty  to  the  drunkard,  Caliban.
his  adoration  of  valour,  his  love  of  natural  beauty  and
feeling  for  music  and  poetry,  his  hatred  and  super-
stitious fear  of  his  task-master,  and  the  simple  cunning
and  savagery  of  his  attempts  at  revenge  and  escape —
all  this  is  a  composition  wrought  from  fragments  of
travellers'  tales,  and  shows  a  wonderfully  accurate  and
sympathetic  understanding  of  uncivilised  man.

These  travellers'  tales  gave  a  new  import  to  the  old  ^"^^  Golden
fables  of  Arcadia  and  the  Golden  Age.  The  poetic  idea  ^^'
of  the  original  simplicity  and  virtue  of  man  seemed  to
be  confirmed  by  the  warrant  of  sober  fact,  and  steadily
gained  in  acceptance,  until,  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,
it  overturned  the  institutions  and  disturbed  the  peace
of  Europe.  Montaigne,  in  his  essay  Of  Cannibals,  ex-
presses the  view  of  a  philosophic  observer.  *  I  find,'  he
says,  speaking  of  the  Indians,  *  that  there  is  nothing
barbarous  and  savage  in  this  nation,  by  anything  that  I
can  gather,  excepting  that  everyone  gives  the  title  of
barbarism  to  everything  that  is  not  in  use  in  his  own
country.  .  .  .  They  are  savages  at  the  same  rate  that
we  say  fruits  are  wild,  which  nature  produces  of  herself

XII  113  H

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Montaigne  on
Cannibals.

The  pe7-fe€t
Common-
wealth.

Shakespeare
and  the
Golden  Age.

and  by  her  own  ordinary  progress ;  whereas  in  truth  we
ought  rather  to  call  those  wild,  whose  natures  we  have
changed  by  our  artifice,  and  diverted  from  the  common
order.  ...  I  am  sorry  that  Lycurgus  and  Plato  had
no  knowledge  of  them :  for  to  my  apprehension,  what
we  now  see  in  those  nations  does  not  only  surpass  all
the  pictures  with  which  the  poets  have  adorned  the
Golden  Age,  and  all  their  inventions  in  feigning  a  happy
state  of  man,  but,  moreover,  the  fancy  and  even  the
wish  and  desire  of  philosophy  itself;  so  native  and  so
pure  a  simplicity,  as  we  by  experience  see  to  be  in  them,
could  never  enter  into  the  poets'  imagination,  nor  could
they  ever  believe  that  human  society  could  have  been
maintained  with  so  little  artifice  and  human  patchwork.'
Then  follows  the  famous  passage  which  Shakespeare
borrowed  for  Gonzalo's  description  of  his  perfect  com-
monwealth, in  the  Tempest.  *  I  should  tell  Plato,'  says
Montaigne,  *  that  it  is  a  nation  wherein  there  is  no
manner  of  traffic,  no  knowledge  of  letters,  no  science
of  numbers,  no  name  of  magistrate  or  political  superi-
ority ;  no  use  of  service,  riches  or  poverty ;  no  con-
tracts, no  successions,  no  dividends,  no  properties ;  no
employments  but  those  of  leisure;  no  respect  of  kindred,
but  common ;  no  clothing,  no  agriculture,  no  metal,
no  use  of  coin  or  wine ;  the  very  words  that  signify
lying,  treachery,  dissimulation,  avarice,  envy,  detraction,
pardon,  never  heard  of.  How  much  would  he  find  his
imaginary  Republic  short  of  this  perfection } '

The  humours  of  this  ideal  as  a  practical  theory  of
colonisation  tickled  Shakespeare's  fancy;  the  combination
of  the  virtues  of  the  Golden  Age  with  that  extension  of
trade and of  sovereignty  which was aimed  at  by the

114

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

explorers  made  a  delightful  paradox;  and  he  interrupts
Gonzalo's  speech  with  a  running  fire  of  scornful  comment
from  the  two  men  of  sin.  Yet  he,  too,  came  under
the  spell  of  the  Golden  Age,  and,  for  all  we  know,  would
have  been  willing  to  say  with  Montaigne,  '  I  am  some-
times troubled  that  we  were  not  sooner  acquainted  with
these  people,  and  that  they  were  not  discovered  in  those
better  times  when  there  were  men  much  more  able  to
judge  of  them  than  we  are.'  He  had  always  coveted  a
retreat  from  the  struggles  and  clamour  of  the  Court  and
city;  but  the  retreats  pictured  in  his  later  plays  have
a  primitive  simplicity  which  is  lacking  in  the  pleasure-
gardens  of  the  King  of  Navarre  and  the  masquerading
of  the  forest  of  Arden.  Perdita,  who,  like  Miranda,  is
prompted  in  all  her  words  and  actions  by  a  plain  and
holy  innocence,  is  something  of  a  devotee  of  Nature.
She  will  have  no  flowers  in  her  garden,  not  the  fairest
of  the  season,  if  Art  has  had  a  share  in  their  production ;
and  she  is  deaf  to  the  reproofs  of  experience.  The  The  religu
religion  in  which  Belarius,  the  upright  banished  courtier  "J"^^"^^-
in  Cymbeline,  educates  his  adopted  sons  is  a  pure  religion
of  naturalism ;  their  brief  ritual  is  performed  as  they
come  out  from  the  cave  where  they  house :

Belarius.  *  Stoop,  boys  :  this  gate

Instructs  you  how  to  adore  the  heavens,  and  bows  you
To  Morning's  holy  office :  the  gates  of  monarchs
Are  arch'd  so  high,  that  giants  may  jet  through
And  keep  their  impious  turbans  on,  without
Good  morrow  to  the  Sun. Hail,  thou  fair  Heaven  !
We  house  i'  the  rock,  yet  use  thee  not  so  hardly
As  prouder  livers  do.'

Guiderius.  *  Hail,  Heaven  !'

Arviragus.  *  Hail,  Heaven  ! '

Belarius. '  Now  for  our  mountain  sport.'

"5

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

In  these  rocks  Belarius  has  lived,  he  says,  for  twenty-
years,  and  during  that  time  has  paid  more  pious  debts
to  heaven  than  in  all  the  fore-end  of  his  life.  A  kind  of
weariness  of  institutions  pervades  Shakespeare's  later
plays ;  and  it  is  easy  to  believe  that  the  fascinating  tales
told  by  the  voyagers  quickened  his  longing  for  a  simpler
society,  and  contributed  something  to  his  magical  descrip-
tions of  innocence  and  kindliness,  whether  in  the  wizard's
cell  on  the  island,  or  on  the  shepherd's  lawn  in  Bohemia,
or  in  the  cave  among  the  mountains  of  Wales.
Influence  of  There  is  no  catching  Shakespeare  in  the  act  of  theft ;

//  national  ^^^  Creative  power  transforms  and  inspires  all  that  it
imagination,  touches,  and  brings  it  obedient  to  his  own  thought.  It
is  certain  that  he  was  a  poet;  and  there  certainty  ends.
But  whether  it  count  for  much  or  little  in  the  history
of  his  thought,  the  great  fact  of  the  Voyages  can  never
be  neglected,  nor  its  influence  on  the  national  imagination
denied.  In  this  partial  and  naked  record,  preserved  for
us  by  Hakluyt,  are  inscribed  the  deeds  which  for  half
a  century  excited  wild  emotions,  kindled  emulation
in  the  young,  provided  strange  food  for  the  intellect,
and  gave  strength  and  purpose  to  the  activities  of  a
nation.  What  this  scholar  or  that  learned  we  can  only
The  School  of  guess ;  but  here  was  the  school  of  the  people.  It  was
the  people.  ^  great  training-ground,  and  gave  noble  exercise  to  those
qualities  of  strenuousness,  high  carelessness,  and  almost
braggart  magnanimity  which  are  the  distinguishing  mark
of  the  Elizabethans.  In  those  days  the  prudential
virtues  hid  their  heads,  to  wait  for  a  less  stormy  season,
when  coasting  voyages  for  profit  should  come  into  fashion
again.  The  poets  and  men  of  action  vied  with  each
other  in the  effort  to  outshine  deeds  with  words,  and

ii6

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

to  impoverish  words  with  deeds.  Both  were  fantastic
and  extravagant,  but  the  morbid  literary  extravagance
which  refuses  the  test  of  action,  and  claims  to  be  judged
as  a  thing  apart,  in  a  filigree  world  of  its  own  creation,
belongs  to  ages  less  full-blooded  and  vigorous  and  sane.

This  great  background and seminary  of  action  gave  The  Age  of
its  colour  and  character  to  the  literature of  the Eliza-  fhTA^oP^
bethan  age. The  later  and  lesser  outburst  of  Romantic  Revived
poetry  at  the  beginning  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  had  ^°^^^^^-
origins curiously diiferent. As the Voyagers were
the begetters of the Elizabethan age, so were the
Encyclopaedists  of  the  age  of  revived Romance. The
later movement had its impulse  and  inspiration from
the long labours of critical thought and the hopes
of  awakening  science. The poetry  of  the Nineteenth
Century,  unlike  the  poetry  of  the Elizabethans,  began
in reaction and protest. For three generations and
more before  William Blake struck the note that  was
to  dominate  Romantic  poetry,  the  disciples of  positive
knowledge  had  been  busy  at  their  work  of  questioning,
examining,  undermining,  condemning,  without  hesitation
or remorse  ;  and the poets of  the new  age were the  The  poetry  of
rebellious  children of the destroyer. Some of  them,  ^7^1^''"'^
taking  advantage  of  the  conquests  of  critical  knowledge
in  the  domain  of  history,  flung  themselves  back  into  the
Middle  Ages,  and  attempted  to  live  as  pensioners  on  the
faith of  a bygone time. Others, fired by the hope
of  a new happiness to be achieved by experimental
science and  philanthropy,  lived  in  their dreams  of  the
future, built cloud-castles of wonderful tenuity and
beauty,  and peopled bubble-worlds with phantoms of
men. Almost  all  the  poetry  of  the  age  is  *  sicklied  o'er

117

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Diseases  of
thought.

Godwin  and
Hakluyt.

with  the  pale  cast  of  thought.'  Those  of  the  poets  who,
like  Keats,  celebrate  the  joys  of  the  moment,  for  the
most  part  regard  these  joys  as  a  palliation  only,  a  brief
respite  and  escape  from  the  prevailing  melancholy.  They
glut  their  sorrows  *  on  a  morning  rose,  or  on  the  rainbow
of  the  salt  sand-wave.'  It  is  the  distinction  of  Words-
worth that  he  alone  among  the  greater  poets  did  not
renounce  or  blaspheme  the  age  and  the  world,  but
found  in  it  room  enough  for  hope  and  faith  and  lasting
joy.  But  the  poetry  of  the  age,  taken  as  a  whole,  is
disaffected — out  of  sympathy  with  the  main  motives  that
stir  men  to  action,  and  liable  to  all  the  diseases  generated
by  abstract  thought.  The  worst  of  these,  which  attack
only  weak  constitutions,  producing  kinks  in  the  brain,
and  making  men  the  fevered  and  querulous  slaves  of
ideas  they  are  not  strong  enough  to  master,  may  be  dis-
covered in  not  a  few  of  the  later  followers  and  adherents
of  the  Romantic  movement.  It  was  the  misfortune  of
the  age  that,  struggling  in  the  meshes  of  thought,  it
found  no  sufficient  opportunity  for  clear,  united,  whole-
hearted, and  decisive  action.  Some  of  its  poets  were
ardent  students  of  Godwin's  Political  Justice,  a  book  alert
and  blind,  full  of  vaporous  casuistry,  giving  ample
exercise  to  the  logical  faculty,  and  absolutely  ignoring
those  passions,  desires  and  powers,  which  are  the  breath
of  human  life.  The  Elizabethan  poets  were  happier
in  their  teachers — they  had  Hakluyt's  Voyages.

When  all  is  said,  the  chief  influence  of  Hakluyt  and
his  noble  company  must  not  be  looked  for  in  literature.
Literature  is  only  one  expression  of  the  imaginative
of  a people, and not  the  most  important. It

IS

The  value  of  JJfg

true that poetry can never be divided from action

ii8

POETRY  AND IMAGINATION

without  paying  heavy  penalties.  Only  by  keeping  firm
hold  of  that  guarantee  of  sincerity  which  is  supplied
by  the  deed  done  can  it  steer  clear  of  the  slippery
pitfall  of  rhetoric.  But  action  is  not  dependent  on
poetry  ;  and  the  inarticulate  generations  who  inherited
and  carried  on  the  work  celebrated  in  the  Book  of
Voyages  played  for  higher  stakes  than  praise.  It  was
almost  an  accident  that  the  book  was  made ;  the  dynasty
of  Drake  and  Hawkins  and  Frobisher  would  have  es-
tablished its  reign  had  it  never  found  a  chronicler.  In
1736  proposals  were  issued  for  a  reprint  of  Hakluyt,  Reprints ^oj
but  support  was  lacking,  and  the  scheme  fell  through.  ^^^^_
A  single  later  reprint,  numbering  three  hundred  and
twenty  five  copies,  satisfied  the  demand  of  near  three
hundred  years.  It  is  the  high  reward  of  great  deeds
that  they  can  afford  to  be  forgotten.  Fame  is  a  luxury,
if  not  a  vanity.  By  secret  and  unconscious  methods  of
initiation,  by  that  unwritten  tradition  which  descends
from  father  to  son,  by  the  law  of  nature  which  gives
currency  to  inherent  value  no  matter  whose  the  super-
scription, the  ideas  and  aims  of  the  great  Elizabethan
seamen  have  become  the  creed  of  the  British  Empire.
Yet  Hakluyt's  book,  though  it  has  little  to  do  with
the  history  of  letters,  gives,  to  those  who  care  to  read,
a  rare  opportunity  of  insight  into  the  hidden  processes
of  the  making  of  a  nation.  When  it  was  first  published  -^record  of
all  that  had  been  imagined  and  attempted,  at  the
cost  of  so  many  years  of  effort  and  so  many  men's
lives,  was  yet  to  do.  No  thoroughfare  had  been  dis-
covered by  the  North  East  or  the  North  West.  No
English  community  had  been  established  oversea.  No
gold-mine was in the possession of  England. The

119

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Spanish  power  was  stronger  on  the  seas  than  it  had  been
before  the  Armada.  So  far  the  record  is  one  of  failure.
But  on  the  other  side  of  the  account  there  is  an  item
The  zvarrant  which  cannot  be  neglected.  It  is  to  be  found  in  those
oj  success.  \ong  and  dull  lists  of  unknown  names,  of  merchant
promoters,  gentlemen  adventurers,  intending  colonists,
and  ship's  companies,  which  give  so  business-like  an  air
to  Hakluyt's  pages.  It  may  be  true,  as  someone  has
said,  that  these  detailed  summaries  *  leave  as  little  im-
pression of  excitement  or  emulation  upon  our  minds
as  so  many  almanacks.'  But  they  held  in  them  the
promise  of  Empire.  The  ideas  of  colonial  expansion  and
of  the  command  of  the  sea  had  captured  the  nation ;  the
seeds  had  been  scattered,  and  were  germinating  in  tens

The  island of  thousands of  minds. From the sea England had

and  the  sea, ,  i j i  •  r  ^  • •

been  peopled  by  successive  waves  or  conquest  or  immi-
gration ;  to  the  sea,  after  a  long  interval,  she  gave  back
a  race  who  had  learned  that  there  and  there  alone  could
her  safety  be  secured  and  her  name  upheld.  As  a
people — to  borrow  a  phrase  from  the  poetry  of  common
speech — we  follow  the  sea;  it  will  be  an  ill  day  for  us
when  the  tides  that  wash  the  world  run  their  ancient
courses,  and  we  may  not  follow.

Walter Raleigh.
September^  1904.

INDEX

XII

Index

Aa,  Sir  John  de,  deputy  for  Rostock,

11.  60,  79.
Abaan,  King  of  Guinea  and  William

Towerson (1557) vi. 226, 227.
Abacuck,  see  Habbakuk.
Abad,  Baya  del,  haven  discovered  by

Ulloa  (1539)  IX.  242 ; fishing-  near,

243-
Abassens, see  Abyssinians.
Abassi,  chief  of  idolaters  in  Thibet,

IV.  436.

Abath  or  female  unicorn,  vi.  399.

Abdelmelech,  Mully,  Emperor  of
Morocco  (1577)  VI.  285;  reception
of  ambassadors,  vi.  288.

Abdollocan,  see  Abd'UUah  Khan.

Abdon  Island,  iii. 74.

Abdrahaman,  Ben  Allies,  in  Gago
(1594)  vii. 100.

Abd'UUah  Khan,  King  of  Shirvan,
and  Anthony  Jenkinson,  in.  21,
33 ;  portrait  of,  32 ;  receives
Thomas  Alcock,  41 ;  and  Richard
Johnson,  46; death  of  (1565)  47.

Abebeck,  Mahomet's  disciple,  in.  36.

Abel,  Richard,  of  London,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  62.

Abes,  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg  of,
VI.  67.

Abex,  map  of  the  coasts  of,  engrav-
ing of,  IV.  458.

Abilfada,  Ismael,  *  Epitome  '  of,  in.
281 ;  description  of  the  Northern
Sea  by,  in.  413;  'Cosmography,'

V.  452.

Abnegar,  City  in  Chaul,  v.  380.
Abolos, Don Diego  de. General  in
Peru  (1590)  X. 171.

Aborise,  King  of  the  Arabians,  Cus-
toms paid  to  sons  of,  v.  368,  466,
VI.  8.

Abraham  Pasha,  William  Har-
borne's  present  to  (1583)  v. 252.

Abraham,  house  of,  in  Mecca,  v.
342,  352,  353.  355; and  the  devil,

358-.

Abreojos,  Shoals,  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley at  (1595)  X.  210;  meaning  of,
X.  210.

Abrim,  Pasha,  and  Edward  Barton
(1593)  VI.  102. _

Abrolhos,  Os  baixos  dos,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  79;  shoals,
near  Puerto  Seguro,  xi.  250.

Absito  Castle, in Rhodes  (1522)  v.

15-

Abubacar,  Mahomet's  companion,
Tomb  of,  at  Medina,  v.  363.

Abydos  castle, vi. 107.

Abyssinians,  Queen  Elizabeth's  letter
to  the  King  of  the,  vii. 131.

Acamacari  town,  near  Cari  river,  x.
407.

Acamanta,  promontory  in  Cyprus,
v.  125.

Acapulco,  UUoa's  fleet's  departure
from  (1539)  IX.  207;  latitude  of
haven,  ix.  207,  225,  xi.  350;  the
5.  Agueda  at  (1540)  ix.  278;  Cap-
tain Gualle  leaves  (1584)  ix.  326;
Port  of  Mexico  for  China,  ix.  381,
X.  164;  English  at  (1580)  ix.  432;
Spanish  troops  at,  under  Dr.
Robles  Alcalde  de  Corte,  ix.  433 ;
port  of  New  Spain,  xi.  287;  from,
to  S.  lago,  XI.  362.

123

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Acari, in Peru, wine  made  in, xi.

285.
Acassingo,  Indian  town,  tributary  to

the  King  of  Spain  (1568)  ix.  363.
Acatlan  town,  Thomas  Cavendish  at

(1587)  XI.  322.
Acaxutla,  Port  on  the  South  Sea,  ix.

366.
Acba,  Walls  of,  on  the  Red  Sea,  v.

347-
Accilius  Julius  in  Iceland  (1552)  iv.

11^  175-
Accurgar  Island,  in  the  Caspian  Sea,

II.  456.
Achaia, Anthony  Jenkinson  in, iii.

IPS-

Acheland,  Castle  of,  founded  by
Anthony Beck (1305) iv. 371.

Achem,  King  of,  and  the  Portu-
guese, V.  498.

Achen,  see  Acre.

Acias,  see  Alanians.

Achilles,  tomb  of,  in  Troy,  vi.  107.

Achillo,  Ulloa's  dog,  sent  against
Indians  (1540)  ix.  265.

Achim,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  Churches
destroyed  in  Jerusalem  by,  iv.
292.

Achmet,  at  the  Siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V.  23,  34;  gains  the  plain
of  Spain,  v.  42  ;  the  Grand  Master
of  Rhodes'  Ambassadors  to,  v.
49;  and  Sir  Passin,  v.  50;  detains
Sir  Raymund  Market,  ambassa-
dor, V.  52;  and  Solyman's  grand-
father's letter,  v.  54;  demands  24
knights  as  hostages,  v.  58.

Achmigi,  see  Adventurers.

Achon,  see  Acre.

Acmek  Pasha,  see  Achmet.

Acmet  Chaus,  Turkish  ambassador
in  Poland  (1578)  v. 168.

Acoma,  Indian  town  described  by
Antonio  de  Espejo  (1582)  ix. 198.

Aeon,  see  Acre.

Agores  Islands,  see  Azores.

Acorns  used  as  food  in  Virginia
(1586) VIII. 367.

Acosta,  Josephus  de,  quotation  from
the  works  of,  xi. 16-19.

Acra,  see  Acre.

Acre,  or  Ptolemais,  Order  of  the
Hospital  of  Jerusalem  removed  to,
I.  52,  264;  sacked  by  the  Sultan,  11.

5 ;  subdued  by  Saracens,  5 ;  Saint
John's  Knights  leave,  6;  noble-
men of  France  at,  iv.  350;  Wil-
liam Longespde  at  (1249)  355;
Prince  Edward  at  (1270)  iv.  362,
366;  siege  of  (1191)  iv.  303-4;
Philip,  King  of  France  at  the,  iv.
327;  Richard  I.  at  the  (1191)  iv.
331 ;  terms  of  surrender  of,  iv.  332  ;
Baldwin,  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, at  the,  IV.  341 ;  Sir
Frederick  Tilney  knighted  at,  iv.
342 ;  defences  of,  engraving  of,
ly. 367.

Acridophagi,  locust-eating  nation  of
Ethiopia,  iv.  84,  189.

Acton,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  317.

Acton,  Sir  John,  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596)  IV.  259.

'  Acts  and  Monuments  of  the  Church
of  England, 'by  John  Foxe,iv.3i9.

Acuco,  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara
sent  to,  for  discoveries  (1540)  ix.
164, IX. 296.

Acucu,  cotton  found  in  Acus  (1540)
IX. 158.

Acunna,  Don  Pedro  de,  governor  of
Cartagena,  and  Don  Bernaldino
Delgadillo  (1596)  x.  250.

Acus,  Kingdom  of.  Friar  Marco  de
Niga  and  the  (1539)  ix.  131;
description  of,  ix.  136 ;  taken
possession  of,  by  Friar  Marco  de
Niga  (1539)  ix.  143;  description
of,  by  Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)
IX. 158.

Acuzamil,  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara
on,  VII.  134;  conquest  of,  vm.
124.

Ada,  an  Indian  Idol,  description  of,
v.  477.

Adalbert,  Metropolitan  of  Hamburg,
converted  Iceland  to  Christianity
(1070)  IV.  46, 143.

Adam,  house  of,  on  the  Mountain  of
Pardons,  v.  356.

Adamo  of  Fermo,  Capt.  Hannibal,
slain  at  Famagusta  (1571  v. 150.

Adams,  Clement  (1519-87)  relation  of
I.  xliv.  ;  his  Latin  account  of
Chancellor's  voyage,  11.  239;
Sebastian  Cabot's  Map  cut  by,  vii.
145-

124

INDEX

Adams, Luke, of the Sunshine  of

London  (1585)  vii.  382.
Adams, Robert, description and

measurements of the Madre de

Dios  b)'  (1592)  VII.  117.
Adams,  Thomas,  of  Yarmouth,  and

Prussian  pirates,  11, 63.
Adder, description  of  a  monstrous,

in  S.  Martha  (1568)  ix.  450.
Adders,  length  of,  in  Florida,  x.  59.
Addy,  Captain,  at  the  siege  of  Per-

nambuco  (1595) xi. 51 ; and  the

Portuguese  stratagem  (1595)  xi.  60.
Adecia,  a  port  in  Teneriffe,  x. 11.
Adelantado, the, of Colima, and

Captain  Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  318.
Aderravgan, burial place of the

Princes  of  Persia,  iii.  26.
Adhothuys, described by Jacques

Cartier  (1535)  viii.  218;  in  Hoche-

laga  river,  245.
Administration of China, vi. 307,

358-
Admiral  or  flagship  in the  fishing
fleet  in  Newfoundland  (1583)  viii.

51.  53-
Adonibezek  and  Judah,  viii. 103.
Adrianople, Henry Austell at, v.

323-

Adriaticum,  Mare,  in  Thome's  map,
II.  170.

Adultery,  Laws  against,  in  Iceland,
IV.  79,  182.

Adventure,  the,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  Jonas  Bodenham
captain  of  (1595)  x.  234;  Henry
Savile  new  captain  of  (1596)  x.
240,  2^3 ;  return  of,  to  Ply-
mouth (1596)  X.  245 ;  at  the  fight
of  Pinos  (1596)  X.  262.

Adventure,  Captain  Parker's  bark,
Richard  Hen  captain  of  (1596)  x.
277 ;  taken  by  the  Spanish,  x.  280.

Adventurers,  in  the  Turkish  army
{1594)  VI.  104;  shares  of,  in  the
freight  of  the  Madre  de  Dios  (1592)
VII.  117;  society  of  gentlemen
and  merchants,  for  the  Western
Planting,  viix.  113,148;  for  Brazil,
letter  from,  to  John  Whithall
(1580)  XI.  31,  33.

Advice,  of  Robert  Thorne  to  Henry
VHL  (1527)  II.  159-163;  to
Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman

by  W.  Borough,  iii,  259-262 ;  by
Dee,  262-263  >  by  Richard  Hak-
luyt,  264-275 ;  to  English  Mer-
chants, by  the  Muscovy  Company,
303-306 ;  on  colonising,  by  Richard
Hakluyt,  vii.  244-250;  of  Captain
Frobisher to  his Fleet, vii. 322-

325-
Advice,  letters  of,  of  the  arrival  of

Thomas Cavendish, sent from

Lima,  captured  by  him  (1587)  xi.

309-
JEgeland,  Willoughby's  discovery  of

(1553)  II.  219.
Aegypt,  see  Egypt.
Aeg3'^ptium,  see  Egyptian.
Aele, weak place of Panama har-
bour, X. 151.
^neid, quotation from Book VL

VIII.  449.
Aeolia,  iv.  26, 118.
Aequara, King, Vassal of King

Utina  (1564)  IX.  21.
Aesculapius,  fountain  at  Athens,  iv.

36, 131; and  the Oracle  of  the

Sun,  IV.  281.
Aethiopia,  see  Ethiopia,
^tna,  see  Etna.
Affreca,  wife  of  Olaf,  King  of  Man,

I.  30.

Affreca,  wife  of  John  de  Courci,  i.

34-
Affrica,  see  Affreca.
Affrike,  see  Africa.
Afield, Roger,  member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi, 419,

420  f.
Africa, Thome's description of, 11.

169  f. ;  Coast  of,  in  Thome's  Map,

II.  171 ;  City  of,  or  Mahdia,  be-
sieged by  the  Earl  of  Derby,  iv.
452;  description,  by  Richard
Eden  (1553)  vi.  142  ;  the  Great  and
the  Less,  vi.  144;  peoples  of  the
East  of,  VI.  169;  meaning  of,  vi.
170;  ornaments  of  natives,  vi.
172 ;  Inland,  Melchior  Petoney's
account  of  (1591)  vii.  88;  voyage
of  Captain  Gourgues  to,  ix.  11 1.

Aga,  of  the  Janissaries,  pay  of,  vi.

62 ; of the Spahi, pay of, vi.

62.
Aganginae,  people  of  Libya,  vi.  168.
Agar,  see  Hagar.

125

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Agaricum  found  in  Germany,  vi.
26.

Agatarchides  on  the  Mandri,  a
people  of  India,  iv.  84, 189.

Agatha,  daughter  of  Emperor  Henry
II. of  Germany,  i. 25.

Agathocles,  King  of  Sicily,  son  of  a
potter, VIII.  470.

Agaus, meaning  of, vi. 100.

Agerut,  description  of,  v.  347f.

Agira, Diego  de,  pirate,  xi. 17.

Agira,  Lopez  de,  soldier  of  Pedro  de
Orsua,  mutiny  and  piracies  of,  in
West  Indies,  x.  362,  x.  499;  slays
Pedro  de  Orsua  at  Mutylones,  x.
408,  XI.  248;  death  of,  x.  363,  xi.
248;  cruelties,  xi.  246;  murders
his  own  daughter,  xi.  248.

Agiri,  see  Agira.

Agirri,  see  Agira.

Agium  el  Cassap,  spring  of  water,
between  Acba  and  Biritem,  v.  347.

Agoa,  Baia  de,  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  at  (1593)  vi.  402.

Agoada  de  S. Bras,  see  S. Bras.

Agogna,  see  Iconium.

Agonna,  enemy  to  Taignoagny
(1536)  VIII.  253;  new  King  of
Canada  (1540)  viii.  265;  against
Jacques  Cartier,  viii.  271.

Agora, Tartar town of wood, iii.

396.
Agouhanna  or  King  in  Canada,  viii.

219.  235.
Agra, description by Ralph Fitch,

V.  473.  475-

Agra  and  Delhi,  King  of,  see  Akbar.

Agreement,  between  Henry  IV.  and
the  Hanse  Merchants  (1405)  11.  55-
67;  Commercial,  between  England
and  Prussia  (1390)  11.  20;  de-
nounced (1398)  26;  (1405)  47-55;
(1408)  87-90,  91,  93,  95;  objected
to  by  England  (1408)  93;  accepted
by  England  (1408)  96.

Agricola,  Georgius,  on  the  petri-
fying fountains  of  Iceland,  iv.  36,
132.

Aguada,  Punta,  in  Puerto  Rico,  x.
283.

AgTjada  Saldanha,  harbour,  Captain
Raimond  at (1591) x. 194.

Aguaiavall,  Vasquez  de  Coronado's
departure  from  (1540)  ix. 279.

Aguatulco,  Sir  Francis  Drake  in
(1579)  IX.  365,  XI.  117;  Nuno  da
Silva  released  at,  Xl.  146,  266;
latitude  of,  xi.  320,  350;  burnt  by
Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)  xi.  368;
from,  to  Angeles,  xi.  362  ;  anchor-
age, XI.  373 ;  Don  Pedro  de
Robles  sent  to  fight  the  English
at  (1580)  443;  pearls  on  the  coast
of,  471.  _

Aguava,  in  Hispaniola,  burnt  by
Christopher  Newport  (1591)  x.  187.

Agubio,  Captain  Barnardino,  death
at  defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.

136-

Aguirre,  see  Agiri.

Aguja,  Cape  de,  description  of,  x.
235 ;  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  288 ;  lati-
tude, X.  335.

Agulhas,  Cape  das,  Thomas  Stevens
stranded  at  (1579)  vi.  382.

Agulias,  see  Agulhas.

Abacus,  a  city  in  America,  ix. 135.

Ahasuerus,  King  from  India  to  Ethi-
opia (580  B.C.)  VII.  180;  magnifi-
cence of, VII. 186.

Ahoia,  name  of  King  and  river  in
Florida, ix. 112; Cacique, ix.

1^3-
Ahoiaue,  name  of  King  and  river  in
Florida, ix. 112; Cacique, ix.

113-
Aiai, Indians, and the Gold of

Guiana,  x.  366.
Aid,  the.  Sir  Henry  Norris  and  (1589)

VI.  512.

Aid,  the,  of  Captain  Frobisher's
second  voyage  (1577)  vii.  211,
284,  290,  294  f. ;  flagship  of  the
fleet,  Martin  Frobisher,  captain
of  (1578)  VII.  322;  damaged
by  ice, vii. 344 ; council  aboard,

VII.  361.

Aid, the, Edward Winter, captain

in  (1585)  X.  98.
Aigrettes, Cape des, in Cuba, ix.

44.
Aileford, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.
Aimon,  soldier  in  Captain  Vasseur's

expedition  (1565)  ix.  53.
Almonte Castle, mentioned in the

Ruttier,  x.  301.
Ainan Island,  see  Hainan.

26

INDEX

Aio  or  Ajo  mountain,  x.  417;  Sir
Walter Raleigh near (1595) x.

398-

Aioanapa,  town,  Heirs  of  Perez
Gomez  owners  of, ix. 468.

Ait,  see  Heit.

Ajax's  tomb  in  Troy,  vi. 107.

Akaniri  river,  tributary  of  the  Ori-
noco, X.  420.

Akas,  see  Alanians.

Akbar  the  Great,  King  of  Agra  and
Delhi,  V.  474 ;  conquest  of  Cambay
by,  V.  377,  473,  VI.  7;  defeats  King
of  Patna,  v.  410,  480;  letter  from
Queen  Elizabeth  to  (1583)  450;  and
Cambaietta,  469 ;  and  William
Leedes  (1583)  475 ;  and  the  king-
dom of  Orissa,  482 ;  and  Serre-
pore,  484; portrait  of,  vi.  16.

Alacranes  or  Scorpions,  the,  on  the
course  from  Cape  S.  Antonio  to
New  Spain,  x.  296,  316;  danger
of, X, 321; latitude, x. 334.

Alagranza,  see  Alegranza.

Alandrina,  see  Flandrina.

Alani,  see  Alanians.

Alania,  i.  255,  256;  mountains  of,  i.
271.

Alanians,  i.  76,  166,  255  ;  Tartars  and
the,  I.  93, 261 ;  in  Orna,  1. 152  ;  their
use  of  mare's  milk,  i.  252;  called
Adas,  I.  253 ;  and  Sartach,  i.
269 ;  Rubruquis  in  fear  of  am-
bushes from,  I.  270.

Alanson,  Simon  Ferdinando's  friend,
in Hispaniola (1587) viii. 389.

Alarach,  river,  the  survivors  of  the
Toby  at  (1593)  vii. 127.

Alarbes  or  Moors  of  Barbary,  ix.
168.

Alarchon,  Captain  Ferdinando  or
Fernando,  voyage  of,  ix.  115,  116;
voyage  and  discoveries  of  (1540)
IX.  212,  279-318;  and  the  Indians
of  Buena  Guia  River  (1540)  ix.
281 ;  exchange  of  presents  with
the  Indians,  ix.  283 ;  chosen  Lord
of  the  Indians  (1540)  ix,  291,  295;
and  the  Indian  Chiefs  (1540)  ix.
302,  304;  leaves  the  Indians,  ix.
311;  expedition  of,  to  join  Cap-
tain Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)
IX.  311  f. ;  and  the  Adelantado  in
Colima  (1540)  ix.  318.

Alard,  Richard,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Albacore,  fish  on  the  coast  of
Africa,  vi.  381,  401 ;  found  by
Captain  Gualle  near  New  Spain
(1584)  IX.  335.

Albania,  Isidore  and,  i,  271.

Albania,  or  Epirus,  John  Locke  at
(^553)  V.  80;  soldiers  from,  at
the  defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)

V. 135-

Albany,  William  of,  see  Arundel,
Earl  of.

Albemarle,  John,  Earl  of,  his  voy-
age to  Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Albert,  Captain,  Governor  of
Charles-Fort in Florida (1562)

VII.  472 ;  and  the  Kings  of  Flori-
ida, VIII. 474; Mutiny against,

VIII.  482; death,  viii.  483,  ix.  i.
Alberti,  Albertacio  degli,  ambassador

for  Florence  (1564)  v. 121.

Albertus,  on  the  one-horned  fish,  vii.
183.

Albertus  of  Brandenburg,  34th
master  of  the  Dutch  knights
(15 10)  11. 10.

Albinus,  see  Alcuin.

Albion,  Nova,  account  of  the  discov-
ery of,  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)

IX.  319,  321,  XII.  60;  king  of,  IX.
322 ;  king  of  and  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  ix.  323,  xi.  120;
king  of,  resigns  his  dignity  to  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1578)  ix.  324,  xi.
122 ;  taken  possession  of,  in  Queen
Elizabeth's  name,  ix.  324,  325,  xi.
123 ;  description  of  animals  in,  xi.
123  ;  meaning  of,  ix.  325  ;  descrip-
tion of  people,  XI.  119,  124.

Albion, New, see  Albion, Nova.

'  Albion's  England,'  by  William
Warner  (1602)  xii.  96.

Albocore,  see  Albacore.

Albukerk, see  Albuquerque.

Albuquerque,  Alonzo  de,  discoveries
of  (1497- 15 10)  VIII. 128.

Albuquerque,  Don  Mathias  de.  Cap-
tain of  Ormuz  (1583)  v.  469;
viceroy  of  Portuguese  India  (1590)
VII.  78 ; character  of,  vii.  78  f.

Alburrough,  Willoughby's  fleet  at
(1553)  II.  218.

Alcair,  see  Cairo.

127

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Alcan  Murcy,  see  Murcy.

Alcane  de  Barasoga,  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  x.  304.

Alcantara,  English  troops  at  (1589)
VI.  500.

Alcatrarsa,  see  Alcatrazes.

Alcatrarses,  see  Gannets.

Alcatrazes  Island,  xi.  35,  39,  83,
353;  Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1564)
X. 16 ; origin  of  name, x. 16.

Alcavre,  Portuguese  measure,  vi.
152.

Alcazar,  battle  of,  death  of  Thomas
Stukeley  at,  xii. 102.

Alcock,  Thomas  (d.  1564),  voyage  in
Russia,  I.  xlv. ;  letter  from,  11.  396-
399;  sent  to  prison,  397;  Bearer
of  the  Muscovy  Company's  letter,
405,  407;  servant  of  the  Muscovy
Company,  iii.  33,  37,  335;  2nd
voyage  to  Persia  (1563)  40;  mur-
dered, 42,  49;  his  debts  lost,  47;
on  Russia, iii. 100.

Alcoran,  see  Koran.

Alcuin,  Epistle  on  foreign  trade,  i.
311  f.

Alday,  James,  letter  to  Michael
Locke  (1575)  III.  197-200;  VI.
136.

Alday,  William,  in  Cairo,  and  Laur-
ence Aldersey  (1586)  vi.  45.

Aldenborg,  Theodoricus,  Earl  of,
i6th  Master  of  the  Dutch  Knights
(1352)  II.  6.

Alderney  Island,  John  Chidley  at
(1590)  XI. 384.

Aldersey,  Laurence,  ist  voyage  of
(1581)  V.  202-214;  2nd  voyage  of,
to  Egypt  (1586)  VI.  39-46;
bearer  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  let-
ters to  the  Emperor  of  Ethiopia
(1597)  VII. 129, 131.

Aldridg,  see  Aldridge.

Aldridge,  Sir  John,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Aldridge,  William,  Thomas  Cordall's
servant,  and  Laurence  Aldersey
(1586)  VI.  40;  bearer  of  a  letter
from  the  Sultana  to  Queen  Eliza-
beth (1593)  VI.  102.

Aldworth,  Richard,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  88.

Aldworth,  Thomas,  mayor  of  Bristol,
Sir Francis Walsingham's letter

to (1582) VIII. 132; his answer

(1583)  VIII. 133.
Alebrandus,  see  Brandan.
Alegranza, one of the Canaries,

VIII. 407,  X.  281 ; latitude  of,  x.

332-

Alemania,  see  Germany.

Alengon,  Duke  of,  brother  to  the
King  of  France,  in  England  (1586)
VI. 52.

Alenson,  see  Alencon.

Alepine,  weight  of  Bussorah,  v.  11.

Alepo,  see  Aleppo.

Aleppo,  I.  154,  III.  141 ;  the  Sultan  of,
I.  78,  154;  cloth  brought  to  Bok-
hara from,  11.  473,  III.  57,  58,  62  ;
silk  market  in,  144,  148 ;  Solyman
and  his  army  at  (1553)  v.  105,  107 ;
gifts  to  Solyman  by  the  Pasha
of,  v.  118;  Pasha  of,  at  siege  of
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  148,  152;
Richard  Forster,  consul  at  (1583)
V.  260;  commandment  for  (1584)  v.
290;  Caesar  Frederick  at  (1563)  v.
366 ;  Caravan  from  Babylon  to
(1567)  V.  445;  John  Newbery's
letter  from,  to  Richard  Hakluyt
(1583)  V.  452 ;  to  Leonard  Poore,
V.  453 ; John  Newbery  at  (1583)

V.  456;  Ralph  Fitch  at  (1583)  v.
465.  (1591)  V.  505;  Cosmopolitan
population  of  (1584)  v.  506;  John
Eldred  at  (1583)  vi.  2,  8;  English
Consuls  at,  vi.  9 ;  charges  from,
to  Goa,  VI.  23 ;  retinue  of  the
Beglerbeg  of  (1588)  vi.  67;  Pasha
of,  and  Richard  Wrag  (1594)  vi.
106; Cosmopolitan  mart  at  (1594)

VI.  108 ;  English  consul  at,  xii.
102.

Alera,  river  in  Saxony,  black-
coloured  water  in,  iv.  38,  134.

Alexander  the  Great,  and  Derbent,  i.
261,  III.  20;  poisoned  by  the  Styx,
IV.  39,  135 ;  and  King  Porus,  iv.
412 ;  and  the  Ichthyophagi,  vi.
170;  experience  in  India,  vii.  185;
and  Calanus  the  Indian,  x.  484.

Alexander  II.,  King  of  Scotland,  i.
35 ;  sends  ships  to  conquer  the
Islands, 40.

Alexander  III.,  King  of  Scotland,
becomes  King  of  the  Islands  (1266)
I.  41.

198

INDEX

Alexander, Duke  of  Lithuania, iii.

386.
Alexander, Master Gunner's mate,

killed  in  a  fight  against  the  Portu-
guese (1587)  XI.  220.
Alexander  VI.,  Pope,  and  Philip  and

Mary,  11.  313; Bull  of  Partition  of

(1493)  XII.  8.
Alexander,  son  of  Jaroslav,  11,  187.
Alexander,  David,  condemned  by  the

Inquisition in Mexico (1575) ix.

428 ; sent  to  the  Grey  Friars,  ix.

430; married  a  negro  woman,  ix.

431-
Alexander, Robert, in Sir Francis
Drake's  fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-

Alexandretta,  in  Cilicia,  Richard
Wrag  at  (1593)  vi.  94,  (1594)  vi.
108.

Alexandria,  i.  307 ;  Trade  of,  super-
sedes the  Chios  trade  with  Venice
(1569)  V.  114;  John  Foxe  and  the
Christian  slaves  at  (1577)  v.  153-
167 ;  plan  of,  engraving  of,  v.  160 ;
English  merchants  at,  v.  187;
Hervey Millers, consul at (1583)

V.  259 ;  Free  Port  (1584)  v.  272 ;
spice  market,  v.  273 ;  command-
ment for  (1584)  V.  288,  289;  de-
scription, V.  329;  description  by
John  Evesham  (1587)  vi.  35;  cap-
ture by  galleys  from  (1586)  vi.
42; Laurence  Aldersey  at (1586)

VI.  43; gates  of, 43

Alexius,  Emperor  of  Constantinople
(1064)  IV.  291.

Alezai,  Island,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii.  194.

Alfanas,  Knez,  and  Benet  Butler,  iii.
119.

Alfandica,  the,  at  Morocco,  vii.  128.

Alferius,  see  Oliver.

Alfred,  King,  and  Octher,  i.  11,  iv.
279 ;  VII.  163  ;  taught  by  John  Eri-
gena,  iv.  281.

Algeciras,  Granada,  i.  308.

Alger,  see  Algiers.

Algezer, see Algeciras.

Algiers,  Anthony  Jenklnson  at,  iii.
195;  Matthew  Gourney's  voyage
to,  IV.  444;  Sir  Thomas  Chalon-
er's  voyage  to  (1541)  v.  70;  letter
from  an  Englishman  at, to  Wil-

liam Harborne  (1583)  v.  263  ;  King~
of,  grants  passport  to  Thomas
Shingleton  (1583)  v.  266;  letter
from  Sir  Edward  Osborne  to  King
of  (1584)  v.  268;  English  trade  pri-
vileges at  (1584)  V.  274;  Murad
Khan  to  viceroy  (1584)  v.  275;
John  Tipton,  consul  at,  v.  276;
John  Evesham  at  (1587)  vi.  35  ;  de-
scription (1587)  VI.  38;  Laurence
Aldersey  at  (1586)  vi.  45;  The
Moonshine  of  London  at  (1586)  vi^
46; English merchants' fleet at

(1586)  VI.  55;  King  of,  and  the
English  merchants,  vi.  56 ;  Re-
tinue of  the  Beglerbeg  of,  vi.
67.

Ali,  son-in-law  to  Mahomet  and  hus-
band of  Fatma,  v.  351;  tomb  of,
at  Medina,  v.  362 ;  prophet  of  the-
Persians,  v.  364.

Ali  Pasha,  Azim  Khan's  brother,  11.
462;  Queen  Elizabeth's  letter  to,
v.  228

Aligarto,  see  Alligator.

Aligato  Bay  at  Cape  Tiburon,  viii.
409.

Alimacani,  King,  visits  Captain
Ribault  at  Fort  Caroline  (1565)  ix.
88.

Alinore,  see  Eleanor.

Alisandre,  see  Alexandria.

Alise,  Philip,  King  of  France's
sister,  iv,  327.

AUard, the  skinner, 11.  409.

Allen,  Cardinal,  and  the  intended
conquest  of  England,  iv.  206 ;  and
the  Duke  of  Parma  (1588)  iv.  220.

Allen,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)-
VIII.  317.

Allen, Maurice, settler  in Virginia

(1587)  VIII. 403.

Allen,  Richard,  Knight  of  the  Sepul-
chre, and  the  Canon  of  S. Paul,

VIII. 2.
Allen,  Thomas,  of  the  Bona  Esper-

anza, 11. 213; Russian licence

granted  to  (1569)  in.  109.
Allen, William, assistant to the

Muscovy  Company, 11. 307 ; and

Persian  trade,  iii.  213.
Alii,  see  Ali.
Allibey  at  the  Siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)

v.  23.

129

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Allimacany, King, and Captain

Laudonniere  (1564)  ix.  32.
Allot, Richard, merchant  in China

(1596)  XI.  417,  419.
Allow, in Guinea, William  Tower-
son  at  (1557)  VI.  216.
Allyne,  see  Allen.
Almade  or  interpreter  in  Guinea,  vi.

224; William Towerson's trade

and  the  (1577)  vi.  244.
Almadie, boat in Florida, ix. 28.
Almagro, Diego  de, viii. 124; his

conquest  of  Peru,  x.  356,  xi.  279;

and the expedition in Chili, xi.

274 ; slain  by  Francisco  Pizarro,

XI. 284.
Almaine,  see  Germany.
Almanie,  see  Germany.
Almarin,  in  Portugal,  vi. 153.
Almeida, Aloisius, Aloisius Froes's

companion,  vi.  332  ; ill  at  Sacaio,

VI. 346.
Almeria, hills of Papalo in, de-
scribed, X. 295 ; river, x. 296 ;

Marks  of,  in  2nd  Ruttier,  x.  320.
Aloe, found  in Sekotra  and  Patna,

VI. 26.
Alonso, letter  from, to  his  brother,

commander  of  S.  Lucar  (1594)  x.

433 ; to S. Lucar  Merchants, x.

434-

Alonso,  Friar,  bishop  of  Mechuacan,
letter  from,  to  the  King  of  Spain,
X. 168.

Alonso,  John,  of  Valladolid,  letter
to,  from  Hieronymo  de  Nabares
of  Panama, x. 176.

Alorchon, see  Alarchon.

Alorgon,  Martin,  vicar  general  of
the  Inquisition,  iv.  203.

Alphonso,  taken  prisoner  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1587)  xi.  327.

Alphred,  see  Alfred.

Als  Efferne, see Hel-cliffe.

Altamira,  Conde  de,  and  the  defence
of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Altemira,  Conde  de,  and  the  Span-
ish army  (1589)  vi.  491;  Mar-
quess of  Soralba  and,  vi.  494.

Altine,  silver  Russian  coin,  11.  274.

Altisoldan,  see  Alti,  Sultan.

Alti,  Sultan,  and  Bathy,  i.  76  ;  Bathy's
expedition  against,  i.  152;  and
the  Bisermini, i. 167.

Alto  Velo  Island,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  Ruttier,  x.  285 ;  in
the  2nd  Ruttier, x. 312.

Alum,  rock,  in  China  and  Constan-
tinople, VI.  25;  in  Virginia  (1586)
VIII. 354; in New Spain, ix.

390-
Alumme  di  Rocca,  see  Alum.
Alured,  bishop  of  Worcester,  voyage

of  (1058)  IV.  287.
Alva, Don  Lorenzo  de,  detained  by

Sir John Hawkins on his ship

(1568)  IX.  402.
Alva,  Duke  of,  in  the  Low  Countries,

XII.  25,  51.
Alvala or Portuguese patent, vi.

153-
Alvarado, Fernando  de, companion

of  Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix.

151 ; in  Cevola,  ix. 153.
Alvarado, Rio, John Chilton at

(1572)  IX.  374.
Alvarez, Francisco,  captain  of  Nos-
tra Senora  de  los  remedios  (1591)

VII. 60.
Alvarez,  Peter,  discoveries  of  (1497-

1510) VIII. 128.
Alvelana, English troops poisoned

at  (1589)  VI. 500.
Alwey, Robert, shipmaster, and

Prussian  pirates  (1395)  il.  65.
Aly,  see  Ali.
Amacaiz,  chief  city  of  Ethiopia,  vi.

145-

Amacur  river,  x.  494 ;  between  Cape
Cecil and Raleana, x.^  459, 464.

Amacura,  a  mouth  of  the  Orinoco
river, x. 420.

Amadas,  Captain  Philip,  voyage  of,
to  Virginia  (1584)  viii.  297,  300;
return  of,  viii.  310;  Sir  Richard
Granville  and  (1585)  viii.  316;
Admiral  of  Virginia,  viii.  317;
sent  northward  of  Florida  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  xii.  39 ;  and
Manteo, 113.

Amadavar,  principal  city  of  Cam-
bay, V. 374.

Amader,  a  city  in  Darha,  vii.  89.

Amadia,  market  at  (1568)  in.  139.

Amaipagotos,  see  Amapagotos.

Aman,  Pasha  of,  his  presents  to
Solyman  (1553)  v.  108;  Richard
Forster,  Consul  for  (1583)  v.  260.

130

INDEX

Amana  river,  in  Guanipa  bay,
King,  master  of  the  Lion's  Whelp,
sent  to,  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1595)  X.  378;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
on  (1595)  X.  384,  393;  strength
of  current  of,  x.  421;  cannibals
near,  x.  422 ;  passage  freed,  x.
460;  or  Viapari,  or  Ivia-Pari,  x.
496.

Amanguzzo,  Kingdom  of,  in  Japan,
VI. 336.

Amano  River, xi. 7.

Amapagotos,  Indians,  unmanned
horses  of,  x.  465;  enemies  to  the
Spanish,  474.

Amapaia,  wrought  gold  in,  x.  369;
poisonous  water  in,  x.  370;  Bor-
reo's  wintering  at,  x.  408;  the  Ori-
noco in,  x.  408.

Amapaians,  Indians,  and  Antonio  de
Berreo  (c.  1595)  x.  368.

Amapaias, x. 423.

Amar  Meleck,  King  of  Porto  d'
Ally  (1591)  VII.  94;  and  Richard
Rainolds,  vii.  97.

Amarilla  Haggi,  or  Amir  el  Cheggi,
Captain  of  the  Pilgrims,  v.  341,
346.

Amariocapana,  Valley,  x.  400,  423 ;
town  and  valley,  described  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  416;
Carapana's  flight  over  (1595)  x.
419.

Amasanguano,  residence  of  the  Por-
tuguese Governor  of  Angola,  vi.
468.

Amathusa,  see  Cyprus.

Amazon,  river  of,  or  Marannon,  or
Orellana,  country  between  the,  and
Baraquan,  conquered  by  the  son  of
Guaynacapa,  x.  356;  Papamene,
branch  of,  x.  358;  discovered  by
Orellana  (1542)  x.  3^9;  French
voyages  to,  x.  365 ;  Juan  Corteso
at,  X.  496 ;  testimonies  concerning,
XI.  16-22 ;  width  of  the  mouth,
XI.  17,  18;  description,  xi.  ig ;
Indians  of,  description,  xi.  20.

Amazon  Women,  description  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  366,  xi.
246;  queens  of,  x.  367;  situation
of  country  of,  x. 424.

Ambassador  of  the  Caliph  of  Bagdad
to Kaiuk, i. 170; Russian, to

Poland  (1553)  11.  230,  360;  to  Eng-
land,  his  return  to  Russia  (1556)

II.  358;  names  of  his  native
attendants,  361 ;  disappointment
of  the  Muscovy  Company  in  the
(1557)  391 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson
and,  III.  29 ;  reception  of,  by  Queen
Elizabeth  (1567)  98;  English  and
Prussian,  and  the  settling  of  dam-
ages (1408)  II.  88;  from  Bokhara
and  Balkh  to  Russia  (1559)  11.  475  ;
Turkish,  at  the  Persian  court  (1562)

III.  27;  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor
of  Russia,  asks  Queen  Elizabeth
for  an  English  (1583)  in.  315;  of
all  nations  in  Russia  (1584)  iii.
344 ;  Henry  Roberts  at  the  court  of
Morocco,  VI.  426;  English,  at
Constantinople,  xii. 102.

Ambassadors,  English  merchants
in  Canaries  as,  vi.  235 ;  from
several  nations  at  the  court  of
Ternate,  xi.  127  ;  their  allowances,
in  Turkey,  vi.  68.

Ambergris  trade  in  the  Kingdom  of
Junkseylon  (1592)  vi.  399;  found
in  Bahia,  xi.  250.

Amboina, cloves  found  in, vi. 24.

Amboise,  birthplace  of  Philip  Rouge-
i^ont  (1535)  vm.  247.

Ambrachan,  found  in  Melinde  and
Mozambique,  vi.  26.

Ambrose,  the  musician,  drowned  off
Puna Island  (1587)  xi. 318.

Ameddinbeck,  and  the  English  Mer-
chants,  III.  49, 60.

Ameies,  Indians,  described  by  An-
tonio de  Espejo  (1582)  ix. 198.

Ameleck  Channa,  Princess,  Tomb
of,  III.  25.

Amerciates,  Convent  of  the,  in  Gal-
lipoli  (1577)  V.  165.

America,  English  voyages  to  north
of  (1495)  VII.  141,  143;  Atlantis,
VII.  160;  in  Ortelius's  Map,  vii.
163;  an  island,  vii.  165,  199-203;
fertility  of,  vii.  254,  vii.  261 ;
discovery  through  Frobisher's
Straits  (1578)  vii.  368;  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert  and  colonisation
(157S)  VIII.  17-23;  French  posses-
sions, VIII.  35  ;  named  after  Amer-
igo Vespucci  (1501)  VIII.  129;
company of merchants for dis-

131

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

coveries  (1583)  viii.  134;  advan-
tages of  voyage  to.  viii.  137;
Northern,  products  of,  viii.  139;
Eastern,  products  of,  viii.  139;
discovery,  viir.  448 ;  known  to
Plato  as  Atlantis,  xii.  26.
Amida,  idol  of  the  Bonzes,  in  Japan,
VI. 336 ; or the Devil, vi. 338,

344-
Amidans,  religious  sect  in  Japan,  vi.

336.
Amity, the, in Morocco  (1594)  vii.

100; Thomas  White  in  (1592)  vii.

103.
Amity, the, at Flores (1590) viii.

421.
Am-ity,  the,  Charles  Caesar,  captain

of, in Sir Francis Drake's fleet

(1595)  X.  234.
Amnatopoi  Valley,  x.  403.
Amochi,  guard  of  King  of  Cochin,

V- 394-

Amomum, found  in  China, vi. 25.

Amonna river, x. 459, x. 492.

Amorites,  Joshua  and  the,  viii.  103.

Amsterdam,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  320.

Amurat, see  Amurath.

Amurath  II.,  sixth  Turkish  Em-
peror (1417)  III.  399.

Amurath  III.,  Emperor  of  Constan-
tinople (1585),  letters  to  Queen
Elizabeth  (1579)  v.  169;  Queen
Elizabeth's  letters  to  (1579)  171,
175.  (1581)  189,  (1582)  221-224,
224-226,  (1584)  311;  his  reception
of  William  Harborne,  ambassador
(1583)  257;  his  protection  to  Eng-
lish ships  in  his  dominions  (1584)
275  ;  his  preference  for  the  English
nation,  277;  letter  to  the  King  of
Tripoli  (1584)  314,  324;  state  ex-
penses, VI.  61-68;  Sinan  Pasha,
counsellor  of,  69 ;  and  Casul
Pasha,  71  ;  and  the  Ascension,  95  ;
his  reception  of  Edward  Barton,
ambassador, 98.

Amurath 's  Empress,  her  letter  to
Queen  Elizabeth  (1594)  vi.  114;
style  of, 116.

Amusgan  language  spoken  in
Ometepec, ix. 468, 471.

Amusgos  Mountains,  Tlacamama
river  springs  from, ix. 469.

Amusgos  town,  in  charge  of  Fer-
nando de  Avila, ix. 470.

Anacharaqua,  King,  vassal  of  King
Utina (1564) IX. 21.

Anagacu,  town  near  Marinduque
Islands,  ix.  330.

Anagona  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  269.

Ananas,  see  Pineapples.

Anasebo,  Rio  de.  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  331.

Anawra, Indian  Captain, x. 495.

Anchiassini,  judges  in  China,  vi.
296, 301.

Anchurus,  son  of  King  Midas,  iv.
I. 89.

Ancola,  in  Gargopam,  Caesar  Fred-
erick at  (1567)  V. 389.

Ancon  de  Sant  Andres,  see  S.  An-
drew's haven.

Ancona,  Monte  de,  John  Locke  in
sight  of  (1553)  V.  78.

Andacon,  adviser  of  Pemisapan
against Ralph Lane (1586) viii.

338-
Andalusia, Contribution of, to the

Armada (1588)  iv. 200.
Andaman  Islands,  people  of,  v.  403 ;

amber  found,  v.  404.
Anderson, Henry,  licensed  to  trade

in  Russia  free  from  customs  (1592)

III.  440.
Anderson, Henry, of the Levant

Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.
Andover, in  Hampshire,  birth-place

of  Robert  Tomson,  ix. 338.
Andrada, Conde de, at Puente de

Burgos  (1589)  VI.  491; Marquess

of  Seralba  and,  vi.  494.
Andrew,  Friar,  at  the  Court  of  Ken-
Khan,  I.  267; journey  of,  i.  271;

and Buri, i. 282.
Andrew, Simon, and  Prussian  pir-
ates (1395)  II.  66.
Andrew de Culiacan, Christian

Indian  in  Cevola  (1582)  ix.  199.
Andrewes,  William,  Captain  of  the

Squirrel  (1583)  viii.  47;  returns  to

England  in  the  Swallow,  viii.  62.
Andrews, John, merchant on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553) 11. 212.
Andri  Island,  William  Harborne  at

(1583)  V.  250.
Andrinopoli,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V.  323-

132

INDEX

Andronicus,  the  elder,  in. 397.
Andros,  Island  of,  wine  fountain  in,

IV.  38,  133;  Richard  Wrag  at
(1593)  VI.  95.

Andros,  the  John  Evangelist  on  a
Sand  called  (1557)  n.  414.

Androwes,  wounded  with  poisoned
arrow  at  Cape  Verde  (1567)  vi.  273.

Andruzzi,  keep,  at  Famagusta  (1571)

V.  132; siege  of,  v. 135-152.
Anebas Indians, x. 423 ; and

wrought  gold,  x.  369.
Aneda, Storax Calamita found  in,

VI.  25,

Anegada  Bay,  latitude  of,  xi.  86.
Anegada Island, Captain Laudon-
niere  at  (1564)  ix.  5; latitude,  x.

333-
Anegadas,  Las,  Islands  in  the  South

Sea  (1587) XI. 301.
Anes,  Lady,  wife  of  Pedro  de  Orsua,

murdered  by  his  soldiers  (1560)  x.

499.
Aneta,  town  on  the  Berbice  river,  x.

494.
Angel, the, of  Sir  John Hawkins'

fleet  (1567)  IX.  398,  445;  at  Sierra

Leone  (1568)  ix.  447;  at  Riohacha,

IX.  449 ; sunk  by  the  Spanish  at

S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)  ix.  453.
Angel,  the.  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's

ship  (1595)  X.  213.
Angeles,  Pueblo  de  los,  see  Pueblo,

etc.
Angeli. in Orissa, products of, v.

4S2.
Anger  Island,  in.  74.
Angili,  see  Angles.
Angles  and  Octher,  i.  14; a  nation

in  Britain,  iv.  278.
Anglesey,  King  Edwin  and,  i.  8.
'  Anglorum, De Gestis Regum,'

William  of  Malmesbury,  iv. 279,

283,  284.
*  Anglorum, De  Gestis  Pontificum,'

by William of Malmesbury, iv.

280.
Angola,  Baltazar  Almeida  de  Souza,

on  (1591)  VI.  468; King  of,  and

King of Matamba (1590) vi.

468; new watering place (1592)

VII.  112,  122;  Portuguese  trade  in,
VII.  119;  trade  of  Negroes  in
(1596)  XI,  42.

Angolesme,  see  Angouleme.

AngoulSme,  lake  of,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  229.

Angra  in  Terceira,  vii.  9-1 1,  14,  21;
city  near  El  Brasil,  x.  299 ;  har-
bour of,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
XI.  83.

Angrim,  Mandeville's  description  of

(1559)  "•  482.
Anguilla, Captain Laudonniere at

(1564)  IX. 5.
Anguillas, Las, Islands, described

in  2nd  Ruttier,  x.  329 ;  latitude,  x.

333-

Anguille,  Cape  (Newfoundland),  the
Grace  at,  viii. 163.

Anguillie,  see  Anguille.

Ania,  see  Anian.

Anian,  in  Asia,  iii.  263 ;  people
of,  on  the  borders  of  America,
VII.  165 ;  Paulus  Venetus  sail-
ing by, VII. 170 ; Strait of,

VII.  202.

Anigris  river  in  Aelis,  Smell  of,  iv.

39. 134-

Anile,  used  in  Persian  dyes,  iii.  250 ;
blue  dye,  John  Chilton's  business
in  (1570)  IX.  366;  found  in  Hon-
duras, IX.  367 ;  found  in  Cam-
peachy,  IX.  375 ;  taken  at  Agua-
tulco  by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)
XI.  320.

Animals,  wild,  in  Lapland,  11.
223,  417;  in  Russia,  253,  276;
in  Nova  Zembla,  347 ;  in  Cathay,
482 ;  in  Iceland,  iv.  44,  141 ;
strange,  in  a  Fuco  Monas-
terv,  IV.  427;  in  the  plain  of
Babylon,  vi.  8;  domestic,  of
Canary  Island,  vi.  129 ;  wild,  of
Ethiopia,  vi.  169 ;  in  S.  John
Island,  VII.  146 ;  not  wandering
from  Asia  to  America,  vii.  166;  in
Meta  Incognita,  vii.  228,  374 ;  of
the  Continent  discovered  by  Cap-
tain Frobisher  (1578)  vii.  338;  for
hunting  in  the  Western  Planting,

VIII.  114;  on  Cape  Breton,  viii.
158;  near  Hochelaga,  viii.  244;
in  Florida,  viii.  426.

Anius, King  of the  Thuscans, iv.

72, 174-
Anna, wife of Vladimir (988) 11.
184.

133

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Anna  (mentioned  in  the  New  Testa-
ment), IV.  272.

'Annalium,'  pars  prior,  by  Roger
Hoveden,  iv.  287.

*  Annalium,'  pars  posterior,  by  Roger
Hoveden,  iv.  312,  315.

Annas,  house  of,  in  Jerusalem  (1581)
V. 212.

^nne,  the  (1557)  11.  375,  413,  425;
David  Philly,  master,  380.

Anne  or  Countess  of  Warwick's
Sound,  and  Island  discovered  by
Captain  Frobisher  (1577)  vii.  221;
Captain  Frobisher  lands  at  (1578)
vn.  233,  239;  gold  ore  in  (1577)
VII.  299,  314,  347;  Jackman's
Sound  and,  vii.  306 ;  fort  built  at,
VII.  310,  341;  departure  of  Cap-
tain Frobisher  from,  vii.  315,  364;
mines  worked  on,  by  Captain
Frobisher,  vii.  348;  Captain  Best
at,  VII.  360,  362  ;  house  built  at,
by  Captain Fenton, vii. 362.

Anne  Francis,  the,  of  London,
and  the  survivors  of  the  Toby
(1593)  VII. 128.

Anne  Francis,  the,  of  Captain
Frobisher 's  third  voyage  to
Mcta  Incognita  (1578)  vii.  236,
238.-  240,  340,  344,  349,  350,  356;
the,  George  Best,  Captain  of
(1587)  VII.  322  ;  attendant  on  the
Thomas  Allen,  vii.  325,  340;
brought  to  Countess's  Sound,  vii.
362 ;  and  the  Busse  of  Bridge-
water, VII. 364.

Anniperima,  mountain,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1595)  x.  350.

Annuity  granted  to  Sebastian
Cabot  by  Edward  VI.  (1548)  vii.
157-

Anold,  in  Denmark  or  Norway,  11.

Ansam, near  Macao, in  China,  vi.

351-
Ansell, Edmund, of the Levant

Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.
Anselm, Valerius,  vii, 162.
Anta,  see  Hanta.
'  Antarctique,  French,'  description  of

a tree bearing oysters in, by

Andrew  Thevet,  x.  350.
Antemila  Island,  William  Harborne

at  (1583)  V.  250.

Anthony,  a  negro  of  Hanta,  left  in

London,  vi.  218.
Anthony, John, master  of  the  Red

Dragon  (1586)  xi. 203; in  coun-
cil, XI.  211.
Anthony,  Nicholas,  boatswain  on  the

Bona  Esperanza,  11.  212,  213.
Anthony,  Thomas,  called  in  Council

by  Robert  Withrington,  xi.  211.
Anthony, William, ship master in

the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  Azores

fleet  (1589)  VII.  25.
Anthony, William, captain of the

Mayflower  (1593)  vii. 118; killed

in  a  fight,  vii. 120.
xA.nthony, William, master of the

bark Clifford (1586) xi. 203; in

council,  XI.  211.
Anthropophagi,  see  Cannibals.
Antigua, Vasquez  de  Coronado  at,

IX.  164,  165  ;  Friar  John  de  Padilla

in  (1540)  IX. 166; Friar  Augustin

Ruyz at (1581) ix. 187; in N.

Mexico, Antonio de Espejo in

(1582) IX. 187; latitude, x. 333;

Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.

15-

Antilles,  viii.  450;  of  the  West
Indies,  Sir  Richard  Grenville  at
(1585)  VIII.  311;  Captain  Laudon-
niere  at  (1564)  ix.  3.

Antioch,  i.  28;  history  of,  267;
governor  of,  ambassador  to  Rus-
sia, II.  185  ;  Prince  of,  in  Cyprus
(1191)  IV.  330;  John  Eldred  at
(1587)  VI.  9 ;  description  by  Richard
Wrag  (1594)  VI.  108.

Antiochia,  see  Antioch.

Antipo,  Sanjack  of,  at  Fama-
gusta  (1571)  V.  148; slain,  v.  152.

Antissa,  on  Sea  of  Azov,  vii.  161.

Antivari,  in  Slavonia,  Venetian  pos-
session, V.  80.

Antla, see Intla.

Anton,  Juan  de,  Captain  of  a  Span-
ish treasure  ship  captured  by  Sir
Francis  Drake, xi. 264.

Antoni  Serro,  Punta  de,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  x.  297 ;  or  Anton
Mislardo,  x.  322.

Antonio  de  Guadalajara,  Christian
Indian  in  Cevola  (1582)  ix.  199.

Antonio,  Don,  and  the  Captain  of
Ormuz  (1583)  V.  457,  458; King

134

INDEX

of  Portugal,  VI.  483,  500,  502,
504,  vii.  12,  XI.  339;  and  his
French  ships  at  Terceira  (1580)  ix.
442 ;  advice  of  Don  Alvaro  Bacan
to  oppose,  in  Spain,  x.  96;  in
England^  xi.  340 ;  and  Richard
Hakluyt  In  Paris,  xii.  76 ;  in  Eng-
land,  105.

Antonio,  Don  Luis'  son,  in  Guinea
(1562)  VI.  260.

Antonio  of  Ascoli,  wounded  at  Fam-
agusta  (1571)  V.  137;  made  slave,
V.  151.

Antonio,  Juan  Baptista,  account  of
the  West  Indian  Ports  by  (1587)  x.
135-156;  safe  course  for  the  Span-
ish  fleet  to  S. Marta  advised  by

(1587)  X.  136;  advice  for  strength-
ening Cartagena  Harbour,  x.  140,
141 ;  advises  Puerto  Bello  as  har-
bour, X.  144,  146 ;  general  engineer
of  the  West  Indies,  his  inspection
of  Puerto  Rico  (1590)  x.  161.

Antony, the, at Fayal (1590) viii.

422.
Antwerp,  vii.  52 ; and  the  Armada

(1588)  IV.  204;  siege  of,  by
Frederic  Jenebelli  (1585)  iv.  222  ;
soldiers  of,  at  Joppa  (1107)  iv.
301 ; Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1581)

V.  214; Sesame  seed  in,  v.  230.
Anus,  Aurea,  iii.  409.

Anwara, a Cacique, and Laurence

Keymis  (1596)  x.  463.
Anwik, John, in Virginia (1585)

viii.  318.
Apalatci  Mountains,  rich  copper  in,

viii.  452  ; mines  of  gold  in,  ix.  55,

88; gold and crystal in, ix.

112.
Apalito, Indian name of God, ix.

191.
Apalou,  Captain  Vasseur  and  (1565)

IX.  75.
Apareepo, Indian  poisoned  herb,  x.

495-
Aparwa, a Cacique, and Laurence

Keymis  (1596)  x.  463,  495.
Aphricerones, tribe  east  of  Guinea,

VI.  1 68.

Aponas,  Isles  of,  the  Bonaventure  at

(1591^  VIII. ii;o.
Aponiquay,  at  Punta  de  Olinda,  xi.

74-

Apotomios,  Indians,  and  the  gold  of

Guiana,  x.  366.
Appalatci,  see  Apalatci.
Apparel, Wearing, in Iceland, iv.

65, 165. ,
Appian, his account of Captain

Britomarus, iv. 270 ; and the

North-west  passage, vii. 162.
Apples,  poisonous,  in  S.  Cruz,  viii.

387-

Apponatz,  birds  described  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii.  192.

Apram,  cow's  milk  in  Tartary,  i.
250.

Apprentices  to  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, II,  383.

Apulia,  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.
80.

Aquascogoc, see  Aquascogok.

Aquascogok,  a  town  of  Virginia,
Sir  Richard  Grenville  at  (1585)
VIII.  316;  John  White  and  (1587)
VIII. 394.

Aquaviva,  Claudius,  quotation  from
an  Epistle  of  Friar  Luis  Frois  to
(1596) XI. 441.

Aquilela,  Patriarch  of,  and  the  Tar-
tars, I.  51.

Aquita,  in  Japan,  vi.  340.

Aquitaine  and  Edward  I.'s  Great
Charter,  i.  333.

Ara  Mountain,  mentioned  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  4x7.

Arabia,  Athelard  of  Bath  Abbey  in
(1130)  IV.  307;  three  Sanjacks
of,  at  Siege  of  Famagusta  (1571)
V.  148-152,345,348  caravans  of,  at
Mecca  (1580)  v.  357;  Thieves  on
the  Euphrates  (1563)  v.  368,  (1583)
V.  466,  VI.  3  ;  fertility  of,  vil.  254 ;
Gulf  of, VIII. 128.

Arabia  Felix,  Requitria  found,  vi.
25  ;  Bdellium  found,  vi.  26 ;  dates
found,  VI.  27;  Mahomet  buried
in,  VIII. 128.

Araclia,  see  Herakleia.

Araesonius,  Jonas,  20th  bishop  of
Holen,  in  Iceland  (1525)  iv.  58,
156.

Aragon,  James  I.,  King  of,  at  Tunis
(1270)  IV.  359.

Aragon,  Peter  IV.,  King  of  (1344)  iv.
368,  VI. 119,  368.

Araia  Point  (1596)  x.  272.

135

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Arakan,  kingdom  of,  and  the  King
of  Tipperah,  v.  483 ;  Ralph  Fitch
near  (1583)  485;  King  of,  v.  438;
and  the  King  of  Pegu,  439.

Aramatappo  river,  x.  492  ;  between
Cape  Cecil  and  Raleana  river,  x.

459-

Aramatto,  Indians  of,  and  Sir
Walter  Raleigh (1597)  xi. 6.

Arambec,  see  Norumbega.

Aramiary,  a  Cacique,  and  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  398.

Aranacoa,  Indian  Captain,  x.  493.

Arara,  metal  found  in  Yguirie,  x.
207.

Arash  river, see  Araxes.

Arataco,  a  Cacique,  and  Domingo
da  Vera  (1593)  x.  437.

Aratoori  river,  x.  464,  494 ;  a  mouth
of  the  Orinoco  river,  x.  420 ;  be-
tween Cape  Cecil  and  Raleana
river,  x.  459.

Arauco  in  Chili,  independence  of,  x.
501 ;  La  Mocha  Island  near,  xi.
260 ;  governor  of  Chili  lands  at,  xi.
270 ;  El  Estado  de,  description  of,
XI.  275  ;  unconquered  by  the  Span-
iards (1587)  XI.  302;  gold  in,  XI.
303 ;  John  Chidley's  voyage  in-
tended for  (1589)  XI.  382.

Arawaccos, see Arawaks.

Arawagotos,  near  the  Caroli  river,
enemy  to  the  Spaniards  (1595)  x.
402.

Arawaks,  people  in  Punta  de  Carao
in  Trinidad,  x.  350 ;  Indian  of  the,
pilot  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  x.  380,
389 ;  treatment  of  their  dead,  x.
384,  424 ;  trade  in  women  with
West  Indies  by  the,  x.  407;  wan-
dering tribe  of  Indians,  x.  455 ;
Arracuri  of  the,  x.  460 ;  Indian
allies  of  the  Spaniards,  x.  462,
474 ;  nation  of  the  Cunanama
river,  x.  492 ;  of  the  Cawroora,
492 ;  Marrac,  town  of,  xi.  7 ;
Thomas  Masham  and,  xi. 10.

Arawanna  river,  x.  494.

Arawawo  river,  in  Trinidad,  Cia-
wannas  dwelling  near  (1596)  x.  476.

Araxes,  tributary  to  the  Caspian  Sea,
II. 478.

Arbitration  between  England  and
Prussia  (1408)  11.  92.

Arcadius,  son  of  Theodosius,  Em-
peror of  the  East, viii. 106.

Arcawas,  see  Arawaks.

Archaha,  Captain  Laudonniere's
mutinous soldiers at (1564) ix.

43-

'  Archaionomia,'  by  William  Lam-
barde  (1568)  i.  li.  5.

Archangel,  latitude  of,  in.  247;  Im-
perial sepulchres  at,  337 ;  castle
of.  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at,  346 ;
English  port  prohibited  at,  352 ;
Russian  port,  431 ;  house  given  to
Muscovy  Company  at  (1592)  443.

Archangel,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley,  left  to  the  Earl  of  Essex
(1596)  X.  266.

Archard,  Arnold  and  Joyce,  settlers
in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.  402,  403.

Archard,  Thomas,  child  settler  in
Virginia  (1587)  viii.  403.

Archipelago,  the,  Roger  Bodenham
in  (1551)  V.  73  ;  William  Harborne
in  (1583)  V.  250.

Archipelago,  near  Bears'  Sound  and
Hall's  Island,  vii.  364,  368.

Arcooa  river,  x.  454 ;  discovered  by
Laurence  Keymis,  x.  490.

Arda,  the  Richard  of  Arundel
athwart  of  (1590)  vi.  464.

Ardock,  see  Ardoh.

Ardoh  river,  falls  into  the  Lake  of
Cathay,  in.  465  ;  William  de  Rub-
ruquis  and  the,  11.  461 ;  Anthony
Jenkinson  on,  in.  456.

Ardok,  see  Ardoh.

Ardouill,  latitude  of,  in.  26,  32 ;
one  of  the  chief  cities  of  Persia,
35;  silk  market,  51 ;  English  mer-
chants in,  137;  sepulchres  of  the
Emperors  of  Persia  at,  151 ;  mutiny
in, 162.

Ardovil,  see  Ardouill.

Arenas  Gordas,  near  S.  Lucar,  West
Indian  Fleet  at  (1580)  ix.  443,  x.
300 ;  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
XI.  86.

Arenas,  Island  of,  x.  288.

Arenas,  Punta  de  las,  or  point  of,
the  Sands,  in  Cuba,  x.  286.

Areo  river,  inhabited  by  the  Wikiri,
x. 423.

Areshine,  Russian  measure  for  cloth.

n.  275.

[36

INDEX

Argier, see  Algiers.
Argilla, at  the  limit  of  the  King-
dom of  Fez,  VI.  143.
Arguin,  Island  and  Castle,  latitude,

VII.  88; Portuguese  garrison  at,

VIII.  445.
Ariacoa, Sir Walter Raleigh at

(1595)  X.  417.

Arica,  x.  177;  haven  in  Peru,  de-
scription of,  by  Friar  Alonso
(1590)  X.  168;  importance  of,  x.
170;  latitude  of,  xi.  115,  261,  285,
2>o7,  349>  359.  368;  sacked  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1579)  xi.  115,
261;  Nuno  da  Silva  at  (1579)  xi.
141 ;  Fort  and  garrison  at,  xi.
262 ;  Bark  taken  at,  by  Thomas
Cavendish  and  called  the  George
(1587)  XI,  307,  368;  from,  to  Par-
aca,  XI.  360;  Bay  of,  anchorage
in, XI. 372.

Arima,  princedom  of,  in  Figen,  xi.
424;  Jesuit  College  at  (1591)  xi.
428.

Aripacoro  river, x. 494.

Aristides  the  Philosopher  and  The-
mistocles'  stratagem,  viii. 93.

Aristotle,  vii.  199,  265 ;  on  fire  and
water,  iv.  21,  112;  on  Lipara
Hill,  IV,  26,  118;  on  hot  spring
baths,  IV.  35,  129 ;  on  an  oil
fountain  in  Carthage,  iv.  37,  133;
on  the  vinegar  fountain  in  Sicily,
IV.  38,  134 ;  on  the  blood  fountain
in  Japigia,  iv.  38,  134 ;  '  Morals  '
of, translated by John Erigena,

IV.  281 ; and  Alexander  the  Great,

V.  119;  '  De  Mundo  '  by,  vi.  171,
VII.  162 ;  and  Mare  Indicum,  vii.
180.

Ark-royal,  the,  flagship  in  pursuit  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  215;  of  the
Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  iv.  248,
262  ; engraving  of,  iv.  208.

Arkey,  Laurence,  Master  of  the
Trinity  Fitz  Williams  (1534)  v.
62.

Arlac,  M.  de.  Ensign  of  Captain
Laudonniere  at  the  river  of  Dol-
phins (1564)  IX.  5 ;  and  the  Indian
prisoners  (1564)  ix.  31,  33;  and
King  Utina,  ix.  34;  and  the  ship-
building  in Fort Caroline (1565)

IX.  60.

XII  137

Armada,  Spanish  (1588)  i.  xxxiii.  f. ;
Iviii. ;  record  of  (1588)  iv.  197-
234 ;  daily  cost  of,  202  ;  sails  from
Lisbon  (1588)  iv.  209 ;  passes  Ply-
mouth, IV.  211 ;  first  action  in  the
English  Channel,  engraving  of,
212;  meets  the  English  fleet,  iv.
218;  Spanish  and  English  fleets
at  close  quarters,  engraving  of,
220 ;  and  the  fire  ships  of  Lord
Charles  Howard,  iv.  222 ;  last
action  in  the  English  Channel,  en-
graving of,  224;  Spanish  relics
from,  engraving  of,  232  ;  defeat  of
(1588)  vii.  39;  effects  of  the  defeat
of  the,  on  the  markets  of  New
Spain  (1590)  x.  166;  Drake  and,
XII.  63.

Armadilla,  see  Armadillo.

Armadillo  or  Cassacam,  used  as
food  in  Guiana  (1595)  x.  399 ;  used
as  food  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1595)  X.  421.

Armago,  Captain  of  Orocoa,  and  Sir
Robert Dudley (1595)  x. 208.

Armenal,  the,  ship  of  Captain  Fro.
bisher's  fleet  (1578)  vii.  324.

Armenia,  Conquest  of,  i.  154,  166 ;
discovered  by  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, III.  86,  88;  Russian  fur
trade  in  (1588)  365 ;  Lyon,  King
of,  voyage  of,  to  England  (1386)
IV.  445.

Armenia  Major,  Azaron  city  in,  iv.
409 ;  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg  of,
VI.  67.

Armenians,  i.  78,  86,  264;  Trade
between  Venetians  and,  iii.  139.

Armoniago,  found  in  Persia,  vi.
26.

Arms,  see  Weapons.

Arms,  Portuguese,  graven  on  Seal
Island  by  Martin  Alonso  de  Souza,
XI. 249.

Armshow,  William,  on  board  the
Aid  (1577)  vii.  285.

Army,  in  Russia,  11.  229,  258,
43 1 ;  splendour  of,  230 ;  descrip-
tion of,  430;  Russian,  iii.  377-
386 ;  Land,  of  the  Armada,  iv.
205 ;  Richard  Wrag  on  the  Turk-
ish (1594)  VI.  103-110;  of  the  King
of  Pegu,  VI.  386;  sufferings  of
the  English,  in  Portugal  (1589)  vi.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

408 ;  voluntary  contribution  ad-
vised towards  maintaining  an
English  (1589)  VI.  522 ;  sent  by
Don  Antonio  de  Mendoza  for  con-
quests in  Cevola,  expenses  of
(1540)  IX.  161 ;  proposed  Spanish,
to  oppose  Sir  Francis  Drake,  x.
95;  to  oppose  Don  Antonio's  in-
vasion (1585)  X.  96.

Arnacho  di  Salini,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V. 93,  96,  98.

Arnam,  see  Arnheim.

Arneoste,  Giant,  and  his  family,  in.

25-
Arnerus, loth Bishop  of  Schalholt,

in  Iceland  (1269)  iv.  55, 154.
Arnerus,  son  of  Helgo, nth  bishop

of  Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1304)  iv.

55. 154-
Arnerus, surnamed Milldur, 20th

bishop of Schalholt, in Iceland

(1420)  IV. 57, 156.
Arnfurt,  river  Main  at,  v.  321.
Arngrimus, Jonas, *  Commentary

of Iceland  '  by, iv. 1-89, 89-194;

on  the  Westerly  current,  vii. 152,

168.
Arnheim, Laurence Aldersey at

(1581)  V.  214.
Arnica,  town  in  Cyprus,  v.  125.
Arnold, surgeon on the Edward

Bonaventure, death of  (1592)  vi.

393-
Aroami mountain, Sir Walter

Raleigh  near  (1595)  x. 398.
Aromala,  Antonio  de  Berreo's  envoys

killed  by King Morequito at, x.

374; Topiawari  King  of,  x.  375,

395,  398,  399; Port  of  Morequito

in,  X.  423.
Aron Voivoda, prince of Moldavia

(1593)  yi-  102.

Arooca  river,  x.  494.

Aroras,  inhabitants  of  Sayma,  poi-
soned arrows  of,  x.  397.

Arowari,  river,  discovered  by
Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  x.  490.

Arowocai,  town  of  King  Topari-
maca,  x.  394.

Arra  Castle,  Portuguese  possession,
VI. 160.

Arracuri,  of  the  Arawaks  of  Barima,
X.  460.

Arracuri, Indian  captain, x. 495.

Arragon,  see  Aragon.

Arraroopana,  branch  of  the  Orinoco
River,  x.  395.

Arrash,  or  Erex,  silk  market  at,  in.
24,  158 ;  Edward  Clark  sent  to,
34;  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  Per-
sia, 35;  Kersey  market  in,  137;
Thomas Banister  at, 153.

Arrazife,  see  Pernambuco.

Arrecife,  see  Pernambuco.

Arrian  on  India,  vii.  180.

Arricari,  nation  of  the  Marpari,  x.
490.

Arricurri,  nation  of  the  Caipurogh,
x.  490.

Arrogostoria,  harbour  in  Cepha-
lonia,  V.  310.

Arromaiarie,  conqueror  of  the  Tiviti-
vas,  X.  460.

Arrowari  river,  mouth  of,  latitude
of,  Laurence  Keymis  at  (1596)  x.

453-
Arrows,  and  arrowheads  of  Indians
of  Florida,  x.  52 ;  of  Indians  of
Trinidad,  xi.  22 ;  poisoned,  used
against  English  merchants  in
Cape  Verde  Islands  (1567)  vi.  272 ;
deaths  by,  vi.  274 ;  Captain  Dud-
ley wounded  by  (1568)  ix.  446;  of
negroes.  Sir  John  Hawkins's  crew
wounded  with,  on  the  Guinea
Coast  (1567)  x.  64;  used  by  In-
dians at  the  defence  of  Cartagena

(1586)  X.  119;  used  by  the  Aboras,
x.  397 ;  of  the  negroes,  of  Sierra
Leone  (1586)  xi.  293.

Artawische,  on  the  Stzuchogora,  in

Russia, III. 407.
Arthemidorus  on  Cyprus,  v. 125.
Arthur,  Richard,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.

Arthur,  Walter,  of  the  Sunshine  of
London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Articles  of  Covenant  of  the  Edward
Cotton  (1583)  VI.  408.

Articles  between  Sir  John  Hawkins
and  Don  Martin  de  Henriquez,
viceroy  of  Mexico  (1568)  ix. 404.

Artificers,  English,  Emperor  of  Rus-
sia and  the,  in.  118,  184;  licensed
to  leave  Russia, 191.

Artillery,  Russian,  in.  385;  Master
of  the.  in  the  Russian  Army,  381 ;
Turkish, at  the  siege  of  Rhodes

138

INDEX

(1522)  V.  19;  Master  of  the  Turk-
ish, or  Topagi  Pasha,  pay  of  (1588)
VI.  63.

Artois,  customs  in,  i.  352,  355.

Artois,  Robert,  Earl  of,  brother  of
Louis  IX.,  and  William  Longes-
pee  (1249)  IV.  355;  his  defeat  of
the  Saracens,  iv.  356-358 ; death,

IV. 358-
Artoys,  see  Artois.
Aruba, Island, Sir John Hawkins

near (1565) x. 37; Sir Francis

Drake  at  (1595)  x.  233; latitude,

X.  287,  335.
Arui,  river,  through  Lake  Cassipa,

X.  405.
Arumburch, Marquess of, Admiral

of  Seville  Squadron  (1591)  vii.  47.
Arundel, Henry, Earl of. Queen

Mary's  Steward  (1555)  11.  304.
Arundel,  William  of  Albany,  Earl  of.

Voyage of, to the Holy Land

(12 18)  IV.  349.
Arundell, John, of Sir Richard

Grenville's voyage to Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  310,  316; sent  to  the

mainland  with  Manteo,  viii.  315.
Arusburg,  on  the  Osella,  iii.  454.
Arvoredo,  Illha  de,  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  xi.  84.
Arwaca, see  Arawaks.
Arwacca,  see  Arawaks.
Arwaccawes,  see  Arawaks.
Arwakima,  town  on  the  Caitooma,

x.  494.
Arwaos,  nation  on  the  Arowari,  x.

490.
Arz, or bill of complaint to the

Grand Signior, vi. 96.
Arzila, town, conquered by the

Portuguese,  viii. 127.
Arzina, reca, or  river, in Lapland,

death  of  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  at

(1553) II. 224; Sir Hugh Wil-
loughby at  (1553)  II.  417,  III.  331.
Asafoetida,  found  in  Lahore,  vi.  25.
Asagresal,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,

X.  299.
Asaphi,  see  Azafi.
Asarie,  money  of  Ormuz,  vi.  14.
Ascalon,  iv.  299; destroyed  by  Sala-

din  (1191)  IV.  335.
Ascelline,  Friar,  Pope  Innocent  IV.  's

envoy,  i. 134.

Ascension,  the,  of  London,  in  Cepha-

lonia (1585) V. 310; Henry

Roberts  in,  vi.  426
Ascension,  the,  of  London,  Richard

Wrag in (1593) vi. 94; at the

Seven Towers, vi. 95 ; leaves

Turkey  (1593)  vi.  103.
Ascension, and the Spanish ships

(1590)  VII.  31,  32.
Ascension,  of  Seville,  sunk  with  the

Revenge  (1591)  vii. 47.
Ascension, Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's

ship  (1593)  X.  213'
Ascension, Isle of, latitude, viii.

277; Roberval  at  (1542)  viii.  284;

Islands,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,

XI. 88.
Ascension, La, town  on  the  River

Plate  (1582)  XI.  183,  210,  253.
Aschilius,  King  of  Denmark,  i.  4.
Ascoli, Prince  of.  Volunteer  in  the

Armada  (1588)  iv. 203; at  Dun-
kirk, IV.  219.
Ascon,  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  vi.

145-

Aselye,  Henry,  taken  prisoner  by  In-
dians on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.
318.

Ashaguas,  province  of  the,  x.  408.

Ashby,  Francis,  and  M.  Gonson  at
Deptford  (1564)  vi.  262.

Ashe,  Lancelot,  death  of,  at  S.  Vin-
cent (1583)  XI.  197.

Ashe,  William,  of  the  Sunshine
(1586)  VII.  409.

Ashen,  Arnold,  damages  paid  to
(1409)  II. 103.

Ashley,  Ralph,  and  Laurence  Alder-
sey  at  Patras  (1586)  vi.  40;  of
the  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.
76,  78.

Ashley,  Sir  Anthony,  of  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596)  iv.  241 ;  knighted
at  Cadiz,  iv.  259.

Ash-Wednesday  Mass,  in  Captain
LTlloa's ship  (1540)  ix. 269.

Asiano,  gold  coin  of  Algiers  (1584)  v.
270;

Askham,  William,  English  Ambas-
sador to  Prussia  (1409)  11.  98,  106.

Asmerome,  meeting  place  of  Pashas
(1583)  V.  453.

Asores,  see  Azores.

Asou,  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  11.  454.

139

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Aspelia,  see  Cyprus.

Asper,  coin  of  Algiers  and  Constan-
tinople (1584)  V.  270;  of  Alex-
andria, V.  273.

Assan,  see  Hassan.

Assani,  see  Roumanians.

Assanus,  land  of,  see  Roumania.

Assapana  Island,  in  Orinoco  river,
description,  x.  395 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  landing  at  (1595)  x.
421.

Assassini,  see  Musihet.

Assawai  Indians,  and  the  gold  of
Guiana,  x.  366;  inhabitants  of
Sayma,  x.  396.

Assension, see  Ascension.

Asshindon,  Sir  John,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Assi,  King  of,  enemy  to  Portuguese,
V.  404; trade  with  Pegu,  v.  428.

Assi,  see  Alanians.

Assuerus,  see  Ahasuerus.

Assumption,  City,  mentioned  in  the
Ruttier,  xi. loi.

Assumption,  Isles  of,  voyage
of  English  to  (1527)  viii,  i ;
Jacques  Cartier  and  (1^34)  viii.
144-  (1535)  VIII.  214,  216;  voyage
of  the  Grace  to  (1594)  viii.  162,
164; river  near,  viii.  243.

Assur,  Baldwin,  King  of  Jerusalem
in  (1102)  IV.  297;  conquered  by
King  Baldwin  (1107)  iv.  304;
battle  near,  between  Richard  I.
and Saladin (1191) iv. 334.

Assyria,  Chrinisins  or  silk  worms
bred  in,  iii.  401.

Assyrius,  sent  to  Asia  by  Nimrod,
III. 371.

Asta,  knight  of,  slain  at  Famagusta
(1571)  v. 150.

Astar, son  of  Vastacius,  i. 231.

Astatlan,  in  Western  America,  viii.

450-

Astina,  King,  King  Utina  and  (1565)
IX.  63.

Astrakhan,  iii.  248,  370,  373;  sub-
dued by  Russia,  11.  190 ;  market,
406,  456;  governor  of,  450;  old
and  new,  description  of,  454 ;
Island  at,  456 ;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son  at,  477;  latitude,  479;  to  Sera-
chick,  ten  days'  journey  by  land,
480; fifteen  days  by  sea,  481; to

Turkomans  by  the  Caspian,  ten
days  with  barks,  480;  Way  to
Persia  by,  iii.  1 1 ;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son  in,  18,  36;  Thomas  Alcock
in,  41;  Arthur  Edwards'  Letter
from,  44-46 ;  Moscow  to,  69 ;
Yaroslavl  to,  71 ;  English  Trade
in.  93.  95.  109.  m.  112,  155,  156,
181,  182,  190,  245;  English
and  Tartars  fight  near,  150;
Ancient  Market  Town,  183,  217;
besieged  by  the  Crims,  219;  King-
dom of,  conquered  by  Russia,  359,
387; salt  made  at, 368.

Astraphen,  Thomas  Grolos,  Bishop
of  (1577)  V. 166.

Astrolabe,  used  for  taking  latitudes,
vii. 316.

Astronomers,  Chinese,  vi.  362.

Ataballpa,  Prince  of  Peru,  prisoner
of  Francisco  Pizarro  (1533)  viii.
125 ;  son  of  the  Emperor  of  Peru,
and  Caxamalca,  x.  340,  355 ;  gold
and  silver  of,  taken  by  Francisco
Pizarro,  x.  358;  King  of  Peru,  xi.
282  ;  imprisonment  and  murder  of,
by  Francisco  Pizarro,  xi.  283.

Atacama,  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  xi.
279.

Aterima,  Indian  chief,  tortured  by
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)  x.

353-
Athanasius,  Body  of,  on  the  gate  of

Trebizond, iv. 409; Bishop of

Alexandria,  and  Frumentius,  vili.

105.
Athelard,  of  the  Abbey  of  Bath  (1130)

IV.  306.
Athelstan, First King of Britain

(895-940)  I.  21.
Athelwold, Bishop of Winchester

(908-984)  I.  22.
Athens, John Erigena  at (858) iv.

281.
Atherton,  Andrew,  Release  of  (1569)

III. 118.
Athole, Earl  of,  see  Durward.
Athore, son of King Satourioua

(1564)  IX.  30; and  Captain  Vas-

seur (1564) IX. 75; King, and

Captain  Gourgues  (1567)  ix. 102.
Athore,  village  in  Florida,  ix.  68.
Athule  Island, in  the  Baraquan  or

Orinoco  river,  x.  408.

140

INDEX

Atle,  Arthur,  gentleman,  member  of

the  Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.

419,  420  f.
Atinas, Martin, of Dieppe, in Sir

John Hawkins' ship, lands at

Florida  (1565)  ix.  77.
Atkins,  Tobias,  gunner's  boy  (1580)

III.  232.
Atkinson,  Thomas,  Russian  licence

granted  to  (1569)  iii. 109.
Atlantic,  vii.  162.
Atlantis,  see  America.
Atoiaque,  see  Atoyaque.
Atoica  river,  x.  406.
Atoyaque, Mountains, Tlacamama

river  springs  from,  ix.  469.
Atoyaque  town,  ix.  470.
Attica, Ottoman  in,  iii. 399.
Attire,  Book  of  the,  of  all  nations,

III.  272.
Aubry, Captain, sent to Croatan

(1585)  VIII.  315; to  Wokan,  viii.

316.
Aucher,  Sir  Anthony,  owner  of  the

Aucher  (1551)  v.  72.
Aucher, the, Roger Bodenham's

voyage in (1550) v. 71, 168;

voyage  to  Chios,  v.  73-75 ; James

Alday,  master  of  (1551)  vi. 136.
Auctolia,  daughter  of  Simon,  iv.  72,

174.
Audely, John, of Poplar, rear ad-
miral of  James  Lancaster's  ships

(1594)  XI.  44.
Audunnus,  loth  bishop  of  Holen,  in

Iceland  (1314)  iv.  55, 154.
Audusta, King, in Florida (1562)

vm. 474; and Nicholas Barre,

VIII. 483 ; Captain Laudonniere

and  (1565)  IX.  53-
Augmundus, 26th  bishop  of  Schal-

holt, in Iceland (1522) iv. 58,

157-
Augsburg, on the Lech, Laurence

Aldersey in (1581) v. 202, 214;

Richard  Wrag  at,  vi. 113.
August,  William,  mariner,  in,  42.
Augusta,  see  Augsburg.
Augusta Island  near  Dalmatia, v.

78; John Locke near (1553) v.

104.
Augustine, S., first archbishop of

Canterbury  (d.  604)  i.  309.
Augustine Eucunocamindono, suc-

cesses of,  in  Corea  (1591)  xi.  431,

433-
Augustus,  see  Caesar.
Aulberge, musters of Knights of

Rhodes  in  (1522)  v. 11.
Aura  Soltana,  Tartar  girl,  11.  401.
Aurea  Anus,  see  Anus.
Aurid,  Antonio  de,  and  the  surrender

of  Peniche  (1589)  vi.  496.
Auripigmentum, found in Turkey,

VI.  27.
Austell,  Henry,  voyage  of  (1585)  v.

320-328.
Austen, John, ship master and

Prussian  pirates  (1395)  11.  66.
Austen, John, steward of the Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  li.  214.
Austen, Robert, and the cypher

alphabet  (1557)  11.  394.
Austin,  Captain,  in  the  fleet  of  Sir

Francis  Drake  at  S.  Marta  (1595)

X.  236.

Austin, John, distress of, at Port

Desire  (1592)  xi. 399.
Austin,  Peter,  new  mate  of  the  Jesus

(1583)  V.  293.
Austria,  Duke  of,  and  the  Tartars,

I.  51; in  Prussia  (1262)  11.  3,
Austridge,  see  Austria.
Autochthones,  Icelanders  not,  iv.  13,

102.
Auto-da-fe,  first,  in  Mexico  (1557)  ix.

348.
Auvergne, bulwark of, see under

Rhodes.
Aveador,  general  of  Ormuz,  v.  459 ;

and  John  Newbery  (1584)  v.  461.
Avellaneda,  see  Delgadillo.
Avenon,  Alexander,  member  of  the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Avernus,  James,  Captain,  killed  at

the  battle  of  Assur  (1191)  iv.  335.
Avero,  Duke  of,  and  Thomas  Stuke-

ley  (1578)  VI.  294; lord  of  Puerto

Seguro,  XI.  250.
Aves,  Isla  de,  latitude  of,  x.  333.
Aviero, Portuguese shipping from

(1578)  VIII. II.

Avila, Fernando de, in charge of

Amusgos  town,  ix.  471.
Aviso,  Barks  of,  or  despatch  boats,

used  by  the  Spanish  fleets  (1586)

XI.  457-

141

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Avite,  Sierras  de,  in  Coquebacoa,  x.
287.

Avocottes,  fruit  of  Mexico,  ix.  457.

Avoirdupois  (Haver  de  pois),  I.  337.

Awarawaqueri,  see  Iwarawaqueri.

Awaricana,  town  of  the  Mawarpari,
X.  492.

Awiapari,  town  of  the  Chaimera-
goro,  X.  494.

Awodwaier,  Indian  village,  xi.  8.

Axa,  Vasquez  de  Coronado  receives
news  of  (1540)  IX.  164.

Axiunitae,  people  of  East  Africa,  vi.
169.

Ayacastecan,  language  spoken  in
Ometepec,  ix.  468.

Ayde, the, see  the  Aid.

Aynam,  Isle  of,  pearls  in,  v.  504.

Ayraste,  town  in  Canada,  viii.  244.

Aythe,  the,  see  the  Aid.

Azafi  Bay,  viii.  406 ;  latitude  of,
VI.  138 ;  west  of  Morocco,  vi.
143 ;  port  in  Barbary,  English-
men at,  VI.  285;  Edmund  Hogan's
reception  at  (1577)  vi.  286;  Henry
Roberts  at  (1585)  vi.  426;  con-
quered by  Portuguese,  viii.  127 ;
near  Cape  Cantin,  xi.  148.

Azaffi,  see  Azafi.

Azamoglans, pay  of, vi. 61.

Azamor,  west  of  Morocco,  vi.  143 ;
conquered  by  the  Portuguese,  viii.
127.

Azania,  elephant  country  in  Africa,
VI. 169.

Azaron,  City  in  Armenia  major,  iv.
409.

Azegue,  in  Darha,  vii.  89.

Azgar,  Kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Azim  Khan,  and  Anthony  Jenkin-
son,  II.  461,  463.

Azon  Agon,  substitute  of  Mahomet
Chaus  (1584)  V.  284.

Azores,  Islands,  vi.  176;  William
Towerson  at  (1556)  vi.  211,  (1577)
VI.  250 ;  George  Fenner  near
(1567)  VI.  280;  voyage  to  the,  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  ships  (1586)
VI.  434-437 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1587)  VI.  442;  (1589)  VI.  514;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1588)  vi.
460,  467;  George,  Earl  of  Cum-
berland (1589) VII. I, 62, no;

fight  near,  between  the  Revenge
and  a  Spanish  Armada  (1591)  vii.
38-53 ;  Lord  Thomas  Howard  at
(1591)  VII.  56;  Sir  John  Burrough
at  (1592)  VII.  109;  the  Mangold's
course  by  (1593)  viil.  160;  Sir
Richard  Grenville  at  (1586)  viii.
348;  woad  sown  in,  viii
442  ;  Portuguese  garrison  in,  viii.
445 ;  Earl  of  Essex's  voyage  to
(1597)  X.  280;  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1588)  XI.  347;  John  Chidley
at  (1590)  XI.  384;  settlements  on,
by  the  Portuguese  (1448)  xii.  3;
Madre  de  Dios  captured  off  (1592)
84.

Azov,  Conquest  of,  by  the  Turks,
III.  394.

Azov,  sea  of,  i.  256,  258,  271,  iii.
363, VII. 161, 183.

Azoyoque  town,  description,  ix.  472.

Azv,  and  Anthony  Jenkinson,  11.
458.

Baatu,  see  Bathy.

Babbas,  Chetera,  in  Russia,  iii.  243,
244.

Babel,  tower  of,  in  Chaldaea,  iv.
411;  description,  by  Caesar  Fred-
erick (1563)  V.  369;  by  Ralph
Fitch  (1583)  V.  467;  by  John  Eld-
red,  VI.  5.

Bab-el-Mandeb,  Strait  of,  viii.  128.

Bab-el-Mandell,  see  Bab-el-Mandeb.

Babelbar,  port  of  Alexandria,  v.  330.

Baberno,  headland  in  Asia,  v.  251.

Babil  gehenham,  door  of  Hell,  vi.
8.

Babington,  Thomas,  at  Guaybea,
Brazil  (1581)  xi.  34;  at  Santos,  xi.

37-

Bab-Nassera,  Gate  of  Cairo,  v.  343.

Babylon,  date  market  at,  iii.  140;
field  of,  IV.  26,  118;  Robert,  son
of  Godwin,  a  martyr  in,  iv.  296 ;
Semiramis  and  thewallsof,  v.  118;
description  by  Caesar  Frederick,  v.
368,  369,  445 ;  by  John  Eldred,
VI.  4  f.  ;  caravan  to  Aleppo,  v.  445  ;
Letter  from  John  Newbery  at,  to
Leonard  Poore  (1583)  v.  455  ;  price
of  spices,  V.  456;  Ralph  Fitch  in,
V.  463,  505;  voyage  of  John  Eld-
red to  (1583)  VI.  1-9;  camels  in,  vi.

142

INDEX

4;  weight,  measure,  and  money
current  in,  vi.  10;  customs  of,
VI.  11;  English  consul  at,  xii.
102.

Babylonia  and  Cairo,  Keeper  of,  and
Louis  IX.,  King  of  France  (1249)
IV.  355-

Babylonians,  people  of  East  Africa,

VI.  169.

Bacabatra,  Rajah  of  Java  (1580)  xi.
132.

Bagan,  Don  Alfonso,  or  Alonso  de,
general  of  Spanish  fleet,  brother
to  the  Marquess  of  S.  Cruz,  vii.
47;  and  Sir  Richard  Grenville
in  the  Revenge  (1591)  vii.
46,  47,  81 ;  his  attempt  to
meet  English  fleet  (1590)  vii.  77;
and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  fleet
(11^92)  VII.  109;  disgrace  of,  vii.
118.

Bagan,  Don  Alvaro,  Marquess  of
S.  Cruz,  VI.  485 ;  ship  of
(1587)  439;  death  of,  440;
his  opinion  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  army  (1585)  x.  88,  92;
advice  to  oppose  Sir  Francis  Drake
in  the  West  Indies  (1585)  x.  94-97;
Terceira  conquered  by  (1583)  x.  95;
advice  to  oppose  Don  Antonio  in
Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Bacao  Point,  latitude  of,  x.  333 ;
mentioned  in  the  2nd  Ruttier,  313.

Baccalaos  or  fish  in  S.  John  Island,

VII.  146 ;  impede  Sebastian  Cabot
(1497) VII. 152.

Baccalaos  Island,  see  Newfound-
land.

Bacchus  Island,  discovered  by
Jacques Cartier, vines in (1535)

VIII.  221.

Bacco  Islands,  description,  ix,  330.
Bacco,  Rio  del,  description,  ix.  330.
Bachu,  see  Baku.
Bacilla,  La,  depth  between  S.  Bar-

nardo  Islands,  x.  292.
Backhouse, John, Ship-master, in.

303-
Backhouse, William, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  318.
Bacoa,  see  Bacao.
Bacola,  Kingdom  of,  description  by

Ralph  Fitch  (1583)  v.  484.
Bacon,  Francis,  one  of  Queen  Eliza-

beth's great  men,  xii,  25;  quota-
tion from,  41,  63,  69;  '  Considera-
tions touching  a  War  with  Spain  '
by,  72.

Bactria,  a  city  of,  11.  469 ;  Anthony
Jenkinson's  voyage  to  (1558)  in.
335  ; King  of,  vii.  181.

Baden,  Earl  of,  and  the  Tartars,  i,
51; hot  baths,  iv.  35, 129.

Badeves,  Paul,  and  Edward  Fenton
at  S.  Vincent  (1583)  xi, 191, 194.

Badu,  King  of  Cambay,  killed  at
assault  of  Diu,  v.  377,  469.

Baffes,  see  Buffaloes.

Baffin  Bay,  Captain  Davis  in,  xil.
28.

Baffo,  see  Paphos.

Bagazzana,  the,  Ceesar  Frederick  in
(1581)  V.  447.

Bagdad,  i.  86,  167;  Caliph  of,  i.
78,  154;  and  the  Tartars,  154;
his  ambassador,  i.  170 ;  retinue  of
the  Beglerbeg  of,  vi.  67.

Bagge,  John,  of  the  Sunshine  of
London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Bagge,  Michael,  of  Ipswich,  boat-
swain's mate  of  the  Golden
Dragon  (1591)  x.  189.

Baglione,  General  of  Christian  army
at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  130,  132,
135,  136,  139,  144,  150;  Mustafa
Pasha  and, v. 145.

Baglione,  Ester  and  Federico,  slain
at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  150.

Baglioni, see  Baglione.

Bagnese,  Simon,  Captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Bagnol,  Sir  Samuel,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Bagone,  Francesco,  Captain,  at  de-
fence of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  133.

Baguare,  la,  or  le  Bamare,  Joan,
Richard I.'s  sister  at, iv. 322.

Bahama,  viii.  451; channel,  vi.  404,

VIII.  451,  IX.  460,  X.  74,  251 ;  John
White  in,  viii.  412 ;  mutineers
against Captain Laudonniere in,

IX.  45;  Captain  Gourgues  in,  ix.
loi ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  in,  x.
226;  Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  in,  x.
244;  Spanish  ship  sunk  in,x.  427;
Isles,  VIII.  451,  IX.  43;  Peter
Martyr  on  the  pigeons  of,  53 ;
Town,  in  Cuba,  ix.  368.

143

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Baharem,  see  Bahrein.

Baharim,  see  Bahrein.

Bahia  de  todos  los  Santos,  in
Brazil,  voyage  of  Pudsey  to
(1542)  XI.  25;  Withrington  at
(1587)  XI,  215;  his  fight  with  In-
dians at  (1587)  XI.  218,  219;  at-
tempts to  take  (1587)  XI.  221;
Pedro  Sarmiento  asks  for  help  at,
XI.  272.

Bahia  town,  description  of,  xi.  250.

Bahrein  Island,  in  Persian  Gulf  v.
468 ; pearls-fishery  at,  v.  504,  vi.

7-

Baian  Baths,  Pontanus  on,  iv.  35,
130.

Baiazet,  see  Bajazet.

Baily,  captain  of  the  bark  Talbot
(1585)  X.  98.

Baily,  John,  Anthony  Dassel's  ser-
vant, in  Porto  d'AUy  (1591)  vii.  96.

Baily,  Roger,  settler  in  Virginia
O587)  viii.  402.

Baion,  see  Bayonne.

Baiset, see Bajazet.

Baixos,  Cavo  dos,  the  Richard  of
Arundel  at  (1589)  vi.  451.

Bajazet,  Emperor,  prisoner  of  Tam-
erlane, II.  187;  son  of  the  Great
Turk,  III.  27; defeat  of,  xii.  105.

Baker,  John,  of  the  Edward  Cotton
(1583)  VI.  412.

Baker,  Matthew,  in  Roger  Boden-
ham's  expedition  to  Chios  (155 1)
V.  76.

Baker,  Peter,  of  Ratcliffe,  committed
in  the  Levant  (1581)  v. 189.

Baker,  Robert,  his  relation  of  voy-
age to  Guinea  (1562)  vi. 258.

Baker,  Thomas,  death  of,  one  of
Anthony  Godard's  men  at  S.
Maria (1568) ix. 417.

Baku,  III.  26;  distance  from  She-
makha, III.  235 ;  captain  of,  and
English  merchants,  in.  224;  his
table  etiquette,  in.  226.

Baku,  Sea  of,  see  Caspian  Sea.

Bala,  scribe  of  Kaiuk,  i. 176.

Balagvate,  Laccha  found  in,  vi.
26.

Balak,  John,  letter  to  Gerardus  Mer-
cator  (1581)  III.  450-457.

Balances,  Port  of,  description  of,
VIII. 186.

Balasen,  Mully,  son  of  King  of
Morocco,  slain  in  Guinea,  vii.  10 1.

Baldach,  see  Bagdad.

Baldivia,  Don  Pedro  de,  see  Val-
divia.

Baldivia,  see  Valdivia.

Baldwin,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
life  and  travels  of  (1190)  iv.  339-

341-

Baldwin,  brother  of  Godfrey  of
Bouillon,  IV.  293 ;  his  marriage
with  Gutuere,  iv.  294 ;  at  Rama
(1102)  IV.  296;  King  of  Jerusa-
lem, IV. 297; at  Joppa,  IV.  300.

Baldwin,  Count  of  Hainault,  i.  262.

Baldwin,  Emperor  of  Constan-
tinople, his  visit  to  England
(1247)  IV. 353.

Baldwin,  King  of  France,  tomb  in
Jerusalem,  v.  211.

Bale,  Robert,  historian  (H.  146 1)  i.
xxiv. ;  on  Athelard,  iv. 306.

Balenas,  Punta  de,  or  Point  of,  S.
Cruz,  IX.  269.

Balgh,  see  Balkh.

Baliabadram,  commandment  for
(1584)  V.  287.

Balis,  paper  money  of  Hang-chow,
IV.  426,  428.

Balke, see  Balkh.

Balkh,  ambassador  from,  to  Russia,

"•  475-
Ballano,  garrison  of,  fortified  (1587)

X. 151.
Ballantis  Albanese, Turkish  spy  in

Rhodes  (1522)  v. 35; messenger

of  Solyman,  v.  43.
Ballard,  William,  Nicholas  Thome's

servant,  and  trade  in  the  Canaries

(1526)  VI. 124,  X.  6.
Balm trees at Bedrihone, v. 338;

Caesar Frederick's description of

(1563)  V.  371; (1567)  445.
Balsam, found  in Guiana, x. 427,

458, XI. 14 ; used in kneading

bread,  xi.  20.
Balsamum,  see  Balsam.
Balsara,  see  Bussorah.
Balsas,  or  cane-made  rafts,  ix.  257.
Balsey  slade,  Anthony  Jenkinson  at

(T557)  "•  413-
Balthasar, Indian  interpreter  of  Sir
Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.  207; de-
serts the  sailors, x. 209.

144

INDEX

Baltimore  Haven,  rendezvous  of  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert's  fleet  (1583)
VIII. 46.

Bamberg,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
321.

Bamburch,  see  Bamburgh.

Bamburgh,  ships  from,  in  Edward
ni.'s  fleet,  I.  298,  III.  302.

Bampton,  John,  at  Azafi  (1577)  vi.
285 ;  and  Mully  Abdelmelech,  vi,
292.

Ban,  death  of,  I.  283.

Banbrucke,  Christopher,  quarter-
master of  the  Bona  Esperanza
(1553)  "•  212.

Banda,  nutmegs  and  maces  found
In,  V.  403,  405,  504,  VI,  24;  trade
with  Malacca,  v.  498.

Banderduess,  Peter,  and  Don  Diego
Pimentelli  (1588)  iv.  227.

Bandu,  University  town  in  Japan,
VI.  331-

Bangor,  College  of  Divines  in  (390)
IV.  277.

Baniane,  an  astronomer  of  Ormuz,
VI. no.

Banio,  prison  in  Tripolis,  v.  297;
English  merchants  in  (1584)  v.
299.

Banister,  Thomas,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  in.  109;  voyage
of  discovery  (1588)  119;  fifth  voy-
age into  Persia  (1568)  150;  death,
153 ;  detained  at  Astrakhan  by
Russian  officials  (1572)  181 ;  es-
corted by  Russian  officials,  190 ;
and  the  Persian  trade,  212,  335.

Bank,  the,  near  Cape  Race,  Captain
Parker  crosses  (1597)  x.  280.

Bannaras,  see  Benares.

Banner  of  Spanish  ship  in  Leyden
church  (1588)  IV.  227.

Banning,  Andrew,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.

Banning,  Paul,  alderman,  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78;
and  James  Lancaster's  expedition
(1594)  XI.  43.

Bannister,  in  Edward  Fenton's  voy-
age (1582)  XI. 175.

Banton  Island,  latitude,  ix.  329.

Bantonsilla  Island,  Captain  Gualle
at  (1584)  IX.  329.

Baptism,  Russian,  11.  443.

Baptista,  John,  physician,  traitor  to^
Rhodes  (1522)  v.  22.

Baque  Island,  viii.  390 ;  near  S.
Domingo,  x.  285 ;  in  second  Rut-
tier,  X.  313;  longitude  from,  to
Navassa,  x.  336.

Bar,  weight  of  Ormuz,  vi.  14;  of
Cochin,  VI.  21;  of  Malacca,  vi.
21.

Bara,  sea  of,  v.  429.

Baracoa,  Marks  of,  x,  301,  328.

Baracou,  in  Jamaica,  ix.  43.

Baraquan,  see  Orinoco.

Barasoga,  see  Alcane  de  Barasoga.

Barateve,  Island  of.  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1579)  xi.  129;  descrip-
tion  and  products, xi. 130.

Barba,  Friar  Vincent,  Prior  of  the
Convent  of  Amerciates  in  Galli-
poli  (1577)  V.  165.

Barbadoes,  island,  latitude  of,  x.
332-

Barbaregaf, in Ethiopia, vi. 145.

Barbaria,  see  Barbary.

Barbarie,  see  Barbary.

Barbaro,  Daniel,  first  Consul  at
Matarea  (1504)  v.  338.

Barbarossa,  see  Frederick  Barbar-
ossa.

Barbary,  in  Thome's  map,  11.  171 ;
Hubbed  town  near,  dyers  in,  v.
240;  euphorbium  found  in,  vi..
27 ;  first  voyage,  by  the  Lion
(1551)  VI.  136;  second  voyage,  by
three  ships  (1552)  vi.  138;  formerly
Mauritania,  vi.  143  ;  English  mer-
chants and  ships  at  (1577)  vi.  290;
Company  (1585)  vi.  419,  vi.  421  j
English  trade  in,  by  Captain
Carleill  (1583)  viii.  136;  Robert
Withrington  on  coast  of  (1586)
XI. 204.

Barbas,  Cape  de  las,  vi.  157,  x.  14,
335 ;  the  Richard  of  Arundel  at
(1588)  VI.  451 ;  the  Marigold  takes
a  caravel  at  (1577)  xi. 150.

Barbaterre, see  Barbotiere.

Barbinas,  Prince,  son  of  Madoni,
King  of  Columbo,  v.  399.

Barbos,  Rio  de  los,  English  trade
in  (1562)  VI.  261;  the  Richard  of
Arundel  at  (1590)  vi.  463.

Barbotiere,  Captain  Charles  de  la,
from  Caen,  vi.  404; and  Captain.

145

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Lancaster  of  Edward  Bonaventure
(1593)  X.  198;  Henry  May  and,
wrecked  on  Bermuda  Island  (1593)
X.  200;  builds  a  bark,  x.  201;  in
Newfoundland,  parts  from  Henry
May  (1594)  x.  203.

Barbu,  prisoner  of  King  Onathaqua
(1565)  IX.  49.

Barbuda,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  in
sight  of  (1597)  XI. 15.

Barbudos,  see  Barbadoes.

Barbusano,  a  tree  in  Teneriffe,  vi.
130.

Barca, desert  of, vi. 142.

Barcelona,  cardamom  found  in,  vi.
26.

Barchin, besieged by Tartars, i.

152.

Bardes,  near  Goa,  v.  510.

Barecombe,  Edward,  in  Virginia
(1585) VIII. 318.

Barema,  see  Barima.

Barge,  captain  of  the  Turkish  Em-
peror's, or  Capigilar  Caiasi,  pay
of,  VI.  62.

Barges,  Chinese,  for  the  use  of
magistrates,  vi.  366,  367.

Barima,  x.  376,  380,^  459,  464,  494;
mouth  of  the  Orinoco  river,  x.
420 ;  Spaniards  slain  by  Indians
at  (1596)  X.  465.

Bark,  built  on  Bermuda  Island  by
the  French  crew  (1594)  x.  201.

Barka,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74,  150,
269.

Barker,  Andrew,  of  Bristol,  voyage
to  Terra  Firma  and  Honduras
(1576)  X.  82-88;  goods  confiscated
by  the  Inquisition  of  Teneriffe
(1574)  X.  83;  captain  of  the
Ragged  Staff  (1576)  x.  83;  con-
spiracy against,  and  death  at  S.
Francisco Island, x. 86.

Barker,  Captain,  of  the  Victory
(1588)  IV.  218.

Barker,  Edmund,  of  Ipswich,  and
the  voyage  to  the  East  Indies
(1591-94)  VI.  387-407;  lieutenant
of  the  Edward  Bonaventure  in
Malacca  (1592)  vi.  396,  398,  x.
200;  at  Mona  (1593)  vi.  405;  at
Dieppe  (1594)  vi.  407;  vice-
admiral  of  James  Lancaster's
ships  (1596)  XI.  44; at  the  siege

of  Pernambuco  (1595)  xi.  51;  and
the  Portuguese  stratagem  (1595)
XI.  60; death,  xi.  61.

Barker,  John,  brother  of  Andrew
Barker,  goods  confiscated  by  the
Inquisition  of  Teneriffe  (1574)  x.
83 ;  sends  betrayers  of  Andrew
Barker  to  prison  (1576)  x,  87;
death,  xi.  61.

Barkley,  Sir  Maurice,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Barlango,  Marquess  de,  volunteer
with  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Barlowe,  Arthur,  captain,  voyage  to
Virginia  (1584)  viii.  297,  310;  sent
northward  of  Virginia  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  xii.  39;  and
Manteo, 113.

Barmake  Tash,  rocks,  in.  224.

'  Barmudas,'  see  '  Bermudas.'

Barnacles,  found  in  African  seas,  vi.

175-
Barnacles,  birds  by  the  Irish  Sea,  iv.

435-
Barnam, Alderman, joint-owner of

the  Solomon  (1590)  vii.  31.
Barnardo  of  Brescia,  Captain,  made

slave at Famagusta (1571) v,

151-

Barne,  Richard,  granted  Russian
licence  (1589)  in. 109.

Barnes,  Dennis,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 318.

Barnes,  or  Barne,  Sir  George,  con-
sul to  the  Muscovy  Company
(1555),  privileges  granted  to,  11.
29S,  306,  362,  392,  406;  and  the
discovery  of  Cathay  (1580)  in.  251-
258,  (1553)  331;  granted  Russian
licence,  348 ;  and  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  74,  75,_  78;  and
the  second  voyage  to  Guinea  (1554)
VI.  154.

Barnes,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  88.

Barons  or  Citizens  of  London,  i.
44.

Barons,  Tartar,  at  the  Khan  of
Cathay's  Court  (1330)  iv.  431.

Baros,  belzuinum  mandolalo  found
in,  VI.  26.

Baros, John,  see  Barros.

Barrampore,  Ralph  Fitch  at  (1583)
V.  473-

146

INDEX

Barran,  Don  Diego,  return  from
England  (1589)  vi.  485.

Barranca,  or  cliff,  mentioned  in  the
Ruttier,  xi.  98.

Barrancas  Blancas,  xi.  87.

Barrat,  William,  at  Tripoli  (1583)  v.
263.

Barre,  Nicholas,  governor  of  Charles-
Fort  (1562)  VIII.  483,  484,  485;
and  the  soldier  Roufifi  left  in  Flor-
ida (1562)  IX.  53.

Barrera,  John  de  la,  from  Mexico,
fortune  of  (c.  1557)  ix.  350.

Barrera,  Marie  de  la,  wife  of  Robert
Tomson  (c.  1557)  ix.  350.

Barret,  Alan,  and  Prussian  pirates,
II.  67.

Barret,  Charles,  merchant  on  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  212.

Barret,  Master,  his  present  to  Leo-
nard Poore  (1583)  V.  454.

Barret,  Robert,  master  of  the  Jesus
(1567)  IX.  398;  messenger  of  Sir
John  Hawkins  to  the  Viceroy  of
Mexico  (1568)  IX.  406,  452  ;  prisoner
in  Mexico  (1568)  ix.  422,  459 ;  burnt
by  the  Inquisition  (1575)  ix.  423,
463 ;  and  the  venomous  worm  at
Placentia  (1568)  ix.  449;  with
Spanish  fleet,  ix.  460,  461 ;  kind-
ness of  Diego  Flores  de  Valdez  to
(1570)  IX.  462.

Barret,  William,  merchant  in  Alep-
po, goods  of  (1584)  V.  290;  Eng-
lish consul  at  Aleppo  (c.  1584)  vi.
9 ;  money  and  measures  of  Baby-
lon by,  VI.  10;  with  Richard
Wrag  in  Cyprus  (c.  1594)  vi.  108.

Barrie,  William,  mariner  on  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.

Barros,  John,  '  Decade  '  by,  vii.  170,
viii.  442 ;  and  the  Chinese  Sea,
VII. 176.

Bart,  Hermannus,  third  master  of
the  Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem
(1206)  II. I.

Bartandono,  General  of  the  Bis-
cayans  in  the  Spanish  Armada
(1588)  VII.  83.

Bartenstein  Castle,  garrisoned  by
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  2,  3,  6.

Barter  in  the  Western  Planting
(1583)  VIII.  118;  between  Jacques
Cartier  and  natives  of  Newfound-

land (1534)  VIII.  ig8;  Indians  of
Virginia and Captain Amadas

(1584)  VIII.  301 ;  Indians  of
Northern  Florida  and  John  of  Ver-
razzano  (1524)  viii.  437;  Dom-
ingo da  Vera  and  Indians  (1593)
X.  437 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and
the  Indians  of  Guiana  (1597)  xi.  6.

Bartholomew,  faithful  to  Captain
Laudonniere  in  Fort  Caroline
(1565)  IX.  95.

Bartholomew,  of  Cernole,  Captain,
slain  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Bartholomew,  friar  of  Gallipoli
(1577)  v.  165.

Bartholomew,  the,  and  the  second
voyage  to  Guinea  (1554)  vi.  155.

Bartholomew  Island  in  the  Magel-
lan Straits,  xi.  357.

Barthra,  i.  76.

Bartlemew,  see  Bartholomew.

Barton,  ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s
fleet,  I.  298,  299.

Barton,  Captain,  wounded  at  Puente
de  Burgos  (1589)  vi.  493;  leaves
Peniche,  vi.  511.

Barton,  Captain  George,  land  cap-
tain in Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet

(1585)  X.  98;  at  the  taking  of  S.
lago  City  (1585)  x. 104.

Barton,  Edward,  William  Har-
borne's  letter  to  (1584)  v.  274;  and
Romadan  Pasha  (1584)  v.  281 ;
and  the  English  slaves  in  Tripolis
(1584)  V.  306,  314-318;  returns  to
Constantinople,  v.  306-309 ;  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78;
Ambassador  to  Turkey  (1593)  vi.
94; and  the  Chief  Vizir  (1593)  vi.

97-
Barton,  Robert,  and  the  Peter  (1584)

V.  281,.
Baru Islands, Sir  Thomas  Basker-

ville  at  (1596)  X.  241 ; described  in

the  Ruttier,  x.  291.
Baruada,  La,  Island,  latitude  of,  x.

333-
Barutti,  see  Beyrout.
Barwick,  John,  master's  mate  of  the

Content  (1591)  x.  183.
Barwike,  see  Berwick.
Baryhryur,  Tartars  and,  i,  86.
Barzelor,  Portuguese  hold  in  India,

V.  390.

147

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Basain,  see  Bassein.

Basan,  Caesar  Frederick's  descrip-
tion of  (i563)_v.  378.

Basan,  see  Basin.

Basanier,  Martin,  Richard  Hak-
luyt's friend, viii. 439.

Basaruchi,  money  of  Goa,  vi.  18.

Bascart,  see  Hungary  the  Greater.

Bascha,  see  under  Hungary  the
Greater.

Baschare,  see  Hungary  the  Greater.

Base  River,  discovered  by  Captain
Ribault  (1562)  VIII.  473.

Basil  HL,  son  of  Demetrius,  n.  188.

Basil  IV.,  Cziemnox,  son  of  Basil
HI.,  and  the  dukedom  of  Moscow,
11. 188.

Basil  v.,  or  Gabriel,  Emperor  of
Russia,  III.  371 ;  conquests  of,  11.
190,  III.  386-387;  and  the  Tartar
Khan,  391 ;  attempted  conquest  of
northern  regions,  iii.  411.

Basilius,  see  Basil.

Basilisks,  used  at  the  siege  of
Rhodes  (1522)  v.  19;  of  Fama-
gusta  (1571)  V.  132.

Basins,  trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1555)
VI.  184,  197,  (1577)  VI.  252.

Baskerville,  Captain  Nicholas,
wounded  at  Panama  (1596)  x.
238.

Baskerville,  Sir  Thomas,  on  the
Hope  (1595)  X.  226;  in  the  Gar-
land, in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1595)  X.  230;  lands  at  Puerto  Rico
(1595)  X.  232;  burns  Tapia,  Sal-
lamca,  etc.  (1595)  x.  235;  attacks
Panama  (1595)  x.  238,  239;  new
general  of  Drake's  fleet  (1596)  x.
240;  approves  Savile's  confutation
of  Spanish  lies  (1596)  x.  264;  at
the  fight  of  Pinos  (1596)  x.  262.

Bason, see  Basin.

Basora,  see  Bussorah.

Basques  of  S.  John  de  Luz,  voyages
of,  VIII. 161.

Basque,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.

304-

Bassa,  see  Pasha.

Bassein,  Ralph  Fitch  in,  v.  470;
and  Monsoons,  vi. 28.

Bassendine,  James,  and  the  expedi-
tion on  the  Pechora  (1588)  in.
119.

Basset,  Gilbert,  Baron  of  Wy-
combe (d.  1241),  witness  to  Henry
ni.'s  charter,  i.  324.

Basset,  William,  his  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Bastarci,  see  Hungary  the  Greater,
people  of.

Bastimentos,  Isla  de  los,  near  Car-
tagena, X.  144;  at  Nombre  de
Dios,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.
291.

Batag,  Vologda  to,  in.  69.

Batansas,  see  Betanzos.

Bate,  Anthony,  English  consul  at
Aleppo  (1584)  VI.  9.

Bate,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Bateman,  William,  on  the  Content
(1591)  X.  183.

Bates,  John,  English  agent  in
Levant  (1584)  v.  275.

Bath,  Thomas  Buts  and  Rastall  at,
VIII. 7.

Bath,  Abbey  of,  Athelard  of  the
(1130)  IV.  306.

Baths,  Russian,  11.  448;  hot  spring,
IV.  35,  129;  in  Dominica  (1595)
X.  215.

Bathy,  grandson  of  Jenghiz  Khan,
I.  60  f..  74,  76,  77,  84,  150,  152,
162,  164,  178,  232,  234;  and
Andrew,  Duke  of  Russia,  i.  139  f. ;
his  expeditions,  i.  152-153 ;  visited
by  papal  legates,  i.  162-165,  11.
187 ;  their  return  to  his  court,  i.
178 ;  his  wives,  i.  232,  234,  235 ;
and  their  houses,  i.  235  f. ;  tri-
bute of  mare's  milk,  i.  241 ;  Rub-
ruquis  at  his  court,  I.  266,
272-276;  and  Ban,  i.  283;
courtesy  of  his  people,  I.  283 ;
conquers  Muscovy  for  Tartary
(1237)  II.  186;  conquers  Hungary,
187.

Bati,  see  Bathy.

Batman, Persian  weight, in. 50.

Batochina,  Cape,  latitude  of,  xi.  351 ;
Island,  near  Gilolo,  latitude  of,  xi.

336.
Bats,  William,  master  of  the  Castle

of  Comfort  (1567)  vi.  270;  hostage

at  Cape  Verde,  vi.  271,  272.
Bats, large, in an island near

Celebes,  xi.  128.

148

INDEX

Battacella, queen of, tributary to

Bezeneger,  v.  391.
Battista,  John,  of  Rivarole,  captain,

slain  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.
'  Battle  of  Alcazar,'  by Peele, xii.

103.
Batu,  see  Bathy.
Baudet,  Jerome,  vice-admiral  of  the

French  ships  in  Guinea  (1557)  vi.

215,  218.
Baudzen,  see  Bautzen.
Baughleata, Anthony  Jenkinson at

(1558)  II.  457.
Baugie, Foulke  de, his  voyage  to

Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.
Bautisus,  river,  iii.  280.
Bautzen,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-
Bawcunar, King  of  Trinidad, con-
quered by  Augustine  Delgado,  x.

497

Bawhiata  Island,  11.  457.

Baxos,  or  sands  of  Judah,  Don  Fer-
nando de  Mendoza  on  (1592)  vii.

Baya,  see  Bahia.

Bayha,  see  Bahia.

Bayon,  see  Bayonne.

Bayona  Islands,  in  Galicia,  Earl  of
Essex  at  (1589)  vi.  495;  English
fleet  at,  512;  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1585)  X.  92,  100;  governor  of,
and Drake, loi ; latitude  of, x.

„335-

Baj'onne,  salt  factory  at,  viii. 11 1 ;

damages  due  to  John  Unkeltop,  11.

103 f. ; three galleys of the

Armada  on  the  coast  of,  iv.  210;

ships  (1345)  I.  299.
Bdellium, found in Arabia Felix

and  Mecca,  vi.  26.
Beake Island, near S. John, viii.

388-
Beal  Ozera,  see  Byelo-Ozera.
Beale,  Valentine,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII. 318.
Beame, see Bohemia.
Beans,  found  in  Virginia,  viii,  360 ;

in  Florida,  455.
Bear,  the,  Lord  Sheffield,  captain  of

(1588)  IV.  218.
Bear, the, of Captain Frobisher's

third voyage to Meta Incognita

(1578) VII. 237; in Countess of

Warwick's Sound, vii. 239;

Richard  Philipot,  captain  of  (1578)

VII.  322 ; attendant  on  the  Judith,

VII.  324.
Bear,  the,  Andrew  Barker's  ship  in

his  voyage  to  Terra  Firma  (1576)

X.  82.
Bear, the, Sir Robert Dudley's

flagship  (1594)  X. 204; Abraham

Kendal,  master  of,  x.  205.
Bear,  the,  Benjamin  Wood's  ship,  to

Magellan  and  China  (1596)  xi.  2,

417-

Bear,  the,  Galleon,  Edward  Fenton's
ship  (1582)  XI.  163.

Bear  Bay,  discovered  by  Arthur  Pet
(1580)  III.  286.

Bear-Haven,  in  Ireland,  rendez-
vous for  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
fleet  (1583)  VIII.  46;  the  Desire
at  (1593)  XI.  416.

Beare,  James,  master  of  the  Judith
(1584)  V.  281.

Beare,  James,  master  of  the  Michael

(1577)  VII.  285,  290;  master  of  the
Anne  Francis  (1578)  vii.  334;  and
Captain  Best  on  Hatton's  Head-
land, VII.  357.

Beare, John, quartermaster on a

Spanish  ship,  ix.  460.
Beare, William, mariner of the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) 11.

214.
Bear's Sound  (1578)  vii. 239, 299;

the Bridgwater Busse in,  vii.

241,  243; Captain  Frobisher  and

the  natives  of  Meta  Incognita  at

(1578)  VII.  361 ;  miners  at,  vii.
362;  Archipelago  near,  vii.  364;
the  Michael  in,  vii,  365.

Bear's  Whelp,  the.  Captain  Munck
of,  vice-admiral  ship  of  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1594)  x.  204.

Bear's  Whelp,  the,  Benjamin  Wood's
ship  (1596)  XI.  417.

Beares,  William,  of  Ratcliffe,  his
prizes,  vi.  437.

Bears,  white,  i.  84;  licence  to  take
from  Russia,  11,  396;  in  Birds
Islands,  viii.  184;  as  food  in  New-
foundland (1578)  VIII.  13;  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  368;  in  Newfound-
land, VIII.  59,  82  ;  in  Florida,  462  ;
in  Hochelaga, 244.

149

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Beasemar,  Russian  weight,  ii.  274.
Beast, Robert, Queen Elizabeth's

messenger  (1572)  iii.  176.
Beata Island, near Hispaniola,

marks  of,  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  285 ;

in  second  Ruttier,  x.  312  ;  latitude,

X.  333 ; longitude from, to Isle
Baque, 336.

Beau,  le.  Treasurer,  his  nephew
saved  in  Fort  Caroline  by  Captain
Laudonniere  (1565)  ix.  97.

Beauchamp,  divers  crusaders  named
(1096)  IV.  293.

Beauchamp,  Geoffrey,  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Beauchamp,  John,  voyage  to  Syria
(1240)  IV.  352.

Beauchamp,  Walter  de,  witness  to
charter  of  Henry  III.  i.  324;  of
Edward  I.  i.  338.

Beaufort,  John  de,  and  Saracen
war,  by  Froissart  and  Holinshed,
IV.  451.

Beauhaire,  Monsieur  de,  his  servant
in Florida (1565)  ix. 93.

Beaupr^,  Viscount  of,  captain  of  a
ship  in  the  third  voyage  of  Jacques
Cartier  (1540)  viii.  265;  governor
of  Charlesburg  Royal,  viii.  269.

Beavers,  found  in  Hochelaga  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii. 244.

Becas,  grandson  of  Jenghiz  Khan,
I. 74-

Becher,  Henry,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307.

Beching,  Silvester,  in  Virginia
(1585) VIII. 318.

Beck,  Anthony,  bishop  of  Durham,
patriarch  of  Jerusalem  (1305)  iv.
370.

Bede  (673-735,  his  '  Historia  Ecclesl-
astica  Gentis  Anglorum,'  i.  8,  9,
10; on  Pelagius,  iv.  277.

Bedford,  Lord,  and  the  Genoese  car-
racks (1437) II. 143.

Bedford,  Earls  of,  see  Russell.

Bedingam,  Ralph,  of  Lynn,  and
Prussian  pirates,  il.  70.

Bedrihone,  balm  trees,  v.  338 ;
Mecca  caravan  at,  v.  350,  361.

Beds  in  Japan,  vi.  334;  under  the
Equinoctial,  vii.  260;  of  Amazon
Indians,  xi.  21; of  Nova  Albion,

XI.  119.

Beecher, Henry, granted Russian

licence,  iii. 109.
Beer, Dutch, made  in  Lapland,  11.

372.
Beffart, Charles, of Triers, thir-
teenth master of the Dutch

knights  (1341)  II.  6.
Beglerbegs, or  Turkish governors,

pay of the five (1588) vi. 61.
Beguaes,  River  de  los,  mentioned  in

the  Ruttier,  xi.  99.
Beit, Island  of  Tunis, vi. 143.
Bekesborne,  see  Bekesbourne.
Bekesbourne,  i.  47,  48.
Bela  IV.,  King  of  Hungary,  11.  187,

III. 392.
Belanzara, ship of Venice, lost at

sea  (1588)  IV.  230.
Belen,  Port,  Captain  Ulloa  at  (1539)

IX.  222.
Belgern,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-

Belgrade,  taken  by  Solyman  (152 1)
V.  47,  51;  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hun-
garian-Turkish war  (1594)  VI.
104.

Belinas,  see  Csesarea  Philippi.

Beling,  Captain,  at  the  taking  of  S.
lago  de  Leon  (1595)  x.  220.

Bell,  draping  of  Scotch  wools  at,  11.

I2X.

Bellapola  Island,  William  Harborne

near  (1583)  v.  250.
BelJapore,  Ralph  Fitch  at  (1583)  v.

473-
Belle,  river  in  Florida,  discovered  by

Captain  Ribault  (1562)  viii.  460;

King Ovade's country on, viii.

478.
Bellegrado, see  Belgrade.
Belle Isle, harbour in Brittany,

Roberval  at  (1542)  vin.  284.
Belle Isle, in the Strait of New-
foundland (1578) VIII. 14; ship

of,  and  Charles  Leigh  (1597)  viii.

178 ; voyage  of  John  Alphonse  of

Xanctoigne  to  (1542)  viii.  275-283;

latitude  of,  viii.  275.
Bellergan, market for precious

stones  (1583)  V.  472.
Bellinger, Stephen, of  Rouen, and

Hakluyt,  xii.  76.
Bellingham, Henry, captain  of  the

Rainbow  (1587)  vi.  438.

150

INDEX

*  Bello Gothico, de,' by Procopius

(500)  IV.  278.
Belmarye,  i.  308.
Belozerco, Vologda to, iii. 69.
Belschey, Ivan Demetrowich,  iii.

Belskoy,  Bodan,  Russian  counsellor,
III.  317,  336;  and  Sir  Jerome
Bowes  (1583)  321,  467,  474;  ban-
ished to  Kazan,  326.

Beltran,  Friar  Bernardin,  his  voyage
to  Antigua  (1581)  ix.  188;  and
Antonio  de  Espejo  (1582)  ix.  196;
returns  to  Cevola  (1582)  ix.  202  ;  to
S.  Bartholomew  Valley  (1583)  ix.
203.

Belyetere,  Edmund,  of  King's  Lynn,
and  Prussian  pirates,  11.  67.

Belzuinum,  in  Siam,  Baros  and
Bonnia,  vi.  26.

Bembo,  Cardinal,  report  on  the
Maranon  by  Gonzalo  Fernando  de
Oviedo,  to,  x.  361.

Benamazin,  battle  of,  Matthew
Gourney  at,  iv.  444.

Benares,  cotton  cloth  made  in,  v.
476.

Bence,  Edmund,  captain  of  the
Golden  Noble  (1586)  vi.  46.

Bendarha,  John  Frere  de.  King  of
Spain's  commissioner  in  Angola
(1591)  VI. 468.

Bends,  William,  master's  mate  in
the  Edward  Cotton,  confession  of
(1583)  VI.  412.

Bendzin,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.
326.^

Benedict,  Friar,  Companion  of  John
de  Piano  Carpini,  i.  56,  134,  11.
187.

Benedict,  the,  bark  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  xi. 103.

Benedict,  the,  ship  of  John  Winter
(1577)  XI.  148;  exchanged  for  a
Spanish  cantar  (1578)  xi.  151.

Beneventa,  Cond^  de,  and  the  de-
fence of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Bengala,  see  Bengal.

Bengal,  xi.  378;  King  of,  and  of
Patna,  v.  410,  411;  trade  with
Pegu,  v,  428;  gulf  of,  Ganges
runs  into,  v.  476;  Ralph  Fitch
and,  V.  481,  500;  pepper,  v.  504;
galls and wax in, vi. 25;

cardamom  in,  vi.  26;  monsoon
from  Ormuz  to,  vi.  34 ;  products,
VI.  400 ;  discovered  by  Portuguese  ^
VIII.  129.

Bengatre,  brother  of  Ramaragio
(1563)  V. 382.

Bengorion,  Joseph,  i.  xxv.

Benin,  English  merchants'  voyage
to  (1553)  VI.  141,  145;  King  of,
and  Pinteado,  vi.  149 ;  English
merchants  left  at  (1561)  vi.  254 ;
first  voyage  of  the  Richard  of
Arundel  to  (1588)  vi.  450-461;
second  voyage  of  the  Richard  of
Arundel  to  (1590)  461-467;  pro-
ducts, VI.  457 ;  King  of,  and  the
English  merchants, vi.  459.

Benin,  Rio  de,  vi.  148 ;  the  Richard
of  Arundel  at  (1589)  vi.  454,  (1391)
465  ;  climate,  vii.  252  ;  discovered
by  Portuguese,  viii. 127.

Benjamin,  distress  of,  at  Port  Desire
(1592)  XI.  399.

Benjamin,  the,  John  Martin,  cap-
tain of (1585)  X.  99.

Benjamin,  the,  Benjamin  Wood's
ship for Magellan and China

(1596)  XI. 2, 417.

Benman's man, killed in a fight

with  Portuguese  (1587)  xi.  220.
Benmurwagh, Indian captain, x.

495-

Bennet,  Christopher,  privileges  with-
drawn from  III.  118;  goods  con-
fiscated, 191.

Bennet,  Mark,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 402.

Bennet,  Stephen,  of  the  Chancewell

(1597)  VIII. 166.

Benson,  cooper  of  the  Richard  of
Arundel,  death  in  Benin  (1588)  vi.
460.

Benteld,  and  the  Livonian  ships,  11.

34-
Bently, Erasmus, mariner on the

Bona Confldentia  (1553)  11. 214.
Benzo,  Hieronimus,  historiographer

of  the  West  Indies,  iv.  18,  25,  108,

117.
Berbeese,  see  Berbice.
Berbice river, x. 494; cannibals

near,  423  ; trade  near,  x.  459.
Berca, see  Barka.
Bercuthanth,  son  of  Tushi,  i,  74.

151

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Berde,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  viii. 403.

Berecillo,  dog  of  Captain  Ulloa
wounded  by  Chichimecas  Indians
(1539)  IX.  237;  sent  against  In-
dians,  IX.  260,  265.

Berengaria,  wife  of  Richard  I.
(1191)  IV.  325,  327;  in  Cyprus,
IV.  328,  329 ;  marriage  with
Richard  I.  in  Cyprus,  iv.  330;  in
Acre,  IV. 333.

Berettin,  Francis,  of  Venice,  and
Caesar Frederick, v. 444, 445.

Berezona  River, in.  409.

Berg, Henry Austell at (1585) v.

327-

Bergen,  iv. 12,  100.

Berin,  John,  in  Guinea  (1555)  vi.
163.

Berk,  Joh.  van,  of  Cologne,  Hanse
deputy  (1407)  II.  79.

Bermejo,  Mar,  see  California,  Gulf
of.

Bermes,  Peruccio  de,  calker  of  the
Trinity  (1540)  ix.  276.

Bermuda,  Isle  of,  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  at  (1593)  vi.  404;  sea-
monster  at  (1570)  IX.  461;  ship-
wreck of  Henry  May  at  (1593)  x.
194;  and  Captain  de  la  Barbo-
tiere,  x.  200;  description  by
Henry  May,  x.  201 ;  products,  x.
201  f. ;  Sir  Robert  Dudley  at
(1594)  X.  210,  (1595)  X.  210;  Cap-
tain Parker  at  (1597)  x.  280;
advice  in  the  Ruttier  to  sailors  for,
X.  299,  300,  334,  337.

'*  Bermudas,  Discovery  of  the,'  etc.
(1610),  by  Sylvester  Jourdain,  its
influence  on  the  '  Tempest,'  xii.
112.

Bermudes,  Don  John,  of  Figueroa,
licences  letter  of  Don  B.  Delga-
dillo  (1596)  X.  252.

Barnacles,  see  Barnacles.

Bernardin  of  Agubio,  captain,  slain
at Famagusta  (1571)  v. 150.

Berosus  the  Chaldaean,  fifth  book  of ,

III.  371 ; and the Ganges, vii.
180.

Berosus Hill, deadly fountains  on,

IV.  39. 135-

Berozova  Gooba,  Bar  of,  Stephen
Borough at (1557) 11. 363.

Berozova  Ostia,  English  merchants'
proposed  stay  at  (1582)  iii.  305.

Berreo,  Don  Antonio  de,  and  his
Spanish  soldiers  (1595)  x.  206;  and
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  340,
353-  354;  governor  of  Spanish
Town  (1595)  X.  351;  betrays  Cap-
tain Whiddon's  men  (1594)  x.  352  ;
capture  of,  engraving  of,  352 ;
his  camp  master,  and  the  gold
from  Guiana,  x,  364;  his  at-
tempt to  discover  Guiana,  x.  365,
499 ;  at  Amapala,  x.  408 ;  and
the  Amapaians,  x.  368 ;  and  Cara-
pana.  King  of  Emeria,  x.  372 ;
rivalry  with  Vides,  governor  of
Cumana,  x.  373 ;  sends  envoys  to
Macureguarai  and  Manoa,  x.  374 ;
executes  King  Morequito,  x.  375,
395 ;  his  attempt  to  conquer
Guiana  defeated  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  x.  429 ;  on  the  Orinoco
river,  x.  434 ;  defeated,  and  left
at  Cumana,  x.  460 ;  at  Carapana,
and  the  governors  of  Caracas  and
Margarita,  x.  461 ;  flight  to  Car-
oli  river,  x.  462 ; forces  at  Caroli

(1596)  X.  466; plan  for  transplant-
ing Indians  (1596)  x.  470.

Berry,  Duke  of  (1386)  iv.  445,  449.
Berry, Henry  and  Richard,  settlers

in  Virginia  (1587)  vili.  402.
Berry, Leonard, in Sir Walter

Raleigh's  third  voyage  to  Guiana

(1597)  XI.  5.
Bert,  Captain,  i.  10.
Berta,  see  Barka.

Bertely,  Ferdinando,  his  map  of  the

globe,  VII.  203.
Berthorshvol, in Iceland, iv. 48,

145-

Bertus,  see  Bert.

Berwick,  Osep  Napea  at  (1556)  11.
354; Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  in.  302.

Besegulache  or  Besegueache,  near
Cape  Verde,  products  of,  vii.  90;
negro  habitation  near  Liberty
Island,  VII.  92.

Besson  Mysserevy  and  Anthony
Jenkinson  (1572)  in.  185;  pun-
ishment of, 191, 193.

Best,  George,  discourse  by,  vii.  250-
251;  lieutenant  of  Captain  Fro-
bisher (1577) vii. 218, 285, 297,

152

INDEX

(1578)  310,  321,  348,  360;  map
of  the  world  by,  engraving
of,  256;  and  the  bulwark  on
Countess  Island,  vii.  310;  cap-
tain of  the  Anne  Francis
(1578)  VII.  322,  365;  leaves  the
fleet,  VII.  335 ;  advice  to  Upcot
and  Tanfield,  vii.  351 ;  at  Hat-
ton's  Headland,  vii.  355,  357;
discovery  of  Blessing  Island,  356 ;
embarks  on  the  pinnace,  vii.  358 ;
finds  Captain  York  and  the
miners,  vii.  360 ;  fetches  his  ship
to  Countess's  Sound,  vii.  361 ;
dangers  of,  in  the  Busse  of
Bridgwater,  vii.  366 ;  *  Discourse  '
by,  xii.  91.

Best,  Robert,  merchant  in  Russia,
II.  291,  392;  interpreter  in  Russia
(1556)  362;  in  a  proposed  trial  by
combat  (1560)  411.

Beta  river,  x.  408.

Betancourt,  John,  and  the  Canary
Islands  (1417)  iv.  369,  vi. 120.

Betanzos,  biscuit  baking  in,  for  the
Spanish  fleet,  vi.  485.

Betel  leaf,  found  in  Cannanore,  v.

391-

Bethlehem,  Laurence  Aldersey  at
(1581)  V.  209,  216;  John  Eldred  at
(c. 1583)  VI.  9.

Bethlem,  see  Bethlehem.

Bets,  William,  of  Cley,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  64.

Bets,  William,  released  from  prison
in  Goa  (1583)  v.  461.

Bevice,  see  Bevis.

Bevis,  John,  of  London,  of  the  Em-
bassy to  Prussia  (1390)  11. 19.

Bevis,  Thomas,  death  of,  at  Roa-
noke (1590) VIII. 416.

Bevis,  the,  flagship  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  (1596)  x.  266;  distress  and
return  of  (1597)  x.  276.

Beyram,  see  Bairam.

Beyrout,  in  Syria,  English  trade  in
(1511)  v. 62.

Beza,  Theodore  de,  on  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  235.

Bezeneger,  sack  of  (1565)  v.  382,
383 ;  diamond  mine,  v.  386 ;
King's  Palace  in,  v.  387;  Queen
of  Gargopam  tributary  to,  v.
389; and Queen of Battacella,

XII  153

391; and  S. Thomas  City, 401;

products  of  Goa  sent  to,  v.  389 ;

Ceesar  Frederick  at  (1567)  x.  381.
Bianco  Cavo,  John  Locke  at  (1553)

v.  85, 100.
Biarmia, country, iii. 461 ; state

of, I. 12 ; north  of  Norway, iv.

196, VII, 164.
Biarmlandia,  see  Biarmia.
Biaza, haven of, or la Laguna,

mentioned in the Ruttier, xi.

96.
Bichier  Castle,  near  Alexandria,  v.

332.
Bichleri,  Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1586)

VI. 43.
Bidoux, Pr6 John de, prior of S.

Giles, and the Turks at Lango

(1522)  V. 15; and  Captain  Mar-

tiningo,  v. 20; wounded, v. 29,

37-

Bigat,  William,  master  of  the  Wil-
liam and  John  (1581)  lii.  247.

Biggat,  William,  shipmaster  (1582)
III. 303.

Bigs,  Captain  Walter,  land  cap-
tain in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1585)  X.  98; death,  x. 134.

Bilbao,  in  Biscay,  the  Primrose  at
(1585)  VI.  413.

Bilbll  Port,  III.  224,  285 ;  arrival  of
Arthur  Edwards  at  (1568)  iii,  136;
arrival  of  Thomas  Banister  at
(1569)  151;  English  merchants  at
(1580)  III.  224,  230;  latitude,  229;
Jacob  the  Armenian  shipwrecked
ofif  (1580)  232.

Bileri,  see  under  Bulgaria  the
Greater.

BIlis,  John,  of  Cromer,  damages
owed  to (1409) II. 104.

Bima,  one  of  the  Java  Islands,  con-
dition of  women  in,  v.  500.

Bimba,  see  Bymba.

Binne,  a  negro  of  Hanta,  left  in
London  (1557)  vi. 218.

Binny,  William  Towerson's  negro  in
Guinea  (1577)  vi. 245.

Blorno,  third  bishop  of  Holen,  in
Iceland  (1147)  iv. 54, 153.

Bir,  description  by  Caesar  Frederick
(1563)  V.  367;  Ralph  Fitch  at
(1584)  V.  505;  Sanjack  of,  Nestor
Martiningo,  slave  to  (1571)  v.  147.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

BIrca,  caravans  at,  v.  340,  343,  347,

365-
Bird,  John,  and  the  first  voyage  to

Benin  (1588)  vi.  45o-458,_  458-461 ;

second voyage to Benin (1590)

461-467.
Bird,  John,  friend  of  John  Whithall

(1580) XI. 31; adventurer for

Brazil,  xi.  33.
Bird, William, son of John Bird,

death of, in Benin (1588) vi.

460.
Birde,  Master,  owner  of  the  Golden

Noble  (1586)  VI.  46.
Birds,  wild,  in  Iceland,  iv.  44,  141 ;

in Teneriffe, vi. 130 ; in the

Western  Planting  (1583)  viil.  115;

in Newfoundland, described by

Jacques Cartier (1534) viii. 195,

228,  244 ;  by  Xanctoigne,  viii.  282  ;

in Tortugas Islands, x. 46; in

Guiana,  x.  426.
Birds,  Islands  of,  Charles  Leigh  at

(1597)  VIII. 167; description,  viii.

181; birds in, viii. 184; great

numbers  of  Godetz  in, 184, 187;

the  Great  Hennina  at  (1535)  viil.

211.
Biritem  on  the  Red  Sea,  v. 347.
Biron, voyage of, in the Trinity

(1536) VIII. 3.

Birra,  on  the  Euphrates,  Ralph
Fitch  at  (1583)  V.  465 ;  John  Eld-
red  at,  VI.  3.

Birrah, see Birra.

Bisante,  Antonio,  interpreter  of
Domingo  de  Vera  (1593)  x.  436.

Bisapor,  city  in  the  country  of  Dial-
can,  V.  381,  471 ; Ralph  Fitch  at

{^5^3)  V.  472.

Biscaine,  the,  Spanish  ship  taken
by  Thomas  White  (1592)  vii.  103.

Biscaino,  Sebastian,  letter  from,  to
Antonio Biscaino (1590) x. 164.

Biscay,  and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
200;  Captain  Cross  and  the  ship
of,  IV.  226;  the  Armada's  return
to,  IV.  230;  Charles  Leigh  and
(1597)  VII.  4,  VIII.  174;  ships  from,
and  John  Davis's  fleet  (1587)  vii.
422,  437-

Biscay,  New  (Nueva  Viscaia),  ix.
115;  Las  Quatro  Cienegas,  town
in, IX. 188; discovered  by  Diego

de  Guiara,  ix.  364; John  Chilton

in  (1568)  364.
Biscombe,  Robert,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  318.
Bisermini,  Tartars  and,  i.  86;  visit-
ed by  John  de  Piano  Carpini,  i.

94 ;  Bathy  and  the,  76,  152 ;  speak

Comanian language, 167.
Bishop, of Calais, sea captain, 11.

104.
Bishop  and  his  Clerks, rocks  near

Scilly, VII. 21, 30, XI. 201.
Bishop,  Michael,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587) VIII. 403.
Bishoprics in Peru, xi. 284.
Bishops, influence of, in Iceland

(1592)  IV.  75, 178.
Bisnagar, diamonds found in, v.

504-
Bissas,  see  Bromas.
Bitfield, captain of the Swallow

(1585)  X. 99.
Bithat,  Jenghiz  Khan's  grandson,  i.

150.
Bitom,  in  Silesia  (1585)  v.  326.
Bizerta, port of Tunis (1553) vi.

143-

Blac,  see  Roumanians.

Blacians,  see  Roumanians.

Black  Sea,  and  its  tributaries,  i.
163,  229,  230,  II.  477,  vii.  183,  194;
and  the  Don,  259;  and  the
Dnieper,  11.  252 ;  Henry  Austell
on  (1585)  V.  324.

Black  Pinnace,  the,  Thomas  Caven-
dish's ship  (1591)  XI.  389,  394,
397 ;  engraving  of,  400 ;  lost  in
the  South  Sea  (1592)  xi.  405.

Blackcoller,  in  Edward  Fen  ton's
voyage  (1582)  xi.  179;  M.,  Luke
Ward  and  (1583)  xi.  202.

Blackenals,  Henry,  of  the  Hugh
Gallant,  killed  by  Indians  (1587)
XI. 306.

Blackeney,  see  Blakeney.

Blackheath,  Henry  IV.  receives
Emperor  of  Constantinople  at
(1400)  IV.  454.

Blackney, sec Blakeney.

Blacknie,  see  Blakeney.

Blackwall,  Willoughby's  fleet  at
(1553)  II.  217;  the  Searchthrift  at,
ir.  322  ;  the  Holy  Cross  at  (1535)
V. 67; William Harborne's de-

154

INDEX

parture  from  (1582)  v.  243;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1588)  vi.
450;  the  Toby  leaves  (1593)  vii.
124;  departure  of  Captain  Fro-
bisher  (1577)  vii.  211;  his  first
voyage  (1576)  vii.  279;  second
voyage  (1577)  vii.  284,  285  ;  James
Lancaster's  departure  from  (1594)
XT.  44;  Edward  Fen  ton's  depar-
ture from  (1582)  XI. 172.

Blage,  George,  mariner  on  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  n.  213.

Blake,  Thomas,  friend  of  Robert
Tomson  in  Vera  Cruz, ix. 347.

Blake,  William,  xii. 117.

Blakeney,  Norfolk,  ships  furnished
by,  to  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.
299 ;  and  the  Iceland  trade,
304;  damages  due  from,  11.
103.

Blanc  Sablon,  see  White  Sand.

Blanca  Island,  see  White  Island.

Blancas,  see  Barrancas.

Blanco,  Cape  (Argentine),  in  A  Rut-
tier  to  Magellan  Straits,  xi.  87,
99 ; latitude, 350.

Blanco,  Cape  (Barbary),  vi.  156 ;
William  Towerson  at  (1555)
VI.  181,  (1556)  212,  (1557)
236;  George  Fenner  at  (1567)  vi.
269;  John  Raymond  at  (1591)  vi.
387;  Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1568)
IX.  446 ;  Portuguese  fishing  place
(1564)  X.  14;  Drake  at,  x.  103,  xi.
103  ;  described  by  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley, X.  205 ;  latitude,  x.  335,  xi.
150 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and
Benjamin  Wood  at  (1597)  xi.  2 ;
James  Lancaster  at  (1596)  xi.  44;
Captain  Fenner  and  the  Biscayan
ship  at  (1594)  XI.  46;  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1586)  xi.  291 ;  John
Chidley  at,  xi.  382.

Blanco,  Cape  (Peru),  distance  from
Puna  Island,  x.  351; latitude  of,

XI.  359-

Blancos, or white men, vii. 93.

Bland,  Captain,  two  men  of,  drown-
ed near  Panuco  (1568)  ix.  410;
of  Rochelle  and  the  Portuguese
carvel  (1568)  ix.  446;  at  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1568)  IX.  453.

Blank, see  Blanco.

Blanke,  see  Blanco.

Blankenberghe,  the  Spanish  ship  lost
at  (158S)  IV.  227.

Blasghoy,  Ivan,  diake,  debtor  to  the
Muscovy  Company  (1583)  iii.  329.

Blasie,  Sir  Andrew  de  Merall's  ser-
vant (1522)  V. 40.

Blaveshina,  church  in  Moscow,  iii.

338-

Blay,  Spanish  ships  at  (1568)  ix.
no.

Blayfield,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
321.

Blekinge,  Wolstan  and,  i. 15.

Blekingie, see  Blekinge.

Blemines,  headless  tribe  of  Africa,
VI. 169.

Blemmyans,  conquered  and  con-
verted by  Constantine,  viii. 106.

Blew,  see  Blue.

Blindness,  a  disease  of  Famagusta,

V.  96.

Blinton,  demnar  found  in, vi. 26.
Blonket, master of the Green

Dragon  (1584)  v.  304.
Blonket,  runaway  boy  of  the  Green

Dragon,  killed,  v.  309.
Bloody  Point,  discovered  by  Captain

Frobisher's men (1577) vii. 220;

fight  between  English  sailors  and

natives of Meta Incognita at

(1577)  vii.  304.
Blue  Sea,  11.  457.
Blundel,  Denis,  captain,  admiral  of

the  French  ships  in  Guinea  (1557)

VI.  215,  218,  224.

Blunt, John, of the Levant Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.
Blunt, Philip, in Virginia (1585)

VIII. 317.
Blunt,  Sir  Charles,  and  the  Armada

(1588)  IV. 217,  225; knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.
Blunt,  Sir  Christopher,  of  the  Cadiz

expedition (1596) iv. 243, 250.
Boacio,  Augustin,  fellow  prisoner  of

Robert Tomson (1557) ix. 347;

condemnation, ix. 349; escape

(1557)  IX.  350.
Boat-building  in  Florida,  viii.  429;

in Fort Caroline (1564) ix. 39,

(1565)  48.
Boats, Astrakhan governor's, 11.
450; Tartar, on the Don, 454;
on the Volga, iii. 71 ; flat-bot-

155

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

tomed,  on  the  Euphrates,  vi.  3 ;
of  Indians  of  Virginia,  viii.  303 ;
Spanish,  and  the  English  cap-
tains in  Cartagena  harbour  (1586)
X.  124 ;  bridge  of,  on  the  Tigris,
VI.  6;  river  of,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  194.

Boatswain's  mate  of  the  Desire  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Boa  Vista,  Cape  Verde  Island,
colonised  by  Alouis  de  Cadomosta
(1455)  VIII,  127;  latitude  of,  x.
335; John  Winter  at,  xi, 151.

Boca  Chica,  la,  in  Cartagena  Har-
bour (1587)  X. 137.

Bocas  de  Dragon,  las  Siete,  or
mouths  of  the  Orinoco  river,  x.
441.

Bodenham,  Jonas,  captain  of  the
Adventure,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  X.  234;  joint-executor
of  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1596)  x.
239 ;  captain  of  the  Defiance,  x.
240 ; at Pinos, 262.

Bodenham,  Roger,  voyage  to  Can-
dia  (1550)  V.  71-76,  168;  to  S.
Juan  d'Ulloa  (1564)  ix.  359.

Bodicus, Sinus, vii. 176.

Bodin  Island,  Friar  Odoric  in  (1330)
IV.  421.

Bogdania,  see  Moldavia.

Boghar,  see  Bokhara.

Bogher,  see  Bokhara.

Bogota,  in  the  kingdom  of  Granada,
Peru,  X.  174; John  de  Labera  in,

175-
Bohemia, 11. 123 ; John de Piano

Carpini  in,  i.  94;  Ottocar  I.,  King

of,  I. 159,  179;  and  the  Tartars, 51.
Bohume,  see  Bohun.
Bohun,  Henry  de,  Earl  of  Hereford,

his  vovage  to  the  Holy  Land  (1222)

IV. 349-
Bohun, Humphrey de, witness of
Edward I.'s Carta Mercatoria,

I-  338.
Boiaren  Conesheva,  or  master  of  the

horse, in  Russia,  iii.  413.
Boiarens, see  Boyars.
Boiarskey, Russian gentleman, iii.

417-

Boilas,  Rio  de,  the  Richard  of  Arun-
del at  (1590)  VI.  463.

Bojador, Cape, in Africa, latitude

of.  X.  335,  XI.  150,  348; discovery
of,  bv  Prince  Henry  the  Navigator

(1439) XII. 3.

Bojador,  El  Cabo  de  (Indies),  lati-
tude of,  IX.  332.

Bokhara,  Jenkinson's  journey  to,  i.
xxvi,  III.  335;  Anthony  Jenkinson's
return  from  (1559)  11. 400 ;  situation,
426;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  descrip-
tion, 469;  foreign  wares,  473;
forbidden  drinks  in,  470 ;  coin,  471 ;
besieged  by  the  King  of  Samar-
cand,  474 ;  latitude,  479 ;  distance
from  Kashgar,  490 ;  distance  from
Taskent,  481 ;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son's journey  to  (1562)  iii.  18;
English  trade  in,  iii.  94,  (1569)
109 ;  English  merchants  in,  iii.
117;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  voyage
to  (1558) 196,  335.

Bolac,  village  of,  i.  283.

Bolamboam,  Rajah,  King  of  Java
(1588)  XI.  340.

Boldroe,  John,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Bolingbroke,  Henry,  Earl  of,  see
Henry  IV.  of  England.

Bollon,  haven  of,  near  Capuli
Island,  IX.  327.

Boloine,  see  Boulogne.

Bolsan,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Bolschega  Mountain,  iii.  409.

Bolton,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
William  and  John  (1567)  ix.  398.

Bombards,  used  at  the  Siege  of
Rhodes  (1522)  v. 19.

Bombasey,  salt  pits  in,  iii.  368.

Bombasin  cotton  tree,  or  Gossam-
pine,  in  Persia,  m. 149.

Bombast  cloth,  in  use  in  India,  v,
448.

Bombazine  fleece  or  silk,  in  China,

VI. 355-
Bombyclne,  see  Bombazine.
Bomeiius, Doctor, his treason

against the Emperor of Russia

(1579)  III. 324.
Bona, Anthony Jenkinson at, iii.

195 ; port  and  city  in  Tunis,  vi.

143-
Bona  Confidentia,  the  (1553)  ii.  214,
220,  221,  246; wreck  of,  at  Dron-

156

INDEX

theim, Norway (1556) 351, 372,
379; Stephen  Borough  and  (1557)

363-

Bona  Esperanza,  the,  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby's  ship  (1553)  11.  212;
wintering  at  Drontheim,  Norway
(1556)  351 ;  no  news  of  (1557)  358 ;
Stephen  Borough  and  (1557)  363 ;
probable  loss  of,  379;  Henry
Lane's  account,  iii.  331.

Bonaldi,  John  Antonio  de,  captain
of  a  Venetian  ship  (1522)  v. 9.

Bona  Speranza,  see  Good  Hope,
Cape  of.

Bonava,  Francis  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  charter  to  the  Cinque
Ports,  I.  296.

Bonaventure,  Cape,  Stephen  Bor-
ough at  (1557)  II.  371.

Bonaventure,  the,  voyage  of,  to
Ramea  (1591)  viii.  150.

Bonaventure,  the.  Queen  Elizabeth's
ship,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1587)  VI.  438,  (1595)  X.  227;  at
Flores  (1591)  vii.  41 ;  in  the  fight
with the Spanish fleet (1596) x.

243-

Bona  Vista,  suburb  of  Lisbon,  Eng-
lish  troops at (1589) VI. 501.

Bona  Vista  Island,  see  Boa  Vista.

Bond,  of  Harwich,  joint  owner  of
the  Solomon  (1590)  vii.  31.

Bond,  Alderman,  and  the  Muscovy
Company  (1576)  iii.  203.

Bond,  Martin,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

Bond,  William,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Bond,  the,  bark,  Robert  Cross  cap-
tain of  (1585)  X.  98.

Bonde,  Sir  George,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.

Bondendon, Nicolo Zeno at (c.

1380) VII. 449.

Bond-servants  in  Persia,  iii. 165.
Bone, John, condemned to  galleys
by  Inquisition  of  Seville  (1570)  ix.

463-
Boniface, of  Provence, at  le  Fisco

(1522)  V.  12.
Boniface, Clays, and the English

ship,  11.  60.
Boniten, Captain, sent  to Croatan

(1585)  VIII.  315; to  Wokan,  viii.
316.

Bonitoes, see  Bonitos.

Bonitos, IV. 244, X. 60, XI. 153 ;

found near Sokotra, vi. 395 ;

found near Madagascar, vi.

401 ; found near New Spain by

Captain Gualle, ix. 335 ; found

by  Sir  Francis  Drake,  xi. 106.
Bonna,  El,  Venetian  ship  (1553)  v.

100.
Bonner, the bark, offered by Sir

Francis Drake to Ralph Lane

(1586)  VIII.  344;  George  Fortescue,
captain  of  (1585)  x. 98.

Bonnia,  burnt  Belzuinum  found  in,
VI. 26.

Bontemps.  captain  of  the  Green
Dragon  (1564)  vi.  263;  in  Gran-
ada Island  (1565)  x.  25;  tidings
of  the  Minion  brought  to  Sir  John
Hawkins  by  (1565)  x.  35.

Bontinge,  Roger,  master  of  English
rope works in Russia (1557) 11.

393-
Bonzes, priests in Japan, vi. 329,

337.  340-345.  373-
Bonzi,  see  Bonzes.
Bookener, Thomas, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  317.

Boppo  ab  Osterna,  sixth  master  of
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  3,  5.

Bora,  son  of  Tushi,  i.  74,  150.

Borazo,  found  in  Cambay  and  La-
hore, VI.  25.

Borborch,  treaty  of,  between  Eng-
land and  Spain  (1588)  iv. 206.

Borden, John, settler in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.

Borden, Richard, of the Sunshine

(1586)  VII. 408.

Boreman,  M.,  voyages  of,  ship-
owner, to  Mexico  Bay  (1592)  x.
190.

Borey.  Thomas,  voyage  of,  to
Brazil  (1540)  xi.  25.

Borgers,  Bernard,  of  Hamburg,
servant  of  the  Archbishop  of  Goa
(1583)  V.  460,  508.

Borges,  Joseph,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Borgoignon,  Nicholas,  brought  from
Florida  by  Sir  Francis  Drake,  ix.
113; his  account  of  Florida, ix.

157

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

113;  of  Copalla,  383;  fifer  of
S.  John's  fort  (1586)  x. 129.

Boriquen  Island,  see  Puerto  Rico.

Boris  Feodorowich  Godonova,  or
Godenoe  (1583)  iii.  327;  at  the
coronation  of  Feodor  Ivanowich
(1584)  340;  dignities  of,  341;
kindness  to  Sir  Jerome  Horsey
(1588)  346;  his  letter  to  William
Burghley  (1590)  419-422 ;  Queen
Elizabeth's  letter  to  (1591)  428-
439;  Lord  Burghley 's  letter  to,
430-432 ;  his  letter  to  Queen
Elizabeth  (1592)  434-436;  and  the
English  merchants  in  Russia,  435-
438 ;  his  letter  to  Lord  Burghley,
436-438;  and  John  Dee,  447;
made Emperor of Russia (1597)

449-

Boris  Gregoriwich,  diake  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  and  English
merchants,  in.  329.

Boristhenes,  see  Dnieper.

Borneo,  Isle  of,  camphor  found  in,
V.  504 ;  the  Portuguese  at,  viii.
129.

Boroseva,  Richard  Gray's  plan  of  a
house  at  (1558) 11. 396.

Borough,  Christopher,  letters  on
Persia,  in.  214-247;  at  Derbent,
233  ;  leaves  Astrakhan,  245  ;  and
the  captain  of  Baku,  266.

Borough,  Hugh  of,  see  Burgh,
Hubert  de.

Borough,  Stephen,  i.  xl. ;  master
of  Edward  Bonaventure,  11.  206,
III.  331;  master  of  the  Swallow,
II.  408 ;  master  and  pilot  of  the
Searchthrift,  334;  his  discoveries,
322-390.

Borough,  William  (1536-99),  on
northern  regions,  i.  xxix.  xliv.  ;
mariner  on  Edward  Bonaventure,
II.  2 14 ;  his  letter  to  the  Emperor
of  Russia,  III.  167;  on  whale  fish-
ing necessaries,  203 ;  on  Russian
towns,  203-206;  dedicatory  epistle
to  Queen  Elizabeth,  209-212  ;  topo-
graphical observations  of,  2 10;  on
the  necessity  of  knowing  sciences,
211;  chart  of  the  Northern
Ocean  by,  engraving  of,  224 ;
maps,  252 ;  instructions  for  the
proposed expedition to Cathay,

258-262  ;  voyage  to  St.  Nicholas,
306;  of  the  Levant  Company,  vi.
75,  78;  master  of  the  Lion,  con-
troller of  the  Navy,  vi.  438;  in
the  Searchthrift,  334,  vii,  164;
chart  of  Cadiz  Harbour  by,  en-
graving of,  448;  and  the  Mus-
covy Committee  (1583)  vni.  147;
and  Hakluyt,  xii.  75.

Boroughs  Straits,  in.  252,  257.

Borowgh,  see  Borough.

Borozden,  Gregory  Mekitowich,
treasurer  of  the  Emperor  of  Rus-
sia (1583)  in. 329.

Borracheras,  or  drunken  feasts  of
Indians,  x.  437.

Borrough,  see  Borough.

Borsis,  burnt  by  the  English  (1589)

VI. 513-

Boscovo,  Osep,  and  the  Muscovy
Company  (1558)  n.  394.

Boserman,  see  Busorman.

Bosnia,  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  VI. 104.

Bosphorus,  lighthouse  in  the  (1594)
VI. 106; Gulf  of,  VII.  183.

Bostock,  Thomas,  John  Newbery's
friend  (1583)  v.  455.

Boston,  of  Bury  in  Suffolk,  on
Robert  Curson  (12 18)  iv.  348.

Boston,  Lincolnshire,  ships  fur-
nished by,  to  Edward  III.'s  fleet
(1217)  I.  299;  and  the  customs,
355 ;  and  the  Muscovy  Company,
III. 91.

Bosus,  Anthony  of.  Knight  of
Rhodes,  sent  to  Crete  (1522)  v.  9.

Boswell,  captain  in  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's voyage  (1589^ vii. i.

Botero, quotation  from,  xi. 112.

Botolphus,  6th  bishop  of  Holen,  in
Iceland (1239) iv. 55, 153.

Botta  or  Tartar  women's  head
dress,  i.  244  f.

Bottanter,  Dermain,  King  of,  v.
483 ; products of, v. 483.

Bottel,  headland  of  the  Sound  of
Norway,  in.  282.

Bottia,  city  of,  in  Bottanter,  v.  483.

Boucher,  John,  11.  407.

Bougharia,  see  Bulgaria  the  Greater.

Bougori,  Chetera,  or  Four  Hillocks
Island,  in.  222,  239;  Amos  Rial!
at,  240.

'58

INDEX

Bouillon,  Godfrey  of,  and  the  jour-
ney to  Jerusalem  (1097)  iv.  293;
and  Gutuere  or  Godwera,  iv.  294,

Boulghoria,  see  Bulgaria  the
Greater.

Boulogne,  Lyon,  King  of  Armenia
at  (1386)  IV.  445.

Bountillier,  of  Cherbourg,  report  of,
concerning  El  Dorado  (1594)  x.
440

Bourbon,  Duke  of,  general  of  the
Christian  army  against  the  Sara-
cens, IV. 451.

Bourdelois,  Francis,  master  in  Cap-
tain Gourgues'  ships  (1567)  ix.
100.

Bourdet,  Captain,  in  Florida  (1564)

IX.  37,  38.

Bourel,  John,  on  the  Content  (1591)

X.  183.

Bourgh,  Sir  John,  Turcoplier  of
England  in  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  7;
death  (1522)  v.  29.

Bourgoyne, see  Burgundy.

Bourne,  in  Lincolnshire,  Job  Hor-
top's  birthplace,  ix.  445.

Bovadilla,  Francis,  chief  marshal  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Bovilla,  John  de,  inquisitor  in
Mexico  (1574)  IX. 424.

Bowes,  Sir  Edward,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Bowes,  Sir  Jerome  (d.  1616)  i.  xlvi. ;
portrait  of,  iii.  iii. ;  English
ambassador  to  Russia  (1583)
III.  308-314;  account  of  voyage
to  Russia,  315-330;  reception
by  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor
of  Russia  (15S3)  318-321 ;  prisoner
in  his  own  house  (1584)  326-336;
and  Emperor  Feodor  Ivanowich,
327;  refuses  Emperor's  letter,  328;
embassy  to  Russia  (1583)  463-485;
Bowes  Island,  464;  and  John  de
Wale's  trade  in  Russia,  469,  470,
473 ;  decided  on  departure  from
Russia,  482;  imprisoned  by  late
Emperor's  counsellors,  483 ;  re-
turn home,  485.

Bowles,  Sir  John,  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596)  IV.  259.

Bows,  stone,  for  Persia,  iii.  67.

Bowyer, Robert, memjaer of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Bowyer,  Sir  William,  London  alder-
man (1531)  V.  63; William  Eyms,

servant  of,  v.  6g.
Box  trees,  in  Hochelaga  (1535)  viii.

228.
Boxtchoede, see  Buxtehude.
Boyars,  noble  Muscovites,  11.  188.
Boys  on  the  Cinque  Ports'  ships,  i.

48.
Bozacca,  town  in  Japan,  xi.  440.
Brabant, and Edward I.'s Great

Charter,  i.  333; customs  in,  352,

355  > products,  11.  128 ; fish  trade

129 f. ; English merchants in

(1462)  148  f.
Bracamont, Reuben of, admiral  of

France  (1417)  vi. 120.
Bracelets,  ivory,  of  African  women,

VI. 172.
Brackenbury,  Francis,  on  board  the

Aid  (1577)  VII.  285,
Bracton,  Henry  (d.  1268)  ecclesiasti-
cal judge,  I.  44,  45.
Bradshaw, Robert, master of the

Centurion  (1591)  vii. 35.
Bragadino, Andrea, governor of

Famagusta (1571) v. 130, 147.
Bragadino, Victor, ambassador  for

Venice  (1564)  v.  121.
Braganine,  money  of  Goa,  vi.  20.
Braganza,  Duke  of,  and  the  English

army  in  Portugal  (1589)  vi.  504.
Braha  river,  in  Paria,  x.  209.
Brahmans, ceremonies of the, by

Ralph Fitch (1583) v. 475, 479;

in  Pekin,  vi.  323.
Brambois,  otherwise  Wolfe,  captain

of  the  Gallienge  of  Rhodes  (1522)

V.  8.
Brames,  see  Brahmans.
Bramley, Thomas, member of  the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Bramley, Thomas, adventurer for

Brazil  (1580)  XI.  33.
Bramlie,  see  Bramley.
Brampton,  William,  ambassador  to

Prussia  (1404)  11.  28,  47,  91.
Branca,  Ilha,  Captain  Gualle  at,  ix.

333-
Branco  de Malambo, on  the  great
river  of  Magdalena,  xi.  235.

159

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Brandan,  or  Alebrandus,  bishop  of
Bremen,  iv.  41, 137.

Brande,  John,  mariner  on  the  Bona
Esperanza,  11.  213.

Brandeburg,  Otto,  Marquis  of,  in
Prussia, 11. 3.

Brandenburg,  Albertus  of,  thirty-
fourth  master  of  the  Dutch
knights  (1510)  II.  10  f.

Brandon,  John,  of  Lynn  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  6y,  69.

Brandus,  fourth  bishop  of  Holen,  in
Iceland  (1165)  iv.  54, 153.

Brandus,  an  abbot,  eighth  bishop  of
Holen, in Iceland (1263) iv, 55,

153-

Branham,  Hugh,  minister  of  Har-
wich (1595)  IV, 195.

Brasil, product  of New Spain, ix.

390-

Brasil,  El,  cape  near  Angra,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  vii.  11,  x.
299.

Brasile,  death  of,  in  the  wreck  of
the  Delight  (1583)  viii.  68.

Brava  Island,  xi.  106,  152 ;  George
Fenner  at  (1567)  vi.  279;  one  of
the  Cape  Verde  Islands,  vi.  466 ;
French sailors  wrecked  at  (1564)

X.  15  ;  Captain  Lancaster  at  (1595)

XI.  47  ; Nuno  da  Silva  taken  to,
by Sir Francis Drake (1578) xi.

133-

Bravo,  Alonso,  governor  of  Carta-
gena, taken  by  Captain  Goring
(1586)  X. 119.

Bravo,  Pedro,  owner  of  a  farm  in
New Spain, ix. 471.

Brayley,  William,  privileged  trader
in  Senegal  (1588)  vi.  443-450.

Brazil,  discovered  by  Portugal,  11.
175 ;  coasts  of,  in  the  keeping  of
the  Portuguese  (1553)  vi.  146;
Company,  shares  of,  in  the  Ed-
ward Cotton  (1583)  VI.  409;  Span-
ish fleet  from  (1589)  vii.  71  ;
Sebastian  Cabot's  voyage  (1497)
vii.  149;  conquest  of,  viii.  444;
Portuguese  garrison  at,  viii.  445 ;
or  land  of  parrots,  viii.  449  ;  voyage
of  Captain  Gourgues  to,  ix.  iii;
projected  voyage  of  Sir  Thomas
Pert  and  Sebastian  Cabot  to  (15 16)
X. 2-6 ; English ship at, x. 4 ;

King  of,  and  William  Hawkins
(1530)  XI.  24;  voyage  of  Robert
Reniger  and  Thomas  Borey  to
(1540)  XI.  25;  voyage  of  the
Minion  of  London  to  (1580)  xi.
34 ;  Ruttier  for,  xi.  73-83 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake  on  the  coast  of
(1578)  XI.  106;  Villegagnon's  voy-
age to,  XII.  32  ;  Southampton  mer-
chants traders  to  (c.  5140)  47.

Brazil-wood,  found  in  Guiana,  x.
426;  trade  of,  with  Indians  (1596)
X.  456 ;  French  trade,  started  by
Villegagnon,  xi.  251.

Br6,  Peter  de,  helps  Captain  Gour-
gues (1567)  IX.  103. _

Bread  made  of  straw,  in  Russia,  11.
448.

Breams,  sea,  found  in  the  Guinea
Seas,  VI.  180,  212;  bag  made  of
the  skin  of,  by  Indians  (1540)  ix.
301 ; garments  made  of  the  skin

of,  313-

Breme  Saphiana,  viceroy  of  Morocco
and  Henry  Roberts  (1585)  vi.  427.

Bremen,  restitution  of  losses  de-
manded from  England  by  (1407)
II.  35 ;  a  Hanse  town,  and  Eng-
land (1405)  II.  55;  Sir  Jerome
Horsey  at  (1584)  iii.  345;  Iceland
trade  with  (1592)  iv.  86,  191 ;
levies  at,  for  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
204 ;  ship  of,  captured  by  the  Eng-
lish (1589)  VII. 2.

Bremige,  master  in  Sir  Richard
Grenville's  voyage  to  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  310.

Brenia  soil,  in  Palm  Island,  vi.
132.

Brenne,  see  Brienne.

Brennus,  Strabo  on  the  origin  of,
IV. 270.

Brense,  Peter  de,  his  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Bres,  island,  vii.  451.

Bresinia,  secretary  of  the  Inquisition
at  Seville  (1570)  ix. 463, 464.

Breslau,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.
326.

Brest  Island,  in  Newfoundland,  viii.
187;  Jacques  Cartier  at  (1534)
VIII. 189.

Bret,  Colonel,  in  Spain  (1589)  vi.
484 ; at  the  taking  of  Puente  de

160

INDEX

Burgos,  VI.  492  ;  marching  to  Lis-
bon, VI.  497;  killed  at  Lisbon,  vi.
501.

Breton,  Cape,  voyage  of  the  English
to  (1527)  VIII.  2;  of  M.  Hore  to
(1536)  viii.  3,  4;  timber,  viii.  11;
rendezvous  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's fleet  (1583)  VIII.  46;  fleet  at,
VIII.  63 ;  voyage  of  the  Mangold
to  (1593)  VIII.  157,  158;  products
and  fishing,  viii.  159;  the  Grace
in  sight  of  (1594)  viii.  165;
Charles  Leigh  at  (1597)  viii.  166,
172,  176;  description,  viii.  181;
Captain  de  la  Barbotiere  and
Henry  May  at  (1594)  x.  202.

Bretons,  of  S.  Malo,  ships  of,  and
the  Richard  of  Arundel,  vi.  456 ;
voyages  of,  viii. 161.

Bretsch,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-

Brewer,  in  the  Content  (1586)  xi.
291.

Brewer,  or  Bruer,  captain  of  the
Hugh  Gallant,  landing  of  (1587)
XI.  311.

Brewer,  John,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's company  (1578) xi. 109.

Brian,  see  Brion.

Brian,  Leonard,  agent  for  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1557)  11.  387.

Bricks,  sun  dried,  used  in  Persia,
III,  158,  164;  of  Tower  of  Babel,
V.  370.

Bride,  M.,  sermon  by,  on  the  De-
fiance (1596)  X.  240.

Bridger,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Bridges,  made  of  casks  for  the  Ar-
mada (1588)  IV.  204;  number  of,
in  Hang-chow,  iv.  425 ;  in  China,
description  of,  vi.  298 ;  in  Quanchi
city,  VI.  319.

Bridgwater,  ships  from,  in  Edward
HL's  fleet,  i.  298.

Bridgwater,  the  Busse  of,  or  the
Emmanuel,  of  Captain  Frobisher's
third  voyage  (1578)  vii.  236,  237;
in  Countess  oif  Warwick's  Sound,
VII.  239;  in  Bear's  Sound,  vii.
241,  243;  at  Galway,  vii.  244;
and  the  crew  of  the  Anne  Francis,
VII.  365 ;  Island  and  Channel  dis-
covered by,  VII.  367.

Brieg, in Silesia, plague  in  (1585)

V.  326.
Briel, Henry Austell at (1585) v.

328.
Brienne,  John  de.  King  of  Jerusalem,

at  the  taking  of  Damietta  (12 18)

IV.  348;  and  French  noblemen,  iv.

350-

Brigantines,  at  the  Siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V.  5,  9;  at  Chios,  v.  14;
sent  to  the  Pope,  v. 16.

Bright,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  viii.  402.

Brightlingsey,  see  Brightlingsea.

Brigk,  see  Brieg.

Brimeo,  camphor  found  in,  vi.  25.

Brimstone  in  Russia,  in.  369 ;  in
Iceland  (1592)  iv.  39,  135.

Brindisi,  in  Apulia,  Earl  of  Leicester
embarks  at  (1240)  iv.  352;  Ingulf
at  (1064)  IV.  292.

Brion,  Isle  of,  the  Bonaventure  near
(1591)  VIII.  151;  description,  viii.
167,  181,  182;  Jacques  Cartier
(1534)  VIII. 193, (1536)  VIII  259.

Brisas,  or  Northern  Winds,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  x.  291.

Bristol,  ships  from,  in  Edward  Ill's
fleet,  I.  297;  William  of  Malmes-
bury  on,  i.  315;  custom  in,  11.
76 ;  trade  with  Iceland,  11.  136 ;
Laurence  Aldersey's  departure
from  (15S6)  VI.  39;  the  Hart  at
(1556) VI. 212; the Merlin at

(1564)  VI.  262;  John  Cabot  and
his  sons  at  (1495)  vii.  144,
146,  154;  Captain  Frobisher
ordered  to  (1577)  vii.  318;  Captain
Frobisher's  bark  at  (1577)  vii.
230 ;  Thomas  Butts  and  Rastall  at
(1536)  VIII.  7;  city  of,  and  the
voyage  of  Captain  Carleill  (1583)-
VIII.  148 ; Captain  Laudonniere  at

(1565)  IX,  99;  Robert  Tomson's
departure  from  (1558)  ix.  338;,
Richard  Hakluyt,  prebendary  of
(1586) XII. 82.

Bristow,  see  Bristol.

Britain,  boundaries  in  time  of  King
Arthur,  i.  6;  products  of,  i,  7;
united  under  Vortiporius,  8 ;  rela-
tions with  the  Norsemen,  7  and  8;
fish  trade  with  Frisland,  vil,  450;
conquered  and  converted  by  Con-

161

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

stantxne,  viii.  io6;  Arthur,  Duke
of,  heir  to  Richard  I.  (1190)  iv.
324;  Kings  of,  Coelus,  iv.  271;
Octavius,  IV,  272,  276;  Flavius
Constantine,  iv.  274;  Maximus,
IV.  278 ; nations  in,  iv.  278.

Britaine, Little, see  Brittany.

Britomarus,  Captain,  meaning  of
his  name,  iv,  270.

Briton,  Cape,  see  Breton.

Britona,  the,  crew  of,  v.  281.

Britones,  nation  in  Britain,  iv.  278.

Britons  in  Italy  and  Greece,  B.C.,  iv.
269.

Brittandona,  admiral  of  the  Biscayan
squadron  (1591)  vii.  42,  47.

Brittany,  products  of,  11.  118  f.

Britton,  William,  captain  of  the
Hermerillon  (1535)  viii.  211;  goes
up  the  Hochelaga  river,  viii.  230.

Brixiano,  Father  Organtino,  quota-
tion from  the  epistles  of  (1594)  xi.
438-441.

Broadbanke,  John,  and  the  goods  of
the  Primrose  (1585)  vi.  416.

Broadbanke,  William,  master  of  the
Ascension  (1593)  vi. 94.

Broas  Island,  despoiled  by  Zichmnx
(c. 1380)  VII.  451.

Brocke,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Broken, Hugh, of the Sunshine

(1586)  VII. 408,

Brokers in Cambaietta (1563) v.

375;  in  Pegu,  V.  431,  434,  491  f.
Bromas, wood-eating worms, vi.

176.
Bromfield,  M.,  and  the  negro  trade

(1562)  X.  7.
Bromfield, Thomas, merchant in

China  (1596)  xi.  417,  419.
Bromley, Thomas, Robert Flicke's

report to (1591) vii. 56.
Brook,  John,  master  gunner  on  the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  n.  212.
Brooke, Francis, in Sir Richard

Grenville's voyage to Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  316.
Brooke,  John,  deputed  to  Vardo,  ad-
vice to  (1555)  II. 281.
Brooke,  John,  and  the  Chios  trade

(1569)  V.  115.
Brooke, John, settler in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.

Brooke,  John,  on  the  Content,  non-
combatant  (1591)  x.  183.
Brooke,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.
Brooke, Rowland, mariner  on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  n.  213.
Brooke,  Sir  Henry,  and  the  Armada

(1588)  IV.  217.
Brosse,  la,  in  Francis  de  Roberval's

voyage  (1542)  viil.  283,  288.
Brotiius,  Captain,  of  Robert  Flicke's

fleet  (1591)  VII.  58.
Browbear,  John,  and  Pedro  Gonsal-

vez  (1591)  VII.  97.
Browewich,  James,  of  Captain  Ama-

das's  Company  (1584)  viii.  310.
Browne, under John Hooper's

leadership in Panuco, missing

(1568)  IX.  413.
Browne,  Andrew,  and  the  goods  of

Andrew  Barker  (1576)  x.  87.
Browne, Henry, settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Browne, John, of Lynn, Royal

letter-bearer,  11.  28,  43,  44.
Browne, John, mariner on the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) n.

214.
Browne, John,  in  the  Moscow  fire

(1571)  III.  169.
Browne,  John,  condemned  to  galleys

by  Inquisition  in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.

428.
Browne,  M.,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's

fleet, wounded at Puerto Rico

(1595)  X.  230.
Browne, Maurice, captain of the

Swallow  (1583)  VIII. 47; captain

of the Delight, viii. 62 ; lost

with  the  Delight,  viii.  67  ;  Stephen

Parmenius  and,  viii.  82.
Browne,  Richard,  and  the  expedition

on  the  Pechora  (1588)  in.  119.
Browne, Sir  Matthew, knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.
Browne, Thomas, Russian licence

granted  to,  iii. 109.
Browne,  Thomas,  condemned  to  gal-
leys by Inquisition in Mexico

(1575)  IX.  428.
Browne, Thomas, gunner on the

Delight  (1589)  XI.  388,  389.
Browne,  William,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.

162

INDEX

Bruges,  and  the  Hanse  towns,  ii.
31,  34;  arbitration  market  of,  50,
93;  staple  fair  of,  115;  wool
trade,  126;  English  chapel  to  St.
Thomas,  154;  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  204;  Jesuit  from,  and
John  Newbery  (1584)  v.  507.

Brulles  Castle,  near  Alexandria,  v.

333-
Brundusium,  see  Brindisi.
Brune,  Hugh,  captain,  and  the  citi-
zens of  Messina  (1190)  iv.  323.
Brune, William, member of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Brunsburg Castle, garrisoned by

the Dutch  knights, 11. 2.
Brunswick,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V.  320.
Brunswick, Ludolphus, Duke of,

fifteenth master of the Dutch

knights,  11. 6.
Bruskome, John, of the Sunshine

(1586)  vii.  409.  _
Brusonius,  Domitius,  his  account  of

petrifying  rivers,  iv.  37,  132.
Brutaches,  the,  i, 166.
Bruton, William, captain of the

Moonshine (1585) vii. 382; and

the  damaged  ship  (1587)  vii.  417;

at  Earl  of  Cumberland's  Isle,  vii.

420.
Brytska,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

326.
Buccaneers,  religion  of  English,  xii.

34-
Buchan  Ness,  in  Scotland,  in.  302,
Buck,  Sir  John,  knighted  at  Cadiz

(1596)  IV.  259.
Buckingham,  Earl  of,  and  the  King

of  Armenia  (1386)  iv.  445.
Buckland, John, master mate in

Cabot's intended voyage (1553)

II.  206 ; mate  of  the  Bonaventure

(1553)  213,  (155s)  286,  (1556)  351;

master  of  the  Primrose  (1557)  380.
Bucthare, Alcaide, in Gago (1594)

VII. 100.
Buda,  Pasha  of,  retinue  of,  vi.  67 ;

in the Hungarian-Turkish war

(1594)  VI. 104.
Budoa  on  Bocca  de  Cataro,  v.  80.
Budomel, kingdom of, west of

Guinea,  vi.  168.

Buen Jesus, or Bon Jesus, the,

Spanish carrack (1592) vii, 112;

viceroy  of  Goa  in, vii. 115.
Buena Guia River, Captain Alar-

chon  sails  up  the  (1540)  ix. 281 ;

names,  312;  twenty-three  different

peoples on the, ix. 296; chapel

built  at  (1540)  IX. 312.
Buena  Speranza,  Cape  of,  see  Good

Hope, Cape  of.
Buena Ventura Island, in Puerto

Bello  Harbour,  x.  147.
Buena  Ventura,  La,  town  in  Peru,

XI. 286.
Buena  Vista  Island,  see  Boa  Vista.
Buenaire  Isle,  Cape  de  la  Vela  in,  x.

272.
Buenos  Aeres, see  Buenos  Aires.
Buenos Aires, haven of, on the

Plate  river,  x. 172,  xi.  208;  trade

of, with  Potosi, X. 172 ; Rio  de,

mentioned  in  a  Ruttier  for  River

Plate,  first  Spanish  colony  planted

on,  by  Don  Pedro  de  Mendoza,  xi.

98 ; Don Pedro de Mendoza  at,

XI.  252.
Buffaloes,  at  Sierra  Leone,  seen  by

Thomas Cavendish's men (1586)

XI. 293.
Buffes,  see  Buffaloes.
Bugen, kingdom  of, governors  of,

XI. 425.
Bugia,  in  Africa,  vi. 142.
Bugon,  Francesco,  of  Verona,  slain

at  Famagusta  (1571)  v. 150.
Buildings, Chinese, vi. 298.
Buinaro Island, latitude of, x.

335-

Bulgaria,  i.  231;  William  Har-
borne's  journey  through  (1578)  v.
169.

Bulgaria  the  Greater,  i.  77,  86,  142,
166;  and  the  Volga,  260,  270,
272,  278;  formerly  Greek  pos-
session, 279;  conquered  province
of  Russia,  III.  359;  Russian  fur
market  in,  365;  trade  open  to
English  merchants  in,  in.  401 ;
people  of,  and  Sartach,  i.  269 ;
Saracens  or  Mahometans,  272 ;
and  the  Huns.  279.

Bulls, self-sacrifice  of, iv. i. 89.

Bull,  Bartholomew,  master  of  the
Michael  (1578)  vii.  233.

163

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Bull  fight  In  Isabella,  Hispaniola
(1585) VIII. 314.

Bulle,  a  town  in  Guinea,  William
Towerson  at  (1557)  vi.  217.

Bulley,  Thomas,  on  Russian  drinks,
II.  448.

Bullinao,  Cabo  de,  latitude,  ix.  332.

Bullingbroke, see Bolingbroke.

Bullocks  in  Benin  (1590)  vi.  464,
(1591)  VI.  465.

Bulls,  papal,  taken  from  Spanish
ships  by  Thomas  White  in  the
Amity  of  London  (1592)  vii.
103,  105 ;  brought  to  the  Indies
(1570)  IX.  364;  their  sale  to
the  Indians  a  source  of  re-
venue to  the  King  of  Spain,  ix.

376.
Bulls,  sea,  see  Walruses.
Bully, William, Russian licence

granted  to  (1569)  ill. 109.
Bulmar, M., assay-master, and  Sir

Walter Raleigh's white Spar

(1595)  X.  344.
Bulverhithe,  i.  47,  48.
Bulwerheth,  see  Bulverhithe.
Bungo,  King  of,  and  Cainocami,  xi.

426.
Bungo,  kingdom  of, in  Japan, vi.

336-
Bunting, Thomas, ropemaker m

Russia  (1558)  II. 395.
Buntzel,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.

326.
Buona Esperanza, Cape of, see

Good Hope, Cape of.
Buona vSperanza, see Good Hope,

Cape  of.
Buona Vista, Cape of, in New-
foundland, latitude,  VIII. 183.
Buquhannesse, see  Buchan  Ness.
Burbon,  see  Bourbon.
Burburata, town in Venezuela, Sir

John Hawkins  at  (1564)  vi. 265,

(1568)  IX.  448,  (1565)  X.  30; attack

of  the  Caribs  on  (1565)  x.  35.
Burchers Island, people of, and

Captain Martin Frobisher (1576)

VII.  209.
Burckardus a Schuvenden, ninth

master of the Dutch knights

(1282)  II.  5.
Burden, John, settler in Virginia

(15S7)  VIII.  402.

Bures,  Robert  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  338.

Bureth,  Duke  of  Hungary,  i.  74.

Burg,  see  Burrough.

Burges,  Richard,  new  purser  of  the
Jesus  (1583)  V.  293;  persecuted,
V.  305,  310.

Burgh,  Hubert  de,  and  the  French
fleet  (12 17)  I.  49,  Ivii.

Burgh,  Michael  van,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  70.

Burgh,  Sir  John,  see  Burrough.

Burghley,  see  Cecil,  William.

Burgignon,  see  Borgoignon.

Burgolgnon,  see  Borgoignon.

Burgos,  Puente  de,  English  army
at  (1589)  VI.  474;  Conde  de  And-
rada  at,  vi.  491 ;  nine  regiments
of  English  at,  vi.  492.

Burgoyn,  see  Burgundy.

Burgrave,  Marquess  of,  son  of
Archduke  Ferdinand  and  Phlllppa
Welser,  and  the  Armada  (1588)
IV.  205.

Burgundle, see  Burgundy.

Burgundy,  products  of,  11.  129 ;
soldiers  of,  in  the  Armada  (1588)
IV.  205;  Duke  of,  II.  142,  148;  left
In Damietta  (1249) iv. 354.

Burl,  and  Friar  Andrew,  i.  282.

Burien,  George,  letter  from,  con-
cerning El Dorado (1594) x.

439-

Burin,  Jagatai's  son,  i.  74,  167.

Buritabeth,  Tartars  and,  i.  86 ;  in-
habited by  heathens,  i.  72 ;  Jeng-
hiz  Khan  and,  i. 147.

Burke,  Lord,  and  the  voyage  to
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  236,250;  knighted
at  Cadiz,  iv.  259.

Burleigh,  Lord,  see  Cecil.

Burley,  Port,  at  the  mouth  of
Amonna  river, x. 459.

Burlings,  the,  the  English  fleet  at
(1589)  VI.  495;  English  fleet  at
(1591)  VII.  57,  (1594)  119;  latitude
of,  X.  335 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
near  (1595)  x. 348.

Burnet,  Robert,  master  of  the  De-
light (1589)  XI.  381;  petition  of
certain  of  the  company  of  the
Delight  to  (1589)  XI.  385,  389.

Burnham,  Francis,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  iii. 109.

164

INDEX

Burning  of  towns  in  Spain  by  Eng-
lish soldiers  (1589)  vi.  513, 525.

Burr,  the,  and  the  Richard  of  Arun-
del (1588)  VI. 460.

Burrell,  John,  and  the  goods  of  the
Primrose  (1585)  vi.  416.

Burrough,  Hugh  of,  see  Burgh,
Hubert  de.

Burrough,  or  Burgh,  Sir  John,
lieutenant  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
fleet  (1592)  VII.  105;  in  charge  of
half  the  fleet,  vii.  108 ;  and  the
Spanish  fleet,  vii.  109 ;  at  S.
Cruz,  VII.  no.  III;  in  Flores
Island,  VII.  no;  tactics  of,  vii.
113;  in  Flores  with  Christopher
Newport,  x.  190;  and  Don  Juan
Sarmiento,  governor  of  Margar-
ita, X.  363.

Burrough,  Stephen,  see  Borough.

Burrough,  William,  see  Borough.

Burton,  George,  merchant  in  Ca-
bot's intended  voyage,  11.  206;  on
the  Edward  Bonaventure,  213;  in
Russia,  407.

Burton,  Master,  on  the  Minion
(1562)  VI.  258; illness  of,  vi.  261.

Burton,  Robert,  quotation  from,  xii.

38.

Burutabeth, see  Buritabeth.

Buryas  Point,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  328.

Buschoducensis,  Jacobus  Cnoyen,
voyage  of  (1580)  iii.  281.

Bush,  Richard,  in  John  Chidley's
voyage,  return  of  (1590)  xi.  384.

Bushell,  Edward,  bearer  of  the  Sul-
tana's letter  to  Queen  Elizabeth
(1593)  VI. 102.

Business,  advice  as  to,  given  to  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi. 169.

Busorman,  Cafar,  Gawar,  Christian
renegade,  iii.  41, 145, 148,  458.

Buss,  the,  of  Zeeland,  11.  66,  67.

Busse  or  Persian  bark,  in.  230,  233.

Bussorah,  Caesar  Frederick  at  (1567)
V.  445 ;  description  by,  v.  32 1 ;
spice  market  at,  v.  371 ;  John
Eldred  and  William  Shals  at,  v.
457;  Ralph  Fitch  in,  description
of,  V.  467,  503,  505;  John  Eldred's
voyage  to  (1583)  vi.  1-9;  weights,
measure  and  money,  vi.  11;  cho-
min  found  in,  vi.  25; retinue  of

Beglerbeg,  vi.  67;  English  con-
sul at,  XII. 102.

Bussormans,  see  Busorman.

Butcher,  John,  on  the  Content,  non-
combatant  (1591)  X. 183.

Butchers,  on  the  Marigold  (1593)
VIII. 28, 157.

Butes  Haven,  in  the  Grand  Bay  of
Newfoundland,  viii,  275.

Butler,  captain  of  the  bark  Raleigh
(1583) VIII. 46; illness of, viii.

47-

Butler,  Benet,  and  the  Muscovy
Company,  in.  119.

Butler,  Master,  his  advice  to  An-
thony Parkhurst  (1578)  viii. 15.

Butler,  Sir  John,  and  the  war
against the Saracens (1390) iv.

451-
Butler, Sir Philip, in the English

fleet  (1589)  VI.  495.

Butler,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402,

Butrigarius,  Galeacius,  papal  legate
in  Spain  and  Sebastian  Cabot's
discoveries  (1497)  vii.  147.

Butter,  Miles,  mariner  on  the  Ed-
zvard  Bonaventure  (1553)  11. 214.

Buttolfe,  the,  and  the  second  voyage
to  Barbary  (1552)  vi. 138.

Buttor,  temporary  village  at,  v.
410.

Butts,  Sir  William,  of  Norfolk,  and
the  voyage  of  M.  Hore  to  New-
foundland (1536)  VIII.  3.

Butts,  Thomas,  voyage  of,  in  the
Trinity  (1536)  viii.  3;  return  of,
VIII.  7 ;  and  Richard  Hakluyt,  xil.
20.

Buxtehude,  Mainard,  Hamburg  de-
puty at,  II.  79 ;  Henry  Austell  at,
V.  327.

Buytron,  house  of,  under  the  Monte
de  Carneros,  x.  295.

Byarmia,  see  Biarmia.

Bye,  Robert,  Sir  W.  Bowyer's  fac-
tor in  Chios  (1535)  v.  69.

Byelo-ozera,  lake  in  Russia,  11.
252  f. ;  source  of  the  Volga  in,  iii.
104; province,  iii.  358.

Byet,  William,  of  the  Content,
killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Byleri,  see  under  Bulgaria  the
Greater.

[65

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Bymba,  negro  town,  Sir  John
Hawkins's  attack  on  (1564)  x.
21.

Bysayas,  natives  of  Luzon  or  Philip-
pines (1584)  IX. 334.

Bytonuse  Bay,  11. 117.

Byzantine, a  coin,  iv.  304.

Cabanas,  loaf  of,  or  Pan  de,  de-
scribed in the Ruttiers, x. 297,

324-

Cabanca,  Las  Sierras  de,  mentioned
in  second  Ruttier,  x.  328.

Cabannas,  see  Cabanas.

Cabasa,  in  Angola,  vi.  468.

Cabega  de  Cativa,  Francisca  River
in  Panama  near,  x. 154.

Cabega  de  Vaca,  see  Nunnez,  Al-
varo.

Cabite  Haven,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  331.

Cables,  and  ropes,  made  in  Russia
by  English  ropemakers  (1557)  11.
382,  393,  395,  403,  404;  made  on
Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.  313.

Cabodelo  Castle,  besieged  by  the
French  (1597)  xi.  66;  importance
of,  XI.  70 ;  John  de  Matas  Car-
doso,  governor  of  (1597)  xi. 70.

Cabot,  John,  and  Henry  VH.  I.
xxvii ;  letters  patent  of  Henry
Vn.  (149s)  vii.  141;  granted  six
English  ships,  vii.  145 ;  discover-
ies (1497)  VII.  146,  XII,  8;  and
Sebastian,  discoveries  by,  viii.  35;
letters  patent  granted  to,  by  Henry
vn., viii. 37.

Cabot,  Lewis,  letters  patent  of
Henry  VH.  (1495)  vii. 141.

Cabot,  Sancius,  letters  patent  of
Henry  VH.  (1495)  vii.  141;  born
in  England,  vin. 109.

Cabot,  Sebastian,  11.  161,  166;  and
Edward  VL,  i.  xxvi. ;  expedition
planned  by  (1553)  il.  195-224,
239 ;  portrait  of,  240 ;  privi-
leges granted  to  (1555)  298;
and  the  Muscovy  Company,  305  f. ;
on  the  Searchthrift  (1556)  322 ;
and  the  discovery  of  Cathay  (1553)
III.  331 ;  his  ship  lifted  from  the
sea,  VI.  172 ;  and  James  Alday,
137;  letters  patent  of  Henry  VH.
(1495) VII. 141; map, VII. 145,

147;  discoveries  (1497)  vn.  146;
discovery  in  West  India  (1497)  vii.
147 ;  first  voyage  to  the  North
(1496)  VII.  148;  second  voyage  to
Brazil,  vii.  149,  xi.  91 ;  takes  S.
Salvador  Island,  99 ;  builds  fort
on  river  Plate,  252  ;  Peter  Martyr
on  his  voyage  to  West  and  North-
west, vii.  150 ;  and  the  Baccalaos,
VII.  152  ;  and  Gomara,  vn.  153 ;
Robert  Fabian  on,  vn.  154;  sav-
ages brought  to  England,  vn.
155  ;  Grand  Pilot  of  England  (1549)
vn.  156;  his  annuity,  vn.  157;
charts,  vn.  171 ;  discovery  of
Northwest  passage,  vn.  181,  188;
geographical  tables  by,  at  Chein-
ies,  vn. 194 ; map  of  the  world,

VII.  197, 203 ; born  in England,

VIII.  109 ;  projected  voyage  of  Sir
Thomas  Pert,  and,  to  Brazil,  etc.
(1516)  X.  2-6;  discovered  the  river
Plate  (1526)  XI.  91 ;  S.  Salvador
Island  taken  by,  xi.  99;  voyages
of,  XII. 19-22.

Cabota, see  Cabot.

Cabota river. Sir Robert Dudley's

sailors  on  the  (1595)  x.  208.
Cabral, Pedro  Alvarez,  discovery  of

Brazil  by,  xi.  248.
Cabrera, Island of, William Har-

borne  at  (1583)  v.  243.
Cabriera,  Roderigo  de,  licence  given

to,  for  printing  the  account  of  Sir

Francis Drake's death (1596) x.

252.
Cabritos or  goats, dried, found  in

Maio Island (1578) xi. 103,

105.
Cabuccapollo,  Rajah  in  Java  (1580)

XI. 131.
Cacafuego,  the,  Portuguese  ship  in

Barbary  (1552)  vi. 140.
Cacafuego,  the,  Spanish  ship,  laden

with  silver  (1579)  xi. 115; taken

by Sir Francis Drake, xi. 116,

XH.  60.
Cacan, on the Persian Gulf, vi.

323-
Cacao,  growing  in  Soconusco  (1570)

IX.  365  ;  used  as  tribute,  ix.  366,
374,  384 ;  growing  in  the  garden
of  Alonso  Pedraza,  ix.  471 ;  in
Cuahintlan  del  Rey, ix. 471.

166

INDEX

Cacatepec Mountains, in New

Spain,  IX.  467.
Cacatepec, town, in charge of

Raphael  de  Treyo,  ix.  469.
Cacchegate, port of Couche or

Quicheu,  v.  481.
Caceres, his attempt to discover

Guiana ; settles  in  Matachines,  x.

497-
Cacetto,  Fabrice  of,  Grand  Master  of

Rhodes  (1522)  v.  4.
Cacique, sons of a, of Dominica,

prisoners  of  the  English,  vii.  409 ;

of Puna Island, married to a

Spanish  lady,  xi.  313; converted

to  Christianity,  316.
Cacique of Capul Island, and

Thomas Cavendish (1588) xi.

330.
Caciques,  native  governors  of  New

Mexico, IX. 194; of Trinidad,

enslaved  by  Don  Antonio  de  Ber-

reo, X. 352.
Caconado,  meaning  of, ix. 133.
Cadam, best Martens in Russia

found  in,  iii,  365.
Cadan,  see  Chadan.
Cade,  master  of  the  Squirrel  (1583)

vin,  47.
Cadecha, King, vassal of King

Utina  (1564)  IX.  21.
Cades, see  Cadiz.
Cadiz,  English  expedition  to  (1596)

IV. 236, 245 ; large  shipping  at,

IV.  244;  taken,  iv.  251,  257,  265;
description,  iv.  255 ;  Roger  Bod-
enham  at  (1551)  v.  72;  Noblezia,
pilot  at,  V.  76;  John  Locke  at  (1553)

V.  76;  Sir  Francis  Drake's  victory
at  (1587)  VI.  438,  439 ;  despatch  of
Sir  Francis  Drake  of  victory  at,
facsimile  of,  vi.  440;  Earl  of
Essex  at  (1589)  vi.  495;  Spanish
fleet  in  (1592)  vii.  108;  Robert
Tomson  at  (1553)  ix.  338;  John
Chilton's  departure  from,  for  New
Spain  (1568)  IX.  361 ;  Spanish
ships  burnt  at  the  taking  of,  x.
254;  bay  of,  IV.  246,  x.  281;  sea
victory  of  the  English  at,  iv.  249 ;
action  on  21st  June,  engraving  of,
256;  harbour,  chart  of,  by  Wil-
liam Borough,  engraving  of,  vi.
448,  XII.  63,  67.

Cadomosta,  Alouis  de,  Cape  Verde

discovered  by  (1455)  viii. 127.
Cady  of  Patras  and  the  Turks  freed

by  Sir  Francis Drake  (1586)  vi.

40.
Caen,  in  Normandy,  Charles  de  la

Barbotiere,  from,  vi.  404,  x. 198.
Caen  river,  in  Canada,  latitude  of,

VIII.  278.
Caesar, captain and owner of the

Toby,  death  of  (1593)  vii. 125.
Cassar  of  Adversa,  captain,  slain  at

Famagusta  (1571)  v.  150.
Csesar, Augustus,  pieces  of  money

engraved  with,  found  in  America,

VII.  160; Dukes  of  Muscovy  de-
scended from,  II. 183.

Caesar.  Charles,  captain  of  the
Amity,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  X.  234.

Cassar,  William,  in  Cairo,  and
Laurence  Aldersey  (1586)  vi.  45.

Caesarea  Philippi,  or  Belinas,  con-
quered by  King  Baldwin  (1107)  iv.

304-.
Caesaria,  see  Taurida.
Cafaa Island, Captain Gualle at

(1584)  IX.  331.
Caffa,  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  11.  454 ;

conquest of, by the Turks, in.

394-
Caffyl, or Caravan, from Tripolis

(1584)  V.  506.
Cafraria, see  Kaffraria.
Cage, Anthony, settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  viii.  402.
Cage, John, in Virginia (1585)

VIII.  318.

Cagiers,  found  in  Malabar  and  Mal-

dive,  VI.  25.
Cahaia  of  the  Andoluzes, in  Gago

(1594)  VII. 99.
Caiama  Island,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh

at  (1595)  X.  402.
Caiane or Caian, river, x. 492 ;

mentioned by Laurence Keymis

(1596)  X.  454,  458;  the  Discoverer

in  (1596)  X.  477.
Caiaremappo,  town  of  the  Itorebece,

X.  494.
Caicos, Isles  of.  Sir  Richard  Gren-

ville at (1585) VIII. 315; John

White at (1587) VIII. 390; Sir

John Hawkins at (1563) x. 8.

167

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Caida,  a  custom  paid  in  Ormuz,  vi.
i6.

Caido,  description  of,  iv,  429 ;  Khan
of  Cathay  in, iv.  430.

Cailac,  market  of,  i.  284.

Cailechesworth,  ships  furnished  by,
to  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i,  298,

Caille,  Francis  la,  see  La  Caille.

Caimans,  see  Caymans.

Caine,  allotted  land  in  Newfound-
land  (1534) viii. 188.

Cainocami,  governor  of  half  the
kingdom  of  Bugen,  xi.  425 ;  King
of  Bungo  and,  xi.  426.

Caio, Sir Amyas de Preston at

(1595)  X. 223.

Caiowa,  King,  and  river  in  Florida,

IX. 112.
Caipurogh  river,  x.  454 ; great  river

discovered by Laurence Keymis

(1596)  490.
Caira, see  Capira.

Cairamo,  Carapana's  flight  to  (1595)

x.  419 ; situation  of,  x.  419.
Cairi, Indian  name  of  Trinidad,  x.

350-

Cairo,  vi.  36,  144;  Robert,  son  of
Godwin,  prisoner  at  (1103)  iv.  296;
Louis  IX.  of  France  at  (1249)  335;
death  of  the  Turkish  captain  of
(1522)  V.  34;  ruins  of,  45;  pyra-
mids at,  118;  Harvey  Millers,  con-
sul at  (1583)  V.  259;  market  (1584)
V.  273;  description,  v.  333,  335;
caravans,  344,  356;  cassia  found
in,  VI.  25;  momia  found  in,  26;
description  of,  36 ;  products  of,
37;  Laurence  Aldersey  in,  45;  re-
tinue of  the  Beglerbeg  of,  67.

Caitan,  Minorite  friars  in,  iv.  424;
the  Portuguese  at,  viii.  129.

Caitooma  river,  x.  494.

Cajicos,  the,  vi.  407.

Cakam,  in  the  land  of  Pygmaei,  iv.
428.

Cakeado,  in  Guinea,  vi. 159.

Cakow,  victory  of  Prince  Edward
over  the  Saracens  at  (1270)  iv.
362.

Calabria,  Richard  I.  in  (1190)  iv.
322 ; and  Sicily, vii. 161.

Calais,  France,  fleet  of  Edward  III.
before,  i.  297  f.  ;  customs  paid  at,
II.  73, II. 126; importance  of,  to

England,  11.  114,  116,  137  f. ;  taken
by  the  English  (1347)  li.  142 ;
Armada  at,  iv.  219,  222  ;  Moncada's
Galleass  lost  at,  iv.  223 ;  Lyon,
King  of  Armenia  at  (1386)  iv.
449 ;  ship  from,  captured  by  the
English  (1589)  VII.  2;  the  Span-
ish Armada  beaten  from  Portland
to  (1588)  VII.  39;  Captain  Laudon-
niere  at  (1565)  ix.  99.

Calamea  de  la  Sorengo,  in  Castile,
X.  174.

Calami,  people  called,  iii.  409.

Calamus  Aromaticus  found  in  Con-
stantinople, VI. 27.

Calanus,  the  Indian,  Alexander  the
Great  and,  x.  484.

Calany,  King,  vassal  of  King  Utina
(1564)  IX.  21.

Calauai,  Cacique  in  Florida,  ix.  115.

Calben,  hot  baths  in  the  Duchy  of
Wittenberg,  iv.  35,  129.

Calcei  Ethiopes,  people  of  Libya,  vi.
168.

Caldea,  see  Irak  Arabi.

Caldera,  La,  in  S.  Marta  Harbour,

X.  135-

Calecut,  see  Calicut.

Caleis,  see  Calais.

Calentura,  see  Calenture.

Calenture,  illness  of  Andrew  Bark-
er's sailors  (1576)  x.  85  ;  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  army  ill  of  (1586)  x.
120;  illness  of  Robert  Withring-
ton's  crew,  in  Sierra  Leone  (1586)

XI.  207.
Cales,  see  Calais.

Calf,  sea,  found  near  Sierra  Leone
(1582)  XI.  178.

Calfield,  Captain,  and  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  take  S.  Joseph  City  (1595)
X.  353 ;  sent  to  Capuri  River  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  378,
379  ;  discovers  Sayma,  x.  396 ;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  expedition  to  the
Caroli  River  (1595)  x.  403  ;  on  the
Cararoopana  River  with  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  417;  at
Curiapan,  Trinidad,  x.  422.

Caliban,  meaning  of,  xil.  112;  per-
sonage  of, XII. 113.

Calice,  see  Calais.

Calicoes,  taken  in  the  Madre  de
Dios  (1592)  VII. 116.

168

INDEX

Calicut,  Thome's  map  of,  ii.  170;
discovered  by  the  Portuguese,  11.
172,  174,  III.'  147,  viii.  128;  con-
quests, 126;  King  of,  enemy  to
Portugal  (1567)  V.  392,  502;  or
Samorin,  or  Cananore,  v.  502 ;
monsoon  from  Goa  to,  viii.  31;
Portuguese  possession,  x.  487.

California,  coasted  by  Drake,  xii.
60.

California,  Gulf  of,  reformation  of
the  map  of,  by  Ortelius,  viii.  444 ;
discovery  of  (c.  1539)  ix.  206;
shoak  in,  ix.  280;  Thomas  Caven-
dish at,  XI.  369.

California  Islands,  number  and  pro-
ducts of,  IX,  129 ;  Vasquez  de  Cor-
onado  at  (1540)  ix.  148;  taken
possession  of,  by  Captain  Ulloa
(1539)  IX.  211,  215;  in  Mar  del
Zur,  IX.  318.

Calker,  or  Carenero  of  Spanish
ships,  XI.  447.

Callowsa  river,  see  Calousa.

Caloiero,  monk,  in  Famagusta
(1571)  V. 140.

Caloieros,  Greek  monastery  of,  in
Patmos,  VI. 107,

Calos,  situation  of,  ix,  52 ;  King  of,
IX.  50.

Calousa  river,  Job  Hortop  sent  on,
to  capture  negroes  (1568)  ix.  446;
Sir  John  Hawkins  and  the  capture
of  negroes  of  (1564)  x.  21.

Calvaria,  see  Calvary.

Calvary  Church,  description  by
Laurence  Aldersey  (1581)  v.  210.

Cama,  see  Kama.

Cama,  or  Anta,  an  animal  in
Guiana,  x.  426.

Camaiwini  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana  river, x.  459.

Camana,  port  in  Peru^  xi.  285 ;
Withrington at  (1587) xi. 215.

Camarian,  see  Cardandan.

Camarie  Mountains  in  Armenia,  v.
108.

Camaron,  shoals  of  the  Cape  of,
described  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  293 ;
latitude,  x.  336.

Camarones,  Rio  de,  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  xi.  87.

Camascho,  Don  Pedro,  del  tercio  de
Napoles  (1589)  vi.  514.

XII  169

Cambaia, see  Cambay.

Cambay,  kingdom  of,  in  India,  v.
374,  469 ;  conquest  by  the  King  of
Agra,  V.  377;  products,  v.  380;
Akbar,  King  (1583)  v.  450,
VI.  7  ;  dog  and  cat  hospitals
in  (1583)  V.  471 ;  opium  in,  v.  491,
VI.  27 ;  spodium  in,  v.  505 ;  gall
and  ginger  found  in,  vi.  25;  in-
digo, VI.  26 ;  monsoon  from  Goa
to,  VI.  28.

Cambaietta,  port  in  Cambay,  v.
374,  469;  products,  v.  374  f. ;
brokers,  v.  375.

Cambaleth,  see  Pekin.

Cambalu,  see  Pekin.

Cambodia, near  China, vi. 324.

Camboia,  see  Cambodia.

Cambridge,  Earl  of,  see  Langley,
Edward  de.

Camchick  to  Cathay,  two  months'
journey, 11. 481.

Camden,  William,  the  antiquary
(1551-1623)  I.  Ivi. ;  on  Richard
Hakluyt,l.lxii.  ;  '  Chorography '  of,

I.  25 ;  on  the  English  guard  of  the
Emperors  of  Constantinople  (i  177)
IV.  310;  on  John  Hawkwood's
victories  in  Italy  (1390)  iv.  452;
and  the  verses  on  Madoc,  vii.
135;  quotations  from,  xii.  50,  51,
61,  64; on  Tom  Stukeley, 102.

Camels,  iii.  21,  23; drawing  carts,

II.  454 ;  in  Sillyzure,  459 ;  in  Per-
sia, 474;  in  Babylon,  vi.  4;  pro-
cured in  Shemakha,  in.  33  ;  scarce
in  Persia,  146,  148;  in  Canary
Islands,  description  (1564)  x. 12.

Camen,  see  Camen  Bolschoi.

Camen  Boldshay,  see  Camen  Bol-
schoi.

Camen  Bolschoi,  mountain  in  Rus-
sia, II.  337,  in.  407,  408,  409.

Cameni,  on  the  Stzuchogora,  iii.
407.

Cameret,  products  of,  11.  129.

Camienijecz,  in  Poland,  William
Harborne  in  (1578)  v.  168;  Henry
Austell  in  (1585)  v.  325.

Camlaia  Island,  Straits  between
Luzon  and,  xi.  330.

Camoloquea,  Camaloqua,  rock,
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  302,
305-

M

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Camoniaca  Hills,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  second  Ruttier,  x.
330.

Campa,  vi.  324;  kingdom  of.  Friar
Odoric  in  the  (1330)  iv.  419.

Campaa, see  Campa.

Campanna  de  la  Cruz,  La,  named
by  Captain  Alarchon  (1540)  ix.
312.

Campeache, see  Campeachy.

Campeachy  province,  John  Chilton
in  (1572)  IX.  374;  Sir  John  Haw-
kins near  (1568)  ix.  450;  town.
Captain  Parker's  voyage  to  (1596)
X.  277 ;  Captain  Parker  lands  at
and  takes,  x.  279.

Campeachy  wood,  used  for  dyeing,
IX.  375,  X.  280.

Campeche,  see  Campeachy.

Campen,  see  Kampen.

Camphor,  found  in  Brimeo,  vi.  25.

Campion,  Caspar,  letters  to  Michael
Locke  and  William  Winter,  i.
Ixviii.  (1569)  V. Ill, 168.

Campo,  Andrew  de,  Portuguese
gardener  of  Francis  de  Solis,  ad-
ventures  of, IX. 166.

Campo  Santo,  at  Famagusta,  v.
132  ;  mined  during  the  siege  (1571)

Camyenetz, see  Camienijecz.

Cana  Fistula,  found  in  New  Spain,
IX.  397.

Canaan,  land  of,  and  Moses,  viii.
102.

Canaanites,  Joshua  and  the,  viii.
103.

Canada,  vii.  171 ;  map  of,  by  Mer-
cator,  III.  280,  VIII.  183,  210;  dis-
covered by  Jacques  Cartier,  vii.
149,  VIII.  144,  215,  284;  map  of,
by  Beloguine  Galterius,  vii.  196 ;
voyages  of  Cartier  to  (1534)  183-
209,  210-262;  vocabulary  of,  209,
260;  climate  of,  281;  discovered
by  John  de  Verrazzano  (1524)
449;  King  of,  kidnapped  by
the  French,  viii.  145 ;  voy-
age of  the  Hopewell  and  the
Chancewell  to  (1597)  viii.  166;
voyage  of  Robcrval  to  (1542)  viii.
283-287;  Hochelaga  river  in,
VIII.  214;  Donnacona,  Lord  of
(1535)  VIII.  219,  235; Cudruaigny,

god  of  the  natives  of,  viii.  226,
240 ;  vines,  south  of,  viii.  227 ;
marriage  customs,  viii.  241 ;
tobacco  used,  viii.  242 ;  vocabu-
lary, VIII.  250  ;  John  Francis  de  la
Roche,  first  governor  of,  viii.
263;  fertility,  viii.  267;  diamonds,
VIII.  268 ;  gold  and  silver,  282 ;
hemp,  VIII.  268;  map  (1587)  viii.
272 ;  expedition  of  Don  Pedro
Melendez  to,  ix.  91,  xii.  9.

Canada  river, see St. Lawrence.

Cananea,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,  xi.
84.

Cananor,  see  Cannanore.

Canary  Islands,  in  Thome's  map,
II.  169,  VI.  120-131,  147,  156,  231;
X.  12,  93;  English  fleet  bound  for
the,  (1577)  VI.  231  ;  Thomas
Stevens  at  (1579)  vi.  378;  George
Raymond  and  the  (1591)  vi.  387;
Captain  Amadas  at  (1584)  viii.
297 ;  Sir  Richard  Grenville  at
(1585)  VIII.  310;  John  White  at
(1590)  VIII.  407;  John  Chilton  at
(1568)  IX.  361 ;  Christopher  New-
port at  (1591)  X.  1S4;  Sir  Robert
Dudley  at  (1594)  x.  204;  Laurence
Keymis  at  (1590)  x.  452;  trade
in  the,  xi.  27 ;  James  Lancaster
at  (1596)  XI.  44;  Amadas  and  Bar-
lowe  at,  XII. 39.

Canasia,  see  Hang-chow.

Canavate,  in  Spain,  x. 163.

Canavate,  John  Lopez,  alderman  in
Canavate,  letter  to,  from  Havana
(1590)  X. 163.

Canawi,  town  of  the  Caiane,  x.
492.

Cancer,  Tropic  of,  vii.  253,  vi.  230,
236, 387; latitude  of, vi. 181.

Candelox,  S.  Nicholas  to,  iii.  69.

Candia,  see  Crete.

Candill, weight of Goa, vi. 17.

Candinal,  near  Porto  d'Ally,  pro-
ducts of,  VII.  90.

Candish,  Thomas,  see  Cavendish.

Candona  La,  independent  Indian
province,  ix.  369.

Candy,  see  Crete.

Cane,  see  Caen.

Canemarie,  in  Karamania,  Storax
Calamita  found  in,  vi.  25.

Canete,  town  in  Peru,  xi.  286.

170

INDEX

Canga,  kingdom  of  Japan,  clima-
teric  extremes  in,  vi.  333.

Cangiti,  see  Cangle,  people  of.

Cangle,  land  of,  i.  166,  167,  271,
278,  279;  people  of,  or  Kangittae,
86,  278;  John  de  Piano  Carpini
among  the,  94.

Cangoxima, haven in Japan, vi.

331-
Cangues, ministers of the high

priest  in  Japan, vi. 335.

Caninoz,  Stephen  Borough  at  (1556)

II-  333.  337.  342,  343  f-
Cannanore, Portuguese  hold  (1567)

V.  390; products, V. 391; dis-
covered by  Portuguese,  viii.  128.

Cannas,  near  the  Islands  of  Bayona,

VI.  495-

Cannas,  Las  Baixos  del  Rio  de,
Captain Gualle at (1584) ix.

331-

Cannaveral  Cape,  in  Bahama  Chan-
nel, IX.  460 ;  latitude  of,  in  second
Ruttier,  ix.  52,  x.  326,  334;  longi-
tude from,  to  Bermuda,  x.  337.

Cannel  or  Cannal,  Cape,  latitude  of,
XI.  351;  from,  to  Batochina
Island, XI. 365.

Cannete,  see  Canete.

Cannette,  or  Cannete,  Marquis  of,
viceroy  of  Peru,  xi.  277 ;  father  of
Don  Garcia  de  Mendoza,  governor
of  Chili,  XI.  259.

Cannibalism  of  Samoj^edes,  11.  483.

Cannibals  (Anthropophagi),  people
of  Ethiopia,  vi.  170;  in  Meta  In-
cognita (1577)  VII.  227;  David  In-
gram on,  VIII.  100;  among  the
Indians  of  New  Spain  (1572)  ix.
397 ;  near  Amana  river,  x.  422 ;
near  Guanipa  and  Berbice  rivers,
X.  423;  in  St.  Vincent  (1596)  x.
478; essay  of  Montaigne  on,  xii.

113-
Cannitz,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-

Canno, see  Cano.

Cannons,  perriers  of  brass,  used  at
the  siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  19.

Cano,  Bartholomew,  his  letter  from
Mexico  to  Francis  Hernandez
(1590)  IX.  204-206;  letter  from,  to
Peter  de  Tapia,  in  Seville  (1590)
X.  166.

Cano,  Juan  Sebastian  del,  first  man
to  sail  round  the  world,  xi.  258.

Cano,  Isle  of,  latitude  of,  ix.  319;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  xi.  266,  xi.
117;  Nuno  da  Silva  and  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  at,  xi. 145.

Canoa,  see  Canoe.

Canoa,  Punta  de  la,  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  x.  289.

Canoas  Island,  latitude  of,  xi.  350.

Canoe,  Indian,  Periago  or,  x.  279,
XI. 288.

Canoes,  of  the  natives,  in  John
Davis's  second  voyage  to  the
north  (1586)  VII.  395 ;  of  Africa,
description,  x.  18;  of  Indians  of
Dominica  (1595)  x.  215;  Indian  or
periagos,  279,  xi.  288 ;  taken  by
Captain  Gilford  (1595)  x.  388;  East
Indian,  described  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1579)  xi. 124, 125.

Canon  of  S.  Paul,  and  the  expedi-
tion to  the  North  Pole  (1527)  viii.
2.

Canow,  Tartar  town,  i. 160.

Cansaco,  Jesuit  College  in  (1591)  xi.
428.

Cansai, see Hang-chow.

Cansas,  province  in  China,  descrip-
tion of,  XI.  378.

Cansay,  province  in  China,  xi.  380.

Cantam,  see  Canton.

Can  tan,  see  Canton.

Cantar,  the,  of  Weymouth,  Captain
Kenel  of  Limehouse,  captain  of
(1592)  X. 193.

Cantar  (or  fishing  boat),  the  Bene-
dict exchanged  for  a  Spanish
(1578)  XI. 151.  _

Cantare,  weight  in  Algiers  (1584)  v.
271.

Cantars,  Spanish  barks,  taken  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi.  103,
150.

Canterbury,  Baldwin,  archbishop  of,
life  and  travels  of  (1190)  iv.  339-
341; Hubert,  archbishop  of  (1201)

IV.  345,  347;  William  Courtenay,
archbishop  of,  and  the  King  of
Armenia  (1386)  iv.  448;  Edmund
Grindal,  archbishop,  and  Importa-
tion of  tamarisks  from  Germany,

V.  242 ;  Robert,  archbishop  of,  see
Winchelsea, Robert  de.

171

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Canthers,  or  Portuguese  fishermen,
Sir  Robert  Dudley  and  (1595)  x.
205.

Cantin,  Cape,  viii.  406 ;  Christopher
Newport  at  (1591)  x.  184;  Casa
del  Cavallero  near,  x.  281 ;  marks
of,  described  in  second  Ruttier,  x.
306;  latitude  of,  x.  335,  xi.  148,
348 ;  longitude  from  Sal  Medina
to,  X.  336;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1577)  XI. 102  ;.

Cantire, Cape,  see  Cantyre.

Canton,  city,  v.  406,  vi.  351,  352,
VII.  195,  XI.  379 ;  Portuguese  trade
in,  V.  498;  silver  market  in,  v.
354;  province,  vi.  295,  320,  350,
XI. 380 ; river  and  bay, latitude,

IX.  333-
Canton, in  Africa, on  the  Gambia

river,  vii.  98.
Cantus,  see  Canute.
Cantyman, a cacique, and Sir

Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  351.
Cantyn,  see  Cantin.
Cantyre, Mull of, Spanish ships

wrecked  at  (1588)  iv.  231.
Canuri  Province,  x.  403  ; Sir  Walter

Raleigh  at,  x.  409.
Canuriaj Wanuretona, Cacique of,

and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.

402.
Canute, King  (994-1035),  privileges

obtained by, i. xlvii.  ; Edric's

counsel  to,  24 ; journey  to  Rome

(1027)  I.  313  f.
Caopui river, between Cape Cecil

and  Raleana  river,  x. 459.
Caorai river, Ewaipanoma, nation

of  headless people near, x. 406 ;

branch of the Orinoco river, x.

408.
Caorle,  near  Venice,  v. 105.
Caos,  Bay  of,  mentioned  in  second

Rutjiier,  x.  330.
Capana,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

322.
Caparana,  see  Carapana.
Capari,  found  in  Alexandria,  vi.  27.
Caparwacka, river, Laurence  Key-
mis  at  (1596)  x.  454.
Cape,  North,  Arthur  JPet  at  (1580)111.

299.
Cape, Richard, and treachery of

Pedro  Gonzalves  (1591)  vii.  95.

Cape  Verde  Islands,  vi.  162  ;  George
Fenner's  voyage  to  (1566)  266-284;
salt  for  the  Edward  Cotton  pro-
cured at  (1583)  408;  the  Richard
of  Arundel  near  (1568)  460;  dis-
covered by  Alouis  de  Cadomosta
(1455)  viii.  127;  distance  of,  from
Canaries,  x,  93 ;  latitude  of,  335 ;
Sir  Anthony  Sherley  at,  x.  268-
271 ;  Laurence  Keymis  at  (1596)
452 ;  Nuno  da  Silva  at,  xi.  133 ;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  260  ;  Thomas
Cavendish  at,  244,  (1586)  294;
John  Chidley  at  (1590)  xi.  384.

Capellepo,  or  Cappelepo,  great  river,

X.  492,  493.

Caphars, Turkish  name  for  Chris-
tians, II.  458,
Capiguoari, mentioned in Ruttier,

XI.  74.

Capira,  Mountains  of,  iv.  18,  108,
X.  144,  148,  291 ;  description  of,
X.  151.

Capitague,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier, XI.  74.

Caplan,  precious  stones,  v.  496,

Caplen  Bay,  see  Chaplin.

Caplin  Bay,  see  Chaplin.

Capling,  William,  master  in  the
Matthew  of  London,  v.  62.

Caponaiarie, Indian captain, x.

493-
Caporaco,  great  Indian  captain,  x.

495-

Cappadocia,  in.  399.

Capricorn,  Tropic  of,  vi.  170.

Caprima,  Indian,  of  Aramatto,  guide
to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1597)  xi,
6.

Captain  of  Alexandria,  the,  Turk-
ish galley,  v.  160;  John  Foxe's
escape,  v. 161 ; famine, v. 163.

Captain  of  the  barge  of  the  Grand
Signior  or  Capigilar  Caiasi,  pay
of,  VI.  62.

Captain  of  the  guard  of  the  Grand
Signior  or  Solach  Pasha,  pay  of,
VI.  62  ; annuity  of,  vi.  65.

Captains,  regulations  for,  on  Span-
ish ships,  XI.  446.

Capthac, see Comanians.

Captives  of  Don  Bernaldino  Delga-
dillo  from  the  English  fleet  (1596)
X.  252.

172

INDEX

Capua,  M.  T.  Cicero,  beheaded  at,
V,  82.

Capul  Island,  Thomas  Cavendish  and
the  Cacique  at  (1588)  xi.  330,  331,
370;  latitude  of,  xi.  350;  from,
to  Masbat  Island,  xi.  364;
anchorage,  xi.  373 ;  people
of,  and  other  islands,  side  with
English  against  the  Spanish  (1588)

XI.  333-
Capule,  a  stone  fruit  in  Mexico,  ix.

410.
Capuli Island, Captain Gualle at

(1584)  IX.  327.
Capulio, foreland, x. 208.
Capurepana, town, x. 417; cap-
tains sent to, by Sir Walter

Raleigh  (1595)  x.  403.
Capurepani,  on  Caroli  river,  x.  423.
Capuri  river,  x.  407 ; forces  sent  to,

by Sir  Walter  Raleigh (1595) x.

378; Indians near, described  by

Sir Walter Raleigh, x. 383 ;

branch of the Orinoco river, x.

421.
Capurwacka,  great  river,  discovered

by  Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  x.  490.
Cara,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i. 150.
Cara  Carum,  Vut  Khan,  Lord  of,  i.

210,  268; an  idol  at,  i.  286.
Cara-Cathay,  i.  86,  94;  and  Jenghiz

Khan, 143 ; Rubruquis  enters, i.

284.
Cara-calmack, see  Kara-Kalmucks.
Cara  Reca,  see  Kara.
Carabbe,  found  in  Germany,  vi.  26.
Caracas, fort in, taken by Sir

Amyas de Preston, x. 217;

coast of, despoiled by Agiri,

X.  363 ; Don  Antonio  de  Berreo's

camp  master  at,  x.  364; S.  lago

de  Leon  in,  x.  377; governor  of,

and the conquest of Guiana, x.

460.
Caracks,  see  Carracks.
Caracol  river,  in  Panama,  x, 154.
Caracones,  see  Coracones.
Caracos,  see  Caracas.
Caraemiti,  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg

of, VI. 67.
Carak,  see  Carrack.
Caramasal,  Don  Gomez  de,  returned

from  England  (1589)  vi.  485.
Caramusalins,  see  Carramuzzals.

Caraniti,  see  Karanites.

Caranza,  Rodrigo  de,  registrar  of
the  Spanish  army  (1593)  x.  434.

Carapana,  King  of  Emena,  and
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)  x.
365.  373;  wisdom  of,  x.  372;
Lord  of  the  Orenoqueponi,x.  417  ;
flight  of,  X.  419;  Lord  of  Emeria,
ruler  of  the  Nepoios,  x.  423  ;  Que-
pyn  Mountains,  dwelling  place  of,
X.  465 ;  his  envoy  and  Laurence
Keymis  (1596)  x.  471,  475.

Carapana  town,  fort  of  Guiana,  X:
375; Berreo  at,  x.  461.

Carapi  river,  x.  492.

Cararoopana,  or  Carerupana,  branch
of  the  Orinoco  river,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  on  the  (1595)  x.  417,  420.

Carassi, Indian poisoned herb, x.

495-

Caravallos,  Albert,  Ralph  Fitch  in
the  ship  of  (1586)  v.  485.

Caravans,  of  merchants  to  Bokhara,
II.  472  ;  stopped  between  Taskent
and  Kashgar,  473,  v.  273,  340-356,
445;  John  Eldred's,  from  Bus-
sorah  to  Aleppo  (c. 1583)  vi.  8.

Caravel,  see  Carvel.

Carawool,  or  Russian  watch,  in.
217.

Cardamom,  found  in  Barcelona  and
Bengal,  vi.  26.

Cardamomum,  see  Cardamom.

Cardan,  on  mountains,  iv.  18  28,
108,  X20 ;  on  hot  spring  baths,  iv.
35,  129;  on  rivers,  iv.  36,  131;
on  Corinth  river,  iv.  37,  132  ;  on
the  oil  fountains  in  Saxony,  iv.  38,
133 ;  on  hydromel,  iv.  38,  134 ;  on
the  smell  of  water,  iv. 39, 134.

Cardandan,  description  of,  vi.  322 ;
or  Camarian,  322.

Cardane,  see  Cardan.

Cardanus,  see  Cardan.

Cardenas,  Don  Garcia  Lopez  de,
master  of  the  field  in  Vasquez  de
Coronado's  expedition  (1540)  ix.
150;  at  Cevola,  ix.  151;  saves  the
life  of  Vasquez  de  Coronado,  ix.
153 ; at  Acuco  (1540)  ix. 164.

Cardia, sweet  fountain  in, iv. 38,

133-
Cardiff,  Glamorgan,  ships  furnished
by,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.  298.

173

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Care,  weight  of  Bussorah,  vi. 13.
Careless, Edward, alias Wright,
captain  of  the  Hope  (1589)  vii.  i,

(1585)  X.  98.

Carena,  or  careening,  of  Spanish
ships,  XI.  447.

Carenes,  see  Triangle  Islands.

Carepini,  nation  on  the  Chaimawi-
mini,  x.  492.

Carepuna  province,  x.  366.

Careres, see  Triangle  Islands.

Cares,  Lindius,  scholar  to  Lysippus,
and  the  Colossus  Soils,  v. 119.

Cares,  Island  of,  x.  290;  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake at, to take in water

(1586)  x.  126;  in  Cartagena  Har-
bour (1587)  X.  137,  140;  proposed
fort  in,  X.  141 ;  lime  stones  at,  x.
142.

Carew,  Henry,  or  Carewe,  captain
of  the  Hopezvell  (1578)  vii.  231,
322,  364;  on  board  the  Aid  (1577)
285  ;  in  Captain  Frobisher's  coun-
cil, 348.

Carew,  Sir  George,  and  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596)  iv. 241,  247.

Carew,  Sir  Robert,  and  the  Armada

(1588)  IV.  217.

Carey, Henry, letter  from  Thomas

Cavendish  to  (1588)  xi.  376-378.
Carey, Paul, sailor  on  the  Delight

(1589)  XI.  389.

Carey,  Sir  George,  bark  sunk  at
Flores  Island  (1591)  vii.  41;  ships
of;  against  the  Spanish  near  Cuba
(1591)  X. 178.

Cargapolia,  province  of  Russia,  iii.
358 ;  Russian  iron  at,  369 ;  city
of,  370.

Cargo  of  captured  ships  (1589)  vii.
5,  13,  19;  from  the  Spanish  Indies
in  Terceira  (1589)  66;  of  the
Madre  de  Dios  (1592)  116.

Cari  river,  tributary  of  the  Orinoco
river, x.  407.

Caria,  iii.  398.

Caribs,  and  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1565)
X.  29;  and  the  .Spanish  captain,
29;  war  stratagems  of  the  (1565)
30;  at  Burburata  (1565)  35  ;  king-
dom of,  or  Man-eaters,  in  Guiana,
and  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  207;
Roponowini  lake,  named  Parime
by  the,  459 ; of  Guanipa  and  Ar-

rowaiarie,  460,  474;  language,
465;  nation  of  the  Arowari,  etc.,
490 ;  of  Wias,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
and  (1597)  XI.  6;  Quiparia,  town
of  the,  8.

Carichii  Island,  in  the  gxilf  of  Per-
sia, V.  372.

CarillO;  Francis,  witness  of  Spanish
possession of Guiana (1593) x.

435-
Carinamari,  Indian  captain,  x.  493.
Carinepagotes, people of  Trinidad,

X.  350.
Carinthia,  Duke  of,  and  the  Tartars,

I.  51.
Canon,  the,  Spanish  ship  lost  in  a

storm at S. Juan d'Ulloa (1556)

IX.  343-

Carios, nation  on Rio  Grande,  xi.

96; inhabitants of S. Salvador,

99.
Cariwacka,  town  of  the  Winitwari,

X.  492.

Carleill,  Christopher,  captain  of  the
Tiger  (1582)  in.  303,  463,  x.  98;
portrait  of,  viii.  2  ;  chosen  captain
by  the  Company  of  Merchants
(1583)  133;  discourse  by,  134-147;
and  Muscovy  Committee,  147 ;
lieutenant-general  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1585)  x.  97;  and  a
Spanish  ship  (1585)  100;  his  cap-
tures in  Vigo,  10 1 ;  his  landing
with  soldiers  at  Playa,  104 ;  leader
of  Sir  Francis  Drake's  forces
against  S.  Domingo  (1586)  iii;
in  Cartagena  (1586)  116;  praises
of, 128,

Carlet,  David,  captain  of  the  Minion
(1564)  VI.  263,  X.  9;  prisoner  of
the  Portuguese,  vi.  265,  x.  35.

Carliell,  see  Carleill.

Carlil, see Carlisle.

Carlile,  Alexander,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-
Carlile,  Captain,  and  the  voyage  of

Edward  Fenton  (1582)  xi.  165,  171.
Carlisle,  Walter,  bishop  of,  witness

of  Henry  IIT.'s  charter,  i.  324.
Carmarthen,  ships  from,  in  Edward

III.'s  neet, I. 298.
Carmel, Mount, John Locke near

(1553)  V.  92.

174

INDEX

Carmosale,  see  Carramuzzal.

Carnaby,  Nicholas,  joint  owner  of
the  Jesus  (1583)  v.  292.

Carneros,  Monte  de,  a  black  hill,  in
the  Ruttier,  x.  295.

Caroa  Point,  in  Trinidad,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1595)  x.  349;  Ara-
waks  at,  350.

Carobia  or  Cheste,  in.  231.

Carobs  or  locust-bean  trees,  in
Cyprus,  V.  99.

Caroli  river,  Antonio  de  Berreo  and,
X.  369,  371 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1595)  401,  402,  403;  Canuri,
inhabitants  of,  governed  by  a
woman,  423;  Berreo's  flight  to,
462; his  forces  on  (1596)  466.

Caroline,  Fort,  in  Laudonniere  Vale,
description  (1564)  ix.  17;  meeting
in,  IX.  41;  completion  (1565)  ix.
48;  famine  (1565)  ix.  59,  66;  ship-
building, IX.  60 ;  entered  by  Span-
iards (1565)  IX.  95;  Captain  Lau-
donniere leaves  (1565)  IX.  97;  razed
by  Captain  Gourgues  (1568)  ix.
109.

Caroius,  see  Charles.

Carolus  Magnus,  see  Charlemagne.

Caroius  V., see  Charles  V.

Carone,  river,  in  Trinidad,  x.  350.

Carovans, see  Caravans.

Carowe,  John,  quartermaster  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  213.

Carpathus  Mountain,  green  water  in
the,  IV. 38, 134.

Carpenters,  in  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's expedition  (1583)  viii.  47;
in  Fort  Caroline,  killed  by  the
sons  of  King  Emola  (1565)  ix.  68.

Carpet-making,  Persian,  in.  249;
Turkish,  251.

Carpets,  sale  of,  in  Chios  (1569)  v.
114.

Carpont,  or  Carpunt,  in  Newfound-
land, latitude  of,  viii.  185,  275 ;
Jacques  Cartier  at  (1540)  viii.  265 ;
voyage  of  John  Alphonse  of
Xanctoigne  to  (1542)  viii.  275-
283.

Carrack,  Domingo  de  Fournati,  cap-
tain of  a,  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes,
V.  10.

Carracks,  Genoese,  11.  123,  143.

Carrah  Colmak,  see  Kara-Kalmuck.

Carraich,  Tolvich  to,  in.  81.

Carramuzzal,  Turkish  ship,  engrav-
ing of  a,  V.  136 ;  at  the  siege  of
Famagusta,  v.  130 ;  passage  boats
of  Tripoli,  vi.  43.

Carre,  Captain,  killed  at  the  taking
of Lisbon (1589) vi. 501.

Carrell,  Denis,  left  at  Mosquito  Bay
(1587)  vin.  389.

Carrero.  Bras,  Captain,  prisoner  of
Captain  Grant  (1594)  vii.  122.

Carricurrina,  province.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  description  of  (1595)  x.
417.

Carriers,  English  merchants  in  Rus-
sia, allowed  to  hire,  in.  442 ;  upon
mules  (or  catergi),  upon  camels
(or  cinegi)  of  the  Grand  SIgnior,
pay  of,  VI.  64.

Carroaori,  Indian  chief  tortured  by
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)  x.

353-

Carrobi,  see  Carobs.

Carsey,  Captain,  killed  at  the  taking
of  Lisbon  (1589)  vi. 501.

Carsies,  see  Kerseys.

Cartagena  (Spain),  galleys  from,
leagued  against  English  ships
(1583)  V.  264.

Cartagena  (West  Indies),  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  voyage  to  (1589)  vii.
I ;  sacked  by  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1586)  VIII.  346,  XII.  62;  Sir  John
Hawkins  at  (1568)  ix.  401,450,  x.
66,67;  Sir  Francis  Drake's  forces
land  near,  under  Christopher  Car-
leill  (1586)  X.  116;  description  of,
X,  117,  XI.  234;  taking  of,  x.  119;
ransom  of,  x.  125 ;  ordnance  cap-
tured at,  by  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1586)  x.  134;  latitude,  x.  137;
weakness  of,  x.  138 ;  advice  of
Baptista  Antonio  for  strengthen-
ing the  harbour  of,  x.  140 ;  lime
stones  in,  x.  142  ;  Hieronymo  de
Nabares  at  (1590)  x.  176;  Portu-
guese ship  bound  for,  captured  by
Christopher  Newport  (1591)  x.
184 ;  Don  Pedro  de  Acunna,  gover-
nor of,  and  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo  (1596)  X.  250;  marks  of,
described  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  287,
289,  291 ;  Ruttier  from,  to  Hav-
ana, X. 292 ; traffic with New

175

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Granada,  xi.  235 ;  passage  over-
land from,  to  Peru,  xi.  236;  bom-
barded by  Drake  and  Hawkins,
XII.  49 ;  Spanish  ship  captured  by
Drake  at  (1570)  52;  Scrivano  of,
captured  by  Andrew  Barker  (1576)
X.  86.
Carter, voyage of, in the Trinity

(1536)  VIII. 3.

Carter,  Mark,  master's  mate  of  the
Sunshine  (1586)  vii.  408.

Carter,  Richard,  taken  by  Luke
Warde  (1582)  xi.  183.

Carthage,  vi.  144 ;  description  of,
(1587)  VI.  38.

Carthagena,  see  Cartagena.

Cartier,  Jacques,  of  S.  Malo,  the
two  voyages  of,  by  Baptista  Ram-
usio,  VII.  149 ;  in  Terra  de  Labra-
dor, VII.  i6g,  171 ;  discoveries
(1534)  VIII.  144;  and  the  natives
of  Holy  Cross,  viii.  145;  discovery
of  Gulf  of  St.  Laurence,  viii.  156  ;
first  voyage  of  discovery  (1534)
VIII.  183-209 ;  second  voyage  of
discovery  (1535-1536)  viii.  210-262;
third  voyage  of  discovery  (1540)
VIII.  263-272  ;  Captain  General  and
leader  of  the  French  ships  (1540)
VIII.  263;  at  S.  John's  Road  with
Roberval,  viii.  284;  on  the  Vir-
ginians, VIII.  374  ;  discovered  Can-
ada (1535) VIII. 450; discoveries

of, XII. 9.

Carts, in Fatehpur, v. 474.

Cartwright,  John,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Carvel,  Portuguese,  captured  by
English  ships  (1591)  vi.  388,
(1590)  464;  taken  by  the  English
near  Graciosa  Island  (1586)  vi.
435;  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1595)  X.  227,  232.

Carvels,  Spanish  (1588)  of  the  Ar-
mada, IV.  200 ;  fight  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  with  seven,  ix.  448;  cap-
tured at  Cumana  by  Sir  Amyas
Preston,  x.  217,  218;  taken  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi. 103.

Cary, Sir George, see  Carey.

Casada,  Don  Gonzales  Ximenes  de,
his  attempt  to  discover  Guiana,  x.
364-

Casada,  Captain,  New  Kingdom  of
Granada  discovered  and  named
by,  XI.  235.

Casan,  see  Kazan.

Casas,  Bartholomew  de,  Amana
river named Ivia Pari by, x.

496..

Casavi,  see  Cassava.

Casbin,  see  Kazvin.

Cascaes,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1587)  VI.  442  ;  stores  of  provisions
for  ships  at,  vi.  482  ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  and  the  English  fleet  at
(1589)  VI.  502,  506;  English  army
at,  VI.  507 ;  castle  of,  surrenders,
VI.  509  f.

Cascais,  see  Cascaes.

Cascar,  see  Kashgar.

Casicola,  Cacique,  near  S.  Helena
in  Florida,  ix.  113.

Casimir,  son  of  Vladislaus,  King
of  Poland,  11.  7,  9,  11.

Casique,  see  Cacique.

Caskar,  see  Kashgar.

Caskets,  Flanders,  trade  oF,  in
Guinea  (1577)  vi.  252.

Casks  for  Russian  trade,  11.  388,
390, 402.

Casnero  river,  course  of  the,  x.  407,
408.

Casoldo,  Earl  Sigismund  of,  slain
at  Famagusta  (1571)  v. 150.

Caspian  Sea,  i.  270,  278,  iii.  15 ;  or
Baku  Sea,  iv.  410;  and  its  tribu-
taries, I.  163 ;  and  the  Volga,  270,
II.  252  ;  discovered  by  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  (1559)  400;  Tartars  and
the,  452 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson
reaches  the,  456,  475 ;  storms,
description  of,  476,  477,  iii.  19 ;
absence  of  trade,  11.  478 ;  latitude,
479 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  crosses
the  (1563)  III.  36,  196;  Thomas
Alcock  on  the,  iii.  41 ;  distance
from  S.  Nicholas,  iii.  70;  English
trade,  iii.  88 ;  English  bark  on
the.  III.  104;  fight  on  the,  iii.  155;
description,  iii. 166,  xii. 105.

Cassacam,  see  Armadillo.

Cassachi,  wife  of  Solyman,  built  hos-
pital at  Medina,  v.  363.

Cassak,  see  Cossack.

Cassamar,  Cassanar,  Cassonar,
river, tributary of Pato river,

76

INDEX

Guiana,  x.  365 ; Don  Antonio  de

Berreo  on,  x.  368.
Cassamari,  enemies  to  the  Spanish

(1596)  X.  474.
Cassan  (Russia),  see  Kazan.
Cassan (Persia), see  Kazvin.
Cassan (Africa), on the Gambia

river,  vii.  98.
Cassanar,  river,  x.  408.
Cassanari,  nation  of  clothed  people,

near the beginning of Orinoco

river, x.  464.
Cassaria,  see  Taurida.
Cassava, Don Diego de, returned

from  England  (1589)  vi.  514.
Cassava or Indian bread, x. 465.

XI.  390; description,  xi. 14.
Cassavi,  see  Cassava.
Cassavy, poisonous root found in

Virginia  (1586)  viii. 365.
Casserroes  river,  Job  Hortop  on  the

(1568)  IX.  447 ; Sir  John  Hawkins

in  the  (1565)  x. 23.
Cassia, found in Cambay and

Cairo,  vi.  25.
Cassim  Castle,  in  Russia,  11.  450.
Cassima  river,  iii.  409.
Cassine, national drink  of  the In-
dians of Florida, viii. 454, ix.

23-
Cassipa,  Lake,  on  the  Caroli  river,

X. 405.
Cassipagotos, nation unconquered

by  the  Orejones, x. 400; enemy

to the Spaniards, x. 401, 474;

enemy to the Inga and the

Epurenei,  x.  405  ;  on  Cassipa  lake,

X.  423.
Cassones  bay,  near  Tuspa  river,  x.

319-

Cassopo,  in  Corfu,  v. 103.

Cassuri,  the  Alcaide  of,  and  the  sur-
vivors of  the  Toby  (1593)  vii.
127.

Castel  Nuovo,  John  Locke  at  (1553)
V.  80.

Castelin,  Edward,  trader  in  the
Canary  Islands,  vi.  134,  ix.  341 ;
voyage  to  Guinea  (1554)  vi.  154,
(1561)  VI.  253,  (1562)  258;  pro-
posed voyage  to  Guinea  (1564)  vi.
262.

Castelin,  Francis,  and  William
Towerson  (1577)  vi.  236.

Castelin,  John,  member  of  the  Mus-
covy Committee  and  Captain  Car-

leill  (1583)  VIII. 147.
Casteline, Edward, joint owner of

the  Primrose  (1557)  11.  378.
Castellammare, near Naples, hoop

market  at,  v. 117.
Castellanes,  Juan  de,  '  Primera  parte

de  las  Elegias  de  varones  illustres

de  Indias,'  by,  x.  496.
Castellani,  rulers  in  Famagusta  for

Venice, v,  95.
Castellanos, Baixos de los, men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  85.
Castello, Dominico  del, in  Captain

Alarchon's  voyage  (1540)  ix.  280.
Casti, King, murderer of Captain

Laudonniere's carpenters (1565)

IX.  68 ; visits  Captain  Ribault  at

Fort  Caroline,  ix.  88.
Castilia,  Don  Luis  de,  and  Captain

Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  318.
Castiliano or Castillo, Juan, chief

pilot  of  Captain Ulloa, calker  of

the  Trinity  and  captain  of  the  5.

Agueda (1540) ix. 234, 276;

discoveries  by,  ix.  241.
Castilia, Don Martin  de, in Santa

Marta  town  (1597) x. 273.
Castille,  Jews  expelled  from,  11.  173 ;

and the Armada (1588) iv.

200; Henry  III.  of,  and  Macham

(1395)  IV.  369,  VI. 120; John  II.

of (1417) IV. 369, VI. 120.
Castilia  de  la  Mar, see  Castellam-
mare.
Castilleia,  Gaspar  de,  comptroller  of

Captain  Alarchon's  fleet  (1540)  ix.

281.
Castle  of  Comfort, the  flagship,  in

the  voyage  to  Guinea  of  1566,  vi.

266; at Gomera, vi. 269.
Castler, Master, and Laurence

Aldersey, In Augsburg (1581) v.

202.
Castles, garrisoned, in Germany

against  Prussian  infidels,  11.  2.
Castles,  passage  of  the,  viii.  196.
Castles,  bay  of,  viii.  211 ;  harbour  in

Newfoundland  (1578)  viii,  14,  275,-

Jacques Cartier at (1534) viii.

185; description,  viii.  186.
Castorium found in Germany, v.

26.

177

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Castow  Hill,  in  Derbent,  iii. 20.

Castran,  English  trade  free  of  cus-
tom in  (1569)  III. 112.

Castro,  governor  of  Peru,  fleet  sent
for  discoveries  by,  xi.  287.

Castro,  Laurence  de,  heirs  of,  in
charge  of  Thualapa,  ix.  468.

Castro, on the coast of Chili, xi.

273-

Castrum  Peregrinorum,  Prince  Ed-
ward at  (1270)  IV.  362.

Casul-bas,  see  Casul  Pasha.

Casul  Pasha,  Prince  of  the  Persians,
and  Murad  Khan,  vi.  71.

Cat,  Gervaise,  ship  master,  and
Prussian  pirates, 11. 66.

Catai,  see  Cathay.

Cataie,  see  Cathay.

Catalonia  and  Edvi^ard  I.'s  great
charter,  i.  333.

Catanduanes,  Island  of,  Captain
Gualle  at  (1584)  ix. 327.

Cataracts  in  Sag-uenay  river,  viii.
236;  Jacques  Cartier  at  (1540)269,
270;  latitude  of,  272,  274;  of  the
river  Caroli  described  by  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh  (1595)  x.  403;  on  the
Mountain  of  Crystal,  418;  of  Wia-
poucou  river,  Raleigh  and  the
(1597)  XI.  5.

Cataracts  of  heaven,  see  Water-
spout.

Calaro,  see  Cattaro.

Catay,  and  Cataya,  see  Cathay.

Catches,  or  boats,  two,  in  Sir
Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.
227.

Catchoe,  native  king  in  Meta  In-
cognita (1577)  VII.  310.

Catecha,  in  Orissa,  Caesar  Fred-
erick in  (1567)  V.  409.

Cates,  Thomas,  Sir  Francis  Drake's
voyage  to  West  Indies  published
by  (1585)  x._  97-134.

Catetios,  province  of  the,  x.  408.

Cathaia, see Cathay.

Cathan,  Duke  of  Hungary,  i.  74.

Cathay,  i.  56,  66,  69,  70,  86,  87,  94,
135.  143.  144.  167,  170;  victory
over  and  defeat  by  Tartary,  144;
religion  of,  70,  145  f. ;  wind  cave
in,  167,  242;  dukes  of,  at  Kaiuk's
court,  170;  Prcster  John  and,  267;
Vut Khan's flight into, 268;

178

Cabot's  voyage  to  (1553)  11.  195;
Willoughby's  voyage  of  discovery
to,  217-224;  Chancellor's  voyage
to,  239;  way  to,  285,  398;  An-
thony Jenkinson  on  the  way  to
(1559)  400;  river  Oxus  in,  461;
products  of,  brought  to  Bokhara,
473;  description  of,  481;  and  the
Muscovy  Company,  iii.  86;  Rus-
sian help  promised  towards  the
discovery  of,  1 19 ;  English  mer-
chants and  the  discovery  of  (1580)
251-258;  herbs,  268,  274;  first
attempt  to  discover  (1553)  330;
north-east  passage  to,  450,  457 ;
Kara-Kalmuck  or  nation  of,  456;
lake  of,  408,  410; bells  heard  in,

III.  457 ;  Khan  of,  and  the  King
of  Java  (1330)  IV.  417;  and  the
King  of  Moumoran,  iv.  420;
Friar  Odoric  in  (1330)  iv.  429;
Khan  of,  in  Caido,  iv.  430 ;  em-
pire of,  IV.  432 ;  intended  dis-
covery of  (1551)  VI.  136;  Sebas-
tian Cabot  on  the  passage  to,  vii.
149 ;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  on  the
passage  to  (1548)  vii.  158;  west
of  America,  vii.  160;  in  Ortelius's
map,  VII.  163  ;  Paulus  Venetus  in,
VII.  166;  divided  from  America,
VII.  170;  King  of,  and  Galeotto
Pereira,  vii.  201 ;  Captain  Fro-
bisher's  voyage  to  discover  (1578)

VII.  319-367; the Portuguese  at,

VIII.  129 ;  north-west  passage  to,
looked  for  by  Jacques  Cartier
(1534)  VIII.  144;  sea  of,  tide  of,
VIII.  279 ;  ships  thought  to  come
from,  seen  at  Quivira  (1540)  ix.
166;  North-east  passage  to,  xii.
22 ;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  and,
xii.  25,  26.

Cathedral of Holen, built  of  wood
(1592)  IV. 62, 161 ; of  Schalholt,

IV.  62, 162.
Cathes, the,  i. 166.

Cathneia, Richard I. and Tan-

cred  at  (1191)  iv.  325.
Cativa,  Cabeza  de,  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier, x. 290 ; islands of, x.

290.
Catoche  or  Yucatan Cape, latitude

of, X. 334; Captain Parker at

(i£79)  279.  280.

INDEX

Cat's-eyes  in  Ceylon,  v.  399.
Cats, Italians' predilection for, v.
87 ; hospital for, in Cambay

(1583)  471-
Cattaro,  Bocca  di,  Venetian  hold  in,

V.  80; Henry  Austell  at,  v.  322.
Cattewater,  see  Catwater.
Cattle, Finland, 11. 416; Tartar,

464; Russian,  George  Turberville

on (1568) III. 127; Persian, as

beasts  of  burden,  148,  166;  accom-
modation for,  in  Iceland  (1592)  iv.

63, 163; in China, vi. 298; in

Ag-uada Saldanha, vi. 289;

imported  in  Hispaniola,  viii.  441  ;

in  Curacao  Island, abundance  of

(1565)  x/36;  in  S.  pomingo  (1535)

X. 36, 37; breeding of, advised

for  Florida  and  Virginia  (1565)  x.

62 ; of Peru, description of, xi.

282.
Caturi  river,  x.  407.
Caturlune and Edward I.'s great

charter, I. 333.
Catwater, the Richard of Arundel

in  (1589)  VI. 456; Robert  Flicke

at  (1591)  VII.  61.
Catza Island, near Dalmatia, v.

78.
Caucasus,  i.  279,  282,  11.  477;  rivers'

sources  in,  478.
Cauchinchina,  see  Cochin  China.
Caucus Point, mentioned in the

Ruttier,  x.  302.
Caufield, Captain, of Sir John

Burrough's  fleet  (1592)  vii.  no.
Caumbrigge, Robert, of Norwich,

and  Prussian  pirates,  11.  63.
Causedo  Point,  described  in  second

Ruttier,  x.  312.
Causet,  see  Cawsand.
Caushen  Bay,  see  Cawsand.
Causon  Bay,  see  Cawsand.
Cavalette,  in  Cyprus,  destruction  of,

v.  85.
Cavalla,  the,  of  Venice,  John  Locke

and, at  Cadiz  (1553)  v. 77.
Cavallero, captain of a Maltese
_^  frigate  (1586)  vi.  51,  52.
Cavallero, Casa del, near Cape

Cantin,  x.  281.
Cavalleros,  Exarama  de  los,  English

battalion  at  (1589)  vi.  498.
Cavallos,  Port  of,  in  Honduras,  x.

187; John Chilton in (1570) ix.

367 ; Miles  Philips  sails  for,  from

Spain  (1580)  IX.  441.
Cavannas  harbour,  William  King  at

(1592)  X. 192.
Cave, Captain, wounded at the

taking of Lisbon (1589) vi.

SOI.
Cave,  George,  captain  of  the  Royal

Exchange  (1593)  vii.  118;  and  Las

Cinque  Llaguas,  vii. 120.
Cave,  wind,  in  Cathay,  i.  167.
Cavendish, George, in Sir  Francis

Drake's fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-

Cavendish,  John,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  281.

Cavendish,  Thomas,  of  Trimley,
Suffolk  (1560-92),  South  Sea  voy-
ages, I.  xxviii.,  X.  164;  in  Sir
Richard  Grenville's  expedition  to
Virginia  (1585)  viii.  310;  at
Cotesa  Island,  viii.  311;  Sir  Rich-
ard Grenville  and,  viii.  316;  and
the  Spanish  ship  from  China,
spoiled  and  burnt  (1588)  x.  165 ;
portrait  of,  xi.  iii.  ;  circumnaviga-
tion of  (1586-88)  XI.  290-347;  and
the  m.en  left  in  the  Straits  of  Ma-
gellan by  Pedro  Sarmiento,  xi.273  ;
at  Sierra  Leone  (1586)  xi.  291 ;  at
Port  Desire,  xi.  295 ;  in  the  Straits
of  Magellan,  xi.  298;  at  Quintero
Bay  (1587)  XI.  303;  ships  captured
by  (1587)  XI.  312; at  Puna  Island

(1587)  XI.  313  f. ;  prisoners  taken
by  (15S7)  XI.  322,  327;  and  the
Cacique  of  Capul  Island  (1588)  xi.
330;  conspiracy  against  (1588)  xi.
331; and the Spanish frigate

(1588)  XI.  334;  leaves  the  Philip-
pines (1588)  XI.  336;  at  Java
Major  (1588)  XI.  337;  at  S.  Helena
Island  (1588)  XI.  343,  347;  letter
from,  to  Lord  Hunsdon  (1588)  xi.
376-378;  map  of  China  brought
home  by  (1588)  xi.  378;  last  voy-
age of  (1591)  XI.  389-416;  Santos
taken  by  (1591)  xi.  390;  in  the
Straits  of  Magellan  (1592)  xi.  392 ;
looked  for  at  Port  Desire  (1592)
XI.  394;  departure  of,  from  Ply-
mouth (1591)  XI.  397;  loss  of,
testimonial of the crew of the

179

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Desire  concerning"  (1592)  xi.  397;

XII.  28,  6S-71.
Caverley, Captain, drowned off

Lisbon  (1589)  vi.  312.
Cavery, see Caviare.
Caviare, trade, ili. 367 ; price of,

483.

Cawo  river,  x.  454 ;  great  river,
discovered  by  Laurence  Keymis
(1596)  X.  490;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1597)  XI.  5;  Ritimo,  captain  of,
XI. 6.

Cawrooma,  x.  494 ;  inland  river,
near  Aratoori  river, x. 465.

Cawroor  river,  see  Cawroora.

Cawroora  river,  x.  454,  492.

Cawsand  Bay,  near  Plymouth,  the
Richard  of  Arundel  at,  vi.  456 ;
departure  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's expedition  from,  viii.  41,
47,  89 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  and
Sir  John  Hawkins  (1595)  x.  226;
Purser,  a  pirate  in,  xi.  202.

Cawse,  William,  prisoner  of  the
Inquisition,  boatswain  in  a  Span-
ish ship  (1568)  IX.  460.

Caxamalca,  province  in  Guiana,
X.  408.

Caxamalca,  Tambo  of,  in  Peru,  viii.
125.

Caxamalca  town,  viii.  95;  and
Atabalipa,  son  of  the  Emperor  of
Peru,  X.  340;  Atabalipa 's  reception
of  Francisco  Pizarro  at,  xi.  282.

Caycos,  see  Caicos.

Cayman  Islands,  William  King  at
(1592)  x.  191  ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton at.  X,  225 ;  in  second  Ruttier,
314;  latitude,  x.  333;  longitude,
X. 336.

Cavmans  in  the  Magdalena  river,  x.

'75-
Cayo, meaning"  of,  in  Biscayan,  x.

328.
Cayphas,  conquered  by  King  Bald-
win (1107)  IV.  304.
Cayro,  see  Cairo.
Cazan,  see  Kazan.
Cazenove, Captain, lieutenant of

Captain  Gourgues'  (1567)  ix.  100;

at the Spanish attack (1568) ix.

J05,  108.
Cecil, Cape, named by Laurence

Keymis (1596) x. 454; the Dis-

coverer meets  Laurence  Keymis  at
(1596)  X.  477;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at (1597) IX. 5; latitude of, xi.

5-

Cecil,  Captain,  at  the  attack  on
Cartagena  (1586)  x.  119;  death  of,
X. 134.

Cecil,  Captain  William,  land  captain
in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1585)
X.  98.

Cecil,  Sir  Robert,  dedication  to,  i.
Ixiii.,  Ixxiv.,  xii.  81-2  ;  and  the  Ar-
mada (1588)  IV.  217;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  letter  to  (1595)  x.
338-343 ;  and  Richard  Hakluyt,
XII.  75-

Cecil,  Sir  Thomas,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  217.

Cecil,  Sir  William,  Lord  Burghley,
lord  treasurer  of  England,  iii.  429,

VII.  163  ;  Boris  Feodorowich's  letter
to.  III.  419;  second  letter  to,  436  ;  his
letter  to  Boris  Feodorowich,  430 ;
portrait  of,  iv.  iii.  ;  and  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert  (1578)  vili.  21  ;  letter
from  Thomas  James  to,  concern-
ing the  discovery  of  Ramea(i59i)
viii.  155  ;  and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1584)  VIII.  294,  XII.  42  ;  and  Hak-
luyt, 75.

Cedars  in  Hochelaga  (1535)  viii.
228  ;  found  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.
355'  372;  in  Florida,  x.  57;  on
Bermuda Island, x. 201.

Cedars,  Isle  of,  discovered  by  Cap-
tain Ribault  (1562)  VIII.  464;
Captain  Ulloa  at  (1540)  ix.  253,
255,  266;  latitude,  ix.  262,  336;
one  of  S.  Stephen's  Isles,  ix.  267;
distance  from,  to  Colima  Port,  ix.
277.

Cedros,  Isle  de,  see  Cedars.

Ceffala,  discovered  by  the  Portu-
guese, VIII. 128.

Ceilon,  see  Ceylon.

Celebes  Islands,  the  Portuguese  at,

VIII.  129 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  near
(1579)  XI. 128.

Celer,  Quintus  Metellus,  pro-consul

of  Gaul,  VII. 172.
Celestine  and  the  heresy  of  Pelagius,

IV. 277.
Celleler,  Friar  Anthony,  of  Gallipoli

(1577)  V. 165.

INDEX

Celoena. town of, in Phrygia, iv.

i.  89.
Cen,  sectaries  of  Xaquani,  in  China,

VI.  373-

Census  in  Iceland  (1090)  iv.  15,  104.

Centanilla,  see  Santanilla.

Centurion,  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  on  the
(1583)  HI. 464.

Centurion,  the,  of  London,  and
Laurence  Aldersey  (1586)  vi.  39.

Centurion,  the,  and  the  Spanish
ships  (1590)  VII.  31,  (1591)  35;
boarded  by  the  Spanish  galleys
(1591)  VII.  36;  victory  of  the,  vii.
37;  missing  in  Robert  Flicke's
fleet,  VII,  57.

Cephala, coast  of, vii. 115.

Cephalonia  Island,  Venetian  posses-
sion, V.  81 ;  John  Locke  near
(1553)  V.  102;  William  Harborne
at  (1583)  V.  249;  fight  between
Tripolitan  and  Venetian  galleys
(1585)  V.  310;  Levant  Company
in,  yi.  75,  yy.

Cepusius  in  Hungary,  petrifying
water,  iv.  37, 132.

Cerafagio,  money  of  Goa,  vi.  19.

Ceremonies  and  superstitions,  in
Russia,  II.  236,  265,  423,  428,  442  ;
used  in  drinking,  in  Guinea  (1557)
VI.  227.

Cerezo,  Gongalo,  of  Mexico,  friend
of  Robert  Tomson  (1556)  ix.  347;
and  the  statue  of  our  Lady  (1557)
IX.  351.

Cergis,  see  Kirghiz.

Cerigo  Island,  Menelaus,  King  of,
V.  250.

Cerkes  Mahomet,  Chaus,  v.  291.

Ceron,  see  Pepper.

Ceruto,  Tiberio,  Captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Cespedes,  Don  Francisco  de,  re-
turned from England (1589) vi.

514-

Ceuskalon,  or  Ceuskala,  in  India,
description  of,  iv.  423.

Ceuta  in  Barbary,  iv.  367,  368;
English  merchants  aid  the  Portu-
guese conquest  of  (1415)  vi.  121;
conquered  by  the  Portuguese,
viii.  127.

Ceuxima,  Omurandono,  Lord  of,  xi.
425; castle  built  in  (1591)  xi.  427,

Cevola,  in  America,  vii.  170,  viii.
450,  IX.  125,  307;  Friar  Marco  de
Niga's  voyage  to  (1539)  ix.  125-
144,  148 ;  distance  from  Vacupa
to,  IX.  129;  description,  ix.  131,
136,  142  ;  named  El  Nuevo  Regno
de  S.  Francisco,  by  Friar  Marco
de  Niga  (1539)  143 ;  treatment  of
Stephen  Dorantez  by  people  (1539)

IX.  139 ;  his  death,  305 ;  called
Zuny  by  Indians,  198;  Antonio  da
Espejo  at  (1582)202  ;  Captain  Alar-
chon's  interpreter's  description  of
the  Indians  of  (1540)  ix.  299;  Turks
in,  IX.  300;  Captain  Alarchon's
information  about  (1540)  ix.  303;
Spaniards  at,  ix.  307.

Ceylon,  iv.  420;  Friar  Odoric  at
(1330)  420;  pearl  fishery  at,  v.
395'  397;  description  of,  398;  cat's-
eyes  found  in,  399 ;  Caesar  Fred-
erick in  (1563)  441 ;  cotton  cloth
from  Sinnergan  in,  v.  485  ;  Raia,
King  of  (1583)  V.  509;  court
etiquette,  v.  500  f. ;  products,  v,
501;  pearls,  v.  504;  cinnamon
found  in,  vi.  24 ;  monsoon  from
Goa  to,  31 ;  the  Edward  Bonaven-
ture  Sit  (1592)  400;  discovered  by
Portuguese,  viii.  128 ;  the  Edward
Bonaventure  at  (1592)  x.  196;
Portuguese  possession,  487.

Chaccalla,  Bay  of,  Thomas  Caven-
dish at  (1587)  XI.  322.

Chadan,  Jagatai's  son,  i.  74,  167.

Chaday,  or  Charday,  English  trade
in.  III.  94,  109;  English  merchants
in, 117.

Chagres  river,  near  Panama,  used
for  carrying  goods  (1570)  ix.  368;
Andrew  Barker  at  (1576)  x.  85;
a  danger  to  Panama,  x.  94,  151;
Venta  Cruz  near,  x.  144 ;  forti-
fied (1587) X. 151; latitude of,

X.  155 ;  merchandise  from  Spain
carried  up  (1587)  x.  155.

Chaimawimini,  great  river,  x.  492.
Chaimeragoro  river,  x.  494.
Chalangi, Ruvia, a dye found in,

VI.  25.
Chaldea,  see  Irak  Arabi.
Challaine, money of Malacca, vi.

22.
Challica  Ostriva,  islands,  iii.  19.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Chaloner, Sir Thomas, voyage to

Algiers  (1541)  v.  70-71.
Chamberlaine,  Edward,  merchant  in

Alexandria,  death  (1584)  v.  288.
Chamberlaine,  Richard,  assistant  to

the  Muscovy  Company,  11.  307,  iii.

39-
Chamberlaine, Robert, licensed to

trade  in  Russia  (1592)  iii.  440.
Chamberlaine, Thomas, on board

the  Michael  (1577)  vii.  285.
Chamberlayne,  John,  and  Augustin

de Villanueva's treason against

Sir  John  Hawkins  (1568)  ix.  452.
Chainesis,  or  Africa, vii. 264.
Chamlets, rate  of, in Chios (1569)

V. 114.
Chamois  leather,  made  in  New  Spain

(1572)  IX.  393.
Chamoyce,  see  Chamois  leather.
Champa,  city  In  China,  latitude  of,

XI.  381.
Champeche,  see  Campeachy.
Chanceler, Nicholas, merchant, iii.

255-

Chanceler,  Richard,  see  Chancellor.

Chancellor,  Richard,  In  the  Northern
Ocean,  i.  xl. ;  his  voyage  to  Mos-
cow, xliv;  description  of  the
Golden  Castle,  1. ;  captain  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
206,  2oq,  213;  on  Russia,  224-
238;  his  voyage  of  discovery,  239,
242,  246,  247;  his  reception  by
the  Emperor  of  Russia,  255 ;
Emperor  of  Russia's  letters  and,
271;  grand  pilot  (1555)  286,  291,
351;  his  expedition  to  Russia,
279 ;  privileges  granted  to,  280 ;
Queen  Mary's  letter  and,  282;
death  of,  352,  379;  pilot  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure,  iii.  331  ;
drowned  off  the  coast  of  Scotland,
334;  in  Roger  Bodenham's  ex-
pedition to  Chios  (1551)  V.  76;  and
Sebastian  Cabot,  vi.  172 ;  his  dis-
covery of  S.  Nicholas  in  Moscovy,
VII.  164,  XII.  22,  23,  97.

Chancellor,  Russian,  disgrace  of,
on  Sir  Jerome  Bowes'  account,  in.
478;  of  the  Grand  Signior,  func-
tions of,  VI.  66.

Chancelor,  Nicholas,  sent  to  Russia
(1560)  II.  409

Chancelour,  see  Chancellor.
Chancery  of  Puerto  Rico,  discoveries
of Juan Martinez, seen in, x.

359-
Chancewell  of  London,  the,  voyage

of, to Canada (1597) viii. 166;

lost by the Hopewell, viii. 166 ;

cast  away  and  pillaged  on  Cape

Breton (1597) viii. 172; Charles

Leigh  exacts  restitution  for,  viii.

174.
Chandeau, market in Bengal, v.

483-
Chandeler,  John,  In  Virginia  (1585)

viii.  317.
Changlae, the, see Cangle, people

of.
Changle,  see  Cangle.
Channel, English, the Armada in

the  (1588)  IV.  210.
Channel, old, mentioned In the

Ruttler,  X.  301,  304.
Chanyl, Oktai  Khan  and,  i. 143.
Chaplains  in  the  fleets,  11. 199.
Chaplin Bay, Charles Leigh at,

VIII. 166, 181.
Chapman, George, '  De _Guiana

Carmen epicum  ' by (1596) xii.

97-
Chapman, John and  Alice, settlers

in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.  403.
Chapman,  Laurence,  his  voyage  Into

Persia  (1569)  in. 136; at  Kazvin

and  Tiflls, 137; at  Ghllan, 141;

granted Persian privileges, 145 ;

death, 153 ; Persian trade and,

213-

Chapman,  William,  mariner  on  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.

Chappell,  Bennet,  In  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Chappell,  John,  loses  Russian  privi-
leges (1569)  III.  118;  English  mer-
chants' goods  in  Russia  and  (1591)
427; goods  confiscated,  433.

Chapt,  Cape  du.  In  Ramea,  viii.
152.

Chare  SIbersky,  Emperor  of  Siberia
(1584)  III.  343.

Charente,  river.  In  Florida,  dis-
covered by  Captain  Ribault,  viii.
460.

Charges  from  Aleppo  to  Goa,  vr.
23-24.

I

INDEX

Chari,  nation  on  the  Shurinama,  x.
492.

Charibes,  see  Caribs.

Charing  Cross,  hill  in  West  England
or  West  Frisland,  vii.  327.

Charlemagne  (742-814)  and  King
Offa,  I.  310  f.

Charles,  Captain,  and  Charles  Leigh
(1597)  VIII.  169 ;  claims,  and
treachery  of,  viii.  170.

Charles  V.,  Emperor,  vii.  187;
discoveries  under,  11.  164 ;  and
Peter  Read  at  Tunis  (1538)
V.  69;  his  voyage  to  Algiers
(1541)  v.  70,  71 ;  meets  Ferdi-
nand at  Landeck,  v.  321;  and
Alphonso  Ulloa,  and  the  north-
west passages,  vii.  187;  nnd
Charles  of  Chiquola,  Indian,  viu.
467;  and  Don  Antonio  de  Men-
doza,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  ix.  115;
law  for  the  freedom  of  Indians
made  by,  ix.  388 ;  Dr  Leigh,  am-
bassador to  (1527)  X.  3;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  and  the  exploits
of,  X.  346.

Charles,  King  of  France,  and  John
Erigena  (858)  iv.  281.

Charles,  King  of  Sicily,  at  Tunis
(1270)  IV.  359.

Charles  VIlL,  King  of  France,  and
Bartholomew  Columbus  (1494)  vii.
140.

Charles  le  maigne,  see  Charle-
magne.

Charles  the  Great,  see  Charle-
magne.

Charles,  the,  of  the  French  fleet
(1591)  vm. 150.

Charlesburg  Royal,  Jacques  Cartier
at  (1540)  viii.  269.

Charles-Fort,  built  by  Captain
Ribault  (1562)  VIII.  471,  472;  gar-
rison of, VIII. 471-484.

Charlotta,  daughter  of  John,  King
of  Cyprus  (1470)  v. 125.

Chart  by  Dee,  given  to  Arthur  Pet
and  Charles  Jackman  (1580)  iii.
263 ;  of  Guiana  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x.  365,  385;  sea,
by  Jacques  Cartier  (1587)  viii.  273.

Charter,  of  Edward  I.,  i.  43,
46,  49 ;  of  England,  i.  45 ;
of Edward I. to the Cinque

Ports,  I.  293  f. ;  witnesses  of
Edward  I.'s  great,  i.  296,  338;
of  Henry  III.'s,  324;  Henry  III.
and  Edward  I.'s,  to  Cologne,  i.
323;  of  Lubeck  (1257)  i.  325;
Henry  III.  and  Edward  I.'s,  to
German  merchants,  i.  326 ;  Ed-
ward I.'s  General,  I.  333-339;
of  Edward  II..  I.  353;  of
Henry  IV.,  granted  to  English
of  Henry  IV.,  granted  to  English
merchants  (1404)  11.  108  f. ;  of
Edward  IV.,  to  English  mer-
chants (1462)  II.  147-158;  of  the
merchants  of  Russia  (1555)  n.
304-316.

Charts  by  Sebastian  Cabot,  vii.  171.

Charuas.  Bay  of,  or  Guanipa,  Cap-
tain Parker's  information  on
(1595) X. 340.

Chasteaux,  see  Castles.

Chastillion,  see  ChAtillon.

Chatalet,  island,  in. 19.

Chatigan,  in  India,  v.  435,  v.  438;
products,  V.  439 ;  and  King  of
Aracan,  v.  483.

Chatillgn,  admiral  of  France,  and
James  Morgues  (1587)  viii.  440;
and  Captain  John  Ribault  (1562)
VIII.  457 ;  and  Captain  Ribault's
men  left  in  Florida  (1562)  ix.  i ;
his  letter  to  Laudonniere  (1565)  ix.

85-
Chatterton,  Ralph,  merchant  on  the

Bona  Esperanza,  11.  212.
Chaucer, Geoffrey, i. Iv. ; the

'Knight's Prologue' by, 397;

quotation from, xii. 92.
Chaul, cities of, description by

Caesar Frederick (1563) v. 378;

by  Ralph  Fitch  (1583)  v.  463,  470,

503; products, v. 378 f., 470;

Galangals  found  in,  vi.  26; and

Monsoons,  vi.  28,  30.
Chaunis  Temoatan,  mine  of  copper

in,  VIII.  328 ; opinion  of  Youghan

on the copper of, viii. 332 ;

Master  Lane  and  the  hills  of,  ix.

113-
Chauntenay,  Peter  de,  his  voyage  to

Syria (1240) iv. 352.
Chaus,  eaten  by  a  crocodile,  v.  337.
Chaveau, Martin, wounded  by  the

Indians  of  Dominica  (1564)  ix.  4.

183

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Chavez,  Alonzo  and  Hieronymo  de,
on seamanship, i. xxxv.

Chavez,  Hieronymo  or  Geronimo  de,
Spanish  Professor  of  Navigation,
XII. 80.

Chawanook,  city  on  the  Nomopana
river,  viii.  306 ;  north  west  pos-
session of  the  English  in  Virginia,
strength  of  (1585)  viii.  322 ;
Menatonon,  King  of,  and  Ralph
Lane, viii. 324; river of, viii.

325.  332-
Chazza,  money  of  Malacca,  vi.  22.
Chebe  Navoloche,  Stephen  Borough

and  (1557)  II.  371.
Checherebiche,  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston

at  (1595)  X.  223.
Che-de-Bois, see  Cheduba.
Cheduba,  Spanish  ships  at,  chasing

Captain  Gourgues  (1568)  ix.  no.
Cheesman, William, merchant on

the  Edward  Cotton  (1583)  vi.  408;

advice  to, vi, 410.
Chefe  de  Boys, Roberval  at  (1542)

VIII.  283.
Cheinie, Richard, servant to the

Muscovy Company, iii. 38 ; on

the  second  voyage  to  Persia  (1563)

40.
Cheinies, Sebastian Cabot's geo-
graphical tables  at,  vii.  194.
Che-Kiang,  third  shire  of  China,  vi.

295.  350-
Chelim, fifth shire of China, vi.

295-

Chelsey,  Cuthbert,  manner  of  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  213.

Chemaccus,  King,  Vasques  Nunnes
de  Valboa  and,  viii.  124.

Chemin,  John  du,  faithful  to  Cap-
tain Laudonnlere  in  Fort  Caroline
(1565)  IX.  96.

Chenchi,  on  the  Chinese  frontier,
description  of,  vi. 324.

Chenonceau  river  in  Florida,  dis-
covered by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)
VIII.  472.

Chepanoc,  Indian  town  in  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  322.

Chepstow  boat,  crew  of,  saved  by
the  Hercules  (1586)  vi. 39.

Chepstow, Earl  of,  see  Strangbow.

Chequeam,  or  Chequiam,  see  Che-
Kiang.

Cherbourg,  Monville  de  Hage  near,
XI.  384;  Bountillier  of,  his  report
concerning  Eldorado,  x.  440.

Cherchisea,  town  with  forty
churches,  v.  324.

Chere,  La,  Captain  Albert's  ill-
treatment  (1562)  viii.  482;  death,
486.

Cheremisi,  see  Cheremisses,  land
of.

Cheremisses, Tartar  tribe  of  two  sorts,
III,  399;  land  of  the,  11.  452,  vii.
177;  source  of  the  Yug  in,  418;
Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.  196.

Cheremizes,  see  Cheremisses.

Cheremizzi,  see  Cheremisses,  land
of.

Cherente  river,  see  Charente.

Cherilland,  see  Karelia.

Chermisin,  Evan,  Tartar  merchant
in  Russia,  in.  42.

Chernigov,  conquered  province  of
Russia, III. 359.

Cherrepe,  xi.  361 ;  latitude  of,  xi.
349 ; anchorage  at,  xi,  372.

Cherry,  Francis,  Prince  Boris
Feodorowich's  envoy  to  Sir
Jerome  Horsey  (1586)  iii.  347;
bearer  of  letters  from  the  Emperor
of  Russia,  430 ;  and  William
TurnbuU's  inheritance,  433;  the
letter  from  Queen  Elizabeth,  en-
trusted to,  437 ;  licensed  to  trade
in  Russia,  free  from  custom,
440.

Cherubin,  the,  Robert  Flicke's  skiff
(1591)  VII.  57;  in  a  storm  off
Flores  Island,  vii.  58.

Cherubin,  the,  of  Lime,  at  Yoala
(1591)  VII. 95.

Chesapeake,  Bay  of,  colonising  in-
tended in,  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1587)  VIII.  391.

Chesepian,  tribe.  Northern  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  321;  allies  of  Ralph
Lane,  viii.  341.

Chesepiok, see  Chesapeake.

Chess played in Russia (1568) iii.

133-
Chester,  Brian,  mariner  of  the  Bona

Confidentia,  11.  214.
Chester,  Charles,  son  of  Dominic  of

Bristol, in Teneriffe (1574) x.

82.

184

INDEX

Chester,  John,  son  of  Sir  William,
in  Sir  John  Hawkins's  voyage  to
Florida  (1565)  x.  63.

Chester,  Sir  William,  11.  362;  joint
owner  of  the  Primrose  and  the
John  Evangelist,  378 ;  governor  of
the  Muscovy  Company,  iii.  39;
Persian  privilege  granted  to  (1567)
64;  Russian  licence  granted  to,
93,  109;  and  Persian  trade,  212;
his  voyage  to  Guinea  (1562)  vi.
258 ;  and  the  proposed  voyage  to
Guinea  (1564)  vi.  262.

Chester,  Earl  of,  see  Glanvile,
Ranulph.

Chester,  John,  constable  of,  his
voyage  to  the  Hoi)'-  Land  (12 18)

IV.  349.
Chester,  Thomas  de, and  Prussian

pirates,  11.  60.
Chests  of  Roan,  trade  of,  in  Guinea

(1577)  VI.  252.
Chetula, Indian town, tributary  to

the King of Spain (1568) ix.

363-

Cheu, name of inferior cities in

China,  vi.  351.
Cheven, John, settler in Virginia

(1587)  viii. 403.
Cheyne,  Vincent,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII. 318.
Chialo, Christian  country  in  India,

V.  395-
Chiametla, inland town in New

Spain,  XI.  323.

Chiametla  Islands,  see  Ciametlan.

Chian  or  Chaien,  High  Commis-
sioner or  Visitor  in  China,  vi.
296 ;  duties  of,  vi.  302 ;  Lord
Chief  Justice,  vi.  310,  363.

Chiana,  river  and  bay,  xi.  6.

Chianso,  weight  of  Ormuz,  vi.
14.

Chiapa,  John  Chilton  in  (1570)  ix.

369-
Chiapes, King, Vasques Nunnes

and, VIII. 124.
Chiavez, Alonso de, grand pilot

(1586)  XI.  448,  453.
Chiavez, Graviel de, in charge of

Pio and Huehuatlan towns, ix.

469.
Chibe Navolocke, S. Nicholas to,

III.  69.

XII  185

Chichester,  Anthony  Watson,  bishop
of  (1596-1605)  I.  liv. ;  and  Richard
Hakluyt,  xii.  76.

Chichester,  Ralph  Neville,  bishop
of,  witness  of  Henry  III.'s
charter,  i.  324.

Chichilticale, '  latitude  of,  Vasquez
de  Coronado  at  (1540)  ix.  149;
Indians  of,  their  treason  against
Stephen  Doranez  (1540)  ix.  162.

Chichimecas  Indians,  Andrew  de
Campo's  journey  through  the
country  of  (1540)  ix.  166;  one
taken  prisoner  by  Captain  Ulloa
(1539)  IX.  217;  Juan  Castillo  and
the,  on  land  (1539)  ix.  234;  attack
on  Captain  Ulloa  (1539)  ix.  236.

Chichimici  Indians,  attack  of,  on
Miles  Philips  and  the  English
sailors  (1568)  ix.  410.

Chidley,  voyage  of,  to  the  Isle  of
Trinidad,  vi.  403.

Chidley,  Cape,  discovered  by  John
Davis  (1587)  VII.  421.

Chidley,  John,  fleet  of,  in  the  Strait
of  Magellan  (1589)  x.  170;  voyage
of,  in  the  Delight  (1589)  xi.  381-

384-
Chiego, Mount, near  the Strait  of

Gibraltar,  vii. 124.
Chiernisa, Henry  Austell at (1585)

V.  323-

Chikino,  Turkish  monev,  v.  294,
428.

Chilao,  pearl  fishing  off  the  coast
of,  v.  395 ; shoals  near,  v.  398.

Chilenso,  Friar  Odoric  in  (1330)  iv.
427.

Chili,  province  of,  description,  xi.
274 ;  towns  in,  built  by  Don  Pedro
de  Valdivia,  xi.  276;  subdued
by  Don  Garcia  de  Mendoza,  xi.
277 ;  coast,  errors  committed  in
maps  about  the,  xi.  1 12  ;  described
by  Lopez  Vaz,  xi.  273 ;  soundings
on,  XI.  355.

Chilili,  King,  vassal  of  King  Utina
(1564)  IX.  21.

Chilily,  Captain  Laudonniere's  en-
voys at  (1565)  IX.  54.

Chilsiztlahuaca,  subject  to  Com-
astlahuaca,  ix.  472.

Chiltham  Manor,  in  Gloucestershire,
I.  45-

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Chilton,  John,  S.  Benito  of,  shown
in  Mexico  Church,  ix.  350;  dis-
course on  New  Spain  (1568)  ix.
360;  ill  in  Panuco  (1572)  ix.  371;
and  the  Indians,  ix.  372.

Chilton,  Leonard,  captain  of  a  Span-
ish ship  (1555)  IX.  341.

Chimaera,  Mount,  in  Lycia,  iv.  26,
118.

Chimera,  Cape,  in  Albania,  v.  80.

China,  11.  163  ;  or  Upper  India,  Friar
Odoric  in,  iv.  422  ;  idol  worship  in,
423;  Portuguese  trade  (1567)  v.
405 ;  products,  v.  406 ;  King  of.
Queen  Elizabeth's  letter  to  (1583)
V.  451 ;  trade  with  Malacca,  v.  498;
with  Manilla,  xi.  287;  King  of,  v.
499 ;  description  and  products,  vi.
25,  26,  27,  32,  295-327,  348-377,
407 ;  aliens  forbidden  to  enter,  vii.
195 ;  the  Portuguese  at  the  ports
of,  VIII. 129, X.  487 ; climate  of,

VIII.  384;  ships  thought  to  come
from, seen from Quivira (1540)

IX.  166 ;  map  of  the  coasts
of,  engraving  of,  ix.  336;
products  brought  to  New  Spain
(1572)  IX.  392,  x.  165;  pre-
sents to  the  King  of  Spain  (1570)
IX.  459 ;  Benjamin  Wood  bound
for  (1596)  XI.  2;  map  of,  brought
home  by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1588)
XI.  378 ;  Emperor  of,  letter  from
Queen  Elizabeth  to  (1596)  xi.  417-
419,  419-421 ;  Quabacondono's  vow
to  conquer  (1590)  xi.  422,  423;
kingdom  of  Korea  tributary  to,  xi.
426.

Chinas,  land  of,  see  China.

Chincha.  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1587)  XI. 309.

Chinchon,  Santy  of,  description  of,
to  Captain  Gualle  (1584)  ix.  333  f.

Chinese,  urbanity  of,  vi.  370.

Chingalayes, see  Cingalese.

Chingay,  Kaiuk's  secretary,  i.  173,
176.

Chingis  Cham,  see  Jenghiz  Khan.

Chinzu,  graduates  of  the  third  de-
gree in  China,  vi.  361.

Chioggia,  Genoese  war  of,  vir.  446.

Chios,  Jewish  spy  of  Soiyman  in
(1522)  V.  3  ;  and  the  brigantines  at,
14; English  trade  (c.  1511)  v.  62;

voyage  of  the  Holy  Cross  to  (1534)
V.  67 ;  of  the  Matthew  Gonson
(1535)  V.  68;  Roger  Bodenham's
voyage  to  (1550)  v.  71-76,  168;
trade,  Caspar  Campion  on  (1569)
V.  Ill;  products,  v.  113;  super-
seded by  Alexandria,  v.  114;  taken
by  Piali  Pasha  (1566)  v.  122;  Bey
of,  and  William  Harborne  (1583)
v.  250;  commandment  for  (1584)
V.  286 ;  mastic  found  in,  vi.  26 ;
description  and  products  of,  42 ;
Richard  Wrag  at  (1594) 107.

Chiozza,  surrender  of  the  Genoese
fleet  at  (1380)  xii.  3

Chipanama  river,  x.  494.

Chiparemai,  Caribbean  name  of  the
headless  men,  x.  465.

Chiparepare,  port  of  Putijma  in
Warapana,  x.  417.

Chipariparo,  town  of  the  Ecawini,
X.  494.

Chipiona,  town  of  Andalusia,  near
S. Lucar,  x.  324.

Chipping,  Edward,  in  Virginia
(1585) vm. 318.

Chiquola,  King  of  Florida  (1562)
VIII.  466.

Chiquola,  Charles  of,  and  Emperor
Charles  V.,  viii.  467.

Chircassi,  see  Circassia.

Chirkasses, see  Circassians.

Chirusta,  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg
of,  VI.  67.

Chisani,  in  Asia,  vii. 177.

Chitini,  pearl  experts,  v.  397.

Choanists,  tribe  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  326 ;  allies  of  Ralph  Lane,
vm.  339.

Chochenillo,  see  Cochineal.

Chochi  Indians  and  the  gold  of
Guiana,  x.  366.

Chome,  a  tent  in  Samoyeda,  11.  348.

Chomin  found  in  Bussorah,  vi.  25.

Chondery,  King  of  Serrepore,  v.
484.

Choniata,  Nicetas,  on  the  English
guard  of  the  Emperors  of  Con-
stantinople (1177)  IV.  31.1.

Chopra  (Copra  ?)  found  in  Cochin
and  Malabar,  vi.  25.

Choranca,  see  Corrensa.

Choranus,  ruler  in  South  Russia,  iii.
357-

i86

INDEX

Chos  Promontory,  in  Iceland,  iv.  lo,

99-
Chrim  Tartars, see  Crim.
Chrinisin  or  Chrymson,  a  silk  worm,

III.  401.
Christ  Church,  Oxford,  Hakluyt  at

(1570)  XII.  78.
Christ,  Persian  opinion  of,  iii.  160.
Christal,  see  Crystal.
Christening  of  an  Indian  by  Friar

Raimund  (1540)  ix.  265.
Christian III., King  of Denmark,

and Bishop Jonas Araesonius

(1525)  IV.  58,  157; and  the  Iceland
schools  (1588)  IV.  60,  159.

Christian  IV.,  King  of  Denmark,
(1593)  IV.  i.  89.

Christianity,  preaching  of,  in  savage
countries,  viii.  98;  advantages  to
savages  (1583)  viii.  119;  preached
to  Indians  of  Virginia  (1586)  viii.
379,  443,  IX.  294;  conversion  of
Indians  of  Jalisco  to,  ix. 118.

Christians  feared  by  Indians  (1540)
IX.  307  f.

Christina,  daughter  of  Edward  Iron-
side's son,  I.  25.

Christopher,  young  Japanese  taken
prisoner  by  Thomas  Cavendish
(1587)  XI.  327.

Christopher,  the,  of  Cadiz,  cargo  of

(1526)  VI. 124.

Christopher,  the,  voyage  of,  to
Guinea  (1577)  vi.  231  ;  at  Cape
Verde,  vi.  237;  fight  with  the
Portuguese,  vi.  240 ;  at  Weamba,
VI.  242 ;  at  Mowre,  vi.  245 ;  loss
of,  VI.  251.

Christopher,  the,  of  Dartmouth,
Andrew  Barker's  ship  sent  to
Teneriffe  (1574)  x. 82.

Christopher,  the,  lost  and  found  at
the  Cape  of  Joy,  (1578)  xi.  107.

Christopher  Campion,  the,  and  the
Levant  trade  (c. 15 11)  v.  62.

Chronicles,  manuscript,  of  Russia,
II.  185;  of  Iceland,  iv.  19,  51,  109,
149;  of  Genoa,  iv.  451;  Latin,
by  Thomas  Walsingham  (1415)  vi.
121 ;  on  Sebastian  Cabot,  by  Robert
Fabian,  vii.  154;  of  Spain,  by
Siculus  Marinaeus,  vii.  160;  Span-
ish, Montezuma's  speech  quoted
from  (c. 1520)  VIII. 109.

'  Chronicon Hierosolymitanum, '  iv.

294,  298,  299.
Chuli, Port  of. Sir Francis Drake

at,  XI.  262.
Chumpin,  lieutenant  general  of  the

King  of  China,  vi.  360,  363.
Church  Bells,  see  Bells.
Church, Christian, at Xauquin in

China (1583) vi. 375; in Pegu

(1587) VI. 386; in S. Helena

Island, description  of  (1588)  XI. 343.
Church, William, survivor of the

Toby  (1593)  VII.  129.
Churches  in  Russia,  11.  226,  254,  268,

346,  419,  422,  440; in  Jerusalem,

destroyed by Achim, Sultan of

Egypt,  IV.  292.
Churchman, Geoffrey, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  318.
Churchyard,  John,  pilot  of  the  pin-
nace," in John Davys 's third

voyage  (1587)  vii.  417.
Churl,  value  of,  v.  456.
Chursa,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

322.
Chus,  son  of  Cham,  vii.  264.
Chypanum, in Virginia, weirs of

(1585)  VIII.  327; Ralph  Lane  at,

VIII.  331.
Chyrinen,  see  Cyrenen.
Cia,  great  city  in  the  Cumanes,  ix.

197.
Ciametlan or Chiametlan Islands,

latitude, xi. 350; distance from

Cape de los Corrientes, 363;

anchorage, xi. 373; Thomas

Cavendish  at,  xi.  369.
Ciawani,  or  Seawano,  kingdom  of,

x.  207.
Ciawani, tribe  of  the  Tivitivas  In-
dians, X.  382,  423;  port  of  the,  x.

384; old pilot of Sir Walter

Raleigh  of  the,  x.  381 ; procures

relief to the expedition, x. 386;

dismissed and rewarded by Sir

Walter  Raleigh,  x.  392.
Cibo,  harbour  in  Cape  Breton,  viil.

174; Charles  Leigh's  landing  at

(1597)  VIII.  182.
Cibola,  see  Cevola.
Cibrilciman,  passage  of,  by  Manuel

Comnenus  (1177)  iv.  316.
Cicero, Marcus TuUius, tomb in

Zante,  v.  82.

C87

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Cicones,  petrifying  river  of  the,  iv.

37. 132.

Cicuic,  IX.  165 ;  description  of
natives  and  wild  animals  between,
and  Quivira,  ix.  167.

Ciemana,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
XI.  78.

Cienaga,  or  the  Fenne  del  Roreado,
in  Cartagena  Harbour,  x.  139.

Cieza,  Feliciano,  de  Carvalsho,
governor  of  Parajua,  letter  from,
to  Philip  II.  (1597)  XI.  64-72;  and
the  French  prisoner  (1596)  xi.  65 ;
and  Manuel  Mascarenhas,  xi.  66;
fight  between,  and  Frenchmen
allied  to  the  cannibals  of  Petiguar
(1597)  XI.  68;  and  the  friars  of
the  S.  Antony  Monastery  (1597)
XI.  70;  sentence  against,  by
the Father Custodio (1597) xi.

Cieza,  Pedro  de,  his  works  on  Peru,
X.  356;  religion  of  the  Ingas,
accounts  of,  by,  x.  424.

Cilicia, Alexandretta  in, vi. 94.

Cilician  Sea,  north  of  Cyprus,  v.
124.

Cilicium,  see  Cilician.

Cimbrians,  in  Italy  and  Greece  (b.c.)
IV.  269.

Cinnabar  or  dragon's  blood,  or  ver-
milion, VI.  165  ;  found  in  Sekotra,
26.

Cinnabaris,  see  Cinnabar.

Cinceo,  in  the  shire  of  Fo-kien,  vi.
295 ; wealth  of,  vi.  297.

Cingalese, v. 501.

Cinnamon  trees,  description  of,  by
Caesar  Frederick,  v.  399;  found
in  Ceylon,  vi.  24,  vi.  169 ;  of
China,  vi.  355  ;  in  Guiana,  x.  455  ;
in La Canela, xi. 241.

Cinoper,  see  Cinnabar.

Cinque  Ports,  Kentish,  i.  Ivi. ;  ship-
ping of  the,  I.  42-50;  warden,  295;
King  John  and  the  barons  of  the,
320.

Cinque  Llaguas,  or  Cinquo  Cha-
guas,  Las,  firing  and  sinking
of,  by  Captain  Nicholas  Downton
(1593)  VII.  118,  121 ;  fight  with  the
English  fleet  (1594)  vii.  119;
freight for King of Spain, vii.

Cion,  John  Locke's  description  of  a,
V.  90,  100.

Cipo,  river,  a  tributary  of  the
Occam, VIII.  306.

Ciprian,  Portuguese  ambassador  to
Morocco  (1589)  VI.  511.

Circassi,  see  Circassians.

Circassia,  war  in,  iii.  17;  discovered
by  Anthony  Jenkinson,  196 ;  Prin-
cess  of, 16 ; Teneruk, King of,

34-
Circassians, or  Cherkesses, i. 166;

soldiers  in  Russian  army,  11.  427,

344; description  of,  399.
Circle, Arctic, position of Iceland

outside  the, iv. 12, loi.
Circui, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

.323-
Circumnavigation of Sir Francis

Drake  (1577- 1578)  xi. 101-133.
Ciremissi,  see  Cheremisses,  land  of.
Cirion,  Port,  in  Pegu,  v.  428,  491 ;

Ralph  Fitch  at,  v.  486.
Cisterium,  see  Citeaux.
Citeaux,  France,  St.  Mary's  Abbey,

I.  28.
Cities,  seven,  voyage  of  Friar  Marco

de Niga  to  the  (1539) ix. 130  f.

135 ; hidden  by  Indian  witchcraft,

IX. 382.
Citron Island, Edward Fenton at

(1583)  XI.  190.
Citta  nova,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V.  322.
Ciudad  del  Don  Philippe,  see  Ciudad

del  Rey  Philippe.
Ciudad  del  Rey  Philippe,  La,  men-
tioned in  Ruttier,  xi.  90;  built  by

Pedro  Sarmiento,  in  the  Straits  of

Magellan, xi, 271 ; Thomas

Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  298.
Civet-cats,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)

viii.  356.
Civita Vecchia, Tom Stukeley at,

XII. 102.
Civitas  Palmarum,  see  Canary.
Civola,  see  Cevola.
Clairvaux, in France, abbot of,

Richard I.'s letter to (1193) iv.

335-  .
Clanchinoltepec, Indian town, S.
Augustine  Monastery  in  (1572)  ix.

370-
Clara  valle,  see  Clairvaux.

188

INDEX

Clare,  Richard  de  (Strongbow),  Earl
of  Pembroke,  i.  32,  34-

Clare, Cape,  see  Clear.

Clare,  Richard  de,  Earl  of  Pem-
broke (d.  1 176),  in  Ireland,  I.  32.

Clarke,  Captain  John,  of  Sir  Richard
Grenville's  voyage  to  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  310,  316,

Clarke,  Captain,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Capuri
river  (1595)  x.  380 ;  sent  to  Capure-
pana  (1595)  x.  403.

Clarke,  Edward,  sent  to  Arrash,  iii.
34;  sent  on  mission,  37;  and  the
third  Persian  voyage  (1565)  44;
death  of,  45.

Clarke,  John,  in  the  Moscow  fire
(1571)  III.  169.

Clarke,  Richard,  master  of  the  De-
light (1583)  VIII.  46,  68;  account,
VIII,  85;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert
and,  VIII.  85 ;  and  Edward  Headly,
VIII.  86 ;  S.  Laurence  river,  in
Newfoundland,  discovered  by,
VIII. 88.

Clarke,  J^oger,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Clarocke,  John,  mariner  of  the  Bona
Confidentia,  11.  214.

Claudia,  mother  of  Francis  L,  King
of  France  (1524)  viii.  431.

Claudia  Island,  discovered  by  John
de  Verrazzano  (1524)  viii.  431.

Clawsten, Simon, of Rostock, 11.

79-
Cleanliness on Cabot's ships, 11.

199.
Clear,  Cape,  iv.  230; Captain  Fro-

bisher's fleet  at (1578) vii. 325;

the  Sunshine  at  (1586)  vii.  413.
Clefs, Erasmus, in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  318.
Clement V., Pope, and Anthony

Beck, patriarch of Jerusalem

(1305) IV. 370.
Clement, Maurice, governor  of  the

English  hospital  in  Rome  (1577)  v.

166.
Clement,  William,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Clement, William, gunner on the

Content  (1591)  x. 183.
Clements, Joseph, voyage of, to

Constantinople  (1575)  v. 168.

Clere  Cape,  see  Clear.

Clermont  in  Auvergne,  Council  of
(1096)  IV.  293.

Clesinine,  And.reas  Petrowich,  comp-
troller of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
III.  414.

Cley,  ships  from  (1395- 1398)  11.  64  f.

Cliff  or  Barranca,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  XI.  98.

Cliffe,  Edward,  voyage  of  John
Winter,  with  Sir  Francis  Drake,
written  by  (1577)  xi.  148-162.

Clifford,  George,  Earl  of  Cumberland
(1558-1603)  I.  xxviii. ;  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  217;  and
Christopher  Lyster  (1586)  vi.
294; his  ship the Dragon (1591)

VI.  466 ;  portrait  of,  vii.  iii. ;
voyage  to  the  Azores  (1589)  vii.
I ;  ultimatum  to  Fayal,  vii.  6 ;
takes  Fayal,  vii.  7;  sufferings,
vii.  26;  and  Captain  Lister's
death,  vii.  30 ;  lands  at  Falmouth,

VII.  30 ;  exploits  of,  by  John
Huighen  van  Linschoten  (1589-
91)  VII.  62-87;  ^t  S.  Marie,  vii.
65 ;  at  Graciosa,  vii.  66 ;  prizes,
VII.  67 ;  English  prisoners,  vii.
70 ;  ships  chasing  Spanish  car-
racks  (1592)  VII.  no;  (1593)  118;
and  Lopez  Vaz  at  the  River  Plate
(1572)  x.  75 ;  Spanish  fort  in
Puerto  Rico  taken  by  (1598)  x,
162;  voyage  of  (1586-1587)  written
by  John  Sarracoll,  xi.  202-227 ;
ships  of,  at  Seal  Island  (1587)  xi.
249; voyages  by,  xii.  67.

Clifford,  Roger  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  296.

Clifford,  Sir  Alexander,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Clifford,  Sir  Conyers,  of  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596),  member  of  the
council  of  war,  iv.  241 ;  at  Puente
de  Suaco,  250.

Clifford,  Sir  Nicholas,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  wounded  at  Puerto
Rico  (1595)  X.  230.

Clifford,  the  bark,  Christopher
Lister,  captain  of  (1586)  xi.  202.

Clifton,  Will,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1555)  11.  307.

Climate,  extremes  of,  ii.  178 ;  of
Africa,  vi.  176 ;  of  Japan,  vi,  333 ;

[89

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  Benin,  vi,  457,  465 ;  of  Guiana,
X.  426,  XI.  13 ;  of  Maio  Island,  xi.
104 ; at  the  Equinoctial,  xi. 153.

Clitarchus  on  the  Mandri,  a  people
of  India,  iv.  84, 189.

Clito  Edgar,  son  of  Edward,  Ed-
mund Ironside's  son,  i.  25.

Clodi,  people  of  the  east  of  Africa,
VI. 169.

Cloth,  customs  on,  Edward  I.'s
charter,  i.  337 ;  Prussian  law
about,  II.  52 ;  heavy  customs  on,
74  f. ;  Flemish,  116,  125;  Dutch,
277  f. ;  made  in  Russia  (1557)
Poland  and  Lithuania,  383 ;  Lon-
don, in  demand  in  Persia,  iii.  55 ;
Armenians  and,  57;  Shah  of
Persia  and,  67 ;  for  export,  90 ;
markets,  148;  Persian  dyeing-  of,
249 ;  English,  best  in  the  world
(1582)  V.  232  ;  Richard  Hakluyt's
directions  about,  v,  231,  233;
painted,  made  in  S.  Thomas,  in
India,  v.  402 ;  sold  in  Pegu,  v.
427,  491 ;  cotton,  made  in  Ben-
ares, V.  476;  in  Patna,  v.  481;
in  Sinnergan,  v.  485 ;  Tellami,
made  in  Coromandel,  vi.  31 ;  made
of  the  bark  of  trees,  vi.  184 ;  trade
in  Guinea  (1556)  vi.  207,  209,  224,
252;  for  Benin  (1589)  vi.  456,  467;
from  Benin,  vi.  457;  English  trade
in  America  (1583)  viii.  140;  worn
in  China,  x. 165.

Clothworkers,  master  and  wardens
of  the.  III.  90.

Cloves,  found  in  the  Moluccas,  Ter-
nate,  Amboyna,  vi.  24.

Clovesten,  Simon,  Hanse  messenger,
II.  55.

Clusen,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Clusius,  Carolus,  and  the  importa-
tion of  tulips,  v.  241.

Cneius  Pompeius,  example  of,  iv.
2,  90.

Coaca  Indians,  and  the  gold  of
Guiana,  x.  366.

Coaches,  in  Pegu,  or  Delingeyes,  v.
486.

Coadera  Cape,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
at  (1596)  x.  272.

Coama  near  Cevola,  ix.  300;  Cap-
tain Alarchon  at  (1540)  ix.  314.

Coanawini  river,  mentioned  by  Laur-
ence Keymis  (1596)  x.  454.

Coanchefu,  see  Canton.

Coansi,  see  Kwang-si.

Coantum,  see  Canton.

Coasts  to  be  described  by  English
discoverers  (1588)  iii.  123;  maps
of  newly  discovered,  260.

Cobre,  Sierras  del,  in  Cuba,  S.  lago
harbour  at,  x.  285 ;  in  second  Rut-
tier,  X.  313.

Cocahulapa,  a  mansion  of  Ometepee,
IX.  467.

Coche  Califay,  Keeper  of  the  Seal  in
Persia,  iii.  145.

Coche  Island,  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's
captures on (1595) x. 216.

Cocheneal,  see  Cochineal.

Cochin,  lading  port  for  Portugal,  v.
381 ;  Caesar  Frederick's  voyage  to
(1567)  V.  390,  412;  description,  v.
392-394 ; Ralph  Fitch  at  (c. 1583)

V.  501 ;  King  of,  v.  502  ;  King  of,
and  the  custom  on  horses,  vi.  16;
weight,  measure,  and  money,  vi.
21;  pepper  gawrie,  etc.,  vi.  24;
wild  sandal,  vi.  25 ;  folium  indi-
cum,  VI.  27;  Monsoon,  vi.  31;
Friar  Peter  at  (1587)  vi.  385;  dis-
covered by  the  Portuguese,  viil.
128.

Cochin-China,  aloes  trade  in,  v.
407,  504 ;  discovered  before  China,

VI.  315;  near  China,  vi.  324;
port  of,  XI.  381.

Cochineal  found  in  West  Indies,  vi.
27;  in  captured  ships,  vii.  59,  60,
66 ;  in  Mexico,  ix.  358,  363 ;  at
Puebla  de  los  Angeles,  ix.  360 ;  in
Honduras,  ix.  367 ;  in  Tlaxcalla,
IX. 380.

Cochinilla,  see  Cochineal.

Cocke,  Abraham,  captain  of  the
Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  (1592)

VII.  112.

Cocke,  Abraham,  and  John  Noyer
(1595)  XI.  53.

Cocke,  Abraham,  formerly  of  the
Minion  of  London,  and  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  xi.  208.

Cocke,  captain  of  the  Roebuck  (1591)
XI.  389 ;  at  the  taking  of  Santos
(1591)  XI.  390;  distress  of,  xi.
391-

190

INDEX

Cocke, William, of the Solomon

(1584)  V.  281.
Cockeram, Martin, of Plymouth,

hostage for the King of Brazil

(1530-32)  XI.  24.
Cocknedge, Henry, English mer-
chant at  Moscow  (1575)  III.  197.
Cocks,  John,  gunner  on  the  Edward

Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  213.
Cocks,  Richard,  unlicenced  English

merchant  in  Russia  (1591)  iii.  426.
Coco, Barnardino, Captain, made

slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.
Coco,  see  Palms.
Cocoa, taken at Aguatulco by

Thomas  Candish  (1587)  xi. 320.
Cocos-trees,  see  Palms.
Cocten,  see  Cocthen.
Cocthen, Oktai's  son,  i. 74, 150.
Cod  fishing  by  the  Moonlight's  crew

(1586) VII. 406; by  John Davis,

VII.  443; in  Newfoundland  (1578)

VIII.  10 ;  off  Cape  Race,  viii.  62 ;
near  Cape  Breton  (1593)  viii.  160;
near  Assumption  Island  (1594)
VITI. 164.

Codo,  measure  of  Ormuz,  vi. 15.

Coelio,  Duarte,  captain  in  Pernam-
buco,  XI.  249.

Coelus,  King  of  Britain,  iv.  271.

Cogi,  Ali,  captain  of  the  King  of
Samorin,  v.  503.

Cog,  the,  of  Norway,  i.  322.

Cogge,  the,  of  Hull,  11.  61.

Coholia,  tops  of  the  sugar  canes,  vi.
128.

Coia,  university  in  Japan,  vi.  331 ;
story  of  founder, vi. 339.

Coiat,  the  Nestorian,  i.  261,  263,
264  f.

Coimbra,  Bishop  of,  and  Thomas
Stukeley  (1578)  vi.  294.

Coin,  Shah  of  Persia's  offering  to
Mahomet  in  English  (1569)  iii.
152;  of  S.  Domingo  (1555)  ix.
343-

Coins,  weights  and  measures,  used
in  Russia,  by  John  Hasse,  11.  273,
294 ;  tested  by  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany_(i557)  383;  in  Bokhara,  471;
English  merchants  in  Russia  and
their  own,  in.  116;  commemora-
tive, of  Zeeland  (1588)  iv.  232;  of
Holland,  iv.  233.

Coirama  river,  tributary  of  the  Ori-
noco river,  x.  420.

Cola,  in  Africa,  Anthony  Jenkinson
at.  III. 195.

Colan  or  Asses,  I.  281.

Colchester,  ships  from,  in  Edward
ni.'s  fleet,  I.  299;  ship  from
(1398)  II. 62.

Cole,  Alexander,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Cole,  Humphrey,  preacher,  member
of  Sir  Jerome  Bowes,  embassy
(1583)  III.  316,  323,  464.

Cole,  James,  musician,  of  the  Sun-
shine of  London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Cole,  Master,  and  the  second  voyage
to  Barbary  (1552)  vi. 138.

Cole,  Peter,  of  Zeeland,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  67.

Colein,  see  Cologne.

Colem,  see  Cologne.

Coleman,  Robert,  death  of,  in  Roan-
oake  (1590)  VIII.  416.

Colgoieve,  see  Kolguev.

Colima,  see  S.  lago  de  Colima.

Collier,  James,  condemned  to  the
galleys  by  the  Inquisition  in
Mexico  (1575)  IX.  428;  seeks  for
Panuco,  joins  Anthony  Godard
(1568)  IX.  456.

Collins,  David,  called  in  council  by
Robert  Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.

CoUom,  town,  11.  449.

Colm,  devastated  by  infidels,  11.  2.

Colmack,  see  Kalmucks.

Colmagro,  see  Kholmogory.

Colman,  Thomas,  and  Mrs,  settlers
in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.  402,  403.

Colmax,  and  Anthony  Jenkinson,  on
the  north-west  passage,  vii.  183.

Colmogorod,  see  Kholmogory.

Colmagro,  see  Kholmogory.

Colobone's  journey  to  Lampas(i558)

"•  394-
Cologne II. 129; Tartars'  intended

voyage  to,  i.  54; Henry  III.  and

merchants  of,  323 ; bishop  of,  in

Prussia,  11.  3  ; Laurence  Aldersey

at,  II.  202,  214.
Colombo,  city  of,  in  Ceylon  Island,

V.  398;  Portuguese  fort  in  Ceylon,

V.  500.
Colon,  see  Columbus.
Colona  and  the  Tartars,  i.  86.

191

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Colonia,  see  Cologne.

Colonising,  advice  about,  by  Richard

Hakluyt  (1578)  vii.  244-250; plan

for, of Sidney  and Raleigh, xii.

86.
Colonna, Prince Vespasian Gon-

zaga,  lieutenant  of  Valencia,  and

John  Foxe  (1577)  v. 167.
Colony, first Spanish, planted on

Buenos  Aires  river  by  Don  Pedro

de  Mendoza,  xi.  98.
Coloquintida, found  in  Cyprus, vi.

26.
Colossus  Solis  at  Rhodes,  v.  iig.
Colours for painting Indians, x.

57-
Colsi, Matteo, hostage  to  Mustafa

Pasha  (1571)  V. 144.
Colt, Christopher, English mer-
chant in Lapland  (1575)  in. 197,

200.
Colthirst, Henry, member of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Columba,  see  Colombo.
Columbus, Bartholomew, sent by

his  brother  to  Henry  VH. (1488)

VII.  137,  139 ;  his  map,  vii.  137 ;
verses  by,  vii.  138 ;  meets  Chris-
topher at  Hispaniola,  vii.  139 ;
and Henry  VH., xii. 5,

Columbus,  Christopher,  i.  xii. ;  and
Henry  VH.,  xxvi.  f . ;  and  Henry
VH. (1488) VII. 135, 137,

VIII.  94 ;  and  the  name  Colon
de  Terra  Rubra,  vii.  138 ;
and  Bartholomew  Columbus  at
Hispaniola,  vii.  139 ;  discovery  of
America  (1492)  vii.  161,  464,  viii.
449 ;  and  the  geography  of  the
West  Indies,  vii.  188;  conquests,
VIII.  no;  Elizabeth  or  Isabella,
Queen  of  Castile,  and,  viii.  442 ;
story  of, XII. 4  sq.

Columbus,  Diego,  son  of  Christo-
pher (1494)  VII.  140;  'Life  and
Deeds  of  Christopher  Columbus  '
by,  VII. 135,  139.

Columbus, Fernando, vii. 140.

Comana, i. 70; division of, 71.

Comanamo  town.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh at (1597) xi. 7.

Comani  Brutachi,  Tartars  and,  i.
86, 166.

Comania,  i.  89,  163,  166 ;  Tartars
conquer,  86,  153 ;  John  de  Piano
Carpini  in,  i.  94;  Tushi  Khan  and,
146;  description,  166;  language
of,  spoken  by  Saracens,  i. 152.

Comanians,  and  Bathy,  i.  76,  77 ;
their  country  conquered  by  the
Tartars,  233;  or  Capthac,  255,
256 ;  graves  of  the,  248,  250,  256 ;
original  country  of,  261.

Comastlahuaca,  town  of  Suchistla-
huaca,  ix.  472.

Combant,  Mery,  bailiff  de  la  Moree,
knight  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  31.

Combe,  the  Grace  at  (1594)  viii.
165.

Combe,  William,  intended  murder
of,  by  Captain  Hawlse  (1589)  xi.
388.

Combendaxis,  founder  of  Coia,  and
Micozu,  the  great  learned  man  of
Japan,  vi.  339.

Comet  seen  (1098)  i.  28;  (1166)  32;
seen  in  Virginia  (1586)  vili.  382.

Comfort,  Cape,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  "•  368,  370.

Command,  the,  at  Porto  d'Ally,  vii.
94.

Commandments  of  Murad  Khan,  in
favour  of  English  merchants
(1584)  V.  285-291.

Commelski,  distance  from  Vologda
to, II. 420.

'  Commentary,  Brief,  on  Iceland,'  by
Arngrimus  Jonas,  iv.  1-88 ;  Eng-
lish, 89-194.

Commenus,  Alexius,  and  John,  son
of,  IV.  310.

Commenus,  Manuel,  Emperor  of
Constantinople,  his  letter  to  Henry
II. (1177) IV. 312-315, IV. 315-

319-

Commerce,  under  King  Alfred,  i.
12;  under  Edgar,  20;  foreign,  at
the  time  of  King  Offa,  311;  at
the  time  of  Edward,  333 ;  anti-
quity of,  between  England  and
Norway,  348;  English,  hindered
by  customs,  352.

Commercial  relations  between  Eng-
land and  Prussia  (1403)  11.  38-46;
(1405)  47-55;  (1408)  87-90,  91-95,
95-106;  between  England  and
Persia  (1561)  ill.  7.

192

INDEX

Cominges,  see  Comminges.

Comminges,  ix. 103.

Commission  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to
Sir  Jerome  Bowes  (1583)  iii.  308-
310,  3 10-3 1 1 ;  of  the  King  of  Spain
to  the  Corrigidor  of  Biscay  con-
cerning English  ships  (1585)  vi.
417.

Commons  of  Rhodes,  refuse  to  sur-
render (1522)  V.  51;  abandon
their  posts,  v. 53.

Como,  see  Comum.

Comori,  see  Comorin.

Comorin,  Cape,  v.  501 ;  vi.  394,
Ceesar  Frederick's  voyage  to,  v.
395;  pearl  fishing,  v.  395;  mon-
soon from  Goa  to,  vi.  29 ;  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1592)  vi.

395-

Comoro  Island,  Edward  Bonaven-
ture at  (1591)  VI.  390,  X.  195 ;
William  Mace  and  thirty-two
sailors  slain  at,  vi.  392,

Comorom,  people  of,  11.  482.

Compass,  William  Borough  on
(1578)  HI.  211 ;  variations  in  Astra-
khan of  the,  220 ;  variations  of  the
needle,  279 ;  variations  of  the,  vi.
162,  380;  variation  of  our,  xi.
366.

Complexions,  causes  of  the  differ-
ences of,  VII.  262  ff.

Compostela  in  Mexico,  Vasquez  de
Coronado's  letters  from  (1538)  ix.
120 ;  Friar  Marco  de  Niga  at
(1539)  IX.  144.

Comul,  discovered  by  Anthony  Jen-
kinson,  in.  196.

Comum,  ancient  town  of,  in  Persia,
IV.  410.

Concepcion,  La,  or  Penco,  xi.  261,
276;  flight  of  the  Spaniards  from,
XI.  277;  description,  xi.  278;  Bay,
the  Swallow  meets  the  Golden
Hind  in  (1583)  viii.  50;  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  303,  368;
latitude,  xi.  358;  from  to  Val-
paraiso, XII.  360;  anchorage,  xi.
372-

Conception,  the,  Spanish  prize  of
Robert  Flicke  (1591)  vii.  59.

Conception  town, see  Concepcion.

Conchos,  Indians,  and  Friar  Augus-
tine Ruyz  (1581)  IX.  186; descrip-_

tion, IX. 189 ; and Antonio de

Espejo's  expedition  (1582)  ix.  189.
Conchos River, Antonio  de  Espejo

at  the  (1583)  IX. 203.
Concord,  the,  in  Morocco  (1594)  vii.

100.
Concord,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's

fleet,  in  the  fight  with  the  Spanish

fleet  (1596)  X.  242.
Condora, conquered province of

Russia,  III. 359.
Cone,  town  on  the  Sala,  v.  321.
Conell,  Bay  of,  mentioned  in  second

Ruttier,  x.  330.
Conference, Indian, described by

Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  x,  464.
Conferrent,  Bertrand,  captain  of  the

mutineers  in  Fort  Caroline  (1564)

IX.  42.
Confidentia,  the,  in.  331.
Confiscations, English merchants',

in  the  Netherlands,  11.  154.
Confu,  ninth  shire  of  China,  vi.  296.
Confucius,  doctrine  of,  vi.  372.
Conger,  Nicholas, Lord  Warwick's

footman,  and  the  two  natives  of

Hall's  Island  (1577)  vii.  294.
Congo, discovered by the Portu-
guese,  VIII. 127.
Congoes,  negroes  of  "  this  side  the

Cape of Good Hope  " (1564) x.

15-

Conies,  see  Rabbits.

Con  Khan,  and  the  French,  i.  266.

Connock,  William,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the
Capuri  river  (1595)  x.  380;  sent
to find mineral stones (1595) x.

403-
Conquerabia, see Puerto de los

Espagnoles.
Conrad II., Emperor  of  Germany,

privileges  granted  by,  i.  313  f.
Conrad  III.,  Emperor  of  Germany,

in  the  Holy  Land  (1147)  iv.  309.
Conrad  ab  Ellerichshausen,  twenty-
seventh master of the Dutch

knights,  II.  8.
Conrad a Feuchtuvang, tenth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

5-
Conrad  a  Jungingen,  twenty-second

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
^ 7-

193

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

•Conrad,  Landgrave,  fifth  master  of

the Dutch knights (1240) 11. 2.
Conrad, Marquess, and  the  city  of

Acre (1191) IV. 333; death of

(1193)  IV.  337.
Conrad of the  borough of Gastal-

dion, and Friar Odoric's death

(1331)  IV. 444.
Conrad Walenrod, twenty-first

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

7-

Conrad  Zolner  of  Rotenstein,
twentieth  master  of  the  Dutch
knights,  II.  7.

Consentinum,  John  Rufus,  arch-
bisliop  of,  VII. 160.

Conspiracy,  Prussian,  against  the
Christians,  11.  3  f.  ;  against
Andrew  Barker,  in  S.  Francisco
Island  (1576)  X.  86.

Constable,  Marmaduke,  in  Virginia
(1585)  VIII. 318.

Constance,  Council  of.  Bishop  of
Winchester  at  (1417)  iv.  455.

Constantina,  town  in  Tunis  (1553)
^vi. 143.

Constantine,  Emperor,  in  league
with  Vladimir  Monomachos,  li.
185.

Constantine  the  Great,  son  of
Helena,  iv.  271 ;  conquests  of,
VIII. 105,  106.

Constantinople,  i.  163,  166,  230,
231,  232;  letters  of  the  Em-
peror to  Scacati,  250,  252 ;
English  wares  in,  in.  13;  Nor-
mandy pilgrims  at  (1064)  iv.  291 ;
Emperor  of,  his  visit  to  England
(1400)  IV.  454;  William  Malim  at
(1564)  V.  121  ;  William  Harborne's
arrival  at  (1578)  v.  169;  (1583)
251  ;  list  by  Richard  Hakluyt  of
dyeing  materials  to  be  got  in
(1582)  V.  229;  plan  of,  engrav-
ing of,  256 ;  Henry  Austell  at
(1584)  V.  324;  rock  alum  found  in,
VI.  25 ;  Calamus  aromaticus
found  in.  vi.  27;  the  Toby  bound
for  (1586)  VI.  48;  William  Har-
borne  leaves  (1588)  vi.  58;  voyage
of  Richard  Wrag  to  (1593-95)  vi.
94-113 ;  the  Ascension  at  the  Seven
Towers  in,  vi.  95 ;  description
'(1594) VI. 105; Straits of, in

Thome's map, 11. 170; English
ambassador  at, xii. 102.
Constantius Chlorus, and Helena,

IV.  271 ;  died  at  York,  iv.  272.
Consul  chosen  by  English  mer-
chants in  Turkey  (1580)  188;
English,  for  Alexandria  and
Cairo,  Harvie  Millers  (1583)  v.
259 ;  Richard  Forster,  for  Aleppo,
etc.,  V.  260.

Consuls,  of  the  Muscovy  Company,

II. 306 f.. III. 84; English, at

Aleppo,  VI.  9.
Consultation  House  or  Town  House

in the towns of the Sapies, in

Guinea  (1564)  x.  19.
Contarenus on the Mediterranean

Sea,  VII. 167 ; on  the  north-west

passage,  vii.  183.
Contas, Rio  das,  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  xi.  78.
Conte, Pietro, captain of Montal-

berto, at the defence of Fama-

gusta  (1571)  V.  133,  135;  wounded,

V.  136; made  slave,  v. 151.
Conte, Porto  de,  in  Cephalonia,  v.

249.

Content,  the.  Sir  George  Carey's
ship,  valiant  fight  of  (1591)  x.  179-
183.

Content,  the,  ship  of  James  Lan-
caster (1594)  XI.  43.

Content,  the,  Thomas  Cavendish's
ship  (1586)  XI.  290;  Master  Brewer
in,  XI.  291;  wine  found  by  (1587)
XI.  308;  loss  of  (1587)  XI.  310,
327;  graved  at  Puna  Island  (1587)
XI.  318;  meets  the  Santa  Anna
(1587)  XI.  324;  mutiny  in,  xi.
326.

Conterenus,  see  Contarenus.

Contomanni,  the,  i.  284.

Contractation  House  or  Exchange,
at  Seville,  English  prisoners  sent
to  the  (1570)  IX.  463;  regulations
of,  for  Spanish  ships  and  mariners,
XI.  443  f. ; XII.  80.

Contribution,  voluntary,  advised  to-
wards maintenance  of  English
army  (1589)  vi.  522.

Controller,  of  the  Emperor  of
Russia  (1588)  III.  414;  of  the
Turkish  Household  or  Sisinghir
Pasha,  pay  of,  vi.  62.

194

INDEX

Contursia,  see  Ursence.

Conway, Sir Edward, knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259,
Cooke,  Captain,  and  the  Moonlight

(1590) VIII. 411; at Roanoke

Island,  viii.  414  f.
Cooke, Edward,  oflf  Gomera  (1567)

VI.  269.
Cooke, John, and the Indians of

Panuco  (1568)  IX. 456.
Cooke, John, '  The  World  Encom-
passed '  by,  XII.  59,  note.
Cooke, Robert, condemned by the

Inquisition  in  Mexico  to  serve  in

a  monastery  (1575)  ix. 428, 430;

married  a  negro  woman,  ix.  431.
Cooke, Sir Anthony, knighted at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.
Coonoracki,  nation  of  the  Waipoco,

x.  490.
Cooparoore,  town  of  the  Moruga,  x.

494.
Cooper, Captain, killed at Puente

de Burgos (1589) vi. 493.
Cooper,  Christopher,  assistant  to  the

governor  of  Virginia (1587)  viii.

397.  402.
Cooper, Henry, killed by Indians,

on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi. 318.
Cooper, Richard, of Harwich, his

prizes  (1586)  vi.  437.
Cooper,  William,  ship's  master,  his

prizes  (1586)  vi.  437.
Coopers sent to Russia (1557) 11.

387; on  the  Marigold  (1593)  viii.

157.
Cooshepwinne river, Sir Walter

Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.  7.
Coote,  John,  of  Wiveton  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11,  66.
Coowini  river,  x.  494.
Copal,  La  grande,  town  in  Florida,

VIII.  466,  IX. 112, 113.
Copalita  river,  Thomas  Cavendish  at

anchor  at  (1587)  xi.  319.
Copaoba, silver  mine  found  at, by

Daurmigas  (1597)  xi.  67.
Cope,  William,  i.  xxx.
Copella, Indian town, Spanish

search  for  (1572)  ix.  383.
Copenhagen or Hafnia, university

of  (1585)  IV.  43, 139.
Cophantrus, mount  in  Bactria, iv.

26, 118.

Copiapo  in  Chili,  xi.  274;  port,  xi.
278;  latitude  of,  xi.  358;  from,  to
Morro  Moreno,  xi.  360.

Coppeleto  Bay  to  Aguatulco,  xi.
362.

Copper,  custom  on,  Edward  I.'s
charter,  i.  337 ;  Russian,  11.  382 ;
found  in  Newfoundland,  by  Sebas-
tian Cabot,  VII.  153 ;  in  the  land
discovered  by  John  .Davys  (1586)
VII.  398 ;  mines  in  Newfoundland
(1578)  VIII.  15,  60;  red,  found  in
Saguenay,  viii.  214,  237,  245;
knife  given  to  Donnaconna  (1536)
viii.  258 ;  mine  in  Chaunis  Temo-
aton,  VIII.  328;  Youghan's  opinion
on,  VIII.  332 ;  found  in  Virginia
(1586)  VIII.  356;  preferred  to  gold
by  Indians  of  Florida  (1524)  viii.
433 ;  found  in  Florida,  viii.  437,
452,  X.  58;  in  Cuba,  x.  160;  coins,
in  Hispaniola,  x. 115.

Coppersmiths  of  London,  ship  of
the,  off  Gomera  (1567)  vi.  269.

Copstone,  Francis,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Copstow,  English  sailor,  tortured
by  the  Spaniards  (1568)  ix.  407.

Copyhold, reversion of the (1589)

vi".  523-

Coquebacoa,  latitude  of,  mentioned
by  the  Ruttier,  x.  287.

Coquimbo,  xi.  360;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1578)  xi.  114,  261 ;  lati-
tude of,  XI.  261,  278,  349;  or
Villanueva  de  la  Serena,  xi.  271.

Coragao,  see  Curasao.

Coracones,  Valle  de  los,  near
Cuhiacoun,  ix.  124,  127;  Vasquez
de  Coronado  at  (1540)  ix. 147.

Coral,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
VI.  382 ;  of  Levant,  found  in
Malabar,  vi.  25 ;  blue,  in  Guinea
(1577)  VI.  252;  white,  found  near
Frisland,  vii.  289.

Coralles,  see  Corrals.

Corallina,  from  the  Red  Sea,  vi.
26.

Corasan,  see  Khorassan.

Corbara,  James  of,  Conte,  made
slave at Famagusta (1571) v.

151-
Corbet,  Sir  Miles,  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596)  IV.  259.

195

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Corbett,  Julian,  '  Drake  and  the
Tudor  Navy,'  by,  xii.  46.

Corchio  in  Spain,  x. 164.

Corcunia  found  in  India,  vi.  25.

Corcyra,  see  Corfu.

Cordal,  see  Cordall.

Cordall,  owner  of  the  Centurion
(1590)  VII.  31.

Cordall,  Master,  Robert  Flicke's  re-
port to  (1591)  VII.  56.

Cordall,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  74,  75,  78.

Cordova,  birth-place  of  Antonio  de
Espejo,  IX. 188.

Cordova,  in  Tucuman,  xi.  285.

Cords,  used  as  means  of  defence  for
a  town  in  Guinea  (1557)  vi.  227.

Cordua,  Don  Pedro  de,  and  English
prisoners  (1596)  iv.  266.

Coray,  see  Korea.

Corea,  see  Korea.

Corea,  Cape,  in  Africa,  Captain
Don  John  in  (1555)  vi. 160.

Corelia,  see  Karelia.

Corfu,  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.  81 ;
description,  v,  102  ;  Querini,  cap-
tain of,  V.  123  ;  Laurence  Aldersey
near  (1581)  v.  244.

Corinth,  river  of.  Cardan's  account
of,  IV.  37,  132 ;  gulf  of,  VII.
161.

Corinth  raisins,  trade  restricted
to  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  84,
86.

Corinthiacus,  see  Corinth.

Coritine  river,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1597)  XI.  10,  15;  Spaniards
at,  XI. 12.

Cormantin,  vi.  260;  English  ships
at  (1577)  VI.  245.

Cormorants,  Isle  of,  the  Bonaven-
tiire  at  (1591)  viii.  154;  in  New-
foundland (1594)  viii.  164.

Corn,  dearth  in  England,  i.  315;
duty  on,  in  Edward  I.'s  charter,
337;  dearth  in  Russia  (1572)  iii.
185 ;  in  Alexandria,  vi.  36 ;  in
China,  vi.  357.
Corna  Castle,  see  Kurna.
Cornaro  family,  in  Venice,  and  the
kingdom  of  Cyprus,  v.  96;  Cath-
erine, daughter  of  Marco,  marries
James,  bishop  of  Nicosia,  v.
126.

Cornelius,  the  Irishman,  burnt  to
death  by  the  Inquisition  in  Mexico
(1575)  IX.  428.

Cornelius  Nepos  and  Pliny,  vii.  172.

Cornewal, see  Cornwall.

Cornibotz,  see  Esurgny.

Cornish,  John,  and  the  sailors  of  Sir
John  Hawkins  landed  near  Pan-
uco,  killed  by  an  Indian  (1568)  ix.

455-
Cornish, Robert, musician, of the
Sunshine of London (1585) vii.
382.

Cornish,  William,  ship's  master
(1586)  VI.  437.

Cornwaile,  Thomas,  of  Colchester,
and  Prussian  pirates,  11.  63.

Cornwall,  Richard,  Earl  of,  i.  325 ;
voyage  to  Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Cornwall  and  Devon,  Sheriff  of,
King  John  and,  i.  320.

Coro,  or  Coros,  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton at  (1595)  x.  223;  death  of
Captain  Prowse  at,  x.  223 ;  taken
and  burnt  by  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton (1593)  X.  224,  341.

Corolla,  Don  Antonio  de,  and  Eng-
lish prisoners  (1596)  iv.  266.

Coromandel,  coast,  v.  398 ;  city  of
S.  Thomas  on,  v.  408;  Tellami
cloth  made  in,  vi,  31.

Coron,  see  Korone.

Coronado,  Francisco  Vasques  de,  see
Vasquez.

Coronation  of  Feodor  Ivanowich,
Emperor  of  Russia  (1584)  iii.  336-
345  ;  of  Russian  Emperors,  account
of,  by  Giles  Fletcher  (1588)  374-
376.

Coronto,  Grana  found  in,  vi.  27.

Corpus  Christi  Bay,  Stephen
Borough's  description  of  (1556)11.
325  f. ;  point,  367,  368.

Corrals  or  hog-houses  in  Mexico,  x.
192.

Corrants, see Currants.

Corre,  fish  in  Newfoundland,  viii.
49.

Corrensa,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74,
150,  161 ;  John  de  Piano  Carpini
and,  162  f.,  165;  papal  legates
return  to  the  court  of, 178  f.

Corrientes,  Cape  dos,  in  Africa,
storm  at  (1591)  vi.  390.

196

INDEX

Corrientes,  Cape  de,  in  Cuba,  x.
286,  293,  315,  321,  333,  336,  337;
Sir  George  Carey  at  (1591)  x.  178;
William  King"  at  (1592)  x.  192 ;
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at  (1595)  x.
225 ;  Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  at
(1596)  X.  243 ;  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  and  Captain  Parker  at  (1597)

X.  274.

Corrientes,  El  Cabo  de  los,  m
Mexico,  XI.  363 ; latitude,  ix.  336,

XI.  350.

Corrigidor,  of  Biscay,  and  the  Prim-
rose (1585)  VI. 413, 416, 417.

Corsaries,  see  Corsairs.

Corsairs  or  pirates,  Russian,  and
English  ships,  11.  60,  67 ;  in  the
Indian Ocean (c. 1563) v.

377.

Corsale,  Andrew,  discoveries  of
(1497-15 10)  viii. 128.

Corterialis,  and  the  North-west  pass-
age, vii.  179, 181,  188.

Cortes,  Hernando,  see  Cortez.

Cortes,  John,  sent  to  Guatemala  to
fight the English (1580) ix.

433-

Corteso,  Juan,  at  the  Amazon  river,
X.  496.

Cortez,  Hernando,  and  the  conquest
of  Mexico,  viii.  95,  no;  and
Montezuma's  oration  (c.  1520)
viii.  108;  conquest  of  Cuba  and
Acuzamil,  viii.  124;  and  Don  An-
tonio de  Mendoza,  viceroy  of
Mexico,  IX.  115;  expeditions  of
discovery  by,  ix.  121 ;  his  reverse,
IX.  122 ;  conquest  of  Mexico  and
return  to  Spain,  ix.  356;  in
Tescuco,  IX.  363.

Cortise,  Robert,  master  of  the  May
Flower  (1566)  vi.  266,  270;  letter
from,  to  the  head  officer  of  Santa
Cruz,  VI.  267.

Cortreight,  see  Courtrai.

Corugna,  captures  of  William  King
at  (1592)  X.  192.

Corunna,  Bay  of,  or  the  Groyne  of
Galicia,  iv.  209,  210;  Spanish  fleet
at,  VI.  472 ;  stores  at,  482 ;  Eng-
lish army  at,  483,  494;  Don  Alonso
de  Bagan  at  (1590)  vii.  77.

Corunna,  Conde  de,  viceroy  of  New
Spain,  and  undiscovered  countries

(1581)  IX.  187  ;  account  of  the  voy-
age of  Antonio  de  Espejo  sent  to
(1583)  IX.  204.

Corvo,  Isle  of,  vi.  280,  456,  466,
latitude  of,  vi.  162,  x.  299,  334;
Indian  Spanish  fleet  near  (1591)
VII.  55  ;  English  fleet  sent  to  (1591)
VII.  56;  ships  at  (1589)  VII.  62;
caravel  from,  brings  tidings  to
Terceira  (1590)  vii.  76;  an  armada
at  (1591)  VII.  80;  the  Marigold  at
(1593)  VIII.  160;  John  White  at
(1587)  VIII.  400;  (1590)  420;  Sir
Robert  Dudley  at  (1595)  x.  210;
Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  at  (1596)
X.  245 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at
(1597)  XI.  15;  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1588)  XI.  347,  371.

Cos,  see  Lango.

Coscaynos,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  II.  363.

Cosmas,  '  Universal  Christian  Topo-
graphy,' by,  XII.  10.

Cosmas,  kindness  of,  to  papal
legates,  i.  176.

Cosmin,  harbour  in  Pegu,  v.  428,
429;  Ralph  Fitch  in,  (c.  1583)  v.
485,  500.

Cosmographer,  a  perfect,  a  Cosmo-
polite, I.  16.

'  Cosmography,'  by  Abilfada  Ismael,
V.  452.

Cosmus,  young  Japanese,  taken
prisoner  by  Thomas  Cavendish
(1587)  XI.  327.

Cossacks,  III.  156;  and  English
merchants  (1573)  iii.  155 ;  and
Persians,  in.  156;  or  barkmen,
III.  215;  Polish  thieves  and  Murad
Khan,  vi.  72.

Cossin  river,  in.  409.

Ccssine,  native  of  Virginia,  follow-
ing Ralph  Lane  (1585)  vni.  335.

Costa,  Francisco  de,  deceitfulness
towards  negroes  (1590)  vii.  94;
towards  English  (1591)  vii,  97.

Costa  Rica,  between  Panama  and
New  Spain,  xi.  287;  John  Chilton
in  (1570)  IX.  366.

Costly,  the,  of  Robert  Flicke's  fleet
(1591)  VII.  97.

Costo  Dulce  found  in  Scinde  and
Cambay,  vi.  25.

Costrom,  see  Kostromo.

197

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Costromitskey, Sheray, and Henry

Lane  (1560)  11.  411.
Costrum,  see  Kostromo.
Coswig,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-
Cotamaluc, King  of  the  Moors,  at

the sack  of Bezeneger  (1567) v.

382.
Cotesa, Island, Sir Richard Gren-

ville  at  (1585)  VIII.  311.
Cotoche,  Cape  de,  see  Catoche.
Cotsmur, John, settler  in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.
Cotta,  King  of,  in  Ceylon,  v.  399.
Cottea, John White  at  (1587)  viii.

388.
Cotteswold, borrowers in, 11. 125,

127.
Cotton,  Captain,  death  of,  xi.  61.
Cotton, Edward, of Southampton

voyage  of  (1583)  vi.  408-410; his

information  concerning  the  voyage

of Pudsey to Baya  de todos los

Santos  (1542)  XI.  25.
Cotton,  Randolph,  captain  of  Adrian

Gilbert's  bark  (1591)  xi. 389; in

the  Desire,  xi.  391  ; distress  of,  at

Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399;  in  Pen-
guin Isle  (1592)  XI.  408.
Cotton,  Master,  in  Edward  Fenton's

voyage  (1582)  xi. 182.
Cotton,  trade  in,  in  the  West  Indies,

X.  376; found  in  Guiana,  x.  426,

458; trees in Puna Island, xi.

316.
Cotton  wool, found  in  Guiana, xi.

14.
Couch  Kaly,  see  Jerusalem.
Couche or Quicheu near Cochin

China,  v.  481 ;  products,  v.  482.
Coudre  Island,  see  Filberds  Island.
Coulam, Caesar Frederick's  voyage

to  (1567)  v.  395; Ralph  Fitch  at

(c. 1583)  V.  501.
Council,  Lords  of,  instructions  given

to  Edward  Fenton  by,  concerning

his voyage to East Indies and

Cathay,  xi. 163-171.
Councils  of  Indians  of  Florida,  viil.

454-
Counsellors  in  the  voyage  to  Cathay

(1553)  II- 206.
Countermasters  or  Master's Mates,

regulations  for  Spanish,  xi.  443.

Countess  of  Warwick's  Sound  and
Island, see  Anne  Warwick.

Countries,  Low,  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert in  the,  xii.  25.

Country  taken  possession  of  in
Queen  Elizabeth's  name,  see  Meta
incognita.

Courci,  John  de,  conquers  Ulster
(1176)  I.  32; loses  Ulster  (1204)  i.

33  f-

Courland,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6;
11.  6.

Couroura,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at
(1597)  XI.  7.

Court,  Golden,  in  Moscow,  11.  256.

Courtbuttressow,  Englishmen  im-
prisoned at,  II.  63.

Courtney,  captain  of  the  Emmanuel
of  Exeter  (1578)  vii.  322.

Courtney,  Rise,  with  Ralph  Lane  in
Virginia  (1585)  viii.  317.

Courtrai,  land  army  of  the  Armada
at  (1588)  IV.  205;  cloth  of,  II.
116.

Couset,  Captain,  his  account  of  the
Spanish  ships  in  Dolphin's  river
(1565)  IX.  89.

Coutinho,  Luis,  commander  of  the
hulks  and  fiyboats  at  Flores  (1591)
VII.  47.

Coutinho,  Vasques  Fernandes  de,
lord  of  Espirito  Santo,  xi.  250.

Couton,  in  Darha,  vii.  89.

Coventry  and  Lichfield,  Walter
Langton,  bishop  of  (d.  1321)  wit-
ness of  Edward  I.'s  great  charter,

I.  338-

Coverings,  French  trade  in,  in
Guinea  (1577)  vi.  252.

Covexis,  King  in  Florida,  viii.  478 ;
liberality  of,  viii.  481.

Covla, Kholmogory  to, iii. 70.

Cowel,  William,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  281.

Cowes,  John  White  at  (1587)  viii.
386.

Cowlthirste,  see  Colthirst.

Cox,  Richard,  master  gunner  in
Captain  Frobisher's  second  voyage
to  the  north-west  passage  (1577)
VII.  217;  of  the  Aid  (1577)  vii.
285,  295;  pilot  of  the  Thomas  of
Ipswich,  VII.  351;  his  discredit-
able behaviour,  vii.  355.

[98

INDEX

Cox,  William,  master  of  the  Golden
Hind  (1583)  VIII.  47,  64,  92.

Coxe,  an  old  sailor  of  the  Edward
Cotton,  buried  alive  by  the  Moors
(1583)  VI.  412.

Coxe,  George,  carpenter  of  Edward
Fenton's  voyage,  death  of  (1583)
XI.  200.

Coxe,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

Coxe,  William,  of  Limehouse,
master  and  captain  of  the  Bear
(1576)  X,  83  ;  conspiracy  of,  against
Andrew  Barker  at  S.  Francisco
Island  (1576)  X.  86;  at  Truxillo,
X.  86;  and  the  goods  of  Andrew
Barker  (1576)  x.  87.

Coxworthy,  Robert,  of  the  Sunshine
of  London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Coya,  Captain  Laudonniere's  mes-
sengers at  (1565)  IX. 54.

Coya  Reca,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  II.  363.

Cozamomet,  and  the  English  mer-
chants, III.  49,  60;  and  the  corn
mill,  67.

Cozumel  Island,  on  the  coast  of
Yucatan,  latitude  of,  x.  294.

Crab  Apples,  found  in  Virginia,  viii.

367-

Crabs,  red,  Thomas  Stevens'  ac-
count of  (1579)  VI.  383.

Cracovia,  see  Cracow.

Cracow  on  the  Vistula,  v.  326 ;  duke
of,  I.  159.

Cracurim,  in  Tartary,  i. 135.

Crafton,  William,  of  the  Hopewell
('597)  VIII.  166;  and  the  Basques
of  S.  John  de  Luz  (1597)  viii.
177 ;  Charles  Leigh  and,  viii.
180.

Crane,  Ralph,  master  of  the  Eliza-
beth (1582)  XI. 172.

Crane,  the,  and  the  Spanish  fleet  at
Flores  Island  (1591)  vii.  41.

Cranes,  found  in  Canada,  viii.  228,
244;  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.  369;
in  Florida,  viii.  451.

Cranganor,  Portuguese  fort,  v.  391.

Crantor,  the  Greek,  on  America,  vii.
161.

Crasnoyare,  or  Red  Cliff,  iii.  243.

Crassus,  '  De  Oratore,'  by,  quota-
tion from,  V. 120.

Crawford,  Richard,  of  the  Swallow

(1584)  V.  281.
Crayfishes,  large,  in  an  island,  near

Celebes,  xi.  128.
Creame, Charles, on the Content

(1591)  X.  183.

Crecy, battle  of,  11. 142 ; Matthew

Gourney  at,  iv.  444.
Crecye,  see  Crecy.
Cremeur,  owner  of  Jacques  Cartier's.

sea  chart  (1587)  viii.  273.
Cremia,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.

196.
Cremona,  Bartholomew  of,  i.  233.
Crescent, the, and Spanish ships

(1590)  VII. 31.

Cresset-light,  used  by  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville  at  the  fight  of  Pinos
(1596)  X.  263.

Cressie,  see  Crecy.

Creta,  see  Crete.

Crete  Island,  in  Thome's  map,  11.
171 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  iii.
195;  Richard  I.  in  (1191)  iv.  328;
wine  from,  brought  to  Rhodes
(1522)  V.  8,  9;  English  trade  in
(c.  1511)  V.  62;  voyage  of  the
Holy  Cross  to  (1534)  v.  67;  of  the
Matthew  Gonson  (1535)  v.  68;
Roger  Bodenham  (1550)  v.  71,  73,
168;  John  Lock  (1553)  76,  84,  100;
hoop  market,  v.  117;  help  to
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  134,  136;
Nestor Martiningo's escape into

V.  150;  (1577)  V.  163;  (1581)  v.
206,  214;  King  of,  in  Ceylon
Island,  V.  399 ;  Epithymum  found
in,  VI.  27  ;  John  Evesham  in  (1587)

VI.  35 ;  Sowday  Castle  in,  vi.
41 ; Levant Company's trade in

(1592)  VI.  75  ;  Levant  Company's
privileges  in,  vi.  77,  84,  86;
complexions of the people of,

VII.  264; climate  of,  viii.  384.
Cretton,  William,  and  the  captured

ships  of  Danzig  (1577)  vi.  232.
Crew  of  the  Bona  Esperanza,  11.
212;  of  the  Edward  Bonaventure,
213  ;  of  the  Bona  Confidentia,  214;^
of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  fleet,
behaviour  of  (1583)  viii.  61 ;  loss
of  the,  in  the  wreck  of  the  De-
light, VIII.  66;  of  the  Marigold
and the natives of Cape Breton

199

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

(1593).  VIII. 159; of Sir John

Hawkins, half of, landed in

Mexico  bay  (1568)  x.  73.
Crimea,  neck  of,  i.  233.
Crim  Tartar, the, or  Great  Khan,

in.  390 ; and  the  Turks,  394.
Crim  Tartars,  and  Russians,  11.  233,

438, 453; or  Scythians, iii. 344;

and  the Moscow  fire  (1571) 169;

invade  Russia,  391.
Crimme, see  Crim.
Crion,  see  Krio.
Criquare,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,

XI. 81.
Crispe,  Captain,  and  the  breach  of

discipline in Portugal (1589) vi.

497-

Crit,  Vut  Khan,  King  of  the,  i.
268.

Crivellatore,  Marco,  Captain,  at  the
defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.
136; made  slave, v. 151.

Croatan  Sound,  Aubry  and  Boniten
sent  to  (1585)  VIII.  315  ;  fishing  at,
VIII.  338;  Captain  Stafford  at
(1587)  VIII.  393;  John  White  at
(1590)  VIII.  413;  English  settlers
of  Roanoke  at,  vm.  417  f. ;  Manteo
born  at,  viii.  418.

Croatoan  Sound,  see  Croatan
Sound.

Croce,  Monte  de  la,  in  Cyprus,  v.
98.

Crociers,  see  Crosiers.

Crocodiles,  in  Malabar,  iv.  413 ;  in
the  Nile,  description,  v.  337;  in
the  Senegal,  vi.  167;  used  as  food
in  Florida,  viii.  456;  in  Riohacha,
description,  x.  40 ;  in  Florida,  x.
59 ;  on  Coche  Island,  description
(1595)  X.  216;  in  Magdalena  river,
XI.  235.

Crocodiles,  river  of,  described  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  x.  388.

Crolland, see  Croyland.

Croix,  La,  conspiracy  of,  against
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  ix.
39;  ensign  of  the  mutineers,  ix.
42.

Croke, headland in Guinea, vi.

159-
Crolowe,  John,  of  Danzig,  Prussian

procurator,  11.  88,  92,  98,  106.
Cromer,  damages  paid  by,  11. 103.

Cromo,  II,  and  the  monastery  of  S.
Jeronimo,  v.  79.

Crompton,  William,  and  the  French
pilot's ransom (1577) vi. 234.

Cropeda  Island,  described  in  the
Ruttier,  x.  302.

Crosiers,  the,  vi.  151,  157;  form  and
latitude  of,  xi.  150.

Cross,  a,  proceeding  from  the  moon
(1580)  III.  218.

Cross,  erected  on  Cape  Prato,  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  203;
near  S.  Nicholas'  Haven  (1535)
viii.  213;  near  Fovetz  river,  viii.
238;  on  Holy  Cross  Fort  (1536)
vm.  254;  erected  by  Captain
UUoa  (1539)  IX.  212;  by  Captain
Alarchon  among  the  Indians
(1540)  IX.  294,  301,  316.

Cross,  Mountain  of  the,  in  Iceland,
IV. 16, 105.

Crosse,  Captain,  and  the  Spanish
ship  of  Biscay  (1588)  iv. 226.

Crosse,  Captain,  bearer  of  Sir
Francis  Drake's  letters  (1587)  vi.
441 ;  captain  of  the  bark  Bond
(1585)  X.  98;  at  the  attack  on
Cartagena  (1586) 117.

Crosse,  Captain,  bark  of,  in  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  voyage  to  Trini-
dad (1595)  X.  349.

Crosse  Island,  Stephen  Borough  off
(1556)  II.  326; on,  365,  417.

Crosse,  Sir  Robert,  of  the  Cadiz  Ex-
pedition (1596)  IV.  242;  knighted
at  Cadiz,  iv.  260 ;  captain  of  the
Bonaventure  (1591)  vii.  41 ;  in
Sir  John  Borough's  fleet  (1592)
VII.  108 ;  of  the  Foresight,  vii.
113;  boards  the  Madre  de  Dios,
Vll. 114, XII.  84.

Crosse,  William,  boatswain  of  the
Sunshine  of  London  (1585)  vil.
382.

Crossehaire,  Nicholas,  and  the  Eng-
lish customs,  II.  75  f.

Crosses,  House  of,  see  Venta  Cruz.

Crosses  erected  by  Friar  Marco  de
Niga  as  an  act  of  taking  posses-
sion (1539)  IX.  132,  138,  144;  given
to  Indians  by  Captain  Alarchon
(1540)  IX.  288,  302,  306,  315.

Crossiers,  see  Crosiers.

Crow, Giles, English merchant  in

INDEX

Russia  (1581)  III.  245 ;  at  Moscow,
246.

Crowmer,  see  Cromer.

Crowsand,  the  Richard  of  Arundel
at  (1591)  VI.  467.

Crowns,  three,  of  the  Emperor  of
Russia  (1583)  III.  319;  six,  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  338,  339.

Croyland,  Ingulf,  abbot  of  (1064)
IV. 288.

Crozets,  see  Crosiers

Crua,  near  Ratire,  vi.  451.

*  Cruelties,  Spanish,'  by  Bartholo-
mew de  las  Casas,  vii.  53.

Crutzburg  Castle,  garrisoned  by  the
Dutch  knights,  11.  2,  3.

Cruz,  Cape  de,  in  Cuba,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  x.  285  ; latitude  of,

X.  286,  333 ;  marks  of,  in  second
Ruttier,  x.  314;  longitude  from,
to  Cayman  Brack,  x.  336.

Cruz,  Cayo  de  la,  a  shoal  mentioned
in  second  Ruttier,  x. 329.

Cruz  del  Padre,  marks  of,  men-
tioned in  second  Ruttier,  x.  330.

Cruz,  Rio  de,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier, XI.  88.

Cruzado,  money  of  Malacca,  vi.  22.

Cruzes,  on  the  river  Chagres,  ix.
368.

Crymara  Island,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  329.

Cr)-stal,  mine  in  Florida,  viii.  482 ;
in  Apalatci  mountain,  ix.  112,
113;  mountain.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  near  (1595)  x. 418.

Cuahintle,  see  Cuahintlan  del  Rey.

Cuahintlan  del  Rey,  wealth,  ix.
471 ;  deeps  near,  ix.  466.

Cuahucapotla,  a  '  mansion  of  Intla,'
IX. 469.

Cuausa,  province  in  China,  xi.  380.

Cuba,  one  of  the  Antilles,  viii.
450; or Isabella, 451, x. 285,

XI.  238,  240 ;  discovered  by
Spain  (1492)  II.  173;  Sebas-
tian Cabot  near  (1497)  vii.  152;
Ferdinand  Oviedo  on  pasture
of,  VII.  267;  conquered  by  Spain,
VIII.  124;  John  White  in  sight  of
(1590)  VIII.  411;  Captain  Gour-
gues  at  (1567)  IX.  loi ;  Cap-
tain Ulloa  at,  228;  principal
towns  in  (1570)  ix.  367; trade,  ix.

368,  390,  415,  X.  345 ;  Indians  of,
and  Friar  Marco  de  Ni^a,  ix.  126 ;
S.  Antonio  Cape  in,  x.  46;  copper
mines  discovered  in  (1590)  x.  160;
ships  built  in,  for  an  expedition
against  England  (1590)  x.  164;
fight  of  Sir  George  Carey's  ships
against  the  Spanish,  near  (1591)
X.  178 ;  ship  from,  captured  from
Christopher  Newport  (1591)  x.
189 ;  Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  in
sight  of  (1596)  X.  242,  244;  Rut-
tier for  navigation  about,  x.  301 ;
conquest  of,  xii.  7.

Cubagua,  Indians  sold  as  slaves  by
Augustine  Delgado  at,  x.  498  j
difficult  of  access  from  Guiana,
X.  499.

Cubeb  found  in  China,  vi.  25.

Cubucama  or  Emperor  in  Japanese,

VI.  335-
Cucahu-Atoyaque  in  Francisco  Mal-

donado's  land,  ix.  471.
Cuchillo,  Indians  from,  companions

of  Friar  Marco  de  Niga,  ix.  125.
Cucumber, poisonous, used  by the

Sapies and Samboses (1564) x.

20.
Cudruaigny, god  of  the  natives  of

Canada,  viii.  226; belief  in,  viii.

240.
Cuerpo  Santo,  see  St.  Elmo's  fire.
Cuervo,  see  Corvo.
Culeman,  Henry,  damages  paid  to,

II. 103.
Culiacan,  ix.  381 ;  Vasquez  de  Coro-

nado at (1539) ix. 116, 145; S.

Michael of, ix. 118, 123; Friar

Marco  de  Niga  at,  123,  125,  144.
Culma, Insana  river, near, iv. 37,

132.
Culvacan,  correction  of  the  map  of,

by  Ortelius,  viii.  444.
Cumaca  river.  Captain  Keymis  sent

to,  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)

X. 417; Sir Walter Raleigh at

(1595)  X.  420.
Cumana, Lord of, Indian chief

(1540)  IX.  310; and  Captain  Alar-

chon, IX. 315; enchanter from,

and (1540) IX. 316; Sir John

Hawkins at (1565) x. 26, 27;

Indians of, description (1565) x.

28 ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at  (1595)

XII

201

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

X.  2i6;  ransom  of  the  town  of,
paid  to  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston,  x.
217;  English  prisoners  at,  ex-
changed with  Spanish  prisoners
(1596)  X.  277;  taken  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x. 341, 406;  despoiled
by  Agira,  x.  363  ;  Pedro  Hernan-
dez de  Serpa  at,  x.  364;  King
Morequito  and  Vides,  governor  of,
X.  373 ;  flight  of  King  Morequito
to,  X.  374 ;  Antonio  de  Berreo  at,
with  Fasshardo,  x.  460.

Cumanagotos  Indians  and  the  gold
of  Guiana,  x.  366;  Hernandez  de
Serpa  slain  by,  x.  497.

Cumanawgoto,  Augustine  Delgado
at,  X.  498.

Cumberland,  Earl  of,  see  Clifford,
George.

Cumberland  Sound,  explored  by
Captain  Davis,  xii.  28.

Cumberland's  Island,  see  Meta  In-
cognita.

Cunames,  the,  province  of  New
Mexico,  described  by  Antonio  de
Espejo  (1582)  IX. 197.

Cunanama  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana  river,  x.  459 ;  the
Discoverer  in  (1596)  x.  477,  492.

Cuningaia,  custom  in  Japan,  xi.
424.

Cunington,  George,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi. 399.

Cupanamma  river,  between  Cape
Cecil  and  Raleana  river,  x.  459 ;
or  Northumbria,  x.  492.

Cupari,  town  on  the  Shurama,  x.
492.

Cuppanamo,  in  Guiana,  xi.  10.

Curaa  Mountain,  in  Guiana,  x.  400;
gold  in,  X.  403.

Curasao  Island,  Sir  John  Hawkins
at,  IX.  401,  449;  abundance  of
cattle  in  (1565)  x.  36;  Andrew
Barker's  men  wounded  by  Indians
at  (1576)  X.  84;  Sir  Francis  Drake
^t  (1595)  X.  233;  latitude  of,  in
the  Ruttier, x. 287,  335.

Curassawini  river,  x.  492 ;  men-
tioned by  Laurence  Keymis  (1596)
X.  454.

Curazao,  Island,  see  Curasao.

Curcy,  see  Courci.

Curdi,  people  of  Merdin,  v.  505.

Cureey  river,  x.  492.

Curiapan,  Punta  de,  or  Punta  de
Gallo,  in  Trinidad  Island,  x.  205 ;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)  x.
341,  349,  422; latitude,  x.  349.

Curipotoore,  Indian  captain,  x.  493.

Curitini,  river,  the  Discoverer  in
(1596)  X.  477; great  river,  x.  492.

Curland,  see  Courland.

Curligin,  Richard,  of  the  expedition
to  Guinea  (1555)  vi. 199.

Curna  Castle,  see  Kurna.

Curnaatoi,  Indian  prisoner  of  Ber-
reo (1596)  X.  467.

Curopolata  on  the  English  guard  of
the  Emperors  of  Constantinople
(1177)  IV.  311.

Currents  of  the  Sea,  run  with  the
wind.  III.  292 ;  deceiving  to  the
ships,  VI.  230 ;  in  West  African
seas,  VI.  462 ;  toward  the  west,
VII.  152,  166,  167,  195,  202 ;  An-
thony Jenkinson  on,  vii.  168,  183  ;
discovered  by  Captain  Frobisher
(1578)  VII.  326, 333  ;  or  indrafts,  vii.
336  f. ;  strong,  of  Florida  (1565)  x.
48;  at  Pinos  Island,  x.  293;  near
the  Tortugas,  x.  297 ;  at  Matan-
zas,  X.  303 ;  from  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  to  Brazil,  xi.  3,  72.

Cursemay,  a  Russian  tavern,  11.
424.

Curshes,  or  Shah's  messengers,  iii.
164.

Curson,  Robert,  travels  of  (1218)  iv.

348.
Curtia,  measure  in  Algiers  (1584)  v.

271.
Curtice, John, hostage in Cape

Verde  (1567)  vi.  271.
Curtice,  Robert,  see  Cortise.
Curtis, Thomas, pewterer, trader

with  Chios  (1535)  v.  69.
Curtius,  Quintus,  on  Alexander  the

Great,  v. 119; mention  of  India,

VII. 180, 185.
Curtike,  see  Courtrai.
Curwara  river,  cataract  on,  x.  468.
Curzola  Island,  John  Locke  in  (1553)

V.  104; Henry  Austell  in,  v.  322.
Cusco, see  Cuzco.
Cushwini  river,  x.  492 ; Sir  Walter

Raleigh's  expedition  on  (1597)  xi.

10.

INDEX

Cusse-winne  river,  see  Cushwini.

Custodio,  Reverend  Father,  prior  of
S.  Anton  of  Brazil,  and  the  sen-
tence against  Feliciano  Cieza
(1597)  XI.  71.

Customs,  in  England  (1407)  11.
72  ff. ;  English  merchants  free
of,  in  Shirvan,  iii.  33,  39;  Mus-
covy Company  in  Russia  free
from,  94,  96,  1 10,  325,  440,  441;
suits  in  Russia  free  from,  97 ;
exacted  from  English  merchants
at  Kazan  and  Astrakhan,  182 ;
English  trade  in  Russia  free  from
(1583)  325;  to  be  paid  on  Russian
money  by  English  merchants,  431 ;
merchants  of  Muscovy  Company
licenced  to  trade  in  Russia  free
from,  440;  (1592)441;  or  tolls,  in
Persia,  for  English  merchants,  iii.
64;  in  Russia,  abating  and  re-
mitting of,  343  ;  in  Turkish  coun-
tries (1569)  V.  112,  284;  to  the
King  of  Algiers  (1584)  v.  271 ;
in  Alexandria  (1584)  v.  272;  paid
to King Aborise and his sons,

V.  368,  VI.  8;  on  pearls,  to  the
King  of  Portugal,  v.  396 ;  in
Orissa,  v.  409,  410;  in  Pegu,  v.
429,  430;  of  Babylon,  vi.  11;  of
Bussorah,  vi.  12  ;  of  Ormuz,  vi.
15; on  horses, vi. 16; of  Goa,

VI.  20;  of  Cochin,  vi.  21;  of
Malacca,  vi.  22 ;  of  Danzig,  vi.
59;  in  London  for  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  79,  80;  excess
of,  in  the  Levant,  vi.  84;  in
China,  vi.  319;  Barbary  Com-
pany free  from,  for  twelve  years
(1585)  VI.  424;  Senegal  Company
free  from,  for  ten  years  (1588)  vi.
448;  in  Burburata,  on  slaves,  x.
34; in  Brazil,  xi.  37,  38.

Customs  officers  and  merchants
(1407)  II. 75-79.

Custumal  (Customal)  Latin,  of  the
town  of  Hyde,  i.  48.

Cutarapama,  Indian  herb  anti-
poisonous,  x.  495.

Cuthen, Duke  of  Tartary, i. 74.

Cutup  de  lashach.  King  of  Gol-
conda,  v.  472.

Cuyne,  see  Kaiuk.

Cuynch,  see  Kaiuk.

Cuynth  Can,  see  Kaiuk.

Cuzco.  in  Peru,  viii.  95,  125 ;  John
Chilton  at  (1570)  ix.  369;  Bishop
of,  prisoner  of  the  English  (1596)
IV.  261 ;  Orejones  of,  and  Guascar,
X.  340;  unwrought  gold,  hidden
in,  X.  358.

Cyclopedes,  i.  154.

Cyguateo,  Sir  Richard  Grenville  at
(1585) viii. 315.

'  Cvmbeline,' quotation from, xii.

Cynamon,  see  Cinnamon.

Cyncilim  in  Malabar,  iv.  412.

Cyngis,  see  Jenghiz  Khan.

Cyntla,  battle  of,  Hernando  Cortez's
victory  at,  viii. 124.

Cypher,  Muscovy  Company's  letters
in,  II.  389,  394.

Cypresses  in  Florida,  x.  57.

Cyprus,  I.  262  ;  Knights  of  S.  John
and,  II.  6;  in  Thome's  map,  171;
Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  iii.  195 ;
Queen  Berengaria  in  (1191)  iv.
328;  conquered  by  Richard  L,  iv.
330,  v.  125 ;  Radulphe,  keeper  of,
for  Richard  L,  iv.  331 ;  allegiance
to  England  (1270)  iv.  362  ;  English
trade  (c.  1511)  v.  62;  John  Locke
at  (1553)  V.  85,  92;  Famagusta,
town  of,  V.  118;  conquered  by  Mus-
tafa Pasha  (1571)  V.  123,  150;  de-
scription, V.  124-5;  Laurence
Aldersey  at,  v.  207,  vi.  42  ;  Caesar
Frederick  at  (c.  1563)  v.  366 ;
Coloquintida  found  in,  vi.  26;
Sumach  found  in,  vi.  27 ;  re-
tinue of  the  Beglerbeg  of,  vi.  67 ;
Paphos  in,  vi.  107; climate,  viii.

384-

Cyragay,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74.

Cyrenaica,  boundary  of  Africa  the
less,  VI. 144.

Cyrenen,  Oktai's  son,  i.  74, 150.

Cyrpodan,  i.  74,  77,  150;  Duke,  sub-
dues the  Khirgiz,  153.

Cyrus,  his  invasion  of  Tartary,  in.

397-
Cyrus,  river,  11.  478.
Cysimbre  Island,  William  Harborne

at  (1583)  V.  249.
Czilma,  river,  in.  406.
Czircho,  river,  in.  406.

203

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Dabul,  port  in  Chaul,  v.  380;  ginger
dabulin  found  in,  vi.  25.

Dadin, see  Bodin.

Dainty,  the,  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1592)  VII.  112;  and  the  Madre
lie  Dios,  113;  at  Flores  (1590)
VIII.  421.

Dalamor,  in  Robert  Withrington's
voyage  (1587)  xi.  222;  ship  cap-
tured by,  XI.  225.

Daldilus,  King,  and  the  Saracens
(1330)  IV.  412.

Dale,  see  Deal.

Dalkins,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Dallaber,  James,  on  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1553)  n.  213.

Dallimore,  Oliver,  of  the  Elizabeth
(1584)  v.  281.

Dalmatia,  language  of,  i.  279 ;  in
Thome's  map,  11.  170;  Robert  de
Ketene  in  {1143)  iv.  309;  Henry
Austell  in  (1585)  v.  322 ;  Islands
of,  V.  78 ;  Prince  of,  and  the  Tar-
tars, I.  51;  Beglerbeg  of,  pay  of,
VI,  61 ; his  retinue, 67.

Damages  asked  of  England  by
Prussia  (1403)  11.  27,  29,  30,  32;
by  Livonia,  33,  34;  by  Prussia
and  Livonia,  56  f. ;  asked  of  Prus-
sia by  England  (1405)  29,  32,  33;
settled  by  English  and  Prussian
ambassadors,  88 ;  guaranteed  to
Prussians  by  Henry  IV.  (1409)
loi  f. ;  details  of,  paid  to  Prus-
sian merchants  by  England  (1409)
103-106;  paid  to  English  mer-
chants, 105.

Daman,  Caesar  Frederick's  descrip-
tion (1563)  V.  378;  Ralph  Fitch's
description  (c.  1583)  469;  Friar
Peter  in,  vi.  385 ;  monsoon  from
Goa  to,  VI.  28.

Damaon,  see  Daman.

Damaro,  Friar  Albert,  superior  of
the  Convent  of  the  Amerciates  in
Gallipoli  (1577)  V.  165.

Damas,  Calle  de  las,  in  S.  Domingo,
X. 284.

Damasco,  see  Damascus.

Damascus,  English  merchants  in
(1580)  V.  187;  Richard  Forster,
consul  for  (1583)  v.  260;  caravan
at  Mecca, v.  356; Pasha  of,  his

presents  to  Soliman  (1553)  v.  108;

and the Persian Wars (1583) v.

453 ; and  the  Hungarian-Turkish

war,  VI. 104 ; Sultan  of,  i.  74.
Dambere Island, laid waste by

Zichmni  (c.  1380)  vii.  451.
D'Amboise,  Merj^  Grand  Master  of

Rhodes,  v.  37.
Damiata,  see  Damietta.
Damietta, Robert Curson at the

taking of (12 18) iv. 348; Ran-

ulph.  Earl  of  Chester,  at  the  siege

of,  349,  351; taken  by  Louis  IX.

of  France  (1249)  353; description

of.  V.  333.
Damoiselle,  Isles  de  la,  latitude  of,

VIII,  276.
Danadin,  river,  in  Russia,  iii.  409,
Danarie,  money  of  Ormuz,  vi, 14,
Dancie, Edward, George Turber-

ville's letter to (1568) iii, 124-

126.
Danec,  boats  on  the  Tigris,  v.  467.
Danes, English merchants robbed

by,  II, 113  f.
Daniel,  Friar,  at  Cevola  with  Vas-

quez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix.  151.
Daniel, miner, of Sir Humphrey

Gilbert's expedition (1583) viii.

60 ; lost  in  the  wreck  of  the  De-
light, 67; in  Virginia  (1585)  318,
Daniel, son of Alexander, founds

Moscow,  II,  187.
Daniel, Samuel, '  Musophilus,' by

(1601) XII, 99.

Danilon,  John  de  Piano  Carpini  at,
I, 160.

Danine,  money  of  Bussorah,  vi,  12.

Dansey,  Alexander,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi, 88.

Danske,  Russian  measure,  11.  275.

Danske,  cable  market  at  (1557)  11.
382  ;  Leonard  Brian  at,  387 ;  wax
market  at,  389 ;  Thomas  Alcock
at,  396-399 ;  and  the  Narva  navi-
gation, 485,

Dansoyville,  Sir  Claude,  called  Vil-
liers,  Grand  Master  of  Rhodes'
envoy  to  the  Pope  (1522)  v. 16.

Dantiske,  Robert  Elson  at  (1555)  ii.
296.

Dantzig,  see  Danzig.

Danube,  river,  i.  231,  234,  256,  279,
VII. 176; at Tonewert, Henry

204

INDEX

Austell  on  the  (1585)  v.  321;
freshets  in,  vii.  183.
Danubius,  see  Danube.
Danzig,  11.  8;  Wolstan's  voyage  to,
I,  15 ;  or  Gdanum,  11.  10 ;  English
merchants  and  goods  seized  in,
15-18;  mercantile  differences
settled  in,  22 ;  ships  of,  despoiled
by  Hanse  merchants,  70 ;  Sir
Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)  iii.  345  ;
burgomaster  of,  and  William  Har-
borne  (1588)  vi.  58;  customs  in,
59 ;  hulk,  with  Spanish  goods,  cap-
tured by  the  English  (1589)  vi.  510.

Darcie,  Edward,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  217.

Darcies  Island,  discovered  by  John
Davys  (1587)  vii.  421.

Dare,  Ananias,  assistant  of  the
governor  of  Virginia,  viii.  397,
402 ;  Eleanor,  wife  of  Ananias,
VIII.  397,  403 ;  Virginia,  born  in
Roanoke,  viii.  397,  403,  xii.  112.

Darha,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  gold
mines  (1591)  vii.  88;  products,
VII.  89.

Darien,  gulf  of,  English  ship  cap-
tured by  the  Spanish  in  (1575)  xi.
232 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  xii.
52 ;  straits  of,  John  Oxenham
and  the  Spanish  in  the,  viii.  315  ;
voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  to
(1572)  X.  75-77;  voyage  of  John
Oxenham  to  (1575) xi. 77-81 ;  town,
built  by  the  Spanish,  xi.  228;
colony  of  Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa,
xii.  9.

Darige,  Richard,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Darius  Hystaspis,  invasion  of  Tar-
tary  by,  iii.  397.

Darliehead,  fish  caught  by  William
Eston  (1585)  VII.  383.

Darling  of  London,  the,  Laurence
Keymis  in  (1596)  x.  452.

Darling,  the,  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton's ship  (1595)  X.  213;  sick
crew  of,  at  Dominica,  215;  secret
mission  of  (1595)  225.

Darsall,  Richard,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Dartmouth,  ships  from,  in  Edward
in.'s  fleet,  I.  297;  damages  paid
by,  II.  104;  Edward  IIL  and,  120;

return  of  John  Evesham  to  (1587)
VI.  38 ;  of  Laurence  Aldersey
(1586),  46;  of  Christopher  New-
port, X.  190 ;  William  Towerson  at
(^555)  ^77 'j  departure  of  the  Eng-
lish merchants  from,  for  Guinea,
155'  258;  the  Richard  of  Arundel
at  (1591)  467;  the  Madre  de  Dios
brought  to  (1592)  VII.  105,  117;
port  free  to  Adrian  Gilbert  (1583)
377;  John  Davys  at  (1583),  381;
(1585)  393.  408,  414,  422,  425,  443,
(1585)  393>  408.  414.  422,  425,
443,  439;  the  Sunshine's  re-
turn to,  407;  the  Golden
Hind  at  (1583)  viii.  75;  the  Tra-
montane of  the  Queen  at  (1597)
180;  Robert  Withrington  at  (1586)
XI.  204;  flyboat  of,  bound  for
Maio  Island,  xi.  i-

Dasamonquepeio,  or  Dasamongue-
peuk,  in  Virginia,  viii.  337;
Pemisapan  at,  339;  Englishmen
left  at  Roanoke  and  the  natives
from,  394 ;  Manteo,  lord  of,  397 ;
John  White  at  (1590)  416.

Dasi,  Anthony  de,  taken  prisoner  by
Thomas Cavendish (1587) xi.

327-

Dassel,  Anthony,  Laurence  Madoc's
letter  to  (1594)  vii.  99-100.

Dassel,  Thomas,  his  voyage  to
Senegal  and  Gambra  (1591)  vii.
90;  Pedro  Gonzalves  and,  91;
traffic  at  Porto  d'Ally  (1591)  92,
95  ;  conspiracy  against  (1591)  95  ;
Pedro  Gonzalves  saved  by,  96.

Dassele,  Arnold  de,  procurator  of
Prussia,  11.  43,  97  f.

Dassell,  Anthony,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f. ;  privileged  trader  in  Sene-
gal (1588)  443-450.

Daurmigas,  silver  mine  found  at
Copaoba  by  (1597)  xi.  67.

David,  VI.  171 ;  Tower  of,  at  Jeru-
salem, IV.  302.

David,  son  of  the  King  of  Georgia,
I.  86, 140.

David,  son  of  Owen  Gwynedd  (c.
1170)  VII. 133.

David's  Sound,  in  Meta  Incognita,
Englishmen  attacked  at,  by
natives  (1578)  vii.  239.

205

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Davie,  Henry,  gunner,  of  the  Sun-
shine of  London  (1585)  vii,
382.

Davie,  Robert,  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton's voyage  to  West  Indies
written  by,  x.  213.

Davis,  John,  master  of  a  pinnace
with  William  Towerson  (1557)  vi.
223.

Davis,  John,  sailor  on  the  Delight
(1589)  XI.  389.

Davis,  Morgan,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Davis,  Neville,  escaped  prisoner  of
the  Inquisition  (1592)  vii.  107.

Davis,  Richard,  mariner,  death  of,
in  Persia  (1565)  in.  48.

Davis,  Robert,  master  of  the  bark
Raleigh  (1583)  viii.  46.

Davis  Strait,  discovered  by  John
Davis  or  Davys,  xii.  28.

Davison,  Richard,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  281.

Davison,  Thomas,  quartermaster  on
the  Bona  Esperanza,  11,  212.

Davys,  John  (1550-1605)  i.  xxviii. ;
facsimile  of  letter  to  Walsingham
from  (3rd  October,  1585)  vii,  392,
and  the  capture  of  Spanish
ships  (1589)  VII.  6;  at  Graci-
osa,  11;  and  the  Pernambuco
prize,  19 ;  first  voyage  of,  for  dis-
covery of  northwest  passage,  by
John  Janes  (1585)  381-393;  second
voyage  (1586)  393-407;  second  voy-
age, by  Henry  Morgan,  408-413 ;
third  voyage  (1587)  by  John  Janes,
414-422;  captain  of  the  Sunshine
of  London,  382 ;  discoveries  of
(1586)  403  f. ;  his  letters  to
William  Sanderson,  407,  423  ff.  ;
'  World's  Hydrographical  Descrip-
tion '  by,  quotation  from,  440-445 ;
VIII.  444;  of  the  Desire  (1591)  xi.
389;  at  the  taking  of  Santos  (1591)
390 ;  distress  of,  at  Port  Desire
(1592)  399;  address  to  his  men,  xi.
403;  at  Padstow  (1593)  416;  story
of,  xii.  27,  30.

Dawbeney, Arthur, member  of  the
Barbary Company, vi. 419,
420  f.
Dawbeney, Oliver, merchant, voy-
age of,  in  the  Minion  (1536)  vii.  3  ;

his  account  of  Newfoundland,  viii.

4-
Dawe,  John,  of  Colchester,  Prussian

pirates,  11.  63.
Dawney  river,  x.  408.
Day,  length  of,  in  Iceland,  iv. 12,

lOI.

Day,  Nicholas,  lands  in  Santa  Cruz
(1566)  VI.  268;  hostage  in  Cape
Verde  (1567)  271,  272.

Dead,  funeral  ceremonies  of  the,  in
Malabar  (1330)  iv.  414;  in  Thibet
(1330)  436;  in  Chaul,  v.  470;  in
Benares,  478 ;  in  Jamahey,  495 ;
in  Persia,  vi.  112;  in  Japan,  vi.
341;  by  Indians,  ix.  297;  of
Sapies,  x.  18 ;  honours  given  to
the,  by  Indians  of  Orinoco  river,
X.  384.

Deal,  I.  47,  48,  V. 355.

'  De  Amicitia  '  of  Cicero,  quotation
from,  V.  121.

Deane,  Roger,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII,  318.

Death,  yearly  sleep  or,  of  the  people
of  Lucomoria,  iii.  408.

Debts  owed  to  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany in  Persia,  iii.  47,  49,  59,  60,
64,  181 ;  owed  to  English  mer-
chants in  Russia,  115;  recovered
by  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  for  the  Eng-
lish merchants  in  Russia,  325 ;  of
the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  English
merchants  (1583)  329;  owed  to
William  TurnbuU  in  Russia,  426,

433.  435-

'  Decade,'  the  first,  by  John  Barros,
VIII.  442.

'  Decades  Book  of, '  by  Peter  Martyr,
quotation  from,  x.  50 ;  translated
by  Richard  Eden  (1555)  xil.  35;
published  by  Hakluyt  (1587)  83.

Decan,  see  Deccan.

Deccan,  diamonds  in  the  kingdom
of,  V.  472.

Dedalus,  King  of  Scotland,  and
Icaria,  in  Zeno's  voyage,  vil.  459.

Dedissen,  Gerard,  shipmaster,  and
Prussian  pirates,  il.  63.

Dee,  John  (1527- 1608)  on  Nicholas
of  Lynn,  i.  liv.  303 ;  on  the
British  monarchy,  16 ;  advice  to
Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman
(1580)  III.  262; and  the  Emperor

206

INDEX

of  Russia  (1586)  III.  445;  map  of
America  by,  engraving  of,  viii.
486.

Deer  used  as  horses  by  Samoyedes,
II,  346 ;  by  Lapps,  lil.  405 ;  found
in  Hochelaga,  vm.  244;  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  368;  in  Florida,  451,
X.  51,  56,  59;  in  Trinidad,  x.  350;
in  Guiana,  426,  xi.  14;  in  Nova
Albion  (1579)  XI.  123;  Olen,  death
of  Richard  Gray's,  n.  396.

Defiance,  the,  flagship,  and  the
Spanish  fleet  at  Flores  Island
(1591)  VII.  41.

Defiance,  the,  flagship  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.  232;  Jonas
Bodenham,  new  captain  of  (1596)
240 ;  in  the  fight  with  the  Spanish
fleet  at  Pinos  (1596)  243,  262;  re-
turn of,  to  Plymouth  (1596)  245.

Degrad,  Cape,  country  from  Cape
Race  to,  description  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  vm.  185.

Deimond,  Richard,  new  master  of
the  Jesus  (1583)  v.  293.

Dekker,  '  Olde  Fortunatus  '  by,  xii.
108.

Dela,  wild  elephants  tamed  in,  v.
486.

Delabere,  James,  gentleman  of  the
expedition  to  Cathay  (1553)  11.
206.

Delaware,  Lord,  first  governor  of
Virginia  (1609)  xii.  112.

Dele,  see  Deal.

Delfi,  Porto,  near  Chios,  v.  250.

Delft,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.
320,  327.

Delgada,  Punta,  near  Villa  Rica,  x.
295  ; in  second  Ruttier,  320.

Delgadillo  de  Avellaneda,  Don  Ber-
naldino,  *  Libel  of  Spanish  Lies,'
written  by  (1596)  x.  246-265.

Delgado,  Augustine,  conquest  of
Trinidad  by,  x.  497 ;  attempt  to
discover  Guiana,  x.  498.

Delhi,  diamonds  found  in,  v.  504.

Delli,  see  Delhi.

Delight,  the,  alias  the  George,  flag-
ship of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
expedition  (1583)  vm.  46;  dam-
aged, vm.  52 ;  Maurice  Browne,
captain,  vm.  62 ;  lost,  vm.  64,
66,  92,  XII.  37.

Delight,  the,  of  Bristol,  John  Chid-
ley's  ship  (1589)  x.  170;  voyage
of,  written  by  W.  Magoths,  xi.
381-384.

Delight,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  X.  227,  232;  Captain
Josias  of,  his  death  (1596)  x.  240;
sinking  of,  x.  241.

Delingeges,  see  Coaches.

Delos,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1593)  vi.

95-
Delphi, Temple of  Apollo in, vii.

269.
Delphin, Cape, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  vm.  193.
D'Elvas,  Dr.  John,  of  the  Portuguese

embassy to England (1481) vi.

123,
Demetrius,  son  of  George,  11.  185  f.
Demetrius, son  of  John, 11. 187.
Demnar  found  in  Siacca  and  Blin-

ton,  VI.  26.
Demogorgon,  breathing  of,  and  the

movement  of  the  sea,  vii. 152.
Demongenitus,  Franciscus,  and  the

north-west  passage,  vii. 163.
Denga, silver Russian coin, n.

273-

Dengemareys,  i.  48.

Denia,  in  Valencia,  William  Har-
borne  at  (1583)  v.  243.

Denichi,  idol  of  the  bonzes  in  Japan,
VI.  336.

Denizenship,  English,  granted  to
British  subjects  born  in  discovered
territories  (1583)  vii.  379;  granted
to  inhabitants  of  English  territories
(1578)  vm.  20;  (1584)  vm.  293.

Denmark,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  4,  6 ;
King  Vortiporius  and,  8;  Octher's
description  of  the  Sound  of,  14;
islands  subject  to,  15  ;  and  Prussia,
II.  46;  English  merchants  in  (1404)
108  f..  Ill  f.,  113;  merchants  of,
127;  Thome's  map  of,  169;  and
Russia,  438;  Lapland  pays  tribute
to.  III.  204 ;  and  the  Iceland
schools  (158S)  IV.  60,  159;  soldiers
of,  at  Joppa  (1107)  301-306;  climate
of,  VII.  268 ;  fish  trade  with  Fris-
land,  VII.  450;  Kings  of,  iv.  i,
58,  89,  157.

Dennis,  the,  bark,  Kendal,  captain
of  (1578)  VII. 322; attendant  on

207

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Aid,  324;  lost  near  Queen's
Foreland,  329.

Denny,  Sir  Edward,  and  Robert
Flicke  (1591)  VII.  56;  his  instruc-
tions for  the  fleet,  57.

Dente  d'Abolio  found  in  Melinde
and  Mozambique,  vi.  27.

'  De  Oratore,'  by  Cicero,  quotation
from,  V.  120.

Deptford,  Willoughby's  fleet  at
(1553)  II.  217;  Captain  Martin
Frobisher  at  (1576)  vii.  204;
Francis  Ashby  sent  to  (1564)  vi.
262  ; Drake  knighted  at,  xii.  45.

Deputy  Knight  of  the  Hospitallers
of  Jerusalem  ordained  in  Russia,
II. 2.

Derbent,  Porta  Ferrea,  i.  261 ;  Alex-
ander's Gate  of  Iron  at,  271,  272  ;
description,  iii.  20;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  in,  196;  in  possession  of
the  Turks  (1580)  220,  224;  Eng-
lish merchants  --t,  228,  236;  Alex-
ander the  Great  and,  235,  400 ;
latitude  of,  235.

Derby,  Henry,  Earl  of,  see  Henry
IV.

'  De  Republica  Anglorum  instaur-
anda,'  by  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner,
V.  70.

Derlowe,  John  van,  and  the  English
ship,  II.  61.

Dermain,  King  of  Bottanter  (c.
1583)  V.  483.

Derrican,  court  of  Akbar  in  Fateh-
pur  (c. 1583)  V.  474

Derrick,  Humphrey,  of  the  Hugh
Gallant,  killed  by  Indians  (1587)
XI.  306.

Dertmouth,  see  Dartmouth.

Derwen,  see  Derwent.

Derwent,  ships  from,  in  Edward
II. 's  fleet,  I.  299.

Desconoscido,  Cape,  Captain  Parker
at  (1597)  X.  279.

Description  of  new  countries,  re-
commended by  Cabot,  11.  203.

Deseada  Island,  x.  336;  latitude,
282,  308,  333;  marks  of,  in  the
second  Ruttier,  307.

Deseado, see Desire.

Desekebe  river,  see  Essequibo.

Desert,  the,  island  near  Madeira,  vi.
135-

Desert,  Friar  Marco  de  Ni9a  in  the
first,  in  Cevola  (1539)  ix.  134;  in
the  second,  139  ;  Vasquez  de  Coro-
nado  in,  150.

DesiVe, the, Thomas  Cavendish's  ship

(1586)  XI.  290; meets  the  S.  Anna

(1587)  324;  illness  on  (1588)  337;
Thomas  Fuller  of  Ipswich,  master
of,  348;  Thomas  Cavendish's  ship
(1591)  John  Davys,  captain  of,
389 ;  testimonial  of  the  crew  of,
concerning  the  loss  of  Thomas
Cavendish,  397-399;  dangerous
worm  on  (1593)  415;  at  Bear-
Haven,  416.

Desire,  Cape,  xi.  357,  372 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake  and  John  Winter
at  (1578)  159;  latitude  of,  349;  the
Desire  at  (1592)  406.

Desire,  Port,  or  Deseado,  named  by
Thomas  Cavendish  (1586)  xi.  295,
367  ;  Indians  of,  xi.  296 ;  latitude,
349,  354,  356;  anchorage,  371;
John  Chidley  at  (1589)  382;  the
Roebuck  and  the  Desire  at  (1592)
39  X,  397;  Thomas  Cavendish
looked  for  at,  xi.  394;  the  Desire
re-enters  (1592)  409.

Desmond,  Earl  of,  and  Dingen-
acush,  VII.  27;  his  rebellion,  29;
Maurice  Fitz-John,  cousin  ger-
main  of,  50.

Desmond,  Sir  James,  death  of,  vii.

51-

Desmond,  Sir  John,  death  of,  vii.  51.

Desolation,  land  of,  discovered  by
Captain  Davys  (1585)  vii.  384,  393,
440 ; the  Sunshine at, 407, 410,

444-
Despenser, Geoffrey, witness to

Henry III.'s charter, i. 324.
Despenser,  Hugh  Le,  the  elder.  Earl

of  Winchester  (1262-1326)  witness

to Henry III.'s charter, i. 324;

Edward  I.'s  great  charter,  338.
D'Espere, Cape, in Newfoundland,

VIII. 160.
Desseaso,  Lord  Francis,  overseer  of

the  house  of  the  King  of  Portugal

(1551)  VI.  152.
Dessekebe,  see  Essequibo.
Detford,  see  Deptford.
D'Eureuse,  Sir  George,  knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV. 259.

208

INDEX

Deurum,  Sultan,  conquered  by  Tar-
tars, I.  78, 154.

Devereux,  Walter,  In  the  English
fleet  (1589)  VI.  495 ;  his  reg-iment
marches  to  Lisbon,  497,  500;  re-
turns to  England,  510.

Devil,  the,  and  Abraham,  v.  358,
359 ;  belief  in,  in  Japan,  vi.
338;  cult  of,  in  New  Mexico  (1582)
IX. 195.

Devoritia,  see  Essequibo.

Dewbv,  William,  of  the  Maria  Martin
(1584)  V.  281.

Dewin,  Punchard  de,  and  his
brother  William,  their  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Diake,  or  secretary,  in  Russia,  iii.
217.

Dialcan,  King  of  the  Moors  (1563)
V.  381 ;  at  the  sack  of  Bezeneger
(1565)  382 ;  Caesar  Frederick
assaulted  between  Angola  and
land  of  (1567)  V.  389;  Goa  be-
sieged by  the  people  of,  439 ;  king-
dom of,  471 ;  diamonds  found  in
kingdom  of,  472.

Diamant,  the,  in  the  Bay  of  Sebas-
tian, dangers  of,  in  the  Ruttier,  x.
282.

Diamantes,  Los,  in  California,  Cap-
tain Ulloa  at  (1539)  IX.  214.

Diamonds,  mine  of,  near  Bezeneger,
V.  386 ;  in  land  of  Dialcan  and
Deccan,  472 ;  in  Zamba  and
Laban,  499;  in  Bisnagar,  etc.,
504 ; in  Canada,  viii.  268,  284.

Diana,  Island  of,  Laurence  Aldersey
near  (15S6)  vi.  42,

Diana,  Temple  of,  see  Ephesus.

Dias,  Paul,  governor  of  Angola,  vi.
468.

Dias,  Pedro,  '  Examinations  of
Masters  and  Pilots  '  by, xi. 448-

453.  453-458-
Diasprum,  see  Jasper.
Diaz,  Bartholomew,  discovery  of  the

Cape  of  Good Hope (1494) viii.

127.
Diaz,  Melchior,  companion  of  Vas-

quez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix. 146;

at  Lord's  Valley, 147.
Dicasca,  cacique,  in  Florida,  ix.  113.
Dick, William, of  the  Sunshine  of

London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Dickenson,  Henry,  quartermaster  of
the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  lu
214.

Dickenson,  Miles,  of  a  Bristol  ship,
in  Tripolis  (1584)  v.  294.

Dictamnum  album  found  in  Lom-
bardy,  vi.  27.

Dido,  Queen,  In  Carthage,  vi.  38.

Diego,  the  Portuguese,  taken
prisoner  by  Thomas  Cavendish
J 1587)  XI.  322.

Diego,  Friar,  of  Lisbon,  Friar  Peter
to, on the kingdom of Pegu

^,(1587)  VI.  385.

DIepe,  see  Dieppe.

Dieppe,  ships  of,  and  the  crew  of
the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1594)
VI.  406  f. ;  Frenchmen  of,  In  Sene-
gal, VII.  91 ;  Captain  Laudon-
niere  returns  to  (1562)  ix.  i ;  Cap-
tain John  Noyer  of,  xi.  53 ;  his
death,  61.

Dier,  Andrew,  master  of  the  Jesus
(1584)  V.  281,  293;  death  of,  299,
300,  318.

Dier,  Edward,  see  Dyer,  Sir  Ed-
ward.

Dier,  James,  In  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet,  death  of  (1586)  x.  134.

Dier's  Sound,  In  Meta  Incognita,
Captain  Froblsher  In  (1578)  vii.
240.

Diet,  of  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  at
Moscow,  scroll  of  (1584)  in.
322,  473,  478,  483;  of  the  Grand
Signlor,  yearly  cost,  vi.  61 ;  pay
of  attendants,  63.

DIeulamont,  in  Francis  de  Rober-
val's  voyage  (1542)  viii.  283.

DImock,  assay-master,  and  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  white  spar  (1595)

X-  344-
DImmock,  John,  draper  of  London,

and Osep Napea, 11. 361-362  ,-

owner  of  the  Anne,  378.
DInaretta,  promontory  in  Cyprus,  v.

125.
DIngaway Dowil in the Castle  of

Rushen,  i.  41.
Dingen  a  Cushe,  see  Dingenacush.
Dingenacush,  in  Ireland,  viii.  401 1

English  crew  lands  at  (1589)  vii.

27; description,  27-28.
Diodorus, SIculus, on Acridophagi

209

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

or  locust  eaters,  iv.  84,  189 ; on
Africa,  vi.  i6g.

Dionyse,  the,  of  Captain  Frobisher's
third  voyag-e  (1578)  vii.  234,  241.

Dionysius,  on  the  Ocean  Sea,  vii.
199.

Dionysius  Areopagita,  the 'Heavenly
Hierarchy,'  by  (858)  iv.  281.

Discipline,  on  Cabot's  ships,  11.  195,
205 ;  on  the  George  and  the
William,  in.  253 ;  in  the  English
navy  (1596)  iv.  237;  of  Richard  I.
for  his  navy  (1177)  iv.  320;  on  the
ships  of  Edward  Fenton  (1582)  xi.
163.

Discoverer,  the,  pinnace  of  Laurence
Ke3'mis,  lost  at  sea  (1596)  x.  452;
Laurence  Keymis  meets,  at  the
mouth  of  the  Orinoco  river  (1596)
477; burnt  by  him,  477.

Discoveries,  Russian,  exclusive  pri-
vilege of  the  Muscovy  Company,
II.  315  f. ;  in  the  North  Sea  by
Englishmen,  in.  460.

Disdain,  the.  Sir  Martin  Frobisher
in  the  (1592)  vii.  106.

■*  Diseases,  Curing  of  Hot,'  etc.,  by
George  Watson,  xii.  81.

Dissequebe,  see  Essequibo.

Disspenser,  see  Despenser.

Ditter  Island,  Laurence  Aldersey
near  (1586)  vi.  41.

Diu  Island,  in  Cambay,  Portu-
guese possession  in  (1563)  374,
445 ;  trade  between,  and  Cambai-
etta,  377 ;  Ralph  Fitch  at  (c.  1583)
V.  463,  469;  turbith  found  in,  vi.
26; and  monsoons.  28.

Divan,  or  Justice-hall  of  the  Vizier,
in  Turkey,  vi.  97,  99.

Diverie,  the  Framburaro  of,  v.
148;  slain  at  Famagusta  (1571)
152.

Dixmud,  Duke  of  Parma  at  (1588)
IV.  220.

Dnieper,  river  (Boristhenes),  i.  163,
HI.  362,  VII.  176;  and  the  Black
Sea,  II.  252.

Dockwray,  Lord  Thomas,  grand
prior  of  the  Order  of  Jerusalem,
in  England  (1522)  v.  i.

Dod,  Thomas,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Doddington, John, and Laurence  i

Aldersey  at  Patras  (1586)  vi.  40.  I

Doderidge,  Richard,  of  Barnstaple,  I
privileged  trader  in  Senegal  (1588)

VI.  443-450-

Dodrant,  a  measure  used  by  William
Towerson  (1555)  vi.  166.

Doffie,  Caesar,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

Dog,  the,  voyage  of  William  Michel-
son,  captain  of,  to  Mexico  in
(1589)  X. 156.

Dogger-ship,  the,  of  Wiveton,  11.
66.

Dogonne,  pilgrimage  of  the  Pegus
to  the  varella  or  pagoda  called,
V.  492.

Dogs  Nose,  cape  in  Russia,  fullers'
earth  at,  11.  364.

Dogs,  Icelanders'  affection  for,  iv.
74,  177;  in  Canary  Island,  vi.
126;  of  Quivira,  described,  ix.
168;  in  California,  ix.  224;  used
by  the  Spaniards  to  hunt  the
Indians,  226,  238,  260;  of  New
Spain  described,  ix.  384;  wild,  used
to  destroy  superabundant  cattle  in
S.  Domingo  (1535)  x.  37.

Dolce,  Rio,  xi.  81,  372;  voyage  of
Sir  Anthony  Sherley  to  (1596)  x.
266-276 ;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  and
Captain  Parker  on  the  (1597)  275,
278;  Captain  Parker's  voyage  to
(1596)  277;  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1587)  XI.  319,  368.

Doldavius,  King  of  Gotland,  i.  3  f.

Doletus,  interpretation  of  the  word
Victus,  IV.  64,  164.

Dolgoia,  see  Kolguev.

Dolgoiave,  see  Kolguev.

Dolgoieve,  see  Kolguev.

Dolopes,  people  of  Libya,  vi.  168.

Dolphin,  Captain,  wounded  at  tak-
ing of  the  Groyne  (1589)  vi.  490.

Dolphin,  the,  set  on  fire  at  Gibral-
tar (1591)  VII.  37.

Dolphin,  the,  French  ship,  for  the
discovery of Florida (1524) viii.

423-.
Dolphins,  x.  61,  xi.  153;  near  Soko-
tra  Island,  vi.  395;  the  Richard
of  Arundel's  crew  and  (1591)  vi.
467;  Sir  Francis  Drake  finds  store
of  (1578)  XI. 106.

INDEX

Dolphins,  River  of,  discovered  by
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  ix.  6;
Spanish  ships  on  the  (1565)  ix.  80.

Domagaia,  Indian  taken  captive  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  219,
255;  at  Stadacona,  221;  consents
to  go  to  Hochelaga,  224;  at  Holy
Cross,  238;  asks  to  be  baptised,
240;  illness  and  recovery  (1535)
249;  warning  to  Jacques  Cartier,
252;  Francis  I.'s  reception  of,
263.

Domesday  Book  (1070)  i.  43,  46.

Domingo,  Spanish  prisoner's  escape
from  the  ships  of  Thomas  Caven-
dish (1587)  XI.  323.

Dominica,  discovered  by  Spain
(1492)  II.  173 ;  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville  at  (1585)  VIII.  311;  John
White  near  (1587)  387;  at  (1590)
407 ;  Cacique's  sons  prisoners  from,
409 ;  natives  of,  ix.  4,  25 ;  Sir
John  Hawkins  at,  ix.  401,  448,  x.
25,  66;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1585)
109  ;  Christopher  Newport  at  (1591)
184;  William  King  at  (1592)  191;
the  Darling's  sick  crew  and»  Indi-
ans of  (1595)  215 ;  tobacco  trade  in
(1595)  228;  voyage  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  to  (1596)  266-276;  latitude
of,  282,  332 ;  Ruttier  from,  to
Martinino,  287;  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  308;  Indians  of,
and  the  gold  of  Guiana,  366;
Laurence  Keymis  at  (1596)  478;
Guanipa  and,  479;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.  15.

Dominus  Vobiscum,  the,  voyage  of,
to  the  north  (1527)  viii. i.

Domshaff, Stephen Borough, and

(1557)  n-  371-

Don,  river  (Tanais)  i.  76,  163,  256,
II.  252,  253,  III.  216,  362,  VII.  176,
183,  x._367;  John  de  Piano  Car-
pini's  journey  over  the,  i.  94;
source,  258 ;  course,  260  f. ;  and
the  Tartar  boats,  11.  454;  Tamer-
lane's escape  towards,  iii.  397;
Cardan's  account  of,  iv.  36,  131;
freshets  in,  vii.  183-

Donaw,  Rajah,  in  Java  (1580)  xi.
130,  132.

Donchion,  principal  town  of  Che-
kiang,  vi.  295.

Dondou,  a  town  in  Guinea,  William
Towerson  at  (1557)  vi.  216.

Don  Devis  town,  trade  in  (1556)  vi.
202.

Don  John's  sons,  William  Tower-
son's  trade  with  (1556)  vi.  203.

Don  John's  town,  in  Guinea,  vi.
196 ;  trade,  201 ;  description,  202  ;
William  Towerson  at,  244.

Don  Roderigo,  Porto  de,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  84.

Donnacona,  Lord  of  Canada,  his
meeting  with  Jacques  Cartier
(1535)  VIII.  219,  221;  at  Holy
Cross,  238;  asks  to  be  baptised,
240 ;  stratagem  of,  25 1 ;  taken
prisoner  by  Jacques  Cartier  (1536)
255  ;  and  his  people,  256 ;  Jacques
Cartier's  present  to,  257;  Francis
I.'s  reception  of,  263;  death  of
(1540)  265.

Donna  Maria,  Las  sierras  de,  hills
near  Bacoa,  in  second  Ruttier,  x,

313-.

Donwich,  see  Dunwich.

Dopnald,  governor  of  Man,  i.  27.

Dorado,  see  Guiana.

Dorado,  Nuevo,  Alonso's  letter  about
(1594)  X.  433,  434.

Dorantez,  Andrew,  voyage  by,  ix.
116, 122.

Dorantez,  Stephen,  negro  of  Andrew
Dorantez,  his  voyage  with  Friar
Marco  de  Niga  (1538)  ix.  120,  125;
sent  by  Friar  Marco  de  Niga  to
make  discoveries,  128,  130 ;  treat-
ment of,  by  the  people  of  Cevola
(1539)  139;  death  of  (1540)  162,
305  ;  voyage  in  the  Jumenos  coun-
try, IX. '305.

Dordaci,  in  New  Spain,  ix.  466.

Dordewant,  Tidman,  his  ship  at
Orwell,  II.  40.

Dordract,  see  Dordrecht.

Dordrecht,  in  Holland,  ambassadors'
meeting  place,  11.  30,  50  f.,  53,  56,
84,  85;  first  Diet  held  at  (1407)
33 ;  Laurence  Aldersey  at,  v.
214.

Dore,  Joffo,  John  Whithall's  father-
in-law  (1578)  XI.  26;  and  Ed-
ward Fenton  at  St.  Vincent,  191,

193-
Dorea,  see  Doria.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Doria, pistachio-nuts found  in, vi.

Doria,  Andrea,  viceroy  of  the  King
of  Spain,  in  the  Straits  of  Gibral-
tar (1590)  vn.  32.

Doria,  John  Andrea,  captain  of  a
Spanish  fleet  (1586)  vi.  49.

Doria,  Juanette,  at  siege  of  Malta,
V. 112.

Doria,  Prince  Pedro,  captain  against
the  Turks  (1569)  v. iii.

Doricot,  John,  of  Exeter,  privileged
trader  in  Senegal  (1588)  vi.  443-
450.

Dorives,  Juan,  general  of  the  Indian
fleet  (1589)  vn.  68.

Dornel,  Emmanuel,  sailor  in  the
Delight  (1589)  XI.  388,  389.

Doro  river  and  the  defence  of  Spain
(1585)  X.  96- _

Dorogobose,  see  Dorogobuzh.

Dorogobuzh,  hemp-growing  in,  in.
368.

Dorothy,  the,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  310.

Dorothy,  the,  pinnace  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1586)  xi.  203.

Dorp,  see  Dorpat.

Dorpat,  in  Livonia,  11.  49 ;  chron-
icles of,  II.  194 ;  and  the  Russian
privileges,  11.  276,  278;  English
trade  in,  in.  93,  95.

Dorpte,  see  Dorpat.

Dorrell,  Captain,  of  the  Cadiz  ex-
pedition, capture by (1596) iv.

243-
Dorrell, Henry, settler  in Virgmia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Dorrington,  Francis,  of  the  Levant

Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.
Dorses, John Davis at the (1586)

vii.  409.
Dorset, Henry, merchant, on the

Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.  214.
Dort,  see  Dordrecht.
Dory,  Joseph,  see  Dore,  Joffo.
Doshnikes, Russian  barks, 11. 419,

III.  214.
Dosneckes,  see  Doshnikes.
Double, gold  coin  in  Algiers  (1584)

V.  270.
Double,  Cape,  discovered  by  Jacques

Cartier  (1534)  viii. 189,  208.

Doublet,  mutineer,  killed  at  Archaha
(1564)  IX.  43.

Doughtie,  see  Doughty.

Doughty,  Master  Thomas,  sent  on
Maio  Island  by  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1578)  XI.  104,  151 ;  captured
Portuguese  ship,  entrusted  to
(1578)  io6;  master  of  the  flyboat
of  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)  107;
judgment  on  and  execution,  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1578)  109-110,  157,
260,  XII. 56.

Douglas,  Isle  of  Man,  i.  33.

Douton,  see  Down  ton.

Douty, see Doughty.

Dovan,  see  Divan.

Dove,  Robert,  licensed  to  trade  in
Russia  free  from  custom  (1592)  in.
440.

Dove-gate  ward,  in  London  (1407)
n.  72,  73.

Dover,  vi.  155 ;  Edward  the  Con-
fessor and,  I.  43  ff.  ;  ships,  46  f. ;
ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,
297 ;  importance  to  England  in
war  time  of,  n.  114,  116;  Lyon,
King  of  Armenia,  at  (1386)  iv.
445,  449;  Roger  Bodenham  at
(1551)  V.  72;  Christopher  New-
port's departure  from  (1591)  x.
184;  William  King's  return  to
(1592)  X. 193.

Dover  House  Island,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  190.

Dowbnay,  distance  from  Peraslav
to,  n.  420.

Dowe,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Dowglas,  John,  master  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  ship,  x.  376;  sent  to
Capuri  river,  378,  379 ;  on  the
Macuri  river  (1595)  382.

Dowle,  William,  master  of  the  Watt
(1597)  XI.  6.  . , ^.

Downe,  William,  master  of  the  Dis-
coverer (1596)  X.  477

Downs,  the,  in  Kent,  x.  190 ;  Cap-
tain Lancaster  at  the  (1595)  xi.  63.

Downton,  Nicholas,  captain  in  the
Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  (1592)
VII.  112;  of  the  Sampson,  118;
and  Las  Cinque  Llaguas,  118;
wounded  (1594)  119;  returns  to
Portsmouth,  123.

INDEX

Drachms,  money  of  Aleppo,  vi.  lo  ;
of  Bussorah,  12.

Draganti  found  in  Morea,  vi.  27.

Drago,  tree  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  130 ;
in  Madeira,  135.

Dragio,  or  Drogeo,  discovered  by
Nicholas  and  Antonio  Zeno  (c.
1380)  VII.  445  ;  Frisland  fishermen
in,  VII.  456,  vii.  457;  description,
by  Antonio  Zeno,  vii.  463,  465.

Dragon,  the,  Earl  of  Cumberland's
ship  (1591)  VI.  466.

Dragon,  the,  Sir  Francis  Drake's
ship  in  his  voyage  to  N  ombre  de
Dios  (1572)  X. 75-77.

Dragone,  Boca  de,  see  Dragos.

Dragos,  Boca  de  (or  Dragon's
Mouth)  VI.  198,  403.

Drake,  the,  news-bearer  to  English
fleet  (1589)  VII.  5.

Drake,  the,  John  Vaughan,  captain
of  (1585)  X.  98;  captured  by  Sir
Francis  Drake,  x.  99.

Drake,  Edmund,  naval  chaplain,
father  of  Sir  Francis,  xii.  48.

Drake,  Sir  Bernard,  and  Newfound-
land fishers  (1585)  x.  95.

Drake,  Sir  Francis,  i.  xxiv.,  vi.  i,
vm.  129 ;  at  Nombre  de  Dios,
xxvii.  ;  vice-admiral  of  the  Eng-
lish fleet  (1588)  IV.  208,  218;
and  the  Easterling  hulks,  213;
and  Don  Pedro  de  Valdez,
214;  his  ship  shot  through
by  the  Spanish,  225 ;  at
Molucca,  V.  459,  460;  and
the  captive  Turks  (1586)  vi.  40;
and  the  Spanish  fleet  (1587)  438;
general  of  the  English  fleet  (1587)
438 ;  at  Cadiz,  439 ;  facsimile  of
despatch  from,  dated  27th  April,
1587,  440;  deeds  of,  477;  at
the  taking  of  the  Groyne  (1589)
489 ;  at  Puente  de  Burgos,  492 ;
on  the  way  to  Lisbon,  499,  500;
at  Cascaes,  502;  at  Vigo,  513;
at  the  Azores,  514;  at  Plymouth,
515;  in  the  West  Indies  (1585)  vii.
40;  expected  in  Terceira  (1589)  64;
Ralph  Lane  and  (1586)  viii.  320-
342,  343.  345.  X.  132,  133;  barks
of,  VIII.  332 ;  in  Virginia,  346 ;
his  voyage  from  Aguatulco  to
north-west  of  California  (1578)  ix.

319-326;  at  Aguatulco  (1579)  365;
at  Acapulco,  433  ;  at  Nova  Albion,
321,322,  324,  XII.  60;  captain  of  the
Judith  (1567)  X.  398;  in  Sir  John
Hawkins's  fleet  (1568)  446;  and
his  fight  with  the  negroes  (1568)
448;  in  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)
454,  XII.  50;  portrait  of,  x.
iii.  ;  voyage  of,  to  Nombre  de
Dios,  written  by  Lopez  Vaz,  x.
75-77,  XI.  227-290 ;  wounded  at
Nombre  de  Dios,  xi.  228 ;  voyage
of,  to  West  Indies,  by  Thomas
Cates  (1585)  X.  97-134;  at  S.  lago
Island,  103-109;  S.  lago  town,
109,  269,  XI.  234;  takes  S.
Domingo,  x.  iii,  112,  xi.  234;  and
the  resolutions  of  his  land  captains
about  Cartagena,  X.  121-124;  at  S.
John's  Fort  in  Florida,  128;  at
Limaret  (1587)  152;  voyage  of,  to
West  Indies  (1595)  226-245,  ^^l-
64;  death  of  (1596)  x.  239,  xii.  66;
Spanish  lies  about,  confuted  by
Henry  Savile  (1596)  x.  246-265;
West  Indian  expedition  of  1585-6 ;
map  of,  engraving  of,  x.  502 ;
drum  of,  engraving  of,  xi.
104;  voyage  of,  to  the  South
Sea  (1577-1580)  XI.  101-133,  149;
and  Nuno  da  Silva,  134,  146 ;  and
the  natives,  155 ;  wounded  by  In-
dians, 138 ;  letter  of,  to  his  com-
pany, 147;  and  Thomas  Doughty's
judgment  and  execution  (1578)  109,
XII.  56 ;  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan,

XI.  260;  the  Cacafuego  taken  by
(1579)  116,  264;  and  the  natives
of  Nova  Albion  (1579)  119;  and
the  King  of  Nova  Albion,  120,  122,

XII.  60 ;  and  the  King  of  Ternate,
XI.  125 ;  near  Celebes  Islands
(1579)  XI.  128;  in  danger,  xi.  129;
in  Java,  xi.  130;  in  the  Spanish
Indies,  xii.  23  ;  treasures  brought
home  by,  28 ;  and  the  Virginian
colonists,  41 ;  nickname  of,  45 ;
'  Drake  and  the  Tudor  Navy,'
by  Julian  Corbett,  46;  captain  of
the  Judith,  48 ;  exploits  of,  52 ;
spoils  of,  in  West  Indies  (1572)  52,
62;  'Sir  Francis  Drake  revived,'
by  Philip  Nichols  (1626)  53;  the
Armada  and,  63; at  Lisbon,  64;

213

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

'  Sir Francis Drake, his  voyage,

1595.'  ''^y  Thomas  Maynarde,  64;

Warner  on,  97.
Drake,  George,  of  Apsham,  ship  of,

in  consort  of  the  Marigold  (1593)

viTi. 157; his prize, viii. 158;

voyage  of,  to  Ramea,  viii.  161.
Drake, John, captain, sights the

Cacafuego  (1579)  xi. 116.
Drake,  John,  captain,  adventures  of,

in  river  Plate,  xi.  94 ;  captain  of  the

Francis  (1582)  xi.  172,  175;  taken

by  natives, 189, 209 ; escape  of,

209 ; and  his  pinnace  in  the  river

Plate,  sufferings  of,  269 ; sent  to

the  viceroy  of  Peru,  270.
Drake, Thomas, in Sir Francis

Drake's  company  (1578)  xi. 109.
Drake, Thomas, captain of the

Thomas (1585) x. 98; captain

of the Hope (1595) 234; joint

executor  of  Sir  Francis  (1596)  239;

his  son,  heir  to  Sir  Francis,  239;

at  the  fight  of  Pinos  (1596)  262.
Drake,  Thomas,  corporal,  his  prizes

(1586)  VI.  437.
Drams,  see  Drachms.
Drauer,  Master,  of  the  Chios  trade

(1569)  V.  115.
Draward, George, of  the  Sunshine

(1586)  VII.  408.
Drayton, Michael, quotation from,

XII.  34,  77.
Dreadnought,  the,  Thomas  Fenner,

master  of  (1587)  vi.  438.
Drenton,  see  Drontheim.
Dress  of  Bezeneger  people,  v.  389 ;

of  Pegu  people, 448 ; of  Indians

of  Florida,  x.  52,  57.
Drette, Rue, principal street in

Goa,  V.  459.
Drew, Geoffrey,  of  Lynn,  i.  349.
Drew, John, his prizes (1586) vi.

437-
Drinking ceremonial in Guinea

(.1557)  yi-  227.  _
Drinks,  in  Russian  monasteries,  11.

441  ; Thomas  Bulley's  account  of,

448; in Bokhara, 470; African,

VI. 174; Japanese,  328.
Drontheim,  Norway,  iv.  12,  100 ;  the

Bona  Confidentia  on  the  coast  of,

II-  35i>  372; summer  trade  in,  vii.

453.

Dronton,  see  Drontheim.

Drue,  John,  of  Bastable,  factor  of
Andrew  Barker  at  Teneriffe  (1574)
X.  82 ;  imprisoned  by  the  Inquisi-
tion,  83.

Druel,  Sir  Humphrey,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Drugs,  III.  13 ;  Persian  and  Eng-
lish merchants  of  (1568)  140;
found in Virginia (1586) viii..

357-
Drunkenness,  in  England  (1589)  vi.

480; in  Guiana,  x.  361.
Dubgal,  son  of  Sumerled,  King  of

Argyll,  I.  30,  31.
Dublin,  Godred,  King  of  Man,  in,  I.

31-

Ducat,  money  of  Babylon,  vi.  10;  of
Bussorah,  12 ;  of  Goa,  19 ;  of
Cochin,  21.

Duccala,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Du-chef,  Sir  Gabriel,  at  the  defence
of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  34

Duckat,  see  Ducat.

Duck,  the,  Richard  Hawkins,  cap-
tain  of (15S5) X. 99.

Ducket,  Geoffrey,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  iii.  109;  voyage  to
Persia,  150;  illness,  152;  suc-
ceeds Thomas  Banister  in  Persia,
153 ;  and  the  Cossacks,  155 ;  at
Moscow,  157 ;  on  Persia,  158-166  ;
and  Russian  officials  (1572)  181,
190; and  Persian  trade,  212,  335.

Ducket,  Lionel,  granted  Russian
licence,  ill.  109 ;  and  Persian
trade, 212.

Ducket,  Sir  Lionel,  and  the  negro
trade (1562) x. 7.

Duddeley, see  Dudley.

Dudley,  Ambrose,  Earl  of  Warwick
(i528?-i59o),  of  the  Barbary  Com-
pany, VI.  419,  420 ;  and  Captain
Frobisher  (c.  1576)  vii.  278 ;  Queen
Elizabeth's  visit  to,  283;  Mount
Warwick  in  Hall's  Island  named
from  (1577)  292.

Dudley,  Captain,  and  capture  of
negros  (1568)  ix.  446;  death  (1568)
IX. 448.

Dudley,  Henry,  and  the  Armada
(1588) IV. 217.

Dudley,  John,  first  Duke  of  North-

214

INDEX

umberland,  Richard  Eden's  epistle
to  (1553)  X.  2.

Dudley,  Robert,  Earl  of  Leicester,
dedication  to,  by  William  Malim,
V.  118;  chancellor  of  Oxford  Uni-
versity, 120 ;  passport  for  Thomas
Fuller  (c.  1580)  329;  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,  420,
422;  Myra  Momanyn's  letter  to
(1587)  VI.  430,  431.

Dudley,  Sir  Robert,  Earl  of  War-
wick, fleet  of,  I.  Ixxviii. ;
knighted  at  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.
260;  voyage  of,  to  Trinidad,
etc.  (1594)  X.  203-212;  ships  cap-
tured by  (1595)  205;  and  the  dis-
covery of  Guiana,  206;  descrip-
tion of  Guiana  by,  207;  portrait
of,  208;  captain  of  Orocoa  and,
208;  Spanish  ship  sunk  by  (1595)
210;  on  El  Dorado,  361;  and  the
ships  of  Richard  Allot  (1596)  xi.
417.

Duel  of  Captain  Andrew  Barker  and
Philip  Roche  at  Veragua  (1576)  x.

85-
Duffield, owner of the Richard

(1590)  vii.  31.
Duffild,  captain  of  the  Crane  (1591)

VII.  41.
Dufgald,  son  of  Nel,  and  Loglen,  i.

38  f.
Dufgaldus,  see  Dufgald.
Dufglas,  see  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.
Duina,  see  Dvina.
Duisburg, Gerardus Mercator at

(1581)  III.  453,  457.
Duke,  Peter,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's

heet,  death  of  (1586)  x. 134.
Dulce,  Rio,  vi.  158,  159.
Dulgallus,  see  Dubgal.
Dulwer, John, of  Cley, and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  64.
Dumaryn  Point,  in  land  of  Mindora,

IX. 330.
Dumitch,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-

Duna  river,  see  Dvina.

Dunkerk,  see  Dunkirk.

Dunkirk,  and  the  ships  for  the
Armada  (15S8)  iv.  204;  besieged
by  Seymer  and  Lonck,  209;  Duke
of  Parma  at,  and  the  Armada,
220.

Dunne, Samuel,  of  the  Richard  of

Arundel,  in  Benin  (1588)  vi.  460;

death  of,  in  the  Azores,  vi.  460.
Dunstan,  Archbishop,  i.  22.
Dunwich, Suffolk, contention be-
tween Cinque Ports and, i. 44;

ships in Edward III.'s fleet,

299.
Duoron,  Isle  of,  the  Bonaventure  at

(1591)  viii. 151.
Durfoorth,  see  Durfurth.
Durfurth,  Cornelius,  master  of  the

Confidentia,  11.  206,  214.
Durham,  Anthony  Beck,  bishop  of,

patriarch  of  Jerusalem  (1305)  iv.

370.
Durham,  John,  survivor  of  the  Toby

(1593)  VII. 129.
Durham, Simon, of Wiveton and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  65,  66,  67.
Duriforth, John, mariner on the

Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.
Durisme,  see  Durham.
Dursies,  the.  off  west  Ireland  (1578)

VII.  231.
Durward,  Thomas,  Earl  of  Athole,

I-  37-

Dutch  or  Deutsch  Knights,  cata-
logue of  the  Grand  Masters  of  the
Order  of  the,  11.  i-ii ;  defeated  by
Vladislaus,  King  of  Poland,  7  f. ;
league  between  Poland  and,  8-11 ;
rebellion  of  Prussia  against,  9 ;
overthrow  of  the  Order  of  the,
11;  ambassadors  of  the,  to
Richard II., 12.

Dutch,  free  from  toll  in  Russia
(1554)  II.  276.

Dutch  trade  in  Kegor,  11.  373 ;
leather  trade,  383 ;  interference
with  English  merchants  in  Russia
(1583)  III.  316;  soldiers,  eighty
bands  of,  in  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
205 ; fishing trade in Lapland

(1557)  n- 374-
Dutton,  William,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Duina,  see  Dvina.
Duyna,  see  Dvina.
Dvina,  province  of  Russia,  iii.  358;

description of, 363 ; products  of,

368.
Dvina  river,  in  Russia,  iii.  68,  363,

vi[. 183, 199; oil made on, 11.

215

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

224,  225,  263 ;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son  on,  418;  Osep  Napea  on,  426;
fish  in.  III.  71 ;  St.  Michael's  Mon-
astery on,  73;  English  trade  on,
93.  95.  109.  "6.  469,  474;  Eng-
lish trade  restricted  to  Muscovy
Company,  97;  description,  103  ;  the
Searchthrift  in,  122;  sixth  Per-
sian expedition  on,  214;  Yug  and
Sukhona, tributaries, 406.

Dyeing,  Richard  Hakluyt's,  of  the
Middle  Temple,  instructions  about,
V. 229-234.

D\'er,  Andrew,  master's  mate  in
Captain  Frobisher's  second  voy-
age to  the  west  and  north-west
(1577)  VII.  217;  master  of  the
Hopewell  (1578)  vii.  231 ;  pilot  of
the  Aid  (1577)  vii.  285,  295.

Dyer,  Sir  Edward  (d. 1607)  i.  xxix.

Dyer's  cape,  discovered  by  John
Davys  (1585)  vii.  389.

Dyes,  Russian,  11.  383 ;  Venetian,
III.  52 ;  Persian  (1579)  iii.  249 ;
found  in  the  Western  Planting
(1583)  VIII.  116;  in  Virginia  (1586)
VIII.  357;  in  Florida,  viii.  452;
in  Guiana,  x.  426.

Eagle,  the,  at  Flores  (1590)  viii.
421.

Earl  of  Cumberland's  Isles,  dis-
covered by  John  Davys  (1587)  vii.
420.

Earle,  Thomas,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  70.

Earnest,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 402.

Earthquakes,  in  Iceland  (1581)  iv.
17,  107;  in  S.  Michael  Island
(1591)  vii.  79;  in  Terceira  Island,
80;  in  Meta  Incognita,  228,  374;
in  Mexico,  ix.  380,  457.

Earwig,  the,  pinnace  of  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1594)  x.  204.

East  Seas,  princes  of  the,  agreement
of,  III. 177.

Easter  Customs  in  Russia,  11.  436.

Easterland,  ships  of.  King  of
Spain's  commission  concerning
(1585)  VI.  417.

Easterlings,  Witland,  country  per-
taining to,  I.  15;  bad  dealings  of
(1583)  VIII. 135.

Eastern Russian countries, opened

to  English  trade  (1588)  in.  355.
Eastland see  Lithuania.
Eastmeere, and its tributaries, i.

15-

Eastwestone,  i.  48.

Eaton,  George,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307.

Ecatepec,  highest  hill  discovered  in
New Spain (1570)  ix. 370.

Ecawini  river,  x.  494.

Ecclesia  Major,  principal  church  in
Mexico,  IX.  431.

'Ecclesiastical  History, 'by  Eusebius,

VIII.  105.

'  Ecclesiastical History,' by Theo-

doratus,  viii. 106.
Ecfrid,  King  of  Northumberland,  i.

10.
Eclauou, King, vassal of King

Utina  (1564)  IX.  21.
Ecrowto  river,  x.  492.
Eddystone, off Plymouth, vii. 30 ;

the  Hope  on  (1595)  x.  226; rock

in  Straits  of  Magellan  resembling,

XI.  297.
Edelano,  King  of.  Captain  Laudon-

niere  and  (1565)  ix. 67.
Edelano Island, in the river May,

IX,  54; Peter Gamby at (1565)

55-

Edell,  see  Volga.

Eden,  Captain,  frigate  of,  sunk
(1596)  X.  241.

Eden,  Richard  (1521-1576)  historian,
I.  xxiv.  ;  on  Muscovy,  11.  239  ff. ;
and  Queen  Mary,  270;  descrip-
tion of  Africa,  by  (1553)  vi.  142;
on  the  Ocean  Sea,  vii.  199;  'A
Treatise  of  New  India,'  translated
by  (1553)  X.  2  ;  and  the  voyage  of
Sir  Thomas  Pert  and  Sebastian
Cabot  (15 16)  4;  preface  to  his
translation  of  Peter  Martyr's
'  Decades,'  xii.  35.

Edenborough,  see  Edinburgh.

Edesius,  scholar  of  Meropius,  viii.
104;  butler  of  the  King  of  India,
104; leaves  India, 105.

Edgar,  grandson  of  Edmund  Iron-
side, voyage  to  Jerusalem  of  (1102)
IV. 295.

Edgar,  King  (944-75).  I-  16  ff. ;
navy of, mentioned by several

216

INDEX

authors,  i.  Iv. ; praise  of,  ii.  138-

141, 144.
Edgerton,  Lionel,  at  Azafi  (1577)  vi.

285.
Edict  of  Mully  Hamed,  Emperor  of

Morocco  (1587)  VI.  428,  429.
Ediestone,  see  Eddystone.
Edil,  see  Volga.
Edinburgh, Queen's court  at, n.

253; Spanish refugees at (1588)

IV. 232 ; Lord Robert Steward,

imprisoned  in  (1577)  vii.  287.
Edmund  Ironside, King,  i. 24,  iv.

295-

Edmund,  son  of  Edmund  Ironside,
I.  24,  25,  IV.  295.

Edmund,  brother  of  Prince  Edward,
son  of  Henry  III.  (1270)  iv.  365.

Edward,  King,  i.  7.

Edward  the  Confessor,  i.  25 ;  and
the  charter,  i.  294 ;  and  the  Cinque
Ports,  42,  43,  50;  vision  of  (1056)
IV.  285;  and  William,  Earl  of
Normandy  (1064)  iv.  291.

Edward  I.  of  England,  i.  45 ;  the
Hanse  Towns  and,  xlviii. ;  and
the  Cinque  Ports  privileges,  Ivii.,
50 ;  his  charter,  i.  46 ;  part  of  his
charter  to  the  barons  of  the  Cinque
Ports,  293-296 ;  his  voyage  to  Asia
(1270)  IV.  359-366.

Edward  1 1,  of  England,  letters  to
Haco,  King  of  Norway,  i.  341  ff.

Edward  III.  of  England,  fleet  of,  i.
Ivii.,  297-299;  and  the  Dutch  or
Deutsch  knights,  11.  13 ;  and  Brit-
tany, 119;  and  Dartmouth,  120;
his  statute  concerning  Lombards.
121;  his  forces  at  the  siege  of
Calais  (1347) 142.

Edward  IV.  of  England,  commerce
under,  i.  li. ;  grants  charter  to
English  merchants  (1462)  11.  147;
embassy  from  John  II.,  King  of
Portugal  (1481)  VI.  123.

Edward  VI.  of  England,  grant  of
corporation,  11,  201,  iii.  83,  84;
granting  charter  of  Bridewell  to
the  citizens  of  London,  engraving
of,  II.  208;  his  letter  to
kings  and  princes  of  the  north-
east regions  (1553)  11.  209-211;
death  of,  245 ;  his  letters  delivered
to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  256,
XII

261 ;  Ivan  Vasiliwich's  letter  to,
271,  272;  beginning  of  Rus-
sian relations  with  England
under,  iii.  3 ;  made  Sebastian
Cabot  grand  pilot  of  England
(1548)  VII.  156;  granted  annuity
to  Sebastian  Cabot,  157;  and
company  of  merchant  adventurers,
XII, 22.

Edward,  hostage  in  Guinea  (1556)
VI. 208.

Edward  or  Jorweth  Drwydion,  son
of  Owen  Gwynedd  (c. 11 70)  vii.

133-
Edward, son of  Edmund Ironside,

I.  24,  25,  IV.  295.

Edward,  the  gunner's  man,  drowned

off  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.  318.
Edward  Bonaventure,  the,  crew  of,

II.  213  f. ;  Chancellor,  captain  of
the,  239,  245,  246,  279,  281 ;  ap-
pointed return  of  the,  287;  in
Russia  (1554)  314,  III.  85,  331;  at
Orwell,  II.  323  ;  wreck  of  the  (1556)

"•  351.  359.  379.  "I-  334;  goods
recovered  from  wreck,  11.  390.

Edward  Bonaventure,  the,  of  the
English  merchants'  fleet  (1586)
VI.  47 ;  bound  for  Venice,  vi.  48 ;
rear-admiral,  voyage  of  the  (1591)
VI.  387-407;  James  Lancaster,
captain  of,  vi.  390,  x.  194;
William  Mace,  master  of,  vi.  392 ;
doubles  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
(1591)  x.  194;  captures  of,  195  f. ;
and  Englishman  found  at  S.
Helena  Island  (1593)  197;  mutiny
on  board  (1592)  196;  (1593)  199;
return  to  England  of,  200.

Edward  Bonaventure,  of  Sir  John
Hawkins's  fleet,  at  Flores  (1590)
VIII.  421.

Edward  Bonaventure,  the,  Edward
Fenton's  ship  (1582)  xi.  163,  172;
Luke  Warde,  captain  of,  165 ;  the,
loses  the  galleon  Leicester  (1583)
197;  and  the  Indians  of  Brazil,
199.

Edward  Cotton,  the,  voyage  of
(1583)  VI.  408;  loss  of  the,  VI.
411;  confession  of  William  Bends
concerning  loss  of,  vi,  412.

Edwards,  Arthur,  11.  213;  agent  for
Muscovy  Company  (1553)  291,  iii.

217

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

332 ;  letter  to  Thomas  Nicols
(1565)  III.  44;  to  Sir  Thomas
Lodge,  46 ;  first  letter  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  54-63 ;  second
letter,  64-67 ;  kindness  shown  to,
56;  and  the  customs  ofificer,  59;
his  appreciation  of  Anthony  Jen-
kinson,  63 ;  his  Persian  privilege,
64;  in  the  fourth  voyage  to
Persia  (1569)  136-140;  received  by
the  Shah,  143  ;  privileges  granted,
144;  in  the  sixth  voyage  to  Persia,
212;  winters  at  Astrakhan,  217;
death  (1580)  232,  335.

Edwards,  John,  boatswain's  mate  on
the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.
214.

Edwards,  Laurence,  purser's  mate
on  the  Bona  Esperanza,  11.  213.

Edwards,  Thomas,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Edwin,  king  of  Northumberland,  i.
8  f.

Edystone,  see  Eddystone.

Egaeus,  death  of,  iv.  72, 173.

Egerton,  Captain,  on  the  Foresight,
death  of  (1596)  x.  240.

Eggs, Easter, in  Russia, 11.  436.

Egillus,  twelfth  bishop  of  Holen,  in
Iceland  (1332)  iv.  55, 154.

Egomort,  Sir  Peter,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Egrand,  French  ship  at  (1577)  vi.
240;  William  Towerson  at,  vi.
242  ;  the  Minion  at,  vi.  242  ;  the
Tiger  at,  vi.  243.

Egrets  in  Florida,  x.  61.

Egripts,  see  Egrets.

Eguemortes  (Aiguesmortes),  Prince
Edward embarks at (1270) iv.

359-

Egypt,  Athelard  in  (1130)  iv.  307;
Lent  in,  v.  44;  map  of,  engraving
of,  176;  commandment  for  (1584)
V.  288 ;  voyage  of  John  Evesham
to  (1586)  VI.  35-38;  of  Laurence
Aldersey, 39-46.

Egyptian  Sea,  south  of  Cyprus,  v.
124.

Eisleben,  Martin  Luther  born  in,  v.
321.

Eiton, see Eyton.

Elabath,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Eland,  Wolstan  and,  i. 15.

Elbe, the, at Hamburg, Henry

Austell  at  (1585)  v.  320,  327.
Elbing,  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)

III.  345; senate  of,  and  William
Harborne  (1588)  vi.  58.

Elbogan,  pine  trees  in,  in  Iceland,

IV.  36, 132.

Elburg,  II.  10 ;  English  merchants
and  goods  seized  in,  15-18;  mer-
cantile differences  settled  in,  22.

Elcair,  kingdom  of,  under  kingdom
of  Fez,  in  Africa,  vi. 144.

Elchies,  Emperor  of  Morocco  and
his  (1577)  VI. 288.

Eldergay,  Bathy's  agent,  and  the
papal legates, i. 164, 165.

El  Dorado, city, XI.  18;  reported  on, by
Armago,  x.  208;  in  Guiana,  340;
magnificence  of,  356;  origin  of
name  of,  362  ;  various  letters  con-
cerning, x,  432-441 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  and  his  plans  about,  xii.
42,  72.

El  Dorado  river,  see  Marafion.

Eldred,  John,  John  Newbery's  letters
to,  from  Ormuz  (1583)  v.  457,
458;  voj'age  of,  to  Tripolis  and
Bussorah  (1583)  vi.  1-9 ;  engraving
of  monument  to,  8 ;  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  76,  78.

Eleanor,  mother  of  Richard  I.,  at
Naples  (1191)  IV. 325,  327.

Elephants,  white,  in  Pegu,  v.  421,
487;  hunting  and  taming,  422,
486,  488 ;  in  war  time,  424,  489 ;
in  Ceylon,  501;  description  (1555)
VI. 164, 165.

Elgazair,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Elie,  see  Ely.

Elinore,  see  Eleanor.

Eliot,  Hugh,  of  Bristol,  discoverer
of Newfoundland, 11. 178, vii.

155-

Elisha,  prophet,  and  the  duke  of
Samaria, x.  44.

Elizabeth  Bay,  named  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1587)  xi.  300;  anchor-
age, XI.  372.

Elizabeth  Island,  xi.  357;  named  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi. 158.

Elizabeth,  Lady,  tomb  of,  at  Mar-
burg, II.  2.

218

INDEX

Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Castile  and
Aragon,  and  Christopher  Colum-
bus, VIII.  442.

Elizabeth,  Queen  (1533- 1603),  i.
17 ;  portrait  of,  i.  iii.  ;  and
Sigismund,  King  of  Poland,
II.  485-487 ;  letters  to  Emperor  of
Russia,  III.  3 ;  to  the  Sophi  of
Persia  (1561)  in.  6;  and  the  Mus-
covy Company,  83 ;  letter  of
Sigismund,  King  of  Poland,  to
(1567)  99,  100;  and  the  Russian
ambassadors  (1567)  98-100;  letter
to  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor
of  Russia  (1568)  loi ;  her  pre-
sent to  him,  106 ;  and  the
Emperor  of  Russia  (1572)  175-179;
her  letters  to  Shah  Thomas,  Sophi
of  Persia  (1579)  212-214;  letters
of,  entrusted  to  Arthur  Pet,  iii.
25s.  257;  unfriendliness  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia  towards
(1583)  320;  her  letters  to  Ivan
Vasiliwich,  Emperor  of  Russia
(1583)  312 ;_  (1591)  422;  her
letter  to  Boris  Feodorowich,  428 ;
Feodor  Ivanowich's  letter  to
(1591)  432;  (1583)  484;  Boris  Feo-
dorowich Godonova's  letter  to  434-
436 ;  her  promise  of  help  against
Russia's  enemies  an  article  of  the
league,  469,  471,  473,  479,  481;
enters  London  in  triumph  (1588)
IV.  233 ;  prayer  by,  239 ;  letters
from  Murad  Khan  to  (1579)  v.
169;  (1581)  189; to  Murad  Khan

(1579)  171.  175;  (1581)  189;  (1582)
221,  224;  (1584)  311;  to  All  Pasha,
Turkish  admiral  (1582)  228;  from
Mustapha  Chaus  (1583)  258;  to
Akbar,  King  of  Cambay  (1583)
450;  to  the  King  of  China
(1583)  451;  Sinan  Pasha's  letter
(1590)  VI.  60-72 ;  privileges  to
Levant  Company  (1592)  73-92 ;
letter  to  the  Chief  Vizier,  99 ;  pre-
sents to  Murad  Khan  and  the  Sul-
tana, 102 ;  letter  from  Murad
Khan's  Sultana  (1594)  114,  116;
privileges  to  the  Barbary  Com-
pany (1585)  419;  letter  to  the  Em-
peror of  Morocco  (1587)  432,  433;
grants  patent  to  traders  in  Guinea
(15S8)  443-450,  VII.  90; patent  to

Thomas  Gregory  (1592)  vii.  102;
and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1592)
106;  and  the  Madre  de  Dios,  117;
letters  of,  to  the  Emperor  of  Ethi-
opia (1597)  129,  131;  and  Captain
Martin  Frobisher  (1576)  204,  283,
321,  XII.  27;  letters  patent  to
Adrian  Gilbert,  for  discovery
of  China  passage  (1583)  vii.
375-381 ;  names  Meta  Incognita,
VIII.  2  ;  her  letters  patent  to  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  for  colonising
America  (1578)  17-23,  xii.  36;  let-
ters patent  granted  to  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  by  (1584)  vili.  289-296;
Indian  name  of,  x.  354;  her
efifigy  on  new  twenty-shilling
pieces  given  to  Indians  (1595)  415  ;
'  patroness  and  defender  of  the
Indians  '  (1596)  464;  letter  to  the
Emperor  of  China  (1596)  xi.  417-
419,  419-421 ;  her  men,  xii.  25 ;  her
policy, 43 ; her  navy, 44.

Elizabeth,  the,  leaves  St.  Nicholas
for  England  (1581)  iii.  246.

Elizabeth,  the,  and  Spanish  ships
(1590)  VII.  31.

Elizabeth,  the,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  310.

Elizabeth,  the,  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  xii.  55;  sunk  (1596)
x.  241 ;  return  of,  to  England,  xii.
60.

Elizabeth,  the,  John  Winter's  ship
(1578)  XI.  137,  148,  155;  lost  sight
of  (1578) 159.

Elizabeth,  the,  ship  of  Edward  Fen-
ton  (1582)  XI.  172  ;  on  Guinea  coast
(1582)  173.

Elizabeth  Bonaventure,  the,  Thomas
Fenner,  captain  in  the  (1585)  x.
98.

Elizabeth  Bonaventure,  John  Traugh-
ton,  captain  of,  at  the  fight  of
Pinos  (1596)  X.  262.

Elizabeth  Constance,  the,  of  Sir
Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.
227,  235.

Elizabeth  Jonas,  the,  of  the  English
fleet  (1588)  IV.  218.

Elizabeth  of  Dartmouth,  the,  in
John  Davys 's  third  voyage  to  the
north  (1587)  VII.  414.

219

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Elizabeth  of  Guernsey,  the,  and
Hassan,  viceroy  of  Algiers  (1584)
V.  280; crew,  V.  281.

Elizabeth  Stokes  of  London,  the,
and  Hassan,  viceroy  of  Algiers
(1584)  V.  2S0; crew,  282.

Elizaeus,  see  Elisha.

Elkin,  William,  adventurer  for
Brazil  (1580)  xi.  33.

Ellerichshausen,  Conrad  ab,  twenty-
seventh  master  of  the  Dutch
knights,  n.  8.

Ellerichshausen,  Lewis  ab,  twenty-
eighth  master  of  the  Dutch
knights  (1450)  11.  9.

Ellis,  John,  of  the  Sunshine  of  Lon-
don (1585)  VII.  382.

Ellis,  John,  master  of  the  Moon-
shine (1585)  VII.  382;  and  the
natives,  387.

Ellis,  John,  master  of  the  White
Lion  (1589)  XL  381.

Ellis,  Robert,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 403.

Ellis,  Simon,  of  the  Sunshine  (1586)
VII. 409.

Ellis,  Thomas,  his  account  of  Cap-
tain Frobisher's  third  voyage  to
Meta  Incognita  (1578)  vii.  231.

Ellis,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Ellis,  Thomas,  condemned  to  galleys
by  Inquisition  of  Seville  (1570)  ix.
464.

Eliot,  John,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307.

Elmes,  Richard,  surgeon  to  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  III.  324.

El  Pongo,  fall  on  the  Amazon  river,
XI. 17.

Elson,  Robert,  of  Dantiske,  11.  296.

Eltham  Manor,  near  Greenwich,  iv.

371-
Elvas,  birth-place  of  Lopez  Vaz,  x.

75.

Elvers,  Anthony,  of  the  Swallow
(1584)  V.  281.

Ely,  Bishop  of,  chancellor  of  Eng-
land (1190)  IV.  320.

Ely,  Bishop  of,  and  the  Russian  am-
bassador (1556) II. 356, 357,

359-
Ely, Isle of, English Catholic re-
cusants at  (1588)  IV.  208.

Emanuel,  King  of  Portugal,  and
the  tax  on  horses,  vi.  15 ;  his
ammunition  and  arms,  496.

Emanuel,  King  of  Portugal,  and  the
discovery  of  Brazil,  xi.  248.

Emanuel,  Portuguese  calker,  and
Thomas  Cavendish  (1586)  xi.  292.

Emanuel,  the,  John  Newbery  and
(1583)  V.  454.

Emden,  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)
III.  345 ;  levies  made  at,  for  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  204;  Henry
Austell  at  (1585)  v.  327.

Emeralds,  found  in  the  Iwaripoco  by
Vincent  Pinzon,  x.  491.

Emeria,  mentioned  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x.  417;  King  of,
Carapana,  x.  423  ;  and  Antonio  de
Berreo,  372  ;  his  flight  to  Cairomo,
419.

Emery,  John,  his  escape  from  the
Contractation  House  and  recapture
(1570)  IX.  463 ;  condemned  to  gal-
leys, 464.

Emmanuel,  negro  of  the  Lewis
(1587)  XI.  311;  and  the  English
at  Puna  Island,  317.

Emmanuel  of  Bridgwater,  or  Busse,
of  Frobisher's  third  voyage  to  the
North-west,  vii.  243 ;  Captain
Newton  of,  vii.  322 ;  attendant  on
the  Thomas  Allen,  325 ;  dangers
of, 341.

Emmanuel  of  Exeter,  the.  Captain
Courtney  of  (1578)  vii.  322.

Emola,  King,  Captain  Laudon-
niere's  carpenters  killed  by  the
sons  of  (1565)  IX.  66;  and  the
landing  of  the  Spaniards  in
Florida  (1565)  90.

Emoloa,  food  found  at,  by  Captain
Laudonniere  (1565)  ix.  75.

Emparepana  town,  mentioned  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  417.

Empedocles  on  the  causes  of  hot
springs,  iv.  35,  130.

Empoli,  John  de,  discoveries  of
(1497-1510)  VIII.  128.

Empress  Dowager  of  Russia  sent  to
Ouglets  (1584)  III.  337.

Emyri,  descendants  of  the  Prophet,
v".  351-

Enacappe,  King,  vassal  of  King
Utina  (1564)  IX,  21.

INDEX

Enam  province,  in  China,  xi.  381.

Encisa,  city  in  Spain,  x. 171.

Enciza,  Martin  Fernandez  de,  de-
scription of  the  Amazon  by,  xi.
19-22.

Enckhuysen,  see  Enkhuizen.

Enecaque,  Captain  Laudonniere  at
(1565) IX. 54, 67.

Eneguape,  see  Enecaque.

Enerus,  Otto,  thirtieth  bishop  of
Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1589)  iv.  60,

Eng-anno,  Cabo  del,  discovered  by
Captain  Ulloa, latitude  of  (1540)

IX.  278.

Enganno,  Cabo  del,  in  Hispaniola,

X.  327; latitude  of,  333.
Enganno, Isla  del. Captain  Gualle

at  (1584)  IX.  326.
England,  discoveries,  i.  Ixvi.  f. ;
agreement  between  and  Prussia
(1388)  II.  18-24,  (1409)  98-103;
Prussian  merchants  privileges  in,
23;  promises  of  restitution  to
Prussia,  38-41 ;  and  the  Hanse
merchants,  55,  95-98;  importance
of  the  Narrow  Sea  to,  11.  114,
130  f.,  145;  and  the  Hanse  towns,
34-36;  Thome's  map  of,  11.  169;
route  for  bringing  Persian  goods
to  (1568)  m.  147;  Emperor  Bald-
win's visit  to  (1247)  IV.  353;
voyage  of  Lyon,  King  of  Armenia,
to  (1386)  445;  Kings  of,  called
themselves  Kings  of  Jerusalem,  v.
125 ;  arms  of,  on  Levant  Com-
pany's ships  (1581)  197;  ships  of.
King  of  Spain's  commission  to
arrest  the  (1585)  vi.  417 ;  climate  of,
VII.  268 ;  comparison  with  Morocco,
269; fish trade with Frisland,

450-

English,  Edmund,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII. 402.

English  merchants  attacked  by  Tar-
tars, III.  150;  products  sold  in
Persia,  53 ;  coins,  152 ;  trade
with  Sweden,  207;  soldiers  under
Sir  William  Stanley  in  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205; at  Dunkirk,  220.

English  Port,  see  Ingles  Port.

Englishmen's  Strait,  between  New-
foundland and  Greenland,  ix.  381.

Engroneland,  see  Greenland.

Engrontland,  see  Greenland.

Engus,  son  of  Sumerled,  king  of
Argyll,  I.  30;  victory  over  Regi-
nald, 33 ; death  of, 34.

Enkhuizen,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  320.

Enriquez,  Don  Martin,  new  viceroy
of  Mexico  (1567),  at  San  Juan
d'Ulloa,  XII.  49.

Ensenore,  Indian,  death  of  (1586)
vm.  333-337-

Ensign,  black  and  white,  seen  in
Countess  of  Warwick's  Sound,  vii.
359-

Ensigns  and  colours,  Spanish,  in  St.
Paul's  Cathedral  (1588)  iv.  234;
English,  at  Cadiz  (1596)  251.

Entremonson,  vi.  29.

Eparacano,  nephew  of  Topiawari,
christened  Don  Juan,  x.  412.

Eparagotos,  nation  near  the  Caroli
river,  enemy  to  the  Spaniards  and
the  Inga  (1595)  x.  402,  405.

Epenscheid,  John,  Livonian  messen-
ger, II,  88,  92.

Ephesus,  Neophytus,  Metropolitan
of,  in  Russia,  11.  185.

Ephesus,  mountains  of,  iv.  26,  118;
bishop  of,  and  the  English  am-
bassadors, 287;  Diana's  Temple  in,
V.  119;  gulf  of,  Richard  Wrag  in
the  (1594)  VI. 107.

Epimes,  gulf  of,  Turkish  galleys
enter  the  (1522)  v. 15.

Epirus,  see  Albania.

Episcopia,  town,  in  Cyprus,  v.  125.

Epithymum,  found  in  Crete,  vi,  27.

Eppera  town,  near  Berbice  river,  x.
494.

Epuramei  from  Peru,  conquerors  of
Guiana,  x.  400,  475;  subject  to
the  Emperor  of  Guiana,  401 ;
enemies  of,  403.

Epyrus,  see  Albania.

Equator,  xi.  153;  causes  of  heat
under  the,  vii.  255-268 ;  cold  nights
under  the,  271.

Equi,  Don  John's  town  in  Guinea
(1562)  VI.  260.

Equier,  see  Esquire.

Equinoctial,  see  Equator.

Eracano,  native  of  Virginia,  and
Ralph  Lane  (1585)  vm.  335.

Eramacoa,  Indian  captain,  x.  493.

221

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Erasbec,  Sultan,  and  Arthur  Ed-
wards, III.  136 ;  and  Lionel  Plum-
tree, 154.

Erasinus  river,  In  Argolica,  iv.  36,

Erasmo,  Captain,  da  Fermo,  killed
at  the  siege  of  Famagusta  (1571)

V. 137.  151-
Erigena, John, life  and  travels  of,

IV.  280; death  of  (884)  282.
Erigene,  see  Erigena.
Erington,  Captain,  at  the  taking  of

Puente  de  Burgos  (1589)  vi.  492.
Erinsleiben  in  Saxony,  v.  321.
Erizo,  James,  captain  of  the White

Lion  (1585)  X.  98.
Ermine, magistrate in Alexandria

(1584)  V.  271.
Errif, kingdom of, in Africa, vi.

144.
Ersola, Thomas de, pilot, taken

prisoner by Thomas Cavendish

(1587)  XI. 327; conspires  against

Thomas Cavendish (1587) 331;

executed,  332.
Escot, lieutenant in Sir Francis

Drake's fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-

Escovedo,  secretary  to  Philip  II.,
King  of  Spain  (1588)  iv.  198.

Escudamor,  Sir  James,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Escudo  Island,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1596)  x.  239;  death  of  Sir  Francis
Drake near (1596) 253.

Escumas,  second  sort  of  sugar,  vi.
128.

Escutcheon  of  the  King  of  Spain
(1586) X. 114.

Eseven,  George,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  317.

Espanna,  Nueva,  see  New  Spain.

Espannoles,  Puerto  de  los,  see  Port
of  Spain.

Espartel,  Cape,  Laurence  Aldersey
at  (1586)  VI.  39;  casting  away  of
the  Toby  near  (1593)  vii.  124,  125.

Espejo,  Antonio  de,  voyage  of,  and
discovery  of  New  Mexico  by  (1583)
IX.  169-185,  186-204;  at  St.  Bar-
tholomew Valley  (1582)  188,  203;
presents  from  Indians,  192  ;  deci-
sion about  fresh  discoveries  (1582)
196 ; deserted by most of his

soldiers  (1582)  199;  account  of
voyage,  sent  to  the  Conde  of
Corunna  (1583)  204.

Esperes,  horsemen  in  the  Turkish
army  (1553)  v.  105.

Espiney,  L',  ensign  of  Francis  de
Roberval  (1542)  viii.  283,  288.

Espirito  Santo,  El  Cabo  de,  in  the
Philippines,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  327.

Espirito  Santo,  town,  in  Brazil,  de-
scription, XI.  250;  Fenton  at,
269.

Espoir,  the,  of  Hableneff,  Denis
Blundell,  captain  (1557)  vi.  218.

Esquimaux,  Captain  Frobisher's  first
acquaintance  with,  xii.  27.

Esquire  or  Equier,  of  the  Grand
Signior,  pay  of,  vi.  62  ;  servitors
of  the,  or  Seiesir,  pay  of,  64.

Essequibo,  x.  376,  459;  named  after
the  Earl  of  Essex,  460,  494;  Fer-
dinand, Indian  pilot  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  settled  at,  455  ;  descrip-
tion, XI. II.

Essex,  Countess  of,  and  the  boy
prisoner  of  Thomas  Cavendish
(1587)  XI.  327.

Essex,  Robert  Devereux,  Earl  of,  i.
Iviii.  ; and the voyage to Cadiz

(1596)  IV.  236,  250,  VII.  40,  X.  266;
secret  council  called  by,  iv.  240 ;
portrait  of,  iv.  240 ;  head  of  a
squadron,  242,  248;  takes  Cadiz,
252  ;  and  the  wounded,  vi.  481 ;
and  the  English  fleet  (1589)  495;
at  Peniche,  496;  at  Lisbon,  500,
501,  507;  cartel  to  Spanish  general
(1589)  508;  departure  for  England,
511; voyage of, to the Azores

(1597)  X.  280 ;  gentleman  adven-
turer, XII.  66.

Essiran,  province  in  China,  xi.  380.

Estampes,  a  gentleman  of  Com-
minges,  ix. 103.

Estates,  three,  in  Japan,  vi.  329.

Estazia  Island,  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1595)  X. 229.

Estcrlings,  ii.  122 ;  and  Russian
leather  trade,  3S3.

Estivi,  money  of  Bussorah,  vi. 11.

Estland,  vii.  463 ;  attempted  con-
quest of,  by  Nicolo  Zeno  (c.  1380)
VII.  450.

INDEX

Eston,  William,  master  of  the  Sun-
shine of  London  (1585)  vii.  382 ;
discoveries  of,  403.

Estotiland, the Sunshine at (1586)

VII.  407;  discovered  by  Nicholas
and  Antonio  Zeno  (1380)  445,  464;
description  of,  455,  463,  465;  Fris-
land  fishermen  in,  455,  458;  trade
with  Greenland,  456 ;  discovered
formerly  by  Frisland  fishermen,
464.

Estremadura,  people  of,  and  the  de-
fence of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Estrecho  de  todas  Santos,  11.  169,
176  f.

Estria,  see  Istria.

Esturmy  (Sturmy)  Sir  William,  am-
bassador to  Prussia,  11.  27,  28,  30,
47.  55.  59.  79.  84,  85,  87,  91.

Esurgny  or  Esnoguy,  way  of  procur-
ing, in  Hochelaga  (1535)  viii.  233  ;
chains  made  of,  presented  to
Jacques  Cartier  C1536)  256,  257,
265.  _

Etaiguinams,  enemies  of  the  Span-
ish (1596)  X.  474  .

Ethelwold,  bishop  of  Winchester,  i.
22.

Ethingham,  Sir  William  de,  vice-
admiral  (1409)  II. 104.

Ethiope, see  Ethiopia.

Ethiopia,  iv.  26,  118;  locusts  as
food  in,  84,  189;  David,  Em-
peror of,  VI.  144 ;  people  of,  or
Nigritae,  167 ;  divisions  of,
168,  169;  animals  and  products
of,  169 ;  Emperor  of,  letters
of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  (1579)  vii.
129, 131.

Ethiopians,  or  Saracens,  Jenghiz
Khan  and  the,  i.  146 ;  conquered
and converted by Constantine,

VIII.  106.
Etilia,  see  Volga.

Etiquette  in  court.  In  Russia,  11.
226  f.,  255  f.,  428,  430,  432;  at
table,  227,  257  f.,  293,  421,  428-
430,  432-

Euboea,  ortogules  in,  iii.  399.

Eucunocamindono,  Augustine,  gover-
nor of  half  the  kingdom  of  Finga,
XI.  425,  429.

Euet,  see  Evet.

Euphorbium,  found  in  Barbary,vi.27.

Euphrates,  near  Azaron,  v.  409,
v.  446,  465 ;  branch  of,  at
Aleppo,  Syria,  v.  108;  flat-
bottomed  boats  on  the,  367;  Tig-
ris and,  meeting  point  of,  371 ;
Birrah  on,  vi. 3 ; description  of,

Euracco  river,  xi.  7.

Europa  river,  tributary  of  the  Ori-
noco river,  x.  395.

Europe,  Thome's  map  of  Eastern,
II. 170  f.

Eusebius,  bishop  of  Caesarea,  and
the  Jerusalem  mother,  iv.  73,  175;
on  Empress  Helena,  271 ;  Flavins
Constantine  and,  275 ;  life  of
Octavius,  King  of  Britain,  by,
276 ;  '  Ecclesiastical  History, '  viii.
105.

Eustace,  brother  of  Godfrey  de
Bouillon,  in  the  Holy  Land  (1097)
IV.  294,

Eutropius  on  Flavins  Constantine,
IV.  274.

Euxinus  Sea,  see  Black  Sea.

Evagrius,  Scholasticus,  ecclesiasti-
cal writer,  viii. 107.

Evans,  assistant  to  Edward  Fenton
(1582)  XI.  163,  176;  at  Sierra
Leone, 175.

Evans,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)  viii.
318.

Evans,  Richard,  and  Henry  Roberts,
ambassador  to  Turkey  (1585)  vi.
426.

Evats,  lizards  like,  in  the  houses  of
Sapies,  x.  20.

Eversby,  James,  at  Port  Desire
(1592)  XI.  399.

Every,  William,  cooper  on  the  Ed-
zvard  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
214.

Evesham,  John,  his  voyage  to
Egypt  (1586)  VI.  35-38;  account
of  voyage  to  the  Azores  (1586)  434-

437-
Evet, William, at Santos, Brazil

(1581)  XI.  37.
Ewaipanoma  nation,  headless  people,

near Caora river, x. 406, 423,

465-
Ewiapanomos,  see  Ewaipanoma.
Ewparepani, on Caroli river, x.

423-

223

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Exchange,  the,  In  London  (1587)  vi.

37-
Exchange, the, of  Bristol, Captain

Roberts In, and William King

(1592)  X.  193.
Exchange, the, of Sir Francis

Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.  227.
Exeter  merchants,  privileges  granted

to  (1588)  VI.  443,  446.
Exeter Sound discovered by John

Davys  (1585)  vii.  389.
Exmouth, ships from. In Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.
'  Expedition  of  King  Richard,'  the,

by  William  the  Pilgrim,  iv.  345.
Expedition,  the,  of  London,  and  the

survivors  of  the  Toby  (1593)  vii.

129.
Ey,  see  Eye.
E5^e,  in  Suffolk,  xi.  290.
Eyms, William, his ledger book

(1533-1544)  V.  69.

Eynos,  or  Eynus,  Captain,  in  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  expedition  to
Guiana  (1595)  x.  379,  417;  dis-
covery of  Sayma  by,  396.

Eyton,  or  Yatton,  in  Hereford,
Richard  Hakluyt,  Esquire  of  (1572)
IX.  378; his  family  and,  xii.  77.

Ezeklel's  prophecy  about  Tyre,  vi.
108.

Ezlem,  near  the  Red  Sea,  v.  347 ;
caravans  of  pilgrims  at,  364.

Ezrabeta  Casslpuna  Aquerewana,
Indian  name  of  Queen  Elizabeth
(1595)  X.  354.

Ezzah,  In  Africa,  vi. 142.

Faar-Islands,  see  Faroe.

Faareyiar, see  Faroe.

Faber,  John,  clerk,  afterwards  bishop
of  Vienna,  ambassador  to  England
(1527)  V.  61.

Fabian,  see  Fabyan.

Fabian,  William,  and  John  IL,
King  of  Portugal  (1481)  vi. 123.

Fablano,  Mario  de.  Captain  en-
slaved at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.
152.

Fabrlano  or  Fablano,  Glacomo  de
Captain,  killed  at  the  defence  of
Famagusta (1571) v. 137, 150.

Fabyan,  Robert  (d.1513),  chronicler,
I. xxvil. ; Intended voyage of

Henry  IV.  to  the  Holy  Land  by
(1413)  IV.  455;  chronicle  of,  on
Sebastian Cabot (1497) vn. 154,

155-

Faces,  painted,  of  Russian  women,
III. 416.

Factoryj  Portuguese,  in  Zanzibar
(1591)  VI.  392.

Facy,  Captain,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Cap-
url  river  (1595)  x.  380.

Faial,  see  Fayal.

Fair  Island,  Captain  Martin  Fro-
blsher  sights  (1576)  vii.  204.

Fairs,  in  Mexico  city,  ix.  380.

Falrweather,  Richard,  master  of
Captain  John  Drake's  pinnace,
adventures  of  (1583)  xi.  94;
escape  of,  with  John  Drake  (1587)
209 ; sufferings  of,  269.

Faith,  Charles,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

B'alchines  of  Caesar  Frederick,  faith-
fulness of  (1567)  V.  390;  of  the
King  of  Pegu, 415.

Falcon,  the,  of  London,  in  S.
Michael  harbour  (1589)  vii.  3.

Falcons,  caught  by  Captain  Burton,
at  God's  Mercy  Cape  (1585)  vii.
393  ;  found  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.
369; in  Florida,  451.

Falconara  Island,  William  Harborne
at  (1583)  V.  250.

Falerno,  Richard  I.  at  (1196)  iv.
322.

Falernum, see  Falerno.

Falls,  see  Cataracts.

Falmouth,  the  Jesus  driven  to  (1583)
v.  293 ;  John  Newbery  at  (1583)
45^1  453;  Earl  of  Essex  leaves
(1589)  VI.  495;  Earl  of  Cumber-
land lands  at  (1589)  vii.  30,  31;
John  Davys  at  {1585)  382;  return
of  the  Golden  Hind  to  (1583)  viii.
74 ;  departure  of  the  Mangold
from  (1593)  157;  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  166;  the  Tiger  at  (1585)
317;  Henry  May  returns  to  (1594)
X.  203 ;  French  ship  from  the
Amazon  river  at,  366 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake  at  (1577)  xi.  102;
John  Winter's  ships  at  (1577)
148.

Falso.  Cape,  xi.  365 ;  Thomas  Cav-

224

INDEX

endish  at  (1588)  342; latitude  of,

351-

Falster,  Wolstan  and,  i.  15.

Famagusta,  John  Locke's  descrip-
tion (1553)  V.  94;  French  laws  in,
100;  chief  city  of  Cyprus  (1571)
124;  siege  of  (1571),  account  by
Nestor  Martiningo,  v.  129-152 ;
conquered  by  the  Turks,  vi.  109  f.

Famine,  excesses  caused  by,  iv.  73,
175,  viii.  5  f. ;  in  the  Minion  in  M.
Hore's  voyage  to  Newfoundland
(1536)  VIII.  5  ;  in  the  bark  of  French
discoverers,  485  f. ;  in  Fort  Caro-
line (1565)  IX.  59,  66,  X.  54;  on
the  Minion  (1568)  ix.  408;  in
Potosi  (1590)  X. 171.

Famine,  Port,  or  Nombre  de
Jesus,  XI.  349,  357,  371;  in
Strait  of  Magellan,  Pedro  Sarmi-
ento's  men  left  to  starve  at  (1587)
299;  John  Chidley  and  the  Span-
iard at  (1590)  382.

Fanes,  Castle  of,  in  Rhodes,  v.  15.

Fano, II, rock  near  Corfu, v. 80.

Fant  Church  Street,  see  Fenchurch.

Faranias  Islands,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  328.

Faraon,  in  Portugal,  iv.  268.

Faraone  Castle,  at  Alexandria,  v. 331.

Fare,  see  Faro.

Fareyiar,  see  Faroe.

Farfar,  see  Orontes.

Farillon,  English  ships  in  (1594)
VIII.  165 ;  Charles  Leigh  and
William  Sayer  at  (1597)  166;
Charles  Leigh  at, 181.

Farmne  river,  by  Portsmouth,  v.
292.

Faro,  del,  strait,  between  Sicily  and
Calabria,  iv.  322.

Faroe  Islands,  iv.  14,  103,  229;  dis-
tance from  Iceland, 12, 100.

Faroo,  in  Darha,  vii.  89.

Farre,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Farrington,  Henry,  Levant  trader,
non-member  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  87.

Farrington,  Henry,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Farrington,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Farthow, William, in Virginia

(1585)  viii. 318.
Fashardo  or  Fasshardo,  King  More-

quito at the house of, x. 375 ;

Antonio  de  Berreo  left  at  Cumana

with,  460.
Fatehpur,  larger  than  London  (1583)

V.  474 ; William  Leedes  and  the
King  of,  475.

Fatepore,  see  Fatehpur.

Fatma,  daughter  of  Mahomet,
ancestress  of  the  Serifo,  king  of
Mecca,  v.  351;  tomb  of,  at
Medina,  362.

Fatonochaiti, bonzes  at, in Japan,

VI.  339-

Faulcon Island, named  by  Edward

Fenton  (1583)  xi.  189.
Faulcons,  see  Falcon.
Fawcet  or  Faucet,  Christopher,  his

voyage  into  Persia  (1569)  iii.  136;

at  Shemakha,  137; agent  for  the

Muscovy  Company,  241.
Fawkner, John, mariner on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  ll.  213.
Fayal  Island,  vii.  56,  63,  66,  68,  75,

119; X.  300,  326,  334,  337;  George

Fenner  at, vi. 280; the  Earl  of

Cumberland's  fleet  at  (1589)  vii.

6-9, 66; English fleet at (1590)

VIII.  422 ; Spanish  fleet  at  (1570)

IX.  461.

Fear, cape of. Sir Richard Gren-

ville's  danger  at  (1585)  viii.  315;

John  White  at  (1587)  391.
Feasts,  the  four,  at  the  court  of  the

Khan of Cathay, iv. 434; in

China,  vi.  306.
Feather  garments  of  the  natives  of

Meta  Incognita, vii. 369.
Fecamp, France, monastery of, i.

45-
Felippe, Indian, and Sir Francis

Drake  (1578)  xi. 138.
Felix,  captain  of  the  Luisa  of  Dieppe

(1593)  VI.  406.
Felles,  see  Skins.
Feltrius  mountain,  iv.  38,  134.
Feluchia,  see  Feluge.
Feluge,  on  the  Euphrates,  v.  367-8;

the Tiger at (1583) 455; Ralph

Fitch  at,  466 ; John  Eldred  at,  vi.

3.  4-
Felugia,  see  Feluge.

225

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Femeer,  Nicholas,  and  the  English

ships,  II.  62.
Femeland,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6.
Fen,  Hugh  ap,  and  Russian  pirates,

II.  64.
Fenchurch Street, lodgings of the

Russian ambassador in London,

"•  355-

Fenner,  Edward,  captain  of  the  May
Flower  (1566)  vi.  266,  270.

Fenner,  George,  and  Lord  Charles
Howard  (1588)  iv.  216;  captain  of
the  Leicester,  218;  voyage  of,  to
Guinea,  by  Walter  Wren  (1566)
VI.  266-284 ;  portrait  of,  272  ;  cap-
tain of  the  Lion  (1591)  vii.
41.

Fenner,  Thomas,  Captain,  master  of
the  Dreadnought  (1587)  vi.  438;
lands  in  Spain  (1589)  vi.  483;  cap-
tain in  the  Elizabeth  Bonaventure,

X.  98 ;  and  the  attack  on  Carta-
gena, 117;  of  the  Peregrine  at
Maio  (1594)  XI.  46;  at  the  siege
of  Pernambuco  (1595)  51 ;  and  the
Armada,  xii.  67.

Fenton,  Edward  (d.  1603),  south-
western voyage  of,  i.  xxviii. ;  cap-
tain of  the  Gabriel  (1577)  vii.  211,
285,  297;  Captain  Frobisher  and,
218;  captain  of  the  Judith  (1578)
233,  322  ;  in  Anne  of  Warwick's
Island  (1578)  241 ;  and  the  soldiers'
drill,  312;  lieutenant  general  of
Captain  Frobisher  (1578)  321-
362; friars taken by (1582)

XI.  93 ;  instructions  given  to,
concerning  his  voyage  to  East
Indies  and  Cathay  (1582)  163-171  ;
voyage  of,  to  China  (1582-83),
written  by  Captain  Luke  Ward,
172-202 ;  captain  of  the  galleon
Leicester,  172  ;  meets  the  Spanish
ships  at  S.  Vincent  (1583)  195,
254,  268,  XII.  26.

Feodor  Ivanowich,  Emperor  of  Rus-
sia, coronation  of  (1584)  ill.  338;
and  the  Muscovy  Company,  347 ;
his  letter  to  Queen  Elizabeth
(1592)  432;  privileges  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  439-445  ;  his  death,
448.

Feraclous,  isle  of,  v.  578.

Ferariis,  William  de,  i.  324.

Ferca  Framburaro  at  Famagusta
(1571)  V. 148, 152.

Ferdinand,  Archduke,  father  of  the
Marquess  of  Burgrave,  of  the
Spanish  Armada  (1588)  iv.  205;
brother  of  Charles  V.,  embassy  of,
to  Henry  VIII.  (1527)  v.  61;
meeting  with  Charles  V.  at  Lan-
deck,  321.

Ferdinand,  King  of  Castile,  and
Christopher  Columbus, vii. 188.

Ferdinando,  Arawak  Indian,  pilot  of
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  x.  381,  392  ;
settled  near  Essequibo  (1596)  455.

Ferdinando,  the  Portuguese,  in
Sierra  Leone  (1582)  xi. 176.

Ferdinando,  Simon,  of  Captain
Amadas's  expedition  (1584)  viii.
299,  310;  loses  John  White's  fly-
boat  in  the  Bay  of  Portugal  (1587)
387-390 ;  at  Rosse  Bay,  389 ;  at
Portsmouth,  401.

Fergat,  see  Malathia.

Fergus  of  Galloway,  i.  30.

Fermenia  Island,  William  Harborne
at  (1583)  ¥.250.

Fermo,  Marquis,  Captain,  wounded,
V.  139 ;  and  enslaved  at  Fama-
gusta, 151.

Fermorie,  the,  hospital  in  Rhodes,
Turks  in  (1522)  v.  59.

Fermosas,  As  Ilhas,  see  Formosa.

Fermous,  rendezvous  of  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's fleet (1583) viii.

45-
Fernambuck,  see  Pernambuco.
Fernandes, Francis, and Richard
^Hakluyt  (1583)  v. 452.
Fernandez, Gonzalvo, in  charge  of

Suchistlahuaca and Ometepec

towns, IX. 468.
Fernando,  master  of  the  Tiger  (1585)

VIII. 315; settler in Virginia,

402.
Fernando  or  Hernando,  treachery  of,

towards  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)

XI.  304.
Fernando  de  Loronha Island,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  74 ; Sir

Francis Drake  in  sight  of  (1579)

162.
Fernandos, Matthew, Portuguese

captain,  dwelling  at  Sierra  Leone

(1582)  XI. 177.

226

INDEX

Fernelius,  John,  on  the  four  ele-
ments, IV.  34,  129.

Ferol,  see  Ferrol.

Ferra  Pasha,  and  his  janissaries  at
Rhodes  (1524)  v.  58.

Ferrar,  Jerome,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Cap-
uri river  (1595)  x. 380.

Ferrara, William Thomas on, iv.

452.
Ferro,  Island,  William  Towerson  at

(1555)  VI. 179.
Ferrol  in  Galicia,  Sir  John  Hawkins

at  (1564)  VI,  264,  X. 10; Spanish

fleet  escapes  to  (1589)  vi,  483.
Fes,  see  Fez.
Fescampe,  see  Fecamp.
P'essa,  in  the  kingdom  of  Fez, vi.

Feuchtuvang,  Conrad  a,  tenth
master  of  the  Dutch  Knights,  11.

5-
Feuchtuvang, Sifridus a, twelfth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.  6.
Fever,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)  viii.

318.
Feversham,  i.  47,  48 ; ships  from,  in

Edward  III.'s  fleet,  297.
Fez, kingdom of, vi. 143 ; Mully

Abdelmeleck,  king  of  (1577)  285;

gold  market  at  (1591)  vii.  88;  new

trade  in,  begun  by  Roger  Boden-

hani  (1564)  IX.  359.
Fez  river,  captives  of  the  Moors  at

.(1593)  VII. 128.
Ficino, Marsilio, on America, vii.

160; on  the  Ocean  Sea, 199.
Fiddle Island, Edward Fenton at

/1583)  XI. 197.
Field, Captain, of the Solomon,

death  of,  at  the  taking  of  Bymba

(1564)  X.  22.
Field,  John,  and  the  Chief  Vizier  of

Turkey,  vi.  96.
Field, John, English merchant

settled  in  Seville,  friend  of  Robert

Tomson (1553) ix. 338; leaves

Seville (1555) 339; and Gongalo

Ruiz  de  Cordova,  346; death,  in

Mexico,  347.
Field, Matthew, Russian licence

granted  to  (1569)  iii.  109.
Field, Richard, draper, Levant

trader (c. 1533) v. 69.

Fierro  Island,  and  the  water-drop-
ping tree  (1564)  x.  13;  mentioned
in  second  Ruttier,  307.

Figen,  kingdom  of,  xi.  424.

Figueroa,  x.  252.

Fila  Cavena,  the,  of  Venice,  John
Locke  in  (1553)  v.  77;  becalmed,
88.

Filberds,  Island  of,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  218,
258 ; latitude  of,  280.

Fillie, David, ship's master (1582)

V.  218,  219;  captain  of  the  Eliza-
beth Stokes  (1584)  280,  282.

Filpot,  see  Philpot.

Fingal, King  of  Man, i. 25.

Finister, see Finisterre.

Finisterre,  Cape,  vi.  72,  251,  x.  335;
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1564)  vi.
264,  IX.  399,  X.  10,  64,  264 ;  George
Fenner  near  (1566)  vi.  266;  the
Richard of Arundel near (1589)

VI.  456;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
fleet  scattered  at  (1592)  vii.  107;
Sir  Robert  Dudley  near  (1594)  x.
204; latitude  of,  335.

Finland,  Russian  frontier,  11.  252 ;
cattle  of, 416.

Finland,  Gulf  of,  11.  261 ;  and  the
Volock  river,  iii.  363.

Finlandia,  see  Finland.

Finmark,  English  merchants  in,  11.
Ill  f. ;  Willoughby's  fleet  off,
220  f . ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  's  fleet
off,  415 ;  Arthur  Pet  and  the  coast
of.  III.  254;  map  of,  460;  coast
of,  461.

Finns,  i.  11;  fishers  and  hunters,
12 ; pay  tribute  to  Octher, 13.

Finqua,  xi.  423 ;  or  Finga,  king-
dom of, governors  of, xi. 425,

Fiquinville,  Captain,  in  Captain
Ribault's  expedition  (1562)  viii.
,457-

Firando,  see  Hirado.

Fire,  Indian  way  of  kindling  a,  x.
.52.

Fire  mountains,  see  Volcanoes.

Fisco,  le,  Boniface  of  Provence  at
(1522)  V. 12; Solyman  at,  21.

Fish,  commerce  of  salt,  in  Brabant
and  Zeeland,  11.  129;  stockfish
trade  in  Iceland,  136;  markets  in
Russia, 224; salt fish in Khol-

227

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

mogory,  263,  276;  advice  to  buyers
of,  287;  in  the  Dvina,  in.  71;  in
the  Caspian  Sea,  166;  in  the  Vol-
ga, 370 ;  in  Iceland,  diminution
of,  IV.  40,  136;  trade  in  Iceland,
76,  178;  in  Campa,  Friar  Odoric's
account  of  the  strange,  419;
in  Fuco,  caught  by  birds,  425 ;  in
the  Euphrates,  vi.  4 ;  on  the
African  coasts,  181;  sale  of,  210;
in  Pekin  moats,  316;  in  China,
317,  318;  poisonous,  called  Ship
of  Guinea,  379 ;  the  Richard  of
Arundel's  crew  and  the  (1591),
467 ;  of  Newland,  or  Poor  John,
X.  TOO ; in  Trinidad,  350.

Fish,  bones  of,  used  as  arrowheads
by  Indians  of  Trinidad,  xi.  22 ;
Sword-,  or  utelif  and  sea-calf,
found  near  Sierra  Leone  (1582)  xi.
178.

Fisher,  distress  of,  at  Port  Desire
(1592)  XI.  399.

Fisher,  Richard,  his  voyage  in  the
Marigold  (1593)  vm. 157.

Fisheries  at  Sconia,  11.  42 ;  of  the
Portuguese  at  Cape  Blanco  (1564)
X. 14.

Fisherman  of  Tartary  and  the  north-
east passage, vii. 181.

Fishers,  Lapland,  11.  417;  in  New-
foundland, free  from  taxes  (1548)
VIII.  8.

Fishes,  flying,  xi.  153 ;  in  Spanish
seas,  IV.  244 ;  in  African  seas,  vi.
173,  274,  381,  395;  in  Florida  and
Guiana,  x.  60;  Sir  Francis  Drake
finds  store  of  (1578)  xi.  106.

Fishing,  on  the  ships  of  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  320 ;  Stephen
Borough  and,  344;  trade  in  Kegor,
373;  at  Inger  Sound,  416;  at
Petowse,  453 ;  in  the  Dvina  and
the  Volga,  in.  71 ;  ships  for,  208 ;
of  Samoyedes,  403  ;  of  Laplanders,
404;  in  China,  vi.  327;  Spanish
destroyed  by  the  English  (1587)
441 ;  in  Newfoundland,  viii.  10,
49,  58,  63,  82,  83,  163,  164,  167,  187,
201,  233,  277,  300,  315,  338;  at
Alcatrazes  Island  (1581)  xi.  35;
wonderful,  by  Luke  Warde  (1582)
182.

Fitch, Ralph  (fl. 1583-1606)  vi. 76,

77»  78;  voyage  of,  i.  Ixix.,  Ixxii. ;
voyage  of,  to  the  East  Indies,
with  John  Newbery  (1583-1591)  v.
450,  465-505  ;  released  from  prison,
461 ;  John  Eldred's  voyage  with
(1583)  VI.  I ;  his  escape  from  Goa,
7;  of  the  Levant  Company  (1592)
76,  78 ; discoveries  of,  77.

Fitzherbert,  release  of,  imprisoned
in  Russia  (1569)  iii. 118.

Fitz-John,  Morice,  son  of  John  Des-
mond, and  the  English  prisoners
of  the  Armada  (1591)  vii.  50;  de-
fection of,  51.

Fitz-roy,  Oliver,  his  voyage  to  the
Holy  Land  (1218)  iv.  349.

Fitzwalter,  Lord  Robert,  his  voyage
to  the  Holy  Land  (12 18)  iv.  349.

Fitzwilliam,  M.,  in  Sir  John
Hawkins's  voyage  to  Florida
(1565)  X.  63.

Five  Men's  Sound,  discovered  by
Captain  Martin  Frobisher  (1576)
VII.  210.

Five  Ports,  see  Cinque  Ports.

Flag,  of  England,  in  the  Caspian
Sea,  II.  477;  William  Towerson
and  his  (1577)  vi.  235.

Flamborough  Head,  Anthony  Jen-
kinson's  fleet  at  (1557)  11.  414.

Flamborow,  see  Flamborough.

Flamingoes,  in  Florida,  x.  61.

Flaminio,  Captain,  slain  at  Fama-
gusta  (1571)  V. 151.

Flanders,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6
fleet  of,  before  Calais,  299 ;  mer
chants  of,  in  England,  333 ;  cus
toms  in  352,  355;  products  of,  11
115  f. ;  industry  of,  121,  129  f. ;  Eng
lish  merchants  in  (1462)  148  f.
Thome's  map  of,  169;  Anthony
Jenkinson  in,  in.  195;  soldiers  of,
at  Joppa  (1107)  IV.  301-306;  fish
trade  with  Frisland,  vii.  450.

Flandrina,  in  Malabar,  iv.  412,

Flats  in  Russian  rivers,  in.  221,  455;
round  Savona  Island,  vi.  404;
mentioned  in Ruttier, x. 302.

Flavins  Constantino,  King  of  Bri-
tain, IV.  274;  prayer  by,  275;  his
death,  275,  339.

Flax,  Russian,  n.  278,  in.  71;  trade
in  Russia,  n.  393,  403,  in.  367;
sold  in  Cairo  (1584)  v.  274; found

228

INDEX

in  the  Western  Planting  (1583)
VIII. 116; in  Virginia  (1586)  354.

Flax,  river  of,  discovered  by  Vas-
quez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix.  150.

Fleets,  English,  at  the  time  of
Edgar,  i.  Iv.,  11.  140;  of  Edward
III.,  I.  Ivii.  ;  of  Henry  V.,  Ivii. ;
of  Edward  III.  before  Calais,
297  f. ;  of  King  John,  Ivi.  ;  south,
297  f. ;  north,  298  f. ;  expenses  of,
in  France  and  Normandy  and
Calais,  299  f. ;  Walsingham  on
the,  300  f. ;  and  the  Armada,  iv.
217,  218;  English,  at  Joppa  (1107)
301-306;  of  Richard  I.  for  the
conquest  of  Jerusalem,  340 ;  to  the
help  of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  129 ;
English  merchants',  to  Turkey
(1586)  VI.  47;  Spanish  and  Eng-
lish, 49 ;  Spanish,  bound  for  the
West  Indies  (1577)  235;  Spanish,
and  the  English  ships  (1585)  417;
Spanish,  and  Sir  Francis  Drake,
general  of  the  English  (1587)  438;
English,  to  Spain  and  Portugal
(1589)  470-527;  of  Benjamin  Wood,
bound  for  Magellan  and  China
(1596)  X,  I,  3;  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  for  the  negro  trade,  7,
10 ;  Spanish,  and  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa
(1568)  68;  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1585)  92,  97,  98;  Spanish  Indian,
to  be  strengthened  (1585)  96,  158,
160 ;  Spanish,  safe  course  for  the,
to  S.  Marta,  advised  by  Baptista
Antonio  (1587)  136;  of  John  Chid-
ley  in  Strait  of  Magellan  (1589)
170;  of  Christopher  Newport
(1591-2)  184;  of  Watts,  Captain
Lane,  general  of  (1592)  193;  of
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  for  his  voy-
age to  West  Indies  (1595)  213,
225 ;  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  Sir
John  Hawkins  (1595)  227;  fight
between  Spanish  and  English  near
Pinos  Island  (1596)  242,  250,  255;
Spanish,  Don  Pedro  Telio,  general
of  (1596)  254,  261,  264;  English,
ships  of,  at  Pinos  (1596)  262;  of
Sir  Anthony  Sherley  (159,6)  266;
of  Sir  Francis  Drake  at  S.  lago,
S.  Domingo,  etc.  (1586)  xi.  234;
of  Thomas  Cavendish  (1586)  290;

foreign,  i.  299 ;  French,  proposed
from  Rochelle  (1597)  67;  Japanese,
in  Corea  (1591)  431;  wherein
Sebastian  Cabot  discovered  the
river  Plate  (1526)  91 ;  of  the  mer-
chants of  Seville  for  Moluccas
(1527)  91;  Spanish,  Don  Pedro
Telio,  general  of  (1596)  x.  254,
261,  264;  bound  for  Magellan
Straits,  under  Diego  Flores  de
Valdez  (1582)  xi.  92,  183,  267;  sent
for  discoveries  by  Castro,  gover-
nor of  Peru,  287; regulations  for,

XI.  442-448,  457.
Flemengoes,  see  Flamingoes.
Fleming, Captain Thomas, sights

the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  iv.
210.

Flemings,  forbidden  the  market  of
Novgorod  (1553)  II.  261;  free  from
customs  in  Russia  (1554)  276;  and
the  Edward  Bonadventure  (1554)
111.  331;  cowardice  of  two  ships
of  the  (1590)  VII.  33.

Fletcher,  chaplain  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet  (1578)  xi. no, 114,

XII.  33.  56.

Fletcher,  Giles,  D.C.L.,  Russian  am-
bassador (1588)  III.  353-357.  (1591)
423 ;  and  the  style  of  the  Russian
Emperor  (1588)  370,  376.

Fletcher,  John,  death  of,  in  Barbary
(1551)  VI. 137.

Fleur-de-lys,  an  isle  like  a,  in
Ramea,  viii.  151.

Flicke,  Robert,  report  to  Thomas
Bromley,  etc.  (1591)  vii.  56;  in  a
storm  off  F'lores  Island,  58;  his
prizes,  59,  60;  mutiny  against,  61.

Flight  of  the  English  fleet  reported
bv  Don  B.  Delgadillo  (1596)  x.
251.

Flint,  found  in  pine  trees,  iv,  37,
132.

Flispe,  Stephen,  of  Colchester  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.

Flok,  voyage  of,  to  Iceland,  iv.  13,
102.

Floods  in  Guiana,  x.  389,  403.

Florence  and  Edward  I.'s  great
charter,  i,  333;  William  Thomas
on,  IV.  452  ;  galleys  from,  leagued
against  English  ships  (1583)  v.
264.

229

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Florence  of  Worcester  (d.  1118)  on
King-  Edgar,  i.  16;  on  the  sons
of  Edmund  Ironside;  voyage  of
Ingulf  (1064)  according  to,  iv.  288.

Florentia,  see  Florence.

Florentines,  home  products  of  the,
II. 124.

Florentius  Wigorniensis,  see  Flor-
ence of  Worcester.

Flores  de  Valdes,  Diego,  prisoner  in
England  (1590)  x.  161 ;  sent  to
the  Straits  of  Magellan  (1582)  xi.
92,  267;  French  ships  taken  by,
271 ;  prisoner  of  Thomas  Caven-
dish (1587)  323.

Flores  Island,  x.  327,  337,  xi.  366;
latitude  of,  vi.  162,  x.  299,  334;
one  of  the  Azores,  vi.  280;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  near  (1589)
456,  466;  English  fleet  at  (1589)
VII.  4 ;  fight  at,  of  English  and
Spanish  fleets  (1591)  41  ff. ;  West
Indian  Spanish  fleet  at,  55 ;  Eng-
lish fleet  sent  to  (1591)  56,  57;
Dutch  ships  at  (1589)  62;  Sir  John
Burrough  at  ( 1 592 )  1 09  ;  rendezvous
of  the  Spanish  fleet,  112;  the
Marigold  at  (1593)  viil.  160;  John
White  at  (1587)  400;  (1590)  420;
the  Moonlight  at,  421;  Captain
Laudonniere  at  (1565)  ix.  98;
Christopher  Nevi^port,  and  Sir
John  Burrough  at  (i59i-2)x.  190;
Sir  Robert  Dudley  at  (1595)  210;
Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  at  (1596)
245;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1597)
XT. 15 ; Thomas Cavendish at

(1588)  347.  371-

Florez,  Dr.  Peter,  letter  from  Don
Bernaldino  Delgadillo  to  (1596)  x.
247-249,  250-252.

Florida,  viii.  281,  x.  62;  Spanish
fleet  of  a  hundred  ships  wrecked  off
(1590)  vii.  71  ;  Sebastian  Cabot's
voyage  (1496)  148,  154,  viii.  35;
discovered  by  John  and  Sebastian
Cabot,  35  ;  Spaniards  and  French
unsuccessful  in,  37;  Jacques  Car-
tier  on,  246;  near  Norumbega,
281 ;  Sir  Richard  Grenville's  fish-
ing at  (1585)  315;  John  White  in
sight  of  (1590)  411,  412;  dis-
covered by  John  de  Verrazzano
(1524)  423-438,  450; latitude,  426,

436 ;  fertility,  434 ;  description  of,
by  Laudonniere  (1587)  448;  native
of,  engraving  of,  448 ;  cus-
toms of,  453  f. ;  first  voyage  of
Captain  Ribault  to  (1562)  457;
king  of,  and  Laudonniere  (1562)
458;  Chiquola,  king  in,  466;
kings  in,  and  Captain  Albert,  474;
Captain  Laudonniere's  second  voy-
age to  (1564)  IX.  i-ioo;  Captain
Ribault 's  third  voyage  to  (1565)
82 ;  fourth  voyage  of  the  French
to  (1567)  100- 1X2 ;  products  de-
scribed by  Nicholas  Burgoignon,
114;  Pamphilo  Narvaez  in  (1527)
192)  Spanish  forts  in  (1572)  397;
Sir  John  Hawkins  on  the  coast  of
(1565)  X.  46,  48,  63;  an  island,
description  of,  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1565)  51-62;  Soto's  ex-
pedition to,  XII.  83 ;  cape  of,  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1593)  vi.
404 ; Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  at,

X.  244 ;  Indians  of,  described  by
John  of  Verrazzano,  viii.  424,  428  ;
described  by  Laudonniere,  452  ;  by
Sir  John  Hawkins,  x.  52.

Florinasa,  Messer,  Venetian  travel-
ler, V.  445,  446.

Florrie,  Charles,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Florus,  Lucius  (1516-87)  i.  xx.  ;  his
account  of  Captain  Britomarus,
IV. 270.

Floure-de-lice, see Fleur-de-lys.

Flowerdeluce,  the,  in  Milford  (1561)
VI.  256.

Flowers,  in  Florida,  viii.  430.

Flushing,  Laurence  Aldersey  at
(1581)  V.  214;  men  of,  and  the
5.  Philip,  Spanish  galleon,  iv.
226 ;  hulk  of,  a  prize  of
Robert  Withrington,  burnt  at  sea
(1587)  XI.  227.

Flyboat,  loss  of  a,  in  John  White's
fleet,  in  the  Bay  of  Portugal  by
Simon  Ferdinando  (1587)  viii.
387;  arrival  of  the,  in  Virginia,
392  ;  leaves  Virginia,  399  ;  dangers
of,  400;  of  John  White  at  Smer-
wick  in  Ireland  (1587)  401 ;  of
Sir Francis Drake burnt (1578)

XI.  108; of  John  Winter  (1577)  xi.
148,  155-

230

INDEX

Flyboats  of  Middelburg,  and  Sir
Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)  x.  217.

Focea,  plague  in  (1585)  v.  323.

Fochia,  see  Focea.

Fogo  Island,  description  and  pro-
ducts, VI.  279 ;  description.  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  at,  x.  271 ;  salt
found  in,  xi.  3 ;  or  the  Burning
Island,  Portuguese  possession,  106;
John  Winter  at, 152,

Fogs  in  Guinea  seas,  vi.  179.

Foi,  Chinese  money,  vi.  299.

Foi,  La,  of  Honfleur,  and  William
Towerson  (1577)  vi.  241.

Foito,  master  of  the  ordnance  at  the
defence of Famagusta (1571) v.

131-

Foix,  M.  de,  French  ambassador  to
England,  and  Captain  Laudon-
niere  (1565)  ix.  99.

Fo-kien,  first  shire  of  China,  vi.  295,
318,  350;  Moors  in,  321;  foreign
merchants  in,  vii.  201.

Folium  Indicum,  found  in  Goa  and
Cochin,  VI.  27.

Folkestone,  Kent,  i.  47,  48.

Folkstane, see Folkestone.

Fondeghi  Ingles,  dwelling  of  Eng-
lish consul  and  merchants  at  Tri-
polis,  VI. I.

Fones,  Andrew,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Fonseca,  Vincent,  Portuguese,
prisoner  of  Sir  John  Burrough
(1592)  VII. III.

Fonsecco,  gulf  of,  ten  islands  in,  xi.
362.

Fontechi,  five,  in  Alexandria  (c.
1580)  V.  331.

Fontenay  Foreland,  xi.  200.

Fonzeca,  island,  latitude  of,  x.  332.

Foo-chow,  chief  town  of  Fo-kien,  vi.
295 ;  price  of  food  in,  299 ;  Portu-
guese prisoners  in,  313;  descrip-
tion, 314.

Food,  in  Iceland,  iv.  64,  82,  164,
186 ;  in  China,  vi.  299 ;  scarcity
of  necessaries,  in  Japan  (1565)
328;  stores  of,  at  the  Groyne
(1589)  485;  in  S.  Domingo  Island
(155s)  IX.  342;  of  the  English
prisoners  in  Mexico  (1568)  422;
price  of,  in  Panama  (1599)  x.
177.

Foord  Monastery,  Baldwin,  abbot  of,.

IV. 340.
Football in Greenland (1586) vii.

411.
Foquien.  see  Fo-kien.
Forackan of Kazvin, and Arthur

Edwards,  iii.  60.
Foranosuque,  soldiers  of,  xi.  426.
Forcera,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

322.
Forchaim,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

321.
Forder, Francis, corporal, on the

Aid, Captain Frobisher's ship

(1577)  VII.  285.
Fordwich,  i.  47,  48.
Fore  town,  in  the  island  of  Hiu,  vi.

344-

Foreigners,  traffic  with,  advised  by
Richard  Hakluyt, vii.  247.

Foresight,  the.  Sir  Edward  Norris
in  (1589)  VI.  515.

Foresight,  the,  Queen  Elizabeth's
ship,  and  the  Spanish  fleet  at
Flores  (1591)  vii.  41 ;  fight  of,
near  the  Revenge,  vii.  48 ;  in  Sir
John  Burrough 's  fleet,  vii.  105;
and  the  Madre  de  Dios,  113,  (1590).
VIII.  421.

Foresight,  the,  of  Sir  Francis.
Drake's  fleet,  x.  240; loss  of,  241.

Foretz,  river,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartler  (1535)  viii._238.

Forfeitures  for  breaking  the  laws  of
the  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  84,
85 ;  incurred  by  the  members  of
the  Barbary  Company,  423.

Forforaine,  see  Pois  Parfareine.

Forks  used  in  Italy  and  Spain  (1578)
VI.  304; in  Japan,  334.

Formaretti,  Lorenzo,  Captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Formentera  Island,  William  Har-
borne  at  (1583)  v.  243;  galleys
cast  away  at  (1586)  vi.  45.

Formio,  La,  island  of  the  Sapies,  Sir
John  Hawkins  at  (1564)  x.  16.

Formosa,  ix.  333.

Forrest,  George,  carpenter's  ser-
vant, on  the  Matthew  Gonson
(1535)  V.  69.

Forster,  Richard,  consul  for  Aleppo,
etc.  (1583)  V.  260;  advice  from
William  Harborne,  261.

231

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Forster,  Thomas,  gentleman,  his
passport  to  Constantinople  (c.
1580)  V. 329.

Forster,  Thomas,  master  of  the
Nicholas  (1584)  v.  281,  282.

Forts,  English,  in  Countess's  Island
(1577)  VII.  310,  341 ;  built  by  Cap-
tain Frobisher  in  Countess's
Island  (157S)  VII.  347;  French,  in
Florida  (1565)  x.  53;  in  Brazil  (1542)
XI.  25 ;  in  Parajua,  taken  by  the
people  of  Pernambuco,  xi.  249 ;  in
Parajua,  taken  by  Diego  Flores  de
Valdez,  271 ;  Spanish,  built  in  S.
Juan  d'Ulloa  and  Vera  Cruz  (1590)
IX.  204,  205 ;  in  Florida  (1572)
397  >  possibility  of  building  a,  near
Rio  de  Janeiro,  x.  93 ;  built  in
Puerto  Rico  (1590)  161 ;  taken  by
the  Earl  of  Cumberland  (1598)
162 ;  near  the  Caracas,  taken  by
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)
217,  223;  in  Nombre  de  Dios
{1595)  237;  of  S.  lago  town,  de-
scription of,  269 ;  on  S.  Vincent
river  to  guard  the  Strait  of  Magel-
lan, XI.  251,  267;  built  on  the  river
Plate  by  Sebastian  Cabot,  252 ;
and  garrison  at  Arica,  262 ;
in  Chili,  built  by  Don  Pedro
de  Valdivia,  276;  of  El  Callao  de
Lima,  285.

Fortan  Islands,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  331.

Fortescue,  George,  captain  of  the
bark  Bonner  (1585)  x.  98; death,

134-
Forteventura,  see  Fuerte  Ventura,
Fortis,  Williain,  and  his  voyage  to

Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.
*  Fortunatus,  Olde, '  by  Dekker,  xii.

108.
Fosse, the,  port  of  Rhodes,  v. 10,

16.
Foster,  John,  master  of  the  Edward

Cotton  (1583)  VI.  408,  410.
Foster,  master  of  the  Primrose,  and

the  Corrigidor  of  Biscay  (1585)  vi.

413-417-
Fotoquiens, or  Japanese  saints,  vi.

337-
Fouchall,  see  Funchal.
Foulness, Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.

299.

Fountains  in  Iceland,  iv.  33,  128 ;
Saxo  on, 37, 132  ; wine  and  oil,

38,  133 ; blood,  38,  134 ;  poisoned,

39.  135-

Four  Hillocks  Island,  or  Chetera
Bougori,  III.  222.

Fournati,  Domingo  de,  captain  of  a
Genoese  carrack  (1522)  v.  11.

Fourneaux,  conspiracy  of,  against
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  ix.  39.

Fowey,  Cornwall,  11.  120 ;  ships
from,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.
297.

Fowlnesse,  see  Foulness.

Fowl,  wild,  in  India,  v,  476,  481.

Fowlay  Island,  latitude  of,  vii.  205,
206.

Fowler,  Thomas,  of  Lynn,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  67.

Fowles,  Richard,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Fowls,  in  China,  vi.  299 ;  near  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  380 ;  strange,
in  the  Northern  Seas  (1577)  vii,
287 ;  of  the  Continent,  discovered
by  Captain  Frobisher  (1578)  338;
of  Meta  Incognita,  374;  in  Pen-
guin Island,  description  of,  viii.
4;  in  Newfoundland,  6,  13,  49,  59;
wild,  on  Cape  Breton,  158;  water,
at  Seven  Islands  (1585)  243;  in
Granada,  ix.  156;  in  Mexico,  380;
in  Trinidad,  x.  350;  in  Guiana,
XI.  14;  in  Maio  Island,  104;  on
the  river  Plate,  108 ;  in  the  Straits
of  Magellan  (1578)  iii,  158;  at
Port  Desire,  description  of,  296 ;
in  S.  Helena,  345 ;  killed  by
Indians  as  a  present  for  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi. 155.

Fox,  John,  survivor  of  the  Tohy
(1593)  VII.  129.

Fox,  the,  bark,  of  London,  Roger
Bodenham's  ship  (1564)  ix. 359.

Foxcroft,  Samuel,  captain  of  the
Merchant  Royal,  voyage  of,  to
East  Indies  (1591)  x. 194.

Foxe,  John  (historian),  i.  xxiv.  ;
Acts  and  Monuments  by,  Ixiv.

Foxe,  John,  of  Woodbridge,  in  Suf-
folk, delivery  of  Christian  slaves
of  Alexandria  (1577)  v.  153-167;
gunner  of  the  Three  Half  Moons,
154-

232

INDEX

Foxe,  Randolph,  leaves  Astrakhan
(1581)  III.  245.

Foxe,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Foxenose,  see  Foxnose.

Foxes,  Persian,  and  the  English  ex-
pedition, III.  151 ;  in  Shirvan  or
Media,  166;  furs  of  Russian,  364,
417;  found  in  Hochelaga  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  244;
in  Florida,  x.  59.

Foxnose,  Cape,  Stephen  Borough
and  (1557)  II.  364;  Anthony
Jenkinson  and  (1557)  418;  seal
hunting  at, iii. 366.

Foy,  see  Fowey.

Foye,  La.  see  Foi.

Fracastorius,  Hieronymus,  voyages
of,  VII.  171,

Frailes,  the,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier,  X.  285,  287 ;  or  Friars  Island,
in  second  Ruttier,  313.

Frampton,  John,  'Arte  de  Navegar, '
translated  by  (1581)  xii.  80,  note.

France,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  4;
wasted  by  Huns,  279;  and  Ed-
ward I.  's  great  charter,  333 ;  war-
fare with  England,  11.  43 ;
Thome's  map  of,  169;  Anthony
Jenkinson  in,  iii.  195 ;  hot
springs  in,  iv.  35,  129 ;  Henry
III.,  King  of,  his  advice  to
Queen  Elizabeth  about  the  Ar-
mada (1588)  207;  conquered  by
Flavius  Constantine,  274 ;  and  the
British  immigration,  278;  Robert
de  Ketene  in  (1143)  309;  ships  of,
and  King  of  Spain's  commission
(1585)  VI.  417;  English  armies  in,
479 ;  unsuccessful  against  England
in  Florida,  viii.  37 ;  English  ship-
wrecked mariners  in  (1583)  88;
sale  of  hides  from  the  Western
Planting  by  Walker  in  (c.  1583)
114.

France,  Antarctic,  colony  of  Ville-
gagnon, in  America, vm. 450.

France,  New,  see  Canada.

France-Roy  Fort,  latitude  of,  vm.
281 ;  built  by  Francis  de  Roberval
(1542)  285.

Francesco,  Captain,  of  Venice,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  152.

Francesco,  John,  Captain,  of  Venice,

XII  233

slain at Famagusta (1571) v.

Francia,  Nova,  see  Canada.

Francis  I.,  King  of  France  (1536)
VIII.  255,  449  ;  and  Jacques  Cartier
(1540)  263,  264;  dedication  to,  of
John de Verrazzano's voyages

(1524)  423-438,  449-

Francis,  friar  of  Gallipoh  (1577)  v.
165.

Francis,  Friar,  companion  to  Fnar
John  de  Padilla  (1540)  ix. 166.

Francis,  Thomas,  merchant  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
213.

Francis,  the,  offered  to  Ralph  Lane,
by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1586)  viii.
343,  344;  Thomas  Moone,  captain
of  (1585)  x.  98;  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet  (1595)  227;  Captain
Wignol  and,  taken  prisoner  by  the
Spanish,  229.

Francis,  the  bark,  Edward  Fen  ton's
ship  (1582)  XI. 163, 172.

Francis,  the,  John  Drake,  captain
of, fate  of  (1582)  XI. 189.

Francis  of  Foy,  the,  of  Captain  Fro-
bisher's  third  voyage  to  Meta  In-
cognita (1578)  VII.  236,  238;  in
Anne  of  Warwick's  Sound,  239;
Moyles,  captain  of  (1578)  322;
attendant  on  the  Aid,  324;  rejoins
the  fleet,  341.

Francisca,  river  in  Panama,  x.  154.

Francisco,  Portuguese  merchant  in
Benin  (1553)  vi.  148.

Francisco, William  Towerson's  inter-
preter (1577)  VI.  235,  236.

Francisco,  pilot  of  Sir  Francis
Drake,  and  his  silver  cups  (1579)
XI.  116.

Francisco,  the  Greek,  and  Luke
Warde,  at  Sierra  Leone  (1582)  xi.

Francisco,  Rio  de,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  Ruttier,  x.  290.

Franco,  Cabo,  marks  of,  described
in  second  Ruttier,  x.  328.

Franco  Castle,  Henry  Austell  at
(1585)  V.  322.

Frangois,  Cape,  in  Florida,  dis-
covered by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)
VIII.  457;  Captain  Laudonniere
lands  near  (1564)  ix.  5.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Frank,  Jenklnson  called  a,  iii.  29,31.

Franke.  John,  of  the  Maria  Martin
(1584)  V.  281.

Frankfort,  Laurence  Aldersey  at
(1581)  V.  214.

Frankincense,  found  in  Sekotra,  vi.
26; found  in  Florida,  x 57.

Fransham,  Richard,  apothecary  of
Emperor  of  Russia  (1583)  ill.  324.

Frasoli,  weight  of  Ormuz,  vi. 14.

Fraud,  punishment  of,  11. 153  f.

Fred,  or  Freed,  Robert,  captain  of
the  Margaret  (1591)  x.  184;  Span-
ish ships  captured  by,  185.

Fredelaw,  Henry,  of  Cologne,  11.  79.

Frederick  Barbarossa,  Emperor  of
Germany,  league  with  Henry  H.
of  England,  i.  316-318;  and  In-
dians from America (1160) vii.

173-

Frederick  IV.,  Emperor,  and  the
Dutch  knights,  11.  9,  10.

Frederick,  King,  and  the  cathedral
of  Holen  (1584)  iv.  62,  162.

Frederick,  Caesar,  his  mention  of
Thana,  iv.  412;  voyage  of,  trans-
lated by  Thomas  Hickocke  (1563)
V.  365-449;  his  sufferings,  408,
414;  and  the  Retors  of  Martaban,
416;  ill  in  Goa,  440;  misfortunes
in  India,  440-442.

Fredo,  or  Frio,  Cape,  in  North
America,  vii. 167, 188.

Freebooters  and  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, III, 167.

Freedom,  religious,  in  China,  vi.
321;  of  Indians,  law  of  Charles
V.  for  the,  ix.  388.

Freeman,  Thomas,  of  Andrew
Barker's  company,  killed  at  S.
Francisco  Island  (1576)  x.  86.

Freeman, William, shipmaster, in.

303-
Frees,  Diego  de,  John  Oxenham  and

his  sailors captured  by (1575) x.

80 ; sent  by  the  viceroy  of  Peru  to

capture  John  Oxenham  (1575)  xi.

232.
Free trade between English and

Prussian  merchants  (1405)  11. 56.
Freight  of  the  barks  from  Ormuz  to

Bussorah,  vi. 13; to  Chaul,  Goa

and Cochin, 17; from Bussorah

to  Ormuz,  24.

Freigius,  John  Thomas,  '  Historia
de  caede  Sebastian!  Regis  Lusi-
taniae,'  vi.  293.

French,  the,  rumoured  landing  of,
in  England  (1386)  iv.  445;  at
Tunis,  450 ;  and  Brazil,  vi.  146 ;
William  Towerson  and  the  (1556)
213;  in  Cape  Verde  Islands,  237,
258,  X.  15 ;  stratagem  of  the,  at
Grand  Canary  Island  (1555)  ix.
340;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  friendly
intercourse  with,  at  Sal  Island
(1597)  XI.  2;  allied  to  the  canni-
bals of  Petiguar,  fight  of  Feliciano
Cieza  with  (1597)  67-68.

Frenoi,  university  town  in  Japan,  vi.

331-

Frenolz,  Sir  Francis  de,  commander
of  Roumania,  knight  of  Rhodes,
death  of  (1522)  v.  32.

Frese,  John,  Sir  Jerome  Horsey's
servant,  in.  347.

Freshets  in  the  Don,  vii.  183.

Fretum  trium  fratrum,  vii.  172,  181,
196.

Frey,  see  Friar.

Friars,  Franciscan,  iv.  408;  in  Cai-
tan,  424  ;  and  the  Tartar  idols,  439 ;
Greek,  in  Nicosia,  John  Locke  on
(1553)  V.  98;  monastery  of,  in
Greenland  (c.  1380)  vii.  451 ;  Nor-
way and  Sweden,  453 ;  liberal  pay
of  workmen  by,  454 ;  in  New
Spain,  Indians  and  the  (1572)  ix.
388;  Black,  at  Mestitlan,  and
Anthony  Godard  (1568)  417  ;  White,
of  S.  Maria  town,  and  Anthony
Godard  (1568)  417;  Grey,  at
Ouoghliclan  (1568)  419;  taken  by
Fenton,  their  report  of  the  Eng-
lish (1582)  XI.  93.

Friars,  the,  distance  from  Novgorod
to.  III.  68.

Friary  of  Fayal,  foundation  of  (1506)

VII. 9.

Friday,  the,  of  Cley,  11.  64.
Fridericus, first Christian preacher

in Iceland  (981)  iv.  52, 150.
Friendship between England and

Russia  (1572)  in. 189.
Frier,  William,  gunner's  mate  of  the

Delight  (1589)  XI.  388.
Frigate, Spanish, and  the  Spanish

fugitives (1590) VIII. 410; cap-

234

INDEX

tured  at  Veragua  by  Andrew-
Barker,  X.  85 ;  captured  at  S.
Domingo  by  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1585)  no;  treasure,  engraving  of,
160 ;  Thomas  Cavendish  and
the, of Manila Island (1588)

XI. 334-
Frigates, Spanish, taken by Sir
Richard  Grenville  (1585)  viii.  312  ;
new,  for  the  Spanish  fleet  (1590)  x.

158.
Frio Cape, mentioned  in the Rut-
tiers,  XI.  82,  349,  352; in  Brazil,
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1586)  294,
367, (1591) 389; the Desire at

(1593)  415-

Frisius,  Gemma,  on  Iceland,  iv.  10,
99;  mistake  of,  14,  16,  103,  105;
on  the  fire  of  Hecla,  21,  27,  112,
120;  on  the  fountains  in  Iceland,
33,  128;  description  of  petrifying
fountain  in  Iceland,  36,  131;  on
deadly  fountains,  39,  135 ;  on  Ice-
land houses,  61,  160;  and  the
north-west  passage,  vii.  162,  172  ;
maps  and  globes  by,  194;  his
account  of  three  brothers  in  the
north-west  passage,  196 ;  map  by,
197,  203 ; on  cold  regions,  268.

Frisking,  the,  pinnace  of  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1594)  x.  204.

Frisland,  discovered  by  Nicolo  and
Antonio  Zeno  (1380)  vii.  445,  447;
large  fish  trade  with  foreign
countries,  450;  death  of  Nicolo
Zeno  in  (c.  1380)  454 ;  return  of
the  fishermen  of,  from  Estoti-
land  and  Drogio,  458 ;  King
Zichmni  leaves,  458 ;  Antonio  Zeno
returns  to,  462.

Frisland,  West,  or  West  England,
VII.  326;  latitude,  vii.  206;  ice
round,  210;  Captain  Frobisher  in
(1577)  214,  (1578)  232,  279,  288;
Bridgwater  Busse  In,  243 ;  de-
scription, 288.

Frisones,  nation  in  Britain,  iv.  278.

Friuli,  Friar  Odoric  of  (1330)  iv.
408.

Frobisher,  Sir  Martin  (1535-94),  and
the  north-west  passage,  i.  xxvlii. ;
his  men,  136;  observations  of  the
sea  demanded  of,  iii.  280 ;  com-
mander of  the  fourth  squadron  of

the  fleet  (1588)  iv.  218;  prize  taken
by  (1589)  VII.  30;  exploits  of,
written  by  John  Huighen  van
Linschoten  (1589-91)  62-87;  general
of  the  English  fleet  (1590)  74;  and
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  fleet  (1592)
106-107;  voyages  of,  etc.,  to  North
America,  etc.  (1495)  141,  143;  on
the  Portuguese  explorer  of  Fretum
trium  Fratrum,  196;  voyage  to
the  north,  198;  account  of  the
depth  of  the  sea  in  the  north-west
passage,  200;  first  voyage  to
north-west,  by  Christopher  Hall
(1576)  204-211;  portrait  of,  208;
by  George  Best,  250,  279-283 ;
another  account  of  the  same
voyage,  277-283 ;  second  voyage
to  the  west  and  north-west
by  Dionise  Settle  (1577)  211-230;
another  account  of  the  same  voy-
age, 284-319;  third  voyage  of,  to
Meta  Incognita,  by  Thomas  Ellis
(1578)  231-242;  by  Thomas  Wiars
(1578)  243-244;  another  account
of  the  same  voyage  (1578)  319-
367;  discoveries  (1576-1583)  214-
375  >  Frobisher's  Strait  discovered,
215,  280;  and  the  natives,  293,
308,  312  ;  his  letter  to  English  cap-
tive sailors,  309 ;  his  departure
from  Countess's  Island  (1577)  315  ;
Queen  Elizabeth's  gift  to,  321;
captain  of  the  Aid,  322  ;  directions
to  the  fleet,  322-325 ;  and  the
Canon  of  S.  Paul's,  viii.  2;
natives  of  Meta  Incognita  brought
to  England  by,  ix.  167 ;  vice-
admiral  in  the  Primrose  (1585)  x.
98 ;  voyages  by,  xii.  23-27 ;  vice-
admiral  in  Drake's  fleet  (1585)  62  ;
death  of  (1594)  67.

Frobisher's Straits, discovered by
Captain  Frobisher,  xii.  27.

Froes, Aloislus, letter from, on
Japan,  yi.  332.

Frois, Friar Luis, quotations from
the  epistles  of  (1590)  xi.  422-424;

(1591-1592)  424-438,  (1596)  441-
Froissart, Jean, i. 308, iv. 445 ;
Richard  11.  and  the  Genoese  by,
451 ; Earl  of  Huntington's  voyage

by,  453-
Frolle,  see  Frollo.

235

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Frollo,  Savio,  secretary  of  the  Em-
peror of  Russia  (1583)  III,  322;
Sir  Jerome  Bowes  and,  466,  467,

474-

Frosmont,  Thomas,  master  of  the
Great  Hermina  (1535)  viii.  210.

Frote,  or  Frete,  in  Francis  de  Rober-
val's  voyage  (1542)  viii.  283,  288.

Frothing-ham,  Christopher,  Richard
Chancellor's  uncle,  11.  238.

Froude,  J.  A.,  and  the  English  voy-
ages,  XII. 18.

Froward,  Cape,  xi.  349,  357,  372 ;
latitude  of,  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1587)  300;  (1592)  392,  393;  John
Chidley  at  (1590)  383 ;  the  Desire
at,  401.

Froysard.  see  Froissart.

Froysart,  see  Froissart.

Froyssart,  see  Froissart.

Fruit  harvest  in  Russia,  iii. 364.

Fruits,  different,  found  in  the  West-
ern Planting  (1583)  viil.  116;  in
Newfoundland,  described  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  195,  203;
in  Virginia,  304;  in  Trinidad,  x.
350 ; in  Guiana,  xi.  14.

Frumentius,  scholar  of  Meropius,
VIII.  104;  secretary  of  the  King
of  India,  104;  and  the  Emperor
Constantine,  105.

Fu,  name  of  principal  cities  in
China, vi. 351.

Fubborne,  William,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  63.

Fuchinoxima,  castle  built  in  (1591)
XI.  427.

Fuchsius,  '  De  Arte  medendi  '  by,  iv.
35.  129.

Fuckin,  see  Fo-kien.

Fuco  City,  Friar  Odoric  in  (1330)
IV. 424.

Fuego  Island,  see  Fogo.

Fuentes,  Conde  de,  and  the  English
at  Peniche  in  Portugal  (1589)  vi.
496.

Fuentes  de  Ozumba,  springs  of
water  in,  ix.  362.

Fuerte  Island,  dangers  of,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  x.  292.

Fuerte  Ventura,  one  of  the  Canary
Islands,  belonging  to  the  lord  of
Lanzarota,  vi.  134,  178;  the  Lion
at,  139; latitude,  156,  x.  332; the

Richard  of  Arundel  near  (1590)  vi.
461 ;  Sir  Richard  Grenville  at,
VIII.  310;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at,
X.  227;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at
(1595)  X.  348;  Robert  Withrington
at,  XI.  204 ;  Thomas  Cavendish
at,  291.
Fulco,  Earl,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  i.

34-
Fulford, Captain,  at  the  taking  of

Puente  de  Burgos  (1589)  vi.  492.
Fuller,  Thomas,  of  Ipswich,  master

in the Desire, notes  of, xi. 348-

376.
Funchal,  in  Madeira,  vi.  135.
Funerals,  Russian,  11.  268,  447; in

Jamahey, v. 495; in Japan, vi.

340-344; in  Florida,  viii.  455.
Fuochi,  Celio  de.  Captain,  killed  at

the  defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)

v.  137.
Fuquien,  see  Fo-kien.
Fuquieo, see Foo-chow.
Fur  market  in  Hungary  the  Greater,

I. 242 ; in  Russia, 242 ; Persian

trade,  iii.  50,  365 ; trade  in  Cape

Breton  (1594)  x.  202.
Furbishers  of  armour,  or  Giebegi  of

the Grand Signior, pay of, vi.

63.

Furbushers, see  Furbishers.

Furicanos  or  storms  in  the  West
Indies,  x.  67.

Furnivall,  Thomas  de,  and  his
brother  Gerard,  their  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv. 352.

Furnivall,  William,  his  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  iv.  352,

Furriers  of  London  and  Livonian
furs,  II.  34.

Furs,  in  Tartary,  i.  243;  Livonian,
n.  34 ;  markets  of,  in  Russia,  224,
262,  276;  trade  in  Russia,  382,
402,  405;  presents  to  Queen  Eliza-
beth from  the  Russian  Emperor
(1567)  III.  98;  use  of,  in  England,
99 ;  sent  to  Queen  Elizabeth  by
Boris  Fedeorowich  Godonova
(1586)  346;  of  Russian  foxes,  364;
variety  of,  in  Russia,  364;  for
foreign  trade  in,  365;  black  fox,
best  in  Russia,  417.

Furtho,  Captain,  bearer  of  Robert
Flicke's  letter  (1591)  vn.  62.

536

INDEX

Fusts,  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)

V.  15,  16.
Fylki,  petty  kingdom  or  province  of

Norway  (858)  iv.  68, 169.
Fynmarke,  see  Finmark.
Fynnes,  see  Finns.

Gabiford,  Robert,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  60.

Gabota,  see  Cabot.

Gabriel,  see  Basil  V.

Gabriel,  Stephen  Borough's  friend,
II.  328  f.,  333,  334.

Gabriel,  the,  Christopher  Hall,  master
of,  in  Captain  Frobisher 's  first  voy-
age (1576)  VII.  204,  279;  second
voyage,  211,  284;  third  voyage,
236,  242 ;  Master  Fenton,  captain
of  (1577)  211;  dangers  of,  298;
towed  to  Bristol  (1577)  318;  Har-
vey, captain  of  (1578)  322  ;  atten-
dant on  the  Aid,  324 ;  in  Fro-
bisher's  Strait,  339;  meets  part  of
the  fleet,  at  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  341;  found  in  Countess's
Sound,  344 ;  news-bearer  of  the
Thomas  Allen,  348 ;  Captain  Fro-
bisher in,  looking  for  the  fleet,
365,  XII.  27.

Gabriel's  Islands,  Captain  Martin
Frobisher  at  (1576)  vii.  208,  210;
in  Countess's  Sound,  359.

Gadeling,  William,  of  Dartmouth,
sea-captain,  11.  104.

Gado,  Juan  del,  v.  167.

Gagara,  see  Giagra.

Gago,  Laurence  Madoc  on  (1594)
VII.  99,  100;  taken  by  Alcaide
Hamode,  loi ;  Leo  Africanus  on,
102.

Gagus,  Balthasar,  description  of
Hainan  Island,  vi.  347.

Gaillon,  Michael,  condemned  to
death  by  Roberval  in  France-Roy
Fort  (1542)  VIII.  286.

Gainsh,  Robert,  master  of  the  John
Evangelist  (1554)  vi.  155;  and
negroes  from  Guinea  (1554)  vi.
207,  219.

Galangals  found  in  China,  Chaul
and  Goa,  vi.  26.

Galata  Island,  coral  found  at,  v.
249.

Galatia,  Britons  in,  iv,  270.

Galavyn,  Peter  Ivanowich,  treasurer
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  (1584)
III.  342.

Galbanum,  found  in  Persia,  vi.
27.

Galder,  a  town  in  the  Canaries,  vi.
127.

Gale,  Nicholas,  of  the  Minion  of
London,  death  of  (1581)  xi.  35.

Galego,  a,  from  Plymouth,  in
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  expedition,
lost  on  the  coast  of  Spain
(1595)  X.  349;  joins  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  353 ;  built  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  to  go  up  the  Capuri  river,

379-
Galegos,  Rio  de,  described  in  Rut-
tier,  XI.  88.
Galeon,  see  Galleon.
Galleon, the, of London, Edmund

Hogan  in  (1577)  vi.  285.
Galleon, the, ship of Sir Anthony

Sherley (1596) x. 266; loss of

(1597)  276.
Galleon, the, flagship of Thomas

Cavendish (1591) xi. 389, 397;

hardships  suffered  by  the  crew  of

(1592)  392-
Galleon Dudley, the. Job Hortop's

return  to  Portsmouth  in  (1590)  ix.

464.
Galleon Leicester, Captain Francis

Knolles,  rear-admiral,  in  (1585)  x.

98.
Galleon  Leicester, the, ship  of  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi. 172.
Galleons,  of  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.

199,  200; description  of,  201;  the

Saint  Philip,  loss  of,  226 ; return

of  the,  230 ;  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes

(1522)  V. 16.
Galera, Punta de, in Trinidad,

Nepojos, people near, x. 350 ;

Laurence Keymis at (1596)

477-

Gales,  galls,  abundance  of,  near
Tabriz,  iii. 153.

Galfridus  Monumetensis,  see  Geof-
frey of  Monmouth.

Galicia,  governor  of,  and  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1585)  x.  102.

Galicia,  Groyne  of,  see  Corunna
Bay.

Galicia,  New,  voyages  from,  to  New

237

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Mexico,  IX. 115; Nunno  de  Guz-
man, governor  of, 121.
Galilee, Anthony  Jenkinson  in, in.

195-

Galipoli,  see  Gallipoli.

Gallant,  Cape,  in.  102 ;  Stephen
Borough  at  (1557)  11.  368,  370.

Gallatia, see  Galatia.

Galle,  Point  de,  in  Ceylon,  vi.  400;
the  Edward  Bonaventure  loses  an
anchor  at,  401.

Galleasses,  of  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
200;  description  of,  201;  Mon-
cada's,  lost  at  Calais,  223;  return
of  the,  230 ;  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V. 16.

Galleres,  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V. 16.

Gallets,  various  furs  found  at,  in
Russia,  HI.  365.

Galley,  engraving  of,  xi.  240.

Galley,  of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
(1596)  X.  266.

Galley-frigate,  built  in  Maio  by  Cap-
tain Lancaster  (1594)  xi.  46.

Galleys,  of  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
200 ;  return  of  the,  230 ;  at  the
siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  14,  16;
Laurence  Aldersey  and  (1581)  213;
from  Alexandria,  Laurence  Alder-
sey and  (1586)  VI.  42 ;  captains,
masters,  boatswains,  and  pursers
of,  of  the  Grand  Signior,  pay  of,
64;  Spanish,  William  Lane  and
(1590)  VIII.  409;  English  sailors
condemned  to  the,  by  the  Inquisi-
tion in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428;  by
the  Inquisition  in  Seville,  463 ;
Portuguese,  and  the  Minion  in
Guinea  (1565)  x.  35.

Galliasses,  see  Galleasses.

Gallienge,  the,  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.
8.

Gallies,  see  Galleys.

Gallipoli,  in  Crete,  John  Foxe  at
(1577)  V.  163,  166;  convent  of  the
Amerciates  in,  165 ;  straits  of,
251;  Richard  Wrag  at  (1593)  vi.
95;  (1594) 107.

Gallo,  Cape,  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.

JOI.

Gallo,  Isla  del,  Francisco -Pizarro  at,

XI.  280,  281.
Gallo,  Punta  de,  see  Curiapan.

Galloway,  Alan,  lord  of,  i.  36  f.
Galls,  from  Cambay,  Bengal,  Istria

and  Syria,  vi. 25.
Galopoli,  see  Gallipoli.
Galvano Antonio, '  History of

Portugal' by, iv. 368, vi. 119;

on  Madeira,  120; '  Discoveries  of

the  World  '  by,  xii.  83.
Galway,  see  Galloway.
Galway, the Bridgwater Busse at

(1578)  VII. 244.
Gama,  bay  of,  in  Norumbega,  viii.

449-

Gama,  Vasco  da,  discoveries  of
(1497-1510)  viii.  128;  through  the
Indian  Ocean  (1497)  xii.  3.

Gamage,  Anthony,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  iii.  109.

Gambling  in  Russia,  in.  133 ;  for-
bidden in  Kazan,  154;  unknown
in  Japan  (c._  1578)  vi.  329,  333.

Gambia,  Ethiopians  in,  vi.  143 ;
kingdom  of, 168.

Gambia  river,  privileges  granted  to
English  trade  in  (1588)  vi.  443,
445  ;  Richard  Rainold's  voyage  to
(1591)  vii.  90;  products  of,  91;
secret  trade  on,  91.

Gambra. see Gambia.

Gambrel,  Laurence,  of  Hampton,
killed  in  a  fight  against  Portu-
guese (1587)  XI.  220.

Gamby,  Peter,  killed  by  Indians
(1565)  IX.  55.  _

Game in Russia, iii. 369.

Gameford,  John,  cooper  on  the  De-
sire, death  of  (1588)  xi.  336.

Gamelaro,  island  of  Tunis,  vi. 143.

Gamesby,  Laurence,  of  the  Content
killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Ganaba, latitude  of, x.  336.

Ganchasu,  criininal  judge  in  China,
VI.  363-

Ganes,  Marquess  of,  volunteer  in  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Ganges,  river,  11.  170,  472 ;  native
boats  on  the,  v.  410;  worship  of
the,  411;  meets  Jumna  at  Prage,
47$  ;  breadth  of,  480  ;  Tanda  and
th'eT  481;  water  of,  483;  the
Portuguese  at  the,  viii. 129.

Ganigoga,  Portuguese  trader  in
Senegal,  vii.  98.

Gannards,  see  Gannets.

J38

INDEX

Cannes, Dougham, in Virginia

(1585)  vin.  318.
Gannets,  in  Cape  Verde  Islands,  vi.

237; in Alcatrazes Island, x,

16.
Ganphasantes,  people  of  Africa,  vi.

169.
Garaab,  King  of,  vii.  181.
Garachico, in  Teneriffe, vi. 131.
Garamantians,  people  of  Libya,  vi.

168.
Garamental,  cacique,  and  Augustine

Delgado,  x.  498.
Garbino. quarter of the wind be-
tween west  and  south,  vi. 168.
Garcia,  conspirator  against  Thomas

Dassell  (1591)  vii.  95.
Garcia,  Captain  Ulloa's  soldier  and

the  Indians  (1540)  ix.  264.
Garcions,  see  Boys.
Gardarus,  voyage  of,  to  Iceland,  iv.

13, 102.
Garden, Humphrey, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  318.

Gardiner,  Alexander,  surgeon  on  the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  213.
Gardiner,  Master,  in  Virginia,  viil.

317-

Gardiner,  Wolfe,  and  the  importa-
tion of  apricots,  v.  241.

Garet,  Richard,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Garet,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Garge, John, wounded by Indians

(1586)  XI.  296.

Gargefield,  William,  of  the  Hugh
Gallant, landing of (1587) xi.

311-
Gargopam, Queen of, tributary to
the  King  of  Bezeneger  (1567)  v,

389-

Garland, the,in  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
fleet  (1592)  VII.  105;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  in,  107.

Garland,  the,  in  Drake  and  Hawkins
Expedition  (1595),  Sir  John  Haw-
kins's ship  in,  X.  230;  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville's  flagship  on  Haw-
kins's death,  x.  230,  245;  pinnace
of,  lost,  X.  236;  at  the  fight  of
Pinos  (1596)  262.

Garleben,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
327-

Garlic,  remedy  against  Indian
poisons,  X.  397.

Garonne  river,  in  Florida,  discovered
by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)  viii.
460.

Garrard,  hostage  to  the  captain  of
Baku (1580) III. 226.

Garrard,  Anthony,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Garrard,  Anthony,  his  information
concerning  the  voyages  to  Brazil
(1540)  XI.  25;  adventurer  for
Brazil  (1580)  33.

Garrard,  Sir  William,  see  Garret.

Garraway,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Garraway,  William,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  74,  75,  78.  _

Garret,  John,  master  of  the  Minion
(1567)  IX.  398.

Garret,  Garrard  or  Gerard,  Sir
William,  11.  306,  392 ;  alderman,
consul  of  the  Muscovy  Company,
306,  392 ;  governor  of  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1563)  in.  39;
granted  Persian  privileges  (1567)
64;  granted  Russian  licence  (1569)
93 >  95 »  granted  free  access  to
Russia  (1569)  109;  and  the  Eng-
lish ships  for  Russia,  167;  Em-
peror of  Russia's  displeasure  with,
177,  180;  and  Persian  trade,  212;
and  the  discovery  of  Cathay  (1553)
331 ;  and  the  second  voyage  to
Barbary  (1552)  vi.  138;  and  the
voyage  to  Guinea  (1562)  253,  258;
meeting  at  the  house  of  (1564)
262.

Garret,  William,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1581)  v. 193-202.

Garrowe,  William,  licenced  to  trade
in  Russia  free  from  customs  (1592)
III.  440.

Garter,  order  of  the,  11.  357.

Garthe,  Richard,  i.  xxx.

Gasaria,  see  Taurida.

Gasarians,  see  Taurida,  people  of.

Caspar  de  Mexico,  Christian  Indian
in  Cevola  (1582)  ix.  199.

Caspay,  see  Gasp^.

Casp^,  haven,  viii.  203 ;  latitude,
277.  _

Gassaria,  see  Taurida.

239

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Gassipine,  see  Cotton  Wool.
Gastaldion,  borough  of,  in  Italy,  iv.

^444-

Gastaldus,  and  the  north-west  pass-
age, VII. 162.

Gate, Cape de, see Gates.

Gates,  Sir  Thomas,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Gates,  Cavo  de,  William  Harborne
at  (15S3)  V.  243;  John  Evesham
leaves  his  fleet  at  (1587)  vi.  35.

Gate,  Ochi  de,  see  Cat's  eyes.

Gato,  El  buio  del,  described  in  the
Rattier,  x.  289.

Gatte,  Cavo  de  la,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V.  85;  Nestor  Martiningo
at  (1571)  149.

Gauls  in  Italy  and  Greece  (b.c)  iv.
269.

Gauri,  King  of  Egypt,  miracle  in
the  reign  of,  v.  339;  Jehbir  and
the  caravan  of, 348.

Gawralo,  Neodatza,  secretary  to
Feodor  Andrewich  Spisemskie
(1582) HI. 463.

Gay,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  150.

Gaymal,  Geoffrey  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  338.

Gaza,  John  Eldred  at  (c. 1587)  vi.

9-

Gazari,  see  Taurida,  people  of.

Gazatia,  position  of,  vi,  170.
Gebarsvil, hot baths in, iv. 35,

129.
Gedney, in Lincolnshire, Hakluyt

rector  of  (1612)  xii.  83.
Geese  in  Upper  India,  iv.  423,
Gefferson, William, master of the

flagship  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.

206, 212.
Geffherne, in the Duchy  of Liine-

burg,  V.  320.
Geffreis,  see  Jeffreys.
Geirgifield, William, killed by In-
dians  on Puna Island (1587) xi.

318.
Geisera, island, conquered by the

Portuguese,  viii.  127.
Gelber,  Anthony,  of  Prussia, death

of,  at  Cyprus  (1553)  v.  100.
Gelder,  Hans  van,  and  the  English

ships,  II.  61.
Gelderland, ships from, before

Calais,  i.  299.

Genaza,  latitude  of,  x.  336.

Genealogy  of  Murad  Khan  (1580)  v,
184.

Genevois,  Stephen  le,  conspiracy  of,
against  Captain  Laudonniere
(1564)  IX.  39.

Genguis,  a  sect  in  Japan,  vi.  338.

Gennadius  on  the  heretic  Pelagius,
IV. 277.

Gennings,  Tristram,  called  in  coun-
cil by  Robert  Withrington  (1587)
XI. 211.

Genoa,  Philip,  King  of  France,  at
(1190)  IV.  321;  Christian  army
sails  from  (1390)  451 ;  Chios,  the
property  of  (1569)  v.  11 1 ;  and  the
Turks,  112;  English  ships  to  trade
in,  116;  ships  of,  and  the  Straits
of  Magellan,  xi.  258  ;  surrender  of
the  fleet  of,  at  Chiozza  (1380)  xii.

3-
Genoese,  home  products  of,  11.  123 ;

war of the, against the Moors

(1390)  IV.  450,  451.
Genre, le, accomplice of La

Roquette's conspiracy against

Captain Laudonniere (1564) ix.

39-  , ,

Gentiles,  pilgrimage  of  the,  to
Benares,  v.  477.

Gentlemen  adventurers,  see  Adven-
turers.

Gentlemen  of  the  chamber  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  in.  414.

Genua,  see  Genoa.

Genuois,  see  Genoese.

Genuoys,  see  Genoese.

Geoffrey,  a  Maltese  renegado,  steals
a  brigantine  from  Tripolis  (1585)
v.  308.

Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  (1100-1154),
'  Historia  Britonum,'  i.  3,  7.

Geography,  Arabian,  by  Abilfada
Ismael,  John  Baptista  Ramusio
on.  III.  412  ; Japanese,  vi.  332.

George,  a  Greek  pilot  for  the  Chili
coast,  taken  and  tortured  with
three  Spaniards  by  Thomas  Cav-
endish (1587)  XI.  309.

George,  letter-bearer  of  the  Grand
Master  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  13.

George,  son  of  Wsewolod,  11.  185.

George,  son  of  Demetrius,  killed  by
Bathy  (1237)  11.  186.

240

INDEX

George,  Spanish  captain,  taken  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  x.  364.

George,  William  Towerson's  negro,
in Guinea (1557) vi. 217, 225;

(1577)  245-
George, Captain, information of,

about  a  silver  mine  near  the  Car-

oli  river  (1595)  x.  403.
George, the (Sir Humphrey Gil-
bert's), see  the  Delight.
George, the, of London, iii. 252 ;

discipline  of,  253,  254; victualled

for  tvi^o  years,  256 ; damaged  by

ice  (1580)  295; aground,  296.
George, the, voyage to Guinea of

(1566)  VI,  266; in  the  fight  with

Portuguese  (1567)  282.
George,  the, John Varney, captain

of  (1585)  X.  99.
George, the, rear-admiral's  ship  of

Sir  Anthony  Sherley  (1596)  x.  266;

return of, with  his  letters  (1597)

276.
George,  the,  ship  captured  by  Robert

Withrington  (1587)  xi.  224.
George,  the,  bark  taken  by  Thomas

Cavendish and called (1587) xi.

307-

George  Bonaventure,  the,  in  Cepha-
lonia  (1585)  V.  310.

George  Noble,  the,  of  London,  and
the  Revenge  (1591)  vii.  43.

George  Noble,  the,  ship  of  Sir  An-
thony Sherley  (1596)  x.  266;  sent
to  Mogador  Island,  267.

Georgia,  i.  65,  78,  86,  166,  230;  con-
quest of  part  of,  154 ;  mountains
of,  271 ;  Edward  Cleark  in,  iii.
34;  silk  market  in,  50,  68;  mer-
chant of,  and  Laurence  Chapman,
158;  or  Grosin,  158;  Russian  fur
trade  in  (1588)  365;  King  of,  and
Anthony  Jenkinson,  iii.  33 ;  his
sons,  I.  85  f. ;  his  sons  at  the  court
of  Tartary,  138,  170;  his  son  a
Christian,  iii.  30.

Georgians, Tartars and, i. 86.

Georgius  Agricola  on  petrifying
fountains  in  Iceland,  iv.  36,  132.

Gerard  (Garrard),  Peter,  agent  to  the
Muscovy  Company  (1579)  iii.  212  ;
winters  at  Astrakhan,  217;  returns
to  England  (1581)  247.

Gerard, Thomas, of the English

fleet, and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.

217.
Gerard, Sir  Thomas, of  the  Cadiz

expedition, lands  at  Cadiz  (1596)

IV.  250.
Gerard,  Sir  William,  see  Garret.
Gerbi, English ship taken at, by

the  Maltese  (1583)  v.  275; King

of  Tripolis'  son,  governor  of  (1584)

304-

Gerfalcons,  Richard  Gray  on,  11.
396 ;  in  Rhiphei  Mountains  or  Cin-
gulus  Mundi,  iii.  369,  411;  Great
Khan  of  Cathay's  white,  iv.  432  ;
sent  from  Florida  to  New  Spain
(1572)  IX.  397.

Gerickson,  Jonas  Sueden,  twenty-
first  bishop  of  Schalholt,  in  Ice-
land (1432)  IV.  57,  156.

Germanic,  see  Germany.

Germans,  soldiers  in  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205.

Germany,  ambassadors  of,  i.  177 ;
English  trade  with,  315;  and  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  333;  Eng-
lish merchants  in  (1404)  11.  108  f. ;
Thome's  map  of,  169;  Anthony
Jenkinson  in,  iii.  195 ;  agarlcum
and  carabbe  found  in,  vi.  26 ;
ships  of.  King  of  Spain's  com-
mission concerning  the  (1585)  417;-
from  Mar  del  Zur  to,  voyage  of
Friar  Andrew  Urdaneta,  vii. 196.

Gernesey,  see  Guernsey.

Gerrard,  brother  of  Hugh  of  Tab-
aria,  IV.  305.

Gerrin,  see  Pois  Gerrin.

Gersech,  sanjack  of,  in  the-
Hungarian-Turkish  war  (1594)  vi.
104.

Geste  City,  near  the  Sea  of  Sand,

IV.  410.

Getulia,  south  of  Mauritania  or  Bar-

bary,  vi.  167.
Gevano,  see  Aquita.
Ghaletsa, province of Russia, iii..

359-
Ghassain,  from  Goa  to,  vi.  29.
Ghelfo, Julius Caesar, of Bressa

made  slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)

V.  151.
Ghendt,  see  Ghent.

Ghent,  hoyes  or  ships  of,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  204.

241

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ghesira  Island,  near  Alexandria,  v.

330-
Ghetto, in  Algiers,  v.  272 ; Henry

Roberts'  lodgings  at,  at  Morocco

(1585)  VI.  427.
Gholoven, Peter, treasurer of the

Emperor  of  Russia, and  English

merchants  (15S3)  lii,  329.
Ghosti  Carabelski,  meaning  of,  lii.

333-
Giagra,  sugar  made  of  Indian  nuts,

V.  379'  470.

Giamalazar,  or  house  of  Lazarus,
general university of Egypt, v.

335-

Giambelat  Bey,  at  the  siege  of
Famagusta  (1571}  v.  135,  148,  152.

Gianifampatan,  King  of.  King  of
Colombo, V. 399.

Giannizzers,  see  Janissaries.

Giant,  '  Anatomy  '  of  a  Chinese,  a
present  to  the  King  of  Spain
(1570)  IX. 459.

Giapan, see  Japan.

Gibben,  Richard,  of  the  Elizabeth
(1584)  V.  280.

Gibbes,  master  of  the  Thomas  Allen
(1578)  VII. 231.

Gibbes,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Gibbet  set  up  by  Magellan  in  Port
S.  Julian,  xi.  109,  157.

Gibraltar,  Straits  of,  vii.  124 ;
Roger  Bodenham  in  (1551)  v.  72;
John  Locke  in  (1553)  77;  William
Harborne  in  (1583)  243;  English
and  Spanish  fleets  in  (1586)  vi.
57;  Richard  Wrag  in  (1593)  94;
fight  between  English  and  Span-
ish ships  at  (1590)  VII.  31  f.  ;  the
Centurion  and  five  Spanish  gal-
leys in  (1591)  35;  Nicolo  Zeno's
ship  through  (1380)  447;  latitude
of,  X.  335.

Gibs,  Richard,  shipmaster  of  the
Muscovy  Company,  iii.  303.

Gibson,  Clement,  mariner  of  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.

Gideon, and the Midianites, viii.

Giebegies  in  the  Hungarian-Turkish

war  (1594)  VI. 104.
Giersul,  retinue  of  the  beglerbeg  of,

VI.  67.

Gifford,  Sir  George,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260;  captain  in  Sir
Martin  Frobisher's  fleet  (1592)  vii.
107;  in  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  ex-
pedition to  Guiana  (1595)  x.  353,
378,  396,  403,  417,  422  ;  capture  of
Indian  canoes  by  (1595)  388.

Gift,  the.  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's
ship  (1595)  X.  213.

Gifts,  a  hindrance  to  commerce,  11.
128;  Queen  Mary's,  to  the  Rus-
sian ambassador,  356;  to  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  359;  sent  to
Queen  Mary  by  the  Emperor  of
Russia,  360 ;  to  the  Emperor  by
Queen  Mary,  361 ;  to  the  ambas-
sador, 361 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson's,
to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  478 ;
made  by  Richard  I.  to  the  French
King  and  others  (1191)  iv.  325.

Giggs,  Edmund,  on  the  Content,
non-combatant  (1591)  x.  183.

Gilan,  iii.  51;  province  of  Persia,
35  ;  trade  in,  43  ;  good  silk  market
at,  61 ;  Laurence  Chapman's  voy-
age to  (1568)  141 ;  open  to  Eng-
lish trade, 146.

Gilbert,  pilot  of  Laurence  Keymis  in
Guiana  (1596)  x.  468;  on  Tobago
Island,  478.

Gilbert,  Adrian,  Queen  Elizabeth's
letters  patent  to,  for  discovery  of
the  China  passage  (1583)  vii.
375-381 ;  bark  of,  in  Thomas
Cavendish's  last  voyage  (1591)  xi.
389; returns  home,  391.

Gilbert,  Doctor,  and  George  Wat-
son's work,  XII.  81.

Gilbert,  Edward,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  in. 109.

Gilbert,  John,  burnt  by  the  Inquisi-
tion (1575)  IX.  424;  escape  from
the  Contractation  House  and  re-
capture, his  condemnation,  463.

Gilbert,  John,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  (1595)  x,  380,
396, 403.

Gilbert,  Richard,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Gilbert,  Sir  Humphrey  (1539-83)  i.
xxviii.  ;  and  Anthony  Jenkinson
on  north-east  passage  (1581)  in.
457;  and  passage  to  Cathay  (1549)
VII. 158-190, 192 ; map of the

242

INDEX

world  by,  engraving  of,  176;
spherical  instrument  invented  by,
190 ;  portrait  of,  viii.  iii. ;  letters
patent  granted  by  Queen  Elizabeth
for  colonising  America  (1578)  viii.
17-23 ;  praises  of,  by  Stephen
Parmenius  (1583)  23-33;  voyage
of,  34-77,  85-88;  death  of,  in  a
storm,  VIII.  74;  praise  and  criti-
cism of,  76 ;  discoveries  of,  89,
117;  reception  in  Newfoundland,
90 ;  return  home,  92 ;  and  the
North-west  passage,  xii,  25 ;  col-
onisation plan  by,  35 ;  charter
granted  to,  by  Queen  Elizabeth
(1578)  36;  death  of,  38;  Warner
on,  97.

Gilbert,  Sir  John,  and  the  live  sable
sent  by  Sir  Humphrey  (1583)  viii.
60 ;  and  Edward  Hayes,  master  of
the  Golden  Hind,  75.

Gilbert's  Sound,  discovered  by  John
Davys  (1585)  vii.  386;  the  Sun-
shine at  (1586)  410,  413.

Gildhall,  see  Guildhall.

Giles,  Geoffrey,  mariner  in  a  Span-
ish ship,  IX.  460.

Gilgat  in  Armenia,  great  silk  trade
(1568)  III. 147.

Gill,  George,  purser  of  the  Tiger
(1583)  V.  455.

Gillam,  William,  escape  of,  from  a
storm  (1576)  X.  87.

Gillan,  see  Gilan.

Gillescrist, son of Mac-Kerthac, i.

39-
Gillingham,  Francis  Ashby  at  (1564)

VI.  262.
Gilman, Edward, captain of the

Scout  (1585)  X.  99
Gilman, John, joint owner of the

Jesus  (1583)  V.  292.
Gilolo,  or  Jilolo,  the  Portuguese  at,

VIII. 129; Batochina  Island  near,

XI. 336.
Gilpin,  John,  and  the  Russian  am-
bassador (1556)  II.  353.
Ginger  found  in  India,  v.  503.
Ginnee,  see  Guinea.
Gioechni,  Greek  patriarch  in  Cairo,

miracle  of,  v.  339.
Giraldo,  Lucas,  sugar  houses  of,  xi.

79 ; lord  of  As  Ilhas,  250.
Giraldus  Cambrensis  (i  146-1220),  on

the  Hebrides,  i.  302  f. ; Itinerari-

um  Cambrise  by,  iv.  340.
Gironde,  river  in  Florida,  discovered

by Captain Ribault (1562) viii.

460.
Girybia  Island,  Brazil,  xi.  34.
Gittons, Williams, merchant, on

the Bona Esperanza (1553) 11.

212.
Giustiniano, Lorenzo, ambassador

for  Chios  (1564)  v.  121.
Glaclale, Mare,  see  Frozen  Sea.
Glande, Darby, in Virginia (1585)

VIII.  318.
Glane,  Elizabeth,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Glanvile,  Ranulph,  Earl  of  Chester,

travels  of  (12 18)  iv. 349, 350.
Glass, English, used for window

panes,  iii. 129.
Glastonbury,  i.  18.
Glauca,  in  Misena,  iv.  38, 134.
Glaven,  Darby,  left  at  Mosquito  Bay

(1587)  VIII.  389.
Glinsky,  Knez  Ivan  Michaelowitch,

III. 340.
Globe,  published  by  William  Sander-
son  (1587)  VII. 445.
Glocester,  see  Gloucester.
Gloucester, Lord  of,  11. 121, 122.
Gloucester, Thomas, Duke of, his

journey,  i.  liv. ;  regent  of  England

(1359)  301 ; his  voyage  to  Prussia,

306.
Glover,  Thomas,  11.  406 ; letter  from

the Muscovy Company to, 401 ;

agent  of  the  Muscovy  Company,

III.  37,  42  ; and  Arthur  Edwards,

44,  52  ;  privileges  withdrawn  from,

118; in the Moscow fire, 170;

offences  of,  183  ; and  the  Emperor

of  Russia, 190.
Gnats,  in  Meta  Incognita,  vii.  373 ;

dangerous, in S. Domingo, xx.

342-
Goa,  Caesar  Frederick's  description
of  (1563)  V.  373,  380;  trade  with
Diu,  377;  besieged  by  King  Dial-
can  (1570)  381,  439;  voyage  of
Ccesar  Frederick,  388,  440 ;  pro-
ducts of,  sent  to  Bezeneger,  389 ;
John  Newbery  imprisoned  at  (1583)
458,  461  f.,  507,  VI.  7;  Ralph
Fitch  at  (1583)  V. 463, 464, 471,

243

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

503  ;  weight,  measure  and  money
current  in,  vi.  17;  charges  from
Aleppo  to,  23  ;  description,  26-30  ;
monsoons  to  and  from,  29-34 ;
Thomas  Stevens's  letter  from
(1579)  377-385;  ship  from,  cap-
tured by  the  Edward  Bonaventure
(1592)  398.  399;  plan  of,  engrav-
ing of,  VI.  384 ;  Spanish  carracks
from  (1592)  VII.  112;  discovered
by  the  Portuguese,  viii.  128 ;
Portuguese  garrison  at,  445,  487;
bound  for  Malacca,  with  victuals
(1591)  X.  196;  English  at,  xii.
102.

Goats,  found  in  Maio  Island,  xi.
104,  105 ;  skins  of,  sent  to  Portu-
gal, VI.  275.

Goauar, river, x. 408.

Gobarto,  monstrous  fish,  on  West
African  coast,  vi.  461.

Godard,  Anthony,  captain  of  the
sailors  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
landed  near  Panuco  (1568)  ix.  412,
414-429,  455,  456;  his  men
marched  to  Mexico  (1568)  417-420,
458;  as  slaves  in  Tescuco,  421,
459 ;  sold  as  slaves  in  Mexico,  422  ;
working  as  miners,  423  ;  prisoners
of  the  Inquisition  (1575)  424;  put
on  the  rack,  426;  led  to  execution
by  the  Inquisition  (1575)  427;  some
of  his  company  sent  to  Spain  with
General  Lu^on  (1568)  459.

Goddard,  see  Godard.

Godek,  John,  of  Danzig,  Prussian
ambassador  to  England,  11.  37,  38,
48.

Godenoe,  or  Godonova,  Boris  Feo-
dorowich,  brother  of  the  Emperor
of  Russia,  Feodor  Ivanowich
(1583)  III.  327,  340;  adopted  son
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  336 ;
his  friendliness  to  English  mer-
chants, 346;  master  of  the  horse,
413  ;  his  letter  to  Lord  Burghley
(1590)  419-422,  436-43S;  Queen
Elizabeth's  letter  to,  428-430;  Lord
Burghley's  letter  to,  430-432;  his
letter  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  434-
436.

Godericus,  his  voyage  to  the  Holy
Land (1102) iv. 297.

Godetz, birds, their description by

Jacques  Cartier  (1584)  viii.  184,
187, 192.

Godezere,  the,  English  ship  from
Newcastle  (1394)  11.  60.

Godfrey,  John,  of  Bristol,  master
gunner  of  the  Matthew  Gonson
(153s)  V.  68.

Godfrey,  Thomas,  on  the  Content
(1591)  X. 183.

Godolphin,  Sir  Francis,  and  wreck-
age of  the  Victory  (1589)  vii.  30;
and  death  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville  (1591)  44.

Godonoe,  Gregory  Vasilowich,  stew-
ard of  the  household  of  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  III.  413.

Godonoe,  Ivan  Vasilowich,  and  Feo-
dor Alexandrowich,  tasters  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  iii.  414.

Godonoe,  Stephan  Vasilowich,  treas-
urer of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  iii.

,4^3-

Godonova,  Demetri  Ivanovitch,  Em-
press Irenia's  uncle  (1584)  iii.  343.

Godoroke,  in  Russia,  11.  420.

Godred  Crovan,  son  of  Harold  the
Black,  I.  25  ; Ireland  and,  26.

Godred  Don,  son  of  Reginald,  i.
38.

Godred,  son  of  Syrric,  King  of  Man,
I. 25 ff.

Godred,  son  of  Olaf,  King  of  Man,
I.  30  f.  ;  Sumerled  and,  32 ;  his
marriage  with  Fingola,  32  ; death

of. 33-
Godred,  son  of  Olaf,  i.  39.
God's  Mercy,  Cape  of,  discovered  by

John Davys, vii. 390; islands

near,  391.
Godschalcus, seventeenth  bishop  of

Holen, in Iceland (1457) iv. 57,

I5S-
Godschalcus, nineteenth bishop of

Holen, In Iceland (1500) iv. 57,

156.
Godwera,  see  Gutuere.
Godwin, Earl, and  his  son Sweyn,

IV. 283.
Godwin,  William,  '  Political  Justice'

by, XII. 118.
Goford,  ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s

fleet, I.  299.
Gogi  and  MagogI,  Abilfada  Ismael

and  the,  in.  413.

244

INDEX

Golconda,  Ralph  Fitch  in  (c.  1583)
V.  472.

•Gold,  English  expedition  to  find
(1553)  VI.  147;  trade  in  Guinea
(1555)  163,  (1556-77)  195-245 ;  orna-
ments, worn  by  Africans,  173 ;
stores  of,  in  China,  354 ;  found  in
captured  ships,  vii.  66;  mines  of,
in  inland  Africa  (1591)  88;  in
Guinea,  98;  in  Tombuto  and
Gagfo,  loi ;  found  in  Meta  Incog-
nita, 283,  372  ; in  Saguenay  river,

VIII.  237,  245 ;  found  in  Canada,
268,  282,  284;  copper  preferred  to,
by  Indians  of  Florida  (1524)  433;

in the  kingdom of Calos (1565)

IX.  50;  in  the  Apalatci  mountains,
55, 88, 112, 113; in Coragones,

127;  in  Cevola,  163,  199;  in  Cali-
fornia, 318;  in  Nova  Albion,  325,
XI.  123 ;  in  Lequeos  Islands,  334 ;
in  Veragua  coast,  366;  in  Nicar-
agua, 367;  in  rivers  in  Mexico,
382;  sapies'  store  of  (1564)  x.  18;
mines,  of  the  Caribs  (1565)  30;
found  in  Florida,  57 ;  ornaments
of,  made  and  worn  by  Indians,
58;  mines  of,  in  Hispaniola,  115;
mines  of,  in  China,  165 ;  mines
of,  in  Seawano  and  Waliame,
207;  in  Guiana,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  on  the  (1595)  341,  344;
in  Trinidad,  350,  xi.  22 ;  profusion
of  wrought,  used  in  Guiana,  x.
357;  unwrought,  hidden  in  Cuzco,
358 ;  from  Guiana,  x.  364,  366,
369,  403,  405,  414,  416,  425,  426,
461,  468,  XI.  9,  13;  idol  of,  sent
to  the  King  of  Spain  by  the  In-
dians (1593)  X.  439;  'growing'  in
Trinidad,  xi.  22  ;  mines  at  S.  Vin-
cent, 26 ;  Indians  constrained  by
Spaniards  to  work  the  mines  of,
275;  found  on  Solomon  Islands,
289 ;  in  Arauco,  303 ;  in  the
Philippines,  xii.  21.

Golden  Dragon,  the,  Christopher
Newport,  captain  of  (1592)  vii.
1 12  ;  flagship  of  Christopher  New-
port's fleet  (1591-2)  x. 184.

Golden  Hind,  the,  rear-admiral  of
Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  expedition
(1583)  viii.  47;  succeeds  to  the
vice-admiral,  48; meets  the  Swal-

low in  Conception  Bay,  50;  meets
the  Squirrel  at  S.  John's  Harbour
(1583)  51  ;  leaves  S.  John's  Bay,
62  ;  sufferings  of,  69 ;  returns  to
Falmouth,  74,  xii.  37.

Golden  Hind,  Drake's  ship,  see
Pelican.

Golden  Noble,  the,  of  London,  in
Tunis  (1586)  VI.  46.

Golden,  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)

"I-  345-

Goldesmith,  Clays,  ship-master,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  63.

Golding,  Rainold,  merchant  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure,  death  of
(1592)  VI.  396.

Golding,  Robert,  and  the  captain  of
Baku  (1580)  III.  224;  his  expedi-
tion to  Shemakha  (1580)  230,  232,
at  Uchooge,  239;  at  Astrakhan,
240; leaves  Astrakhan,  245.

Goldmore  gate,  Anthony  Jenkinson
at,  II.  413.

Gold-powdered  Indians,  described  by
Armago,  x.  208 ;  described  by  Sir
Robert  Dudley,  361 ;  during  their
Borracheras,  437.

Goleta,  see  Goletta.

Goletta,  Island,  Laurence  Aldersey
at  (1586)  VI.  39.

Goletta,  the,  in  Barbary,  iii.  238 ;
port  of  Tunis,  vi. 35, 143.

Gomara,  Francisco  Lopez  de,  '  Gen-
eral History  of  the  West  Indies  '
by,  quotations  from,  vii.  134,  153,

IX.  152,  156,  163-169,  x.  356,  357,
359,  400 ;  on  America,  an  island,
VII.  171 ;  and  the  Indians  from
America,  173 ;  his  mention  of
Acuco,  IX.  296.

Gomera  Island,  and  town,  descrip-
tion and  latitude  of,  vi.  132,  156;
William  Towerson  at  (1555)
178;  the  Castle  of  Comfort
at  (1567)  269;  Sir  John  Haw-
kins at  (1567)  IX.  399,  466;
Sir John Hawkins at (1564)

X.  II,  (1567)  64;  Sir  Amyas  de
Preston  at  (1595)  215;  latitude  of,
332-

Gomes  Polo  Islands,  near  Sumatra,

VI.  395-  .
Gomez, Diego, governor of Fayal

(1589) VII. 9.

245

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Gomez,  Martin,  prisoner  of  the
King-  of  Calos  (c. 1565)  ix.  51.

Gomez,  Perez,  heirs  of,  owners  of
Aioanapa  town,  ix.  468.

Gomez,  Stephen,  and  the  discovery
of  the  north-west  passage  (1527)
vn. 187.

Gondeau,  Stephen,  mutineer,  pri-
soner at  Archaha  (1564)  ix.  43.

Gonnavy,  or  Guanaba,  near  Cape
Tiburon,  x. 198.

Gonsaga,  Vespasian,  of  the  Spanish
fleet,  and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
205.

Gonsales,  Juan,  discoveries  of,  con-
cerning Guiana,  x.  496.

Gonsalvez,  Pedro  (1588)  vii.  91,  94-

97-
Gonson, Benjamin,  father-in-law  of

Sir  John  Hawkins,  and  the  voyage

to  Guinea  (1561)  vi.  253; and  the

proposed  voyage  to  Guinea  (1564)

262 ; and the negro trade (1562)

X.  7.

Gonson,  Richard,  captain  of  the
Matthew  Gonson  (1534)  v.  67.

Gonzalves,  Peter,  King  of  Portu-
gal's envoy  to  Pinteado  (1551)  vi.

153-

Good  Fortune,  Cape,  Stephen
Borough  and  (1556)  11.  326,  365.

Good  Hope,  Cape  of,  n.  163,  169,
177,  VI.  144,  170,  379,  380,  XI.
343.  351.  355.  366;  Captain
George  Raymond  at  (1591)  vi.
388,  X.  194 ;  the  Edward  Bonaven-
ture  doubles  the  (1593)  vi.  402,
X.  197;  strong  sea  currents  at
the,  vii.  166;  on  the  south-
eastern road  to  Moluccas,  191 ;
people  of,  264 ;  the  Gabriel  at
(1578)  341  ;  discovered  by  Bar-
tholomew Diaz  (1494)  VIII.  127,  XII.
3;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1580)  xi.
132; Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1588)

342,  370-

Goodlay,  George,  master  of  the
Tohy  (1503)  VII. 124; death, 125.

Goodman,  Edward,  English  messen-
ger to  Russia,  III. 174.

Goods,  law  about  Prussian  stolen,  11.
53  f.  ;  sent  from  England  to  Russia,
380;  English,  in  Persia,  protected
by the Shah in case of  owner's

murder,  in.  65 ;  carriage  of,  in
Persia,  146;  English,  for  foreign
trade. 273-275  ;  English  merchants',
seized  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia
(1589)  427,  437;  English,  com-
plained of  in  Russia,  471 ;  Portu-
guese, found  in  a  captured  galleon,

VI.  399; detained  at  Yoala  (1591)

VII.  96 ;  useful  for  the  S.  Vincent
trade,  xi.  28-29 ; in  Brazil,  37,  38.

Goodwin,  Captain,  at  the  Groyne,
death  of  (1589)  vi.  488.

Goodwin,  or  Godwin,  Hugh,  left  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  Topiawari's
care  to  learn  his  language  (1595)
X.  414;  supposed  to  have  been
eaten  by  a  tiger,  470.

Gordianus  the  Elder,  proconsul  of
Africa,  iv.  72, 173.

Gordon,  see  Gourdon.

Gore,  Gerald,  the  elder,  and  his
sons,  members  of  the  Barbary
Company (1585) vi. 419, 420 f.

Gore,  Thomas,  the  elder,  member  of
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
422.

Gorge,  Arthur,  of  the  English  fleet,
and the Armada (1588) iv. 217.

Gorges,  Butshead,  of  the  expedition
of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  Guiana
(1595)  X.  380,  396,  403.

Goring,  Captain  John,  land-captain
in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1585)
X.  98 ;  and  the  Portuguese  mes-
senger (1585)  106;  in  S.  lago  city,
107 ;  Alonso  Bravo,  governor  of
Cartagena,  taken  prisoner  by
(1586)  119.

Gorney,  Christopher,  boy  of  the
Sunshine  of  London  (1585)  vii.
3S2.

Goro.Earl  Giovanni  Francesco,  death
of,  at  the  defence  of  Famagusta
(1571)  V. 136.

Goropius,  Joannes,  'Origines'  by,  i.
xxi.

Goset,  bearer  of  Rubruquis'  letters,
I.  233; Rubruquis'  clerk,  276.

Gosmit, Tartars  and, i. 86.

Gosnopoli  monastery,  iii.  80,  81.

Gospatricius  (Gospatric),  son  of
Mac-Kerthac,  i.  39.

Gostigo,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  318.

>46

INDEX

Gostine  house,  Persian  merchants'
place  of  meeting,  in.  219.

Gostomislius  of  Novgorod  (1572)  11.
183.

Goswinus,  twenty-second  bishop  of
Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1445)  iv.  57,

Gothland,  heat  of,  vii.  271.
Goths,  Dutch  speaking,  i.  233.
Goticum  Mare, vii. 176.
Gotland, King  Arthur  and,  i.  3  f.,

6 ; King Vortiporius and, 8 ;

Octher  and, 14  f.  ; Wolstan  and,

15-
Goto, in Benin, vi. 458; English

merchants at, 459 ; Master

Hassald at (1591) 465.
Goto,  in  Japan,  governor  of,  and  his

soldiers,  xi.  425.
Gotoguane, province  of  Guiana, x.

498.
Gouion, John, goes -with Jacques

Cartier up the Hochelaga river

(1535)  vm.  230.
Gourdon,  governor  of  Calais  (1588)

IV.  224 ; and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh

(1592)  VII. 107.
Gourds, Friar Odoric's account of

the,  in  Kalor,  iv.  435  ; crew  of  the

Edward  Bonaventure  feeds  on,  vi.

406 ; found  in  Virginia,  viii.  360 ;

in Florida, 455 ; in Sambula

Island,  X.  17,  20.
Gouren,  Tanda  in, v. 481 ; Ralph

Fitch  in  (c. 1583)  482.
Gourgues, Captain Dominique de,

and the fourth voyage of the

French  to  Florida  (1567)  ix. 100-

112; and Indian kings, 102;

attacks the Spaniards, 104; In-
dians' devotion to, 109; his  life

and  voyages,  iii ;  his  death  (1582)

112.
Gourney, Matthew, voyage  of, iv.

444.
Goven,  Vobsky  to,  in.  6g.
Government, civil, of  China (1590)

VI.  369;  native,  in  Virginia  (1586)

VIII,  375.
Governor of English merchants

abroad, appointed  by Henry IV.

(1404)  II.  108-110.
Governors of the Muscovy Com-
pany, III.  84.

Gowateri  Island,  x.  492 ;  or  Port
Howard,  inhabited  by  the  She-
baios  (1596)  458.

Gower  or  Christian,  see  Giaour.

Gowry,  Alcayde,  and  Edmund
Hogan  (1577)  VI.  291.

Gozi,  Islands,  v.  84;  John  Locke  at
(1553)  100.

Graa,  Thomas,  of  London  and
York,  ambassador  to  Prussia,  11.
18, 19,  25.

Grace,  Cape,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  11.  365,  417.

Grace,  the,  voyage  of,  to  S.  Laur-
ence Bay  (1594)  VIII. 162.

Grdce  de  Dieu,  the,  11.  143.

Grace  of  God,  the,  Arthur  Edwards'
ship  (1568)  III. 136.

Graclosa  Island,  George  Fenner  at
(1567)  VI.  280;  the  Serpent  at
(1586)  434;  naval  fight  off,  435;
English  fleet  near  (1589)  vii.  11;
fight  at,  12  ;  Dutch  ships  at  (1589)
63 ;  Earl  of  Cumberland  in,  66 ;
Spanish  and  Portuguese  ships
wrecked  at  (1591)  86;  English
fleet  at  (1590)  viii.  422;  latitude
of,  X.  334.

Gracloso,  see  Graciosa.

Gradaige,  the,  of  Venice,  Caesar
Frederick's  voyage  in  (1563)  v,
366.

Grades  in  the  Russian  army,  in.
380.

Graduates,  Chinese,  and  the  King
of  China  (1590)  vi.  362.

Graecia,  see  Greece.

Grafton,  M.,  his  account  of  the  ex-
pedition to  the  North  Pole  (1527)

VIII.  I.

Graie,  see  Gray.

Grain,  harvest  in  Russia,  iii.  364;
abundant  in  Cyprus,  v. 125.

Gramme,  Thomas,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  vm.  402.

Grana  found  in  Coronto,  vi.  27.

Grana  Paradisi,  found  in  Africa,  vi.

175-
Granada, in Spain, i. 307; coast

of,  in  Thome's  map,  11. 170.
Granada,  New,  name  given  to  Cev-

ola  by  Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)

IX.  151; taken  by  Vasquez, 153;
climate of, 156; in Peru, 174;

247

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Aglri's  overthrow  and  death
in,  363;  Antonio  de  Berreo  in,
368 ;  Don  Antonio  Ximenes,  son
of  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  at,  372,
377 ;  Orinoco  river  navigable
up  to,  X.  395 ;  the  Orinoco
river  in,  408 ;  Caceres  settling
at,  497;  difificulties  of  gaining
access  to  Guiana  from,  499 ;
traffic  with  Cartagena,  xi.  235,
XII.  66.

■Granado,  see  Granada.

Granata, see  Grenada.

Oran  Canaria, see  Grand  Canary.

Grand  Bay  in  Newfoundland,  situa-
tion of,  VIII.  56 ;  voyage  of  John
Alphonse  of  Xanctoigne  to  (1542)
275-283 ;  latitude  of,  275 ;  Rober-
val  at,  284.

Grand  Canary  Island,  John  White
at  (1590)  VIII.  407;  Robert  Tom-
son  at  (1555)  IX.  340;  William
King  at  (1592)  x.  190;  Captain
Raymond  at  (1591)  194;  the  Dar-
ling at  (1595)  215;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  227;  latitude  of,
280,  332 ;  longitude  from,  to
Deseada,  336  ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1595)  349.  (1596)  XI.  I.

Grand  Cayman  Island,  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville  at  (1596)  x.  242.

Grand  Pr6,  mutineer,  prisoner  at
Archaha (1564)  ix. 43.

Grande,  river,  in  Florida,  discovered
by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)  vili.
460.

Grande  Coste,  Charles  Leigh's  crew
on  the  way  to  (1597)  viii.  172.

Grande,  Rio,  in  Guinea,  vi.  157;
death  of  the  Edward  Cotton's
crew  at  (1583)  412  ;  negro  trade  in
(1591)  VII.  98;  fight  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  with  seven  Portuguese
carvels  at  (1568)  ix.  447;  the
Sapies  inhabitants  of  (1564)  x.  17.

Grande,  Rio,  near  Morro  Hermoso,
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  288;
near Timana mountains, 368,

371-
Grande,  Rio  (Brazil),  Philip  II.  and

the  proposed  conquest  of  (1596)  xi.

64 ; French  ships  at,  66.
Grande, Rio, called  also  Yerai, xi.

96.

Grandvell,  Thomas  Perenot  of,
death  of  (1588)  iv.  231.

Granganimeo,  brother  of  the  King
of  Virginia  (1584)  viii.  300;  de-
scription of,  and  of  his  wives,
302 ;  his  kindness  to  the  English,
304; death  of, 326.

Grange,  la,  see  La  Grange.

Granger,  Edward,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Granges,  hills  of  the,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  189-
208.

Grangino,  King  Wingina's  brother,
and  Sir  Richard  Grenvllle  (1585)
VIII. 316.

Grant,  Captain,  on  the  Sampson
(1594)  VII.  119;  Nuno  Velio  Pere-
ira,  prisoner  of, 122.

Grant,  John,  master  of  the  Tiger,
and  the  boats  in  Cartagena  har-
bour (1586)  X.  124.

Grapes,  found  in  Florida,  x.  51,
56.

Gratlosa,  see  Graclosa.

Gravellnes,  bridges  made  at,  for  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  204;  fortified
against  the  Armada,  209 ;  fight  at,
between  English  fleet  and  the
Armada,  224,  226.

Graves,  in  Earl  of  Cumberland's
Isles  (1587)  vii.  420.

Gravesend,  Wllloughby's  fleet  at,  11.
217;  the  Searchthrift  at,  322;
Anthony  Jenkinson's  departure
from  (1557)  413;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson's departure  from  (1561)
III.  15,  (1566)  92 ;  Christopher
Borough's  departure  from  (1579)
214;  return  of  Sir  Jerome  Bowes
to  (1583)  328;  Roger  Bodenham
embarks  at  (1550)  v.  71 ;  Henry
Austell  at  (1586)  328;  John  New-
bery's  departure  from  (1583)  452  ;
John  Evesham's  departure  from
(1586)  VI.  35;  Richard  Wrag's
departure  from  (1593)  94;  Captain
Martin  Froblsher  at  (1576)  vii.
204,  (1578)  231;  Captain  Fro-
bisher's  ships  at  (1577)  285;  de-
parture of  M.  Hore  from,  for
Newfoundland  (1536)  viii.  4;
Charles  Leigh's  departure  from
(1597)  166;  departure  from,  of  the

248

INDEX

Earl  of  Cumberland's  ships  (1586)
XI.  202.

Gray,  John,  condemned  to  the  gal-
leys by  the  Inquisition  in  Mexico
(1575)  IX.  428.

Gray,  John,  Captain,  and  William
Harborne  in  Majorca  (1583)  v.
245,  247.

Gray,  John,  master's  mate  of  the
Anne  Francis  and  the  pinnace
(1578)  VII.  358.

Gray,  Richard,  11.  291,  380,  392;
Queen  Mary's  letter  and,  280 ;
agent  to  the  Muscovy  Company,
281,  384;  Muscovy  Company's
letter  to,  379 ;  masts  bought  by,
390;  his  letter  to  Henry  Lane,
394-396;  Thomas  Alcock's  letter
to,  396; Emperor  of  Russia  and,

436-

Gray,  Richard,  captain  of  the  Mat-
thew Gonson  (1535)  v.  68.

Gray,  Sir  John,  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596)  IV.  260.

Grays,  the  Searchthrift  at,  11.  322.

Grecia,  see  Greece.

Grecians  and  the  use  of  mare's  milk,
I.  252,  253.

Greece,  I.  166;  in  Thome's  map,  11.
170 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  in.
195;  Britons  in  (b.c.)  iv.  269;
Robert  de  Ketene  in  (1143)
309 ;  Southern,  climate  of,  viii.
384 ;  Beglerbeg  of,  at  the  siege  of
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  148,  152 ;
pay  of,  VI.  61 ;  retinue  of  the,  67;
in  Poland,  72 ;  in  the  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  104.

Greek  fire,  i.  83.

Greek  church  ceremonies,  descrip-
tion of,  by  John  Locke  (1553)  v.
86.

Green,  Mahomet's  favourite  colour,
forbidden  in  Holy  Land,  v.  89 ;
forbidden  to  Christians,  352.

Green  Dragon,  the,  English  ship  in
Tripolis  (1584)  v.  304.

Green  Dragon,  the,  of  Havre,
in  Grenada  Island  (1565)  x.  25 ;
tidings  of  the  Minion  brought  to
Sir John Hawkins by (1565)

35-
Green Island, Robert Withrington
at  (1587)  XI.  209.

Greene,  Henry,  of  Captain  Amadas's

Company  (1584)  viii.  310.
Greene, Thomas, freedom granted

to  (1569)  III. 118.
Greene, Thomas, master of the

Tohy of Harwich, bearer of

Arthur Pet's letters (1580) in.

283
Greeneaway, Ralph, alderman of

London,  11.  362.
Greenefield,  Captain,  in  Sir  Francis

Drake's  fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-
Greene's  wife  and  children  burned

in Moscow  fire  (1571)  m. 169.

Greenland,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6;
coast  of.  III.  461 ;  distance  of,
from  Iceland,  iv.  12,  loi ;  fables
concerning,  21,  112;  position  of,
196;  English  voyages  to  (1495)
VII.  141,  143;  in  Ortelius's  map,
163 ;  an  island,  171 ;  latitude  of,
188 ;  geographical  position  of,  ig8 ;
West  Frisland  supposed  to  be  part
of  the  continent  of  (1578)  327;
strong  sea  currents  in,  337;  the
Sunshine  at  (1586)  407,  410;  de-
scription of  football  in,  411 ;  John
Davys  at,  431,  440,  444;  dis-
covered by  Nicholas  and  Anthony
Zeno  (1380)  445;  description,  451-
456,  463 ;  discovered  by  Frisland
fishers,  464;  coasted  by  Davys,
XII.  28.

Greensell,  Humphrey,  and  the
Portuguese  Inquisition  (1570)  iii.

154-

Greenvile,  Captain  John,  of  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  expedition  to
Guiana  (1595)  x.  380,  396,  403,
417,  422.

Greenville, see Grenville,

Greenwich,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  11.
217,  244;  departure  of  the  Russian
ambassadors  from  (1568)  iii.  99;
Queen  Elizabeth  at  (1576)  vii.
204.

Gregory,  Thomas,  of  Taunton,
patent  granted  to  (1592)  vii. 102.

Grenada  Island,  the  Green  Dragon
of  Havre  at  (1565)  x.  25 ;  Sir
Amyas  de  Preston  in  sight  of
(1595)  216;  Sir  Robert  Dudley  at
(1594)  203 ; capture  near,  by  Sir

XII

249

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Robert  Dudley  (1595)  209;  latitude
of,  332 ;  Laurence  Keymis  at
(1596)  478.

Grenche,  at  Gillingham,  Kent,  i.  47,
48.

Grenville,  Captain,  in  Sir  Martin
Frobisher's  fleet  (1592)  vii.  108.

Grenville,  Sir  Richard,  vii.  62  ;  vice-
admiral,  and  the  Richard  of  Arun-
del (1591)  VI,  466;  captain  of  the
Revenge  (1591)  vii.  39;  and  the
Spanish  fleet,  42 ;  wounded,  43 ;
prisoner  of  Alfonso  de  Bagan,
47;  death  of,  47  f.,  81;  por-
trait of,  48 ;  and  the  Span-
ish fleet  at  Corvo  Island  (1591)
VII.  80;  character  of,  81  f . ;  ex-
ploits of,  by  John  Huighen  van
Linschoten  (1589-91)  62;  voyage
to  Virginia  (1585)  viii.  310-
318,  (1586)  347;  and  the  governor
of  Isabella  in  Hispaniola,  313;  re-
turn to  England,  317;  colony  in
Virginia  founded  by,  349;  xii.  25,
41,  68.

Grenville,  William,  of  Captain
Amadas's  company  (1584)  viii.
310.

Gresham,  John,  goods  of,  in  Portu-
gal, v.  63,  66.

Gresham,  Sir  John,  privileges
granted  to  (1555)  11.  298;  assistant
to  the  Muscovy  Company,  307.

Gresham,  Sir  Thomas  (1519-79),
founder  of  the  mathematical  lec-
tures, I.  xxxvii.

Gresham,  William,  factor  in  the
Mary  George  (c.  15 11)  v.  62.

Grevandel,  fir  woods  at,  v.  321.

Greveling,  see  Gravelines.

Grey,  carpenter  in  the  Hugh  Gal-
lant, death  of  (1587)  xi.  300.

Grey,  Ralph,  on  the  Content  (1591)
X. 183.

Greyhound,  the,  Captain  Laudon-
niere  rescued  in  (1565)  ix.  97.

Grida  on  the  Red  Sea,  description
of,  v.  359.

Griega, Cavo  de  la, in  Cyprus, v.

93-
Griego, John, Greek pilot of Sir

Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi.  114.
Griffith, William, of the Solomon

(1584)  v.  281.

Griffonum,  Monasterium,  Richard  I.
seizes  (1190)  iv.  322.

Griff yn,  Rowland,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  318.

Grigno,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Grigs,  Thomas,  purser  of  the
Minion  of London (1580)  xi. 34.

Grijalva,  well  of,  in  S.  Cruz,  ix.
226.

Grimes,  Master,  English  consul  at
Patras  (1586)  vi.  40.

Grimes,  Philip,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Grimesby,  see  Grimsby,

Grimsby,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Grimsby,  New,  in  Scilly,  John
Davys  at  (1585)  vii.  382 ;  Luke
Warde  at  (1583)  xi.  201.

Grimston,  Captain,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  death  of,  in  Grand
Canary  Island  (1595)  x.  229.

Grindal,  Edmund,  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  and  the  importation
of  the  Tamarisk  from  Germany,
V.  242.

Gripes,  Cretan  boats,  v.  9.

Gripeswold,  restitution  for  losses  de-
manded of England by, 11. 36,

(1405)  .55-
Grisland,  Norwegian  ship  cast  upon

(c. 1380)  VII. 450.
Grodecz,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

325-
Greenland,  see  Greenland.
Groine  of  Galicia,  see  Corunna  Bay.
Groiswine,  George,  ship's  carpenter

of  the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  ii.

213.
Grolos, Thomas, bishop of Astra-

phen, and John Foxe (1577) v.

166.
Grondland,  see  Greenland.
Groneland,  see  Greenland.
Gronland,  see  Greenland.
Grosin,  see  Georgia.
Grosse  Carle, Hugh  of  Tabaria  in

the  country  of  the  (1107)  iv.  304.
Groutald,  his  discoveries  at  Utina's

court  (1565)  IX.  55.
Grove, master of the Three Half

Moons, and the  Turks  (1577) v.

154-

250

INDEX

Growte,  or  Groute,  John,  Jacques
Noel's  first  letter  to,  touching  the
discoveries  of  Jacques  Cartier
(1587)  vin.  272 ;  second  letter,  273.

Groyne  of  Galicia,  see  Corunna  Bay.

Gruk,  John,  of  Danzig,  damages
paid  to,  II. 105.

Grussina,  in.  80,  81.

Grustina,  Castle  of,  in  Russia,  iii.
408.

Grustintzi,  people  of,  in.  408.

Gryffons,  emperor  of  the,  see
Isakius.

Gryneus,  Simon,  annotations  on  '  De
Mundo  '  by,  vii.  162.

Guadalajara,  troubles  caused  by
marriages  in  (1590)  ix.  205.

Guadalcanal,  Island,  discovered  by
Alvares  de  Mendanio,  xi.  288.

Guadalquivir,  Rio  del  Norte  com-
pared to,  IX. 190.

Guadalupe,  Nuestra  Senora  de,
church  near  Mexico,  ix.  419.

Guadeloupe,  John  White  near  (1587)

VIII.  387 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1595)  X.  229,  282  ;  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  second  Ruttier,  308 ;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.

IS-
Guadiana, Friar  Bernardin  Beltran

at  (1583)  IX.  203.
Guaia, Nuno de Silva, citizen of,

XI.  133.
Guaiacum, inferior to sassafras,

vm.  355-
Guaiaquil,  see  Guayaquil.
Guaiare  river,  tributary  of  Baraquan

river,  x.  368.
Guaincapa, Emperor of Peru, and

the  city  of  El  Dorado,  x.  340 ; a

son  of.  Emperor  of  Guiana,  356.
Guaipel Island, mentioned in the

Ruttier,  xi.  81.
Guajaval river. Captain UUoa at

(1539)  IX.  208.
Gualle, Captain Francisco de, his

mention  of  vapours  in  California,

IX.  242 ; voyage of (1584) 326-

337-
Gualtero,  Topiawari's  son,  x. 466;

cousin  of  Don  Juan,  469.
Guamone,  see  Cinnamon.
Guana Island, or  Iwana, or  Guai-

haime, one of the Ladrones

Islands, xi. 328, 363 ; latitude,

350,  369-
Guana,  las  Sierras  de,  mentioned  in

second  Ruttier,  x.  330.
Guanaba,  see  Gonnavy.
Guanaguarico, las  Sierras  de,  near

Cape de Corrientes, in second

Ruttier,  x.  315.
Guanba, province of Guiana, x.

498.
Guanches, former inhabitants of

Teneriffe,  vi. 131.
Guaniguanico, in Pinos Island, x.

250.
Guanima, Sir  Richard  Grenville  at

(1585)  vm.  315.
Guanipa or  Charuas Bay, x. 340 ;

Indians of, and the gold of

Guiana, 366; and  Amana river,

378; Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)

380; alliance  of  Indians  of,  with

those  of  Dominica  (1576)  479.
Guanipa river, cannibals near, x.

423-

Guard,  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
III.  414;  English,  at  the  court  of
John,  son  of  Alexius  Comnenus
fii77)  IV.  311;  of  Sultan  Murad
^1583)  V.  256;  Turkish,  captain
of,  or  Solach  Pasha,  pay  of,  vi.
62  ; annuity  of,  65.

Guarda  Fu,  see  Guardafui.

Guardafui,  Cape,  the  Portuguese  at,

VIII.  128.

Guariparim,  Sierra  de,  mentioned  in

Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  81.
Guasacapan  province,  John  Chilton

in  (1570)  IX. 366.
Guascar,  see  Huascar.
Guastecan  province,  John  Chilton  in

(1572)  IX.  370; salt  used  as  money

and  medicine  in,  371.
Guatazaca,  old  Indian  woman  living

in  a  lake  (1540)  ix.  305.
Guatemala, papal bulls for (1592)

VII. 105; John  Chilton  in (1568)

IX.  364,  369;  description  of  the
city  of,  366;  cacao  used  as  coin
and  goods  in  (1572)  384;  John
Cortez  sent  to,  to  fight  the  Eng-
lish (1580)  433;  Miles  Phillips
escapes  to  (1580)  440;  distance
from,  to  the  South  Sea^  x.  275.

Guatimala,  see  Guatemala.

251

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Guatulco,  see  Aguatulco.

Guavaes,  nation  on  Rio  Grande,  xi.
96.

Guaxaca,  Indian  town  in  Mexico,
tribute  paid  by, ix. 364.

Guaxacan,  bishopric  of,  situation  of,
IX.  466.

Guaxutia,  Augustinian  monastery
in  (1572)  IX.  370.

Guayaquil,  town  in  Peru,  xii.  60;
sarsaparilla  gathered  at,  xi.  286;
garrison  at  (1587)  315.

Guaybea,  Brazil,  Thomas  Babington
at  (1581)  XI.  34.

Gudbrand  Thorlacius,  bishop  of
Holen,  in  Iceland,  iv.  6,  93 ;  and
Arngrimus  Jonas,  8,  97.

Gudmund,  surnamed  Bonus,  fifth
bishop  of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1203)
IV.  54,  153-

Guer,  Cabo  de,  in  Africa,  vi.  134;
latitude  of,  xi. 150.

Guernache,  drummer  in  Charles-
Fort,  death  of  (1562)  viii.  482.

Guernsey,  Lewis  de  Vike  from,  re-
port of  (1583)  viii.  146.

Guerriero,  or  Ghenero,  Augustine,
and  Captain  Alarchon  in  Colima
(1540)  IX.  313,  318.

Guetelus,  public  notary  of  Utina
(J33i)  IV.  444.

Guia,  a  town  in  the  Canaries,  vi.
127.

Guiacar  river,  x.  408.

Guiana,  xi.  18  ;  discovery  of  Sir  Robert
Dudley  and  Captain  Popham  con-
cerning (1595)  x.  206;  discovered
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  225,
338-431,  398;  distance  from  to  the
sea,  354;  importance  of,  355;  de-
scription by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
356;  Diego  Ordas's  attempt  to
discover,  359;  Pedro  de  Orsua's
attempt  to  discover,  362;  Agira's
attempt  to  discover,  363 ;  Ortal
and  Sllva's  attempt  to  discover,
363;  gold  from,  364,  366,  xi.  9,
13 ;  map  or  chart  of,  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  x.  365,  385  ;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  knowledge  of,
371,  399,  410;  Spanish  rivalry
about  the  discovery  of,  373,  434,
435,  460;  map  of,  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh, engraving of, 384; cli-

mate and  products,  426,  427,  xi.
13  ;  river  Amazon's  course  through,
16 ;  easy  of  conquest,  x.  428  ;  easy
to  fortify,  429 ;  taken  possession  of
by  Domingo  da  Vera  (1593)  435;
second  voyage  to,  by  Laurence
Keymis  (1596)  452-501;  ten  Span-
ish ships  sent  to,  491 ;  Spanish  at-
tempts to  discover,  quoted  from
Juan  de  Castellanos'  book,  496;
difficult  of  access,  499 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  third  voyage  to,  written
by  Thomas  Masham  (1596)  xi.
1-15;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  at-
tempt at  colonising,  xii.  72  ;  '  The
Discovery  of  the  Large,  Rich,  and
Beautiful  Empire  of  Guiana,'  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  xii.  73.

'  Guiana  Carmen  Epicum,  De,'  by
George  Chapman  (1596)  x.  446-
452,  XII.  97.

Guiara,  Diego  de,  of  Biscay,  dis-
covery of New Biscay by, ix.

Guicciardini,  and  the  north-west
passage,  vii. 162.

Guido,  governor  of  Trebizond,  i.
231.

Guido,  King,  see  Guy.

Guido,  son  of  Matthew,  i.  341.

Guidotus,  Father,  of  the  Franciscan
Friars  in  Trevlso,  iv.  442.

Guildhall,  London,  Cologne  mer-
chants' dues  at,  i.  323,  326.

GuIHelmus  Neobrigensis,  see  Wil-
liam of  Newburgh.

Gulllame,  Peter,  John  Newbery's
friend  (1583)  v.  453.

Guillaumurius, King  of  Ireland, i.

4;
Guimunde, patriarch of Jerusalem

(1128)  IV.  308.
Guinea,  Portuguese  possession,  John
Tintam  and  William  Fabian's  in-
tended voyage  to  (1481)  vi.  123;
English  merchants'  first  voyage  to
(1553)  141-152;  latitude,  142,  378;
second  voyage  to  (1554)  154-177;
William  Towerson's  first  voyage  to
(1553)  177-211;  second  voyage  to
^1556)  212-231;  third  voyage  to
(1577)  231-252;  advice  to  John
I.ock  touching  a  voyage  to  (1561)
253; company,  John  Lock's  letter

252

INDEX

to  the  (1561)  255-257;  proposed
voyage  to  (1564)  262;  voyage  of
George  Fenner  to,  by  Walter
Wren  (1566)  266-284;  ship  of,  a
poisonous  fish,  379;  coast  of,  loss
of  the  Edward  Cotton  on  the
(1583)  411;  coast  of,  map  of,  en-
graving, 528;  Spanish  fleet  from
(1589)  VII.  71;  gold  in,  98;  King
of  Morocco's  proceedings  in  (1594)
100;  Mulley  Balasen,  son  of  the
King  of  Morocco,  slain  in,  10 1 ;
Captain  Windam's  voyage  to
(1553)  252;  coast  of,  discovered
by  the  Portuguese,  viii.  127;
Portuguese  garrison  at^  445  ;  coast
of,  negroes  taken  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  on  (1567)  ix.  399,  447;
the  William  and  John  lost  off  the
(1568)  400;  negroes  of,  sold  in
Hispaniola  by  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1562)  X.  7;  coast  of,  first  voyage
of  Sir  John  Hawkins  to  (1562)  7;
second  voyage  (1564)  9-63;  third
voyage  (1567-8)  64-74;  water-
dropping  trees  in  (1564)  13;
negroes  of,  about  Cape  Verde,  de-
scription (1564)  15;  the  Minion
and  the  Portuguese  galleys  in
(1565)  35;  Portuguese  ship  from,
captured  by  Christopher  Newport
(1591)  184;  ship  from,  captured
by  William  King  (1592)  191 ;  Sir
Anthonj'  Sherley  on  the  coast  of
(1596)  267  f.  ;  Edward  Fenton  in
sight  of  (1582)  XI.  173,  XII.  15.

Guinea-cocks  in  Granada,  ix. 156.

Guinecourt,  Captain  in  Francis  de
Roberval's  voyage  (1542)  viii.  283  ;
sent  to  France  by  Roberval  to
carry  news,  286.

Guinie,  see  Guinea.

Guiny-wheat,  to  make  a  drink,  xi.

Guipusco,  see  Guipuzcoa.
Guipuzcoa and the Armada (1588)

IV.  200.
Gullistone  Castle,  in.  25.
Gum found  in Florida, x. 57.
Gum Arabic found in Zaffo, vi.

27.
Gumme,  see  Gum.
Gundall, the, Portuguese boat at

Sierra  Leone  (1582)  xi. 179.

Gundy,  Alexander,  gunner's  mate,
called  in  council  by  Robert  With-
rington (1587) xi. 211.

Gunfacius, King  of  Orkney,  i. 3.

Gunfride,  keeper  of  the  Tower  of
David  (1107)  IV. 302.

Gunnasius, King  of Orkney, i. 4.

Gunner,  the  Master,  in  John  Win-
ter's voyage,  killed  by  Patagon-
ians,  XI. 157.

Gunner,  the  Master,  called  in  coun-
cil by  Robert  Withrington  (1589)
XI.  211.

Gunpowder in the Guipuzcoa ship

(1588)  IV.  215.

Guns,  made  by  Chinese,  vi.  359.
Gunson, William, owner of the

Mary  Grace  (c. 15 11)  v.  62.
Gunson,  see  Gonson,  Benjamin.
,  Guritini, river, or Curitini, honey

found  near,  x.  459.
Gusman,  Don  Fernando  de,  accom-
plice of  Lopez  de  Agira,  xi.  244 ;

killed  by  Agira,  245.
Guthlac,  Saint,  of  Croyland  monas-
tery (1064)  IV.  290.
Gutieres, Diego, pilot, his  account

of  China,  ix.  393.
Gutierez, Gregory, notary of Don

John  Bermudes  of  Figueroa  (1596)

X.  252.
Gutte, Port  of,  description  of, viii.

186.
Gutuere, wife of Baldwin, voyage

of, to Jerusalem (1097) iv. 293;

death  of,  294.
Gutyn  Owen,  on  Madoc's  discovery,

VII.  134.
Guy, King  of  Jerusalem,  in  Cyrus

(1191)  IV.  330; and  Philip,  King

of  France,  333.
Guy, Reinold,  member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi. 419,

420  f.
Guy,  Rowland,  and  the  saltpetre  at

Sus (1577) VI. 291.
Guydo,  see  Guido.
Guyecardinus,  see  Guicciardini,
Guzman,  Don  Pedro  de,  general  of

the Spanish fleet  from West In-
dies (1580)  IX.  442.
Guzman, Don  Pedro  Henriquez  de,

Conde de Fuentes, at Penlche

(1589)  VI.  473.

253

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Guzman, Nunno de, governor of

New  Galicia,  ix.  121.
Guzula,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.

144.
Gwaripoco,  see  Iwaripoco.
Gwasto, Marquess del, captain of

horsemen in the Armada (1588)

IV.  205.
Gwathanelo,  viii.  408.
Gwinne,  Richard,  ship's  carpenter  of

the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  li.  213.
Gwinne,  Robert,  purser  of  the  Bona

Esperanza  (1553)  11. 213.
Gwyn, David, and the Spanish

Armada, on the Bayonne coast

(1588)  IV. 210.
Gwynedd, Madoc ap Owen, dis-
coveries of,  VIII. 108, 109.
Gylbert, Sir John, knighted at

Cadiz (1596) IV. 260.
Gypwich,  see  Ipswich.
Gyrthus, fifteenth bishop of Schal-

holt,  in  Iceland  (1349)  iv.  56,  155.
Gysserus, bishop of Schalholt, in

Iceland  (c.  1090)  iv. 15,  104.
Gysserus, second bishop of Schal-
holt, in  Iceland  (1082)  iv.  54,  152.
Gysserus, twenty-seventh  bishop of

Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1541)  iv.  58,

157-

Habbakuk's  Mountain,  Laurence
Aldersey  at  (1581)  v.  210.

Haban,  King  of,  plans  of  English
merchants  towards  the  (1561)  vi.

254-

Habech,  or  Habasia,  kingdom  of,  in
Africa,  vi.  169.

Hachenberg,  Ulrich,  Prussian  am-
bassador to  England,  11. 18,  20.

Hacken,  Arnold  de,  Prussian  am-
bassador, II.  47,  91.

Hacker,  Richard,  of  the  Edward
Cotton  (1584)  VI.  412.

Hacklewit,  see  Hakluyt.

Hackluit,  see  Hakluyt.

Hackluyt, see Hakluyt.

Haco,  King  of  Norway  invades  the
islands  (1229)  i.  38;  acknowledges
Magnus,  King  of  Man  (1254)  40;
death  of  (1260)  40;  long  reign  of,
IV.  68, 169.

Haderwerck  of  Westphalia,  at  Joppa
(1102)  IV.  299.

Hafina,  see  Copenhagen.

Hage,  see  Hague.

Hague,  in  Holland,  English  and
Prussian  ambassadors'  meeting
place,  II.  30,  32,  33,  36,  60,  79,  87,
91,  95;  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
320.

Haharacoa,  cacique,  nephew  to  Topi-
awari,  lord  of  Capurepana,  x.  403.

Haie,  see  Hay.

Hainan  Island,  near  China,  vi.  349;
latitude  of,  347 ; pearls  at,  355.

Hainault,  see  Hainaut.

Hainaut,  products  of,  11.  129  f. ;
English  merchants  in,  146 ;  Bald-
win,  count  of,  I.  262.

Hais,  John  de,  master  carpenter  at
Fort  Caroline  (1565)  ix.  75  ;  news-
bearer  of  the  taking  of  Fort  Caro-
line by  Spaniards  (1565)  96.

Haiward,  see  Heywood.

Hakluyt,  Edmund,  brother  of  the
author,  i.  xxxii.

Hakluyt,  Richard  (1552-1616)  i.
xvii. ;  panegyric  verses  on,  Ix. ;
French  voyages  printed  by,  Ixviii. ;
translated  by,  viii.  439-445 ;
Epistle  Dedicatorie  to  first  edition
of  Principal  Navigations,  i.  xvii. ;
Preface  to  first  edition,  xxiii.  ;
Principall  Navigations,  Title  page
of  first  edition,  xxiv.  ;  Epistle
Dedicatorie  to  first  volume  of
second  edition  (1598)  xxxi. ;  Title
page  of  first  volume  of  second
edition,  xxxii. ;  Preface  to  the
second  edition,  xxxix.  ;  Epistle
Dedicatorie  to  second  volume  of
second  edition  (1599)  Ixiii.  ;  Title
page  of  second  volume  of  second
edition,  Ixiv.  ;  Epistle  Dedicatorie
to  third  volume  of  second  edition
(1600)  Ixxiv.  ;  Title  page  of  third
volume  of  second  edition,  Ixxiv. ;
and  Henry  Lane,  iii.  98-
100 ;  Gerardus  Mercator  to,  275-
282;  and  the  Levant  merchants'
ledgers,  v.  63;  John  Williamson's
voyage  related  to  (1534)  67,  68;
John  Newbery's  letter  to  (1583)
452;  and  Nicholas  Thome's  letter
on  the  Canary  Islands,  vi.  124;
and  Raymond  Lancaster's  voyage
to the East Indies (1591) 387;

254

INDEX

Stephen  Parmenius's  letter  to
(1583)  vm.  78,  81;  Sir  Francis
Walsingham's  letter  to,  131;  and
Walsingham's  letter  to  Thomas
Aldworth,  132,  133 ;  map  of  the
New  World  (a.d.  1587),  dedicated
to,  engraving  of,  272 ;  John
White's  letter  to  (1585)  404-
406;  Martin  Basanier,  friend
of,  439;  Pedro  Morales 's  ac-
count of  Florida  made  to  (1586)
IX.  112;  and  Thomas  Tison's  voy-
age to  the  West  Indies  (1526)  x.
6 ;  notes  of,  on  Andrew  Barker's
voyage  to  Terra  Firma  (1576)  82-
88';  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  voyage
(1594)  written  at  the  request  of,
203 ;  '  Examinations  of  Spanish
Masters  and  Pilots,'  written  by
Pedro  Dias  at  the  request  of  (1586)

XI.  458;  letter  from,  to  Sir  Fran-
cis Walsingham, facsimile of

XII.  80 ;  Introductory  essay  on,  by
Professor  Raleigh,  xii.  1-120;  and
Thomas  Buts  of  the  voyage
to  Labrador,  xii.  20;  and  the
Catholic  missions,  32 ;  '  Dis-
course on  the  Western  Planting  '
by,  32  ;  character  and  works  of,
74;  at  Paris,  and  Don  Antonio,
76;  friends  of,  76;  life  of,  77;
first  work  of,  79 ;  chaplain  of
Sir  Edward  Stafford,  ambassador
in  Paris  (1583)  82;  ecclesiastical
preferment  of,  82  ;  literary  works
of,  83 ;  quotation  from,  84,  88,
89;  living  of  James  Town,  Vir-
ginia, given  to,  86 ;  method  of  his
works,  89;  'Voyages  of,'  92;  re-
print of  the  '  Voyages  of,'  119.

Hakluyt,  Richard,  of  the  Middle
Temple  (cousin  of  the  author),  i.
xvii. ,  xxix. ,  XII.  78 ;  letter  to  Morgan
Hubblethorne  on  Persia,  i.  249-25 1 ;
list  by,  of  dyeing  materials  to  be
got  in  Constantinople  (1582)  v.
229;  on  trade  (1582)  231;  notes
framed  by  (1578)  vii.  244;  Oliver
Dawbeney's  account  of  Newfound-
land to  (1536)  VIII.  4;  Anthony
Parkhurst's  letter  to  (1578)  9;
Ralph  Lane's  letter  to  (1585)  319;
'  Remembrances  for  a  Factor  at
Constantinople  '  by,  88.

Hakluyt,  Richard,  of  Eyton,  letter  to
Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman,
III.  264;  Henry  Hawks's  account
of  New  Spain  requested  by  (1572)
IX.  378.

'  Hakluyt  Society,'  work  done  by
the,  XII.  90.

Halabolina  Harbour,  in  Ramea,
VIII. 167.

Halberstadt,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  320.

Haldorus,  Jonas,  twelfth  bishop  of
Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1322)  iv.  55,

154-
Halepo,  see  Aleppo.
Hales, Sir James, his regiment's

march  to  Lisbon  (1589)  vi.  497.
Halewater,  John,  damages  paid  to,

II.  103  f.
Halgeland,  see  Helgoland.
Halibut,  found  on  the  coast  of  Fris-

land  (1577)  VII.  289.
Hall, Christopher, of  the  Tomasin,

III.  247.

Hall,  Christopher,  his  account  of
Martin  Frobisher's  first  voyage  to
the  north-west  (1576)  vii.  204;
pilot  of  the  Thomas  Allen  (1578)
231 ;  master  of  the  Aid  (1577)  285,
304;  master  of  the  Gabriel  (1576)
290;  chief  pilot  of  Captain  Fro-
bisher's fleet  (1578)  323;  _  his
opinion  on  the  geographical  situa-
tion of  the  fleet,  334;  assistant  in
sea  causes  in  Captain  Frobisher's
council,  348.

Hall,  Christopher,  master  of  the  gal-
leon Leicester  (1582)  xi.  172;  at
Sierra  Leone,  175.

Hall,  John,  master  of  the  Edward
Bonaventure, death  of (1592) vi.

396-
Hall,  Master,  his  account  of  the  ex-
pedition to  the  North  Pole  (1527)

VIII. I.

Hallape, see Aleppo.

Halli  Pasha,  landing  at  Famagusta
(1571)  V.  129.

Hall's  Islands,^ discovered  by  Captain
Frobisher  (1576)  vii.  215;  Captain
Frobisher  at  (1577)  290-292  ;  archi-
pelago near,  364.

Halmacanir,  King,  and  Captain
Gourgues  (1567)  ix.  102.

255

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Haly,  John,  shipmaster  of  the  Mus-
covy Company,  in.  303.
Hama,  Hill  of,  described  in  the  Rut-
ticr,  X.  305.

Hamacas,  see  Hammocks.

Hamacata,  nuns  in  Japan,  vi.  331.

Hamane,  William,  boatswain  on  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.

Hamber,  small  toys  made  at,  v.  321.

Hamborough,  see  Hamburg.

Hambourgh,  see  Hamburg.

Hamburg,  restitution  of  losses  de-
manded from  England  by,  11.  34 ;
and  England  (1405)  55;  wax
market  at,  389 ;  ambassador  from,
399;  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)
III.  345 ;  distance  between  Iceland
and,  IV.  12,  100;  levies  made  at,
for  the  Armada  (1588)  204;  Henry
Austell  at  (1585)  v.  320,  327;
William  Harborne  at  (1588)  vi.
58;  hulk  with  Spanish  goods  cap-
tured by  the  English  (1589)  510;
ship  captured  by  the  English
(1589)  VII.  2 ;  ships  and  Robert
Withrington  (1586)  xi.  203.

Hamed,  Mully,  brother  of  Mully
Abdelmelech,  vi.  291.

Hamed,  Mully,  Sheriff,  and  English
trade  (1585)  vi,  419;  and  Henry
Roberts,  426;  edict  (1587)  428;
letter  to  Earl  of  Leicester,  430 ;
letter  from  Queen  Elizabeth,  432.

Hamet,  see  Hamed.

Hammah,  city,  description  of,  vi.  2.

Hammocks,  trade  and  use  of,  in
West  Indies,  x.  376.

Hamode,  Alcaide,  in  Gago  (1594)
VII.  99,  100 ;  expedition  to  Guinea,
led  by, loi.

Hamor,  William,  William  Har-
borne's  servant  (1584)  v.  282.

Hamowlhooke,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Hampshire,  Sheriff  of,  and  King
John,  I.  320.

Hampton,  John,  captain  of  the
Minion,  with  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1567)  IX.  398;  cruelty  of,  to
the  sailors  landed  (1568)  409;
opinion  of,  on  navigation,  quoted
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh, x.  379.

Hampton,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
Swallow  (1562)  x.  7.

Hampton,  see  Southampton.
Hance,  keeper  of  the  artillery,  and

the  ship-building  in  Fort  Caroline

(1565)  IX.  60.
Hance, the surgeon, death of, in

Roanoke  (1590)  viii.  416.
Hancock, Edward, in Sir Walter

Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Capuri

river  (1595)  x.  380; at  the  Caroli

river (1595) 403.
Hancock, George, of the Toby,

death  of  (1593)  vii.  129.
Hancock, Thomas, mariner  on  the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) n.

214.
Handicrafts for foreign trade, vil.

187.
Hanege or  Hanega, a  measure  of

New  Spain  (1572)  ix.  391.
Hang-chow, in. 252, viii, 129; in

Northern China, 263; map of

(1580)  268.
Hannam,  Captain  John,  land-captain

in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1585)

X.  98 ; death  of, 134.
Hannibal,  v.  iig ; in  Carthage,  vi.

38.
Hanno de Sangershusen, seventh

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

5-

Hanse  Towns,  the,  and  England
(1405)  II.  55-67;  depredations  on
the  seas  by  the  (1405)  60-71 ;  mer-
chants' grievances  against  Eng-
land (1407)  72-79;  and  English
merchants  (1407)  81  ;  steeds  of
English  merchants  in  the  (1404)
109;  trade  of,  with  Spain  (1588)
VI.  59.

Hanta,  in  Guinea,  William  Tower-
son  at  (1557)  VI.  218,  220,  ^1577)
239,  247; English  trade  in  (1562)

259-
Hante,  Thomas,  cook  on  the  Bona

Confidentia (1553) 11. 214.
Haquinus,  see  Haco.
Harald  Harfagre, King  of  Norway

(846)  I.  25,  V.  68,  169.
Harbert,  see  Herbert.
Harbey, John, licensed to  trade  in

Russia  free  of  custom  (1592)  in.

440.
Harbingers  (household  officers)  of  the

Emperor  of  Russia,  in.  414.

=  56

INDEX

Harborne,  William,  factor  for  Sir
Edward  Osborne,  first  voyage  of
(1578)  V.  168;  letter-bearer  of
Queen  Elizabeth,  184;  ambassa-
dor at  Constantinople  (1583)  243-
258;  correspondence  about  the
embassy  (1582)  v.  221-228;  and
the  viceroy  of  Majorca,  245,  247,
249  ;  letter  to  Harvey  Millers,  259 ;
to  Richard  Forster,  260-261;  to
Mustafa,  265 ;  his  complaints  of
the  dishonesty  of  the  Turks,
265,  274,  276,  282 ;  to  Ed-
ward Barton  (1584)  274;  to
John  Tipton,  consul  for  Algiers,
Tunis,  and  Tripolis,  276;  the  in-
ventory of  sunk  English  ships  by
(1584)  279-282  ;  to  Hassan  Aga,  in
Algiers,  282  ;  letter  to  the  King  of
Tripolis  about  the  restitution  of
the  Jesus  (1585)  316,  318;  return
from  Constantinople,  VI.  58;  Levant
trade  and  (1592)  vi.  73;  member
of  the  Levant  Company  (1592)  75,
78.

Harbour  of  S.  Marta,  description,  x.
136; of Cartagena, description,

137-
Hardie, voyage of, in the Trinity

(1536)  vm.  3.
Hardine  of  England,  his  voyage  to

Joppa  (1102)  IV.  298,  299.
Hare, Christopher, master of the

flagship of Thomas Cavendish

(1586)  XI,  295.
Hare, Stephen, captain of the

Minion of London, bound for

Brazil  (1580)  xi.  34-39; master  of

the  Content  (1587)  xi. 327.
Hareborne,  William, see  Harborne.
Harecourt, Sir  John, and the  war

against the Saracens (1390) iv.

451-

Harecourt,  William  de,  his  voyage
to  the  Holy  Land  (12 18)  iv.  349.

Hares,  found  in  Hochelaga  (1535),  by
Jacques  Cartier,  vm.  244 ;  in  Vir-
ginia (1584)  304;  in  Cevola,  ix.
139;  in  Granada,  156;  in  New
Spain,  385 ;  in  Florida,  x.  59 ;  in
Guiana,  426,  xi. 14.

FL-ares,  Island  of,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1536)  vm.  258;
latitude  of,  279.

Harewich,  see  Harwich.

Harfleur,  11.  119;  taken  (1416)  143;
lost  (1449)  138.

Harflew,  see  Harfleur.

Hariot,  Thomas,  of  Sir  Richard
Grenville's  voyage  to  Virginia
(1585)  vm.  316,  317;  opinion  on
Moratoc  river.  332 ;  conspiracy
against,  338;  report  of,  on  Vir-
ginia, 348 ;  and  the  narrative  of
Nicholas  Burgoignon,  ix.  113;
Laurence Keymis's dedication to

(1595)  X.  451-
Haro,  soldier  of  Captain  Ulloa,  and

the attack of the Chichimecas

Indians (1539) ix. 236; courage

of,  238.
Harold, son  of  Godwin,  i.  25 ; his

daughter marries the Duke of

Russia  (1067)  42; and  his  brother

Sweyn  (1052)  iv.  283  ;  and  Edward

the  Confessor,  286.
Harold, son of Godred Crovan, i.

26.
Harold,  son  of  Godred  Don,  i.  40.
Harold,  brother  of  Olaf,  sons  of,  i.

30  f.
Harold,  son  of  Olaf,  King  of  Man

(1102)  I.  30.
Harold,  son  of  Olaf, King  of  Man

(1237) I. 38  f. ; knighted  by  the

King  of  England  (1247)  39;  death

of  (1249)  39.
Harpaha,  King,  and  Captain  Gour-

gues  (1567)  IX.  102.
Harper, Captain, prisoner of the

Spanish,  his  knowledge  of  Guiana

(1595)  X.  206.
Harps, captain  of  a  pinnace  (1590)

VIII.  410.
Harrie, Bennet, in Virginia (1585)

VIII.  317.
Harris,  called  in  council  by  Robert

Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.
Harris,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)  viii.

318.
Harris,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII. 402,  403.
Harrison,  Ambrose,  of  the  Elizabeth

Stokes (1584) V. 282.
Harrison, John, Russian licence

granted  to  (1569)  iii,  109.
Harry  of  London,  the,  Anthony  Jen-

kinson  on  (1566)  m.  92; Thomas

257

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Randolph  in  (1568)  102; at  Rose

Island  (1571)  i6g; in  St.  Nicholas

Bay  (1572)  170.
Hart, Alderman, member of the

Muscovy  Committee,  and  Captain

Carleiir(i583)  viii.  147.
Hart, Sir John, of the Muscovy

Company,  and  Feodor  Ivanowich,

Emperor of Russia, in, 439 ;

licensed  to  trade  in Russia, 440 ;

of  the  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.

74.  75.  78-
Hart, the, first  voyage to Gmnea,

John  Ralph,  master  (1555)  vi.  177;

second voyage to Guinea (1556)

212;  captures  a  caravel,  180;  fight

with  the  Portuguese  (1557)  221.
Harte, Johannes  de, master  of  the

5. Maria of S. Vincent, and

Charles  Leigh  (1597)  viii. 174.
Hartlepool, ships from, in Edward

HL's  fleet,  i.  298.
Hartmann ab Heldringen, eighth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights  (1282)

II. 5.
Hartwitch,  see  Harwich.
Harvest  in  Rhodes  (1522)  v. 10.
Harvey,  on  board  the  Aid  (1577)  vii.

285; captain  of  the  Gabriel  (1578)

322.
Harvey,  born  in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.

403-
Harvey, Captain, at  the  taking  of

Puerto  Santo  Island  (1595)  x.  214.
Harvey, Dyonis, and Margery,

settlers  in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.  402,

403-

Harvey,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Harvey,  William,  of  the  English
fleet,  and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
217;  knighted  at  Cadiz  (1596)
260.

Harvie,  see  Harvey.

Harwich,  Essex,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  299;  Willough-
by's  fleet  at,  11.  245;  port  of  call
of  the  Muscovy  Company,  321;
departure  of  Thomas  Randolph
from  (1568)  in.  102;  departure  of
Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman
(1580)  282  ;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  at
(1583)  316,  464;  English  ships  at
(1588)  IV.  228; Henry  Austell's  de-

parture from  (1585)  V.  320;
William  Towerson  leaves  (1556)
VI.  212;  Captain  Martin  Fro-
bisher  at  (1576)  vii.  211,  282,  (1577)
212,  286;  his  fleet  meets  at  (1578)
322,  325 ;  Stephen  Hare  leaves
(1580)  XI.  34.

Hasels,  Thomas,  maker  of  pewter
ware,  11.  380.

Haselwood,  Stephen,  master  of  the
Golden  Noble  (1586)  vi.  46.

Haslewood,  Richard,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v. 281.

Hassald,  Master,  in  Goto  town
(1591)  VI.  465.

Hassan  Aga,  treasurer  of  Hassan
Pasha,  V.  282.

Hassan Pasha, Algerian viceroy

(1583)  V.  267; and  English  ships

(1584)  280.

Hasse,  John,  of  the  Edward  Bona-
venture,  11.  213;  on  Russia  (1554)
273-278.

Haste,  knight  of,  and  Mustafa
Pasha  at  the  siege  of  Famagusta
(1571)  V.  145.

Hastings,  i.  44  f. ;  ships  of,  47  f.  ;
ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,
I.  297.

Hastings,  Lady  Mary,  and  the  Em-
peror of  Russia  (1582)  III.  323.

Hatorashe,  see  Hattoras.

Hatton,  Sir  Christopher,  portrait  of,
XI. 136.

Hatton,  Sir  William,  of  the  English
fleet,  and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv
217.

Hatton 's  Headland,  the  Anne  Fran-
cis at  (1578)  VII.  340;  the  Busse  oi
Bridgwater  at,  341 ;  the  English
fleet  at,  342  ;  Captain  Best  near,
355 ; his  explorations  on,  357.

Hattoras, Sir  Richard Grenville  at

(1585)  VIII.  316;  Prideox  at,  338;
fish  at,  338;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
ship  at,  347;  John  White  at  (1597)
391 ;  flyboat  at  392  ;  English  flee
tO'  395  >  John  White  at  (1590)
414.

Haucoir, Hamshe, and the giant

Arneoste,  in.  25.
Haukadal fountain in Iceland, iv.

36, 131-
Haukins,  see  Hawkins.

'58

INDEX

Hauser,  Christopher,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Hautory,  see  Hawtrey.

Havana,  x.  47;  xi.  240;  meeting
place  of  the  Spanish  fleets,  vii.  54,
66,  76,  87;  Spanish  ships  bound
for  (1590)  VIII.  411 ;  stolen  bark  of
Captain  Laudonniere  at  (1564)  ix.
39 ;  importance  of,  367 ;  Miles
Philips  escapes  to  (1580)  441 ;  Eng-
lish prisoners  at  (1570)  460 ;  open  to
Sir  Francis  Drake's  attack,  x.  94;
John  de  Orimo,  general  of  the
Spanish  fleet  in  (1590)  158;  John
de  Trexeda,  governor  of  (1590)
159 ;  description  of  the  harbour  of,
by  Juan  de  Porva  Canavates  (1590)
163 ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at
(1595)  226;  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo  at  (1596)  250;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  deserted  by  his  ships  at
(1597)  276;  Captain  Parker  at
(1597)  280;  Ruttier  from  Carta-
gena to,  292 ;  described  in  the
Ruttier,  297,  298,  303,  323;  in
second  Ruttier,  325,  334,  337.

Haver  de  pois,  see  Avoirdupois.

Havers,  Captain,  landing  of,  in
Arauco  (1587)  xi.  305;  at  Agua-
tulco,  320 ;  sent  by  Thomas
Cavendish  to  Chaccalla  Bay  (1587)
XI.  322 ;  death  of,  on  the  Desire
(1588)  336.

Havre,  iv.  219;  Spanish  ships  at
(1588)  230;  the  Jesus  at  (1583)  v.
293  ;  ship  of,  captured  by  the  Eng-
lish (1589)  VII.  i;  Frenchmen  of,
in  Senegal,  gi ;  Laudonniere's  de-
parture for  Florida  from, ix.  2.

Haward,  John,  see  Heyw^ood.

Havi^es,  captain  of  the  2?oe  (1586)  xi.
203.

Hawes,  John,  merchant,  witness  of
the  fight  between  the  Centurion
and  the  Spanish  galleys  (1591)  vii.
38.

Hawk  Islands,  see  Azores.

Hawkin  Berlin  of  Danzig,  the,  11.
61.

Hawkins,  bark,  in  a  storm  near
Bayona  Island  (1585)  x,  loi.

Hawkins,  Captain  William  (fl.  1595),
assistant  to  Edward  Fen  ton  (1582)
XI. 163, 165 ; and  the  succession

to  Edward  Fenton  in  case  of  his
death  on  the  voyage  (1582)  166;
in  the  galleon  Leicester,  lieutenant-
general  (1582)  172,  175.
Hawkins,  Sir  John  (1532-1595),  voy-
ages to  Hispaniola  and  Mexico,  i.
xxvii. ,  xxix. ;  commander  of  the
third  squadron  of  the  English
fleet  (1588)  IV.  218;  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78;  his
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  (1564)
263 ;  general  of  the  English  fleet
(1590)  VII.  75;  owner  of  the
Dainty  (1592)  112;  and  the  Span-
iards at  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa,  viii.
315,  IX.  378,  451;  in  the  Mary
Rose  at  Flores  (1590)  viii.  421;
his  ship  lands  at  Florida  (1565)  ix.
77 ;  kindness  to  Laudonniere  and
his  men,  78,  80,  x.  53,  55;  and
the  Englishmen  left  in  Mexico,  ix.
350 ;  and  the  Jesus  of  Lubeck
(1563)  365 ;  general  of  an  English
fleet  bound  for  the  West  Indies
(^567)  398-445;  portrait  of,
400;  his  brother,  governor  of
Plymouth  (1580)  433;  third
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  (1567)
445-465 ;  five  hundred  negroes
taken  by  (1568)  447;  fight  of,  with
seven  Portuguese  carvels  at  Rio
Grande,  448 ;  in  the  West  Indies,
448  ;  and  Augustine  de  Villanueva,
45 1 ;  and  the  agreement  with  the
viceroy  of  West  Indies,  451 ;  first
voyage  of ,  to  the  West  Indies, (1562)
X.  7 ;  second  voyage  of,  to  New
Spain  (1564)  9-63  ;  third  voyage  of,
to  Guinea  and  the  West  Indies
(1567-8)  64-74;  l^st  voyage  of,  to
the  West  Indies  (1595)  '226-245;
signals  for  his  fleet,  prearranged
by,  10 ;  negroes  of  Sambula
Island  taken  by,  20;  negroes  sold
at  Burburata  by,  31  f. ;  and  the
treasurer  of  Riohacha  (1565)  38;
and  the  fight  at  Riohacha,  39 ;
misled  in  the  West  Indies  by  the
Spanish  merchant,  43  ;  description
of  Florida  by,  56  ff. ;  returns  to
England,  63 ;  and  the  town  cap-
tured for  the  King  of  the  Negroes

(1567)  65; Riohacha taken by

(1568)  66; and the Spanish

259

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

fleet  in  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa
(1568)  68;  lands  half  his  crew
in  Mexico  Bay  (1568)  73;  Ad-
miral Pedro  Melendez  and,  in
Mexico  Bay,  131;  illness  of,  at
Las  Virgines  (1595)  229;  death
of,  off  Porto  Rico,  230 ;  at  S.
Juan  d'Ulloa,  and  the  report
about  Agiri,  363  ;  son  of  William
Hawkins  of  Plymouth,  xi.  23 ;
Miles  Philips  left  in  the  West  In-
dies by  (1587)  210;  in  the  Spanish
Indies,  xii.  23 ;  on  the  coast  of
Guinea,  25 ;  head  of  English  Navy
(1580)  45;  voyages  by,  and  his
ancestors,  47;  at  San  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1567)  50;  last  voyage  of
Drake  and  (1595)  64;  death  of,
at  Puerto  Rico,  66 ;  and  Hakluyt,
75;  Warner  on,  97;  and  the
Spanish  Squadron  (1567) 104.

Hawkins,  Sir  Richard  (1562-1622),
captain  of  the  galiot  the  Duck
(1585)  X.  99.

Hawkins,  William  (d.  1554?),  of
Plymouth,  father  of  Sir  John,  xii.
47 ;  and  the  treason  of  the  Portu-
guese of  S.  lago,  X.  109;  voyages
of  (1530-1532)  xi_.  23-25.

Hawks,  Henry,  his  account  of  New
Spain  requested  by  Richard  Hak-
luyt (1572)  IX.  378-397-

Hawks,  used  for  hunting  wild  horses,
II.  464 ;  variety  of,  in  Russia,  iii.
369 ;  black,  in  St.  John  Island,
VII.  146; in  Florida,  x.  59.

Hawkwood,  Sir  John,  victories  of,
in  Italy  (1390)  iv.  452.

Hawlse,  Matthew,  captain  of  the
Delight (1589) XI. 385-389-

Hawtrey,  see  Hawtry.

Hawtry,  Thomas,  merchant  in
Russia  (1555)  II.  291;  in  Vologda,
392-394,  395,  409;  joint  witness  of
the  Russian  privileges,  iii.  97.

Hay,  or  Ai,  city  burnt  by  Joshua,
viii. 102.

Hay,  Edward,  account  of  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's voyage by, viii.

34-
Haye, John, quartermaster of the

Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.
Hayes,  Edward,  captain  and  owner

of the Golden Hind (1583) viii.

47,  92  ;  and  Sir  John  Gilbert,  75 ;
and  Sir  John  Peckham,  89;  his
return  home, 92, xii. 38.

Hayman,  William,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi. 399.

Hayn,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.
326,  327.

Haython  on  the  spelling  of  Cathay,
I. 144.

Hayti,  see  Hispaniola.

Hayward,  Heyward,  Haiward,  Sir
Rowland,  of  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, II,  307 ;  granted  Russian
license  (1569)  iii.  93,  109,  (1586)
348 ;  license  to  build  houses  in
Russia,  113;  and  Persian  trade,
212;  and  the  discovery  of  Cathay
(1580)  251-258.

Hazchora,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,
VI.  144.

Hea,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Headly,  Edward,  death  of,  in  the
wreck  of  the  Delight  (1583)  viii.
68,  87 ;  his  proposition  to  Richard
Clarke,  86.

Health,  gate  of,  in  Mecca,  v.  354.

Health,  port  of.  Sir  Francis  Drake's
crew  at  (1578)  xi.  160.

Heat,  bay  of,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii.  200;  Jacques
Cartier  at,  259 ; latitude  of,  277.

Hebrides,  the,  subdued  by  England,
fertility  of,  i.  9.

Hecht,  Arnold,  of  Danzig,  Prussian
procurator,  11.  87,  91.

Heckelfell,  promontory  in  Iceland,
IV. II, 99.

Hecla,  Mount,  iv. 16, 19,  105,  109;

fire  of,  21,  26, 112, 118; Cardan

on, 28, 120; fountains of, 34,

128.
Hector of Brescia, Captain, and

Mustafa  Pasha, v. 145 ; slain  at

Famagusta,  151.
Heilick Islands, Anthony Jenkin-

son's  fleet  at,  11.  415.
Heirin,  city  in  Persia,  iii.  35.
Heit, city of, near the Euphrates,

spring of pitch, v. 370, 467;

springs  of  tar  at,  vi.  8.
Heith,  William,  factor  of  John  Gres-

ham  (1531)  V.  66.
Heiwood,  see  Heywood.

260

INDEX

Heket,  see  Hecht.

Helcliffe, death of Captain Lister

at  (1589)  VII.  30.
Heldring-en, Hartmann ab, eighth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights  (1282)

II.  5.

Helena,  wife  of  Alexander  the  Great,

King  of  Poland,  11.  188  f.
Helena, second wife of Basil, 11.

190.
Helena,  Flavia  Augusta,  mother  of

Emperor  Constantine,  iv.  271.
Helena Palaeologus, wife  of  John,

King  of  Cyprus  (1571)  v. 125.
Helena,  the,  from  Cley,  11.  65.
Helene of London, the, in John

Davys 's  third  voyage  to  the  north-
west (1587)  VII. 414.
Helford, French ship at, from the

Amazon  river,  x.  366.
Helga,  or  Helgafel,  Mount,  iv. 16,

18,  105,  loS.
Helgoland, description of, i. 11;

Willoughby's discovery of, 11.

219.
Helicon, island of the banks of,

Laurence  Aldersey  near  (1586)  vi.

HelicopiM,  King,  and  Captain  Gour-
gues  (1567)  IX.  102  ;  in  the  attack
of  the  Spaniards,  104.

Helike  Kirke,  a  church  off  Foulness,

III.  300.

Hellespont,  Richard  Wrag  in  the
(1.S93)  VI.  95,  (1594)  107.

Hellier,  Aches,  master  of  the  Jesus
(1583)  V.  292.

Helmacap^,  King,  and  Captain
Gourgues  (1567)  ix.  102.

Helman,  Edward,  of  the  Sunshine  of
London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Help,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet, loss of (1596) x. 242.

Hely,  John,  master  of  the  Mary
Grace  (c. 15 11)  v.  62.

Hemmington,  John,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII.  402.

Hemp,  II.  395,  403 ;  in  Russia,  in.
71 ;  trade,  367 ;  found  in  the
Western  Planting  (1583)  viii.  116,
118;  in  Eastern  America,  139;
natives'  nets  made  of,  202  ;  growth
of,  in  Canada,  268 ;  found  in  Vir-
ginia  (1586) 354; wild, used in

Florida (1524) 429; found in
Guiana,  xi.  14.
Hempson, Hugh, of the Sunshine

(1586)  VII.  408.

Hempsteed,  see  Hemsted.

Hemsted,  Thomas,  death  of,  at
Benin  (1589)  vi.  455,  460.

Hen,  Richard,  captain  of  the  Adven-
turer (1596)  X.  2^7;  taken  prisoner
by  the  Spanish,  280.

Henao,  Alonso  Sapata  de,  in  Cas-
tile, letter  to,  from  John  de
Labera  of  S.  F^  de  Bogota  (1590)

X.  174.

Henault,  see  Hamaut.

Hendie,  Nicholas,  killed  by  Indians

on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.  318.
Henmer,  Thomas,  a  survivor  of  the

crew  of  the  Tohy  (1593)  vii. 126,

129.
Henmore,  see  Henmer.
Henricus,  see  Henry.
Henriques, Lewis, Portuguese,

dwelling at Sierra Leone (1582)

XI.  177, 178.

Henriquez,  Diego,  King  of  Portu-
gal's secretary  (1551)  vi. 153.

Henriquez,  Don  Martin  de,  new
viceroy  of  Mexico  (1568)  ix.  403;
treachery  of,  405 ;  his  agreement
with  Sir  John  Hawkins  in  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1568)  451.

Henry  I.  of  England  and  the  charter,
I.  294.

Henry  II.  of  England  and  Frederick
Barbarossa,  i.  xlviii.  ;  league  be-
tween, 316-318;  and  the  Cinque
Ports'  privileges,  50;  and  the  help
to  the  Christian  soldiers  in  Holy
Land  (1177)  iv.  311 ;  Manuel  Com-
nenus's  letter  to  (1177)  312-319.

Henry  III.  of  England  and  Haco,
King  of  Norway,  i.  xlviii. ;  and
the  Cinque  Ports,  49 ;  the  Cinque
Ports'  privileges,  50;  his  charter,
294 ;  his  treaty  with  Haco,  King
of  Norway,  321;  the  charter  of
Liibeck, 325.

Henry  IV.  of  England  in  Prussia,  i.
xlix. ,  liv. ;  and  the  navy  of  the
Cinque  Ports,  59;  in  France  (1359)
301 ;  and  Prussia  (1404)  11.  37,  41,
(1405)  55-67.(1407)83-85,  (1408)87
95, (1409)  98; grants  charter  to

261

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

English  merchants  abroad  (1404)
108  f. ;  voyage  to  Tunis  (1390)  iv.
450;  and  the  Duke  of  Norfolk
(1398)  IV.  453 ;  intended  voyage
to  the  Holy  Land  (1413)  455.

Henry  V.  of  England,  11.  114;  fileet
of,  I.  Ivii.,  II.  Ill;  praise  of,
143  f-

Henry  VI.  of  England,  foreign  trade
in  his  time,  i.  xlix.  ;  statutes  of,
II.  Ill,  113;  remonstrance  to  the
King  of  Denmark, 113  f.

Henry  VH.  of  England  and  Chris-
topher Columbus  (1488)  VII.  135,
138;  letters  patent  to  John  Cabot
and  his  sons  (1495)  vii.  141,  145;
discoveries  made  under,  viii.  37 ;
letters  patent  granted  to  John  and
Sebastian  Cabot,  37;  and  Chris-
topher Columbus, 94.

Henry  VHI.of  England,  i.  xxi.  ;  his
interest  in  naval  matters,  i.  xxxvi.,
XII.  46;  Robert  Thome's  advice  to
(1527)  II.  159-163;  and  the  French
King,  160 ;  embassy  from  Don
Ferdinand  to  (1527)  v.  61 ;  letter
to  John  HI.  King  of  Portugal,  63  ;
and  Robert  Thorne,  viii.  i,  x.  3;
and  the  King  of  Brazil  (1530-32)
XI.  24.

Henry  H.  Emperor  of  Germany
(972-1024)  I.  25.

Henry  VI.,  Emperor  of  the  Romans
(1193),  letter  of,  to  Philip,  King  of
France,  iv.  336.

Henry  III.,  king  of  Castile  (1395)
VI.  120.

Henry  IV.,  king  of  Navarre  (1590)
IV.  83, 187.

Henry,  Duke,  son  of  Lady  Hedvig,
II.  '186.

Henry,  earl  of  Plaen,  twenty-fourth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights  (1410)
II.  8.

Henry,  Indian  interpreter  of  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1597)  xi.  7,  8.

Henry,  Prince,  son  of  the  King  of
Germany, at Tunis (1270) iv.

359-
Henry,  seventh  bishop  of  Holen,  in

Iceland  (1247)  iv.  55,  153.
Henry a Richtenberg, thirtieth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights, 11.

10.

Henry  a  Tusimer,  eighteenth  master
of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.  6.

Henry  of  Walpot,  first  master  of  the
Hospitallers of Jerusalem (1200)

II.  I.

Henry  Reuss,  twenty-ninth  master
of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.  10.

Henry  the  Navigator,  son  of  John
I., King  of  Portugal,  discoveries

of (1410) XII. 3.

Heore,  William,  on  the  Content
(1591)  X. 183.

Heracleia,  Godfrey  of  Bouillon's
army  at  (1097)  ^v.  293  ;  William
Harborne  at  (1583)  v.  251 ;  Richard
Wrag  at  (1594)  vi. 107.

'  Herbal,'  natural  history  book,  in.
272.

Herberstein,  Sigismund  ab,  descrip-
tion of  eastern  countries  by  (1588)

III.  405.

Herbert,  Henry  II. 's  envoy,  i.  318.

Herbert,  Lord  and  the  Cadiz  expedi-
tion (1596)  IV.  236,  250;  knighted
at  Cadiz,  259.

Herbert,  William,  Earl  of  Pembroke
(i5oi?-i57o)  II.  304.

Herbortius  Fulstinius,  '  History  of
Poland  '  by,  11. 186.

Hercules,  the,  of  London,  John
Eldred  in  (1588)  vi.  9;  Laurence
Aldersey's  voyage  in  (1586)  39,

Hercules,  Pillars  of,  vi. 144.

Herdson,  Henr)^  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Hereford,  duke  of,  see  Henry  IV.
of  England.

Hereford,  Henry  de  Bohun,  Earl  of,
his  voyage  to  the  Holy  Land  (1222)

IV.  349-

Hereford,  Lefardus  de,  Prussian  am-
bassador, II. 106.

Herehaught,  dignity  of  second
estate  in  Japan, vi. 329.

Herera,  or  Herrera,  Alonzo  de,  his
attempts to discover Guiana, x.

497-
Herera,  Don  Antonio  de,  return  from

England  (1589)  vi. 485.
Herera, Don Augustine de, and

Lanzarota Island, vi. 133 ; and

Fuerte  Ventura  Island,  134.
Herergaidel,  see  Argyll.
Heresy  of  Pelagius,  iv.  277.

262

INDEX

Heriot,  see  Hariot.
Herman,  John,  English  rebel,  Em-
peror of Morocco  and  (1587) vi.

430-433.
Hermannus, companion of Robert

de  Ketene  (1147)  iv.  309.
Hermannus Bart, third master of

the Hospitallers of Jerusalem

(1206)  II. I.
Hermannus  de  Saltza,  fourth  master

of the Hospitallers of  Jerusalem

(1210)  II.  I.
Hermenllon, the, one of Jacques

Cartier's  ships  (1535)  viii.  211.
Hermia, ecclesiastical writer, viii.

107.
Hermina, the Great, Jacques  Car-
tier's  ship  (1535)  VIII.  210; at  the

Island  of  Birds,  211.
Hermina,  the  Little,  one  of  Jacques

Cartier's  ships  (1535)  viii.  210.
Hermoso, Morro, or Fair Moun-
tain near Rio Grande, x. 288 ;

marks  of,  described  in  the  Ruttier,

289.
Hermoso, Puerto, course from, to

New Spain, mentioned in the

second  Ruttier,  x.  312.
Hermoso,  Rio,  marks  of,  in  second

Ruttier,  x.  318.
Hernandez, Francis, Bartholomew

Cano's  letter  to  (1590)  ix.  204-206.
Hernandez, Gregorio, standard-
bearer  in  Friar  Augustine  Ruyz's

expedition  (1581)  ix.  202,
Hernando, Spaniard, taken by

Thomas Cavendish in Magellan

Straits  (1587)  xi.  298.
Heme,  Griffith,  shipmaster  with  Sir

Francis Drake, left with Ralph

Lane  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.  344.
Herodotus  on  Africa,  i.  xli.
Herons,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.

369; in  Florida,  451.
Herreria,  the,  bay  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  x.  295.
Hersee, in Iceland, latitude and

longitude  of,  iv.  10,  99.
Hertford and Essex, Gilbert de

Clare,  Earl  of,  witness  of  Edward

I.'s  great  charter,  i.  338.
Hertford and Essex, Sheriff of.

King  John  and,  i.  320.
Hertipoole,  see  Hartlepool.

Hertson,  Peter,  and  the  English  cus-
toms, II.  76.

Hervvich,  see  Harwich.

Herwick,  Abraham  van,  London
merchant  and  the  voyage  to
Canada  (1597)  viii.  166.

Herwick,  Stephen  van,  of  the  voyage
to  Canada  (1597)  viii.  166;  de-
tained by  Johan  de  Harte,  175;
prisoner of Captain Laurence

(1597)  177-
Hesket,  Thomas,  in  Virgmia  (1585)

VIII.  318.
Heth,  see  Hythe.
Hetha, Octher's voyage to, i. 14;

Wolstan's  voyage  from,  15.
Hevites,  see  Hivites.
Hewes,  John,  of  Captain  Amadas's

Company  (1584)  viii.  310.
Hewes, Lieutenant, of Sir Walter

Raleigh's expedition up the

Capuri  river  (1595)  x.  380.
Hewet, Henry,  Levant  trader,  non-
member  of  the  Levant  Company

(1592)  VI.  87.
Hewet,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  viii.  403.
Hewish,  Rowland,  Richard  Wrag's

dedication  to  (1597)  vi.  93.
Hexasi,  see  Anchiassini.
Heydon, Sir  Christopher, knighted

at  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.  260.
Heyreth, Willoughby's fleet at, 11.

217.
Heyward,  see  Hayward.
Heywood, John, captain of the

George  (1567)  vi. 270-271,  272.
Hialterus,  Olaus,  twenty-first  bishop

of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1553)  iv.  59,

157-

Hiansanhien,  see  Ansam.

Hiatiqui,  interpreter  of  Queen  Nia
Cubacani  (1565)  ix.  54

Hiberi  and  Tartar  sovereignty,  i.
231.

Hiberia,  a  province  of  Georgia,  i.
230.

Hickman.  Anthony,  owner  of  the
Primrose,  11.  378.

Hickman,  Anthony,  trader  in  the
Canaries,  vi.  134;  and  the  voy-
age to  Guinea  (1554)  154,  253,
258,  262 ;  English  merchant  at
Grand  Canary  (1555)  ix.  341.

563

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Hickocke,  Thomas,  Caesar  Fred-
erick's voyage  translated  by  (1563)

V.  365-449-

Hidalcan,  see  Dialcan.

Hide  tanning  by  the  Tartars,  i.  246.

Hides,  customs  on,  in  Edward  I.'s
charter,  i.  337;  Russian,  in  Eng-
lish markets,  11.  403 ;  trade  in,  in
Cape  Verde  Island  (1577)  vi.  237;
in  S.  Cruz,  Cuba  (1565)  x.  45;
in  Hispaniola,  115;  found  in  S.
lago  de  Leon,  223.

Hien,  name  of  common  cities  in
China,  vi.  351.

Hiera,  Isle  of,  iv.  26,  118.

*  Hierarchy,  the  Heavenly,'  by
Dionysius Areopagita, iv. 281.

Hierro  Island  or  Yron,  one  of  the
Canaries,  subject  to  Gomera
Island,  description  of,  vi.  133 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake  at  (1585)  x. 103.

Hilg,  of  Hull,  damages  paid  by,  11.
103.

Hill,  of  Redrlff,  and  the  Mangold
(1593)  viii.  157.

Hill,  John,  of  Taunton,  and  the
Hierro  vineyard,  vi.  133.

Hill,  Ralph,  and  the  boatswain's
mate,  prisoners  of  the  French
(1597)  VIII. 169.

Hill,  Thomas,  of  the  Sunshine  of
London  (1585)  vii,  382.

Hilliard,  Henry,  of  the  Hugh  Gal-
lant, landing  of  (1587)  xi.  311.

Hills,  William,  of  the  Desire,  killed
by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Hind,  the,  cruise  of,  to  Guinea,
William  Cartier,  master  (1555)  vi.
177.

Hinder,  Captain,  in  Spain  (1589)  vi.
484 ;  and  food  for  English  soldiers,
489;  at  the  taking  of  Puente  de
Burgos,  492.

Hinge,  King  of  Norway,  i.  30.

Hinkensman,  shipmaster,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  62.

Hiocaia,  Nia  Cubacani,  widow^  of
King,  and  Captain  Laudonniere
(1565)  IX.  53.

Hippocrates,  born  in  Lango,  vi.  107.

Hirado,  Aloisius  Froes  at  (1565)  vi.

332  ; one  of  the  Japan  Islands,  ix.

334; governor  of,  and  his  soldiers,

XI.  425.

Hircan,  see  Shirvan.

Hircania,  see  Shirvan.

Hircan  Sea,  see  Caspian.

Hispania  Nova,  see  New  Spain.

Hispaniola  Island,  vi.  404;  James
Lancaster  at  (1594)  407;  Drake
lands  at  (1589)  502 ;  Drake's  voy-
age to,  VII.  I ;  Spanish  cruelties
in,  52;  fleet  of,  54;  Sp.anish  fleet
from  (1589)  71,  (1591)  87;  negro
trade  in  (1591)  98;  Christopher  and
Bartholomew  Columbus  at  (1494)
139 ;  Ferdinand  Oviedo  on  the  pas-
ture of,  267  ;  conquered  by  Spain,
VIII.  124 ;  Sir  Richard  Grenville  at
(iS-'^S)  313;  John  White  at,  389;
cattle  imported  into,  441  ;  one  of
the  Antilles,  450 ;  otherwise  called
S.  Domingo,  ix.  341,  x.  37;
Robert  Tomson  at  (1555)  ix.  341;
products  of,  342 ;  John  Chilton  at
(1568)  361;  hides  in,  389;  caravel
from,  to  Riohacha  (1568)  449;  voy-
age of  Sir  Thomas  Pert  and  Sebas-
tian Cabot  to  (15 16)  X.  2-6;
negroes  of  Guinea  sold  in,  by  Sir
John  Hawkins  (1562)  7,  8;  muti-
nous soldiers  of  Captain  Laudon-
niere at  (1565)  54;  cattle  abundant
in,  56;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  iio-
116;  products  of,  115;  hurricanes
on  the  coast  of,  136 ;  Sir  Amyas  de
Preston  at  (1595)  225;  Sierras  de
Yguey  in,  283;  Reynoso's  burial
place  in,  498 ;  inhabited  by  Indians,
XI.  238 ;  Mount  Sopora  in,  xii.
15;  successive  names  of,  17;  Sir
John  Hawkins  and  the  negro  trade
in  (1562)  47.

'  Historia  belli  sacri,'  by  Wil-
liam, archbishop  of  Tyre,  iv.
294.

'  Historia  de  caede  Sebastiani  regis
Lusitaniae,'  by  Joannes  Thomas
Freigius,  vi.  293.

'  History,  Danish,'  by  Saxo  Gram-
maticus  (1067)  i.  42.

'  History,  English,'  by  Polydore,  v.
125.

'  History,  Natural, 'by  Pliny,  descrip-
tion of  a  tree  bearing  oysters,  x.

350.
'  History of Norway,' by Albertus
Krantzius,  11.  68.

264

INDEX

'  History  of  Poland,'  by  Herbortus

Fulstinius,  ii.  i86.
'  History  of  Portugal,'  by  Anthony

Galvano,  iv.  368,  vi. 119.
Histria,  Duke  of,  see  Austria.
Hitchcocke,  Thomas,  member  of  the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Hithe,  see  Hythe.
Hittites,  Joshua  and  the,  viii.  103.
Hiu,  isle  of,  Aloisius  Froes  at  (1565)

VI-  344-

Hivites,  Joshua  and  the,  viii,  103.

Ho,  see  Plymouth  Hoe.

Hobbeig-h  Mount,  x.  458.

Hobby,  Sir  Edward,  at  the  taking
of  Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  252.

Hochelaga,  in  Ortelius's  map,  vii.
163  ;  in  New  France,  171 ;  Jacques
Cartier  at  (1535)  viii.  144,  230;
island  and  river  in  Canada,
Jacques  Cartier  and  (1535)  183,
184,  210,  214;  Jacques  Cartier 's
projected  voyage  to  (1535)  222;
voyage  to  hindered  by  Donnacona,
225 ;  city  (or  Montreal)  description
by  Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  232-237,
243 ;  sick  of,  brought  to  Jacques
Cartier,  235  ;  vocabulary  of,  260 ;
map  of  (1587)  272;  distance  from
France-Roy  fort  to,  281 ;  Rober-
val's  vo3'^age  to  (1542)  283-287;
lord  of,  and  Jacques  Cartier  (1540)
VIII.  269 ;  Jacques  Cartier 's  pre-
sents to,  270;  deceitfulness  of
Agonna  and  the  lord  of,  towards
Jacques  Cartier, 271.

Hochelaga,  river,  see  S.  Lawrence.

Hocoa  in  S.  Domingo,  x.  284.

Hoddesdon,  Sir  Christopher  (1534-
1611)  his  voyage  to  Narva,  i.  xliv. ;
merchant  in  Russia  (1555)  11.  291,
297;  Muscovy  Company's  letter  to
(1560)  401 ;  his  return  to  England,
406;  his  letter  to  the  Muscovy
Company,  408 ;  his  letter  to  the
Emperor  of  Russia  (1570)  iii.  167;
member  of  the  Muscovy  Committee
and  Captain  Carleill  (1583)  viii.
147.

Hodeney,  i.  48.

Hodgkins,  Richard,  of  John  Chid-
ley's  voyages,  return  of  (1590)  xi.
384.

XII  265

Hodsdon,  see  Hoddesdon.

Hodsdon,  Christopher,  adventurer
for  Brazil  (1580)  xi.  33.

Hodson,  see  Hudson.

Hodson,  Christopher,  see  Hoddes-
don.

Hogan,  Edmund,  English  ambassa-
dor to  Morocco  (1577)  VI.  285-293.

Hognedo,  Toudamani  in  (1533)  viii.

239-.

Hogs  in  Bermuda,  x.  202.

Hohenlohe,  Count,  General  Norrls
and  (1589)  VI.  476.

Hohenlohe,  Godfrey,  Earl  of,
eleventh  master  of  the  Dutch
knights,  II.  6.

Hoke,  ships  froin,  in  Edward  HI.'s
fleet,  I.  298.

Hola,  see  Holen.

Holder  of  Lisbon  and  John  Whithall
(1578)  XI.  30.

Holecroft,  Robert,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Holen,  in  Iceland,  bishopric  of,  iv.
II,  12,  99,  loi ;  bishops  of,  54-60,
152-159; cathedral  of,  62,  161.

Holenshed, see Holinshed.

Holinshed,  voyage  of  William  Man-
deville  to  Jerusalem,  by  (1177)  iv.
310;  Henry  H.  and  the  Christian
soldiers  in  the  Holy  Land,  by
(1177)  311 ;  contribution  to  the  suc-
cour of  the  Holy  Land  made  by
King  John,  by  (1201)  345;  Earl
of  Chester's  voyage  to  the  Holy
Land,  by  (1218)  349;  Earl  of
Cornwall's  voyage  to  Syria,  by
(1240)  352;  Emperor  Baldwin's
visit  to  England,  by  (1247)  353;
and  his  account  of  Richard  H.  and
the  Genoese  (1390)  451;  Duke  of
Norfolk's  voyage,  by  (1399)  453;
intended  voyage  of  Henry  IV.  to
the  Holy  Land,  by  (1413)  455;  on
Don  Ferdinando's  embassy  (1527)
V.  61.

Holland,  English  merchants  in
(1462)  II.  148  f. ;  preparations  in,
for  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  208;
ships  of,  at  Dunkirk,  220,  221;
and  the  King  of  Spain's  commis-
sion, VI.  417;  coins  commemora-
tive of  the  Spanish  fleet"  (1588)  iv.
232  ;  merchants,  rivals  of  English

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

merchants  at  Kola,  in.  209 ;  trade
of,  in  north-east  parts  (c.  1574)  ni.
462 ; ships of, at Pernambuco

(1595)  XI.  48-
Holland, Lord John of. Earl of
Huntington,  voyage  of  (1399)  iv.

453-

Hollands,  our  Lady  of,  the  Search-
thrift  at,  II.  323.

Hollibut,  see  Halibut.

Hollie  haven,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,
II.  217.

Hollocke,  the  butt  of,  11.  297.

Hollyfoot,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.
302.

Holmden,  Edward,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  4x9,
420  f.

Holmeden,  Edward,  member  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  vi,  74,  75,
78.

Holmehead,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,
11.  217.

Holmes,  Christopher,  and  William
TurnbuU's  inheritance  in.  433;
licensed  to  trade  in  Russia  free
from  customs,  440.

Holmes,  Giles,  on  the  way  to
Cathay,  11.  482-483.

Holstocke,  William,  Richard  Gon-
son's  page,  in  the  Matthew  Gon-
son  (1534)  V.  67;  purser  (1535)
68.

Holy,  see  Burgoignon,  Nicholas.

Holy  Cross  discovered  and  named  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  144,
220,  238,  244;  illness  of  the  crew
of  Jacques  Cartier  in,  246  ;  Jacques
Cartier  at,  258, (1540)  265.

Holy  Cross,  the,  voyage  of  (1534)  v.
67.

Holy  Ghost, the,  11. 143.

Holy  House,  Spanish  place  of  tor-
ture, VI.  418;  of  the  Inquisition  of
Mexico  (1557)  IX.  347.

Holy  man's  faithfulness  to  Anthony
Jenkinson,  11.  468.

Homer, prophet  of the  Turks, in.

159-
Homer's  opinion  on  the  Ocean  Sea,

VII. 198.
Homi,  university  town  in  Japan,  vi.

331-
Homoloa King, visits Captam

Ribault  at  Fort  Caroline  (1565)  ix.
88.

Honan,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.

Honda  Baya,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier,  X.  287;  in  second  Ruttier,
323  ; latitude  of,  335.

Hondius,  Judocus,  portrait  of,  in.
288;  chart  of  the  world  by,  en-
graving of,  XI.  336.

Honduras, kingdom of, fleet of

(1591)  vii. 54; papal bulls for

(1592)  105;  Spanish  traffic  from
Mexico  to  (1570)  IX.  365.

Honduras,  Bay  of,  voyage  of
Andrew  Barker  to  (1576)  x.  82-88;
Christopher  Newport  in  (1591)
187 ;  voyage  of  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  to  (1596)  266-276;  Captain
Parker  and Sir  Anthony Sherley

at  (1597)  274-

Honestones,  market  of,  in  Kazan
(1570)  in.  154.

Honfleur,  ship  from,  John  de  Or-
leans, master  of  the  (1557)  vi.
218;  ship  from,  and  the  English
pinnace  (1590)  463  ;  ships  prepared
at,  for  the  third  voyage  of  Jacques
Cartier  (1540)  viii. 264.

Honguedo,  Jacques  Cartier  at  (1535)
vin.  214,  259.

Honor  de  la  mer,  the.  Lord  William
Howard  aboard  of  (1596)  iv.  248.

Honoratus,  Friar,  companion  of
Marco  de  Niga,  ix.  125  ;  illness  of,
at  Petatlan, 126.

Honorius,  on  the  heresy  of  Pelagius
(390)  IV.  277.

Honorius,  son  of  Theodosius,  Em-
peror of  the  West,  viii.  106.

Honorius  nL,Pope,  Robert  Curson,
legate  of,  in  England,  iv.  348  ;  and
the  siege  of  Damietta  (12 18)  350.

Honterus,  quotation  from,  vii.
265.

Hoo,  ships  from,  in  Edward  HL's
fleet,  I.  297.

Hood,  in  Edward  Fenton's  voyage
(1582)  XI. 175.

Hood,  Roger,  and  Prussian  pirates,
II.  70.

Hood,  Thomas,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  company  (1578)  xi.  109.

Hood,  Thomas,  pilot  for  the  Straits
of  Magellan,  in  council  (1584)  xi.

266

INDEX

211 ; and Christopher Lister's

plan  (1587)  224.
Hooper,  John,  captain  of  the  sailors

of  Sir  John  Hawkins  landed  near

Panuco  river  (1568)  ix.  412.
Hooper.  John,  lieutenant  of  the  Ed-
ward Cotton  (1583)  VI.  408,  410.
Hoops, market  of, in Crete  (1569)

V.  117.
Hoords,  see  Hordes.
Hope,  ships  from,  in  Edward  HI.'s

fleet,  I.  297.
Hope, Cape of, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  197.
Hope,  Cape,  named  by  Sir  Francis

Drake  (1578)  xi.  154; Sir  Francis

Drake  at,  156.
Hope, the, at Flores (1590) viii.

421.
Hope,  the,  Sir  Francis  Drake's  ship

(1589)  VII.  I ;  Edward  Careless,
captain  of  (1585)  x.  98;  ship  of
Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1595)
226 ;  death  of  Captain  Yorke  of,
succeeded  by  Thomas  Drake  (1595)
234;  at  the  fight  of  Pinos  (1596)
262.

Hope  Sanderson,  coast  discovered
by  John  Davys  (1587)  vii. 418.

Hopewell,  the,  escort  to  Henry
Roberts  (1585)  vi.  426.

Hopewell,  the,  rear-admiral  of  the
third  voyage  of  Captain  Frobisher
to  Meta  Incognita  (1578)  vii.  231 ;
in  Countess  of  Warwick's  Sound,
239 ;  Henry  Carew,  captain  of
(1578)  322 ;  attendant  on  the
Judith,  324; dangers  of,  364.

Hopewell,  of  London,  the,  voyage
of,  to  Canada  (1597)  viii.  166;
loses  the  Chancewell,  166 ;  and
the  ship  of  Sibiburo  (1597)  173;
leaves  Newfoundland,  180 ;  of
John  White's  voyage  to  Virginia

(1590)  406.

Hopewell, the. Sir George Carey's

ship,  near  Cuba  (1591)  x.  179.
Hopkins  of  Bristol,  bark  of,  in  Sir

John Burrough's  fleet  (1592)  vii.

no.
Hopkins, John, assistant to the

Muscovy Company, 11. 307.
Hopkins, Master, chaplain of the

Earl  of  Essex  (1596)  iv.  259.

Hoptan,  Walter  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward L's  great  charter,  i.  296.

Horatio,  Captain  of  Veletri,  at  the
defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.
133; enslaved,  151.

Horda,  meaning  of,  i.  271.

Hordes,  of  Nagayans,  11.  452 ;  Tar-
tar military  divisions,  iii.  395.

Hore,  Master,  voyage  of,  to  New-
foundland and  Cape  Breton  (1536)
VIII.  3,  XII.  20.

Hormigas,  las,  rocks  near  S.  Mary
and  Fayal  Islands,  x.  300.

Horneby,  William,  sea-captain,  and
Edgar  Scoff,  11. 104.

Horotomaka  Islands,  in  the  tribu-
taries of  the  Orinoco  river,  x.
382.

Horse,  master  of,  in  Turkey,  pay  of,
VI.  62,  65.

Horses,  dearth  of,  in  the  Islands,  i.
4;  Tartar,  53,  81,  139  f. ;  in  Tar-
tar funerals,  63 ;  Tartar  war,  155,
156,  158,  160;  customs  on,  in  Ed-
ward L's  great  charter,  337;
Russian,  11.  230,  259;  toll,  in
Russia,  276;  post,  in  Russia,  291;
Tartar,  in  Russia,  430;  blessing
of,  433 ;  wild,  hunted  with  hawks
by  Tartars,  464 ;  in  Iceland,
swiftness  of,  iv.  40,  136 ;  cus-
toms on,  in  Ormuz,  vi.  15 ;  cus-
toms on,  in  Goa,  20;  post,  in
China,  297,  367;  unmanned,  of
the  Amapagotas,  x.  465 ;  increase
of  the, left  at Buenos  Aires, xi.

253-

Horsewell,  Paul,  condemned  by  In-
quisition in  Mexico  to  serve  in  a
monastery  (1575)  ix.  428;  servant
to  Pedro  de  los  Rios,  430 ;  mar-
riage of,  431;  questioned  by  vice-
roy of  Mexico  about  Sir  Francis
Drake,  433.

Horsey,  Sir  Jerome  (1573-1627)  voy-
age in  Russia,  i.  xlv.  ;  account  of
coronation  of  the  Emperor  of
Russia  (1584)  III.  336-342  ;  recep-
tion by  the  Emperor,  iii.  342 ;
carried  his  letters  to  Queen  Eliza-
beth (1584)  345;  Russian  privi-
leges for  Muscovy  Company
obtained  (1586)  346,  347;  and  Rus-
sian license, 348 ; Queen Eliza-

567

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

beth's  ambassador  to  Russia,  422 ;
disgrace  of, in Russia,  428,  430,

43^.  437-
Hortop,  Job,  adventures  of,  in  New
Spain  (1568)  IX.  445;  powder
maker,  then  gunner  in  the  Jesus
of  Lubeck,  445  ;  description  of  the
voyage  of  (1568)  446  f. ;  prisoner
of  the  Spanish,  made  gunner,  460 ;
saves  the  fleet,  460 ;  escape  from
the  Contractation  House  and  re-
capture, his  condemnation  to  the
galleys  (1570)  463;  brought  to
Portsmouth  by  the  galleon  Dudley
(1570)  464;  return  to  Redriffe,  and
computation  of  his  imprisonment,

465-

Horuse,  Richard,  of  Hull,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  61.

Hospital,  in  Cairo,  v.  334;  in
Medina,  363 ;  for  dogs  and  cats  in
Cambay  (1583)  471;  for  animals
in  Couche,  482 ;  in  Manila  Island
(1588)  XI.  335.

Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem,  Knights,
II.  I ;  Messina  placed  in  their
charge  (1190)  iv.  324,

Hospitals  or  Inns  in  Cathay  for
travellers,  iv.  433;  in  China,  vi.
316.

Hostages,  English  and  Spanish  ex-
changed by  the  viceroy  of  Mexico
and  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1568)  x.
70 ;  advice  as  to  the  exchange  of,
given  to  Edward  Fenton  (1582)  xi.
168.

Hostaqua,  King  of,  his  presents  to
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  ix.
37;  Groutald's  account  (1565)  55;
vassal  of  King  Satourioua  (1504)  2 1 .

Houldships,  Thomas,  boatswain  of
the  Content  (1591)  x. 183.

Houndflew,  11.  119.

Houses,  movable,  of  felt,  in  Tartary,
I.  234-237;  in  Russia,  11.  226,  255,
269  f.  ;  in  Iceland,  description  of,
IV.  61,  63,  160,  163;  interior
of,  in  Florida,  description  by
Sir  John  Hawkins  (1565)  x.
51;  of  Tivitivas,  description  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  383 ;  of
Macureguarai,  401;  of  Amazon
Indians,  xi.  21;  of  Nova  Albion,
119.

Houstaqua,  see  Hostaqua.

Hoveden,  or  Howden,  Roger  of  (d.
1201),  historian,  i.  16;  '  Annalium
pars  prior, '  by,  iv.  287  ;  '  Annalium
pars  posterior,'  by,  312-319;  '  His-
tory of  King  Richard  I.'s  voyage
to  Jerusalem,'  by,  338.

How,  George,  child  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  viii.  403.

How,  M.,  shipowner,  voyage  of,  to
Mexico  Bay  (1592)  x. 190.

How,  Robert,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Howard,  Lord  Charles,  of  Effing-
ham, Earl  of  Nottingham  (1536-
1624)  I.  xxiv.,  Iviii.,  xii.  67;  dedi-
cation to,  I.  xxxi. ;  high  admiral
of  England  (1588)  iv.  197,  208,
VII.  39;  portrait  of,  iv.  200;  and
the  Armada  off  Plymouth,  iv.
210;  first  engagement  with  the
Armada,  213;  sends  fire  ships
against  the  Armada,  222 ;  and  the
Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  236;  secret
council  called  by,  240;  at  the  taking
of  Cadiz,  252 ;  his  letters  to  the
Duke  of  Medina-Sidonia  (1596)
263-265;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
letter  to  (1595)  x.  338-343;  and
Hakluyt,  xii.  75  ;  and  the  Spanish
ships, 104.

Howard,  Lord  Thomas,  Earl  of  Suf-
folk (1561-1626),  captain  of  the
Lion  (1588)  IV.  218;  and  the
Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  236,  241,
252 ;  and  the  Richard  of  Arundel
(1591)  VI.  466;  at  Flores  Island
(1591)  VII.  41;  and  the  last  fight
of  the  Revenge,  48-80;  London
supplies  (1591)  65;  fleet  sent  to
look  for,  VIII.  57  ;  and  the  Pleasure
(1591)  VIII.  155;  and  the  four
ships  under  Captain  Benjamin
Wood  (1592)  X. 193.

Howard,  Lord  William,  of  Effing-
ham, admiral  in  Queen  Mary's
time,  II.  304-356.

Howard,  Lord  William,  son  of  Lord
Charles,  of  the  Cadiz  expedition
(1596)  IV.  248;  at  the  taking  of
Cadiz,  252 ;  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596)  259.

Howard,  Port,  see  Gowateri  Island.

268

INDEX

Howe, George, slain in Virginia

(1587)  vin.  392; settler,  402.
Howel,  Henry,  of  the  Maria  Martin

(1584)  V.  281.
Howell,  son  of  Owen  Gwynedd  (c.

1 170)  VII.  133.
Howfoote,  Hans  and  Peter,  and  the

English  ship,  11.  60.
Howlet,  John,  master  of  the  Philip

and  Mary,  agent  for  the  Muscovy

Company,  11.  286.
Hoya, King  in Florida  (1562)  viii.

474-

Hoyes  or  Hoys,  Dutch  ships  at  Ant-
werp and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
204.

Huascar,  and  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco,
X.  340 ;  son  of  the  Emperor  of
Peru,  X.  355 ;  King  of  Peru,  xi.
282  ;  killed  during  Atabalipa's  im-
prisonment, X.  283.

Hubates  Indians,  Antonio  de  Espejo
and  the  (1583)  ix. 203.

Hubbed,  near  Barbary,  dyers  in,  v.
240.

Hubblethorne,  Morgan,  dyer,  iii.
245 ; Richard  Hakluyt  to,  249.

Hubert,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
dedication  to,  by  William  the  Pil-
gnm_  (1200) IV. 345.

Hubilai,  see  Hybilay.

Huddie,  William,  captain  of  the
Edward  Cotton  (1583)  vi.  408,
410.

Hudirat,  Jenghiz  Khan  conquers,  i.
144.

Hudson,  Christopher,  see  Hoddes-
don.

Hudson,  Thomas,  of  Limehouse,  iii,
225;  at  Baku,  227;  brings  his
ship  to  Derbent,  229;  at  Chetera
Bougori,  241 ;  leaves  Astrakhan,
245 ; returns  to  England,  246.

Hudson's  Straits,  discovered  by  Cap-
tain Frobisher,  xii.  28.

Huehuatlan  town  in  charge  of
Graviel  de  Chiavez,  ix.  469.

Hugell,  see  Hugli.

Hugh  Gallant,  the,  Thomas  Caven-
dish's ship  (1586)  XI.  290;  death
of  Grey,  carpenter  in  (1587)  300;
dangers  of,  301 ;  food  found  by,
310;  the  Lewis  captured  by  (1586)
311; sunk  at  Rio  Dolce,  319.

Hughson,  John,  of  Yarmouth,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  63.

Hugli,  Ralph  Fitch  in  (c.  1583)  v.
482.

Hugo,  two  earls  in  Anglesey  called,
and  Magnus,  King  of  Norway,  i.
29.

Hugorie,  see  Ugoria.

Hugri,  Hugry,  see  Ugoria.

Huighen  van  Linschoten,  John,  on
the  people  of  Malabar,  v.  502 ;  on
the  voyage  of  John  Eldred  and
Ralph  Fitch,  505 ;  his  testimony
to  the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  ex-
ploits (1589-91)  VII.  62-87;  ^rid  Sir
R.  Grenville's  last  fight,  80;  *  His-
tory,' 122;  translation  of  Captain
Gualle's  voyage  (1584)  ix. 337.

Huini,  see  Huns.

Hulks,  captured  by  English  fleet,
lading  of  (1589)  vi.  510.

Hull,  Thomas,  condemned  by  In-
quisition in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428;
death  of,  430.

Hull,  ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s
fleet,  I.  298 ;  and  the  cus-
toms, 355 ;  ships  from,  de-
spoiled (1394)  II.  61 ;  mer-
chants of,  1 13  ;  and  the  Muscovy
Company,  iii.  91 ;  freightage  of,
cheaper  than  London,  208;  best
fish  market  (1578)  209.

Hulme,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Humber,  i.  8  f.

Humfrey,  Jacques,  Frenchman,
saved  from  the  Indians  by  Luke
Ward  (1583)  XI.  199

Humphrey,  Richard,  in  Virginia
(1585) VIII. 318.

Humphrey,  Thomas,  child  settler  in
Virginia  (1587)  viii.  403.

Hunan,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.

Hunfieur, see Honfleur.

Hungaria,  see  Hungary.

Hungaria  Magna,  see  Hungary  the
Greater.

Hungarie,  see  Hungary.

Hungary,  i.  74,  77,  86,  89,  153,  166,
242,  256,  279,  II.  123;  King  of,
and  the  English  spy,  i.  52  ;  Tar-
tars and,  64,  153,  II.  187;  Cepusius
petrifying  water  of,  iv.  37,  132 ;
Beglerbeg  of,  pay  of,  vi.  61 ; war

569

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of,  with  Turkey  (1593)  103 ;  Turk-
ish army  sent  to  (1594)  104.

Hungary  and  Beame  (Bohemia),
Don  Ferdinando,  King  of  (1527)
V.  61.

Hungary  the  Greater,  i.  77,  86,  278;
people  of,  Tartars  and,  I.  161 ;
Rubruquis  in  fear  of  ambushes
from,  270  ;  their  clergymen,  276  f.  ;
language,  278.

Hungate,  Richard,  sailor  in  the  De-
light (1589)  XI. 388, 389.

Hungerford,  Baron  of,  11. 147.

Hungon,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.
299.

Hungrode,  port  of  Bristol,  William
Towerson  at  (1556)  vi.  211;  the
Grace  at  (1594)  viii, 165.

Huns,  I.  135 ;  original  country  of
the,  I.  278.

Hunsdon,  Lord,  see  Carey,  Henry.

Hunt,  Edward,  mariner  on  the  Bona
Esperanza  (1553)  11. 213.

Hunt,  Thomas,  of  Lynn,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  67.

Hunter,  and  the  north-west  passage,
VII. 162.

Hunting  in  Ireland,  11.  133  ;  in  Tar-
tary,  11.  464;  on  ice,  iv.  31,  124;
in  the  Western  Planting,  vili.  114;
in  Florida,  453.

Huntingdon,  Earl  of,  see  Holland,
Lord  John  of.

Huntley,  Colonel,  lands  in  Spain
(1589)  VI.  483;  at  the  Groyne,
487 ;  his  regiment  at  the  taking
of  Puente  de  Burgos,  492  ;  march
to  Lisbon,  497.

Hupp  Isle,  description  of,  viil. 152.

Huquam,  see  Hunan.

Hurcados,  the,  Spanish  fleet  at
(1570)  IX.  463.

Huricanos,  see  Hurricanes.

Hurin, see Burin.

Hurricanes,  on  Hispaniola  coast,  x.
136.

Hurst  Castle,  departure  of  the  Ed-
7vard  Cotton  from  (1583)  vi.  411.

Hurtleberries  found  in  Virginia
(1586)  VIII.  367.

Hus,  see  Uz.

Husbac,  son  of  Owmund,  i.  38.

Hussie,  or  Husie,  or  Huse,  Anthony,
consul  of  the  Muscovy  Company,

II.  307, 362, 390, 392 ; and the
discovery  of  Cathay  (1553)  iii.  331.

Hussie,  Hubert,  11.  362.
Hussie, Lawrence, D.C.L., the
Russian  ambassador, 11. 353, iii.

334-
Hussie,  Lawrence,  granted  Russian

license  (1567)  iii.  93,  109.
Huyghen, see Huighen.
Huyri, Jenghiz Khan and the, i.

144.
Huyur,  Tartars  conquer,  i.  86.
Hwang-ho,  iv.  429 ; Pekin  near  the,

III.  263 ; from  the mouth of, to
Pekin,  280.

Hy,  see  lona.

Hybilay, Duke of Tartary, i. 74,

150.
Hyde,  i.  44,  48.
Hynde, James, settler in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.
Hyperboreos  Mountains,  lii.  411.
Hyrcania,  see  Shirvan.
Hythe, i. 44, 48; ships from, in

King  Edward's  fleet,  298.
Hythe,  New,  in  Kent,  i.  297.
Hythe,  W^est,  pertaining  to  Hythe,

I.  48.

laec,  see  Ural  river.

lagac,  see  Ural.

laic,  see  Ural.

laio,  people  of  Parico  in  Trinidad,
X.  350.

lakint, see  Sarguit.

lala.  Father,  his  voyage  to  Guiana
(1560)  X.  497.

laos,  mighty  nation  in  Guiana
(1596)  X.  455;  self-inflicted  mark
of  the,  457 ;  enemies  to  the  Span-
ish (1596)  474;  nation  of  the
Iwaripoco,  490.

laremappo,  town  on  the  Amonna
river,  x.  492.

laroslaus, see  Jaroslav.

larwarema,  Indian  captain,  x.  495.

Ibarra,  John  de,  and  John  dfe  Trex-
eda  (1598)  X.  160.

Iberia,  i. 166.

Icari,  kings  and  people  of  Icaria,
VII.  459."

Icaria.  discovered  by  Nicholas  and
Antonio  Zeno  (1380)  vii.  445,  459;
Zichmni  driven  from,  460.

270

INDEX

Icarian  Sea,  meaning  of  name  of,
VII.  459.

Ice,  II.  339,  342  ;  Stephen  Borough's
ship  icebound  (1556)  335;  in  June
(1557)  367;  dangers  to  Arthur  Pet
(1580)  III.  284,  286,  290,  293,  295;
on  the  river  Ob,  456;  Iceland
named  from,  iv.  13,  102 ;  miracu-
lous properties  of,  32,  127;
dangers  of,  to  ships  in  northern
regions,  iii.  242,  243,  vii.
193,  218,  233;  Captain  Mar-
tin Frobisher  prevented  from
landing  by  (1576)  207;  straits
closed  by  (1577)  215;  islands  of,
made  of  fresh  water,  near  Fris-
land  (1577)  289;  causes  of  the  sea
turning  to,  328;  Frobisher's  fleet
surrounded  by  (1578)  330;  roaring
of  the,  383 ;  dangers  of,  to  John
Davys  (1586)  402,  419.

Iceland,  King  Arthur's  expedition
to,  I.  3  f. ;  trade  to  Blakeney,  i.
304;  stock-fish,  a  product  of,  11.
136 ;  brief  commentary  on,  by
Arngrimus  Jonas,  iv.  1-88,  89-194 ;
description  of,  10,  12,  98,  100;  dis-
covery of,  13,  loi ;  first  inhabited
in  (718)  13,  102 ;  navigation  to
and  from  in,  14,  103 ;  population
of,  15,  104;  census  in  (1090)  15,
104;  volcanoes  in,  16,  106;  earth-
quake in  (1581)  17,  107;  chronicles
of,  19,  51,  109,  149;  fables  con-
cerning, 21,  112  f. ;  fountains  in,
33-40,  128-136;  brimstone  in,  39,
135 ;  horses  and  fish,  40,  136 ;
whales,  41,  137;  map  of,  43,  139;
walking  stone  in,  44,  140;  wild
animals  and  birds,  44,  141 ;  con-
version of,  to  Christianity,  47,
144;  religious  faith  in,  49-51,  146-
148;  first  inhabitants  of  (874)  52,
150 ;  Fredericus,  first  Christian
preacher  (981)  52,  150  f. ;  priests'
marriages  in  (1544)  58,  157;  first
printing  house  in  (1568)  59,  158;
houses  in,  61,  160;  accommodation
for  cattle  in,  63,  163 ;  food,  64,
164;  dress,  65,  165;  merchants
in,  67,  168;  first  inhabitants  of,
68,  169 ;  manners  in,  69,  70,  80,
170,  171,  184;  Manhelge,  book  of
laws,  72,  174; dogs,  74,  177; ex-

cesses caused  by  famine  in,  73,
175 ;  influence  of  bishops  in,  75,
178;  fish  trade  in,  76,  178;  trade
of,  with  England  and  Holland,
86,  191;  chronicles  of,  196;
Sebastian  Cabot  sailing  towards
(1497)  VII.  153;  supposed  by
Virgil  to  be  the  extremest  point
north,  193 ;  strong  sea  currents
in,  337;  the  Sunshine  at  (1586)
407;  Henry  Morgan  sent  to,  by
John  Davys  (1586)  409;  descrip-
tion and  products  of,  409;  fishing
in,  410;  discovered  by  Nicholas
and  Antonio  Zeno  (1380)  445;
friars  from,  to  Greenland  (c.  1380)
453  ;  description  by  Antonio  Zeno,
463 ;  discovered  formerly  by  Fris-
land  fishermen,  464;  Act  against
exaction  for  traffic  in,  Edward  VI.
(1548)  VIII.  7  f.

Icelanders  called  Thulenses,  iv.  53.
151;  respect  for  their  forefathers,
IV.  76,  179.

Ichkebre,  carawool  or  gunner's
watch  at,  thirty  versts  from  Astra-
khan, III.  21.

Ichthiophagi,  fish  eaters  in  Africa,
VI. 170.

Ickary,  see  Caviare.

Icomana,  town  of  the  laos,  x.  490.

Iconium,  alias  Agogna,  in  Licaonia,
IV.  293 ;  battle  of,  by  Roger  Hove-
den,  312,  319.

Iconocami,  governor  of  half  the
kingdom  of  Bugen,  xi.  425 ;
soldiers  of,  426.

Iconuri  Mountain,  mine  of  gold  in,
x.  416.

Icosa  or  Dicosa,  king  and  river
named,  in  Florida,  ix. 112.

Idleness  forbidden  in  Japan  (1594)
XI.  440.

Idol  of  Virginia  (1584)  viii.  305 ;
golden,  sent  to  the  King  of  Spain
by  the  Indians  (1593)  x.  439.

Idolaters,  i.  285 ;  priests  of,  287  f. ;
temples  and  rites  of,  287  f. ;  in
Ormuz,  IV. 412.

Idols,  in  Russia,  11.  269 ;  of  the
Samoyedes,  338 ;  Tartar,  iii.  395  ;
in  Mobar,  description,  iv.  414;  in
India,  423;  food  of,  424;  In  Tibet,
436; Tartar, and  the  Franciscan

271

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

friars,  439 ;  of  the  kingdom  of
Pegu,  V.  425 ;  houses  of,  433 ;  in
kingdom  of  Dialcan,  472 ;  in
Benares,  478,  480;  of  the  Sapies,
X.  20;  in  Sierra  Leone  (1587)  xi.
207.

Idumaea,  many-coloured  fountain
in, IV. 39, 134.

Idy  stone,  see  Eddystone.

lekonga  river,  Stephen  Borough
and  (1557)  II.  368.

leloffes,  negroes,  enemies  to  the
Leophares  (1564)  x.  15.

Ignorance  of  the  Russian  people,  n.

442.  443-
Igor,  son  of  Rurik,  11.  183  f.
Iguanas, used  as food  by  Thomas

Cavendish,  xi.  322.
Ihame,  i,  48.
Ihualapa  town, in  the  government

of  the  heirs  of  Laurence  de  Castro,

IX.  468.

Ila,  see  Islay.

Ilac  or  Blac,  i.  279.

Ilfercombe,  see  Ilfracombe.

Ilfoord-combe,  see  Ilfracombe.

Ilfracombe,  Devon,  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i,  298;  Sir
Francis  Drake  at  (1579)  xi.  162.

Ilgenburg,  built  by  Ludolphus,  duke
of  Brunswick,  11.  6.

Ilhas,  As,  town,  description  of,  xi.
250.

Ilhas,  Baia  das,  latitude  of,  in  Rut-
tier  for  Brazil,  xi.  77.

Ilhas,  Rio  das,  in  Ruttier  for
Brazil,  xi.  77.

Ilkusch,  lead  mines  in,  v.  326.

Illness  of  Jacques  Cartier's  crew,
in  Holy  Cross  Port  (1535)  viii.
246;  in  France-Roy  Fort  (1542)
286;  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's  crew
after  leaving  S.  lago  Island  (1585)

X.  109.

Ilofe  Island,  conquered  by  Zichmni

(c.  1380)  vii.  448; Zichmni's  fleet

at,  458.
'  Imitivo  de  buena  moneda,'  of  Goa,

VI.  20.
Imperial, La, town in Chili, xi.

276.
Importations in England, Richard

Hakluyt  on,  v.  241.
Inambuxo,  a  sect  in  Japan,  vi.  337.

Inamia, a  kind  of  bread  in  Benin,

VI.  457-

Inana  river,  x.  492  ;  between  Cape
Cecil  and  Raleana  river,  459.

Inangondono,  successor  of  Quaba-
condono (1591) xi. 430.

Incense,  trees  of,  near  the  Amazon,
XI. 19.

Incent,  John,  protonotary,  his  ac-
count of  the  reception  of  the
Russian  ambassador  in  England
(1556)  n-  350-360.

Incommenderos,  first  Spanish  con-
querors of  Mexico,  IX.  375.

Indemnity  for  Muscovy  Company's
losses  in  the  Moscow  fire  (1572)
III. 183, 190, 193.

India,  i.  71 ;  Jenghiz  Khan  and,
146 ;  products  of,  11.  472 ;  4400
islands,  under,  iv.  422 ;  Caesar
Frederick's  voyage  to  East  (1563)
v.  365-449;  John  Newbery's  voy-
age to  (1583)  450;  Ralph  Fitch's
voyage  to  (1583-91)  465  ;  monsoons
from,  for  Portugal,  vi.  33 ;  known
before  Christ,  vii.  180;  fertility
of, 254; people  of, 261.

India  Minor,  Tartars,  and,  i.  86.

'  India,  New,  A  Treatise  of,'  by  Mun-
ster,  translated  by  Richard  Eden
(1553)  X.  2.

India,  the  great,  discovered  by
Metrodorus,  viii.  104;  Meropius
in, 104.

India,  Upper,  or  China,  Friar  Odoric
in, IV, 422 ; idol worship in,

423-
Indians,  tribes  of,  in  Canada  Touda-
mani,  viii.  239 ;  and  Teguenon-
dahi,  244  ;  Picquemians,  tribe  of,  in
Virginia,  253 ;  of  Virginia  and
Captain  Amadas  (1584)  299;  de-
scription of,  300  f.,  303,  307,  429,
474;  Chesapians,  tribe  of,  in  Vir-
ginia, 321  ;  Mandoages,  Opos-
sians  and  Tripanicks  in  Virginia,
326;  Choaniste  in  Virginia,  326;
Maratoc,  tribe  of,  in  Virginia,
327 ;  Mangoaks,  tribe  of,  in  Vir-
ginia, 330;  Renapoaks,  meaning
of  name  of,  334;  superstitions  of,
of  Virginia,  concerning  the  Eng-
lish (1585)  335;  of  Florida,  dis-
covered by John de Verrazzano

272

INDEX

(1524)  424-438;  description  of,
425,  428,  432,  435;  white  sailor
and,  of  Florida  (1524)  427;  kings
of,  VIII.  432  ;  intercourse  between
John  de  Verrazzano  and,  433 ;  re-
ligion of,  of  Florida,  438,  453 ;
and  Captain  Ribault,  458,  463 ;
two  taken  away  by  Captain
Ribault  (1562)  465,  467;  La  Grand
Copal,  city  of,  in  Florida,  466 ;  of
Dominica  and  Captain  Laudon-
niere  (1564)  ix.  3;  of  Florida,  6-9-
10,  23-28,  31-33..  52,,  101-104-109;
their  custom  to  live  in  woods,  59 ;
and  the  famine  at  Fort  Caroline
(1565)  61 ;  M.  de  Ottigni  and  the
ambushes  of,  72  f.  ;  and  Friar
Marco  de  Niga,  117,  119,  125,  126,
13S;  of  Mexico,  Antonio  de  Men-
doza  and  (1539)  123;  treason  of,
against  Vasquez  de  Coronado
(1540)  151;  oi  Cevola,  152,  155,
159;  Chichilticale  and  Stephen
Dorantez,  162 ;  of  Mechuacan,
and  Friar  Juan  de  Padilla,  166;
Conchos,  and  Friar  Augustin
Ruyz  (1581)  166  f. ;  and  Antonio
de  Espejo,  190,  192,  198,  203;
Christian  names  of,  199 ;  Chichi-
mecas  and  Captain  tJlloa  (1539)
217,  221,  244  f.,  259,  262,  265;
canoes  made  by,  261 ;  and  Francis
Preciado,  263  ff.  ;  Friar  Raimund
and,  264  f. ;  of  Buena  Guia  river,
description  by  Captain  Alarchon,
281-284  >  kindness  of,  to  Captain
Alarchon,  293  ff.,  311;  and  the
burning  of  their  dead,  297;  of
Nova  Albion,  321;  towns  of,  near
Mexico,  357 ;  witchcraft  of,  382  ;
of  New  Spain,  description  by
Henry  Hawks  (1572)  386-397;
religious  beliefs,  117,  387;  law  of
Charles  V.  for  the  freedom  of,
.388;  Chichimici,  and  Miles  Philips
(1568)  410;  of  Panuco,  and  An-
thony Godard  and  John  Cornish,
455 ;  of  Tlaxcalla,  and  Anthony
Godard  and  John  Cornish,  458;  of
Niciecan,  trade  in  Ihualapa,  468;
of  Terra  Firma,  description  of,  x.
27;  of  Cumana,  and  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1565)  27;  description  of,
28  f. ; of  Florida,  description  of.

by  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1565)  52 ;
of  Trinidad,  and  Andrew  Barker
(1576)  84;  of  Dominica,  and  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1585)  no;  at  the
defence  of  Cartagena,  and  their
poisoned  arrows  (1586)  119;  of
Terra  Firma,  traffic  of  (1587)  135;
of  De  La  Paz,  and  the  small  pox
(1590)  171 ;  of  Florida,  their
traffic  with  Christopher  Newport's
crew  (1591)  189;  of  Trinidad,  Sir
Robert  Dudley's  description  of
(1595)  205;  of  Dominica  and  the
sick  crew  of  the  Darling  (1595)
215;  in  Martinino,  309;  of  Trini-
dad, cruelties  of  Don  Antonio  de
Berreo  towards  (1594)  352;  of
West  Indies  and  the  gold  of
Guiana,  366;  trade  of,  in  Margar-
ita, 376;  Tivitivas,  description  of
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  382 ;  of
Capuri  and  Macureo,  383 ;  and
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  391 ;
Nepoios,  394 ;  Borracheras  or
drunken  feasts  of,  437 ;  with  high
shoulders,  438 ;  Arawak,  wander-
ing tribe  of,  455;  of  Moruga's
plan  for  driving  out  the  Spaniards,
462  ;  of  Guiana,  their  wish  to  live
under  English  rule  (1596)  472;
character  of,  described  by  Laur-
ence Keymis,  477,  xi.  13 ;  ill-
treated  by  Antonio  Sedenno,  x.
497;  by  Augustine  Delgado,  498;
of  Aramatto  and  Wias,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  and  (1597)  xi.  6;  of  the
Amazon  river,  description  of,  20 ;
of  Trinidad,  arrows  of,  22 ;  of
Baya  de  las  Islas,  135 ;  of  Santos
bring  a  present  to  Edward  Fenton
(1583)  192;  treason  of,  against
Edward  Fenton  (1583)  199;  of
Granada,  character  of,  235 ;  of
Hispaniola,  character  of,  238 ;  of
La  Mocha,  Sir  Francis  Drake
wounded  by,  260;  constrained  by
the  Spaniards  to  work  the  mines,
275 ;  of  Chili  and  Don  Pedro  de
Valdivia,  276;  of  Port  Desire,  de-
scription of  (1586)  296;  graves  of,
297;  of  S.  Marie  Island,  tribute
paid  by,  to  the  Spaniards  (1587)
302 ;  of  Morro  Moreno,  descrip-
tion of, 307; of the Straits of

273

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Magellan  and  the  sailors  of  John
Chidley  (1590)  383.

Indico.  see  Indigo.

Indies,  East,  voyage  to,  by  Captain
Raimund  (1591)  x.  194-203 ;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley's  intention  of
going  to  (1597)  276.

Indies,  Oriental  and  Occidental,  11.
163.

Indies,  West,  '  History  of,'  by  Benzo,
IV.  108,  117;  Sir  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  (1564)  vi.  263;  Sir
Francis  Drake  in  the  Spanish,  vii.
40;  discovery  of,  by  Madoc  (1170)
133 ;  offer  of  discovery  of,  by
Christopher  Columbus  to  Henry
VII.  (1488)  135;  map  of,  by  Sebas-
tian Cabot  (1497)  145 ;  Sebastian
Cabot's  voyages  to,  152;  '  General
History  of  the,'  by  Francis  Lopez
de  Gomara,  vii.  153 ;  islands  of.
Captain  Amadas  at  (1584)  viii.
297 ;  quotation  from,  ix.  163-
169 ;  tribute  paid  by,  to  the  King
of  Spain,  375 ;  Don  Martin  Hen-
riquez,  viceroy  of  (1568)  451 ;  third
voyage  to,  virith  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1567)  445;  '  History  of,'  by  Gon-
zalvo  de  Oviedo,  x.  4 ;  Thomas
Tison,  English  factor  in  (c.  1526)
6 ;  way  to,  discovered  by  Thomas
Tison,  6;  first  voyage  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  to  (1562-3)  7,  xii.  47;
second  voyage  (1564)  x.  9-63;
third  voyage  (1567-8)  64-74;  last
voyage  to,  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
and  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1595)  226-
245,  XII.  23 ;  voyage  of  John
Oxenham  to  (1575)  x.  77-81 ;
rebellion  feared  by  Spain  in  (1587)
152;  Christopher  Newport's  voy-
age to  (1591-2)  184-190;  Sir  Amyas
de  Preston's  voyage  to  (1595)  213-
226 ;  Ruttier  for,  280-305  ;  second
Ruttier  for,  306-337 ;  conquest  of,
XII.  8.

Indigo,  found  in  Scinde  and  Cam-
bay,  VI.  26 ; found  in  Mexico,  ix.

358.
Indus  river,  viii. 128.
Infant, river of the, discovered  by

Bartholomew  Diaz,  viii. 128.
Infidels  beaten  by  the  Dutch  knights,

II.  2.

Infierno Island, Sir  Robert  Dudley

at  (1595)  X.  210.
Inga,  Emperor  of  Guiana  (1595)  x.

401.
Ingas, golden  garden  of  the,  near

Puna,  X.  357 ; religion  of  the,  by

Pedro  de  Cieza,  424.
Ingemundus,  i.  27,  28.
Ingenios,  or  sugar  house  in  Grand

Canary,  vi.  127,  128;  in  Teneriffe,

130;  in  Gomera, 132; in Palma,

132  ;  in  Madeira, 135 ;  set  on  fire

by  Robert  Withrington,  near  Bahia

(1587)  XI.  222  ; worked  by  negroes

from  Guinea,  240 ;  in  Bahia  town,

250.
Ingenos, battle  of, Matthew  Gour-

ney  at,  iv.  444.
Inger  Sound,  11,  416.
Ingles,  Port,  Charles  Leigh  and  the

ship  of  Biscay  in  (1597)  viii.  174;

Charles  Leigh  at, 182.
Ingram, Anthony, and the goods

from Benin (1589) vi. 454; his

account of the first voyage to

Benin, 45S-461.
Ingram, David, on  cannibals, viii.

100 ; quotations  of  Welsh  names

from, 108; on salt in western

parts,  no; description  of  animals

of  Western  Planting  (1583)  114.
Ingram,  David,  under  John  Hooper's

leadership in Panuco (1568) ix.

412  ; missing,  413.
Ingram, Richard,  master's  mate  in

Cabot's  intended  voyage,  11.  206 ;

ship's  mate  on  the  Bona  Confiden-

tia  (1553)  214.
Ingulf, Abbot  of  Croyland, voyage

to Jerusalem (1064) iv. 288-293;

to  Normandy,  291 ; robbed  on  the

way  to  Jerusalem,  291 ; his  return

home,  293.
Ingulphus, Norwegian chieftain in

Iceland  (874)  iv.  52, 150.
Innachari,  Zavia  della,  doctor  of  law

at  Cairo,  v.  335.
Innocent  HI.,  Pope,  and  the  succour

of  the  Holy  Land  (1201)  iv.  345.
Innocent  IV.  (Sinibaldo  de  Fieschi),

Pope (1243-1254), I. 55, 94, 134;

his legates  in Tartary (1246) 55-

133.  134-179.  II-  187  ;  and  the  King

of  Russia  (1246)  III.  371.

274

INDEX

Innocentius, see Innocent.

Inns  or  hospitals,  in  the  empire  of

Cathay, for  travellers, iv. 433.
Innsbruck, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V.  321.

Inquisition,  the,  in  the  East  Indies
(1570)  III.  154;  Neville  Davies,
prisoner  of  (1592)  vii.  107;  settled
in  West  Indies  in  (1574)  ix.  424;
Anthony  Godard  and  his  men
judged  by  (1575)  424  f. ;  in  Tene-
riffe,  and  Andrew  Barker  (1574)
X.  82.

Inquisition  House  in  Triana,  Eng-
lish prisoners  at  (1570)  ix.  463.

Insana  river,  near  Culma,  iv.  37,
132.

Inspruck,  see  Innsbruck.

Instructions  to  master  and  mariners
of  the  English  fleet  (1577)  11.  375-
378 ;  given  to  Edward  Fenton  by
the  Lords  of  Council  concerning
his  voyage  to  East  Indies  and
Cathay  (1582)  xi.  163-171.

Insulae  Fortunatae,  see  Canary
Islands.

Intent,  the,  captured  by  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1595)  Benjamin  Wood
made  captain  of,  x.  205.

Interpreter,  French,  for  English
merchants in Cape Verde (1567)

VI.  273 ;  Indian,  Balthasar,  of  Sir
Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.  207;  In-
dian, of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  in
his  voyage  to  Guiana  (1595)  353.

Intla,  Punta  de,  in  Mexico,  ix.  466.

'  In  Turchas  precatio,'  by  William
Malim,  v. 128.

Invasion,  Spanish,  intended,  of
England,  iv.  221.

*  Inventio  Fortunata,'  by  Nicholas
of  Lynn,  i.  303.

Inventory,  of  ships  to  be  made  by
pursers,  11.  317;  of  Edward  Fen-
ton's  ships  (1582)  XI. 166.

lona,  Island  of,  i.  33.

Ipaios,  nation  of  the  Manmanuri,  x.
492.

Iparoma  river,  tributary  of  the  Ori-
noco river, x. 420.

Ipswich,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  299;  and  the  cus-
toms, 355.

Iracana  river,  see  Somme  in  Florida.

Irak  Arabi  (Chaldea),  climate  of,  1.
52  ; Tartars  in,  53.

Ireland,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  3  f.,  6;
King  Vortiporius  and,  8 ;  devas-
tated (684)  10;  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  299;  Richard
de  Clare  (Strongbow),  Earl  of
Pembroke  in  (1171)  32;  King
John  of  England  and,  34;  pro-
ducts of,  II.  132  f. ;  mines  of  silver
and  gold  in,  132 ;  possible  con-
quest of,  135 ;  fables  concerning,
IV.  20,  1 10 ;  Spanish  ships  wrecked
on  the  coast  of  (1588)  232  ;
William  Towerson  in  (1556)  vi.
211;  description  of,  vii.  28;
church  ceremonies,  29  ;  Sir  Henry
Sidney,  deputy  of  (1568)  179;
strong  sea  currents  from  the
Mexico  Bay  to  (1578)  337;  Act
against  exaction  for  traffic  in,  Ed-
ward VI.  (1548)  viii.  8;  conquest
by  Richard  Strongbow  (1171)
444.

Ireland,  Marquess  of,  see  Stukeley,
Thomas.

Ireland,  Richard,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viil.  317.

Irene,  or  Irenia,  Empress  of  Russia,
III.  435,  449;  wife  of  Feodor
Ivanowich  (1584)  340; wisdom  of,

344-

Irish,  improvident  nature  of  the
(1589) VII. 28.

Iron,  Russian,  iii.  369;  mines  of,  at
Wichida,  113;  mines  in  New-
foundland, viii,  60 ;  mines  in
Canada,  268;  in  Virginia  (1586)
356.

Iron  Island,  iron  and  copper  mines
in  (1578)  VIII. 15.

Irraparragota,  King  of  Amario-
capana  (1595)  x.  416.

Irrouacas,  river,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  246.

Irtische,  see  Irtysh.

Irtysh  river,  iii.  408.

Isabel, the, of  Clay, 11. 65.

Isabella,  Queen  of  Spain,  and  the
sons  of  Christopher  Columbus
(1494)  VII. 140.

Isabella,  in  Hispaniola,  governor  of,
and  Sir  Richard  Grenville  (1585)
VIII. 313; John White  at (1587)

275

I

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

390;  port  of  Hispaniola,  Sir  John
Hawkins  at (1562) x. 8.

Isacan,  King  of  Sinnergan,  v.  485.

Isakius,  King  of  Cyprus  (1191)  iv.
328;  and  Richard  I.,  329;  defeat
of,  330; sent  to  Tripolis,  331.

Isakrakur  or  crow, in Iceland, iv.

Isamacon,  king  and  river  named,  in
Florida,  ix. 112; cacique, 113.

Iscant  Island,  despoiled  by  Zichmni
(c. 1380)  vii.  451.

Iseland, see  Iceland.

Isham,  Henry,  in  Charles  V. 's  ex-
pedition to  Algiers  (1541)  v.  71.

Isidore,  i.  255,  vn.  137;  on  Cyclo-
pedes,  I.  154;  on  the  Caspian  Sea,
270,  271 ;  on  Albania,  271 ;  on
Bulgarian  horses,  278 ;  on  deadly
water,  iv.  39, 135.

Isla,  Don  Nicolas  de,  colonel  of  the
Armada  (1588)  iv,  202.

Island,  see  Iceland.

Island  in  Scythian  Sea,  iii. 264.

Islands, discovered by Arthur Pet

(1580)  III.  288;  on  the  lake  of  An-
golesme,  viii.  229 ;  South  Euro-
pean, Thome's  map  of,  11. 171.

Islands,  kingdom  of  the,  i.  27,  28;

Dopnald  and  the,  27.
Islas,  Baya  de  las,  latitude  of,  Nuno

da  Silva  at  (1578)  xi.  134.
Islay,  Spanish  ships  wrecked  at,  iv.

231.
Isle  of  Man, see  Man.
Isle  of  Wight, see  Wight.
Isleif, first bishop of Schalholt, in

Iceland  (1057)  iv.  53,  151, 152.
Islettes, the, great  fishing  at, viii.

187.
Ismael, Sophi of Persia, buried in

Meskit, in. 26; father of Shah

Thomas,  35, 160.
Ismo,  the,  rocks  in  Cartagena  har-
bour, X. 140.
Isocrates,  sage  saying  of,  i.  xxxiii.
Isthmus,  between  Asia  and  the  West

Indies,  vii. 199.
Istria,  V,  204; Laurence  Aldersey  at

(1581)  V.  214; galls  from,  vi.  25.
Istria, cape  of, John Locke  before

(1553)  V. 104.
Isvenogorodsky, Vasili Andrevitch,
and  Sir  Jerome  Horsey,  iii.  346.

Itaa  Island,  in  Isle  of  Goats,  Cap-
tain Gualle  at  (1584)  ix.  329.

Ita  Caponea  Island,  in  the  Orinoco
river,  x.  494.

Italian  soldiers  in  the  Armada  army
(1588)  IV.  205.

Italy,  Thome's  map  of  the  coast  of,

II.  170  ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  in.
195;  Robert  de  Ketene  in  (1143)
IV.  308 ;  Cardan  on,  35,  129 ;
petrifying  fountains  in,  36,  131  ;
and  the  Armada  (1588)  200;
Britons  in,  before  Christ,  269;
climate  of,  viii.  384 ;  navy  of,
XII. 3 ; navigators  of,  8.

Itarey,  king  of  the  natives  of  Cape

Breton  (1597)  viii. 174.
Itewee, town  of  the  Maicawini, x.

494.
'  Itinerarium  Cambriae,'  by  Giraldus

Cambrensis,  iv.  340.
Itorebece  river,  x.  494.
lucatan, see  Yucatan,
lug  river,  see  Yug.
Ivan or John, son of Daniel, and

the aggrandisement of Moscow,

III.  371.

Ivan  Feodorowich,  Knez,  in.  336.

Ivangorod,  open  to  foreign  trade
(1569)  III.  118.

Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor  of  Russia,
conquests  of,  11.  188 f.  ;  son  of  Basil,
190;  character  of,  191,438;  portrait
of,  192 ;  Grand  Duke  of  Russia
(1580)  249;  his  letters  to  Edward
VI.  271-272;  King  Philip  and
Queen  Mary's  letters  to  (1555)278;
wars  of,  450 ;  losses  of,  in.  386 ;
built  Narva  Castle,  387.

Ivia  Pari,  river,  named  by  Bartho-
lomew de  Casas,  x.  496.

Ivie,  master  of  the  Dragon  (1591)
VI. 466.

Ivory,  in  Guinea,  vi.  163,  261 ;
trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1554)  184,  189,
190,192,215;  in  Cape  Verde  Island,
237;  in  Rio  de  Potos,  239;  from
Benin  (1589)  455,  457.  459,  465,
467;  value  of,  VIII.  156;  used
against  poison,  157 ;  Edward
Fenton's capture of (1582) xi.

Iwana  Island,  in  Orinoco  river,  x.
395-

176

INDEX

Iwanama, town  of  the  Mawari,  x.

492.
Iwanas found in Triangle Islands

(1596)  X.  458.
Iwarawakeri,  Macureguarai  near,  x.

423 ; enemies  to  the  Spanish,  475.
Iwarawaqueri, nation unconquered

by  the  Orejones, x. 400 ; settled

on the left bank of the Carol!

river,  405.
Iwarewakeri,  see  Iwarawakeri.
Iwaripoco  river,  x.  490; mentioned

by Laurence Keymis (1596) 454;

emeralds  in,  491.

Jackman,  Bennet,  unlicensed  Eng-
lish merchant  in  Russia  (1591)  m.
426,

Jackman,  Charles,  pilot,  i.  xl. ;  ship-
master, III.  251 ;  vice-admiral,  253;
advice  as  to  his  behaviour  towards
foreign  nations,  255 ;  advice  to,
by  William  Borough,  259-262 ;  by
Dee,  262-263  >  by  Richard  Hak-
luyt,  264-275;  discoveries  by  (1580)
282-303 ;  winters  in  Norway,
303 ;  master's  mate  in  Cap-
tain Frobisher's  second  voyage
(1577)  VII,  217;  master  of  the
Judith  (1578)  233;  master's  mate
of  the  Aid  (1577)  285,  295,  304;
assistant  in  Captain  Frobisher's
council,  348 ;  North-east  voyage
by  (15S0)  XII.  23.

Jackman,  Edward,  granted  Russian
license  (1569)  iii.  109.

Jackman 's  Sound,  discovered  by
Captain  Frobisher  (1577)  vii.  217,
237,  296 ;  natives  of  Meta  Incog-
nita in  (1577)  302  ;  and  Anne  War-
wick's Sound,  306.

Jacks,  Austen,  cook  on  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  214.

Jackson,  Arthur,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Jackson,  Captain,  at  Peniche  (1589)
VI.  496.

Jackson,  Robert,  of  Andrew
Barker's  company,  killed  at  San
Francisco  Island  (1576)  viii.  86.

Jacob,  Armenian  bark  owner,  iii.
230,  232.

Jacob,  Robert,  English  doctor  of
Emperor  of  Russia,  iii,  314,  323.

Jacobiti,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.

Jacuino,  Quabacondono  and,  xi.  436.

Jaffa,  in  Judea,  coloured  water  in,
IV.  38,  134;  fleet  from  Genoa  at
(1064)  292;  Goderic  at  (1102)  298;
siege  of  (1102)  299-301;  Eng-
lish fleet  at  (1107)  301,  303;  ad-
miral of,  and  Prince  Edward
(1270)  363;  Richard  I.  at  (1191)
335,  V.  87;  towers  of,  89;  Laur-
ence Aldersey  at  (1581)  208,  212;
Caesar  Frederick  in  (1567)  447;
John  Eldred  at  (c.  1587)  vi.  9.

Jagatai,  son  of  Jenghiz  Khan,  i,  74,
150.

Jaic,  see  Ural  river.

Jaico,  Island  of,  mentioned  in  second
Ruttier,  x.  328.

Jalapa,  summer  town  of  Vera  Cruz,
IX,  361.

Jalisco  Islands,  Captain  UUoa  at
(5539)  IX.  208.

Jalisco,  province  of  Mexico,  ix.  364;
Spaniards  in,  and  the  conversion
of  Indians  to  Christianity,  118;
latitude  of,  350 ;  from,  to  Chia-
metla,  363 ;  Thomas  Cavendish
at,  369 ; anchorage  at,  373.

Jallobert,  see  Salobert.

Jalobert,  see  Salobert.

Jalofo,  Ethiopians  in,  vi. 143.

Jamahey,  description  of,  by  Ralph
Fitch  (c. 1583)  V. 495 ; products

of. 495-

Jamaica,  conquered  by  Spain,  viii.
124;  John  White  in  sight  of  (1590)
411;  Spanish  fleet  at  420;  gover-
nor of,  taken  b}'  the  mutinous
soldiers  of  Captain  Laudonniere
(1564)  IX.  43;  inhabited  by  Span-
iards (1570)  367;  Sir  John
Hawkins  at,  and  the  Spanish  mer-
chant (1565)  X.  43;  mutinous
soldiers  of  Captain  Laudonniere  at
(1565)54;  William  King  at  (1592)
191 ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at
(1595)  225  ;  voyage  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  to  (1595)  266-276;  taken
by  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  (1597)  273 ;
products  of,  274 ;  Captain  William
Parker's  voyage  to,  and  meeting
with  Anthony  Sherley  at  (1596)
277; latitude  of,  333.

Jamayca, see Jamaica.

277

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Jamba,  one  of  the  Java  Islands,
diamonds  in,  v.  499.

James  I.,  and  Cavendish,  xii.  71.

James,  bishop  of  Nicosia,  v.  125 ;
conquers  Cyprus,  126.

James,  Leonard,  of  the  Elizabeth
(1584)  V.  281.

James,  Thomas,  Bodley's  librarian
(1573-1629) I. xxii.

James,  Thomas,  letter  from,  to  Sir
William  Cecil  concerning  dis-
covery of  Ramea  (1591)  viii. 155.

James  Cartier's  Sound,  discovered
by  Jacques  or  James  Cartier  (1534)

VIII.  188.

James  Town,  Virginia,  living  of,
offered  to  Hakluyt,  xii.  86.

Jane,  John,  last  voyage  of  Thomas
Cavendish  (1591-1593),  written  by,
XI.  389-416.

Jane,  Philip,  of  the  Sunshine  (1586)
VII.  408.

Jane  Bonaventure,  the,  voyage  of,
to  Mexico  Bay  (1592)  x.  190.

Janes,  John,  merchant,  account  of
John  Davys 's  first  voyage  for  the
discovery  of  the  north-west  pass-
age (1585-1587)  VII.  381-445;  in
the  Sunshine  of  London,  382.

Jangomes,  country  of  the,  Ralph
Fitch  in,  v.  495 ;  benzoin  found
at,  504.

Janissaries  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  v.  23-34,  58;  uniform  of,
106;  at  Famagusta  (1571)  148,
152;  in  Turkish  garrisons,  vi.  6;
pay  of,  61,  63 ;  captain  of  the,
65 ;  in  the  Hungarian-Turkish
war  (1594) 104.

Janitzary,  Cape,  Richard  Wrag  at
(1594)  VI. 107.

Janni, Prete,  see  Prester  John.

Janzu,  Franciscan  Friars  in  (1330)
IV.  428.

Japan,  Jesuits  in,  iii.  263;  Portu-
guese trade  in  (1567)  v.  405  ;  trade
with  Macao,  498;  by  R.  Willes,
VI.  327-347;  latitude  of,  327,  viii.
129 ;  character  of  natives  of,  vi.
328;  sixty-six  kingdoms  in,  335;
P.  Maffeius  on,  332,  347;  the  Por-
tuguese at,  VIII.  129;  climate,
384; Captain Gualle at (1584)

IX.  334-

Japhet,  see  Joppa.

Japhet,  VII.  162  ;  son  of  Noah,  settled

in  Europe,  264.
Japigia, blood  fountain  in, iv. 38,

134-

Japon,  see  Japan.

Jaques,  last  King  of  Cyprus  (1473)
tomb  of,  v.  95.

Jaques,  clerk  of  the  galleys  at
Rhodes  (1522)  v.  12.

Jardines,  Los,  described  in  the  Rut-
tier, X. 286; latitude, 314, 333.

Jarfawkons,  see  Gerfalcons.

Jaroslav,  or  Waldemar,  duke  of
Russia,  I.  42.

Jaroslav,  son  of  Demetrius,  li. 187.

Jaroslav,  son  of  Vladimir,  11.  185.

Jaroslave,  see  Yaroslavl.

Jaroslaw,  see  Yaroslavl.

Jarrefalcons,  see  Gerfalcons.

Jase,  see  Tartar  ships.

Jasper,  green,  found  in  Cambay,  vi.
27.

Jassy, Henry Austell at (1585) v.

325-
Java,  wealth  of,  iv,  416;  spice  trade
in,  V.  405;  diamonds  in,  499,  504;
pepper  found  in,  504;  mace  found
in ;  the  Portuguese  at,  viii.  129 ;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1579)  xi.
130 ;  customs  of  the  people  of,  131 ;
vocabulary  of,  13 1-2  ;  Thomas  Cav-
endish at  (1588)  337,  370;  King's
secretary  visits  him  on  the  Desire,
338  ;  Rajah  Bolamboam,  king  of
(1588)340;  character  of  the  people
of,  341  ;  distance  from,  to  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  343 ;  latitude  of,
351 ;  from,  to  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
365;  anchorage  at,  373;  Straits,
Thomas  Cavendish  through  (1588)

XI. 337-

Javat,  in  Shirvan,  iii.  40;  a  tribu-
tary of  the  Caspian  Sea  in,  165.

Jawa or  Indian magician, ix, 57.

Jawdara,  Alcaide,  in  Gago  (1594)
VII. 100.

Jaya,  river  of,  James  Welsh  at
(1588)  VI.  453;  the  Richard  of
Arundel  in (1590)  465.

Jean,  Francis,  traitor  to  his  country-
men (1564)  IX.  39,  (1565)  95;  and
Captain  James  Ribault,  97.

Jebusites,  Joshua  and  the,  viii.  103.

78

INDEX

Jeffries,  return  of  (1583)  xi.  201.
Jehbir,  in  the  kingdom  of  Mecca,  v.

348-

Jebel-et-Tor  (Mount  Tabor),  near
Nazareth,  iv.  305.

Jemena,  see  Jumna.

Jena,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
321.

Jenebelli  or  Genebelli,  Frederick,
engineer  (1588)  iv.  208;  at  the
siege  of  Antwerp  (1585)  iv.  222.

Jenero,  see  Rio  de  Janeiro.

Jenghiz  Khan,  Mogul  Emperor
I.  60,  68  f.,  72,  77,  88;  con-
quests of,  69  f.,  84,  143-150;
laws  of,  73  f.,  78  f.,  149  f.  ;  origin
of,  142  f . ;  Emperor  of  Tartary,  145  ;
and  the  cave-dwellers,  148  f. ;
vanquishes  Vut  Khan,  268 ;  his
descendants,  281 ;  prisoner  of  the
people  of  Tangut,  290.

Jenise,  Master,  and  Laurence  Alder-
sey,  in  Augsburg  (1581)  v.  202.

Jenkinson,  Anthony  (d.  161 1),  on
north  regions,  xxix. ;  discourse,
xliv. ;  voyages  of,  xlv.  f. ;  in
Russia,  xlvi ;  captain  of  the  Prim-
rose (1557)  II.  375,  390;  his  return
from  Bokhara  (1559)  400;  Mus-
covy Company's  hopes  of,  404;  in
Moscow,  407 ;  message  from  Mus-
covy Company  to,  409 ;  first  voy-
age of  (1557)  413  ;  at  Flamborough
Head,  414;  at  Heilick  Islands
and  Lofoden  Islands,  415 ;  at
Foxenose  up  the  Dvina,  418;  and
the  Emperor  of  Russia,  420,  436 ;
his  voyage  to  Bokhara  (1558)  449-
479 ;  down  the  Volga,  456 ;  in
Manguslave,  459-461 ;  drinks
mares'  milk,  460,  461 ;  his  en-
counter with  thieves,  466-469 ;
leaves  Bokhara,  474;  his  recep-
tion by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
478 ;  his  safe-conduct  through
Russia  (1561)  III.  1-5;  bearer  of
Queen  Elizabeth's  letters,  4,  6;  his
authority  over  apprentices,  10 ;
and  the  Nova  Zembla  passage,  12  ;
his  discretionary  power,  13 ;  his
journey  to  Persia  (1561-1564)  15 ;
his  reception  by  King  of  Shir-
van,  21;  his  arrival  at  the
Sophi's Court, 27, 29; and the

Persian  trade,  48,  63,  64;  his  voy-
age to  Muscovy  (1566)  92  ;  privi-
leges obtained  by,  92,  93;  joint
witness  of  the  Russian  privileges,
97;  ambassador  to  Russia  (1571)
i7o>  (1557)  334.  (1561)  335;  re-
ceived by  the  Emperor,  173-188;
his  travels  (1546-1572)  195;  on
north-east  passage,  457 ;  his  map
of  Russia,  engraving  of,  486;  on
Solyman's  expedition  to  Syria
(1553)  V.  105 ;  safe-conduct  given
by  Solyman  to,  109 ;  privileges
granted  by  Solyman  to,  168 ;  and
the  passage  to  Cathay,  vii.  159,
181 ;  and  the  sea  currents,  168,
183 ;  and  the  Mare  Glaciale,  176,
183 ;  and  the  overland  route  to
Cathay  (1558)  xii.  23;  and  the
North-east  passage,  25  ;  and  Hak-
luyt,  75.

Jenkinson,  John,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Jennings,  Master  of  the  Toby,  and
Hakluyt,  xii.  76.

Jennings,  William,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Jerado,  Anthony,  of  Marseilles,  pilot
of  the  Jesus  (1583)  v. 292.

Jeraslave,  see  Yaroslavl.

Jeremiah's  fountain,  Laurence  Alder-
sey  at  (1581)  v.  210.

Jeres,  iv.  260.

Jerfalcons,  see  Gerfalcons.

Jericho,  Joshua  in,  viii.  102.

Jerom,  Castle  of,  in  Russia,  iii.  408.

Jersey,  ship  from  (c.  1581)  viii.  118,
146.

Jerundus,  ninth  bishop  of  Holen,  in
Iceland  (1267)  iv.  55,  153.

Jerusalem,  i.  167 ;  British  soldiers  at
the  sack  of,  xxv. ;  original  seat
of  the  order  of  the  Dutch  knights
(1190)  II.  i;  Persian  pilgrims  to,
III.  161 ;  called  Couch  Kaly,  161 ;
Empress  Helena's  visit  to,  337,  iv.
272;  Andrew  Leucander  at  (1020)
282;  Sweyn  at  (1052)  283;  Alured
at  (1058)  287;  Ingulf,  abbot  of
Croyland,  voyage  to  (1064)  288,
292  ;  Normandy  pilgrims  at,  291 ;
churches  destroyed  in,  292;
Gutuere's  voyage  to,  293 ;  Edgar's

279

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

voyage  to  (1102)  295;  Godericus'
journey  to,  297 ;  chronicles  of
(1107)  301;  Tower  of  David  at,
302  ;  pilgrims  to,  302  ;  John  Lacy
(1137)  and  William  Mandevile  in
(1177)  3^0;  Ranulph,  Earl  of
Chester's  voyage  to  (1218)  349;
Peter  des  Roches,  bishop  of  Win-
chester's voyage  to  (1231)  351  ;
Louis  IX.  of  France's  journey  to
Holy  Land  (1248)  353;  King  of,
asks  for  help  from  Cyprus  (1270)
362 ;  engraving  of,  370 ;  the
three  wise  men  of  Kazvin
led  to,  410;  Earl  of  Hunting-
ton (1394)  and  the  Duke  of  Nor-
folk at  (1399)  453;  bishop  of  Win-
chester's journey  to  (1417)  by
Thomas  Walsing,  454 ;  Henry  IV.  's
project  of  conquest  of  (1413)  455;
order  of,  v.  i ;  John  Locke's  voy-
age to  (1553)  76,  91 ;  messenger
sent  to  the  guardian  of,  89 ;  Laur-
ence Aldersey  at  (1581)  209-212;
monuments  in,  210-212;  Richard
Forster,  consul  for  (1583)  260;
Caesar  Frederick  at  (1567)  447;
John  Eldred  at,  vi.  9 ;  ivory  gate
in,  166 ;  Eustaphius,  abbot  of,  his
visit  to  Russia,  11.  185 ;  Kings  of,
Godfrey  of  Bouillon  (1098)  iv.
293;  Baldwin  (iioo)  297;  Guy
(1191)  330,  V.  125;  John  de
Brienne  (12 18)  iv.  348;  patriarchs
of,  Sophronius  (1064)  iv.  292 ;
Hugh  of  Tabaria  (1107)  302  ;  Gui-
mund  (112S)  308; Anthony  Beck

(1305)  370-

Jeruslaus,  see  Jaroslav.

Jesuits  in  Japan,  iii.  263;  in  Venice
(1581)  V.  204;  in  S.  Paul's  Col-
lege in  Goa  (1586)  460;  and  John
Newbery,  507,  510;  in  China  (1583)
VI-  375 ;  college  of,  in  Panama
(1587)  X.  148;  in  Japan,  difificul-
ties  (1591)  XI.  428;  and  Quabacon-
dono,  435.

Jesus,  the,  voyage  to  S.  Nicholas
(1560)  II.  401  ; wares  in,  408.

Jesus  of  London,  the,  and  Romadan
Pasha  (1584)  v.  281  ;  voyage  of,  to
Tripolis,  by  Thomas  Sanders
(1583)  292-311;  shot  at,  by  Sebas-
tian at Tripolis, 297; Murad

Khan's  letter  about  (1584)  314;
William  Harborne's  letter,  316,
318.
Jesus,  the,  of  Liibeck,  engrav-
ing of.  IX.  416;  Sir  John
Hawkins's  second  voyage  to  West
Indies  with  (1564)  vi.  253,  x.  9,
17;  left  by  Sir  John  Hawkins  in
S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)  ix.  365.
406,  X.  72 ;  Sir  John  Hawkins's
ship  (1567)  IX.  398,  X.  64;  Job
Hortop,  gunner  in  (1567)  ix.  445,
(1568)  453;  at  Riohacha  (1568)
449 ;  Captain  Bland  aboard,  in  S.
Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)  454;  third
voyage  of  Sir  John  Hawkins  to
Guinea  and  the  West  Indies  in
(1567-1568)  x.  64;  in  a  storm  near
Florida  (1568)  67;  in  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  attacked  by  Spaniards
(1568)  71;  lent  by  Queen  Eliza-
beth to  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1564)
XII.  48 ; taken  at  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa,

50.
Jewels,  trade  in  Pegu,  v.  434,  443 ;

Orenoqueponi  buried  with  their,  x.

424.
Jews, expelled from Castile (1527)

II. 173; in Venice (1581) v.

204.
Jeza,  nation  of  Tartars,  xi.  441 ; de-
scription of, 442.
Joala, near Palmerin, products of,

VII.  90; Thomas  Dassel  in  (1591)

92,  95 ; trade  in,  98.
Joan,  Richard  I.'s  sister.  Queen  of

Sicily  (1190)  IV. 322; in  Cyprus,

328,  329; in  Acre,  333.
Job, land of, named Uz, iv. 410;

manna  found  in,  411.
Jocasta,  daughter  of  Creon,  iv.  72,

174.
Jocoel  Lamiockerie,  King  of  Joala,

VII.  95.
John,  King  of  England,  I.  49; and

Ireland,  34 ; and  the  charter,  294 ;

grants safe conduct to foreign

merchants, 319 f.  ; and Philip

King  of  France  (1193)  iv.  335; in

England, 337.
John  I.  of  Portugal  and  the  conquest

of  Ceuta  (1415)  VI.  121.
John II., King of Castile, and

Madeira (1417) vi. 120.

INDEX

John  II.,  King  of  France,  and  Ed-
ward III.,  I.  300.

John  II.,  King-  of  Portugal,  embassy
to  Edward  IV.  (1481)  vi.  123;  life,
by  Gracias  de  Resende,  vi.  123.

John  III.,  King  of  Portugal,  letter
from  Henry  VIII.  (1527)  v.  63;
and  Luis  de  Melo's  licence  to  ex-
plore the  Maranon,  xi.  242.

John  XVIII.,  Pope,  and  King
Canute,  i.  313  f.

John  XXII.,  Pope,  and  Friar
Odoric's intended visit to (1331)

IV.  443-

John,  Prester,  King  of  Ethiopia,  vi.

144, 168 ; different names, 169 ;

and  the  Ethiopians, vin. 106.
John  a  Tieflen,  thirty-second  master

of the Dutch knights (1489) il.

10.
John,  Captain  Don,  and  the  English

merchants at Cape Corea (1555)

VI. 160; death  (1562)  260.
John, Don,  and  the  Turks  at  Lep-

anto,  VI. no.
John, interpreter of Sir Walter

Raleigh, and  his  account  of  the

headless  men  (1586)  x.  465.
John  of  Ascoli,  captain,  made  slave

at  Famagusta  (1571)  v. 151.
John  of  Istria,  captain,  wounded  at

Famagusta  (1571)  v. 137; made

slave,  V.  151.
John,  of  Nantes,  punished  by  Rober-

val  in  France-Roy  Fort  (1542)  viii.

286.
John, Prince  Don,  and  the  sons  of

Christopher  Columbus  (1494)  vii.

140.
John,  son  of  Dugall,  at  Roghalwaht,

I.  40.
John, son of Ivan Vasiliwich, 11.

189.
John, son of Janus of Lusignan,

King  of  Cyprus  (1470)  v. 125.
John,  the  Greek,  chief  boatman  of

Sir  Francis  Drake  (1578)  xi. 139.
John  Antonio,  of  Piacenza,  captain,

made  slave  at Famagusta  (1571)

V.  151.

John  Kaleta,  son  of  Daniel,  11. 187.
John Maria, of Verona, captain,

made  slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)

V.  152.
XII

John  of  London,  the,  in  Guiana,  xi.
10, 15.

John  Baptist,  the,  of  London,  and
the  proposed  voyage  to  Guinea
(1564)  VI.  262 ;  bound  for  Guinea
(1564)  X.  g; lost  in  a  storm,  10.

John  Evangelist,  the  (1557)  11.  375,
413,  425 ;  letters  from  the  Mus-
covy Company  sent  in,  379  ;  Laur-
ence Roundal,  master,  380.

John  Evangelist,  the,  and  the  second
voyage  to  Guinea  (1554)  vi.  155.

John  Evangelist,  the,  of  John
White's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1590)
VIII.  406 ;  at  Cape  Tiburon,  409 ;
and  the  S.  Domingo  fleet,  420.

John  Thomas,  the.  Sir  Francis
Drake's  ship,  wrecked  hull  of,
found  by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)
XI. 298.

John  and  Francis,  the,  of  London,
of  the  Cadiz  expedition,  captures
by  (1596)  IV.  243.

John  Luis  or  John  Alvarez  Island,
latitude  of,  x.  334 ;  distance  from
Flores,  337.

Johnson,  Neales,  killed  by  Indians
on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi. 318.

Johnson,  Nicholas  and  Henry,
settlers  in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.
402.

Johnson,  Richard,  account  of  the
Samoyedes,  i.  xliv.,  11.  213,  377,
401 ;  merchant  in  Russia  (1555)
291;  on  the  discovery  of  Vaigach
and  Nova  Zembla  (1556)  345-349;
at  Novgorod  (1557)  392;  Anthony
Jenkinson  and,  400,  449,  476,  iii.
14;  on  the  road  between  Russia
and  Cathay,  11.  480-482 ; sales  by,

III.  42 ;  his  voyage  to  Persia,  43-
47 ;  his  reception  by  the  King  of
Shirvan  or  Hircania,  47 ;  dis-
honesty of,  52  ;  carelessness  of,  59.

Johnson,  Richard,  survivor  of  the
Toby  (1593)  VII.  129.

Johnson,  Robert,  and  Anthony  Jen-
kinson, II.  400,  449,  476.

Jollobert,  see  Salobert.

jolly,  John,  of  Blakeney,  sea-
captain,  II.  X03.

Jonas,  son  of  Augmundus,  first
bishop  of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1106)

IV.  54, 152.

281  T

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Jonas, son of Ericus, fourteenth
bishop  of  Holen  in  Iceland  (1358)

IV.  56, 154-
Jonas, son of Indrid, thirteenth

bishop of Schalholt, in Iceland

(1339)  IV. 56,_  154.
Jonas,  son  of  Sig"uardus,  fourteenth

bishop of Schalholt, in Iceland

(1343)  IV.  56.  154-
Jonas, Arngrinius, commentary on

Iceland  by, iv. 1-88,  89-144.
Jonas,  Gislaus,  twenty-ninth  bishop

of  Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1556)  iv.

59. 158.
Jonas, the, of Sir John Hawkins'

fleet  (1562)  X.  7.
Jones,  captain  in  the  Darling  in  Sir

Amyas  de  Preston's  voyage  (1595)

X.  213; secret  mission  and  death

of  (1595)  225.
Jones, Griff  en, settler in Virginia

(1587) VIII. 403.
Jones, John and Jane, settlers in

Virginia  (1587) viii. 402, 403.
Jones, Lieutenant, in Sir Francis

Drake's  fleet,  killed  at  Nombre  de

Dios (i_S95)  X, 237.
Jones,  Philip,  John  Newbery's  friend

(1583)  V.  453.
Jones,  Philip,  and  the  fight  of  Pan-

talleria (1586) vi. 46; master  of

the Christopher, in William

Towerson's third voyage (1577)

VI.  250.
Jones, Rice, owner of the Grace

(1594) VIII. 162.
Joppa,  see  Jaffa.
Jordan,  river,  in  Palestine,  viii.  102  ;

John  Eldred  at  (c. 1587)  vi.  9.
Jordan,  river,  in  Florida,  viii.  461.
Joritono,  Prince,  hunting  and  hawk-
ing by,  XI.  429.
Joseph, Envoy from Harold, King

of  Man,  to  Loglen,  i.  39.
Joseph, son of Jacob, storehouses

founded by, v. 338; in Cairo

(1587)  VI.  37; house,  45.
Josephus, on the Ivory Gate, vi.

166; on  Meroe  Island,  168.
Joshua, leader of the Jews, viii.

102.
Josias,  captain  of  the  Delight,  death

of  (1596)  X.  240.
Joughoria,  see  Ugoria.

Jourdain, Sylvester, '  Discovery of

the  Bermudas,'  etc.,  by  (1610)  xii.

112.
'  Journal of King Richard,' by

Richard  of  Devizes  (1200)  iv.  344.
Joy,  gentleman  of  the  King's  chapel,

voyage  in  the  Minion  (1536)  viii.

3-
Joy,  Cape  of,  named  by  Sir  Francis
Drake, the Christopher found  at
(1578) XI. 107; John Winter  at,

153-

Joy,  Cape,  latitude  of,  xi.  349,  356 ;
anchorage,  371.

Juan  III.,  see  John  III.

Juan,  Don,  nephew  of  King  More-
quito,  christened  by  the  Spaniards,
X.  376 ;  or  Eparacano,  nephew  of
Topiawari,  christened,  412  ;  cousin
of  Gualtero,  chief  of  the  Indians
(1596)  469,  471.

Juan  Griego,  Puerto  de,  latitude
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.
287.

Juana Creos, Stephen Borough at

(1557)  II-  370.

Juba,  and  the  two  dogs  in  the
Canaries,  vi. 126.

Juca,  root,  description  of,  xi.  240.

Judaea,  viii.  384;  in  Thome's  map,
II.  171.

Judah,  leader  of  the  Jews'  army,
VIII. 103.

Judaria,  see  Ghetto.

Judde,  Richard,  merchant  In  Russia
(1555)  II.  291.

Judde,  Sir  Andrew,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307,  362,
392  ;  joint  owner  of  the  Primrose
and  the  John  Evangelist  (1557)
378,  392 ;  and  the  discovery  of
Cathay  (1553)  m.  331;  and  the
elephant's  head,  vi.  164.

Judea,  see  Judasa.

Judeo, castle, in Rhodes (1522) v.

15-

Judeo,  Point  del,  in  Cartagena  har-
bour, mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.
290.

Judge,  dignity  of  third  estate  in
Japan,  vi.  330.

Judges,  Russian,  11.  263;  Turkish,
and  English  and  Turkish  mer-
chants' controversies  (1580)  v.  187.

INDEX

Judith,  the,  of  London,  Romadan
Pasha  and  (1584)  v.  281.

Judith,  the,  of  Captain  Frobisher's
third  voyage  to  Meta  Incognita
(1578)  VII.  233,  238;  lieutenant-
general,  Edward  Fenton,  captain
of  (1578)  322; missing,  329.

Judith,  the,  of  Sir  John  Hawkins'
fleet  (1567)  IX.  398,  445  ;  escape  of,
in  the  fight  with  the  Spaniards
and  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)  ix.
407,  X.  72  ;  at  Sierra  Leone  (1568)
447 ;  at  Riohacha,  449 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake  in,  in  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1568)  454,  XII.  48,  50.

Juell,  the.  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  X.  227.

Jug,  see  Yug.

Jugman,  master  of  the  George  (1580)

III.  291.

Jugoria,  or  Yuhra,  see  Ugoria.

Jugures,  the,  i.  285-291.

Julian  and  the  heresy  of  Pelagius,

IV.  277.

Juliers, Earl of, against Russian

infidels  (1262)  11.  3.
Jumanos  Indians,  description  of,  and

Antonio de Espejo's expedition

(1582)  IX. 190.

Jumna, Ralph Fitch on the river

(1583)  V. 475; tributary of the
Ganges,  476.

Junan,  see  Yunnan.

Juncales,  Los,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier  for  river  Plate,  xi.  99.

Junco,  a  Moorish  bark,  vi.  394.

Jungingen,  Conrad  de,  twenty-
second  master  of  the  Dutch
knights,  II.  7,  25,  27,  36,  37,  38.
41,  47,  83,  87,  91.

Jungingen,  Ulricus  de,  twenty-third
master  of  the  Dutch  knights  (1407)
II.  7,  91,  95,  98.

Junkseylon,  kingdom  of,  latitude,  vi.
399 ; Ralph Fitch  near  (c. 1583)

V.  498.

Junsalaom,  see  Junkseylon.
Jupiter's  statue,  by  Phidias,  v. 119.
Juramentum,  see  Oath.
Jurassus  Mountain,  oil  fountain  in,

IV.  38, 133.
Jury,  Jewry,  see  Ghetto.
Jury  in merchants' trials, Edward

I.'s charter, 1, 335.

Justice  in  Eire  or  Itinerant,  i.  44 ;
speedy,  Edward  I.'s  charter  on,
336,  355 ;  to  merchants  in  Prussia,
II.  54;  in  Russia,  administration
of,  233-235,  411.

Justiciars,  twelve  chosen  by  William
Obray, governor,  11. 151, 157.

Justine,  lib.  4,  on  Sicilia  and  Cala-
bria, VII.  161.

Justinian,  Emperor,  King  of  the
Franks'  embassy  to,  iv.  278.

Justus,  Bishop,  I.  309.

Jutland, and Octher, i. 14.

Kadac,  principal  agent  for  Kaiuk's

empire,  i. 176.
Kaermarthen,  see  Carmarthen.
Kaffraria,  on  the  coast  of  Ethiopia,

V.  444.
Kait Castle, subject to Saramet

Sultan,  II.  465.
Kaiuk, Oktai's  son,  i. 73, 74, 88,

150; papal  legates  at  his court,

165,  169,  173 ;  his  coronation,  171;

character, 172 ; seal,  173 ; dislike

of Christianity, 173 ; defies the

western  countries, 176.
Kalor, kingdom of, gourds or

pompions  in  the, iv. 435.
Kama,  river,  11.  452.
Kameni Carawool or watch, 120

versts  from  Peravolok,  iii.  217.
Kampen, restitution of losses de-
manded from  England  by,  11.  36.
Kangittae,  see  Cangle,  people  of.
Kanutus,  see  Canute.
Kapei  Mountains,  in  Kalor,  iv.  435.
Kara-Kalmucks, nation of  Cathay,

III.  456; land  of,  II.  458.
Kara-Catay, see  Cathay.
Kara  Kithay,  see  Cathay.
Kara  Kytai,  see  Cathay.
Karamania,  v.  129 ;  Turkish  soldiers

from,  at  the  siege  of  Famagusta,

148; Pasha  of, 148, 152; in  the

Hungarian-Turkish  war,  vi. 104;

Beglerbeg of, his pay, 61 ; his

retinue,  67.
Kara  moron,  see  Hwang-ho.
Karanites,  and  Jenghiz  Khan,  i.  70,

86, 144.
Kara Reca, in. 120; in Ugoria,

435-

283

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Karavitae,  see  Karanites.

Karavoran  river,  see  Hwang-ho.

Kardife,  see  Cardifif.

Karelia,  King  Arthur  at,  i.  6;  in-
habited by  Kerilli  or  Karelians,  ii.
346 ; iron  at,  iii.  369.

Karsies,  see  Kerseys.

Katharine,  Regent  of  Castile  and
Madeira  (1417)  vi.  120.

Kazan,  Emperor  of  the  East  Tartars,
Pachymerius  on,  in.  398.

Kazan,  subdued  by  Russia,  11.  igo;
by  Tartars,  451;  latitude,  479;
three  princes  formerly  emperors
of,  at  the  Russian  court,  420,  427,
450,  451 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,
II.  478,  III.  36,  196 ;  inferiority  of
goods  made  in,  66;  Moscow  to,
69;  English  trade  in,  93,  95,  109;
English  merchants  at,  156  {1579)
215;  customs  at,  and  English
merchants,  in,  112,  182,  190;
spice  market  at,  140 ;  Geoffrey
Ducket  at,  154 ;  William  Turnbull
at,  246 ;  garrison  of,  337 ;  king-
dom of,  conquered  by  Russia,  359,
3S7;  best  martens  found  in,  365;
city  of,  370 ;  strong  town  of
Russia,  373 ;  province  of.  Friar
Odoric  in,  iv.  436.

Kazanka  reca,  at  Kazan,  11.  451.

Kazvin,  in.  23;  Sophi's  court  at,
26;  Anthony  Jenkinson  leaves,  32 ;
chief  city  of  Persia,  35  ;  Thomas
Alcock  at,  41 ;  Arthur  Edwards  at,
52,  54.  59.  137.  143;  ffom  Ormuz
to,  six  weeks'  travel,  58;  five  days'
journey  to  Gilan,  61 ;  English
trade  in,  109;  English  mer-
chants in,  117;  Shah  Thomas'  re-
ception of  Thomas  Banister  in,
152  ; residence  of  the  Shah, 158.

Keats,  xii. 107, 118.

Kedilwike  Chapel,  Stephen  Borough
at,  II.  325.

Keele,  John,  captain  of  a  ship,  v.
218,  219.

Keezcyur,  carawool  or  watch,  fifty
versts  from  Ichkebre,  in.  217.

Kegor,  n.  .^16 ;  Stephen  Borough
and  (1557)  371,  372,  374,  375;
Dutch  trade  in,  373;  S.  Nicholas
to,  in.  69;  William  Borough  on,
203 ; market at, 205 ; Charles

Jackman at (1580) 284; Arthur

Pet  at,  299 ;  Lapp  fishing  at,  404.
Kelborne, Edward, death of, in

Roanoke  (1590)  viii.  416.
Kelly, Edward, in Virginia (1585)

vin.  318; death  of  (1590)  416.
Kelly, John, of the Sunshine of

London  (1585)  vii.  382.
Kelly,  Richard,  of  the  Command,  at

Porto d'Ally, vii. 94; treachery

of, VII. 95.
Kemme,  Richard,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.
Kempe, William, on the Edward

Bonaventure  (1553)  n.  213.
Kenchat,  arrival  of  Rubruquis  at,  i.

282.
Kendal,  captain  of  the  bark  Dennis

(1578)  vn.  322.
Kendal, Abraham, master of the

Merchant Royal (1591) vi. 390;

and  John  Segar  (c. 1593)  402.
Kendall,  Abraham,  ship's  master  of

Sir  Francis  Drake,  left  with  Ralph

Lane  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.  317,

344-
Kendall, Abraham, master of Sir

Robert Dudley's ship, the Bear

(1595)  X.  205.
Kendall, Abraham, on the Saker,

death  of  (1596)  x.  241.
Kene Island, Arthur Pet  at  (1580)

in.  282.
Kenel  of  Limehouse,  captain  of  the

Cantar of Weymouth (1592) x.

193-
Kenitsma,  salt  pits  in,  in.  368.
Ken-Khan  and  the  Christians,  i.  266,

267 ; the  King  of  France's  mes-
sengers and,  273.
Kenrick's  or  Kindriker's  Mount,  in

Roanoke  Island,  viii.  414,  419.
Kent,  I.  8  ;  bailiff  of.  King  John  and,

320.
Kerbie, Thomas, quartermaster  on

the Bona Confidentia (1553) il.

214.
Kergis,  see  Kirghiz.
Kerilli,  see  Karelians.
Keril's brother, and the Muscovy

Company,  n.  394.
Kerils,  see  Karelians.
Kerkis, see  Kirghiz.
Kerpen, Otto  of, second  master  of

584

INDEX

the  Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem
(1200)  11.  I.

Kerry,  John,  master  of  the  Lion
(1552)  VI.  138.

Kerseys,  customs  on  (1407)  11.  75;
sale  of,  409,  463,  471,  473,  478;
for  Persian  markets,  iii.  10,  12,
45 ;  sale  of,  17,  50 ;  red  coloured,
5S>  66;  good  quality  of,  61;  for
export,  90;  bartered  at  Ardouil,
137 ;  at  Tiflis,  138 ;  bought  by  the
Shah  of  Persia,  152 ;  customs  on,
imposed  by  the  Pasha  of  Derbent,
230;  English,  for  Levant  trade,
V.  62;  sale  in  Chios  (1569)  113,
116;  sale  of,  abroad  (1582)  230,
23S;  sold  in  Cairo  (1584)  273;
sold  in  the  Canaries,  xi. 27.

Kersis,  see  Kirghiz.

Kersova,  St.  Clement's  martyrdom
in,  I,  230; castles  near,  233.

Keselbach,  or  Jeselbach,  iii.  42.

Keshan,  iii.  35,  51.

Ketcheman,  Edward,  in  Virginia
(1585)  yiii.  318.

Ketenensis,  see  Robert  de  Ketene.

Ketillus  or  Catullus,  second  bishop
of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1122)  iv.  54,
152.

Kettell,  Edward,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viTi.  318.

Kettelwicke  Island,  11.  416.

Kever,  Edward,  merchant  on  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.  214.

Keyes,  John,  condemned  to  galleys
by  Inquisition  in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.
428.

Keymis,  Lawrence  (d.  1618),  captain
of  a  galego,  his  arrival  to  join  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  353;  of
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  expedition
up  the  Capuri  river  (1595)  380;
sent  to  Cumaca  river  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  417-421;
second  voyage  to  Guiana  by
(1596)  441-501;  his  dedication
to  Thomas  Harlot  (1595)  151;
Cape  Cecil  named  by,  454 ;
rivers  mentioned  by,  454 ;  Howard
Port  named  by,  458  ;  rivers  sighted
by.  459;  at  Topiawari's  Port,  466;
Carapana's  envoy  and,  471  f.,
475 ;  urging  England  to  the  con-
quest of  Guiana  (1596)  481.

Khan,  Great,  of  Cathay,  m.  410;
in  Caido  (1330)  iv.  430;  at
Pekin,  441 ;  his  court,  magnifi-
cence, hunting,  431-433-

Kholmogory,  fur  market  in,  11.  225.
262  f.,  276;  William,  Muscovy
Company's  cook,  drowned  at,  291 ;
English  merchants'  headquarters
at,  294,  320;  Stephen  Borough,
344,  362,  372,  375,  390;  goods
stolen  at  (1557)  389;  Henry  Lane,
agent  at,  392  ;  tar  and  rope  works
at,  393 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,
418,  479;  Osep  Napea  at,  425;
latitude  of,  479;  English  house
allowed  the  Muscovy  Company  at,
III.  13,  247,  351,  443;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson at,iii.38,i7i,i85,i94;  from
S.  Nicholas  Bay  to,  68,  73 ;  wares
from,  So;  English  trade  in,  93,
95,  109  ;  English  trade  in,  restricted
to  the  Muscovy  Company,  97  ;  de-
scription of,  103 ;  arrival  of  the
Searchthrift  at  (1556)  122 ;  Mus-
covy Company  seek  a  market  at
(1572)  182  ;  sixth  Persian  expedi-
tion of  Muscovy  Company  leaves
(1579)  215;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  at
(1583)  316; the  Dvina  at,  406.

Khorassan,  province  of  Persia,  in.
35 ;  conquered  by  the  Sultan,  11.
462.

Kiang-si,  sixth  shire  in  China,  vi.
296,  350 ; porcelain  made  in,  356.

Kidgil,  Henry,  captain  of  the  Virgin
(1591)  x.  184.  _

Kiev,  metropolis  of  Russia,  i.
76,  160;  John  de  Piano  Carpini
in,  94;  Tartars  in,  152;  papal
legates  guided  to,  179 ;  residence
of  Vladimir  Monomachos,  11. 185.

Kildina  Island,  or  Cape  Comfort,
and Stephen Borough (1557) li.

371-

Killegrew,  William,  Sir  Francis
Godolphin's  account  of  Sir  Richard
Grenville's  death,  sent  to  (1591)
VII.  44.

Klllegrue,  see  Killegrew.

Killingworth,  George,  and  Queen
Mary's  letters  (1555)  11.  280;  agent
for  the  Muscovy  Company,  281,
384,  in.  332 ;  letter  of,  on  the
second  voyage  (1555)  11.  291 ;  letter

^85

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  (1557)  379.  392;  Sir  Hugh  WIl-
loughby's  remains  sent  to  Eng-
land by  (1555)  III.  333.

Kinderslye,  see  Kinersley.

Kindry,  meaning  of,  iii.  340.

Kinersley,  Matthew,  captain  of  the
Michael  (1576)  vii.  204,  (1578)  233,
322;  on  board  the  Aid  (1577)
285.

King,  master  of  the  Lion's  Whelp,
sent  to  Amana  river  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x.  378.

King,  William,  of  the  expedition  to
Guinea  (1556)  vi.  211.

King,  William,  master  of  the  Con-
tent (1591)  X.  183;  voyage  of,  to
Mexico  Bay  (1592) 190-193.

King  Road,  near  Bristol,  vi. 138.

Kingman,  William,  of  the  Desire,
killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Kingsnod,  Roger,  pilot  of  the  Dog,
killed by the Spanish (1589) x.

.157-

King's  Lynn,  Norfolk,  ships  from,
in  Edward  lll.'s  fleet,  i.  299;  and
the  Iceland  trade,  303  f.  ;  and  the
customs,  355  ;  ships  and  merchants
from  (1394)  II.  67,  69-71;  restitu-
tion of  losses  demanded  by  Ham-
burg from,  35,  36.

King's  ships  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,
I.  297.

Kingston  upon  Hull,  see  Hull.

Kington,  John,  ambassador  to
Prussia,  11.  27,  28,  30,  47,  55,  59,
79,  84,  85,  87,  91,  98,  106.

Kingtse,  viii.  129.

Kinnersley,  see  Kinersley.

Kinstut,  King  of  the  Lithuanians,
prisoner  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
6  f.

Kio,  ruler  in  South  Russia,  in,  357.

Kiov,  see  Kiev.

Kiow,  see  Kiev.

Kire,  John,  and  William  Towerson
(1557)  VI.  223.

Kirghiz,  the  land  of,  i.  72,  77,  86,
242 ;  Jenghiz  Khan  and,  148 ;
Oktai  Khan  and,  153 ;  and  the
Tartars,  261  ; and  Sartach,  269.

Kiriach,  Morsey,  nephew  of  the  Em-
peror of  Crim  Tartars,  in.  395.

Kirkwall,  chief  town  of  Orkney,  vii.
287.

Kisel  Pashas,  aristocracy  of  Persia,
in.  235.

Kitchin,  Alexander,  his  voyage  to
Persia  (1565)  iii.  44,  46;  death  of,
48.

Kitchin,  Rainold,  unlicensed  Eng-
lish merchant  in  Russia,  in.  426,

433-

Kithai,  see  Cathay.

Kittay,  see  Cathay.

Kitthay,  see  Cathay.

Klaingus,  fifth  bishop  of  Schalholt,
in  Iceland  (1152)  iv.  54, 153.

Knesvolt,  Thederic,  secretary  of  the
Hanse  league,  11.  55,  59.

Knevett,  Sir  Henry,  i.  xxi.  ;  am-
bassador to  Charles  V. (1541)  v.

71-

Knight,  Nicholas,  ship's  carpenter
on  the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.
214.

Knightlingsea,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  299.

Knights  of  Rhodes,  Order  of  the,  v.
1-60; mustered  in  aulberge, 11.

Knights'  service  in  Capite,  in.  87.

KnoUes,  Captain  Francis,  rear-
admiral  in  the  galleon  Leicester
^(1585)  x.  98.

Knolles,  Henry,  in  Charles  V. 's  ex-
pedition to  Algiers  (1541)  v.  71.

Knoppenrodt,  Winricus  a,  nineteenth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  n.
6.

Kola,  river,  Stephen  Borough  on
(1556)  n.  326;  latitude  of,  327;
salmon-fishing  in,  374;  English
trade  in,  restricted  to  Muscovy
Company,  in.  97,  116,  203-209;
William  Borough  on,  203 ;  Lapp
fishing  at,  404;  opened  to  French
merchants, 470.

Kolguev  Island,  in.  19 ;  Stephen
Borough  off  (1556)  II.  343,  in.  262  ;
to  Vaigach,  distance  from,  shoals
off, 297 ; Oliver  at, 455.

Konigsberg  in  Prussia,  Prince  of
Prussia's  stronghold,  u,  3,  10;  Sir
Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)  in.  345.

Koningsburgh,  see  Konigsberg.

Koran  (Alcoran,  Alcaron)  n.  183,  v.

345.  365-
Korea,  three  testimonies  concerning,
XI.  422-441 ; distance  from  Pekin,

286

INDEX

423;  Japanese  fleet  at  (1591)  43^;
kingdom  of,  tributary  to  China,
426;  conquered  by  Augustine
Eucunocamindono,  431 ;  descrip-
tion, 432  ;  disorders  in,  437  ;  King
of,  his  flight  from  Augustine
Eucunocamindono,  434.

Korone,  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.  84,
loi ; oil  trade  in, 114.

Kosan  in  Pretegoani,  Friar  Odoric
in  {1330)  IV.  436.

Kostromo,  Moscow  to,  in.  69 ;  Eng-
lish trade  in, 95.

Koumiss,  I.  67,  238  f.,  246,  340;  a
drink  in  Eastland,  16 ;  in  Tartary,
137,  170,  176 ;  a  tribute  to  Tar-
tars, 241 ;  given  to  Rubriquis,  250;
forbidden  to  Christians,  252,  254;
drink  in  Bokhara,  11.  170;  Nag-
ayan  Tartars'  drink,  453,  464;  A.
Jenkinson  drinks,  460,  461.

Krantzius,  Albertus,  '  History  of
Norway  '  by,  11,  68 ;  description  of
Iceland,  iv.  15,  41,  46,  104,  137.

Krio,  Cape,  Turkish  galleys  pass
(1522)  V. 15.

'  Kubla  Khan,'  by  Coleridge,  xii.
106.

Kublai  or  Kubla  Khan's  Court,  de-
scribed by  Friar  Odoric,  iv.  429-
433 ;  described  by  Marco  Polo
and  Odoric,  xii. 13.

Kuchenmeister,  Michael,  twenty-
fifth  master  of  the  Dutch  knights,

II.  8.

Kuhena,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

326.
Kulvio,  river  and  lake,  in.  406.
Kunigsberg,  see  Konigsberg.
Kur,  river  in  Hircania  or  Shirvan,

III.  25.

Kurna  Castle,  at  the  meeting  point

of  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  v.  371.
Kurbski, Simeon Feodorowich, his

account of  northern regions, in.

411.
Kvass,  national  drink  in  Russia,  11.

238,  273,  HI.  415.
Kwang-si,  eighth  shire  of  China,  vi.

296.
Kwei-chou,  inland  province  of  China,

IV.  350,  XI.  379.

Kyoto,  residence  of  the  King  of
Japan,  vi.  331,  335;  Gaspar  Vilela

at, 332 ; Aloisius Froes  at, 346 ;

city in Japan, xi. 423; Quaba-

condono  at  (1591)  429;  meaning  of

name,  435.
Kyrway,  see  Kirkwall.
Kythay,  see  Cathay.

Laaland,  Wolstan  and,  i.  15.

Laban,  see  Labuan.

Labera,  John  de,  of  S.  F^  de  Bogota,
letter  from,  to  Alonso  Sapata  de
Henao  (1590)  x.  174.

Labourers,  use  of,  in  new  countries,
X.  56.

Labrador,  Cape,  vii.  210;  Sebastian
Cabot  (1497)  153;  sea  currents,
167,  168,  169;  Captain  Martin
Frobisher  sights  land  supposed  to
be  (1576)  207;  and  Newfoundland
(1578)  VIII.  14;  Terra  de,  in
America,  450.

Labrodor,  see  Labrador.

Labuan,  one  of  the  Java  Islands,
diamonds  in,  v.  499.

La  Caille,  Francis,  sergeant  of  Cap-
tain Laudonniere,  and  King
Molona  (1564)  ix.  23;  and  Sir
John  Hawkins'  ship,  80.

La  Canela,  Gonsalo  Pizarro  at,  xi.
241.

Laccha,  found  in  Pegu  and  Balag-
hat,  VI.  26.

Laches  or  Polaches,  Poles  called,  iii.

389-
Lachimi  river,  ix. 147.

Lacie,  see  Lacy.

Lacquer,  used  in  Persian  dyes,  in.

La  Croix,  conspiracy  of,  against
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  x.  39;
ensign  of  mutineers,  42.

Lactantius,  Flavins  Constantine,  iv.

275-
Lacy,  Edward,  in  Sir  John  Hawkins'

voyage  to  Florida  (1565)  x.  63.
Lacy,  Henry  de,  third  Earl  of  Lin-
coln, witness  of  Edward  I.'s  great

charter,  i.  338.
Lacy,  Hugh  de,  first  Earl  of  Ulster,

subdues  Ulster  (1204)  i.  33.
Lacy,  James,  in  Virginia  (1585)  viii.

318.
Lacy,  John,  his  voyage  to  Jerusalem

(i"i73)  IV.  310.

287

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Lacy,  Walter  de,  in  Ulster,  i.  34.
Ladd,  John,  gunner,  his  prizes  (1586)

VI.  437-
Ladenum,  see  Laudanum.
Lading  ships,  order  of,  11.  317  f.,  388.
Ladiskaie,  see  Ladoga.
Ladiski,  Vologda  to,  iii.  69.
Ladoga,  lake  of,  in.  79 ; town  and

lake,  79,  81.
Ladrones  Islands,  Isla  del  Enganno,

one  of,  IX.  326 ; products  of,  xi.

327 ; description  of  the  inhabitants

of, 328 ; Thomas Cavendish at,

369-

Lady  of  Holland,  Our,  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  at,  11.  413.

Lady's  Church,  Our,  or  Nuestra
Senora  de  Guadalupe,  near
Mexico,  IX.  419.

Lady's  Hospital,  Our,  in  Mexico,
Anthony  Godard  at  (1568)  ix.  420.

Lagarto,  see  Crocodile.

Lagman,  son  of  Godred  Crovan,  i.
26  f.

Lagman,  son  of  Olaf,  King  of
Man,  I.  30.

Lagoa,  see  Lagos.

Lago  Grande,  distance  from  Negroes
Island,  XI.  364;  Thomas  Caven-
dish at,  370; anchorage,  373.

Lagos, town  in Guinea, vi. 228.

Lagos,  Rio  de,  French  ship  at,  vi.
240;  James  Welsh  at  (1589)  453;
the  Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1590)
464.

Lagova,  see  Lagos.

La  Grange,  and  the  accusations
against  Captain  Laudonniere
(1565)  IX.  86;  his  advice  on  the
Spanish  ships  in  Florida  (1565)  x.
90 ; servant  of, in  Florida, 93.

Lagrita, in  Granada,  x.  363.

Lagua,  Laguoa,  see  Lagos.

Laguna,  in  Teneriffe,  seat  of  the
governor  of  the  island,  vi.  131 ;
Robert  Tomson  at  (1555)  ix.  341.

Laguna,  in  Hispaniola,  Captain
Lancaster  at  (1593)  x.  199;  Cap-
tain de  la  Barbotiere  leaves,  200 ;
town  and  bay,  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton at  (1595)  225.

Laguna,  la,  or  haven  of  Biaza,  men-
tioned in  Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.
84,  96.

Lahore,  John  Newbery's  journey  to

(1585)  V.  474; spikenard  found  in,

VI.  25.
Laighon, Laurence Chapman at

(1568)  III.  141.
Lake,  great,  above  the  falls  of  the

Saguenay  river,  viii.  272; great,

in  China,  xi.  380.
Lakenswither, Henry,  of  York  and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.
Lakes, John, master of  the  Moon

(1578)  VII.  351.
Lakes, Russian, in. 362 ; in New-
foundland, VIII.  13,  59; discovered

by  Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  245 ; in

Florida,  426.
Lakingay,  John,  of  Lynn,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  69,  70.
Lakinglich,  John,  see  Lakingay.
Lamb, Charles, and the English

drama,  xii.  94.
Lambarde,  William  (d. 1618)  i.  43;

his '  Archaionomia  ' (1568)  li. 5 ;

his '  Perambulation of Kent  '

(1570)  Ivi.
Lambart  or  Lambert, Nicholas, in

Benin  (1553)  vi.  148,  151.
Lambert, Francis, and the Chios

trade,  v.  115.
Lambert, Francis, and the second

voyage  to  Barbary  (1552)  vi. 138.
Lambert, Sir Oliver, knighted at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.
Lambolt, Henry, and the English

ship,  II.  69.
Lammori,  customs  of  the  people  of,

IV.  416.
La  Mocha,  see  Mocha.
Lampadola,  island  of  Tunis,  vi.  143.
Lampas. 11. 394; walrus teeth

market, 225, 263 ; fur  trade in,

276; fair to barter wares, 346;

Richard  Gray  at  (1558)  396;  Khol-

mogory  to,  in.  70.
Lampedo,  Queen  of  the  Amazons,  x.

367.

Lancaster,  Henry,  Duke  of,  see
Henry  IV.

Lancaster,  Sir  James,  his  voyage  to
the  East  Indies,  i.  Ixxi,  (1591-
1594)  yi-  387.  407.  X.  194,  xn.  67 ;
Captain  of  the  Edward  Bonaven-
ture  (1591)  V.  390;  in  Malacca
(1592)  396; ship  captured  by,  398;

INDEX

in  Mona  Island  (1593)  405 ;  on  the
Luisa  of  Dieppe  (1593)  vi.  406;  on
the  ship  of  John  la  Noe  of  Dieppe
(1593)  407;  meets  Captain  de  la
Barbotiere,  x.  198;  voyage  of,  to
Brazil  (1594)  xi.  43-64;  at  the
siege  of  Pernambuco  (1595)  51 ;  his
opinion  of  Portuguese,  55 ;  fight
of  the  Portuguese  with  (1595)  56;
leaves  Pernambuco  (1595)  62.

Lancerot,  Lancerota,  see  Lanzarote.

Lanchin,  King  of  China's  residence
(1567)  V.  406.

Lanciano,  Joseph  of,  captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Lanczut,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
326.

Land,  signs  of,  vi.  384.

Land,  Holy,  see  Jerusalem.

Landeck,  meeting  place  of  Charles
V.  and  Ferdinand,  v.  321.

Landehum  in  Iceland,  iv.  48,  145.

Landfang  at  a  salt  house,  11. 364,

367-
Landman,  David,  master's  mate  in

the  Lion  (1552)  vi.  138.
Landret,  the,  return  of  Miles  Phillips

in  (1582)  IX.  445.
Lands, maps of newly  discovered,

III.  260;  descriptions  of,  261.
Landsberg,  in  Bavaria,  v.  321.
Land's End, Captain Frobisher

near  (1578)  vii.  242.
Lane, Augustine, member of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Lane, Captain, general of Watt's

fleet,  and  William  King  (1592)  x.

193-

Lane,  Colonel,  his  regiment  at  tak-
ing of  Puente  de  Burgos  (1589)  vi.
492;  march  to  Lisbon,  497;
at  the  taking  of  Lisbon,  501.

Lane,  Henry,  merchant  in  Russia
(1555)  11.  291;  Muscovy  Company
and,  379,  380;  agent  to  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1557)  384,  386;  at
Kholmogory,  392 ;  letter  from
Anthony  Jenkinson  to,  400 ;  letter
from  the  Muscovy  Company  to,
401;  his  return  to  England,  409;
on  Russian  justice,  411;  letter  of,
to  Richard  Hakluyt,  ni.  98-100;  at
Antwerp and Amsterdam, 100;

Richard  Uscombe  to,  169;  to
William  Sanderson  (1583)  220-336.

Lane,  Michael,  leaves  Astrakhan
(1581)  III.  245;  unlicensed  English
merchant  in  Russia,  426.

Lane,  Ralph,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  310;  at  Roxo  Bay,  313;  Sir
Richard  Grenville  and,  316;  gover-
nor of  Virginia,  317,  xii.  41 ;  Eng-
lishmen left  in  Virginia  with,  viii.
317  f. ;  letter  to  Richard  Hakluyt,
319;  account  of  the  English  left
in  Virginia  with  (1585-86)  320-
345  ;  Menatonon  and,  about  pearls,
324 ;  conspiracy  against  the  life  of,
338;  Sir  Francis  Drake's  letter
to,  342  ;  and  help,  343,  x.  132  ;  re-
turn with  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1586)
VIII.  345,  X.  133.

Lane,  William,  and  the  Spanish  gal-
leys (1590)  VIII.  409;  his  prize  off
Cape  Tiburon,  410.

Langa,  habits  of  the  people  of,  i.
291 f.

Langeiannes,  see  Jangomes.

Langeland,  Wolstan  and,  i. 15.

Langley,  Edward  de.  Earl  of  Cam-
bridge, and  the  King  of  Armenia
(1386)  IV.  445.

Langlie,  Thomas,  merchant,  on
Cabot's  intended  voyage  (1553)  11.
206 ; on the Bona Confidentia

(1553)  214-
Lango, Isle  of, one  hundred  miles

from  Rhodes,  v.  8 ; Turkish  army

at, 14; Hippocrates' birth-place,

VI. 107.
Langro, Laurence Chapman at

(1568)  III. 141.
Langston,  John,  of  the  Desire,  killed

by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.
Langton, Stephen, Archbishop of

Canterbury  (d.  1228)  i.  49.
Languages,  root  of  the  Turkish  and

Comanian, i. 291 ; Portuguese,

necessary  for  English  merchants,

III.  52  ; similarity  between  Tartar

and  Turkish,  399.
Languyn, province in China, xi.

379-
Lang  worth,  Peter,  master's  mate  of

the  Marigold  (1593)  viii. 157.
Lano  Harbour,  near  Cape  Laurence,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Charles  Leigh  landed  at  (1597)
VIII. 181.

La  Noe,  John,  of  Dieppe  (1594)  vi.
407.

Lanzarota,  one  of  the  Canaries,  be-
longs to  Don  Augustine  de  Her-
rera,  vi.  133,  178;  latitude  of,  134;
the  Lion  at  (1552)  139;  Sir  Richard
Grenville  at  (1585)  viii.  310;
William  King  at  (1592)  x.  190;
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  281 ;
taken  by  the  Turks  (1586)  xi.  204.

I^aonicus,  Chalcacondylas,  '  Turkish
History  '  by,  iii.  397,  398.

Laoynes,  a  people  in  Pekin,  vi,  323;
country of the, near China, vi.

324-

Lapina,  Ostrovo  to,  iii.  81.

Lapis  lazuli,  found  in  Persia  and
Germany,  vi.  27.

Lapland,  11.  345,  416,  in.  460,  461  ;
King  Arthur  and,  i.  6;  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby  and,  11.  212,  224;  his
death  in  (1553)  212,  xii.  22;
Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.  196;
English  trade  to  be  established  in
(1575)  III.  197;  tribute  to  Den-
mark, 204;  to  Sweden,  205;
William  Borough  at  the  discovery
of  .(^557)  2^°;  geographical  de-
scription of,  403.

Laplanders,  subjects  to  the  Emperor
of  Russia,  II.  252,  345;  Stephen
Borough  and  (1557)  368;  fishing
trade  of  the,  374;  untrustworthi-
ness  of  the,  375 ;  fishers  and
hunters,  417;  Giles  Fletcher  on,
III.  403-405.

Lappia,  see  Lapland.

Lappians,  see  Laplanders.

Lara,  Don  Diego  Ordonez  de,  of
Salamanca,  lieutenant  of  the
governor of Popayan (1590) x.

174-

Laras,  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Larbe,  language  of  Morocco,  vi.
288.

Large,  Roger,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Larine,  money  of  Bussorah,  vi.  12  ;
of  Ormuz,  14;  of  Goa,  19;  of
Malacca,  22.

La  Roche,  see  Roberval.

La  Roche  Ferriere,  sent  to  King
Utina  by  Captain  Laudonniere,  x.

37-

La  Roquette,  conspiracy  of,  against
Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)  x.  35.

Larotava  in  Teneriffe,  vi. 130,  131.

Las  Casas,  Bartholomew  de,  Span-
ish bishop  in  the  West  Indies,  vii.
52  ;  '  Spanish  Cruelties  '  by,  53  ;
work  of, in Spanish Indies, xii.

34-
Lasie, James, settler in Virginia

(1587) VIII. 403.

Lassaija,  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg
of,  VI.  67.

Lassie,  William,  cook's  mate  on  the
Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.  214.

Lasso,  Rodorigo  de,  prisoner  in  Ire-
land (1588)  IV.  232.

Latham,  Randall,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 318.

Latherelio,  captain  of  the  ships  of
Chili in Strait of Magellan, xi.

259-

Latin  spoken  in  Frisland  (c.  1380)
vn.  447,  455.

Latitude,  English  discoverers  ad-
vised to  note  the  (1588)  in.  122,
260.

Latitudes,  Robert  Thorne  on,  11.
167;  of  certain  principal  places  in
Russia  and  other  regions,  479;
taken  by  Captain  Frobisher  (1577)
VII.  316.

Latma  Castle, near  Alexandria, v.

333-

Latton  found  in  China,  vi.  26.

Lauandote,  Adam  de,  pilot  of  the
Maria  of  S.  Vincent  (1597)  viii.
174.

Laudanum,  found  in  Cyprus  and
Crete,  vi.  27.

Laude,  Monte  de,  xi.  79.

Laudonniere,  Captain  Ren^,  relation
of  voyages  by,  viii.  439 ;  and
Admiral  de  Chatillon  (1587)  440;
preface  by,  446 ;  description  of
Florida  by,  448;  and  the  Indian
language,  466 ;  and  Captain  Salles
in  Florida  (1587)  471;  his  second
voyage  to  Florida  (1564)  ix.  i-
100 ;  lands  in  Florida,  5 ;  his  plan
of  settling  in  Florida,  14;  in  Vale
of  Laudonniere,  ix.  16;  Fort  Caro-

290

INDEX

line  built  in,  17 ;  and  King  Sat-
ourioua  (1564)  26,  52 ;  damage
caused  by  lightning,  31;  con-
spiracy of  La  Roquette  and  Le
Genre  against,  35;  illness  of  (1564)
36,  88 ;  La  Roche  Ferriere  sent  to
King  Utina  by,  37 ;  second  illness
of,  and  mutiny  in  Fort  Caroline
(1564)  41 ;  prisoner  of  the  muti-
neers, 42  ;  speech  by,  46 ;  his  treat-
ment of  mutineers,  47;  portrait  of,
48;  King  Audusta  and  (1565)
53 ;  and  the  widow  of  King
Hiocaia,  53;  and  King  Utina,  55,
64 ;  distressed  for  food  in  Fort
Caroline  (1565)  59;  finds  food  at
Enecaque  (1565)  67;  and  the  libera-
tion of  King  Utina,  69 ;  his  regret
at  forsaking  Florida  (1565)  76;  and
Sir  John  Hawkins'  ship  (1565)  80;
slander  against,  83  ;  his  meeting
with  Captain  Ribault,  84 ;  accusa-
tions against,  and  his  answer  to
them  (1565)  86;  men  left  with,  by
Captain  Ribault  93 ;  escape  of,
from  the  Spaniards  (1565)  95;
rescued  in  the  Greyhound,  97;
leaves  Fort  Caroline  (1565)  97 ;  in
S.  George's  Channel,  98;  in  Wales
and  England  (1565)  99;  in  France,
99 ;  his  reception  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  at  the  French  Fort  (1565)
X.  53 ;  kindness  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  to  (1565)  55  ;  his  account
of  Florida,  translated  by  Hakluyt
(1587)  xii.  87.

Laurence,  the  elect  of  Man,  i.  39.

Laurence,  eleventh  bishop  of  Holen,
in  Iceland  (1324)  iv.  55,  154.

Laurence,  Captain,  captures  Stephen
Van  Herwick  and  the  Hopewell
(1597)  viii. 177.

Laurence,  Margaret,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII.  403.  ^

Laurence,  Nicholas,  mariner  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
214.

Laurence,  Simon,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  88.

Laurence,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78^.

Laurence,  Cape,  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  vm. 182.

Lautiscia,  see  Massovia.

Lavanderas  river,  near  Panama,  x.

149.
Lavers, trade  of, in Guinea (1577)

VI.  252.
Lavon,  wife  of  Olaf,  son  of  Godred,

I-  35-

Lawrence,  Simon,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Laws,  Saxon,  for  the  advancement
of  merchants,  i.  312;  English,
and  the  Muscovy  Company,  11.
311 ;  administered  to  the  Muscovy
Company  in  Russia,  iii.  96,  353 ;
severity  of  Persian,  161 ;  Russian,
in  time  of  plague,  172  ;  unwritten,
of  the  Tartars,  401 ;  of  the  Sapies,
X.  19  f. ;  of  Corea,  xi.  433 ;  of
Japan,  439.

Layes,  John,  distress  of,  at  Port  De-
sire (1592)  XI.  399.

Layland, see Laaland.

Leach,  James,  master  of  the  Em-
manuel of  Bridgwater,  in  Captain
Frobisher's  third  voyage  to  Meta
Incognita  (1578)  vii.  243.

Lead,  mine  of  black,  discovered  by
Captain  Frobisher  (1577)  vii.  296;
mines  of,  in  New  Spain,  ix.
388.

League,  between  England  and  Prus-
sia, projected  (1408)  11.  97;  be-
tween Russia  and  England,  dis-
cussion of  (1583)  III.  467-483;
commercial,  between  England  and
Turkey  (1580)  v.  178,  183,  226;
Turkish,  against  English  ships  in
the  Levant  (1583)  264.

Leaguers,  French,  Spanish  help  to,
against  the  King  of  Navarre
(1590)  VII.  75.

Leake,  member  of  the  Muscovy
Committee,  and  Captain  Carleill
(1583)  yiii.  147.

Leate,  Nicholas,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Leather,  Russian, bought  by  Lithuan-
ians and  Germans,  11.  383 ;  Per-
sian, used  in  Russia,  iii.  417;
Spanish,  made  in  New  Spain
(1572)  IX.  393.

Leauguave,  in  the  Antilles,  Spanish
possession,  ix.  42.

Lebanon,  Mount,  Tripoli  at  the  foot

291

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

of,  VI.  I ;  Sidon  at  the  foot  of,
loS.

Lech,  money  of  Ormuz,  vi.  14.

Leche,  Roger,  EngUsh  merchant  in
Lapland  (1575)  m.  197,  198.

Leckar, see Lacquer.

Lede,  see  Lydd.

Ledet,  Wiscard,  voyage  to  Syria
(1240)  IV.  352.

Ledger  of  Nicolas  Thorne,  mer-
chant, of  Bristol  (c. 1526)  X.  6.

Ledgers compiled by Hakluyt, v.

63-
Ledovo Island, conquered by

Zichmni (c. 1380) vii. 448;

Zichmni's fleet  at, 458.
Lee, Francis, powder-maker  to  the

Queen  (1568)  ix.  445.
Lee,  John,  on  board  the  Aid  (1577)

VII.  285.
Lee,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  11.  217.
Leech, William, discoveries  of, vi.

77-
Leedes  or  Leades,  William,  jeweller,

voyage to East India (1583) v.

465  ; in  Fatehpur,  475.
Le Genevois, Stephen, conspiracy

against Captain Laudonniere

(1564)  X.  39.
Le Genre, accomplice of La

Roquette's conspiracy against

Captain Laudonniere (1564) x.

35-
Leger, or  log-book, to  be  used  in

navigation,  11. 197.
Leghorn,  v.  76, 116,  vii. 124.
Legmame, likeness of the ark in,

v.  345; Mahomet's  tomb  in,  362.
Legnitz,  see  Liegnitz.
Legorno,  see  Leghorn.
Legulxil or monks in Japan, vi.

33i>
Leicester, Robert, Earl of, see

Dudley.

Leicester,  Simon,  Earl  of,  see  Mont-
fort.

Leicester,  the,  of  the  English  fleet
(1588)  IV.  218.

Leicester  Point,  the  Anne  Francis
and  the  Moon  at  (1578)  vii.
350.

Leicester's  Island,  discovered  by
Captain  Frobisher  (1577)  vii.  299.

Leiden,  see  Leyden.

Leigh,  captain  of  the  John  of  Lon-
don, XI.  10,  15.

Leigh,  Charles,  voyage  of,  to
Ramea  (1593)  viii.  162  ;  his  voyage
to  Canada  (1597)  166-182;  and  the
French  ships  (1597)  167;  leaves
Ramea,  171 ;  and  the  Chancewell,
172 ;  exacts  restitution  from
Johannes  de  Harte,  174 ;  detained
by  Johannes  de  Harte,  175  ;  leaves
Cape  Breton,  176;  fights  with  a
Belle  Isle  ship,  178;  returns  home
with  his  prize, 180.

Leigh,  or  Ley,  Dr.,  English  ambas-
sador to  Charles  V.  (c.  1527)  11.
164  f.,  VIII.  I,  X.  3;  quotation
from  the  book  of  Robert  Thorne
to,  VII. 155,  XI.  91.

Leigh,  Francis,  merchant,  lands  at
Cape  Verde  (1567)  vi.  271.

Leigh  or  Lee,  Sir  John,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Leigh,  Sir  Urias,  knighted  at  Cadiz
(1596) IV. 260.

Leinster,  kingdom  of,  in  Ireland,
conquered  by  Strangbow,  viii.
123.

Leitoan,  adopted  name  of  John
Whithall,  in  Brazil  (1578)  xi.  30.

Leiva,  Alonzo  de,  volunteer  with  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Leiva,  Don  Pedro  de,  general  of
the  Spanish  fleet  (1586)  vi.  50;  and
Richard  Rowit  (1586)  53.

Leman,  Reginald,  of  Norwich,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  63.

Lemdrare  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana  river,  x.  459.

Lemerare,  great  river,  x.  494.

Lemnos,  Richard  Wrag  near  (1594)
VI.  107.

Lemond,  Peter,  English  sailor  taken
at  S.  Marta  town  by  Indians
(1595)  X.  236.

Le  Moyne,  James,  map  of  Florida
by,  engraving  of,  ix. 112.

Lende, Ingelram, of  Thorenden, i.

349-

Lenetotes,  John  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  296.

Leneyn  on  the  Hwang-ho,  Friar
Odoric  in  (1330)  iv.  429.

Lenigo,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

292

INDEX

Lenne  or  Linne,  see  King's  Lynn.

Lent,  in  Russia,  ii.  237,  238,  266,
393 ;  time  for  trade,  394 ;  number
of,  423  ;  food  during,  433  ;  Turkish,
V.  340; in  Egypt,  vi.  44.

Leo,  personage  in  the  dialogue
about  China,  vi.  348-377.

Leo  Africanus,  on  Muhaisira,  v.
237 ;  on  Hubbed,  240 ;  on  Darha,
VII.  89 ;  seventh  book  of,  on  Tom-
buto  and  Gago, 102.

Leo,  Joachimus,  German  writer
against  Iceland (1561)  iv. 5, 94.

LeoduS;  see  Lewis.

Leoline,  Roman  senator,  iv.  274.

Leon,  in  West  Indies,  xii.  66.

Leon,  Don  Pedro  poure  de,  and  the
English at Retanzas (1589) vi.

485-
Leon, Juan Ponce  de, governor  of

Puerto  Rico,  in  Florida  (15x2)  xii.

12.
Leonard,  distress  of,  at  Port  Desire

(1592)  XI.  399.
Leonard of Cawe, Master Monax

and  (1597)  XI. II.
Leonard, Sir Henry, knighted at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.
Leones,  Puerto  de  los,  mentioned  in

the  Ruttier,  xi.  86.
Leopards  or  Ounces,  in  Newfound-
land, viii.  57,  59; in  Florida,  451,

X.  59 ; in  Guiana,  426.
Leophares, negroes  of  Cape  Verde

(1564)  X.  15.
Leopold, Duke of Austria, and

Richard I. (1193) iv. 335, 337;

judgment  of  God  on,  338.
Leopolis, in Poland, William  Har-

borne in (1578) v. 168; Henry

Austell  in  (1585)  325.
Lepanto,  Jews  of,  in  debt  to  English

merchants (1584) v. 285; Don

John  and  the  Turks  at,  vi.  no.
Lepers,  i.  255.

Lepin,  Castle  of,  in  Russia,  iii.  408.
Lequeos  Islands  or  Fair  Islands,  ix.

333  ; description  of,  334.
Lesgi,  or  Saracens,  and  the  Tartars,

I.  261.
Lesgi,  mountains  of,  i.  271.
Lesson, Oliver,  servant  to  William

and  Nicholas  Wilford  (c.  1552)  v.

69.

Lethland,  Edward,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

Letis,  John,  of  Cley,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  65.

Letters,  of  Richard  Hakluyt,  dedi-
catory, to  Sir  Francis  Walsing-
ham  (1589)  I.  xvii. ;  dedicatory  to
Lord  Charles  Howard,  first
volume,  second  edition,  xxxi. ;
dedicatory  to  Sir  Robert  Cecil,
second  volume,  second  edition,
Ixiil. ;  dedicatory  to  Sir  Robert
Cecil,  third  volume,  second  edition,
Ixxlv. ;  Henry  III.  to  Haco,  King
of  Norway,  i.  320;  Edward  II.  to
Haco,  King  of  Norway,  first  letter,
339;  second,  343;  third,  344;
Conrad  of  Jungingen  to  Richard
II.  of  England,  11.  25;  to  Henry
IV.  of  England,  44 ;  Chancellor  of
England  to  Conrad  of  Jungingen,
38;  Henry  IV.  of  England  to
Conrad  of  Jungingen,  first  letter,
41 ;  second,  83 ;  to  Ulrich  of
Jungingen,  first  letter,  85 ;  second,
95 ;  Werner  de  Tettingen  to  Sir
William  Esturmy,  85 ;  Ulrich  of
Jungingen  to  Henry  IV.,  91 ;  Ed-
ward IV.  of  England  to  all  Kings
and  Princes  of  the  North-East,
206  ;  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor  of
Russia,  to  Edward  VI.  of  Eng-
land, 271 ;  Philip  and  Mary  to
Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor  of  Rus-
sia, II.  278,  292  ;  George  Killing-
worth  to  the  Muscovy  Company,
291 ;  Muscovy  Company  to  their
agents,  379 ;  second,  401 ;  third,
407;  Thomas  Hawtry  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  292  ;  Richard
Gray  to  Henry  Lane,  394 ;  Thomas
Alcock  to  Richard  Gray  and
Henry  Lane,  396;  Anthony  Jen-
klnson  to  Henry  Lane,  400 ;  Slgis-
mund.  King  of  Poland  (1559)  to
Queen  Elizabeth,  485 ;  Queen
Elizabeth  to  the  Emperor  of
Russia,  III.  I ;  second,  loi ;  third,
422 ;  to  the  Sophi  of  Persia,  6 ;
to  Sir  Jerome  Bowes,  312;  to
Boris  Feodorowich,  428;  to  Murad
Khan  (1579)  V.  171;  second  (1581)
189;  third  (1582)  224;  fourth
(1584) 311; to Alii Pasha, 228;

293

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  Akbar  (Zelabdim  Echebar)
(1583)  450;  to  the  King  of  China,
451;  to  the  Emperor  of  Morocco,
VI.  432  ;  to  the  Emperor  of  Ethi-
opia (1597)  VII.  129;  to  the  Em-
peror of  China  (1596)  xi.  417;
Arthur  Edwards  to  the  Muscovy
Company,  iii.  54 ;  Henry  Lane  to
Richard  Hakluyt,  98  ;  George  Tur-
berville  to  Edward  Dancie,  124;  to
Spencer,  127 ;  to  Parker,  131 ;  James
Alday  to  Michael  Locke,  197 ;  Ger-
ardus  Mercalor  to  Richard  Hak-
luyt, 275 ;  Boris  Feodorowich  to
Lord  Burghley,  419;  second,  436;
to  Queen  Elizabeth,  434;  Lord
Burghley  to  Boris  Feodorowich,
430 ;  Feodor  Ivanowich,  Emperor
of  Russia  to  Queen  Elizabeth,
432 ;  Edward  Garland  to  John
Dee,  447 ;  John  Meyrick  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  448 ;  to  Ger-
ardus  Mercator,  450  ;  Gudbrandus
Thorlacius  concerning  Iceland,  iv.
194 ;  Manuel,  Emperor  of  Con-
stantinople, to  Henry  H.  of  Eng-
land, 312;  Emperor  Henry  VL  to
Philip,  King  of  France,  336 ;
Henry  VHL  of  England  to  John
in.  of  Portugal,  V.  63 ;  Caspar
Campion  to  William  Winter,  115;
Murad  Khan  to  Queen  Elizabeth
(1579)  169;  to  the  King  of  Tri-
polis,  314;  Mustafa  Chaus  to
Queen  Elizabeth  (1583)  258;
William  Harborne  to  Harvey
Millers  (1583)  263;  to  Mustafa,
265;  to  Edward  Barton  (1584)
274;  to  M.  Tipton,  276;  to  Hassan
Aga,  282 ;  to  Romadan  Pasha,
316;  Sir  Edward  Osborne  to  the
King  of  Algiers,  268;  John  New-
bery  to  Richard  Hakluyt  (1583)
452';  to  Leonard  Poore  (1583)  453  ;
second  (1583)  458;  third  (1584)
458 ;  to  John  Eldred,  457 ;  Ralph
Fitch  to  Leonard  Poore,  463 ;
Sinan  Pasha  to  Queen  Elizabeth
(1590)  VI.  69;  wife"of  Murad  Khan
to  Queen  Elizabeth  (1594)  114;
John  Lock  to  the  Guinea  mer-
chants (1561)  255;  Emperor  of
Morocco  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester
(1587) 430; Martin Frobisher to

English  captives  in  Meta  Incog-
nita, VII.  309 ;  John  Davys  to
William  Sanderson,  on  his  second
voyage,  407 ;  on  his  third  voyage,
423 ;  Anthony  Parkhurst  to
Richard  Hakluyt  of  the  Middle
Temple,  viii.  9 ;  Stephen  Par-
menius  to  Richard  Hakluyt,
78 ;  Sir  Francis  Walsingham  to
Richard  Hakluyt,  131 ;  to  Thomas
Aid  worth,  132 ;  Thomas  Aid-
worth  to  Walsingham,  133 ;
Thomas  James  of  Bristol  to  Lord
Burghley  about  Ramea,  155 ;
Jacques  Noel  of  S.  Malo  to  John
Groute  (1587)  first,  272;  second,
273 ;  John  White  to  Richard
Hakluyt  (1593)  404;  dedicatory,
Richard  Hakluyt  to  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  439 ;  Lord  Admiral  of
France,  to  Captain  Laudonniere,
IX.  85 ;  Vasquez  de  Coronado  to
the  secretary  of  Don  Antonio  de
Mendoca,  116;  to  Don  Antonio  de
Mendoga,  118;  Antonio  de  Men-
do(ja  to  Charles  V.,  121;  Bar-
tholomew del  Cano  to  Francis
Hernandez  of  Sevile  (1590)  204;
anonymous  at  New  Spain,  about
California,  318;  twelve  Spanish,
intercepted  by  John  Watts,  x.
158 ;  dedicatory.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  to  Lord  Charles  Howard
and  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  338;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  to  the  reader,  343  -
Lawrence  Keymis  to  the  reader,
441 ;  John  Whithall  in  Brazil  to
Richard  Staper,  xi.  26 ;  adven-
turers of  Brazil  to  John  Whithall,
31;  Francis  Suarez  to  Diego
Suarez,  39 ;  Feliciano  Cieza  da
Carvalho  to  Philip  II.  of  Spain,
64;  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  John
Winter,  147 ;  Spanish,  taken  by
Luke  Warde  (1582)  184;  Thomas
Cavendish to Lord Hunsdon,

376.
Letters  patent,  see  Privileges.
Letti,  see  Lithuania.
Lettowe,  see  Lithuania.
Leucander, Andrew, see Andrew

Whiteman.
Leuci  Ethiopes,  people  of  Libya,  vi.

168.

294

INDEX

Leuriere, the, of Dieppe, at Cape

Verde  (1557)  vi.  218.
Leuriere, the, of Rouen, Jerome

Baudet,  master  of  (1557)  vi.  218.
Leuvacta, Thomas Alcock at, iii.

41-

Levant,  i.  Ixix. ;  dangers  of  Eng-
lish trade  in,  by  Captain  Car-
leill  (1583)  vin.  136;  Company,
first  (1579)  V.  169;  second
(1580)  178,  183;  granted  Queen
Elizabeth's  privileges  (1581)  192-
202 ;  privileges  granted  by  Queen
Elizabeth  (1592)  vi.  73-92 ;  first,
private,  74 ;  second  company
(1572)  75;  for  twelve  years,  76;
privileges  restricted  to  (1592)  vi.
83-87.

Levant  Seas,  Anthony  Jenkinson  on
the,  III.  195.

Leven,  Sir  Richard,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Levison,  Sir  Richard,  of  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596)  iv.  243,  252 ;
knighted  at  Cadiz,  259.

Levnona,  Kholmogory  to,  iii.  70.

Levontie,  governor  of  Georgia,  iii.
138.

Lewes,  see  Louis.

Lewfoot,  see  Lofoden.

Lewgues,  Peter,  of  Hamburg,  and
the  Danzig  ships  (1577)  vi.
232.

Lewike,  Peter,  mariner  on  the  Bona
Confidentia (1553) 11. 214.

Lewis  ab  Ellerichshausen,  twenty-
eighth  master  of  the  Dutch
knights,  11.  9.

Lewis.  John,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Lewis,  Isle  of,  i.  27 ;  laid  waste
by  Godred,  i.  35 ;  wreck  of  Span-
ish ships  at  (1588)  IV.  231.

Lexo,  Rio,  latitude  of,  xi.  350 ;  from,
to  Fonsecco  Gulf,  362.

Ley,  Dr.,  see  Leigh.

Leyden,  Spanish  ship's  banner  dis-
played as  a  trophy  in  church  of
(1588)  IV.  227.

Leyes  in  Armenia,  i.  308.

Leymington,  see  Lymington.

Lezina  Island,  near  Dalmatia,  v.
78;  John  Locke  near  (1553)  104;
Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  322.

Liampo,  in  Che-kiang,  vi.  295 ;  pro-
montory of,  349.

Libanus,  see  Lebanon.

Libau,  in  Courland,  Sir  Jerome
Horsey  at  (1584)  iii.  345.

Libeda,  Queen  in  South  Russia,  iii.

3.57-

'  Libel  of  English  policy,  Prologue
of,'  II. 114  f.

Liberty  Island,  English  ships  at
(1591) VII. 92.

Libou,  see  Libau.

Libourne  river,  in  Florida,  dis-
covered by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)
viii.  464.

Libya,  vi.  144;  population  of,  168;
Gemma  Phrygius  on,  vi.  167  j
deserts  of,  143 ;  Cape  Blanco  in,
X.  205.

Licaonia,  Iconium  or  Konieh,  in,  iv.

.293-
Licence granted to Frobisher and

Davis  by  Queen  Elizabeth  (1575)

XII.  27.
Lichtenstein, Conrad of, Prussian

ambassador,  11.  47,  91.
Licoris,  see  Liquorice.
Liefland,  see  Livonia.
Li^ge,  George  of  Austria,  bishop  of,

and maps of Canada and New

France,  iii.  281.
Liegnitz,  battle  of,  11. 186.
Liepueres, Isle  of, see  Hares.
Liese,  Nicholas,  and  Pinteado  (1552)

VI. 154.
Lifland,  see  Livonia.
Ligate, John, merchant, and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  66.
Lighachdo, Stephen, diake of the

Emperor  of  Russia, and  English

merchants,  iii.  329.
Light, William, mariner on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  il.  213.
Lightning, damage caused by, in

Florida  (1564)  ix.  31  f.
Ligier,  see  Ambassador.
Ligier-book,  see  Ledger.
Lignizt,  see  Liegnitz.
Lignum aloes, found in Cochin

China  and  Malacca,  vi.  26.
Lignum  de  China,  found  in  China,

VI.  26.
Lille,  fortified  against  the  Armada,

IV.  209.

295

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Lima  in  Peru,  bark  from,  captured
by  John  Oxenham  (1575)  x.  78,
XI.  230 ;  execution  of  John  Oxen-
ham  and  his  sailors  at,  x.  80,  xi.
233 ;  undefended,  x.  93 ;  harbour
of  Peru  (1587)  153;  Friar  Alonso
in  (1589)  168;  ships  from  Panama
to  (1590)  177;  sacked  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1579)  xi.  115  ;  ships
sent  from,  under  Pedro  Sarmiento,
to  pursue  Sir  Francis  Drake,  265,
266 ;  bay  of,  latitude  of,  349 ;  dis-
tance from  Cherrepe,  xi.  361.

Lima,  El  Callao  de,  in  Peru,  viii.
125 ;  Nuno  da  Silva  and  Sir
Francis  Drake  at,  xi.  142,  143;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  262 ;  fort
built  at,  285.

Limaret, near Venta de Cruz, x.

151-
Limasol, port in Cyprus, iv. 328 ;
Richard L at, 329 ; marriage  of
Richard L and Berengaria at
(1191)  330; John  Locke  at  (1553)

V.  85, 98; city  in Cyprus, 125;
gate  at  Famagusta,  132,  139.

Limbones,  Islands  de  Los,  descrip-
tion of,  IX,  46,  331.

Lime,  bark  of.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
owner  of  the  (1589)  vii. 6.

Lime,  see  Lyme.

Limehouse,  in  the  Thames,  iii.  247 ;
the  Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1591)

VI.  467; departure  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  from  (1596)  xi. i.

Limestone,  cast  out  of  a  fiery  moun-
tain in  Greenland  (c.  1380)  vii.
452.

Limisso,  see  Limasol.

Limo  river,  tributary  of  the  Orinoco,
X.  407.

Limoso,  island  of  Tunis,  vi. 143.

Limpias,  Pedro  de,  attempts  to  dis-
cover Guiana,  slain  by  Cacique
Porima,  x.  497.

Linacre,  Dr.,  and  the  damask  rose,
V.  241.

Linaker, see  Linacre.

Lincoln,  Henry,  bishop  of,  and
Jungingen's  ambassadors,  11.  27  f.,

36,  38-
Lind, Thomas, bearer of Queen
Elizabeth's  letters  to  Emperor  of
Russia  (1592)  HI.  432,  433,  434.

Lindebergius, Petrus, on the  siege

of  Paris  (1590)  iv.  83, 187.
Lindsey, Castle  Somaridune  in  the

county  of,  iv.  371.
Ling, James, distress of, at Port

Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.
Linne,  see  King's  Lynn.
Lino,  El  rio  del,  see  Flax  river.
Lins, Abraham, on board the  Aid

(1577)  VII. 285.
Linschoten, John Huighen van,

of Enkhuizen, servant of the

Archbishop  of  Goa  (1583)  v.  460,

508 ; account of affairs at the

Azores,  vii.  62-87  5 portrait  of,  64 ;

quotation  from, xii.  68.
Linsev,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)  vili.

318:
Linsey,  John,  in  Laurence  Keymis'

voyage  to  Guiana  (1596)  x.  454.
Linus, personage in the dialogue

about  China,  vi.  348-377.
Lion, Robert, and  Edmund  Hogan

at  Azafi  (1577)  VI.  285.
Lion, Robert, member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi. 419,

420  f.
Lion,  the,  of  the  English  fleet  (1588)

IV.  218; of  the  Cadiz  expedition,

IV.  247.
Lion,  the,  of  London,  voyage  of,  to

Morocco  (1551)  VI. 136, 138; and

first  voyage  to  Guinea  (1553)  145.
Lion,  the,  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  fleet,

William  Borough,  master  of  (1587)

VI.  438 ; and  the  Spanish  fleet  at

Flores  Island  (1591)  vii.  41.
Lion,  the,  of  Sir  Richard  Grenville's

voyage to Virginia (1585) viii.

310.
Lion,  the,  John  White's  flagship,  in

a  storm  (1587)  viii.  397.
Lions,  see  Lyons.
Lions in New Spain, ix. 385; in

Florida,  x.  59; in  Guiana,  426.
Lion's Whelp, the. Lord Charles

Howard's  ship  (1595)  x.  349; Cap-
tain George Gifford in (1595)

378.
Lipara  Hill,  iv.  26, 118.
Lippe,  Tidman,  i.  349.
Liquorice, abundance of, on the

shore of Samara, in Russia, ll.

454; at  Oveak,  iii.  216.

296

INDEX

Lisa,  abbot  of,  Norwegian  ambassa-
dor to  England,  i.  321  f.

Lisart,  see  Lizard.

Lisbon,  the  Armada  sails  from  (1588)
IV.  209;  John  Evesham  at  (1586)
VI.  35  ;  seat  of  justice  for  Madeira,
135  ;  Thomas  Stevens  at  (1579)  vi.
377;  English  army  under  Drake
and  Sir  John  Norris  at  (1589)  497,
502-507,  xil.  64 ;  Earl  of  Essex  at
gates  of  (c.  1591)  VII.  40;  Robert
Tomson  at  (1553)  ix.  338;  Thomas
Stukeley  at,  xii. 102.

Lishby,  Roger,  quartermaster  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
213.

Lisle,  Nicholas,  captain  of  the  Con-
tent (1591)  X. 183.

L'Isle  Blanche,  see  White  Isle.

Lisney,  Thomas,  of  the  Rabnet
(1584)  V.  281.

Lissa  Island,  near  Dalmatia,  v.  78.

Lister,  Christopher,  south-western
voyage  of,  1.  xxviii.  ;  adventures
of  (1586)  VI.  294;  of  the  Earl  of
Cumberland's voyage (1589) vii.

I,  5;  at  Fayal,  6;  at  Graciosa,  11;
at  S.  Marie's  Island,  15 ;  in  the
Victory,  20;  death  of  (1589)  30;
captain  of  the  bark  Clifford  (1586)
XI.  202;  in  council,  211;  plan  of,
to  go  to  the  South  Sea  (1587)  224;
at  Seal  Island  and  the  Portuguese
arms (1587) 249.

Literature,  Chinese,  vi.  360.

Lithuania  (Lettowe)  i.  307 ;  Wol-
stan's  description  of,  i.  15;  pro-
ducts of,  16 ;  Skirgall,  King  of,
vanquished  by  Henry,  Earl  of
Derby,  503 ;  and  the  Russian
army,  11.  229 ;  and  Russian  fron-
tier, 252 ; conquest  of,  by  Russia,

II.  423,  438,  III.  386,  387.
Lithuanians,  11.  7 ; Russia  and  the,

I. 160.
Little,  Robert  and  Peter,  settlers  in

Virginia  (1587)  viii.  403.
Little  Britain, see  Brittany.
Little John, the, of John White's

voyage to Virginia (1590) viii.

406
Little John, the, of Sir Francis

Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x. 227; loss

of,  244.

XII  297

Little  John,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  left  to  the  Earl  of  Essex
(1596)  X.  266.

Lituania,  see  Lithuania.

Livers,  Indian  money,  value  of,  v.
440.

Livonia,  Tartars  and,  i.  89  f. ;
Grand  Master  of,  305 ;  Knights
of  the  Swords  in,  11.  2,  6;
furs  of,  34;  merchants  of,  49,
50,  56 ;  wasted  by  Ivan  Vasilo-
wich,  191 ;  situation  of,  193 ;  and
Russian  frontier,  252  ;  ambassador
from,  to  Russia,  276,  399;  con-
quest of,  by  Russia,  386,  387,  423,
438;  John  Lucke,  prisoner  in
(1560)  407;  English  trade  in,  in.
93,  109 ;  open  to  foreign  mer-
merchants,  118.

Livorno,  see  Leghorn.

Livy,  v. 119.

Lizard,  the  Tiger  at  (1557)  vi.  231;
George  Fenner  at  (1587)  283;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  at,  450,  461,
467;  the  Spanish  Armada  beaten
from,  to  Portland  (1589)  vii.  39.

Lizards  in  the  Houses  of  Sapies,  x.
20.

Lizart,  see  Lizard.

Llamas  and  their  loads  of  silver  cap-
tured by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1579)
XI.  115; description  of,  282.

Lloyd,  Humphrey,  vii.  134.

Loadstone,  near  Tabin  promontory,
in.  279.

Lobell, ph5''sician, on Sesamum, v.

237-

Lobi,  Earl  Francis  of,  of  Cremona,
slain  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  150.

Lobos,  Baya  de.  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  327.

Lobos  Island,  or  Isle  of  Seals,  near
Panuco  river,  x.  318,  xi.  97;  marks
of,  X.  319; latitude  of,  334.

Lobos  Island,  in  river  Plate,  xi.  94;
mentioned  in  Ruttier  for  river
Plate,  97;  Robert  Withrington  at
(1587)  209,  249.  _

Lobos  Islands,  latitude  of,  xi.  359.

Lobshanga,  S.  Nicholas  to,  in.  69.

Lobsters  in  Cibo  harbour,  viii. 174.

Lock,  Michael,  agent  for  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1575)  in.  197;
Gaspar  Campion's  letter  to  (1569)

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

V. 111-115, 117; James Alday's
letter  to  (1551)  vi. 136; and  Fro-
bisher's  North-west  voyages  (1575)
XII.  27.
Locke,  John,  voyage  of,  to  Jerusalem

(1553)  V.  76-105- . ^ ,

Locke,  John,  captam  of  the  second
voyage  to  Guinea  (1554)  vi.  154;
advice  to,  touching  a  voyage  to
Guinea  (1561)  253;  letter  to  the
Guinea  Company,  255-257.

Locke,  John,  master's  mate  of  the
Golden  Dragon,  and  traffic  with
Indians  (1591)  x. 189.

Locke,  Thomas,  trader  in  the
Canaries,  vi.  134;  second  voyage
to  Guinea  (1554)  154.

Locke,  Sir  William,  mercer  of  Lon-
don, goods  of  (c.  1534)  V.  63.

Locut,  Russian  measure  for  cloth,  11.

275-

Lodais,  see  Lodias.

Lodge,  Sir  Thomas,  governor  of  the
Muscovy  Company,  iii.  14,  39 ;
and  Arthur  Edwards,  46;  Persian
privileges  to  (1567)  64;  his  voyage
to  Guinea  (1562)  vi.  258;  and  the
proposed  voyage  to  Guinea  (1564)
262  ; and  the  negro  trade  (1562)  x.

7-

Lodge,  Thomas,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Lodge,  Thomas,  and  Hakluyt,  xii.
79  ; '  Rosalynd  '  by.

Lodia,  or  Russian  bark,  in.  73 ;  en-
graving of, 80.

Lodias, Stephen Borough and, 11.

327.  329-
Lodovick,  brother  of  the  Landgrave

Conrad,  11.  2.
Lodowick, Count of Nassaw, see

Nassau.
Lofoden  Islands,  Willoughby  at,  11.

219, 223; Stephen Borough at,

345; Anthony  Jenkinson's  fleet  at,

415 ; Arthur  Pet  at,  iii.  300.
Loglen,  king's  deputy  in  Man,i.38f.
Loggewood,  see  Logwood.
Logwood, colour produced by, iii.

251; or palo campechio, blue

colour,  V.  239.
Loire, river, in Florida, discovered

by Captain Ribault (1562) viii.

460.

Lok,  Michael,  see  Lock.

Lombards,  deceitfulness  of,  11.  131  f.

Lombardy,  and  Edward  I.'s  great
charter,  i.  333  ;  dictamnum  album
found  in,  vi.  27.

Lonck,  admiral  of  the  Dutch  fleet
(1588)  IV.  209.

London,  barons  of,  i.  44;  ships
from,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  297;
a  market  town  in  time  of  Nero,
308;  of  Bede,  309,  (1142)  314;
Cologne  merchants'  dues  at  Guild-
hall, 6,  323,  II.  21,  51;  mayor  of
the  city  of,  26,  v.  270 ;  ships  from
(1393,  1405)  II.  62  ;  sights  of  (1557)
358;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  return
to  (1564)  III.  38;  return  of  Eng-
lish merchants  to  (1574)  157;
Sir Jerome Horsey 's arrival at

(1584)  345;  Queen  Elizabeth  enters
in  triumph  (1588)  iv.  233;  birth-
place of  Ingulf,  290 ;  palace  built
by  Anthony  Beck,  371  ;  Lyon,
King  of  Armenia,  in  (1386)  447;
Laurence  Aldersey's  return  to
(1582)  V.  214;  size  of,  474;  Ralph
Fitch's  return  to  (1591)  505  ;  Henry
Roberts leaves, in the  Ascension

(1585)  VI.  426;  heat  of,  compared
to  the  Poles,  vii.  273 ;  port  of,
free  to  Adrian  Gilbert  (1583)  377;
Thomas  Buts  and  Rastall  at,  viii.
7;  city  and  voyage  of  Captain
Carleill  (1583),  148;  Charles  Leigh
and  his  prize  in  (1597)  viii.  180;
Captain  Laudonniere  at  (1565)  ix.
99;  John  Chilton's  departure  from
(1561),  and  return  to  (1586)  360;
plan  of,  engraving  of,  xii.  120.

London,  coast  discovered  by  John
Davys  (1587)  vii.  418.

Long,  Henry,  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's voyage  (1589)  vii. i.

Long,  James,  gunner  on  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  213.

Long,  Nicholas,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  281.

Longenthorpe,  Tidericus  de,  Prus-
sian ambassador,  11.  98,  106.

Longespee,  William,  see  Salisbury,
Earl  of.

Longeval,  in  the  voyage  of  Roberval
(1543) VIII. 288.

Longitudes, Robert  Thorne on, 11.

298

INDEX

i68,  174,  179 ;  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert  and  his  spherical  instru-
ment for,  VII.  190.

Longsound,  in  Norway,  11.  63,  65.

Loo,  see  Looe.

Looe,  Cornwall,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.

Lookout  Point,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1556)  n.  326.

Lopez,  ambassador  of  the  Grand
Master  of  Rhodes  to  Solyman
(1522)  V.  52.

Lopez,  Friar  Francis,  murdered  in
Poala in Antigua (1582) 11.

195-
Lopez,  Thomas,  discoveries  of  (1497-

15 10)  VIII.  128.
Loraigne,  see  Lorraine.
Lord's  Valley,  maize  found  in  (1540)

IX. 145 ; or  Valle  del  Sefior,  Mel-

chior  Diaz  at  (1540)  ix. 147.
Loreine, Cape,  in  Canada,  latitude

of,  Jacques  Cartier  at  (1536)  viii.

259-
Lores,  in  Portugal,  English  army  at

(1589)  VI.  499.

Lorinha,  English  camp  at,  in  Portu-
gal (1589)  VI. 498.

Lorraine,  Duke  of,  at  Marasia  (1097)
IV.  293.

Losada,  Diego  de,  his  attempt  to
discover  Guiana,  x.  498.

Losh  (reindeer),  hides  market,  iii.
70; export,  366.

Loshak, Stephen  Borough's  friend,

"•  337  f-.  339-
Los  Santos,  John  White  In  sight  of

(1590)  VIII.  407.

Lot,  King  of  Norway,  i.  4.
Loubeux  Verdala,  Hugo  de.  Grand

Master of Malta, passport by

(1582)  V.  215,  217.
Loues, Friar, and  Edmund  Hogan

(1577)  VI.  292.
Louis, Duke  of  Savoy,  besieged  by

the Sultan Selim  in Nicosia, v.

126.
Louis, Don, son of Don John, in

Guinea  (1562)  vi.  260.
Louis  n..  King  of  France,  and  John

Erigena,  iv.  281.
Louis  Vn.,  King  of  France,  in  Holy

Land  (1147)  iv.  309.
Louis  IX.,  King  of  France,  i.  229;

and  the  Saracens, 275 ; his vow

to  go  to  Holy  Land  (1234)  iv.  353 ;

takes Damietta (1249) 353 » i"

Cairo,  355.
Louis n.. King of Hungary and

Bohemia,  killed  by  Solyman  (1526)

V.  61.
Loutea,  or  gentlemen,  in  China,  vi.

300; examination  of,  302  ;  dignity

of,  303-

Loutea,  or  lieutenant,  of  Cathay,
and  the  Moors,  vii.  201.

Lovel,  Sir  Robert,  knighted  at
Cadiz (1596) IV. 260.

Loviana,  wife  of  Eparacano,  chris-
tened Don  Juan,  nephew  of  Topi-
awari, x.  412.

Lowde,  Christopher,  in  Virginia
(1585)  VII. 317.

Lowe,  S.  John  de,  see  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa.

Lowe,  William,  condemned  by  In-
quisition in  Mexico  (1575-1580)  ix.
430;  married  and  settled  in  Spain,

431-

Lowfoot,  see  Lofoden.

Lubao  Islands,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  331.

Lubec,  see  Liibeck.

Liibeck,  charter  of,  i.  325 ;  restitu-
tion of  losses  demanded  of  Eng-
land by,  II.  35 ;  Hanse  town  and
England,  55 ;  meeting  place  of
ambassadors,  86 ;  wax  market  at,
389;  ambassadors  from,  399;
Narva  port  open  to  (1567)  in.  100;
Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)  345;
Iceland  trade  with,  iv.  86,  191 ;
William  Harborne  at  (1588)  vi.  58;
hulk,  with  Spanish  goods,  cap-
tured (1589)  510;  ship,  captured
by  the  English  (1589)  vn. 2.

Lubonia,  devastated  by  infidels,  11.
2.

Lucas,  Thomas,  of  the  Desire,
soldier  killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.
306.

Lucas,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 402.

Lucaya,  see  Bahama.
Lucayos,  see  Bahama.
Lucerne,  Cape,  in  Florida,  discovered

by Captain Ribault (1562) viii.

463-

299

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Luche, Hernando, conquests of,

viii. 125.
Lucie, Geoflfrey de, his voyage to

Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.
Lucius Marcius in Spain, iv. 22,

113-
Luclie, John, and  Anthony  Jenkin-

son's  letter  (1559)  11.  400;  prisoner

in  Livonia  (1560)  407.
Lucland, Richard, mutineer  on  the

Edward Bonaventure (1593) x.

200.
Lucomoria,  people  of,  iii.  408,  410.
Lu^on,  general  of  the  Spanish  fleet

(1568) IX. 451  ; Anthony Godard

and  some  of  his  company  sent  to

Spain  with  (1568)  459.
Lugon, Don  Alonso, colonel  of  the

Armada  (1588)  iv. 202; prisoner

in Ireland,  232.
Lugone,  see  Luzon.
Luddington, Thomas, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  317.
Ludekensson, Matthew, damages

paid  to,  II. 103.
Ludolphus, Duke of Brunswick,

fifteenth master of the Dutch

knights,  II.  6.
Ludolphus, seventeenth master of

the  Dutch  knights,  11.  6.
Ludovic, brother  of  the  Landgrave

Conrad,  li.  2.
Ludovicus,  Andreas,  and  John  Foxe

(1577)  V. 166.
Luis,  Don,  Infant  of  Portugal,  letter

to Captain Pinteado (1552) vi.

153-
Luis,  the,  Spanish  ship  captured  by

the  Hugh  Gallant  (1587)  xi.  311.
Luisa,  the,  of  Dieppe,  and  the  crew

of  the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1593)

VI. 406.
Lumley,  Lord,  and  the  Russian  am-
bassador, 11. 357 ; and Hakluyt,

XII. 76.
Lumley 's  Inlet,  discovered  by  John

Davys {1587) vii. 420.
Luna, Don  Juan  de,  on  the  taking

of the Groyne (1589) vi. 484;

prisoner  of  the  English,  485.
Lunae  Montes,  see  Mountains  of  the

Moon.
Lundy,  Island,  Charles  Leigh  in  his

prize at (1597) viii. 180.

Liineburg, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V.  320,  327.
Lunenberg, see  Liineburg.
Lupulee, town on the Berbice, x.

494-

Lusignan,  Guy  of,  last  King  of
Jerusalem,  v. 125.

Lutch,  boy  wounded  by  Indians
(1586)  XI. 296.

Luther,  Martin,  v.  321;  religious
influence  of,  on  Iceland,  iv.  49,
146.

Lutheran,  Laurence  Aldersey  a
(1581)  V.  207.

Luthro,  or  goat  skin,  for  holding
sugar,  VI.  99.

Lutterell,  Sir  John,  death  of,  in  Bar-
bary (1551) vi. 137.

Luttrell,  Sir  John,  Thomas  Buts
and  Rastall  in  the  castle  of  (1536)
VIII.  7.

Luys,  Friar,  at  Cevola  with  Vasquez
de  Coronado  (1540)  ix. 152.

Luzon,  VI.  349,  IX.  326;  one  of  the
Philippines,  Captain  Gualle's  voy-
age to  (1584)  IX.  326;  description
of,  327 ;  trade  with  China,  Span-
ish fort  on,  XI.  287;  description
of,  329 ;  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1588)  333;  Spaniard  from,  taken
by Cavendish, 334; hospital in,

335-
Luzon  Straits,  xi.  330.
Lybia, see Libya.

Lycia,  John  Eldred  at  (c.  1588)  vi.  9.
Lycus, river, in  Asia,  iv.  36, 131.
Lydd,  Kent,  i.  47,  48.
Lydde,  see  Lydd.
Lyderpole, Thomas, of Cley, and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  65,  66.
Lydia,  iii.  398.
Lydiat,  George,  member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi. 4x9,

420  f.
Lyme  Bay,  George  Fenner  at  (1567)

VI.  284.

Lyme  Regis,  Dorset,  ships  from,  in
Edward III.'s fleet, i. 297.

Lymery,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  in.  302.

Lymington,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Lympold,  see  Leopold.

Lymszem,  see  Limasol.

Lyndo, near  Rhodes,  v.  8.

300

INDEX

Lyne,  Matthew,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII, 318.

Lynester,  see  Leinster.

Lynn,  Friar  Nicholas  of,  his  voy-
age to  the  North  Pole,  i.  301  f.  ;
'  Inventio  Fortunata,'  303.

Lynn  Regis,  see  King's  Lynn.

Lynn,  Bailiff  of,  and  King  John,  i.
320; merchants  of,  and  Norway,

347-

Lvnxamatae,  people  of  Libya,  vi.
'168.

Lyon,  King  of  Armenia,  voyage  of,
to  England  (1386)  iv.  445;  in
London,  447.

Lyon,  the,  see  Lion.

Lyons,  breaking  of  the  bridge  at
(1190)  IV.  321.

Lys  or  Luys,  M.  de,  at  Fort  Caro-
line (1565)  IX.  91,  92.

Lyster,  Christopher,  see  Lister.

Lyzard, see Lizard.

Maapuere  town,  xi,  13.

Maber,  William,  gunner,  distress
of,  at  Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Maburesa,  great  town  on  the  Maha-
waica,  x. 494.

Macao,  near  Pegu,  Ralph  Fitch  at
(c.  1583)  V.  486.

Macao,  Portuguese  port  in  China,  v.
406;  trade  with  Japan,  498;  Portu-
guese garrison  at,  viii.  445  ;
Island,  in  the  river  of  Canton,  in
China, ix. 333.

Macapowa,  Indian  captain,  x.  495.

Macaran  harbour  in  China,  free  to
Spanish  trade  (1590)  x.  166.

Macareo,  or  race  of  tide,  v.  374,
419,  420.

Macaria,  see  Cyprus.

Macatto,  Indian  herb,  anti-poison-
ous, x._  495.

Macawini  river,  gold  in,  x,  468.

Maccharibi  town,  xi.  13.

Maccou,  king  in  Florida,  and  Cap-
tain Albei't  (1562)  VIII.  478;  and
Nicholas Barre, 483.

Mace,  William,  of  Radcliff,  master
of  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  at
Comoro  Island  (1591)  vi.  392
master  of  the  Dog,  voyage  of,  to
Mexico  (1589)  X.  156;  letters
from  to  Edward  Wilkinson  (1589)

157;  killed  by  the  natives  of
Comoro Island  (1591) 195.

Macerea,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at
(1597)  XI.  7.

Macham,  Island  of  Madeira  dis-
covered by  (1344)  IV.  368,  VI.  119,

134-

Macharibi,  town  in  Guiana,  xi. 11.

Machian,  the  Portuguese  at,  viii.
129.

Machico  haven,  named  after  Mac-
ham,  VI. 119; town, 135.

Macirria,  town  in  Guiana,  xi.  8.

Mac-Maras,  at  the  battle  of  Sant-
wat, I. 28.

Macureguarai,  in  Guiana,  x.  364;
Antonio  de  Berreo's  first  civil
town  in  Guiana,  373,  401,  410,
423 ;  envoys  at,  374 ;  Capure-
pana  province  adjoining,  x.  403 ;
in Muchikeri  province, 464.

Macureo,  Indians  settled  near,  de-
scription of,  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  x.  383 ;  dwelling  place
of  Ciawannis  destroyed  by  the
Spanish  (1596)  476.

Macuri  river,  John  Douglas  on  the
(1595)  X.  382.

Macuria  river,  mentioned  by  Laur-
ence Keymis  (1596)  x.  454,  492.

Macuruma  river,  x.  492.

Macurwini  river,  in  the  country  of
the  Cassanari, x. 464.

Madagascar,  on  the  way  to  India
from  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  vi.  383,
391;  latitude  of,  401,  viii.  127;  or
S.  Laurence  Island,  the  Edward
Bonaventure  at  (1591)  x. 195.

Maddock,  Andrew,  of  the  Sunshine
of  London  (1585)  vii.  382,  409.

Maddock,  Robert,  on  Puna  Island,
death  of  (1587) xi. 317, 318.

Maddox,  chaplain,  assistant  to  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi.  163;
recorder  of  Edward  Fenton 's
voyage,  164 ;  and  the  succession
of  Edward  Fenton  in  case  of  his
death  on  the  voyage  (1582)  166;
at  Sierra  Leone, 175.

Madeira  Island,  discovered  by  Mac-
ham  (1344)  IV.  368,  369,  VI.  119,
134;  Reuben  of  Bracamont  and
(1417)  120;  products  of,  135;
English ships at (1553) 146,

301

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

(1554)  155;  description  of,  155  f. ;
William  Towerson  at  (1555)  178,
(1556)  212;  Sir  John  Hawkins
near  (1564)  264,  x.  11;  George
Fenner  near  (1566)  vi.  266;  the
Dolphin  at  (1524)  viii.  424;
Portuguese  garrison  at,  445  ;  dis-
tance from  Spain,  x.  93 ;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  and  (1596)  266;
latitude  of,  332 ;  discovered  by
Prince  Henry  the  Navigator  (1417)
XII. 3.

Madera  Bomba,  a  shoal.  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  at  (1596)  x.  268;
soundhigs,  xi.  352.

Madera  Island,  see  Madeira.

Madewini,  town  of  the  Wapari,  x.
494.

Madher  promontory,  in  Iceland,  iv.
II,  99.

Madianites,  see  Midianites.

Madoc,  son  of  Owen  Gwynedd,
prince  of  North  Wales,  discovery
of  West  Indies  by  (1170)  vii.  133;
verses  on,  135.

Madoc,  Laurence,  narrative  of,  sent
to  Anthony  Dassel  (1594)  vii.  99-
100.

Madoni,  king  of  Colombo,  de-
throned by his son Ragine, v.

3Q9-

Madrabomba,  see  Madera  Bomba.

Madrabumba  Islands,  see  Cape
Verde Islands.

Madrabumba  river,  Thomas  Greg-
ory privileged  to  trafific  in  the
(1592)  VII. 102.

Madre  de  Dios,  the,  vi.  443,  x.  190;
carrack  of  the  Spanish  fleet  taken
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  fleet
(1592)  VII.  105-118;  captured  by
Sir  Robert  Crosse,  xii.  84.

Madre  del  Oro,  found  in  Guiana,  x.

405-

Maelstrom,  in  Arctic  Ocean,  i.  303;
Anthony  Jenkinson's  description
of, II. 415-

Maeotis,  see  Azov,  sea  of.

Maestro  del  Campo,  Isla  del,  lati-
tude of,  IX.  330.

Maffeius,  Petrus,  '  De  rebus  Japon-
icis,'  by, vi. 332.

Magaraxiaibi,  or  Jethro's  river,  be-
tween Acba  and  Biritem,  v.  347.

Magdalena,  river  of,  in  New  King-
dom of  Granada,  xi.  235,  237.

Magdalena  river,  in  Peru,  descrip-
tion of  caymans  in,  x.  175.

Magdalene,  the,  Richard  Uscombe
in  (1571)  III. 169.

Magdeburg,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
v.  327.

Magelan,  see  Magellan.

Magelane,  see  Magellan.

Magellan,  Fernando,  at  Port  S.
Julian,  XI.  109 ;  at  Baya  de  las
Islas,  134;  his  discoveries,  255;
death,  257 ;  and  the  execution  of
his  captain,  xii.  56.

Magellan,  Strait  of,  11.  163,  vii.
167,  169,  178,  191,  195;  Chris-
topher Lister's  voyage  to,  vi.
294 ;  Pedro  Sarmiento,  gover-
nor of,  435,  XI.  92,  93;  sea
currents  in,  vii.  202,  xi.  158;
latitude  of,  x.  93,  xi.  158,  256;
the  Delight  in,  x.  170;  Benjamin
Wood  bound  for  (1596)  xi.  2  ;  Sir
Francis  Drake's  description  of,
iio-iii;  chart  of,  engraving  of,
112;  description  of,  135-136,
.355.  357.  371;  Cape  Victory  at
the  entrance  of,  158 ;  Spanish
fleet  at  (1582)  183;  English  and
Spanish  ships  in  (1582)  254;  ships
wrecked  in,  257,  260 ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  in,  260,  xii.  59 ;  Spanish
forts  ordered  to  be  built  in,  xi.  267 ;
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1586)  367,
(1592)  392,  397;  John  Chidley's
voyage  to  (1589)  381,  382;  dis-
covery of,  by  Magellan,  xii.  9.

Magellenes,  see  Magellan.

Maggio,  knight,  engineer,  of  Fama-
gusta  (1571)  v.  135,  136,  138;
made  slave, 152.

Maggiore  Mare,  see  Black  Sea.

Magistrates,  Chinese,  magnificence
of,  VI.  364  f. ; selection,  366.

Magnus  III.,  King  of  Norway  (1098)
I,  28; King  of  Man,  28-29.

Magnus,  fourth  bishop  of  Schalholt,
in  Iceland  (1134)  iv.  54,  153.

Magnus,  eighth  bishop  of  Schalholt,
in Iceland  (1216) iv. 55, 153.

Magnus,  son  of  Olaf,  King  of  Man
(1252)  knighted  by  the  King  of
England  (1256)  i.  40; death,  40.

302

INDEX

Magnus,  son  of  Eiolphus,  twenty-
fourth  bishop  of  Schalhoit,  in  Ice-
land (1489)  IV. 57, 156.

Magog,  sent  to  Asia  by  Nimrod,  iii.

371-
Magoths,  W.,  voyage  of  John  Chid-
ley  written  by  (1589)  xi.  381-384;
in the Delight, 382 ; return of

(1590)  384-
Magueis  tree,  plant  of  Mexico,  ix.
^77; honey of, 384; uses of,

457-
Mahahonero, Indian captain, x.

493-
Mahawaica  river, x. 494; between
Cape Cecil and Raleana river,

459-.

Mahdia,  see  Africa.

Mahomet,  iii.  29,  35,  vi.  321;  suc-
cessor of.  III.  159 ;  Persian  opinion
of,  160;  tree  of,  221;  his  favourite
colour,  green,  forbidden  in  Holy
Land,  v.  89 ;  battle  against  the
Christians,  legend  of,  349 ;  tomb
at  Medina,  361 ;  buried  in  Arabia
Felix, vni. 128.

Mahomet  Beg,  a  Justice,  v.  318.

Mahomet  Chaus,  and  the  inventory
of  sunk  ships  (1584)  v.  279.

Mahomet  Chaus,  Nadir  of  Lepanto,
exactions  of,  from  English  people
(1584)  V.  284,  285.

Mahomet  Khan,  son  of  Murad
Khan,  vi.  116.

Mahomet  Pasha,  William  Har-
borne's  presents  to  (1583)  v.  251.

Mahomet  II.,  Sultan,  at  the  siege  of
Constantinople,  vi. 106.

Maiapoore,  town  of  the  Winitwari,
X.  492.

Maiarare, province of Guiana, x.

Maicaiwini  river,  x.  494;  between
Cape  Cecil  and  Raleana  river,  x.

459-

Maidstone,  Kent,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward  III.'s  fleet,  I. 297.

Main  river,  at  Arnfurt,  v.  321.

'  Maine  Historical  Society,'  and  the
Hakluyt  MS.  (1877)  xii.  32.

Maingare,  James,  captain  of  the
H ermerillon  (1535)  viii.  211.

Maio  Island,  near  Cape  Verde,  vi.
275 ; Andrew  Barker's  trumpeter

killed  at  (1576)  x.  83 ;  Sir  Amyas
de  Preston  at  (1595)  223;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  at  (1596)  267;
Dartmouth  flyboat  bound  for
(1596)  XI.  I ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
^t  (1597)  2;  salt  found  in,  3;
James  Lancaster  at  (1594)  46;
dried  cabritos  found  in  (1578)  103;
climate  of, 104; John  Winter  at

(1577) 151-

Maior,  see  Mayor.

Maipar  Island,  in  the  Orinoco  river,
X.  494.

Maipari  river,  x.  490 ;  mentioned  by
Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  x.  454.

Maisouna, in Hochelaga,  viii. 271.

Maiyo,  see  Maio.

Maize,  found  in  the  Lord's  Valley
(1540)  IX.  147;  in  Granada,  156;
in  New  Spain,  use  of,  391 ;  in
Cumana,  x.  27 ;  found  in  Florida,
51,  56;  Indian  wheat  captured  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1595)  234.

Major,  M.,  lieutenant  of  the  Con-
tent (1591)  X.  183.

Majorca,  in  Thome's  map,  11,  171 ;
Roger  Bodenham  at  (1551)  v.  72;
viceroy  of,  and  William  Harborne
(1583)  243,  245,  247,  249;  Miles
Philips  escapes  to  England  from
(1582)  IX. 444.

Make-Speed,  the,  at  Azafi  (1577)  vi.
285.

Makeworth,  John,  of  the  expedition
to  Guinea  (1556)  vi.  199,  202,  208;
in  Cape  Verde  Island  (1577)  237.

Malabar,  pepper  found  in,  iv.  412,
VI.  24 ;  Levant  coral  found  in,
25  ;  Cape  Comorin  in,  394 ;  Vasco
da  Gama  at  (1498)  xii.  3.

Malabars,  races  of,  v.  502.

Malaca, see  Malacca.

Malacca,  11.  163 ;  Thome's  mention
of  the  spicery  in,  170;  and  Portu-
guese ships,  V.  402,  X.  196;
Caesar  Frederick  in  (1566)  v.  403,
408,  412 ;  trade  with  the  Indian
Islands,  407;  cotton  cloth  from
Sinnergan  to,  485 ;  Ralph  Fitch
at  (c.  1583)  497;  Portuguese  cap-
tain of,  and  the  trade,  498;
weight,  measure  and  money,  cur-
rent in,  VI.  21;  tin  found  in,  24;
domestic sandals found in, 25 ;

303

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

monsoon  from  Goa  to,  32 ;  the
Edward  Bonaventure  in  (1592)
396;  latitude,  xi.  351;  bay  of,
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1587)  321;
cape  of,  the  Portuguese  at,  viii.
129 ; Portuguese garrison at,

445-
Malatesta,  Hercole,  wounded  at  the

defence of Famagusta, v. 136;

made  slave, 151.
Malathia, Fergat, governor of, v.

148; slain at Famagusta (1571)

152.
Malavar,  see  Malabar.
Malays,  v.  498.
Malcolm  IV.,  the  Maiden,  King  of

Scotland  (1141-1165)  i.  32.
Maiden,  see  Maiden.
Maldivia,  see  Maldive.
Maldive Islands, vi. 401 ; cagiers

found  in, 25.
Maldon, Essex, ships from, in  Ed-
ward  III.'s fleet, I. 299.
Maldonado, Castillo, in the Ju-

manos  country,  ix. 192.
Maldonado, Francisco, Cacahu-

Atoyaque (garden of Cacao), in

the  land  of,  ix.  471.
Maldonado, Roderigo, treasurer of

Captain  Alarchon's  fleet  (1540)  ix.

2S1.
Malestrande,  see  Maelstrom.
Malfata,  haven  in  Rhodes,  v, 15.
Malgo,  King  of  England,  i.  7  f.
Malgualire, Jamaica vessel (1564)

IX.  44.
Malica, King, brother of King

Malona,  and  Captain  Vasseur,  ix.

2:; ; visits  Captain  Ribault  at  Fort

Caroline (1565) 88.
Malim, William, translator of the

'Siege  of  Famagusta,'  v.  1 18-124;

at Constantinople (1564) 121; to

the  reader (1572) 127; 'In Tur-

chas precatio  '  by, 128.
Malio  Cavo,  William  Harborne  near

(1583)  V. 250.
Mallary, Richard, of the Muscovy

Company  (1553)  iii.  39.
Mallatin, calf-like fish in Panuco

river  (1568)  ix. 457.
Mallorca,  see  Majorca.
Mallory, William, assistant to the

Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Mallow,  Peter  de,  his  voyage  to
Syria  (1240)  IV.  352.

Mallums,  stockfish  market  at,  11.
276.

Malmesbury,  William  of,  see  Wil-
liam  of Malmesbury.

Malmesbury,  abbey  of,  John  Eri-
gena  at  the  (884)  iv. 282.

Malta,  King  Philip  and  the  Turks
at  (1566)  III.  53,  54;  Anthony
Jenkinson  at,  195 ;  Turkish  gal-
leys for  the  siege  (1551)  v.  72,  75;
siege  by  the  Turks,  112;  Grand
Master  of,  passport  to  English-
men (1582)  215;  galleys  from,
leagued  against  English  ships
(1583)  264;  escaped  Christian
slaves  near  (1584)  304;  John
Evesham  near  (1587)  vi.  35;
Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1586)  39;
galleys  of,  in  the  pay  of  Spain,  50  ;
Grand  Master  of  Rhodes  at, 143.

'  Malta,  Jew  of,'  xii.  104.

Malucos, see Moluccas

Malus  Catulus,  see  Roger.

Malvasius,  King  of  Iceland,  i.  4.

Malvezzi  or  Malvezzo,  Roberto,  cap-
tain, at  the  defence  of  Famagusta
(1571)  V.  133;  death  of,  139,
150.

Mamale Islands, latitude, vi. 395.

Mamedine,  money  of  Bussorah,  vi.
II.

Mammie,  Alcayde,  and  the  saltpetre
at  Sus  (1577)  VI.  291.

Mamoute,  Alcayde,  escort  to  Ed-
mund Hogan  (1577)  VI.  291.

Man,  Jeremy,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Man,  Isle  of,  i.  30-41 ;  a  chronicle
of  the  Kings  of,  i.  Iv.,  25  fT. ;
King  Edwin  and,  8;  invaded  in
(1066)  by  Godred  Crovan,  25,  26;
divided  between  Harold's  sons,
31;  Reginald  invades  (1172)  33;
O-Fogolt,  viscount  of  (1183)  33;
devastated  by  Earl  Fulco,  34 ;  de-
vastated by  Reginald  (1228)  37;
divided  (1230)  38;  Alexander  II.,
King  of  Scots,  in,  41  ;  devastated
by Richard de Mandevile, 41.

Mana,  weight  of  Babylon,  vi.  10;
of  Bussorah,  11;  of  Ormuz,  14;
of  Goa, 17.

304

INDEX

Mana  river,  in  Tivitlvas,  x.  208 ;  Sir

Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)  416.
Manache, Sibill, viceroy of Santa

Cruz  (1552) VI. 139.
Manacobeece, town on Berbice

river,  x.  494.
Manamanora, Sir Walter Raleigh

at  (1597)  XI.  7.
Manar  Island,  off  Indian  coast,  v.

397-
Manarecowa, Indian captain, x.

495-
Manati,  used  as  food  in  Guiana,  x.

417-
Mance  Point,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier,  X. 305.
Mancherule,  see  Manchuria.
Manchuria, original  country  of  the

Tartars,  i.  269.
Mancino, Captain, made slave at

Famagusta  (1571)  v.  152.
Mancy,  see  India.
Mandevile,  Sir  John,  his  account  of

the Ewaipanoma or headless

people,  X.  406.
Mandevile,  Richard  de,  at  Ramald-

wath,  I.  41.
Mandevile,  William,  Earl  of  Essex,

his  voyage  to  Jerusalem  (1177)  iv.

310.
Mandie, John, of the Sunshine

(1586) VII. 408.
Mandoages,  tribe  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  322.
Mandoway, besieged by  Akbar, v.

473-
Mandra, the, or the Field, in

Rhodes,  v.  37.
Mandrana, Diego de, and the

Armada  (1588)  iv.  200; death  of,

210.
Mangalore, Portuguese hold, v.

390 ; discovered by the Portu-
guese,  VIII. 128.
Mang  Bange,  or  Mawgbange,  Rajah

in  Java  (1590)  xi. 131, 132.
Mangia,  Tartars  and,  i.  87;  Paulus

Venetus sailing by, vii. 170 ;

people of, on the borders of

America, 165.
Mangiallino,  weight  of,  Goa,  vi.  18.
Mangoaks,  tribe  in  Virginia  (1585)

viii. 326; fight of, with Ralph

Lane, 330.

Mangu  Khan,  i.  248 ;  son  of
Seroctan,  74,  150;  and  the  Chris-
tians, 266,  267;  his  relation  to
Jenghiz  Khan,  268;  Rubruquis
sent  to,  275 ;  courtesy  of  his
people,  283 ;  his  letters  to  King
Louis,  IX.  288.

Mangues,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
XI. 78.

Manguslave,  port  of,  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  in,  11.  459;  his  sufferings
in,  461 ; latitude  of,  479.

'  Manhelge,'  book  of  laws  of  Ice-
land, IV.  72,  79, 174, 182.

Maniches,  Emperor  of  Constanti-
nople, English  embassy  to  (1056)
IV.  286.

Manila  Bay,  latitude  of,  Captain
Gualle  at  (1584)  ix. 331.

Manila,  Isle  of,  see  Luzon.

Manilia,  see  Manila.

Manilios,  trade  in  Guinea,  vi.  184,
191,  218,  239,  252.

Manils,  see  Manilios.

Manly,  English  messenger  to  Russia
(1572)  III.  174 ;  his  punishment  re-
quested by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
192.

Manmanuri  river,  x.  492.

Manna,  found  in  the  land  of  Job,
IV.  411;  in  Persia,  vi.  27;  in
New Spain, uses  of, ix. 385.

Mannering,  Jane,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Manners,  in  Iceland,  iv.  69,  70,  80,
170,  171,  184; table,  in  China,  vi.

304-

Mannheim,  Henry  Austell  at,  v.  321.

Manni,  or  bracelets  of  elephants'
teeth,  V.  377.

Mano  river,  xi. 13.

Manoa,  Indian  name  of  El  Dorado,
X.  340 ;  magnificence  of,  356 ;  dis-
covered by  Juan  Martinez,  359,
360;  Antonio  de  Berreo's  envoys
at,  374 ;  Spaniards  from,  killed  by
Morequito,  402 ;  lake  of,  grains
of  gold  found  in,  414;  town  on  a
lake,  460,  XI.  11;  distances  to,  x.
464.

Manoripano  Island,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1595)  x.  398.

Manpater,  harbour,  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier, x.  287

305

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Manrique,  Don  Alonso,  at  the  tak-
ing of  Cevola  (1540)  ix.  154.

Manriques,  Don  Antonio  de,  Veador
General  of  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.
223.

Manriques,  Don  Henrico,  ix.  373 ;
viceroy  of  Mexico,  and  Don  Fran-
cisco de  Pago  (1572)  X. 373.

Manriques,  Don  Pedro  de,  returned
from  England  (1589)  vi.  485.

Mansfield,  copper  mines,  v.  321,

Mansfield,  Count,  successor  of  the
Duke  of  Parma  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  Low  Countries  (1588)
IV. 220.

Mansfield,  Sir  Robert,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Mansor,  fight  between  Christians
and Saracens  at  (1249)  iv. 357.

Manta  river,  branch  of  the  Orinoco
river,  x.  408.

Mantellets, see  Mantlets.

Manteo,  Indian  of  Virginia  brought
to  England  (1584)  vin.3io,xil.  113  ;
sent  with  John  Arundel  to  Florida,
VIII.  315  ;  and  Grangino  on  the  flag-
ship, 316;  with  Ralph  Lane,  330;
in  Croatan  Island  with  Captain
Stafford  (1587)  393;  christening
of,  397;  native  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  403;  born  in  Croatan,
418.

Mantlets,  Turkish,  used  in  the  siege
of  Rhodes  (1522)  v. 18, 23, 24.

Mantoae,  native  gods  of  Virginia
(1586)  vm.  376.

Manuchio,  Jacomo,  his  passport
(1585)  V.  328.

Manuel,  Emperor  of  Constantinople,
letter  from,  to  Henry  II.  (1177)
IV. 312-319.

Manurawini  river,  x. 494.

Maones,  Turkish  ships  at  the  siege
of Famagusta  (1571)  v. 130.

Map  of  the  World,  by  Thorne,  11.
166-181  ;  presented  to  Henry
VII.  by  Bartholomew  Colum-
bus (1488)  VII.  137;  by  Sebas-
tian Cabot  (1497)  145,  147,  197;
by  Ortelius  (1569)  163,  180,  192,
197,  466;  of  Andrew  Urdaneta,
friar  of  Mexico,  196 ;  by  Mer-
cator,  197;  by  Gemma  Frisius,
197; by  Nicolo  Zeno,  448;  faults

in,  corrected  by  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert, 190; French, 195.

Mapal,  Indian  town  in  Fonsecco
Gulf, XI. 362.

Mapeributto, Indian  village, xi. 8.

Mapocha,  see  S.  lago  of  Chili.

Maps,  of  Russia,  by  William
Borough,  III.  209,  252,  (1556)  334;
of  newly  discovered  lands,  260,
264 ;  of  Pekin  or  Hangchow,  268 ;
of  England,  272 ;  of  Canada  and
New  France,  280 ;  of  Europe,  by
Mercator,  460;  of  Iceland,  iv.
43)  63,  139,  163 ;  of  the  English
expedition  to  Cadiz  (1596)  255;  of
Guinea,  to  be  made  by  John
Locke,  VI.  253  ;  of  China,  357 ;  of
the  north  parts  by  Nicolo  Zeno  (c.
(1380)  VII.  448 ;  dedicated  to  Richard
Hakluyt  (1587)  vm.  272  ;  corrected
by  Ortelius,  444;  of  the  way  to
Cevola,  by  Vasquez  de  Coronado
(1540)  IX.  146;  of  Antigua,  by
Francisco  Sanchez  Xamuz  Cado
(1581)  187;  of  Guiana  by  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh  (1595)  x.  365,  385  ;  of
the  South  Seas,  taken  by  Sir
Francis  Drake,  xi.  146 ;  of
China,  brought  home  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1588)  xi.  378;  of  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  by  Captain
Davis  (1592)  407.

Mapurwanas,  nation  of  the  Iwari-
poco,  X.  490.

Maquarima,  Indian  chief,  tortured
by  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)

x". 353-
Maracapana,  Jeronimo  de  Ortal  at,

X.  497; Antonio  Sedenno  at  (1536)

497 ; Friar  Francis  Montesino  at,

499 ; Indians  of,  and  the  gold  of

Guiana,  366.
Marannon,  see  Amazon.
Marafion,  see  Amazon.
Marasia, Godfrey of Bouillon's

army  at  (1097)  iv.  293.
Marata, kingdom of. Friar Marco

de Niga and the (1539) ix. 131,

143 ; description of, 136.
Maratea, not  found  by  Vasquez  de

Coronado  I1540)  ix. 158.
Marawini river, x. 492 ; between

Cape Cecil and Raleana river,

459-

306

INDEX

Marawinne  river,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.  7;  latitude
of, 10.

Marble,  Cape  of,  near  Newfound-
land, VIII.  279.

Marburg,  tomb  of  the  Lady  Elisa-
beth at,  II.  2 ;  principal  house  of
Dutch  knights  at,  6.

Marcasite,  found  in  Guiana  by
sailors  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1595)  X.  343;  mine  of,  in  Trini-
dad  (1595) 205.

March,  Peter,  of  the  Maria  Martin
(1584)  V.  281.

Marchant,  Captain,  death  of,  at
Panama  (1596)  x.  238.

Marchants, see Merchants.

Marcheso  of  Fermo,  Captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (157 1)  v.  151.

Marchetto  of  Fermo,  Captain,
wounded  at  the  defence  of  Fama-
gusta (1571)  V. 139.

Marchevetti,  Turkish  possession  in
Slavonia,  v.  80.

Marco,  weight  of  Goa,  vi.  18.

Marchopota,  in  Rhodes,  conspiracy
of  women  slaves  of  (1522)  v. 18.

Marcolino,  Francisco,  account  of
discoveries  of  Nicholas  and  An-
tonio Zeno  (1380)  vii.  445,  465.

Marcus,  companion  of  Friar  Marco
de  Ni^a  (1539)  ix. 141.

Mare  Euxinum,  see  Black  Sea  or
Euxine.

Mare  Major, see  Black  Sea.

Mare  mortuum,  near  the  country  of
Panten,  iv.  418.

Marequita,  mines  of  silver  in  (1590)

175-

Mare's  Milk,  see  Koumiss.

Margaratina,  found  in  Balaghat,
VI. 26.

Margaret,  daughter  of  Edward,
Edmund  Ironside's  son,  i.  25.

Margaret,  Queen  of  Denmark,  iv.
68,  170.

Margaret,  the,  of  Cley,  11.  64.

Margaret,  the,  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's fleet  (1589)  VII.  I ;  in
Graciosa,  11,  13;  sent  back  to
England, 18.

Margaret,  the,  of  Christopher  New-
port's fleet  (1591)  X. 184.

Margaret and John, the, and the

Spanish  ships  (1590)  vii.  31,  32;
hunting prizes (1591) 57.

Margarita  Island,  pearls  of,  ix.  318;
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1568)  401,
448,  X.  66,  (1565)  26;  Andrew
Barker  at  (1576)  84;  Antonio
de  Berreo  and  (1595)  206,  372;
pearl  fishing  in  (1595)  216;  voy-
age of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  to
(1596)  266-276;  Captain  William
Parker's  voyage  to  (1596)  277;
Ruttier  from  Martinino  or  Domin-
ica to,  287 ;  latitude  of,  335  ;  Juan
Martinez  at,  361 ;  or  Puerto  de
Tyranno,  Agira  at,  362  ;  Don  Juan
de  Villa  Andreda  and  Don  Juan
Sarmiento,  governors  of,  362 ;
King  Morequito  at,  373 ;  trade  of
Indians  at,  376;  governor  of,  and
Tobago  Island  (1596)  378;  gover-
nor of,  and  the  conquest  of
Guiana,  460 ;  description  of,  pearl
trade  in,  xi.  238;  governor  of,
killed  by  Lopez  de  Agira  (1568)  247.

Margaritas,  see  Pearls.

Margat, see Margate.

Margate,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.

Margaulx,  birds,  description  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  184,
192.

Margaulx  Islands,  animals  and
birds  found  on, viii. 191.

Maria  Martin,  the,  of  London,
Hassan,  viceroy  of  Algiers,  and
(1584)  v.  280; crew  of,  281.

Marias,  las  tres.  Islands  of,  latitude
of,  IX.  337.

Maribillas  Islands,  Captain  Gualle
at_(i584)  IX.  332.

Maricandis, city  of,  i.  231.

Marie,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of
Tyversky,  first  wife  of  Ivan  Vasil-
iwich,  II. i8g.

Marie,  William,  master  of  the  Little
Hermina (1535) viii. 211.

Marieburg,  see  Marienburg.

Marien,  cross  near  the  Panuco  river,
X. 318.

Marien,  Puerto  de,  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  x.  324.

Marien,  Table  of,  or  La  Meza  de,
near  Havana,  in  second  Ruttier,
X. 324.

307

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Marienburg,  principal  house  of  the
order  of  the  Dutch  knights,  ii.  6 ;
Casimir,  King  of  Poland,  and,  9,
10 ;  English  ambassadors  at
II.  19,  23 ;  conferences  between
England  and  Prussia  at  (1408)
91,  92,  96;  procurator  of,  dam-
ages paid  to, 106.

Maries  Islands,  latitude  of,  xi.  350.

Marigalante  Island,  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  x.  228;  marks  of,
in  the  second  Ruttier,  308 ;  lati-
tude of, 333.

Marigny,  President,  Captain  Gour-
gues  in  the  house  of  (1570)  ix.
III.

Mangold,  the,  voyage  of,  to  Cape
Breton,  by  Richard  Fisher  (1593)
VIII,  157;  on  the  coast  of  New-
foundland (1593)  158;  voyage
home  of, 160, 161.

Marigold,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1577)  xi.  102,  148,  155,  xii.
57 ;  takes  a  carvel  at  Cape  de  las
Barbas,  xi.  150 ;  lost  sight  of
(1578) 159. XII. 60.

Marinduque  Islands,  latitude  of,  ix.

329-

Mariners,  of  the  Armada,  iv.  199,
200;  forty,  sent  to  Meta  Incog-
nita to  winter  (1578)  vii.  321;
their  courage  in  a  storm,  336 ;  on
Spanish  ships,  xi.  446.

Maipa,  town  on  the  Aripacoro,  x.
494.

Maripai, nation  of  the  Coowini, x.

494-
Maripomma,  town  on  the  Pawro,  x.

492.
Marius, Roman senator, iv. 274.
Mark.  Padre,  of  S.  Pauls's  College

in  Goa  (1584)  v.  460,  463.
Markesbury, Captain, and  his  ship

at the capture of Spanish ships

(1589)  vn.  6.
Market, Sir Raimond, ambassador

of the Grand Master of Rhodes

to  Solyman (1522)  v. 52.
Market  towns  in Russia, 11. 225.
Markham, William, master of the

Francis  (1582)  xi. 172.
Marks, Thomas, condemned  to  the

galleys by Seville Inquisition

(1570)  IX.  464.

Marlowe,  '  Tamburlaine, '  by,  xii.
103 ; Shelley  compared  to, 107.

Marmesia,  see  Naramsy.

Marmora,  in  Asia,  v.  251 ;  Richard
Wrag  at  (1594)  vi. 107.

Marmori,  Giovanni,  engineer,  at
the  defence  of  Famagusta  (1571)
V. 134; slain, 152.

Maroca,  see  Morocco.

Marochus,  see  Morocco.

Maroons,  rebels  against  the  Span-
iards (1576)  X.  85  ;  in  West  Indies,
148;  .S.  Cruz  la  Real,  town  of
(1587)  149;  and  the  Frenchmen
brought  to  Panama,  155 ;  Sir
Robert  Dudley  in  Paracoa,  and
the  (1595)  206.

Marowanas,  nation  on  the  Arcooa,
X.  490.

Marpurg,  see  Marburg.

Marques,  Graviello,  soldier  of  Cap-
tain Ulloa,  wounded  by  the  Chi-
chimecas  Indians  (1539)  ix.  237.

Marquese,  la  Plaza  del,  in  Mexico,
IX. 420.

Marrac,  town  of  Arawak  Indians
(1597)  XI.  7.

Marracon, Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and

(1597) XI. II.

Marracou,  King,  and  Captain  Lau-
donniere  (1565)  ix. 49.

Marriage  ceremonies  in  Russia,  11.
444-447;  customs  in  Canada  (1535)
VIII. 241 ; of natives of Florida,

453-

Marroccos  Bay,  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1586)  XI. 367.

Marseilles,  Richard  I.  at  (1190)  iv.
321  ;  Baldwin,  archbishop  of  Can-
terbury, embarks  at  (1190)  341;
Richard  Earl  of  Cornwall  em-
barks at  (1240)  352;  weights  of,
V.  272 ;  Anthony  Jerado,  pilot
from  (1583)  292;  the  Centurion  at
(1591)  VII.  35;  birth-place  of
Michael Sancius (c. 1587) xi.

319-
Marseils, see Marseilles.
Marsh, Anthony, and the letter of

advice  for  England  (1580)  iii.  220;

Russian debts of, 421 ; Queen

Elizabeth  and, 426.
Marsh, John, granted Russian

license  (1567)  in.  93.

308

INDEX

Marshall, Christopher, in Virginia

(1585)  vm.  318.
Marshfield-Park, in Somersetshire,

Thomas  Windham  at, vi. 138.
Marshok  Reiz,  ambassador  of  Muly

Hamed  to  Queen  Elizabeth  (1588)

VI.  427.

Marsilia,  see  Marseilles.
Martaban,  in  the  kingdom  of  Pegu,

V.  414,  428; troubles  in,  416-418;

CjEsar Frederick leaves (1563)

419; wares sold  in, 491; Ralph

Fitch near (c. 1583) 497, 500;

haven  for  Pegu,  vi.  397.
Martasew,  John  White's  landing  at

(1587) VIII. 401.
Martaven,  see  Martaban.
Martenson,  Cornelius,  of  Schiedam,

master  of  the White  Dove  (1591)

VII.  84.

Marthesia,  Queen  of  the  Amazons,
X.  367.

Martin,  Indian  pilot  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x.  392.

Martin,  trader  in  Samva  and  in
Guinea  (1555)  vi. 163.

Martin  V.,  Pope,  Walden's  epistle
to,  IV.  277;  Bull  of,  and  the  dis-
covered lands  (1444)  XII.  4.

Martin,  Sir,  stratagem  of,  against
Prussians,  11.  5.

Martin,  John,  captain  of  the  Ben-
jamin (1585)  X.  99.

Martin,  Richard,  granted  Russian
license  (1586)  iii.  348.

Martin,  Richard,  junr.,  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  76,
78.

Martin,  Sir  Richard,  and  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  74,  75,  78.

Martin,  William,  servant  of  Captain
Hawlse  (1589)  xi. 388.

Martin  de  Sousa,  Rio  de,  mentioned
in  Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  84.

Martin  Garzia  Island,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  river  Plate,  xi.  97.

Martine,  Truchses,  thirty-first  master
of  the  Dutch  knights  (1477)  11.
10.

Martinez,  Domingo,  report  concern-
ing El  Dorado  (1593)  x.  439.

Martinez,  Juan,  discovery  of  Manoa
by,  X.  359,  360;  his  death  at
Puerto  Rico,  361.

Martiningo,  Captain  Gabriel,  and
the  siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  20-
45 ;  and  the  envoy  of  Solyman,
48.

Martiningo,  Earl  Hercole,  at  the  de-
fence of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  133,
137 ; hostage, 144 ; slave, 146,

151-

Martiningo,  Earl  Nestor,  '  Report
of  the  Success  of  Famagusta  '  by
(1571)  V.  129;  slave  to  Sanjack
of Bir, 147, 151; escape, 149.

Martiningo,  Luigi,  chief  of  ord-
nance at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.
132,  139;  and  Mustafa  Pasha,
145 ; slain  in Famagusta, 150.

Martinino,  one  of  the  Antilles,  Cap-
tain Laudonniere  at  (1564)  ix.  3;
or  Metalina,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1595)  X.  228;  Ruttier  from
Dominica  to,  287 ;  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  309 ;  latitude  of,
332; uninhabited  (1596)  478.

Martinus,  twenty-eighth  bishop  of
Schalholt, in Iceland (1547) iv.

59-  15^-

Martires,  head  of  the,  or  Cabeza  de
los,  X.  337 ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston
^t  (1595)  226;  described  in  the
Ruttier,  298 ;  in  second  Ruttier,
325; latitude  of, 298, 334.

Martyn,  George,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  viii.  403.

Martyr,  Peter,  of  Angleria,  iii. ;
'Decade'  by,  quotation  from,  vii.
150,  151;  friend  of  Sebastian
Cabot,  153 ;  and  the  north-west
passage,  163 ;  on  the  pigeons  of
the  Isles  of  Lucayos,  ix.  53 ;
'  Decades  '  by,  translated  by
Richard  Eden  (1555)  xii.  35;  pub-
lished by  Hakluyt  (1587)  83.

Martyrs  in Thana, iv. 412.

Martyrs,  the,  shoals  near  the  Cape
of  Florida,  ix.  50.

Martyrs,  Islands  of,  the  Grace  at
(1594)  VIII.  163;  John  White  in
sight  of  (1590)  411.

Marvyn,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Marwabo,  Indian  captain,  x.  493.

Mary,  Queen  of  England,  Richard
Eden  to,  11.  270;  letters  to  Ivan
Vasiliwich  (1555)  11.  278-281 ;  and

309

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

George  Killingworth  (1555)  and
Richard  Gray,  280;  and  the  mer-
chants' charter  (1555)  304;  pre-
sents between  the  Emperor  of
Russia  and,  360-361 ;  and  Osep
Napea,  iii.  16;  and  the  Muscovy
Company,  84.

Mary,  Queen  of  Scotland,  wreck  of
Osep Napea and, 11. 353.

Mary,  wife  of  Magnus,  Duke  of
Hoist,  II. 190.

Mary,  the,  ship  of  the  knights  of
Rhodes  (1522)  v,  9.

Mary  Edward,  the,  of  London,  and
the  survivors  of  the  Tohy  (1593)
VII.  129.

Mary  George,  the,  and  Levant
trade  (c. 151 1)  v.  62.

Mary  Grace,  the,  and  Levant
trade  (c. 151 1)  v. 62.

Mary  Rose,  the,  of  the  Cadiz  ex-
pedition (1596)  IV.  242,  247.

Mary  Rose,  the,  flagship  of  Sir  John
Hawkins,  at  Flores  (1590)  viii.  421.

Mary  Sparke,  the,  of  Plymouth,  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  ship,  voyage  to
the  Azores  (1586)  vi.  434.

Mary  Susan,  the  (1581)  iii.  246.

Mary's  sepulchre  in  Jerusalem,  v.
212.

Masadie,  boats  used  in  S.  Thomas,
in  India,  v.  402.

Masagunt,  in  Barbary,  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  in  sight  of  (1596)  x.  267.

Masbat,  see  Masbate.

Masbate  Island,  Captain  Gualle  at
(1584)  IX.  328;  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1588)  XI.  334;  from,  to  Sebo-
jon  Island,  364.

Mascarenhas,  Don  Francisco  de,
viceroy  of  Goa  (1583)  v.  469.

Mascarenhas,  Manuel,  and  Feliciano
Cieza  (1597)  xi.  66,  68.

Masham,  Thomas,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  third  voyage  to  Guiana
(1596-97) written by, xi. 1-15.

Mashwipo, Indian  captain,  x.  491.

Mason,  James,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii. 317.

Masons,  in  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
expedition (1583)  viii. 47.

Massacre  of  Christian  captains  at
Famagusta  by  Mustafa  (1571)  v.
146.

Massam,  William,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.

Massatlan,  latitude  of,  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  322.

Masse,  Nicholas,  master  of  the  Rose
of  Danzig  (1577)  vi.  231.

Masson,  see  Barre.

Massovia,  i.  159,  ii.  7;  Conrad,
Duke  of,  2.

Master,  Nicolas,  mutineer  killed  at
Archaha  (1564) ix, 43.

Masterlina,  in  Russia,  Povensa  to,
m. 81.

Mastic, found  in Chios, vi. 26.

Masticke,  see  Mastic.

Masulipatam,  in  gulf  of  Bengal,
V.  472  ;  painted  cloth  of,  exported
to  Pegu,  491.

Matachines,  near  Granada,  x.  497.

Matalina, see  Martinino.

Matalino,  latitude  of,  mentioned  In
the  Ruttier,  x. 287.

Matamba,  King  of,  war  with  King
of  Angola  (1590)  vi,  468.

Matangas,  see  Matanzas.

Matanzas,  the,  John  White  at  (1590)
VIII.  412;  William  King's  cap-
tures at  (1592)  X.  192 ;  sea  cur-
rents at,  in  the  Ruttier,  303 ;  El
pan  de,  marks  of,  325,  331;  El
Puerto  de,  meaning  of,  330.

Matapan  Cape,  John  Locke  at  (1553)
V.  84,  10 1 ;  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V.  250.

Matarea,  balm  refining  at,  v.  338.

Matas,  Cape  de,  mentioned  In  the
Ruttier,  xi.  87.

Matas  Cardoso,  John  de,  governor
of  Cabodelo  (1597)  xi.  70.

Materta,  see  Matriga.

Mateumal  Isle,  Tartar  traffic  at
(1596)  XI.  441.

Mathiaca,  King,  and  the  Spanish
prisoner  (1565)  ix.  49.

Mathiaqua,  Captain  Laudonniere's
discovery  beyond  (1565)  ix. 54.

Mathin,  the  Portuguese  at,  viil.
I2q.

Matorooni  river,  x.  494.

Matria, well of the Virgin Mary

near  Cairo,  vi.  38.
Matricula, Portuguese  registry, vi.

153-
Matriga,  on  the  Don,  i.  230,  231.

310

INDEX

Matteo,  of  Capua,  captain  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  152.

Mattheo,  Don,  mansion  of,  near
Tecuanapa,  ix.  471.

Matthew  Gonson,  the,  voyage  of
(1534)  V.  67;  John  Locke  on  (1553)
76; voyages  to  Chios  (1569) 117.

Matthew  of  London,  the,  and
Levant  trade  (c.  151 1)  v.  62,

Matthew  of  Westminster,  on  King
Edgar,  i.  20.

Matthew  Paris,  see  Paris.

Matthew,  John,  of  the  Edward
Cotton  (1583)  VI.  412.

Matthews,  John,  survivor  of  the
Tohy  (1593)  VII.  129.

Mauci,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74.

Mauneses,  governor  of  Chios  (1569)
V.  hi; expelled  from  Chios,  112.

Maunsell,  Richard,  of  the  Eliza-
beth (1584)  V.  281.

Maupas, garden  of, in  Rhodes, v.

25-

Maure  Island,  in  Asia,  v.  251.

Mauritania  Caesariensis,  see  Bar-
bary.

Mausolus'  tomb  In  Caria,  v. 119.

Maustrond  In  Norway,  11,  64,  65.

Mawara  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana,  x.  459.

Maware  town,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1597)  XI.  7.

Mawarl  river,  x.  492.

Mawarparl  river,  x.  492.

Mawarparo  river,  between  Cape
Cecil  and  Raleana  river, x. 459.

Mawdly,  Henry,  burnt  to  death  on
Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.  318.

Mawewiron,  see  Mawerlrou.

Mawerirou,  Indian,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  and  (1597)  xi.  78.

Maworia,  nation  of  the  Wia,  x.  490.

Mawronama,  town  on  the  Curitini,
X.  492 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at
(1597) XI. II.

Maxentlus,  Flavius  Constantine  and,
IV.  274.

Maximus,  King  of  Britain  (390)  iv.
278.

May,  Henry,  Captain  Ralmond's
voyage  to  East  Indies,  written  by
(1591)  X.  194;  wrecked  on  Ber-
muda Island  (1593)  200;  builds  a
bark, 201 ; in Newfoundland,

parts  from  Captain  de  la  Barbo-
tiere  (1594)  203.

May,  Richard,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

May,  river  of,  in  Florida,  discovered
by  Captain  RIbault  (1562)  viii.
460 ;  Captain  Laudonniere  at
(1564)  IX.  6-14;  Sir  John  Hawkins
at (1565)  X.  51.

MayacI  Point,  mentioned  In  the  Rut-
tier,  X.  301.

Mayarqua,  on  the  river  of  May
(1564)  IX.  33.

Maydstone, see  Maidstone.

May  Flower,  the  voyage  to  Guinea
of  (1566)  VI.  266;  the  fight  of,
with  Portuguese  (1567)  282.

Mayflower,  the,  vice-admiral  of  the
Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  (1593),
the  fight  of,  with  Las  Cinque
Llaguas,  119.

Maynarde,  Thomas,  '  Sir  Francis
Drake,  his  voyage,  1595,'  xii.  64;
quotation  from, 66.

Mayne,  Randall,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 317.

Mayo  Island,  see  Maio.

Mayon,  King  in  Florida  (1562)  viii.

474-

Mayor,  Lord,  of  London,  and  the
Russian  ambassador,  11. 355.

Mayrra,  King,  in  Florida  (1564)  ix.
20.

Mazigam,  conquered  by  Portuguese,
viii.  127.

Mazovia,  see  Massovia.

Meaco,  see  Kyoto.

Mead,  Russian  drink,  iii.  415.

Meadhole,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  vi.
284.

Meani,  Captain,  of  Perugia,  ser-
geant major,  killed  at  the  defence
of  Famagusta  (1571)  v. 137, 150.

Meani,  or  Temple,  in  China,  de-
scription, VI. 305.

Measures,  used  in  Russia,  11.  273,
294;  of  Babylon,  by  William  Bar-
ret, VI.  10;  of  Bussorah,  11;  of
Ormuz,  14 ;  of  Goa,  17 ;  of  Cochin
and  Malacca,  21.

Meat,  drying  of,  by  the  natives  of
Cape  Breton, viii. 160.

Mecala,  dangers  of  the  flats  of,  x.
302.

311

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Mecallawich,  Weskawate,  Ivan,
Emperor  of  Russia's  secretary,  ii.
296.

Mecameca,  Miles  Phillips  at  (1580)
IX.  435.

Mecca,  11.  457;  offering-  to  Mahomet
sent  to,  III.  152  ;  Persian  pilgrims
to,  161,  162;  trade  with  Diu,  377;
trade  with  Chaul,  470;  trade  with
Cairo  (1584)  v.  273,  344;  pilgrim-
age of  the  Mahometans  to,  329-
365;  ginger  found  in,  vi.  25;
senna  found  in,  27 ;  port  of,  in
Arabia  Felix,  viii.  128.

Mechuacan,  Indians  of,  and  Friar
John  de  Padilla  (1540)  ix.  166;
John  Chilton  at  (1572)  374;
copper  mines  in,  374;  hot  springs
in,  384;  Friar  Alonso,  bishop  of
(1590)  X.  168.

Mecka,  see  Mecca.

Mecklenburg,  Albert,  prince  of,  11.
68.

Medelin  river,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier, X. 297.

Media,  see  Shirvan.

Medices,  John,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205.

Medicine,  art  of,  in  China,  vi.  353.

Medina,  Duke  of,  and  John  de
Trexeda  (1590)  x.  160.

Medina,  John  Lopez  de,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  200.

Medina,  Pedro  de,  '  Arte  de  Nave-
gar  '  by  (1545)  xii.  80

Medina,  Mahomet's  tomb  in,  v.
361  ; mosque  in,  362.

Medina-Sidonia,  Duke  of,  and  the
intended  English  voyage  to  Guinea
(c.  1481)  VI.  123.

Medina-Sidonia,  Duke  of,  general  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  199,  203,
209;  and  Hugo  de  Moncada,  215;
and  the  Prince  of  Parma,  219,231 ;
letters  from  Lord  Howard  to
(1596)  263.

Medine,  money  of  Babylon,  vi.  10;
of  Ormuz, 14.

Mediterranean  Sea,  ffi.  144;  sailing
chart  of  the,  engraving  of,  v.  512;
Levant  Company's  privileges  to
trade  in  (1592)  vi.  181  ;  Contarenus
on  the,  vii.  167;  and  its  tributaries,
176.

Mediterraneum,  see  Mediterranean.
Medkerk, Colonel, his  regiment  at

the  taking  of Puente  de  Burgos

(1589)  VI.  492,  493; at  the  taking

of  Lisbon,  497,  501.
Medlars, found in Virginia (1586)

viii. 366; in Florida, 451.
Medon,  Ralph  Fitch  in  (c. 1583)  v,

486.
Modus  sent  to  Asia  by  Nimrod,  in.

371-

Medusa,  Queen  of  the  Amazons  of
Africa,  x.  367.

Meere,  Wolstan  and,  i.  15.

Meg,  the,  of  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's fleet  (1589)  VII. I, 2.

Megalandra,  Solyman's  pavilion  at,
in  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  21.

Megastenes  on  the  Mandri,  a  people
of  India,  iv.  84, 189.

Mehemet  Khan,  son  of  Murad
Khan, vi. 116.

Meidenburg,  Burgrave  of,  11.  2.

Mekleburg,  see  Mecklenburg.

Melanogetuli,  wandering  tribe  of
Africa, vi. 167.

Melaz,  John,  mentioned  by  Vasquez
de  Coronado  (1540)  ix. 157.

Melchisedech,  tomb  of,  in  Jerusalem,
V. 211.

Meleda  Island,  under  the  govern-
ment of  Ragusa,  v.  79,  104;  John
Locke  at  (1553) 103.

Melegettes,  discovered  by  the  Portu-
guese, VIII. 127.

Melendez,  Don  Pedro,  and  his  ex-
pedition to  New  France  (1565)  ix.
91 ;  enters  Fort  Caroline  (1565)
95 ;  and  the  French  slain  in
Florida  (1568)  109;  Roger  Boden-
ham's  voyage  to  New  Spain  with

(1564)  359-
Melendez, Pedro, admiral, and Sir
John  Hawkins  in  Mexico  Bay,  x.

131-
Melendez, Pedro, governor of

Florida,  nephew  of  Admiral  Pedro

Melendez,  ix.  113; governor  of  S.

Helena,  in  Florida  (1586)  x.  131.
Melgosa,  Paul  de,  in  Cevola  (1540)

IX. 153.
Mf-lic,  legitimate  son  of  the  King  of

Georgia,  i.  86,  140.
Melick  Zamba,  King,  south  of  Sene-

312

INDEX

gal  (1591)  VII.  92;  Amar  Meleck,
son  of,  94.

Melinde,  ambrachan  found  in,  vi.
26;  dente  d'abolio  found  in,  27;
King  of,  in  Africa,  and  Prester
John  (1555)  169;  discovered  by
the  Portuguese,  viii.  128;  Portu-
guese garrison  at,  445 ;  latitude
of,  X. 195.

Melipotamo, town in Cyprus, v.

Melistorte, Friar Odoric in (1330)

IV. 438.
Mella, found in Roumania, vi.

27.
Melleghete,  found  in  western  parts,

VI.  27.
Mellitus,  Bishop,  i.  309.
Melo,  Friar  Anthony  de,  of  Captain

Ulloa's  expedition  (1540)  ix.  266;

restores  the  seal  skins  to  the  In-
dians, 277.
Melo,  Lewis  de,  exploration  of  Ma-

ranon or Amazon river by, xi.

242.
Melos  Island,  in  the  Archipelago,  v.

250; Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1586)

VI.  41.
Memel,  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)

"I- 345-

Memet,  Chaggi,  on  the  way  from
Tabriz  to  Persia,  11.  484.

Memorancie,  Cape,  in  Canada,  dis-
covered by  Jacques  Cartier  (1534)
vm.  205.

Memphis, see Cairo.

Men, headless, description of, x.

465-

Menatoan's  wife,  taken  by  the  Eng-
lish to  Roanoke  (1587)  viii. 396.

Menatonon,  ally  of  Pooneno  and
Wingandacoa,  vin.  307 ;  King  of
Chawanook,  prisoner  of  Ralph
Lane  in  Virginia  (1585)  322,  335;
Skiko,  son  of,  329;  ally  of  Ralph
Lane,  339.

Mendanio,  Alvares  de,  discoveries
of,  XI.  288.

Mendez  de  Valdes,  governor  of
Puerto  Rico,  letter  from  to  Don
Pedro  de  Xibar,  x. 161.

Mendoga,  Anthony,  see  Don  Antonio
de  Mendoza.

Mendoga,  Don  Fernando  de,  captain

of  the  Madre  de  Dios  (1592)  vii.

"5-

Mendoga,  Don  Garcia  Urtado  de,
viceroy  of  Peru  (1590)  x.  169.

Mendogino,  Cape,  distance  from  the
Cape  of  S.  Lucas,  ix.  336.

Mendoza,  Anthony  de,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  200.

Mendoza,  Bernardino  de,  and  the
Spanish  reverse  (1588)  x. 255.

Mendoza,  Don  Antonio  de,  vil.
169 ;  viceroy  of  Mexico,  and
Don  Ferdinando  Cortes,  ix.
115;  Vasquez  de  Coronado's
letter  (1539)  118;  letter  of,
to  Charles  V.,  121;  Indians  of
Mexico  and  (1539)  123;  gift  from
Indians  sent  by  Vasquez  de  Coro-
nado  (1540)  161 ;  account  of  Cap-
tain Alarchon's  voyage  and  dis-
covery ordered  by  (1540)  279-318.

Mendoza,  Don  Garcia  de,  governor
of  Chili,  and  the  Straits  of  Magel-
lan, XI.  259;  Chili  subdued  by,
277.

Mendoza,  Don  Pedro  de,  and  the
first  Spanish  Colony  on  river
Plate,  XI.  98 ;  explores  the  river
Plate, 252 ; his  death, 253.

Menego  Isle,  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  VIII.  167,  172 ;  description
of, 181.

Menelaus, King  of  Cerigo,  v.  250.

Meneses,  Don  Gonsalo  de,  captain
of  Ormuz  (c. 1584)  v.  507.

Menetow,  a  knight  of  Rhodes,  at  le
Fisco  (1522)  v. 12.

Mengu,  see  Mangu  Khan.

Meniti,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.

Mennones,  people  of  Africa,  vi.  169.

Menquit,  native  name  for  Ramea,
VIII. 157.

Mensurado,  Cape,  description  of,  vi.
158;  William  Towerson  at  (1557)
229 ; the Richard of Arundel at

(1588)  451-

Mentz,  in  Germany,  xi.  441 ;  arch-
bishop of,  and  the  Normandy  pil-
grims to  Jerusalem  (1064)  iv.  291.

Meotis  Palus,  see  Azov.

Mepenes  nation,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  XT. 100.

Mequaretas,  Los,  nation,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  100.

XII

3^3

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Merall,  Sir  Andrew  de,  knight
of  Rhodes,  traitor,  v.  4;  and
Solyman,  5,  35  ;  Blasie,  servant  of,
40.

Mercator,  Gerard,  i.  liii.  f. ;  account
of  Nicholas  of  Lynn's  voyage,  302,
in.  210;  his  map,  211,  460,  vii.
203;  letter  to  Hakluyt,  iii.  275-
292  ;  portrait  of,  288  ;  John  Balak's
letters  to,  450-457 ;  on  Iceland,  iv.
10,  99 ;  his  opinion  on  the  north
passage,  vii.  194;  and  Hakluyt,
XII.  75.

Mercenaries,  in  the  Russian  army,
III.  379.

Merchant  Adventurers,  Company  of,
XII.  22.

Merchant,  Captain  John,  land  cap-
tain in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1585)  X.  98.

Merchant,  Spanish,  from  Jamaica,
return  home  of  (1565)  x.  43.

Merchant Royal, the, at Flores

(1590)  VIII. 421.

Merchant  Royal,  the,  of  the  English
merchant's  fleet  (1586)  vi.  47;  at
Zante,  48 ;  flagship  of  the  English
merchants'  fleet,  50;  vice-admiral
in  the  voyage  to  the  East  Indies

(1591)  387;  Abraham  Kendal,
master  of,  390 ;  returns  to  Eng-
land, VI.  390,  x.  194 ;  at  S.  Helena,
VI.  402;  sent  to  Peniche  (1589)
511;  Samuel  Foxcroft,  captain  of,
X.  194.

Merchants,  Company  of,  and  the
Virginian  patent  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1588)  xii.  87.

Merchants,  English,  and  foreign,  i.
310-320;  protection  of  the  Eng-
lish, 311,  313;  English  and  Nor-
wegian, 321,  349;  English,  ar-
rested in  Norway,  341  f.,  343  f.,
347  f.  ;  and  the  Livonian  ships,  11.
14,  33 ;  and  their  goods  seized  in
Prussia,  15-18,  19;  agreement  be-
tween, and  Prussian,  20  f. ;  privi-
leges of,  and  Prussian,  23 ;  busi-
ness prohibited  between,  and  Prus-
sian in  (1404)  28  f.  ;  and  the  Prus-
sian laws,  52  ;  their  unfairness  to
foreigners,  72 ;  excluded  from
foreign  markets,  80;  and  Hanse
league (1407) 81; commercial

facilities to, and Prussian (1409)
99;  charter  granted  to  (1404)  io8f.,
(1462)  147; in  Denmark,  113; in
foreign marts, 128 ; confiscations
and  forfeitures  for  fraud,  154 ;  taxes
on  goods,  155  f. ; regulations  for,
by  Cabot  (1553)  200  f. ; advice  to,
by  Cabot,  202-205 ; their  interest
in finding  new foreign  markets,
239  f. ; privileges  granted  to,  in
Russia, 271 ; privileges to, and
Russian (1555) 280; settled in
Russia  as  the  Muscovy  Company
(1555)  281-303  ;  received  by  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  292  ;  met  by  Rus-
sian merchants,  293  ;  Queen  Mary's
charter  to  (1555)  304;  free  to  trade
in  Narva,  486 ; and  Russians,  in.
(^563)  41.  235,  316,  420;  and  the
discovery  of  new  trades,  87; and
the  Russian  privileges  (1567)92-97,
111-116;  and  Turkish  (1568) 141;
licensed  to  own  houses  in  Persia
(1568)  147;  return  of,  to  Yaroslavl,
156 ; detained at Astrakhan by
Russian  officials  (1572)  181 ;  offend
the  Emperor  of  Russia  (1572)  187;
granted free  pardon by Emperor
of Russia, III. 188, 189 ; rivalry
between, and Dutch at Kola
(1578) 209; at Yaroslavl (1579)
215, 246; at Nizhniy Nov-
gorod and Kazan, 215; at
Astrakhan, 217, 245; at Bil-
dih  (1580)  224; at  Derbent  (1580)
228 ; and  the  Pasha  of  Derbent,
228,  232 ;  distress  of,  in  the  Cas-
pian Sea, 241-245 ; attacked by
Nagay  Tartars,  244 ;  and  Dutch,
in Russia (1583) 316; friendless
state of, at the Russian court
(1583)  317;  compensations  obtained
for,  by  Sir  Jerome  Bowes,  of  the
Emperor of Russia (1583) 324;
leave Russia, 352 ; and the
Russian trade, 420-427, 431-443;
in  Russia,  protected  by  Boris  Feo-
dorowich (1592) 435, 438; house
at Moscow given to, 443 ; and
John I. of Portugal (1415) iv.
367, 368 ; and foreign shipping,
V. 63 ; privileges granted to, by
Murad Khan (1579) 170-178;
charter of privileges, by Murad

314

INDEX

Khan,  178;  molested  in  Patras
(1584)  283 ;  by  King  of  Tripolis,
297-321;  in  Ormuz,  459;  com-
mandments in  favour  of,  285 ;
Queen  Elizabeth's  letter  concern-
ing (1584)  311 ;  in  Cambay  (1583)
450 ;  in  China,  45 1 ;  privileges
granted,  by  Peter,  Prince  of  Mol-
davia (1588)  VI.  59;  in  the  Levant,
privileges  granted,  by  Queen
Elizabeth  (1592)  73-92  ;  at  conquest
of  Ceuta  by  Portuguese  (1415)  121 ;
trade  in  Canaries  (1526)  124;
fight  with  Spaniards  (1552)  139;
in  Guinea  and  Benin  (1553)  141,
196;  at  the  Castle  of  Mina,  201;
and  the  Portuguese,  203 ;  treach-
ery of  natives  against,  in  Guinea
(1556)  207;  and  the  French  ships
in  Guinea  (1556)  213;  as  ambas-
sadors in  Canaries  (1577)  235  ;  and
French,  on  Guinea  coast  (1562)
258;  fight  between,  and  Portu-
guese (1562)  278,  280;  negro
treachery  towards,  at  Cape  Verde
(1567)  272  ;  trading  in  S.  lago,  276;
and  French,  at  the  reception  of
Edmund  Hogan  at  Morocco  (1577)
287 ;  MuUy  Abdelmelech  and  the,
2qo ;  privileges  of  the  Emperor  of
Morocco  to  (1577)  292  ;  and  foreign,
reception  of  the,  by  Henry
Roberts  (1585)  427;  and  the  edict
of  Mully  Hamed,  Emperor  of  Mor-
occo (1587)  428,  429;  in  Benin
(1588)  450-458,  458-461 ;  privileges
granted  to,  in  Senegal  and  Gam-
bia (1588)  VII.  go;  killed  in  Porto
d'Aliy,  91 ;  and  goods  detained
at  Joala  (1591)  96;  English,
of  Morocco,  and  the  captives
of  the  Moors  (1593)  128;  in
Newfoundland  (1583)  viii.  52;
adventurers  in  the  Western  Plant-
ing, 1 13 ;  company  of,  for  dis-
coveries in  America  (1583)  134;
in  Grand  Canary  Island  (1555)
IX,  341 ;  of  Southampton,  voy-
ages to  Brazil  by,  xi.  25 ;  of
Brunswick,  and  Henry  HI.'s
charter,  i.  323 ;  Chinese,  vi.  326 ;
of  Cologne,  and  Henry  HI.  i.
323;  Danish,  and  Henry  HI.'s
charter, 325 ; Dutch  rivalry  with

English,  at  Kola  in  Russia  (1578)
III.  209;  in  Russia  (1583)  316;
foreign,  i.  310-320;  and  Edward
I.,  327;  arbitrary  arrest  of ,  il.  73  ;
in  Iceland,  iv.  67,  168;  and
brokers  in  Cambaietta,  v.  375 ;  in
Cathay,  vii.  201 ;  French,  in  Kola,
Russia,  III.  470;  on  Guinea  coast,
(1562)  VI.  258;  German,  and
Henry  III.'s  and  Edward  I.'s
charters,  i.  326 ;  Hanse,  and
Henry  IV.  of  England,  11.  55-67;
grievances  of  (1407)  72-79;  and
the  English  merchants,  81  f. ;
Kaffir  and  Portuguese,  v.  444;  of
Liibeck,  and  Henry  III.'s  charter,

I.  325 ;  Norwegian  and  English,
321,  344;  of  Pegu,  business  ways
of,  V.  432 ;  Portuguese,  and
Kaffir,  V.  444;  and  the  English,
VI.  203,  260,  278;  Prussian,  de-
spoiled by  the  English,  11.  13  f. ;
agreement  between  English  and,
20  f. ;  privileges  of,  23 ;  suffer-
ings of,  26;  business  prohibited
between  English  and,  28  f. ;  com-
mercial facilities  to,  99  ;  of  Rhodes,
and  the  Grand  Master  (1522)  v.
44  f. ;  of  Riohacha,  accounts  of
Eldorado  by  (1594)  x.  440;  Rus-
sian, privileges  to,  11.  280;  Em-
peror of  Russians  a  merchant,
277 ;  and  English  merchants,  iii.
41,  316,  420,  435;  in  Bottanter,v.
4S3 ;  Saracen,  William  Longesp^e
and  the  (1249)  iv.  354;  of  Seville,
fleet  of,  for  the  discovery  of  the
Moluccas  (1527)  XI.  91 ;  Turkish,
in  Sudak,  I.  230 ;  and  the  English,
III.  141 ;  privileges  demanded  by
Murad  Khan  for  (1579)  v.  169;
granted  by  Queen  Elizabeth,
171.

Merchants,  Island  of,  near  Kazan,
great  market  centre,  11.  451.

Merchants'  Isle,  the  Sunshine  at
(1586)  VII.  411;  John  Davys 's
fleet  at,  417.

Merchena, Dr. Leigh's  servant  in,

II.  164.

Merclas,  or  Saracens,  i.  260.
Merdin, in  Armenia, v. 505.
Merdui,  see  Merclas.
Meredith,  son  of  Rhesus,  his  verses

315

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

on  Madoc,  son  of  Owen  Gwynedd
(c.  1447)  VII.  135.

Merick,  Andrew,  captain  of  the  De-
light in  John  Chidley's  voyage
(1589)  XI.  381.

Mericke,  Sir  Giliy,  see  Meyrick.

Mericke, Sir  William,  see  Meyrick.

Merida,  birth-place  of  Francis
d'UUoa,  IX.  374.

Merida,  in  Campeachy,  on  the  Tal-
asco  river,  ix.  374.

Merida,  in  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Gran-
ada, X.  363.

Merike,  see  Meyrick.

Merkat,  a  tribe  of  Tartary,  i.  68,
86,  142 ;  vanquished  by  Jenghiz
Khan, 143.

Merkiti, see Merkat.

Merlin,  the,  and  proposed  voyage  to
Guinea  (1564)  vi,  262,  x.  9;  voy-
age to  West  Indies  (1564)  vi.  263;
loss,  264,  X. 10.

Merlowe,  Richard,  English  ambas-
sador, II.  98, 106.

Mermaid,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley,  left  to  the  Earl  of  Essex
(1596)  X.  266.

Mermaid  of  Dartmouth,  the,  John
Davys 's  second  voyage  in,  for  the
discovery  of  the  north-west  pass-
age (1586)  VII.  393;  forsakes
John Davys  (1586)  442.

Meroe  island,  in  the  Nile,  vi. 168.

Meropius,  philosopher  of  Tyre,  viii.
104; death  of, in India, 104.

Merosro, gulf  of, iii. 280.

Merrick,  Hugh,  captain  of  the
Prudence  (1591)  x. 184.

Merrimoth,  Emme,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII. 403.

Mersalquiber, port of Oram, vi.

143-
Mersey, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  299.
Mersh,  John,  esquire,  11.  362.
Mersh, John, granted Russian

license  (1569)  iii. 109.
Mersh, Thomas, and Prussian

pirates,  11.  63.
Mervin, Master, in the Earl of

Cumberland's voyage (1589) vii.

I.
Meschora, province of Russia, iii.

359-

Meskit,  Ismael  Sophi's  burial-place,

III.  26.

Mesquinez,  fruit  of  New  Spain,  de-
scription,  IX. 382.
Messana,  see  Messina.
Messania, sweet-smelling pond in,

IV.  39. 134-

Messenger  of  the  Admiral  of  Jaffa
and  Prince  Edward  (1270)  iv.  363;
Portuguese  and  Captain  Sampson
at  S. lago  Island  (1585)  x. 106.

Messenger,  the,  at  Liberty  Island
(1591)  vii._  92. _

Messina,  rising  in,  against  the  Eng-
lish (1190)  IV.  323;  taken  by  the
English,  324 ;  the  Matthew  Gon-
snn  at  (1535)  v.  68,  117;  Roger
Bodenham  at  (1551)  72,  76;  port
for  Tripolis,  212.

Mestizo  or  half  caste,  ix.  431;  com-
panion of  Friar  Augustin  Ruiz
(1581)  IX.  187.

Mestizos  of  De  la  Paz  town  and  the
smallpox  (1590)  X.  171.

Mestiso, Mestisa,  see  Mestigo.

Mestitlan,  Indian  city  of  Panuco,  ix.
370;  Anthony  Godard  and  his  men
at  (1568)  417.

Mestre,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Mestre  Alvaro,  Sierra  de,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  81.

Mesureur,  killed  in  the  Indians'  am-
bush (1565)  IX.  94.

Meta  river,  x.  408;  tributary  of  the
Baraquan,  in  Guiana,  x.  365,  407;
source  of,  368.

Metackweni,  native  town  in  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  322.

Meta  Incognita,  or  North-west,
English  voyages  to  (1495)  vii.  141,
143 ;  Captain  Frobisher's  first
voyage  to  (1576)  204-211,  279-283;
second  voyage  (1577)  211-230,  284-
319;  third  voyage  (1578)  231-242,
243-244;  vocabulary  (1576)  211;
people,  262;  inhabited,  277;  Cap-
tain Frobisher  takes  possession  of,
in  Queen  Elizabeth's  name  (1577)
282;  products  (1577)  291,  298;
winter  houses  of,  300 ;  named  by
Queen  Elizabeth,  320,  viii.  2;
map  of,  engraving  of,  vii.  336 ;
description (1578) vii. 367-375;

316

INDEX

natives of, brought to England

by Captain Frobisher, ix. 167;

discovered  by  Frobisher,  xii,  27.
Metelin,  commandment  to  the  Beys

and Cadies  of  (1584)  v. 290.
Metelin Island, near Natolia, v.

Meteran,  Emanuel  van,  '  History  of
the  Low  Countries  '  by, iv. 197-

234-

Moticals,  weight  of  Bussorah,  vi.
12 ; of  Ormuz, 14.

Metingham,  John  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great charter, i. 296.

Metrals,  money  of  Babylon,  vi. 10.

Metrit,  a  tribe  of  Tartary,  i.  68,  142 ;
vanquished  by  Jenghiz  Khan,  143.

Metrodorus,  India  the  great  dis-
covered by,  VIII.  104.

Metropolitan  of  Moscow,  11.  226,  423,
433  >  439)  St  the  blessing  of  the
Moskva,  432  ;  made  abbot  of  Sol-
ofky  monastery,  iii.  75 ;  at  the
coronation  of  the  Emperor  of
Russia  (1584)  338;  of  Mangu-
slave, II. 460; of Bokhara, 470,

474-

Mewestone,  see  Mew  Stone.

Mew  Stone  rock,  the,  near  Ply-
mouth, VI.  462 ;  island  like,  in
West  Indies,  x.  233.

Mexia,  Don  Augustin  de,  colonel  in
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  202.

Mexico,  ship  from,  captured  by  Eng-
lish (1589)  VII.  20;  Vasquez  de
Coronado's  voyage  to  Sierra  Nev-
ada, 170 ;  conquest  of,  by  Her-
nando Cortez,  viiT.  95;  Monte-
zuma, Emperor  of,  124;  map  of
(1587)  272,  voyage  to,  ix.  115;  Don
Antonio  de  Mendoza,  governor  of,
115;  Indians  of,  and  Don  Antonio
de  Mendoza  (1539)  123;  return  of
Spaniards  (1542)  165;  return  of
Andrew  de  Campo,  166;  discovery
of,  by  Friar  Augustin  Ruyz  and
Antonio  de  Espejo  (1581-1583)  169-
204;  Antonio  de  Espejo  In  (1582)
194;  or  Cibola,  Bartholomew
Cano  on  (1590)  204;  S.  Juan
d'UUoa  port,  343;  description,
by  Robert  Tomson  (1558)  355,
357  ;  products,  358,  382  ;  conquest
(1519-1520)  358; John  Chilton  in

(1572)  370;  Spanish  goods  from
Vera  Cruz  to  (1572)  379;  Sir  John
Hawkins's  message  to  the  viceroy
(1568)  402 ;  Don  Martin  de  Hen-
riques,  viceroy,  403  ;  Anthony  God-
ard  and  his  men  at,  420,  458;  In-
quisition In  (1574)  424;  Miles
Philips  taken  back  to,  in  irons
(1580)  437,  438;  viceroy  of,  and
Sir  John  Hawkins  (1568)  x.  69;
conquered  by  Spain,  xii.  20.

Mexico,  chief  town  of  New  Spain,
or  Mexico,  xi.  287;  description  of,
by  Robert  Tomson,  ix.  355,  357;
by  Roger  Bodenham,  359 ;  by
Henry  Hawks,  380;  by  Job
Hartop, 457.

Mexico  Bay,  strong  sea  currents
from  Ireland  to,  vii.  337 ;  latitude
of,  viii.  450 ;  Sir  John  Hawkins
lands  In  (1568)  ix.  408,  x.  73;
voyage  of  William  Nicholson  to
(1589)  156;  voyage  of  William
King  to  (1592)  190;  Englishmen
landed  at,  by  Sir  John  Hawkins,
XII.  50.

Meyer,  Hermann,  deputy  for  Wismar
and  Rostock,  11.  60,  79.

Meylleraye,  Sir  Charles  of,  see
Mouy.

Meyrick,  Sir  Gilly,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV, 259.

Meyrick,  or  Merick,  Sir  John,
licensed  to  trade  in  Russia  free
from  customs  (1592)  in.  440;  on
the  death  of  Feodor  Ivanowich,
Emperor  of Russia (1597)  448.

Meyrick,  Sir  William,  governor  of
the  Muscovy  Company,  11.  410,
III, 14.

Mezen,  shoals  near,  11.  328;  English
trade  in,  restricted  to  Muscovy
Company,  in.  97;  English  mer-
chants in, 116.

Mezen  river,  in.  406.

Mezena, see Mezen.

Mezzo,  I  sola  de,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V.  79.

MIac6, see  Kyoto.

Michaeas,  Governor,  and  John  de
de  Piano  Carpini,  i. 160.

Michael, i. 85.

Michael,  bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man,
I-  33-

317

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Michael,  eighteenth  bishop  of  Schal-
holt, in Iceland (385) iv. 56,

155-
Michael,  personage  in  the  dialogue

about China, vi. 348-377.

Michael,  prince  of  Walachia,  vi.
102.

Michael,  surgeon  of  Andrew
Barker's  ship,  killed  at  S.  Fran-
cisco Island  (1576)  X.  86.

Michael  de  Truxillo,  half-caste  taken
by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)  xi.
320.

Michael,  or  Mighel,  Godekin,  and
the  English  ship,  11.  60,  61,  64,
70.

Michael  Kuchenmeister,  twenty-fifth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
8.

Michael,  Thomas,  sent  from  Santos
to  Baya  (1581)  xi.  36.

Michael,  the,  of  Yarmouth,  11.  64.

Michael,  the,  in  Captain  Frobisher's
first  voyage  (1576)  vii.  204,  279;
second  voyage  (1577)  212,  219,  284,
287;  third  voyage  (1578)  233;  in
a  storm  (1578)  238,  290;  dangers
of,  298;  return  to  Yarmouth,  315;
tidings  of  (1577)  318;  Kinersley,
captain  of  (1578)  322 ;  attendant
on  the  Thotnas  Allen,  325;  miss-
ing, 329 ;  found,  344 ;  left  in
Bears' Sound, 365.

Michael  Archangel,  see  Archangel.

Michelson,  William,  captain  of  the
Dog,  voyage  of,  to  Mexico  (1589)
x. 156.

Micone  Island,  Roger  Bodenham
at  (1551)  V.  73.

Middelburg,  ii.  84;  chapel  to  St.
Thomas  in,  154;  in  the  Isle  of
Walcheren,  v.  320;  flyboats  of,
and  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)
x.  217.

Mlddleborough,  see  Middelburg.

Middleburg,  see  Middelburg.

Middleton,  Captain,  at  the  taking
of  Puente  de  Burgos  (1589)  vi.
492  ;  and  the  Armada  (1591)  vil.
41.

Middleton,  George,  English  messen-
ger to  Russia  (1572)  III.  174;  his
punishment  requested  by  the  Em-
peror of  Russia, 192.

Middleton, Thomas, of  the  Levant

Company  (1592)  vi.  88.
Midian,  city  of,  v.  347.
Midianites, Gideon and the, vm.

103.
Midnall,  Thomas,  Nicholas  Thome's

letter  to  (c. 1526)  vi. 124; factor

of Nicholas Thorne (1526) x. 6.
Mifa, Monsieur, French captain

wounded  at  the  siege  of  Cabodelo

(1597)  XI.  67.
Mikita Romanowich and Ivan

Vasiliwich,  11. 191.
Milbrooke, the pirate purser and

(1583)  XI. 202.
Milford Haven, Captain Frobisher

returns to (1577) vii. 230, 318;

Sir Amyas de Preston returns

(1595)  X.  226.
Milk, Cape of, in Canada, dis-
covered by  Jacques  Cartier  (1534)

vm. 190.
Mill,  Walter,  in  Virginia  (1585)  vm,

318.
Millard,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)

vm.  318.
Millechap, Nicholas, stones like

sapphires found in Guiana by

(1595)  X.  405.
Miller, Rowland, distress of, at

Port  Desire  (1592)  xi. 399.
Millers, Harvey, consul for Egypt

(1583)^  V.  259.
Mills,  English,  for  cloths,  v.  236.
Milo,  see  Melos.

Mimaces,  people  of  Libya,  vi. 168.
Mimant Island, despoiled by

Zichrnni  (c.  1380)  vii.  451.
Mimbres, shoals of the, or the

Osiers,  in  the  Ruttiers,  x.  298,  325,

334.  337-
Mina,  near  Mecca,  v.  355 ; fair  in,

35S.

Mina,  Castle  of,  vi.  201,  203;  or
La  mina,  Portuguese  possession,
VI.  146,  148,  160;  garrison  in,
200,  452 ;  William  Towerson  at
(1556)  212,  2x6;  projected  Eng-
lish fort  on  the  coast  near  (1561)
VI.  253  ;  governor  and  renters  of
(1591)  VII.  98;  built  by  the  Portu-
guese, VIII, 127.

Mina  river,  vi.  148.

Minas  Viejas,  Sierras  de  las,  in  S.

ii8

INDEX

Domingo,  x.  283 ; near  Velo  Alto

harbour, 291, 312.

Mindanao  Island,  the  Portuguese
at,  VIII.  129;  latitude  of,  xi.  351;
distance  from  Cape  Cannal, 365.

MIndoro  Island,  one  of  the  Philip-
pines, Captain  Gualle  at  (1584)  ix.
330,  331 ; latitude  of,  330.

Mindoro  town,  ix.  330.

Minehead, in Somersetshire, vi.

138-

Miners,  thirty,  sent  to  Meta  Incog-
nita to  winter  (1578)  vii.  321,  330;
found  by  Captain  Best,  360.

Mines,  iron,  of  WIchida,  open  to
English  merchants  (1569)  in.  113;
silver,  in  Japan,  account  of,  iv.  39,
135 ;  brimstone  in  Iceland,  Mun-
ster's  Slawkow,  v,  326;  lead,  at
VI.  328,  333 ;  in  Ireland,  vii.  28 ;
gold,  in  America,  160;  in  Anne
of  Warwick's  Island  (1578)  239,
348 ;  silver,  in  Orkney  Islands,  286 ;
lead  and  silver,  near  Hall's  Island

(1577)  296,  348;  of  Countess  of
Sussex  Island,  named  by  Captain
Yorke,  360 ;  of  iron  and  copper,
in Iron Island, Newfoundland

(1578)  VIII.  15,  60;  of  iron  in
Canada,  268 ;  in  Virginia,  356 ;  of
copper  in  Chaunis  Temoatan,  328 ;
discovered  by  Antonio  de  Espejo
(1582)  IX.  201 ;  of  gold  and  silver
in  California,  318;  silver  in
Mexico,  358,  382 ;  silver  in  Tama-
scaltepec,  364 ;  silver  in  Toma-
angua  and  gold  in  Nicaragua,  367 ;
in  Sacatecas,  373 ;  in  Mechuacan
(1572)  374;  fifth  part  of  the,  re-
quired by  the  King  of  Spain,  375 ;
in  New  Spain,  385,  388;  copper
and  lead,  in  New  Spain,  388;
silver,  at  Pachuca,  418 ;  Anthony
Godard  and  his  men  working  as
slaves  in,  423  ;  gold,  of  the  Caribs
(1565)  x.  30;  gold  and  silver  in
Hispaniola,  115;  copper  dis-
covered in  Cuba  (1590)  160;  of
gold  and  silver  in  China,  165 ;  of
Potosi,  in  Peru,  170 ;  of  silver  in
Marequita  (1590)  175 ;  in  Peru,
177 ;  of  marcasite  in  Trinidad
Island  (1595)  205;  gold  in  Sea-
wano and Waliame, 207; in

Guiana,  389;  silver  near  the
Caroli  river,  403 ;  gold  in  Ico-
nuri  Mountains,  416;  in  Guiana,
and  the  life  of  Morequito,
468;  of  silver  and  gold  at  St.
Vincent,  xi.  26;  use  of,  forbidden
to  Portuguese  (1581)  38;  silver,
found  at  Copaoba  by  Daurmigas,
67;  gold,  Indians  constrained  by
Spaniards to work the, 275.

Mines,  under  the  town  of  Rhodes,
during  the  siege  (1522)  v.  26,  28,
3O)  36,  38;  in  Famagusta  (1571)
134, 140, 142.

Minho  river,  and  the  defence  of
Spain,  X.  96.

Minibar,  see  Malabar.

Minion,  the,  of  Queen  Elizabeth's
navy,  flagship,  voyage  of,  to
Guinea  (1577)  vi.  231,  234;  at
Cape  Verde,  237 ;  at  Egrand,  242  ;
unsound  state  of  (1552)  255;  voy-
age to  Guinea  of  (1562)  258;
and  the  proposed  voyage  to  Guinea
(1564)  262  ;  and  Sir  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  (1564)
263 ;  escort  to  Henry  Roberts
(1585)  426;  in  Sir  John  Haw-
kins' fleet  (1567)  IX.  398,  445;
fight  with  Spaniards  at  S.  Juan
d'UUoa  (1568)  406,  452,  X.  71,
XII.  50 ;  escape  of,  ix.  407,  x.  72 ;
engraving  of,  ix.  432 ;  at  Car-
tagena (1568)  IX.  450;  bound  for
Guinea  (1564)  x.  9;  and  the  Portu-
guese galleys  in  Guinea  (1565)  35;
third  voyage  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
to  Guinea  and  the  West  Indies
with  (1567-8)  64;  Thomas  Seeley,
captain  of  (1585)  98.

Minion,  the,  and  the  Spanish  ships
(1590)  VII.  31,  32;  in  M.  Hore's
voyage  to  Newfoundland  (1536)
VIII.  3.

Minion  of  London,  the,  and  the  ad-
venturers' letter  to  John  Whithall
(1580)  XI,  31 ;  voyage  of,  to  Brazil
(1580)  34;  Brazil  trade  of,  194;
and  Abraham  Cocke  (1581)  208;
at  St.  Vincent  (1581)  295.

Minno,  see  Minho.

Minorca,  in  Thome's  map,  11. 171.

Minsapa,  Pan  de,  in  the  hills  of  S.
Martin, x. 296,  322.

319

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Minshaw,  Captain,  and  the  Spanish

hulk  (1589)  VI,  512.
Mint, the, M. Palmer, comptroller

of,  X.  344.
Mirabolans, found  in Cambay, vi.

25-
Miramontes,  see  Suasola.
'  Miranda,'  or  Virginia  Dare, born

in  Virginia,  xii. 112.
Mire, Francis de, in Francis de

Roberval's voyage (1542) viii.

283.
Mirescoge Monastery, founded by

King  Godred,  i.  32  f.
Miritius,  Johannes,  bishop  of  Holen,

in  Iceland,  iv. 11, 14,  99, 102.
Mirozu,  the  learned  man  of  Japan,

Combendaxis, founder of Coia

and, VI. 339.
Misena, Radera river in, coloured

water  of, iv.  38, 134.
Missagh, Laurence Aldersey in

(1581)  v.  207,  213.
Missionaries,  Franciscan,  discoveries

of, XII. II.

Misteca,  silk  found  in,  ix.  358.
Mito, Sir  Jerome Horsey  at  (1584)

"I-  345-

Mitylene,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1594)
VI. 107.

Moa,  Cayo  or  shoal  of,  x.  301,  304.

Moals  or  Tartars,  i.  263,  266;  op-
pressed by  Vut  Khan,  268.

Mobar,  Kingdom  of,  iv.  414.

Mocha,  La,  island,  xi.  278,  349,  360,
372  ;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1578)
113;  Sir  Francis  Drake  wounded
at,  by  Indians,  260;  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1587)  302,  367.

Modon,  Turks  at,  v.  47;  John
Locke  at  (1553)  84;  description
of,  loi ;  oil  trade  in,  114;  town
and castle of, 250.

Moptis, see  Azov, Sea  of.

Mogador,  Isle  of,  John  White  and
the  Moonshine  at  (1590)  viii.  406;
the  George  Noble  sent  to,  by  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  (1596)  x.  267;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1577)  xi.
102;  John  Winter  at  (1577)  149;
latitude  of, 150,  348.

Mogores,  white  people  of  Pekin,  vi.
323 ;  kingdom  of,  in  China,  xi.
378.

Mogotes,  Los  tres,  mentioned  in  the
Ruttier,  xi.  97.

Mohotze,  Antonio  de  Espejo  in  (1582)
IX. 199.

Moile,  headland  in  the  Sound  of
Norway,  iii.  282.

Moiobamba,  spring  of  the  Orellana
river, x, 499.

Moislave,  in.  80,  81.

Moldavia,  Stephen,  Palatine  of,  11.
189;  William  Harborne  in  (1578)
v.  169,  (1588)  VI.  58;  Henry  Aus-
tell through  (1585)  V.  325;  Peter,
prince  of,  and  Henry  Austell,  325,
328 ;  privilege  granted  to  English
merchants  by  the  Prince  of,  vi.
59 ;  Aron  Voivoda,  prince  of,  and
the  bearers  of  the  Sultana's  letter
to  Queen Elizabeth (1593) 102.

Moletius,  Joseph,  his  opinion  on
north  passage,  vii.  193 ;  his  map
of  the  globe, 203.

Molgomzes,  Arthur  Pet's  proposed
voyage  to  the  land  of,  in.  257.

Moliapor,  see  Mobar.

Molibae,  people  of  East  Africa,  vi.
169.

Molili,  people  of  East  Africa,  vi.
169.

Molins,  see  Moulins.

Mollineux,  Emmerie,  of  Lambeth,
terrestrial  globe  of,  i.  xxx.

Molloua,  king  in  Florida,  and  Cap-
tain Vasseur  (1564)  ix.  20,  22  ;  and
Captain  Gourgues  (1567)  102.

Molmore,  son  of  Nel,  and  Loglen,  i.

38  f.

Molona  King,  and  Captain  Vasseur
(1564)  IX.  22;  and  Sergeant  la
Caille,  23 ;  King  Malica,  brother
of,  25.

Molton,  Richard,  surgeon  on  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  n.  213.

Molucca  spices,  first  importation  in
England, i. xxiv.

Moluccas,  the.  Sir  Francis  Drake  at,
and  the  Portuguese  galleon  (1583)
V.  459 ;  the,  trade  with  Malacca,
498;  cloves  found  in,  504,  vi.  24;
monsoon  from  Goa  to,  32 ;  Ber-
nard de  la  Torre's  voyage  to  (1542)
VII.  169;  four  ways  to,  191;  fer-
tility, 254;  heat,  258;  people,  261;
passage from Grand Bay to.

320

INDEX

probabilities  of  a,  viii.  112;
spiceries  of,  129 ;  the,  Portuguese
g-arrison  at,  445 ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1579)  xi.  124,  xii.  61 ;
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1588)  xi.
370 ;  islands  near,  discovered  by
Thomas  Cavendish  (1588)  336;
death  of  Magellan  at,  257;  map
of, engraving  of, 458.

Moluccoes, see Moluccas.

Molucques, see  Moluccas.

Molves,  see  Gasp^.

Mombasa,  discovered  by  the  Portu-
guese, VIII. 128.

Momfry,  Peter,  burnt  by  the  Inquisi-
tion in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428.

Momia,  found  in  Cairo,  vi.  26.

Mompatar,  Margarita  north  of,  x.
362.

Mompox,  in  New  Kingdom  of
Granada,  xi.  235.

Mona,  Isle  of,  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  at  (1593)  vi.  403,  405;
John  White  and  the  Spaniards  at
(1590)  VIII.  408;  Portuguese
family  at,  and  Christopher  New-
port (1591)  X.  185;  William  King
at  (1592)  191  ;  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  and  Charles  de  la  Bar-
botiere  at  (1593)  198;  Sir  Robert
Dudley  at  (1594)  203;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  232;  latitude  of,
marks  of,  described  in  the  Rut-
tiers,  283,  311;  Captain  Lancaster
and John Noyer at (1594) xi.

53-

Monardes,  *  The  Joyful  News  from
the  West  Indies  '  by,  viii.  355 ;
on  roots,  364; on  laurel,  372.

Monardus  on  the  uses  of  the  arma-
dillo's horn,  X.  399.

Monasteries,  in  Russia,  11.  267,  440;
of  idolaters  in  Caitan,  iv.  424;  in
Japan,  vi.  336;  Augustinian,  in
Chanchinoltepec,  and  Guaxutla
(1572)  IX.  370;  in  Shallapa,  burnt
by  Indians,  372 ;  in  Cartagena,
X.  137;  in  Panama,  148;  Domini-
can, in  Mexico  (1557)  ix.  351;  in
Cartagena,  x.  137 ;  in  Panama,
148;  Franciscan,  in  Cartagena,  x.
137;  in  Panama,  148;  in  Cam-
peachy,  279.

Monax, in Sir Walter Raleigh's

third  voyage  to  Guiana  (1597)  xi.

8; and  Leonard  of  Cawe, 11.
Monbaza,  see  Mombasa.
Moncada,  Hugo  de,  and  the  Armada

(1588) IV. 200, 215; his galleass

cast  on  a  shoal  at  Calais,  223,  vii.

39- .  .

Monchico,  Sierras  de,  mentioned  in

the  Ruttier,  x.  300.
Mondenstova,  Stephen  Borough  and

(1557)  n-  363-

Monek  of  Elbing,  Prussian  ambas-
sador to  England,  11.  37,  38,  48.

Money,  of  Hang-chow,  iv.  426;  of
Janzu,  428;  of  Mancy,  437;  of
Pegu,  v.  431-433.  437.  492;  of
Babylon,  by  William  Barret,  vi.
10 ;  of  Bussorah,  11;  of  Ormuz,
14;  of  Goa,  17;  of  Cochin  and
Malacca,  21;  Venetian,  in  Ormuz,

15-
Mongols,  I.  68  f.  ; Great  or  Yeka,  a

tribe  of  Tartary,  142  f.
Monhaim, see Mannheim.
Monjas  Islands,  Sir  Francis  Drake

in  sight  of  (1595)  x.  233  ; birds  in,

mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  287.
Monjoy, Buttoll, and John Locke

(1561)  VI.  255.
Monkey,  the,  John  White  in  (1587)

VIII.  401.
Monkeys,  found  in  Guiana,  xi.  14.
Monks,  in  Russia,  11.  238,  265,  267,

423,  440; as  merchants,  441.
Monluc,  M.,  Captain  Gourgues  and,

at Bordeaux (1568) ix. no.
Monserate,  see  Montserrat.
Monserrata, see  Montserrat.
Monson, Sir William (1569-1643),

knighted  at  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.  259;

captain  of  the  Meg  (1589)  vii. i,

2  ; near  Terceira,  5  ;  in  St.  George

Island, 17; in the Victory, 18;

author  of  '  Naval  Tracts,'  xii.  67.
Monsons, see Monsoons.
Monsoons,  vi.  28,  xi.  80.
Monsor,  Alcaide,  in  Gago  (1594)  vii.

TOO.

Monsor, Rico, in Gago (1594) vii.

TOO.

Monsters,  i.  69,  77,  78;  dogs,  71  f.  ;
in  Kara-Cathay,  143  f.  ;  Jenghiz
Khan  and  the,  147;  northern,
^53' i54> 166; in Russia, iii.

321

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

410;  sea,  met  by  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert  near  Newfoundland,  viii.
70;  at  Sierra  Leone,  description
of,  XI.  206.

Montague,  Viscount,  a  Russian  am-
bassador, II.  355.

Montaigne,  essay  of,  on  '  Cannibals,'
XII.  113.

Montamas,  Rio  de  las,  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  x.  317.

Montanno,  archer  of  Captain  Ulloa,
courage  of  (1539)  ix.  238.

Montcevell  father  of  Claude  de
Pont  Briand  (1535)  viii.  210.

Monte,  Camillo  de,  camp-master,  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  205.

Monte,  Cape  de,  vi.  158;  currents
off,  161 ;  William  Towerson  at
(1556)  211,  (1577)  238;  the  Richard
of  Arundel  at  (1588)  451,  455.

Monte  Christi,  port  in  Hispaniola,
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1562)  x.
8.

Monte  Corvino,  John  de,  travels  of,
XII. 12.

Mont-de-Marsan,  in  Guienne,  birth-
place of  Captain  Gourgues,  ix.
III.

Monterey,  Conde  of,  and  the  defence
of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Montesino,  Friar  Francis,  his
attempt  to  discover  Guiana,  x.
499.

Montezuma,  Emperor  of  Mexico,  ix.
356,  396,  X.  355 ;  address  to  his
subjects,  VIII.  108 ;  prisoner  of
Cortez,  124 ;  houses  of,  ix.  356 ;
wealth  and  character  of,  396.

Montfort,  Simon,  Earl  of  Leicester,
his  voyage  to  Syria  (1240)  iv.  352.

Montii, Duke,  i. 163, 165, 178.

Montreal, viii. 232, 236.

Montserrat  Island,  Spanish  pos-
session (1564)  IX.  5,  X.  282 ;
marks  of,  described  in  the  second
Ruttier,  308;  latitude  of,  338;
longitude  from,  to  S.  Cruz,  336;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1595)  229;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  in  sight  of
(1597)  XI. 15.

Monts  Notre  Dame,  Cape  des,  lati-
tude of,  VIII.  277.

Montu,  on  the  river  Thalay,  in  the
land  of Pygmaei,navy  of,  iv.  428.

Monument  erected  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  in  Nova  Albion  (1579)  xi.
123.

Monuments  of  Cairo,  v.  334.

Monville  de  Hage,  near  Cherbourg,
XI.  384.

Monzoins,  see  Monsoons.

Moon,  eclipse  of  the  (1580)  in.  218,
(15th  September,  1578)  xi.  112,
159;  worship  of,  in  India,  vi.  iii;
King  David  on  the,  171 ;  or
Chinese  month,  297 ;  feast  of  the,
306.

Moon,  mountains  of  the,  in  Africa,

VI.  170.

Moon,  the,  and  the  first  voyage  to
Guinea  (1553)  vi. 145.

Moon,  the,  Upcot,  captain  of,  in
Captain  Frobisher's  third  voyage
(1578)  VII.  322;  attendant  on  the
Aid,  324;  in  a  storm,  344;  miss-
ing, 349;  in  distress,  350;  helps
the  Anne  Francis,  356.

Moone,  John,  condemned  to  the  gal-
levs  by  the  Inquisition  in  Mexico
(1575)  IX. 428.

Moone,  Richard,  his  prizes  (1586)  vi.

437-
Moone,  Thomas, and  the  Spaniard

of  Aguatulco  (1578)  IX.  320.
Moone, Thomas, captain of the

Francis (1585) x. 98; and the

boats  in  Cartagena  harbour  (1586)

X. 124; death  of, 190.
Moone,  Thomas,  and  the  Spaniards

(1578)  XI. 113; gold taken by

(1579)  117-

Moonlight,  the.  Captain  Cooke  and
(1590)  VIII.  411 ;  return  of,  to  Eng-
land, 419; at  Flores,  421.

Moonshine,  the,  of  London,  at
Algiers  (1586)  vi.  46.

Moonshine  of  Dartmouth,  the,  in
John Davys 's  first  voyage  (1585)

VII.  382,  393 ; second  voyage,  393-

413-
Moonshine,  the,  at  the  isle  of  Moga-

dor  (1590)  VIII.  406.
Moore,  John,  mariner  on  the  Bona

Confidentia  (1553)  n. 214.
Moore, John, gunner (1579) iii.

218.
Moore, M., voyage  of, ship-owner,

to  Mexico  Bay  (1592)  x. 190.

1

322

NDEX

Moore,  Robert,  of  Harwich  in  Essex,
freed  slave  (1577)  v.  157.

Moore,  Sir  Thomas,  and  the  ambas-
sadors from  Hungary  (1527)  v.
62.

Moore,  Thomas,  master  of  the
Maria  Martin  (1584)  v.  280,  281.

Moore,  William,  Murad  Khan  and
(1584)  V.  277.

Moore  Sound,  Arthur  Pet  in  (1580)
in. 301.

Moors,  war  of  the  Genoese  against
the  (1389)  IV.  450;  inhabitants  of
Barbary,  vi.  144 ;  in  Morocco
(1577)  288;  in  Fo-kien,  in  China,
321,  322;  captain  of  the,  and  sur-
vivors of  the  Toby  (1593)  vii,  126;
and  goods  of  the  Toby,  127 ;  tribu-
taries of  the  Portuguese,  viii.  128  ;
of  Barbary  or  Alarbes,  ix.  168;
King  of  the,  tribute  paid  to,  by
the  Portuguese  (1564)  x.  14;  re-
ligion of,  observed  in  Ternate,  xi.
128.

Moquoso,  King,  vassal  of  King
Utina  (1564)  IX.  21,

Moralez,  Pedro,  from  S.  Augustine,
account  of  Florida  (1586)  ix.  112;
account  of  Copalla,  383.

Moram,  from  Moscow  to,  in.  68.

Morastano, hospital of Cairo, v.

334-

Mora  toe,  river  of,  and  town  in  Vir-
ginia, VIII.  325  ;  strong  current  of
the  river,  331 ;  opinion  of  Hariot
on,  332.

Moratoc, tribe in Virginia, viii.

327-.
Moravia, Marquess of, in Prussia,

11. 3.
Mordas, ginger  mordassi  found  in,

VI.  25.
Mording, Miles, assistant to the

Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.
Mordoviti, see Mordwites, country

of.
Mordovits,  see  Mordwites.
Morduans,  i.  77; Tartars  and  the,
^86,  153.

Mordui,  see  Morduans.
Morduyni  Byleri, see Bulgaria  the

Greater.
Mordwites, Tartar tribe, in. 399,

400;  conquered  by  Russia,  11.  451;

country  of,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,
III. 196.

More,  Sir  Thomas,  xii.  86,

More,  Thomas,  Russian  license
granted  to  (1569)  in.  109.

Morea,  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  in.
195;  John  Locke's  description  of
(1553)  V.  81 ;  draganti  found  in,
VI.  27;  the  Toby  bound  for  Pat-
ras  in  (1593)  vii.  124;  com-
plexions of the  people, 264.

Moreden,  Simon  de,  mayor  of  Lon-
don (1407)  n.  72.

Morequito,  King,  and  the  discovery
of  Guiana,  x.  373 ;  and  Antonio
de  Berreo's  envoys,  374;  his
flight  to  Cumana,  374 ;  con-
demned and  executed  by  Antonio
de  Berreo,  375,  395,  468;  and  the
Spaniards  from  Manoa,  402  ;  wit-
ness at  the  taking  possession  of
Guiana by Domingo de Vera

(1593)  435-

Morequito,  port  in  Guiana,  on  the
Amazon,  x.  359;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1595)  398,  409;  in
Aromaia,  423.

Morgan,  Captain  Matthew,  field
corporal  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1585)  X.  98 ;  at  the  attack  on
Cartagena  (1586)  120;  at  the
attack  of  S.  John's  fort  (1586)  129.

Morgan,  Henry,  purser  on  the  Sun-
shine, report  of  John  Davys 's
second  voyage  by  (1586)  vii.  408-

413-

Morgan,  Master,  his  kindness  to
Captain  Laudonniere  (1565)  ix.
99.

Morgan,  Miles,  in  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert's  expedition  (1583)  viii.
40.

Morgan,  Richard,  cook  on  the  Bona
Esperanza  (1553)  11. 213.

Morgan,  Sir  John,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV. 259.

Morgan te.  Captain,  made  slave  at
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  152.

Morgiovets  harbour,  Stephen  Bor-
ough in  (1556)  II.  333 ;  latitude  of,
334-

Morgues,  Jacques,  painter,  saved  in
Fort  Caroline  by  Captain  Laudon-
niere (1565)  VIII.  440,  IX.  96.

323

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Morispikes, see  Morris-pikes.

Morley,  Richard,  of  London,  and
Prussian  pirates,  ii. 62.

Moro,  captain  at  the  court  of  the
king  of  Ternate  (1579)  xi. 127.

Morocca,  mouth  of  the  Orinoco
river,  x.  420.

Morocco,  in  Barbary,  the  Lion's
voyage  to  (1551)  vi.  136,  138;
kingdom  and  town  of,  143 ;  Ed-
mund Hogan,  English  ambassador
to  (1577)  285-293;  Henry  Roberts,
ambassador  (1565)  426-7;  Laur-
ence Madoc  in  (1594)  vn.  99;
king  of,  his  proceedings  in
Guinea,  100;  climate  of,  253,  269;
causes  of  the  heat  of,  267 ;  Muly
Hamed  Sheriffe,  emperor  of,
and  English  trade  (1585)  vi.  420;
emperor  of,  letter  to  Earl  of
Leicester  (1587)  430,  431;  Queen
Elizabeth's letter to (1587) 432,

433-
Morom,  11.  450,  478.
Morren, William, mariner on the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) H.

214.
Morrice, John, and the petition to

Robert  Burnet  (1589)  xi.  389.
Morris,  Richard,  mate  of  the  Jesus

(1583)  V.  292.
Morris-pikes used at the siege of

Rhodes  (1522)  v.  28.
Morro  Moreno,  xi.  360 ; latitude  of,

Thomas  Cavendish  at,  Indians  of

(1587)  XI.  306; latitude  of,  xi.  349,

359-

Morse,  see  Walrus.

Mortmain  of  discovered  lands,  11.
308 f.

Mortus  Ali, see  Murtezalll.

Morucca,  kingdom  of,  in  Guiana,
and  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.
207.

Moruga  river,  Wareo,  Indian  cap-
tain at,  X.  459,  492,  494.

Moruga  Indians,  plan  of,  to  drive
out  the  Spaniards  (1596)  x.  462.

Morum,  Russia,  best  martens  found
In, III. 365.

MorzovetS;  bay  of,  Arthur  Pet  at
(1580)  III. 298.

Mosalle,  Don  Juan  de,  and  the  Eng-
lish at  Rctanzas  (1589)  vi.  485.

Moscheas,  see  Mosques.

Moscita, Cacique in Florida, ix.

113-

Mosco,  the,  see  Moscow.

Moscovia, see Russia.

Moscow,  in.  370  ;  founded  by  Daniel,
grand  duke  of  Russia,  11.  187;
corn  and  fish  markets  in,  225,  277;
description  of,  226,  254,  422 ;
Chancellor's  journey  to  (1553)
250  f. ;  castle,  stronghold  of  Mos-
cow, 254 ;  description  of,  254 ;
emperor's  seat  at,  261 ;  fur  trade
in,  277;  Muscovy  Company's
goods  sent  to  {1557)  384,  386,  in.
442;  company's  agent  in,  11.  388;
Anthony  Jenkinson  at  (1559)  407,
478 ;  latitude,  479,  iii.  460 ;  An-
thony Jenkinson  at,  in.  13,  15,  36,
92  ;  from  St.  Nicholas  Bay  to,  68 ;
English  trade  in,  93,  109,  442 ;
English  house  at,  443,  460;
Thomas  Randolph  at,  104 ;  Eng-
lish money  coined  in,  116;  fire  in
(1571)  169,  371,  390;  indemnity  to
Muscovy  Company,  183,  190;
William  Borough's  voyage  to
(1574-1575)  210;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes
at  (1583)  318,  465;  Sir  Jerome
Horsey 's  departure  from  (1584)
and  return,  345  ;  legend  and  his-
tory of  the  fire,  371 ;  plan  of,  en-
graving of,  384;  Richard  Chan-
cellor and  his  company  at  the
court  of,  XII.  22.

Moscow,  province  of  Russia,  ill.
358 ;  fertility  of,  360.

Moscua,  see  Moscow,

Moscua, river, see  Moskva.

Moscus  sent  to  Asia  by  Nimrod,  ill.

371-
Moscva,  see  Moskva.
Moseley,  Nicholas,  licensed  to  trade

in  Russia  free  from  customs  (1592)

III.  440.
Moses  and  Sarmates,  in.  358;  flight

of, from Pharaoh, v. 347; and

the  grant  of  the  land  of  Canaan,

vni. 102.
Moskva  river,  n.  226 ; at  Moscow,

254 ; blessing of, 432 ; and the

Occa,  449.
Mosley, Nicholas, alderman, of  the

Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.

I

324

INDEX

Mosowes,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
X.  302.

Mosque,  caravan  at  the,  before  start-
ing-, V.  343 ;  on  arriving  at
Mecca,  351;  Abraham's  house  in
the, 352 ; in Medina, 362.

Mosques,  Chinese,  or  temples,  vi.
322.

Mosquita,  see  Mosque.

Mosquito,  VII.  403,  ix.  379,  413.

Mosquito  Bay,  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville  at  (1585)  VIII.  311;  John
White  at  (1587)  388.

Mostiska, Henry Austell at (1585)

V.  325-

Mosul,  or  Niniveh,  vi.  5 ;  Ralph
Fitch  at  (1591)  V. 505.

Motijones,  Pedro  de  Orsua  embarks
in  the  country  of  (1560)  x.  498.

Motte,  Thomas,  of  Cley,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  65.

Motu,  Captain  Ulloa  at  (1539)  ix.
207.

Motue  or  Morne,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.

Moubray,  see  Mowbray.

Moujik, dress  of  Russian, iii, 419.

Moulins,  in  France,  Captain  Lau-
donniere  at  (1565)  ix.  99.

Moumoran,  dog-faced  people  in
(1330) IV. 420.

Mounson,  see  Monson.

Mountain,  in  Ceylon,  where  Adam
mourned  Abel,  iv.  420.

Mountains,  in  Iceland,  iv.  17,  107;
from  S.  Martha  to  Magellan
Straits,  xi.  237,  257.

Mount-Marsan,  see  Mont-de-Mar-
san.

Mounts  Bay,  in  Cornwall,  arrival  of
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1568)  x.  74.

Moura,  Nigel  de,  at  Lisbon,  and
Melchior  Petoney's  description
(1591)  VII.  88.

Mourning,  in  China,  v.  499 ;  col-
ours of,  in  Japan,  vi.  341 ;  in
China, 370.

Mourray,  Don  Jeronimo  de,  re-
turned from  England  (1589)  vi.
485.

Mousik,  see  Moujik.

Mouy,  Sir  Charles  of,  and  Jacques
Cartier's  expedition  (1534)  viii.
183.

Mowre,  town  in  Guinea,  vi.  228 ;
English  ships  at  (1577)  244;  the
Christopher  at,  245  ;  English  trade
(1562) 260.

Moxel,  I.  242 ;  laws  and  habits  of,
260.

Moya  de  Contrerer,  Don  Pedro,  chief
Inquisitor  in  Mexico  (1574)  ix.
424.

Moyles,  captain  of  the  Francis  of
Foy  (1578)  VII.  322.

Mozambique,  Portuguese  possession
(1567)  V.  444,  X.  487;  ambrachan
found  in,  vi.  26;  dente  d'abolio
found  in,  27;  monsoon  from  Goa
to,  34 ;  on  way  to  Goa,  from  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  383,  391 ;  dis-
covered by  the  Portuguese,  viii.
128;  Portuguese  garrison  at,  445;
and  Cefala,  Nuno  Velio  Pereira,
governor  of  (1594)  vii.  122;
Island,  Portuguese  possession
(1591)  X.  195.

Muc,  the  people  called,  cattle  of,  i.
292  f.

Mucheron,  Peter,  his  account  of  the
Ewaipanoma  or  headless  people
(1595)  X. 407.

Muchikeri  province,  Macureguarai
in,  X.  464.

Muel, on  the Red  Sea, v. 347.

Muffett,  Captain,  and  Hakluyt,  xii,
76.

Muhaisira,  in  Egypt,  sesame  seed
in, v. 230 ; Leo Africanus on,

237-
Miihlberg, Henry  Austell at  (1585)

v.  327.
Mulattoes, of De  la Paz, and the

smallpox  (1590)  X. 171.
Mulberg-,  see  Miihlberg.
Mulbrooke, ships from, in  Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.
Mulcaster, Richard (1530-1611),

verses on Richard Hakluyt, I.

Ix. f.
Mulet de Bataille, the, William

Towerson  and  (1577)  vi.  241.
Mulley  Balasen,  see  Balasen.
Mully Abdelmelech, see Abdelme-

lech.
Mully  Hammet,  see  Hamed.
Mummies  found  at  the  foot  of  the

Pyramids,  v.  336.

325

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Munck,  Captain,  In  the  Bear's
Whelp  (1594)  X.  204.

Munde,  William,  of  Colchester,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.

'  Mundo,  De,'  by  Philo  the  Jew,  on
America,  vii.  161.

'  Mundo,  De,'  by  Aristotle,  vii.  162.

Muns,  M.,  lieutenant  of  Portsmouth,
and  Job  Hortop  (1590)  ix.  465.

Munster,  General  Norris,  lord  presi-
dent of,  VI.  476.

Munster,  Sebastian  '  Cosmography, '
IV.  10,  13,  98,  105 ;  mistake
of,  14,  103 ;  on  population  of
Iceland,  15,  104;  on  volcanoes,
18,  22,  24,  loS,  113,  116;
on  brimstone  in  Iceland,  39,
135 ;  on  fish,  40  136 ;  on  whales,
refuted,  41,  137;  on  religion,
46,  143;  on  Iceland  houses,  61,
160 ;  on  food  and  lodging  in  Ice-
land, 63,  64,  162,  165;  on  Iceland
simplicity,  67,  168;  on  Iceland
manners,  70,  171 ;  on  Iceland,  99,
10 1  ;  and  the  north-west  passage,
VII.  162  ;  'A  Treatise  of  New  India'
by,  translated  by  Richard  Eden
(^553)  X.  2.

Munt,  John,  on  the  Minion  (1562)
VI.  258.

Muntezuma,  see  Montezuma.

Murad  Khan,  see  Amurath.

Murcy,  Alcan,  governor  of  Shabran,
III. 20.

Murmonskey,  best  beaver  found  at,
III.  365.

Murrecotima  Island,  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1595)  x.  398.

Mursay,  son  of  Abd'Ullah  Khan,  iii.

47, 59-

Murse,  or  ruler  of  Tartar  hordes,
II.  452.

Murtezalli,  Mahomet's  disciple,  ill.
29>  35 ;  prophet  of  the  Persians,
159; sons  of, 162.

Muscamunge,  native  town  in  Vir-
ginia (1585)  VIII,  322.

Muscovy  Company,  seal  of,  11.
xii.  ;  rules  of  the  (1555)  H-
281-289,  3^5>  402;  oath  taken
by  the  agents  of  the,  289,
290;  adventurers  (1555)  305 ;  self-
governing  power  of  the,  309  f. ;
laws of, 311, 312, III, 90; dis-

coveries made  by  the,  n.  3x5?
exclusive  privileges  of,  315;
directions  to  ship-servants,  317-
322;  log  of,  319;  Henry  Lane
and,  II.  379,  380,  384,  386;
trade  of  the,  threatened  by  foreign
enemies,  399 ;  Christopher  Hod-
desdon  and,  401,  406,  408;  treat-
ment of  its  good  and  bad  servants,
406  ;  advice  to  Anthony  Jenkinson
by  the  (1561)  iii.  9-14;  first  voyage
to  Persia  by  the  (1561-1564)  15-38;
second  voyage  to  Persia  by  the
(1563-1565)  40-44;  third  voyage  to
Persia  by  the  (1565)  44-53;  fourth
voyage  to  Persia  by  the  (1568)
136-142 ;  fifth  voyage  to  Persia  by
the  (1568-1574)  150-157 ;  sixth  voy-
age to  Persia  by  the  (1579-1581)
212-247;  send  an  English  ship-
wright to  Russia  (1565)  45;  debts
owed  to,  47,  49,  59,  60;  Arthur
Edwards'  letter  to,  54-63;  William
Rowley,  agent  to,  80 ;  Queen
Elizabeth  and,  83 ;  Queen  Mary
and,  84 ;  its  discoveries  not  public
property,  85,  88;  and  the  East-
ern countries,  86,  88,  213;  and
the  eastern  towns  of  England,  91 ;
and  the  Russian  treasury,  94,  no,
350 ;  and  the  Russian  privileges
(1569)  108-118,  354;  and  free-
booters, 167 ;  treacherous  servants
of,  178,  335;  Emperor  of  Russia's
displeasure  towards,  180;  indem-
nity to,  for  losses  in  the  Moscow
fire  (1571)  183,  190;  and  franchise
of  Persian  trade  (1579)  213;  and
the  discovery  of  Cathay  (1580)  251,
258  ;  and  their  own  fleet,  303  ;  and
the  Russian  privileges  (1554)  331,
348,  440 ;  agents  of,  at  the  Rus-
sian court,  332,  345,  439;  re-
sponsible only  for  its  members
(1588)  355;  shipping  of  merchan-
dise in  Russia  by  the,  444 ;  and
the  Company  of  Merchants  for  the
discovery  of  the  west  coast  of
America  (1583)  viii.  134;  com-
mittee of, and Captain Carleill

(1583)  147-
Musihet,  east  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  i.

270.
Musk, made in Tartary, v. 504  j

126

INDEX

found  in  Tartary,  vi.  26;  trade
of,  in  Cape  Verde  Island  (1577)
237 ; of  China,  355.

Musk  Cat,  English  merchants  in
Africa  and  the,  vi.  173;  negroes
of  Guinea  and  the,  ix.  448.

Musketos  Bay,  see  Mosquito.

Muskitos,  see  Mosquito.

Muskle-Cove,  see  Mussel-Cove.

Muskyto, see Mosquito.

'  Musophilus,'  by  Samuel  Daniel
(1601)  XII.  99.

Musquito, see  Mosquito.

Mussel-Cove,  named  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1587)  xi.  300;  anchor-
age, 371.

Musswara,  great  town  on  the  Cur-
assiwini,  x.  492.

Mustafa,  Turkish  interpreter.  Queen
Elizabeth  and  (1582)  v.  227  ;  letter
from  William  Harborne  to,  v.
265.

Mustafa  Bey,  general  of  the  Turk-
ish adventurers,  v.  148 ;  slain  at
Famagusta  (1571)  152.

Mustafa  Chaus,  letter  to  Queen
Elizabeth  (1583)  v. 258.

Mustafa  Pasha  and  the  expedition
against  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  3 ;  in  the
trenches,  23 ;  Solyman  and,  33,
34;  Cyprus  conquered  by  (1571)
123 ;  at  the  siege  of  Famagusta,
132, 152.

Mustapha, see Mustafa.

Mustofa,  see  Mustafa.

Mutezuma,  see  Montezuma.

Mutiny,  against  Captain  Albert  in
Charles-Fort,  viii.  482 ;  on  board
the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1592)  x.
196,  (1593)  199;  of  Lopez  de  Agira
against  Pedro  de  Orsua,  xi.  244 ;
in  the  Content  against  Thomas
Cavendish  (1587)  326;  on  board
the  Desire  in  the  Strait  of  Magel-
lan (1592)  395.

Mutylones,  province  near  the  Ama-
zon river,  x.  362 ;  Don  Pedro  de
Orsua  killed  In,  by  Agira,  408.

Mutyr,  island  belonging  to  the  King

of  Ternate  (1579)  xi. 124.
Myeul  or  Meule,  Tidman  de,  Livon-

ian  messenger,  11.  88,  92.
Myllet,  Michael,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Mvlton, Henry, settler  in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Myndora,  see  MIndoro.
Mynhed,  see  MInehead.
Mynion,  see  Minion.
Myra  Momanyn's  letter  to  Earl  of

Leicester  (1587)  vi.  430,  431.
Myrrh, found in Arabia Felix, vi.

25 ; found  in  Florida,  x.  57.

Nabares,  Hieronymo  de,  of  Panama,
letter  from,  to  John  Alonso  of  Val-
ladolid  (1590)  X. 176.

Nabunanga,  xi.  432 ;  emperor  of
Japan,  predecessor  of  Quabacon-
dono  (1594)  438.

Nachel,  description  of,  v.  347.

Nadar,  latitude  and  longitude  of,  iv.
10, 99.

Naddocus,  island  discovered  by,  iv.
13, loi, 102.

Nadir,  In  Turkey,  v.  284.

Naga,  Punte  de,  on  Teneriffe  Island,
X.  280,  306 ;  marks  of,  307 ;  lati-
tude of,  332.

Nagaia,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.
196.

Nagay,  Feodor  Feodorowich,  father
of  Dowager-Empress  of  Russia
(1584)  III.  337.

Nagayan  Tartars,  iii.  399 ;  and  Rus-
sians, II.  229,  233,  438;  customs
of,  452 ;  at  peace  with  Russians,
454;  famine  and  plague  among,
455 ;  attack  English  merchants >
III.  244.

Naguachato,  chief  of  the  Indians  of
Buena  Guia  river,  and  Captain
Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  293,  301.

Nalmani,  i.  56,  69,  86,  94,  135,  168 ;
empire  of  the, 143.

Nalres,  a  people  of  Calicut,  v.  502.

Nairi,  Nalres,  a  people  of  the  King
of  Cochin,  V.  394.

Naldo,  Carletto,  Captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Nana  Ferra,  the,  Venetian  ship,
Richard  Wrag  in  (1594)  vi. 108.

Nangasaque,  see  Nagasaki.

Nangoia,  port  of  Ximo,  castle
erected  at,  xi.  426.

Nankin,  principal  town  of  Chellm,
VI.  295; gold  table  in,  315.

Nankin,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.

327

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Nanquin,  see  Nankin.

Napea,  Osep,  Russian  ambassador
to  England  (1556)  11.  350-360,  411,
413,  III.  334;  his  return  home
(1557)  II.  425  ;  his  reception  by  the
Emperor  of  Russia  (1557)  427;
and  Anthony  Jenkinson  (1561)  in.
17; and  Queen  Mary,  98.

Naper,  Giles,  of  the  Elizabeth  (1584)
V.  281.

Naples,  IV.  26,  118;  Richard  I.  at
(tigi)  321;  Queen  Berengaria  at,
325 ;  wheat  brought  to  Rhodes
from  (1522)  V.  8;  John  Foxe  at
(1577) 164, 166.

Napolis  de  Romania,  in  Morea,  v.

lOI.

Naramsy,  river  of,  11.  339 ;  tributary
of  the Ob, III. 120 ; in Ugoria,

455-

Narsinga,  kingdom  of,  Caesar  Fred-
erick in  (1567)  V.  381 ;  Arabian
horses  in,  381.

Narva,  in.  78 ;  trade  to,  forbidden
by  the  king  of  Poland,  11,  485 ;
English  trade  on,  in.  80,  91,  93,  95,
99,  109,  112,  117;  from  Novgorod
to,  68 ;  markets  at,  83 ;  open  to
foreign  trade,  118;  Voivoda  of,
and  the  eighty-two  freebooters,
168,  178 ;  William  Borough  ques-
tioned on,  203 ;  products  of,  207 ;
William  Borough's  voyage  to,
210;  trade  opened  to  English
merchants  (1560)  335;  in  posses-
sion of  Sweden,  367 ;  in  Livonia,
castle  of,  387 ;  English  trade
hindered  in,  by  Sweden's  wars,
461.

Narvaez,  Pamphilo,  ix.  1 16 ;  Andrew
Dorantez,  travelling  companion
of, 122 ; in  Florida  (1527)  192.

Narve, see Narva.

Narwhal,  description  of  a,  by  Alber-
tus,  vii.  183  ;  found  in  the  North-
ern Seas  (1577)  219;  found  by
Captain  Frobisher  (1577)  297.

Nase, see  Naze.

Nnshe.  Thomas,  cook's  mate  on  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  213.

Nassades,  11.  394,  395 ;  or  boats
from  Kholmogory  to  Vologda,  11.
419.

Nassau, Justin of, admiral  of  Zee-

land,  and  the  Prince  of  Parma
(1588)  IV.  209; at  Dunkirk,  220.

Nassau,  Count  Lodowick  of,  and  the
Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  iv.  236,
250 ; knighted  at  Cadiz,  259.

Nassaw,  see  Nassau.

Natan,  Dutch  knights  victorious  in,
II.  3.

Natiscotec,  see  Assumption  Island.

Natives,  of  Newfoundland  brought
to  England  by  Sebastian  Cabot,  vii.
155 ;  of  Meta  Incognita  and  Cap-
tain Frobisher  (1576)  vii.  209;  five
men  of  Captain  Frobisher 's  cap-
tured by,  210,  (1577)  216,  219,  302  ;
fight  between  the,  and  Captain
Frobisher 's  men,  220 ;  craftiness
of,  222 ;  description  of,  224,  368-
375;  Captain  Frobisher 's  meeting
with  (1576)  280;  treachery  of,
281 ;  Captain  Frobisher  and
(1577)  292  f.,  308  fif.,  312;  one
of  the,  interpreter  for  Captain
Frobisher,  299 ;  twenty,  in  Jack-
man 's  Sound,  302;  fight  of,  with
English  sailors  at  Bloody  Point
(1577)  304;  woman  captured  after
the  fight,  305  f. ;  and  Captain
Frobisher,  308  ff.,  312;  brought
to  England  by  Frobisher,  ix.
167;  of  the  Land  of  Desola-
tion John  Davys  meets  with,
in  his  voyage  of  discovery
(1585)  386;  friendliness  of,  387  f.,
394 ;  description  of,  396 ;  thefts
%>  397 ;  unfriendliness  of,  400 ;
fight  between  the  crew  of  the
Moonshine  and  (1586)  406;  fight
between  the  crew  of  the  Sunshine
and  the  natives  of  Merchants'  Isle,
412 ;  and  John  Davys'  pinnace
(1587)  416;  business  of  John
Davys'  crew  with  the,  418,  419;
of  Newfoundland,  viii.  4,  58;  ad-
vantages of  Christianity  to,  119;
of  Cape  Breton,  and  the  crew  of
the  Marigold  (1593)  159;  of  New-
foundland, description  of,  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  188,  200,
202 ;  and  Jacques  Cartier,  197,
199;  of  Honguedo  taken  away,
by  Jacques  Cartier,  214;  death  of
(1540)  263;  of  Hochelaga,  kind-
ness of,  to  Jacques  Cartier  (1535)

328

INDEX

230,  237 ;  of  Saguenay,  at  the
falls  of  the  Saguenay  river,  and
Jacques  Cartier  (1540)  270;  pre-
sents to,  from  Jacques  Cartier,
271 ;  description  of,  by  Roberval,
287;  of  Florida,  intercourse  be-
tween John  de  Verrazzano  and
(1524)  433;  arrows  of,  435;  of
Northern  Florida,  their  ungentle-
ness,  437;  religion  of,  438;  of
New  Mexico,  description  of  (1582)

IX.  194;  of  Dominica  Island,
fierceness  of,  x.  25 ;  sold  as  slaves
by  other  natives  or  savages  of
Peru  (1581)  XI.  38;  of  Mogador
Island,  Sir  Francis  Drake  and
(1577)  102 ;  of  Brazil,  and  their
sacrifices  made  to  devils,  107;  of
the  river  Plate,  and  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  108;  of  Nova  Albion,
description  of,  119;  and  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1579)  119,  155.

Natividad,  see  Navidad.

Natolia,  Turkish  soldiers  from,  at
the  siege  of  Famagusta  (1571)
V.  148 ;  Beglerbeg  of,  at  the  siege
of  Rhodes  (1522)  23;  wounded  at
the  bulwark  of  Spain,  33 ;  pay  of,
61 ;  retinue  of,  67  ;  Pasha  of,  slain,
152.

Naumburg  on  the  Neiss, v. 326.

Navarre  and  Edward  I.'s  great
charter,  i.  333.

Navarre,  Sancho  V.,  king  of,  father
of Queen Berengaria, iv. 325,

330-
Navarre,  Henry  Crassus,  king  of,  at

Tunis  (1270)  IV.  359.
Navarre,  Henry  IV.  of  France,  king

of,  Spanish  help  to  French  leaguers

against  the  (1590)  vii.  75.
Navarre,  prior  of,  and  Captain  Mar-

tiningo  (1522)  v.  20;  activity  of,  39.
Navassa  Island,  Spanish  ship  taken

by the English near (1590) viii.

411; marks  of,  in  second  Ruttier,

X.  313;  latitude  of,  333;  longi-
tude from,  to  S.  lago  de  Cuba,
336-

Navaza,  see  Navassa.

'  Navegar, Arte de,' by Pedro de

Medina  (1545)  xii.  80.
Nave Ragasona, the, Laurence

Aldersey  in  (1581)  v.  213.

XII  329

Navidad,  Puerto  de,  Bernard  de  la
Torre's  voyage  from  (1542)  vil.
169;  Captain  Gualle  at  (1584)  ix.
337 ;  port  for  China  and  the  Philip-
pines, 364;  in  New  Spain,  392;
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.
321;  distance  from  Chiametlan,
363; anchorage,  373.

Navigation,  without  dangers  in  the
Arctic  regions,  11.  162  ;  to  Iceland,
IV.  14,  103 ;  Chinese,  vi.  359 ;
easy  to  Guiana,  x.  427.

'  Navigations  and  Voyages,'  by  John
Baptista  Ramusio  (1557)  iii.  458.

'  Navigations,  Principal,'  by  Hak-
luyt,  XII.  82;  first  edition  (1589),
account  of  Sir  Jerome  Bowes 's
embassy  taken  from,  iii.  463.

Navigators,  sufferings  of  the  first
English,  I.  xlii.

Nav3^  English,  unsatisfactory  state
of  the  (fifteenth  century)  11.  127 ;
Philip  II.,  King  of  Spain,  his
mighty  (1588)  iv.  199;  return  of,
230;  discipline  of  Richard  I.  for
his  (1191)  230;  of  Richard  I.,  at
I,imasol,  329  ;  of  Ceuskolon,  423  ;
of  Chilenso,  427;  of  Montu,  428;
English,  and  the  ships  of  the
Levant  Company  in  case  of  war
(1592)  VI.  82;  useful  for  the
settler,  by  Richard  Hakluyt,  vil.
249 ;  of  Zichmni,  entrusted  to
Nicolo  Zeno  (1380)  448;  Nicolo
Zeno,  captain  of  the,  450;  of
Queen  Elizabeth,  xii.  44.

Naxos  Island,  in  the  ^gean  Sea,  iv.

38. 134-

Naxus, see  Naxos.

Naymani,  see  Naimani.

Nazaran,  in  Spain,  battle  of,  Mat-
thew Gourney  at,  iv.  444.

Nazareth,  Hugh  of  Tabaria  burled
at  (1107)  IV.  305;  taken  by  Prince
Edward  (1270)  362.

Nazavoe,  port,  iii.  46.

Naze,  the,  Willoughby's  fleet  at  the,
II. 217; Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.

303-

Neco,  King  of  Egypt,  sends  a  fleet
round  Africa,  i.  xli.

Needle,  King  Pharaoh's,  in  Alex-
andria, VI.  36 ;  Laurence  Aldersey
and,  44.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Needles,  the,  George  Fenner  at
(1567)  VI.  284;  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley at  (1594)  X.  204.

Neekeari,  nation  on  the  Cushwini
river,  x.  492.

Nefifisa's  tomb  in  Cairo,  v.  334.

Nefte,  black  Persian  oil,  111. 165.

Negapatam,  description,  v.  400;
pearls  found  near,  501 ;  ships
from,  captured  by  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1592)  vi.  398.

Negrais  In  Pegu,  Ralph  Fitch  in  (c.
1583)  V.  485.

Negro  river,  see  Niger.

Negroes,  treachery  towards  English
merchants,  in  Cape  Verde  (1567)
VI.  272 ;  taken  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  on  the  coast  of  Guinea

(1567)  IX. 399 ; sold  in  Riohacha

(1568)  401 ;  Captain  Dudley  and
the,  446;  500,  taken  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1568)  447;  7000
drowned  by  the  Negro  Kings
(1568)  447;  of  Rio  Grande,  and
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1568)  447-448;
sold  by  Sir  John  Hawkins  at  S.
Marta  (1568)  450;  King  of,  and
Sir  John  Hawkins  (1568)  ix.  399,
X.  65 ;  of  Guinea,  sold  in  Hispani-
ola  by  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1562)  x.
7 ;  of  Guinea  and  Cape  Verde,  de-
scription of  (1564)  15;  of  Sam-
bula  Island,  taken  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1564)  20;  of  Callowsa
river,  taken  by  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1564)  21 ;  of  Sierra  Leone
and  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1565)
24 ;  sale  of,  in  Burburata
by  Sir  John  Hawkins  (1565)  31  f.  ;
captured  by  Sir  John  Hawkins,
envenomed  arrows  of  (1567)  64,66;
sold  in  Riohacha  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1568)  67;  of  Panama,
and  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1572)  76;
and  John  Oxenham  (1575)  77;
treason  of,  80;  of  Panama,  pun-
ishment of,  by  the  Spaniards
(1578)  81 ;  use  of,  and  price  of,  in
West  Indies  (1587)  142;  wanted  in
Havana  (1590)  159;  wanted  in
Puerto  Rico  (1590)  162;  trade  of,
in  S.  Thom6  (1590)  172  ;  taken  by
Christopher  Newport  in  the  Portu-
guese ship  (1591)  184; captured  by

William  King  in  the  ship  from
Guinea  (1592)  191 ;  trade  In,  in
Angola  (1596)  XI.  42 ;  Robert
Withrlngton  and  the  (1586)  206;
Spanish  wars  with  the,  of  America
(1575)  233;  from  Guinea,  Imported
in  Hispanlola,  to  work  the  In-
genios,  240;  of  Sierra  Leone,  and
Thomas  Cavendish  (1586)  292;
trade  in,  and  Sir  John  Hawkins,
XII.  47.

Negroes,  Island  of,  latitude  of,  xi.
335,  350;  from,  to  Mindanao,  365.

Negroes,  town  of,  xi.  206;  town
burnt, 207.

Negropont  Island,  William  Har-
borne  at  (1583)  v.  250.

Negru, university town in Japan,

VI.  331-

Nelper,  see  Dnieper.

Neiuport, see  Nieuport.

Nel,  sons  of,  and  Harald,  i.  38.

Nelson,  John,  Christian  renegade  in
Tripolis  (15S4)  V.  305.

Nendega, Kholmogory  to, iii. 70.

Neobrigensis,  Guilielmus,  see  Wil-
liam of Newburgh.

Neome,  isle  of,  Antonio  Zeno  at  (c.
1380) VII. 462.

Neper, see Dnieper.

Neperwari, Indian  captain, x. 493.

Nepoios  Indians,  description  of,  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  394;
followers  of  Carapana,  lord  of
Emeria,  423.

Nepojos,  people  near  Punta  de  Gal-
era,  in  Trinidad,  x.  350.

Nestorians,  i.  264,  284-286 ;  and  Tar-
tars, 86;  and  the  Huyri,  144;  and
the  Cathayans,  267;  about  Sar-
tach,  269;  priests  In  Mobar,  iv.
414.

Nettle  cloth.  In  Orlssa,  Cassar  Fred-
erick's description  of  (c.  1563)  v.
409.

Nettle  Road  at  Southampton,  Ed-
ward Fenton  at  (1582)  xi. 172.

Neuburg  on  the  Saale,  fair  at  (1585)
v.  32'!.

Neuhus,  the,  and  the  beehive  tribute
to  Russia,  II.  194.  ■

Neumargt,  see  Neumarkt.  ■

Neumark,  Henry  Austell  at  (158,1;)  v.
322.

330

INDEX

Neumarkt,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)
V.  326.

Neus  river,  in  Newsiok,  viii.  308.

Neustadt,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
321.

Nevadas,  Sierras,  or  Snowy  Moun-
tains, near  Cape  del  Aguja,  men-
tioned in  the  Rattier,  x.  288.

Neville,  John,  his  voyage  to  Syria
(1240)  IV.  352.

Neville,  Sir  Henry,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Newbery,  John,  voyage  to  the
East  Indies  (1583)  v.  450;  bearer
of  Queen  Elizabeth's  letters,  450,
451;  his  letter  to  Richard  Hak-
luyt  (1583)  452  ;  to  Leonard  Poore,
453.  455;  to  John  Eldred,  457;
imprisoned  at  Ormuz,  457,  458 ;
his  business  in  Ormuz  and  Goa,
461-506;  his  journey  to  Lahore
(1585)  474;  and  the  Jesuits  of  Goa,
510;  John  Eldred 's  voyage  with
(1583)  VI,  I ;  prisoner  in  Goa
(1583)  7; discoveries,  77.

Newborrow,  Nicholas,  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure, 11. 213.

Newcastle-on-Tyne,  ships  from,  in
Edward  HL's  fleet,  i.  298;  and
the  customs,  355  ;  Livonian  goods
detained  at,  11.  34 ;  ships  from,
60;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  fleet  at,
414;  and  the  Moscovy  Company,
III.  91 ; freightage,  208.

Newfoundland,  discovered  by  the
English,  II.  163,  166,  170,  176-8,
XI.  92  ;  the  Edward  Bonaventure
bound  for  (1593)  vi.  404;  dis-
covery by  Sebastian  Cabot  (1497)

VII.  154;  by  Robert  Thome's
father  and  Hugh  Eliot,  155 ;
sea-currents  at,  168 ;  or  con-
tinent of  America,  290;  voyage
of the English nation to (1527)

VIII.  ,1;  of  M.  Hore  to  (1536)  3;
Oliver  Dawbeney's  account  of
(1536)  4;  natives  of,  4,  58;  Act
against  exaction  for  traffic  in,
Edward  VL  (1548)  7  f. ;  Anthony
Parckhurst's  letter  to  Richard
Hakluyt  on  (1578)  9-16;  fertility
of  (1578)  II,  87;  pearls,  11;
climate  of,  13;  venison  in,  14;
salt  in,  15  ;  Portuguese  and  French

fishing  in  (1583)  49 ;  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  fleet  entertained  by
the  fishing  fleet  of  (1583)  52  ;  taken
possession  of  for  Queen  Elizabeth
(1583)  53.  82,  90;  description,  55,
182  ;  products,  58 ;  results  of  cul-
tivation in,  59 ;  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert  and  (1583)  72,  90,  117;
Sancius  haven  in,  109;  the  Mari-
gold off  (1593)  158;  description  of,
by  Charles  Leigh  (1597)  180;
fishers  from,  taken  by  Sir  Bar-
nard Drake  (1585)  x.  95;  Captain
de  la  Barbotiere  and  Henry  May
at  (1594)  203;  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton at  (1595)  226;  voyage  of  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  to  (1596)  266-
276;  intended  colony  in,  by  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  (1583)  xii.  37.

'  New  found  World  Antarctic,'  by
Andrew  Thevet,  vi. 125,

New  France,  see  Canada.

New  Grimsby,  in  Scilly,  John  Davys
at  (1585)  VII.  382.

Newhaven,  ship  from,  and  the  miss-
ing men  of  the  Edward  Bonaven-
ture (1594)  VI.  407.

Newhaven,  in  France,  see  Havre.

Newhouse,  or  Nyhouse,  from  Vobsky
to.  III.  69  ; Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at,  345.

New  Hythe,  see  Hythe.

Newland,  fish  of,  or  'Poor  John,'
cargo  of,  captured  by  Christopher
Carleill  (1585)  x.  100.

Newlander  ship  rifled  by  the  crew  of
the  Swallow  (1583)  viii.  50.

Newles,  market  town  in  Sweden,  iii.
207.

Newman,  John,  of  the  Hugh  Gal-
lant, landing  of  (1587)  xi.  311.

Newmouth,  ships  from,  in  Edward
HL's  fleet,  i.  298.

Newnox,  S.  Nicholas  to,  iii.  69  ;
Richard  Chancellor  at,  74 ;  dis-
covered by  the  Edward  Bonadven-
ture,  331.

Newport,  Christopher,  captain  of  the
Golden  Dragon  (1592)  vii.  112;
and  the  Madre  de  Dios,  1 13 ;  voy-
age of,  to  West  Indies,  written  by
John  Twitt  (1591-2)  x.  184;  ships
taken  and  towns  sacked  by  (1591-
2)  189 ;  and  Sir  John  Burrough  at
Flores,  190.

331

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Newport,  in  Wales,  vi.  138.

Newport,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  vi.
177.

New  Port,  near  Cibo  harbour,  viii.
174;  Charles  Leigh  landed  at
(1597) 182.

'  News,  the  Joyful,  from  the  West
Indies,'  by  Monardes,  viii.  355.

Newsick,  neighbouring  country  to
Pomovick,  viii.  308.

Newslot,  Vobsky  to,  in.  69.

Newton,  captain  of  the  Emmanuel
of  Bridgwater  (1578)  vii. 322.

Newton,  Humphrey,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII.  402.

Newton,  John,  member  of  the
Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  88;
of  the  Barbary  Company  (1585)
419,  420  f. ;  and  first  voyage  to
Benin  (1588)  450-458,  458-461;
second  voyage  to  Benin  (1590)  461-
467.

Newton,  Walter,  of  Andrew  Barker's
company,  killed  at  S.  Francisco
Island  (1576)  X.  86.

Newtown,  in  Kylmore,  John  White's
house  in  (1593)  viii.  406,

New  Year's  Gift,  the,  captured  at  S.
Domingo,  then  given  up  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1586)  x.  127.

Nezavoo,  in.  237.

Nia  Cubacani,  widow  of  King
Hio-Caia  (1565)  ix.  54;  her
present  to  Captain  Laudonniere,
68.

Nialus,  life  of  (loio)  iv.  48, 145.

Niga,  Friar  Marco  de,  voyage  of,  ix.
115,  116,  123;  Pintados  mentioned
by,  IX.  119;  account  of  Cevola
or  Cibola  (1539)  125-144,  147;  pre-
sents offered  by  Indians  (1539)  133  ;
his  negro  companion,  Stephen
Dorantez,  killed  by  Indian  king
(1540)  300.

Nicaea, Henry  Austell  at  (1585) v.

323-
Nicamula,  John  Chilton  in  (1570)  ix.

369-
Nicaragua, Sir Francis Drake at

(1578)  IX.  319;  gold  mines  in,  367;
John  Chilton  at,  369;  Nuno  da
Silva and Sir Francis Drake at

(1579)  XI.  145;  coast  of,  287;
lake  of,  XII.  66.

Nicaria,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1593)  vi.

95.  (1594)  107-
Nicea,  see  Nicaea.
Nicholai, town  and  lake,  in. 406.
Nicholas of Lynn, his voyage, x.

301  f . ; his  '  Inventio  Fortunata,'

I-  303-

Nicholas  of  Meaux,  bishop  of  Sodor
and  Man  (1203)  i.  33,  34.

Nicholas,  the,  of  Cley,  il.  65.

Nicholas,  the,  of  London,  Hassan  of
Algiers  and  (1584)  v.  281 ;  crew
of, 282.

Nichols,  Philip,  preacher,  '  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  revived,'  by  (1626)  xii.

53-

Nichols,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  vin.  403.

Niciecan,  Indians  of,  trade  in  Ihua-
lapa,  IX.  46S.

Nicobar  Channel,  Caesar  Frederick
through  (1567)  V.  403.

Nicobar  Islands,  latitude  of,  vi.  395 ;
Moors  in,  400;  near  Sumatra,  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1592)  x.
196.

Nicoia  Port,  shipbuilding  in  (1570)
IX. 366 ; John  Chilton  at, 369.

Nicola,  cayo  de,  mentioned  in  second
Ruttier, x. 330.

Nicolas,  Rubruquis'  servant,  i.  233.

Nicols,  Thomas,  and  Arthur  Ed-
wards, III.  44-53 ;  Persian  privi-
leges granted  to,  64.

Nicols,  Thomas,  description  of  the
Canary  Islands  by,  vi. 125-136.

Nicomedia,  death  of  Flavius  Con-
stantine  at  (339)  iv.  275.

Nicosia,  in  Cyprus,  description,  v.
97,  VI.  109  ;  Genoese  laws  observed
in,  V.  100;  wealthy  town  in  Cyprus
(1571)  124;  taken  by  the  Turks
(1571)  130;  James,  bishop  of  (c.
1470)  125 ;  Musafer,  Pasha  of,
148,  152.

Nicubar,  see  Nicobar.

Nidrosia, iv. 12, 100.

Nieper,  see  Dnieper.

Nieuport,  and  the  ships  for  the
Spanish  Armada  (1588)  iv.  204.

Niger  or  Negro  river,  vi. 143.

Niger,  Dominicus  Marius,  and  the
Indians  from  America, vil. 172.

Nightingale, Thomas, of Andrew

332

INDEX

Barker's company, killed at S.

Francisco  Island  (1576)  x.  86.
Nightingale, the, of London at

Liberty  Island  (1591)  vii.  92; at

Porto d'AUy, 96.
Nig'htingales  in Russia, in. 361.
Nigondin, river in Bezeneger, v.

384-
Nigrillos  Island,  latitude  of,  x.  334 ;
longitude  from,  to  Vermeja  Island,

337-
Nigritis, see Senegal  river.
Nile,  river,  i.  258,  271,  v.  330,  vii.

176; Louis  IX.  and  the  (1249)  iv.

355; Muhaisira, on  the, v. 230;

water  stored  in  Alexandria,  vi.  35,

44; in  Cairo,  37; description,  44;

boundary  of  Africa, 144; sources

of  the,  explored  by  Nero,  xii.  15.
Nilus,  see  Nile.
Nimpo,  see  Liampo.
Nimrod, called Saturn, and the

Asiatic  founders  of  kingdoms,  in.

371-

Nimrod,  tower  of,  see  Babel.

Nine  Fathoms,  the,  at  Cape  de  Cruz
in  Cuba,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
X.  286.

Nineveh,  see  Mosul.

Nisnovogrod,  see  Nizhniy  Novgorod.

Nixapa,  in  Mexico,  John  Chilton  in
(1570)  IX.  365.

Nizao,  Punta  de,  in  S.  Domingo,  x.
284;  in  second  Ruttier,  312;  lati-
tude of,  333.

Nizhniy  Novgorod,  11.  450,  in.  358,

370-
Noah, seven precepts of, given to

Persians,  vi.  iii; sons  of,  in  the

Ark,  VII.  263.
Noblezia, Roger Bodenham's pilot

(1551)  V.  76.
Nobon,  Island  da,  discovered  by  the

Portuguese,  viii.  127.
Noce,  David,  Captain,  master  of  the

camp, killed at the defence of

Famagusta  (1571)  v. 139.
Noe,  see  Noah.
Noel,  Jacques,  his  first  letter  to  John

Growte on the discoveries of

Jacques Cartier (1587) viii. 272 ;

his  second  letter,  273.
Noel, Michael and John, sons of

Jacques  Noel  (1587)  viii.  274.

Noel,  Stephen,  nephew  of  Jacques
Cartier,  returns  to  France  with
letters  for  the  King  (1540)  viii.
266.

Nogas,  Tartar  captain,  his  refusal
of  Michael  Palaeologus's  present,
III.  397.

Nohele, see  S. Maria  town.

Noie,  William,  ship  master,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  65.

Nolrefontaine,  in  Francis  de  Rober-
val's  voyage  (1542)  viii^  283 ;  death
of,  at  sea  (1543)  289.

Nombre  de  DIos,  xi.  227 ;  John  Chil-
ton in  (1570)  IX.  368;  Spanish
ships  at  (1572)  391;  English
prisoners  at  (1570)  460;  voyage  of
Sir  Francis  Drake  to  (1572)  x.  75-
77,  XII.  52 ;  Andrew  Barker
at  (1576)  X.  85;  Spanish  West
Indian  port,  description  of  (1587)
142-144,  146-151,  237;  Hieronymo
de  Nabares  at  (1590)  176;  taken
by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1595)  236,
XII.  66;  course  from,  to  Car-
tagena, marks  of,  described  by
the  Ruttier,  x.  291 ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1572)  xi.  227.

Nombre  de  Jesus  (or  Port  Famine),
mentioned  in  Ruttier,  xi.  89 ;  town
built  by  Pedro  Sarmiento  in  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  271.

Nomopana  river,  a  tributary  of  the
Occam,  viii.  306.

Nonnia  river,  Thomas  Gregory  privi-
leged to  traffic  on  (1592)  vii. 102.

Nonocks,  salt  pits  In,  in.  368.

Nonpareilia,  the,  at  Flores  (1590)
VIII. 421.

NonpareiUe,  the,  of  the  Cadiz  ex-
pedition (159b)  IV.  247.

Norado,  Patrone,  a  hostage  In  Tri-
polis  (1584)  V.  295;  aboard  the
Jesus,  296 ;  condemned  to  slavery,
300

Norbern,  In  Norway,  11.  67;  mart
for  German  merchants,  68.

Norden,  Thomas,  of  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Norembega,  see  Norumbega.

Noremberg,  see  Nuremberg.

Norfolk,  Thomas,  fourth  duke  of,
and  the Russian ambassador, n.

357-

333

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Norfolk, Thomas, Lord Mowbray,

duke  of,  his  voyage  to  Jerusalem

(1399)  IV.  453.
Norfolk and Suffolk, Sheriff of.

King  John  and, i. 320.
Norman, the, French ship for the

discovery of Florida (1524) viii.

423-

Normandy,  Philip,  King  of  France,
and (1193)^  IV. 337.

Normannel,  Thomas  of,  witness  of
Edward  I.'s  great  charter,  i.  296.

Normonia,  vii. 164.

Norris,  Francis,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii. 318.

Norris,  General  Sir  Edward,  master
of  the  ordnance  at  the  Groyne,
VI.  487,  492  ;  his  regiment  at  the
taking  of  Puente  de  Burgos,  492  ;
at  Peniche,  496;  at  Lisbon,  497,
500;  in  the  Foresight,  515;  re-
turn to Plymouth, 515.

Norris,  Sir  Henry,  his  regiment  at
the  taking  of  Puente  de  Burgos
(1589)  VI.  492 ;  marches  to  Lis-
bon, 497,  499; in  the  Aid,  512.

Norris,  Sir  John  (i547?-i597),  early
training  of,  vi.  476 ;  in  Spain
(1589)  483;  his  plan  of  campaign,
502;  return  to  Plymouth,  515;
and  Drake,  at  Lisbon,  xii.  64.

Nortans.  infantry  in  the  Turkish
arm5^  v. 105.

Norte,  Rio  del,  compared  to  the
Guadalquivir,  ix.  190 ;  Antonio
de  Espejo's  journey  along  the
(1582)  190-194;  Los  Quires,  In-
dian province  on the, 197.

North,  Gabriel,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VTii.  318.

Northampton,  Prince  Edward  and
the  papal  legate  at  (1267)  iv.  359.

Northberne,  Northbern,  or  North-
bergen,  in  Norway,  English  mer-
chants in, II. 112, 345, 372.

North  Cape,  discovered  by  Stephen
Borough  (1556)  II.  325,  416;  the
Harry  at  (1568)  iii.  102;  Arthur
Pet  at, 254, 283, 299.

North  Cape  of  Spain,  the  Burr  and
the  Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1588)
VI.  460 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  in
sight  of  (1595)  X.  348.

North-east  passage,  see  Passage.

North-east  Sea,  discoveries  by  Eng-
lishmen in  the,  iii.  460.

Northie.  i.  48.

North  Star,  the,  of  John  Davys'
second  voyage  for  the  discovery
of  the  North-west  passage  in
(1586)  VII.  393;  course  of,  account
by  Henry  Morgan,  408 ;  going  to
Iceland, 409 ; loss  of,  413.

Northumberland,  i.  8;  conversion
of,  9.

Northumberland,  Duke  of,  see  Dud-
ley.

Northumberland,  Earl  of,  see  Percy.

Northumbria  or  Cupanama,  very
great  river  in  Guiana,  x.  492.

North-west  passage,  see  Passage.

Norton,  captain  in  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's voyage  (1589)  vii.  i,
(1592) 112.

Norton,  called  in  council  by  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.

Norton,  John,  Anthony  Jenkinson's
messenger  to  the  Emperor  of
Russia  (1572)  III. 194.

Norumbega  or  Arambec,  voyage  of
the  English  nation  to  (1527)  viii.
I ;  discovery  of,  attempted  by  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  (1583)  85  ;  the
Marigold  on  the  coast  of  (1593)
160 ;  entrance  of,  in  Florida,
281  ; in  Eastern  America,  449.

Norway,  King  Vortiporius  and,  i.
4 ;  King  x'lrthur  and,  4 ;  islands
pertaining  to,  6;  annexed  to
Britain,  7;  Octher  and,  11,  13;
Margaret,  queen  of,  11.  68 ;  Eng-
lish merchants  in  (1407)  82,  (1404)
108  f.,  Ill  f.  ;  Thome's  map  of,
169;  Stephen  Borough,  on  the
coast  of  (1556)  323,  III.  461;  An-
thony Jenkinson's  navigation  in,
196;  distance  from  Iceland,  iv.  12,
100;  fables  concerning,  iv.  21,
III  ;  Olaf  I.,  son  of  Thriggo,  968,
and  Saint  Olaf,  son  of  Harald
Harfagre,  Kings  of  (1013)  47,
145 ;  change  of  government  in,  by
Harald  Harfagre  (858)  68,  169;
strong  sea  currents  in,  vii.  337;
fish  trade  with  Frisland,  450 ;  fleet
of  the  king  of,  destroyed  by  a
storm  (c.  1380)  450;  friars  from,
to  Greenland,  453 ; description  of,

334

INDEX

by  Antonio  Zeno,  463  ;  Haco,  King
of,  expels  Harald  out  of  Man,  and
takes  tribute  (1238)  i.  39;  acknow-
ledges Harald,  King  of  Man
(1239)  39;  and  England  (1229)
320-322; and  Edward  II.,  341  f.,

343  f-.  347  f-

Norwegians,  first  inhabitants  of  Ice-
land (874)  IV.  52,  68, 150, 169.

Norwel,  William,  keeper  of  the
King's  wardrobe, i. 300.

Norwey,  see  Norway.

Norwich,  ship  from,  and  the  pirates
(1394)  II.  63 ;  St.  Peter's  Church
in,  epitaph  of  Peter  Read  in  (1566)
V. 69.

Noss,  meaning  of,  in  Russian,  iii,
410.

Nostra  Senora  de  los  remedios,  the,
Spanish  prize  (1591)  vii.  60.

Not,  James,  distress  of,  at  Port  De-
sire (1592)  XI.  399.

Notary  kept  in  Spanish  ships  (1586)

XI. 457-

Nottingham,  Earl  of,  see  Howard.

Noue.  de  la,  father  of  M.  de  Tel-
igny,  Spanish  prisoner  in  the
castle  of  Tournai  (1588)  iv.  232.

Nova  Zembla,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1556)  II. 337, 342, XII. 22  ;  account  by
Richard  Johnson  of  discovery  of,
"•  345>  346;  passage,  iii.  12,  265,
286,  455  ;  William  Borough  at  the
discovery  of  (1556)  210;  Arthur
Pet  and,  254,  257,  265,  286;  Sir
Hugh  Willoughby  at,  xii.  22.

Novgorod,  great  market  town  in
Russia,  II.  225,  261,  276;  pro-
ducts of,  278 ;  flax  market,  296 ;
source  of  the  Volga  near,  477 ;
treasure  of,  188 ;  flax  and  hemp
markets  in,  225 ;  oil  market,
276;  latitude,  479.  iii.  78,
37O'  372 )  from  Moscow  to,
68,  69 ;  from  Kholmogory  to,  73 ;
plague  in,  80;  salt  market  at,  82;
English  trade  in,  93,  95,  109,  215;
free  of  custom,  112;  English
money  coined  in,  116;  Russian
wares  in  the  market  of,  207 ;  gar-
rison of,  337 ;  Sir  Jerome  Horsey
at,  345; English  trade  free  (1586)

349-
Novgorod  velica,  province  of  Russia,

III.  358 ; fertility,  360 ; dukedom,
conquest  of  (1480)  386.
Novibazar, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V. 323-

Novogardia,  11.  346.

Novogorod, see  Novgorod.

Nowel,  translation  of  Ochther's
navigation  by,  vii.  (871)  163.

No  well,  Henry,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV. 217.

Noyer,  John,  of  Dieppe,  and  Cap-
tain Lancaster  at  Pernambuco
(1595)  XI. 53.

Nubi,  see  Nubians.

Nubia,  kingdom  of,  vi. 168.

Nubians,  people  of  Libya,  vi.  168.

Nueblas  or  Cloudy  Islands,  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure at (1593) vi.

405-

Nuestra  Senora  de  Gracia,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  xi.  90.

Nueva  Reyno  de  Granada,  see
Granada.

Nugent,  Edward,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VII.  318;  death  of  Pemisapan
by,_  342.

Numidia,  desert  of,  yi.  142 ;  boun-
dary of  Africa  the  less, 144.

Nunez,  Alvaro,  called  Cabega  de
Vaca,  voyages  by,  vii.  171,  ix.
116;  in  the  Jumanos'  country,
192.

Nunez,  Vasquez,  de  Balboa,  con-
quests of,  VIII.  no;  and  King
Chemaccus,  124 ;  and  King
Chiapes,  124;  Pacific  Ocean
sighted  by, xii. 9.

Nunnius,  Alvarus,  see  Nunez,  Al-
varo.

Nuremberg,  Laurence  Aldersey  in
(1581)  V.  214;  Henry  Austell  at
(1585)  321; Richard  Wrag  at,  vi.

113-

Nurendof,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V. 321.

Nuses,  Stephen  Borough  and  fish-
ing of,  II.  344.

Nutmegs  found  in  Banda,  vi.  24.

Nuts  of  India  found  in  Goa,  vi.  26.

Nuts,  cochos,  see  Palm  trees.

Nux  vomica,  found  in  Malabar,  vi.
26.

Nympheum,  flaming  rock  in  Ice-
land, IV. 21, 1X2.

335

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Nyse  Novogrod,  see  Nizhniy  Nov-
gorod.

Oaks,  found  in  Hochelaga  by
Jacques  Cartler,  viil.  228,  231;  in
Virginia,  for  shipbuilding  (1586)
371 ;  found  in  New  Spain,  ix.
382;  in  Nicaragua,  467;  on
Atoyaque  mountains,  469.

Oakum,  made  in  Chaul,  v.  379.

Oaths,  sea  captain's,  or  juramentum,
11.  215,  216;  taken  by  the  ser-
vants of  the  Muscovy  Company,
290 ;  of  Persians,  iii,  163 ;  of
fidelity,  betwixt  Richard  I.  and
Philip,  King  of  France  (1190)  iv.
320; in China, vi. 308.

Oathcaqua,  King,  friend  of  the  king
of  Calos  (c. 1565)  IX. 51.

Oatlands,  Queen  Elizabeth  at,  in.
98 ;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  received  by
Queen Elizabeth  at  (1583)  328.

Ob,  river,  in.  408 ;  discoveries  by
Stephen  Borough  in  the  (1556)  n.
322.  337.  339.  344.  390,  482;  Eng-
lish trade  on,  restricted  to  Mus-
covy Company,  in.  97;  and  the
English  expedition  (1588)  120;
Arthur  Pet  at  the  mouth  of,  254 ;
journey  to,  by  Sigismund  ab  Her-
berstein,  405;  seventy  mouths  of,
455  ;  Oliver  on  the,  456 ;  and  the
North-east  sea,  vn.  176,  199;  and
the  current  in  Mare  Glaciale,  183.

Obba  river,  see  Ob.

Obdolowcan,  see  Abd'Ullah  Khan.

Obdoria,  conquered  province  of
Russia,  in.  359.

Obesi,  I.  86.

Obi,  see  Ob.

Obiowa, III. 409.

Obispo,  Exarama  de,  English  bat-
talion at  (1589)  VI. 498.

Obraches  or  houses  of  correction  in
Tescuco,  IX.  421.

Obray,  William,  first  governor  of
English  merchants  in  the  Nether-
lands, II.  147  f.  ;  his  authority,
149  f., 152, 156.

O'Brien,  Murecard,  King  of  Ireland,
I.  25,  29,  31.

Observances,  religious,  in  Iceland,
IV. 78, 181.

Ocapanio  Indian,  captain  of,  x.  493.

Ocaywita Island,  in  Orinoco  river,

X. 395.
Occa, tributary  of  the  Moskva, 11.

254. 449-
Occam  river,  in  Virginia,  viii.  304,

306.
Occaday,  see  Oktai.
Occient to Kashgar, twenty days'

journey, n. 481.
Occoday,  see  Oktai.
Ocetera,  see  Sturgeon.
Ochther, see Octher.
Ocka  river,  tributary  of  Volga,  in,

3^53  •
Ockam,  see  Oakum.
Ocoa,  in  Hispaniola  Island,  sacked

by  Christopher  Newport  (1591)  x.

185 ; longitude from, to Beata,

336.
Ocona,  salt  pits  in,  in.  368.
Octacer, see Odoacer.
Octavius, king  of  Britain  (339)  iv.

272,  276.
Octher's voyage of discoveries, i.

IX  f.  ; description  of  Norway,  13;

voyage  to  Hetha, 14; in  Halge-

land,  II.  219; navigation  of  (871),

translated  by  Nowel,  vn. 163.
Oddgeirus, seventeenth bishop of

Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1366)  iv.  56,

155-

Odericus,  see  Odoric.

Odia  in  Siam,  king  of  Pegu  at  war
with  (c. 1583)  v.  489.

Odoacer,  king  of  Bohemia,  in  Prus-
sia, II.  2,  3.

Odoric,  Friar,  of  Pordenone,  journal
of,  on  the  Eastern  Tartars  (1330)
IV.  371-408,  408-444;  and  Kublai
Khan  at  Pekin  (1330)  441,  xii.  12;
death  of  (1331)  iv.  443;  on  fishing
in  China,  vi.  327;  Kublai  Khan's
court  described  by,  xii.  13.

Odrangi,  people  of  Libya,  vi. 168.

Oechardes,  see  Hwang-ho.

Oechordes,  see  Hwang-ho.

Oecope  Mountain,  near  Putapayma
Island,  x.  396.

Olifa,  King,  and  Charlemagne,  i.
xlvii.,  310  f.

Ofifley,  Robert,  of  Levant  Company
(1592)  VI. 75,  78.

Offley,  Thomas,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  n.  307.

336

INDEX

Ofley, Sir Thomas, and Persian

trade,  iii.  212.
Oghane Mountain, in the port of

Goa,  VI.  28.
Ognedoc, bay of, fishing in, viii.

277.
Oguzalpes,  father  of  Ortogules,  iii.

399-

Ohanoak,  or  Blind  Town,  in  Vir-
ginia (1585)  vm.  322.

Oher,  Vologda  to,  iii.  69.

Oia  river,  south  of  Quito,  in  Peru,
X. 362.

Oiaren,  kingdom  of,  hunting  and
hawking  in,  by  Quabacondono
(1591)  XI.  429.

Oijana  Valley,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
in  (1595)  X.  416.

Oil,  spring  of,  in  Persia,  iii.  165 ;
train,  in  Lapland,  200 ;  train,  from
seal  fish,  366;  from  Crete,  rate
of,  in  Chios  (1569)  v.  114;  from
Spain,  117;  product  of  Cyprus,
125;  want  of,  in  England,  237;
market  in  Tripolis,  293,  319;  made
of  palm  nuts,  379,  470;  palm,  from
Benin,  vi.  457,  467;  train,
found  in  the  Western  Planting
(1583)  VIII.  116,  118,  139;  found
in  Newfoundland,  117;  in  Ramea,
155 ;  in  Assumption  Island,  162 ;
seal,  drink  of  natives,  287;
walnut,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)
355 ;  Palmito,  Job  Hortop  on
(1568)  IX. 447.

Okisco,  king  of  Weapomeiok  (1585)
VIII.  322 ;  his  submission  to  Queen
Elizabeth,  336;  not  party  to
the conspiracy of Pemisapan,

339-
Oktai,  son  of  Jenghiz  Khan,  i.  69,
74, 76, 77, 150; Kaiuk's  father,
poisoned,  173  ; his  death  avenged,

175-
Olaf,  son  of  Godred  Crovan,  i.  26,

30-
Olaf,  son  of  Godred,  King  of  Man,
I- 32.  35; warfare  between  God-
red and, 36; King  of  Man,  and
all the islands (1226) 37; death

of  (1237)  38-
Olaf, son of Sumerled, King of

Herergaidel  or  Argyll,  i.  30.
Olaf,  son  of  Rogwaldus,  eighteenth

bishop  of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1458)

IV.  57.  155-
Olaf  I.,  son  of  Thriggo,  first  Chris-
tian King  of  Norway  (968)  iv.  47,

145-
Olaf, Saint, son of Harold, King

of  Norway  (1013)  iv.  48,  145.
Olaw, Henry Austell in (1585) v.

326.
Olde  Rumney,  see  Romney,  Old.
Oldenburg,  Wilstenius,  schoolmaster

of, IV. 15, 104.
Olechus,  see  Oleg.
Oleg,  Rurik's  kinsman,  11.  183,  184.
Olen,  see  Deer.
Olga,  wife  of  Igor,  11.  184.
Olinda, Punta de, mentioned in

Ruttier,  xi.  74.
Olinda, Villa  de, see Pernambuco.,
Oliphants,  see  Elephants.
Oliver, the  Netherlander  (Alferius)^

and the North-east passage, iv.

454-457-
Oliver,  master-gunner  in  Sir  Francis

Drake's  company  (1578)  xi. 109.
Olivet, Mount, in Jerusalem, v.

212.
Olmor, II. 420.

Olmutz,  bishop  of,  in  Prussia,  11.  3,
Olotacara,  nephew  of  King  Satouri-

oua,  and  Captain  Gourgues  (1567)

IX. 103, (1568) 107 ; courage of,

105.
Omar,  Mahomet's  companion,  tomb

of,  at  Medina,  v.  363.
Ometepec, river of, flows into the

haven of  Tecuanapa, ix. 467.
Ometepec, town  in  charge  of  Gon-

zalvo  Fernandez,  ix.  468.
Omitaqua, King, vassal of King

Utina  (1564)  IX.  21,
Omoloa,  King,  ally  of  King  Satouri-

oua (1564) IX. 28.
Omura,  princedom  of,  in  Figen,  xi.

424; Jesuit  College  at  (1591)  428.
Omurandono,  lord  of  Ceuxima,  and

his  soldiers,  xi.  425,  429.
Omyl, I. 69.
Onatheaqua, King, or Onathaqua,

vassal  of  King  Satourioua  (1564)

IX.  21; and  the  Spanish  prisoner

(1565)  49-
Oncaiarie  Island,  stormy  weather  at

(1596) X. 457.

337

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Onchio,  city  in  China,  vi.  320.

Oncowi  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana  river, x. 459.

Onega  lake,  from  Vologda  to,  in.
6q ; description  of, 78.

Onega  river,  iii.  363,  vii.  199.

Ongar  Point,  latitude  of,  viii. 278.

Onor,  Portuguese  hold,  v.  390;  in
the  kingdom  of  Battacella,  391.

Ontiveros,  Juan  de,  chief  justice  of
Las  Ouatro  Cienegas  (1582)  ix.
188.

Opium,  Caesar  Frederick's  trade  in
(1567)  V.  440-442;  in  Cambay
(1583)  491;  in  Pugia  and  Cam-
bay,  VI.  27.

Oporto,  Nuno  da  Silva's  birth-place,

XI.  133 ; bishop  of, and  Thomas
Stukely  (1578)  vi.  294.

Opossians, Indian  tribe  in  Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  322.
Opopanax, found in Persia, vi.

26.
Oppeln,  on  the  Oder,  v.  326.
Oppenheim,  '  Administration  of  the

Royal  Navy  '  by  (1509- 1660)  (1896)

XII.  44.
Opressini, iii. 113.

Oquendo, Michael de, and the

Armada  (1588)  iv. 200; ship  of,

burnt  by the English, 215; lost

at  sea, 230.
Orage, found in Virginia (1586)

VIII.  360.
Oram, city, on the Mediterranean

Sea,  VI. 143.
Orange,  de,  captain  of  the  mutineers

in Fort  Caroline  (1564) ix. 43.
Orange, Prince  of, tune  of,  played

on  the  fife  by  Nicholas  Burgoig-

non at S. John's fort (1586) x.

129.
Oratina, see  Utina.
Oratio,  Regaly,  Caesar  Frederick  at

the  house  of,  in  Tripolis  (1581)  v.

447-
Orcades, see  Orkney.
Orchell moss, found in Canary

Islands,  used  for  dyeing,  vi. 125,

130-135-
Orcus, river, in Thessaly, iv. 37,

133-
Orda,  Golden,  or  Emperor's  tent,  i.

171.

Ordas,  Diego,  de  Leon,  his  attempt
to  discover  Guiana  (1531)  x.  359,
496.

Orders,  sealed,  of  the  Cadiz  expedi-
tion (1596)  IV.  241.

Ordinance,  see  Ordnance.

Ordnance,  Russian,  11.  430,  431 ;  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  201 ;  in
Rhodes  (1522)  v.  7;  used  by  the
Turks  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes,  18;
Turkish  master  of  the,  killed  at
the  siege,  25 ;  of  the  King  of
Pegu,  425 ;  of  Fayal,  vii.  9 ;  in
English  ships,  in  (1594)  123;  cap-
tured by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1586)
X. 134.

Ordowil,  see  Ardouill.

Ordu,  Tushi's  son,  senior  duke,
I. 74, 150, 167  f.

Ore,  found  in  Hall's  Island,  by
Hall,  master  of  the  Gabriel  (1576)
VII.  290;  in  Meta  Incognita  (1577)
291,  342;  found  by  Captain  Fro-
bisher  (1577)  298;  gold,  in  Anne
of  Warwick's  Island,  300,  314,
347 ;  black,  found  by  Captain
Best,  VII.  355,  357,  360;  from
Newfoundland  (1578)  viii.  15 ;
found  by  Daniel,  the  miner  (1583)
60.

Oreiche  na  maelay,  place  in  Russia,
HI.  78.

Orejones,  '  Gentlemen  of  Peru,'  in
Gomara's  '  Hist.  Gen.,'  cap,  119,
X.  400.

Orejones  of  Cuzco,  and  Huascar,  x.
340 ; and  the  son  of  Guaynacapa,

356.

Orellana,  Captain,  his  attempt  to
discover  Guiana  (1542)  x.  358;
discovery  of  the  Amazon  river  by,
359,  476,  499;  first  attempt  of,  to
conquer  Guiana,  429 ;  sent  down
the  Amazon  river,  xi.  241 ;  death
of,  242.

Orellana  river,  Pedro  de  Orsua  at
(1560)  X.  498;  difficulties  of  gain-
ing access  to  Guiana  from,  499.

Orenoque,  see  Orinoco.

Orenoqueponi,  x.  361 ;  people  on  the
Orinoco,  366  ;  or  Guianians,  400  ;
followers  of  Topiawari,  423.

Orfa,  Ralph  Fitch  at  (c.  1583)  v.
50.5-

338

INDEX

Orford,  Suffolk,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet  at,  i.  299.

Orfordness,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  11.
218,  219;  Anthony  Jenkinson's
fleet  at,  414;  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)
III.  282,  302.

Org-anes  hills,  see  Organos.

Organes,  fight  near,  between  Eng-
lish and  Spanish  ships  (1590)  viii.
420 ;  dangerous  rocks  near  Cuba,
X. 244.

Organos,  Los,  hills  in  Cuba,  viii.
411,  X.  323.

Organum,  land  of,  i.  284.

Orgas,  Count  of,  on  the  Saint  Philip
(1588)  IV.  226.

Orguene,  Regnum,  east  of  Guinea,
VI. 168.

Orimo,  John  de,  letter  from,  to  the
King  of  Spain  (1590)  x,  158;
general  of  the  Spanish  fleet,  160.

Orinikero,  town  of  Gowateri,  x.
492.

Orinoco  river,  x.  356,  365,  368;  Sir
Robert  Dudley's  sailors  on  the
(1595)  208;  derivation  of,  212;
tributaries  of,  371 ;  description  of,
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  382 ;
breadth  of,  394;  navigable  up  to
Granada  and  Popayan,  395;
means  of  invasion  for  Peru,  Gran-
ada, and  Popayan,  408;  Bara-
quan,  name  of  the,  above  Meta,
408 ;  divides  itself  in  three
branches  at  Ariacoa,  417 ;  tribu-
taries and  mouth  of  the,  420 ;  de-
scribed by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1595)  425;  in  Laurence  Keymis's
report  on  Guiana,  x.  455,  459,  494;
channel  of,  description  of,  463 ;
named  Raleana  after  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1596)  476;  mouths  of,
Christopher  Columbus  at,  xii.  11;
Sir Walter Raleigh at (1595)

73-

Oripei, hunters  of  Africa, vi. 169.

Orisa,  see  Orissa.

Orissa,  Caesar  Frederick  at  (c.  1583)
V.  408 ;  description  of,  409 ;  pro-
ducts of,  409;  king  of  Patna  in,
410; near  Satagan,  482.

Oristou,  name  of  King  and  river  in
Florida, ix. 112; cacique, 113.

Orixa,  see  Orissa.

Orkney  Islands,  King  Arthur  and,  i.
3,  4;  Spanish  ships  at  (1588)  iv.
229;  Captain  Martin  Frobisher
sights  (1576)  VII.  211,  (1577)  212;
description  of,  213,  286  f. ;  S.
Magnus  Sound  in,  Captain  Fro-
bisher at  (1577)  286;  Kirkwall,
chief  town of, 287.

Orleance,  see  Orleans.

Orleans,  John  de,  master  of  a
French  ship  in  Guinea  (1557)  vi.
215,  218.

Orleans  Cape,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii.  194,  219;
Jacques  Cartier  at  (1536)  258;
fresh  water  river  at,  280;  latitude
of,  281.

Orleans  Isle,  viii.  279;  Roberval  at
(1542)  284.

Orlovanos,  S.  Nicolas  to,  iii.  69.

Ormes,  see  Ormuz.

Ormond, Earl  of,  11. 135.

Ormus,  see  Ormuz.

Ormus,  thirteenth  bishop  of  Holen,
in Iceland (1343) iv. 55, 154.

Ormuz,  viii.  128 ;  and  the  Portu-
guese, III.  31;  spice  trade  in,  43;
thirty  days'  journey  from  Kazvin
to,  51;  great  market  at,  62,  147;
Indian  warfare  at,  138 ;  Humphry
Greensell  burnt  at  (1570)  154;
spices  brought  from,  161 ;  Friar
Odoric  at  (1330)  iv,  411;  Ceesar
Frederick's  description  of  (1563)  v.
372  ;  election  of  the  King  of,  373  ;
trade  with  Diu,  377 ;  Cassar  Fred-
erick at,  442 ;  John  Newbery  in
(1583)  457,  458,  460,  461  f.,  506;
Ralph  Fitch  in  (1583)  463-468,
503 ;  his  description  of,  468 ;  Don
Gonsalo  de  Meneses,  captain  of,
507 ;  products  of,  sold  at  Bus-
sorah,  vi.  6 ;  weight,  measure  and
money  current  at,  14;  and  mon-
soons, 29,  30,  34;  plan  of,
engraving  of,  32 ;  sun-worship
at,  no;  vanil  of  Cambay,  sold  at,
323  ;  Portuguese  garrison  at,  viii.
445,  X.  487.

Orna,  on  the  Don,  i.  76;  besieged
by  Tartars, 152.

Ornaments worn by Africans, de-
scription of,  VI. 173.
Oro, Cape  de,  latitude  of,  xi.  348.

339

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Oro,  Rio  del,  latitude  of,  x.
335; John Winter at (1577)

XI,  150;  Robert  Withring-ton  at,
latitude  of  (1586)  204;  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1586)  291;  sound-
ings, 351.

Oro, river del, vi. 157, 180, 236;

latitude of, 450.
Orocoa,  gold  mine  in,  in  Waliame,

X.  207.
Orocotona, town of the King of

Aromaia,  latitude  of,  x.  401.
Orodes, king  of  the  Parthians, iv.

72, 174-

Orontes,  river  in  the  plain  of  Anti-
och,  VI.  108.

Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  iv.  28, 120.

Orsele,  Warner  ab,  fourteenth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
6.

Orsino,  Latino,  friendliness  of,  to-
wards Nestor  Martiningo  (1571)  v.
150.

Orsua,  Pedro  de,  his  attempt  to  dis-
cover Guiana  (1560)  x.  362,  497,
498;  murdered  by  his  soldiers,
408,  499,  XI.  18,  245 ;  and  the  dis-
covery of  the  Amazon,  17,  243;
mutiny  of  Lopez  de  Agira  against,
244.

Ortal,  Jeronimo  de,  of  Saragossa,
his  attempt  to  discover  Guiana
(1534)  X. 363, 497.

Ortega,  Captain  John  de,  in  pur-
suit of  John  Oxenham  (1575)  x.
78,  XI.  230 ;  his  fight  with  John
Oxenham,  x.  79.

Ortega,  Pedro  de,  Alvar^s  de  Men-
danio's  vice-admiral,  xi.  288.

Ortelius,  Abraham,  i.  liii.,  iii.  210;
map  of  the  world  by,  engraving  of,

I.  i.  ;  map  of  Europe,  engraving  of,

II.  488 ;  portrait  of,  iii.  272 ;
book  of  maps  by,  272  ;  map  by
(1569)  VII.  163,  180,  192;  map  of
the  Scythian  Cape  by,  192  ;  of  the
world  by,  197,  203 ;  on  the  dis-
covery of  Estotiland,  by  Antonio
Zeno  (1390)  464;  his  correction
of  maps,  VIII.  444; and  Hakluyt,

XII.  75.

Ortogules, son of Oguzalpes, iii.

399-
Ormus,  see  Ormuz.

Orwell  Wands,  Willoughby's  fleet
at,  II,  217,  218;  Stephen  Borough
at, 323 ; Anthony Jenkinson at,

413-

Orzua,  see  Orsua.

Osascan,  native  of  Virginia,  enemy
to  the  English  (1586)  viii.  337.

Osborne,  Sir  Edward,  portrait
of,  V.  iii. ;  and  the  Levant
trade  (1578)  v.  167,  170;  granted
privileges  by  Queen  Elizabeth
(1581)  192 ;  governor  of  the
second  company  for  the  Levant
trade  (1581)  193-202 ;  and  the
Grand  Master  of  Malta,  218;
letter  tp  the  King  of  Algiers  (1584)
268,  269;  and  the  Jesus  (1583)
292  ;  and  Ralph  Fitch's  voyage  to
India  (1583)  465;  and  Levant
trade  (1592)  vi.  73;  governor  of
the  Levant  Company  (1592)  75,
76,  78.

Osborne,  Master,  and  the  trade  with
S. Vincent  in Brazil, xi. 27.

Osburne,  see  Osborne.

Osella,  Arusberg  on  the,  iii.  454.

Osibel,  brother  of  Murecard,  King
of Ireland, i. 31.

Osiers,  see  Mimbras.

Osman,  Pasha,  governor  of  Media
(1577) III. 234.

Osmlne,  Russian  measure  for  corn,
II. 275.

Osorius,  '  De  rebus  gestis  Emanuelis
Regis  Portugalliae,'  ni.  461.

Osprey,  English  discoverers  fed  by
an (1536)  VIII. 5.

Osterna,  Boppo  ab,  sixth  master  of
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  3,  5.

Ostrich,  Henry,  death  of,  in  Bar-
bary,  vi. 137.

Ostrige,  William,  Levant  trader
(1535)  V.  69.

Ostrov,  on  the  Owiga,  in.  76 ;  Var-
nich  to,  81.

Osua,  Pedro  de,  see  Orsua.

Oswald,  Saint,  archbishop  of  York
(d.  992)  I.  22.

Otelands,  see  Oatlands.

Othon,  and  the  Indians  from
America,  vil. 173.

Othor,  Earl,  at  the  battle  of  Sant-
wat,  I.  28.

Otoman,  see  Ottoman.

340

INDEX

Otranto, Cape,  in  Apulia,  v. 80.

Ottavio,  of  Rimini,  captain,  made
slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  152.

Ottigni,  M.  de.  Captain  Laudon-
niere's  lieutenant,  and  the  Indians
of  Dominica  (1564)  ix.  4;  at  the
river  of  Dolphins,  5 ;  and  the  In-
dians of  Florida,  9 ;  expedition  of,
towards  Thimogoa  (1564)  18;  and
King  Utina  make  war  on  King
Potanou  (1565)  56  f. ;  and  the
shipbuilding  in  Fort  Caroline,  60  ;
deceived  by  King  Utina  (1565)  63  ;
and  the  Indian  ambushes  (1565)
72  f.,  74;  and  Sir  J.  Hawkins'
ship  (1565)  80;  and  his  advice
about Spanish ships in Florida

(1565)  90-
Ottigny,  see  Ottigni.
Otto of Kerpen, second master  of

the Hospitallers of Jerusalem

(1200)  II.  I.
Otto Frisingensis, appendix to a

history  of,  i.  316.
Ottocar  I.,  king  of  Bohemia,  i,  51,

159. 179-
Ottoman, son of Ortogules, first
chief of the  Turkish nation, iii.

399-

Ottoman,  Mahomet's  companion,
tomb  of,  at  Medina,  v.  363.

Ottonburge,  see  Salamanca.

Ottver,  or  Otver,  from  Moscow  to,
III.  68 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  awaits
the  Emperor  of  Russia  at  (1572)
III. 179; Sir Jerome Horsey at,

345-
Otwer,  see  Ottver.
Oudoria, conquered province of

Russia,  III.  359.
Ouglets,  see  Ouglits.
Ouglits, the Dowager-Empress of

Russia  at  (1584)  in.  337; various

furs  found  at,  365.
Ounces, see Leopards.
Ourari, Indian poisonous herb, x.

495-
Our Lady of Pity, Spanish bark,

taken  by  Luke  Warde  (1582)  xi.

184.
Ousley, Captain, ambassador from

the  English  generals  in  Portugal

to  the  emperor  of  Morocco  (1589)

VI. 511.

Outina,  see  Utina.

Outlaws  in  Crete  (1551)  v.  75.

Ouygat,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i, 150.

Ovade,  King,  brother  of  King  Cov-
exis,  and  Captain  Albert  (1562)
VIII.  478;  liberality  of,  479,
481.

Ovando,  Francis  de,  sacrificed  by
Indians  (1540)  ix. 164.

Oveak,  on  the  west  side  of  Vol-
ga, III.  216;  English  merchants
at, 246 ; altitude of, 248.

Ovear, Mahomet's disciple, in. 36.

Ovejas,  Las,  or  the  Sheep,  danger-
ous rocks near Hispaniola, x.

327-.
Overniron, Boca de, mentioned in

Ruttier,  xi.  84.
Ovid, Metamorphoses 15,  quotation

from,  IV.  36, 131.
Oviedo, Gonsalo Fernando de, 11.

161 ;  on  Cuba  and  Hispaniola,  vii.

267 ; '  History  of  the  West  Indies  '

by,  X.  4 ; account  of  the  Maranon

by,  sent  to  Cardinal  Bembo,  361;

quotation  from  Book  20,  xi.  259.
Oviedus,  see  Oviedo.
Ovsca Gouba, S. Nicholas to, in.

69.
Ovslona,  Monastery,  altitude  of,  in.

248.
Ovst  Colla,  S.  Nicolas  to,  in.  69.
Ovst  Navelocki,  S.  Nicholas  to,  in.

69.
Owarecapater  Island,  in  the  Orinoco

river,  x.  494.
Owaripoore,  town  of  the  Inana,  x.

492.
Owchay,  n.  420.
Owcowi  river, x.  492.
Oweke,  latitude  of,  11.  479.
Owen Gwynedd, prince of North

Wales  (1170)  VII. 133.
Owen,  Thomas,  member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi. 419,

420  f.
Owiga  river,  in.  75.
Owna  river,  in.  74.
Owrinoicke, river in Guiana, x.

207.
Owry, Arthur Pet at (1580) in.

302.
Ox  birds  in  Malacca,  vi.  397.
Oxen, crook-backed, found  in  Qui-

341

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

vira,  IX.  165 ;  of  Quivira,  descrip-
tion and  use  of,  168;  crook-
backed,  of  Quivira,  description  of,
made  to  Captain  Alarchon  (1540)
306;  crook-backed,  of  Cevola,
description  of  (1540)  309;  de-
scription of, by Henry Hawks,

383-

Oxenham,  John,  of  Plymouth  (d.
1575),  in  the  isthmus  of  Darien,  1.
xxvii. ;  and  the  Spaniards  in  the
straits  of  Darien,  viii.  315;  voy-
age of,  to  West  Indies  (1575),
written  by  Lopez  Vaz,  x.  77-81 ;
fight  of,  with  the  Spanish  cap-
tain, John  de  Ortega  (1575)  79;
captured  by  Diego  de  Frees,
execution  of,  at  Lima  (1575)  80,
XI,  233,  286;  reference  to  the
landing  of,  in  Nombre  de  Dios
(1587)  X.  151 ;  ships  captured  by
(1575)  XI.  229,  230;  on  the  Pacific
Ocean,  xii.  67.

Oxford,  Earl  of,  see  Vere,  Edward
de.

Oxford,  Mount,  in  Meta  Incognita,
the  Thomas  Allen  in  distress  near
(1578)  vii._348._

Oxford,  university  of.  Ingulf  at
(1064)  IV.  290;  Robert  Curson  at
(12 18)  348;  Earl  of  Leicester,
chancellor  of,  v.  120 ;  Christ
Church,  Hakluyt  at,  xii.  78.

Oxnam,  see  Oxenham.

Oxney,  William,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  64.

Oxus,  spring  of,  in  Paraponisus,  11.
461,  462;  Anthony  Jenkinson  near
the,  465,  468.

Oyle, see  Oil.

Oyman, province in China, xi.

379-

Oysters,  drying  of,  in  New  Spain,
IX.  385 ;  growing  on  trees,  de-
scription of,  by  Job  Hortop  (1568)
447  >  growing  on  trees  in  Trini-
dad (1595)  x.  349;  growing  on
trees  at  Sierra  Leone,  xi.  132,
174.

Ozeah, on  the  Tigris, vi. 6.

Pacheco, Don  Luis  and,  in  Guinea

(1562)  VI.  260.
Pachin,  see  Pekin.

Pachora,  Anthony  Godard  at  (1568)
IX. 418.

Pachuca, silver  mines  of, ix.  418.

Pachura,  see  Pachora.

Pachymerius,  '  Story  of  the  Em-
perors of  Constantinople  '  by,  iii.

397-

Paciacama  in Peru, viii. 125.

Pacie,  Edward,  mariner  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  214.

Pacific  Ocean,  vii.  160,  165,  168;
sea  currents  in,  169  ;  Friar  Andrew
ITrdaneta's  voyage  from,  to  Ger-
many, 196;  map  of,  by  Ortelius,
464,  466 ;  voyage  of  Captain  Gour-
gues  to,  IX.  Ill;  California
Islands  in,  318;  ports  on  the,
365  f. ;  Tecuanapa  Harbour  in,
473 ;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's  inten-
tion of  finding  a  passage  from
Rio  Dolce  to  (1597)  x.  275;  Sir
Francis  Drake's  voyage  to  (1577-
1578)  XI.  101-133 ;  the  Desire  in
the  (1592)  404; Drake  in,  xii.  59.

Padilla,  Friar  John  de,  adventures
and  death  of  (1540)  ix. 166.

Padstow,  Cornwall,  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.  298;  Cap-
tain Frobisher  at  (1577)  vii.  318;
Sir  John  Hawkins'  arrival  at
(1565)  X.  63;  Captain  Davys  at
(1593)  XI.  416.

Padua.  Richard  Wrag  at  (c.  1594)
VI. 113.

Pages  of  honour  in  the  Turkish
army,  v.  106.

Pago,  Don  Francisco  de,  captain-
general  of  Don  Henrico  Manri-
ques  (1572)  IX.  373.

Pagoda  in  Pegu,  v.  490.

Paine,  Henry  and  Rose,  settlers  in
Virginia  (1587)  viii. 403.

Painpont,  Martin  de,  leaves  Charles-
burg  Royal  with  Jacques  Cartier
(1540)  viii.  269.

Paint,  earth  used  as,  by  Indians  of
Mexico  (1572)  IX.  382;  war,  of
Indians  of  Florida  (1565)  x.  52.

Painter,  Thomas,  quartermaster's
mate  on  the  Bona  Esperanza,  11.
213.

Painters,  Chinese,  vi.  359.

Paita  bridge  in  Panama,  x.  153.

Paita  in  Peru,  see  Payta.

342

INDEX

Paiton,  Henry,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Pakeman,  Richard,  expedition  to
Guinea  (1555)  v. 208.

Palace  of  Vanfuli,  nephew  of  the
King  of  China,  description  of,  vi.
326.

Palaces  built  in  Japan  (1591)  xi.
427.

Palasologus,  Helen,  wife  of  John,
King-  of  Cyprus  (1571)  v.  125.

Palaeologus,  Michael,  Pachymerius
on,  in.  397.

Palaeologus,  Thomas,  11. i8g.

Palandrie,  Turkish  ships  at  the
siege  of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  130.

Palango,  Kholmogory  to,  in.  70.

Palathye  or  Palice,  in  Turkey,  i.
308.

Palavicino,  Sir  Horatio,  portrait  of,
IV.  216;  and  the  Armada  (1588)
217;  and  his  Spanish  prisoner,  M.
de  Teligny  (1588)  232.

Palestine  or  Philistine,  Anthony
Jenkinson  in,  in. 195.

Pallamos  Islands,  in  the  tributaries
of  the  Orinoco  river,  x.  382.

Pallie,  Thomas,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Palm  or  span,  measure  of  Ormuz,
VI. 15.

Palm  Sunday,  ceremonies  on,  in
Russia,  II. 434.

Palma,  Juan  de,  captain  of  a  Span-
ish ship  (1589)  VII.  5.

Palma  Island,  and  town,  one  of  the
Canaries,  subject  to  Spain,  vi.
131;  description  of,  132,  156;
latitude  of,  133,  156,  x.  332 ;  Wil-
liam Towerson  at  (1555)  vi.  178,
^1556)  212;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1585)  X.  102  ;  birth-place  of  Pedro
Dias,  XI.  458.

Palmas,  Cape  de  las,  vi.  158;  de-
scription, 159,  463  ;  latitude,  189 ;
William  Towerson  at  (1555)  191,
(1556)  211,  (1557)  229;  English
and  Portuguese  merchants  at
(1562)  259 ;  the  Richard  of  Arun-
del of  (1591)  466;  climate  of,  vii.
252.

Palmas,  Las,  Hawkins  and  Drake
repulsed  at  (1595)  xii.  66.

Palmas,  Rio  das,  in  Guinea,  vi.
238.

Palmas,  Rio  de  Las,  between  New
Spain  and  Florida,  ix.  374.

Palmas,  Rio  de  Las,  near  Panuca
river,  marks  of,  in  second  Ruttier,
X.  317.

Palmas,  Rio  de  las,  mouth  of  Par-
ana river,  mentioned  in  Ruttier
for  Brazil,  xi.  99.

Palmer,  comptroller  of  the  Mint,
and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  white
spar  (1595)  x.  344.

Palmer,  Peter,  boatswain  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  n.  213.

Palmer,  Richard,  of  the  Maria  Mar-
tin (1584)  V.  281.

Palmer,  Sir  Henry,  owner  of  the
Jane  Bonaventure  (1592)  x. 190.

Palmer,  Sir  Thomas,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Palmer,  William,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  281.

Palmer,  William,  mate  of  the  Toby,
death  of  (1593)  vii.  125.

Palmerin, near  Candimal, products

of, VII. 90.

Palmerin,  near  Refisca  Viejo,  pro-
ducts of,  VII.  90.

Palmes  Island,  Sir  John  Hawkins
at  (1564)  X.  II.

Palmo,  see  Palm.

Palm  trees,  cocoa-nut,  in  Chaul,  v.
379,  470;  in  Pegu,  487;  in  Cey-
lon, 501;  in  Cochin,  502  ;  descrip-
tion, by  Job  Hartop,  ix.  447;  in
Sambula  Island,  x.  17 ;  in  S.  lago
Island,  description  of,  106  ;  descrip-
tion of,  and  their  fruit,  xi.  104 ;  on
Maio  Island, 151.

Palobane,  the  Portuguese  at,  viii.
129.

Palo  Campechio,  see  Logwood.

Palomide,  a  fish,  description  by  John
Locke  (1553)  V.  81.

Palominos,  Rio  de,  from  the  Sierras
Nevadas,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier, X.  288.

Palos,  cavo  de,  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V.  243.

Palsin  on  Pruth,  Henry  Austell  at
(1585)  V.  325.

Pamphilian  Sea,  west  of  Cyprus,  v.
124.

343

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pamphilus,  Eusebius,  ecclesiastical
writer,  viii. 107.

Pamplon,  in  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Gran-
ada, X.  363,  368.

Pamplona,  Robert  de  Ketene  buried
at  (1143)  IV. 309.

Panama,  John  Chilton  in  (1570)  ix.
368;  port  on  South  Sea,  391 ;  cap-
ture of  Spanish  treasure  between
Nombre  de  Dios  and,  by  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  (1572)  x.  76;  governor
of,  and  John  Oxenham  (1575)  78;
open  to  Sir  Francis  Drake,  94;
Spanish  West  Indian  port,  lati-
tude of,  148  ;  monasteries  in,  148  ;
fortifications  of  (1587)  149,  150;
Hieronymo  de  Nabares  at  (1590)
176 ;  latitude  of,  177 ;  ships  in,
177;  silver  brought  from,  to
Nombre  de  Dios  (1587)  143;  river
of  Chagres  near,  144 ;  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville's  expedition  to  (1595)
238  ;  the  Cacafuego  gone  towards
(1579)  XI.  116;  ship  from,  and
Nuno  da  Silva  and  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1579)  142;  ship  to,  and
Nuno  da  Silva  and  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1579)  144;  John  Oxen-
ham's  men  executed  at  (1575)  233;
Sir  Francis  Drake  and  the  Span-
ish ship,  gone  from  Lima  to,  264;
built  by  the  Spaniards,  279  ;  wealth
of,  286 ;  latitude  of,  350 ;  pro-
ducts of  Peruvian  mines  brought
to,  XII.  52 ;  Drake  and  Hawkins
beaten  off,  66.

Panama  Island,  see  Panay.

Panapi,  nation  of  the  Maicawini,  x.
494.

Panay  or  Panuma  Island,  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1588)  xi.  334;  lati-
tude of,  350;  from,  to  Lago
Grande, 364, 370 ; anchorage  at,

373-
Pancaldo,  shipmaster  of  Genoa,  and

the  Strait  of  Magellan,  xi.  258.
Panela or Netas, inferior sort of

sugar,  VI. 128.
Pangaias,  Moorish  barks,  vi.  391.
Pannay, see  Panay.
Pannonia,  see  Hungary.
Pantalarea,  see  Pantelleria.
Pantelleria Island, William Har-

borne  sights  (1583)  v. 249; fight

off  (1586)  VI.  46,  50,  54;  victory
of  English  fleet  at,  55 ;  Island  of
Tunis, 143.

Pan  ten  Island  or  Tathalamasin,  pro-
ducts of,  IV.  417.

Panuco,  Andrew  de  Campo's  journey
to  (1540)  IX.  166;  John  Chilton's
voyage  to  (1572)  370;  John  Chil-
ton's illness  in  (1572)  371;  An-
thony Godard  and  his  men  in
(1568)  414,  415.

Panuco  river,  ix.  371 ;  sailors  of  Sir
John  Hawkins  landed  near  (1568)
409,  454;  marks  of,  in  second  Rut-
tier,  X.  318.

Pao  river,  in  Guiana,  x.  407.

Papalo  Hills,  in  Almeria,  x.  295.

Papamene, branch  of  the  Amazon,

X.  358 ;  Don  Gonzales  Ximenes
de  Casada  on  the,  364 ;  tributary
of  the  Amazon, 408.

Paphos  or  Baffo,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V.  85;  Lorenzo  Tiepolo,
governor  of  (1571)  123,  131 ;  temple
of  Venus  in,  v.  124,  131 ;  in
Cyprus,  VI.  107 ; S.  Paul  in,  108.

Papini,  language  of  the,  iii.  411.

Papuas,  VI.  464.

Paqui,  see  Pekin.

Paraca,  see  Paracas.

Paracas,  Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1587)

XI.  309 ;  latitude  of,  359 ;  from,  to
Lima,  360; anchorage  at,  372.

Paracaussy,  King,  in  Florida,  ix.  6.

Paracoa.  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  de-
scription of  (1595)  X.  206;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)  349;
laio,  people  living  at,  350;  in
Trinidad,  King  Carapana  brought
up  in,  372.

Paracuttos,  nation  on  the  Marawini
river,  x.  492.

Paradise,  site  of  the  earthly,  vi.  145,

VII. 255, XII. 10.

Paraguay  river,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier  for  river  Plate,  xi. 100.

Parai, Chinese  barge,  vi.  314,  320.

Paraiba, silver  mines  at,  xi.  67.

Parajua,  latitude  of,  Feliciano  Cieza,
governor  of  (1597)  xi.  65;  French
fort  in,  taken  by  the  people  of
Pernambuco,  249 ;  Diego  Flores
de  Valdes  at,  and  the  French
ships,  271.

344

INDEX

Paramantia,  Cape  de,  in  Ortelius's

map,  VII. 163.
Parammona, great town on the

Maworia,  x.  490.
Parana,  Indian  captain,  x.  495.
Parana  river,  mentioned  in  Ruttier

for river Plate, xi. 98; Rio de

Palmas,  mouth  of,  99.
Paranda,  village  in  Russia,  iii.  77.
Parapara,  poisonous  Indian  herb,  x.

495-

Paraponisus  in  India,  spring  of  the
Oxus,  II.  461.

Pararweas,  nation  on  the  Arowari
river,  ,x.  490.

Parawatteo,  Indian  captain,  x.  493.

Parawianni,  nation  on  the  Curitini
river, x.  492.

Parawiannos,  town  on  the  Berbice
river,  x.  494.

Parcberk,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
321.

Pardao,  money  of  Ormuz,  vi.  14;
of  Goa, 19 ; of  Malacca,  22.

Pardons,  the  Mountain  of,  at  Mecca,
description,  v.  355;  Santon's
sermon  on the, 357.

Paredes,  Count  of,  volunteer  in  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Parenzo,  near  Rovigno,  John  Locke
at  (1553)  V.  104,  105;  Henry  Aus-
tell at  (1585)  322.

Pargoes,  see  Breams.

Pargos,  Cape,  George  Fenner  at
(1567)  VI.  269.

Paria,  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  voyage
to  (1594)  X.  203;  High  land  of,
in  Guiana,  and  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley (1595)  207;  coast  of,  Jeronimo
Ortal  cast  on,  363 ;  Indians  of,
and  the  gold  of  Guiana,  366 ;
Antonio  de  Berreo's  coasting  of,
372 ;  distance  from  Amazon  river
to,  XI.  21;  gulf  of,  or  Bocca  del
Dragone,  vi.  403.

Pariagotos,  enemies  to  the  Spanish,
superstitions  of  (1596)  x.  474.

Parico,  see  Paracoa.

Parime  or  Roponowini  lake,  named
by  the  Caribs,  x.  459 ;  inland  sea
of  salt  water,  464.

Parino  province.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  description  of  (1595)  x.
417.

Paris,  Matthew  (d.  1259)  i.  43  ;  on
Tartars,  50-54;  Henry  II.  and  the
Christian  soldiers  in  the  Holy
land  (1177)  IV.  311;  contribution
to  the  succour  of  the  Holy  Land
by  King  John  (1210),  by,  345;
testimony  of,  on  Robert  Curson,
348;  Earl  of  Chester's  voyage  to
the  Holy  Land  by,  349 ;  Earl  of
Cornwall's  voyage  to  Syria,  by
(1240)  352;  Emperor  Baldwin's
visit to England, by (1247)

353-

Paris,  or  Parris,  Tobias,  mate,  iii.
244;  leaves  Astrakhan,  245;  re-
turns to  England,  247.

Paris,  siege  of  (1590)  iv.  83,  187;
Prince  Edward  at,  entertained  by
the  King  of  France  (1270)  366;
heat  of,  compared  to  that  of  St.
Thomas  Islands,  etc.,  vii.  258;
Captain  Laudonniere  at  (1565)  ix.
99 ;  Hakluyt  at,  and  Don  Antonio,
XII. 76.

Paris,  Island  of,  Laurence  Aldersey
near  (1586)  vi.  41.

Parish,  Edward,  merchant  in  Ham-
burg (1585)  V.  320.

Parker,  George  Turberville's  verses
to,  III. 131-135.

Parker,  Captain,  wells  made  in
Brazil  by  (1582)  xi.  182 ;  woods
set  on  fire  by, 182.

Parker,  Captain  William  (d.  1618),
of  Plymouth,  and  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  leave  Jamaica  for  the  Bay
of  Honduras  (1597)  x.  274;  voyage
of,  to  Margarita,  etc.  (1596)  277-
280 ; information  of,  on  Charuas

Bay  (1595)  340.

Parker,  Charles,  and  the  mutiny  on
board  the  Desire  (1592)  xi,  396;
distress  of,  at  Port  Desire  (1592)
399  ;  sent  on  Penguin  Island  (1592)
408,  410; slain  by  wild  men,  411.

Parker,  Henrv,  of  the  Maria  Martin
(1584)  V.  281.

Parker,  Nicholas,  assistant  to  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi.  163;  at
Sierra  Leone,  176.

Parker,  Nicolas,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399,

Parkhurst,  Anthony,  letter  from,  to
Richard  Hakluyt  (1578)  viii.  9-16;

XII

345

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  Sir  John  Hawkins'  voyage  to
Florida  (1565)  x.  63.

Parlican  Harbour,  in  Newfoundland,
VIII. 179.

Parma,  Prince  of,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  203,  219;  and  the  Eng-
lish and  Dutch,  207;  and  Justin
of  Nassau,  209;  towns  taken  by
the,  VI.  491.

Parma,  a  Turkish  boat,  vi.  95.

Parmenius,  Stephen,  of  Buda,  his
praises  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert
(1583)  VIII.  23-33;  death,  in  wreck
of  the  Delight,  67;  letter  from,
to  Richard  Hakluyt  {1583)  78,
81.

Parmentier,  discoveries  of  the
brothers, xii. 9.

Paroes  or  house  boats  in  Cosmin,  v.

485.
Paroma,  mouth  of  the  Ormoco  river,

X.  420.
Parossitae,  i.  77,  86; habits  of  the,

153,  166.
Parr, Thomas, in Virginia (1585)

VIII.  318.

Parrots,  land  of,  see  Brazil.

Parrots  in  California,  ix.  312;  found
in  Guiana,  xi.  14;  in  Trinidad,
22.

Parsons,  Richard,  master  of  the
Susan  (1582)  V.  243.

Parthia,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.
196.

Partridge,  Master,  of  the  Earl  of
Cumberland's  voyage  (1589)  vii.
I.

Partridges,  tame,  in  Trebizond,  iv.
408 ;  in  Canada,  vili.  228 ;  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  369;  grey  and  red,
in Florida, 451, 461 ; in Cevola,

IX.  139.

Parvis,  Henry,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Pascatir,  see  Hungary  the  Greater.

Pasha,  Great,  William  Harborne's
presents  to  (1583)  v. 251.

Pashas,  pay  of  the  five,  of  the  Grand
Signior,  annuities  of  (1588)  vi.  61,

65-

Pasqual,  Monte,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  XI.  79.

Pass, see  Passport.

Passage,  North-east,  to  Cathay,  iii.

450.  457 ;  Mercator  on,  275-282 ;
Anthony  Jenkinson  on,  457;
Ramusio  on, 458.

Passage,  North-west,  the,  to  North-
ern America,  intended  discovery  of
(1495)  VII.  141,  143;  Sebastian
Cabot  in  search  of  (1496)  148;  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  on  (1548)  158-
191,  XII.  25,  26;  ancient
authorities  on,  vii.  160-164;
Fretum  trium  fratrum,  172,
181,  197;  travellers  through  the,
179;  and  the  king  of  Portugal,
180; proofs  of, 181; dangers  of

^navigation in, 183, 192; advan-

*  tages  of,  184,  185 ;  Richard  Willes
on,  191-203;  latitude  of,  197;
Martin  Froblsher's  first  voyage  to
(1576)  204-211,  279-283;  second
voyage  (1577)  211-230,  284-319;
his  plan  of  discovery  (1576)  277;
Adrian  Gilbert  and  the  discovery
(1583)  375-381;  company  for  dis-
covery of,  378;  John  Davys 's  first
voyage  for  discovery  (1585-1587)
381-393;  second  voyage  of  John
Davys  (1586)  393-413;  third  voy-
age of  John  Davys  (1587)  414-422  ;
to  Cathay,  arguments  for  a,  vii.
191-203;  from  the  Grand  Bay  to
Cathay,  likeHhood  of  a,  viii.  112;
intended  discovery  of,  by  Edward
Fenton  (1582)  xi.  167;  voyages  to,
XII.  24,  26,  28 ; '  Discourse  to  prove
a  passage  to  Cathay  '  by  Sir  H.
Gilbert,  26.

Passage,  the,  a  harbour  in  Biscay,
VIII.  88 ;  near  St.  John  de  Luz,  x.
100.

Passage  of  the  Castles,  see  Castles.

Passage  overland  from  Cartagena  to
Peru.  XI. 236.

Passages,  the.  Islands  in  West
Indies, x. 230.

Passaguates  Indians  and  Conchos
Indians  (1581)  ix.  186;  description
of,  Antonio  de  Espejo's  expedition
to  (1582) 189.

Passaje,  El,  north-east  of  Puerto
Rico,  X.  327.

Passaquenoke,  the  woman's  town,
native  town  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  322.

Passaro,  Cape,  in  Sicily,  v.  249.

346

INDEX

Passengers  on  the  ships  of  the  Mus-
covy Company,  ii.  319.

Passin,  Sir,  Grand  Master  of
Rhodes'  ambassador  to  Solyman
(1522)  V.  49,  54,  55,  56;  and
Achmet  Pasha,  50.

Passport,  for  Russian  ambassadors
in  England,  11.  17;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson's,  to  pass  through  Russia
(1561)  III.  I,  9,  18;  from  the  King
of  Shirvan  to  Jenkinson,  33 ;  or
'Tartar  Bull,'  in.  401;  given  to
Anthony  Jenkinson  by  Solyman
(^553)  V.  109;  necessary  for
English  trade  in  Chios,  115;
for  the  Englishmen  in  the  Rey-
nolds, by  the  Grand  Master  of
Malta  (1582)  V.  215,  217;  for
Thomas  Shingleton,  by  the  King
of  Algiers  (1583)  266,  267;  for
Captain  Henry  Austell,  and  Yac-
omo  Manuchio  (1585)  328;  for
Thomas  Forster  (1586)  329;  for  a
Flemish  ship,  from  the  English
lord-admiral,  x. 272.

Pastelnischay,  Estoma  Bisabroza,
chamberlain  of  Emperor  of  Russia,
III.  414.

Pastrana,  duke  of,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205.

Pasture  for  cattle  in  Cuba  and
Hispaniola,  Ferdinand  Oviedo  on,
VII.  267.

Pasvolans,  used  at  the  siege  of
Rhodes  (1522)  v. 19.

Pat,  see  Patna.

Pataches  of  the  Armada,  iv.  200;
return  of  the,  230.

Patachine,  money  of  Malacca,  vi.
22.

Patagones,  see  Patagonians.

Patagonians,  description  of,  by
Lopez  Vaz,  xi,  256;  and  English
sailors  (1578)  157.

Patagons,  see  Patagonians.

Patamar,  Indian  postman,  v.  510.

Patane,  see  Patna.

Patanson,  John,  and  Prussian
pirates, 11.  60.

Patarabueyes,  see  Jumanos.

Patenaw,  see  Patna.

Patica,  King,  and  the  return  of  the
mutinous  soldiers  of  Captain  Lau-
donniere  (1565)  ix.  45.

Patica,  Captain  Laudonniere's  en-
voys at  (1565)  IX.  54;  Captain
Laudonniere  at,  with  King  Utina

(1565)  69.

Patimara,  Rajah  of  Java  (1580)  xi.
132.

Patmos,  St.  John  in,  vi. 107.

Patna,  description  of  gold  pits  in,  v.
480 ;  aloe  epatica  found  in,  vi.
26; King  of,  in  Orissa,  v.  410.

Pato  river,  tributary  of  Meta  river,
Guiana,  x.  365,  408;  spring  of,
368.

Patos,  Porto  de,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier, XI. 84.

Patras,  English  ship  from,  sunk  by
two  Algiers  galleys  (1584)  v.  268,
269;  English  molested  in  (1584)
283 ;  commandment  to,  285 ;
Laurence  Aldersey  and  (1586)  vi,
39,  40;  the  Toby  bound  for  (1593)
VII. 124.

Patriarch  or  religious  governor,  11.

254-
Patrickestowe,  see  Padstow.
Pattay, Count  Arnar  and Richard

Rainolds  in  Refisca  (1591)  vii.  93.
Pattenson,  Hugh,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Patterson,  Edward,  mariner  on  the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) 11.

214.
Paul,  and  Godred,  King  of  Man,  i.

31-
Paul, seventh  Bishop  of  Schalholt,

in  Iceland  (1195)  iv.  55, 153.
Paul a Russdorff, twenty-sixth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

8.
Paul of Plymouth, the, ship of

William  Hawkins  (1530-32)  xi.  23.
Paul, John, master's mate of the

Golden  Hind,  reckonings  made  by

(1583) VIII. 64.

Paulin,  John,  and  Prussian  pirates,

II.  60.
Paulinus,  apostle  of  Northumberland

(d.  644)  I.  9.
Paulus  Venetus,  on  the  spelling  of

Cathay,  i, 144.
Pavos,  a  boat,  in.  221,  239,  243.
Pavosan,  Port,  in  S.  Thomas,  built

by  the  Portuguese,  viii.  127.
Pawro  river,  x.  492.

347

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Pawroma  river,  see  Pawrooma.

Pawrooma  river,  x.  376,  494;
between  Cape  Cecil  and  Raleana
river,  459.

Paxides,  Earl  of,  brottier  of  Don
Pedro  de  Manriques,  vi.  485.

Pay,  Henry,  of  Plymouth,  sea  cap-
tain, II.  104;  and  the  French  ships,
I.  50.

Pay,  of  the  Russian  army,  iii.  378,
379;  of  the  officers  of  the  Grand
Turk's  Seraglio  or  Court  (1588)  vi.
61-68;  of  Bonzes,  for  a  funeral  in
Japan,  343 ;  of  the  English  army
(1589) 515.

Payta,  John  Chilton  at  (1570)  ix.
369 ;  the  Cacafuego  gone  towards
(1579)  XI.  115;  Nuno  da  Silva  and
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1579)  143;
town  in  Peru,  286 ;  taken  and
burnt  by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)
312,  368.

Payta  Bay,  latitude  of,  xi.  349,  359 ;
from,  to  Cape  Blanco,  361 ;
anchorage,  372.

Paytiti,  Amazon  river's  course
through,  XI. 16; situation  of,  18.

Payva,  John,  conspirator  against
Thomas  Dassel  (1591)  vii.  95.

Paz,  de  la,  city,  plague  and  small-
pox  in (1590) X. 171.

Peace,  between  England  and  France,
King  Lyon's  mission  of  (1386)  iv.

445-449-

Peach,  Bartholomew,  witness  of
Henry  HI.'s  charter,  i.  324.

Peak,  the,  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  268;  de-
scription of,  X. 13.

Pearde,  Nicolas,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Pearls,  near  Chilao,  v.  395,  396,
397,  443  ;  at  Bahrein  Island,  468,
504,  VI.  7 ;  on  the  Negapatam
coast,  V.  501 ;  in  Guinea,  vi.  184,
191,  252;  at  Hainan  Island,  vi.
355 ;  in  oysters  and  mussels  in
Newfoundland  (1578)  viii.  11;  in
Virginia,  303,  357;  account  of
Menatonon  of  (1585)  323;  found
in  California,  ix.  318;  in  China,
392,  X.  165;  found  in  Riohacha,
IX.  401 ;  in  Aguatulco,  471 ;  in
Paria,  xi.  22;  trade  in,  at
Riohacha and Cabo de la Vela

237;  at  Margarita  Island,  238;
fisheries  in  Florida,  description  of,
X.  37,  58 ;  in  Bermuda,  202  ;  in  Mar-
garita and  Coche  Islands  (1595)
216.

Pearls,  Isle  of.  Captain  UUoa  at
(1509)  IX.  228,  229.

Pearls,  Island  of,  John  Oxenham
at  (1575)  X.  77,  230.

Pechinchow, see  Pechingo.

Pechingo,  Russian  monastery,  11.
416,  III.  205,  331;  English  mer-
chants in,  116;  William  Borough
questioned  on,  203  ;  English  trade
in,  restricted  to  Muscovy  Com-
pany, 397.

Pechora,  river,  11.  334  f.,  341,  346;
lodias  for,  327;  fishing  in  the,
328 ;  yew  market,  387 ;  from
Dvina  to,  six  days'  journey,  482;
English  trade  at,  restricted  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  iii.  97 ;  Eng-
lish merchants  in,  116;  English
expedition  on  the  (1588)  119- 124;
Arthur  Pet  in  the  bay  of  (1580)
287 ;  best  sables  found  at,  365 ;
walrus  found  at,  368 ;  conquest  of,
388 ;  journey  from  Moscow  to,
by  Sigismund  ab  Herberstein,  405-
412; Oliver  on  the,  454,  456.

Peckham,  Sir  George,  in  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  expedition  (1583)
viii.  41 ;  account  of  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  discoveries,  89;
conference  with  Richard  Hakluyt
(1582)  131.

Pedraza,  Alonso,  cacao  garden  of,
IX.  471.

Pedro,  a  Mulatto,  runaway  from
Virginia  (1590)  viii.  408.

Pedro  de  Venetia,  John  Locke  at  the
house  of,  in  Zante  (1553)  v.  82.

Pedro,  Don,  son  of  Don  Juan,
nephew  of  Topiawari,  x.  412.

Pedro  Garcia,  Cabeza  de,  x.  300.

Peele,  '  Battle  of  Alcazar  '  by,  xii.
103.

Peerson,  opinion  of  the  pinnace,
in  John  Davys 's  third  voyage
(1587)  VII.  415;  steward  in  the
fleet,  422.

Pegasus,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  X.  227;  attacked  by  the
Spaniards  (1596)  241 ; loss  of,  242.

348

INDEX

Pegu,  kingdom  of,  v.  374;  ship
from  S.  Thomas  to,  402 ;  Caesar
Frederick's  voyage  to  (1567)  412;
gulf  of  Tavoy,  in  the,  414;  Mar-
taban,  in  the,  414;  white  elephants
in,  421,  422-424;  idols  in,  425  f. ;
justice,  427;  products  of,  430,  433,
492,  504,  VI.  386,  401 ;  bankruptcy
in,  V.  431 ;  business  ways  in,  434;
jewel  trade  in,  434  f. ;  and  the
King  of  Aracan,  439;  dress  in,
448;  Ralph  Fitch  in  (c.  1583)  485,
486,  500;  priestcraft  in,  493;  cus-
toms of,  497;  lacca  found  in,  vi.
26;  monsoon  from  Goa  to,  31;
from,  to  the  Indies,  31;  the  way
to,  from  Ormuz,  324;  description,
by  Friar  Peter  of  Lisbon  (1587)
385 ;  products,  386,  401 ;  ship
from,  taken  by  the  Edward  Bona-
V entity e (1591) x. 195.

Pegu,  city  of,  v.  419;  described,
420,  486 ;  King  of,  Siam  taken  by,
407;  falchines  of,  415;  riches  of,
425 ;  triumphal  procession  of,  426 ;
palace  of, 487.

Peirs,  Thomas,  of  Cley,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  65.

Pekin  (Cambalu),  ten  days'  journey
from  Cathay,  11.  481 ;  chief  seat  of
the  Khan,  in.  252,  280;  on  the
Hwang-ho,  263  ;  shipping  at,  265  ;
map  of,  268;  in  Cathay,  iv.  429;
forest  near,  433 ;  the  Great  Khan
at,  441 ;  residence  of  the  King  of
China,  vi.  295,  296,  350;  size  of,
316;  wine  in,  357;  description  of,
XI. 379; chief city in China,

423-

Pekwa,  great  town  on  the  Barima
river,  x.  494.

Pelagius, heresy  of  (390) iv. 277.

Peiagius  Albanensis,  at  the  taking
of  Damietta  (12 18)  iv.  348,

Pelagosa  Island,  near  Dalmatia,  v.
78.

Pelican,  the,  flagship  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1577)  xi.  102,  xii.  55;  or
Golden  Hind  (1579)  xi.  146;  in  the
Pacific  Ocean,  60 ;  return  to  Ply-
mouth,  61.

Pelican's  Bay,  named  by  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1595)  x.  205.

Pelicans  in  Florida,  x.  61.

Pells,  John,  on  the  Content  (1591)  x.

183.
Pembroke, Richard, Earl of,  see

Clare.
Pembroke, Earl of, see Herbert,

William.
Pemisapan,  see  Wingina.
Pena,  physician,  on  sesame,  v.  237.
Penalosa.Don  John  Garcias  de, letter

to,  from  Don  John  de  Miramontes

Suasola  (1590)  x.  169.
Penbroke,  see  Pembroke.
Penchester, Stephen, constable of

Dover Castle, i. 47; witness of

Edward  I.'s  great  charter,  296.
Penco,  see  Concepcion.
Penegonde, King  of  Bezeneger  in,

V.  386.

Penelope, the, flagship, voyage of

(1591)  VI.  387,  X.  194;  George
Raymond,  captain  of,  vi.  390 ;  loss
of,  390,  X. 194.

Penguin  Island,  latitude  and  pro-
ducts of,  viii.  4;  fowls  on,  14;
penguins,  49,  81 ;  discovered  by
Owen  Gwynedd,  108 ;  the  Grace
at  (1594)  165;  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1587)  XI.  298;  in  the  Magellan
Straits,  357;  anchorage  at,  371;
John  Chidley  at  (1589)  382;  the
Desire's  crew  at,  their  sufferings

(1592)  400.  408.

Penguins in Aguada Saldanha,

VI,  389 ;  living  in  burrows,  xi.
296.

Peniche,  in  Portugal,  Gusman,
Conde  de  Fuentes  at  (1589)  vi.
473  ;  English  army  at,  496 ;  Cap-
tain Barton  leaves,  with  the  Eng-
lish army,  511;  General  Sir  John
Norris  at  (c.  1591)  vii.  40;  Eng-
lish fleet  at  (1591)  57.

Pennafiel,  Marquess  de,  volunteer  in
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Pennester,  see  Penchester.

Penninge,  fur  trade  at,  11.  276.

Penny,  Earnest,  in  bargains,  i.  334.

Pensioners,  captain  of  the,  in  Tur-
key, or  Chaus  Pasha,  pay  of,  vi.
62 ; his  pension,  63.

Pentecost  Point,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  II.  365.

Pepper,  ^  scarcity  of,  in  Persia,  iii.
161 ; in  Malabar,  iv.  412  ; growth

349

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of,  413 ;  from  Cochin,  v.  392,  395,
502,  503;  growth  and  harvest  of,
442 ;  from  Coulam,  501 ;  in  Ben-
gal, Pegu,  and  Java,  504;  found
in  Cochin  and  Malabar,  vi.  24;
long,  found  in  Bengal  and
Malacca,  26;  in  Benin,  149,  454-
459 ;  cargo  of,  captured  by  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1592)  397;
from  Benin,  sack  of,  or  ceron
(1589)  465,  467;  found  in  Guiana,
X.  427,  458,  XI. 14.

Pera,  Christian  quarter  at  Constan-
tinople, V.  324,  VI.  98 ;  pepper
market  at,  397.

Perak,  in  Guinea  (1555)  vi.  161 ;
French  ship  at  (1577)  240;  the
Tiger  at,  242.

Perambolin,  Turkish  host  in  (1522)
V.  16.

'  Perambulation  of  Kent  '  (1570),  by
William  Lambarde,  i.  312.

Peranjew,  or  Peranjeu,  Captain
Lancaster  at  (1595)  xi.  62.

Peraslave,  distance  from  Dowbney
to,  II.  420 ;  town  in  Russia,  426 ;
from  S.  Nicholas  Bay  to,  iii.  68.

Peravolok,  see  Perovolog.

Percevena,  the,  and  the  pilgrims,  at
Rovigno  (1553)  V.  77.

Percy,  Lord  Henry  de,  heirs  of,  11.
106.

Percy,  Lord  Henry,  ninth  Earl  of
Northumberland,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  217,  225.

Perecow,  and  Perecow  Grande,  see
Perak.

'  Peregrinationis  Historia  '  by  Ptol-
emy, VII.  203.

Peregrine,  the,  Captain  Fenner  of,
at  Maio  (1594)  xi.  46.

Percira,  Nuno  Velio,  prisoner  of
Captain  Grant  (1594)  vii. 122.

Peremene,  or  express  travelling,  in
Russia,  III,  214.

Perera,  Galeotto,  account  of  China
by  (c.  1578)  VI.  295 ;  prisoner  in
China,  vii.  195 ;  king  of  Cathay
and,  201.

Peresites,  see  Perizzites.

Perez,  Diego,  of  the  S.  Antonio,
v.  66.

Pergosses,  see  Breams.

Periago  or  Indian  canoe,  x.  279.

Pericles,  quotation  from,  x.  441.

Perico  Harbour,  near  Panama,  x.
149.  153 ; safety  of,  154.

Pericose,  Indian  boats,  v.  483.

Perima  lake,  Manoa  town  on,  xi.
II.

Perinen,  French  ship  at  (1577)  vi.
240 ; English  ships  at,  243.

Peripatane  Island,  on  the  Coroman-
del  coast,  v.  398.

Perlas,  Isla  de,  see  Pearls,  Isle  of.

Perm,  yew  market  in,  11.  387;  con-
quered province  of  Russia,  iii.
359  ;  best  wolverine  found  at,  365  ;
salt  pits  in,  368;  conquest  of,  388;
Giles  Fletcher  on  people  of,  402.

Permia,  see  Perm.

Pernambucke,  see  Pernambuco.

Pernambuco,  vi.  403,  vii.  19,
75 ;  news  from  Portugal  brought
to  (1581)  XI.  36;  Arrecife,
lower  town  of,  46;  its  Span-
ish garrison  (1597)  70;  Captain
Lancaster  at  the  siege  of  (1595)
47  ;  description  of,  51 ;  latitude  of,
75,  226;  near  Maranon,  or
Amazon  river,  241 ;  or  Villa  de
Olinda,  249 ;  Pedro  Sarmiento  asks
for  help  at,  272.

Pero  Cam,  Sierra  de,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  81.

Peroclave  Castle,  11.  449.

Perota,  a  town  of  ventas  or  lodgings
near  Jalapa  (1568)  ix.  362.

Perota  or  silver  found  in  Paria,  x.
207.

Perovolog,  in  Russia,  11.  454;
meaning  of  name,  iii.  216;  Eng-
lish merchant  at, 245.

Perrie,  Thomas,  master  of  the  Ed-
ward  Bonaventure  (1582)  xi. 172.

Perrin,  William,  gunner,  in.  245.

Perruse,  Robert  de.  Judge  Ordinary,
Grand  Master  of  Rhodes'  ambas-
sador to  Solyman,  v.  49,  51;
letter-bearer to Solyman (1522)

54-  , .  .  ,

Persia,  markets  m,  i.  242; rivers  of,

261 ;  south  of  the  Caspian  Sea,
270 ;  products  of,  brought  to  Bok-
hara, II.  473 ;  and  English  trade,
III.  7;  Muscovy  Company's  first
voyage  to  (1561)  9-38;  second
voyage  to  (1563)  40-44; third  voy-

350

INDEX

age  to  (1565)  44-53;  fourth,  136-
142;  fifth,  150-157;  sixth,  212-247;
Anthony  Jenklnson's  first  voyage
to  (1562)  18;  description  of,  35;
products  of,  53,  139 ;  privi-
leges granted  to  English  mer-
chants in  (1567)  64;  trade  in  arms
in,  67;  trade  started  by  the  Mus-
covy Company  in,  86,  88 ;  English
trade  in,  109-117,  145,  401;  Arthur
Edwards  in,  136 ;  privileges  granted
to  Muscovy  Company  in  (1568)
144;  wares  of,  brought  to  England,
147;  inferior  in  power  to  Turkey,
160;  severity  of  law,  161;  Lent
in,  162;  troubles  in,  217,  234,  235;
war  between  Constantinople  and
(1177)  IV.  316;  products  of,  410;
seragni  and  tutia  found  in,  vi.  25 ;
opopponax,  etc.,  in,  26;  Gal-
banum  in,  27;  retinue  of  the  Beg-
lerbeg  of,  67  ;  grass  silk  found  in,
VIII.  353  ;  climate  of,  384 ;  gulf  of,
III.  161,  V.  371,  VII.  176,
VIII.  128;  Thome's  map  of,
II.  170;  Ralph  Fitch  in  the  (1583)
V.  468.
Persian  language  in  Bokhara,  11.
470 ;  trade  in  Syria,  478 ;  products,

!"•  53-

Persians,  Alii,  son-in-law  of  Maho-
met, prophet  of  the,  v.  364;  re-
ligion of  the  VI. Ill, 112.

Persicus  Sinus,  see  Persian  Gulf.

Pert,  Sir  Thomas,  voyage  of,  and
Sebastian  Cabot  to  Brazil,  etc.
(1516)  X.  2-6;  and  the  North-west
passage  (15 17) xii. 20.

Pertinax,  ^lius,  parentage  of,  viii.
469.

Peru,  heat  of,  compared  to  heat  of
Paris,  VII.  258 ;  discovery  of,  464 ;
conquest  by  Francisco  Pizarro,
VIII.  95,  124,  XI.  279;  in  Southern
America,  latitude  of,  viii.  450 ;
Spanish  traffic  from  Mexico  to
(1570)  IX.  365 ;  New  Spain  cloth
sold  in  (1572)  390;  savages  or
natives  of  (1581)  x.  38;  small-
pox and  plague  in  (1590)  171 ;
New  Spain  and,  distress  of,  and
the  King  of  Spain's  want  of
money  (1590)  173;  silver  mines  in
(1590) 177; the  Orinoco  river  in,

408;  mountains  of,  Amazon  river's
source  in,  xi.  16 ;  distance  from
Santos  to,  38;  passage  overland
from  Cartagena  to,  236;  conquest
of,  by  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  241 ;
Don  Fernando  de  Gusman,  king
of,  245 ;  description  of,  281 ;  con-
quered by  Spain,  xii.  20;  produce
of  the  mines  of,  brought  to
Nombre  de  Dios,  52 ;  viceroy
of,  and  John  Oxenham  and  his
sailors  (1575)  x.  80,  xi.  232;  and
Captain  John  Drake  (1583)  95.

Perularia,  treasure  from  Peru  kept
in  Sevile,  x.  3.

Peruleros,  or  merchants  of  Peru  in
the  Rio  de  Janeiro  (1596)  xi.  41.

Pery,  John,  distress  of,  at  Port  De-
sire (1592) XI. 399.

Pery  Pasha  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V.  23.

Pescadores  (off  African  coast),  lati-
tude of.  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  ill
at  (1596)  X.  267.

Pescadores,  Los,  port  on  the  coast  of
Peru,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at,  xi.
261.

Pescadores,  Os  Baixos  dos.  Captain
Gualle  at  (1584)  ix.  333.

Pesce  columbini,  description  of,  v.
92.

Pesmarck  Harbour,  the  Grace  in
(1594)  viii. 165.  _

Pesmes,  Gerard,  his  voyage  to  Syria
(1240)  IV.  352.

Pet,  Arthur,  pilot,  i.  xl. ;  mariner  on
the  Edzvard  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
214;  of  Ratcliffe,  master  of  the
George,  iii.  251;  admiral,  253;  his
behaviour  towards  foreign  nations,
255 ;  advice  to,  by  William
Borough,  259-262 ;  by  Dee,  262-
263 ;  by  Richard  Hakluyt,  264-
275 ;  discoveries  made  by  (1580)
282-303  ;  North-east  voyage  by,  xii.

23-
Pet,  Peter,  and  the  repairing  of  the

Minion  (1561)  vi.  255,  (1564)  262.
Petance,  near  Burgos,  vi.  491.
Petatlan,  companions  of  Friar  Marco

de  Niga  at,  ix.  125,  126; Indians

of, 120.
Petchingo  Abbey,  see  Pechingo.
Peter  IV.,  King  of  Aragon,  iv.  368;

351

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

discovery  of  Madeira  by  Macham
in  the  time  of  (1344)  vi.  119.
Peter,  fifteenth  bishop  of  Holen,  in

Iceland  (1392)  iv.  56, 155.
Peter,  Indian  interpreter  of  Antonio

de  Espejo  (1582)  ix. 191.
Peter,  of  John  Chidley's  voyage,  re-
turn of  (1590)  XI.  384,  ;i89,

Peter,  prince  of  Moldavia,  and
Henry  Austell  (1585)  v.  325,  328.

Peter  des  Roches,  bishop  of  Win-
chester, his  voyage  to  Jerusalem
(1231)  IV.  351.

Peter,  Friar,  of  Lisbon,  on  the  king-
dom of  Pegu  (1587)  VI.  385.

Peter  Gregorowich,  and  Benet  But-
ler, III.  119.

Peter,  Sir  William,  and  the  Russian
ambassador,  11.  357,  359.

Peter,  the,  of  Cley,  11.  65.

Peter,  the,  of  Wiveton,  11.  66.

Peter,  the,  of  Bristol,  crew  of  (1584)
V.  281.

Peterson,  John,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Petiguar,  negro  from,  and  Feliciano
Cieza  (1597)  xi.  66;  fight  of
Feliciano  Cieza  with  cannibals  of,
allied  to  Frenchmen  (1597)  67,  68.

Petit  Jahn,  i.  47.

Petition  by  certain  of  the  company  of
the  Delight  to  Robert  Burnet,
master  (1589)  xi.  385-389.

Petman, Nicholas, of Captain
■  Amadas's company (1584) viii.
310.

Petoney,  Melchior,  account  by,  of
Central  Africa  (1591)  vii.  88,

Petowse,  fishing  at,  11.  453.

Petra  Bezzuar,  found  in  Tartary,  vi.
27.

Petrimol,  Antonio,  ligier  or  ambas-
sador of  the  King  of  France  (1564)
V. 121.

Petroe  Soetoe,  iii.  80,  81.

Pett,  Sir  Thomas,  11. 161.

Pette,  Arthur,  master  of  the  Jesus,
II.  408.

Pette,  Thomas,  sales  by,  in.  42.

Pettislego,  see  Pitsligo.

Petuin,  Captain,  at  the  burning  of
Borsis  (1589)  VI.  513.

Petune,  beef  barrelled  up  at  the  river
Plate  (c. 1580)  VI.  410.

Petzora,  see  Pechora.

Peucer, Doctor Caspar, on Mount

Hecla,  IV.  24,  115.
Pevensey,  the  lowie  of,  i.  47,  48.
Pevenshey,  see  Pevensey.
Pew, Captain Robert, land-captain

in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1585)

X.  98.
Pezano,  Aluigi,  captain,  made  slave

at  Famagusta  (1571)  v, 151.
Pharaoh, statue of his wife and

daughter  near  Thebes,  v.  339.
Pharaoh, pyramid of King, John

Evesham's  description  of  (1587)  vi.

37; Laurence  Aldersey's descrip-
tion of  (1586)  45.
Pharia  Tower  in  Pharos  Island,  v.

118.
Pharos,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1593)  vi.

95-
Pharusii,  wandering  tribe  of  Africa,

VI. 167.
Phenix,  the  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's

fleet  (159s)  X.  227,  232 ; at  Cape

de  la  Vela,  233,  235  ; is  separated

from  the  fleet,  236; return  of,  to

Plymouth  (1596)  245.
Pheodocine, daughter of Irene,

Empress of Russia (1592) in.

435-

Pheodor,  see  Feodor.

Phernambuc,  see  Pernambuco.

Phernambuck,  see  Pernambuco.

Phevens,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Phibarie,  George,  mariner  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
214.

Philip,  Earl  of  Flanders,  escorts
Queen  Berengaria  to  Naples  (1191)
IV.  325.

Philip  II.,  King  of  France,
and  Richard  Coeur  de  Lion
(1177)  IV.  319;  oath  between
Richard  I.  and  (1190)  320;
at  Genoa,  321;  at  Messina,  322;
disloyalty  of  (1191)  326;  at  Tyre
331;  Acre  surrenders  to,  and
Richard,  331;  terms  of  surrender
of  Acre,  332  ;  division  of  the  spoils
by,  and  Richard,  333 ;  departure
of,  334;  John,  brother  of  Richard
I.,  and,  335;  letter  of  the  Em-
peror Henry  to  (1193)  336.

352

INDEX

Philip  II.,  King-  of  Spain,  and  Ivan
Vasiliwich,  ii.  278 ;  and  Queen
Mary  and  the  merchants'  charter

(1555)  304;  Turks  defeated  at
Malta  by  (1566)  iii.  53,  54;  and
his  wars  against  the  Turks,  143 ;
his  enmity  against  England  (1588)
IV.  198;  his  strict  orders  to  the
Armada,  211;  and  Baltazar  Al-
meida de  Sousa  (1591)  vi.  468;
letter  from  Feliciano  Cieza  de
Carvalsho  to  (1597)  xi.  64-72;  be-
comes King-  of  Portugal,  xii.  61.

Philip  III.,  King  of  France,  and
Prince  Edward  at  Tunis  (1270)  iv.

359-
Philip,  the,  Spanish  ship  at  Puerto

Rico  (1595)  X. 427.
Philip  and  Mary,  the,  (1555)  11,  286,

III. 332 ; return to England of

(1556)  II.  351,  (1557)  372,  379;
Stephen  Borough  and,  363 ;  voy-
age to  S.  Nicholas  of  (1560)  401;
wares  in,  408.

Philip  of  Spain,  the,  at  Cadiz,  iv.
244 ; loss  of,  248.

Philipplnas,  see  Philippines.

Philippine  Islands,  ix.  326;  papal
bulls  for,  VII.  105 ;  unwholesome
climate  of,  x.  166;  trade  in,  177;
Portuguese  possession,  487;  gover-
nor of, and Sir Francis Drake

(1579)  XI.  118;  discovered  by  Don
Luis  de  Velasco,  287 ;  description
of,  329 ;  departure  of  Thomas
Cavendish  from  (1588)  336;  from
the,  to  Capul  Island,  364 ;  Thomas
Cavendish  at,  370 ;  death  of
Magellan  at,  xii.  g ;  Drake  at,  60.

Philippopolis  on  Stanuch,  Henry
Austell  at  (1585)  v.  323.

Philipps,  Sir  Thomas,  Richard  Hak-
luyt's  MS.  in  possession  of,  xii.
32.

Philips,  Miles,  Sir  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  by
(1567-1582)  IX.  398-445;  under
Anthony  Godard's  leadership  in
Panuco  (1568)  412  ;  condemned  by
Inquisition,  Mexico  (1575)  428;
sent  to  the  Black  Friars  as  over-
seer to  the  Indian  workmen  (1575-
80)  430 ; apprentice  to  a  weaver

(1580)  432 ; questioned by the

viceroy  of  Mexico  about  Francis
Drake,  433 ;  interpreter  to  Dr.
Robles  (1580)  433 ;  his  escape  from
Mexico,  435;  return,  437;  second
escape,  438  f. ;  his  imprisonment
in  Vera  Cruz,  436 ;  his  escape  to
Seville  (1580)  443 ;  his  escape  at  S.
Mary  Port,  444 ;  his  escape  from
Majorca,  444 ;  his  return  to
Poole,  in  England  (1582)  445 ;:
takes  refuge  in  the  Red  Dragon
(1586)  XI. 210.

Philips,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Philips,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Phillipinas,  see  Philippines.

Philly,  David,  master  of  the  Anne
(1537)  n.  380.

Philo  the  Jew,  on  America,  vii.  161.

Philonides,  on  names  of  Cyprus,  v.,
124.

Philosophy,  Chinese,  vi.  362.

Philostratus,  on  elephants,  vi.  166,
and India, vii. 180.

Philpe  or  Filpe,  John,  of  the  Sun-
shine (1586)  VII.  409;  shoots  a
native  of  Merchants'  Isle,  412.

Philpot,  Captain  at  the  Groyne
(1589)  VI. 488.

Philpot,  Richard,  leader  in  Captain;
Frobisher's  absence  (1577)  vii.
219;  ensign  of  Captain  Frobisher
(1577)  285;  in  the  third  voyage  of
Captain  Frobisher  (1578)  321 ;  cap-
tain of  the  Bear,  322 ;  in  Captain
Frobisher's  counsel,  348.

Phingola,  wife  of  Godred,  King  of
Man,  I.  32.

Phisition,  see  Physician.

Phoenicia,  Tyre,  metropolis  of  (1130)
IV. 308.

Phrygia,  iii.  399.

Phrygius,  Gemma,  on  Inland  Africa,.
VI.  167;  on  natural  phenomena
in  Africa, 170.

Phydias's  statue  of  Jupiter,  v.  119.

Physician  of  the  Grand  Signior,  or
Hakim  Pasha,  pay  of,  vi.  63.

Piali  Pasha  and  the  siege  of  Chios
(1566) V, 123.

Piamacum,  King  of  Pomovik,  viii.
308 ;  his  wars  with  Wingina^
King  of  Wingandacoa,  308.

353

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Piara  river, x. 494.

Piche,  Indian  name  of  Tierra  de
Brea, x. 349.

Pichet,  John,  master  of  the  Matthew
Gonson  (1535)  v. 68.

Pick,  John,  distress  of,  at  Port  De-
sire (1592)  XI.  399.

Pickman,  William,  death  of,  from  a
poisoned  arrow  (1586)  xi.  293.

Pico  Deteithe,  or  peak  of  Teneriffe,
description  of,  vi.  129.

Pico  Island,  in  the  Azores,  vii.  8;
George  Fenner  at  (1587)  vi.  280;
English  prisoners  at,  vii.  9 ;  ships
wrecked  at  (1596)  86; latitude  of,

X.  334-

Picquemians,  Jacques  Cartier  and
the  (1536)  viii.  253.

Pideville  of  Bayonne,  sea  captain,
II.  104.

Pie,  John,  on  the  Content,  non-
combatant  (1596)  X. 183.

Piedmont,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.

195-

Piedras  hijadas,  green  stones  found
in  the  Amazons'  country,  x.  367.

Piemont,  see  Piedmont.

Pienega  river,  tributary  of  the
Dvina,  iii.  406.

Pierce,  Jane,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 403.

Piescoia river, iii. 406.

Piew,  Robert,  captain,  killed  at
Peniche  (1589)  vi.  496.

Pieza,  river,  in.  406.

Pigafeta,  Marc  Antonio,  on  Richard
Hakluyt,  i.  Ixii.

Pigeon,  captain  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's voyage, vii. i.

Pike,  the,  see  Peak.

Pike,  measure  of  Babylon  and  Alep-
po,  VI. 10; of  Bussorah, 11.

Pike,  Isle  of,  the  Richard  of  Arun-
del in  sight  of  (1589)  vi.  456.

Pikeron,  John,  of  Lynn,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  70.

Pilate's  hall,  in  Jerusalem,  Laurence
Aldersey  on  (1581)  v.  210.

Pilatro,  found  in  Barbary,  vi.  27.

Pilgrim,  the,  at  the  fight  of  Flores
Island  (1591)  VII.  44;  Spanish
ship  from  India,  boarded  by,  49.

Pilgrims,  to  Jerusalem  (1553)  v.  77;
to  Mecca,  329-365.

Pilgrimson,  Everade,  and  the  Eng-
lish ships, II. 61.

Pillar,  Pompey's,  outside  Alexan-
dria, VI.  36;  Laurence  Aldersey 's
description,  43.

Pillar,  Pompey's,  near  the  Bosphor-
us,  Richard  Wrag's  description,
VI.  106.

Pillar  of  stone,  erected  in  Florida  by
Captain  Ribault  (1562)  viii.  457,
464, IX. 7.

Pillory  board  for  thieves  in  China,
VI.  309.

Pilot,  Grand,  of  Spain,  Sebastian
Cabot,  VII.  147;  of  England  (1549)
156;  Portuguese,  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  set  ashore  at  Aguatulco
(1578)  IX.  320;  Flemish,  to  S.
Thom^,  taken  by  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  (1596)  X.  267;  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  old  Indian  Ciawani
captured  and  employed  as  (1595)
381,  389;  Portuguese,  landed  at  S.
Mary  Port  (1579)  xi. 117.

Pilots  through  the  desert,  v.  341 ;
Portuguese.  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet  (1596)  x.  245;  re-
gulations for  Spanish,  xi.  442 ;
examinations  of  Spanish  (1586)
448-453.  453-458;  election  of  Span-
ish (1585)  455; wages  of,  456.

Pimentelli,  Diego,  colonel  of  the
Armada  land  forces  (1588)  iv.  202 ;
carried  prisoner  by  Peter  Bander-
duess  to  Zeeland,  227,  231.

Pina,  Ferdinand  de,  secretary  of  the
Portuguese  embassy  to  England
(1481)  VI. 123.

Pinas  Island,  Sir  John  Hawkins  at
(1565)  X.  45.

Pine-apples,  a  product  of  Dominica,
IX.  3.

Pinego,  river,  11.  418.

Pinesse,  see  Pinnace.

Pine  trees,  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  130 ;  on
Atoyaque Mountains, ix. 469.

Pini,  Puerto,  mentioned  in  second
Ruttier,  x.  327,

Pinnace,  lost  in  naval  fight  (1557)
VI.  323 ;  building  of  a,  in  the
North  Sea  (1578)  vii.  354;  Cap-
tain Best  embarks  in  the,  358 ;
finds  the  miners  and  Captain
Yorke,36o;  of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley

354

INDEX

<i596)x.266;  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
for  his  third  voyage  to  Guiana
(1596)  XI,  I ;  built  at  Mogador
Island  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1577)
102,  149;  built  on  S.  Sebastian
Island  by  Thomas  Cavendish
(1586)  295.

Pinnace,  The  Black,  engraving  of,
XI.  400.

Pinos  Island,  near  Cuba,  viii,  411;
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at  (1595)  x.
225 ;  Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  at
(1596)  242 ;  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo  meets  the  English  fleet  at,
250,  255 ;  truth  about  the  fight  be-
tween the  English  and  Spanish
ships  at  (1596)  255,  261 ;  marks  of,
described  by  the  Ruttier,  286 ;  in
second  Ruttier,  315;  sea  currents
near,  293  ;  latitude,  333  ;  longitude
from, to  Cape  Corrientes, 336.

Pinotespan,  '  Mansion  of,'  subject
to  Tutu  tepee,  ix.  470.

Pinotespan  del  Rey  town,  Salt  Lake
in,  IX.  470.

Pins,  trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1577)  vi.
252.

Pintados,  or  painted  Indians,  men-
tioned in  Friar  Marco  de  Nina's
book,  IX.  1 19 ;  and  Friar  Marco
de  Niga  (1539)  130;  mines  of  gold
and  silver  in  the  country  of,  142.

Pinteado,  Anthony  Anes,  captain  in
an  English  fleet  (1553)  vi.  145;
and  Captain  Windam,  148,  150;
and  the  King  of  Benin,  149 ;  death
of,  151;  letters  patent  of  knight-
hood (1551)  152;  letter  of  Don
Luis,  Infant  of  Portugal,  to,  153.

Pinto,  John,  Portuguese  dweller  on
the  river  Plate  (1582)  xi.  184;  em-
ployed as  interpreter, 196, 198.

Pinzon,  Vincent,  emeralds  in  Iwari-
poco  found  by,  x.  491.

Pio  town,  frontier  town  against  the
Mexicans,  in  charge  of  Graviel  de
Chiavez,  ix.  468.

Piqueno  Harbour,  in  India,  v.  410 ;
Caesar  Frederick  in  (c.  1583)  412 ;
Portuguese  possession,  482.

Piquiri  town,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,
XI.  100.

Piracy  in  Chinese  waters,  vii.  195 ;
in  Orkney  (1577)  213.

Piraos,  nation  of  the  Macuria,  x.  492.

Pirates,  see  Corsairs.

Piru,  see  Peru.

Pisa,  Friar  Odoric's  vision  at  (1331)
IV.  443.

Pisca  Bay,  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1587)  XI.  310,  368;  latitude  of,
310,  349  ;  anchorage  at,  372  ;  town,
latitude  of,  xi.  359.

Pistachio, found  in  Doria, vi. 27.

Pistolet,  coin  in  Algiers  (1584)  v.
271.

Pitch,  spring  of,  near  Shemakha,  iii.
166 ;  product  of  Cyprus,  v.  125 ;
thrown  out  in  the  air,  near  Heit,
370,  467;  springs  of,  at  Heit,  vi.
8;  found  in  Zanzibar  (1592)  394;
found  in  the  Western  Planting,
VIII.  116;  in  Newfoundland,  117;
in  Eastern  America,  139 ;  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  354;  in  Tierra  de
Brea,  x.  350;  found  in  Guiana,
XI.  14.

Pitcher,  Robert,  of  the  Desire,
killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Pithaias,  fruit  of  S.  Cruz,  ix.  226.

Pitsligo,  wreck  of  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  in  the  bay  of  (1556)  11.
352,  379.

Pitt,  William,  of  the  Hugh  Gallant,
killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi.  306.

Pius,  on  the  ocean  sea,  vii. 199.

Pius  v.,  Pope,  and  the  Friars  of  the
S.  Antony  Monastery,  xi.  71 ;  and
Queen Elizabeth's enemies, xii.

51-

Pizarro,  Francisco,  and  the  conquest
of  Peru,  VIII.  95,  no,  124,  x,  340,
356,  XI.  279;  and  the  gold  and
silver  of  Atabalipa,  x.  357;  slain
by  the  son  of  Diego  de  Almagro,
284.

Pizarro,  Gonsalo,  Orellana's  attempt
to  discover  Guiana  by  orders  of
(1542)  X.  358;  and  the  conquest  of
Peru,  XI.  241 ;  rebellion  and
death  of, xi. 284.

Placencia,  in  Spain,  bishop  of,  and
the  Strait  of  Magellan,  xi,  258.

Placencia  Isle,  in  Brazil,  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1591)  xi.  389;  the
Desire  at,  412 ;  thirteen  men  of
the  Desire  killed  at,  by  Indians
and  Portuguese  (1593)  414.

355

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Placentia,  near  Burburata,  Sir  John
Hawkins  at  (1568)  ix.  448.

Placentia  Bay,  near  Cape  Race,  viii.
63;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  fleet
at  (1583)  92;  in  Newfoundland,
163;  the  Grace  at  (1594)  165;
Charles  Leigh  at  (1597)  166.

Plaen,  Henry,  Earl  of,  twenty-
fourth  master  of  the  Dutch
knights  (1410)  II.  8.

Plague,  in  Novgorod  (1566)  iii.  80;
in  Russia  (1572)  171,  174;  and
small  pox  in  Potosi  and  De  la  Paz
(1590)  X.  171.

Plaias,  Cape  de  las,  discovered  by
Captain  Ulloa  (1539)  ix.  212.

Plancius,  Peter,  map  of  the  world
by,  engraving  of,  ix.  474.

Piano  Carpini,  John  de,  i.  Hi.,  11.
187;  his  voyage  in  Tartary,  i.  55-
179 ;  ambassador  to  the  Khan
(1246)  94,  134,  158;  received  by
Bathy,  163  f. ;  food  during  Lent
in  Tartary,  165 ;  Kaluk  and,  168 ;
received  by  Kaiuk,  173 ;  suffer-
ings of,  176;  leaves  Tartary,
177  f.  ;  returns  to  Rome,  178  f.  ;
and  Wasilico,  179;  at  Bathy's
court,  273 ;  writings,  ill.  281 ;
travels  of,  xil. 12.

Planta,  first  fruit  of  the  sugar  cane,
VI.  128.

Planta  Soils,  found  in  Virginia
(1586)  vm. 361.

Plantain,  in  Canary  Islands,  vi.
128 ;  description  of,  by  Job  Har-
top  (1568)  IX. 447.

Plantan,  see  Plantain.

Planting,  Western,  report  of,  by  Sir
George  Peckham  (1583)  vm.  89-
131 ;  two  ways  of  colonizing,  98,
100;  two  societies  for  the,  113;
hunting  in,  114;  usefulness  of
rivers  in,  117;  '  Discourse  on  the,'
by  Richard  Hakluyt  (1584)  xii.  32,
82.

Plat,  Captain  Anthony,  land  cap-
tain in  Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet
(1585)  x.  98; death  of  (1596)  239.

Plata,  Cabos  del,  marks  of ,  described
in  the Ruttier, x. 281.

Plata,  El  Puerto  de,  harbour,  men-
tioned in  second  Ruttier, x. 328.

Plate, River, discovered by Cabot

(1526)  II.  166;  the  Edward  Cot-
ton's trade  on  the  (1583)  vi.  409;
products  of,  410;  Sebastian
Cabot's  account  of  the  (1497)  vii.
149;  Lopez  Vaz  at  (1586)  x.  75;
trade  between  Rio  de  Janeiro
and  (1596)  XI.  39;  Ruttier  for,  73,
86;  Sebastian  Cabot's  discovery
of  (1526)  91 ;  Captain  John  Drake
in  (1583)  94;  Sir  Francis  Drake  in
(1578)  107;  Nuno  da  Silva,  Sir
Francis  Drake's  pilot  to  (1578)
134 ;  latitude  of  the  mouth  of,  153  ;
Edward  Fen  ton  bound  for  (1582)
188;  S.  F6  on  (1587)  208;  towns
on,  208,  210;  description  of,  252;
latitude  of,  354;  John  Chidley  at
(1590)  383;  English  ships  on  the,
XII. 102.

Plato,  on  West  Indies,  i.  xli.  ;  on
Atlantis,  vii.  160;  '  Commentaries-
on,'  by  Philo  the  Jew,  161,  189;
on  the  Atlantic,  162  ;  on  the  Ocean
Sea,  199;  America  known  to,  as
Atlantis,  xii.  26.

Playa  or  Praya,  landing  of  Christo-
pher Carleill  with  soldiers  at  (1585)
X.  103 ;  burnt  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1585)  108.

Pleasure,  the,  ship  from  S.  Malo
captured  by  (1591)  vm. 155.

Plesance,  in  Newfoundland,  vm.  14.

Plesco,  in  Russia,  11.  188,  194,  ill.
370;  hide  markets  in,  11.  225;
honey  and  wax  market  at,  262 ;
flax  market  at,  296;  or  Plescove,
English  trade  in,  iii.  95,  109;  Eng-
lish money  coined  in,  116;  Rus-
sian wares  on  the  market,  207;
English  trade  free  in  (1586)  349.

Plesko,  province  of  Russia,  iii.  358.

Plettebergius,  grand  master  of  the
Dutch  knights,  and  Ivan  Vasili-
wich, II. 189.

Plimmouth,  see  Plymouth.

Plimouth,  see  Plymouth.

Plinie,  see  Pliny.

Plinius,  see  Pliny.

Pliny,  I.  xix.,  vii.  137;  account  of
Hanno's  sailing  round  Africa,  i.
xli.;  on  earthquakes,  iv.  17,  107;
second  book  of  his  '  Natural  His-
tory,' 21,  112;  on  fire  and  water,
22,  26,113,  118; on  fountains,  36,

356

INDEX

130;  on  subterranean  rivers,  36,
131;  on  petrifying  rivers,  37,  132;
on  a  wine  fountain,  38,  133 ;  on  the
smell  of  water,  39,  135  ;  on  dyeing-
rivers,  43,  140;  on  the  geography
of  Cyprus,  v.  125 ;  on  the  ele-
phant, VI.  165 ;  '  Natural  History  '
by,  166;  on  Africa,  169;  on  stars
and  planets,  171 ;  and  the  Indians
from  America,  172,  173,  178;
on  the  Ocean  Sea,  199;  '  Natural
History  '  by,  description  of  a  tree
bearing  oysters  in,  x.  350.

Ploket,  Thomas,  of  Lynn,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11. 69.

Ploughing  in  China,  vi.  299 ;  in
Virginia  (1586)  viii.  361.

Plumer,  John,  of  Colchester,  and
Prussian  pirates, 11.  62.

Plummer,  Thomas,  carpenter  on  the
Matthew  Gonson  (c. 1535)  v.  69.

Plumtree,  Lionel,  account  of  the
fifth  voyage  to  Persia,  iii.  150-
157;  voyage  to  Cathay,  153;
Sultan  Erasbec  and,  154 ;  and  the
Cossacks  (1573)  15s ; at  Moscow,

Plymouth,  11.  20,  64;  ships  from,  in
JEdward  HL's  fleet,  i.  297;  dam-
ages paid  by,  11.  104;  English
ships  at,  to  meet  the  Armada
{1588)  IV.  208,  211;  Don  Pedro
de  Valdez  prisoner  at,  2 14 ;  ren-
dezvous of  the  English  fleet
(1596)  236,  240;  Roger  Boden-
ham at (1551) v. 72; the

.  Jesus  driven  to  (1583)  293;  the
Lion  of  London  at  (1552)  vi.  140;
William  Towerson  at  (1557)  212,
231 ;  Sir  John  Hawkins'  departure
from  (1564)  263 ;  George  Fenner's
departure  from  (1566)  266;  depar-
ture of  the  English  fleet  from,  for
East  Indies  (1591)  387;  de-
parture of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's
ships  from  (1586)  434;  their  re-
turn to,  437;  English  fleet  leaves
(1587)  439;  returns,  443;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  at  (1588),  450,
(1589)456,(1590)  461;  General  Nor-
ris  returns  to  (1589)  515 ;  departure
©f  fleet  of  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
from  (1589)  VII.  i;  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's  fleet  leaves (1594) 118;

Captain  Frobisher  at  (1578)  231;
port  of,  free  to  Adrian  Gilbert
(1583)  377 ;  return  of  barque  Raleigh
(1583)  VIII.  47;  departure  of  Sir
H.  Gilbert's  fleet,  81 ;  Sir  Richard
Grenville  at  (1585)  317;  John
White  at  (1587)  387;  departure
from  (1590)  406;  return  to,
422 ;  departure  of  Captain  John
Hawkins'  fleet  from  (1567)  ix.
398,  445;  Sir  John  Hawkins'
brother,  governor  of  (1580)  433;
departure  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
for  the  second  voyage  to  Guinea
and  the  West  Indies  from  (1564)
X.  9;  third  voyage,  64;  Andrew
Barker's  departure  from,  83 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake's  fleet  at  (1585)  97;
the  Dog  returned  to  (1589)  97;
departure  of  Captain  Raimond
from  (1591)  194;  Sir  Robert
Dudley  at  (1594)  204;  Sir  Francis
Drake  and  Sir  John  Hawkins
leave  (1595)  226;  return  of  the
fleet  of  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  (1596)
245 ;  Earl  of  Essex  and  Sir  An-
thony Sherley  at  (1596)  266;  Cap-
tain Parker's  departure  from
(1596)  277;  Captain  Parker  re-
turns to,  280 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  return  to  (1597)  xi.  15;
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1577)  102;
John  Winter's  ships  at  (1577)  148;
Luke  Warde  at,  201 ;  Withring-
ton's  departure  from  (1586)  203;
Thomas  Cavendish's  departure
from  (1586)  290;  Thomas  Caven-
dish's return  to  (1588)  347,  371;
John  Chidley's  departure  from
(1589)  381 ;  Thomas  Cavendish's
departure  from  (1591)  389,  397;
Hoe,  the,  two  soldiers  executed  at
(1596)  IV. 237.

Poala,  Friars  Francis  Lopez  and
Augustin  Ruys  murdered  in  (1582)
IX. 195.

Pode,  see  Pud.

Podezemsky,  an  English  house
allowed  the  Muscovy  Company  at
(1586)  Tii.  352.

Poganna  Volocki,  S.  Nicholas  to,
III.  69.

Pogorel,  Sloboda  to,  iii.  70.

Pogorella, Theodore, Russian am-

357

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bassador  to  England  (1567)  iii.  98;
and Queen Elizabeth's letters,

lOI.

Pogosa,  III.  409.

Poiassa,  mountain  in  Russia,  ill.
409.

Poictou,  see  Poitou.

Pointed  Cape,  the,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartler  (1534)  viii.  190.

Pointer,  Richard,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Pois,  Forforeine,  weight  in  Alex-
andria (1584)  V.  272 ;  Gerrin,
weight  in  Alexandria  (1584)  273.

Poisons  made  by  the  Indians  of
Cumana  (1565)  x.  28;  Indian,
Tupara  root  useful against, 397.

Poitou,  battle  of  Poitiers  in,  Mat-
thew Gourney  at,  iv.  444.

Pol,  son  of  Boke,  viscount  of  Skye,
I.  35  f.

Pola,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Polambo,  town  in  Java  Major,  xi.
370.

Poland,  I.  77,  89,  256;  Ordu  and,
74;  John  de  Piano  Carpini  and,
94,  II.  386;  Tartars  and,  i.  153;
John  de  Piano  Carpini  through,
159,  179 ;  league  between  the
Dutch  knights  and,  11.  3,  11;  war
between  the  Dutch  knights  and,
9 ;  history  of,  by  Herbortus  Ful-
stinius,  x86;  war  with  Russia,
188,  438;  cloth  made  in,  383 ;  Eng-
lish wares  in,  in.  13;  letter  of
Sigismund,  King  of,  to  Queen
Elizabeth,  99-100;  conquests  of,
from  Russia,  359 ;  William  Har-
borne  in  (1578)  v.  168;  Acmet
Chaus,  Turkish  ambassador  to
(1578)  168;  chancellor  of,  and  Wil-
liam Harborne  (1588)  vi.  58;
kingdom  of,  peace  with  Turkey
(1590)  69.

Pole, Antarctic, 11. 163.

Pole,  North,  i.  6;  only  way  to  un-
discovered lands,  II.  161 ;  naviga-
tion under  the,  162,  176;  Sebas-
tian Cabot's  voyage  to  the  (1497)
VII.  152 ;  difficulties  of  navigation
near  the,  175;  sun's  heat  at  the,
177  ;  Robert  Thome's  advice  about
discovery (c. 1527) viii. i ; the

canon  of  S.  Paul's,  and  the  expedi-
tion to  the  (1527)  2.

Polecats  in  Florida,  x.  59.

Poledenga, silver  Russian  coin, 11.

273-
Polerwan, ships from, m Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.
Poles, II. 7; Tartars  and, i. 161;

Russian conquests over, 11. 423 ;;

or Polacks, etymology of, in.

389-
Poles, small Russian copper com,

II.  273.
Poles,  temperate  climate  at  the,  vii.

271
Polisacus  fluvius,  vii.  179.
Polison,  Michael,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII. 318.
Poll,  or  head  money.  Englishmen  in

Turkey  free  from  (1580)  v.  187.
Pollard,  Thomas,  mate  of  the  Jesus,

cruelty to sailors of Sir John

Hawkins  (1568)  ix.  409.
Polo,  Andrea  de,  and  Caesar  Fred-
erick (c. 1563)  V.  445,  446.
Polo, Marco, the Venetian (1254-

1324), on spelling of Cathay, i.

144; accounts of the travels of,

XII.  12.
Polonia,  see  Poland.
Polonians,  see  Poles.
Polooy  Carawool,  120  versts,  ill.  120.
Polotzko taken by Russia (1563-

1579)  III.  100.
Polskoy,  wing  of  Russian  army,  iii.

380, 383.

Polumbrum,  city  of,  in  Malabar,  iv.
413 ; burning  of  the  dead  in,  419.

Polydore,  '  English  History  '  by,  v.
125.

Pomary,  Steven,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Pomeiock,  Pomeiok,  city,  on  the
Occam  in  Virginia,  viii.  306;  Sir
Richard  Grenville  at  (1585)  316;
John  White  and,  394.

Pomer,  see  Pomerania.

Pomeraies,  Pommeraze,  see  Pomer-
ania.

Pomerania,  Suandepolcus,  Duke  of,
against  Christians,  11.  4 ;  William
Harborne  through  (1588)  vi.  58;
ship  of,  captured  by  the  English,
VII. 2 ; Charles  of, in  the  Great

358

INDEX

Hermina  (1535)  viii.  210;  goes  up
the  Hochelaga  river,  230.

Pomerella,  in  Prussia,  11. 10.

Pomeren,  Henry  van,  and  the  Eng-
lish ship,  II.  60.

Pommerolles,  Gabriel  de,  lieutenant
of  the  Grand  Master  of  Rhodes
(1522)  V.  7; death  of,  28.

Porno,  II,  near  the  coast  of  Dal-
matia,  v,  78.

Pomovik,  country  adjoining  Seco-
tan,  VIII.  308.

Pompey's Pillar, see  Pillar.

Pompions,  see  Gourds.

Pomponius  Mela,  on  the  Ocean  Sea,
VII.  199.

Ponchiassini,  captain  of  a  town  and
treasurer  of  the  King,  in  China,
VI.  296,  301.

Pongo,  El,  see  El  Pongo.

Ponta  Malota,  Cape,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V.  85.

Pontanus,  on  earthquakes,  iv.  17,
107; on  Baian  Baths,  35, 130.

Pont  Briand,  Claude  de,  in  the  Great
Hermina  (1535)  viii.  210;  goes
up  the  Hochelaga  river,  230.

Ponte,  Nicholas  de,  duke  of  Venice,
funeral  of  (1585)  v.  322,

Ponte,  Nicolas  de,  son  of  Peter  de
Ponte,  and  Sir  John  Hawkins
(1564)  X. 12.

Ponte,  Peter  de,  governor  of  Tene-
riffe  (1564)  X.  II.

Ponte  grande,  near  Constantinople,
v. 251.

Ponte  piccola,  near  Constantinople,
V.  251.

Ponte  Vedra,  near  Vigo,  Sir  John
Hawkins  at  (1568)  x. 74.

Ponticus  on  the  deeds  of  Empress
Helena,  iv.  272.

Pontus  Euxinus,  see  Black  Sea.

Pood, see Pud.

Poole,  Dorset,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward ni.'s  fleet,  I.  298;  return
of Miles Philips to (1582) ix.

445.
Pooley, Sir William, knighted at

Cadiz  (1596) IV. 260.
Pooneno,  Lord  of  Chawanook,  viii.

306; ally of Menatonon and

Wingandacoa,  306.
Poor,  conditions  of  the,  in  Russia,

II.  235,  448;  their  indifference  to
liberty,  264.

Poor  John,  dried  fish  from  New-
land,  captured  in  a  ship  by  Chris-
topher Carleill  (1585)  x.  100.

Poore,  Leonard,  of  London,  John
Newbery's  letters  to  (1583)  v.  453,
455 >  458; Ralph  Fitch's  letter  to,

463  •'

Poore,  Richard,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 317.

Popayan,  x.  408;  government  of,  in
Peru,  174;  Orinoco  river  navi-
gable to,  395 ;  description  of,  xi.
236;  Oxenham  and  his  men  taken
at,  286.

Pope,  Richard,  master's  mate  of  the
Sunshine  of  London  (1585)  vii.
382,  408.

Pope,  Thomas,  patent  granted  to
(1592)  VII. 102.

Poperinghe,  town,  11. 121.

Popham,  Captain,  and  the  discovery
of  Guiana  (1595)  x.  206;  arrival
of,  in  Trinidad,  and  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1595)  209;  letters  taken
at  sea  by  (1594)  432,  433.

Popham,  Sir  Francis,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Popham,  Stephen,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Poplliniere's  '  L 'Admiral  de  France,  "^
I.  xix.

Popinjays,  see  Parrots.

Poplar  at  Blackwall,  xi.  44;  resi-
dence of  Sir  Thomas  Pert,  vice-
admiral  of  England,  x.  3.

Popocatepetl,  ix.  363  ;  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  x.  297,  316.

Popou,  Protou,  Emperor  of  Russia's
envoy  to  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  (1583)
III.  464.

Population  of  Russia,  iii.  360 ;  of
Canary  Island,  vi.  127;  of  Tene-
riffe, 131.

Porcelain,  in  China,  vi.  356,  ix^
392; used  in  Hispaniola,  x. 116.

Porcellan,  see  Porcelain.

Porima,  Cacique,  Pedro  de  Limpias
slain by, x. 497.

Porland,  Zichmni,  Prince  of  (1380)
VII.  448.

Porpoises,  caught  by  the  Golden
Hind  (1583)  VIII.  65; near  Cape

359

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Breton,  i6o; in  Hochelaga  river,

245-

Porshet,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.
303.

Porta  Eburnea, see  Jerusalem.

Porta  Ferrea,  see  Derbent.

Porter,  Edward,  in  the  expedition  of
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  up  the  Capuri
river  (1595)  x.  379;  discovery  of
the  Sayma  by,  396 ;  on  the  Cara-
roopana  river  with  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  417.

Porter,  Giles  and  Edmund,  their
voyage to Jerusalem (1583) v.

455-

Porter,  Nicholas,  advises  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.

Porters,  of  Muscovy  Company  not
allowed  to  sell  wares,  iii.  96;  of
English  merchants,  443 ;  head,  or
Capagi  Pashas  of  the  Grand  Sig-
nior,  pay  of,  vi,  62  ;  of  the  court
and  city,  pay  of,  63.

Portes,  John,  *  Life  of  Octavius,'
translated  into  French  by,  iv.
276.

Portete,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.
287.

Port  Famine,  see  Nombre  de  Jesus.

Portingall,  see  Portugal.

Portland,  English  fleet  and  the
Armada  at  (1588)  iv.  216;  to
Calais,  the  Spanish  Armada  beaten
from  (1588)  VII.  39;  departure  of
Laurence  Keymis  for  Guiana  from
(1596)  x.  452;  Laurence  Keymis
returns  to  (1596)  495.

Porto,  see  Oporto.

Porto  Bello,  see  Puerto  Bello.

Porto  d'Ally,  near  Palmerin,  pro-
ducts of,  VII.  90;  French  traders
in,  91 ;  Thomas  Dassel  in  (1591)
92;  Amar  Meleck,  king  of,  94;
the  Nightingale  at,  96; trade  in.

Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  x.  349;  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)  349,  350;
fortified  by  the  Spanish  (1596)  462,
479 ;  Antonio  de  Berreo,  governor
of  (1595)  X.  351.

Porto  Grande,  or  Tipperah,  and  the
King  of  Arakan,  v.  483;  Ralph
Fitch  near  (c. 1583)  485.

Porto  Gruaro,  iv.  444.

Porto  Piqueno,  Portuguese  posses-
sion, V. 482.

Porto  Santo  Island,  near  Madeira,
VI.  135 ;  Portuguese  possession,
description  and  latitude,  177 ;
William  Towerson  at  (1556)  212;
George  Fenner  at  (1566)  266;
Thomas  Stevens  at  (1579)  378.

Port  Real,  naval  fight  off  (1587)  vi.

439-

Port-Royal,  in  Florida,  discovered  by
Captain  Ribault  (1562)  viii.  461;
fort  built  in,  471.

Port-Royal,  river  in  Florida,  viii.
472,  IX. 113.

Porto  Seguro,  Ruttier  for,  xi.  79 ;
description  of,  250 ;  Thomas  Cav-
endish at  (1587)  324,  326.

Ports,  of  Alexandria,  v.  330;  old
and  new,  331;  West  Indian,  ac-
count of  the,  by  Baptista  Antonio
(1587)  X. 135-156.

Portsmouth,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  297;  the  Three  Half
Moons  at  (1563)  v.  153;  William
Wickney  of  (1577)  157;  the  Jesus
leaves  (1583)  293;  the  Lion  at
(1552)  VI.  137;  the  Primrose  and
the  Lion  leave  (1553)  145;  Captain
Downton's  return  to  (1594)  vii.
123  ;  the  Toby  at  (1593)  124;  Ralph
Lane's  return  to  (1586)  viil.  345;
departure  of  John  White's  fleet
from  (1587)  386;  flagship  of  John
White's  fleet  at  (1587)  401;  Job
Hortop  brought  to,  by  the  Galleon
Dudley  (1590)  ix.  464.

Portuens,  Robert  of,  cardinal,  wit-
ness of  Edward  I.'s  great  charter,
I.  296.

Portugal  and  Edward  I.'s  great
charter,  1. 333  ;  products  of,  11. 117  f.;
discovery  of  East  Indies  by,  loi,
172  f.  ;  contention  with  Spain,  173-
180 ;  discovery  of  Brazil  by,  175 ;
language  of,  necessary  for  Eng-
lish merchants  in  Russia,  iii.  52  ;
trade  of,  in  the  East  Indies  (1568)
147;  and  the  spice  trade,  161;
Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  195;  and
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  199;  em-
bassy from,  to  England  (1462)
369;  captain  of,  in  Ormuz  (1563)
V.  372,  468; viceroy  of, at  Goa,

360

INDEX

373,  386;  trade  in  Martaban,  416,
417 ;  trade  in  India,  444 ;  mon-
soons for  ships  from,  to  the  Indies,
vi.  33 ;  and  the  negroes  (c.  1556)
200;  and  English  merchants,
ships  of,  in  Guinea  (1557)  218,
220,  229 ;  their  fight  with  the  Eng-
lish and  French,  221;  Colonel
Anthony  Wingfield's  discourse  on
the  expedition  against,  470-527;
public  feeling  in,  about  Don  An-
tonio (1589)  505 ;  conquests  of,
VIII.  126;  Captain  Carleill's  trade
with  (1583)  137;  news  from,
brought  to  Pernambuco,  xi.  36 ;
Bay  of,flyboat  lost  in  the,  by  Simon
Ferdlnando  (1587)  viii.  387;  John
III.,  King  of,  discoveries  under,
II.  164 ;  Prince  of,  Don  Chris-
topher, and  the  Cadiz  expedition
(1596)  IV.  236,  260;  John  I.,  King
of,  and  the  English  merchants,
367,  368;  and  the  conquest  of
Ceuta  (1415)  VI.  121;  King  of,
first  husband  of  Carlotta,  daughter
of  John,  King  of  Cyprus,  v.  125 ;
Emmanuel,  King  of,  and  the  duty
on  horses,  vi.  15;  John  II.,  King
of,  and  King  Edward  IV.  of  Eng-
land (1481)  123;  Don  Sebas-
tian, King  of,  and  Thomas  Stuke-
ley  (c.  1578)  294;  King  of,  and
the  north-west  passage,  vii.  180 ;
discoveries  of  the  Kings  of,  xii.
3,  15;  Philip  II.,  King  of  Spain,
becomes  King  of,  61.
Portuguese,  treacherous  dealings  of,
with  English  (1591)  vi.  277,  392,
(1588)  VII.  91-97;  fight  between  the
English  and  the,  vi.  278 ;  on
China,  295;  in  Pegu  (1587)  386;
use  of  mines  forbidden to  (1581)

XI.  38;  Captain  Lancaster's
opinion  of  (1595)  55;  fight  of  the,
with  Captain  Lancaster  (1595)  56;
treachery  of,  against  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1579)  162;  Edward  Fen-
ton's  traffic  with  the  (1582)  175;
fight  of,  with  Robert  Withrington
(1587)  219; early  conquests  of  the,

XII.  15.

Portuguese  trade,  11.  169;  fishing
in  Newfoundland  (1578)  viii.  11;
Caravels, fight of Sir John

Hawkins  with,  at  Rio  Grande
(1568)  IX.  448;  fishing  place  at
Cape  Blanco  (1564)  x. 14.

Porus,  King,  and  Alexander  the
Great, iv. 412.

Porva,  Juan  de,  Canavates,  letter
from,  to  John  Lopez  Canavate
(1590)  X. 163.

Pory,  John  (1570-1635),  Richard
Hakluyt's  friend  and  pupil,  i.
Ixxx.

Posna,  in  Poland,  11.  10.

Possidonius  on  the  volcanoes  of  Ice-
land, IV.  17,  107.

Postesora,  walrus  hunters  in,  11.  225.

Post  horses,  English  merchants  in
Russia  granted  the  use  of  (1569)

III.  116;  Anthony  Jenkinson
travelling  with, 179; in  Cathay,

IV.  433 ; in  China,  vi.  297.
Potaju,  Captain  Lancaster  at  (1595)

XI. 63.
Potanca, King of, prisoner in Al-
giers (1586)  VI.  45.
Potanou,  King,  vassal  of  King  Sat-

ourioua  (1564)  ix.  21 ;  King  Utina's

war  with  (1564)  34,  (1565)  56  f. ;

his reprisals on Utina's village,

64; subjects of, killed by the

Spaniards, 112, 115; cacique in

Florida, 113.
Potassi,  neighbour  to  King  Potanou,

IX. 115.
Potatoes  in  Cumana,  description  of

(1565)  x.  27.
Potguns, used at the siege of

Rhodes  (1522)  v. 19.
Potis, Rio  de, English  and  French

merchants  at  (1562)  vi.  259.
Potkin, Henry, in Virginia (1585)

VIII. 318.
Potofarnia,  port  of  Tunis  (1553)  vi.

143-
Potos, Rio de los, in Guinea, vi.

161; ivory  in  (1577)  239.
Potosi, in Peru, John Chilton at

(1570) IX. 369; Friar  Alonso in

(1589) X. 168; mines of, 170;

famine  and  plague  in  (1590)  171 ;

and  the  haven  of  Buenos  Aires  on

the  river  Plate,  172  ; engraving  of

mines  of,  172.
Pots,  tin,  trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1577)

VI.  252.

361

2  A

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Potter,  John,  mariner  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  214.

Pound,  Wiliam,  of  Hull,  and  Prus-
sian pirates, 11. 61.

Poure,  Henry,  Captain,  at  the  burn-
ing of  Borsis  (1589)  VI.  513.

Povensa,  market  for  Novgorod
wares,  iii.  77 ;  on  Lake  Onega,
81 ;  no  communication  in  summer
between  Some  and,  82.

Powel,  Anthony,  sergeant-major  of
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1585)  x.  98;
at the attack on S. Domingo

(1586)  112; at  the  attack  on  Car-
tagena (1586)  120; death  of, 131,

134-

Powel,  David,  '  History  of  Wales  '
by  (1170)  VII. 133.

Powell,  Edward  and  Winefrid,
settlers  in  Virginia  (1587)  viii.
402,  403.

Power,  Leonard,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Powles,  the,  shoals  called,  xi. 180.

Powlet,  or  Poulet,  John,  in  the  Great
Hermina  (1535)  viii.  210;  goes  up
the  Hochelaga  river,  230 ;  sent  to
Donnacona  by  Jacques  Cartier,
252.

Powstezer,  fur  trade  in,  11.  276.

Pox,  small,  in  De  la  Paz  and  Potosi
(1590)  X.  171.

Poyas  Semnoi  or  Cingulus  mundi,
III. 407.

Pozanka, Island, Stephen Borough

at  (1557)  "•  363-
Pracellas,  see  Flats.
Prage,  Ganges  and  Jumna  meet  at,

V.  476.
Pragmatics, or Spanish book of

orders,  xi.  444,  446.
Praia,  town  in  S.  lago,  Sir  Anthony

Sherley  at  (1596)  x.  268.
Prat,  John,  child  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.

Prat,  Roger,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Prato,  Cape  of,  Jacques  Cartier  at
fi534)  VIII. 201-204,  259.

Prayer,  at  the  coronation  of  Russian
Emperors,  11.  374;  by  Queen
Elizabeth  (1596)  iv.  239,  261.

Prayers,  in  Russia  for  drowned  mer-
chants  and sailors, 11. 90.

Preaching,  of  the  Sainton  on  the
Mountain  of  Pardons,  v.  357 ;  of
the  Bonzes,  vi.  345.

Precepts,  seven,  of  Noah,  vi. iii.

Prechista,  cathedral  church  in  Mos-
cow, III.  338 ;  coronation  of  Rus-
sian Emperors  in,  374.

Preciado,  Francis,  soldier  of  Captain
Ulloa,  and  the  attack  of  the  Chi-
chimecas  Indians  (1539)  ix.  237,
238 ;  parley  with  peaceable  In-
dians, 247;  and  the  Indians  (1540)
263,  265,  278;  and  the  restitution
of  the  sealskins  to  the  Indians,
276 ;  account  of  Captain  UUoa's
voyage,  27S.

Precipola,  Turkish  camp  at  (1571)  v.
130.

Prentises,  see  Apprentices.

Presbiter  John, see  Prester  John.

Presla  (Breslau),  chief  city  of
Silesia,  11.  186.

Prest,  John,  ship  master,  and  Prus-
sian pirates, 11. 65.

Prester  John,  v.  337,  xii.  12 ;  and
Jenghiz  Khan,  i.  146;  stratagem
of,  71 ;  King  of  Cathay,  267,  290.

Preston,  Sir  Amyas  de,  and  the  Gal-
leass of  Moncada,  iv.  223 ;  in
Cadiz  (1596)  258;  knighted  at
Cadiz,  259;  in  S.  Mary's  Island
(1589)  VII.  15  ;  in  S.  George  Island,
17 ;  sent  in  ship  from  Pernam-
buco,  19 ;  his  prize,  30 ;  voyage
of,  to  West  Indies  (1595)  x.  213-
226 ;  sick  crew  of,  at  Dominica
(1595)  215;  at  Coche  Island,  216;
and  the  flyboats  of  Middelburg,
217;  captures  of,  at  Cumana,  217;
taking  of  S.  lago  de  Leon  by
(1595)  218,  364;  and  the  offer  of
a  ransom  for  S.  lago  de  Leon,
221;  burning  of  S.  lago  de  Leon
(1595)  222;  meeting  of,  with  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  225.

Pretegoani,  empire  of.  Friar  Odoric
in. (1330)  IV.  435  f.

Pretie,  see  Pretty.

Pretty,  Francis,  of  the  Hugh
Gallant,  landing  of  (1587)  xi.
311 ;  Cavendish's  circumnavigation
(1586-S8)  written  by,  xi.  290-347.

Prideox,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317; sent  to  Hatteras,  338.

362

INDEX

Prieg'o,  Earl  of,  assistant  of  the  city

of  Seville  (1596)  x,  252.
Priesthood, dignity of first estate

in Japan, vi. 329.
Priests, Russian, 11. 442 ; Persian,

III.  162 ;  marriag-e  of,  in  Iceland
(1544)  IV.  58,  157;  high,  in  Japan,
VI. 329 ; holiness  of,  335.

Prima  Vista,  discovered  by  John  and
Sebastian  Cabot  (1497)  vii. 146.

'  Primera  Parte  de  las  Elegias  de
Varones  Illustres  de  Indias,'  by
Juan  de  Castellanos,  x.  496.

Primrose,  Russian  ambassador  re-
turns home  on  the,  11.  359 ;  flag-
ship, captain,  Anthony  Jenkinson
(1557)  375.  413;  John  Buckland,
master,  380.

Primrose,  the,  and  the  first  voyage
to  Guinea  (1553)  vi.  145;  gold
received  by,  163 ;  shells  on  the
keel  of,  175 ;  uncertainty  of  the
fate  of  (1561)  255,  256;  William
Rutter  in (1563) 261 ; escape of

(1585)  413-
Primrose,  the.  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,

captain  of  (1585)  x.  98.
Princes, right government of, iv.

281.
Principe Island, discovered by the

Portuguese, viii. 127.
Pringle,  Richard,  voyage  into  Persia

(1569)  III.  136;  at  Shemakha,  137;

bearer of Anthony Jenkinson 's

letter  (1572)  193.
Printing,  Chinese,  vi.  359.
Printing house, first, in Iceland

(1568)  IV. 59, 158.
Prior's  Sound,  discovered  by  Martin

Frobisher  (1576)  vii.  208.
Priour,  John,  of  King's  Lynn,  and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  70.
Prise,  Edward,  merchant  in  Russia,

II.  291.
Prisena,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

322.
Prison  for  galley  slaves,  near  Alex-
andria (1577)  v. 156,  260; Chris-
tians in  the,  157.
Prisoners,  English,  in  Spain  (1596)

IV.  266;  English,  of  the  Armada,
urged  to  serve  the  King  of  Spain,
by  Morice  Fitz-John  (1591)  vii.  50;
English  sailors,  in  Terceira  (1589)

70 ;  English,  murdered  by  a  Span-
iard (1590)  72  ;  English,  in  Ter-
ceira (1591)  83;  English  hostages
in  Mexico,  and  Anthony  Godard
and  his  men  (1568)  ix.  422  ;  An-
thony Godard  and  his  men,  in
Tescuco  (1568)  421,  459;  English
sailors  at  Havana  (1570)  460;
condemned  by  the  Inquisition  of
Seville  (1570)  463;  English,  in
Cumana,  exchanged  by  Captain
Parker  for  his  Spanish  prisoners
(1596)  X.  277;  Russian,  set  at
liberty  (1584)  iii.  344;  Spanish,
in  England  (1588)  iv.  214  ff.
Prisons  in  China,  description  of,  vi.

311-

Pristaves,  Russian  court  officials,
III. 105.

Privileges,  granted  to  the  Muscovy
Company  by  Ivan  Vasiliwich,
Emperor  of  Russia  (1555)  11.
297  ff-.  315;  by  King  of
Shirvan  (1563)  in.  33,  39;
by  the  Shah  of  Persia,  56,  144;
granted  by  Shah  of  Persia  (1567)
64;  by  Prince  of  Gilan,  61;  by
Russian  Emperor  (1567)  92-97;  by
Russian  Emperor  (1569)  108-118;
restricted  to  them  in  Russia,  97,
187,  189 ;  obtained  for,  by  Sir
JeromeHorsey,  347-353 ;  withdrawn
by  him  (1572)  187  sq. ;  obtained
by  Giles  Fletcher,  353-357;  Eng-
lish trade  increasedby,2o6;  granted
to  the  first  Levant  Company,  by
Murad  Khan  (1579)  v.  169;  to  the
second  Levant  Company  (1580)
178,  183  ;  granted  by  Queen  Eliza-
beth to  Sir  Edward  Osborne  and
Richard  Staper  for  the  Levant
Company  (1581)  192 ;  restricted
to  the  Levant  Company,  197 ;
of  the  Levant  Company  liable
to  be  withdrawn  for  misdemean-
our (1581)  200;  for  English  trade,
to  be  enforced  by  Edward  Barton
(1584)274;  granted  by  Peter,  Prince
of  Moldavia  (1588)  vi.  59;  granted
by  Queen  Elizabeth  (1592)  73-
92 ;  of  the  Levant  trade,  restricted
to  the  Levant  Company  (1592)  83 ;
87;  of  the  Emperor  of  Morocco,
to the Barbary Campany (1577)

363

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

2g2  ;  granted  to  the  Barbary  Com-
pany by  Queen  Elizabeth  (1585)
419 ;  restricted  to  its  members,
421;  granted  to  the  Guinea  Com-
pany (1588)  443,  VII.  90  ;  restricted
to  the  members,  vi.  447 ;  of  Queen
Elizabeth  to  Thomas  Gregory  of
Taunton,  vii.  102;  of  Henry  VII.,
to  John  Cabot  and  his  sons  (1495)
141,  143;  granted  for  five  years
by  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Adrian
Gilbert  (1583)  375-381;  granted
by  Henry  VII.  to  John  and
Sebastian  Cabot,  viii.  37;
granted  by  Queen  Elizabeth  to
Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  for  colonis-
ing America  (1578)  viii.  17-23,  41 ;
granted  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  to
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1584)  289-
296;  share  of  the  crown,  291;
causes  of  revocation  of,  295.
Privy  seals  sent  to  Peru  from  Spain

to  borrow  money  (1590)  x.  174.
Prizes  or  ships  captured  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1587)  vi.  439,  441,
(1577-79)  XI.  101-133,  133-147.  148-
162;  near  the  Azores  (1589)  vii.
2-4;  at  S.  Mary's  Island,  17;
Spanish  (1589)  30;  Robert  Flicke's
(1591)  59,  60;  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's (1589)  67,  (1590)  79;  cargo
of  the  Spanish,  taken  by  Thomas
White  (1592)  104;  Captain  Lane's,
off  Cape  Tiburon  (1590)  viii.  410.
Proclus on America, vii. 161 ; on

the  Ocean  Sea, 199.
Proconesus,  see  Marmora.
Procopius, '  de Bello Gothico,'  by,

IV. 278.
Proctor,  Nicholas,  and  Richard  Us-
combe, iii. 169 ; chief  agent for
the  Muscovy  Company  in  Russia
(1572) 183, 193.
Prodeno Island, John Locke off
(1553)  V. loi ; William  Harborne
at {1583)  249.
Promhell, i. 48.

Pronetto, heirs  of, part  owners  of
Atoyaque  and  Xicaian  towns,  ix.
470.
Propertius, quotation from the

*  Elegies  '  of,  iv.  38, 133.
Prophecy  of  an  Indian  against  Spain
(1589)  VI.  387; of  the  coming  of

Vasquez  de  Coronado  to  the  In-
dians (1540)  IX.  160;  in  Peru,
mentioned  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,

X.  431.

Prophet  of  Mahomet,  description  of
a,  V.  252 ;  his  garment,  or  Chisva
Talnabi,  342.

Propontis,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1594)
VI. 107.

Protasio, Don,  Quabacondono  and,

XI.  424 ;  soldiers  of,  425 ;  and  the
Jesuit  fathers,  429.

Prouaz, Henry  Austell  at  (1583)  v.

325-
Prouse, Laurence, gunner, leaves

Astrakhan  (1581)  iii.  245.
Provence and Edward I.'s great

charter,  i.  333 ; bulwark  in  walls

of Rhodes, named from, v. 23-

39-

Provisions,  for  whale-fishing  expedi-
tion, III.  201 ;  to  take  on  board  for
a  voyage  of  discoveries,  269-271 ;
sent  to  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  by  the
Emperor  of  Russia  (1586)  347;  for
the  Armada  (1588) iv. 202.

Provost,  John,  Indian  interpreter  of
Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  x.  454.

Prowse,  Captain,  in  the  Angel  in
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's  voyage
(1595)  X.  213;  death  of,  at  Coros
(1595)  223.

Pruce,  see  Prussia.

Prudence,  the,  of  the  Muscovy
Company  (1582)  iii. 304.

Prudence,  the,  of  Christopher  New-
port's fleet  (1591)  X. 184.

Prudence,  the.  Captain  Parker's
ship  (1596)  X.  277.

Prunaria,  Don  George,  killed  at  the
naval  fight  off  Flores  (1591)  vn.

47-

Pruse, see  Prussia.

Prussia,  King  Arthur  and,  I.  6,
15 ;  Tartars  and,  i.  89  f.  ;  con-
quest of,  256 ;  Grand  Master  of,
305  ;  conquest  of,  by  the  Hospital-
lers of  Jerusalem,  11.  2 ;  and
England,  agreement  between
(1388)  18-24;  claims  of,  for  dam-
age to  ships,  33;  England's  pro-
mises to,  45;  and  Henry  IV.,  37,
4^'  55-67;  unlawful  treatment  of
English  ships  and  crew  by,  60  f. ;

364

INDEX

and  Sir  William  Esturmy  (1407)
85.  87;  Ulricus,  master  of,  his
letter  to  Henry  IV.,  91;  open  to
English  merchants  (1409)  99;
English  merchants  in  (1404)  109;
products  of, 122  f.

Prussus,  governor  over  the  Vistula
and  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  Sea,
11. 183.

Pryhouse,  Mr.,  of  Guernsey,  and
Hakluyt, xii. 77.

Psara  Island,  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V. 250.

Ptolemais, see  Acre.

Ptolemayda,  Richard  I.  at  (1192)  v.
125.

Ptoleme, see Ptolemy.

Ptolemy,  11.  168 ;  on  the  peoples  of
Libya,  vi.  168,  vii.  137 ;  opinion
on  northern  part  of  the  world,
193 ;  first  principle  of  geography,
196 ;  limits  of  his  knowledge,
197;  '  Peregrinationis  Historia,'
by,  203.

Ptolemy,  King,  Pharia  tower  by,  v.
118.

Ptolomais,  see  Acre.

Ptolomew,  see  Ptolemy.

Ptolomy,  see  Ptolemy.

Puchinsu,  fosterer  of  the  King  of
China,  vi.  363.

Pud,  a  Russian  weight,  11.  274,  iii.
82.

Pudkey  or  Torture,  iii.  355.

Pudsey,  voyage  of,  to  Bahia,  in
Brazil  (1542)  xi.  25.

Puebla,  Capitan,  return  from  Eng-
land (1589) VI. 514.

Puebla  de  los  Angelos,  in  New
Spain,  IX.  318;  near  Vera  Cruz,
355;  Roger  Bodenham  at  (1564)
359;  cochineal  found  at,  360;
John  Chilton  at  (1568)  362;  Span-
ish goods  carried  from  Vera  Cruz
to  (1572)  379;  Miles  Philips  at
(1580)  434-

Puebla  Nova,  John  Chilton  at  (1572)
IX.  374.

Pueblo,  see  Puebla.

Puente  de  Suago,  English  fleet  at
(1596)  IV. 246, 249,  254.

Puercos,  Los,  in  the  Bay  of  S,  Sebas-
tian, dangers  of,  described  in  the
Ruttier,  x.  282.

Puercos,  Punta  de  los,  mentioned  in
second  Ruttier,  x.  325.

Puercos,  Rio  de,  in  Cuba,  viii.  411,
x.  47;  WiUiam  King  at  (1592)
192  ;  or  river  of  hogs,  mentioned
in  the  second  Ruttier,  323.

Puerto  Bello,  Spanish  West  Indian
port,  description  of  (1587)  x.  144;
excellence  of  the  harbour  of,  145 ;
Baptista  Antonio's  advice  about
deserting  Nombre  de  Dios  for,
146 ;  latitude  of,  148 ;  Baptista
Antonio's  advice  to  strengthen
(1587)  156;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1596)  239;  description  of,  240;
English  fleet  repaired  at  (1596)
251 ;  death  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
between  Escudo  Island  and  (1596)
253,  XII.  66.

Puerto  de  Cavallas,  or  Cavallos,
Christopher  Newport  at  (1591)  x.
187;  spoils  of,  187;  ship  of
boarded  by  William  King  (1592)
193 ;  taken  by  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  and  Captain  Parker  (1598)  275,
278;  Captain  Parker's  voyage  to
(1596)  277.

Puerto  de  Plata,  Sir  John  Hawkins
at  (1562)  X.  8.

Puerto  Hermoso,  in  S.  Domingo,  x.
284.

Puerto  Rico,  Island  of,  the  Edward
Bonaventure  at  (1593)  vi.  405 ;
Sir  Richard  Grenvineat(i585)  viii.
311;  John  White  at  (1590)  408;
abundance  of  hides  in  (1572)  ix.
390 ;  voyage  of  Sir  Thomas  Pert
and  Sebastian  Cabot  to  (15 16)  x.
2-6;  English  ship  at  (1517)  4,  5;
open  to  Drake's  devastations,  94;
Don  Diego  Mendez  de  Valdes
governor  of  (1590)  161 ;  Christo-
pher Newport  at  (1591)  184;  cap-
tures of  William  King  in  the  har-
bour of  (1592)  191;  Sir  Robert
Dudley  at  (1594)  203;  Sir  Robert
Dudley  and  his  prize  at  (1595)
210;  death  of  Sir  John  Hawkins
off  (1595)  230,  XII.  66;  fight
between  Sir  Francis  Drake
and  the  Spanish,  x.  230;
Spanish  ships  burnt  and  sunk
in  (1596)  254;  latitude  of,  283,
333 » marks  of, described in the

365

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ruttier,  283,  310;  course  from,  to
Havana,  327 ;  death  of  Juan  Mar-
tinez at,  361 ;  the  Philip,  Spanish
ship,  at  (1575)  427;  or  Boriquen
Island,  XI.  238,  240.

Puerto  Rico  town,  in  Puerto  Rico,
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1595)  x.
230.

Puerto  Santo  Island,  inhabited  by
old  Portuguese  soldiers,  latitude
and  description  of,  x.  213,  332.

Puerto  Santo  town,  taken  by  Sir
Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)  x. 214.

Puerto  Seguro,  see  Porto  Seguro.

Pugia,  Rhapontlcum  found  in,  vi.
26; opium  found  in,  27.

Puglia,  see  Apulia.

Pulo,  meaning  of,  in  Malayan,  vi.
3Q6.

Pulo  Penang  Islands,  vi.  396;  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1591)  x.

195-  .

Pulo  Pinaou,  see  Pulo  Penang.

Pulo  Sambilam  Islands,  in  the
Straits  of  Malacca,  vi.  397.

Fulpit,  the,  bark  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.  232.

Pumpions,  see  Gourds.

Puna,  golden  garden  of  the  Ingas
near,'x.  357.

Puna  Island,  Thomas  Cavendish  at
(1587)  XI.  313,  368;  products  of,
316;  English  sailors  killed  on,
318;  latitude  of,  349,  359;  anchor-
age at,  372.

Punames,  see  Cunames.

Punishments  in  Tartary,  i.  247 ;  of
thieves  in  Russia,  11.  235,  265;  for
breaking  the  law  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  85;  of  crim-
inals in  Japan, vi. 330, 335.

Punta  de  Gallo,  see  Curiapan.

'  Purchas  His  Pilgrims,'  by  Samuel
Purchas,  xii.  83.

Purchas,  Samuel,  compared  to
Richard  Hakluyt,  xii.  74 ;  and  the
unpublished papers of Hakluyt,

83.
Purchas,  William,  mayor  of  London

(1497)  VII. 155.
Purpagotos,  enemies  to  the  Spanish

(1596)  X. 474.
Purpet,  Thomas,  distress  of,  at  Port

Dpsire  (1592)  xi.  399; on  Penguin

Island,  410;  slain  by  wild  men,
411.

Purselaine,  boiled  in  water,  crew  of
the  Edward  Bonaventure  feeding
on  (1593)  VI.  406.

Purser,  pirate,  and  Milbrooke  town
(1583)  XI.  202.

Purser,  Andrew,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  70.

Pursers,  inventory  of  ships'  neces-
saries, made  by,  11.  317;  regula-
tions for  Spanish, xi. 443.

Pustosero,  castle  and  town,  in.  407.

Putapayma  Island,  near  Oecope
Mountain, x. 396.

Puteanus,  Bernardus,  and  the
North-west  passage, vii. 163.

Putijma,  Cacique,  x.  395 ;  governor
of  the  province  of  Warapana,  and
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  416;
Laurence  Keymis  and  (1596)
467.

Putima,  guide  of  Captain  Keymis
to  the  Cumaca  river  (1595)  x.  421 ;
Spaniards from Manoa slain  by,

458-
Putyma,  see  Putijma.
Puys,  Henry,  of  Elbing,  ship  master,

and  Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.
Pygmaei,  land  of,  iv.  427,  428.
Pyramid  in  Alexandria,  v.  330.
Pyramids of Egypt, v. 118, 336;

description by John Evesham

C1587)  VI.  36; by  Laurence  Alder-

sey  (1586)  45.
Pyrei,  people  of  Libya,  vi.  168.
Pj'riplegethon,  see  Albania.
Pyrites,  see  Flint.
Pyrrha,  on  sea  of  Azov,  vii.  161.

Quabacondono,  monarch  of  Japan
(1590)  XI.  422;  proclamation  by,
428 ;  and  Augustine  Eucunocam-
indono  (1591)  434;  and  the  Jesuits
in  Japan,  435.

Quacapotla  'a  mansion  of  Intla,'
IX.  467.

Quadrilla  de  Sierras,  la,  mentioned
in  second  Ruttier,  x.  324.

Quaherque  in  Darha,  vii.  89

Quambioindono,  Cainocami,  son  of,
XI.  425.

Quanchi  city,  in  China,  vi.  318.

Quansi,  see  Kwang-si.

366

INDEX

Quarez,  Agoniez,  wounded  at  the
taking- of Cevola (1540) ix.

153-

Quarles,  John,  Russian  Ucence
granted  to, iii. 109.

Quass,  see  Kvass.

Quatro  Cienegas,  las,  in  New  Bis-
cay, IX. 188.

Quebrada  fortified  (1587)  x, 151.

Quebraran,  Colonel,  suppositious
general  of  the  English  fleet  after
Sir  Francis  Drake's  death,  name
unknown  in  the  English  navy,  in-
vented by  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo,  X.  259.

Queeneland,  warfare  between
Queenes  and  Normans,  i.  14.

Queen  Elizabeth's  Cape,  in  Meta
Incognita, vii. 306; latitude of,

367-
Queen's Foreland, discovered by

Captain  Frobisher  (1576)  vii.  214,

233.  237,  279,  315,  328; flow  and

ebb near, 238; the Dennis lost

near  (1578)  336; discovered  to  be

an island, 339.
Queicheu,  see  Kwei-chou.
Quepyn Mountains, dwelling-place

of  Carapana,  x.  465.
Quequenich, Southam and Sparke

at  (1566)  III.  77.
Querini,  Giovanni  Antonio,  death  of

(1571) V. 123; at  the  defence  of

Famagusta, 133, 136; and  Mus-
tafa Pasha.  145.
Quernero, G'_Jf  of, John Locke  in

(1553)  V.  104.
Queros, captain  of  a  Spanish  ship,

wrecked  in  the  Strait  of  Magellan,

XI.  259.
Quesala, town in New Spain, ix.

471.
Quesida,  Don  Ximenes  de,  the  Ade-

lantado,  x.  497.
Quiacim,  shire  in  China,  vi,  320.
Quianci,  Quiansi,  see  Kiang-si.
Quibian, Cacique  of  Veragua, xii.

18.
Quicama,  the  Lord  of,  and  Captain

Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  313.
Quicheu  or  Cutchew,  see  Kweichou.
Quicin,  seventh  shire  of  China,  vi.

296; city  of,  318.
Quicksilver, from China, vi. 25 ;

loss  of,  to  the  King  of  Spain
(1592)  VII.  104;  sold  in  New  Spain
by  the  King  of  Spain  (1590)  x.
167.

Quicoma,  near  Cevola,  ix.  300.

Quiloacas,  nation  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier  for  river  Plate,  xi.  100.

Quincy,  Saer,  see  Winchester,  Earl
of.

Quiniones,  Alvaro  Flores  de,  ad-
miral of  the  Spanish  fleet  (1589)
VII.  69;  brought  to  Spain  (1590)
70.

Quinsay,  see  Hang-chow.

Quintal,  weight  of  Aleppo  and  Baby-
lon, VI.  10;  of  Goa,  17;  of  Cochin,
21.

Quintas,  or  fifth  part  of  the  mines
of  gold  and  silver  in  Mexico,  re-
ceived by  the  King  of  Spain,  ix.

375-

Qumte,  John,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Quintero  Bay,  latitude  of,  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  303,  306,
368 ;  English  sailors  killed  at,  306 ;
English  sailors  taken  prisoners  at
(1587)  308;  latitude  of,  349,  358;
from,  to  Coquimbo,  360 ;  anchor-
age, 372.

Quinzai,  see  Hang-chow.

Quinzay,  people  of,  on  the  borders
of  America,  vii. 165.

Quiola,  discovered  by  the  Portu-
guese,  viii. 128.

Quiparia,  town  of  the  Caribs,  xi.
8;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  pinnace
at,  9.

Quiquifs,  and  the  Giant  Arneoste,
III.  25.

Quires,  los,  Indian  province  on  the
Rio  del  Norte,  ix.  197;  latitude
of,  197;  Antonio  de  Espejo's  voy-
age towards  (1582)  203.

Quitangone,  the  Edward  Bonaven-
ture  at  (1591)  vi.  391,  x.  195.

Quito,  in  Peru,  viii.  125,  x.  174;
bark  from,  captured  by  John
Oxenham  (1575)  78;  near  the  Oia
river,  in  Peru,  362 ;  ship  from,
captured  by  John  Oxenham  (1575)
XI.  230.

Quiugin,  graduates  of  the  second
degree  in  China,  vi.  361.

367

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Quivira, Vasquez  de Coronado in,

VII.  170; in Western America,

VIII.  450;  voyages  to,  ix.  115;
Vasquez  de  Coronado  hears  of
(1540)  164;  latitude  of,  165;  Friar
John  de  Padilla  and  Friar  Francis
at  (1540)  166;  description  of  the
natives  and  wild  animals  from
Cicuic  to,  167.

Quoghliclan,  Anthony  Godard  and
his  men  at  (1568)  ix.  419.

Quosquino,  gate  in  Rhodes,  v.  49 ;
bulwark  of,  28 ; postern  of,  38.

Rabacapala,  Rajah  of  Java  (1580)
XI. 132.

Rabat  (Rabast),  Cape,  Jacques  Car-
tier  at  (1535)  viii. 213.

Rabbits,  in  Hochelaga  (1535)  viii.
244 ;  in  Virginia,  304,  368 ;  in
Florida,  451,  x.  59; in  Granada,

IX.  156;  strange,  in  Nova  Albion
(1578)327,  XI.  123;  in  New  Spain,
IX.  385 ; In  Guiana,  xi.  14.

Rabnet  of  Southampton,  the,  crew
of  (1584)  v.  281.

Race,  Cape,  in  Russia,  Stephen
Borough  at  (1557)  11.  365,  367.

Race,  Cape,  in  Newfoundland,  viii.
14,  162 ;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
fleet  ordered  to,  45  ;  geographical
situation  of,  56;  English  fleet
arrives  at,  62,  70  ;  fleet  leaves,  85  ;
returns  to,  92  ;  the  Bonaventure  at
(1591)  150;  the  Mangold  at  (1593)
158,  310;  the  Grace  at,  165;
description,  185;  Charles  Leigh
at  (1597)  165,  181 ;  Jacques  Car-
tier  at  (1536)  260.

Rachim,  see  Arakan.

Radcliffe,  Robert,  fifth  Earl  of  Sus-
sex (i569?-i629),  and  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596)  iv.  236,  250;
knighted  at  Cadiz,  259.

Radera  river,  in  Misena,  coloured
water  of, iv. 38,,  134.

Radevicus  Canonicus  Frisingensis,
I.  316.

Radulph,  keeper  of  Cyprus  for
Richard  I.  (1191)  iv.  331.

Rafe,  John,  and  the  voyage  to
Guinea  (1555)  vi. 162.

Raft,  John  Chilton  on  the  Rio  de  las
Palmas  in  a  (1572)  ix. 374.

Rafts  on  the  Tigris,  vi.  5 ;  cane-
made  or  Balsas,  ix,  257.

Ragaun  town,  xi.  335.

Ragevil,  Cardinal,  and  Sir  Jerome
Horsey  (1584)  iii. 345.

Ragged  Staff,  the,  ship  of  Andrew
Barker  in  his  voyage  to  Terra
Firma  (1576)  x.  82 ;  sunk  In  Vera-
gua,  85.

Ragine,  usurper  of  throne  of  his
father.  King  of  Colombo,  v.  399.

Ragonasco,  Charles,  of  Cremona,
captain,  Mustafa  Pasha  and(i57i)

V.  145 ; slain  at  Famagusta,  150.
Ragster,  Henry,  of  the  Maria  Mar-
tin (1584)  V.  281.

Ragusa,  tributary  to  the  Turks
(1553)  V.  79;  John  Locke  near
(1553)  103  ;  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
322,  323.

Rahab,  and  Joshua's  messengers,
viii. 102.

Rahemet,  Pasha  of,  and  the  Persian
wars  (c. 1583)  V. 453.

Raia,  King  of  Ceylon  (c.  1583)  v.
500.

Raiemores,  As  serras,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  77.

Raignaldus  (Reginald),  son  of  Sum-
erled,  King  of  Argyll,  i.  30 ;  battle
with  ^ngus,  33.

Raimond,  Captain,  of  the  Penelope,
voyage  of,  to  East  Indies  (1591),
written  by  Henry  May,  x.  194-
203  ; Portuguese  ship  captured  by

(1591) 194-

Raimund,  Friar,  his  sermons  to
Captain  Ulloa  and  his  crew  (1539)
IX.  252 ;  and  the  Indians  (1540)
264; christens  an  old  Indian,  265.

Rainbek,  and  the  English  ship,  11.
60.

Rainbow,  the,  of  the  Cadiz  expedi-
tion (1596)  IV. 247.

Rainbow,  the,  of  Queen  Elizabeth's
fleet,  Henry  Bellingham,  captain
of  (1587)  VI.  438;  at  Floras  (1590)
VIII.  421.

Rainford,  Thomas,  his  prizes  (15S6)

VI.  437-

Rainolds, see  Raynolds.

Rainolds, Richard, his voyage to

Senegal and Gambia (1591) vii.

90; entertains the negroes at

368

INDEX

Beseguiache, 92 ; Amar Melick

and,  98.
Rainolds,  William, of  the  Swallow

(1584)  V.  281.
Rains,  season  of,  in  New  Spain,  ix.

Raisins,  Corinth,  trade  in,  restricted
to  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  84,
86.

Rajahs  or  Kings  of  Java,  xi.  130,  132.

Raleana, see Orinoco river.

Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  lord  warden
(1552-1618)  I.  xxix. ;  and  the  Vir-
ginian colonies,  xxviii.  ;  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  217;  and  the
Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  236,  241;
head  of  a  squadron,  242,  247  ;  voy-
age to  the  Azores  by  the  ships  of

(1586)  VI.  434;  owner  of  the  Barfe
of  Lime  (1589)  vii.  6;  his  account
of  the  fight  of  the  Revenge  and  a
Spanish Armada (1591) 38-53;

1  fleet  prepared  by,  and  the  Spanish

I  ships  (1592)  105; Queen  Elizabeth

'  and, 106 ; tactics  of, 108 ; owner

of  the  bark  Raleigh  (1583)  viii.  46  ;
letters  patent  granted  by  Queen
Elizabeth  to  (1584)  289-296 ;  charges
of,  and  the  voyages  to  Virginia,
289,  346,  349 ;  account  of  the  Eng-
lish left  in  Virginia  by  Ralph
Lane,  sent  to  (1585-86)  320-345;
colonising  in  Chesapeak  Bay  in-
tended by,  391 ;  and  the  relief  ex-
pedition to  Virginia  (1590)  404;
Richard Hakluyt's dedication to

(1587)  439;  portrait  of,  ix.  iii. ;
and  the  English  settlers  sent  to
Roanoke  Island  (1586)  x.  132;
geographical  names  quoted  from,
207,  208 ;  expected  in  Trinidad  by
Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  209;
meeting  of,  with  Sir  Amyas  de
Preston  (1595)  225;  discovery  of
Guiana  by  (1595)  338-431;  letter
from,  to  Lord  Charles  Howard
and  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  338-343  ;  and
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)  340  ;
towns  taken  by,  in  Venezuela,
341 ;  to  the  reader,  343-348 ;  map
or  chart  of  Guiana  by  (1595)  365,
385 ;  engraving  of  chart  of,  387 ;
description  of  Amazon  women  by,
366;  his  knowledge  of  Guiana,  371 ;

his  expedition  for  the  discovery  of
Guiana,  378;  his  expedition  up
the  Capuri  river,  379 ;  old  Ciawani
Indian  as  pilot  of,  381 ;  sufferings
of  the  expedition,  385 ;  sufferings
relieved  by  the  old  Ciawani  In-
dian, 386;  Arawak  Indian,  pilot
to,  389 ;  kind  treatment  of  Indians
by  (1595)  391 ;  and  King  Topari-
maca,  393;  information  concern-
ing Guiana  given  to,  by  the  King
of  Aromaia  (1595)  398-399;  ex-
pedition of,  to  the  Caroli  river
(1595)  403,  409;  advice  of  Topi-
awari  to,  about  the  conquest  of
Guiana,  410;  Topiawari's  son
entrusted  to  (1595)  414;  takes
leave  of  Topiawari,  415 ;  and  of
his  captains  on  the  Cararoopana
(1595)  422;  dedication  of  the  ac-
count of  Laurence  Keymis's  voy-
age to  (1596)  441 ;  third  voyage  to
Guiana  by,  written  by  Thomas
Masham  (1596)  xi.  1-15 ;  and  the
French  (1597)  2 ;  the  Dorothy,
pinnace  of  (1586)  203;  Pedro  Sar-
miento  taken  by  the  barks  of
(1586)  273;  training  of,  xii.  25;
in  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  expedi-
tion (1578)  37;  and  Virginia  (1587)
41 ;  and  El  Dorado,  42 ;  on  the
wealth  of  Spain,  52  ;  '  History  of
the  World  '  by,  7 1 ;  character
of,  71 ;  in  El  Dorado  and
Guiana,  72 ;  '  Discovery  of  the
Large,  Rich  and  Beautiful  Em-
pire of  Guiana,'  by,  73;  and
Hakluyt,  73  ;  Virginian  patent  of,
and  the  Company  of  Merchants
(1588)  87.
Raleigh,  the  bark,  at  Flores  Island
(1591)  VI.  41;  vice-admiral's  ship
of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  expedi-
tion (1583)  VIII.  46;  illness  in,  47;
return  of,  47,  81 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  vice-admiral  in  (1583)  xii.

37-
Raleigh,  city  of,  in  Virginia  (1587)

VIII.  386.
Raleigh,  Mount,  discovered  by  John

Davys (1585) vii. 389, 420-433;

products  of,  390.
Ram,  feast  of  the,  Mahometan  feast, .

369

V.  354-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Rama,  King  Baldwin  besieged  at
(1102)  IV,  296;  Laurence  Alder-
sey  at,  description  of  (1581)  v.
20S  ;  John  Eldred  at  (c.  1587)  vi.  9.

Ramaragio,  usurper  of  the  throne  of
Bezeneger, v, 382.

Ramazaco,  Pascha  di,  Mahometan
feast,  V.  354.

Ramble, the, hill in Teneriffe, vi.

131-

Rame,  kingdom  of, v.  483.

Ramea,  Isles  of,  voyage  of  English
to  (1527)  VIII.  I  ;  discovery  of
(1591)  150;  Thomas  James'  letter
concerning  the  discovery  of,  155 ;
discovered  by  Jacques  Cartier
(1534)  156;  natives'  name  for,
157;  George  Drake's  voyage  to
(1593)  161 ;  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  167,  171 ;  description  of,
181,  182.

Rame  Head,  Cape,  English  fleet  at
(1589)  VII.  30;  Luke  Warde  at,  xi.
201.

Rames,  King  Baldwin  at  (1107)  iv.
302.

Ramires,  Alonso,  Peru  merchant,
builds  a  ship  to  go  back  to  Spain,
XI.  43.

Ramsey,  Isle  of  Man,  i.  30;  battle
of,  25  f. ,  (1164)  32;  Andrew  Leu-
cander,  third  abbot  of  the  abbey
of  (1020)  IV.  282.

Ramsie,  see  Ramsey.

Ramusio,  John  Baptista,  and  the
Arabian  Geography,  in.  412 ;
secretary  to  the  State  of  Venice
(1557)  458;  on  the  bridges  of
Hang-chow,  iv.  425  ;  voyages  of,
VII.  147,  149 ;  and  the  discovery  of
the  north-west  passage,  189 ;
quotations  from  the  voyages
gathered  by,  ix.  115,  207-278;
quotation  from  a  translation
of  Gonsalvo  de  Oviedo  by,  x.  4,
416.

Ramusius,  see  Ramusio.

Ranas  Island,  latitude  of,  x.  334,

Rancheria,  pearl  fishing  near.  Sir
John  Hawkins  at  (1565)  x.  37;
taken  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (1595)
234;  burnt  by  Sir  Francis  Drake,
235 ;  Spanish  village  at  Topia-
wari's  Port,  466.

Randacchi,  governor,  killed  at  the
defence of Famagusta (1571) v.

143-

Randal,  Captain,  of  the  Solomon  of
Weymouth  (1578)  vii.  322.

Randolph,  Thomas  (1523-1590),  am-
bassador, in  Russia,  i.  xlvi. ;  Eng-
lish ambassador  to  Russia  (1568)
III.  102,  (1567)  336;  his  arrival  at
Moscow,  105 ;  received  by  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  106,  107 ;  and
the  privileges  (1569)  108,  118;  and
the  voyage  of  discovery  (1588)  119;
and  the  Emperor  of  Russia  (1572)

174. 177-

Range  of  Dartmouth,  the  Solomon
damaged  at  (1596)  xi.  44.

Rangifa,  Francisco  Gomez,  Spanish
merchants'  factor  in  Aguatulco
(1570)  IX.  365.

Rangiferi,  see  Reindeer.

Ransoms,  of  Richard  I.  (1193)  iv.
337 ;  Hubert  Walter,  bishop  of
Salisbury,  and  the  (1218)  347;  of
William  Bats,  and  Nicholas  Day,
prisoners  at  Cape  Verde  (1567)  vi.
273;  of  Atabalipa  (1533)  viii.  125;
of  Cartagena  (1586)  x,  125;  of
Cumana,  217;  of  S.  lago  de  Leon
refused  by  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston
(1595)  221;  of  Riohacha  (1595)
234. 235,

Ranulphus  Cestrensis,  on  Edgar's
navy,  i. 19.

Raonoak,  see  Roanoke.

Rapamat,  in  Turkey,  English  am-
bassador's house  at,  v.  263,  275,
VI.  96.

Raparo  Island^  in  the  haven  of
Biaza,  xi.  96.

Raquelle.  Isle  of,  latitude  of,  viii.
278.

Rasalgate,  Cape,  and  the  monsoons,
VI.  29,  30.

Rastall,  voyage  of,  in  the  Trinity
(1536)  VIII. 3; return  of,  7.

Rastwold,  Anthony,  pilgrim  (1553)
V.  77.

Rasus  Isle,  see  R^.

Ratcliffe,  Anthony,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi. 88.

Ratcliffe,  John,  letter-bearer  of
Henry  VIII. (1531)  v. 66.

Ratcliffe, Willoughby's departure

370

INDEX

from,  II.  217,  244;  Stephen
Borough's  departure  from,  322;
Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.  303;  the
Richard  of  Arundel  leaves (1588)

VI.  450,  (1590)  461;  Martin  Fro-
bisher  sails  from  (1576)  vii.  204;
the  Sunshine  at  (1586)  413.

Rates,  book  of  (1580)  iii.  273;  table
of,  or  Aranzel  kept  in  the  Con-
tractation  house  at  Seville  (1586)
XI. 457.

Ratire, French ships at (1588) vi.

451-
Ratisbon,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

326.
Ratliffe,  see  Ratcliffe.
Rats  found  in  Hochelaga  (1535)  viii.

244; as food near Hochelaga,

229.
Ratta, La, ship of  Venice, lost  at

sea  (1588)  IV.  230.
Raunce,  James,  master  of  the Wil-
liam and  John  (1567)  ix.  398.
Ravens, uses of, in New Spain

(1572)  IX.  393.
Ravenser, ships from, in Edward

ni.'s  fleet, I.  298.
Ravillon,  Monsieur  de  La  Court  Pr6,

discovery of Ramea made for

(1591)  VIII.  150.
Rawlings,  Robert,  Murad  Khan  and

(1584)  V.  277.
Raymond, Captain, prize  of  (1589)

VII.  30.

Raymond,  George,  and  the  voyage
to  the  East  Indies  (1591)  vi.  387-
407 ;  captures  a  Portuguese  cara-
vel, 388,  390.

Raymund,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  310;  his  men  left  at  Croatan,
316.

Raynolds,  the  bark,  Grand  Master
of  Malta  and  (1582)  v.  215.

Raz,  see  Race.

Razo,  see  Race.

R6,  Isle  of  (Rasus),  viii.  281.

Rea,  Francis  de,  and  John  Newbery
in  Goa  (1583)  v.  460.

Read,  Peter,  epitaph  of  (1566)  v.
69.

Reade,  John,  in  John  Chidley's  voy-
age, return  of  (1590)  xi.  384.

Rebellion  in  Angola,  against  Spain

(1590)  VI,  468;  in  the  French  Fort
against  Captain  Laudonniere
(1565)  X.  54;  execution  of  rebels,
55 ;  feared  by  Spain  in  the  West
Indies  (1587) 152.

Rebuiam  Island,  latitude  of,  ix.  329.

Recola,  altitude  of,  iii.  247.

Recon,  see  Arakan.

Reculver.  i.  48.

Recusants,  Catholic,  at  the  time  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  208.

Red  Cross  river,  described  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  381.

Red  Dragon,  the,  flagship,  Robert
Withrington,  captain  of  (1586)  xi.
202.

Redemptionaries,  members  of  the
Society  of  Adventurers  for  the
Western  Planting,  viii. 117.

Reden,  garrisoned  castle,  of  the
Dutch  knights,  11.  2.

Redewish,  Albert,  and  the  Newcastle
customs,  II. 79.

Reding,  Edward,  carpenter,  leaves
Astrakhan  (1581)  iii.  245.

Red  Lion  of  London,  the,  and  John
Davys's  fleet  (1587)  vii.  414.

Redondo,  Cabo,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  XI.  86.

Redondo  Island,  Spanish  possession
(1564)  IX.  5 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1595)  X.  229.

Redondo, Monte, near Mina, vi.

452-
Redriff, near  London, Job Hortop,
powder-maker, at (c. 1568) ix.
445  ; Job  Hortop 's  return  to  (1590)

465-
Red  Rose, the,  or  Golden  Dragon,

at  Peniche  (1591)  vii.  57.
Red  Sea,  y.  347,  359.
Refinado,  inferior  sort  of  sugar,  vi.

128.
Refiner's  basket  and  tools  found  by

Sir Walter Raleigh in Guiana

(159s)  x.  389.
Refiners  in  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's

expedition  (1583)  viii. 47.
Refisca Viejo, near Beseguiache,

products of, vii. 90; French

traders  in,  91 ; Richard  Rainolds

at  (1591-92)  93.
Reginald,  bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man

(1217-1226)  I.  34,  35.

371

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Reginald,  son  of  Olaf,  King-  of
Man,  I.  30,  39; death  (1249)  39.

Reginald,  son  of  Harald,  i.  30  f.

Reginald,  brother  of  Godred,  King
of  Man,  I.  32.

Reginald,  son  of  Godred,  succeeds
him,  I.  33,  34.

Reginald,  son  of  Eacmarcat,  in-
vades Man,  I.  33

Register  on  Spanish  ships,  xi.  445.

Regnaldus,  see  Reginald.

Regulations  for  Spanish  ships,  xi.
442-448.

Reichenbach,  Henry  Austell  at
(1585)  V.  327.

Reignolds,  see  Reynolds.

Reindeer,  brought  from  Russia  by
Sir  Jerome  Bowes  (1583)  iii.  328;
Munster's  description  of,  in  Ice-
land, IV.  80.  136.

Reinholdus,  bishop  of  Schalholt,  in
Iceland,  iv. 11,  99.

Reis,  Portuguese  money,  vi.  152 ;
in  Goa, 19; in  Malacca,  22.

Relfe.  Richard,  agent  for  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1580)  ill.  230;
leaves  the  Armenian  village,  238 ;
left  at  Astrakhan,  245.

Relics,  holy,  in  Rhodes  (1522)  v.
46.

Religion.  Cabot's  advice  about,  11.
202  ;  Russian,  346 ;  of  Persia,  iii.  36,
151,  159,  160,  163,  VI.  hi;  of  Tar-
tars, III.  394;  of  Samoyedes,  402;
of  the  Icelanders,  summary  of  the,

IV.  49-51,  146-148;  of  the  Malabar
people,  413;  in  Pegu,  preach-
ing  chief religious ceremony of,

V.  494 ;  of  the  Chinese,  vi.
304,  371 ;  of  the  King  of  China,
369 ;  tyranny  of  Spain  on  matters
of  (1591)  VII.  52 ;  of  natives  in
Virginia  (1586)  viii.  376  f.  ;  of
natives  of  Florida,  438,  453 ;  of
Indians,  described  by  Friar  Marco
de  Niga.  ix.  117;  of  the  Ingas,  by
Pedro  de  Cieza,  x.  424;  of  Ter-
nate,  xi.  128.

Reliques,  see  Relics.

'  Remembrances for a Factor at

Constantinople,'  by  Richard  Hak-

luyt  the  Elder,  xii.  88.
Remiel  or  Molasses,  inferior  sort  of

sugar,  VI. 128.

Remington,  Sir  Robert,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Renapoaks,  general  name  of  the
tribes  of  Virginia  (1585)  viii.  334.

Rendes,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  318.

Rendsburg,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
v._  327.

Reniger,  Robert,  voyage  of,  to
Brazil  (1540)  xi.  25.

Rennedeer,  see  Reindeer.

Rensperg, see Rendsburg.

Repose,  Stephen,  and  Edward  Fen-
ton  at  S.  Vincent  (1583)  xi. 191,

193-

Repouso,  Ilha  de,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier, XI.  82.

Requitria,  found  in  Arabia  Felix,  vi.

25-

Rescaseo,  El  Cabo  de.  Captain
Gualle  at  (1584)  ix. 331.

Resende,  Garcia  de,  '  Life  of  Don
John  II.,  King  of  Portugal,'  by
(1481)  IV.  369,  VI. 123.

Resil  castle,  garrisoned  by  the  Dutch
knights,  II.  2,

Restitution  to  English  merchants
trading  in  Russia,  il.  302  f.

Retanzas.  landing  of  the  English  at
(1589)  VI.  485.

Retors  of  Martaban  and  Caesar
Frederick  (c. 1583)  v.  416.

Retsbon,  see  Ratisbon.

Reuss,  Henry,  twenty-ninth  master
of  the  Dutch  knights,  11. 10.

Revato,  Cacique,  and  Domingo  da
Vera  (1593)  x.  437.

Revel  and  the  Russian  privileges,  il.
276,  278,  386,  404;  cloth  made  in,
383 ; taken  by  Russia,  in. 100.

Revenge,  the,  fight  of,  and  the
Spanish  fleet  (1591)  vii.  38-
53,  XII.  68;  the  San  Philip
and,  VII.  42 ;  boarded  by  four
Spanish  ships,  43 ;  Sir  Richard
Grenville's  orders  to  sink  the,
45 ;  the  captain  and  master
of,  willing  to  surrender,  46;  at
Corvo  Island  (1591)  80;  wrecked
in  a  storm,  84.

Revenues,  of  the  Grand  Signior,  vi.
68; of  the  King  of  China,  319.

Rey,  see  Rcis.

Rey,  Cape  de,  see  Reyes  Point.

372

INDEX

Reyes  Point,  the  Bonaventure  at
(1591)  VIII.  150;  the  Grace  at
(1594)  163, 165.

Reyes  Magos,  Rio  dos,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  81.

Reykians, see  Reykjanas.

Reykjanas  Promontory,  in  Iceland,
IV.  22, 113.

Reyne,  John,  steward  on  the  Bona
Confidentia  (1553)  n.  214.

Reynolds,  Humphrey,  captain  of  the
Garland,  at  the  fight  of  Pinos
(1596)  X.  262.

Reynoso,  his  attempt  to  discover
Guiana,  x.  498.

Reys  Hamed  Bencasamp,  ambassa-
dor from  Morocco  to  Portugal
(1589)  VI.  511.

Rezan,  deserted  town  in  Russia,  11.
449.

Rezan  province,  see  Ryazan.

Rha,  see  Volga.

Rhaponticum,  found  in  Persia  and
Pugia,  VI.  26,

Rhapsii,  people  of  Ethiopia,  vi.  170.

Rhesus,  father  of  Meredith  (c.  1447)
VII. 135-

Rhiphei Mountains, see Riphean.

Rhodanus,  see  Rhone.

Rhodes,  Island  of,  knights  of  St.
John  and,  11.  6;  in  Thome's  map,
171 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  iii.
195 ; claimed  by  Solyman,  v. 13.

Rhodes,  city  of,  besieged  by  Sultan
Solyman  (1522)  v.  1-60;  bulwark
of  Auvergne  in,  v.  3,  7,  26,  27,  30;
bulwark  of  England  at,  23,  24-29,
31,  34;  bulwark  of  Italy  at,  23-40;
bulwark  of  Provence,  23,  24,  28,
3O)  3I)  39;  bulwark  of  Spain
at,  V.  23,  26,  31,  41,  42;  taken
by  the  Turks  (1522)  122;
commandment  to  the  Beys  and
Cadies  of  (1584)  v.  290;  storax
calamita  and  liquida  found  in,  vi.
25;  Richard  Wrag  at  (1593)  95;
remains  of  Christian  possession  in
^1594)  107.
Rhone,  river,  in.  411,  iv.  321.
Rhubarb, found in Persia and

China,  vi.  27.
Rhymnus,  see  Ural.
Rialeio,  in  Teneriffe,  description  of,
VI. 130, 131.

Riall,  Amos,  and  the  Cossacks  (1573)
III.  155  ;  at  Moscow,  157 ;  and  the
letters  for  England,  220 ;  and  the
Pavoses,  239;  at  Astrakhan,  241,
244,  245.  . , ,

Ribadeo,  biscuit  baking  in,  for  the
Spanish  fleet  (1589)  vi.  485.

Ribas,  Gonsalvo  de,  pilot  of  the
Lewis (1587) XI. 311.

Ribault,  Captain  James,  and  Cap-
tain Laudonniere  agree  to  return
to  France  (1565)  ix.  97.

Ribault,  Captain  John,  first  voyage
of,  to  Florida  (1562)  viii.  457;  and
the  King  of  Florida,  458;  his  ad-
dress to  his  crew,  468 ;  Charles-
Fort  built  by,  471 ;  return  of,  to
France,  474;  promises  of,  to  his
men  left  in  Florida  (1562)  ix.  i ;
pillar  of  stones  erected  by,  in
Florida,  7;  third  voyage  to  Flor-
ida (1565)  82;  his  meeting  with
Captain  Laudonniere,  84 ;  and  the
pursuit  of  the  Spanish  ships  in
Florida  (1565)  90;  killed  by  the
Indians  of  Florida  (1565)  100;
ministers  in  his  voyages  to  Flor-
ida,  XII. 32.

Ribazuba,  or  fish  tooth,  as  ornament
in  Russia,  iii.  368.

Ribbe,  Roger,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Ribera,  Diego  de,  lieutenant  of
Diego  Flores  de  Valdes,  xi.  270;
lands  Pedro  Sarmiento  in  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  xi.  271.

Ribero,  Bernardin,  admiral  of  the
Portuguese  fleet  (1589)  vii.  76.

Ricalde,  John  Martines  de,  admiral

of  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  200,  203;

opinion  of,  on  Philip's  orders,  212 ;

death  of,  231.

Ricards,  Jane,  widow  of  Dr.  Bome-

lius,  III.  324.
Rice,  not  allowed  to  be  taken  out  of
Egypt  (1584)  V.  273 ;  in  China,  vi.
357 ;  Moluccan  way  of  boiling,  xi.
131;  found  at  Sierra  Leone  by
Edward  Fenton  (1582)  xi.  175.
Rich, Sir Edmund, knighted at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.
Richard I. of England, and
the Cinque Ports' privileges,
I. 50 ; and his charter, 294 ;

373

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

his  voyage  to  Asia  (1177-1193)
IV.  319-335;  Philip,,  King  of
France,  and,  319;  his  oath  of
fidelity  to  the  King  of  France,
320;  discipline  on  his  ships,  320;
in  Sicily,  321-327;  marriage  of,
with  Berengaria  of  Navarre,  327,
330  ;  and  the  Emperor  of  the  Gryf-
fons,  328 ;  conquers  Cyprus,  330 ;
Acre  surrenders  to,  and  Philip  of
France,  331 ;  terms  of  surrender
of  Acre,  332  ;  division  of  the  spoils
by,  and  Philip,  333  ;  and  the  Sara-
cen captives,  334;  conquers  Syria,
335;  imprisoned  at  Synaca  (1193)
335;  ransom  of  (1193)  337;  epi-
taphs of,  338,  339 ;  Baldwin,  arch-
bishop of  Canterbury,  follows
(1190)  339-341;  Sir  Frederick  Til-
ney  knighted  by,  at  Acre,  342 ;
Hubert  Walter,  bishop  of  Salis-
bury, and,  346;  and  Cyprus,  v.
97;  his  conquest  of  Cyprus  (1192)
125.
Richard  II.  of  England,  and  Prus-
sia, I.  xlix.  ;  and  Prussia,  11.  12  ;
and  Conrad  of  Jungingen,  11.
25 ; and the Genoese (1390) iv.

.450-
Richard, master's boy in Spanish

ship,  IX.  460.

Richard,  surgeon  of  the  Muscovy
Company,  iii. 245.

Richard  of  Bristol,  of  Andrew
Barker's  company,  killed  at  San
Francisco  Island  (1576)  x.  86.

Richard,  surnamed  Canonicus,
travels  of  (1200)  iv.  343.

Richard,  the,  and  the  Spanish  ships
(1590)  vii. 31.

Richard,  the,  storeship  of  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x. 229.

Richard  of  Arundel,  the,  first  voyage
of,  to  Benin  (1588)  vi.  450-458,
458-461  ;  second  voyage  of,  to
Benin  (1590)  461-467.

Richtenberg,  Henry  a,  thirtieth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights, 11.

TO.

Rickman, Robert, master of the

Tiger  {1586)  vi. 35.
Rickman, Thomas, master of the

Tiger of London, and Laurence

Aldersey  (1586)  vi.  43.

Rider,  Edward,  mariner  in  a  Span-
ish ship,  IX.  460.

Rider,  John,  condemned  to  the  gal-
leys by  the  Inquisition  in  Mexica
.(i575)'ix.  428.

Ridley, voyage of, in the Trinity

(1536) VIII. 3.

Ridley,  Francis,  musician  of  the
Sunshine  of  London  (1585)  vii.
382.

Ridolfi,  plot  of,  in  London,  xii.  51.

Rie,  England,  see  Rye.

Rie,  Russia,  see  Riga.

Rifoles,  ship  of,  cast  away  on  the
coast  of  Petiguar  (1597)  xi.  67.

Riga,  in  Russia,  11.  49,  386,  404;  vic-
tory of  the  Dutch  knights  over  in-
fidels at,  6 ;  and  the  Russian
privileges,  276,  278;  cloth  made
in,  383;  seat  of  Justice  of  the
King  of  Poland,  487;  Vobsky  to,
III.  69 ;  taken  by  Russia,  100 ;  Sir
Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)  iii.  345.

Rights,  Border,  between  Russians
and  Tartars,  iii.  390.

Rigweys,  Robert,  ship-master,  and
Prussian  pirates,  n,  64.

Rij,  see  Riga.

Rimarus,  Henry,  Hanse  messenger,
II.  59.

Rinconado,  near  Vera  Cruz,  ix.  355.

Rio  de  Janeiro,  on  the  Brazil  coasts
latitude  of,  x.  92 ;  French  war-
ships in  the  (1581)  xi.  35;  trade
of,  with  the  river  Plate  (1596)  39 ;
description  of,  in  the  Ruttier,  82  ;
Spanish  fleet  at,  93,  183,  267;  de-
scription of,  250 ;  Pedro  Sarmi-
ento  at,  272 ;  Thomas  Cavendish
at  (1586)  295.

Rio  de  la  Hacha,  see  Riohacha.

Rio  Grande,  negro  trade  in  (1591)
VII. 98.

Riohacha,  pearls  found  in,  Hawkins'"
trade  in  (1568)  ix.  401;  the  Angel
and  the  Judith  at,  and  the  Jesus
of  Lubeck  at  (1568)  449;  taken  by
Sir  John  Hawkins  (1568)  449,  x.
66;  Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1565)
37;  treasurer  of,  and  Sir  John
Hawkins,  38 ;  fight  at,  between
the  Spaniards  and  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1565)  39;  taken  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  and  Hawkins  (1595)^

374

INDEX

233,  234,  xii.  49;  burnt,  x,  235,
XII.  66;  province  of,  despoiled  by
Agira, xi. 363 ; pearl trade at,

237-
Rio,  Rodrigo  del,  governor  of  New

Biscay, and the conquest of

Cevola  (1590)  IX.  205.
RIos,  Pedro  de  los,  secretary  of  the

Inquisition in Mexico (1574) ix.

424-

Riosogo,  governor  of,  soldiers  of,
XI.  426.

Riphean  mountains,  11.  253,  iii.  411.

Rippen,  Thomas,  and  the  captain  of
a  negro  tov/n  in  Guinea  (1557)  vi.
224.

Risophagi,  people  of  East  Africa,  vi.
169.

Ritimo,  captain  of  Cawo,  and  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1597)  xi.  6.

Rively,  George,  burnt  by  the  In-
quisition in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428.

Rivera,  Don  Pedro  de,  detained  by
Sir  John  Hawkins  on  his  ship
(1568)  IX. 402.

Rivers,  John,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  iii. 109.

Rivers,  John,  captain  of  the  Van-
tage (1585)  X.  98.

Rivers,  farmed  out  in  Russia,  iii.
206;  frozen,  in  Russia,  361;  of
Russia,  405-412  ;  frozen  in  winter
near  Pekin,  in  China,  vi.  323 ;
inhabited,  in  China,  352 ;  use  of,
in  colonizing,  by  Richard  Hak-
luyt,  vii.  246;  deep,  in  Florida,
VIII.  430;  forty,  in  Guiana,
navigable  for  merchants,  x.  480;
great  number  of,  in  Peru,  xi.  281.

Roan,  see  Roanne.

Roan,  see  Rouen.

Roanne,  Captain  Gourgues  hiding
at  (1570)  IX. III.

Roanoac,  see  Roanoke.

Roanoke  Island,  in  Virginia,  viii.
304;  description,  309;  Wingina
at,  315;  English  at  (1585)  321,
331;  conspiracy  against  Ralph
Lane  in,  340;  Englishmen  left  in,
by  Sir  Richard  Grenville  (1586)
348 ;  John  White  and  the  English-
men left  in  (1587)  391 ;  fate  of  the
Englishmen  left  at,  394;  Manteo,
Lord  of  (1587)  397; John  White's

departure  from,  399 ;  John  White
at  (1590)  414  f. ;  English  settlers
of,  gone  to  Croatan  Island,  417;
English  settlers  at,  sent  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1586)  x.  132 ;
taken  possession  of,  in  Queen
Elizabeth's  name,  by  Amadas  and
Barlow,  xii.  39.

Robert,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
see  Winchelsea.

Robert,  archdeacon  of  East  Riding,
witness  of  Edward  I.'s  great  char-
ter, I.  296.

Robert  Curtois,  son  of  William  the
Conqueror,  his  voyage  to  Jeru-
salem (1096)  IV.  293.

Robert,  son  of  Godwin,  his  voyage
to  Jerusalem  (1102)  iv.  295.

Robert  de  Bruce,  eighth  King  of
Scotland  (i  274-1329),  siege  of
Rushen  by  (13 13)  i.  41.

Robert  de  Ketene,  voyages  and
learning  of  (1143)  iv.  308.

Robert,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Roberts,  captain  of  the  Exchange,
and  William  King  (1592)  x.  193.

Roberts,  Henry,  amlaassador  to  Mor-
occo (1585-1589)  VI.  426;  his  re-
ception of  the  English  and  foreign
merchants  near  the  Tensist,  426 ;
his  return  to  England  (1588)  427;
and  the  edict  of  MuUy  Hamed,
428  f.

Roberts,  Henry,  of  Bristol,  captain
of  the  Christopher  of  Dartmouth,
imprisoned  in  Teneriffe  (1574)  x.
82  ;  liberated,  83  ;  at  the  taking  of
Puerto  Santo  Island  (1595)  214;
at  the  taking  of  S.  lago  de  Leon
(159s)  218,  220.

Roberts,  Humphrey,  his  escape  from
the  Contractation  House  and  re-
capture (1570)  IX.  463;  condemned
to  the  galleys,  464.

Roberval,  John  Francis  de  la  Roche,
I^ord  de,  viii.  266 ;  governor  of
Canada  (1540)  263 ;  his  voyage
delayed,  264;  Xanctoigne,  chief
pilot  of  (1542)  275;  voyages  of,
283-287,  288-289  >  discoveries  of,
XII.  9.

Robines,  Robert,  ship  master,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  64.

375

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Robins,  John,  pilot  of  the  Philip  and
Mary  (1555)  11.  286;  master  of  the
Trinity  (1557)  380.

Robinson,  Francis,  Russian  license
granted  to  (1569)  iii.  109.

Robinson,  John,  quartermaster  of
the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)
II.  213.

Robinson,  John,  mariner  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
214.

Robinson,  Moses,  of  the  Maria
Martin  (1584)  v.  381.

Roble,  see  Rouble.

Robles,  Doctor  Alcalde  de  Corte,
sent  to  Acapulco  (1580)  ix.  433.

Robles,  Don  Pedro  de,  sent  to
Aguatulco  to  fight  the  English
(1580)  IX.  433.

Rohucke,  see  Roebuck.

Robyns,  Philip,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 318.

Roca  Partida,  course  from,  to  S.
Juan  d'Ulloa,  x.  322.

Roche,  La,  see  Roberval.

Roche  Ferriere,  La,  see  La  Roche
Ferriere.

Roche,  Philip,  master  of  the  Ragged
Staff  (1576)  X.  83; death  of,  87.

Rochelle,  La,  iii.  210;  wine  of,  11.
1 17 ;  .Spanish  ships  on  the  coast
of  (1588)  IV.  230;  salt  factory  at,
VIII.  Ill;  ships  from,  Charles
Leigh  and  (1597)  174;  meridian
of,  compared  to  that  of  New
France,  281 ;  Roberval's  depar-
ture from  (1542)  283;  Captain
Gourgues  returns  to  (1568)  ix.
no;  captain  from,  after  the  siege
of  Pernambuco  (1595)  xi.  53;  pro-
posed fleet  from  (1597)  67.

Rochester  Assizes,  xii.  86.

Rock,  the,  of  Lisbon,  English
fleet  sent  to  (1591)  vii.  56;  Sir
John  Burrough  at  the  (1592)  108;
latitude  of,  X.  335 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  in  sight  of  (1595)  348.

Rockweed,  along  the  shore  of
Benin, vi. 456.

Rocquemado,  Our  Lady  of,  Jacques
Cartier's  vow  to  (1535)  viii. 247.
Rode, Albertus, consul of  Thoren,
compensation for  loss  of  life  de-
manded by,  II. 59.

37

Roderigo,  Nicholas,  taken  prisoner
by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)  xi.
327 ;  his  account  of  Thomas  de
Ersola's  treason  (1587)  331.

Rodmena, Henry  Austell  at (1585)

V.  325-

Rodondo,  Monte,  near  Perak,  in
Guinea,  vi.  161.

Rodorigues,  Friar  John,  and  Qua-
bacondono  (1591)  xi. 435.

Rodwan,  Alcayde,  and  Edmund
Hogan  (1577)  VI.  291.

Roe,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6.

Roe,  the,  Peter  Baker's  bark,  v.
190.

Roe,  the,  Hawes,  captain  of  (1586)
XI.  203.

Roebarge,  the,  French  ship,  at  Mina
(1557) VI. 217.

Roebuck,  the,  Sir  John  Burrough  in
(1592)  VII.  108;  and  the  Madre  de
Dios, 1 13.

Roebuck,  the,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  310.

Roebuck,  the,  Thomas  Cavendish's
ship  (1591)  XI.  389,  397;  distress
of,  391.  _

Rogarin,  in  Russia,  11.  420.

Roger  of  the  Dead  Sea,  witness  of
Edward  L's  great  charter,  i.  296.

Roger,  called  Malus  Catulus,  vice-
chancellor  of  Richard  L  (1191)  iv.
328.

Roger,  armourer  of  the  Jesus,  con-
demned to  the  galleys  by  the  In-
quisition in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428.

Rogers,  Hugh,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Rogers, Simon, unlicensed  English
merchant  in  Russia  (1591)  m.  426;
and  William  Turnbull,  426,  435.
Roges,  Otho  of,  at  Jaffa  (1102)  iv.

299.
Rogne,  or  Rognoso  Bay,  the  Mari-
gold at  (1593)  VIII. 158; Charles
Leigh  at  (1597)  166; Jacques  Car-
tier  at,  260.
Rogneuse  or  Reguiso,  see  Rogne.
Rogneux, rendezvous  of Sir Hum-
phrey Gilbert's fleet (1583) viii.

45-
Rognolfwaht,  King  Olaf  at,  i.  36  f. ;
Alexander,  King  of  Scots  at,  41.

6

INDEX

Roial,  see  Royal.

Roiall,  Mount,  see  Montreal.

Roials  of  plate,  see  Royals.

Roidas,  x.  408.

Roieze,  in  Francis  de  Roberval's
voyage  (1542)  viii.  283;  lieutenant
of  the  fort,  288.

Romadan  Pasha,  King  of  Tripolis
(1583)  V.  264,  274;  and  the  Eng-
lish' ships  (1584)  281;  Murad
Khan  to  (1584)  314;  William  Har-
borne  to  (1585) 316.

Romagers,  regulations  for  Spanish,
XI. 443.

Romano,  Cayo,  marks  of,  described
in  the  Ruttier,  x.  304,  305,  329.

Romanowich,  Mekita,  Russian
councillor  (1583)  iii.  317,  336;  Sir
Jerome  Bowes  imprisoned  by,
326.  483 ;  and  Sir  Jerome  Bowes,
467!

Romany,  see  Roumania.

Rome,  John  de  Piano  Carpini's  re-
turn to,  I.  94;  Canute's  journey
to,  313;  bishop  of,  II.  10;  death
of  Empress  Helena  at  (337)  iv.
272;  Ingulf  at  (1064)  292  ;  Prince
Edward  at,  received  by  the  Pope
(1270)  366;  John  Foxe  at,  v.  164;
bishop  of,  and  John  Foxe  (1577)
166 ;  colonizing  by,  results  of,  viii.
447 ;  sack  of,  Don  Pedro  de  Val-
divia  at  the,  xi.  277.

Romeguas,  commander  of  the  army
of  Malta,  and  the  liberation  of
Captain  Gourgues,  ix. 11 1.

Romenal,  see  Romney,  New.

Romesal  Sound,  Arthur  Pet  at
(1580)  III.  300.

Romney,  New,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  48,  297.

Romney,  Old,  i.  48.

Roncador,  latitude  of,  x.  335.

Rone,  see  Rouen.

Roos,  William,  Lord  de,  and  Jun-
gingen's  ambassadors,  11.  27  f.,
36,  38.

Roots,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.
364; in  Florida,  451 ;  used  as  food
by  Amazon  Indians,  xi.  20.
Ropehouse, English, at Vologda

(1569)  m.  113- .
Ropemakers, English, in Russia
(1557)  II.  381.

XII  377

Ropes  made  of  palm  tree  bark,  v.

379.  470-  „ .

Roponowini,  see  Parime  lake.

Roquette, La,  see  La  Roquette.

Rorebek,  ship  master,  and  Prussian
pirates, 11.  62.

'  Rosalynd,'  by  Thomas  Lodge,  xii.
108.

Rosar,  Laurence  Chapman  at  (1568)
III.  141.

Rosdnoska,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  325.

Rose,  Christopher,  merchant,  in
Russia,  II. 407.

Rose,  the,  of  Danzig,  Nicholas
Masse,  master  of  (1577)  vi.  231;
and  the  English  ships,  233.

Rose  Island  in  S.  Nicholas  Bay,  in.
72,  73;  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,
170;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  at  (1583)
316; Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at,  346.

Roserade,  or  high  constable,  in
Russia,  in.  381.

Rosetta,  near  Alexandria,  v.  330,
332,  333 ; the  Nile  at,  vi.  36,  44.

Rosin,  product  of  Cyprus,  v.  125;
found  in  Virginia,  viii.  354.

Ross  Bay,  salt  at  (1587)  viii.  387.

Rosse,  Robert,  quartermaster  on  the
Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  212.

Rossetto,  see  Rosetta.

Rosso,  Castle,  Richard  Wrag  at
(1593)  VI.  94-

Rost,  Isles  of,  Willoughby  and,  ll.
219,  246;  situation  of,  345;  An-
thony Jenkinson's  fleet  at,  415.

Rostock,  Octher's  probable  discov-
ery of,  I.  14 ;  compensation  de-
manded by  England  from,  11.  36,
60-71 ;  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)
III.  345 ;  William  Harborne  at
(1588)  VI.  58;  soldiers  of,  11.  68;
hulk  of,  with  Spanish  goods,  cap-
tured (1589)  VI.  510.

Rostok,  see  Rostock.

Rostorke,  see  Rostock.

Rostov  city,  11.  420,  426;  from  S.
Nicholas  Bay  to,  in.  68.

Rostov, province of Russia, ill.

358.

Roterodam,  see  Rotterdam.

Rotilo,  weight  of  Bussorah,  vi.  13 ;
of  Ormuz,  14;  of  Goa,  17;  of
Cochin,  21; of  Malacca,  21.

2B

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Rotta, Spanish ships escaped to

(158S)  IV.  254.
Rottenbury, Thomas, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  318.

Rotterdam,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)

V,  328.

Rouble,  silver  Russian  coin,  11.  274;

English  rate  of,  391.
Roue or  Erubi, weight  of  Aleppo,

VI.  10; of Ormuz, 14; of  Goa,
18; of  Malacca,  21.

Rouen,  loss  of,  11.  138 ;  ship  of,  at
naval  fight  in  Guinea  (1557)  vi.
223,  (1577)  241 ;  Stephen  Bel-
linger of,  and  Richard  Hakluyt,
XII.  76.

Roufifi,  soldier  left  in  Florida  at  the
first  voyage  of  the  French  (1562)

IX.  53-  '

Rougemont,  Philip,  of  Amboise,
death  of  (1535)  viii.  247.

Roumania  (Walachia),  i.  231,  269,
279  ;  wheat  brought  to  Rhodes  from
Naples  (1522)  V.  8;  William  Har-
borne's  journey  through  (1578)
169;  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  328;
honey  found  in,  vi.  27;  the
Great,  William  Harborne  In  (1588)
58 ;  Beglerbeg  of,  at  the  siege  of
Rhodes  (1522)  v.  23;  Michael,
prince  of,  and  the  bearers  of  the
Sultana's  letter  to  Queen  Eliza-
beth (1593)  VI.  102.

Roundal,  Laurence,  master  of  the
John  Evangelist  (1557)  11.  380.

Round  Islands,  the,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  215.

Rouse,  Abraham,  survivor  of  the
Toby  (1593)  viT. 129.

Rovigno,  In  Istria,  John  Locke  at
(1553)  V.  77,  104;  Henry  Austell
at  (1585)  322.

Row, John, of Saltash, his prizes

(1586)  VI.  437.

Rowed,  Richard,  English  agent
(1584)  V.  275.

Rowit,  Richard,  merchant,  on  the
Merchant  Royal  (1586)  vi,  52;  and
Don  Pedro  de  Leiva,  53.

Rowley,  William,  agent  to  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1566)  III.  80,  183;
licence  granted  to,  93 ;  witness  of
the  privileges,  97;  In  the  Moscow
fire, 170.

Rowli,  chief  Talapoyn  in  Pegu,  v.

493-

Rowlle,  Francis,  Hassan  Aga,  son
of  (1584)  V.  282.

Rox,  agent  for  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, III.  183.

Roxellani  or  Russians,  iii.  357.

Roxo  Bay,  Ralph  Lane  at  (1585)
VIII.  313.

Roxo,  Cape,  in  Africa,  discovered  by
Alouis  de  Cadomosta  (1455)  viii.
127.

Roxo,  Cape,  In  California,  discovered
by  Captain  Ulloa  (1539)  ix.  211.

Roxo,  Cape,  In  Puerto  Rico,  x.  283 ;
Sir  Robert  Dudley  at  (1595)  x.
210;  marks  of,  in  second  Ruttier,
310;  from,  to  Mona,  311;  longi-
tude from,  to  Saona,  336.

Royal,  coin  in  Algiers  (1584)  v.  271,
273;  money  of  Mexico  (1558)  ix.
357; of  plate,  money  of  Babylon,

VI.  10 ; of  Bussorah,  12 ; of  Goa,
19.

Royal,  Cape,  discovered  by  Jacques

Cartier  (1534)  viii.  190.
Royal Exchange, flagship of the

Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  (1593)

VII.  118; and  the  fight  with  Las
Cinque  Llaguas,  120.

Royden,  captain  of  the  Red  Rose
(1591)  VII.  57.

Roydon,  John,  of  Ipswich,  and
Henry  Morgan  in  Iceland  (1586)
VII.  410.

Rozen, see  Rosin.

R.  T.,  owner  of  the  Trinity,  11.  378.

Rubble,  see  Rouble.

Rubicho  river,  iii.  406.

Rubies  in  Florida,  ix.  113.

Rubricis,  see  Rubruquis.

Rubruquis,  Friar  William  de,  sent
by  S.  Louis  to  the  Tartar  chiefs,
I.  Hi.,  XII.  11;  journey  to  Tartary
(1253)  I.  229-293;  and  the  mes-
sengers from  Holy  Land,  231  f. ;
journey  to  Sartach,  323  f.  ;  arrival
among  the  Tartars,  249  f.  ;  at  the
court  of  Scacati,  251,  260;  suffer-
ings, 253  f. ;  and  difficulties,
256  f. ;  treachery  of  his  interpreter,
257 ;  received  by  Coiat  at  Sar-
tach's  court,  261  f. ;  leaves  his
vestments in charge  of Sartach,

378

INDEX

264  f. ;  his  journeys  round  the
Caspian  Sea,  271 ;  division  of  his
suite,  275  f. ;  escort  to  Mangu
Khan,  277  f. ;  as  copyist,  277;
difficulties  in  getting  horses,  280 ;
patience  under  hardships,  280 ;  at
Kenchat,  282 ;  on  the  Nestorians
and  Idolaters,  285  f. ;  and  the  Ar-
doh  river,  11.  461 ;  on  the  people
of  Tibet, IV. 437.

Ruce,  see  Russia.

Ruddal,  Sir  Richard,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Ruffinus,  lib.  i.,  cap.  9,  viii.  104;
Edesius's  account  to,  of  the  con-
quest of  India,  105.

Rufoote,  Henry,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  viii. 403.

Ruiz,  Gongalo,  de  Cordova,  John
Field's  friend  in  Vera  Cruz  (1556)
IX.  346.

*  Rulers,  early,  of  Russia,'  by  Giles
Fletcher,  iii. 357.

Rumnie,  James,  master's  mate  on
the  Matthew  Gonson  (1535)  v.  68.

Rupert,  King  of  the  Romans,  arbi-
trator between  England  and  Prus-
sia, II.  92.

Rupibus,  Petrus  de,  see  Peter  des
Roches.

Rurek,  see  Rurik.

Rurico,  see  Rurik.

Rurik,  conquers  and  civilises  Rus-
sia, II.  183;  his  descendants,  184;
first  ruler  of  Russia,  iii.  357.

Rushen  Abbey,  Isle  of  Man,  founda-
tion of,  I.  30 ;  Mirescoge  Monas-
tery and  the  abbey  of,  32,  33 ;  the
abbey  of,  temporarily  removed  to
Douglas  (1192)  33;  besieged  by
Robert  Bruce,  King  of  Scots,  41.

Rushin,  see  Rushen.

Rushtails,  birds  near  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  vi.  380.

Russ,  Anthony,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII. 317.

Russdorff,  Paulus  a,  twenty-sixth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
8.

Russe,  Laurence  van,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  70.

Russell,  Francis,  Earl  of  Bedford,
and  the  liberation  of  Thomas
Sanders  (1584)  v.  306,  311; and

Cabot's geographical tables at
Cheinies,  vii.  194.
Russell, John, Earl of Bedford,
keeper  of  the  Privy  Seal  (1553)  11.

304.  356.

Russell,  John,  and  Prussian  pirates,
11.  60.

Russell,  John,  musician  of  the  Sun-
shine of  London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Russell,  Sir  John,  and  the  war
against the Saracens (1390) iv.

451-

Russell,  Thomas,  in  Edward  Fen-
ton's  voyage  (1582)  xi. 178.

Russell,  William,  of  the  Sunshine  of
London  (1585)  vii.  382.

Russia,  I.  76,  242,  256,  307;  King
Arthur  and,  6;  John  de  Piano
Carpini  travels  through  94,  159,
179 ;  Tartars  and,  152 ;  Basil,
duke  of,  159,  179 ;  Daniel,  duke
of,  159,  179;  converted  to  Christi-
anity under  Vladimir  (988)  11.
184;  tributary  to  Tartary  (1237)
186  ;  freed  from  Tartar  vassalage,
189 ;  fictitious  rights  of,  over
Livonia,  189 ;  products  of,  224  f. ;
Richard  Chancellor  on,  224-238;
court  etiquette  in,  226  f.,  255  f.,
421;  churches,  226,  254,  268,  346,
422,  440;  houses  and  apparel  in,
226,  255,  269;  table  etiquette,  227,
257,  293,  421 ;  army  and  weapons
in,  229;  sumptuousness  of  the
Emperor  and  nobles  in,  229  f.,
259  f.,  431;  hardiness  of  the
soldiers  in,  230,  258;  autocratic
government  in,  231  f.,  260;  ad-
ministration of  justice  in,  233,
263;  and  Crim  Tartar,  233,  438;
condition  of  the  poor  in,  235  f. ;
their  indifference  to  freedom,  264;
religious  superstitions  in,  236  f.,
265 ;  monks,  and  their  customs  in,
238,  265,  267;  Richard  Chancellor
in,  255;  army  discipline  in,  258;
privileges  granted  to  English  mer-
chants in,  271 ;  coins,  weights,
and  measures  used  in,  273 ;  pro-
ducts of,  brought  to  Bokhara,  473;
her  power  increased  by  English
trade,  486 ;  Rurik,  and  the  civilisa-
tion of,  183 ;  government  and  re-
ligion of,  193  ; discovery  by  Chan-

379

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

cellor  of  (1553)  239,  249;  descrip-
tion of,  251;  products  of,  253;
Anthony  Jenkinson's  journey  to,
in.  92,  196;  and  privileges  of  Eng-
lish merchants  (1567)  63  ;  products
of,  104;  privileges  of  the  Muscovy
Company  iii.  108-119,  (1588)  348;
Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  196;  mis-
understanding with  England
(1572)  175-179;  description  of,  by
Giles  Fletcher  (1588)  357;  or  Sar-
matia,  357;  borders  of,  358;
breadth  and  length,  359;  army,
379-384;  soil  and  climate,  360;
conquests  of,  386;  administra-
tion of  conquests,  388 ;  coun-
try of  the  Crim  Tartars,  399 ;
Permians  and  Samoyedes,  subject
to,  402 ;  Lapps,  subject  to,  403 ;
journey  to  the  coast  of,  by  Sigis-
mund  ab  Herberstein,  405  ;  private
and  household  officers  of  the  Em-
peror of,  413 ;  dress  of  nobles,
416;  ladies,  418;  moujiks,  419;
unlicensed  English  merchants  in,
426 ;  and  Sir  John  Hart,  439 ;  de-
scription of  the  coast  of,  by  Octher
(871)  VII.  164;  climate  of,  268;
grass  of,  288;  snow  in,  viii.  57;
English  trade  in,  by  Captain
Carleill  (1583)  135;  Michael,
duke  of,  I.  60 ;  Jaroslav,  duke
of,  60,  85 ;  Andreas,  duke
of,  61,  and  the  Tartar  horses,
139  f. ;  Grand  Duke  of,  at  the  Tar-
tar Court,  138 ;  Jaroslav,  duke  of,
65;  his  servants  at  Kaiuk's  court,
170  ;  death,  175  ;  Emperor  of  (Ivan
Vasiliwich),  and  Richard  Chancel-
lor, II.  255 ;  letters  from,  271  ;  his
presents  to  and  from  Queen  Mary,
360-361 ;  Queen  Elizabeth's  letter
to  (1561)  III.  3;  marriage  of,  16;
Anthony  Jenkinson  and,  37,  92;
Queen  Elizabeth's  present  to
(1568)  106;  and  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, 108,  119;  and  the  Moscow
fire,  170;  death  of  (1583)  325,  483;
and  Sir  Jerome  Bowes,  463-483 ;
claims  Elizabeth's  promise  of  help
against  his  enemies,  468,  471,
473'  479>  481 ;  new  Emperor  of
(Feodor  Ivanowich),  his  corona-
tion, 336-345; English  merchants

in  favour  with,  421;  and  Sir
Jerome  Horsey,  423 ;  his  letter  to
Queen  Elizabeth  (1591)  432-434,
484 ;  and  Sir  John  Hart,  439 ;  and
Dr.  John  Dee  (1586)  445,  447;
death  of  (1597)  448;  Emperor  of
(Boris  Feodorowich)  (1597),  449.

'  Russian  Commonwealth,'  by  Giles
Fletcher,  iii.  356.

Russians,  i.  76,  86;  in  Orna,
I.  152 ;  Russian  ambassadors
to  Pope  Innocent  IV.,  179;
the  use  of  mare's  milk,  252,
263  ;  dress  of,  259  ;  Sartach  and,
269 ;  Rubruquis  in  fear  of  am-
bushes from,  270 ;  characteristics
of,  II.  423 ;  description  of,  by
George  Turberville  (1568)  in.  124-
131 ;  physical  description  of,  415-
419.

Russin,  see  Rushen  Abbey.

Rustan  Pasha,  son-in-law  of  the
Great  Turk,  viii.  470.

Rutheni,  see  Russians.

Ruthenians,  see  Russians.

Rutland,  Earl  of,  and  Don  Ferdi-
nando's  ambassador  (1527)  v.  61.

Rutter,  Rafe,  Russian  translator,  in.
97;  privileges  withdrawn  from,
118;  death  of  his  children,  169;
English  rebel,  178;  unfaithful
servant  of  the  Muscovy  Company,
184;  sent  out  of  Russia,  191,
194.

Rutter,  William,  to  Anthony  Hick-
man (1562)  VI.  258.

Ruttier,  or  sailing  directions,  for
West  Indies,  Terra  Firma,  and
New  Spain,  x.  280-305 ;  second,
from  S.  Lucar  to  New  Spain,  306-
337;  for  Brazil,  xi.  73-83;  to
Magellan  Straits,  85-90;  from  the
Isle  of  S.  Catelina  to  the  Plate
river,  96-101.

Ruvia,  found  in  Chalangi,  vi.  25.

Ruyz,  Friar  Augustin,  voyage  of,
and  his  discovery  of  New  Mexico
(1581)  IX.  169-185,  186-204;  depar-
ture of,  with  eight  soldiers  for  un-
known countries  (1581)  187;  mur-
dered in  Poala,  in  Antigua  (1582)

195-
Ryazan,  province  of  Russia,  in.  358;
fertility of, 360; ruins of, 412;

380

INDEX

source  of  the  Don  in,  ii.  454;  An- S.
thony  Jenkinson  in, in. 196.
Rye, ships  from, in  Edward  III.'s S.
fleet, I. 298; Guinea expedition
stops at (1554) VI. 155; James
Lancaster's  return  to  (1594)  407. S.

S.  Agatha,  see  5.  Agueda.

S. Agueda, the, Spanish  ship, dis- S.
coveries  by  (1539)  ix, 207; Cap- S.
tain  Ulloa  in  the,  232 ;  in  a  storm,
243; returns  to  New  Spain  (1540) S.

275-
S. Albe5'ne, in France, lodging  of S,

King  Lyon  of  Armenia  at  (1386) S.

IV.  445.
S. Alexio, Island, latitude of, xi.

75.  .  , S.

S. Aloise Cape, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii. 205. 5,
S. Andr^, Cape of, mentioned in

Ruttier  for  Magellan Straits, xi. S.

86.
S. Andr^, Rio  de,  in  Guinea,  Wil-
liam Towerson  at  (1557)  vi.  215; S.

English  merchants  at  (1562)  259.
S.  Andrea,  rock  near  Dalmatia,  v.

78.
S. Andrew, the, captured by the

English in the Cadiz expedition

(1596)  IV.  249.
S.  Andrew,  Ancon  de  or  Haven  of,

taken possession of, by Captain

Ulloa (1539) IX. 218.
S.  Andrew,  chapel  of,  in  Patras,  vi.

40.
S.  Andrew  Island  (off  Caracas),  lati-
tude of,  X,  335.
S. Andrew Island (off Mexico),

provisions obtained by Thomas

Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  322,  369;

latitude of, 350; anchorage at,

373-
S.  Andrew's  town,  in  Palma  Islands,

VI. 132.  S.

S. Angelo, Monte,  on  the  coast  of

Apulia,  John  Locke  and  (1553)  v. S.

79-
S.  Anna,  in  Cartagena,  x. 139.
5.  Anna,  the,  Michael  Sancius's  in- S.

formation concerning (1587) xi.

319; met  by  Thomas  Cavendish's S.

ships  (1587)  324,  369; surrenders,

325-

381

Anna,  Os  Baixos  de,  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier  for  Brazil,  xi.  73.

Anna,  Punta  de,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Magellan  Straits,  xi.
90.

Anna,  Rio  de,  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Magellan  Straits,  xi.
86.

Anthonie,  Cape,  see  S.  Antonio.

Anthony,  Cape  of,  see  S.  An-
tonio.

Anthony,  gardens  of,  in  Rhodes,
AUibey  at  the  (1522)  v.  23.

Anthony,  Island,  see  S.  Antonio.

Anthony,  monastery  of,  friars  of,
and  Feliciano  Cieza  (1597)  xi.  70;
his  sentence  against  them,  71.

Anthony's  Port,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  188.

Antonio,  Portuguese  ship  from
Crete,  v. 66.

Antonio,  Cape,  in  Brazil,  men-
tioned in  Ruttier  from  river  Plate,
XI. 85.

Antonio,  Cape,  in  Cuba,  viii.  408,
IX.  44,  167,  X.  46 ;  John  White  at
(1590)  VIII.  411;  Captain  Gour-
gues  at  (i567)ix.  loi ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1583)  x.  127;  the  Con-
tent at  (1591)  182;  William  King
at  (1592)  192  ;  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton at  (1595)  225;  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville  off  (1596)  242,  244;
flight  of  the  English  fleet  round,
reported  by  Don  Bernaldino  Del-
gadillo  (1596)  251 ;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley's  course  towards  (1597)
276;  latitude  of,  286,  333;  marks
of,  described  in  the  Ruttier,  286,
293;  in  second  Ruttier,  316  j
course  from,  to  New  Spain,  294;
course  from  Cape  Corrientes  to,
32 1 ;  longitude  from,  to  the
Nigrillos,  337.

Antonio,  Cape  Verde  Island,  Wil-
liam Towerson  at  (1577)  vi.  250.

Antonio,  church,  near  Lisbon,  Sir
Roger  Williams  and  (1589)  vi.
501.

Antonio,  Os  Baixos  de,  men-
tioned in  Ruttier,  xi.  80.

Augustine,  Cape  of,  11.  177,
XI.  20,  250 ;  Captain  Lancaster  at
(1595)  47; mentioned  in  Ruttier^

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

74 ;  description  of,  75 ;  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  in  sight  of  (1579)  162;
latitude  of,  351.

S.  Augustine,  fort  in  Florida,  sacked
by  Sir  F.  Drake  (1586)  viii.  346,
XII.  62  ;  Pedro  Morales  at,  ix.  112  ;
Nicholas  Burgoignon  at,  113;
ordnance  captured  at,  by  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  (1586)  x. 130, 134.

S.  Augustine  Island,  latitude  of,  ix.

336.

S.  Aumond,  Almerike  de,  his  voy-
age to  Syria  (1240)  iv. 352.

S.  Austine  Cape,  see  S.  Augustine.

S.  Avis  Bay,  at  Cape  Blanco,  Sir
John Hawkins  at  (1564)  x. 14.

S. Barbara, mines  of, ix. 187.

S.  Barnardo  Islands,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  Ruttier,  x.  292.

S.  Bartholomew  Island  (West  In-
dies), latitude  of,  x. 333.

S.  Bartholomew  Island  (in  Strait  of
Magellan),  named  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  xi. 158.

S.  Bartholomew  valley,  dwelling-
place  of  Friar  Augustine  Ruyz
(1581)  IX.  186;  Antonio  de  Espejo
and  Friar  Bernardin  Beltran  in
(1583)  203; John  Chilton  in  (1568)

364-
S. Benitos, garments for  heretics,

description  of  (1557)  ix.  348,  427;

of Robert Tomson, exposed in

Mexico  church  (1557)  350;  exposed

in  the  church  Ecclesia  Major, in

Mexico,  431.
S.  Bernard  Cape,  Stephen  Borough

and  (1556)  II.  326.
S. Bernardo, the, Spanish carrack

(1592)  VII. 112.
S.  Botulphs'  town,  see  Boston.
S. Brandon Island, supposed  to  be

Madeira,  vi. 135.
S.  Bras,  Agoada  de,  harbour  of,  vi.

S.  Camilla,  Sir  Anastase  de,  knight
of  Rhodes,  and  Domingo  de  Four-
nati  (1522)  V. 11; death  of,  32.

S.  Catalina  Island  (off  Haiti),
marks  of,  described  in  second  Rut-
tier, X. 311.

S.  Catelina,  one  of  the  Leeward
Islands,  latitude  of,  x.  335.

S.  Catharina  Island,  Stephen  Hare

at  (1581)  XI.  34;  mentioned  in
Ruttier  for  Magellan  Straits,  84;
Spanish  fleet  at  (1582)  93,  268;
description of, 96 ; situation of,

251-
S.  Catherina,  La  Calle,  in  Mexico,

X.  420.
S. Catherine, ship of Fernando

Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  279.
S. Christopher, Leeward Island,

John White in sight of (1590)

VIII. 407 ; Spanish possessions

(1564)  IX.  5;  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1585)  X.  no,  (1595),  229.

5.  Christophero,  the,  Spanish  car-
rack  (1592)  VII. 112.

S.  Clara,  Cape,  latitude  of,  xi.  350 ;
from,  to  the  Ladrones,  363.

S.  Clara  of  Biscay,  the,  taken  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  fleet  (1592)
VII. 105 ; freight  of, 108.

S.  Clement's  Monastery,  Southam
and  Sparke  at  (1566)  iii.  79,  81.

S. Cler, sentry of Fort Caroline

(1565)  IX.  94.

SS.  Cosmas  and  Damian,  church  of,
v. 18.

S.  Cretice,  Piero  de,  ambassador  of
the  people  of  Rhodes  to  Solyman
(1522)  V.  54,  56.

S. Croix, see  Holy  Cross.

S.  Cruz,  Marquess  of,  see  Bagan,
Alvaro.

S.  Cruz,  in  California,  ix.  122 ;  Cap-
tain Ulloa  at  (1539)  208,  225.

S.  Cruz,  in  Flores  Island,  descrip-
tion of  (1589)  VII.  4;  Sir  John
Burrough  at  (1592)  110;  survivors
of  the  Tohy  at  (1593)  128.

S.  Cruz,  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  124,  131,
266;  the  Lion  at  (1552)  138;  the
May  Flower  at,  267 ;  English  mer-
chants at,  268 ;  Henry  Roberts  at
(1588)  427;  Sir  John  Hawkins  at
(1564)  X.  12;  Christopher  New-
port at  (1591)  184;  Sir  Thomas
Baskerville  at  (1596)  245;  With-
rington  at  (1586)  xi.  204.

S.  Cruz  Island  (West  Indies),  John
White  at  (1587)  viii.  387,  (1590)
406;  Cacique's  sons  run  away
from  the  English  at,  409 ;  Sir
Robert  Dudley  at  (1594)  x.  203,
(1595)  210;  latitude  of,  marks  de-

382

INDEX

scribed  in  the  Ruttier,  283;  from S,
Montserrat  to,  marks  of,  in  second
Ruttier, 310; latitude of, 333; S,
longitude  from,  to  Cape  Roxo,  336.

S. Cruz, Point of, or Punta de S,
Balenes, ix. 269.

S. Cruz, Sierras de, or Punta de S,
Samblas,  x.  290.

S. Cruz,  the,  taken  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's fleet (1592) vii. 105; S
burnt  by  her  own  crew,  iii.

S.  Cruz  la  Real,  near  Panama,  town
of  Negro  Maroons  (1587)  x.
149.

S.  Denis,  in  France,  S.  Albeyne
near,  iv.  445.  S,

S.  Domingo  Island,  see  Hispaniola.

S. Domingo, town, sacked  by Sir
Francis Drake (1586) viii. 346; S,
English ship at, x. 4; attacked
by Sir Francis Drake's forces S<
(1586)  III; taken,  112; burnt  and
ransomed,  114; description  of  the S.
inhabitants  of,  125  ; ordnance  cap-
tured  at, by Sir Francis Drake
(1586) 134; harbour, 283; from, S
312; longitude from, to Ocoa,
in  second  Ruttier, 336; death  of S,
Jeronimo  de  Ortal  at,  497.

S.  Domingo  river,  William  King  at S

(1592)  X. 191.

S. Domingo, village, in S, lago S,

Island, Sir Francis Drake at

(1585)  X. 107.  S,

S. Dunstan's Island, discovered  by

Stephen  Borough  (1556)  11.  323.
S. Edmund's Point, Stephen Bor- S

ough  and  (1556)  11.  326.
S.  Elmo's  fire,  ix.  345; seen  on  the

Trinity  (1539)  228.  S

S.  Eufemia's  Church  at  Rovigno,  v.

77.  .  s

S. Fi, in Cumana, Sir John

Hawkins  at, for  water  (1565) x. S

27.  S

S.  F^,  town  on  the  river  Plate  (1587)

XI.  208,  254,  285.
S.  F6  de  Bogota,  see  Bogota.
S.  Fee,  see  S.  F6.  S

S. Francis, Friar Marco de Niga,

of  the  order  of,  ix.  125.  S

S.  Francis,  Cape,  in  Newfoundland,

VIII. 50, 158; the Marigold at S

(1593)  160.  '

383

Francis, city in Cartagena, x.

139-

Francis,  church  of,  in  Nega-
patam,  v.  400.

Francis,  new  kingdom  of,  see
Cevola.

Francis,  place  of,  chief  street  of
Seville,  English  prisoners  judged
in  (1570)  IX.  463.

Francisco,  Cape,  capture  of  the
Cacafuego,  Juan  de  Anton,  a
Biscayan,  being  master,  by  Sir
Francis  IDrake,  at,  xi.  264;  lati-
tude of,  349 ;  from,  to  Cape
Blanco,  361.

Francisco  Island,  conspiracy
against  Andrew  Barker  in  (1576)
X.  86.

Francisco,  Nuevo  Reyno  de,  see
Cevola.

Francisco  river,  xi.  250 ;  men-
tioned in  Ruttier  for  Brazil,  84.

Gabriel,  Spanish  ship  for  carry-
ing army  provisions  in  the  West
Indies  (1540)  ix.  280.

George  Bay,  wrecks  found  in
(1594)  VIII.  163.

George  Island  (Azores),  see  S.
Jorge.

George's  Channel,  Captain  Lau-
donniere  in  (1565)  ix.  98.

George's Cross, English flag

(1586)  VI.  435.

George's Island, in Strait of
Magellan, named  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  xi. 158, 160.
, George's Islands, off coast of
Russia, Stephen Borough and

(1557)  n-  370-
George's Monastery, in Cairo

(1587)  VI.  37.

,  Georgius,  in  the  Holy  Land,  iv.
362.

, Germaine,  see  S. German.
,  German's  Bay,  Puerto  Rico,  Sir
Richard Grenville at (1585) viii.
313; fertility of, 389; port of,
English  ship  in  (1517)  x.  4, 5.
,  German's  Islands,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  212.
.  Giles,  Prou  John  de  Bidoux,  prior
of,  see  Bidoux.

. Graviel Islands, mentioned in
Ruttier  for  river  Plate,  xi.  97.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

S.  Gregorio,  Cape  de,  Indians  of,
XI.  90.

S.  Helena,  in  Florida,  ix.  112;  lati-
tude of,  113;  Pedro  Melendez,
governor  of  (1586)  x. 131.

S. Helena, Isle of, description of,

VI.  33;  John  Segar  on  (1593)
402  ;  products  of,  402  ;  watering-
place  for  Portuguese  ships  (1592) S.

VII.  112;  Englishman  found  by
the  Edward  Bonaventure  on  (1593)
197;  latitude  of,  xi.  343,  351;
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1588)  343,
370; church  in,  343; products  of,

344 ; fowls in, 345 ; settled by S,
Portuguese,  346 ; from,  to  Flores,
366 ; anchorage  at,  373.  S.

S.  Helen's  chapel,  in  Jerusalem,  v.
211.

S.  Hypolittos,  fair  of,  in  Mexico,  ix.
380.

S. lago Island  (Cape  Verde), lati-
tude of, VI. 276 ; colonized by
Alouis  de  Cadomosta  (1455)  viii. S.
127; Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1585)

X.  103 ; description  and  products S,
of,  105 ;  ordnance  captured  at,  by S.
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1586)  x. 134;
voyage  of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  to S.
(1596)  266, 268, 276; latitude  of,
335, XI. 152 ; description of, xi.
105;  Nuno  da  Silva  at  (1578)  133, S.
138; Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1577)
152; sacked  by  Drake  (1585)  xii. S,
62.

S. lago, town in Chili, xi. 276 ; S.
sacked by Sir Francis Drake
(1578) 114; Valparaiso, port of S.
261; or Mapocha, 276; descrip- S,
tion of, 278; bark from, taken
by  Thomas  Cavendish  (1587)  309. S,

S. lago de Colima, Mexico, port
of,  the  5.  Agueda  at  (1540),  lati- S,
tude  of,  IX.  278;  Captain  Ulloa  at S.
(1539)  IX.  207; Captain  Alarchon
at  (1540)  279,  318;  Captain  Gualle
at  (1584)  337; from,  to  Navidad,

XI.  362 ; anchorage  at, 373 ;  bay S.
of, latitude of, xi. 321; Thomas
Cavendish  at, 321, 369.  S.

S.  lago  de  Cuba,  in  Cuba  Island,
IX.  368 ;  taken  by  Christopher
Carleill  (1585)  x.  104;  description
of, 105 ; burnt by Sir Francis

384

Drake  (1585)  109;  plan  of,  en-
graving of,  112;  description  of,
taken  by  Sir  BYancis  Drake  (1585)
269 ;  note  taken  by  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  (1596)  270;  mentioned  by
the  Ruttier,  285 ;  longitude  from,
to  Cape  de  Cruz,  336;  latitude  of,
XI.  350.

lago  de  Leon,  taking  of,  by  Sir
Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)  x.  218  f. ,
341,  364;  ransom  offered  for,  to
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston,  221 ;  burnt
by  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  (1595)
222  ; on  Caracas  coast,  377.

lago  de  los  Valles,  John  Chilton
at  (1572)  IX. 373.

Ives  (Cornwall),  Henry  Roberts
lands  at  (1589)  vi.  428;  return  of
M.  Hore's  expedition  to  New-
foundland to  (1536)  VIII.  7;  Sir
Robert  Dudley  at  (1595)  x.  210;
Sir  Francis  Drake  in  sight  of
(1579)  XI. 162.

Izabella  Island,  discovered  by
Alvares  de  Mendanio,  xi.  288.

James  in  Galicia,  see  Santiago.

James,  fair  of,  in  Mexico,  ix.
380.

James  river,  or  the  river  of  S.
Jacques,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii. 188.

James's  Island,  discovered  by
Stephen  Borough  (1556)  11.  336.

Jerome, channel of, Thomas
Cavendish  through  (1587)  xi.  300.
Jerome, river, in Magellan
Straits,  XI.  357.

John,  in  Patmos,  vi. 107.

John,  Don  Luis  de,  killed  in  fight
off  Flores  Island  (1591)  vii.  47.

John,  knights  of,  leave  Acre,  11.
6.

John,  fair  of,  in  Mexico,  ix.  380.

John  de  Anton,  ship  of,  taken  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  (1579)  xi.  146;
letter  from  Sir  Francis  Drake  con-
cerning, 147.

John  de  la  Fountaine,  church  of,
in  Rhodes,  v. 19,  24.

John  de  Luz,  ship  from,  English
ship-wrecked  mariners  in  (1583)
VIII.  88;  Basques  of,  161 ;  Basques
of,  and  Charles  Leigh  (1597)  177;
mariners  from, and  the  passage,

INDEX

and  Christopher  Carleill  (1585)  x. S.
100.

S. John de Ullua, see S. Juan S.
d'Ulloa.

S.  John,  Cape,  discovered  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1534)  viii.  191.

S.  John  Harbour,  taken  possession
of,  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  name,
VIII.  53 ;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
fleet  leaves,  62,85  ;  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert's  arrival  at  (1590)  viii.  89;
the  Golden  Hind  meets  the  Squir-
rel at  (1583)  511;  the  Delight  at
(1583)  XII.  37;  Drake's  attempt  to
reach  (1596)  xii.  66.

S.  John  Island,  Newfoundland,  dis-
covered by  John  and  Sebastian
Cabot  (1497)  VII. 146.

S.  John  Island,  see  Puerto  Rico.

S.  John  Port,  from,  to  Rio  Lexo,
XI.  362.

S.  John's  Cape,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1556)  II.  328,  330;  latitude  of,
332.

S.  John's  Church,  at  Rhodes,  and
the  tombs  of  the  Grand  Masters,

V.  59-
S. John's Fort, in Florida, Sir

Francis  Drake's  landing  at  (1586)

X. 128; taken, 130.
S.  John's  Island,  off  coast  of  Russia,

Stephen  Borough  at  (1557)  11.  368,

370.  S,

S. John's Islets, in S. Lawrence

Gulf, discovered  by  Jacques  Car- S

tier  (1535)  VIII.  216.
S. John's Road, Roberval and S,

Jacques Cartier at (1542) viii.

284.  S

S.  John's  Town,  in  Guinea,  vi.  194,

195-

S.  Jorge  Island,  vii.  10;  George
Fenner  at  (1567)  vi.  280;  English
fleet  at  (1589)  vii.  17;  Dutch
ships  at  (1589)  63;  Spanish  and
Portuguese  ships  wrecked  at  S
(1591)  86;  John  White  in  sight  of
(1590)  VIII.  422;  or  Sayles  Island,
latitude  of,  x.  299, 334.  S

S.  Josepho,  in  Venezuela,  taken  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  341,

353-  .  ^ ^

S. Juan  de Colorado, the, Spanish S
ship  (1589)  VI.  472-483-

385

Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  see  Puerto
Rico.

Juan  d'Ulloa,  vii.  20;  Sir  John
Hawkins  and  the  Spaniards  at,
Hawkins and the Spaniards

VIII.  315;  island  and  port,
Spanish fort built in (1590)

IX.  204,  205,  359,  403;  port
of  Mexico,  storm  in  (1556)  343;
Robert  Tomson  at,  346;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Robert  Tomson  (1558)
353 ;  by  Henry  Hawks,  378 ;  John
Chilton  in  (1568)  361 ;  the  Jesus
of  Liibeck  left  in  (1578)  365;  mer-
chant port,  375  ;  latitude,  378,  402  ;
Sir  John  Hawkins  and  Drake  in

(1567)  402,  450,  XII.  49;  fight  in
the  port  of,  between  English  and
Spaniards,  ix.  406,  xii.  50 ;  salt  of
Panuco  sent  to,  ix.  415 ;  Don  Luys
Suares  sent  to,  to  fight  the  English
(1580)  433 ;  Augustin  de  Villa-
nueva  at,  451;  English  prisoners
leave  (1570)  460;  latitude  of,  x.
67, 334; Sir John Hawkins at

(1568)  67;  castle  of,  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  295 ;  latitude  of  the
harbour  of,  297;  harbour  of,  in
the  second  Ruttier,  3x6;  course
from  Roca  Partida  to,  322  ;  course
from,  to  Spain,  323;  longitude
from,  to  the  Tortugas,  337.

Juan  river,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,
XI.  97.

. Julian, near Cascaes, vi. 506;
Spanish  army  at  (1589)  508.
,  4  Julian Bay, in Newfoundland,
VIII. 190.

.  Julian,  Port  (Patagonia),  descrip-
tion of,  XI.  88 ;  and  the  gibbets
set  up  by  Magellan,  xi.  109,  157;
discovered  by  Magellan,  255;  Sir
Francis  Drake  at,  execution  of
Doughty  at,  260,  xii.  56;  latitude
of,  349.

.  Katherine,  born  in  old  Fama-
gusta,  V.  95;  bath  of,  in  Alex-
andria (1586)  VI.  44.
.  Katherine 's  haven  and  island,  in
Newfoundland,  Jacques  Cartier  in
(1534)  VIII.  183;  description  of,
186.

Katherine 's  Mount,  Earl  of  Hunt-
ington at  (1399)  IV.  453.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

S. Kelmes, English fleet  at  (1589) S.
VII.  26.

S.  Laurence,  Cape,  from,  to  S.  Fran-
cisco Cape,  XI.  361.

S.  Laurence,  Gulf  of,  discovered
by  Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  144,
156;  voyage  of  the  Grace  to  (1594)
162 ;  discovered  by  Jacques  Car-
tier  (1535)  183-272.

S.  Laurence  Island,  see  Madagas-
car.

S.  Laurence,  river  in  Canada,  near
Newfoundland,  viii.  55 ;  voyage
of  the  English  to,  viii.  i,  210;
fresh  water  in,  280.

S.  Laurence,  river  in  Newfoundland,
discovered  by  Richard  Clarke
^1583)  VIII.  88;  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  176.  S.

S. Lazarus Islands, mentioned in S.
Ruttier,  xi.  98.

5. Lorenzo,  the, at  Goa  (1580)  vi. S.

33-

S. Lucar, in Andalusia, the  Jesus S.
at (1584) V. 293; Thomas
Midnall at, vi. 124; Spanish S.
West Indian fleet at (1589)
VII. 68; Spanish fleet in (1592)
108 ; Robert Tomson and John
Field's  departure  from  (1555) ix.
339 ; escape  of  Job  Hortop  from S.
(1590)  464; Thomas  Midnall  and
William Ballard at (1526) x. 6;
bar of, 300 ; letter to the com-
mander  of (1594) 433; letter to
merchants of, 434.  S.

S.  Lucas,  El  Cabo  de,  in  California,
XI. 323 ; latitude of, ix. 336 ;
Thomas Cavendish at, xi. 369 ; S.
port,  anchorage  at,  373.

S. Lucia (Cape Verde), see S. S.
Luzia.

S.  Lucia  (West  Indies),  Laurence
Keymis  at  (1596)  x.  478.

S.  Luis  de  Tampice,  town  near  Pan- S.
uco  river,  x.  318.

S.  I>unario's  Bay,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  196.

S.  Luzia  (Cape  Verde  Island),  lati-
tude of,  x.  332 ;  William  Tower-
son  at  (1577)  VI.  249.  S.

S.  Magnus,  Sound  of,  in  Orkney
Islands,  Captain  Frobisher  at
(1577)  VII. 286; abbey  of, 287.

386

Malo,  II.  118,  120;  ship  from,
captured  by  the  English  (1589)  vii.
I ;  another  ship  from,  captured  by
the  Victory,  13 ;  voyage  to  the
Western  Planting  by  merchants  of
(c.  1581)  VIII.  118;  departure  of
the  French  fleet  from  (1591)  150;
ships  from,  at  the  discovery  of
Ramea,  155 ;  voyage  of  Bretons
of,  161 ;  ships  from,  in  Halabo-
lina  harbour  (1597)  167;  Charles
Leigh  and  the  merchants  from,
168;  Jacques  Cartier's  departure
from  (1534)  183,  240;  and  return
to,  209,  (1536)  260;  bishop  of,  and
Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  210;  ships
prepared  at,  for  the  third  voyage
of  Jacques  Cartier  (1540)  264.

Margaret  at  Cliffe,  Kent,  i.  48.

Maria  de  Cassopo,  church  of,  v.
103.

Maria  de  la  Croce,  monastery,  at
Zante,  v.  82.

Maria  of  St.  Vincent,  the,  Bis-
cayan  ship  (1597)  viil. 174.

Maria,  Cape  (Brazil),  mentioned
in  Ruttier  for  river  Plate,  latitude
of,  XI.  85,  97;  described  in  Rut-
tier, 97,  99 ; near  the  river  Plate,

153-

Maria,  Cape  (Spain),  William
Harborne  at  (1583)  v.  243;  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  x.  299 ;
longitude from, to Sal Medina,

337-

Maria,  Cape  of  (West  Indies),
mutinous  soldiers  of  Captain  Lau-
donniere  at  (1564)  ix.  43.

Maria,  Cavo  de,  in  Albania,  v.
102.

Maria  Island  (Azores)  vi.  250;
English  fleet  at,  vii.  15,  16;  Earl
of  Cumberland  at  (1589)  65;  lati-
tude of,  X.  300,  335.

Maria  Island  (Chile),  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1587)  xi.  302,  367;
latitude  of,  349,  358,  402 ;  from,
to  Conception  Bay,  360 ;  anchor-
age at,  372  ;  the  Desire's  intended
course  to  (1592)  402.

Maria  Port,  near  S.  Lucar
(Spain),  Miles  Philips  at  (1580)  ix.
444;  Sir  Francis  Drake's  pilot
taken  at  (1579)  xi. 117.

INDEX

S.  Maria,  town,  in  Mexico,  Anthony S.

Godard and his men taken

prisoners  to  (1568)  ix.  417.  S.

S.  Marie,  Captain,  his  advice  about

the  Spanish  ships  in  Florida  (1565) S.

IX.  90.
S. Marie, Cape, in Newfoundland, S.

VIII.  163;  the  Grace  at  (1594)  165;
Charles  Leigh  at  (1597)  178.

S.  Marie  Port,  Newfoundland,
Charles  Leigh  lands  at  (1597)  viii.
181.

S. Mark, beheaded at Alexandria,

VI. 44.

S.  Marta  (Spanish  West  Indian
port).  Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1568)

IX.  450;  latitude  of  (1587)  x.  135;
safe  course  for  the  Spanish  fleet
to,  advised  by  Baptist  Antonio
(1587)  136;  fortifications  of,  136;
taken,  and  burnt  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1595)  236;  taken  by  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  (1597)  273  ;  sacked
by  Agira,  363 ; Rio  Grande  falls

to the sea by, 368 ; description S.

of,  XI.  237.
S. Martha's Islands, Canada, dis- S.

covered  by  Jacques  Cartier  (1535)

VIII.  212.  S.

S. Martin, Mexico, latitude  of  the

island near, ix. 336; mines in, S.

358; Spanish  goods  carried  from

Vera  Cruz  to  (1572)  379.  S.

S. Martin,  Cape  of,  in  Rhodes,  v.

16.
S.  Martin  Hills,  latitude  of.  Pan  de S.

Minsapa  in,  x.  296 ; described  in

second  Ruttler,  317,  322.  S.

S. Martin Island, latitude of, x.

333-
S. Martin's Creek, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  197.
St. Mary's Hospital of Jerusalem,

Prussia  conquered  by  the  Knights

of,  I.  256.
S.  Marv's  Monastery  in  Cairo  (1587)

VI.  37.
S. Matthew Island, discovered by

the  Portuguese,  viii.  127.  S.

S.  Matthew,  the,  Don  Diego  Pimen-

telli  in  (1588)  iv.  226.
S. Matthew, the, captured by the

English in the Cadiz expedition

(1596)  IV.  249.

387

Maxim's,  in  Moscow,  English
house  at  (1569)  iii. iii,  351.

Michael  Archangel,  see  Arch-
angel.

Michael  of  Culiacan,  see  Culia-
can.

Michael,  one  of  the  Azores
Islands,  vi.  250,  vii.  3 ;  William
Towerson  at  (1557)  vi.  230;  gover-
nor of,  taken  prisoner  by  the  Eng-
lish (1585)  434;  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1587)  438,442;  English  fleet  at,

VII.  II,  15;  Spanish  fleet  damaged
by  the  storm  near  (1591)  49;
Portuguese  ship  at  (1590)  75;
earthquake  in  (1591)  79;  Spanish
and  Portuguese  ships  wrecked  at,
86;  Sir  John  Burrough  at  (1592)
109;  Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet
at  (1594)  119;  the  Marigold  at
(1593)  160;  John  White  in  sight
of  (1590)  422;  latitude  of,  x.  335;
longitude  from,  to  Cape  S.  Vin-
cent,  337.

Michael,  monastery  on  the  Dvina,
III.  73.

Michael,  Valley  of,  John  Chilton
In  (1572)  IX.  374.

Michael's Mount, in Cornwall,

VIII.  401.

Miguel  de  Neveri,  on  the  coast  of
Paria,  x.  363.

MIsericordia  Commissaria,  house
in Portuguese  cities  in India,  v.

447-
Nappa,  turret  of,  at  Famagusta,

V. 132, 135. 140-

Nicholas  Abbey,  In  Russia,  iii.
73,  81 ;  Stephen  Borough  at,  11.
363  ;  Osep  Napea  at,  426 ;  Anthony
Jenkinson  at  (1561)  iii.  15,  (1566)
92 ;  distance  to,  from  certain
places  in  Russia,  63-70;  main  port
of  the  Muscovy  Company,  90,  157 ;
description  of,  102,  206;  Thomas
Randolph  at,  102,  108;  discovery
of,  VII.  164;  In  the  Arctic  Zone,
276.

,  Nicholas  Bay,  11.  401,  417,  425;
discovered  by  Chancellor,  248;
English  ships  In,  320,  342,  350,
351.  375.  390,  417.  418,  425;
Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  iii.  15,  92  ;
William  Borough  at  the  discovery

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of,  2io; discovered  by  the  Edward

Bonaventure,  23^  I Oliver  at,  454 ;

strong  sea  currents  in,  vii.  337.
S.  Nicholas,  Cape,  Charles  de  la  Bar-

botiere  and  Captain  Lancaster  at

(1593)  X. 200; mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  301.
S. Nicholas Haven, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  213.
S. Nicholas Island, near  the  Can-
aries,  English  ships  at  (1553)  vi.

147; William  Towerson  at  (1577)

249.
S.  Nicholas  Tower,  in  Rhodes,  and

the Turkish Mantlets (1522) v.

24.
S. Nicolo  Island,  near  Parenzo,  v.

104.
S.  Osyth,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  11.

217.
S.  Panthalion,  church  of,  in  Rhodes,

V.  41.
S.  Paul  and  the  governor  of  Paphos

in  Cyprus,  vi.  108 ;  quotation  from

I.  Corinthians  ix. 11,  viii. 119.
S. Paul,  low  land  described  in  the

Ruttier,  x.  295.
S. Paul, mountains mentioned in

second  Ruttier,  x.  320.
S. Paul, the, ship of Don Alonso

de  Bagan  (1591)  vii.  81.
S. Paulo, Morro  de, mentioned  in

Ruttier,  xi.  76.
S. Paul's Cape, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1536),  latitude  of,

VIII. 260.
S. Paul's Cathedral, Spanish en-
signs and colours in (1588) iv.

234 ; the  Canon  of,  and  the  ships

for  Labrador  (1527)  xii.  20.
S.  Paul's  College  of  Jesuits,  in  Goa

(1583)  V.  460,  VI.  7.
S.  Paul's  Islands,  Stephen  Borough

at  (1557)  II.  371.
S.  Paul's  order,  friars  of,  in  Chialo,

V.  395 ; in  the  islands  near  Japan,

405-
S. Pedro  Islands,  see  S. Pierre.
S. Pedro, Porto de, in Majorca,

William Harborne at (1583) v.

243-

S.  Pedro,  Rio  de,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier for  Brazil,  xi.  85.

S. Pedro  y S. Pablo, Rio  de, dis-

covered  by Captain UUoa (1539)

IX.  207,  208.
S. Peter, castle  of, in Rhodes, v.

6,  8,  15.
St.  Peter  Islands,  see  S.  Pierre.
5. Peter, the, flagship of  Captain

Alarchon  (1540)  ix.  279,  311.
S. Peter  and  S. Paul  river,  marks

of,  in  second  Ruttier,  x.  319.
S. Peter's Cape, discovered by

Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii. 194.
S.  Peter's  Church,  in  Norwich,  epi-
taph of  Peter  Read  in (1566)  v.

69.
S.  Peter's  Church,  in  Tescuco,  built

by  Hernando  Cortez,  ix.  364.
S. Peter's  Islands,  off  the  Russian

coast,  Stephen  Borough  at  (1557)

II.  371.
S. Peter's  Strait,  in  Newfoundland,

VIII. 157; discovered  by  Jacques

Cartier  (1534)  207; the  Marigold

at,  158.
S.  Petro,  Scolio  di,  tradition  about,

V.  89.
S. Philip Island, Captain Ulloa  at

(1539)  IX.  228.
5.  Philip,  the,  captured  by  the  men

of  Flushing,  iv.  226.
S. Philip,  the, Portuguese  carrack.

Sir  Francis  Drake  and  (1587)  vi.

438; taken  by  the  English,  442.
5. Philip, the, and the Revenge

(1591)  VII. 42, XII.  69.
S. Pierre  and  Miquelon,  the  Bona-

venture  at, viii. 150; the Grace

at, 163, 165; Charles Leigh at

^1597) 176; Jacques Cartier at

(1536)  360.
S. Salvador, in Mexico, on the

South  Sea,  ix.  366.
S. Salvador  Church,  in  Rhodes,  v.

37-

S.  Salvador  Island,  taken  by  Sebas-
tian Cabot,  XI.  99.

S.  Sebastian,  in  Spain,  English  bat-
talion at  (1589)  VI.  498;  ship
belonging  to,  captured  by  Chris-
topher Carleill  (1585)  x.  100;  her-
mitage of, 282.

S.  Sebastian  Island,  on  the  Brazil
coast,  VI.  410 ;  Stephen  Hare  at
(1581)  XI.  34,  37;  mentioned  in
Ruttier, 83; fishing at (1579)

388

INDEX

162 ;  pinnace  built  by  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1586)  294,  367;  lati-
tude of,  349;  soundings,  353;
anchorage,  371 ;  Thomas  Caven-
dish at  (1591)  390.

S.  Servan's  Port,  discovered  by
Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.  188.

S.  Sophia  Church,  in  Constanti-
nople, description,  iv.  291,  v.  253,

VI.  105.

S. Sophia Church, in Nicosia, v.

97-

S.  Splritus'  Port,  discovered  by
Jacques Cartier (1536) viii. 260.

S.  Stephano,  Ponte,  in  Constanti-
nople, V.  251.

S.  Stephen  Church,  outside  the  town
of  Rhodes,  v.  21.

S.  Stephen's  three  isles.  Captain
Ulloa  at  (1540)  IX.  267.

S.  Thomas,  the  Apostle,  burial  place
of,  IV.  414.

S.  Thomas,  city  of,  on  the  coast  of
Coromandel,  v.  408;  trade  with
Pegu,  427;  verzini  found  in,  vi.
25;  monsoon  from  Goa  to,  31;
ships  of,  bound  for  Malacca  (1591)
X.  196.

S.  Thomas,  the,  Spanish  ship,  dis-
coveries by  (1539)  IX.  207;  lost  in
a  storm,  208.

S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  chapels
dedicated  to,  by  English  mer-
chants, II.  154.

S.  Thomas  of  India,  church  of,  voy-
age of  Sighelm,  bishop  of  Sher-
borne, to,  IV.  279,  280,  V.  401.

S.  Thomas  Church,  in  Greenland  (c.
1380)  VII.  451.

S. Thomas Island, near Ethiopia,

VII.  198;  climate  of,  252,  258;  dis-
covered by  the  Portuguese,  viii.
127;  William  Towerson  at  (1577)
VI.  248 ;  description  of,  248 ;  ship
from,  escapes  the  Edward  Bona-
venture  (1592)  398;  negro  trade
of  (1590)  X.  172;  intended  voyage
of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  to  (1596)
266.

S.  Thome,  see  S.  Thomas.

S .  Tronions  Sound,  Martin  Fro-
bisher  at  (1576)  vii.  205.

S.  Vincent  Island  (Cape  Verde)  Wil-
liam Towerson  at  (1577)  vi.  249.

S.  Vincent  Island  (West  Indies)  lati-
tude of,  X.  332 ;  tobacco  in,  Laur-
ence Keymis  at  (1596)  478.

S.  Vincent,  port  in  Brazil,  the  Ed-
ward Cotton's  trade  at,  vi.  408 ;
mines  of,  at,  xi.  26;  latitude  of,
27;  Spanish  ships  in  (1582)  94;
latitude  of,  160 ;  Edward  Fenton
bound  for  (1582)  188;  Edward
Fenton  at  (1583)  190;  fight  at,  be-
tween English  and  Spanish  ships,
195 ;  English  and  Spanish  ships
in,  268 ;  John  Whithall  dwelling
at  (1586)  295 ;  burnt  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1591)  390;  bay,  x.  93;
mentioned  in  Ruttier,  xi.  82 ;  lati-
tude of,  83.

S,  Vincent,  Cape,  in  Portugal,  Wil-
liam Harborne  at  (1583)  v.  243;
English  fleet  bound  for  (1591)  vii.
58;  English  fleet  at (1590) 74,  (1592)
108;  the  Toby  at  (1593)  124;  Wil-
liam King  at  (1592)  x.  190;  Sir
Robert  Dudley  in  sight  of  (1594)
204 ;  marks  and  latitude  of,  299,
300,  335 ;  longitude  from,  to  Cape
S.  Maria,  337;  seized  by  Drake,
xil.  63.

S.  Vincent,  harbour  in  Guinea,  vi.

159-
S. Vincent river (Brazil), Spanish

fort  on,  XI.  251.
S. Vincent  river  (Guinea),  William

Towerson  at  (1555)  vi.  183; trad-
ing in  the,  184 ; latitude  of,  186.
5. Vittor,  the,  Nestor  Martiningo's

escape  in,  v. 149.
S.  William's  Islands,  discovered  by

Jacques  Cartier  (1535)  viii.  212.
S.  Yves,  hill  of,  description  of,  xi.

88.
S.,  Master,  Richard  Hakluyt  to,  on

his  going  to  Constantinople  (1582)

V.  231.
Saba,  see  Sheba.
Saba  Island, Sir  Francis  Drake  at

(1595)  X.  229;  marks  of,  in  second

Ruttier,  309.
Sabea  Island,  see  Meroe  Island.
Sabellicus on the Carthaginian

mothers, iv. 71, 173; on the

names  of  Cyprus,  v.  124.
Sabione, Mare de, in Africa, vi.

144.

389

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sable,  best,  found  at  Pechora  (1588)
III.  365 ;  live,  sent  to  Sir  John
Gilbert  (1583)  viii.  60.

Sablon  Island,  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's fleet  at,  viii.  63,  85.

Sacaio,  in  Japan,  vi.  334.

Sacatecas,  Augustin  Boacio  taken
prisoner  at  (1557)  ix.  348;  mines
in,  358 ;  Don  Francisco  de  Pago
and  the  mines  of  (1572)  373;  John
Chilton  at  the  mines  of,  374;
Spanish  g'oods  carried  from  Vera
Cruz  to  (1572)  379.

Sacatlan, in Chiapa province, ix.

369-

Sacatocaluca,  distance  from,  to  the
South Sea, x. 275.

Sacatula,  Captain  Ulloa  at  (1539)  ix.
207.

Sacayr,  Sakayr,  Sakair,  Sir  Jerome
Bowes  and  (1584)  in.  474;  con-
demned to  prison,  478.

Sacile,  Girolamo  di,  captain,  and
Mustafa  Pasha  (1571)  v.  145.

Sacre,  Cape,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1587)  VI.  438,  441,  442,

Sacres,  see  Sakers.

Sacrifices,  religious,  of  the  Samo-
yedes,  11.  347-349 ;  of  the  people
of  Nova  Albion  (1578)  ix.  324;  to
devils,  made  by  natives  of  Brazil
(1578)  XI. 107.

Sacrifices,  Island  of,  near  New
Spain,  haunted  by  spirits  (1572)
IX.  378; latitude  of,  378.

Sacro  Bosco,  Johannes  de,  etymo-
logy of  Zodiac  by,  vii.  265 ;  his
opinion  on  cold  regions,  268.

Saders,  see  Breams.

Sadine,  money  of  Ormuz,  vi.  14.

Sadler,  Edward,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Sadler,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Sadlers  or  Saesi,  of  the  Grand
Signior, pay  of, vi. 64.

Safe  conduct,  see  Passport.

Safet,  near  Jerusalem,  vi.  no.

Saffron,  sale  of,  abroad  (1582)  v.
230,  240 ;  brought  to  England  by
a  pilgrim,  v.  241 ;  found  in  Bus-
sorah  and  Persia,  vi.  26.

Saffron-Walden,  in  Essex, v. 240.

Safran,  see  Saffron.

Sagbulve  Company  in  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Sagitta,  city  of,  besieged  by  Chris-
tians (1107)  IV.  302-306.

Sago,  presented  to  Sir  Francis
Drake  by  the  King  of  Ternate
(1579)  XI.  126.

Sagu  meal,  see  Sago.

Saguenay,  in  New  France,  vil.  171 ;
kingdom  of,  near  Honguedo,  viii.
183,  210,  214;  red  copper  found
in,  214,  237;  gold  and  silver  in,
237;  riches  of,  253,  274;  map  of
(1587)  272;  entrance  of,  279;
Roberval's  voyage  to  (1542)  283-
287,  288.

Saguenay,  river,  in  Saguenay,  viii.
217,  243,  245; falls  on,  236.

Saia,  red  dyeing  root,  found  in  S.
Thomas,  in  India,  v.  402,  428,
491.

Sailing  Chart,  English  (1592),  en-
graving of,  VI. 128.

Sailors,  English,  character  of,  xii.  6.

Sailors,  French,  wrecked  at  Brava
Island  (1564)  x.  15.

Saima,  x.  207;  Morequito's  flight
through,  375  ;  plains  of,  inhabited
by four  nations, 396.

Saincte  Michael,  Mount  of,  see  Mont
S.  Michel.

Sainterre,  M.  de,  lieutenant  of
Francis  de  Roberval  (1542)  viii.
283 ;  sent  to  France  by  Roberval
to  carry  news, 286.

Saints'  Island,  Spanish  possession
(1564)  IX.  5.

Saker,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1596)  X.  241.

Sakers,  Turkish,  used  at  the  siege
of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  18.

Sal,  Ilha  do.  Cape  Verde  Island,
Andrew  Barker  at  (1576)  x.  63;
latitude  of,  335 ;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.  2.

Sala, port  of  the  kingdom  of  Fez,

^^- ^43-  ^  . ,

Sal  ammoniac,  from  Scmde  and
Cambay, vi. 25.

Sal  armoniack,  see  Sal  ammoniac.

Sal  Medina,  mentioned  in  the  Rut-
tier,  X.  290 ;  longitude  from,  to
Cape  Cantin,  336.

Salaco  Castle, in  Rhodes,  v. 15.

390

INDEX

Saladin, Sultan of the Saracens

(1191)  IV.  332,  341; and  Richard

I., 334; beaten at Assur, 334;

destroys  Ascalon,  335.
Salamanca  and  the  defence  of  Spain

(1585)  X.  96.
Salamanca,  Gabriel  de,  ambassador

to  England  (1527)  v.  61.
Salamander, the, in Captain Fro-

bisher's fleet, and the whale

(1578)  VII.  327.
Salasalma Island, on  lake Onega,

III.  79.
Salcot,  Edward,  and  Henry  Roberts

(1585)  VI,  426.
Saldanha, Aguada, George Ray-
mond at  (1591)  VI.  389,  X.  194.
Sale,  James,  killed  in  the  Indian's

ambush  (1565)  ix.  74.
Salfeld, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

321.
Salgano  of  Castello, captain,  made

slave at Famagusta (1571) v.

151-

Salimbria,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1594)
VI. 107.

Salina,  town  in  Cyprus,  v.  125 ;
John  Locke  at  (1553)  93;  Laur-
ence  Aldersey at (1581) 213.

Salinacani  river,  see  Somme  river,
in  Florida.

Salinas,  Admiral  Juan  de,  and  the
Amazon  river,  xi. 17.

Salinas  of  Panuco  (1568)  ix.  415.

Saline,  see  Salina.

Salini,  see  Salina,

Salino, the Nana Ferra in (1594)

VI.  108,

Salisbury,  Hubert  Walter,  bishop  of,
travels  of  (1205)  iv.  346.

Salisbury,  William  Longespee,  Earl
of,  his  voyage  to  Syria  (1240)  iv.
352;  to  Asia  (1248)  353;  Saracen
merchants  and,  354 ;  Earl  of
Artois and, 355, 357; death of

(1249)  358.
Salkenstow, Richard, licensed to

trade  in  Russia  free  from  custom

(1592)  IIL  440.
Sallamca,  in  West  Indies,  burnt  by

Sir  Thomas  Baskerville  (1595)  x,

235-
Salle,  captives  of  the  Moors  at  (1593)

VII,  128.

Salle,  la,  in  Francis  de  Roberval's

voyage  (1542)  viii,  283,
Salles,  Captain,  and  Laudonniere  in

Florida  (1587)  viii,  471.
Salmon  fishing,  11.  328,
Salmon, white, in the Volga, iii.

370-

Salobert,  Mace,  captain  of  the  Little
Hermina  (1535)  viii.  211;  goes
up  the  S.  Lawrence  river,  230 ;  re-
turns to  France  with  letters  to  the
King (1540) 266.

Salomon,  see  Solomon.

Salsa  Perilla,  see  Sarsaparilla.

Salt,  in  Russia,  pits  of,  i.  234,
255,  II.  224,  263,  276,  410;
a  salt  house  near  Dogsnose,  364 ;
sent  to  Russia  (1560)  405,  408;
rock,  near  the  Caspian  Sea,  iii.
71 ;  fetched  from  Some,  82  ;  mak-
ing in  Russia,  368;  want  of,  in
Iceland,  iv.  84,  188;  hill  of,  in
Tabriz,  409 ;  pit  of,  in  Italy,
John  Locke's  description  of  (1553)
V.  93 ;  product  of  Cyprus,  125 ;
mines  in  Sorstyn  Mountains,
326;  in  Japan,  dearth  of,  vi.
328;  to  be  procured  at  the
Cape  Verde  Isles  for  the  Edward
Cotton  (1583)  408;  in  Mare  Glaci-
ale,  VII.  176;  in  Newfoundland
(1578)  VIII.  15;  found  in  the
Western  Planting  (1583)  116,  139;
not  used  in  Hochelaga,  233 ;  at
S.  John  Island,  Ralph  Lane  and
(1585)  313;  in  Granada,  ix.  157;
used  as  money  in  Guastacan,  371 ;
water  congealed  to,  in  New  Spain,
384;  island  of  red,  in  New  Spain,
397;  made  in  the  Salines  of  Pan-
uco, 415 ;  lake  in  Pinotespan  del
Rey  town,  470 ;  found  in  Maio
and  Fogo  Islands  (1597)  xi.  3,
104.

Salter,  David,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  317.

Salter,  George,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Salterne,  William,  deputy  of  the
Company  of  Merchants  (1583)
VIII. 133.

Saltfleet,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Salt,  Isle  of,  see  Sal,  Ilha  do.

391

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Saltonstall,  Richard,  Russian  licence

granted  to  (1586)  iii.  348.
Saltonstall, Richard,  of  the  Levant

Company  (1592)  vi.  75,  78.
Saltpetre in Russia, iii. 369; in

Morocco  (1577)  VI.  291.
Saltza, Hermannus de, fourth

master of the Hospitallers of

Jerusalem  (12 10)  11. i  f.
Salum, Riman, Hanse messenger,

"•  55-

Salvador,  Bahia  de,  mentioned  in
Ruttier,  xi.  82 ;  Thomas  Caven-
dish at  (1591)  389,  397.

Salvage  Cove,  Magellan  Straits,  the
Desire  at  (1592)  xi. 401.

Salvages,  the,  Solitary  Island,  near
Madeira,  vi.  136 ;  called  one  of  the
Canaries,  Captain  Laudonniere  at
(1564)  IX,  2; latitude  of,  x.  332.

Salvago,  Anselm,  and  the  bark
Aucher  (1551)  v.  72.

Salvaja  Island,  see  Salvages.

Salvajos,  people  near  Curiapan,  in
Trinidad,  x.  350.

Salvaterra  of  Spain,  and  the  north-
west passage  (1568)  vii.  179.

Samaitia,  11.  10.

Samar,  see  Samara.

Samara,  river,  11.  453 ;  abundance  of
liquorice  on  the  shore  of, 454.

Samaria,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  in.
195 ;  Duke  of,  and  the  Prophet
Elisha,  X.  44.

Samarkand,  King  of,  besieges  Bok-
hara, II.  474.

Samba  or  Zamba,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  Ruttier,  x.  288.

Samballes,  Cabo  de,  latitude  of,
Captain Gualle at (1584) ix.

332-

Samblas,  Punta  de,  S.  Cruz  Moun-
tains on,  X.  290.

Samborus,  benefactor  of  the  order  of
the  Dutch  knights,  ll.  4.

Samboses,  the,  people  near  Sierra
Leone  (1564)  x.  17;  cannibalism
of,  18.

Sambula  Island,  Sir  John  Hawkins'
raids on negroes from (1564) x.

17-

Samipagotos,  enemies  to  the  Span-
ish (1596)  X.  474.

Samma,  or  Samva,  city  in  Guinea,

VI. 160; gold trade in (1555)

163.
Sammaterra,  gold  trade  in  (1555)  vi.

163.
Samoed,  see  Samoyeda.
Samoeds,  see  Samoyedes.
Samogedi,  see  Samoyedes.
Samogetae,  see  Samoyedes.
Samoites,  see  Samoyedes.
Samorin, see  Calicut.
Samos,  English  merchants  in  (1580)

V.  187; Richard  Wrag  at  (1594)

VI.  107.

Samoyeda.  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,
III.  196;  William  Borough  at  the
discovery  of  (1556)  210;  cannibal-
ism in,  402;  Oliver  in,  454;
Arthur  Pet,  and  the  coast  of,  254-

257-

Samoyedes,  i.  77,  86 ;  habits  of
the,  153,  166,  VII.  368 ;  and
fur  trade  in  Russia,  11.  276;
and  Stephen  Borough  (1556)
334>  338 ;  description  of,  by
Richard  Johnson,  345,  346;  use
deer  instead  of  horses,  346;  Rus-
sian conquests  among,  423 ;  de-
scription, by  Feodor  Towtigin,
483 ;  cannibalism  of,  483 ;  Giles
Fletcher  on,  in.  402-403.

Sampoole,  Thomas,  of  Andrew
Barker's  Company,  killed  at  S.
Francisco  Island  (1576)  x.  86.

Sampson,  Captain  Anthony,  and  the
provisions  for  the  English  army
at  the  Groyne  (1589)  vi.  489.

Sampson,  Captain  John,  in  Spain
(1589)  VI.  484;  at  the  Groyne,  489;
field  corporal  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
expedition  (1585)  x.  98;  sent  by
Sir  Francis  Drake  to  the  governor
of  Bayona  Islands  (1585)  100;  at
the  taking  of  S.  lago  city  (1585)
104;  and  the  Portuguese  messen-
ger (1585)  106;  wounded  at  the
taking  of  Cartagena  (1586)  119;
at the attack of S. John's fort

(1586)  129.

Sampson,  Ensign,  death,  of,  at  Pan-
ama (1596)  X.  238.
Sampson, John, settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  vm.  402.

Sampson,  John,  child  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  viii.  403.

392

INDEX

Sampson,  the,  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's fleet  (1593)  VII.  118;  and
Las  Cinque  Llaguas, 119.

Samuel  and  products  from  Benin
(1591)  VI,  415.

Samuel,  page  of  Sir  John  Hawkms,
at  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)  ix.  453.

Samuel,  Dean  Robert,  witness  of
Edward  I.'s  great  charter,  i.  296.

Samuel,  the,  and  the  Spanish  ships

(1590) VII. 31.

Sanches,  John,  fiscal  of  the  Inquisi-
tion in  Mexico  (1574)  ix.  424.

Sancho,  King  of  Navarre,  father  of
Berengaria,  iv.  325,  330.

Sancian,  see  Santianum.

Sancius,  Michael,  pilot  in  the  South
Sea,  taken  by  Thomas  Cavendish
(1587)  XI.  319,  322 ;  sent  by  Caven-
dish to  Chaccalla  Bay  (1587)  322.

Sancius  Haven,  in  Newfoundland,
VIII.  109.

Sand  in  Devonshire,  Rowland  Hew-
ish  at  (1597)  VI.  93.

Sand,  sea  of,  in  Persia,  iv.  410 ;
bank  of,  moving  near  Tripolis,  vi.
I ; shoal of, near Riohacha, x.

234-

Sandals,  found  in  Cochin  and  Mala-
bar, VI.  25.

Sanders,  Blase,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307,  362,  410;
governor  to  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany (1561)  III.  14.

Sanders,  John,  boatswain  of  the
Jesus  of  LiJbeck,  cruelty  of,  to
landed  sailors  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  (1588)  ix.  409.

Sanders,  Master,  and  Henry  Austell
(1585)  V.  320.

Sanders,  Thomas,  '  Voyage  of  the
Jesus  to  Tripolis  '  (1583)  v.  292-
311; made  slave, 301; liberated

(1585)  307-

Sanderson,  William,  i.  xxx. ;  letter
from  Henry  Lane  (1554)  iii.  330-
336 ;  and  the  voyage  of  discovery
of  the  North-west  passage  (1583)
VII.  381 ;  John  Davys 's  letters  to,
407,  423 ;  greatest  owner  in  John
Davys's  fleet  (1585)  442;  globe,
published  by,  445.

Sandie,  Robert,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  76,  78.

Sands,  White,  see  White  Sand.

Sandwich,  Edward  the  Confessor
and,  I.  43  ff. ;  ships,  46  f. ;  ships
from,  in  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  297;
Edward  HL's  fleet  off  (1359)  301 ;
Prussian  ship  masters  prisoners
in, II. 14, 15 ; customs  in,  75.

Sandy  Island,  mentioned  in  second
Ruttier,  x.  322.

Sandy  Islands,  west  of  Wokan,  vm.

413-
Sandys,  George,  and  his  translation

of  Ovid,  XII. 108.
Sanestrol,  Zichmni  and  Nicolo  Zeno

meet  at  (c.  1380)  vii.  448.
Sangershusen, Hanno de, seventh

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

5-
Sangiaccho,  see  Sanjack.
Sangiam,  see  Santianum.
Sangradura, mentioned in second

Ruttier,  x.  326.
Sanguelos, the, or merchants, xi.

330- .

Sanguis  Draconis,  see  Cinnabar.

Sanjacks,  or  captains  in  the  Turkish
army,  v.  105 ;  three,  killed  at  the
bulwark  of  England  at  the  siege
of  Rhodes  (1522)  29.

Santa,  coast  town  in  Peru,  xi.  286.

Santanilla  or  Centanilla  Island,  lati-
tude of,  X.  336.

Santiago  forsakes  his  governor,
Antonio  de  Berreo,  x.  460 ;  takes
Francis  Sparrow  prisoner,  462 ;
taken  prisoner  by  the  Spanish,
462.

Santiago  di  Compostela,  intended
Tartar  pilgrimage  to,  i.  54.

Santianum  Island,  near  Canton,  vi.
347; death  of  S. Francis  Xavier

at/1552)  348.  .

Santisso,  Terneis  de.  Marquess  of
Seralba  and  (1589)  vi.  494.

Santo,  province  in  China,  xi.  379.

Santone's  '  Sermon  on  the  Mountain
of  Pardons,'  v.  357.

Santos,  Brazil,  the  Edward  Cotton's
trade  at,  vi,  408;  John  Whithall
at  (1578)  XI.  26;  Stephen  Hare  at
(1581)  35;  Stephen  Hare  leaves,
37;  distance  from,  to  Peru,  38;
Edward  Fenton  sends  a  present  to
the  governor  of  (1583) 192; lati-

XII

393

2  c

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

tude  of,  349 ;  taken  by  Thomas
Cavendish,  Cocke,  and  Captain
Davys  (1591)  390,  397;  on  S.
Vincent  river,  251.

Santos,  Island  de  los,  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  x.  309.

Santwat,  Isle  of  Man,  battle  of,  i.
28.

Saona  Island,  John  White  at  (1590)
VIII.  408 ;  Christopher  Newport  at
^1591)  X.  185;  William  King  at
(1592)  191 ;  described  by  the  Rut-
tier,  283  ;  marks  of,  in  second  Rut-
tier,  311;  latitude  of,  333;  longi-
tude from,  to  S.  Domingo,  336.

Sapata,  see  Henao.

Sapientia  Island,  near  Modon,  in
Morea,  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.
loi ;  William  Harborne  at  (1583)
250.

Sapies,  La  Formio,  island  of  the,
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1564)  x.  16;
conquered  by  the  Samboses,  de-
scription of,  17 ; laws  of,  19  f .

Saporatona,  cacique,  follower  of
Carapana  (1595)  x.  419.

Sapotecas, province in Mexico, ix.

365-

Sapphires,  stones  like,  found  in
Guiana  (1595)  x.  405.

Saracens,  i.  84,  87,  135,  142,  146,
285  f. ;  Bathy  and,  76,  84,  86,
152 ;  in  Orna,  152 ;  refusing
baptism,  254 ;  Sartach  and,  269 ;
captive,  beheaded  by  Richard  I.
(1191)  IV.  334;  fight  between
Christians  and,  at  Mansor  (1249)
357 ;  and  the  country  of  Ormuz,
411;  Lyon,  King  of  Armenia,  de-
spoiled of  his  kingdom  by  the
(1386)  446,  448;  Genoese  war
against  (1390)  450; in  China,  vi.

374-

Sarafo  Island,  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V.  250.

Saramet,  Sultan  of  Kait,  and  An-
thony Jenkinson,  11.  465.

Sarauahi,  village  of,  in  Florida,  ix.
38;  food  found  at,  by  Captain
Laudonniere  (1565)  75.

Sarcacolla,  found  in  Persia,  vi.  27.

Sardenna, see  Sardinia.

Sardinia,  in  Thome's  map,  11.  171  ;
Roger Bodenham in sight of

(1551)  V.  72; Spanish  possession,
249.
Sare, Richard, in Virginia (1585)

VIII.  318.

Sarguit,  Tartars  and  the  town  of,  i.
152.

Sarimento,  see  Sarmiento.

Sarinbugh,  town  on  the  Manurawini
river, x. 494.

Sarisburie,  see  Salisbury.

Sarmates  or  Asarmathes,  son  to  Jok-
tan.  III.  358.

Sarmatia,  see  Russia.

Sarmiento,  Don  Juan,  governor  of
Margarita,  son  of  Don  Juan  de
Villa  Andreda,  and  Sir  John  Bur-
rough,  x.  363 ;  and  Antonio  de
Berreo,  373.

Sarmiento,  Pedro,  governor  of  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  prisoner  of
the  English  (1586)  vi.  435,  xi.  92,
93 ;  and  the  building  of  the  forts,
267 ;  sent  from  Lima  to  the  Strait
of  Magellan,  to  pursue  Sir  Francis
Drake,  266 ;  lands  in  the  Strait  of
Magellan,  and  builds  a  town,  271 ;
seeks  for  help  at  Pernambuco  and
Bahia,  272 ;  taken  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  barks  (1586)  273;  lieu-
tenant of  Alvares  de  Mendanio,
288.

Sarnichoke,  Tartar,  subject  to  the
Prince  of  Bokhara,  11.  480.

SarracoU,  John,  '  Voyage  of  the  Earl
of  Cumberland  '  (1586-7),  written
by,  XI.  202-227 ;  called  in  council
by  Robert  Withrington  (1587)  211.

Sarre,  Ralph,  merchant  in  Exeter,
his  voyage  to  S.  Domingo  and
Mexico  (1555)  IX.  341.

Sarrope, Island, fertility  of,  ix.  51.

Sarsaparilla, found  in New Spain,

IX.  397;  in  S.  lago  de  Leon
by  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston,  x,  223 ;
in  Guayaquil,  xi.  286.

Sartach,  i.  231,  232,  234,  249;  Rub-
ruquis'  letter  to,  252 ;  arrival  of
Rubruquis  at  the  court  of,  260 ;
state  of,  261 ;  reception  of  Rub-
ruquis in  vestments  by,  262  f. ;
sends  Rubruquis  to  Bathy,  264  f. ;
the  Christians  and,  266,  269.

Sarthi,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.

Saruiur,  i.  70,  144.

394

INDEX

Saruyur,  see  Saruiur.

Saseno  Island,  John  Locke  at  (1553)

V.  103.
Sassafras  bark,  a  cure  for  Jacques

Carder's crew (1535) viii. 250;

leaves  used  as  food  by  Ralph  Lane

(1585)  331 ;  found  in  Virginia,  355,

372 ;  in  Florida,  xii.  76.
Sassi,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.
Satagan, on the Ganges, v. 410;

products  of,  411; Ralph  Fitch  in

(c.  1583)  475,  482 ; description  of,

483-

Satalia,  i.  308.

Satayle,  see  Satalia.

Sathiodaphnitae,  people  of  Libya,  vi.
168.

Satourioua,  King  of  the  river  May,
and  Captain  Laudonniere  (1564)
IX.  6,  26,  29,  52 ;  family  of,  7 ;
enemy  of  the  King  of  Thimagoa,
12;  vassals  of  (1564)  21;  enmity
against  the  King  of  Utina  (1565)
66 ;  presents  to  Captain  Gour-
gues  (1567)  loi ;  complaints  of  the
Spaniards, 102.

Satyrs,  people  of  Africa,  vi. 169.

Sauban,  Captain,  returned  from
England  (1589)  vi.  514.

Saucy  Jack,  the,  of  the  English  fleet

(1589)  VII. 5, II.

Saukevill,  Bartholomew  de,  witness
of  Henry  IIL's  charter,  i.  324.

Saults,  see  Falls.

Sava, on  the  Nile,  vi. 145.

Savage,  Sir  Arthur,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Savano, mentioned in Ruttier, x.

304-

Savile,  Henry,  captain  of  the  Ad-
venture, X.  240 ;  confutation  of
Spanish  lies  about  Sir  Francis
Drake  by  (1596)  246-265;  at  the
fight  of  Pinos  (1596)  262.

Savill,  John,  in  William  Towerson's
expedition  to  Guinea  (1555)  vi.
199,  202,  208.

Savin,  Andrew,  Russian  ambassador
to  England  (1568)  iii.  107,  177;
and  the  privileges,  108;  and
Queen  Elizabeth, 183.

Savine  trees,  in  Teneriffe,  vi.  130.

Saviour,  the,  of  Bristol,  and  the
Chios  trade,  v. 115.

Savona  Island,  surrounded  by  flats,
VI.  404.

Savoy,  Amadeus,  duke  of,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  205.

Savoy,  Lewis,  Duke  of,  second  hus-
band of  Charlotta,  daughter  of
John,  King  of  Cyprus,  v.  125.

Savoy,  Hakluyt,  chaplain  of  the,
XII.  83,

Sawsie  Jack,  see  Saucy  Jack.

Saxi,  on  Danube,  Henry  Austell  at

(1585)  V.  325-

Saxie,  Zachary,  honourable  death  of,
at  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.  317,  318.

Saxo  Grammaticus,  Lib.  ii.  pag.
187.  III.  373;  on  Iceland,  iv,  13,
102  ;  on  the  fountains  of  Iceland,
35. 37. 130; on Icelanders, 53,

Saxons  and  Octher,  i.  14.

Saxony,  Duke  of,  thirty-third  master
of  the  Dutch  knights  (1500)  11.
10.

Say,  money  of  Bussorah,  vi.  12.

Sayas,  Alonzo  de,  prisoner  in  Eng-
land (1588)  IV.  213,  231.

Sayer,  William,  admiral  of  Dart-
mouth, and  Charles  Leigh  at  Far-
rillon  (1597)  VIII.  166.

Sayi,  I.  87.

Sayles  Island,  see  S.  George  Island.

Sayma,  see  Saima.

Saymi,  x.  424.

Saytosa,  see  Sidon.

Sazeuma,  King  of,  soldiers  of,  xi.
426.

Scacafel  Hill,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  i.
251.  254.

Scacatai,  Scacatay,  see  Scacati.

Scacati, Bathy's kinsman, i. 251,

254-

Scamonea,  found  in  Syria  and  Per-
sia, VI.  26.

Scantia,  see  Norway.

Scarborough,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  299;  trade  with
Iceland,  11. 137.

Sardeburg,  damages  paid  by,  11.  34,
103,  105.

Scawe,  II.  63,  69.

Schalholt,  bishops  of,  in  Iceland,  iv.
54-60,  152-159;  cathedral  of,  62,
162;  bishopric  of.  In  Iceland,  11,
15,  99,  104.

395

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Scheldt, Martin Frobisher sights

the  (1576)  VII.  211.
Schesche,  Indian  beggars,  v.  476.
Schiedam,  in  Holland,  v.  320.
Schinick,  Nicholas,  chancellor  of  the

King  of  Hungary,  Bela  IV.,  in.

392-
Schrichfinnia,  see  Lapland.
Schurgasse,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)

V.  326.

Schuvenden,  Burckardus  a,  ninth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights
(1282)  ir.  5.

Scieko, ruler  in South Russia, in.

357-
Scilly, Isle  of, the Tiger  at  (1556)

VI.  2 12  ;  the  Richard  of  Arundel  in
sight  of  (1591)  466;  Captain  Fro-
bisher near  (1578)  vii.  242,  at
(1577)  317;  John  Davys  at  (1585)
382,  (1587)  415,  425;  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  fleet  begins  its
course  from  (1583)  viii.  45;  ship
from  S.  Malo  taken  near,  by  the
Pleasure  (1591)  155;  William  Coxe
and  Andrew  Browne  at  (1576)  x.
87;  Captain  Barker  (1597)  280;
Luke  Warde  at  (1583)  xi.  201.

Scinde,  coast  of,  in  India,  v.  469 ;
spikenard  found  in,  vi.  25 ;  mon-
soon from  Goa  to,  29 ;  from
Ormuz  to, 30.

Scio,  see  Chios.

Scipio,  Livy  on,  v.  119.

Scipio,  of  Castello,  captain,  slain  at
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  150.

Scirings Hall, Octher and, i.

Scitadin,  Sidatin,  town  in  Canada,
viii.  244,  254.

Scithia,  see  Scythia.

Scivassi  and  Marasco,  Pasha  of,  v.
148, 152.

Sclavonia,  see  Dalmatia.

Scluse,  see  Sluys.

Scof,  Edgar,  his  ship  at  Calais,  11.
40.

Scoffe,  Egghard,  of  Danzig,  dam-
ages paid  to,  II. 103  f.

Scolmus,  a  Dane,  and  the  North-
west passage,  vii.  179,  188.

'  Scondia.  History  of,'  by  Jacobus
Zieglerus,  vii.  183.

Sconeland,  11.  69.

Sconia,  free  passage  to,  demanded
by  Henry  IV.  11.  42,  44,  46.

Sconie,  Wolstan  and,  i.  15.

Sconses,  built  by  Ralph  Lane  in  Vir-
ginia (1585)  VII.  324,  332.

Scorpe  Sound,  Arthur  Pet  in  the
(1580)  III.  302.

Scot,  lost  in  the  Ilha  do  Sal  (1577)

VI.  249.

Scot,  Michael,  of  Calais,  sea  cap-
tain, II. 104.

Scot,  Nicholas,  of  Calais,  damages
paid  by,  11. 103.

Scotland,  products  of,  11.  121;
climate  of,  vii.  268;  heat  of,  271;
fish  trade  with  Frisland,  450.

Scots,  eight  bands  of,  in  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205.

Scott,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Scout,  Edward  Gilman,  captain  of
(1585)  X.  99.

Scoutsnesse,  Stephen  Borough  near,
II.  324.

Scrickfin,  see  Lapland.

Scritlna,  wife  of  Olaf,  son  of  God-
red,  I.  35.

Scroope,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet,  death  of  (1586)  x.  134.

Scurvy  grass,  use  of,  at  Penguin
Island,  XI.  411.

Scythae,  see  Scythians.

Scythia,  i.  166,  234.

Scythian Cape, in Ortelius's map,

VII.  192;  Ocean,  11.  251,  iii.
264 ;  whalefishing  in  the,  265 ;
Anthony  Jenkinson's  remarks  on,
VII. 168 ; strong  sea  currents  in,

337-

Scythians,  discovery  of  America  and
the,  VII.  165 ;  conquered  and  con-
verted by  Constantine,  viii.  106 ;
Wandering  (Scythae  Nomades),  or
Tartars,  iii.  398.

Scythish,  see  Scythian.

'  Sea,  Fluxions  and  Eruptions  of
the,'  Aristotle  on,  vi.  171.

Sea,  the  Narrow,  importance  of,  to
England,  11.  114  f.,  136,  145;
westerly  currents  of  the,  vii.  152,
166,  167;  Jenkinson  on  Northern,
168,  183 ;  frozen,  175 ;  salt  in,
176;  opinions  on  frozen,  unjusti-
fied by  experience,  289 ; depth  of

396

INDEX

the,  Frobisher's  account  of  the,
200 ;  currents  of  the,  202 ;  fresh
water  rivers  running  in  the,
347;  Red,  towns  on  the  bank
of,  V.  347,  359 ;  coral  found
in,  VI.  26;  monsoon  from
Goa  to,  30;  of  West  Indies,  mer-
chants in  the,  vii.  201 ;  Fresh
water,  in  Canada,  Jacques  Cartier
and  the  (1535)  viii.  246;  Fresh
water,  river  in  Brazil  called,  de-
scription of,  XI.  20 ;  latitude  of,
21;  White  and  Red,  discovered
by  Captain  UUoa  (1539)  ix.  225.

Sea-Apostles,  the,  Spanish  ships,
XII. 69.

Seabremes,  see  Breams.

Sea  Dragon,  the,  Henry  White,  cap-
tain of  (1585)  X.  98.

Seaford,  Sussex,  i.  48 ;  ships  from,
in  Edward  III.'s  fleet, 298.

Seahorses,  see  Walruses.

Seal,  Russian  Emperor's,  11.  272 ;
for  the  Muscovy  Company,  11.
308 ;  of  the  Levant  Company
(1592)  VI.  83.

Seal  Oil,  drink  of  Canadian  natives,

VIII.  287.

Scale Island, see  Lobos Island.

Scales  Bay,  latitude  of,  xi.  349,  356.

Scales  Island,  see  Lobos  Island.

Seals,  hunting  of,  in  Russia,  iii.
366 ;  caught  on  the  ice  in  Iceland,
IV.  30,  123 ;  in  Saldanha  Bay,  vi.
389;  near  Cape  Breton,  viii.  160;
abundance  of,  in  California,  de-
scribed by Captain Ulloa (1539)

IX.  216;  near  Japan,  found  by
Captain  Gualle  (1584)  336;  or  sea-
wolves,  killed  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  xi.  107,  108;  near
the  river  Plate,  160;  of  Port  Desire,
description  of  (1586)  295;  skins
of,  unprofitable  ware,  11.  404 ;
used  by  natives  of  Meta  Incognita
(1577)  VII.  225;  skins  of,  dressed
by  Indians,  described  by  Captain
Ulloa  {1540)  IX.  261;  skins  of,  re-
stored to  Indians  by  Francis
Preciado,  276.

Seamanship, proposed  improvement

of,  I.  xxxiv.  f.
Seames, the, Edward Fenton at

(1583)  XI.  201.

Searchthrift,  the,  Stephen  Borough,
master,  11.  322,  345,  363,  390;  at
Our  Lady  of  Hollands,  323 ;  voy-
ages of,  345,  363  ;  at  Kholmogory,
390;  off  Vaigach  Island  (1556)  m.
121; discoveries  of  the  (1556)334.

Scawano,  kingdom  of,  in  Guiana,
and  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.
207.

Sebastian,  King  of  Portugal,  and
Tom  Stukelcy,  xii.  102.

Sebastian,  and  the  Jesus  in  Tripolis

(1584)  V. 297.

Sebastian  of  Ascoli,  Captam,  made

slave  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.
Sebenico,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

322.
Sebesten,  found  in  Cyprus,  vi.  27.
Sebo, Captain Parker's voyage to

(1596)  X. 277; taken  by  Captain

Parker  (1597)  279.
Seboyon  Island,  latitude  of,  xi.  350;

from,  to  Masbat  Island,  364.
Seburgh, John, of  Colchester, and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.
Seclemore, Edward, in Virginia

(1585)  VIII.  318.

Secotan  or  Sequotan,  in  Winganda-
coa,  VIII.  307 ;  Sir  Richard  Grcn-
villc  at  (1585)  316;  south  posses-
sion of  the  English  in  Virginia,
321;  village  of,  by  John  White,
engraving  of,  336;  John  White
and,  394.

Secretary  of  the  viceroy  in  Turkey,
or  Ressistop,  attributions  of,  vi.
66.

'  Secrets  of  Secrets,'  John  Erigena
and  the  translation  of,  iv.  281.

'  Secrets,  the  Seaman's,'  by  John
Davys  (1594)  xii.  29.

Sects,  religious, in  China,  vi. 372.

Secutra,  see  Sokotra.

Sedenno,  Antonio,  his  attempt  to
discover  Guiana  (1536)  x.  497.

Seeds,  a  present  from  Captain  Alar-
chon  to  Indians  (1540)  ix.  314.

Seeley,  Thomas,  Captain  of  the
Minion  (1585)  x. 98.

Seelie,  sec  Scelcy.

Seething  Lane,  lodgings  of  the  Rus-
sian ambassadors in (1567) iii.

Sefelt,  in  Austria,  v.  321.

397

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Seford,  see  Seaford.

Segar, John, of Bury in Suffolk,

on St. Helena Island (1593) vi.

402.
Segoorus, Marcus, and the freed

slaves  of  Tripolis  (1585)  v.  309.
Segrave, Elizabeth, wife of Lord

Mowbray  (1399)  iv.  453.
Segswick, Segewicke and Sedge-

wike,  John,  11.  213; merchant  in

Russia  (1555)  291; at  Novgorod,

392-

Segura,  Aguada,  see  Porto  Seguro.

Seguro,  Porto,  see  Porto  Seguro.

Seilan,  see  Ceylon.

Seimer,  see  Seymour.

Seine,  river  of,  in  Florida,  discov-
ered by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)
VIII.  460;  Captain  Laudonniere
at  (1564)  IX.  13;  Captain  Gour-
gues  lands  at  the  mouth  of  (1567)

lOI.

Selaw,  in  Norway,  11.  64.

Selim,  Sultan,  father  of  Solyman,  v.
2.

Sellyzure,  Anthony  Jenkinson's  dif-
ficulties in,  II.  459;  his  arrival  at,
461 ;  products  of,  462  ;  his  return
from,  475.

Selman,  Edward,  and  the  captured
ships  of  Danzig  (1577)  vi.  232,
234; in  Cape  Verde  Island  (1577)

237-
Selman,  Master,  notary  of  the  pro-
ceedings of Captain Frobisher's

expedition (1578)  vii. 348, 349.
Seloy  river,  see  Dolphins  river.
Seloy,  village  in  Florida, ix. 90.
Selucax, Southam and Sparke at

(1566)  III.  79.
Seluco Hills, mentioned in second

Ruttier,  x.  325.
Selvnaz,  on  the  lake  of  Ladoga,  iii.

81.
Semana, Gulf of, mentioned in

second Ruttier, x. 327.
Semaracon, captain of Wackerew

town  (1595)  X.  207.
Sembrano,  Spanish  carpenter,  taken

prisoner by Thomas Cavendish

(1587)  XI.  322.
Semeland, King  Arthur  and,  i.  6.
Semiramis, and Babylon walls, v.

119.

Semnoi,  Poyas,  or  Cingulus  mundi,
in.  407,  410,  411.

Senates, two, in  China,  vi. 364.

Senators,  Chinese,  selection  of,  vi.
366.

Sendxizow,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  326.

Seneca,  lib.  3  Nat.  Quaest,  iv.  35,
130;  on  subterranean  rivers,  36,
131;  on  petrifying  fountains,  36,
131;  on  sweet  fountains,  37,  133;
on  poisoned  fountains,  39,  135;
quotation  from, viil. 443.

Senega, see  Senegal.

Senegal,  Ethiopians  in,  vi.  143 ;
River,  or  Nigritis,  167 ;  privileges
granted  to  English  trade  on  (1588)
443,  445;  Richard  Rainolds's  voy-
age to  (1591)  VII.  90;  products  of,
90;  French  traders  in,  91;  Gani-
goga,  trader  in,  98;  discovered  by
Alouis  de  Cadomosta  (1455)  viii.
127  ;  Company,  privileges  granted
to  the  (1588)  VI.  443-450;  limited
to  ten  years,  446 ;  free  from  cus-
toms, 448.

Senex  de  Monte  at  Melistorte,  Friar
Odoric  and  (1330)  iv.  438;  death
of,  439.

Senlis,  King  of  France  at  (1386)  iv.
446.

Senlize, see  Senlis.

Senna,  found  in  Mecca,  vi.  27.

Senor,  Valle  del,  see  Lord's  Valley.

Sens,  Cardinal  of,  keeper  of  the
great  seal  of  France,  vi.  125.

Sepulchre,  Holy,  at  Jerusalem,  de-
scription of,  by  Laurence  Aldersey
(1581)  V.  211.

Sequanus,  Joannes  Metellus,  iii.
461.

Sequin,  value  of,  v.  147.

Serachick,  subject  to  Murse  Smille,
II.  457 ;  products  of,  462  ;  Urgenj
to,  fifteen  days'  journey,  480,  481.

Seraglio,  officers  of  the  (1588)  vi.
68; pay  of,  61,  68.

Seragni, found  in  Persia,  vi. 25.

Seralba,  Marquess  of,  and  Juan  de
Vera  (1589)  vi.  486;  and  defence
of Puente de Burgos, 491, 494,

525-.
Seranilla, latitude of, described in
the  Ruttiers, x. 292,  336.

398

INDEX

Seraphine  of  gold,  money  of  Ormuz,
VI, 14, 19; of  Goa, 18.

Serauahi,  King,  visits  Captain
Ribault  at  Fort  Caroline  (1565)  ix.
88.

Serchthrift,  see  Searchthrift.

Seremum,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i,  74.

Serena,  mountain  in  Spain,  crook-
backed  sheep  found  on,  ix.  165.

Seres, people and town called, i.

293-
Sergeant  to  the  Muscovy  Company,

11.  312.
Sergius-and-the-Trinity Monastery,

in-  343-
Serica,  iii.  279.
Serifo,  King  of  Mecca,  v.  348; his

authority  handed  over  to  the  cap-
tain of  the  caravan, 350.
Seripho, see  Serifo.
Seroctan, Mangu's mother, i. 74,

150.
Serowos, enemies to the Spanish

(1596)  X.  474.
Serpa, Pedro Hernandez de, his

attempt to discover Guiana, x.

364,  497; and  the  Wikiri,  396.
Serpent, the, Sir  Walter  Raleigh's

ship, voyage of, to the Azores

(1586)  VI.  434.
Serpents,  used  as  food  in  Pegu,  v.

425 ; in  Florida,  description  of,  x.

60.
Serpeto,  Castle  of,  Laurence  Alder-

sey  near  the  (1586)  vi.  41.
Serponowtzi,  trade  of  the,  iii.  408.
Serrabosa,  animal  found  at  the  river

Plate,  VI.  410.
Serrana,  shoals  of,  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  x.  292 ; rocks  of,  latitude

oi,  335-
Serrano,  Luis,  governor  of  Angola,

VI.  468.
Serrany, King, and Captain Lau-

donniere  (1564)  ix.  32.
Serre,  i.  48.
Serrepore,  kingdom  of,  description,

V.  484.
Serringe, Ralph  Fitch  at  (c. 1583)

V.  473-
Serrion, King  of Pegu's  letter, v.

490.
Servants  of  the  Muscovy  Company,

II.  406 ; bond,  in  Persia,  iii.  165 ;

Russian,  of  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, not  allowed  to  sell  English
wares  (1569)  349.

Servidore,  King  of,  called  King  of
Bread,  v.  472.

Serving  men  in  England,  wages  of
(1589)  VI.  523.

Servius  Tullius, iv. 22, 113.

Sesame  seed,  to  be  brought  to  Eng-
land (1582)  v.  230,  237.

Sesto,  see  Sestos.

Sestos  Castle,  in  the  Hellespont,  vi.
107.

Sestos,  river  in  Guinea,  vi.  147 ;  lati-
tude of,  158;  William  Towerson's
expedition  on  the  (1555)  177,  182,
(1556)  213,  (1577)  233;  French  ship
in  (1557)  218;  English  merchants
at  (1562)  258,  261 ;  the  Richard
of  Arundel  athwart  of  (1588)  451;
William  Hawkins  at  (1530-32)  xi.

23-
Setebos, or Settaboth, god of the

Patagonians,  xii. 112.
Setes, or  holy  men, in Persia, in.

162.
Setforth,  Russian  measure  for  corn,

II.  275.
Seton,  ships  from,  in  Edward  HL's

fleet,  I.  297.
Settea, ship of Zante, Thomas

Saunders  in  a  (1585)  v.  309.
Settle, Dionysus, his account of

Martin  Frobisher's  second  voyage

to  the  North-west  (1577)  vii.  211.
Setubal,  in  Portugal,  vi.  502 ; Span-
ish ship lost at (1589) VII. 69;

English  prisoners  at  (1591)  83.
Setuval,  Setuvel,  see  Setubal.
Seven Islands, Jacques Cartier at

(1535)  VIII.  243; latitude  of,  278.
Seven Islands, Sir  Walter  Raleigh

at  (1597)  XI.  6.
Seven  Towers,  the  Ascension  at  the

(1593)  VI.  95.
Severing  of  Friends,  Bay  of,  named

by Sir Francis Drake (1578)  xi.

112.
Severn river, vi. 231.
Sevilla,  see  Seville.
Seville,  in  Spain,  Robert  Thorne  at,

II.  159 ; galleon  of,  disabled  at  the

first engagement  (1588) iv. 213;

John  Betancourt  leaves  (1417)  369;

399

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

the  Three  Half  Moons  at  (1563)  v.
153  ;  Reuben  of  Bracamont  leaves
(1417)  VI.  120;  flyboats  of,  in  Ter-
ceira  (1589)  vii.  71 ;  Robert  Tom-
son  and  John  Field  at  (1553)  ix.
338 ;  Roger  Bodenham  at  (1564)
359;  Miles  Philips  at  (1580)  443;
English  prisoners  sent  to  the  Con-
tratation  House  at  (1570)  463;
people  of,  and  the  defence  of
Spain  (1585)  X.  96;  fleet  of  the
merchants  of,  for  the  discovery  of
the  Moluccas  (1527)  xi.  91.
Sevsemski  Headland,  in  Russia,  in.

74-
Sewramo, Sir Walter Raleigh at

(1597)  XI. 10.

Sextus,  Aurelius,  on  Flavius  Con-
stantine,  iv.  275.

Seymour,  Edward,  Duke  of  Somer-
set, and  Sebastian  Cabot  (1548)
VII.  147.

Seymour,  Lord  Henry,  and  the
lesser  ships  of  the  English  fleet
(1588)  IV.  208;  and  Admiral
Lonck,  209 ;  and  Lord  Charles
Howard,  219;  and  the  Spanish
ships  in  flight,  228.

Seynam  Island,  or  Zeman,  Wil-
loughby's  fleet  at  (1553)  n.  220,
221;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  fleet
at,  415.

Seyton,  Robert  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward L's  great  charter,  i.  296.

Shabedge,  Richard,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia  (1587)  VIII. 403.

Shabowshare,  11.  451.

Shabran,  Ant??ony  Jenkinson  at
(1562)  III.  20,  26.

Shah,  Thomas,  see  Thamas  L

Shakespeare,  Plays  of,  xii.  92 ;
characters  of  the  plays  of,  95 ;
nautical  error  of,  in  the  Tempest,
109.

Shalapa,  S.  Augustine  Monastery  in,
burnt  by  Indians  (1572)  ix.  372;
Miles Philips's escape to (1580)

439-
Shalcan,  from, to  Russian  borders,

Tartar  grazing  country,  in.  397.
Shalcans,  Tartar  tribe,  in.  399,  400.
Shales, William, his voyage from

Bussorah  to  Aleppo,  vi.  7,  8; of

the  Levant  Company  (1592)  76,  78.

Shalkan,  Andrew,  Russian  chancel-
lor (1583)  III.  317,  321,  467;  beaten
by  the  Emperor,  324 ;  Sir  Jerome
Bowes  sent  to  prison  by,  326,  483 ;
and  English  merchants,  329,  330.

Shalkan,  Vasili,  counsellor  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia  (1584)  iii.  342;
English  merchants  and,  442,  444.

Shalkaules  country,  in.  238.

Shallawy  Island,  English  trade  in,
restricted  to  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, III.  97.

Shalli,  Murzey,  son  of  the  King  of
Shirvan  (1562)  in.  27;  courtesy  of,
to  Anthony  Jenkinson,  31.

Shals,  William,  John  Newbery's
letter to, from Ormuz (1583) v.

457.  458-

Shaltcall,  latitude  of,  in.  20.

Shamaky, see  Shemakha.

Shame  river,  English  merchants  on
the  (1569)  III. 116.

Shamma,  a  town  in  Guinea,  Wil-
liam Towerson  at  (1557)  vi.  218,
228,  (1577)  246,  247;  George  the
Negro  at,  225.

Shan-se,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.

Shan-tung, province of China, vi.

350-

Sharks  at  Sierra  Leone,  ix.  446 ;
taken  by  the  Jesus  and  the  Solo-
mon (1564)  X.  23.

Shascal,  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  in.
196.

Shasko,  Anthony  Jenkinson's  inter-
preter detained  at  (1572)  in. 171.

Shauan,  Alcayde,  at  Sus,  in  Morocco
(1577)  VI.  291.

Shaudet,  the,  bound  for  Mina  (1557)
VI. 217.

Shaugh,  see  Shah.

Shaugh,  Persian  money,  in.  49;
value  in  English  money,  53.

Shauo,  see  Shyawe.

Shavaran,  Thomas  Banister  at
(1569)  in.  151;  English  merchants
at, 154,

Shaw,  Randolph,  assistant  to  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi.  163;  and
the  council,  172  ;  and  the  Spanish
letters  (1582) 184.

Sha,  see  Shah.

Shawdet  of  Honfleur,  ships  belong-
ing to  (1577)  VI.  241.

400

INDEX

Shawgro, in  Guinea, vi. 159.

Sheba,  Queen  of, vi, 145, 169.

Shebaios,  Gowateri  Island  inhabited
by  the  (1598)  x.  458,  492 ;  enemies
to  the  Spanish  (1596)  474.

Sheep,  Russian,  iii.  369;  and  shep-
herds in  the  desert,  v.  446 ;  crook-
backed,  found  on  Serena  Moun-
tain, in  Spain,  ix.  165  ;  of  Quivira,
description of, 168.

Sheets,  packing,  trade  of,  in  Guinea
(1577)  VI.  252.

Sheffield,  Lady  (1545-1608)  i.  xlx.

Sheld,  see  Scheldt.

Sheld,  Clays,  and  the  English  ship,
II.  60,  61,  64.

Shelepin,  Vasili  Feodorowich,  secre-
tary of  Astrakhan  (1579)  iii.  217,
220.

Shelley,  compared  to  Marlowe,  xii.
107.

Shellie,  Laurence,  on  the  Content,
non-combatant  (1591)  x.  183.

Shem,  son  of  Noah,  settled  in  Asia,
VII. 264.

Shemakha,  in  Shirvan  or  Media,
trade  of,  11.  478 ;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  at  (1562)  iii.  21,  23,
33  >  34;  one  of  chief  cities
in  Persia,  35 ;  Thomas  Alcock
at  (1563)  41 ;  Richard  John-
son at  (1565)  46;  one  month's
travel  to  Aleppo,  57  ;  sixteen  days'
journey  to  Kazvin,  58;  English
trade  in  (1567)  94;  Arthur  Ed-
wards at  (1568)  136;  Christopher
Faucet  and  Richard  Pringle  at,
137;  Thomas  Banister  at,  151;
Geoffrey  Ducket  at,  154 ;  descrip-
tion of  (1574)  158;  mutiny  in,  162;
tar  in,  166;  conquered  by  the
Turks  (1580)  224;  Robert  Gold-
ing's  expeditions  to  and  from,  230,
232 ;  siege  of,  235 ;  market  for
raw  silk  in,  400.

Shemines  or  noblemen,  in  Pegu,  v.
489.

Shen-se,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.

Shepeway,  see  Sheppey.

Sheppey,  seat  of  justice  for  the  Five
Ports,  I.  44,  45,  294.

Shepwash,  William,  quartermaster
on  the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.
214.

Sherborne,  Sighelm,  bishop  of  (883)

IV.  279.
Sherbrouke,  see  Cherbourg.
Sheres,  see  Xeres.
Sherife  or  Moorish  priest, vi. 392,

393-

Sherington,  William,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Sherley,  Sir  Anthony,  voyage  to  S.
lago,  etc.  (1596)  X.  266-276;  ill-
ness of,  at  Pescadores  (1596)  267;
recovery  of,  269 ;  S.  lago  town
taken  by  (1596)  270;  illness  of  the
crew  of,  272 ;  and  the  Flemish
ship,  272 ;  portrait  of,  272 ;  and
Captain  Parker  meet  at  Jamaica,
and  leave  for  the  Bay  of  Honduras
(1597)  274,  277;  on  Rio  Dolce,
275  ; in  Newfoundland,  276.

Shersbonare,  garden  of  the  Emperor
of  Morocco,  VI.  291 ;  Henry
Roberts  at  (1588)  427.

Sherwood,  William,  master  of  the
Aucher  (1550)  v.  71.

Shetly,  Head  of,  iii.  238.

Shillabey,  new  mate  of  the  Jesus
(1583)  v.  293.

Shingleton,  Thomas,  passport  grant-
ed to,  by  the  King  of  Algiers
(1583)  v.  266,  267.

Ship,  Norwegian,  Henry  HL's
mandate  concerning,  i.  322 ;
Guipuzcoan,  of  the  Armada,
burnt  by  the  English  (1588)
IV.  215;  Venetian,  taken  by  the
English  (1588)  216;  Biscayan,
Captain  Crosse  and  the,  226 ;
Spanish,  lost  on  the  coast  of
Blankenberghe,  227 ;  or  Busse,
297,  301 ;  Tartar,  called  Yase,  411 ;
Portuguese,  captured  by  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1592)  vi,  397;
from  Caen,  M.  de  Barboti^re,  cap-
tain of,  at  Mona  (1593)  404;  Span-
ish, captured  by  the  English  (1589)
VII.  5 ;  prize  of  the  Weymouth
(1589)  13;  of  S.  Malo,  taken  by
the  English,  13 ;  from  Pernam-
buco,  captured  by  the  English  fleet
(1589)  19;  from  Mexico,  captured
by  the  English,  20;  mutiny  on
the,  of  Robert  Flicke  (1591)  61;
Spanish,  captured  by  the  English

401

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

•(1590)  73;  from  the  Portuguese
Indies,  captured  by  the  English,
79;  Biscayan,  and  John  Davys's
fleet  (1587)  422,  437;  of  Nicolo
Zeno  (1380)  447;  Norwegian,  cast
upon  Grisland  (c.  1380)  450;
French,  taken  by  the  English  at
Newfoundland  (1536)  viii.  6;  com-
pensation of  Henry  VIII.  to,  7;
of  Newland,  rifled  by  the  crew  of
the  Swallow,  50 ;  Spanish,  taken
by  Charles  Leigh  (1597)  176;  of
Belle  Isle,  taken  by  Charles  Leigh,
178 ;  European,  cast  away  on
Wingandacoa,  307 ;  Spanish,  taken
by  Sir  Richard  Grenville  (1585)
317;  English,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  third  voyage  to  Virginia
(1586),  by  the,  346;  Spanish,  taken
by  the  English  near  Navassa
Island  (1590)  411;  bought  from
Sir  John  Hawkins  by  Captain
Laudonniere  (1565)  ix.  80;  French,
stratagem  of  a,  at  Gran  Canaria
(1555)  340;  Spanish,  set  on  fire
Iby  the  Minion  in  S.  Juan  d'UUoa
(1568)  452 ;  English,  at  Brazil,
Baptista  Ramusio  on  (15 17)  x.  4,
5 ;  at  S.  Domingo,  4,  5 ;  from  S.
Domingo,  and  the  mutinous
soldiers  of  Captain  Laudonniere
(1565)  54;  of  S.  Sebastian,  cap-
tured by  Christopher  Carleill
{1585)  100;  Spanish,  from  China,
despoiled  and  burnt  by  Thomas
Cavendish  (1588)  165;  Portuguese,
taken  by  Christopher  Newport
(1591)  184;  from  Cuba,  cap-
tured by  Christopher  Newport
(1591)  189;  from  Guiana,  cap-
tured by  William  King  (1592)
191 ;  of  Puerto  de  Cavallos,
boarded  by  William  King  (1592)
193 ;  Portuguese,  taken  by  Cap-
tain Raimond  (1591)  194;  from
Pegu,  taken  by  the  Edward  Bona-
ventiire  (1591)  195;  Spanish,  sunk
by  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  210;
English,  captains  and  crew  taken
by  the  Spanish,  report  of,  by  Don
B.  Delgadillo  (1596)  260;  Flem-
ish, with  the  English  admiral's
pass,  met  by  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
at  Araia  Point  (1596)  272; Span-

ish, captured  by  Captain  Parker
at  Campeachy  (1597)  279;  of
Alderman  Wats  at  Dominica,  477 ;
Portuguese,  taken  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  xi,  105;  from  Pan-
ama, and  Nuno  da  Silva,  and  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1579)  142;  to
Panama  (1579)  144;  English,
captured  by  the  Spanish  in  the
Gulf  of  Darien,  232.

Shipbuilding,  trees  for,  found  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  VIII.  371;  in  Fort
Caroline  (1565)  ix. 60.

Shipmasters,  Prussian,  prisoners  in
Sandwich,  11.  14;  Livonian,  rifled
by  English  merchants,  14,  33 ;
goods  of  Livonian,  unjustly  de-
tained at  Newcastle,  34;  Prussian
and  Livonian,  37 ;  regulations  for
Spanish,  xi.  442.

Shipper  Berlin  of  Prussia,  the,  ll.
61.

Shipping,  the,  of  the  Cinque  Ports,
I.  42  f . ;  of  Pekin  (1580)  in.  265;
and  Hang-chow,  268 ;  of  merchan-
dise in  Russia  by  the  Muscovy
Company  (1592)  ill.  444;  large,
at  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.  244;  English,
for  Levant  trade  (c. 15 11)  v.  63.

Ships,  in  the  time  of  Edgar,  i.  19,
23 ;  Scottish  boats  in  the  reign  of
Godred,  26;  Magnus,  King  of
Norway,  his  fleet,  28  f. ;  of  Sum-
erled.  King  of  Argyll  (1156)  31,
(1158  and  1164)  32;  King  John's,
34;  fleet  of  John  de  Courci  and
Reginald,  King  of  the  Islands,
34;  Olaf's  fleet  (1224)  36;  Regi-
nald's ships,  37;  fleet  of  Alex-
ander, King  of  Scots,  40;  found
by  the  Cinque  Ports,  47  f. ;  French
fleets,  49;  Tartar,  57;  Tartar
boats,  156 ;  free  service  of  the
Cinque  Ports'  ships,  295;  de-
livered to  Prussia  as  restitution
(1403)  II.  40;  English,  taken  and
robbed  by  Hanse  pirates,  60-
67,  69-71;  Henry  V.'s,  iii;  car-
racks  of  the  Genoese,  123 ;  gal-
leys of  Venetians  and  Florentines,
124;  King  Edgar's,  138;  Edward
III.'s,  142;  carracks  taken  by
Henry  V.,  143;  made  at  South-
ampton  by Henry V., 143, 144;

402

INDEX

Spanish  (1527)  166;  regulations
by  Cabot  (1553)  195-205;  discip-
line in  the  time  of  Edward  VI.,
198;  three,  found  by  the  Society
of  Merchants  (1553)  240,  279;  in
London  port,  287;  for  discoveries
in  Queen  Mary's  time,  304;  Eng-
lish privileged  to  sail  everywhere,
313;  inventory  of,  by  pursers,
317;  lading  of,  317,  388;  passen-
gers on,  319;  unlading  of,  320;
Russian,  346;  four,  provided  for
Russian  trade  (1557)  357;  Eng-
lish, only  to  be  used  by  the  Mus-
covy Company,  iii.  90 ;  flat-
bottomed,  on  the  Volga,  104 ;
English,  taken  by  Cossacks  (1573)
155 ;  of  the  freebooters,  taken  by
the  Muscovy  Company,  168 ;  laden
with  corn  on  the  Dvina,  185 ;
hire  of,  208 ;  shifting  of,  to  S.
Nicholas  (1582)  306;  early  depar-
ture for  S.  Nicholas  of  English,
307;  goods  of  English,  in  Russia
(1586)  351;  built  on  the  Dvina
for  discovering  the  North-east
passage  (1581)  454;  flat-bottomed,
for  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  204,  209 ;
war,  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  207 ;
English,  superior  in  quickness  to
the  Armada,  213,  224;  of  fire,
sent  against  the  Armada,  222 ;  Sir
Francis  Drake's  225 ;  flight  of
Spanish,  228;  losses  of  the  Span-
ish, 229 ;  return  to  Biscay  of  the
Spanish,  230 ;  of  Michael  de
Oquendo,  lost  at  sea,  230 ;  Span-
ish, burnt  on  the  Cadiz  shore
(1596)  254;  lost,  off  the  Sicilian
coast  (1270)  360;  ordered  for
Henry  IV. 's  intended  conquest  of
Jerusalem  (1413)  455;  Turkish,
to  besiege  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  5,
16 ;  for  Venice,  use  salt  for  bal-
last, 93 ;  English,  privileged  to
enter  Turkish  ports  (1580)  186;
to  be  helped  by  the  Turks,  188 ;
of  the  Levant  Company,  notice  to
be  given  of  the,  to  the  admiral  of
England  (1581)  199;  English,
Turkish  league  against,  in  the
Levant  (1583)  264;  English,  sunk
by  two  Algiers  galleys  (1584)
V. 268, 269 ; inventory of

English,  sunk,  by  William  Har-
borne  (1584)  279-282;  of  drugs,
from  the  Indies  to  China,
405;  made  of  boards,  468;  from
Ormuz,  description  of  the,  vi.  6;
going  to  the  East  Indies  with  the
monsoons,  28 ;  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  81  ;  requisitioned  in  case
of  war,  82 ;  Portuguese,  at  Cape
Verde,  168;  French,  and  William
Towerson's  expedition  to  Guinea
(1556)  213;  at  Mina  (1557)  217;
Portuguese,  in  Guinea  (1557)  218,
220,  229 ;  fight  with  the  English
and  French,  221;  Danzig,  laden
with  French  goods  (1577)  232;
spoils  of,  235 ;  Spanish,  bound
for  the  West  Indies  (1577)
235 ;  French,  on  the  African
coast  (1577)  240;  fight  be-
tween English  and  French,  241 ;
English,  at  Mowre  (1577)  244;  at
Cormatin,  245 ;  naval  fight  be-
tween English  and  Portuguese
(1567)  281;  captured  by  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1592)  398;
English,  commission  of  the  King
of  Spain  to  the  Corrlgidor  of  Bis-
cay concerning  the  (1585)  417;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's,  voyage  of,
to  the  Azores  (1586)  434;  French,
captured  by  the  English  (1589)
VII.  I ;  of  Hanse  towns,  captured
by  the  English,  2 ;  Spanish,  towed
out  of  S.  Michael  harbour  (1589)
3;  off  S.  Marie's  Island,  16;  fight
of  English  and  Spanish,  in  the
Strait  of  Gibraltar  (1590)  31 ;
small  English,  and  the  Centurion
against  the  Spanish  galleys  (1591)
35 ;  Dutch  and  English,  fight  be-
tween, near S. George's Island

(1589)  63;  Dutch,  in  Terceira,  65;
Spanish,  taken  by  the  English  at
Terceira  (1589)  68,  69,  75;  Eng-
lish and Spanish, near Terceira

(1590)  72 ;  Spanish  and  Portu-
guese, wrecked  (1591)  86;  of
white  men  or  Blancos,  93 ;  Span-
ish, taken  by  the  Amity  of  Lon-
don (1592)  103;  Spanish,  and  Sir
Walter  Raleigh's  fleet  (1592)  105;
Sir  John  Burrough  In  danger  from
Spanish,  109 ; Spanish,  chased  by

403

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sir  John  Burroug-h  and  the  Earl
of  Cumberland,  no;  ordnance  in
English  (1594)  123;  merchant,
near  Sierra  Nevada,  170 ;  dangers
of  ice  to,  in  the  northern  regions,
193  ;  of  Captain  Martin  Frobisher
(1576)  204,  279,  (1577)  211,  284,
(1578)  231,  243,  319;  names  of
officers  and  gentlemen  on  Captain
Frobisher's  (1577)  285;  of  John
Davys  (1585)  381,  (1586)  393,  408,
(1587)  414;  trading  without  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert's  licence  (1578)
VIII.  19;  merchant,  and  the  sup-
plies for  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
expedition  (1583)  52  ;  from  Jersey,
for  Canadian  trade  (c.  1581)  118,
146 ;  from  S.  Malo,  for  Canada
(1591)  150;  from  S.  Malo,  cap-
tured by  the  Pleasure,  155 ;  from
Sibiburo  and  S.  Malo,  163,  168,
170 ;  from  Rochelle  and  Biscay,
174;  from  Belle  Isle  (1597)  178;
prepared  at  S.  Malo  for  the  third
voyage  of  Jacques  Cartier  (1540)
264 ;  English  and  Spanish,  fight
near  Organes  (1590)  420;  of  Cap-
tain Laudonniere  return  to  France
(1564)  IX.  26;  Spanish,  in  the
Dolphin  river  (1565)  89,  90;  Span-
ish, sent  in  pursuit  of  Captain
Gourgues  (1568)  no;  seen  on  the
sea  coast  of  Quivira,  thought  to
come  from  Cathay  and  China
(1540)  166;  merchant,  from  Spain
to  New  Spain  (1572)  391;  one-
sailed,  Chinese,  392 ;  of  war,
French,  at  Terceira,  with  Don
Antonio  (1580)  442  ;  four  Spanish,
sunk  by  the  English  at  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1568)  453;  provided  by
Sir  John  Hawkins  and  others  for
the  negro  trade  (1562)  x.  7;  Span-
ish, burnt  in  the  fight  in  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1568)  72;  to  be  provided
by  Spain  to  oppose  Sir  Francis
Drake  in  West  Indies,  95 ;  in
Spain,  97;  French,  and  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake  (1585)  99;  Spanish,
captured  by  the  Dog  (1589)  156;
built  in  Cuba  in  1590  for  an  ex-
pedition against  England,  planned
for  (1592)  164;  from  S.  Thom^
to  Buenos  Aires,  172  ; in  Panama

(1590)  177;  Spanish  and  English,
fight  of,  near  Cuba  (1591)  178;  of
Christopher  Newport's  fleet  (1591-
2)  184;  captured  by  Christopher
Newport  and  Robert  Freed  (1591)
185  ;  of  Captain  Raimond,  for  his
voyage  to  East  Indies  (1591)  194;
Portuguese,  taken  by  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1591)  196;  of  Sir
Robert  Dudley's  voyage  to  West
Indies  (1594)  204;  Spanish,  taken,
sunk  or  burnt  by  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley (1595)  205,  209,  211;  of  Sir
Amyas  de  Preston  for  his  voyage
to  W>st  Indies  (1595)  213;  of
Southampton,  at  Gran  Canada
(1595)  215;  at  the  Testigos,  216;
Spanish, Captain Sommers and

(1595)  223;  of  Southampton,  and
Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's  fleet  (1595)
225 ;  Spanish,  and  the  Francis,  of
Sir  Francis  Drake's  fleet  (1595)
229 ;  fight  between  Spanish  and
English,  at  Pinos  Island  (1596)242,
250 ;  Spanish,  destroyed  by  the
English  at  Puerto  Rico  and  Cadiz,
254 ; of Sir Anthony Sherley

(1596)  266;  captured  by  Sir  An-
thony Sherley  (1596)  271,  272;
French,  returning  from  the
Amazon  river,  wealth  of,  366;
Spanish,  sunk  in  the  Bahama
Channel  (1595)  427;  Spanish,  to
Guiana  (1596)  462  ;  and  men  levied
in  Spain  by  Domingo  de  Vera  for
the  conquest  of  Guiana,  461 ;
Spanish,  at  Trinidad,  467 ;  Span-
ish, at  Trinidad  and  Conquerabia
(1596)  479;  Spanish  sent  to  Trini-
dad for  the  conquest  of  Guiana
(1596)  490;  of  Benjamin  Wood,
bound  for  Magellan  and  China
(1596)  XI.  2;  Flemish,  at  Maio
and  Fogo  Islands  (1597)  3  ;  French,
of  war,  at  Rio  de  Janeiro  (1581)
35 ;  Spanish,  taken,  by  James
Lancaster  (1596)  44,  46;  taken  by
the  Solomon  (1594)  46;  French,  at
Pernambuco  (1595)  53;  French,
at  Rio  Grande  (1597)  66;  French,
cast  away  on  the  coast  of  Peti-
guar  (1597)  67;  fight  between
English  and  Spanish  (1583)  94;
of  .Sir  Francis  Drake  (1577) 102;

404

INDEX

of  John  Winter  (1577)  148;  of
Edward  Fenton  (1582)  163,  167;
Spanish, meet Edward Fenton

~  (1583)  194;  from  Hamburg,
Robert  Withrington  and  (1586)
203  ;  Portuguese,  taken  by  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  209,  216,  223,
225 ;  French,  taken  by  the  Span-
ish (1575)  234;  French,  burnt  in
Parajua,  249 ;  of  the  Earl  of
Cumberland,  at  Seal  Island  (1587)
249 ; English  and  Spanish,  in  the

"  Straits  of  Magellan  (1582)  254;
wrecked  in  the  Straits  of  Magel-
lan, 257-260;  French,  at  Parajua,
taken  by  Diego  Flores  de  Valdez,
271;  of  Thomas  Cavendish  (1586)
290 ;  Biscayan,  fight  with  Thomas
Cavendish  (1586)  291;  taken  and
burnt  by  Thomas  Cavendish  in  the
South  Seas  (1587)  312,  319,  321;
of  John  Chidley  (1589)  381;
Japanese,  in  Korea  (1591)  431;
regulations  for  Spanish,  442-
448.

Ships'  names,  see  separate  Index  of
Ships,  page  464.

Shipwey,  see  Sheppey.

Shipwright  wanted  in  Russia  by  the
Muscovy  Company  (1565)  iii.  45;
of  the  Grand  Signior,  pay  of,  vi.
64;  in  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
expedition  (1583)  viii.  47.

Shirburne,  see  Sherborne.

Shirvan,  in.  21 ;  description  and  pro-
ducts of,  24;  Abd'Ullah  Khan,
King  of,  and  English  trade  (1562)
28 ;  letter  to  the  Sophi  of  Persia  by
the  King  of,  32 ;  a  province  of
Persia,  35 ;  privileges  granted  to
English  merchants  by  Abd'Ullah
Khan  (1563)  39;  trade  in,  by  the
Muscovy  Campany,  86,  88;  or
Media,  trees  in,  166 ;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  in,  196;  invaded  by  Tar-
tars and  Crims  (1577)  234.

Sholcaves,  see  Foxes.

Sholkalove,  Andrew,  Emperor  of
Russia's  chief  secretary  (1586)  in.

351-

Shooters'  hoose,  garden  in  Augs-
burg, V.  203.

Shoreman,  ships  from,  in  Edward
HI.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Shetland,  Willoughby's  fleet  off,  11.

218  f.
Shotland  Head,  latitude  of,  vii.  205.
Shotton, Timothy, translation of

Ersola's  letter  by  (1587)  xi.  331.
Shuracoima, Indian captain, x.

495-

Shurama  river,  Guiana,  x.  459,  492.

Shurinama  river,  Guiana,  x.  459,
492.

Shyawe,  in  Guinea,  vi. 195.

Shyrvansha,  land  of,  in.  20.

Siacca,  Demnar  found  In,  vi.  26.

Siam,  VI.  324;  verzino  trade  in,  v.
407;  King  of  Pegu  in,  408;  war
between  Pegu  and,  489 ;  benzoin
found  in,  504;  Tenasserim,  in  the
kingdom  of,  vi.  400;  Belzuinum
Mandolalo  found  in,  26.

Sian, see  Siam.

Siba,  see  Syban.

Sibel,  or  Sibil,  Walter,  of  London,
ambassador  to  Prussia,  11.  18,  19,

25-.
Siberia,  city,  in.  257,  389 ; conquest
of  (1584)  343,  388; best  martens
found in, 365; Oliver in (1581)

454-

Sibiburo,  ships  of,  in  S.  Pedro  har-
bour, VIII.  163  ;  in  Halabolina  har-
bour (1597)  167;  Charles  Leigh
and,  168 ;  ships  of,  and  the  Hope-
well  (1597) 173.

Sibut  river,  in  Russia,  in.  408.

Sichiva  ( ?  Sze-chuen),  eleventh  shire
of  China,  vi.  296.

Sicilia,  see  Sicily.

Sicily,  in  Thome's  map,  n.  171 ;
compared  to  Iceland,  iv.  15,
104 ;  proposed  meeting  place  of
Richard  I.  and  Philip,  King  of
France,  32 1 ;  tribute  owed  to  the
King  of,  359;  English  trade  in,
V.  62;  Roger  Bodenham's  voy-
age to  (1550)  71,  168;  William
Harborne  near  (1583)  249 ;  gal-
leys from,  leagued  against  Eng-
lish ships  (1583)  264;  John
Evesham  near  (1587)  vi.  35 ;
division  of  the  English  fleet  near
(1586)  47;  galleys  of,  in  the  pay
of  Spain,  50;  and  Calabria,  vii.
161 ;  complexions  of  the  people  of,
2S4.

405

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sickness  of  Jacques  Cartler's  crew
in  Holy  Cross  Port  (1535)  viii.
246;  in  France  Roy  fort  (1542)
286;  of  Drake's  crew  (1585)  x.
109;  in  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's
fleet  (1595)  X.  225;  on  the  Desire
(1588)  XI.  337.

Siculus,  see  Diodorus.

Siculus,  Marinaeus,  '  Chronicle  of
Spain  '  by,  vii.  160.

Sidmouth,  Devon,  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.  297.

Sidney,  Colonel,  his  regiment  at  the
taking  of  Puente  de  Burgos  (1589)
VI.  492 ;  march  of,  to  Lisbon,
497)  500;  returns  to  England,
510.

Sidney,  Henry,  speech  to  the  Lon-
don merchants  by, 11. 242.

Sidney,  Sir  Henry,  lord-deputy  of
Ireland  (1568),  and  the  North-
west passage,  vii.  179 ;  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert  with,  in  Ireland,  xii.

25-

Sidney,  Sir  Philip,  death  of,  at  Zut-
phen  (1586)  xii.  41;  and  Hakluyt,
75 ; dedication  of  Hakluyt  to,  79.

Sidon,  Richard  Wrag  and  (1594)  vi.
107 ; description  of, 108.

Sidonia,  Sir  Loys  de.  Grand  Master
of  Rhodes 's  envoy  to  the  Pope
(1522)  V. 16.

Sidrach and India, vii. 18.

.Siege  of  Rhodes,  by  Solyman  (1522)
V.  1-80;  of  Famagusta  (1571)
1 18-152;  of  Pernambuco,  by  Cap-
tain Lancaster  (1595)  xi.  47  ff.

Siena,  Captain  Gourgues  in  a  battle
at, against  the  Spanish, ix. iii.

Sierra  Leone,  William  Towerson  at
(1556)  VI.  212,  (1557)  230;  trade
between  Mina  and,  252  ;  Sir  John
Hawkins  at  (1564)  265;  discovered
by  Alouis  de  Cadomosta  (1455)
VIII.  127 ;  Sir  John  Hawkins  at
(1568)  IX.  446,  (1562)  X.  8,  (1565)  23;
Job  Hartop  at,  ix.  447  ;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1580)  xi.  132  ;  Edward
Fenton  at  (1582)  174,  177;  Robert
Withrington  at  (1586)205  ;  Thomas
Cavendish  at  (1586)  291,  293,  367;
anchorage  at,  371 ;  Hawkins  and
the  capture  of  negroes  at  (1562)
XII.  47  ; Cape,  latitude  of,  xi.  348 ;

soundings,  352 ;  River,  Thomas-
Gregory  privileged  to  traffic  on
the  (1592)  VII. 102.

Sierra  Nevada,  in  America,  vii.  170.

Sierva,  Diego,  proposed  as  gover-
nor of  Brazil  by  Feliciano  Cieza
(1597)  XI.  69.

Sifridus  a  Feuchtuvang,  twelfth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.
6.

Sigala,  Turkish  Admiral,  and  Ed-
ward Barton  (1593)  vi. 102,

Sigean  Promontory,  see  Cape  Janis-
sary.

Sighelm,  bishop  of  Sherborne  (883)
Indian  voyage  of,  i.  Ixiii.,  iv.  279,
280.

Sigismund,  Emperor,  11.  114;
makes  peace  between  the  Dutch
knights  and  Poland,  8;  and
Calais, 137.

Sigismund  II.,  King  of  Poland,  letter
to  Queen  Elizabeth,  11.  485-487;
married  to  the  daughter  of  Ferdi-
nando,  iii. 100; on  Russia,  135.

Signals  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
fleet  (1583)  viii.  44;  pre-arranged
by  Sir  John  Hawkins  for  his  fleet
(1564)  X. 10.

Signet,  private,  of  the  Sophi  of  Per-
sia, description  of  (1568)  iii.  149.

Signior, Grand, see  Solyman.

Sigra  in  Metelin,  v.  250,  251.

Sigvardus,  ninth  bishop  of  Schalholt,
in  Iceland  (1239)  iv.  55, 154.

Silar,  petrifying  river,  iv.  37, 132.

Silauria,  William  Harborne  at  (1583)
V. 251.

Silesden,  William,  of  Lynn,  and
Prussian  pirates, 11. 69.

Silesia,  invaded  by  Tartars,  11.  186;
Boleslav,  Duke  of,  i.  159.

Silitari  Company,  in  the  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Siliveri, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

324-
Silk,  raw,  in  Persia,  11.  404,  iii.  147,
231,  234;  white,  in  Tripoli,  vi.  2;
found  in  China, 26, 355  ;  raw, taken
by  English  in  captured  ships,  vil.
59,  60,  116;  found  in  Mexico,  ix.
358;  found  in  Guiana,  x.  427,  458;
duty  on,  in  Edward  I.'s  charter,  i.
337; use  of,  in  England,  iii.  99;

406

INDEX

wroug-ht,  in  Persia,  147,  161 ;  Per-
sian dyeing  of,  250;  plentiful  in
China,  vi.  355,  x.  165 ;  wrought,
in  New  Spain  (1572)  ix.  390;
market,  at  Arrash,  iii.  24;  in
Georgia,  50;  at  Ardouill  and
Tiflis,  51;  in  Gilan,  61;  in  Persia,
63;  at  Gilgat,  147;  at  Kazvin,
154; in  Sumakoto,  iv.  429.

Silk  grass,  found  in  Virginia,  viii.
353.

Silkworms,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)
VIII.  353 ; in  Shemakha,  iii.  400.

Silland  (PSeeland),  Octher  and,  i.
14  f. ; Englishmen  there, 15.

Silleum,  Richard,  witness  to  the
Bishop  of  Rome's  letter  on  behalf
of  John  Foxe  (1577)  v.  166.

Sillie,  see  Scilly.

Silva,  Don  Pedro  da,  Portuguese,  of
the  family  of  Ruy  Gomez,  his
attempt to discover Guiana, x.

363-
Silva, Nuno da, Portuguese pilot,

voyage  of  (iS77-i579)  xi.  133-147;
taken  prisoner  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  Brava  Island,  134,  152,
260;  set  free  at  Aguatulco  (1579)
146.

Silva,  Vasquez  da,  prisoner  in  Eng-
land (1588)  IV,  213,  231.

Silvanus,  abbot,  and  King  Godred,
I.  32  f.

Silver,  pound  of,  duty  on,  in  Edward
I.'s  charter,  i.  337;  arbitrary  in-
crease of  duty  per  pound  of,  11.
74;  mines  of,  in  Japan,  vi.  328,
333;  stores  of,  in  China,  354;
found  in  captured  ships,  vii.  66 ;
Spanish  ships  loaded  with  (1589)
68;  mines  of,  in  Orkney  Islands,
286;  mine  of,  in  Smith's  Island,
discovered  by  Captain  Frobisher
(1577) 296; in Saguenay river,

VIII.  237 ;  in  Canada,  282 ;  found
in  Virginia  (1586)  356;  in  Florida,
452,  482,  IX.  12,  79,  X.  57  ;  trade
in,  between  the  Indians  of  Florida
and Captain Laudonniere (1564)

IX.  21;  in  the  kingdom  of  Calos
(1565)  50;  found  in  Cevola,  163;
found  in  the  Passaguates  country
(1582)  190;  mines  in  California,
318; mines  in  Nova  Albion,  325;

found  in  Japan,  335;  mines  in
Mexico,  358,  (1572)  382  ;  mines  in
Tamascaltepec,  364;  mines  in
Tomaangua,  367;  mark  of,
value  of,  376;  mines  in  Pac-
huca,  418 ;  ornaments  of,  made
and  worn  by  Indians,  x.  58 ;  mines
in  Hispaniola,  1 15 ;  brought  from
Panama  City  to  Nombre  de  Dios
(1587)  143;  mines  in  China,  165;
mines  in  Marequita  (1590)  175;  in
Peru,  177;  found  in  Paria,  207;
mine  near  the  Caroli  river,  403 ;
mines  of,  at  S.  Vincent,  xi.  26;
mine  found  at  Copaoba  by  Daur-
migas  (1597)  67;  captured  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1579)  115;  at
Arica,  115;  in  Nova  Albion,  123.
Silvester,  Daniel,  Anthony  Jenkin-
son's interpreter (1571) in. 170,

,192,  193-

Simerons,  see  Maroons.

Simkinson  of  Hull,  bearer  of
Thomas  Garland's  letter  to  John
Dee  (1586)  III.  445.

Simoltra,  see  Sumatra.

Simon  de  Sanct-Quentin,  Friar,  re-
lation of  his  voyage  among  Tar-
tars, I. 134.

Simons,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant
Company  (1592)  vi.  76,  78.

'  Simples,'  found  in  Florida,  viii.
462.

Simplicity  of  the  Icelanders,  iv.  67,
168.

Simpson,  Thomas,  quartermaster  on
the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)11.  212.

Sinaboyarskey,  or  Russian  soldiers,
III.  377.

Sinai,  Mount,  Moses  and,  viii.  102,

Sinamome,  see  Cinnamon.

Sinan,  Pasha,  letter  of,  to  Queen
Elizabeth  (1590)  vi.  6g,  71 ;  war  in
Hungary  (1593)  96;  general  of  the
Turkish  army  sent  to  Hungary
(1594) 104.

Sinaus  or  Sinees,  ruler  in  North
Russia,  III.  357;  and  the  civilisa-
tion of  Russia,  II. 183.

Sin  fondo  Baia,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier  to  Magellan  Strait,  xi.  86.

Singonina,  Island  of,  Laurence
Aldersey  at  (1586)  vi.  42.

SInnamon, see  Cinnamon.

407

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sinnergan,  Isacan,  King  of,  v.  484;

cotton  cloth  made  in, 485.
Sintra, Peter, discoveries of (1497-

1510)  VIII. 128.
Sinus  Finnicus,  see  Finland,  Gulf  of.
Sinus  Persicus,  see  Persian  Gulf.
Sio, see  Chios.
Sion,  see  Siam.
Siquera, Francisco  de, secretary  of

the King  of Portugal (1551) vi.

153.
Siraco,  Francesco,  Captain,  slain  at

Famagusta  (1571)  v. 150.
Sirroes,  road  of,  in  Teneriffe,  x.  10.
Sisal, Cape, on  the  coast  of  Cam-
peachy,  in  Yucatan,  x.  321.
Sittia,  in  Candia,  Richard  Wrag  at

(1593) VI. 95.
Siusai,  graduates  of  the  first  degree

in  China, vi. 361.
Sivil,  see  Seville.
Sivyl,  see  Seville.
Sixtus v., Pope, and the Armada

(1588)  IV.  205.
Skafcayl  or  Connyk,  in  Persia,  iii.

19.
Skagefiord,  in  Iceland,  iv.  63, 163.
Skala, Henry  Austell at (1585) v.

325-
Skalla,  Russian  weight,  11.  274.
Skegs, Richard, merchants' factor

in  the  Jesus  (1583)  v.  292; gives

his  life  for  Andrew  Dier,  300,  318.
Skeuelabs, Thomas, in Virginia

(1585)  viii.  318.
Skevington,  Thomas,  captain  of  the

Elizabeth  (1582)  xi. 172,
Skicoak  City,  in  Virginia,  viii.  304,

306.
Skiko, son  of  Menatonon, prisoner

of Ralph Lane (1585) viii. 329,

335  ; ally  of  Ralph  Lane,  339.
Skinner, James, in Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  317.
Skinner, Ralph, master's mate, in

John  White's  fleet  (1590)  viii.  415;

death  of,  416.
Skins, used by natives, discovered

by John Davys (1585) vii. 387;

deer, painted, used as garments

by  Indians,  x.  57;  Cordovan,  trade

in,  in  Canaries,  xi.  27.
Skites beare nesse, Arthur Pet at

(1580)  III.  283.

Shout,  see  Scout.

Skyrasas, Turkish  vessels  in  Crete

(1551)  V.  73.
Slafsky,  Mesthis,  and  the  election  of

Feodor Ivanowich, Emperor of

Russia  (1584)  m. 336.
Slany, member of the Muscovy

Committee, and Captain Carleill

(1583)  VIII.  147.

Slaves,  Tartar,  in  Russia,  il.  455 ;
of  Novgorod,  revolt  of  the  (1588)
III.  372  ;  of  Tartars,  394 ;  galley,
and  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  200;
thirty-eight  Turkish,  freed  by  the
English  (1596)  262;  conspiracy  of
Turkish  women  in  Rhodes  (1522)

V.  18;  Turkish,  in  Rhodes,  slain
by  the  people  (1522)  20;  Christian,
at  Alexandria,  John  Foxe  and
(1577)  153-167;  galley.  Queen
Elizabeth's  letter  to  Murad  Khan
on  behalf  of  English  (1579)  177;
set  at  liberty,  185 ;  English,  in
Algiers,  Sir  Edward  Osborne  and

(1584)  268,  269  ;  English  merchants
made,  in  Tripolis  (1584)  301 ;
freed  (1585)  307;  Christian  liber-
ated by  a  Venetian  galley  (1585)
310; brought to England (1554)

VI.  176,  200, 205  ;  negro,  exchanged
for  sugar  (1567)  284;  Anthony
Godard  and  his  men  sold  as,  in
Mexico,  IX.  422 ;  galley,  descrip-
tion of  the  life  of,  by  Job  Hortop
(1570)  464;  Sapies,  to  the  Sam-
boses  (1564)  X.  17;  duty  on,  in
Burburata  (1565)  24.

Slavonia,  see  Dalmatia.

Slawkow,  lead  mines  in,  v.  326.

Sleds,  II.  225,  250;  Samoyedan,
338;  wares  sent  by,  in  winter,
III.  82 ; travelling  in  Lapland  on,

405-
Sleep, yearly, or 'death,' of the

people  of  Lucomoria,  iii.  408.
Sleepers,  Seven,  Edward  the  Confes-
sor's vision of the (1056) iv.

286.
Sleeve,  the,  Robert  Withrington  in,

with  the  Hamburg  ships  (1586)  xi.

203.
Slesia,  see  Silesia.
Sleyre, Gerard, and the English

ships,  11.  62.

408

INDEX

Sloboda, Kholmogory to, iii. 70;

Anthony  Jenkinson  leaves, 179.
Sloboday, Southam  and  Sparke  at

(1566)  III.  77.
Slothone  or  Sloczow,  Henry  Austell

at  (1585)  V.  325.
Slotnike,  Russian  weight,  li.  274.
Sloure Sound, Arthur Pet in the

(1580)  III.  301.
Slovoda,  Emperor  of  Russia's  House

of  Solace  at  (1568)  in.  107.
Sluce,  see  Sluys.
Slude,  rock  found  in  Karelia,  used

for  glass  in  Russia  (1588)  in.  368.
Sluys,  II.  116; battle  of, 142;  Mat-
thew Gourney  at,  iv.  444 ; King

of  France  at  (1386)  446; King  of

Armenia  at,  449.
Smart,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)

vm.  318.
Smart,  Thomas,  child  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII.  403.
Smerwick, John White at (1587)

VIII.  401.
Smille, Murse, of Nagaya, Tartar

prince,  11.  454,  457.
Smirna,  see  Smyrna.
Smith,  master's  mate  of  the  Toby,

and  Hakluyt,  xil.  76.
Smith, Edward, mariner on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  li.  213.
Smith, Edward, taken prisoner  by

Indians  on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.

318.
Smith,  Edward,  and  the  mutiny  on

board  the Desire (1592) xi. 396;

distress  of, at  Port  Desire, 399 ;

sent  on  Penguin  Island  (1592)  408,

410; slain  by  wild  men,  411.
Smith,  Francis,  distress  of,  at  Port

Desire  (1592)  xi.  399,
Smith, Gilbert,  privileged  trader  in

Senegal  (1588)  vi.  443-450.
Smith,  Hugh,  account  of  Arthur  Pet

and Charles Jackman's discover-
ies by  (1580)  III. 282-303.
Smith, Hugh,  pilot  of  the  Edward

Cotton  (1583)  VI.  408,  410.
Smith,  James,  quartermaster's  mate

on  the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.

213,
Smith, James, persecuted for his

faith, in Tripolis (1584) v. 305;

set  free,  309.

XII  409

Smith,  John,  quartermaster's  mate
on  the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.
213.

Smith,  John,  leaves  Astrakhan  (1581)
in.  245,  282-303.

Smith,  John,  of  Southampton,
master  of  the  George  (1567)  vi.
270.

Smith,  John,  on  the  Content,  non-
combatant  (1591)  X.  183.

Smith,  Nicholas,  of  the  Maria  Mar-
tin (1584)  v.  281.

Smith,  Sir  Thomas,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259.

Smith,  Sir  Thomas,  and  the  East
India  Company,  xii.  92.

Smith,  Thomas,  ship-master,  and
Prussian  pirates, 11. 64, 65.

Smith,  Thomas,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  in.  109,  (1586)
348.

Smith,  Thomas,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1581)  V. 193-202.

Smith,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII. 402.

Smith,  William,  mariner  (1565)  iii.
48.

Smith,  William,  ship-master,  and
the  Cossacks  (1573)  in.  155.

Smith's  Island,  in  Jackman's  Sound,
discovered  by  Captain  Frobisher
(1577)  vn.  296.

Smiths,  in  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's
expedition  (1583)  viii.  47.

Smolensk,  province  of  Russia,  in.
358 ;  fertility  of,  360 ;  and  war
with  Poland,  368 ;  conquest  of,
386.

Smolensk  City,  n.  396,  in.  370;  con-
quest of,  by  Emperor  Basil
(1514)  n.  190;  from  Moscow  to,
III.  68 ;  taken  by  Russia,  100,  386 ;
garrison  of,  337,  373.

Smolensko,  see  Smolensk.

Smolkin,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Smyrna,  Richard  Wrag  at  (1594)  vi.
107.

Smyrnophora,  or  myrrh-producing
country  in  Africa,  vi. 169.

Smyth,  William,  master  of  the  Gab-
riel (1577)  VII.  285 ; death  of,  315.

Snarke,  Haunce,  captain  of  free-
booters (1570)  III. 168.

2D

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Snelling,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  317.
Snow, Arthur Pet in a storm of

(1580) III. 294; in Russia, 361;

storm, in Meta Incognita (1578)

VII.  238,  343 ;  on  the  mountains
under  the  Equinoctial,  261 ;  in
Newfoundland,  viii.  57.

Snycop, James,- ship-master, and

Prussian  pirates, 11. 70.
Soap,  found  in  Newfoundland  (1583)

VIII.  117.

Sobakin,  Ivan,  diake  of  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  and  English  mer-
chants (1583)  III.  329.

Sobissacalo  Mountains,  iv.  409.

Soboal,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.

Soca,  see  Ghetto.

Socas,  Captain  Mango  Caucaso  de,
his  return  from  England  (1589)
VI.  485.

Societies  of  the  Hanse  Merchants
(1407)  II.  79,  82,  83;  of  merchants
for  the  discovery  of  new  markets,
240 ;  two,  for  the  Western
Planting  (1583)  viii.  113;  privi-
lege for  the  adventurers, 116.

Soconusco,  John  Chilton  in  (1570),
Cacao  growing  in,  ix.  365;  rains
in,  369 ;  Cacao  used  as  coin  and
goods  in  (1572)  384.

Socrates  Scholasticus,  ecclesiastical
writer,  viii. 107.

Sodom,  John  Eldred  at  the  lake  of
(1587)  VI.  9.

Sodom,  in  Russia,  iii.  216.

Sodor  and  Man,  bishops  of,  Nicholas
of  Meaux  (1203)  i.  33,  34;  Regi-
nald (1217-1226)  34,  35;  Richard
(1252-1275)  40.

Sofia,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.  323.

Soford  or  Seford,  see  Seaford.

Sogisney  Island,  Southam  and
Sparke  at  (1566)  in.  74.

Sokotra,  vi.  384,  394;  aloe  secutrina
found  in,  vi.  26;  monsoon  from,
for  Ormuz,  29 ;  Portuguese  pos-
session, viii.  445.

Solana,  Gonsalvo  de,  of  Encisa,
Spain,  letter  to,  from  Christopher
Uslano  of  Potosi  (1590)  x. 171.

Solanga,  Friar  William  de,  Friar
Odoric's  account  taken  down  by
(1330)  IV.  442.

Solangi,  see  Solangians.
Solangians, i. 85, 86, 135, 170;
dukes  of  the, at  Kaiuk's  Court,
170.
Solbulve  Company  in  the  Hungar-
ian-Turkish war  (1594)  VI. 104.
Soldaia,  see  Sudak.
Soldan, see  Sultan.

Soldania,  summer  residence  of  the
Emperor  of  Persia,  iv.  410.

Soldatello  or  Soldatelli,  of  Agubio,
captain,  wounded  at  Famagusta
(1571)  V.  137; made  slave,  151.

Soldiers,  of  Rostock,  11.  68;  Rus-
sian, hardiness  of,  230,  258;  re-
wards of,  231,  259;  apparel  of,
424 ;  description  of,  by  Giles
Fletcher,  iii.  377-386;  Polish,
voluntary  service  of  (1584),  in
Russia,  344;  foreign,  in  the
Armada  land  army  (1588)  iv.  205;
visit  of  foreign,  to  Jerusalem  (1107)
301 ;  English,  two  executed  on
Plymouth  Hoe  (1596)  237;  at
Constantinople  (1177)  311;  Valour
of,  VI.  519;  fear  inspired  by
211;  thirty  sent  to  Meta  Incog-
nita to  winter  (1578)  vii.  321;
Venetian,  in  Famagusta  (1571)  v.
95,  129 ;  Albanian,  in  Venetian
army,  135  ;  Turkish  or  Azappi,  pay
of,  VI.  64 ;  in  Constantinople,  103  ;
sent  to  Hungary  (1594)  104;  Span-
ish, pay  for,  wanted  in  Havana
(1590)  X.  159;  sent  to  Puerto  Rico
(1590)  162 ;  kept  from  running
away,  163 ;  In  Margarita,  with
Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)  206.

Sole,  Sebastian  del,  captain,  slain  at
Famagusta  (1571)  v.  151.

Sole,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Sollman  Bey,  at  Famagusta  (1571)
V.  148; slain,  152.

Sollman, Emperor, see Solyman.

Soliman,  Sorda,  letter-bearer  of  John
Tipton  (1584)  V.  276.

Soline,  on  the  elephant,  vi. 165.

Soils,  discovery  of  the  river  Plate  by,
XI.  252.

Soils,  Francis  de,  Andrew  de  Cam-
po,  gardener  of,  ix.  166.

Solis,  river  of,  mentioned  in  Rattier,
XI.  97.

410

INDEX

Solo,  Captain,  Juan  de,  del  tercio  de
Naples  (1589)  VI.  514.

Solofky  monastery  and  the  monks
(1566)  m.  75.

Solomon  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba,
VI,  145,  169;  and  gold  from  Cef-
fala,  viii.  128; ships  of,  xii.  15.

Solomon,  King  of  Hungary,  and
Edmund  Ironside's  sons,  i.  25.

Solomon,  the,  flagship  of  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1582)  iii.  304.

Solomon,  the.  Sir  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  with
(1564)  VI.  263,  X.  9;  lost  for  four
days,  17;  death  of  Captain  Field
of,  at  Bymba,  22,  23.

Solomon,  the,  and  the  Spanish  ships
(1590)  VII.  31,  32,  33.

Solom.on,  the,  of  Weymouth,  Ran-
dal, captain  of  (1578)  vii.  322;  in
Countess  of  Warwick's  Sound
(1578)  239;  attendant  on  the
Judith,  324.

Solomon,  the,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet,  voyage  of,  to  Mexico
Bay  (1592)  X.  190,  (1595)  227;
surgeon  of,  taken  prisoner  in
Grand  Canary  Island,  228 ;  and
the  Spanish  ships  (1596)  243.

Solom,on,  the,  ship  of  James  Lan-
caster (1594)  XI.  43 ;  damaged  at
the  Range  of  Dartmouth,  44;
ships  taken  by  (1594)  46.

Solom,on  of  Plymouth,  the,  Hassan,
viceroy  of  Algiers,  and  (1584)  v.
280; crew  of,  281.

Solomon,  Cape,  in  Crete,  v.  84.

Solomon  Islands,  discovery  of  (1568)
IX.  392,  XI.  287;  gold  and  victuals
found  on,  289;  meaning  of  the
name  of,  290.

Solomon's  Porch,  discovered  by  Cap-
tain Fenton  (1578)  vii.  346.

Solonia,  i.  231.

Solor,  sandal  trade  in,  v.  407.

Solovetskiye  Island,  English  mer-
chants at  (1569)  in. 116.

Solovetsky,  salt  at,  in.  368.

Soltweded,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)
V.  327.

Solvsca  monastery,  S.  Nicholas  to,
III.  69.

Solyman,  Sultan,  The  Magnificent,
and  the  city  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.

1-60;  Sir  Andrew  de  Merall  and,
5 ;  letter  from,  to  the  Grand
Master  of  Rhodes,  13 ;  his  envoys
to  Rhodes,  48;  portrait  of,  48;
and  the  ambassadors  from  Rhodes,
57;  the  Grand  Master  of  Rhodes'
visit  to,  60 ;  embassy  from  Don
Ferdinando  to  Henry  VIII.  against
^1527)  61 ;  his  expedition  to  Syria
(1553)  105;  description  of,  107;
his  safe  conduct  to  Anthony  Jen-
kinson,  109 ;  contemporary  of
Charles  V.,  vi.  105  ;  and  the  brass
pillars  of  the  Mosque  of  Mecca,  v.

353-

Som,  province  In  China,  xi.  380.

Somaridune,  Castle,  in  the  county
of  Lindsey,  iv.  371.

Sombrero  Channel,  at  Sumatra
Island,  v.  403.

Sombrero  Island,  latitude  of,  x.  333.

Some,  in  Russia,  Lapina  to,  iii.  81 ;
salt fetched from, 82.

Some,  Stephen,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

Somers,  John,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569) iii. 109.

Somers,  Sir  George,  shipwreck  of,
on  the  Bermudas,  xii. 112.

Somerset,  Edward,  Duke  of,  see
Seymour.

Somme,  meaning  of,  vi.  23.

Somme  river,  in  Florida,  discovered
by  Captain  Ribault  (1562)  viii.
460;  Paracoussy  of  the.  Captain
Laudonnlere  and  the  (1564)  ix.  13;
food  found  near  the,  by  Captain
Laudonnlere  (1565)  75;  rendez-
vous of  Captain  Gourgues  and  the
Indians  (1568)  103.

Sommers,  Captain  George,  voyage
of,  to  West  Indies  (1595)  x.  213-
226;  and  the  ships  of  Southamp-
ton at  Gran  Canada  (1595)  215;
at  the  taking  of  S.  lago  de  Leon
^1595)  220;  and  the  Spanish  ships
(1595)  223  ;  dangers  of,  in  a  storm
(1595)  224.

Sonda  Island,  near  Java,  v.  405.

Sondiva  Island,  in  India,  v.  437;
Ralph  Fitch  near  (c. 1583)  485.

Sonnings,  Romane,  merchant's  fac-
tor In  the  Jesus  (1583)  v.  292 ;  and
Miles Dickenson, 294; and the

411

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

King  of  Tripolis,  295  ; condemned

to  death  by  the  King  of  Tripolis,

299,  300; ill-behaviour  of,  318.
Sonsonate, in Guatemala, John

Chilton in (1568) ix. 364, 366,

(1570)  374; distance  from,  to  the

South Sea, x. 275 ; ships from

(1587)  XI.  319;  bay,  from,  to  Agua-

tulco,  362.
Sophet  Keri  Alii,  King  of  the  Crim

Tartars  (1584)  iii.  344.
Sophi  of  Persia,  see  Thamas  I.
Sophia,  daughter  of  Thomas  Palseo-

logus,  second  wife  of  Ivan  Vasili-

wich,  11.  189.
Sophia,  see  Sofia.
Sophronius, patriarch  of  Jerusalem

(1064)  IV.  292.
Sophy,  see  Sophi.
Sorachyn, mourning time at the

Russian  court,  iii.  337.
Sorani,  Zichmni,  Duke  of  (1380)  vii.

448.
Sorat,  see  Surat.
Sorel, see  Sorrel.
Soria,  Hernando  de,  treasurer  of  the

King of Spain's mint, and Job

Hortop  (1570)  IX.  464.
Soria,  Marquess  of,  and  the  defence

of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.
Soroka, on the Owiga, iii. 76 ;

dangers of crossing to, 78; S.

Nicholas  to,  82.
Sorrel, used by the Indians of

Cumana,  x.  28 ; found  in  Florida,

51-

Sorstyn  Mountain,  salt  mines  in,  v.
326.

Sosnova, a  Russian  tree, iii.  72.

Sossa  river,  in.  408,  409.

Sotherich,  James,  of  the  Maria  Mar-
tin (1584)  V. 281.

Sotile,  weight  of  Venice,  vi. 17.

Sotinoz,  Cape,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1557)  II.  368.

Soto's  Expedition  to  Florida,  trans-
lated (1609) XII. 83.

Soudil,  the,  of  the  French  fleet  (1591)
VIII. 150.

Sour  Beer  Cape,  Stephen  Borough
at  (1557)  II.  371.

Sousa,  Baltazar  Almeida,  Philip  II.,
King  of  Spain,  and  (1591)  vi.
468.

Sousa,  Don  Francisco  de,  governor
of  Brazil  (1596)  xi.  64;  and  Felici-
ano  Cieza  (1597)  69.

Sousa,  Ruy  de,  ambassador  to  Eng-
land, from  Portugal  (1481)  vi.
123.

Souses,  Petro  de,  in  Teneriffe,  vi.
269.

South,  Cape,  John  Evesham  at
(1586)  VI.  35.

Southam, Thomas, discovery by

(1566)  III.  73-83;  joint  witness  of
the  Russian  privileges  (1567)  97;
and  the  council  (1569)  118;  death
of,  in  the  Moscow  fire  (1571)  169.

Southampton,  11.  78;  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.  298  ;  and  the
customs,  355  ;  bailiff  of.  King  John
and,  320 ;  the  Merlin  brought  to
(1564)  VI.  262; George  Fenner  at

(1567)  284;  John  White  at  (1587)
401 ;  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  depar-
ture from  (1594)  X.  204;  ships  of,
with  Captain  Sommers  at  Gran
Canada  (1595)  215;  ships  at  Tes-
tigos,  with  Captain  Willis,  216;
ships  of,  and  Sir  Amyas  de  Pres-
ton's fleet  (1595)  225  ;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley's  departure  from  (1596)
266 ;  voyages  to  Brazil  by  some
merchants  of,  xi.  25,  xii.  47.

South European Islands, Thome's

map  of,  II. 171.
Southley, Bartholomew  of, witness

of Edward I.'s great  charter, i.

296.
South  Sea,  see  Pacific  Ocean.
Southwell,  Sir  Robert,  captain  of  the

Elizabeth  Jonas  (1588)  iv.  218;  in

the Cadiz expedition (1596) 247;

portrait  of,  248; at  the  taking  of

Cadiz, 252.
Souza, Martin Alonso de, and  the

Portuguese  arms graven  at  Seal

Island, XI. 249 ; country  belong-
ing to,  251.
Soveraigne, see Sovereign.
Sovereign,  chief  officer  of  a  town,  in

Ireland, vii. 28.
Sowchick to Camchick, five days'

journey,  11.  481.
Sowday, in  Crete, Laurence  Alder-

sey  at  (1586)  vi.  41.
Sower  Beere  Cape,  see  Sour  Beer.

412

INDEX

Sowing  in  Virginia  (1586)  viil.  361  ;

in  Florida,  455.
Soyava,  Kholmogory  to,  iii.  70.
Soychin, province of China, xi.

379-

Sozomen,  ecclesiastical  writer,  viii.
107.

Spacheford,  Thomas,  English  mer-
chant, in  the  Canary  Islands
(1526)  VI.  124.

Spada,  Cape,  in  Crete,  v.  84.

Spagna,  Nova,  see  New  Spain.

Spahis,  in  the  Hungarian-Turkish
war  (1594)  VI. 104.

Spain,  ships  of,  before  Calais  (1345)
I,  299;  and  Edward  I.'s  great
charter,  333 ;  products  of,  11.
115  f. ;  discovery  of  the  West
Indies  by,  161 ;  treatment  of  con-
tagious illnesses  in,  164 ;  trade  and
navigation  of  (1527)  165  f. ;
Thome's  map  of,  169;  Cuba  and
Dominica  discovered  by  (1492)
173 ;  contention  with  Portugal,
173-180;  Anthony  Jenklnson  in,
III.  195 ;  Robert  de  Ketene,
student  of  astrology  in  (1143)  iv.
309 ;  and  trade  with  the  Hanse
towns  (1588)  VI.  59;  Gran  Can-
aria,  Teneriffe,  and  Palma,  sub-
ject to,  131 ;  prophecy  of  an  Indian
against  (1589)  387;  discourse
written  by  Colonel  Anthony  Wing-
field,  on  the  voyage  to  (1589)  470-
527;  war  with,  advised  (1589)
516-527;  products  of,  520;  wealth
of,  523 ;  tyranny  of,  on  matters  of
religion  (1591)  vii.  52;  and  the
French  leaguers  against  the  King
of  Navarre  (1590)  75  ;  unsuccessful
against  England  in  Florida,  viii.
37 ;  conquests  of,  124 ;  English
trade  with,  by  Captain  Carleill
(1583)  137;  climate  of,  384;  Queen
of  France's  charge  to  Captain
Laudonnlere  about  (1564)  ix.  40;
Robert  Tomson  and  Augustin
Boacio  sent  to  (1557)  349;  John
Chilton  in  (1561-1568)  360;  ord-
nance and  soldiers  sent  to  West
Indies  from  (1580)  441;  Miles
Philips  in,  443 ;  ships  and  army
prepared  by,  to  oppose  Sir  Francis
Drake, x. 95 ; to oppose Don

Antonio,  96;  course  from  Havana
to,  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  298 ;
course  from  Bahama  Channel  to,
300;  from  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  to,
323 ;  course  from  Havana  to,  in
second  Ruttier,  325  ;  from  Bahama
Channel  to,  326;  Philip  II.,  King
of,  and  John  Foxe  (1577)  v.  167;
and  the  English  trade  in  the  Lev-
ant (1586)  VI.  46;  and  the  Eng-
lish ambassador  at  Morocco  (1577)
288;  commission  of,  concerning
English  ships  (1585)  417;  and  Eng-
land (1589)  518;  tribute  of  the  In-
dies to,  IX.  375 ;  part  owner  of
Atoyaque  and  Xicaian  towns,  etc.,
470 ;  letter  to,  from  John  de  Trex-
eda  (1590)  X.  159;  displeasure  of,
with  Pedro  Sarmiento,  xi.  272.
Spain,  New,  in  America,  discovered
by  Christopher  Columbus  (1492)
vn.  464;  latitude  of,  viii.  450;
fleet  of  (1591)  VII.  54,  (1589)
71,  (1591)  87;  papal  bulls
for  (1592)  105;  Anthony  Men-
doza,  viceroy  of  (1592)  169;
Don  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  gover-
nor of  (1539)  IX.  115;  Conde  de
Corunna,  viceroy  of  (1581)  187  ;  re-
turn of  Captain  Ulloa  to  (1540)
278 ;  Colima,  haven  of,  279  ;  voy-
age of  Robert  Tomson  to  (1555)
338-358 ;  Roger  Bodenham  in
(1564)  359 ;  discourse  of  John  Chil-
ton on  (1568)  360-377;  Henry
Hawks 's  account  of  the  products
of  (1572)  378-397 ;  adventures  of  Job
Hortop  in  (1568)  445-465;  voyage
of  Sir  John  Hawkins  to  (1564)  x.
9;  trade  between  China  and  (1590)
165 ;  effect  on  markets  of,  caused
by  the  Spanish  Armada's  defeat
(1590)  166;  sale  of  quicksilver
in,  by  the  King  of  Spain  (1590)
167;  and  the  letter  of  Friar  Alon-
so,  bishop  of  Mechuacan  (1590)
168 ;  distress  of,  and  the
King  of  Spain's  want  of  money
(1590)  173;  course  from  S.  An-
tonio Cape  to,  294 ;  in  second  Rut-
tier, 316;  Ruttier  for,  280-305;
from  S.  Domingo  to,  in  second
Ruttier,  312;  soundings  near,  xi.
355-

413

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Spaniards  delivered  by  the  English
from  the  Turks  (1581)  iii.  238;
sixty  bands  of,  in  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  205;  unfair  dealings  of,
V.  76 ;  fight  of,  with  English
merchants  (1552)  vi.  139;  aboard
the  Primrose  (1585)  414;  fishing
of, in Newfoundland  (1578) viii.

10,  11; and  Sir  Richard  Grenville
on  S.  John  Island  (1585)  312; Sir
John  Hawkins  and  the,  at  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa,  315; prisoners  of  the  In
dians  of  Florida  set  free  by  Cap
tain Laudonniere (1565) ix. 49
landing  of, in Florida (1565) 88
112  ; Fort  Caroline  entered  by,  95
treatment  of Indians (1567) 102
attack of Captain Gourgues  on
104, 108; at Cevola (1540) 307
at  Essequibo  river  (1597)  xi. 12.

Spanish  Armada,  see  Armada.
Spanish  town,  in  Trinidad,  see  Port

of  Spain.
Spanne,  Russian  measure  for  liquids,

11.  275.

Spar,  White,  found  in  Guiana,  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.
344;  abundance  of,  in  Guiana,
404.

Sparke,  John,  assistant  to  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307 ;  discovery
by  (1566)  III.  73-83  ;  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  109;  his  voyage
into  Persia  (1568)  136; at  Kazvin,

137-
Sparke, John, the  younger, second
voyage  to  the  Indies  of  Sir  John
Hawkins,  written  by  (1564)  x.  9-

63.

Sparrow,  Francis,  entrusted  to  Topi-
awari,  lord  of  Aromaia,  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.  414;  in-
structions of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
to,  416;  prisoner  of  Santiago,
462.

Spayne,  see  Spain.

Speachman  or  Talmack,  11.  353.

Spearmen,  or  Mustafaracas,  of  the
Grand  Signior,  pay  of,  vi.  63.

Spears,  i.  80.

'  Speculum  Regale,'  on  Iceland,  iv.
19, no.

Speedwell  of  Bristol,  the,  Andrew
Barker's  ship,  bound  for  Teneriffe

(1594)  X.  82 ; driven  back  to  Eng-
land by  a  storm  (1585) 10 1.

Spell,  to  break  up  a  Cion  or  water-
spout, V.  90.

Spencer,  George  Turberville's  verses
to  (1568)  III. 1 27- 13 1.

Spencer,  lieutenant  of  the  ordnance
at  the  Groyne,  death  of  (1589)  vi.
487.

Spencer.  Alderman,  and  Captain
Carleill  (1583)  vili.  147.

Spencer,  John,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Spendlove,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Spenser,  Edmund,  quotation  from
the  '  Faerie  Queene,'  xii.  loi ;  and
his  works,  107.

Spenser,  Hugh  Le,  see  Despenser.

Speranze,  see  Bona  Esperanza.

Sperthius,  self-sacrifice  of,  iv.  i,  89.

Spheres,  half,  of  the  world,  by
Joseph  Moletius,  vii.  193.

Sphinx,  the,  v.  337.

Spicer,  Edward,  master  of  the  fly-
boat,  in  John  White's  fleet  (1587)
VIII.  392 ;  his  arrival  at  Cape
Tiburon  (1590)  410;  at  Roanoke
Island,  414  f. ; death  of,  415,  416.

Spicer,  Nicolas,  privileged  trader  in
Senegal  (1588)  vi.  443-450-

Spiceries  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  11.
164  f.,  170,  175;  from  England  to
the,  177 ;  of  the  Molucca  Islands,
Portuguese  possession,  viii.  129.

Spices,  trade  in,  in  Ormuz  (1563)  iii.
43 ;  prices  of,  in  Persia,  57,  142 ;
Persian  market  of,  67,  147,  154;
brought  to  Ormuz  by  Portuguese,
161 ;  imported  to  England,  v.  63  ;
market  at  Alexandria  and  Cairo
(1584)  273  ;  at  Bussorah,  372  ;  at
Cambaietta,  375 ;  at  Cananore,
391 ;  at  Cochin,  392,  395;  at  Cey-
lon, 399;  in  Banda,  403;  in  Sum-
atra, 404,  498 ;  in  Malacca,  405 ;
in  Orissa,  409 ;  in  Tenasserim,
412;  in  Pegu,  428;  in  India,  de-
scription of,  442 ;  bought  for
traffic  in  India  by  John  Newbery
(1583)  454.  455;  found  in  Ormuz,
468;  in  Masulipatam,  472;  of
China,  vi.  355 ;  taken  in  the
Madre  de  Dios  (1592)  vii.  116; in

414

INDEX

Canada,  found  by  Jacques  Cartier
(1587)  viii.  274;  in  Philippine
Islands,  xii.  21.

Spicknard,  see  Spikenard.

Spikenard,  found  in  Scinde  and  La-
hore, VI.  25.

Spinola,  Francisco,  captain  of  the
Conception  (1591)  vii. 59.

Spinosa,  companion  of  Vasquez  de
Coronado,  death  of  (1540)  ix.  150;
soldier  of  Captain  UUoa  (1539)
238 ;  lands  on  the  Island  of  Cedars,

259-

Spirit,  man-killing,  in  Iceland,  iv.
28,  121,

Spirito  Santo,  Baia  do,  in  Brazil,
Ruttier  for,  xi.  80;  latitude  of,
82;  English  ships  at  (1583)  94;
mentioned  in  Ruttier,  100 ;  ifriars
at  (1582)  184.

Spirito  Santo,  Cabo  del,  on  Luzon,
in  the  Philippines,  xi.  329;  lati-
tude of,  350 ;  from,  to  the  entrance
of  the  Straits  of  Philippines,  364;
Thomas  Cavendish  at  (1588)  370.

Spisemsky  or  Phisemsky,  Feodor
Andre  wich,  Russian  envoy  to
Queen  Elizabeth  (1583)  in.  310,
315;  ambassador  of  John  Vasili-
wich.  Emperor  of  Russia,  to  Eng-
land (1582)  463.

Spits,  Willoughby's  fleet  at  the,  11.
217.

Spodio  di  Cana,  found  in  Cochin,
VI.  26.

Spodium, found in Cambay (1584)

V.  505.

Sponges, Lapis Spongii found in,

VI.  27.

Spouts,  the,  or  Bufladeros,  in
Hispaniola,  x.  283.

Sprat, Cape, see  Espartel.

Springs,  hot,  in  Mechuacan,  in  New
Spain,  IX.  384.

Spy,  Jewish,  in  Rhodes,  v.  3 ;  Turk-
ish, 5 ;  Spanish,  and  Captain
Gourgues  (1568)  ix. 106.

Squirrel,  the,  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's expedition  (1583)  viii.  47,
XII.  37;  meets  the  Golden  Hind
at  S.  John  Harbour,  viii.  51 ;  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  in  the,  62,  69,
73 ;  loss  of,  in  a  storm,  74,  xii.
38.

Squirrels,  Calaber  or  gray,  iii.  364;
flying,  in  Russia,  369 ;  found  in
Virginia  (1586)  vill.  368.

Stad,  see  Norway.

Stadacona,  dwelling  place  of  Don-
nacona,  fruitfulness  of  (1535)  viii,
220;  Jacques  Cartier  at,  221,  230;
description  of,  244;  pestilence  in,
246.

Staden,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
320.

Staff,  used  by  Captain  Frobisher  for
taking  latitudes  (1577)  vii.  316.

Staff,  Russian  Imperial,  price  of  the
(1584)  m.  339.

Stafford,  George  Turberville's  friend,
in  Russia  (1568)  ni.  130.

Stafford,  Captain  Edward,  in  Vir-
ginia (1585)  VIII.  317;  sent  to
Croatan  Island,  338,  393 ;  and  the
unknown  fleet  (1586)  342;  at  S.
Cruz, 388; at Virginia, 391,

396.

Stafford,  Edmund,  on  board  the  Aid
(1577)  VII.  285.

Stafford,  John,  chaplain  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  n.  213.

Stafford,  Richard,  chaplain  for
Cabot's  intended  voyage,  11.  206.

Stafford,  Sir  Edward  (1552-1605),
Queen  Elizabeth's  ambassador  at
Paris,  I.  xvii.,  xxxi.,  xii.  82.

Stafford,  Sir  John,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Stainford  Bridge,  see  Stamford.

Stalame,  King,  in  Florida  (1562)
VIII.  474.

Stamford,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  in.
282.

Stamford  Bridge,  battle  of,  i.  25.

Standish,  Doctor,  Emperor  of  Rus-
sia's physician,  11.  397,  429,  430.

Stanfew  Harbour,  Willoughby's  fleet
in,  II.  219.

Stanlaw,  foundation  of  the  abbey  of
(1172)  IV.  310.

Stanley,  Sir  William,  leader  of  seven
bands  of  English  soldiers  in  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  205;  at  Dun-
kirk, 220.

Stanton,  Captain  Richard,  land-
captain  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1586)  X.  28.

Stanton,  Robert,  master  gunner  on

415

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
213.
Stapelapa,  Miles  Philips  at  (:58o)  ix.

434-

Staper,  member  of  the  Muscovy
Committee,  and  Captain  Carleill
(1583)  VIII. 147.

Staper,  James,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  75,  78.

Staper,  Richard,  his  information  on
Turkish  trade,  i.  xxix. ;  and  the
Levant  trade  (1578)  v.  167,  170,
VI.  73 ;  privileges  granted  to,  by
Queen  Elizabeth  (1581)  v.  192;  of
the  company  for  the  Levant  trade
(1581)  193-202,  (1592)  VI.  75,  78;
and  the  Grand  Master  of  Malta,

V.  218;  and  the  Jesus  (1583)  292;
and  the  accounts  of  the  bark  Rai-
nolds,  454;  and  Ralph  Fitch's
voyage  to  India  (1583)  465;  mem-
ber of  the  Barbary  Company  (1585)

VI.  419,  420  f. ;  Robert  Flicke's  re-
port to  (1591)  VII.  56;  owner  of
the  Tohy  (1593)  124;  John  Whit-
hall's  letter  to  (1578)  xi.  26-30.

Staple,  ordinance  of  the,  i.  352.

Star,  North,  xi.  162.

Stararovse,  best  Russian  salt  at,  iii.

368.
Starkey,  Alexander,  lieutenant  of  Sir

Francis Drake's fleet, death of

(1586)  X. 134.

Starkie, Thomas, member of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Starky,  John,  Mercer,  Levant  trader

{1535)  V.  69.
Starnatan, town in Canada, viii.

244.
Start  Point,  vi.  261 ;  George  Fenner

at  (1567)  284.
Starte, John, settler in Virginia

(1587)  viii.  402.

Staryts,  Emperor  of  Russia  at
(1572)111.  179;  Anthony  Jenkinson
at,  180; his  departure  from,  193.

States,  Eastern,  and  the  English
trade  in  Russia  (1567)  iii.  99.

Staves,  Indian,  found  by  sailors  of
Captain  Ulloa  (1539)  ix,  226.

Stealing  in  the  Custom  House  of
Pegu,  v.  430.

Steel,  Tartar  and  Russian,  11. 382.

Stelston, Thomas, mariner on the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) 11.

214.
Stepan  Batore,  see  Stephen  Bathory.
Stepanitze,  see  Stepnitz,
Stephen,  twenty-fifth  bishop  ofSchal-

holt, in Iceland (1494) iv. 38,

156.
Stephen Bathory, King of Poland

(1580)  III.  385,  386.
Stepnitz,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

325-

Sterfier,  harbour,  11,  223.

Stert,  see  Start.

Stetine,  see  Stettin.

Stettin,  in  Pomerania,  Sir  Jerome
Horsey  at  (1584)  iii,  345;  William
Harborne  at  (1588)  vi.  58;  hulk,
with  Spanish  goods,  captured  by
the  English  (1589)  510.

Stevens,  Father  Thomas,  of  St.
Paul's  College,  in  Goa  (1583)  v.
460,  463;  and  Ralph  Fitch's  sure-
ties, 471 ;  and  John  Newbery
(1583)  VI.  7.

Stevens,  Patrick,  steward's  mate  on
the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
214.

Stevens,  Thomas,  letter  of,  i.  Ixxi. ;
Richard  Hakluyt  and  a  letter  of
(1583)  V.  452  ;  letter  to  his  father
from Goa (1579) vi. 377-385-

Stevens,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Stevens,  William,  gunner,  of  the
Hugh  Gallant,  killed  by  Indians
(1587)  XI.  306.

Stevenson,  James  and  Charles,  in
Virginia  (1585)  vml  317.

Steven  ton,  Thomas,  letter-bearer  of
Sir  Francis  Walsingham  (1582)
VIII.  132 ;  chosen  captain  by  the
Company  of  Merchants, 133.

Steward  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia's
household,  Gregory  Vasiliwich
Godonoe  (1588)  iii.  413.

Stewart,  Lord  Robert,  governor  of
Orkney,  vii.  287.

Steyhard,  Nicholas,  of  Cley,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  65.

Sticfla  Stodum,  Norway,  martyrdom
of  Saint  Olaf  in, iv. 48, 145.

Stile,  Nicolas,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88; member  of  the

.16

INDEX

Barbary  Company  (1585)  419,
420  f.

Stile,  Oliver,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88;  member  of
the  Barbary  Company  (1585)  419,
420  f.

Stilman,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Stizen,  Henry  Austell  near  (1585)  v.
322.

Stoad,  William  Harborne  at  (1588)
VI.  58-

Stocket,  Nicholas,  ambassador  to
Prussia,  11. 18, 19,  25.

Stockholm,  trade  with  Narva  (1576)
III.  207;  Thomas  Alcock's  letter
from  (1560)  II.  407.

Stocks,  Knit,  sale  of,  abroad  (1582)
v.  230.

Stoke-under-Hamdon,  burial-place
of  Matthew  Gourney,  iv.  444.

Stoke  under  Hampden,  see  Stoke-
under-Hamdon.

Stokes  Bay,  the  Toby  sails  from
(1593)  VII. 124.

Stone,  Thomas,  quartermaster  on
the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
213.

Stone,  able  to  run,  in  Iceland,  iv.
44,  140;  black,  fallen  from  heaven,

^  at  Mecca,  v.  353,  355.

Stones,  precious,  brought  back  from
India  by  Sighelm,  iv.  280 ;  to  pre-
vent wounds,  418;  in  Ceylon,  421 ;
Merdochas,  430;  found  in  Beller-
gan,  v.  472;  in  Caplan,  496;  in
Pegu,  504;  variety  of,  found  in
the  Western  Planting  (1583)  viii.
116.

Stones,  Turkey, see Honestones.

Stoning,  Andrew,  murder  of,  in-
tended by  Captain  Hawlse  (1589)
XI.  388.

Stonor,  I.  47.

Stora,  port  of  Tunis  (1553)  vi.  143.

Storax  calamita,  found  in  Rhodes
and  Canemarie,  vi.  25 ;  liquida,
found  in  Rhodes,  25 ;  liquida,
found  in  Florida,  x.  57.

Storie,  James,  painter,  enters  St.
Paul's  College,  in  Goa  (1583)  v.
461,  465,  508;  leaves  the  college,
511; discoveries  of,  vi.  77.

Storms, in the Caspian Sea, 11.

476;  off  the  Sicilian  coast  (1270)
IV.  360 ;  in  Bermuda,  vi.  404 ;
English  fleet  in  (1589)  vii.
24,  25 ;  the  Spanish  fleet  dam-
aged by,  near  S.  Michael  Island
(1591)  49;  Indian  Spanish  fleet
damaged  by,  55 ;  off  Flores
Island  (1591)  58;  in  Terceira
(1591)  83;  in  Anne  Warwick's
Sound  (1578)  233,  234,  241 ;  snow,
in  Meta  Incognita  (1578)  238,
343  f. ;  the  Aid  in  a  (1577)  294  f.  ;
in  the  North  Sea  (1577)  316,  (1578)
330;  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert's  ships
in  a  (1583)  VIII.  73 ;  loss  of  the
Squirrel  in  a,  74;  on  the  coast  of
Virginia  (1586)  344;  Captain  Ul-
loa's  ships  in  a  (1540)  ix.  269,
271  f. ;  in  the  port  of  S.  Juan
d'Ulloa  (1556)  343;  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  a,  near  Cape  Finis-
terre  (1567)  399,  x.  64  ;  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  a,  in  the  West  Indies
(1568)  IX.  401,  X.  67;  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  a  (1564)  9;  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  fleet  in  a,  near  Bayona
Islands  (1585)  loi ;  at  Oncaiarie
Island  (1596)  457;  Spanish  fleet
in  a  (1582)  XI.  92,  93,  267;  Sir
Francis  Drake  in  a  (1577)  102;
Master  Winter  in  a,  in  the  Straits
of  Magellan  (1578)  112;  Robert
Withrington  in  a  (1587)  217;
Thomas  Cavendish  in  a  (1587)
301 ; the  Desire  in  a  (1592)  405.

Story,  John,  painter,  enters  S.
Paul's  College,  in  Goa,  vi.  7.

Story,  John,  condemned  by  Inquisi-
tion in  Mexico  (1575)  ix.  428;
sent  to  the  White  Friars  (1575)
430; married a negro woman,

431-

Stoslaus,  son  of  Igor,  11.  184.

Stow,  John,  antiquarian  (1497)  vii.
154; quotation  from,  xii.  45,  66.

Strabo,  vii.  137 ;  on  Africa,  i.  xli. ;
seventh  book  of  geography  of,  iii.
358;  on  fire  and  water,  iv.  21,
112;  on  the  origin  of  Brennus,
270;  quotation  from,  v.  121;  and
the  Ocean  Sea,  called  Atlanticum
Pelagus,  VII.  162,  199

Straco,  Francesco,  Captain,  and
Mustafa  Pasha  (1571)  v. 145.

417

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Strait,  discovered  by  Captain  UUoa
(1539)  IX.  213;  north-west,  be-
tween Newfoundland  and  Green-
land, 381.

Straker,  George,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Stralsund,  restitution  demanded  of
England  by,  11,  35.

Strambali,  Giacomo,  at  the  defence
of  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  143.

Stranfeord,  see  Strangford.

Strangbow, see  Strongbow.

Strangers,  reception  of,  by  the  Shah
of  Persia  (1574)  iii. 159.

Strangford,  siege  of,  i,  34.

Stratford,  Captain  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  wounded  at  Puerto
Rico  (1595)  X.  230.

Strawberries,  found  in  Virginia
(1586)  VIII.  367.

Street,  Walter,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V,  282.

Street,  Walter,  mate  of  the  Delight
(1589)  XI.  385.

Streets,  Russian,  wood  pavement  in
(1588)  III.  373;  in  China,  descrip-
tion of,  VI.  300.

Strehlen,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

327-

Strelen,  see  Strehlen.

Strelitz,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.
326.

Strelze,  on  the  Sukhona,  iii.  405.

Strivalia  Island,  Laurence  Aldersey
at  (1586) VI. 41.

Strokhithe,  ships  from,  in  Edward
ni.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Strong,  Richard,  of  Apsham,  master
of  the  Marigold  (1593)  viii.  157.

Strongbow,  Richard,  Earl  of  Chep-
stow, conquest  of  Leinster  by,
VIII.  123  ;  conquest  of  Ireland  by
(1171)  444.

Stroogs  or  brigantines  on  the  Cas-
pian Sea,  III.  18,  70 ;  on  the  Volga,
215.

Stropene,  Michael,  and  John  New-
bery's  imprisonment  at  Ormuz
(1583)  V.  457,  458,  462.

Strotbeker,  Stertebeker,  and  the
English  ships,  11.  61,  64,  65,66,70.

Strowde,  Richard,  boatswain's  mate
on  the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)
n.  213.

Strucophagi, people of Africa, vi.

169.
Stubbes, Matthew, distress of, at

Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.
Stukeley,  of  Sir  Richard  Grenville's

voyage to Virginia (1585) viii.

310; Sir  Richard  Gren villa  and,

316.
Stukeley, Thomas, voyage  to  Bar-

bary  (1578)  vi.  293 ;  adventures  of,

XII. 102.
Stupino Carawool, a watchhouse

near  Peravolog,  iii. 217.
Sturgeon, abundant at Astrakhan,

II.  455 ;  fishing  in  the  Volga,  iii.

71.  367-
Styx  river,  iv.  39,  135.
Stzuchogora  river,  iii.  407.
Suares,  Francis,  letter  from,  to  his

brother Diego (1596)  x. 39; his

successful  trade,  41.
Suarez,  Don  Luys,  sent  to  S.  Juan

d'Ulloa  to  fight  the  English  (1580)

IX.  433.
Suas,  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hungarian-
Turkish  war  (1594)  VI.  104.
Suasola, Don  John de Miramonte,

letter  from,  to  Don  John  Garcias

de  Penalosa  (1590)  x. 169.
Sucana,  see  Sukhona.
Succession, Royal, in Persia, iii.

164 ; in  China,  vi.  368.
Succussio,  or  earthquake,  iv.  17, 107.
Suchana,  see  Sukhona.
Suchetepec province, John Chilton

in  (1570)  IX.  366.
Suchistlahuaca,  town  in  New  Spain,

IX. 467, 472 ; in  charge  of  Gon-

zalvo  Fernandez,  468.
Suchuon, province of China, vi.

350-
Suckel  Counse,  King  of  Couche,  v.

481.
Sucket, white, found in Scinde,

Cambay,  and  China,  vi.  25.
Sudak,  William  de  Rubriquis  at,  i.

230,  231,  234,  249  f.,  252.
Sudero  Bay,  Zichmni's  conquest  in

(c.  1380)  VII.  448.
Suecia,  see  Sweden.
Sueno  the  Wise,  twenty-third  bishop

of  Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1472)  iv.

57. 156.
Suetia, see Sweden.

418

INDEX

Suevi  and  Tartar  sovereignty,  i.  231.

Suevia,  see  Swabia.

Suez  Canal,  '  Tamburlaine  '  and,  xii.
106.

Suez,  Isthmus  of,  vn. 194.

Sugar,  in  Canary  Islands,  vi.  127;
making  of,  128;  negro  slaves  ex-
changed for  (1567)  284;  in  China,
357 ;  found  in  Mexico,  ix.  358 ;
in  New  Spain,  386;  from  Santos,
trade  in,  xi.  31;  lading  of,  on
English  ships  (1581)  36; houses,

79-
Sughano,  see  Sukhona.
Sugo  di  Requillicie,  found  in  Arabia

felix,  VI.  27.
Suicides, religious, in Japan, vi.

344- ,
Suits,  obtained  by  Sir  Jerome  Bowes

of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  (1583)

HI.  324-329; the  Russian  manner

of  presenting,  329.
Sukhona,  river  in  Russia,  iii.  215;

source  of,  near  Vologda,  11.  418;

tributary  of  the Dvina, in. 363,

405-

Sultans,  of  Aleppo,  i.  78,  154;  Alti,
76,  122,  167;  Deurum,  78,  154;
Solyman,  v.  1-60;  Selim  I.,  2;
Amurath  III.,  221-319;  tombs  of
the,  in  S.  Sophia,  253.

Sumac,  Spanish  black  dye,  v.  235 ;
found  in  Cyprus,  vi.  27.

Sumack,  see  Sumac.

Sumakoto,  or  Sumacoto,  silk  market
in,  IV.  429.

Sumatra,  Island,  v.  403,  vi.  395,
400;  kingdom  of,  iv.  416;  de-
scription of,  V.  404;  cotton  cloth
from  Sinnergan  in,  485 ;  spices  in,
498  ;  heat  of,  vn.  258 ;  the  Portu-
guese at,  VIII.  129;  Nicobar
Islands,  near,  x.  196.

Sumerled,  King  of  Argyll,  i.  30 ;
Dubgal,  son  of,  31;  Godred  and,
32 ; death  of, 32.

Summer,  Henry,  of  Camphire,  and
the  Dantzig  ships  (1577)  vi.  232.

Sumongols  or  Water-Mongols,  a
tribe  of  Tartary,  i.  142  ;  strife  with
Tartars,  68.

Sumpter,  John,  in  Santa  Cruz  (1566)
VI. 268.

Sun,  eclipse  of  the  (1185)  i.  33 ;  wor-

ship of  the,  in  Ormuz,  vi.  no;
spots  in  the  (1590)  462,  463;  heat
of  the,  at  the  Pole,  vii.  177;  in
the  Torrid  Zone,  255-268;  under
the  Poles,  271 ;  revered  by  the
Indians,  ix.  189  sq.,  287,  292.

Sund,  and  England  (1405)  11.  55.

Sunshine  of  London,  the,  in  John
Davys'  first  voyage  (1585)  vii.
382  ;  return  of,  393 ;  second  voyage
of  (1586)  393-413;  at  Dartmouth,
407 ;  course  of,  report  by  Henry
Morgan  (1586)  408;  going  to  Ice-
land, 409 ;  to  Greenland,  410 ;
fight  between  the  crew  of,  and
the  natives  of  Merchants  Isle,  412 ;
in  John  Davys'  third  voyage  (1587)
414;  dissensions  on,  415;  a  leak
in,  417,  425.

Superstitions,  religious,  in  Russia,
n.  236,  265,  423,  428,  442;  of
Samoyedes,  in.  402 ;  of  Lapps,
404 ;  in  Mobar,  Friar  Odoric  on
the  (1330)  IV.  415;  in  Bodin
Island,  421;  in  Fuco  City,  426;
of  the  Indians  of  Virginia  con-
cerning  the English (1585) viii.

335-

Superum  Sea,  and  Sicily,  vn. 161.

Surat,  ginger  found  in,  vi.  25.

Surey,  Mustafa  Pasha  ordered  back
from  Rhodes  to,  v.  35.

Surgeon,  Thomas,  death  of,  at  the
taking  of  Riohacha  (1568)  ix.
449.

Surgeons,  scarcity  of,  in  the  army,
VI.  478,  480.

Surta  or  Zarza,  near  New  Spain,
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  296.

Sus,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.  144;
Mully  Abdelmelech,  King  of  (1577)
285 ; stores  of  saltpetre  at,  291.

Susan,  the,  voyage  of  (1582)  v.  243;
in  Majorca,  248 ;  arrival  of,  at
Constantinople,  251,  254;  of  the
English  merchants'  fleet  (1586)  vi.
47; bound  for  Venice,  48.

Susan  Parnell,  the,  of  Sir  Francis
Drake's  fleet,  loss  of  (1596)  x.
242.

Susis,  see  Tabriz.

Susky,  Ivan  Petrowich,  and  the  elec-
tion of  Feodor  Ivanowich,  Em-
peror of  Russia  (1584)  in.  336.

419

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Sussex,  I,  44  f. ;  ships  of,  47  f. ;
Sheriff  of,  and  King  John,  320.

Sussex  Island,  Countess  of,  discov-
ered by  Captain  Frobisher  (1578)
VII, 239 ; meeting  on, 240.

Sussex,  Earl  of,  see  Radcliffe,
Robert.

Suthcot,  John,  consul  of  the  Mus-
covy Company,  11.  307.

Suttee,  in  Bezeneger  (1567)  v.  384-
386 ;  in  Chaul,  470 ;  in  Benares,
478.

Sutton,  Martin,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII. 403.

Suzan,  John,  member  of  the  Bar-
bary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Svanego,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v,
321.

Sveno  the  Dane  and  the  marriage
of  King  Vladimir  (1067)  in.  373.

Swabber,  Nicholas,  in  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  318.

Swabia,  King  of,  see  Frederick  Bar-
barossa.

Swallow,  the,  voyage  to  S.  Nicholas
(1560)  II.  401 ;  wares  in,  408,
409 ;  and  the  eighth  journey
of  the  Muscovy  Company  to
Persia  (1561)  iii.  9;  Anthony  Jen-
kinson  in  (1561)  15;  his  return
home  in  (1564)  38;  at  Rose
Island  (1571)  169;  in  S.  Nicholas
Bay (1572) 170.

Swallow,  the,  of  London,  crew  (1584)
V. 281 ; and Hassan  Aga, 282.

Siuallow,  the.  Sir  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  with
(1564)  VI.  263,  X.  9 ;  of  Captain
Hawkins'  fleet  (1567)  ix.  398,  445;
at  Rio  Grande,  448 ;  taken  by
Spanish  in  S.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1568)
453 ;  Thomas  Hampton,  captain
of  (1562)  X.  7;  in  the  Casserroes
river,  23 ;  Bitfield,  captain  of,
99.

Swallow,  the,  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's expedition  (1583)  viii.  47,  xii.
37;  meets  the  Golden  Hindin  Con-
ception Bay,  viii.  50 ;  misdemean-
our of  the  crew  of,  50  f.  ;  returns
home,  62,  92.

Swallow,  the,  Sir  George  Carey's
ship,  near  Cuba  (1591)  x. 179.

Swan,  the,  fight  of,  at  the  Cadiz
expedition,  with  a  Flemish  ship
(1596)  IV.  243.

Swan,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherley,  left  to  the  Earl  of  Essex
(1596)  X.  266.

Swansea,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298;  Captain  Lau-
donniere  at  (1565)  ix.  99.

Swanson,  Robert,  of  the  Tohy,
death  of  (1593)  vii. 129.

Swanus,  see  Sweyn.

Swanzey, see  Swansea.

Swecia,  see  Sweden.

Sweden,  i.  14;  King  Arthur  and,  6;
countries  pertaining  to,  15 ;  King
of,  sends  Edmund  Ironside's  son
to  Hungary,  25  ;  King  of,  Albert
of  Mecklenburg,  11.  68;  English
merchants  in  (1404)  xo8  f.,  iii  f. ;
and  Russian  frontier,  11.  252 ;
Russian  conquests  in,  423 ;  and
Russia,  438 ;  Emperor  of  Russia
at  war  with,  in.  172 ;  Lapp  tri-
bute to  (1576)  205;  conquests  in
Russia  of,  359 ;  wars  of,  their
effect  on  English  trade,  461 ;  friars
from,  to  Greenland  (c.  1380)  vii.
453 ; snow  in, viii. 57.

Swedland,  see  Sweden.

Sweeting,  John,  owner  of  a  Spanish
ship  (155s)  IX.  341.

Sweeting,  Robert,  at  Tescuco,  and
Anthony  Godard  and  his  men
(1568)  IX.  421.

Swen,  in  Flanders,  11.  14,  20.

Sweno,  see  Sweyn  II.

Swethens, see  under Sweden.

Swethland,  see  Sweden.

Swetinoz,  Stephen  Borough  at  (1556)
II. 334  f.  ; cape  of,  417.

Sweveland,  see  Sweden.

Sweyn  II.  of  Denmark,  and  Har-
old's children,  i.  42.

Sweyn,  son  of  Earl  Godwin,  voyage
of,  to  Jerusalem  (1052)  iv.  283.

Swift-sure,  the,  at  Flores  (1590)  viii.
421.

Swinborne  Head,  latitude  of,  vii.
205.

Swinefleet,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Swinhumber,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  299.

420

INDEX

Swinnerton, John, member of the

Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,

420  f.
Swird,  river,  in  Russia,  iii.  79,  81.
Sword, Knights of the, and the

Dutch  Knights  in  Prussia,  11.  2.
Sword-fish,  found  near  Sierra  Leone

(1582)  XI.  178.
Swyasko  Castle,  11.  451.
Swyn  in  Flanders,  see  Swen.
Swyn,  Thomas  de,  of  Waynfleete,  i.

344-

Swyoskagorod,  altitude  of,  iii.  248.

Syban,  son  of  Tushi,  i.  74;  Bathy's
brother,  167.

Sybedey,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74,
150.

Sydenham,  Captain,  at  the  Groyne,
death  of  (1589)  vi.  490,  499.

Sydmouth,  see  Sidmouth.

Sylan,  see  Ceylon.

Sylley,  see  Scilly.

Sylva,  Caspar  de,  buried  at  Trini-
dad, X.  496.

Sylverberge,  John  Burgrave  of,  am-
bassador to  England  (1527)  v.  61.

Sylvester,  John,  survivor  of  the  Toby
(1593)  vn.  129.

Symberbe,  of  Edward  Fenton's  voy-
age, return  of  (1583)  xi.  201.

Synaca,  in  Austria,  Richard  I.,
prisoner  in  (1193)  iv.  335.

Synagogue  in  Venice,  description  of
a,  by  Laurence  Aldersey  (1581)  v.
204.

Synocur,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74,
150.

Synopolis,  stronghold  of  the  Sultan
of  Turkey,  i.  229,  231.

Syra  Orda,  the  Tartar  Imperial
Court  at,  I.  56,  171 ;  meaning  of,
13s.  167  f.

Syrennen,  i.  74.

Syria,  v.  129;  in  Thome's  map,  11.
170;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  in.
195;  Tyre  in,  iv.  308;  conquered
by  Richard  L  (1191)  335;  Richard,
Earl  of  Cornwall's  voyage  to
(1240)  352  ;  Turkish  soldiers  from,
at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  148;
Galls  found  in,  vi.  25 ;  Scamonea
found  in,  26.

Syrian  Sea,  east  of  Cyprus,  v.
124.

Tabago,  see  Tobago.

Tabanoo,  negroes  from,  and  the
Richard  of  Arundel  (1589)  vi.  451.

Tabaria,  town  of,  conquered  by
King  Baldwin  (1107)  iv.  304.

Tabaria,  Hugh  of,  patriarch  of  Jeru-
salem (1107)  IV.  302;  in  the  coun-
try of  the  Grosse  Carle,  304 ;  death
of,  305 ; his  brother  Gerard,  305.

Tabasco  coast,  mentioned  in  second
Ruttier,  x.  319.

Tabasco river, Merida on the, ix.

374-  . „ .

Tabin, promontory in Russia, iii.

262,  279,  454.
Table,  the,  hill  in  Cuba,  x.  46,  244.
Table of Rates or Aranzel in the

Contractation House at Seville

(1586)  XI.  457.
Taborer,  Andreas,  surety  for  Ralph

Fitch  and  John  Newbery  (1583)  v.

471.
Tabriz,  in  Persia,  trade  of,  11.  478;

distance  of, from  Campion,  484;

greatest  city  of  Persia,  in.  26,  35 ;

silk  market  at,  51 ; English  trade

in (1568) 137; Thomas Banister

in, 162 ; riots  in, 162 ; great  re-
sort for  traffic  (1330)  iv.  309.
Tabuebbi  or  Tapuellibi  river,  xi.  13.
Tacadocorou, Captain  Vasseur  and

(1565)  IX.  75.
Tacarao, green stone found in

Morucca,  x.  207.
Tacatacourou, King, and Captain

Gourgues  (1567)  ix.  102.
Tacatacouru, river, see Seine in

Florida.
Tachnin,  river,  iii.  409.
Tacitus, Cornelius, London in the

time  of,  I.  xlvii.  308.
Tadascu, see  Saguenay  river.
Tadouac,  ix.  158.
Taffours (ships) at the siege of

Rhodes,  v.  16.
Taggarin  river, Sir  John  Hawkins

and  the  negroes  at  (1568)  ix.  447.
Tagrona,  rich  valley  of,  xi.  237.
Tagulada  Islands,  Sir  Francis  Drake

at  (1579)  XI.  124.
Taigarandono,  John  Vongiu,  son  of

(1596)  XI.  441.
Taiguoagny  native,  taken  captive  by

Jacques Cartier  (1534)  viii. 219;

421

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

at  Stadacona,  221;  refuses  to  go
to  Hochelaga,  223  ;  at  Holy  Cross,
238 ;  asks  to  be  baptised,  240 ;
stratagem  of,  251;  taken  prisoner
by  Jacques  Cartier  (1536)  255;
Francis  I.'s  reception  of,  263.

Tailbois,  Matthew,  agent  to  the
Muscovy  Company  (1579)  in.  212;
winters  at  Astrakhan,  217;  at
Baku,  227;  leaves  Astrakhan
(1581)  245;  returns  to  England,
246.

Tailer,  Henry,  master  gunner  on
the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  11.
214,

Tailla,  town  in  Canada,  viii.  244.

Tails,  cows',  in  Bottanter,  v.  484;
horse,  trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1577)
VI.  252.

Taissu,  prison  officer  in  China,  vi.
302,  310.

Talapoyns,  priests  in  Pegu,  v.  492 ;
their  dress,  493.

Talas,  city  of,  i.  282.

Talas  Island,  despoiled  by  Zichmni
(c. 1380)  VII.  451.

Talbot,  Lord,  and  the  Russian  am-
bassador, II.  357.

Talhot,  the  bark,  Baily,  captain  of
(1585)  X.  98 ;  in  a  storm  near  Bay-
ona  Islands  (1585)  loi.

Talboys,  Matthew,  assistant  to  Ed-
ward Fen  ton  (1582)  xi.  163.

Talebot,  in  Roberval's  voyage  (1542)

VIII.  289.

Talismani,  to  call  the  people  to  the
Mosque,  v.  353.

Tallipoies,  see  Talapoyns.

Tallow,  II.  383,  396,  401,  403;  home
and  foreign  trade  of,  in  Russia,
III.  365 ;  found  in  the  Western
Planting (1583) viii. 116.

Talmach  or  Speachman,  11.  353.

Tamachos, salt  of  Panuco  sent  to,

IX.  415.

Tamaclipa, Mountain  of, near  Rio

Hermoso,  x.  318.
Tamaclipa, town, John Chilton at

(1572)  IX.  374.
Tamarind, found in Bussorah, vi.

26.
Tamascaltepec, silver  mines  in,  ix.

364; John  Chilton  at  (1568)  364.
Tamassus,  see  Famagusta.

'  Tamburlaine  ' by Marlowe, xii.

103 ; success of, 105 ; and the

Suez  Canal, 106.
Tamegines,  proper  name  of  Chinese,

VI.  315-
Tamen,  proper  name  of  China,  vi.

315.

Tamerlane,  11.  187;  escape  of,  to-
wards the  Don,  in.  397;  Drake
compared  to,  xii.  66.

Tamiago,  salt  of  Panuco  sent  to,  ix.

415-
Tamisari,  the,  in  Rovigno  (1553)  v.

77-
Tamos  Indians,  Antonio  de  Espejo

and  the  (1583)  ix.  203.
Tampice,  ix.  411; on  Panuco  river,

IX.  371.
Tana, Chaus  eaten by  a crocodile

at,  V.  337.
Tana Island, Friar Odoric at, v.

378; Ralph  Fitch  in,  470.
Tanais,  see  Don.
Tanaquiny, native of Virginia,

enemy  to  the  English  (1586)  viii.

337-

Tanasary,  see  Tenasserim.

Tanaseri,  see  Tenasserim.

Tanassarin,  see  Tenasserim.

Tanay,  a  place  in  Brazil,  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  business  in  (1597)  xi.
161.

Tanchipa,  John  Chilton  at  (1572)  ix.

374-

Tancred,  King  of  Sicily  (1190)  iv,
322  ;  and  Richard  I.  324 ;  at  Cath-
neia,  325.

Tancuylabo  in  Guastecan,  John  Chil-
ton in  (1572)  IX.  370.

Tanda  in  Gouren,  description,  v.
481.

Tandaya,  one  of  the  Philippines,  ix.

327-

Tane  Sound,  Arthur  Pet  in  (1580)
in.  299.

Tanfield  or  Tamfield,  William,  on
board  the  Gabriel  (1577)  vii.  285;
captain  of  the  Thomas  of  Ipswich
(1578)  322 ;  consultation  on  the
safety  of  the  Thomas,  351;  his
suspicions  of  Pilot  Cox,  355.

Tanga,  money  of  Goa,  vi.  18;  of
Cochin,  21; of  Malacca,  22.

Tanger, see Tangiers.

422

INDEX

Tangiers,  conquered  by  the  Portu-
guese, VIII. 127.

Tangomangos  and  the  King  of
Sierra  Leone  (1565)  x.  24;  and
the  Spanish  merchant  (1565)  43.

Tangut,  in  Cathay,  11.  484;  Ezina,
city  of  the  kingdom  of,  iii.  280 ;
people  of,  I.  290  f.

Tapaon  Island,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  XI.  76.

Tapestry,  made  of  small  reeds  in
Florida  (1564)  ix,  25.

Tapia,  Francis  de,  governor  of  S.
Domingo,  and  the  English  ship
(1517)  X.  4,  5.

Tapia,  Peter  de,  letter  to,  from  Bar-
tholomew  Cano (1590) X. 166.

Tapia,  in  West  Indies,  burnt  by  Sir
Thomas  Baskerville  (1595)  x.  235.

Tappan,  Audrey,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Taprobana,  see  Ceylon.

Tapuere,  small  river  in  Guiana,  xi.
II,  13.

Taquani,  see  Mosquito.

Tar,  works  at  Kholmogory,  11.  393  ;
trade,  in  Russia,  iii.  368.

Taranto,  John  Foxe  at  (1577)  v.
164,  166, 167.

Tarapaza,  Port,  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1578)  XI. 114.

Tarenate, see Ternate.

Tarentum,  see  Taranto.

Tarifa,  William  Harborne  at  (1583)
v.  243.

Tarquia,  Las  Sierras  de,  near  Pan-
uco  river,  x.  318.

Tarquino,  Sierras  de,  at  Cape  de
Cruz,  in  Cuba,  mentioned  in  the
Ruttier,  x.  285  ;  in  second  Ruttier,

314-
Tarracoa  province,  mentioned  by  Sir

Walter  Raleigh, x. 416.
Tarroopanama,  Indian  chief  tortured

by  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo  (1595)

X-  353-

Tarrose  of  Scilly,  John  Davys  at
(1586)  VII.  409.

Tartaria,  see  Tartary.

Tartars,  cannibalism  of,  i.  50 ;  Eng-
lish spy's  account  of,  51  ff.;  char-
acteristics of,  S3,  136;  morality
of,  138;  horses,  53,  81;  couriers,
54 ;  marriage  laws,  58,  67,  139  f . ;

garments,  58 ;  of  wool,  242  ;  hair,
243  f. ;  women's  dresses  and  head-
gear, 244  f. ;  their  habitations,  59,
136  f. ;  movable  houses,  234-237 ;
beds,  236  f. ;  cattle,  59,  135,  137,
234 ;  faith  of,  59  f. ;  worship  of
the  moon,  62,  288  f. ;  supersti-
tions of,  61  f.,  64,  141,  163,  237,
248,  275  ;  purifying  customs,  142  ;
soothsayers,  289 ;  funerals,  63  f. ;
peaceful  habits,  64  f. ;  deceitful-
ness,  65  f. ;  food,  66,  137,  239 ;
winter  food,  241  f . ;  arms,  67  f.,
79,  83,  90  ff.,  155,  157;  army  of,
78 ;  fighting,  82  ;  conquests,  84 ;
wars,  88 ;  discipline,  137,  151,  155;
strategy,  158 ;  empire,  68 ;  sove-
reignty in  the  East,  231 ;  captives,
83 ;  laws  of  inheritance,  86 ;  cus-
toms, 136;  severe  punishments  of
crimes,  139,  157 ;  hereditary  laws,
'85,  140;  Tartars  named  after  a
river,  142 ;  taught  to  read,  144 ;
expedition  into  the  country  of
Sultan  Alti,  152 ;  in  Georgia
and  Armenia,  154;  the  Caliph
of  Bagdad  and,  154 ;  the  Sul-
tans and,  154 ;  their  treatment
of  cowards,  155,  157  f. ;  crossing
a  river,  156;  how  to  resist  them,
157  f. ;  court  ceremonial,  162,
164;  drinking  ceremonial,  165,
237  f.  ;  eating  ceremonial,  239  f. ;
funeral  ceremonial,  247  f. ;  am-
bassadors discouraged  by  the
legates,  177;  their  preparation  of
mare's  milk  or  koumiss,  240  f. ;
hawk's  used  for  hunting  by,  242 ;
duties  of  their  women,  245  f. ;
duties  of,  246 ;  laws  and  judg-
ments, 247 ;  thieving  ways  of,  250,
251,255;  rye  harvest,  259  ;  Moxel
in  bondage  to  the,  260 ;  their  pre-
ference for  the  name  of  Moal,  266 ;
oppressed  by  Vut  Khan,  268;
scriptural  quotations  applied  to
the,  279 ;  Vitoldus,  captain  of  the,
II.  7;  war  stratagem  of,  186;  con-
quest of  Poland  and  Silesia  by
(1237)  186;  of  Hungary,  187;  re-
ligion of,  187 ;  defeated  by  Russia,
190,  423,  438;  two,  in  England,
and  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby's  voy-
age (1553)244;  a  migratory  people.

423

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

346; fight  between  English  and,

III.  150 ;  Moscow  burnt  by  the
(1571)  169,  390;  Giles  Fletcher  on
the,  389-401;  metals  of  the,  397;
called  Scythae  Nomades,  language
of,  similar  to  Turkish,  399 ;
unwritten  laws  of,  401 ;  idols  of,
and the Franciscan friars (1330)

IV.  439 ;  in  the  Turkish  army
(1594)  VI.  104;  in  Pekin,  323;  in
China,  359;  America's  discovery
and  the,  vii.  165,  368;  wars  of,
with  a  Chinese  captain,  xi.  378.

Tartary,  description  of,  i.  56 ;
scarcity  of  water  in,  56;  floods  in,
57;  Pope's  legates  ill-treated  in,
75 ;  wild  animals  in,  84,  242 ;
situation  of,  135,  270;  Emperor's
authority  in,  150;  papal  ambassa-
dors to,  159,  161 ;  their  sufferings
in,  176;  Kaiuk,  emperor  of,  169;
geographical  position  of,  11.  163 ;
and  the  Russian  boundaries,  251;
trade  of,  474;  invasions  of,  iii.
397; China  near  the  kingdom  of,

V.  406;  musk  found  in,  504,  vi.
26 ;  Petra  Bezzuar  found  in,  27 ;
fishermen  of,  and  the  North-west
passage,  vii.  181;  unicorn's
horn  found  in,  182.

Tarvisius  mountain,  iv.  38,  134.

Tarviso, see  Treviso.

Tashkend,  11.  473 ;  to  Occient,  seven

days'  journey,  481.
Taskent,  see  Tashkend.
Taslizea,  Henry  Austell  in  (1585)  v.

323.
Tassacort, sugar  of  Palma Island,

VI.  132.

Tasters  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,

III.  414.
Tatarrax,  King,  report  about  (1540)

IX. 164; truth  about, 165.
Tathalamasin,  see  Panten  Island.
Taunton, Thomas Gregory of, a

patent  granted  to  (1592)  vii.  102.
Taurica  Chersonesus,  see  Taurida.
Taurida,  i.  180,  229; description  of,

230. 233.
Tauris,  see  Tabriz.
Taurus,  Ottoman  and  the  Greeks  at,

III.  399.
Tauzu,  sect  in  China,  vi.  373.
Tavara,  Christopher  de,  vi.  294.

Tavara, Don  Alvaro Perez  de, vi.

294.
Taverner, Richard, settler in Vir-
ginia (1587)  viii.  402.
Tavernium  in  Sicily,  iv.  325.
Tavistock,  Thomas  Sanders's  father

in  (1584)  V.  306.
Tavoy,  Gulf  of,  in  Pegu,  v.  414.
Tavoy  Island,  Ralph  Fitch  near,  v.

497; tin  found  in,  498.
Tawrooromene,  town  on  the  Cush-

wini  river,  x.  492,
Taxes  on  Christians  and  Indians  of

Mexico  (1570)  IX.  377.
Taybayba, bush in Teneriffe, vi.

130.
Taylor,  Clement,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.
Taylor, Hugh, settler  in  Virginia,

403-
Taylor, John, in Virginia (1585)

318.
Taylor,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)

318.
Teats  of  Havana,  mentioned  in  the

Ruttier,  x.  303.
Tebek,  see  Tibet.
Tebet,  see  Tibet.
Tebris,  see  Tabriz.
Tecoanapa,  Haven  of,  description  of,

IX.  466;  cattle  near,  471;  harbour

for  building  ships for  the South

Sea,  473.
Tecoantepec,  port  in  the  South  Sea,

IX. 365; John Chilton in (1570)

370.
Tedcastle,  John,  member  of  the  Bar-

bary Company (1585) vi. 419,

420  f.
Tedle, kingdom of, in Africa, vi,

144.
Teeth,  elephants',  see  Ivory.
TegUa or teda wood, used at the

siege  of  Faniagusta  (1571)  v.  141.
Tegmouth, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  297.
Teguenondahi, tribe in Canada,

VIII.  244.
Telde,  a  town  in  Gran  Canaria,  vi.

127; wine  of, 128.
Telegas or Russian waggons, 11.

426,  in.  215.
Telegos,  see  Telegas.
Telemark,  in  Norway,  iv. 14,  X03.

424

INDEX

Telensln,  see  Tlemsen.

Teligny,  Monsieur  de,  prisoner  of
the  English  in  the  castle  of  Tour-
nai  (1588)  IV.  232.

Telio,  Don  Pedro,  general  of  a
Spanish  fleet  (1596)  x.  254.

Tellekina,  Southam  and  Sparke  at
(1566)  III.  77; Mastelina  to,  81.

Teller,  Samuel,  master's  mate  of  the
Clifford,  death  of  (1587)  xi.  215.

Teloptske,  11.  420.

Temesne,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Temirkutla,  see  Tamerlane.

Temiswar,  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hun-
garian-Turkish war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Templars,  see  Knights  Templar.

Temple,  Master  of  the,  and  the
Earl  of  Artois  (1249)  iv.  356.

Tenasserim,  vi.  400,  xi.  378 ;  de-
scription of,  V.  412 ;  products  of,
VI.  401 ;  islands  of,  Ralph  Fitch
near,  v. 498.

Tenbuis,  Los,  a  people  mentioned  in
Ruttier,  xi.  100.

Tench,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Tenedos,  Isle  of,  Pliny's  account  of
an  intermittent  fountain  in  the,
IV.  36,  130 ;  William  Harborne
in  (1583)  V.  251;  Richard  Wrag
near  (1594)  vi.  107.

Teneriffa,  see  Teneriffe.

Teneriffe,  one  of  seven  Canary
Islands,  iv.  18,  26,  108,  118,  vi.
124 ;  description  of,  129 ;  latitude
of,  129,  156;  products  of,  130;
subject  to  Spain,  131 ;  William
Towerson  at  (1555)  178;  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  sight  of  (1564)  264,
(1562)  X,  8;  George  Fenner  at
(1566)  VI.  266;  Thomas  Stevens
at  (1579)  378;  Captain  Laudon-
niere  at  (1564)  ix.  2  ;  Robert  Tom-
son  at  (1555)  341 ;  rendezvous  of
Sir  John  Hawkins's  fleet  (1567)
445)  (1564)  X.  10;  Adecia  port  in,
II ;  description  of  the  Peak  in,  13  ;
Andrew  Barker  and  Charles
Chester  at  (c.  1574)  82 ;  Cap-
tain Sommers .  at  (1595)  215;
latitude  of,  marks  of,  de-
scribed in  the  Ruttier,  280;
mentioned  in  second  Ruttier,  306;

Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1595)  349;
James  Lancaster  at  (1596)  xi.
44.

Teneruk,  King  of  Circassia,  in.  34.

Tenez,  kingdom  of,  in  Africa,  vi.
144.

Tenmouth,  ships  in  Edward  III.'s
fleet,  I.  297.

Tenslst,  river  In  Morocco,  vi.  426.

Tenterden,  i.  47.

Tepeaca,  in  Mexico,  cochineal  found
in  (1568)  IX.  363;  Miles  Philips  at
(1580)  434-

Terazzo,  soldier  of  Captain  Ulloa,
wounded  In  Cedars  Island  by  the
Indians  (1540)  ix.  259.

Tergera,  see  Terceira.

Terceira  Island,  George  Fenner  at
(1567)  VI.  280;  naval  fight  between
English  and  Spanish  near  (1586)
434;  carracks  at  (1589)  vii.  5;
English  prisoners  escape  from,  6,
69,  83;  English  fleet  at,  11,  57,
74;  ships  from,  captured,  30;
account  from,  of  the  slain  at  the
fight  off  Flores  (1591)  49;  Spanish-
Indian  ships  at,  55  ;  Robert  Flicke
at,  59 ;  Spanish  and  Indian
fleets  ordered  to  meet  at,  61 ;
Dutch  ships  at,  64 ;  Spanish  fleet
at  (1589)  66,  68;  Seville  fly-
boats  In  (1590)  71 ;  caravel  from
Corvo  Island  brings  news  of  Eng-
lish ships  at  (1590)  76;  earth-
quake in  (1591)  80;  storm  in,  83;
the  Marigold  at  (1593)  viii.  160;
John  White's  ship  at  (1587)  400;
Don  Antonio  and  his  French
ships  at  (1580)  IX.  442;  conquered
by  Don  Alvaro  Bagan  (1583)  x.
95;  latitude  of,  299,  334;  longi-
tude from,  to  S.  Michael,  337.

Terega,  soldier  of  Captain  Ulloa,  his
courage  in  the  attack  of  the  Chi-
chlmecas  Indians  (1539)  ix.  238.

Terenate,  see  Ternate.

Terentia  Antonia,  wife  of  M.  T.
Cicero,  tomb  of,  in  Zante,  v.  82.

Terfynnes'  country,  state  of,  i.  12.

Tergensch,  abbey  of.  In  Sweden,  oil
fountain  in,  iv. 38, 133.

Terllchlchimici,  in  Western  America,
viii. 450.

Ternados,  see  Tornadoes.

XII

425

2  E

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ternate,  chief  island  of  the  Moluccas,
XI.  128;  cloves  found  in,  vi.  24;
the  Portuguese  at,  vin.  129;  and
Sir  Francis  Drake,  xi.  125  ;  canoes
of,  125 ;  King  of,  Mutyr  Island
belonging  to  (1579)  124;  Antonio
Galvano,  governor  of,  xii.  83.

Terra  de  Labrador,  see  Newfound-
land.

Terra  firma,  vi.  265;  fleet  of  (1591)
VII.  54;  Spanish  fleet  from  (1589-
91)  87;  Indians  of,  description  of,
x.  27 ;  voyage  of  Andrew  Barker
to  (1576)  82;  open  to  Sir  Francis
Drake's  devastations,  94;  S.
Marta,  in  the  bishopric  of  (1587)
135  ;  voyage  of  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  to  (1596)  266-276;  Ruttier  for,
28'o-305.

Terra  nova, see Newfoundland.

Terraquine,  adviser  of  Pemisapan
against Ralph Lane (1586) viii.

338-

Terra  Rubra,  Colon  de,  see  Colum-
bus.

Terra  Sigillata,  or  Wapeih,  found  in
Virginia  (1586)  viii.  354.

Terrecovia  Castle,  11.  449.

Terrevettisko  Castle,  11.  449.

Terry,  William,  of  Hull,  11.  103 ;  and
Prussian  pirates,  61.

Terwill  or  Tirwill,  in  Poland,  11.
296,  396.

Terzas  or  Spanish  regiments  (1588)
IV. 202.

Terzera,  see  Terceira.

Tescuco,  on  Mexico  Lake,  Hernando
Cortez  in,  ix.  363;  Anthony  God-
ard  and  his  men  sent  to,  as  slaves
(1568)  421,  459.

Teseva,  from  Novgorod  to,  iii.  68.

Testament  of  Englishmen  in  Turkey
(1580)  V.  187.

Testigos,  the,  a  group  of  nine
islands.  Sir  John  Hawkins  in
sight  of  (1565)  X.  26;  Sir  Amyas
de  Preston  and  the  three  South-
ampton ships  at  (1595)  216;  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  287;  lati-
tude of, 335.

Testimonial  of  John  Locke,  v.  91 ;
of  the  crew  of  the  Desire  concern-
ing the  loss  of  Thomas  Cavendish
(1599)  XI.  397-399-

42

Testimonies  concerning  the  river
Amazon  or  Orellana,  xi.  16-22.

Tetepano,  Indian  of  Virginia,  fol-
lower of  Ralph  Lane  (1585)  viii.
335.

Tettingen,  Warnherus  de,  Prussian
ambassador,  11.  47,  86,  91 ;  his
letter  to  Sir  William  Esturmy,  85-
86.

Tetusha,  William  Turnbull  at  (1581)

MI. 246.

Tetushagorod,  on  the  Crim  side  of
Volga,  III.  216;  altitude  of,
248.

Teve,  Portuguese  ships  winter  at,
VI. 34.

Teveris,  see  Tabriz.

Tewflish,  see  Tiflis.

Texela,  Juan  de,  master  of  the  field,
his  inspection  of  Puerto  Rico
(1590)  X.  161.

Teximo, Lords  of,  xi.  425.

Thaaday,  see  Jagatai.

Thaber,  Mount,  see  Jebel-et-Tor.

Thafnis,  river,  death  of  Robert  of
Artois  in  the  (1249)  iv. 358.

Thalay,  river,  in  the  land  of  Pyg-
maei,  iv.  427.

Thamas,  or  Tamasp  I.,  Sophi  of
Persia,  his  wars  with  Tartary,  11.
474;  and  Anthony  Jenkinson(i562)
III.  5,  29,  32 ;  character  of,  35,
158;  his  reception  of  Arthur
Edwards  (1566)  54;  his  wish  to
buy  English  products,  58 ;  his
orders  for  the  Muscovy  Company's
wares,  66;  and  Solyman  (1553)
105,  108;  letters  from  Emperor  of
Russia  to,  1 18 ;  and  Arthur  Edwards
(1568)  143;  summons  Thomas
Bannister  to  Kazvin  (1569)  152;
magnificence  of,  163 ;  long  life
of,  164.

Thames  river,  i.  315,  vii.  176;
Arthur  Pet  to  sail  down  the  (1580)
III.  254 ;  proposed  Spanish  in-
vasion by  the,  iv.  212,  221;  at
Lambeth,  compared  to  the  Euph-
rates at  Birrah,  vi.  4.

Thamesis,  see  Thames.

Thamworth,  John,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  iii. 109.

Thana,  Franciscan  friars  martyred
in (1330)  IV. 412.

6

INDEX

Thangbrand,  bishop  in  Iceland  (997)
IV.  53, 151.

Thanksgiving  for  the  departure  of
the  Spanish  fleet  (1588)  iv.  233.

Thawghts,  Mark,  on  Edward  Fen-
ton's  voyage  (1583)  xi.  199.

'  Theatrum  Orbis  Terrarum,'  by
Abraham  Ortelius, vii.  464.

Thebek,  see  Tibet.

Thebes,  ruins  of,  v.  339.

Thebet,  see  Tibet.

Themistitan,  city  of,  in  New  Spain,
VIII.  450.

Themistocles,  stratagem  of,  viii.  93.

Theodor,  see  Feodor.

Theodoretus,  'Ecclesiastical  History'
by,  VIII. 106, 107.

Theodoricus,  Earl  of  Aldenborg,  six-
teenth master  of  the  Dutch
knights  (1352)  II,  6.

Theodosius,  Emperor,  mentioned  by
Theodoretus,  viii.  106.

Theodosius,  the  younger.  Emperor,
Christian  zeal  of, viii. 107.

Theophrastus,  on  dyeing  rivers,  iv.

43.  140.
Thermodon,  river  in  Scythia,  x.  367.
Thermopylis,  coloured  water  in,  iv.

38.  134-

Thester,  Thomas,  of  York,  and
Prussian pirates, 11. 62.

Thevet,  Andrew,  cosmographer  of
the  King  of  France  (c.  1535)  viii.
145  ;  '  The  New  found  World  Ant-
arctic '  by,  VI.  125 ;  errors  found
in,  128;  description  of  a  tree  bear-
ing oysters  in  the  French  Antarc-
tic by,  X.  349 ;  description  of  the
Maranon  or  Amazon  river  by,  358 ;
his  description  of  golden  croissants
worn  on  the  Amazon,  366 ;  and
Hakluyt, xii. 75.

Thiaday, see  Jagatal.

Thieves,  treatment  of,  in  China,  vi.
307,  312; in  Japan,  335.

Thimogoa,  enemy  of  King  Satouri-
oua  (1564)  IX. 12.

Thimogoa,  expedition  of  M.  de
Ottigni  towards  (1564)  ix. 18.

Thin,  Captain,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Cap-
uri  river  (1595)  x.  380;  discovery
of  Sayma  by,  396 ;  sent  to  Capure-
pana  by  Raleigh  (1595)  403 ; sent

by  Raleigh  to  meet  his  ships  (1595)
417.

Thin,  Captain  Henry,  of  the  bark
Raleigh  (1591)  vii.  41 ;  in  Sir
Martin  Frobisher's  fleet  (1592)
108.

Thirtes,  in  Iceland,  latitude  and
longitude  of,  iv. 10,  99.

Thoas, Tartars  and,  I.  86.

Tholosa,  see  Toulouse.

Thomas  k  Becket,  Henry  II. 's  chan-
cellor,  at  Northampton,  i. 318.

Thomas  of  Woodstock,  see  Glouces-
ter, duke  of.

Thomas,  the,  Thomas  Drake,  cap-
tain of  (1585)  X.  98.

Thomas  of  Ipswich,  the,  of  Captain
Frobisher's  third  voyage  to  Meta
Incognita  (1578)  vii.  237;  loss  of,
241 ;  William  Tanfield,  captain  of
(1578)  322 ;  attendant  on  the
Thomas  Allen,  325;  in  a  storm,
344,  350;  missing,  349;  her  re-
turn home  (1578)  355.

Thomas  Allen,  the,  English  mer-
chants return  home  in  (1581)  iii.
246 ;  vice-admiral  ship  of  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1582)  304.

Thomas  Allen,  the,  vice-admiral  of
the  third  voyage  of  Captain  Fro-
bisher  to  Meta  Incognita  (1578)
VII.  231,  237;  Yorke,  captain  of
(1578)  322  ;  harboured  near  Mount
Oxford, 348; missing, 349.

Thomas  Bonaventure,  the,  and  the
voyage  to  Persia  (1568)  ill.  150.

Thomas,  James,  and  the  second  voy-
age to  Barbary  (1552)  vi. 138.

Thomas,  John,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  company  (1578)  xi. 109.

Thomas,  William,  his  '  History  of
the  Commonwealths  of  Italy  '
(1390)  IV.  452.

Thomas  Williams  Island,  Martin
Frobisher  at  (1576)  vii.  209,  210.

Thomebamba,  province  in  Guiana,
X.  408.

Thomson, Thomas, joint  owner  of

the  Jesus  (1583)  v.  292,
Thomson, William, purser of the
Jesus  (1583)  V.  292.

Thorarinnus,  sixteenth  bishop  of
Schalholt,  in  Iceland  (1362)  iv.  56,

427

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Thorati,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.
Thorfinus,  son  of  Oter,  and  Sumer-
led, King of the Islands, i,

31-

Thorlacius,  Gudbrandus,  twenty-
second  bishop  of  Holen,  in  Ice-
land, IV.  8,  59,  93,  97,  158;  letter
by, 194-197.  '

Thorlacus,  sixth  bishop  of  Schalholt,
in  Iceland  (1178)  iv.  55, 153.

Thorlacus,  son  of  Rumilphus,  third
bishop  of  Schalholt,  in  Iceland
(1118)  IV.  54, 153.

Thorne,  German  town,  11.  10.

Thorne,  Nicholas,  the  elder,  mer-
chant of  Bristol  (c,  1526)  X.  6;
on  the  Canary  Islands,  vi. 124.

Thorne,  Robert,  his  advice  to  Henry
VIII.  on  the  Indies  (1527)  11.  159-
163  ;  to  Dr.  Leigh,  English  ambas-
sador to  Spain,  164;  on  latitudes,
167;  epitaph  of,  11.  181;  his
father  a  discoverer  of  Newfound-
land, 178,  VII.  155 ;  map  of  the
world  by,  engraving  of,  176 ;  and
his  advice  to  Henry  VIII.  about  the
discovery  of  the  North  Pole,  viii.
i;  letter  from,  to  Henry  VIII.
(1527)  X.  3 ;  quotation  from  the
information  of,  to  Dr.  Leigh,  xi.
91;  Treatise  on  the  Northern
Passage  by  (1527)  xii.  20.

Thorne,  Simon,  sent  from  Santos  to
Baya  (1581)  xi.  36.

Thorneton,  Roger  de,  and  Prussian
pirates,  11.  60.

Thorno,  losto,  of  Santos,  xi.  36.

Thornton,  Giles,  on  the  Content
(1591)  X.  183.

Thossut  Khan,  see  Tushi.

Thracia,  see  Roumania.

Thrasumenus,  see  Trasimeno.

Three  Half  Moons,  voyage  of,  to
Seville  (1563)  v.  153;  taken  by  the
Turks,  155.

Three  Hillocks,  the,  hill  in  Ramea
harbour,  viii. 151.

Three  Islands,  near  the  Gulf  of  Cali-
fornia, sighted  by  Captain  Ulloa
(1539)  IX.  208.

Three  Points  Cape,  vi.  159,  191 ;  de-
scription of,  193  ;  William  Tower-
son  at  (1557)  216;  English  mer-
chants at  (1562)  259; the  Richard

of Arundel at (1589) 451, 452,

(1590)  463  ; climate  of,  vii.  252.
Throckmorton,  Sir  Arthur,  knighted

at  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.  259.
Throgmorton, Clement, granted

Russian  licence  (1569)  iii.  109.
Thrums and Persian dyeing, iii.

249.
Thuatamur,  Duke  of  Tartary,  i.  74.
Thule,  King  of  Egypt,  iv. 13, 102.
Thule,  see  Iceland.
Thule. Ultima, Virgil on, iv. 14,

103.
Thuman, or tributary division in

Fuco,  IV.  426,  428,  431.
Thunder,  sailors  killed  by  (1591)  vi.

390-

Thurland,  George,  gunner's  mate
on  the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  li.
214.

Thus,  see  Frankincense.

Thyle, see Iceland.

Thylenses,  see  Icelanders.

Thylensey,  see  Iceland.

Tiber,  Richard  I.  on  the  (1190)  iv.
321.

Tibet,  kingdom  of,  Friar  Odoric
in  (1330)  IV.  436;  people  of,  and
reverence  to  the  dead,  i.  291,  iv.
436.

Tiburon,  Cape,  viii.  408;  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  doubles  (1593)
VI.  404 ;  the  John  Evangelist  at
(1590)  VIII.  409;  Edward  Spicer
at,  410;  Patach  taken  at,  by  the
mutinous  soldiers  of  Captain  Lau-
donniere  (1564)  ix.  43;  Christo-
pher Newport  at  (1591)  x.  186;
William  King  at  (1592)  191 ;  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1593)
198;  Sir  Amyas  de  Preston  at
(1595)  225;  in  S.  Domingo,  men-
tioned in  the  Ruttier,  285  ;  marks
of,  in  second  Ruttier,  313;  latitude

of.  333

Tiburons,  see  Sharks.

Ticao,  Island  of,  in  the  Philippines,
Captain  Gualle  at  (1584)  ix.  328.

Tichamachalcho,  in  Mexico,  cochi-
neal found  in  (1568)  ix.  363.

Tichiri,  battle  of,  between  Vasquez
Nunnes  and  King  Chemaccus,
viii.  124.

Tides, to  be  noted  by  English  dis-

428

INDEX

coverers  (1588)  iii.  123 ;  tables  of,
in  newly  discovered  seas,  261,  280;
of  the  rivers  on  the  Guinea  coast,
VI.  188,  189.

Tidore  Island,  xi.  124;  Bernard  de
la  Torre  at,  vii.  169;  the  Portu-
guese at,  VIII. 129.

Tieflen,  John  a,  thirty-second  master
of  the  Dutch  knights  (1489)  11.
10.

Tiennot,  Captain,  and  Jacques  Car-
tier  (1534)  VIII.  208.

Tiennot  or  Thiennot,  Cape,  discov-
ered by  Jacques  Cartier  (1534)  viii.
208;  Jacques  Cartier  at  (1535)
212; latitude  of,  276.

Tiepolo,  Lorenzo,  death,  v.  123,  146;
at  the  defence  of  Famagusta,  131,
132,  143,  144.

Tierra  de  Brea,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (159s)  X.  349;  pitch  found  in,
35°.

Tierra  Firma,  see  Terra  Firma.

Tifiis  (Tewflish),  iii.  20.

Tiger,  the,  iii.  303  ;  Christopher  Car-
leill,  captain  of,  463;  in  Drake's
West  Indian  voyage,  x.  98.

Tiger,  the,  George  Gill,  purser  of
(1583)  V.  455;  Ralph  Fitch  in
(1583)  465 ;  John  Eldred's  voyage
in  (1583)  VI.  1-9;  John  Evesham's
voyage  in  (1586)  35;  Laurence
Aldersey  in,  43.

Tiger,  the,  voyages  of,  to  Guinea
(1556)  VI.  212-231,  (1577)  231-252;
prizes  of,  234 ;  William  Towerson
and  Francis  Castelin  in,  236;  at
Cape  Verde,  237 ;  damaged,  239 ;
at  Perak,  242 ;  at  Egrand,  243 ;
at  Shamma,  246;  distress  of  (1577)
249 ; loss  of,  250.

Tiger,  the,  a  bark.  Sir  John
Hawkins'  voyage  to  the  West
Indies  with  (1564)  vi,  263,  x.  9;
lost  for  four  days,  17 ;  carpenter
of,  slain  by  the  negroes  of  Sam-
bula  Island  (1564)  21.

Tiger,  the,  of  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville's  voyage  to  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  310;  sinking  of,  315;  return
of,  317-

Tiger,  the,  ship  of  John  Davys  (1605)
XII.  30.

Tigers,  in  New  Spain,  ix.  385 ; in

Placentia  (1568)  449;  in  Florida,
X. 59 ; in  Guiana,  426.

Tigris,  in  Mesopotamia,  iv.  36,  131 ;
passes  Babylon,  v.  368,  369,  vi.
5  ;  meets  Euphrates,  v.  371 ;  goods
brought  down  the,  to  Babylon,
466.

Tiguas,  see  Antigua.

TIguex,  see  Antigua.

Tilbury,  English  army  at,  waiting
for  the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  208;
Roger  Bodenham  at  (1551)  v.  71.

Tilbury  Hope,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,
II.  217;  Captain  Froblsher's  de-
parture from  (1577)  VII.  286.

Tilliard,  Walter,  taken  prisoner  by
Indians  on  Puna  Island  (1587)  xi.
318.

Tilney,  Sir  Frederick,  knighted  at
Acre,  by  Richard  I.,  iv.  342.

Timana,  mountains  in  Granada,  x.
368.

Timber  in  Madeira,  vi.  135 ;  whale-
bones used  as,  in  Meta  Incognita
(1577)  VII.  300 ;  brought  to  Meta  In-
cognita by  unknown  traders,  373 ;
at  Cape  Breton  (1578)  viii.  11;  In
Newfoundland,  197;  in  Virginia
(1586)  371 ;  for  shipping  in
Nicaragua,  ix.  467;  carried  down
by  the  Ometepec,  470 ;  in  Bermuda
Island,  x.  201.

Timbuctoo,  Laurence  Madoc  in
(1594)  VII.  29,  100;  taken  by  Al-
caide Hamode,  10 1 ;  Leo  Africanus
on,  102.

TImeragio, brother of Ramaragio^

V.  382 ;  his  return  to  Bezeneger,
383; son  of,  387.

Timitwara,  Indian  captain.  Sir
Walter  Raleigh  and  (1595)  x.  418.

Timor,  governor  of  Manguslave,  11.
460.

Timor,  sandal  trade  in,  v.  407,  504;
trade  with  Malacca,  498.

TImosthenes  on  Cyprus,  v.  125.

Tin,  II.  116,  125; found  in  Malacca,

VI.  24.

Tinados  river,  Antonio  Sedenno's
burying-place  near  the  head  of,  x.
498.

Tinder  boxes  for  foreign  trade,  iii.
274.

Tingitana  Mauritania,  see  Fez.

429

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Tingvalla,  battle  of,  in  Man  (1229),
consultation  with  Harald's  de-
puties in,  I.  38,  39.

Tinmouth,  see  Tynemouth.

Tino,  Castle  of,  Laurence  Aldersey
near  (1586)  vi.  42.

Tinsares  river,  described  in  Ruttier
for  Brazil, xi. 76.

Tintam,  John,  John  II.,  King  of
Portugal,  and  (1481)  vi.  123.

Tippara, see  Tipperah.

Tipperah,  kingdom  of,  or  Porto
Grande,  and  the  King  of  Arakan,
V. 483 ; Ralph Fitch near (c.

1583)  485-
Tipperdas,  chief  in  Patna,  v.  481.
Tipton,  Hugh,  English  merchant  in

Seville,  Robert  Tomson,  cashier  of

(1557)  IX.  350.
Tipton,  John,  English  commissioner

in  Algiers  (1584)  v.  269,  270,  274;

consul  for  Algiers,  Tunis,  and  Tri-

polis,  276,  VI.  45.
Tirbon, Bathy's brother-in-law, i.

163.
Tirrington,  resting-place  of  the  Til-

ney  family  at,  iv.  342.
Tirus,  see  Tyre.
Tisiks or Persian merchants, iii.

219; and the captain of Baku

(1580) 225.
Tisnados,  Indians  of,  x.  366.
Tison, Thomas, English merchant

in  the  West  Indies  (1526)  vi. 125,

X.  6 ; way  to  West  Indies  discov-
ered by,  6.
Tition,  in  Barbary,  English  fleet  in

(1590)  vii.  33.
Titus  Livius,  see  Livy.
Tivitivas, kingdom of. Sir Robert

Dudley's sailors in the  (1595) x.

208 ; on  the  Orinoco, description

of, by Sir Walter Raleigh, 382,

423  ; houses  and  villages  of,  383  ;

tree-dwellers, 421; conquered by

Arromaiarie, 460.
Tlacamama river, springs from

Atoyaque and Amusgos moun-
tains, IX.  469.
Tlacamama town, owned by the

King  of Spain, ix. 470.
Tlacolula, river  in New Spain, ix.

468  ;  springs  from  Chilsiztlahuaca,

472.

TIapa,  province  of  New  Spain,  ix.
472.

Tlapanecan,  language,  spoken  m
Cuahintlan  del  Rey,  ix.  471.

Tlarcali,  bishopric  of,  situation  of,
IX. 466.

Tlaxcala,  Roger  Bodenham  at  (1564)
IX.  359 ;  Indian  town  in  Mexico,
362,  458;  tribute  paid  by,  to  the
King  of  Spain  (1568)  362 ;  free
from  tribute  to  the  King  of  Spain,
379;  freedom  of,  encroached  upon,

391-
Tlaxcalaa,  see  Tlaxcala.
Tlaxcalla,  see  Tlaxcala.
Tlemsen,  in  Barbary,  i.  308,  v.  240;

kingdom and city of, vi. 143,

Toar, Sancho de, discoveries of

(1497-15 10)  VIII. 128.

Tobacco,  description  of,  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1535)  viii.  242;  found  in
Virginia  (1586)  363;  used  at  sacri-
fices by  Indians,  364;  used  by
Indians  (1540)  ix.  285;  used  by
the  Indians  of  Florida  (1565)  x.
57 ;  Indians  of  Dominica  and  their
presents  of,  to  Sir  Francis  Drake
^1585)  no;  trade  in  Dominica
(1595)  228;  in  S.  Vincent  (1596)
478.

Tobago  Island,  latitude  of,  x.  332 ;
described  by  Laurence  Keymis,
478.

Tobias,  master's  mate  of  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1582)  xi.  181.

Tobosos  Indians,  description  of,  and
Antonio  de  Espejo's  expedition
(1582)  IX.  190.

Tohy,  the,  of  Harwich,  Thomas
Greene  master  of  (1580)  lii. 283.

Tohy,  the,  vice-admiral  ship  of  the
English  merchants'  fleet  (1586)  vi.
47,  50 ;  bound  for  Constantinople,
48.

Tohy,  the,  of  London,  Richard
Staper's  ship,  casting  away  of,
near  Cape  Espartel  (1593)  vii.  124,
125 ;  survivors  of  the  crew  of.
125  f.

Tohy,  the,  Bristol  ship,  xil.  76.

Tocoopoima,  great  town  on  the
Waini  river,  x.  494.

Tode,  measure  of  Goa,  vi.  18.

430

I

INDEX

Todos  OS  Santos,  Bahia  de,  Ruttier
for,  XI.  75 ; latitude  of,  75,  77.

Todos  Santos  Islands,  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  x.  228.

Todos  Santos,  Strait  of,  see
Magellan.

Tofild,  death  of,  in  the  Moscow  fire
(1571)  III.  169.

Toledo,  Don  Francisco  de,  colonel  of
the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  202  ;  and  the
Saint  Philip,  226;  and  the  Eng-
lish army  in Portugal  (1589)  vi.

504-

Toledo,  Don  Diego  Hermano  de,  his
chart  for  navigation,  vii.  196;  on
Magellan's  Strait,  203.

Tolipane,  a,  iii.  21.

Tolistlahuaca,  a  '  mansion  of  Xica-
ian,'  IX.  469.

Tolls  in  Russia,  11.  275  f.

Tolmach,  Laurence  Chapman's  com-
panion to  Tabriz  (1568)  iii  137.

Tolstick Point, in Russia, iii.  74.

Tolvick,  Tellekina  to,  iii.  81.

Tolvo,  on  lake  Onega,  in.  79,  81.

Tomaangua,  silver  mines  in,  ix.  367.

Tomasin,  the,  of  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany (1581)  III.  247.

Tombs,  sacred,  in  Medina,  v.  362  f. ;
ceremonies  at  the,  364.

Tomkins,  Richard,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  VIII.  403.

Tomson,  Captain,  in  Sir  John  Bur-
rough's  fleet  (1592)  VII.  108;  cap-
tain of  the  Dainty  (1592)  112;
sights  the  Madre  de  Dios, 113.

Tomson,  John,  hostage  at  Cape
Verde  (1567)  vi.  271,  272.

Tomson,  Robert,  his  voyage  to  New
Spain  (1555)  IX.  338-358;  illness
of,  in  Mexico  (1556)  347;  prisoner
of  the  Inquisition  (1557)  347.  353 ;
sent  prisoner  to  Spain  (1557)  349;
marries  Marie  de  la  Barrera  (c.
1557)  350;  upholds  his  faith  in
Mexico  (1557)  351.

Tomynes,  money  of  Mexico  (1558)
IX.  357-

Tonewert, on  the  Danube, v. 321.

Tonnesbergh,  in  Norway,  i.  341.

Tools  for  foreign  trade,  in.  275  ;  iron,
wanted  in  Havana  (1590)  x.  159.

Topago,  province  of,  inhabited  by
Amazons,  x.  367.

Topan,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  402.

Toparimaca,  King,  and  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  (1595)  x.  393,  396.

Toparimaca,  port  of,  x.  420.

Toparimacko,  port  of,  Laurence
Keymis  at  (1596)  x.  471.

Topciiffe,  John,  of  York,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  62.

Topiawari,  King  of  Aromaia,  uncle
of  King  Morequito,  x.  375,  395;
successor  of  Morequito,  395 ;  and
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  401 ;  gives
information  to  Raleigh  about
Guiana,  409 ;  advice  of,  to  Raleigh,
410 ;  son  of,  entrusted  to  Raleigh,
412  ;  Raleigh  takes  leave  of  (1595)
415 ;  Orenoqueponi,  followers  of,
423 ;  acknowledges  Antonio  de
Berreo  for  his  governor  (1593)
436 ;  friendly  with  English,  460 ;
port  of,  Laurence  Keymis  at,  466;
cacique,  death  of,  467;  report  of
death  of,  disbelieved  by  the  Span-
iard (1596)  X.  470.

Topira,  Friar  Marco  de  Niga's  de-
scription of,  IX.  116;  Vasquez  de
Coronado's  description  of,  119;
Vasquez  de  Coronado,  governor
of, 124.

'Topography,  Universal  Christian,'
by Cosmas, xii. 10.

Topoo,  town  on  the  Chaimeragoro,
X.  494.

Toranosuque,  governor  of  half  the
kingdom  of  Finga,  xi.  425.

Torci,  Tartary  and,  i.  86.

Torga, Henry  Austell at (1585)  v.

327-

Tornadoes,  xi.  73 ;  George  Ray-
mond's fleet  and  (1591)  vi.  388.

Torneste  Castle,  near  Zante,  v.  84;
John  Locke  off  (1553)  102.

Toro,  and  the  defence  of  Spain  (1585)
X. 96.

Toroco,  town  taken  possession  of
by  Domingo  de  Vera  (1593)  x.  436.

Torquellus,  son  of  Nel,  and  Loglen,
I.  38.

Torre,  Bernard  de  la,  on  sea  cur-
rents, VII.  168;  his  voyage  to  the
Moluccas  (1542)  169.

Torres,  Antonio  de,  letter  from  Chris-
topher Columbus  to,  XII.  17.

431

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Torres  de  Panuco,  wounded  at  the
taking-  of  Cevola  (1540)  ix.  153.

Torre  Vedra,  Don  Francisco  de,
taken  by  Luke  Warde  (1582)  xi.
183.

Torre  Vedra,  Don  John  de,  governor
of  the  river  Plate  (1582)  xi.  183.

Torres  Vedras,  English  reverse  at
(1589)  VI.  ^498.

Tortoises,  Friar  Odoric's  account
of  large,  iv.  419 ;  description  of,
VI.  275;  in  S.  John's  Islets,  viii.
218;  in  S.  Cruz,  387;  in  Tortugas
Islands,  description  of,  x.  46;  at
the  Ilha  do  Sal,  caught  by  Andrew
Barker  (1576)  83;  eggs  of,  used
as  food  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
393 ; in Guiana, xi. 14.

Tortori,  i.  76.

Tortuga  Island,  Sir  John  Hawkins
at  (1565)  X.  219.

Tortugas,  the,  Sand  Islands,  birds
in,  X.  46;  William  King  at  (1592)
192 ;  mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,
293;  on  the  course  to  Spain,  297;
marks  of,  323  ;  or  Hinagua,  328  ;
soundings  at,  331;  latitude  of,
334; longitude  from,  to  Havana,

337-
Torture  or  Pudkey,  English  subjects
in Russia spared the (1588) in.

355-

Torzhoke  or  Torshook,  from  Mos-
cow to.  III.  68 ;  Sir  Jerome  Hor-
sey at  (1584)  345.

Tossuch,  see  Tushi.

Totma,  in  Russia,  11.  393,  iii.  215;
from  S.  Nicholas  Bay  to,  68;  salt
in, 368.

Totness  Road,  discovered  by  John
Davys  (1585)  vii.  389.

Totonteac,  kingdom  of.  Friar  Marco
de  Niga  and  the  (1539)  ix.  131  ;
woollen  cloth  and  sheep  in  (1539)
133.  135;  description  of,  136;  by
Vasquez  de  Coronado,  158;  taken
possession  of,  by  Friar  Marco  de
Nica  (1539)  143;  Captain  Alar-
chon's  inquiries  about  (1540)  303.

Totteon,  the  survivors  of  the  Toby
at  (1593)  VII.  127.

Toudamani,  tribe,  south  of  Canada,
VIII.  239.

Touer y de Guillen, Francis de.

heirs  of,  owners  of  Xicayan  town,
IX.  467.

Touffon,  see  Typhoon.

Toulon,  v.  295.

Toulouse,  merchants  of,  and  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  333.

Touppekyn,  cacique  in  Florida,  ix.

113-
Touppo,  King,  in  Florida  (1562)  viii.

474-
Tournai, Castle of. Monsieur de

Teligny prisoner of the English

at  (1588)  IV.  232.
Touz, John  de  le, called  Pradines,

knight  of  Rhodes,  maimed  at  the

siege (1552) V. 33.
Tovar, Don Pedro de, in Cevola

(1540)  IX.  153; sent  to  Tucano  by

Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540) 160.
Towage, native settler  in Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Tower  on  forty  pillars  in  Fuquieo,

description  of,  vi. 315.
Tower  Hill,  in  London  (1589)  x.  157.
Towerson,  member  of  the  Muscovy

Committee, and Captain Carleill

(1583)  VIII. 147.
Towerson,  William,  his  first  voyage

to  Guinea  (1555)  vi. 177-2 11 ;  his

second voyage to Guinea (1556)

212-231; his third voyage to

Guinea,  and  Mina  (1577)  231-252;

and  the sea current at  Cavo  de

Monte,  455.
Towlma,  altitude  of,  in.  248.
Townes, Thomas, mariner on the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) n.

214.
Townesend,  sent  to  Penguin  Island

(1592)  XI.  410; slain  by  wild  men,

411.
Townesend, Sir  John, knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.
Towns,  in  China,  description  of,  vi.

299,  352  ; native,  in  Virginia,  viil.

374; of  the  Sapies  (1564),  descrip-
tion of,  X.  18.
Towpenie, John, on the Content,

non-combatant  (1591)  x.  183.
Towreson, William, of Edward

Fonton's  voyage,  return  of  (1583)

XI.  202.
Towtigin,  Feodor,  on  Samoyedes,  11.

483.

432

INDEX

Towtwi,  town  on  the  Manurawini
river,  x.  494.

Toya,  Indian  feast,  viii.  466;  Cap-
tain Albert  at  the  (1562)  475;  de-
scription of,  476.

'  Tracts,  Naval, '  by  Sir  William
Monson,  xii.  67.

Tracv,  John,  of  the  Solomon  (1584)
¥.'281.

Trade,  English,  in  Levant,  i.  Ixix. ;
requires  new  markets,  11.  239 ;
benefited  by  discoveries,  iii.  89-91,
VIII.  Ill  f . ;  Sir  Edward  Osborne
and,  V.  167;  privileges  granted
to, 170, 175, 192 ; and Philip

II.  of  Spain  (1586)  VI.  46;
and  England  (1592)  74  f. ;
restricted  to  Levant  Company,
83  f. ;  with  Germany,  in  (1157)
I.  316  f. ;  with  Russia,  Mus-
covy Company's,  11.  320  f. ;  ex-
clusive privileges of, in Russia,

III.  325 ;  treaty  for  furthering
(1583)  469;  retail,  not  allowed  in
Russia,  420 ;  English  merchants  in
Russia  (1590)  420,  (1583)  469;  in
Chios,  V.  112,  113,  116;  in  Malta
(1582)  219;  in  Guinea,  vi.  177-
252,  252-284,  443-450;  in  Barbary,
419-425  ;  in  Gambia  (1591)  vii.  98;
with  foreigners  advised  by  Hak-
luyt,  VII.  247;  with  infidels  and
savages,  lawfulness  of,  viii.  97 ;
in  the  Western  Planting  (1583)
117;  in  discovered  countries
to  belong  to  the  first  adven-
turers, 148;  in  West  Indies,  for-
bidden by  the  King  of  Spain  (1565)
X.  30,  38,  (1568)  66;  Sir  John
Hawkins  and  the  negro  trade  in
West  Indies,  7;  Venetian,  with
Armenians,  in.  139  ;  Greenland  (c.
1380)  vii.  453 ;  Breton,  S.  Malo
merchants  in  the  Western  Plant-
ing, VIII, 118.

Traders,  English,  in  Spain,  religi-
ous observances  required  of, xii.

33-

Trahere,  Roman  senator,  iv.  274.

Train  oil,  in  Russia,  11.  388,  394,
402,  408;  spring  of,  in  Persia,  iii.
165 ;  in  Lapland,  200 ;  made  from
seals,  366;  in  Earl  of  Cumberland's
Isles,  VII.  420 ; found  in  the  West-

ern Planting  (1583)  viii.  116,  118,
139;  found  in  Newfoundland,  117;
found  in  Ramea  (1591)  155;  in
Assumption  Island, 162.

Tramasinus,  Michael,  and  the  North-
west passage,  vii.  163 ;  his  map,
203.

Tramezine,  see  Tramasinus.

Tramissen, see  Tremisen.

Tramontane  of  the  Queen,  the,  and
Charles  Leigh  (1597)  viii. 180.

Tramontanus,  and  the  North-west
passage,  vii. 163.

Trans  Island,  despoiled  by  Zichmni
(c.  1380)  VII.  451.

Trapes,  city  in  Sicily,  Prince  Ed-
ward off  (1270)  IV.  360;  his  re-
turn to,  366.

Trapesunda,  see  Trebizond.

Trasimeno,  lake,  iv.  21,  112.

Traughton,  John,  captain  of  the
Elizabeth  Bonaventure,  at  the
fight  of  Pinos  (1596)  x.  262.

Traverse-book  or  Logbook,  by  John
Davys,  in  his  third  voyage  for  the
discovery  of  the  Northwest  pass-
age (1587)  VII. 424-439-

Treachery  of  the  Spaniards  against
the  Primrose  (1585)  vi.  414;  of
Don  Martin  Henriquez  towards  Sir
John  Hawkins  in  S.  Juan  d'UUoa
(1568)  IX.  452,  X.  70;  Spanish,
against  the  English  (1589) 157.

Treasure,  Turkish,  and  the  Pasha  of
Derbent  (1580)  in.  233;  of  the
English,  captured  by  the  Spanish
(1575)  XI.  231;  captured  by  Sir
Francis  Drake  at  S.  Francisco
Cape,  264; its  worth,  265.

Treasurer  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
III.  413  ; of  the  Grand  Signior,  vi.

65-

Treasury  House,  Spanish,  in  Pan-
ama (1587)  X.  150; in  Lima,  153.

Treaties,  of  the  Hanse  towns,  Eng-
lish ambassadors  and,  11.  30,  32 ;
for  English  trade  in  Russia  (1583)
III.  482 ;  of  surrender  of  Rhodes,
V.  48,  50,  55 ;  of  surrender  of
Famagusta  (1571)  144.

*  Treatise  of  Syria, '  by  Sebastian
Munster,  11.  i.

Trebizond,  Guido,  governor  of,  i.
231; Friar Odoric at (1330) iv.

433

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

408,  409 ;  meeting  place  of  the
Turkish  army  (1583)  v.  453.

Trecado,  Vobsky  to,  iii.  69.

Trees  in  the  Romesal  Sound,  iii.
300;  pine,  in  Elbogan,  iv.  36,
132  ;  of  great  compass,  in  Madeira
(1344)  368;  useful  for  dyeing,  to
be  brought  from  Constantinople
(1582)  V.  229,  235;  abundance  of,
in  Zanzibar,  vi.  393;  in  Pulo-
Penang  Islands,  396;  fir,  floating
in  the  North  Sea  (1577)  vii.  213;
burning  of,  a  hindrance  to  fishing,
VIII.  83 ;  different,  found  in  the
Western  Planting  (1583)  115;  on
Cape  Breton,  159;  in  Newfound-
land, described  by  Jacques  Cartier
(1534)  195;  for  shipbuilding,  197;
described  by  Jacques  Cartier  (1535)
228,  267  ;  described  by  Xanctoigne,
282 ;  of  Virginia,  excellence  of,
299;  in  Florida,  426,  434,  451,
462 ;  in  New  Spain,  used  for
masts  (1572)  IX.  382;  water  drop-
ping, in  Fierro  Island  and  in
Guinea  (1564)  x.  13  ;  oysters  grow-
ing on,  in  Trinidad  (1595)  349!
bearing  oysters  at  Sierra  Leone,
XI.  132,  174.

Tremisen,  kingdom  and  city  of,  I.
308,  V.  240,  VI. 143, 144.

Trenchant,  pilot  of  Captain  Laudon-
niere  (1564)  ix.  42,  44;  and  Sir
John  Hawkins's  ship  (1565)
80.

Trent,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Trepassa  Bay,  near  Cape  Race,  viii.

63-
Trepointes  Cape,  see  Three  Points.

Tresio,  Stephen  de,  of  Panama,
letter  from,  to  Alonso  Martines
Vaca  of  Seville  (1590)  x.  173.

Tres  Puntas,  Cape  (Africa),  see
Three  Points.

Tres  Puntas,  Cape  (West  Indies),
Sir  Anthony  Sherley  at  (1597)  x.
275.

Treviso, Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

323-
Trexeda,  John  de,  letter  from,  to  the

King  of  Spain  (1590)  x. 159.
Treyo, Raphael de, in charge of

Cacatepec  town,  ix.  469.

Trial  by  combat,  or  Campe,  11.  234,
264,  411.

Triana,  Inquisition  house  at,  and
English  prisoners  (1570)  ix.  463.

Triangle  Island,  near  New  Spain,
mentioned  in  the  Ruttier,  x.  296,
322  ;  latitude  of,  products  of,  458 ;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi.  7.

Tribute  levied  by  the  Tartars,  i.  231 ;
paid  by  Lapland  to  Denmark,  iii.
204;  to  Sweden,  205;  owed  by
the  Prince  of  Tunis  to  the  King
of  Sicily  (1270)  IV.  359;  in  Hang-
chow,  426 ;  of  the  Indies  to  the
King  of  Spain,  ix.  375;  paid  by
Indians  to  the  King  of  Spain
(1572)  391 ;  of  the  Portuguese  for
their  fishing  at  Cape  Blanco,  to
the  King  of  the  Moors  (1564)  x.
14;  paid  by  Indians  of  S.  Marie
Island  to  Spaniards  (1587)  xi.  302.

Trimley,  in  Suffolk,  xi.  290.

Trin,  land  and  cape,  discovered  by
Zichmni  (c. 1580)  vii. 461.

Trinidad,  Isle  of,  Chidley's  voyage
to,  VI.  403 ;  Andrew  Barker,  and
the  Indians  of  (1576)  x.  84;  the
Edward  Bonaventure  at  (1593)
197;  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  voyage
to  (1594)  203-212;  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley at  (1595)  205;  Indians  of,  and
Sir  Robert  Dudley,  205 ;  depar-
ture from,  of  Sir  Robert  Dudley
and  Captain  Popham  (1595)  209;
vocabulary  of,  by  Sir  Robert  Dud-
ley (159s)  211 ;  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
at  (1595)  225,  349 ;  latitude  of,  332  ;
description  and  products  of,  by
Raleigh  (1595)  350;  Indians  of,
352 ;  Juan  Martinez  at,  361 ;  In-
dians of,  and  the  gold  of  Guiana,
366;  Antonio  de  Berreo's  return
to,  372;  Spanish  ships  at  (1596)
467,  479;  Ciawani  Indians  in,
476 ;  people  of,  and  Tobago  Island
(1596)  478;  Caspar  de  Sylva
buried  at,  Juan  Gonsales  starts
from,  496;  conquest  of,  by  Augus-
tine Delgado,  etc.,  497;  difficul-
ties of  gaining  access  to  Guiana
from,  499 ;  near  the  Gulf  of  Paria,
XI.  21; latitude  of,  22.

Trinidad,  Punta  de  la.  Captain  Ul-
loa  at  (1539)  IX.  251.

434

INDEX

Trinity,  the,  of  Hull,  ii.  6i.

Trinity,  the,  of  London  ,(1557)  11.
375)  4i3>  425  ;  John  Robins,  master
of,  380.

Trinity,  the,  and  the  second  voyage
to  Guinea  (1555)  vi.  155,  160 ;_ her
courteous  treatment,  in  Guinea
(1555)  207.

Trinity,  the,  flagship,  in  Hore's
voyage  to  Newfoundland  (1536)
viii.  3.

Trinity,  the,  Spanish  ship,  in  the
Dolphin  river  (1565)  ix.  89;  dis-
coveries by  (1539)  207;  aground  in
S.  Cruz  Channel  (1539)  226;  S.
Elmo's  fire  seen  on,  228;  lost  for
three  days  (1539)  229,  232;  found,
233 ;  in  a  storm,  243 ;  and  the
Indians  (1540)  262;  return  with
Captain  Ulloa  to  New  Spain  (1540)
278.

Trinity  Fitz-Williams,  the,  and  the
Levant  trade  (c.  15 11)  v.  62;  and
the  Chios  trade,  115.

Tri  Ostrove  Island,  Stephen  Borough
at  (1557)  II.  366.

Tripanicks,  tribe  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  322.

Tripoli  (Africa),  vi.  142 ;  Romadan
Pasha,  King  of  (1583)  v.  264;
English  trade  privileges  (1584)
274 ;  Murad  Khan  to  the  viceroy
of  (1584)  275;  John  Tipton,  con-
sul at,  276;  voyage  of  the  Jesus
to (1583) 292-311; the Jesus at

(1584)  293  ;  King  of,  and  Sonnings,
295, 296; killed by his soldiers

(1585)  309;  Murad  Khan's  letter
to,  about  the  Jesus's  crew  and
cargo  (1584)  314;  William  Har-
borne's  letters  to, 316.

Tripoli  (Syria),  six  days'  journey
from  Aleppo,  iii.  57 ;  Venetian  silk
and  cloth  market  at,  144,  148 ;
Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  195  ;  Isakius
and  his  daughter  sent  prisoners
to  (1191)  IV.  331;  English  trade
in  (c.  1511)  V.  62;  English  mer-
chants in,  188,  239;  Laurence
Aldersey  at  (1581)  212,  (1586)  vi.
43 ;  safi'ron  grows  near,  v.  240 ;
Richard  Forster,  consul  for  (1583)
260;  Caesar  Frederick  at  (1563)
.366, (1567)  446,  447; John  New-

bery  at  (1583)  452,  454;  Ralph
Fitch  at  (c,  1583)  465,  505 ;  voyage
of  John  Eldred  to  (1583-1588)  vi.
1-9 ;  description  of,  2 ;  the  Royal
Merchant  and  the  William  and
John  at  (1586)  48;  Richard  Wrag
at  (1594)  108;  English  consul  at,
XII.  102 ;  Beglerbeg  of,  his
retinue,  vi.  67;  Pasha  of,  and  the
Persian  war  (c.  1583)  v.  453 ;  San-
jack  of,  148;  his  presents  to  Soly-
man, 108; killed  at Famagusta

(1571)  152.
Tripolitanus, Gulielmus, writings

of.  III. 281.
Tristram,  John,  killed  in  the  fight

on  the  Primrose  (1585)  v.  416.
Troglodytes,  cave-dwellers  in  Africa,

VI.  169.
Troietes, Russian monastery, 11.

440.
Troiocouria or Proiocoorow, Duke

Feodor  Michalowich,  iii,  218,  229.
Trollhualur,  iv.  42, 139.
Troncavilla, Francesco, Captain,

slain  at  Famagusta  (1571)  v.  150.
Trondon,  see  Drontheim.
Tronquiere,  la,  in  Rhodes,  Sir  Anas-

tase de S. Camilla, commander

of (1522) v. II.

Tropics, products of, li. 164 f. ;

greatest heat under the, vii.

266  f.
Trotero,  messenger  in  Morocco,  vi.

285,  426.
Troy,  ruins  of,  vi. 107.
Trubor, ruler  in  North  Russia,  iii.

357-

Truchses,  Martin,  thirty-first  master
of  the  Dutch  knights  (1477)  11.  10.

Trumpeter,  French,  aboard  the  Tiger
(1557)  VI.  230;  of  the  Flemish
ship  at  Gibraltar  (1590)  vii.  33;
of  the  Centurion  (1591)  36;  Eng-
lish, killed  at  Fayal  (1590)  75;  of
Sir  Francis  Drake  killed  at  Nombre
de  Dios  (1572)  x.  76,  xi.  228;  of
Andrew  Barker,  killed  at  Maio
Island  (1576)  X.  83.

Trumpets  Island,  Martin  Frobisher
at  (1576)  VII.  210.

Trusco,  Wolstan's  voyage  to,  i. 15.

Truvor,  and  the  civilisation  of  Rus-
sia, II.  183.

435

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Truxillo,  in  Honduras  Bay,  William
Coxe  at  (1576)  X.  86;  Christopher
Newport  at  (1591)  187;  descrip-
tion of,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  and
Captain  Parker  at  (1597)  274,  278;
Captain  Parker's  voyage  to  (1596)
277.

Truxillo,  town  in  Peru,  xi.  286.

Tsaritsna  Island,  in.  217.

Tuatepec,  Miles  Philips  at  (1580)  ix.

434- ^  ,  . ,  .

Tubaron,  A  punta  do,  mentioned  in

Ruttier,  xi.  81.
Tuberones, fish on sea coast of

Africa,  vi. 381.
Tubguer,  in  Darha,  vii.  89.
Tucaman,  province  of,  xi.  285.
Tucaman,  town  on  the  river  Plate,

XI.  208.
Tucano,  chief  city  of  seven,  described

to Vasquez de Coronado by In-
dians (1540)  IX.  160.
Tucaris Indians and the gold of

Guiana,  x.  366.
Tucke, of  Kent,  voyage  of, in  the

Trinity  (1536)  viii.  3.
Tucker, Francis, and Pedro Gon-

salvez  (1591)  VII.  97.
Tucker,  Lieutenant,  in  S.  lago  City

(1585)  X. 107; lieutenant  in Sir
Francis Drake's fleet, death of

(1586)  134-

Tuckfield,  voyage  of,  in  the  Trinity

(1536)  VIII. 3.

Tuk,  Laurence,  of  Cley,  ship-
master and  Prussian  pirates,  11.
64.

Tuke,  in  the  country  of  Tumen,  iii.
19.

Tulaningo,  a  small  lake  in  New
Spain,  IX.  466.

Tulen  Sands,  description  of,  ix.  331.

Tully,  see  Cicero.

Tulu  Bay,  treasure  captured  by
Andrew  Barker  at  (1576)  x.  84.

Tumat,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.

Tumbex,  in  Peru,  Francisco  Pizarro
at,  XI.  280; Indian  town,  286.

Tumbuto, see  Timbuctoo.

Tumen, Castle of, in Russia, in.

Tumen, land  of, iii. 19.
Tumen,  Persian  money,  in.  49.
Tundi, bishops  in  Japan, vi. 329.

Tunez, see  Tunis.

Tunis  and  Constantia,  kingdom  of,
VI. 142.

Tunis,  Prince  Edward  arrives  at
(1270)  IV.  359;  Henry  IV.  of  Eng-
land, his  voyage  to  (1390)  450,
451 ;  Charles  V.  at  the  taking
of  (1538)  V.  69;  in  Turkey,  Eng-  i
lish  merchants  in,  183 ;  English  |
trade  privileges  to  be  enforced  in,
by  Edward  Barton  (1584)  274;
Murad  Khan  to  the  viceroy  of
(1584)  275;  John  Tipton,  consul
at,  276;  John  Evesham  at  (1587)
VI.  35 ;  the  Golden  Noble  of  Lon-
don at  (1586)  46;  retinue  of  the
Beglerbeg  of,  67;  Gulf  of,  An-
thony Jenkinson  in  the,  in.  195.

Tunny,  salted,  markets  of,  in  Japan,

IX.  335-
Tunstal,  Adam, English  cooper,  in

Lapland  (1575)  ni.  197.

Tunxa,  in  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Gran-
ada, X.  363.

Tupara  root,  useful  against  Indian
poisons,  X.  397.

Turara,  Indian  herb,  anti-poisonous,

X.  495-
Turbervile (Turberville), George

(1540- 16 10),  secretary  of  Thomas
Randolph,  verses  of  (1568)  i.  xliv. ;
description  of  Russia  by,  in. 124-

135-
Turbi  Tartari,  in  Asia,  vii. 177.
Turbith,  found  in  Diu  and  Cambay,

VI. 26.
Turcia,  see  Turkey.
Turcomanni,  see  Turkomans.
Turcoplier, Sir  John Bourgh  a,  v.

7-
Turgemannus,  i.  233.
Turk,  Great,  see  Solyman.
Turk, etymology of the word, in.

39S.

Turkeman,  see  Turkomans.

Turkey,  i.  166;  in  Thome's  map,  n.
170 ;  Persia  inferior  in  power  to,
III.  160;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,
195  ;  Russian  fur  market  in  (1588)
365 ;  complaints  of,  against
Rhodes,  v.  2 ;  William  Harborne,
ambassador  in  (1582)  221;  Auri-
pigmentum  found  in,  vi.  27;
state expenses of, 61-68; peace

436

INDEX

between,  and  Poland  (1590)  69;
Company  or  Levant  Company
(1592)  74  ff. ;  trade  in,  by  Captain
Carleill  (1583)  viii. 136.

Turkeys,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)
VIII.  369; in  Florida,  451,  461.

Turkish  merchants,  i.  230 ;  ambas-
sador at  the  Persian  court  (1562)
III.  27;  Anthony  Jenkinson  and,
29 ;  league  with  Venetians,  28  ;
and  English  merchants,  141 ;  car-
pet-making, and  the  Muscovy
Company,  251;  language  similar
to  Tartar,  399.

Turkomans,  state  of  the  land  of,  11.
463;  to  Urgenj,  ten  days'  jour-
ney with  camels,  480 ;  Anthony
Jenkinson  in,  iii. 196.

Turkomans  and  the  Tartars,  i.  86.

Turks,  original  country  of,  i.  267;
and  King  Philip  of  Spain  at  Malta
(1566)  III.  53,  54;  in  battle,  394;
at  the  siege  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.
1-60 ;  at  the  siege  of  Famagusta
(1571)  129-152;  victory  of,  over
the  Three  Half  Moons'  crew  (1577)
155 ;  twenty  captive,  in  the  West
Indies,  and  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1586)  VI.  40;  conquest  of  Fama-
gusta by,  109  f. ;  at  Lepanto,
no.

Turnbull,  William,  agent  to  the
Muscovy  Company  (1579)  iii.  212;
at  Astrakhan,  217;  leaves,  245;
at  Baku  (1580)  227;  received  by
the  Pasha  of  Derbent,  228;  re-
fused audience,  231 ;  takes  leave,
232 ;  returns  to  England,  246 ;
debts  owed  to,  in  Russia  (1591)
426,  429,  433,  435.

Turneham,  Robert,  Franciscan
preacher  in  the  Syrian  expedition
(1268)  IV.  366,  368.

Turneham,  Stephen,  captain,  dedi-
cation to,  by  William  the  Pilgrim
(1201)  IV.  345.

Turner,  Nicolas,  of  London,  privi-
leged trader  in  Senegal  (1588)  vi.
443-450.

Turney,  see  Tournai.

Turon,  Richard  L  meets  Philip,
King  of  France,  at  (1190)  iv.  320.

Turpentine,  found  in  Virginia  (1586)
VIII.  354; in  Florida,  x.  57.

Turquesses, see  Turquoises.
Turquoises,  found  by  Friar  Marco  de

Niga, used as house decoration

(1539) IX. 129, 136; earrings of,

131; collars of, 134; found in

Ceyola  (1540)  ix.  155,  300.
Turrianus, Cosmus, and Aloisius

Froes,  vi.  332.
Tushi,  son  of  Jenghiz  Khan,  i,  71,

74,  150; and  Comania,  146.
Tusimer, Henry a, eighteenth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

6.
Tuspa river, marks of, in second

Ruttier,  x.  319.
Tussmetta,  dried  goat's  flesh,  used

in  Lanzarota,  vi. 134.
Tutan,  viceroy  or  governor  of  a  shire

In  China,  vi.  296,  301,  313,  363.
Tuteritona,  town  near  Mana  river,

X.  416.
Tutia, found  In  Persia, vi. 25.
Tutonaguy, first cataract of the

Saguenay  river  at, viil. 270.
Tutteburle,  John,  11.  103 ; and  Prus-
sian pirates,  61.
Tuttee  Island,  fight  between  English

merchants and freebooters at

(1570)  III.  167.
Tututepec, province  of  New  Spain,

IX.  472 ;  '  mansion  of  Pinotespan,'
subject  to,  470.

Tuvia,  city  In  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Gran-
ada, X.  368.

Tuzi,  war  officer  in  China,  vi.  302.

Twelfth-Night  In  Flanders,  vi.  228.

Twerdico,  Stephen,  Russian  ambas-
sador to  England  (1567)  in.  98;
Queen  Elizabeth's  letter  and,  loi.

Twerra,  conquered  province  of  Rus-
sia, III.  359.

Twide,  under  John  Hooper's  leader,
ship,  missing  in  Panuco  (1568)  ix.

415-

Twilight  in  the  Burning  Zone,  vii.
259; under  the  Poles,  275.

Twit,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)  viu.
318.

Twitt,  John,  of  Harwich,  Christo-
pher Newport's  voyage  by  (1591)

X.  184.

Twyd, of Harwich, joint-owner  of

the  Solomon  (1590)  vii.  31.
Tydore, see  TIdore.

437

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Tydway,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  vm.  402.

Tygar,  see  Tiger.

Tygre,  see  Tiger.

Tymbanton,  Rajah  of  Java  (1580)
XI. 132.

Tynemouth,  in.  302,

Tynne,  see  Tin.

Typhoon,  description  of  a,  in  Indian
Ocean,  v.  436.

Typton,  M.,  see  Tipton,

Tyranno,  Puerto  de,  or  Mompatar,
Agira  at,  x.  362.

Tyre,  Richard  I.  prevented  from  en-
tering, by  King  Pliilip  of  France
(1191)  IV.  331;  Philip,  King  of
France,  at,  334;  Baldwin,  arch-
bishop of  Canterbury,  in  (1190)
341 ;  engraving  of,  in  the  sixteenth
century,  369;  Ezekiel's  prophecy
about,  VI.  108;  William,  arch-
bishop of,  *  Historia  belli  sacri,'
by  (1097)  IV.  294;  life  and  travels
of  (1130)  307.

Tyrus,  see  Tyre.

Ubarro, river  in  Guiana,  x.  408.
Uchali Pasha, William Harborne's

present  to  (1583)  v.  254.
Uchoog  or  Ouchooge  Weir,  iii.  221  ;

Robert Golding at (1580) 239;

English  merchants  at,  243.
Udene,  see  Udine.
Udine, Friar Odoric's death at

(1331)  IV.  443.
Ugini,  Ralph  Fitch  at  (c. 1583)  v.

473-

Ugoria,  11.  394;  yew  market  in,  387,
III.  119,  455;  Arthur  Pet's  pro-
posed voyage  to,  257 ;  Arthur  Pet
near  (1580)  298;  journey  to,  of
Sigismund  ab  Herberstein,  405.

Ugory,  see  Ugoria.

Ugritzchi,  the,  people  dwelling  near
the  Ob,  HI.  408.

Ulfliot,  and  the  Norwegian  laws  in
Iceland  {926)  iv.  53, 151.

Ulie,  the,  see  Vlieland.

Ulishingers,  see  Flushing,  men  of.

Ulloa,  Francis  de,  captain  of  the
Spanish  fleet,  discoveries  by  (1539)
IX.  207-278 ;  takes  possession  of
California  (1539)  211,  215;  erects
a  cross,  212; takes  possession  of

S.  Andrew's  haven,  218;  and  the
Indians  of  California,  221,  236;
wounded,  236 ;  courage  of,  238 ;
gifts  exchanged  with  the  peace-
able Indians,  245  ff. ;  lands  in
Cedars  Island,  259,  266 ;  attacked
by  Indians  on  Cedars  Island  (1540)
259,  265 ;  ships  in  a  storm  (1540)
269,  271  f. ;  discovery  of  Cabo  del
Enganno  by,  and  return  of  (1540)
278;  tale  of,  about  the  discovery
of  the  North-west  passage,  xii.
26.

Ulhva  or  S.  John  de  Lowe,  see  S.
Juan  d 'Ulloa.

Ullva.  Alphonso,  and  the  '  Story  of
Charles  V.'s  Life,'  vii. 187.

Ulpian,  on  the  word  Victus,  iv.  64,
164.

Ulricus  a  Jungingen,  twenty-third
master  of  the  Dutch  knights  (1407)
II.  7.

Ulster,  conquered  by  John  de
Courci,  I.  32,  34;  subdued  by
Hugh  de  Lacy  (1204)  33.

Ultar  Sound,  Arthur  Pet  in  the
(1580)  III.  301.

Umpton,  colonel,  in  Spain  (1589)  vi.
484; his  march  to  Lisbon,  497.

Umpton,  Henry,  Stephen  Parmenl-
us's  patron (1583)  viii. 84.

Underwood,  John,  of  the  second  voy-
age of  William  Towerson  to
Guinea  (1557)  vi.  230.

Unduglesme,  river,  iv.  371.

Unekius,  Oliver  and  (1581)  iii.  454.

Unicorn,  the,  of  Danzig,  Melchior
White,  master  of  (1577)  vi.  231;
and  the  English  ships,  233.

Unicorn,  the,  English  pinnace,  voy-
age of,  to  Guinea  (1577)  vi.  231,
234 ; to  Hanta,  247.

Unicorn,  horn  of  the  Abath  or
female,  vi.  399 ;  horn  of,  found  in
Tartary,  vii.  182  ;  horn,  found  in
a  native's  dart,  418;  horn  of,  and
walrus's  tooth  used  against  poison
(1591)  viii.  157;  horn  of,  use  in
Florida  (1565)  x.  59.

Unicorn  fish,  see  Narwhal.

Uniforms  of  the  Turkish  army,  de-
scription of, V. 105, 108.

University  of  Egypt,  or  Giamalazar,
V.  335-

438

INDEX

Unkeltop,  John,  damages  paid  to,
n. 103  f.

Unticaro,  Peter,  prisoner  of  the
Turks  (1577)  V.  157;  and  John
Foxe's  plan  of  escape,  158;  and
the  jailer's  treasure,  159;  death
of,  160.

Upcot,  captain  of  the  Moon  (1578)
VII.  322,  351;  and  Captain  Best,
in  the  pinnace,  358.

Upotommas,  nation  on  the  Ecrowto
river,  x.  492.

Upton,  Thomas,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Cap-
uri  river  (1595)  x,  380.

Uquam,  province  in  China,  xi.  379.

Ura,  Matthew  de,  Genoese  merchant
of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  43.

Uraba,  gulf  of,  x.  383.

Uraca  river,  x.  492.

Uracco  river,  between  Cape  Cecil
and  Raleana  river,  x.  459,  492.

Ural  river,  i.  278,  11.  477;  John  de
Piano  Carpini's  journey  over  the,
I.  94,  163 ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  ill
on  the,  II.  457.

Urban  II.,  Pope,  and  the  Council  of
Clermont  (1096)  iv.  293.

Urdaneta,  Andrew,  Mexican  friar,
through  the  North-west  passage,
vii.  179,  181,  188;  the  King  of
Portugal  and,  180 ;  his  voyage  to
Germany  from  the  South  Sea,  196.

Ure,  in  Russia,  11.  420.

Uredeland,  Henry,  Hanse  messen-
ger, II.  55.

Uren,  Philip  de,  attempt  to  discover
Guiana  by,  x.  497.

Urgence,  see  Urgenj.

Urgenj,  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  11.
462,  465,  475;  description  of,  463;
ambassador  from,  475  ;  latitude  of,
479 ;  from  Bokhara  to,  fifteen
days'  journey,  480,  481 ;  Anthony
Jenkinson 's  voyage to  (1558) iii.

335-
Urgenshe,  see  Urgenj.
Uriogorod,  see  Vriagorod.
Urnan, tenth shire of China, vi.

296.
Uromo,  Sloboda  to,  in.  70.
Ursence  or  Contursia,  iv.  37, 132.
Uruay, Rio, mentioned  in  Ruttier,

XI.  98.

Uschatoi,  Knez  Peter,  iii.  411.

Uscombe,  Richard,  letter  from,  to
Henry  Lane  (1571)  m.  169.

Usdrum,  retinue  of  the  Beglerbeg
of,  VI.  67;  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hun-
garian-Turkish war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Ushant  Islands,  xi.  200;  George
Fenner  athwart  of  (1566)  vi.  266;
English  fleet  unable  to  double
(1589)  475;  John  White  in  sight
of  (1590)  viii.  422.

Usiran,  Mahomet's  disciple,  iii.  36.

Uslano,  Christopher,  of  Potosi,  letter
from,  to  Gonsalvo  de  Solana,  of
Encisa, Spain (1590) x. 171.

Usman,  son  of  Homer,  in.  159.

Usnago,  Michael  de,  admiral  of  the
Spanish  fleet  (1538)  ix.  125.

Usont,  Mount,  in  China,  vi.  323,

Ussa  river,  in.  407.

Ussant  Island,  see  Ushant.

Ust  Pinnego,  Kholmogory  to,  in.
70.

Ustiug,  see  Ustyug.

Ustiug  Thelesna,  iron  at,  in.  369.

Ustuga,  province  of  Russia,  in.  359.

Ustyoug,  see  Ustyug.

Ustyug  Velikiy,  in.  405;  Anthony
Jenkinson  at,  n.  418;  Osep  Napea
at,  426 ;  from  S.  Nicholas  Bay  to,
in.  68, 71;  English  wares  conveyed
to  (1569)  no; on  the  Dvina,  215.

Usurers,  foreign,  n.  125  f.

Usury  in  another  world,  Japanese
belief  in,  vi.  337.

Utelif,  see  Sword-fish.

Utina,  Guetelus,  public  notary  at
(133 l)  IV. 444.

Utina  Olata  Ouae,  Great  King  in
Florida  (1564)  ix.  20;  vassals  of,
21;  and  M.  de  Arlac  with  the
Indian  prisoners  (1564)  34;  and
King  Potanou,  34 ;  La  Roche  Fer-
riere,  sent  by  Captain  Laudon-
niere  to  (1564)  37;  and  Captain
Laudonniere's  envoys  (1565)  55;
asks  for  help,  56 ;  and  the  famine
at  Fort  Caroline  (1565)  62;  de-
ceives Ottigni  and  Vasseur,  63 ;
taken  prisoner  by  Captain  Lau-
donniere  (1565)  64;  his  son  elected
King,  65 ;  liberation  from  impri-
sonment at  Fort  Caroline  (1565)
69.

439

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Utrecht,  Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1581)

V.  214.
Utreight,  see  Utrecht.
Utrii,  rafts  on  the  Tigris,  v.  368.
Utzar  Zegoline,  Emperor  of  Kazan,

II.  450.
Uvaga  river,  iii.  406.
Uvogolici,  the,  people  dwelling  near

the  Ob,  III.  408.
Uz,  land  of  Job,  iv.  410.
Uzesucani,  in  Asia,  vii.  177.

Vaca,  Alonso  Martines,  of  Seville,
letter  to,  from  Steven  de  Tresio  of
Panama  (1590)  x.  173.

Vaca,  Cabega  de,  see  Nunnez,  Al-
varo.

Vacas,  Rio  de  las,  discovered  by
Antonio  de  Espejo  (1583)  ix.  203.

Vachen,  country  w^est  of  the  Volga,
II.  452  ;  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  in.
196.

Vachin,  see  Vachen.

Vacquieulx,  Receiver  of,  and  Cap-
tain Gourgues  (1570)  ix. iii.

Vacupa,  Friar  Marco  de  Niga  at
(1539)  IX. 128, 130.

Vadska,  conquered  province  of  Rus-
sia, III.  359.

Vaga,  province  of  Russia,  in.  359.

Vaigach  Island,  Stephen  Borough  at
(1556)  n.  337,  339,  340,  346;  dis-
covery of,  related  by  Richard
Johnson  (1556)  11.  345;  English
expeditions  to  (1588)  in.  120,  (1580)
252,  254;  Tabin  Promontory  to,
262  ;  Arthur  Pet  sights  (1580)  288  ;
returns  to,  291,  (1580)  296;  dis-
covered by  the  Searchthrift  (1556)
334'  455  >  Straits  of,  William  Bor-
ough at  the  discovery  of  (1556)
210.

Vaigats,  see  Vaigach.

Valachia,  see  Roumania.

Valakia,  see  Roumania.

Valania,  see  Alania.

Valani,  see  Alanians.

Valdenare,  Sir  Christopher,  castellan
of  Rhodes,  captures  a  Turkish
banner  (1522)  v.  29.

Valdez,  Diego  Flores  de,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  200;  opinion
of,  on  Philip  II. 's  orders,  212;
general  of  the  Spanish  fleet  (1570)

IX.  460 ;  his  kindness  to  Robert
Barret  (1570)  462.

Valdez,  Pedro  de,  and  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  200;  taken  by  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake,  213,  231;  at  Portland
(1588)  VII.  39;  prisoner  in  Eng-
land (1590)  X.  161.

Valdivia,  Don  Pedro  de,  and  the
conquest  of  Chile,  xi.  274 ;  wealth
of,  275 ;  towns  in  Chile  built  by,
276 ; death  of,  276.

Valdivia,  town  on  the  coast  of  Chile,
XI.  274,  276 ; description  of,  278.

Valencia,  Adomar  of,  witness  of  Ed-
ward I.'s  great  charter,  i.  338.

Valencia,  kingdom  of,  v.  243.

Valencia,  William  of,  witness  of
Edward's  I.'s  great  charter,  i.  296.

Valentia,  see  Valencia.

Valentine,  Thomas,  merchant,  lands
at  Cape  Verde  (1567)  vi.  271.

Valerius  Antias,  iv.  22, 113.

Valerosa,  Gabriel,  of  John  Chid-
ley's  voyage,  return  of  (1590)  xi.

384.  389-

Valle,  Marquess  de,  see  Cortez,  Her-
nando.

Valles,  the,  ships  from  Panama  to
(1590)  X. 177.

Valona,  John  Locke  near  (1553)  v.
103.

Valparaiso,  port  of  S.  lago  in  Chile,
Sir  Francis  Drake  at  (1578)  xi.
113;  latitude  of  113,  278,  349;
Sir  Francis  Drake  captures  a  ship
at,  261 ;  from,  to  Quintero  Bay,
360.

Valpares,  see  Valparaiso.

Valpariso,  see  Valparaiso.

Valvot,  Captain,  and  Captain  Lau-
donniere  agree  to  return  to  France
(1565)  IX.  97.

Van  or  Nan,  Pasha  of,  in  the  Hun-
garian-Turkish war  (1594)  VI.  104.

Vanam,  province  in  China,  xi.  380.

Vandals  and  Octher,  i.  14;  and  the
Huns,  279.

Vanderfoord,  Sir  John,  Dutch  ad-
miral, and  the  Cadiz  expedition
(1596)  IV.  236;  head  of  a  squad-
ron, 242  ; knighted  at  Cadiz,  260.

Vanfuli,  nephew  of  the  King  of
China,  description  of  his  palace,
VI.  326.

440

INDEX

Vanil  of  Cambay,  in  Ormuz  market,

VI.  323.

Van-Svi, style of address to the

King  of  China,  vi.  368.
Vantage,  the,  John  Rivers,  captain

of  (1585)  X.  98.
Vaperon, town in Guiana, xi. 12,

13-

Vararzana,  John  de,  see  Verrazzano.

Varas,  silk  market  at,  iii.  50.

Vardo,  or  Wardhouse,  Norway,  Eng-
lish ships  at  (1553)  II.  220,  246,
247,  323  ;  weights  of,  275  ;  stock-
fish markets,  276;  John  Brooke,
Muscovy  Company's  agent  at,  281,
286,  287;  Stephen  Borough  at
(1556)  332,  344.  345;  Anthony
Jenkinson's  description  of,  416;
chart  of,  engraving  of,  416;  S.
Nicholas  to,  in.  69 ;  fishing  trade
in,  89;  English  trade  in,  restricted
to  Muscovy  Company  (1567)  97;
English  merchants  at,  117,  305;
whale-fishing  (1575)  201;  Danish
captain  of,  206 ;  Arthur  Pet  and
(1580)  254,  283;  journey  from,  to
Tabin,  262  ;  discovered  by  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure,  331;  Lapp
fishing  at,  404 ;  in  the  Arctic  Zone,

VII.  276 ;  climate  of,  compared
with  Meta  Incognita,  369 ;  Sound
of,  Stephen  Borough  in  (1557)  n.

371-
Vare, measure of Ormuz, vi. 15 ;

of  Goa,  18.
Varellas, or Temples of Idols, in

Pegu,  V.  492.
Vargas, Diego  and  Juan  de, their

attempt  to  discover  Guiana,  x.  497.
Varivus,  ruler  in  North  Russia,  in.

357-

Varney,  John,  captain  of  the  George
(1585)  X.  99 ;  and  the  boats  in  Car-
tagena harbour  (1586)  124;  death
of,  125,  134.

Varnich,  Carraich  to,  in.  81.

Vasiagy,  English  merchants  in
(1569)  III. 116.

Vasiliagorod  Castle,  11.  450.

Vasili  Feodorowich,  Russian  Em-
peror's deputy,  and  Stephen  Bor-
ough (1557)  n.  374.

Vasma,  hemp-growing  in,  in.  368.

Vasquez de Coronado, Francisco,

Cathay  unknown  to,  vii.  166 ;  and
strange  ships  from  China  and
Cathay,  170;  voyage  of,  ix.  115;
letters  from  (1539)  116,  118  ;  voyage
of,  to  Cevola  (1540)  145-169;  news
of  Axa  and  Quivira  brought  to
Antigua  (1540)  164;  madness  of,  in
Antigua  (1542)  165;  marriage  of,
166 ;  crosses  erected  in  Cevola
by  (1540,  1541)  198;  and  the  gold
there,  199 ;  his  departure  from
Aguaiavall  (1540)  279;  inquiries
of  Captain  Alarchon  about  (1540)
292,  308,  311.
Vasseur,  Captain,  expedition  of,  to
Thimogoa  (1564)  ix.  20;  and  King
Molloua,  20,  21,  22;  and  King
Molona,  22,  23;  and  King  Malica,
25  ;  and  the  Indian  prisoners  (1564)
31,  33;  expedition  of,  towards  the
north  of  Florida  (1565)  53;  de-
ceived by  King  Utina  (1565)  63;
and Athore, son of Satourioua

(1565)  75; and  Sir  John  Hawkins'
ship  (1565)  80.

Vasseur,  La,  of  Constance,  in
Roberval's  voyage  (1542),  death  of,
at  sea  (1542)  viii.  289.

Vassian, Southam and Sparke at

(1566)  m.  79.
Vastacius,  i.  231.

Vatica,  Jacomo,  master  of  the  Gra-
daige  (1563)  v.  366.

Vaughan,  Captain,  in  Virginia
(1585)  VIII.  317.

Vaughan,  John,  captain  of  the
Drake  (1585)  x.  98.

Vavasour,  Andrew,  and  the  North-
west passage,  vii. 163.

Vavasour,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
Foresight  (1591)  vii.  41;  his  help
to  the  Revenge,  48.

Vaygatz,  see  Vaigach.

Vaz,  Lopez,  voyage  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  to  Nombre  de  Dios  and
Darien  (1572),  written  by,  x.  75-
77;  voyage  of  John  Oxenham  to
West  India  and  Darien  (1575),
written  by  77-81 ;  discourse  of,
concerning  the  fight  of  Fenton
with  the  Spanish  ships  (1582)  xi.
92-95  ;  discourse  of,  concerning  the
West  Indies  and  South  Sea
(1572-87)  227-290.

XII

441

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Vaz,  Pedro,  Portuguese  pilot  at
Sierra  Leone  (1582)  xi. 177.

Vazabaris,  Enseada  de,  bay  men-
tioned in  Ruttier,  xi.  77.

Veadore, chief man in Benin, vi.

459-

Vedagoba,  English  trade  in  (1575)
III.  199;  Lapp  fishing  at  (1588)
404.

Veii,  '  walking-houses  '  of  Tartars,
III.  396.

Vela,  Cape  de  la.  Sir  John  Hawkins
at  (1568)  IX.  401,  (1565)  X.  37,
(1568)  66  ;  Andrew  Barker  at  (1576)
84 ;  description  of,  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  233;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  at  (1596)  272;  mentioned
in  the  Ruttier,  288 ;  latitude  of,
335  ; pearl  trade  at,  xi.  237.

Velas,  Islas  de  las,  see  Ladrones.

Velasco,  Don  Luis  de,  viceroy  of
Mexico  (1558)  IX.  356;  discovery
of  the Philippines by, xi. 287.

Velasco  de  Varre,  Don  Juan  de,
general  of  the  Spanish  fleets  (1570)
IX.  460;  and  the  English  prison-
ers sent  to  Spain  (1570)  459.

Veles,  Port  of,  from  Cape  Blanco  to,
XI.  361 ;  from,  to  S.  John  Port,
362.

Velez  Malaga,  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V.  243.

Veline,  lake,  petrifying  waters  of
the,  IV.  37,  132.

Veloso,  Manoel,  slave  of,  in  Peru
(1581)  XI.  38.

Veneseander,  value  of,  v.  511.

Venetiano,  Benedetto,  slave  in  Tri-
polis  (Africa)  (1584)  v.  304.

Venetians,  home  products  of  the,  11.
124 ;  in  league  with  the  Turks,
in.  28;  merchants  at  Aleppo  (1566)
57 ;  and  trade  with  Armenians
(1568)  139;  consul  of  the  Com-
pany of,  in  Tripolis  (Syria),  his
present  to  Solyman,  v.  108.

Venetus,  Paulus,  his  map,  iii.  459 ;
in  Cathay,  vii. 166,  170.

Venezuela,  province  of,  despoiled  by
Agira,  x.  363  ;  Indians  of,  and  the
gold  of  Guiana,  366.

Venice,  a  month's  sailing  from  Tri-
polis, III.  57 ;  ships  of,  lost  at  sea
(1588)  IV.  230; body  of  Empress

Helena  preserved  at,  272 ;  death
of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  at  (1399)
453;  John  Locke  at  (1553)  v.  77,
105;  trade  with  Chios  (1569)  114,
116;  rights  of,  over  Cyprus,  126;
Laurence  Aldersey  in  (1581)  203,
214;  description  of,  205;  Duke
of,  205;  Sesame  seed  in,  230;
Henry  Austell  at,  322  ;  the  Edward
Bonaventure  and  the  Susan  at
(1586)  VI.  48;  Levant  Company's
trade  in  (1592)  75,  77;  Richard
Wrag  at  (1594)  113; navy  of,  xii.

3-

Venison  in  Newfoundland,  viii. 14.

Venner,  Captain,  see  Fenner.

Vennor,  Thomas,  see  Fenner.

Venta  Cruz,  or  House  of  Crosses,
in  New  Spain,  Sir  Francis  Drake
and  the  sacking  of  (1572)  x.  76;
open  to  Sir  Francis  Drake's  devas-
tations, 94 ;  near  the  river  of
Chagres,  144;  fortified,  150;  a
danger  to  Panama  (1587)  151 ;
set  on  fire  by  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1572)  XI.  229.

Venta  de  Cruzes,  see  Venta  Cruz.

Ventereuse,  La,  of  Honfleur,  Wil-
liam Towerson  and  (1577)  vi.  241.

Vento,  French  Consul  in  Alexandria
(1584)  V.  288;  Pasha  of  Alex-
andria and,  289.

Ventry  haven,  English  fleet  at  (1589)
VII. 26.

Vera,  Domingo  de,  general  for
Antonio  de  Berreo  (1593)  x.  434.

Vera,  Juan  de,  taken  prisoner  by
the  English  at  the  Groyne  (1589)
VI.  485; on  Bayona,  514.

Vera  Cruz,  Spanish  fort  built  in
(1590)  IX.  204,  205;  Robert  Tom-
son  at  (1556)  346;  description  of,
by  Robert  Thomson  (1558)  354;
otherwise  called  Villa  rica,  359 ;
Roger  Bodenham  in  (1564)  359;
John  Chilton  at,  361  ;  cattle  used
in,  as  purifiers  of  the  air,  361  ;
commercial  port  (1572)  378;  dan-
gerous mosquitoes  in,  379 ;  Miles
Philips  escaping  from  Mexico,
arrested  at  (1580)  435,  436;  lati-
tude and  marks  of,  described  in
the  Ruttier,  x.  294 ;  in  second
Ruttier,  316,  3x7;  latitude  of,  317,

442

INDEX

334;  soundings  of,  mentioned  in
second  Ruttier,  320;  longitude
from, to S. Juan d'Ulloa,

337-  . .

Veragua,  province  of,  mountains  in,
IV.  18,  108;  gold  found  on  coast
of,  IX.  366.

Veragua,  town,  Spanish  frigate  cap-
tured at,  by  Andrew  Barker  (1576)
X.  85.

Vera  Paz,  John  Chilton  in  (1570)  ix.

369-

Verde,  Cape,  in  Thome's  map,  11.
168,  169,  173,  177;  sea  currents
off,  VI.  161 ;  station  for  the  Portu-
guese ships,  168  ;  William  Tower-
son  at  (1555)  181,  (1556)  211, (1557)
230,  (1577)  236,  249;  the  Leuriere
of  Dieppe  at  (1557)  218;  French
merchants  (1577)  237,  258;  Eng-
lish merchants  at  (1562)  258;
Sir  John  Hawkins  at  (1564)  265  ;
George  Fenner  at  (1567)  270;  pro-
ducts of,  271 ;  negroes'  treachery
towards  English  merchants  at
(1567)  272;  flying  fishes  at,  274;
George  Raymond  at  (1591)  387;
latitude  of,  451 ;  the  Richard  of
Arundel  in  sight  of  (1590)  462;
Spanish  fleet  from  (1589)  vii.  71 ;
discovered  by  Alouls  de  Cadomosta
viii.  127;  Portuguese  garrison
at,  445 ;  Sir  John  Hawkins
at  (1567)  IX.  399,  446,  X.  15,  64;
latitude  of,  15 ;  traffic  of  the
French  at  (1564)  15;  Sir  Francis
Drake  at  (1595)  228;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  at  (1596)  267;  Ruttier
from,  to  the  coast  of  Brazil,  xi.
73-75  ;  latitude  of,  348 ;  discovery
of  (1446)  XII.  3.

Verde,  Ilha,  latitude  of,  xi.  348,  352 ;
anchorage  at,  371.

Verdier,  Captain,  and  Sir  John
Hawkins's  ship  (1565)  ix.  80.

Vere,  Edward  de,  seventh  Earl
of  Oxford,  and  the  Armada,  iv.
217.

Verona,  civil  war  in,  pacified  by
Marino  Zeno  (c. 1200)  vii. 145.

Verrazzano,  John  de,  voyages  of,  by
Ramusio,  vii.  149 ;  America  un-
known to,  166;  voyages  of,  to
Florida (1524) viii. 423-438;

natives  discovered  by,  424;  inter-
course between  Indians  of  Florida
and,  433;  thirty-two  islands  dis-
covered by  438;  New  France  dis-
covered by  (1524)  449; discoveries

of, XII. 9.

Verst,  III.  73,  405.

Vertendono, Martin de, in the

Armada  (1588)  iv.  200.
Verzini, found in S. Thomas and

China,  vi.  25.
Vere, Sir Francis, Lord Marshall,

and  the  Cadiz  expedition  (1596)  iv.

236, 241; in  the  Rainbow, 247;

lands  at  Cadiz,  250.
Vere,  Sir  Horatio,  knighted  at  Cadiz

(1596)  IV.  259.
Vereies Islands, near Marinduque,

latitude  of,  ix.-  329.
Vergotie, Nicholas, ambassador of

the  people  of  Rhodes  to  Solyman,

V.  54.  56-
Verlotaus,  people  of  the  Cabota  river

(1595)  x.  208.
Vermeja Island, mentioned in the

Ruttier,  x.  294;  in  second  Rut-
tier, 316; longitude  from  to  Villa

Rica,  337.
Vermejo,  Mar,  see  California,  Gulf

of.
Vermilion  or  Cinnabar,  vi.  165.
Vermizzo, Fernando, at Cevola,

with  Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)

IX. 152.
Vescom,  Kholmogory  to,  iii.  70.
Vespasian, and  Constantinople, vi.

105.
Vespucci,  Amerigo,  his  discovery  of

America  (1497)  vii.  161,  viii.  449;

discoveries  of  (1501) 129.
Vespucius,  see  Vespucci.
Vesuvius,  Mount,  Pliny  and,  iv.  26,

119.
Viana, in Portugal, bark from,

taken  by  the  Mayflower  (1594)  vii.

119; Portuguese shipping from

(1578) VIII. II.

Viaparia,  river,  named  by  Diego  de

Ordas  (1531)  x.  496.
Viccars, Ambrose and Elizabeth,

settlers in Virginia (1587) viii.

402,  403.
Viccars, Ambrose, child settler in

Virginia  (1587)  vili.  403.

443

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Viceroy  of  the  Grand  Signior,
annuity  of,  vi.  65  ;  of  Mexico,  Don
Martin  Henriques  and  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  S.  Juan  d'UUoa
(1568) IX. 451, X. 69 f.

Victory,  the,  or  Our  Lady  de  la
Victoria,  church  in  Rhodes,  v.  17;
cast  down,  41.

Victory, the, of the English fleet

(1588)  IV.  218.

Victory,  the,  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's fleet  (1589)  vii.  I,  2 ;
English  prisoners  rescued  in,  6 ;
Captain  Monson  in  the,  10 ;  and
the  ship  from  S.  Malo,  13 ;  Cap-
tain Lister  in,  20.

Victory,  the,  Spanish  ship,  Sebastian
del  Cano,  pilot  of,  xi.  258.

Victory,  Cape,  at  the  entrance  of
the  Straits  of  Magellan,  xi.  158,
160.

Victuals,  scarcity  of,  in  the  English
army  (1589)  vi.  478,  481 ;  on
Spanish  ships,  xi.  444.

Victus,  meaning  of,  iv.  64,  164.

Vides,  governor  of  Cumana,  rivalry
of,  with  Antonio  de  Berreo,  about
the  discovery  of  Guiana,  x.  373 ;
and  King  Morequito,  373.

Viejo,  Puerto,  town  in  Peru,  xi.
286.

Vigne,  M.  de  la,  sentry  of  Fort
Caroline  (1565)  ix. 94.

Vigo,  William  Towerson  at  (1577)
VI. 250 ; Sir Francis Drake at

(1589)  513;  burning  of,  514;  Sir
John  Hawkins  procures  help  to
go  back  to  England  (1568)  x.  74;
captures  of  Christopher  Carleill  at
(1585)  102.

Vigonia,  the,  Spanish  ship  at  the
fight  of  Puerto  Rico  (1595)  x.  231.

Vike,  Lewis  de,  report  of  (1583)
viii.  146.

Vikia (Norway), Bailiff of, i. 341,

347-

Vilela,  Caspar,  at  Tokyo,  vi.  332 ;
and  Alolsius  Froes,  346.

Viliega,  at  the  taking  of  Cevola
(1540)  IX.  154.

Villa  Andreda,  Don  Juan  de,  gover-
nor of  Margarita,  killed  by  Agira,
X.  362.

Villa  Dorca,  Earl  of,  French  noble-

man, and  the  proposed  fleet  of
Rochelle  (1597)  xi.  67.

Villa  Franca,  in  S.  Michael  (Azores)
VII.  15 ;  destroyed  by  earthquake
^1591)  79;  Sir  John  Burrough  at
(1592)  109.

Villages  of  Tivitivas,  description  of,
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  x.  383.

Villa  Grande,  Pedro  de,  chosen  cap-
tain of  the  Spaniards  in  Chile,  xi.
277.

Villa  Inscensia,  Don  Nunno  de,
judge  in  Guadalajara,  marriage
of  (1590)  IX.  205.

Villa  Longa,  the  Richard  of  Arundel
at  (1588)  VI.  452,  (1591)  464.

Villa  Manrique,  Marquess  of,  vice-
roy of  New  Spain  (1590)  ix.  205.

Villanova,  Portuguese  hostage  to
Thomas  Dassel  (1591)  vii.  96.

Villanueva,  Augustin  de,  and  Sir
John  Hawkins,  at  S.  Juan  d'UUoa
(1568)  IX.  451 ; treachery  of,  452.

Villa  nueva  de  la  Serena,  see
Coquimbo.

Villa  Rica,  town  in  Chili,  xi.  276.

Villegagnon,  colonising  in  Southern
America  by,  viii.  450;  first  settle-
ment of,  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  xi.
251;  ships  of,  in  the  Strait  of
Magellan,  259.

Villeneuve,  de,  in  Roberval's  voyage
(1542)  viii.  289.

Viiliers,  French  admiral,  prepara-
tions of,  for  the  colonisation  of
Guiana  (1595)  x.  365.

Viiliers,  Philip  de,  de  L'Isle  Adam,
Grand  Master  of  Rhodes  (1522)  v.
4 ;  preparations  for  war  by,  7-13 ;
letter  from  Solyman  to,  13 ;  por-
trait of,  16;  at  the  breach  of
Spain,  31;  activity  of,  39;  and
the  proposals  of  surrender,  43 ;
and  the  people  of  Rhodes,  51,  53;
surrenders,  55 ;  visits  Solyman,
60.

Vilna,  taken  by  the  Earl  of  Derby,
I.  305 ; Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.

325-
Vinatico, a tree in Teneriffe, vi,

129.
Vincent,  of  Sir  Richard  Grenville's

voyage to Virginia (1585) viii.

310.

1

444

INDEX

Vincentius Beluacensis, '  Speculum

Historiale,'  by,  i.  94,  134.
Vincula  Sancti  Petri,  fort  in  Cyprus

(1270)  IV.  362.
Vines  in  Bacchus  Island,  viii.  221,

227 ; in Canada, 244, 267 ; in

Florida  (1524)  430.
Vinton,  money  of  Goa,  vi.  18.
Violet, the, and  the Spanish  ships

(1590)  VII.  31.
Violet,  the,  or  the  Why  not  I  ?  in  the

Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  (1592)

VII.  118.

Viralta,  Christopher  Vasquez  de,
soldier  of  Flanders  (1589)  vi.  514.

Virgenes,  Cabo  de  las,  in  Ruttier  to
Strait  of  Magellan,  xi.  89.

Virgil  and  Ultima  Thule,  iv.  14,  103,
vii.  193  ;  on  the  Torrid  Zone,  198 ;
quotation  from  Book  VI.  of  the
'  Aeneid  '  of,  viii.  449.

Virgil,  Polydor,  testimony,  on
Christian  valour  (12 18)  iv.  350,
351 ;  Henry  IV.  of  England's  voy-
age to  Tunis  (1389)  by,  450,  452 ;
intended  voyage  of  Henry  IV.  to
the  Holy  Land  (1413)  455,  456.

Virgin  Gorda  Island,  marks  of,  in
second  Ruttier,  x.  309.

Virgin  Islands,  east  of  Puerto  Rico,

VIII.  407;  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1595)  X.  229;  illness  of  Sir  John
Hawkins  at,  229; latitude  of,  333.

Virgin Maria, Cape of, see Vir-

genes.
Virgin,  the,  pinnace  of  Christopher

Newport's  fleet  (1591)  x.  184.
Virgin,  the,  ship  of  James  Lancaster

(1594) XI. 43; lost, 44; found,

45-
Virginia,  first  voyage  to,  by  Philip
Amadas  and  Arthur  Barlowe  (1584)
VIII.  297-310;  taken  possession  of,
by  Captain  Amadas  (1584)  298;
description  of  the  king's  brother
and  his  wives,  302 ;  warrior  of,
engraving  of,  304 ;  second  voyage
to,  by  Sir  Richard  Grenville  (1585)
310-318;  description  of,  319;
chart  of,  by  John  White,  320;
account  of  the  English  left  in,
with  Ralph  Lane  (1585-86)  320-
345  ;  third  voyage  to,  by  Raleigh's
ship  (1586)  346; Thomas  Harlot's

report  on,  348;  *  Merchantable
Commodities  '  of  (1586)  353 ;  priest
of,  engraving  of,  by  John  White,
376 ;  wholesome  climate  of,  384 ;
fourth  voyage  to,  by  John
White,  governor  of  (1587)  386-403  ;
names  of  English  settled  in,
402  f. ;  fifth  voyage  to,  by  John
White  (1590)  406-422;  Waterin,  or
Waren  river,  in,  ix,  114;  breed-
ing of  cattle  advised  as  profitable
in  (1565)  X.  62;  Indians  of,  kind-
ness of,  to  Amadas  and  Barlow,
XTi.  39;  Lane,  governor  of,  41;
colonists  of,  taken  home  by  Drake
(1585)  62 ;  colonisation  of,  86 ;
Lord  Delaware,  governor  of  (1609)
112.

Virginia  and  Florida,  chart  of,  by
John  White,  engraving  of,  viii.
400.

'  Virginia  richly  valued,'  etc.,  last
work  of  Hakluyt  (1609)  xii.  83.

Viridy,  King  of  the  Moors,  at  the
sack  of  Bezeneger  (1567)  v.  382.

Virtues, five  principal  Chinese,  vi.

370.
Virumnius,  on  Empress  Helena,  iv.

271.
Viscaia,  Nueva,  see  Biscay,  New.
Vision  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  iv.

286 ; its confirmation, 287 ; of

Friar  Odoric  (1331)  443.
Visitors or Inspectors on Spanish

ships,  XI.  444,  456.
Viso, IDon John de, town of, in

Guinea  (1556)  vi.  204.
Vistula,  river,  i. 15.
Visty,  Captain,  his  advice  about  the

Spanish  ships  in  Florida  (1565)  ix.

90.
Vitalians,  depredations  committed  in

Norway  by,  11.  68  f.
Viterblum,  King  of  Germany  killed

at  (1270)  IV.  359.
Vitoldus,  captain  of  the  Tartars,  11.

7-
Vitoldus,  Grand  Duke  of  Lithuania,

and Basil V., Grand Duke of

Russia,  II.  190.
Vivianus,  legate  from  Rome,  i.  32.
Vizellac, Richard I. and Philip,

King  of  France,  at  (1190)  iv.  320,

321.

445

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Vizir,  Chief,  of  Turkey,  and  John
Field  (1593)  VI.  96;  his  reception
of  Edward  Barton,  English  am-
bassador, 99.

Vladimir  the  Great,  son  of  Stoslaus,
II.  184; his  descendants,  184  f.

Vladimir  Monomachos,  son  of  Jaro-
slav,  II. 185.

Vladimir  or  Jaroslav,  married  Har-
ald's  daughter  (1067)  iii.  373.

Vladimir,  first  province  of  Russia,
in.  358.

Vladimir,  cit)'^  of,  in.  370.

Vladislaus,  King  of  Poland,  defeats
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  7,  8.

Vlieland,  in  Holland,  v.  320.

Vlishing,  see  Flushing.

Vo,  or  chief  Herehaught  in  Japan,

VI.  329.

Voari  river,  x.  407.

Vob,  river,  English  merchants  on
the  (1569)  III.  116.

Vobsko,  from  Novgorod  to,  in.  69 ;
English  trade  free  of  customs  in
(1569)  112;  garrison  of  the  (1584)
345;  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)
345  ;  strong  town  of  Russia,  373  ;
siege  of  (1580)  385.

Vobsk)^,  see  Vobsko.

Vocabulary,  Samoyede,  11.  369 ;  of
S.  Vincent  river  (Africa)  vi.  187;
of  Don  John's  town,  201 ;  Moor-
ish, 400; of  Meta  Incognita  (1576)

VII.  211;  of  the  natives  met  by
John  Davys  (1586)  398;  of  New
France,  noted  by  Jacques  Cartier
(1534)  VIII.  209,  260;  of  Trinidad,
noted  by  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)
X.  211;  of  Java  (1580)  XI.  132-133.

Voiavod,  or  general,  in  the  Russian
army, in. 380, 385.

Vois,  Tristram,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Voisie,  Lord  John,  and  Prince  Ed-
ward (1270)  IV,  365.

Volcano  of  Mexico,  see  Popocate-
petl.

Volcanoes,  in  Mercator's  map,  in.
280 ;  in  Iceland,  causes  of,  iv.  17-
19,  106-109;  in  Mount  Hecla,  19,
27, 109, 119.

Volga,  I.  94,  163,  256;  the  course  of
the,  260,  271 ;  Rubruquis  crosses
the, 266; and the  Caspian Sea,

270,  282;  II.  252,  420,  426,  450;
and  the  Kama,  452 ;  and  the  Tar-
tar boats,  454;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son  on  the,  456,  (1561)  m.  18;
source  of  the,  11.  477;  traffic  on
the.  III.  71 ;  description  of,  104;  hal-
lowing the  water  of  the,  218;  fer-
tility of  the  land  near,  360,  362 ;
fish  of  the,  370.

Volhuski  river,  and  the  city  of  Nov-
gorod, III.  80.

Volock  river,  tributary  of  the  Onega,
in.  363.

Volodemer,  see  Vladimir.

Vologda,  hemp  and  flax  market,  n.
225,  262  ;  central  market,  277,  291,
295 ;  Muscovy  Company's  goods
sent  to,  384,  386 ;  goods  stolen  at,
389;  Anthony  Jenkinson's  de-
scription of,  419  ;  Osep  Napea  at,
426;  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  479;
latitude  of,  479;  Anthony  Jenkin-
son at  (1561)  in.  13,  15,  (1572)
194 ;  from  S.  Nicholas  Bay  to,  68 ;
to  Yaroslavl,  70;  English  trade  in,
95 ;  description  of,  104 ;  English
trade  free  at  (1569)  112;  rope-
house  at,  113;  Persian  goods
brought  to,  147;  altitude  of,  248;
Sir  Jerome  Bowes  at  (1583)  317;
English  house  allowed  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1586)  351, 443.

Vongui,  John,  son  of  Taigarandono,
baptism  of  (1596)  xi.  441.

Vonuez,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
326.

Vopnafiord  Haven,  in  Iceland,  iv.
14, 103.

Vopsko,  see  Vobsko.

Vorronia  Island,  Southam  and
Sparke  at  (1566)  in.  79,  81.

Vortiporius,  King  of  England,  i.  S.

Voshansko,  11.  420.

Vosnessino  Christo,  monastery  on
the  Swire,  in.  79,  81.

'  Voyages  to  the  East  and  West
Indies,'  by  John  Huighen  van
Linschoten  (1589-91)  vii.  62.

Vo^'ets,  Southam  and  Sparke  at
("1566)  in.  77.

Voyrat, i. 70 ; Tartars and, 86

Vriagorod,  in.  68 ;  English  trade  in
(1569)  109;  free  of  customs,
112; English  merchants  in,  117.

446

INDEX

Vulcan,  see  Volcano.

Vulodimir, see  Vladimir.

Vulture, description  of  a, by  John

Locke  (1553)  V.  99.
Vuszevolodus,  see  Wsewolod.
Vut Khan, Prester John's  brother

and  successor,  i.  267  f,,  290.

Wacacoia, nation of  the  Waipoco,

X.  490.
Wacarima  Mountains,  x.  400; near

Winicapora  river,  418.
Wacawaios,  nation  of  the  Lemerare,

X.  494.
Waccawaes or Waccawayans, In-
dians at  Vaperon, xi. 12.
Wackerew, town in Seawano, x.

207.
Wade,  Armigil,  clerk  of  the  council

of  Henry  VIII. , viii. 3.
Wade,  Thomas,  master  of  the  Philip

and  Mary,  11.  408.
Wade,  William, clerk  of  the  Privy

Council,  VIII.  3.
Wadworth, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.
Wages  of  serving--men  in  England

(1589) VI. 523; voyages worked

without  (1583)  VIII.  121.
Wagham, Griffin, ship's carpenter

on  the  Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)

II.  214.
Wagtail,  bird  like  a,  in  Cyprus,  de-
scription of,  by  John  Locke  (1553)

V.  99.
Waimouth,  see  Weymouth.
Wainfleet,  Simon,  son  of  Alan  of,  i.

341.  344-
Wainfleet, William, son of Laur-
ence of,  I.  341.
Waini  river,  x.  494;  in  Guiana,  459.
Wainman,  Sir  Richard,  knighted  at

Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  259,
Waipoco,  great  river,  x.  490.
Wake, Hugh, his  voyage  to  Syria

(1240)  IV.  352.
Walachia,  see  Roumania.
Walbie, Thomas, distress of, at

Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.
Walcheren,  Isle  of,  Henry  Austell  at

(1585)  V.  320.
Waldemarus,  see  Jaroslav.
Walden's  epistle  to  Pope  Martin  V.,

IV.  277.

Wale,  John  de,  Dutch  merchant  in
Russia  (1584)  III.  342,  469,  470.

Walenrod,  Conrad,  twenty-first
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.

7-

Wales,  II.  134;  rebellion  in  (1403)
39;  an  exhortation  to  the  keep-
ing of,  136 ;  Pelagius  in,  iv.  277 ;
'  History  of,'  by  David  Powel
(1170)  VII.  133;  Edward,  prince
of,  in  France  (1359)  I.  301.

Waliame,  kingdom  of,  in  Guiana,
and  Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.
207.

Walkaden,  Robert,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi.  419,
420  f.

Walkaden,  Robert,  friend  of  John
Whithall  (1580)  XI.  31.

Walkenden,  Geoffrey,  assistant  to
the Muscovy  Company, 11. 307.

Walker,  and  the  hides  on  the  West-
ern Planting  (1583)  viii.  114.

Walker,  chaplain,  assistant  to  Ed-
ward Fenton  (1582)  xi.  163;  and
the  council,  172  ;  at  Sierra  Leone,
178 ; illness of, 180 ; death of

(1583)  198.
Walker,  John,  gunner's  mate  on  the

Edward Bonaventure (1553) n.

213.
Walker, Thomas, mariner on the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  213.
Wall, Alexander the Great's, be-
tween Derbent  and  Tiflis,  iii.  20,

236 ; of  China,  vi.  350.
Walloon soldiers, ten  bands of, in

the  Armada  (1588)  iv.  205.
Walnut trees, found in Hochelaga

(i53S)> t>y Jacques Cartier, viii.

228; found  in  Virginia  (1586)  366;

in  Florida,  451.
Walpode de Bassenheim, Sifridus,

ambassador  to  England,  11.  18,  20.
Walpot, Henry  of, first master  of

the  Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem,  11.

I.
Walrich, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.
Walrode,  Conrad  de,  ambassador  to

England,  11.  18,  20.
Walruses,  11.  337  f. ;  use  of  skins  of,

I. 12 ; fishing,  11.  328 ; teeth  of,

markets  in  Russia,  224,  262 ;  used

447

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I

in  Russian  dress,  425 ;  teeth  found
in  Pechora,  iii.  368;  number  of,
near  White  Isle  (1591)  viii.  152 ;
near  Ramea,  157;  description  by
Jacques  Cartier,  156,  216;  by  Job
Hortop,  IX.  446;  on  Island  of
birds,  VIII.  167;  on  Brion's  Island,
described  by  Jacques  Cartier,  193  ;
near  Seven  Islands,  243 ;  in  the
S.  Lawrence  245.

Walsing,  Thomas,  bishop  of  Win-
chester's voyage  to  Jerusalem  in
(1417)  IV.  454.

Walsingham,  Sir  Francis  (1530-
1590),  statesman,  dedication  to,  i.
xvii.  ;  Russian  licence  granted  to
(1569)  III.  109;  portrait  of,  vi.
iii.  ;  facsimile  of  letter  from  John
Davys  to  (3rd  October,  1585)  vii.
392  ;  secretary  of  Queen  Elizabeth,
and  the  discovery  of  the  North-
west passage  (1585)  440,  441,  442;
his  letter  to  Richard  Hakluyt  (1582)
VIII.  131 ;  to  Thomas  Aid  worth,
mayor  of  Bristol,  132 ;  Thomas
Aldworth's  answer  to,  133;  and
Hakluyt,  xii.  75,  78,  81 ;  letter
from  Richard  Hakluyt  to,  fac-
simile of, XII. 80.

Walsingham,  Thomas  (d.  1422),  his-
torian, on  Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.
Ivii. ;  and  the  fleet  (1345)  297;
his  not  about  the  fleet  (1359)
300  f. ;  his  record  of  King  Henry
IV. 's  voyage  to  Prussia,  304  f. ;
his  record  of  the  Duke  of  Glouces-
ter's voyage  to  Prussia,  306;
'  Latin  Chronicle  '  by  (1415)  iv.
367,  VI.  121  ;  intended  voyage  of
Henry  IV.  to  the  Holy  Land  by
(1413)  IV.  455.

Walsingham,  Cape,  discovered  by
John  Davys  (1585)  vii.  389.

Walsursye,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  11.
217.

Walter,  Giles,  John  Growte's
brother-in-law  (1587)  viii.  272.

Walter,  Hubert,  bishop  of  Salisbury,
travels  of  (1205)  iv.  346.

Walter,  Thomas,  surgeon  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
213.

Walters,  Hance  and  William,  in
Virginia  (1585)  viii.  318.

W^alters, John, of Yarmouth, and

Prussian  pirates,  11.  63,
Walton,  Dunstan,  and  the  Muscovy

Company's  letters,  11.  296.
Wana, mouth of the Orinoco, x.

420.
Wanabacoa, Indian town near

Havana,  ix.  368.
Wanari  river,  Laurence  Keymis  and

(1596)  x.  454,  490.
Wanchese, Indian of Virginia,

brought to England (1584) viii.

310; enemy  to  the  English,  337,

394-
Wannawanare, Indian chief, tor-
tured by  Don  Antonio  de  Berreo

(1595)  X.  353-
Wanuretona, Cacique of Canuria,

and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  x.

402.
Wapari river, in Guiana, x. 459,

494-  ^ .

Wapeih, or  Terra Sigillata, found

in  Virginia  (1586)  viii.  354.
Wapo, Indian  herb,  anti-poisonous,

X.  495-
Wapototo,  poisonous  herb,  x.  493.
Wappari  river,  in  Guiana,  x.  459.
Wapping,  in  the  port  of  London,  iii,

247.
War, Polish, detrimental to trade

(1588)  III.  368;  Third  Punic,  Car-
thaginian mothers  during  the,  iv.
71,  173;  John  Newbery  on  the
Persian  (1583)  v.  452,  453;  science
of,  in  China,  vi.  359,  360;  Eng-
lish, in  Spain  and  Portugal  (1589)
470-527 ; English  in  Spain,  urged

(1589)  516-527;  English  public
opinion  on  (1589)  517;  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  VIII.  375;  of  Indians
of  Florida,  453,  454;  French  Civil,
cause  of  mutiny  of  Captain
Ribault's  men  in  Florida  (1562)  ix.
I ;  Indian  ways  of  making  (1564)
34;  Indians'  inclination  for  (1540)
292 ;  between  the  Sapies  and  the
Samboses  (1564)  x.  20.

Waracayari  river,  tributary  of  the
Orinoco  river,  x.  420.

Warapana  province,  Putijma,  gov-
ernor of,  and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
(1595)  x.  416.

Warawaroco,  Indian  captain,  x.  495.

448

INDEX

Waraweete,  tribe  of  the  Tivitivas
Indians,  x.  382,  423.

Warde,  Luke,  captain  (fl.  1587).
south-western  voyage  of,  i.  xxviii. ;
of  Captain  Frobisher's  fleet,  trade
with  natives  (1578)  vii.  338;
assistant  to  Edward  Fen  ton  (1582)
XI.  163 ;  captain  of  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1582)  165,  172  ;  and
the  succession  to  Edward  Fenton
in  case  of  his  death  on  the  voyage
(1582)  166;  voyage  of  Edward
Fenton  (1582-1583),  written  by,
172-202 ;  and  the  Spanish  ships  at
S.  Vincent,  268.

Warden,  the,  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  i.

295-
Wardhouse,  see  Vardo.
Wardhuyse, see  Vardo.
Wardrobe  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,

n.  437-
Warefield, William, gunner, his

prizes (1586) vi. 437.
Waren,  see  Waterin.
Wareo,  captain  of  Indians,  x.  491 ;

dispossessed  by  the  Spanish  (1596)

X.  455,  460.
Warford,  Arthur,  of  the  Hugh  Gal-
lant, landing  of  (1587)  xi.  311.
Warham, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  298,
Wariaaremagoto, in Tarracoa  pro-
vince, X.  416.
Wariarimagoto,  chief  captain  of  the

Emperor  of  Guiana,  enemy  to  the

Spanish  (1596)  x.  475.
Waricapana river. Sir Walter

Raleigh  on  the  (1595)  x.  420.
Wariseaco, nation  on  the  Waipoco

river,  x.  490.
Waritappi,  great  town  on  the  Cuna-

mana  river,  x.  492.
Wariwagh, town on the Manura-

wini  river, x.  494.
Warner,  Thomas,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  402.
Warner, Walter, John Newbery's

friend  (1583)  v.  453.
Warner, William, '  Albion's Eng-
land '  by  (1602) XII. 96; on the

English  Voyages,  96,  97.
Warnerus ab Orsele, fourteenth

master  of  the  Dutch  knights, 11.

6.

Waroopana,  town  on  the  Pawrooma
river, x. 494.

Warowen,  Tidman,  his  ship  at  Ips-
wich, 11.  40.

Warrawalle,  town.  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  at  (1597)  xi. 10,  13.

Warren,  John,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Warspight,  the,  of  the  Cadiz  expedi-
tion (1596)  IV.  247.

Warteslaus,  knight  of  the  order  of
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  4.

Warthfel,  battle  of,  in  Isle  of  Man,

Warucanasso,  island  in  the  Orinoco

river,  x.  494.
Warwick, Ambrose, Earl of, see

Dudley.
Warwick Sound and Island, see

Anne  or  Countess  of  Warwick.
Washaca,  Miles  Philips  at  (1590)  ix.

434-

Washborne,  Robert,  and  Edmund
Hogan  at  Azafi  (1577)  vi.  285;
member  of  the  Barbary  Company
(1585)  419.  420  f.

Wasnes,  called  in  council  by  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.

Wasse,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Wat,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  pinnace
(1596) XI. I.

Watch-house  in  the  Arica  road,  xi.
308.

Watchwords,  of  Captain  Frobisher's
fleet  (1578)  VII.  323;  of  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  expedition  (1583)
VIII.  43.

Waten,  river,  in  Flanders,  iv.  204.

Water,  blessing  of  the,  in  Russia,
II.  422,  432,  III.  218;  scarcity  of,
in  Persia,  141;  hot,  iv.  35,  129;
petrifying,  37,  132;  cold,  37,  132;
sweet,  38,  133 ;  coloured,  38,  134 ;
smell  of,  39,  134 ;  deadly,  39,  135 ;
fresh,  in  Alexandria,  vi.  35,  44;
preserved  at  sea,  457 ;  hot  spring,
used  instead  of  fire  in  Greenland
(c.  1380)  VII.  451 ;  used  in  gardens,
454 ;  deliciousness  of  the,  in  the
Western  Planting,  viii.  123 ;  wor-
shipped by  Indians,  discovered  by
Vasquez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix.
160; poisonous in Amapaia, x.

449

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

370;  sea  of  fresh,  discovered  by
Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  454.

Waterden,  Thomas,  of  Lynn,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11. 69.

Waterford,  bay  and  coast  of,  11.  133.

Waterhouse,  lieutenant  in  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  fleet,  death  of  (1586)
X. 134.

Wateri,  king  and  river  in  Florida,
IX,  112.

Waterin  or  Waren,  river  in  Virginia,
IX.  114.

Waters,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Waterspouts,  vi.  171.

Watkins,  Thomas,  distress  of,  at
Port  Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Watling  Street,  in  London,  narrow-
ness of  (1596)  IV.  255.

Wats,  owner  of  the  Margaret  and
John  (1590)  VII.  31;  five  Spanish
ships  taken  by  the  ship  of,  49.

Wats,  Alderman,  ship  of,  at
Dominica,  x.  477.

Wats,  Captain,  of  the  galley-frigate
built  at  Maio  (1595)  xi.  47.

Wats,  John,  alderman,  and  the  ships
for Brazil (1594) xi. 43.

Wats  or  Wag,  Robert,  carpenter,  of
the  Sunshine  of  London  (1585)  vii.
382,  409.

Wats'  fleet.  Captain  Lane,  general
of  (1592)  X.  193.

Watson,  George,  '  Curing  of  Hot
Diseases,'  etc.,  by,  xii.  81.

Watson,  William,  mariner  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  11.
214.

Watson,  William,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

Watts  and  the  Elizabeth  (1596)  x.
241.

Watts,  John,  of  the  Levant  Com-
pany (1592)  VI.  88.

Watts,  John,  London  merchant,
charges  of,  in  the  expedition  to
Virginia  (1590)  viii.  404.

Watts,  John,  Spanish  letters  inter-
cepted by  (1590)  X. 158-178.

Waverley,  death  of,  in  the  Moscow
fire  (1571)  ui. 169.

Wax trade, 11. 389 ; Russian, 386,

389.  391.  396,  401.  403.  I"-  365.
420,  421 ; found  in  Bengal,  vi.  25 ;

found  in  the  Western  Planting
(1583)  VIII.  116,  139.

Waxazingo,  in  Mexico,  cochineal
found  in  (1568)  ix.  363.

Way,  John,  preacher,  of  the  Hugh
Gallant,  landing  of  (1587)  xi.  311.

Wayland,  Thomas  of,  witness  of
Edward  L's  great  charter,  i.  296.

Waymouth,  see  Weymouth.

Waynefleet,  ships  from,  in  Edward
IIL's  fleet,  I.  298.

Weamba,  French  ship  at  (1577)  vi.
240 ;  the  Christopher  at,  242  ;  the
pinnace  Unicorn  at,  243.

Weapomeiok,  the  flagship  of  Sir
Richard  Grenville  at  (1585)  viii.
316;  Okisco,  king  of  (1585)  322;
Sound  of,  325.

Weapons,  in  Russia,  11.  229,  258,
431;  their  splendour,  230;  descrip-
tion of,  430 ;  of  newly  discovered
nations  to  be  described,  iii,  268 ;
of  horsemen,  and  foot-soldiers  and
the  Russian  army,  382 ;  of  Tar-
tars, 391 ;  of  the  Armada,  iv.  201 ;
trade  in,  in  Guinea  (1577)  vi.  252;
of  the  natives  of  Meta  Incognita
(1577)  VII.  226;  of  the  natives  met
by  John  Davys,  370,  398;  of  the
Indians  of  Virginia,  viil.  307,  374 ;
of  Indians  of  Florida  (1587)  374,
452  ;  of  Indians,  described  by  Vas-
quez  de  Coronado  (1540)  ix.  162;
native,  in  New  Mexico  (1583)  195;
of  Indians  of  New  Spain  (1572)
388 ;  of  negroes,  description  of
(1564)  X.  15;  of  Indians  of
Cumana  (1565)  28;  of  Indians  of
Florida  (1565)  52  ; of  Koreans,  XI.

433-
Weaving  in  China,  vi. 355.
Web,  John,  boatswain's  mate  on  the

Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  212.
Webbe, Sir William, licensed to

trade  in  Russia  free  from  custom

(1592)  III.  440.
Wedges, iron, trade  in, in Guinea

(1577)  VI.  252.
Weeds,  floating,  with  fish  and  birds

among  them,  ix.  254; sea,  growth

of, near California, 263 ; near

Punta de Balenas, 278; sea of.

Sir  Francis  Drake  through  (1579)

XI.  162.

45°

I

INDEX

Weekes,  voyage  of,  in  the  Trinity
(1536)  vm.  3.

Weiborne,  German  in  Andrew
Barker's ship (1576) x. 86.

Weichsel,  see  Vistula.

Weights,  and  measures,  in  Edward
I.'s  charter,  i.  335  f. ;  measures,
and  coins  used  in  Russia,  11.  273,
294 ;  in  Algiers,  list  of,  v.  271 ;
in  Alexandria,  272 ;  list  of,  by
William  Barret,  vi.  10-22 ;  of
Bussorah,  11;  of  Ormuz,  14;  of
Goa,  17;  of  Cochin  and  Malacca,
21.

Weirs  made  by  the  natives  of  Cape
Breton,  vni.  158;  of  Chypanum,
327;  use  of  the  art  of  making,
334 ;  built  by  the  Indians  of  Vir-
ginia for  Ralph  Lane,  336;  in
Florida  (1562)  459;  discovered  by
Captain  UUoa  (1539)  ix.  211.

Weissenburg,  Henry  Austell  outside
(1585)  V.  321.

Welcome  of  Plymouth,  the,  at  Maio
(1594)  XI.  46.

Welford,  Roger,  mariner  on  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  n.
214.

Wells,  Anthony,  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  expedition  up  the  Capuri
river  (1595)  x.  380.

Wells,  made  in  Brazil  by  Captain
Parker  (1582)  xi. 182.

Welser,  Philippa,  mother  of  the
Marquess  of  Burgrave,  iv.  205.

Welsh,  James,  first  voyage  to  Benin,
written  by  (1588)  vi.  450-458;
second  voyage  to  Benin,  written
by  (1590)  461-467.

Wendels, see  Vandals.

Wenden,  Vobsky  to,  iii.  69 ;  Sir
Jerome  Horsey  at  (1584)  345.

Wenedland,  Wolstan  and,  i.  15.

Wentworth,  Captain,  made  captain
of  a  ship  captured  by  Sir  Robert
Dudley  (1595)  x.  205.

Wersingham,  John  Marion  of,  dam-
ages paid  to  the  heirs  of,  11. 105.

Wesenham,  John,  of  Lynn,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  69.

Weser,  Alera,  coloured  tributary  of
the,  IV.  38,  134.

West,  John,  mutineer  on  the  Edward
Bonaventure  (1593)  x. 200.

West  England,  or  Frisland,  see  Fris-
land.  West.

Westhethe,  see  West  Hythe.

Westhoff,  Heinrich,  deputy  for
Lubeck,  11.  79.

West  Hythe, see  Hythe.

Westminster,  Prussian  and  English
ambassadors'  meeting  at,  11.  37;
Russian  ambassador's  reception  by
Philip  and  Mary  at,  356;  Ingulf
at  (1064)  IV.  290;  death  of  Henry
IV.  at  (1413)  457;  plan  of,  en-
graving of,  XII.  32 ;  Abbey,  Hak-
luyt  buried  in,  xii.  74;  Hakluyt,
prebendary  of  (1602)  82 ;  arch-
deacon of  (1603)  83;  School,  Hak-
luyt educated  at,  78.

Westminster,  Matthew  of,  '  Book  of
Chronicles  '  by,  iv.  348 ;  Earl  of
Cornwall's  voyage  to  Syria  by
(1240)  352.

Weston,  Sir  Richard,  of  the  Cadiz
expedition  (1596)  iv.  243  ;  knighted
at  Cadiz,  259.

Weston,  Sir  William,  knight  of
Rhodes,  captain  of  the  postern  of
England  at  Rhodes  (1522)  v.  33.

West-Stowe,  in  Zeeland,  11.  63.

Westwood,  refiner  in  Woodstreet,
and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  White
Spar  (1595)  X.  344.

Wethemonkule,  Hans  van,  and  the
English  ships, 11. 61.

Wetheringsett  in  Suffolk,  Richard
Hakluyt,  rector  of  (1590)  xii.  82.

Weymouth,  Dorset,  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  i.  297;  and
the  customs,  355 ;  ship  of,  prize
of  (1589)  VII.  13  ;  the  Golden  Hind
at  (1583)  VIII.  75;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's departure from (1596)

XI. I.

Whales,  hunters  of,  i.  11;  use  of
skins  of,  13 ;  Stephen  Borough
and  the  (1556)  11.  336;  at  Zenam
Island,  415 ;  abundance  of,  iii.
102;  in  Iceland,  iv.  41,  137;  and
the  Salamander  (1578)  vii.  327;
bones  used  as  timber,  in  Meta
Incognita  (1577)  300;  seen  by
John  Davys  (1585)  383,  431;  in
Merchants'  Isle  (1587)  417;  Bis-
cayan  ship  and  the,  422 ;  near
Cape  Breton,  vm.  160; following

451

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  Marigold,  i6i ;  near  Assump-
tion Island,  162  ;  seen  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1535)  214;  near  Seven
Islands,  243 ;  in  Hochelaga  river,
245 ;  the  5.  Aguada  and  the,  at
Punta  de  Balenas  (1540)  ix.  278;
found  by  Captain  Gualle  near  New-
Spain  (1584)  335;  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  pinnace  and  the  (1597)
XI.  15 ;  fishing,  advice  about,  in.
200,  203 ;  in  the  Scythian  Sea,
265;  in  Newfoundland  (1578)  VIII.
10.

Whale-horse,  see  Walrus.

Wharton,  Lord,  Warden  of  the  East
Marches,  and  the  Russian  ambas-
sador, II.  354.

Wheat  brought  into  Rhodes  from
Naples  and  Roumania  (1522)  v.
8;  African,  vi.  174;  growth  of,
in  the  burning  zone,  vii.  254 ;  dif-
ferent sorts  of,  in  Western  Plant-
ing (1583)  VIII.  114;  English,
growing  in  Virginia  (1586)  363.

Wheele,  Paul,  captain  of  the  White
Lion,  John  Chidley's  ship  (1589)
XI. 381;  voyage  of  (1598-90)  381-

384.
Wheeler, Nicholas, Russian  licence

granted  to  (1569)  in.  109.
Wheeler, Richard, of the Desire,

killed  by  Indians  (1587)  xi. 306.
Whelp,  the,  Benjamin  Wood's  ship,

bound for Magellan and China

(1596)  XI.  2.
Whiddon,  Captain,  his  prizes  (1586)

VI.  437-

Whiddon,  Captain,  death  of,  in
Trinidad  (1595)  x.  351;  men
of,  betrayed  by  Don  Antonio  de
Berreo  (1594)  352;  and  Don  An-
tonio de  Berreo  (1595)  377;  sent
to  Capuri  river  by  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  378;  of  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh's  expedition  up  the
Capuri  river  (1595)  380;  sent  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  find  silver
(1595)  403;  stones  like  sapphires
found  in  Guiana  by,  405.

Whiddon,  Jacob,  captain  of  the  Pil-
grim (1591)  VII.  44.

Whiddon,  Jacob,  servant  of  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  sent  to  Guiana
(1595)  X.  340.

Whipping  in  China,  vi.  308.
Whirlwind, seen by John Davys

(1586)  VII.  399.
Whitbanes,  see  Whitby.

Whitby, ships from, in Edward

III.'s  fleet,  I.  299.
Whitcome, Roger, factor in the

Christopher  Campion  {c.  15 11)  v. 62.
White,  Cuthbert,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII. 402.

White,  Henry,  captain  of  the  Sea
Dragon  (1585)  x.  98;  at  the  attack
on  Cartagena  (1586)  117.

White,  John,  mariner  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  ii.  214.

White,  John,  viii.  402 ;  engraving
of  Virginian  warrior  from  water-
colour  drawing  by,  304 ;  of  Sir
Richard  Grenville's  voyage  to  Vir-
ginia (i58s)_  316;  engraving  of
chart  of  Virginia  from  water-
colour  drawing  by,  320 ;  engraving
of  village  of  Secotan  from  draw-
ing by,  336 ;  engraving  of  priest
of  Virginia  from  water-colour
drawing  by,  376 ;  governor  of  Vir-
ginia (1587)  386;  engraving  of
chart  of  Virginia  from  water-
colour  drawing  by,  400 ;  his  letter
to  Richard  Hakluyt  (1593)  404-
406 ;  fifth  voyage  to  Virginia  by
(1590)  406-422;  engraving  of
native  of  Florida  from  water-
colour  drawing  by,  440 ;  colonist
of  Virginia  under  (1590)  xii.  41 ;
Virginia  Dare,  grand-daughter  of,
112.

White,  John,  on  the  Content,  non-
combatant  (1591)  X. 183.

White,  Melchior,  master  of  the  Uni-
corn, of Danzig (1577) vi. 231.

White,  Sir  Thomas,  assistant  to  the
Muscovy  Company,  11.  307.

White,  Thomas,  Spanish  ships  taken
by  (1592)  VII. 103.

White,  William,  quartermaster's
mate  on  the  Bona  Esperanza
(1553)  II.  213.

White,  William,  of  the  Maria  Mar-
tin (1584)  V.  281.

White,  William,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

White,  William,  on  the  Content,
non-combatant  (1591)  x.  183.

452

INDEX

White  Cape,  see  Blanco,  Cape.
White river, the, latitude of, xi.

349-  , ,

White  Dove,  the,  flyboat,  wreck  of

(1591)  VII.  84.

Whitehall, tilt  at,  on  Queen's  day,

VII.  21; reception  of  the  King  of
Brazil  by  Henry  VIII.  at,  xi,  24.

White  Isle,  or  Lisle  Blanch,  or
Blanca  Island,  the  Bonaventure  at
^1591)  viii.  152;  Charles  Leigh  at
(1597)  171 ;  description  of,  181 ;
fruitfulness  of,  182 ;  John  White
at  (1590)  407.

White  Lion,  the,  James  Erizo,  cap-
tain of  (1585)  X.  98.

White  Lion,  the,  John  Chidley's
ship  (1589)  XI.  381.

Whiteman,  Andrew,  alias  Leu-
cander,  travels  of  (1020)  iv,  282.

White  Sands,  or  Blanc  Sablon,  de-
scription of,  VIII.  186;  isles  of,
Jacques  Cartier  at  (1534)  viii.  208,
211;  in  the  Grand  Bay  of  New-
foundland, 275 ; latitude  of,  276.

Whithall,  James,  brother  of  John
Whithall  (1580)  XI.  31.

Whithall,  John,  his  letter  to  Richard
Staper  (1578)  xi.  26-30;  letter  from
the  adventurers  for  Brazil  to  (1580)
31-33;  son-in-law  of  Joffo  Dore
(1583)  191 ;  and  Edward  Fenton,
193  ; dwelling  at  S.  Vincent  (1586)

295-
Whiting,  John,  distress  of,  at  Port

Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.
Whiting, Thomas, survivor of the

Toby  (1593)  VII. 129.
Whittingdon,  Richard  of,  praise  of,

II. 127  f.
Whitton,  Francis,  in  Virginia  (1585)

VIII.  318.

Why  not  I  ?  the,  see  Violet.

Wia river, x. 490 ; mentioned by

Laurence  Keymis  (1596)  454.
Wiaco,  nation  of  the  Wia  river,  x.

490.
Wiana,  gold  market  at,  xi.  13 ;  coast

of. Sir Walter Raleigh at the

(1597)  3-
Wiapassa,  medicinal  herb  found  in

Guiana,  x.  458.
Wiapo  river,  x.  492.
Wlapoco  river,  Laurence  Keymis  at

(1596)  X.  454;  distance  from,  to
Manoa,  464;  the  Discoverer  in
^1596)  477; Sir  Walter  Raleigh  at

(1597)  XI.  5.
Wiapoucou,  see  Wiapoco.

Wiars,  Thomas,  passenger  in  Cap-
tain Frobisher's  third  voyage
(1578) VII. 243.

Wias,  Caribs  of.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
and  (1597)  XI.  6.

Wiawiami  river,  Guiana,  x.  459,
492.

Wichida,  iron  mmes  at,  open  to
English merchants (569) iii.

"3-

Wichida  river,  tributary  of  Volga,
in. 363 ; salt  pit  at,  368.

Wickney,  William,  of  Portsmouth,
Christian  slave  (1579)  v.  157.

Widows,  burning  of,  see  Suttee.

Wiggleworth,  Nicholas,  mariner  on
the  Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  n.
214.

Wight,  John,  voyage  of,  to  Con-
stantinople (1575)  V.  168.

Wight,  Robert,  of  Colchester,  and
Prussian  pirates,  11.  62.

Wight,  Isle  of,  ships  from,  in  Ed-
ward III.'s  fleet,  I.  297;  fight
between  the  English  fleet  and  the
Armada  near  (1588)  iv.  218;  Wil-
liam Harborne  at  (1583)  v.  243;
John  Evesham  at  (1586)  vi.  35;
William  Towerson's  return  to
(1577)  252 ; the  Sunshine  at  (1586)

VII.  413; Charles  Leigh  at  (1597)

VIII.  180.

Wignol,  captain  of  the  Francis,
taken  prisoner  by  the  Spanish
(1595)  X.  229.

Wijmi,  mouth  of  the  Orinoco  river,
X.  420.

Wikeri,  see  Wikiri.

Wikiri,  Indians,  x.  207,  375;  and
Pedro  Hernandez  de  Serpa,  364;
inhabitants  of  Sayma,  396;  in-
habitants of  the  Areo  river,  423,
424.

Wilde  of  Bristol,  in  Andrew  Barker's
company,  killed  by  the  Spanish
at  S.  Francisco  Island  (1576)  x.
86.

Wild  Man,  the,  John  Chidley's  ship
(1589)  XI.  381.

453

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1

Wildmen's  Cape,  discovered  by
Jacques  Carder  (1534)  viii.  195.

Wildye,  Richard,  settler  in  Virginia

(1587)  VIII.  403.
Wilford,  William  and  Nicholas,  mer-
chant tailors  in  London,  Levant
traders  (c.  1533)  v.  69.
Wilhelmus  English,  Jonas,  sixteenth
bishop  of  Holen,  in  Iceland  (1432)
IV.  56, 155.

Wilkes,  called  in  council  by  Robert
Withrington  (1587)  xi.  211.

Wilkes,  William,  of  the  Levant
Company (1592) vi. 76, 78.

Wilkins,  Laurence,  of  the  Elizabeth
Stokes  (1584)  V.  282.

Wilkinson,  Edward,  captain  of  the
Merchant  Royal  (1586)  vi.  51,  52.

Wilkinson,  Edward,  of  Tower  Hill,
in  London,  letters  from  William
Mace  to  (1589)  x.  157.

Wilkinson,  Richard,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  iii. 109.

Wilkinson,  Robert,  settler  in  Vir-
ginia (1587)  viii.  402.

Wilkinson,  Thomas,  purser,  passport
for,  V.  218.

Wilks,  of  Edward  Fenton's  voyage
(1583)  XI. 190.

Willes,  Richard  (f.  1558-1573),  Arthur
Edwards'  account  of  the  fourth
voyage  to  Persia  (1568),  related
by.  III.  143-146;  translator  of  Gale-
otto  Perera's  description  of  China,
VI.  295;  of  Japan,  327;  on  the
North-west  passage,  vii. 191-203.

Willes,  William,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587) VIII. 402.

William,  Friar,  of  Southampton,
witness  of  Edward  L's  great
charter,  i.  296.

William;  first  archbishop  of  Tyre
(1128)  IV.  307,  308.

William,  Henry  II. 's  clerk,  i.  318.

William,  nineteenth  bishop  of  Schal-
holt  in  Iceland  (1394)  iv.  56, 155.

William  of  Cawo,  Indian,  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh  and  (1597)  xi.  8.

W^illiam  of  Malmesbury(d.  1143),  his-
torian, quoted,  i.  Iv.,  Ixiii.,  314,
513;  '  De  Gestis  regum  Anglo-
rum,'  by,  IV.  279,  283,  284;  '  De
Gestis  pontificum  Anglorum,'  by,
280 ; voyage  of  Edgar,  grandson

of  Edmund  Ironside  by  (1102)  295  ;
on  .the  English  Guard  at  Con-
stantinople (1177)  311.
William  of  Newburgh  (1147)  iv.
309 ;  '  History  of  King  Richard
I. 's  Voyage  to  Jerusalem  '  by,  338.
William  the  Conqueror,  i.  294,  iv.
290 ;  subdues  England,  i.  25  •
Harold  slain  by,  42 ;  and  the
Cinque  Ports,  42,  43,  50;  Robert
Curtoys,  son  of  (1096)  293.

William  Rufus,  King  of  England,
increases  privileges  of  the  Cinque
Ports,  I.  50;  and  the  charter,
294.

William  the  Lion,  King  of  Scotland
(1143-1214),  succeeds  his  brother,
Malcolm  IV.,  i.  32,  35,  40.

William  the  Pilgrim,  poet  and  travel-
ler, IV.  345.

William,  the,  of  London  (1580)  iii.
252  ;  discipline  on,  253 ;  route  of,
254 ;  victualled  for  two  years,  256 ;
at  Vardo,  283 ;  at  Kegor,  284 ;
sighted  by  the  George  (1580)  290;
aground,  297 ;  lost  sight  of,  298 ;
loss  of,  303.

William  and  John,  the,  at  New-
castle (1581)  III.  247.

William  and  John,  the,  of  the  Eng-
lish merchants'  fleet  (1586)  vi.  47;
bound  for  Tripoli,  48.

William  and  John,  the,  of  Sir  John
Hawkins's  fleet  (1567)  ix.  398,
445 ;  lost  off  the  coast  of  Guinea
(1568)  400; at  Rio  Grande,  448.

Williams,  David,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii.  318.

Williams,  John,  mariner  on  the  Ed-
ward Bonaventure  (1553)  11.  214.

Williams,  John,  and  Edmund
Hogan's  letters (1577)  vi. 285.

Williams,  Maurice,  death  of,  at
Panama  (1596)  x.  238.

Williams,  Richard,  condemned  by
the  Inquisition  in  Mexico  to  serve
in  a  monastery  (1575)  ix.  428;
sent  to  the  Gray  Friars  (1575)  430;'
marriage  of,  431.

Williams,  Sir  Roger,  his  regiment
at  the  taking  of  Puente  de  Burgos
(1589)  VI.  402  ;  In  the  English  fleets
495  ;  at  Peniche,  496 ;  his  march
to  Lisbon,  497,  500,  507,

454

I

INDEX

Williams,  Thomas,  in  Algiers  (1584)
V,  272.

Williams,  Walter,  member  of  the
Barbary  Company  (1585)  vi,  419,
420  f.

Williams,  William,  carpenter  on  the
Toby  (1593)  VII. 129.

Williamson,  John,  cooper,  relation
of  his  voyage  to  Richard  Hakluyt
(1534)  V.  67,  (1535)  68.

Willis,  captain  in  one  of  the  South-
ampton ships  (1595)  X.  215;  at  the
Testigos,  216.

Willis,  James,  ransomed  by  Captain
Parker  (1596)  x.  277.

Willoughby,  Ambrose,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  217.

Willoughby,  Gabriel,  merchant  on
the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  11.  212.

Willoughby,  Sir  Hugh  (d.  1554)  i.
xl. ;  portrait  of,  11.  iii. ;  com-
mander of  Cabot's  fleet,  206,
209-224,  239,  246,  417;  death  of,
in  Lapland  (1553)  212,  vii.  184;
accounts  of  his  voyage  of  dis-
covery, II.  217-227  ;  chosen  general
of  the  voyage  of  discovery,  241  f. ;
non-arrival  in  Russia,  272 ;  in-
quiry for,  285 ;  and  his  dis-
coveries (1553)  III.  121;  and  the
expedition  for  the  discovery  of
Cathay  (1553)  331;  his  body  sent
to  England  (1555)  333;  his  dis-
covery of  S.  Nicholas,  in  Russia
(1553)  VII.  164;  and  the  north-east
road  to  the  Moluccas,  192 ;  and
the  English  Expedition  to  the
North  (1553)  XII.  22.

Willoughby 's  land,  Arthur  Pet  and
(1580)  III. 254,  257.

Willows  found  in  Hochelaga  (1535)
by  Jacques  Cartier,  viii.  228 ;  used
in  making  weirs  in  Virginia  (1586)

372.
Wilmer,  and  the  English  ships,  11.

61.
Wilson  and  William  Malim  (1571)  v.

122.
Wilson, Captain, at  the  taking  of

Lisbon  (1589)  vi.  501.
Wilson,  Henry,  steward  of  the  Tiger

(1557)  VI.  230.
Wilson, Roger, master's mate in

Cabot's  intended  voyage,  ii.  206 ;

mate  on  the  Bona  Esperanza
(1553)  212.

Wilstenius,  schoolmaster  of  Olden-
burg, IV. 15, 104.

Wilton,  church  of,  iv.  288.

Winchelsea,  i.  44  ff. ;  ships,  47  f. ;
ships  from,  in  Edward  IIL's  fleet,
297.

Winchelsea,  Robert  de,  archbishop
of  Canterbury  (d.  13 13),  witness  to
Edward  L's  great  charter,  i.  338.

Winchester,  mayor  of,  King  John
and,  I.  320 ;  chronicle  in  the  Trin-
ity Church of, 11. iii.

Winchester,  William,  Marquess  of^
Queen Mary's  treasurer, 11. 304,

356-
Winchester, Saer  Quincy, Earl of,

voyage  of,  to  the  Holy  Land  (12 18)

IV.  349.
Winchester, Peter des Roches,

bishop  of,  his  voyage  to  Jerusalem

(1231)  IV.  351.
Winchester,  bishop  of,  voyage  of,  to

Jerusalem  (1417),  by  Thomas  Wal-

sing.  IV.  454.
Winckle,  or  WincoU,  William,  agent

for  the  Muscovy  Company  (1580)

III.  230;  message  from,  233,  237;
left  at  Astrakhan,  245.

Windam,  Captain,  and  the  first  voy-
age to  Guinea  (1553)  vi.  146,  vii.
252 ;  and  the  gold  of  Guinea,  vi.
148 ;  Pinteado  and,  149  f . ;  death
of, 151.

Windam,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
Lion,  in  the  first  voyage  to  Bar-
bary (1551)  VI.  136;  and  James
Alday,  137;  captain  of  the  second
voyage  to  Barbary  (1552)  138;  in
the  Canaries, 139.

Windland,  see  Prussia.

Windsor,  Duke  of  Norfolk  at  (1398)

IV.  453 ;  Captain  Frobisher  at
(1578)  VII.  319.

Winds,  note  of  the,  by  Thomas
Fuller  (1588)  XI.  374-376.

Wine,  duty  on,  in  Edward  L's  char-
ter, I.  334,  336,  338;  brought  to
Rhodes  from  Crete  (1522)  v.  8,  9;
imported  to  England,  63 ;  product
of  Cyprus,  125 ;  made  of  palm
nuts,  379,  470;  of  Tenasserim,
413 ; of  Crete,  trade  in,  restricted

455

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  Levant  Company  (1592)  vi.  84,
86;  in  the  Canary  Islands,  128;
in  Teneriffe,  131;  in  Palma,  132;
in  Madeira,  135 ;  de  Palma,  in
Cape  das  Palmas,  191 ;  French,  in
the  captured  Danzig  ships  (1577)
232 ;  scarcity  of,  in  China,  357 ;
in  Goa,  385;  in  Benin,  457;
Nipar,  found  in  Tenasserim,  401 ;
palm,  in  the  Western  Planting,
vui.  114;  grape,  in  the  Western
Planting,  118,  139;  found  in  Vir-
ginia (1586)  355;  Palmito,  Job
Hortop  on  (1568)  ix.  447;  Palmito
made  by  the  Sapies,  x.  19;  of
Florida,  like  the  Orleans  wine,  56 ;
made  of  dates  by  Amazon  Indians,
XI.  20;  taken  in  the  captured
Portuguese  ship,  entrusted  to
Master  Doughty  (1578)  106;  Chili,
taken  at  S.  lago  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1578)  114;  Spanish,  cap-
tured by  the  Content  (1587)  308.

Wingandacoa,  native  name  of  Vir-
ginia, VIII.  300.

Wingfield  (or  Winkfield),  Colonel
Anthony,  discourse  written  by,  on
the  expedition  in  Spain  and  Portu-
gal (1589)  VI.  470-527;  and  the
ordnance  at  the  Groyne  (1589)  489,
492  ;  at  Lisbon  (1589)  500,  507;  at
the  taking  of  Vigo  (1589)  513.

Wingfield,  Sir  Edward,  in  the  Eng-
lish fleet  (1589)  VI.  495;  his  regi-
ment marching  to  Lisbon,  497.

Wingfield,  Sir  John,  slain  at  the
taking  of  Cadiz  (1596)  iv.  252;
funeral  of,  258.

Wingfield,  Sir  Richard  (Viscount
Powerscourt),  in  Spain  (1589)  vi.
484 ;  at  the  Groyne,  488 ;  in  Lis-
bon, 507;  at  the  taking  of  Vigo
(1589)  513.

Wingina,  King  of  Virginia  (1584)
viii.  300;  wounded  in  a  fight,  301 ;
ally  of  Pooneno  and  Menatonon,
306;  wars  of,  with  Piamacum,
308;  Richard  Grenville  and  (1585)
315;  conspiracy  of,  320;  Pemis-
apan,  new  name  of,  326;  his  ad-
visers, 338 ;  at  Dasamonguepeio,
339; hiV  death,  341.

Winicapora  river,  x.  423 ;  Sir  Wal-
ter Raleigh on the (1595) 418;

Cacique  of,  follower  of  Carapana
^1595)419;  occupied  by  Spaniards
(1596)  469.  , , „

Winicines,  nation  of  the  Mawan
river,  x.  492.

Winitwara  river,  Guiana,  x.  459.

Winitwari,  great  river,  x.  492.

Winkfield, see  Wingfield.

Winricus  a  Knopperodt,  nineteenth
master  of  the  Dutch  knights,  11.  6.

Winter,  letter  from  Sir  Francis
Drake  to,  concerning  the  ship  of
S.  John  de  Anton  (1579)  xi.  147.

Winter,  Captain  Edward,  land-
captain  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1585)  X.  98;  captain  of  the
Aid,  98;  at  the  attack  on  Carta-
gena (1586)  119;  captain  of  the
Exchange,  in  Sir  Francis  Drake's
fleet  (1595)  232.

Winter,  John,  and  the  Peter  (1584)
v.  281.

Winter,  John,  on  Maio  Island  (1577)
XI.  104,  151;  the  Elizabeth,  ship
of  (1578)  137;  voyage  of,  with  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1577- 1579),  written
by  Edward  Cliffe,  148-162 ;  and
the  natives  (1578)  156;  in  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  260.

Winter,  Nicholas,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's fleet, death  of  (1586)  x.

134-
Winter,  Sir  William,  and  the  negro

trade  (1562)  x.  7.
Winter,  William,  Gaspar  Campion's

letter  to  (1569)  v. 11 1, 115-117.
Winter,  William,  and  the  voyage  to

Guinea  (1561)  vi.  253.
Winter, William, captain  and  part

owner  of  the  Delight  (1583)  vili.

46 ; captain  of  the  Swallow  on  the

return  home,  62,  92.
Winter  in Russia, ill. 128; under

the  equinoctial, vii. 258; length

of, in Greenland, 452.
Winterhie, Robert, in Sir Francis

Drake's  company  (1578)  xi. 109.
Winters  Furnace,  mine  in  (1578)  vii.

239  ;  sermon  and  service  by  Master

Wolfall  on,  362.
Winterton,  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)  iii.

282.
Wioma  river, x. 492.
Wireland,  King  Arthur  and,  i.  6.

456

INDEX

Wisbeach,  Catholic  recusants  at
(1588)  IV.  208.

Wisbich,  see  Wisbeach.

Wisedom,  John,  of  Hull,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  61.

Wisle,  Godekin,  and  the  English
ships,  II.  62.

Wismar,  Octher's  probable  discov-
ery of,  I.  14;  compensation  de-
manded by  England  from,  11.  36,
60-71 ;  soldiers  of,  68 ;  William
Harborne  at  (1588)  vi.  58.

Wismer,  see  Wismar.

Wisnovolloko,  from  Moscow  to,  iii.
68.

Wisse,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318.

Wissenburg  Castle,  garrisoned  by
the  Dutch  knights,  11.  2.

Witchcraft,  in  Tartary,  11.  466,  iii.
395;  in  Ditter  Island  (1586)  vi.
42 ;  used  by  the  natives  of  Meta
Incognita,  vii.  373  ;  used  by  the
natives  met  by  John  Davys  (1586)
397;  used  by  Indians  for  hiding
the  Seven  Cities,  ix.  382 ;  Indians'
belief  in  their  own,  x.  474.

Witergen,  Vologda  to,  iii.  69.

Withrington,  Robert,  south-western
voyage  of,  i.  xxviii. ;  captain  of
the  Red  Dragon,  flagship  (1586)
XI.  202 ;  and  Abraham  Cocke
(1587)  208;  and  Miles  Philips
(1587)  210;  in  council,  211;  fight
of,  and  the  Portuguese  at  Bahia
(1587)  216,  219;  his  decision  to
return  home  (1587)  225.

Withrington,  William  and  Beumond,
councillors  on  the  voyage  (1587)
XI. 211.

Witland,  the  Lithuanians  and,  i.  15.

Witrazh,  Bernard,  of  Galatia,  at
Joppa  (1102)  IV. 299.

Wittenberg,  Duchy  of,  hot  baths  of,

IV.  35, 129; town,  university  at,

V.  327.

WIveton,  ships  from  (1395-1397),  11.

Wixel,  river,  see  Vistula.

Woad,  imported  to  England,  v.  235 ;
In  Fayal  Island,  vi.  280;  sown  in
Azores  Islands,  viii.  442  ;  found  in
in New  Spain, ix. 390.

Wocokan,  see  Wokan.

Wocowaios,  nation  of  the  Chipan-
ama,  x.  494.

Wokan  Island,  viii.  299 ;  wrecked
people  in,  307;  Richard  Gren-
ville  at  (1585)  315,  316;  Aubry  and
Boniten  at,  316;  taken  possession
of  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  name  by
Amadas  and  Barlow,  xii.  39.

Wolcome,  William,  of  the  Sunshine

(1586)  VII. 409.

Wolf,  the,  ship  of  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  (1596)  X.  266;  arrival  of,  at  S.
Martha,  return  to  England  (1597)

273-

Wolfall,  chaplain,  in  Captain  Fro-
bisher's  fleet  (1578)  vii.  345,  xii.
33 ;  sermon  and  service  by,  on
Winters  Furnace,  vii.  362.

Wolfe,  see  Bramboise.

Wolmerstal,  possession  of  the  Mar-
quess of  Brandenburg,  v.  327.

Wolmerstene,  Nicolas,  of  Elblng,
damages  paid  to,  11.  103,  104.

Wolsene,  see  Mana.

Wolstan,  navigations  of,  i.  II.  ;  his
voyage  to  Hetha,  15 ;  description
of  the  Vistula, 15.

Wolstan.  abbot  of  Worcester  (1058)
IV.  288.

Wolves  found  In  Virginia  (1586)
VIII.  369; in  Florida,  451.

Women,  Russian,  11.  446;  painted
faces  of,  III.  416;  dress  of,  418;
In  Venice  (1581)  v.  206;  dress  of,
in  Ormuz  (1583)  468;  in  Cambay,
469;  in  Benares,  479;  Arabian,
VI.  4;  Babylonian,  5 ;  of  Canada,
hard  labour  of  the  (1535)  viii.  242  ;
natives  of  Florida,  456 ;  of  Guiana,
X.  424.

Wood,  pilot  of  Roger  Bodenham
(1551)  V.  71.

Wood, Agnes, settler in Virginia

(1587)  vnu  403.

Wood,  Benjamin,  his  prizes  (1586)
VI.  437-

Wood,  Benjamin,  of  Captain  Ama-
das's  company  (1584)  viii.  310.

Wood,  Benjamin,  captain  of  four
ships,  and  William  King  (1592)  x.

193-
Wood,  Benjamin,  captain  of  the  In-
tent, in  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  voy-
age (1595) X. 205; bound for

XII

457

2G

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

I

Magellan  and  China  (1596)  xi,  i ;

master of the Wild Man (1589)

381 ; and the ships of Richard

Allot  (1596)  417.
Wood,  James,  chief  surgeon  of  Sir

Francis  Drake's  fleet,  death  of,  x,

240.
Wood, John, of  Captain  Amadas's

company  (1584)  viii.  310.
Wood, Master, of the Richard of

Arundel, death of (1591) vi.

466.
Wood, Richard, mariner on the

Bona Confldentia  (1553)  11. 214.
Wood,  Pernambuco,  granted  to  John

Noyer  by  Captain  Lancaster  (1595)

XI.  153-

Woodbridge,  in  Suffolk,  John  Foxe
of,  V.  157.

Woodcocke,  James,  shipmaster,  iii.
303-  305;  ^iid  the  expedition  on
the Pechora  (1588) 119.

Woodfoord,  Alexander,  merchant  on
the  Bona  Esperanza  (1553)  n.
212

Woodhouse,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  298.

Woodhouse,  Sir  Philip,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV.  260.

Woodhouse,  Thomas,  and  the
Armada  (1588)  iv,  217.

Woods,  granted  to  Englishmen  in
Russia  (1569)  III.  113;  set  on  fire
in  Brazil  by  Captain  Parker  (1582)
XI. 182.

Woodson,  Alexander,  and  the  wal-
rus tusks,  VIII. 156.

Woodstock,  Thomas  of,  see  Glou-
cester, Duke  of.

Woodward,  John,  of  the  Elizabeth
(1584)  V.  281.

Woodworth,  John,  licensed  to  trade
in  Russia  free  of  customs  (1592)
HI,  440.

Wool,  use  of,  in  Tartary,  i.  243 ;
duty  on,  Edward  I.'s  charter,  337,
338;  English,  heavy  duty  on,  11.
73 ;  Flemish  cloths  made  of,
116  f.  ;  to  be  sold  preferably  in
dyed  cloths,  v.  238;  found  in  New
Spain  (1572)  IX.  390.

Woolly,  secretary  of  Queen  Eliza-
beth, and  Martin  Frobisher  (1576)
VII.  204.

Woolman,  Robert,  granted  Russian
licence  (1569)  iii.  109.

Woolwich,  Willoughby's  fleet  at,  n.
217,  245.

Woorley,  Thomas,  in  Sir  John
Hawkins's  voyage  to  Florida
(1565)  X.  63.

Wootton,  Sir  James,  knighted  at
Cadiz  (1596)  IV,  259.

Worcester,  Alured,  bishop  of,  voyage
of  (1058)  IV.  287;  Wolstan,  abbot
of,  288;  Baldwin,  bishop  of  (1190)
340 ;  bishop  of,  his  journey  to  the
Holy  Land  (1247)  353.

Wordsworth,  xii, 118.

World,  three  ways  of  compassing
the,  II.  163;  Thome's  description
of  the,  166  f. ;  divided  by  Portugal
and  Spain,  173  f. ;  division  of  the,
between  Spain  and  Portugal, xi.

254-

'World,  Discoveries  of  the,'  by
Antonio  Galvano,  published  by
Hakluyt  (1601)  xii,  83.

'  World  Encompassed,  the, '  by  John
Cooke, xii. 59.

'World,  History  of  the,'  by  Sir
Walter  Raleigh,  xii.  71,  108.

'  World's  Hydrographical  Descrip-
tion,' by  John  Davys,  quotation
from  (1587)  VII.  440-445,  XII.  29.

Worme,  John,  merchant,  lands  at
Cape  Verde  (1567)  vi.  271.

Worm-seed,  found  in  Persia,  vi.  27.

Worms,  silk,  found  in  the  Western
Planting  (1583)  viii.  115;  found
in  Virginia,  353;  in  Florida  (1562)
460 ;  dangerous,  in  S.  Domingo,
IX.  342 ;  venomous,  found  at
Placentia  by  Robert  Barret  (1568)
449 ;  leaks  in  the  Minion  made  by
(1581)  XI.  37;  fiery,  in  an  island
near  Celebes  Islands,  128  ;  danger-
ous, found on the Desire (1593)

415-

Worsenham,  Thomas,  unlicensed
English  merchant  in  Russia  (1591)
III. 426.

Wotton,  Lewes,  settler  in  Virginia
(1587)  VIII.  403.

Wrag,  Richard,  dedication  to  Row-
land Hewish  (1597)  vi.  93;  de-
scription of  a  voyage  to  Constan-
tinople by (1593-95) 94-113; de-

458

I

INDEX

scription  of  a  marble  tomb,  94 ;
report  of  the  Turkish  army  by,
103-110.

Wrangle,  ships  from,  in  Edward
III.'s  fleet,  I.  399.

Wren,  Walter,  George  Fenner's  voy-
age to  Guinea  and  Cape  Verde
Islands  by  (1566)  vi.  266-284;  i"
Santa  Cruz,  267.

Wrenne,  George,  agent  of  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1562)  in.  33,  38;
second  voyage  to  Persia  by  (1563)
40.

Wright, voyage  of, in  the  Trinity

(1536) VIII. 3.

Wright,  Edward,  map  of  the  world
by,  engraving  of,  i.  356 ;  voyage  of
George,  Earl  of  Cumberland,  writ-
ten by  (1589)  VII.  I ;  map  of  the
Earl  of  Cumberland's  voyage  to
the  Azores  by,  engraving  of,  vii.
466.

Wright,  John,  in  Virginia  (1585)
VIII.  318;  settler  in  Virginia  (1587)
402.

Wright,  William,  sailor  on  the
Golden  Dragon,  and  the  traffic
with  Indians  (1591)  x. 189.

Writing,  Tartar  and  Chinese,  i.
288; Persian,  iii. 149; in  China

. and  Japan,  v.  499.

Wroth,  Sir  Thomas,  and  the  second
voyage  to  Barbary  (1552)  vi. 138.

Wsewolod  II.,  son  of  Vladimir
Monomachos,  11.  185.

Wyet,  Silvester,  voyage  to  Ramea
(1594)  VIII.  162.

Wyeth,  William,  distress  of,  at  Port
Desire  (1592)  xi.  399.

Wyght,  Andrew,  of  the  Hugh  Gal-
lant, landing  of  (1587)  xi.  311.

Wyles,  John  and  Brian,  settlers  in
Virginia  (1587)  viii.  403.

Wyman,  Henry,  of  York,  and  Prus-
sian pirates,  11.  62.

Wyntson,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
320.

Wythers,  William,  child  settler  in
Virginia  (1587)  viil.  403.

Wytot,  King,  helps  Henry,  Earl  of
Derby,  in  Prussia,  i.  305.

Xaca,  last  book  of,  used  in  religious
services  in  Japan, vi. 337.

Xacaians, religious sect in Japan,

VI. 336.
Xaguas,  Alonzo  de  Herera,  slain  by

the,  X.  497.
Xaguges  of  the  Port  of  S.  Cruz,  ix.

231.
Xalapa,  see  Jalapa.
Xalisco,  see  Jalisco.
Xa-Maluco,  see  Zamaluc.
Xamuzcado,  Francisco  Sanchez,  map

of  Antigua  by  (1581)  ix.  187.
Xanctoigne,  John  Alphonse  of,  chief

pilot  to  Roberval  (1542)  viii.  275-

283.
Xanigeton,  in  Darha,  vii.  89.
Xansi, see Shan-se.
Xantes, Pedro Vermandes, ships

taken from, by General Drake

(1589)  VI.  502.
Xantum,  see  Shan-tung.
Xaquam, or Xequiam, sect of, in

China, vi. 373.
Xaraes, Los,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,

XI. lOI.

Xarate,  Don  Francisco,  taken  by
Nuno  da  Silva  and  Sir  Francis
Drake  (1579)  xi. 146.

Xaroca  harbour,  marks  of,  described
in  Ruttier,  x.  303.

Xaucheo,  Jesuit  fathers  at,  vi.  376.

Xauquin,  Christian  house  and
church  at  (1583)  vi.  375;  Jesuit
fathers  expelled  from, 376.

Xavier,  S.  Francis,  death  of  (1552),
at  Santianum  Island,  vi.  348,  374.

Xavierus,  and  the  Barbarian  mer-
chant, VII.  195.

Xenogoras,  on  names  of  Cyprus,  v.
124.

Xeres, see  Jeres.

Xibar,  Don  Pedro  de,  letter  to,  from
Don Diego Mendez de Valdes

(1590)  X. 161.

Xicaian  town,  owned  by  the  King
of  Spain  and  the  heirs  of  Pronetto,
IX.  470.

Xicayan  de  Touer,  town  and  moun-
tains, IX. 467.

Xiensi,  see  Shen-si.

Xlllcei  Ethiopes,  people  of  Libya,  vi.
168.

Ximenes,  brother  of  Don  Ximenes
de  Quesida,  his  attempt  to  dis-
cover Guiana,  x.  497.

459

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ximenes,  Don  Antonio,  son  of  Don
Antonio  de  Berreo,  x.  372,  377,
462,  467; small  forces  of,  470.

Ximo,  kingdom  of,  xi.  423 ;  Lords
of,  425 ; Nangoia,  port  of,  426.

Xutiamfu,  fourth  shire  of  China,  vi.
295-

Yacovius,  Oliver  and,  in.  454.

Yaguana,  town  and  river,  in  S.
John's  Island,  viii.  409;  Spanish
refugees in (1590)  410.

Yaguana,  in  Hispaniola,  Christo-
pher Newport  at  (1591)  x,  186;
burnt  by  Christopher  Newport,
187. -

Yaic,  see  Ural.

Yaik,  see  Ural.

Yaks  Olgush,  in  Siberia,  iii.  456.

Yalme,  ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s
fleet,  I.  297.

Yanguitle,  a  '  mansion  of  Omete-
pec,'  IX.  467.

Yannes,  or  posts,  in  Russia,  11.  420.

Yarmouth,  contention  between  the
Cinque  Ports  and,  i.  44 ;  and
the  charter,  294 ;  ships  from,  in
Edward  III.'s  fleet,  299;  and  the
customs,  355;  ships  from  (1394-
1405)  II.  63  f.  ;  Willoughby's  fleet
at,  218;  Anthony  Jenkinson's
fleet  off,  414;  Arthur  Pet  at  (1580)
in.  282  ;  Spanish  refugees  at  (1588)
IV.  232  ;  William  Harborne  leaves
(1583)  V.  243;  Captain  Martin
Frobisher  anchors  at  (1576)  vii.
211,  (1577)  230;  the  Michael  re-
turns to  (1577)  315.

Yaroslavl,  in.  41,  358,  370,  373,  412,
443  ;  markets  of,  11.  297,  420,  426 ;
products  of,  225,  262;  Arthur  Ed-
wards at  (1565)  III.  44;  from  S.
Nicholas  Bay  to,  68  ;  from  Vologda
to,  70;  English  trade  in  (1567)  95;
Thomas  Randolph  at  (1568)  104;
English  trade  free  of  customs  at
112  ;  departure  of  Arthur  Edwards
from  (1569)  136;  Persian  goods  in,
147 ;  departure  of  Thomas  Banister
from  (1568)  150;  English  mer-
chants at  (1573)  156;  English  mer-
chants at  (1579)  215,  246;  latitude
of,  248 ;  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  met  by
a Russian escort at (1583) 317;

English  house  allowed  the  Mus-
covy Company  at  (1586)  351;  Sir
Jerome  Bowes  and  the  Emperor
of  Russia's  envoy  at  (1583)  465;
Henry  Austell  at,  v.  325.
Yaroslavl, province of Russia, iii.

358.
Yas,  see  Yassy.
Yassy, Henry Austell at (1585) v.

325.
Yavate  or  Zavat,  in  Persia,  in.  25,

32-

Yayman  or  Nayman,  i.  267.

Ycacos  Point,  in  Cartagena  harbour,
X.  139 ;  importance  of,  for  the  de-
fence of  Cartagena  harbour,  141 ;
lime  stone  at,  142 ;  mentioned  in
the  Ruttier,  289.

Ycarie, see  Caviare.

Year,  change  of,  in  Italy  and  Eng-
land, V.  129 ;  beginning  of  the,  in
China,  vi.  306.

Yeegris,  latitude  of,  in.  247.

Yeka  Mongol,  see  Mongols.

Yelvas,  Count  de,  volunteer  on  the
Armada  (1588)  iv.  203.

Yem,  river,  n.  458,  477.

Yemps,  Anthony  Jenkinson  at,  n.
418.

Yeraslave,  see  Yaroslavl.

Yernmouth,  see  Yarmouth.

Yesse,  large  city  in  Persia,  in.  35.

Yevskoy,  Istomay,  diake  of  the  Em-
peror of  Russia,  and  English  mer-
chants (1583)  in.  329.

Yew  trade  in  Russia,  n.  387 ;  for
bowstaves  in  Persia,  in.  51.

Ygai, see  Grande, Rio.

Yguey,  Sierras  de,  in  Hispaniola,  x.
283.

Yguirie,  kingdom  of,  in  Guiana,  and
Sir  Robert  Dudley  (1595)  x.
207.

Ylgenburg,  see  Ilgenburg.

Yohoron  town,  xi. 13.

Yong,  Richard,  Russian  licence
granted  to  (1569)  in. 109.

Yong,  Robert,  in  Virginia  (1585)
viii. 318.

Yonville,  Captain,  his  advice  about
the  Spanish  ships  in  Florida  (1565)
IX.  90.

Yoong,  James,  of  the  Britona  (1584) i
v.  281.

460

INDEX

Yorive,  Voivoda  of  Plesco  and  the
freebooters  of  (1570)  iii.  168.

York,  ships  from,  in  Edward  III.'s
fleet,  I.  298;  ships  from  (1349)  11.
61;  merchants,  113;  and  the  Mus-
covy Company  (1567)  iii.  91 ;  death
of  Constantius  Chlorus  at,  iv.  272.

York,  Sir  John  (d.  1569),  master  of
the  mint,  assistant  to  the  Muscovy
Company,  11.  307;  and  the  second
vo)'age  to  Barbary  (1552)  vi.  138;
to  Guinea  (1554)  154;  his  nephew,
hostage  at  Samva  (1555)  160;  and
the  French  pilot's  note  of  the  sea
currents,  xi.  72.

Yorke,  Captain,  at  the  Groyne
(1589)  VI.  488;  march  of,  to  Lis-
bon, 498,  501.

Yorke,  Captain,  of  the  Hope,  death
of, at  Riohacha  (1595)  x. 234.

Yorke,  Gilbert,  captain  of  the
Michael  (1577)  vii.  212,  285,  297;
Captain  Frobisher  and,  218,  219;
captain  of  the  Thomas  Allen
(1578)  231,  322  ;  at  Yorke's  Sound,
303;  leaves  the  fleet  (1578)  335;
news  of,  brought  to  the  fleet  by
the  Francis  of  Foy,  341 ;  in  Cap-
tain Frobisher 's  council,  348;  and
the miners, 360.

York's  Sound,  discovered  by  Captain
Frobisher's men (1577) vii. 220,

303-
Youghan,  opinion  of,  on  the  copper

of  Chaunis  Temoatan  (1585)  viii.

332.
Youghoria,  see  Ugoria.
Young, Captain, his death at the

Groyne  (1589)  vi.  499.
Young,  John,  of  Coliton,  privileged

trader  in  Senegal  (1588)  vi.  443-

450-
Young,  the  bark,  Robert  Tomson's

ship  (1553)  IX.  338.
Yourt,  fire  in  (1580)  in.  218.
Youth, fountain  of, xii. 12.
Yowgorians,  see  Ugorians.
Yper-lee  Channel, Duke  of  Parma

and  (1588)  IV.  204.
Yperpera, Georgian money tribute

to  Tartars,  i.  154.
Ypres,  cloth  of,  11.  116.
Yrchasi,  Tartars  and,  i.  86.
Yria  Niagorod,  see  Vriagorod.

Yucas, a  present  to  Captain  Alar-

chon  (1540)  IX.  301.
Yucatan (Santa Maria de Los

Remedios), papal  bull for  (1592)

VII.  105.
Yucatan  Cape,  see  Catoche.
Yug  river,  source  of,  in  Cheremis-

sia,  II.  418 ; and  the  Sukhona,  ill.

405-
Yunnan,  province  of  China,  vi.  350.
Yvarus, son of Godred, King of

Man,  I.  33.
Yvarus,  a  soldier,  murders  Reginald,

King  of  Man,  i.  39.
Yvo, abbot of Furness, and Olaf,

King  of  Man,  i. 30.
Yvo  of  Narbonne's  epistle,  i.  50.

Zabraes,  see  Zabras.

Zabras,  Spanish  ships  of  the  Armada
(1588)  IV.  199,  200;  return  of  the,
230;  ordnance  wanted  for,  by
John  de  Orimo  (1590)  x.  158.

Zacheo  Island,  Sir  Robert  Dudley
at  (1594)  X.  203,  (1595)  210.

Zaffetto,  Lapis  Zudassi  from,  vi.  27.

Zaffo,  gum  arable  from,  vi.  27.

Zafia,  see  Azafi.

Zagatay,  Anthony  Jenkinson  in,  ill.
196.

Zaguato,  Antonio  de  Espejo's  recep-
tion in  (1582)  IX.  200;  fort  in,  201.

Zagueio,  land  of,  in  the  Jardines
Island,  X.  286.

Zahara,  Las  Sierras  de,  in  Cabos  del
Plata,  X.  281.

Zaiton,  see  Caitan.

Zalterius,  Belognine,  his  map  of
New  France,  vii.  196;  on  Magel-
lan's Strait,  203.

Zamachi,  see  Shemakha.

Zamalluco, see  Zamaluc.

Zamaluc,  Moorish  king  of  Chaul
(1563)  V.  378,  470;  his  ordnance,
380;  at  sack  of  Bezeneger  (1567)
382.

Zamargo,  or  Queros,  captain  of  a
Spanish  ship  wrecked  in  the  Strait
of  Magellan,  xi.  259.

Zamora  and  the  defence  of  Spain
(1585)  X.  96.  .  , .,

Zamorano,  Nicolas,  chief  pilot  of
Captain  Alarchon  (1540)  ix,  280,
312.

461

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Zamorano,  Roderigo,  on  seaman-
ship, I.  XXXV.  ;  King  of  Spain's
reader  (1585)  xi.  449,  453.

Zanctius,  see  Sancho.

Zante,  Roger  Bodenham  at  (1551)  v.
76;  John  Locke  at,  81,  102;  his
description  of,  83 ;  Laurence  Al-
dersey  near  (1581)  206,  214;  Coren
found  in,  242  ;  Greek  possession,
249;  Laurence  Aldersey  at  (1586)
VI.  40;  products  of,  41;  rendez-
vous of  EngUsh  merchants'  fleet
(1586)  47;  Levant  Company's
trade  in  (1592)  75;  its  privileges
for  the  trade  in,  77;  Richard
Wrag  at  (1593)  94;  the  Tohy
bound  for  (1593)  vii.  124;  Greek
from,  in  the  S.  Vincent  fight  (1583)
XI. 195.

Zanzibar  Island,  Edward  Bonaven-
ture  at  (1591)  vi.  392,  x.  195 ;  trees
in,  VI.  393.

Zapolle,  .Sloboda  to,  iii.  70.

Zara,  Henry  Austell  at  (1585)  v.
322.

Zauzes,  sugar  of  Palma  Island,  vi.
132.

Zavena,  tame  partridges  led  to,  iv.
408.

Zea  Island,  William  Harborne  at
(1583)  V.  250.

Zecchiah,  on  the  Tigris,  vi.  6.

Zechini,  see  Sequin.

Zedoari,  found  in  India,  vi.  25.

Zeeland,  products  of,  11.  129  f. ;  Eng-
lish merchants  in,  148  f.  ;  Don
Diego  Pimentelli,  taken  prisoner
to,  IV.  227,  231 ;  preparations  in,
for  the  Armada  (1588)  208;  ships
of,  at  Dunkirk,  220,  221;  com-
memorative coins  of,  232 ;  ships
of,  King  of  Spain's  commission
concerning the (1585) vi. 417.

Zegham  and  the  hazel-nut  trade,  iii.
158.

Zeilam,  see  Ceylon.

Zeilan,  see  Ceylon.

Zelabdim  Echebar,  see  Akbar.

Zelcvetskyes  Island,  see  Solovet-
skiye.

Zelon  Islands,  Sir  Francis  Drake  at
(1579)  XI. 124.

Zeno,  Antonio,  letter  from  Nicolo  to
(c. 1380) VII. 450; forbidden to

leave  Frisland,  454;  letters  to
Carlo,  brother  of,  455,  463 ;  cap-
tain of  Zichmni's  fleet,  458;  dis-
coveries by,  460  f. ;  Ortelius  on,
464.

Zeno,  Carlo,  brother  to  Nicolo  and
Antonio,  letters  from  Antonio  (c.
1380)  VII.  455,  463.

Zeno,  Marino,  first  Venetian  Podesta
appointed  in  Constantinople  (1205)
VII.  445  f. ; his  descendants,  446.

Zeno,  Nicolo  and  Antonio,  discover-
ies of,  VII.  288 ;  account  by  Fran-
cisco Marcolino  (1380)  445.

Zeno,  Nicolo,  voyage  of  (1380)  vii.
446;  meeting  with  Zichmni,  447;
conquests  of,  448 ;  knighted  by
Zichmni,  449;  death  of,  454;  his
descendants  in  Venice  (c.  1380)
454; Carlo,  brother  of,  455.

Zeno,  Pietro,  son  of  Marino  Zeno,
VII. 446.

Zenopski,  English  houses  in  (1569)
III. 113.

Zephalonia,  see  Cephallonia.

Zepiswich,  see  Ipswich.

Zerbi,  island  of  Tunis,  vi.  143.

Zerbst, Henry  Austell  at (1585) v.

327-  . ^

Zere  Island,  in  the  Caspian  Sea,  in.
230.

Zerraluo,  Marquess  of,  and  the  de-
fence of  Spain  (1585)  x.  96.

Zerzerline  mountains,  near  the  king-
dom of  Orissa, v. 408.

Zetland  and  Flanders,  vii. 161.

Zewarra  Islands,  Sir  Francis  Drake
at  (1579)  XI.  124.

Zhemaker, S. Nicholas  to,  in.  69.

Zichmni,  Duke  of  Sorani,  Prince  of
Porland,  and  Nicolo  Zeno  in  Fris-
land (1380)  VII.  448;  conquests  of,
448;  knights  Nicolo  Zeno,  449;
forbids  Antonio  Zeno  to  leave  him,
454;  driven  forth  from  Icaria,
460;  discovery  of  Trin  by,  461;
town  built  in  Trin  by,  462 ;  life
of,  by  Antonio  Zeno,  463 ;  dis-  ^
coverics  of,  464.

Zieglerus,  Jacobus,  on  Iceland,  iv.
10.  15.  99'  loi,  104,  105 ;  on  Mount
Hecla,  19,  109;  on  the  Asinus
Indicus,  in  his  '  History  of  Scon-
dia,'  VII. 183.

462

I

INDEX

Zikia,  I.  231.
Zindi, see  Scinde.
Zipango  Island,  see  Japan.
Zizarii,  ancient  nation  of  Bussorah,

V.  371.
Zoca,  Tertia  and  Quarta,  third  and

fourth  fruit  of  the  sugar  cane,  vi.

128.
Zocotora,  see  Sokotra.
Zocotoro,  see  Sokotra.
Zodiac, etymology  of,  by  Johannes

de  Sacro  Bosco,  vii.  265.
Zodome,  see  Sodom.
Zolatitsa, Stephen Borough at

(1557)  II.  365.
Zolner, Conrad, ambassadors of,

and  Richard  II.  11.  12.
Zolner of Rotenstein, Conrad,

twentieth master of the Dutch

knights,  II.  7, 18, 19.
Zonaras's  account  of  the  conversion

of  Russia  (988)  II. 184.
Zone,  torridj  vii.  252-268 ; Captain

Windam's  voyage  in (1553)  252;

width of, 253; fertility  of, 253;
Johannes  de  Sacro  Bosco  on,  265;
Arctic,  268-277 ; greatest  store  of
fish  in,  276.
Zotebotter, or Sotebotter, John, 11.

55.  59-
Zotschen  on  Dneister,  Henry  Austell

at  (1585)  V.  385.

Zouch,  John,  and  Sir  John  of  Des-
mond (1591)  VII.  51.

Zuegara,  province  in  Japan,  xi.  441 ;
grapes  in,  442.

Zuider Zee, Henry Austell on the

(1585)  V.  320.
Zuni,  see  Cevola.
Zun-Zun  Pond,  v. 352,  354,  355.
Zuny,  see  Cevola.
Zupanna Island, John Locke at

(^553)  V.  79.
Zur,  Mar  del,  see  Pacific  Ocean.
Zutberwik, castle  of,  11. 106.
Zutphen,  death  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney

at  (1586)  XII.  41.
Zuydersee,  see  Zuider  Zee.

[Index  to  Ships

463

Index  to  Ships

Adventure,  Drake's,  x,  234,  240,  245,

253,  262,  277,  280.
Aid, Sir Henry Norris's, vi. 512;

Frobisher's  second  (1577)  vii.  211,

284, 290, 294, 322, 344, 361 ; in

Drake's  expedition  (1585)  x.  98.
Amity, Senegal traders' ship, vii.

100,  103;  in  Hawkins's  expedition

(1590)  vin.  421 ; in  Drake's  fleet

(1595)  X.  234.
Angel,  of  Hawkins's  fleet  (1567)  ix.

398,  445.  447.  449.  453 ;  Sir  Amyas

de  Preston's  ship  (1595)  x.  213.
Anne  Francis,  of  London,  vii. 128 ;

in Frobisher's  third  voyage,  236,

238,  240,  322,  325,  340,  344,  349,

350.  356,  362,  364-
Anthony,  the, at  Fayal  (1590)  vni.

422.
Archangel,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,  x.

266.
Ark-Royal, Lord Admiral's ship

(1588)  IV.  215  (1596)  248,  262.
Armenal, in Frobisher's expedition

(1578)  VII. 324.
Ascension, of London, v. 310, vi.

426 ; Levant merchant ship, vi.

94,  95,  103; of  London,  merchant

ship, vii. 31, 32; of  Seville,  47;

Sir  Amyas  de  Preston's  ship  (1595)

X.  213.
Aucher, Sir Anthony Aucher's, v.

71.  73.  75. 168,  VI. 136.

Bagazzana,  of  Venice,  v.  447.

Bear,  Lord  Sheffield's,  iv.  218;  Fro-
bisher's, VII.  237,  239,  322,  324;
Andrew Barker's, x. 82 ; Sir

Robert  Dudley's  flagship,  204,.
205;  Benjamin  Wood's,  xi.  2,
417; Edward  Fenton's, 163.

Bear's  Whelp,  Sir  Robert  Dudley's
X.  204;  Benjamin  Wood's,  xi.
417.

Belanzara,  of  Venice,  iv.  230.

Benedict,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,  xi.
103; John  Winter's, 148, 151.

Bevis,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's  flag-
ship, X.  266,  276.

Biscaine,  Spanish  trader,  vii.  103.

Black  Pinnace,  Cavendish's  ship,  xi.

389.  394.  397.  405-
Bona Confidentia, Sir Hugh Wil-
loughby's, II,  214,  220, 221,  246,

351.  363.  372,  379-
Bona Esperanza, Sir Hugh Wil-
loughby's, II. 212, 351, 358, III.

331-
Bonaventure, Queen Elizabeth's

ship,  VI.  438,  VII.  41,  x.  227,  243,

244.
Bond,  the  bark,  in  Drake's  expedi-
tion (1585)  X.  98.
Bonna,  El,  Venetian  ship,  v. 100.
Bonner,  Sir  Francis  Drake's  (1586)

VIII.  344,  (1585)  X.  98.
Busse  of  Bridgwater,  or  Emmanuel,

VII. 236,  237,  239,  241,  243,  244,

322,  365,  367.
Buen  Jesus,  or  Bon  Jesus,  Spanish

carrack,  vii.  112,  115.
Burr, Guinea merchants'  ship, vi.

460.
Buss  of  Zeeland,  11.  66,  67.
Buttolfe, Barbary Company's  ship,,

VI. 138.

464

INDEX TO SHIPS

Cacafuego,  Portuguese  ship,  vi.  140.
Cantar,  of  Weymouth,  x.  193.
Captain,  of  Alexandria,  Turkish  gal-
ley, V.  160,  161,  163.
Carion,  Spanish  West  Indian  ship,

IX.  343.

Castle  of  Comfort,  in  George  Fen-

ner's  voyage  (1566)  vi.  266,  269.
Cavalla, of  Venice, v. 77.
Centurion,  Master  Cordal's,  vii.  31,

35.  36,  37,  57-

Chancewell,  of  London,  viii.  166,
172,  174.

Charles,  French  ship,  viii.  150.

Cherubin,  Robert  Flicke's,  vii.  57,
58; of  Lyme,  95.

Christopher,  of  Cadiz,  vi.  124;  of
William  Towerson's  third  voyage
to  Guinea  (1577)  vi.  231,  237,  240,
242,  245,  251 ;  of  Dartmouth,
Andrew  Barker's  ship,  x.  82 ;  in
Drake's  circumnavigation  (1578-
1580)  XI. 107.

Christopher  Campion,  Levant  Com-
pany's ship,  V.  62.

Cinque  Llaguas,  Spanish  ship,  vii.
118,  119,  121,  122.

Cog,  of  Norway,  i.  322.

Cogge,  of  Hull,  II.  61.

Command,  at  Porto  d'Ally,  vii.  94.

Conception,  Spanish  West  Indian
ship,  VII.  59.

Concord,  trader  to  Morocco,  vii.
100;  Guinea  Merchants'  ship,
VII. 100; of  Drake's  fleet  (1596)

X.  242.

Content,  Sir  George  Carey's,  x.  179-
183 ;  James  Lancaster's,  xi.  43 ;
Thomas  Cavendish's,  290,  291,
308,  310,  318,  324,  326,  327.

Costely, Robert Flicke's  skiff, vii.

97-
Crane,  Queen  Elizabeth's  ship,  v^ii.

41.
Crescent,  of  London,  vii.  31.

Dainty, Sir John Hawkins's, vii.

112,  113,  vin.  421.
Darling, of London, x. 452; Sir

Amyas  de  Preston's  ship,  x.  213,

215,  225.
Defiance, Queen Elizabeth's ship,

VII.  41 ;  Drake's  flagship  (1595)  x.

232,  240,  243,  245,  262.

Delight,  or  the  George,  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert's  flagship  (1583)
VIII.  46,  52,  62,  64,  66,  92 ;  of
Bristol,  John  Chidley's  ship,  x.
170,  XI.  381-384.

Dennis,  in  Frobisher's  third  expedi-
tion (1578)  VII.  322,  324,  329.

Desire,  Thomas  Cavendish's  ship,
XI. 290, 324, 337, 348, 389, 397-

399,  415,  416.
Dionyse,  of  Frobisher's  third  voyage

(1578)  VII.  234,  241.
Discoverer,  Lawrence  Keymis's  pin-
nace, X.  452,  477.
Disdain, Lord  Admiral's  ship, vii.

106.
Dog,  William  Michelson's,  x.  156.
Dogger-ship  of  Wiveton,  11.  66.
Dolphin,  of  London,  vii.  37; John

de  Verrazzano's,  viii.  423.
Dorothy, Sir Richard Grenville's,

VIII. 310; Sir  Walter  Raleigh's,

XI.  203.
Dragon,  Earl  of  Cumberland's,  vi.

466; Sir  Francis  Drake's,  x.  75-

77-
Drake,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,  vii.  5.
Dreadnought,  Thomas  Fenner's,  vi.

438.
Duck,  Richard  Hawkins's,  x.  99.

Eagle,  in  Sir  John  Hawkins's  fleet,
VIII. 421.

Earwig,  Sir  Robert  Dudley''s,  x.
204.

Edward  Bonaventure,  Levant  Com-
pany's ship,  V.  47,  48,  387-407,
390,  392,  X.  194,  195,  196,  197,  199,
200;  in  Sir  John  Hawkins's  fleet,
VIII.  421;  Edward  Fen  ton's,  xi.
163,  165,  172,  197,  199.

Elizabeth,  Muscovy  Company's,  iii.
246;  of  London,  vii.  31;  Sir
Richard  Grenville's,  viii.  310;  Sir
Francis  Drake's,  x.  241 ;  John
Winter's,  xi.  137,  148,  155,  159;
Edward  Fenton's,  172,  173;  of
Dartmouth,  John  Davys's,  vii.
41,  414;  of  Guernsey,  v.  280,
281.

Elizabeth  Bonaventure,  Sir  Francis
Drake's,  x.  98,  262.

Elizabeth  Constance,  Sir  Francis
Drake's,  x.  227,  235.

465

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Elizabeth Jonas, in expedition

against  Armada,  iv.  218.
Elizabeth!  Stokes,  of  London,  v.  280,

282.
Emanuel,  Levant  trader,  v.  454; of

Exeter,  vii.  322.
Exchange,  of  Bristol,  x.  193 ;  of  Sir

Francis  Drake's  fleet,  227.
Expedition,  of  London,  vii. 129.

Falcon, of  London,  vii.  3.

Fila  Cavena,  v.  77,  88.

Flower  de  luce,  Guinea  merchants'
ship,  VI.  256.

Foi, of Honfleur, vi. 241.

Foresight,  in  the  Spanish  expedition
(1589)  VI.  515;  Queen  Elizabeth's
ship,  VII,  41,  48,  VIII.  421 ;  in  Sir
John  Burrough's  fleet,  vii.  105,
113;  of  Drake's  fleet,  x.  240,
241.

Fox,  of  London,  Roger  Bodenham's,

IX.  359-
Francis, Sir  Francis  Drake's, viii.

343,  344.  X.  98,  227,  229; Edward

Fen  ton's  ship,  xi. 163, 172, 189.
Francis,  of  Foy,  in  Frobisher's  third

expedition,  vii.  236,  238,  239,  322,

324.  341-
Friday,  of  Cley,  il.  64
Frisking, Sir Robert Dudley's, x.

204.

Gabriel,  Sir  Martin  Frobisher's,  vii.
204,  211,  236,  242,  298,  318,  322,

324.  339.  341.  344.  348,  365-

Galleon,  of  London,  vi.  285;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley's  x.  266,  276;
Thomas  Cavendish's  flagship,  xi.
389,  392, 397.

Galleon Dudley,  ix.  464.

Galleon  Leicester,  Edward  Fenton's,
XI. 172.

Gallienge,  of  Rhodes,  v.  8.

Garland,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's,  vii.
105,  107;  Sir  Francis  Drake's,  x.
230,  236,  245,  262.

George,  of  London,  iii.  252,  253,  254,
256,  295,  296;  Guinea  merchants'
ship,  VI.  266,  282 ;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley,  x.  266,  276;  Sir  Francis
Drake's  (1585)  99;  Withrington's
prize,  XI.  224;  Thomas  Caven-
dish's prize,  307.

George  Bonaventure,  of  London,  v.

310.

George  Noble,  of  London,  vii.  43;
Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,  x.  266,  267.

Godozere,  of  Newcastle,  11.  60.

Golden  Dragon,  Christopher  New-
port's, VII.  112,  184.

Golden  Hind,  Sir  Humphrey  Gil-
bert's, VIII.  47,  48,  50,  51,  62,  69,

74-
Golden  Noble,  of  London,  vi.  46.
Green  Dragon,  trader  with  Barbary,

v. 304; of Newhaven, x. 25,

35-
Gundall,  Portuguese  boat,  xi.  179.

Harry,  of  London,  Muscovy  Com-
pany's, III.  92,  102,  169,  170.

Hart,  William  Towerson's,  vi.  177,
180, 212,  221.

Hawkin  Derlin,  of  Danzig,  11.  61.

Hawkins, Sir  John Hawkins's, x.

lOI.

Helen,  of  London,  vil.  414.

Helena,  of  Cley,  11.  65.

Help,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,  x.  242.

Hercules,  of  London,  vi.  9,  39.

Hermerillon,  Jacques  Cartier's,  vili.
211.

Hermina,  the  Great,  Jacques  Car-
tier's,  vin.  210,  211.

Hermina,  the  Little,  Jacques  Car-
tier's,  VIII.  210.

Hind,  William  Towerson's,  vi.  177.

Hope,  Queen  Elizabeth's,  vill.  421;
Sir  Francis  Drake's,  vii.  i,  x.  98,
226,  234,  262.

Hopewell,  of  London,  vi.  426;  Fro-
bisher's, VII.  231,  239,  322,  324,
364;  in  Charles  Leigh's  expedi-
tion (1597)  VIII.  166,  173,  180,  406;
Sir  George  Carey's,  x.  179.

Hugh  Gallant,  Thomas  Cavendish's,
XI.  290,  300,  301,  310,  311,  319.

Intent,  Sir  Robert  Dudley's  prize,  x.

205.
Isabel,  of  Clay,  11.  65.

Jane  Bonaventure,  Sir  Henry
Palmer's, x. 190.

Jesus,  Muscovy  Company's,  11.  401,
408;  Levant  Company's,  v.  281,
292,  311,  314,  316,  318;  of  Liibeck,

466

INDEX TO SHIPS

VI.  253,  IX.  398,  445,  449,  453,  454,

X.  9,  17,  64,  67,  71,  72.
John,  of  London,  xi.  10,  15.

John  Baptist,  of  London,  vi.  262,  x.
9,  10.

John  Evangelist,  Muscovy  Com-
pany's, II.  375,  379,  380,  413,  425 ;
Guinea  Company's,  vi.  155 ;  John
White's,  VIII.  406,  409,  420.

John  Thomas,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,

XI.  298.

John  and  Francis,  iv.  243.
Judith,  of  London,  v.  281 ;  Sir  Mar-
tin Frobisher's,  vii.  233,  238,  322,

329-
Juell, Sir  Francis  Drake's,  x. 227.

Landret,  ix.  445.

Leicester,  Lord  Admiral's  ship,  iv.
218.

Leuriere,  of  Dieppe,  vi,  218;  of
Rouen,  vi.  218.

Lime,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's,  vii.
6.

Lion,  Lord  Admiral's  ship,  iv.  218,
247;  of  London,  vi.  136,  138,  145,
438,  VII.  41;  Sir  Richard  Gren-
viile's,  VIII.  310;  John  White's
flagship,  397.

Lion's  Whelp,  Lord  Charles  How-
ard's, x.  349,  378.

Little  John,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,
X.  266.

Luis,  Spanish  ship,  xi.  311.

Luisa, of  Dieppe, vi.  406.

Madre  de  Dios,  vi.  443,  vil.  105-118,

X. 190.
Make-speed, Barbary trader, vi.

285.
Margaret,  of  Cley,  11.  64; Earl  of

Cumberland's,  vii. i, 11, 13, 18;

Christopher  Newport's, x. 184.
Margaret  and  John,  of  London,  vn.

31, 32,  57.
Marigold, Hill of Redriff's, vni.

157. 158, 160, 161 ; Sir Francis

Drake's, xi. 102, 148, 150, 155,

159-
Mary,  Knights  of  Rhodes 's  ship,  v.

9-
Mary  Edward,  of  London,  vii. 129.
Mary George, Levant Company's,

v.  62.

Mary  Grace,  Levant  Company's,  v.

62.
Mary  Rose,  of  the  Cadix  Expedition

(1596) IV. 242, 247; Sir John

Hawkins's  flagship,  viii.  421.
Mary Sparke, of Plymouth, Sir

Walter  Raleigh's  ship,  vi.  434,
Mary Susan, Muscovy Company's

III.  246.
Matthew  Gonson,  Levant  trader,  v.

67,  76,  117.
Matthew,  of  London,  Levant  trader,

V.  62.

Mayflower, George Fenner's ship,

VI.  266, 282 ; Earl of Cumber-
land's, 266,  VII.  119.

Merchant  Royal,  of  London,  vi.  47,

48.  SO-  387.  390.  VIII.  421,  x,  194,

402,  511.
Merlin,  Benjamin  Gonson's,  vi.  262,

263,  264,  X.  9,  10.
Mermaid,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,  x,

266;  of  Dartmouth,  John  Davys's,

y"-  393.  442.

Michael,  Frobisher's,  vii.  202,  212,
219,  279,  284,  287,  298,  315,  318,
322,  325,  329,  344,  365;  of  Yar-
mouth, II.  64.

Minion,  Queen  Elizabeth's  ship,  vi.
231.  234,  237,  242,  255,  258,  262,

263, 426, VII. 31, 32, VIII. 3, IX.

398,  406,  407,  450,  452,  X.  9,  35,

64,  71,  72,  98; of  London,  xi.  31,

34, 194,  208,  295.
Monkey,  viii.  401.
Moon,  of  the  first  voyage  to  Guinea,

VI. 145;  Captain  Frobisher's,  vii.

322,  324,  344,  349,  350,  356.
Moonlight,  John  White's,  viii.  411,

419,  421.
Moonshine, of  London, vi. 46; of

Dartmouth, John Davys's, vii.

382,  393,  413;  John  White's,  viii.

406.
Mulet  de  Bataille,  of  Rouen,  vi.  241.

Nana  Ferra,  of  Venice,  vi. 108.

Nave  Ragasona,  of  Venice,  v.  213.

New  Year's  Gift,  captured  by  Drake,
X.  127.

Nicholas,  of  Cley,  11.  65 ;  of  Lon-
don, V.  281,  282.

Nightingale,  of  London,  vii.  92,  96.

Nonpareilia,  see  Nonpareille.

467

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Nonpareille, Queen Elizabeth's,  iv.

247,  vin.  421.
Norman,  John  de  Verrazzano's,  viii.

423-
North  Star,  John  Davys 's,  vii.  393,

408,  409,  413.
Nuestra Senora de los remedies,
Robert  Flicke's  prize,  vii.  60.

Our  Lady  of  Pity,  Luke  Warde's
Spanish  prize,  xi. 184.

Paul  of  Plymouth,  William  Haw-
kins's, XI.  23.

Pegasus,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,  x.
227,  241,  242.

Pelican  or  Golden  Hind,  Drake's
flagship  (1577)  XI. 102, 146.

Penelope,  in  James  Lancaster's
voyage  (1591)  vi.  387,  390,  x.
194.

Peregrine,  Captain  Fenner's  (1594)
XI. 46.

Peter,  of  Cley,  11.  65;  of  Wiveton,
66; of Bristol, x. 281.

Phenix,  of  Drake's  fleet,  x.  227,
232, 233, 235, 236, 245.

Philip  and  Mary,  Muscovy  Com-
pany's, II.  286,  III.  332,  351,  363,
372,  379,  401,  408.

Philip  of  Spain,  of  Spanish  navy,
IV. 244,  248.

Philip, Spanish  ship, x.  427.

Pilgrim,  Jacob  Whiddon's,  vii.  44,
49.

Pleasure,  Thomas  James's,  viii.  155.

Primrose,  Muscovy  Company's,  11.
359.  375.  38o,_  413;  of  the  first
voyage  to  Guinea,  vi.  145,  163,
175,  25s,  256,  261,  413;  Sir  Mar-
tin Frobisher's,  x.  98.

Prudence,  Muscovy  Company's,  iii.
304 ;  Christopher  Newport,  x.  184  ;
Captain Parker's, x. 277.

Pulpit,  Sir  Francis  Drake's  (1595)
X.  232.

Rabnet,  of  Southampton,  v.  281.
Ragged  Staff,  Andrew  Barker's,  x.

82,  85.
Rainbow, of the  Cadix  expedition,

IV. 247 ; Queen Elizabeth's, vi.

421,  438.
Ratta,  La,  of  Venice,  iv.  230.

Raynolds,  Levant  merchants'  ship,
v.  215.

Red  Dragon,  Withrington's  flag-
ship, XI.  202.

Red  Lion,  of  London,  vii.  414.

Red  Rose,  or  Golden  Dragon,  Earl
of  Cumberland's,  vii.  57.

Revenge, Sir Richard Grenville's,

VII.  38-53,  80-83.

Richard,  Master  Duffield's,  vii.  31;

storeship  of  Drake's  fleet  (1595)  x.

229; of  Arundel,  450-458,  458-461,

461-467.
Roe,  Peter  Baker's,  v.  190; Earl  of

Cumberland's, xi.  203.
Roebarge,  French  ship,  vi.  217.
Roebuck,  Sir  John  Burrough's,  vii.

108,  113; Sir  Richard  Grenville's,

VIII.  310; Thomas Cavendish's,
XI.  389,  391,  397.

Rose,  of  Danzig,  vi.  231,  233.
Royal Exchange, Earl  of  Cumber-
land's flagship,  VII.  118,  120.

S.  Agueda,  Captain  Ulloa's,  ix.  207,

232,  243,  275.
S.  Andrew,  Spanish  ship,  iv.  249.
S.  Anna,  Thomas  Cavendish's  prize,

XI.  319.  324.  325.  369-
S.  Antonio,  Portuguese  ship,  v.  66.
S. Bernardo, Spanish  carrack, vii.

1X2.

S. Catherine, Captain Alarchon's

ship,  IX.  279.
S. Christophero, Spanish carrack,

VII. 112.
S.  Clara,  of  Biscay,  vii.  105,  108.
S. Gabriel, Spanish West Indian

storeship,  ix.  280.
S.  Juan  de  Colorado,  Spanish  ship,

VI.  472,  483.

S.  Lorenzo,  Portuguese  East  Indian

ship,  VI.  33.
S. Maria of S. Vincent, Biscayan

ship,  VIII.  174.
S.  Matthew,  of  the  Spanish  Armada,

IV.  226; of  the  defence  of  Cadiz,

249
S. Paul, Don Alonso de Bagan's,

VII.  81,

S.  Peter,  Captain  Alarchon's  flag-
ship, IX.  279,  311.

S.  Philip,  of  the  Spanish  Armada,
IV.  226; Portuguese  carrack,  vi.

468

INDEX TO SHIPS

438, 442; Alonso de Bagan's

(1591)  vii.  42.
S. Thomas, Spanish  ship, ix. 207,

208.
S.  Vittor,  French  ship,  v.  149.
Saker, Sir Francis Drake's, x.

241.
Salamander,  Martin  Frobisher's,  vii.

327-
Sampson, Earl of Cumberland's,

VII.  118,  119.
Samuel,  of  London,  vii.  31,
Saviour,  of  Bristol,  v. 115.
Sea  Dragon,  in  Drake's  fleet  (1585)

X. 98.
Searchthrift,  in Stephen  Borough's

voyage (1556) 11. 322, 323, 345,

363,  390,  III. 121,  334.
Serpent, Sir  Walter  Raleigh's, vi.

434-

Shaudet,  French  ship  for  Guinea,
VI.  217.

Shipper  Berlin,  of  Prussia,  11.  61.

Solomon,  Muscovy  Company's  flag-
ship, III.  304;  Sir  John  Haw^kins's,
VI.  263,  X.  9,  17,  22,  23 ;  of  Lon-
don, VII.  31,  32,  33;  Frobisher's,
239,  322,324;  Sir  Francis  Drake's,
X.  190,  227,  228,  243 ;  James  Lan-
caster's, XI.  43,  44,  46;  of  Ply-
mouth, V.  280,  281.

Soudil,  of  the  French  fleet,  viii.  150.

Speedwell,  of  Bristol,  Andrew
Barker's,  x.  82,  loi.

Speranze,  see  Bona  Esperanza.

Susan,  of  London,  Levant  trader,  v.
243,  248,  251,  254,  VI.  47,  48.

Susan  Parnell,  Sir  Francis  Drake's,
X.  242.

Swallow,  Muscovy  Company's,  11.
401,  408,  409,  III.  9,  15,  38,  169,
170;  of  London,  v.  281,  282;  Sir
John  Hawkins's,  vi.  263,  ix.  398,
445,  448,  453,  X.  7,  9,  23,  99;  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert's,  viii.  47,  50,
62,  92;  Sir  George  Carey's,  x.
179,  XII.  37.

Swan,  of  the  Cadiz  expedition,  iv.
243 ;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,  x.
266.

Swift-sure,  at  Flores,  viii.  421.

Talbot,  X.  98,  loi.

Thomas,  Sir  Francis  Drake's  (1585)

X.  98; of Ipswich, Frobisher's,

VII.  237,  241,  322,  325,  344,  349,

350.  355-
Thomas  Allen,  Muscovy  Company's,

III.  246,  304; Frobisher's,  vii.  231,

237.  322,  348,  349- . , ^
Thomas Bonaventure, m the first

voyage  to  Persia,  iii. 150.
Three  Half  Moons,  John  Foxe's,  v.

153,  155.
Tiger,  iii.  303,  x,  98,  463; Levant

trader,  v.  455,  465,  vi.  1-9,  35,  43;

Guinea  merchants', 212-231, 231-

252; Sir  John  Hawkins's,  263,  x.

9,  17,  21 ; Sir  Richard  Grenville's,

VIII.  310,  315,  317.

Toby,  of  Harwich,  iii.  283;  Levant
Company's,  vi.  47,  48,50;  Richard
Staper's,  vii.  124,  125.

Tramontane  of  the  Queen,  viii.
180.

Trinity,  of  Hull,  11.  61 ;  of  London,
375.  380,  413,  425 ;  in  the  second
voyage  to  Guinea,  vi.  155,  160,
207;  H ore's  flagship,  viii.  3;  Cap-
tain UUoa's,  IX.  89,  207,  226,  228,
229,  232,  233,  243,  262,  278.

Trinity  Fitz  Williams,  Levant  trader,
V.  62,  115.

Vantage, in Drake's West Indian

expedition,  x.  g8.
Victory,  Queen  Elizabeth's,  iv.  218;

Earl  of  Cumberland's,  vil.  i,  2,  6,

10,  13, 20; Spanish ship, xi.
258.

Vigonia,  Spanish  ship,  x.  231.
Violet, VII. 31; or the Why not

I? Earl of Cumberland's, vii.

118.
Virgin, Christopher Newport's, x.

184; James Lancaster's, xi. 43,

44.  45-

Warspight,  of  the  Cadiz  Expedition,

IV.  247.

Wat,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  pinnace,

XI.  I.

Welcome,  of  Plymouth,  xi.  46.
Whelp, Benjamin  Wood's, xi.  2.
White  Dove,  flyboat,  vii.  84.
White  Lion,  in  Drake's  West  Indian

voyage,  x.  98;  John  Chidley's,  xi.

381.

469

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Wild  Man,  John  Chidley's,  xi.  381.

William, of London, in. 252, 253,

254,  256,  283,  284.  290,  297,  298,

303-
William  and  John,  iii.  247 ; Levant
Company's,  vi.  47,  48; Sir  John

Hawkins's, ix. 398, 400, 445,
448.
Wolf,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's,  x.  266,
273-

Young-, Robert  Tomson's, ix. 338.

END OF VOLUME XII,

CLAPP

3  5002  00074  2218

Hakluyt,  Richard

The  principal  navigations  voyages  traffi

G 240 . H2 1903 12

Hakluyt., Richard, 15527-
1616,

The- principal naviga-tions
vovaore'S "traf f iQues &

H12
