The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 3 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 3 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  EngHsh  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume  III

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND COMPANY FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIII

PhotopB-vuiE  li7Aimaii.ZLB[m.B.  Biasijiiw.

SIR JEROME BOWES

The Principal

Navigations  Voyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  English Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within the

compasse  of  these 1600 Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME III

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

lo  \  S^^

no  5

3

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  third  volume
made  to  the  North  and  Northeast  quarters  ;
with  the  Ambassages,  Treatises,  Priviledges,
Letters,  and  other  observations,  depending
upon  the  Voyages  of  this  third  Volume  :

The  letters  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  written  to  the  Emper-
our  of  Russia,  requesting  licence  and  safe-conduct  for
Anthonie  Jenkinson,  to  passe  through  his  dominions
into  Persia,  ......

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  to  the  great  Sophie  of  Persia,
sent  by  M.  Anth.  Jenkinson, ....

Instructions  given  by  the  Governours  and  Assistants  of  the
Moscovie  Company,  unto  M.  Anthonie  Jenkinson,

The  voyage  of  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  through  Russia,  and
over  the  Caspian  sea  into  Persia,  Anno 1561,

The  privileges  given  by  Obdoloucan  K.  of  Hircania  to  the
Company  of  English  merchants  trading  in  Russia,
obteined  by  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson, .

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Alcock,  George  Wrenne,  and
Richard  Cheyney,  servants  unto  the  Company  of  Mos-
covy  Merchants  in  London,  into  Persia,  Anno  1563,  -

15

39

40

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  Richard  Johnson,  Alexander  Kitchin,  and
Arthur  Edwards  servants  to  the  foresaid  company  into
Persia, Anno 1565,  .....  44

Certaine  letters  of  Arthur  Edwards  written  out  of  Russia,
Media,  and  Persia,  to  the  Company  of  the  Moscovie
merchants  in London, .  .  .  .  .54

The  distance  of  divers  places  in Russia, ...  68

The  way  and  distances  from S.  Nicolas  in Russia  to  the

Caspian  sea,  ......  70

The  vo}-age  of  Thomas  Southam  and  John  Sparice  by  land
and  river  from  Colmogro  to  Novogrod  in  Russia,
Anno 1566,  ......  73

An  Acte  for  the  corporation  of  merchants  Adventurers  for
the  discovering  of  newe  trades,  made  in  the  eighth
yeere  of  the  Queenes  Majestie,  .  .  .  83

The voyage of M. Anthony Jenkinson into Russia the

third  time,  Anno 1566, .....  92

The  privileges  granted  by  the  Emperour  of  Russia  to  the

English  merchants,  obteined  by  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson,  92

A  letter  of  M.  Henry  Lane  to  M.  Richard  Hakluyt  con-
cerning the  first  Ambassage  from  the  Russian  Emperour
to  our  most  gracious  Queene  Elizabeth,  .  .  98

A  letter  of  her  Majestie,  sent  by  Stephen  Twerdico  and
Pheodata  Pogorella,  Messengers  of  the  Emperour  of
Russia,  unto  their  master,  .  .  .  .101

The  Ambassage  of  M.  Thomas  Randolfe  Esquier,  from  the

Queenes  Majestie  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  . 102

The  privileges  graunted  to  the  English  merchants,  at  M.

Randolfe  his  sute, .  .  .  ,  .  .108

vi  ~~

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  Commission  granted  by  M,  Randolfe  for  a  discovery  to

the  Northeast  by  sea, .  ,  .  .  .119

Instructions  given  to  the  discoverers  for  that  action, . 122

Certaine  letters  in  verse,  written  out  of  Moscovia,  by  M.
George  Turbervile,  Secretary  to  M.  Randolfe,  touching
the  state  of  the  Countrey,  and  maners  of  the  people, . 124

The  voyage  of  Arthur  Edwards  Agent  for  the  Moscovy
company,  John  Sparke,  Laurence  Chapman,  Christopher
Faucet,  and  Richard  Pingle,  servants,  into  Persia,  An.
1568,  ....... 136

Notes  concerning  the  fourth  English  voyage  into  Persia, . 14.3

The  voyage  of  Thomas  Banister  and  Geffrey  Ducket,  Agents
for  the  Moscovy  Company,  into  Persia  the  fift  time,
Anno 1569,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .150

Observations  of  the  Sophy  of  Persia,  and  of  the  Religion

of  the  Persians, .  .  .  .  .  .158

The  voyage  of  William  Burrough  Captaine  of  i  3.  English

ships  to  the  Nai"ve  in  Liefland,  Anno 1570,.  . 167

A  letter  of  Richard  Uscombe  to  M.  Henry  Lane  touching
the  burning  of  the  Citie  of  Mosco  by  the  Crimme
Tartar,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .169

The voyage of M. Anthony Jenkinson into Russia the

fourth  time,  Anno 1571,  .  .  .  . 170

A briefe rehearsall of  all the travailes of  M. Anthony

Jenkinson, .  .  .  .  .  .  .195

A  letter  of  James  Alday  to  M. Michael  Locke  Agent  in

London  for  the  Moscovie  Company  touching  a  trade  -

to  be  established  in  Lappia, .  .  .  .197

vii

THE TABLE

A Catalogue  of  the  ^'ovages — Continued.  f-^ge

A  note  of  all  the  necess.iry  instruments  and  appurtenances

belonging  to  the  killing  of  the  Whale,  .  ,100

The  deposition  of  William  Burrough  to  certeine  Interrog;i-
tories  mooved  unto  him  concerning  the  Xarve  and
Kegor,  ....... 203

The  reasons  of  M.  William  Burrough  to  disswade  the  use

of  a  trade  to  the  Xarve  by  the  way  through  Sweden, 207

A  remembrance  of  advise  given  to  the  Moscovie  merchants,

toucJiing  a  voyage  for  Cola  abovesaid,  .  . ;oS

An Epistle dedicatorie unto the Queenes  most  excellent

Majestic,  written  by  M.  William  Burrough,  .  . 209

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  to  Shaugh  Thamas  the  great

Sophy  of  Persia, .  .  .  .  .  .212

The  voyage  of  Christopher  Burrough  into  Persia  the  sixt

time.  Anno 1579, .  .  .  .  .  .214

The  Latitudes  and  Meridian  Altitudes  of  divers  places  in

Russia,  from  the  North  to  the  South,  .  . 247

Directions given by M. Richard Hakluyt Esquire, to

Morgan  Hubblethome  Diet,  sent  into  Persia,  . 249

A  Commission  given  by  sir  Rowland  Hepvard  knight,  and
George  Barne  Aldermen,  and  govemours  of  the
Moscovie  Company,  to  Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jack-
man,  for  the  discover}-  by  Sea  tow;irds  Cathay, . 2  >  i

Rules and orders  given to be  observed  by  them  in that

Discoverr, ....... 259

Brieie  advises  given  by  I^I. John  Dee  to  that  purpose, . 262

Instructions  given them by  Richard Hakluyt Esquire to

that  purpose  also,  ...... 264

viii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — -Continued.  page

The letter of  Gerard. Mercator to Richard Hakluyt of

Oxford  touching  that  discovery,  .  .  . 275

The  voyage  of  Arthur  Pet  and  Charles  Jackman,  sent  to
discover  the  Northeast  seas  beyond  the  Hand  of
Vaigats,  Anno 1580, ..... 282

Instructions  given  by  the  Moscovie  Company  unto  Richard
Gibbs,  William  Biggat,  John  Backhouse,  &c.  Masters
of  their  ships,  ...... 303

The  opinion  of  M.  William  Burrough,  sent  to  a  friend
requiring  his  judgement  for  the  fittest  time  of  the
departure  of  our  ships  toward S. Nicolas in Russia, 306

The  Queenes  Majesties  Commission  given  to  sir  Jerome
Bowes,  authorizing  him  her  highnesse  Ambassadour
with  the  Emperour  of  Moscovie,  .  .  . 308

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  written  to  the  Emperour  by

sir  Jerome  Bowes  in  his  commendation,  .  . 312

The  discourse  of  the  Ambassage  of  sir  Jerome  Bowes  to  the

aforesaid  Emperour,  .  .  .  .  .315

The  maner  of  preferring  suites  in Russia, .  .  .329

A  letter  of  M.  Henry  Lane  to  M.  William  Sanderson
merchant  of  London,  conteyning  a  briefe  discourse  of
all  things  passed  in  our  Northren  discoveries  for  the
space  of  33.  yeeres,  .  .  .  .  -330

The  most  solemne  and  magnificent  Coronation  of  Pheodor
Ivanowich  Emperour  of  Russia,  set  downe  by  M.
Jerome  Horsey, .  .  .  .  .  -336

The  voyage of  Master Jerome Horsey over land from

Mosco  in  Russia  to  England,  Anno 1584, .  . 345

ix

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  Privileges graunted hj  the newe Emperour,  to the
\  English  merchants,  and  obteined  by  the  foresaid  Jerom

Horsey,  ....... 347

The  Ambassage  of  M.  Giles  Fletcher,  Doctor  of  the  Civil
lawe,  from  her  Majestic,  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia, .

A  notable  description  of  Russia,  ....

A  voyage  to  the  Northeast,  performed  by  certaine  Russes,

and  translated  out  of  Sigismundus  ab  Herberstein, . 405

A  speciall  note  gathered  by  the  excellent  Venetian  Cosmo-
grapher  M.  John  Baptista  Ramusius,  concerning  the
Northeast  passage,  .  .  .  .  .412

The  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich  his  letter  to  the  right  hon-
ourable William  Burghley  Lord  high  Treasurer  of
England, .  .  .  .  .  .  .419

The Oueenes Majesties letter to Pheodor Ivanowich,

Emperour  of  Russia,  .  .  .  .  .422

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  to  the  Lord  Boris  Pheo-
dorowich, .  .  .  .  .  .428

The  L.  Treasurer  sir  William  Cecil  his  letter  to  the  Lord

Boris  Pheodorowich,  .  .  .  .  .430

A  letter  of  Pheodor  Ivanowich  to  the  Oueenes  Majestie, . 432

An other letter to the Queenes most excellent  Majestie

from  the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich, .  .  . 434

A  second  letter  from  the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich  to  the

L.  William  Burghley, ..... 436

A  most  gracious  letter  of  Privileges  given  to  the  English

merchants  by  Pheodor  Ivanowich,  .  .  . 439

X  —

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  contents  of  M.  Garlands  Commission  unto  Thomas
Simkinson  for  the  bringing  of  M.  John  Dee  to  the
Emperour  of  Russia  his  Court, .  .  .  .44.5

A  letter  to  the  right  worsh.  M.  John  Dee  Esquier,  con-
teyning  the  summe  and  effect  of  M.  Garland  his
message, ....... 44.7

A  branch  of  a  letter  from  John  Merick  touching  the  death

of  Pheodor  Ivanowich, ..... 448

A  learned  Epistle  written  unto  the  famous  Cosmographer
M.  Gerardus  Mercator,  concerning  the  Countreys,
Rivers  and  Seas,  towards  the  Northeast,  .  . 450

The  honourable  testimonies  of  divers  strangers  touching  the
notable  discoveries  of  the  English,  made  in  the  North-
east parts, .  .  .  ,  .  .  .458

Appendix  :

The  Ambassage  of  Sir  Hierome  Bowes  to  the  Emperour

of  Moscovie, 1583,  .  .  .  .  . 463

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Jerome  Bowes, ..... Frontispiece

From  the  portrait  at  Charlton  Park,  by  permission  of
the  Earl  of  Suffolk  and  Berkshire.  This  portrait,
which  it  is  believed  has  never  been  reproduced
before,  shows  Sir  Jerome  Bowes  in  his  dress  as
Ambassador  to  Russia.

Abd'Ullah  Khan, 32

This  portrait  is  taken  from  a  manuscript  album  in  the
Oriental  Department  of  the  British  Museum,  con-
taining miniatures  by  Indian  artists,  mostly  portraits
of  princes  and  chiefs  of  the  reigns  of  Jahangir,
Shah  Jehan,  and  Aurangzeb.  It  was  made  a  Vakf  or
pious  donation  by  Ashraf  Khan,  whose  seal  bears
the  date  A.H.  1072.  Abd'Ullah  was  'King'  of
Bokhara  (Boghar)  at  the  time  of  Anthony  Jenkinson's
visit  in 1558.

A  Russian  Lodia,  or  Small  Coaster, ... 80

From  De  Bry^s  Collections  of  Travels  and  Voyages.
Petits  (Eastern)  Voyages,  Part  III.  Frankfort, 1601.

Chart  of  the  Northern  Ocean  by  William  Burrough, 224.

William Burrough or Borough  was born at Northam
in  Devonshire  in 1536. In 1583  he was  Comp-
troller of the Queen's Navy: in 1587 he was
xiii

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Vice-Admiral  (on  The  Lion)  under  Drake  in  the
Cadiz  Expedition  of  that  year.  He  died  in  1599.
His  map  of  Russia,  mentioned  on  page  209,  is
now  lost,  but  several  of  his  charts  are  still  extant.
The  Chart  here  reproduced  is  in  his  own  hand-
writing, and  bears  his  signature.  It  is  taken  from
the  original  in  Saxton  ij'  Rythers  Atlas  in  the
British  Museum,  which  was  Lord  Burghley's  own
copy.

Abraham  Ortelius, .  .  .  .  .  .272

Ortelius  or  Ortels  was  born  at  Antwerp  in  1527,  and
died  there  in  1598.  In  1570  he  published  the  first
edition  of  the  Theatrum  Orbis  Terrarum,  which
collected  in  one  volume  many  of  the  best  maps  then
existing.  This  Atlas  was  re-published  in  many
editions  until  161 2.  The  map  Typus  Orbis
Terrarum,  issued  with  Vol.  I.  of  this  edition,  is  one
of  the  few  maps  which  Ortelius  is  known  to  have
engraved  himself,  but  it  is  chiefly  as  a  preserver  of
maps  that  in  his  day  had  already  become  scarce  that
he  is  best  known.  This  portrait  is  taken  from  the
first  edition  of  his  Theatrum  Orbis  Terrarum,  pub-
lished at  Antwerp in 1570.

Gerardus  Mercator  and  Jodocus  Hondius, .  . 288

Gerardus  Mercator  was  born  in  Rupelmonde,  in  Flanders,
in  1 5 12.  He  speedily  became  famous  as  a  map
engraver  and  instrument  maker,  and  in  1569  he
published  his  Map  of  the  World,  on  the  projection
now  called  after  him.  The  projection,  however,
in  his  map  is  only  approximately  correct,  and  the
true  tables  for  this  projection  and  the  mathematical
principles  on  which  they  are  founded  were  first
discovered  and  published  by  Edward  Wright  in
1599.  Mercator  died  in  1594,  just  before  the
publication  of  the  last  part  of  his  great  Atlas.  His
Atlas  was  ready  before  that  of  Ortelius,  but  with  a
xiv

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

noble  generosity  Mercator  delayed  its  publication,
to  give  his  friend  a  chance  of  fame.  Jodocus
Hondius  was  born  in  Ghent  in  1563.  He  worked
as  an  engraver,  and  went  to  London  on  the  out-
break of  the  War  in  the  Netherlands,  and  while
there  became  the  friend  of  Edward  Wright  who
showed  him  the  MS.  of  his  map  projection.
Wright  accuses  him  of  having  appropriated  his
calculations  and  used  them  for  his  own  maps.
Hondius  purchased  in  1604  Mercator's  engraved
copper-plates,  and  thereafter  published  many  maps
and  new  editions  of  Mercator's  Works.  He  died  in
161 1.  The  portraits  here  reproduced  are  taken
from  the  first  English  edition  of  Mercator's  Atlas,
'  translated  by  Henry  Hexham,  Quartermaister  to
the  Regiment  of  Colonell  Goring,'  and  printed
at  Amsterdam  in 1636.

Plan  of  Moscow,  .  .  .  . .  .384

From  G.  Braun  and  F.  Hohenberg's  Chntates  Orbis
Terrarum,  1573.  This  plan  shows  Moscow  before
its  burning  by the  Crim Tartars in 1571.

Map  of  Russia,  ....... 486

Made  by  Anthony  Jenkinson  in  1562  to  illustrate  his
travels  through  Russia  and  Persia.  This  map  was
included  in  the  Theatrum  Orb'is  Terrarum  of  Abraham
Ortelius, 1570,  and  is  taken  from  that  edition.

XV

THE THIRD VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made  to  the  North  and  North-east  quarters  of  the

World,  with  the  directions,  letters,  privileges

discourses,  and  observations  incident

to  the  same

The  Queenes  Majesties  Letters  to  the  Emperour
of  Russia,  requesting  Hcence,  and  safe  con-
duct for  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson  to  passe
thorow  his  kingdome  of  Russia,  into  Persia,
to  the  Great  Sophie. 1561.

LiZABETHA  Dei  gratia,  Angliae,  &c.
Regina,  serenissimo  &  potentissimo
principi,  D.  Joanni  Basilivich,  Im-
peratori  totius  Russiae,  Magno  Duci,
&c.  Salutem,  &  omnium  rerum  pros-
perarum  foelicissimum  incrementum.
Potentissime  Princeps,  res  est  nobis  ad
memorandum  longe  gratissima,  ilia  vestras  Majest  tis
erga  nos  &  nostros  amicitia.  Quas  tempore  foelicissimas
memoriae  Regis  Edwardi  sexti,  fratris  nostri  charissimi,
Dei  benignitate  incepta,  deinceps  vero  vestra  non  solum
singulari  humanitate  alta  atque  fota,  sed  incredibili  etiam
bonitate  aucta  atque  cumulata,  nunc  autem  omnibus
benevolentiae  vestrae  officiis  sic  firmata  est  atque  con-
stabilita,  ut  jam  minime  dubitemus,  quin  ea  ad  laudem
Dei,  ad  gloriam  utriusque  nostrum,  ad  publicam  nos-
trorum  utrobique  regnorum  immensam  commoditatem,
ad  privatam  singulorum  utrinque  subditorum  optatam
spem,  certamque  foelicitatem  multis  sit  deinceps  seculis
duratura.  Et  quanquam  haec  vestra  bonitas,  plenissime
sese  effudit  in  omnes  nostros  subditos,  qui  sese  in  ullas
imperii  vestri  partes  unquam  receperunt,  (pro  qua
ingentes  nostras,  ut  par  est,  gratias  vestrae  Majestati
habemus, vestrisque vicissim in omni opportunitatis

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

loco  libentissime  feremus)  tamen  abundantia  benigni-
tatis  vestrae,  in  accipiendo,  tamque  humaniter  tractando
nostrum  fidelem  &  perdilectum  famulum  Antonium
Jenkinson,  qui  has  perfert  literas,  seorsim  nobis  gratis-
[I-  339-]  sima  existit.  Nam  prasterquam  quod  nullis  non  locis
vestri  Imperii  &  magna  libertate,  &  summa  humanitate;
vestrae  serenitatis  non  permissu  soliim,  sed  jussu  etiam
frueretur,  vestra  bonitas  tamen  non  in  hac  domestical
benign^  faciendi  ratione  conquievit,  sed  perlibenter  &
ultro  eundum  nostrum  hunc  per  dilectum  famulum,
variis  exteris  principibus,  quoquoversus  ipse  iter  suum
instituerat,  Uteris  suis,  suo  magno  Imperiali  sigillo
consignatis  commendavit.  Quod  beneficium  illi  ubivis
gentium,  &  viam  sine  ullo  periculo,  propter  publicam
vestram  fidem,  &  adventum  cum  magno  favore,  propter
vestram  commendationem,  optate  quidem  &  foeliciter
communivit.  Itaque  quemadmodum  gemina  haec  vestra
benevolentia,  cum  ilia  generalis  exhibita  in  vestro
regno  negotiantibus  subditis  nostris  universis,  tum  ista
seorsim  praestita  huic  Antonio  Jenkinson,  perfideli
nostro  famulo,  nobis  in  mente  non  solum  ad  gratam
perpetuamque  memoriam,  veriim  etiam  ad  mutuam,  vel
opportunam  compensationem,  firmissime  defixa  est  :  ita,
petimus  a  vestra  Maj estate  ut  utramque  benevolentiae
vestrae  rationem  &  communem  nostris  universis,  &
privatam  huic  nostro  dilecto  famulo,  utrisque  deinceps
dignetur  tueri,  atque  conservare.  Neque  nos  quidem
diffidimus,  quin  quem  favorem  vestra  Majestas  antea
sua  sponte  Antonio  Jenkinson,  tum  quidem  privato
ostendit,  eundem  nunc  nostro  rogatu  eidem  Antonio
in  nostrum  jam  famulatum  cooptato  benigne  velit  denuo
declarare.  Et  propterea  petimus  a  vestra  Maj  estate,  ut
dignetur  iterum  concedere  eidem  nostro  famulo,  literas
suas  commeatus,  publicas  fidei,  ac  salviconductus,  quarum
tenore,  authoritate,  atque  praesidio,  sit  illi,  familiaribus
suis,  &  servis,  tutum,  liberumque,  cum  mercibus,  sar-
cinis,  equis,  &  bonis  suis  universis,  invehendis  evehen-
disque, per vestra regna, domicilia, atque provincias,

2

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1561.

proficisci,  ire,  transire,  redire,  abire,  &  istic  morari,
quamdiu  placuerit,  &  inde  recedere  quandocunque  illi
aut  suis  libitum  fuerit.  Et  sicut  non  dubitamus,  quin
vestra  Majestas  haec  omnia  humanitatis  grata  officia,  pro
immensa  bonitate  sus  naturae  benigne  &  largiter  huic
famulo  nostro  sit  concessura,  ita  valde  optamus,  adeoque
petimus,  ut  vestra  Majestas  eodem  nostrum  famulum,
una  cum  omnibus  suis  familiaribus,  ac  bonis,  exteris  aliis
principibus  literis  suis  dignetur  commendare,  prassertim
vero  atque  seorsim  Magno  Sophi,  Persarum  Imperatori,
in  cujus  etiam  imperia  &  ditiones  idem  noster  famulus
gratia  potissime  experiundi  peregrina  commercia,  pro-
ficisci una  cum  suis  constituit.

Confidimus  igitur  haec  omnia  nostra  postulata  pro
famuli  spe,  pro  nostra  expectatione,  pro  vestra  bonitate,
pro  nostrorum  utrinque  subditorum  commoditate,
fausta  illi,  grata  nobis,  accepta  etiam  vestras  Majesti,  &
nostris  utrobique  perquam  utilia  evasura.  Deus  vestrae
Majestatis,  &c.  Datum  in  celeberrima  nostra  Civitate
Londini,  anno  mundi  5523.  Domini  ac  Dei  nostri
Jesu  Christi 1561.  regnorum  vero  nostrorum  tertio.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queene  of  England,
&c.  to  the  right  excellent,  and  right  mightie  Prince,
Lord  John  Basiliwich,  Emperour  of  all  Russia,  &c.
greeting,  and  most  happie  increase  in  all  prosperitie.
Right  mightie  Prince,  the  amitie  of  your  Majestie
towards  us  and  our  subjects  is  very  pleasant  to  us  to
be  remembred,  which  being  begun  by  the  goodnesse
of  God  in  the  reigne  of  our  most  deare  brother  of
happie  memorie.  King  Edward  the  sixt,  and  afterwards,
through  your  not  onely  singular  humanitie,  fed,  and
nourished,  but  also  through  your  incredible  goodnesse
increased,  and  augmented,  is  now  firmed  and  estab-
lished, with  all  maner  of  tokens  of  your  benevolence,
that  now  we  doubt  not,  but  that  from  hencefoorth,
during  many  ages,  the  same  shall  endure  to  the  praise

3

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

of  God,  to  both  our  glories,  to  the  publike  great
commoditie  of  our  Realmes  on  either  part,  and  to  the
private  desired  hope,  and  certeine  felicitie  of  all  our
subjects.  And  although  that  this  your  goodnesse  hath
bene  abundantly  extended  to  all  our  subjects,  that  have
at  any  time  repaired  into  any  part  of  your  Empire,  for
the  which  wee  give  (as  reason  is)  your  Majestie  right
heartie  thanks,  and  will  againe  shew  the  like  unto  yours,
right  willingly,  whensoever  opportunitie  shall  require ;
yet  the  abundance  of  your  benignitie  both  in  receiving,
and  also  in  enterteining  our  faithfull  and  beloved  servant,
Anthonie  Jenkinson,  the  bringer  of  these  our  letters,
is  unto  us  for  him  privately  very  thankefull.  For
besides  this,  that  in  all  places  of  your  Empire,  he  not
onely  by  your  Majesties  sufferance,  but  also  by  your
commandement,  enjoyed  much  libertie,  and  great  friend-
ship, your  goodnesse  not  ceasing  in  this  your  domestical!
disposition  of  clemencie,  did  right  willingly,  and  of
your  owne  abundant  grace,  commend  the  same  our
welbeloved  servant,  by  your  letters  sealed  with  your
Imperiall  scale,  to  sundrie  forren  Princes,  unto  whom  he
was  minded  to  journey  :  which  your  magnificence  did
purchase  unto  him  happily,  according  to  his  desire,  both
passage  without  all  perill,  through  your  notable  credit,
and  also  atchieving  of  his  journey  through  your  com-
mendation. Thereforelike  as  these  your  duplicated
benevolences, both that one generally exhibited to all

[I.  340.]  our  subjects  frequenting  that  your  Realme,  and  also
this  the  other  extended  apart  to  this  our  right  faithfull
servant  Anthonie  Jenkinson,  is  right  assuredly  fastened
in  our  remembrance,  not  onely  for  a  perpetuall  and
gratefull  memoriall,  but  also  for  a  mutuall  and  meet
compensation  :  so  we  desire  of  your  Majestie,  to  vouch-
safe from  hencefoorth  to  conserve  and  continue  the
geminate  disposition  of  your  benevolences,  both
generally  to  all  our  subjects,  and  also  privately  to
this  our  beloved  servant.  And  we  doubt  not,  but
that at our request,  you will againe graciously shew

4

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  a;d.

1561.

unto  the  same  Anthony,  now  admitted  into  our  ser-
vice, the  like  favor  as  heretofore  your  Majesty  of
your  meere  motion  did  exhibite  unto  him,  being  then
a  private  person.  And  therefore  we  desire  your
Majesty  eftsoones  to  grant  to  the  same  our  servant,
your  letters  of  licence,  pasport,  "  &  safe  conduct,
through  the  tenour,  authority,  and  helpe  whereof,  he,
his  servants,  together  with  their  merchandises,  baggages,
horses,  and  goods  whatsoever,  that  shall  be  brought
in,  or  carried  out,  by  or  thorow  all  your  empire,  king-
dome,  dominions,  and  provinces,  may  surely  and  freely
journey,  go,  passe,  repasse,  depart,  and  there  tary  so
long  as  it  shall  please  him  :  and  from  thence  returne
whensoever  it  shall  seeme  good  to  him  or  his :  and  as
we  doubt  not,  but  that  your  Majesty  in  the  goodnesse
of  your  nature  will  graciously  and  abundantly  grant  all
these  good  offices  of  humanity,  so  we  do  heartily  desire
that  your  Majesty  wil  likewise  vouchsafe  to  commend
the  same  our  servant,  together  with  all  his  goods,  by
your  letters  to  other  forren  Princes,  and  specially  to
the  great  Sophy,  and  Emperour  of  Persia,  into  whose
empire  and  jurisdictions  the  same  our  servant  purposeth
with  his  for  to  journey,  chiefly  for  triall  of  forren  mer-
chandises.

We  therefore  doe  trust  that  all  these  our  demands  shall
tend,  and  have  effect,  according  to  the  hope  of  our
servant,  and  to  our  expectation,  for  your  wealth,  for  the  •
commodity  of  both  our  subjects,  lucky  to  him,  thankefull
to  us,  acceptable  to  your  Majesty,  and  very  profitable
to  our  subjects  on  either  part.  God  grant  unto  your
Majesty  long  and  happy  felicity  in  earth,  and  everlasting
in  heaven.  Dated  in  our  famous  city  of  London  the
25  day  of  the  moneth  of  April,  in  the  yeere  of  the
creation  of  the  world  5523,  and  of  our  Lord  God  Jesus
Christ,  1 561,  and  of  our  reigne  the  third.

[The  Queenes

A.D.
I561.

THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Queenes  Majesties  Letters  to  the  great  Sophy
of  Persia,  sent  by  M.  Anthonie  Jenkinson,
1561.

LizABETHA  Dei  gratia,  Angliae,  Franciae,
&  Hiberniae  Regina,  &c.  Potentissimo
&  invictissimo  Principi,  Magno  Sophi
Persarum,  Medorum,  Parthorum,  Hir-
canorum,  Carmanorum,  Margianorum,
populorum  cis  &  ultra  Tygrim  fluvium,
&  omnium  intra  Mare  Caspium,  &  Per-
sicum  sinum  nationum  atque  Gentium  Imperatori
salutem,  &  rerum  prosperarum  foelicissimum  incremen-
tum.  Summi  Dei  benignitate  factum  est,  ut  quas  gentes,
non  solum  immensa  terrarum  spacia,  &  insuperabiles
marium  vastitates,  sed  &  ipsi  etiam  coelorum  cardines
longissime  disjunxerunt,  ipsae  tamen  literarum  bono  &
mentis  certa  cogitata,  &  humanitatis  grata  officia,  &
intelligentiae  mutuas  multa  commoda  facile  inter  se
&  opportune  possint  communicare.  Itaque  cum  perdi-
lectus,  &  fidelis  noster  famulus  Antonius  Jenkinson,  qui
has  literas  nostras  perfert,  cum  bona  venia,  favore,  &
gratia  nostra  hoc  Angliae  nostras  regnum  excedere,  &  in
Persiam  usque,  vestrasque  alias  ditiones  Dei  benignitate
penetrare  constituerit,  hoc  illius  institutum  perlaudabile
quidem  grato  nostro  favore  prosequi,  &  promovere
studuimus :  id  quod  eo  nos  libentiiis  facimus,  quoniam
hoc  ejus  propositum  ex  honesto  studio  commercii  con-
stituendi  potissimum  cum  vestris  subditis,  aliisque  pere-
grinis  hominibus,  ad  vestra  regna  confluentibus,  omnino
exortum  sit.  Propterea  nobis  &  scribendum  ad  vestram
Majestatem,  ab  eaque  petendum  esse  duximus,  ut  nostro
rogatu  dignetur  concedere  huic  famulo  nostro  Antonio
Jenkinson  literas  publicae  fidei,  &  salvi  conductus,
quarum  authoritate  atque  praesidio,  licitum,  liberumque
sit  illi,  una  cum  suis  familiaribus,  servis,  sarcinis,  mer-
cibus & bonis universis, per vestra regna, domicilia,

6

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1561.

ditiones,  atque  provincias  libere,  &  sine  impedimento
proficisci,  ire,  transire,  redire,  abire,  &  istic  morari,
quamdiu  placuerit,  &  inde  recedere,  quandocunque  illi
vel  suis  lubitum  fuerit.  Si  haec  sancta  hospitalitatis  jura
&  dulcia  communis  humanitatis  officia,  inter  nos,  nostra
regna,  nostrosque  subditos  libenter  constitui,  sincere  coli,
&  constanter  conservari  queant,  speramus  nos,  Deum
Optimum  Maximum  effecturum,  ut  ab  hiis  parvis  initiis,
grandiora  rerum  momenta,  nobis  ad  magna  ornamenta
atque  decus,  nostris  ad  summa  commoda  atque  usus,
aliquando  sint  oritura  :  siquidem,  ut  non  terra,  non  mare,
non  coelum,  ad  nos  longissime  seperandos,  quam  divina
ratio  communis  humanitatis,  &  mutuas  benevolentiae  ad
nos  firmissime  conjungendos  plus  virium  habuisse  vi-
deatur.  Deus  salutem  omnem,  &  foelicem  in  terris,  &  [I.  341.]
perpetuam  in  coelis,  vestras  concedat  Majestati.  Datum
in  Anglia,  in  celebri  nostra  urbe  Londino,  25  die  mensis
Aprilis,  anno  mundi,  5523,  Domini  ac  Dei  nostri  Jesu
Christi,  1 56 1,  regnorum  vero nostrorum  tertio.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queene  of  England,  This  letter

&c. To the riffht mightie, and right victorious  ^'^{^^jo  writ-

■r,  .  ,  o 1  • ?^  r ^1 -r» •  tentn Hebrew,

Frmce, the great bophie, JLmperour or the Jrersians,  and  Italian

Medes,  Parthians,  Hircans,  Carmanians,  Margians,  of  the
people  on  this  side,  and  beyond  the  river  of  Tygris,  and
of  all  men,  and  nations,  betweene  the  Caspian  sea,  and
the  gulfe  of  Persia,  greeting,  and  most  happie  increase
in  all  prosperitie.  By  the  goodnesse  of  the  Almightie
God  it  is  ordeined,  that  those  people,  which  not  onely
the  huge  distance  of  the  lands,  and  the  invincible  wide-
nesse  of  the  seas,  but  also  the  very  quarters  of  the
heavens  do  most  farre  separate,  and  set  asunder,  may
neverthelesse  through  good  commendation  by  writing,
both  ease,  and  also  communicate  betweene  them,  not
onely  the  conceived  thoughts,  or  deliberations,  and  grate-
full  offices  of  humanitie,  but  also  many  commodities  of
mutuall intelligence. Therefore whereas our faithfull,

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

and  right  welbeloved  servant  Anthonie  Jenkinson,  bearer
of  these  our  letters,  is  determined  with  our  licence,
favour,  and  grace,  to  passe  out  of  this  our  Realme,  and
by  Gods  sufferance  to  travell  even  into  Persia,  and  other
your  jurisdictions :  we  minde  truely  with  our  good
favour,  to  set  forward,  and  advance  that  his  right  laud-
able purpose :  and  that  the  more  willingly,  for  that  this
his  enterprise  is  onely  grounded  upon  an  honest  intent,
to  establish  trade  of  merchandise  with  your  subjects,  and
with  other  strangers  traffiking  in  your  realm es.  Wher-
fore  we  have  thought  good,  both  to  write  to  your
Majestie,  and  also  to  desire  the  same,  to  vouchsafe  at
our  request,  to  grant  to  our  sayd  servant,  Anthonie
Jenkinson,  good  pasports,  and  safe  conducts,  by  meanes,
and  authoritie  whereof,  it  may  be  free  and  lawfull  for
him,  together  with  his  familiars,  servants,  cariages,
merchandise,  and  goods  whatsoever,  thorow  your
Realmes,  Dominions,  Jurisdictions,  and  Provinces,  freely,
and  without  impeachment,  to  journey,  go,  passe,  repasse,
and  tary  so  long  as  he  shall  please,  and  from  thence  to
returne  whensoever  he  or  they  shall  thinke  good.  If
these  holy  dueties  of  entertainment,  and  sweet  offices  of
naturall  humanitie  may  be  willingly  concluded,  sincerely
embraced,  and  firmely  observed  betweene  us,  and  our
Realmes,  and  subjects,  then  we  do  hope  that  the
Almightie  God  will  bring  it  to  passe,  that  of  these  small
beginnings,  greater  moments  of  things  shall  hereafter
spring,  both  to  our  furniture  and  honours,  and  also  to
the  great  commodities,  and  use  of  our  peoples :  so  it
will  be  knowen  that  neither  the  earth,  the  seas,  nor  the
heavens,  have  so  much  force  to  separate  us,  as  the  godly
disposition  of  naturall  humanity,  and  mutuall  benevolence
have  to  joyne  us  strongly  together.  God  grant  unto
your  Majestie  long  and  happy  felicity  in  earth,  and  per-
petuall  in  heaven.  Dated  in  England,  in  our  famous  citie
of  London,  the  25  day  of  the  moneth  of  April,  in  the
yere  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  5523,  and  of  our  Lord
and  God  Jesus  Christ,  1561,  and  of  our  reigne  the  third.

THE  RUSSIA  COMPANY'S  INSTRUCTIONS

A.D.

I561.

A  remembrance  given  by  us  the  Governours,
Consuls,  and  Assistants  of  the  company  of
Merchants  trading  into  Russia,  the  eight
day  of  May  1561,  to  pur  trustie  friend
Anthonie  Jenkinson,  at  his  departure  towards
Russia,  and  so  to  Persia,  in  this  our  eight
journey.

Irst  you  shall  understand  that  we  have
laden  in  our  good  ship,  called  the
Swallow,  one  Chest,  the  keyes  whereof
we  doe  heere  deliver  you,  and  also  a
bill,  wherein  are  written  particularly  the
contents  in  the  sayd  Chest,  and  what
every  thing  did  cost :  and  because,  as
you  know,  the  sayd  Chest  is  of  charge,  we  desire
you  to  have  a  speciall  regard  unto  it,  and  when  God
shall  send  you  unto  Mosco,  our  mindes  and  will  is,
that  you,  with  the  advise  of  our  Agents  there,  doe
appoint  some  such  presents  for  the  Emperour  and  his
Sonne,  either  wine,  cloth  of  golde,  scarlet,  or  plate,  as  to
your  good  discretion  shall  be  thought  meet,  and  when
you  have  delivered  unto  him  the  Queenes  Majesties
Letters,  and  our  sayd  present  in  the  name  of  the  Com-
pany, we  thinke  it  good  that  you  make  your  humble
sute  unto  his  Highnesse  in  our  name,  to  get  his  licence
or  safe  conduct  for  you  and  all  other  our  servants
or  Agents  at  all  times  hereafter  with  such  wares  and
merchandise  as  you  at  this  time,  or  they  hereafter  at
all  other  times  shall  thinke  good  to  passe  out  of  his
dominions  towards  Tartaria,  Persia,  or  other  places,  and
also  to  returne  unto  Mosco  with  such  wares  and
merchandises  as  you  shall  bring  or  send  from  any  land
or  countrey  that  is  not  in  his  dominions,  and  if  it  be
thought  good  by  you  and  our  Agents  there  to  make  [I.  342-]
composition  with  the  emperor  or  his  officers  for  some
certeine  custome  or  tole upon  such  goods as  we shall

9

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

passe  that  way,  to  the  intent  we  might  be  the  better
favored,  we  refer  it  to  your  descretion,  foreseeing  that
ye  opening  of  this  matter  be  not  prejudicial!  unto  our
former  privileges.

And  for  the  sale  of  our  cloth  of  gold,  plate,  pearles,
saphyres,  and  other  jewels,  we  put  our  trust  and  confi-
dence in  you  principally  to  sell  them  for  ready  money,
time  to  good  debters,  or  in  barter  for  good  wares,  so
that  you  make  our  other  Agents  privy  how  and  for
what  price  you  sell  any  of  the  premisses,  and  also
deliver  such  summes  of  money,  billes  or  wares,  as  you
shall  receive,  unto  our  said  Agents :  thinking  good
further,  that  if  you  perceive  that  the  plate  or  other
jewels,  or  any  part  thereof  will  not  be  sold  for  profit
before  your  departure  from  the  Mosco,  that  then  you
cause  them  to  be  safe  packed,  and  set  order  they  may
be  sent  hither  againe  in  our  shippes  the  next  yeere,
except  you  perceive  that  there  may  be  some  profit  in
carrying  some  part  of  them  into  Persia,  which  we  would
not  to  be  of  any  great  value.

We  have  also  laden  in  the  sayd  Swallow  and  the
other  two  ships  80  fardles,  conteining  400  kersies,  as
by  ye  invoice  doth  appeare,  which  fardles  be  packed,
&  appointed  to  be  caried  into  Persia  :  neverthelesse,  if
you  chance  to  finde  good  sales  for  them  in  the  Mosco,
we  thinke  it  were  good  to  sell  part  of  them  there,
and  to  cary  the  lesse  quantity  with  you,  because  we
be  uncertaine  what  vent  or  sale  you  shall  finde  in
Persia  or  other  places  where  you  shall  come.

If  you  obtaine  the  Emperours  licence  to  passe  out  of
his  dominions,  and  to  returne,  as  aforesaid,  &  that  you
perceive  you  may  safely  do  the  same,  our  minde  is,
that  at  such  time  as  you  thinke  best  and  most  con-
venient for  that  purpose,  you  do  appoint  so  many,  and
such  of  our  hired  servants  or  apprentises  as  you  thinke
necessary  &  meet  for  our  affaires,  and  may  best  be
spared,  to  go  with  you  in  your  said  voyage,  whereof
we  would  one  to  be  such  as  you  might  make  privy  of

THE  RUSSIA  COMPANY'S  INSTRUCTIONS ad.

1561.

all  your  doings  for  divers  considerations  and  causes
that  may  happen  :  which  servants  and  apprentises,  we
will  and  command,  by  this  our  remembrance,  to  be
obedient  unto  you  as  unto  us,  not  onely  to  goe  with
you  and  to  doe  such  things  as  you  command  them  in
your  presence,  but  also  to  goe  unto  such  countreys  or
places  as  you  shall  appoint  them  unto,  either  with
wares  or  without  wares,  &  there  to  remaine  and  con-
tinue so  long  as  you  shall  thinke  good,  and  if  they  or  any
of  them  will  refuse  to  do  such  things  as  you  do  ap-
point them,  as  aforesaid,  or  that  any  of  them  (be  he
hired  servant  or  apprentise)  do  misuse  himselfe  by  any
maner  of  disobedience  or  disorder,  and  will  not  by
gentle  and  faire  meanes  be  reformed,  we  will  that  you
send  him  backe  to  the  Mosco,  with  straight  order  that
he  may  be  sent  from  thence  hither,  &  let  us  have
knowledge  of  his  evill  behavior,  to  the  intent  that  if
he  be  a  hired  servant  we  may  pay  him  his  wages
according  to  his  service,  and  if  he  be  an  apprentise  we
may  use  him  according  to  his  deserts.

We  will  also  that  you  take  with  you  such  karsies,
scarlet,  and  other  clothes,  or  any  other  such  wares  of
ours,  as  you  shall  thinke  good,  and  so  in  the  name  of
God  to  take  your  journey  towards  Persia,  either  by  the
way  of  Astracan  and  Mare  Caspium,  or  otherwise,  as
you  shall  see  cause  :  and  when  God  sendeth  you  into
Persia,  our  minde  is,  that  you  repaire  unto  the  great
Sophy  with  the  Queenes  Majesties  letters,  if  he  be  not
too  farre  from  the  Caspian  sea  for  you  to  travell,  and
that  you  make  him  such  a  present  as  you  shall  thinke
meet,  and  if  you  passe  by  any  other  kings,  princes,  or
governors,  before  or  after  you  come  to  the  presence  of
the  Sophy,  likewise  to  make  them  some  present,  as
you  see  cause,  according  to  their  estate  and  dignitie,
and  withall  to  procure  letters  of  privilege  or  safecon-
duct  of  the  sayd  Sophy  or  other  princes  in  as  large
and  ample  manner  as  you  can,  for  the  sure  establishing
of  further  trade  in  merchandise by  us heereafter  to  be

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

made,  frequented  and  continued  in  those  parts,  not
onely  that  we  may  freely  sell  in  all  places  within  his
dominions  such  wares  as  we  cary  thither,  but  also  buy
and  bring  away  any  maner  of  wares  or  merchandise
whatsoever  it  be,  that  is  for  our  purpose  and  com-
moditie  within  his  dominions,  with  free  passage  also  for
us  at  all  times,  to  passe  as  often  as  we  will  with  our
goods  and  merchandise  into  any  part  of  India  or  other
countreys  thereunto  adjoyning,  and  in  like  maner  to
returne  thorow  his  dominions  into  Russia  or  elswhere.
And  for  the  sale  of  our  kersies  or  other  wares  that
you  shall  have  with  you,  as  our  trust  is  that  you  will
doe  for  our  most  profit  and  commoditie  :  even  so  we
referre  all  unto  your  good  discretion,  aswell  in  the
sale  of  our  sayd  goods,  as  to  make  our  returne  in
such  things  as  you  shall  finde  there,  and  thinke  best
for  our  profit.  But  if  passage  cannot  be  had  into
Persia  by  Astracan,  or  otherwise,  the  next  Summer,
which  shalbe  in  the  yeere  1562,  then  our  minde  is,
that  you  procure  to  sell  our  kersies,  &  other  such
wares  as  are  appointed  for  Persia,  in  the  Mosco,  or
other  the  Emperours  dominions,  if  you  may  sell  them
for  any  reasonable  price,  and  then  to  employ  your  selfe
with  such  other  of  your  servants,  as  you  shall  thinke
The  passage  of  Ti\Q.^t  for  the  search  of  the  passage  by  Nova  Zembla,  or
NovaZembla.  gjg  ^q^  ^-q  returne  for  England  as  you  thinke  good.
Provided  alwayes,  that  if  you  do  perceive  or  under-
stand, that  passage  is  like  to  be  had  into  Persia  the
[I.  343.]  Summer  folowing,  which  shalbe  in  the  yere  1563,  and
that  you  can  not  sell  our  kersies  in  the  Emperours
dominions,  as  aforesayd,  at  a  reasonable  price  :  then  we
will  rather  they  may  be  kept  till  the  said  Summer  in
the  yeere  1563,  and  then  you  to  proceed  forwards  upon
your  journey  towards  Persia  as  aforesayd.  If  passage
into  Persia  cannot  be  obteined  the  next  yeere,  neither
good  hope  of  passage  in  the  yeere  1563,  neither  yet  in
the  meane  time  good  sale  of  our  kersies  in  the  Em-
perours dominions, then we thinke good for  you to

12

THE  RUSSIA  COMPANY'S  INSTRUCTIONS a.d.

see  if  you  can  practise  to  cary  your  said  wares  by  safe
conduct  thorow  Polonia,  or  any  other  wayes  unto
Constantinople,  or  els  where  you  thinke  beter  sale
may  be  had, then  in  Russia.

Thus  have  we  given  you  to  understand  our  mean-
ings in  this  intended  adventure  :  .but  forasmuch  as  we
do  consider  and  know,  that  if  we  should  prescribe
unto  you  any  certeine  way,  or  direct  order  what  you
should  doe,  we  might  so  worke  cleane  contrary  to  our
purpose  and  intent  :  therefore  knowing  your  approved
wisedome  with  youre  experience,  and  also  your  carefull
and  diligent  minde  in  the  atchieving  and  bringing  to
good  successe  (by  the  helpe  of  almighty  God)  all  things
that  you  take  in  hand,  we  doe  commit  our  whole
affaires  concerning  the  said  adventure  wholly  unto  your
good  discretion,  praying  God  so  to  prosper  you,  as
may  be  first  for  his  glory,  secondly  for  the  honour  and
commoditie  of  this  realme,  and  next  for  our  profit,
with  the  increase  of  your  good  name  for  ever.

And  yet  further  desiring,  and  also  most  earnestly
requiring  you,  as  you  tender  the  state  of  our  company,
that  you  will  have  a  speciall  regard  unto  the  order  of
our  houses  &  our  servants,  aswell  at  Colmogro  and
Vologda,  as  at  Mosco,  and  to  see  and  consider  if  any
misorder  be  amongst  our  servants  or  apprentises,  wher-
by  you  thinke  we  might  hereafter  be  put  to  hinderance
or  losse  of  any  part  of  our  goods  or  privilege  there,
that  you  doe  not  onely  see  the  same  reformed,  but  also
to  certifie  us  thereof  by  your  letter  at  large,  as  our
trust  is  in  you.

And  for  the  better  knowledge  to  be  had  in  the
prices  and  goodnes  of  such  things  as  we  do  partly
suppose  you  shall  finde  in  the  partes  of  Russia,  we
doe  heerewith  deliver  you  a  quantitie  of  certeine
drugges,  wherby  you  may  perceive  how  to  know  the
best,  and  also  there  are  noted  the  prices  of  such  wares  ^^^^^^^ ^^^
and  drugges  as  be  heere  most  vendible  :  also  we  deliver  e^^g^to^M.'
you heerewith one pound and one ounce weight in  Jenkhson.

13

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1561.

brasse, to the end, that  you may therby, & with the

bill of  prices of  wares, know what things be worth

here. As for the knowledge of  silks,  we  need  not  to

give  you  any  instructions  thereof,  other  then  you  know.

And if you understand that any commoditie in

Russia be profitable for us to have with you into

Persia or other places, our minde is that our Agents

shall  either provide it for  you, or deliver  you  money

The  niaine  sea  to  make  provision  your  selfe. And  because  the  Russes

within  ikirtie  ^^y  ^j^^j.  -j.^  tra veiling  Eastwardes  from  Colmogro  thirty

dayes  East-  ^ r ^ i  ■ ^  ^u  • ^u  •  ^ U

ward  of  Col-  °^ iorty dayes  journey, there is the mame sea to be
mogro.  found, we thinke that Richard Johnson might imploy

his  time  that  way  by  land,  and  to  be  at  Mosco  time
enough  to  goe  with  you  into  Persia  :  for  if  it  be  true
that  he  may  travell  to  the  sea  that  way,  and  that  he
may  know  how  many  miles  it  is  towards  the  East  from
Colmogro,  it  will  be  a  great  helpe  for  us  to  finde  out
the  straight  and  passage  that  way,  if  any  be  there  to
be  had.

William  Gerard. ) p  f  William  Merike.

Thomas  Lodge,  j  '  \  Blase  Sanders.

14

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1561.

A  compendious  and  briefe  declaration  of  the
journey  of  M.  Anth.  Jenkinson,  from  the
famous  citie  of  London  into  the  land  of
Persia,  passing  in  this  same  journey  thorow
Russia,  Moscovia,  and  Mare  Caspium,  alias
Hircanum,  sent  and  imployed  therein  by  the
right  worshipfull  Societie  of  the  Merchants
Adventurers,  for  discoverie  of  Lands,  Islands,
&c.  Being  begun  the  foureteenth  day  of
May,  Anno  1561,  and  in  the  third  yere  of  1561.
the  reigne  of  the  Queenes  Majestic  that  now
is  :  this  present  declaration  being  directed  and
written  to  the  foresayd  Societie.

Irst  imbarking  my  selfe  in  a  good  shippe
of  yours,  named  the  Swallow,  at  Graves-
end,  having  a  faire  and  good  winde,  our
anker  then  weyed,  and  committing  all  to
the  protection  of  our  God,  having  in
our  sailing  diversitie  of  windes,  &  there-
by forced  to  direct  and observe  sundry

courses  (not  here  rehearsed,  because  you  have  bene
thereof  heretofore  amply  informed)  on  the  fourteenth
day  of  July,  the  yere  aforesayd  I  arrived  in  the  bay  of
S.  Nicholas  in  Russia  :  and  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day
of  the  same  moneth,  after  conference  then  had  with
your  Agents  there,  concerning  your  worships  affaires,
I  departed  from  thence,  passing  thorow  the  countrey  of
Vago,  and  on  the  eight  day  of  August  then  following,
I  came  to  Vologda,  which  is  distant  from  Colmogro,
seven  hundred  miles,  where  I  remained  foure  dayes,
attending  the  arrivall  of  one  of  your  boats,  wherein  was  [I.  344.
laden  a  chest  of  jewels  with  the  present,  by  your  worships
appointed  for  the  Emperors  Majesty :  which  being
arrived,  and  the  chest  received,  I  therewith  departed
toward  the  city  of  Mosco,  and  came  thither  the  twentieth

15

A.D.
I561.

The  Queenes
letters  to  the
Emperoiir  of
Russia.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

day  of  the  same  moneth,  where  I  immediatly  caused  my
comming  to  be  signified  unto  the  Secretary  of  the
Imperiall  Majesty,  with  the  Queenes  Highnesse  letters
addressed  unto  the  same  his  Majestie,  who  informed
the  Emperour  thereof.  But  his  Highnesse  having  great
affaires,  and  being  at  that  present  ready  to  be  married
unto  a  Ladie  of  Chircassi,  of  the  Mahometicall  law,
commanded  that  no  stranger,  Ambassadour,  nor  other,
should  come  before  him  for  a  time,  with  further  streight
charge,  that  during  the  space  of  three  dayes  that  the
same  solemne  feast  was  celebrating,  the  gates  of  the  citie
should  be  shut,  and  that  no  person,  stranger  or  native
(certeine  of  his  houshold  reserved)  should  come  out  of
their  said  houses  during  the  said  triumph,  the  cause
thereof  unto  this  day  not  being  knowen.

The  sixt  of  September  following,  the  Emperour  made
a  great  feast,  whereunto  were  called  all  Ambassadours
and  strangers  being  of  reputation,  and  having  affaires  :
amongst  whom  I  was  one,  but  being  willed  by  the
Secretary  first  to  come,  and  to  shew  him  the  Queenes
Majesties  letters,  I  refused  so  to  doe,  saying  I  would
deliver  the  same  unto  the  Emperours  owne  hands,  and
not  otherwise  :  which  heard,  the  Secretarie  answered,
that  unlesse  he  might  first  peruse  the  sayd  letters,  I
should  not  come  into  the  Emperors  presence,  so  that
I  was  not  at  the  feast.  Neverthelesse,  I  was  advertised
by  a  noble  man  that  I  was  inquired  for  by  the  Emperours
Majestie,  although  the  cause  of  my  absence  was  to  his
Majestie  unknowen.  The  next  day  following,  I  caused
a  supplication  to  be  made,  and  presented  it  to  his
Highnesse  owne  hands,  and  thereby  declared  the  cause
of  my  comming,  signified  by  the  Queenes  Majesties
letters,  and  the  answere  of  his  sayd  Secretary,  most
humbly  beseeching  his  Grace  that  he  would  receive  and
accept  the  same  her  Highnesse  letters,  with  such  honour
and  friendship,  as  his  letters  sent  by  Osep  Napea  were
received  by  the  hands  of  our  late  Sovereigne  Lady
Queene  Mary,  or  els  that  it  would  please  his  Highnes

16

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1561.

to  dismisse  me,  saying  that  I  would  not  deliver  the  said

letters  but  unto his  owne  hands,  for  that  it  is  so  used

in  our  countrey. Thus  the  matter  being  pondered,  and

the  effect  of  my  supplication  well  disgested,  I  was  foorth-

with  commaunded  to  come  with  the  said letters  before

his Majestie,  and  so  delivered th^  same  into  his  owne

hands (with such presents as by  you were  appointed)

according  to  my  request,  which  were  gratefully  accepted,

&  the same day I dined in his Graces presence,  with

great  entertainment. Shortly  after, I desired to know  Request  to

whether  I  should  be  licenced  to  passe  thorow  his  High-  P^^^^^^^to

J ••  ' ^ ^-i ijr-n-  j-^ Persia  thorow

nesse  dommions  mto  the  land  or  rersia,  accordmg  to  j^^^^g^ig
the  Queenes  Majesties  request :  hereunto  it  was  answered,
that  I  should  not  passe  thither,  for  that  his  Majestie
meant  to  send  an  armie  of  men  that  way  into  the  land
of  Chircassi,  whereby  my  journey  should  be  both  dan-
gerous &  troublesome,  and  that  if  I  should  perish  therein,
it  would  be  much  to  his  Graces  dishonour,  but  he
doubted  other  matters,  although  they  were  not  expressed.
Thus  having  received  his  answere,  neither  to  my  expecta-
tion, nor  yet  contentation,  and  there  remaining  a  good
part  of  the  yere,  having  in  that  time  solde  the  most  part
of  your  kersies  and  other  wares  appointed  for  Persia,
when  the  time  of  the  yeere  required  to  returne  for
England,  I  desired  pasport,  and  post  horses  for  money,
which  was  granted  :  but  having  received  my  pasport,
ready  to  depart,  there  came  unto  our  house  there  Osep  O-^^/  A^^/^^

Napea,  who  perswaded  me  that  I  should  not  depart  that  ^J^^^"^^'>^^

^ ^ . ^  1 • r  1 from  the  Em-

day,  saymg  that  the  llmperor  was  not  truely  mrormed,  peror  of  Russia

imputing  great  fault  to  the  frowardnesse  of  the  Secretary,  to  Q.  Mary.
who  was  not  my  friend  :  before  whom  comming  againe
the  next  day,  and  finding  the  same  Secretary  and  Osep
Napea  together,  after  many  allegations  and  objections  of
things,  and  perceiving  that  I  would  depart,  I  was  willed
to  remaine  untill  the  Emperours  Majestie  were  spoken
with  againe  touching  my  passage  :  wherewith  I  was  con-
tent, &  within  three  dayes  after  sending  for  me,  he
declared  that  the  Emperours  pleasure  was,  that  I  should
III  17  B

A.D.

1562.

Jn  ambassa-
dor of  Persia.

Astracan.

[I. 3+5.]

M.  Jenkinsotis
voyage  to  Bog-
har.

He  passeth  ike
Caspian  sea.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

not  onely  passe  thorow  his  dominions  into  Persia,  but
also  have  his  Graces  letters  of  commendations  to  forren
princes,  with  certaine  his  affaires  committed  to  my  charge,
too  long  here  to  rehearse  :  whereupon  I  appointed  my
selfe  for  the  voyage,  &  the  15  day  of  March,  the  yeere
aforesaid,  I  dined  againe  in  his  Majesties  presence  in
company  of  an  Ambassadour  of  Persia  and  others,  and
receiving  a  cup  of  drinke  at  his  Majesties  hands,  1  tooke
my  leave  of  his  Highnesse,  who  did  not  onely  give  me
letters,  as  aforesayd,  but  also  committed  matter  of  im-
portance and  charge  unto  me,  to  be  done  when  I  should
arrive  in  those  countreys  whither  I  intended  to  go,  and
having  all  things  in  readinesse  for  the  same  voyage,  I
departed  from  the  city  of  Mosco  the  27  day  of  April
1562,  downe  by  the  great  river  of  Volga,  in  company  of
the  said  Ambassadour  of  Persia,  with  whom  I  had  great
friendship  and  conference  all  the  way  downe  the  same
river  unto  Astracan,  where  we  arrived  all  in  health  the
10  day  of  June.

And  as  touching  the  situations  of  the  cities,  townes,
castles  and  countreys,  aswell  of  Mahometans  as  also  of
Gentils  adjoyning  to  the  same,  whereby  I  passed  from
Mosco  unto  Astracan,  I  omit  in  this  breviat  to  rehearse,
for  that  I  heretofore  have  declared  the  same  most  amply
unto  you  in  my  voyage  to  Boghar.  Thus  being  arrived
at  Astracan,  as  is  aforesayd,  I  repaired  unto  the  captaine
there,  unto  whom  I  was  commended  from  the  Emperours
Majesty,  with  great  charge  that  he  not  only  should  ayd
and  succor  me  with  all  things  needfull  during  my  abode
there,  but  also  to  safeconduct  me  with  50  gunners  wel
appointed  in  two  stroogs  or  brigantines  into  the  Caspian
sea,  until  I  had  passed  certaine  dangerous  places  which
pirats  &  rovers  do  accustome  to  haunt,  and  having  pre-
pared my  barke  for  the  sea,  the  Ambassador  of  Persia
being  before  departed  in  a  barke  of  his  owne  the  1 5  day
of  July,  the  yeere  aforesayd,  I  and  my  company  tooke
our  voyage  from  the  sayd  Astracan,  and  the  next  day
at  a  West sunne, passed the mouth of  the  said river

r8

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1562.

being  twenty  miles  distant,  lying  next  Southeast.  The
18  at  a  Southwest  sunne,  we  passed  by  three  Islands
being  distant  nine  miles  from  the  said  mouth  of  Volga,
and  Southsouthwest  from  thence,  sailing  Southsouthwest
the  next  day,  at  a  West  &  by  North  sun  we  fel  with
the  land  called  Challica  Ostriva,  being  foure  round  Islands
together,  distant  from  the  said  three  Islands  forty  miles.
From  thence  sailing  the  said  course  the  next  day,  we
had  sight  of  a  land  called  Tuke,  in  the  countrey  of  "i'he  comtrey
Tumen,  where  pirats  and  rovers  do  use :  for  feare  of  ^  Tumen.
whom  we  haled  off  into  the  sea  due  East  forty  miles,
and  fell  upon  shallowes  out  of  the  sight  of  land,  and
there  were  like  to  have  perished,  escaping  most  hardly :
then  the  22  day  we  had  sight  of  a  goodly  Island  called  The  Island  of
Chatalet,  distant  from  the  said  Challica  Ostriva  an  hundred  Chatalet.
miles,  the  winde  being  contrary,  and  a  stiffe  gale,  we  were
not  able  to  seize  it :  but  were  forced  to  come  to  an  anker
to  the  leeward  of  the  same  sixe  miles  off  in  three  or
foure  fathom  water,  being  distant  from  the  maine  land
to  the  Westward  of  us,  which  was  called  Skafcayl  or
Connyk a countrey of  Mahometans,  about  miles,

and  so  riding  at  two  ankers  a  head,  having  no  other
provision,  we  lost  one  of  them,  the  storme  and  sea  being
growen  very  sore,  and  thereby  our  barke  was  so  full  of
leaks,  that  with  continuall  pumping  we  had  much  adoe
to  keepe  her  above  water,  although  we  threw  much  of
our  goods  overboard,  with  losse  of  our  boat,  and  our
selves  thereby  in  great  danger  like  to  have  perished
either  in  the  sea  or  els  upon  the  lee  shore,  where  we
should  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  those  wicked  infidels,
who  attended  our  shipwracke :  and  surely  it  was  very
unlike  that  we  should  have  escaped  both  the  extremities,
but  onely  by  the  power  and  mercy  of  God,  for  the
storme  continued  seven  dayes,  to  wit,  untill  the  thirtieth
day  of  the  same  moneth :  and  then  the  winde  comming
up  at  the  West  with  faire  weather,  our  anker  weyed,
and  our  saile  displayed,  lying  South,  the  next  day  haling
to  the shore  with a West sunne,  we  were  nie  a land

19

A.D.

1562.

The  land  of
Shi7-vansha.

Derhent.

A  mighty

wall.

Or  Tiphlis.

Fortie  one  de-
grees.

Skabran.

Alcan  Mu?ry
the  governour.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

called  by  the  inhabitants  Shyrvansha,  and  there  we  came
againe  to  an  anker,  having  the  winde  contrary,  being
distant  from  the  said  Chatalet  150  miles,  and  there  we
continued  untill  the  third  day  of  August,  then  having  a
faire  winde,  winding  Southsoutheast,  and  sailing  three-
score miles,  the  next  day  at  a  Southeast  sunne  we  arrived
at  a  city  called  Derbent  in  the  king  of  Hircans  dominion,
where  comming  to  land,  and  saluting  the  captaine  there
with  a  present,  he  made  to  me  and  my  company  a  dinner,
and  there  taking  fresh  water  I  departed.

This  city  of  Derbent  is  an  ancient  towne  having  an
olde  castle  therein,  being  situated  upon  an  hill  called
Castow,  builded  all  of  free  stone  much  after  our  building,
the  walles  very  high  and  thicke,  and  was  first  erected
by  king  Alexander  the  great,  when  he  warred  against
the  Persians  and  Medians,  and  then  hee  made  a  wall
of  a  woonderfull  height  and  thicknesse,  extending  from
the  same  city  to  the  Georgians,  yea  unto  the  principall
city  thereof  named  Tewflish,  which  wall  though  it  be
now  rased,  or  otherwise  decayed,  yet  the  foundation
remaineth,  &  the  wall  was  made  to  the  intent  that  the
inhabitants  of  that  countrey  then  newly  conquered  by
the  said  Alexander  should  not  lightly  flee,  nor  his
enemies  easily  invade.  This  city  of  Derbent  being
now  under  the  power  of  the  Sophy  of  Persia,  bordereth
upon  the  sea,  adjoyning  to  the  foresaid  land  of  Shalfcall,
in  the  latitude  of  41  degrees.  From  thence  sailing
Southeast  and  Southsoutheast  about  80  miles,  the  sixt
day  of  August,  the  yere  aforesaid,  we  arrived  at  our
landing  place  called  Shabran,  where  my  barke  discharged :
the  goods  layd  on  shore,  and  there  being  in  my  tent
keeping  great  watch  for  feare  of  rovers,  wherof  there
is  great  plenty,  being  field  people,  the  governor  of  the
said  countrey  named  Alcan  Murcy,  comming  unto  me,
entertained  me  very  gently,  unto  whom  giving  a  present,
he  appointed  for  my  safegard  forty  armed  men  to  watch
&  ward  me,  until  he  might  have  newes  from  the  king
of  Shirvan. The 12 day  of  the  same moneth newes

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1562.
did  come  from  the  king,  with  order  that  I  should
repaire  unto  him  with  all  speed  :  and  for  expedition,
aswell  camels  to  the  number  of  five  and  forty  to  cary
my  goods,  as  also  horses  for  me  and  my  company  were
in  readinesse,  so  that  the  goods  laden,  and  taking  my
journey  from  thence  the  said  twelft  day,  on  the  18  of
the  same  moneth  I  came  to  a  city  called  Shamaky,  in
the  said  countrey  of  Hircan,  otherwise  called  Shirvan,
and  there  the  king  hath  a  faire  place,  where  my  lodging
being  appointed,  the  goods  were  discharged  :  the  next
day  being  the  19  day,  I  was  sent  for  to  come  to  the  [I.  346.]
king,  named  Obdolowcan,  who  kept  his  court  at  that  King  Obdo-
time  in  the  high  mountaines  in  tents,  distant  from  the  ^°'^'^^^-
said  Shamaki  twentie  miles,  to  avoyd  the  injury  of  the
heat  :  and  the  20  day  I  came  before  his  presence,  who
gently  interteined  me,  and  having  kissed  his  hands,  he
bad  me  to  dinner,  and  commanded  me  to  sit  downe
not  farre  from  him.  This  king  did  sit  in  a  very  rich  '^^^  majesty
pavillion,  wrought  with  silke  &  golde,  placed  very  ~^  ^^^f^  /
pleasantly,  upon  a  hill  side,  or  sixteene  rathom  long,  ^^^
and  sixe  fathom  broad,  having  before  him  a  goodly
fountaine  of  faire  water  :  whereof  he  &  his  nobility
did  drinke,  he  being  a  prince  of  a  meane  stature,  and
of  a  fierce  countenance,  richly  apparelled  with  long
garments  of  silke,  and  cloth  of  gold,  imbrodred  with
pearles  and  stone  :  upon  his  head  was  a  tolipane  with
a  sharpe  ende  standing  upwards  halfe  a  yard  long,  of
rich  cloth  of  golde,  wrapped  about  with  a  piece  of
India  silke  of  twentie  yards  long,  wrought  with  golde,
and  on  the  left  side  of  his  tolipane  stood  a  plume  of
fethers,  set  in  a  trunke  of  golde  richly  inameled,  and
set  with  precious  stones  :  his  earerings  had  pendants  of
golde  a  handfull  long,  with  two  great  rubies  of  great
value,  set  in  the  ends  thereof:  all  the  ground  within
his  pavilion  was  covered  with  rich  carpets,  &  under
himselfe  was  spred  a  square  carpet  wrought  with  silver
&  golde,  and  therupon  was  layd  two  sutable  cushions.
Thus  the king  with  his  nobility  sitting in  his pavilion

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

with  his  legs  a  crosse,  and  perceiving  that  it  was  painfull
for  me  so  to  sit,  his  highnesse  caused  a  stoole  to  be
brought  in,  &  did  will  me  to  sit  thereupon,  after  my
fashion.  Dinner  time  then  approching,  divers  clothes
were  spred  upon  the  ground,  and  sundry  dishes  served,
and  set  in  a  ranke  with  divers  kindes  of  meats,  to  the
number  of  140  dishes,  as  I  numbred  them,  which  being
taken  away  with  the  table  clothes,  and  others  spred,  a
banket  of  fruits  of  sundry  kindes,  with  other  banketting
meates,  to  the  number  of  150  dishes,  were  brought  in  :
so  that  two  services  occupied  290  dishes,  and  at  the
end  of  the  sayd  dinner  &  banket,  the  king  said  unto
me,  Quoshe  quelde,  that  is  to  say.  Welcome  :  and  called
for  a  cup  of  water  to  be  drawen  at  a  fountaine,  and
tasting  thereof,  did  deliver  me  the  rest,  demanding  how
I  did  like  the  same,  and  whether  there  were  so  good
in  our  countrey  or  not  :  unto  whom  I  answered  in  such
sort,  that  he  was  therewith  contented  :  then  he  proponed
unto  me  sundry  questions,  both  touching  religion,  and
also  the  state  of  our  countreys,  and  further  questioned
whether  the  Emperor  of  Almaine,  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
or  the  great  Turke,  were  of  most  power,  with  many  other
things  too  long  here  to  rehearse,  to  whom  I  answered
as  I  thought  most  meet.  Then  he  demanded  whether
I  intended  to  goe  any  further,  and  the  cause  of  my
comming :  unto  that  I  answered,  that  I  was  sent  with
The  Queenes  letters  from  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majesty  of
letters  to  the  England  unto  the  great  Sophy,  to  intreat  friendship
"^  ■^'  and  free  passage,  and  for  his  safeconduct  to  be  granted

unto  English  merchants  to  trade  into  his  Segniories,
with  the  like  also  to  be  granted  to  his  subjects,  when
they  should  come  into  our  countreys,  to  the  honour
and  wealth  of  both  realmes,  and  commodity  of  both
their  subjects,  with  divers  other  words,  which  I  omit
to  rehearse.  This  sayd  king  much  allowing  this  de-
claration sayd,  that  he  would  not  onely  give  me  passage,
but  also  men  to  safeconduct  me  unto  the  sayd  Sophy,,
lying  from the  foresayd citie  of  Shamaki thirtie  dayes

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1562.

journey,  up  into  the  land  of  Persia,  at  a  castle  called
Casbin  :  so  departing  from  the  king  at  that  time,  within  CasMn.
three  dayes  after,  being  the  foure  and  twentieth  day
of  August  the  yere  aforesaid,  he  sent  for  me  againe  :
unto  whom  I  repaired  in  the  morning,  and  the  king
not  being  risen  out  of  his  bed  (for  his  maner  is,  that  Multitude  of
watching  in  the  night,  and  then  banketting  with  his  ^''»^«^^«^^-
women,  being  an  hundred  and  forty  in  number,  he
sleepeth  most  in  the  day)  did  give  one  commandement
that  I  should  ride  on  hawking  with  many  Gentlemen  of
his  Court,  and  that  they  should  shew  me  so  much  game
and  pastime  as  might  be  :  which  was  done,  and  many
cranes  killed.  We  returned  from  hawking  about  three
of  the  clocke  at  the  afternoone  :  the  king  then  risen,
and  ready  to  dinner,  I  was  invited  thereunto,  and  ap-
proching  nigh  to  the  entring  in  of  his  tent,  and  being
in  his  sight,  two  gentlemen  incountered  me  with  two
garments  of  that  countrey  fashion,  side,  downe  to  the
ground,  the  one  of  silke,  and  the  other  of  silke  and
golde,  sent  unto  me  from  the  king,  and  after  that  they
caused  me  to  put  off  my  upper  garment,  being  a  gowne
of  blacke  velvet  furred  with  Sables,  they  put  the  sayd
two  garments  upon  my  backe,  and  so  conducted  me
unto  the  king,  before  whom  doing  reverence,  and  kissing
his  hand,  he  commanded  me  to  sit  not  farre  from  him,
and  so  I  dined  in  his  presence,  he  at  that  time  being
very  mery,  and  demanding  of  me  many  questions,  and
amongst  other,  how  I  like  the  maner  of  their  hawking.
Dinner  so  ended,  I  required  his  highnesse  safeconduct
for  to  depart  towards  the  Sophy,  who  dismissing  me
with  great  favour,  and  appointing  his  Ambassadour
(which  returned  out  of  Russia)  and  others,  to  safe-
conduct  me,  he  gave  me  at  my  departure  a  faire  horse
with  all  furniture,  and  custome  free  from  thence  with
all  my  goods.  So  I  returned  to  Shamaki  againe,  where
I  remained  untill  the  sixt  of  October,  to  provide  camels,
horses,  and  other  necessaries  for  my  sayd  intended
journey.

23

A.D.
1562.

The  descrip
tton  ofHtr-
cania.

[I- 347.]

Danger  by  di-
versitie  in
religion.

Barbarous
crueltie.

The  citie  of
Arrash  or
Erex.

The  commodi-
ties of  this
countrey.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

But  now  before  I  proceed  further,  I  purpose  to  write
something  of  this  countrey  of  Hircan,  now  called  Shirvan,
with  the  townes  and  commodities  of  the  same.  This
countrey  of  Hircan  in  times  past  was  of  great  renowme,
having  many  cities,  townes,  and  castles  in  it :  and  the
kings  thereof  in  time  of  antiquity  were  of  great  power,
able  to  make  wars  with  the  Sophies  of  Persia  :  but  now
it  is  not  onely  otherwise  (for  that  the  cities,  townes,
and  castles  be  decayed)  but  also  the  king  is  subject  to
the  sayd  Sophie  (although  they  have  their  proper  king)
and  be  at  the  commandement  of  the  sayd  Sophy,  who
conquered  them  not  many  yeeres  passed,  for  their
diversity  in  religion,  and  caused  not  onely  all  the  nobility
&  gentlemen  of  that  countrey  to  be  put  to  death,  but
also  over  and  besides,  rased  the  walles  of  the  cities,
townes,  and  castles  of  the  said  realme,  to  the  intent
that  there  should  be  no  rebellion,  and  for  their  great
terror,  caused  a  turret  of  free  stone  and  flints  to  be
erected  in  the  sayd  city  called  Shamaki,  and  in  a  ranke
of  flints  of  the  sayd  turret,  did  set  the  heads  of  the
sayd  nobility  and  gentlemen,  then  executed.  This  city
is  distant  from  the  sea  side,  with  camels,  seven  dayes
journey,  but  now  the  same  being  much  decayed,  &
chiefly  inhabited  with  Armenians,  another  city  called
Arrash,  bordering  upon  the  Georgians,  is  the  chiefest  and
most  opulent  in  the  trade  of  merchandise,  &  thereabouts
is  nourished  the  most  abundant  growth  of  raw  silke,  and
thither  the  Turks,  Syrians,  and  other  strangers  do  resort
and  trafficke.  There  be  also  divers  good  and  necessary
commodities  to  be  provided  &  had  in  this  sayd  realme  :
viz.  galles  rough  and  smooth,  cotton  wooll,  allome,  and
raw  silke  of  the  naturall  growth  of  that  countrey  ;  besides,
nere  all  kinde  of  spices  and  drugges,  and  some  other
commodities,  which  are  brought  thither  from  out  of
East  India,  but  in  the  lesse  quantity,  for  that  they  be
not  assured  to  have  vent  or  utterance  of  the  same  :  but
the  chiefest  commodities  be  there,  raw  silks  of  all  sorts,
whereof  there  is  great  plenty. Not  farre  from  the  sayd

24

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1562.
city  of  Shamaki,  there  was  an olde  castle  called Gulli-  The  strong
stone, now beaten downe by this Sophy, which was  ^. ^  ""j  fj
esteemed  to  be  one  of  the  strongest  castles  in  the  world,
and  was besieged by Alexander the great, long time
before  he  could  win it. And  not  farre from  the  sayd
castle  was  a  Nunry  of  sumptuous  building,  wherein  was
buried  a  kings  daughter, named  Ameleck  Channa,  who
slew  herselfe  with  a knife, for that her father  would
have  forced  her  (she  professing  chastity)  to  have  married
with a king of Tartaric  : upon which occasion the
maidens  of  that  countrey  do  resort  thither once every
yere  to  lament  her  death.

Also  in  the  sayd  countrey  there  is  an  high  hill  called
Quiquifs,  upon  the  toppe  whereof  (as  it  is  commonly
reported)  did  dwell  a  great  Giant,  named  Arneoste,
having  upon  his  head  two  great  homes,  and  eares,  and
eyes  like  a  Horse,  and  a  taile  like  a  Cow.  It  is  further
sayd,  that  this  monster  kept  a  passage  thereby,  untill
there  came  an  holy  man,  termed  Haucoir  Hamshe,  a
kinseman  to  one  of  the  Sophies,  who  mounted  the  sayd
hill,  and  combating  with  the  sayd  Giant,  did  binde  not
onely  him  in  chaines,  but  also  his  woman  called  Lami-
sache  with  his  sonne  named  After  :  for  which  victory
they  of  that  countrey  have  this  holy  man  in  great  repu-
tation, and  the  hill  at  this  day  (as  it  is  bruited)  savoureth
so  ill,  that  no  person  may  come  nigh  unto  it  :  but
whether  it  be  true  or  not,  I  referre  it  to  further  know-
ledge.

Now  to  returne  to  the  discourse  of  the  proceeding
in  my  voyage  towards  the  great  Sophie.  The  6  of
October  in  the  yeere  aforesayd,  I  with  my  company
departed  from  Shamachi  aforesaid,  and  having  journeyed
threescore  miles,  came  to  a  towne  called  Yavate,  wherein  The  towne  of
the  king  hath  a  faire  house,  with  orchards  and  gardens  '^^^(ite.
well  replenished  with  fruits  of  all  sorts.  By  this  towne
passeth  a  great  river  called  Cor,  which  springeth  in  the
mountaines  of  the  Georgians,  &  passing  thorow  the
countrey of  Hircania aforesayd, falleth into the Cas-

25

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

pian  or  Hircan  sea,  at  a  place  betweene  two  ancient
townes  called  Shabran  and  Bachu,  situate  within  the
realme  of  Hircane,  and  from  thence  issueth  further,
passing  thorow  a  fruitfull  countrey,  inhabited  with  pas-
turing people,  which  dwell  in  the  Summer  season  upon
mountaines,  and  in  Winter  they  remoove  into  the
valleyes  without  resorting  to  townes  or  any  other  habi-
tation :  and  when  they  remoove,  they  doe  journey  in
carravans  or  troops  of  people  and  cattell,  carrying  all  their
wives,  children  and  baggage  upon  bullocks.  Now  passing
this  wilde  people  ten  dayes  journey,  comming  into  no
towne  or  house,  the  sixteenth  day  of  October  we  arrived
The  city  of  z,t  2.  citie  called  Ardouill,  where  we  were  lodged  in  an
Ardouil.  hospitall  builded  with  faire  stone,  and  erected  by  this
Sophies  father  named  Ismael,  onely  for  the  succour  and
lodging  of  strangers  and  other  travellers,  wherein  all
men  have  victuals  and  feeding  for  man  and  horse,  for
three  dayes  and  no  longer.  This  foresayd  late  prince
Ismael  lieth  buried  in  a  faire  Meskit,  with  a  sumptuous
sepulchre  in  the  same,  which  he  caused  to  be  made  in
his  life  time.  This  towne  Ardouill  is  in  the  latitude
of  eight  and  thirtie  degrees,  an  ancient  citie  in  the
province  of  Aderravgan,  wherein  the  Princes  of  Persia
are  commonly  buried  :  and  there  Alexander  the  great
did  keepe  his  Court  when  he  invaded  the  Persians.
The  city  Foure  dayes  journey  to  the  Westward  is  the  citie  Tebris
Tebris  or  \^  ^^^  time  called  Tauris,  the  greatest  citie  in  Persia,
but  not  of  such  trade  of  merchandise  as  it  hath  bene,
or  as  others  be  at  this  time,  by  meane  of  the  great  in-
vasion of  the  Turke,  who  hath  conquered  from  the
Sophie  almost  to  the  sayd  citie  of  Tauris,  which  the
sayd  Turke  once  sacked,  and  thereby  caused  the  Sophie
[I.  348.]  to  forsake  the  same,  and  to  keepe  his  court  ten  dayes
journey  from  thence,  at  the  sayd  citie  of  Casbin.

The  21  day  we  departed  from  Ordowil  aforesayd,
travelling  for  the  most  part  over  mountaines  all  in  the
night  season,  and  resting  in  the  day,  being  destitute  of
wood,  and therefore  were  forced  to  use for fewell  the

26

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1562.
dung  of  horses  &  camels,  which  we  bought  deare  of  the
pasturing  people. Thus  passing ten  dayes  journey  the  M.Jenkinsons
yere  aforesayd,  the  second  day  of  November  we  arrived  ^^^^'^^'l- ^t  ^he
at  the foresayd  citie of  Casbin,  where  the  sayd  Sophie  2  November
keepeth  his  court,  and  were  appointed  to  a  lodging  not 1562.
farre  from  the  kings  pallace,  and  within  two  dayes  after
the  Sophie  commanded  a prince called Shalli  Murzey,
Sonne to Obdolowcan king of Shirvan aforesayd, to
send  for  me  to  his  house,  who  asked  me  in  the  name
of  the said Sophy  how  I did,  and  whether  I were  in
health, and  after did welcome me, and  invited me  to
dinner,  whereat  I  had  great  enterteinment,  and  so  from
thence  I  returned  to  my  lodging. The  next day  after
I  sent  my  interpreter  unto  the  Sophies  Secretarie,  declar-
ing that  I had letters  directed  from our  most  gracious
Sovereigne ladie the Queenes most excellent Majestic
of  the  Realme of  England, unto  the sayd Sophy,  and
that  the cause of  my comming  was expressed in the
same  letters,  desiring  that at convenient time  I  might
come  into his Majesties presence, who advertising  the
Sophy  thereof,  shortly  after  answered  me  that  there  were
great  affaires  in hand : which being finished, I should
come  before  his  presence,  willing  me  in  the  meane  time
to  make  ready  my  present  if  I  had  any  to  deliver.

At this  time,  the  great  Turkes  Ambassadour  arrived  The  Turkes
foure  dayes  before  my  comming,  who  was sent  thither  ^^^^"^dour
to  conclude  a  perpetuall peace betwixt the same  great " £  op  y.
Turke  and  the  Sophie,  and  brought  with  him  a  present
in  golde,  and  faire  horses  with  rich  furnitures,  and  other
gifts,  esteemed  to  be  woorth  forty  thousand  pound. And
thereupon a peace was concluded with joyfull feasts,
triumphs  and  solemnities,  corroborated  with  strong  othes,
by  their  law  of  Alkaron,  for  either  to  observe  the  same,
and to live alwayes after  as sworne brethren, ayding
the  one  the other  against  all  princes  that  should  warre
against  them, or  either  of  them. And  upon  this  con-
clusion the  Sophy  caused  the  great  Turkes  sonne  named
Baiset  Soltan, a  valiant Prince  (who being fled from

27

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

his  father  unto  the  Sophie,  had  remained  in  his  Court
the  space  of  foure  yeeres)  to  be  put  to  death.  In
which  time  the  sayd  Turkes  sonne  had  caused  mortall
warres  betwixt  the  sayd  Princes,  and  much  prevailed
therein  :  the  Turke  demanded  therefore  his  sonne  to
be  sent  unto  him,  &  the  Sophy  refused  thereunto  to
consent.  But  now  being  slaine  according  to  the  Turks
will,  the  Sophy  sent  him  his  head  for  a  present,  not
a  litle  desired,  and  acceptable  to  the  unnaturall  father.
Discoursing  at  my  first  arrivall  with  the  king  of  Shirvan
of  sundry  matters,  and  being  intertained  as  hath  bene
before  declared,  the  sayd  king  named  Obdolocan,  de-
maunding  whether  that  we  of  England  had  friendship
with  the  Turks  or  not  :  I  answered,  that  we  never  had
friendship  with  them,  and  that  therefore  they  would  not
suffer  us  to  passe  thorow  their  countrey  into  the  Sophy
his  dominions,  and  that  there  is  a  nation  named  the
Venetians,  not  farre  distant  from  us,  which  are  in  great
league  with  the  sayd  Turks,  who  trade  into  his  domin-
ions with  our  commodities,  chiefly  to  barter  the  same
for  raw  silks,  which  (as  we  understand)  come  from
thence  :  and  that  if  it  would  please  the  sayd  Sophy
and  other  Princes  of  that  countrey,  to  suffer  our  mer-
chants to  trade  into  those  dominions,  and  to  give  us
pasport  and  safe  conduct  for  the  same,  as  the  sayd
Turke  hath  granted  to  the  sayd  Venetians,  I  doubted
not  but  that  it  should  grow  to  such  a  trade  to  the
profit  of  them  as  never  before  had  beene  the  like,  and
that  they  should  be  both  furnished  with  our  commo-
dities, and  also  have  utterance  of  theirs,  although  there
never  came  Turke  into  their  land,  perswading  with  many
other  wordes  for  a  trade  to  be  had.  This  king  under-
standing the  matter  liked  it  marveilously,  saying,  that
he  would  write  unto  the  Sophy  concerning  the  same  :
as  he  did  in  very  deed,  assuring  me  that  the  Sophy
would  graunt  my  request,  and  that  at  my  returne  unto
him  he  would  give  me  letters  of  safe  conduct,  and  privi-
ledges. The Turks Ambassadour was not  then  come

28

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1562.

into  the  land,  neither  any  peace  hoped  to  be  concluded,
but  great  preparation  was  made  for  warre,  which  was
like  much  to  have  furthered  my  purpose,  but  it  chanced
otherwise.  For  the  Turks  Ambassadour  being  arrived.  The  Turkes
and  the  peace  concluded,  the  Turkish  merchants  there  "^^J'^'^^^j^
at  that  time  present,  declared  to  the  same  Ambassadour,  ^  jenkinson
that  my  comming  thither  (naming  me  by  the  name  of
Franke)  would  in  great  part  destroy  their  trade,  and
that  it  should  be  good  for  him  to  perswade  the  Sophy
not  to  favour  me,  as  his  Highnesse  meant  to  observe
the  league  and  friendship  with  the  great  Turke  his
master,  which  request  of  the  Turkish  merchants  the
same  Ambassadour  earnestly  preferred,  and  being  after-
wards dismissed  with  great  honour,  he  departed  out  of
the  Realme  with  the  Turks  sonnes  head  as  aforesayd,
and  other  presents.

The  20  day  of  November  aforesayd, I was  sent  for  Shaw  Thomas
to  come  before  the sayd Sophy,  otherwise  called  Shaw  ^^^  Sophies
Thomas, and about three of  the  clocke at  afternoone  "^^  '
I  came  to the Court, and in lighting from my horse
at  the  Court  gate,  before  my  feet  touched  the  ground,
a  paire  of  the  Sophies  owne  shoes  termed  in the  Per-  [I.  349.]
sian  tongue Basmackes, such as hee himselfe  weareth
when  he  ariseth  in  the  night  to  pray  (as  his  maner  is)
were put upon  my  feet,  for  without  the  same  shoes  I
might not  be  suffred to tread upon his holy  ground,
being  a  Christian,  and  called  amongst  them  Gower,  that
is,  unbeleever,  and  uncleane  :  esteeming  all  to  be  infidels
and  Pagans  which  do  not beleeve  as  they  do,  in their
false  filthie  prophets,  Mahomet  and  Murtezalli. At  the
sayd  Court  gate  the  things  that  I  brought  to  present  his
Majestie  with,  were  devided  by  sundry  parcels  to  sundry
servitors  of  the  Court,  to  cary  before  me,  for  none  of  my
company  or  servants  might  be  suffered  to  enter  into  the
Court  with  me,  my  interpreter onely  excepted. Thus The  Queenes
comming  before  his Majestie with such  reverence  as I  ''^^^f"
thought meete to be used, I delivered the Queenes
Majesties  letters  with  my  present,  which  hee  accepting,

29

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1562.

demaunded  of  mee  of  what  countrey  of  Franks  I  was,  and
what  affaires  I  had  there  to  doe  ?  Unto  whom  I  answered
that  I  was  of  the  famous  Citie  of  London  within  the
noble  Realme  of  England,  and  that  I  was  sent  thither
from  the  most  excellent  and  gracious  soveraigne  Lady
Elizabeth  Queene  of  the  saide  Realme  for  to  treate  of
friendship,  and  free  passage  of  our  Merchants  and  people,
to  repaire  and  traffique  within  his  dominions,  for  to  bring
in  our  commodities,  and  to  carry  away  theirs  to  the
honour  of  both  princes,  the  mutuall  commoditie  of  both
Realmes,  and  wealth  of  the  Subjects,  with  other  wordes
here  omitted.  He  then  demaunded  me  in  what  language
the  letters  were  written,  I  answered,  in  the  Latine,  Italian
and  Hebrew  :  well  said  he,  we  have  none  within  our
Realme  that  understand  those  tongues.  Whereupon  I
answered  that  such  a  famous  and  worthy  prince  (as  hee
was)  wanted  not  people  of  all  nations  within  his  large
The  Sophies  dominions  to  interprete  the  same.  Then  he  questioned
questions.  ^j^|^  ^^g  ^^  ^^  State  of  our  Countreys,  and  of  the  power
of  the  Emperour  of  Almaine,  king  Philip,  and  the  great
Turke,  and  which  of  them  was  of  most  power  :  whom  I
answered  to  his  contentation,  not  dispraysing  the  great
Turke,  their  late  concluded  friendship  considered.  Then
he  reasoned  with  mee  much  of  Religion,  demaunding
whether  I  were  a  Gower,  that  is  to  say,  an  unbeleever,  or
a  Muselman,  that  is,  of  Mahomets  lawe.  Unto  whom  I
answered,  that  I  was  neither  unbeleever  nor  Mahometan,
but  a  Christian.  What  is  that,  said  he  unto  the  king  of
the  Georgians  sonne,  who  being  a  Christian  was  fled  unto
the  said  Sophie,  and  he  answered  that  a  Christian  was  he
that  beleeveth  in  Jesus  Christus,  affirming  him  to  be  the
Sonne  of  God,  and  the  greatest  Prophet.  Doest  thou
beleeve  so,  said  the  Sophie  unto  me  }  Yea  that  I  do,  said
I  :  Oh  thou  unbeleever,  said  he,  we  have  no  neede  to
have  friendship  with  the  unbeleevers,  and  so  willed  me  to
depart.  I  being  glad  thereof  did  reverence  and  went  my
way,  being  accompanied  with  many  of  his  gentlemen  and
others,  and  after  me  followed  a  man  with  a  Basanet  of

30

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1562.

sand,  sifting  all  the  way  that  I  had  gone  within  the  said
pallace,  even  from  the  said  Sophies  sight  unto  the  court
gate.

Thus  I  repaired  againe  unto  my  lodging,  and  the  said  The  curtcsie  of
night  Shally  Murzey  sonne  to  the  king  of  Hircan  afore-  ^^' ^  ^"^~
said,  who  favoured  me  very  much  "for  that  I  was  com- ■^'
mended  unto him from his father,  willed  mee  not  to
doubt  of  any  thing,  putting  mee  in  hope  that  I  should
have  good  successe  with  the  Sophie,  and  good  intertain-
ment.

Thus  I  continued  for  a  time,  dayly  resorting  unto  me
divers  gentlemen  sent  by  the  Sophie  to  conferre  with  me,
especially  touching  the  affaires  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia,
and  to  know  by  what  way  I  intended  to  returne  into  my
countrey,  either  by  the  way  that  I  came,  or  by  the  way  of
Ormus,  and  so  with  the  Portingals  ships. Unto  whom  I
answered,  that  I  durst  not  returne  by  the  way  of  Ormus,
the  Portingals  and  wee  not  being  friendes,  fully  perceiving
their  meaning  :  for  I  was  advertised  that  the  saide  Sophie  JVarres  in-
meant  to  have  warres  with  the  Portingals,  and  would  have  tended  against
charged mee  that  I  had  bene come  for  a  spie  to  passe ^ °^  "^^^'
through  his  dominions  unto  the  saide  Portingals,  think-
ing them  and  us  to  be  all  one  people,  and  calling  all  by
the  name  of  Franks,  but  by  the  providence  of  God  this
was  prevented.

After  this  the  said  Sophie  conferred  with  his  nobilitie
and  counsel  concerning  mc,  who  perswaded  that  he  should
not  entertaine  me  wel,  neither  dismisse  me  with  letters  or
gifts,  considering  that  I  was  a  Franke,  and  of  that  nation
that  was  enemie  to  the  great  Turke  his  brother,  perswad-
ing  that  if  he  did  otherwise,  and  that  the  newes  thereof
should  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Turke,  it  should  be
a  meane  to  breake  their  new  league  and  friendship  lately
concluded  :  disswading  further  because  he  had  no  neede,
neither  that  it  was  requisite  for  him  to  have  friendship
with  unbeleevers,  whose  Countreys  lay  farre  from  him,
and  that  it  was  best  for  him  to  send  me  with  my  letters
unto  the  said  great  Turke  for  a  present,  which  he  was

31

A.D.

1562.

The  king  of
Hircans  second
letters  in  M.
Jenkinsons  be-
halfe.

[I-  350.]

Conference
with  Indian
Merchants.

M.  Jenkinsons
returne.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

fully  determined  to  have  done  at  some  meet  time,  mean-
ing to  send  his  Ambassadour  unto  the  said  great  Turke
very  shortly  after.

But  the  king  of  Hircanes  sonne  aforesaide,  under-
standing this  deliberation,  sent  a  man  in  post  unto  his
father,  for  to  declare  and  impart  the  purpose  unto  him,
who  as  a  gracious  prince,  considering  that  I  had  passed
through  his  dominions,  and  that  1  had  journeyed  for  a
good  intent,  did  write  to  the  Sophie  al  that  which  he
understood  of  his  said  determination,  &  that  it  shouL
not  stand  with  his  Majesties  honour  to  doe  mee  an"
harme  or  displeasure,  but  rather  to  give  mee  good  enter-
tainment, seeing  I  was  come  into  his  land  of  my  free  will^
and  not  by  constraint,  and  that  if  hee  used  mee  evil,
there  would  few  strangers  resort  into  his  countrey,
which  would  bee  greatly  unto  his  hinderance,  with  many
other  perswasions  :  which  after  that  the  saide  Sophie  had
well  and  throughly  pondered  and  disgested  (much
esteeming the  same  king  of  Hircane,  being  one  of  the

him  and  his  nigh  kinseman)
purpose,  and  the  twentieth  of
me  a  rich  garment  of  cloth  of
me  without  any  harme.
I  sojourned  at  the  sayde  City
of  Casbin,  divers  merchants  out  of  India  came  thither
unto  mee,  with  whom  I  conferred  for  a  trade  of  spices  :
whereunto  they  answered  that  they  would  bring  of  all
sorts  so  much  as  we  would  have,  if  they  were  sure  of
vent,  whereof  I  did  promise  to  assure  them,  so  that  I
doubt  not  but  that  great  abundance  thereof  may  from
time  to  time  be  there  provided  and  had.

The  same  twentieth  day  of  March  I  returned  from  the
saide  Citie  of  Casbin  where  I  remayned  all  the  Winter,
having  sent  away  all  my  Camels  before,  and  the  thirtieth
day  I  came  to  the  saide  Citie  of  Ardouil,  and  the  fifteenth
of  April  unto  Zavat  aforesayd,  where  king  Obdolowcan
was  at  that  present,  who  immediatly  sent  for  me,  and
demaunding  of  me  many  questions,  declared  that  if  it  had

32

valiantest  princes  under
changed  his  determined
March  1562.  he  sent  to
golde,  and  so  dismissed
During  the  time  that

^  ^  ^ ^ >^ ^  ^

f  ^

f4

ABD'ULLAH KHAN

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1563.
not  bene  for  him,  I  had  bene  utterly  cast  away,  and  sent
to  the  great  Turke  for  a  present  by  the  Sophie,  through
the evill perswasion of  his wicked counsell, that the
Zieties  and  holy  men  were  the  chiefe  and  principal  pro-
curers and moovers thereof:  but the Sophie  himselfe
ment  mee  much  good  at  the  first,  and  thought  to  have
given  me  good  entertainement,  and  so  had  done,  had  not
the peace  and  league  fortuned  to  have  bene  concluded
betweene them and the great Turke. Neverthelesse,
sayd  he,  the  Sophie  hath  written  unto  me  to  entertaine
you  well,  and  you  are  welcome  into  my  Countrey,  and  so
he  intreated  mee  very  gently,  in  whose  Court  I  remained
seven  dayes,  and  obteined  of  him  letters  of  safe  conductes  Priviledges
and  priviledges  in  your  names to  bee  free  from  paying  ^^f^^^  y
custome,  which  1  delivered  unto  your  servants i  homas  ^^^-^^  ^^^
Alcocke  and  George  Wrenne,  at  their  departure  towards  hereafter  an-
Persia  for  your  affaires  :  and  his  highnesse  did  give  mee  nexed.
two  garments  of  silke,  and  so dismissed  me  with  great
favour,  sending  with  me his  Ambassadour  againe  unto
the Emperour of  Russia, and committed the  chiefest
secret  of  his  affaires  unto  me,  to  declare  the  same  unto
the  Emperours  Majestie  at  my  returne  :  and  thus  depart-
ing the tenth day of  April, I came to the City of
Shamachi,  and  there  remayning certaine  dayes  for  pro-
vision  of  Camels downe to  the  Sea side,  I sent  from
thence  before  men  to  repaire  my  Barke,  and  to  make  her
in  a  readinesse. And  during  my  abode  in  Shammachi,  An  Armenian
there  came  unto  me  an  Armenian  sent  from  the  king  of  ^f^^^^^-J^^-
Georgia,  who  declared  the  lamentable  estate  of  the  same  ^^^  ^^^g.  g^
king,  that  being  enclosed  betwixt  those  two  cruell  tyrants  Georgia.
and  mightie  princes,  the  said  great  Turke  and  the  Sophie,
hee  had  continuall  warres  with  them,  requiring  for the
love  of  Christ  and  as  I  was  a  Christian,  that  I  would  send
him  comfort  by  the  said  Armenian,  and  advise  how  he
might  send  his  Ambassadour  to  the  sayd  Emperour  of
Russia, and  whether I thought  that  he  would  support
him  or  no  :  and  with  many  other  wordes  required  me  to
declare his necessitie unto the  same  Emperour  at  my
m  33  c

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563.

returne  :  adding  further  that  the  said  king  would  have
written  unto  me  his  minde,  but  that  hee  doubted  the  safe
passage  of  his  messenger.  Unto  whom  I  did  likewise
answere  by  word  of  mouth,  not  onely  perswading  him  to
sende  his  Ambassadour  to  Russia,  not  doubting  but  that
hee  should  finde  him  most  honourable  and  inclined  to
helpe  him,  but  also  I  directed  him  his  way  how  the  sayde
king  might  send  by  the  Countrey  of  Chircassi,  through
Teneruk  king  the  favour  of  Teneruk  king  of  the  sayd  Countrey,  whose
of  Chircassi.  daughter  the  said  king  had  lately  married.  And  thus
dismissing  the  saide  Armenian,  within  two  dayes  after  I
sent  Edward  Cleark  your  servaunt  unto  the  Citie  of
Arrash,  where  the  most  store  of  Silkes  is  to  be  had,
giving  him  Commission  to  have  passed  further  into  the
saide  Countrey  of  Georgia,  and  there  to  have  repaired
unto  the  sayde  king.  And  after  my  commendations  pre-
mised, and  my  minde  declared  to  have  pursued  for
safeconduct  of  the  same  Prince  for  our  Merchants  to
trade  into  his  dominions,  and  that  obtained  to  have
returned  againe  with  speede.  The  same  your  servaunt
journeying  to  the  sayd  Citie  of  Arrash,  and  there  finding
certaine  Merchants  Armenians,  which  promised  to  goe
to  the  sayd  City  of  Georgia,  comming  to  the  borders
thereof,  was  perceived  by  a  Captaine  there,  that  he  was
a  Christian,  and  thereupon  demaunded  whither  he  went,
and  understanding  that  he  could  not  passe  further  with-
out great  suspition,  answered  that  he  came  thither  to
buy  Silkes,  and  shewed  the  king  of  Hircanes  letters
which  hee  had  with  him,  and  so  returned  backe  againe,
and  the  fifteenth  of  April  came  to  Shamachi  :  from
whence  I  departed  the  sixteene  of  the  same  moneth,  |
and  the  one  and  twentie  therof  comming  to  the  Seaside,  '<
and  finding  my  barke  in  a  readinesse,  I  caused  your
goods  to  be  laden,  and  there  attended  a  faire  winde.
L^'  351-]  But  before  I proceede any further  to  speake  of  my

returne,  I  intend  with  your  favours  somewhat  to  treate
of  the  countrey  of  Persia,  of  the  great  Sophie,  and  of
his  countrey,  lawes  and  religion.

34

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1563.

This  land  of  Persia  is  great  and  ample,  devided  into  The  descrlp-
many  kingdomes  and  provinces,  as  Gillan,  Corasan,  t'^°n  of  Persia.
Shirvan,  and  many  others  having  divers  Cities,  townes
and  castles  in  the  same.  Every  province  hath  his  seve-
rall  King,  or  Sultan,  all  in  obedience  to  the  great  Sophie.
The  names  of  the  chiefest  Cities  be  these  :  Teveris,  T'he  chiefe  Ci-
Casbin,  Keshan,  Yesse,  Meskit,  Heirin,  Ardouill,  Sham-  ^^>^  e^  ^^"^■^•
achi,  Arrash  with  many  others.  The  countrey  for  the
most  part  toward  the  sea  side  is  plaine  and  full  of
pasture,  but  into  the  land,  high,  full  of  mountaines,  and
sharpe.  To  the  South  it  bordereth  upon  Arabia  and
the  East  Ocean.  To  the  North  upon  the  Caspian  sea
and  the  lands  of  Tartaria.  To  the  East  upon  the  pro-
vinces of  India,  and  to  the  West  upon  the  confines  of
Chaldea,  Syria,  and  other  the  Turkes  lands.  All  within
these  dominions  be  of  the  Sophies,  named  Shaw  Thamas,
Sonne  to  Ismael  Sophie.  This  Sophie  that  now  raigneth
is  nothing  valiant,  although  his  power  be  great,  and  his
people  martiall  :  and  through  his  pusillanimitie  the  Turke
hath  much  invaded  his  countreys,  even  nigh  unto  the
Citie  of  Teveris,  wherein  hee  was  wont  to  keepe  his
chiefe  court.  And  now  having  forsaken  the  same,  is
chiefly  resident  at  Casbin  aforesaide,  and  alwayes  as  the
said  Turke  pursueth  him,  he  not  being  able  to  with-
stand the  Turke  in  the  fielde,  trusting  rather  to  the
mountaines  for  his  safegard,  then  to  his  fortes  and
castles,  hath  caused  the  same  to  bee  rased  within  his
dominions,  and  his  ordinance  to  be  molten,  to  the  intent
that  his  enemies  pursuing  him,  they  should  not
strengthen  themselves  with  the  same.

This  prince  is  of  the  age  of  fiftie  yeeres,  and  of  a
reasonable  stature,  having  five  children.  His  eldest
Sonne  he  keepeth  captive  in  prison,  for  that  he  feareth
him  for  his  valiantnesse  and  activitie  :  he  professeth  a
kinde  of  holynesse,  and  saith  that  hee  is  descended  of
the  blood  of  Mahomet  and  Murtezalli  :  and  although
these  Persians  bee  Mahometans,  as  the  Turkes  and  Tar-
tars bee,  yet  honour they this false fained Murtezalli,

35

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1563.

saying  that  hee  was  the  chiefest  disciple  that  Mahomet
had,  cursing  and  chiding  dayly  three  other  disciples
that  Mahomet  had  called  Ovear,  Usiran,  and  Abebeck,
The  difference  and  these  three  did  slay  the  saide  Murtezalli,  for  which
9f  religion.  cause  and  other  differences  of  holy  men  and  lawes,  they
have  had  and  have  with  the  Turkes  and  Tartars  mortall
warres.  To  intreat  of  their  religion  at  large,  being
more  or  lesse  Mahomets  lawe  and  the  Alkaron,  I  shall
not  need  at  this  present.  These  persons  are  comely
and  of  good  complexion,  proude  and  of  good  courage,
esteeming  themselves  to  bee  best  of  all  nations,  both
for  their  religion  and  holinesse,  which  is  most  erroneous,
and  also  for  all  other  their  fashions.  They  be  martial,
delighting  in  faire  horses  and  good  harnesse,  soone
angrie,  craftie  and  hard  people.  Thus  much  I  have
thought  good  to  treate  of  this  nation,  and  nowe  I  re-
turne  to  discourse  the  proceeding  of  the  rest  of  my
voyage.

My  barke  being  ready  at  the  Caspian  sea  as  afore-
saide,  having  a  faire  winde,  and  committing  our  selves
The  T,o.  of  unto  God  the  30.  day  of  May  1563.  we  arrived  at
May  ii)6T,.  Astracan,  having  passed  no  lesse  dangers  upon  the  Sea
in  our  returne,  then  wee  sustained  in  our  going  foorth,
and  remayning  at  the  said  Astracan,  untill  the  tenth
day  of  June,  one  hundred  gunners  being  there  admitted
unto  mee  for  my  safegard  up  the  river  Volga,  the
fifteenth  of  July  I  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  Cazan,  where
the  Captaine  entertained  me  well,  and  so  dismissing  mee,
I  was  conducted  from  place  to  place  unto  the  Citie  of
Mosco,  where  I  arrived  the  twentieth  day  of  August
1563.  in  safetie,  thankes  bee  to  God,  with  all  such  goods,
merchandizes,  and  jewels,  as  I  had  provided  as  well  for
the  Emperours  stocke  and  accompt,  as  also  of  yours,
all  which  goods  I  was  commaunded  to  bring  into  the
Emperours  treasurie  before  it  was  opened,  which  I  did,
and  delivered  those  parcels  of  wares  which  were  for  his
Majesties  accompt,  videlicet,  precious  stones,  and  wrought
silkes  of  sundry  colours  and  sortes,  much  to  his  high-

36

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1564.
nesse  contentation,  and  the  residue  belonging  to  you,
viz.  Crasko,  and  rawe  silkes,  with  other  merchandizes,
(as  by  accompt  appeareth)  were  brought  unto  your  house,
whereof  part  there  remained,  and  the  rest  was  laden  in
your  shippes  lately  returned.

Shortly  after  my  comming  to  the  Mosco,  1  came  be-
fore the  Emperours  Majestie,  and  presented  unto  him  the
apparell  given  unto  me  by  the  Sophie,  whose  highnesse
conferred  with  mee  touching  the  princes  affaires  which
he  had  committed  to  my  charge  :  and  my  proceedings
therein  it  pleased  him  so  to  accept,  that  they  were
much  to  his  contentation,  saying  unto  mee,  I  have  per-
ceived your  good  service,  for  the  which  I  doe  thanke
you,  and  will  recompence  you  for  the  same,  wishing
that  I  would  travell  againe  in  such  his  other  affaires,
wherein  hee  was  minded  to  employ  mee  :  to  whom  I
answered,  that  it  was  to  my  heartie  rejoycing  that  my
service  was  so  acceptable  unto  his  highnesse,  acknow-
ledging all  that  I  had  done  to  bee  but  of  duetie,  humbly
beseeching  his  grace  to  continue  his  goodnesse  unto
your  worships,  and  even  at  that  instant  I  humbly  re-
quested his  Majestie  to  vouchsafe  to  graunt  unto  you  a  [I.  352.]
newe  priviledge  more  ample  then  the  first,  which  imme-  New  privi-

diately  was  graunted,  and  so  1  departed. And  afterwards  ^^S"  obtained
I--'  =5,,/-  .J^_  , hereafter  fol-

navmg  penned  a briere  note  nowe  1  meant  to  nave  the  io^i^„

same  priviledges  made,  I  repaired  dayly  to  the  Secretary

for the perfecting of  the  same,  and obtained  it under

his  Majesties  broade  scale,  which  at  my  departure  from

thence,  I  delivered  unto  the  custody  of  Thomas  Glover

your  Agent  there. The  copy  whereof,  and  also  of  the

other priviledges  graunted and given by the king  of

Hircan,  I  have  already  delivered  unto  you. Sojourning

all  that  winter  at  Mosco,  and  in  the  meane  time  having

bargained with the Emperours Majestie,  I sent away

your  servant  Edward  Clarke  hither  overland  with  advise,

and  also  made  preparation  for  sending  againe  into  Persia

in  meete  time  of  the  yeere. And  committing  the  charge

thereof  unto your servants Thomas Alcocke, George

37

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

Wrenne,  and  Richard  Cheinie,  the  28.  of  June  last,  I
departed  in  poste  from  the  said  Mosco,  and  comming  to
Colmogro  and  so  downe  to  the  Sea  side,  I  found  your
ships  laden  and  ready  to  depart,  where  I  embarked  my
selfe  in  your  good  ship  called  the  Swallow,  the  9.  of
July,  one  thousand  five  hundred  sixtie  foure,  and  having
passed  the  Seas  with  great  and  extreme  dangers  of  losse
28.  Septemb.  of  shippe,  goods  and  life,  the  28.  day  of  September
^5°4-  last (God be praised) we arrived here at London in

safetie.

Thus  knowing  that  the  couragious  and  valiant  souldier,
which  adventureth  both  fame,  member  and  life,  to  serve
faithfully  his  soveraigne,  esteemeth  not  the  perils  and
dangers  passed  (the  victorie  once  obtained)  neither  for
his  guerdon  desireth  any  thing  more,  then  that  his
service  bee  well  taken  of  him  for  whom  he  enterprised
it  :  So  I  perceiving  your  favourable  benevolence  to  me
extended  in  accepting  my  travels  in  good  part  to  your
contentations,  do  thinke  my  selfe  therewith  in  great  part
recompensed  :  beseeching  Almightie  God  so  to  prosper
your  adventures,  from  time  to  time  hereafter  to  be  made
for  reaping  the  fruits  of  my  travels  (at  your  great  charges,
and  to  my  no  small  dangers)  that  ye  may  plentifully
gather  in  and  enjoy  the  same,  to  the  illustrating  of  the
Queenes  most  excellent  Majestic,  the  honour  and  com-
moditie  of  this  her  highnesse  Realme,  and  to  the  ample
benefit  and  abundant  enriching  of  you  and  your  suc-
cession, &  posteritie  for  ever.

38

KING OF HIRCANIA'S PRIVILEGES  ad.

1563.

A  copie  of  the  priviledges  given  by  Obdolowcan
King  of  Hircania,  to  the  company  of  English
merchants  Adventurers  for  Russia,  Persia,  and
Mare  Caspium,  v^ith  .  all  the  lands  and
countreys  adjoyning  to  the  "same,  obtained  by
M.  Anthonie  Jenkinson  at  his  being  there
about  the  affaires  of  the  said  company,  April
14.  Anno 1563.

WE  Obdolowcan  by  the  mightie  power  of  God
maker  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  appointed  and  now
raigning  king  of  Shirvan  and  Hircan,  of  our  meere
motion  and  great  goodnes,  at  the  earnest  sute  and  re-
quest of  our  favoured  and  welbeloved  Anthonie  Jenkin-
son Ambassadour,  have  given  and  graunted  unto  the
right  worshipfull  Sir  WilHam  Garret,  sir  William  Chester,
sir  Thomas  Lodge,  M.  Richard  Mallarie,  and  M.  Richard
Chamberlaine,  with  all  their  company  of  merchants
Adventurers  of  the  Citie  of  London  in  England,  free
libertie,  safe  conduct,  and  licence  to  come  or  sende  their
factors  in  trade  of  merchandize  into  our  countreys,  and  to
buy  and  sell  with  our  merchants  and  others,  either  for
ready  money  or  barter,  and  to  tary  and  abide  in  our
countrey,  so  long  as  they  will,  and  to  goe  away  when
they  list,  without  impediment,  let,  or  hinderance,  either
of  body  or  goods.

And  further  our  commaundement  and  pleasure  is,  that
the  said  English  merchants  with  their  company,  shall  pay
no  maner  of  custome  for  wares,  which  they  or  their
factors  shal  buy  or  sel  within  our  dominions.  And  if  at
any  time  our  customers  or  other  officers,  or  any  of  them,
doe  disturbe,  misuse,  force  or  constraine  the  said  English
merchants  or  any  of  them,  or  their  factors,  to  pay  any
maner  of  custome  or  duetie  for  any  wares  they  bring  in
or  cary  out  of  our  dominions  contrary  to  this  our  com-
mandement,  and  the  same  be  knowen  unto  us,  then  we
will  that  the  saide  customers  and  officers  shall  loose  &  be

39

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1563.

put  out  of  their  said  offices,  with  our  further  displeasure,
and  the  saide  English  merchants  to  have  restored  all  such
money  &  wares  as  our  customers  have  taken  of  them
for  our  said  custome.  And  whensoever  the  saide  English
merchants  or  their  factors  shall  bring  any  maner  of  wares
meete  for  our  treasurie,  then  our  treasurer  shall  take  the
said  wares  into  our  treasurie,  and  shall  give  unto  the  said
English  merchants,  either  ready  money  or  raw  silkes,  to
the  value  of  their  saide  wares.  And  wheresoever  this  our
letter  of  priviledges  shall  bee  scene  and  read  within  our
dominion,  we  straightly  wil  and  command  that  it  take
effect,  and  be  obeyed  in  al  points.

Dated  at  our  place  of  Javat,  the  day  and  yere  above
written,  and  sealed  with  our  princely  scale,  and  firmed  by
our  Secretarie  in  the  12.  yeere  of  our  raigne.

353.]  The  second  voiage  into  Persia  made  by  The.
Alcock,  who  w^as  slaine  there,  and  by  George
Wrenne,  &  Ric.  Cheinie  servants  to  the  wor-
shipfull  compaine  of  Moscovie  merchants  in
Anno  1563.  v^ritten  by  the  said  Richard
Cheinie.

T  may  please  your  worships  to  understand,
that  in the  yere 1563.  I  was  appointed
by M. Antho. Jenkinson, and M.
Thomas  Glover  your  Agent  in  Russia,  to
goe  for  Persia  in  your  worships  affaires,
one  Thomas  Alcock  having  the  charge  of
the  voyage  committed  to  him,  and  I  one
of  your  worships  servants  being  joyned  with  him  in  your
A  rubble  is  a  busines,  having  with  us,  as  they  said  1 500.  rubbles. And
if  it  shall  please  you  I  cannot  tell  certainly  what  summe
of  money  we  had  then  of  the  Emperors  :  for  I  received
none,  nor  disbursed  any  of  it  in  wares  for  the  voyage.
Aso,  God  I  take  to  record,  I  could  not  tell  what  stocke
your  worships  had  there,  for  the  bookes  were  kept  so
privily  that  a  man  could never  see  them. The 10.  of

40

ALCOCK, WREN AND CHEINIE  a.d.

1563.

May  anno  1563.  we  departed  from  a  towne  called  Yera-
slave  upon  our  voyage  toward  Persia.  The  24.  of  July
we  arrived  at  Astracan  :  and  the  second  of  August  wee
departed  from  Astracan,  and  the  4.  of  the  same  moneth
we  came  to  the  Caspian  sea,  and  the  1 1 .  day  of  the  said
moneth  we  arrived  at  our  port  In  Media  :  and  the
21.  of  the  said  August  wee  arrived  at  Shammaki,
whereas  the  king  Obdolocan  lay  in  the  fielde.  We
were  wel  entertained  of  heathen  people,  for  the  thirde
day  after  our  arrivall  at  Shammaki  wee  were  called
before  the  king  :  we  gave  him  a  present,  and  he  en-
tertained us  very  well.

At  our  comming  to  the  Court  wee  were  commaunded
to  come  before  the  king,  who  sate  in  his  tent  upon  the
ground  with  his  legs  a  crosse,  and  all  his  dukes  round
about  his  tent,  the  ground  being  covered  with  carpets  :
wee  were  commaunded  to  sit  downe,  the  King  appointing
every  man  his  place  to  sit.  And  the  king  commaunded
the  Emperour  of  Russelands  Merchants  to  rise  up,  and
to  give  us  the  upper  hande.  The  20.  of  October
Thomas  Alcock  departed  from  Shammaki  towards  Casbin,  Casbin.
leaving  mee  at  Shammaki  to  recover  such  debts  as  the
dukes  of  Shammaki  ought  for  wares  which  they  tooke  of
him  at  his  going  to  Casbin.  In  the  time  I  lay  there  I
could  recover  but  little.  And  at  Thomas  Alcocks  com-
ming from  Casbin,  who  arrived  at  a  towne  called  Leuvacta,  Leuvacta.
whereas  the  king  Obdolocan  lay,  a  day  and  a  halfes
journey  from  the  towne  whereas  I  lay,  I  hearing  of  his
arriving  there,  departed  from  Shammaki,  finding  him
there  in  safetie  with  all  such  goods  as  he  had  with  him.
During  his  abode  there  for  seven  dayes  he  made  suite  to
the  king  for  such  money  as  the  dukes  ought  him.  But
the  king  was  displeased  for  that  the  Emperour  of  Russe-
lands merchant  had  slaine  a  Boserman  at  his  going  to  ABosermanis
Casbin.  Thomas  Alcocke  seeing  the  king  would  shewe  ^  Renegado.
us  no  favour,  and  also  hearing  from  Shammaki,  that  the
Russes  sent  their  goods  to  the  sea  side,  for  that  they
feared  that  the  king  of  Persia  should  have  knowledge  of

41

A.D.
1563.

Thomas  Al-
cocke  slaine  in
the  way  be-
tweene  Leu-
vacta  and
Zhammaki,

Keselbash,  or
Jeselbash.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  death  of  the  Boserman,  willed  mee  to  depart  to
Shammaki  with  all  such  goods  as  he  had  brought  with
him  from  Casbin,  I  leaving  him  at  the  Court.

The  thirde  day  after  mine  arrivall  at  Shammaki,  I  had
newes  that  Thomas  Alcocke  was  slaine  comming  on  his
way  towards  me.  Then  the  king  Obdolocan  understand-
ing of  his  death,  demaunded  whether  he  had  ever  a
brother.  Some  said  I  was,  some  saide  I  was  not  his
brother.  When  this  fell  out,  your  worships  had  no
other  servant  there  but  mee  among  those  heathen  people.
Who  having  such  a  summe  of  goods  lying  under  my
handes,  and  seeing  howe  the  Russes  sent  their  goods  with
as  much  hast  as  they  might  to  the  sea  side,  and  having
but  foure  men  to  sende  our  wares  to  the  sea  side,  I  used
such  diligence,  that  within  two  dayes  after  Thomas
Alcocke  was  slaine,  I  sent  in  company  with  the  Russes
goods,  all  your  worships  goods  with  a  Mariner,  William
August,  and  a  Swethen,  for  that  they  might  the  safer
arrive  at  the  seaside,  being  safely  layd  in.  All  which
goods  afterwards  arrived  in  Russeland  in  good  condition,
Master  Glover  having  the  receipt  of  all  things  which  I
sent  then  out  of  those  parties  into  Russeland.  Concern-
ing my  selfe,  I  remained  after  1  had  sent  the  goods  into
Russeland  sixe  weekes  in  Shammaki,  for  the  recovery  of
such  debts  as  were  owing,  and  at  last  with  much  trouble
recovered  to  the  summe  of  fiftene  hundreth  rubbles  or
there  about,  which  M.  Glover  received  of  me  at  my
comming  to  Mosco,  and  all  such  goods  as  I  brought
with  me  out  of  Keselbash,  as  by  a  note  of  my  hand  that
hee  hath  shall  appeare.  Aso  he  having  the  receipt  of  all
such  goods  as  I  sent  into  Russeland  by  these  two  above
named,  he  then  had  that  voyage  in  venter  of  his  owne
better  then  an  hundreth  rubbles,  one  Richard  Johnson
twentie  rubles,  one  Thomas  Pette  fiftie  rubles,  one
Evan  Chermisin  a  Tartar  seventie  rubles.  All  these
had  their  returne  :  M.  Glover  allowed  himselfe  God
knoweth  howe,  I  then  being  in  Persia  in  your  worships
affaires.

42

ALCOCK, WREN AND CHEINIE  ad.

1565-
And  whereas  he  saith,  the  Emperour  had  but  for  his
part  a  dobble,  as  farre  as  I  can  see,  knowing  what  the
wares  cost  in  those  partes,  hee  had  treble.  If  they  gave
him  so  much  wares,  all  charges  turned  to  your  worships,
as  well  of  the  Emperours  as  of  their  owne  returnes.  I
have  sowen  the  seede,  and  other  men  have  gathered  the  [I.  354.]
harvest  :  I  have  travailed  both  by  lande  and  by  water  full
many  a  time  with  a  sorrowfull  heart,  aswell  for  the  safe-
garde  of  their  goods  as  yours,  how  to  frame  all  things
to  the  best,  and  they  have  reaped  the  fruites  of  my
travaile.  But  ever  my  prayer  was  to  God,  to  deliver
mee  out  of  those  miseries  which  I  suffered  for  your
service  among  those  heathen  people.  Therefore  know-
ing my  duetie  which  I  have  done,  as  a  true  servant
ought  to  do,  I  beseech  your  worships  (although  I
have  but  small  recompence  for  my  service,)  yet  let
me  have  no  wrong,  and  God  will  prosper  you  the
better.

Also,  to  informe  your  worships  of  your  Persian  voyage  Gillan  in  Per
what  I  judge  :  it  is  a  voyage  to  bee  followed.  The  king  "^•
of  Gillan,  whereas  yet  you  have  had  no  traffique,  liveth
al  by  marchandise :  and  it  is  neere  Casbin,  and  not  past
six  weekes  travaile  from  Ormus,  whither  all  the  spices
be  brought :  and  here,  (I  meane  at  Gillan)  a  trade  may
be  established :  But  your  worships  must  send  such  men
as  are  no  riotous  livers,  nor  drunkards.  For  if  such  men
goe,  it  wil  be  to  your  dishonour  and  great  hinderance,  as
appeared  by  experience  the  yeere  1565.  when  as  Richard
Johnson  went  to  Persia,  whose  journey  had  bene  better
stayed  then  set  forward.  For  whereas  before  wee  had
the  name  among  those  heathen  people  to  be  such
marchants  as  they  thought  none  like  in  all  respects,  his
vicious  living  there  hath  made  us  to  be  compted  worse
then  the  Russes.

Againe,  if  such  men  travaile  in  your  affaires  in  such
a  voyage,  you  shall  never  know  what  gaine  is  to  be
gotten.  For  how  can  such  men  imploy  themselves  to
seeke  the  trade,  that  are  inclined  to  such  vices }  or  howe

43

A.D.
1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

can  God  prosper  them  in  your  affaires  ?  But  when  a
trade  is  estabhshed  by  wise  and  discreet  men,  then
wil  it  be  for  your  worships  to  traffique  there,  and
not  before :  for  a  voiage  or  market  made  evil  at
the  first,  is  the  occasion  that  your  worships  shal
never  understand  what  gaine  is  to  be  gotten  thereby
hereafter.

1565.

The  thirde  voyage  into  Persia,  begun  in  the  yeere
1565.  by  Richard  Johnson,  Alexander  Kitchin,
and  Arthur  Edvv^ards.

A  letter  of  Arthur  Edwards  to  M.  Thomas
Nicols,  Secretarie  to  the  worshipful  company
trading  into  Russia  and  other  the  North  parts,
concerning  the  preparation  of  their  voyage
into Persia.

Jeraslave  a
towne  upon  the
river  of  Volga.

Richard  John-
son chiefe  of
the  third-
voyage  into
Persia.

Aster  Nicols,  my  bounden  duetie  remem-
bred,  with  desire  of  God  for  the  preser-
vation of  you  and  yours :  you  shall
understand  that  the  second  of  March  I
was  sent  by  M.  Thomas  Glover  (your
Agent)  unto  Jeraslave,  appointed  to
receive  such  goods  as  should  come  from
Vologhda,  as  also  such  kinde  of  wares  as  should  be
bought  and  sent  from  Mosco  by  your  Agent,  and  M.
Edward  Clarke,  thought  meete  for  your  voyage  of  Persia.
And  further,  I  was  to  provide  for  biscuit,  beere,  and
beefe,  and  other  victuals,  and  things  otherwayes  needful
according  to  advise.  Thus  I  remained  here  until  the
comming  of  your  Agent,  which  was  the  12.  of  May,
who  taried  here  three  dayes,  to  see  us  set  forwards  on
our  voyage,  and  then  he  departed  towards  Colmogro,
having  appointed  (as  chiefe  for  your  voyage  of  Persia)
Richard  Johnson.  For  my  part  I  am  willing,  as  also
have  bene  &  shalbe  content  to  submit  my  selfe  under
him,  whom  the  Agent  shall  appoint,  although he  were

44

JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS  ad.

1565.

such  a  one  as  you  should  thinke  in  some  respects
unmeete.  Thirtie  two  packes  of  carseis  are  all  of  that
kinde  of  cloth  that  we  shall  have  with  us.  The  other  18.
packs  that  should  have  gone,  were  sold  in  Mosco.  What
other  goods  are  shipped  for  our  voyage,  you  shall  under-
stand by  your  Agents  letters.  Whereas  Edward  Clarke
(being  an  honest  man)  was  appointed  Agent  for  Persia,
as  one  for  those  parts  more  fit  then  any  I  do  know  here,
God  hath  taken  him  unto  his  mercie,  who  departed  this
present  life  the  16.  of  March  last  past.  I  wished  of  God
for  my  part  he  had  lived :  for  my  desire  was  in  his
company  to  have  traveiled  into  Persia.  Your  barke  or  Abarkeof-t^o.
craer  made  here  for  the  river  of  Volga  and  the  Caspian  ^j^^^^/"^'^-^^^
sea  is  very  litle,  of  the  burthen  of  30.  tunnes  at  the  most.  ^.^  topasle
It  is  handsomly  made  after  the  English  fashion :  but  the  Caspian
I  thinke  it  too  litle  for  your  goods  and  provision  of  seas.
victuals.  If  the  worshipful  company  would  send  hither
a  Shipwright,  being  skilfull  to  make  one  of  the  burden  of
60.  tunnes  or  more,  drawing  but  sixe  foote  water  at  the
most  when  it  is  laden,  I  thinke  it  should  be  profitable.
For  if  your  owne  goods  would  not  lade  the  same,  here  be
Marchants  that  would  bee  glad  and  faine  to  give  great
fraight  to  lade  their  goods  with  us,  whereby  your  charges
would  be  much  lessened :  And  so  it  may  happen,  the
wages  of  your  men  hired  here  may  be  saved,  and  your
servants  and  goods  in  farre  greater  assurance :  for  their
boates  here  are  dangerous  to  saile  with  and  to  passe  the
Caspian  sea.  There  be  Carpenters  here  that  will  doe
well  ynough  having  one  to  instruct  them.  Your  wares
bought  here,  and  orders  taken  for  those  that  goe  for  your
voyage  of  Persia  are  yet  unknowen  unto  me :  wherefore  I
cannot  (as  I  would  at  this  present)  write  to  you  thereof.
Yet,  (as  you  do  know)  it  was  the  Governors  mind  I  [I.  355.]
should  be  acquainted  with  greater  affaires  then  these.
Howbeit  I  doubt  not  but  I  shall  be  informed  of  them
that  are  appointed,  and  all  things  shall  be  bought  when
they  shall  see  time  and  have  more  laisure.  Thus  in  hast
(as  appeareth)  I  commit  you  and  yours  into  the  hands  of

45

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

almightie  God ;  who  preserve  you  in  perfect  health  with
increase  of  worship.

From  Jeraslave  the  15.  of  May  1565.

By yours  to  command  here  or  elsewhere
during  life. Arthur Edwards.

Another  letter  of  the said M.  Arthur Edwards,
1566.  written the 26. of  April 1566. in Shamaki

in  Media,  to  the  right  worshipful  Sir  Thomas
Lodge  Knight  and  Alderman :  and  in  his
absence  to  M.  Thomas  Nicols,  Secretarie  to
the  right  worshipfull  companie  trading  into
Russia,  Persia,  and  other  the  North  and  East
partes,  touching  the  successe  of  Richard
Johnson  in  the  third  voiage  into  Persia.

'Orshipfull Sir, my bounden duetie remembred,

with  heartie  prayer  unto  God  for  the  preservation

of  you and yours in perfect health with increase of

worship. It may  please  you  that  my  last  letter I sent

The^j  departed  you was from Astracan the 26 of  July  1565. From

fromAstracan  whence Richard Johnson, my selfe, and Alexander

tke^^o.ofJuly  Kitchin, departed as the 30 of the same. And by

^ '  meanes of  contrary  windes, it  was the 23 of  August

before  we came to our desired port named Nazavoe.

There,  after  we had gotten your  goods on land,  with

much labour and strength of  men, as  also windlesses

devised and made,  we haled your  barke  over  a  barre

of  beach or  peeble  stones  into a  small River,  sending

your  ships  apparell  with  other  things  to  an  house  hired  in

a  village  thereby. And  as  soone  as  we  might  get  camels,

September. being  the  fift  of  September  we  departed  thence,  and  came

to  this  towne  of  Shamaki  the  11.  of  the  same:  and  the

Presents  to  the ly.  day  folowing,  we  presented  unto  Abdollocan  the  king

kingObdolozc-  ^£  ^j^jg  countrey,  one  timber  of  Sables,  one  tunne  or  nest

of  silver  cups  parsill  gilt,  three  Morses  teeth,  4.  Arshines

of  skarlet,  3.  pieces  of  karseis,  with  40.  red  foxes.

46

w

JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS  ad.

1566.

He received our  presents  with  giving us  thanks  for
our  good  wilsj  demanding  if  M.  Jenkinson  were  in  good
health,  and  whether he  would returne into  these  parts
againe. He  willed  us  also  himselfe  to  sit  downe  before
him the distance  of  a  quoits cast  from  his  tent,  where
he  sate  with  divers  of  his  counsaile  -and  nobilitie,  sending
us from his  table  such  meate  as  was  before  him :  And
after  certaine  talke had  with us, he sayd,  if  he might
perceive or know  any  maner  of  person  to doe us  any
wrong, he  would punish them in example of  others,
whereby  we  should  live  in  quietnesse,  and  have  no  cause
to  complaine,  giving  us  a  litle  house  for  the  time,  untill  a  ^  house  given
better might be provided in such place as  we should  °^^  ^^^.  ^^
thinke  most meete,  never  willing us  to rise or  depart, j^^y  ^  ^
untill such time  as  we of  our selves thought it  con-
venient. At  the  taking of  our  leave,  hee  willed  us  to
put  our  whole  minds and requests  in writing,  that  he
might further understand our desires. But while we  '^^^  ^^^^^  "f
were about  to  doe  so,  God tooke this  good king our  ■^'^d°j^°^<^^^ j^^
friend out  of  this  present life the  2.  of  October  past. ^f^.
The  want  of  him hath  bene  the  cause that  as  yet  wee
cannot  receive  certaine debts. Howbeit,  we  doubt  not
but  we  shall  recover  all  such  summes  of  money  as  are
owing  us  for  this  voyage. As  for  Thomas  Acocks  debts
they  are  past  hope  of  recoverie,  which  had  not  bene  lost
if  the  king  had  lived. We  trust  in  the  place of  him,
God  will  send  as friendly  a king  towards us :  who by
report (and as  we be  credibly  informed,)  shall  bee  his
Sonne  named  the  Mursay :  who  since  the death of  his  Mursay  the  -
father,  at  our  being  with  him,  promised  to  shew  us  more  "^^  ^,^'^^  °f
friendship  then  ever  we  found :  God  grant  the  same.  ^  ^^'

Great  troubles  have  chanced  in  these  parts.  Of  those
which  were  of  the  old  kings  counsell  or  bare  any  rule
about  him  in  these  quarters,  some  are  in  prison,  some  are
pinched  by  the  purse,  and  other  sent  for  unto  the  Shaugh.
These  troubles  have  partly  bene  the  let  that  wares  were
not  sold  as  they  might,  to  more  profite.  Your  Agent
Richard  Johnson  bought  foure  horses,  minding  to  have

47

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

The  death  of  sent  to  Casbin  Alexander  Kitchin,  whom  God  tooke  to
Alexander  j^jg  mercy  the  23.  of  October  last:  and  before  him
zx  of  October  departed  Richard  Davis  one  of  your  Mariners,  whose
1565.  soules  I  trust  the  Lord  hath  received  to  his  mercy. We

are  now  destitute  of  others  to  supply  their  roumes.
Foure  Mariners  were  few  enough  to  saile  your  barke,
whereof  at  this  present  we  have  but  one,  whose  name
is  William  Smith,  an  honest  yong  man,  and  one  that
doeth  good  service  here.  For  want  and  lacke  of
Mariners  that  should  know  their  labours,  we  all
were  like  to  be  cast  away  in  a  storme.  For  all  the
broad  side  of  our  barke  lay  in  the  water,  and  we  had
much  adoe  to  recover  it,  but  God  of  his  mercy  de-
livered us.  Mariners  here  may  doe  you  good  service
all  the  winter  otherwayes  :  and  merchants  here  will  be
gladder  to  ship  their  goods  in  us  giving  good  fraight.
One  merchant  at  this  present  is  content  to  pay  20.
rubbles  for  twentie  camels  lading  fraight  to  Astracan.
The  Caspian  Such  barkes  as  must  passe  these  seas,  may  not  draw
sea  very  s  oa  2i}ooY^  five  foote  of  water,  because  that  in  many  places
places.  ^1*^  very  shallow  waters. Wee  mind  hereafter  to  make

[I.  356.] the Russian boates more strong, and they shall serve
our  turnes  very  well.

And  whereas  some  in  times  past  tooke  great  paines,
travell  and  care,  and  could  not  have  their  desire  in
the  getting  of  the  Shaughs  letters  or  priviledge  :  Now,
I  trust  (with  Gods  helpe)  they  may  be  obtained  :  which
being  had,  will  be  beneficiall  to  the  company,  and  great
quietnes  to  those  that  shal  remaine  here,  although  here-
tofore things  have  chanced  ill,  as  the  like  in  other
countries  hath  bene.  But  I  doubt  not,  this  priviledge
once  gotten  and  obtained,  we  shall  live  in  quietnesse
and  rest,  and  shall  shortly  grow  into  a  great  trade  for
silkes  both  raw  and  wrought,  with  all  kind  of  spices
and  drugs,  and  other  commodities  here,  as  to  M.
Anthonie  Jenkinson  is  well  knowen,  who  (I  doubt  not)
hath  long  agoe  throughly  advertised  the  Companie
thereof.

JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS  ad.

1566.

The  trueth  of  the  slaughter  of  Thomas  Alcock  your  The  murther-
servant,  is  not  certainly  knowen.  Some  thinke  it  was  ^^g  of  Thomas
by  the  meanes  of  a  noble  man,  with  whom  your  sayd
servant  was  earnest  in  demanding  of  your  debts  :  upon
whose  words  he  was  so  offended,  that  he  procured  his
death.  But  other  doe  thinke  verily,  that  in  riding  from
the  Court  without  companie,  false  knaves  lay  in  waite,
thinking  he  had  much  about  him,  and  so  slew  him.
I  doubt  not  though  this  misfortune  hath  chanced,  that
things  shall  come  well  to  passe,  and  that  we  shall  be
better  beloved  when  we  shall  be  more  knowen.

Honest  merchants  are  glad  of  our  being  here,  and
seeke  to  grow  in  acquaintance  with  us,  being  glad  to
further  us  in  that  they  may,  &  have  spoken  in  our
favours  to  the  chiefest  of  this  Countrey  :  one  being  a
noble  man,  with  whom  your  Agent  and  I  are  entred
into  friendship,  who  is  at  this  time  in  great  favour
with  the  Shaugh.  He  hath  here  and  in  other  places
of  these  parts  set  a  good  stay  in  things  since  the  kings
death  :  he  is  well  knowen  to  M.  Jenkinson,  his  name  Cozamomet  a
is  Cozamomet.  Also  another  Duke  named  KmtM\n-  ""^^j^'J^^f^f
beck  is  our  great  friend  :  And  his  sister  is  the  Shaughes  nation.
wife.  These  two  have  promised  your  Agent  by  their
lawe,  not  onely  to  procure  to  get  the  Shaughes  privi-
ledge,  but  also  that  I  shall  have  the  debts  paied  me  of
those  that  went  from  hence  to  Casbin,  if  we  would
send  one  with  them.  In  consideration  whereof,  I  was
upon  short  warning  (for  want  of  a  better)  appointed  by
your  Agent  M.  Richard  Johnson,  all  excuses  laied
apart,  presently  to  put  my  selfe  in  readinesse,  and  to
depart  in  company  with  these  noblemen  :  with  charge,
when  God  should  send  me  to  Casbin,  to  use  my  dis-
cretion with  their  advise,  for  the  recovering  of  your
debts  and  priviledge.  I  shall  have  with  mee  one  inter-
preter and  two  bought  servants  :  one  of  which  partly
understandeth  this  tongue,  and  may  be  put  in  trust
whatsoever  should  become  of  me.  I  have  received  6.  The  value  of
tumens  in  ready  money,  200.  shaughs  is  a  tumen,  ^  *^^^^-
III  49  D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

reckoning  every  shaugh  for  sixe  pence  Russe.  I  have
further  received  two  timbers  of  Sables,  one  to  be  sold,
the  other  to  bee  given  to  Thomas  the  Shaugh  :  and
have  order  further  to  give  as  I  shall  see  good  to  those
that  shall  further  my  suite,  and  as  occasion  serveth.
And  forasmuch  as  I  am  commanded  to  go,  I  shall
willingly  do  my  best,  putting  my  trust  in  God  that  he
will  send  me  well  to  speed  in  this  journey.

For  all  kind  of  wares  bought  or  sold,  you  shal
throughly  be  advertised  by  your  Agent  Richard  John-
son, whose  reckonings  or  accompts  at  no  hands  I  might
see  or  be  privie  unto.  Your  karseis  were  good  and
well  sorted,  they  are  and  will  be  sold  from  150.
shaughs,  to  160.  the  piece.  Two  hundred  pieces  were
sold  under,  that  needed  not  :  one  100.  pieces  at  146.
and  147.  the  piece  but  more  would  have  bene  given,
if  circumspection  had  bene  used.  They  were  sold  to
those  noble  men  aforesayd,  when  as  yet  it  was  not
knowen  that  I  should  have  gone  with  them.  They
may  stand  us  much  in  stead,  as  they  have  promised  us
their  good  wils  in  that  they  may  doe.  Here  is  at  this
time  bought  for  England  11.  packes  of  rawe  silke,  25.
What  a  bat-  and  26.  batmans  being  in  every  packe  :  The  batman
man  ts.  being  7.  pound,  which  may  be  6.  pound  and  a  halfe  of

English  waight,  being  bought  here  from  66.  to  70.
shaughes  the  batman.  It  is  fine  and  good,  litle  course
at  this  time  was  to  be  had.  And  where  course  silke
might  be  had  being  at  Grosin,  we  could  not  send
thither  :  for  that  time  was  neglected  at  the  first.  When
wee  shall  have  lidgers  here  to  remaine  in  Sommer,  we
may  buy  it  at  the  first  hand  of  the  countrey  people
that  bring  it  to  sell  hither,  and  to  other  places.  I
would  to  God  the  Companie  could  find  the  meanes  to
have  a  vent  to  make  sales  for  the  one  halfe  that  we
may  buy  here.  The  Companie  may  have  for  30.  or
Faras  a  great  40.  thousand  pounds  yeerely.  And  as  appeareth  by
mart  for  silke.  your  Agents  wordes  being  at  Varas,  he  and  others
sawe  there  so  great  abundance,  that  by  report  of  divers,

50

JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
you  may  bestow  (if  it  were  not  for  the  Turkes)  for  a
two  hundred  thousand  pounds  :  besides  silke  of  all
colours  died  in  graine,  bound  up  in  pound  waights,  I
thinke  15.  of  our  ounces  to  their  pound  waight,  and
here  sold  for  23.  shaughs,  at  6.d.  the  shaugh,  may  be
U.S. 6.pence.

From  Astracan  in  7.  or  8.  dayes,  wee  may  saile  with  GUanj.dayes
our  barke  to  a  place  named  Gilan  : the  which  place  in  ^^f^^Sfi'°^^
time to come, (I thinke) shall  serve  our  purpose  best
to  goe  unto. Alom  is  there  good  cheape,  being  brought  Alom.
from thence  hither to Shamaki,  and  sold  here  for  two  [I-  357-]
bists their batman, which may be 5. pence in our
money  :  and  so  I  have  bought  to  bee  sent  home  223.
batmans  for  example. And  at  Gilan  there  is  rawe  silke
enough for the companies stocke. I beleeve, if any
great store of  wares be sent from you, that must be
the place  : & from thence a man may travell in 4. Gtlan  j^.. dayes
dayes to Casbin, and there make quicke and better  J^^^"p ■j''°"^
sales, at  which place  your  commodities  are  to  be  sold.
For there be the chiefe and best merchants, and
divers  other  cities  round  about,  to  wit,  Teveris,  Ardouil,
and Caishan, being the heart of  the countrey,  where
there is more civilitie and merchants are better used.
Concerning  this  point  I  have  inquired  of  divers  merchants
both  Russes  and  others  that  have  bene  in  those  parts,  and
found  them  all  agreeing  in  one  tale,  and  perceive  the  same
to  be  true,  and  that  all  kind  of  wares  come  from  thence
into  these  parts. And  from  Casbin  to  Ormus,  is  about  ^^"^  Casbin
70. daies travelling  with camels. I have  written the  ^° 'f  *f  ^ 1
prices  of  wares  in  my  letter  to  the  governour  both  for  ^^.//^  camels.
spices  and  some  drugs  which  I  do  know.

Aso  you  shall  understand  here  is  plentie  of  yew  for
bowstaves.  I  caused  three  horse  loades  to  be  bought
us  for  to  know  the  trueth  :  but  they  were  cut  out
of  season  this  moneth  of  April,  the  sap  being  in  them.
Three  moneths  I  never  left  speaking  to  the  Countrey
men  to  bring  some.  Your  Agent  will  send  some  home
for  example.

51

A.D.
1566.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

This  day  being  the  26.  of  Aprill  I  departed  towards

Casbin  :  God  give  me  a  good  houre  and  well  to  speed,  with

a  mery  heart  in  returning  againe,  as  my  hope  is  I  shall.

I have written my  mind to M. Glover  your Agent,

what  Russian  wares  I  thinke  best  to  be  bought  for  this

Countrey, and to send some one hither  that  hath  the

Russe tongue, for  we  have need. And the companie

shall  do  well  hereafter  in  taking  of  servants  to  be  sent

hither, to see that they be such as have discretion,

and be something broken in the world, and scene

in  the  trade  of  merchandise,  and  one (if  they  can get

some such) as can speake the Portingall tongue, may

do them as  good service, as those that shall be here

two  yeeres  before  him  : for  then  we  may  buy  a slave

that  can  speake  this  language  and  the  Portingal  tongue

The  secret  do-  also, which shall then interprete unto us in all your

ings  of  the secret doings, not making the  Russes  privy  :  for  they

Moscovie  com-  ^u\.  A ^ j • ^ ^u  \. c

pam  ^^^  ^°^7  ^^'^^  ^^  ^°^  trade  mto  these  partes,  tor  we  are

better  beloved  then  they  are  :  because  they  are  given  to
be  drunkards,  they  are  much  hated  of  these  people.  It
is  to  be  wished  that  none  should  serve  your  worships
in  these  parts  that  be  given  to  that  kind  of  vice  :  And
that  your  chiefe  Agent  and  Factor  should  be  able  to
rule  and  governe  himselfe,  that  no  dishonestie  should
be  imputed  to  him  and  us.  By  his  evill  usage  he  paied
here  24  rubbles,  being  in  this  Countrey  4.  tumens  for
a  boy,  that  he  was  charged  to  have  conveied  away  from
a  Tesicke  one  of  this  countrey  men,  who  willed  him  to
sweare  that  he  knew  not  where  the  boy  was  become,  and
he  should  not  pay  it.  If  he  were  honest  he  might  do  your
worships  good  service  because  of  his  Russian  tongue.

Your  London  reds  are  not  to  be  sent  hither,  for
they  will  not  give  above  18.  shaughes  their  arshine.
Orient  reds  of  Here  be  reds  of  more  orient  colour,  being  Venice  die.
The  people  are  given  much  to  weare  cloth  :  the  common
people  specially  weare  karseis,  and  the  merchants  of  more
wealth  weare  broad  cloth.  You  shall  doe  well  to  send
five  or  sixe  broad  clothes,  some  blackes,  pukes,  or  other

52

Fenice  die.

JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS  ad.

1566.

sad  colours,  that  may  be  affoorded  at  20.  shaughes  the
arshine,  and  not  above.  It  is  here  reported  that  King
Philip  hath  given  the  Turkes  a  great  overthrow  at  Malta,
and  taken  70.  or  80.  of  his  chiefe  captains.

Thus  wishing  I had  more  time  to  write,  I  pray  you
to  beare  with  this  my  scribled  letter,  and  after  you  have
red  it,  that  M.  Nicols  may  have  a  sight  thereof.
By  your  servant  to  command,

Arthur  Edwards.

Commodities  to  be  caried  out  of  England  into
Persia,  with  their  prizes  there.

I ly^Arseis are sold there for 180. Shaughes: so
J^  that  a  karsey  is  sold  there  in  Persia  for  foure

pound  ten  shillings : for  every  shaugh  is  sixe  ^  shaugh  is
pence  English,  and  every  Bist  is  two  pence  halfe- *  ^^S^"^-
peny  English,  and  in  Russe  money  three  pence.
\  2  Tinne is sold in  Persia for 14.  and 18.  shaughes
the  batman. The  batman  containing  as  I  have
mentioned  before.

3  Brasil  is  at  10.  and  12.  shaughes  the  batman.

4  Red  cloth  fine,  at  25.  and  30.  shaughes  the  yard.

5  Copper  at  20.  and  25.  shaughes  the  batman.

Commodities  to  be  brought  out  of  Persia  for ['•  358-]
England.

1  T3  Aw  silke  at  60.  shaughs  ye  batman.

2  Xv  Pepper  at  32.  shaughs  ye  batman.

3  Ginger  at 18.  &  20.  shaughs  ye  batman.

4  Nutmegs  at  30.  shaughs  the  batman.

5  Brimstone  at  4 shaughs the great  batman. The
\  great  batman  is  12.  li.  English.

6  AUom  at  2.  bists  and  a  halfe  the  batman  and  lesse.

7  Rice  at  halfe  a  bist  the  batman.

8  Gals  at  halfe  a  bist  the  batman.

9  Cloves  at  40.  shaughs  the  batman.
^  10  Yew  for  bow  staves,  at

53

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

A  letter  of  M.  Arthur  Edwards,  written  the  8.
of  August  1566.  from  the  towne  of  Shamaki
in  Media,  to  the  right  worshipfull  the  Gover-
nours,  Consuls,  Assistants,  and  generalitie  of
the  companie  of  Russia,  &c.  Shewing  his
accesse  unto  the  Emperour  of  Persia,  his  con-
ference with  him,  his  obtaining  of  a  priviledge,
with  divers  other  good  observations.

Right  worshipfull  Sirs,  my  bounden  dutie  remembred,
with  most  humble  commendations  and  like  request
to  God  for  the  preservation  of  your  good  healths,  with
the  rest  of  the  companie,  &c.  It  may  please  you  to
understand,  that  the  last  letter  which  I  sent  you  from
hence  was  of  the  26.  of  April  of  this  present  yeere  by
Richard Johnson at my departure towards Casbin : to

His  arrival which  citie  I  Came  the  25.  of  May  folowing,  not  slacking
at  Casbin  the ^^^ ^^^^ j^^^^^

speedie bringing  me  before  the  presence

at  Casbin  the  ^  j^

zz..ofMa\. ..■I.J]. , '  ..

rriends ror  the  speedK

of  the  Shaugh,  being  the  29.  day  of  the  same  moneth
brought  before  him,  with  whose  majestie  I  was  in  talke
(as  I  thinke)  two  houres.  He  willed  me  twise  to  come
neerer  him,  demanding  what  were  my  requests :  and
having  heard  them,  he  promised  me  his  gracious  letters.
Conference  l£  Afterwards  he  called  me  twise  againe  to  come  neerer
ih'^^h  ^  him,  and  talked  with  me  of  our  Queenes  majestie  and
Countrey,  and  what  commodities  we  had,  and  what  other
commodities  we  desired :  and  then  of  other  countries
adjoyning  to  us  and  their  commodities,  as  also  of  king
Philip,  what  overthrow  he  gave  the  Turks  at  the  siege
of  Malta.  And  how  long  we  had  traded  into  Russeland
and  Moscovia,  and  in  what  space  we  might  saile  out  of
England  into  Russeland,  &  how  many  weekes  travell  it
is  from  Colmogro  to  Astracan :  and  then  came  to  dis-
course of  Russeland,  and  what  townes  the  Emperour  had
wonne,  declaring  unto  me  himselfe  most  of  our  com-
modities. In the end he willed that your worships

54

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
should send him of  all sorts of  clothes, but of  one  All  sorts  of
especially  which maidens  do  make  (as  he  sayd:) He  ^^ot^tobesm,
named  it  Karengi,  I  thinke  it  is  Westerne  dozens  died  fJne dozens'
into scarlets. Time will  not permit  mee to write at  died  into
large  the  conference  which I  had  with  his  majesty. It  skarlet.
was  strange  to  his  people  (knowing  our  religion)  to  see
me  so  long  in  talke  with  him,  willing  his  Secretarie  before
mee  to  write  what  he  was  desirous  of :  to  wit,  of  London
clothes,  three  or  foure  of  all  sorts  for  example,  being  well
shorne and drest. Violets in graine  and fine reds be
most  worne, but other good  colours  will  away, when
they  shall  see  them. I  wore  a  garment  of  London  russet,
being  much  esteemed. You  shall  doe  well  to  send  such
sorts  as  be  lively  to  the  sight,  and  some  blacks  for  womens
garments,  with  some  Orenge  colours  and  tawneis. Here
is  much  broad  cloth  worne. They  talke  much  of  London  London  chthes
clothes,  and  they  that  know  the  wearing,  are  desirous  of  ^^'^p^^^-J
them  before  the  cloth  of  the  womens  making,  for  they  yiuch  Venice
find  it  nothing  durable. For  when  it  commeth  to  weare  doth  worne  in
on the threed, it renteth like paper. Here is much  Persia.
Venice  cloth  worne,  being  cromplisted  a  yard  and  a  halfe
broad,  and sold here from 24. to 30. shaughes their
arshine, being longer by two inches then the Russe
arshine  is. I  wish  also  that  you  send  some  good  chamlets
& velvets  died in  graine, with purple colours & fine
reds  :  because  these  are  most  worne. Also  some  blacks
with  other  colours  :  some  cloth  of  gold,  tissue  &  bocky,
some  velvets  wrought  with  gold,  with  sattins  and  damaskes,
most  purple,  and  reds  of  all  sorts. You  may  not  forget
to  send  some  Western  karseis,  to  wit,  dozens,  which  be
thicked  well,  and  close  shut  in  the  weaving,  being  died
into  fine  reds,  and  some  skarlets : for  I  thinke  there  is
no  such  cloth  for  their  caps.

Your  worships  shall  understand,  that  after  my  first
departure  from  the  presence  of  the  Prince,  I  neglected
no  time  in  daily  attendance  on  them,  who  had  my
priviledge  in  writing,  that  I  might  have  it  in  readinesse
at  such  time  as  I should  againe  bee  called  before  the

55

A.D.

1566.

The  second  ad-
mission to  the
Skaughs  pre-
sence, the  29.
of  June  1566.
at  which  time
he  received
the  priviledge.
The  Shaughs
promise  to  in-
crease the
priviledge.

[I-  359-]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

presence  of  the  Shaugh,  which  was  the  29.  of  June  last.
I  was  in  apparell  that  he  gave  unto  me,  with  other
garments  to  mine  interpreter,  and  one  of  your  servants,
and  then  I  received  your  letters  or  priviledge,  according
to  my  desire,  sealed  and  firmed  with  the  Shaughs  owne
hand.  Praysed  bee  God  who  hath  wrought  with  me,
and  for  me,  in  all  my  doings.

The  29.  of  June  is  one  of  their  chiefe  festivall  daies,
so  that  all  his  nobilitie  was  there  present,  with  two
Ambassadors  in  companie  with  his  majestic,  who  sayd
unto  me  that  if  my  letters  were  not  to  my  mind,  in
time  to  come  they  should  be  mended.  Whereupon  I
made  my  reverence,  and  gave  his  highnesse  most  humble
and  heartie  thanks,  saying,  that  with  as  much  speed  as
might  bee,  our  Queenes  Majestie  should  understand  of
his  goodnesse  towardes  her  Merchants,  which  I  thought
would  write  their  letters  of  request  unto  his  Highnes,  in
such  forme  &  order  as  by  them  should  be  thought  meete
and  requisite  for  their  good  assurance  in  the  trade  of
merchandizes  :  who  replied  with  these  wordes  :  when  wee
shall  see  their  reasonable  requests,  we  will  shew  them
our  farther  good  will,  and  so  I  departed.

Since  the  receiving  of  the  Shaughs  letters,  I  have
eaten  in  company  of  good  Dukes  and  others,  who  before
would  not  come  neere  me.  And  every  day  some  would
come  to  my  Shop,  and  eate  and  drinke  with  me  out  of
mine  owne  dish.  Likewise  in  riding  from  Casbin  hither,
on  the  way  when  I  sate  downe  to  dinner,  they  would
come  and  eate  with  mee  unbidden,  when  I  wished  them
further  off:  for  I  spared  them  that,  which  gladly  I
would  have  eaten  my  selfe.  I  doubt  not  but  we  shall
live  here  from  hencefoorth  in  quietnes  :  for  now  in  all
places  where  I  come,  I  am  friendly  used  with  the  best.

I  was  asked  by  the  Shaugh  if  you  were  able  to  bring
him  yeerly  one  hundred  thousand  pieces  of  kersies,  and
clothes.  And  I  answered  him,  saying,  your  worships
were  able  to  furnish  his  countrey  with  two  hundred
thousand. Whereat his Highnesse rejoyced : for the

56

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
Turkes  Ambassador  the  last  yere,  as  divers  have  told  me,
did  put  the  Shaugh  in  despaire,  saying,  that  the  Turke
would not permit any cloth to be brought into his
countrey.

There  is  a  citie  in  Syria  named  Aleppo,  wherein  con-  Aleppo  a  cltie
tinually  are  many  Venetians  dwelling,  besides  other  that  VS^'^^^^^'^^^-
come  yeerely  and  there  buy  wools,  gals,  tallow,  saffron,
skins,  cotton  wooll,  and  other  wares,  and  great  store  of
spices. Also  the  Armenians  yeerly  receive  at  the  Vene-  Armenians
tians hands, karsies in barter for rawe silks, giving  barterwlththe
sometimes  60.  pieces  of  karsies  for  70.  batmans  of  silke ^^^*^^'^^-
of  this  countrey,  and  40.  pieces  for  Grosin  silke. And
karsies  sold  commonly  for ready  money in Aleppo, at
II.  and 12, duckets  the  piece,  (the  ducket  being  here
woorth 12.  shillings) may cost  the  first  peny 132.  and
144. Shaughs a karsie. By  report it is one moneths  '^^^  distance
travel  from  this  towne  of  Shamaky  to  Aleppo,  and  from  {^^f ''^'^■^
thence  to  Tripolis,  six  dayes  journey  :  and  from  Tripolis
to Venice by water, a  moneth  or five  weekes sailing.
As  I  learne,  from  hence  to  Venice  may  easily  be  travelled
in lesse then three moneths. Therefore  I wish your
worships to procure some trustie and assured friend
there,  to  whom  from  hence  letters may  be sent. For
I  can  have  them  here  to  put  in  suerties  to  deliver  my
letters,  and  to  bring  answere. If  I had  any  other  here
with  me,  I  would  nothing  have  doubted  to  have  brought
you  the  Shaughs  letters  that  way.

The  Armenians  and  other  are  desirous  to  barter  with  Armenians

us,  giving  silke  for  karsies,  and  also  will  serve  us  of  all  ^^^  °^^^^^  ^^~

kind of  spices, we  giving them sufficient  warning: to  '^ ",?"■'  ^ ,  ^[.  ^^
r 1 • • 1 T J-  1 -n 1 T  •  • (-1 ° 1 silke  and  Spices

retch  it  m  tne  Indies,  and  will  deliver  it  us  in  bhamaky  foj-  karsies.

at  these  prizes.

Pepper  this  townes  batman  for  18.  Shaughs,  every
Shaugh  is  sixepence.

Maces  large  for  40.  Shaughs,  and  45.  the  batman.

Cloves  for  40.  Shaughs  the  batman.

Nutmegs  for 16.  and 18.  Shaughs  the  batman.

Sinamom  for  40.  Shaughs  the  batman. I  doubt  not

57

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

but  there  will  be  profite  and  good  done  in  spices,  with
drugs  and  other  like  in  time.

From  Casbin  to  Ormus  is  six  weeks  travel,  and  from
hence  to  Casbin  is  16.  dayes  with  camels  laden  :  but  if
one  travell  with  a  good  Mule  unladen,  it  may  be  gone
in  seven  or  eight  dayes.  And  I  thinke  to  Ormus  and
other  places,  may  be  travelled  in  like  order  and  pro-
portion, with  cattel  unladen.  But  here  in  all  places
as  men  travel,  they  must  carie  their  owne  provision  on
horses,  which  they  are  to  buy,  and  thus  they  travell  but
a  footepase.
The  Shaugh  The Shaugh himselfe is desirous to bargaine with

desirous  to  bar-  y-Q^ ^N\\o will give money, silke, and other wares  as
gamejor  our  ^^i ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ wares as we may affoord

commodities.  '  -  J

them, wilhng me himselre to bnng such wares as

we  might  gaine  by  him.  The  Armenians  by  report,
and  as  I  perceive,  bring  from  Aleppo  yeerely,
foure,  five,  and  six  thousand  pieces  of  karsies,  and
clothes,  besides  those  which  other  men  bring.  If  your
Worships  might  procure  and  find  vent  or  sales  for  rawe
silke,  and  silke  died  in  graine,  besides  other  silkes
wrought  and  made  here,  by  which,  profite  may  be
made  :  then  you  might  send  a  great  substance  of  wares
hither.  But  I  feare  you  shall  be  hindered  by  the
Venetians  if  they  may  :  for  I  know  it  will  grieve  them
that  you  doe  trade  into  these  partes  :  for  in  short  time
it  shall  cleane  alter  their  trade,  and  hinder  the  sales  of
their  clothes  in  Aleppo  and  other  places  adjoyning.  You
shall  understand  that  60.  batmans  of  silke  is  a  Mules
lading  :  and  as  it  is  reported,  one  village  of  the
Armenians  yerely  carieth  400.  and  500.  Mules  lading
of  silke  to  Aleppo,  and  bringeth  thence  800.  or  a
thousand  Mules  laden  with  karsies  &  Venice  clothes.
[I.  360.]  And  18.  pieces  of  karsies  are  a  Mules  lading.  But  I
^°°°*/'^'^^^^  wish  you  not  to  send  above  2000.  pieces  of  karsies,
senT'into  although I have bene  willed to write for  more. If  I

Persia.  might  have  had  any  understanding  what  your  Worships

had  written  for  in  your  letters  sent  this  yeere,  I  should

58

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
in  this  my  letter  have  bene  better  able  to  have  answered
you.  They  which  be  now  in  Astracan,  might  have
written  some  thing  unto  me  hither,  if  it  had  pleased
them,  or  else  have  sent  me  such  letters  of  mine,  as  I
hope  some  of  my  friends  have  written  to  me  :  for  here
are  arrived  eight  weekes  past,  two  boates  with  wares
and  Russes,  by  whom  they  might  have  written,  had  it
bene  but  3.  or  4.  lines.  They  promised  the  Russes  to
write,  but  promise  was  not  kept.  I  would  be  sory
that  any  boat  should  depart  out  of  these  partes,  and
not  write  unto  them,  waying  how  all  things  stand,  I
heare  they  have  bought  a  boat,  which  cost  40.  rubbles,
and  shipped  certaine  wares  to  come  hither.  God  send
them  in  safetie.  I  do  tarie  their  comming,  or  els  I
had  thought  to  have  come  to  Astracan  in  those  boates
which  departed  hence  lately.

The fifteenth of  July  last, I departed from Casbin,  He  departed
and came to this towne the 29. of ye same. And  fi'"^  Casbin
the fourth of  August I found meanes to arrest the ^  5-y  «J-
falsest knave in this countrey, to wit, the Customer
for  11. tumens,  and 100. shaughs,  (200. shaughs  is a
tumen.) I have caused  him  to  put in suerties for his
foorthcomming at all times, what ende I shall have
with him,  God knoweth, the debt will be recovered,
but  not  yet,  for  he  must  pay  the  Shaugh 1000.  rubbles.
These partes as yet are in no stay for lacke of a
Governour  or  head  to  rule,  which  I  thinke  shall  bee  the
Mursey. Within  5.  or  6.  dayes  we  shall  know,  for  it  is
time,  because  men  are  in  feare  to  travell  for  being  robbed.
If  there  were a prince placed,  I should soone get in
your  debts,  for  they  dare  not  disobey  the  Shaughs  letters
or  priviledge  : wherein he  hath  not  onely  written  that
our debts shall be paied, but also that we shall be
taken heed to, so as we need not to doubt (God
willing) in time to  come, to be here as wel used as
we are in Russeland. The bils of  debts  that Rich.  Rich.  Johnsons
Johnson left with me, had neither the parties name  great  negh-
nor  summe  of  mony  in  two  of  them,  and  in  other  bils  *  ^'^ '

59

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

but  his  own  name.  If  I  had  not  used  discretion  in
causing  to  be  written  in  our  priviledge,  that  such  debtes
as  are  owing,  should  be  paied  any  of  us  in  the  absence
of  the  other,  some  men  would  not  have  paied  one
penie,  but  onely  to  Richard  Johnson,  who  hath  written
but  his  owne  name  onely  in  the  bils.  I  received  in
Casbin  of  Forackan  in  part  of  29.  tumens,  300.  shaughs
in  money  :  the  rest  he  will  deliver  me  here  in  silke,
and  this  is  all  that  I  have  received  to  this  day.  And
as  for  Hawrambecks  twelve  tumens,  I  make  accompt,
that  if  I  could  ride  to  speake  with  him,  I  should  be  paid
in  money  and  wares.  Touching  Ackons  money,  by
meanes  of  Duke  Ameddinbeck,  who  first  owed  the  debt,
because  they  meant  not  to  pay  a  penie,  he  did  rather
seeke  to  hinder  my  sute  then  to  further  mee,  but
I  found  out  a  present  remedie  :  for  God  sent  me  friends
that  were  alwayes  about  the  Shaugh,  and  daily  put  on
his  apparell,  who  opened  all  my  sute,  and  brought  mee
to  the  presence  of  the  Shaugh  before  that  Cozomomet
Cozomomet  sawe  the  Shaughs  eyes.  But  Cozomomet  in  the  end
was  Arthur  ^^g  j^y  fj-iend  :  for  he  was  sent  for,  and  declared  unto
friend  to  th  ^^  Shaugh  what  good  merchants  we  were,  using  trueth
Shaugh.  ii^  "^  oi^r  doings,  and  how  we  were  in  great  favour
with  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  what  good  com-
modities wee  might  bring  into  his  Countrey,  with  other
talke.  And  daily  he  was  sent  for  to  the  Shaugh  about
the  affaires  in  those  partes,  for  no  man  was  able  to
advise  the  Shaugh  of  the  state  and  affaires  of  those
Countreys  so  much  as  hee  was.  He  owed  your  Wor-
ships seven  tumens  and  48.  shaughs,  which  was  not  all
this  time  to  be  gotten  at  his  hands  :  for  hee  was  at  great
charges  in  riding  to  Casbin,  and  giving  great  gifts  since
his  comming,  which  he  twise  declared  unto  me.  I
feeling  his  griefe  became  Physicion  to  ease  his  paine,
and  forgave  him  his  debt  abovesayd,  in  recompence
of  ten  pieces  of  karsies,  that  were  promised  him  by
Richard  Johnson  and  me,  to  give  him  at  the  comming
of  our  goods,  in  consideration  that  he  should  with  speed

60

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
doe  what  lay  in  him,  to  dispatch  me  away  :  for  I  per-
ceive hee  procured  other  that  did  helpe  me  in  my  sute
to  delay  me  of,  till  time  he  had  his  purpose.  I  never
was  in  quiet,  till  I  had  the  Princes  priviledge,  and  had
got  mee  out  of  Casbin  :  for  victuals,  and  all  other  things  Victuals  and
are  very  deare  there,  because  they  are  brought  thither  ^^l  things  dear
from  farre  off.  As  for  all  other  smal  debts  (which  may
be  about  7.  tumens)  when  our  Merchants  are  come
hither,  we  shall  seeke  to  get  them  in  as  we  may.  I
wish  your  Worships  to  send  some  bullion  to  bee  coyned
here,  it  will  please  the  prince  there,  and  be  profitable  to
you.  Silke  is  better  cheape  by  two  or  three  shaughs  the
batman,  then  it  was  the  last  yeere.  You  shall  understand
that  I  have  written  two  letters  of  all  my  proceedings,
which  I  sent  from  Casbin  long  since  :  to  wit,  the  24.
and  29.  of  June  last,  by  one  of  your  servants  to  Gilan,
there  to  take  ship  and  to  goe  to  Astracan,  and  to  deliver
the  same  unto  your  Factors,  which  might  have  bene
to  their  quietnes  and  mine,  long  agoe.  But  I  am  right
sorie  to  heare  since  my  comming  hither,  that  he  hath
plaied  the  loitering  merchant  in  Gilan,  not  going  in
those  boats  that  went  first,  but  taried  for  the  last  boats.
But  1  will  teach  him,  to  the  example  of  other,  how  he
shall  make  haste  hereafter  in  such  affaires.  The  karsies
which  you  sent  last,  being  bought  of  M.  Quarles,  were  [I.  361.]
good  and  full  lengths  and  well  sorted.  The  Princes  The  Ambassa-
Ambassador  of  Gilan  was  in  Casbin,  at  mv  being  there. .  ^-^-^^

i^TtTlCB  Of

I  hope  in  God,  if  I  remaine  here,  and  may  goe  to  Gilan,  QUan,
to obtaine  for  your  worships  the  like  priviledge  at  the
kings  hand there also. For I have somthing moved
the  matter,  being  put  in  such  comfort,  that  I  doubt  not
the getting thereof  with small charges, which I had
done  at  this  time  if  I  had had  other  here  with  me to
put in trust  : for from Casbin to Gilan is but 5.  Gilan  but  five
dayes  riding,  which  Countrey  may  be  profitable  to  your  dpes  ndtng
Worships. There  is  in  that  Province  good  store  of  silke,
better  cheape,  &  better  in  goodnesse  then  this  countrey
silke  is. Also  great  store  of  Alom,  being  there  sold  this

61

A.D.

1566.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Gab.

townes  batman,  for  one  bist  and  a  halfe.  I  have  made
reckoning,  al  charges  borne  from  hence  to  Colmogro,
&  from  thence  fraight  into  England  at  three  pounds  the
tunne,  al  charges  accounted,  will  not  stand  you  in  above
18.  and  20.  shillings  the  hundreth.  You  have  yeerly
by  report  two  or  three  hundred  tunnes  lading.  Other
commodities  there  for  England  I  heare  not  of.  As  for
gals  here  to  bee  bought,  there  is  no  profit  to  be  done
by  them.  They  be  brought  from  Aleppo,  and  sold
here  not  under  3.  or  4.  shaughs  their  batman,  being
Graine.  six  pounds  English  waight.  Graine  that  you  die  scarlet
withall  is  worth  the  batman  ready  mony,  200.  shaughs,
reckoning  the  shaugh  for  6.  pence  Russe,  it  may  be  6.
rubbles  their  batman.  Your  worships  may  send  some
portion  of  mony,  if  you  may  buy,  as  I  thinke  you  may,
for  12.  and  13.S.  a  pound  the  berries,  so  you  shall  gaine
both  in  the  price  and  waight.  If  one  Englishman  more
had  bene  here  with  me,  to  whom  I  might  have  delivered
our  bils  of  debts  and  other  things,  whatsoever  should
have  chanced  of  me,  I  would  then  have  become  servant
to  mine  Interpreter,  and  so  have  gone  to  Ormus  and
Aeppo,  which  both  joyne  on  the  borders  of  this  countrey,
being  the  chiefe  Mart  townes,  whereunto  from  all  places
merchants  resort.  And  thus  would  I  have  spent  4.  or
5.  months  in  travelling  for  further  knowledge  of  things
for  to  have  certified  your  worships  of.  I  hope  in  God
to  use  things  in  such  order,  that  yeerly  you  shall  have
returne  of  your  goods  from  hence,  as  you  have  forth
of  Russeland,  and  in  those  ships.  For  if  we  may,  as  I
doubt  not  with  diligence,  provide  to  make  sales  in  time,
and  with  speed  receive  silke  at  the  Shaughs  hand,  and
other  mens,  that  it  may  be  sent  from  hence  to  be  in
Astracan  at  the  beginning  of  Aprill,  from  whence  it  may
be  sent  to  Colmogro  in  three  moneths  and  lesse,  and
there  to  be  ready  with  the  rest  of  your  goods  by  the
end  of  June  for  your  ships  to  receive,  that  will  be  time
inough.  This  I  doubt  not  to  bring  to  passe  within  a
yeere  or two,  when we are throughly setled  in these

62

Ormus.
Aleppo.

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1566.
parts,  and  better  knowen. Moreover you  shall  under-
stand, that  at  my  last  being  in  the  presence  of  the  Shaugh,  M.  Jntkonie
it was sayd to mee that  M. Anthonie  Jenkinson  did  Jjl^^^^^°"^
proffer to take all the  rawe silke  in  those  parties,  de-  Persian
livering  cloth and  other  commodities  for the same. I
assure you there  is  in  those parts  to be had  three  or
foure  thousand  horses  lading,  every  horse  load  being  50.
or  60.  batmans,  beside  silke  of  Grosin. Great  abundance
of  silke  at times  is sent out of  these  parts,  to  wit,  4.
or 5. hundred horse  lodes  at  a time by  the Turkes,
who  bring  great store of  silver to be coined, to wit.
Dollars  at  ten  shaughs  the  piece. The  Hungarie  Ducket
is at 12. shaughs. And having  money  in  readines  at
the  time  of  the  yeere,  they  buy  silke  the  better  cheape,
when the countrey  men bring it  first to be sold. If
your  worships  may  bargaine  with  the  Venetians  to  take
silke  at  your  hands,  or  otherwise  deale  with  them,  I  doe
not  mistrust  but  to  have  at  the  Shaughs  hand  sixe  bat-

o

mans  of  silke  for  two  pieces  and  a  halfe  of  karsies. Your

good advise herein, and in other matters,  I  trust  you

will write with convenient speed. Master Anthonie  M.  Jntkonie

Jenkinson  hath  deserved  great  commendation  at  all  your  ^^^ktnson

worships  hands  : for the good report  of  his  well  and

wise doings in those parts, was oftentimes a comfort

to  me  to  heare  thereof,  and  some  good  helpe  to  me  in

my  proceedings. To  this  day  I  never  heard  from any

of  our merchants. God graunt me in health to see

your  worships, for  I  have  had a carefull travell, with

many  a sorrowfull day and unquiet sleepes. Neither

had I the company of  one  English person,  to whom

sometimes I might have eased my pensive heart, as

God  well knoweth,  who hath delivered  me  from  mine

enemies. Thus almightie God graunt you in health

and  wealth  long  to  live.

Your  humble  servant  at  commandement
during  life,

Arthur  Edwards.

63

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1567.

Another  letter  of  Arthur  Edwards  written  in
Astracan  the  16.  of  June,  1567.  at  his  returne
in  his  first  voiage  out  of  Persia,  to  the  right
worshipfull  Companie  trading  into  Russia,
Persia,  and  other  the  North  and  Northeast
partes.

The  Shaughs T  T may please  your Worships that herein I have

letters  to  the J_  written  not  onely  certaine  articles  of  your  priviledge,

panie^'^  '^°^~  ^^^ ^^° ^^ Governours names, with the Consuls,

Assistants and generalitie. Also such commodities as

the  Prince or Emperour  of  the  Countrey  hath  written

in  one  of  his  letters  directed  to  your  Worships  to be

sent him, with other  notes  which I thought  good to

[I.  362.] be remembred, as may appeare hereafter following.

Your  priviledge  is  written,  graunted,  and  given  in  the

names of these sixe persons following  : to wit, sir

William Garrard, sir  William  Chester, governours, sir

Thomas Lodge, master Anthony Jenkinson, master

Thomas  Nicols  and  Arthur  Edwards.

1  First,  it  is  granted  that  you  shall  pay  no  maner
of  customes  or  tols,  any  kinde  of  wayes,  now,  nor  in
time  comming,  unto  his  heires  after  him.  And  that
all  English  merchants,  such  as  you  shall  appoint  now
and  hereafter,  shall  and  may  passe  and  repasse  into
all  places  of  his  dominions  and  other  countries  adjoining
in  the  trade  of  merchandise,  to  buy  and  sell  all  maner
of  commodities,  with  all  maner  of  persons.

2  Item,  that  in  all  places  where  any  of  our  merchants
shall  have  their  resort,  or  abiding,  his  chiefe  Governours,
Rulers  and  Justices  shall  take  heed  unto  us,  being  our
aide  &  defence  against  all  evil  persons,  punishing  those
that  shall  do  us  any  wrong.

3  Item,  that  for  all  such  debts  as  shall  be  owing
by  any  maner  of  person,  justice  shal  be  done  on  the
partie,  and  we  paid  at  the  day.

4  Item,  that  no  maner  of  persons  of  whatsoever  estate

64

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1567.
or degree they  be of, shall be so hardie as to take
any  kind  of  wares,  or  any  gifts,  without  any  leave  and
good  will.

5  Item,  if  by  chance  medley  any  of  our  merchants
or  servants,  as  God  forbid,  should  kill  any  of  his
subjects,  that  no  part  of  your  goods  shall  be  touched
or  medled  withall,  neither  any  partie  but  the  offendour,
and  true  justice  to  bee  ministred,  and  being  any  of
us,  not  to  suffer  without  the  Princes  knowledge  and
advise.

6  Item,  that  all  such  debts  as  are  now  owing,  or
hereafter  shall  be,  are  to  be  paied  unto  any  of  us,  in
the  absence  of  the  other,  be  the  partie  dead  or  alive.

7  Item,  that  no  person  returne  any  kind  of  wares
backe againe,  being  once  bought  or  sold.

8  Item,  that  when  God  shall  send  your  goods  to
shore,  presently  his  people  shall  helpe  us  on  land  with
them.

These  articles  before  written,  I  trust  in  God  wil
content  your  minds,  untill  your  farther  letters  be
hitherto  written  unto  the  Prince,  who  I  am  assured
will  graunt  your  farther  reasonable  requests,  which  his
majestie  hath  promised.  For  I  moved  the  question,
declaring  unto  him  that  I  thought  your  Worships  would
write  your  letters  of  requests,  to  crave  his  farther  good
will,  as  should  be  thought  meet  for  your  better  assurance
in  the  trade  of  merchandize  :  you  will  hardly  beleeve
what  long  and  gracious  talke  he  had  with  mee,  which  I
assure  you  continued  two  houres,  which  was  strange
unto  the  people  &  other  merchant  strangers.  For  be-
twixt every  question  that  his  majestie  moved,  when  I
had  answered  him,  hee  would  talke  with  his  Nobles  and
iother  his  servants,  having  some  knowledge  of  our
Westerne  parts  &  commodities,  and  then  againe  would
demaund  other  questions.  He  caused  his  Secretarie  to
write  the  articles  before  named,  in  all  of  his  foure  letters
given  me  (whereof  two  as  I  required,  are  in  the  Turkish
tongue  to  be  sent  you.) On  the  backe  side  of  the  one,

III  65  E

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

hee  hath  written  what  wares  his  Majestic  would  have
you  to  send  him.  He  held  me  one  houre  within  night
before  I  departed  from  him.

These  bee  the  names  of  the  wares  or  commodities,
which  on  the  backe  side  of  one  of  his  letters
the  Shaugh  hath  written  to  you  to  be  sent
him.

First,  some  cloth  of  Gold,  with  cloth  of  Tissue,  and
cloth  of  Botky,  as  Velvets  wrought  with  gold.
Item,  good  velvets,  to  wit,  crimosins,  purples,  reds,
greenes  and  blackes.  These  colours  his  majestie  re-
quireth,  for  they  are  most  worne.  And  though  there
be  some  of  these  wares  made  in  his  citie  of  Cassan,  yet
nothing  like  in  goodnes,  to  those  that  you  may  procure
for  him.  Small  profite  I  thinke  will  be  in  these  wares  :
yet  for  divers  considerations,  as  also  to  satisfie  the  Princes
mind,  I  wish  you  to  send  some,  and  those  that  be
especiall  good.

Item,  good  damasks  and  sattins  of  all  sortes,  with  an
hundred  pieces  of  good  chamlets,  which  are  woorth
here  80.  shaughs  the  piece,  at  sixe  pence  the  shaugh,
and  those  silkes  to  bee  of  those  colours  above  written,
to  wit,  crimosins,  purples,  reds,  greenes,  blackes,  with
some  light  watchet  colours.

Item,  three  or  foure  complete  harnesses  that  wil  abide
the  shot  of  a  handgun  with  10.  or  12.  targets  of  Steele,
being  good.

Item,  ten  or  twelve  good  shirts  of  male  being  very
good  or  else  none,  that  may  abide  the  shot  of  an  arrow,
and  two  buffe  jerkins.

Item,  ten  or  twelve  pieces  of  Westerne  karsies,  being

thicked  well and close shut  in the  weaving,  and  died

[I-  363-] into scarlets  and  fine  reds. I thinke there wil be  no

By  the^  word  ^^^  cloth  for  noblemens  caps. The  prince  named  them

thinke  the] *  karangies,  saying,  that  maidens did make them,  &  is

meaneKarsies. desirous of  them.

66

ARTHUR  EDWARDS  a.d.

1567-

Item,  six  pieces  of  fine  Holland  cloth  for  the  Prince,
with  some  other  for  noblemen,  of  a  lower  price.

Item,  twentie  handguns  being  good,  some  of  them
with  fire  locks,  and  also  six  good  dags,  with  locks  to
travel  withall.

Item  100.  brusshes  for  garments  (none  made  of  swines
haire,)  for  gifts,  and  otherwise  to  be  sold.

Item,  six  stone  bowes  that  shoot  lead  pellets.

Item,  a  mill  to  grind  corne  in  the  field  as  they  goe,
finely  devised  :  for  Cozomomet  willed  me  to  write  for
one  to  be  sent,  to  give  the  Prince.

;  Item,  the  Prince  requireth  of  all  sortes  and  colours
iof  London  clothes.  I  wish  you  to  send  no  lesse  then
40.  or  50.  for  I  know  they  will  be  sold  to  profit,
especially  such  cloth  as  may  be  affoorded  for  20.  shaughs
the  arshine,  which  is  longer  by  two  of  mine  inches  then
Russia  arshine  is.  Let  there  be  fine  skarlets,  violets  in
graine,  fine  reds,  blacks,  browne  blewes,  foure  or  five
of  every  sort,  for  the  prince  and  other  lords  :  the  rest
of  other  colours  lively  to  the  sight,  as  London  russets,
itawnies,  lion  colours,  good  lively  greenes,  with  other,
as  you  shall  thinke  good  :  for  the  prince  desireth  to  see
of  all  sorts,  which  will  be  an  occasion  that  the  Venetians
and  Turkes  shall  bee  in  lesse  estimation  then  they  are :
for  they  themselves  do  feare,  and  secretly  say  the  same.
And  truely  the  Princes  subjects  intend  to  enter  into
trade  with  us  for  spices  and  other  commodities  that
they  were  woont  to  sell  unto  the  Venetians  and  Turkes.

Thus  I  commit  you  all  to  God,  who  send  you  health
ivith  increase  of  worship.  Written  in  Astracan  the  16.
Df  June, 1567.

By  your  servant  during  life  to  command,

Arthur  Edwards.

[Distances
67

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

Distances  of  certaine  places  in Russia.
The  way  from  Saint  Nicholas  Baie  to  Mosco.

To  Colmogro

100

To  Ustiug

500

To  Totma

250

To  Vologhda

250

All  by  the  river  of  Dwina

} IIOO

To  Yeraslave

180

To  Rostove

60

To  Peraslave

60

To  Mosko

120

By  land  East  and  West

}  440

The  way  from  Mosko  to  Smolensko.

To  Moram  300

To  Smolensko  200

The  way  from  Mosko  to  Novogrod.

To  Ottver  180

To  Torzhoke  60

To  Wisnovolloko  60

To  Novogrod  150

Southeast  and  Northwest  ]■ 450

The  way  from  Novogrod  to  Narve.

To  Teseva

50

To  the  Friers

60

To  Yria  Niagorod

40

To  Narve

15

Southwest  and  Northeast } 165

68

ARTHUR EDWARDS

From  Novogrod  to  Vobsky,  is i8o.  versts  by  East.

The  way  from  Vobski  to  Ry  in  Liefland.
To  Newhouse  50  versts

To  Goven  on  ye  borders
To  Wenden
To  Trecado

A.D.

1567.

To  Newslot

Y  \^1.  OLO

To  Rie

The  way  from  Mosco  to  Astracan.

To  Costrom

To  Nisnovogrod

To  Cazan

To  Astracan  in  all  is | 2800.

versts

The  way  from  Vologhda  to  Narve.

To  Belozerco

140

To  Batag

80

To  Witergen

40

To  Ladiski

60

To  Onega  lake

80

To  Oher

90

To  Narve

180

Southwest  and  Northeast

} 770.

versts

To  20  with  a  small  boat  within  the  land  from  S.  Nicholas
to  Wardhouse.
To  Newnox  river
To  Ovsca  Gouba
To  Lobshanga
To Ovst  Navelocki
To  Orlovanos
To  Solvsca Monasterie
To  Candelox
To  Ovst  Colla
To  Zhemaker
To  Poganna  Volocki
To Chibe  Navolocke
To  Kegor

69

To Wardhouse in
)'  all  8oo.versts  North-
west and  Southeast.

[I.  364.]

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

The  way  from  Colmogro to  Mizemske  Sloboda,  where
the  Samoeds  keep  their  Mart.

To  Ust  Pinnego

To  Palango

To  Levnona

To  Vescom

To  Soyava  ^  Al  is  230.  versts

To  Covla

To  Nendega

To  Lampas

To  Sloboda

The  way  to  Uromo  from  Mezemske  Sloboda,  where  the
Losh  hides  are  gotten.

To  Lampas  1 a  1  •

^ p ^ ,  Al  IS  115.  versts

•T ry  ^  ■,,  >  Northeast  and

io  Zapolle  I  o ^1

rr^ jj^  bouthwest.

io Uromo  J

The  way  and  distances  from  Saint  Nicholas,  to
the  Caspian  Sea.

IF  you  goe  straight  from  Saint  Nicholas  to  the  Caspian
Sea,  you  must  goe  to  Vologhda  by  water,  as  by  the
easiest  passage,  and  that  is  accomplished,  passing  day
and  night,  in  foureteene  dayes  and  foureteene  nights,  in
boates  cut  out  of  a  tree  :  (the  boates  are  called  Stroogs)
1 100.  versts  it  is.

By  horse  and  sleds  in  8.  dayes  you  may  passe  it  in
Winter.  In  Summer  the  way  is  dangerous  by  meanes
of  marishes  and  bogs,  and  not  safely  then  to  be  passed.
Then  from  Vologhda  to  Yeraslave,  180.  versts  over  land.
This  Yeraslave  standeth  upon  the  river  of  Volga,  180.
versts  I  say  distant  from  Vologhda.

To  the  Caspian  sea  are  2700.  versts  from  Yeraslave.

So  from  S.  Nicholas  to  the  Caspian  sea,  are  j- 3800.80.
versts.

The  journey  from  S. Nicholas  to  Yeraslave  is accom-

70

ARTHUR EDWARDS  ad.

1567.

plished  in  foureteene  dayes  by  water,  and  two  dayes  by
land. }i6.  dayes.

From  thence  to  Astracan  men  travell  by  water  in  30.
dayes  and  30.  nights.

So  between  S.  Nicholas  and  the  Caspian  sea,  are  }4.6.
dayes  journey.

There  passe  downe  Volga  every  Summer,  500.  boats
great  &  smal,  from  all  the  upper  parts  of  the  river,
whereof  some  be  of  500.  tunne.  They  go  for  Minerall
salt  and  for  Sturgeon.

The  salt  lieth  in  rocks  (and  is  whitish  red,  and  in
fine  sand)  as  it  were  30.  miles  from  Astracan  toward
the  Caspian  sea.  They  dig  it  themselves  and  pay
nothing  for  it,  but  to  the  prince  a  peny  a  pood,  viz.
40.  pound  waight.

The  Sturgeon  which  they  call  Ocetera  is taken fiftie  Fishingfo?-
miles  on  this  side  Astracan. Along  the  river  the  space  ^^^^S^o'^M'i-
of  20.  miles,  they  make  their  booties  in  plaine  grounds,
&  fish for the space  of  three moneths, viz. from the
end of  May till the end of  August, and having salt
they  use  to  salt  them.

The  river  is  there  5.  or  6.  miles  broad,  but  with
some  Islands.

The  river  below  Yeraslave,  where  it  is  most  narow,
is  a  mile  broad  from  side  to  side.

The  river  runneth  upon  red  clay,  all  woods  of  birch
and  oke  on  the  river  sides,  save  about  the  townes  of
the  fishing  places.

Dwina  from  S.  Nicholas  to  Ustiug  runneth  all  on
chalke  and  sand :  the  fish  are  sweete  &  fat.  The
Mene  a  fish  with  a  great  head  a  foot  long  breedeth
about  Vologda,  and  is  fat  and  delicate.

Between  Vobsko  and  Novogrod,  the  space  of  an  1 80.
miles,  groweth  flaxe :  the  whole  soile  in  length  is  so  im-
ploied,  and  as  much  in  breadth :  this  is  upon  a  flat  soile.

The  hempe  groweth  about  Smolensko  upon  the  Polish
border,  300.  miles  in  compasse :  much  of  the  soile  is
so  imploied.

71

A.D.

1567.

The  English-
men in  making
of  cables,  set
on  workeai  00
men  in  Russia.

Sosnova  tree,
excellent  for
the  cure  of
the  wolfe.

[I.  365.]

The  descrip-
tion of  Rose
Island.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Of  this  hempe  they  bring  in  Winter  to  Vologda  and
Colmogro,  and  we  set  in  worke  in  making  of  cables
above 100.  men.

The  Russians  do  spin  and  hachell  it,  and  the  English
tarre  it  in  threed  and  lay  the  cable.  And  one  cable
of  those  is  woorth  two  of  Danzick,  because  the  Dan-
zickers  put  in  old  cable  and  rotten  stuffe,  which  in
fowle  weather  is  found  of  no  strength.

Sosnova,  a  tree  that  cureth  the  wolfe  with  the  shavings
of  the  wood,  groweth  in  these  parts,  and  of  the  barks
they  make  ropes  as  big  as  a  mans  arme  for  their
boats.

The  Samoeds  lacking  linnen  make  handkerchiefs  and
towels  of  the  very  wood  of  this  tree.  The  wood  of
this  tree  is  as  heavie  as  hollie,  and  the  shavings  tough.

Rose  Island  in  S.  Nicholas  Baie  is  full  of  Roses
damaske  and  red,  of  violets  and  wild  Rosemarie :  This
Island  is  neere  7.  or  8.  miles  about,  and  good  pasture,
and  hath  the  name  of  the  roses.

The  snow  here  about  the  midst  of  May  is  cleared,
having  bin  two  moneths  in  melting,  then  the  ground
is  made  dry  within  14.  dayes  after,  and  then  the  grasse
is  knee  high  within  a  moneth.  Then  after  September
the  frost  commeth  in,  the  snow  is  a  yard  deepe  upon
plaine  ground.  The  Island  hath  Firre  and  Birch,  and
a  faire  fresh  spring  neere  the  house  built  there  by  the
English,

72

SOUTHAM AND SPARKE

A.D.
1566.

The  way  discovered  by  water  by  us  Thomas
Southam  &  John  Sparke,  from  the  towne  of
Colmogro,  by  the  Westerne  bottome  of  the
Baie  of  S.  Nicholas,  unto  the  citie  of  Novo-
grod  in  Russia,  containing  many  particulars
of  the  way,  and  distance  of  miles,  as  here-
after foloweth. Anno 1566.

E  departed  from  Colmogro  about  10.  of
the  clocke  afore  noone  in  a  Lodia  or
Barke,  which  we  hired  to  bring  us  along
the  coast  to  a  place  called  Soroka,  &  in
the  sayd  barke  we  hired  6.  mariners,
and  a  boy  to  conduct  us  to  the  place
before  rehearsed.
The  Lodia  or  barke  was  of  the  burden  of  25.  tunnes
or  thereabout,  wherewith  we  valed  downe  the  river  of
Dwina,  the  winde  being  then  calme,  unto  a  monasterie
called  S.  Michael  where  we  were  constrained  to  anker
because  of  a  contrary  wind  which  there  met  us.

From Colmogro  to  this  monasterie  are  50.  versts  or  A  vent  is  but
miles  of  Russia,  at  which place we taried till the  21. 3  •  ?«<^''^^"  ?/"
day  in the morning,  and then having  the  wind  some-  ^^-^^^  ^"
what  faire,  we  set  saile  and  departed  thence.

21  We  departed  from  the  monasterie  of  S.  Michael,
having  the  wind  somwhat  faire,  and  arrived  at  Rose
Island,  over  and  against  the  monasterie  of  S.  Nicholas,
the  22.  day  at  2.  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  which
is  35.  miles  distant  from  the  monasterie  of  S.  Michael.
By  reason  of  contrary  wind  and  tide  we  were  constrained
to  tary  there  all  that  day.

23  We  departed  from  the  monasterie  of  S.  Nicholas
at  7.  of  the  clocke  in  the  evening,  &  came  to  an  anker
at  the  Beacons,  &  continued  there  until  halfe  an  houre
past  10.  of  the  clocke,  and  then  set  from  thence,  the
wind  being  South :  our  course  was  West  until  5.  of
the  clock  in  the  morning,  when  as  we  came  to  an  anker

73

A.D,

1566.

Jt  this  towne
Newnox  Ri-
chard Chan-
celler  in  his
first  voyage,
with  his  com-
panie  aship-
board  were
relieved.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

against  Newnox  towne,  where  we  continued  until  the
25.  day.

The  sayd  towne  of  Newnox  is  from  the  monasterie
of  S.  Nicholas  ^^k^.  miles.

25  We  departed  from  Newnox  haven  at  one  of  the
clocke  in  the  after  noone,  the  wind  at  South  and  South-
east, and  our  course  Northwest  and  by  West.

The  point  of  Tolstick  which  is  the  headland  before
the  entrance  of  Newnox  haven,  and  the  headland  of
Sevsemski  lie  next  Southeast  and  by  South,  Northwest
and  by  North. We  came  to  an  anker  there  this  day  at

4.  of  the  clock  in  ye  afternoone,  being  from  Newnox
haven  15.  miles,  where  we  continued  in  harbour  til  the
27.  day  of  the  moneth,  by  reason  of  contrary  winds.

27  We  departed  from  Sevsemski in the  morning  at

5.  of  the  clocke,  the  wind  next  at  East  and  by  North,
and  our  course  Northwest  and  by  West.

The  said  land  of  Sevsemski  &  the  headland  going
into  Owna  river  lieth  East  and  by  South,  west  and  by
North,  and  between  them  is  25.  miles.

This  day  at  Sunne  set  we  came  to  an  Island  called
Sogisney  passing  betwixt  it  &  the  maine,  with  the  wind
at  South  and  by  East,  our  course  was  West  and  by
South,  being  85.  miles  from  Owna  river.

Being  past  the  said  Island  10.  miles,  the  wind  came
contrary,  whereupon  we  returned  to  the  Island  of
Sogisney,  where  we  remained  until  the  29.  day.

29  The  29.  day  we  departed  from  Sogisney  afore-
sayd,  at  5.  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  at
East  northeast,  &  our  course  was  Southwest  &  by  west,
passing  by  an  Island  called  Anger,  being  30.  miles  from
Sogisney,  and  keeping  on  our  course,  we  came  by  the
headland  of  an  Island  called  Abdon,  being  from  the
Island  of  Anger  15.  miles,  where  we  found  many  rocks  :
and  if  the  great  providence  of  God  had  not  preserved
us,  wee  had  there  perished,  being  fallen  amongst  them
in  the  night  time,  and  our  pilot  none  of  the  perfectest,
which  was  contrary  to  his  profession  as  we  found  it.

74

SOUTHAM AND SPARKE  a.d.

1566.

But  whosoever  will  travell  that  way  must  either  keepe
hard  aboord  the  shore,  for  that  there  is  a  chanell  which
goeth  along  the  coast  within  the  rocks,  or  els  give  the
headland  a  birth  of  6.  miles  at  the  least,  and  so  goe  a
seaboord  all  :  for  there  are  ledges  of  rocks  that  lie  five
miles  from  the  headland.

We  gave  the  headland a birth  of  3.  miles,  notwith-
standing there  lay  two  rockes  two  miles  to  sea  boord  of  [I.  366.]
us,  so  that  we  were  inclosed  with  them,  and  sate  upon  the
highest  of  them  :  but  it  pleased  God  to  make  it  calme,
and  give  us  the  day  also,  or  els  we  had  miscaried.

30  We  departed  from  the  headland  of  the  Island  of
Abdon,  at  4.  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  directing
our  course  West,  and  at  10.  of  the  clocke  before  noone,
we  arrived  at  a  monasterie  named  Solofky,  which  is  15.
miles  from  Abdon.

At  this  monasterie  we  continued  untill  the  31.  day
of  this  moneth.  We  had  here  delivered  us  by  the
chiefe  monkes  of  the  monasterie,  their  letter  and  house
seale,  and  a  servant  of  theirs  to  conduct  us  safely  through
the  dangerous  river  of  Owiga.

The  people  of  all  those  parts  are  wild,  and  speake
another  kind  of  language,  &  are  for  the  most  part  all
tenants  to  the  monasterie.  The  effect  of  the  letter  was,
that  they  should  be  ready  to  helpe  and  assist  us  in  all
dangerous  places,  and  carie  our  boats  and  goods  over
land  in  places  needfuU,  as  in  deed  they  did,  as  hereafter
shall  appeare.

Note,  that  at  our  being  at  the  monasterie,  there  was
no  Abbot  for  the  place  as  then  chosen  :  for  15.  dayes
before  our  arrival  there,  the  Abbot  was  sent  for  by  the
Emperour,  and  made  Metropolitane  of  the  realme,  as
he  now  is.  The  number  of  monkes  belonging  to  the
monasterie  are  at  the  least  200.

31  Wee  departed  from  the  monasterie  of  Solofky,
as  is  aforesayde,  to  a  faire  stone  house  of  theirs,  which
is  5.  miles  from  the  monasterie,  lying  from  it  South
and  by  West.

75

A.D.

1566

August.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I  We  departed  from  the  Stone  house  at  3.  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning :  our  course  was  West  for  60.
versts,  and  then  passing  betwixt  divers  and  sundry  rocks,
with  many  small  Islands  round  about  us  for  the  space  of
20  miles,  keeping  most  commonly  the  same  course  still,
we  then  shaped  a  new  course,  and  yet  sundry  times
shifting,  but  we  alwayes  kept  the  Southwest,  and  neerest
of  all  South  southwest,  until  we  came  within  two  miles
of  the  entrance  of  the  river  Owiga  where  we  were  to
beare  in.  West  and  by  North.
The  river  From  the  river  Owiga,  to  the  Islands  and  rocks  before

Owiga.  mentioned,  are  20.  miles.

We  arrived  about  4.  of  the  clocke  in  the  after  noone
within  the  river  of  Owiga,  at  a  place  named  Soroka,  at
which  place  we  forsooke  our  barke  or  Lodia,  &  continued
there  in  making  provision  for  small  boates  to  carie  us  up
the  river  untill  the  3.  day  of  the  same.

3  We  departed  from  Soroka  at  two  of  the  clocke  in
the  afternoone,  with  3.  boats  and  12.  men  to  rowe,  and
set  the  foresaid  boates  up  the  river  of  Owiga,  which  we
hired.

We  went  this  day  7.  miles  to  a  place  called  Ostrove,
where  we lay  all night,  but in the  way  4.  miles from
The  fall  of  a Soroka,  at  a  place  where  the  water  falleth  from  the  rocks,
river.  as  if  it  came steepe  downe from a mountain,  we  were

constrained  to  take  out  our  goods  and  wares  out  of  the
said  boats,  and  caused  them  to  be  caried  a  mile  over  land,
and  afterwards  also  had  our  boates  in  like  sort  caried  or
drawen  over  land  by  force  of  men  which  there  dwelled,
being  tenants  to  the  monasterie  aforesaid.

And  when  our  boats  were  come  to  the  place  where  our
wares  were  laid,  we  lanched  our  boats  and  laded  our
wares  againe,  and  went  to  the  place  before  named,  where
we  continued  and  remained  that  night.

We  departed  from  Ostrove  in  the  morning  before
Sunne  rising,  rowing  and  setting  up  the  river  5.  miles,
where  we  came  to  a  place  whereas  we  were  againe
constrained to take out our  wares,  and to carie them

76

SOUTHAM AND SPARKE  ad

1566.

and  our  boats  three  miles  over  land,  so  that  with  rowing,
drawing  and  setting,  we  went  this  day  7.  miles  more  to  a
place  called  Sloboday,  where  we  lay  all  night.

5  We  departed  from  Sloboday  in  the  morning  at
Sunne  rising,  and  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
we  came  to  a  village  called  Paranda,  which  is  from
Sloboday  30.  miles,  where  wee  remained  all  that  night.

6  We  departed  from  Paranda  at  6.  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  and  all  that  day  what  with  setting  and
drawing  our  boats,  we  went  but  1 1 .  miles,  for  we  twise
unladed  our  wares,  &  drew  our  boats  overland,  in  one
place  a  mile  &  an  halfe,  in  another  place  as  it  were  the
eight  part  of  a  mile,  and  so  we  came  to  a  place  called
Voyets,  where  we  taried  all  that  night.

7  We  departed  from  Voyets  at  4.  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  &  so  came  to  an  Ozera  or  lake,  called  after
the  name  of  the  river,  &  unto  a  place  called  Que-
quenich,  wee  rowed  all  this  day,  and  came  thither  by
one  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone,  which  is  25.  miles
from  Voyets,  and  there  we  remained  all  night  to  hire  men
and  boats  to  carie  us  forward  on  our  journey.

Here  departed  backe  from  us  the  servant  which  we  had
at  the  Monasterie,  being  sent  by  the  monkes  to  go  thus
far  with  us.  And  after  that  he  had  hired  the  boats  and
taken  the  mens  names  that  should  conduct  us,  &  given
them  charge  to  deliver  us  with  all  things  in  safetie,  at
a  place  being  a  litle  towne  called  Povensa,  then  hee
departed  from  us  without  taking  any  reward  for  his
paines,  for  so  he  was  charged  and  commanded  by  the
monkes.

8  We  departed  from  Quequenich  at  sunne  rising,  &  [I-  367-]
all  that  day  rowed  upon  the  lake  amongst  many  Islands, flfr'^j^'^.
The  inhabitants  doe  there  report  that  there  are  as  many

Islands  in  their  lake,  as  there  are  dayes  in  the  yeere.  In
the  evening  we  came  to  a  village  named  Tellekina,  which
is  60.  miles  from  Quequenich.

9  We  departed  from  Tellekina  in  the  morning  at  5.  of
the  clocke,  and  so  entring  into  a  river,  we  went  that  day

77

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

13.  miles.  In  one  place  we  caried  our  boates  and  goods
overland  3.  miles.  At  evening  we  came  to  a  place  called
Oreiche  na  maelay,  where  we  lay  all  night.

10  Wee  departed  thence  at  5.  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  and  so  rowing,  came  to  a  place  where  the  river
ended,  being  20.  miles  distant  from  the  place  where  wee
lay  all  night,  at  which  place  wee  forsooke  our  boates  and
unladed  our  wares,  and  sent  a  man  to  the  towne  of
Povensa,  which  was  seven  mile  off,  for  horses  to  cary
us  and  our  wares  to  the  said  place.  The  horses  came,
and  we  laded  our  goods,  and  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  wee  arrived  at  the  towne  of  Povensa,  with  all
things  in  safetie.
The  famous  This  towne  of  Povensa  standeth  within  one  mile  of  the

lake  of  Onega,  famous  lake  or  Ozera  of  Onega,  which  is  320.  miles  long,
and  in  some  places  70.  miles  over.  But  where  it  is
narrowest  it  is  25.  miles  over,  being  fed  with  many
goodly  rivers  which  fall  into  it.  Hard  aboord  the  shore
within  6.  miles,  you  shall  have  40.  and  45.  fathoms
of  depth.

Here  it  is  to  bee  noted  that  from  this  place  of  Povensa
unto  the  village  of  Soroka  downe  those  dangerous  rivers
which  wee  came  through,  at  no  time  of  the  yeere  can  or
may  any  man  cary  or  transport  any  goods  that  come
from  Novogrod,  or  the  Narve,  and  such  other  places :
for  in  the  Sommer  it  is  impossible  to  cary  downe  any
wares  by  reason  of  the  great  fals  of  water  that  doe
descend  from  the  rockes.  Likewise  in  the  Winter  by
reason  of  the  great  force  and  fall  of  waters  which  make
so  terrible  raises,  that  in  those  places  it  never  freezeth,
but  all  such  wares  as  come  from  Novogrod  to  Povensa,
are  transported  by  land  to  a  place  called  Some  in  the
Winter,  which  Some  standeth  on  the  sea  side,  as  doth
Soroka.  The  ready  way  from  Povensa  by  land  to  this
place  of  Some,  with  the  distance  of  miles  I  will  shew
hereafter.

12  We  departed  from  Povensa  at  9.  of  the  clocke  in
the morning,  with  2.  smal  boats  which  we  hired  to  cary

78

SOUTHAM AND SPARKE  a.d.

1566.

us  to  a  place  called  Tolvo  upon  the  lake  of  Onega,  being

50 miles from Povensa,  where  we  arrived the 13.  day

in the morning, where wee bought a boate that

caried us and all  our  wares from thence to the Citie

of  Novogrod.

14  We  departed  from  Tolvo  at  3.  of  the  clocke  in
the  afternoone,  and  at  the  evening  arrived  at  a  certaine
Island  named  Salasalma,  upon  the  said  lake  7.  miles  from
Tolvo,  and  by  reason  of  contrary  windes  we  there  taried
untill  the  16.  day  of  this  moneth.

16  We  departed  from  Salasalma,  at  8.  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning,  and  came  to  an  Island  the  17.  day  in  the
morning,  named  Vorronia,  where  wee  continued  by
reason  of  contrary  winds,  untill  the  2 1 .  day  of  the  said
moneth,  and  it  is  60.  miles  from  Salasalma.

21  We departed from Vorronia Island two houres  S.  Clement  Ms
before day,  and arrived at S. Clements Monasterie at  Monastene.
1.  of  the  clocke  in  the  after  noone,  being  from  Vorronia

48.  miles.

22  We  departed  from  S.  Clements  Monasterie  at  the
breake  of  the  day,  having  a  faire  wind  all  a  long  the  lake :
we  sailed  without  striking  of  saile  until  two  houres  within
night,  and  then  entred  into  a  river  called  Swire,  at  a
Monasterie  called  Vosnessino  Christo,  five  miles  from
the  entrance  of  the  river,  where  we  taried  al  night.  It
is  from  S.  Clements  Monastery  1 60.  miles :  the  streame
of  that  river  went  with  us.

23  Wee  departed  from  Vosnessino  Christo  before
Sunne  rising,  and  valed  downe  the  river  sometime  sailing,
and  sometime  rowing,  so  that  this  day  wee  went  90.  miles
and  lay  at  night  at  a  place  called  Vassian.

24  Wee  departed  from  Vassian  at  the  breake  of  the

day,  and  came  to  a  place  called  II  Selucax,  where  we  lay  all  \\Qr,Sermaxe.
night,  and  is  10.  miles  from  Vassian.

25  We  departed  from  Selucaxe  at  4  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  and  entred  upon  the  Lake  of  Ladiskaie,  the
winde  being  calme  al  that  day  saving  3.  houres,  and  then
it  was  with us,  so that  we sailed and rowed that day

79

A.D,
1566.

The  river  of
Volhuski.
The  lake  of
Ladeskai.

The  Monas-
terie  of  Gos-
nopoli.

[I.  368.]

The  Cit'ie  of
Novogi'od.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

10.  miles,  along  upon  the  said  lake,  and  entred  into
the  river  of  Volhuski,  which  river  hath  his  beginning
20.  miles  above  Novogrod,  and  runneth  through  the
midst  of  the  Citie,  and  so  falleth  into  this  lake,  which
is  farre  longer  then  the  lake  of  Onega,  but  it  is  not
so  broad.  This  lake  falleth  into  the  sea  that  commeth
from  the  Sound :  where  any  vessel  or  boat,  having  a
good  pilot,  may  goe  through  the  Sound  into  England.

As  soone  as  we  were  entred  into  the  river,  we  came
to  a  Monasterie  called  S.  Nicholas  Medved,  where  we
lay  all  that  night.

26  Wee  departed  from  S.  Nicholas  Medved,  at  five  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  rowing  and  drawing  our
boates  all  day,  and  came  at  night  to  another  Monasterie
called  Gosnopoli,  which  is  30  miles  from  S.  Nicholas
Medved,  where  we  lay  all  that  night.

27  We  departed  from  Gosnopoli  at  6.  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  and  at  evening  came  to  a  place  called
Moislave,  where  we  lay  all  night,  being  46.  miles  from
the  Monasterie  of  Gosnopoli.

28  We  departed  from  Moislave,  and  the  saide  day  at
night  came  to  a  place  called  Grussina,  35.  miles  from
Moislave  where  we  lodged.

29  Wee  departed  from  Grussina  in  the  morning,  and
the  same  day  at  evening  came  to  a  place  called  Petroe
Svetoe,  where  we  lay  all  night,  being  40  miles  from
Grussina.

30  We  departed  from  Petroe  Svetoe  in  the  morning,
and  at  two  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone  we  arrived  at
the  Citie  of  Novogrod,  being  twentie  miles  from  Petroe
Svetoe.  Here  we  found  William  Rowlie  Agent  to  the
company,  who  was  there  stayed  with  all  his  company,  and
was  not  licenced  to  depart  thence  for  the  Mosco,  by
reason  that  the  plague  was  then  in  the  Citie  of  Novogrod.
Unto  him  we  delivered  all  the  wares  that  wee  brought
from  Colmogro,  for  by  the  way  we  sold  not  a  peny
worth,  the  people  of  the  countrey  every  where  be  so
miserable.

80

%;

SOUTHAM AND SPARKE  ad.

1566.

The  right  way  to  bring  and  transport  wares  from
Novogrod  to  Rose  Island  into  S.  Nicholas  bay,  where
our  Ships  yeerely  lade,  with  the  distance  of  miles  from
place  to  place,  is  as  followeth  :

20  Miles  from  Novogrod  to  Petroe  Svetoe.

40  Miles  from  thence  to  Grusina.

35  Miles  from  thence  to  Moislave.

46  Miles  from  thence  to  the  Monasterie  Gosnopoli.

15  Miles  from  thence  to  Ladega  towne.

15  Miles  from  thence  to  Selvnaz  over  the  lake  of
Ladega,  albeit  there  be  many  villages  all  along  the  lake.

180  Miles  from  Ladega  towne  up  the  river  of  Swire,
unto  the  Monasterie  of  Vosnessino  Christo,  albeit  there
are  many  villages  upon  the  river  :  for  within  every  five
or  sixe  miles  you  shall  have  villages  or  small  townes.

160  Miles  from  Vosnessino  Christo  to  S.  Clements
Monastery,  albeit  there  be  many  villages  all  along  the
lake  of  Onega.

48  Miles  from  thence  to  Voronia.

67  Miles  from  thence  to  Tolvo  towne  :  and  there  are
divers  villages  al  along  the  lake  where  the  carriers  may
lie,  and  have  meate  for  man  and  horse.

50  Miles  from  thence  to  Povensa,  where  Onega  lake
endeth.

The  way  from Povensa to Some tow^ne  is  this  :

30  Miles  from  Povensa  to  Mastelina.

10  Miles  from  thence  to  Tellekina.

30  Miles  from  thence  to  Tolvich.

35  Miles  from  thence  to  Carraich.

20  Miles  from  thence  to  Varnich.

10  Miles  from  thence  to  Ostrovo.

15  Miles  from  thence  to  Lapina.

20  Miles  from  thence  to  Some  it  selfe.

Note,  that  from  the  Citie  of  Novogrod  unto  the  towne
of  Some  is  936.  miles,  and  from  the  towne  of  Some  unto
the  Monasterie  of  S.  Nicholas  or  Rose  Island,  over  and
against  where  our  Ships  do  ride,  is  just  as  many  miles  as

III  81  F

A.D,
1566.

Travel  by
sleds.

2000.  Sleds
belonging  to
one  towne.

[I.  369.]

J  good  caveat
for  seasonable
travell.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

is  Soroka  village  from  S.  Nicholas,  as  the  Russes  doe
accompt  it,  as  also  we  do  judge  it,  namely  325.  miles.
So  that  from  Novogrod  to  S.  Nicholas  road,  is  by  our
accompt 1 26 1,  miles  or  versts.

Furthermore  it  is  to  be  noted  that  all  such  wares  as
shall  be  bought  at  Novogrod,  and  sent  to  Some  towne,
must  be  sent  by  sled  way  in  the  Winter  :  for  if  any  ware
should  be  sent  from  Novogrod  by  water  in  the  spring  of
the  yeere  after  the  yce  is  gone,  then  must  the  said  wares
remaine  at  Povensa  towne  al  that  Summer,  by  reason  that
in  the  Summer  there  is  no  way  to  goe  from  Povensa  unto
Some  towne.

At  Povensa  there  are  many  warehouses  to  be  hired,  so
that  if  there  were  as  much  goods  as  ten  ships  could  cary
away,  you  might  have  warehouses  to  put  it  in  :  but  if
there  should  remaine  much  ware  all  the  Summer,  to  be
caried  in  the  Winter  to  Some  towne,  then  horses  are  not
easily  to  be  gotten  at  that  place  to  cary  it  thither  :  so  that
your  wares  once  bought  at  Novogrod,  you  must  have
cariers  there  to  cary  it  to  the  towne  of  Some  by  Sleds,
whereof  you  may  there  have  2000.  if  you  will,  by  the
report  of  the  Russes.

For  from  Novogrod  yerely  there  go  many  Sleds  in  the
Winter  to  fetche  salt  from  Some,  with  carriers  and  emptie
Sleds  there  to  buy  it,  and  to  bring  it  to  Novogrod  to  sell
it  in  the  market  or  otherwise.

From  Novogrod  unto  Some  towne  you  may  have  a
pood  of  wares  carried  for  eight  pence  or  nine  pence  :  but
in  any  wise  your  wares  must  bee  sent  from  Novogrod  by
the  sixt  of  January,  so  that  the  wares  may  bee  at  Some
by  Candlemas,  or  soone  after  :  for  if  your  wares  should
tary  by  the  way  untill  the  15.  of  February  when  the
Sunne  is  of  some  power,  then  is  it  dangerous  :  for  the
heate  of  the  Sunne  in  the  day  causeth  the  deepe  lakes  of
Ladega,  and  specially  of  Onega  to  cleave  :  and  if  there
should  come  then  a  sudden  thaw,  as  oftentimes  in  that
time  of  the  yeere  doeth,  then  doe  these  lakes  open  and
breake,  whereby  many  men  are  lost,  and  both  men  and

82

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S ACT

A.D,

1566.

horse  drowned,  although  other  rivers  do  remaine  frozen  a
long  time  after.

In  the  towne  of  Some  also  there  are  many  warehouses,
whereof  we  cannot  be  destitute  for  the  reposing  of  our
wares,  as  also  as  many  barkes  as  you  wil  to  transport  your
wares  from  thence  to  S.  Nicholas  road,  and  that  for  three
pence  a  poods  caryage  :  so  that  from  the  Citie  of  Novo-
grod  unto  S.  Nicholas  road  you  may  have  wares  caried
for  two  altines.  The  pood  commeth  unto  23.  altines  the
tunne.

Provided  alwayes,  that  you  buy  your  wares  there  your  Nomgrod
selfe,  and  send  it  thence  :  for  there  is  no  hope  that  the  '^''■^^^^  ^8°
natives  will  bring  their  wares  from  Novogrod  to  Some,  in
hope  to  sell  unto  us,  considering  the  great  trade  that  they
have  at  the  Narve,  which  is  within  180  miles  off  them.
Written  by  Thomas  Southam  a  servant
to  the  company.

An  Act  for  the  corporation  of  Merchants  adven-
turers for  the  discovering  of  new  trades,  made
in  the  eight  yeere  of  Queene  Elizabeth.
Anno 1566.

miles  of  the
Karve.

Hereas  divers  very  good  Subjects  of  this
Realme  of  England  in  the  latter  ende  of
the  reigne  of  the  late  right  high  and
mightie  prince  our  Soveraigne  Lord  king
Edward  the  sixt,  at  the  gracious  in-
couragement,  and  right  good  liking  of
the  said  king,  and  by  his  Majesties
liberall  example,  did  at  their  adventure,  and  to  their
exceeding  great  charges,  for  the  glory  of  God,  the  honor
and  increase  of  the  revenues  of  the  Crowne,  and  the
common  utilitie  of  the  whole  Realme  of  England,  set
forth  three  ships  for  the  discovery  by  Sea,  of  Isles,  lands,
territories,  dominions,  and  Seigniories  unknowen,  and  by
the  Subjects  of  the  sayd  late  king  not  commonly  by  seas
frequented  :  and  after  that  Almightie  God  had  called  to

83

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

his  mercie  the  said  king,  who  died  before  the  finishing
and  sealing  of  his  most  ample  and  gracious  letters  of
priviledges  promised  to  the  said  Subjects,  as  wel  in  con-
sideration of  the  said  enterprise,  as  for  divers  other
respects  it  pleased  our  late  sovereigne  Q.  Mary,  at  the
humble  suites  of  the  same  subjects,  to  graunt  by  her
letters  Patents  under  the  great  Seale  of  England,  bearing
date  at  Westminster  the  26.  day  of  February,  in  the
second  yeere  of  her  raigne,  for  the  considerations
mentioned  in  the  said  letters  Patents,  to  the  saide  subjects
being  specially  named  in  the  saide  letters  Patents,  and  to
their  successors,  that  they  by  the  name  of  Merchants
adventurers  of  England,  for  the  discoverie  of  lands,
territories.  Isles,  dominions,  and  Seigniories  unknowen,
and  not  before  their  late  adventure  or  enterprise,  by  seas
or  Navigations  commonly  frequented,  should  be  from
thenceforth  one  body,  and  perpetual  felowship  and
communaltie  of  themselves,  both  in  deed  and  in  name,
and  that  the  same  felowship  and  communaltie  from  thence-
forth should  and  might  have  one  or  two  governours,
foure  Consuls,  and  24.  assistants,  of  the  said  felowship
and  comminaltie  of  Merchants  adventurers,  and  that  they
by  the  name  of  the  Governour,  Consuls,  assistants,  felow-
ship, and  comminaltie  of  Merchants  adventurers,  for  the
discovery  of  lands,  territories.  Isles,  dominions,  and
Seigniories  unknowen,  by  the  seas  and  Navigations,  and
not  before  their  said  late  adventure  or  enterprise,  by
y  Seas  frequented,  should  or  might  be  able  in  the  lawe  to
implead  and  to  bee  impleaded,  to  answere  and  to  be
answered,  to  defend  and  to  be  defended,  before  what-
soever Judge  or  Justice  temporall  or  spiritual,  or  other
persons  whatsoever,  in  whatsoever  court  or  courts,  and
in  all  actions,  real,  personal,  and  mixt,  and  in  every  of
them,  and  in  all  plaints  of  Novel  deseison,  and  also  in
all  plaints,  sutes,  quarrels,  affaires,  businesse,  and  de-
maunds  whatsoever  they  be,  touching  and  concerning  the
said  felowship  and  comminaltie,  and  the  affaires  and
businesse of  the same, only in as ample maner and

84

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S ACT  ad.

1566.

forme,  as  any  other  corporation  of  this  Realme  might
doe,  giving  also,  and  granting  unto  them  by  the  said
letters  Patents,  divers  authorities,  powers,  jurisdictions,
preheminences,  franchises,  liberties  and  priviledges,  as
by  the  same  letters  Patents  more  at  large  will  appeare.
And  among  other  things  mentioned  in  the  said  letters
Patents,  whereas  one  of  the  three  ships,  by  the  said
fellowship  before  that  time  set  foorth  for  the  voyage
of  discovery  aforesaid,  named  the  Edward  Bonaventure,
had  arrived  within  the  Empire  and  dominion  of  the
high  and  mightie  Prince  Lord  John  Vasiliwich,  Em-
perour  of  all  Russia,  Volodimersky,  great  duke  of
Musky,  &c.  who  received  the  Captaine  and  Merchants
of  the  saide  shippe  very  graciously,  granting  unto  them
freely  to  traffique  with  his  subjects  in  all  kinde  of  [I.  37°-J
merchandizes,  with  divers  other  gracious  priviledges  and
liberties  :  therefore  the  said  late  Queene  by  the  same
letters  Patents,  for  her,  her  heires  and  successors,  did
graunt  that  all  the  maine  lands.  Isles,  ports,  havens,  creeks
and  rivers  of  the  said  mighty  Emperour  of  all  Russia,
and  great  duke  of  Mosco,  &c.  and  all  and  singular
other  lands,  dominions,  territories.  Isles,  ports,  havens,
creeks,  rivers,  armes  of  the  seas,  of  al  and  every  other
Emperour,  king,  prince,  ruler,  or  governer  whatsoever
he  or  they  be,  before  the  said  late  adventure  or  enter-
prise not  knowen,  or  by  the  aforesaid  merchants  and
subjects  of  the  said  king  and  Queene,  by  the  seas  not
commonly  frequented,  nor  any  part  or  parcell  thereof,
and  lying  Northwards,  Northeastwards,  or  Northwest-
wards, as  in  the  said  letters  patents  is  mentioned,  should
not  be  visited,  frequented  nor  haunted  by  any  the  sub-
jects of  the  said  late  Queene,  other  then  of  the  said
company  and  fellowship,  and  their  successors,  without
expresse  licence,  agreement,  &  consent  of  the  Governer,
Consuls,  and  Assistants  of  the  said  felowship,  and  com-
munaltie,  or  the  more  part  of  them,  in  maner  &  forme,
as  is  expressed  in  the  saide  letters  patents,  upon  paine
of  forfeiture  and  losse  aswell  of  the  ship  and  ships,  with

85

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

the  appurtenances,  as  also  of  the  goods,  merchandizes,
and  things  whatsoever  they  be,  of  those  the  subjects  of
the  said  late  Queene  not  being  of  the  saide  fellowship
and  communaltie,  which  should  attempt  or  presume  to
saile  to  any  of  those  places,  which  then  were,  or  after
should  happen  to  be  found  and  traffiqued  unto,  the
one  halfe  of  the  same  forfeiture  to  be  to  the  use  of
the  said  late  Queene,  her  heires  &  successors,  and  the
other  halfe  to  be  to  the  use  of  the  said  felowship  &
communaltie,  as  by  the  same  letters  patents  more  plainly
will  appeare.

Since the making of  which letters patens, the said
fellowship have, to their exceeding  great costes, losses
and  expences,  not  onely  by  their  trading  into  the said
dominions of  the saide mightie prince of  Russia, &c.
found out convenient  way to saile into the saide do-
minions :  but also passing thorow  the same, and over
the  Caspian  sea,  have  discovered  very  commodious  trades
into Armenia, Media, Hyrcania,  Persia, and other  do-
minions in  Asia  minor,  hoping  by  Gods  grace  to  discover
also the countrey of  Cathaia, and other  regions very
convenient  to  be  traded  into  by  merchants  of  this  realme,
for  the  great  benefite  and  commodities  of  the  same.
This  Is  meant And forasmuch as divers subjects of this realme,
%ndiZ"'^^ understanding the premises, and perceiving that now
elder.  ^^^^^  ^^^ charge  and travel  aforesaid,  divers  wares  and

merchandizes  are  brought  by  the  saide  fellowship  into
this  Realme,  out  of  the  dominions  already  discovered,
which  bee  within  this  realme  of  good  estimation,  mind-
ing for  their  peculiar  gaine,  utterly  to  decay  the  trade
of  the  sayde  fellowship,  have  contrary  to  the  tenor  of
the  same  letters  patents,  in  great  disorder  traded  into
the  dominions  of  the  said  mightie  prince  of  Russia,
&c.  to  the  great  detriment  of  this  common  wealth  :
And  for  that  the  name  by  which  the  saide  felowship  is
incorporated  by  the  letters  patents  aforesaid,  is  long,  &
consisteth  of  very  many  words  :  Therfore  be  it  enacted
by the Queenes most excellent Majestie, the Lords

86

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S ACT  ad.

1566.

spiritual  and  temporal,  &  the  commons  in  this  present

parliament  assembled,  and  by  authoritie  of  the  same,  that

the said felowship, company, society & corporation

made or created by the  said letters  patents,  shal  at  al

time & times from henceforth be  incorporated, named

and called onely by the name of the fellowship of

English  merchants,  for  discovery  of  new  trades,  and  by  English  Mer-

the same name for ever shall and may continue a  ^«'^«^-f>'«"-
,1 , J .  • 1 J  1  1 cover-i  of  new

perpetuall body incorporate m deeae and name, and  f^.^/^^

onely  by  the  same  name  from  henceforth,  shall  implead, "*■
and  be  impleaded,  answere  and  be  answered,  defend  and
be  defended,  sue  and  bee  sued,  in  whatsoever  courts
and  places,  and  shall  and  may  by  the  same  name  bee
inabled  to  purchase,  have,  holde,  possesse,  reteine,  and
enjoy  whatsoever  manors,  landes,  tenements,  rents,  re-
versions, services,  &  hereditaments  not  exceeding  a
hundred  marks  yeerely,  not  being  holden  of  the  Queenes
majestic,  her  heires,  or  successors  by  knights  service  in
Capite,  and  all  goods,  merchandizes,  chattels,  and  other
things  whatsoever,  and  shall  and  may  by  the  same
name  make  and  do  all  things  as  any  other  corporation
may  do,  and  also  shall  have  and  enjoy  all  and  singular
the  liberties,  priviledges,  jurisdictions,  franchises,  pre-
heminences,  powers,  authorities,  and  things,  and  may
doe  and  execute  all  other  matters  and  things  in  the  sayd
letters  patents  mentioned,  or  in  any  wise  conteined.
And  that  no  part  nor  parcell  of  the  maine  lands.  Isles,
ports,  havens,  roades,  creekes,  rivers,  armes  of  the  seas
of  any  Emperour,  king,  prince,  ruler  or  governor  what-
soever he  or  they  be,  before  the  said  first  enterprise
made  by  the  merchants  of  the  saide  corporation,  not
knowen  by  the  merchants  and  subjects  of  this  Realme,
or  by  them  not  commonly  by  seas  frequented,  and  lying
from  the  City  of  London  Northwards,  Northwestwards,
or  Northeastwards,  nor  any  part  or  parcel  of  the  maine
lands,  dominions,  isles,  ports,  roades,  havens,  creeks,
armes  of  the  Seas,  that  now  be  subject  to  the  said
high  and  mightie  prince  Lord  John  Vasiliwich,  his  heires

87

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

or  successours,  or  to  the  Emperour,  chiefe  governour  or
ruler  of  the  said  country  of  Russia  for  the  time  being,
his  heires  or  successors,  nor  the  countries  of  Armenia
major  or  minor,  Media,  Hyrcania,  Persia,  or  the  Caspian
sea,  nor  any  part  of  them  shall  be  sailed  or  traffiqued
unto, visited, frequented, or haunted by any person

[I.  371.]  being  or  that  shalbe  a  subject  or  denizen  of  this  realme,
by  themselves,  their  factor  or  factors,  or  any  other  to
their  use  or  commoditie,  by  any  wayes  or  meanes,  directly
or  indirectly,  other  then  by  the  order,  agreement,  con-
sent, or  ratification  of  the  governour.  Consuls  and
assistants  of  the  saide  fellowship  and  comminaltie,  or
the  more  part  of  them,  and  their  successors  for  the
time  being  :  upon  paine  that  every  person  and  persons
offending  in  this  behalfe,  shall  forfeit  and  loose.  Ipso
facto,  every  such  ship  and  ships,  with  the  appurten-
ances, and  all  such  goods.  Merchandizes,  and  things
whatsoever,  as  by  any  such  person  or  persons  shalbe
by  any  wayes  or  meanes,  directly  or  indirectly,  pro-
vided, caried,  conducted,  brought  or  exchanged,  in,  at,
to,  through  or  from  any  of  the  places  prohibited,  as  is
aforesaide,  contrary  to  the  true  intent  of  this  statute  :
the  one  moietie  of  all  which  forfeitures  to  bee  to  our
said  sovereigne  Lady  the  Queenes  Majestie,  her  heires
and  successors,  and  the  other  moitie  thereof  to  the
sayde  fellowship  of  English  Merchants  for  discovery  of
newe  trades,  and  their  successors,  to  be  seized  and
taken  wheresoever  they  may  be  found,  by  any  person
or  persons,  to  the  use  of  our  said  Sovereigne  Lady,
her  heires  and  successors,  and  of  the  said  fellowship  of
English  merchants  for  discovery  of  newe  trades,  and  of
their  successors,  or  the  same  or  the  value  thereof  to
bee  demaunded  or  sued  for  by  the  Queenes  highnesse,
her  heires  and  successors,  or  by  the  saide  fellowship  of
English  Merchants  for  discovery  of  newe  trades,  or
their  successors,  or  their  atturney  or  atturneis,  or  by
any  person  or  persons  being  of  the  same  fellowship  of
English Merchants for discovery of newe trades, or

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S ACT  ad.

1566.
their  successors  in  any  court  of  Record,  or  in  any-
other  Court  or  courtes  within  this  Realme,  or  els
where,  by  Action  of  debt,  action  of  detinue,  bill,
plaint,  information,  or  otherwise  :  in  which  suite  no
essoine,  protection,  wager  of  lawe,  or  injunction  shall
be  allowed,  for,  or  on  the  behalfe  of  the  partie  or
parties  defendant.

Provided  alwayes,  that  whereas  divers  Subjects  of  this
Realme  being  not  of  the  fellowship  aforesaid,  have  here-
tofore made  adventures  to  and  from  some  of  the  places
prohibited  by  the  said  letters  patents,  that  the  said  sub-
jects, their  heires,  executors,  administrators  and  assignes,
or  any  of  them  shall  not  be  impeached,  impleaded,
troubled,  sued,  nor  molested  for  the  same  in  their
goods  or  persons  in  any  maner  of  wise,  either  by  our
saide  sovereigne  Lady,  her  heires  or  successors,  or  the
said  fellowship,  or  their  successors.

Provided  also,  that  it  shall  be  lawful!  for  any  subject
of  this  Realme,  having  presently  any  shipping,  goods,
wares,  or  ready  money,  remayning  at  or  in  any  place,
of  or  within  the  dominion  of  the  said  mighty  prince  of
Russia,  or  in  any  other  of  the  places  prohibited  to  be
visited  or  traffiqued  unto  by  this  statute  or  the  said
letters  Patents,  to  fetch,  bring,  and  convey  the  same,
or  cause  the  same  to  be  brought  or  conveyed  from
thence  by  sea  or  otherwise,  before  the  feast  of  S.  John
Baptist,  which  shalbe  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God
1568.  any  thing  conteined  in  this  statute,  or  in  the
said  letters  Patents  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

Provided  also,  that  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  any  of  the
subjects  of  this  Realme,  to  saile  to  the  port,  towne,
territorie,  or  castle  of  Wardhouse,  or  to  any  of  the
coastes,  townes,  havens,  creekes,  rivers.  Islands,  and
land  of  Norway  for  trade  of  fishing,  or  any  other  trade
there  used  by  the  subjects  of  this  Realme,  any  thing
in  this  statute  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

And  for  the  better  maintenance  of  the  Navie  and
Mariners  of  this Realme,  be it provided and inacted,

89

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1566.

that  it  shall  not  be  lawfuU  to  the  saide  fellowship  and
company,  nor  to  any  of  them  to  cary  and  transport,  or
cause  to  be  caried  and  transported  any  commodie  of
this  Realme  to  their  newe  trade,  but  onely  in  English
ships,  and  to  be  sailed  for  the  most  part  with  English
Mariners,  nor  also  to  bring  into  this  Realme  nor  into
Flanders  from  their  saide  new  trade,  any  merchandizes,
or  other  commodities  but  in  English  ships,  and  sailed
for  the  most  part  by  the  English  Mariners,  on  paine
to  forfeit  for  every  such  offence  two  hundred  pounds,
whereof  the  one  moitie  shall  be  to  the  Queenes
Majestie,  her  heires  and  successors,  the  other  moitie
to  the  head  officers  of  any  port  towne,  having  any
haven  or  harborough  decayed,  by  what  name  soever
they  bee  incorporate,  to  the  reparation  of  such  har-
borough, that  will  sue  for  the  same  in  any  Court  of
Record,  by  action,  bill,  plaint  or  information,  wherein
no  essoine,  protection,  or  wager  of  lawe  for  the  de-
fendant shall  be  admitted  or  allowed.

Provided  also,  and  be  it  enacted,  that  no  maner  of
person  or  persons  shall  from  henceforth  carrie  or  trans-
port, or  cause  to  bee  carried  or  transported  out  of  this
Realme  of  England,  any  maner  of  clothes  or  karsies
into  any  of  the  partes  where  the  said  fellowship  and
societie  is  priviledged  to  trade  by  this  Act,  before  the
same  clothes  and  karsies  shall  be  all  dressed,  and  for
the  most  part  died  within  this  Realme,  upon  paine  of
forfeiture  for  every  such  cloth  and  karsie,  otherwise
caried  and  transported,  five  pounds  :  the  one  halfe  thereof
to  the  Queenes  Majestie,  her  heires  and  successors,  the
other  halfe  to  the  Master  and  Wardens  of  the  Cloth-
workers  in  the  Citie  of  London  for  the  time  being,  by
what  name  soever  they  be  incorporate  that  wil  sue  for
the  same.

Provided  also that whensoever the said societie or
[I.  372.]  company  shall  willingly  withdraw,  and  discontinue  wholy
by  the  space of  three  yeeres  in  time of  peace,  the  dis-
charging of  their  merchandizes  at  the  road  of  S.  Nicholas

90

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S ACT  ad.

1566.
bay  in  Russia,  and  doe  not  discharge  their  said  mer-
chandizes at  some  other  port  or  roade  lying  on  that
North  coast  of  Russia,  or  other  territorie  no  we  subject
to  the  saide  mightie  prince  of  Russia,  &c.  hitherto  by
the  subjects  of  this  realme  not  commonly  frequented,
that  then  during  the  time  of  any  such  discontinuance
and  withdrawing,  as  is  aforesaid,  it  shalbe  lawful  to  all
the  subjects  of  this  realme  to  trade  to  the  Narve  onely
in  English  bottoms,  any  thing  in  this  Act  to  the
contrary  notwithstanding.

Provided  also,  that  every  of  the  Queenes  Majesties
Subjects  inhabiting  within  the  Citie  of  Yorke,  the
townes  of  Newcastle  upon  Tine,  Hull  and  of  Boston,
having  continually  traded  the  course  of  merchandize
by  the  space  of  ten  yeeres,  and  which  before  the  25.  of
December  that  shalbe  in  Anno  D.  1567.  shal  contribute,
joyne,  and  put  in  stocke,  to,  with,  and  amongst  the  said
company,  such  summe  &  summes  of  money,  as  any  of
the  said  company,  which  hath  throughly  continued  and
contributed  to  the  saide  newe  trade,  from  the  yeere
1552.  hath  done,  and  before  the  saide  25.  of  December
1567.  shall  do  for  the  furniture  of  one  ordinary,  full
and  intire  portion,  or  share,  and  do  in  all  things
behave  himselfe  as  others  of  the  said  societie  be  bound
to  doe,  and  hereafter  shall  bee  bound  to  do  by  the
priviledges,  ordinances  and  statutes  of  the  saide  company,
shall  from  the  same  25.  day  of  December  1567.  be,
and  be  accompted  free,  and  as  one  of  the  said  societie
and  company,  and  subject  to  the  priviledges,  ordinances
and  statutes  of  the  saide  company,  reasonably  made  and
to  be  made,  any  thing  in  this  present  Act  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding.

[A  very
91

A.D.
1566.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  very  briefe  remembrance  of  a  voyage  made
by  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson,  from  London  to
Moscovia,  sent  from  the  Queenes  Majestie
to  the  Emperour,  in  the  yeere 1566.

He  fourth  day  of  May  in  the  yere  afore-
said, I  imbarked  my  selfe  at  Gravesend
in  the  good  ship  called  the  Harry  of
London,  and  having  had  a  prosperous
voyage  arrived  at  the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas
in  Russia  the  10.  day  of  July  following,
and  immediatly  I  sent  in  post  to  the
Emperor  to  advertise  of  my  comming,  and  traveiling
then  thorowe  the  countrey,  I  with  my  company  came  to
the  Mosco  where  the  Emperour  kept  his  court,  the  23.  of
August,  and  foorthwith  gave  the  Secretarie  to  understand
of  my  arrivall,  who  advertised  the  Emperours  Majestie  of
it,  and  the  first  day  of  September,  being  a  solemne  feast
among  the  Russes,  I  came  before  the  Emperours  Majestie,
sitting  in  his  seate  of  honour,  and  having  kissed  his  hand
and  done  the  Queenes  Majesties  commendations,  and
delivered  her  Graces  letters  and  present,  he  bad  me
to  dinner,  which  I  accepted,  and  had  much  honour  done
unto  me  both  then  and  all  the  time  of  my  abode  in  Russia.

The  Priviledges  graunted  by  the  Emperour  of
Russia  to  the  English  merchants  of  that  com-
pany :  obteined  the  22.  of  September,  Anno
1567.  by  M.  Anthony  Jenkinson.

Ne  onely  strengthener  of  all  things,  and
God  without  beginning,  which  was  before
the  world,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  holy  Ghost,  our  onely  God  in
Trinitie,  and  maker  of  all  things,  whom
we  worship  in  all  things,  and  in  all  places,
the  doer  and  fulfiller  of  all  things,  which
is  the  perfect knowledge giver of  the true God, our

92

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  ad.

1567-
Lorde  Jesus  Christ,  with  the  comforter  the  holy  Spirit,
and  thou  which  art  the  strengthener  of  our  faith,  keepe
us  together,  &  give  us  health  to  preserve  our  kingdome,
thou  giver  of  all  good  fruites,  and  helper  of  all  Christian
beleevers.

We  great  lord  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  great  duke
John  Vasiliwich  of  all  Russia,  Volodimer,  Mosco,  Novo-
grod,  Cazan,  Astracan,  Plesco,  Smolensko,  Tweria,
Yougorie,  Vadika,  Bulgar,  Sybier  and  others,  Emperour
and  great  duke  of  Novogrod  of  the  lower  land,  of
Chernygo,  Rezan,  Polotski,  Rostove,  Yereslave,  Bealo-
zera,  Oudoria,  Obdoria,  Condensa,  and  lord  of  many
other  lands,  and  of  all  the  North  parts,  commander
and  lord  of  Liffe-land.

Whereas  our  sister  Queene  Elizabeth,  by  the  grace
of  God,  Queene  of  England,  France  and  Ireland,  hath
written  to  us  her  letters,  that  wee  would  graunt  her
merchants,  William  Gerrard,  William  Chester,  Rowland
Heyward,  Lawrence  Hussie,  John  Marsh,  Anthony
Jenkinson,  William  Rowly,  and  their  company  of
England,  to  come  in  ships  into  this  kingdome,  and
those  merchants,  William  Gerrard  and  his  company
have  required  of  us  that  we  would  graunt  and  licence
them  to  come  into  our  countrey  of  Dwina,  with  all
kind  of  wares  at  wil,  to  our  City  of  Mosco,  and  to  all
our  castles  in  our  kingdomes,  we  for  our  sisters  sake
Elizabeth,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queene  of  England,
France  and  Ireland,  have  licenced  her  merchants,
William  Gerrard  and  his  company  to  passe  in  ships  to  [I,  373.]
our  kingdome  of  Colmogro,  and  to  the  land  of  Dwina,
and  to  all  other  our  inheritances  in  the  North  parts,
with  all  kind  of  wares  to  our  city  of  Mosco,  and  to
all  castles  and  townes  in  our  kingdome.  And  sir
William  Garrard  &  his  company  desired  of  us,  that  we
would  grant  them  licence  to  passe  to  our  inheritance
of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  and  into  our  inheritance  of
Novogrod  the  great,  and  to  our  inheritance  of  Lifland
to Narve and Dorpe, and to other our castles and

93

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

townes  of  Lifland,  with  all  kinde  of  wares,  and  the
trade  to  be  without  custome,  which  request  we  have
granted  to  sir  William  Garrard  and  his  company,  and
have  given  them  licence  to  passe  to  our  inheritance  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  and  Novogrod  the  great,  and  into
our  inheritance  of  Lifland,  Narve  and  Dorpe,  and  other
places  of  our  inheritance  in  Lifland  with  all  kinde  of
wares,  to  buy,  barter  and  sell  at  will,  without  custome :
and  what  wares  soever  they  bring  out  of  England,
or  out  of  any  other  countrey,  needfuU  or  necessary,  that
they  shall  bring  all  those  wares  needfull  or  necessary
to  our  treasury,  &  those  wares  there  to  be  opened,  and
then  to  take  out  of  the  same,  such  wares  as  shalbe
needfull  for  our  treasury,  and  the  rest  being  delivered
again e,  to  sell  and  barter  at  their  pleasure,  and  to  sell
none  of  the  fine  wares  before  they  be  scene  by  our
chancellers,  except  sorting  clothes,  and  other  wares  not
meet  for  our  treasury  :  and  when  our  chanceller  will
send  our  treasure  out  of  our  treasury  with  them,  they
shall  take  it  with  them,  and  so  sell  and  barter  it  for
wares  meet  for  our  treasury,  and  bring  it  to  our  treasury,
and  they  to  take  no  other  mens  wares  to  barter  or  sell
with  them,  nor  yet  our  people  to  buy  or  sell  for  them
their  wares  :  and  if  those  English  merchants  do  desire
to  passe  out  of  our  kingdome  of  Astracan  to  Boghar,
Shamaky,  Chaday,  or  into  any  other  countreys,  or  els
to  go  into  their  owne  countrey,  then  they  to  take  their
treasure  with  them,  and  to  barter  and  sell  it  for  wares
necessary  for  our  treasury,  and  to  bring  it  and  deliver
it  to  our  chanceller,  and  when  they  come  backe  againe
to  our  inheritance  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  or  to  any
other  of  our  castles  and  townes,  that  then  our  cap-
taine  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  and  all  other  our
people  of  charge  shall  not  holde  them,  but  with  speed
let  them  passe  without  taking  custome  of  them  or
their  wares,  and  without  opening  or  looking  upon
them  in  any  wise  :  and  when  they  have  not  our
treasure with them, that then likewise no custome

94

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  ad.

1567.

shalbe taken of  them nor their  wares to be seene of
any  man.

And  likewise  we  have  granted  them  to  buy  and  sell
in  all  our  kingdomes  and  castles,  with  all  kinde  of  wares :
and  we  have  also  licenced  them,  that  when  those  English
merchants  do  desire  to  buy  &  sell  with  our  merchants
wholly  together,  that  they  shall  have  liberty  so  to  do
wholly  together  :  and  they  that  do  desire  to  sell  their
owne  wares  by  retaile  in  their  owne  house,  that  then
they  sell  it  in  their  own  house  by  retaile  to  our  people
&  other  strangers,  as  they  can  agree  :  and  weights  and
arshnids  to  be  kept  in  their  house  with  our  scale,  and
they  themselves  to  barter  and  sell  their  owne  wares :  and
no  Russe  merchant  in  Mosco,  or  any  other  place  in  our
kingdome  to  sell  for  them  any  wares,  nor  to  buy  or
barter  any  wares  for  them,  nor  couler  any  strangers
goods.  And  whereas  those  merchants  of  England,  sir
William  Garrard  and  his  company  do  desire  to  sell  their
wares  at  Colmogro,  Dwina,  Vologda,  Yeraslave,  Costrum,
and  in  Novogrod  the  lower,  Cazan,  Astracan,  great  Novo-
grod,  Plesko,  Narve,  Dorpe,  and  in  other  our  townes
&  castles,  they  shall  have  their  will  to  sell  it  :  and  of
their  wares  of  England  and  Russeland  no  custome  shalbe
taken,  neither  they  nor  their  wares  shalbe  stayed  in  any
place  :  and  when  they  depart  out  of  Mosco,  to  advertise
our  chancellor  thereof,  and  not  to  give  any  note  or  in-
ventory of  any  kinde  of  their  wares  they  cary  away  :
and  when  the  English  merchants,  sir  William  Garrard
and  his  company  do  come  upon  the  sea,  and  by  mis-
fortune have  their  ships  cast  away  upon  those  coasts
of  the  North  parts,  then  we  will  their  goods  to  be
sought  out  with  trueth,  and  to  be  delivered  to  sir
William  Garrard  and  his  company,  which  as  then  shall
be  found  in  our  countrey  :  and  if  that  sir  William
Garrards  company  be  not  in  the  Mosco  nor  in  our
countrey,  then  we  will  and  command  that  those  goods
of  theirs  shall  be  layd  up  in  a  place  of  safegard  untill
such time as the said sir William Garrard or his

95

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1567.

company  come  to  demand  the  same :  and  then  at  their
comminp:  we  will  that  it  shall  be  delivered.  And  whereas
heretofore  we  have  given  sir  William  Garrard  and  his
company  in  this  our  kingdome  of  Mosco  the  new  castle
by  the  church  of  S.  Maxim  behinde  the  market,  they
shal  there  still  holde  their  house  as  heretofore  we  have
given  them,  paying  no  custome  for  the  same  :  and  we
also  do  licence  them  to  keepe  one  Russe  porter  or  two,
or  els  of  their  owne  countrey,  and  those  porters  shall
dwell  with  them,  and  not  sell  for  them,  nor  barter,  nor
buy  for  them  :  And  also  I  have  granted  them  to  buy
a  house  at  Vologda  and  at  Colmogro,  or  in  any  other
place  where  they  can  chuse  for  themselves  any  good
harbour,  and  there  they  to  set  up  those  houses  in  those
places  at  their  owne  charges  :  and  in  Vologda  or  the
other  houses  to  keepe  two  or  three  porters  of  their
owne,  or  els  two  or  three  Russes,  and  their  wares  to
be  layed  up  in  those  houses,  and  to  sell  their  owne
wares  at  will  :  and  the  porters  without  them  to  sell
none  of  their  wares,  neither  yet  to  buy  any  for  them.
And  our  officers  of  Colmogro  and  Dwina,  and  of  other

[I.  374.]  our  castles  &  townes  shall  not  looke  over  their  wares,
nor  take  any  custome  thereof:  neither  shall  those  Eng-
lish merchants  sir  William  Garrard  and  his  company  be
judged  by  any  of  them.  And  when  the  English  mer-
chants shall  send  from  our  kingdome  their  owne  people
into  their  owne  countrey  by  land  over  other  kingdomes
whatsoever  the  be,  they  may  without  ware  send  their
owne  people  at  their  pleasure.  And  when  any  matter
of  law  doth  fall  out  in  their  trade  of  merchandise,  then
they  shall  be  judged  by  our  chancellers,  and  law  shalbe
done  with  equitie  betwixt  our  people  and  them :  and
when they  cannot  be  judged by  law,  they  then shalbe

Triall  by  lots,  tried  by  lots,  and  whose  lot  is  first  taken  out,  he  shall
have  the  right.  And  if  it  happen  any  of  those  merchants
to  have  any  matter  of  law  in  any  other  part  of  our
dominions  for  trade  of  merchants,  then  our  captaines,
judges, and chiefe officers shall heare the  matter, and

96

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  ad.

1567.
administer  justice with equity and trueth, and where
law  can  take  no  place,  to  be tried by  lots,  and  his  lot
that  is  first  taken out to have the  right,  and  for  their
matters  of  law  no  custome  to  be  payed.

Furthermore,  we  for  our  sisters  sake  Elizabeth  have
granted,  that  none  beside  sir  William  Garrard  and  his
company,  out  of  what  kingdome  soever  it  be,  England
or  other,  shall  not  come  in  trade  of  merchandise  nor
otherwise  to  Colmogro,  nor  to  the  river  Ob,  nor  within  The  river  of
Wardhouse,  nor  to  Petzora,  nor  Cola,  nor  Mezen,  nor  ^"^^^ffikable.
to  the  abbey  of  Petchingo,  nor  to  the  Island  of  Shallawy,
nor  to  any  mouth  of  the  river  of  Dwina,  nor  to  any
part  of  the  North  countrey  of  our  coast.  And  if  any
merchant,  out  of  what  countrey  soever  it  be,  doe  come
with  ship  or  shippes,  busses,  or  any  other  kinde  of  vessell
to  any  of  our  harbours,  within  all  our  North  parts,  we
will  that  then  the  people  and  goods,  ship  or  ships,  shalbe
confiscate,  and  forfeited  to  us  the  Emperour  and  great
Duke.

Given  in  our  kingdome  and  house  of  Mosco,  the
yeere  from  the  beginning  of  the  word  7076,  in  the
moneth  of  September,  and  in  the  34  yeere  of  our
reigne,  and  in  our  conquest  of  Cazan  16,  and  in  our
conquest  of  Astracan 15.

Anthonie  Jenkinson.

William  Rowly.

Thomas  Hawtry.
Perused  and  allowed  by  us  :  I  Thomas  Sowtham.

Rafe  Rutter,  trans-
latour  hereof  out  of
the  Russe  tongue.

[A  letter

III  97  G

A.D.

1567.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  letter  of  M.  Henrie  Lane  to  M.  Richard
Hakluit,  concerning  the  first  ambassage  to
our  most  gracious  Queene  EHzabeth  from
the  Russian  Emperour  anno  1567,  and  other
notable  matters  incident  to  those  places  and
times.

Orshipfull  sir,  because  I  finde  you  have
the  successe  and  proceedings  of  Osep
Napea  the  first  ambassadour  of  the
Russian  Emperour  to  the  Majesties  of
King  Philip  and  Queene  Marie,  at  what
time  and  at  his  returne  I  was  remaining
in  Russia,  &  do  not  finde  that  the
perfect  knowledge  of  the  first  ambassage  from  thence
to  this  our  Sovereigne  Ladie  Queene  Elizabeth  is  come
to  your  hands,  betweene  whose  Highnesse  and  the
ambassadours  I  was  interpretour,  I  thinke  good  to
expresse  it.  In  August  Anno  1567  arrived  at  London
with  their  retinue  two  especiall  authorised  messengers,
named  Stephen  Twerdico,  and  Theodore  Pogorella,  with
letters  and  presents  to  her  Majesty,  at  that  time  being
at  Otelands,  where  divers  of  the  chiefe  merchants  of  the
Russian  company  did  associate  them,  and  I  there  doing
my  duetie  and  office  of  interpretour,  her  Majestie  gave
them  audience.  First  they  rehearsed  the  long  stile  and  ,
Majesty  of  their  Master,  with  his  most  friendly  and
hearty  commendations  to  her  Highnesse,  and  then  they
testified  the  singular  great  joy  and  pleasure  that  he
conceived  to  heare  of  her  most  princely  estate,  dignitie
and  health  :  and  lastly,  they  delivered  their  letters  and
presents.  The  presents  sent  unto  her  Majesty  were
Sables,  both  in  paires  for  tippets,  and  two  timbars,  to
wit,  two  times  fortie,  with  Luserns  and  other  rich  furres.
For  at  that  time  that  princely  ancient  ornament  of  furres
was  yet  in  use.  And  great  pitie  but  that  it  might  be
renewed,  especiall  in  Court,  and  among  Magistrates,  not

98

FIRST AMBASSAGE TO ELIZABETH  ad.

1567.

onely  for  the  restoring  of  an  olde  worshipful!  Art  and

Companie, but also because they be for our climate  ^^^  «-f^  °f

wholesome,  delicate,  ffrave  and  comely : expressing dig;-  J"'^'^^^  '^nok-
r •  iri  •  J ^"^^7  delicate,

nitie, comrortmg age, and or longer  continuance, and  ^j.^^,^  ^^^

better  with  small cost  to  be  preserved,  then  these  new  comely.
silks,  shagges,  and ragges,  wherein a  great  part  of  the
wealth  of  the  land  is  hastily  consumed.

These  ambassadours  were  appointed  lodging  and  enter-
teinement  by  the  Moscovie  company  at  their  house  then
in  Seething  Lane,  and  were  sundrie  times  after  permitted
to  be  in  presence. And  in  May  1568 tooke  their  leave  [I.  375.]
at Greenwich, where they understood and had the
Queenes Majesties  minde,  letters and reward. At  the
latter part  of  her  talke,  her  Highnesse  considering  that
our  trade  to  Saint  Nicholas  since  the  beginning  had  bene  "^^^  f'^^^  ^^
offensive to divers princes,  states,  and merchants East- ; ^5  °  ^^
ward,  used  these  speeches  or  the  like :  Who  is  or  shall  di^'ers  primes
be more touched  by  detractours,  with flying tales and l^ states  East-
untrue  reports,  then  Princes  and  Rulers,  to  the  breach  of  ward.
love  and  unitie  ?  your  Master  and  I  in  things  that  passe
by  word  and  writing, I  doubt not  will  keepe  and  per-
forme  promises. If  he heare the contrary of  me, let
him  suspend  his  judgement,  and  not  be  light  of  credit,
and  so  will  I. These  words  they  termed  her  Majesties
golden speech : and kneeling downe, kissed her hand,
and  departed.

The  letters  that  these two  messengers brought,  were
delivered to me by  my Lord Treasurour, being then
1 Secretarie,  to  be  translated,  the  copies  whereof  I  had,  but
I now  cannot  finde. The  copie  of  the  Queenes  Majesties
! letter I send inclosed herewith  unto your  worship. I
also have  sent  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  written  from  the
king of  Polonia to the Queenes Majestic,  with other
I letters  from  some  of  our  nation and  factours,  declaring
the  displeasure  for  our  trafiicke  to  the  Russes  from  anno
1558 to the yere 1566, especially by  the  way  of  the
Narve :  in  which  yere  of  1566,  having  generall  procura-
tion and  commission  from  the  Company,  I  was  in  the  Low

99

A.D.
1567.

Smoknsco  zvon
by  the  Russe.

Polotzko
taken.

Polotzko  re-
covered by
Stephanus
Batore.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

countrey  at  Antwerpe  and  Amsterdam,  and  sometimes
in  company  with  Polacks,  Danskers,  and  Easterlings :
and  by  reason  I  had  bene  a  lidger  in  Russia,  I  could
the  better  reply  and  prove,  that  their  owne  nations  and
the  Italians  were  most  guiltie  of  the  accusations  written
by  the  king  of  Poland.

This  king  Sigismundus  (whose  ambassadours  very
sumptuous  I  have  seene  at  Mosco)  was  reported  to
be  too  milde  in  suffering  the  Moscovites.  Before  our
trafficke  they  overranne  his  great  dukedome  of  Lituania,
and  tooke  Smolensco,  carrying  the  people  captives  to
Mosco.  And  in  the  yere  1563,  as  appeareth  by  Thomas
Alcocks  letter,  they  suffered  the  Russe  likewise  in  that
Duchy  to  take  a  principall  city  called  Polotzko,  with
the  lord  and  people  thereof.  Likewise  the  said  Sigis-
mundus and  the  king  of  Sweden  did  not  looke  to  the
protection  of  Livonia,  but  lost  all,  except  Rie  and  Revel,
and  the  Russe  made  the  Narve  his  port  to  trafficke,  not
onely  to  us,  but  to  Lubec  and  others,  generall.  And  still
from  those  parts  the  Moscovites  were  furnished  out  of
Dutchland  by  enterlopers  with  all  arts  and  artificers,  and
had  few  or  none  by  us.  The  Italians  also  furnished  them
with  engines  of  warre,  and  taught  them  warrelike  strata-
gemes,  and  the  arte  of  fortification.  In  the  dayes  of
Sigismund,  the  Russe  would  tant  the  Polacks,  that  they
loved  their  ease  at  home  with  their  wives,  and  to  drinke,
and  were  not  at  commandement  of  their  king.  This
Sigismund  had  to  wife  the  daughter  of  Ferdinando,
Charles  the  fifts  brother,  and  he  died  without  issue.
Since  which  time  their  late  elected  king  Stephanus  Batore
kept  the  Russe  in  better  order,  and  recovered  Polotzko
againe  in  the  yere  1579.  Thus  with  my  heartie  farewell
I  take  my  leave  of  your  worship.

Your  assured  friend  Henrie  Lane,

FIRST AMBASSAGE TO ELIZABETH

A.D.
1568.

A  Letter  of  the  most  excellent  Majestie  of
Queene  Elizabeth,  sent  by  Stephen  Twerdico
and  Pheodata  Pogorella,  messengers  of  the
Emperour  of  Russia,  unto  their  Master  the
ninth  of  May 1568.

Imperatori Moscovitarum, &c.

LizABETHA  &c.  Litcras  vestrae  Majes-
tatis  superiori  anno  1567,  decimo  die
mensis  Aprilis  datas,  vestri  mercatores
Stephanas  Twerdico,  &  Pheodata  Pogo-
rella, qui  has  nostras  perferunt,  nobis
tradidere.  Quos  vestros  mercatores  in
omni  suo  apud  nos  &  nostros  obeundo
negotio,  ita  tractari,  &  libenti  voluntate,  &  expresso
nostro  mandate  curavimus,  ut  non  solum  vestras  Majes-
tatis  pro  illis  postulationi,  sed  eorundem  etiam  hominum
expectationi  plene  satisfactum  esse  confidamus.  Id  quod
eo  fecimus  studiosius,  quod  plane  perspectum,  probeque
cognitum  habeamus,  nostros  omnes,  qui  bona  cum  gratia
nostra,  nostrarumque  literarum  commendatione,  istuc,
sub  vestro  imperio  negotiaturi  veniunt,  pari,  cum  vestrae
Majestatis  favore,  tum  vestrorum  subditorum  humani-
tate,  ubivis  acceptos  esse.  Quae  nostra  utrobique,  &
mutuae  inter  nos  amicitias,  &  gratae  inter  nostros  bene-
volentiae  officia,  ut  crebra  &  perpetua  existant,  nos
admodum  postulamus.  Quem  animi  nostri  sensum
fusius  hi  vestri,  &  opportunius  suo  sermone  coram
declarabunt  :  Quibus  non  dubitamus,  quin  vestra  Majes-
tas  amplam  fidem  sit  tributura.  Deus  &c.  Grenovici
nono  die  Maii 1567.

1568.

[The  Ambassage

A.D.
1568.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[I.  376.]

In  this  voyage
went  Thomas
Bannister,
iff  Geo/rey
Ducket,  for
their  voyage
into  Persia.

The  abbey  of
S.  Nicholas  of
20  Monks.

The  Ambassage  of  the  right  worshipfull  Master
Thomas  Randolfe,  Esquire,  to  the  Emperour
of  Russia,  in  the  yeere  1568,  briefly  written
by  himselfe.

He  22  day  of  June,  in  the  yere  of  our
Lord  1568,  I  went  aboord  the  Harry,
lying  in  the  road  at  Harwich  with  my
company,  being  to  the  number  of  fortie
persons  or  thereabout  :  of  which  the
one  halfe  were  gentlemen,  desirous  to
see  the  world.
Within  one  dayes  sailing,  we  were  out  of  the  sight
of  land,  and  following  our  course  directly  North,  till
we  came  to  the  North  Cape,  we  sailed  for  the  space  of
twelve  dayes  with  a  prosperous  winde,  without  tempest
or  outrage  of  sea  :  having  compassed  the  North  Cape
we  directed  our  course  flat  Southeast,  having  upon  our
right  hand  Norway,  Wardhouse,  Lapland,  all  out  of
sight  till  we  came  to  Cape  Gallant  :  and  so  sailing
betweene  two  bayes,  the  two  and  thirtieth  day  after  our
departure  from  Harwich,  we  cast  ancre  at  Saint  Nicholas
road.  In  all  the  time  of  our  voyage,  more  then  the
great  number  of  Whales  ingendering  together,  which
we  might  plainly  beholde,  and  the  Sperma  Cetae,  which
we  might  see  swimming  upon  the  sea,  there  was  no
great  thing  to  be  woondered  at.  Sometimes  we  had
calmes,  wherein  our  Mariners  fished,  and  tooke  good
store  of  divers  sorts.  At  S.  Nicholas  we  landed  the
23  of  July,  where  there  standeth  an  abbey  of  Monks
(to  the  number  of  twentie)  built  all  of  wood  :  the
apparell  of  the  Monks  is  superstitious,  in  blacke  hoods,
as  ours  have  bene.  Their  Church  is  faire,  but  full
of  painted  images,  tapers,  and  candles.  Their  owne
houses  are  low,  and  small  roomes.  They  lie  apart,
they  eat  together,  and  are  much  given  to  drunken-
nesse, unlearned, write they can, preach they doe

THOMAS RANDOLPH'S AMBASSAGE  ad

1568.

never,  ceremonious in their Church,  and long  in  their
prayers.

At  my  first  arrivall  I  was  presented  from  their  Prior
with  two  great  rie  loaves,  fish  both  salt  and  fresh  of
divers  sorts,  both  sea  fish  and  fresh  water,  one  sheepe
alive,  blacke,  with  a  white  face,  to  be  the  more  grate-
full  unto  me,  and  so  with  many  solemne  words
inviting  me  to  see  their house,  they  tooke  their  leave.

Towne or habitation at S. Nicholas there is none  The  English
more then about foure houses neere the  abbey, and  '^f-^^  ^^  ^•
another  built by  the  English Company for their  owne
use.

This  part  of  the  countrey  is  most  part  wood,  saving
here  and  there  pasture  &  arable  ground,  many  rivers
and  divers  Islands  unhabited,  as  the  most  part  of  the
countrey  is,  for  the  coldnesse  in  Winter.

S.  Nicholas  standeth  Northeast:  the  elevation  of  the  The  river  of
pole  64  degrees.  The  river  that  runneth  there  into  the  ^"'''^^•
sea  is  called  Dwina,  very  large,  but  shallow.  This
river  taketh  his  beginning  about  700  miles  within  the
countrey,  &  upon  this  river  standeth  Colmogro,  and
many  prety  villages,  well  situated  for  pasture,  arable
land,  wood,  and  water.  The  river  pleasant  betweene
hie  hils  of  either  side  inwardly  inhabited,  and  in  a
maner  a  wildernesse  of  hie  firre  trees,  and  other  wood.

At  Colmogro  being  100  versts,  which  we  account  for  Colmogro.
three  quarters  of  a  mile  every  verst,  we  taried  three
weeks,  not  being  suffered  to  depart  before  the  Emperour
had  word  of  our  comming,  who  sent  to  meet  us  a
gentleman  of  his  house,  to  convey  us,  and  to  see  us
furnished  of  victuals,  and  all  things  needfull,  upon  his
owne  charge.

The  allowance  of  meat  and  drinke  was  for  every  day
two  rubbles,  besides  the  charge  of  boats  by  water,  and
foure  score  post  horses  by  land,  with  above  100  carts
to  cary  my  wines,  and  other  cariage.

Colmogro  is  a  great  towne  builded  all  of  wood,  not
walled,  but  scattered  house  from  house. The  people  are

103

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

rude in maners,  and in apparell homely, saving upon
their  festival!,  and  marriage  dayes.

The people of  this  town  finding commodity  by the

English  mens  traffike  with  them  are  much  at  their  com-

mandement,  given  much  to  drunkennesse,  and  all  other

kinde  of  abominable  vices.

An  English  In  this towne the English  men  have  lands of  their

home  with owne,  given  them  by  the  Emperour,  and faire houses,

lands  at  Col- -^i S-  r ^u •  j-l

mosro  vjiXh  offices  ror  their  commodity,  very  many.

Of  other  townes  untill  I  come  to  Vologda,  I  write  not,
because  they  are  much  like  to  this,  and  the  inhabitants
not  differing  from  them.

I  was  five  whole  weeks  upon  the  river  of  Dwina  till
I  came  to  Vologda,  being  drawen  with  men  against  the
streame,  for  other  passage  there  is  none.

Vologda  standeth  upon  the  river  of  Vologda,  which
commeth  into  Dwina.  The  towne  is  great  and  long,
built  all  of  wood,  as  all  their  townes  are.

In  this  towne  the  Emperour  hath  built  a  castle  in-
[I.  377.]  vironed  with  a  wall  of  stone,  and  bricke,  the  walles  faire
and  hie,  round  about.  Here  (as  in  all  other  their
townes)  are  many  Churches,  some  built  of  bricke,  the
rest  of  wood,  many  Monks  and  Nunnes  in  it :  a  towne
also  of  great  traffike,  and  many  rich  merchants  there
dwelling.

From  hence  we  passed  by  land  towards  Mosco  in  poste,

being  500  versts  great,  which  are  equall  with  our  miles.

In  their  townes  we  baited  or  lay,  being  post  townes.

The  descrtp- The countrey is  very faire, plaine & pleasant, well

twn  of  the inhabited,  corne,  pasture, medowes enough,  rivers, and

inland  of  ■> r  •  j  ji

Moscome. woods,  faire  and  goodly.

At  Yeraslave  we  passed  the  river  of  Volga,  more  then
a  mile  over.  This  river  taketh  his  beginning  at  Beal
Ozera,  &  descendeth  into  Mare  Caspium,  portable  thorow
of  very  great  vessels  with  flat  bottomes,  which  farre  passe
any  that  our  countrey  useth.

To  saile  by  this  river  into  Mare  Caspium  the  English
company  caused  a  barke  to  be  built  of  27  tunns,  which

104

THOMAS RANDOLPH'S AMBASSAGE  ad.

1569.
there  was  never  seene  before :  This  barke  built,  and  ready
rigged  to  the  sea  with  her  whole  furniture  cost  not  the
company  above  one  hundreth  marks  there.

To Mosco we came about the end of  September,  ^^-f  arrivdl
received  by  no  man,  not  so  much  as  our  owne  countrey-  ^^  ^osco.
men  suffered  to  meet  us,  which  bred  suspition  in  me  of
some  other  course  intended,  then  we  had  hitherto  found.

We  were  brought  to  a  house  built  of  purpose  by  the  ^  special
Emperour for Ambassadours,  faire  and  large,  after  the  f^f '^^f^T^'
fashion  of  that  countrey.  _  hlsladmn. ""

Two  gentlemen  were  appointed  to  attend  upon  me,
the  one  to  see  us  furnished  of  victuals,  and  that  we
lacked  nothing  of  the  Emperors  allowance  :  the  other
to  see  that  we  should  not  goe  out  of  the  house,  nor  suffer
any  man  to  come  unto  us,  in  which  they  left  nothing
undone  that  belonged  to  their  charge.  But  specially  he
that  looked  to  our  persons  so  straightly  handled  us,  that
we  had  no  small  cause  to  doubt  that  some  evill  had  bene
intended  unto  us.  No  supplication,  sute,  or  request
could  take  place  for  our  liberty,  nor  yet  to  come  to  his
presence.

Having  passed  over  1 7  weeks  in  this  sort,  the  Emperour
sendeth  word  that  we  should  be  ready  against  Tuesday
the  20  of  Februarie,  at  eight  a  clocke  in  the  morning.

The  houre  being  come  that  I  should  goe  to  the  Court,  Two
the  two  gentlemen  Pristaves  (as  they  call  them)  came  Pristaves.
unto  me  apparelled  more  princely  then  before  I  had  ever
seene  them.  They  presse  us  to  depart,  and  mounted
upon  their  owne  horses,  and  the  Ambassador  upon  such
a  one  as  he  had  borrowed,  his  men  marching  on  foot,  to
their  great  griefe.

The  Ambassadour  (being  my  selfe)  was  conveyed  into
an  office  where  one  of  the  chancellors  doeth  use  to  sit,
being  there  accompanied  with  the  two  foresayd  gentle-
men :  I  taried  two  long  houres  before  I  was  sent  for  to
the  Emperor.  In  the  end  message  being  brought  that
the  Emperour  was  set,  I  was  conveyed  by  my  gentlemen
up  a  paire  of  staires  thorow  a  large  roome,  where  sate  by

105

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

my  estimation  300  persons,  all  in  rich  attire,  taken  out
of  the  Emperors  wardrobe  for  that  day,  upon  three  ranks
of  benches,  set  round  about  the  place,  rather  to  present
a  majestie,  then  that  they  were  either  of  quality  or
honor.

At  the  first  entry  into  the  chamber  I  with  my  cap  gave
them  the  reverence,  such  as  I  judged  their  stately  sitting,
grave  countenances,  and  sumptuous  apparell  required,  and
seeing  that  it  was  not  answered  againe  of  any  of  them
I  covered  my  head,  and  so  passing  to  a  chamber  where
the  Emperor  was,  there  received  me  at  the  doore  from
my  two  gentlemen  or  governors,  two  of  the  Emperors
His  admission  counsellors,  and  shewed  me  to  the  Emperor,  and  brought
to  the  j^g ^Q ^^ middle  of  the chamber,  where  I  was  willed

presence  ^°  Stand  Still,  and  to  say  that  which  I  had  to  say. I  by

my  Interpretor  opened  my  message  as  I  received  it  from
the  Queene  my  Mistresse,  from  whom  I  came,  at  whose
name  the  Emperor  stood  up,  and  demanded  divers  ques-
tions of  her  health  and  state :  whereunto  answere  being
made,  he  gave  me  his  hand  in  token  of  my  welcome,  and
caused  me  to  sit  downe,  and  further  asked  me  divers
questions.
The  Queenes  This  done,  I  delivered  her  Majesties  present,  which
present.  ^^g  ^  notable  great  Cup  of  silver  curiously  wrought,  with

verses  graven  in  it,  expressing  the  histories  workmanly
set  out  in  the  same.

All  being  sayd  and  done  (as  appeared)  to  his  content-
ment, he  licenced  me  and  my  whole  company  to  depart,
who  were  all  in  his  presence,  and  were  saluted  by  him
The  Emperors  with  a  nod  of  his  head,  and  sayd  unto  me  :  I  dine  not
speech  to  the  ^j^^^  j  openlv  for  great  affaires  I  have,  but  I  will  send
thee  my  dinner,  and  give  leave  to  thee  and  thine  to  go
at  liberty,  and  augment  our  allowance  to  thee,  in  token
of  our  love  and  favor  to  our  sister  the  Queene  of
England.

I  with  reverence  tooke  my  leave,  being  conveyed  by
two  other  of  greater  calling  then  those  that  brought  me
to the Emperors sight,  who delivered me to the two

106

THOMAS RANDOLPH'S AMBASSAGE  ad.

1569.

first  gendemen,  who  conducted  me  to  the  office  where
I  first  was,  where  came  unto  me  one  called  the  Long
duke,  with  whom  I  conferred  a  while,  and  so  returned
to  my  lodging.

Within  one  houre  after  in  comes  to  my  lodging  a
duke  richly  apparelled,  accompanied  with  fiftie  persons,  [I.  378.]
ech  of  them  carying  a  silver  dish  with  meat,  and  covered
with  silver.  The  duke  first  delivered  twenty  loaves  of
bread  of  the  Emperors  owne  eating,  having  tasted  the
same,  and  delivered  every  dish  into  my  hands,  and  tasted
of  every  kinde  of  drinke  that  he  brought.

This  being  done,  the  duke  and  his  company  sate
downe  with  me,  and  tooke  part  of  the  Emperors  meat,
and  filled  themselves  well  of  all  sorts,  and  went  not  away
from  me  unrewarded.

Within  few  nights  after  the  Emperor  had  will  to
speake  secretly  with  me,  and  sent  for  me  in  the  night
by  the  Long  duke :  The  place  was  farre  off,  and  the  night
colde,  and  I  having  changed  my  apparell  into  such  as  the
Russes  do  weare,  found  great  incommoditie  thereby.

Having  talked  with  him  above  three  houres,  towards  ^  second  con-

the  morning  I  was  dismissed,  and  so  came  home  to  my  M^^^^  "^^^^

lodging,  where  I  remained  above  six  weeks  after,  before  ^

I heard  againe  from  the  Emperour,  who  went  the  next

day  to  Slovoda,  the  house  of  his  solace. After  the  end

of  which  sixe  weeks,  which  was  about  the  beginning  of

April,  the  Emperour  returned from Slovoda  aforesayd,

and  sent  for  me  againe  to  make  repaire  unto  him. And

being  come,  I  dealt  effectually  with  him  in  the  behalfe  of

our English merchants, and found him so graciously

inclined  towards  them,  that  I  obtained  at  his  hands  my

whole  demands  for  large  privileges  in  generall,  together

with  all  the  rest  my  particular  requests. And  then he

commended  to  my  conduct  into  England,  a  noble  man

of  his,  called  Andrew  Savin,  as  his  Ambassadour,  for  the  Andrew  Savin

better  confirmation  of  his  privileges  grranted,  and other  ^'^^^■ff^*"*'"
. .  -11  TV /r  • .  A J .1  1 •  T to  the  Queene.

negotiations with her Majesty. And  thus being dis-

patched with full contentment, the sayd Ambassadour

107

A.D.
1569.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  my  selfe  departed,  and  Imbarked  at  S.  Nicholas  about
the  end  of  July,  and  arrived  safely  at  London  in  the
moneth  of  September  following.

A  copie  of  the  priviledges  granted  by  the  right
high  and  mightie  Prince,  the  Emperour  of
Russia,  &c.  unto  the  right  worshipfull  fellow-
ship of  English  merchants,  for  the  discoverie
of  new  trades  :  and  hither  sent  by  Thomas
Randolfe  esquire,  her  Majesties  Ambassadour
to  the  sayd  Emperour,  and  by  Andrew  Savin
his  Ambassadour  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord
God 1569.

Ne  God  everlasting,  and  without  and  before
the  beginning,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  holy  Ghost,  the  blessed  Trinitie,  our
onely  God,  maker,  and  preserver  of  all
things,  and  replenisher  of  all  things  every
where,  who  by  thy  goodnesse  doest  cause
all  men  to  love  the  giver  of  wisedome
our  onely  Mediatour,  and  leader  of  us  all  unto  blessed
knowledge  by  the  onely  Sonne  his  word,  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  holy  and  everlasting  Spirit,  and  now  in  these  our
dayes  teachest  us  to  keepe  Christianitie,  and  sufFerest  us
to  enjoy  our  kingdome  to  the  happy  commodity  of  our
land,  and  wealth  of  our  people,  in  despight  of  our
enemies,  and  to  our  fame  with  our  friends.

We  John  Vasiliwich  by  the  grace  of  God,  great  lord,
Emperour,  and  great  duke  of  all  Russia,  Volodemer,
Moscovia,  Novogrod,  Emperour  of  Cazan,  Tversky,
Vgorsky,  Permisky,  Vadsky,  Bulgaria,  and  many  others,
lord  and  great  duke  of  the  Low  countreys  of  Novogrod,
Chernigosky,  Resansky,  Polotsky,  Rastow,  Yeraslave,
Bealosera,  Owdorsky,  Condinsky,  and  all  Siberland,
great  commander  of  all  the  North  parts,  lord  of  Leifland,
and  many  other  Northward,  Southward  and  Westward.

108

fRUSSIA COMPANY'S PRIVILEGES  ad.

1569.

Whereas  our  sister  Elizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God
Queene  of  England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender  of
the  faith,  hath  written  unto  us  her  letters  for  her
merchants,  who  hath  made  sute  that  we  should  grant
our  goodnesse  to  the  merchants  which  are  of  one
Company,  and  give  them  free  leave  to  come  to  traffike
in  our  kingdome  to  Colmogro,  and  to  the  countrey  of
Dwina,  and  to  our  great  citie  of  Moscovia,  and  to  all
the  cities  in  our  dominions,  and  thorow  our  countrey
to  Boghar,  to  Persia,  Casbin,  and  Charday,  and  to  all
other  countreys.

I  We  John  Vasiliwich  Emperour  and  great  duke  of
all  Russia  (for  our  sister  Elizabeths  sake,  Queene  of
England)  have  given  and  granted  to  the  English
merchants,  the  Governours,  Consuls,  Assistants  &  fello-  •
ship,  sir  Wil.  Garrard  Knight,  Rowland  Haiward  Alder-
man, Joh.  Thamworth  Esquire,  John  Rivers  Alderman,
Henry  Beecher  Alderman,  Consuls  :  Sir  Wil.  Chester
Knight,  Edward  Jackman  Alderman,  Lionel  Ducket
Alderman,  Edward  Gilbert,  Laurence  Huse,  Francis
Walsingham,  Clement  Throgmorton,  John  Quarles,
Nicholas  Wheeler,  Thomas  Banister,  John  Harrison,
Francis  Burnham,  Anthony  Gamage,  John  Somers,
Richard  Wilkinson,  Joh.  Sparke,  Richard  Barne,  Robert
Woolman,  Thomas  Browne,  Thomas  Smith,  Thomas
Allen,  Thomas  More,  William  Bully,  Richard  Yong,
Thomas  Atkinson,  Assistants  :  John  Mersh  Esquire,
Geofrey  Ducket,  Francis  Robinson,  Matthew  Field,  &
all  the  rest  of  their  company  and  fellowship,  and  to
their  successours  and  deputies,  to  come  with  ships  and
other  vessels  into  our  Countrey,  at  Colmogorod,  &  [I.  379.]
Dwina,  and  to  all  the  North  parts  now  being  ours,  or
that  hereafter  shall  at  any  time  be  in  our  possession,
by  sea,  river  or  land,  even  to  our  great  Citie  of  Mosco,
in  all  the  townes  of  our  Countrey,  to  Cazan  and
Astracan,  to  Novogorod  the  great,  to  Plesko  &  Leifland,
Vriagorod,  to  Narve,  and  all  other  townes  of  Leifland.
2  And to passe through our  land to Boghar, Persia,

109

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

Casbin,  Charday,  and  other  Countreyes  :  And  whereso-
ever they  come  there  to  be  and  abide  freely,  and  to
barter  and  bargaine  freely  all  wares  of  sale,  without
custome  of  all  people,  and  Marchants  strangers  whatso-
ever.

And  if  so  be  they  bring  any  fine  wares  out  of
Englande,  or  any  other  Countrey  from  Boghar,  Persia,
Casbin,  or  from  any  other  place,  &  those  their  wares
that  come  by  the  way  of  Narve,  or  any  other  part  into
our  Dominion,  to  bring  the  same  wares  into  our
treasure,  and  our  Treasurers  to  view  the  same  wares,
and  to  take  into  our  Treasurie  of  the  same  such  as
shalbe  needfull  for  us.  And  all  such  wares  as  we  shal
not  need,  our  Chancellour  to  redeliver  ye  same  :  And
after  the  view  of  our  Chancellours,  to  barter  it  freely
to  whom  they  will,  not  selling  any  of  their  wares
needful  for  us,  before  our  Chancellour  have  seene  the
same.  And  all  other  grosse  and  heavy  wares  that  shall
be  needfull  to  our  use,  not  being  brought  to  Mosco,  to
declare  &  tell  our  Chancellour  of  the  same  wares  :  And
to  give  a  note  thereof  by  name,  and  how  much  they
leave  there,  not  brought  to  Mosco  :  and  then  if  we
neede  not  the  said  wares,  the  English  Marchants,  their
servants  &  Factors,  to  convey  their  wares  the  neerest
way  to  Ustiug  the  great,  and  so  to  Colmogorod,  or
elsewhere  at  their  pleasure,  there  to  barter  and  sell  the
same.  But  those  wares  that  shalbe  needfull  for  our
Treasurie,  they  shall  not  hide  from  us  in  any  case.

And  when  our  Chauncellours  shall  send  our  adven-
ture, with  the  said  Marchants  or  their  Factors,  they  to
take  our  adventures  with  them,  and  to  sell,  &  to  barter
for  such  wares  as  shalbe  meete  for  our  Treasurie,  and
to  returne  it  into  our  Treasurie.

And  when  we  shall  sende  any  adventure  into  England
then  our  Chauncellour  to  give  them  a  yeeres  warning,
that  their  ships  may  be  provided  thereafter,  that  by
taking  in  of  our  wares,  they  leave  not  their  owne
behind them.

RUSSIA COMPANY'S PRIVILEGES  a.d.

1569.

And  to  take  our  adventure  yeerely  when  they  goe
into Persia.

Neither  shall  the  English  marchants  receive  or  colour
any  of  our  peoples  goods,  nor  barter  nor  sell  it  in  any
wise  :  likewise  our  people  not  to  barter  for  the  sayd
English  marchants  or  occupy  for  them,

3  And  when  they  shall  come  into  our  Empire  of
Casan  and  Astracan,  and  other  places  of  our  Dominions,
then  our  Captaines  of  Casan  and  Astracan,  and  our
authorised  people,  quietly  to  let  them  passe,  not  taking
any  toll  or  custome  of  their  wares,  nor  once  to  make
search  thereof.

And  when  we  shal  send  no  adventure  with  them,  yet
to  suffer  them  freely  to  passe,  not  viewing  their  wares,
nor  taking  any  kinde  of  custome.  And  whatsoever
English  marchant  will  bargaine  with  our  Marchants  or
Factors  ware  for  ware  to  barter  the  same  at  their  pleasure.

And  whatsoever  their  Marchant  or  Factors  will  sell
their  wares  at  their  house  at  Mosco,  which  house  I
granted  them  at  S.  Maxims  at  the  Mosco,  they  to  sel
the  ware  to  our  people,  either  strangers  as  they  may
best  utter  it,  keeping  within  their  house,  arshines,
measures, and waights under scales.

4  We  have  granted  them  the  saide  house  at  S.  Maxims
in  the  halfe  free,  and  without  standing  rent,  as  heretofore
we  did  graunt  it  the  said  English  Marchants,  sir  Wil.
Garrard,  and  the  Company,  maintayning  in  the  said
house  one  housekeeper  a  Russe,  and  two  Russe  servants,
or  some  of  their  owne  countrey  men,  and  none  other
Russes  besides  the  aforesayde.  And  the  said  house-
keepers that  shal  live  at  their  house  with  the  English
marchants,  neither  to  buy  nor  sel  any  wares  for  them,
but  that  the  said  marchants  themselves  or  their  factors,
shall  buy,  sell,  and  barter  their  owne  wares  :  and  our
Moscovie  marchants  not  to  take  the  said  Englishmens
wares  to  sell  them  in  our  townes,  nor  to  buy  any  wares
for  them,  neither  the  English  marchant  to  colour  any
Russes  wares  at  any  towne.

Ill

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

5  And  whatsoever  English  marchant  will  sell  his  wares
at  Colmogorod,  Dwyna,  Vologda,  Yeraslave,  Castran,
Novogorod  the  lower,  Casan,  Astracan,  Novogrod  the
great,  Vopsko,  the  Narve,  Vriagorod,  or  at  any  other
townes,  they  to  sel  their  wares  there  at  their  pleasure  :
And  of  all  wares  aswell  of  other  countreis  as  of  Russia,
no  officer  or  other  to  take  any  custome,  neither  in  any
place  to  stay  them  in  any  wise,  neither  take  any  kinde
of  toll  of  them  for  their  wares  whatsoever.

6  And  whatsoever  marchant  shall  bargaine  or  buy  any
wares  of  English  marchants  :  The  said  Russe  not  to
returne  those  wares  upon  the  marchants  hands  againe,
but  to  give  ready  money  for  the  said  wares,  otherwise
they  to  crave  the  Justice  to  give  right,  and  to  execute
the  lawe  upon  the  same  with  all  expedition. And  when

[I.  380.]  the  English  marchants  or  factors  shal  travaile  from
Moscovie  after  the  dispatch  of  their  wares  and  businesse,
then  to  shew  themselves  unto  our  Chancellours,  whatso-
ever wares  of  theirs  shall  goe  from  Mosco,  they  not  to
shew  the  same  wares  to  any  our  officers,  nor  pay  no
custome  nor  toll  in  any  place.

7  If  it  so  happen  the  English  marchants  have  any
wracke,  and  the  shippes  be  brought  to  any  port  of
our  Dominions,  we  to  command  the  said  goods  to  be
enquired  and  sought  out,  and  to  be  given  to  the  English
merchants,  being  here  abiding  at  that  time  in  our
Countrey,  the  factors,  servants,  or  deputies,  of  the
Company  aforesayd,  to  whom  we  have  granted  this  our
gratious  letter.

And  if  there  happen  none  of  the  English  merchants,
factors,  servants,  or  deputies  to  be  in  our  Countreis  at
such  time,  then  we  wil  all  the  said  goods  to  be  sought
out  and  bestowed  in  some  convenient  place,  and  when
any  of  the  Company  aforewritten,  bringing  these  our
letters,  shall  come  for  their  goods,  we  to  command  their
goods  to  be  restored  unto  them.

8  Likewise  wee  have  graunted  leave  to  the  English
merchants, their Governours, Consuls, and assistants,

side.

RUSSIA COMPANY'S PRIVILEGES  a.d.

1569.

namely,  sir  William  Garrard  knight,  Rowland  Hayward,
and  to  the  Companie,  to  builde  houses  at  Vologda,
Colmogro,  and  the  seaside,  at  Ivangorod,  at  Cherell,  and
in  all  other  places  of  our  Dominions,  as  shall  be  needefull
for  their  trade.  And  they  to  keepe  at  the  said  house  one
housekeeper,  a  Russe,  and  two  or  three  men  to  keepe
their  wares  at  the  said  houses,  making  sale  thereof  to
whom  they  will,  they,  their  Factors  or  deputies :  the  said
housekeeper  not  to  buy  or  sell  for  them.

9  Also  we  have  given  and  graunted  to  the  English
Merchants,  their  house  which  they  have  by  our  good-
nesse  at  S.  Maximes  in  the  Zenopski,  and  other  their
houses  in  the  towne  of  Zenopski,  made  for  the  better
assurance  of  their  goods,  and  all  such  as  they  shall  set  up
hereafter  shal  be  of  the  II  Opressini,  and  will  make  them  il.^^'  ^'^"■^^'^
knowen  to  all  them  of  Opressini.

10  And  whereas  by  our  goodnes  we  have  graunted
them  a  Ropehouse  at  Vologda,  being  farre  from  the  Eng-
lish Merchants  house,  now  we  have  given  them  to  build  a
house  for  that  use  by  the  said  English  house,  and  have
given  and  graunted  them  (of  our  goodnesse)  ground,  one
hundreth  and  fourescore  fadome  long,  and  fiftie  fadomes
in  breadth,  according  to  their  owne  request.

1 1  Also,  we  have  of  our  goodnesse  given  and  graunted
to  the  English  Merchants,  leave  to  buy  them  a  house
at  Wichida,  and  there  to  search  out  mines  of  yron.  And
where  they  shal  happily  find  it,  there  to  set  up  houses
for  the  making  of  the  same  yron :  and  to  make  the  same,
of  our  goodnesse  have  graunted  them  woods,  five  or  sixe
miles  compasse  about  the  sayd  houses,  to  the  making
of  the  sayd  yron,  and  not  to  exceede  these  bounds  and
limits :  And  where  they  shall  cut  the  sayde  wood,  not
to  set  up  any  village  or  farme  there,  bringing  the  artificers
for  making  of  their  yron,  out  of  their  owne  Countrey,
and  to  learne  our  people  that  arte,  and  so  freely  occupying
the  said  yron  in  these  our  Dominions,  transporting  also
of  the  same  home  into  Englande,  allowing  for  every
pound  one  dingo,  or  halfe  penie.

HI  113  H

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

12  And  if  any  of  the  said  yron  shalbe  needfull  for
our  workes,  then  we  to  take  of  the  said  yron  to  our
worke,  upon  agreement  of  price,  paying  money  out  of
our  Treasurie  for  the  same :  And  when  the  said  English
Merchants  or  Factors  shal  send  their  owne  people  out
of  our  Realme  into  their  Countrey,  over  land  through
any  Countrey  whatsoever,  freely  to  send  the  same  with
our  words.

13  Also,  we  of  our  goodnesse  have  graunted,  that  if
any  man  misuse  the  said  English,  the  Factors  or  servants,
or  the  saide  English  Merchants,  their  Factors  or  servants
abuse  any  other  at  Moscovie,  or  any  other  out  townes
whatsoever  within  our  Dominions  in  trade  of  Marchan-
dise  or  otherwise,  then  they  to  have  upright  justice  in
all  such  matters  of  our  counsaile  the  Opressini  without
all  let  or  delay  :  But  if  our  Justice  may  not  agree  the
parties,  then  lots  to  be  made,  and  to  whose  lotte  it  shall
fall,  to  him  the  right  to  be  given,  and  that  only  our
counsaile  at  Moscovie,  and  none  of  our  Captaines,  or
authorised  people,  or  officers  in  any  other  our  townes,
give  judgement  upon  the  said  English  Merchants  for
any  thing.

14  Also,  if  any  stranger  shall  have  matter  of  contro-
versie  with  any  English  Merchant,  Factor  or  servant,  i
abiding  within  these  our  Realmes,  or  contrariwise  any
English  Merchant,  Factor  or  servant,  against  any  other
stranger,  in  all  those  causes  our  Counsaile  of  the
Opressini,  to  give  them  Justice,  and  to  make  an  agree-
ment &  end  betweene  the  parties,  without  all  delay :
And  none  to  deale  therein,  save  our  Counsaile  of  the
Opressini.  1 5  And  if  any  man  have  action  against  any
English  Merchant  being  absent,  that  then  in  his  absence
it  shalbe  lawful  for  any  other  Englishman  at  his  assigna-
tion to  answere  his  cause.

16  If  any  Englishman  happen  to  be  wounded  or
beaten  to  death,  or  any  Russe  or  stranger  slaine  or
beaten,  17  Or  any  stoUen  goods  to  be  found  in  the
said  English houses,  then  our  Counsellers  to  cause  the

114

RUSSIA COMPANY'S PRIVILEGES  a.d.

1569.

guiltie  persons  to  be  sought  out,  and  to  doe  right  and
Justice  in  the  cause,  and  the  partie  that  is  guiltie,  if  he
deserve  punishment,  to  be  corrected  accordingly  after
his  offence :  That  the  said  English  Merchants,  factors
and  servant,  sustaine  thereby  no  hinderance  or  damage.

18  And  whatsoever  English  Marchant,  Factor,  servant,  [I.  381-]
or deputie, shalbe guiltie of  any fault, deserving our
displeasure,  then our Counsellers to cause the guiltie

partie  to  goe  under  suerties,  and  their  goods  to  be
sealed  and  kept,  untill  our  pleasure  be  further  knowen,
and  our  Counsaile  to  examine  their  offence,  and  so  to
report  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  command  what  shall  be
done  therein,  and  none  other  to  be  arrested  or  have
their  goods  sealed,  which  are  not  guiltie  of  that  offence,
nor  to  stay  or  apprehend  them  in  any  of  our  Dominions
for the same.

19  If  any  English  Marchant,  Factor  or  servant
shall  offend,  it  shalbe  lawfull  for  their  Agent  to  doe
justice  upon  the  said  partie,  or  to  send  him  home  into
England  at  his  pleasure.

20  If  any  English  Marchant,  Factor  or  servant,  have
lent  or  hereafter  shall  lende  money  to  any  of  our  people,
or  credite  them  with  wares,  and  so  depart  into  any
forreigne  Countrey,  or  die  before  the  debt  be  due  to
be  payde,  then  our  people  and  Marchants  to  paye  the
sayde  debt,  to  whom  soever  shall  be  appointed  to  the
sayd  roome  or  charge,  and  the  saide  English  Marchant,
factor,  or  servant,  to  bring  his  bill  of  debt  to  our
Counsell,  to  shewe  them  what  is  due,  and  what  money
is  owing  them  for  any  wares :  and  thus  to  doe  truly,  not
adding  any  whit  to  the  debt,  and  our  Counsel  to
command  the  debt  to  be  discharged  unto  the  English
Marchant,  factor,  or  servant,  without  delay.

2 1  And  whatsoever  English  Marchant  shall  be  arrested
for  debt,  then  our  Counsell  to  command  the  partie  under
arrest  to  be  delivered  to  the  Agent :  and  if  he  have
no  suertie,  to  binde  the  Agent  with  him,  for  the  better
force  of  the  bond.

115

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

And  if  any  Englishman  be  endebted,  we  will  the
Creditor  not  to  cast  him  in  prison,  or  to  deliver  himi
to  the  Sergeant,  lest  the  officer  lose  him,  but  to  take
ware  in  pawne  of  the  debt.

11  Also  of  our  goodnes,  we  have  granted  the  English
Marchants  to  send  our  Commission  to  all  our  Townes,
Captaines,  and  authorised  men,  to  defende  and  garde  the
said  Marchants  from  all  theeves,  robbers,  and  evill  dis-
posed persons.

23  If  in  comming  or  going  to  and  fro  our  dominions,
the  Marchants,  the  factors,  or  servants  be  spoyled  on  the
sea,  our  Counsell  shall  send  our  letters,  and  will  them
to  be  sought  out,  and  where  they  shall  finde  the  goods,
cause  it  to  be  restored  againe,  and  the  offender  to  be
punished,  according  to  our  commandement.

24  Also  of  our  goodnes,  we  have  granted  the  saide
Merchants  to  take  up  Brokers,  Packers,  Wayers,  and
such  like  labourers,  as  shall  be  needefull  for  them,  paying
for  their  hier  as  the  labourers  and  they  shall  agree.

25  We  likewise  of  our  goodnes,  have  licensed  the
English  Marchants  in  our  Townes  of  Mosco,  Novogorod
the  great,  and  Plesko,  that  the  Coiners  of  the  said
Townes  shall  melt  Dollers,  and  coine  money  for  them,
without  custome,  allowing  for  coales,  and  other  neces-
saries, with  the  workemanship.

26  Also  of  our  goodnes,  we  have  granted  to  the  sayd
English  Merchants,  to  take  poste  horse  at  needfull  times,
leaving  with  our  officers  a  note  how  many  they  take,
and  not  else,  in  no  case  hindering  or  diminishing  our
treasurie.

27  Also  for  our  sister  Queene  Elizabeths  sake,  we  of
our  goodnes  have  granted  to  the  merchants  within
written,  this  our  letter,  and  to  their  successors,  that  no
Englishman,  nor  any  other  stranger,  come  without  the
Queenes  leave  to  Colmogorode,  the  river  of  Vob,
Vasiagy,  Pechora,  Cola,  Mezena,  Pechingo,  Zelevetskyes
Island,  the  river  of  Shame,  nor  to  no  other  haven  of
Dwina, nor to any part of  the northside of Dwina

116

RUSSIA COMPANY'S PRIVILEGES  ad.

1569.

by  hetherward  of  Wardhouse,  to  any  haven,  with
shippe,  Busse,  or  any  other  vessell,  nor  to  occupie  in
any  kind  of  waies,  but  only  the  said  English  companie,
and  their  successors,  to  whom  we  of  our  goodnes  have
granted  this  priviledge.

28  Also  that  no  English  Merchant,  without  the
Queenes  leave,  shall  come  with  any  wares,  to  the  Narve,
or  Uriogorod.

29  And  whatsoever  English  Merchant,  stranger,  or
other,  of  whatsoever  Countrey  he  be,  shall  come  with  any
shippe,  Busse,  or  any  other  vessel,  to  any  of  the  said
havens,  of  the  north  side,  to  any  part  of  Dwina,  by
North  the  Narve,  or  Uriogorod,  without  the  Queenes
leave  or  knowledge,  not  being  of  the  company  above
written,  we  to  apprehende  and  take  the  same  vessell  from
those  strangers  and  Merchants,  the  one  halfe  to  us  the
Emperour,  and  great  Duke,  and  the  other  halfe  to  the
company  of  English Merchants.

30  Also  of  our  goodnes  we  have  granted  the  said
company  of  English  merchants,  that  no  English  mer
chants  or  strangers  shall  passe  through  our  dominions,
to  Boghar,  Persia,  Casbin,  Charday,  or  other  Countreys,
save  onely  the  company  of  English  merchants,  and  our
owne  messengers.

31  Also  whatsoever  Englishman,  comming  out  of
England  or  any  other  Countrey,  into  our  dominions,
without  the Queenes leave, and knowledge, not  being

of  the  sayd  company,  written  within  those  our  letters,  [l.  382.]
mind,  and  purpose,  to  abide  in  our  realme,  contrary  to
the  Queenes  will  and  pleasure,  or  any  way  abuse  himselfe,
the  Agent  shall  freely  send  him  home,  to  the  Queene  his
Soveraigne  :  which  if  the  Agent  of  himselfe  be  unable
to  do,  let  him  pray  for  ayd  of  the  captaines  and  officers
of  our  townes  there  being,  and  so  send  him  to  prison,
and  will  the  sayd  captaines  not  to  hinder  the  sayd  Agent
from  sending  home  such  evill  persons  into  England.

32  And  if  any  man  within  our  countrey  runne  away
to  any  other  towne  or  place,  the  English  merchants  and

117

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

factours,  to  have  free  libertie  to  apprehend  him,  and  take
their  goods  from  him  againe.

33  And  as  for  our  privilege  given  to  Thomas  Glover,
Ralfe  Rutter,  Christopher  Bennet,  John  Chappell,  and
their  adherents,  we  have  commanded  the  same  privileges
to  be  taken  from  them.

34  Also  we  of  our  goodnesse  have  granted  the  sayd
company  of  English  merchants,  their  successours,  servants
and  deputies,  that  doe  or  shall  remaine  at  Mosco,  or
elsewhere  within  our  dominions  freely  to  keepe  their
owne  law  :  and  in  any  wise  none  of  ours  to  force  them
to  our  law  or  faith  against  their  will.

Moreover,  besides  and  with  the  company  of  English
merchants,  we  permit  all  strangers,  to  trade  to  our
towne  of  Narve,  Ivanogorod,  &  other  our  townes  of
Liefland,  as  they  have  done  beforetime.  Given  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  7077,  in  the  moneth  of  June  20,
Indiction  12,  the  yere  of  our  lordship  and  reign  25)  ^^d
of  our  Empire  of  Rusland  23,  Cazan  17,  Astracan  15.

Other special! grants by his Majesties private
letters  at  the  sute  of  M.  Randolfe  Ambassadour.

Eleasement  out  of  prison of  Fitzherbert, that  was
accused  for  writing  of  letters  against  the  Emperour.

Liberty  given  to  Thomas  Greene  that  was  accused
and  troubled  upon  suspition  of  his  dealing  with  the
Ambassadour,  and  licence  given  to  him  to  trafficke  as
he  was  accustomed.

Andrew  Atherton  and  his  sureties  released  at  the
Narve  and  his  servant  at  the  Mosco,  that  were  in  trouble
for  sending  the  merchants  letters  into  England.

A  letter  granted  to  Thomas  Southam  to  the  Councell,
for  justice  against  them  that  stole  the  pearles.

His  Majesties  favor  promised  to  the  Artificers,  and
livings  to  be  appointed  them  as  they  can  best  deserve.

A  letter  to  the  merchants  that  went  into  Persia,  to
passe  freely  without  impeachment  in  his  dominions,  as
also  letters  of  favour  to  the  great  Shaugh  of  Persia.

118

COMMISSION TO BASSENDINE

A  grant  unto  the  company  that  at  what  time  soever
they  send  to  the  discovery  of  Cataya,  they  shalbe  licenced
to  repaire  unto  this  countrey,  and  have  such  conducts
and  guides,  mariners,  vessels,  men  and  victuals  as  they
shall  stand  in  need  of.

It  is  also  promised  by  Knez  Alfanas,  and  Peter
Gregoriwich  in  the  Emperours  name,  that  if  Benet  Butler
or  any  English  man  complaine,  deface,  hinder  in  way
of  traffike  or  otherwise  go  about  to  discredit  the  wor-
shipfull  company,  and  their  doings,  that  therein  they
shall  not  be  heard,  and  the  doers  to  be  punished,  as
in  such  cases  they  shalbe  judged  to  have  deserved.

Certaine  persons  granted  to  be  sent  home  into  Eng-
land that  served  the  company,  and  were  practisers  against
them  in  that  countrey.

A  Commission  given  by  us  Thomas  Randolfe
Ambassadour  for  the  Queenes  Majestie  in
Russia,  and  Thomas  Bannister,  &c.  unto  James
Bassendine,  James  Woodcocke  and  Richard
Browne,  the  which  Bassendine,  Woodcocke,
and  Browne  we  appoint  joyntly  together,  and
aiders,  the  one  of  them  to  the  other,  in  a
voyage  of  discovery  to  be  made  (by  the  grace
of  God)  by  them,  for  searching  of  the  sea,
and  border  of  the  coast,  from  the  river  Pec-
hora, to  the  Eastwards,  as  hereafter  followeth
Anno 1588. The  first  of  August.

Nprimis,  when  your  barke  with  all  furni-
ture is  ready,  you  shall  at  the  beginning
of  the  yere  (assoone  as  you  possibly
may)  make  your  repaire  to  the  Easterne
part  of  the  river  Pechora,  where  is  an
Island  called  Dolgoieve,  and  from  thence
you  shall  passe  to  the  Eastwards  alongst
by the Sea coast of  Hugorie, or the maine  land of

A.D.

1588.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Pechora,  and  sailing  alongst  by  the  same  coast,  you
shall  passe  within  seven  leagues  of  the  Island  Vaigats,
which  is  in  the  straight,  almost  halfe  way  from  the  coast
[I.  383.]  of  Hugorie,  unto  the  coast  of  Nova  Zembla,  which
Island  Vaigats  and  Nova  Zembla  you  shall  finde  noted
in  your  plat,  therefore  you  shall  not  need  to  discover
it  :  but  proceed  on  alongst  the  coast  of  Hugory,  towards
the  river  Obba.

There  is  a  Bay  betweene  the  sayd  Vaigats,  and  the
river  Obba,  that  doth  bite  to  the  Southwards,  into  the
land  of  Hugory,  in  which  Bay  are  two  small  rivers.
Cava  Reca.  the  One  called  Cara  Reca,  the  other  Naramsy,  as  in  the
Naranm  paper  of  notes  which  are  given  to  you  herewith  may
appeare  :  in  the  which  Bay  you  shall  not  need  to  spend
any  time  for  searching  of  it,  but  to  direct  your  course
to  the  river  Ob  (if  otherwise  you  be  not  constrained  to
keepe  alongst  the  shore)  and  when  you  come  to  the
river  Ob  you  shall  not  enter  into  it,  but  passe  over
unto  the  Easterne  part  of  the  mouth  of  the  sayd
river.

And  when  you  are  at  the  Easterne  part  of  the  mouth
of  Obba  Reca,  you  shall  from  thence  passe  to  the  East-
wards, alongst  by  the  border  of  the  sayd  coast,  describing
the  same  in  such  perfect  order  as  you  can  best  do  it.
You  shall  not  leave  the  sayd  coast  or  border  of  the  land,
but  passe  alongst  by  it,  at  least  in  sight  of  the  same,
untill  you  have  sailed  by  it  so  farre  to  the  Eastwards,  and
the  time  of  the  yeere  so  farre  spent,  that  you  doe  thinke
it  time  for  you  to  returne  with  your  barke  to  Winter,
which  travell  may  well  be  300  or  400  leagues  to  the
Eastwards  of  the  Ob,  if  the  Sea  doe  reach  so  farre  as
our  hope  is  it  doth  :  but  and  if  you  finde  not  the  said
coast  and  sea  to  trend  so  farre  to  the  Eastwards,  yet
you  shall  not  leave  the  coast  at  any  time,  but  proceed
alongst  by  it,  as  it  doth  lie,  leaving  no  part  of  it  un-
searched,  or  scene,  unlesse  it  be  some  bay,  or  river,
that  you  doe  certeinly  know  by  the  report  of  the  people,
that  you  shall  finde  in  those  borders,  or  els  some  certeine

COMMISSION TO BASSENDINE  ad.

1588.

tokens  whereby  you  of  your  selves  may  judge  it  to
be  so.  For  our  hope  is  that  the  said  border  of  land
and  sea  doth  in  short  space  after  you  passe  the  Ob,
incline  East,  and  so  to  the  Southwards.  And  therefore
we  would  have  no  part  of  the  land  of  your  starreboord
side,  as  you  proceed  in  your  discovery,  to  be  left  un-
discovered.

But  and  if  the  said  border  of  land  do  not  incline  so
to  the  Eastwards  as  we  presuppose  it,  but  that  it  doe
prove  to  incline  and  trend  to  the  Northwards,  and  so
joyne  with  Nova  Zembla,  making  the  sea  from  Vaigats
to  the  Eastwards  but  a  bay  :  yet  we  will  that  you  do
keepe  alongst  by  the  said  coast,  and  so  bring  us  certaine
report  of  that  forme  and  maner  of  the  same  bay.

And  if  it  doe  so  prove  to  be  a  bay,  and  that  you
have  passed  round  about  the  same,  and  so  by  the
trending  of  the  land  come  backe  unto  that  part  of  Nova
Zembla  that  is  against  Vaigats,  whereas  you  may  from
that  see  the  said  Island  Vaigats,  if  the  time  of  the  yeere
will  permit  you,  you  shall  from  thence  passe  alongst
by  the  said  border  and  coast  of  Nova  Zembla  to  the
Westwards,  and  so  to  search  whether  that  part  of  Nova
Zembla  doe  joyne  with  the  land  that  sir  Hugh  Willough-
bie  discovered  in  anno  ^^j  ^^^  is  ^^  7^  degrees,  and
from  that  part  of  Nova  Zembla  120  leagues  to  the
Westwards,  as  your  plat  doeth  shew  it  unto  you  :  and
if  you  doe  finde  that  land  to  joyne  with  Nova  Zembla,
when  you  come  to  it,  you  shall  proceed  further  along
the  same  coast,  if  the  time  of  the  yere  will  permit  it,
and  that  you  doe  thinke  there  will  be  sufficient  time  for
you  to  returne  backe  with  your  barke  to  Winter  either
at  Pechora  or  in  Russia,  at  your  discretion  :  for  we  refer
the  same  to  your  good  judgements,  trusting  that  you
will  lose  no  time,  that  may  further  your  knowledge
in  this  voyage.

Note  you,  it  was  the  20  of  August,  ^6  yer  the  Serch-
thrift  began  to  returne  backe  from  her  discoverie,  to
Winter in Russia,  and then she  came  from  the  Island

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

VaigatSj  being  forcibly  driven  from  thence  with  an  Easterly
winde  and  yce,  and  so  she  came  into  the  river  Dwina,
and  arrived  at  Colmogro  the  1 1  of  September,  56.  If
the  yce  had  not  bene  so  much  that  yere  as  it  was  in  the
Streights,  on  both  sides  of  the  Island  Vaigats,  they  in
the  said  pinnesse  would  that  yeere  have  discovered  the
parts  that  you  are  now  sent  to  seeke :  which  thing  (if  it
had  pleased  God)  might  have  bene  done  then  :  but  God
hath  reserved  it  for  some  other.  Which  discoverie,  if
it  may  be  made  by  you,  it  shall  not  only  prove  profitable
unto  you,  but  it  will  also  purchase  perpetuall  fame  and
renowme  both  to  you  and  our  countrey.  And  thus  not
doubting  of  your  willing  desires,  and  forwardnesse  towards
the  same,  we  pray  God  to  blesse  you  with  a  lucky  be-
ginning, fortunate  successe,  and  happily  to  end  the  same.
Amen.

Necessarie  notes  to  be  observed,  and  followed in
your  discoverie,  as  hereafter  followeth.

Hen  your  barke  with  all  furniture  and  necessaries
shall  be  in  readinesse  for  you  to  depart  to  the  sea

^  (if  it  be  that  you  take  your  barke  at  S.  Nicholas,
or  any  part  of  Dwina  Reca)  you  shall  from  thence,  even
as  timely  in  the  spring  as  the  yce  will  permit  you,  saile,
[I.  384.]  &  make  all  expedition  that  may  be,  unto  the  mouth  of
the  river  Pechora  (as  your  commission  doth  leade  you)
and  as  you  passe  by  the  coast  all  alongst  (notwithstanding
the  plat  that  sheweth  you  the  description  of  the  said
coast,  from  Dwina  unto  Vaigats)  yet  you  shall  seeke  by
all  the  meanes  that  you  can,  to  amend  the  same  plat,
using  as  many  observations,  as  you  possibly  can  do  :  and
these  notes  following  are  to  be  observed  by  you  princi-
pally.

1  First,  that  you  do  observe  the  latitude  as  often,  and
in  as  many  places  as  you  may  possibly  do  it,  noting
diligently  the  place  where  you  do  so  observe  the  same.

2  Also  that  you  doe  diligently  set  with  your  compasse,
how  the  land  doth  lie  from  point  to point,  all alongst

COMMISSION TO BASSENDINE  a.d.

1588.

as  you  goe,  and  to  use  your  judgements  how  farre  there

may  be  betweene  ech  of  them.

3  Item,  that  you  do  alwayes  use  to  draw  the  proportion
and  biting  of  the  land,  aswell  the  lying  out  of  the  points,
and  headlands,  unto  the  which  you  shall  give  some  apt
names  (at  your  discretion)  as  also  the  forme  of  the  Bayes,
and  to  make  some  marke  in  drawing  the  forme,  and
border  of  the  same,  where  the  high  cliffes  are,  and  where
low  land  is,  whether  sandy  hilles,  or  whatsoever :  omit
not  to  note  any  thing  that  may  be  sensible  and  apparant
to  you,  which  may  serve  to  any  purpose.

4  In  passing  along  by  any  coast,  that  you  keepe  your
lead  going  often  times,  and  sound  at  the  least  once  every
glasse,  and  oftener  if  you  thinke  good  as  occasion  doth
serve,  and  note  diligently  the  depth  with  the  maner  of
the  ground,  and  at  every  time,  how  farre  the  same
sounding  may  be  from  the  next  shore  to  it :  and  how
the  next  point  or  headland  doth  beare  from  you.  And
in  the  sea  after  you  set  off  from  your  port,  you  shall
orderly  at  the  end  of  every  foure  glasses  sound,  and  if
you  finde  ground,  note  the  depth  and  what  ground,  but
if  you  can  finde  no  ground,  you  shall  also  note  in  what
depth  you  could  find  no  ground.

5  Also  that  you  do  diligently  observe  the  flowing,  &
ebbing  in  every  place,  and  how  the  tides  do  set,  which
way  the  flood  doth  come,  and  how  much  water  it  doth
high  in  every  place,  and  what  force  the  same  tide  hath
to  drive  a  ship  in  an  houre,  as  neere  as  you  can  judge  it.

6  Also  that  you  doe  seeke  to  observe  with  the  instru-
ment which  I  deliver  you  herewith,  according  as  I  taught
you  at  Rose  Island,  the  true  platformes,  and  distances,
in  as  many  places  as  conveniently  you  may,  for  it  serveth
very  aptly  your  purpose.

7  Also  that  you  take  with  you  paper  and  ynke,  and
keepe  a  continuall  jour  nail  or  rememberance  day  by  day,
of  all  such  things  as  shall  fall  out  worth  the  knowledge,
not  forgetting  or  omitting  to  write  it,  and  note  it,  that
it  may  be  shewed  and  read  at  your  returne.

123

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

8  These  orders  if  you  shall  diligently  observe,  it  will
be  easie  for  you  to  make  a  plat  and  perfect  description
of  your  discovery,  and  so  shall  your  notes  be  sufficient
to  answere  that  which  is  looked  for  at  your  hands.  But
withall  you  may  not  forget  to  note  as  many  things  as
you  can  learne  and  understand  by  the  report  of  any
people  whatsoever  they  be,  so  that  it  appertaine  any  way
to  our  desires.  And  thus  the  Lord  God  prosper  your
voyage. Amen.

Certaine  letters  in  verse,  v^ritten  by  Master  George
Turbervile  out  of  Moscovia,  which  went  as
Secretarie  thither  with  Master  Tho.  Randolph,
her  Majesties  Ambassadour  to  the  Emperour
1568,  to  certeine  friends  of  his  in  London,
describing  the  maners  of  the  Countrey  and
people.

To  his  especiall  friend  Master  Edward  Dancie.

MY  Dancie  deare,  when  I  recount  within  my  brest,
My  London  friends,  and  wonted  mates,  and  thee
above  the  rest :
I  feele  a  thousand  fits  of  deepe  and  deadly  woe,
To  thinke  that  I  from  land  to  sea,  from  blisse  to  bale

did  go.
I  left  my  native  soile,  full  like  a  retchlesse  man.
And unacquainted of the coast, among the Russes

ran :
A  people  passing  rude,  to  vices  vile  inclinde,
Folke  fit  to  be of  Bacchus traine,  so  quaffing is their

kinde.
Drinke  is  their  whole  desire,  the  pot  is  all  their  pride,
The  sobrest  head  doth once  a  day  stand  needfull of  a

guide.
If  he  to  banket  bid  his  friends,  he  will  not  shrinke
On them at dinner to bestow a douzen kindes of
drinke :

124

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  a.d.

1568.

Such  licour  as  they  have,  and  as  the  coiintrey  gives,
But  chiefly  two,  one  called  Kvas,  whereby  the  Mousike

lives.
Small  ware  and  waterlike,  but  somewhat  tart  in  taste.
The  rest  is  Mead of  honie  made,  wherewith their  lips

they  baste.  [I.  385.]

And  if  he  goe  unto  his  neighbour  as  a  guest.
He  cares  for  litle  meate,  if  so  his  drinke  be  of  the  best.
No  wonder  though  they  use  such  vile  and  beastly  trade,
Sith  with  the  hatchet  and  the  hand,  their  chiefest  gods

be  made.
Their  Idoles  have  their  hearts,  on  God  they  never  call,
Unlesse  it  be  (Nichola Bough) that hangs against the

wall.
The  house  that  hath  no  god,  or  painted  Saint  within.
Is  not  to  be  resorted  to,  that  roofe  is  full  of  sinne.
Besides  their  private  gods,  in  open  places  stand
Their  crosses  unto  which  they  crooche,  and  blesse  them-
selves with  hand.
Devoutly downe they ducke, with forehead to the

ground.
Was  never  more  deceit  in  ragges,  and  greasie  garments

found.
Almost  the  meanest  man  in  all  the  countrey  rides.
The woman eke,  against our use, her trotting horse

bestrides.
In  sundry  colours  they  both  men  and  women  goe.
In  buskins  all,  that  money  have on buskins  to  bestoe.
Ech  woman  hanging  hath  a  ring  within  her  eare.
Which  all  of  ancient  use,  and  some of  very  pride doe

weare.
Their gate is very brave,  their countenance wise and

sadde,
And  yet  they  follow  fleshly  lustes,  their  trade  of  living

badde.
It  is  no  shame  at  all  accompted  to  defile
Anothers bedde, they make no care their follies to

concile,

125

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1568.

Is  not  the  meanest  man  in  all  the  land  but  hee,

To  buy  her  painted  colours  doeth  allow  his  wife  a  fee,

Wherewith  she deckes her selfe,  and dies her tawnie

skinne,
She pranks and paints her smoakie face, both brow,

lip,  cheeke,  &  chinne.
Yea  those  that  honest  are,  if  any  such  there  bee
Within  the  land,  doe  use  the  like :  a  man  may  plainely

see
Upon  some  womens  cheekes  the  painting  how  it  lies,
In  plaister  sort,  for  that  too  thicke her  face  the  harlot

dies.
But  such  as  skilfull  are,  and  cunning  Dames  indeede,
By dayly practise  doe it well,  yea sure they  doe ex-

ceede.
They  lay  their  colours  so,  as  he  that  is  full  wise.
May  easly  be  deceiv'd  therein,  if  he  doe  trust  his  eyes.
I not  a  little  muse,  what  madnesse  makes  them  paint
Their faces, waying how they keepe the stoove by

meere  constraint.
For  seldome  when,  unlesse  on Church  or  marriage  day
A  man  shall  see  the Dames abroade,  that are of  best

aray.
The  Russie  meanes  to  reape  the  profit  of  her  pride,
And  so  he  mewes  her  to  be  sure,  she  lye  by  no  mans

side.
Thus much, friend Dancie,  I did meane to write to

thee,
To let thee weete in Russia land, what men and

women  bee.
Hereafter  I  perhaps  of  other  things  will  write
To thee,  and other of  my  friends,  which I shall see

with  sight  :
And  other  stuffe  besides,  which  true  report  shall  tell,
Meane  while  I  ende  my  loving  lines,  and  bid  thee  now

farewell.

126

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  a.d.

1568.

To  Spencer.

IF  I  should  now  forget,  or  not  remember  thee,
Thou Spencer might'st a foule rebuke,  and  shame

impute  to  mee.
For  I  to  open  shew  did  love  thee  passing  well,
And  thou  wert  he  at  parture,  whome  I  loathde  to  bid

farewell.
And  as  I  went  thy  friend,  so  I  continue  still.
No  better proofe thou canst then this desire  of  true

good  will.
I  doe  remember  well  when  needes  I  should  away.
And  that  the Poste would licence  us,  no longer  time

to  stay  :
Thou wrongst me by the fist, and holding fast my

hand.
Didst crave of  me to send thee newes, and how I

liked  the  land.
It  is  a  sandie  soile,  no  very  fruitfull  vaine,  [I.  386.]

More waste and wooddie grounds there are, then

closes  fit  for  graine.
Yet  graine  there  growing  is,  which  they  untimely  take.
And  cut  or  eare  the  corne  be  ripe,  they  mowe  it  on  a

stacke.
And  laying  sheafe  by  sheafe,  their  harvest  so  they  dry,
They make the greater haste,  for feare the frost  the

corne  destroy.
For  in  the  winter  time,  so  glarie  is  the  ground.
As neither grasse, nor other graine,  in pastures may

be  found.
In corns the cattell then, the sheepe, the colt, the

cowe,
Fast by his bed the Mowsike then a lodging doth

allowe.
Whom he with fodder feeds, and holds as deere  as

life:
And  thus  they  weare  the  winter  with  the  Mowsike  and

his  wife.

127

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

Seven  months  the  Winter  dures,  the  glare  it  is  so  great,
As  it  is  May  before'  he  turne,  his  ground  to  sowe  his

wheate.
The  bodies  eke  that  die  unburied  lie  they  then,
Laid up in coffins made  of  firre, as well  the  poorest

men.
As  those  of  greater  state  :  the  cause  is  lightly  found,
For  that  in Winter  time,  they  cannot  come to  breake

the  ground.
And wood  so plenteous is, quite throughout all the

land.
As  rich, and  poore, at  time  of  death  assurd  of  coffins

stand.
Perhaps thou musest much,  how  this  may  stand with

reason.
That  bodies  dead  can  uncorrupt  abide  so  long  a  season.
Take  this  for  certaine  trothe,  as  soone  as  heate  is  gone.
The  force of colde the body binds as hard as any

stone.
Without  offence  at  all  to  any  living  thing :
And so they lye in perfect state,  till  next  returne  of

Spring.
Their  beasts  be  like  to  ours,  as  farre  as  I  can  see
For shape, and shewe, but somewhat lesse of  bulke,

and  bone  they  be.
Of watrish taste, the flesh not firme, like English

beefe.
And yet it serv's them very well, and is a good

releefe  :
Their sheepe  are  very  small, sharpe singled, handfull

long.
Great store of  fowle on sea and land, the moorish

reedes  among.
The  greatnes  of  the  store  doeth  make  the  prices  lesse,
Besides in all the land they know not how good

meate  to  dresse.
They use neither broach nor spit, but when the

stove  they  heate,

128

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  ad.

1568.

They put their victuals in a pan, and so they  bake

their  meate.
No  pewter  to  be  had,  no  dishes  but  of  wood,
No use  of  trenchers, cups cut out of  birche are  very

good.
They  use  but  wooden  spoones,  which  hanging  in  a  case
Eache Mowsike  at his girdle ties, and thinkes it no

disgrace.
With  whitles  two or three, the  better  man  the moe.
The chiefest Russies in the land, with spoone and

knives  doe  goe.
Their  houses  are  not  huge  of  building,  but  they  say,
They plant them in the loftiest  ground, to shift the

snow  away.
Which in the Winter time, eache where full thicke

doth  lie :
Which  makes them have  the  more  desire,  to  set  their

houses  hie.
No  stone  worke  is  in  use,  their  roofes  of  rafters  bee.
One  linked  in  another  fast,  their  wals  are  all  of  tree.
Of  masts both long, and large, v/ith mosse put in

betweene.
To  keepe  the  force  of  weather  out,  I never  earst  have

seene
A  grosse  devise  so  good,  and  on the  roofe  they  lay
The burthen barke, to rid the raine, and sudden

showres  away.
In  every  roome  a  stove,  to  serve  the  Winter  turne,
Of  wood they have sufficient store, as much as  they

can  burne.
They  have  no English  glasse,  of  slices  of  a  rocke
Hight Sluda  they  their  windowes make, that English

glasse  doth  mocke.
They  cut  it  very  thinne,  and  sow  it  with  a  thred
In  pretie  order  like  to  panes,  to  serve  their  present  need.
No  other  glasse,  good  faith  doth  give  a  better  light  :
And sure the  rocke  is nothing rich,  the cost is  very  [I,  387.]

slight.
HI  129  I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

The  chiefest  place  is  that,  where  hangs the  god  by  it,
The  owner  of  the  house  himselfe  doth  never  sit,
Unlesse  his  better  come,  to  whom he  yealds  the  seat  :
The stranger  bending to the god, the ground with

brow  must  beat.
And  in  that  very  place  which  they  most  sacred  deeme.
The stranger lies  : a token that his guest he doth

esteeme.
Where  he  is  wont  to  have  a  beares  skinne  for  his  bed.
And must,  in stead of  pillow,  clap his saddle to his

head.
In  Russia  other  shift  there  is  not  to  be  had.
For  where  the  bedding  is not  good, the boalsters are

but  bad.
I  mused  very  much,  what  made  them  so  to  lie,
Sith in their  countrey  Downe is rife,  and feathers  out

of  crie :
Unlesse  it  be  because  the  countrey  is  so  hard.
They  feare  by  nicenesse  of  a  bed  their  bodies  would  be

mard,
I  wisht  thee  oft  with  us,  save  that  I  stood  in  feare
Thou wouldst have  loathed to have layd thy  limmes

upon  a  beare.
As  I  and  Stafford  did,  that  was  my  mate  in  bed :
And  yet  (we  thanke  the  God  of  heaven)  we  both  right

well  have  sped.
Loe  thus  I  make  an  ende :  none  other  newes  to  thee.
But  that  the countrey  is too colde,  the  people  beastly

bee.
I  write  not  all  I  know,  1  touch  but  here  and  there.
For if I should, my penne would pinch, and eke

offend  I  feare.
Who  so  shall  read  this  verse,  conjecture  of  the  rest.
And thinke by reason of  our trade,  that I do thinke

the  best.
But  if  no  traffique  were,  then  could  I  boldly  pen
The  hardnesse  of  the  soile,  and  eke  the  maners  of  the(

men.

130

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  ad.

1568.

They say the Lions paw gives judgement of the

beast :
And so may  you deeme of  the great,  by  reading ot

the  least.

To  Parker. ^

MY Parker, paper,  pen, and inke were made to
write.
And  idle  heads,  that  little  do,  have  leisure  to  indite :
Wherefore,  respecting  these,  and  thine  assured  love.
If  I would  write no  newes to thee,  thou might'st  my

pen  reprove.
And  sithence  fortune  thus hath shov'd my  shippe on

shore :
And  made  me seeke another Realme unseene of  me

before :
The  maners  of  the  men  I  purpose  to  declare.
And other private points besides,  which strange and

geazon  are.
The  Russie  men  are  round  of  bodies,  fully  fac'd.
The  greatest  part  with bellies  bigge that  overhang  the

waste.
Flat  headed  for  the  most,  with  faces  nothing  faire.
But  browne,  by  reason of  the  stove,  and closenesse  of

the  aire :

[t  is  their  common  use  to  shave  or  els  to  sheare
Their  heads,  for  none  in  all  the  land  long  lolling  locks

doth  weare,
Unlesse perhaps he have his sovereigne prince dis-

pleas'd.
For  then  he  never  cuts  his  haire,  untill  he  be  appeas'd.
A  certaine  signe  to  know  who  in  displeasure  be.
For every man that viewes his head, will say, Loe
' this  is  he.

\nd  during  all  the  time  he  lets  his  locks  to  grow.
Dares no  man  for his  life  to  him  a  face of  friendship

show.
Their  garments  be  not  gay,  nor  handsome  to  the  eye,

131

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

A  cap  aloft  their  heads  they  have,  that  standeth  very  hie,
Which Colpack  they  do  terme. They  weare  no ruffes

at  all:
The best have collers set with pearle, which they

Rubasca  call.
Their shirts in Russie  long,  they  worke  them downe

before.
And on the sleeves with coloured Silks, two inches

good  and  more.
Aloft  their  shirts  they  weare  a  garment  jacket  wise
Hight  Onoriadka,  and  about  his  burlie  waste  he  tyes
[I.  388.]  His  portkies,  which  in  stead  of  better  breeches  be :

Of  linnen  cloth  that  garment  is,  no  codpiece  is  to see.
A  paire  of  yarnen  stocks  to  keepe  the  colde  away.
Within his boots the Russie  weares, the heeles they

underlay
With  clouting  clamps  of  Steele,  sharpe  pointed  at  the  toes.
And  over  all  a  Shuba  furd,  and  thus  the  Russie  goes.
Well  butned  is  the  Shube,  according  to  his  state.
Some  Silke,  of  Silver  other  some :  but  those  of  poorest

rate
Do  weare  no  Shubs  at  all,  but  grosser  gownes  to  sight,
That reacheth downe beneath the calfe, and that

Armacha  hight :
These  are  the Russies  robes. The  richest  use to ride
From place to place,  his  servant  runnes,  and  followes

by  his  side.
The  Cassacke  beares  his  felt,  to  force  away  the  raine :
Their bridles  are  not  very  brave,  their saddles  are  bull

plaine.
No  bits  but  snaffles  all,  of  birch  their  saddles  be.
Much fashioned like the Scottish  seates, broad  flake;

to  keepe  the  knee
From  sweating  of  the  horse,  the  pannels  larger  farre
And  broader be  then  ours,  they  use  short  stirrups fo:

the  warre :
For  when  the  Russie  is  pursued  by  cruel  foe.
He  rides  away,  and  suddenly  betakes  him  to  his  boe,

132

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  ad.

1568.

And  bends  me  but  about  in  saddle  as  he  sits,
And  therewithal!  amids  his  race  his  following  foe  he  hits.
Their bowes are very short, like Turkic bowes out-
right.
Of  sinowes  made  with  birchen  barke,  in  cunning  maner

dight.
Small  arrowes,  cruel  heads,  that  fell  and  forked  bee.
Which being  shot from out those bowes,  a cruel  way

will  flee.
They  seldome  use  to  shoo  their  horse,  unlesse  they  ride
In post upon  the  frozen flouds,  then cause they  shall

not  slide.
He  sets  a  slender  calke,  and  so  he  rides  his  way.
The horses of  the countrey  go good fourescore  versts

a  day.
And  all  without  the  spurre,  once  pricke  them  and  they

skippe,
But  goe  not  forward  on  their  way,  the Russie  hath  his

whippe
To  rappe  him  on  the  ribbes,  for  though  all  booted  bee,
Yet  shall  you  not  a  paire  of  spurres  in  all  the  countrey

see.
The  common  game  is  chesse,  almost  the  simplest  will
Both give  a  checke  and  eke  a  mate,  by  practise  comes

their  skill.
Againe they  dice  as  fast,  the  poorest  rogues  of  all
Will  sit  them  downe  in  open  field,  and  there  to  gaming

fall.
Their  dice  are  very  small,  in  fashion  like  to  those
Which  we  doe  use,  he  takes  them  up,  and  over  thumbe

he  throwes
Not  shaking  them  a  whit,  they  cast  suspiciously.
And  yet  I deeme them voyd of  art that dicing most

apply.
At  play  when  Silver  lacks,  goes  saddle,  horse  and  all.
And eche thing els worth Silver  walkes,  although the

price  be  small.
Because  thou  lovest  to  play  friend  Parker  other  while,

^33

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

I  wish  thee  there  the  weary  day  with  dicing  to  beguile.
But  thou  weart  better  farre  at  home,  I  wist  it  well,
And  wouldest be loath among  such lowts  so long a

time  to  dwell.
Then  judge  of  us  thy  friends,  what  kinde  of  life  we  had,
That neere  the frozen  pole to waste  our weary  dayes

were  glad.
In  such  a  savage  soile,  where  lawes  do beare  no  sway,
But  all  is  at the king  his  will,  to  save  or  els  to  slay.
And  that  sans  cause,  God  wot,  if  so  his  minde  be  such.
But  what  meane  I  with  Kings  to  deale  ?  we  ought  no

Saints  to  touch.
Conceive the rest your selfe, and deeme what lives

they  lead.
Where lust is Lawe, and Subjects  live  continually in

dread.
And  where  the  best  estates  have  none  assurance  good
Of  lands,  of  lives,  nor  nothing  falles  unto  the  next  of

blood.
But  all  of  custome  doeth  unto  the  prince  redowne,
[I.  389.]  And all the  whole revenue  comes unto the King  his

crowne.
Good  faith  I  see  thee  muse  at  what  I  tell  thee  now.
But  true  it  is,  no  choice,  but  all  at  princes  pleasure  bow.
So  Tarquine  ruled  Rome  as  thou  remembrest  well,
And what his fortune  was at last, I know thy selfe

canst  tell.
Where will in Common weale doth beare the onely

sway.
And  lust  is  Lawe,  the  prince  and  Realme  must  needs

in  time  decay.
The  strangenesse  of  the  place  is  such  for  sundry  things

1  see.
As  if  I  woulde  I  cannot  write  ech  private  point  to  thee.
The  colde  is  rare, the  people  rude,  the  prince  so  full

of  pride.
The  Realme  so  stored  with Monks and nunnes, and

priests  on  every  side  :

134

GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS  ad.

1568.

The  maners  are  so  Turkie  like,  the  men  so  full  of  guile,
The  women  wanton.  Temples  stuft  with  idols  that  defile
The  Seats  that  sacred  ought  to  be,  the  customes  are  so

quaint.
As  if  I  would  describe  the  whole,  I  feare  my  pen  would

faint.  *.

In summe, I say I never saw a prince that so did

raigne,
Nor  people so beset  with Saints, yet  all but  vile and

vaine.
Wilde  Irish  are  as  civill  as  the  Russies  in  their  kinde.
Hard choice which  is the best of  both, ech bloody,

rude  and  blinde.
If  thou  bee  wise,  as  wise  thou  art,  and  wilt  be  ruld  by  me,
Live still at home, and covet not those barbarous

coasts  to  see.
No good befalles a man that seeks, and findes no

better  place.
No civill customes  to be  learnd, where God bestowes

no  grace.
And  truely  ill  they  do  deserve  to  be  belov'd  of  God,
That  neither  love  nor  stand  in  awe  of  his  assured  rod  :
Which  though  be  long,  yet  plagues  at  last  the  vile  and

beastly  sort
Of  sinfull  wights,  that  all  in  vice  do  place  their  chiefest

sport.
A  dieu  friend  Parker,  if  thou  list,  to  know  the  Russes

well,
To  Sigismundus  booke  repaire,  who  all  the  trueth  can

tell:
For  he  long earst in message went unto that savage

King,
Sent  by  the Pole, and true report in ech respect did

bring.
To him I recommend my  selfe, to  ease  my penne  of

paine,
And now  at  last do wish thee  well, and bid farewell

againe.

135

A.D.
1568.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  fourth  voyage  into  Persia,  made  by  M.
Arthur  Edwards  Agent,  John  Sparke,  Laur-
ence Chapman,  Christopher  Faucet,  and
Richard  Pingle,  in  the  yeere  1568.  declared
in  this  letter  written  from  Casbin  in  Persia
by  the  foresaide  Laurence  Chapman  to  a
worshipfull  merchant  of  the  companie  of
Russia  in  London.  Anno  Domini  1569.
Aprill 28.

Orshipfull  sir,  my  duetie  alwayes  remem-
bred,  and  your  prosperous  health,  and
good  successe  in  all  your  affaires  wished,
to  the  glory  of  God,  and  your  owne
hearts  desire,  &c.  May  it  please  you  to
understand  that  your  Agent  M.  Arthur
Edwards  and  we  departed  from  Yera-
T heir  arrival  slave  in  July 1 568.  and the 14. of  August  arrived at

7  ^'ffATust  °^^  P°^^  ^^^^^^  ^\\\^\\  with  your  ship  the  Grace  of  God,
jt'gg  and  the  goods  in  her  in  good  safetie,  God  bee  thanked

for  it,  finding  there  neither  the  people  so  ready  to  ayd
us  for  the  bringing  of  her  in,  &  unlading  of  the  goods,
nor  yet  so  obedient  to  the  Shaughs  privilege,  as  the
worshipfull  company  have  bene  informed.  Our  goods
brought  upon  land,  we  were  compelled  to  open  &  sel
as  they  would  set  the  price,  or  otherwise  it  would  have
bene  worse  for  us.  Being  so  satisfied  to  their  content-
ment, we  were  speedily  aided  with  camels  by  the  prince
Erasbec  Sultan  his  appointment,  to  carry  our  goods  to
Shamaki,  to  which  place  we  attained  the  first  of  Sep-
tember, finding  it  so  throughly  furnished  with  all
maner  of  commodities  by  occasion  of  our  late  comming,
and  by  such  as  came  before  us,  that  no  man  would
aske  to  buy  any  one  piece  of  karsie  of  us,  and  lying
then  the  space  of  one  whole  moneth  before  your  Agent
Arthur  Edwards  would  disperse  us  abroade  with  the
goods, such as came out of Russia afterwardes, had

136

Prince
Erasbec

EDWARDS, SPARKE AND CHAPMAN  ad.

1568.
brought their goods to that and other places, and
spoyled those sales  wee might have  made, being sent
abroad  in  time  convenient,  being  no  little  hinderance  to
the worshipfull, as also great griefe unto us to see.
To conclude, through  our  dayly  calling  upon  him, he
bent  himselfe  for  Casbin,  taking'  with  him  the  greatest
summe of the goods, and two of the worshipfuls
servants,  to  witte,  John  Sparke  and  my  selfe,  to  helpe
and  procure  the  better  sale  for  the  same  :  and  leaving
at  Shamaki  Christopher  Faucet  and  Richard  Pingle  with  [I-  39°-]
three hundred and fiftie pieces of karsies in their  Christopher
handes,  supposed  to  be  solde  there  or  in  Arrash  before  ^i^^^rd
hee should be  able to make his returne from Casbin,  Pingk.
which, so  farre  foorth  as I can understand,  lie  for  the
greatest  part  unsolde. And  being  upon  our  way,  at  a
certaine  towne  called  Ardouil,  we  chanced  to  barter  nine
pieces  of  karsies  with  those  merchants  for  fourescore  and
foure  batemans  of  cynamom, selling  the  karsies  at  one
hundred  and  fiftie  shawghs  the  piece.

And  being  at  that  present  not  farre  from  Teveris,
called  the  principal  place  in  this  countrey  for  uttering
of  cloth  or  karsies,  by  much  intreatie  I  perswaded  your
Agent  to  send  thither  to  proove  what  might  be  done,
and  receiving  from  him  foure  and  fiftie  pieces  of
karsies,  as  also  his  commission  for  the  sale  of  the
same,  I  proceeded  on  that  voyage  my  selfe,  and  one
Tolmach  in  company  with  me,  finding  in  that  place
great  store  of  broad  cloth  and  karsies  brought  thither,
some  part  by  the  Turkes  who  be  resident  there,  some
by  the  Armenians,  who  fetch  them  at  Aleppo,  and
some  by  the  townesmen,  who  travell  unto  Venice  and
there  buy  them,  so  that  no  man  offered  me  one  penie
more  then  a  hundred  and  fourtie  shawghs  for  a  karsie  :
and  having  speciall  commission  and  charge  from  your
Agent  not  to  stay  there  above  the  space  of  seven  dayes
after  my  arrivall  there,  but  to  repaire  to  Casbin  with
all  speed,  and  furthermore,  having  regard  to  keepe  up
the price  of  the  worshipfuls  commodities, according to

137

A.D.

1568.

Warre  against
the  Portingah
at  Ormuz..

The  governour
of  G?-ozin  his
Merchant.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

their  desire,  I  found  meanes  to  barter  them  away  for
spices,  such  as  were  there  to  be  had,  neither  in  good-
nesse  nor  yet  in  price  to  my  content  :  neverthelesse,
considering  the  colde  sales  which  were  there,  as  well  for
your  karsies,  as  also  the  hot  newes,  that  Ormuz  way
was  shut  up  by  occasion  that  the  Indians  do  warre
against  them,  which  is  true  in  deed  :  and  againe  the
desire  that  the  worshipfuU  hath  to  have  such  commo-
dities bought,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  buy  them,  the
prices  and  weight  whereof  appeareth  at  large  by  my
accompt  sent  to  the  worshipfuU,  and  is,  as  I  thinke,
the  whole  summe  of  spices  bought  at  this  time.

It  chanced  me  in  that  place  to  meet  with  the  gover-
nours  merchant  of  Grozin,  who  was  not  a  litle  desirous
to  bargen  with  me  for  a  hundred  pieces  of  karsies  for
his  master  called  Levontie,  and  offering  me  so  good
bands  for  the  paiment  of  the  money  or  silke  to  the
merchants  contentment  upon  the  delivery  of  them,  as  in
any  place  within  all  this  countrey  is  to  be  had  :  and
offering  me  besides  his  owne  letter  in  the  behalfe  of
his  master,  that  no  custome  should  be  demanded  for
the  same,  and  the  obtaining  also  at  his  masters  hand
as  large  a  priviledge  for  the  worshipful  to  travel  into
all  parts  of  his  dominion,  as  the  Shaugh  had  given
them,  and  hearing  good  report  made  of  him  by  the
Armenians  also,  and  that  he  was  a  Christian,  I  was
much  more  the  willing  to  bargen  with  him,  and  sold
him  a  hundred  pieces  for  a  hundred  and  threescore
shawghs  a  piece,  to  be  paid  to  the  merchant  in  Grozin
either  in  money  or  silke  to  his  contentment,  within
three  dayes  after  the  deliverie  of  the  karsies  there,
having  a  band  of  him  made  by  the  Metropolitanes  owne
hand,  for  the  performance  of  the  same,  which  is  as
sure  as  any  here  is  to  be  devised  :  and  upon  the  same
I  sent  my  Tolmach  from  me  backe  to  Shamaki,  with
such  goods  as  I  bought  at  Teveris,  and  to  the  end  hee
might  cause  the  worshipfuls  servants  there  to  see  this
bargen  accomplished. At  whose  arrivall  there,  as  I do

138

EDWARDS, SPARKE AND CHAPMAN  ad.

1568.

perceive,  the  Captaine  would  not  accomplish  his  bargen

to take them, but saith, hee hath no need of  them  :

such  is  the  constancie  of  all  men  in  this  countrey,  with

whomsoever  you  shal  bargen. If  the  ware  be bought,

and they doe mislike it  afterwards, they  will  bring it

againe, and compel you to deliver the money for it  The  generdl^

againe,  regarding  the  Shawghs  letters,  which  manifesteth  ^«^^«-f^^««^ «»

the contrary, as a straw in the winde  : by meanes  ^nd  dealers  of

whereof,  the  worshipfuU  may  know  whether  all  be  true  those  parts.

that  hath  bene  written of  this  countrey  people  or  not.

I  am  informed  by  all  the  brokers  in  Teveris,  that
the  way  once  open  to  Ormuz,  from  whence  commeth
no  such  store  of  spices  as  the  worshipfuU  doeth  looke
for,  that  here  will  bee  put  a  way  in  Teveris,  some  for
money,  and  other  some  for  barter,  to  the  number  of
three  hundred  or  foure  hundred  pieces  of  karsies,  being
in  coulers  and  goodnesse  to  the  examples  here  sent
you,  the  rest  of  the  karsies  to  make  them  up  a  thousand,
and  broad  clothes  to  the  summe  of  a  hundred,  bee  as
many  as  will  be  put  away  yeerely  in  this  countrey,  so
farre  as  yet  I  can  perceive.

To breake the trade betwixt the Venetians  and  the  The  trade

whole company of the Armenians it is not possible,  betweene  the

unlesse  the  worshipful  will  finde  some  meanes  to  receive  J^^^J^"^  f^

_ ,  ,  ^ ,  1  r  1 the  Armenians

or  them  yerely  to  the  number  or 100.  catters  or  mules  not  easily  to  be

lading, and deliver them for the same one third  part  broken.

money,  the  rest  cloth  and  karsies  fitted  in  coulers  meete

for  this  countrey  : the examples,  as  abovesaid,  are  sent

unto  you.

At Amadia sixe dayes  journey from Teveris, grow

abundance of  galles, which are brought up  yerely  by

the  Venetians, and be solde there for two bistes  the

Teveris bateman, which as your Agent here saith,

maketh sixe pound English weight, but I doubt it

wil  not  so  be  proved. Neverthelesse  it  is  supposed  much

good  will  bee done  by  buying  of  them  :  which  might

at  this  present have partly  bene proved, if  so  be  that

some  could  do  but  halfe  that  which  hath  bene  written.

139

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

Touching  drugges,  I  finde  many  as  well  at  Teveris,
[I.  391.]  as  also  in  Casbin,  but  the  goodnesse  nothing  like  to
such  as  be  brought  into  England  out  of  other  places  :
&  the  price  is  so  high  that  smal  gaine  will  be  had  in
buying  of  them  :  albeit,  if  I  had  bene  furnished  with
money,  as  I  might  have  bene,  if  some  would,  I  would
have  bought  some,  to  the  ende  the  goodnesse  of  them
might  have  bene  seene  in  England.  At  my  comming
to  Casbin  I  found  no  maner  of  sales  of  any  commoditie
made,  but  all  lying  there  whole,  and  newes  given  out
(as  your  Agent  saith)  that  ye  Shaugh  would  buy  all  such
commodities  as  he  had,  and  give  him  silke  and  spices
for  the  same  :  but  by  report  the  Shaugh  never  tooke
cloth  into  his  treasurie  all  the  dayes  of  his  life,  and
will  not  now  begin  :  his  whole  trade  is  in  raw  silke,
which  he  selleth  alwayes  for  money  to  the  Armenians
and  Turkes,  and  such  other  as  use  to  buy  it :  thus
hoping  of  that  which  is  not  like  to  be  had,  hee  hath
driven  off  the  time,  not  sending  to  any  other  places  :  by
means  whereof  the  worshipfuls  goods  lie  unsold  to  this
day  to  their  great  hinderance,  which  I  for  my  part  am
not  a  litle  sory  to  see.
Babylon  15.  Babylon  is  from  hence  fifteene  dayes  journey,  whereas

dayes  journey  ]^^  ^^^^  report  be  great  store  of  Dates,  and  sold  for  a
'  bisse  the  batman,  the  commoditie  fit  for  England,  and
the  place  so  neere  unto  us  might  easily  have  bene
knowen,  if  hee,  whose  deeds  and  sayings  differ  much,
had  bene  willing  to  the  same.  Cassan  also  is  but  seven
dayes  journey  from  hence,  &  a  place  by  report  where
most  store  of  spices  be  at  all  times  to  be  had,  over  and
above  any  place  in  this  countrey  :  it  could  not  be  granted
by  him  to  be  seen  and  prooved  at  this  time  :  if  this  be
losse  to  the  worshipful!,  referre  it  to  the  want  of  one
which  can  do  that  which  he  speaketh  in  words.

To  travell  in  this  countrey  is  not  onely  miserable  and
uncomfortable  for  lacke  of  townes  and  villages  to  harbour
in  when  night  commeth,  and  to  refresh  men  with  whole-
some victuals in time of  need, but  also such scarsitie

140

EDWARDS, SPARKE AND CHAPMAN  ad.

1568.
of  water,  that  sometime  in  three  dayes  journey  together,
is  not  to  be  found  any  drop  fit  for  man  or  beast  to
drinke,  besides  the  great  danger  we  stand  in  for  robbing
by  these  infidels,  who  doe  account  it  remission  of  sinnes
to  wash  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  one  of  us.  Better
it  is  therefore  in  mine  opinion  to  continue  a  beggar  in
England  during  life,  then  to  remaine  a  rich  Merchant
seven  yeeres  in  this  Countrey,  as  some  shall  well  find
at  their  comming  hither.

By  commandement  of  the  Agent  also  I  went  to  Gilan,  His  voyage  to
as  well  to  see  what  harbor  was  there  for  your  ship,  as  Gz7<jw.
also  to  understand  what  commoditie  is  there  best  sold,
and  for  what  quantitie.  I  found  the  way  from  hence
so  dangerous  and  troublesome,  that  with  my  pen  I  am
not  able  to  note  it  unto  you  :  no  man  travelleth  from
hence  thither,  but  such  poore  people  as  need  constraineth
to  buy  Rice  for  their  reliefe  to  live  upon,  and  they  lay
not  above  twentie  batmans  upon  a  catter,  and  it  lieth
no  lower  then  the  skirts  of  the  saddle,  and  he  escapeth
very  hardly  that  commeth  there  with  the  same.

The  towne  of  Laighon,  which  was  the  chiefest  place
in  all  that  land,  have  I  seen,  and  Langro  and  Rosar
also,  which  be  now  overrun  by  the  Shaugh  and  his
power,  and  be  so  spoiled,  &  the  people  so  robbed,  that
not  one  of  them  is  able  to  buy  one  karsie.  The  best
commoditie  there  to  bee  bought,  is  raw  silke,  and  is  sold
in  the  Summer  time  for  38.  shaughs  the  Laighon  bat-
man, which  is  litle  above  40.  li.  waight,  and  for  ready
money  :  also  there  is  to  bee  had  what  store  of  Alom
you  will,  and  sold  there  for  one  bisse  the  Teveris
batman.

In  these partes be  many  Turkie  merchants  resident.  The  malice  of
which  give  an  outward  shew,  as  though  they  were  glad  ^^^  Turkish
of  our  comming  hither,  but  secretly  they  be  our  mortall  ^^^^f^^"^^-
enemies, searching by  all  meanes to hinder our  sales,
because  we  should  the  sooner  give  over  our  trade  thither,
which  in  processe  of  time  I hope  will  growe  to  better
perfection. They  wish us  to go to Hallape  with  the

141

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

rest  of  our  commodities  unsold,  where  they  say  we
shall  have  good  intertainment  in  spight  of  the  great
number  of  Venetians  which  be  there  resident,  and  the
custome  but  two  in  the  hundred,  and  our  karsies  to
be  sold  presently,  had  we  never  so  many,  for  twelve
duckets,  which  maketh  of  this  money  165.  shaughs  :
but  by  such  as  know  the  place,  market  and  custome,
it  is  reported  to  us  credibly  to  the  contrary,  and  that
such  karsies  as  ours  be,  are  not  sold  for  above  8.  duckets
there  :  the  custome  thirtie  in  the  hundred  and  more,
that  no  place  in  the  world  is  so  well  furnished  with
good  cloth  and  karsies,  and  of  so  brave  colour  as  that
place  is,  supposing  it  to  bee  craftily  purposed  of  them,
to  bring  us  into  trouble,  which  God  defend  us  from.
The  price  of  The  price  of  spices  be  these,  at  this  present  enhansed
sptces.  I^y.  j-eason  ye  way is shut  to  Ormus,  which  when  God

shal  send  open,  I  purpose  (God  willing)  to  see,  and  at
my  returne  to  advertise  the  worshipful  what  benefit  is
there  to  be  had  in  all  points,  so  neere  as  I  can  learne  :
Pepper  25.  shaughs  the  Teveris  batman  :  Cloves  50.
shaughs.  Long  pepper  25.  shaughs.  Maces  large  50.
shaughs.  Ginger  24.  shaughs,  ready  money  all,  or  els
looke  not  upon  them.  And  the  best  sort  of  rawe  silke
is  sold  for  60.  shaughs  the  Teveris  batman.  Thus  for
want  of  further  matter  to  inlarge,  I  ende  for  this  time,
beseeching  God  to  preserve  you  in  continuall  health.
By  your  obedient  servant,  Lawrence  Chapman.

142

RICHARD WILLES' NOTES  a.d.

1568.

Notes  concerning  this  fourth  voyage  into  Persia,  [i.  39^]
begun  in  the  moneth  of  July 1568. gathered
by M. Richard Willes from the mouth  of
Master  Arthur  Edwards,  which  was  Agent  in
the  same.

Hen  he  came  first  to  the  Sophies  presence,
at  his  court  in  Casbin,  bringing  his  in-
terpreter with  him,  and  standing  farre  off,
the  Sophie  (sitting  in  a  seat  roiall  with
a  great  number  of  his  noble  men  about
him)  bad  him  come  neere,  and  that
thrise,  until  he  came  so  neere  him  that
he  might  have  touched  him  with  his  hand.  Then  the
first  demand  that  he  asked  him  was,  from  what  countrey
he  came  :  he  answered,  that  he  came  from  England.
Then  asked  hee  of  his  noble  men,  who  knew  any  such
countrey  ?  But  when  Edwards  saw  that  none  of  them
had  any  intelligence  of  that  name,  he  named  it  Inghil-
terra,  as  the  Italians  call  England.  Then  one  of  the
noble  men  said  Londro,  meaning  thereby  London,  Londro.
which  name  is  better  knowen  in  far  countries  out  of  ^°"'^°^-
Christendom,  then  is  the  name  of  England.  When
Edwards  heard  him  name  Londro,  he  said  that  that
was  the  name  of  the  chiefe  citie  of  England,  as  was
Teveris  of  the  chiefe  city  of  Persia.  He  asked  him
many  things  more,  as  of  the  realme  of  England,  marvel-
ling that  it  should  be  an  Island  of  so  great  riches  and
power,  as  Edwards  declared  unto  him  :  of  the  riches
&  abundance  of  our  merchandize  he  further  understood
by  our  traffike  in  Moscovia  and  other  countreis.  He
demanded  also  many  things  of  the  Queenes  majestie,
and  of  the  customes  and  lawes  of  the  realme  :  saying
oftentimes  in  his  owne  language,  Bara  colla,  (that  is  to
say)  Well  sayd.  He  asked  also  many  things  of  king
Philip,  &  of  his  wars  against  the  Turke  at  Malta.
Then  he demanded  of  him  what  was  the  chiefe  cause

143

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

of  his  resort  into  his  realme.  And  being  certified  that  it
was  for  the  trade  of  merchandize,  he  asked  what  kind  of
merchandize  he  could  bring  thither.  Such  (sayd  hee)  as
the  Venetian  merchants  do,  which  dwelling  in  our  country
in  the  city  of  Londro  send  to  Venice,  &  from  thence
into  Turkie  by  Halepo  &  Tripoli  in  Syria,  from  whence,
as  by  the  second  and  third  hands,  with  great  charges  of
many  customs  and  other  things  thereunto  pertaining,  they
are  at  the  length  brought  into  your  countrey  and  cities  of
Persia.  What  merchandize  are  those  ?  sayd  the  Sophie.
Edwards  answered,  that  they  were  great  abundance  of  fine
karsies,  of  broad  clothes  of  all  sorts  &  colours,  as  skarlets,
violets,  and  other  of  the  finest  cloth  of  all  the  world.
The  Venetians  Also  that  the  Venetians  brought  out  of  England  not
traffike  tn  onely  such  clothes  ready  made,  but  furthermore  great
«<§''^«  •  plenty  of  fine  wooll  to  mingle  with  their  wools,  of  which
they  could  not  otherwise  make  fine  cloth  :  affirming  that
there  went  out  of  England  yeerly  that  waies,  above  two
hundred  thousand  karsies,  and  as  many  broad  clothes,  be-
side fine  wooll  &  other  merchandize,  beside  also  the  great
abundance  of  like  clothes,  the  which  were  caried  into
Spaine,  Barbarie,  &  divers  other  countries.  The  Sophie
then  asked  him  by  what  means  such  merchandize  might
be  brought  into  Persia.  Right  wel  sir  (said  he)  by  the
way  of  Moscovia,  with  more  safety  and  in  much  shorter
time  then  the  Venetians  can  bring  them  :  first  from
England  to  Venice,  and  from  thence  into  Persia  by  the
way  of  Turkie.  And  therefore  if  it  shal  please  your
majestie  to  grant  us  free  passage  into  all  your  dominions,
with  such  privileges  as  may  appertaine  to  the  safegard  of
our  lives,  goods  and  merchandize,  we  will  furnish  your
countries  with  all  such  merchandize  and  other  com-
modities, in  shorter  time,  and  better  cheape  then  you  may
have  the  same  at  the  Turks  hands.  This  talke  and  much
more  was  between  the  Sophie  and  Edwards  for  the  space
of  two  houres  :  all  which  things  liked  him  so  well,  that
shortly  after  he  granted  to  the  sayd  Arthur  Edwards
other  privileges  for  the  trade  of  merchandize  into  Persia,

144

RICHARD WILLES' NOTES  ad.

1568.
all  written  in  Azure  and  gold  letters,  and  delivered  unto
the  lord  keeper  of  the  Sophie  his  great  seale. The  lord
keeper  was  named  Coche  Califay,  who  sayd  that  when  the
Shaugh  (that  is  the  king  or  prince)  did  sit  to  seale  any
letters,  that  last  priviledge  should  he  sealed  &  delivered
to  Laurence  Chapman. In  this  priviledge  is  one  principall
article  for  servants  or  merchants  :  That  if  the  Agent  do
perceive that upon their naughtie doings,  they  would
become  Busormen,  that  then  the  Agent  wheresoever  he
shall  find  any  such  servant  or  servants,  to  take  them  and
put them in  prison,  and  no person  to  keepe  them or
maintaine  them. This  article  was  granted  in  respect  of  a
custome  among  the  Persians,  being  Mahumetans,  whose
maner  is  friendly  to  receive  and  wel  entertaine,  both  with
gifts  and  living, all such Christians, as forsaking  their
religion,  wil  become  of  the  religion  of  the  Persians. In-
somuch that  before  this  priviledge  was  granted,  there  was
great  occasion  of  naughty servants to deceive  and  rob
their  masters,  that  under  the  colour of  professing  that
religion,  they  might  live  among  them  in  such  safetie,  that
you  might  have  no  lawe  agaynst  them,  either  to  punish
them  or  to  recover  your  goods  at  their  hands,  or  else-
where. For  before  the  Sophie  (whom  they  say  to  be  a
marvelous  wise  and  gracious  prince)  seemed  to  favour  our
nation,  and to  grant  them such  priviledges,  the  people
abused  them  very  much,  and  so  hated  them,  that  they
would  not  touch  them,  but  reviled  them,  calling  them
Cafars and Gawars,  which is,  infidels or misbeleevers.  [I.  393.]
But  after  they  saw  how  greatly  the  prince  favoured  them,
they  had  them  afterward  in  great  reverence,  and  would
kisse  their  hands  and  use  them  very  friendly. For  before
they  tooke  it  for  no  wrong  to  rob  them,  defraud  them,
beare  false  witnesse  against  them,  and  such  merchandizes
as  they  had  bought  or  sold,  make  them  take  it  againe,
and change it as often as them listed. And if  any
stranger  by  chance  had  killed  one  of  them,  they  would
have  the  life  of  two  for  one  slaine,  and  for  the  debts  of
any  stranger  would  take  the  goods  of  any  other  of  the
III  145  K

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

same  nation,  with  many  other  such  like  abuses,  in  maner
unknowen  to  the  prince,  before  the  complaints  of  our
men  made  unto  him  for  reformation  of  such  abuses :
which  were  the  cause  that  no  merchant  strangers  of
contrary  religion  durst  come  into  his  dominions  with  their
commodities,  which  might  be  greatly  to  the  profite  of
him  and  his  subjects.

The  Articles  of  the  second  priviledge  delivered
to  Laurence  Chapman,  which  are  to  be
annexed  unto  the  former  priviledge.

10  Item,  that  the  merchants  have  free  libertie,  as  in
their  first  priviledge,  to  goe  unto  Gilan,  and  all  other
places  of  his  dominions,  now  or  hereafter  when  occasion
shall  be given.

1 1  Item,  if  by  misfortune  any  of  their  ships  should
breake,  or  fall  upon  any  part  of  his  dominions  on  the  sea
coast,  his  subjects  to  helpe  with  all  speed  to  save  the
goods  and  to  be  delivered  to  any  of  the  sayd  merchants
that  liveth  :  or  otherwise  to  be  kept  in  safetie  until  any
of  them  come  to  demaund  them.

12  Item,  if  any  of  the  said  merchants  depart  this  life  in
any  citie  or  towne,  or  on  the  high  way,  his  governours
there  to  see  their  goods  safely  kept,  and  to  be  delivered
to  any  other  of  them  that  shall  demand  them.

13  Item,  the  said  merchants  to  take  such  camel-men  as
they  themselves  wil,  being  countrey  people,  and  that  no
Kissell  Bash  do  let  or  hinder  them.  And  the  said  owners
of  the  camels  to  bee  bound  to  answere  them  such  goods
as  they  shal  receive  at  their  hands,  and  the  camel-men  to
stand  to  the  losses  of  their  camels  or  horses.

14  Item  more,  that  the  sayd  Cariers  do  demaund  no
more  of  them,  then  their  agreement  was  to  pay  them.

1 5  Item  more,  if  they  be  at  a  price  with  any  Cariers,  &
have  given  earnest,  the  camel-men  to  see  they  keepe  their
promise.

16  Item,  if  any  of  the  said  merchants  be  in  feare  to
travel,  to  give  them  one  or  more  to  go  with  them  and  see

146

RICHARD WILLES' NOTES  ad.

1568.

them  in  safetie  with  their  goods,  to  the  place  they  will
goe  unto.

17  Item,  in  all  places,  to  say,  in  all  cities,  townes  or
villages  on  the  high  way,  his  subjects  to  give  them  honest
roume,  and  victuals  for  their  money.

18  Item,  the  sayd  merchants  may  in  any  place,  where
they  shall  thinke  best,  build  or  buy  any  house  or  houses
to  their  owne  uses.  And  no  person  to  molest  or  trouble
them,  and  to  stand  in  any  Caravan  where  they  will,  or
shal  thinke  good.

THe  commodities  which  the  merchants  may  have  by
this  trade  into  Persia  are  thought  to  bee  great,  and
may  in  time  perhaps  be  greater  then  the  Portugals  trade
into  ye  East  Indies,  forasmuch  as  by  the  way  of  Persia
into  England,  the  returne  may  be  made  every  yeere
once  :  whereas  the  Portugals  make  the  returne  from
Calecut  but  once  in  two  yeeres,  by  a  long  and  dangerous
voiage  all  by  sea  :  for  where  as  the  citie  and  Island  of
Ormus,  lying  in  the  gulfe  of  Persia,  is  the  most  famous
Mart  towne  of  all  East  India,  whither  al  ye  merchandises
of  India  are  brought,  the  same  may  in  shorter  time  and
more  safely  be  brought  by  land  and  rivers  through  Persia,
even  unto  the  Caspian  sea,  and  from  thence  by  the
countreis  of  Russia  or  Moscovia  by  rivers,  even  unto  the
citie  of  Yeraslave,  and  from  thence  by  land  180.  miles  to
Vologda,  and  from  thence  againe  all  by  water  even  unto
England.

The  merchandises  which  be  had  out  of  Persia  for  the
returne  of  wares  are  silke  of  all  sortes  of  colours,  both
raw  and  wrought.  Also  all  maner  of  spices  and  drugs,
pearles  &  precious  stones,  likewise  carpets  of  divers
sortes,  with  divers  other  rich  merchandises.  It  was  told
me  of  them  that  came  last  from  Persia,  that  there  is  more
silke  brought  into  some  one  city  of  Persia,  then  is  of
cloth  brought  into  the  city  of  London.  Also  that  one
village  of  Armenia  named  Gilgat  doeth  carie  yeerely  five
hundred,  and  sometime  a thousand mules laden  with

147

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

silke  to  Halepo  in  Soria  of  Turkic,  being  4.  dayes  journey
from  Tripoli,  where  the  Venetians  have  their  continuall
abiding,  and  send  from  thence  silks  which  they  returne
for  English  karsies  and  other  clothes  into  all  partes  of
Christendome.

I

[I-  394-1 The  maner  how  the  Christians  become  Busor-
men,  and  forsake  their  religion.

Have  noted  here  before  that  if  any  Christian  wil
become  a  Busorman,  that  is,  one  that  hath  forsaken
his  faith,  and  be  a  Mahumetan  of  their  religion,  they  give
him  many  gifts,  and  sometime  also  a  living.  The  maner
is,  that  when  the  devill  is  entred  into  his  heart  to  forsake
his  faith,  he  resorteth  to  the  Soltan  or  governor  of  the
towne,  to  whom  hee  maketh  protestation  of  his  divelish
purpose.  The  governour  appointeth  him  a  horse,  and
one  to  ride  before  him  on  another  horse,  bearing  a  sword
in  his  hand,  and  the  Busorman  bearing  an  arrow  in  his
hand,  and  rideth  in  the  citie,  cursing  his  father  and
mother  :  and  if  ever  after  he  returne  to  his  owne  re-
ligion, he  is  guiltie  of  death,  as  is  signified  by  the  sword
borne  before  him.  A  yong  man,  a  servant  of  one  of
our  merchants,  because  he  would  not  abide  the  correc-
tion of  his  master  for  his  faults,  was  minded  to  forsake
his  faith.  But  (as  God  would)  he  fell  suddenly  sicke
and  died,  before  he  gave  himselfe  to  the  devill.  If  he
had  become  a  Busorman,  he  had  greatly  troubled  the
merchants  :  for  if  he  would  then  have  said  that  halfe
their  goods  had  bene  his,  they  would  have  given  credite
unto  him.  For  the  avoiding  of  which  inconvenience,  it
was  granted  in  the  privileges,  that  no  Busorman,  &c.  as
there  appeareth.

In  Persia  in  divers  places  oxen  and  kine  beare  the
tents  and  houshold  stufFe  of  the  poore  men  of  the
countrey,  which  have  neither  camels  nor  horses.

RICHARD WILLES' NOTES  ad.

1568.

Of  the  tree  which  beareth  Bombasin  cotton,  or
Gossampine.

IN  Persia  is  great  abundance  of  Bombasin  cotton,  &
very  fine  :  this  groweth  on  a  certaine  litle  tree  or
brier,  not  past  the  height  of  a  mans  waste  or  htle  more  :
the  tree  hath  a  slender  stalke  hke  unto  a  brier,  or  to  a
carnation  giUifloure,  with  very  many  branches,  bearing  on
every  branch  a  fruit  or  rather  a  cod,  growing  in  round
forme,  containing  in  it  the  cotton  :  and  when  this  bud
or  cod  commeth  to  the  bignes  of  a  wahiut,  it  openeth
and  sheweth  foorth  the  cotton,  which  groweth  still  in
bignes  untill  it  be  like  a  fleece  of  wooll  as  big  as  a  mans
fist,  and  beginneth  to  be  loose,  and  then  they  gather  it
as  it  were  the  ripe  fruite.  The  seeds  of  these  trees  are
as  big  as  peason,  and  are  blacke,  and  somewhat  flat,  and
not  round  ;  they  sowe  them  in  plowed  ground,  where
they  grow  in  the  fields  in  great  abundance  in  many
countries  in  Persia,  and  divers  other  regions.

The  writing  of  the  Persians.

ARthur  Edwards  shewed  me  a  letter  of  the  Sophie,
written  in  their  letters  backward,  subsigned  with  the
hands  both  of  the  Sophy  &  his  Secretarie.  The  Sophies
subscription  was  onely  one  word  (his  name  I  suppose
was  Shaugh)  written  in  golden  letters  upon  red  paper.
The  whole  letter  was  also  written  on  the  same  piece
of  red  paper,  being  long  &  narow,  about  ye  length  of
a  foote,  and  not  past  three  inches  broad.  The  private
signet  of  the  Sophie  was  a  round  printed  marke  about
the  bignes  of  a  roial,  onely  printed  upon  the  same
paper  without  any  waxe  or  other  seale,  the  letter  seem
so  mishapen  and  disordered,  that  a  man  would  thinke  it
were  somwhat  scribled  in  maner  at  adventures.  Yet  they
say  that  almost  every  letter  with  his  pricke  or  circunflexe
signifieth  a  whole  word.  Insomuch  that  in  a  piece  of
paper  as  big  as  a  mans  hand  their  writing  doeth  containe
as  much  as  doeth  ours  almost  in  a  sheet  of  paper.

149

A.D.

1568.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  English
Barke  as-
saulted neere
Astracan  by
the  'Nagaian
Tartars.

[I-  395-]

The  fift  voiage  into  Persia  made  by  M.  Thomas
Banister,  and  master  Geofrey  Ducket,  Agents
for  the  Moscovie  companie,  begun  from
England  in  the  yeere  1568.  and  continuing
to  the  yeere  1574.  following.  Written  by
P.  I.  from  the  mouth  of  M.  Lionel
Plumtree.

Pen  the  3.  day  of  July  1568.  they  em-
barked themselves  at  Yeraslave,  being
accompanied  with  Lionel  Plumtree,  and
some  12.  English  men  more,  in  a  Barke
called  the  Thomas  Bonaventure  of  the
burden  of  70.  tunnes,  taking  also  along
with them  of  Russes  to  the  number  of

Astracan  be-
sieged by
70000.  Turks
and  Tartars.

40.  for  their  use  and  imploiments.  It  fell  out  in  the
way,  before  they  came  to  Astracan  by  40.  miles,  that
the  Nagaian  Tartars,  being  a  kind  of  thievish  and  cruel
people,  made  an  assault  upon  them  with  18.  boates  of
theirs,  each  of  them  being  armed,  some  with  swords,
some  with  speares,  and  some  others  with  bowes  and
arrowes,  and  the  whole  number  of  them  they  discovered
to  be  about  300.  men.  They  for  their  parts,  although
they  could  have  wished  a  quiet  voyage  and  journey
without  blowes  and  violence,  yet  not  willing  to  be
spoiled  with  such  Barbarians  as  they  were,  began  to
defend  themselves  against  their  assault,  by  meanes
whereof  a  very  terrible  &  fierce  fight  folowed  and  con-
tinued hot  &■  sharpe  for  two  houres,  wherein  our  men
so  wel  plaied  their  parts  with  their  calivers,  that  they
forced  the  Tartars  to  flee  with  the  losse  of  120.  of
them,  as  they  were  afterwards  enformed  by  a  Russe
prisoner,  which  escaped  from  the  Nagaians,  and  came
to  them  to  Astracan,  at  which  towne  they  arrived  the  20.
of  August.

In  this  towne  of  Astracan  they  were  somwhat  hindered
of  their  journey, and staied the space of  sixe weekes

150

BANISTER AND DUCKET  ad.

1569.

by  reason  of  a  great  army  of  70000.  Turkes  and  Tartars
which  came  thither  upon  the  instigation  of  the  great
Turke,  hoping  either  to  have  surprised  it  suddenly  or
by  continuance  of  siege  to  win  the  same.  But  in  the
end  by  reason  that  the  winter  approched,  as  also,  because
they  had  received  newes  of  a  great  expedition,  which
the  Emperour  of  Russia  was  in  providing  for  the  de-
fence of  the  said  place,  they  were  constrained  to  raise
their  siege,  &  to  leave  the  town  as  they  found  it.

Upon  their  departure  our  men  had  opportunitie  to
proceed  on  their  voyage,  and  using  the  occasion,  they
left  Astracan,  and  came  to  Bilbil  towards  the  end  of
October  :  from  whence  they  went  to  Shavaran,  where
(as  they  lodged  in  their  tentes)  they  were  greatly  molested
with  strange  troopes  of  sholcaves  or  foxes,  which  were
so  busie  with  them  that  they  tooke  their  meate  and
victuals  out  of  their  lodgings,  and  devoured  to  the  bare
bones  in  one  night  a  mighty  wilde  Bore  that  was  sent
unto  them  for  a  present  from  the  governour  of  the
countrey.

Having  staied  here  some  three  or  foure  daies  in  pro-
viding of  cariages  and  other  necessaries  for  their  journey,
they  departed  thence  and  came  to  Shamaky,  which  is
foure  dayes  journey  from  the  aforesayd  Shavaran.  In
this  towne  of  Shamaky  their  whole  company  spent  out
the  Winter,  and  from  thence  in  April  folowing  they
tooke  their  journey  towards  Ardouil  a  place  of  great
account  and  much  esteemed,  by  reason  of  the  sepulchres
of  the  Emperours  of  Persia,  which  for  the  most  part  lie
there  buried,  and  so  is  growen  to  bee  a  place  of  their
superstitious  devotion.  In  this  towne  of  Ardouil  they
sojourned  the  space  of  5.  or  6.  moneths,  finding  some
traffique  and  sales,  but  to  no  purpose,  the  towne  being
more  inhabited  and  frequented  with  gentlemen  and
noblemen  then  merchants.

The  difference  of  religion  bred  great  broiles  in  this
towne  whiles  they  remained  there  :  for  the  brother  sought
the  destruction  of  the  brother,  and  the  neerest  kinsmen

151

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1569.

rose  up  one  against  another,  insomuch  that  one  of  their
company  Lionel  Plumtree  hath  seene  in  one  day  some-
times 14.  slaine  in  a  garboile.  And  he  being  further
desirous  to  see  their  maner  of  fight,  or  rather  somewhat
more  curious  to  behold,  then  mistrustful  of  their  blowes,
was  like  to  have  borne  a  share  in  their  bloodie  tragedie,
being  twise  wounded  with  their  shot  and  arrowes,  although
not  to  the  death.

At  this  towne  the  Shaw  Thamas  sent  a  messenger
for  our  men  to  come  to  his  presence  at  Casbin,  to  whom
Thomas  Banister  failed  not  to  goe,  although  master
Ducket  lay  very  sicke  at  Ardouil,  and  in  such  case  that
they  almost  despaired  of  his  recoverie.  Hee  being  come
to  the  Shaugh  was  received  and  entertained  of  him  with
great  favour  and  speciall  countenance,  and  had  the  most
part  of  all  his  requests  granted  him,  this  onely  excepted,
that  whereas  he  entreated  a  priviledge  or  sufferance  to
transport  and  cary  through  his  dominions  certaine  horses
into  India,  the  Shaugh  seemed  loth  to  yeeld  thereunto,
and  yet  did  not  altogether  denie  it,  but  referred  it  to
some  further  time.  As  for  the  point  of  traffique,  he
could  not  make  that  motion  or  request  that  was  not
so  soone  granted  as  it  was  preferred  :  and  the  Shaugh
himselfe  bought  there  of  him  many  karsies,  and  made
him  as  good  paiment  as  any  man  could  wish,  and  often-
times would  send  his  mony  for  the  wares  before  the
wares  were  delivered,  that  he  might  be  the  surer  of
this  honourable  intended  dealing.

One  thing  somewhat  strange  I  thought  good  in  this
place  to  remember,  that  whereas  hee  purposed  to  send
a  great  summe  of  money  to  Mecca  in  Arabia,  for  an
offering  to  Mahomet  their  prophet,  hee  would  not  send
any  money  or  coyne  of  his  owne,  but  sent  to  the  English
merchants  to  exchange  his  coyne  for  theirs,  according
to  the  value  of  it,  yeelding  this  reason  for  the  same,
that  the  money  of  the  merchants  was  gotten  by  good
meanes,  and  with  good  consciences,  and  was  therefore
woorthie  to  be  made  for  an  oblation  to  their  holy  prophet,

152

BANISTER  AND DUCKET  a.d.

1572.
but  his  owne  money  was  rather  gotten  by  fraud,  oppres-
sion and  unhonest  meanes,  and  therefore  was  not  fit  to
serve  for  so  holie  a  use.

After  sixe  moneths  spent  in  Casbin  the  sayde  Thomas
Banister  departed  towards  the  great  citie  of  Tauris,  where
being  arrived,  he  found  M.  Ducket  well  recovered  of  his
sicknesse,  whom  he  had  left  ill  at  Ardouil.

At  this  Citie  the  foresayd  Master  Ducket  made  sales
of  the  English  commodities,  remaining  there  to  that
purpose  the  space  of  two  yeeres  and  a  halfe.  And  besides
other  kindes  of  merchandises  of  that  countrey,  he  bought
great  store  of  gals  which  grow  in  great  abundance  at  a
place  within  one  dayes  journey  of  the  aforesayd  Tauris.  [I.  396.]

After  this  Thomas  Banister  departed  from  Tauris,  and
went  to  Shamaky  to  give  order  for  the  transporting  of
those commodities which were bought for England.
And  having  dispatched  them  away,  he  went  there  hence
to  Arrash,  a  towne  foure  dayes  journey  with  camels  from
Shamaky for the buying of  rawe  silke. But  there  by  The  death  of
reason  of  the  unwholesomnesse  of  the  aire,  and  corrup-  '^^''^f^
tion  of  the  waters  in  the  hote  time  of  the  yeere,  he  with  ^^^  Laurence
Lawrence Chapman and some other English men un-  chapman.
happily died : which being  knowen  of  M.  Ducket,  he
immediatly  came  from  Tauris  to  Arrash,  to  take  possession
of  the goods, for otherwise by the custome of the
countrey,  if  there  had  bene  no  merchant  or  other  friend
of  his to enter  upon  that  which he  left,  all  had  fallen
into the Shaughs  hands, which goods notwithstanding
could not bee recovered from the officers which had
seized and sealed up the same, untill  M.  Ducket  had
bene  in  person  with  the  Shaugh,  and  had  procured  his
order  for  the  deliverie  thereof.

Lionel  Plumtree,  in  the  meane  time  that  M.  Ducket
was  at  Casbin  in  sute  for  goods,  upon  the  perswasion
of  certaine  Bogharians,  made  provision  for  a  journey  to
Cathaia,  with  cariages  and  commodities,  and  having  all
things  ready,  departed  secretly  with  a  Caravan :  but  being
gone  forwards  on  his  way  sixe  dayes  journy,  some  fifty

153

A.D.
1572.

Humfrey
Greensell
burnt  at
Ormus.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

horsemen  by  the  procurement  of  Humfry  Greensell
(who  afterwards  being  at  Ormus  in  the  East  Indies,  was
there  cruelly  burnt  in  the  Inquisition  by  the  Portingals)
were  sent  after  him  in  poste  from  Soltan  Erasbec,  the
Shaughs  lieutenant,  to  fetch  him  backe  againe,  not  suffer-
ing him  to  passe  on  so  perillous  and  dangerous  a  journey
for  feare  of  divers  inconveniences  that  mig^ht  follow.

After  this  M.  Ducket  returned  from  Casbin  to  Shamaky
againe,  and  immediately  made  preparation  for  a  journey
to  Cassan,  being  about  foure  dayes  journey  from  Shamaky,
and  caried  with  him  foure  mules  laden  with  mony.

In  the  way  of  his  travel  he  passed  through  Persepolis,
sometime  the  roiall  seate  of  the  Emperors  of  Persia,  but
now  altogether  ruined  and  defaced,  whereof  remaine  to
be  scene  at  this  day  two  gates  onely  that  are  distant
one  from  the  other  the  space  of  12.  miles,  and  some
few  pinnacles  in  the  mountains  and  conveiances  for  fresh
water.

The  foresaid  Cassan  is  a  towne  that  consisteth  alto-
gether of  merchandise,  and  the  best  trade  of  all  the  land
IS  there,  being  greatly  frequented  by  the  merchants  of
India.

Here  our  men  bought  great  store  of  al  maner  of
wrought  silkes,  and  some  spices,  and  good  store  of  Turkic
stones.

The  towne  is  much  to  be  commended  for  the  civil
and  good  government  that  is  there  used.  An  idle  person
is  not  suifred  to  live  amongst  them.

The  child  that  is  but  five  yeeres  old  is  set  to  some
labour.  No  ill  rule,  disorder  or  riote  by  gaming  or
otherwise,  is  there  permitted.  Playing  at  Dice  or  Cards
is  by  the  law  present  death.

At  this  Cashan  they  remained  about  the  space  of
tenne  weekes,  and  then  came  downe  againe  to  Shamaky,
and  after  some  time  spent  in  divers  places  of  the  countrey
for  buying  of  rawe  silke  and  other  commodities,  they
came  at  last  to  Shavaran  againe,  where  their  ship  was
in harbour, and then they shipt all their goods and

154

BANISTER AND DUCKET  a.d.

1573-
embarked  themselves  also,  setting  sayle  the  eight  day
of  May,  in  the  yeere  1573.  intending  to  fetch  Astracan.
By  reason  of  the  varietie  of  the  windes  and  dangerous
flats  of  the  Caspian  sea,  they  beat  it  up  and  downe  some
20.  dayes.  And  the  28.  day  riding  at  anker  upon  the
flats,  certaine  Russe  Cassaks,  which  are  outlawes  or
banished  men,  having  intelligence  of  their  being  there,
and  of  the  great  wealth  that  they  had  with  them,  came
to  them  with  divers  boates  under  the  colour  of  friend-
ship, and  entred  their  ship,  but  immediately  they  tooke
their  hatchets  &  slew  divers  of  the  Russes  that  were  of
the  ship  upon  the  hatches :  Whereupon  master  Ducket,
Lionell  Plumtree,  William  Smith,  the  master,  a  man  of
singular  valure,  and  Amos  Riall  being  under  the  Spar-
decke,  did  so  well  behave  themselves,  that  they  skowred
the  hatches,  and  slew  14.  of  the  Cassaks  gunners,  and
hurt  and  wounded  about  30.  more,  being  of  them  al
in  number  150.  at  the  least,  armed  with  calivers  and
other  weapons  fit  for  so  villanous  a  purpose.

M.  Ducket  notwithstanding  and  the  rest  aforesaid  T^^^  English
received  divers  wounds  from  the  enemie,  and  were  so  ^'^^■P ^/^^^ p
hurt,  and  withall  so  oppressed  with  the  multitude  and
force  of  them,  that  they  were  at  last  constrained  to  make
an  agreement  with  the  Cassaks  by  rendring  the  ship
into  their  hands,  having  received  first  their  othes  sworne
by  their  crucifixes,  not  to  do  any  further  harme  to  their
persons.

Thus  the  shippe  being  taken,  and  all  the  English
grievously  hurt,  the  Cassaks  immediately  discharged  the
ship  of  them,  putting  them  all  into  the  ship  boate  with
two  or  three  Persian  targets  full  of  horse  flesh  and
swines  flesh,  without  further  victuals  or  reliefe :  they
being  in  that  case,  made  the  best  hast  they  could  to  get
to  Astracan  :  and  being  come  to  the  towne,  master
Ducket  made  great  sute  to  the  captaine  to  have  men  [I.  397.]
and  boates  set  out  for  the  rescuing  and  recovering  of
the  ship  if  it  were  possible :  who  immediately  sent  out
his Sonne  with  fortie boates  and  five hundred  men  to

155

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1573-

pursue  the  Pirats,  and  by  good  hap  came  to  the  place
where  they  rid  at  anker  with  the  ship,  but  by  reason
of  their  foolishnes  in  striking  up  their  drums  before
they  were  come  neere  them,  the  Cassaks  discovering  the
boats,  cut  their  gables  and  put  out  to  sea,  whereupon
the  boats  not  being  able  to  folow  them,  returned  againe
to  Astracan.  After  which,  60.  boats  more  were  sent  out
to  pursue  them  againe  the  second  time :  &  that  second
army  came  to  a  place  where  they  found  many  of  those
Cassaks  and  slew  them,  and  found  out  the  places  where
they  had  hid  certaine  parcels  of  their  goods  in  the
earth  in  the  chests  of  the  ship :  all  which  they  recovered
againe  for  the  English  merchants,  to  the  value  of  5000.
li.  of  30.  or  40.  thousand  pound,  but  all  the  rest  the
Cassaks  in  the  ship  had  caried  away.

In  the  same  place  they  found  further  divers  of  the
Cassaks  which  the  Englishmen  had  slaine,  buried  in  the
earth,  and  wrapt  some  in  fortie  or  fifty  yards  of  Sattin
and  Taffataes,  and  some  in  Turkic  carpets  cut  &  spoiled
by  those  villanous  Pirats,  of  whom  afterwards  as  many
as  could  be  taken  by  the  Persians  who  entirely  loved
the  English  merchants,  were  put  to  most  cruell  torments
in  all  places  according  to  their  deserts.

But  our  men  being  thus  spoyled  of  their  goods,  and
wounded  in  their  bodies,  remained  about  two  moneths
at  Astracan  for  their  better  recoverie :  &  having  gotten
some  reasonable  strength,  they  then  provided  boates  and
went  up  the  river  of  Volga  to  Cazan,  with  such  goods
as  they  had  recovered  from  the  Cassaks.  From  Cazan
Ice  in  the  be-  they  went  towards  Yeraslave,  but  in  the  way  the  ice
ginning  of  intercepted  them  about  the  beginning  of  October,  where
suddenly  in  the  night  they  were  taken  with  a  cruell  and
vehement  frost,  and  therewithal!  the  waters  so  congeled,
that  their  boates  were  crushed  and  cut  in  sunder  with
the  ice,  whereby  they  sustained  both  a  further  danger
of  life  and  losse  of  goods :  but  as  much  as  they  could
preserve  with  much  adoe,  they  conveyed  over  land
in sleds to Vologda, and from thence sent much

156

BANISTER AND DUCKET  ad.

1574-
of  it to Saint Nicholas to be laden in the ships for
England.

But  Master  Ducket,  Lionel  Plumtree  and  Amos  Riall
went  with  some  parcels  to  the  Mosko,  and  there  sold
certaine  quantities  of  it  to  the  Emperour,  who  pitying
the  mightie  losse  that  they  had  sustained  by  his  owne
rebellious  people  and  subjects,  bought  himselfe  as  much
as  hee  liked,  and  payed  present  money  for  the  same.
So  that  Winter  being  spent  out  in  Mosko,  and  such
wares  provided  by  them  as  served  for  England,  they
departed  to  Saint  Nicholas,  and  there  embarked  in  the
moneth  of  August :  and  having  endured  a  very  terrible
passage  in  nine  weekes  and  three  dayes,  with  some  hard-
nesse  of  victuals,  contrary  and  furious  windes,  and  other
sea  accidents,  they  arrived  at  London  in  the  moneth  of
October,  one  thousand  five  hundred  seventie  and  foure,  1574.
and  so  made  an  ende  of  an  unfortunate  voyage :  which
if  it  had  pleased  God  to  prosper,  that  all  things  had
come  home  as  safely  as  they  were  carefully  provided,
and  painfully  laboured  for,  it  had  proved  the  richest
voiage  and  most  profitable  returne  of  commoditie,  that
had  ever  bene  undertaken  by  English  merchants,  who,
notwithstanding  all  misfortunes,  lost  nothing  of  their
principall  adventure,  but  onely  the  interest  and  gaine
that  might  have  risen  by  the  use  of  their  stocke  in  the
meane  time.

[Further

157

A.D.

1574-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Further  observations  concerning  the  state  of
Persia,  taken  in  the  foresayd  fift  voyage  into
those  partes,  and  written  by  M.  Geffrey
Ducket,  one  of  the  Agents  emploied  in  the
same.

Hamaky  is  the  fairest  towne  in  all  Media,
and  the  chiefest  commoditie  of  that
countrey  is  rawe  silke,  &  the  greatest
plentie  thereof  is  at  a  towne  three  dayes
journey  from  Shamaky  called  Arash  :  and
within  3.  dayes  journey  of  Arash  is  a
Grosin  or '  ' countrey  named Grosin, whose inhabit-

Georgia.  ants  are  Christians,  &  are  thought  to  be  they  which
are  otherwise  called  Georgians :  there  is  also  much  silke
to  be  sold.  The  chiefe  towne  of  that  countrey  is  called
Zegham,  from  whence  is  caried  yeerely  into  Persia,  an
incredible  quantitie  of  Hasell  nuts,  all  of  one  sort  and
goodnesse,  and  as  good  and  thin  shaled  as  are  our
Filberds.  Of  these  are  caried  yeerely  the  quantitie  of
4000.  Camels  laden.

Of  the  name  of  the  Sophy  of  Persia,  &  why  he
is  called the Shaugh,  and  of  other  customes.

THe  king  of  Persia  (whom  here  we  call  the  great
Sophy)  is  not  there  so  called,  but  is  called  the
Shaugh.  It  were  there  dangerous  to  cal  him  by  the
[I.  398.]  name  of  Sophy,  because  that  Sophy  in  the  Persian
tongue,  is  a  begger,  &  it  were  as  much  as  to  call  him,
The  great  begger.  He  lieth  at  a  towne  called  Casbin,
which  is  situate  in  a  goodly  fertile  valley  of  3.  or  4.  daies
journy  in  length.  The  towne  is  but  evil  builded,  and
for  the  most  part  all  of  bricke,  not  hardened  with  fire,
but  only  dried  at  the  sunne,  as  is  the  most  part  of  the
building  of  all  Persia.  The  king  hath  not  come  out
of  the  compasse  of  his  owne  house  in  33.  or  34.  yeeres,
whereof  the  cause  is  not  knowen,  but  as  they  say,  it  is

158

GEFFREY  DUCKET  ad.

1574-
upon  a  superstition  of  certaine  prophesies  to  which  they
are  greatly  addicted :  he  is  now  about  80.  yeeres  of  age,
and  very  lusty.  And  to  keepe  him  the  more  lusty,  he
hath  4.  wives  alwayes,  and  about  300.  concubines,  and
once  in  the  yeere  he  hath  all  the  faire  maidens  and  wives
that  may  be  found  a  great  way  about  brought  unto  him,
whom  he  diligently  peruseth,  feeling  them  in  all  parts,
taking  such  as  he  liketh,  and  putting  away  some  of  them
which  he  hath  kept  before,  &  with  them  that  he  putteth
away,  he  gratifieth  some  such  as  hath  done  him  the
best  service.  And  if  hee  chance  to  take  any  mans  wife,
her  husband  is  very  glad  thereof,  and  in  recompense  of
her,  oftentimes  he  giveth  the  husband  one  of  his  old
store,  whom  he  thankfully  receiveth.

If  any  stranger  being  a  Christian  shall  come  before  How  strangers
him,  he  must  put  on  a  new  paire  of  shooes  made  in  ^^^  "^^^•
that  countrey,  and  from  the  place  where  he  entreth,  there
is  digged  as  it  were  a  causey  all  the  way,  until  he  come
to  the  place  where  he  shal  talke  with  the  king,  who
standeth  alwayes  above  in  a  gallerie,  when  he  talketh
with  any  strangers :  and  when  the  stranger  is  departed,
then  is  the  causey  cast  downe,  and  the  ground  made
even  againe.

Of  the  religion  of  the  Persians.

THeir religion is all one  with the Turkes, saving
that they differ who was the right successor of
Mahumet. The  Turkes say that it  was one Homer
and  his  sonne  Usman. But  the  Persians  say  that  it  was
one Mortus Ali, which they would proove in this
maner. They  say  there  was  a  counsell  called  to  decide
the  matter  who  should  be  the  successor :  and  after  they
had  called  upon  Mahumet  to  reveale  unto  them  his  will
and pleasure therein,  there came among them a litle  ^  goodly  and
Lizard,  who declared that it was Mahumets pleasure  ^e II  grounded
that  Mortus  Ali  should  be  his  successor. This  Mortus  ^^  ^^'^^'
Ali was a  valiant man and slew Homer the Turkes
prophet. He  had  a  sword  that  hee  fought  withall,  with

159

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1574.

the  which  hee  conquered  all  his  enemies,  and  killed  as
many  as  he  stroke.  When  Mortus  Ali  died,  there  came
a  holy  prophet,  who  gave  them  warning  that  shortly  there
would  come  a  white  Camell,  upon  the  which  he  charged
them  to  lay  the  body  and  sword  of  Mortus  Ali,  and
to  suffer  the  Camel  to  cary  it  whither  he  would.  The
which  being  performed,  the  said  white  camell  caried  the
sword  &  body  of  Mortus  Ali  unto  the  sea  side,  and
the  camell  going  a  good  way  into  the  sea,  was  with
the  body  &  sword  of  Mortus  Ali  taken  up  into  heaven,
for  whose  return  they  have  long  looked  in  Persia.  And
for  this  cause  the  king  alwayes  keepeth  a  horse  ready
sadled  for  him,  and  also  of  late  kept  for  him  one  of
his  owne  daughters  to  be  his  wife,  but  she  died  in  the
yere  of  our  Lord,  1573.  And  they  say  furthermore,
y*^  if  he  come  not  shortly,  they  shalbe  of  our  beliefe :
much  like  the  Jewes,  looking  for  their  Messias  to  come
&  reigne  among  them  like  a  worldly  king  for  ever,  and
deliver  them  from  the  captivitie  which  they  are  now  in
among  the  Christians,  Turkes,  and  Gentiles.

The  Shaugh  or  king  of  Persia  is  nothing  in  strength
&  power  comparable  unto  the  Turke :  for  although  he
hath  a  great  Dominion,  yet  is  it  nothing  to  be  compared
with  the  Turks :  neither  hath  he  any  great  Ordinance  or
gunnes,  or  harquebusses.  Notwithstanding  his  eldest
Sonne  Ismael  about  25.  yeeres  past,  fought  a  great
battell  with  the  Turke,  and  slew  of  his  armie  about
an  hundreth  thousand  men :  who  after  his  returne,  was  by
his  father  cast  into  prison,  and  there  continueth  until
this  day :  for  his  father  the  Shaugh  had  him  in  suspicion
that  he  would  have  put  him  downe,  and  have  taken
the  regiment  unto  himselfe.
Their  opinion  Their  opinion  of  Christ  is,  that  he  was  an  holy  man
0/  rist.  ^^^  ^  great  Prophet,  but  not  like  unto  Mahumet :
saying,  that  Mahumet  was  the  last  prophet  by  whom
all  things  were  finished,  &  was  therefore  the  greatest.
To  proove  that  Christ  was  not  Gods  sonne,  they  say  that
God  had  never  wife,  and  therefore  could  have  no  sonne

160

GEFFREY DUCKET  ad.

1574-
or  children. They  go  on  pilgrimage  from  the  furthest
part of  Persia  unto Mecha  in Arabia,  and  by  the  way
they  visite  also the sepulchre of  Christ at Jerusalem,
which  they  now  call  Couch  Kaly.

The  most  part  of  spices  which  commeth  into  Persia
is  brought  from  the  Island  of  Ormus,  situate  in  the  gulfe
of  Persia  called  Sinus  Persicus,  betweene  the  maine  land
of  Persia  and  Arabia,  &c.  The  Portingals  touch  at
Ormus  both  in  their  voyage  to  East  India  and  homeward
againe,  and  from  thence  bring  all  such  spices  as  are
occupied  in  Persia  and  the  regions  thereabout :  for  of
pepper  they  bring  very  small  quantitie,  and  that  at  a
very  deare  price.

The  Turkes  oftentimes  bring  pepper  from  Mecha  in
Arabia,  which  they  sell  as  good  cheape  as  that  which  [I.  399.]
is  brought  from  Ormus.  Silkes  are  brought  from  no
place,  but  are  wrought  all  in  their  owne  countrey.
Ormus  is  within  two  miles  of  the  maine  land  of  Persia,
and  the  Portingals  fetch  their  fresh  water  there,  for  the
which  they  pay  tribute  to  the  Shaugh  or  king  of
Persia.

Within  Persia  they  have  neither  gold  nor  silver  mines. Their  money.
yet  have  they  coined  money  both  of  gold  and  silver,  and
also  other small  moneys  of  copper. There  is brought
into  Persia  an  incredible  summe  of  Dutch  dollars,  which
for  the  most  part  are  there  imploied  in  raw  silke.

They  have  few  bookes  and  lesse  learning,  and  are  for  T^^^'"'  ^ooh^
the  most  part  very  brutish  in  all  kind  of  good  sciences,  ^'^'^  learning.
saving  in  some  kind  of  silke  works,  and  in  such  things
as  pertaine  to  the  furniture  of  horses,  in  the  which  they
are  passing  good.

Their  lawes  are  as  in  their  religion,  wicked  and  detest-  ^^'^^  ^^^  ^^^
able. And  if  any  man  offend  the  prince,  he  punisheth  it  {^J"  ''■^!^^.

,  r  ^  1  jy£  dCBciOfllClTlS

extremely,  not  onely  in  the  person  that  offendeth,  but  f^j.  treason.
also  in  his  children,  and  in  as  many  as  are  of  his  kin.
Theft  and  murther  are  often  punished,  yet  none  other-
wise then  pleaseth  him  that  is  ruler  in  the  place  where
the  offence  is  committed,  and  as  the  partie  offending
III  161  L

A.D.

1574-

Dissention  for
religion.

Their  priests
and  preaching.
Their  Lent.

Their  saints
and  holy  men.

Pilgrimage.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

is able to make friends, or with money to redeeme
his  offence.

There  is  oftentimes  great  mutinie  among  the  people
in  great  Townes  which  of  Mortus  Ali  his  sonnes  was
greatest:  insomuch  that  sometimes  in  the  towne  two  or
three  thousand  people  are  together  by  the  eares  for  the
same,  as  I  have  seene  in  the  towne  of  Shamaky  and
Ardouil,  and  also  in  the  great  City  of  Teveris,  where
I  have  seene  a  man  comming  from  fighting,  in  a  braverie
bringing  in  his  hand  foure  or  five  mens  heads,  carying
them  by  the  haire  of  the  head :  for  although  they  shave
their  heads  most  commonly  twise  a  weeke,  yet  leave  they
a  tuft  of  haire  upon  their  heads  about  2.  foote  long.
I  have  enquired  why  they  leave  the  tuft  of  haire  upon
their  heads.  They  answer,  that  thereby  they  may
easiler  be  caried  up  into  heaven  when  they  are  dead.

For  their  religion  they  have  certaine  priests  who  are
apparelled  like  unto  other  men.  They  use  every  morn-
ing and  afternoone  to  go  up  to  the  tops  of  their  churches,
and  tell  there  a  great  tale  of  Mahumet  and  Mortus
Ali :  and  other  preaching  have  they  none.  Their  Lent
is  after  Christmas,  not  in  abstinence  from  flesh  onely,
but  from  all  meats  and  drinks,  untill  the  day  be  off  the
skie,  but  then  they  eate  somtimes  the  whole  night.
And  although  it  be  against  their  religion  to  drinke  wine,
yet  at  night  they  will  take  great  excesse  thereof  and
be  drunken.  Their  Lent  beginneth  at  the  new  Moone,
and  they  do  not  enter  into  it  untill  they  have  seene  the
same :  neither  yet  doeth  their  Lent  end,  untill  they  have
seen  the  next  new  Moone,  although  the  same  (through
close  weather)  should  not  be  seen  in  long  time.

They  have  among  them  certaine  holy  men  whom  they
call  Setes,  counted  holy  for  that  they  or  any  of  their
ancestors  have  bene  on  pilgrimage  at  Mecha  in  Arabia,
for  whosoever  goeth  thither  on  pilgrimage  to  visite  the
sepulchre  of  Mahumet,  both  he  and  all  his  posteritie
are  ever  after  called  Setes,  and  counted  for  holy  men,
and  have  no  lesse  opinion  of  themselves. And  if  a  man

162

GEFFREY DUCKET  ad.

1574-
contrary  one  of  these,  he  will  say  that  he  is  a  Saint,
and  therefore  ought  to  be  beleeved,  and  that  hee  cannot
lie,  although  he  lie  never  so  shamefully.  Thus  a  man
may  be  too  holy,  and  no  pride  is  greater  then  spirituall
pride  of  a  mind  puffed  up  with  his  owne  opinion  of
holinesse.  These  Setes  do  use  to  shave  their  heads  all
over,  saving  on  the  sides  a  litle  above  the  temples,  the
which  they  leave  unshaven,  and  use  to  braid  the  same
as  women  do  their  haire,  and  to  weare  it  as  long  as  it
will  grow.

Every  morning  they  use  to  worship  God,  Mahumet,  Their  praier
and  Mortus  Ali,  &  in  praying  turne  themselves  toward ^_^f'-
the  South, because Mecha lieth that way  from  them. ^o^W
When  they  be  in  travell  on  the  way,  many  of  them  will  Mahumet.
(as  soone  as  the Sunne  riseth)  light  from  their  horses,
turning themselves to the South, and will lay their
gownes  before  them,  with their  swords and  beads,  and
so  standing upright  worship  to  the South  : and  many
times  in  their  prayers  kneele  downe  and  kisse  their  beads,
or  somwhat  els  that  lieth  before  them.

The men or  women doe never  goe  to  make  water,  fVas king  and
but they use  to take  with them a pot  with  a  spout,  outward  ckn-
and  after  they  have  made  water,  they  flash  some  water ^^^"^'
upon  their  privy  parts,  and  thus  doe  the  women  as  well
as  the  men  :  and  this  is  a  matter  of  great  religion  among
them,  and  in  making  of  water  the  men  do  cowre  downe
as  well  as  the  women.

When  they  earnestly  affirme  a  matter,  they  will  sweare  Their ^
by  God, Mahumet, or  Mortus Ali, and  sometimes  by  ^'^^^^^^g-
all  at ones  : as thus in their owne language, saying,
Olla, Mahumet, Ali. But if  he will sweare by the
Shaughs  head,  in  saying  Shaugham  basshe,  you  may  then
beleeve  him  if  you  will.

The  Shaugh  keepeth  a  great  magnificence  in  his  court : The  kings
and  although  sometimes  in  a  moneth  or  six  weekes  none  "^^S^w^"'^^-
of  his  nobilitie or  counsaile  can  see  him,  yet  goe  they
daily  to  the  court,  and  tary  there  a  certaine  time  untill
they  have  knowen  his  pleasure  whether  hee  will  com-

163

A.D.

1574-
[I.  400.]

Pursuivants.

The  kings
company  with
his  wives  and
concubines.

The  succession
of  ye  kingdom.

Circumcision.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

maund  them  any  thing  or  not.  Hee  is  watched  every
night  with  a  thousand  of  his  men,  which  are  called  his
CursheSj  who  are  they  that  hee  useth  to  send  into
the  Countreis  about  his  greatest  affaires.  When  he
sendeth  any  of  them  (if  it  be  to  the  greatest  of  any  of
his  nobilitie)  he  will  obey  them,  although  the  messenger
should  beat  any  of  them  to  death.

The  Shaugh  occupieth  himselfe  alwayes  two  dayes  in
the  weeke  in  his  Bathstove,  and  when  he  is  disposed  to
goe  thither,  he  taketh  with  him  five  or  sixe  of  his  con-
cubines, more  or  lesse,  and  one  day  they  consume  in
washing,  rubbing,  and  bathing  him,  and  the  other  day
in  paring  his  nailes,  and  other  matters.  The  greatest
part  of  his  life  hee  spendeth  amongst  his  wives  and
concubines.  Hee  hath  now  reigned  about  fiftie  and
foure  yeeres,  and  is  therefore  counted  a  very  holy  man,
as  they  ever  esteeme  their  kings,  if  they  have  reigned
fiftie  yeeres  or  more  :  for  they  measure  the  favour  of
God  by  a  mans  prosperitie,  or  his  displeasure  by  a  mans
misfortune  or  adversitie.  The  great  Turke  hath  this
Shaugh  in  great  reverence,  because  he  hath  reigned  king
so  long  time.

I  have  sayd  before  that  hee  hath  foure  wives,  and  as
many  concubines  as  him  listeth  :  and  if  he  chance  to
have  any  children  by  any  of  his  concubines,  and  be
minded  that  any  of  those  children  shall  inherite  after
him,  then  when  one  of  his  wives  dieth,  the  concubine
whom  hee  so  favoureth,  he  maketh  one  of  his  wives,
and  the  childe  whom  he  so  loveth  best,  he  ordaineth  to
bee  king  after  him.

What  I  heard  of  the  maner  of  their  manages,  for
offending  of  honest  consciences  and  chaste  eares,  I  may
not  commit  to  writing  :  their  fasting  I  have  declared
before.  They  use  circumcision  unto  children  of  seven
yeeres  of  age,  as  do  the  Turkes.

Their  houses  (as  I  have  said)  are  for  the  most  part
made  of  bricke,  not  burned  but  only  dried  in  the  Sunne  :
In  their  houses  they  have  but  litle  furniture  of  houshold

164

GEFFREY  DUCKET  ad.

1574.
stuffe,  except  it  be  their  carpets  and  some  copper  worke  : Their  houses
for  all  their  kettles  &  dishes  wherein they  eate,  are  of  ^^^.  "^^^^^  ^
copper. They eate on the ground, sitting on carpets ^'
crosse  legged  as  do  Tailors. There  is  no  man  so  simple
but  he  sitteth  on  a  carpet  better  or  worse,  and  the  whole
house or roume  wherein he sitteth is wholy  covered
with carpets. Their houses are all with flat roofes
covered  with  earth  : and  in the  Sommer time  they  lie
upon  them  all  night.

They  have  many  bond  servaunts  both  men  and  women.  Bondmen  and
Bondmen  and bondwomen, is one  of  the  best  kind  of  ^^«'''«""«^''-
merchandise  that  any  man  may  bring. When  they  buy
any  maydes or  yong  women, they use to feele them
in  all  partes, as with us men doe horses  : when one
hath  bought  a  yong  woman,  if  he  like  her,  he  will  keepe
her  for  his  owne  use  as  long  as  him  listeth,  and  then
selleth  her  to an other, who doeth the like with  her.
So  that  one  woman  is sometimes sold  in the space  of
foure or five yeeres, twelve, or twentie times. If  a  Women  bought
man  keepe  a  bondwoman  for  his  owne  use, and  if  hee ^  ^°^^^\  ^"^
find  her  to  be  false  to  him,  and  give  her  body  to  any ^^  °  '^'^'
other,  he  may  kill  her  if  he  will.

When  a  merchant  or  traveller  commeth  to  any  towne
where  he  entendeth  to  tary  any  time,  he  hireth  a  woman,
or  somtimes  2.  or  3.  during  his  abode  there.  And  when
he  commeth  to  an  other  towne,  he  doeth  the  like  in
the  same  also  :  for  there  they  use  to  put  out  their  women
to  hire,  as  wee  do  here  hackney  horses.

There  is  a  very  great  river  which  runneth  through  the
plaine  of  Javat, which falleth into the Caspian  sea,  by
a towne called Bachu, neere unto which towne is a
strange  thing  to  behold. For  there  issueth  out  of  the  Abundance  of
ground  a  marvellous  quantitie of  oile,  which oile  they  "'^^^  issuing
fetch  from  the  uttermost  bounds  of  all  Persia  :  it  serveth  °"^  ^ ,  '^

....  ground.

all  the  countrey  to  burne  in  their  houses.

This  oyle  is  blacke,  and  is  called  Nefte  :  they  use  to
cary  it  throughout  all  the  Countrey  upon  kine  &  asses,
of  which  you shall  oftentimes meet with foure  or  five

165

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1574-

hundred  in  a  company. There  is  also  by  the  said  towne

of  Bachu  another  kind  of  oyle  which  is  white  and  very

precious  : and  is  supposed  to  be  the  same that  here  is

Oleum  Petro-  called  Petroleum. There  is  also  not  far  from  Shamaky,

leum.  ^  thing  like  unto  tarre,  and  issueth  out  of  the  ground,

whereof  we  have  made  the  proofe,  that  in  our  ships  it

serveth  well  in  the  stead  of  tarre.

Two  sorts  of In Persia  are  kine  of  two  sorts: the  one  like  unto

^^^^-  ours in these partes  : the other are marveilous evill

favoured,  with  great  bones  and  very  leane,  and  but  litle

haire  upon  them  :  their  milke  is  walowish  sweete  :  they

are  like  unto  them  which  are  spoken  of  in  the  Scripture,

which  in  the  dreame  of  Pharao  sio^nified  the  seven  deare

yeeres  :  for  a  leaner  or  more  evill  favoured  beast  can  no

man  see.

In  the  countrey  of  Shirvan (sometime  called Media)
if  you  chance  to  lie  in  the  fields  neere  unto  any  village.
Foxes  in  great  as the twilight beginneth, you shall have about you
plenty.  ^^Q  Qj. three  hundred  foxes,  which  make  a  marveilous

wawling  or  howling  :  and  if  you  looke  not  well  to  your
victuals,  it  shal scape them hardly  but they  will  have
part  with  you.
[I.  401.]  The  Caspian  sea  doeth  neither  ebbe  nor  flowe,  except

sometimes  by  rages  of  wind  it  swelleth  up  very  high  :
the  water  is  very  salt.  Howbeit,  the  quantitie  of  water
that  falleth  out  of  the  great  river  of  Volga  maketh  the
water  fresh  at  the  least  twentie  leagues  into  the  sea.
The  Caspian  sea  is  marveilous  full  of  fish,  but  no  kind
of  monstrous  fish,  as  farre  as  I  could  understand,  yet
hath  it  sundry  sortes  of  fishes  which  are  not  in  these
parts  of  the  world.

The  mutton  there  is  good,  and  the  sheepe  great,  having
very  great  rumpes  with  much  fat  upon  them.
Rice  and  mutton  is  their  chiefe  victuall.

166

HODSDON AND BURROUGHS LETTER

A.D.

1570

The  copy  of  a  letter  sent  to  the  Emperour  of
Moscovie,  by  Christopher  Hodsdon  and  WilHam
Burrough,  Anno 1570.

Ost  mightie  Emperour,  &c.  Whereas
Sir  William  Garrard  and  his  felowship
the  company  of  English  merchants,  this
last  Winter  sent  hither  to  the  Narve
three  ships  laden  with  merchandise,  which
was  left  here,  and  with  it  Christopher
Hodsdon  one  of  the  sayd  felowship,  and

their  chiefe  doer  in  this  place,  who  when  hee  came
first  hither,  and  untill  such  time  as  hee  had  dispatched
those  ships  from  hence,  was  in  hope  of  goods  to  lade
twelve  or  thirteene  sailes  of  good  ships,  against  this
shipping,  wherefore  he  wrote  unto  the  sayd  Sir  William
Garrard  and  his  companie  to  send  hither  this  spring  the
sayd  number  of  thirteene  ships.  And  because  that  in
their  comming  hither  wee  found  the  Freebooters  on  the
sea,  and  supposing  this  yeere  that  they  would  be  very
strong,  he  therefore  gave  the  said  sir  William  and  his
Companie  advise  to  furnish  the  sayd  number  of  ships  so
strongly,  as  they  should  bee  able  to  withstand  the  force
of  the  Freebooters  :  whereupon  they  have  according  to
his  advise  sent  this  yeere  thirteene  good  ships  together
well  furnished  with  men  and  munition,  and  all  other
necessaries  for  the  warres,  of  which  13.  ships  William
Burrough  one  of  the  said  felowship  is  captaine  generall,
unto  whom  there  was  given  in  charge,  that  if  hee  met
with  any  the  Danske  Freebooters,  or  whatsoever  robbers
and  theeves  that  are  enimies  to  your  highnesse,  he
should  doe  his  best  to  apprehend  and  take  them.  It  so
hapned  that  the  tenth  day  of  this  moneth  the  sayd
William  with  his  fleete,  met  with  sixe  ships  of  the  Free-  Five  ships  of
hooters  neere  unto  an  Island  called  Tuttee,  which  is  about  Preeboters
50.  versts  from  Narve,  unto  which  Freebooters  he  with
his  fleete  gave  chase,  and  tooke  of  them  the  Admirall,

167

taken.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1570.

wherein  were  left  but  three  men,  the  rest  were  fled  to
shore  in  their  boats  amongst  the  woods  upon  Tuttee,  on
which  ship  he  set  fire  and  burnt  her.  He  also  tooke
foure  more  of  those  ships  which  are  now  here,  and  one
ship  escaped  him  :  out  of  which  foure  ships  some  of  the
men  fled  in  their  boates  and  so  escaped,  others  were
slaine  in  fight,  and  some  of  them  when  they  saw  they
could  not  escape,  cast  themselves  willingly  into  the  Sea
and  were  drowned.  So  that  in  these  five  ships  were  left
but  83.  men.

The  said  Wil.  Borough  when  he  came  hither  to  Narve,
finding  here  Christopher  Hodsdon  aforenamed,  both  the
said  Christopher  and  William  together,  in  the  name  of  sir
William  Garrard  and  the  rest  of  their  whole  companie
and  felowship,  did  present  unto  your  highnesse  of  those
Freebooters  taken  by  our  ships  82.  men,  which  we
delivered  here  unto  Knez  Voivoda,  the  13.  of  this
moneth.  One  man  of  those  Freebooters  we  have  kept
by  us,  whose  name  is  Haunce  Snarke  a  captaine.  And
the  cause  why  we  have  done  it  is  this :  When  wee  should
have  delivered  him  with  the  rest  of  his  felowes  unto  the
Voivodaes  ofllicers,  there  were  of  our  Englishmen  more
then  50.  which  fell  on  their  knees  unto  us,  requesting
that  he  might  be  reserved  in  the  ship,  and  caried  back
into  England  :  and  the  cause  why  they  so  earnestly
intreated  for  him,  is,  that  some  of  those  our  English-
men had  bene  taken  with  Freebooters,  and  by  his  meanes
had  their  lives  saved,  with  great  favour  besides,  which
they  found  at  his  hands.  Wherefore  if  it  please  your
highnesse  to  permit  it,  we  will  cary  him  home  with  us
into  England,  wherein  we  request  your  majesties  favour  :
notwithstanding  what  you  command  of  him  shalbe
observed.

Wee  have  also  sent  our  servant  to  your  highnesse  with
such  bestellings  and  writings  as  wee  found  in  those
shippes  :  whereby  your  Majestie  may  see  by  whom,  and
in  what  order  they  were  set  out,  and  what  they  pretended,
which  writings  wee  have  commended  unto  Knez  Yorive

168

RICHARD USCOMBE'S LETTER

A.D.

I57I.

your  Majesties  Voivoda  at  Plesco,  by  our  servant.  And
have  requested  his  furtherance  for  the  safe  deliverie  of
them  to  your  majesties  hands  :  which  writings  when  you
have  perused,  we  desire  that  they  may  be  returned  unto
us  by  this  our  servaunt,  as  speedily  as  may  bee  :  for
these  ships  which  we  now  have  here  will  be  soone  dis-
patched from  hence,  for  that  we  have  not  goods  to  lade
above  the  halfe  of  them.  And  the  cause  is,  we  have  this
winter  (by  your  majesties  order)  bene  kept  from  trafiqu-
ing,  to  the  companies  great  losse.  But  hoping  your  [I.  402.]
majestie  will  hereafter  have  consideration  thereof,  and
that  we  may  have  free  libertie  to  trafique  in  all  partes  of
your  majesties  Countries,  according  to  the  priviledge
given  unto  us,  we  pray  for  your  majesties  health,  with
prosperous  successe  to  the  pleasure  of  God.  From
Narve  the  15  of  July,  Anno  1570.

Your  Majesties  most  humble  and  obedient,

Christopher  Hodsdon. William  Borough.

A  letter  of  Richard  Uscombe  to  M.  Henrie
Lane,  touching  the  burning  of  the  Citie  of
Mosco  by  the  Crimme  Tartar  :  written  in
Rose Island  the 5. day  of  August, 1571.  1571.

Aster  Lane  I  have  me  commended  unto
you.  The  27.  of  July  I  arrived  here
with  the  Magdalene,  and  the  same  day
and  houre  did  the  Swalow  and  Harry
arrive  here  also.  At  our  comming;  I
found  master  Proctor  here,  by  whom  wee
understand  very  heavie  newes.  The
Mosco  is  burnt  every  sticke  by  the  Crimme  the  24.  day
of  May  last,  and  an  innumerable  number  of  people  :  and
in  the  English  house  was  smothered  Thomas  Southam,
Tofild,  Waverley,  Greenes  wife  and  children,  two  children
of  Rafe,  &  more  to  the  number  of  25.  persons  were
stifeled  in  our  Beere  seller  :  and  yet  in  the  same  seller
was  Rafe,  his  wife,  John  Browne,  and  John  Clarke  pre-

169

The  citie  of
Mosco  burnt
by  ye  Crimme.
Englishmen
smothered  at
the  burning  of
Mosco.

A.D.
I57I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

M.  Glover  served,  which  was  wonderful!.  And  there  went  into  that
and  M.  Row-  seller  master  Glover  and  master  Rowley  also  :  but  be-
ey  pieserve  .  ^^^^^  ^j^g  heate  was  so  great,  they  came  foorth  againe
with  much  perill,  so  that  a  boy  at  their  heeles  was  taken
with  the  fire,  yet  they  escaped  blindfold  into  another
seller,  and  there,  as  Gods  will  was,  they  were  preserved.
The  Emperour  fled  out  of  the  field,  and  many  of  his
people  were  caried  away  by  the  Crimme  Tartar  :  to  wit,
all  the  yong  people,  the  old  they  would  not  meddle
with,  but  let  them  alone,  and  so  with  exceeding  much
spoile  and  infinite  prisoners,  they  returned  home  againe.
What  with  the  Crimme  on  the  one  side,  and  with  his
crueltie  on  the  other,  he  hath  but  few  people  left.  Com-
mend me  to  mistresse  Lane  your  wife,  and  to  M.  Locke,
and  to  all  our  friends.

Yours  to  command,  Richard  Uscombe.

A  note  of  the  proceeding  of  M.  Anthonie  Jenkin-
son,  Ambassadour  from  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie,  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,
from  the  time  of  his  arrivall  there,  being  the
26.  of  July  1 57 1,  until!  his  departure  from
thence  the  23.  of  July 1572.

He said  26.  day  I arrived  with  the  two

good ships called the Swalow  and  the

Harry in safetie, at the Baie of S.

Nicholas  in  Russia  aforesayd,  and  landed

at  Rose  Island,  from  whence  immediately

I sent away my interpreter Daniel

Silvester in post towards the Court,

being  then  at  the  Mosco,  whereby  his  majestie  might  as

well bee  advertised  of  my  arrivall  in  his  Dominions,  as

also to know his highnesse pleasure for my further

accesse. And  remaining  at  the  sayd  Island  two  or  three

dayes,  to have  conference  with  your  Agent  about  your

affkires,  I did  well  perceive  by  the  wordes  of  the  sayd

Agent  and  others  your  servants,  that  I  was  entred  into

170

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1571.

great  perill  and  danger  of  my  life  :  for  they  reported  to
mee  that  they  heard  said  at  the  Mosco,  that  the  princes
displeasure  was  such  against  me,  that  if  ever  I  came  into
his  countrey  againe,  I  should  loose  my  head,  with  other
words  of  discouragement.  Whereat  I  was  not  a  litle  dis-
maid,  not  knowing  whether  it  were  best  for  me  to
proceed  forwards,  or  to  returne  home  againe  with  the
ships  for  the  safegard  of  my  life.  But  calling  to  mind
mine  innocencie  and  good  meaning,  and  knowing  my
selfe  not  to  have  offended  his  Majestic  any  maner  of
wayes  either  in  word  or  deed,  or  by  making  former
promises  not  performed,  heretofore  by  mine  enemies
falsly  surmised  :  and  being  desirous  to  come  to  the  triall
thereof,  whereby  to  justifie  my  true  dealings,  and  to  re-
proove  my  sayd  enemies  as  well  here  as  there,  who  have
not  ceased  of  late  by  untrue  reports  to  impute  the  cause  of
the  sayd  Emperors  displeasure  towards  you  to  proceed  of
my  dealings,  and  promises  made  to  him  at  my  last  being
with  him  (although  by  his  letters  to  the  Queenes
Majestie,  and  by  his  owne  words  to  me  the  contrary
doeth  appeare)  I  determined  with  my  selfe  rather  to  put
my  life  into  his  hands,  &  by  the  providence  of  God  to
prosecute  the  charge  committed  unto  me,  then  to  returne
home  in  vaine,  discouraged  with  the  words  of  such,  who
had  rather  that  I  had  taried  at  home,  then  to  be  sent  over
with  such  credite,  whereby  I  might  sift  out  their  evil
doings,  the  onely  cause  of  your  losse.

Wherefore,  leaving  the  said  ships  the  nine  and  twentieth  [I.  403.]
day  of  the  moneth,  1  departed  from  the  seaside,  and  the
first  of  August  arrived  at  Colmogro,  where  I  remained
attending  the  returne  of  my  said  messenger  with  order
from  his  Majestie.

But  all  the  Countrey  being  sore  visited  by  the  hand
of  God  with  the  plague,  passage  in  every  place  was
shut  up,  that  none  might  passe  in  paine  of  death :  My
messenger  being  eight  hundreth  miles  upon  his  way,
was  stayed,  and  kept  at  a  towne  called  Shasko,  and  might
not  bee  suffered  to  goe  any  further,  neither  yet  to  returne

171

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^571-

backe  againe,  or  sende  unto  me  :  by  meanes  whereof
in  the  space  of  foure  moneths,  I  could  neither  heare
nor  know  what  was  become  of  him,  in  which  time  my
said  messenger  found  meanes  to  advertise  the  Governour
of  the  Citie  of  Vologda,  as  well  of  his  stay,  as  of  the
cause  of  his  comming  thither,  who  sent  him  word  that
it  was  not  possible  to  passe  any  neerer  the  Prince  without
further  order  from  his  Majestic,  who  was  gone  to  the
warres  against  the  Swethens,  and  that  he  would  advertise
his  highnesse  as  soone  as  he  might  conveniently  :  And
so  my  said  messenger  was  forced  to  remaine  there  still
without  answere.  During  which  time  of  his  stay
through  the  great  death  (as  aforesaid,)  I  found  meanes
to  send  another  messenger,  with  a  guide  by  an  un-
knowen  way  through  wildernesse,  a  thousand  miles  about,
thinking  that  way  he  should  passe  without  let :  but
it  prooved  contrary,  for  likewise  hee  being  passed  a
great  part  of  his  journey,  fell  into  the  handes  of  a  watch,
and  escaped  very  hardly,  that  hee  and  his  guide  with
their  horses  had  not  bene  burnt,  according  to  the  lawe
provided  for  such  as  would  seeke  to  passe  by  indirect
wayes,  and  many  have  felt  the  smart  thereof  which  had
not  wherewith  to  buy  out  the  paine  :  neither  could  that
messenger  returne  backe  unto  me.

And  thus  was  1  kept  without  answere  or  order  from
his  Majestic,  and  remained  at  the  saide  Colmogro,  untill
the  1 8.  of  January  following,  neither  having  a  Gentleman
to  safegard  me,  nor  lodging  appointed  me,  nor  allow-
ance of  victuals  according  to  the  Countrey  fashion  for
Ambassadours,  which  argued  his  grievous  displeasure
towards  our  nation.  And  the  people  of  the  Countrey
perceiving  the  same,  used  towards  mee  and  my  company
some  discourtesies  :  but  about  the  28.  day  aforesaid,  the
plague  ceased,  and  the  passages  being  opened,  there
came  order  from  his  Majestie  that  I  should  have  poste
horses,  and  bee  suffered  to  depart  from  Colmogro  to
goe  to  a  Citie  called  Peraslave  neere  to  the  Court,  his
Majestie being newly returned from the said warres.

172

ANTHONY  JENKINSON

And  I  arrived  at  the  said  Peraslave  the  3.  of  February,
where  I  remained  under  the  charge  of  a  gentleman,
having  then  a  house  appointed  me,  &  allowance  of
victuals,  but  so  straitly  kept,  that  none  of  our  nation
or  other  might  come  or  sende  unto  me,  nor  I  to  them.
And  the  14.  of  March  folowing,  I  was  sent  for  to  the
Court,  and  being  within  three  miles  of  the  same,  a  poste
was  sent  to  the  Gentleman  which  had  charge  of  me,  to
returne  backe  againe  with  mee  to  the  said  Peraslave,
and  to  remaine  there  untill  his  Majesties  further  pleasure,
wherewith  I  was  much  dismayed,  and  marveiled  what
that  sudden  change  ment,  and  the  rather,  because  it  was
a  troublesome  time,  and  his  Majestie  much  disquieted
through  the  ill  successe  of  his  affaires,  (as  I  did  under-
stand.) And  the  twentieth  of  the  same,  I  was  sent  for
againe  to  the  Court,  and  the  23.  I  came  before  his
Majestie,  who  caused  mee  to  kisse  his  hande,  and  gave
gratious  audience  unto  my  Oration,  gratefully  receiving
and  accepting  the  Queenes  Majesties  princely  letters,
and  her  present,  in  the  presence  of  all  his  nobilitie.
After  I  had  finished  my  Oration,  too  long  here  to  re-
hearse, and  delivered  her  highnesse  letters,  and  present
(as  aforesaid)  the  Emperour  sitting  in  royall  estate  stood
up  and  said.  How  doth  Queene  Elizabeth  my  sister,  is
she  in  health  ?  to  whom  I  answered,  God  doth  blesse
her  Majestie  with  health,  and  peace,  and  doeth  wish
the  like  unto  thee  Lord,  her  loving  brother.  Then  his
Majestie  sitting  downe  againe,  commaunded  all  his
nobilitie  and  others  to  depart,  and  avoyde  the  chamber,
saving  the  chiefe  Secretarie,  and  one  other  of  the
Counsell,  and  willing  me  to  approch  neere  unto  him
with  my  Interpretor,  said  unto  me  these  words.

Anthony,  the  last  time  thou  wast  with  us  heere,  wee
did  commit  unto  thee  our  trustie  and  secret  Message,
to  be  declared  unto  the  Queenes  Majestie  herselfe  thy
Mistresse  at  thy  comming  home,  and  did  expect  thy
comming  unto  us  againe  at  the  time  wee  appointed,
with  a  full answere of  the same from her highnesse.

173

1572.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

And  in  the  meane  time  there  came  unto  us  at  severall
times  three  messengers,  the  one  called  Manly,  the  other
George  Middleton,  and  Edward  Goodman,  by  the  way
of  the  Narve  about  the  Merchants  affaires  :  to  whom
wee  sent  our  messenger  to  know  whether  thou  Anthony,
were  returned  home  in  safetie,  and  when  thou  shouldest
returne  unto  us  againe :  but  those  messengers  could
tell  us  nothing,  and  did  miscall,  and  abuse  with  evil
words,  both  our  messenger  and  thee,  wherewith  wee
were much offended. And understanding that the

o

said  Goodman  had  letters  about  him,  we  caused  him
to  be  searched,  with  whom  were  found  many  letters,
wherein  was  written  much  against  our  Princely  estate,
and  that  in  our  Empire  were  many  unlawfull  things
done,  whereat  we  were  much  grieved,  &  would  suffer
none  of  those  rude  messengers  to  have  accesse  unto
us  :  and  shortly  after  wee  were  infourmed  that  one
[I.  404.]  Thomas  Randolfe  was  come  into  our  Dominions  by
the  way  of  Dwina,  Ambassadour  from  the  Queene,  and
we  sent  a  Gentleman  to  meete  and  conduct  him  to  our
Citie  of  Mosco,  at  which  time  we  looked  that  thou
shouldest  have  returned  unto  us  againe.  And  the  said
Thomas  being  arrived  at  our  said  Citie,  wee  sent  unto
him  divers  times,  that  hee  should  come  and  conferre
with  our  Counsell,  whereby  we  might  understand  the
cause  of  his  comming,  looking  for  answere  of  those  our
princely  affaires  committed  unto  thee.  But  hee  refused
to  come  to  our  said  Counsell :  wherefore,  and  for  that
our  saide  Citie  was  visited  with  plague,  the  saide  Thomas
was  the  longer  kept  from  our  presence.  Which  being
ceased,  foorthwith  wee  gave  him  accesse  and  audience,
but  all  his  talke  with  us  was  about  Merchants  affaires,
and  nothing  touching  ours.  Wee  knowe  that  Merchants
matters  are  to  bee  heard,  for  that  they  are  the  stay  of
our  Princely  treasures  :  But  first  Princes  affaires  are  to
be  established,  and  then  Merchants.  After  this  the  said
Thomas  Randolfe  was  with  us  at  our  Citie  of  Vologda,
and wee dealt with him about our Princely affaires,

174

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1572.

whereby  amitie  betwixt  the  Queenes  Majestie  and  us
might  bee  established  for  ever,  and  matters  were  agreed
and  concluded  betwixt  your  Ambassadour  and  us,  and
thereupon  wee  sent  our  Ambassadour  into  England  with
him  to  ende  the  same  :  but  our  Ambassadour  returned
unto  us  againe,  without  finishing  our  said  affaires,  contrary
to  our  expectation,  and  the  agreement  betwixt  us,  and
your  said  Ambassadour.

Thus  when  his  Majestie  had  made  a  long  discourse,
I  humbly  beseeched  his  highnesse  to  heare  me  graciously,
and  to  give  me  leave  to  speake  without  offence,  and
to  beleeve  those  wordes  to  be  true  which  I  should  speake.
Which  he  graunted,  and  these  were  my  words.

Most noble  and  famous Prince, the message which
thy  highnesse did  sende by mee  unto  the Queene  her
most  excellent  Majestie  touching  thy  Princely  and  secret
affaires, immediatly,  and so soone as I  came  home, I
did  declare  both secretly  and truely unto  the  Queenes
Majestie  her  selfe,  word  for  word,  as  thou  Lord  diddest
commaund mee. Which her highnesse did willingly
heare and accept, and being mindefull thereof, and
j  willing to answere the same, the next shipping after,
i  her  Majestie  did  sende  unto  thee.  Lord,  her highnesse
Ambassadour  Thomas  Randolfe,  whose  approoved  wise-
dome and  fidelitie  was  unto  her  Majestie  well  knowen,
and  therefore  thought  meete  to  bee  sent  to  so  worthy  a
Prince, who had  Commission  not onely  to  treate  with
{  thy  Majestie  of  Merchants  affaires,  but  also  of  those  thy
Princely  and  secret  affaires  committed  unto  mee. And
the cause (most gracious Prince) that I  was not sent
againe,  was,  for  that I was imployed in service upon
the Seas against the Queenes  Majesties  enemies, and
was  not  returned  home  at  such  time  as  Master  Thomas
Randolfe  departed  with  the  Shippes,  to  come into thy
Majesties Countrey, otherwise I had bene sent. And
whereas  thy  Majestie  saith,  that  Thomas  Randolfe  would
not treate with thy Counsell of the matters of  his
Legation,  hee  did  (Lord)  therein  according  to  his  Com-

175

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

mission  :  which  was  :  First  to  deale  with  thy  Majestic
thy  selfe,  which  order  is  commonly  used  among  all
Princes,  when  they  send  their  Ambassadours  about  mat-
ters of  great  waight.  And  whereas  the  saide  Thomas
is  charged  that  hee  agreed  and  concluded  upon  matters
at  the  same  time,  and  promised  the  same  should  bee
perfourmed  by  the  Queene  her  Majestie  :  Whereupon
(Lord)  thou  diddest  send  thy  Ambassadour  with  him
into  England,  for  answere  thereof:  It  may  please  thy
Majestie  to  understand,  that  as  the  saide  Thomas  Randolfe
doeth  confesse,  that  in  deede  hee  had  talke  with  thy
Highnesse,  and  counsell  divers  times  about  princely
affaires  :  even  so  hee  denieth  that  ever  hee  did  agree,
conclude,  or  make  any  promise  in  any  condition  or
order,  as  is  alleaged,  otherwise  then  it  should  please
the  Queene  her  Majestie  to  like  of  at  his  returne  home,
which  hee  did  justifie  to  thy  Highnes  Ambassador  his
face  in  England.  Wherefore,  most  mighty  Prince,  it
doth  well  appeare,  that  either  thy  Ambassador  did  un-  I
truly  enforme  thy  Majestie,  or  els  thy  princely  minde,  1
and  the  true  meaning  of  the  Queenes  highnes  her
Ambassador,  for  want  of  a  good  Interpretor,  was  not
well  understood :  and  how  thankefully  the  Queene  her
Majestie  did  receive  thy  highnes  commendations,  and
letters  sent  by  thy  Majesties  Ambassador,  and  how
gratiously  shee  gave  him  audience  sundry  times,  using
him  with  such  honour  in  all  points  for  thy  sake,  Lord,
her  loving  brother,  as  the  like  was  never  shewed  to  any
Ambassador  in  our  Realme,  and  how  honourably  with
full  answere  in  all  things,  her  Majestie  dismissed  him,
when  hee  had  finished  all  thy  princely  affaires  (as  it
seemed)  to  his  owne  contentation,  it  may  well  appeare
by  a  true  certificate  lately  sent  with  her  highnes  letter
unto  thee  Lord,  by  her  messenger  Robert  Beast,  and
her  Majestie  did  suppose  that  that  thy  Ambassador  would
have  made  report  accordingly,  and  that  by  him  thy
highnes  would  have  bene  satisfied  in  all  things  :  other-
wise she  would  have  sent  her  Majesties  Ambassador  with

176

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1572.
him  unto  thee  Lord  againe.  But  now  her  highnes  per-
ceiving that  thy  Majestie  is  not  fully  satisfied  in  thy
Princely  affaires,  neither  by  Thomas  Randolfe,  her  highnes
Ambassador,  nor  by  thine  owne  Ambassador  Andrea  Andrew  Savin
Savin,  nor  yet  by  her  Majesties  letter  sent  by  the  said  -j^^^^^^^^^^
Andrea :  and  also  understanding  thy  great  griefe  and  p^j-^j^j.  ^
displeasure  towards  sir  William  Garret,  and  his  company,  [i.  405.]
merchants  traffiking  in  thy  Majesties  dominions,  hath
thought  good  to  send  mee  at  this  present  unto  thee
Lord  Emperor,  and  great  duke,  as  wel  with  her  highnes
ful  mind,  touching  thy  princely  affaires,  as  also  to  know
the  just  cause  of  thy  Majesties  said  displeasure  towards
the  said  company  of  merchants  :  and  hath  commanded
me  to  answere  to  all  things  in  their  behalfe,  and  according
to  their  true  meanings.  For  her  highnes  doth  suppose
thy  Majesties  indignation  to  proceede  rather  upon  the
evill,  and  untrue  reports  of  thy  late  Ambassador  in
England,  and  of  such  wicked  persons  of  our  nation
resident  here  in  thy  highnes  dominions,  rebels  to  her
Majestie,  and  their  Countrey,  then  of  any  just  deserts
of  the  said  merchants,  who  never  willingly  deserved  thy
highnesse  displeasure,  but  rather  favour  in  all  their  doings
and  meanings.  And  since  the  first  time  of  their  traffik-
ing in  thy  Majesties  dominions,  which  is  now  nineteene
yeres,  the  said  merchants  have  bene,  and  are  alwayes
ready  and  willing  truely  to  serve  thy  highnesse  of  all
things  meete  for  thy  Treasurie,  in  time  of  peace  and  of
warre  in  despite  of  all  thy  enemies  :  although  the  Princes
of  the  East  Seas  were  agreed  to  stoppe  the  sound,  and
the  way  to  the  Narve,  and  have  brought,  and  do  bring
from  time  to  time  such  commoditie  to  thee.  Lord,  as
her  Majestie  doeth  not  suffer  to  be  transported  foorth
of  her  Realme  to  no  other  Prince  of  the  world.  And
what  great  losses  the  said  sir  William  Garret,  with  his
company  hath  sustained  of  late  yeeres  in  this  trade,  as
well  by  Shipwracke,  as  by  false  servants  it  is  manifestly
knowen  :  and  what  service  the  said  companies  Ships  did
unto  thy  Majestie  against  thy  enemies,  two  yeeres  past
III  177  M

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

in  going  to  the  Narve,  when  they  fought  with  the  king
of  Poles  shippes  Freebooters,  and  burnt  the  same  and
slew  the  people,  and  as  many  as  were  taken  alive  delivered
unto  thy  Captaine  at  the  Narve,  I  trust  thy  highnesse
doth  not  forget.  Wherefore  most  mighty  prince,  the
premises  considered,  the  Queene  her  most  excellent
Majestie  thy  loving  sister,  doeth  request  thy  highnes
to  restore  the  said  sir  William  Garret  with  his  company
into  thy  princely  favour  againe,  with  their  priviledges
for  free  traffique  with  thy  accustomed  goodnes  and
justice,  to  be  ministred  unto  them  throughout  all  thy
Majesties  dominions,  as  aforetime :  and  that  the  same
may  be  signified  by  thy  Princely  letters,  directed  to  thy
officers  in  all  places,  and  thy  highnesse  commaundement
or  restraint  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  And  further
that  it  will  please  thy  Majestie,  not  to  give  credite  to
false  reports,  and  untrue  suggestions  of  such  as  are
enemies,  and  such  as  neither  would  have  mutuall  amitie
to  continue  betwixt  your  Majesties,  nor  yet  entercourse
betwixt  your  countries.  And  such  rebels  of  our  nation,
as  Ralfe  Rutter,  and  others  which  lye  lurking  here  in
thy  highnes  dominions,  seeking  to  sowe  dissentions
betwixt  your  Majesties  by  false  surmises,  spending  away
their  masters  goods  riotously,  and  will  not  come  home
to  give  up  their  accompts,  advancing  themselves  to  be
merchants,  and  able  to  serve  thy  highnes  of  all  things
fit  for  thy  treasurie,  whereas  indeed  they  be  of  no  credite,
nor  able  of  themselves  to  do  thy  Majestie  any  service
at  all  :  the  Queenes  highnes  request  is,  that  it  would
please  thy  Majestie  to  commaund  that  such  persons
may  be  delivered  unto  me  to  be  caried  home,  least  by
their  remayning  here,  and  having  practises  and  friend-
ship with  such  as  be  not  thy  highnesse  friendes,  their
evil  doing  might  be  a  cause  hereafter  to  withdraw
thy  goodnes  from  sir  William  Garret  and  his  com-
pany, who  have  true  meaning  in  all  their  doings,  and
are  ready  to  serve  thy  highnesse  at  all  times,  using
many  other  words  to the  advancement  of  your  credits,

178

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad

1572.

and the disgracing of  your enemies, and so I ended
for  that  time.

Then  sayd  his  Majestic,  We  have  heard  you,  and  will
consider  of  all  things  further,  when  wee  have  read  the
Queene  our  sisters  letters :  to  whom  I  answered,  that
I  supposed  his  Majestie  should  by  those  letters  under-
stand her  highnesse  full  minde  to  his  contentation,  and
what  wanted  in  writing,  I  had  credite  to  accomplish  in
word.  Wherewith  his  Majestie  seemed  to  be  wel  pleased,
and  commaunded  me  to  sit  downe.  And  after  pawsing
a  while,  his  Majestie  said  these  words  unto  me,  It  is
now  a  time  which  we  spend  in  fasting,  and  praying,
being  the  weeke  before  Easter,  and  for  that  we  will
shortly  depart  from  hence,  towards  our  borders  of  Novo-
grod,  wee  can  not  give  you  answere,  nor  your  dispatch
here,  but  you  shall  goe  from  hence,  and  tary  us  upon
the  way,  where  wee  will  shortly  come,  and  then  you
shall  knowe  our  pleasure,  and  have  your  dispatch.  And
so  I  was  dismissed  to  my  lodging,  and  the  same  day
I  had  a  dinner  ready  drest  sent  me  from  his  Majestie,
with  great  store  of  drinkes,  of  divers  sorts,  and  the  next
day  following,  being  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  March
aforesayde,  the  chiefe  Secretary  to  his  Majesty,  sent
unto  mee  a  Gentleman,  to  signifie  unto  mee,  that  the
Emperours  Majesties  pleasure  was,  I  should  immediatly
depart  towards  a  Citie,  called  Otwer,  three  hundred
miles  from  the  aforesaid  Sloboda,  and  there  to  tary  his
highnes  comming  unto  a  place  called  Staryts,  three  score
miles  from  the  sayd  Otwer.

Then  I  sent  my  Interpretor  to  the  chiefe  Secretary,
requesting  him  to  further,  and  shew  his  favour  unto
our  saide  merchants  in  their  sutes,  which  they  should
have  occasion  to  move  in  my  absence :  who  sent  me  [I.  406.]
word  againe,  that  they  should  be  wel  assured  of  his
friendship,  and  furtherance  in  all  their  sutes.  And  forth-
with post  horses  were  sent  me,  with  a  Gentleman  to
conduct  me.  And  so  departing  from  the  said  Sloboda,
I  arrived  at  the  said  Otwer,  the  28.  of  March  aforesaid,

179

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

where  I  remained  til  the  eight  of  May  folowing.  Then
I  was  sent  for  to  come  unto  his  Majestie,  to  the  said
Staryts,  where  I  arrived  the  tenth  of  the  same,  and  the
twelfth  of  the  same  I  was  appointed  to  come  to  the
chiefe  Secretary,  who  at  our  meeting  said  unto  me  these
words.

Our  Lord  Emperor,  and  great  Duke,  hath  not  onely
perused  the  Queene  her  highnes  letters  sent  by  you,
and  thereby  doeth  perceive  her  minde,  as  well  touching
their  princely  affaires,  as  also  her  earnest  request  in  the
merchants  behalfe,  but  also  hath  well  pondered  your
words.  And  therefore  his  Majesties  pleasure  is,  that
you  let  me  understand  what  sutes  you  have  to  move
in  the  merchants  behalfe,  or  otherwise,  for  that  to
morrowe  you  shall  have  accesse  againe  unto  his  highnes,
and  shall  have  full  answere  in  all  things,  with  your
dispatch  away.

Then  after  long  conference  had  with  him  of  divers
matters  I  gave  him  in  writing  certaine  briefe  articles  of
requests,  which  I  had  drawen  out  ready,  as  foloweth :

1  First  the  Queenes  Majestie  her  request  is,  that  it
would  please  the  Emperors  highnesse  to  let  me  know
the  just  cause  of  his  great  displeasure  fallen  upon  sir
William  Garrard,  &  his  company,  who  never  deserved
the  same,  to  their  knowledge.

2  Also  that  it  would  please  his  highnes  not  to  give
credite  unto  false  and  untrue  reports,  by  such  as  seeke
to  sowe  dissention,  and  breake  friendship  betwixt  the
Queenes  highnesse,  and  his  Majestie.

3  Also  that  it  would  please  his  Majestie  to  receive
the  said  sir  William  Garrard,  with  his  company  into  his
favour  againe,  and  to  restore  them  to  their  former  privi-
ledges  and  liberties,  for  free  traffike  in,  and  through,
and  out  of  al  his  Majesties  dominions,  in  as  ample  maner
as  aforetime,  according  to  his  princely  letters  of  privi-
ledge,  and  accustomed  goodnes.

4  Also  it  would  please  his  highnes  to  graunt,  that
the  said  company  of  merchants  may  have  justice  of  all

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1572.
his  subjects,  as  well  for  money  owing  unto  them,  as
other  their  griefes  and  injuries,  throughout  al  his
dominions  suffred  since  the  time  of  his  displeasure,
during  which  time,  the  merchants  were  forced  by  severe
justice  to  answer  to  al  mens  demands,  but  theirs  could
not  be  heard.

5  Also  that  his  Majestic  would  understand,  that
much  debts  are  owing  to  the  said  merchants,  by  divers
of  his  Nobilitie,  whereof  part  are  in  durance,  and  some
executed,  and  the  said  merchants  know  not  howe  to  be
paide,  and  answered  the  same,  except  his  highnes  pitie
their  case,  and  commaund  some  order  to  be  taken
therein.

6  Also  it  would  please  his  highnes  to  commaund
that  the  saide  merchants  may  be  payde  all  such  summe
or  summes  of  money  as  are  owing,  and  due  unto  them
by  his  Majestic,  for  wares,  as  well  English,  as  Shamaki,
taken  into  his  highnes  treasury  by  his  officers  in  sundry
places,  the  long  forbearing  whereof  hath  bene,  and  is
great  hinderance  to  the  said  company  of  merchants.

7  Also  it  would  please  his  Majestie  to  understand,
that  at  this  present  time  there  are  in  Persia  of  English
merchants,  Thomas  Banister,  and  Geffrey  Ducket,  with
their  company,  &  goods,  ready  to  come  into  his
Majesties  countrey  of  Astracan,  and  would  have  come
the  last  yeere,  but  that  the  ship,  with  our  merchants
and  mariners  appointed  to  goe  for  them,  were  stayed  at
Astracan  by  his  highnes  Captaine  there,  to  the  great
hinderance  of  the  said  merchants.  Wherefore  it  may
now  please  his  Majestie  to  direct  his  princely  letters
unto  his  Captaines  and  rulers,  both  at  Astracan  and
Cazan,  not  onely  to  suffer  our  people,  as  well  merchants
as  mariners,  quietly  and  freely  to  passe  and  repasse  with
their  shippes,  barkes,  or  other  vessels  downe  the  river
Volga,  and  over  the  Mare  Caspium,  to  fetch  the  sayd
English  merchants,  with  their  company  and  goods,  out
of  the  sayd  Persia,  into  his  Majesties  dominions,  but
also that it would please his highnes streightly to

181

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

command,  that  when  the  sayd  Thomas  Banister,  and
Geffrey"  Ducket,  with  their  charge,  shal  arrive  at  the
sayd  Astracan,  his  Majesties  Captaine  there,  and  in  all
other  places  upon  the  river  Volga,  shall  so  ayde  and
assist  the  sayd  merchants,  as  they  may  be  safely  con-
ducted out  of  the  danger  of  the  Crimmes,  and  other
their  enemies.

8  Also  it  may  please  his  highnes  to  understand,  that
lately  our  merchants  comming  from  Shamaki,  have  bene
ill  used  by  his  Majesties  Customers,  both  at  Astracan
and  Cazan,  at  both  which  places  they  were  forced  to
pay  custome  for  their  wares,  although  they  solde  no
part  thereof,  but  brought  the  same  into  his  highnesse
treasury  at  Sloboda  :  and  the  sayd  Customers  did  not
only  exact,  and  take  much  more  custome  then  was  due
by  his  Majesties  lawes,  but  also  for  want  of  present
money,  tooke  wares  much  exceeding  their  exacted  cus-
tome, and  doe  keepe  the  same  as  a  pawne.  It  may
therefore  please  his  highnes  to  direct  his  princely  letters
to  the  said  Customers,  to  signifie  unto  them  his  great
goodnes  againe  restored  unto  the  said  English  mer-
chants, as  also  to  command  them  to  send  the  said
merchants their said goods so detained, up to the

[I.  407.]  Mosco, they paying such custome for the same, as
shall  be  by  his  Majestic  appointed.

9  Aso  that  it  would  please  his  highnesse  to  grant,
that  sir  William  Garrard  with  his  companie  may  estab-
lish their  trade  for  merchandise  at  Colmogro  in  Dwina,
and  that  such  wares  as  shal  be  brought  out  of  our
Countrey  fit  for  his  treasurie  might  be  looked  upon,
and  received  by  his  officers  there  :  and  that  his  Majes-
ties people  traffiking  with  our  merchants  may  bring
downe  their  commodities  to  the  saide  Colmogro,  by
meanes  whereof  the  saide  English  merchants  avoyding
great  troubles  and  charges,  in  transporting  their  goods
so  farre,  and  into  so  many  places  of  his  dominions,
may  sell  the  same  better  cheape,  to  the  benefite  of  his
Majesties  subjects.

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1572.

10  Also  if  it  seemed  good  to  his  highnes,  that  the
whole  trade  likewise  from  Persia,  Boghar,  and  all  other
those  Countreys  beyond  the  Mare  Caspium,  might  be
established  at  Astracan,  the  ancient  Marte  towne  in
times  past,  which  would  be  both  for  the  great  honour
and  profite  of  his  Majesty,  and  subjects,  as  I  am  well
able  to  proove,  if  it  will  please  his  highnesse  to  appoint
any  of  his  counsell  to  talke  with  me  therein.

11  Also  forasmuch  as  it  pleased  his  Majestie,  im-
mediatly  after  the  burning  of  the  Mosco,  to  command
that  the  said  English  merchants  should  give  in  a  note
into  his  Treasury,  for  their  losses  sustained  by  the  said
fire,  which  was  done  by  William  Rowly,  then  chiefe
Agent  for  sir  William  Garrard  and  his  company,  and
the  particulars  in  the  same  note  consumed  with  the
said  fire  did  amount  to  the  summe  of  loooo.  rubbles
and  above  :  It  may  please  his  highnes  of  his  accus-
tomed goodnes  and  great  clemencie  to  consider  of  the
same,  and  to  give  the  said  company  so  much  as  shal
seeme  good  unto  his  Majestie,  towards  their  said  losses.

12  Also  that  it  will  please  his  highnesse  to  understand
that  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie,  at  the  earnest
sute  and  request  of  Andrea  Savin  his  Majesties  Ambassa-
dour,  did  not  onely  pardon  and  forgive  Thomas  Glover
his  great  and  grievous  offences  towards  her  highnesse
committed,  onely  for  his  Majesties  sake,  but  also  com-
manded sir  William  Garrard  with  his  company,  to  deale
favourably  with  the  said  Glover  in  his  accompts,  to
whom  he  was  indebted  greatly,  and  being  their  servant,
detained  their  goods  in  his  hands  a  long  time  :  where-
upon the  said  sir  William  Garrard  with  his  company
counted  with  the  said  Glover,  and  ended  all  things  even
to  his  saide  contentation,  and  was  found  to  bee  debter
to  the  said  company  4000.  rubbles  and  above,  and
bound  himselfe  both  by  his  solemne  othe,  and  his
hand-writing,  to  pay  the  same  immediatly  after  his
returne  into  Russia  with  the  said  Andrea  Savin,  unto
Nicholas  Proctor  chiefe  Agent  there,  for  the  said  com-

183

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

pany  of  merchants.  But  although  it  is  now  two  yeeres
past,  since  the  said  agreement,  and  that  the  said
Nicholas  hath  divers  and  sundry  times  requested  the
said  money  of  the  said  Thomas,  yet  will  he  not  pay
the  same  debt,  but  maketh  delay  from  time  to  time,
alleadging  that  his  Majestie  oweth  him  a  great  summe
of  money,  without  the  payment  whereof  he  cannot  be
able  to  pay  the  said  merchants  his  due  debt  long  for-
borne, to  their  great  hinderance.  In  consideration  of
the  premisses,  It  may  please  his  highnesse  to  give  order
that  the  said  Glover  may  be  payd,  and  that  he  may
discharge  his  debt  to  the  said  company  of  merchants,
and  the  rather  for  that  hee  found  such  mercie  and
favour  in  England,  onely  for  his  Majesties  sake.

13  Also  forasmuch  as  Ralfe  Rutter  a  rebell  to  the
Queenes  Majestie,  and  an  enemie  to  his  Countrey,  and
to  sir  William  Garrard  and  his  company,  hath  of  long
time  remained  here,  living  of  the  spoyles  and  goods  of
the  said  merchants,  which  he  wrongfully  detained  in
his  handes,  riotously  spending  the  same,  during  the
time  that  he  was  their  servant,  and  would  not  come
home  when  he  was  sent  for,  and  also  for  that  the
Queenes  Majestie  doth  understand,  that  the  said  Ralfe,
with  other  his  adherents,  doe  seeke  by  all  false  meanes
to  sowe  dissention,  and  breake  amitie  betwixt  their
Majesties,  and  to  overthrowe  the  trade  of  the  said
merchants  :  Her  highnes  request  is,  that  the  said  Ralfe
with  his  complices  may  be  delivered  unto  me,  to  be
caried  home,  and  none  other  of  her  Majesties  subjects,
not  being  of  the  societie  of  the  said  Sir  William  Garrard
and  his  company,  to  be  suffered  to  traffike  within  his
highnes  dominions,  but  to  be  delivered  to  their  Agent
to  bee  sent  home  :  for  that  the  said  merchants  with
great  charges  and  losses,  both  by  shipwracke,  and  riotous
servants,  did  first  finde  out  this  trade,  and  have  con-
tinued the  same  these  19.  yeeres,  to  their  great  hinder-
ance.

14  Also  whereas  divers  masters  and  artificers  of  our

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1572.
Nation  are  here  in  his  Majesties  service,  and  do  finde
themselves  grieved  that  they  cannot  have  licence  to
depart  home  into  their  native  Countrey  at  their  will
and  pleasure  :  the  Queenes  Majesties  request  is,  accord-
ing to  her  highnes  writing  in  that  behalfe,  that  not  onely
it  will  please  his  Majestie  to  permit  and  suffer  such
artificers  here  resident  in  the  service  of  his  highnes,  to
have  free  libertie  to  depart,  and  go  home  with  me,  if
they  request  the  same,  but  also  all  other  the  like,  which
shall  come  hereafter  to  serve  his  Majesty,  to  have  free
libertie  to  depart  likewise,  without  any  let  or  stay.

15  Also it may please his Majesty to understand

that  during  the  time  of  my  long  being  at  Colmogro,  [I.  408.]
attending  his  highnesse  pleasure  for  my  further  accesse,
I  with  my  company  have  not  onely  bene  ill  used  and
intreated  there,  and  likewise  the  merchants  there,  by
one  Besson  Mysserevy  his  Majesties  chiefe  officer,  who
hath  dishonoured  me,  and  smitten  my  people,  and
oweth  the  saide  merchants  much  money,  and  will  not
pay  them  :  but  also  the  saide  Besson  hath  spoken
wordes  of  dishonour  against  the  Queenes  Majestie.
Wherefore  it  may  please  his  highnesse  to  send  downe
with  me  to  Colmogro,  a  Gentleman,  as  well  chiefly  to
search  foorth  his  evill  behaviour  towards  her  Majestie,
as  towards  me  her  highnesse  Ambassador,  and  to  punish
him  accordingly :  and  also  that  it  would  please  his
Majestie  to  sende  downe  his  letter  of  justice,  by  vertue
whereof  the  said  Besson  may  be  forced  to  pay  all  such
money  as  he  oweth  to  the  sayd  merchants,  without  delay.

16  Also  that  it  would  please  his  highnesse  to  under-
stand, that  sir  William  Garrard  with  his  company  under-
standing of  the  great  dearth  in  his  Majesties  dominions,
by  licence  of  the  Queens  Majestie,  (not  otherwise  per-
mitted) hath  sent  certaine  ships  laden  with  corne  into  his
highnesse  Countrey  of  Dwyna,  rather  for  the  reliefe  of
his  Majesties  subjects,  then  for  any  gaine  :  yet  the  good
wil  of  the  said  merchants  lightly  regarded,  they  were  for-
bidden to  sel  the  said  corne,  to  their  great  discourage-

185

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

ment  hereafter  to  send  any  more.  Wherefore  it  may
please  his  highnesse,  to  tender  the  good  will  of  the  said
merchants,  as  well  in  sending  the  saide  corne,  as  in  all
other  things,  ready  to  serve  his  Majestie,  and  to  direct
his  letters  to  his  officers  of  Dwina,  to  suffer  the  saide
merchants  with  their  company,  to  sell  the  said  corne  by
measure,  great  or  small  at  their  pleasure,  without  paying
custome.

These  articles  being  delivered  to  the  chiefe  Secretary,
as  aforesayde,  and  our  talke  ended  for  that  time,  I
departed  to  my  lodging,  accompanied  with  certaine
Gentlemen.  The  next  day,  being  the  13.  of  May  afore-
said, I  had  warning  earely  in  the  morning,  to  prepare  my
selfe  to  be  at  the  Court,  betwixt  the  houres  of  10.  and  1 1.
of  the  clocke,  where  I  should  have  accesse  unto  the
presence  of  the  Prince,  as  well  to  receive  answere  of  all
things,  as  to  bee  dismissed  to  goe  home.  At  which
houres  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Court,  and  brought  into  the
Chamber  of  presence,  where  his  Majestie  did  sit  apparelled
most  sumptuously,  with  a  riche  Crowne  upon  his  head,
garnished  with  many  pretious  stones,  his  eldest  sonne
sitting  by  him,  and  many  of  his  Nobilitie  about  him  :
and  after  my  duetie  done,  his  highnesse  commanded  me
to  approch  very  neere  unto  him,  and  sayde  unto  me
these  wordes.

Anthony,  the  Queene  our  loving  sister  her  letters  wee
have  caused  to  be  translated,  and  doe  well  understand  the
same,  and  of  all  things  as  well  therein  contained,  as  by
worde  of  mouth  by  you  to  us  declared  wee  have  well
considered,  and  doe  perceive  that  our  secret  message  unto
you  committed,  was  done  truely  according  to  our  minde
(although  wee  were  advertised  to  the  contrary)  and  nowe
wee  are  by  you  fully  satisfied.  And  when  wee  did  sende
our  Ambassadour  into  England,  about  those  our  great
and  waightie  affaires,  to  conclude  the  same  with  the
Queene  our  sister,  our  Ambassadour  coulde  ende  nothing
for  want  of  such  assurance  as  was  requisite  in  princely
affaires,  according  to  the  maner  of  all  Countreys,  but  was

186

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

dismissed unto us againe,  with letters  of  small  effect, The  causes  of
touching  the  same,  and  no  Ambassadour  sent  with  him  ^.^  Emperors
from  the  Queene  :  which  caused  us  to  thinke,  that  our "r^^^"'"^-
princely  affaires  were  set  aside,  and  little  regarded,  where-
with wee  were  at  that  time  much  grieved  :  for  the  which
cause,  and for the evill behaviour  of  your  merchants,
resident  in  our  dominions  (who  have  divers  wayes  trans-
gressed and  broken  our  lawes,  living  wilfully  in  al  their
doings)  we  did  lay  our  heavie  displeasure  upon  them,  and
did  take  away  from  them  their  priviledge,  commaunding
that  the  same  throughout  all  our  dominions,  should  be
voyd,  and  of  none  effect  :  and  thereupon  did  write  to  the
Queene  our  sister,  touching  our  griefes.

And  nowe  her  highnesse  hath  sent  unto  us  againe,  you
her  Ambassadour,  with  her  loving  letters,  and  full  minde,
which  we  doe  thankefuUy  receive,  and  are  thereby  fully
satisfied.  And  for  that  our  princely,  and  secret  affaires
were  not  finished  to  our  contentation  at  our  time
appointed,  according  to  our  expectation,  we  doe  now
leave  of  all  those  matters,  and  set  them  aside  for  the
time,  because  our  minde  is  nowe  otherwise  changed,  but
hereafter  when  occasion  shall  moove  us  to  the  like,  wee
will  then  talke  of  those  matters  againe.  And  for  that  it
hath  pleased  the  Queene  our  loving  sister,  to  sende  unto
us  at  this  present,  and  doeth  desire  to  continue  in  friend-
ship with  us  for  ever  (which  wee  doe  gratefully  accept,  and
willingly  agree  to  the  same)  wee  of  our  goodnesse  for  her
highnesse  sake,  will  not  onely  from  hencefoorth  put  away,
and  forget  all  our  displeasure  towardes  the  same  Sir
William  Garrard  and  his  company  (as  though  they  had
never  offended  us)  but  also  will  restore  them  to  their
priviledges,  and  liberties,  in,  and  throughout  all  our
dominions,  and  will  signifie  the  same  by  our  letters,  in  all
Townes  and  Cities,  where  the  said  merchants  do  traffique,
and  we  will  shewe  them  favour  as  aforetime,  if  they
deserve  not  the  contrary.  And  if  the  Queene  our  sister  [I,  409.]
had  not  sent  thee  Anthony  unto  us  at  this  present,
God  knoweth  what  we  should  have done to  the  said

187

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

merchants, or  whether  we  would have called  back  our
indignation.

Then  I  humbly  beseeched  his  Majestie,  to  let  me  know
the  particular  offences  committed  by  the  said  merchants,
and  the  offenders  names,  to  the  intent  I  might  make
report  thereof,  unto  the  Queenes  Majestie,  my  mistres,
accordingly,  that  the  said  offenders  might  receive  just
punishments  for  their  deserts  :  but  he  said,  I  should  not
know  them,  because  he  had  cleerely  remitted  al  offences  :
and  further,  that  it  was  not  princely  to  forgive,  and  after
to  accuse  the  parties,  whereby  her  Majesties  displeasure
might  fall  upon  them  at  home.  Notwithstanding  I  did
after  understand  some  part  thereof,  by  other  meanes.

Then  his  Majestie  proceeding  in  talke,  said  :  As
touching  the  articles  of  request,  concerning  the  marchants
affaires,  which  you  did  yesterday  deliver  unto  our
Secretary,  we  have  not  onely  read  the  same  our  selfe,  but
also  have  appointed  our  said  Secretary  to  declare  unto
you  our  mind,  and  answere  to  the  same.  And  for  that
we  are  now  upon  our  journey  towards  our  borders,  and
will  depart  from  hence  shortly,  we  will  dismisse  you  to  ye
Queene  our  loving  sister,  your  mistres,  with  our  letters,
&  full  mind  by  word  of  mouth,  touching  all  your
requests,  &  will  send  a  gentleman  one  of  our  houshold
with  you  to  safe  conduct  you  to  your  ships  :  and  of  our
goodnes  will  give  you  victuals,  boates,  men,  and  post
horses,  so  many  as  you  shall  neede.  And  therewith  his
Majestie  standing  up,  and  putting  off  his  cappe,  said  unto
me  these  words.  Doe  our  hearty  commendations  unto
our  loving  sister,  Queene  Elizabeth,  unto  whom  we  wish
long  life,  with  happie  successe :  and  therewith  his  highnes
extended  his  hand  to  me  to  kisse,  and  commanded  his
Sonne,  sitting  by  him,  to  send  the  like  commendations,
which  he  did,  whose  hand  likewise  I  kissed.  And  then
his  Majestie  caused  me  to  sit  downe,  and  commaunded
wine  and  drinkes  of  divers  sorts  to  be  brought,  whereof
he  gave  me  to  drinke  with  his  owne  hand,  and  so  after  1
departed.

188

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1572.

Then  the  next  day,  being  the  14  of  May  aforesaid,  I
was  sent  for  to  come  to  the  chief  Secretary,  &  one  other
of  the  counsel  with  him,  who  at  our  meeting  said  unto
me  these  words  :  We  are  appointed  by  the  Emperor  his
majesty,  to  give  you  answere  from  his  Highnes,  touching
your  requests  delivered  in  writing,  which  his  Majestie
himselfe  hath  perused,  &  answered  as  followeth.

1  To  the  first  request  it  is  answered,  that  all  his
Majesties  griefes  and  displeasure  (now  put  away  from  the
merchants)  did  grow,  because  the  Queenes  Majestie  did
not  accomplish  and  ende  with  his  ambassador,  his  secrete
and  waighty  affaires,  according  to  his  expectation,  and  the
promise  made  by  Thomas  Randolph,  at  his  being  here  :
and  also  of  the  ill  behaviour  of  your  merchants  resident
here  in  our  Countrey,  as  his  Majestie  did  himselfe  yester-
day declare  unto  you.

2  To  the  second,  his  Majesty  willeth  you  to  under-
stand, that  he  hath  not,  nor  will  not  hereafter  be  moved
to  breake  friendship  with  the  Queenes  Majesty,  without
good  and  just  cause.

3  To  the  third,  you  are  answered  by  the  Emperors
Majestie  himselfe,  that  his  great  goodnes  and  favour
againe  unto  the  merchants  shall  be  restored,  and  the  same
to  be  knowen  by  his  gratious  letters  of  privilege  now
againe  granted.

4  To  the  fourth,  his  majesty  hath  commanded,  that
your  merchants  here  resident  shall  exhibite,  and  put  in
writing  unto  me  his  Majesties  Secretarie,  all  their  griefes,
and  complaints,  as  well  for  debts,  as  other  injuries  offred
them  since  the  time  of  his  Highnes  displeasure,  and  they
shall  have  justice  truly  ministred  throughout  all  his
Majesties  dominions  without  delay.

5  To  the  fifth,  his  majesty  doth  not  know  of  any  debts
due  unto  the  merchants,  by  any  of  his  Noblemen,  as  is
alleaged  :  and  whether  it  be  true  or  no,  he  knoweth  not  :
the  trueth  whereof  must  be  tried  out,  and  thereupon
answere  to  be  given  :  and  hereafter  his  majestie  would
not  have  the  merchants  to  trust  his  people  with  too  much.

180

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

6  To  the  sixth,  it  is  answered,  that  his  majesty  hath
commanded  search  to  be  made  what  money  is  owing  j
to  the  marchants,  for  wares  received  into  his  treasury,
as  in  the  article  :  (the  most  of  the  bookes  of  accompt
being  burnt  in  the  Mosco)  and  such  as  is  due,  &  found
meete  to  be  paid,  shall  be  paid  forthwith  to  the  mar-
chants,  their  factors  or  servants,  which  shall  come  for
the  same.  And  for  paiment  of  the  rest,  his  majesties
further  pleasure  shall  be  signified  hereafter.

7  To  the  7  his  Majesties  answere  is,  that  letters  shall
be  written  forthwith  to  his  captaines  of  Astracan,  and
Cazan,  and  other  his  officers,  upon  the  river  Volga,  to
whom  it  appertaineth,  not  onely  to  suffer  your  people,
both  marchants,  &  mariners,  to  passe  with  their  ships,
or  barkes,  from  Astracan,  over  the  Mare  caspium,  to
fetche  Thomas  Banister,  and  Geofry  Ducket,  with  their
company,  and  goods  out  of  Persia,  but  also  when  they
shall  arrive  within  his  Majesties  dominions,  to  aide  and
assist  them,  and  see  them  safely  conducted  up  the  river
Volga,  from  danger  of  enemies.

8  To  the  eight,  his  majestic  hath  commanded  letters
to  be  written  to  the  Customers,  both  of  Astracan  and
Cazan,  to  make  restitution  to  the  English  merchants  of
their  goods  so  deteined  by  them  for  custome,  &  to  take

[I.  410.]  custome  for  the  same,  according  to  his  Majesties  letters
of  privilege.

9  10  To  the  ninth  and  tenth  articles,  his  Majestic
will  consider  of  those  matters,  and  hereafter  will  signifie
his  princely  pleasure  therein.

1 1  To  the  eleventh,  as  touching  an  inventorie  given
into  the  treasury,  what  goods  the  merchants  had  burnt
in  the  Mosco,  in  their  houses  there,  his  Majesties
pleasure  was  to  understande  the  same,  to  the  intent  he
might  know  the  losses  of  all  strangers  at  that  present,
but  not  to  make  restitution,  for  that  it  was  Gods  doing,
and  not  the  Emperours.

12  To  the  twelfth,  concerning  Thomas  Glover,  his
Majestic was enformed by his Ambassador of the

190

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1572.

Queenes  great  mercy  and  clemencie  towards  the  said
Thomas,  for  his  sake,  which  his  Highnes  received  in
good  part,  but  what  agreement  or  dealings  was  betwixt
the  said  sir  William  Garrard,  &  his  company,  &  the
said  Glover,  or  what  he  doth  owe  unto  the  said  mer-
chants, his  Majestic  doth  not  know.  And  as  for  the
money  which  the  said  Thomas  saith  is  owing  unto  him
by  the  Emperour,  his  Majesties  pleasure  is,  that  so
much  as  shall  be  found  due,  &  growing  upon  wares
delivered  unto  the  treasurie,  out  of  the  time  of  his
Majesties  displeasure,  shall  be  paid  forthwith  to  the
said  Thomas,  and  the  rest  is  forfeited  unto  his  Majestie,
and  taken  for  a  fine,  as  appertaining  to  Rutter  and
Bennet,  accompted  traitors  unto  his  Highnes,  during  the
time  of  his  displeasure.

13  To  the  thirteenth  article,  concerning  Rutter  to  be
delivered  unto  you,  to  be  caried  home,  the  answere
was,  that  as  his  Majestie  will  not  detaine  any  English
man  in  his  Countrey,  that  is  willing  to  go  home,  accord-
ing to  the  Queenes  request :  even  so  will  he  not  force
any  to  depart,  that  is  willing  to  tary  with  him.  Yet
his  Highnes,  to  satisfie  the  Queenes  Majesties  request,
is  contented  at  this  present  to  send  the  said  Ralfe  Rutter
home  with  you,  and  hath  commanded  that  a  letter  shall
be  written  unto  his  chiefe  officer  at  the  Mosco,  to  send
the  said  Rutter  away  with  speed,  that  he  may  be  with
you  at  Vologda,  by  the  fine  of  May,  without  faile  :  and
touching  the  rest  of  your  request  in  the  said  article,  his
Majesties  pleasure  shall  be  signified  in  the  letters  of
privilege,  granted  to  the  said  merchants.

14  To  the  fourteenth,  touching  artificers,  his  Majestie
will  accomplish  all  the  Queenes  Highnes  request  in  that
behalfe,  and  now  at  this  present  doth  licence  such  and
so  many  to  depart  to  their  native  countrey  as  are  willing
to  goe.

15  To  the  15,  touching  Besson  Messerivey,  the
Emperors  majestie  is  much  offended  with  him,  and
will  send  down  a  gentleman  with  you  to  inquire  of  his

191

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

ill  behavior,  aswel  for  speaking  of  undecent  words  against
the  Queens  majestic  as  you  have  alleaged,  as  also  against
you,  and  the  merchants  for  his  outrages  mentioned  in
the  article,  &  the  said  Besson  being  found  guilty,  to
be  imprisoned  &  punished  by  severe  justice  accordingly,
and  after  to  put  in  sureties  to  answere  the  Emperors
high  displeasure,  or  els  to  be  brought  up  like  a  prisoner
by  the  said  gentleman  to  answere  his  offences  before  his
Majestic.  And  his  highnes  doth  request  that  the
Queenes  highnes  would  doe  the  like  upon  Middleton
and  Manlie  her  messengers  sent  thither  two  yeres  past,
and  of  all  others  for  their  ill  behaviour  towards  his
majestie,  as  may  appeare  by  letters  sent  by  Daniel
Silvester  from  his  highnes,  least  by  the  bad  demeanor
of  such  lewd  persons,  the  amity  and  friendship  betwixt
their  majesties  might  be  diminished.

16  To  the  16  and  last  article,  touching  the  corne
brought  into  the  Emperors  dominions  by  the  merchants,
his  majestie  doth  greatly  commend  them  for  so  wel
doing,  and  hath  commanded  to  give  you  a  letter  forth-
with in  their  behalf,  directed  to  his  officers  of  Duina,
to  suffer  the  said  merchants  to  sell  their  corne,  by
measure  great  or  small  at  their  pleasure  without  custome.

Thus  I  received  a  full  answere  from  his  majestie
by  his  chiefe  Secretarie  &  one  other  of  his  counsel,  to
the  1 6  articles  afore  rehearsed,  by  me  exhibited  in  writing
touching  your  affaires,  with  his  letter  also  sent  by  me  to
the  Queenes  majesty.  Which  being  done,  I  requested
that  the  new  letters  of  privilege  granted  by  his  highnes
unto  you  might  be  forthwith  dispatched,  to  the  intent
I  might  carie  the  same  with  me.  Also  I  requested
that  such  money  due  to  you,  which  it  had  pleased  his
majesty  to  command  to  be  payd,  might  be  delivered  to
me  in  your  behalfe.

Touching  the  letters  of  privilege,  the  Secretary
answered  me,  it  is  not  possible  you  can  have  them
with  you,  for  they  must  be  first  written  and  shewed
unto  the  Emperor,  and  then  three  to  be  written  of  one

192

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1572.

tenour  according  to  your  request,  which  cannot  bee  done
with  speede,  for  that  his  majesties  pleasure  is,  you  shall
depart  this  night  before  him,  who  remooveth  himselfe
to  morrow  towards  Novogrod  :  but  without  faile  the
sayd  letters  shall  be  dispatched  upon  the  way,  and  sent
after  you  with  speede  to  Colmogro.  And  as  touching
the  money  which  you  require,  it  cannot  be  paid  here
because  we  have  not  the  bookes  of  accounts,  for  want
whereof  we  know  not  what  to  paie  :  wherfore  the  best
is  that  you  send  one  of  the  merchants  after  the  Em-
peror to  Novogrod,  &  let  him  repaire  unto  me  there,
and  without  faile  I  will  paie  all  such  money  as  shall  be
appointed  by  his  majestie  to  be  paied  after  the  bookes
scene.

But  forasmuch  as  there  was  none  of  your  servants  with  [I.  411.]
me  at  that  present  (although  I  had  earnestly  written  unto
your  Agent  Nicholas  Proctor  by  Richard  Pingle  one
of  your  owne  servants,  one  moneth  before  my  comming
to  Starites,  where  I  had  my  dispatch,  that  he  should
not  faile  to  come  himselfe,  or  send  one  of  your  servants
to  mee  hither,  to  follow  all  such  sutes  as  I  should  com-
mence in  your  behalfs,  which  he  neglected  to  doe  to
your  great  hinderance)  I  requested  the  said  Secretarie
that  I  might  leave  Daniel  my  interpreter  with  him,
aswel  for  the  receit  of  money,  as  for  the  speedy
dispatch  of  the  letters  of  priviledge,  but  it  would  not
be  granted  in  any  wise  that  I  should  leave  any  of  mine
own  companie  behind  me,  and  thereupon  I  did  take  my
leave  with  full  dispatch,  and  departed  to  my  lodging,
and  foorthwith  there  came  unto  me  a  gentleman  who  had
charge  as  wel  to  conduct  me,  and  provide  boates,  men,
post  horses  and  victuals  for  me  all  the  way  to  the  sea
side,  being  a  thousand  and  three  hundred  miles,  as  also
to  doe  justice  of  the  sayd  Bessone,  as  aforesaid.  And
he  said  unto  me,  the  Emperours  pleasure  is,  that  you
shall  presently  depart  from  hence,  and  I  am  appointed
to  goe  with  you.  And  that  night  I  departed  from  the
said  Starites, being the fourteenth of  May aforesayd.

Ill  193  N

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

And  passing  a  great  part  of  my  journey,  I  arrived  at
the  citie  of  Vologda  the  last  of  the  sayd  May,  where
I  remained  five  daies  as  well  expecting  a  messenger  to
bring  unto  me  the  new  letters  of  priviledge,  as  the
comming  of  Rutter,  whom  the  Emperours  majestic
himselfe  commanded  before  my  face  should  bee  sent
unto  me  without  faile,  and  I  did  see  the  letters  written
to  the  chiefe  officers  at  the  Mosco  for  the  same.
Neverthelesse  the  said  Rutter  did  not  come,  neither
could  I  heare  of  him  after,  nor  know  the  sudden  cause
of  his  stay  contrary  to  the  princes  owne  word  and
meaning,  as  I  suppose.  But  I  could  not  help  the
matter  being  farre  from  the  prince,  neither  could  I  tell
how  to  have  redresse,  because  by  absence  I  could  not
complaine.  Notwithstanding  I  used  my  indevour,  and
sent  a  messenger  John  Norton  one  of  your  servants
from  Vologda  to  Novogrod,  where  the  court  then  lay,
expressely  with  letters,  as  well  to  advertise  [his  majestie
that  the  sayd  Rutter  was  not  sent  unto  me  according  to
his  highnes  commandement  &  order,  as  also  about  the
dispatch  of  the  said  letters  of  priviledge  and  receit  of
your  money,  with  straight  charge  that  he  should  in  any
wise  returne  unto  me  againe  before  the  departing  of  the
ships.  And  the  first  day  of  June  I  departed  from  the
said  Vologda  by  water  towards  Colmogro,  where  I
arrived  the  21  of  June  aforesaid,  and  remained  there
untill  the  23  of  July,  looking  for  the  said  John  Norton
to  have  returned  unto  me  in  al  that  time,  which  had
respite  fully  enough  in  that  space  both  to  go  to  the
court  to  dispatch  his  busines,  and  to  have  returned  againe
unto  me,  but  he  came  not,  for  it  was  otherwise  determined
before  his  going,  as  I  did  after  understand,  and  can  more
at  large  by  worde  of  mouth  declare  unto  your  worships
the  occasion  thereof.

Neverthelesse,  I  am  well  assured  before  this  time  your
Agent  hath  received  into  his  hands  the  sayd  letters  of
priviledges,  and  shall  have  dispatch  with  expedition  in
all  things  touching  your  affaires,  according  to  his  majesties

194

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

1572.
grant  by  me  obtained,  and  as  he  hath  written  to  the
Queenes  majestie  at  this  present,  wishing  that  as  now
by  my  going  the  Emperour  hath  withdrawen  his  grievous
displeasure  from  you,  and  restored  you  againe  into  his
favour,  so  your  Agent  and  others '  your  servants  there
resident  may  behave,  &  endevour  themselves  to  keepe
&  augment  the  same,  whose  evill  doings  have  bene
the  onely  occasion  of  his  indignation  now  remitted.

The  names  of  such  countries  as  I  Anthony
Jenkinson  have  travelled  unto,  from  the
second  of  October  1546,  at  which  time  I
made  my  first  voyage  out  of  England,  untill
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1572,  when  I  returned
last  out  of  Russia.

First,  I  passed  into  Flanders,  and  travelled  through  all
the  base  countries,  and  from  thence  through  Ger-
manic, passing  over  the  Alpes  I  travelled  into  Italy,  and
from  thence  made  my  journey  through  Piemont  into
France,  throughout  all  which  realme  I  have  throughly
journied.

I  have  also  travelled  through  the  kingdomes  of  Spaine
and  Portingal,  I  have  sailed  through  the  Levant  seas
every  way,  &  have  bene  in  all  the  chiefs  Islands  within
the  same  sea,  as  Rhodes,  Malta,  Sicilia,  Cyprus,  Candie,
and  divers  others.

I  have  bene  in  many  partes  of  Grecia,  Morea,  Achaia,
and  where  the  olde  citie  of  Corinth  stoode.

1  have  travelled  through  a  great  part  of  Turkie,  Syria,
and  divers  other  countries  in  Asia  minor.

I  have  passed  over  the  mountaines  of  Libanus  to
Damasco,  and  travelled  through  Samaria,  Galile,  Philis-
tine or  Palestine,  unto  Jerusalem,  and  so  through  all  the
Holy  land.

I  have  bene  in  divers  places  of  Affrica,  as  Algiers,
Cola,  Bona,  Tripolis,  the  gollet  within  the  gulfe  of
Tunis.

195

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.

[I.  412.]  I  have  sailed  farre  Northward  within  the  Mare  glaciale,

where  we  have  had  continuall  day,  and  sight  of  the  Sunne
ten  weekes  together,  and  that  navigation  was  in  Norway,
Lapland,  Samogitia,  and  other  very  strange  places.

I  have  travelled  through  all  the  ample  dominions  of
the  Emperour  of  Russia  and  Moscovia,  which  extende
from  the  North  sea,  and  the  confines  of  Norway  and
Lapland,  even  to  the  Mare  Caspium.

I  have  bene  in  divers  countries  neere  about  the  Caspian
sea.  Gentiles,  and  Mahomeans,  as  Cazan,  Cremia,  Rezan,
Cheremisi,  Mordoviti,  Vachin,  Nagaia,  with  divers  others
of  strange  customes  and  religions.

I  have  sailed  over  the  Caspian  sea,  &  discovered  all
the  regions  thereabout  adjacent,  as  Chircassi,  Comul,
Shascal,  Shirvan,  with  many  others.

I  have  travelled  40  daies  journey  beyond  the  said  sea,
towards  the  Oriental  India,  and  Cathaia,  through  divers
deserts  and  wildernesses,  and  passed  through  5  king-
domes  of  the  Tartars,  and  all  the  land  of  Turkeman  and
Zagatay,  and  so  to  the  great  citie  of  Boghar  in  Bactria,
not  without  great  perils  and  dangers  sundry  times.

After  all  this,  in  An.  1562,  I  passed  againe  over  the
Caspian  sea  another  way,  and  landed  in  Armenia,  at  a
citie  called  Derbent,  built  by  Alexander  the  great,  &
from  thence  travelled  through  Media,  Parthia,  Hircania,
into  Persia  to  the  court  of  the  great  Sophie  called  Shaw
Tamasso,  unto  whom  I  delivered  letters  from  the  Queenes
majestie,  and  remained  in  his  court  8  moneths,  and  re-
turning homeward,  passed  through  divers  other  countries.
Finally  I  made  two  voyages  more  after  that  out  of  England
into  Russia,  the  one  in  the  yeere  1566,  and  the  other  in
the  yeere  1571.  And  thus  being  weary  and  growing  old,
I  am  content  to  take  my  rest  in  mine  owne  house,  chiefly
comforting  my  selfe,  in  that  my  service  hath  bene
honourably  accepted  and  rewarded  of  her  majestie  and
the  rest  by  whom  I  have  bene  imploied.

196

JAMES ALDAY'S LETTER

A.D.

1575-

A  letter  of  James  Alday  to  the  Worshipfull  M.
Michael  Lock,  Agent  in  London  for  the
Moscovie  company,  touching  a  trade  to  be
established  in  Lappia,  written 1575.

Have  in  remembrance  (worshipful  Sir)
the  talke  we  had  when  I  was  with  you,
as  touching  the  trade  in  Lappia :  And
certeinly  I  have  something  marveiled  that
in  all  this  time  the  right  wor.  your  societie
have  not  given  order  that  some  little
conference  (by  you,  or  with  some  other)
might  have  bin  had  with  me  touching  those  parts,  con-
sidering they  know  (as  I  thinke)  that  I  remained  there
one  whole  yere  &  more,  by  which  meanes  reason  would
that  I  should  have  learned  something.  But  the  cause  why
they  have  not  desired  to  conferre  with  me  (as  I  judge)
resteth  only  in  one  of  these  4  cases,  that  is  to  say,  either
they  thinke  themselves  so  throughly  certified  of  that
trade,  as  more  neede  not  be  spoken  therof,  or  that  they
have  no  lust  more  to  deale  that  waies,  or  that  they  hold
mee  so  untrusty  to  them  that  they  dare  not  open  their
minds,  for  feare  or  doubt,  I  should  beare  more  affection
to  others  then  to  them,  &  so  discover  their  secrets :  or
els  they  think  me  of  so  simple  understanding,  that  I
am  not  worthy  to  be  spoken  with  in  these  matters.  To
which  4  cases  I  answere  as  followeth :  First,  if  they  think
themselves  so  throughly  certified  as  more  need  not  to  be
spoken  :  certeinly  I  something  marvel  by  whom  it  should
be  :  for  in  ye  winter  past  there  lay  but  5  English  persons
there,  viz.  Christopher  Colt,  Roger  Leche,  Adam  Tunstal
cooper,  one  lad,  and  I  :  for  Henry  Cocknedge  was  the
whole  winter  at  Mosco.  And  of  these  persons,  as  touch-
ing Colt,  I  think  him  (if  I  may  without  offence  speake
my  conscience)  the  most  simple  person  that  was  there,
(as  touching  the  understanding  of  a  marchant)  although
indeed  he  tooke  upon  him  very  much  to  his  owne  harme

197

He  marvelleth
the  company  do
not  conferre
zuith  him  of
Lappia.

1574-

5  English  men
wintered  in
Lappia.

Christopher
Colt  a  simple
marchant.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1575-

&  others  I  doubt,  for  he  used  himselfe  not  like  a
marchant,  neither  shewed  diligence  like  a  worthy  servant
or  factor,  but  lay  stil  in  a  den  al  ye  whole  winter,  having
wares  lying  upon  his  hand,  which  he  would  not  imploy
to  any  use  :  although  sundry  waies  there  were  that  he
might  have  put  his  wares  in  ready  money  with  gaine,
&  no  great  adventure,  which  money  would  have  bin
more  acceptable  to  the  poore  Lappes  &  fishermen  at  the
Good  trade  in  spring,  then  any  kind  of  wares  :  but  his  fond  head  did

iTV" ^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^"^  ^^  ^^^  Gospel,  &  yet  he  had

^"  '  counsel  to  the  contrary  which  he  disdained,  so  that  men

perceiving his captious head, left not only  to  counsell

him, but  also some, in as much as they  might, kept

him  from  knowledge  of  the  trade  that  might  be  in  that

countrey,  the  winter  time,  which  is  better  peradventure

then  most  men  think  of. Wherfore  if  Colt  have  written

or  said  any  thing  touching  those  countries,  it  is  doubtful

whether  it  toucheth  the  effect  or  not,  considering  he  lay

Henry  Cock- still  all  the  winter  without  trial  of  any  matter. And  for

iiedge onest, f^^j-^j-y  Cocknedge  assuredly  speaking  so  much  as  I  do

out  Ignorant.  r -i i  t  i  i  i •

perfectly  know,  1  must  needs  say,  that  he  is  a  very
[I.  4.13.]  honest  yong  man,  &  right  carefull  of  his  busines,  and
in  that  respect  worthy  to  be  praised.  But  yet  he  being
absent  in  the  winter  other  then  by  hearesay  he  could
not  learne,  so  that  his  instructions  may  be  something
doubtful.  And  like  as  of  the  lad  nothing  can  be  learned,
so  am  I  sure  that  Tunstal  the  Cooper  hath  not  yet  bene
spoken  with,  so  that  of  those  parts  certaine  knowledge
Roger  Leche  cannot  as  yet  be  learned,  except  by  Roger  Leche,  of
expert  of  whom  I  confesse  knowledge  may  be  had,  for  indeed  there
is  no  English  man  living  that  hath  like  knowledge  in
those  countries  as  he  hath,  nor  that  is  able  to  do  so
much  with  the  people  as  he  may :  he  in  the  winter
travailed  one  waies  &  other  nere  300  miles  :  he  of  a
litle  made  somthing,  and  learned  not  only  the  maners,
conditions  &  customs  of  the  people,  but  also  he  learned
of  al  kind  of  commodities  in  those  regions  how  they
may  be  bought  at  the  most  advantage,  that  gaine may

JAMES ALDAY'S LETTER  ad

1575-
be  made  of  them  :  So  that  I  confesse,  if  he  hath  given
intelligence  to  the  right  Wor.  company,  then  have  they
no  neede  to  speake  with  me  or  any  other  for  to  learne
of  those  countries  (except  it  be  to  heare  mine  opinion)
which  in  truth  I  wil  alwaies  open  unto  them.  But
the  effect  of  ye  beneficial  secrets  of  that  countrey  is
to  be  inquired  of  him,  &  in  mine  opinion  worthy  to
be  learned,  except,  as  in  the  second  case,  they  list  no
more  to  deale  that  waies.  To  which  I  answere,  that
if  they  deale  not  that  waies,  &  that  with  speede  they
seeke  not  to  prevent  others  y'  mean  to  deale  there,
although  not  English  men,  let  them  then  not  thinke
long  to  have  any  profitable  trade  in  Russia :  for  the  V^^^^  '^o^-
ffreater part  of  that  benefit  wil  be  wiped  from  them,  or  ^^^^^ . ^°\

D  X  1  '  cntCT  into  the

5  yeere  to  an  end,  as  I  will  shew  good  reason,  if  I be  ^^^^^  ^
demanded  the  question. Therefore  if  they  will  maintaine  Lappia,  others
the Russia trade  with advantage,  then ought they  to  "^H prevent
looke  to  this  in  time,  and  so  may  they  keepe  the  Russia  ^

trade as it is, and likewise make a trade in Lappia
more profitable then that,  and therfore this is to bee
considered,  rather then to prohibite Englishmen from  The  trade  of
the  trade  of  Vedagoba. For  if  they  looke  not  to  this,  Vedagoba.
and that in time,  they  may  be  likened  (if  it  might  be
without offence spoken) to two dogs that strive for
the bone  whiles the third run away  with it : and yet
meane  I  not  otherwise,  but  in  such  order,  as  not  English-
men only, but also Hollanders, Brabanders, & others
may  be  justly  and  utterly  put  from  the  trade  in  Lappia,
and the company to keepe  the  whole trades to  them-
selves without  interruption  of  any,  to  their  great  benefit,
which  I  wish  to  them  from the  bottome of  my  heart,
as ever I wished wealth to mine own person : And
thereby  hold  me  excused in  the  third  case I  write  of.
And for the fourth as touching my  judgement,  as  I  ^^  ^<^"  ^'^'S
confesse  it  is  not  very  deepe,  so I thanke  God  I am  ^°"^^^^^^
not  utterly  without  understanding  (although  I  be  poore)  f„uch.

6  therfore  peradventure holden  out  of  reputation,  yet
God doth distribute his gifts as it pleaseth him. I

199

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1575-

have  seen  wise  men  poore  in  my  time,  &  foolish  men
rich,  and  some  men  have  more  knowledge  then  they
can  utter  by  speech,  which  fault  was  once  objected  against
me  by  a  great  learned  man  of  this  realme :  but  surely
how  weak  soever  my  utterance  is,  my  meaning  is  faithful
and  true,  and  I  wish  in  my  heart  to  your  laudable
company  al  the  gaine  that  may  be,  or  els  I  pray  the
Lord  God  to  confound  me  as  a  false  dissembler.  It
greeveth  me  to  see  how  of  late  they  have  bin  brought
to  great  charges,  beating  the  bush,  as  the  old  terme
is,  &  other  men  taking  the  birds :  this  last  yere  having
in  Lappia  2  ships,  as  I  am  partly  informed,  they  both
brought  not  much  above  300  barrels  of  traine  oile,  yet
am  I  sure  there  was  bought  besides  them  of  the  Russes,
I \%'i,  barrels  Corels,  &  Lappes,  1 183  barrels,  besides  27  barrels
of  oyle  bought  q^-^^ ^^y ^^ j^^^^ ^^^ Hollander,  at two barrels for

by  others.  tvt 1  1  a i  1

Colt  sold  2  J  o'''6  JNortherne  dozen.  And  yet  there  is  a  greater
barrels  to  a  inconvenience  springing,  which  if  it  take  a  litle  deeper
roote  it  will  be  (I  feare)  too  hard  to  be  pulled  up,
which  for  love  &  good  will  (God  is  my  witnes)  I  write
of,  wishing  as  to  my  deare  friends  that  they  should
looke  to  it  in  time,  if  they  meane  to  keepe  the  trade
of  Russia  or  Lappia.  And  thus  love  hath  compelled  me
to  write  this  advertisement,  which  I  wish  to  be  accepted
in  as  good  part,  as  I  with  good  will  have  written  it.

The  request  of  an  honest  merchant  to  a  friend
of  his,  to  be  advised  and  directed  in  the
course  of  killing  the  Whale,  as  followeth.
An. 1575.

I pray you pleasure me in getting me perfect infor-
mation of  the  matter  hereunder  specified.

FOr  the  provision  and  furniture  for  a  shippe  of  200
tunnes,  to  catch  the  Whale fish in Russia,  passing
from  England. How  many  men  to  furnish  the  ship.

How  many  fishermen skilful  to  catch  the  Whale,  &
how  many  other  officers  and  Coopers.

Hollander.

OF KILLING THE WHALE  ad.

1575-

How  many  boats,  and  what  fashion,  and  how  many
men  in  each  boate.

What  wages  of  such  skilful!  men  and  other  officers,
as  we  shall  neede  out  of  Biskay.

How  many  harping  irons,  speares,  cordes,  axes,  hatchets,
knives,  and  other  implements  for  the  fishing,  and  what
sort  and  greatnes  of  them.

How  many  kettles,  the  greatnesse  and  maner  of
them,  and  what  mettall,  and  whether  they  bee  set  on
trivets  or  on  furnaces  for  boiling  of  the  traine  oyle,
and  others.

What  quantitie  of  caske,  and  what  sort  of  caske,  and
what  number  of  hoopes  and  twigges,  and  how  much
thereof  to  be  staved  for  the  traine.

What  quantitie  of  victuals,  and  what  kinde  of  victuals  [I.  414.]
for  the  men  in  all  the  ship  for  4  moneths  time.

For  the  common  mariners  and  officers  to  governe
the  ship,  we  shall  not  neede  any  out  of  Biskaie,  but
onely  men  skilful  in  the  catching  of  the  Whale,  and
ordering  of  the  oile,  and  one  Cooper  skilfull  to  set
up  the  staved  caske.

Also  what  other  matters  are  requisite  to  be  knowen,
and  done  for  the  said  voyage  to  catch  the  Whale,  not
here  noted  nor  remembred.

These  requests  were  thus  answered,  which  may
serve  as  directions  for  all  such  as  shall  intend
the  same  voyage,  or  the  like  for  the  Whale.

A  proportion  for  the  setting  forth  of  a  ship  of  200.
tunne,  for  the  killing  of  the  Whale.

THere must  be ^^ men  who departing for  Ward-
house  in  the  moneth  of  April,  must  bee  furnished
with  4  kintals  and  a  halfe  of  bread  for  every  man.
250  hogsheds  to  put  the  bread  in.
150  hogsheds  of  Cidar.
6  kintals  of  oile.
8 kintals  of  bacon.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1575.

6  hogsheds  of  beefe.

10  quarters  of  salt.

150  pound  of  candles.

8 quarters  of  beanes  and  pease.

Saltfish  &  herring,  a  quantitie  convenient.

4  tunnes  of  wines.

Half  a  quarter  of  mustard  seed,  and  a  querne.

A  grindstone.

800  empty  shaken hogsheds.

350  bundles  of  hoopes,  and  6  quintalines.

800  paire  of  heds  for  the  hogsheds.

10  Estachas  called  roxes  for harping  irons.

10  pieces  of  Arporieras.

3 pieces  of  Baibens  for  the  Javelines  small.

2 tackles  to  turne  the  Whales.

A  halser  of  27  fadom  long  to  turne  ye  whales.

15  great  Javelines.

18 small  Javelins.

50  harping  irons.

6  machicos  to  cut  the  Whale  withall.

2  doozen  of  machetos  to  minch  the  Whale.

2  great  hookes  to  turne  the  Whale.

3  paire  of  Can  hookes.
6  hookes  for  staves.

3  dozen  of  staves  for  the  harping  irons.
6  pullies  to  turne  the  Whale  with.

10  great  baskets.

10  lampes  of  iron  to  carie  light.

5  kettles  of  150  li.  the  piece,  and  6  ladles.
1000  of  nailes  for  the  pinnases.

500 of nailes of Carabelie for the houses, and the

wharfe.
1 8  axes  and  hatchets  to  cleave  wood.
12  pieces  of  lines,  and  6  dozen  of  hookes.
2  beetles  of  Rosemarie.

4  dozen  of  oares  for  the  pinnases.

6  lanternes.
500  of  Tesia.

WILLIAM BURROUGH'S DEPOSITION  ad.

1576.

Item,  gunpouder  &  matches  for  harquebushes  as  shalbe

needful!.
Item,  there  must  be  caried  from  hence 5 pinnases,  five

men to strike  with harping irons, two cutters  of

Whale,  5  coopers,  &  a  purser  or  two.

A  note  of  certaine  other  necessarie  things  belong-
ing to  the  Whalefishing,  received  of  master
W. Burrough.

A  sufficient  number  of  pullies  for  tackle  for  the  Whale.

A  dozen  of  great  baskets.

4  furnaces  to  melt  the  Whale  in.

6  ladles  of  copper.

A  thousand  of  nailes  to  mend  the  pinnases.

500  great  nails  of  spikes  to  make  their  house

3  paire  of  bootes  great  and  strong,  for  them  that  shall

cut  the  Whale.
8 calve  skins  to  make  aprons  or  barbecans.

The  deposition  of  M.  William  Burrough  to
certaine  Interrogatories  ministred  unto  him
concerning  the  Narve,  Kegor,  &c.  to  what
king  or  prince  they  doe  appertaine  and  are
subject,  made  the  23 of  June,  1576.

These  articles  seeme  to  have  bene  ministred
upon  the  quarel  betv^een  Alderman  Bond  the
elder,  and  the  Moscovie  company,  for  his
trade  to  the  Narve  without  their  consent.

First,  whether  the  villages  or  townes  vulgarely  called  The  first  In-
the  Narve,  Kegor,  Pechingo  and  Cola,  and  the  portes  ^^rrogatone.
of  the  same  townes,  as  well  at  the  time  of  the  grant  of
the letters  of  privilege by  the  Emperour  to  our  mer-  [I.  415.]
chants,  as  also  in the  yeeres  of  our  Lord,  1566, 1567,
1568, 1569,  1570,  1571, 1572,  1573,  1574,  and  1575.
respectively  were  (as  presently  they  be)  of  the  jurisdiction,
and subject to the mightie prince the Emperour of

203

answer.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

Russia  :  and  whether  the  saide  Emperour  of  Russia,
by  all  the  time  aforesaide,  was  chiefe  lord  and  governour
respectively  of  the  said  places,  and  so  vulgarly  knowen,
had,  and  reputed  :  and  whether  the  said  townes  and
places,  and  either  of  them  be  situated  towards  the  North
and  Northeast  or  Northwest,  and  between  the  North
and  the  East  point  :  and  be  the  same  places  whereunto
by  force  of  the  said  privilege,  it  is  forbidden  to  any
other  subject  to  have  traffike,  saving  to  the  societie
aforesaid.
The  deponents  To  this  Interrogatorie  the  deponent  saith,  that  it  is
true  that  the  villages,  townes  and  places  vulgarly  called
the  Narve,  Kegor,  Pechingo  and  Cola,  and  the  portes
thereof,  at  the  time  of  the  grant  of  the  said  privilege
(as  he  judgeth)  were  reputed  respectively  to  be  under
the  jurisdiction,  &  subject  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,
and  so  from  the  time  of  the  said  grant,  unto  the  yeere,
1566,  and  that  in  the  yeeres  of  our  Lord,  1566,  67,
68,  69,  70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  and  1575.  respectively  they
were  (as  presently  they  be)  of  the  jurisdiction,  and  subject
unto  the  mighty  prince  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and
the  same  Emperour  of  Russia,  by  all  the  time  aforesaid,
was  chiefe  governour  respectively  of  the  said  places,  and
so  vulgarly  knowen,  had  and  reputed.  And  that  all
the  said  places  are  situated  from  London  Northwards,
betweene  the  East  and  the  North,  and  within  the  grant
of  the  letters  patents,  and  privileges  of  the  said  com-
panie  of  merchants  for  the  discovery  of  new  trades,  and
the  same  places  whereunto  by  force  of  the  said  letters
patents,  it  is  forbidden  to  any  other  subject  to  have
traffike  saving  to  the  societie  aforesaid.

Notwithstanding  the  Deponent  saith,  that  he  hath
heard  it  credibly  reported  by  divers,  that  the  king  of
Denmarke  of  late  yeres,  or  every  yefere  once,  hath  had
one  of  his  subjects  or  more  by  him  selfe,  or  with  his
guide  a  Lappian,  that  hath  at  the  places  Cola,  Kegor,
and  divers  other  places  in  Lappia,  taken  of  the  Lappies
certain tribute or  head pence, which the  said Lappies

204

WILLIAM BURROUGHS DEPOSITION  ad

1576-
have  willingly  given  to  winne  favour  of  the  saide  prince,
and  to  live  quietly  by  his  subjects,  the  people  of  Fin-
marke  which  border  upon  their  countrey,  whereof
Wardhouse  is  the  strongest  hold,  &  bordereth  neere
unto  them.  Hee  hath  also  hearde  that  in  the  time  of
peace  betweene  the  saide  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  the
kings  of  Sweden,  there  was  yeerely  for  the  king  of
Sweden  one  or  more  that  came  into  Lappia  unto  divers
places,  in  maner  as  the  king  of  Denmarkes  servant
useth  to  doe,  and  did  demaund  of  them  some  tribute
or  duetie  which  they  willingly  paide  :  but  since  the  late
warres  betweene  the  saide  Emperour  and  king  of  Sweden,
hee  hath  not  heard  of  any  thing  that  hath  bene  paide
by  them  to  the  king  of  Sweden  :  such  is  the  simplicitie
of  this  people  the  Lappies,  that  they  would  rather  give
tribute  to  all  those  that  border  upon  their  countrey,
then  by  denying  it  have  their  ill  willes.

But  the  trueth  is,  as  this  Deponent  saith,  that  the
saide  mightie  prince  the  Emperour  of  Russia  is  the
chiefe  lord  and  governour  of  the  saide  countrey  of  Lappia,
his  lawes  and  orders  are  observed  by  them,  hee  takes
toll  and  custome  &c.  of  them.  They  are  infidels,  but
if  any  of  them  become  Christians  it  is  after  the  Russe
law.  If  there  happen  any  controversie  betweene  those
people,  such  as  cannot  be  ended  amongst  themselves,
or  by  the  Emperours  deputies  in  that  countrey,  they
repaire  to  the  Mosko  as  their  highest  Court,  and  there
have  it  ended.  Betweene  the  place  specified  Kegor,  and
the  confines  of  Finmarke  aforesaide  in  Lappia,  is  the
monasterie  Pechingo,  which  are  monkes,  and  use  the  Pechhgo
Russe  lawe,  the  chiefe  or  head  of  that  abbey  is  alwayes  ^""^3-
appointed  by  the  cleargie  in  Mosko.

Also  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1557.  the  said  Deponent
was  at  the  place  Kegor,  in  the  moneth  of  June,  the  29.
day  being  S.  Peters  day,  at  which  time  was  a  great
assembly  of  people  at  a  mart  there,  the  Russes,  Kerils
and  Lappians  on  the  one  side  subjects  to  the  said  mighty
prince the Emperour of  Russia, and the Norwegians

205

A.D.

1576.

The  second
Interroga-
torie.
[I.  +16.]

The  deponents
answer.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

or  Norses  and  people  of  Finmarke  subjects  to  the  king
of  Denmarke  on  the  other  part,  they  did  barter  and
exchange  fish  for  other  commodities.  The  deputie  for
the  Russe  had  the  chief  government  of  the  said  Mart,
and  tooke  toll  of  those  people  y'  were  subject  to  his
master,  and  the  captaine  of  Wardhouse  had  then  the
government  of  the  people  subject  to  his  master  the  king
of  Denmark.  He  saith  also,  that  betweene  the  abbey
Pechingo,  and  the  abbey  of  S.  Nicholas  in  Russia,  upon
the  border  of  the  said  coast  of  Lappia,  he  hath  bene
upon  the  shore  at  divers  places,  where  fresh  rivers  fall
into  the  Sea,  where  are  commonly  taken  fresh  salmons,
all  which  places  he  doth  know  for  certaine,  that  they
were  farmed  out  to  the  subjects  of  the  said  Emperour,
and  he  the  said  Emperour  received  yeerely  the  rent  for
them.  And  further  he  saith  that  it  hath  bene  further
credibly  reported  unto  him,  that  there  is  not  any  such
river  or  creek  of  fresh  water  which  falleth  out  of  the
said  countrey  of  Lappia  into  the  sea,  between  the  said
abbey  Pechingo,  and  the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas,  but  they
are  all  and  every  of  them  farmed  out,  and  the  Emperour
receiveth  the  rent  for  them.

Item,  whether  as  well  before,  as  also  within  the
memorie  of  men,  till  the  time  of  the  graunt  of  the  said
letters  patents  any  of  the  English  merchants  (saving
the  merchants  of  the  said  societie)  subjects  of  this  realme
of  England,  have  commonly  exercised  or  frequented
businesse  or  trade  in  the  said  villages  or  townes  called
the  Narve,  Kegor,  Pechingo,  and  Cola,  or  in  any  of
them,  or  in  any  ports  or  territories  of  the  said  Emperour
of  Russia.

To  this  Interrogatorie  the  Deponent  answereth,  that
the  subjects  of  this  realme  before  the  graunt  of  the  said
letters  patents  did  not  commonly  exercise,  neither  fre-
quent or  trade  to  any  of  the  said  places  called  the  Narve,
Kegor,  Pechingo  or  Cola,  or  to  any  of  them.

206

WILLIAM BURROUGHS ADVICE  a.d.

1576.

Certaine  reasons  to  disswade  the  use  of  a  trade
to  the  Narve  aforesaide,  by  way  through
Sweden.

THe  merchandise  of  the  Narve  are  grosse  wares,  viz.
flaxe,  hempe,  waxe,  tallow  and  hides.

The  traffique  at  that  place  standeth  upon  the  agree-
ment and  liking  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  with  the
king  of  Sweden  :  for  all  these  merchandises  that  are
brought  thither  come  from  Plescove,  Novogrod,  and
other  parts  of  the  Emperours  dominions.

For  transporting  those  merchandises  ;from  Narve  to
Stockholm,  or  what  other  place  shall  bee  thought  con-
venient in  Sweden,  it  must  be  in  vessels  of  those
countries,  which  wilbe  of  smal  force  to  resist  Free-
booters, or  any  other  that  shall  make  quarel  or  offer
violence  against  them.

When  the  goods  are  brought  into  Sweden,  they  must
be  discharged,  and  new  laden  into  smaller  vessels,  to
cary  the  same  by  river  or  lake  a  part  of  the  way,  and
againe  to  be  unladen  and  transported  by  land  to
Newles.

So  as  the  ordinary  charges  for  transporting  of  goods
from  Narve  to  Newles  by  way  as  aforesaid,  besides  the
spoile  by  so  often  lading  and  unlading,  cariage  by  land,
and  the  dangers  of  the  seas,  pirats,  &c.  will  be  such  as
when  it  shalbe  so  brought  to  Newles  it  wil  be  as  deare
to  the  merchants  in  that  place  as  it  shall  be  worth  to
be  sold  in  London,  wherefore  the  trade  that  wayes  can-
not be  profitable  to  our  nation.

Moreover,  when  the  goods  shall  be  in  Newles,  it  may  i^ote.
bee  thought  doubtfull  to  bring  it  thence  quietly  without
disliking  or  forcible  resistance  of  the  king  of  Denmarke,
forasmuch  as  he  maketh  quarell,  and  alleageth  damage
unto  him  in  his  tolles  of  the  Sound  by  our  trade  to
S.  Nicholas,  how  much  more  will  he  now  doe  by  this
way, and with how much greater advantage may he

207

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1576.

performe  it  ?  The  danger  that  may  grow  in  our  trade
to  Russia  by  way  of  S.  Nicholas,  through  the  displeasure
that  the  Emperour  may  conceive  by  our  trade  with  the
Sweden  to  Narve  is  also  to  be  considered.

A  remembrance  of  advise  given  to  the  merchants,
touching  a  voyage  for  Cola  abovesaid. 1578.

WHereas  you  require  my  counsell  after  what  order
the  voyage  for  Cola  is  to  be  set  forth,  I  answere
that  I  know  no  better  way  then  hath  bene  heretofore
used,  which  is  after  this  maner.  First  of  all  we  have
hired  the  ship  by  the  great,  giving  so  much  for  the
wearing  of  the  tackle  and  the  hull  of  the  shippe,  as  the
ship  may  be  in  bignesse  :  as  if  shee  bee  about  the  burden
of  an  hundred  tunnes,  we  pay  fourescore  pound,  and  so
after  that  rate  :  and  thereunto  we  doe  victual  the  ship
our  selves,  and  doe  ship  all  our  men  our  selves,  shipping
no  more  men,  nor  giving  them  more  wages  then  we
should  doe  if  they  went  of  a  merchants  voyage,  for  it  hath
bene  a  great  helpe  to  our  voiage  hitherto,  to  have  our
men  to  fish  with  one  boate,  &  costing  us  no  more
charges  then  it  should  do,  if  our  men  should  lie  &  doe
nothing  saving  the  charges  of  salt,  &  of  lines,  which  is
treble  paid  for  againe.  For  this  last  yere  past  our  men
killed  with  one  boat  betwixt  9.  or  10.  thousand  fish,
which  yeelded  to  us  in  money  with  the  oile  that  came
of  it,  about  15.  or  16.  score  pounds,  which  is  a  great
helpe  to  a  voyage.  And  besides  al  this,  our  ship  did  take
in  so  much  oile  and  other  commodities  as  we  bestowed
100.  whole  clothes  in.  But  because,  as  I  doe  suppose,
it  is  not  the  use  of  London  to  take  ships  to  fraight
after  that  order  before  prescribed,  neither  I  think  that
the  mariners  wil  take  such  paines  as  our  men  will  :
Therefore  my  counsell  is,  if  you  thinke  good,  to  freight
some  ship  of  Hul  or  Newcastle,  for  I  am  sure  that
you  may  have  them  there  better  cheap  to  freight,  then
here  at  London.  Besides  al  this,  one  may  have  such
men as wil take paines for their merchants. And

208

BURROUGHS EPISTLE DEDICATORIE

A.D.

c.  1598.

furthermore  when  it  shal  please  God  that  the  ship  shal

returne to come to discharge  at Hull,  which will be  ^^^l  ^^^^  ^^^^

the  most for  your  profit  for  the  sales  of  all  such  like  ^^^'^f*  f

...  J  t-  England  for

commoQitie  as  comes  rrom  that  place,  as  tor  nsh,  oyle,  ^^/^  offish.

and  Salmon  chiefly,  hee  that  will  seeke  a  better  market
for  the  sales  then  at  Hull,  he  must  seeke  it  out  of
England,  for  the  like  is  not  in  England.  This  is  the
best  way  that  I  can  devise,  and  most  for  your  profite,  [I.  417.]
and  if  you  will,  I  will  also  set  you  downe  all  the  com-
modities that  are  necessarie  for  such  a  voyage,  and  which
way  also  that  the  Hollanders  may  within  two  or  three
yeeres  be  forced  to  leave  off  the  trade  of  Cola  which
may  easily  be  done.  For  if  my  abilitie  were  to  my  will,
I  would  use  the  matter  so  that  they  should  either  leave  off
the  trade,  or  els  cary  light  ships  with  them  home  againe.

A  dedicatorie  Epistle  unto  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie,  written  by  Master  William
Burrough  late  Comptroller  of  her  High-
nesse  navie,  and  annexed  unto  his  exact  and
notable  mappe  of  Russia,  briefly  containing
(amongst  other  matters)  his  great  travailes,
observations,  and  experiments  both  by  sea  and
land,  especially  in  those  Northeastern  parts.

To  the  most  high  and  renowmed  Princesse  Elizabeth  by
the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,  France  and
Ireland,  &c.

Y  minde  earnestly  bent  to  the  knowledge

of navigation and Hydrographie from

my youth (most excellent my dread

Soveraigne)  hath  eftsoones  beene  moved

by diligent studie to search out the

chiefest points to  them belonging  :  and

not therewith sufficed  hath also  sought

by  experience in divers discoveries  and other voyages

and  travailes to practise the same. I  was in the first

III  209  o

i

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

c.  1598.

voyage  for  discoverie  of  the  partes  of  Russia,  which
begun  in  anno  1553.  (being  then  sixteene  yeeres  of  age)
also  in  the  yeere  1556.  in  the  voyage  when  the  coastes
of  Samoed  and  Nova  Zembla,  with  the  straightes  of
Vaigatz  were  found  out :  and  in  the  yeere  1557,  when  the
coast  of  Lappia,  and  the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas  were  more
perfectly  discovered.  Since  which  time,  by  my  continual!
practise  in  the  voyages  made  yeerely  to  S.  Nicholas  in
Russia,  or  to  the  Narve,  and  to  some  other  countreys
also  by  Sea  :  as  likewise  in  passing  from  S.  Nicholas  to
Mosco,  and  from  Mosco  to  Narve,  and  from  thence
backe  againe  to  S.  Nicholas  by  land,  in  the  yeeres  1574.
and  1575.  (being  then  Agent  in  those  countreis  for
the  companie  of  English  merchants  for  discoveries  of
new  trades)  setting  downe  alwayes  with  great  care  and
diligence,  true  observations  &  notes  of  al  those  countreys,
Islands,  coasts  of  the  sea,  and  other  things  requisite  to
the  artes  of  Navigation  and  Hydrographie  :  and  with
like  diligence  gathering  exact  notes  and  descriptions  of
the  wayes,  rivers,  cities,  townes,  &c.  as  I  passed  by  land  :
I  finde  my  selfe  sufficiently  furnished  to  give  report  unto  1
your  Majesty,  and  to  make  description  of  those  North
parts  of  the  world  in  forme  and  maner  of  every  leagues
distance  that  I  have  passed  &  scene  in  all  those  my
travels.  The  places  herein  described,  which  I  have  not
scene  and  tried  my  selfe,  I  have  set  downe  by  the
best  authorities  that  I  could  finde,  and  therein  may  erre
with  the  learned  Gerardus  Mercator,  Abraham  Ortelius,
and  the  rest  :  but  for  the  maine  part  which  is  from
Rochel  in  France  hither  to  London,  and  from  hence
Eastward  to  Narve  by  sea,  and  from  thence  to  Mosco
and  to  S.  Nicholas  by  land  :  also  from  hence  Northwards
and  Northeastwards  by  Sea  to  Saint  Nicholas,  and  to
the  straight  of  Vaigatz  (first  craving  humbly  your  high-
nesse  pardon)  I  dare  boldly  affirme  (and  that  I  trust:
without  suspect  of  arrogancie,  since  truely  I  may  say
it)  I  have  here  set  it  open  to  the  view,  with  such  exact-
nesse and trueth, and  so  placed  every  thing  aright in

BURROUGHS EPISTLE DEDICATORIE  ad.

c.  1598.
true  latitude  and  longitude,  (accompting  the  longitudes
from  the  meridian  of  London,  which  I  place  in  21.
degrees)  as  till  this  time  no  man  hath  done  the  like  :
neither  is  any  man  able  by  learning  onely,  except  he
travaileth,  as  I  have  done.  For  as  it  may  be  truely  saide
of  navigation  and  Hydrographie,  that  no  man  can  be
cunning  in  the  one  which  wanteth  convenient  knowledge
in  the  other  :  and  as  neither  of  them  can  be  had  without
the  helpes  of  Astronomic  and  Cosmographie,  much  lesse
without  these  two  grounds  of  all  artes,  Arithmetike  and
Geometric  :  so  none  of  the  best  learned  in  those  sciences
Mathematicall,  without  convenient  practise  at  the  sea  can
make  just  proofe  of  the  profite  in  them  :  so  necessarily
dependeth  art  and  reason  upon  practise  and  experience.
Albeit  there  are  divers  both  learned  and  unlearned,  litle
or  nothing  experienced,  which  in  talke  of  navigation
will  enter  deeply  and  speake  much  of  and  against  errours
used  therein,  when  they  cannot  reforme  them.  Such
also  have  written  therof,  pretending  singular  great
knowledge  therein,  and  would  so  be  accompted  of,
though  in  very  deede  not  worthy  the  name  of  good  and
sufficient  pilots.  To  whom  I  thinke  it  shall  not  be
amisse  in  defence  of  rules  builded  upon  reason,  and  in
practise  allowed,  thus  much  to  say  for  answere.  It  is
so,  that  there  are  rules  used  in  navigation  which  are
not  perfectly  true  :  among  which  the  streight  lines  in  sea-
cardes,  representing  the  32.  points  of  the  compasse  or
windes,  are  not  holden  to  be  the  least,  but  noted  of
such  talkers  for  principall,  to  condemne  the  occupiers
thereof  for  ignorant :  yet  hath  the  famous  and  learned
Gerardus  Mercator  used  them  in  his  universal  mappe.
But  such  as  condemne  them  for  false,  and  speake  most  [L  418.]
against  their  use  cannot  give  other  that  should  serve
for  navigation  to  better  purpose  and  effect.  Experience
(one  of  the  keyes  of  knowledge)  hath  taught  mee  to
say  it.  Wherein  with  my  abilitie,  together  with  some
part  of  my  studie,  I  am  the  rather  moved  (in  this  my
plot)  to  make  some  triall  unto  your  majestic  :  for  that

A.D.

c.  1598.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I  perceive  that  such  attempts  of  newe  discoveries  (where-  •
unto  this  noble  Island  is  most  aptly  situated)  are  by
your  royall  maintenance  so  willingly  furthered  :  beseech-
ing your  highnesse  so  to  accept  of  these  my  travailes,
as  a  pledge  of  my  well  willing  to  my  countrey,  and  of
my  loyall  service  to  your  majestie,  whose  healthfuU
happie  life  and  reigne  God  continue  which  is  Almightie.
Amen.

Your  Majesties  most  humble  subject

William  Burrough.

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  to  Shaugh  Thamas
the  great  Sophi  of  Persia,  sent  by  Arthur
Edwards,  William  TurnbuU,  Matthew  Tailbois,
and  -Peter  Gerard  appointed  Agents  for  the
Moscovie  companie,  in  their  sixt  voyage  to
Persia,  begun  in  the  yeere 1579.

To  the  most  noble  and  invincible  Emperour  of  Persia,
King  of  Shirvan,  Gilan,  Grosin,  Corassan,  and  great
Governour  of  the  Indies.

jLizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender  of
the  faith,  &c. To the most noble  and
invincible  Emperour of  Persia, King  of
Shirvan, Gilan, Grosin, Corassan, and
great governour even unto the Indies,
sendeth greeting. Most noble and in-
II 1568 vincible Prince, it is now  II  tenne yeeres since, or
P^g-  394- thereabouts,  wherein  (after  the  honourable  ambassade  of
the  noble  man  Anthony  Jenkinson  our  welbeloved  sub-
ject, to  your  most  noble  and  invincible  father  performed)
we  laboured  to  bring  to  passe  by  Thomas  Bannister  and
Geiferey  Ducket  merchants,  our  subjects,  that  throughout
all  the  kingdomes  subject  to  his  empire,  free  power  might
be given to Will. Garrard, Thomas Ofley, William
Chester knights, Rowland Haiward, Lionel Ducket,

QUEEN  ELIZABETH'S  LETTERS a.d.

1579-
William  Allen,  Thomas  Bannister,  GefFerey  Ducket,
Lawrence  Chapman  Merchants,  and  unto  their  societie,
to  enter  into  his  lands  and  countreys  at  al  times
when  they  would  and  could,  there  to  exercise  &  use
their  trade  of  merchandise,  and  from  thence  likewise
after  exchange  or  sale  made  of  those  wares,  which  they
should  bring  with  them  with  his  like  good  leave  and
favour,  to  carie  from  thence  those  things  wherwith  his
dominions  do  abound  &  with  us  be  scant.  Which  our
petition  the  most  noble  prince  your  father  took  so
thankfully  and  in  such  good  part,  that  he  not  onely
graunted  franke  and  commodious  leave,  as  was  desired  :
but  the  same  he  would  to  bee  unto  them  most  free  and
benenciall,  and  to  have  continuance  for  many  yeeres  and
times.  The  benefite  of  the  which  his  wonderfull  liber-
ality, our  subjects  did  enjoy  with  such  humanitie  &
freedome  as  there  could  be  no  greater,  till  the  time  that
by  reason  of  wars  more  and  more  increasing  in  those
partes,  by  the  which  our  subjects  were  to  make  their
journey  into  Persia,  they  were  debarred  and  shut  from
that  voyage  &  traffique.  The  which  traffique  the  said
societie  being  eftsoones  desirous  to  renew  to  the  weale
and  commoditie  of  both  our  dominions  they  have  now
sent  into  Persia  their  factors  &  Agents  Arthur  Edwards,
William  Turnbull,  Matthew  Tailbois,  Peter  Gerrard
merchants,  with  their  associats,  whom  we  beseech  your
invincible  majesty  to  entertaine  with  that  favour  where-
with your  father  did  imbrace  Tho.  Bannister  &  Geffrey
Ducket,  and  to  enfranchise  their  whole  societie  with  that
freedome,  that  neither  they  through  any  their  misde-
meanours towards  your  subjects,  may  thereof  seeme
unworthy  (as  we  hope  they  will  not)  neither  we  our
selves  otherwise  enjoy  them,  then  with  the  perpetuall
remembrance  of  your  good  affection  towards  us,  and
with  the  like  favourable  inclination  of  our  part  towards
you.  The  matter  it  selfe  &  tract  of  time  shall  suffi-
ciently prove  the  foresaid  maner  of  traffike  unprofitable
to neither of  us. For so hath one God the chiefe

213

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

governor  of  all  things  disposed  of  our  affaires  on  earth,
that  ech  one  should  need  other.  And  as  for  our  people
&  subjects  of  the  English  nation,  in  verie  deed  your
majesty  shal  find  them  made  and  fashioned  so  pliant
to  the  perfourmance  of  all  dueties  of  humanity,  that  it
can  never  repent  you  to  have  graunted  them  this  franke
traffike,  nor  shame  us  to  have  obteined  it  for  them  at
your  hands.  That  therefore  it  may  please  your  majesty
to  yeeld  unto  them  this  at  our  request,  most  earnestly
we  beseech  you.  And  we  (as  it  wel  beseemeth  a  prince)
if  ever  hereafter  we  may,  wil  shew  our  selfe  not  to  bee
unmindfuU  of  so  great  a  benefit.  We  wish  your  majesty
wel  &  prosperously  to  fare.  Given  at  our  palace  of
Westminster  the  lo.  day  of  June,  in  the  yere  of  our
Lord 1579.  and  of  our  reigne  the  21.

[I.  419.]  Advertisements  and  reports  of  the  6.  voyage  into
the  parts  of  Persia  and  Media,  for  the  companie
of  English  merchants  for  the  discoverie  of  new
trades,  in  the  yeeres  1579.  1580.  and  1581.
gathered  out  of  sundrie  letters  written  by
Christopher  Burrough,  servant  to  the  saide
companie,  and  sent  to  his  uncle  Master  William
Burrough.

4rst  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  the  ships  for  the
voiage  to  S.  Nicholas  in  Russia,  in  which  the
factors  and  merchandise  for  the  Persian  voiage  were
transported,  departed  from  Gravesend  the  19.  of
June,  1579.  which  arrived  at  S.  Nicholas  in  Russia  the
22.  of  July,  where  the  factors  and  merchants  landed,
and  the  merchandise  were  discharged  &  laden  into
doshnikes,  that  is,  barkes  of  the  countrey,  to  be  caried
from  thence  up  by  river  unto  Vologda.  And  the  25.
day  of  ye  said  Julie,  the  doshnikes  departed  from  Rose
Island  by  S.  Nicholas  up  the  river  Dwina,  Peremene,
that  is  to  say,  in  poste,  by  continual  sailing,  rowing,
setting  with poles,  or  drawing  of  men,  which  came  to

214

F

i

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1579-
Colmogro  the  27.  day,  and  departed  thence  the  29.  of
Julie  up  the  said  river  Dwyna,  and  came  to  Ustyoug
(which  is  at  the  head  of  the  river  Dwina,  and  mouth
of  Sughano)  the  9.  of  August,  where  they  stayed  but  a
small  time,  providing  some  victuals,  and  shifting  certaine
of  their  cassacks  or  barkmen,  &  sp  departed  thence  the
same  day  up  the  river  Sughano,  and  came  to  Totma
(which  is  counted  somewhat  more  then  halfe  the  way
from  Ustioug)  the  15.  day,  where  they  shifted  some  of
their  cassaks,  and  departed  thence  the  same  day,  and
came  to  the  citie  Vologda  the  19.  of  August,  where
they  landed  their  goods,  and  staied  at  that  place  till
the  30.  of  the  same.  Having  provided  at  Vologda,
Telegas,  or  wagons,  whereupon  they  laded  their  goods,
they  departed  thence  with  the  same  by  land  towards
Yeraslave  the  said  30.  of  August  at  eight  of  the  clocke  Teraslave.
in  the  morning,  and  came  to  the  East  side  of  the  river
Volga  over  against  Yeraslave,  with  25.  Telegas  laden
with  the  said  goods  the  seventh  of  September  at  five
of  the  clocke  afternoone.  Then  the  three  stroogs  or
barks  provided  to  transport  the  saide  goods  to  Astracan
(where  they  should  meete  the  ship  that  should  carie  the
same  from  thence  into  Persia)  came  over  from  Yeraslave
unto  the  same  side  of  the  river  Volga,  and  there  tooke
in  the  said  goods.  And  having  prepared  the  said  barks
ready  with  all  necessary  furniture  they  departed  with
them  from  Yeraslave  downe  the  river  of  Volga  on  the  14
day  of  September  at  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
and  they  arrived  at  Niznovogrod  the  17  day  at  three  of
the  clocke  afternoone,  where  they  shewed  the  Emperors
letters  to  passe  free  without  paying  any  custome,  and
taried  there  about  three  houres  to  provide  necessaries,
and  then  departing,  arrived  at  Cazan  (or  neere  the  same
towne)  on  the  22.  of  September  at  five  of  the  clock
afternoone,  where  (through  contrary  windes,  and  for
providing  new  cassaks  in  the  places  of  some  that  there
went  from  them)  they  remained  till  the  26.  day,  at  what
time  they  departed  thence  about  two  of  the  clocke  after

215

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

noone,  and  arrived  at  Tetushagorod,  which  is  on  the
Crim  side  of  Volga,  and  in  latitude  55.  degrees  22.
minutes,  the  28.  day  at  ten  in  the  forenoone,  where
they  ankered,  and  remained  about  3.  houres,  and
departing  thence  came  to  Oveak,  which  is  on  the  Crims
side  (on  the  Westerne  side  of  Volga)  the  fift  of  October
about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  This  place  is
accounted  halfe  the  way  betweene  Cazan  and  Astracan  :
Great  store  of  and  heere  there  groweth  great  store  of  Licoris  :  the  soile
Licons.  -g ^gj.y fruitfull  : they found there apple trees, and

cherrie  trees.  The  latitude  of  Oveak  is  5 1 .  degrees  30.
minutes.  At  this  place  had  bene  a  very  faire  stone
castle  called  by  the  name  Oveak,  &  adjoyning  to  the
same  was  a  towne  called  by  ye  Russes,  Sodom  :  this
towne  &  part  of  the  castle  (by  report  of  the  Russes)
was  swalowed  into  the  earth  by  the  justice  of  God,  for
the  wickednesse  of  the  people  that  inhabited  the  same.
There  remaineth  at  this  day  to  be  seene  a  part  of  the
ruines  of  the  castle,  and  certaine  tombs,  wherein  as  it
seemeth  have  bin  laid  noble  personages  :  for  upon  a
tombe  stone  might  be  perceived  the  forme  of  a  horse
and  a  man  sitting  on  it  with  a  bow  in  his  hand,  and
arrowes  girt  to  his  side  :  there  was  a  piece  of  a  scutchion
also  upon  one  of  the  stones,  which  had  characters  graven
on  it,  whereof  some  part  had  beene  consumed  with  the
weather,  and  the  rest  left  unperfect  :  but  by  the  forme
of  them  that  remained,  we  judged  them  to  be  characters
of  Armenia  :  and  other  characters  were  graven  also  upon
another  tombe  stone.  Nowe  they  departed  from  Oveak
the  said  fift  of  October  at  five  of  the  clocke  after  noone,
Peravolok.  and  Came  to  Peravolok  the  10.  day  about  eleven  or
twelve  of  the  clocke  that  night,  making  no  abode  at
that  place,  but  passed  alongst  by  it.  This  worde  Pera-
volok in  the  Russe  tongue  doeth  signifie  a  narrow
straight  or  necke  of  land  betweene  two  waters,  and  it
is  so  called  by  them,  because  from  the  river  Volga,  at
that  place,  to  the  river  Don  or  Tanais,  is  counted  thirty
versts,  or  as  much  as  a  man  may  well  travell  on  foote

216

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1579-
in  one  day.  And  seven  versts  beneath,  upon  an  Island
called  Tsaritsna  the  Emperour  of  Russia  hath  fiftie
gunners  all  the  summer  time  to  keepe  watch,  called  by
the  Tartar  name  Carawool.  Betweene  this  place  and
Astracan  are  five  other  Carawools  or  watches.

1  The  first  is  named  Kameni  Carawool,  and  is  distant  [I.  420.]
from  Peravolok 120,  versts.

2  The  second  named  Stupino  Carowool,  distant  from
the  first  50.  versts.

3  The  third called Polooy Carowool, is 120. versts
distant  from  the  second.

4  The  fourth  named  Keezeyur  Carawool,  is  50.  versts
distant  from  the  third.

5  The  fift  named  Ichkebre,  is  30.  verst  distant  from
the  fourth,  and  Ichkebre  to  Astracan  is  30.  versts.

The  16.  of  October  they  arrived  at  Astracan,  with  Astracan.
their  three  stroogs  in  safetie  about  nine  of  the  clock  in
the  morning,  where  they  found  the  ship  provided  for
the  Persia  voyage  in  good  order  &  readinesse.  The  17.
day  the  foure  principal  factors  of  the  company,  Arthur
Edwards,  William  Turnbull,  Matthew  Talbois,  and  Peter  ^^^^^  ^^^"
Garrard,  were  invited  to  dine  with  the  chiefe  diake  or
secretary  of  Astracan  (Vasili  Pheodorovich  Shelepin)  who
declared  then  unto  them  the  troubles  that  were  in  Media
and  Persia  :  and  how  the  Turke  with  helpe  of  the  Crims
had  conquered,  and  did  possesse  the  greatest  part  of
Media  :  also  he  laid  before  them  that  Winter  was  at
hand,  &  if  they  should  put  out  with  their  ship  to  the
sea,  they  should  bee  constrained  to  take  what  hazards
might  happen  them  by  wintring  in  the  parts  of  Media,
or  els  where,  for  backe  againe  to  that  place  there  was
no  hope  for  them  to  returne  :  whereupon  the  said  factors
determined  to  stay  there  all  Winter  to  learne  further  of
the  state  of  those  countreis.

The 19. of  November the winde being Northerly,  Ice  at  Astra-
there  was  a  great  frost,  and  much  ice  in  the  river :  the  '^^'"Mfi^^'^

.  1710716  ths

next day  being the 20.  of  November  the  ice  stood  in
the  river,  and  so  continued  untill  Easter  day.

217

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

The  22.  of  December  departed  this  life  John  Moore
the  gunner  of  the  ship.
Anno  1580.  Thursday  the  7.  of  January  betweene  8.  and  9.  of
the  clocke  at  night  there  appeared  a  crosse  proceeding
from  the  moone,  with  two  galles  at  the  South  and
North  end  thereof.

The  6.  of  January  being  Twelfe  day  (which  they
call  Chreshenia)  the  Russes  of  Astracan  brake  a  hole
in  the  ice  upon  the  river  Volga,  &  hallowed  the  water
with  great  solemnity  according  to  the  maner  of  their
countrey,  at  which  time  all  the  souldiers  of  the  towne
shot  off  their  smal  pieces  upon  the  ice,  and  likewise  to
gratifie  the  captaine  of  the  castel  being  a  Duke,  whose
name  is  Pheodor  Michalovich  Troiocouria,  who  stood
hard  by  the  ship,  beholding  them  as  they  were  on  the
river,  was  shot  off  all  the  ordinance  of  our  ship  being
15  pieces,  viz.  2.  faulcons,  2.  faulconets,  4.  fowlers,
4.  fowlers  chambers,  and  3.  other  small  pieces  made
for  the  stroogs  to  shoote  hailestones,  and  afterwards  the
great  ordinance  of  the  castle  was  shot  off.

On  the  3 1 .  of  January  there  happened  a  great  eclipse
of  the  moone,  which  began  about  12.  of  the  clocke  at
night,  and  continued  before  she  was  cleare  an  houre
and  a  halfe  by  estimation,  which  ended  the  first  of
February  about  halfe  an  houre  past  one  in  the  morning :
she  was  wholly  darkned  by  the  space  of  halfe  an  houre.

The  26.  of  February  the  towne  of  Nagay  Tartars,
called  the  Yourt,  which  is  within  3.  quarters  of  a  mile
of  the  castle  of  Astracan,  by  casualty  was  set  on  fire
about  10.  of  the  clock  at  night,  &  continued  burning
til  midnight,  whereby  one  halfe  of  it  was  burnt,  and
much  cattell  destroyed.  The  Nagayes  that  inhabite  that
towne,  are  the  Emperour  of  Russia  his  vassals :  It  is
supposed  there  are  of  them  inhabiting  that  place  of
men,  women,  and  children,  the  number  of  seven  thou-
sand. That  night  the  Allarum  was  made  in  the  castle
and  towne  of  Astracan.  The  captaine  thereof  had  all
his souldiers in  very  good order  and  readinesse,  being

218

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580/

of  them  in  number  two  thousand  gunners  and  cassaks,
that  is  to  say,  a  thousand  gunners,  which  are  accounted
meere  souldiers,  and  are  not  put  to  any  other  service
then  the  use  of  their  pieces,  watch,  &c.  as  souldiers
which  alwaies  keepe  the  castle,  and  the  cassaks  also
using  their  pieces,  do  keepe  the  towne,  and  are  commonly
set  to  all  kind  of  labours.

The  7.  of  March  1580.  the  Nagayes  and  Crims  came
before  Astracan  to  the  number  of  one  thousand  foure
hundred  horsemen,  which  incamped  round  about,  but
the  neerest  of  them  were  two  Russe  versts  and  a  halfe
off  from  the  castle  and  town :  some  of  them  lay  on
the  Crims  side  of  Volga,  and  some  on  the  Nagay  side,
but  none  of  them  came  upon  the  Island  that  Astracan  Astracan  situ-
standeth  on.  It  was  said  that  two  of  the  prince  of  ^J^  ^^°^  ^"
the  Crims  his  sonnes  were  amongst  them.  They  sent
a  messenger  on  the  eight  day  to  the  captain  of  Astracan,
to  signifie  that  they  would  come  and  visit  him :  who
answered,  he  was  ready  to  receive  them :  and  taking
a  great  shot  or  bullet  in  his  hand,  willed  the  messenger
to  tel  them  that  they  should  not  want  of  that  geare,
so  long  as  it  would  last.  The  ninth  day  newes  was
brought  that  the  Crims  determined  to  assault  the  towne
or  castle,  and  were  making  of  fagots  of  reede,  to  bring
with  them  for  that  purpose.  The  tenth  day  two  Russes
that  were  captives,  and  two  of  the  Tartars  bondmen
ranne  away  from  the  Nagayes,  and  came  into  Astracan.
The  same  day  word  was  brought  to  the  Duke  of  two
Nagayes  which  were  scene  at  Gostine  house,  supposed
to  be  spies,  but  were  gone  againe  from  thence  before
they  were  suspected.  This  Gostine  house  is  a  place  a  [I.  421.]
litle  without  the  towne  where  the  Tisiks  (or  Persian
merchants)  do  usually  remaine  with  their  merchandize.
The  1 1 .  day  the  said  Nagayes,  and  one  more  with  them,
came  againe  to  that  house  earely  in  the  morning,  where
they  were  taken  by  the  Russes,  and  brought  to  the
captaine  of  the  castle,  and  being  examined,  confessed
that their comming  was onely  to seeke two of  their

219

A.D.
1580.

The  variation
of  the  compas
in  Astracan
zuas  I  3 .  deg.
40,  minuts.

May.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bondmen  that  were  runne  from  them  :  whereupon  their
bondmen  were  delivered  to  them :  which  favour  the
said  captaine  commonly  sheweth  if  they  be  not  Russies,
and  they  were  set  at  libertie.  The  13.  day  they  brake
up  their  camps,  and  marched  to  the  Northwards  into
the  countrey  of  Nagay.

The  17.  of  April  the  variation  of  the  compasse
observed  in  Astracan  was  13.  deg.  40.  min.  from  North
to  West.  This  spring  there  came  newes  to  Astracan
that  the  queene  of  Persia  (the  king  being  blind)  had
bene  with  a  great  army  against  the  Turks  that  were
left  to  possesse  Media,  and  had  given  them  a  great
overthrow :  yet  notwithstanding  Derbent,  &  the  greatest
part  of  Media  were  still  possessed  and  kept  by  the
Turks.  The  factors  of  the  company  consulting  upon
their  affayres,  determined  to  leave  at  Astracan  the  one
halfe  of  their  goods  with  Arthur  Edwards,  and  with
the  other  halfe  the  other  three  factors  would  proceed
in  the  ship  on  their  purposed  voyage  to  the  coast  of
Media,  to  see  what  might  be  done  there :  where,  if  they
could  not  find  safe  traffike,  they  determined  to  proceed
to  the  coast  of  Gilan,  which  is  a  province  nere  the  Caspian
sea  bordering  upon  Persia :  and  therupon  appointed
the  said  goods  to  be  laden  aboord  the  ship,  and  tooke
into  her  also  some  merchandize  of  Tisiks  or  Persian
merchants.

The  29.  of  April  Amos  Riall,  and  Anthony  Marsh,
the  companies  servants  were  sent  from  Astracan  by  the
said  factors,  up  the  river  Volga  to  Yeraslave,  with  letters
of  advise  to  be  sent  for  England,  and  had  order  for
staying  the  goods  in  Russia  that  should  come  that
yeere  out  of  England  for  mainteining  the  trade  purposed
for  Persia,  untill  further  triall  were  made  what  might
be  done  in  those  parts.

The  first  day  of  May  in  the  morning,  having  the
shippe  in  readinesse  to  depart,  the  factors  invited  the
duke  Pheodor  Micalovich  Proiocoorow,  and  the  principall
secretary Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin, with other of

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

the  chiefest  about  the  duke  to  a  banket  aboord  the  ship,

where they  were interteined to their  good liking,  and

at  their  departure  was  shot  off  all  the  ordinance  of  the

ship,  and about nine of  the clocke  at night the same

day they  weyed anker, and departed with their ship

from Astracan, and being but litle  winde, towed her

with  the  boat  about  three  versts,  &  then  ankered,  having

with  them  a  pavos  or  lighter  to  helpe  them  at  the  flats.

The  second  day  at  foure  of  the  clocke in ye morning

they  weyed  &  plyed downe  the  river  Volga  toward  the

Caspian  sea. The  seventh  of  May  in  the  morning  they

passed  by  a  tree  that  standeth  on the  left  hand  of  the

river as they  went downe, which is called Mahomet

Agatch,  or  Mahomets  tree,  &  about  three  versts  further,

that is to  say,  to the Southwards of  the said tree is

a  place  called  Uchoog,  that  is  to  say,  the  Russe  weare : Uchoog.

(but Ochoog is the name of  a weare in the Tartar

tongue) where are certain cotages,  and the Emperour

hath lying at that place certaine  gunners to gard his

fishermen  that  keepe  the  weare. This  Uchoog  is  counted

from Astracan 60.  versts : they proceeded downe the

said  river  without  staying  at the Uchoog. The ninth Should  water.

and tenth dayes they  met  with shoald  water,  and  were

forced  to  lighten their ship by  the pavos :  the  1 1 .  day

they  sent  backe  to  the  Uchoog  for  an  other  pavos :  This

day  by  mischance  the  shippe  was  bilged  on  the  grapnell

of  the  pavos,  whereby  the  company  had  sustained  great

losses,  if  the  chiefest  part  of  their  goods  had  not  beene

layde  into  the  pavos : for  notwithstanding  their  pumping

with 3.  pumps,  heaving out  water  with buckets, and

all  the  best  shifts  they  could  make,  the  shippe  was  halfe

full  of  water  ere  the  leake  could be found and stopt.

The  12.  day  the  pavos  came  to  them  from  the  Uchoog,

whereby  they  lighted  the  shippe  of  all  the  goods. The

13.  day  in the morning  there came to them a small

boat,  sent  by  the  captaine  of  Astracan,  to  learne  whether

the shippe were at sea cleere of  the flats. The 15.  Flats.

day by  great industry  and travell they  got their ship

A.D.

1580.

Chetera  Bou-
gori.

The  Caspian
sea.

45  degrees
20.  minuts.
The  first  ob-
servation in
the  Caspian
sea.

[I.  422.]

Brackish
water  far  re
within  the  sea.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

cleare  off  the  shoales  and  flats,  wherewith  they  had  beene
troubled  from  the  ninth  day  untill  then :  they  were
forced  to  passe  their  shippe  in  three  foot  water  or  lesse.
The  16.  day  they  came  to  the  Chetera  Bougori,  or  Island
of  Foure  Hillocks,  which  are  counted  forty  versts  from
Uchoog,  and  are  the  furthest  land  towards  the  sea. The

17.  day  they  bare  off  into  the  sea,  and  being  about  twelve
versts  from  the  Foure  hillocks,  riding  in  five  foot  and
a  halfe  water  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,
they  tooke  their  goods  out  of  the  pavoses  into  the  shippe,
and filled their  shippe  with all things necessary. The

18.  day  in  the  morning  about  seven  of  the  clock,  the
pavoses  being  discharged  departed  away  towards  Astracan,
the  winde  then  at  Southeast,  they  road  still  with  the
shippe,  and  observing  the  elevation  of  the  pole  at  that
place,  found  it  to  be  45.  degrees  20.  minuts.  The  19.
day,  the  wind  Southeast,  they  road  still.  The  20.  day
the  winde  at  Northwest  they  set  saile  about  one  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  &  stered  thence  South  by
West,  &  Southsouthwest  about  3.  leagues,  and  then
ankered  in  6.  foot  and  a  halfe  water,  about  nine  of  ye
clocke  before  noone,  at  which  time  it  fell  calme  :  the
elevation  of  the  pole  at  that  place  45.  degrees  13.  minuts.
The  21.  having  the  winde  at  Northwest,  they  set  saile,
and  stered  thence  South  by  West,  and  South  untill
eleven  of  the  clocke,  and  had  then  nine  foote  water  :
and  at  noone  they  observed  the  latitude,  and  found  it
to  be  44.  degrees  47  minuts  :  then  had  they  three  fathoms
and  a  halfe  water,  being  cleare  of  the  flats.  It  is  counted
from  the  Foure  hillockes  to  the  sea  about  fiftie  versts.
From  the  said  noonetide  untill  foure  of  the  clocke  they
sayled  South  by  East  five  leagues  and  a  halfe  :  then
had  they  five  fathoms  and  a  halfe  and  brackish  water  :
from  that  till  twelve  at  night  they  sayled  South  by
East  halfe  a  league,  East  tenne  leagues  :  then  had  they
eleven  fathome,  and  the  water  Salter.  From  that  till
the  22.  day  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  they
sayled three & fifty leagues, then had they sixtene

CHRISTOPHER  BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

fathome  water  :  from  thence  they  sayled  until  noone
South  and  by  West  seven  leagues  and  a  halfe,  the  latitude
then  observed  43.  degrees  15.  minuts,  the  depth  then  43-  de^-ees
eight  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  shallow  ground:  from  i5-^^"*^'f-
that  untill  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  they  sayled  South
by  East  five  leagues  and  a  halfe,  then  had  they  three
and  fortie  fathoms  shallow  ground.  From  thence  till
the  23.  foure  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  they  sailed  South-
southwest  three  leagues  and  a  halfe  :  then  could  they
get  no  ground  in  two  and  fiftie  fathoms  deepe.  From
thence  untill  noone  they  sayled  South  nine  leagues,  then
the  latitude  observed  was  42.  degrees  20.  minuts.  From
that  till  the  24.  day  at  noone  they  sayled  South  by  West
seventeene  leagues  and  a  halfe,  then  the  latitude  observed
was  41.  degrees  32.  minuts.  From  noone  till  seven  of  4i-  degrees
the  clocke  at  night,  they  sailed  Southsouthwest  foure  ^^"  '"^'^'^''^•
leagues,  then  had  they  perfect  sight  of  high  land  or
hilles,  which  were  almost  covered  with  snow,  and  the
mids  of  them  were  West  from  the  ship,  being  then  about
twelve  leagues  from  the  nearest  land  :  they  sounded  but
could  finde  no  ground  in  two  hundred  fathoms.  From
thence  they  sailed  Southwest  until  midnight  :  about  three
leagues  from  thence  till  the  25.  day  foure  of  the  clock
in  the  morning,  they  sayled  West  three  leagues,  being
then  litle  winde,  and  neere  the  land,  they  tooke  in  their
sayles,  and  lay  hulling  :  at  noone  the  latitude  observed,
was  40.  degrees  54.  minuts  :  they  sounded  but  could  get  4°  degrees
no  ground  in  two  hundred  fathoms.  At  four  of  the  54-  mmuts.
clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the  winde  Northwest,  they  set
their  sailes,  &  from  thence  till  the  26.  day  at  noone
they  sailed  East  southeast  foure  leagues.  From  thence
they  sailed  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  Southwest
three  leagues,  the  winde  then  at  North.  From  thence
they  sailed  untill  the  27.  day  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  Westsouthwest  eight  leagues,  the  winde  blowing
at  North  very  much.  From  the  sayd  two  til  foure  of
the  clocke  they  sailed  South  by  West  one  league :  then
being  day  light,  they saw  the land plaine,  which was

223

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

not  past  three  leagues  from  them,  being  very  high  ragged;
land.  There  were  certaine  rocks  that  lay  farre  off  into  the
sea,  about  five  leagues  from  the  same  land,  (which  are
called  Barmake  Tash)  they  sayled  betweene  those  rocks
and  the  land,  and.  about  five  of  the  clocke  they  passed

Bilbill.  by  the  port  Bilbill,  where  they  should  have  put  in  but
could  not  :  and  bearing  longst  the  shoare  about  two
of  the  clocke  afternoone,  they  came  to  Bildih  in  the
countrey  of  Media  or  Shervan,  against  which  place  they
ankered  in  9.  foot  water.  Presently  after  they  were
at  anker,  there  came  aboord  of  them  a  boat,  wherein
were  seven  or  eight  persons,  two  Turks,  the  rest  Persians,
the  Turkes  vassals,  which  bade  them  welcome,  and
seemed  to  be  glad  of  their  arrivall,  who  told  the  factors
that  the  Turke  had  conquered  all  Media,  or  the  countrey
Shervan,  and  how  that  the  Turks  Basha  remained  in
Derbent  with  a  garrison  of  Turkes,  and  that  Shamaky
was  wholly  spoyled,  and  had  few  or  no  inhabitants  left
in  it.  The  factours  then  being  desirous  to  come  to
the  speech  of  the  Basha,  sent  one  of  the  Tisikes  (or
merchants  that  went  over  with  them  from  Astracan.,
passingers) and one  of  the companies servants Robert

Bachu  port.  Golding,  with  those  souldiours,  to  the  captaine  of  Bachu,
which place  standeth hard by  the sea, to certifie him
of  their  arrivall,  and  what  commodities  they  had  brought,
and  to  desire  friendshippe  to  have  quiet  and  safe  traffike
for  the same. Bachu is from Bildih, the place where
they  road,  about  a  dayes  journey,  on  foote  easily  to  be
travelled,  which  may  be  sixe  leagues  the  next  way  over
land  :  it  is  a  walled  towne,  and  strongly  fortified. When
the  sayd  messenger  came  to  the  captaine  of  Bachu,  the
said  captaine  gave  him  very  friendly  intertainment,  and  ||
after he  understood  what  they  were  that  were  come  in  1'
the  shippe, and  what  they  had  brought,  he  seemed  toL
rejoyce  much  thereat  :  who  gave  the  said  Golding  licence!
to depart backe the next day, being the eight and'
twentieth  day  : and promised that he would himselfe
come  to  the  shippe  the  next  day  following  : with  which

224

^

V

y

v^

'-t'

J  67-  V

rem jUy / -'  ^.._^

'v-w/jN

s?"

^^'■'..

■v  '  <k^Mi^\ %fh.

St.,;/,-.,..,  i...,?',.^:.

^*tsjl>''"?.^'''' Vi^^--  ^^'"^'

A'ouo ~o„/.-

r:i

#

,;AfiV„_

CHART OF THE NORTHERN OCEAN BY WILLIAM BURROUCH

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

answere  the  said  Golding  returned  and  came  to  the  shippe
the  sayd  eight  and  twentieth  day  about  nine  of  the  clocke
at  night.  The  nine  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  the
factours  caused  a  tent  to  be  set  up  at  shoare  neare  the
shippe,  against  the  comming  of  the  sayd  captaine  :  who  came
thither  about  three  of  the  clocke  after  noone,  and  brought
about  thirtie  souldiers,  that  attended  on  him,  in  shirts
of  male,  and  some  of  them  had  gauntlets  of  silver,  others
of  Steele,  and  very  faire.  The  factors  met  him  at  their
tent,  and  after  very  friendly  salutations  passed  betweene
them,  they  gave  him  for  a  present  a  garment  of  cloth  [I.  423.]
of  velvet,  and  another  of  scarlet,  who  accepted  the  same
;  gratefully.  After  they  had  talked  together  by  their
'  interpretors,  as  well  of  the  state  of  the  voyage  and  cause
of  their  comming  thither,  as  also  learned  of  the  sayde
captaine  the  state  of  that  countrey,  the  factours  made
request  unto  him,  that  he  would  helpe  them  to  the  speech
of  the  Basha,  who  answered  that  their  demand  was
[reasonable,  and  that  he  would  willingly  shew  them  therein
'what  pleasure  he  could,  and  sayd,  because  the  way  to
Derbent,  where  the  Basha  remayned,  was  dangerous,
he  would  send  thither,  and  certifie  him  of  their  arrival!,
and  what  commodities  they  had  brought,  and  such
commodities  as  they  would  desire  to  exchange  or  barter
the  same  for  he  would  procure  the  said  Basha  to  pro-
vide for  them  :  and  therefore  willed  the  factors  to
consult  together,  and  certifie  him  what  they  most  de-
sired, and  what  quantity  they  would  have  provided :  so
whilest  the  factors  were  consulting  together  thereupon,
the  captaine  talked  with  a  Tisike  merchant  that  came
over  in  the  ship  with  them  from  Astracan,  which  Tisike,
among  other  matters  in  talke,  certified  the  captaine,
that  the  night  before,  the  factors  &  their  company  were
determined  to  have  returned  backe  againe  to  Astracan,
and  that  they  were  about  to  wey  their  ankers,  which  Thomas  Hud-
in  deed  was  true,  but  the  maister  of  the  barke  Thomas  ^'^^  ofLtme-
Hudson  of  Limehouse  perswaded  them  that  the  wind  of^the^EmlLh
[was  not  good  for  them  to  depart,  &c.  When  the  factors  barke.
i in  225  p

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

came  againe  to  talke  with  the  captaine,  they  desired  to
goe  to  the  Basha,  and  that  he  would  safely  conduct  them
thither :  he  granted  their  requests  willingly,  desiring
them  to  goe  with  him  to  a  village  hard  by,  and  there
to  abide  with  him  that  night,  and  the  next  day  they
should  go  to  Bachu,  and  from  thence  proceede  on  their
journey  to  Derbent.  They  were  unwilling  to  go  that
night  with  him,  because  their  provision  for  the  way  was
not  in  readinesse,  but  requested  that  they  might  stay
til  the  morning.  Thereupon  the  captaine  sayd  it  was
reported  unto  him,  that  they  ment  the  night  before  to
have  gone  away :  and  if  it  should  so  happen,  he  were
in  great  danger  of  loosing  his  head :  for  which  cause
he  requested  to  have  some  one  for  a  pledge :  wherefore
M.  Garrard  one  of  the  factors  offered  himselfe  to  go,
who,  because  he  could  not  speake  the  Russe  tongue,
M.  Christo-  tooke  with  him  Christopher  Burrough,  and  a  Russe
pher  Bur-  interpretour :  that  night  they  road  from  the  seaside,  to  a
village  about  ten  miles  off,  where  at  supper  time  the
captaine  had  much  talke  with  M.  Garrard  of  our
countrey,  demanding  where  about  it  did  lie,  what
countreys  were  neare  unto  it,  and  with  whom  we  had
traffike,  for  by  the  Russe  name  of  our  countrey  he
could  not  conjecture  who  we  should  be  :  but  when  by
the  situation  he  perceived  we  were  Englishmen,  he
demanded  if  our  prince  were  a  mayden  Queene :  which
when  he  was  certified  of,  then  (quoth  he)  your  land  is
called  Enghilterra,  is  it  not  ?  answere  was  made,  it  was
so  :  whereof  he  was  very  glad  when  he  knew  the  cer-
tainety.  He  made  very  much  of  them,  placing  M.
Garrard  next  to  himselfe,  and  Christopher  Burrough,
with  the  Russie  interpretour  for  the  Turkie  tongue  hard
by.  There  was  a  Gillan  merchant  with  him  at  that
present,  of  whom  he  seemed  to  make  great  account :
him  he  placed  next  to  himselfe  on  the  other  side,  and
his  gentlemen  sate  round  about  him  talking  together.
Their  sitting  is  upon  the  heeles,  or  crosse  legged.
Supper being  brought  in,  he  requested  them  to  eate.

226

rough.

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

After  their  potage  (which  was  made  of  rice)  was  done,
and  likewise  their  boyled  meat,  there  came  in  platters
of  rice  sodden  thicke,  and  hony  mingled  withall  :  after
all  which,  came  a  sheepe  rosted  whole,  which  was  brought
in  a  tray,  and  set  before  the  captaine  :  he  called  one  of
his  servitours,  who  cut  it  in  pieces,  and  laying  therof
upon  divers  platters,  set  the  same  "before  the  captaine  :
then  the  captaine  gave  to  M.  Garrard  and  his  company
one  platter,  and  to  his  gentlemen  another,  and  to  them
which  could  not  well  reach  he  cast  meat  from  the  platters
which  were  before  him.  Divers  questions  he  had  with
M.  Garrard  and  Christopher  Burrough  at  supper  time,
about  their  diet,  inquiring  whether  they  eat  fish  or  flesh
voluntarily,  or  by  order.  Their  drinke  in  those  partes
is  nothing  but  water.  After  supper  (walking  in  the
garden)  the  captaine  demanded  of  M.  Garrard,  whether
the  use  was  in  England  to  lie  in  the  house  or  in  the
garden,  and  which  he  had  best  liking  of:  he  answered,
where  it  pleased  him,  but  their  use  was  to  lie  in  houses  :
whereupon  the  captaine  caused  beds  to  be  sent  into
the  house  for  them,  and  caused  his  kinsman  to  attend
on  them  in  the  night,  if  they  chanced  to  want  any
thing  :  he  himselfe  with  his  gentlemen  and  souldiers
lying  in  the  garden.

In  the  morning  very  early  he  sent  horse  for  the  rest
of  the  company  which  should  go  to  Derbent,  sending
by  them  that  went  tenne  sheepe  for  the  shippe.  In
that  village  there  was  a  Stove,  into  which  the  captaine
went  in  the  morning,  requesting  M.  Garrard  to  go
also  to  the  same  to  wash  himselfe,  which  he  did.
Shortly  after  their  comming  out  of  the  Stove,  whilest
they  were  at  breakfast,  M.  Turnbull,  M.  Tailboyes,
and  Thomas  Hudson  the  M.  of  the  shippe,  came
thither,  and  when  they  had  all  broken  their  fasts,  they
went  to  Bachu  :  but  Christopher  Burrough  returned
to  the  ship,  for  that  he  had  hurt  his  leg,  and  could  not
well  endure  that  travell.  And  from  Bachu  they  pro-
ceeded towards Derbent, as it was by the captaine

227

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

promised,  being  accompanied  on  their  way  for  their  safe

conduct,  with  a  gentleman,  and  certaine  souldiers,  which

[I.  424,] had  the  captaine of  Bachu his  letters  to the Basha  of

Derbent,  very  friendly  written  in  their  behalfe. In  their

journey  to  Derbent  they  forsooke the ordinarie  wayes,

being  very dangerous,  and  travelled thorow  woods till

they  came almost  to  the towne  of  Derbent  :  and then

the gentleman road before with the captaines letters

to  the  Basha,  to certifie  him  of  the  English merchants

comming,  who  receiving  the  letters,  and understanding

the  matter,  was  very  glad  of  the  newes,  and sent forth

The  receiving  to receive them certaine souldiers gunners, who met

■  /  ^ i them  about  two  miles  out of  the  towne, saluting  them

into  Dcrbctit, ,  -^  o

with  great  reverence,  and  afterwardes  road  before  them  :
then  againe  met  them  other  souldiours,  somewhat  neerer
the  castle,  which  likewise  having  done  their  salutations
road  before  them,  and  then  came  foorth  noble  men,
captaines,  and  gentlemen,  to  receive  them  into  the
castle  and  towne.  As  they  entred  the  castle,  there  was
a  shot  of  twentie  pieces  of  great  ordinance,  &  the  Basha
sent  M.  TurnbuU  a  very  faire  horse  with  furniture  to
mount  on,  esteemed  to  be  worth  an  hundred  markes,
and  so  they  were  conveyed  to  his  presence  :  who  after
he  had  talked  with  them,  sent  for  a  coate  of  cloth  of  '
golde,  and  caused  it  to  be  put  on  M.  Turnbulles  backe,
and  then  willed  them  all  to  depart,  and  take  their  ease,
for  that  they  were  wearie  of  their  journey,  and  on  the
morrow  he  would  talke  further  with  them.  The  next
day  when  ye  factors  came  againe  to  the  presence  of  the
Basha,  according  to  his  appointment,  they  requested
him  that  he  would  grant  them  his  privilege,  whereby
they  might  traffike  safely  in  any  part  and  place  of  his
countrey,  offering  him,  that  if  it  pleased  his  Majestic
to  have  any  of  the  commodities  that  they  had  brought,  |
and  to  write  his  mind  thereof  to  the  captaine  of  Bachu,
it  should  be  delivered  him  accordingly.  The  Bashaes
answere  was,  that  he  would  willingly  give  them  his
privilege  :  yet  for  that  he  regarded  their  safetie,  having

228

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

come  so  farre,  &  knowing  the  state  of  his  countrey  to
be  troublesome,  he  would  have  them  to  bring  their
commodity  thither,  &  there  to  make  sale  of  it,  promising
he  would  provide  such  commodities  as  they  needed,  and
that  he  would  be  a  defence  unto  them,  so  that  they
should  not  be  injured  by  any  :  wherupon  the  factors
sent  Thomas  Hudson  backe  for  ye  ship  to  bring  her
to  Derbent,  and  the  Basha  sent  a  gentleman  with  him
to  the  captaine  of  Bachu,  to  certifie  him  what  was  deter-
mined, which  message  being  done,  the  captaine  of  Bachu,
and  the  Bashaes  messenger,  accompanied  with  a  doozen
souldiours,  went  from  Bachu  with  Thomas  Hudson,  &
came  to  the  ship  at  Bildih  the  1 1  day  of  June.  After
the  captaine  and  his  men  had  beene  aboord  and  scene
the  ship,  they  all  departed  presently,  but  the  gentleman,
messenger  from  ye  Basha,  with  three  other  Turks,
remained  aboord,  and  continued  in  the  ship  till  she
came  to  Derbent  :  the  latitude  of  Bildih  by  divers  The  latitude
observations  is  40.  degrees  25,  minuts  :  the  variation  of  Bildth  ^o.
of  the  compasse  10.  degrees  40.  minuts  from  North  to  xfgl,lr'iaiion
West.  After  the  returne  of  Thomas  Hudson  backe  of  the  compas
to  Bildih,  they  were  constrayned  to  remaine  there  10.  deg.  40.
with  the  shippe  through  contrary  windes  untill  the  16.  ^''^•
day  of  June  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
at  which  time  they  weyed  anker,  set  saile  and  departed
thence  towards  Derbent,  and  arrived  at  anker  against
Derbent  East  and  by  South  from  the  sayd  castle  in
foure  fathome  and  a  halfe  water,  the  22.  day  of  June
at  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  :  then  they  tooke
up  their  ordinance,  which  before  they  had  stowed  in
hold  for  easing  the  shippe  in  her  rowling.  In  the
afternoone  the  Basha  came  downe  to  the  waterside
against  the  shippe,  and  having  the  said  ordinance  placed,
and  charged,  it  was  all  shotte  off  to  gratifie  him  ;  and
presently  after  his  departure  backe,  he  permitted  the
factors  to  come  aboord  the  shippe.  The  29.  day  their
goods  were  unladen  and  carried  to  the  Bashaes  garden,
where  he  made  choyce  of  such  things  as  he  liked,  taking

229

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

for  custome  of  every  five  &  twenty  karsies,  or  whatso-
ever, one,  or  after  the  rate  of  foure  for  the  hundred.
The  factors  after  his  choyce  made,  determined  to  send
a  part  of  the  rest  of  the  goods  to  Bachu,  for  the  speedier
making  sale  thereof,  for  which  cause  they  obtained  the
Bashaes  letter  to  the  captaine  of  Bachu,  written  very
favourably  in  their  behoofe  :  and  thereupon  was  laden
and  sent  in  a  small  boat  of  that  countrey  in  merchandize,
to  the  value  (very  neere)  of  one  thousand  pound
sterling  :  videlicet,  one  hundreth  pieces  of  karsies,  seven
broad  clothes,  two  barrels  of  cochenelio,  two  barrels  of
tinne,  foure  barrels  of  shaffe.  There  went  with  the
same  of  the  companies  servants  William  Winckle,  Robert
Golding,  and  Richard  Relfe,  with  two  Russies,  whereof
one  was  an  interpretor,  besides  foure  barkemen.  They
departed  from  Derbent  with  the  said  barke  the  19.  of
July,  and  arrived  at  Bildih  the  25.  day  :  their  passage
and  carriage  of  their  goods  to  Bachu  was  chargeable,
although  their  sales  when  they  came  thither  were  small  :
they  had  great  friendship  shewed  them  of  the  captaine
of  Bachu,  as  well  for  the  Bashaes  letter,  as  also  for  the
factors  sakes,  who  had  dealt  friendly  with  him,  as  before
is  declared.  Robert  Golding  desirous  to  understand  what
might  be  done  at  Shamaky,  which  is  a  daies  journey  from
Bachu,  went  thither,  from  whence  returning,  he  was
set  on  by  theeves,  and  was  shot  into  the  knee  with
an  arrow,  who  had  very  hardly  escaped  with  his  life  &
goods,  but  that  by  good  hap  he  killed  one  of  the  theeves
horses  with  his  caliver,  and  shot  a  Turke  thorow  both
cheeks  with  a  dag.  On  the  sixt  day  of  August  the
factors  being  advertised  at  Derbent  that  their ship was

[I.  425.]  so  rotten  &  weake,  that  it  was  doubtfuU  she  would
not  carry  them  backe  to  Astracan,  did  therupon  agree
and  bargen  at  that  place  with  an  Armenian,  whose  name
was  Jacob,  for  a  barke  called  a  Busse,  being  of  burden
about  35.  tunnes,  which  came  that  yere  from Astracan,

Zere  Island,  and  was  at  that  instant  riding  at  an  Island  called  Zere,
about  three  or  foure  leagues  beyond  or  to  the  Eastwardes

230

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.
of  Bildih,  which  barke  for  their  more  safety,  they  ment
to  have  with  them  in  their  returne  to  Astracan,  and  ther-
upon  wrote  unto  Wincoll  and  the  rest  at  Bachu,  that
they  should  receive  the  same  Busse,  and  lade  in  her  their
goods  at  Bildih  to  be  returned  to  Derbent,  and  to  dis-
charge their  first  boate,  which  was  observed  by  them
accordingly.  When  all  their  goods  were  laden  aboord
the  sayd  Busse  at  Bildih,  and  being  ready  to  have
departed  thence  for  Derbent,  there  arose  a  great  storme
with  the  winde  out  of  the  sea,  by  force  whereof  the
cables  and  halsers  were  broken,  and  their  vessell  put  a
shoare,  and  broken  to  pieces  against  the  rockes  :  every  The  English
of  them  that  were  in  her  saved  their  lives,  and  part  ^W^^^^^p-
of  the  goods.  But  there  was  a  Carobia  or  cheste,  wherein
were  dollers,  and  golde,  which  they  had  received  for
the  commodities  of  the  company,  which  they  sold  at
Bachu,  which  at  the  taking  out  of  the  Busse,  fell  by
the  barkes  side  into  the  water  amongst  the  rockes,  and
so  was  lost.  The  packes  of  cloth  which  they  could  not
well  take  out  of  the  Busse  were  also  lost,  other  thiiigs
that  were  more  profitable  they  saved.

The  18.  of  August,  the  Factors  received  from  the
Basha  500.  Batmans  of  raw  silke,  parcell  of  the  bargaine
made  with  him,  who  bade  them  come  the  next  day
for  the  rest  of  the  bargaine.

The  19.  day  the  Factors  went  to  the  Basha  according
to  his  appointment,  but  that  day  they  could  not  speake
with  him,  but  it  was  delivered  them  as  from  him,  that
they  should  looke  and  consider  whether  any  thing  were
due  unto  him  or  not,  which  grieved  the  Factors  :  and
thereupon  M.  Turnebull  answered,  that  their  heads  &
all  that  they  had  were  at  the  Bashaes  pleasure  :  But
then  it  was  answered  there  was  no  such  matter  in  it  :
but  that  they  should  cast  up  their  reckonings,  to  see
how  it  stood  betweene  them.  The  20.  day  they  cast
up  their  reckonings.  The  21.  they  went  to  have  spoken
with  the  Basha,  but  were  denied  audience.  wards  dleth  at

The  22.  day  they  heard  newes  by  a  Busse  that  came  Astracan.

231

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

from  Astracan,  that  Arthur  Edwards  (whom  the  Factors
left  at  Astracan  with  the  moietie  of  the  goods)  was
dead,  who  departed  this  life  the  of

The 23. day the Factors received more from the

September. Basha 500. Batmans of  silke. The 4. of September

newes  was  brought  to  Derbent,  that  Golding  comming

from Shamaky was set on by theeves (Turkes) and

had  hurt  one  of  them.

The  5.  Tobias  Atkins  the  gunners  boy  died  of  the
fluxe,  who  was  buried  the  6.  day  2.  miles  to  the
Southward  of  the  Castle  of  Derbent,  where  the  Armenian
Christians  do  usually  bury  their  dead.  About  the  20.
of  September  newes  came  to  Derbent,  that  the  Busse
which  they  had  bought  of  Jacob  the  Armenian  as  before,
was  cast  away  at  Bildih,  but  they  received  no  certaine
newes  in  writing  from  any  of  our  people.

The  26.  of  September  was  laden  aboord  the  ship  40.
bales  of  silke.  From  the  26.  till  the  2.  of  October,
they  tooke  into  the  ship,  bread,  water,  and  other
necessary  provision  for  their  sea  store  :  the  said  2.  day  of
October,  the  Factors  were  commanded  upon  the  suddaine
to  avoide  their  house,  and  get  them  with  their  provision
out  of  the  towne  :  Whereupon  they  were  constrained  to
remove  and  carry  their  things  to  the  sea  side  against
the  ship,  and  remained  there  all  the  night.  The  cause
of  this  sudden  avoyding  them  out  of  the  towne  (as
afterwards  they  perceived)  was  for  that  the  Basha  had
received  newes  of  a  supplie  with  treasure  that  the  Turke
had  sent,  which  was  then  neare  at  hand  comming  toward
him.

The  3.  day  of  October  all  things  were  brought  from
the  shoare  aboord  the  ship  :  and  that  day  the  Factors
went  to  the  Basha  to  take  their  leave  of  him,  unto
whom  they  recommended  those  the  Companies  servants,
&c.  which  they  had  sent  to  Bachu,  making  accompt  to
leave  them  behinde  in  the  Countrey  :  who  caused  their
names  to  be  written,  and  promised  they  should  want
nothing,  nor  be  injuried  of  any. After  this  leave  taken,

232

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

the  Factors  went  aboord  purposing  presently  to  have  set

saile  and  departed  towards  Astracan,  the  winde  serving

well  for  that  purpose  at  South  Southeast  :  And  as  they

were  readie  to  set  saile,  there  came  against  the  ship  a

man, who weved  : whereupon the boate was sent a

shoare  to  him,  who  was  an  Armenian  sent  from  William

WincoU,  with  his  writing  tables,  wherein  the  said  WincoU

had  written  briefly,  the  mishap  of  the  losse  of  the  Busse,

and that they were comming from Bildih towardes

Derbent, they, and such things as they saved  with a

small boate, forced to put  a  shoare  in a  place  by  the

sea side called the Armenian village  :  Whereupon the  ^-^^  Armen-

Factors  caused  the  shippe  to  stay,  hoping  that  with  the  ^^^  ^"^^g^-

Southerly  winde  that  then  blew,  they  would  come  from

the place they  were at to the ship,  but  if  they  could

not  come  with  that  winde,  they  ment  to  saile  with  the

shippe, with the next wind that would serve them,

against  the  place  where  they  were, &  take  them  in,  if

they could  : which stay and losse of  those Southerly  [I.  426.]

windes, was a cause  of  great  troubles, that  they  after-

wardes  sustained  through  yce,  &c.  entring  the  Volga  as

shalbe  declared.

The  4.  day  the  winde  South  Southeast,  the  shippe
rode  still  :  This  day  Christopher  Burrow  was  sent  to
shore  to  Derbent  to  provide  some  necessaries  for  the
voyage,  &  with  him  a  Tisike  or  two,  which  should
goe  in  the  shippe  passengers  to  Astracan.  And  being
on  shoare  he  saw  there  the  comming  in  of  the  Turkes
treasure,  being  accompanied  with  200.  souldiers,  and
one  hundreth  pioners,  besides  Captaines  and  Gentlemen  :
the  Basha  with  his  Captaines  and  souldiers  very  gallantly
apparelled  and  furnished  went  out  from  Derbent  about
three  or  foure  miles,  to  meete  the  said  treasure,  and
received  the  same  with  great  joy  and  triumph.  Treasure  TheTurkehls
was  the  chiefe  thing  they  needed,  for  not  long  before  ^^^1^^'T  "^^"^
the  souldiers  were  readie  to  breake  into  the  Court  against
the  Basha  for  their  pay  :  there  was  a  great  mutinie
amongst  them,  because  hee  had  long  diiferred  and  not

233

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

payed them their due. The treasure  came in seven
wagons,  and  with  it  were  brought  tenne  pieces  of  brasse.

In  the  parts  of  Media  where  they  were,  there  was
no  commoditie  to  be  bought  of  any  value,  but  raw
silke,  neither  was  that  to  be  had  but  at  the  Bashaes
hands  :  who  shortly  after  their  comming  thither  taxed
the  Countrey  for  that  commoditie.  His  dealing  with
our  Marchants  as  it  was  not  with  equitie  in  all  points
according  to  his  bargaine,  so  it  was  not  extreme  ill.
Of  the  commodities  they  carried  hee  tooke  the  chiefest
part,  for  which  he  gave  but  a  small  price  in  respect  of
the  value  it  was  there  worth,  and  because  he  had  pro-
vided such  quantitie  of  commoditie  for  them,  which
otherwise  they  could  not  have  had,  the  Countrey  being
so  troublesome,  and  travaile  by  land  so  dangerous,  he
used  them  at  his  pleasure.

The  newes  that  was  reported  unto  them  at  Astracan
touching  the  warres  betweene  the  Turkes  &  Persians
differed  litle  from  the  truth  :  for  the  Turkes  armie
with  aide  of  the  Crims,  (being  in  number  by  ye  infor-
mation of  two  Spaniards  that  served  in  those  wars,
about  200000)  invaded  and  conquered  the  Countrey  of
Media  in  Anno  1577.  When  the  great  Turke  under-
Osman  Basha.  stood  of  the  conquest,  he  appointed  Osman  Basha  (the
said  Basha,  and  now  Captaine  of  Derbent)  governour
of  the  whole  Countrey,  who  settled  himselfe  in  Shamaky
the  chiefe  Citie  of  Media,  and  principall  place  of  traffike,
unto  whom  was  sent  from  the  great  Turke,  in  signifi-
cation of  the  gratefull  acceptation  of  his  service  and  the
great  conquest,  a  sword  of  great  value.

After  the  said  Basha  had  brought  the  Countrey  in
order  to  his  liking,  and  placed  garrisons  where  he
thought  convenient,  the  armie  was  dissolved  and  sent
backe  :  When  the  Persians  understood  that  the  Turkes
armie  was  dissolved  and  returned,  they  gathered  a
power  together,  and  with  the  Queene  of  their  Countrey
as  chiefe,  they  entred  the  Countrey  of  Media,  and
overranne the same with fire and sword, destroying

234

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.
whatsoever  they  found,  as  well  people,  cattell,  as  what-
soever els,  that  might  be  commodious  to  the  Turkes.
And  after  they  had  so  overrunne  the  Countrey,  they
came  to  Shamaky,  where  the  said  Basha  Lieutenant
generall  of  the  great  Turke  was  settled,  and  besieged
it  :  whereupon  the  Basha  seeing  hee  could  not  long
indure  to  withstande  them,  fled  thence  to  Derbent
where  he  now  remaineth.

Derbent  is  a  strong  Castle  which  was  built  by  Alex-  Derbent  built
ander  the  great,  the  situation  whereof  is  such,  that  the  ^^  Alexander
Persians  being  without  Ordinance,  are  not  able  to  winne
it  but  by  famine.  When  the  Turkes  were  fled  from
Shamaky,  the  Persians  entred  the  same  and  spoyled  it,
leaving  therein  neither  living  creature  nor  any  com-
moditie,  and  so  returned  backe  into  Persia,  and  setled
themselves  about  Teveris,  where  there  grewe  some
question  among  them  for  the  kingdome.  Afterwards
the  Persians  having  intelligence  of  an  armie  from  the
Turke  comming  into  Media,  gathered  themselves  to-
gether in  a  great  armie  and  encountring  the  said  Turkes,
set  upon  them  on  the  sudden,  and  vanquished  them,
putting  them  all  to  the  sword.  This  overthrow  of  the
Turkes  grieved  the  Basha  of  Derbent,  and  made  him
to  have  the  more  care  for  his  owne  safetie.  Moreover,
newes  was  brought  unto  him  that  the  Kisel  Bashaes,
(that  is  to  say  the  nobles  and  Gentlemen  of  Persia)
were  minded  to  set  upon  him,  and  that  neere  unto
Bachu  there  lay  an  army  readie  to  besiege  it.  Where-
upon the  Basha  oftentimes  would  ride  about  the  Castle
of  Derbent  viewing  the  same,  and  the  springs  that  did
come  to  it,  and  where  he  saw  any  cause  of  reformation,
it  was  amended.

The  latitude  of  Derbent  (by  divers  observations  exactly  The  latitude
there  made)  is  41.  deg  52.  min. The  variation  of  the  °f'-^^J"^^^
Compasse at that place about 1 1 .  degrees  from North  ^^-^
to  West. From  Derbent  to  Bildih  by  land  46.  leagues. The  variation
From  Derbent  to  Shamaky  by  land  45.  leagues. From  of  the  Com-
Shamaky  to  Bachu  about  10.  leagues,  which  may  be  30.  f^"^'

235

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

miles.  From  Bachu  to  Bildih  five  or  sixe  leagues  by-
land,  but  by  water  about  12.  leagues.  From  the  Castle
Derbent  Eastwards,  there  reach  two  stone  wals  to  the
border  of  the  Caspian  sea,  which  is  distant  one  English
mile.  Those  wals  are  9.  foote  thicke,  and  28.  or  30.
foote  high,  and  the  space  betweene  them is 160.  Geo-

[I.  427,]  metricall  paces,  that  is  800.  foot.  There  are  yet  to  be
perceived  of  the  ruine  of  those  wals,  which  do  now
extend  into  the  sea  about  halfe  a  mile  :  also  from  the
castle  Westward  into  the  land,  they  did  perceive  the
ruines  of  a  stone  wall  to  extend,  which  wal,  as  it  is
reported,  did  passe  from  thence  to  Pontus  Euxinus,
and  was  built  by  Alexander  the  great  when  the  castle
Derbent  was  made.

The  5  of  October  about  noone  the  winde  North-
northeast  they  wayed  ancre,  and  set  saile  from  Derbent,
being  alongst  the  coast  to  the  Southwards  to  seeke
their  men  :  but  as  they  had  sailed  about  foure  leagues
the  winde  scanted  Easterly,  so  that  they  were  forced  to
ancre  in  three  fathom  water.

The  6  day  they  wayed  ancre,  and  bare  further  off  into
the  sea,  where  they  ancred  in  seven  fathom  water,  the
ship  being  very  leake,  and  so  rotten  abaft  the  maine  mast,
that  a  man  with  his  nailes  might  scrape  thorow  her
side.

The  7  day  about  7  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  they
set  saile,  the  winde  Southwest.  They  considered  the
time  of  the  yere  was  far  spent,  the  ship  weake,  leake  and
rotten,  and  therefore  determining  not  to  tary  any  longer
for  WincoU  and  his  fellowes,  but  to  leave  them  behinde,
bent  themselves  directly  towards  Astracan  :  and  sailing
Northnortheast  untill  midnight  about  16  leagues,  the
winde  then  came  to  the  Northnorthwest,  and  blew  much,  a
very  storme,  which  caused  them  to  take  in  all  their  sailes,
saving  the  fore  corse,  with  which  they  were  forced  to
steere  before  the  sea.  South  by  West,  and  Southsouth-
west.  And  on  the  8  day  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  their  great  boat  sunke  at  the  ships  sterne,  which

236

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

they  were  forced  to  cut  from  the  ship  to  their  great  griefe
and  discomfort :  for  in  her  they  hoped  to  save  their  lives
if  the  ship  should  have  miscaried.  About  10  of  the
clocke  before  noone  they  had  sight  of  the  land  about  5
leagues  to  the  South  of  Derbent,  and  bare  longst  the
coast  to  the  Southeastwards  unto  Nezavoo,  where  they  Nezavoo.
came  at  ancre  in  three  fathoms,  and  blacke  oze,  good  ancre
holde,  whereof  they  were  glad,  as  also  that  the  winde  was
shifted  to  the  Northwest,  and  but  a  meane  gale.  Wincoll
and  the  rest  of  his  fellowes  being  in  the  Armenian  village,
which  is  about  1 8  versts  to  the  Westwards  of  Nezavoo,
the  place  whereagainst  they  rode  at  ancre,  saw  the  ship  as
she  passed  by  that  place,  and  sent  a  man  in  the  night
following  alongst  the  coast  after  her,  who  came  against
the  ship  where  she  rode,  and  with  a  firebrand  in  the  top
of  a  tree  made  signes,  which  was  perceived  by  them  in  the
shippe,  whereupon  they  hoised  out  their  skiife,  and  sent
her  ashore  to  learne  what  was  meant  by  the  fire  :  which
returned  a  letter  from  Wincoll,  wherein  he  wrote  that
they  were  with  such  goods  as  they  had  at  the  Armenian
village,  and  prayed  that  there  they  might  with  the  same
goods  be  taken  into  the  ships.  The  9  day  it  was  litle
winde,  they  wayed  and  bare  a  little  further  off  into  the
sea  towards  the  said  village,  and  ancred.  The  10  day
they  sent  their  skiffe  to  the  Armenian  village  to  fetch
those  men  and  the  goods  they  had,  with  order  that  if  the
winde  served,  that  they  could  not  returne  to  fetch  the
ship,  they  of  the  ship  promised  to  come  for  them,  against
the  said  village. This  day  it  was  calme.

The  1 1  day  the  winde  Northwest  they  rode  still.  The
12  day  the  winde  Southeast  they  wayed  ancre,  &  bare
against  &  nere  to  the  Armenian  village  where  they  ancred,
and  then  the  skiffe  came  aboord  and  tolde  them  that  our
people  at  shore  were  like  to  be  spoiled  of  the  Tartars,
were  it  not  that  the  gunners  defended  them  :  then  was
the  skiffe  sent  backe  againe  to  charge  them  at  any  hand
they  should  hasten  aboord  the  ship  whatsoever  it  cost
them. Whereupon,  all the company  came aboord the

237

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

same day saving Richard Relfe and two Russes,  but
assoone  as  the  skiffe  was  returned  aboord  the  ship,  the
winde  blew  at  Southeast,  and  the  sea  was  growen,  so  as
they  were  forced  to  take  in  their  skiffe  into  the  ship,  and
rode  stil  till  the 13 day,  and then  being  faire  weather,
early  in  the  morning  the  skiffe  was  hoised  out  of  the  ship,
and sent to  shore to  fetch  the  said  Relfe  and  the  two
Russes,  which  were  ready  at  the  shore  side,  and  with  them
Two  Span- two  Spaniards  that  were  taken  captives  at  the  Goletta  in
mrdsdelwered  g^j-bary, which served  the  Turke  as souldiers. Those
^^  Spaniards  (of  Christian  charity)  they  brought  also  aboord

the  ship  to  redeeme  them  from  their  captivity,  which  were
brought  over  into  England,  and  set  free  and  at  liberty
here  in  London,  in  September  1581.  The  winde  this
day  at  Northnortheast,  faire  weather.  The  14  day  they
sent  the  skiffe  to  shore,  and  filled  fresh  water.  The  15
day  they  rode  still,  being  litle  winde  and  fog.  The  16
day  the  winde  Eastsoutheast,  they  wayed  ancre  and  set
saile,  bearing  Northwards  towards  Astracan,  and  the  same
night  they  ancred  in  ten  fathoms  water,  about  five  miles
from  the  shore  of  the  Shalkaules  countrey,  which  place  is
eight  leagues  Northnorthwest  from  Derbent.  The  17
day  the  winde  at  North  very  stormy,  they  rode  still  all
that  day  and  night.  The  18  the  winde  all  Southeast
about  one  of  the  clocke  afternoone,  they  wayed  ancre,  and
sailed  thence  till  foure  of  the  clocke  Northnortheast  sixe
leagues,  then  they  might  see  the  land  Northwest  about
tenne  leagues  from  the  winde  Southeast  :  from  thence
they  sailed  til  midnight  Northnortheast  twelve  leagues.
From  thence  till  the  19  day  seven  a  clocke  in  the
[I.  428.]  morning  they  sailed  Northnortheast  eight  leagues  :  the
winde  then  Eastsoutheast,  a  faire  gale,  they  sounded  and
had  17  fathoms,  and  sand,  being  (as  the  Master  judged)
about  the  head  of  Shetly  :  from  thence  till  12  of  the
clocke  at  noone  they  sailed  North  5  leagues,  the  winde
then  at  East  a  faire  gale,  they  sounded  and  had  5  fathoms.
From  thence  till  8  of  the  clocke  at  night,  they  sailed
North  7  leagues,  the  winde  then  at  Northeast  with  small

238

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

raine,  they  tooke  in  their  sailes,  and  ancred  in  3  fathoms
water  and  soft  oze,  where  they  rode  still  all  night,  and  the
20  day  and  night  the  winde  Northeast,  as  before  with
small  raine.

The  2 1  day  the  winde  Northwest,  they  likewise  rode
still.  The  22  day  about  3  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
they  wayed  ancre,  the  winde  Westnorthwest,  and  sailed
from  thence  till  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  North  4
leagues,  then  they  ancred  in  2  fathoms  and  a  halfe  soft
oze,  the  winde  at  West  a  small  breath.

The  23  day  about  7  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  they
wayed  ancre,  and  set  saile,  being  litle  winde  Easterly,  and
sailed  till  2  of  the  clocke  after  noone  Northwest  in  with
the  shore  about  sixe  leagues,  and  then  ancred  in  6  foot
water,  having  perfect  sight  of  the  low  land  (sand  hilles)
being  about  3  miles  from  the  nerest  land.  This  place  of
the  land  that  they  were  against,  they  perceived  to  be  to
the  Westwards  of  the  4  Islands  (called  in  the  Russe
tongue  Chetera  Bougori)  and  they  found  it  afterwards  by
due  proofe,  to  be  about  50  versts,  or  30  English  miles  to
the  Southwest,  or  Southwest  by  South,  from  the  sayd
Chetera  Bougori.

The  24  day  the  winde  at  East,  and  by  South,  a  Sea
winde  called  Gillavar,  caused  them  to  ride  still.  The  25
day  they  thought  good  to  send  in  their  skiffe  Robert
Golding,  and  certaine  Russes,  to  row  him  alongst  North-
wards by  the  shore,  to  seeke  the  foure  Islands,  and  so  to
passe  unto  the  Uchooge,  and  there  to  land  the  sayd
Robert  Golding  to  proceed  to  Astracan,  to  deliver  Amos
Riall  a  letter,  wherein  he  was  required  to  provide  Pavoses
to  meet  the  shippe  at  the  sayd  Islands,  and  the  skiffe  with
the  Russes  were  appointed  to  returne  from  the  Uchooge
with  victuals  to  the  shippe,  which  skiffe  departed  from  the
shippe  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone.  The
26,  27,  28,  and  29  dayes,  the  windes  Easterly  and  North-
east, they  rode  still  with  their  ship.  The  30  day  the
winde  Southeast,  they  wayed,  and  set  saile  to  the
Northeastwards  : but  the  ship  fell  so  on  the  side  to  the

239

A.D.
1580.

A  strange
accident  of
provision  for
their  reliefe.

"November.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

shorewards,  that  they  were  forced  eftsoones  to  take  in
their  saile,  and  ancre  againe,  from  whence  they  never
removed  her.  That  day  they  shared  their  bread  :  but  in
their  want  God  sent  them  two  covies  of  partridges,  that
came  from  the  shore,  and  lighted  in  and  about  their  ships,
whereby  they  were  comforted,  and  one  that  lay  sicke,  of
whose  life  was  small  hope,  recovered  his  health.

The  4  of  November  the  skiffe  returned  to  the  ship
with  some  victuals,  and  certified  that  the  foure  Islands
were  about  60  versts  from  them  to  the  Northeastwards.
When  Robert  Golding  came  to  Astracan,  and  delivered
there  the  Factors  letters  to  Amos  Rial,  the  duke,  captaine
of  that  place,  was  done  to  understand  of  the  ships  arrivall,
&  of  the  state  they  were  in,  and  their  request  for  Pavoses,
who  was  very  glad  to  heare  of  their  safe  returne,  and
appointed  to  be  sent  with  all  speed  two  Pavoses  and  a
Stroog,  with  gunners  to  gard  and  to  defend  them.  With
the  which  Stroog  and  Pavoses,  Amos  Riall  went  downe  to
the  Chetera  Bougori,  or  4.  Islands  aforesayd,  where  he
stayed  with  those  barks,  according  to  the  Factors  appoint-
ment. The  5  day  they  purposed  to  send  from  the  ship
their  skiffe  with  the  carpenter,  and  4  Russes  to  row  him
to  the  4  Bougories,  to  request  Amos  Riall  to  come  from
thence  with  the  Pavoses  to  the  shippe  with  all  possible
speed.  The  skiffe  with  those  men  departed  from  the
ship  in  the  morning,  and  within  one  houre  they  met  with
a  small  boat  with  Russes,  rowing  towards  the  ship,  which
came  from  the  Ouchooge  with  a  wilde  swine  and  other
victuals  to  sell  :  with  the  same  boat  the  skiffe  returned
backe  to  the  ship  after  the  Russes  had  received  and  were
satisfied  for  the  victuals  they  brought  :  the  same  day  they
returned  with  their  boat  backe  toward  the  Ouchooge,  and
with  them  in  the  same  boat  was  sent  the  Carpenter  of  the
shippe  to  the  Chetera  Bougori,  which  were  in  their  way,
to  declare  unto  Amos  Riall  the  message  before  appointed
him.  From  the  5  untill  the  9  day  the  ship  rode  still  with
contrary  winds  Easterly.  The  same  9  day  came  to  the
shippe certaine Russes  in  a  small boat,  which brought

240

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

with  them  some  victuals  sent  by  Amos  Riall,  and  de-
clared that  he  with  the  Pavoses  and  Stroog  had  remained
at  the  Chetera  Bougori  five  dayes,  expecting  the  comming
thither  of  the  ship.  The  10  day  being  doubtful!  of
the  Pavoses  comming,  they  sent  Thomas  Hudson  Master
of  the  ship  in  the  skiffe  (and  with  her  went  the  foresayd
skiffe  boat)  towards  the  Chetera  Botigori  to  the  Pavoses
to  bring  word  whether  they  would  come  to  the  ship
or  not,  the  wind  then  at  Northeast  with  fogge.  The
II  day  the  winde  Northerly  with  fogge,  the  ship  rode
still.  The  12  day  Amos  Riall,  Christopher  Fawcet,  and
a  new  gunner  came  to  the  ship,  and  with  them  the  M.
Thomas  Hudson  returned;  but  the  Stroog  with  the
gunners  remained  at  the  Chetera  Bougori ;  and  from
thence  (when  it  began  to  freese)  returned  to  Astracan.
Amos  Riall  declared  that  he  sent  the  carpenter  backe  from  [I.  429.]
the  Chetera  Boogori  in  a  small  boat  on  the  10  day,  and
marveiled  that  he  was  not  come  to  the  shippe  (but  in
the  fogge  the  day  before  as  afterwards  they  learned)
missed  the  shippe,  and  overshot  her,  and  afterwards
returning  backe,  he  found  the  ship  at  ancre,  and  nothing
in  her  but  the  Russes  that  were  left  to  keepe  her,  and
then  he  departed  thence,  and  went  to  the  Uchooge,  and
there  stayed.  Presently  upon  the  comming  of  the
Pavoses  to  the  ship  they  used  as  much  speed  as  might
be,  to  get  the  goods  out  of  the  shippe  into  them,  and
after  the  goods  were  laden  in,  they  tooke  in  also  of
the  shippes  ordinance,  furniture  and  provision,  as  much
as  they  could.

The  1 3  day  in  the  morning  Amos  Riall  was  sent  away  ice  the  i^  of
in a small boat towards Astracan,  to provide  victuals  ^°'^^^^^^  ^»
and  cariages  to  relieve  and  helpe  them,  who  could  passe  ^^^  ^^^^^  Z
no  further then  the  foure  Islands,  but  was  there  over-  Volga.
taken  with  yce,  and  forced  to  leave  his  boat,  and  from
thence  passed  poste  to  Astracan,  finding  at  the  Uchooge
the Carpenter returned from his ill  journey,  very  ill
handled  with  the  extremity  of  the  colde. The  same  day
they departed also in those lighters with the goods
III  241  Q

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

towards  the  Chetera  Bougori,  leaving  the  ship  at  ancre,
and  in  her  two  Russes,  which  with  three  more  that  went
in  the  Pavoses,  to  provide  victuals  for  themselves  and  the
rest,  &  therewith  promised  to  returne  backe  to  the  ship
with  all  speed,  had  offered  to  undertake  for  twenty
rubbles  in  money  to  cary  the  ship  into  some  harborow,
where  she  might  safely  winter,  or  els  to  keepe  her  where
she  rode  all  winter,  which  was  promised  to  be  given
them  if  they  did  it :  and  the  same  day  when  with  those
lighters  they  had  gotten  sight  of  the  foure  Islands  being
about  eight  versts  Southwest  from  them,  the  winde  then
at  Northeast,  did  freese  the  sea  so  as  they  could  not
row,  guide,  stirre  or  remove  the  said  lighters,  but  as
the  winde  and  yce  did  force  them.  And  so  they  con-
tinued driving  with  the  yce.  Southeast  into  the  sea  by
The  1 6  day.  the  space  of  forty  houres,  and  then  being  the  sixteenth
day  the  yce  stood.  Whiles  they  drove  with  the  yce,  the
dangers  which  they  incurred  were  great :  for  oftentimes
when  the  yce  with  the  force  of  winde  and  sea  did  breake,
pieces  of  it  were  tossed  and  driven  one  upon  another  with
great  force,  terrible  to  beholde,  and  the  same  happened  at
sometimes  so  neere  unto  the  lighters,  that  they  expected
it  would  have  overwhelmed  them  to  their  utter  destruc-
tion :  but  God  who  had  preserved  them  from  many  perils
before,  did  also  save  and  deliver  them  then.

Within  three  or  foure  dayes  after  the  first  standing
of  the  yce,  when  it  was  firme  and  strong,  they  tooke
out  all  their  goods,  being  fourty  and  eight  bales  or  packes
of  raw  silke,  &c.  layde  it  on  the  yce,  and  covered  the
same  with  such  provisions  as  they  had.  Then  for  want
of  victuals,  &c.  they  agreed  to  leave  all  the  goods  there
upon  the  yce,  and  to  go  to  the  shore :  and  thereupon
brake  up  their  Chests  and  Corobias,  wherewith,  and  with
Travaile  upon  such  Other  things  as  they  could  get,  they  made  sleddes
the  yce.  foj- every of them to draw upon the yce,  whereon

they  layed  their  clothes  to  keepe  them  warme,  and  such
victuals  as  they  had,  and  such  other  things  as  they  might
conveniently  cary,  and so  they  departed  from  the  sayd

242

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.
goods  and  Pavoses  very  earely  about  one  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning,  and  travailing  on  the  yce,  directed  their
way  North,  as  neere  as  they  could  judge,  and  the  same
day  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  they  had
sight  of  the  Chetera  Babbas  (four,e  hillocks  of  Islands  CheteraBab-
so  called)  unto  the  same  they  directed  themselves,  and
there  remained  that  night.

The  goods  and  Pavoses  which  they  left  on  the  yce
they  judged  to  be  from  those  Chetera  Babbas  about
20  versts.

And  the  next  morning  departed  thence  Eastwards,  and
came  to  the  Chetera  Bougories  (or  foure  Islands  before
spoken  of)  before  noone  (the  distance  betweene  those
places  is  about  1 5  versts)  where  they  remained  all  that
night,  departing  thence  towards  Astracan :  the  next
morning  very  early  they  lost  their  way  through  the
perswasion  of  the  Russes  which  were  with  them,  taking
too  much  towards  the  left  hand  (contrary  to  the  opinion
of  M.  Hudson)  whereby  wandering  upon  the  yce  foure
or  five  dayes,  not  knowing  whether  they  were  entred  into
the  Crimme  Tartars  land  or  not,  at  length  it  fortuned
they  met  with  a  way  that  had  bene  travailed,  which  crost
backwards  towards  the  sea :  that  way  they  tooke,  and
following  the  same,  within  two  days  travaile  it  brought
them  to  a  place  called  the  Crasnoyare  (that  is  to  say
in  the  English  tongue)  Red  cliffe,  which  divers  of  the
company  knew.

There they remained that night,  having nothing  to

eat but one loafe of  bread,  which they happened to

finde  with  the  two  Russes  that  were  left  in  the  ship  to

keepe her  all  the Winter (as is aforesaid) whom they

chanced to meet going towards Astracan, about five

miles before they  came to the sayd Crasnoyare, who

certified  them  that  the  ship  was  cut  in  pieces  with  the  ^^^  English

yce,  and  that  they  had  hard  scaping:  with  their  lives. ^^'!^  ^"^/f
•w r\  -1  1  1  1 r  r^  pteces  with 'ice.

In  the mornmg  they  departed  early  rrom  Crasnoyare

towards  the  Ouchooge,  and  about  9  of  the  clocke  before

noone,  being  within  10  versts  of  the  Uchooge,  they  met

243

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

[I.  430.]  Amos  Riall,  with  the  carpenter,  which  he  found  at
Ouchooge,  and  a  gunner  newly  come  out  of  England,
and  also  6^  horses  with  so  many  Cassacks  to  guide  them,
and  50  gunners  for  gard,  which  brought  provision  of
victuals,  &c.  and  were  sent  by  the  Duke  to  fetch  the
goods  to  Astracan.  The  meeting  of  that  company  was
much  joy  unto  them.

The  factors  sent  backe  with  Amos  Riall  and  the  sayd
company  to  fetch  the  goods,  Thomas  Hudson  the
Master,  Tobias  Paris  his  Mate,  and  so  they  the  sayd
Factors  and  their  company  marched  on  to  the  Uchooge,
where  they  refreshed  themselves  that  day,  and  the  night
following. And from thence proceeded on towards

December.  Astracan,  where  they  arrived  the  last  day  of  November.
These  that  went  for  the  goods  after  their  departure  from ;
the  Factors  travailed  the  same  day  untill  they  came  within
10  versts  of  the  Chetera  Babbas,  where  they  rested  that
night.  The  next  morning  by  the  breake  of  the  day
they  departed  thence,  and  before  noone  were  at  the
Chetera  Babas,  where  they  stayed  all  night ;  but  presently
departed  thence  Thomas  Hudson  with  the  Carpenter
and  gunner  to  seeke  where  the  goods  lay :  who  found ;
the  same,  and  the  next  day  they  returned  backe  to  their
company  at  the  Chetera  Babbas,  and  declared  unto  them
in  what  sort  they  had  found  the  sayd  goods.

The  3  day  early  in  the  morning  they  departed  all  from
the  4  Babbas  towards  the  said  goods,  and  the  same  day
did  lade  all  the  goods they  could find upon the said
sleds, and with all convenient speed returned backe
towards  Astracan. And  when  they  came  to  the  Chetera  1
Bougori,  where they  rested the night,  in the morning;
very  early  before  the  breake  of  day,  they  were  assaulted
by  a  great  company  of  the Nagays Tartars horsemen, ,
which came  showting  and  hallowing  with  a  great  noise, ,
but our  people  were so invironed  with the sleds,  that  I
they  durst  not  enter  upon  them,  but  ranne  by,  and  shot  I
their  arrowes  amongst  them,  and  hurt  but  one  man  in  the:
head,  who  was  a  Russe,  and  so  departed  presently. Yet  I

244

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1581.

when  it  was  day,  they  shewed  themselves  a  good  distance

off  from  our  men,  being  a  very  great  troope  of  them,  but

did not  assault them any more. The same day our  Their  retume

men  with  those  cariages,  departed from thence towards  ^°  Astracan.

Astracan,  where  they  arrived  in  safety  the  4  of  December,

about  3  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  where  our  people

greatly  rejoyced  of  their  great  good  happe  to  have  escaped

so many  hard  events,  troubles  and miseries,  as  they  did

in  that  voyage,  and  had  great  cause  therefore to praise

the Almighty, who had so mercifully preserved and

delivered  them. They  remained  the  Winter  at  Astracan,

where they  found  great favour and friendship of  the

duke,  captaine,  and  other chiefe officers of  that place :

but  that  Winter  there  happened  no  great  matter  worth

the  noting.

In  the  spring  of  the yeere  1581,  about  the mids  of  The  breaking
March,  the  yce  was  broken  up,  and  cleare  gone  before  ^^  ^ •^^^'
Astracan,  and  the  ninth  of  Aprill,  having  all  the  goods
that  were  returned  from  the  parts  of  Media,  laden  into  a
Stroog,  the  Factors,  William  Turnebull,  Matthew  Taile-
boyes,  Giles  Crow,  Christopher  Burrough,  Michael  Lane,
Laurence  Prouse  gunner,  Randolfe  Foxe,  Tho.  Hudson,
Tobias Parris, Morgan Hubblethorne the dier. Rich.  Morgan  Hub-
the Surgean, Rob.  Golding, Joh. Smith, Edw.  Reding  ^^'^.'1'^'''
carpenter, and William Perrin gunner,  having also 40  pg,.s.
Russes, whereof 36 were Cassacks to row, the rest
merchants passengers,  departed  from  Astracan  with  the
sayd  Stroog  and  goods  up  the  Volga  towards  Yeraslave.
They  left  behinde  them  at  Astracan,  with the English
goods  &  merchandise  there  remaining,  Amos  Riall,  W.
Wincoll,  and  Richard  Relfe,  and  appointed  them  to  sell
&  barter  the  same,  or  so  much  thereof  as  they  could  to
the  Tisiks,  if  there  came  any  thither  that  spring,  and  to
others  as  they  might,  &  the  rest  with  such  as  they  should
take  in  exchange  to  returne  up  to  Yeraslave  that  Summer,
when  the  Emperors  carriage  should  passe  up  the  Volga.
The  2 1  day  they  came  with  their  Stroog  to  the  Peravolok,
but  made  no  stay  at  that  place  : for  they  had  beene  much

24s

rsta.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

troubled  with  yce  in  their  comming  from  Astracan.  The
May.  3  of  May  about  noone  they  came  to  Oveak,  and  from
thence  proceeding  up  the  river,  on  the  17  day  William
Turnebull  departed  from  the  Stroog  in  a  small  boat,  and
went  before  towards  Tetusha  to  provide  victuals,  and
send  downe  to  the  Stroog,  from  which  place  they  were
then  about  230  versts.  The  23  day  they  met  a  boat  with
victuals,  which  William  Turnebull  sent  from  Tetusha,
and  the  same  day  they  arrived  with  their  Stroog  at
Tetusha,  where  they  stayed  all  night,  and  the  next
morning  betimes  departed  thence,  but  W.  Turnebull  was
gone  in  the  small  boat  before  to  Cazan,  to  provide
necessaries  from  thence,  and  to  make  way  for  their
dispatch.  The  26  day  they  arrived  with  their  Stroog  at
Cazan,  where  they  remained  till  the  fourth  of  June  :  the
Factors  sent  Giles  Crow  from  Cazan  to  the  Mosco,  with
their  letters  the  30  of  May.  The  4  day  of  June  they
departed  from  Cazan  with  their  Stroog,  and  arrived  at
Yeraslave  the  22  day  about  5  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning.

The  23  day  they  provided  Telegos,  to  carry  the  goods
to  Vologda.  The  24  day  having  the  goods  laden  upon
Telegos,  they  departed  with  the  same  towards  Vologda,
and  remained  there  five  versts  from  Yeraslave.
[I.  431.]  The  29  day  they  came  to  Vologda,  with  all  their  goods
in  safety,  and  good  order.  The  same  29,  William
Turnbull  and  Peter  Garrard  departed  from  Vologda  post
by  water  towards  Colmogro,  the  third  of  July,  having
their  goods  laden  in  a  small  doshnik,  they  departed  with
the  same  from  Vologda  towards  Rose  Island  by  S.
Nicholas,  where  they  arrived  in  safety  the  1 6  of  July,  and
found  there  the  Agents  of  Russia,  and  in  the  rode  the
ships  sent  out  of  England,  almost  laden  ready  to  depart.

The  25  day  departed  for  England  (out  of  the  rode  of
S.  Nicholas)  the  ship  Elizabeth.

The  26  day  departed  thence  the  Thomas  Allen  and
Mary  Susan,  and  in  the  Thomas  Allen  went  William
Turnbul, Matthew Tailboys, Thomas Hudson, and

246

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1581.

others. The  goods  returned  of  the  Persia  voyage  were

laden into the ship, William and John, whereof  was

Master,  William  Bigat,  and  in  her  with  the  same  goods

came  Peter  Garrard  and  Tobias  Parris.

The  1 1  of  August,  the  same  ship  being  laden  and
dispatched  departed  from  the  rode  of  S.  Nicholas,  and
with  her  in  company  another  of  the  companies  fraighted
ships,  called  the  Tomasin,  whereof  was  M.  Christopher
Hall.  In  their  returne  homewards  they  had  some  foule
weather,  and  were  separated  at  the  sea,  the  William  and
John  put  into  Newcastle  the  24  of  September  :  from
whence  the  sayd  Peter  Garrard  and  Tobias  Parris  came  to
London  by  land,  and  brought  newes  of  the  arrivall  of  the
ship.

The  25  of  September  both  the  sayd  ships  arrived  at
the  port  of  London  in  safety,  and  ankered  before  Lime-
house  and  Wapping,  where  they  were  discharged,  158 1.

Observations  of  the  latitudes  and  meridian
altitudes  of  divers  places  in  Russia,  from  the
North  to  the  South: Anno 1581.

Michael  Archangel.

Meridian altitude observed at Michael the

Archangel,  42.  degrees,  30,  minuts.
The  true  latitude,  64.  degrees,  54.  minuts.
The  English  house  in  Colmogro.

The  English  house  in  Colmogro,  in  latitude,

64.  d.  25.  m.
The meridian altitude there observed,  the
29  of  July,  42.  d.  15.  m.
Recola.

Meridian altitude the 30 of  July,  41.  d.

40.  m.
Declination,  16.  d.  6.  m.  64.  d.  20.  m.

Yeegris.

Meridian,  4  of  August,  41.  d.  50.  m.
Declination  Northerly,  14.  d.  49.  m. 62.  d.  59.  m.

247

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

Towlma.

Meridian  altitude,  the 15  of  August,  40.  d.

45.  m.
Declination  Northerly,  11.  d.  2.  m, 60.  d.  17.  m.

Vologda.

JMeridian  altitude,  the  20  of  August,  40.  d.
Declination  Northerly,  9.  d.  17.  m. 59.  d.  17.  m.

Vologda.

Meridian  altitude,  21  of  August,  39.  d.  2^-  ni*
Declination,  8.  d.  ^6.  m.  59.  d.  20.  m.

Yeraslave.

Latitude  by  gesse,  57.  d.  50.  m.

Swyoskagorod.

Meridian  altitude,  21.  September,  31.  d.
Declination,  2.  d.  ^6.  m.  ^6.  d.  4.  m.

Ovslona  Monastery.

Meridian  altitude,  23.  September,  30.  d.  26.  m.
Declination,  2.  d.  ^6.  m.  ^^.  d.  51.  m.

Tetuskagorod.

Meridian  altitude,  28.  September,  28.  d.  28.  m.

Declination,  5.  d.  ^S-  ^'  SS-  '^-  ^^-  "^•

Oveek.

Meridian  altitude,  5.  October,  30.  d.  12.  m.

Declination,  8.  d.  18.  m.  51.  d.  30.  m.

Astracan.

Astracan  meridian  altitude,  22.  October,  29.  d.

:^6.  m.
DecHnation,  14.  d.  16.  m.  46.  d.  10.  m.

Astracan.

Meridian  altitude,  i  of  November,  26.  d.  35.  m.
Declination,  17.  d.  16.  m.  46.  d.  9.  m.

RICHAKD HACKLUIT'S DIRECTIONS  ad.

1579-

Certaine directions given by M. Richard  [i-  432.]
Hackluit of the Middle Temple, to M.
Morgan  Hubblethorne,  Dier,  sent  into  Persia,

1579-

I  T70r  that  England  hath  the  best  wool  &  cloth  of  the
X^  world,  and  for  that  the  clothes  of  the  realme  have
no  good  ventj  if  good  dying  be  not  added  :  therfore  it  is
much  to  be  wished,  that  the  dying  of  forren  countreyes
were  scene,  to  the  end  that  the  arte  of  dying  may  be
brought  into  the  Realme  in  greatest  excellency  :  for
thereof  will  follow  honour  to  the  Realme,  and  great  and
ample  vent  of  our  clothes  :  and  of  the  vent  of  clothes,
will  follow  the  setting  of  our  poore  on  worke,  in  all
degrees  of  labour  in  clothing  and  dying  :  for  which  cause
most  principally  you  are  sent  over  at  the  charge  of  the
city  :  and  therfore  for  the  satisfying  the  lords,  and  of  the
expectation  of  the  merchants  and  of  your  company,  it
behooves  you  to  have  care  to  returne  home  with  more
knowledge  then  you  caried  out.

2  The  great  dearth  of  clothes  is  a  great  let  in  the
ample  vent  of  clothes,  and  the  price  of  a  cloth,  for  a  fifth,
sixth  and  seventh  part  riseth  by  the  colour  and  dying  :
and  therefore  to  devise  to  die  as  good  colours  with  the
one  halfe  of  the  present  price  were  to  the  great  com-
modity of  the  Realme,  by  saving  of  great  treasure  in  time
to  come.  And  therefore  you  must  have  great  care  to
have  knowledge  of  the  materials  of  all  the  countreys  that
you  shall  passe  thorow,  that  may  be  used  in  dying,  be
they  hearbs,  weeds,  barks,  gummes,  earths,  or  what  els
soever.

3  In  Persia  you  shall  finde  carpets  of  course  thrummed
wooll,  the  best  of  the  world,  and  excellently  coloured  :
those  cities  &  townes  you  must  repaire  to,  and  you  must
use  meanes  to  learne  all  the  order  of  the  dying  of  those
thrummes,  which  are  so  died  as  neither  raine,  wine,  nor
yet  vineger  can  staine  :  and  if  you  may  attaine  to  that

249

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1579-

cunning,  you  shall  not  need  to  feare  dying  of  cloth  :  For
if  the  colour  holde  in  yarne  and  thrumme,  it  will  holde
much  better  in  cloth.

4  For  that  in  Persia  they  have  great  colouring  of  silks,
it  behooves  you  to  learne  that  also,  for  that  cloth  dying
&  silke  dying  have  a  certaine  affinity,  and  your  merchants
mind  to  bring  much  raw  silke  into  the  Realme,  and
therefore  it  is  more  requisit  you  learne  the  same.

5  In  Persia  there  are  that  staine  linnen  cloth :  it  is
not  amisse  you  learne  it  if  you  can :  it  hath  bene  an
olde  trade  in  England,  whereof  some  excellent  clothes
yet  remaine :  but  the  arte  is  now  lost,  and  not  to  be
found  in  the  Realme.

6  They  have  a  cunning  in  Persia  to  make  in  buskins
of  Spanish  leather  flowers  of  many  kindes,  in  most  lively
colours,  and  these  the  Courtiers  do  weare  there :  to
learne  which  arte  were  no  harme.

7  If  any  Dier  of  China,  or  of  the  East  parts  of  the
world,  be  to  be  found  in  Persia,  acquaint  yourselfe  with
him,  and  learne  what  you  may  of  him.

8  You  shall  finde  Anile  there,  if  you  can  procure
the  herbe  that  it  is  made  of,  either  by  seed  or  by  plant,
to  cary  into  England,  you  may  do  well  to  endevour
to  enrich  your  countrey  with  the  same :  but  withall  learne
you  the  making  of  the  Anile,  and  if  you  can  get  the
herbe,  you  may  send  the  same  dry  into  England,  for
possibly  it  groweth  here  already.

9  Returne  home  with  you  all  the  materials  and  sub-
stances that  they  die  withall  in  Russia,  and  also  in  Persia,
that  your  company  may  see  all.

10  In  some  litle  pot  in  your  lodging,  I  wish  you
to  make  daily  trials  in  your  arte,  as  you  shall  from
time  to  time  learne  ought  among  them.

1 1  Set  downe  in  writing  whatsoever  you  shall  learne
from  day  to  day,  lest  you  should  forget,  or  lest  God
should  call  you  to  his  mercy :  and  by  ech  returne  I  wish
you  to  send  in  writing  whatsoever  you  have  learned,
or  at  the  least  keepe  the  same  safe  in  your  cofi^er,  that

250

COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN  ad

1580.

come  death  or  life  your  countrey  may  enjoy  the  thing
that  you  goe  for,  and  not  lose  the  charge,  and  travell
bestowed  in  this  case.

12  Learne  you  there  to  fixe  and  make  sure  the  colour
to  be  given  by  logge  wood :  so  shall  we  not  need  to
buy  woad  so  deare,  to  the  enriching  of  our  enemies.

13  Enquire  of  the  price  of  leckar,  and  all  other
things belonging  to  dying.

14  In  any  wise  set  downe  in  writing  a  true  note  from
whence  every  of  them  doe  come,  and  where,  and  in  what
countrey  ech  of  them  doth  grow,  I  mearie  where  the
naturall  place  of  ech  of  them  is,  as  how  neere  to  such
a  city,  or  to  such  a  sea,  or  to  such  a  portable  river  in
Russia,  Persia,  or  elsewhere.

15  If  before  you  returne  you  could  procure  a  singular
good  workeman  in  the  arte  of  Turkish  carpet  making,
you  should  bring  the  arte  into  this  Realme,  and  also
thereby  increase  worke  to  your  company.

Commission  given  by  sir  Rowland  Hayward  [I-  433-]
knight,  and  George  Barne,  Aldermen  and
governours  of  the  company  of  English  Mer-
chants, for  discovery  of  new  trades,  unto
Arthur  Pet,  and  Charles  Jackman,  for  a
voyage  by  them  to  be  made,  for  discovery
of  Cathay,  1580.  in  forme  following.

N  the  Name  of  God  Almightie,  and
everlasting.  Amen.  This  writing  for
commission  Tripartite,  made  the  twen-
tieth day  of  May  Anno  Dom.  1580.
and  in  the  22.  yeere  of  the  reigne  of
our  Sovereigne  Lady  Elizabeth  by  the
grace  of  God,  Queene  of  England,
France  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith,  &c.  Betweene
sir  Rowland  Hayward  knight,  and  George  Barne,  Alder-
men of  the  Citie  of  London,  and  Governours  of  the
company  of  English Merchants, for discovery of  new

251

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

trades,  for  the  behoofe,  and  in  the  name  of  the  said
company,  on  the  first  partie,  and  Arthur  Pet  of  Ratcliffe,
in  the  Countie  Middlesex,  Captaine,  Master,  and  chiefe
ruler  of  the  good  barke,  called  the  George  of  London,
of  the  burthen  of  40.  tunnes,  or  thereabouts,  on  the
second  partie,  and  Charles  Jackman  of  Popler,  in  the  said
Countie  of  Middlesex,  Captaine,  Master  and  ruler  of
the  good  barke,  called  the  William  of  London,  of  the
burthen  of  20.  tunnes,  or  thereabouts,  (which  barkes
are  now  riding  at  anker  in  the  river  of  Thames  against
Limehouse)  on  the  third  partie :  witnesseth,  that  the  said
Governours,  and  company  have  hired  the  saide  Arthur
Pet,  to  serve  in  the  said  barke,  called  the  George,  with
nine  men  and  a  boy :  And  likewise  the  said  Charles
Jackman,  to  serve  in  the  said  barke,  called  the  William,
with  five  men  and  a  boy,  for  a  voyage  by  them  to  be
made  by  Gods  grace,  for  search  and  discoveries  of  a
Burroughs  passage  by  sea  from  hence  by  Boroughs  streights,  and
stretts.  ^i^g  Island  Vaigats,  Eastwards,  to  the  countreis  or
dominions  of  the  mightie  Prince,  the  Emperour  of
Cathay,  and  in  the  same  unto  the  Cities  of  Cambalu
and  Quinsay,  or  to  either  of  them.

The  which  passage  (upon  authoritie  of  writers,  and
great  reason)  is  conceived  to  bee  from  the  Vaigats  East-
wards, according  to  the  description  in  plat  of  spirall  lines,
made  by  master  William  Burrough,  whereof  either  of
the  saide  Arthur  Pet,  and  Charles  Jackman,  have  one
delivered  unto  them,  and  also  one  other  sailing  carde,
and  a  blanke  plat  for  either  of  them.  But  if  it  should
not  be  in  all  points,  according  to  that  description,  yet  we
hope  that  the  continent  or  firme  land  of  Asia  doth  not
stretch  it  selfe  so  farre  Northwards,  but  that  there  may
be  found  a  sea  passeable  by  it,  betweene  the  latitude
of  70.  and  80.  degrees.  And  therefore  we  have  ap-
pointed you  with  these  two  barkes  to  make  triall  of
the  same :  wishing  you  both  to  joyne  in  friendship
together,  as  most  deere  friends  and  brothers,  to  all
purposes and effects, to the furtherance and orderly

252

COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN  ad.

1580.

performing  of  the  same  voyage.  And  likewise  order
your  companies,  that  they  of  the  one  barke  may  have
such  love  and  care,  to  helpe  and  succour  them  of  the
other,  as  most  deere  friends  and  brothers  would  doe :  so
as  it  may  appeare,  that  though  they  be  two  barkes,  and
two  companies,  (which  is  so  appointed  for  your  greater
comfort  and  assurance)  yet  that  you  are  wholy  of  one
minde,  and  bend  your  selves  to  the  uttermost  of  your
powers,  to  performe  the  thing  that  you  are  both  em-
ployed for.

Doe  you  observe  good  order  in  your  dayly  service,
and  pray  unto  God,  so  shall  you  prosper  the  better.

We  would  have  you  to  meete  often  together,  to  talke,
conferre,  consult,  and  agree  how,  and  by  what  meanes
you  may  best  performe  this  purposed  voyage,  according
to  our  intents.  And  at  such  meeting  we  thinke  it
requisite,  that  you  call  unto  you  your  mates,  and  also
Nicholas  Chanceler,  (whom  wee  doe  appoint  as  merchant,
to  keepe  accompt  of  the  merchandize  you  shall  buy  or
sell,  barter  or  change)  to  the  ende  that  whatsoever  God
should  dispose  of  either  of  you,  yet  they  may  have  some
instructions  and  knowledge  howe  to  deale  in  your  place,
or  places.  And  of  all  your  assemblies  and  consultations
together,  and  the  substance  of  matter  you  shal  at  every
time  agree  upon,  we  would  have  you  to  note  them  in
the  paper  bookes  that  wee  give  you  for  that  purpose,
unto  each  barke  one.  We  do  appoint  Arthur  Pet  in
the  George,  as  Admiral,  to  weare  the  flagge  in  the  maine
top,  and  Charles  Jackman  in  the  William,  as  Viceadmirall.
For  good  orders  to  be  taken  for  your  good  and  orderly
keeping  of  company  together,  which  we  wish  may  be
such,  as  you  should  never  lose  sight  the  one  of  the  other,
except  by  both  your  consents,  to  discover  about  an
Island,  or  in  some  river,  when  and  where  you  may
certainly  appoint  to  meete  together  againe,  wee  referre
the  same  to  your  discretions.

And  now  for  your  good  direction  in  this  voyage,  we
would  have  you  with  the  next  good  winde  and  weather,

253

Samoeda.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

that  God  shall  send  thereunto  meete  and  convenient,
after  the  22.  day  of  this  present  moneth  of  May,  saile
from  this  river  of  Thames,  to  the  coast  of  Finmarke,
to  the  North  Cape  there,  or  to  the  Wardhouse,  and  from
thence  direct  your  course  to  have  sight  of  Willoughbies
land,  and from it passe alongst to the Nova Zemla,

[I.  434.]  keeping  the  same  landes  alwayes  in  your  sight  on  your
larboordsides  (if  conveniently  you  may)  to  the  ende  you
may  discover,  whether  the  same  Willoughbies  land  be
continent  and  firme  land  with  Nova  Zembla,  or  not :
notwithstanding  we  would  not  have  you  to  entangle  your
selves  in  any  Bay,  or  otherwise,  so  that  it  might  hinder
your  speedy  proceeding  to  the  Island  Vaigats.

The  land  of  And  when  you  come  to  Vaigats,  we  would  have  you
to  get  sight  of  the  maine  land  of  Samoeda,  which  is
over  against  the  South  part  of  the  same  Island,  and  from
thence  with  Gods  permission,  to  passe  Eastwards  alongst
the  same  coast,  keeping  it  alwayes  in  your  sight  (if  con-
veniently you  may)  untill  you  come  to  the  mouth  of
the  river  Ob,  and  when  you  come  unto  it,  passe  over
the  said  rivers  mouth  unto  the  border  of  land,  on  the
Eastside  of  the  same  (without  any  stay  to  bee  made  for
searching  inwardly  in  the  same  river)  and  being  in  sight
of  the  same  Easterly  land,  doe  you  in  Gods  name  proceed
alongst  by  it,  from  thence  Eastwards,  keeping  the  same
alwayes  on  your  starboordside  in  sight,  if  you  may,  and
follow  the  tract  of  it,  whether  it  incline  Southerly  or
Northerly  (as  at  times  it  may  do  both)  untill  you  come
to  the  Countrey  of  Cathay,  or  the  dominion  of  that
mightie  Emperour.

And  if  God  prosper  your  voyage  with  such  good
successe,  that  you  may  attaine  to  the  same,  doe  you
seeke  by  all  meanes  you  can  to  arrive  to  the  Cities
Cambalu,  and  Quinsay,  or  to  the  one  of  them.  But
if  it  happen  that  you  cannot  conveniently  come  to
either  of  those  places,  or  shalbe  driven  to  remaine  &
winter  in  some  other  port  or  place  of  his  dominion,
do you seeke by all  meanes possible to  winne  favour

254

COMMISSION TO PET  AND JACKMAN  ad.

1580.

and  liking  of  the  people,  by  gifts  and  friendly  demeanes
towards  them,  and  not  to  offer  violence,  or  do  wrong
to  any  people  or  nation  whatsoever,  but  therein  to  be
innocent  as  doves,  yet  wilie  as  serpents,  to  avoid  mis-
chiefe,  and  defend  you  from  hurt.  And  when  you  shall
have  gotten  friendship  through  your  discreete  ordering
of  your  selves,  towards  the  people,  doe  you  learne  of
them  what  you  can  of  their  Prince,  and  shewe  them
one  of  the  Queenes  Majesties  letters,  which  she  sendeth  The  Queenes
with  you  (by  either  of  you  one,  made  of  one  substance  ^'^'^'^"•
and  effect,  for  ech  of  you  particularly)  written  in  Latine,
whereunto  her  Majestie  hath  subscribed,  and  caused  her
signet  seale  to  be  set,  the  effect  of  the  same  letters  you
have  also  written  in  English,  for  your  owne  under-
standing thereof.

The  same  her  Majesties  letters  you  shall  procure  to
deliver  unto  the  same  mightie  Prince,  or  Governour,
with  some  present  to  be  given,  such  as  you  shall  thinke
meete  and  convenient,  using  your  selves  in  all  points
according  to  the  effect  of  the  same  letters,  and  procure
againe  from  the  same  Prince,  his  letters  accordingly.

And  if  God  so  prosper  your  voyage,  that  you  may
this  Summer  passe  the  Streights,  and  compasse  about
the  Northermost  land  of  Asia,  unto  the  countrey  of
Cathay,  or  dominion  of  that  mightie  Prince,  and  winter-
ing in  it,  may  obtaine  from  him  his  letters  of  priviledge
against  the  next  yeeres  spring,  you  may  then  after  your
first  setting  foorth,  search  and  discover  somewhat  further
then  you  had  discovered  before  your  wintering,  so  farre
as  you  shall  thinke  convenient,  with  regard  had,  and
alwayes  provided,  that  you  may  returne  home  hither,
to  give  us  advise  of  your  proceedings  the  same  Summer,
or  before  the  sharpenes  or  extremitie  of  winter  overtake
you.

And  if  it  happen  you  cannot  this  summer  attaine  to
the  border  of  Cathay,  and  yet  find  the  land  beyond  the
Ob,  to  stretch  it  selfe  Easterly,  with  the  sea  adjoyning
unto  it  navigable,  doe you then proceed on  your dis-

255

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

covery  (as  before  said)  alongst  the  same  continent,  so
farre  as  you  can  this  summer,  having  care  in  the  travel
to  finde  out  some  convenient  harborow  and  place,  where
you  may  winter  :  and  when  you  thinke  it  convenient,
put  your  selfe  to  wintering,  where  if  you  happen  to
finde  people,  you  shall  deale  with  them,  as  we  have
before  advised  you  to  do  with  the  people  of  Cathay,
&c.  And  if  you  can  learne  that  they  have  a  prince  or
chiefe  governour,  do  you  procure  to  deliver  unto  the
same  Prince  or  governour  one  of  the  Queenes  Majesties
letters,  as  before  said,  and  seeke  to  obtaine  againe  his
letters  accordingly.  If  you  so  happen  to  winter  &
obtaine  letters  of  priviledge,  finding  the  countrey  and
people,  with  the  commodities  to  bee  such,  that  by
using  trade  thither  with  the  people,  and  for  the  com-
modities, it  may  be  beneficial  unto  us  (as  we  hope
you  may)  the  same  wil  be  some  good  liking  unto  us  :
notwithstanding  we  would  have  you  the  next  summer
(by  the  grace  of  God)  at  your  first  setting  out  of  your
wintering  harborough,  proceed  alongest  that  tract  of  land
to  Cathay,  if  you  see  likelihood  to  passe  it  (for  that  is
the  Countrey  that  we  chiefly  desire  to  discover)  and
seeing  you  are  fully  victualed  for  two  yeres  and  up-
wards, which  you  may  very  wel  make  to  serve  you  for
two  yeres  and  a  halfe,  though  you  finde  no  other  help,
you  may  therefore  be  the  bolder  to  adventure  in  pro-
ceeding upon  your  discovery  :  which  if  you  do,  we
doubt  not,  but  you  shall  atchieve  the  Countrey  of
Cathay,  &  deliver  to  the  prince  there,  one  of  her
Majesties  letters,  bringing  from  thence  the  same  princes
letters  answerable  :  and  so  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1582.  returne  home  with  good  newes,  and  glad  tidings,
not  onely  unto  us  the  adventurers  in  this  voyage,  but
also  to  our  whole  Countrey  and  nation,  which  God
graunt  you  may  do,  Amen.

[I.  435.]  But  if  it  happen  that  the  land  of  Asia,  from  beyond
the  river  Ob,  extende  it  selfe  Northwards  to  80.  degrees,
or  neerer  the  poole,  whereby  you  finde  it  to  leade  you

256

COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN  ad.

1580.

into  that  extremitie,  that  small  or  no  hope  may  be
looked  for,  to  saile  that  way  to  Cathay,  doe  you  not-
withstanding followe  the  tract  of  the  same  land,  as  farre
as  you  can  discover  this  Summer,  having  care  to  finde
out  by  the  way  a  convenient  place  for  you  to  Winter
in,  the  which  (if  you  may  discover  the  same  lande  of
Asia  this  Summer  to  extend  it  selfe  to  80.  degrees  of
latitude,  and  upwards  or  to  85.  degrees)  we  wish  then
that  the  same  your  wintering  place  may  be  in  the  river
of  Ob,  or  as  neere  the  same  river  as  you  can,  and
finding  in  such  wintering  place,  people,  be  they  Samoeds,
Yowgorians,  or  Molgomzes,  &c.  doe  you  gently  entreat
with  them  as  aforesaide,  and  if  you  can  learne  that  they
have  a  prince  or  chiefe  governour  amongst  them,  doe
you  deliver  him  one  of  her  Majesties  letters,  and  pro-  The  Queenes
cure  thereof  an  answere  accordingly  :  do  you  procure  ^^^^^'"•^•
to  barter  &  exchange  with  the  people,  of  the  merchandise
and  commodities  that  you  shall  cary  with  you,  for  such
commodities  as  you  shall  finde  them  to  have,  &c.

If  you  so  happen  to  winter,  we  would  have  you  the
next  Summer  to  discover  into  the  river  Ob,  so  farre  as
conveniently  you  may  :  And  if  you  shall  finde  the  same
river  (which  is  reported  to  be  wide  or  broad)  to  be  also
navigable  and  pleasant  for  you,  to  travell  farre  into,
happely  you  may  come  to  the  citie  Siberia,  or  to  some  The  Citk  of
other  towne  or  place  habited  upon  or  neere  the  border  '^''^^^■^^•
of  it,  and  thereby  have  liking  to  winter  out  the  second
winter :  use  you  therein  your  discretions.

But  if  you  finde  the  said  river  Ob  to  be  sholde,  or
not  such  as  you  may  conveniently  travell  in  with  your
barkes,  do  you  then  the  next  summer  returne  backe
through  Boroughs  streights  :  And  from  that  part  of
Nova  Zembla,  adjoyning  to  the  same  streights,  doe
you  come  alongst  the  tract  of  that  coast  Westwards,
keeping  it  on  the  starbord  side,  and  the  same  alwayes
in  sight,  if  conveniently  you  may,  until  you  come  to
Willoughbies  land,  if  outwards  bound  you  shall  not  willouMies
happen  to  discover  and  trie  whether  the  said  Willough-  land.
Ill  257  R

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

bies  land  joyne  continent  with  the  same  Nova  Zembla,
or  not.  But  if  you  shall  then  prove  them  to  be  one
firme  and  continent,  you  may  from  Nova  Zembla  direct
your  course  unto  the  said  Willoughbies  land,  as  you
shall  thinke  good,  and  as  you  may  most  conveniently  :
and  from  Willoughbies  land  you  shall  proceed  West-
wards alongst  the  tract  of  it,  (though  it  incline  Northerly)
even  so  farre  as  you  may  or  can  travell,  having  regard
that  in  convenient  time  you  may  returne  home  hither
to  London  for  wintering.

And  for  your  orderly  passing  in  this  voyage,  and
making  observations  in  the  same,  we  referre  you  to  the
instructions  given  by  M.  William  Burrough,  whereof
one  copie  is  annexed  unto  the  first  part  of  this  Inden-
ture under  our  scale,  for  you  Arthur  Pet,  another  copie
of  it  is  annexed  to  the  second  part  of  this  Indenture,
under  our  scale  also,  for  you  Charles  Jackman,  and  a
third  copy  thereof  is  annexed  unto  the  third  part  of
this  Indenture,  remaining  with  us  the  saide  companie,
sealed  and  subscribed  by  you  the  said  Arthur  Pet,  and
Charles  Jackman.

And  to  the  observing  of  all  things  contained  in  this
Commission  (so  neere  as  God  will  permit  me  grace
thereunto)  I  the  said  Arthur  Pet  doe  covenant  by  these
presents  to  performe  them,  and  every  part  and  parcell
thereof.  And  I  the  said  Charles  Jackman  doe  for  my
part  likewise  covenant  by  these  presents  to  performe
the  same,  and  every  part  thereof,  so  neere  as  God  will
give  me  grace  thereunto.

And  in  witnes  thereof  these  Indentures  were  sealed
and  delivered  accordingly,  the  day  and  yeere  first  above
written.  Thus  the  Lorde  God  Almightie  sende  you  a
prosperous  voyage,  with  happie  successe  and  safe  returne.
Amen.

258

WILLIAM BURROUGHS INSTRUCTIONS  . a.d.

1580.

Instructions  and  notes  very  necessary  and  needfull
to  be  observed  in  the  purposed  voyage  for
discovery  of  Cathay  Eastwards,  by  Arthur  Pet,
and  Charles  Jackman  :  given  by  M.  WiUiam
Burrough. 1580.

WHen  you  come  to  Orfordnesse,  if  the  winde  doe
serve  you  to  goe  a  seabord  the  sands,  doe  you  set
off  from  thence,  and  note  the  time  diligently  of  your
being  against  the  saide  Nesse,  turning  then  your  glasse,
whereby  you  intende  to  keepe  your  continuall  watch,
and  apoint  such  course  as  you  shal  thinke  good,  according
as  the  wind  serveth  you  :  and  from  that  time  forwards
continually  (if  your  ship  be  lose,  under  saile,  a  hull
or  trie)  do  you  at  the  end  of  every  4.  glasses  at  the
least  (except  calme)  sound  with  your  dipsin  lead,  and
note  diligently  what  depth  you  finde,  and  also  the  ground.
But  if  it  happen  by  swiftnes  of  the  shippes  way,  or
otherwise,  that  you  cannot  get  ground,  yet  note  what
depth  you  did  prove,  and  could  finde  no  ground  (this
note  is  to  be  observed  all  your  voyage,  as  well  outwards
as  homewards.)  But  when  you  come  upon  any  coast,
or  doe  finde  any  sholde  banke  in  the  sea,  you  are  then
to  use  your  leade  oftener,  as  you  shal  thinke  it  requisite,
noting  diligently  the  order  of  your  depth,  and  the  [I.  436.]
deeping  and  sholding.  And  so  likewise  doe  you  note
the  depthes  into  harboroughs,  rivers,  &c.

And in keeping your dead reckoning, it is very  Howtomte^

necessary  that  you  doe  note  at  the  ende  of  every  foure r'^^^iT A[
1  1  11-  11  1/1  1  Jornallofthe

glasses, what  way  the  shippe hath  made (by  your  best  ^o'^age,  his

proofes  to  be  used)  and  howe  her  way  hath  bene  through  dead  reckon-

the  water,  considering  withall  for  the  sagge  of  the  sea, '^^g->  ^^^  "^^^^

.  h  fin

to  leewards,  accordingly  as you shall finde it  growen  :  °'^^^^'^^""^^-
and  also  to  note  the depth,  and  what  things  worth  the
noting  happened  in  that  time,  with  also  the  winde  upon
what point you finde it then, and of  what force or
strength  it  is,  and  what  sailes  you  beare.

259

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

But  if  you  should  omit  to  note  those  things  at  the
end  of  every  foure  glasses,  I  would  not  have  you  to
let  it  slip  any  longer  time,  then  to  note  it  diligently  at
the  end  of  every  watch,  or  eight  glasses  at  the  farthest.

Doe  you  diligently  observe  the  latitude  as  often,  and
in  as  many  places  as  you  may  possible,  and  also  the
variation  of  the  Compasse  (especially  when  you  may
bee  at  shoare  upon  any  land)  noting  the  same  observa-
tions truely,  and  the  place  and  places  where,  and  the
time  and  times  when  you  do  the  same.

When  you  come  to  have  sight  of  any  coast  or  land
whatsoever,  doe  you  presently  set  the  same  with  your
sailing  Compasse,  howe  it  beares  off  you,  noting  your
judgement  how  farre  you  thinke  it  from  you,  drawing
also  the  forme  of  it  in  your  booke,  howe  it  appeares
unto  you,  noting  diligently  how  the  highest  or  notablest
part  thereof  beareth  off  you,  and  the  extreames  also  in
For  ncting  the  sight  of  the  same  land  at  both  ends,  distinguishing  them
shapeandviezo  . letters,  A.  B.  C. &c. Afterwards when you have

of  the  land  at •^ ^  ^  / 1  s  ■  i-i-  1

first  discovers sailed  I.  2.  3.  or  4.  glasses  (at  the  most)  notmg  aihgently
13c.  what  way  your  barke  hath  made,  and  upon  what  point

of  the  Compasse,  do  you  againe  set  that  first  land  seene,
or  the  parts  thereof,  that  you  first  observed,  if  you  can
well  perceive  or  discerne  them,  and  likewise  such  other
notable  points  or  signes,  upon  the  land  that  you  may  then
see,  and  could  not  perceive  at  the  first  time,  distinguishing
it  also  by  letters  from  the  other,  and  drawing  in  your
booke  the  shape  of  the  same  land,  as  it  appeareth  unto
you,  and  so  the  third  time,  &c.

And  also  in  passing  alongst  by  any  and  every  coast,
doe  you  drawe  the  maner  of  biting  in  of  every  Bay,
and  entrance  of  every  harborow  or  rivers  mouth,  with
the  lying  out  of  every  point,  or  headland,  (unto  the
which  you  may  give  apt  names  at  your  pleasure)  and
make  some  marke  in  drawing  the  forme  and  border
of  the  same,  where  the  high  cliffs  are,  and  where  lowe
lande  is,  whether  sande,  hils,  or  woods,  or  whatsoever,
not  omitting to note any thing that  may be sensible

260

WILLIAM BURROUGHS INSTRUCTIONS ad.

1580.

and  apparant  to  you,  which  may  serve  to  any  good
purpose.  If  you  carefully  with  great  heede  and  dili-
gence, note  the  observations  in  your  booke,  as  aforesaid,
and  afterwards  make  demonstration  thereof  in  your  plat,
you  shall  thereby  perceive  howe  farre  the  land  you  first
sawe,  or  the  parts  thereof  observedj  was  then  from  you,
and  consequently  of  all  the  rest  :  and  also  how  farre  the
one  part  was  from  the  other,  and  upon  what  course  or
point  of  the  Compasse  the  one  lieth  from  the  other.

And  when  you  come  upon  any  coast  where  you  find
floods  and  ebs,  doe  you  diligently  note  the  time  of  the
highest  and  lowest  water  in  every  place,  and  the  slake
or  still  water  of  full  sea,  and  lowe  water,  and  also  which
way  the  flood  doeth  runne,  how  the  tides  doe  set,  how  For  observing
much  water  it  hieth,  and  what  force  the  tide  hath  to  e^^'^^'^^  ^^^
drive  a  ship  in  one  houre,  or  in  the  whole  tide,  as
neere  as  you  can  judge  it,  and  what  diff'erence  in  time
you  finde  betwene  the  running  of  the  flood,  and  the
ebbe.  And  if  you  finde  upon  any  coast  the  currant  to
runne  alwayes  one  way,  doe  you  also  note  the  same
duely,  how  it  setteth  in  every  place,  and  observe  what
force  it  hath  to  drive  a  ship  in  one  houre,  &c.

Item, as often and  when as you may conveniently
come  upon  any  land,  to  make  observation  for  the  lati-
tude and  variation,  &c.  doe  you  also  (if  you  may)  with
your instrument, for trying of  distances, observe the  ^'^  ^^^^  ^^^
platforme  of  the place,  and of  as many things (worth  PfP^"^"°J
the noting) as you may then conveniently see from  compasse  of
time  to  time. These orders if  you diligently observe,  view  upon
you  may  thereby  perfectly  set  downe  in the  plats,  that  l^^^'^-
I  have  given  you  your  whole  travell,  and  description  of
your discovery, which is a thing that will be chiefly
expected at your hands. But withall you may not
forget  to  note  as  much  as  you  can  learne,  understand  or
perceive of  the maner  of  the soile, or  fruitfulnesse of
every place and countrey  you shall come in, and of
the maner,  shape,  attire  and disposition  of  the people,
and  of  the  commodities  they  have,  and  what  they  most

261

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

covet  and  desire  of  the  commodities  you  cary  with  you.
It  behoveth  you  to  give  trifling  things  unto  such  people
as  you  shall  happen  to  see,  and  to  offer  them  all  courtesie
and  friendship  you  may  or  can,  to  winne  their  love
and  favour  towardes  you,  not  doing  or  offering  them
any  wrong  or  hurt.  And  though  you  should  be  offered
wrong  at  their  handes,  yet  not  to  revenge  the  same
lightly,  but  by  all  meanes  possible  seeke  to  winne
them,  yet  alwayes  dealing  wisely  and  with  such  cir-
cumspection that  you  keepe  your  selves  out  of  their
dangers.

[I.  437.]  Thus  I  beseech  God  Almightie  to  blesse  you,  and
prosper  your  voyage  with  good  and  happie  successe,  and
send  you  safely  to  returne  home  againe,  to  the  great  joy
and  rejoycing  of  the  adventurers  with  you,  and  all  your
friends,  and  our  whole  countrey.  Amen.

Certaine briefe  advises given by  Master Dee,  to
Arthur Pet, and Charles Jackman, to bee
observed in their Northeasterne discoverie,
All  o 1580.

IF  we  recken  from  Wardhouse  to  Colgoieve  Island
400.  miles  for  almost  20.  degrees  difference  onely  of
longitude  very  neere  East  and  West,  and  about  the
latitude  of  70.  degrees  and  two  thirde  parts  :  From
Colgoieve  to  Vaigats  200.  miles  for  10.  degrees  difference
onely  in  longitude,  at  70.  degrees  of  latitude  also  :  From
Vaigats  to  the  promontorie  Tabin  60.  degrees  difference
of  longitude  (the  whole  course,  or  shortest  distance  being
East  and  West)  in  the  latitude  likewise  of  70.  degrees,
maketh  1200.  miles  :  then  is  summa  totalis  from  Ward-
house  to  Tabin  600.  leagues,  or  1800.  English  miles.
Therefore  allowing  in  a  discovery  voiage  for  one  day
with  another  but  50.  English  miles,  it  is  evident  that
from  Wardhouse  to  Tabin,  the  course  may  bee  sailed
easily  in  sixe  and  thirtie  dayes  :  but  by  Gods  helpe
it  may  be  finished  in  much  shorter  time,  both  by  helpe

MASTER DEE'S ADVICE  ad.

1580.

of  winde  prosperous,  and  light continuall for the  time
requisit  thereunto.

When  you  are  past  Tabin,  or  come  to  the  longitude  ^-  ^^^  Efl'^^

r  thpni  n  Ohnrf

of 142.  degrees,  as  your  chart sheweth,  or two,  three, ^,.

T^o^y  ..  of  nts  owns

foure, or five degrees  further Easterly, it is probable  making,  which

you shall finde the land on your right hand runne  here  he  refers

much  Southerly  and  Eastward,  in  which  course  you  are  ^^^^  ^^^°-

like  either  to  fall  into the  mouth  of  the famous river

Oechardes, or some  other, which yet I conjecture to

passe by the renowmed Citie of Cambalu, and the

mouth  to  be  in latitude  about 50.  or  52.  degrees,  and

within  300. or  400. miles of  Cambalu it selfe, being

in the latitude of  45. degrees Southerly  of  the saide

rivers mouth, or els that you shall trend about the

very  Northerne and most Easterly point of  all Asia,

passing  by  the  province  Ania,  and  then  to  the  latitude

of  46.  degrees,  keeping  still  the  land  in view  on your

right  hand  (as  neere  as  you  may  with  safetie)  you  may

enter into Quinsay  haven,  being  the  chiefe  citie  in  the

Northern  China,  as  I  terme  it  for  distinctions  sake,  from

the  other  better  knowen.

And  in  or  about  either  or  both  of  these  two  warme
places,  you  may  to  great  good  purpose  bee  occupied
the  whole  winter,  after  your  arrivall  in  those  quarters,
as  sometime  by  sea,  sometime  in  notable  fresh  rivers,
sometime  in  discreet  view  and  noting  downe  the  situation
of  the  Cities  within  land,  &c.  and  ever  assaying  to  come
by  some  charts  or  maps  of  the  countrey,  made  and
printed  in  Cathay  or  China,  and  by  some  of  their  bookes
likewise  for  language,  &c.  You  may  also  have  oppor-
tunitie  to  saile  over  to  Japan  Island,  where  you  shall
finde  Christian  men,  Jesuits  of  many  countreys  of
Christendome  some,  and  perhaps  some  Englishmen,  at
whose  handes  you  may  have  great  instruction  and  advise
for  you  affaires  in  hand.

[Notes

w

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Notes  in  writing,  besides  more  privie  by  mouth,
that  were  given  by  M.  Richard  Hakluyt
of  Eiton  in  the  Countie  of  Hereford,  Esquire,
Anno  1580:  to  M.  Arthur  Pet,  and  to  M.
Charles  Jackman,  sent  by  the  Merchants  of
the  Moscovie  companie  for  the  discovery  of
the  Northeast  straight,  not  altogether  unfit
for  some  other  enterprises  of  discovery,  here-
after to  be  taken  in  hand.

What  respect  of  Islands  is  to  be  had,
and  why.

'Hereas  the  Portingals  have  in  their  course  to
their  Indies  in  the  Southeast,  certaine  ports  and
fortifications  to  thrust  into  by  the  way,  to  divers  great
purposes :  so  you  are  to  see  what  Islands,  and  what  ports
you  had  neede  to  have  by  the  way  in  your  course  to
the  Northeast.  For  which  cause  I  wish  you  to  enter
into  consideration  of  the  matter,  and  to  note  all  the
Islands,  and  to  set  them  downe  in  plat,  to  two  ends :
that  is  to  say,  That  we  may  devise  to  take  the  benefit
by  them,  And  also  foresee  how  by  them  the  Savages
or  civill  Princes  may  in  any  sort  annoy  us  in  our  pur-
posed trade  that  way.

And  for  that  the  people  to  the  which  we  purpose  in
this  voyage  to  go,  be  no  Christians,  it  were  good  that
the  masse  of  our  commodities  were  alwayes  in  our  owne
disposition,  and  not  at  the  will  of  others.  Therefore
it  were  good  that  we  did  seeke  out  some  small  Island
in  the  Scithian  sea,  where  we  might  plant,  fortifie,  and
staple  safely,  from  whence  (as  time  should  serve)  wee
might  feed  those  heathen  nations  with  our  commodities
without  cloying  them,  or  without  venturing  our  whole
masse  in  the  bowels  of  their  countrey.
[I.  438.]  And  to  which  Island  (if  neede  were,  and  if  wee  should
thinke  so  good)  wee  might  allure the  Northeast  navie,

264

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  a.d.

1580.

the  navie  of  Cambalu  to  resort  with  their  commodities
to  us  there  planted,  and  stapling  there.

And  if  such  an  Island  might  be  found  so  standing
as  might  shorten  our  course,  and  so  standing,  as  that
the  navie  of  Cambalu,  or  other  those  parties  might  con-
veniently saile  unto  without  their  dislike  in  respect  of
distance,  then  would  it  fal  out  well.  For  so,  besides
lesse  danger  and  more  safetie,  our  ships  might  there
unlade  and  lade  againe,  and  returne  the  selfe  same
summer  to  the  ports  of  England  or  of  Norway,

And  if  such  an  Island  may  be  for  the  stapling  of
our  commodities,  to  the  which  they  of  Cambalu  would
not  saile,  yet  we  might,  having  ships  there,  imploy  them
in  passing  betweene  Cambalu  and  that  stapling  place.

Respect  of  havens  and  harborowes.

ANd  if  no  such  Islands  may  bee  found  in  the  Scithian
sea  toward  the  firme  of  Asia,  then  are  you  to  search
out  the  ports  that  be  about  Nova  Zembla,  all  along
the  tract  of  that  land,  to  the  end  you  may  winter  there
the  first  yeere,  if  you  be  let  by  contrary  winds,  and
to  the  end  that  if  we  may  in  short  time  come  unto
Cambalu,  and  unlade  and  set  saile  againe  for  returne
without  venturing  there  at  Cambalu,  that  you  may  on
your  way  come  as  farre  in  returne  as  a  port  about
Nova  Zembla :  that  the  summer  following,  you  may  the
sooner  be  in  England  for  the  more  speedy  vent  of  your
East  commodities,  and  for  the  speedier  discharge  of  your
Mariners :  if  you  cannot  go  forward  and  backe  in  one
selfe  same  Summer.

And  touching  the  tract  of  the  land  of  Nova  Zembla,
toward  the  East  out  of  the  circle  Arcticke  in  the  more
temperate  Zone,  you  are  to  have  regard :  for  if  you  finde
the  soyle  planted  with  people,  it  is  like  that  in  time
an  ample  vent  of  our  warme  woUen  clothes  may  be
found.  And  if  there  be  no  people  at  all  there  to  be  A  good  con
found,  then  you  shall  specially  note  what  plentie  of  sideramn.
whales,  and  of  other  fish is to  be found there,  to the

265

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

ende  we  may  turne  our  newe  found  land  fishing  or  Island
fishing,  or  our  whalefishing  that  way,  for  the  ayde  and
comfort  of  our  newe  trades  to  the  Northeast  to  the
coasts  of  Asia.

Respect  of  fish  and  certaine  other  things.

ANd  if  the  aire  may  be  found  upon  that  tract  tem-
perate, and  the  soile  yeelding  wood,  water,  land  and
grasse,  and  the  seas  fish,  then  we  may  plant  on  that
maine  the  offals  of  our  people,  as  the  Portingals  do  in
Brasill,  and  so  they  may  in  our  fishing  in  our  passage,
and  divers  wayes  yeelde  commoditie  to  England  by
harbouring  and  victualling  us.

And  it  may  be,  that  the  inland  there  may  yeeld  masts,
pitch,  tarre,  hempe,  and  all  things  for  the  Navie,  as
plentifully  as  Eastland  doth.

The Islands  to  be  noted  with  their  commodities

and  w^ants.

TO  note  the  Islands,  whether  they  be  hie  land  or  low
land,  mountaine  or  flat,  gravelly,  clay,  chalkie,  or  of
what  soile,  woody  or  not  woody,  with  springs  and  rivers
or  not,  and  what  wilde  beastes  they  have  in  the  same.

And  whether  there  seeme  to  be  in  the  same  apt  matter
to  build  withall,  as  stone  free  or  rough,  and  stone  to
make  lime  withall,  and  wood  or  coale  to  burne  the  same
withall.

To  note  the  goodnesse  or  the  badnesse  of  the  havens
and  harborowes  in  the  Islands.

If  a straight  be found,  what  is  to  be  done, and
what  great  importance  it  may  be  of.

ANd  if  there  be  a  straight  in  the  passage  into  the
Scithian  seas,  the  same  is  specially  and  with  great
regard  to  be  noted,  especially  if  the  same  straight  be
narrow  and  to  be  kept.  I  say  it  is  to  be  noted  as  a  thing
that  doeth  much  import :  for  what  prince  soever  shall
be  Lorde of  the  same,  and shall possesse the same,  as

266

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1580.
the  king  of  Denmarke  doeth  possesse  the  straight  of
Denmarke,  he  onely  shall  have  the  trade  out  of  these
regions  into  the  Northeast  parts  of  the  world  for  him-
selfe,  and  for  his  private  profit,  or  for  his  subjects  onely,
or  to  enjoy  wonderfull  benefit  of  the  toll  of  the  same,
like  as  the  king  of  Denmarke  doth  enjoy  of  his  straights,
by  suffi-ing  the  merchants  of  other  Princes  to  passe  that
way.  If  any  such  straight  be  found,  the  elevation,  the
high  or  lowe  land,  the  havens  neere,  the  length  of  the
straights,  and  all  other  such  circumstances  are  to  be  set
downe  for  many  purposes :  and  al  the  Mariners  in  the
voyage  are  to  be  sworne  to  keepe  close  all  such  things,
that  other  Princes  prevent  us  not  of  the  same,  after  our
returne  upon  the  disclosing  of  the  Mariners,  if  any  such
thing  should  hap.

Which  v^ay  the  Savage  may  bee  made  able  to [I.  439-]
purchase  our  cloth and other their  wants.

IF  you  find  any  Island  or  maine  land  populous,  and
that  the  same  people  hath  need  of  cloth,  then  are
you  to  devise  what  commodities  they  have  to  purchase
the  same  withall.

If  they  be  poore,  then  are  you  to  consider  of  the  soile,
and  how  by  any  possibilitie  the  same  may  be  made  to
inrich  them,  that  hereafter  they  may  have  something
to  purchase  the  cloth  withall.

If  you  enter  into  any  maine  by  portable  river,  and
shall  find  any  great  woods,  you  are  to  note  what  kind
of  timber  they  be  of,  that  we  may  know  whether
they  are  for  pitch,  tarre,  mastes,  dealeboord,  clapboord,
or  for  building  of  ships  or  houses,  for  so,  if  the  people
have  no  use  of  them,  they  may  be  brought  perhaps
to  use.

Not  to  venture  the  losse  of  any  one  man.

YOu  must  have  great  care to preserve your people,
since  your  number is  so  small,  and  not  to  venture
any  one  man  in  any  wise.

267

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

To  bring  home  besides  merchandize  certaine

trifles.

BRing  home  with  you  (if  you  may)  from  Cambalu  or
other  civil  place,  one  or  other  yong  man,  although
you  leave  one  for  him.

Also  the  fruites  of  the  Countreys  if  they  will  not  of
themselves  dure,  drie  them  and  so  preserve  them.

And  bring  with  you  the  kernels  of  peares  and  apples,
and  the  stones  of  such  stonefruits  as  you  shall  find  there.

Also  the  seeds  of  all  strange  herbs  &  flowers,  for  such
seeds  of  fruits  and  herbs  comming  from  another  part
of  the  world,  and  so  far  off^,  will  delight  the  fansie  of
many  for  the  strangenesse,  and  for  that  the  same  may
grow,  and  continue  the  delight  long  time.

If  you  arrive  at  Cambalu  or  Quinsay,  to  bring  thence
the  mappe  of  that  countrey,  for  so  shall  you  have  the
perfect  description,  which  is  to  great  purpose.

To  bring  thence  some  old  printed  booke,  to  see
whether  they  have  had  print  there  before  it  was  devised
in  Europe  as  some  write.

To  note  their  force  by  sea  and  by  land.

IF  you  arrive  in  Cambalu  or  Quinsay,  to  take  a  speciall
view  of  their  Navie,  and  to  note  the  force,  greatnesse,
maner  of  building  of  them,  the  sailes,  the  tackles,  the
ankers,  the  furniture  of  them,  with  ordinance,  armour,
and  munition.

Also,  to  note  the  force  of  the  wals  and  bulwarks  of
their  cities,  their  ordonance,  and  whether  they  have  any
calivers,  and  what  powder  and  shot.

To  note  what  armour  they  have.

What  swords.

What  pikes,  halberds  and  bils.

What  horses  of  force,  and  what  light  horses  they  have.

And  so  throughout  to  note  the  force  of  the  Countrey
both  by  sea  and  by  land.

268

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1580.

Things  to  be  marked  to  make  conjectures  by.

TO  take  speciall  note  of  their  buildings,  and  of  the
ornaments  of  their  houses  within.

Take  a  speciall  note  of  their  apparell  and  furniture,
and  of  the  substance  that  the  same  is  made  of,  of  which
a  Merchant  may  make  a  gesse  as  well  of  their  com-
moditie,  as  also  of  their  wants.

To  note  their  Shoppes  and  Warehouses,  and  with
what  commodities  they  abound,  the  price  also.

To  see  their  Shambles,  and  to  view  all  such  things
as  are  brought  into  the  Markets,  for  so  you  shall  soone
see  the  commodities,  and  the  maner  of  the  people  of
the  inland,  and  so  give  a  gesse  of  many  things.

To  note  their  fields  of  graine,  and  their  trees  of
fruite,  and  how  they  abound  or  not  abound  in  one
and  other,  and  what  plenty  or  scarsitie  of  fish  they  have.

Things  to  be  caried with  you,  whereof  more  or  [i-  44-0-]
lesse is to bee caried for a shew of our
commodities  to  be  made.

KArsies  of  all  orient  colours,  specially  of  stamell,
broadcloth  of  orient  colours  also.

Frizadoes,  Motlies,  Bristow  friezes,  Spanish  blankets,
Baies  of  al  colours,  specially  with  Stamel,  Worsteds,
Carels,  Saies,  Woadmols,  Flanels,  Rash,  &c.

Felts  of  divers  colours.

Taffeta  hats.

Deepe  caps  for  Mariners  coloured  in  Stamel,  whereof
if  ample  vent  may  be  found,  it  would  turne  to  an  infinite
commoditie  of  the  common  poore  people  by  knitting.

Quilted  caps  of  Levant  taifeta  of  divers  colours,  for
the  night.

Knit  stocks  of  silke  of  orient  colours.

Knit  stocks  of  Jerzie  yarne  of  orient  colours,  whereof
if  ample  vent  might  folow  the  poore  multitude  should
be  set  in  worke.

269

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Stocks  of  karsie  of  divers  colours  for  men  and  for
women.

Garters  of  silke  of  severall  kinds,  and  of  colours
divers.

Girdles  of  Buffe  and  all  other  leather,  with  gilt  and
ungilt  buckles,  specially  waste  girdles,  waste  girdles  of
velvet.

Gloves  of  all  sorts  knit,  and  of  leather.

Gloves  perfumed.

Points  of  all  sorts  of  silke,  threed,  and  leather,  of  all
maner  of  colours.

Shooes  of  Spanish  leather  of  divers  colours,  of  divers
length,  cut  and  uncut.

Shooes  of  other  leather.

Velvet  shooes  and  pantophles.

These  shooes  and  pantophles  to  be  sent  this  time,
rather  for  a  shew  then  for  any  other  cause.

Purses  knit,  and  of  leather.

Nightcaps  knit,  and  other.

A  garnish  of  pewter  for  a  shew  of  a  vent  of  that
English  commoditie,  bottles,  flagons,  spoones,  &c.  of
that  mettall.

Glasses  of  English  making.

Venice  glasses.

Looking  glasses  for  women,  great  and  faire.

Small  dials  a  few  for  proofe,  although  there  they
will  not  hold  the  order  they  do  here.

Spectacles  of  the  common  sort.

Others  of  Christall  trimmed  with  silver,  and  otherwise.

Hower  glasses.  ) f  Combes  of  boxe.

Combes  of  Ivorie.  j \  Combes  of  home.

Linnen  of  divers  sorts.

Handkerchiefs  with  silke  of  severall  colours  wrought.

Glazen  eyes  to  ride  with  against  dust.

Knives  in  sheaths  both  single  and  double,  of  good
edge.

Needles  great  and  small  of  every  kind.

Buttons  greater  and smaller,  with moulds  of  leather

270

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  ad.

1580.

and  not  of  wood,  and  such  as  be  durable  of  double
silke,  and  that  of  sundry  colours.

Boxes  with  weights  for  gold,  and  of  every  kind  of
the  coine  of  gold,  good  and  bad,  to  shew  that  the
people  here  use  weight  and  measure,  which  is  a  certaine
shew  of  wisedom,  and  of  certaine  government  setled  here.

All  the  severall  silver  coynes  of  bur  English  monies,
to  be  caried  with  you  to  be  shewed  to  the  governours
at  Cambalu,  which  is  a  thing  that  shall  in  silence  speake
to  wise  men  more  then  you  imagine.

Locks  and  keyes,  hinges,  bolts,  haspes,  &c.  great  and
small  of  excellent  workemanship,  whereof  if  vent  may
be,  hereafter  we  shall  set  our  subjects  in  worke,  which
you  must  have  in  great  regard.  For  in  finding  ample
vent  of  any  thing  that  is  to  be  wrought  in  this  realme,
is  more  woorth  to  our  people  besides  the  gaine  of  the
merchant,  then  Christchurch,  Bridewell,  the  Savoy,  and
all  the  Hospitals  of  England.

For  banketting  on  shipboord  persons  of  credite.

First,  the  sweetest  perfumes  to  set  under  hatches  to
make  ye  place  sweet  against  their  comming  aboord,
if  you  arrive  at  Cambalu,  Quinsey,  or  in  any  such
great  citie,  &  not  among  Savages.

Marmelade.  I (  Figs  barrelled.  [I.  441.]

Sucket.  j \  Raisins  of  the  sunne.

Comfets  of  divers  kinds  made  of  purpose  by  him
that  is  most  excellent,  that  shal  not  dissolve.

Prunes  damaske.  ) |  Walnuts.

Dried  Peares.  J ( Almonds.

Smalnuts.

Olives  to  make  them  taste  their  wine.

The  apple  John  that  dureth  two  yeeres  to  make  shew
of  our  fruits.

Hullocke.  } { Sacke.

Vials  of  good  sweet  waters,  and  casting  bottels  of
glasses  to  besprinkle  the  ghests  withall,  after  their
comming  aboord.

271

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Suger  to  use  with  their  wine  if  they  will.

The  sweet  oyle  of  Zante,  and  excellent  French
vineger,  and  a  fine  kind  of  Bisket  stieped  in  the  same
do  make  a  banketting  dish,  and  a  little  Sugar  cast  in  it
cooleth  and  comforteth,  and  refresheth  the  spirits  of
man.

Cynamon  water") is to be had  with you to make a
>  shew  of  by  taste,  and  also  to  comfort
Imperiall  waterj your  sicke  in  the  voyage.

With  these  and  "such  like,  you  may  banket  where  you
arrive  the  greater  and  best  persons.

Or  with  the  gift  of  these  Marmelades  in  small  boxes,
or  small  vials  of  sweet  waters  you  may  gratifie  by  way
of  gift,  or  you  may  make  a  merchandize  of  them.

The  Mappe  of  England  and  of  London.

Take  with  you  the  mappe  of  England  set  out  in
faire  colours,  one  of  the  biggest  sort  I  meane,  to  make
shew  of  your  countrey  from  whence  you  come.

And  also  the  large  Mappe  of  London  to  make  shew
of  your  Citie.  And  let  the  river  be  drawen  full  of
Ships  of  all  sorts,  to  make  the  more  shew  of  your
great  trade  and  trafiike  in  trade  of  merchandize.

Ortelius  booke  of  Mappes.

If  you  take  Ortelius  booke  of  Mappes  with  you  to
marke  all  these  Regions,  it  were  not  amisse  :  and  if
need  were,  to  present  the  same  to  the  great  Can,  for
it  would  be  to  a  Prince  of  marveilous  account.

The  booke  of  the  attire  of  all  Nations.

Such  a  booke  caried  with  you  and  bestowed  in  gift
would  be  much  esteemed,  as  I  perswade  my  selfe.

Bookes.

If  any  man  will  lend  you  the  new  Herball  and  such
Bookes  as  make  shew  of  herbes,  plants,  trees,  fishes,
foules  and  beasts  of  these  regions,  it  may much  delight

272

ABRAHAM ORTELIUS

RICHARD HAKLUYT'S NOTES  a.d.

1580.

the  great  Can,  and  the  nobilitie,  and  also  their  merchants
to  have  the  view  of  them  :  for  all  things  in  these  partes
so  much  differing  from  the  things  of  those  regions,  since
they  may  not  be  here  to  see  them,  by  meane  of  the
distance,  yet  to  see  those  things  in  a  shadow,  by  this
meane  will  delight  them.

The  booke  of  Jtates.

TAke  with  you  the  booke  of  Rates,  to  the  ende  you
may  pricke  all  those  commodities  there  specified,
that  you  shall  chance  to  find  in  Cambalu,  in  Quinsey,
or  in  any  part  of  the  East,  where  you  shall  chance  to  be.

Parchment.
Rowles of  Parchment, for that  we may  vent much
without  hurt  to  the  Realme,  and  it  lieth  in  small  roume.

Glew.
To  carie  Glew,  for  that  we  have  plentie  and  want  vent.

Red  Oker  for  Painters.
To seeke vent because we have great mines of  it,
and  have  no  vent.

Sope  of  both  kindes.
To  try  what  vent  it  may  have,  for  that  we  make  of
both  kinds,  and  may  perhaps  make  more.

Saffron.  [I.  442.]

To  try  what  vent  you  may  have  of  Saffron,  because
this  realme  yeelds  the  best  of  the  world,  and  for  the
tillage  and  other  labours  may  set  the  poore  greatly  in
worke  to  their  reliefe.

Aquavitas.
By new devises wonderful quantities may be made
here,  and  therefore  to  seeke  the  vent.
Blacke  Conies  skins.
To  try  the  vent  at  Cambalu,  for  that  it  lieth  towards
the  North,  and  for  that  we  abound  with  the  commoditie,
and  may  spare  it.

Threed  of  all  colours.
The  vent  thereof  may  set  our  people  in  worke.
Ill  273  s

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Copper  Spurres  and  Hawkes  bels.
To  see  the  vent  for  it  may  set  our  people  in  worke.

A  note  and  Caveat  for  the  Merchant.

That  before  you  offer  your  commodities  to  sale,  you
indevour  to  learne  what  commodities  the  countrey  there
hath. For  if  you  bring  thither  velvet,  taffeta,  spice,  or
any  such  commoditie  that  you  your  selfe  desire  to  lade
your  selfe  home  with,  you  must  not  sell  yours  deare,  least
hereafter  you  purchase  theirs  not  so  cheape  as  you  would.
Seeds  for  sale.
Carie  with  you for  that  purpose all sorts of  garden
seeds,  as  well  of  sweete  strawing  herbs  and  of  flowers,
as  also  of  pot  herbes  and  all  sorts  for  roots,  &c.
Lead  of  the  first  melting.
Lead  of  the  second  melting  of  the  slags.
To  make  triall  of  the  vent  of  Lead  of  all  kinds.

English  iron,  and  wier  of  iron  and  copper.
To  try  the  sale  of  the  same.

Brimstone.
To try the vent of  the same, because we abound
with  it  made  in  the  Realme.

Antimonie  a  Minerall.
To  see  whether  they  have  any  ample  use  there  for
it,  for  that  we  may  lade  whole  navies  of  it  and  have
no  use  of  it  unlesse  it  be  for  some  small  portion  in
founding  of  bels,  or  a  litle  that  the  Alcumists  use  :  of
this  you  may  have  two  sortes  at  the  Apothecaries.

Tinder  boxes  with  Steele,  Flint  &  Matches  and
Tinder,  the  Matches  to  be  made  of  Juniper
to  avoid  the  offence of  Brimstone.

To trie and make the better sale of  Brimstone by
shewing  the  use.

Candles  of  Waxe  to  light.

A  painted  Bellowes.
For  that  perhaps  they  have  not  the  use  of  them.

274

GERARDUS MERCATOR'S LETTER  ad.

1580.
A  pot  of  cast  iron.
To  try  the  sale, for  that  it  is  a  naturall  commoditie
of  this  Realme.

All  maner  of  edge  tooles.
To  be  sold  there  or  to  the  lesse  civil  people  by  the
way  where  you  shall  touch.

What  I  would  have  you  there  to  remember.

To  note  specially  what  excellent  dying  they  use  in
these  regions,  and  therefore  to  note  their  garments  and
ornaments  of  houses  :  and  to  see  their  Die  houses  and
the  Materials  &  Simples  that  they  use  about  the  same,
and  to  bring  musters  and  shewes  of  the  colours  and  of
the  materials,  for  that  it  may  serve  this  clothing  realme
to great  purpose.

To  take  with  you  for  your  owne  use.

All  maner  of  engines  to  take  fish  and  foule.

To  take  with  you  those things  that  be  in

perfection  of  goodnesse.

For  as  the  goodnesse  now  at  the  first  may  make  your

commodities  in  credite  in  time  to  come  : so  false and

Sophisticate  commodities shall drawe you  and all  your

commodities  into  contempt  and  ill  opinion.

A letter of Gerardus Mercator,  written to M.  [I.  443.]
Richard Hakluyt of Oxford, touching the
intended  discoverie  of  the Northeast passage,
An. 1580.

Iteras  tuae  (vir  humanissime)  19.  Junii
demum  mihi  redditae  fuerunt  :  vehe-
menter  dolui  visis  illis  tantam,  non  modo
temporis,  sed  mult6  magis  tempestivae  in-
structionis  jacturam  factam  esse.  Optassem
Arthurum  Pet  de  quibusdam  non  levibus
ante  suum  discessum  praemonitum  fuisse.
Expeditissima  sane  per  Orientem  in  Cathaium  est  navi-
gatio  : &  saspe  miratus  sum,  eam foeliciter inchoatam,

275

A.D.
1580.

Ingens  Sinus
post  htsulam
Faigats  iff
Nopam  Zem-
blam.

Tabinpromon-
terium  ingens.

Quo  propius
ad  polum
acceditur,  eh
directorium
Nauticum
magis  a  Sep-
tentrione
deviat.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

desertam  fuisse,  velis  in  Occidentem  translatis,  postquam
plus  quam  dimidium  itineris  vestri  jam  notum  haberent.
Nam  post  Insulam  Vaigats,  &  Nova  Zembla  continuo
ingens  sequitur  Sinus,  quem  ab  ortu  Tabin  immane
promontorium  complectitur.  In  hunc  medium  maxima
illabuntur  flumina,  quae  universam  Regionem  Sericam
perluentia,  utque  existimo,  in  intima  continentis  usque
magnis  navigiis  pervia,  facillimam  rationem  exhibent  quas-
libet  merces  ex  Cataio,  Mangi,  Mien,  CECterisque  circum-
fusis  regnis  contrahendi,  atque  in  Angliam  deportandi.
Caeterum  cum  non  temere  eam  navigationem  intermissam
crederem,  opinabar  ab  Imperatore  Russorum  &  Moscoviae
obstaculum  aliquod  interjectum  fuisse.  Quod  si  vero
cum  illius  gratia  ulterior  iliac  navigatio  detur,  suaderem
profecto  non  primum  Tabin  promontorium  quasrere,
atque  explorare,  sed  Sinum  hunc  atque  flumina,  in  iisque
portum  aliquem  commodissimum,  stationemque  Anglicis
Mercatoribus  deligere,  ex  quo  deinceps  majore  opportuni-
tate,  minoribusque  periculis  Tabin  promontorium,  &
totius  Cathai  circumnavigatio  indagari  posset.  Esse
autem  ingens  in  Septentrionem  excurrens  promontorium
Tabin,  non  ex  Plinio  tantum,  verum  &  aliis  scriptoribus,
&  tabulis  aliquot  (licet  rudius  depictis)  certum  habeo.
Polum  etiam  Magnetis  haud  longe  ultra  Tabin  situm
esse,  certis  Magnetis  observationibus  didici  :  circa  quem
&  Tabin  plurimos  esse  scopulos,  difficilemque  &  pericu-
losam  navigationem  existimo  :  diflliciliorem  tamen  ad
Cathaium  accessum  fore  opinor,  ea  qua  nunc  via  in
Occidentem  tentatur.  Propinquior  enim  fiet  haec  navi-
gatio polo  Magnetis,  quam  altera,  ad  quem  propius
accedere  non  puto  tutum  esse.  Quia  vero  Magnes  alium
quam  Mundi  polum  habet,  quo  ex  omni  parte  respicit  :
quo  propius  ad  eum  acceditur,  eo  directorium  illud
Nauticum  magnetis  virtute  imbutum,  magis  a  Septentrione;
deviat,  nunc  in  Occidentem,  nunc  in  Orientem,  prout!
quis  vel  orientalior,  vel  occidentalior  est  illo  Meridiano,
qui  per  utrumque  polum  Magnetis,  &  Mundi  ducitur.
Mirabilis  est  haec  varietas,  &  quae  navigantem  plurimum

276

GERARDUS MERCATOR'S LETTER  ad.

1580.

fallere  potest,  nisi  banc  Magnetis  inconstantiam  norit,  &

ad poli  elevationem per instrumenta subinde respiciat.

Ill  hac  re  si  non  sit  instructus  D.  Artburus,  aut  ea  sit

dexteritate,  ut  deprebenso  errore  eum  invenire  &  castigare

possitj  timeo  ne  devias  faciat  ambages,  tempus  ilium  fallat,

&  semiperacto  negotio,  a  gelu  praeoccupetur  :  Aiunt  enim

Sinum  ilium  fortius  quotannis  congelari. Quod  si  con-

tingat  :  boc  quod  consultius  mibi  visum  fuit,  proximum

illi  erit  refugium,  ut  in  eo  sinu,  iisque fluminibus  quae

dixi, portum quasrat, & per Legatum aliquem, cum

magno Cbam, nomine Serenissimae Reginae notitiam,

amicitiamque contrabat  : quam opinor Maximo orbis

Imperatori  gratam,  imo  gratissimam fore  propter  remo-

tissima  commercia. Opinor  ab  ostiis  Bautisi  &  Oecbardi  Bautisus  y

fluminum maximorum, usque ad Cambalu Regiam  Oeckardus

^, .  1,  ^  -IT • /-^  •  maxima

summam  Lhami,  non  ultra  300.  milliaria  Crermanica  esse,  ^^^1^^  in

&  iter  sumendum  per  Ezinam  urbem  regni  Tangut,  quae  hunc  Simm

100.  tantum  milliariis  Germanicis  ab  ostiis  distare  videtur,  illabimtur.

&  paret  Magno  Cbam.

Valde optarem cognoscere, quam alte communiter  Postulata

exurgat  aestus  maris  in  eo  Moscoviae  portu,  quem  vestri  Mercatoris,de

° , •  Lu^g-  T-  ^  • M.  1- guibus  certtor

pro  statione  babent,  &  m  abis  versus  orientem  locis  r^,.-^  ^^^^^^
usque  ad  Tabin.  Item,  an  mare  in  boc  districtu  semper
in  unam  partem,  videlicet  Orientem,  aut  Occidentem  fluat,
an  vero  pro  ratione  aestuum  fluat,  &  refluat,  in  medio
inquam  canali,  boc  est,  an  ibi  sex  boris  in  occasum,  &
iterum  sex  in  ortum  fluat,  an  vero  semper  in  eandem
partem  :  alias  enim  speculationes  non  parum  utiles  bine
dependent.  Idem  optarem  a  D.  Frobiscero  in  occidentem
observari.  Quod  ad  Sinum  Merosro,  &  Canadam,  ac
Novam  Franciam  attinet,  ea  in  meis  tabulis  desumpta
sunt  ex  quadam  Tabula  marina,  quae  a  quodam  sacerdote
ex  earum  ditionum  Naucleri  peritissimi  Galli  descriptione
excerpta  fuit,  &  illustrissimo  Principi  Georgio  ab  Austria
episcopo  Leodiensi  oblata.  Non  dubito,  quin  quantum
ad  littorum  situm  attinet  &  poli  elevationem,  ad  veritatem
ea  quam  proxime  accedant.  Habebat  enim  ea  tabula
praeter scalam graduum latitudinis per medium sui

277

A.D.

1580.

[I. 444.]

Duke  mare
inter  Novum
Zemblam  y
Tabin  suspi-
catur.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

extensam,  aliam  praeterea  particularem  Novae  Franciae
littoribus  adjunctam,  qua  depravatae  latitudines,  occasione
erroris  Magnetis  ibi  commissae,  castigarentur.  Jacobi
Cnoyen  Buscoducensis  itinerarium  per  omnem  Asiam,
Affricam,  &  Septentrionem,  olim  mihi  Amicus  Antverpias
ab  alio  mutuo  acceptum  communicavit,  eo  usus  sum,  &
reddidi  :  post  multos  annos  eundem  ab  amico  repetii,
&  reminisci  ille  non  potuit  a  quo  accepisset.  Gulielmi
Tripolitani  &  Joannis  de  piano  Carpini  scripta  non  vidi,
tantum  excerpta  ex  illis  quasdam  in  aliis  scriptis  libris
inveni.  Abilfads  Epitome  gaudeo  verti,  utinam  cito
habeamus.

Haec  (mi  Domine)  tuis  respondenda  putavi :  si  quid
est  aliud  quod  a  me  desideres,  libentissime  tibi  communi-
cabo  :  hoc  vicissim  amanter  a  tua  humanitate  petens,  ut
quae  ex  utriusque  navigationis  cursu  observata  nancisci
poteris,  mihi  communices,  penes  me  pro  tuo  arbitrio
manebunt  omnia,  &  quaecunque  inde  coUegero,  fideliter
ad  te  perscribam,  si  forte  ad  pulcherrimum,  utilissimumque
orbi  Christiano  hoc  navigationis  institutum  aliquid  opis
&  consilii  adferre  possint.  Bene  vale,  vir  doctissime.
Duisburgi  in  Clivia, 28.  Julii 1580.

Redeunte  Arthuro,  quaeso  discas  ab  illo  quae  optavi,  &
num  alicubi  in  suo  itinere,  dulce  mare,  aut  parum  salsum
invenerit :  suspicor  enim  mare  inter  Nova  Zembla,  &
Tabin  dulce  esse.

T.  H.  paratissimus  quantus  quantus  sum,

Gerardus  Mercator.

The  same  in  English.

Sir,  I  received  your  letters  the  19.  of  June  :  it  grieved
me  much  that  upon  the  sight  of  them  the  time  being
spent,  I  could  not  give  any  convenient  instructions  :  I
wish  Arthur  Pet  had  bene  informed  before  his  departure
of  some  speciall  points.  The  voyage  to  Cathaio  by  the
East,  is  doutlesse  very  easie  and  short,  and  I  have  often-
times marveiled,  that  being  so  happily  begun,  it  hath  bene
left  of,  and  the  course  changed  into  the  West,  after  that

278

GERARDUS MERCATOR'S LETTER  ad.

1580.

more  then  halfe  of  your voiage was discovered. For  J  great  gulfe
beyond  the  Island  of  Vaigats  and  Nova  Zembla,  there  "^fy""^
foloweth  presently  a  great  Baie,  which  on  the  left  side  is  ^If^^i^f^
inclosed  with  the  mightie  promontorie  Tabin. Into  the  mighty  rivers
mids  hereof  there  fall  great  rivers,  which  passing  through  descend.
the whole countrey of  Serica, and being as I  thinke
navigable  with  great  vessels  into  ye  heart  of  the  continent,
may  be  an  easie  means  whereby  to  traffique  for  all  maner
of  merchandize, and transport them out of Cathaio,
Mangi, Mien, and other kingdoms thereabouts into
England. But  considering  with  my  selfe  that  that  navi-
gation was  not  intermitted,  but  upon  great occasion,  I
thought  that  the  Emperor  of  Russia  and  Moscovie  had
hindered  the  proceeding  thereof. If  so  be  that  with  his
grace  and  favour  a  further  navigation  may  be  made,  I
would  counsell  them  certainly  not  first  to  seeke  out  the
promontorie Tabin, but to search this  baie  and  rivers  ^-^^  ^^^^
aforesayd, and  in them to picke and chuse  out  some  J^^^^^ -^ ^
convenient port and harborough for the English  discoveries.
merchants,  from  whence  afterward  with  more  opportunitie
and  lesse  perill,  the  promontorie  Tabin  and  all  the  coast
of  Cathaio  may  bee  discovered. And  that  there  is  such  a
huge  promontorie  called  Tabin,  I  am  certainly  perswaded
not  onely  out  of  Plinie,  but  also  other  writers,  and  some
Maps  (though  somewhat  rudely  drawen  :)  and  that  the
pole  of  the  Loadstone  is  not  farre  beyond  Tabin,  I  have
learned  by  the  certaine  observations  of  the  Loadstone :
about  which pole and Tabin I thinke there are very
many  rockes,  and  very  hard  and  dangerous  sailing  :  and
yet  a  more  hard  and  difficile  passage  I  thinke  it  to  bee  this
way  which  is  now  attempted  by  the  West,  for  it  is  neerer
to  the  pole  of  the  Loadstone,  to  the  which  I  thinke  it  not
safe to approch. And because the Loadstone hath
another  pole  then  that  of  the  world,  to  the  which  from
all  parts  it  hath  a  respect,  the  neerer  you  come  unto  it,
the  more  the  needle  of  the  Compasse  doeth  varie  from
the  North,  sometimes  to  the  West,  and  sometimes  to  the
East,  according  as  a  man  is  to  the  Eastward  or  to  the

279

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

Westward  of  that  Meridian, that passeth by both the
poles  of  the  Magnes  and  the  World.

This  is  a  strange  alteration  and  very  apt  to  deceive
the  Sailer,  unlesse  hee  know  the  unconstancie  and  varia-
tion of  the  Compasse,  and  take  the  elevation  of  the  pole
somtimes  with  his  instruments.  If  master  Arthur  be
not  well  provided  in  this  behalfe,  or  of  such  dexteritie,
that  perceiving  the  errour  he  be  not  able  to  correct  the
same,  I  feare  least  in  wandering  up  and  downe  he  lose
his  time,  and  be  overtaken  with  the  ice  in  the  midst  of
the  enterprise.  For  that  gulfe,  as  they  say,  is  frozen
every  yere  very  hard.  Which  if  it  be  so,  the  best  counsel
I  could  give  for  their  best  safetie,  were  to  seeke  some
harborough  in  that  baie,  and  those  rivers  whereof  I  have
spoken,  and  by  some  Ambassador  to  make  friendship
and  acquaintance  with  the  great  Can,  in  name  of  the
Queenes  majestic,  which  I  beleeve  will  be  gratefull  to
the  mightiest  Emperour  in  the  world,  yea  most  excellent
for  the  length  of  the  traffique,  and  great  distance  of
The  mouthes  the  places.  I  thinke  from  the  mouthes  of  the  mighty
ofBautisus rivers  Bautisus  and  Oechardus to Cambalu  the  chiefest

andOecnaraus  r ,1  •  1 /-■  ,1

qoo  leames ^^^^ °^ ^^^ prmce the Lan, there  are not past 300.
from  Cam- Germane miles, and to passe by  Ezina  a  citie of  the

bak.  kingdom of Tangut, which seemeth to be but 100.

Germane miles from the mouthes  of  the sayd rivers,
and  is  subject  to  the  great  Can.

I  would  gladly  know  how  high  the  sea  doeth  flowe
commonly  in  the  port  of  Moscovia  where  your  men  do
harborow,  and  in  other  Easterly  places  unto  Tabin.  And
also  whether  the  sea  in  this  streight  do  flow  alwaies  one
way  to  the  East  or  to  the  West,  or  whether  it  do  ebbe

[I-  445-] and flow  according to the maner of  the tides in the

Upon  the middle  of  the  chanel,  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  flow  there

observations  of . .  .  . ^  ^^^  . ■'  ^  , .

the  tides  ^^^^  houres  mto  the  West,  and as  may  backe  agame  to

depend  great the East, for hereupon depend other speculations of

speculations, importance. I would wish M. Frobisher to observe

the  same  Westwards. Concerning  the  gulfe  of  Merosro

and Canada,  and  new  France  which  are  in my  mappes,

280

GERARDUS MERCATOR'S LETTER  a.d.

1580.

they  were  taken  out  of  a  certaine  sea  card  drawn  by  a
certaine  priest  out  of  the  description  of  a  Frenchman,
a  Pilot  very  skilfull  in  those  partes,  and  presented  to
the  worthy  prince  George  of  Austria,  bishop  of  Liege :
for  the  trending  of  the  coast,  and  the  elevation  of  the
pole,  I  doubt  not  but  they  are  very  neere  the  trueth  :
For  the  Charte  had,  beside  a  scale  -of  degrees  of  latitude
passing  through  the  middest  of  it,  another  particularly
annexed  to  the  coast  of  New  France,  wherewith  the  errour
of  the  latitudes  committed  by  reason  of  the  variation
of  the  compasse  might  be  corrected.  The  historie  of  the
voyage  of  Jacobus  Cnoyen  Buschoducensis  throughout
al  Asia,  Affrica,  and  the  North,  was  lent  me  in  time
past  by  a  friend  of  mine  at  Antwerpe.  After  I  had
used  it,  I  restored  it  againe :  after  many  yeeres  I  re-
quired it  againe  of  my  friend,  but  hee  had  forgotten
of  whom  hee  had  borrowed  it.  The  writings  of
Gulielmus  Tripolitanus,  and  Joannes  de  Piano  Carpini
I  never  saw :  onely  I  found  certaine  pieces  of  them  in
other  written  hand  bookes.  I  am  glad  the  Epitomie
of  Abilfada  is  translated,  I  would  we  might  have  it
shortly.

Thus  much  Sir  I  thought  good  to  answere  your  letters :
if  there  bee  any  thing  els  that  you  would  require  of  me,
I  will  most  willingly  communicate  it  with  you,  craving
this  likewise  of  your  curtesie,  that  whatsoever  observa-
tions of  both  these  voyages  shall  come  to  your  hands,
you  would  impart  them  to  me,  they  shall  all  remaine
with  mee  according  to  your  discretion  and  pleasure,  and
whatsoever  I  gather  of  them,  I  will  faithfully  signifie  unto
you  by  letters,  if  happily  they  may  yeeld  any  helpe  or
light  unto  this  most  excellent  enterprise  of  navigation,
and  most  profitable  to  our  christian  common  wealth.
Fare  you  well  most  learned  friend.  At  Duisburg  in
Cliveland,  28.  of  Julie,  the  yeere,  1580.

At  Arthur  his  returne  I  pray  you  learne  of  him  the
things  I  have  requested,  and  whether  any  where  in  his
voiage,  he found the sea fresh, or not  very salt :  for

A.D.
1580.

May.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

I suppose  the  Sea betweene Nova Zembla  and  Tabin
to  be  fresh.

Yours  wholly  to  my  power  to be  commanded,
Gerardus  Mercator.

The  discoverie  made  by  M.  Arthur  Pet,  and  M.
Charles  Jackman,  of  the  Northeast  parts,  be-
yond the  Island  of  Vaigatz,  with  two  Barkes :
the  one  called  the  George,  the  other  the
William,  in  the  yeere  1580.  Written  by
Hugh Smith.

Pon  Munday  the  30.  of  May,  we  departed
from Harwich in the afternoone, the
winde  being  at  South,  and  to  the  East-
ward. The  ebbe  being spent  we could
not double  the  pole,  and  therefore  were
constrained to put in againe untill the
next  day  in  the  morning,  being  the  last
of  May: which  day  wee  wayed  our  ankers  about  3. a
clocke  in  the  morning,  the  wind  being  West  southwest.
The  same  day  we  passed  Orfordnesse  at  an  East  Sunne,
and Stamford at a  West Sunne, and Yarmouth at a
West northwest  sunne,  and  so  to  Winterton,  where  we
did  anker al night : it  was then calme, and  the  flood
was  come.

The  next  day  being  the  first  of  June,  we  set  saile  at
3.  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  set  our  course  North,
the  wind  at  the  Southwest,  and  at  Southsouthwest.
The  10.  day  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
Norwa{  ^^^  P"^^  ^^^°  Norway  to  a  place  where  one  of  the  head-
lands of  the  sound  is  called  Bottel :  the  other  headland  is
called  Moile.  There  is  also  an  Island  called  Kene.
Heere  I  did  find  the  pole  to  be  elevated  62.  deg.  it
doeth  flowe  there  South,  and  it  hieth  7.  or  8.  foote,
not  above.

The  1 1 .  day  in  the  morning  the  winde  came to the
South  and  to  the  Southeast :  the  same day  at sixe in

June.

Kene  an

'Norway.

ARTHUR  PET  AND  CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.
the  afternoone  we  set  saile,  and bare along  the coast :
it  was  very  foule  weather  with  raine  and  fogge.

The  22.  day  the  wind  being  at  West,  we  did  hall  the  '^he  North
coast  East  northeast,  and  East. The  same  day  at  6.  in  ^^^^  doubled.
the  morning  we  did  double  the  north cape. About 3.
in  the  afternoone  wee past Skites  beare  nesse,  and  hald
along the coast East,  and East southeast,  and all the
same  night  wee  hailed  Southeast,  and  Southeast  by  East.

The  23.  day  about  3.  in  the  morning  we  came  to  Wardhouse.
Wardhouse,  the  wind  at  the  Northwest.  The  cause  of
our  comming  in  was  to  seeke  the  William,  whose  com-
panie  wee  lost  the  6.  day  of  this  moneth,  and  to  send  [I.  446.]
letters  into  England.  About  one  of  the  clock  in  the
after  noone  the  William  also  came  into  Wardhouse  to
us  in  good  safetie,  and  all  her  company  in  good  health.

The  24.  the  wind  came  to  the  East  Northeast.  This
day  the  William  was  hald  a  ground,  because  she  was
somewhat  leake,  and  to  mend  her  steerage.  This  night
about  12.  of  the  clocke  she  did  hale  a  flote  againe.

The  25.  day  the  wind  was  at  East  northeast.

The  26.  day  the  Toby  of  Harwich  departed  from
Wardhouse  for  London,  Thomas  Greene  being  master,
to  whom  we  delivered  our  letters.

The  27.  day  the  wind  was  at  South  southeast,  and
the  28.  also.

The  29.  day  about  6.  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  came
to  the  West  northwest  for  the  space  of  one  houre,  and
presently  to  the  East  againe,  and  so  was  variable  all
the  same  night.

The  30.  about  sixe  in  the  morning,  the  winde  came
to  East  southeast,  and  continued  so  all  the  same  day.

The  first  of  July  about  5.  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  /a/y.
was  at  Northnorthwest :  and  about  7.  of  the  clocke  we
set  saile  from  Wardhouse  East  and  by  South.

The  second  day  about  5.  in  the  morning,  the  wind
was  East,  and  East  southeast,  and  we  did  lie  to  the  shore-
wards.  And  about  10.  in  morning  the  wind  came  to
South  southeast,  and  we  laid  it  to  the  Eastward :  some-

283

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580,

time  we  lay  East  by  South,  sometime  East  southeast,  and
sometimes  East  by  North.  About  5.  in  the  afternoone
we  bare  with  the  William,  who  was  willing  to  goe  with
Kegor,  because  we  thought  her  to  be  out  of  trie,  and
sailed  very  ill,  where  we  might  mend  her  steerage :
whereupon  master  Pet  not  willing  to  go  into  harborough
said  to  master  Jackman,  that  if  he  thought  himselfe  not
able  to  keepe  the  sea,  he  should  doe  as  he  thought  best,
and  that  he  in  the  meane  time  would  beare  with
Willoughbies  Willoughbies  land,  for  that  it  was  a  parcel  of  our
land.  direction, and would meete him at Verove Ostrove,

or  Vaigats,  and so  we set our course East northeast,
the  winde  being  at  Southeast.

The  3.  day  the  winde  at  Southeast  we  found  the  pole

to  be  elevated  70.  degrees,  46.  minuts. The  same  night

at 12.  of  the  clocke  we  sounded,  but  had no ground,

'c^o.  leagues j^  I20.  fathoms,  being fifty  leagues from the one side

from  Kegor. ^^  ^^^  reckoning  East  northeast  from  Kegor.

The  4.  day  all  the  morning  was  calme.  This  day
we  found  the  pole  to  be  elevated  71.  degrees  38.
minutes.  This  day  at  9.  in  the  afternoone  the  wind
at  Northeast  with  a  gentle  gale,  we  hald  along  Southeast
by  East.

The  5.  day  the  wind  at  Northwest,  we  hald  East
and  East  by  South  :  this  day  we  saw  land,  but  we
could  not  make  it,  the  wind  being  Northerly,  so  that
we  could  not  come  neere  to  it.

The  6.  day  about  2.  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  at
North  northwest,  we  halde  East  southeast  with  a  faire
and  gentle  gale  :  this  day  we  met  with  ice.  About  6.
in  the  afternoone  it  became  calme  :  we  with  saile  and
oares  laide  it  to  the  Northeast  part,  hoping  that  way  to
cleare  us  of  it  :  for  that  way  we  did  see  the  head  part
of  it,  as  we  thought.  Which  done,  about  12.  of  the
clocke  at  night  we  gate  cleere  of  it.  We  did  thinke  it
to  be  ice  of  the  bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  but  it  was  not
J  sight  of ^^  "^^  found  afterwards.

perjeci  land. The  Seventh  day  we  met  with  more  yce,  at  the  East

284

ARTHUR  PET  AND  CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.

part  of  the  other  yce  :  we  halde  along  a  weather  the  yce
to  finde  some  ende  thereof  by  East  northeast.  This
day  there  appeared  more  land  North  from  us  being
perfect  land  :  the  ice  was  betweene  us  and  it,  so  that
we  could  not  come  neerer  to  it.

The  same  morning  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  wee  put  into
the  ice  to  finde  some  way  through  it,  wee  continued  in
it  all  the  same  day  and  all  the  night  following,  the
winde  by  the  North  Northwest.  Wee  were  constrained
to  goe  many  pointes  of  our  compasse,  but  we  went
most  an  Easterly  course.

The  eight  day  the  winde  at  North  northwest,  we
continued  our  course,  and  at  five  in  the  morning  we
sounded,  and  had  90.  fadoms  red  oze.  This  day  at
foure  in  the  afternoone  we  sounded  againe,  and  had
84.  fadoms  oze,  as  before.  At  sixe  in  the  after  noone
we  cleared  our  selves  of  the  ice,  and  hald  along  South-
east by  South  :  we  sounded  againe  at  10.  a  clocke  at
night,  and  had  43.  fathom  sandy  oze.

The  9.  day  at  2.  in  the  morning,  we  sounded  againe,
and  had  45.  fadoms,  then  there  appeared  a  shadow  of
land  to  us  East  Northeast,  and  so  we  ran  with  it  the
space  of  2.  houres,  and  then  perceiving  that  it  was  but
fogge,  we  hald  along  Southeast.

This day  at 2. in the afternoone  wee sounded  and  7°-  ^^S-  3-
had fiftie fadoms blacke oze. Our latitude was 70.  ^^^'
degrees  three  minutes. At  tenne  a  clocke  at  night  wee
sounded  againe,  and  had  fiftie  fadoms  blacke  oze.

The  tenth  day  the  wind  being  at  North  northwest,  we
haled  East  and  by  North,  which  course  we  set,  because  [I.  447.]
at  ten  of  the  clocke  afore  noone  wee  did  see  land,  and
then  wee  sounded  having  2>S'  fadoms  blacke  oze.  All
this  day  there  was  a  great  fogge,  so  that  wee  durst  not
beare  with  the  land  to  make  it,  and  so  we  kept  an  out-
wardly course.  This  day  at  6.  in  the  afternoone  we
espied  land,  wherewith  we  hailed,  and  then  it  grew  calme  :
we  sounded  and  had  120.  fadoms  blacke  oze  :  and  then
we  sent  our  boat  a  land to  sound  and  prove  the  land.

285

A.D.
1580.

An  Island.

The  maine
land.

Bearebay.

70.  deg.  26.
min.

The  supposed
maine  of  Nova
Zembla.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  same  night  we  came  with  our  ship  within  an
Island,  where  we  rode  all  the  same  night.  The  same
night  wee  went  into  a  bay  to  ride  neere  the  land  for
wood  and  water.

The  1 1 .  day  the  wind  came  to  the  East  southeast  :
this  day  about  a  league  from  us  to  the  Eastwards,  we
saw  a  very  faire  sound  or  river  that  past  very  farre
into  the  countrey  with  2.  or  3.  branches  with  an  Island
in  the  midst.

The  12.  of  July  the  wind  was  East  Southeast.  This
day  about  11.  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  there  came  a
great  white  beare  down  to  the  water  side,  and  tooke
the  water  of  his  own  accord,  we  chased  him  with  our
boate,  but  for  all  that  we  could  doe,  he  gote  to  land
and  escaped  from  us,  where  we  named  the  bay  Bearebay.
This  day  at  7.  in  the  after  noone  we  set  saile,  for  we
had  good  hope  that  the  winde  would  come  Westerly,
and  with  saile  and  oares  we  gate  the  sea.  All  the  night
it  was  calme  with  fogge.

The  13.  day  in  the  morning  the  wind  was  very  variable
with  fog,  and  as  it  cleared  up  wee  met  with  great  store
of  ice,  which  at  the  first  shewed  like  land.  This  ice
did  us  much  trouble,  and  the  more  because  of  the  fog,
which  continued  untill  the 14.  day, 12.  of  the  clocke.

The  14.  day  in  the  morning  we  were  so  imbayed
with  ice,  y*  we  were  constrained  to  come  out  as  we  went
in,  which  was  by  great  good  fortune,  or  rather  by  the
goodnesse  of  God,  otherwise  it  had  bene  impossible,
and  at  12.  of  the  clock  we  were  cleere  of  it,  the  wind
being  at  South  and  South  by  West.  The  same  day
we  found  the  pole  to  be  elevated  70.  degrees,  26.
minutes  :  we  lay  along  the  coast  Northwest,  thinking
it  to  be  an  Island,  but  finding  no  end  in  rowing  so  long,
we  supposed  it  to  be  the  maine  of  Nova  Zembla.  About
2.  in  the  afternoone  we  laide  it  to  the  Southward  to
double  the  ice,  which  wee  could  not  doe  upon  that
boorde,  so  that  we  cast  about  againe  and  lay  West
along under the ice. About seven in the afternoone

286

ARTHUR  PET  AND  CHARLES  JACKMAN a.d.

1580.

we  gote  about  the  greatest  part  thereot.  About  1 1 .
a  clock  at  night  we  brought  the  ice  Southeast  of  us,
and  thus  we  were  ridde  of  this  trouble  at this  time.

The  15.  day  about  3.  in  the  morning,  the  wind  was
at  South  southwest :  wee  cast  about  and  lay  to  the
Eastwards  :  the  winde  did  Wester,  so  that  wee  lay
South  southwest  with  a  flawne  sheete,  and  so  we  ranne
all  the  same  day.  About  8.  in  the  after  noone  we
sounded,  and  had  23.  fadoms  small  grey  sand.  This
night  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  sounded  againe,  and
had  29.  fadoms  sand,  as  afore.

The  16.  day  unto  3.  in  the  morning  we  hald  along
East  Southeast,  where  we  found  18.  fadoms  red  sand,
then  we  hald  along  Northeast.  In  these  soundings  wee
had  many  overfals.  This  day  at  10.  of  the  clocke  we  Many  over-
met  with  more  ice,  which  was  very  great,  so  that  we  fals.
coulde  not  tell  which  way  to  get  cleere  of  it.  Then  the
winde  came  to  the  South  Southeast,  so  that  we  lay  to
the  Northwards.  We  thought  that  way  to  cleere  our
selves  of  it,  but  that  way  we  had  more  ice.  About  6.
in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  came  to  the  East.  Then
we  lay  to  the  Southwards  that  wee  had  30.  fadoms
blacke  oze.  This  day  we  found  the  pole  to  bee  elevated
69.  deg.  40.  minutes,  and  this  night  at  12.  a  clocke  we
had  41.  fadoms  red  sand.

The  17.  day  at  3.  in  the  morning,  we  had  12.  fadoms.
At  9.  we  had  8.  and  7.  all  this  day  we  ran  South  and
South  by  West,  at  the  depth  aforesaid,  red  sand,  being
but  shallow  water.  At  eight  in  the  afternoone,  the  winde
with  a  showre  and  thunder  came  to  the  Southwest,  and
then  wee  ranne  East  Northeast.  At  12.  at  night  it
came  to  the  South  and  by  East,  and  all  this  was  in  the
bay  of  Pechora.  ^^^  ^''y  'f

The  18.  day  at  7.  in  the morning  we bare  with  the ^'^  °'^^-
headland of  the bay, where wee founde two Islands.
There  are also  overfals of  water or tides. We went
between the maine  and the Island, next to the head,
where  we  had  about  2.  fadoms  and  a  halfe. We  found

287

A.D.

1580.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

They  had  sight  the  pole  elevated  69.  deg.  13  minutes.  This  day  we
ofFaygatz.  j^^j  sight  of  Vaigatz :  the  land  of  the  maine  of  Pechora
did  trend  Southeast,  we  hald  East  southeast,  and  had
10.  fadoms  oze  all  the  same  day  untill  4.  in  the  after
noone,  then  being  calme,  we  ankered  in  10.  fadoms  all
the  same  night.

The  19.  day  at  two  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,
and  ran  South  and  South  southwest  all  the  same  day
at  8.  7.  and  6.  fadoms,  this  was  off  the  South  part  of
Vaigatz,  this  part  of  the  land  lieth  North  and  South.
This  day  at  4.  in  the  afternoone  we  found  shallow
water  sometime  4.  fadoms,  sometime  3.  and  2.  and  a
halfe,  and  one  fadome  and  a  halfe  :  there  we  ankered
and  sent  our  boate  away  to  sound,  and  all  to  leeward
we  had  4.  foote  and  3.  foote,  and  2.  foot,  there  was
not  water  for  the  boate  betweene  Vaigatz  &  the  other
side  :  finding  no  more  water,  there  was  no  other  way
[I.  448.]  but  to  goe  backe  as  we  came  in,  having  the  wind
Northwest, so  at twelve  at night  we  set  saile.

The  20.  day  we  plied  to  the  Northwards,  and  got
deepe  water  againe  6.  and  7.  fadoms.

The  21.  day  the  winde  by  the  Northwest,  we  hald
along  the  coast  North  and  North  northwest,  we  had  8.
and  9.  and 10.  fadoms.

The  22.  day  the  winde  came  to  the  Southwest,  wee
bare  along  the  coast  of  Vaygatz,  as  wee  found  it  to  lie
North  and  by  West,  and  North  northwest,  and  North.
The  winde  blewe  very  much  with  great  fogge,  we  lacking
Jn  Island  water  and  wood  bare  within  an  Island  where  wee  founde
having  store  of  prreat  Store  of  wood  and  water,  there  were  three  or
foure  goodly  sounds.  Under  two  points  there  was  a
crosse  set  up,  and  a  man  buried  at  the  foote  of  it.  Upon
the  said  crosse  Master  Pet  did  grave  his  name  with
the  date  of  our  Lorde,  and  likewise  upon  a  stone  at  the
foote  of  the  crosse,  and  so  did  I  also,  to  the  end  that
if  the  William  did  chaunce  to  come  thither,  they  might
have  knowledge  that  wee  had  beene  there.  At  eight
in  the  afternoone  the  winde  came  to  the  North  north-

wood  13  water.

ARTHUR  PET  AND  CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.

west,  we  set  saile  and  turned  out  of  the  Bay.  The
same  night  the  winde  came  to  the  West,  so  that  wee
lay  North  along  the  land.

The  23.  day  at  five  in  the  morning,  the  wind  came
to  the  Southwest,  a  Sea  boord  we  sawe  a  great  number
of  faire  Islands,  to  the  number  of  sixe  :  a  sea  boord  6._/a/V^
of  these  Islands,  there  are  many  great  overfals,  as  great  "^'^  ^'
streames  or  tides  :  we  halde  Northeast  and  East  north-
east as  the  lande  did  trend.  At  eight  aforenoone  the
winde  came  to  the  Southeast  with  very  much  wind,
raine  and  fogge,  and  very  great  store  of  ice  a  sea
boorde  :  so  we  lay  to  the  Southwest  to  attaine  to  one
of  the  Islands  to  harbour  us  if  the  weather  did  so
extremely  continue,  and  to  take  in  our  boate,  thinking
it  meete  so  to  doe,  and  not  to  towe  her  in  such  weather.
About  twelve  of  the  clocke  it  became  very  calme  upon
the  sudden,  and  came  up  to  the  West  Northwest,  and
Northwest  by  West,  and  then  we  tooke  in  our  boate,  and
this  done,  there  came  downe  so  much  winde,  as  we  were
not  able  to  steere  afore  it,  with  corse  and  bonnets  of
each,  we  hald  South  with  the  land,  for  so  the  land  did
trend.  This  day  all  the  afternoone  we  sailed  under  a
great  land  of  ice,  we  sailed  betweene  the  land  and  it,
being  not  able  to  crosse  it.  About  twelve  at  night  we
found  the  ice  to  stretch  into  the  land,  that  we  could
not  get  cleare  to  the  Eastward,  so  we  laide  it  to  the
shore,  and  there  we  founde  it  cleare  hard  aboord  the
shore,  and  we  found  also  a  very  faire  Island  which
makes  a  very  good  harbour,  and  within  are  12.  fadoms.

This Island is to ye Eastwards  of  Vaigatz,  4  or 5.  An  Island  to
leagues. This  land  of  the  maine  doth  trend  Southeast,  *^^  ^^^^ ''f
and Southeast by East. It is a very faire coast, and r  leameT.
even  and  plaine,  and  not  full  of  mountaines  nor  rocks  :
you  have  but  shallow  water  of  6.  or  7.  fadoms,  about
a league from the shore,  all this morning  we hailed
East southeast. This day we found the pole to be
elevated 69.  degrees 14.  minutes. About 12.  a  clocke
we  were  constrained  to  put  into  the  ice  to  seeke  some

HI  280  T

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

way  to  get  to  the  Northwards  of  it,  hoping  to  have
some  cleare  passage  that  way,  but  there  was  nothing
but  whole  ice.  About  nine  in  the  afternoone  we  had
sight  of  the  WiUiam,  and  when  wee  sawe  her,  there  was
a  great  land  of  ice  betweene  her  and  us,  so  that  we  could
not  come  one  to  the  other,  but  as  we  came  neere  to
her,  we  sounded  our  trumpet  and  shot  off  two  muskets,
and  she  put  out  her  flag  upon  her  foretopmaste  in  token
that  she  did  see  us  :  all  this  time  wee  did  shorten  our
sailes,  and  went  with  our  foresaile  &  mainetopsaile,
seeking  the  best  way  through  the  broken  ice,  she
making  away  the  best  that  she  could  to  follow  us,  we
put  out  our  flagge  to  answere  her  again  with  the  like  :
thus  wee  continued  all  the  afternoone  till  about  12.  a
clocke  at  night,  and  then  we  moared  our  ship  to  a
piece  of  ice  to  tarie  for  the  William.
The  WiUiam  The  25.  day  about  five  in  the  morning,  the  William
and  the  came to us, being both glad of  our meeting. The

°'-^t  William had her sterne post broken, that the rudder

a^aine.  tii  ^  i-ii

did  hang  clean  besides  the  sterne,  so  that  she  could  in
no  wise  port  her  helme,  with  all  hands  she  did  lighten
her  sterne,  and  trimme  her  head,  and  when  we  had
brought  her  forward  all  that  we  could,  wee  brought  a
cable  under  her  sterne,  and  with  our  capstaine  did  wind
up  her  sterne,  and  so  we  made  it  as  wel  as  the  place
would  give  us  leave,  and  in  the  ende  wee  brought  her
to  steere  againe.  Wee  acknowledge  this  our  meeting  to
be  a  great  benefite  of  God  for  our  mutuall  comfort,
and  so  gave  his  majestie  thanks  for  it.  All  the  night
after  we  tooke  our  rest  being  made  fast  upon  a  piece
of  ice  :  the  winde  was  at  West  Northwest,  but  wee  were
so  inclosed  with  ice  that  we  coulde  not  tell  which  way
to  passe.  Windes  wee  have  had  at  will,  but  ice  and
fogge  too  much  against  our  willes,  if  it  had  pleased  the
Lord  God  otherwise.

The  26.  day  the  wind  was  at  West  Northwest:  we
set  saile  to  the  Northwardes,  to  seeke  if  we  could  finde
any  way  cleare  to  passe  to  the  Eastward,  but  the  further

290

againe.

ARTHUR  PET  AND CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.

we  went  that  way,  the  more  and  thicker  was  the  ice,
so  that  wee  coulde  goe  no  further.  So  about  foure  in
the  afternoon  we  were  constrained  to  moare  upon  another
piece  of  ice.  I  thinke  we  sailed  in  all  a  league  this  day,
here  we  had  15.  fadoms  oze,  and  this  oze  is  all  the
chanell  over.  All  the  same  day  after  foure  of  the  clocke,  [I.  449.]
and  all  the  night  we  tarried  there,  being  without  all
good  hope,  but  rather  in  despaire.  This  day  Master
Jugman  did  see  land  East  Northeast  from  us,  as  he
did  thinke,  whether  it  were  land  or  no,  I  cannot  tell
well,  but  it  was  very  like  land,  but  the  fogges  have
many  times  deceived  us.

The  27.  day  the  winde  was  at  Northwest.  This  day
at  nine  in  the  morning  we  set  saile  to  seeke  the  shore.
Further  into  the  ice  we  could  not  goe,  and  at  seven
in  the  afternoone  we  moared  to  a  piece  of  ice,  and  the
William  with  us,  here  we  had  14.  fathoms  oze.  At
three  in  the  afternoone  we  warpt  from  one  ice  to  another.
At  nine  in  the  afternoone  we  moared  againe  to  a  piece
of  ice  untill  the  next  day.  All  this  night  it  did  snow
with  much  wind,  being  at  West  Northwest,  and  at
Northwest,  and  by  West.

The  28.  day  the  winde  came  to  the  Southwest,  and
Southsouthwest  :  this  day  was  a  very  faire  day.  At  one
in  the  afternoone  master  Pet  and  master  Jackman  did
conferre  together  what  was  best  to  be  done  considering
that  the  windes  were  good  for  us,  and  we  not  able  to
passe  for  ice,  they  did  agree  to  seeke  to  the  land  againe,
and  so  to  Vaygatz,  and  there  to  conferre  further.  At  Their  retume.
3.  in  the  afternoone  we  did  warpe  from  one  piece  of
ice  to  another  to  get  from  them  if  it  were  possible  :
here  were  pieces  of  ice  so  great,  that  we  could  not  see
beyond  them  out  of  the  toppe.  Thus  we  warped  until
9.  in  the  afternoone,  and  then  we  moared  both  our
shippes  to  a  great  and  high  piece  of  ice,  untill  the  next
morning.

The  nine  and  twentie  day  the  winde  came  to  the
Southwest,  wee  set  saile  at  five  in  the  morning  to  plie

291

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

The  currant  into  the  shore  if  it  were  possible,  we  made  many  turnes
runneth  with  ^mong  the  ice  to  small  purpose,  for  with  the  winde
doeth  the  currant  runne.  This  day  by  misfortune  a
piece  of  ice  stroke  of  our  greepe  afore  at  two  afternoone,
yet  for  all  this  we  turned  to  doe  our  best.  The  William
beeing  incumbered  with  ice,  and  perceiving  that  shee  did
litle  good,  tooke  in  all  her  sailes,  and  made  her  selfe
fast  to  a  piece  of  ice,  and  about  foure  in  the  afternoone
she  set  saile  to  foUowe  us.  We  were  afraide  that  shee
had  taken  some  hurt,  but  she  was  well.  At  seven  afore
noone  we  tooke  in  all  our  sailes  to  tarie  for  the  William,
and  made  our  shippe  fast  to  a  piece  of  ice  :  the  William
before  she  came  to  us  tooke  in  all  her  sailes,  and  moared
to  another  piece  of  ice,  and  thus  we  continued  untill
the  next  morning.

The  30.  day  the  winde  at  Southeast,  and  by  South,
and  at  9.  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,  and  sooner  would
have  done  if  ye  William  had  bene  by  us,  but  we  did
tary  for  her  to  know  whether  all  was  well  with  her  :
But  as  soone  as  we  made  saile,  she  did  the  like.  All
this  day  wee  did  our  best  to  seeke  our  way  as  the  ice
would  give  us  leave,  sometime  we  lay  South,  sometim.e
West,  and  sometime  East,  and  thus  we  continued  untill
eight  at  night,  and  then  being  calme,  wee  made  our
ship  fast  to  a  piece  of  ice,  and  went  to  supper.  In
the  meane  time  the  wind  with  a  faire  gentle  gale  came
up  to  the  East,  and  East  and  by  South,  but  there  came
downe  a  showre  of  raine  with  it,  which  continued  the
space  of  one  houre  :  Which  being  done,  it  became  calme
againe,  so  that  wee  could  doe  no  good  all  that  night,
but  tooke  our  rest  untill  the  next  day.

The  3 1 .  the  winde  being  at  Southwest,  we  set  saile
to  turne  to  windeward  at  three  a  clock  in  the  morning.
In  this  turning  we  did  litle  good,  for  the  currant  would
not  give  us  leave.  For  as  the  winde  is,  so  is  the  currant.
We  did  our  best  untill  ten  of  the  clocke,  and  then  ■,
perceiving  that  we  did  no  good,  and  being  inclosed  ||
with ice, wee made our ships fast to a piece of  ice  :

292

i

[

ARTHUR  PET  AND CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.
All this day  the William lay still, and did as much
good  as  we  that  did  labour  all  the  forenoone. Thus  we
took  our  rest  all  the  same  day.

In  the  afternoone  we  set  saile,  the  winde  being  at
South  &  by  East,  we  lay  to  the  Westwards,  as  South-
west and  Southwest  and  by  South,  and  sometime  to
the  Westward  as  wee  might.  Thus  we  continued  until
9.  at  night,  and  then  we  could  go  no  further  for  ice  :
so  we  with  the  William  were  constrained  to  make  our
ship  fast  to  a  piece  of  ice  al  the  same  night.  This
day  we  found  the  pole  elevated  69.  degrees  20.  minutes,
and  here  we  had 17.  fathoms  oze.

The first day of  August was verie calme in the  August.
morning,  the  winde  beeing  at  West  Northwest. About
twelve  the  winde  came  to  the  West,  and  continued  so
all  the  same  night  with  great  fogge.

The  second  day  the  winde  was  at  Southwest  all  day
with  rayne  and  fogge.  All  this  day  wee  were  inclosed
with  ice,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  lye  still.  Here  we
had  one  and  twentie  fathoms  oze.  At  sixe  in  the
afternoone  the  winde  was  at  West  with  very  much
foule  weather,  and  so  continued  all  the  same  night.

The  third  day  the  winde  was  at  West,  and  West  by
North,  and  West  Northwest,  this  day  we  lay  still  inclosed
with  yce,  the  weather  beeing  darke  with  fogge  :  thus
abiding  the  Lords  leasure,  we  continued  with  patience.
And  sounding  we  found  21.  fathoms.

The fourth day we lay still inclosed with ice, the
winde  being  at  West  Northwest,  this  ice  did  every  day  [1.  450.]
increase upon us, yet putting our trust in God, we
hoped  to  be  delivered  out  of  it  in  good  time.

The  iift  day  all  the  morning  it  rained  with  very
much  wind,  being  at  South  Southeast  :  about  3.  in  the
after  noone  we  set  sayle,  and  presently  it  became  calme
for  the  space  of  one  houre,  then  the  wind  came  to  the
North  Northeast,  and  here  we  had  33.  fathoms  :  thus
we  made  way  among  the  yce  Southwest,  and  South-
southwest, & West, as we might finde our way for

293

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

A  whole  land  the space of  3. houres  : then we met with a whole

"f'S'^^-  land  of  yce, so  that  we  could  go  no  further  :  here  we

moared  our  ship  to  tarie  for  a  further  opening. Here

we  found  45.  fathoms  oze,  and  all  the  night  was  very

darke  with  fogge.

The  sixt  day  having  no  opening  of  the  yce  wee  lay
still,  the  winde  being  at  West,  and  West  by  South  :
here  we  had  sixty  three  fathoms  oze  :  all  the  same  night
the  winde  was  at  the  West  Northwest.

The  7.  day  the  winde  was  at  West,  and  West  and
by  North  all  day.  And  all  this  day  we  lay  still  being
inclosed  with  yce,  that  we  could  not  stirre,  labouring
onely  to  defend  the  yce  as  it  came  upon  us.  Here
we  had  68.  fathoms  oze.

The  8.  day  was  very  faire  &  calme  but  foggy. This

day towards night there  was litle winde  by  the South

Southwest  : then the yce began a litle to open, and

here  we  had  70.  fathoms  oze  :  all  the  night  was  io^^j.

The 9. day the winde was at Northwest, and by

West, all the afternoone we lay still because of  the

yce, which did still inclose us. This day we found

70.  degr.  4. the pole  elevated seventy  degrees, 4. minutes,  we  had

^'"^-  ^'X)- fathoms oze  : this night was a very fayre night.

Frost.  but  it  freezed  :  in  the  morning  we  had  much  adoe to

goe through the same  : and  we  were  in  doubt  that  if

it should have freezed so much the night following,

Theappearhig  we should hardly have passed out of  it. This night

of  the  starres, ^^-^^  ^^s  ^^^  gtar  that  appeared  to  us.

Winter.  T\\&  tenth  day  the  winde  was  at  East  Northeast  with

a  very  small  gale. Wee  with  saile  and  oares  made  way

through the yce  : about five in the morning  we set

saile  : sometime wee laye Southwest, and sometime

South, and sometime West, as wee might best finde

the  way. About  three  in  the  afternoone  the  gale  began

to fresh  : about sixe in the afternoone the winde was

at Northeast with fogge. Here we had eighty eight

Much  snow, fathoms  : we bare saile all the same night, and it

snowed  very  much.

294

ARTHUR  PET  AND CHARLES  JACKMAN a.d.

1580.

The  eleventh  day  we  were  much  troubled  with  yce,
and  by  great  force  we  made  our  way  through  it,  which
we  thought  a  thing  impossible  :  but  extremity  doth
cause  men  to  doe  much,  and  in  the  weakenesse  of
man  Gods  strength  most  appeareth.  This  day  we  had
95.  fathoms.  At  three  in  the  afternoone  the  winde
came  to  the  Southwest,  we  were'  forced  to  make  our
shippe  fast  to  a  piece  of  yce,  for  we  were  inclosed
with  it,  and  taried  the  Lordes  leasure.  This  night  we
had  97.  fathoms.

The  12.  day  the  wind  was  at  the  Southeast  not  very
much  but  in  a  maner  calme  :  at  a  1 1 .  of  the  clocke
the  winde  came  to  the  West  Southwest  :  all  the  day
was  very  darke  with  snowe  and  fogge.  At  6.  in  the
afternoone  we  set  saile  the  winde  being  at  the  North
Northeast :  all  this  night  we  bare  away  Southwest,  and
Southsouthwest,  as  well  and  as  neere  as  the  yce  would
give  us  leave  :  all  this  night  we  found  the  yce  some-
what favourable  to  us,  more  then  it  was  before,  wherupon
we  stood  in  good  hope  to  get  out  of  it.

The  13.  day  at  7.  in  the  morning,  the  winde  was  at
the  Northeast,  and  Northeast  and  by  East  :  all  this  day  we
were  much  troubled  with  the  yce,  for  with  a  blow  against
a  piece  of  yce  we  brake  the  stocke  of  our  ancre,  and
many  other  great  blowes  we  had  against  the  yce,  that
it  was  marveilous  that  the  ship  was  able  to  abide  them  :
the  side  of  our  boate  was  broken  with  our  ship  which
did  recule  backe,  the  boate  being  betwixt  a  great  piece
of  yce,  and  the  ship,  and  it  perished  the  head  of  our
rudder.  This  day  was  a  very  hard  day  with  us  :  at
night  we  found  much  broken  yce,  and  all  this  night  it
blewe  very  much  winde,  so  that  we  lay  in  drift  with
the  yce,  &  our  drift  was  South,  for  the  winde  was  at
North  all  this  night,  and  we  had  great  store  of  snowe.  ^''^^^  ^^°^'^  "f

The 14. day in  the morning  wee made our shippe  ^^°'^^-
fast to a piece of  yce, and let  her drive  with it. In
the  meane  time  wee  mended  our  boate  and  our  steerage  :
all this day the  winde continued Northerly, and here

295

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

wee  had  threescore  and  two  fathoms.  Thus  we  lay  a
drift  all  the  same  night.

The 15.  day  we  set  saile  at  6.  in the morning, the
winde  being  at  Northeast. At  9.  aforenoon  we  entred
into  a  cleare Sea  without  yce, whereof  wee were most
glad, and not  without  great  cause, and  gave God the
praise. We  had  19.  fathoms  water,  and  ranne  in  South-
west all the morning untill  we came to 14. fathoms,
and  thence  we  hailed  West,  til  we  came  to  10.  fathoms,
and then we  went Northwest, for so the  land doeth
trend. At 12. of the clocke we had sight of the
[I.  451.] land, which wee might have had sooner, but it was
darke  and foggie  all  the  same  day  :  for  when  wee  had
sight  of  the  lande,  wee  were  not  passing  three  leagues
69^^^^^J49  from  it. This  day  we  had  the  pole  elevated  69  degrees
minutes.  ^^ minutes. All day we ran along  the coast in ten

and nine fadoms, pepered sand. It is a  very goodly
coast  and a  bolde, and faire soundings off  it,  without
sandes  or  rocks.
T/iey  are  The 1 6 day the winde was at East  : this day we

thwart  against  ^^^.^  troubled  againe  with  ice,  but  we  made  great  shift
with  it  :  for  we  gotte  betweene  the  shoare  and  it.  This
day  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  were  thwart  of  the
Southeast  part  of  Vaigats,  all  along  which  part  there
was  great  store  of  yce,  so  that  we  stood  in  doubt  of
passage,  yet  by  much  adoe  we  got  betwixt  the  shoare
and  it  :  about  6  in  the  afternoone  was  found  a  great
white  beare  upon  a  piece  of  ice  :  all  this  day  in  the
afternoone  it  was  darke  with  fogge.  And  all  the  night
we  haled  North  and  North  by  West,  and  sometime
North  and  by  East,  for  so  doth  the  land  trend.
Sands.  The 17 day  in  the  morning  we haled  West, for  so

doth  the  land  lie.  The  wind  was  at  Southeast,  and  it
was  very  darke  with  fogge,  and  in  running  along  the
shoare  we  fell  a  ground,  but  God  be  praised  without
hurt,  for  wee  came  presently  off  againe.  The  William
came  to  an  anker  to  stay  for  us,  and  sent  some  of
their men to help us, but before they  came we  were

296

ARTHUR  PET  AND  CHARLES  JACKMAN a.d.

1580.

under  saile,  and  as  we  came  to  the  William  we  did
stowe  our  boates,  and  made  saile,  we  went  within
some  of  the  Islands,  and  haled  Westsouthwest.  The  Islands.

About  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  we  set
our  course  Southwest  and  by  South  :  so  we  ranne
Southwest  untill  twelve  at  night,  the  wind  came  to  the
North  northeast,  and  then  we  haled  West.

The  18  day  at  6  in  the  morning  we  had  16  fadoms
red  sand  :  at  6  in  the  morning  13  fadoms.  At  10,  14
fadoms,  and  we  haled  Westnorthwest.  At  12  a  clocke
the  winde  came  to  the  East,  and  East  by  South,  we
haled  West  and  by  North  all  the  same  day  and  night.
At  6  in  the  afternoone  we  had 17  fadoms  red  sand.

The  19  day  the  wind  was  at  Eastnortheast  :  at  6  in
the  morning  wee  had  1 9  fathoms  red  sand :  at  12  of
the  clocke  the  wind  blew  North  and  North  by  East,
we  had  17  fadoms  of  water,  at  3 in  the  afternoone 15.

The  20  day  the  wind  was  at  Northeast,  and  North-
northeast  :  at  7  in  the  morning  we  had  30  fadomes
blacke  oze  :  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  were  upon  the
suddaine  in  shoale  water,  among  great  sands,  and  could
find  no  way  out.  By  sounding  and  seeking  about,  we
came  aground,  and  so  did  the  William,  but  we  had  no
hurt,  for  the  wind  was  off  the  shoare,  and  the  same
night  it  was  calme  :  all  night  we  did  our  best,  but  we
could  not  have  her  aflote.  These  shoales  doe  lie  off  ^hoales  off
Colgoyeve  :  it  is  very  flat  a  great  way  off,  and  it  doth  ^°k°y^^^'
not  high  above  2  or  3  foote  water  :  it  floweth  North-
east, and  Southwest.

The  21  day  the  wind  was  at  Southwest,  and  being
very  faire  weather  we  did  lighten  our  ships  as  much
as  was  possible  for  us  to  doe,  by  reason  of  the  place.
The  same  high  water,  by  the  helpe  of  God,  we  got
both  a  floate,  and  the  wind  being  at  the  Southwest
did  help  us,  for  it  caused  it  to  flow  the  more  water.

This  day  we  found  the  pole  to  be  elevated  68
degrees  40  min.  In  the  afternoone  we  both  set  saile
to seeke way to get out of  these sands, our boate a

297

A.D.

1580.

The'j  lost  the
William  here.

The  land  of
Hug}-y.

The  bay  of
Moricovets.

[I.  452.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

head  sounding,  having  6,  7,  and  8  fadomes  all  within
the  sand  which  was  without  us.  We  bare  to  the  South-
ward, and  the  William  bare  more  to  the  Eastwards,  and
night  being  at  hand  the  wind  came  to  the  Southeast,
whereupon  we  layd  it  to  the  Southwards,  lying  South-
west, and  South  and  by  West,  and  ran  to  19,  and  12  and
14  fadoms,  and  presently  we  had  but  sixe  fadoms,  which
was  off  the  sands  head,  which  we  were  a  ground  upon
the  day  before.  Then  we  cast  about  to  the  Eastwards
for  deepe  water,  which  we  presently  had,  as  10,  15,  and
20  and  so  to  23 fadoms.

The  22  day  at  8  in  the  morning,  we  cast  about
to  the  Southward,  and  this  day  in  the  morning  we  saw
the  William  under  our  lee  as  far  as  we  could  see  her,  and
with  a  great  fogge  we  lost  the  sight  of  her,  and  since  we
have  not  seene  her.  Thus  we  ranne  till  we  came  to
thirtie  fadomes  blacke  oze,  which  we  had  at  twelve  of
the  clocke,  and  at  three  in  the  afternoone  we  had  twenty
and  three  fadoms,  and  then  we  ranne  Westnorthwest,
and  West  by  North,  all  the  same  night  following.

The  23  day  we  had  at  6  in  the  morning  27  fadoms,
at  8  a  clocke  28  fadoms:  at  9  the  winde  being  at  East-
southeast,  we  haled  Westnorthwest :  this  day  we  had
sight  of  the  land  of  Hugri  side.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke
we  had  thirty  two  fadoms  sand.  This  day  we  ranne  West
and  by  North,  and  came  to  five  fadoms  off  the  bay  of
Morzovets.  Then  we  layd  it  to  the  Northwards,  so  that
we  lay  Northnortheast  off.  The  wind  after  came  to  the
North,  and  North  by  East,  and  we  lay  East  and  East  by
North,  then  we  layd  it  to  the  Westward  againe :  and
thus  we  lay  till  we  came  to  fortie  fadoms,  and  then  we
went  Northwest  till  wee  came  to  fourteene  fadoms,  and
so  to  tenne  fadoms.  Then  we  cast  about  to  the  East-
wards and  lay  East,  and  East  by  North  all  the  same
night.

The  24  day  at  8  in  the  morning  we  had  32  fadoms.
We  ran  Northwest  till  we  came  to  1 1  fadoms,  then  we
lay  to the Northwards till 12 at night,  and then  we

ARTHUR  PET  AND CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.

came  to  forty  fadoms,  then the  wind at Northeast  we
lay  to  the  Westwards,  and  haled  Northwest  along.

The  25  at  4  in  the  morning  we  had  37  fadoms,  wee
ranne  Northwest,  the  winde  at  Northnortheast  very  much.

The  26  day  we  ran  with  the  same  winde,  and  found
the  pole  to  be  elevated  70  deg.  40  min.

The  27  at  7  in  the  morning  We  saw  land,  which  we
made  to  be  Kegor,  then  we  haled  Northwest,  and  North
by  West  to  double  the  North  Cape.

The  28  day  at  3  in  the  morning  we  ran  Northwest,
and  so  all  day.  At  night  the  wind  came  to  the  South-
west, and  we  ran  Northwest  all  that  night.

The  29  day  we  put  into  a  sound  called  Tane,  and  the  The  towne  of
towne  is  called  Hungon :  we  came  to  an  ancre  at 5 in  Hungon.
the afternoone, at 25 fadoms very faire sand. This
sound is  very  large and good,  and the same night  we
got  water  aboord.

The  30  day  in  the  morning  the  winde  at  Northeast,
and  but  litle,  we  set  saile,  and  with  our  boate  on  head  we
got  the  sea  about  1 2  of  the  clocke :  the  wind  with  a  faire
gale  came  to  the  East  Southeast,  and  all  this  day  and
night  we  ran  Westnorthwest.

The  31  day  at  12  of  the  clocke  we  doubled  the  North They  double
Cape,  the  wind  being at Eastsoutheast,  we haled  West  ^^  ^orth _  ^
all  the  same day,  and at night  we ran  Westsouthwest.  j.gf^j.„g

The  I  day  of  September  the  wind  was  at  Northeast
with  very  much  fogge :  all  this  day  we  ran  Westsouth-
west :  at  2 in  the  afternoone  the  wind  came  North.

The  second  day  at  3  in  the  morning  we  doubled
Fowlnesse,  &  the  wind  was  this  day  variable  at  all  parts
of  the  Compasse.  In  the  afternoone  we  made  but  litle
way :  at  6  a  clocke  the  winde  came  to  the  Southwest,
and  we  went  Northwest.  At  9  in  the  night  there  came
downe  so  much  winde  by  the  Westsouthwest,  that  we
were  faine  to  lay  it  a  hull,  we  haled  it  to  Northwards
for  the  space  of  2  houres,  and  then  we  layd  her  head
to  the  Southwards,  and  at  the  breake  of  day  we  saw  land,
which is very  high, and is called  by the men of  the

299

Lowfoote.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.
Fowlenesse. countrey  Foulenesse. It is  within  ful  of  small  Islands,
and  without  full  of  rocks  very  farre  out,  and  within  the
rockes  you  have  fayre  sand  at  20  fadoms.

The  3  day  in  the  morning  we  bare  with  the  sound
aforesaid :  Within  it  is  but  shoale  water,  4  5  and  3
fadoms,  sandie  ground,  the  land  is  very  high,  and  the
Church  that  is  seene  is  called  Helike  Kirke.  It  doeth
high  here  not  above  8 or  9  foote.

The  1 2  day  at  3  in  the  afternoone,  we  put  into  a  sound
by  Lowfoote,  where  it  doeth  flowe  Southwest,  and  by
South,  and  doth  high  7  or  8 foote  water.

The  13  day  much  wind  at  West:  we  had  a  ledge
of  rocks  in  the  wind  of  us,  but  the  road  was  reasonable
good  for  all  Southerly  and  Westerly  winds.  We  had
the  maine  land  in  the  winde  of  us :  this  day  was  stormie
with  raine.

The  23  day  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone
The  sound  of  we  put  into  Norway,  into  a  sound  called  Romesal,  where
it  floweth  Southsoutheast,  and  doth  high  8  foote  water :
this  place  is  full  of  low  Islands,  and  many  good  sounds
without  the  high  mountaine  land.  Here  is  great  store
of  wood  growing,  as  firre,  birch,  oke,  and  hasell :  all  this
night  the  wind  was  at  the  South,  very  much  winde,
with  raine  and  fogge.

The  28  day  in  the  morning  the  wind  being  at  East-
northeast  we  set  saile  at  8  of  the  clocke,  and  haled  out
of  the  bay  Westsouthwest,  and  Southwest,  having  a
goodly  gale  untill  one  of  the  clocke,  and  then  the  wind
came  to  Southeast,  and  to  the  South  with  raine  and
fogge,  and  very  much  winde :  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  we
came  into  a  very  good  rode,  where  we  did  ride  all  the
same  night  in  good  safetie.

The  29  day  we  put  into  a  good  sound,  the  wind  by
the  Southwest :  at  three  in  the  afternoone  there  came
downe  very  much  wind  by  the  South,  and  all  night  with
vehement  blastes,  and  raine.

The  30  day  all  day  the  wind  was  at  Westsouthwest.
And  in  this  sound  the  pole  is  elevated  6^  deg.  10  min.

300

Romesal.

ARTHUR  PET  AND CHARLES  JACKMAN ad.

1580.

The  first  day  of  October  the  winde  was  at  South  with October.
very  much  winde,  and  vehement  blastes.

The  7  day  we  set  saile :  for  from  the  first  of  this
moneth  untill  this  7  day,  we  had  very  foule  weather,
but  specially  the  fourth  day  when  the  wind  was  so  great,
that  our  cables  brake  with  the  very  storme,  and  I  do
not  thinke  that  it  is  possible  that  any  more  wind  then
that  was  should  blow:  for  after  the  breaking  of  our  [I.  453.]
cable,  we  did  drive  a  league,  before  our  ankers  would
take  any  hold :  but  God  be  thanked  the  storme  began
to  slacke,  otherwise  we  had  bene  in  ill  case.

The  7.  day  at  night  we  came  to  an  anker  until  the  next
day,  which  was  the  8  day  of  the  moneth,  when  as  the
winde  grew  great  againe,  with  raine,  whereupon  we  set
saile  and  returned  into  the  sound  againe :  and  at  our  first
comming  to  an  anker,  presently  there  blew  so  much
winde,  that  although  our  best  anker  was  out,  yet  the
extremitie  of  the  storm  drove  us  upon  a  ledge  of  rocks,
and  did  bruse  our  ship  in  such  sort,  that  we  were  con-
strained to  lighten  her  to  save  her,  and  by  this  meanes
(by  the  helpe  of  God)  we  got  off  our  ship  and  stopped
our  leakes,  and  moared  her  in  good  safetie  abiding  for
a  wind.  We  rid  from  this  day  by  reason  of  contrary
winds,  with  fogge  and  raine  untill  the  24  day,  which  day
in  the  morning  the  wind  came  to  the  Northeast,  and  at  8
of  the  clocke  we  set  saile.  This  sound  is  called  Moore  Moore  sound.
sound,  where  it  higheth  about  5  foote  water,  &  floweth
Southsoutheast.  The  next  day  being  the  25  day  wee  put
into  a  sound  which  is  called  Ultar  sound,  where  was  a
ship  of  the  king  of  Denmark  put  into  another  sound
there  by,  being  2  leagues  to  the  southwards  of  us,  that
came  out  of  Island :  ye  wind  was  contrary  for  us  at
Southsouthwest.

The  12  day  of  November  we  set  saile  the  wind  being
at  the  East  Southeast,  and  past  through  the  sound  where
the  kings  ship  did  lie :  which  sound  is  called  Sloure
sound.  But  as  we  did  open  the  sound,  we  found  the
wind  at  the  Southwest,  so  that  we  could  doe  no  good,  so

301

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580.

that  we  moared  our  ship  betweene  2.  Islands  until  the
18  day,  and  then  the  weather  being  faire  and  calme,
we  set  saile,  &  went  to  sea  hoping  to  find  a  faire  wind,
but  in  the  sea  we  found  the  wind  at  the  Southwest,  and
Southsouthwest,  so  that  we  were  constrained  to  returne
into  the  same  sound.

The  next  day  being  the  19  the  kings  ship  came  out
also,  because  she  saw  us  put  to  sea,  &  came  as  farre  out
as  we,  and  moared  where  we  did  moare  afore :  And  at
our  returne  backe  againe,  we  moared  our  ship  in  an  utter
sound  called  Scorpe  sound,  because  the  kings  ship  was
without  victuals,  and  we  did  not  greatly  desire  her  com-
pany, although  they  desired  ours.  In  this  sound  the
pole  is  elevated  62  deg.  47  min.  Thus  we  lay  stil  for  a
wind  untill  the  i  of  December,  which  day  we  set  saile  at
6  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  &  at  4  in  the  afternoone  we
laid  it  to  the  inwards.

The  9  day  we  had  sight  of  the  coast  of  Scotland  which
was  Buquhamnesse.

The 10  day  we  were  open  off  the  Frith.

The  1 1  day  at  4  in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  of
Barwike  :  at  6  we  were  thwart  of  Bamburch  :  the  same
day  at  10  at  night  we  were  shot  as  farre  as  Hollyfoote.
Then  the  wind  came  to  the  South  and  Southeast,  so  that
we  lay  still  untill  the  next  day  in  the  morning,  and  then  we
were  constrained  to  put  with  Tinmouth.  The  same  day
at  night  wee  haled  aground  to  stoppe  a  leake,  which  we
found  to  be  in  the  skarfe  afore.  The  wind  continued  by
the  Southeast  &  Southsoutheast  untill  the  20  day,  and
then  we  set  saile  about  12  at  night,  bearing  along  the
coast.

The  22  day  by  reason  of  a  Southeast  wind,  we  thought
we  should  have  bene  put  into  Humber,  but  the  wind
came  to  the  West,  so  that  we  haled  Southeast  :  and  at  3
in  the  afternoone  we  haled  a  sea  boord  the  sands,  and  had
shoale  water  off  Lymery  and  Owry,  and  were  in  4
fadomes  off  them.  The  next  day  we  haled  as  we  might
to  sease  Orfordnesse.

302

INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET  ad.

1582.

The  24  day  we  came  thwart  of  the  Nase,  about  8  in
the  morning.

The  25  day  being  the  Nativity  of  Christ,  we  came  to
an  anker  betweene  Oldhaven,  and  Tilberie  hope.  The
same  day  we  turned  as  high  as  Porshet.

The  26  day  we  turned  as  high  as  RatcHffe,  and  praised
God  for  our  safe  returne. And  thus  I  ende, 1580.

The  William  with  Charles  Jackman  arrived  at  a  port  in
Norway  betweene  Tronden  and  Rostock  in  October  1580.
and  there  did  winter :  And  from  thence  departed  againe
in  Februarie  following,  and  went  in  company  of  a  ship  of
the  King  of  Denmarke  toward  Island :  and  since  that  time
he  was  never  heard  of.

Instructions  made  by  the  company  of  English
merchants  for  discovery  of  new  trades,  unto
Richard  Gibs,  William  Biggat,  John  Back-
house, William  Freeman,  John  Haly,  and
James  Woodcock,  &c.  masters  of  the  9  ships,
and  one  barke  that  v^e  had  freighted  for  a
voiage  with  them  to  be  made  (by  the  grace
of  God)  from  hence  to  S.  Nicholas  in  Russia,
and  backe  againe  :  which  ships  being  now  in  the
river  of  Thames  are  presently  ready  to  depart
upon  the  said  voyage,  with  the  next  apt  winds
that  may  serve  thereunto :  and  with  this  Fleet
afterwards  was  joined  M.  Christopher  Carlisle
with  the  Tyger. The i of  June 1582.

Orasmuch  as  the  number  of  shippes  which
we  purpose  to  send  in  this  Fleete
together  for  Saint  Nicholas  in  Russia  is
greater  then  at  any  time  heretofore  wee
have  sent  thither,  as  also  for  that  some
speeches  are  given  out  that  you  shall  be
met  withall  by  such  as  with  force  &
violence  will  assault  you  as  enemies,  to  the  end  that  good

3°3

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

[I.  454.]  order  may  be  established  among  you  for  keeping  together
in  company,  and  uniting  your  forces,  as  well  for  the
better  direction  to  be  had  in  your  navigation,  as  also  for
your  more  safety  and  strength  against  the  enemie,  we
have  thought  good  to  appoint  among  you  an  Admirall
and  Viceadmirall,  and  that  all  of  you  and  every  one
particularly  shall  be  bound  in  the  summe  of  one  hundred
pounds  to  keepe  company  together.

2  Because  the  Salomon  is  the  biggest  ship,  best
appointed,  and  of  greatest  force  to  defend  or  offend  the
enemie,  we  doe  therefore  appoint  that  ship  Admirall,
which  shall  weare  the  flag  in  the  maine  top.

3  The  Thomas  Allen  being  a  good  ship  and  well
appointed,  and  for  that  the  master  of  her  is  the  ancientest
master  of  the  Fleete  that  hath  taken  charge  that  way,  we
doe  appoint  the  same  ship  to  be  Viceadmirall,  and  to
weare  the  flag  in  the  foretop.

4  And  for  that  the  master  of  the  Prudence  is  of  great
experience,  and  knowledge  in  that  voyage,  we  doe
appoint  that  he  with  the  master  of  the  Admirall  and
Viceadmirall  shall  conferre,  consult  and  agree  upon  the
courses  and  directions  that  shall  be  used  in  this  voyage,
and  it  shall  be  lawfuU  unto  the  master  of  the  Admiral,
with  the  consent  of  M.  Gibs,  and  M.  Biggat,  or  one  of
them  to  make  his  courses  and  directions  from  time  to
time  during  the  whole  voyage,  and  all  the  fleete  are  to
follow  and  observe  the  same  without  straying  or  breaking
of  company  at  any  time  upon  the  penalty  before  specified.

5  The  appointing  of  the  ships  for  Admiral  and  Vice-
admiral,  and  those  men  to  consult  and  agree  upon  the
courses  and  directions  of  the  voyage,  as  aforesaid,  hath
bene  done  by  the  consents  and  with  the  liking  of  you  all,
and  therefore  we  doubt  not  but  that  you  will  all  carefully
and  willingly  observe  the  premisses.

6  Item,  we  have  thought  good  to  put  you  in  mind,
that  at  such  times  as  you  may  conveniently  from  time
to  time,  you  do  assemble  and  meete  together,  to  consider,
consult,  and  determine  upon  such articles as  you  shall

304

INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET  ad.

1582.

think  necessary  to  be  propounded  touching  your  best
safety  and  defence  against  all  forces  that  may  be  offered
you  in  this  voyage,  as  well  outwards  bound,  and  while
you  shall  remaine  in  the  roade  and  bay  of  S.  Nicholas,  as
also  homewardes  bound,  and  that  which  you  shall  agree
upon,  or  that  which  most  of  you  shal  consent  unto,  cause
it  to  be  set  down  in  writing  for  recbrd,  which  may  serve
for  an  acte  amongst  your  selves  to  binde  you  all  to
observe  the  same.

7  We  have  appointed  James  Woodcock  in  the  smal
barke  to  attend  upon  you,  &  to  receive  his  directions
from  you.  You  are  therfore  to  remember  well  what
conference  and  talke  hath  bene  had  with  you  here  before
your  going  touching  ye  sayd  barke,  to  what  purposes  she
may  best  serve,  and  the  maner  how  to  imploy  her,  and
thereupon  to  give  your  order  and  direction  unto  him,  as
the  time  and  place  shall  require.

8  Item,  if  you  shall  understand  as  you  are  outwards
bound,  that  the  enemie  is  gone  before  you  to  S.  Nicholas,
remember  what  advise  hath  bene  given  you  for  your  stay

at Berozova  Ustia,  till  you  have  by  espials  viewed  and  Berozova
understood  the  forces,  and  the  maner  of  their  abode  at  ^■^'^'^•
that  place.

9  And  if  in  the  sea  either  outwards  or  homewards,  or
in  the  time  of  your  abode  at  anker  at  Saint  Nicholas,  you
shall  be  assaulted  by  force  of  any,  as  enemie  whatsoever,
you  are  to  defend  your  selves  with  such  forces  as  you  may
or  can  :  trust  not  too  farre,  neither  give  place  to  incon-
venience.

10  You  will  not  forget  what  conference  we  had  touch-
ing your  passing  outwards  bound  by  Wardhouse,  to  view
and  understand  what  you  can  at  that  place,  and  to  shew
your  selves,  to  see  if  there  be  any  there  that  have  a  mind
to  speake  with  you,  for  that  we  thinke  it  better  then,  &
thereabout,  then  afterwards  or  els  where.

1 1  While  you  shall  remaine  in  the  road  at  S.  Nicholas,
be  circumspect  and  carefull  to  have  your  ships  in  readi-
nesse,  and  in  good  order  alwaies,  and  upon  all  suddens.

Ill  305  u

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

The  greatest  danger  unto  you  in  that  place  will  be  while
you  shall  shift  your  ships  :  therefore  you  are  to  consider
of  it,  but  the  fittest  time  for  you  to  doe  the  same,  will  bee
when  the  winde  is  Southerly  off  the  shore,  or  calme,  and
at  such  time  you  may  the  better  doe  it  without  danger.
You  must  take  such  order  among  you,  that  your  com-
panies may  be  alwaies  willing  and  ready  to  helpe  one  the
other,  and  appoint  among  your  selves  such  ships  to  shift
first,  and  such  after,  in  such  sort  and  forme  as  you  shall
thinke  best  and  most  convenient.  And  while  they  shall
be  in  discharging,  shifting,  and  lading,  let  the  rest  of  your
companies  which  have  not  then  to  doe  in  lading  or  dis-
charging, helpe  those  ships  that  shall  have  labour  to  doe,
as  well  for  carying  the  barkes  from  ships  to  the  shoare,  or
from  shore  to  the  shippe  with  your  boates,  as  also  for
any  other  helpe  that  they  shall  have  neede  of.
[I.  455.]  12  Remember  what  hath  bene  said  unto  you  touching
the  moring  of  your  ships,  &c.  for  using  advantage
against  the  enemie,  if  you  shall  be  assaulted  in  that  place.

13  See  that  you  serve  God,  abolish  swearing  and
gaming,  be  carefull  of  fire  and  candles,  &c.

14  You  are  to  consult  and  agree  among  your  selves
upon  signes,  tokens,  and  good  orders  for  the  better
keeping  of  company  together,  and  also  the  maner  how
and  by  what  meanes,  rescue,  ayde,  or  helpe  may  be  given
by  one  to  the  other  in  fight,  if  you  happen  to  come  to  it.

Thus  we  pray  God  to  send  you  a  prosperous  voyage
and  safe  returne.

The  opinion  of  Master  William  Burrough  sent
to  a  friend,  requiring  his  judgement  for  the
fittest  time  of  the  departure  of  our  ships
towards  S. Nicholas  in  Russia.

WHereas  you  request  me  to  perswade  the  company
not  to  send  their  shippes  from  hence  before  the
fine  of  May,  I  do  not  thinke  the  same  so  good  a  course
for  them  to  observe  :  for  you  know  that  the  sooner  wee

306

WILLIAM BURIIOUGH'S OPINION  a.d.

1582.

sende them hence,  the  sooner we may  looke for  their
returne. If  wee  sende  them  in  the  beginning  of  May,  ^-^^  Russian
then may  they  be  at  Saint  Nicholas  by  the  fine  of  the  -^^f^^  ^"^ . "  /
same  moneth  : and  by  that  time  the  greatest  parte of  he^nnlngof
your  lading  of  necessitie  must  bee  come  downe,  especially  M^^.
the  flaxe  :  but  if  it  should  fall  out  so  lateward  a  breaking
up  of  the  river  of  Duyna,  that  by  -the  ende  of  May  the
goods cannot be brought to Saint Nicholas, yet this
is  alwayes  to  be  accounted  for certaine,  that  before  our
ships can come thither, the goods may be brought
downe  to  that  place  :  and  if  through  ice  the  shippes  be
kept  backe  any  time,  the  losse and  charge  of  that  time
toucheth not the companie at all, but the owners of
the shippes, and  yet  will the Owners put  that  in ad-
venture, rather  then  tarie  longer  time  before  their  going
hence.

Now  seeing  by  sending  our  shippes  hence  in  the
beginning  of  May,  their  arrivall  at  S.  Nicholas  may  be
at  the  ende  of  the  same  moneth,  and  remaining  thirtie
dayes  there,  they  may  bee  laden  and  come  thence  by
the  last  of  June,  and  returne  home  hither  by  the  10
of  August  with  commodities  to  serve  the  market  then,
it  cannot  bee  denied  but  we  should  reape  thereby  great
commoditie.

But  it  may  be  objected,  that  if  all  our  shippes  be  sent
then  to  returne  as  aforesaid,  you  shall  not  be  able  to
send  us  in  so  much  cordage,  Waxe  and  Oyles,  as  other-
wise you  should  doe  if  they  remained  a  moneth  longer,
neither  could  you  by  that  time  perfect  your  accounts
to  be  sent  in  them  as  you  would  doe.

For  answere  thereunto  this  is  my  meaning  :  though
I  wish  the  greatest  part  of  our  shipping  to  go  as  afore-
said, yet  would  I  have  one  good  ship  or  two  at  the  most
well  furnished  in  al  points  that  should  depart  alwaies
from  hence,  betweene  the  beginning  and  the  10  day  of
June  :  and  the  same  to  be  conditioned  withall  to  remaine
at  S.  Nicholas  from  the  first  arrivall  there  untill  the
middest  of  August,  or  to  be  dispatched thence  sooner,

307

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

at  the  will  and  liking  of  our  factors for the same  :  by
this  order  these  commodities  following  may  ensue

1  You  may  have  our  commodities  there  timely  to
send  up  the  river  before  it  waxe  shallow,  to  be  dispersed
in  the  countrey  at  your  pleasure.

2  The  greatest  part  of  our  goods  may  be  returned
hither  timely  to  serve  the  first  markets.

3  Our  late  ships  remaining  so  long  here  may  serve
to  good  purpose,  for  returning  answere  of  such  letters
as  may  be  sent  over  land,  and  received  here  before  their
departure.

4  Their  remaining  so  late  with  you  shal  satisfie  your
desire  for  perfecting  your  accounts,  and  may  bring  such
cordage,  Waxe,  Oile,  &  other  commodities,  as  you  can
provide  before  that  time  :  and  chiefly  may  serve  us  in
stead  to  bring  home  our  goods  that  may  be  sent  us
from  Persia.

Now  seeing  it  may  be  so  many  wayes  commodious  to
the  company  to  observe  this  order,  without  any  charge
unto  them,  I  wish  that  you  put  to  your  helping  hand
to  further  the  same.

A  copie  of  the  Commission  given  to  Sir  Jerome
Bow^es,  authorizing  him  her  Majesties  Am-
bassadour  unto  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  Anno

1583-

LIZABETHA  Dei  gratia,  Angliae,  Franciae,  &
Hyberniae  Regina,  fidei  defensatrix,  &c.  Universis
&  singulis  praesentes  literas  visuris  &  inspecturis,  salutem.
Cum  Serenissimus  Princeps,  Joannes  Basilius,  Rex,  &
magnus  Dux  Russiae,  Volodimeras,  Moscoviae,  &  Novo-
grodis.  Rex  Cazani,  &  Astracani,  Dominus  Plescoas,  &
magnus  Dux  Smolenscoae,  Tueri,  Ugori,  Permiae,  Valeae,
Bolharae,  &  aliarum  ditionum  :  Dominus  &  magnus
[I.  456.]  Dux  Novogrodiae  in  inferiori  regione  Chernigae,  Rezanae,
Polotscoae,  Ratsaviae,  Yeraslavas,  Bealozeri,  Liflandiae,
Oudori,  & Condense, & gubernator in tota provincia

308

E

COMMISSION TO Sm JEROME BOWES  ad-

1583.

Siberias,  &  partium  Septentrionalium,  &  aliarum,  frater,
&  Amicus  charissimus,  Nobilem  virum,  Feodor  Andre-
wich  Spisemski,  nuper  ad  nos  ablegaverit,  ad  certa
quasdam  negotia  nobiscum  agenda,  quae  honorem
utrinque  nostrum  quam  proxime  attingunt,  quaeque  recte
definiri  concludique  nequeunt,  .nisi  Ambassiatorem
aliquem  &  oratorem  ad  praefatum  serenissimum  prin-
cipem  amandaverimus  :  Hinc  est,  quod  nos  de  fidelitate,
industria,  provida  circumspectione,  &  satis  magno  rerum
usu,  pr^dilecti  nobis  famuli  nostri,  Hieronimi  Bowes
Militis,  ex  nobilibus  domesticis  nostris  unius,  plurimum
confidentes,  praefatum  Hieronimum  Bowes  Militem,
nostrum  verum  &  indubitatum  Ambassiatorem,  Ora-
torem, &  Commissarium  specialem  facimus,  &  con-
stituimus  per  praesentes.  Dantes,  &  concedentes  eidem
Hieronimo  Bowes  Militi  oratori  nostro  tenore  prae-
sentium,  authoritatem,  &  mandatum,  tam  generale,  quam
speciale,  ita  quod  specialitas  non  deroget  generalitati,  nee
e  contra  generalitas  specialitati,  nomine  nostro,  &  pro
nobis,  cum  prasfato  serenissimo  principe,  ej  usque  con-
siliariis,  &  deputatis  quibuscunque  de  prsfatis  negotiis
&  eorum  singulis,  tractandi,  conferendi,  concludendi,
appunctuandique,  prout  prasfato  Oratori  nostro  aequum,
&  ex  honore  nostro  videbitur  :  Nee  non  de,  &  super
hujusmodi  tractatis,  conclusis,  appunctuatisque,  caeterisque
omnibus  &  singulis,  pr^missa  quovismodo  concernen-
tibus,  literas,  &  instrumenta  valida  &  efficacia,  nomine
nostro,  &  pro  nobis  tradendi,  literasque  &  instrumenta
consimilis  vigoris  &  eifectus,  ex  altera  parte  petendi,  &
confici,  &  sigillari  debite  procurandi,  &  recipiendi,  &
generaliter  omnia,  &  singula  praemissa  qualitercunque
concernentia,  faciendi,  exercendi,  &  expediendi,  in,  &
eodem  modo,  sicut  nos  ipsi  faceremus,  &  facere  possemus,
si  essemus  prassentes,  etiamsi  talia  sint,  quae  de  se  man-
datum  exigant  magis  speciale  :  promittentes  bona  fide,  &
in  verbo  Regio,  omnia  &  singula,  quae  per  praedictum
Ambassiatorem,  &  oratorem  nostrum  appunctuata,  pro-
missa,  conventa,  concordata,  &  conclusa fuerint in hac

309

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

parte,  nos  rata  &  grata,  &  firma  habituras  &  observaturas,
&  superinde  literas  nostras  patentes  confirmatorias,  &
approbatorias  in  forma  valida,  &  autentica,  prout  opus
fuerit,  daturas.  In  cujus  rei  testimonium,  his  prassen-
tibus  manu  nostra  signatis,  magnum  sigillum  nostrum
regni  nostri  Anglias  apponi  fecimus.  Datas  e  Regia
nostra  Grenwici  quinto  die  mensis  Junii,  Anno  Dom.
1583.  Regni  vero  nostri  vicessimo  quinto.

The  same  in  English.

ELIZABETH  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queene  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith,
&c.  to  al  and  singular,  to  whom  these  presents  shal  come
to  be  seen  and  red,  greeting.  Whereas  the  most  excellent
prince  John  Basiliwich  king,  and  great  duke  of  all
Russia,  Volodomer,  Moscovie,  and  Novogrod,  king  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  lord  of  Plesco,  and  great  duke  of
Smolensco,  of  Tuer,  Ugor,  and  Permia,  Valca,  Bolhar
and  others,  lord  great  duke  of  Novogrod  in  the  low
country,  of  Cherniga,  Rezan,  Polotsco,  Rostove,  Yera-
slave,  Bealozera,  Liefland,  Oudor,  Obdor  and  Condensa,
and  governour  of  al  the  land  of  Siberia,  and  of  the  North
parts  and  other,  our  most  deare  brother  and  friend  did  of
late  send  unto  us  one  Feodor  Andrewich  Spisemsky,
a  noble  man  of  his,  to  deale  with  us  in  certaine  speciall
businesses,  respecting  very  neerely  the  honour  of  either
of  us,  and  being  such  as  without  the  speeding  of  some
Ambassadour  of  ours  to  the  foresaid  most  excellent
prince,  cannot  be  sufficiently  determined  and  con-
cluded :  For  this  cause  we  having  great  confidence  in
the  fidelitie,  Industrie,  provident  circumspection  and
convenient  experience  of  our  welbeloved  servant  Jerome
Bowes  knight,  a  gentleman  of  qualitie  of  our  housholde,
do  by  these  presents  make  and  constitute  the  foresaid
Jerome  Bowes  knight  our  true  &  undoubted  Am-
bassadour, Orator  and  special  commissioner,  giving  and
graunting  to  the  same  Jerome  Bowes  knight,  our  Orator,
by  the  vertue  of  these  presents  authoritie  and  commande-

310

COMMISSION TO SIR JEROME BOWES  ad.

1583.

ment,  as  wel  general  as  special,  so  that  the  special  shall
not  prejudice  the  generall,  nor  on  the  other  side  the
general  the  special,  to  intreat,  conferre,  conclude,  and
appoint  in  our  name,  and  for  us  with  the  foresaid  most
excellent  prince  and  his  counsellers  and  deputies  what-
soever, concerning  the  foresaide  businesses,  and  ech  of
them,  according  as  it  shall  seeme  good,  and  for  our
honour  to  our  foresaide  Orator,  as  also  of  and  upon
such  things  intreated,  concluded  and  appointed,  as
in  all  and  singular  other  things,  any  maner  of  way-
concerning  the  premisses,  to  deliver  in  our  name  and
for  us,  sufficient  and  effectual  letters  and  instruments,
and  to  require  letters  &  instruments  of  the  like  validitie
and  effect  of  the  other  part,  and  to  procure  them  lawfully
to  bee  made  and  sealed,  and  then  to  receive  them,  and
generally  to  doe,  execute,  and  dispatch  al  and  singular
other  things  concerning  the  premisses,  in,  and  after
the  same  maner,  as  we  our  selves  would  and  might
do  if  we  were  present,  although  they  be  such  things
as  may  seeme  of  themselves  to  require  a  more  speciall
commandement :  promising  in  good  faith  and  in  the  [I.  457.]
word  of  a  prince,  that  we  will  hold  and  observe  all
and  singular  the  things  which  by  our  Ambassador  afore-
sayd  shall  be  appointed,  promised,  agreed,  accorded  and
concluded  in  this  behalfe,  as  lawfull,  gratefull,  and  firme,
and  thereupon  as  need  shall  require,  will  give  our  letters
patents,  confirmatory  and  approbatory,  in  forme  effectuall
and  autenticall.  In  witnesse  whereof,  we  have  caused
our  great  seale  of  our  kingdome  of  England  to  be  put
to  these  presents,  and  signed  them  with  our  owne  hand.
Given  at  our  pallace  of  Greenewich  the  fourth  day
of  June,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583,  and  of  our
reigne  the  five  and  twentieth.

[A  Letter
311

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  Letter  sent  from  her  Highnesse  to  the  sayd
great  Duke  of  Russia,  by  sir  Hierome  Bowes
aforesayd,  her  Majesties  Ambassadour.

Serenissimo  Principi  ac  Domino,  Joanni  Basilio,  Dei
gratia  Regi  &  magno  Duci  totius  Russiae,  Volo-
domerae,  &c.  Regi  Cazani,  &c.  Domino  Plesco^,
&c.  Domino  &  magno  Duci  Novogrodiae,  &c.  &
Gubernatori  in  tota  Provincia  Siberias,  &c.  Fratri
&  amico  nostro  charissimo.

LizABETHA,  Dei  gratia  Angliae,  Franciae,
&  Hibernias  Regina,  fidei  defensatrix,
&c.  Serenissimo  Principi  ac  Domino,
Joanni  Basilio,  eadem  Dei  gratia  Regi
&  magno  Duci  totius  Russia,  Volo-
domerae,  Moscoviae,  &  Novogrodiae,  Regi
Cazani  &  Astracani,  Domino  Plescoae,  &
magno  Duci  Smolenscoae,  Tueri,  Ugori,  Permiae,  Viatskae,
Bolharae,  &  aliarum  ditionum.  Domino  &  magno  Duci
Novogrodiae  in  inferiori  regione,  Chernigae,  Rezanae,
Polotscoae,  Rostovae,  Jaroslavae,  Bealozeri,  Liflandiae,
Oudori,  &  Condensae,  &  Gubernatori  in  tota  provincia
Siberiae,  &  partium  Septentrionalium,  &  aliarum,  fratri
&  amico  suo  charissimo,  Salutem.

Serenissime  princeps,  frater  &  amice  charissime,  ex  iis
quae  nobiscum  egit  S.  V.  illustris  legatus,  intelleximus,
quam  grate  vobis  faceremus  satis,  si  legatum  aliquem
cum  mandatis  instructum,  ad  S.  V.  ablegaremus.  In  quo
certe  quidem  instituto  adeo  nobis  ex  animo  placuit,
quod  est  honeste  postulatum,  ut  non  nisi  praestita  re,
possemus  nobis  quoquo  modo  satisfacere.  Atque  cum
id  haberemus  apud  nos  decretum,  nobis  non  incommode
incurrit  in  mentem  &  oculos  Hieronimus  Bowes  miles,
ex  nobilibus  nostris  Domesticis,  plurimum  nobis  dilectus,
quem  inprsesentiarum  ad  S.  V.  ablegamus,  cujus  prudentiae
&  fidei,  totum  hoc  quicquid  est,  quod  ad  Serenitatum
mutuo  nostrarum dignitatem ornandam pertinere posse

312

LETTER TO THE KING OF RUSSIA  ad.

1583.
arbitramur,  commisimus.  In  quo  munere  perfungendo,
quin  omnem  curam  &  diligentiam  sit  collaturus,
neutiquam  dubitamus  :  a  S.  autem  V.  rogamus,  velit  ei
earn  fidem  habere  in  iis  persequendis  quae  habet  a  nobis
in  mandatis,  quam  nobis  habendam  putaret,  si  essemus
praesentes.  Praeterea,  cum  nobis  multum  charus  sit
Robertus  Jacobus  medicus,  quern-  superiori  II  anno,  ad  1582.
S.  V.  misimus,  rogamus  ut  eum  eo  loco  S.  V.  habeat,
quo  virum  probatissimum,  &  singulari  quam  plurimarum
virtutum  laude  ornatum  habendum  esse,  boni  principes
censent.  Quem  a  nobis  neutiquam  ablegavissemus,  nisi
amicitiae  nostras,  &  studio  gratificandi  S.  V.  plurimum
tribuissemus.  In  qua  dum  voluntate  manemus  erga
S.  V.  non  nisi  optime  de  bonis  vestris  meritis  in  praefatum
Jacobum  nobis  pollicemur.  Et  Deum  Opt.  Max.  pre-
camur,  ut  S.  V.  salvam  conservet,  &  incolumem.  Datae
e  Regia  nostra  Grenovici  19  die  mensis  Junii,  Anno
Domini 1583,  regni  vero  nostri  vicessimo  quinto.

S.  vestrae  bona  soror.

The  same  in  English.

ELizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queene  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith,  &c.  to
the  most  excellent  Prince  and  Lord,  John  Basiliwich,
by  the  same  grace  of  God,  King  and  great  Duke  of  all
Russia,  Volodomer,  Moscovie,  and  Novogrod,  King  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  Lord  of  Plesco,  and  great  Duke  of
Smolensco,  of  Tuer,  Ugor,  and  Permie,  Viatsca,  Bolhar,
and  others.  Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod  in  the
lowe  countrey,  of  Cherniga,  Rezan,  Polotsko,  Rostove,
Jaroslave,  Bealozera,  Lifland,  Oudor,  Obdor,  and  Con-
densa,  and  Governour  of  all  the  land  of  Siberia,  and  of
the  North  parts  and  others,  her  dearest  brother  and
friend.  Salutations.

Most  excellent  Prince,  most  deare  brother  and  friend,
by  those  things  which  the  worthy  ambassador  of  your
excellency  declared  unto  us,  we  have  understood  how
kindly it  would be taken,  if  we should send to your

313

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.
[I.  458.]  excellency  an  ambassador  from  us,  with  commandement
and  instructions.  In  which  matter  your  honourable
request  hath  so  much  pleased  us,  that  we  could  not
any  maner  of  way  satisfie  our  selves,  except  we  per-
formed the  same.  And  having  purposed  with  our  selfe
so  to  doe,  we  thought  of,  and  remembred  Jerome  Bowes
Knight,  a  gentleman  of  qualitie  of  our  householde,  a
man  very  much  beloved  of  us,  whom  at  this  present
we  send  unto  your  Majesty,  and  to  whose  wisedome
and  faithfulnesse  we  have  committed  all,  whatsoever
we  take  to  apperteine  to  the  advancement  of  both  our
honors  indifferently.  In  the  discharge  of  which  service,
we  doubt  not  but  that  all  care  and  diligence  shall  be
used  on  his  part,  so  that  we  intreat  your  Majesty  to
give  him  credence  in  the  prosecuting  of  those  things
which  he  hath  from  us  in  commandement,  no  lesse
then  to  our  selfe,  if  we  were  present.  And  whereas
Doctor  Jacob.  Robert  Jacob  doctor  of  physicke  is  a  man  very  deare
unto  us,  whom  the  last  yere  we  sent  unto  your  excellency,
we  desire  that  he  may  have  that  favor  and  estimation
with  you,  which  good  princes  thinke  a  most  honest  and
vertuous  man  woorthy  of:  for  had  we  not  caried  great
respect  to  our  mutual  friendship,  and  indevour  to  gratifie
your  Majestic,  we  should  in  no  case  have  parted  with
him.  And  seeing  we  continue  still  the  same  good  will
towards  your  excellency,  we  doe  even  promise  to  our
selfe  your  honourable  kindnesses  towards  him  :  and  we
pray  the  almightie  God  to  preserve  your  Majesty  in
good  safetie  and  health.  Given  at  our  pallace  of  Greene-
wich  the  19  day  of  June,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lord
1583,  and  of  our  reigne  the  five  and  twentieth.

Your  Majesties  good  sister.

314

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES

A  briefe  discourse  of  the  voyage  of  Sir  Jerome
Bowes  knight,  her  Majesties  ambassadour  to
Ivan  Vasilivich  the  Emperour  of  Muscovia,
in  the  yeere 1583.

He  Emperour  of  Russia  that  then  lived,
by  name  Ivan  Yasiliwich,  having  de-
hberately  considered  how  necessary  it
were  for  the  strengthening  of  his  estate,
that  a  sure  commerce  and  entercourse
of  merchants  should  be  againe  renued
betweene him and her sacred Majesty

A.D.

1583.

of  England,  with  such  further  immunities  and  privileges
for  the  honor  and  utility  of  both  their  dominions,  and
subjects  of  the  same,  as  upon  mutuall  treatie  of  persons
interposed  on  both  sides,  might  be  assented  unto  :  sent
over  into  this  realme,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1582,
as  his  ambassadour  for  that  purpose,  an  ancient  discreet
gentleman  of  his  householde  called  Pheodor  Andrevich  Pheodor  An-
Phisemsky,  accompanied  with  one  of  his  Secretaries,  for  iT- 7

hi  •  •■1  I'*  11*11* L  fitScittSri'^  tnC

IS  better  assistance  m  that  expedition  : and  besides  his  ^^pgrg/i

many  other  directions,  whereof  part  were  to  be  delivered  ambassadour.

by  word  of  mouth,  and  the  rest  set  downe  in  a  letter

under the Emperours signature, addressed to her

Majesty  : he had in speciall charge to sollicit her

Majesty to send over with him to his maister an

ambassador from her, to treat and contract of such

affaires of  importance as concerned both the realmes,

which  was  the  principall  end  of  his  imployments  hither.

Whereupon her Majesty very graciously inclining to

the Emperors motion,  and at the humble sute of  the

English  merchants  trading  those  countreys  being  caried

with  the  same  princely  respects,  to  satisfie  his  demands

in that behalfe, made  choice  of  sir Jerome Bowes, a

gentleman  of  her  Court,  ordinarily  attending  upon  her

Majesties  person,  towards  whom  was  apparantly  expressed

her princely opinion and favor by the credit of  this

negociation.

315

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^583.

After he had received his commission, with other

speciall  letters  to  the  Emperor,  with  all  other  instructions
apperteining  to  his  charge,  and  that  the  sayd  Russe
ambassadour  was  licenced  to  returne  home  to  his  maister,
being  honorably  entertained  and  rewarded,  the  English
ambassador  being  attended  upon  with  forty  persons  at
the  least,  very  honourably  furnished,  whereof  many  were
gentlemen,  and  one  M.  Humfrey  Cole  a  learned  preacher,
tooke  his  leave  of  her  Majesty  at  the  Court  at  Greenwich
the  eighteenth  of  June,  and  with  the  other  ambassadour,
with  their  severall  companies,  embarked  themselves  at
Harwich  the  two  and  twentieth  of  the  same,  and  after
a  stormy  voyage  at  the  Sea,  they  arrived  both  in  safety
in  the  road  of  S.  Nicholas  the  three  and  twentieth  of
July  next  following.

The  Russe  ambassador  lodged  himselfe  at  the  abbey
of  S.  Nicholas  :  and  the  English  ambassador  was  lodged
and  well  intertained  by  the  English  merchants,  at  their
house  at  S.  Nicholas,  standing  in  an  Island  called  Rose
Island.

The  Russe  ambassador  having  reposed  himselfe  one
whole  day,  tooke  his  leave  of  the  English  ambassador,
and  departed  towards  Mosco.

The  English  ambassadour  abode  yet  at  S.  Nicholas
foure  or  five  dayes,  when  having  made  provision  of
boats,  and  meanes  to  that  purpose,  he  went  forward
[I-  459-]  upon  his  journey  towards  Mosco,  to  a  towne  called
Colmogro,  about  foure  score  miles  distant  from  S.
Nicholas.
The  Hoi- You must here understand that before the English

landers  m-  ,  .  •  • ^ -n •  ^1  j-

irude  into  ambassadors  gomg  mto  Russia,  there  were  divers
mi-  trade.  Strangers,  but  especially  certeine  Dutch  merchants,  who
had  intruded  themselves  to  trade  into  those  countreys.
Notwithstanding  a  privilege  of  the  sole  trade  thither
was  long  before  granted  to  the  English  merchants.
These  Dutch  men  had  already  so  handled  the  matter,
as  they  had  by  chargeable  meanes  woonne  three  of
the chiefest counsellers to the Emperour to be their

316

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES  ad.

1583-

assured  friends,  namely,  Mekita  Romanovich,  Bodan
Belskoy,  and  Andrew  Shalkan  the  chancellor  :  for
besides  dayly  gifts  that  they  bestowed  upon  them  all,
they  tooke  so  much  money  of  theirs  at  interest  at  five
and  twenty  upon  the  hundred,  as  they  payd  to  some
one  of  them  five  thousand  marks  yeerely  for  the  use
of  his  money,  and  the  English  merchants  at  that  time
had  not  one  friend  in  Court.

The  ambassador  having  now  spent  five  weeks  at  S.
Nicholas  and  at  Colmogro,  there  came  to  him  then  a
gentleman  sent  from  the  Emperor  to  enterteine  him,
and  had  in  charge  to  conduct  him  up  the  rivers
towards  Mosco,  and  to  deliver  him  provision  of  all
kinde  of  victuals  necessary.

This  gentleman  being  a  follower  of  Shalkan  the
chancellor,  was  by  him  (as  it  seemed)  foisted  into  that
service  of  purpose,  as  afterward  appeared  by  the  course
he  tooke,  to  offer  discourtesies,  and  occasions  of  mislike
to  the  ambassador  :  for  you  must  understand  that  the
chancellor  and  the  other  two  great  counsellors  (spoken
of  as  friends  to  the  Dutchmen)  had  a  purpose  to  oppose
themselves  directly  against  her  Majesties  ambassage,
especially  in  that  point,  for  the  barring  of  all  strangers
from  trading  into  the  Emperors  countrey.

This  gentleman  conducted  the  English  ambassador  a
thousand  miles  up  the  rivers  of  Dwina  and  Soughana,
to  a  citie  called  Vologda,  where  received  him  another
gentleman  sent  from  the  Emperor,  a  man  of  better
countenance  then  the  other,  who  presented  the  am-
bassador from  the  Emperor  with  two  faire  geldings
well  furnished  after  their  maner.

At  a  city  called  Yeraslave  upon  the  river  Volga  there
met  the  ambassador  a  duke  well  accompanied,  sent  from
the  Emperor,  who  presented  him  from  the  Emperor  a
coach  and  ten  geldings  for  the  more  easie  conveying
of  him  to  Mosco,  from  whence  this  citie  was  distant
five  hundred  miles.

Two miles on this side Mosco there met the am-

317

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

bassador  foure  gentlemen  of  good  account,  accompanied
with  two  hundred  horse  :  who  after  a  litle  salutation,
not  familiar,  without  imbracing,  tolde  him  that  they
had  to  say  to  him  from  the  Emperor,  and  would  have
had  him  light  on  foot  to  have  heard  it,  notwithstanding
themselves  would  still  have  sit  on  horsebacke  :  which
the  ambassador  soone  refused  to  doe,  and  so  they  stood
long  upon  termes,  whether  both  parties  should  light  or
not  :  which  afterwards  agreed  upon,  there  was  yet  great
nicenesse  whose  foot  should  not  be  first  on  ground.

Their  message  being  delivered,  and  after  having
embraced  ech  other,  they  conducted  the  sayd  ambas-
sador to  his  lodging  at  Mosco,  a  house  builded  of
purpose  for  him,  themselves  being  placed  in  the  next
house  to  it,  as  appointed  to  furnish  him  of  all  provisions,
and  to  be  used  by  him  upon  all  other  occasions.

The  ambassador  having  beene  some  dayes  in  Mosco,
and  having  in  all  that  time  bene  very  honorably  used
from  the  Emperor  (for  such  was  his  will)  though  some
of  his  chiefest  counsellors  (as  is  sayd)  had  another
purpose,  and  did  often  times  cunningly  put  it  in  use  :
He  was  sent  for  to  Court,  and  was  accompanied  thither
with  about  forty  gentlemen  honorably  mounted,  and
sumptuously  arayed,  &  in  his  passage  from  his  lodging
to  the  court,  were  set  in  a  ward  five  or  sixe  thousand
shot,  that  were  of  the  Emperors  gard.  At  the  entry
into  the  court  there  met  him  foure  noble  men  apparelled
in  cloth  of  gold,  and  rich  furres,  their  caps  embroidred
with  pearle  and  stone,  who  conducted  him  towards  the
Emperor,  till  he  was  met  with  foure  others  of  greater
degree  then  they,  who  guided  him  yet  further  towards
the  Emperor,  in  which  passage  there  stood  along  the
walles,  and  sate  upon  benches  and  fourmes  in  row,
seven  or  eight  hundred  persons,  said  to  be  noblemen
and  gentlemen,  all  apparelled  in  garments  of  coloured
satins  and  cloth  of  golde.

These  foure  noblemen  accompanied  him  to  the
Emperors  chamber  doore,  where  met  him  the  Emperors

318

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES  ad.

1583.
herald,  whose  office  is  there  held  great  :  and  with  him
all  the  great  officers  of  the  Emperors  chamber,  who  all
conducted  him  to  the  place  where  the  Emperor  sate  in
his  state,  having  three  crownes  standing  by  him,  viz.  of
Moscovia,  Cazan,  and  Astrakan,  and  also  by  him  4
yoong  noblemen  of  about  twenty  yeres  of  age,  of  ech
side  twaine,  costly  apparelled  in  white,  holding  upon
their  shoulders  ech  of  them  a  brode  axe,  much  like  to
a  Gallogals  axe  of  Ireland,  thin  and  very  sharpe,  the
steale  or  handle  not  past  halfe  a  yard  long,  and  there
sate  about  the  chamber  upon  benches  and  other  low
seats,  above  an  hundred  noblemen  richly  apparelled  in
cloth  of  golde.

The  ambassador  being  thus  brought  to  the  Emperor
to  kisse  his  hand,  after  some  complements  and  inquirie  [I.  460.]
of  her  Majesties  health,  he  willed  him  to  goe  sit  downe
in  a  place  provided  for  that  purpose,  nigh  ten  pases
distant  from  him,  from  whence  he  would  have  had  him  to
have  sent  him  her  Majesties  letters  and  present,  which
the  ambassadour  thinking  not  reasonable  stept  forward
towards  the  Emperor  :  in  which  passage  the  chancellor
came  to  meet  him,  and  would  have  taken  his  letters  :
to  whom  the  ambassador  sayd,  that  her  Majesty  had
directed  no  letters  to  him  ;  and  so  went  on,  and  delivered
them  himselfe  to  the  Emperors  owne  hands.

And  after,  having  thus  delivered  her  Majesties  letters
and  what  he  had  els  to  say  at  that  time,  he  was  con-
ducted to  the  Councell  chamber,  where  having  had
conference  with  the  councell  of  matters  of  his  ambassage,
he  was  soone  after  sent  for  againe  to  the  Emperour,
where  he  dined  in  his  presence  at  a  side  table,  nere
unto  him,  and  all  his  company  at  another  boord  by,
where  also  dined  at  other  tables  in  the  same  place,  all
the  chiefe  noble  men  that  were  about  the  Court,  to
the  number  of  an  hundred.  And  in  the  time  of  this
dinner,  the  Emperor  used  many  favors  to  the  am-
bassadour and  about  the  midst  of  dinner  (standing  up)
dranke  a  great  carouse  to  the  health  of  the  Queene  his

319

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

good  sister,  and  sent  him  a  great  bowle  full  of  Rhenish
wine  and  sugar  to  pledge  him.

The  ambassadour  after  this,  was  often  called  to  Court,
where  he  had  conference  both  with  the  Emperour  and
his  councell  of  the  matters  in  question,  touching  both
ambassages,  which  divers  times  raised  many  jarres  :  and
in  the  end,  after  sundry  meetings,  the  Emperour  finding
himselfe  not  satisfied  to  his  liking,  for  that  the  am-
bassadour had  not  power  by  his  commission  to  yeeld
to  every  thing  that  he  thought  fit,  as  a  man  whose
will  was  seldome  wonted  to  be  gainsayd,  let  loose  his
passion,  and  with  a  sterne  and  angry  countenance  tolde
him  that  he  did  not  reckon  the  Queene  of  England  to
be  his  fellow  :  for  there  are  (quoth  he)  that  are  her
betters.

The  ambassadour  greatly  misliking  these  speeches,  &
being  very  unwilling  (how  dangerous  soever  it  might
proove  to  his  owne  person)  to  give  way  to  the  Emperor,
to  derogate  ought  from  the  honour  and  greatnesse  of
her  Majesty  :  and  finding  also  that  to  subject  himselfe
to  the  angrie  humour  and  disposition  of  the  Emperour
was  not  the  meanes  to  winne  ought  at  his  hands,  with
like  courage  and  countenance  to  answere  his,  tolde  him
that  the  Queene  his  Mistresse  was  as  great  a  prince  as
any  was  in  Christendome,  equall  to  him  that  thought
himselfe  the  greatest,  well  able  to  defend  herselfe  against
his  malice  whosoever,  and  wanted  no  meanes  to  offend
any  that  either  shee  had,  or  should  have  cause  to  be
enemy  unto.  Yea  (quoth  he)  How  sayest  thou  to  the
French  king,  and  the  king  of  Spaine  ?  Mary  (quoth
the  ambassadour)  I  holde  the  Queene  my  Mistresse  as
great  as  any  of  them  both.  Then  what  sayest  thou
(quoth  hee)  to  the  Emperour  of  Germany  ?  Such  is
the  greatnesse  of  the  Queene  my  Mistresse  (quoth  the
ambassadour)  as  the  King  her  father  had  (not  long
since)  the  Emperor  in  his  pay,  in  his  warres  against
France.

This  answere  misliked  the  Emperor  yet  so  much  more,

320

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES  ad

1583-
as  that  he  tolde  the  ambassadour,  that  were  he  not  an
ambassador,  he  would  throw  him  out  of  the  doores.
Whereunto  he  answered  that  he  might  doe  his  will,  for
he  was  now  fast  within  his  countrey :  but  he  had  a  Mis-
tresse  who  (he  doubted  not)  would  be  revenged  of  any
injury  that  should  be  done  unto  him.  Whereupon  the
Emperour  in  great  sudden  bade  him  get  him  home.
And  he  with  no  more  reverence  then  such  usage  re-
quired, saluted  the  Emperor,  and  went  his  way.

All  this  notwithstanding,  the  ambassadour  was  not
much  sooner  out  of  the  chamber,  and  the  Emperours
cholar  somewhat  setled,  but  he  delivered  to  his  councell
that  stood  about  him  many  commendations  in  the  favor
of  the  ambassador,  for  that  he  would  not  indure  one
ill  word  to  be  spoken  against  his  Mistresse,  and  there-
withal! wished  himselfe  to  have  such  a  servant.

The  ambassadour  had  not  beene  much  more  then  one
houre  in  his  lodging,  but  the  Emperour  imagining  (as  it
seemed)  by  the  extraordinary  behavior  of  the  ambassador
(for  he  wanted  not  wit  to  judge)  that  he  had  found  what
was  the  Emperors  case,  sent  his  principal!  secretary  unto
him,  to  tell  him,  that  notwithstanding  what  had  past,  yet
for  the  great  love  that  he  bare  to  the  Queene  his  sister,
he  should  very  shortly  be  called  againe  to  Court,  and
have  a  resolution  of  all  the  matters  in  question :  and  this
Secretary  was  now  further  content  to  impart,  and  sayd  to
the  ambassadour  that  the  Emperour  was  fully  resolved  to
send  a  greater  noble  man  home  with  him  in  ambassage  to
the  Queene  his  sister,  then  ever  he  yet  at  any  time  sent
out  of  his  countrey :  and  that  he  determined  also  to
send  to  the  Queene  a  present  woorth  three  thousand
pounds,  and  to  gratifie  himselfe  at  his  departure  with  a
gift  that  should  be  woorth  a  thousand  pounds :  and  tolde
him  also  that  the  next  day  the  Emperour  would  send  a
great  noble  man  unto  him,  to  conferre  with  him  of
certaine  abuses  done  him  by  Shalkan  the  chancellor,  and
his  ministers.

And  so  the  day  following  he  sent  Bodan  Belskoy  the

III  321  X

1583-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

chiefest  counseller  that  he  had,  a  man  most  in  credit  with
him :  this  man  examined  all  matters  wherewith  the
ambassador  had  found  himselfe  grieved,  and  supplied
him  with  what  hee  wanted,  and  righted  him  in  all  things
wherein  hee  had  beene  wronged.
[I.  461.]  Not  long  after  the  returne  of  this  noble  man,  the
Emperor  caused  to  be  set  downe  in  his  owne  presence,
a  new  and  much  larger  allowance  of  diet  for  the  am-
bassador then  he  had  had  before,  and  shortly  after  sent
the  same  to  the  ambassadour  by  his  principall  Secretarie
Savio  FroUo.  This  diet  was  so  great,  as  the  ambassadour
often  times  sought  to  have  it  lessened,  but  the  Emperour
would  not  by  any  meanes.

The  scroule  of  the  new  diet  was  this :

One  bushell  of  fine  meale  for  three  dayes.

One  bushell  of  wheate  meale  for  a  day  and  a  halfe.

Two  live  geese  for  one  day.

Twenty  hennes  for  the  day.

Seven  sheepe  for  a  day.

One  oxe  for  three  dayes.

One  side  of  porke  for  a  day.

Seventie  egges  for  a  day.

Ten  pound  of  butter.

Seventy  peny  white  loaves  of  bread.

Twelve  peny  loaves  of  bread.

One  veather  or  gallon  of  vineger.

Two  veathers  of  salt  cabiges.

One  pecke  of  onions.

Ten  pound  of  salt.

On  altine,  or  sixe  peny  woorth  of  waxe  candles.

Two  altines  of  tallow  candles.

One  fourth  part  of  a  veather  of  cherrie  mead.

As  much  of  Mallynovomead.

Halfe  a  veather  of  burnt  wine.

One  veather  of  sodden  mead  called  Obarni.

Three  veathers  of  sweet  mead.

Ten  veathers  of  white  mead.

Fifteene  veathers  of  ordinary  mead.

322

AMBASSAGE OF SIR  JEROME  BOWES  ad.

1583.

Foure  veathers  of  sweet  beere.

Fifteene  veathers  of  beere.

Halfe  a  pound  of  pepper.

Three  sollitincks  or  ounces  of  saiFron.

One  sollitincke  of  mase.

One  sollitincke  of  nutmegs.

Two  sollitincks  of  cloves.

Three  sollitincks  of  sinamon.

rOne  bushell  of  oats.
Provender, -<  One  load  of  hay.
I^One  load  of  straw.

Now  he  began  so  much  to  discover  his  purpose  and
affections  towards  her  Majesty  &  her  countrey,  as  he  sent
to  the  ambassador,  intreating  him  that  his  II  preacher,  and  M.  Cole.
doctor  Jacob  his  English  physician,  might  set  downe  the
points  of  the  religion  in  use  in  England,  which  the
ambassadour  caused  to  be  done  accordingly,  and  sent
them  unto  him,  who  seemed  so  well  to  like  them,  as  he
caused  them  (with  much  good  allowance)  to  be  publikely
read  before  divers  of  his  councell,  and  many  others  of
his  nobility.

Now  he  drew  hotly  againe  in  question  to  marry  some
kinsewoman  of  her  Majesties,  &  that  he  would  send
againe  into  England,  to  have  some  one  of  them  to  wife,
and  if  her  Majestic  would  not  upon  his  next  ambassage
send  him  such  a  one  as  he  required,  himselfe  would  then
goe  into  England,  and  cary  his  treasure  with  him,  and
marry  one  of  them  there.

Here  you  must  understand  that  the  yeere  before  this
ambassage,  he  had  sent  to  her  Majesty  by  his  ambassador
to  have  had  the  lady  Mary  Hastings  in  marriage,  which
intreaty  by  meanes  of  her  inability  of  body,  by  occasion
of  much  sicknesse,  or  perhaps,  of  no  great  liking  either
of  herselfe  or  friends,  or  both,  tooke  no  place.

The  ambassador  was  now  so  farre  growen  into  the
Emperors  favor,  &  his  affection  so  great  to  England,  as
those  great  counsellers  that  were  the  ambassadors  great
enemies before, were now desirous of some publike

323

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

'583.

courtesies  at  his  hands  for  their  advantage  to  the  Emper-
our :  neither  durst  they  now  any  more  interpose  them-
selves twixt  the  Emperour  and  him :  for  not  long  before
this,  the  Emperor  for  abusing  the  ambassador,  had  (to
shew  his  favor  towards  him)  beaten  Shalkan  the  chan-
celler  very  grievously,  and  had  sent  him  word,  that  he
would  not  leave  one  of  his  race  alive.

Now  whilest  the  ambassador  was  thus  strongly  possest
of  the  Emperours  favor,  he  imployed  himselfe  in  all  he
might,  not  onely  for  the  speedy  dispatch  of  the  negotia-
tion he  had  in  hand,  but  laboured  also  by  all  the  good
meanes  he  might,  further  to  benefit  his  countrey  and
countreymen,  and  so  not  long  after  wanne  at  the  Emper-
ours hands  not  onely  all  those  things  he  had  in  com-
mission to  treat  for  by  his  instructions,  but  also  some
other  of  good  and  great  importance,  for  the  benefit  of
the  merchants.

Private  sutes  obteined  of  the  Emperor by  the
ambassador.

L'

Eave for Richard Fransham an English man and

apothecary  to  the  Emperour,  his  wife,  and  children,

to  come  home  into  England,  and  to  bring  with  him  all

such  goods  as  he  had  gotten  there.

[I.  462.] He  obteined  like  leave  for  Richard  Elmes  an  English

man  one  ot  the  Emperours  surgions.

He also  got leave for Jane Ricards the widow of
Doctor Bomelius a Dutchman, and physician to the
Emperour,  who for treason  practised  with the king  of
Pole  against  the sayd Emperour,  was rosted to death
at  the  city  of  Mosco,  in  the  yere 1579.

These  following  he  obteined  for  the  behoofe  of
the  merchants.

HE  procured  for the merchants promise of recom-
pense  for  certaine  goods taken from  their factors
by  robbery  upon  the  Volga.

324

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME BOWES  a.d.

1583.

He  obtained  likewise  the  payment  of  five  hundred
marks,  which  was  payd  for  ten  yeeres  before  his  going
into  Russia  (into  the  Emperours  receit)  for  a  rent  of  a
house  that  they  had  at  Vologda.

He  also  got  granted  for  them  the  repayment  of
fifteene  hundred  marks,  which  had  bene  exacted  of  them
the  two  last  yeres  before  his  comming  thither.

He  got  also  for  them  order  for  the  repayment  of
an  olde  and  desperate  debt  of  three  thousand  marks,  a
debt  so  desperate,  as  foure  yeres  left  out  of  their  accounts,
and  by  the  opinion  of  them  all,  not  thought  fit  to  be  dealt
with,  for  too  much  offending  the  Emperor,  or  impeach-
ing his  other  businesse,  which  was  thought  at  least
otherwise  sufficient,  and  was  therefore  left  out  of  his
instructions  from  her  Majesty.

He  obteined  that  all  strangers  were  forbidden  to  trade
any  more  into  Russia,  and  that  the  passage  and  trade  to
all  the  Emperors  Northren  coasts  and  countries,  from  the
Wardhouse  to  the  river  of  Ob  should  be  onely  free  to  the
English  nation.

Lastly,  of  a  great  desire  he  had  to  do  the  merchants
good,  without  motion  either  of  themselves  here,  or  their
Agents  there,  or  any  other  of  them,  he  obteined  of  the
Emperour  the  abatement  of  all  their  custome  which  they
had  long  before  payd,  and  agreed  still  to  continue,  which
custome  the  Dutchmen  and  strangers  being  remooved,  as
now  it  was  agreed,  amounted  to  two  thousand  pounds
yerely.

All  these  were  granted,  some  already  payd  before  his
comming  from  Mosco,  the  olde  privilege  ratified,  newly
written,  signed  and  sealed,  and  was  to  be  delivered  to  the

ambassadour  at  his  next  comming  to  Court,  before  when

the  Emperor  fell  sicke  of  a  surfet,  and  so  died.

After  whose  death  the  case  was  woondrously  altered
with  the  ambassador  :  for  whereas  both  in  his  owne
conceit,  and  in  all  mens  opinion  els,  he  was  in  great
forwardnes  to  have  growen  a  great  man  with  the  Emperor,
what for the love he bare to her Majesty, and the

325

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

particular  liking  he  had  of  himselfe,  he  now  fell  into  the
hands  of  his  great  enemies,  Mekita  Romanovich  and
Andre  Shalkan  the  chanceller,  who,  after  the  death  of  the
Emperour,  tooke  the  speciall  government  upon  them-
selves, and  so  presently  caused  the  ambassadour  to  be
shut  up  a  close  prisoner  in  his  owne  house,  for  the  space
of  nine  weeks,  and  was  so  straightly  guarded  and  badly
used  by  those  that  attended  him,  as  he  dayly  suspected
some  further  mischiefe  to  have  followed  :  for  in  this  time
there  grew  a  great  uprore  in  Mosco  of  nigh  twenty
thousand  persons,  which  remembring  that  his  enemies
reigned,  somewhat  amazed  the  ambassadour,  but  yet  after-
wards the  matter  fell  out  against  that  great  counsellor
Bodan  Belskoy,  whom  I  noted  before  to  be  a  special  man
in  the  old  Emperors  favor  :  who  was  now  notwithstand-
ing so  outragiously  assaulted,  as  that  he  was  forced  to
seeke  the  Emperors  chamber  for  his  safety,  and  was  after-
wards sent  away  to  Cazan,  a  place  he  had  in  government,
five  hundred  miles  from  Mosco,  where  he  hath  remained
ever  since,  and  never  as  yet  called  againe  to  court,  at
which  time  the  ambassador  expected  some  such  like
measure,  and  prepared  himselfe  aswell  as  he  could,  for
his  defence  :  yet  happily  after  this,  was  sent  for  to  court,
to  have  his  dispatch,  and  to  take  his  leave  of  the
Emperor :  whither  being  conducted  (not  after  the
woonted  maner)  and  brought  to  the  councell  chamber,
came  to  him  onely  Shalkan  the  chanceller  and  a  brother
of  his,  who  without  more  adoe,  tolde  him  for  the  summe
of  his  dispatch,  that  this  Emperour  would  not  treat  of
further  amity  with  the  Queene  his  mistresse,  then  such  as
was  betweene  his  late  father  and  her,  before  his  comming
thither  :  and  would  not  heare  any  reply  to  be  made  by
the  ambassadour,  but  presently  caused  both  himselfe  and
all  his  company  to  be  disarmed  of  their  weapons,  and  go
towards  the  Emperor.  In  which  passage  there  were  such
outrages  offered  him,  as  had  he  not  used  more  patience
then  his  disposition  afforded  him,  or  the  occasion
required,  he  had  not  in  likelihood  escaped  with  life,  but

326

AMBASSAGE OF SIR JEROME  BOWES  ad.

1583.
yet  at  length  was  brought  to  the  presence  of  the
Emperour,  who  sayd  nothing  to  him,  but  what  the
chanceller  had  already  done,  but  offered  him  a  letter  to
carry  to  her  Majesty,  which  the  ambassadour  (for  that  he
knew  it  conteined  nothing  that  did  concerne  his  ambas-
sage)  refused  till  he  saw  his  danger  grow  too  great  :
neither  would  the  Emperour  suffer  the  ambassadour  to
reply  ought,  nor  well  he  could,  for  they  had  now  of
purpose  taken  away  his  interpreter,  being  yet  unwilling  [I.  4.63.]
(as  it  seemed,  and  suspecting  the  ambassadours  purpose)
that  the  Emperor  and  other  should  know  how  dishonor-
ably he  had  beene  handled  :  for  there  was  at  that  time,
in  that  presence  a  noble  brave  gentleman,  one  Boris  The  great
Pheodorovich  Godenoe,  brother  to  the  Emperor  that  now  f'^^^f^^sMp  of
is,  who  yet  after  the  death  of  the  Emperour  did  alwayes  p/igodorovkh.
use  the  ambassadour  most  honorably,  and  would  very
willingly  have  done  him  much  more  kindenesse,  but  his
authority  was  not  yet,  till  the  coronation  of  the
Emperor  :  but  notwithstanding  he  sent  often  unto  him,
not  long  before  his  departure,  and  accompanied  his  many
honorable  favours  with  a  present  of  two  faire  pieces
of  cloth  of  golde,  and  a  tymber  of  very  good  sables  :
and  desired  that  as  there  was  kindnesse  and  brotherhood
twixt  the  Emperor  and  her  Majesty,  so  there  might  be
love  and  brotherhood  twixt  him  and  the  ambassadour.
Saving  from  this  man,  there  was  now  no  more  favour
nor  friendship  left  for  the  ambassadour  in  Moscovia  :
for  the  chanceller  Shalkan  had  now  sent  him  word  that
the  English  Emperor  was  dead  :  he  had  now  nothing
offered  him  but  dangers  and  disgraces  too  many,  and
a  hasty  dispatch  from  the  Mosco,  that  he  might  not
tary  the  coronation  of  the  new  Emperour  :  offences
many  in  his  preparation  for  his  long  journey,  onely
one  meane  gentleman  appointed  to  accompany  him  to
the  sea  side,  expecting  daily  in  his  passage  some  sudden
revenge  to  be  done  upon  him,  for  so  he  understood  it
was  threatned  before  his  comming  from  the  Mosco,
&  therefore  with  resolution  provided  by  all  the  meanes

327

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

he  might,  by  himselfe  and  his  servants  for  his  defence
(for  now  was  his  danger  knowen  such,  as  the  English
merchants  did  altogether  leave  him,  although  he  com-
manded them  in  her  Majesties  name  to  accompany
him)  that  if  any  such  thing  should  happen  to  be  offered
him,  as  many  of  them  as  he  could  that  should  offer  to
execute  it,  should  die  with  him  for  company  :  which
being  perceived  was  thought  to  make  his  passage  the
safer.  So  afterward  being  driven  to  disgest  many  injuries
by  the  way,  at  length  he  recovered  S.  Nicholas,  where
remembring  his  unfortunate  losse  of  the  old  Emperor,
and  his  ill  usage  since  then  at  the  Mosco,  he  being  forced
to  take  a  bare  letter  for  the  summe  of  his  dispatch,  con-
teyning  nothing  of  that  he  came  for,  and  the  poore  and
disgracefull  present  sent  him  (in  the  name  of  the
Emperour)  in  respect  of  that  that  was  meant  him  by  the
old  Emperor,  knowing  all  these  to  be  done  in  disgrace  of
her  Majestic  and  himselfe,  determined  now  to  be  dis-
charged of  some  part  of  them  in  such  sort  as  he  could,
and  so  providing  as  he  might  to  prevent  his  danger,  in
getting  to  his  shippe,  furnishing  and  placing  his  men  to
answere  any  assault  that  should  be  offered  him,  after  he
had  bidden  farewell  to  the  uncourteous  gentleman  that
brought  him  thither,  by  three  or  foure  of  the  valiantest
and  discreetest  men  he  had,  he  sent  to  be  delivered  him
or  left  at  his  lodging,  his  maisters  weake  letter,  and
worsse  present,  and  so  afterwards  happily  (though  hardly)
recovered  his  ship  in  safetie,  although  presently  after-
wards, there  was  great  hurly  burly  after  him,  to  force  him
to  receive  the  same  againe,  but  failed  of  their  purpose.
So  came  the  ambassadour  from  S.  Nicholas  the  twelft  day
of  August,  and  arrived  at  Gravesend  the  twelft  of
September  following,  and  attended  her  Majestic  at  the
court  at  Otelands,  where,  after  having  kist  her  Majesties
hands,  and  delivered  some  part  of  the  successe  of  his
ambassage,  he  presented  her  an  Elke  or  Loshe,  the  Red
deere  of  the  countrey,  and  also  a  brace  of  Raine  deare,
Buck  and  Doe,  both  bearing  very  huge  homes  :  they  in

328

OF PREFERRING SUITS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1583-
lier  Majesties  presence  drew  a  sled  and  a  man  upon  it,
after  the  maner  of  the  Samoeds,  a  people  that  inhabite  in
the  Northeast  from  Russia,  and  were  that  yeere  come
over  the  sea  in  the  winter  season  upon  the  yce,  in  their
sleds,  drawen  with  these  deere  into  Russia,  where  the
ambassadour  bought  of  them  seyenteene,  whereof  he
brought  nine  alive  into  Kent.

The  maner  of  the  preferring  of  sutes  in  Russia,
by  the  example  of  our  English  merchants
bill,  exhibited  to  the  Emperour.

John Basiliwich,  Lord,  King,  and great  Duke  of  all
Russia, the English merchants, William,  sonne of
Thomas,  with  his  company  sue  unto.

Lord,  in  the  7082.  yeere  of  the  worlds  creation,  thy
Majesties  treasurer,  named  Gregorie  Mekitowich  Boroz-
den,  tooke  of  us  for  thy  use  12.  poods  of  loafe  sugar,
prised  at  8.  robles  the  pood,  which  sugar  was  sent  to  the
II  Sloboda.  More,  the  sayd  Gregorie  treasurer,  tooke  of  us  II  The  Empe-
for  thy  Majestic  200.  reames  of  paper,  prised  at  20.  ^'°^"  ^°"^^  "f
altines  the  reame,  for  all  which  the  money  hath  not  bene
payd  which  amounteth  to  216.  robles.

And  in  the  84.  yeere  thy  diake  Stephan  Lighachdo
tooke  of  us  for  thy  Majesty  copper  plates,  for  the  summe
of  1032.  robles  and  one  fourth  part  unpayd  for.

Also  in  the  said  84.  yeere  thy  Majesties  diakes  called
Ivan  Blasghoy,  and  Ivan  Sobakin  tooke  of  us  for  thy  use,
sundry  commodities,  and  have  not  payd  630.  robles,  the
rest  of  the  money  due  for  the  said  goods.

In the 85. yeere thy Majesties treasurer Peter  [I.  464.]
Gholoven  tooke  of  us  for  thy  Majestic,  cloth  of  sundry
sorts,  and  hath  not  payd  of  the  money  due  therefore  538.
robles.

In  the  88.  yeere,  thy  diakes  Andrea  Shalkan,  and
Istomay  Yevskoy  tooke  of  us  lead  for  thy  Majestic,  to
the  value  of  267.  robles  and  a  halfe  not  payd.

And  in  the  same  yeere  thy  Majesties  diak  Boris
Gregoriwich  had  for  thy  use  15.  broad  cloths  of  diverse

329

A.D.
1583.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

sorts,  prised  at  210.  robles,  whereof  90.  robles  are
unpayd.

Also  in  the  said  88.  yere  thy  diak  Andrea  Shalkan
tooke  from  us  1000.  robles  for  thee  (Lord)  in  ready
money,  yet  we  know  not  whether  by  thy  Majesties
appointment.

And  also  in  the  89.  yeere  (Lord)  thy  diak  Andrea
Shalkan  tooke  from  us  for  thy  Majesty  500.  robles,  we
know  not  whether  by  thy  Majesties  order  or  no,  because
that  thy  authorized  people  do  yeerely  take  away  from
us,  neither  do  they  give  us  right  in  any  cause.

All  the  mony  (Lord)  which  is  not  payd  us  out  of  thy
Majesties  treasury  for  our  commodities  or  wares,  with
the  money  taken  from  us  by  Andrea  Shalkan,  is  4273.
robles  25.  altines.

Right  noble  king  and  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy,  and
cause  the  money  to  be  payd  us  which  is  owing  for  our
goods,  as  also  that  which  hath  beene  taken  from  us  :
extend  thy  favor,  King  and  Lord.

A  letter  of  M.  Henrie  Lane  to  the  worshipful!
M.  William  Sanderson,  conteining  a  briefe
discourse  of  that  which  passed  in  the  North-
east discovery  for  the  space  of  three  and
thirtie  yeres.

Aster  Sanderson,  as  you  lately  requested
mee,  so  have  I  sought,  and  though  I
cannot  finde  things  that  heretofore  I  kept
in  writing,  and  lent  out  to  others,  yet
perusing  at  London  copies  of  mine  old
letters  to  content  one  that  meaneth  to
pleasure  many,  I  have  briefly  and  as
truly  as  1  may,  drawen  out  as  followeth  :  The  rough
hewing  may  be  planed  at  your  leasure,  or  as  pleaseth  him
that  shall  take  the  paines.

First  the  honourable  attempt  to  discover  by  sea  North-
east and Northwest named for Cathay, being chiefly

330

HENRY LANE'S LETTER  ad.

1554.
procured  by  priviledge  from  king  Edward  the  sixt,  and
other his  nobilitie,  by  and  at  the  cost  and  sute  of  M.
Sebastian  Cabota,  then  governor  for  discoveries  with  sir
Andrew  Judde,  sir  George  Barnes,  sir  William  Garrard,
M.  Anthony  Hussie,  and  a  companie  of  merchants,  was
in the  last yeere of  his Majesties reigne 1553. The  Anno  1553,
generall  charge  whereof  was  committed  to  one  sir  Hugh  ^-  ^^"^^"^
Willoughbie knight, a  goodly Gentleman,  accompanied  ^j^^^ f  ^^^j
with sufficient number of  Pilots, Maisters, Merchants  with  his
and Mariners,  having three shippes  well furnished, to  brothe?-  in  this
wit.  The  Bona  Speranga,  the  Edward  Bonadventure,  and  -^^'^^  voyage.
the Confidentia. The  Edward Bonadventure, Richard
Chanceller being  Pilot, and Steven Burrough Maister,
having discovered Wardhouse upon the coast of  Fin-
mark,  by  storme  or  fogge  departed  from  the  rest,  found  ^^'^"°^  "  ^
the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas  now  the chiefe  port  for  Russia,  v^^  Nicholas
there  wintred  in  safetie,  and  had  ayde  of  the  people  at  Westivard  35
a  village  called  Newnox.  miles.

The  other  two  shippes  attempting  further  Northwards
(as  appeared  by  pamphlets  found  after  written  by  sir
Hugh  Willoughbie)  were  in  September  encountred  with
such  extreame  colde,  that  they  put  backe  to  seeke  a
wintring  place  :  and  missing  the  saide  baye  fell  upon  a
desert  coast  in  Lappia,  entring  into  a  River  immediately
frozen  up,  since  discovered,  named  Arzina  Reca,  distant
East  from  a  Russian  Monastery  of  Monkes  called
Pechingho,  from  whence  they  never  returned,  but  all  to
the  number  of  70.  persons  perished,  which  was  for  want
of  experience  to  have  made  caves  and  stoves.  These  "Note.
were  found  with  the  shippes  the  next  Summer  Anno
1554.  by  Russe  fishermen  :  and  in  Anno  1555.  the  place
sent  unto  by  English  Merchants  as  hereafter  appeareth.

Anno  1554.  the  sayd  shippe  Edward  Bonadventure  Anno  1554.
(although  robbed  homewardes  by  Flemings)  returned
with  her  company  to  London,  shewing  and  setting  foorth
their  entertainments  and  discovery  of  the  countreys  even
to  the  citie  of  Mosco,  from  whence  they  brought  a
privilege  written  in  Russe  with  the  Kings  or  great  Dukes

331

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1554.

scale,  the  other  two  shippes  looked  for  and  unknowen
to  them  where  they  were.

Jnno  i$ss-  An.  1555.  the  said  company  of  Merchants  for  dis-
coverie  upon  a  new  supply,  sent  thither  againe  with  two
ships,  to  wit,  the  Edward  Bonadventure,  &  another
bearing  the  name  of  the  King  and  Queene,  Philip  and

Th  King  and  Marie, whose Majesties by their letters to the said

Queenes  Moscovite, recommended sundry their subjects then

passing,  wherof  certaine,  to  wit,  Richard  Chanceller,
George  Killingworth,  Henry  Lane,  and  Arthur  Edwards,
after  their  arrivall  at  the  Bay,  and  passing  up  Dwina  to
Vologda,  went  first  up  to  Mosco,  where,  upon  knowledge
of  the  said  letters,  they  with  their  traine  had  speciall
entertainment, with houses and diet appointed, and

[I.  465.]  shortly  permitted  to  the  princes  presence,  they  were
with  gentlemen  brought  through  the  citie  of  Mosco,  to
the  castle  and  palace,  replenished  with  numbers  of  people,
and  some  gunners.  They  entred  sundry  roomes,  fur-
nished in  shew  with  ancient  grave  personages,  all  in  long
garments  of  sundry  colours,  golde,  tissue,  baldekin,  and
violet,  as  our  vestments  and  copes  have  bene  in  England,
sutable  with  caps,  jewels,  and  chaines.  These  were  found
to  be  no  courtiers,  but  ancient  Moscovites,  inhabitants,
and  other  their  merchants  of  credite,  as  the  maner  is,
furnished  thus  from  the  Wardrobe  and  Treasurie,  wait-
ing and  wearing  this  apparell  for  the  time,  and  so  to
restore  it.

Then  entring  into  the  presence,  being  a  large  roome
floored  with  carpets,  were  men  of  more  estate,  and  richer
shew,  in  number  above  an  hundred  set  square  :  who  after
the  said  English  men  came  in,  doing  reverence,  they  all
stood  up,  the  prince  onely  sitting,  and  yet  rising  at  any
occasion,  when  our  King  and  Queenes  names  were  read
or  spoken.  Then  after  speeches  by  interpretation,  our
men  kissing  his  hande,  and  bidden  to  dinner,  were  stayed
in  another  roome,  and  at  dinner  brought  through,  where
might  be  seene  massie  silver  and  gilt  plate,  some  like
and  as  bigge  as  kilderkins,  and  washbowles,  and  entring

332

HENRY LANE'S LETTER  ad.

1556.
the  dining  place,  being  the  greater  roome,  the  prince  was
set  bare  headed,  his  crowne  and  rich  cappe  standing  upon
a  pinnacle  by.  Not  farre  distant  sate  his  Metropolitane,
with  divers  other  of  his  kindred,  and  chiefe  Tartarian
Captaines  :  none  sate  over  against  him,  or  any,  at  other
tables,  their  backes  towards  him  :  which  tables  all  fur-
nished with  ghests  set,  there  was  for  the  Englishmen,
named  by  the  Russes,  Ghosti  Carabelski,  to  wit,  strangers
or  merchants  by  ship,  a  table  in  the  middest  of  the  roome,
where  they  were  set  direct  against  the  prince  :  and  then
began  the  service,  brought  in  by  a  number  of  his  yoong
Lordes  and  Gentlemen,  in  such  rich  attire,  as  is  above
specified  :  and  still  from  the  Princes  table  (notwith-
standing their  owne  furniture)  they  had  his  whole  messes
set  over  all  in  massie  fine  golde,  delivered  every  time
from  him  by  name  to  them,  by  their  severall  Christian
names,  as  they  sate,  viz.  Richard,  George,  Henry,  Arthur.
Likewise  bread  and  sundry  drinkes  of  purified  mead,
made  of  fine  white  and  clarified  honie.  At  their  rising,
the  prince  called  them  to  his  table,  to  receive  each  one
a  cup  from  his  hand  to  drinke,  and  tooke  into  his  hand
Master  George  Killingworths  beard,  which  reached  over  M.  Killing-
the  table,  &  pleasantly  delivered  it  the  Metropolitane,  "norths  beard
who  seeming  to  blesse  it,  sayd  in  Russe,  this  is  Gods  "l^s  knlth^ '
gift.  As  in  deede  at  that  time  it  was  not  onely  thicke,
broad,  and  yellow  coloured,  but  in  length  five  foot  and
two  inches  of  assize.  Then  taking  leave,  being  night,
they  were  accompanied  and  followed  with  a  number,
carying  pots  of  drinke,  and  dishes  of  meat  dressed,  to
our  lodging.

This  yeere  the  two  shippes,  with  the  dead  bodies  of
Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie,  and  his  people,  were  sent  unto
by  Master  Killingworth,  (which  remained  there  in  Mosco
Agent  almost  two  yeeres)  and  much  of  the  goods  and
victuals  were  recovered  and  saved.

Anno  1556. The  company  sent  two  ships  for  Russia,  Anno  1556.
with  extraordinary  masters  and  saylers  to  bring  home  the
two  ships,  which  were  frozen  in  Lappia,  in  the  river  of

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^556-

Arzina  aforesaid.  The  two  ships  sent  this  yeere  from
England  sailing  from  Lapland  to  the  Bay  of  S.  Nicholas,
tooke  in  lading  with  passengers,  to  wit,  a  Russe  am-
bassador, named  Joseph  Napea,  and  some  of  his  men
shipped  with  Richard  Chanceller  in  the  Edward.  But
so  it  fel  out  that  the  two  which  came  from  Lappia,  with
all  their  new  Masters  and  Mariners,  never  were  heard
of,  but  in  foule  weather,  and  wrought  seas,  after  their
two  yeeres  wintring  in  Lapland,  became,  as  is  supposed,
unstanch,  and  sunke,  wherein  were  drowned  also  divers
Russes  merchants,  and  servants  of  the  ambassadour.  A
third  shippe  the  Edward  aforesayd,  falling  on  the  North
part  of  Scotland,  upon  a  rocke  was  also  lost,  and  Master
Chanceller,  with  divers  other,  drowned.  The  sayd  Russe
ambassadour  hardly  escaping,  with  other  his  men,
mariners,  &  some  goods  saved,  were  sent  for  into  Scot-
land, from  the  King,  Queene,  and  Merchants  (the
messenger  being  M.  Doctor  Laurence  Hussie,  and
others  :)  And  then,  as  in  the  chronicles  appeareth,
honorably  enterteined  and  received  at  London.

This  yeere  also  the  company  furnished  and  sent  out
a  pinnesse,  named  the  Serchthrift,  to  discover  the  har-
borowes  in  the  North  coast  from  Norway  to  Wardhouse,
and  so  to  the  Bay  of  S.  Nicholas.  There  was  in  her
Master  and  Pilot,  Stephen  Burrough,  with  his  brother
William,  and  eight  other.  Their  discovery  was  beyond
the  Bay,  towarde  the  Samoeds,  people  dwelling  neare  the
river  of  Ob,  and  found  a  sound  or  sea  with  an  Island
called  Vaigats,  first  by  them  put  into  the  Carde  or
Mappe.  In  that  place  they  threw  snowe  out  of  their
said  pinnesse,  with  shovels  in  August,  by  which  ex-
tremitie,  and  lacke  of  time,  they  came  backe  to  Russia,
and  wintred  at  Colmogro.
.Jnno  1557.  Anno  1557.  The  company  with  foure  good  ships,
sent  backe  the  said  Russe  ambassadour,  and  in  company
with  him,  sent  as  an  Agent,  for  further  discovery.  Master
Anthony  Jenkinson,  who  afterward  anno  1558,  with
great  favour  of  the  prince  of  Moscovia,  and  his  letters

334

HENRY LANE'S LETTER  a.d.

1579-
passed  the  river  Volga  to  Cazan,  and  meaning  to  seeke  [I.  466.]
Cathay  by  land,  was  by  many  troupes  and  companies  of  Bogkar
uncivil  Tartarians  encountred,  and  in  danger :  but  keep-  '^°y^S^-
ing  company  with  merchants  of  Bactria,  or Boghar,  and
Urgeme,  travelling  with camels, he  with his company,
went  to  Boghar,  and  no  further :  whose  entertainment  of
the  king  is  to  be  had  of  master  Jenkinson,  which  returned
anno  1559.  to Moscovie. And  in  anno  1560.  he,  with 1560.
Henry  Lane,  came  home  into  England :  which  yeere  was
the  first  safe  returne,  without  losse  or  shipwracke,  or  dead
fraight, & burnings. And at this time was the first  The  first  trade
traffike to the Narve in Livonia,  which confines  with  ^°  ^^^  Narve.
Lituania, & all the dominions of Russia : and the
markets,  faires,  commodities,  great  townes  &  rivers,  were
sent  unto  by  divers  servants :  the  reports  were  taken  by
Henry Lane, Agent, and delivered to the companie,
1 56 1. The  trade  to  Rie,  and  Revel,  of  old  time  hath
bene  long  since  frequented  by  our  English  nation,  but
this  trade  to  the  Narve  was  hitherto  concealed  from  us
by  the  Danskers  and  Lubeckers.

Anno  1 56 1,  the  said  Master  Anthony  Jenkinson  went
Agent  into  Russia,  who  the  next  yeere  after,  passing  all
the  river  of  Volga  to  Astracan,  and  over  the  Caspian
sea,  arrived  in  Persia,  and  opened  the  trade  thither.

Also  betweene  the  yeeres  of  1568.  and  1573.  sundry
voyages  after  Master  Jenkinsons,  were  made  by  Thomas
Alcock,  Arthur  Edwards,  Master  Thomas  Bannister,  and  ^^"^^  \^^^"^
Master  Geffrey  Ducket,  whose  returne ("if  spoyle  neere  ^^  P^^["^-
Volga  had not  prevented  by  roving  theeves) had  alto-  ^-^  Media.
gether  salved  and  recovered the  companies (called the  Edwards  died
olde  companies)  great  losse,  charges,  and  damages :  but  ^t  Astracan.
the  saying  is  true.  By  unitie  small  things  grow  great,  &
by  contention  great  things  become  small. This  may  be
understood  best  by  the  company. The  frowardnesse  of
some  few,  and  evill  doing  of  some  unjust  factors,  was
cause  of  much  of  the  evill  successe.

Arthur  Edwards  was  sent  againe  1579.  and  died  in  the
voyage at  Astracan. About  which matters, are to be

335

A.D.

1579-

II  Or  Theodor.

The  death  of
Ivan  Vasili-
zvich  I  584.
Apr.  18.

L.  Boris

adopted  as  tin
Emperors
third  Sonne.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

remembred the  voyages of Master Thomas Randolph

Esquire, Ambassador, anno 1567. And late of Sir

Jerome  Bowes,  anno  1583.  both  tending  and  treating  for

further discoveries,  freedomes,  and  privileges,  wherewith

I  meddle  not. But  in  conclusion,  for their paines and

adventures this way (as divers do now adayes other

wayes)  as  worthy  Gentlemen sent  from  princes,  to  doe

their  countrey  good,  I  put  them  in  your  memorie,  with

my  hearty  farewell. From  S.  Magarets  neere  Dartforth

in  Kent.  v  tt  t

lours  idenry  Lane.

The  most  solemne,  and  magnificent  coronation
of  II  Pheodor  Ivanowich,  Emperour  of  Russia
&c.  the  tenth  of  June,  in  the  yeere  1584.
seene  and  observed  by  Master  Jerom  Horsey
gentleman,  and  servant  to  her  Majesty,  a  man
of  great  travell,  and  long  experience  in  those
parts :  wherwith  is  also  joyned  the  course
of  his  journey  over  land  from  Mosco  to
Emden.

Hen  the  old  Emperour  Ivan  Vasiliwich
died,  (being  about  the  eighteenth  of
Aprill,  1584.  after  our  computation)  in
the  citie  of  Mosco,  having  raigned  54.
yeeres,  there  was  some  tumult  and  uprore
among  some  of  the  nobilitie,  and  cominal-
tie,  which  notwithstanding  was  quickly
pacified.  Immediately  the  same  night,  the  Prince  Boris
Pheodorowich  Godonova,  Knez  Ivan  Pheodorowich,
Mesthis  Slafsky,  Knez  Ivan  Petrowich  Susky,  Mekita
Romanowich  &  Bodan  Jacovlewich  Belskoy,  being  all
noble  men,  and  chiefest  in  the  Emperors  Will,  especially
the  Lord  Boris,  whom  he  adopted  as  his  third  sonne,  &
was  brother  to  the  Empresse,  who  was  a  man  very  wel
liked  of  al  estates,  as  no  lesse  worthy  for  his  valure  &
wisedome :  all  these  were  appointed  to  dispose,  &  settle

336

JEROME HORSEY  ad.

1584.
his Sonne Pheodor Ivanowich,  having one sworne an-
other, and  all  the  nobilitie,  and  officers  whosoever. In
the  morning  ye  dead  Emperor  was  layd  into  the  Church
of  Michael  the  Archangel,  into a hewen sepulcre,  very
richly  decked  with  vestures  fit  for  such  a  purpose :  and
present Proclamation was made,. (Emperor Pheodor
Ivanowich  of  all  Russia  &c.) Throughout  all  the citie
of  Mosco  was  great  watch  and  ward,  with  souldiers,  and
gunners,  good  orders  established,  and  officers  placed to
subdue the tumulters, and mainteine quietnes : to see
what  speede  and  policie  was  in  this  case  used  was  a  thing
worth  the  beholding. This  being  done  in  Mosco,  great
men  of  birth  and  accompt  were  also  presently  sent  to  the
bordering  Townes,  as  Smolensko  Vobsko,  Kasan,  Novo-
gorod  &c.  with  fresh  garrison,  and  the  old  sent  up. As
upon  the  4.  of  May  a  parliament  was  held,  wherein  were
assembled, the Metropolitane, Archbishops, Bishops,
Priors,  and  chiefe  clergie  men,  and  all  the  nobility  what-
soever :  where  many  matters  were  determined  not  perti-
nent to  my  purpose,  yet  all  tended  to  a  new  reformation  [I.  467.]
in the  government :  but  especially  the  terme,  and  time
was agreed upon for the solemnizing of the new
Emperors  coronation. In  the  meane  time  ye  Empresse,  27;^  ^^^^  ^»'-
wife to the old Emperor, was with her child the  ^^^f  ^'  '^^'j ,
Emperors sonne, Charlewich Demetrie Ivanowich, of  ^^^p.  l^^^g
one yeres age or there abouts, sent with her father  semtoOugkts.
Pheodor  Pheodorowich  Nagay,  &  that  kindred,  being  5.
Brothers, to a towne called Ouglets,  which  was given
unto  her,  and  the  young  Prince  her  sonne,  with  all  the
lands belonging to it  in the  shire,  with officers of  all
sortes appointed, having allowance of  apparell,  jewels,
diet,  horse  &c.  in  ample  maner  belonging  to  the  estate
of  a  princesse. The  time  of  mourning  after  their  use  The  day  of
being  expired,  called  Sorachyn,  or  fortie  orderlie  dayes,  Pf^^°^°^/^^^
the  day  of  the  solemnizing  of  this  coronation,  with  great
preparations,  was  come,  being  upon  the  10.  day  of  June,
1584.  and  that  day  then  Sunday,  he  being  of  the  age  of
25. yeeres : at  which time.  Master Jerom Horsey  was
HI  337  V

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

orderly  sent  for,  and  placed  in  a  fit  roome  to  see  all
the  solemnitie.  The  Emperor  comming  out  of  his
Pallace,  there  went  before  him,  the  Metropolitan,  Arch-
bishops, Bishops,  and  chiefest  Monkes,  and  Clergie  men,
with  very  rich  Copes,  and  Priestes  garments  upon  them,
carying  pictures  of  our  Ladie  &c.  with  the  Emperours
Angell,  banners,  censers,  and  many  other  such  cere-
monious things,  singing  all  the  way.  The  Emperour
with  his  nobilitie  in  order  entred  the  Church  named
Blaveshina,  or  Blessednes,  where  prayers,  and  service  were
used,  according  to  the  maner  of  their  Church  :  that  done,
they  went  thence  to  the  Church,  called  Michael  the
Archangell,  and  there  also  used  the  like  prayers,  and
service :  and  from  thence  to  our  Lady  Church,  Prechista,
being  their  Cathedrall  Church.  In  the  middest  thereof
was  a  chaire  of  majestie  placed,  wherein  his  Auncestors
used  to  sit  at  such  extraordinarie  times :  his  robes  were
then  changed,  and  most  rich  and  unvaluable  garments  put
on  him :  being  placed  in  this  Princely  seate,  his  nobility
standing  round  about  him  in  their  degres,  his  imperiall
Crowne  was  set  upon  his  head  by  the  Metropolitane,  his
Scepter  globe  in  his  right  hand,  his  sword  of  Justice  in
his  left  of  great  riches :  his  6.  Crownes  also,  by  which
he  holdeth  his  kingdomes  were  set  before  him,  and  the
Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich  was  placed  at  his  right  hand :
then  the  Metropolitan  read  openly  a  booke  of  a  small
volume,  with  exhortations  to  the  Emperour  to  minister
true  Justice,  to  injoy  with  tranquilitie  the  Crowne  of  his
auncestors,  which  God  had  given  him,  and  used  these
words  following.

Through  the  will  of  the  almighty  &  without  beginning
God,  which  was  before  this  world,  whom  we  glorifie  in
the  Trinitie,  one  onely  God,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  holy  Ghost,  maker  of  all  things,  worker  of  all  in  all
every  where,  fulfiller  of  all  things,  by  which  will,  and
working,  he  both  liveth,  and  giveth  life  to  man :  that  our
only  God  which  enspireth  every  one  of  us  his  only
children  with  his  word  to  discerne  God  through  our  Lord

338

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.

Jesus  Christ,  and  the  holy  quickning  spirit  of  life,  now  in
these  perilous  times  establish  us  to  keep  the  right  Scepter,
and  suffer  us  to  raigne  of  our  selves  to  the  good  profit
of  the  land,  to  the  subduing  of  the  people,  together
with  the  enemies,  &  the  maintenance  of  vertue.  And  so
the  Metropolitan  blessed  and  layd  Jiis  crosse  upon  him.
After  this,  he  was  taken  out  of  his  chaire  of  Majestie,
having  upon  him  an  upper  robe  adorned  with  precious
stones  of  all  sorts,  orient  pearles  of  great  quantitie,  but
alwayes  augmented  in  riches  :  it  was  in  waight  two
hundred  pounds,  the  traine,  and  parts  thereof  borne  up
by  6.  Dukes,  his  chiefe  imperiall  Crowne  upon  his  head
very  precious  :  his  staffe  imperiall  in  his  right  hand  of  an
unicornes  home  of  three  foot  and  a  halfe  in  length  beset
with  rich  stones,  bought  of  Merchants  of  Ausburge  by
the  old  Emperour  in  An.  1581,  and  cost  him  7000.
Markes  sterling.  This  Jewel  M.  Horsey  kept  some-
times, before  the  Emperor  had  it.  His  scepter  globe  was
caried  before  him  by  the  prince  Boris  Pheodorowich,  his
rich  cap  beset  with  rich  stones  and  pearles  was  caried
before  him  by  a  Duke  :  his  6.  Crownes  also  were  caried
by  Demetrius  Ivanowich  Godonova,  the  Emperors  uncle,
Mekita  Romanowich  the  Emperors  uncle,  Stephan  Vasili-
wich,  Gregory  Vasiliwich,  Ivan  Vasiliwich  brothers  of  the
blood  royal.  Thus  at  last  the  Emperor  came  to  the  great
Church  doore,  and  the  people  cried,  God  save  our
Emperour  Pheodor  Ivanowich  of  al  Russia.  His  horse
was  there  ready  most  richly  adorned,  with  a  covering  of
imbrodered  pearle  and  precious  stones,  saddle,  and  all
furniture  agreeable  to  it,  reported  to  be  worth  300000.
markes  sterling.

There  was  a  bridge  made  of  150.  fadome  in  length,
three  maner  of  waies,  three  foote  above  ground  and  two
fadome  broad,  for  him  to  goe  from  one  Church  to  the
other  with  his  Princes  and  nobles  from  the  presse  of  the
people,  which  were  in  number  infinite,  and  some  at  that
time  pressed  to  death  with  the  throng.  As  the  Emperour
returned  out  of  the  Churches,  they  were  spred  under  foot

339

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

with  cloth  of  gold,  the  porches  of  the  Churches  with  red
velvet,  the  bridges  with  scarlet,  and  stammell  cloth  from
one  church  to  another  :  and  as  soone  as  the  Emperor  was
passed  by,  the  cloth  of  gold,  velvet  and  scarlet  was  cut,
and  taken  of  those  that  could  come  by  it,  every  man
desirous  to  have  a  piece,  to  reserve  it  for  a  monument :
[I.  468.]  silver  and  gold  coyne,  then  mynted  of  purpose  was  cast
among  the  people  in  great  quantitie.  The  lord  Boris
Pheodorowich  was  sumptuously,  and  richly  attired,  with
his  garments  decked  with  great  orient  pearle,  beset  with
al  sorts  of  precious  stones.  In  like  rich  maner  were
appareled  all  the  family  of  the  Godonovaes  in  their
degrees,  with  the  rest  of  the  princes,  and  nobilitie,
whereof  one  named  Knez  Ivan  Michalowich  Glynsky,
whose  robe,  horse,  and  furniture,  was  in  register  found
worth  one  hundred  thousand  markes  sterling,  being  of
great  antiquitie.  The  Empresse  being  in  her  pallace,  was
placed  in  her  chaire  of  Majesty  also  before  a  great  open
window  :  most  precious,  and  rich  were  her  robes,  and
shining  to  behold,  with  rich  stones,  and  orient  pearle
beset,  her  crowne  was  placed  upon  her  head,  accompanied
with  her  Princesses,  and  Ladies  of  estate  :  then  cried  out
the  people,  God  preserve  our  noble  Empresse  Irenia.
After  all  this  the  Emperour  came  into  the  Parliament
house  which  was  richly  decked  :  there  he  was  placed  in
his  royall  seat  adorned  as  before  :  his  6.  crownes  were  set
before  him  upon  a  table  :  the  basin,  and  ewer  royall  of
gold  held  by  his  knight  of  gard  with  his  men  standing
two  on  each  side  in  white  apparell  of  cloth  of  silver,  called
Kindry,  with  scepters,  and  battle  axes  of  gold  in  their
hands :  the  Princes,  and  nobilitie  were  all  placed  according
to  their  degrees  all  in  their  rich  roabs.

The  Emperour  after  a  short  oration,  permitted  every
man  in  order  to  kisse  his  hande :  which  being  done,  he
removed  to  a  princely  seate  prepared  for  him  at  the  table :
where  he  was  served  by  his  nobles  in  very  princely  order.
The  three  out  roomes  being  very  great,  and  large  were
beset  with plate of  golde, and silver round,  from the

340

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.
ground  up  to  the  vauts  one  upon  the  other :  among
which  plate  were  many  barrels  of  silver  and  golde :  this
solemnitie,  and  triumph  lasted  a  whole  weeke,  wherein
many  royall  pastimes  were  shewed  and  used:  after  which
the  chiefest  men  of  the  nobilitie  were  elected  to  their
places  of  office,  &  dignitie,  as  the  Prince  Boris  Pheodoro-
wich  was  made  chiefe  Counseller  to  the  Emperor,  Master
of  the  horse,  had  the  charge  of  his  person,  Liuetenant  of
the  Empire,  and  Warlike  engins.  Governor  or  Liuetenant
of  the  Empire  of  Cazan,  and  Astracan  and  others  :  to  this
dignitie  were  by  Parliament,  and  gift  of  the  Emperor
given  him  many  revenues,  and  rich  lands,  as  there  was
given  him,  and  his  for  ever  to  inherite  a  province  called
Vaga,  of  300.  English  miles  in  length,  and  250.  in
bredth,  with  many  townes  and  great  villages  populous
and  wealthy,  his  yeerely  revenue  out  of  that  province,  is
35.  thousand  markes  sterling,  being  not  the  5.  part  of  his
yerely  revenue  Further,  he  and  his  house  be  of  such
authoritie,  and  power,  that  in  40.  dayes  warning  they  are
able  to  bring  into  the  fielde  100.  thousand  Souldiers  well
furnished.

The  conclusion  of  the  Emperors  Coronation  was  a
peale  of  ordinance,  called  a  peale  royall  two  miles  without
the  citie,  being  170.  great  pieces  of  brasse  of  all  sorts,  as
faire  as  any  can  be  made,  these  pieces  were  all  discharged
with  shot  against  bulwarkes  made  of  purpose  :  20.  thou-
sand hargubusers  standing  in  8.  rankes  two  miles  in
length,  appareled  all  in  velvet,  coloured  silke  &  stammels,
discharged  their  shot  also  twise  over  in  good  order  :  and
so  the  Emperor  accompanied  with  all  his  princes  and
nobles,  at  the  least  50.  thousand  horse  departed  through
the  City  to  his  pallace.  This  royall  coronation  would  aske
much  time,  and  many  leaves  of  paper  to  be  described  par-
ticularly as  it  was  performed  :  it  shal  suffice,  to  understand
that  the  like  magnificence  was  never  seene  in  Russia.

The  coronation,  and  other  triumphes  ended,  al  the
nobilitie,  officers,  and  merchants  according  to  an  accus-
tomed order  every  one  in  his  place,  and  degree  brought

341

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

rich  presents  unto  the  Emperor,  wishing  him  long  life,
and  joy  in  his  kingdome.

The  same  time  also  Master  Jerom  Horsey  aforesaid,
remayning  as  servant  in  Russia  for  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestic,  was  called  for  to  the  Emperor,  as  he
sate  in  his  imperiall  seat,  and  then  also  a  famous
Merchant  of  Netherland  being  newly  come  to  Mosco,
(who gave him selfe out to be the  king of  Spaines

JohndeWale.  subject)  called  John  de  Wale,  was  in  like  sort  called  for.
Some  of  the  nobilitie  would  have  preferred  this  subject
of  the  Spaniard  before  Master  Horsey  servant  to  the
Queene  of  England,  whereunto  Master  Horsey  would
in  no  case  agree,  saying,  he  would  have  his  legges  cut  off
by  the  knees,  before  he  would  yeeld  to  such  an  indignitie
offered  to  his  Soveraigne  the  Queenes  Majesty  of
England,  to  bring  the  Emperor  a  present,  in  course  after
the  King  of  Spaines  subject,  or  any  other  whatsoever.
The  Emperor,  and  the  Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich  per-
ceiving the  controversie,  sent  the  Lord  Treasorer  Peter
Ivanowich  Galavyn,  and  Vasili  Shalkan,  both  of  the
Counsell,  to  them,  who  delivered  the  Emperor  backe,
Master  Horseys  speech  :  whereupon  he  was  first  in  order
(as  good  reason)  admitted  and  presented  the  Emperor  in
the  behalfe  of  the  English  Merchants  trading  thither,  a
present  wishing  him  joy,  and  long  to  raigne  in  tran-
quilitie,  and  so  kissed  the  Emperors  hand,  he  accepting
the  present  with  good  liking,  and  avouching,  that  for  his
sisters  sake  Queene  Elizabeth  of  England,  he  would  be  a
gracious  Lord  to  her  Merchants,  in  as  ample  maner  as

[I.  469.]  ever  his  father  had  ben  :  and  being  dismissed,  he  had  the
same  day  sent  him  70.  dishes  of  sundry  kinds  of  meats,
with  3.  carts  laden  with  al  sorts  of  drinks  very  bounti-
fully. After  him  was  the  foresayd  subject  of  the
Spanish  king  admitted  with  his  present,  whom  the
Emperor  willed  to  be  no  lesse  faithfull  and  serviceable
unto  him,  then  the  Queene  of  Englands  subjects  were
&  had  bene,  and  then  the  king  of  Spaines  subjects  should
receive  favour  accordingly.

342

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.

All  these  things  thus  in  order  performed,  praises  were
sung  in  all  the  churches.  The  Emperor  and  Empresse
very  devoutly  resorted  on  foote  to  many  principal
Churches  in  the  Citie,  and  upon  Trinitie  Sunday  betooke
themselves  to  a  progresse  in  order  of  procession,  to  a
famous  monasterie  called  Sergius  and  the  Trinitie,  60.
miles  distant  from  the  Citie  of  Mdsco,  accompanied  with
a  huge  armie  of  Noblemen,  Gentlemen  and  others,
mounted  upon  goodly  horses  with  furniture  accordingly.

The  Empresse  of  devotion  tooke  this  journey  on  foot
all  the  way,  accompanied  with  her  princesses  and  ladies,
no  small  number :  her  guard  and  gunners  were  in  number
20000,  her  chiefe  counseller  or  attendant,  was  a  noble  man
of  the  blood Roial her  uncle  of  great  authoritie  called
Demetri  Ivanowich  Godonova. All  this  progresse  ended,
both  the  Emperor and Empresse  returned to  Mosco  :
shortly  after  the  Emperor  by  the  direction  of  the  prince
Boris Pheodorowich, sent a power into the land of
Siberia,  where  all  the  rich  Sables  & Furres  are  gotten.
This  power  conquered  in  one  yeere  and  a  halfe, 1000.
miles. In  the  performance  of  this  warre,  there  was  taken
prisoner  the  Emperor  of  the  countrey  called  Chare  Siber-  ChareSiberski
sky, and  with him many  other dukes and  noble  men,  ^'.f  ^^  ^^  ,
which  were  brought  to  Mosko with  a  guard  of  souldiers  prisoner  and
and  gunners,  who were  received into the  citie  in  very  brought  to
honorable  maner,  and  do  there  remaine  to  this  day. Mosco.

Hereupon  the  corrupt  officers.  Judges,  Justices,
captains  and  lieutenants  through  the  whole  kingdom
were  remooved,  and  more  honest  men  substituted  in  their
places,  with  expresse  commandement,  under  severe
punishment  to  surcease  their  old  bribing  &  extortion
which  they  had  used  in  the  old  Emperors  time,  and
now  to  execute  true  justice  without  respect  of  persons  :
and  to  the  end  that  this  might  be  the  better  done,  their
lands  and  yeerly  stipends  were  augmented  :  the  great
taskes,  customes,  and  duties,  which  were  before  layd  upon
the  people  in  the  old  Emperors  time,  were  now  abated,
and some  wholy  remitted, and no punishments com-

343

A.D.
1584.

Sophei  Ken
Alii  king  of
the  Critnmes
arrival  at
Mosco.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

manded  to  be  used,  without  sufficient  and  due  proofe,
although  the  crime  were  capitall,  deserving  death  :  many
Dukes  and  noble  men  of  great  houses,  that  were  under
displeasure,  and  imprisoned  20.  yeeres  by  the  old
Emperor,  were  now  set  at  libertie  and  restored  to  their
lands  :  all  prisoners  were  set  at  libertie,  and  their  tres-
passes forgiven.  In  summe,  a  great  alteration  universally
in  the  government  folowed,  and  yet  all  was  done  quietly,
civilly,  peaceably,  without  trouble  to  the  Prince,  or
offence  to  the  Subject  :  and  this  bred  great  assurance  and
honour  to  the  kingdom,  and  all  was  accomplished  by
the  wisedom  especially  of  Irenia  the  Empresse.

These  things  being  reported  and  caried  to  the  eares
of  the  kings  and  princes  that  were  borderers  upon  Russia,
they  grew  so  fearefuU  and  terrible  to  them,  that  the
Monarch  of  all  the  Scythians  called  the  Crimme  Tartar
or  great  Can  himselfe,  named  Sophet  Keri  Alii,  came  out
of  his  owne  countrey  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  accom-
panied with  a  great  number  of  his  nobilitie  well  horsed,
although  to  them  that  were  Christians  they  seemed  rude,
yet  they  were  personable  men,  and  valiant  :  their
comming  was  gratefull  to  the  Emperor,  and  their  enter-
tainment was  honourable,  the  Tartar  prince  having
brought  with  him  his  wives  also,  received  of  the  Russe
Emperor  entertainment,  and  princely  welcome  according
to  their  estates.

Not  long  after,  1200.  Polish  gentlemen,  valiant
Souldiors,  and  proper  men  came  to  Mosko  offring  their
service  to  the  Emperor,  who  were  all  entertained  :  and
in  like  sort  many  Chirkasses,  and  people  of  other  nations
came  and  offi*ed  service.  And  assoone  as  the  report
of  this  new  created  Emperor  was  spred  over  other  king-
doms of  Europe,  there  were  sent  to  him  sundry
Ambassadors  to  wish  him  joy  and  prosperitie  in  his
kingdom  :  thither  came  Ambassadors  from  the  Turke,
from  the  Persian,  the  Bogharian,  the  Crimme,  the
Georgian,  and  many  other  Tartar  princes.  There  came
also Ambassadors  from the Emperor of  Almaine, the

344

JEROIME HORSEY  ad.

1586.
Pole, the Swethen, the Dane, &c. And since his
coronation no enemie of his hath prevailed in his
attempts.

It fell out not long after, that the Emperor was  The  new  Em-
desirous  to  send  a  message  to  the  most  excellent  Queene  P^r°^  Theodore
of  England,  for  which  service  he  thought  no  man  fitter  il'!^i^r7and
then M. Jerome Horsey, supposing that one of  the  requests  to  the
Queen es owne men and subjects would be the more  Queene.
acceptable  to  her. The  summe of  which message  was,
that  the  Emperor  desired  a  continuance  of  that  league,
friendship,  amitie  and  intercourse  of  traffique  which  was
betweene his father and  the Queens majestie and her
subjects, with other private affaires besides,  which are
not  to  be  made  common.

Master  Horsey  having  received  the  letters  and  requests  M.  Horseis
of  the  Emperour,  provided  for  his  journey  over  land,  '^'o^^g^fi'"^
and  departed  from  Mosco  the  fift  day  of  September,  fjZ°JZ.
thence  unto  Otver,  to  Torshook,  to  great  Novogrod,  to  [i.  4.70.]
Vobsky,  and  thence  to  Nyhouse  in  Livonia,  to  Wenden,
and  so  to  Riga  :  (where  he  was  beset,  and  brought
foorthwith  before  a  Cardinall  called  Ragevil,  but  yet
suffred  to  passe  in  the  end  :)  From  thence  to  Mito,  to
Golden,  and  Libou  in  Curland,  to  Memel,  to  Konings-
burgh  in  Prussia,  to  Elbing,  to  Dantzike,  to  Stetine  in
Pomerland,  to  Rostock,  to  Lubeck,  to  Hamborough,  to
Breme,  to  Emden,  and  by  sea  to  London.  Being  arrived
at  her  majesties  roiall  court,  and  having  delivered  the
Emperors  letters  with  good  favour,  and  gracious  accept-
ance, he  was  foorthwith  againe  commaunded  to  repasse
into  Russia,  with  other  letters  from  her  majestie  to  the
Emperor,  and  prince  Boris  Pheodorowich,  answering
the  Emperors  letters,  and  withall  requesting  the  favour
and  friendship,  which  his  father  had  yeelded  to  the
English  merchants  :  and  hereunto  was  he  earnestly  also
solicited  by  the  merchants  of  London  themselves  of  that
company,  to  deale  in  their  behalfe.  Being  thus  dispatched
from  London  by  sea,  he  arrived  in  Mosco,  the  20.  of
April 1586.  and  was  very  honorably  welcommed. And  1586.

345

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

for  ye  merchants  behoofe,  obtained  all  his  requests,  being
therein  specially  favoured  by  ye  noble  prince  Boris  Pheo-
dorowich,  who  alwayes  affected  M.  Horsey  with  speciall
liking.  And  having  obtained  priviledges  for  the  mer-
chants, he  was  recommended  from  the  Emperor  againe,
to  the  Queene  of  England  his  mistresse,  by  whom  the
prince  Boris,  in  token  of  his  honorable  and  good  opinion
of  the  Queens  majestie,  sent  her  highnesse  a  roiall
present  of  Sables,  Luzarns,  cloth  of  gold  and  other  rich
things.  So  that  the  Companie  of  English  merchants,
next  to  their  thankfulnes  to  her  majestie,  are  to  account
M.  Horseis  paines  their  speciall  benefit,  who  obtained  for
them  those  privileges,  which  in  twentie  yeeres  before
would  not  be  granted.

The  maner  of  M.  Horseis  last  dispatch  from  the
Emperor,  because  it  was  very  honorable,  I  thought  good
to  record.  He  was  freely  allowed  post  horses  for  him
and  his  servants,  victuals  and  all  other  necessaries  for
his  long  journey  ;  at  every  towne  that  he  came  unto  from
Mosco  to  Vologda,  which  is  by  land  five  hundred  miles,
he  received  the  like  free  and  bountifull  allowances,  at
the  Emperors  charge.  New  victuall  and  provision  were
given  him  upon  the  river  Dwina  at  every  towne  by  the
kings  officers,  being  one  thousand  miles  in  length.  When
he  came  to  the  new  castle  called  Archangel,  he  was
received  of  the  Duke  Knez  Vasili  Andrewich  Isveno-
gorodsky  by  the  Emperors  commission  into  the  Castle,
gunners  being  set  in  rankes  after  their  use,  where  he
was  sumptuously  feasted  :  from  thence  hee  was  dispatched
with  bountifull  provision  and  allowance  in  the  Dukes
boat,  with  one  hundred  men  to  rowe  him,  and  one
hundred  Gunners  in  other  boats  to  conduct  him,  with
a  gentleman  captaine  of  the  Gunners.  Comming  to  the
road  where  the  English,  Dutch,  and  French  ships  rode,
the  gunners  discharged,  and  the  ships  shot  in  like  maner
46.  pieces  of  their  ordinance,  &  so  he  was  brought  to
his  lodging  at  the  English  house  upon  Rose  Island.
And  that  which  was  the  full  and  complete  conclusion

346

JEROME HORSEY

of  the  favour  of  the  Emperor  and  Boris  Pheodorowich
toward  M.  Horsey,  there  were  the  next  day  sent  him
for  his  further  provision  upon  the  sea  by  a  gentleman  and
a  captaine  the  things  folowing.

1 6.  live  oxen.

A.D.

1586.

70.  sheepe.

600. hens.

25.  flitches  of  Bacon.

80.  bushels  of  meale.

600.  loaves  of  bread.

2000.  egs.

10.  geese.

2.  cranes.

2.  swans.

65.  gallons  of  mead.
40.  gallons  of  Aquavits.
60.  gallons  of  beere.

3.  yong  beares.

4.  hawkes.

Store  of  onions  and  garlike.
10.  fresh  salmons.
A  wild  bore.

All  these  things  were  brought  him  downe  by  a  Gentle-
man of  the  Emperors,  and  another  of  prince  Boris  Pheo-
dorowich, &  were  received  in  order  by  John  Frese  servant
to  M.  Horsey,  together  with  an  honorable  present  and
reward  from  the  prince  Boris,  sent  him  by  M.  Francis
Cherry  an  Englishman  :  which  present  was  a  whole  very
rich  piece  of  cloth  of  gold,  &  a  faire  paire  of  Sables.
This  Gentleman  hath  observed  many  other  rare  things
concerning  those  partes,  which  hereafter  (God  willing)  at
more  convenient  time  and  laisure  shall  come  to  light.

Pheodor  Ivanowich  the  new  Emperors  gracious
letter  of  privilege  to  the  English  Merchants
v^ord  for  vv^ord,  obtained  by  M.  Jerome
Horsey. 1586.

Hrough  the  wil  of  the  almightie,  and
without  beginning  God,  which  was  before
this  world,  whom  we  glorifie  in  ye
Trinitie,  one  only  God  the  father,  the
Sonne,  and  the  holy  ghost,  maker  of  all
things,  worker  of  all  in  all  every  where,
fulfiller  of  all  things,  by  which  will  and
working,  he  both  loveth  and  giveth  life  to  man,  That

347

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.
[I.  471.]  our  onely  God,  which  inspireth  every  one  of  us  his
onely  children  with  his  word,  to  discerne  God  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  holy  quickning  spirit
of  life  now  in  these  perilous  times,  Establish  us  to
keep  the  right  Scepter,  and  suffer  us  of  our  selves  to
raigne  to  the  good  profite  of  the  land,  and  to  the
subduing  of  the  people,  together  with  the  enemies,  and
to  the  maintenance  of  vertue.

We  Pheodor  the  ofspring  of  John,  the  great  Lord,
Emperor,  king  and  great  prince  of  all  Russia,  of  Volo-
demeria,  Moscovia  and  Novogrod,  king  of  Cazan,  king
of  Astracan,  Lord  of  Plesko,  and  great  prince  of
Smolensko,  of  Tuer,  Yougoria,  Permia,  Viatsko,  of
Bolghar  and  others,  lord  and  great  prince  of  the  land
of  the  lower  Novogrod,  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotsko,
Rostcw,  Yeraslave,  the  White  lake,  Liefland,  Gudor,
Condensa,  and  Ruler  of  all  Siberia,  and  all  the  North-
side,  and  lord  of  many  other  countries.

I  have  gratified  the  merchants  of  England,  to  wit,  sir
Rowland  Haiward,  and  Richard  Martin  Aldermen,  sir
George  Barnes,  Thomas  Smith  esquire,  Jerome  Horsey,
Richard  Saltonstall,  with  their  fellowes.

I  have  licensed  them  to  saile  with  their  shippes  into
our  dominion  the  land  of  Dwina,  with  all  kind  of
commodities  to  trade  freely,  and  unto  our  kingdom
and  the  citie  of  Mosco,  and  to  all  the  cities  of  our
empire  of  Moscovia.

And  the  english  merchants  sir  Rowland  Haiward  &
his  societie  desired  us,  that  we  would  gratifie  them  to
trade  into  our  kingdom  of  Moscovia,  and  into  our
heritage  of  great  Novogrod  and  Plesko,  and  into  all
parts  of  our  kingdom,  to  buy  and  sell  with  their  wares
without  custome.

Therefore  we  for  our  sisters  sake  Queene  Elizabeth,
&  also  because  that  they  allege  that  they  had  great
losse  and  hinderance  by  the  venture  of  the  sea,  and
otherwise,  have  gratified  the  said  English  merchants  sir
Rowland  Haiward  and  his  societie,  freely  to  come  into

348

JEROME HORSEY  ad.

1586.

our  kingdom  of  Moscovia,  and  into  al  our  dominions
with  al  kind  of  commodities,  to  trade,  &  traffique  freely,
&  at  their  pleasure  with  all  kind  of  their  commodities  :
also  I  have  commanded  not  to  take  any  maner  of
custome  for  their  goods,  nor  other  customs  whatsoever  :
That  is  to  say,  neither  for  passipg  by  any  place  by
water,  nor  for  lanching,  neither  for  passing  through
any  place  by  land,  neither  for  the  vessels  or  boats,  nor
for  their  heads,  nor  for  passing  over  bridges,  nor  for
ferying  over  at  any  place,  neither  for  acknov/ledgement
at  any  place  where  they  shall  come,  nor  any  maner  of
custome  or  dutie,'  by  what  name  soever.

Only  they  shal  not  bring  with  them  into  our
dominions,  neither  recarie  out  of  our  dominions,  or
father  any  other  mens  goods  but  their  owne,  neither
sell  them  nor  barter  them  away  for  them.

Also  our  naturall  people  shall  not  buy  and  sell  for
them,  or  from  them,  neither  shal  they  retaine  or  keepe
any  of  our  naturall  subjects  goods,  or  pawnes  by  them
to  colour  them.

Also  they  shall  not  send  any  of  their  Russe  servants
about  into  any  citie  to  ingrosse,  or  buy  up  commodities,
but  into  what  citie  they  themselves  shal  come,  they
shal  buy  and  sel,  and  shal  sel  their  owne  commodities
and  not  ours.

And  when  they  shal  come  into  our  inheritance  of
great  Novogrod  and  Plesko,  and  through  all  our  do-
minions with  their  commodities,  then  our  noblemen  and
captains,  and  every  one  of  our  officers  shall  suffer  them
to  depart  according  to  this  our  letter,  &  shall  take  no
custom  at  all  of  them,  for  any  of  their  commodities,
neither  for  passing  through  or  passing  by,  nor  for
passage  over  any  bridges,  nor  shall  take  of  them  any
other  dutie  whatsoever  name  they  have.

Also  into  what  places  of  our  dominion,  or  when
they  shal  happen  to  come,  and  to  proceed  to  buy  or
sell,  and  wheresoever  they  shall  passe  through  with
goods  not  buying  of  any  commodities, neither  will  sell

349

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

their  owne,  then  in  those  cities  and  townes  they  shall
take  no  maner  of  custome  or  dutie  of  them,  accordingly
as  before.

And  I  have  gratified  them  and  given  them  free  leave
to  traffique  throughout  all  the  dominions  of  our  kingdom
in  all  cities  with  their  goods,  to  buy  and  sell  all  maner
of  commodities,  without  any  dutie  or  custome  whatsoever.

And  the  English  merchants  where  they  are  desirous
to  buy  or  sell,  or  barter  their  wares  with  our  merchants,
whole  wares  for  wares,  they  shal  sell  their  commodities
whole,  and  not  by  retaile  :  That  is  to  say,  neither  by
small  weight  nor  by  the  yard,  to  sell  or  barter  in  their
owne  houses,  and  they  shal  sel  and  barter  their  wares
wholy.  Cloth  by  the  packe,  and  by  the  whole  Cloth,
and  Damaske  and  velvet  by  the  piece  and  not  by  the
yard,  and  al  maner  of  commodities  that  are  to  be  sold
by  weight,  not  to  sell  by  the  small  weights,  as  by  the
pound  and  ounce,  but  by  whole  sale  :  also  they  shall
sel  wines  by  the  pipe  :  and  by  the  gallon,  quart  or
stoope  they  shal  not  sell.

And  they  shall  buy,  sell  and  exchange  their  owne
commodities  themselves,  and  the  Russe  merchants  shall
not  make  sales  or  exchange  for  them  or  from  them  any
of  their  commodities,  neither  shal  they  themselves  convey
or  cary  through  any  other  mans  goods  at  no  place  in
stead  of  their  owne  :  and  which  of  the  English  merchants
will  at  any  time  sell  his  commodities  at  Colmogro  or
[I.  472.]  Vologda  or  Yeraslave,  they  may,  and  of  their  commodities
throughout  all  our  cities  and  dominions,  our  noblemen,
captains,  and  every  of  our  officers  shall  take  no  maner
of  custome,  according  as  it  is  written  in  this  our  gracious
letter  :  and  throughout  all  our  dominions  and  cities  they
shal  hire  carriers  and  vessels  with  men  to  labour,  at  their
owne  charge,  to  transport  their  goods.

So  likewise,  whensoever  the  English  merchants  are
disposed  to  depart  out  of  our  kingdom  into  any  other
countrey  or  into  their  owne  land,  if  our  pleasure  be,
they  shall  take  our  goods  with  them  from  our  Treasurie,

350

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1586.

and  shall  sell  them,  and  exchange  them  for  such  com-
moditie  as  is  commodious  for  our  kingdom,  and  shall
deliver  it  into  our  Treasurie,  and  with  those  our  com-
modities, our  Noblemen  and  captains,  and  every  of  our
officers  shall  let  them  passe  through  all  our  cities  also
without  custome  according  to  these  our  letters.

Also  whensoever  the  English  merchants  shall  have  sold
their  own  goods  &  bought  themselves  commodities,  &
wil  depart  out  of  Mosco,  then  they  shal  manifest  them-
selves to  our  chiefe  Secretarie  Andrew  Sholkalove,  in
the  office  where  the  Ambassadors  are  alwayes  dispatched.

And  if  the  English  merchants  comming,  have  had  any
mischance  by  the  sea,  insomuch  that  the  ship  be  broken,
or  if  that  ship  do  come  to  any  part  of  our  countrey  :
then  we  will  cause  the  goods  to  be  sought  out  in  true
Justice,  and  to  be  given  to  the  English  people,  which
at  that  time  shall  bee  here  resident  in  our  countrey  :
and  if  so  be  that  it  so  fall  out  that  at  that  time  there
be  no  Englishmen  within  our  realme  :  then  wil  we
cause  these  goods  to  be  laid  up  in  a  place  together,
and  when  the  people  of  England  shall  come  into  our
realme,  then  we  will  command  all  those  goods  to  be
delivered  to  the  sayd  English  people.

Also  we  have  gratified  all  the  English  merchants  with
the  house  of  one  Urie  here  in  the  Mosco  right  over
against  S.  Maximes  church  behind  the  market,  and  they
shal  dwel  in  the  same  house  according  as  before  time,
and  they  shall  keepe  one  alwayes  in  the  house  to  keepe
it,  either  a  Russe,  or  one  of  their  owne  people.

Also  the  English  merchants  shal  possesse  their  houses,
to  wit,  at  Yeraslave,  Vologda,  Colmogro,  and  the  house
at  the  haven  of  the  sea,  &  they  shal  dwel  in  those
houses,  according  as  our  goodnes  hath  bene  to  them
heretofore  :  and  we  have  commanded,  that  there  shall
not  be  taken  of  them  no  yeerely  rent,  nor  no  maner  of
custome,  taxe,  rent  or  any  other  dutie  whatsoever  for
those  houses,  neither  shal  they  pay  any  dutie  or  taxe
with  any  of  the  townsmen  of  those  places,  &  in  every

351

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

one  of  those  houses,  to  wit,  at  Yeraslave,  Vologda,  and
Colmogro,  they  shall  have  men  to  keepe  their  houses,
two  or  three  of  their  owne  countrey  people,  strangers
or  els  Russes,  men  of  the  meanest  sort,  which  shall  be
no  merchants,  that  they  may  lay  their  goods  in  those
houses,  and  they  may  sell  the  commodities  out  of  those
their  houses  to  whom  they  please,  according  to  this  our
gracious  letter  :  and  those  that  keepe  their  houses  shall
not  sell  or  buy  no  part  of  their  commoditie,  except
they  be  there  or  give  order,  whereby  they  be  not  deceived
by  them.

So  likewise  I  have  gratified  them  with  their  house
at  the  sea  haven,  at  the  mouth  of  Podezemsky,  &  we
have  commanded  that  they  shal  not  cary  their  goods  from
thence  to  the  new  castle  S.  Michael  the  archangel,  but
shall  arrive,  and  doe  as  they  have  done  heretofore  with
their  wares  at  that  their  house,  and  shall  unlade  their
commodities  out  of  their  ships,  and  shal  lade  them  againe
with  Russe  commodities,  even  there  at  that  their  house
without  interruption  :  onely  they  shal  permit  our  officers
of  Colmogro  &  sworn  men  to  write  up  those  com-
modities, both  the  commodities  of  England,  and  those
of  Russeland,  what  the  merchants  shal  declare  themselves,
&  no  otherwise,  but  they  shal  not  overlooke  their  com-
modities, neither  shal  they  unbind  any  of  their  packs.

And  when  the  English  merchants  are  disposed  to
send  into  their  owne  countrey,  to  wit,  any  of  their  owne
people  on  land  through  any  other  kingdom  whatsoever,
they  shall  not  send  their  people  without  our  kingly
knowledge  and  commandement,  and  which  of  their
people  so  ever  they  do  meane  to  send  out  of  our
kingdom  into  their  owne  countrey,  then  they  shal  send
those  their  people,  not  without  our  kingly  majesties
knowledge,  to  wit,  those  that  go  of  pleasure  without
carying  any  commodities  with  them,  and  they  shall  have
a  letter  of  passe  given  unto  them,  out  of  the  office  where
the  Ambassadors  have  alwayes  their  dispatch.

And  whosoever  hath  any  thing  to  doe  with  them  in.

352

DR. GILES FLETCHER'S  AMBASSAGE

A.D.

1588.

matters  of  controversie,  either  concerning  merchandize
or  injuries,  then  they  are  to  be  judged  by  our  treasurers
and  Secretarie  of  the  Ambassadors  office  to  do  justice
between  both  parties,  &  to  seek  out  the  trueth  of  matters
in  al  things,  and  whatsoever  cannot  be  found  out  by  the
Law,  shalbe  tried  by  othe  and  lots  :  whose  lot  soever
is  taken  foorth,  him  to  have  right.  "

And  in  what  place  of  all  our  kingdom,  in  what  citie
soever  they  or  their  people  shall  bee,  and  that  there
happen  any  matter  of  controversie,  either  concerning
merchandise,  injuries  or  otherwise,  that  they  have
occasion  to  set  upon  any  man  by  lawe,  or  that  any
seeke  upon  them,  concerning  what  matter  soever  in  all
our  kingdom  and  cities,  then  our  lieutenants,  captains,
and  our  officers  shall  give  them  Justice,  and  shall  minister  [I.  473,]
all  true  justice  betweene  them,  seeking  out  the  trueth  :
and  what  cannot  be  truly  sought  by  law,  shalbe  sought
out  by  othe  and  lot  :  whose  lot  soever  is  taken  out,
him  to  have  right  accordingly  as  before,  and  the  Judges
or  Justices  shall  take  of  them  no  kind  of  dutie,  for
matters  of  law  no  where  throughout  all  our  realmes.
This  letter  is  given  in  our  princely  palace  within  the
citie  of  Mosco,  in  the  yeere  from  the  foundation  of
the  world,  seven  thousand  fourescore  and  fifteene  in
the  moneth  of  February.

The  Ambassage  of  M.  Giles  Fletcher,  Doctor
of  the  Civil  Law,  sent  from  her  Majestie  to
Theodor  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  Anno  1588.

N  the  yeere  1588.  was  sent  Ambassador
from  her  highnesse  into  the  countrey  of
Russia,  Giles  Fletcher  Doctor  of  the
Civil  Lawe,  as  well  to  treat  with  the
new  Emperor  Pheodor  Ivanowich,  about
league  and  amitie,  in  like  maner  as  was
before  with  his  father  Ivan  Vasilowich,
as  also  for  the  reestablishing  and  reducing  into  order
in  353  2

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

the  decaied  trade  of  our  Englishmen  there.  Who  not-
withstanding at  his  first  arrivall  at  the  Mosco,  found
some  parts  of  hard  entertainment,  by  meanes  of  certainee
rumors  concerning  the  late  navall  victory  which  was<
there  reported  to  have  fallen  on  the  Spanish  side,  as<
also  for  some  dislike  conceived  against  the  privileged
trade  of  our  English  merchants.  Yet  in  the  end  he
obtained  of  the  Emperour  many  good  &  equall  con-
ditions, and  was  curteously  and  honourably  dismissed
by  him.  The  principall  points  which  he  entreated  of,
and  were  granted  unto  him  by  the  said  Emperor,  were
these  :

1  A  continuation  of  league  and  amitie  betweene  her
Highnesse  and  the  sayd  Emperour  Pheodor  Ivanowich,
in  like  maner  as  was  before  with  his  father  Ivan
Vasilowich.

2  A  confirmation  and  reestablishment  of  the  former
privileges  of  the  Companie  of  our  English  merchants,
which  were  infringed  and  annulled  in  the  principal
points,  with  divers  necessary  additions  to  the  same,  for
the  better  ordering  of  their  trade  in  those  countreys
hereafter,  viz.  That  the  state  of  the  privilege  granted
before  in  the  names  of  some  private  and  particular  men,
be  altered  in  that  point,  and  the  same  granted  by  the
name  and  stile  of  their  incorporation,  viz.  To  the
felowship  of  English  merchants  for  the  discoverie  of
new  trades.

3  That  upon  every  surmise  and  light  quarel,  the  said
privilege  be  not  revoked  and  annulled,  as  before  time
it  hath  bene.

4  That  justice  shall  be  administred  to  the  said  Com-
panie and  their  Agent  without  delay,  upon  such  as  shal
offer  them  any  despite  or  injurie,  or  shal  exact  or  impose
upon  them  any  paiment,  taxation  or  imposition  what-
soever, contrary  to  the  freedome  of  the  said  grant.

5  That  the  goods  &  commodities  of  the  said  Com-
panie, be  not  forcibly  taken  as  before  time  they  had
bene  by the  Emperors  officers  or  people  of  authoritie,

354

DR.  GILES FLETCHER'S AMBASSAGE  ad.

1588.

either  for  the  use  of  the  said  Emperor  or  of  his  officers.
But  in  case  they  have  need  of  the  said  commodities,
the  same  to  be  taken  at  reasonable  prices,  and  for
ready  money.

6  That  the  said  Companie  be  not  charged  hereafter
with  the  answering  of  such  debts  as  are  made  by  any
Englishman  not  being  of  the  societie.

7  That  the  Emperors  authorized  people  shall  not
hereafter  repute  any  Englishman  resiant  in  that  countrey,
to  be  any  factor,  servant,  or  dealer  in  the  said  Companies
affaires,  but  such  as  the  Agent  shall  inregister  by  name,
within  the  offices  where  custome  is  entered  in  all  such
places  of  the  land  where  the  sayd  Companie  have
residences  to  traffike.

8  That  the  names  of  such  as  shall  so  be  inregistred
be  no  longer  continued  in  record,  nor  themselves  reputed
as  factors  or  dealers  for  the  said  Companie,  then  the
Agent  shall  thinke  good.  But  in  case  the  said  Agent
in  his  discretion  shall  thinke  meet  to  strike  out  of  the
Register  any  name  of  such  as  have  bene  imploied  in
the  Companies  service,  the  said  person  to  be  held  as
private,  &:  whose  acte  in  bargaining  or  otherwise,  shall
not  charge  the  said  Companie.

9  That  if  any  English  man  within  the  countrey  of
Russia  be  suspected  for  any  notorious  crime,  as  felony,
treason,  &c.  the  same  be  not  straightwaies  set  upon
the  *  Pudkey,  nor  otherwise  tormented,  till  such  time  *Itisrosting
as  he  shall  be  convicted  by  plaine  and  evident  proofes  :
which  being  done,  the  whole  proceeding  to  be  sent  over
to  the  Queene  of  England.

10  That  the  said  privilege  with  the  additions,  shall
be  published  in  all  townes  and  partes  of  the  Emperors
dominions,  where  the  said  Companie  have  traffike.

1 1  That  the  said  Companie  shall  be  permitted  to  use
a  sole  trade  through  the  Emperours  countries,  by  the
river  Volga  into  Media,  Persia,  Bogharia,  and  the  other
the  East  countries.

12  Whereas  there  was  claimed  of  the  said  Companie

355

to  death.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

[I.  474.]  the  summe  of  23553.  markes  of  debt,  made  by  certaine
of  their  factors  for  the  said  company,  for  paiment
whereof,  their  whole  stocke  was  in  danger  of  arrest,
by  publike  authoritie  :  Further  also  2140.  rubbles  for
custome  and  houserent,  he  obtained  a  rebatement  of
eighteene  thousand,  one  hundred  fiftie  and  three  marks
of  the  sayd  debt.

The  said  Ambassador  M.  Giles  Fletcher,  as  I  under-
stand, hath  drawen  a  booke  intituled.  Of  the  Russe
Common  wealth,  containing  :

First,  a  Cosmographicall  description  of  the  countrey,
which  hath  these  chapters.

1  Of  the  length  and  bredth  of  the  countrey  of
Russia,  with  the  names  of  the  shires.

2  Of  the  soile  and  climate.

3  Of  the  native  commodities  of  the  countrey.

Secondly,  a  description  of  their  policie  contained  in
these  Chapters,  viz.

1  Of  the  constitution  or  state  of  the  Russe  Common
wealth.

2  Of  their  Parliaments,  and  maner  of  holding  them.

3  Of  the  Russe  Nobilitie  and  meanes  whereby  it
is  kept in  an  under  proportion  agreeable to that  state.

4  Of  the  maner  of  governing  their  provinces  or
shires.

5  Of  the  Emperours  privie  counsell.

6  Of  the  Emperors  customs  &  their  revenues,  with
the  practises  for  the  increase  of  them.

7  Of  the  Russe  communaltie  and  their  condition.

8  Of  their  publike  justice  and  maner  of  proceeding
therein.

9  Of  the  Emperors  forces  for  his  warres,  with  the
chiefe  officers,  and  their  salarie  or  pay.

10  Of  their  maner  of  mustering,  armour,  and  pro-
vision for  victuall.

1 1  Of  their  ordering,  marching,  charging,  and  their
martiall  discipline.

356

OF THE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA

12  Of  their  colonies  and  policie  in  maintaining  their
purchases  by  conquest.

13  Of  their  borderers  with  whom  they  have  most  to
doe  in  warre  and  peace.

14  Of  their  church  offices  and  degrees.

15  Of  their  liturgie  or  forme  of  Church  service.

16  Of  their  maner  of  administrihg  the  Sacraments.

17  Of  the  doctrine  of  the  Russe  church.

18  Of  the  maner  of  solemnizing  their  manages.

19  Of  the  other  ceremonies  of  the  Russe  church.

Thirdly,  the  Oeconomie  or  private  behaviour  of  the
Russe  containing  these  chapters.

1  Of  the  Emperors houshold officers, and order of
his  house.

2  Of  the  private  behaviour  and  maner  of  the Russe
people.

The description of  the countrey  of  Russia,  with
the  bredth,  length, and  names of  the Shires.

I  He  countrey  of  Russia  was  somtimes  called
Sarmatia.  It  changed  the  name  (as  some
do  suppose)  for  that  it  was  parted  into
divers  smal,  and  yet  absolute  govern-
ments, not  depending,  nor  being  subject
the  one  to  the  other.  For  Russe  in  that
tongue  doeth  signifie  as  much  as  to  part,
or  devide.  The  Russe  reporteth  that  foure  brethren,
Trubor,  Rurico,  Sinees,  and  Varivus  devided  among
them  the  North  parts  of  the  country.  Likewise  that
the  South  parts  were  possessed  by  4.  other,  Kio,  Scieko,
Choranus,  and  their  sister  Libeda  :  each  calling  his
territorie  after  his  own  name.  Of  this  partition  it  was
called  Russia,  about  the  yere  from  Christ  860.  As  for
the  conjecture  which  I  find  in  some  Cosmographers,  that
the  Russe  nation  borowed  the  name  of  the  people  called
Roxellani,  &  were  the  very  same  nation  with  them,  it
is  without all good  probabilitie,  both  in  respect of  the

357

A.D.
1588.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Strabo  in  his etymologic of the word (which is very far fet) and

7.  booke  of especially  for  the  seat  and  dwelling  of  that  people,  which

was  betwixt  the  two rivers of  Tanais and Boristhenes,

(as  Strabo  reporteth)  quite  another  way  from  the  countrey

of  Russia.

When  it  bare  the  name  of  Sarmatia,  it  was  devided
into  two  chiefe  parts  :  the  White  and  the  Black.  The
white  Sarmatia  was  all  that  part  that  lieth  towards  the
North,  &  on  the  side  of  Liefland  :  as  the  provinces  now
called  Dwina,  Vagha,  Ustiug,  Vologda,  Cargapolia,  Novo-
grodia,  &c  whereof  Novogrod  velica  was  the  Metropolite
or  chiefe  citie.  Black  Sarmatia  was  al  that  countrey  that
lieth  Southward  towards  the  Euxin  or  Black  sea  :  as  the
dukedome  of  Volodemer,  of  Mosco,  Rezan,  &c.  Some
have  thought  that  the  name  of  Sarmatia  was  first  taken
Gen.  10.  from  one  Sarmates,  whom  Moses  &  Josephus  cal
osep  .  .  I. Asarmathes sonne to Toktan, & nephew to Heber, of

C(l. I  A..  . .  ~  .  '■  .

the  posteritie  of  Sem.  But  this  seemeth  to  be  nothmg
but  a  conjecture  taken  out  of  the  likenes  of  the  name
Asarmathes.  For  the  dwelling  of  all  Joktans  posteritie  is
described  by  Moses  to  have  bene  betwixt  Mescha  or
Masius  (an  hil  of  the  Ammonites)  &  Sephace,  nere  to

[I-  475-]  the  river  Euphrates  :  which  maketh  it  very  unlikely  that
Asarmathes should plant  any  colonies so  far  off  in ye

The  borders  of  jsjorth  &  northwest  countries.  It  is  bounded  northward
by  the  Lappes  &  the  North  Ocean.  On  the  Southside
by  the  Tartars  called  Crimmes.  Eastward  they  have  the
Nagaian  Tartar,  that  possesseth  all  the  countrey  on  the
East  side  of  Volga  towards  the  Caspian  sea.  On  the
West  and  Southwest  border  lieth  Lituania,  Livonia  and
Polonia.

The  Shires  of  "phe  whole  Countrey  being  nowe  reduced  under  the
government  of  one,  conteineth  these  chiefe  Provinces  or
Shires.  Volodemer,  (which  beareth  the  first  place  in  the
Emperours  stile,  because  their  house  came  of  the  Dukes
of  that  Countrey)  Mosco,  Nisnovogrod,Plesko,Smolensko,
Novogrod  velica  (or  Novogrod  of  the  low  Countrey)
Rostove, Yaruslave, Bealozera, Rezan, Duyna, Carga-

358

OF THE DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA  ad.

1588.

polia,  Meschora,  Vagha,  Ustuga,  Ghaletsa.  These  are
the  naturall  shires  perteyning  to  Russia,  but  farre  greater
and  larger  then  the  shires  of  England,  though  not  so
well  peopled.  The  other  Countreys  or  provinces  which  The  Provinces
the  Russe  Emperours  have  gotten  perforce  added  of  late  \jj^cr^"t
to  their  other  dominion,  are  these  which  followe,  Twerra,
Youghoria,  Permia,  Vadska,  Boulghoria,  Chernigo,
Gudoria,  Obdoria,  Condora,  with  a  great  part  of  Siberia  :
where  the  people  though  they  be  not  naturall  Russes,
yet  obey  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  are  ruled  by  the
Lawes  of  his  Countrey,  paying  customes  and  taxes,  as
his  owne  people  doe.  Besides  these  he  hath  under  him
the  kingdomes  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  gotten  by  con-
quest not  long  since.  As  for  all  his  possession  in
Lituania  (to  the  number  of  30.  great  Townes  and  more,)
with  Narve  and  Dorp  in  Livonia,  they  are  quite  gone,
being  surprised  of  late  yeeres  by  the  Kings  of  Poland
and  Sweden.  These  Shires  and  Provinces  are  reduced
all  into  foure  Jurisdictions,  which  they  call  Chetfyrds
(that  is)  Tetrarchies,  or  Fourthparts.

The  whole  Countrey  is  of  great  length  and  breadth.  The  breadth
From  the  North  to  the  South  (if  you  measure  from  Cola  ^J^  Comtrn
to  Astracan  which  bendeth  somewhat  Eastward)  it
reacheth  in  length  about  4260.  verst,  or  miles.  Not-
withstanding the  Emperour  of  Russia  hath  more  terri-
torie  Northward,  farre  beyond  Cola  unto  the  River  of
Tromschua,  that  runneth  a  hundred  verst,  welnigh  Pechmga.
beyond  Pechinga,  neere  to  Wardhouse,  but  not  intire
nor  clearely  limited,  by  reason  of  the  kings  of  Sweden
and  Denmarke,  that  have  divers  Townes  there,  aswell  as
the  Russe,  plotted  together  the  one  with  the  other  :
every  one  of  them  clayming  the  whole  of  those  North
parts  as  his  owne  right.  The  breadth  (if  you  go  from
that  part  of  his  territorie  that  lyeth  farthest  Westward
on  the  Narve  side,  to  the  parts  of  Siberia  Eastward,  where
the  Emperour  hath  his  garrisons)  is  4400.  verst  or  there-
abouts. A  verst  (by  their  reckoning)  is  a  1000.  pases,
yet  lesse  by  one  quarter  then  an  English  mile. If  the

359

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

whole  dominion  of  the  Russe  Emperour  were  all  habit-
able, and  peopled  in  all  places,  as  it  is  in  some,  he  would
either  hardly  holde  it  all  within  one  regiment,  or  be
over  mightie  for  all  his  neighbour  Princes.

Of  the  Soile  and  Climate.

THe  soyle  of  the  Countrey  for  the  most  part  is  of
a  sleight  sandie  moulde,  yet  very  much  different
one  place  from  another,  for  the  yeeld  of  such  things  as
grow  out  of  the  earth.  The  Countrey  Northwards
towards  the  parts  of  S.  Nicholas  and  Cola,  and  North-
east towards  Siberia,  is  all  very  barren,  and  full  of  desert
woods  by  reason  of  the  Climate,  and  extremitie  of  the
colde  in  Winter  time.  So  likewise  along  the  River
Volgha  betwixt  the  Countreys  of  Cazan,  and  Astracan  :
where  (notwithstanding  the  soyle  is  very  fruitfuU)  it  is
all  unhabited,  saving  that  upon  the  river  Volgha  on  the
Westside,  the  Emperour  hath  some  fewe  Castels  with
garisons  in  them.  This  happeneth  by  meanes  of  the
Crimme  Tartar,  that  will  neither  himselfe  plant  Townes
to  dwel  there,  (living  a  wild  and  vagrant  life)  nor  suffer
the  Russe  (that  is  farre  off  with  the  strength  of  his
Countrey)  to  people  those  parts.  From  Vologda  (which
lyeth  almost  1700.  verst  from  the  port  of  S.  Nicholas)
downe  towards  Mosco,  and  so  towards  the  South  part
that  bordereth  upon  the  Crimme,  (which  conteineth  the
like  space  of  1700.  verst  or  there  abouts)  is  a  very
fruitfull  and  pleasant  Countrey,  yeelding  pasture,  and
corne,  with  woods  and  waters  in  very  great  plentie.
The  like  is  betwixt  Rezan  (that  lyeth  Southeast  from
Mosco)  to  Novogrod  and  Vobsko,  that  reach  farthest
towards  the  Northwest.  So  betwixt  Mosco,  and  Smo-
lensk© (that  lyeth  Southwest  towards  Lituania)  is  a  very
fruitfull  and  pleasant  soile.

The  whole  Countrey  differeth  very  much  from  it
selfe,  by  reason  of  the  yeere  :  so  that  a  man  would
marveile  to  see  the  great  alteration  and  difference  betwixt
the Winter, and the Summer Russia. The whole

360

OF THE SOIL AND CLIMATE  ad.

1588.

Countrey  in  the  Winter  lieth  under  snow,  which  falleth
continually,  and  is  sometime  of  a  yard  or  two  thicke,
but  greater  towards  the  North.  The  Rivers  and  other
waters  are  all  frosen  up  a  yard  or  more  thicke,  how
swift  or  broade  so  ever  they  bee.  And  this  continueth
commonly  five  moneths,  viz.  from  the  beginning  of
November  till  towardes  the  ende  "of  March,  what  time  [I.  476-!
the  snow  beginneth  to  melt.  So  that  it  would  breede  a  ^^^  '^°^^^  °f
frost  in  a  man  to  looke  abroad  at  that  time,  and  see  '^^"^'^'
the  Winter  face  of  that  Countrey.  The  sharpenesse  of
the  aire  you  may  judge  of  by  this :  for  that  water
dropped  downe  or  cast  up  into  the  aire  congealeth  into
yce  before  it  come  to  the  ground.  In  the  extremitie  of
Winter,  if  you  holde  a  pewter  dish  or  pot  in  your  hand,
or  any  other  mettall  (except  in  some  chamber  where  their
warme  stoaves  bee)  your  fingers  will  friese  fast  unto  it,
and  drawe  off  the  skinne  at  the  parting.  When  you
passe  out  of  a  warme  roome  into  a  colde,  you  shall
sensibly  feele  your  breath  to  waxe  starke,  and  even
stifeling  with  the  colde,  as  you  drawe  it  in  and  out.
Divers  not  onely  that  travel!  abroad,  but  in  the  very
markets,  and  streetes  of  their  Townes,  are  mortally
pinched  and  killed  withall :  so  that  you  shall  see  many
drop  downe  in  the  streetes ;  many  travellers  brought  into
the  Townes  sitting  dead  and  stifFe  in  their  Sleds.  Divers
lose  their  noses,  the  tips  of  their  eares,  and  the  bals  of
their  cheekes,  their  toes,  feete,  &c.  Many  times  (when
the  Winter  is  very  hard  and  extreeme)  the  beares  and
woolfes  issue  by  troupes  out  of  the  woods  driven  by
hunger,  and  enter  the  villages,  tearing  and  ravening  all
they  can  finde :  so  that  the  inhabitants  are  faine  to  flie  for
safegard  of  their  lives.  And  yet  in  the  Sommer  time
you  shal  see  such  a  new  hiew  and  face  of  a  Countrey,  the
woods  (for  the  most  part  which  are  all  of  firre  and  birch)
so  fresh  and  so  sweete,  the  pastures  and  medowes  so
greene  and  well  growen,  (and  that  upon  the  sudden)  such
varietie  of  flowers,  such  noyse  of  birdes  (specially  of
Nightingales,  that  seeme  to  be  more  lowde  and  of  a  more

361

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

variable  note  then  in  other  Countreys)  that  a  man  shall
not  lightly  travell  in  a  more  pleasant  Countrey.

And  this  fresh  and  speedy  growth  of  the  Spring  there
seemeth  to  proceede  from  the  benefite  of  the  snow :
which  all  the  Winter  time  being  spread  over  the  whole
Countrey  as  a  white  robe,  and  keeping  it  warme  from  the
rigour  of  the  frost,  in  the  Spring  time  (when  the  Sunne
waxeth  warme,  and  dissolveth  it  into  water)  doeth  so
throughly  drench  and  soake  the  ground,  that  is  somewhat
of  a  sleight  and  sandie  mould,  and  then  shineth  so  hotely
upon  it  againe,  that  it  draweth  the  hearbes  and  plants
foorth  in  great  plentie  and  varietie,  in  a  very  short  time.
As  the  Winter  exceedeth  in  colde,  so  the  Sommer
inclineth  to  over  much  heat,  specially  in  the  moneths  of
June,  July  and  August,  being  much  warmer  then  the
Sommer  aire  in  England.

The  Countrey  throughout  is  very  well  watred  with
springs,  rivers,  and  Ozeraes,  or  lakes.  Wherein  the
providence  of  God  is  to  be  noted,  for  that  much  of  the
Countrey  being  so  farre  inland,  as  that  some  part  lieth
a  thousand  miles  and  more  every  way  from  any  Sea,  yet
it  is  served  with  faire  Rivers,  and  that  in  very  great
number,  that  emptying  themselves  one  into  another,
runne  all  into  the  Sea.  Their  lakes  are  many  and  large,
some  of  60.  80.  100.  and  200.  miles  long,  with  breadth
proportionate.
The  chiefe  The  chiefs  Rivers  are  these.  First,  Volgha,  that  hath
FAven  of  j^-g  \yQ^^  qj.  spring  at  the  roote  of  an  Aldertree,  about
200.  verst  above  Yaruslave,  and  groweth  so  bigge  by  the
encrease  of  other  Rivers  by  that  time  it  commeth  thither,
that  it  is  broad  an  English  mile  and  more,  and  so  runneth
into  the  Caspian  sea,  about  2800.  verst  or  miles  of
lenp;th.

The  next  is  Boristhenes  (now  called  Neper)  that
divideth  the  Countrey  from  Lituania,  and  falleth  into
the Euxin  sea.

The  third  Tanais  or  Don,  (the  ancient  bounder  betwixt
Europe and  Asia) that taketh his head out  of  Rezan

362

OF THE SOIL AND CLIMATE  a.d.

1588.

Ozera,  and so running through the Countrey of  the

Chrim  Tartar,  falleth  into  the  great  Sea,  lake,  or  meare,

(called  Maeotis)  by  the  Citie  of  Azov. By  this  River  (as

the Russe reporteth) you may  passe from their Citie

Mosco  to  Constantinople,  and  so  into  all  those  parts  of

the  world  by  water,  drawing  your  boate  (as  their  maner

is)  over  a  little  Isthmus  or  narrowe  slip  of  land,  a  few

versts  overthwart. Which  was  proved  not  long  since  by

an  Ambassadour  sent  to  Constantinople,  who  passed  the

River of Moscua, and so into another called Ocka,

whence  hee  drew  his  boat  over  into  Tanais,  and  thence

passed  the  whole  way  by  water.

The  fourth  is  called  Duyna,  many  hundred  miles  long,
that  falleth  Northward  into  the  bay  of  S.  Nicholas,  and
hath  great  Alabaster  rockes  on  the  bankes  towards  the
sea  side.

The  fifth  Duna,  that  emptieth  into  the  Baltick  sea
by  the  towne  Riga.

The  sixt  Onega,  that  falleth  into  the  Bay  at  Solovetsko
90.  verst  from  the  port  of  S.  Nicholas.  This  River,  below
the  towne  Cargapolia,  meeteth  with  the  River  Volock,
that  falleth  into  the  Finland  Sea  by  the  towne  Yama.
So  that  from  the  port  of  S.  Nicholas  into  the  Finland
sea,  and  so  into  the  Sound,  you  may  passe  all  by  water,
as  hath  bene  tried  by  the  Russe.

The  seventh  Suchana,  that  floweth  into  Duyna,  and
so  into  the  North  sea.

The  eight  Ocka,  that  fetcheth  his  head  from  the
borders  of  the  Chrim,  and  streameth  into  Volgha.

The  ninth  Moscua,  that  runneth  thorow  the  Citie
Mosco,  and  giveth  it  the  name.

There  is  Wichida  also  a  very  large  and  long  river  that
riseth  out  of  Permia,  and  falleth  into  Volgha.  All  these  [I.  477.]
are  rivers  of  very  large  streames,  the  least  to  be  compared
to  the  Thames  in  bignesse,  and  in  length  farre  more,
besides  divers  others.  The  Pole  at  Mosco  is  ^§.  degrees
10.  minutes.  At  the  port  of  S.  Nicholas  towards  the
North 62.  degrees  and 50.  minutes.

363

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

The  native  commodities  of  the  Countrey.

The  fruits  and  TpOr  kindes  of  fruites,  they  have  Apples,  peares,
graine  of  ^  plummes,  cherries,  red  and  blacke,  (but  the  blacke
wilde)  a  deene  hke  a  muske  milhan,  but  more  sweete
and  pleasant,  cucumbers  and  goords  (which  they  call
Arbouse)  rasps,  strawberies,  and  hurtilberies,  with  many
other  beries  in  great  quantitie  in  every  wood  and  hedge.
Their  kindes  of  graine  are  wheat,  rie,  barley,  oates,  pease,
buckway,  psnytha,  that  in  taste  is  somewhat  like  to  rice.
Of  all  these  graines  the  Countrey  yeeldeth  very  sufficient
with  an  overplus  quantitie,  so  that  wheate  is  solde  some-
time for  two  alteens  or  ten  pence  starling  the  Chetfird,
which  maketh  almost  three  English  bushels.

Their  rie  is  sowed  before  the  Winter,  all  their  other

graine  in  the  Spring  time,  and  for  the  most  part  in  May.

The  Permians  and  some  other  that dwell farre Noijth,

and  in  desert  places,  are  served  from  the  parts  that  l^^e

more  Southward,  and  are  forced  to  make  bread  sometimes

of  a  kinde  of  roote  (called  Vaghnoy)  and  of  the  middle

rine  of  the  firre  tree. If  there be  any  dearth  (as they

accompted  this  last  yeere  Anno  1588.  wheat  and  rie  being

at 13. alteens, or 5. shillings five pence starling the

Chetfird) the fault is rather in the practise of their

Nobilitie  that  use  to  engrosse  it,  then  in  the  Countrey

it  selfe.

The  chiefe  The native  commodities of  the  Countrey  (wherewith

commodities  of  they  serve  both  their  owne  turnes,  and  send  much  abroad

^•^' to  the  great  enriching  of  the  Emperor,  and  his  people)

I  Furres. are many & substantiall. First, furres of all sorts.

Wherein the providence of  God is to be noted,  that

provideth a naturall remedie for them, to helpe the

naturall inconvenience  of  their  Countrey  by  the  cold  of

the Climat. Their chiefe furres are  these,  Blacke  fox.

Sables, Lusernes, dun fox, Martrones, Gurnestalles or

Armins,  Lasets  or Miniver,  Bever,  Wulverins,  the  skin

These  Rats of  a  great  water  Rat  that  smelleth  naturally  like  muske,

arein  Canada.  Calaber  or  gray  squirrel,  red squirrel,  red  &  white fox.

364

OF THE NATIVE COMMODITIES  ad.

Besides  the  great  quantitie  spent  within  ye  Countrey  (the  WHtti^

people  being  clad  al  in  furres  the  whole  winter)  there  are  >,

transported out of  the Countrey some yeeres by the
merchants of  Turkic,  Persia, Bougharia, Georgia, Ar-
menia, and  some  other  of  Christendom,  to  the  value  of
foure  or  five  hundred  thousand  rubbles,  as  I  have  heard
of  the  merchants. The  best  Sable  furre  groweth  in  the
countrey  of  Pechora,  Momgosorskoy  and  Obdorskoy,  the  Momgosorskoy
worser sort in Siberia, Perm, & other places. The  P^^'h^P[  ^°^-
blacke foxe and red come out of  Siberia,  white and  S"^""^^^^-
dunne  from  Pechora,  whence  also  come  the  white  wolfe, .  \^^
and  white  Beare  skin. The  best  Wulverin  also  thence  ]^^^

and  from  Perm.  The  best  Martrons  are  from  Siberia,
Cadam,  Morum,  Perm,  and  Cazan.  Lyserns,  Minever,
and  Armins,  the  best  are  out  of  Gallets,  and  Ouglits,
many  from  Novogrod  and  Perm.  The  Beaver  of  the
best  sort  breedeth  in  Murmonskey  by  Cola.  Other
common  furres  and  most  of  these  kindes  grow  in  many,
and  some  in  all  parts  of  the  Countrey.

The  second  commoditie  is  of  Waxe,  whereof  hath  bene  2.  Waxe.
shipped into forreigne countreys (as I have heard it
reported by those that best know it) the summe of
50000.  pood  yeerely,  every  pood  conteyneth  40.  pound,
but  now  about loooo. pood  a  yeere.

The  third  is  their  Honie,  whereof  besides  an  exceed-  3.  Hony.
ing  great  quantitie  spent  in  their  ordinary  drinkes  (which
is  Mead  of  all  sorts)  and  their  other  uses,  some  good
quantitie  is  caried  out  of  the  countrey.  The  chiefe
encrease  of  hony  is  in  Mordua  and  Cadam  neere  to  the
Cheremissen  Tartar :  much  out  of  Severskoy,  Rezan,
Morum,  Cazan,  Dorogobose,  and  Vasma.

Fourthly,  of  Tallow  they  afoord  a  great  waight  for  4.  Tallow.
transportation  :  not  onely  for  that  their  countrey  hath
very  much  good  ground  apt  for  pasturage  of  cattell,  but
also  by  reason  of  their  many  Lents  and  other  fastes :  and
partly  because  their  greater  men  use  much  waxe  for  their
lights,  the  poorer  and  meaner  sort  birch  dried  in  their
stoaves, and cut into long shivers, which they call

365

A.D.
1588.

5.  Hide.

6.  Trane  oyle.
[I.  478.]
The  maner  of
hunting  the
Scale  fish.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Luchineos.  Of  tallow  there  hath  bene  shipped  out  of  the
Realme  a  few  yeeres  since  about  1 00000.  pood  yerely,
now  not  past  30000.  or  thereabouts.  The  best  yeeld  of
tallow  is  in  the  parts  and  territories  of  Smolensko,  Yaru-
slave,  Oughts,  Novogrod,  and  Vologda,  Otfer,  and
Gorodetskey.

An  other  principall  commoditie  is  their  Losh  and  Cow
hide.  Their  Losh  or  Buffe  hide  is  very  faire  and  large.
Their  bull  and  cowe  hide  (for  oxen  they  make  none,
neither  yet  weather)  is  of  a  small  sise.  There  hath  bene
transported  by  merchants  strangers  some  yeres  1 00000.
hides.  Now  it  is  decreased  to  30000.  or  thereabouts.
Besides  great  store  of  goates  skinnes,  whereof  great
numbers  are  shipped  out  of  the  countrey.  The  largest
kinde  of  Losh  or  Buffe  breedeth  about  Rostove,  Wichida,
Novogrod,  Morum,  and  Perm.  The  lesser  sort  within
the  kingdome  of  Cazan.

An  other  very  great  and  principall  commoditie  is  their
Trane  oyle,  drawen  out  of  the  Seal  fish.  Where  it  wilJL
not  be  impertinent  to  shewe  the  maner  of  their  huntiBlg
the  Seal,  which  they  make  this  oyle  of :  which  is  in  ti|is
sort.  Towards  the  ende  of  Sommer  (before  the  frosf
beginne)  they  goe  downe  with  their  boates  into  the  Bay  of
S.  Nicholas,  to  a  cape  called  Cusconesse  or  Foxnose,
where  they  leave  their  boats  till  the  next  spring  tide.
When  the  Sunne  waxeth  warme  toward  the  spring,  and
yet  the  yce  not  melted  within  the,  Bay,  they  returne
thither  againe.  Then  drawing  their  b'Qates  over  the  sea
yce,  they  use  them  for  houses  to  rest  and  lodge  in.
There  are  commonly  about  17.  or  18.  fleete  of  them,  of
great  large  boates,  which  divide  themselves  into  divers
companies,  five  or  sixe  boats  in  a  consort.

They  that  first  finde  the  haunt,  fire  a  beacon,  which
they  carry  with  them  for  the  nonce.  Which  being  espied
by  the  other  companies,  by  such  among  them  as  are
appointed  of  purpose,  they  come  altogether  and  compasse
the  Seales  round  about  in  a  ring,  that  lie  sunning  them-
selves  together  upon  the yce,  commonly foure  or  five

366

OF THE NATIVE COMMODITIES  ad.

1588.
thousand  in  a  shoale,  and  so  they  invade  them  every  man
with  his  club  in  his  hand.  If  they  hit  them  on  the  nose,
they  are  soone  killed.  If  on  the  sides  or  backe  they
beare  out  the  blow,  and  many  times  so  catch  and  holde
downe  the  clubbe  with  their  teeth  by  maine  force,  that
the  partie  is  forced  to  call  for  helpe  to  his  fellowes.

The  maner  of  the  Seals  is  when  they  see  themselves
beset,  to  gather  all  close  together  in  a  throng  or  plumpe,
to  sway  downe  the  yce,  and  to  breake  it  (if  they  can)
which  so  bendeth  the  yce  that  many  times  it  taketh  the
sea  water  upon  it,  and  maketh  the  hunters  to  wade  a
foote  or  more  deepe.  After  the  slaughter  when  they
have  killed  what  they  can,  they  fall  to  sharing  every
boate  his  part  in  equal!  portions  :  and  so  they  flay  them,
taking  from  the  body  the  skin,  and  the  lard  or  fat  with
all  that  cleaveth  to  the  skin.  This  they  take  with  them,
leaving  the  bodies  behind,  and  so  go  to  shore.  Where
they  digge  pits  in  the  ground  of  a  fadome  and  an  halfe
deepe,  or  thereabout,  and  so  taking  the  fat  or  lard  off
from  the  skinne,  they  throw  it  into  the  pit,  and  cast  in
among  it  hoat  burning  stones  to  melt  it  withall.  The
uppermost  and  purest  is  sold,  and  used  to  oile  wool  for
cloth,  the  grosser  (that  is  of  a  red  colour)  they  sell  to
make  sope.

Likewise  of  Ickary  or  Cavery,  a  great  quantitie  is  made  7.  ickary.
upon  the  river  of  Volgha  out  of  the  fish  called  Bellou-
gina,  the  Sturgeon,  the  Severiga  and  the  Sterledey.
Whereof  the  most  part  is  shipped  by  French  and  Nether-
landish merchants  for  Italy  and  Spaine,  some  by  English
merchants.

The  next  is  of  Flax  and  Hempe,  whereof  there  hath  8.  Hempe
bene  shipped  (as  I  have  heard  merchants  say)  at  the  port  ^^^  Flaxe.
of  Narve  a  great  part  of  100.  ships  small  and  great
yerely.  Now,  not  past  five.  The  reason  of  this  abating
and  decrease  of  this  &  other  commodities,  that  were  wont
to  be  transported  in  a  greater  quantitie,  is  the  shutting  up
of  the  port  of  ye  Narve  towards  the  Finland  sea,  which
now is in the handes and possession  of  the  Sweden.

367

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Likewise  the  stopping  of  the  passage  overland  by  the  way
of  Smolensko,  &  Plotsko,  by  reason  of  their  warres  with
the  Polonian,  which  causeth  the  people  to  be  lesse  provi-
dent in  mainteining  and  gathering  these  and  like  com-
modities, for  that  they  lacke  sales.  For  the  growth  of
flaxe  the  province  of  Vobsko,  and  the  countrey  about  is
the  chiefe  and  onely  place.  For  Hempe  Smolensko,
Dorogobose  and  Vasma.

9.  5alt.  The  countrey  besides  maketh  great  store  of  salt. Their

best  salt  is  made  at  Stararovse  in  very  great  quantitie,
where  they  have  great  store  of  salt  wels,  about  250.  verst
from  the  sea.  At  Astracan  salt  is  made  naturally  by  the
sea  water,  that  casteth  it  up  into  great  hils,  and  so  it  is
digged  downe,  and  caried  away  by  the  merchants  and
other  that  wil  fetch  it  from  thence.  They  pay  to  the
Emperor  for  acknowledgement  or  custome  3.d.  Russe
upon  every  hundred  weight.  Besides  these  two,  they
Nonocks.  make  salt  in  many  other  places  of  the  Realme,  as  in
Perm,  Wichida,  Totma,  Kenitsma,  Solovetsky,  Ocona,
Bombasey,  and  Nonocks,  all  out  of  salt  pits,  save  at
Solovetsky,  which  lieth  neere  to  the  sea.

10.  Tarre. Likewise  of  Tarre  they  make  a  great  quantitie  out  of

their  firre  trees  in  the  countrey  of  Duyna  and  Smolensko,
whereof  much  is  sent  abroad.  Besides  these  (which  are
all  good  and  substantiall  commodities)  they  have  divers
other  of  smaller  accompt,  that  are  naturall  and  proper  to

1 1 .  Riba- that  countrey  :  as  the  fish  tooth  (which  they  call  Riba-
zuba.  zuba) which is used both among themselves,  and  the

Persians  and  Bougharians  that  fetch  it  from  thence  for
beads,  knives,  and  sword  hafts  of  Noblemen  and  gentle-
men, and  for  divers  other  uses.  Some  use  the  powder  of
it  against  poison,  as  the  Unicornes  home.  The  fish  that
weareth  it  is  called  a  Morse,  and  is  caught  about  Pechora.
These  fish  teeth  some  of  them  are  almost  2.  foote  of
length,  and  weigh 11.  or 12.  pound  apiece,

12.  Slude. In  the  province  of  Corelia,  and  about  the  river  Duyna

towards  the  North  sea,  there  groweth  a  soft  rocke  which
they  call  Slude. This  they  cut  into  pieces,  and  so  teare

368

OF THE NATIVE COMMODITIES  ad.

1588.

it  into  thin  flakes,  which  naturally  it  is  apt  for,  and  so
use  it  for  glasse-lanthorns  and  such  like. It  giveth  both
inwards  and  outwards  a  clearer  light  then  glasse,  and  for
this  respect  is  better  then  either  glasse  or  home :  for  that
it  neither  breaketh  like  glasse,  nor  yet  will  burne  like  the
lanthorne. Saltpeter they make in many  places, as  at i3-  Sajtpeter
Oughts,  Yaruslave & Ustiug, and  "some smal  store  of  <^^d brimstone.
brimstone  upon  the  river  Volgha,  but  want  skil  to  refine  [i.  479.]
it. Their  iron  is  somewhat  brittle,  but  a  great  weight  of  14.  Iron.
it  is  made  in Corelia,  Cargapolia,  & Ustiug  Thelesna.
Other  mine  they  have  none  growing  within  ye  realme.

Their  beasts  of  strange  kinds  are  the  Losh,  the  OUen,  ^-^^  strange
the  wild  horse,  the  beare,  the  wolvering,  or  wood  dog,  I^f^^lf/  '
the  Lyserne,  the  Beaver,  the  Sable,  the  Martron,  the  black  that  breed  In
and  dunne  fox,  the  white  Beare  towards  the  sea  coast  of  Russia.
Pechora, the Gurnstale,  the Laset  or Minever. They
have  a kinde of  Squirrell that hath growing on the
pinion  of  the  shoulder  bone  a  long  tuft  of  haire,  much
like  unto  feathers  with  a  far  broader  taile  then  have  any
other  squirrels,  which  they  move  and  shake  as  they  leape
from  tree  to  tree,  much  like  unto  a  wing. They  skise  a
large  space,  &  seeme  for  to  flie  withal,  and  therefore  they
cal them  Letach  Vechshe, that  is,  the flying squirrels.
Their  hares and  squirrels in Sommer  are  of  the  same
colour  with  ours,  in  Winter  the  hare  changeth  her  coate
into  milke  white,  the  squirrel  into  gray,  whereof  commeth
the  Calaber.

They  have  fallow  deere,  the  roe  bucke,  &  goats  very
great  store.  Their  horses  are  but  smal,  but  very  swift
&  hard,  they  travell  them  unshod  both  winter  and
Sommer,  without  all  regard  of  pace.  Their  sheepe  are
but  smal  &  beare  course  &  harsh  wool.  Of  foule  they
have  divers  of  the  principal  kinds  :  First,  great  store  of
hawks,  the  eagle,  the  gerfaulcon,  the  slightfaulcon,  the
goshawk,  the  tassel,  the  sparhawk,  &c.  But  the  principal
hawke  y'  breedeth  in  the  country,  is  counted  ye  ger-
faulcon. Of  other  foules  their  principal  kinds  are  the
swan  tame  &  wilde,  (whereof  they  have  great  store)  the
III  369  2  A

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

storke,  the  crane,  the  tedder  of  the  colour  of  a  feasant,
but  far  bigger  &  liveth  in  the  firre  woods.  Of  feasant
and  partridge  they  have  very  great  plentie.  An  owle
there  is  of  a  very  great  bignesse,  more  ugly  to  behold
then  ye  owles  of  this  country,  with  a  broad  face,  &  eares
much  like  unto  a  man.

For  fresh  water  fish,  besides  the  common  sorts  (as
carpe,  pikes,  pearch,  tench,  roach,  &c.)  they  have
divers  kinds  very  good  and  delicate  :  as  the  Bellouga
or  Bellougina  of  4.  or  5.  elnes  long,  the  Ositrina  or
Sturgion,  the  Severiga  and  Sterledy  somewhat  in  fashion
and  taste  like  to  the  Sturgion,  but  not  so  thicke  nor
long.  These  4.  kinds  of  fish  breed  in  the  Volgha,  and
are  catched  in  great  plenty,  and  served  thence  into  the
whole  Realme  for  a  great  food.  Of  the  Roes  of  these
foure  kinds  they  make  very  great  store  of  Icary  or
Caveary  as  was  said  before.

They  have  besides  these  that  breed  in  the  Volgha  a
fish  called  the  Riba  bela,  or  white  salmon,  which  they
accompt  more  delicate  then  they  do  the  red  salmon,
whereof  also  they  have  exceeding  great  plentie  in  the
Rivers  Northward,  as  in  Duyna,  the  river  of  Cola,  &c.
In  the  Ozera  or  lake  neere  a  towne  called  Perislave,
not  far  from  the  Mosco,  they  have  a  smal  fish  which
they  cal  the  fresh  herring,  of  the  fashion,  and  somewhat
of  the  taste  of  a  sea-herring.  Their  chiefe  townes  for
fish  are,  Yaruslave,  Bealozera,  Novogrod,  Astracan,  and
Cazan  :  which  all  yeeld  a  large  custome  to  the  Emperour
every  yeere  for  their  trades  of  fishing,  which  they  practise
in  Sommer,  but  sende  it  frozen  in  the  Winter  time  into
all  parts  of  the  Realme.

The  chiefe  Cities  of  Russia.

THe chiefe cities of  Russia  are Mosco, Novogrod,
Rostove,  Volodomer,  Plesko,  Smolensko,  Jaruslave,
Perislave, Nisnovogrod, Vologda, Ustiug, Colmogro,
Cazan, Astracan, Cargapolia, Columna. The city of
Mosco. Mosco is supposed to be of  great antiquitie, though

370

OF THE CHIEF CITIES OF RUSSIA  ad.

1588.

the  first  founder  be  unknowen  to  the  Russe. It  seemeth

,  to have taken the name from the river that runneth

;  on the  one side of  the towne. Berosus the  Chaldean

in his 5. booke telleth that Nimrod (whom other

prophane stories cal Saturne) sent Assyrius, Medus,

MoscuSj & Magog into Asia to plant colonies there,

and that Moscus planted both in Asia and Europe.

Which may  make some probabilitie, that the  citie, or

rather  the  river  whereon  it  is  built,  tooke  the  denomi-

:  nation from this Moscus  : the rather because of  the

climate or  situation,  which  is  in the  very  farthest part

&  list  of  Europe,  bordering  upon  Asia. The  Citie  was

I  much  enlarged  by  one  Ivan  or  John, sonne  to  Daniel,

that  first  changed his  title  of  duke  into  King  :  though

that honor continued not to his posterity  : the  rather

!  because  he  was invested into it by  the  Popes Legate,

who at that time was Innocentius the 4. about the

yeere 1246. which was very much misliked by the

Russe people, being then a part of  the Easterne or

Greeke  Church. Since  that  time  the  name  of  this  city

hath  growen  more  famous,  &  better  knowen  to  the  world  :

I  insomuch that not only the province, but the whole

Countrey  of  Russia  is  termed  by  some  by  the  name  of

Moscovia  the  Metropolite  city. The  forme  of  this  City

is in maner round  with 3. strong wals, circuling the

one  within  the  other,  &  streets  lying  betwene,  whereof

the  inmost  wall,  and  the  buildings  closed  within  it  (lying

!  safest  as  the  heart  within  the  body,  fenced  and  watred

■  with  the  river  Moscua,  that  runneth  close  by  it)  is  all

;  accompted  the  Emperors  castle. The  number  of  houses

I  (as I have heard) through the whole Citie (being

'  reckoned by the Emperor a litle before it  was fired

,  by the Crim) was 41500. in all. Since the Tartar

I  besieged and fired the towne (which was in the  yere

'  1 571.)  there  lieth  waste  of  it  a  great  breadth  of  ground,

which before was  wel set  and planted  with buildings,

I  specially  that  part  on  the  South side  of  Moscua, built

'  not  long  before  by  Basilius  the  Emperor  for  his  garison

371

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

[I.  480.]  of  souldiers,  to  whom  he  gave  priviledge  to  drinke
Mead,  and  beere  at  the  dry  or  prohibited  times,  when
other  Russes  may  drinke  nothing  but  water,  and  for
that  cause  called  this  new  city  by  the  name  of  Naloi,
that  is  skinck  or  poure  in.  So  that  now  the  city  of
Mosco  is  not  much  bigger  then  the  city  of  London.
The next in greatnes, & in a maner  as  large, is the

Novograd.  citie  Novograd  :  where  was  committed  (as  the  Russe
saith)  the  memorable  warre  so  m.uch  spoke  of  in  stories
of  the  Scythians  servants,  that  tooke  armes  against  their
masters  :  which  they  report  in  this  sort  :  viz.  That  the
Boiarens  or  gentlemen  of  Novograd  &  the  territory
about  (which  only  are  souldiers  after  the  discipline  of
those  countreis)  had  war  with  the  Tartars.  Which  being
wel  performed  &  ended  by  them,  they  returned  home-
wards. Where  they  understood  by  the  way  that  their
Cholopey  or  bondslaves  whom  they  left  at  home,  had
in  their  absence  possessed  their  townes,  lands,  houses,
wives  and  all.  At  which  newes  being  somewhat  amased,
and  yet  disdeining  the  villany  of  their  servants,  they
made  the  more  speed  home  :  and  so  not  far  from
Novograd  met  them  in  warlike  maner  marching  against
them.  Whereupon  advising  what  was  best  to  be  done,
they  agreed  all  to  set  upon  them  with  no  other  shew
of  weapon  but  with  their  horse  whips  (which  as  their
maner  is  every  man  rideth  withal)  to  put  them  in
remembrance  of  their  servile  condition,  thereby  to  terrific
them,  &  abate  their  courage.  And  so  marching  on  &
lashing  al  together  with  their  whips  in  their  hands  they
gave  the  onset.  Which  seemed  so  terrible  in  the  eares
of  their  villaines,  and  stroke  such  a  sense  into  them  of
the  smart  of  the  whip  which  they  had  felt  before,  that
they  fled  altogether  like  sheepe  before  the  drivers.  In
memory  of  this  victory  the  Novogradians  ever  since
have  stamped  their  coine  (which  they  cal  a  dingoe
Novogrodskoy  currant  through  al  Russia)  with  the
figure  of  a  horsman  shaking  a  whip  aloft  in  his  hand.
These  2.  cities  exceed  ye  rest  in  greatnes. For  strength

372

OF THE CHIEF CITIES OF RUSSIA  ad.

1588.

their  chiefe  townes  are  Vobsko,  Smolensko,  Cazan  &
Astracan,  as  lying  upon  the  borders.  But  for  situation
Jaruslave  far  exceedeth  the  rest.  For  besides  the  com-  Jaruslave.
modities  that  the  soile  yeeldeth  of  pasture  and  corne,  it
lieth  upon  the  famous  river  of  Volgha,  &  looketh  over
it  from  a  high  banke  very  faire  &  stately  to  behold  :
whereof  the  towne  taketh  the  name.  For  Jaraslave  in
that  tongue  signifieth  as  much  as  a  faire  or  famous
banke.  In  this  towne  (as  may  be  ghessed  by  the  ^^^°,  ^f'^J'^-
name")  dwelt  the  Russe  king:  Vladimer  sirnamed  Taruslave,  ^^  ^"^^  ^  o

'  .  ^  .  II.  p(!l[.  I  o  7 .

that  maried  the  daughter  of  Harald  king  of  England,
by  mediation  of  Sveno  the  Dane,  as  is  noted  in  the
Danish  story  about  the  yere 1067.

The  other  townes  have  nothing  y'  is  greatly  memor-
able, save  many  ruines  within  their  wals.  The  streets
of  their  cities  and  townes  in  stead  of  paving  are  planked
with  fir  trees,  plained  &  layd  even  close  the  one  to  the
other.  Their  houses  are  of  wood  without  any  lime  or  '^^^  manner
stone,  built  very  close  and  warme  with  firre  trees  plained  f  -/l^^^
and  piled  one  upon  another.  They  are  fastened  together
with  dents  or  notches  at  every  corner,  &  so  clasped  fast
together.  Betwixt  the  trees  or  timber  they  thrust  in
mosse  (whereof  they  gather  plenty  in  their  woods)  to
keep  out  the  aire.  Every  house  hath  a  paire  of  staires
that  lead  up  into  the  chambers  out  of  the  yard  or  streat
after  the  Scottish  maner.  This  building  seemeth  far
better  for  their  countrey,  then  that  of  stone  or  bricke  ;
as  being  colder  &  more  dampish  then  their  wooden
houses,  specially  of  firre,  that  is  a  dry  &  warme  wood.
Wherof  the  providence  of  God  hath  given  them  such
store,  as  that  you  may  build  a  faire  house  for  20.  or
30.  rubbles  or  litle  more,  where  wood  is  most  scant.
The  greatest  inconvenience  of  their  wodden  building  is
the  aptnesse  for  firing,  which  happeneth  very  oft  &  in
very  fearful  sort,  by  reason  of  the  drinesse  and  fatnes
of  the  fir,  that  being  once  fired,  burneth  like  a  torch,
&  is  hardly  quenched  til  all  be  burnt  up.

[Of
373

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

Of  the maner of  Crowning or Inauguration of
the Russe Emperours.

THe  solemnities  used  at  ye  Russe  Emperors  coro-
nation, are  on  this  maner.  In  the  great  church  of
Precheste  (or  our  Lady)  within  the  Emperors  castle  is
erected  a  stage  whereon  standeth  a  serine  that  beareth
upon  it  the  Imperial  cap  &  robe  of  very  rich  stuife.
When  the  day  of  the  Inauguration  is  come,  there  resort
thither,  first  the  Patriarch  w'  the  Metropolitanes,  arch-
bishops, bishops,  abbots  and  priors,  al  richly  clad  in
their  pontificalibus.  Then  enter  the  Deacons  with  the
quier  of  singers.  Who  so  soone  as  the  Emperor  setteth
foot  into  ye  church,  begin  to  sing  :  Many  yeres  may
live  noble  Theodore  Ivanowich,  &c  :  Whereunto  the
patriarch  and  Metropolite  with  the  rest  of  the  cleargy
answere  with  a  certaine  hymne,  in  forme  of  a  praier,
singing  it  altogether  with  a  great  noise.  The  hymne
being  ended,  the  patriarch  with  the  Emperor  mount  up
the  stage,  where  standeth  a  seat  ready  for  the  Emperor.
Whereupon  the  patriarch  willeth  him  to  sit  downe,  &
then  placing  himself  by  him  upon  another  seat  provided
for  y'  purpose,  boweth  downe  his  head  towards  ye  ground,
and  saith  this  prayer  :  Oh  Lord  God  king  of  kings.
Lord  of  lords,  which  by  thy  prophet  Samuel  didst
chose  thy  servant  David,  &  annoynt  him  for  King
over  thy  people  Israel,  heare  now  our  prayer,  &  looke
from  thy  sanctuary  upon  this  thy  servant  Theodore,
whom  thou  hast  chosen  and  exalted  for  king  over
these  thy  holy  nations,  anoint  him  with  the  oile  of
[I,  481.]  gladnes,  protect  by  thy  power,  put  upon  his  head  a
crowne  of  gold  &  precious  stones,  give  him  length  of
dayes,  place  him  in  the  seat  of  Justice,  strengthen  his
arme,  make  subject  unto  him  all  the  barbarous  nations.
Let  thy  feare  be  in  his  whole  heart,  turne  him  from  an
evill  faith,  and  all  errour,  and  shewe  him  the  salvation
of  thy  holy  and  universal  Church,  that  he  may  judge  thy
people  with  Justice,  &  protect  the  children  of  the  poore,  j

374

OF CROWNING THE EMPERORS  ad.

1588.

and  finally  atteine  everlasting  life.  This  prayer  he
speaketh  with  a  low  voice,  and  then  pronounceth  aloud  :
Al  praise  and  power  to  God  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  holy  Ghost.  The  prayer  being  ended,  he  com-
mandeth  certaine  Abbots  to  reach  the  imperiall  roabe  &
cap  :  which  is  done  very  decently,  and  with  great
solemnitie,  the  Patriarch  withal  .pronouncing  aloud :
Peace  be  unto  all.  And  so  he  beginneth  another  prayer
to  this  eiFect  :  Bow  your  selves  together  with  us,  and
pray  to  him  that  reigneth  over  all.  Preserve  him  (oh
Lord)  under  thy  holy  protection,  keepe  him  that  hee
may  doe  good  and  holy  things,  let  Justice  shine  forth
in  his  dayes,  that  we  may  live  quietly  without  strife  and
malice.  This  is  pronounced  somewhat  softly  by  the
Patriarch,  whereto  hee  addeth  againe  aloud  :  Thou  art
the  king  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  saviour  of  our
soules,  to  thee  the  Father,  Sonne  and  Holy  ghost
be  al  praise  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.  Then  putting
on  the  roabe  and  the  cap,  he  blesseth  the  Emperour
with  the  signe  of  the  crosse,  saying  withall :  In  the  name
of  the  Father,  the  Sonne  and  the  Holy  ghost.  The  like
is  done  by  the  Metropolites,  Archbishops,  and  Bishops  :
who  all  in  their  order  come  to  the  chaire,  and  one  after
another  blesse  the  Emperour  with  their  two  forefingers.
Then  is  sayd  by  the  Patriarch  another  prayer,  that  be-
ginneth :  Oh  most  holy  virgin,  mother  of  God  &c.
After  which  a  Deacon  pronounceth  with  a  loude  voice :
Many  yeres  to  noble  Theodore,  good,  honourable,
beloved  of  God,  great  Duke  of  Volodemer,  of  Mosco,
Emperour,  and  Monarch  of  all  Russia,  &c.  Whereto
the  other  Priests  and  Deacons  that  stand  somewhat  farre
of  by  the  altar  or  table,  answere  singing  :  Many  yeres,
many  yeres  to  the  noble  Theodore.  The  same  note  is
taken  up  by  the  Priests  and  Deacons,  that  are  placed  at
the  right  and  left  side  of  the  Church,  and  then  alto-
gether, they  chaunt  and  thunder  out,  singing  :  Many
yeares  to  the  noble  Theodore,  good,  honourable,  beloved
of  God,  great  Duke  of  Volodomer,  Mosco,  Emperour  of

375

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

all  Russia,  &c.  These  solemnities  being  ended,  first
commeth  the  Patriarch  with  the  Metropolites,  Arch-
bishops, and  Bishops,  then  the  Nobility,  and  the  whole
company  in  their  order,  to  doe  homage  to  the  Emperour,
bending  downe  their  heads,  and  knocking  them  at  his
feete  to  the  very  ground.

The  stile  wherewith  he  is  invested  at  his  Corona-
tion, runneth  after  this  maner.

THeodore  Ivanowich,  by  the  grace  of  God  great  Lord
and  Emperour  of  all  Russia,  great  Duke  of  Volo-
demer,  Mosco,  and  Novogrod,  King  of  Cazan,  King  of
Astracan,  Lord  of  Plesco,  and  great  duke  of  Smolensco,
of  Twerria,  Joughoria,  Permia,  Vadska,  Bulghoria,  and
others.  Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod  of  the  Low
countrey,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotskoy,  Rostove,  Yaru-
slaveley,  Bealozera,  Liefland,  Oudoria,  Obdoria,  and  Con-
densa.  Commander  of  all  Siberia,  and  of  the  North
parts,  and  Lord  of  many  other  Countreis,  &c.

This  stile  conteineth  in  it  all  the  Emperours  Provinces,
and  setteth  foorth  his  greatnesse.  And  therefore  they
have  a  great  delight  and  pride  in  it,  forcing  not  onely
their  owne  people  but  also  strangers  (that  have  any
matter  to  deliver  to  the  Emperour  by  speech  or  writing)
to  repeate  the  whole  forme  from  the  beginning  to  the
end.  Which  breedeth  much  cavill,  and  sometimes
quarell  betwixt  them  and  the  Tartar,  and  Poland  Am-
bassadours  :  who  refuse  to  call  him  Czar,  that  is
Emperor,  and  to  repeate  the  other  parts  of  his  long  stile.
My  selfe  when  I  had  audience  of  the  Emperour,  thought
good  to  salute  him  only  with  thus  much  vz.  Emperour  of
all  Russia,  great  Duke  of  Volodomer,  Mosco  and  Novo-
grod, King  of  Cazan,  King  of  Astracan.  The  rest  I
omitted  of  purpose,  because  I  knew  they  gloried,  to
have  their  stile  appeare  to  be  of  a  larger  volume  then
the  Queenes  of  England.  But  this  was  taken  in  so
ill  part,  that  the  Chancelour  (who  then  attended  the
Emperour,  with  the  rest of  the  nobility)  with  a  loude

376

OF THE FORCES FOR  WAR  a.d.

1588.

chafing  voice,  called  still  upon  me  to  say  out  the  rest.
Whereto  I  answered,  that  the  Emperors  stile  was  very-
long,  and  could  not  so  well  be  remembred  by  strangers,
that  I  had  repeated  so  much  of  it,  as  might  shew  that
I  gave  honour  to  the  rest  &c.  But  all  would  not
serve  till  I  commanded  my  interpreter  to  say  it  all  out.

Their  forces  for  the  wars,  w^ith the  chief  officers
and  their  salaries.

THe  Souldiers  of  Russia  are  called  Sinaboyarskey,
or  the  sons  of  Gentlemen  :  because  they  are  all  of
that  degree,  by  vertue  of  their  military  profession.  For
every  souldier  in  Russia  is  a  gentleman,  and  none  are
gentlemen,  but  only  the  souldiers,  that  take  it  by  discent
from  their  ancestors  :  so  that  the  sonne  of  a  gentleman  [I-  482.]
(which  is  borne  a  souldier)  is  ever  a  gentleman,  and  a  ^^j^i-^^^^^p
souldier  withall,  &  professeth  nothing  els  but  military  inheritance.
matters.  When  they  are  of  yeres  able  to  beare  armes,
they  come  to  the  office  of  Roserade  or  great  Constable,
and  there  present  themselves  :  who  entreth  their  names,
and  allotteth  them  certaine  lands  to  maintaine  their
charges,  for  the  most  part  the  same  that  their  fathers
enjoyed.  For  the  lands  assigned  to  maintaine  the  army,
are  ever  certain,  annexed  to  this  office  without  improving,
or  detracting  one  foot.  But  that  if  the  Emperor  have
sufficient  in  wages,  the  roomes  being  full  so  farre  as
the  land  doeth  extend  already,  they  are  many  times
deferred,  and  have  nothing  allowed  them,  except  some
one  portion  of  the  land  be  devided  into  two.  The  whole
number  of  his  souldiers  in  continuall  pay,  is  this.  First
he  hath  his  Dworaney,  that  is.  Pensioners,  or  Card  of  his
person,  to  the  number  of  15000  horsemen,  with  their
captaines and other officers, that are alwaies in a  Degrees  of

readines.  horsemen.

Of  these 1 5000 horsemen, there are three sorts or i  •  Pra-toriam

degrees,  which  differ  as  well  in  estimation  as  in wages,  "''  -^^^f  f
c3 '  _ o J attend  the

one  degree  from  another. The  first  sort  of  them  is  called  Emperors  per-
Dworaney  Bulshey,  or  the  company  of  head  Pensioners,  son  1 5000.

377

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

that  have  some  an  hundred,  some  fourescore  rubbles
a  yeare,  and  none  under  70.  The  second  sort  are  called
Seredney  Dworaney,  or  the  middle  ranke  of  Pensioners.
These  have  sixty  or  fifty  rubbles  by  the  yeare,  none
under  fortie.  The  third  and  lowest  sort,  are  the  Dyta
Boiarskey,  that  is,  the  low  Pensioners.  Their  salary
is  thirty  rubbles  a  yere  for  him  that  hath  most,  some
have  but  25,  some  20,  none  under  12.  Wherof  the
halfe  part  is  paid  them  at  the  Mosco,  the  other  halfe
in  the  field  by  the  general,  when  they  have  any  wars,  &
are  imploied  in  service.  When  they  receive  their  whole
pay,  it  amounteth  to 55000  rubbles  by  the  yere.

And  this  is  their  wages,  besides  lands  allotted  to  every
one  of  them,  both  to  the  greater  and  the  lesse,  according
to  their  degrees.  Whereof  he  that  hath  least,  hath  to
yeelde  him  twentie  rubbles  or  markes  by  the  yeare.
Besides  these  1 5000  horsemen,  that  are  of  better  choyce
(as  being  the  Emperors  owne  gard  when  himselfe
goeth  to  the  wars,  not  unlike  the  Romane  souldiers
called  Praetoriani)  are  a  hundred  and  ten  men  of  speciall
account  for  their  Nobilitie,  and  trust,  which  are  chosen
by  the  Emperor,  and  have  their  names  registred,  that
find  among  them  for  the  Emperors  wars,  to  the  number

Vumbn-Zf'"' °^  65000. horsemen, with all  necessaries meet  for the

65000.  wars  after  the  Russe  maner.

To  this  end  they  have  yerely  allowance  made  by  the
Emperor  for  themselves,  and  their  companies,  to  the
summe  of  40000  rubbles.  And  these  65000  are  to
repayre  to  the  field  every  yeare  on  the  borders  towards
the  Crim  Tartar  (except  they  be  appointed  for  some  other
service)  whether  there  be  wars  with  the  Tartars,  or  not.
This  might  seeme  peradventure  somewhat  dangerous
for  some  state,  to  have  so  great  forces  under  the  command
of  Noblemen  to  assemble  every  yere  to  one  certain
place.  But  the  matter  is  so  used,  as  that  no  danger
can  growe  to  the  Emperor,  or  his  state  by  this  means.
First,  because  these  noblemen  are  many,  to  wit,  an  no.
in  al,  &  changed  by  the  Emperor  so  oft  as  he  thinketh

378

Two  other
troupes  to  the

OF THE FORCES FOR WAR  ad.

1588.

good. Secondly, because they have their livings of

the  Emperor,  being  otherwise  but  of  very  small  revenue,

and receive  this  yerely pay of  40000  rubbles,  when it

is  presently  to  be  payd  forth  againe  to  the  souldiers  that

are under them. Thirdly,  because for the most part

they are about the Emperors person being of his

Counsel,  either  speciall,  or  at  large. Fourthly,  they  are

rather  as  paymasters,  then  Captaines  to  their  companies,

themselves  not  going  forth  ordinarily  to  the  wars,  save

when  some  of  them  are  appointed  by  speciall  order  from

the  Emperor  himselfe. So  the  whole  number  of  horse-  u .  . •

men  that  are  ever  in  a  readinesse,  and  in  continuall  pay,  continuall  pay

are  80000,  a  few  more  or  lesse.  80000.

If  he  have  neede  of  a  greater  number  (which  seldome
falleth  out)  then  he  enterteineth  of  those  Sinaboiarskey,
that  are  out  of  pay,  so  many  as  he  needeth  :  and  if  yet
he  want  of  his  number,  he  giveth  charge  to  his  Noble-
men, that  hold  lands  of  him  to  bring  into  the  field  every
man  a  proportionable  number  of  his  servants  (called
Kolophey,  such  as  till  his  lands)  with  their  furniture,
according  to  the  just  number  that  he  intendeth  to  make.
Which  the  service  being  done,  presently  lay  in  their
weapons,  and  returne  to  their  servile  occupations  againe.

Of  footemen that are in continuall  pay, he  hath to  Footmen  in
the number of 12000 all gunners, called Strelsey :  <^onttnual  pay
Whereof  5000  are  to  attend  about  the  citie of  Mosco,
or  any  other  place  where  the  Emperor  shall  abide,  and
2000  (which  are called  Stremaney  Strelsey,  or  gunners
at  the  stirrop)  about  his  owne  person  at  the  very  Court
or  house  where  himselfe  lodgeth. The  rest  are  placed
in  his  garison  townes,  till  there  be  occasion  to  have  them
in  the  field,  and  receive  for  their  salarie  or  stipend  every
man seven  rubbles a  yeare, besides twelve  measures a
piece  of  Rye,  and  Oates. Of  mercenary  Souldiers,  that  Strangers ^
are  strangers  (whom  they  call  Nimschoy) they  have  at  ^^^<^^^^^^^^  ^'^
this time 4300  of  Polonians  : of  Chirchasses  (that  are  ^  -^  ^^
under the Polonians) about 4000, wherof  3500 are
abroad  in  his  garisons  :  of  Doutches  &  Scots  about  1 50  :

379

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

of  Greekes,  Turks,  Danes  and  Swedens,  all  in  one  band,

an  TOO  or  thereabouts. But  these  they  use  onely  upon

the  Tartar  side,  and  against  the  Siberians  : as  they  doe

[I.  483.] the  Tartar souldiers (whom they  hire sometimes, but

only for the present) on the other side against the

Polonian and Sweden  : thinking it best policie  to use

their  service  upon  the  contrary  border.

The  chief  The  chiefe  Captaines  or  leaders  of  these  forces,  accord-

captams  or -^^g  ^^  their  names  and  degrees,  are  these  which  follow.

I The  Void-  First,  the  Voyavoda  Bulshaia,  that  is,  the  Great  Captaine,

vod  or  Gene- or  Lieutenant  general  under  the  Emperor. This com-

ral  monly  is  one  of  the  foure  houses  of  the  chiefe  Nobility

of  the land. Their great Voiavod  or  general at this

present  in  their  wars,  is  commonly  one  of  these  foure  :

Knez Feodor Ivanowich Methisloskey, Knez Ivan

Michalowich  Glinskoy,  Cherechaskoy,  and  Trowbetskoy,

2.  Lieutenant  all  of  great  nobilitie. Next  unto  the  Voiavod  or  general
general.  there  is  some  other  placed  as  Lieutenant  general,  being

a  man  of  great  valour  and  experience  in  the  wars,  who
ordereth  all  things  that  the  other  countenanceth.  At
this  time  their  principal  man,  &  most  used  in  their  wars,
is  one  Knez  Demetrie  Ivanowich  Forestine,  an  ancient
and  expert  captaine,  and  one  that  hath  done  great  service

3.  Marshals ^^s they Say) against the Tartar and Polonian. Next
oj  the  jieid m-iJei-  the  Voiavod  and  his  Lieutenant  general  are  foure

tOtl7'€,  .

other  that  have  the  marshalling  of  the  whole  army  devided

among  them,  and  may  be  called  the  marshals  of  the  field.

Every man hath his quarter, or fourth part under

him. Whereof  the  first  is  called  the  Prava  Polskoy,  or

right  wing. The  second  is  the  Levoy  Polskoy,  or  left

wing. The third is Rusnoy Polskoy,  or the broken

band,  because  out  of  this  there  are  chosen  to  send  abroad

upon  any  sodaine  exploit,  or  to  make  a  rescue  or  supplie,

as occasion doth require. The fourth Storoshovoy

Foure  mar- Polskoy, or the warding band. Every one of  these

shah :  deputies  ^^^^^ Marshals have two other under them (eight in

all)  that  twise  every  weeke  at  the  least  must  muster  and

traine  their  several  wings  or  bands,  and hold and  give

380

OF THE ORDER OF MUSTERING  ad.

1588.

justice for all faults, and disorders committed in  the
campe.

And  these  eight  are  commonly  chosen  out  of  the  no.
(which  I  spake  of  before)  that  receive  &  deliver  the  pay
to the souldiers. Under these eight are divers other  Five  Coronels
Captaines,  as the Gulavoy,  Captaines  of  thousands  five  ^^^^^  ^^^'
hundreds  and 100. The  Petyde  S'etskoy  or  Captains  of
fifties,  and  the  Decetskies  or  Captains  of  tennes.

Besides  the  Voiavoda  or  general  of  the  armie  (spoken
of  before)  they  have  two  other  that  beare  the  name  of
Voiavoda,  whereof  one  is  the  master  of  the  great  Ordi-  ^^^^  Masters
nance  (called  Naradna  voiavoda)  who  hath  divers  under  J__^  ^ ^^^ "
officers,  necessary  for  that  service. The other  is  called
the  Voiavoda  gulavoy,  or  the  walking  Captain e,  that  hath  '^'fie  walking
allowed  him 1000  good  horsemen of  principall  choyce, ^Z"^^'''^-
to  range  &  spie  abroad,  &  hath  the  charge  of  the  running
Castle,  which  we  are  to  speake  of  in  the  Chapter  follow-
ing. Al these Captains, & men of  charge  must once
every  day  resort  to  the  Bulsha  voiavoda,  or  General  of
the armie, to  know  his  pleasure,  &  to  informe  him,  if
there  be  any  requisite matter  pertaining  to  their  office.

Of  their  mustering,  and  levying  of  forces,  maner
of  armour,  and  provision  of  victuall  for  the
warres.

WHen  wars  are  towards  (which  they  faile  not  of  Their  order
lightly  every  yere  with  the  Tartar,  &  many  times  <>/ mustering.
with  the  Polonian  &  Sweden)  the  foure  Lords  of  the
Chetfirds  send  forth  their  summons  in  the  Emperors
name,  to  all  the  Dukes  and  Dyacks  of  the  Provinces,
to  be  proclaimed  in  the  head  townes  of  every  Shire  :
that  al  the  Sinaboiarskey,  or  sonnes  of  gentlemen  make
their  repaire  to  such  a  border  where  the  service  is  to  be
done,  at  such  a  place,  &  by  such  a  day,  and  there  present
themselves  to  such,  &  such  Captaines.  When  they  come
to  the  place  assigned  them  in  the  summons  or  proclama-
tion, their  names  are  taken  by  certaine  officers  that  have
commission  for  that  purpose  from  the  Roserade,  or  high

381

A.D.
1588.

The  horse-
mans  furni-
ture.

[I.  484.]

The  footmans
furniture.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Constable,  as  Clarkes  of  the  bands.  If  any  make  default
&  faile  at  the  day,  he  is  mulcted,  &  punished  very
severely.  As  for  the  General  &  other  chief  Captaines,
they  are  sent  thither  from  the  Emperors  owne  hand,
with  such  Commission  &  charge  as  he  thinketh  behoofull
for  the  present  service.  When  the  souldiers  are  assembled,
they  are  reduced  into  their  bands,  &  companies,  under
their  several  Captaines  of  tennes,  fifties,  hundreds,  thou-
sands, &c.  and  these  bands  into  4  Polskeis,  or  Legions
(but  of  farre  greater  numbers  then  the  Romane  Legions
were)  under  their  foure  great  Leaders,  which  also  have
the  authoritie  of  Marshals  of  the  field  (as  was  sayd
before.)

Concerning  their  armour  they  are  but  slightly  appointed.
The  common  horseman  hath  nothing  els  but  his  bow  in
his  case  under  his  right  arme,  &  his  quiver  &  sword
hanging  on  the  left  side  :  except  some  fewe  that  beare
a  case  of  dagges,  or  a  Javelin,  or  short  staife  along  their
horse  side.  The  under  captains  wil  have  commonly  some
piece  of  armour  besides,  as  a  shirt  of  male,  or  such  like.
The  General  with  the  other  chiefe  captaines  &  men  of
Nobilitie  wil  have  their  horse  very  richly  furnished,  their
saddles  of  cloth  of  gold,  their  bridles  fair  bossed  &
tasselled  with  gold,  &  silk  fringe,  bestudded  with  pearle
&  precious  stones,  themselves  in  very  faire  armor,  which
they  cal  Bullatnoy,  made  of  faire  shining  Steele,  yet
covered  commonly  with  cloth  of  golde,  and  edged  round
with  armin  furre,  his  Steele  helmet  on  his  head  of  a  very
great  price,  his  sword  bow  and  arrowes  at  his  side,  his
speare  in  his  hand,  with  another  faire  helmet,  and  Shesta
pera,  or  horsemans  scepter  carried  before  him.  Their
swords,  bowes,  and  arrowes  are  of  the  Turkish  fashion.
They  practise  like  the  Tartar  to  shoote  forwards  and
backwards,  as  they  flie  and  retire.

The  Strelsey  or  footeman  hath  nothing  but  his  piece
in  his  hand,  his  striking  hatchet  at  his  back,  &  his  sword
by  his  side.  The  stock  of  his  piece  is  not  made  caliever-
wise,  but  with  a  plaine  &  straite  stocke  (somewhat  like

382

OF THE MARTIAL DISCIPLINE  ad.

1588.
a  fouling  piece)  the  barrel  is  rudely  &  unartificially  made,
very  heavie  yet  shooteth  but  a  very  small  bullet.  As  for
their  provision  of  victual,  the  Emperor  alloweth  none,  Provision  of
either  for  Captaine  or  souldiour,  neither  provideth  any  for  '^^'^*^'^'-
them  except  peradventure  some  corne  for  their  money.
Every  man  is  to  bring  sufficient  for  himselfe,  to  serve
his  turne  for  foure  moneths,  &  if  neede  require  to  give
order  for  more  to  be  brought  unto  him  to  the  Campe
from  his  tenant  that  tilleth  his  land,  or  some  other  place.
One  great  helpe  they  have,  that  for  lodging  and  diet
every  Russe  is  prepared  to  be  a  souldier  beforehand.
Though  the  chiefe  Captains  &  other  of  account  cary  tents
with  them  after  the  fashion  of  ours,  with  some  better
provision  of  victual  then  the  rest.  They  bring  with
them  commonly  into  the  Campe  for  victuall  a  kind  of
dried  bread,  (which  they  call  Suchary)  with  some  store
of  meale,  which  they  temper  with  water,  and  so  make
it  into  a  ball,  or  small  lumpe  of  dowe,  called  Tollockno.
And  this  they  eate  rawe  in  stead  of  bread.  Their  meat
is  bacon,  or  some  other  flesh  or  fish  dryed,  after  the
Dutch  maner.  If  the  Russe  souldier  were  as  hardy  to
execute  an  enterprise,  as  he  is  hard  to  beare  out  toyle
and  travell,  or  were  otherwise  as  apt  and  well  trained
for  the  warres,  as  he  is  indifferent  for  his  lodging
and  diet,  hee  would  farre  exceede  the  souldiers  of  our
parts.

Of  their marching,  charging,  and other Martial

discipline.

THe  Russe  trusteth  rather  to  his  number,  then  to
the  valure  of  his  souldiers,  or  good  ordering  of  his
forces.  Their  marching  or  leading  is  without  al  order,
save  that  the  foure  Polskey  or  Legions,  (wherinto  their
armie  is  devided)  keepe  themselves  severall  under  their
ensignes,  &  so  thrust  all  on  together  in  a  hurrey,  as
they  are  directed  by  their  Generall.  Their  Ensigne  is  Horsemcns
the  image  of  S.  George.  The  Bulsha  Dworaney  or  drummes.
chiefe  horsemen,  have  every  man  a  small  drum  of  brasse

383

A.D.
1588.

The  hors-
mans  maner
of  charging.

The  footnians
charge.

The  walking
Castle.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

at his saddle bowe,  which he  striketh  when he  giveth
the  charge,  or  onset.

They  have  drummes  besides  of  a  huge  bignes,  which
they  cary  with  them  upon  a  boord  layde  on  foure  horses,
that  are  sparred  together  with  chaines,  every  drumme
having  eight  strikers,  or  drummers,  besides  trumpets
and  shawmes,  which  they  sound  after  a  wilde  maner,
much  different  from  ours.  When  they  give  any  charge,
or  make  any  invasion,  they  make  a  great  hallow  or
shoute  altogether,  as  lowd  as  they  can,  which  with  the
sound  of  their  trumpets,  shawmes,  and  drummes,  maketh
a  confused  and  horrible  noyse.  So  they  set  on  first
discharging  their  arrowes,  then  dealing  with  their  swordes,
which  they  use  in  a  braverie  to  shake,  and  brandish  over
their  heads,  before  they  come  to  strokes.

Their  footmen  (because  otherwise  they  want  order  in
leading)  are  commonly  placed  in  some  ambush  or  place
of  advantage,  where  they  may  most  annoy  the  enemie,
with  least  hurt  to  themselves.  If  it  be  a  set  battell,
or  if  any  great  invasion  be  made  upon  the  Russe  borders
by  the  Tartar,  they  are  set  within  ye  running  or  moving
Castle  (called  Beza,  or  Gulaygorod)  which  is  caried  about
with  them  by  the  Voiavoda  gulavoy  (or  the  walking
General)  whom  I  spake  of  before.  This  walking  or
mooving  Castle  is  so  framed,  that  it  may  be  set  up  in
length  (as  occasion  doeth  require)  the  space  of  one,
two,  three,  foure,  five,  sixe,  or  seven  miles  :  for  so  long
it  will  reach.  It  is  nothing  els  but  a  double  wall  of
wood  to  defend  them  on  both  sides  behinde  and  before,
with  a  space  of  three  yards  or  thereabouts,  betwixt  thei
two  sides  :  so  that  they  may  stand  within  it,  and  have]
roome  enough  to  charge  and  discharge  their  pieces,
and  to  use  their  other  weapons.  It  is  closed  at  both!
ends,  and  made  with  loope  holes  on  either  side,  to  lay
out  the  nose  of  their  piece,  or  to  push  foorth  any
other  weapon.  It  is  caried  with  the  armie  wheresoever
it  goeth,  being  taken  into  pieces,  and  so  layde  on  cartes
sparred together, and drawen by horse that are not

384

OF THE MARTIAL DISCIPLINE  ad.

1588.
scene,  by  reason  that  they  are  covered  with  their  cariage
as  with  a  shelfe  or  penthouse.  When  it  is  brought  to
the  place  where  it  is  to  be  used  (which  is  devised  and
chosen  out  before  by  the  walking  Voiavod)  it  is  planted
so  much  as  the  present  use  requireth,  sometime  a  mile
long,  sometimes  two,  sometimes  three  or  more  :  Which
is  soone  done  without  the  helpe  of  any  Carpenter,  or
instrument :  because  the  timber  is  so  framed  to  claspe
together  one  piece  within  another  :  as  is  easily  under-
stoode  by  those  that  know  the  maner  of  the  Russe
building.

In  this  Castle  standeth  their  shot  wel  fenced  for
advantage,  specially  against  the  Tartar,  that  bringeth
no  ordinance,  nor  other  weapon  into  the  field  with  [1. 485.]
him,  save  his  sword,  and  bow,  and  arrowes.  They
have  also  within  it  divers  field  pieces,  which  they  use
as  occasion  doth  require.  Of  pieces  for  the  field  they
carie  no  great  store,  when  they  warre  against  the  Tartar  :
but  when  they  deale  with  the  Polonian  (of  whose  forces
they  make  more  account)  they  go  better  furnished  with
all  kind  of  munition,  and  other  necessarie  provisions.
It  is  thought  that  no  Prince  of  Christendome  hath
better  store  of  munition,  then  the  Russe  Emperour.
And  it  may  partly  appeare  by  the  Artillery  house  at
Mosco,  where  are  of  all  sortes  of  great  Ordinance,  all
brasse  pieces,  very  faire,  to  an  exceeding  great  number.

The  Russe  souldier  is  thought  to  be  better  at  his
defence  within  some  castle  or  towne,  then  he  is  abroad
at  a  set  pitched  field.  Which  is  ever  noted  in  the
practise  of  his  warres,  and  namely  at  the  siege  of
Vobsco,  about  eight  yeres  since  :  where  he  repulsed  1580.
the  Polonian  king  Stepan  Batore,  with  his  whole  armie
of  1 00000  men,  and  forced  him  in  the  end  to  give
over  his  siege,  with  the  losse  of  many  of  his  best
Captaines  and  souldiers.  But  in  a  set  field  the  Russe
is  noted  to have  ever  the  worse  of  the  Polonian and

Sweden.  Reward  for

If  any  behave  himselfe  more  valiantly  then  the  rest,  valure.

"I  385  2B  '

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

or  do  any  special  piece  of  service,  the  Emperor  sendeth
him  a  piece  of  golde,  stamped  with  the  Image  of  Saint
George  on  horsebacke.  Which  they  hang  on  their
sleeves,  &  set  in  their  caps.  And  this  is  accounted
the  greatest  honour  they  can  receive,  for  any  service
they  doe.

Of  their  Colonies,  and  maintaining  of  their
conquests,  or  purchases  by  force.

THe  Russe  Emperors  of  late  yeres  have  very  much
enlarged  their  dominions,  &  territories.  Their  first
conquest  after  the  Dukedome  of  Mosco,  (for  before
that  time  they  were  but  Dukes  of  Volodomer,  as  before
was  said)  was  the  citie,  &  Dukedome  of  Novogrod  on
ye  West,  and  Northwest  side  :  which  was  no  smal
enlargement  of  their  dominion,  &  strengthening  to
them  for  the  winning  of  the  rest.  This  was  done  by
Ivan  great  grandfather  to  Theodor  now  Emperor,  about
the  yere  1480.  The  same  began  likewise  to  encroach
upon  the  countries  of  Lituania  and  Livonia,  but  the
conquest  only  intended,  &  attempted  by  him,  upon
some  part  of  those  countries,  was  pursued  &  performed
by  his  Sonne  Basileus,  who  first  wan  the  citie  &  duke-
dom of  Plesko,  afterwards  the  citie  &  dukedome  of
Smolensco,  &  many  other  faire  towns,  with  a  large
territory  belonging  unto  them,  about  the  yere  15 14.
These  victories  against  the  Lettoes  or  Lituanians,  in
1580.  the  time  of  Alexander  their  duke,  he  atchieved  rather
by  advantage  of  civil  dissentions,  &  treasons  among
themselves,  then  by  any  great  policie,  or  force  of  his
own.  But  al  this  was  lost  againe  by  his  son  Ivan
Vasiliwich,  about  8  or  9  yeres  past,  upon  composition
with  ye  Polonian  king  Stephan  Batore  :  wherunto  he
was  forced  by  the  advantages  which  the  Pole  had  then
of  him,  by  reason  of  the  foile  he  had  given  him  before,
and  the  disquietnes  of  his  own  state  at  home.  Onely
the  Russe  Emperor,  at  this  time  hath  left  him  on  that
side his countery, the cities of Smolensco, Vobsco,

386

OF THE RUSSIAN COLONIES  ad.

1588.

ChernigOj & Bealagorod in Lituania. In Livonia,  not  Lituanla.
a  towne  nor  one  foot  of  ground.

When  Basilius  first  conquered  those  countries,  he
suffered  then  the  natives  to  keepe  their  possessions,
and  to  inhabite  all  their  townes,  onely  paying  him  a
tribute,  under  the  governement  of  his  Russe  Captaines.
But  by  their  conspiracies  &  attempts  not  long  after,  he
was  taught  to  deale  more  surely  with  them.  And  so
comming  upon  them  the  second  time,  he  killed  and
caried  away  with  him,  three  parts  of  foure,  which  he
gave  or  sold  to  the  Tartars  that  served  him  in  those
wars,  and  in  stead  of  them  placed  there  his  Russes,  so
many  as  might  overmatch  the  rest,  with  certaine  garisons
of  strength  besides.  Wherein  notwithstanding  this  over-
sight was  committed,  for  that  (taking  away  with  him
the  upland,  or  countrey  people  that  should  have  tilled
the  ground,  &  might  easily  have  bene  kept  in  order
without  any  danger,  by  other  good  policies)  he  was
driven  afterwards  many  yeres  together,  to  vitaile  the
countrey  (specially  the  great  townes)  out  of  his  owne
countrey  of  Russia,  the  soile  lying  there  in  the  meane
while  wast,  and  untilled.

The  like  fell  out  at  the  port  of  Narve  in  Liefland,  Islarve.
where  his  sonne  Ivan  Vasiliwich  devised  to  build  a
towne,  and  a  castle  on  the  other  side  the  river,  (called
Ivangorod)  to  keepe  the  towne  and  countrey  in  subjection.
The  castle  he  caused  to  be  so  built  and  fortified,  that
it  was  thought  to  be  invincible.  And  when  it  was
furnished,  for  reward  to  the  Architect  (that  was  a
Polonian)  he  put  out  both  his  eyes,  to  make  him
unable  to  build  the  like  againe.  But  having  left  the
natives  all  within  their  owne  countrey,  without  abating
their  number  or  strength,  the  towne  and  castle  not
long  after  was  betraied,  and  surrendred  againe  to  the
king  of  Sweden.

On  the  Southeast  side,  they  have  got  the  kingdomes
of  Cazan,  and  Astracan.  These  were  wonne  from  the
Tartar,  by  the  late  Emperour  Ivan  Vasiliwich,  the  one

387

A.D.

1588.

Siberia  and

Ob.

[I.  486.]

Conquest  of  a

1000  miles.

Permia  and

Pechoi'a.

Means  of
holding  chiefe
townes.

Meanes  of
holding  the
countries  of
Pecho7-a,
Permia,  and
Siberia.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

about  thirtie  five,  the  other  about  thirtie  and  three
yeares  agoe.  Northward  out  of  the  countrey  of  Siberia,
he  hath  layed  unto  his  realme  a  great  breadth  and  length
of  ground,  from  Wichida  to  the  river  of  Obba,  about
a  1000  miles  space  :  so  that  he  is  bolde  to  write  himselfe
now.  The  great  Commander  of  Siberia.  The  countries
likewise  of  Permia  and  Pechora  are  a  divers  people
and  language  from  the  Russe,  overcome  not  long  since,
and  that  rather  by  threatning,  and  shaking  of  the  sword,
then  by  any  actuall  force  :  as  being  a  weake  and  naked
people,  without  meanes  to  resist.

That  which  the  Russe  hath  in  his  present  possession,
he  keepeth  on  this  sort.  In  his  foure  chief  border
townes  of  Vobsko,  Smolensko,  Astracan,  and  Cazan,  he
hath  certaine  of  his  counsel  not  of  greatest  nobility,  but
of  greatest  trust,  which  have  more  authoritie  within  their
precincts,  (for  the  countenancing  and  strengthening  of
their  government  there)  then  the  other  Dukes  that  are
set  to  governe  in  other  places,  as  was  noted  before,  in
the  maner  of  ordering  their  Provinces.  These  he
changeth  sometime  every  yere,  sometime  every  second
or  third  yere,  but  exceedeth  not  that  time,  except  upon
very  speciall  trust,  and  good  liking  of  the  party,  and
his  service :  least  by  enlarging  of  their  time,  they  might
grow  into  some  familiaritie  with  the  enemie  (as  some
have  done) being  so  farre  out  of  sight.

The  townes  besides  are  very  strongly  fenced  with
trenches,  castles,  &  store  of  munition,  and  have  garisons
within  them,  to  the  number  of  two  or  three  thousand
a  piece.  They  are  stored  with  victual  if  any  siege  should
come  upon  them,  for  the  space  of  two  or  three  yeres
before  hand.  The  foure  castles  of  Smolensko,  Vobsko,
Cazan  and  Astracan,  he  hath  made  very  strong  to  beare
out  any  siege :  so  that  it  is  thought  that  those  townes
are  impregnable.

As  for  the  countries  of  Pechora  and  Permia,  and  that
part  of  Siberia,  which  he  hath  now  under  him,  they  are
kept by  as easie meanes, as they  were first got. vz.

388

OF  THE TARTARS  ad

1588.

rather  by  shewing,  then  by  using  of  armes.  First,  he
hath  stored  the  countrie  with  as  many  Russes  as  there
are  natives,  &  hath  there  some  few  souldiers  in  garison,
inough  to  keepe  them  under.  Secondly,  his  officers  &
Magistrates  there  are  of  his  own  Russe  people,  and  he
changeth  them  very  often,  vz.  every  yere  twise  or  thrise :
notwithstanding  there  be  no  great  Jeare  of  any  innova-
tion. Thirdly,  he  devideth  them  into  many  smal  govern-
ments, like  a  staffe  broke  in  many  small  pieces :  so
y'  they  have  no  strength  being  severed,  which  was  but
litle  neither  when  they  were  al  in  one.  Fourthly,  he
provideth  that  the  people  of  the  countrie  have  neither
armor,  nor  money,  being  taxed  &  pilled  so  often  as  he
thinketh  good :  without  any  meanes  to  shake  off  that
yoke,  or  to  relieve  themselves.

In Siberia  (where  he  goeth  on in pursuing his  con-  Siberia.
quest)  he  hath  divers  castles  &  garisons  to  the  number
of 6000 souldiers of  Russes & Polonians,  & sendeth
many  new  supplies  thither,  to  plant  and  to  inhabite,  as
he  winneth  ground. At  this  time  besides  he  hath  gotten
the kings brother  of  Siberia,  allured  by  certaine  of  his  Tie  kings
captaines,  to leave his  own  country  by  offers of  great  ^^"^^^J  °f
entertainment,  and  plesanter  life  with  the  Russe  Emperor,
then  he had in Siberia. He  was brought in this  last  1588.
yere, and is now with the Emperor at Mosco well
enterteined.

Of  the  Tartars,  and  other  borderers  to  the  country
of  Russia,  with  v^hom  they  have  most  to  doe
in  warre,  and  peace.

THeir  neighbors  with  whom  they  have  greatest  deal-
ings &  intercourse,  both  in  peace  &  war,  are  first
the Tartar. Secondly the Polonian whom the Russe  ^'^^  Polonians

calleth  Laches,  noting  the  first  author  or  founder  of  the  ^f\i  ^^'^"
,  '  11 I X 1  T 1  1  . by  the  Russe.

nation,  who  was  called Laches or Leches,  wnerunto is

added Po, which signifieth People, and so is made

Polaches, that is, the People  or  posterity  of  Laches :

389

A.D.
1588.

The  Chrim
Tartar.

The  firing  of
Mosco  by  the
Chrim  Tar-
tar, in  the
yeare  1571.

[I.  487.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  the  Latins  after  their  maner  of  writing  cal  Polonos.
The  third  are  the  Swedens.  The  Polonians  &  Swedens
are  better  knowen  to  these  parts  of  Europe  then  are  the
Tartars,  that  are  farther  off  from  us  (as  being  of  Asia)
and  divided  into  many  tribes,  different  in  name,  and
government  one  from  another.  The  greatest  and
mightiest  of  them  is  the  Chrim  Tartar,  (whom  some
call  the  Great  Can)  that  lieth  South,  &  Southeastward
from  Russia,  and  doth  most  annoy  the  country  by  often
invasions,  commonly  once  every  yere,  sometimes  entring
very  farre  within  the  inland  parts.  In  the  yere  1571
he  came  as  farre  as  the  citie  of  Mosco,  with  an  armie
of  200000  men,  without  any  battel,  or  resistance  at  al,
for  that  the  Russe  Emperor  (then  Ivan  Vasiliwich)  lead-
ing forth  his  armie  to  encounter  with  him,  marched  a
wrong  way.  The  citie  he  tooke  not,  but  fired  the
suburbs,  which  by  reason  of  the  buildings  (which  are  all
of  wood  without  any  stone,  brick,  or  lime,  save  certeine
out  roomes)  kindled  so  quickly,  and  went  on  with
such  rage,  as  that  it  consumed  the  greatest  part  of  the
citie  almost  within  the  space  of  foure  houres,  being  of
30  miles  or  more  of  compasse.  Then  might  you  have
seene  a  lamentable  spectacle :  besides  the  huge  &
mighty  flame  of  the  citie  all  on  light  fire,  the  people
burning  in  their  houses  and  streetes,  but  most  of  all  of
such  as  laboured  to  passe  out  of  the  gates  farthest  from
the  enemie,  where  meeting  together  in  a  mighty  throng,
&  so  pressing  every  man  to  prevent  another,  wedged
themselves  so  fast  within  the  gate,  and  streetes  neere
unto  it,  as  that  three  rankes  walked  one  upon  the  others
head,  the  uppermost  treading  downe  those  that  were
lower :  so  that  there  perished  at  that  time  (as  was  said)
by  the  fire  &  the  presse,  the  number  of  800000  people
or  more.

The  principall  cause  of  this  continual  quarell  betwixt
the  Russe  &  the  Chrim  is  for  the  right  of  certaine  border
partes  claimed  by  the  Tartar,  but  possessed  by  the  Russe.
The  Tartar  alleageth that besides Astracan and Cazan

390

OF  THE  TARTARS  a.d.

1588.

(that  are  the  ancient  possession  of  the  East  Tartar)  the

whole countrey  from his bounds North  and  Westward

so  farre  as  the  citie  of  Mosko,  and  Mosko  it  selfe  per-

teineth  to  his  right. Which  seemeth  to  have  bene  true  Homage  done

by  the  report  of  the  Russes  them  selves,  that  tell  of  a  h  ^^^  ^^"f

certame  homage  that  was  done  by  the  Kusse  JiLmperour  j^artar.

every yeere to the great Chrim or Can, the Russe

Emperour standing on foot and feeding the Chrims

horse,  (himselfe  sitting  on  his  backe)  with  oates  out  of

his  owne  cappe,  in  stead  of  a  bowle  or  manger,  and  that

within  the  castle  of  Mosko. And  this  homage  (they  say)

was done till  the time of  Basileus  grandfather to this

man. Who  surprising  the  Chrim  Emperour  by  a  strata-

geme  done  by  one  of  his  nobilitie  (called  Ivan  Demetro-

wich  Belschey)  was  content  with  this  raunsome,  viz.  with

the  changing  of  this homage into a tribute of  furres  :

which afterwards also was denied  to be paide by this

Emperors  father.

Hereupon  they  continue  ye  quarrel,  the  Russe  de-
fending his  countrey,  &  that  which  he  hath  won,  ye
Chrim  Tartar  invading  him  once  or  twise  every  yere,
somtime  about  Whitsontide,  but  oftner  in  harvest.
What  time  if  the  great  Can-  or  Chrim  come  in  his  owne
person,  he  bringeth  with  him  a  great  armie  of  1 00000.
or  200000.  men.  Otherwise  they  make  short  &  sudden
rodes  into  the  countrey  with  lesser  numbers,  running
about  the  list  of  the  border  as  wild  geese  flie,  invading
and  retiring  where  they  see  advantage.

Their common practise (being  very populous) is to  The  maner  of
make  divers  armies,  and  so  drawing the  Russe to  one  ^^^  Tartars
or  two  places  of  the  frontiers,  to  invade  at  some  other  -^^  '  ^^
place,  that  is  left  without  defence. Their  maner  of  fight,
or  ordering  of  their  forces  is  much  after  the  Russe  maner
(spoken  of  before)  save  that  they  are  all  horsemen,  and
carie  nothing  els  but  a  bowe,  a  sheafe  of  arrowes, and
a  falcon  sword  after  the  Turkish  fashion. They  are  very
expert  horsemen,  and  use  to  shoote  as  readily  backward,
as  forward. Some  wil  have  a  horsmans  staffe  like  to  a

391

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

bore  speare,  besides  their  other  weapons.  The  common
souldier  hath  no  other  armour  then  his  ordinary  apparell,
viz.  a  blacke  sheeps  skin  with  the  wool  side  outward
in  the  day  time,  and  inwarde  in  the  night  time,  with  a
cap  of  the  same.  But  their  Morseys  or  noblemen  imitate
the  Turk  both  in  apparel  and  armour.  When  they  are
to  passe  over  a  river  with  their  armie,  they  tie  three  or
foure  horses  together,  and  taking  long  poles  or  pieces
of  wood,  bind  them  fast  to  the  tailes  of  their  horse:
so  sitting  on  the  poles  they  drive  their  horse  over.  At
handle  strokes  (when  they  joyne  battell)  they  are  ac-
counted farre  better  men  then  the  Russe  people,  fierce
by  nature,  but  more  hardy  and  bloody  by  continuall
practise  of  warre :  as  men  knowing  no  artes  of  peace,
nor  any  civil  practise.
The  subtiltk  Yet  their  subtilty  is  more  then  may  seeme  to
of  the  Tartar,  ^gree  with  their  barbarous  condition.  By  reason  they
are  practised  to  invade  continually,  and  to  robbe  their
neighbours  that  border  about  them,  they  are  very  preg-
nant, and  ready  witted  to  devise  stratagems  upon  the
sudden  for  their  better  advantage.  As  in  their  warre
against  Beala  the  fourth,  king  of  Hungarie,  whome  they
invaded  with  500000.  men,  and  obtained  against  him  a
great  victorie.  Where,  among  other,  having  slaine  his
Chancelor  called  Nicholas  Schinick,  they  found  about
him  the  kings  privy  scale.  Whereupon  they  devised
presently  to  counterfeit  letters  in  the  kings  name,  to  the
cities  and  townes  next  about  the  place,  where  the  field
was  fought :  with  charge  that  in  no  case  they  should
convey  themselves,  and  their  goods  out  of  their  dwell-
ings, where  they  might  abide  safely  without  all  feare  of
danger,  and  not  leave  the  countrey  desolate  to  the
possession  of  so  vile  and  barbarous  an  enemie,  as  was
the  Tartar  nation,  terming  themselves  in  all  reprochful
maner.  For  notwithstanding  he  had  lost  his  carriages,
with  some  few  straglers  that  had  marched  disorderly,
yet  he  doubted  not  but  to  recover  that  losse,  with  the
accesse  of  a notable  victorie,  if  the  savage  Tartar  durst

392

OF  THE TARTARS  ad.

1588.

abide  him  in  the  field.  To  this  purpose  having  written
their  letters  in  the  Polish  character,  by  certaine  yong  men
whom  they  tooke  in  the  field,  and  signed  them  with  the
Kings  seale,  they  dispatched  them  fiDrth  to  all  the  quarters
of  Hungaria,  that  lay  neere  about  the  place.  Whereupon
the  Ungarians  that  were  now  flying  away  with  their
goods,  wives,  and  children,  upon  the  rumour  of  the  kings
overthrow,  taking  comfort  of  these  counterfeit  letters,
staied  at  home.  And  so  were  made  a  pray,  being  sur-
prised on  the  sudden  by  this  huge  number  of  these
Tartars,  that  had  compassed  them  about  before  they  were
aware.

When  they  besiege  a  towne  or  fort,  they  offer  much
parle,  and  send  many  flattering  messages  to  perswade
a  surrendry  :  promising  all  things  that  the  inhabitants
will  require  :  but  being  once  possessed  of  the  place,  they
use  all  maner  of  hostilitie,  and  crueltie.  This  they  doe
upon  a  rule  they  have,  vz.  that  justice  is  to  bee  practised  [I.  488.]
but  towards  their  owne.  They  encounter  not  lightly,
but  they  have  some  ambush,  whereunto  (having  once
shewed  themselves,  and  made  some  short  conflict)  they
retire  as  repulsed  for  feare,  and  so  draw  the  enemie  into
it  if  they  can.  But  the  Russe  beeing  well  acquainted
with  their  practise  is  more  warie  of  them.  When  they
come  a  roving  with  some  small  number,  they  set  on
horsebacke  counterfaite  shapes  of  men,  that  their  number
may  seeme  greater.

When  they  make  any  onset,  their  maner  is  to  make
a  great  shoute,  crying  all  out  together  Olla  Billa,  Olla
Billa,  God  helpe  us,  God  help  us.  They  contemne  death
so  much,  as  that  they  chuse  rather  to  die,  then  to  yeeld
to  their  enemie,  and  are  scene  when  they  are  slain  to
bite  the  very  weapon,  when  they  are  past  striking  or
helping  of  themselves.  Wherein  appeareth  how  different
the  Tartar  is  in  his  desperate  courage  from  the  Russe
and  Turke.  For  the  Russe  souldier,  if  he  begin  once  to
retire,  putteth  all  his  safetie  in  his  speedy  flight.  And
if  once  he  be  taken  by  his  enemy,  he  neither  defendeth

393

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

himselfe,  nor  intreateth  for  his  life,  as  reckoning  straight
to  die.  The  Turk  commonly,  when  he  is  past  hope  of
escaping,  falleth  to  intreatie,  and  casteth  away  his  weapon,
ofFereth  both  his  hands,  and  holdeth  them,  as  it  were
to  be  tied :  hoping  to  save  his  life,  by  offering  himselfe
bondslave.

The  chiefe  bootie  the  Tartars  seeke  for  in  all  their
warres  is  to  get  store  of  captives,  specially  young  boyes,
and  girles,  whome  they  sell  to  the  Turkes,  or  other  their
neighbours.  To  this  purpose  they  take  with  them  great
baskets  made  like  bakers  panniers  to  carry  them  tenderly,
and  if  any  of  them  happen  to  tire,  or  to  be  sicke  by  the
way,  they  dash  him  against  the  ground,  or  some  tree,  and
so  leave  him  dead.  The  Souldiers  are  not  troubled  with
keeping  the  captives  and  the  other  bootie,  for  hindering
the  execution  of  their  warres,  but  they  have  certaine
bandes  that  intend  nothing  else,  appoynted  of  purpose
to  receive  and  keepe  the  captives  and  the  other  praye.
The  Tartar  The  Russe  borderers  (being  used  to  their  invasions
religion.  lightly every yere in the Sommer) keepe fewe  other

cattell  on  the  border  partes,  save  swine  onely  which  the
Tartar  will  not  touch,  nor  drive  away  with  him  :  for
that  he  is  of  the  Turkish  religion,  and  will  eate  no  swines
flesh.  Of  Christ  our  Saviour  they  confesse  as  much  as
doeth  the  Turke  in  his  Alkaron,  viz.  that  he  came  of
the  Angel  Gabriel  and  the  Virgin  Marie,  that  he  was  a
great  Prophet,  and  shall  be  the  Judge  of  the  worlde  at
the  last  day.  In  other  matter  likewise,  they  are  much
ordered  after  the  manner  and  direction  of  the  Turke  :
having  felt  the  Turkish  forces  when  hee  wonne  from
them  Azov  and  Caifa,  with  some  other  townes  about
the  Euxine  or  blacke  Sea,  that  were  before  tributaries
to  the  Crim  Tartar.  So  that  now  the  Emperor  of  the
Crims  for  the  most  part  is  chosen  one  of  the  Nobility
whom  the  Turke  doeth  commend  :  whereby  it  is  brought
nowe  to  passe,  that  the  Crim  Tartar  giveth  to  the  Turke
the  tenth  part  of  the  spoyle  which  hee  getteth  in  his
warres  against the  Christians.

394

OF  THE TARTARS  ad.

1588.

Herein  they  differ  from  the  Turkish  religion,  for  that
they  have  certaine  idole  puppets  made  of  silke,  or  like
stuffe,  of  the  fashion  of  a  man,  which  they  fasten  to
the  doore  of  their  walking  houses,  to  be  as  Janusses
or  keepers  of  their  house.  And  these  idoles  are  made
not  by  all,  but  by  certaine  religious  women  which  they
have  among  them  for  that  and  like  uses.  They  have
besides  the  image  of  their  King  or  great  Can,  of  an
huge  bignesse,  which  they  erect  at  every  stage  when
the  army  marcheth  :  and  this  every  one  must  bend  and
bowe  unto  as  he  passeth  by  it,  be  he  Tartar  or  stranger.
They  are  much  given  to  witchcraft,  and  ominous  con-
jectures upon  every  accident  which  they  heare  or  see.

In  making  of  mariages  they  have  no  regard  of  alliance
or  consanguinitie.  Onely  with  his  mother,  sister,  and
daughter  a  man  may  not  marrie,  and  though  he  take
the  woman  into  his  house,  and  accompany  with  her,  yet
he  accounteth  her  not  for  his  wife  till  he  have  a  childe
by  her.  Then  hee  beginneth  to  take  a  dowry  of  her
friends  of  horse,  sheepe,  kine,  &c.  If  she  be  barren
after  a  certaine  time,  he  turneth  her  home  againe.

Under the Emperour they have certaine Dukes,  The  Tartar
whome they call Morseis or Divoymorseis, that rule  nobilitie.
over  a  certaine  number  of  loooo. 200CO.  or  40000.  a
piece,  which they  call Hoords. When the Emperour
hath  any  use of  them  to  serve  in  his  warres,  they  are
bound  to  come,  and  to  bring  with  them  their  Souldiers
to  a  certain  number,  every  man  with  his  two  horse  at
the  least,  the  one to ride on,  the other to  kill,  when
it  commeth to  his  turne  to  have  his  horse  eaten. For j^y  Tartar
their  chiefe  vitaile  is  horse  flesh,  which  they  eate  without  diet.
bread,  or  any  other  thing  with  it. So  that  if  a  Tartar
be  taken  by  a  Russe,  he  shall  be  sure  lightly  to  finde
a  horse-legge,  or  some  other  part  of  him  at  his  saddle
bowe.

This last  yeere  when I was  at  the Mosco,  came  in 1588.
one  Kiriach Morsey, nephew  to  the  Emperour of  the
Crims  that  nowe  is  (whose  father  was  Emperour  before)

395

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.
[I.  489.]  accompanied  with  300.  Tartars,  and  his  two  wives,
whereof  one  was  his  brothers  widow.  Where  being
intertained  in  very  good  sort  after  the  Russe  maner,
hee  had  sent  unto  his  lodging  for  his  welcome,  to  bee
made  ready  for  his  supper  and  his  companies,  two  very
large  and  fat  horses,  ready  flayed  in  a  sled.  They  prefer
it  before  other  flesh,  because  the  meate  is  stronger  (as
they  say)  then  Beefe,  Mutton,  and  such  like.  And  yet
(which  is  marveile)  though  they  serve  all  as  horsemen
in  the  warres,  and  eate  all  of  horse  flesh,  there  are
brought  yeerely  to  the  Mosco  to  bee  exchanged  for
other  commodities  30.  or  40.  thousand  Tartar  horse,
which  they  call  Cones.  They  keepe  also  great  heards
of  kine,  &  flocks  of  blacke  sheepe,  rather  for  the  skins
and  milke  (which  they  carie  with  them  in  great  bottels)
then  for  the  use  of  the  flesh,  though  sometimes  they
eate  of  it.  Some  use  they  have  of  ryse,  figs,  and  other
fruits.  They  drinke  milke  or  warme  blood,  and  for
the  most  part  card  them  both  together.  They  use
sometime  as  they  travel  by  the  way,  to  let  their  horse
blood  in  a  vaine,  and  to  drinke  it  warme,  as  it  commeth
from  his  bodie.
The  Tartars  Townes  they  plant  none,  nor  other  standing  buildings,
dwelling.  1^^^  have  walking  houses,  which  the  latines  call  Veii,
built  upon  wheeles  like  a  shepheards  cottage.  These
they  drawe  with  them  whithersoever  they  goe,  driving
their  cattell  with  them.  And  when  they  come  to  their
stage,  or  standing  place,  they  plant  their  carte  houses
verie  orderly  in  a  ranke  :  and  so  make  the  forme  of
streetes,  and  of  a  large  towne.  And  this  is  the  manner
of  the  Emperor  himselfe,  who  hath  no  other  seat  of
Empire  but  an  Agora,  or  towne  of  wood,  that  moveth
with  him  whithersoever  hee  goeth.  As  for  the  fixed
and  standing  building  used  in  other  countreyes,  they
say  they  are  unwholesome  and  unpleasant.

They  begin  to  moove  their  houses  and  cattell  in  the
Spring  time  from  the  South  part  of  their  Countrey
towards  the  North  partes. And  so  driving  on  till  they

396

OF THE TARTARS  ad.

1588.

have  grased  all  up  to  the  farthest  part  Northward,  they
returne  backe  againe  towards  their  South  countrey  (where
they  continue  all  the  Winter)  by  10.  or  12.  miles  a
stage  :  in  the  meane  while  the  grasse  being  sprung  up
againe,  to  serve  for  their  cattell  as  they  returne  From
the  border  of  the  Shalcan  towards  the  Caspian  sea,  to
the  Russe  frontiers,  they  have-  a  goodly  Countrey,
specially  on  the  South  and  Southeast  parts,  but  lost  for
lacke  of  tillage.

Of  money  they  have  no  use  at  all,  and  therefore  prefer
brasse  and  Steele  before  other  mettals,  specially  bullate,
which  they  use  for  swordes,  knives,  and  other  necessaries.
As  for  golde  and  silver  they  neglect  it  of  very  purpose,
(as  they  doe  all  tillage  of  their  ground)  to  bee  more  free
for  their  wandring  kinde  of  life,  and  to  keepe  their
Countrey  lesse  subject  to  invasions.  Which  giveth  them
great  advantage  against  all  their  neighbors,  ever  invading
and  never  beeing  invaded.  Such  as  have  taken  upon  them
to  invade  their  Countrey  (as  of  oldetime  Cyrus  and
Darius  Hystaspis,  on  the  East  and  Southeast  side)  have
done  it  with  very  ill  successe  :  as  wee  finde  in  the  stories
written  of  those  times.  For  their  manner  is  when  any  will
invade  them,  to  allure  and  drawe  them  on  by  flying  and
reculing  (as  if  they  were  afraide)  till  they  have  drawen
them  some  good  way  within  their  countrey.  Then  when
they  begin  to  want  victuall  and  other  necessaries  (as
needes  they  must  where  nothing  is  to  be  had)  to  stoppe
up  the  passages,  and  inclose  them  with  multitudes.  By
which  stratagem  (as  wee  reade  in  Laonicus  Chalcacondylas
in  his  Turkish  storie)  they  had  welnigh  surprised  the
great  and  huge  armie  of  Tamerlan,  but  that  hee  retired
with  all  speede  hee  could  towardes  the  river  Tanais  or
Don,  not  without  great  losse  of  his  men,  and cariages.

In  the  storie of  Pachymerius  the  Greeke  (which  hee  Pachymeriu^,
wrote of the Emperors of Constantinople from the
beginning  of  the  reigne of  Michael Palaeologus to the
time of  Andronicus  the elder) I remember he telleth
to  the  same  purpose  of  one  Nogas  a  Tartarian  captaine

397

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

under  Cazan  the  Emperor  of  the  East  Tartars  (of  whom
the  citie  and  kingdome  of  Cazan  may  seeme  to  have
taken  the  denomination)  who  refused  a  present  of
Pearle  and  other  jewels  sent  unto  him  from  Michael
Palaeologus  :  asking  withall,  for  what  use  they  served,
and  whether  they  were  good  to  keepe  away  sicknesse,
death,  or  other  misfortunes  of  this  life,  or  no.  So  that
it  seemeth  they  have  ever,  or  long  time  bene  of  that
minde  to  value  things  no  further,  then  by  the  use  and
necessitie  for  which  they  serve.

For  person  and  complexion  they  have  broade  and  flatte
visages,  of  a  tanned  colour  into  yellowe  and  blacke,  fierce
and  cruell  lookes,  thinne  haired  upon  the  upper  lippe,
and  pitte  of  the  chinne,  light  and  nimble  bodied,  with
short  legges,  as  if  they  were  made  naturally  for  horse-
men :  whereto  they  practise  themselves  from  their
childhood,  seldome  going  afoot  about  anie  businesse.
Their  speech  is  verie  sudden  and  loude,  speaking  as  it
were  out  of  a  deepe  hollowe  throate.  When  they  sing
you  would  thinke  a  kowe  lowed,  or  some  great  bandogge
howled.  Their  greatest  exercise  is  shooting,  wherein
they  traine  up  their  children  from  their  verie  infancie,
not  suffering  them  to  eate  till  they  have  shot  neere  the
[I.  490.]  marke  within  a  certaine  scantling.  They  are  the  very
same  that  sometimes  were  called  Scythae  Nomades,  or
the  Scythian  shepheards,  by  the  Greekes  and  Latines.
Some  thinke  that  the  Turks  took  their  beginning  from
the  nation  of  the  Crim  Tartars.  Of  which  opinion  is
Laonicus  Cal-  Laonicus  Calcocondylas  the  Greek  Historiographer,  in
cocondylas. j^jg ^^.g^ booke of  his Turkish storie. Wherein hee

1  followeth  divers  verie  probable  conjectures.  The  first
taken  from  the  verie  name  it  selfe,  for  that  the  worde
Turk  signifieth  a  Shepheard  or  one  that  followeth  a
vagarant  and  wilde  kinde  of  life.  By  which  name  these
Scythian  Tartars  have  ever  beene  noted,  being  called
by  the  Greekes  a-KvOai  voiuaSe?  or  the  Scythian  shepheards.

2  His  second  reason  because  the  Turkes  (in  his  time)
that dwelt in Asia the lesse,  to wit, in Lydia, Caria,

398

OF  THE TARTARS  a.d.

1588.

Phrygia  and  Cappadocia,  spake  the  very  same  language
that  these  Tartars  did,  that  dwelt  betwixt  the  river  Tanais
or  Don,  and  the  countrey  of  Sarmatia,  which  (as  is  well
knowen)  are  these  Tartars  called  Crims.  At  this  time
also  the  whole  nation  of  the  Turkes  differ  not  much  in
their  common  speech  from  the  Tartar  language.  Thirdly  3
because  the  Turke  and  the  Crim"  Tartar  agree  so  well
together,  as  well  in  religion,  as  in  matter  of  traffique
never  invading,  or  inurying  one  another  :  save  that  the  ■
Turke  (since  Laonicus  his  time)  hath  encroched  upon
some  Townes  upon  the  Euxin  Sea,  that  before  perteined
to  the  Crim  Tartar.  Fourthly,  because  Ortogules  sonne  4
to  Oguzalpes,  and  father  to  Otoman  the  first  of  name  of
the  Turkish  nation  made  his  first  roads  out  of  those  parts
of  Asia,  upon  the  next  borderers,  till  hee  came  towardes
the  countreys  about  the  hill  Taurus,  where  hee  overcame
the  Greekes  that  inhabited  there  :  and  so  enlarged  the
name  and  territorie  of  the  Turkish  nation,  till  hee  came
to  Eubsea  and  Attica,  and  other  partes  of  Greece.  This
is  the  opinion  of  Laonicus,  who  lived  among  the  Turkes
in  the  time  of  Amurat  the  sixt  Turkish  Emperour,  about
the  yeere  1400.  when  the  memorie  of  their  originall  was  1400.
more  fresh  :  and  therefore  the  likelier  hee  was  to  hit
the  trueth.

There are divers other Tartars that border upon  The  Nagay
Russia,  as  the  Nagayes,  the  Cheremissens,  the  Mordwites,  Tartar  the
the  Chircasses,  and  the  Shalcans,  which  all  differ  in  name  y^^^  Chircasce
more then in regiment, or other condition, from the  the  chilkst
Crim  Tartar,  except  the  Chircasses  that  border  Southwest,  Tartar.
towardes  Lituania,  and  are  farre  more  civill  than  the  rest
of  the Tartars, of  a comely person,  and of  a stately
behaviour,  as  applying  themselves  to  the  fashion  of  the
Polonian. Some  of  them  have  subjected  themselves  to
the Kings of  Poland, and professe Christianitie. The  The  Chere-
Nagay  lieth Eastwarde, and is reckoned for the best  missen  Tartar
man  of  warre  among  all  the Tartars,  but  verie savage,  'u^'^o^orts:
and  cruell  above  all  the  rest. The  Cheremessen  Tartar,  ^^^  t^e
that  lieth  betwixt  the  Russe  and  the  Nagay,  are  of  two  Nagomay.

399

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

sorts,  the  Lugavoy  (that  is  of  the  valley)  and  the
Nagornay,  or  of  the  hilly  countrey.  These  have  much
troubled  the  Emperours  of  Russia.  And  therefore  they
are  content  now  to  buy  peace  of  them,  under  pretence
of  giving  a  yeerely  pension  of  Russe  commodities  to
their  Morseys,  or  Divoymorseis,  that  are  chiefe  of  their
tribes.  For  which  also  they  are  bound  to  serve  them
in  their  wars,  under  certaine  conditions.  They  are  said
to  be  just  and  true  in  their  dealings  :  and  for  that
cause  they  hate  the  Russe  people,  whom  they  account
to  be  double,  and  false  in  al  their  dealing.  And  therefore
the  common  sort  are  very  unwilling  to  keepe  agreement
with  them,  but  that  they  are  kept  in  by  their  Morseis,
or  Dukes  for  their  pensions  sake.

The  Mordtvit The  most  rude  &  barbarous  is  counted  the  Mordwit
attar  ye Tartar,  that  hath  many  selfe-fashions  and strange  kinds

ous  of  the  rest,  of  behaviour,  differing  from  the  rest.  For  his  religion,
though  he  acknowledge  one  God,  yet  his  maner  is  to
worship  for  God,  that  living  thing  y'  he  first  meeteth  in
the  morning,  &  to  sweare  by  it  all  that  whole  day,  whether
it  be  horse,  dog,  cat,  or  whatsoever  els  it  bee.  When  his
friend  dieth,  he  killeth  his  best  horse,  and  having  flayed
off  the  skinne  hee  carieth  it  on  high  upon  a  long  pole
before  the  corpes  to  the  place  of  buriall.  This  hee  doeth
(as  the  Russe  saieth)  that  his  friend  may  have  a  good
horse  to  carie  him  to  heaven  :  but  it  is  likelier  to  declare
his  love  towards  his  dead  friend,  in  that  he  will  have
to  die  with  him  the  best  thing  that  he  hath.

Next  to  the  kingdome  of  Astracan,  that  is  the  farthest
part  Southeastward  of  the  Russe  dominion,  lyeth  the
Shalcan,  and  the  countrey  of  Media  :  whither  the  Russe
marchants  trade  for  rawe  silkes,  syndon,  saphion,  skinnes,
and  other  commodities.  The  chiefe  Townes  of  Media
where  the  Russe  tradeth,  are  Derbent  (built  by  Alexander
the great, as the inhabitants say) and Zamachi  where

The  reviving the  Staple is kept for rawe silkes. Their  maner  is in

of  silkwormes.  ^j^^  Spring  time  to  revive  the  silke-wormes  (that  lie
dead all the Winter) by  laying them in the warme

400

OF THE  TARTARS  ad.

1588.
sunne,  and (to hasten their quickening that  they may
sooner  goe to worke) to put them into bags,  and  so
to hang them under their childrens armes. As for
the  woorme called  Chrinisin  (as  wee  call  it  Chrymson)  Chrinisin  a
that  maketh  coloured  silke,  it  is  bred  not  in  Media,  but  kind  of  silk-
in  Assyria. This  trade  to  Derbent  and  Samachi  for  rawe  ^^'■^^•
silkes,  and  other  commodities  of  that  Countrey,  as  also
into  Persia,  and  Bougharia  downe  the  river  of  Volga,  and
through the Caspian sea, is permitted aswell to the  Liberty  to
English  as  to the  Russe merchants,  by  the  Emperours  //  5,  °'^-^^

0  1-1  TTTi  -11  , />^^  Caspian

last  grant at my being there. Which he accounteth  sea.
for  a  very  speciall  favour,  and  might  prove  indeede  very  [I.  491.]
beneficiall to our  English merchants,  if  the trade  were
wel  and  orderly  used.

The  whole  nation  of  the  Tartars  are  utterly  voide  of
all  learning,  and  without  written  Law  :  yet  certaine  rules
they  have  which  they  hold  by  tradition,  common  to  all
the Hoords for the practise of  their  life. Which  are
of  this  sort. First,  To  obey  their  Emperour  and  other 1
Magistrates, whatsoever they commaund about the
publike  service. 2  Except  for  the  publike  behoofe,  every  2
man  to  be  free  and  out  of  controlment. 3 No private  3
man  to  possesse any  lands,  but the whole countrey  to
be as common. 4 To neglect all daintinesse and  4
varietie  of  meates,  and  to  content  themselves  with  that
which commeth next  to hand,  for  more hardnesse,  and
readines  in  the  executing  of  their  affaires. 5  To  weare  $
any base attire, and to patch their clothes whether
there  be  any  neede or not  :  that  when there  is neede,
it  be no shame to weare  a patcht coate. 6  To take  6
or steale  from  any  stranger  whatsoever  they  can  get,  as
beeing  enemies  to all  men,  save  to  such  as  will  subject
themselves  to  them. 7  Towards  their  owne  hoorde  and  7
nation  to  be  true  in  worde  and deede. 8 To  suffer no  8
stranger to  come  within the  Realme. If  any  doe,  the  ^y^>'^W^'
same to be bondslave to him that first taketh him,  Tgf/admtted
except such merchants and other  as have the Tartar
Bull,  or  passport  about  them.

Ill  401  2C

A.D.
1588.

The  Perm'i-
ans.

The  Samoits.

The  Samoits
religion.

Slaia  Baba
or  the  golden
Hag.

A  fable.
The  Sea.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Of  the  Permians,  Samoites,  and  Lappes.

THe  Permians  and  Samoites  that  lye  from  Russia,
North  and  Northeast,  are  thought  likewise  to  have
taken  their  beginning  from  the  Tartar  kinde.  And  it
may  partly  bee  gessed  by  the  fashion  of  their  countenance,
as  having  all  broade  and  flat  faces  as  the  Tartars  have,
except  the  Chircasses.  The  Permians  are  accounted  for
a  very  ancient  people.  They  are  nowe  subject  to  the
Russe.  They  live  by  hunting,  and  trading  with  their
furres,  as  also  doeth  the  Samoit,  that  dwelleth  more
towardes  the  North  Sea.  The  Samoit  hath  his  name
(as  the  Russe  saith)  of  eating  himselfe  :  as  if  in  times
past,  they  lived  as  ye  Cannibals,  eating  one  another.
Which  they  make  more  probable,  because  at  this  time
they  eate  all  kind  of  raw  flesh,  whatsoever  it  be,  even
the  very  carion  that  lieth  in  the  ditch.  But  as  the
Samoits  themselves  will  say,  they  were  called  Samoie,
that  is,  of  themselves,  as  though  they  were  Indigenae,
or  people  bred  upon  that  very  soyle,  that  never  changed
their  seate  from  one  place  to  another,  as  most  nations
have  done.  They  are  subject  at  this  time  to  the
Emperour  of  Russia.

I  talked  with  certaine  of  them,  and  finde  that  they
acknowledge  one  God  :  but  represent  him  by  such
things  as  they  have  most  use  and  good  by.  And
therefore  they  worship  the  Sunne,  the  Ollen,  the  Losh,
and  such  like.  As  for  the  story  of  Slata  Baba,  or  the
Golden  hagge,  (which  I  have  read  in  some  mappes,
and  descriptions  of  these  countries,  to  be  an  idole  after
the  forme  of  an  olde  woman)  that  being  demanded  by
the  Priest,  giveth  them  certaine  Oracles,  concerning  the
successe,  and  event  of  things,  I  found  it  to  be  a  very
fable.  Onely  in  the  Province  of  Obdoria  upon  the  sea
side,  neare  to  the  mouth  of  the  great  river  Obba,  there
is  a  rocke,  which  naturally  (being  somewhat  helped  by
imagination)  may  seeme  to  beare  the  shape  of  a  ragged
woman,  with  a  child  in  her  armes  (as  the  rocke  by  the

402

OF THE SAMOITES AND LAPPES  a.d.

1588.

North  Cape  the  shape  of  a  Frier)  where  the  Obdorian

Samoites  use  much  to  resort,  by  reason  of  the  commoditie

of  the  place  for  fishing  : and  there  sometime  (as  their  Fishing  or

manner is) conceive, and practise their sorceries, and  ^^^'

ominous conjecturings about the good or bad speede

of  their  journeies,  fishings,  huntings,  and  such  like.

They  are clad in Scale skins, with the hairie side  '^^^  Samoits

outwards  downe  as  low  as  the  knees,  with  their  breeches  ';^f^f'^*
J  ,  1  r 1  11  1  benaviour.

and  netherstockes or the  same, both  men  and  women. 2"^^  y,^w^  ^

They are  all blacke haired, naturally  beardlesse. And  Meta  Incog-

therefore  the  men  are  hardly  discerned  from  the  women  ^^^^  ^^<^h.

by  their  lookes  :  save  that  the  women  weare  a  locke  of

haire downe along both their eares. They  live in a

manner a  wilde and savage life,  roving  still from one

place  of  the  countrey  to  another,  without  any  property

of  house  or  land  more  to  one  then  to  another. Their

leader or  directer in every  companie, is their  Papa or

Priest.

On the North side of  Russia next  to Corelia, lieth The  Lappes.

the  countrey  of  Lappia,  which  reacheth  in  length  from

the farthest point  Northward, (towards the  Northcape)

to  the  farthest  part  Southeast  (which  the  Russe  calleth

Sweetnesse  or  Holy  nose,  the  English men Capegrace)

about  345.  verst  or  miles. From  Sweetnesse  to  Candelox

by the  way of  Versega (which measureth the breadth

of  that  countrey)  is  90.  miles  or  thereabouts. The  whole

countrey  in  a  maner  is  either  lakes,  or  mountaines,  which

towardes the  Sea  side  are  called Tondro, because  they

are  all  of  harde  and  craggy  rocke,  but  the  inland  partes

are  well  furnished  with  woods  that  growe  on  the  hilles

sides,  the  lakes  lying  betweene. Their  diet  is  very  bare

and simple. Bread they have none, but feede onely  [I.  492.]

upon  fish  and  foule. They  are  subject  to  the  Emperor

of  Russia,  and  the  two  kings  of  Sweden  and  Denmarke  :

which all exact tribute and custome of  them (as  was

saide before) but the Emperor of  Russia beareth the

greatest  hand over them, and exacteth of  them farre

more then the rest. The opinion is that they were

403

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.

first  termed  Lappes  of  their  briefe  and  short  speech.
The  Russe  divideth  the  whole  nation  of  the  Lappes
into  two  sortes.  The  one  they  call  Nowremanskoy
Lapary,  that  is,  the  Norvegian  Lappes  because  they  be
of  the  Danish  religion.  For  the  Danes  and  Norvegians
they  account  for  one  people.  The  other  that  have  no
religion  at  all  but  live  as  bruite  and  heathenish  people,
without  God  in  the  worlde,  they  cal  Dikoy  Lapary,  or
the  wilde  Lappes.

The  whole  nation  is  utterly  unlearned,  having  not  so
much  as  the  use  of  any  Alphabet,  or  letter  among  them.
For  practise  of  witchcraft  and  sorcerie  they  passe  all
nations  in  the  worlde.  Though  for  enchanting  of  ships
that  saile  along  their  coast,  (as  I  have  heard  it  reported)
and  their  giving  of  winds  good  to  their  friends,  and
contrary  to  other,  whom  they  meane  to  hurt  by  tying
of  certaine  knots  upon  a  rope  (somewhat  like  to  the
tale  of  -^olus  his  windbag)  is  a  very  fable,  devised  (as
may  seeme)  by  themselves,  to  terrific  sailers  for  comming
neere  their  coast.  Their  weapons  are  the  long  bow,  and
handgunne,  wherein  they  excell,  aswell  for  quicknesse
to  charge  and  discharge,  as  for  neerenesse  at  the  marke
by  reason  of  their  continual  practise  (whereto  they  are
forced)  of  shooting  at  wild  fowle.  Their  maner  is  in
Sommer  time  to  come  downe  in  great  companies  to  the
sea  side,  to  Wardhuyse,  Cola,  Kegor,  and  the  bay  of
Vedagoba,  and  there  to  fish  for  Codde,  Salmon,  &
But-fish,  which  they  sel  to  the  Russes,  Danes,  &  Nor-
vegians, and  nowe  of  late  to  the  English  men  that
trade  thither  with  cloth,  which  they  exchange  with  the
Laps  &  Corelians  for  their  fish,  oyle,  and  furres,  whereof
The  mart  at  also  they  have  some  store.  They  holde  their  mart  at
Cola  on  S.  Peters  day  :  what  time  the  captaine  of
Wardhuyse  (that  is  resiant  there  for  the  king  of  Den-
mark) must  be  present,  or  at  least  send  his  deputie  to
set  prices  upon  their  stockfish,  train  oile,  furres,  and
other  commodities  :  as  also  the  Russe  Emperors  cus-
tomer,  or tribute taker, to receive his custome,  which

404

Cola,

OF THE  NORTH AND  EAST  REGIONS

A.D.

1588.

is  ever  paide  before  any  thing  can  bee  bought  or  solde.

When their  fishing is done, their  manner is to drawe

their carbasses or  boates on shore, and there to leave

them with the keele turned upwardes, till the next

spring  tide. Their  travaile  to  and  fro  is  upon  sleddes  ^/^•^■f  drawen

drawen by  the Glen Deere  : which they  use to turne  ^^^^  ^^"'^•

a  grasing  all  the  Sommer  time  in  an  Island  called  Kildyn,

(of  a  verie  good soyle compared  with other  partes of

that  Countrey)  and  towards  the  Winter  time,  when  the

snowe beginneth to fall they fetch them home againe

for  the  use  of  their  sledde.

The  description  of  the  regions,  people,  and  rivers,
lying  North  and  East  from  Moscovia  :  as  the
way  from  Moscovia  to  the  river  Petzora,  and
the  Province  Jugaria  or  Juhra,  and  from  thence
to  the  river  Obi.  Likew^ise  the  description  of
other  countreys  and  regions,  even  unto  the
Empire  of  the  great  Can  of  Cathay,  taken  out
of  Sigismundus  ab  Herberstein.

He  dominion  of  the  Prince  of  Moscovia,
reacheth  farre  toward  the  East  and  North,
unto  the  places  which  we  will  now  de-
scribe. As  concerning  which  thing,  I
translated  a  book  y'  was  presented  unto
me  in  the  Moscovites  tongue,  and  have
here  made  a  briefe  rehearsall  of  the  same.
I  will  first  therefore  describe  the  journey  from  Moscovia
to  Petzora,  and  so  to  Jugaria  and  Obi.  From  Moscovia
to  the  citie  of  Vologda,  are  numbred  five  hundred  versts,
one  verst  conteyning  almost  the  space  of  an  Italian  myle.
From  Vologda  to  Ustiug  toward  the  right  hand,  descend-
ing with  the  course  of  the  river  of  Vologda  and  Suchana
with  whom  it  joyneth,  are  counted  five  hundred  verstes,
where  within  two  versts  of  the  towne  called  Strelze,  and
hard  by  the  citie  of  Ustiug,  Suchana  joyneth  unto  lug

405

The  dominion
of  the  Duke
of  Moscovia.

Vologda.

Verst.

Ustiug.

A.D.
1588.

Suchana.
lug.  So  called
of  his  swift
and  pleasant
streame.

Pienega.

Nicholai.

Kulvio.
[I-  493-]

The  regions
by  the  North
sea.

Pieza.
Piescoia.

Rubicho.
Czircho.

Czalma.
Petzora.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  runneth  from  the  South  :  from  whose  mouth  unto
the  springs  of  the  same,  are  numbred  five  hundred  versts.

But  Suchana  and  lug,  after  they  joyne  together,  lose
their  first  names,  and  make  but  one  river  named  Dwina,
by  the  which  the  passage  to  the  citie  of  Colmogro
conteineth  five  hundred  versts,  from  whence,  in  the  space
of  sixe  dayes  journey,  Dwina  entreth  into  the  North
Ocean  at  sixe  mouthes.  And  the  greatest  part  of  this
journey  consisteth  by  Navigation.  For  by  lande  from
Vologda  unto  Colmogro,  passing  over  the  river  Uvaga,
are  a  thousand  verstes.  Not  farre  from  Colmogro,  the
river  Pienega  running  from  the  East  on  the  right  hand
for  the  space  of  seven  hundred  versts,  falleth  into  Dwina.
From  Dwina  by  the  river  Pienega,  by  the  space  of  two
hundred  versts,  they  come  to  a  place  called  Nicholai,
from  whence  within  halfe  a  verst  ships  have  passage
into  the  river  Kulvio,  which  hath  his  originall  from  a
lake  of  the  same  name  towarde  the  North,  from  whose
springs  is  eight  daies  viage  to  the  mouth  of  the  same,
where  it  entreth  the  Ocean.

Sayling  by  the  coasts  of  the  right  hand  of  the  sea,
they  passe  by  the  regions  of  Stanuwische,  Calunczscho,
and  Apnu  :  And  sayling  about  the  promontorie  or
cape  of  Chorogoski  Nosz,  Stanuwische,  Camenckh,  and
Tolstickh,  they  come  at  length  into  the  river  Mezen,
and  from  thence  in  the  space  of  sixe  dayes,  to  a  village
of  the  same  name,  standing  in  the  mouth  of  the  river
Pieza,  by  the  which  againe  ascending  toward  the  left
hand  &  sommer  East,  they  come  to  the  river  Piescoia  :
from  whence  sayling  for  the  space  of  five  versts,  they
come  into  two  lakes,  in  the  which  are  seene  two  wayes  :
whereof  one  on  the  right  side,  goeth  to  the  river
Rubicho,  by  the  which  they  passe  to  the  river  Czircho.
Other,  by  an  other  and  shorter  way,  bring  their  ships
from  the  lake  directly  into  Czircho  :  from  whence,  except
they  be  hindered  by  tempest,  they  come  in  the  space
of  three  weekes  to  the  river  and  mouth  of  Czilma,
flowing into the great river Petzora, which in that

406

OF  THE  NORTH  AND  EAST  REGIONS a.d.

1588.
place  is  two  versts  in  breadth.  Sayling  from  thence,
they  come  in  the  space  of  sixe  dayes  to  the  Towne
and  castle  of  Pustosero,  neare  unto  the  which,  Petzora  Pustosero.
entreth  into  the  North  Ocean  at  sixe  mouthes.  The
inhabitants  of  this  place,  are  men  of  simple  wit  :  they
received  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  were  baptised  in  the
yeare  M.D.xviii.

From  the  mouth  of  Czilma  unto  the  mouth of  the
river Ussa, going by Petzora, is one moneths viage. Ussa.
Ussa  hath  his  springs  in  the  mountaine  *  Poyas  Semnoi,  *Cingulus
being  on the  left hand toward the  sommer East,  and  '^^«'^'^^'-
springeth  out  of  a  great  stone  of  the  same  mountaine,
called Camen Bolschoi. From the  springs  of  Ussa  to
the mouthes of  the same,  are numbered more then a
thousand versts. Furthermore, Petzora runneth from
this south winter part, from whence ascending from
the mouthes  of  Ussa,  unto the mouthes  of  the  river
Stzuchogora,  is  three  weekes  viage. They  that  described
this  vyage  sayd  that  they  rested  betweene  the  mouthes
of  the rivers of  Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema,  and  Stzuchogo}-a.
left  their  victuals there  which they brought  with them  Potzscheriema
from Russia. Beyond the rivers of Petzora and
Stzuchogora toward the mountaine Camenipoias, and  Camenipoias.
the sea  with the Hands thereabout, and the Castle of
Pustosero, are divers and innumerable nations, which
by one common name are called Samoged (that is)  Samoged.
such as eate themselves. They  have  great  increase  of  ^o^^^^  ^^^
foules,  birdes,  and divers  kindes  of  beastes  :  as Sables, ^^^^^'
Marternes,  Bevers,  Otters, Hermelines, Squirrels  : and
in the Ocean the beast called a Mors  : Also Vesse,
white Beares, Wolves, Hares, Equiwodvani, great
Whales, and a fish called Semfi, with divers other.
The people of  these nations come not to Moscovia  :
For they  are  wilde,  and flee  the  company  and society  Wilde  people.
of  other  men.

From the mouthes of  Stzuchogora, sayling up the
river unto Poiassa, Artawische, Cameni, and Poiassa  Poiassa.
the  greater, is three  weekes vyage. Furthermore, the

407

A.D.
1588.

Camen.

Artawhcha.

Sibut.

Lepin.

Sossa.
Obi.

Kitaisko.

Uvogolki.
Irtische.

Jerom.
Tumen.

Grustina.
Kitai.

Blacke  men
without  speech.

Serponow.
Lucomoria.

Men  that
yerely  die  and

A  strange
trade  of
marchandise.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ascending  to  the  mount  Camen,  is  three  dayes  journey  :
from  the  which  descending  they  come  to  the  river
Artawischa,  and  from  thence  to  the  river  Sibut,  from
whence  they  passe  to  the  Castle  of  Lepin,  and  from
Lepin  to  the  river  Sossa.  The  people  that  inhabite
the  region  by  this  river,  are  called  Uvogolici.  Leaving
Sossa  on  the  right  hande,  they  come  to  the  great  river
Obi,  that  springeth  out  of  the  lake  Kitaisko,  the  which,
with  all  the  haste  they  could  make,  they  could  scarcely
passe  over  in  one  day,  the  river  being  of  such  breadth
that  it  reacheth  fourescore  versts.  The  people  also
that  dwell  about  the  river,  are  called  Uvogolici  and
Ugritzschi.  From  the  Castle  of  Obea,  ascending  by
the  river  of  Oby,  unto  the  river  Irtische,  into  the
which  Sossa  entereth,  is  three  moneths  journey.  In
these  places  are  two  Castles  named  Jerom  and  Tumen,
kept  by  certaine  Lords  called  Knesi  Juhorski,  being
tributaries  to  the  great  Duke  of  Moscovia,  as  they  say.
Here  are  divers  kinds  of  beasts  and  furres.

From  the  mouth  of  the  river  Irtische  to  the  Castle
of  Grustina,  is  two  moneths  journey  :  from  whence  to
the  lake  Kitai,  by  the  river  Oby  (which  I  said  to  have
his  springs  in  this  lake)  is  more  then  three  moneths
journey.  From  this  lake  come  many  blacke  men,
lacking  the  use  of  common  speech.  They  bring  with
them  divers  wares,  and  especially  pearles  and  precious
stones,  which  they  sell  to  the  people  called  Grustintzi
and  Serponowtzi.  These  have  their  name  of  the  Castle
Serponow,  situate  in  the  mountaines  of  Lucomoria,
beyond  the  river  Obi.  They  say  that  to  the  men  of
Lucomoria  chaunceth  a  marveilous  thing  and  incredible :
For  they  affirme,  that  they  die  yeerely  at  the  xxvii.  day
of  November,  being  the  feast  of  S.  George  among  the
Moscovites  :  and  that  at  the  next  spring  about  the  xxiii.
day  of  Aprill,  they  revive  againe  as  doe  Frogges.

With  these  also,  the  people  of  Grustintzi  and
Serponowtzi  exercise  a  new  and  strange  kinde  of  trade  :
For  when  the  accustomed  time  of  their  dying,  or  rather

408

OF  THE  NORTH  AND  EAST  REGIONS ad.

1588.
of  sleeping,  approcheth,  they  leave  their  wares  in  certaine
places  appointed,  which  the  Grustintzi  and  Serponowtzi
carry  away,  leaving  other  wares  of  equall  value  in  their
places  :  which  if  the  dead  men  at  the  time  of  their
reviving  perceive  to  be  of  unequall  price,  they  require
their  owne  againe  :  by  reason  whereof,  much  strife
and  fighting  is  betweene  them. >

From the river of  Obi descending toward the left  [I.  494-]
hand,  are  the  people  called Calami,  which  came  thither  ^'^'•
from Obiowa  and Pogosa. Beneath Obi,  about  Aurea '^'^'"^•
Anus  (that  is,  the  golden  old  wife)  are  the  rivers  Sossa,  Rhers.
Berezvua,  and Danadim,  all which spring out of  the
mountaines Camen,  Bolschega,  Poiassa,  and the rockes
joyning  to  the  same. All  the  nations  that  inhabite  from
these rivers to  Aurea  Anus,  are subject to the prince
of  Moscovia.

Aurea  Anus,  called  in  the  Moscovites  tongue,  Slata  ^urea  Jnus.
Baba,  is  an  idol,  at  the  mouthe  of  Obi  in  the  province
of  Obdora,  standing  on  the  furthest  banke  toward  the  Obdora.
sea.  Along  by  the  bankes  of  Obi,  &  the  rivers  neare
there  about,  are  here  and  there  many  castles  and
fortresses  :  all  the  lordes  whereof  are  subject  to  the
prince  of  Moscovia,  as  they  say.  They  say  also,  or
rather  fable,  that  the  idol  called  Aurea  Anus,  is  an
image  like  unto  an  old  wife,  having  a  child  in  her  lap,
and  that  there  is  now  scene  another  infant,  which  they
say  to  be  her  nephew  :  Also,  that  there  are  certaine
instruments  that  make  a  continuall  sound  like  the  noyse
of  Trumpets,  the  which,  if  it  so  be,  I  thinke  it  to  be
by  reason  of  the  winde,  blowing  continually  into  the
holow  places  of  those  instruments.

The river Cossin falleth out of  the mountaines of  Cossln.
Lucomoria  : In  the  mouth  of  this  is  a  castle,  whither
from the springs of the great river Cossin, is two
monethes  viage. Furthermore,  from  the  springs  of  the
same river,  the  river Cassima hath his  originall,  which  Cassima.
running  through  Lucomoria,  falleth  into  the  great  river  ^achnin  a
Tachnin, beyond the which (as is said) dwell  men  of  great  river.

409

A.D.
1588.

People  of  mon-
strous shape.

A  fish  like  a
man.

Plinie  writeth
of  the  like
fish.

The  end  of
the  journall.

Mountai7tes.

The  great
Can  of
Cathay.

Moria  is  the
sea.

Lucomoria.
Tumen.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

prodigious  shape,  of  whom,  some  are  overgrowen  with
haire  like  wilde  beastes,  other  have  heads  like  dogges,
and  their  faces  in  their  breasts,  without  neckes,  and
with  long  hands  also,  and  without  feete.  There  is
likewise  in  the  river  Tachnin  a  certaine  fish,  with  head,
eyes,  nose,  mouth,  hands,  feete,  and  other  members
utterly  of  humane  shape,  and  yet  without  any  voyce,
and  pleasant  to  be  eaten,  as  are  other  fishes.

All  that  I  have  hitherto  rehearsed,  I  have  translated
out  of  the  saide  journey  which  was  delivered  me  in
the  Moscovites  tongue  :  In  the  which,  perhaps  some
things  may  seeme  fabulous,  and  in  maner  incredible,
as  of  the  dombe  men,  and  the  dead  reviving,  the  Aurea
Anus  also,  and  the  monstrous  shapes  of  men,  with  the
fish  of  humane  fourme  :  whereof,  although  I  have  made
diligent  inquisition,  yet  could  I  knowe  nothing  certaine
of  any  that  had  seene  the  same  with  their  eyes  :  never-
thelesse,  to  give  further  occasion  to  other  to  search  the
trueth  of  these  things,  I  have  thought  good  to  make
mention  hereof.

Noss  in  the  Moscovites  tongue  signifieth  a  nose,  and
therefore  they  call  all  capes  or  points,  that  reach  into
the  sea,  by  the  same  name.

The  mountaines  about  the  river  of  Petzora  are  called
Semnoi  Poyas,  or  Cingulus  mundi,  that  is,  the  girdle
of  the  world,  or  of  the  earth.

Kithai  is  a  lake,  of  which  the  great  Can  of  Cathay,
whom  the  Moscovians  cal  Czar  Kithaiski,  hath  his
name  :  For  Can  in  the  Tartars  language  signifieth,
A  King.

The  places  of  Lucomoria,  neare  unto  the  sea,  are
salvage,  full  of  woods,  and  inhabited  without  any  houses.
And  albeit,  that  the  author  of  this  journey,  said,  that
many  nations  of  Lucomoria  are  subject  to  the  prince
of  Moscovia,  yet  for  as  much  as  the  kingdome  of  Tumen
is  neare  thereunto,  whose  prince  is  a  Tartar,  and  named
in  their  tongue,  Tumenski  Czar,  that  is,  a  king  in
Tumen,  and hath of  late done great domage to the

410

OF  THE  NORTH  AND EAST REGIONS  ad.

1588.

prince  of  Moscovia  : it  is  most  like  that  these  nations
should  rather  be  subject  unto  him.

Neare unto the river Petzora (whereof  mention is  Petzora.
made  in  this  journey) is  the  citie  and  castle  of  Papin,  Papin.
or  Papinowgorod,  whose  inhabitants  are  named Papini,
and have a private language, differing from the
Moscovites. Beyond this river ,  are exceeding high  ^^S^  ^°^^-
mountaines, reaching even unto the bankes, whose  ^g^fj\l^l~
ridges or tops, by reason of  continuall windes,  are  in  Hyperborei,
maner utterly barren without grasse or fruits. And  and  Rhiphei.
although in divers  places they have divers names,  yet
are  they  commonly  called  Cingulus  mundi,  that  is,  the
girdle  of  the  world. In  these  mountaines  doe  Jerfalcons
breede, whereof  I have spoken before. There  growe
also Cedar trees,  among the  which  are found the  best
and blackest kinde  of  Sables  : and onely  these  moun-
taines are  seene in all the  dominions  of  the  prince  of
Moscovia, which perhaps are the same that the old
writers call Rhipheos, or Hyperboreos, so named of
the Greeke word. Hyper, that is.  Above, and Boreas,
that is, the North  : for by reason they are covered
with continuall snow and frost, they can not without
great  difficultie  be  travayled,  and  reach  so  farre  into  the
North,  that  they  make  the  unknowen  land of  Engron-
land. The Duke of  Moscovia,  Basilius the sonne of
John,  sent  on  a  time  two  of  his  Captaines,  named  Simeon
Pheodorowich Kurbski, & Knes Peter Uschatoi, to
search  the  places  beyond  these  mountaines,  and  to  subdue
the nations thereabout. Kurbski was  yet alive  at my
being  in Moscovia,  & declared  unto me that  he  spent
xvii. dales in ascending the mountaine, & yet  could
not  come to the top  therof,  which  in  their tongue is
called  Stolp,  that  is,  a  piller. This  mountaine  is  extended
into  the  Ocean  unto  the  mouthes  of  the  rivers  of  Dwina
and  Petzora.

But  now  having  spoken  thus  much  of  the  said  journey,  [I.  495.]
I will returne to the dominions of  Moscovia,  with
other  regions  lying  Eastward  & South  from  the same,

411

A.D.
1588.

Cathay.

The  fruitfuU
province  of
Rezan.
Jaroslave.

Hony.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

toward  the  mighty  Empire  of  Cathay.  But  I  will  first
speake  somewhat  briefly  of  the  province  of  Rezan,  and
the  famous  river  of  Tanais.

The  province  of  Rezan,  situate  betweene  the  rivers  of
Occa  and  Tanais,  hath  a  citie  builded  of  wood,  not  far
from  the  bank  of  Occa  :  there  was  in  it  a  Castle  named
Jaroslave,  whereof  there  now  remaineth  nothing  but
tokens  of  the  old  ruine.  Not  farre  from  that  citie  the
river  Occa  maketh  an  Hand  named  Strub,  which  was
sometime  a  great  Dukedome,  whose  prince  was  subject
to  none  other.  This  province  of  Rezan  is  more  fruitful
then  any  other  of  the  provinces  of  Moscovia  :  Insomuch
that  in  this  (as  they  say)  every  graine  of  wheat  bringeth
forth  two,  and  sometimes  more  eares  :  whose  stalkes  or
strawes  grow  so  thicke  that  horses  can  scarsely  go
through  them,  or  Quayles  flie  out  of  them.  There  is
great  plenty  of  hony,  fishes,  foules,  birdes,  and  wilde
beasts.  The  fruits  also  doe  farre  exceede  the  fruits  of
Moscovia. The  people  are  bolde  and  warlike  men.

La  redone
delle  Cine.
Confini  delli
uliimi  Tar-
tan.

A  special!  note  gathered  by  the  excellent  Venetian
Cosmographer  M.  John  Baptista  Ramusius
out  of  the  Arabian  Geographie  of  Abilfada
Ismael,  concerning  the  trending  of  the  Ocean
sea  from  China  Northward,  along  the  coast
of  Tartaric  and  other  unknowen  lands,  and
then  running  Westwards  upon  the  Northerne
coasts  of  Russia,  and  so  farther  to  the  North-
west.

DEscrivendo  poi  il  predetto  Abilfada  Ismael  i luoghi
della  terra  habitabile,  che  circuendo  il  mar  Oceano
tocca,  dice  cosi.

Rivoltasi  I'Oceano  da  levante  verso  la  regione  delle
Cine,  &  va  alia  volta  di  Tramontana,  et  passata  final-
mente  la  detta  regione,  se  ne  giunge  a  Gogi  &  Magogi,
cio  e  alii  confini  de  gli Ultimi Tartari,  & di  quivi  ad

412

OF THE EMPEROR'S HOUSEHOLD  a.d.

1588.
Alcune  Terre  che  sono  Incognite  : Et  correndo  sempre  Akme  Terre
per Ponente,  passa sopra  li confini Settentrionali della  i^^<^ognite.
Rossia,  et  va  alia  volta  di  Maestro.  ConfimSetten-

'  irtonah  della

Ihe  same  in  Jinglish.

THe aforesaid Abilfada Ismael describing  afterward
the  habitable  places  of  the  earth,  which  the  Ocean
sea  in  his  circuit  toucheth,  sayth  in  this  manner  following.

The Ocean sea turneth from the East  toward the  1"^^  Countrey
Countrey of  the Chinaes, and stretcheth toward the  rf  C^^^'^'
North,  and  at  length  having  passed  the  sayd  Countrey,
it reacheth unto  the  Gogi  and  Magogi,  that is,  to the
confines of  The uttermost Tartars, and from thence,  ^^^  ^"^^^^  °f
unto certaine unknowen Countreys  :  and running  still  ^!^  n-t^^rmost
Westward  it  passeth  upon  the  Northerne  coasts  of  Russia,  Certaine  un-
and from thence it runneth toward the Northwest,  kmwne  Coun-
(which  it  doth  indeede  upon  the  coast  of  Lappia.) By  this  ^f^y^-
most notable testimony it appeareth, that the Ocean  ^^^  Northern

•  codsts  of

sea compasseth  and  environeth  all  the  East,  Northeast,  jiussia.
and  North  parts  of  Asia  and  Europe.  The  North-

west,
The  Emperors  private  or  houshold  Officers.

THe  chiefe  Officers  of  the  Emperors  houshold  are  these
which  follow.  The  first  is  the  office  of  the  Boiaren
Conesheva,  or  master  of  the  Horse.  Which  conteineth  Master  of  the
no  more  then  is  expressed  by  the  name,  that  is,  to  be  "^'^^'^^■
overseer  of  the  Horse,  and  not  Magister  equitum,  or
Master  of  the  Horsemen.  For  he  appointeth  other  for
that  service,  as  occasion  doth  require,  as  before  was  sayd.
He  that  beareth  that  office  at  this  time,  is  Boris  Pheo-
dorowich  Godonoe,  brother  to  the  Empresse.  Of  Horse
for  service  in  his  warres  (besides  other  for  his  ordinary
uses)  he  hath  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand  which  are
kept  about  Mosco.

The  next  is  the  Lord  Steward  of  his  houshold  at  this  T'he  L.  Stew-

time, one Gregory  Vasilowich  Godonoe. The  third  is  %i-  ^  ^
,  . '  °, -^  ,  1 11 1  •  • • 1 1  T^he  L.  Trea-

his  Treasurer,  that  keepeth  all  his  moneis,  jewels,  plate,

&c. now called Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe. The

413

surer.

A.D.
1588.

Controller.
Chamberlaine

Tasters.
Harbengers.

Gentlemen  of
the  chamber.

The  Card.

[I.  496.]

Groomes.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

fourth  his  Controller,  now  Andreas  Petrowich  Clesinine.
The  fift  his  Chamberlaine.  He  that  attendeth  that  office
at  this  time,  is  called  Estoma  Bisabroza  Pastelnischay.
The  sixt  his  Tasters,  now  Theodor  Alexandrowich,  and
Ivan  Vasilowich  Godonoe.  The  seventh  his  Harbengers,
which  are  three  Noble  men,  and  divers  other  Gentlemen
that  do  the  office  under  them.  These  are  his  ordinary
officers,  and  offices  of  the  chiefest  account.

Of  Gentlemen,  beside  them  that  waite  about  his
chamber,  and  person  (called  Shilsey  Strapsey)  there  are
two  hundred,  all  Noblemens  sonnes.  His  ordinary
Garde  is  two  thousand  Hagbutters  readie  with  their
pieces  charged,  and  their  match  lighted,  with  other
necessarie  furniture  continually  day  and  night  :  which
come  not  within  the  house,  but  waite  without  in  the
court  or  yard,  where  the  Emperour  is  abiding.  In  the
night  time  there  lodgeth  next  to  his  bedchamber  the  chiefe
Chamberlaine,  with  one  or  two  more  of  best  trust  about
him.  A  second  chamber  off,  there  lodge  sixe  other  of
like  account  for  their  trust  and  faithfulnesse.  In  the
thirde  chamber  lie  certaine  young  Gentlemen,  of  these
two  hundred,  called  Shilsey  Strapsey,  that  take  their
turnes  by  forties  every  night.  There  are  groomes  besides
that  watch  in  their  course,  and  lie  at  every  gate  and
doore  of  the  Court,  called  Estopnick.

The  Hagbutters  or  Gunners,  whereof  there  are  two
thousand  (as  was  said  before)  watch  about  the  Em-
perours  lodging,  or  bedchamber  by  course  250.  every
night,  and  250.  more  in  the  Court  yarde,  and  about  the
Treasure  house.  His  Court  or  house  at  the  Mosco
is  made  castle  wise,  walled  about,  with  great  store  of
faire  ordinance  planted  upon  the  wall,  and  conteyneth  a
great  breadth  of  ground  within  it,  with  many  dwelling
houses  :  Which  are  appointed  for  such  as  are  knowen
to  be  sure,  and  trustie  to  the  Emperor.

414

OF THE RUSSIAN MANNERS  a.d.

1588.

Of  the  private  behaviour,  or  qualitie  of  the
Russe  people.

THE  private  behaviour  and  qualitie  of  the  Russe
people,  may  partly  be  understood  by  that  which
hath  beene  sayd  concerning  the  publique  state  and  usage
of  the  Countrey.  As  touching  the  naturall  habite  of  Constitution  of
their  bodies,  they  are  for  the  most  part  of  a  large  size,  ^^^^^^  ^°^^^^'
and  of  very  fleshly  bodies  :  accounting  it  a  grace  to  be
somewhat  grosse  and  burley,  and  therefore  they  nourish
and  spread  their  beards,  to  have  them  long  and  broad.
But  for  the  most  part  they  are  very  unwieldy  and  unactive
withall.  Which  may  be  thought  to  come  partly  of  the
climate,  and  the  numbnesse  which  they  get  by  the  cold
in  winter,  and  partly  of  their  diet  that  standeth  most
of  rootes,  onions,  garlike,  cabbage,  and  such  like  things
that  breede  grosse  humors,  which  they  use  to  eate  alone,
and  with  their  other  meates.

Their  diet  is  rather  much  then  curious.  At  their  Their  diet.
meales  they  beginne  commonly  with  a  Charke  or  small
cuppe  of  Aqua  vit^,  (which  they  call  Russe  wine)  and
then  drinke  not  till  towardes  the  end  of  their  meales,
taking  it  in  largely,  and  all  together,  with  kissing  one
another  at  every  pledge.  And  therefore  after  dinner
there  is  no  talking  with  them,  but  every  man  goeth  to
his  bench  to  take  his  afternoones  sleepe,  which  is  as
ordinary  with  them  as  their  nights  rest.  When  they
exceede,  and  have  varietie  of  dishes,  the  first  are  their
baked  meates  (for  roste  meates  they  use  litle)  and  then
their  broathes  or  pottage.  Their  common  drinke  is
Mead,  the  poorer  sort  use  water,  and  a  third  drinke
called  Quasse,  which  is  nothing  else  (as  we  say)  but
water  turned  out  of  his  wits,  with  a  litle  branne  meashed
with  it.

This  diet  would  breede  in  them  many  diseases,  but
that  they  use  bathstoves,  or  hote  houses  in  steade  of
all  Phisicke,  commonly  twise  or  thrise  every  weeke.
All  the  winter  time,  and  almost  the  whole  Sommer,  they

415

A.D.
1588.

An  admirable
induring  of
extreme  heat,
and  colde  at
one  and  the
same  time.

The  liable
mans  attire.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

heat  their  Peaches,  which  are  made  like  the  Germane
bathstoves,  and  their  Poclads  like  ovens,  that  so  warme
the  house  that  a  stranger  at  the  first  shall  hardly  like  of
it.  These  two  extremities,  specially  in  the  winter  of  heat
within  their  houses,  and  of  extreame  colde  without,
together  with  their  diet,  make  them  of  a  darke,  and
sallow  complexion,  their  skinnes  being  tanned  and
parched  both  with  cold  and  with  heate  :  specially  the
women,  that  for  the  greater  part  are  of  farre  worse  com-
plexions, then  the  men.  Whereof  the  cause  I  take  to
be  their  keeping  within  the  hote  houses,  and  busying
themselves  about  the  heating,  and  using  of  their  bath-
stoves,  and  peaches.

The  Russe  because  that  he  is  used  to  both  these
extremities  of  heat  and  of  cold,  can  beare  them  both  a
great  deale  more  patiently,  then  strangers  can  doe.  You
shall  see  them  sometimes  (to  season  their  bodies)  come
out  of  their  bathstoves  all  on  a  froth,  and  fuming  as
hoat  almost  as  a  pigge  at  a  spit,  and  presently  to  leape
into  the  river  starke  naked,  or  to  powre  cold  water  all
over  their  bodies,  and  that  in  the  coldest  of  all  the
winter  time.  The  women  to  mende  the  bad  hue  of
their  skinnes,  use  to  paint  their  faces  with  white  and
red  colours,  so  visibly,  that  every  man  may  perceive  it.
Which  is  made  no  matter,  because  it  is  common  and
liked  well  by  their  husbands  :  who  make  their  wives
and  daughters  an  ordinarie  allowance  to  buy  them  colours
to  paint  their  faces  withall,  and  delight  themselves  much
to  see  them  of  fowle  women  to  become  such  faire
images.  This  parcheth  the  skinne,  and  helpeth  to
deforme  them  when  their  painting  is of.

They  apparell  themselves  after  the  Greeke  manner.
The  Noblemans  attire  is  on  this  fashion.  First  a  Taffia,
or  little  night  cappe  on  his  head,  that  covereth  litle  more
then  his  crowne,  commonly  verie  rich  wrought  of  silke
and  golde  threede,  and  set  with  pearle  and  precious
stone.  His  head  he  keepeth  shaven  close  to  the  very
skinne, except he be in some displeasure with the

416

OF THE RUSSIAN MANNERS  ad.

1588.

Emperour.  Then  hee  suffereth  his  haire  to  growe  and
hang  downe  upon  his  shoulders,  covering  his  face  as  [I.  497.]
ugly  and  deformedly  as  he  can.  Over  the  Taffia  hee
weareth  a  wide  cappe  of  blacke  Foxe  (which  they  account
for  the  best  furre)  with  a  Tiara  or  long  bonnet  put
within  it,  standing  up  like  a  Persian  or  Babilonian  hatte.
About  his  necke  (which  is  seene  all  bare)  is  a  coller  set
with  pearle  and  precious  stone,  about  three  or  foure
fingers  broad.  Next  over  his  shirt,  (which  is  curiously
wrought,  because  he  strippeth  himselfe  into  it  in  the
Sommer  time,  while  he  is  within  the  house)  is  a  Shepon,
or  light  garment  of  silke,  made  downe  to  the  knees,
buttoned  before  :  and  then  a  Caftan  or  a  close  coat
buttoned,  and  girt  to  him  with  a  Persian  girdle,  whereat
he  hangs  his  knives  and  spoone.  This  commonly  is  of
cloth  of  gold,  and  hangeth  downe  as  low  as  his  ancles.
Over  that  hee  weareth  a  lose  garment  of  some  rich
silke,  furred  and  faced  about  with  some  golde  lace,
called  a  Ferris.  Another  over  that  of  chamlet,  or  like
stuffe  called  an  Alkaben,  sleeved  and  hanging  lowe,  and
the  cape  commonly  brooched,  and  set  all  with  pearle.
When  hee  goeth  abroad,  he  casteth  over  all  these
(which  are  but  sleight,  though  they  seeme  to  be  many)
an  other  garment  called  an  Honoratkey,  like  to  the
Alkaben,  save  that  it  is  made  without  a  coller  for  the
necke.  And  this  is  commonly  of  fine  cloth,  or  Camels
haire.  His  buskins  (which  he  weareth  in  stead  of
hose,  with  linnen  folles  under  them  in  stead  of  boot
hose)  are  made  of  a  Persian  leather  called  Saphian,
embrodered  with  pearle.  His  upper  stockes  commonly
are  of  cloth  of  golde.  When  he  goeth  abroad,  hee
mounteth  on  horsebacke,  though  it  be  but  to  the
next  doore  :  which  is  the  maner  also  of  the  Boiarskey,
or  Gentlemen.

The Boiarskey or Gentlemans attire is of  the same  The  Gentle-
fashion, but differeth in stuffe  : and yet he  will have  ^^'"  apparel.
his Caftan or undercoat sometimes of  cloth of  golde,
the  rest  of  cloth,  or  silke.

Ill  417  2  D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1588.
The  Noble  The  Noble  woman  (called  Chyna  Boiarshena)  weareth

womans  attire.  ^^  ^iQT  head,  first  a  cauU  of  some  soft  silke  (which  is
commonly  redde)  and  over  it  a  fruntlet  called  Obrosa,
of  white  colour.  Over  that  her  cappe  (made  after  the
coife  fashion  of  cloth  of  gold)  called  Shapka  Zempska,
edged  with  some  rich  furre,  and  set  with  pearle  and
stone.  Though  they  have  of  late  begunne  to  disdaine
embrodering  with  pearle  above  their  cappes,  because  the
Diacks,  and  some  Marchants  wives  have  taken  up  the
fashion.  In  their  eares  they  weare  earerings  (which  they
call  Sargee)  of  two  inches  or  more  compasse,  the  matter
of  gold  set  with  Rubies,  or  Saphires,  or  some  like
precious  stone.  In  Sommer  they  goe  often  with  ker-
chieffes  of  fine  white  lawne,  or  cambricke,  fastned  under
the  chinne,  with  two  long  tassels  pendent.  The  kerchiefe
spotted  and  set  thicke  with  rich  pearle.  When  they
ride  or  goe  abroad  in  raynie  weather,  they  weare  white
hattes  with  coloured  bandes,  called  Stapa  Zemskoy.
About  their  neckes  they  weare  collers  of  three  or  foure
fingers  broad,  set  with  rich  pearle  and  precious  stone.
Their  upper  garment  is  a  loose  gowne  called  Oposhen
commonly  of  scarlet,  with  wide  loose  sleeves,  hanging
downe  to  the  ground  buttened  before  with  great  golde
buttons,  or  at  least  silver  and  guilt  nigh  as  bigge  as  a
walnut.  Which  hath  hanging  over  it  fastned  under  the
cappe,  a  large  broad  cape  of  some  rich  furre,  that  hangeth
downe  almost  to  the  middes  of  their  backes.  Next
under  the  Oposken  or  upper  garment,  they  weare  another
called  a  Leitnick  that  is  made  close  before  with  great
wide  sleeves,  the  cuffe  or  halfe  sleeve  up  to  the  elbowes,
commonly  of  cloth  of  golde  :  and  under  that  a  Ferris
Zemskoy,  which  hangeth  loose  buttoned  throughout  to
the  very  foote.  On  the  hande  wrests  they  weare  very
faire  braselets,  about  two  fingers  broad  of  pearle  and
precious  stone.  They  goe  all  in  buskins  of  white,
yellow,  blew,  or  some  other  coloured  leather,  embrodered
with  pearle.  This  is  the  attire  of  the  Noblewoman  of
Russia,  when  she  maketh the best  shewe  of  her  selfe.

418

LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH

A.D.

1590.

The  Gentlewomans  apparell  may  differ  in  the  stuffe,  but
is  all  one  for  the  making  or  fashion.

As  for  the  poore  Mousick  and  his  wife  they  goe  ^-^^  Mousuks
poorely  cladde.  The  man  with  his  Honoratkey,  or  "^  ^"^^^f
loose  gowne  to  the  small  of  the  legge,  tyed  together
with  a  lace  before,  of  course  white  or  blew  cloth,  with
some  Shube  or  long  wastcoate  of  furre,  or  of  sheepe-
skinne  under  it,  and  his  furred  cappe,  and  buskins.
The  poorer  sort  of  them  have  their  Honoratkey,  or
upper  garment,  made  of  Kowes  haire.  This  is  their
winter  habite.  In  the  sommer  time,  commonly  they
weare  nothing  but  their  shirts  on  their  backes,  and
buskins  on  their  legges.  The  woman  goeth  in  a  red
or  blewe  gowne,  when  she  maketh  the  best  shewe,  and
with  some  warme  Shube  of  furre  under  it  in  the  winter
time.  But  in  the  sommer,  nothing  but  her  two  shirts
(for  so  they  call  them)  one  over  the  other,  whether
they  be  within  doores,  or  without.  On  their  heads,
they  weare  caps  of  some  coloured  stuffe,  many  of  velvet,
or  of  cloth  of  gold  :  but  for  the  most  part  kerchiefs.
Without  earings  of  silver  or  some  other  mettall,  and
her  crosse  about  her  necke,  you  shall  see  no  Russe
woman,  be  she  wife,  or  maide.

The Lord Boris Pheodorowich  his letter  to the  [I.  498.]
Right Honorable William Burghley Lord
high  Treasurer  of  England, &c.

|Y  the  grace  of  God  the  great  Lord  Em-
peror, and  great  Duke  Theodore  Ivano-
wich,  great  Lord,  King,  and  great  Duke
of  all  Russia,  of  Volodemer,  Mosco,  and
Novogorod,  king  of  Cazan,  and  Astracan,
Lord of Vobsko, and great Duke of

^  Smolensco,  Tver,  Ughori,  Permi,  Viatsko,
Bolgorie, and other  places, Lorde and great Duke of
Novogrod  in  the  Lowe  Countrey,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  The  Emperors
Polotsky, Rostove, Yeroslave, Bealozera, and  Liefland,  stik  Increased.

419

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

of  Oudorski,  Obdorski,  Condinski,  and  commander  of
all  Sibierland,  and  the  North  coasts,  great  Lorde  over
the  Countrey  of  Iverski,  Grisinski,  Emperor  of  Kabar-
dinskl,  and  of  the  Countrey  Charchaski,  and  the  Countrey
of  Gorsky,  and  Lord  of  many  other  regions.

From  Boris  Pheodorowich  his  Majesties  brother  in
law,  master  ot  his  horses,  governour  of  the  territories
of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  to  William  Lord  Burghley,
Lord  high  Treasurer  to  the  most  vertuous  Ladie
Elizabeth,  Queene  of  England,  France,  and  Ireland,
and  other  dominions  :  I  received  your  Lordships  letters,
wherein  you  write  that  you  have  received  very  joyfully
my  letters  sent  unto  you,  and  advisedly  read  them,  and
The  English  imparted  the  same  unto  her  Majestie  :  and  that  your
Man  ants Merchants finde themselves asrreeved, that  when they

complaints.  , ,  ,  • j 1  1

approch  these  parts,  and  are  arrived  here,  they  are  not
permitted  to  enter  into  a  free  and  liberall  course  of
barter,  traffike,  and  exchange  of  their  commodities,  as
heretofore  they  have  done,  but  are  compelled  before
they  can  enter  into  any  traffike  to  accept  the  Emperours
waxe,  and  other  goods,  at  high  rates  farre  above  their
value,  to  their  great  losse  :  and  that  they  are  by  reason
of  this  restraint  long  holden  upon  these  coasts  to
the  danger  of  wintering  by  the  way.  Hereafter  there
shalbe  no  cause  of  offence  given  to  the  Marchants  of
the  Queenes  Majestie  Queene  Elizabeth  :  they  shall  not
be  forced  to  any  thing,  neither  are  there  or  shall  be
any  demands  made  of  custome  or  debts.  Such  things
as  have  beene  heretofore  demaunded,  all  such  things
have  beene  already  upon  their  petition  and  supplication
commaunded  to  be  discharged.  I  have  sollicited  his
Majestie  for  them,  that  they  be  not  troubled  hereafter
for  those  matters,  and  that  a  favourable  hand  be  caried
over  them.  And  according  to  your  request  I  will  be
a  meane  to  the  Emperour  for  them  in  all  their  occasions,
and  will  my  selfe  shew  them  my  favorable  countenance.
And  I  pray  you  (William  Burghley)  to  signifie  to  her
Majesties Merchants  that I  promise  to have  a  care  of

420

LETTER FROM  BORIS PHEODOROWICH ad.

1590.
them,  and  for  the  Queenes  Majestic  of  Englands  sake,
I  will  take  her  Merchants  into  my  protection,  and  will
defend them as the Emperours selected people under
the Emperors commission  : and by  mine appointment
all  his  Majesties  officers  and  authorized  people  shall  be
carefull over them. The Emperors gracious favor  English  Mar-
towards  them  was  never  such  as  it  is  now. And  where  chants  in  great
you  write that  at the port the Emperors Officers sell  th^Emeror
their waxe by commission at a set rate given them,
farre above the value, and that they enforce your
Marchants to accept it, they deny that they take any
such course, but say they barter their waxe for other
wares,  and  also  put  their  waxe  to  sale  for  readie  money
to  your  Merchants,  according  to  the  worth  thereof,  and
as  the  price  goeth  in  the  custome  house  here. It  hath
beene  heretofore  deare,  and  now  is  sold  as  good  cheape
as  in  any  other  place,  and  as  they  can  best  agree  : they
enforce  no  man  to  buy  it,  but  rather  kepe  it  : therefore
your  Marchants  have no  just  cause to  make any  such
report. I  have  expressely  given  order, that  there  shall
be no such course used to enforce them, but to  buy
according  to  their  owne  willes,  and  to  tarrie  at  the  port
or to depart  at their pleasure. And as touching the
customes alreadie past, and debts demanded at your
Merchants  hands,  whereof  you  write  :  Our  Lord great
Emperour  and  great  Duke  Theodore Ivanowich of  all
Russia of  famous memory hath shewed his Majesties
especial favour and love, for the great love of his
welbeloved  sister  Queene  of  England,  and  by  my  petition
and  mediation,  whereas  there  was  commandement  given
to take Marshes whole debt of  your Merchants and
factors, it  is  moderated  to  the  halfe,  and  for  the  other  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^
halfe,  commandement  given  it  should  not  be  taken,  and  ^^  .^f"-^
the  Merchants  billes  to  be  delivered  them. And  to  the  fitted.
end hereafter that her Majesties Marchants move no
contention betwixt our Lord the Emperor and great
Duke of Russia, and his welbeloved sister Queene
Elizabeth,  his  Majestie  desireth  order  to  be  given,  that

421

A.D.

1590.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

your  Marchants  doe  deale  justly  in  their  traffike, and

plainely  without  fraud  or  guile. And  I  will  be  a  favourer

of  them  above  all  others,  under  his  Majesties  authoritie  :

Jnn.  Dom.  themselves  shall  see  it. Written  in  our  great  Lorde  the

^59°- Emperours  citie  of  Mosco  in  the  moneth  of  July,  7099.

[I.  499.]

1590.

The  Queenes  Majesties  letter  to  Theodore
Ivanovich  Emperour  of  Russia, 1591.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene
of  England,  France,  and  Ireland,  defender
of  the  faith,  &c.  to  the  right  high,
mighty,  and  right  noble  prince  Theodore
Ivanovich  great  Lord,  King,  and  great
Duke  of  all  Russia,  Volodemer,  Mosco,
Novogrod,  King  of  Cazan,  and  Astracan,
Lord  of  Vobsko,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensko,  Otver,
Ughory,  Perme,  Viatski,  Bolgory,  and  other  places :
Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod  in  the  low  countrey,
of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotsky,  Rostove,  Yeraslave,
Bealozero,  and  Lifland,  of  Oudorsky,  Obdorsky,  Con-
dinsky,  and  commander  of  all  Sibierland  and  the  North
coasts,  great  Lord  over  the  countrey  of  Iversky,  Grisinsky,
Emperor  of  Kabardinsky,  and  of  the  countrey  of
Charkasky,  and  of  the  countrey  of  Gorsky,  and  Lord
of  many  other  countreys,  our  most  deare  and  loving
brother,  greeting.  Right  noble  and  excellent  prince,
we  have  received  your  Majesties  letters  brought  over
by  our  merchants  in  their  returne  of  their  II  last  voyage
from  your  port  of  S.  Nicholas  ;  which  letters  we  have
advisedly  read  and  considered,  and  thereby  perceive  that
your  Majesty  doth  greatly  mislike  of  our  late  imploy-
ment  of  Jerome  Horsey  into  your  dominions  as  our
messenger  with  our  Highnesse  letters,  and  also  that
your  Majesty  doth  thinke  that  we  in  our  letters  sent
by  the  sayd  messenger  have  not  observed  that  due  order
or  respect  which  apperteined  to  your  princely  majesty,
in the forme of  the same letter, aswel touching the

422

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1591.

inlargement  of  your  Majesties  stile  and  titles  of  honor
which  your  Majesty  expected  to  have  bene  therein
more  particularly  expressed,  as  also  in  the  adding  of
our  greatest  scale  or  signet  of  armes  to  the  letters
which  we  send  to  so  great  a  Prince  as  your  Majesty  is  :
in  any  of  which  points  we  would  have  bene  very  loth
willingly  to  have  given  just  cause  of  offence  thereby
to  our  most  deare  and  loving  brother.  And  as  touching
the  sayd  messenger  Jerome  Horsey  we  are  sory  that
contrary  to  our  expectation  he  is  fallen  into  your
Majesties  displeasure,  whom  we  minde  not  to  mainteine
in  any  his  actions  by  which  he  hath  so  incurred  your
Majesties  mislike  :  yet  that  we  had  reason  at  such
time  as  we  sent  him  to  your  Majesty  to  use  his  service
as  our  messenger,  we  referre  our  selves  to  your  princely
judgement,  praying  your  Majesty  to  reduce  into  your
minde  the  especial!  commendation,  which  in  your  letters
written  unto  us  in  the  yeere  1585,  you  made  of  the  1585.
sayd  Jerome  Horsey  his  behaviour  in  your  dominions  :
at  which  time  your  Majesty  was  pleased  to  use  his  service
as  your  messenger  to  us,  requiring  our  answere  of  your
letters  to  be  returned  by  him  and  by  none  other.  That
imployment,  with  other  occasions  taken  by  your  Majesty
to  use  the  service  of  the  sayd  Jerome  Horsey  (as  namely
in  the  yeere  1587)  when  your  Majesty  sent  him  to  us
againe  with  your  letters,  and  your  liberall  and  princely
priviledge  at  our  request  granted  to  our  merchants  (for
which  we  have  heretofore  given  thanks  to  your  Majesty,
so  doe  we  hereby  reiterate  our  thankefulnesse  for  the
same)  mooved  us  to  be  of  minde,  that  we  could  not
make  choise  of  any  of  our  subjects  so  fit  a  messenger
to  your  Majesty  as  he,  whom  your  Majesty  had  at
severall  times  used  upon  your  owne  occasions  into
this  our  Realme.  But  least  your  highnesse  should
continue  of  the  minde  that  the  letters  which  you  sent
by  our  ambassador  Giles  Fletcher  (wherein  some  mention
was  made  of  your  conceived  displeasure  against  the  sayd
Horsey)  came  not  to  our  hands,  and  that  wee  were  kept

423

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591-

ignorant  of  the  complaint  which  your  Majesty  made
therein  against  the  sayd  Horsey,  we  do  not  deny  but
that  we  were  acquainted  aswell  by  our  ambassadour  as
by  those  letters  of  some  displeasure  conceived  against
him  by  your  Majesty  :  but  your  sayd  letters  giving  onely
a  short  generall  mention  of  some  misdemeanour  com-
mitted by  him,  expressing  no  particulars,  we  were  of
opinion  that  this  offence  was  not  so  hainous,  as  that
it  might  utterly  extinguish  all  your  former  princely
favour  towards  him,  but  that  upon  his  humble  submission
to  your  Majesty,  or  upon  better  examination  of  the
matter  of  the  displeasure  conceived  against  him,  the
offence  might  have  beene  either  remitted,  or  he  thereof
might  have  cleared  himselfe.  And  to  that  end  we  were
not  onely  by  his  great  importunity  long  sollicited,
but  by  the  intercession  of  some  of  our  Nobility  giving
credit  to  his  owne  defence,  we  were  intreated  on  his
behalfe  to  use  his  service  once  againe  into  Russia  as
our  messenger  to  your  Majesty,  whereby  he  might  have
opportunity  to  cleare  himselfe,  and  either  by  his  answere
or  by  his  submission  recover  your  Majesties  former
favour  :  whereunto  our  princely  nature  was  mooved  to
yeeld,  wishing  the  good  of  our  subject  so  farre  foorth
as  his  desert  might  carry  him,  or  his  innocencie  cleare
him.

Thus  noble  Prince,  our  most  loving  and  dearest
brother,  it  may  appeare  unto  your  Majesty  how  we
were  induced  to  use  the  service  of  the  sayd  messenger,

[I.  500.]  aswell  for  the  recovery  of  your  Majesties  favor  towards
him  (if  he  had  bene  found  woorthy  of  it)  as  for
experience  of  the  maners  and  fashions  of  your  countrey,
where  he  hath  bene  much  conversant.  But  sith  by
your  Majesties  letters  it  appeareth  that  he  hath  not
cleared  himselfe  in  your  Majesties  sight,  we  meane  not
to  use  him  in  any  such  price  hereafter.

And  as  touching  your  Majesties  conceit  of  the  brevitie
which  we  used  in  the  setting  downe  of  your  Majesties
stile  and  titles  of  honour  : as  nothing  is  further  from

424

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1591.
us,  then  to  abridge  so  great  and  mighty  a  Prince  of
the  honour  due  unto  him  (whom  we  holde  for  his
greatnesse  to  deserve  more  honour  then  we  are  able  to
give  him)  so  shall  we  need  no  further  nor  surer  argu-
ment to  cleare  us  of  the  suspicion  of  the  detracting
from  your  Majesty  any  part  of  your  just  and  princely
honor  and  greatnesse,  then  the  consideration  of  our
owne  stile,  which  is  thus  contracted,  videlicet,  Elizabeth
by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of  England,  France,  and
Ireland,  defender  of  the  faith  &c.  which  kingdomes
and  dominions  of  ours  are  expressed  by  these  generall
words,  videlicet,  England,  France,  and  Ireland  :  in  every
of  which  there  are  severall  principalities,  dukedomes,
earledomes,  provinces  and  countreys  :  which  being
severally  expressed  would  enlarge  much  our  stile,  and
make  it  of  great  length  ;  which  by  our  progenitours
hath  not  bene  used  :  notwithstanding,  we  thinke  it  no
dishonour  to  us,  compendiously  to  abridge  the  same
in  all  our  writings  and  letters  written  to  what  Prince,
King,  or  Potentate  soever.  Whereupon  we  inferre,
that  holding  your  Majesties  generall  stile,  we  offer  your
Highnesse  no  dishonour  in  not  expressing  all  the
particular  provinces  :  albeit  we  can  willingly  content
our  selfe,  upon  the  knowledge  of  your  usages  and
customes,  to  observe  that  course,  which  your  selfe  shall
thinke  most  honourable.  And  for  the  sealing  up  of
our  letters  which  we  write  to  all  our  allies,  kinsemen,
and  friends.  Kings  and  Princes,  we  have  in  use  two
severall  scales  ;  both  which  we  esteeme  alike  honourable,
being  our  princely  scales.  And  as  the  volume  of  our
letters  falleth  out  to  be  great  or  small,  so  accordingly  is
our  greater  or  lesser  scale  annexed  to  the  sayd  letters,
without  esteeming  either  of  them  more  or  lesse  honour-
able then  the  other.  So  as,  our  most  loving  and  dearest
brother,  in  the  said  letters  there  was  nothing  done  of
purpose  to  detract  from  your  Majesty  any  thing  of  the
usuall  regard,  which  our  Highnesse  was  woont  to  yeeld
unto  your most noble father of  famous  memory  Ivan

425

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1591.

Basilivich  Emperor  of  al  Russia,  or  to  your  selfe,  our
dearest  brother.  For  the  residue  of  the  points  of  your
Majesties  letters  concerning  the  entertainement  of  our
ambassadour,  and  proceeding  in  the  cause  of  Anthonie
Marsh  we  holde  our  selfe  satisfied  with  your  princely
answere,  and  doe  therein  note  an  honourable  and  princely
care  in  your  Majestic  to  prevent  the  like  troubles,  con-
troversies and  sutes,  that  Marshes  cause  stirred  up
betweene  our  merchants  and  your  subjects,  which  is,
that  your  Majestie  doeth  purpose  from  time  to  time
to  purge  your  Countrey  of  such  straglers  of  our  subjects,
as  doe  or  shall  hereafter  abide  there,  and  are  not  of
the  Company  of  our  merchants,  but  contemptuously
depart  out  of  our  land  without  our  Highnesse  licence  :
of  which  sort  there  are  presented  unto  us  from  our
merchants  the  names  of  these  severall  persons,  videlicet,
Richard  Cocks,  Bennet  Jackman,  Rainold  Kitchin,  Simon
Rogers,  Michael  Lane,  Thomas  Worsenham  :  whom
it  may  please  your  Majesty  by  your  princely  order  to
dismisse  out  of  your  land,  that  they  may  be  sent  home
in  the  next  shippes,  to  avoid  the  mislike  which  their
residence  in  those  parts  might  breed  to  the  disturbance
of  our  brotherly  league,  and  the  impeaching  of  the
entercourse.

And  whereas,  most  loving  and  dearest  brother,  one
William  Turnebull  a  subject  of  ours  is  lately  deceased
in  your  kingdome,  one  with  whom  our  merchants  have
had  much  controversie  for  great  summes  of  money  due
unto  them  by  him  while  he  was  their  Agent  in  their
affayres  of  merchandises  :  which  differences  by  arbitrable
order  were  reduced  to  the  summe  of  3000  rubbles,  and
so  much  should  have  beene  payed  by  him  as  may  appeare
by  your  Majesties  councell  or  magistrates  of  justice  by
very  credible  information  and  testimony :  and  whereas
also  the  sayd  Turnbull  was  further  indebted  by  billes
of  his  own  hand  to  divers  of  our  subjects,  amounting
in  the  whole,  to  the  summe  of  1326  pounds,  which
billes  are  exemplified  under  our  great  seale  of  England,

426

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S LETTER  ad.

1591-

and  to  be  sent  over  with  this  bearer  :  of  which  summes

he  hath  often promised payment: it may please  your

most  excellent  Majestic  in  your  approoved  love  to  justice,

to  give  order  to  your  favourable  councell  and  magistrates,

that  those  severall  debts  may  be  satisfied  to  our  merchants

and  subjects  out  of  the  goods,  merchandise,  and  debts

which  are  due  to  the  state  of  the  sayd  Turnbull :  whereof

your Majesties  councell shalbe  informed  by  the  Agent

of  our  merchants.

We  trust  we  shall  not  need  to  make  any  new  request

by  motion to  your  Majesty  that  some order might  be

taken  for  the  finding  out  of  the rest  of  our  merchants  ^■^^  Emperor

goods seised to your maiesties use in  the hands  and  ^^"^\°"^
o  y  J  _  ^  ^ fnercfiunts

possession  of  John  Chappel  their  servant,  being  a  thing

granted, and no doubt already performed by your

Majesties order. We therfore intreat your Majesty,

that  as  conveniently  as  may  be,  satisfaction  or  recompense

be given to our said merchants  towards  the  repairing

of  their  sundry  great  losses aswell therein  as  otherwise  [I-  5°J-]

by them of  late  sundry  wayes sustained. And  lastly,

our  most  deare  and  loving  brother,  as  nothing  in  all  these

our  occasions  is  to  be  preferred  before  our  entire  league

and amitie, descending upon us as an inheritance,  in

succession from both our ancestours and noble pro-

genitours :  so let us be carefuU on both sides  by  all

good meanes to holde and  continue the  same  to  our

posterity for  ever. And if  any  mistaking  or  errour  of

either  side  do  rise,  in  not  accomplishing  of  circumstances

agreeable  to  the  fashion  of  either  of  our  countreys  and

kingdomes,  let  the  same  upon  our  enterchangeable  letters

be  reconciled, that our league and amitie be  no  way

impeached  for  any  particular  occasion  whatsoever. And

thus  we  recommend  your  Majesty  to  the  tuition  of  the

most  High. From our  royall  Palace  of  Whitehall  the

14  of  January,  anno  Domini 1591.  1591.

[The  Queenes
427

A.D.
I59I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  Queenes  Majesties  letters  to  the  Lord
Boris  Pheodorowich.

Lizabeth  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France,  and  Ireland,  defendour
of  the  faith,  &c.  to  the  right  honourable
and  noble  Prince  Lord  Boris  Pheodoro-
wich Godonova,  Master  of  the  horses  to
the  great  and  mightie  Emperour  of
=^  Russia,  his  Highnesse  lieutenant  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  our  most  deare  and  loving  cousin,
greeting.  Right  honourable,  it  hath  appeared  unto  us
upon  the  reading  and  perusing  of  the  Letters  lately  sent
unto  our  Highnesse  from  our  deare  and  loving  brother
the  Emperour,  in  what  part  his  Majestie  tooke  the  late
imployment  of  our  messenger  Jerome  Horsey  in  our
affaires  into  Russia :  wherein  we  doe  also  finde  the
honourable  endevour  used  by  your  Lordship  to  appease
his  Highnesse  mislike  and  exception  taken  aswell  to
the  person  of  our  Messenger,  as  to  our  princely  letters
sent  by  him  :  both  of  which  points  we  have  answered
in  our  letters  sent  by  this  bearer  directed  to  our  sayd
loving  brother  the  Emperour  :  upon  perusing  whereof
we  doubt  not  but  his  Majestie  will  be  well  satisfied
touching  our  sayd  Messenger  and  former  letters.  And
for  the  honourable  course  holden  by  your  Lordship  in
the  interposing  of  your  opinion  and  favourable  con-
struction in  a  thing  which  might  grow  to  the  offence
of  the  league  and  amitie  standing  betweene  your
Soveraigne  Lord  and  us  (wherein  your  Lordship  per-
formed the  ofhce  of  an  honourable  and  grave  Counsellour)
we  take  our  selfe  beholding  to  your  Lordship  for  your
readinesse  in  that  behalfe,  and  doe  assure  our  selfe  that
the  same  did  proceed  of  the  especiall  love  and  kinde
affection  that  your  Lordship  hath  ever  borne  and  con-
tinued towards  us,  whereof  our  princely  nature  will
never be unmindfull. We have bene also  from  time

428

LETTER TO BORIS PHEODOROWICH  ad.

1591-

to  time  made  acquainted  by  our  chiefe  and  principall
Counsellour  William  Lord  Burghley,  Lord  high
Treasurour  of  our  Highnesse  Realme  of  England,  of
your  letters  which  have  passed  betweene  your  Lordship
and  him,  concerning  the  entercourse  of  our  Merchants
trafficke  in  your  Countreys,  and  of  the  honourable  offices
done  by  your  Lordship  with  the  Emperour  in  favour
of  our  sayd  Marchants.  And  lastly  (which  wee  take  a
most  assured  argument  of  your  undoubted  love  and
affection  towards  us)  that  your  Lordship  hath  vouch-
safed, and  of  purpose  taken  into  your  hands  the  pro-
tection of  our  sayd  Merchants,  and  the  hearing  and
determining  of  all  their  causes  and  occasions  whatsoever,
which  shall  concerne  them  or  their  trade.  All  which
wee  conceive  to  be  done  for  our  sake,  and  therefore  do
acknowledge  our  selves  to  be,  and  still  will  continue  be-
holding unto  you  for  the  same.

And  whereas  we  have  made  mention  in  our  sayd
letters  written  to  our  loving  brother  the  Emperour  of
certeine  debts  due  aswell  to  our  merchants,  as  to  other
of  our  subjects  by  one  William  Turnebull  a  subject  of
ours  late  deceased  in  Russia,  wee  pray  you  to  be  referred
to  the  sayd  letter.  And  forasmuch  as  the  sayd  cause
will  fall  under  your  Lordships  jurisdiction  by  reason  of
your  acceptation  of  all  their  causes  into  your  patronage  and
protection  :  we  are  so  well  assured  of  your  honourable
inclination  to  justice,  and  your  good  affection  towards  our
merchants  for  our  sake,  that  we  shall  not  need  to  intreat
your  honourable  furtherance  either  of  justice  or  expedition
in  the  sayd  cause.  And  lastly  considering  that  your  noble
linage  together  with  your  great  wisedome  and  desert
hath  made  you  a  principall  Counsellour  and  directour
of  the  state  of  so  great  a  Monarchic,  whereby  your
advice  and  direction  is  followed  in  all  things  that  doe
concerne  the  same,  we  have  given  order  to  our  sayd
principall  Counsellour  William  Lord  Burghley,  treasurour
of  our  Realme  of  England,  that  as  any  occasion  shall
arise to  the hinderance of  the entercourse betweene

429

A.D,
159I.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

these  Countreyes,  or  of  the  priviledges  graunted  by  his
Majestie  to  our  merchants,  that  he  may  by  advertise-
ment treat  with  your  Lordshippe  thereupon  :  which
we  by  reason  of  our  great  princely  aifayres  can  not  so
[I.  502.]  conveniently  at  all  times  doe  with  such  expedition  as
the  cause  may  require.  And  thus  with  our  princely
commendations  we  bidde  you  farewell.  From  our
royall  Pallace  of  Whitehall  the  foureteenth  day  of
Januariee,  Anno  Domini 1591.

To  the  right  honourable  my  very  good  Lord,
the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich,  Master  of  the
horses  to  the  great  and  mighty  Emperour
of  Russia,  his  Highnesse  Lieutenant  of  Cazan
and  Astracan,  William  Cecill  Lord  Burghley,
Knight  of  the  noble  Order  of  the  Garter,
and  Lord  high  Treasurer  of  England,  sendeth
greeting.

Ight  honourable  my  very  good  Lord,
upon  the  last  returne  of  our  merchants
shippes  out  of  Russia,  there  was  brought
unto  my  handes,  by  one  Francis  Cherrie
an  English  merchant,  a  letter  directed  to
the  Queenes  Majestie,  from  the  great  and
mightie  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  another
letter  from  your  Lordship  directed  to  me  :  which  sayd
letter  written  from  the  Emperor  to  her  Majesty  hath
beene  considerately  and  advisedly  by  her  Highnesse  read
and  perused,  and  the  matter  of  complaint  against  Jerome
Horsey  therein  comprised  thorowly  examined  :  which
hath  turned  the  same  Horsey  to  some  great  displeasure.
I  did  also  acquaint  our  Majesty  with  the  contents  of
your  Lordships  letters  written  to  mee,  and  enformed  her
of  your  Lordships  honourable  favour  shewed  to  her
Highnesse  merchants  from  time  to  time  :  who  tooke
the  same  in  most  gracious  part,  and  confessed  her  selfe

430

LORD BURGHLEY'S LETTER  a.d.

1591-

infinidy  beholding  unto  your  Lordship  for  many  honour-
able offices  done  for  her  sake,  the  which  she  meant  to
acknowledge  by  her  letters  to  be  written  to  your  Lordship
under  her  princely  hand  and  seale.  And  forasmuch  as
hath  pleased  your  good  Lordshippe  to  take  into  your
\des  the  protection  of  her  Majesties  merchants,  and
■<"  redresse  of  such  injuries  as  are,  or  shall  be  offered
)  them  contrary  to  the  meaning  of  the  priviledges
a  the  free  liberty  of  the  entercourse,  wherein  in  some
^.oints  your  Lordship  hath  already  used  a  reformation,
as  appeareth  by  your  sayd  letters  :  yet  the  continuance
of  traffique  mooving  new  occasions  and  other  accidents
tending  to  the  losse  of  the  sayd  merchants,  whereof  some
particulars  have  beene  offered  unto  me  to  treat  with  your
Lordship  upon  :  I  thought  it  good  to  referre  them  to
your  honourable  consideration,  that  order  might  be  taken
in  the  same,  for  that  they  are  apparantly  repugnant  to
the  Emperours  letters  written  to  her  Majestic,  and  doe
much  restraine  the  liberty  of  the  trade  :  one  is,  that  at
the  last  comming  of  our  merchants  to  the  port  of  Saint  '^^"  "  ^  «^"'
Michael  the  Archangel,  where  the  mart  is  holden,  their  ^°^^'
goods  were  taken  by  the  Emperours  officers  for  his
Highnesse  service  at  such  rates,  as  the  sayd  officers
were  disposed  to  set  upon  them,  so  farre  under  their
value,  that  the  merchants  could  not  assent  to  accept  of
those  prices  :  which  being  denied,  the  sayd  officers  re-  '^^^  English
strained  them  of  all  further  traffique  for  the  space  of  ^^^'^J^^^^^  3
three  weekes,  by  which  meanes  they  were  compelled  to  strained  from
yeeld  unto  their  demaund  how  unwillingly  soever,  their  Mart.
Another  is,  that  our  sayd  merchants  are  driven  to  pay
the  Emperours  officers  custome  for  all  such  Russe  money
as  they  bring  downe  from  the  Mosco  to  the  Sea  side  to
employ  there  at  the  Mart  within  the  Emperours  owne
land  ;  which  seemeth  strange  unto  me,  considering  the
same  money  is  brought  from  one  place  of  the  Countrey
to  another,  and  there  imployed  without  any  transport
over  of  the  sayd  money.  These  interruptions  and  im-
positions  seeme not to stand  with the liberties  of  the

431

A.D.
I59I.

159I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Emperours  privileges  and  freedome  of  the  entercourse,
which  should  be  restrained  neither  to  times  or  conditions,
but  to  be  free  and  absolute  :  whereof  it  may  please  your
Lordship  to  be  advised,  and  to  continue  your  honourable
course  holden  betweene  the  Emperour  and  her  Majesty,
to  reconcile  such  differences  as  any  occasion  doth  offer
to  their  league  or  trafficke.  Thus  not  doubting  of
your  Lordships  furtherance  herein,  I  humbly  take  my
leave  of  your  good  Lordship.  From  her  Majesties  royall
palace  of  Whitehall  this  15  of  January, 1591.

*592-  A  letter  from  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  Theodore

Ivanovich  to  the  Queenes  Majestie.

Hrough the tender mercie of  our God,
whereby the day-spring from on high
hath visited us, thereby to guide our
feet into the  way  of  peace. Even this
our  God  by  mercy  we  glorifie  in  Trinitie.
We the  great Lord, King  and great
Duke  Theodore  Ivanowich,  governour  of
all  Russia,  of  Volodimer,  Mosco,  and  Novogrod,  King  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  Lord  of  Vobsco,  and  great  Duke  of
[I-  503-] Smolensco,  Otver,  Ughori,  Perme,  Viatsky,  Bulgary,  and
other  regions.  Lord  and  great  Duke  also  of  Novogrod
in  the  low  countrey, of  Chernigo, of  Rezan,  Polotsko,
Rostove,  Yeroslave,  Bealozera,  and  of  Lifland,  of  Udorsky,
The  Emperors  Qbdorsky, Condinsky,  and  all the  countrey  of  Siberia,
enlarzed  ^^^  Commander  of  all  the North parts,  and  Lord  over

the  countrey  of  Iversky,  and  King  of  Grusinsky,  and  of
the  countrey  of  Kabardinsky,  Cherchasky,  and  Duke  of
Igorsky,  Lord  and  ruler  of  many  countreys  more  &c.
To  our  loving  sister  Elizabeth  Queene  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland,  &c.  Loving  sister,  your  letters
sent  by  your  servant  Thomas  Lind,  we  have  received,
and  read  what  you  have  written  in  the  same  touching
our  title,  and  touching  your  order  holden  in  your  letters
heretofore sent us by your servant Jerome Horsey  :

432

LETTER FROM THE EMPEROR  ad.

1592.

wherein you have answered us sufficiently and most
graciously.

And  whereas  your  Majestie  hath  written  in  your  letter
concerning  the  goods  of  William  Turnebull  late  deceased
in  our  kingdome,  that  your  subjects,  for  whom  he  was
factour,  should  have  debts  growing  unto  them  from  him
by  account  :  we  at  your  Majesties  request  have  caused
not  onely  order  to  be  taken,  but  for  your  Highnesse
sake,  loving  sister,  we  have  caused  the  goods  to  be
sought  out  and  delivered  to  your  merchants  Agent  and
his  company,  together  with  his  stufFe,  bookes,  billes  and
writings,  as  also  money  to  the  value  of  sixe  hundred
rubbles,  which  Christopher  Holmes  and  Francis  Cherry
are  to  pay  for  I  ycarie  :  and  we  have  set  at  libertie  the  This  is  a
sayd  Turnebulles  kinseman  Raynold  Kitchin  and  his  '^'^'f^  ff
fellowes  and  delivered  them to your  merchants  Agent.  ^.^^^  of  Stur-

And  further,  where  you  write  unto  us  for  such  your  geons.
subjects  as  have  departed  out  of  your  majesties  Realme
secretly  without  licence,  that  we  should  give  order  to
send  them  home  :  concerning  such  your  subjects  for
which  you  have  written  unto  our  Majestie  by  letters,
we  will  cause  search  to  be  made,  and  such  as  are  willing
to  goe  home  into  your  kingdome,  we  will  command
forthwith  to  be  delivered  unto  your  merchants  Agent,
and  so  to  passe.  And  such  of  your  Majesties  people
as  have  given  themselves  under  our  government  as
subjects,  we  thinke  it  not  requisite  to  grant  to  let  them
passe.

And  further,  where  you  have  written  unto  us  con-
cerning the  goods  of  John  Chappell,  we  have  written
heretofore  the  whole  discourse  thereof,  not  once,  but
sundry  times,  and  therefore  it  is  not  needful!  to  write
any  more  thereof.  And  such  goods  as  were  found  out
of  the  goods  of  the  sayd  Chappell,  the  money  thereof
was  restored  to  your  Majesties  people  William  Turnbull
and  his  fellowes.  Your  Majesties  servant  Thomas  Lind  M.  Thomas
we  have  sent  with  our  letters  the  same  way  whereby  he  ^^'^'^•
came  into  our  kingdome.  The  long  abiding  heere  of
in  433  2  E

A.D.

1592.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

your  Majesties  servant  in  our  kingdome,  was  for  the
comming  of  your  people  from  the  Sea  port.  Written
in  our  princely  court  and  royall  seat  in  the  city  of
Mosco  in  the  yeere  from  the  beginning  of  the  world
1592.  7101,  in  the  moneth  of  January.

To  the  Queenes  most  excellent  Majestie  from
the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorovich  Godonova.

Y  the  grace  of  God  great  Lord  and  great
Duke  Theodore  Ivanovich  governour  of
Russia,  Volodimer,  Mosco,  and  Novo-
grod,  King  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  Lord
of  Vobsko,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensco,
Otver,  Ughori,  Perme,  Viatsky,  Bulgary,
and  other  regions,  Lord  and  great  Duke
of  Novogrod  in  the  low  countrey,  of  Chernigo,  of  Rezan,
Polotsko,  Rostove,  Jeroslave,  Bealozera,  and  of  Lifland,
of  Udorsky,  Obdorsky,  Condinsky,  and  all  the  countrey
of  Sibery,  and  commander  of  all  the  North  parts,  and
Lord  over  the  countrey  of  Iversky,  and  King  of  Grusin-
sky,  and  of  the  countrey  of  Kabardinsky,  Cherchasky,
and  duke  of  Igorsky,  Lord  and  ruler  of  many  countreys
more,  &c.

Most  resplendent  Queene  Elizabeth  of  England,
France,  and  Ireland,  &c.  his  princely  Majesties  servant.
Lord  and  Master  of  his  horses,  and  high  Steward  of
his  house,  and  President  of  the  territories  of  Cazan
and  Astracan,  Boris  Pheodorovich  Godonova,  unto  your
most  excellent  Majesty,  great  Ladie  Queene  Elizabeth,
send  my  humble  commendations.  It  hath  pleased  your
Majestie  to  write  unto  me  your  gracious  and  princely
letter  by  your  servant  Thomas  Lind  :  which  letter  I
received  with  all  humblenesse.  During  the  time  of  the
abode  of  your  messenger  Thomas  Lind  here  in  the
Mosco,  it  pleased  God  of  his  mercifulnesse,  and  our
Lady  the  mother  of  God,  and  holy  Saints,  by  the  prayers
of  our  lord  and  king  his  Majestie  Theodore  Ivanovich

434

LETTER  FROM  BORIS PHEODOROWICH ad.

1592.

over  all  Russia  governour,  the  right  beleever  and  lover

of  Christ,  to  send  our  Queene  and  gracious  Lady  Irene  The  Empresse

a  yoons:  Princesse,  to  the  great  ioy  and  comfort  of  our ,r^"^  ,  "

_/o  '  o  J J  .  tweved  of  &

kingdome, named  Pheodocine. Wherefore  we give all  daushter.
honour  and  glory  to the  almightie God unspeakeable,
whose  giftes  had  beene  manifolde  with  mercie  unto  us  :  [I.  504.]
for  which  all  wee  Christians  laud  and  praise  God.

After  all  this  your  servant  was  occasioned  to  stay  untill
the  comming  of  your  merchants  from  the  sea  port.

Touching  the  letters  which  you  have  received  from
your  loving  brother  our  Lord  and  Master  by  your
ambassadour,  therein  you  perceive  sufficiently  my  good
meaning,  in  travailing  for  the  continuance  of  amitie  and
friendship  betwixt  you  mighty  great  princes,  in  the  which
I  will  continue  mine  endevour.  Also  your  merchants
I  have  taken  into  my  protection  for  to  defend  them
for  the  love  I  beare  to  your  Majestic.  As  heeretofore
I  have  done  it  willingly,  and  with  great  care  of  their
good,  so  I  meane  to  continue  so  farre  as  God  will  give
me  leave  :  to  the  end  that  brotherly  love  be  holden
betweene  you  Princes  without  disturbance.

As  1  have  beene  to  your  merchants  in  times  past,  so
now  by  the  permission  and  commandement  of  our  Lord
and  Master,  I  will  be  their  defendour  in  all  causes  :  and
will  cause  all  our  authorised  people  to  favour  them  and
to  defend  them,  and  to  give  them  free  liberty  to  buy
and  sell  at  their  pleasure.  The  merchants  doe  not
certifie  your  princely  Majestic  of  all  our  friendship  and
favour  shewed  unto  them  from  time  to  time.  And
whereas  your  Majestie  hath  now  written  to  our  Lord
and  Master  for  the  debts  which  your  merchants  ought
to  have  of  William  Turnebull  lately  disceased,  I  having
perused  your  Majesties  letter,  whereby  I  am  requested  to
be  a  meane  for  the  recoverie  and  obtaining  of  their
sayd  debts,  I  have  moved  it  to  our  Lord  and  King  his
Majestie,  that  order  may  be  given  therein  :  and  that
his  kinseman  Rainold  Kitchin  with  three  persons  more
may  be  sent  over  together  with the  sayd Turnebulles

435

A.D.
1592.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

stuffe  and  other  things,  as  billes,  books  and  writings.
All  which  shall  be  delivered  to  your  merchants  Agent
and  his  fellowes,  and  in  money  600  rubbles  of  the  sayd
TurnebuUes.

And  touching  your  merchants,  I  will  have  a  great
care  over  them,  and  protect  them,  whereby  they  shall
suffer  no  damages  in  their  trade  :  and  all  kinde  of  trafficke
in  merchandise  shall  be  at  their  libertie.

Written  in  our  Lord  and  Kings  Majesties  royall  citie
of  Mosco,  in  the  yeere  from  the  beginning  of  the  world
7 10 1,  in  the  moneth  of  Januarie.

A  letter  from  the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich  to
the  right  honourable  Lord  William  Burghley,
Lord  high  Treasurer  of  England.

"Y  the  grace  of  God  great  Lord,  King,  and
great  Duke  Theodor  Ivanovich,  governour
of  Russia,  Volodimer,  Mosco,  and  Novo-
grod.  King  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  Lord
of  Vobsco,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensco,
Otver,  Ughory,  Perme,  Viatsky,  Bulgary,
^  and  other  regions.  Lord  and  great  Duke
of  all  Novogrod  in  the  low  countreys,  of  Chernigo,  of
Liffeland,  of  Udorsky,  Obdorsky,  Condinsky,  and  all
the  countrey  of  Sibery,  and  commaunder  of  all  the
North  parts,  and  Lord  over  the  countrey  of  Iversky,
and  King  of  Grusinsky,  and  of  the  countreys  of  Kabar-
dinsky,  Cherchasky,  and  Duke  of  Igorsky,  Lord  and
ruler  of  many  Countreys  more  &c.  His  princely
Majesties  servant.  Lord  and  Master  of  his  horses,  and
high  Steward  of  his  house,  President  of  the  territories  of
Cazan  and  Astracan,  Boris  Pheodorowich  Godonova,  to
the  most  honourable  Counseller  of  the  most  resplendent
mightie  great  Lady  Elizabeth  Queene  of  England,  France,
and  Ireland,  William  Burghley,  Lord,  and  Knight  of  the
Garter,  high  Treasurour  of  England,  sendeth  greeting.
I perceive by  your letter that your merchants  last

436

LETTER  FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d.

1592.
shippes  came  home  in  saftie,  and  that  you  have  received
the  letters  sent  by  them,  by  the  hands  of  Francis  Cherie,  ^-  F'-ands
one from  our Lord  and great King  of  all Russia his ^'^^'
Majesty, unto your Queenes most excellent Majesty,
and one  from me to her Highnesse,  and one from
my  selfe to you  : and the contents thereof  you have
caused to be read and well understood at large.
And whatsoever is therein written concerning  Jerome
Horsey,  you  have  sought  out  the  ground  thereof,  and
that he is in great displeasure. And her Highnesse
hath  written  in  her  letter  concerning  her  Majesties  mer-
chants, that  whereas  I  have  taken  them  into  protection,
she  taketh  it  very  lovingly  and  kindely,  that  for  her  sake
they  have  received  so  great  kindnesse.

And  touching  the  damages  and  hinderances  which  your
merchaunts  have  sustained  by  meanes  of  the  Emperours
authorised  people  and  officers,  and  that  they  were  not
permitted  to  traffike  at  libertie  at  the  Sea  port  in  the
yeere  1589,  for  the  space  of  three  weekes,  it  hath  beene
against  the  Emperours  Majesties  will  and  pleasure,  as
also  against  mine.  Where  you  desire  and  wish  that  [I-  S^S-l
betweene  our  Emperours  Majestic,  and  your  Queenes
Majestie,  their  love  and  amitie  may  not  bee  seperated  at
any  time,  but  to  continue  :  and  you  request  mee  that
I  should  be  good  unto  the  English  merchants,  and  to
defend  them  from  all  such  domages  hereafter  :  your
honours  loving  letter  I  have  therein  throughly  con-
sidered :  and  as  I  have  bene  heretofore,  so  I  will  still
continue  to  be  a  meane  betwixt  our  Lorde  and  kings
Majestie,  and  your  great  Lady  the  Queene  her  highnesse,
for  the  mainteyning  of  brotherly  love  and  amitie,  most
joyfully  and  willingly,  as  God  knoweth,  aswel  hereafter
as  I  have  bene  heretofore  :  praying  you  to  doe  the  like
also.  Mine  onely  desire  is  for  your  most  excellent  Prin-
cesse  sake,  to  do  all  that  lyeth  in  mee  for  the  ayding,
helping  and  protecting  of  her  Majesties  merchants,  by
the  order  and  commaundement  of  our  Lord  and  king
his  Majestie.

437

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1592.

And  to  that  ende,  I  have  given  order  to  all  our
authorised  people  to  bee  carefull  over  them,  and  to
defende  them  in  all  causes,  and  to  give  them  free  libertie
to  trafficke  at  their  owne  willes  and  pleasures.  It  may
bee  that  your  merchants  doe  not  certifie  you  the  trueth
of  all  things,  nor  make  knowen  unto  your  honour  my
readinesse  to  protect  them  :  And  howe  my  Letters
and  Commissions  are  sent  to  all  authorised  people  for
them,  that  they  shoulde  ayde  and  assist  them  according  to
the  tenour  of  my  Letters,  to  all  others  that  bee  in
authoritie  under  the  said  Officers  or  otherwise.

Also  your  honour  writeth  of  the  debarring  of  your
merchants  at  the  Sea  port  from  their  accustomed  libertie
of  enterchangeable  trafficke  and  bartar.  Touching  which
complaint  search  and  inquisition  hath  bene  made,  and
commaundement  given,  that  your  Queenes  Majesties
merchants  at  the  Seaside,  and  in  all  places  where  the
trade  is,  doe  not  sustaine  any  domage  or  hinderance
hereafter,  but  that  they  shalbe  at  libertie  without  any
hindering  or  letting,  either  in  the  Mosco,  the  Treasure-
house,  or  else  where  by  any  of  our  authorised  people,
but  absolutely  to  bee  at  free  libertie  at  their  owne  will
and  pleasure.  And  also  I  will  continue  to  be  their
protectour  and  defendour  in  all  causes,  by  our  Lorde
and  kings  Majesties  order  and  commaundement  :  as  it
shalbe  knowen  and  certified  you  by  your  people  resident
here  in  the  Mosco.
Anno  Domini  Written  in  our  Kings  Majesties  royall  citie  of  Mosco

^59^-  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  7101.  yeere,

in  the  moneth  of  January.

438

LETTER  TO  THE  ENGLISH  MERCHANTS

A.D.

1596.

1

i

A  most  gracious  Letter  given  to  the  English
Merchants  Sir  John  Hart  and  his  company,
by  Theodore  Ivanowich,  the  King,  Lord,  and
great  duke  of  all  Russia,  the  onely  upholder
thereof.

He  onely  God  omnipotent  before  all
eternitie,  his  will  be  done  without  ende  :
the  Father,  Sonne,  and  holy  Ghost  we
glorifie  in  Trinitie.  Our  onely  God  the
maker  of  all  things  and  worker  of  all  in
all  every  where  with  plentifull  increase  :
for  which  cause  he  hath  given  life  to
man  to  love  him,  and  to  trust  in  him  :  Our  onely  God
which  inspireth  every  one  of  us  his  holy  children  with
his  word  to  discerne  good  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  the  holy  quickning  spirit  of  life  now  in  these  perilous
times  establish  us  to  keepe  the  right  scepter,  and  suffer
us  to  reigne  of  our  selves  to  the  good  profit  of  the  land,
and  to  the  subduing  of  the  people  together  with  the
enemies,  and  to  the  mainteinance  of  vertue.

We  the  great  Lord,  king,  and  great  duke  Theodore
Ivanovich,  of  all  Russia  the  onely  upholder,  of  Volo-
dimer,  Mosco,  and  Novogrod,  King  of  Casan,  and  king
of  Astracan,  Lord  of  Vobsco,  and  great  duke  of
Smolensko,  of  Otver,  Ughorie,  Permia,  Viatski,  Bulgari,
and  other  regions,  great  duke  also  of  Novogrod  in  the
lowe  Countrey,  of  Chernigo,  of  Rezan,  Polotski,  Rostove,
Yaruslave,  Bealozero,  and  of  Liefland,  of  Udorski,
Obdorski,  Condenski,  and  commaunder  of  all  the
Countrey  of  Siberi  and  of  the  North  parts,  and  Lord
over  the  Countrey  of  Iverski,  Grusinski,  and  King  over
the  Countrey  of  Igorski,  and  ruler  over  many  other
kingdomes  and  Lordships  more.

Our  princely  Majestie  at  the  request  of  our  brother
in  lawe  Boris  Feodorowich  Godenova  our  servant,  and
Master  of  our  horses,  generall  Comptroller  of  our  house,

439

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

and  governour  of  the  Lordships  and  kingdomes  of  Casan
and  Astracan  :  unto  the  English  merchants  Sir  John
Hart  knight,  sir  William  Webbe  knight,  Richard  Salken-
stow  Alderman,  Nicholas  Moseley  alderman,  Robert
Dove,  Wil.  Garrowe,  John  Harbey,  Robert  Chamberlaine,
Henry  Anderson,  John  Woodworth,  Francis  Cherry,
John  Merrick,  &  Cristopher  Holmes  ;  hath  graciously
given  leave  to  come  &  go  with  their  ships  into  our
kingdome  &  territories  of  Duina  with  all  kind  of
commodities  at  their  pleasures  to  trafficke  from  the
seaside  to  our  roial  city  of  Mosco,  &  in  al  other  cities,
townes,  countries  and  territories  of  our  whole  kingdom

[I.  506.]  of  Mosco  :  upon  the  humble  petition  and  sute  of  the
saide  English  merchants  sir  John  Hart  and  his  company,
wee  have  given  them  leave  to  passe  and  trafficke  into
all  parts  of  our  dominions  and  territories  of  Mosco,  and  to
our  inheritance  of  Novogrod  and  Plesco  with  their  wares
and  commodities  without  paying  any  custome  or  dueties.

We  the  great  Lord,  king,  and  great  duke  Theodore
Ivanovich  of  all  Russia,  have  firmely  given  and  graunted
unto  the  aforesaide  English  merchants  Sir  John  Hart  and
his  company,  for  the  love  we  beare  to  our  deare  sister
Queene  Elizabeth,  we  I  say  of  our  gracious  goodnes
have  given  leave  to  travel  and  passe  to  our  royal  seat
of  Mosco,  and  to  all  the  parts  of  our  kingdome  with  all
kinde  of  commodities,  and  to  trafficke  with  all  kinde
of  wares  at  their  owne  pleasure,  without  paying  any
custome  of  their  said  wares.

To  you  our  Customers  we  wil  and  command  not  to
take  any  maner  of  custome  of  the  said  merchants  and
their  company,  neither  for  entering,  weying  nor  passing
by  or  through  any  place  of  our  territories,  nor  for
custome,  of  judgement  by  Lawe,  or  for  their  person
or  persons  ;  nor  any  duties  over  bridges,  or  for  certificats
or  processes,  or  for  conducting  over  any  streames  or
waters,  or  for  any  other  customes  or  dueties  that  may
be  named  ;  we  wil  and  straitly  commaund  you  not  to
take  any  of  them  in  any  wise.

440

LETTER  TO  THE  ENGLISH  MERCHANTS a.d.

1596.

Provided  alwayes,  that  the  saide  merchants  shall  not
colour  any  strangers  wares,  nor  bring  them  into  our
countrey,  nor  favour  them  colourably,  nor  sel  for  any
stranger.  To  you  our  subjects  also  we  command,  not
to  meddle  or  deale  with  any  wares  of  strangers  colourably,
nor  to  have  them  by  you  in  keeping,  nor  to  offer  to
sel  their  commodities  ;  but  themselves  to  sel  their  owne
commodities  in  change  or  otherwise  as  they  may  or  can.
And  in  al  townes,  cities,  countreys,  or  any  part  of  our
dominions  and  territories  it  shalbe  lawful  for  the  foresaid
merchants  and  their  company  to  sell  or  barter  away  their
owne  commodities  in  change  or  otherwise,  for  or  at  their
pleasure  as  they  will.  And  whensoever  the  said  merchants
or  any  of  them  come  into  our  territories  of  great  Novo-
grod  or  Plesco,  or  to  any  other  parts  of  our  kingdome
with  their  wares,  by  vertue  of  these  our  Majesties  letters
we  straitly  charge  and  command  you  our  Captaines,
generals,  and  all  other  that  be  authorised  or  in  office,
to  suffer  the  aforesaid  merchants  to  passe  and  repasse,
and  to  take  no  kinde  of  custome  or  dutie  of  them,  or
any  of  their  goods,  howsoever  it  may  have  name  :  nor
in  no  place  else  where  they  shal  come  in  all  our  kingdome.
Likewise  if  they  sell  not  nor  buy  no  wares,  you  shall
take  no  custome,  but  suffer  them  quietly  to  passe  where
they  will  with  their  goods.  Of  our  gratious  goodnes
and  meere  goodwill  we  have  given  the  said  merchants
leave  to  trafficke  throughout  all  our  kingdomes,  and  in
all  townes  and  cities  with  all  maner  of  wares  and  com-
modities without  paying  any  custome  or  dutie.  Where-
soever they  shal  happen  to  sel  or  barter  away  any  of
their  commodities  to  our  subjects,  they  are  to  barter  or
sell  by  whole  sale,  and  not  by  retaile,  as  by  the  yard
or  by  the  ounce  in  their  houses  or  elsewhere  :  but  by
the  packe  or  whole  clothes,  velvets,  damasks,  taffaties
by  the  piece,  and  not  by  the  yard  :  and  al  other  wares
that  are  to  be  sold  by  weight,  they  are  to  be  sold  not  by
the  ounce,  but  by  great  sale.  Your  wines  shalbe  solde  by
hogs  heads,  pipes  or  buttes,  but  not  by  quartes  nor  pintes.

441

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1596.

The  said  English  merchants  are  to  sel  or  barter  away
their  owne  commodities  themselves,  and  not  to  suffer
any  Russes  to  buy  or  sell  for  them  :  nor  to  carry  or
transport  any  wares  of  strangers  in  stead  of  their  owne
in  no  wise.  And  if  the  saide  English  merchants  shall
be  desirous  to  sell  any  of  their  commodities  at  Colmogro,
or  upon  the  River  of  Duina,  or  at  Vologhda  or  at  Yera-
slave  ;  when  as  the  saide  merchants  have  solde  in  any  of
the  saide  Townes,  Cities  or  territories,  then  you  our
officers  and  authorised  people  by  vertue  of  this  our
gratious  letter  wee  will  and  straitly  commaund  not  to
take  any  custome  of  the  aforesaid  merchants,  howsoever
it  may  be  named.

Also  whensoever  the  saide  English  merchants  or  any
of  their  factours  shalbe  desirous  to  hire  carriers  to  carry
their  wares  to  any  place  of  our  dominions  or  Cities,  it
shalbe  at  their  choyse  and  pleasure  to  hier  them  the
best  they  can,  and  where  they  will,  either  water  men  to
rowe,  or  vessels.

Also  when  any  of  the  said  merchants  themselves,  or
any  of  theirs  are  desirous  to  travel  into  any  part  of  our
dominions,  or  into  any  other  kingdomes,  or  into  their
owne  kingdome,  if  any  of  our  treasure  be  delivered  to
them,  they  to  take  it  with  them,  and  to  sel  it  in  bartar
or  otherwise  for  such  wares  as  are  most  requisit  and
necessary  to  be  brought  into  our  kingdome  and  to  be
delivered  into  our  treasury.  You,  our  nobilitie,  generals
&  al  others  in  authority  suffer  them  to  passe  through
al  our  cities,  townes  &  countries  without  taking  any
custome  of  them.  And  when  the  said  merchants  have
done  their  traffick  in  any  place  &  come  to  the  Mosco,
they  shal  make  it  knowen  at  their  arrival  at  the  house
of  Chancery  and  secretariship  to  Vasili  Shalkan.  And
further  when  there  come  any  English  merchants  with
their  ships  or  vessels  by  sea,  that  by  mishap  shalbe  cast
away  upon  any  of  our  shoars  or  costes,  we  wil  and
command  you  to  ayde  &  helpe  them,  and  to  seeke
for  their  goods  so  perished  by  any  casualtie,  and  to  be

442

LETTER  TO  THE  ENGLISH  MERCHANTS ad.

1596.

restored  againe  to  the  saide  English  merchants  or  their  [I-  507-]
assignes  without  any  prolonging  or  detayning.  As  also
if  any  of  the  aforesaide  merchants  goods  be  found  in
any  part  of  our  coastes  or  streames  and  they  not  present
themselves,  let  the  said  goods  be  taken  and  layd  up  in
safetie  in  some  place  or  other,  and  be  delivered  to  the
aforesaid  merchants  or  their  factors  under  penaltie  of
our  displeasure.

Furthermore  we  King,  Lord,  and  great  duke  of  all
Russia,  of  our  gracious  goodnesse  give  unto  the  English
merchants  and  their  company,  their  house  in  the  Citie
of  Mosco  lying  hard  by  the  Church  of  S.  Marke  behinde
the  market  place  :  which  they  shall  keepe  and  remaine
therein  after  their  old  accustomed  use.  Provided  alwayes
that  they  shall  keepe  one  Russe  porter  or  one  of  their
owne  people,  &  may  keepe  any  other  Russe  servant  at
their  discretion.  Also  their  houses  in  sundry  places,  as
at  Jeraslave,  Vologhda,  Colmogro,  and  at  S.  Michael
Archangel,  all  these  houses  they  shall  keepe  and  use  at
their  owne  pleasure,  according  to  our  former  letters
patents  without  paying  any  dutie,  rent,  or  custome.
Nor  you  the  communaltie  of  the  said  townes  shal  take
any  thing  of  them  or  theirs  for  any  duetie  that  should
belong  to  you,  especially  of  the  houses  aforesaid  :  but
the  said  English  merchants  shal  enjoy  them  peaceably
for  themselves  and  their  families,  but  shall  not  suffer
any  other  strangers  Russes  or  others  to  use  the  aforesaid
houses  :  Also  you  shall  suffer  them  to  lay  their  wares
and  commodities  in  their  warehouses,  and  to  sell  their
commodities  to  whom  they  please  without  let  or  hinder-
ance,  by  vertue  of  this  our  gratious  letter.

Their  housekeeper  being  a  Russe  shall  not  undertake
to  meddle,  or  sell  any  of  their  wares  without  they  them-
selves be  present,  nor  to  buy  any  thing  for  them.

Also  it  shalbe  lawful!  for  the  said  merchants  when
they  shal  arrive  at  their  port,  to  lade  and  unlade  their
merchandises  as  in  times  past  they  have  done  at  their
pleasure. And  when  they  lade  their  ships  with Russe

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1596.

commodities  or  unlade  them,  it  shalbe  lawful!  for  them
to  hire  any  of  our  subjects  to  helpe  them  for  the
present  time,  and  for  them  to  carry  their  goods  to  and
fro  with  their  owne  vessels  to  S.  Michael  Archangel,  or
elsewhere.

Also  we  command  you  our  authorised  people  at  the
sea  side  as  wel  Customers  as  others  to  take  of  the
foresaid  merchants  a  note,  or  remembrance,  what  goods
they  bring  in  and  ship  out  :  whereby  it  may  be  knowen
what  goods  come  in  and  go  out.  But  in  no  wise  shall
you  open  or  unpacke  any  of  their  wares  or  merchandises.

In  like  maner  when  as  they  ship  or  sende  away  any
of  their  countrey  commodities  from  S.  Michael  Archangel
to  any  other  place,  or  to  our  royall  Citie  of  Mosco  yee
shall  not  hinder  nor  let  them  any  maner  of  wise  for  the
shipping  of  their  merchandises  in  or  out,  by  vertue  of
these  our  gratious  letters  of  priviledge  given  them.

And  whensoever  any  of  the  said  English  merchants
have  any  occasion  to  send  over  land  out  of  our  dominions
into  their  own  countrey  any  of  their  servants  or  factors,
by  vertue  of  this  our  gratious  letter  we  command  you  to
give  them  their  passeport  out  of  the  office  of  our  Secre-
tariship.

And  whensoever  any  of  our  subjects  hath  any  thing
to  do  with  any  of  the  foresaid  merchants  by  way  of
contentions  :  or  that  they  be  damnified  or  hindered  by
any  of  our  subjects  :  then  we  appoint  and  ordeine  our
Chanceller  and  Secretary  Vasili  Shalcan  to  heare  their
causes,  and  finally  to  determine  on  both  sides  according
to  equitie  and  justice  :  and  that  he  shall  search  the
trueth  betweene  both  parties.

And  when  the  trueth  cannot  be  proved  or  found  out,
then  to  cast  lots  by  order  of  the  foresaide  Judge,  and  he
to  whom  the  lot  shall  fall  to  take  his  othe.

Furthermore  whensoever  any  of  the  English  mer-
chants or  their  factors  shall  come  into  any  parts  of  our
dominions  or  Cities,  and  shalbe  wronged  any  kinde  of
wayes  in  trading,  or  otherwise  by  any  abused,  or have

444

THOMAS SIMKINSON'S COMMISSION  ad.

1586.
any  occasion  of  contention  with  any  by  way  of  trade  in
merchandise  or  otherwayes  :  we  straightly  charge  and
commaund  you  our  governours,  and  authorised  subjects
within  all  our  Realme  and  territories  of  the  same,  to
minister  justice  unto  the  aforesaide  merchants,  or  to
their  deputies,  and  to  search  the  trueth  of  the  contention  :
And  for  want  of  sufficient  proofe  cast  lots  who  shall
take  his  oath  for  the  more  ready  triall  of  the  cause  :
And  in  no  wise  to  take  any  fee  or  duetie  of  the  aforesaid
English  merchants  for  the  said  judgement  in  Lawe.

We  wil  and  commaund  all  this  to  be  observed  and
kept  in  all  parts  of  our  dominions  by  all  our  subjects  and
authorised  people,  by  vertue  of  these  our  royal  letters
patents  :  And  the  said  letters  not  to  be  diminished  in
any  part  or  parsell  thereof,  by  any  persons  howsoever
they  be  named.  And  whosoever  shall  withstand  &  not
regard  these  our  gracious  letters  shalbe  in  our  high
displeasure,  and  shal  incurre  the  losse  of  his  life.  This
our  gracious  letter  was  given  in  our  kingdom  and  royal
City  of  Mosco,  in  the  yere  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  7104.  in  the  moneth  of  May.  After  our

Subscribed  by  the  Emperours  Chancellour
and  Secretarie  Vasili  Shalcan.

accompii  596.

The contents of  M. Garlands Commission unto  [i-  508.]
Thomas Simkinson for the bringing of  M.
John Dee to the Emperour of Russia his
Court.

IRiend  Thomas  Simkinson  I  pray  you
goe  to  Brounswik  or  Cassil  and  inquire
if  Master  John  Dee  be  there  or  where
he  is,  and  when  you  finde  him,  certifie
him  howe  that  I  have  sent  you  purposely
to  knowe  where  hee  doeth  remaine,  and
at  your  returne  I  will  come  and  speake
with  him  my  selfe.  Also  you  may  certefie  him  that
the  Emperour  of  Russeland  having  certaine  knowledge

445

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

of  his  great  learning  and  wisdome  is  marveilous  desirous
of  him  to  come  into  his  Countrey.  And  hath  given  me
his  letter  with  his  hand  and  golden  seale  at  it  for  to
bring  him  into  the  Countrey  with  mee  if  it  be  possible,
and  for  his  living  shewe  him  that  he  shall  be  sure  of
2000.  pound  yeerely,  and  also  all  provision  for  his  table
out  of  the  Emperours  kitchin  free  :  and  if  he  thinke
this  too  little,  I  will  assure  him  that  if  he  aske  asmuch
more,  hee  shall  have  it,  and  for  his  charges  into  the
Countrey,  I  have  sufficient  of  the  Emperours  allowance
to  bring  him  and  all  his  royally  into  the  Countrey.
And  because  hee  may  doubt  of  these  proffers,  hee  shall
remaine  at  the  borders  untill  the  Emperour  be  certified
of  him,  and  of  his  requests,  which  he  would  have.  And
I  am  sure  he  shall  be  conveyed  through  the  land  with
five  hundred  horses,  and  hee  shalbe  accompted  as  one
of  the  chiefest  in  the  land  next  the  Emperour.  Also
shew  him  howe  that  my  Lord  Protectour  at  my
comming  away  did  take  me  in  his  armes,  and  desired
me  as  hee  should  be  my  friend  to  bring  him  with  me,
and  he  would  give  him  of  his  owne  purse  yeerely  1000.
rubbles  besides  the  Emperours  allowance.  All  these
foresaide  grauntes  and  demaunds  doe  I  Thomas  Simkinson
acknowledge  to  be  spoken  by  Edward  Garland  to  mee,
and  to  be  sent  to  declare  the  same  unto  Master  John
Dee.  And  in  witnesse  that  this  is  of  a  trueth  I  have
written  the  same  with  my  owne  hand,  and  thereunto  set
my  name,  in  Wittingaw,  otherwise  called  Trebona,  the
18.  of  September,  Anno 1586.

By  me  Thomas  Simkinson  of  Hull.

446

LETTER TO MASTER  JOHN DEE  ad.

1586.

A  letter  to  the  right  worshipfull  M.  John  Dee
Esquire,  conteyning  the  summe  and  effect  of
M.  Edward  Garland  his  message,  delivered  to
Master  Dee  himselfe,  (Letterwise)  for  a  more
perfect  memoriall  thereof. Anno 1586.

Ight  worshipfull,  it  may  please  you  to
understand,  that  I  was  sent  unto  you
from  the  most  mightie  Prince  Feodor
Ivanowich,  Lord,  Emperour  and  great
duke  of  Russia,  &c.  As  also  from  the
most  excellent  prince  Boris  Feodorowich,
Lord  Protector  of  Russia  :  to  give  your
worship  to  understand  the  great  good  will  and  heartie
desire  they  beare  unto  you  ;  for  that  of  long  time  they
have  had  great  good  report  of  your  learning  &  wisedom,
as  also  of  your  good  counsel  unto  Princes  :  whereupon
his  Majesties  most  earnest  desire  and  request  is  unto
you  ;  that  you  would  take  the  paines  to  come  unto  his
Citie  of  Mosco,  to  visite  his  Majesties  Court  :  for  that
hee  is  desirous  of  your  company,  and  also  of  your
good  counsell  in  divers  matters  that  his  Majestie  shall
thinke  needfull.  And  for  the  great  goodwill  that  his
Majestie  beareth  unto  you,  he  will  give  you  yeerely
toward  your  mainteinance  2000.  pound  starling ;  and
the  Lord  Protectour  will  give  you  a  thousand  rubbles,  as
also  your  provision  for  your  table  you  shall  have  free
out  of  his  Majesties  kitchin  :  And  further  whatsoever
you  shall  thinke  needefull  or  convenient  for  you,  in  any
part  or  parts  of  his  dominion,  it  shall  be  at  your  worships
commaundement.  And  this  is  the  summe  and  effect  of
my  message  and  commandement  given  me  by  his  Majestie
and  the  Lord  Protectour.

In  witnesse  whereof  I  have  written  this  with  my  owne
hand,  the 17.  of  December  1586.

By  me  Edward  Garland.
In Trebona Castel otherwise called Wittingaw in

447

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

Boemia  :  to  which  place  this  M.  Edward  Garland  came
to  M.  Dee  with  two  Moscovites  to  serve  him,  &c.  He
had  sixe  more,  which  by  M.  Dees  counsell  were  sent
backe.
Witnesse  M.  Edward  Kelley,  and  M.  Francis  Garland,
brother  to  the  foresaid  Edward,  and  divers  others.

IT  seemeth  that  this  princely  offer  of  the  Emperour
Pheodor  Ivanowich,  and  of  the  L.  Boris  Pheodorowich
Protectour  to  his  Majestie,  was  made  unto  the  learned
and  famous  Mathematitian  M.  John  Dee,  partly  to
use  his  counsell  &  direction  about  certaine  discoveries
to  the  Northeast  ;  and  partly  for  some  other  weighty
occasions  :  but  because  their  conquest  to  Siberia  was
not  as  then  fully  settled,  &  for  divers  other  secret
reasons,  it  was  for  y'  time  with  al  thankfulnes  refused.

[I.  509.]  A  branch  of  a  letter  from  M.  John  Merick,
Agent  unto  the  Moscovie  company  in  Russia,
closed  up  in  the  Mosco  the  14.  of  March,
Anno  1597.  touching  the  death  of  Pheodor
Ivanov^ich  late  Emperour  of  all  Russia,  &c.

Aving  thus  farre  proceeded  with  this  my
answere  unto  the  chiefest  points  of  your
worships  letters  received, my  desire  was
to have sent  one  unto  you  long  since,
as  you may  perceive  by  II  the  first  date  :
but by reason I could  not  get  leave, I
have deferred  it of  till  this  instant, for
that  there  was  none  suffered  to  passe  out of  the  land.
The causes  may  be  judged,  for  that  it  pleased God  to
call  out  of  this  world,  the  Emperour  his  Majestie,  who
departed  about  the 7.  of  January :  and  ever  since  hath
bene a mourning time, & no suites for any matter
could be  heard. But  it  hath  bene  a  very  dead  season.
Yet (thankes be to God) through the wise govern-
ment of  Lord Boris  Pheodorowich  the  Lord  Protector

448

JOHN MERICK'S LETTER  ad

1597-
unto  the  saide  late  Emperour,  since  his  death  all  things
have  bene  very  quiet  without  any  dissention  ;  as  the
like  in  such  a  great  kingdome  I  have  not  heard  of.  And
now  through  the  providence  of  Almightie  God,  and
by  surrender  of  the  late  Empresse  Irenia  Feodoruna,
and  the  common  consent  of  the  Patriarch,  Nobles,
Bishops,  and  the  whole  Cleargie,  with  the  whole
Commons  besides,  choise  is  made  of  none  other  but
of  the  said  Lord  Protector,  L.  Boris  Pheodorowich  to  Prince  Boris
be  Emperour,  and  great  duke  of  all  Russia,  who  was  f^^^^^''^^^^^
most  unwilling  to  receive  the  kingdome,  but  the  people  consent  chosen
would  make  no  other  choise,  nor  have  any  other.  So  Emperour  of
that  with  much  adoe  and  entreatie,  it  hath  pleased  his  Russia.
Majestie  to  take  upon  him  the  kingdome,  and  he  is
absolute  Emperor  to  him  and  his  heires.  And  certainly
God  hath  done  much  for  this  Countrey,  and  hath  made
the  people  greatly  happy,  in  that  he  hath  provided
and  appointed  so  famous  and  worthy  a  Prince  :  whose
excellent  government  and  experience  these  foureteene
yeeres  hath  bene  manifest  to  all  Russia.  God  graunt
his  highnesse  a  most  prosperous  and  long  raigne,  with
his  Lady  the  Empresse,  the  Prince  his  sonne,  and
the  Princesse  his  daughter.  All  men  do  rejoyce  both
Russe  and  strangers  for  this  most  famous  Emperour.
The  Coronation  is  thought  shalbe  on  the  Assension
day  next,  til  which  time  I  cannot  depart  from  Mosco  :
which  is  a  litle  before  the  time  that  ordinarily  I  doe
take  my  journey  from  hence.  And  touching  his
Majesties  favour  towards  me  on  your  behalfe,  especially
for  her  Majesties  sake,  as  in  foretime  it  was  extra-
ordinary, and  so  specially  shewed  to  mee,  as  to  none
the  like  :  so  hath  his  highnesse  promised  the  continu-
ance thereof,  with  further  favour  as  shalbe  desired.
Whereof  I  have  no  doubt  :  for  dayly  I  do  finde  the
same.

[A  learned

III  449

A.D.
I581.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  learned  Epistle  written  1581.  unto  the  famous
Cosmographer  M.  Gerardus  Mercator  con-
cerning the  river  Pechora,  Naramsay,  Cara
reca,  the  mighty  river  of  Ob,  the  place  of
Yaks  Olgush  in  Siberia,  the  great  river
Ardoh,  the  lake  of  Kittay  called  of  the
borderers  Paraha,  the  Countrey  of  Carrah
Colmak,  giving  good  light  to  the  discovery
of  the  Northeast  passage  to  Cathay,  China
and  the  Malucaes.

U  Inclyto  &  celebri  Gerardo  Mercatori,  domino
&  amico  singulari  in  manus  proprias  Duis-
burgi  in  Clivia.

Um  meminissem,  amice  optime,  quanta,
cum  una  ageremus,  delectatione  affi-
cerere  in  legendis  Geographicis  scriptis
Homeri,  Strabonis,  Aristotelis,  Plinii,
Dionis  &  reliquorum,  laetatus  sum  eo
quod  incidissem  in  hunc  nuncium,  qui
tibi  has  literas  tradit,  quem  tibi  com-
mendatum  esse  valde  cupio,  quique  dudum  Arusburgi
hie  ad  Ossellam  fluvium  appulit.  Hominis  experientia,
ut  mihi  quidem  videtur,  multum  te  adjuverit  in  re
una,  eaque  summis  a  te  votis  expetita,  &  magnopere
elaborata,  de  qua  tam  varie  inter  se  dissentiunt  Cos-
mographi  recentiores  ;  patefactione  nimirum  ingentis
illius  Promontorii  Tabin,  celebrisque  illius  &  opulentae
regionis  sub  Cathayorum  rege  per  Oceanum  ad  Orientem
brumalem.  Alferius  is  est  natione  Belga,  qui  captivus
aliquot  annos  vixit  in  Moscovitarum  ditione,  apud  vires
illic  celeberrimos  Yacovium  &  Unekium  ;  a  quibus
Antuerpiam  missus  est  accersitum  homines  rei  nauticae
peritos,  qui  satis  ample  prepesite  praemie  ad  illos  vires
se recipiant  ; qui Sueve artifice duas ad earn patefac-

450

LETTER TO GERARDUS MERCATOR  ad.

1581.

tionem  naves  aedificarunt  in  Duina  fluvio. Ut  ille  rem Du^e  naves
proponit, quamquam sine arte, apposite tamen, 8z: ut  ^dijjcatce  in
satis  intelligas,  quod quaeso  diligenter  perpendas,  aditus  ^j^Tf  f/_°
ad  Cathayam  per  Orientem  proculdubio  brevissimus  est  tionem  Orien-
&  admodum  expeditus. Adiit  ipse  fluvium  Obam  turn  talem.
terra per Samoedorum & Sibericorum regionem, turn
mari per littus Pechoras fluminis ad Orientem. Hac
experientia confirmatus certo apud se statuit navim
mercibus  onustam,  cujus  carinam  non  nimium  profunde
demissam  esse vult,  in Sinum S.  Nicolai conducere in
regione Moscovitarum, instructam illam quidem  rebus
omnibus ad eam patefactionem necessariis, atque illic  [I.  510.]
redintegrato  commeatu, Moscoviticae  nationis  notissimos
justa mercede asciscere  : qui & Samoedicam linguam
pulchre  teneant,  &  fluvium  Ob  exploratum  habeant,  ut
qui quotannis ea loca  ventitant. Unde Maio exeunte
constituit  pergere  ad  Orientem  per  continentem  Ugoriae
ad Orientales partes Pechorae,  Insulamque cui nomen
est Dolgoia. Hie latitudines observare, terram des-  Dolgoia Insula.
cribere, bolidem demittere, locorumque ac punctorum
distantias  annotare,  ubi  &  quoties licebit. Et quoniam
Pechorae Sinus vel euntibus vel redeuntibus commo-
dissimus  est turn subsidii tum diversorii locus propter
glaciem & tempestates, diem impendere decrevit cog-
noscendis  vadis,  facillimoque  navium  aditu  inveniendo  :
quo loco antehac aquarum altitudinem duntaxat ad
quinque pedes invenit, sed profundiores canales esse
non dubitat  : deinde per eos fines pergere ad tria
quatuorve milliaria  nautica,  relicta Insula  quam  Vaigats  Insula  Vai-
vocant,  media fere  via  inter Ugoriam  & Novam  Zem-  ^'^^^'
blam  : tum Sinum quendam praeterire inter Vaigats  ^'^^^J  ^^^^^
atque Obam,  qui per Meridiem vergens  _  pertingit ad  ^olfmvngens
terram Ugorise, in quem confluunt exigui duo amnes  pg,.  meridiem.
II  Marmesia atque Carah, ad quos amnes gens alia  \\Fel  Naram-
Samoedorum  accolit  immanis  &  efFerata. Multa in eo  ^^y  ^  ^^^'^
tractu  loca  vadosa,  multas  cataractas  invenit  ;  sed  tamen  '^^'^"
per  quas  possit Navigari. Ubi  ad fluvium Obam  per-
ventum  fuerit,  qui  quidem  fluvius  (ut  referunt  Samoedi)

45 1

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

septuaginta  habet  ostia,  quae  propter  ingentem  latitudinem

multas magnasque concludentem Insulas, quas varii

incolunt  populi,  vix  quisquam  animadvertat,  ne  temporis

nimium  impendat,  constituit  ad  summum  tria  quatuorve

tentare ora, ea prasserim quae ex consilio Incolarum,

quos in itinere aliquot habiturus est, commodissima

videbuntur, triaque quatuorve ejus regionis navigiola

Littus  Obce tentandis Ostiis adhibere, quam fieri potest ad littus

mcohtur  ab proxime,  (quod  quidem  sub  itinere  trium  dierum  incoli-

dierumitinere.  ^^^)  ^^  4^°  ^°^°  tutissime  navigari  possit,  mtelligat.

Quod si navim per fluvium Obam adverso amne

possit impellere, prima si poterit cataracta, eaque, ut

verisimile  est,  commodissima,  ad  eumque  locum  appellere,

quem  aliquando ipse  cum  suis  aliquot per Sibericorum

regionem  terra  adiit,  qui  duodecim  juxta  dierum  itinere

distat a Mari, qua influit in mare flumen Ob, qui

locus est in continente, prope fluvium Ob cui nomen

Yaks  Olgush est  Yaks  Olgush,  nomine  mutuato  ab illo  magno  Pro-

locm  super fluente  flumini  Ob  illabente,  tum  certe  speraret  maximas

ium^duoT'dm ^^  difficultates  superasse. Referunt  enim  illic  populares,

dierum  itinere  qui trium duntaxat dierum navigatione ab eo loco

a  mari.  abfuerunt (quod illic rarum est, eo quod multi ad

unum duntaxat diem cymbas pelliceas a littore pro-

pellentes oborta tempestate perierunt, cum neque a

sole neque a syderibus rectionem scirent petere) per

transversum fluminis Ob, unde spaciosum esse illius

latitudinem  constat,  grandes  se  carinas  praeciosis  onustas

mercibus  magno fluvio  delatas  vidisse  per  Nigros,  puta

Ardoh  flumen  ^thiopes. Eum  fluvium  Ardoh  illi  vocant,  qui  influit

influensin -^^ kcum Kittavum, quem Paraha illi nominant, cui
lacum  Kit-  .  •' ^ .7, , . . , ^  ,  r^ \

tha-im :  de  guQ  contermma est gens ilia latissime rusa, quam L-arrah

in  itinere  ad Colmak appellant,  non  alia certe quam Cathaya. Illic,

■tghariam si necessitas postulabit, opportunum erit hybernare, se

scnbtt  An- suosque reficere, resque omnes necessarias conquirere.

sonns  Quod si acciderit, non dubitat interim plurimum se

adjutum  iri,  plura  illic  quaerentem  atque  ediscentem.
Veruntamen  sperat  asstate  eadem  ad  Cathayorum  fines
se perventurum,  nisi ingenti glaciei mole ad os fluvii

452

LETTER  TO  GERARDUS  MERCATOR ad.

1581.
Obas  impediatur,  quae  major  interdum,  interdum  minor
est.  Turn  per  Pechoram  redire  statuit,  atque  illic
hybernare  :  vel  si  id  non  poterit,  in  flumen  Duinae,
quo  mature  satis  pertinget,  atque  ita  primo  vere  proximo
in  itinere  progredi.  Unum  est  quod  suo  loco  oblitus
sum.  Qui  locum  ilium  Yaks  Olgush  incolunt,  a
majoribus  suis  olim  praedicatum  asserunt,  se  in  lacu
Kitthayo  dulcissimam  campanarum  harmoniam  audivisse,
atque  ampla  aedificia  conspexisse  :  Et  cum  gentis  Carrah  Carrah  Col-
Colmak  mentionem  faciunt  (Cathaya  ilia  est)  ab  imo  ^^^
pectore  suspiria  repetunt,  manibusque  projectis  suspiciunt
in  coelum,  velut  insignem  illius  splendorem  innuentes
atque  admirantes.  Utinam  Alferius  hie  Cosmographiam
melius  saperet,  multum  ad  illius  usum  adjungeret,  qui
sane  plurimus  est.  Multa  praetereo,  vir  amicissime,
ipsumque  hominem  te  audire  cupio,  qui  mihi  spospondit
se  in  itinere  Duisburgi  te  visurum.  Avet  enim  tecum
conferre  sermones,  &  procul  dubio  hominem  multum
adjuveris.  Satis  instructus  videtur  pecunia  &  gratia,  in
quibus  aliisque  officiis  amicitias  feci  illi,  si  vellet,  mei
copiam.  Deus  Optimus  maximus  hominis  votis  atque
alacritati  faveat,  initia  secundet,  successus  fortunet,
exitum  foelicissimum  concedat.  Vale  amice  ac  Domine
singularis.
Arusburgi  ad  Ossellam  fluvium  20. Februarii 1581.

Tuus  quantus  quantus  sum
Joannes  Balakus.

To the famous and renowmed Gerardus Mer-  [I.  s^i-]
cator, his Reverend and singular friend at
Duisburgh  in  Cliveland,  these  be  delivered.

C Ailing  to  remembrance  (most  deare  Friend)  what
exceeding  delight  you  tooke  at  our  being  together,
in  reading  the  Geograph-'^all  writings  of  Homer,  Strabo,
Aristotle,  Plinie,  Dion,  and  the  rest,  I  rejoyced  not  a
little  that  I  happened  upon  such  a  messenger  as  the
bearer  of  these  presents, (whom  I  do  especially  recom-

453

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

mend  unto  you)  who  arrived  lately  here  at  Arusburg
upon  the  river  of  Osella.  This  mans  experience  (as
I  am  of  opinion)  will  greatly  availe  you  to  the  knowledge
of  a  certaine  matter  which  hath  bene  by  you  so  vehe-
mently desired,  and  so  curiously  laboured  for,  and
concerning  the  which  the  late  Cosmographers  do  hold
such  varietie  of  opinions  :  namely,  of  the  discoverie  of
the  huge  promontorie  of  Tabin,  and  of  the  famous
and  rich  countreys  subject  unto  the  Emperor  of  Cathay,
and  that  by  the  Northeast  Ocean  sea.  The  man  is
*  Or  Oliver,  called  *  Alferius  being  by  birth  a  Netherlander,  who
for  certaine  yeeres  lived  captive  in  the  dominions  of
Russia  under  two  famous  men  Yacovius  and  Unekius,
by  whom  he  was  sent  to  Antwerp  to  procure  skilfull
Pilots  and  Mariners,  (by  propounding  liberall  rewards)
to  go  unto  the  two  famous  personages  aforesayd,  which
Two  ships  two  had  set  a  Sweden  Shipwright  on  worke  to  build  two
built  upon  the  ghips  for  the  same  discoverie  upon  the  river  of  Dwina.
^Dwina  for  '^^^  passage  unto  Cathay  by  the  Northeast  (as  he  de-
the  Northeast  clareth  the  matter,  albeit  without  arte,  yet  very  aptly,
discoverie.  as  you  may  well  perceive,  which  I  request  you  diligently
to  consider)  is  without  doubt  very  short  and  easie.  This
very  man  himselfe  hath  travelled  to  the  river  of  Ob,
both  by  land,  through  the  countreys  of  the  Samoeds,  and
of  Sibier,  and  also  by  Sea,  along  the  coast  of  the  river
Pechora  Eastward.  Being  encouraged  by  this  his  ex-
perience he  is  fully  resolved  with  himselfe  to  conduct  a
Barke  laden  with  merchandize  (the  keele  whereof  hee
will  not  have  to  drawe  over  much  water)  to  the  Bale
of  Saint  Nicholas  in  Russia,  being  furnished  with  all
things  expedient  for  such  a  discoverie,  and  with  a  new
supply  of  victuals  at  his  arrivall  there,  and  also  to  hire
into  his  companie  certaine  Russes  best  knowen  unto
himselfe,  who  can  perfectly  speake  the  Samoeds  language,
and  are  acquainted  with  the  river  of  Ob,  as  having
frequented  those  places  yeere  by  yeere.

Whereupon  about  the  ende  of  May  hee  is  determined
to  saile  from the  Baie  of  S.  Nicholas  Eastward,  by  the

454

LETTER TO GERARDUS MERCATOR  ad.

1581.

maine of  Joughoria,  and so to the Easterly parts of
Pechora,  &  to  the  Island  which  is  called  Dolgoia. And  T^^e  l^^^nd  of
here also hee is purposed to observe the latitudes,  to  ^"'■SP^^-
survey  and describe the countrey, to sound  the depth
of  the  Sea,  and to  note  the distances of  places,  where,
and  so  oft  as  occasion  shall  be  offered. And  forasmuch
as  the  Baie  of  Pechora  is  a  most  convenient  place  both
for harbour  and  victuall,  as  well in their  going  foorth
as  in  their  returne  home  in  regard  of  Ice  and  tempest,
he  is  determined  to  bestow  a  day  in  sounding  the  Flats,
and in searching  out the best enterance  for  ships : in
which  place  heretofore  he  found  the  water  to  be  but  five
foote  deepe,  howbeit  he  doubteth  not  but  that  there  are
deeper  chanels : and then hee  intendeth  to proceed on
along  those  coasts  for  the  space  of  three  or  foure  leagues,
leaving  the  Island called  Vaigats  almost in the middle  ^^f  l^^^^md  of
way  betweene  Ugoria  and  Nova Zembla :  then also to ^^.?'^^-f-
passe  by  a  certaine  Baie  betweene  Vaigats  and  Ob,  trend-  ^  ^^'^^  ^^-_
ing Southerly  into  the land of  Ugoria,  whereinto fall ^ nd  Ob
two  small  rivers  called  *Marmesia  and  Carah,  upon  the  trending
which  rivers  doe  inhabite  an  other  barbarous  and  savage  Southerly.
nation  of  the  Samoeds. He  found  many  Flats  in  that  *Or,Naram-
tract  of  land,  and  many  cataracts or  overfals of  water,  ^-^  ^^ ^^^
yet  such  as  hee  was  able  to  saile  by. When hee shall
come  to  the  river  of  Ob,  which river  (as  the  Samoeds
report)  hath  seventie  mouthes,  which by  reason  of  the
huge  breadth  thereof  containing  many  and  great  Islands,
which are inhabited  with sundry  sortes of  people, no
man  scarcely  can  well  discover,  because  he  will  not  spend
too  much  time,  he purposeth to search three or foure
at  the  most  of  the  mouthes  thereof,  those  chiefly  which
shall be thought most commodious by the advise of
the  inhabitants,  of  whom  hee  meaneth  to  have  certaine
with him in his  voyage,  and meaneth to employ  three
or foure boates of  that Countrey in search of  these
mouthes,  as  neere  as  possibly  he  can  to  the  shore,  which
within  three  dayes  journey  of  the  Sea  is  inhabited,  that
he  may  learne  where the river  is  best  navigable. If  it

455

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581.

The  place  up-  so  fall  out  that  he  may  sayle  up  the  river  Ob  against
o/^^  r^^'^  ^^  streame,  and  mount  up  to  that  place  which  heretofore
was  but  12  accompanied  with  certaine  of  his  friends,  he  passed  unto
da-jes  journey  by  land  through  the  countrey  of  Siberia  which  is  about
from  ye  twelve  dayes  journey  from  the  Sea,  where  the  river  Ob

mouthes  there-  f^Heth  into  the  Sea,  which  place  is  in  the  Continent  neere
called  Taks  ^^^  river  Ob,  and  is  called  Yaks  Olgush,  borowing  his
Ol^sh.  name  from  that  mightie  river  which  falleth  into  the  river

Ob,  then  doubtlesse  hee  would  conceive  full hope  that
hee had  passed  the greatest difficulties :  for the people
dwelling  thereabout  report,  which  were  three  dayes  sayl-
[I.  512.] ing  onely  from  that  place  beyond  the  river  Ob,  whereby
the bredth thereof  may  be gathered (which is a rare
matter  there,  because  that  many  rowing  with  their  boates
of leather one dayes journey onely from the shore,
have  bene  cast  away  in  tempest,  having  no  skill  to  guide
themselves  neither  by  Sunne  nor  Starre)  that  they  have
seene great  vessels laden with rich and precious mer-
chandize brought downe that  great  river by blacke or
M.  Jenkinson swart  people. They  call  that  river  *Ardoh,  which  falleth
tn  kts  voyage j^^^  ^^^  ^^y.^  ^^  j^-^ ^^^^^  ^^ ^^jj  Paraha,  where-
io  Boghar  , , , ,  •'.'  , , •'  .  ,  ' , ,

speaketh  of  the  upon  bordereth  that  mighty  and  large  nation  which  they

river  Jrdok.  call  Carrah  Colmak,  which  is  none  other  then  the  nation
of  Cathay.  There,  if  neede  require,  he  may  fitly  Winter
and  refresh  himselfe  and  his,  and  seeke  all  things  which
he  shall  stand  in  need  of:  which  if  it  so  fall  out,  he
doubteth  not  but  in  the  meane  while  he  shall  be  much
furthered  in  searching  and  learning  out  many  things  in
that  place.  Howbeit,  he  hopeth  that  hee  shall  reach
to  Cathaya  that  very  Sommer,  unlesse  he  be  hindered
by  great  abundance  of  Ice  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  of
Ob,  which  is  sometimes  more,  and  sometimes  lesse.  If
it  so  fall  out,  hee  then  purposeth  to  returne  to  Pechora,
and  there  to  Winter :  or  if  he  cannot  doe  so  neither,
then  hee  meaneth  to  returne  to  the  river  of  Dwina,
whither  he  will  reach  in  good  time  enough,  and  so  the
next  Spring  following  to  proceed  on  his  voyage.  One
thing  in  due  place  I forgate  before.

456

LETTER TO GERARDUS MERCATOR  ad.

1581.
The  people  which  dwell  at  that  place  called  Yaks
Olgush,  affirme  that  they  have  heard  their  forefathers
say,  that  they  have  heard  most  sweete  harmonic  of  bels
in  the  lake  of  Kitthay,  and  that  they  have  seene  therein
stately  and  large  buildings  :  and  when  they  make  mention
of  the  people  named  Carrah  Colraak  (this  countrey  is
Cathay)  they  fetch  deepe  sighes,  and  holding  up  their
hands,  they  looke  up  to  heaven,  signifying  as  it  were,
and  declaring  the  notable  glory  and  magnificence  of  that
nation.  I  would  this  Oliver  were  better  seene  in  Cos-
mographie,  it  would  greatly  further  his  experience,
which  doubtlesse  is  very  great.  Most  deare  friend,  I
omit  many  things,  and  I  wish  you  should  heare  the  man
himselfe  which  promised  mee  faithfully  that  he  would
visite  you  in  his  way  at  Duisburg,  for  he  desireth  to
conferre  with  you,  and  doubtlesse  you  shall  very  much
further  the  man.  He  seemeth  sufficiently  furnished
with  money  and  friends,  wherein  and  in  other  offices
of  curtesie  1  offered  him  my  furtherance  if  it  had  pleased
him  to  have  used  me.  The  Lord  prosper  the  mans
desires  and  forwardnesse,  blesse  his  good  beginnings,
further  his  proceedings,  and  grant  unto  him  most  happy
issue.  Fare  you  well  good  sir  and  my  singular  friend.
From  Arusburg  upon  the  river  of  Ossella,  the  20.  of
February, 1581.

Yours  wholy  at  commandement,

John  Balak.

M Aster  Anthonie  Jenkinson  in  a  disputation  before
her  Majestie  with  sir  Humfrey  Gilbert  for  proofe
of  a  passage  by  the  Northeast  to  Cathaya,  among  other
things  alleageth  this  :  videlicet,  that  there  came  a  con-
tinuall  streame  or  currant  through  Mare  glaciale,  of  such
swiftnesse  as  a  Colmak  told  him,  that  if  you  cast  any
thing  therein,  it  would  presently  be  caried  out  of  sight
towards  the  West,  &c.

[A  testimonie

457

A.D.

1557-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  testimonie  of  the  Northeasterne  Discoverie
made  by  the  EngHsh,  and  of  the  profite  that
may  arise  by  pursuing  the  same:  taken  out
of  the  second  volume  of  Navigations  and
Voyages,  fol.  17.  of  the  notable  Cosmographer,
M.  John  Baptista  Ramusius,  Secretarie  to  the
State  of  Venice :  Written  in  Italian  in  the
yeere,  1557.

Alia  parte  poi  di  sotto  la  nostra  Tramon-
tana,  che  chiascuno  scrittore  &  Cosmo-
grapho  di  questi  &  de  passati  tempi
fin'  hora  vi  ha  messo  &  mette  mare
congelato,  &  che  la  terra  corra  continua-
mente  fine  a  90.  gradi  verso  il  Polo :
sopra  questo  mappa-mondo  all'  incontro
si  vede  che  la  terra  va  solamente  un  poco  sopra  la
Noruega  &  Suetia,  &  voltando  corre  poi  Greco  &
Levante  nel  paese  della  Moscovia  &  Rossia,  &  va  diritto
al  Cataio.  Et  che  cio  sia  la  verita,  le  navigation!  che
hanno  fatte  gl'  Inglesi  con  le  loro  navi,  volendo  andare
a  scoprire  il  Cataio  al  tempo  del  Re  Odoardo  Sesto
d'Inghilterra,  questi  anni  passati,  ne  possono  far  vera
testimonianza :  perche  nel  mezzo  del  loro  viaggio,
capitate  per  fortuna  a  i  liti  di  Moscovia,  dove  trovarona
air  hora  regnare  Giovanni  Vasilivich  Imperatore  della
Rossia  &  gran  Duca  di  Moscovia,  il  quale  con  molto
piacere  &  maraviglia  vedutogli,  fece  grandissime  carezze,
hanno  trovato  quel  mare  essere  navigabile,  &  non
agghiacciato.  La  qual  navigatione  (ancor  che  con  I'esito
fin  hora  non  sia  stata  bene  intesa)  se  col  spesso  fre-
quentarla  &  col  lungo  uso  &  cognitione  de  que'  mari
[I.  513.]  si  continuera,  e  per  fare  grandissima  mutatione  &  rivol-
gimento  nelle  cose  di  questa  nostra  parte  del  mondo.

458

A TESTIMONY FROM RAMUSIUS  a.d.

1557-

The  same  in  English.

Moreover  (having  before  spoken  of  divers  particu-
larities, in  an  excellent  Map  of  Paulus  Venetus)
on  that  part  subject  to  our  North  pole,  where  every
writer  and  Cosmographer  of  these  and  of  former  times
hitherto,  have,  and  doe  place  the  frozen  Sea,  and  that
the  land  stretcheth  continually  to  90.  degrees,  towards
the  pole  :  contrarywise,  in  this  mappe  is  to  bee  seene,
that  the  land  extendeth  onely  a  litle  above  Norway  and
Swethland,  and  then  turning  it  selfe  trendeth  afterwards
towards  the  Southeast  and  by  East,  unto  the  countrey
of  Moscovie  and  Russia,  and  stretcheth  directly  unto
Cathay.  And  that  this  is  true,  the  navigations  which
the  English  men  have  of  late  made,  intending  to  discover
Cathay,  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  sixt,  king  of  England,
are  very  sufficient  witnesses.  For  in  the  mids  of  their
voiage,  lighting  by  chance  upon  the  coast  of  Moscovie
(where  they  found  then  reigning  John  Vasiliwich  Em-
peror of  Russia,  and  great  duke  of  Moscovia,  who
after  he  had,  to  his  great  delight  and  admiration,  seene
the  English  men,  entertained  them  with  exceeding  great
curtesies)  found  this  sea  to  be  navigable,  and  not  frozen.

Which navigation to Cathay, although  it be not as T^^  &'^^(
yet throughly knowen, yet if  with often frequenting  jVor/i^^j/m
the same, and by long use and knowledge of  those  dhcoverte.
seas  it  bee  continued,  it is  like to make  a  wonderfuU
change  and  revolution  in  the state of  this our part  of
the  world.

[The  testimonie
459

A.D.

c.  1581.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  testimonie  of  Gerardus  Mercator  in  his  last
large  Mappe  of  Europe,  touching  .the  notable
discoveries  of  the  English,  made  of  Moscovie
by  the  Northeast.

Agnam  occasionem  certamque  rationem
emendandae  Europe  nobis  attulit  cele-
berrima  Anglorum  per  Cronium  mare
navigatio  :  quae  littora  Septentrionalia
Finlappiae  Moscoviasque  juxta  coeli  situm,
mundique  plagas  digesta  habet.  Exacta
etiam  urbis  Moscuae  latitude  ab  Anglis
observata,  interiorum  Regionum  emendatius  describen-
darum  infallibilem  legem  praescripsit  :  Quibus  oblatis
adminiculis  pulcherrimis,  iniquum  putavi  tabulam  banc
castigatiorem  non  reddere.

The  same  in  English.

THe  most  famous  navigation  of  the  English  men  by
the  Northeast  sea  hath  offered  unto  me  a  great
occasion,  and  certaine  direction  for  the  reformation  of  the
mappe  of  Europe  :  which  discoverie  hath  the  Northerne
parts  of  Finmarke,  Lapland,  and  Moscovie,  laied  out
according  to  the  just  elevation  and  the  quarters  of  the
world.  And  further,  the  true  observation  of  the  latitude
of  the  city  of  Mosco,  made  by  the  foresaid  Englishmen,
hath  yeelded  me  an  infallible  rule,  for  the  correcting  of
the  situation  of  the  inland  countries  :  which  notable
helps  being  ministred  unto  me,  I  thought  it  my  duetie
to  exhibite  to  the  world  this  Mappe,  more  exact  and
perfect  then  hitherto  it  hath  bene  published.

460

A TESTIMONY FROM SEQUANUS

A.D.

1574-

Another  testimonie  of  Joannes  Metellus  Sequanus
concerning  the  same  Navigation  and  Dis-
coveries in  his  Preface  prefixed  before  Osorius
de  rebus  gestis  Emanuelis  Regis  PortugalH^,
written  about  the  yeere, 1574.

T  ne  omnis,  unis  Hispanis,  Oceani  maris
gloria  totaque  concederetur,  Britanni
Septentriones  nova  in  Moscoviam  navi-
gatione,  ab  hinc  annis  viginti  plus  minus
illustrarunt.  Nam  bellis  Sueticis  a  Mos-
covitarum,  Narvaeque  Livonias  exclusi
commercio,  iter  ad  illos  Oceano,  hinc
Noruegias,  Finmarchi^,  Lappias,  Scricfinniae,  Biarmiasque ;
illinc  Groenlandiae  littora  prsetervecti,  ultra  Septua-
gesimum  latitudinis  Aquilonaris  gradum  sibi  patefaciunt.
Quam  navigationem  Belgae  postea,  non  sine  tamen  cum
iisdem  Britannis  velitatione,  sunt  secuti.  E6  vehunt
argenti  veteris  fragmenta,  lineasque  vestes  prope  detritas,
omnisque  generis  minutiores  merces  ad  usum,  cul-
tumque  corporis  hominum  utriusque  sexus,  veluti  lintea  [I.  514.]
&  byssea  cingula,  periscelides,  crumenas,  cultros,  &  id
genus  sexcenta.  A  Moschis  autem  pelles  omnis  generis
pretiosas  adferunt,  &  salmones  salitos,  fumoque  duratos.

The  same  in  English.

BUt  least  all  and  the  whole  glory  of  discovering  the
Ocean  sea  should  be  ascribed  to  the  Spaniards,  the
Englishmen  about  twentie  yeeres  past,  by  a  new  navi-
gation into  Moscovie,  discovered  the  Northeast  partes.
For  they  by  reason  of  the  warres  of  Swethland  being
hindered  from  the  traffique  of  the  Moscovites  and  of  the
Narve  in  Liefland,  opened  a  passage  for  themselves  by
the  Ocean  sea,  beyond  the  Northerne  latitude  of  70.
degrees  :  having  in  their  course  on  the  one  side  the
coastes  of  Norway,  Finmark,  Lapland,  Scrickfin  and
Biarmia  : On the other side the coast of  Gronland.

461

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^574-

Which voyage the Hollanders afterwarde entred into,

but  not  without  some  conflict  with  the  English. They

cary  thither  old  plate  and  course  Hnnen  cloth,  and  all  kind

of small Mercerie wares, serving for the apparelling

of  men  and  women,  as  linnen,  and  silke  girdles,  garters,

purses,  knives,  and  many  such  like  things. And  they

bring  away  from  the  Moscovites,  all  kinde  of

precious  Furres,  and Salmons salted

and  dried  in  the

smoke.

462

APPENDIX

A.D.
1583.

APPENDIX

The Ambassage of Sir Hierome Bowes to the
Emperour  of  Moscovie. 1583.

From  Hakluyfs  '■  Principal i.  Navigations^' 1589-

Efore  I  enter  into  the  declaration  of  mine
ambassage  into  Moscovie,  it  shall  not  be
amisse  briefely  to  declare  the  occasion
therof.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  understood
that  John  Basiliwich  the  Emperour  of
Russia,  in  the  yeere  1582,  sent  over
into  England,  as  his  ambassadour,  one
Pheodor  Andrewich  Spisemskie,  a  verie  discreet  and
aged  councellor  of  his,  accompanyed  with  a  secretarie
named  Neodatza  Gawralo,  who  were  wafted  hether  with
a  warlike  shippe  called  the  Tyger,  whereof  one  M.
Christopher  Carlile,  a  gentleman  indued  with  many
good  partes,  was  partly  for  that,  and  partly  for  the
safe  wafting  of  the  rest  of  the  fleete  against  the  Dane
appointed  captaine.

The  aforesaid  ambassadour,  with  all  his  traine,  to  the
number  of  above  twentie  persons,  having  beene  enter-
teined  and  used  heere  very  honourablie  both  by  her
Majestie  and  her  subjects,  besought  her  Highnesse  to
send  an  ambassadour  home  with  him  unto  his  Maister,
with  commission  to  conclude  such  matters  of  importance
as  he  was  sent  about  into  these  parts.  Wherupon  I
was chosen for that service  : and after  I had received

463

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

order  for  my  preparation,  and  had  my  commission
delivered  unto  me,  with  two  letters  from  her  Majestie
to  the  Emperour,  &  the  articles  here  agreed  upon
with  his  ambassadour,  as  also  mine  instructions,  with
the  doleances  and  petitions  of  our  English  merchants,  I
tooke  my  leave  in  Court  to  proceed  in  my  voyage.
And  having  assembled  my  company  together,  which
were  in  number,  fortie  persons,  whereof  about  ten  were
gentlemen,  besides  one  M.  Cole  a  learned  man  of  Oxford

June  22.  which  was  my  preacher,  I  embarked  myself  the  22  of
June  1583  at  Harewich  in  a  tall  shippe  of  200  tunnes,
called  the  Centurion,  and  the  Moscovit  ambassadour
and  the  secretarie  were  placed  in  another  shippe  by
themselves,  and  some  of  the  chiefe  of  theyr  company  :
the  rest  were  bestowed  in  other  roomes  convenient.
Thus  our  fleet  being  ten  sailes  in  the  whole  number,
we  committed  ourselves  to  God  and  the  seas,  and  arrived
in  safety  at  S.  Nicholas  bay  in  the  space  of  a  just  moneth,

Julie  23. to  witte  the  23  of  Julie  next  insuing.

Upon  our  arrivall  the  Moscovit  ambassadour  was
joyfully  received  and  lodged  at  the  monasterie  of  S.
Nicholas.  And  I  was  very  well  entertayned  at  our
English  house  in  Rose  island,  where  I  remayned  five
or  sixe  dayes  to  repose  my  selfe  and  my  weary  company.
From  thence  I  passed  up  the  river  of  Dwina  to  Colmogro,
drawne  with  men  against  the  streame  in  large  boats  of
that  countrey. At  Colmogro  I  stayed  the  space  of  five

August.  weeks,  to  witte  all  August,  and  part  of  September,  in  a

Septemb.  22.  cgj-taine  small  Island,  which  upon  mine  aboad  so  long
in  it,  is  still  called  Bowes  island  by  our  nation.  From
Colmogro  I  passed  up  against  the  streame  very  slowly
towards  Vologda,  and  arrived  not  there  untill  the  22
of  September.  At  this  towne  a  gentleman  sent  from
the  Emperour,  received  me,  whose  name  was  Protou
Popou  :  he  presented  me  with  two  geldings,  with  saddle
and  furniture  after  theyr  countrey  fashion.  I  was  tolde
that  the  horses  were  of  those  that  were  for  the  Emperours
owne  saddle.

464

APPENDIX  AD.

1583.

I  stayed  at  Vologda  foure  dayes,  and  then  tooke  journey  ^  Duke  sent
toward  Yeraslave,  where  mette  me  from  the  Emperour,  ^°  ^^^^  ^^"'
a.  Duke  well  accompanyed,  which  presented  me  a  coch  Q^^i^g,.  j '
and tenne  geldings for change. I rested at Yeraslave
sixe  dayes,  and  then  set  forward  towards  Moscua,  where
I  arrived  the  first  of  October. There  met  me  before  I
came at the towne by two miles, .  foure  gentlemen of
the Emperours,  accompanyed, I  gesse, with about  two
hundred  horses. After  divers  salutations,  they  tolde  me
they  had  to  say  to  me  from  the  Emperour  :  I  answered
that  it  was  welcome,  and  requested  them  to  deliver  what
they  had  in  charge. Thus  after  the  rehearsing  of  a  long
stile, both they  and my selfe being  lighted from our
horses,  they  delivered  what  they  had  to  say,  which  were
nothing  but  welcomes  and  messages  of  favour  ; so we
went agayne to horsbacke, and they brought me to
my  lodging  in Mosco. I was  not in my  lodging  one
quarter  of  an houre,  but  there  came  a  gentleman  from  J  supper  sent
the Emperour, and brought me a supper readie drest  ^^^  f''°^  ^^^
of  the Emperours meat. And after rehearsing of  the ^P^^°^^-
Emperours stile,  and deliverie of  his  message, he sate
downe  to supper,  where he  would have driven me  to
have tasted  of  every  sundrie meats and drinks of  the
Emperours  goodnesse  (as  hee  termed  it)  or  els  he  would
say,  that  I  did  not  accept  it  as  I  should.

The  Friday  next  after,  being  the  fourth  of  October,
there  came  to  me  from  the  Emperour  a  principall
secretarie,  who  brought  me  a  dinner  from  the  Emperour,
meaning  himselfe  to  dine  with  me.  He  came,  giving
me  a  very  short  warning,  and  so  founde  me  sicke  in
my  bedde  ;  howbeit  there  was  no  remedie,  but  the  dinner
must  be  set  upon  a  table  at  my  beddes  side,  and  so  it  was.
And  yet  were  they  not  so  satisfied  therewith,  but  I  must
either  take  and  cast  my  gowne  about  my  shoulders,  and  sit
up,  and  taste  of  somewhat,  or  els  the  Emperour  woulde
imagine  that  I  loved  him  not,  and  that  I  scorned  his  send-
ing to  me.  Thus  I  was  faine  to  satisfie  in  parte  these  un-
reasonable requests  :  and  so  we  two  departed  in  kindnesse.
Ill  465  2  G

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583-

The 14  of  October  there  came  to  visite  me  another

secretarie,  whose  name  was  Savio  Frolle,  and  to  aske
me  if  I  had  any  secret  matter  to  send  to  the  Emperour,
to  whome  I  answered  that  I  had  none,  and  so  after  a
little  space  he  left  me.
He  was  sent  The  next  day  the  Emperour  sent  a  gentleman  to  me,
for  to  Court.  ^^^  would  have  had  me  to  have  come  to  Court  the
Sunday  next  following,  but  I  was  sicke  and  could  not  :
but  the  Tuesday  then  next  following,  being  the  16.  of
October,  I  sent  to  intreat  that  I  might  see  his  Majestic
on  the  Thursday  next  insuing  :  which  was  granted  me  ;
yet  the  very  next  day  I  had  a  countermand,  and  that
the  Thursday  seventnight  I  should  come  to  Court.

Thursday  being  come,  which  was  the  24.  of  October,
there  came  gentlemen  to  my  lodging  to  accompany  me
to  Court,  where  I  dined  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperour,
and  all  my  men  at  another  boord,  in  the  presence  of  the
Emperor  also.

When  I  was  set  at  the  table,  the  Emperor  commanded
a  company  of  gentlemen  to  sit  downe  by  me,  to  accom-
pany me  as  he  sayd,  and  I  had  upon  the  sudden  no
comely  meanes  to  shunne  it.

1  was  no  sooner  returned  to  my  lodging,  after  my
going  from  Court,  but  the  Emperor  sent  after  me  a
gentleman  of  his,  and  good  store  of  drinke,  to  potsivat
(as  they  terme  it)  me  and  my  people  ;  so  was  I  forced
to  sit  drinking  with  them,  till  some  of  us  had  too  much.

The  next  Tuesday  following,  being  the  29  of  the
moneth,  there  came  to  me  the  woonted  company  that
invited  me  before,  to  summon  me  to  Court.

Wednesday  being  the  30  day  of  October,  the  gentle-
men came  for  me,  and  so  I  went  againe  to  Court,  and
Was  mette  (as  the  day  before)  with  two  sundrie  companyes
of  gentlemen,  the  one  of  better  degree  then  the  other  ;
and  so  was  conveyed  to  the  Emperors  presence,  who
straightway  after  I  had  done  my  duety  to  him,  bad
me  sit  downe,  without  using  any  other  speeches  or
entertainment  unto  me : neither  had  I  sitten  two  minuts

466

APPENDIX  AD.

1583.
of  an  houre,  but  the  Emperor  sent  his  chancellor  to  me,
to  will  me  to  retyre  my  selfe  to  another  chamber,  whether
I  was  guided  by  my  woonted  companions.

I  had  not  beene  long  in  that  other  chamber,  but  there
came  to  me  Mekita  Romanowich,  Bodan  Belskoy,
Andrew  Shalcan  the  chancellor,  all  three  chiefe  coun-
cellors,  and  Savio  Frolle  principall  secretarie.

They  demanded  of  me  what  it  was  that  I  had  to  say
to  the  Emperour  from  the  Queene  my  mistresse.  I
answered  that  I  was  rather  sent  to  hearke  then  to  speake :
for  it  is  not  unknowne  to  all  your  honours  (quoth  I)
that  the  Emperour  hath  sent  to  the  Queene  my  mistresse,
intreating  her  to  send  a  gentleman  of  hers  unto  him,
naming  what  kinde  of  person  he  desired  to  be  sent
towards  him :  and  for  such  an  one  as  he  desired  to  be
sent,  her  Majestie  hath  allowed  me,  commanding  me
hither  to  knowe  his  Majesties  pleasure :  as  then  I  was
ready  to  doe  his  Majestie  what  service  I  might.

They  tolde  mee  that  the  Queene  had  written  to  the
Emperour,  that  shee  had  delivered  her  minde  in  all
pointes,  that  had  beene  spoken  of,  and  that  I  shoulde
resolve  his  Majestie  in  every  thing.

I  tolde  them  that  I  was  made  privie  to  thus  much,
that  the  Emperour  had  sent  to  the  Queene  to  have  a
perpetuall  league  with  her  Majestie,  and  that  his  am-
bassadour  had  delivered  the  articles  of  his  Majesties
desire  to  the  Queene,  and  the  Queene  had  caused  her
answere  to  every  article  to  be  delivered  to  the  Emperours
ambassadour,  to  be  presented  to  his  Majestie,  as  I  well
knewe  they  were :  I  therefore  looked  that  rather  there
should  be  somewhat  sayd  to  me,  touching  the  liking
or  misliking  of  those  articles,  then  anything  (till  then)
to  be  looked  for  from  me.

They  yet  replyed,  that  it  was  the  course  in  all  partes,
that  the  ambassadours  should  deliver  the  cause  of  theyr
comming :  I  answered  that  I  knew  it  well,  but  that  case
was  altered  in  my  comming,  in  as  much  as  1  was  sent  for,
and  (in  all  likelihood)  to  have  somewhat  to  be  sayd  to

467

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1583.

me :  by  this  time  they  seemed  to  finde  the  argument
reasonable,  saying  they  would  goe  tell  the  Emperour
what  I  had sayd.

Ere  long  they  returned  with  this  answere  from  the
Emperour,  that  now  the  morning  was  well  spent,  so  as
I  could  not  conveniently  speake  with  the  Emperour  any
more  that  day,  but  the  next  time  that  I  came  to  Court,  I
shoulde,  and  that  against  then  they  would  have  theyr
answere  ready  to  the  articles,  and  so  left  me :  and  1
returned  to  my  lodging  with  such  like  farewell  as  I
had  welcome,  saving  that  I  saw  the  Emperour  no  more
that  day.

The  Tuesday  next  following,  being  the  sixt  of
November,  I  was  summoned  by  my  woonted  company,
to  be  at  the  Court  the  next  day :  and  the  next  day  the
gentlemen,  according  to  theyr  former  woont,  came  for
me  to  my  lodging.

When  I  came  to  Court,  and  into  the  Emperours
presence,  I  had  no  sooner  saluted  him,  and  that  he  saw
me  draw  neere  unto  him,  as  I  did,  misliking  my  former
intertainement,  he  sent  his  chancellor  (besides  that  he
bad  me  himselfe  in  his  language)  to  bidde  me  sit  downe,
which  to  do  I  must  go  backe  againe,  and  further  from
him :  which  misliking  much,  as  I  did  the  day  before,
when  I  was  at  Court,  I  caused  the  interpretour  to  tell
the  Emperour  that  I  had  rather  stand  where  I  stood,  then
sit  where  he  willed  me  to  sit :  but  notwithstanding  my
speeches,  he  would  needs  have  me  to  sit  downe,  and
so  I  did.

I  was  almost  no  sooner  set,  but  the  Emperour  sent
his  chancellor,  as  he  did  the  other  time  before,  to  wyll
me  to  retyre  to  another  place,  which  place  was  the  same
chamber  where  I  had  beene  the  other  time  before,  and  was
the  councell  chamber :  where  the  same  onely  councellor
came  againe  to  me,  and  our  questions  tended  all  to  the
articles  of  the  league,  which  they  amongst  them  did  read
over,  without  chalenging  of  any,  saving  that  which
touched the  sending  to  that  prince  that  should  become

468

APPENDIX  AD.

1583.
the  Emperours  enemie,  to  desist  from  his  wrong  doing :
which  they  alleaged  would  aske  so  long  space,  as  in  the
meane  time  the Emperour  might  sustaine irrecoverable
hinderance.

I  tolde  them  that  in  that  poynt  the  Queenes  Majesty  The  article
had  drawen  her  selfe  as  neere  to  satisfie  the  Emperours  '^°^'^^^"^^g^^^

J .  ,  . , .  ,  ,  ^  .  L  nmsh  sole

desire as she might in reason,  honor and conscience :  ^^.^^^^  ^^
and  did  make  her  reckoning  that  the  Emperour  would  Dwina  &
take it in great  good part,  that shee had drawne her  the  bay  of  ^.
consent  so  neere  unto  all  his  requests. Whereunto  they  ^^'^"■°'-
answered nothing : but fell off, and entred into the
article  of  Englishe  merchauntes  sole  trade  to  the  North
partes  of  Russia,  and  to  the  river  of  Dwina.

They  seemed  to  think  it  a  very  hard  request  to  have  John  de  Wak
this  countrey  shut  up  from the  haunt  of  all strangers,  '^  Dutchman
and  not  to  consent to,  that this one Dutch merchant,  fllf.^Q

•  m  ITT  trajfike  to  0.

John  de  Wale,  might  traffike  as  now  he  did.  Nicholas.

Amongst  other  replies,  I  did  answere  them,  that  the
Queenes  Majesty  did  aske  nothing  of  the  Emperour,
but  did  onely  put  him  in  remembrance  to  maintaine  his
promise,  and  that  sith  neither  her  Majesty  nor  her
subjects,  had  deserved  otherwise  then  well,  at  the
Emperors  hands,  he  would  ratifie  and  strengthen  the  olde
and  first  privilege,  which  upon  theyr  well  deserving  it  at
his  hands,  he  thought  them  woorthie  of:  and  did  graunt
unto  them  franck  and  freely  long  since.

Heerupon  we  had  many  speeches,  for  in  this,  and
the  other  I  thinke  we  spent  nigh  three  howres,
and  so  left  off  without  any  conclusion  untill  another
day.

Upon  the  sixteenth  of  November  my  woonted  inviters
came  to  summon  me  to  Court :  I  answered  that  I  was
very  ready  to  obay  the  Emperour,  but  the  next  morrow
was  the  day  when  the  Queene  my  mistresse  came  to  the
crowne,  and  we  (as  we  had  great  cause)  did  thinke  it  a
happy  day,  and  kept  it  festivall  (as  it  were)  and  I  had
already  invited  my  countrey  folks  to  come  to  make  merry
with  me,  and  therefore  would  be  glad  that  his Majesty

469

A.D.

1583-

The  French
permitted  to
come  to  Cola.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

would spare me,  and so he did,  and reckoned it  very
reasonable.

Thursday  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  of  November,
I  went  to  Court,  and  saw  the  Emperours  eyes,  and  went
to  Councell  as  I  was  woont,  but  grewe  no  neerer  any
resolution  then  before.

The  next  Sunday  after,  I  went  to  Court  agayne,  upon
summons,  and  went  to  the  Councell  chamber,  as  of
custome,  where  I  was  neere  an  houre  before  any  Coun-
cellor  came  to  me,  &  when  they  came,  having  beene
in  Councell  halfe  of  that  houre,  betwixt  theyr  parting
from  the  Emperour,  and  comming  to  me :  they  tolde  me
that  the  Emperour,  thinking  it  not  reasonable  that  all
strangers  should  in  all  kindes  of  sortes  be  kept  from,
and  forbidden  his  Northern  Seas  and  Havens  of  that
countrey,  or  that  John  de  Wale  shoulde  be  driven  thence,
had  resolved  that  the  English  merchantes  should  have
theyr  letter  ratified  for  halfe  custome  with  all  favors  that
might  be  done  unto  them,  to  holde  theyr  Haven  at  S.
Nicholas,  and  theyr  houses  there,  and  elswhere  and  that
John  de  Wale  should  enjoy  his  Haven  or  road  thereby,
and  to  trade  up  the  river  of  Dwina  to  Mosco,  and  the
townes  towards  Mosco,  but  not  any  further,  nor  to  any
other  of  his  countryes,  as  the  English  merchantes  might
freely  doe  to  all  partes :  and  sayd  further  that  hee  would
that  his  other  Havens,  as  Cola  and  others  shoulde  bee
free  for  the  French,  and  all  other  commers  to  touche,
barter,  buye,  and  sell,  but  yet  not  at  all  to  trade  further
into  his  countreyes.

I  did  tell  them,  that  if  the  Emperours  resolution  were
such  as  they  sayd,  that  I  doubted  he  would  loose  the
English  merchants,  and  tolde  some  reasons  why  the
English  merchants  could  not  then  trade  thither  to  theyr
profit,  and  that  they  were  not  so  bound  to  the  nation,
that  they  would  come  to  them  to  theyr  hinderance,  and
that  if  the  English  merchants  did  leave  them,  I  was  of
opinion  that  neither  Dutch  nor  French  would  come  to
them. I  tolde  them  that  John  de  Wale  had  not  mispent

470

APPENDIX  AD.

'583.
his time in Russia, for I found he had gotten good
friends among them  : and then more, touching the
Dutchmens disorder  upon Dwina.

The  Sunday  following,  being  the  eight  of  December,  December.
upon  summons  the  day  before  I  went  to  Court,  and  so
to  Councell,  after  having  seen  the  Emperours  eyes,  as
of  custome,  where  we  talked  but'  of  such  matters  as
before,  saving  that  they  urged  me  to  have  named  what
princes  the  Queene  did  reckon  to  be  her  enemyes  :  I
answered  that  I  had  no  commission  to  make  discourse
therof,  nor  the  Queene  had  as  yet  any  occasion  to
proclame  to  whom  she  was  enemie.

This  question  grewe  uppon  the  article,  that  the  Emper-
ours Ambassadour  or  messenger  might  passe  thorowe
Englande,  whereunto  the  Queenes  aunswere  is,  so  as  they
goe  towardes  suche  Princes,  with  whome  her  Majestie
is  in  league,  and  that  holde  the  same  religion  that  shee
doth.

The  Friday  then  next  following,  being  the  thirteenth
day  of  December,  I  was  called  againe  to  Court,  and  the
Emperour  spake  with  mee,  but  yet  with  sixe  or  seven
of  his  councell  about  him  :  and  I  was  willed  before  my
then  going  to  Court  (by  a  councellour  that  was  sent
expresly  to  that  end)  that  I  should  leave  off  my  sword,
which  I  had  alwayes  worne  till  then.  And  further  the
morning  when  I  went,  those  gentlemen  that  came  for
me  did  will  me  from  the  Emperour,  that  I  should  not
have  about  me  neither  dagger  nor  knife.

The Emperour did make cavill, that the English  The  Emperour
merchantes did bring  him nothing  that  was  good,  2ind -^^^^^^  f'^^^^^
compared olde  gaberdines of  his owne of  skarlet  with  ^^  ^""'^

1^  o  .  merchants

such  skarlets  as  the  merchants  had  then  brought  him,  wares.
which  skarlets  were  in  the  merchants  opinions,  the  best
piece  of  cloth  that  ever  came  in  Russia :  and  in  truth
it  was  the  better  cloth-
He  found  fault  also  with  parsement  laces  that  the
merchants  had  also  then  brought  him,  comparing  them
with laces upon his olde cloakes, such as the fashion

471

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

^583-

was  worne  out  in  England  twentie  yeeres  since. Nothing

pleased  that  day.

The  Wednesday  then  next  following,  being  the  eigh-
teenth day  of  December,  I  went  againe  to  Court  after
such  summons  as  of  custome,  when  the  Emperour  talked
with  me,  and  his  councell  about  him,  but  not  so  many
as  before,  but  used  the  like  cavelling  as  the  other  time
he  did  :  seeming  as  though  he  would  make  no  more
reckoning  to  have  any  amitie  with  the  Queenes  Majestic,
vanting  himselfe  quite  beyond  his  compasse,  challenging
me,  as  he  had  done  ere  then,  for  my  too  much  stoutnesse,
reckoning  up  great  numbers  of  ambassadours  that  had
come  to  him  from  many  great  princes,  but  that  not  any
that  bare  himselfe  so  stout  as  I  did,  or  would  challenge
his  place  to  be  so  great.

I  desired  his  Majestie  to  have  patience  (for  he
had  then  none  within  my  seeing)  and  not  to  judge
of  me  in  his  choller,  and  then  he  would  finde  that  I
had  not  at  any  time  done  ought  that  became  me  not  :
saying  further  that  I  had  bestowed  my  time  very  ill,
having  all  my  life  time  beene  brought  up  in  Court  and
forren  nations,  if  I  had  not  learned  with  what  duety  to
use  a  prince,  were  he  never  so  great.

After  these  extreme  jarres  (wherin  I  used  more
patience  then  I  had)  we  grew  calmer,  and  parted  such
friends  (reconciled  as  it  were)  as  presently  upon  my
arrivall  in  my  lodging,  he  sent  of  his  gentlemen  to
potsivate  me,  which  was  the  greatest  token  of  his  favour
that  might  be,  and  therewithall  did  threaten  to  send  me
of  his  owne  meat  as  soone  as  his  Lent  was  ended,  which
should  be  at  Christmas.
Januarie.  Upon New  yeeres  day  I  went  agayne  to  Court  upon

summons,  as  of  custome,  having  onely  the  bare  inter-
tainement  that  I  had  beene  woonted  to,  which  was  onely
to  see  the  Emperours  eyes,  and  was  willed  to  goe  to  the
Councell  chamber,  whither  the  councell  came  unto  me,  and
readde  unto  mee  the  articles  which  had  beene  in  Englande
delivered  to  the  ambassadour  :  and  when  they  had  readde

472

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.
them, they  asked  me  if  I had  commission  to  confirme
them. I answered that I durst  assure them, that  the
Queenes Majestie  woulde not  goe from them, if  her
requestes  tooke  place.

They  then  asked  mee  (as  they  had  done  before  then)
if  I  had  no  power  by  commission  to  alter  them  ;  I
aunswered  that  I  had  not  :  and  tolde  that  the  Queene
my  mistresse,  had  therein  yeelded  so  farre  to  satisfie
the  Emperours  desire,  as  with  honour  shee  might,  and
so  farre  as  shee  did  imagine,  the  Emperour  woulde
rather  have  taken  extreame  kindelye,  then  once  seemed
to  have  misliked  or  disallowed  anie  parte  thereof.  And
I  sayde  further  that  when  the  Queenes  Majestie  shoulde
knowe  that  hee  made  such  cavilling,  and  tooke  her
kindenesse  in  no  better  part,  I  would  not  be  bounde,
that  shee  woulde  performe  all  that  shee  had  saide  :  for
that  since  the  time  that  shee  made  these  kinde  offers
to  the  Emperour,  the  case  was  much  altered.

They  urged  mee  much  to  have  tolde  them  wherein,
(on  my  opinion,)  the  case  was  so  altered  :  whereunto  I
answered,  that  I  purposed  to  doe  so,  but  not  till  1
founde  mine  owne  time.

All  the  rest  of  our  time  was  wasted  in  those  two
points  of  John  de  Wale,  and  the  article  of  wiUing  the
enemies  of  the  Emperour  to  desist  from  offering  of
wrong  : upon  which  both  points  they  stacke  still.

But  I  assured  them,  that  the  reasonable  requests  of
her  Majestie  must  be  answered  in  the  one,  or  els  the
amitie  would  goe  but  slowly  forward,  and  as  for  the
other,  I  assured  them  that  her  Majestie  would  be  drawen
no  further.

The  5  of  Januarie  being  Wednesday,  in  the  afternoone,
he  sent  my  wonted  visitors  to  me,  who  tolde  me,  that
the  Emperour,  because  hee  loved  (quoth  they)  the
Queene  of  England  his  sister,  would  send  the  next
day  a  very  great  noble  personage  to  speake  with  mee,
and intreated mee  that  therefore  I  would  eate  betimes.

I answered, that  who so came from the Emperour,

473

duke.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

shoulde  bee  welcome  to  mee  :  but  as  for  my  eating,  I
had  so  bad  a  disgestion  with  long  keeping  my  chamber,
as  I  might  ill  breake  my  ordinary  times  of  eating.

This  great  man  came  to  me  the  next  day,  but  it  was
Bodan  Bels-  three  of  the  clock  ere  hee  came  :  his  name  is  Bodan
coy  a  great  Belscoy  the  Emperours  chiefest  favourite,  and  Domine
fac  totum.  His  comming  was  to  examine  two  matters  :
The  one,  touching  Sacayr,  who  conducted  mee  from
Colmogro  to  Vologda  :  The  other,  was  against  the
Emperours  officers,  who  were  to  deliver  mee  my  diet,
and  had  used  me  extreeme  naughtily.

Hee  first  began  with  the  matter  of  my  diet,  wherein
my  Stewarde  was  to  playe  a  part,  whom  Bodan  (having
as  it  seemed  before  hande  purposed  to  doe  so)  did  use
naughtily,  and  with  naughtie  termes,  to  bolster  out  the
Emperours  officers,  burthening  him  with  the  selling  of
such  victuals,  as  the  Emperour  had  allowed  me.

After  that  hee  had  called  Sakayr  before  him,  and
that  I  had  named  my  witnesses  against  him  of  his
owne  companie,  touching  his  villainous  behaviour
towardes  mee,  hee  was  dismissed  untill  an  other  time,
that  the  witnesses  might  bee  recovered,  which  were  at
that  time  somewhat  farre  off :  hee  caused  the  Secretarie
Savio  Frolle  who  came  with  him,  to  reade  a  scroule,
which  the  Emperour  had  commaunded  them  to  reade
unto  mee  :  In  which  scroule  were  set  downe  to  bee
repeated,  those  Articles  touching  the  sending  to  the
Prince  that  shoulde  bee  enemie  to  the  Emperour,  to
desist  from  his  doing  of  injurie  (which  point  hee  still
misliked)  and  that  Article  of  the  sole  trade  of  the
English  Marchants  to  the  havens,  and  river  of  Dwina,
which  neither  hee  brooked.

I  answered,  that  what  I  had  to  say,  I  had  alreadie
saide,  and  had  no  more  to  say  concerning  those  pointes.

They  pressed  me  much  that  I  would  be  content  to
receive  againe  such  victuals  for  my  diet,  as  the  Emperour
would  sende  and  allowe  me,  promising  that  all  the  wants
should  be  amended,  and  the  faulters  punished.

474

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.

To  satisfie  them  for  that  they  were  in  my  lodging,
and  for  that  the  one  of  them  was  in  chiefe  favour  with
the  Emperour,  and  sent  of  purpose  to  please  mee
(although  his  pride  caused  him  to  slippe  besides  his
Commission :)  And  againe,  for  that  I  had  desire  that
hee  shoulde  returne  to  the  Emperour,  and  report  that
I  had  used  him  honourablie  (as  I  did)  I  denied  not,
but  that  I  would  receive  victualls  againe  the  next
morning,  although  I  was  resolved  otherwise.

This  being  tolde  the  Emperour,  hee  in  'great  haste
sent  for  his  Chanceller,  and  rated  him,  and  threatned
him  not  to  leave  one  of  his  race  alive  ;  And  then  hee
sent  his  chiefest  Secretarie  unto  mee  to  pacifie  mee,  and  Andmu  Shal-
to  intreate  mee  to  take  my  Corne  (as  they  doe  use  to  '^^"■
terme  it,)  with  offers  that  I  should  have  what  I  would  :
but  I  alleaged  howe  hardly  I  had  bene  used  at  those
Councellers  handes,  and  therefore  that  the  Emperour
should  pardon  mee.  I  hoped  that  hee  would  leave
the  Market  open  for  mee  (which  in  deede  was  stopped)
seeing  that  I  came  from  his  good  friende  and  Sister,
and  so  hee  shoulde  finde  that  I  had  a  Mistresse  that
was  well  able  to  feede  me.

The  Secretarie  finding  mee  so  unreadie  to  satisfie
the  Emperour,  arose  in  great  haste  and  fume,  and
would  needes  have  bene  gone,  thinking  he  should  have
scarred  mee  therewith  saying,  that  sith  he  found  me  so
untractable,  hee  would  be  gone.  I  answered,  that  if
hee  had  nothing  els  to  say  unto  mee  hee  might  goe
when  pleased  him  :  And  so  for  good  manners  sake  I
followed  him  to  guide  him  towards  his  sledde.  But
his  haste  was  but  seeming  :  for  although  I  made  very
slowe  speede  after  him,  hee  gave  me  leave  to  overtake
him,  and  stayed  without  intreating,  first  once  and  then
againe,  and  would  very  gladly  have  had  a  better  message
to  have  carried  to  the  Emperour  :  for  well  he  knew
that  he  should  be  ill  welcome  home.

At  his  departing  I  willed  him  to  intreate  the  Emperour
that the Market  might be set open for me, and that

475

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

'584.

I  might  not  be  starved  :  for  that  it  was  not  impossible
but  that  I  might  yet  doe  his  Majestie  some  service  if
I  shall  live.  You  goe  not  about  (quoth  hee)  to  doe
him  any  service  :  No  (quoth  I)  I  have  no  service  yet
readie  for  him,  for  I  have  had  no  cause  yet  to  doe
him  any,  But  I  will  not  forsweare  to  doe  him  service.
And  thus  he  went  his  way  in  other  sort  then  he
looked  for,  and  sorrowfull.

The  next  morning  he  came  againe,  being  sent  from
the  Emperour,  and  brought  with  him  a  scroll  of  a
newe  allowance  of  victuals,  more  then  I  had  before,  by
much,  which  I  still  in  the  respect  before  spoken  of,
refused  to  receive.  But  yet  for  that  1  knew  it  reason-
able, and  well  becomming  mee  to  yeelde,  (in  as  much
as  I  might)  to  satisfie  the  Emperours  request  at  a
seconde  sending,  especially  for  that  other  men  had  done
mee  the  wrong  and  not  the  Emperour,  I  was  content
to  yeelde  thus  farre  unto  his  Majestie,  to  agree  (if
needes  he  would  feede  mee)  to  take  a  reasonable
allowance  in  money  for  my  diet,  but  so  much  he
pressed  mee  to  satisfie  the  Emperours  kind  sending  to
me,  that  I  agreed  to  receive  the  scroule  of  diet,  that
the  Emperour  had  sent  me  :  and  so  went  the  Secretarie
a  merrie  man  away.

The  Scroule  of  the  new  diet,  was  this,  Januarie, 13.

One  bushell of  fine  meale  for  3.  dayes.
One  bushell  of  wheate  meale  for  a  day  and  a  halfe.
2.  Live  geese  for  one  day.
20.  Hennes  for  the  day.
7.  Sheepe  for  a  day.
I.  Oxe  for  three  dayes.
I.  Side  of  porke  for  a  day.
70.  Eggs  for  a  day.
10.  Pound  of  butter.
70.  Pennie  white  loaves.
12.  Pennie  loaves  of  bread.
I.  Veather,  or  bottle  of  Vinegar.

476

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.
2.  Veathers  of  salt  Cabiges.
I.  Pecke  of  Onions.
10.  Pound  of  Salt.

1.  Altine  of  wax  candles.

2.  Altines  of  tallow  candles.

I.  Fourth  part  of  a  Vether  of  cherrie  meade.

As  much  of  Mallynovomeade.

Halfe  a  Vether  of  burnt  wine.

I.  Veather  of  sodden  meade,  called  Obarni.

3.  Veathers  of  sweete  meade.
10.  Veathers  of  white  meade.
15.  Veathers  of  ordinary  meade.
5.  Veathers  of  sweet  beere.

15.  Veathers  of  beere.
Halfe  a  pound  of  pepper.
3. Solly tnikes  of  saffron.
I. Sollytnike  of  mace.

1.  Sollytnike  of  nutmegs.

2.  Sollytnikes  of  cloves.

3.  Sollytnikes  of  Cinnamom.

Provender.
One  bushell  of  Oates.
One  loade  of  hay.
I.  loade  of  strawe.

The  Secretarie  I  thinke  had  no  sooner  ended  to  tell
the  Emperour  howe  hee  had  spedde,  but  by  and  by
the  Gentlemen,  which  were  wonted,  came  to  summon
mee  to  Court  against  the  next  day.  Whither  I  went,
and  found  the  Emperour  in  his  Majestie  as  of  custome,
and  after  having  sitten  in  his  presence,  (after  the  com-
mon maner)  I  was  willed  (as  of  wont)  to  goe  to  the
Councell  chamber,  whither  came  to  mee  three  of  my
olde  companions,  and  not  the  Chanceller,  and  with
them  five  others  of  the  Counsell,  with  whome  I  had
no  acquaintance  till  then.  And  amongst  those  one
duke,  who  tooke  the  formost  place  of  them  all,  both
of  my  olde  companions,  and  of  the  newe  supplie.

477

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.
The  Chan-  This great duke (as they termed him) began to

celler displaced  j-ghgarse  some  former  matters  touching  the  unkindnesse
^LtmBiZ.  ^i^^  ^^^  ^"d  ^^^  Chanceller,  and  tolde  mee,  that  for
that  the  saide  Chanceller  had  not  used  himselfe  well
towards  me,  the  Emperours  displeasure  was  upon  him,
and  for  his  fault  was  put  out  of  his  place,  and  that
the  Emperours  meaning  was  to  doe  me  right,  upon
every  man  that  had  wronged  mee  :  and  then  they  called
into  presence  Sakair,  to  shewe  him  unto  me  as  a  man
condemned  to  prison,  and  further  to  receive  such  punish-
ment, as  upon  examination  of  his  faults,  hee  should
be  found  to  have  deserved.

Touching  the  Chanceller,  1  answered  no  more  but
that  I  founde  that  the  Emperours  purpose  was  to
doe  the  Queene  my  mistresse  right  :  for  the  others,
Sakayr  and  one  other  Gentleman,  who  had  also  behaved
himselfe  ill  towards  me,  I  intreated  the  great  duke,  and
the  rest,  that  they  would  in  my  name  be  suters  to  his
Majestie,  to  pardon  them  at  my  humble  suite,  and  saide,
that  if  they  had  not  had  better  backes  then  their  owne,
that  were  their  setters  on,  they  durst  never  have  offered
me  a  wrong.

This  suite  was  much  liked,  and  they  all  promised
to  say  to  the  Emperour  all  that  they  had  heard  of  me,
and  so  they  tooke  their  leave  of  me,  willing  me  to  retire
to  my  lodging.

The  Tuesday  next  after,  I  was  summoned  againe  to
Court,  against  the  next  day,  which  was  no  sooner  done,
but  the  cheife  Secretarie  came  to  mee  sent  from  the
Emperour  onely  to  knowe  of  mee,  whether  my  corne
(as  they  terme  it)  were,  and  had  bene  delivered  mee
according  to  the  scroule,  which  the  Emperour  had  sent
mee  before  then,  and  to  knowe  if  I  had  any  other  griefes.

Upon  this  suddaine  arrivall,  my  Pristaves,  Masters  of
housholde,  after  our  reckoning,  for  that  in  all  this  time
they  had  not  yet  delivered  my  corne,  as  they  should  have
done,  but  had  so  much  bungled  with  me,  sent  to  me
in  great  haste,  that  I  would  be  so  good  unto  them,  as

478

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.
to  say,  that  I  had  had  everything  according  to  the
Emperours  appointment  :  for  if  I  shoulde  have  tolde
the  trueth,  they  woulde  all  have  bene  whipped.  And
therefore  to  salve  that  sore,  I  made  a  cleanely  answere,
without  telling  any  lie  that  satisfied  the  Secretarie,
whereof  they  were  more  then  glad.

The  next  day  being  the  19.  of  Januarie,  I  went  againe
to  Court,  and  the  Emperour  spake  with  mee  with  3.
of  his  Counsell  by  him,  and  two  Interpretours,  to  whome
after  I  had  given  thankes  for  the  right  hee  had  done
mee  against  those  who  had  ill  used  mee :  He  asked  me
if  I  had  any  other  griefes,  saying,  that  if  I  had  and  would
tell  them,  I  should  have  remedie  of  them.  I  gave
his  Majestie  most  humble  thankes,  and  told  him,  that
if  1  had  any  other  griefes,  I  would  tel  them  to  his
Majestie  at  some  other  time.

He  then  tolde  mee,  that  hee  had  often  by  himselfe,  and
more  often  by  his  Counsell,  talked  with  mee  touching
the  Articles  of  amitie,  twixt  the  Queene  my  mistresse
and  him,  and  yet  they  were  brought  to  no  good  ende.
Asking  me  if  I  had  no  other,  nor  further  Commission
then  I  had  alreadie  tolde  of :  whereunto  I  answered,
that  I  had  not.  And  then  he  tolde  mee  (as  hee  had  often
done  ere  then)  in  what  sort  he  would  have  the  Queenes
Majestie  joyne  in  friendship  with  him,  that  was,  to
take  his  part  against  all  his  enemies.  I  answered,  that
in  that  matter  I  coulde  say  to  his  Majestie  but  as  I  had
done.

He  then  asked  my  opinion,  whether  the  Queenes
Majestie  did  make  better  reckoning  of  the  king  of  Pole,
or  of  him.  I  answered,  that  I  was  sorie  to  heare  him
make  that  a  question  ;  for  as  betwixt  the  Queenes
Majestie  and  the  King  of  Pole,  there  was  no  enmitie,  so
for  ought  I  knewe  there  was  no  great  friendship.  But  I
was  well  assured,  that  when  I  came  from  her  Majestie,
she  helde  his  highnesse  very  deere  unto  her.  If  she
holde  mee  deare  (quoth  he)  then  shee  will  take  my  part
against my  enemies. So  she  will  (quoth  1)  as  farre  as

479

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

she  hath  promised  in  the  Articles,  which  in  my  opinion
will  serve  your  turne,  although  it  bee  not  set  downe  in
such  wordes  as  you  would  have  it.

Well  (quoth  hee)  I  will  sende  my  Ambassadour  againe
to  the  Queene  my  sister,  about  these  matters,  and  others.

Sir  (quoth  I)  her  Majestic  intreateth  you  but  in  small
matters,  if  it  shal  please  your  Majestie  to  satisfie  her  in
those  her  small  requests,  which  shal  cost  you  nothing,
and  you  may  performe  them  at  home  in  your  owne
Countrey  at  your  ease,  her  Majestie  (I  beleeve)  will  be
loath  to  denie  you  any  reasonable  request.

He  answered  that  touching  those  matters  of  the
Marchants,  hee  would  talke  once  againe  with  his  Counsell,
and  that  at  my  next  comming  to  Court,  I  shoulde  have
answere  in  that  matter,  and  so  willed  mee  to  depart,
being  glad  as  my  selfe  was,  that  wee  parted  so  good
friends.

My  backe  was  no  sooner  turned,  but  hee  rated  his
Counsellers,  and  tolde  them  that  I  was  courteous  ynough
if  I  were  well  used.

The  26.  of  Januarie  the  Emperours  chiefs  Secretarie
came  to  me  two  sundrie  times  about  M.  Roper.

Friday  the  7.  of  Februarie  I  was  at  Court,  and  sawe
the  Emperour  as  of  wont :  and  I  talked  with  the  Counsell
two  sundrie  times,  but  to  litle  purpose.

The  next  tuesday  I  was  summoned  to  Court  to  bee
there  the  next  day,  but  the  same  day,  I  had  a  counter-
maunde  to  stay  till  Saturday  :  Then  I  went  to  Court
and  the  Emperour  talked  with  mee,  and  rehearsed  the
effect  of  his  Ambassage,  and  saide  that  to  the  chiefe
parts  of  his  Articles  and  requests,  hee  was  not  answered
any  whitte  to  his  liking  :  but  that  it  seemed  by  the
Queenes  answeres,  that  shee  would  have  no  friendshippe
with  him,  rather  then  otherwise.  Whereunto  I  answered,
that  if  hee  woulde  consider  well,  howe  farre  her  Majestie
had  drawen  her  selfe  to  friend  him,  hee  shoulde  iinde
great  cause  rather  to  accept  her  friendly  offers  kindely,
then  to  construe  them after  his  owne  fashion. But  he

480

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.
ranne still  to  his  olde point, that  hee  would  have  her
Majestic  take  his  part  directly  against  all  his  enemies.

I  desired  his  Majestie  to  have  a  little  patience  (a  hard
request)  and  that  hee  would  give  mee  leave  to  speake  (a
hard  thing  also  to  come  by  :)  for  hee  must  say  all  him-
selfe  without  to  bee  answered.

Sir  (quoth  I)  then  thus  lyeth  the  case,  that  upon  con-
dition that  the  Queene  will  make  warres  upon  all  your
enemies,  who  all  are  yet  her  friendes,  you  will  then  bee
content  that  the  English  Marchants  shall  enjoy  a  privi-
ledge,  that  they  have  alreadie  more  then  deserved  at  your
handes.  And  besides  you  will  that  the  Queenes
Majestie  first  grant  your  great  requests,  and  then  you
will  graunt  her  little  ones.  But  I  doubt  her  Majestie
will  take  it  very  unkindely,  that  you  take  in  no  better
part  her  kinde  and  friendly  offers  :  for  I  answere,  her
meaning  never  was  to  make  warre  upon  these  Princes,
except  upon  greater  cause  then  shee  yet  knoweth.

Well,  (quoth  he)  I  will  sende  my  Ambassadour  with
you  to  the  Queene  my  sister,  and  will  set  downe  my
meaning  more  plainely  then  before,  and  hee  shall  doe
there  touching  the  Marchants  matters  as  he  shall  finde
cause.

Sir,  (quoth  I)  I  thinke  your  Ambassadour  wil  not  goe
with  mee,  for  the  Queene  my  Mistresse  hath  given  mee
leave  to  goe  over  lande,  and  to  that  ende  I  am  to  crave
your  Majesties  favour  and  furtherance.

This  liked  his  Majestie  as  little,  as  the  deniall  of  it
pleased  mee  :  For  hee  might  not  suffer,  (nor  would)  that  I
shoulde  goe  over  lande,  and  therefore  concluded  that
I  should  goe  home,  the  same  way  that  I  came.  And  so
after  some  other  speaches,  hee  bade  mee  goe  home,  and
tolde  mee  that  upon  the  Munday  next  following  hee
woulde  appoint  his  chiefe  Councellers  to  declare  unto  mee
the  rest  of  his  minde,  and  then  I  should  have  my  dis-
patche  homewards.

Munday,  the  sixt  of  Februarie,  I  went  againe  to  Court,  Februarie.
and  sawe  the  Emperour  as  of  wont,  but  talked  no  whit

III  481  2H

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

with  him  :  I  was  willed  to  retire  my  selfe  to  the  Councell
chamber,  whither  came  his  Counsell,  and  (by  his  com-
maundement)  read  unto  mee  a  scroule  of  Articles,  such
as  he  would  have  to  passe  in  the  league  of  amitie.  I
tolde  them  in  part  my  opinion  of  those  Articles,  as  I
had  done  often  before,  when  I  told  them,  as  then  also,
that  if  the  Emperour  did  not  answere  the  Queenes  smal
demaunds  and  reasonable  requests,  it  was  not  like  that
she  would  yeeld  to  those  of  his,  which  no  man  would
recken  reasonable.

I  had  tolde  them  before,  that  the  Emperour  might  save
labour  in  keeping  his  Ambassadour  at  home,  if  he  left
the  Queenes  Majestie  unsatisfied.

I  was  answered,  that  he  would  proove  once  againe
what  the  Queene  would  doe  for  him  :  But  still  I  felt
both  the  Emperour  and  his  Counsell  to  nibble  at  the
baite,  and  found  that  they  would  bite  at  length.

They  tolde  mee  that  upon  Thursday  then  next,  I
should  be  called  to  Court  againe  to  see  the  Emperour
and  so  to  take  my  leave,  and  thus  we  parted.

In  the  meane  season  the  Emperour  and  his  Counsell,
having  well  considered  my  constancie  in  urging  the
reasonable  requests  of  our  Marchants,  as  also  bethinking
themselves  of  the  greate  benefite  they  might  reape,  by
the  continuance  of  their  trafique,  grewe  to  such  issue  as
I  looked  for,  and  the  Marchants  desired.  So  that  after
certaine  dayes,  I  was  againe  called  to  Court  into  the
Emperours  presence,  where  after  apparant  shewe  of  his
gratious  countenance  and  favour,  I  was  requested  to
repaire  againe  to  the  Counsel  chamber,  where  his  greatest
Counsailers  signified  unto  me,  that  the  Emperour  had
at  last  yeelded  to  these  articles  following,  viz.

1.  First,  that  the  goods  which  were  taken  from  our
Marchants  by  robberie  upon  the  Volga,  should  be  re-
compensed.

2.  Then  that  the  summe  of  500.  markes,  which  was  paid
for  10.  yeeres  together  into  the  Emperours  receit,  for  the
rent  of  a  house  that  they  had  in  Vologda,  should  be  repayed.

APPENDIX  AD.

1584-

3.  Thirdly,  that  1500  markes,  which  had  bene  exacted
from  them  the  two  last  yeeres  before  my  comming
into  Russia,  should  also  be  repayed.

4.  Next  that  an  olde  desperate  debt  of  1000  markes
or  there  abouts,  shoulde  nowe  bee  satisfied.

5.  Lastly,  that  their  custome  which  before  that  time
they  had  payde,  amounting  to  2000  pounds  by  the
yeere,  should  now  be  abated,  and  no  more  required.

There  remayned  nothing  in  the  foresaide  Articles,  but
the confirmation of  them  by  seale,  and  the  deliverie  of
'  them  to  mee,  which  was  determined  to  bee  done  at  my
next  repaire  to  the  Court.

But in the  meane time it fell out so unfortunately  The  death  of
that the Emperour fell sicke,  and within a few  dayes  ^he  olde
died :  After  whose  death,  the  foresaide  Counsellers,  who  ^"^P''''''''-
not  long  before  were  as  glad  of  my  friendship,  as  I  was
also of theirs, grewe againe to be of their former
authoritie,  and  then began to  revenge  themselves  upon
mee,  at their pleasure. For  Mekita  and  Shalkan,  shut
mee  up  immediately  in  mine  owne  house  (as  it  were  a
close  prisoner,) so  that  for the space  of  eight or nine
weekes, I  was forced with all my  companie to keepe
within doores, not so much as to looke out at the
windowes,  that  were upon the streetes side,  with con-
tinuall  watche,  and  gard  set  to  observe  all  our doings.

Besides  this,  they  tooke  from  me  the  liberall  allowance
of  diet,  which  the  late  Emperour  had  graunted  me,  yeeld-
ing  such  slender  and  ill  fare,  as  envious  stomackes  coulde
afoorde,  with  many  other  indignities,  which  for  modesties
sake  I  here  suppresse.

All  this  while  I  sued  for  my  dispatche,  which  I  should
have  had  before  the  Emperour  died,  but  coulde  by  no
meanes  obtaine  it,  such  was  the  pleasure  of  Mekita  and
Shalkan.  But  after  long  and  tedious  delaye,  they  sent
mee  worde  at  last  overnight,  to  come  to  Court  the  next
day  to  have  my  dispatch.  Whicher  being  come,  whereas
ever  to  fore  I  had  bene  mette  within  Counsell,  with  many
of  the  greatest  and  gravest  Counsailers,  I  was  nowe  onely

483

A.D.
1584.

Theodore  the
newe  Emper-

0U1-.

His  departing
from  Mosco
the  29  of
May.

Bratezere.

Doobna.

Peraslave.

Deobola.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

intertained  by  this  Shalcan,  and  a  brother  of  his,  and
one  other  meane  Gentleman,  whome  I  had  never  seene
till  then.  Who  delivered  to  mee  for  resolution  from  the
newe  Emperour,  that  hee  had  no  meaning  to  proceede
further  in  those  treaties,  that  his  late  father  nowe  de-
ceased, had  to  fore  dealt  in.

Shortly  after  I  was  willed  to  come  againe  to  Court
to  take  my  leave  of  the  Emperour,  and  so  I  did,  and
being  come  into  his  presence,  he  told  me  briefly,  that
he  desired  such  league  and  friendshippe  with  the  Queene
my  Mistresse,  as  his  father  heretofore  had  had,  and
for  the  summe  of  my  dispatche,  delivered  unto  mee
a  letter,  which  hee  had  written  to  her  Majestie,  which
I  received.

Thus  within  a  fortnight  after  this,  I  had  post  horses
provided  mee,  and  having  furnished  them  for  the  use  of
my  companie,  I  tooke  horse,  and  departed  from  Mosco,
on  the  29.  of  May  being  then  Saturday,  about  two  of
the  clocke  in  the  afternoone :  I  was  accompanied  out
of  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  with  Mekita,  and  the  four
Prestaves,  and  other  Gentlemen  and  servants,  who  having
brought  me  some  part  of  my  way,  about  two  versts
from  the  Citie,  there  tooke  their  leave,  and  departed
backe  againe :  Onely  Mekita  accompanied  mee  still,  and
went  with  mee  to  S.  Nicholas.

This  Saturday  at  night  I  lodged  at  a  place  about
4  versts  from  Bratezeve,  which  Bratezeve  is  from  Mosco
30.  versts.

On  Sunday  I  ridde  forewardes  towardes  Troits,  which
is  also  30.  versts  from  Bratezeve :  where  I  dined  that
day,  and  lodged  that  night  at  Doobna  300.  versts  from
Troits.

On  Munday  I  ridde  to  Peraslave  20.  versts  from
Doobna,  and  there  dined,  and  lodged  that  night  at
Rogozeve,  12  versts  from  Peraslave.

On  tuesday  I  ridde  to  Deobala,  and  from  thence
to  Rostove,  where  I  lodged,  which  is  48  versts  from
Deobola.

484

APPENDIX  AD.

1584.

On Wednesday I ridde to Sheupza,  where I dined  Sheupza.
and  lodged  that  night  at  Jeraslave  in  my  olde  lodging,  •^^''^•f'''^^^-
which  Jeraslave  is  25.  versts  from  Sheupza.

On  thursday  in  the  afternoone,  I  went  to  the  Volga,
to  have  passed  it  over  by  ferrie,  but  the  wind  was  high,
and  all  things  not  readie,  and .  I  returned  againe  to
Jeraslave  for  that  night.

On  Friday  I  past  the  river,  and  lodged  that  night  at  Davikske.
Davileske,  being  43  versts  from  Vochfur,  where  I  dined
that  day.

On Saturday I ridde from Davileske to Teletske,  Teletske.
where  I  rested  that  night.

On  Sunday  I  ridde  from  Teletske  to  Obnorske,  which Camebkie.
was  20.  versts. Therehence the  next  day  to  Camelski, ^%^'''^-
which  was  20  versts  more,  and  so  upon  tuesday  I  came
to Vologda 30. versts from Camelski. At Vologda
I rested till Sunday morning, and then went downe
the  River.

The  thursday  seventh  night  after  at  night,  I  came  5.  Nicholas.
to  S.  Nicholas,  and  there  remayned  till  our  English
shipping  were  readie  to  way  for  our  voyage  homewards,
which  was  the  tenth  day  of  August  following,  at  which
time  Mekyta,  which  accompanied  mee  hither  from  Mosco
tooke  his  leave  of  me,  and  I  imbarked  my  selfe,  and
my  whole  companie  in  the  bay  or  roade,  and  arrived
in  safetie  at  Gravesend,  the  12.  day  of  September  next
ensuing.

END OF VOLUME III.

Date  Due

1

^^^3  6 mi

1

Library  Bureau  Cat.  No.  1137

w

ELLS  BINDERY  INC.
ALTHAM,  MASS.
JULY  1962

9iaaiiI2:3

Ha..Ac.?.902  00074  2002

The  principal  navigations

voyages  traffi

G  240  . H2  1903  3

Hakluyt.,  R±chard,  15f52?-
1616,

The  principal  navlgfat.lons
yo'i^a'Qfe'S^  t.r  aff  io[ues^  &

V,

y (
