The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation, Vol. 9 (Richard Hakluyt, 1598)
==========================================================
Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1598-1600) - the great English voyage collection that made travel literature a national epic; the source-book for every Elizabethan voyage narrative. The 12-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1903-05), the standard complete edition. Vol. 9 of 12.

Navigations  Voyages  Traffiques  and

Discoveries  of  the  EngHsh  Nation

In  Twelve  Volumes
Volume IX

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE 6=  COMPANY LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO,  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMIV

PKolDiJ^ravurB  by  AnTia.R  Zc  Bona,  [jlaflQ^ow,

SIR WALTER RALEGH

The Principal

Navigations  Vpyages
Traffiques  &  Discoveries

of  the  English Nation

Made by Sea or Over-land to the

Remote  and  Farthest  Distant  Quarters

of  the  Earth at any  time within  the

compasse  of  these 1600  Yeeres

By

RICHARD HAKLUYT

Preacher,  and  sometime  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford

VOLUME  IX

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the University
New  York : The  Macmillan  Company

1

THE TABLE

)

\

PAGE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages  of  this  ninth  volume

made  to  Florida  and  New  Mexico,  certeine

Voyages  made  for  the  discovery  of  the  gulfe

*' of  California, and to the famous city  of

Mexico  ; with  the  Discourses  and  Letters

^  depending  upon  the  Voyages  of  this  ninth

Volume  :

The  voiage  of  captaine  Rene  Laudonniere  to  Florida  1564.
where  he  fortified  and  inhabited  two  sunamers,  and  one
whole  winter  ......  i

An  oration  of  Laudonniere  to  his  mutinous  souldiers.  .  46

A  second  voyage  of  captaine  John  Ribault  to  Florida  1565.  82

A  letter  of  the  lord  admirall  of  France  unto  M.  Laudonniere.  85

The  voyage  of  captaine  Dominique  Gourgues  to  Florida
1567.  where  he  most  valiantly,  justly,  and  sharpely
revenged  the  bloody  and  inhumane  massacre  committed
by  the  Spaniards  upon  his  countreymen,  in  the  yeere
1565.  ....... 100

The  relation  of  Pedro  Morales  a  Spaniard,  whom  sir  Francis
Drake  brought  from  S.  Augustines  in  Florida,  touching
the  state  of  those  parts. .  .  ,  .  .112

The  relation  of  Nicolas  Burgoignon,  alias  Holy,  whom  sir

Francis  Drake  brought  also  from  S.  Augustines.  . 113

V

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

A  Briefe  discourse  of  the  famous  cosmographer  M.  John
Baptista  Ramusius,  concerning  the  three  voyages  of
frier  Marco  de  Nifa,  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado,
and  that  of  Fernando  Alarchon,  &c. .  .  . 115

An  extract  of  a  letter  of  C.  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado,
written  from  Culiacan  the  8  of  March  1 539,  to  a  secre-
tary of  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a  the  viceroy  of  Nueva
Espanna. .  .  .  .  .  .  ,116

A  letter  of  the  sayd  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado  governour
of  Nueva  Galicia,  to  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a  the
viceroy  of  Nueva  Espanna,  written  from  Culiacan  the
8  of  March  1539. .  .  .  .  .  .118

A  letter  written  by  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a,  a  viceroy  of

Nueva  Espanna  to  the  emperour  Charles  the  fift.  . 121

The  voyage  of  frier  Marco  de  Ni9a  from  the  towne  of  S.
Michael  in  the  province  of  Culiacan,  to  the  kingdome
of  Cevola  or  Cibola,  situate  about  30  degrees  of  latitude
to  the  North  of  Nueva  Espanna,  begun  the  7  of  March,
1539 125

The  voyage  of  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado  from  Nueva
Galicia  to  Cibola,  Acuco,  Tiguex,  Quivira,  &  to  the
Westerne  Ocean  :  begun  the  22  of  April,  1540.  . 145

A  testimony  of  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara,  concerning  the
strange  crook-backed  oxen,  the  great  sheepe,  and  the
mighty  dogs  of  Quivira. .  .  .  .  ,167

A  briefe  relation  of  two  notable  voyages,  the  first  made  by
frier  Augustin  Ruyz,  a  Franciscan,  in  the  yeere  1581 ;
the  second  by  Antonio  de  Espejo  in  the  yeere  1583. . 169

A  letter  intercepted  of  Bartholomew  del  Cano,  written  from
Mexico  the  30  of  May  1590,  to  Francis  Hernandez
of  Sivil,  concerning  the  speedy  building  of  two  strong
forts  in  S.  Juan  de  Ullua,  and  Vera  Cruz,  as  also
touching  the  notable  new  and  rich  discovery  of  Cibola
or  New  Mexico,  400  leagues  Northwest  of  Mexico. . 204

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

The  voyage  of  the  right  worshipfull  knight  Francisco  de
UUoa,  with  3  ships  set  forth  at  the  charges  of  the
right  noble  Fernando  Cortez,  by  the  coasts  of  Nueva
Galicia,  &  Culiacan,  into  the  gulfe  of  California,  called
El  mar  vermejo,  as  also  on  the  backside  of  Cape  Cali-
fornia, as  far  as  30  degrees,  begun  from  Acapulco  the
8  of  July,  1539.  ...... 206

The  voyage  and  discovery  of  Fernando  Alarchon,  made  by
the  order  of  the  R.  H.  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a
viceroy  of  New  Spaine,  to  the  very  bottome  of  the
gulfe  of  California,  and  85  leagues  up  the  river  of
Buena  Guia,  begun  the  9  of  May,  1540.  .  . 279

An  extract  of  a  Spanish  letter  written  from  Pueblo  de  los
Angeles  in  Nueva  Espanna  in  October  1597,  touching
the  discovery  of  the  rich  islands  of  California,  being
distant  eight  dayes  sailing  from  the  maine. .  . 318

The  voyage  and  course  which  sir  Francis  Drake  held  from
the  haven  of  Guatulco,  on  the  backside  of  Nueva
Espanna,  to  the  Northwest  of  California,  as  far  as
43  degrees,  &  from  thence  backe  againe  to  38  de-
grees, where  in  a  very  good  harbour  he  graved  his
shippe,  entrenched  himselfe  on  land,  called  the  countrey
by  the  name  of  Nova  Albion,  and  tooke  possession
thereof  on  the  behalfe  of  her  Majestic. .  . . 319

The  memorable  voyage  of  Francis  Gualle  a  Spanish  captaine
and  pilot,  undertaken  at  the  appointment  of  the  viceroy
of  New  Spaine,  from  the  haven  of  Acapulco  in  the  sayd
province,  to  the  islands  of  the  Lu9ones  or  the  Philip-
pinas,  unto  the  haven  of  Manilla,  and  from  thence  to
the  haven  of  Macao  in  China ;  and  from  Macao  by
the  Lequeos,  the  isles  of  Japan,  and  other  isles  to  the
East  of  Japan,  and  likewise  by  the  Northwest  part  of
America  in  37  degrees  and  ^  backe  againe  to  Acapulco,
begun  the  10  of  March  1582,  &  ended  1584.  Out
vii

THE TABLE

A  Catalogue  of  the  Voyages — Continued.  page

of  which  voyage,  besides  great  probabilities  of  a  North,
Northwest,  or  Northeast  passage,  may  evidently  be
gathered,  that  the  sea  betweene  Japan  and  America
is  by  many  hundred  leagues  broader,  and  the  land
betweene  Cape  Mendo9ino  and  Cape  California,  is
by  many  hundred  leagues  narrower,  then  we  finde  them
to  be  in  the  ordinary  maps  and  relations.  .  .326

The  voyage  of  Robert  Tomson  merchant  into  New  Spaine,

in  the  yere  1555. ...... 338

The  voyage  of  M.  Roger  Bodenham  to  Sant  Juan  de  Ullua
in  the  bay  of  Mexico,  and  from  thence  to  the  city  of
Mexico,  Anno  1564.  ..... 359

The  memorable  voyage  of  M.  John  Chilton  to  all  the  prin-
cipal! parts  of  Nueva  Espanna,  and  to  divers  places  in
Peru,  begun  from  Cadiz  in  Andaluzia,  in  March  1568. 360

The  voyage  of  Henrie  Hawks  merchant  to  Nueva  Espanna
(in  which  countrey  he  travelled  for  the  space  of  five
yeres,  and  observed  many  notable  things)  written  at
the  request  of  M.  Richard  Hakluyt  of  Eyton  in  the
county  of  Hereford  esquire,  1572.  .  .  . 378

The  voyage  of  Miles  Philips  one  of  the  company  put  on
shore  by  sir  John  Hawkins,  1568,  a  little  to  the  North
of  Panuco  ;  from  whence  he  travelled  to  Mexico  and,
afterward  to  sundry  other  places,  having  remained  in
the  countrey  15  or  16  yeeres  together,  &  noted  many
things  most  worthy  the  observation. .  .  . 398

The  travels  of  Job  Hortop  set  on  land  by  sir  John  Hawkins
1586  in  the  bay  of  Mexico,  somewhat  to  the  North  of
Panuco  before  mentioned.  .... 445

A  relation  of  the  haven  of  Tecuanapa,  a  most  convenient
place  for  building  of  ships,  situate  upon  the  South  sea
not  farre  from  Nicaragua.  .... 466

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  ..... Frontispiece

Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  the  son  of  a  Devonshire  country-
gentleman,  was  born  near  Budleigh  Salterton,  South
Devon,  about  1552.  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  was
his  half  brother  by  his  mother's  first  marriage.  In
1569  he  joined  the  Huguenots  in  France  as  a
volunteer.  He  was  at  Oriel  College,  Oxford,  in
1572.  In  September  1578  he  assisted  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert  in  fitting  out  his  first  expedition  at
Dartmouth,  and  himself  commanded  the  *  Falcon '
of  100  tons.  The  expedition  returned  in  1579.
From  June  1580  to  December  1581  he  saw  service  in
Ireland,  and  being  then  sent  with  despatches  to  the
Court  at  Greenwich,  he  quickly  sprang  into  favour
with  Elizabeth.  He  was  knighted  in  1584,  and  in
1585  was  appointed  Warden  of  the  Stannaries,  lord
lieutenant  of  Cornwall  and  vice-admiral  of  Cornwall
and  Devon,  He  sat  as  member  for  Devonshire  in
Parliament  in  1585-86,  and  in  1586  he  was  granted
40,000  acres  of  land  in  Munster.  On  the  25th
March  1584  he  was  granted  a  patent  *for  the  dis-
covering and  planting  of  new  lands  and  Countries,'
and  as  a  result  he  founded  the  first  English  colony
of  Virginia.  The  accounts  of  the  various  expedi-
tions to  Virginia  sent  out  by  him  are  given  in
Hakluyt,  Vol.  VIIL,  pp.  289  seq.  He  is  said  to
have  spent  over  j^ 40,000  (about  ^^  3  20,000  of
our  money)  in  his  Virginian  expeditions.  About
ix

ILLUSTRATIONS

1586  he  introduced  the  potato  into  Great  Britain
and  is  believed  to  have  been  the  first  English
gentleman  to  smoke  tobacco.  In  1591  he  was
appointed  second  in  command  under  Lord  Thomas
Howard  in  the  expedition  to  the  Azores  in  that
year,  but  the  Queen  refused  to  let  him  go  and
Sir  Richard  Grenville  was  appointed  in  his  place.
Ralegh's  account  of  the  last  fight  of  the  '  Revenge '
will be  found  in Hakluyt,  Vol.  VII.,  p. 38. In

1592  he  contributed  very  largely  to  the  expedition
under  Frobisher  and  Burgh  which  captured  the
'Madre  de  Dios'  (Hakluyt,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  105),  but  in
July  of  that  year  he  was  disgraced  and  imprisoned
in the  Tower,  but  was  released in  October, In

1593  he  was  returned  to  Parliament  for  Michael,  in
Cornwall.  In  1594  he  sent  Jacob  Whiddon  to  ex-
plore the  Orinoco,  and  early  in  1595  he  headed  an
expedition  to  Guiana  himself  He  ascended  the
Orinoco  for  about  450  miles  in  quest  of  the  gold
mine  of  Manoa,  but  was  unsuccessful  in  his  search.
On  his  return  to  England  he  wrote  his  'Discoverie
of  Guiana'  (Hakluyt,  Vol.  IX.).  In  June  1596
he  commanded,  with  great  distinction,  the  '  War-
spite  '  in  the  Cadiz  expedition  and  was  severely
wounded.  In  1597  he  sailed,  as  second  in  com-
mand under  Essex,  to  the  Azores  and  took  Fayal.
He  was  elected  member  for  Dorset  in  1597  and
for  Cornwall  in  1601.  In  September  1600  he
was  appointed  Governor  of  Jersey.  On  the  acces-
sion of  James  I.  Ralegh  was  stripped  of  all  his
posts  and  monopolies,  sent  to  the  Tower  for
alleged  complicity  in  Lord  Cobham's  conspiracy,
and  condemned  to  be  executed  on  iith  December
1603.  On  the  loth  December,  however,  he  was
reprieved.  From  1603  to  1616  he  was  a  prisoner
in  the  Tower,  and  there  wrote  his  '  History  of
the  World.'  About  1610  Ralegh  requested  per-
mission to  organise  another  expedition  to  Guiana.
In  March i6i6 he  was  released  from the  Tower

x

ILLUSTRATIONS

and  began  to  make  preparations  for  this  expedition.
He  sailed  from  Plymouth  with  14  ships  on  12th
June  1 61 7.  The  expedition  was  a  complete  failure,
and  in  an  attack  on  the  town  of  San  Thomas
Ralegh's  son  Walter  was  killed,  Ralegh  returned
to  Plymouth  with  four  ships  in  June  161 8.  Shortly
after  he  was  arrested,  chiefly  on  the  representation
of  the  Spanish  Ambassador.  He  was  taken  to
London  and,  attempting  to  escape,  was  again  sent
to  the  Tower.  On  the  28th  of  October,  161 8,
he  was  condemned  on  his  former  sentence  and
was  beheaded  on  Tower  Hill  on  the  following
morning.  He  was  buried  in  St.  Margaret's  Church
Westminster.  The  portrait  here  reproduced  is  taken
from  the  original,  attributed  to  Zuccharo,  in  the
Dublin  Gallery.

Rene  Laudonnifere, ......

Ren6  Goulaine  de  Laudonni^re,  a  French  Captain,  was
one  of  the  first  explorers  of  Florida.  In  1561
Admiral  Coligny  wishing  to  find  a  safe  retreat  for
the  persecuted  Huguenots  formed  the  project  of
founding  a  Protestant  colony  in  the  New  World.
A  first  expedition  to  Brazil  had  been  a  complete
failure,'  and  Coligny  next  cast  his  eyes  on  Florida,
from  which  the  Spanish  had  been  driven  by  the
natives.  The  expedition,  which  had  the  approval
of  Charles  IX.,  sailed  from  Dieppe  on  the  15th
February  1562  under  the  command  of  Ribaut  and
Laudonniere.  The  fortunes  of  the  colonists,  and
of  the  relief  expedition  which  left  Havre  on  the
22nd  April  1564  are  recorded  very  fully  by  Hak-
luyt.  On  his  final  return  to  France  in  1566
Laudonniere  was  very  coldly  received  by  the
Court,  and  he  died  in  obscurity.  The  portrait
is  taken  from  the  Effigies  Regum  of  Crispin  de
Passe  in  the  Grenville  Library  in  the  British
Museum.

xi

PAGE

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Map  of  Florida  by  James  Le  Moyne,  a.d.  1564, . 112

'The  skillful  painter'  James  Le  Moyne  de  Mourgues,
'sometime  living  in  the  Black-fryers  in  London'
accompanied  the  second  expedition  under  Laudon-
niere  in  1564  for  the  relief  of  the  French  colonists
in  Florida.  He  was  sent  out  by  '  Monsieur
Chastillion,  then  Admiral  of  France/  and  his
sketches  '  lively  drawn  in  colours '  were  engraved
and  published  in  De  Bry's  Collections  of  Travels
and  Voyages,  Grands  (America)  Voyages,  Part  IL,
Frankfort  1591.  The  Map  here  reproduced  is
taken  from  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of
De  Bry's  Collections.

Map  of  the  Coasts  of  China  .  . . . -336

This  map,  which  shows  the  '  trew  description  of  all  the
coasts  of  China,  Cauchinchina,  Camboya,  Syao,
Malacca,  Arraacan,  Pegu,  together  with  all  the
Islands  thereabowts,  both  great  and  smale,  with
the  cliffes,  breaches,  sands,  droughts  and  shallowes,
all  perfectly  drawn  and  examined  with  the  most
expert  cardes  of  the  Portingales  Pilots'  was  engraved
by  Robert  Beckit  and  printed  in  London  by  John
Wolfe  in  1598.  The  reproduction  is  taken  from
the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  of  John  Huighen
van  Linschoten  Ms  Discours  of  Voyages  unto  ye  Easte
and  Weste  Indies,  London, 1598.

Sir  John  Hawkins, ...... 400

Sir  John  Hawkins  or  Hawkyns  was  born  in  Plymouth
in  1532.  While  a  young  man  he  made  'divers
voyages  to  the  Isles  of  the  Canaries '  and  learnt
'  that  Negros  were  very  good  merchandise  in  His-
paniola  and  that  store  of  Negros  might  easily  bee
had  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea.'  About  1559  he
married  Katharine,  daughter  of  Benjamin  Gonson,
treasurer  of  the  Navy.  In  October  1562  he
commanded  an  expedition  to  Guinea  and  got  into
xii

ILLUSTRATIONS

his  possession  '  partly  by  the  sworde,  and  partly
by  other  means  to  the  number  of  300  Negros  at
the  least,  besides  other  merchandises  which  that
country  yieldeth.'  He  then  sailed  for  Hispaniola,
sold  his  cargo  and  loaded  his  three  ships  and  two
other  hulks  with  hides,  ginger,  sugar  and  pearls  and
arrived  home  in  September  1563.  In  1564  he  set
out  with  a  larger  fleet  on  the  same  route  and  coast-
ing along  Florida  he  found  Laudonniere's  French
colony,  which  he  relieved,  winning  '  the  reputation
of  a  good  and  charitable  man,  deserving  to  be
esteemed  as  much  of  us  all  as  if  he  had  saved  all
our  lives.'  He  arrived  at  Padstow  on  the  20th
September  1565.  On  the  2nd  October  1567  he
set  out  on  his  '  third  troublesome  voyage,'  during
which  he  was  attacked  by  the  Spaniards  in  the
harbour  of  San  Juan  d'UUoa  and  very  narrowly
escaped.  After  suffering  great  hardships  on  the
voyage  home,  *  for  hides  were  thought  very  good
meat,  rats,  cats,  mice  and  dogs,  none  escaped  that
might  be  gotten,'  he  arrived  in  Mounts  Bay  on
25th  January  1569.  In  1572  he  was  Member  of
Parliament  for  Plymouth.  On  nth  October  1573
he  was  stabbed  whilst  riding  in  the  Strand  and  was
dangerously  wounded,  the  Queen  sending  her  own
surgeon  to  attend  him.  About  this  time  he  was
made  treasurer  and  comptroller  of  the  Navy,  and
it  was  largely  owing  to  his  skill  and  experience  that
the  Navy  was  thoroughly  equipped  to  meet  the
Armada.  Hawkins  was  third  in  command  of  the
English  fleet  on  the  *  Victory  '  during  the  struggle
with  the  Armada.  He  was  in  the  thick  of  the
fighting  and  was  knighted  by  Lord  Howard  of
Effingham  for  his  bravery.  In  1590  he,  with  Fro-
bisher,  commanded  a  squadron  sent  to  the  coast
of  Portugal.  In  November  1591  he  was  one  of
the  commissioners  for  the  proper  division  of  prizes
taken  at  sea.  On  28th  August  1595  he  sailed  with
Drake in the expedition '  chiefly pretended for

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

some  speciall  service  on  the  Islands  and  maine  of
the  West  Indies,'  but  died  off  Porto  Rico  on  the
1 2th  November.  The  portrait  reproduced  is  taken
from  the  copy  of  Holland's  Heroolo^a  in  the  British
Museum.

The  Jesus  of  Lubeck, . . . . . .416

The  '  Jesus  of  Lubeck '  was  a  ship  of  700  tons.  She  wz.i
bought  by  Henry  VIII.  for  his  Navy  from  the
Merchants  of  Lubeck  in  1544.  On  the  accession
'of  Elizabeth,  the  'Jesus'  was  condemned,  but  was
afterwards  retained,  and  in  1564  was,  in  accordance
with  the  custom  of  the  times,  lent  to  Sir  John
Hawkins  for  a  voyage  to  Guinea  (Hakluyt,  Vol.
VI.,  p.  263).  In  1567  she  was  again  lent  to
Hawkins  for  his  voyage  to  the  West  Indies  by  way
of  Guinea.  On  the  12th  August,  1568,  Hawkins'
fleet  was  caught  by  '  an  extreme  storme  which  con-
tinued by  the  space  of  foure  days,  which  so  beat
the  Jesus,  that  we  cut  downe  all  her  higher  build-
ings, her  rudder  also  was  sore  shaken,  and  withall
was  in  so  extreme  a  leake  that  we  were  rather  upon
the  point  to  leave  her  then  to  keepe  her  any  longer.'
On  the  1 6th  September  the  fleet  entered  San  Juan
d'UUoa  ;  on  the  23rd  the  fight  with  the  Spaniards
took  place  during  which  the  'Jesus'  was  abandoned.
She  was  the  first  of  only  two  ships  of  Elizabeth's
Navy  to  fall  into  Spanish  hands,  the  other  being  Sir
Richard  Grenville's  '  Revenge.'  The  armament  of
the  'Jesus'  was  as  follows;  Cannons  (50  or  60
pounders),  2  ;  culverins  (long  1 8  pounders),  2  ;
demi-culverins  (long  9  pounders),  8  ;  sacres  (long  5
pounders),  8  ;  falcons  (3  pounders),  2.  Her  breach-
loading  pieces  were  :  slings,  2  ;  fowlers,  10  ;  bases,
30  (Corbett,  Drake  and  the  Tudor  Navy,  Vol,  I.,
p.  114  note).  The  illustrations  of  the  'Jesus'  and
the  '  Minion '  are  taken  from  the  original  water-
colour  paintings  by  Anthony  Anthony  in  the  Pepys

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Library,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,  and are
inserted  by  permission  of  the  College  authorities.

The  Minion, 43^

The  'Minion'  *of  the  Queenes'  was  built  in  1523  for
Henry  VIII.'s  navy.  She  was  originally  of  180
tons  but  was  rebuilt  about  1536  as  a  300  ton
ship.  She  was  given  to  Sir  Thomas  Seymour
about  1549,  but  about  1560  her  name  reappears  in
the  Navy  Lists.  (Oppenheim,  Administration  of  the
Royal  Navy.)  In  1561  she  was  lent  to  the  Guinea
merchants  and  was  damaged  in  an  action  with  the
Portuguese  (Hakluyt,  Vol.  VL,  p.  260).  In  1564
she  was  again  employed  in  the  Guinea  trade  and
in  1567-68  she  formed  one  of  Hawkins'  fleet  in
his  third  expedition  to  Guinea  and  the  West
Indies.  She  was  so  badly  damaged  at  San  Juan
d'Ulloa  and  'so  sore  beaten  with  shot  from  our
enemies  and  brused  with  shooting  off  our  own
ordinance'  that  with  the  greatest  difficulty  she
was  brought  into  Mounts  Bay  in  Cornwall  on  the
25th  of  January  1569.  She  was  condemned  in
1570.

Map  of  the  World  by  Peter  Plancius  a.d.  1594, . 474

Peter  Plancius  was  born  in  1552.  He  was  a  Calvinistic
preacher,  pastor  of  the  church  at  Amsterdam,  but
his  chief  title  to  fame  is  his  service  to  geography.
He  maintained  the  existence  of  an  open  polar  sea,
and  he  induced  the  people  of  Amsterdam  to  despatch
an  expedition  to  seek  a  passage  north  of  Novaya
,  Zemlya  under  Willem  Barents.  He  died  on  25  th
May  1622  (Markham,  John  Davis  the  Navigator^
Hakluyt  Society,  1880).  The  Map  is  interesting
as  being  one  of  the  few  attempts  to  apply  the
principles  of  Mercator's  '  projection '  before  their
correct  demonstration  by  Edward  Wright.  The
engraved  margin  shows  the  inhabitants  and  products

ILLUSTRATIONS

of  the  various  divisions  of  the  globe,  *  Mexicana '
representing  North  America,  *  Peruana '  South
America,  and  '  Magallanica '  the  supposed  great
Southern  Continent.  The  celestial  circles,  with
the  quaint  drawings  of  the  principal  constella-
tions, are  also  of  great  interest.  The  Map  is
reproduced  from  a  copy  of  Linschoten's  Itinerario
(published  at  Amsterdam  in  1604-5)  in  the  British
Museum.

THE NINTH VOLUME

OF THE

Principall  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffiques
and  Discoveries  of  the  English  Nation

Made to florida and New Mexico  ; certeine

Voyages  made  for  the  discovery  ot  the  Gulfe

of  California,  and  to  the  famous  city  of

Mexico,  with the  Discourses  and

Letters  depending  upon  the

Voyages  of  this  ninth

Volume

The  second  voyage  unto  Florida,  made  and  written
by  Captaine  Laudonniere,  which  fortified  and
inhabited  there  two  Summers  and  one  whole
Winter.

Fter  our  arrivall  at  Diepe,  at  our  comming
home,  from  our  first  voyage  (which  was
the  twentieth  of  July  1562)  we  found
the  civil  warres  begun,  which  was  in
part  the  cause  why  our  men  were  not
succoured,  as  Captaine  John  Ribault  had
promised  them  :  whereof  it  fDllowed  that
Captaine  Albert  was  killed  by  his  souldiers,  and  the
country  abandoned,  as  heretofore  we  have  sufficiently
discoursed,  and  as  it  may  more  at  large  be  understood
by  those  men  which  were  there  in  person.  After  the
peace  was  made  in  France,  my  Lord  Admiral  De  Chas-
tillon  shewed  unto  the  king,  that  he  heard  no  newes  at
all  of  the  men  which  Captaine  John  Ribault  had  left  in
Florida,  &  that  it  were  pity  to  suffer  them  to  perish.
In  which  respect,  the  king  was  content  he  should  cause
3  ships  to  be  furnished,  the  one  of  sixe  score  tunnes,
the  other  of  100,  and  the  third  of  60,  to  seeke  them
out,  and  to  succour  them.

My  Lord  Admirall  therefore  being  well  infarmed  of
the  faithfull  service  which  I  had  done,  aswell  unto  his
Majestie  as  to  his  predecessors  kings  of  France,  adver-
tised the  king  how  able  I  was  to  doe  him  service  in  this
voyage,  which  was  the  cause  that  he  made  me  chiefe
Captaine over these 3 shippes, and charged me to

IX  I  A

The  c'tvill
warres  the
cause  why  the
Frenchmen
were  not  sup-
plied, which
were  left  be-
hinde  in  their
first  voyage.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

depart  with diligence to performe his commandement,
which  for  mine  owne part I would not gainesay,  but
rather thinking my  selfe happy to have bene chosen
out  among  such  an infinite number of others, which
in  my  judgement  were  very  well  able  to have quitted
Laudonniers themselves in this charge, I embarked my selfe at
7o%irida^' New  Haven  the  22  of  Aprill 1564,  and  sayled  so,  that
with  three ^^  ^^ neere  unto  the  coast  of  England : and then I
ships  the  22 turned towards the South, to sayle directly to the
of  Aprill fortunate Islands, at this present called the  Canaries,
1564-  one of which called the Isle Salvage (because  as I

thinke  it  is  altogether  without  inhabitants)  was  the  first
that  our  ships  passed.  Sayling  therefore  on  forward,
The  Isle  of  ^g  landed  the  next  day  in  the  Isle  of  Teneriifa,
tk"^Pk  °^  otherwise  called  the  Pike,  because  that  in  the  middest
thereof  there  is  an  exceeding  high  mountaine,  neere  as
high  as  that  of  Etna,  which  riseth  up  like  a  pike,  into
the  top  whereof  no  man  can  go  up  but  from  the
middest  of  May  untill  the  middest  of  August,  by
reason  of  the  over  great  colde  which  is  there  all  the
yere :  which  is  a  wonderfull  strange  thing,  considering
that  it  is  not  past  27  degrees  and  an  half  distant  from
the  Equator.  We  saw  it  all  covered  over  with  snow,
although  it  were  then  but  the  fift  of  May.  The
inhabitants  in  this  Isle  being  heretofore  pursued  by  the
Spaniards,  retired  themselves  into  this  mountaine,  where
for  a  space  they  made  warre  with  them,  and  would  not
submit  themselves  to  their  obedience,  neither  by  foule
nor  faire  meanes,  they  disdained  so  much  the  losse  of
their  Island.  For  those  which  went  thither  on  the
Spaniards  behalfe,  left  their  carkases  there,  so  that
not  so  much  as  one  of  them  returned  home  to
bring  newes.  Notwithstanding  in  the  ende,  the  in-
habitants not  able  to  live  in  that  place  according  to
their  nature,  or  for  want  of  such  things  as  were
necessary  for  the  commoditie  of  their  livelyhood,  did
all  die  there.  After  I  had  furnished  my  selfe  with
some fresh water, very good and excellent, which

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.

sprang  out  of  a  rocke  at  the  foote  of  this mountaine,

I  continued  my  course  toward the  West, wherein the

windes  favoured me so well,  that 15 dayes after our

ships arrived safe and sound at the Antilles : and

going  on land at  the Isle of  Marti nino, one of  the  ^'^^  ^/^f  °f

first  of  them,  the next day we arrived at Dominica, ^^{^^,^^°-

twelve  leagues  distant  from  the  former.  island.

Dominica  is  one  of  the  fayrest  Islands  of  the  West,
full  of  hilles,  and  of  very  good  smell.  Whose
singularities  desiring  to  know  as  we  passed,  and
seeking  also  to  refresh  our  selves  with  fresh  water,  I
made  the  Mariners  cast  anker,  after  wee  had  sayled
about  halfe  along  the  coast  thereof.  As  soone  as  we
had  cast  anker,  two  Indians  (inhabitants  of  that  place)
sayled  toward  us  in  two  Canoas  full  of  a  fruite  of
great  excellencie  which  they  call  Ananas.  As  they  Ananas  a
approched  unto our  Barke, there was one of them  fiu'^teoj great

I'll-  •  • J u^ r  ^ -L 1 excellencie.

which bemg m some misdoubt or us, went backe

againe  on  land,  and  fled  his  way  with  as  much  speede
as  he  could  possibly.  Which  our  men  perceived  and  [III.  320.]
entred  with  diligence  into  the  other  Canoa,  wherein
they  caught  the  poore  Indian,  &  brought  him  unto
me.  But  the  poore  fellow  became  so  astonied  in  be-
holding us,  that  he  knew  not  which  way  to  behave
himselfe,  because  that  (as  afterward  I  understood)  he
feared  that  he  was  fallen  into  the  Spaniards  hands,
of  whom  he  had  bene  taken  once  before,  and  which,
as  he  shewed  us,  had  cut  of  his  stones.  At  length
this  poore  Indian  was  secure  of  us,  and  discoursed
unto  us  of  many  things,  wherof  we  received  very
small  pleasure,  because  we  understood  not  his  minde
but  by  his  signes.  Then  he  desired  me  to  give  him  leave
to  depart,  and  promised  me  that  he  would  bring  me  a
thousand  presents,  whereunto  I  agreed  on  condition  that
he  would  have  patience  untill  the  next  day,  when  I  pur-
posed to  goe  on  land,  where  I  suffered  him  to  depart
after  I  had  given  him  a  shirte,  and  certaine  small  trifles,
wherewith  he  departed  very  well  contented  from  us.

3

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

The  place  where  we  went  on  shore  was  hard  by  a
very  high  Rocke,  out  of  which  there  ran  a  litle  river
of  sweet  and  excellent  good  water ;  by  which  river  we
stayed  certaine  dayes  to  discover  the  things  which  were
worthy  to  be  scene,  and  traffiqued  dayly  with  the
Indians :  which  above  all  things  besought  us  that  none
of  our  men  should  come  neere  their  lodgings  nor
their  gardens,  otherwise  that  we  should  give  them
great  cause  of  jelousie,  and  that  in  so  doing,  wee  should
not  want  of  their  fruite  which  they  call  Ananas,
whereof  they  offered  us  very  liberally,  receiving  in
recompence  certaine  things  of  small  value.  This  not-
withstanding, it  happened  on  a  day  that  certaine  of
our  men  desirous  to  see  some  new  things  in  these
strange  countries,  walked  through  the  woods :  and
following  still  the  litle  rivers  side,  they  spied  two
serpents  of  exceeding  bignes,  which  went  side  by  side
overthwart  the  way.  My  souldiers  went  before  them
thinking  to  let  them  from  going  into  the  woods  :  but
the  serpents  nothing  at  all  astonied  at  these  gestures
glanced  into  the  bushes  with  fearful  hyssings :  yet  for
all  that,  my  men  drew  their  swords  and  killed  them,
and  found  them  afterward  9  great  foote  long,  and  as
big  as  a  mans  leg.  During  this  combate,  certaine
others  more  undiscreete  went  and  gathered  their  Ananas
in  the  Indians  gardens,  trampling  through  them  with-
out any  discretion :  and  not  therewithall  contented
they  went  toward  their  dwellings  ;  whereat  the  Indians
were  so  much  offended,  that  without  regarding  any
thing  they  rushed  upon  them  and  discharged  their
shot,  so  that  they  hit  one  of  my  men  named  Martine
Chaveau,  which  remained  behind.  We  could  not  know
whether  hee  were  killed  on  the  place,  or  whether  he
were  taken  prisoner :  for  those  of  his  company  had
inough  to  doe  to  save  themselves  without  thinking  of
their  companion.  Whereof  Monsieur  de  Ottigni  my
Lieuetenant  being  advertised,  sent  unto  me  to  know
whether  I  thought  good  that  he  should  lay  an  ambush

4

RENE LAUDONNIERE

for  the  Indians  which  had  either  taken  or  killed  our
man,  or  whether  hee  should  go  directly  to  their
dwellings  to  know  the  trueth.  I  sent  unto  him  after
good  deliberation  hereupon,  that  he  should  not  attempt
any  thing,  and  that  for  divers  occasions :  but  contrari-
wise that  he  should  embarke  himself  with  al  diligence,
&  consequently  al  they  that  were  on  land :  which  he
did  with  speed.  But  as  he  sayled  towards  our  ships
he  perceived  along  the  shore  a  great  number  of
Indians  which  began  to  charge  them  with  their
arrowes :  hee  for  his  part  discharged  store  of  shot
against  them,  yet  was  not  able  to  hurt  them,  or  by
any  meanes  to  surprise  them :  for  which  cause  he  quite
forsooke  them,  and  came  unto  our  ship.  Where
staying  untill  the  next  day  morning  we  set  sayle  fol-
lowing our  wonted  course,  and  keeping  the  same,  we
discovered  diverse  Isles  conquered  by  the  Spaniards,
as  the  Isles  of  S.  Christopher,  and  of  the  Saintes,  of
Monserrate,  and  La  Redonda :  Afterward  we  passed
between  Anguilla  and  Anegada,  sayling  toward  New
France.  Where  we  arrived  15  dayes  after,  to  witte,
on  Thurseday  the  22  of  June  about  3  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone,  and  landed  neere  a  litle  river  which
is  30  degrees  distant  from  the  Equator,  and  10  lagues
above  Cape  Fran9ois  drawing  toward  the  South,  and
about  thirtie  leagues  above  the  River  of  May.  After
wee  had  strooken  sayle  and  cast  anker  athwart  the
River,  I  determined  to  goe  on  shore  to  discover  the
same.  Therefore  being  accompanied  with  Monsieur
Ottigni,  with  Monsieur  de  Arlac  mine  Ensigne,  &
a  certaine  number  of  Gentlemen  and  souldiers,  I
embarked  my  selfe  about  3  or  4  of  the  clocke  in
the  evening.  And  being  arrived  at  the  mouth  of
the  river,  I  caused  the  chanell  to  be  sounded,  which
was  found  to  be  very  shallow,  although  that  farther
within  the  same  the  water  was  there  found  reasonable
deepe,  which  separateth  it  selfe  into  two  great  armes,
whereof  one  runneth  toward the  South,  and  the  other

5

A.D.

1564.

His  arrival
in  Florida  the
22  of  June
1564.

Cape  Francois
being  between
the  river  of
Dolphins  and
the  river  of
May,  maketh
the  distance  "i^o
leagues  about,
which  is  but
10  leagues
over  land.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

toward  the  North.  Having  thus  searched  the  River,
I  went  on  land  to  speake  with  the  Indians  which
waited  for  us  upon  the  shore,  which  at  our  comming
on  land,  came  before  us,  crying  with  a  loude  voyce
in  their  Indian  language,  Antipola  Bonassou,  which  is
as  much to say,  as brother, friend, or  some such like

[III.  321.]  thing.  After  they  had  made  very  much  of  us,  they
shewed  us  their  Paracoussy,  that  is  to  say,  their  King
and  Governour,  to  whom  I  presented  certaine  toyes,
wherewith  he  was  well pleased. And for mine owne

The  great  love ^  part, I prayse God continually, for the great love

T'^yrT'v^^^^  which  I  have  found  in  these  Savages,  which  were  sory
for  nothing,  but  that  the  night  approched,  and  made
us  retire  unto  our  ships.

For  though  they  endevoured  by  al  meanes  to  make
us  tary  with  them,  and  shewed  by  signes  the  desire
that  they  had  to  present  us  with  some  rare  things,  yet
neverthelesse  for  many  just  and  reasonable  occasions  I
would  not  stay  on  shore  all  night :  but  excusing  my
selfe  for  all  their  offers,  I  embarked  my  selfe  againe
and returned toward my  ships. Howbeit,  before  my

The  liver  of departure,  I  named  this River,  the  river of  Dolphines,
//^T/ because that at mine arrivall, I saw  there a great

the  Savam  ^^^^iber  of  Dolphines,  which  were  playing  in  the
mouth  thereof.  The  next  day  the  23  of  this  moneth
(because  that  toward  the  South  I  had  not  found  any
commodious  place  for  us  to  inhabit,  and  to  build  a
fort)  I  gave  commandement  to  weigh  anker,  &  to
hoise our sailes to saile toward the river  of May,

Theirarrlvall  where we arrived two dayes after, & cast anker.

nt  the  river  of  ^^^^^^.^-^^ going on land, with some number of
^^'  Gentlemen and Souldiers to know for  a  certaintie  the

singularities  of  this  place,  we  espyed  the  Paracoussy  of
the  countrey,  which  came  towards  us  (this  was  the  very
same  that  we  saw  in  the  voyage  of  Captaine  John  Ribault)
which  having  espied  us,  cryed  very  far  off,  Antipola,
Antipola :  and  being  so  joyful  that  he  could  not  con-
taine  himselfe, he  came to  meet us,  accompanied then

6

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

with  two  of  his  sonnes,  as  faire  and  mightie  persons  as
might  be  found  in  al  the  world,  which  had  nothing  in
their  mouthes  but  this  word,  Amy,  Amy :  that  is  to
say,  friend,  friend :  yea,  and  knowing  those  which  were
there  in  the  first  voyage,  they  went  principally  to  them
to  use  this  speech  unto  them.  There  was  in  their
trayne  a  great  number  of  men  and  women,  which  stil
made  very  much  of  us,  and  by  evident  signes  made  us
understand  how  glad  they  were  of  our  arrivall.  This
good  entertainment  past,  the  Paracoussy  prayed  me  to
goe  see  the  pillar  which  we  had  erected  in  the  voyage  of
John  Ribault  (as  we  have  declared  heretofore)  as  a  thing
which  they  made  great  account  of.

Having  yeelded  unto  him  and  being  come  to  the  place  ^^^^  P'^^^^r  set
where  it  was  set  up,  wee  found  the  same  crowned  with  ?•  7  ■^^'^  -^
crownes of  Bay, and at the foote thereof  many  little  crowned  with
baskets full of Mill which they  call  in  their  language  garlands  of
Tapaga Tapola. Then when they  came thither they  Laurell  and
kissed the  same  with great  reverence  and besought us  ^^^^Jj^^^f^^^-^
to  do  the  like,  which  we  would  not  denie  them,  to  the rn  S^ome,
ende  we  might drawe them to be more in  friendship  worshipped  by
with  us. This  done,  the  Paracoussy  tooke  me  by  the  the  Savages.
hand,  as  if  he  had  desire  to  make  me  understand  some
great  secret,  &  by  signes  shewed  me  very  well  up  within
the  river  the  limits  of  his  dominion,  and  said  that  he  was
called  Paracoussy  Satourioua,  which  is  as  much  as  King  Paracoussy
Satourioua. His children have the selfe  same title  of  Satounoua.
Paracoussy :  The  eldest  is  named  Athore,  a  man,  I  dare
say,  perfect  in  beautie,  wisedome,  and honest  sobrietie,
shewing by  his modest  gravitie that  he  deserveth the
name  which he beareth, besids that he is gentle and
tractable. After  we  had  sojourned  a  certaine  space  with
them,  the  Paracoussy  prayed  one  of  his  sonnes  to  pre-
sent unto  me  a  wedge  of  silver,  which hee did  &  that  ^  wedge  oj
with  a  good  wil :  in  recompence  whereof  I  gave  him  a  "^'^^^''
cutting  hooke  and  some  other  better  present :  wherewith
he  seemed  to  be  very  well  pleased. Afterward  we  tooke
our  leave  of  them,  because  the  night  approched,  &  then

7

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564-

returned  to  lodge  in  our  shippes.  Being  allured  with
this  good  entertainment  I  failed  not  the  next  day  to
imbarke  my  selfe  againe  with  my  Lieutenant  Ottigni  and
a  number  of  souldiers  to  returne  toward  the  Paracoussy
of  the  river  of  May,  which  of  purpose  waited  for  us  in
the  same  place,  where  the  day  before  we  conferred  with
him.  We  found  him  under  the  shadow  of  an  arbour
accompanied  with  fourescore  Indians  at  the  least,  and
apparelled  at  that  time  after  the  Indian  fashion,  to  wit,
with  a  great  Harts  skinne  dressed  like  Chamois,  and
painted  with  devices  of  strange  and  divers  colours,  but
of  so  lively  a  portrature,  and  representing  antiquity,  with
rules  so  justly  compassed,  that  there  is  no  Painter  so
exquisite  that  could  finde  fault  therewith  :  the  naturall
disposition  of  this  strange  people  is  so  perfect  and  well
guided  that  without  any  ayd  and  favour  of  artes,  they  are
able  by  the  helpe  of  nature  onely  to  content  the  eye  of
artizans,  yea  even  of  those  which  by  their  industry  are
able  to  aspire  unto  things  most  absolute.

Then  I  advertised  Paracoussy  Satourioua,  that  my
desire  was  to  discover  farther  up  into  the  river,  but  that
this  should  be  with  such  diligence  that  I  would  come
againe  unto  him  very  speedily :  wherewith  he  was  con-
tent, promising  to  stay  for  me  in  the  place  where  he  was :
and  for  an  earnest  of  his  promise,  he  offered  me  his
goodly  skinne,  which  I  refused  then,  and  promised  to
receive  it  of  him  at  my  returne.  For  my  part  I  gave
him  certaine  small  trifles,  to  the  intent  to  retaine  him  in
our  friendship.

[III.  322.]  Departing  from  thence,  I  had  not  sayled  three  leagues
up  the  river,  still  being  followed  by  the  Indians,  which
coasted  me  a  long  the  river,  crying  still.  Amy,  Amy,  that
is  to  say  friende,  friende :  but  I  discovered  an  hill  of
meane  height,  neere  which  I  went  on  land,  hard  by  the
fieldes  that  were  sowed  with  mil,  at  one  corner  whereof
there  was  an  house  built  for  their  lodging,  which  keepe
and  garde  the  mill :  for  there  are  such  numbers  of  Cor-

Grosses. nish  choughes  in  this  Countrey,  which  continually  devoure

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.

and  spoyle  the  mill,  that  the  Indians  are  constrained  to

keepe  and  watch  it,  otherwise  they  should  be  deceived  of

their  harvest. 1 rested  my  selfe  in  this  place for  cer-

taine  houres,  & commanded Monsieur  de  Ottigni,  and  Monsieur  de

my  Sergeant  to  enter  into  the  woodes  to  search  out  the  ^^^'■S^^-

dwellings of  the Indians : where  after they had gone

awhile,  they  came  unto  a  Marish  of  Reeds,  where  finding

their  way  to  be  stopped,  they  rested  under  the  shadow  of

a  mightie  Bay  tree  to  refresh  themselves  a  little  and  to

resolve  which  way  to  take. Then  they  discovered,  as  it

were  on  the  suddaine,  five  Indians  halfe  hidden  in  the

woodes,  which seemed  somewhat to distrust our  men,

untill  they  said  unto  them  in  the  Indian  language  Anti-

pola  Bonassou,  to  the  end  that  understanding  their  speech

they  might  come  unto  us  more  boldely,  which  they  did

incontinently. But  because they sawe, that the foure

that went last, bare up the traine of the skinne

wherewith he that went formost was apparrelled our

men  imagined  that  the  foremost  must  needes  bee  some

man  of  greater  qualitie  then  the  rest,  seeing  that  withal

they  called  him  Paracoussy,  Paracoussy,  wherfore, some

of our company went towards him, and using him

courteously shewed him, Monsieur de Ottigni, their

Lieutenant,  for  whom they  had made  an  harbour  with

Bay  and  Palme  boughes  after  the  Indian  fashion,  to  the

ende  that  by  such  signes  the  Savages  might  thinke  the

Frenchmen  had compained  with such  as  they at other

times.

The  Indian  Paracoussy  drew  neere  to  the  French,  and  T^^e  curtesle

began  to  make  him  a  long:  Oration,  which  tended  to  no  ^  ,^~

cltcins  to  the
other end, but that he  besought the Frenchmen  very -pj-ench

earnestly  to  come  and  see  his  dwelling  and  his  parents,
which  they  granted  him,  and  straight  for  pledge  of
better  amitie,  he  gave  unto  my  Lieuetenant  Ottigni,  the
very  skinne  that  he  was  clad  with.

Then  he  tooke  him  by  the  hande,  leading  him  right
toward  the  Marishes,  over  which  the  Paracoussy,  Mon-
sieur Ottigni,  and  certaine  other  of  our  men  were  borne

9

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1564.

upon  the  Indians  shouldiers :  and  the  rest  which  could
not  passe  because  of  the  myre  and  reedes,  went  through
the  woodes,  and  followed  a  narrow  path  which  led  them
foorth  untill  they  came  unto  the  Paracoussyes  dwelling ;
out  of  which  there  came  about  fiftie  Indians  to  receive
our  men  gallantly,  and  to  feast  them  after  their  manner.
After  which  they  brought  at  their  entrance  a  great  vessell
of  earth,  made  after  a  strange  fashion  full  of  fountaine
water  cleare  and  very  excellent.

This  vessell  was  borne  by  an  Indiaii,  and  there  was
another  younger  which  bare  of  this  water  in  another
little  vessell  of  wood,  and  presented  thereof  to  every
one  to  drinke,  observing  in  doing  the  same,  a  certaine
order  and  reverence,  which  hee  made  to  each  of  them,  to
whome  hee  gave  drinke.  Our  thirst  well  quenched  by
this  meanes,  and  our  men  beeing  sufficiently  refreshed,
the  Paracoussy  brought  them  to  his  fathers  lodging,
one  of  the  oldest  men  that  lived  upon  the  earth.  Our
men  regarding  his  age,  began  to  make  much  of  him,
using  this  speech.  Amy,  Amy,  that  is  to  say,  friende,
friende, whereat the olde sier shewed himselfe very

Afterward  they  questioned  with  him  concerning  the
course  of  his  age :  whereunto  he  made  answere,  shewing
that  he  was  the  first  living  originall,  from  whence  five
generations  were  descended,  as  he  shewed  unto  them  by
another  olde  man  that  sate  directly  over  against  him.
Men  of  ex-  which  farre  exceeded  him  in  age.  And  this  man  was  his
ceedtng  olde  f^t-j^gj-^  which  seemed  to  be  rather  a  dead  carkeis  then  a
living  body :  for  his  sinewes,  his  veines,  his  artiers,  his
bones,  and  other  parts,  appeared  so  cleerely  thorow  his
skinne,  that  a  man  might  easily  tell  them,  and  discerne
them  one  from  another.  Also  his  age  was  so  great,  that
the  good  man  had  lost  his  sight,  and  could  not  speake
one  onely  word  but  with  exceeding  great  paine.  Monsieur
de  Ottigni  having  scene  so  strange  a  thing,  turned  to  the
yoonger  of  these  two  olde  men,  praying  him  to  vouch-
safe to  answere  him  to  that  which  he  demanded  touch-

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

ing  his  age. Then the  olde man  called  a  company  of

Indians,  and striking  twise  upon  his thigh,  and laying

his  hand  upon  two  of  them,  he  shewed  him  by  signes,

that these two were his sonnes : againe smiting upon

their  thighes,  he  shewed  him  others  not  so  olde,  which

were  the  children  of  the  two  first,  which  he  continued  in

the  same maner  untill  the  fift  generation. But  though

this  olde  man  had  his  father  alive  more  olde  then  him-

selfe,  and  that  both  of  them  did  weare  their  haire  very

long,  and  as  white  as  was  possible,  yet  it  was  tolde  them,  [HI.  323.]

that  they  might  yet  live  thirtie  or  fortie  yeeres  more  by

the course of  nature : although the younger  of  them

both  was  not  lesse  then  two  hundred  and fiftie  yeeres  Savages  in

olde. After  he  had  ended  his  communication,  hee  com-  ^^°^^^^°f

maunded two  young iLgles to be given to our  men,  ^/^^

which he had  bred up for his pleasure in his  house,  Egks  in

Hee  caused  also  little  Paniers  made  of  Palme  leaves  full  Florida.

of  Gourds  red  and blew to  bee delivered unto them.

For  recompence  of  which  presents  he  was  satisfied  with

French  toyes.

These  two  olde  men  caused  our  men  to  bee  guided
backe  againe  to  the  place  from  whence  they  came,  by
the  young  Paracoussy  which  hath  brought  them  thither.
And  having  taken  leave  of  the  Paracoussy,  they  came
and  sought  me  out  in  the  place  where  I  stayed,  and
rehearsed  unto  mee  all  that  they  had  scene,  praying  mee
also  that  I  would  rewarde  their  guide,  which  so  frankely
and  heartily  had  received  them  into  his  house,  which  I
would not  faile  to  doe  by  any  meanes.

Nowe  was  I  determined  to  search  out  the  qualities  of
the  hill. Therefore  I  went  right  to  the  toppe  thereof, Cedars,
where  we found nothing  else  but Cedars, Palme, and  ^^^"^^^^
Baytrees  of  so  sovereigne odour,  that  Baulme smelleth  iJz^swe^te^  ~
nothing  like  in  comparison. The  trees  were  environed  Abundance
rounde  about  with  Vines  bearing  grapes  in  such  quantitie,  of  grapes.
that  the  number  would  suffice  to  make  the  place  habit-  Fsqmne  a
able. Besides this fertilitie of  the soyle for Vines,  a  f'fS^^^ceJ-

.  1 1 1 •' 1  , , . ^^"^  against

man may see iLsqume wreathed about the shrubs in  the  pockes

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

great  quantitie.  Touching  the  pleasure  of  the  place,
the  Sea  may  bee  scene  plaine  and  open  from  it,  and
more  then  sixe  great  leagues  off,  neere  the  River  Belle,
a  man  may  beholde  the  medowes  divided  asunder  into
lies  and  Islets  enterlacing  one  another :  Briefly  the  place
is  so  pleasant,  that  those  which  are  melancholicke  would
be  inforced  to  change  their  humour.

After  I  had  stayed  there  a  while,  I  imbarked  againe
my  people  to  sayle  towards  the  mouth  of  the  River,
where  wee  found  the  Paracoussy,  which  according  to  his
promise  waited  for  us.  Wherefore  to  content  him,  we
went  on  shore,  and  did  him  that  reverence  that  on  our
part  was  requisite.  Then  hee  gave  me  the  skinne  so
richly  painted,  and  I  recompensed  him  with  somewhat
of  our  marchandise.  I  forgat  not  to  demaund  of  him  the
place  whence  the  wedge  of  silver  came  which  he  had
given  me  before :  whereunto  he  made  me  a  very  sudden
answere,  which  notwithstanding  I  understood  not,  which
Silver  certain  he  well  perceived.  And  then  he  shewed  me  by  evident
dayes journey giffnes  that  all  of  it  came  from  a  place  more  within  the

Ut>  ZOttlttfl  t/lB  .  .  .

river  of  Mm.  R^ver  by  certaine  dayes  journeyes  from  this  place,  and

declared  unto  us  that  all  that  which  they  had  thereof,  they

gat  it  by  force  of  armes  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  place,

Thimogoamor-  named by them Thimogoa, their most ancient and

tall  enemies  to  ^aturall enemies,  as hee largely declared. Whereupon

i>at0U710Ua.  ,  t  -11  rr •  1  i  11

when  1  sawe  with  what  arrection  nee  spake  when  hee
pronounced  Thimogoa,  I  understoode  what  he  would
say.  And  to  bring  my  selfe  more  into  his  favour,  I
promised  him  to  accompany  him  with  all  my  force,  if
hee  would  fight  against  them :  which  thing  pleased  him
in  such  sorte,  that  from  thenceforth  hee  promised  him-
selfe  the  victorie  of  them,  and  assured  mee  that  hee
would  make  a  voyage  thither  within  a  short  space,
would  cause  store  of  Mill  to  be  prepared,  and  would
commaund  his  men  to  make  ready  their  Bowes,  and
furnish  themselves  with  such  store  of  arrowes,  that
nothing  should  bee  wanting  to  give  battaile  to  Thimogoa.
In  fine hee  prayed mee very  earnestly not to faile  of

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564-

my  promise, and in so doing, hee hoped to procure

mee  Golde  and  Silver  in  such  good  quantitie,  that  mine

afFaires  shoulde  take  effect  according  to  mine  owne  and

his  desire.

The matter thus fully resolved upon, I tooke  my

leave  of  him to  returne unto  my  shippes,  where  after

wee  had  rested our  selves  all  the  night  following,  wee

hoysed  sayles  the  next  day  very  earely  in  the  morning,

and  sayled  towarde  the  River  of  Seine,  distant  from  the  The  river  of

River  of  May  about  foure  leagues  :  and  there  continu-  ^^^'"■^•

ing  our  course  towarde the North,  wee arrived  at  the

mouth of Somme, which is not past sixe leagues The  river  of

distant  from  the  River  of  Seine :  where  wee  cast  Anker, ^°^^^-

and went  on  shoare to  discover  that place  as  wee  had

done the rest. There wee were gratiously  and  cour-  The  courtesie

teously received of  the Paracoussy of the Countrey,  °-^ ^^f"
,.,■'.  (. ,  „  •'  ^ ,  . J  \ coussv  of  the

which IS  one  or  the tallest  men  and  best  proportioned  j.i^g\.  gf

that may bee  founde. His wife sate by him, which  Somme.

besides  her Indian beautie,  wherewith  shee  was  greatly

endewed,  had so vertuous a countenance and modest

gravitie, that  there  was not one amongst us but did

greatly  commend her  ; shee had in her traine  five of

her  daughters  of  so  good  grace  and  so  well  brought  up,

that  I easily  perswaded  my  selfe  that  their  mother  was

their  Mistresse,  and  had  taught  them  well  and  straightly

to  preserve  their  honestie. After  that  the  Paracoussy  had

received  us  as  I  have  sayde,  hee  commaunded  his  wife

to  present  mee  with  a  certaine  number  of  bullets  of  silver, [III.  324.]

for  his  owne  part  hee  presented  mee  with  his  bowe  and

his  arrowes,  as  hee  had  done  unto  Captaine  John  Ribault

in  our  first  voyage,  which  is  a  signe  of  a  perpetuall  amitie

and  alliance  with  those  which  they  honour  with such  a

kinde  of  present. In  our  discoursing  with  one  another,

wee  entred  into  speach  as  touching  the  exercise  of  armes.

Then  the  Paracoussy  caused  a  corselet  to  be  set  on  end,

and  prayed  me  to  make  a  proofe  of  our  Harguebuzes

and  their  bowes  :  but  this  proofe  pleased  him  very  little ;

for  assoone  as  he  knew  that  our  Harguebuzes  did  easily

13

AD  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

pearce  that  which  all  the  force  of  their  bowes  could  not
hurt,  he  seemed  to  be  sorie,  musing  with  himselfe  how
this  thing  might  bee  done.  Neverthelesse  going  about
to  dissemble  in  his  minde  that  which  his  countenance
could  not  doe  by  any  meanes,  hee  began  to  fall  into
another  matter,  and  prayed  us  very  earnestly  to  stay
with  him  that  night  in  his  house  or  lodging,  affirming
that  no  greater  happinesse  could  come  unto  him  then
our  long  abode,  which  he  desired  to  recompence  with  a
thousand  presents.

Neverthelesse wee could not  grant  him this poynt,

but  tooke  our  leave  of  him  to  returne  to  our  shippes  :

Laudonnieres where soone after I caused all my companie to bee

consultatton assembled,  with  the  Masters  and  Pilots  of  my  shippes,

wtth  his  com-  /  ,  ri  1  1  r  iij

pam  where  it  ^°  consult  together  or  the  place  whereor  wee  should
might  be  best  make  choise  to  plant  our  habitation.  First  I  let  them
for  them  to  understand,  howe  none  of  them  were  ignorant,  that  the
plant.  p^j.^  which  was  towarde  the  Cape  of  Florida, was  alto-

gether a  marish  Countrey,  and  therefore  unprofitable  for
our  inhabitation :  A  thing  which  could  yeelde  neither
profite  to  the  King,  nor  any  contentment  or  pleasure  to
us,  if  peradventure  we  would  inhabite  there.  On  the
other  side  if  wee  passed  further  toward  the  North  to
seeke  out  Port  Royall,  it  would  be  neither  very  profitable
nor  convenient :  at  the  least  if  wee  should  give  credit  to
the  report  of  them  which  remained  there  a  long  time,
although  the  Haven  were  one  of  the  fairest  of  the
West  Indies  :  but  that  in  this  case  the  question  was
not  so  much  of  the  beautie  of  the  place,  as  of  things
necessary  to  sustaine  life.  And  that  for  our  inhabiting
it  was  much  more  needefull  for  us  to  plant  in  places
plentifull  of  victuall,  then  in  goodly  Havens,  faire,  deepe
and  pleasaunt  to  the  view.  In  consideration  whereof
that  I  was  of  opinion,  if  it  seemed  good  unto  them,  to
Gold  and  sil-  seate  our  selves  about  the  River  of  May  :  seeing  also  that
ver  found  at  \^^  q^jj.  £j.g^-  voyage  wee  found  the  same  onely  among
^  new  oj  ^ij  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  abounde  in  Maiz  and  corne,  besides  the
Golde and Silver that was found there : a thing  that

14

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564-
put me in  hope  of  some  happie  discoverie  in time  to
come.

After  I  had  proposed  these  things,  every  one  gave
his  opinion  thereof:  and  in  fine  all  resolved,  namely
those  which  had  beene  with  me  in  the  first  voyage,  that
it  was  expedient  to  seate  themselves  rather  on  the  River
of  May  then  on  any  other,  untill  they  might  heare
newes  out  of  France.  This  poynt  being  thus  agreed
upon,  wee  sayled  toward  the  River,  and  used  such
diligence,  that  with  the  favour  of  the  windes  wee  arrived
there  the  morrow  after  about  the  breake  of  day,  which
was  on  Thursday  the  29.  of  the  moneth  of  June.  Hav-  June  the  29.
ing  cast  anker,  I  embarked  all  my  stuffe  and  the  souldiers
of  my  companie,  to  sayle  right  toward  the  opening  of
the  River :  wherein  we  entred  a  good  way  up,  and  found
a  Creeke  of  a  reasonable  bignesse,  which  invited  us  to
refresh  our  selves  a  little,  while  wee  reposed  our  selves
there.  Afterward  wee  went  on  shoare  to  seeke  out  a
place  plaine  without  trees,  which  wee  perceived  from  the
Creeke.

But  because  wee  found  it  not  very  commodious  for  us
to  inhabite  there  :  wee  determined  to  returne  unto  the
place  which  wee  had  discovered  before,  when  wee  had
sayled  up  the  River.  This  place  is  joyning  to  a
mountaine,  and  it  seemed  unto  us  more  fit  and  com-
modious to  build  a  fortresse,  then  that  where  we  were
last.  Therefore  we  tooke  our  way  towards  the  forrests
being  guided  therein  by  the  young  Paracoussy  which
had  ledde  us  before  to  his  fathers  lodging.  Afterward
we  found  a  large  plaine  covered  with  high  Pinetrees
distant  a  little  from  the  other :  under  which  wee  perceived
an  infinite  number  of  Stagges  which  brayed  amidst  the
plaine,  athwart  the  which  we  passed :  then  wee  dis-
covered a  little  hill  adjoyning  unto  a  great  vale  very
greene  and  in  forme  flat :  wherein  were  the  fairest
medowes  of  the  world,  and  grasse  to  feede  cattel.
Moreover  it  is  invironed  with  a  great  number  of  brookes
of  fresh  water, & high woods,  which make the vale

IS

A.D.
1564.

The  Vale  of
Laudonniere.

An  Herma-
phrodite.

[III.  325.]

Thej  bega'n
their  planting
■with  prayer  to
God.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

more  delectable  to  the  eye.  After  I  had  taken  the  viewe
thereof  at  mine  ease,  I  named  it  at  the  request  of  our
souldiers,  The  Vale  of  Laudonniere.  Thus  we  went
forward.  Anon  having  gone  a  little  forward,  we  met
an  Indian  woman  of  tall  stature,  which  also  was  an
Hermaphrodite,  who  came  before  us  with  a  great  ves-
sell  full  of  cleere  fountaine  water,  wherwith  she  greatly
refreshed  us.  For  we  were  exceeding  faint  by  reason
of  the  ardent  heate  which  molested  us  as  we  passed
through  those  high  woods.  And  I  beleeve  that  without
the  succour  of  that  Indian  Hermaphrodite,  or  rather,  if
it  had  not  bene  for  the  great  desire  which  we  had  to
make  us  resolute  of  our  selves,  we  had  taken  up  our
lodging  all  night  in  the  wood.  Being  therefore  refreshed
by  this  meane,  wee  gathered  our  spirits  together,  and
marching  with  a  cheerefuU  courage,  wee  came  to  the  place
which  wee  had  chosen  to  make  our  habitation  in :  where-
upon at  that  instant  neere  the  rivers  brinke  we  strowed  a
number  of  boughes  and  leaves,  to  take  our  rest  on  them
the  night  following,  which  wee  found  exceeding  sweete,
because  of  the  paine  which  before  we  had  taken  in  our
travell.

On  the  morrow  about  the  breake  of  day,  I  com-
maunded  a  trumpet  to  be  sounded,  that  being  assembled
we  might  give  God  thankes  for  our  favourable  and
happie  arrivall.  There  wee  sang  a  Psalme  of  thankes-
giving  unto  God,  beseeching  him  that  it  would  please
him  of  his  grace  to  continue  his  accustomed  goodnesse
toward  us  his  poore  servaunts,  and  ayde  us  in  all  our
enterprises,  that  all  might  turne  to  his  glory  and  the
advancement  of  our  King.  The  prayer  ended,  every
man  began  to  take  courage.

Afterward  having  measured  out  a  piece  of  ground  in
forme  of  a  triangle,  wee  indevoured  our  selves  of  all  sides,
some  to  bring  earth,  some  to  cut  fagots,  and  others  to
raise  and  make  the  rampire,  for  there  was  not  a  man  that
had  not  either  a  shovell,  or  cutting  hooke,  or  hatchet,  as
well  to  make the  ground  plaine  by  cutting  downe  the

16

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

trees,  as  for  the  building  of  the  Fort,  which  we  did  hasten
w*  such  cheerfulnesse,  that  within  few  dayes  the  effect
of  our  diligence  was  apparant :  in  which  meane  space  the
Paracoussy  Satourioua  our  neerest  neighbour,  &  on
whose  ground  wee  built  our  Fort,  came  usually  accom-
panyed  with  his  two  sonnes  and  a  great  number  of
Indians  to  offer  to  doe  us  all  courtesie.  And  I  likewise
for  my  part  bestowed  divers  of  our  trifles  frankely  on
him,  to  the  end  he  might  know  the  good  will  we  bare
him,  and  thereby  make  him  more  desirous  of  our  friend-
ship, in  such  sort,  that  as  the  dayes  increased,  so  our
amitie  and  friendship  increased  also.

After  that  our  Fort  was  brought  into  forme,  I  began
to build a Grange to retire my munition and things
necessarie for the defence of  our Fort : praying the
Paracoussy  to  command  his  subjects  to  make  us  a  cover-
ing of  Palme  leaves,  and  this  to  the  ende  that  when  that  ^»  Florida
was  done,  I  might  unfraight  my  shippes,  and  put  under  J^^-J/^^^^^^
coverture  those  things  that  were  in  them. Suddenly  the  ^i^^^  Palme
Paracoussy  commaunded  in  my  presence  all  the  Indians  leaves.
of  his  companie  to  dresse  the  next  day  morning  so  good  a
number of  Palme  leaves,  that  the  Grange  was  covered
in  lesse  then  two  dayes :  so  that  businesse  was  finished.
For  in  the  space  of  those  two  dayes,  the  Indians  never
ceassed from  working, some in fetching  Palme  leaves,
others in  interlacing  of  them : in such  sort that their
Kings  commandement  was  executed  as  he  desired.

Our  Fort  was  built  in  forme  of  a  triangle. The  side  The  forme  of
toward  the  West,  which  was  toward  the  lande,  was  in-  ^f^J°^'^  ^^^°'
closed  with  a  little  trench  and  raised  with  turves  made  in  Th'gJVestside.
forme  of  a  Battlement  of  nine  foote  high  :  the  other  side
which  was  toward  the  River,  was  inclosed  with  a  Pallisado
of  plankes  of  timber  after  the  maner that Gabions are
made. On  the  South  side  there  was  a  kinde  of  bastion  TheSouthside.
within  which  I  caused  an  house  for  the  munition  to  be
built : it  was  all  builded  with  fagots  and  sand, saving
about  two  or  three  foot  high  with  turfes, whereof  the
battlements  were  made. In  the  middest  I  caused  a  great
IX  17  B

A.D.
1564.

High  building
is  not  good  for
this  Countrey.

Nota.

Caroline.

[III.  326.]

The  first  voy-
age twentie
leagues.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Court  to  be  made  of  eighteene  paces  long  and  broad,
in  the  middest  whereof  on  the  one  side  drawing  toward
the  South  I  builded  a  Corps  de  gard,  and  an  house  on  the
other  side  toward  the  North,  which  I  caused  to  bee
raised  somewhat  too  high  :  for  within  a  short  while  after
the  wind  beat  it  down :  and  experience  taught  me,  that
we  may  not  build  with  high  stages  in  this  Countrey,
by  reason  of  the  windes  whereunto  it  is  subject.  One
of  the  sides  that  inclosed  my  Court,  which  I  made  very
faire  and  large,  reached  unto  the  Grange  of  my  muni-
tions :  and  on  the  other  side  towardes  the  River  was
mine  owne  lodging,  round  about  which  were  galleries
all  covered.  The  principall  doore  of  my  lodging  was
in  the  middest  of  the  great  place,  and  the  other  was
towarde  the  River.  A  good  distance  from  the  Fort  I
built  an  Oven  to  avoyde  the  danger  against  fire,  because
the  houses  are  of  Palme  leaves,  which  will  soone  be
burnt  after  the  fire  catcheth  holde  of  them,  so  that  with
much  adoe  a  man  shall  have  leasure  to  quench  them.
Loe  here  in  briefe  the  description  of  our  Fourtresse,
which  I  named  Caroline  in  the  honour  of  our  Prince
King  Charles.

After  wee  were  furnished  with  that  which  was  most
necessarie,  I  would  not  lose  a  minute  of  an  houre,  with-
out imploying  of  the  same  in  some  vertuous  exercise :
therefore  I  charged  Monsieur  de  Ottigni  my  Lieutenant,
a  man  in  trueth  worthy  of  all  honour  for  his  honestie  and
vertue,  to  search  up  within  the  River,  what  this  Thimo-
goa  might  be,  whereof  the  Paracoussy  Satourioua  had
spoken  to  us  so  often  at  our  comming  on  shoare.  For
execution  hereof  the  Paracoussy  gave  him  two  Indians  for
his  guides,  which  taking  upon  them  to  lead  him  in  this
voyage,  seemed  to  goe  unto  a  wedding,  so  desirous  they
were  to  fight  with  their  enemies.

Being  imbarked  they  hoised  sayle,  and  having  sayled
about  twentie  leagues,  the  Indians  which  still  looked  on
this  side  and  that  side  to  espie  some  of  their  enemies,
discovered  three  Canoas. And  immediatly  they  began  to

18

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

crie  Thimogoa,  Thimogoa,  and  spake  nothing  else  but  to
hasten  forward  to  goe  fight  with  them  :  which  the  Cap-
taine  seemed  to  be  willing  to  doe,  to  content  them.
When  they  came  to  boord  them,  one  of  the  Indians  gat
holde  of  an  Halbert,  another  of  an  Coutelas  in  such  a
rage,  that  hee  would  have  leapt  into  the  water  to  have
fought  with  them  alone,  Neverthelesse  Ottigni  would
not  let  them  doe  it,  for  while  hee  deferred  to  boord  them,
he  gave  the  others  respite  to  turne  the  prowes  of  their
Canoas  toward  the  shoare,  and  so  to  escape  into  the
woods.  Againe,  the  meaning  of  Ottigni  was  not  to  make
warre  upon  them  of  Thimogoa,  but  rather  to  make  them
friendes,  and  to  make  them  thenceforth  to  live  in  peace
one  with  another  if  it  were  possible,  hoping  by  this  meane
to  discover  dayly  some  new  thing,  &  especially  the
certaine  course  of  the  River.  For  this  purpose  he  caused
the  barke  to  retire,  wherein  were  the  two  Indians  his
guides,  and  went  with  his  men  towarde  the  Canoas  which
were  on  the  Rivers  side.  Being  come  unto  them,  he  put
certaine  trifles  into  them,  and  then  retired  a  good  way
from  them,  which  thing  caused  the  Indians  which  were
fled  away  to  returne  to  their  boats,  and  to  understand
by  this  signe,  that  those  of  our  Barke  were  none  of  their
enemies,  but  rather  come  onely  to  traffique  with  them.
Wherefore  being  thus  assured  of  us,  they  called  to  our
men  to  come  neere  unto  them :  which  they  did  incon-
tinently and  set  foote  on  lande,  and  spake  freely  unto
them,  with  divers  ceremonies  over  long  to  recount.  In
the  ende  Ottigni  demaunded  of  them  by  signes  if  they
had  any  Golde  or  Silver  among  them.  But  they  tolde
him  they  had  none  as  then :  and  that  if  he  would  send
one  of  his  men  with  them,  they  would  bring  him  without
danger  into  a  place  where  they  might  have  some.  Ottigni
seeing  them  so  willing,  delivered  them  one  of  his  men
which  seemed  very  resolute,  to  undertake  this  voyage :
this  fellow  stayed  with  them  untill  tenne  of  the  clocke  the
next  morning,  so  that  Captaine  Ottigny  somewhat  7^^^  kames
off^ended with his  long  stay, sayled ten great leagues  further.

19

A.D.

1564.

Mayrraaklng
rich  in  golde
and  silver.

The  second
voyage.

KingMoIloua.
Olata  Quae
Utina  a  great

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

further  up  the  River :  although  he  knew  not  which  way-
he  should  goe,  yet  he  went  so  farre  up  that  hee  espied
the  Boate  wherein  his  souldier  was :  which  reported
unto  him,  that  the  Indians  would  have  carried  him  three
great  dayes  journey  further,  &  told  him  that  a  King
named  Mayrra  rich  in  Gold  and  Silver,  dwelt  in  those
quarters,  and  that  for  small  quantitie  of  marchandise
enough  might  be  had  of  him  :  yet  that  hee  would  not
hazard  himselfe  without  his  leave,  and  that  he  brought
but  a  very  little  Golde.  This  being  done,  our  men
returned  toward  our  Fort  Caroline,  after  they  had  left  the
souldier  with  the  Indians  to  enforme  himselfe  more  and
more  of  such  things  as  he  might  discover  more  at
leasure.

Fifteene  dayes  after  this  voyage  to  Thimogoa,  I  dis-
patched Captaine  Vasseur  and  my  Sergeant  also  to
returne  againe  into  this  Countrey,  and  to  seeke  out  the
souldier  which  remained  there  in  the  former  voyage.
Being  therefore  imbarked,  they  sayled  two  whole  dayes :
and  before  they  came  to  the  dwelling  of  the  Indians,
they  found  two  of  them  on  the  Rivers  side,  which
were  expresly  sent  unto  that  place  to  descry  whether
any  of  their  enemies  were  come  to  that  part,  with  in-
tention to  surprise  them,  as  they  did  usually.

When  they  perceived  Captaine  Vasseur,  they  knew
incontinently  that  he  was  none  of  their  enemies,  and
therefore  made  no  difficultie  to  come  neere  unto  the
Barke,  and  shewed  him  by  signes  that  the  Souldier
which  they  sought  was  not  in  that  place,  but  was  at
that  present  in  the  house  of  King  Molloua  which  was
vassall  unto  another  great  King  named  by  them  Olata
Ouae  Utina  :  and  that  if  the  Captaine  would  sayle
thitherward,  hee  should  come  thither  very  quickly :
wherwith  he  was  content,  and  caused  his  men  to  rowe
to  that  part  which  the  Indians  shewed  him  :  whereat
they  were  so  glad,  that  they  ranne  quickly  before  by
land  to  declare  his  arrivall,  which  was  at  the  lodging  of
king Molloua, after he had rowed not past halfe a

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.

league. While king Molloua had ended intertaining

Captaine  Vasseur  and  his  men,  the  souldier  came  in  with

five  or  sixe  pounds  weight  of  silver  which  he  had  trucked  ^^^^  °^  "^^

and  traffiqued  with  Indians.  ^offlv'^ef^^'

This  King  caused  bread  to  bee  made,  and  fish  to  bee
dressed  after  the  Indian  fashion  to  feast  our  men  :  to
whom,  while  they  were  at  meate,  hee  made  a  discourse  of
divers  other  Kings  his  friends  &  allies,  reckoning  up  to
the  number  of  nine  of  them  by  name,  to  wit,  Cadecha,
Chilili,  Eclauou,  Enacappe,  Calany,  Anacharaqua,  Omit-
taqua,  Aequara,  Moquoso  :  all  which  with  him  to  the
number  of  more  then  fortie,  hee  assured  us  to  bee  the  ^"^^^'^  ^^^g^
vassals  of  the  most  renowmed  Olata  Ouae  Utina.  utina

This  done,  hee  went  about  likewise  to  discover  the  [m.  327.]
enemies  of  Ouae  Utina,  in  which  number  hee  placed  as
the  first  the  Paracoussy  Satourioua  Monarch  of  the
confines  of  the  river  of  May,  which  hath  under  his  obey-
sance  thirtie  other  Paracoussies,  whereof  there  were  ten
which  were  all  his  brethren,  and  that  therefore  hee  was
greatly  esteemed  in  those  partes  :  then  hee  named  three
others  no  lesse  puissant  then  Satourioua,  whereof  the
first  dwelt  two  dayes  journey  from  his  lord  Olata  Ouae
Utina,  and  ordinarily  made  warre  upon  him,  whose  name
was  Potanou,  a  man  cruell  in  warre,  but  pitifull  in  the  KingPotanou.
execution  of  his  furie.  For  hee  tooke  the  prisoners  to
mercy,  being  content  to  marke  them  on  the  left  arme
with  a  great  marke  like  unto  a  scale,  and  so  imprinted
as  if  it  had  bene  touched  with  an  hotte  yron,  then
hee  let  them  goe  without  any  more  hurt.  The  two
others  were  named  Onatheaqua,  and  Houstaqua,  being
great  Lords,  and  abounding  in  riches,  and  principally
Onatheaqua,  which  dwelt  neere  unto  the  high  moun-
taines,  wherein  there  was  abundance  of  many  rare  things,  ^«  exceeding
&  infinite  quantitie  of  a  kinde  of  slate  stone,  wherewith  ^"^P^^'^^-
they  made  wedges  to  cleave  their  wood.  The  occasion
which  (as  he  sayd)  mooved  Potanou  to  wage  warre
against  Olata  Ouae  Utina,  was  the  feare  that  he  had,
lest he and his companions should get  of  that hard

21

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

stone in his Countrey, wherewith they headed their
arrowes,  and  could  not  get  it  in  any  neerer  place.

Besides  all  this,  Molloua  recited  to  Captaine  Vasseur,

that the kings allies the vassals of  the great Olata,

armed  their  brests,  armes,  thighes,  legs  &  foreheads  with

Large  plates large  plates  of  gold  and  silver  :  and  that  by  this  meanes

of  gold  and j^^  arrowes  that  were discharged upon them could do

them  no  maner  of  hurt  at  all,  but rather  were broken

against them. Hereupon Captaine Vasseur inquired

whether the Kings Onetheaqua and Houstaqua were

like unto us. For by  the description that they  made

of them, he began to doubt whether they were

Spaniards or no  : but Molloua tolde him that they

were  not,  but  that  they  were  Indians  like  the  rest,  saving

^ome  paint ^^^X  they  painted  their  faces  with blacke,  and that the

^^^Ti/^1 rest as Molloua, painted them with red. Then my

a7id  some  with  Lieutenant Vasseur, and my Sergeant promised him,

red.  that  one  day  I should  march  with  my  forces  into  those

Countreys, and that  joyning my selfe with his Lord

Olata,  I  would  subdue  the  inhabitants  of  the  highest  of

those mountaines. Hee was very  glad  of  this  speach,

and  answered  that  the  least  of  these  Kings which hee

had named, should  present  unto  the Generall  of  these

succours the height of  two foot of gold and silver,

which  by  force  of  armes  they  had  already  gotten  of  those

two  Kings, Onatheaqua,  and  Houstaqua.

The  good  cheere  being  done,  and  the  discourses  ended,
my  men  imbarked  themselves  againe,  with  intention  to
bring  mee  those  good  newes  unto  the  Fort  Caroline.
But  after  they  had  sayled  a  very  long  while  downe  the
River,  and  were  come  within  three  leagues  of  us,  the
tyde  was  so  strong  against  them,  that  they  were  con-
strained to  goe  on  lande,  and  to  retire  themselves
because  of  the  night,  unto  the  dwelling  of  a  certaine
Paracoussy  named  Molona,  which  shewed  himselfe  very
glad  of  their  arrivall  :  for  hee  desired  to  know  some
newes  of  Thimogoa,  and  thought  that  the  French  men
went  thither  for  none  other  occasion but  for  to  invade

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.

them.  Which  Captaine  Vasseur  perceiving,  dissembled
so  wel,  that  he  made  him  beleeve  that  he  went  to
Thimogoa  with  none  other  intention,  but  to  subdue
them,  and  to  destroy  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sworde
without  mercy,  but  that  their  purpose  had  not  such
successe  as  they  desired,  because  that  the  people  of
Thimogoa  being  advertised  of  this  enterprise,  retired
into  the  woods,  and  saved  themselves  by  flight  :  that
neverthelesse  they  had  taken  some  as  they  were  fleeing
away,  which  carried  no  newes  thereof  unto  their
fellowes.

The  Paracoussy  was  so  glad  of  this  relation,  that  he
interrupted  him,  and  asked  Vasseur  of  the  beginning  and
maner  of  his  execution,  and  prayed  him  that  hee  would
shew  him  by  signes  howe  all  things  passed.  Immediatly
Francis  la  Caille  the  Sergeant  of  my  band  tooke  his
sword  in  his  hand,  saying,  that  with  the  point  thereof  he
had  thrust  through  two  Indians  which  ranne  into  the  woods,
and  that  his  companions  had  done  no  lesse  for  their
partes.  And  that  if  fortune  had  so  favoured  them,  that
they  had  not  beene  discovered  by  the  men  of  Thimogoa,
they  had  had  a  victorie  most  glorious  and  worthie  of
eternall  memorie.  Hereupon  the  Paracoussy  shewed
himselfe  so  well  satisfied,  that  he  could  not  devise  how
to  gratifie  our  men,  which  hee  caused  to  come  into  his
house  to  feast  them  more  honourably  :  and  having
made  Captaine  Vasseur  to  sit  next  him,  and  in  his
owne  chaire  (which  the  Indians  esteeme  for  the  chiefest
honour)  and  then  underneath  him  two  of  his  sonnes,
goodly  and  mightie  fellowes,  hee  commanded  all  the
rest  to  place  themselves  as  they  thought  good.  This
done,  the  Indians  came  according  to  their  good  custome,
to  present  their  drinke  Cassine  to  the  Paracoussy,  and
then  to  certaine  of  his  chiefest  friends,  and  the  French-
men, Then  hee  which  brought  it  set  the  cup  aside,  and  [III.  328.]
drew  out  a  little  dagger  stucke  up  in  the  roofe  of  the
house,  and  like  a  mad  man  he  lift  his  head  aloft,  and
ranne  apace,  and  went  and  smote  an  Indian  which  sate

23

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

alone  in  one  of  the  corners  of  the  hall,  crying  with  a
loud  voyce,  Hyou,  the  poore  Indian  stirring  not  at  all
for  the  blowe,  which  he  seemed  to  endure  patiently.  He
which  held  the  dagger  went  quickly  to  put  the  same  in
his  former  place,  and  began  againe  to  give  us  drinke  as
hee  did  before  :  but  he  had  not  long  continued,  and  had
scarce  given  three  or  foure  thereof,  but  he  left  his  bowle
againe,  tooke  the  dagger  in  his  hand,  and  quickly
returned  unto  him  which  hee  had  strocken  before,  to
whom  he  gave  a  very  sore  blow  on  the  side,  crying
Hyou,  as  he  had  done  before :  and  then  hee  went  to
put  the  dagger  in  his  place,  and  set  himselfe  downe
among  the  rest.  A  little  while  after  he  that  had  bene
stricken  fell  downe  backwards,  stretching  out  his  armes
and  legs,  as  if  hee  had  bene  ready  to  yeeld  up  the
latter  gaspe.  And  then  the  younger  sonne  of  the  Para-
coussy  apparelled  in  a  long  white  skinne,  fell  downe
at  the  feete  of  him  that  was  fallen  backward,  weeping
bitterly  halfe  a  quarter  of  an  houre  :  after,  two  other  of
his  brethren  clad  in  like  apparell,  came  about  him  that
was  so  stricken,  and  began  to  sigh  pitifully.  Their
mother  bearing  a  little  infant  in  her  armes  came  from
another  part,  and  going  to  the  place  where  her  sonnes
were,  at  the  first  shee  used  infinite  numbers  of  outcries,
then  one  while  lifting  up  her  eyes  to  heaven,  another
while  falling  downe  unto  the  ground,  shee  cryed  so
dolefully,  that  her  lamentable  mournings  would  have
moved  the  most  hard  and  stony  heart  in  the  world  with
pitie.  Yet  this  sufficed  not,  for  there  came  in  a  companie
of  young  gyrles,  which  did  never  leave  weeping  for  a  long
while  in  the  place  where  the  Indian  was  fallen  downe,
whom  afterward  they  tooke,  and  with  the  saddest  gestures
they  could  devise,  carried  him  away  into  another  house
a  little  way  off  from  the  great  hall  of  the  Paracoussy,
and  continued  their  weepings  and  mournings  by  the
space  of  two  long  houres  :  in  which  meane  while  the
Indians  ceassed  not  to  drinke  Cassine,  but  with  such
silence  that  one  word  was  not  heard in  the  parlour.

24

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

Vasseur  being  grieved  that  he  understood  not  these
ceremonies,  demanded  of  the  Paracoussy  what  these
things  meant :  which  answered  him  slowly,  Thimogoa,
Thimogoa,  without  saying  any  more.  Being  more  dis-
pleased then  he  was  before  with  so  sleight  an  answere,
he  turned  unto  another  Indian  the  Paracoussyes  brother,
who  was  a  Paracoussy  as  well  as  his  brother,  called
Malica,  which  made  him  a  like  answere  as  hee  did  at  the  KingMalka,
first,  praying  him  to  aske  no  more  of  these  matters,  and
to  have  patience  for  that  time.  The  subtill  old  Para-
coussy prayed  him  within  a  while  after,  to  shew  him  his
sword,  which  he  would  not  denie  him,  thinking  that  hee
would  have  beheld  the  fashion  of  his  weapons :  but  he
soone  perceived  that  it  was  to  another  ende :  for  the  old
man  holding  it  in  his  hand,  behelde  it  a  long  while  on
every  place,  to  see  if  he  could  finde  any  blood  upon  it,
which  might  shew  that  any  of  their  enemies  had  bene
killed  :  for  the  Indians  are  woont  to  bring  their  weapons
wherewith  their  enemies  have  beene  defeated,  with  some
blood  upon  them,  for  a  token  of  their  victories.  But
seeing  no  signe  thereof  upon  it,  he  was  upon  the  point
to  say  unto  him,  that  he  had  killed  none  of  the  men  of
Thimogoa :  when  as  Vasseur  preventing  that  which  hee
might  object,  declared  and  shewed  unto  him  by  signes,
the  maner  of  his  enterprise,  adding,  that  by  reason  of  the
two  Indians  which  he  had  slaine,  his  sword  was  so
bloudy,  that  hee  was  inforced  to  wash  and  make  it  cleane
a  long  while  in  the  River :  which  the  olde  man  beleeved
to  be  like  to  be  true,  and  made  no  maner  of  replie
thereunto.

Vasseur,  La  Caille,  and  their  other  companions  went
out  of  the  hal  to  go  into  the  roome  whither  they  had
carried  the  Indian  :  there  they  found  the  Paracoussy
sitting  upon  tapistries  made  of  small  reedes,  which  was  Tapistry  made
at  meate  after  the  Indian  fashion,  and  the  Indian  that  of  ^^^l^  ^^^d^-
was  smitten  hard  by  him,  lying  upon  the  selfe  same
tapistry,  about  whom  stoode  the  wife  of  the  Paracoussy,
with  all  the  young  damsels  which  before  bewailed  him  in

25

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

The^  lappe  the  hall  ;  which  did  nothing  else  but  warme  a  great  deal

mosse  about  q£  mosse instead of  napkins to rub the Indians side.

\ndmTlt'in  Hereupon our men asked the Paracoussy againe for

stead  of  nap-  what occasion the Indian was so persecuted in his

kins.  presence :  hee  answered,  that  this was nothing  else  but

A  ceremonie  ^  kinde  of  ceremonie,  whereby  they  would  call  to  minde

to  call  to  mind  ^ ^ ^^ ^^j persecutions of the Paracoussies their

the  death  of  ^  • t-i  ■  n •

their  ancesters  ancestours  executed  by  their  enemie  i  himogoa  :  alleaging
slaine  by  their  moreover,  that  as  often  as  he  himselfe,  or  any  of  his
enemies.  friends and  allies  returned  from the  Countrey,  without

they brought the heads of  their enemies, or  without
bringing  home  some  prisoner,  hee  used  for  a  perpetuall
memorie of all his predecessors, to beate the best
beloved  of  all  his  children  with the  selfe  same  weapons
wherewith they had  bene killed  in times past  :  to the
ende  that  by  renewing  of  the  wound  their  death  should
be lamented afresh. Now when they were thus
informed  of  those ceremonies, they thanked  the Para-
coussy for their good intertainement which they had
received,  &  so  setting  saile  came  to  me  unto  the  fort  :
[III.  329.] where they declared  all unto me  as  I  have recited it
The  returne  of  heretofore. The eight and twentieth of July our
their  ships shippes  departed  to  returne  into  France. And  within  a
the^z'i  IT'^^  while,  about two moneths  after  our arrivall  in  Florida,
July.  the Paracoussy Satourioua sent certaine Indians unto

mee  to  knowe  whether  I  would  stande  to  my  promise
which  I  had  made  him  at  my  first  arrivall  in  that
Countrey,  which  was  that  I  would  shewe  my  selfe  friend
to  his  friendes,  and  enemie  unto  his  enemies,  and  also  to
accompany  him  with  a  good  number  of  Harquebuzes,
when  he  should  see  it  expedient,  and  should  finde  a  fit
occasion  to  goe  to  warre.  Now  seeing  he  rested  upon
this  promise,  he  prayed  mee  not  to  deferre  the  same  :
seeing  also  that  making  accompt  thereof,  hee  had  taken
such  good  order  for  the  execution  of  his  enterprise,  that
he  was  ready,  and  was  furnished  with  all  things  that  were
necessary  for  the  voyage  :  I  made  him  answere,  that  for  his
amitie  I  would  not  purchase  the  enmitie  of  the  other,  and

26

RENE LAUDONNIERE

that  albeit  I  would,  yet  notwithstanding  I  wanted  meanes
to  doe  it.  For  it  behoved  mee  at  that  present  to  make
provision  of  victuals  and  munition  for  the  defence  of  my
Fort.  On  the  other  side,  that  my  Barkes  were  nothing
ready,  and  that  this  enterprise  would  require  time :
Moreover,  that  the  Paracoussy  Satourioua  might  holde
himselfe  ready  to  depart  within  two  moneths,  and  that
then  I  would  thinke  of  fulfilling  my  promise  to  him.

The  Indians  caried  this  answere  to  their  Paracoussy,
which  was  litle  pleased  with  it,  because  hee  could  not
deferre  his  execution  or  expedition,  aswell  because  all
his  victuals  were  ready,  as  also  because  tenne  other
Paracoussies  were  assembled  with  him  for  the  performance
of  this  enterprise.  The  ceremonie  which  this  Savage
used  before  hee  embarked  his  armie  deserveth  not  to  be
forgotten.  For  when  hee  was  set  downe  by  the  Rivers
side,  being  compassed  about  with  ten  other  Paracoussies,
hee  commaunded  water  to  be  brought  him  speedily.  This
done,  looking  up  into  heaven,  he  fell  to  discourse  of
divers  things  with  gestures  that  shewed  him  to  be  in
exceeding  great  choUer,  which  made  him  one  while  shake
his  head  hither  and  thither,  and  by  and  by  with  I  wote
not  what  furie  to  turne  his  face  toward  the  Countrey  of
his  enemies,  and  to  threaten  to  kill  them.  Hee  often-
times looked  upon  the  Sunne,  praying  him  to  graunt  him
a  glorious  victory  of  his  enemies.  Which  when  hee  had
done  by  the  space  of  halfe  an  houre,  hee  sprinkled  with
his  hand  a  little  of  the  water  which  hee  helde  in  a  vessell
upon  the  heads  of  the  Paracoussies,  and  cast  the  rest  as  it
were  in  a  rage  and  despite  into  a  fire  which  was  there
prepared  for  the  purpose.  This  done,  hee  cried  out  thrise,
He  Thimogoa,  and  was  followed  with  five  hundreth
Indians  at  the  least,  which  were  there  assembled,  which
cried  all  with  one  voyce.  He  Thimogoa.  This  ceremonie,
as  a  certaine  Indian  tolde  mee  familiarly,  signified  nothing
else,  but  that  Satourioua  besought  the  Sunne  to  graunt
unto  him  so  happy  a  victory,  that  hee  might  shed  his
enemies  blood,  as  he  had  shed  that  water  at  his  pleasure.

27

A.D.

1564.

The  ceremonie
which  they  use
before  they  goe
to  warre.

Satourioua  fol-
lowed with
five  hundreth
Indians,

A.D.

1564.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Consultation
before  they
assault  their

Moreover,  that  the  Paracoussies  which  were  sprinckled
with  a  part  of  that  water,  might  returne  with  the  heads  of
their  enemies,  which  is  the  onely  and  chiefe  triumph  of
their  victories.

The  Paracoussy  Satourioua  had  no  sooner  ended  his
ceremonies  and  had  taken  a  viewe  of  all  his  company,
but  he  embarked  himselfe,  and  used  such  diligence  with
his  Almadies  or  boates,  that  the  next  day  two  houres
before  the  Sunnes  set,  he  arrived  on  the  territories  of  his
enemies  about  eight  or  tenne  leagues  from  their  villages.
Afterward  causing  them  all  to  goe  on  land,  hee  assembled
his  counsell,  wherein  it  was  agreed  that  five  of  the  Para-
coussies should  saile  up  the  River  with  halfe  of  the
troupes,  and  by  the  breake  of  the  day  should  approche
unto  the  dwelling  of  their  enemie :  for  his  owne  part,  that
hee  would  take  his  journey  through  the  woods  and
forrests  as  secretly  as  hee  coulde :  that  when  they  were
come  thither,  as  well  they  that  went  by  water  as  hee
which  went  by  land  should  not  faile  by  the  breake  of  the
day  to  enter  into  the  village,  and  cut  them  all  in  pieces,
except  the  women  and  little  children.

These  things  which  were  thus  agreed  upon,  were
executed  with  as  great  fury  as  was  possible  :  which  when
they  had  done,  they  tooke  the  heades  of  their  enemies
which  they  had  slaine,  and  cut  off  their  haire  round  about
with  a  piece  of  their  skulles :  they  tooke  also  foure  and
twentie  prisoners,  which  they  led  away,  and  retired  them-
selves immediatly  unto  their  Boates  which  wayted  for
them.  Being  come  thither,  they  beganne  to  singe  praises
unto  the  Sunne,  to  whom  they  attributed  their  victorie.
And  afterwards  they  put  the  skins  of  those  heads  on  the
end  of  their  javelings,  and  went  altogether  toward  the
King  Omoloa.  territories  of  Paracoussy  Omoloa,  one  of  them  which  was
in  the  company.  Being  come  thither,  they  devided  their
prisoners  equally  to  each  of  the  Paracoussies,  and  left
thirteene  of  them  to  Satourioua,  which  straightway  dis-
patched an  Indian  his  subject,  to  carry  newes  before  of
the  victory  to  them  which  stayed  at  home  to  guard  their

28

Hozv  they  use
their  enemies
which  they
take  in  warre.

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564-
houses,  which immediatly  beganne to  weepe. But as-
soone  as  night  was  come, they  never  left  dancing  and
playing  a  thousand  gambols  in  honour  of  the  feast.

The  next  day  the  Paracoussy  Satourioua  came  home,
who before  hee entred into his  lodging  caused  all  the  [III.  330.]
hairie  skuls  of  his  enemies  to  bee  set  up  before  his  doore,
and  crowned  them  with  branches  of  Lawrell,  shewing  by Their  maner
this  glorious  spectacle  the  triumph  of  the  victory  which  °-^  tnumpii.
hee  had  obtained. Straightway  beganne  lamentation  and
mournings, which assoone as the night beganne were
turned  into  pleasures  and  dances.

After  that  I  was  advertised  of  these  things,  I  sent  a
Souldier  unto  Satourioua,  praying  him  to  sende  mee  two
of  his  prisoners  :  which  hee  denied  mee,  saying  that  hee
was  nothing  beholding  unto  mee,  and  that  I  had  broken
my  promise,  against  the  oath  which  I  had  sworne  unto
him  at  my  arrivall.  Which  when  I  understoode  by  my
Souldier,  which  was  come  backe  with  speede,  I  devised
howe  I  might  be  revenged  of  this  Savage,  and  to  make
him  know  how  dearely  this  bolde  bravado  of  his  should
cost  him  :  therefore  I  commanded  my  Sergeant  to  provide
mee  twentie  Souldiers  to  goe  with  mee  to  the  house  of
Satourioua  :  Where  after  I  was  come  and  entered  into
the  hall  without  any  maner  of  salutation,  I  went  and  sate
mee  downe  by  him,  and  stayed  a  long  while  without
speaking  any  woorde  unto  him,  or  shewing  him  any
signe  of  friendship,  which  thing  put  him  deepely  in  his
dumpes :  besides  that  certaine  Souldiers  remained  at  the
gate,  to  whom  I  had  given  expresse  commaundement  to
suffer  no  Indian  to  goe  foorth :  having  stoode  still  about
halfe  an  houre  with  this  countenance,  at  length  I  de-
maunded  where  the  prisoners  were  which  hee  had  taken
at  Thimogoa,  and  commaunded  them  presently  to  bee
brought  unto  me.

Whereunto  the  Paracoussy  angry  at  the  heart,  and
astonied  wonderfully,  stoode  a  long  while  without  mak-
ing any  answere,  notwithstanding  at  last  hee  answered
me  very  stoutly,  that  being  afraide  to  see  us  comming

29

A.D.

1564.

Athore.

Excellent
Pumpions.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

thither  in  such  warrelike  maner  they  fled  into  the  woods,
and  that  not  knowing  which  way  they  were  gone,  they
were  not  able  by  any  meanes  to  bring  them  againe ;  Then
I  seemed  to  make  as  though  I  understood  not  what  he
saide,  and  asked  for  his  prisoners  againe,  and  for  some  of
his  principal!  allies.  Then  Satourioua  commaunded  his
Sonne  Athore  to  seeke  out  the  prisoners,  and  to  cause
them  to  be  brought  into  that  place,  which  thing  he  did
within  an  houre  after.

After  they  were  come  to  the  lodging  of  the  Paracoussy,
they  humbly  saluted  mee,  and  lifting  up  their  hands
before  me,  they  would  have  fallen  downe  prostrate  as  it
were  at  my  feet :  but  I  would  not  suff^er  them,  and  soone
after  ledde  them  away  with  me  unto  my  owne  Fort.  The
Paracoussy  being  wonderfully  offended  with  this  bravado,
bethought  himselfe  by  all  meanes  how  hee  might  be
revenged  of  us.  But  to  give  us  no  suspition  thereof,  and
the  better  to  cover  his  intention,  hee  sent  his  messengers
oftentimes  unto  us  bringing  alwayes  with  them  some
kinde  of  presents.  Among  others  one  day  hee  sent
three  Indians,  which  brought  us  two  baskets  full  of  great
Pumpions,  much  more  excellent  then  those  which  we
have  in  France,  and  promised  me  in  their  Kings  behalfe,
that  during  mine  abode  in  that  Countrey,  I  should  never
want  victuals :  I  thanked  them  for  their  Kings  good  will,
and  signified  unto  them  the  great  desire  which  I  had,
aswell  for  the  benefit  of  Satourioua,  as  for  the  quiet  of
his  Subjects,  to  make  a  peace  betweene  him  and  those  of
Thimogoa :  which  thing  coulde  not  choose  but  turne  to
their  great  benefite,  seeing  that  being  allied  with  the  Kings
of  those  parts,  hee  had  an  open  passage  against  Ona-
theaqua  his  ancient  enemie,  which  otherwise  he  could  not
set  upon.  Moreover  that  Olata  Ouae  Utina  was  so  mightie
a  Paracoussy,  that  Satourioua  was  not  able  to  withstand
his  forces :  but  being  agreed  together  they  might  easily
overthrow  all  their  enemies,  and  might  passe  the  confines
of  the  farthest  Rivers  that  were  towards  the  South.  The
messengers  prayed  mee  to  have  patience  untill  the  morowe,

30

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

at  what  time  they  would  come  againe  unto  me  to  certifie
me  of  their  Lords  inclination :  which  they  failed  not  to
doe,  advertising  me  that  Paracoussy  Satourioua  was  the
gladdest  man  in  the  world  to  treate  of  this  accord
(although  indeed  hee  was  quite  contrary)  and  that  he
besought  mee  to  be  diligent  therein,  promising  to
observe  and  performe  whatsoever  I  should  agree  upon
with  those  of  Thimogoa :  which  things  the  messengers
also  rehearsed  unto  the  prisoners  which  I  had  ledde  away.
After  they  were  departed,  I  resolved  within  two  dayes  to
sende  backe  againe  the  prisoners  to  Olata  Ouae  Utina,
whose  subjects  they  were :  but  before  I  embarked  them,
I  gave  them  certaine  small  trifles,  which  were  little  knives
or  tablets  of  glasse,  wherein  the  image  of  King  Charles
the  ninth  was  drawen  very  lively,  for  which  they  gave
me  very  great  thankes,  as  also  for  the  honest  entertain-
ment which  was  given  them  at  the  Fort  Caroline.  After
this  they  embarked  themselves,  with  Captaine  Vasseur,
and  with  Monsieur  de  Arlac  mine  Ensigne,  which  I  had
sent  of  purpose  to  remaine  a  certaine  time  with  Ouae
Utina,  hoping  that  the  favour  of  this  great  Paracoussy
would  serve  my  turne  greatly  to  make  my  discoveries
in  time  to  come.  I  sent  with  him  also  one  of  my
Sergeants,  and  sixe  gallant  Souldiers.

Thus  things  passed  on  this  maner,  and  the  hatred  of
Paracoussy  Satourioua  against  mee  did  still  continue,  until
that  on the nine  and twentieth of  August  a  lightning  [HI.  331-]
from heaven fell within halfe a league of  our Fort,  ^/^onderfull
more  worthy  I beleeve  to be  wondered  at,  and to  bee  ^q.o/ August.
put  in  writing, then  all  the strange  signes  which  have
bene  scene  in  times  past,  and  whereof  the  histories  have
never  written. For  although  the  medowes  were  at  that
season all  greene, and halfe covered over  with  water,
neverthelesse  the  lightning  in  one  instant  consumed  above
five  hundred  acres  therewith,  and  burned  with  the  ardent
heate  thereof  all  the  foules  which  tooke  their  pastime  in
the medowes, which thing continued for three dayes
space,  which caused  us  not  a  little  to  muse,  not  being

31

A.D.
1564.

King  Sar-
ranay.

King  Allima-
cany.

The  Savages
thinke  the
lightning  to  be
discharging  of
the  Christians
Ordinance.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

able  to  judge  whereof  this  fire  proceeded :  for  one  while
wee  thought  that  the  Indians  had  burnt  their  houses,
and  abandoned  their  places  for  feare  of  us  :  another  while
wee  thought  that  they  had  discovered  some  shippes  in
the  Sea,  and  that  according  to  their  custome  they  had
kindled  many  fires  here  and  there,  to  signifie  that  their
Countrey  was  inhabited :  neverthelesse  being  not  assured,
I  determined  to  sende  to  Paracoussy  Serrany  to  knowe
the  trueth  thereof.  But  even  as  I  was  upon  the  point  to
sende  one  by  boate  to  discover  the  matter,  sixe  Indians
came  unto  mee  from  Paracoussy  AUimacany,  which  at
their  first  entrie  made  unto  mee  a  long  discourse,  and  a
very  large  and  ample  oration  (after  they  had  presented
mee  with  certaine  baskets  full  of  Maiz,  of  Pompions  and
of  Grapes)  of  the  loving  amitie  which  AUimacany  desired
to  continue  with  mee,  and  that  hee  looked  from  day  to
day  when  it  would  please  mee  to  employ  him  in  my
service.  Therefore  considering  the  serviceable  affection
that  hee  bare  unto  mee,  hee  found  it  very  strange,  that  I
thus  discharged  mine  Ordinance  against  his  dwelling,
which  had  burnt  up  an  infinite  sight  of  greene  medowes,
and  consumed  even  downe  unto  the  bottome  of  the
water,  and  came  so  neere  unto  his  mansion,  that  hee
thought  hee  sawe  the  fire  in  his  house :  wherefore  hee
besought  mee  most  humbly  to  commaund  my  men  that
they  would  not  shoote  any  more  towards  his  lodging,
otherwise  that  hereafter  he  should  be  constrained  to
abandon  his  countrey,  and  to  retire  himselfe  into  some
place  further  off  from  us.

Having  understood  the  foolish  opinion  of  this  man,
which  notwithstanding  coulde  not  choose  but  bee  very
profitable  for  us,  I  dissembled  what  I  thought  thereof  for
that  time,  and  answered  the  Indians  with  a  cheerefuU
countenance,  that  the  relation  which  they  made  unto  mee
of  the  obedience  of  their  Paracoussy  did  please  mee  right
well,  because  that  before  hee  had  not  behaved  himselfe
in  such  sort  towards  mee,  especially  when  I  summoned
him  to sende mee the  prisoners of  great Olata Ouae

32

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564-
Utina  which he  detained, whereof  notwithstanding he
made no  great  accompt, which  was  the  principall  cause
wherefore  I  had  discharged  mine  Ordinance  against  him  :
not  that I meant  to  reach  unto  his  house  (as  I might
have  done  easily,  if  it  had  pleased  me)  but that  I  was
content  to  shoote  the  halfe  way  to  make  him  knowe  my
force :  assuring  him  furthermore,  that  on  condition  that  Laudomiere
he  would  continue  in  his  good  affection,  no  more  ordi-  ^^ed  the  pre-
nance should  be discharged  against  him hereafter :  and  ^^  ^^-^  .^.^r^^
besides that I would become his faithful! protectour
against  his  greatest  enemies.

The  Indians  contented  with  mine  answere  returned  to
assure  their  Paracoussy,  which  notwithstanding  the  assur-
ance withdrewe  himselfe  from  his  dwelling  twentie  or  five
and  twentie  leagues  off  and  that  for  the  space  of  more
then  two  moneths.  After  that  three  dayes  were  expired,
the  fire  was  quite  extinguished.  But  for  two  dayes  after
there  followed  such  an  excessive  heate  in  the  aire,  that  A  wonderfuU
the  River  neere  unto  which  we  planted  our  habitation,  ^^^^^'
became  so  hoat,  that  I  thinke  it  was  almost  ready  to  seeth.
For  there  died  so  great  abundance  of  fish,  and  that  of  so
many  divers  sorts,  that  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  onely
there  were founde dead ynough to have loaden fiftie  Fiftie  cart  load

Carts, whereof  there issued a  putrefaction in the aire,  "f-fi^^  ^^^^  ^"
1  .  1 1 J  1  1-  ^  •  the  River  with

which bred  many  dangerous  diseases amongst  us,  inso-  ^^^-^  ^^^^

much  that  most  of  my  men  fell  sicke,  and  almost  ready
to  ende  their  dayes.  Yet  notwithstanding  it  pleased  our
mercifull  God  so  to  provide  by  his  providence,  that  all
our  men  recovered  their  health  without  the  losse  of  any
one  of  them.

Monsieur  de  Arlac,  Captaine  Vasseur,  and  one  of  my  The  thirde
Sergeants being; embarked with their tenne Souldiers  "^'o^age  the
about  the  tenth  of  September,  to  cary  backe  the  prisoners  ;, ^
unto  Utina,  sailed  so  farre  up  the  River,  that  they  dis-
covered a  place  called  Mayarqua  distant  from  our  Fort  Mayarqua  a
about  fourescore  leagues, where  the  Indians  gave  them  P^'^'^^  ^°-
good entertainement,  and  in  many  other  villages  which  ji^l^f^a'v
they  found. From  this  place  they  rowed  to  the  dwel-
IX  33  c

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

ling  of  Paracoussy Utina, which after hee had feasted
them  according  to  his  abilitie  and  power,  prayed  Mon-
sieur de  Arlac  and  all  his  Souldiers  to  stay  a  while  with
him,  to  ayde  and  assist  him  in  battaile  against  one  of  his
KingPatanou.  enemies  called  Potanou, whereunto Monsieur  de  Arlac
consented  willingly. And because  hee knew  not how
long  he  might  have  occasion  to  stay  in  these  parts,  hee
sent  mee  Captaine  Vasseur  and  the  Barke  backe  againe,
which  brought  home  onely  five  Souldiers  with  him.
The  Indians Now  because  the  custome  of  the  Indians  is  alwayes  to
manerofwar.  wage  war  by  surprise,  Utina  resolved  to  take  his  enemie
[III.  3 3 2. J Potanou  in  the  morning  by  the  breake  of  the  day:  to
bring  this  to  passe,  hee  made  his  men  to  travaile  all  the
Two  hundreth  night,  which  might  be  in  number  two  hundred  persons,
Indians.  so  well  advised,  that  they  prayed  our  French-shot  to  be

in  the  fore-front,  to  the  ende  (as  they  saide)  that  the
noyse  of  their  pieces  might  astonish  their  enemies :  not-
withstanding they  coulde  not  march  so  secretly,  but
that  those  of  the  village  of  Potanou,  distant  from  the
dwelling  of  Utina  about  five  and  twentie  leagues,  were
ware  of  them :  which  suddenly  employed  and  bestowed
A  village  in- all their  endevour to defend their  village enclosed all

closed  with ^j^.j^ trees, and issued out in great companies : but
tvces  •  •  •

finding  themselves  charged  with  shotte,  (a  thing  where-
with  they never  had bene acquainted) also beholding
the Captaine of  their bande fall downe dead in the
beginning  of  their  skirmish,  with  a  shot  of  an  Harque-
buse  which  strooke  him  in  the  forehead,  discharged  by
the hande of  Monsieur  de  Arlac,  they  left the place :
and  the  Indians  of  Utina  gate  into the  village, taking
Utina  getteth men,  women,  and  children  prisoners. Thus  Paracoussy
the  victory  of Utina  obtained the victory by  the  ayde  of  our men,
hh°%th^ which  slew  many  of  his  enemies,  and  lost  in  this  conflict
French.  o"'^  of  their  companions,  wherewith  Utina  was  very  much

grieved.  Eight  or  tenne  dayes  after,  I  sent  Captaine
Vasseur  backe  againe  with  a  Barke  to  fetch  home
Monsieur  de  Arlac  and  his  Souldiers,  which  at  their
returne brought  mee  certaine presents from Utina,  as

34

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

some  silver,  a  small  quantitie  of  golde,  painted  skinnes,  silver,  and
and other  things,  with a thousand thankes,  which  the  gold,  and
Paracoussy gave me, which promised that if  in any  PfJ^^^^
enterprise of importance I should have neede  of his
men,  he would furnish mee with three hundreth  and
above.

While  I  thus  travailed  to  purchase  friends,  &  to  practise
one  while  with  one here,  an other  while  with another
there,  certaine  Souldiers  of  my  company  were  suborned
under  hand  by  one  named  la  Roquette  of  the  Countrey  La  Roquettes
of  Perigort,  which  put  in their heads that  hee  was  a  consplracie.
great  Magician,  and  that  by  the  secrets  of  Art-magicke
he  had  discovered  a  Mine  of  golde  and  silver  farre  up
within  the  River,  whereby  (upon  the  losse  of  his  life,)
every  Souldier  should  receive  in  ready  Bullion  the  value
of  tenne thousand Crownes,  beside  and above fifteene
hundred thousand which should be reserved for the
Kings Majestic  :  wherefore  they  allied  themselves with
La Roquette and another of his confederates, whose
name  was Le Genre,  in whom notwithstanding  I  had
great  affiance. This  Genre  exceeding  desirous  to  enrich  Monsieur  de
himselfe in those parts, and seeking to be revenged,  Genre.
because  I  would  not  give  him  the  carriage  of  the  Paquet
into  France,  secretly  enfourmed  the  Souldiers  that  were
already  suborned  by  La  Roquette,  that  I  would  deprive
them  of  this  great  gaine,  in  that  I  did  set  them  dayly  on
worke,  not  sending  them  on  every  side  to  discover  the
Countreys :  therefore  that  it  were  a  good  deede,  after  they
had  made  mee  understand  so  much,  to  seeke  meanes  to
dispatch mee out of  the  way, and  to choose another
Captaine  in  my  place,  if  I  would  not  give  them  victuals
according  to  their  disordinate  appetite. Hee  also  brought  Genres  ms-
mee  word  hereof  himselfe,  making  a  large  discourse  unto  ^ ^fniere  in  the
mee  of  the  good  affection  of  the  Souldiers,  which  all  be-  Souldiers
sought  mee  that  I  would  conduct  them  to  the  Countreys  name.
where  the  Mine  was  :  I  made  him  answere  that  all  could  His  answere.
not  goe  thither,  and  that  it was necessary  before their
departure to settle our Fortresse in  such estate, that

35

A.D.

1564.

A  dangerous
practice
against  the
Captalne  and
his  Lieutenant.

Laudonniers
slcknesse.

Laudonniers
Apothecarie.

[in.  333.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

those  which  were  to  stay  at  home  behind  should  remaine
in  securitie  against  the  Indians  which  might  surprise
them.  Furthermore,  that  their  maner  of  proceeding
seemed  strange  unto  mee,  for  that  they  imagined,  that
the  Kings  Majestic  was  at  the  charges  of  our  voyage
for  none  other  ende,  but  onely  to  enrich  them  at  their
first  arrivall,  in  as  much  as  they  shewed  themselves  much
more  given  unto  covetousnesse,  then  unto  the  service  of
their  Prince  :  But  seeing  mine  answere  tended  unto
none  other  ende  but  to  make  our  Fortresse  strong  and
defensible,  they  determined  to  travaile  in  the  worke,  and
made  an  ensigne  of  olde  linnen,  which  ordinarily  they
bare  upon  the  rampart  when  they  went  to  woorke,
alwayes  wearing  their  weapons,  which  I  thought  they
had  done  to  incourage  themselves  to  worke  the  better.
But  as  I  perceived  afterwards,  and  that  by  the  confession
of  Genre  sent  mee  in  letters  which  he  writ  to  mee  of
that  matter,  these  gentle  Souldiers  did  the  same  for
none  other  ende,  but  to  have  killed  mee,  and  my
Lieutenant  also,  if  by  chance  I  had  given  them  any
hard  speeches.

About  the  twentieth  of  September,  as  I  came  home
from  the  woods  and  coppises  to  finish  the  building  of
my  Fort,  (and  that  according  to  my  usuall  maner,  I
marched  first  to  give  encouragement  unto  my  Soldiers)
I  chafed  my  selfe  in  such  sort,  that  I  fell  into  a  sore
and  grievous  sicknesse,  whereof  I  thought  I  should  have
died :  During  which  sicknesse,  I  called  Le  Genre  often
unto  mee,  as  one  that  I  trusted  above  all  others,  and
of  whose  conspiracies  I  doubted  not  any  whit  at  all.
In  this  meane  while  assembling  his  complices,  sometime
in  his  chamber  and  sometime  in  the  woods  to  consult
with  them,  hee  spake  unto  them  to  choose  another
Captaine  besides  mee,  to  the  intent  to  put  mee  to  death  :
but  being  not  able  by  open  force  to  execute  his  mis-
chievous intention,  hee  gate  him  unto  mine  Apothecarie
praying  him  instantly  to  mingle  in  my  medicine,  which
I  was  to  receive  one or  two dayes  after,  some  drugge

36

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.
that  should  make  mee  pitch  over  the  pearch,  or  at  the
least  that  hee  would  give  him  a  little  Arsenike  or  quicke
Silver,  which  hee  himselfe would  put into my  drinke.
But  the  Apothecary  denied him,  as  did in  like maner
Master  S.  which  was  Master  of  the  fire-workes. Thus  The  Master  of
wholly  disappointed  of  both  his  meanes,  hee  with  certaine  the  fireworks.
others  resolved  to  hide  a  little  barrell  of  gunne-powder
underneath  my  bed,  and  by  a  traine  to  set  it  on  fire.

Upon these  practises  a Gentleman  which  I had  dis-
patched to  returne  into  France,  being  about  to  take  his
leave  of  me,  advertised  me, that  Genre  had  given  him
a  booke  full  of  all  kinde  of  lewde  invectives  and  slanders
against  me,  against Monsieur de Ottigny,  and against
the principal  of  my company  : upon which  occasion I
assembled all my Souldiers together, and Captaine  Captalne
Bourdet  with  all  his,  which  on  the  fourth  of  September  Bonrdet  ar-
arrived in the roade, and  were come into  our River,  ''^^^f^^
In  their  presence  1  caused  the  contents  of  the  booke  to  gfVJ^^^"^'
bee read  alowde, that  they might beare  record of  the
untruths  that  were  written  against  mee. Genre,  which
had  gotten  him  into  the  woods  for  feare  of  being  taken,
(where  he  lived  for  a  while  after  v/ith  the  Savages  by  my
permission,)  writ unto  mee often,  and in  many of  his
letters  confessed  unto  mee,  that  hee  had  deserved  death,
condemning  himselfe  so  farrefoorth,  that  he  referred  all
to  my  mercie  and  pitie.

The  seventh  or  eighth  day  of  November,  after  I  had The  4.  wyage
caused  sufficient  provision  of  such  victuals  as  were  neede-  ^^^  7-  o/No-
full  to  bee  made,  I sent two  of  my  men,  to wit.  La  '"^^"^^^
Roche Ferriere, and  an  other  towarde  King Utina,  to
discover every day more and more of  the Countrey :
where  hee  was  the  space  of  five  or  sixe  moneths,  during
which hee discovered  many small villages,  and among
others  one named Hostaqua,  the King whereof  being  Hostaqua  a
desirous  of  my  friendship,  sent  unto  mee  a  quiver  made  village.
of  a  Luserns  skinne  full  of  arrowes,  a  couple  of  bowes,
foure  or five  skinnes painted after their maner,  and  a
cheine of Silver  weying about a pounde weight. In

37

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1564.

recompence  of  which  presents  I  sent  him  two  whole
sutes  of  apparell,  with  certaine  cutting  hookes  or
hatchets.

After  these  things  therefore  in  this  sort  passed,  about

the  tenth  of  this  moneth,  Captaine  Bourdet  determined

to leave mee and to returne into France. Then I

requested him, yea rather was exceeding importunate

with  him,  to  carry  home  with  him  some  sixe  or  seven

Souldiers, whom I coulde not trust by  any meanes :

which  hee  did  for  my  sake,  and  would  not  charge  him-

selfe  with  Genre,  which offered  him  a  great  summe  of

money,  if  it  would  please  him  to  carry  him  into  France :

hee  transported  him  onely  to  the  other  side  of  the  River.

One  of  his Three  dayes  after  his  departure  thirteene  Mariners  which

Barks  stoke J  j^^^^  brought  out  of  France,  suborned  by  certaine  other

a^jay  y t5 Mariners which Captaine Bourdet had left me, stole

Manners.  , r  r  ^^ •  '-r'1  TV  /r •

away  my  Barkes m maner  roUowmg. These Mariners
of  Captaine  Bourdet  put  mine  in  the  head,  that  if  they
had such  Barkes  as  mine were,  they  might  gaine  very
much  in  the  Isles  of  the  Antilles,  and  make  an  exceed-
ing profitable  voyage. Hereupon  they  beganne  to  devise
howe  they  might  steale  away  my  Barkes,  and  consulted
that when I should command them to goe unto the
T/ie  village  of  village  of  Sarauahi  distant  about  a  league  and  an  halfe
Sarauaki. from  our  Fort,  and  situated  upon  an  arme  of  the  River,
(whither according  to my  maner  I  sent  them  dayly  to
seeke  clay,  to  make  bricke  and  morter  for  our  houses)
they would  returne  no  more,  but  would  furnish  them-
selves with victuals as well as they  might  possibly :
and  then  would  embarke  themselves  all in  one  vessell.
Another  of  his  and  would goe  their  way :  as  indeede they  did. And
Barks  stolne ^-^^t  which was  worse,  two Flemish Carpenters, which
^/7y  y  wo ^j^^  saide  Bourdet had  left mee,  stole away  the other
Barke, and before their departure cut the cables of
the  Barke,  and  of  the  shipboate,  that  it  might  goe  away
with  the  tyde,  that  I might not  pursue them :  so  that
I  remained  without  either Barke or boate, which fell
out  as unluckily  for mee as  was  possible. For 1  was

38

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.

ready  to  imbarke my  selfe  with all  speede,  to  discover
as farre up our River, as I might by  any meanes.
Nowe  my  Mariners,  (as  I understood  afterwards)  tooke
a Barke  that  was  a  passenger of the Spaniards neere
the  Isle  of  Cuba,  wherein  they  founde  a  certaine  quan-
titie  of  golde  and  silver,  which  they  seazed  upon. And  07ie  of  these
having this bootie they lay a while at Sea,  untill  -^^''^J^''^
their victuals beganne to faile them : which was the  j^^^  betrayed
cause, that oppressed with famine they came unto  his  own  coun-
Havana the principall Towne of  the Isle of  Cuba :  trey  men  to  the
whereupon proceeded  that  mischiefe which hereafter I  Spamards,and
will  declare more at large. When  I saw  my Barkes  into%iorida
returned not at their wonted houre, and suspecting
that  which  fell out in deed, I commanded my Car-
penters with  all diligence to make  a  little  boat  with  a
flat bottome,  to search those Rivers for some newes
of these Mariners. The boate dispatched within a
day  and a  night,  by  reason that my Carpenters  found
planks  and  timber  ready  sawed  to  their  hands,  as  com-
monly I  caused  my  Sawyers  to  provide it,  I  sent  men
to  seeke  some newes of  my thieves : but all was in
vaine. Therefore I determined to cause two great  A  Saw-mill
Barkes  to  be  built,  eche  of  which  might  be  thirtie  five,  necessary  here.
or  thirtie  sixe  foote  long  in  the  keele.

And now  the  worke  was very  well forwarde which  [III.  334.]
I set  my  workemen  about,  when  ambition  and  avarice,
the  mother of  all  mischiefe,  tooke  roote in  the hearts
of  foure  or five  souldiers  which  could not away  with
the  worke  and paines taking : and which from hence
forward  (namely  one  Fourneaux,  and  one  La  Croix,  and  The  thirde
another called Steven le Geneuois,  the  three  principall  sedition.
authors  of  the  sedition)  beganne to practise with the
best  of  my  troupe,  shewing them that it was a vile
thing  for men  of  honest  parentage, as they were, to
moyle themselves thus with abject and base worke,
seeing they had the best occasion of the worlde
offered them to  make  themselves all riche :  which was
to arme  the  two Barkes  which were in building,  and

39

A.D.
1564.

By  Peru  the
French  meane
the  coast  of
Carthagena
and  N ombre
de  Dios.

The  captaines
charge  at  his
setting  forth.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  furnish  them  with  good  men :  and  then  to  saile
unto  Peru,  and  the  other  Isles  of  the  Antilles,  where
every  Souldier  might  easily  enrich  himselfe  with  tenne
thousand  Crownes.  And  if  their  enterprise  should  bee
misliked  withall  in  France,  they  should  bee  alwayes  able,
by  reason  of  the  great  wealth  that  they  should  gaine,
to  retire  themselves  into  Italy,  untill  the  heate  were
overpassed,  and  that  in  the  meane  season  some  warre
would  fall  out,  which  would  cause  all  this  to  be  quite
forgotten.

This  word  of  riches  sounded  so  well  in  the  eares
of  my  Souldiers,  that  in  fine,  after  they  had  often-
times consulted  of  their  affaires,  they  grew  to  the  num-
ber of  threescore  and  sixe :  which  to  colour  their  great
desire  which  they  had  to  goe  on  stealing,  they
caused  a  request  to  bee  presented  unto  mee  by  Francis
de  la  Caille  Sergeant  of  my  company,  contayning  in
sum  a  declaration  of  the  small  store  of  victuals  that
was  left  to  maintaine  us,  until  the  time  that  shippes
might  returne  from  France :  for  remedy  whereof  they
thought  it  necessary  to  sende  to  New  Spaine,  Peru,
and  all  the  Isles  adjoyning,  which  they  besought  mee
to  be  content  to  graunt.  But  I  made  them  answere,
that  when  the  Barkes  were  finished,  I  would  take
such  good  order  in  generall,  that  by  meanes  of  the
Kings  marchandise,  without  sparing  mine  owne  apparell,
wee  would  get  victuals  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
Countrey :  seeing  also  that  wee  had  ynough  to  serve
us  for  foure  moneths  to  come.  For  I  feared  greatly,
that  under  pretence  of  searching  victuals,  they  would
enterprise  somewhat  against  the  King  of  Spaines  Sub-
jects, which  in  time  to  come  might  justly  bee  layde
to  my  charge,  considering  that  at  our  departure  out  of
France,  the  Queene  had  charged  me  very  expresly,  to
doe  no  kinde  of  wrong  to  the  King  of  Spaines  Sub-
jects, nor  any  thing  whereof  he  might  conceive  any
jelousie.

They  made as  though they  were content  with this

40

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1564.
answere.  But  eight  dayes  after,  as  I  continued  in
working  upon  our  Fort,  and  on  my  Barkes,  I  fell
sicke.  Then  my  seditious  companions  forgetting  all
honour  and  duetie,  supposing  that  they  had  found  good
occasion  to  execute  their  rebellious  enterprise,  beganne
to  practise  afresh  their  former  designes,  handling  their
businesse  so  well,  during  my  sicknesse,  that  they
openly  vowed  that  they  would  seaze  on  the  Corps  de
gard,  and  on  the  Fort,  yea,  and  force  mee  also,  if  I
woulde  not  consent  unto  their  wicked  desire.  My
Lieutenant  being  hereof  advertised,  came  and  tolde  mee
that  he  suspected  some  evill  practise :  and  the  next
day  in  the  morning  I  was  saluted  at  my  gate  with
men  in  complet  harnesse,  what  time  my  Souldiers  were
about  to  play  mee  a  shrewde  tricke :  then  I  sent  to
seeke  a  couple  of  Gentlemen  whom  I  most  trusted,
which  brought  mee  word  that  the  Souldiers  were  deter-
mined to  come  to  me  to  make  a  request  unto  me :
But  I  tolde  them  that  this  was  not  the  fashion  to  present
a  request  unto  a  Captaine  in  this  maner,  and  there-
fore they  should  send  some  few  unto  me  to  signifie
unto  mee  what  they  would  have.  Hereupon  the
five  chiefe  authours  of  the  sedition  armed  with
Corslets,  their  Pistolles  in  their  handes  already  bent,
prest  into  my  chamber,  saying  unto  mee,  that  they
would  goe  to  New  Spaine  to  seeke  their  adventure.
Then  I  warned  them  to  bee  well  advised  what  they
meant  to  doe :  but  they  foorthwith  replyed,  that  they
were  fully  advised  already,  and  that  I  must  graunt
them  this  request.  Seeing  then  (quoth  I)  that  I  am
enforced  to  doe  it,  I  will  sende  Captaine  Vasseur  and
my  Sergeant,  which  will  make  answere  and  give  mee
an  accompt  of  every  thing  that  shall  be  done  in
this  voyage :  And  to  content  you,  I  thinke  it  good
that  you  take  one  man  out  of  every  chamber,  that
they  may  accompany  Captaine  Vasseur  and  my  Sergeant.
Whereupon,  blaspheming  the  Name  of  God,  they
answered that they must  goe thither : and that  there

41

A.D.
1564.

Laudonniere
kept  15.  da'^es
prisoner  by  his
owne  souldiers.

[in.  335.]

Trenchant  a
skilfull  pilot.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lacked  nothing,  but  that  I  should  deliver  them  the
armour  which  I  had  in  my  custodie,  for  feare  least  I
might  use  them  to  their  disadvantage  (being  so  villan-
ously  abused  by  them :)  wherein  notwithstanding  I
would  not  yeeld  unto  them.  But  they  tooke  all  by
force,  and  caried  it  out  of  my  house,  yea  and  after
they  had  hurt  a  Gentleman  in  my  chamber,  which
spake  against  their  doings,  they  layd  hands  on  mee,
and  caried  mee  very  sicke,  as  I  was,  prisoner  into  a
shippe  which  rode  at  ancker  in  the  middest  of  the
River,  wherein  I  was  the  space  of  fifteene  dayes,
attended  upon  with  one  man  onely  without  permission
for  any  of  my  servants  to  come  to  visite  mee:  from
every  one  of  whom,  as  also  from  the  rest  that  tooke
my  part,  they  tooke  away  their  armour.  And  they
sent  mee  a  passeport  to  signe,  telling  me  plainely
after  I  had  denied  them,  that  if  I  made  any  difficulty,
they  would  all  come  and  cut  my  throat  in  the  shippe.
Thus  was  I  constrained  to  signe  their  Passe-port,  and
forthwith  to  grant  them  certaine  mariners,  with  Tren-
chant an  honest  and  skilfull  Pilot.  When  the  barks
were  finished,  they  armed  them  with  the  kings
munition,  with  powder,  with  bullets,  and  artillery,
asmuch  as  they  needed,  and  chose  one  of  my  Sergeants
for  their  Captain,  named  Bertrand  Conferrent,  and  for
their  Ensigne  one  named  La  Croix.  They  compelled
Captaine  Vasseur  to  deliver  them  the  flag  of  his  ship.
Then  having  determined  to  saile  unto  a  place  of  the
Antilles  called  Leauguave,  belonging  unto  the  king  of
Spaine,  and  there  to  goe  on  land  on  Christmasse  night,
with  intention  to  enter  into  the  Church  while  the
Masse  was  sayd  after  midnight,  and  to  murder  all
those  that  they  found  there,  they  set  saile  the  eight  of
December.  But  because  the  greatest  part  of  them  by
this  time  repented  them  of  their  enterprise,  and  that
now  they  began  to  fall  into  mutinies  among  them-
selves, when  they  came  foorth  of  the  mouth  of  the
river,  the  two  barks divided  themselves  ; the  one  kept

42

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1564.

along  the  coast  unto  Cuba, to double the Cape  more
easily, and the other went right foorth to passe
athwart  the Isles  of  Lucaya : by reason whereof  they
mette not untill sixe weeks after their departure.
During  which  time  the  barke  that  tooke  her  way  along
the coast, wherein one of  the chiefe conspiratours
named De Orange was Captaine, and Trenchant his
Pilot, neere unto a place called Archaha, tooke a
Brigantine  laden with a certaine quantity of  Cassavi,  Cassavi,bread
which is a kinde of bread made of  roots,  and yet  made  of  roots.
neverthelesse  is  very  white,  and  good  to  eat,  and  some
little  Wine,  which was  not  without  some  losse  of  their
men : for  in one  assault  that  the inhabitants of  Arch-
aha made  upon them,  two of their men were taken,
to  wit,  Steven Gondeau,  and one named Grand Pre,
besides  two  more  that  were  slaine  in  the place,  namely
Nicolas Master and Doublet : yet neverthelesse they
tooke  the Brigantine,  wherein  they put all  their  stuife
that  was  in  their  owne  Barke,  because  it  was  of  greater
burthen and better of  saile then their owne. After-
ward they sailed  right unto the  Cape of  Santa Maria
nere  to  Leauguave,  where  they  went  on  land  to  calke  and
bray  their  ship  which  had  a  great  leake. In  this  meane  Baracouaml-
while  they  resolved  to  saile to Baracou,  which is  a  vil-  lageinthelsk
lage  of  the  Isle  of  Jamaica : where  at  their  arrivall they  y^'^^'^^'^^-
found a Caravel  of  fifty  or threescore tunnes burden,
which  they  tooke  without  any  body  in  it :  and  after  they
had  made  good  cheere  in  the  village  the  space  of  five  or
sixe  dayes,  they  embarked  themselves  in  it,  leaving  their
second  ship  :  then  they  returned  to  the  Cape  of  Tiburon,  The  cape  of
where they met  with a Patach, which they tooke by  Tiburon.
force  after  a  long  conflict. In  this  Patach  the  governour  The  governor
of  Jamaica  was  taken,  with  great  store  of  riches,  aswell  of  of  Jamaica
golde  and  silver  as  of  merchandise  and  wine,  and  many  '''^'^^'^•
other  things ; wherewith our  seditious companions not
content,  determined  to  seeke  more  in  their  caravell,  and
their  governour  of  Jamaica  also. After  they  were  come
to  Jamaica,  they  missed  of  another  caravel  which  did  save

43

A.D.

1564.

Malgualire  a
kinde  of  vessel!
that  will  saile
forward  and
backward.

The  Cape  of
S.  Antonj  in
Cuba.
Havana.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

it  selfe  in  the  haven.  The  governour  being  fine  and
subtile,  seeing  himselfe  brought  unto  the  place  which  he
desired  and  where  he  commanded,  obtained  so  much  by
his  faire  words,  that  they  which  had  taken  him  let  him
put  two  little  boyes  which  were  taken  with  him  into  a
little  cocke  boat,  and  send  them  to  his  wife  into  the
village,  to  advertise  her  that  she  should  make  provision  of
victuals  to  send  unto  him.  But  in  stead  of  writing  unto
his  wife,  he  spake  unto  the  boyes  secretly  that  with  all
diligence  she  should  send  the  vessels  that  were  in  the
havens  neere  that  place  to  succour  and  rescue  him.
Which  she  did  so  cunningly,  that  on  a  morning  about  the
breake  of  the  day,  as  our  seditious  companions  were  at  the
havens  mouth  (which  reacheth  above  two  leagues  up
within  the  land)  there  came  out  of  the  haven  a  malgualire
which  maketh  saile  both  forward  and  backward,  and  then
two  great  shippes,  which  might  be  ech  of  them  of  foure-
score  or  an  hundred  tunnes  a  piece,  with  good  store  of
ordinance,  and  well  furnished  with  men :  at  whose
comming  our  mutinous  fellowes  were  surprised,  being  not
able  to  see  them  when  they  came,  aswell  because  of  the
darknesse  of  the  weather,  as  also  by  reason  of  the  length
of  the  haven,  considering  also  they  mistrusted  nothing.
True  it  is  that  five  or  six  &  twenty  that  were  in  the
brigantine  discovered  these  ships  when  they  were  nere
them,  which  seeing  themselves  pressed  for  want  of  leasure
to  weigh  their  anker,  cut  their  cable,  and  the  trumpeter
which  was  in  it  advertised  the  rest :  whereupon  the  Span-
yards  seeing  themselves  descried,  discharged  a  volley  of
canon  shot  against  the  French  men,  which  they  followed
by  the  space  of  three  leagues,  and  recovered  their  own
ships :  the  brigantine  which  escaped  away,  passed  in  the
sight  of  the  Cape  des  Aigrettes,  and  the  Cape  of  S.
Anthony  situate  in  the  Isle  of  Cuba,  &  from  thence
passed  within  the  sight  of  Havana ;  but  Trenchant  their
pilot,  and  the  trumpeter,  and  certaine  other  mariners  of
this  brigantine,  which  were  led  away  by  force  in  this
voyage (as  elswhere  we  have  declared) desired nothing

44

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
more  then  to  returne  to  me :  wherefore  these  men  agreed
together  (if  peradventure  the  wind  served  them  well)  to
passe  the  chanell  of  Bahama,  while  their  seditious  com- The  chanell  of
panions  were asleepe:  which they did accomplish with Bahama.
such  good  successe,  that  in  the  morning  toward  the  breake  [III.  336.]
of  the  day  about  the  five  and  twentieth  of  March  they
arrived  upon  the  coast  of  Florida : where knowing  the
fault  which  they  had  committed,  in  a  kinde  of  mockery
they  counterfaited  the  Judges :  but  they  played  not  this
pranke  untill  they  had  tippled  well  of  the  Wine  which
remained  yet  in  their  prize. One  counterfeited  the  Judge,
another presented my  person : one other  after  he  had
heard  the matter pleaded,  concluded  thus : Make  you
your  causes  as  good  as  it  pleaseth  you,  but  if  when  you
come  to  the  fort  Caroline  the  Captaine  cause  you  not  to
be  hanged, I  will  never take  him  for  an  honest  man  :
others thought  that  my choler being  passed, I  would
easily forget this matter. Their saile was no sooner
descried  upon  our  coast,  but  the  king  of  the  place  named
Patica,  dwelling  eight  leagues  distant  from  our  fort,  and  King  Patka.
being  one  of  our  good  friends,  sent  an  Indian  to  advertise
me  that  he  had  descried  a  shippe  upon  the  coast,  and  that
he thought  it was  one of  our nation. Hereupon the  Theretumeof
brigantine  oppressed  with  famine,  came  to  an  anker  at  the  p^^rt  ofLau-
mouth  of  the  river  of  May,  when  at  the  first  blush  we  ^°^^^eressedt-
thought  they  had  beene  shippes  come  rrom  1^  ranee ;  which
gave  us  occasion  of  great  joy:  but  after  I  had  caused  her
to  be  better  viewed,  I  was  advertised  that  they  were  our
seditious  companions  that  were  returned. Therefore  I  sent
them  word  by  Captaine  Vasseur  and  my  Sergeant,  that  they
should bring up their  brigantine before  the fortresse :
which  they  promised  to  doe. Now  there  was  not  above
two  leagues  distance  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  where
they  cast  anker  unto  the  fortresse. The  next  day  I  sent
the same Captaine  and Sergeant with thirty souldiers,
because  I  saw  they  much  delayed  their  comming. Then
they  brought  them : and  because  certaine  of  them  had
sworne  at  their  departure,  that  they  would  never  come

45

A.D.

1565.

Laudonnieres
oration  to  his
mutinous  soul-
diers.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

againe  within  the  fort,  I  was  well  pleased  they  should
keepe  their  oth.  For  this  purpose  I  waited  for  them  at
the  rivers  mouth,  where  I  made  my  barks  to  be  built,  and
commanded  my  Sergeant  to  bring  the  foure  chiefe
authours  of  the  mutiny  on  shore ;  whom  I  caused  im-
mediatly  to  be  put  in  fetters :  for  my  meaning  was  not  to
punish  the  rest,  considering  that  they  were  suborned,  and
because  my  councell  expresly  assembled  for  this  purpose
had  concluded  that  these  foure  only  should  die,  to  serve
for  an  example  to  the  rest.  In  the  same  place  I  made  an
Oration  unto  them  in  this  maner.

MY  friends,  you  know  the  cause  why  our  king  sent
us  unto  this  countrey ;  you  know  that  he  is  our
naturall  Prince,  whom  we  are  bound  to  obey  according  to
the  commandement  of  God,  in  such  sort,  that  we  ought
neither  to  spare  our  goods  nor  lives  to  do  those  things
that  concerne  his  service :  ye  know,  or  at  least  you  cannot
be  ignorant,  that  besides  this  general  and  naturall  obliga-
tion, you  have  this  also  joyned  thereunto,  that  in  receiving
of  him  reasonable  pay  and  wages,  you  are  bound  to  follow
those  whom  he  hath  established  over  you  to  be  your
governours,  and  to  command  you  in  his  name,  having
for  this  purpose  given  him  an  oth  of  fidelitie,  which  you
cannot  by  any  meanes  revoke  for  any  faire  apparance
which  you  have  to  doe  the  contrary :  for  this  is  reason,
that  seeing  you  live  upon  his  charges  on  this  condition,
(this  is  reason  I  say)  that  you  should  be  faithfull  unto
him.  Notwithstanding  you  have  had  more  regard  unto
your  unbridled  affections  then  unto  vertue,  which  invited
you  to  the  observance  of  your  oth,  in  such  sort  that  being
become  contemners  of  all  honesty,  you  have  passed  your
bonds,  and  thought  that  all  things  were  lawfuU  for  you.
Whereupon  it  is  fallen  out,  that  while  you  thought  to
escape  the  justice  of  men,  you  could  not  avoid  the
judgement  of  God,  which  as  a  thing  by  no  meanes  to
be  avoided  hath  led  you,  and  in  spight  of  you  hath
made  you  to  arrive  in  this  place,  to  make  you  confesse

46

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.

how  true  his  judgements  are,  and  that  he  never  suffereth
so  foule  a  fault  to  escape  unpunished.

After  that  I  had  used  unto  them  these  or  the  like
speeches,  following  that  which  wee  had  agreed  upon  in
councell,  in  respect  of  the  crimes  which  they  had  com-
mitted, aswel  against  the  kings  Majesty  as  against  mee
which  was  their  Captaine,  I  commanded  that  they  should  The  sentence
be  hanged.  Seeing  therefore  that  there  was  no  starting  of  death.
hole,  nor  meanes  at  all  to  save  themselves  from  this
arrest,  they  tooke  themselves  unto  their  prayers :  yet  one
of  the  foure,  thinking  to  raise  a  mutiny  among  my
souldiers,  sayd  thus  unto  them :  What,  brethren  and
companions,  will  you  suffer  us  to  die  so  shamefully }
And  taking  the  word  out  of  his  mouth,  I  sayd  unto  him,
that  they  were  not  companions  of  authours  of  sedition  and
rebels  unto  the  kings  service.  Heereupon  the  souldiers
besought  me  not  to  hang  them,  but  rather  let  them  be
shot  thorow,  &  then  afterward,  if  I  thought  good,  their
bodies  might  be  hanged  upon  certaine  gibbets  along  the
havens  mouth :  which  I  caused  presently  to  be  put  in
execution.  Loe  here  what  was  the  end  of  my  mutinous  Execution.
souldiers,  without  which  I  had  alwayes  lived  peaceably,
and  enjoyed  the  good  desire  which  I  had  to  make  an
happy  and  quiet  voyage.  But  because  1  have  spoken
of  nothing  but  their  accidentes  and  adventures  which
happened  unto  them  after  their  departure,  without  mak-
ing any  mention  of  our  fort,  I  will  returne  to  the  matters
from  which  I  digressed,  to  declare  that  which  fell  out  after
their  departure.  First  I  began  to  consider  to  the  end  I  [HI.  337.]
might  confirme  and  make  my  selfe  more  constant  in  mine  ^'^^  continua-
affliction,  that  these  murmurers  could  not  ground  their  .^"^^
sedition  upon  want  of  victuals :  for  from  the  time  of  our
arrivall,  every  souldier  dayly  unto  this  day,  and  besides
untill  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  February,  had  a  loafe  of
bread  weighing  two  and  twenty  ounces.  Againe  I  re-
counted with  my  selfe  that  all  new  conquests  by  sea  or  by  ^^^<^°M^^^^^

*  KTjhiPrt  to  VP—

land are  ordinarily  troubled  with rebellions, which are  i/iii^ns  and
easie  to  be  raised,  aswell  in  respect  of  the  distance of

47

mutinies.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

place,  as  in  respect  of  the  hope  that  the  souldiers  have  to
make  their  profit,  as  we  may  be  well  informed  both  by-
ancient  histories and also  by  the  troubles which lately
happened unto Christopher Columbus, after his first
discovery,  to Francis  Pizarro, &  Diego  de  Almagro  in
Peru, & to Fernando Cortes. An hundred thousand
other  things  came  unto  my  minde,  to  incourage  and  con-
firme  me. My  Lieutenant  Ottigny,  and  my  Sergeant  of
my  band  came  to seeke  me  in the ship,  where I was
prisoner,  and  caried  me  from  thence  in  a  barke  assoone
Laudonniere as  our rebels were departed. After I was come unto
setieth  things the  fort,  I  caused  all  my  company  that  remained,  to  be
in  order  after assembled  in  the  midst  of  the  place  before  the  Corps  de
of  prison  to  the  garde, and declared unto them the faults which they
fort.  that  had forsaken us had committed,  praying  them  to

beare  them  in  memory,  to  beare  witnesse  thereof  when
need  should  require.  Foorthwith  I  ordained  new
Captaines  to  command  the  troups  ;  and  prescribed
them  an  order,  according  whereunto  they  were
to  governe  themselves  from  thence  forward,  and  to
enter  into  their  watch  :  for  the  greatest  part  of  the
souldiers,  of  whom  I  had  the  best  opinion,  were  gone
away  with  them.  My  declaration  ended,  they  promised
mee  all  with  one  accord  to  obey  mee  most  humbly,  and
to  doe  whatsoever  I  should  command  them,  though  it
were  to  die  at  my  feet  for  the  Kings  service  ;  wherein
assuredly  they  never  after  failed  :  so  that  I  dare  say,
after  the  departure  of  my  mutinous  companions  I  was
as  well  obeyed  as  ever  was  Captaine  in  place  where  he
commanded.  The  next  day  after  my  returne  unto  the
fort,  I  assembled  my  men  together  againe,  to  declare
unto  them  that  our  fort  was  not  yet  finished,  and  that
it  was  needfull  that  all  of  us  should  put  thereto  our
helping  hands,  to  assure  our  selves  against  the  Indians  :
wherein  having  willingly  agreed  unto  mee,  they  raised
.it  all  with  turfes  from  the  gate  unto  the  river  which  is
theWelTside  °^  ^^^  West  side.  This  done,  I  set  my  Carpenters  on
of  the  fort. worke  to  make  another  barke  of  the  same  bignesse  that

Laudihfs  mtacfi^  ?mfn  Laudic?ieru3  abiho  ^
Florida  re,^7wrzim  comprendic  jhierica  ^Zi^  xzt?tc
^/jGuici  Tnimmurn  cuius  Francis t^rrtute ^i/aJhmv .
^er/zda  quern  si  nm  sociorum  turjpiter  hpif^i
'''Faciio  jproc^pt  (cziius  titmen,  ommius  vltis  ,
'^RL^sus  Tnamhis)  ^u^y  ^cdta.,  qudnta ^atraffevi  /

RENE LAUDONNIERE

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
the others were of: I commanded the Sawyers that
they should prepare plancks, the Smithes to prepare
yron  and  nailes,  and  certaine  others  to  make  coales  :  so
that  the  barke  was  finished  in  eighteene dayes. After-
ward I  made  another  lesser  then  the  first,  the  better  to
discover  up  the  river. In  this  meane  space  the  Indians
visited  me,  and  brought  me dayly  certaine presents,  as
Fish, Deere, Turki-cocks, Leopards, little Beares, and
other  things  according  to the place  of  their habitation.
I recompensed them with certaine Hatchets, Knives,
Beads of  glasse. Combes, and Looking-glasses. Two
Indians  came unto me one day to salute me on the
behalfe of their King, whose name was Marracou,  KingMarra-
dwelling  from  the  place  of  our  fort  some  forty  leagues  <:ou.
toward  the  South,  and  tolde  mee  that  there  was one  in
the  house  of  King Onathaqua  which was called Barbu  King  Onatha-
or the bearded man, and in the house of King  ^«f-
Mathiaca another man whose name they knew not,  ^^^^ ^^  ^~
which  was  not  of  their  nation  : whereupon  I  conceived
that these might be some Christians. Wherefore I
sent  to  all  the  kings  my  neighbours  to  pray  them,  that
if  there  were  any  Christian  dwelling  in  their  countreys,
they  would  finde  meanes  that  he  might  be  brought  unto
mee,  and  that  I  would  make  them double recompense.
They  which love rewards, tooke so much paine, that  t^jo  Stan-
the two men, whereof  we  have spoken, were brought  yards  brought
unto the fort unto me. They were naked, wearing  unto  Lau-
their haire long unto their hammes as the Savages  ^^^  lavages.
use to do, and were Spanyards borne, yet so well
accustomed to the fashion of the countrey that at
the first sight they found our maner of apparell
strange. After that I had questioned of certaine
matters with them, I caused them to be apparelled,
and to cut their haire  ; which they  would not loose,
but lapped it up in a linnen cloth, saying that they
would  cary  it  into  their  countrey  to  be  a  testimony  of
the  misery  that  they  had  indured  in  the  Indies. In  the
haire  of  one  of  them  was  found  a  little  gold  hidden,  to

IX  49  D

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

the value  of  five  and  twenty  crownes,  which  he  gave
unto me. And examining them of  the places where
they  had  bene,  and  how  they  came  thither,  they  answered
me that fifteene  yeeres past, three shippes, in one of
which they  were, were cast away  over  against a place
Calos  a  place named  Calos  upon  the  Flats  which  are  called  The  Mar-
^P°^  y^PJ^^^ tyres,  and  that  the  king  of  Calos  recovered  the  greatest
Manxes P^^^ ^^ ^^^ riches which were in the sayd shippes,
neere  the travelling  in  such  sort  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  people
Cape  of  was saved, and many women  ; among which number

Flortda.  there  were three or foure women married, remaining

there  yet,  and  their  children  also,  with  this  king  of  Calos.
The  King  of  I  desired  to  learne  what  this  king  was.  They  answered
Calos.  j^g^  ^}^^|.  ]^g  ^g^g  |.|^£  goodliest  and  the  tallest  Indian  of

the  country,  a  mighty  man,  a  warrier,  and  having  many
Great  quant't-  subjects  under  his  obedience. They  tolde  me  moreover,
tteofgoldeand  |-]^^^ j^g j^^,^ great Store  of  golde and silver, so farre
nil  ' %'x%^ ^*^°^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^  certaine  village  he  had  a  pit  full  thereof,
which  was  at  the  least  as  high  as  a  man,  and  as  large  as
a  tunne  : all  which  wealth  the  Spanyards  fully  perswaded
themselves  that  they  could  cause  me  to  recover,  if  I  were
able  to  march  thither  with  an  hundred  shot,  besides  that
which  I  might  get  of  the  common  people  of  the  countrey,
which  had  also  great store thereof. They  further also
advertised  me,  that  the  women  going  to  dance,  did  weare
Plates  of  gold about  their  girdles  plates  of  golde  as  broad  as  a  sawcer,
as  broad  as  a ^nd  in  such number  ;  that  the  weight  did  hinder  them
to  dance  at  their  ease  ;  and  that  the  men  ware  the  like
also. The  greatest  part  of  these  riches  was  had,  as  they
sayd,  out  of  the  Spanish shippes,  which  commonly  were
cast  away  in  this  straight ;  and  the  rest  by  the  traffique
which this king  of  Calos  had  with the other kings of
the  countrey  :  Finally,  that  he  was  had  in great  rever-
ence of  his  subjects  ;  and that hee made  them  beleeve
that his sorceries and charmes were the causes that
made the earth bring foorth her fruit : and  that hee
might the easier perswade them that it was so, he
retired himselfe once or twise a yeere to a certaine

50

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
house, accompanied with two or three of his most
famihar  friends,  where  hee  used certaine inchantments  ;
and  if  any  man intruded  himselfe  to goe to see  what
they  did  in  this  place,  the  king  immediatly  caused  him
to be put to death. Moreover, they tolde me,  that  One  of  these
every  yeere in the  time of  harvest,  this Savage king  Spanyards
sacrificed one man,  which was kept expresly  for this  «^^^^.^^J
purpose,  and  taken  out  of  the  number  of  the  Spanyards  q^^^^
which by tempest were cast away upon that coast.
One of these two declared unto me, that hee had
served him a long time for a messenger  ; and that
often times by his commandement he had visited a
king named Oathcaqua, distant from Calos foure or  King  Oath-
five  dayes  journey,  which  alwayes  remained  his  faithfull  ^^l^'^  ^
friend  : but  that in the midway  there was an Island
situate in a  great  lake of  fresh water,  named Sarrope,  Sarroj>e  an
about five  leagues in bignesse, abounding with many  Island.
sorts of  fruits,  specially  in Dates,  which growe on the  Abundance  of
Palme  trees,  whereof  they  make  a  woonderfuU  traffique ;  ^^^^-f-
yet not so great  as of  a kinde of  root,  whereof  they  A  root  of  great
make a kinde of  meale, so good to make  bread of,  pr^ce  to  make
that  it  is  unpossible  to  eate  better,  and  that  for  fifteene ^^^ ^'
leagues  about,  all  the  countrey  is  fed  therewith  :  which
is the  cause  that the  inhabitants of  the Isle  gaine of
their  neighbours  great  wealth  and  profit : for they  will
not  depart  with this root  without  they  be well  payed
for  it. Besides  that,  they  are  taken  for  the  most  war-
like men of all that countrey, as they made good
proofe when the king of  Calos, having made alliance
with  Oathcaqua,  was  deprived  of  Oathcaquaes  daughter,
which  he  had  promised  to him in mariage. He tolde
me  the  whole  matter in this sort : As Oathcaqua  well
accompanied  with  his  people  caried  one  of  his  daughters,
exceeding beautifuU, according to the colour of the
countrey, unto king Calos, to give her unto him for
his  wife,  the inhabitants of  this Isle advertised of  the
matter,  layed  an  ambush for  him in a place where he
should  passe,  and  so  behaved  themselves,  that  Oathcaqua

51

A.D.

1565.

The  greatest
victor'^  among
the  Flortdians.

The  situation
ofCalos.

Cannaveral
in  28  degrees.

The  Flor-
idians  great
traitours  and
dissemblers.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

was  discomfited,  the  betrothed  yoong  spouse  taken,  and
all  the  damosels  that  accompanied  her  ;  which  they  caried
unto  their  Isle  ;  which  thing  in  all  the  Indians  countrey
they  esteeme  to  be  the  greatest  victory  :  for  afterward
they  marry  these  virgins,  and  love  them  above  all
measure.  The  Spanyard  that  made  this  relation,  tolde
mee  that  after  this  defeat  he  went  to  dwell  with  Oathca-
qua,  and  had  bene  with  him  full  eight  yeeres,  even  untill
the  time  that  he  was  sent  unto  me.  The  place  of  Calos
is  situate  upon  a  river  which  is  beyond  the  Cape  of
Florida,  forty  or  fifty  leagues  towards  the  Southwest  :  and
the  dwelling  of  Oathcaqua  is  on  this  side  the  Cape  to-
ward the  North,  in  a  place  which  we  call  in  the  Chart
Cannaveral,  which  is  in  28 degrees.

About  the  five  and  twentieth  of  January  Paracoussy
Satourioua  my  neighbour  sent  me  certaine  presents  by
two  of  his  subjects,  to  perswade  me  to  joyne  with  him,
and  to  make  warre  upon  Ouae  Utina  which  was  my
friend  :  and  further  besought  me  to  retire  certaine  of
my  men  which  were  with  Utina  ;  for  whom  if  it  had
not  bene,  he  had  often  times  set  upon  him,  and  defeited
him.  He  besought  me  heerein  by  divers  other  kings
his  allies,  which  for  three  weekes  or  a  moneths  space
sent  messengers  unto  mee  to  this  end  and  purpose :  but
I  would  not  grant  unto  them  that  they  should  make
warre  upon  him  ;  yea  rather  contrariwise  I  endevoured
to  make  them  friends  ;  wherein  they  condescended  unto
me,  so  farre  foorth  that  they  were  content  to  allow  of
any  thing  that  I  would  set  downe  :  whereupon  the  two
Spanyards  which  of  long  time  knew  well  the  nature  of
the  Indians,  warned  me  that  in  any  case  I  should  not
trust  unto  them,  because  that  when  they  shewed  good
countenance  and  the  best  cheere  unto  men,  then  was  the
time  that  they  would  surprise  and  betray  them  ;  and
that  of  their  nature  they  were  the  greatest  traitours  and
most  deepe  dissemblers  of  the  world.  Besides  I  never
trusted  them  but  upon  good  ground,  as  one  that  had
discovered  a  thousand  of  their  crafts  and  subtilties,  aswell

52

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
by  experience  as  by  reading  of  the  histories  of  late  yeres.
Our  two  barks  were  not  so soone  finished,  but  I  sent
Captaine  Vasseur  to  discover  along  the  coast  lying  toward
the  North,  and  commanded  him  to  saile  unto  a  river,
the  king whereof  was  called Audusta,  which was  lord
of  that place,  where  those  of  the  yere 1562 inhabited.
I  sent  him  two  sutes  of  apparell,  with  certaine  hatchets,
knives,  and  other  small  trifles,  the  better  to  insinuate  my  [III.  339.]
selfe  into his friendship. And the better  to  win him,
I sent in the barke with captaine Vasseur  a  souldier
called  Aimon,  which was one of  them  which returned
home  in the first voyage, hoping that king Audusta
might  remember  him. But  before  they  were  imbarked
I commanded  them  to  make  inquiry  what  was  become
of  another  called  Roufii,  which  remained  alone  in  those
parts  when  Nicolas  Masson  and  those  of  the  first  voyage  Nicolas  Mas-
imbarked themselves to returne into France. They  ^o»  otherwise
understood  at  their arrivall  there,  that  a  barke passing  '^^^^"■^^^'^°^^^
that  way  had  caried  away  the  same  souldier :  and  after-
ward  I knew for a  certainty that  they  were Spaniards
which  had  caried  him to Havana. The  king  Audusta  King  Audus-
sent me  backe my  barke  full of  mill, with a certaine  tas  great
quantity  of  beanes,  two  stags,  some  skinnes  painted  after  ^^^^^'^^h
their  maner,  and  certaine  pearles  of  small  value,  because  Pearles
they  were  burnt :  and  sent  me  word  that  if  I  would  dwel  burned.
in  his  quarters,  he  would  give  me  a  great  countrey :  and
that  after  he  had  gathered  his  mill,  he  would  spare  me
as  much  as  I  would  have. In  the  meane  while  there  came  Feter  Martyr
unto  our  fort  a  flocke  of  stocke-doves  in  so  great  number,  '^ritethcap.  i.
and  that  for  the  space  of  seven  weeks  together,  that  every  fl^^nljffg^^^
day  wee killed  with harquebush shot two hundred in  of  pigeons  are
the  woods  about  our  fort. After  that  Captaine  Vasseur  in  the  Isles  oj
was returned,  I caused the two barks to  be  furnished  ^^^  Lucayos.
againe with souldiers & mariners, and sent them to
cary  a  present  from  me  unto  the  widow  of  king  Hiocaia,  The  widow  of
whose  dwelling  was  distant  from  our  fort  about  twelve  ^^^S  ^ioa-
legues  Northward. She  courteously  received our men,  '^^1^/°^^^
sent  me  backe  my  barks  full  of  mill  and  acornes  with

53

A.D,
1565.

This  queenes
name  was  Nia
Cubacani.

Tkejift  voyage
up  the  river
of  May.

Mathiaqua.
The  discovery
of  a  mighty
lake,  on  the  one
side  whereof
no  land  can  be
seene.

The  Isle  of
Edelano.

An  excellent
worke  of
nature.

Eneguape.
Chilily.
Patica.
Coya.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

certaine  baskets  full  of  the  leaves  of  Cassine,  wherwith

they make their drinke. And the place where this

widow  dwelleth  is  the  most  plentifull  of  mill  that  is  in

all  the  coast,  and  the  most  pleasant. It  is  thought  that

the  queene  is  the  most  beautifuU  of  all  the  Indians,  and

of  whom  they  make  most  account :  yea,  and  her  subjects

honour  her  so  much,  that  almost  continually  they  beare

her  on  their  shoulders,  and  will  not  suffer  her  to  go  on

foot. Within  a  few  dayes  after  the  returne  of  my  barks,

she  sent  to  visit  me  by  her  Hiatiqui,  which  is  as  much

to  say,  as  her  interpreter. Now  while  I  thought  I  was

furnished with victuals untill the  time that our ships

might come out of  France (for feare of  keeping  rny

people  idle)  I  sent  my  two  barks  to  discover  along  the

river,  and up  toward the head  thereof,  which went  so

far up that they were thirty leagues  good beyond a

place named Mathiaqua,  and  there  they  discovered  the

entrance  of  a  lake,  upon  the  one  side whereof  no  land

can be seene, according to the report of  the Indians,

which had oftentimes climed on the highest  trees in

the  countrey  to  see  land,  and  notwithstanding  could  not

discerne  any  :  which  was the  cause that  my  men  went

no  further,  but  returned  backe  ;  and  in  comming  home

went  to  see  the  Island  of  Edelano  situated  in  the  midst

of  the river,  as  faire a  place  as  any  that  may  be seene

thorow  the  world  :  for  in  the  space  of  some  three  leagues,

that  it  may  conteine  in  length  and  bredth,  a  man  may

see  an  exceeding  rich  countrey,  and  marvellously  peopled.

At  the  comming out  of  the  village of  Edelano to  go

unto  the  rivers  side  a  man  must  passe  thorow  an  alley

about  three hundred  paces  long  and  fifty  paces  broad :

on  both  sides  wherof  great  tres  are  planted,  the  boughes

whereof  are  tied  together  like  an  arch,  and  meet  together

so  artificially  that  a  man  would  thinke  it  were  an  arbour

made  of  purpose,  as  faire  I  say,  as  any  in  all  christendome,

although  it  be  altogether natural. Our men departing

from  this  place  rowed  to  Eneguape,  then  to  Chilily,  from

thence  to  Patica,  &  lastly  they  came  unto  Coya  :  where

54

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
leaving  their  barks in  a  litle  creeke  of  the river with
men to guard them, they went to  visit Utina, which
received  them  very  courteously  :  and  when  they  departed
from  his  house,  he  intreated  them  so  earnestly,  that  sixe
of  my  men  remained  with  him  ;  of  which  number  there
was  one  gentleman,  named  Groutald,  which  after  he  had
abode  there  about  two  moneths,  and  taken  great  paines
to  discover  the  countrey,  with  another  which  I  had  left
a  great  while  there  to  that  intent,  came  unto  me  to  the
fort,  and  tolde  me  that  he  never  saw  a  fairer  countrey.
Among  other  things,  he  reported  unto  me  that  he  had  The  king  of
seene  a  place  named  Hostaqua,  and  that  the  king  thereof  Hostaqua  or
was  so  mighty,  that  he  was  able  to  bring  three  or  foure  ,  "[^^"^^  ^r  ^
thousand  Savages  to  the  field  ;  with  whom if  I would  or  foure  thous-
joyne  and  enter  into  league,  we  might  be  able  to  reduce  and  Savages  to
all  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  unto  our  obedience  :  besides  the  field.
that  this  king  knew  the  passages  unto  the  mountaine  of  Themountaine
Apalatci,  which  the French men desired so greatly  to  of^P^^^ta.
atteine  unto,  and where  the  enemy  of  Hostaqua  made
his  abode  ;  which  was  easie  to  be  subdued,  if  so  be  wee
would  enter  into  league together. This king sent  me
a  plate  of  a  minerall  that  came  out  of  this  mountaine,  out
of  the  foote  whereof  there  runneth  a  streame  of  golde  or  There  is  a
copper,  as  the Savages thinke,  out  of  which they  dig  ^^^^ySfl'-^^
up  the  sand  with  an  hollow  and  drie  cane  of  reed  untill  ^^^  mountaine
the  cane  be  full  ;  afterward  they  shake  it,  and  finde  that  of  Apalatci.
there  are  many  small  graines  of  copper  and  silver  among
this  sand :  which  giveth  them  to  understand,  that  some
rich  mine  must  needs  be  in  the  mountaine. And  because
the  mountaine  was  not  past  five  or sixe dayes  journey
from  our  fort,  lying  toward  the  Northwest,  I  determined
assoone  as  our  supply  should come  out of  France,  to  [III.  340.]
remoove our habitation unto some river  more  toward
the North,  that I  might be nerer thereunto. One  of
my  souldiers  whose  name  was  Peter  Gamby,  which  had  Peter  Gamby
remained  a  long  space  before  in  this  countrey  to  learne  J^'««'»^-
the  languages  and  traffique  with  the  Indians,  at  the  last  j^^^  village  of
came  to  the village of  Edelano,  where having gotten  Edelano.

55

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

Gold  y  together a certaine quantity of  golde and silver, and

silver.  purposing  to returne  unto me,  he  prayed the  king  of

the  village  to  lend  him  a  canoa  (which  is  a  vessell  made

of  one  whole  piece  of  wood,  which  the  Indians  use  to

fish  withal,  and  to  row  upon  the  rivers)  which  this  lord

of  Edelano granted him. But being greedy of the

riches  which  he  had,  he  commanded  two  Indians,  which

he  had  charged  to  conduct  him  in  the  canoa,  to  murder

him  &  bring him  the  merchandise  and  the  gold  which

he  had. Which  the  two  traitours  villanously  executed  :

for  they  knockt  him on the head with an hatchet,  as

he was  blowing  of  the  fire  in  the  canoa  to  seethe  fish.

IJtina  sendeth The  Paracoussy  Utina  sent  certeine  dayes  afterward,  to

toLaudonntere  pj.^y.  j^g  ^^  Xoxid,  him  a  dozen  or  fifteene  of  my  shot,  to

jor  IS  epe. -j^^^j^  l^-g  QxvQxnj  Potanou,  and  sent  me  word,  that  this

enemy  once  vanquished,  he  would  make  me  passage,  yea,

and would conduct me unto the mountaines in such

sort,  that  no  man  should  be  able  to  hinder  me. Then

I assembled  my  men  to  demand  their  advice,  as  I  was

A  good  note, woont  to  do  in  all  mine  enterprises. The  greater  part

was  of  opinion,  that  I should  do  well  to  send  succour

unto  this  Paracoussy,  because  it  would  be  hard  for  me

to  discover  any  further  up  into  the  countrey  without  his

helpe :  and  that  the  Spanyards  when  they  were  imployed

in  their  conquests,  did  alwayes  enter  into  alliance  with

some one king to ruine another. Notwithstanding,

because I did alwayes mistrust the Indians,  and that

the  more  after  the  last  advertisement  that  the  Spanyards

had  given  me,  I  doubted lest the  small  number  which

Utina  demanded  might  incurre  some  danger  ;  wherefore

I  sent  him  thirty  shot  under  the  charge  of  my  Lieutenant

Ottigny,  which  stayed  not  above  two  dayes  with  Utina,

while  he  prepared  victuals  for  his  voyage,  which  ordinarily

and  according  to  the  custome  of  the  countrey  are  caried

by women and yoong boyes,  and by hermaphrodites.

Threehmdred  Utina  setting  forward  with  three  hundred  of  his  subjects,

Indians.  having  ech  of  them  their  bowe  and  quiver  full  of  arrowes,

caused  our  thirty  shot  to  be  placed  in  the  foreward,  and

56

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.

made  them  march  all  the  day,  until  that  the  night
approching,  and  having  not  gone  past  halfe  the  way,
they  were  inforced  to  lie  all  night  in  the  woods,  nere  a
great  lake,  and  there  to  incampe  themselves :  they
separated  themselves  by  sixe  and  sixe,  making  ech  of
them  a  fire  about  the  place  where  their  king  lay,  for
whose  guard  they  ordeined  a  certeine  number  of  those
archers,  in  whom  he  put  most  confidence.  Assoone  as
day  was  come,  the  campe  of  the  Indians  marched  within
three  leagues  of  Potanou :  there  king  Utina  requested
my  Lieutenant  to  grant  him  foure  or  five  of  his  men
to  go  and  discover  the  countrey ;  which  departed  im-
mediatly,  and  had  not  gone  farre,  but  they  perceived  upon
a  lake,  distant  about  three  leagues  from  the  village  of  A  lake  three
Potanou,  three  Indians  which  fished  in  a  canoa.  Now  leagues  distant
the  custome  is  that  when  they  fish  in  this  lake,  they  ^J^^^fj  ^^^~
have  alwayes  a  company  of  watchmen,  armed  with  bowes  Potanou.
and  arrowes  to  guard  the  fishers.  Our  men  being  hereof
advertised  by  those  of  the  company,  durst  not  passe  any
further,  for  feare  of  falling  into  some  ambush  :  wherefore
they  returned  towards  Utina,  which  suddenly  sent  them
backe  with  a  greater  company  to  surprise  the  fishers,
before  they  might  retire  and  advertise  their  king  Potanou
of  the  comming  of  his  enemies.  Which  they  could  not
execute  so  politikely,  but  that  two  of  them  escaped ;  the
third  also  did  the  best  he  could  to  save  himselfe  by
swimming,  in  which  meane  while  he  was  stayed  with
shot  of  arrowes,  and  they  drew  him  starke  dead  unto
the  banks  side,  where  our  Indians  flayed  off^  the  skinne
of  his  head,  cut  off  both  his  armes  in  the  high  way,
reserving  his  haire  for  the  triumph,  which  their  king
hoped  to  make  for  the  defeat  of  his  enemy.  Utina
fearing  least  Potanou  advertised  by  the  fishers  which
were  escaped,  should  put  himselfe  in  armes  to  with-
stand him  valiantly,  asked  counsell  of  his  Jawa,  which  ^^"^^  ^'^S"^-
is  asmuch  to  say  in  their  language  as  his  Magician,  -^'^f.  ^
whether  it  were  best  to  goe  any  further.  Then  his  Magician.
Magician  made  certeine  signes,  hidious  and  fearefuU  to

57

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

beholde,  and  used  certeine  words  ; which  being  ended,

he sayd unto  his king,  that it  was not best  to passe

Potanouaccom-  any further, and that Potanou accompanied with two

paniedwith thousand  Indians  at  the  least  stayed in such and  such

TnJanr"'^ a  place  for  him,  to  bidde  him  battell  :  and  besides  this,

that  all the  sayd  Indians  were  furnished with  cords  to

binde the prisoners which they made full account to

take.

This  relation  caused  Utina  to  be  unwilling  to  passe  any
further : whereupon my Lieutenant being  as angry as
ever  he  might  be,  because  hee  had  taken  so  great  paines
without  doing  of  any  thing  of  account,  sayd  unto  him,
that hee would never thinke well of  him  nor of  his
people,  if  hee  would  not  hazzard  himselfe : and  that  if  he
would  not  doe  it,  at  the  least,  that  he  would  give  him  a
guide to conduct him and his small company to the
The  prediction  place  where the enemies  were encamped. Heereupon
of  the  Ma- Utina  was ashamed,  and seeing the  good  affection of
^ctanfom Monsieur de  Ottigny determined to go forward : and
he failed not to finde his enemies in the very place
[III.  341.] which  the Magician had named: where the skirmish
beganne,  which  lasted  three  long  houres :  wherein  with-
out doubt  Utina  had  beene  defeated,  unlesse  our  harque-
busiers  had  not  borne  the  burthen  and  brunt  of  all  the
battell, and slaine a  great number of  the  souldiers of
Potanou, upon  which  occasion  they  were put  to  flight.
Wherewithall  Utina  being  content  for  the  present,  caused
his  people  to  retire  and  returne  homeward  to  the  great
discontentment  of  Monsieur  de  Ottigny,  which  desired
Utina  hath  1 8  nothing more, then to pursue his victorie. After  he
or  20  kngs  to  ^^iS come home to his house he sent messengers to
eighteene  or  twentie  villages  of  other  kings  his  vassals,
and summoned them to be present at the feasts  and
dances  which he purposed to  celebrate because  of  his
victorie. In  the  meane  while  Monsieur  de  Ottigny  re-
freshed himselfe  for  two  dayes :  and  then  taking  his  leave
of  the  Paracoussi, and leaving him  twelve of  his  men
to  see  that  Potanou,  bethinking  himselfe  of  his  late  losse,

58

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.

should  not  come  to  burne  the  houses  of  Utina,  he  set

forward on his  way  to come  unto me unto our  Fort,

where  he  up  and  told  me  how  every  thing  had  passed :

and  withall that  he  had  promised the  twelve  souldiers,

that  he  would  come  backe  againe  to  fetch  them. Then

the kings my neighbours all enemies to  Utina,  being

advertised of  the returne of  my Lieutenant, came to

visite  me  with  presents  and  to  enquire  how  things had

passed,  praying  me  all  to  receive  them  into  my  favour,

and  to  become  enemie  to  Utina,  which  notwithstanding  I

would  not  grant  them  for  many  reasons  that  mooved  me.

The Indians  are  wont  to  leave  their houses  and to  A  custome  of

retire themselves into the woods the space of three  the  Indians  to

moneths,  to  wit  Tanuary,  February,  and  March :  during , ^  ^"7"'

,.,.',  *'  •"  •"  T J-  1- houses  for  xor

which  time  by  no  meanes  a  man  can  see  one  Indian, r^or moneths  and

when  they  goe  on  hunting,  they  make  little  cottages  in  to  live  in  the
the  woods,  whereunto  they  retire  themselves,  living  upon  woods.
that  which  they  take  in  hunting. This  was  the  cause  that
during  this  time,  we  could  get  no  victuals  by  their  meanes  :
and  had it  not  beene  that  I had  made  good provision
thereof,  while  my  men  had  store,  untill  the  end  of  Aprill  They  kokefor
(which  was  the  time  when  at  the  uttermost,  we  hoped  to  succour  out  of
have  had  succour out  of  France) I  should  have  beene  ^^^f^it^  v^
greatly amazed. This hope was the cause that the  at  the  utter-
souldiers tooke no  great  care  to  looke  well  unto  their  most.
victuals, although I devided equally among them that
which  I could  get  abroad  in  the  countrey,  without  re-
serving unto  my  selfe  any  more  then  the  least  souldier
of  al  the  company. The  moneth  of  May  approching  and
no  manner  of  succour  come  out  of  France,  we  fell  into
extreme  want  of  victuals,  constrained to  eate  the  rootes
of  the  earth  and  certaine  sorrell  which  we  found  in  the
fields. For  although  the  Savages  were  returned  by  this
time  unto  their  villages,  yet  they  succoured  us  with  no-
thing but  certaine  fish,  without  which  assuredly  wee  had
perished  with  famine. Besides  they  had  given  us  before
the  greatest  part  of  their  maiz  and  of  their  beanes  for  our
marchandise. This  famine  held  us  from  the  beginning

59

A.D.
1565.

Extreme  fa-
mine for  sixe
weekes  space.

Promise
broken.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  May  untill  the  middest  of  June.  During  which  time
the  poore  souldiers  and  handicraftsmen  became  as  feeble
as  might  be,  and  being  not  able  to  worke  did  nothing
but  goe  one  after  another  in  Centincl  unto  the  clift  of  an
hill,  situate  very  neere  unto  the  Fort,  to  see  if  they  might
discover  any  French  ship.  In  fine  being  frustrated  of
their  hope,  they  assembled  altogether,  &  came  to  beseech
me  to  take  some  order  that  they  might  returne  into
France,  considering  that  if  we  let  passe  the  season  to  em-
barke  our  selves,  we  were  never  like  to  see  our  countrey,
where  it  could  not  be  chosen  but  that  some  troubles
were  fallen  out,  seeing  they  had  broken  their  promise
made  unto  us,  and  that  no  succour  was  come  from
thence.  Thereupon  it  was  consulted  and  resolved  by
all  the  company,  that  the  barke  Breton  should  be  trimmed
up,  whereof  Captaine  Vasseur  had  charge.  But  because
the  ship  was  not  bigge  enough  to  receive  us  all,  some
thought  good  to  build  the  Brigandine  two  deckes  higher,
which  our  mutinous  souldiers  had  brought  backe,  and
that  25  men  should  hazard  themselves  to  passe  therein
into  France.  The  rest  being  better  advised  said  that  it
should  be  farre  better  to  build  a  faire  shippe  upon  the
keele  of  the  Galiote  which  I  had  caused  to  be  made,
promising  to  labour  couragiously  therupon.  Then  I
enquired  of  my  shipwrights  to  knowe  in  what  space
they  could  make  this  shippe  readie.  They  assured  the
whole  company  that  being  furnished  with  all  things
necessarie,  they  would  make  it  readie  by  the  8.  of  August.
Immediatly  I  disposed  of  the  time  to  worke  upon  it,
I  gave  charge  to  Monsieur  de  Ottigny  my  Lieutenant  to
cause  timber  necessary  for  the  finishing  of  both  the
vessels  to  be  brought,  and  to  Monsieur  de  Arlac  my
Standart-bearer  to  goe  with  a  barke  a  league  off  from
the  Fort  to  cut  downe  trees  fit  to  make  plankes,  and  to
cause  the  sawiers  which  he  carried  with  him  to  saw  them :
and  to  my  Sergeant  of  the  company  to  cause  fifteene  or
sixteene  men  to  labour  in  making  coales :  and  to  Master
Hance  keeper  of  the  Artillery,  &  to  the  gunner  to  gather

60

KENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
store  of  rosen  to  bray  the  vessels :  wherein  he  used  such
diligence,  that  in  lesse  then  3  weekes  he  gathered  2  hogs-  Two  hogsheads
heads  of  the  same  together.  There  remained  now  but  if^o^^^-
the  principal,  which  was  to  recover  victuals  to  sustaine
us  while  our  worke  endured  :  which  I  undertooke  to  doe
with  ye  rest  of  my  company  &  the  Mariners  of  the  ship.
To  this  end  I  embarked  my  selfe  making  up  the  thirtieth  [HI-  342-]
in  my  great  barke,  to  make  a  voyage  of  forty  or  fifty
leagues,  having  with  us  no  provision  at  all  of  victuals :
whereby  it  may  easily  be  gathered  how  simply  those  of
our  Fort  were  provided.  True  it  is  that  certaine  souldiers
being  better  husbandes  then  the  rest,  and  having  made
some  provision  of  mast,  solde  a  little  measure  thereof  for
fifteene  and  twentie  sous  unto  their  companions.  During
our  voyage  we  lived  of  nothing  else  but  raspices,  of  a
certaine  round  graine  little  and  blacke,  and  of  the  rootes
of  palmitos  which  we  got  by  the  river  sides :  wherein
after  we  had  sayled  a  long  time  in  vaine,  I  was  con-
strained to  returne  to  the  Fort :  where  the  souldiers
beginning  to  be  wearie  of  working,  because  of  the  ex-
treme famine  which  did  consume  them,  assembled  them-
selves and  declared  unto  me,  that  seeing  we  could  get
no  victuals  of  the  Indians,  it  was  expedient  for  the  saving
of  their  lives,  to  seaze  upon  the  person  of  one  of  the
Kings  of  the  Countrie :  assuring  themselves  that  one
being  taken,  the  subjects  would  not  suffer  our  men  to
want  victuals.  I  made  them  answere  that  this  enterprise
was  not  rashly  to  be  attempted :  But  that  wee  ought  to
have  good  regarde  unto  the  consequence  that  might  insue
thereof.  Hereupon  they  replyed  unto  me,  that  seeing
the  time  was  past  of  our  succour  from  France,  &  that
we  were  resolved  to  abandon  the  Countrie,  that  there  was
no  danger  to  constraine  the  Savages  to  furnish  us  with
victuals :  which  for  the  present  T  would  not  grant  unto
them,  but  promised  them  assuredly  that  I  would  send
to  advertise  the  Indians  that  they  should  bring  me
victuals  for  exchange  of  marchandise  and  apparell :  which
they  also  did  for  the  space  of  certaine  daies,  during  which

61

A.D.
1565.

The  vile  na-
ture of  the
Indians.

A  cruel!  an-
swer e  of  the
Savages.

Pinocke  a  cer-
taine  kinde  of
fruit  as  higge
as  cheries.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

they  brought  of  their  mast  and  of  their  fish :  which  these
Indians  being  traiterous,  &  mischievous  of  nature,  and
knowing  our  exceeding  strange  famine,  sold  us  at  so
deere  a  price,  that  for  lesse  then  nothing  they  had  gotten
from  us  al  the  rest  of  our  marchandise  which  remained.
And  which  was  worse,  fearing  to  be  forced  by  us  and
seeing  that  they  had  gotten  all  from  us,  they  came  no
neerer  to  our  Fort  then  the  shot  of  an  Harquebuze.
Thither  they  brought  their  fish  in  their  little  boats,  to
which  our  poore  souldiers  were  constrained  to  goe,  and
oftentimes  (as  I  have  seene)  to  give  away  the  very  shirts
from  their  backs  to  get  one  fish.  If  at  any  time  they
shewed  unto  the  Savages  the  excessive  price  which  they
tooke,  these  villaines  would  answere  them  roughly  &
churlishly  :  if  thou  make  so  great  account  of  thy  mar-
chandise, eat  it,  and  we  will  eat  our  fish  :  then  fell
they  out  a  laughing  and  mocked  us  with  open  throat.
Wherupon  our  souldiers  utterly  impatient,  were  often-
times ready  to  cut  them  in  pieces,  and  to  make  them
pay  the  price  of  their  foolish  arrogancie.  Notwithstand-
ing considering  the  importance  hereof,  I  tooke  paines
to  appease  the  impatient  souldier  :  for  I  would  not  by
any  meanes  enter  into  question  with  the  Savages,  &  it
sufiised  me  to  delay  the  time.  Wherefore  I  devised  to
send  unto  Utina  to  pray  him  to  deale  so  farre  foorth
with  his  subjects,  as  to  succour  me  with  mast  and  maiz :
which  he  did  very  sparingly,  sending  me  12  or  15
baskets  of  mast,  and  two  of  pinocks,  which  are  a  kind
of  little  greene  fruits  which  grow  among  the  weedes  in
the  river,  and  are  as  big  as  cheries  :  yea,  &  this  was
not  but  by  giving  of  them  in  exchange  twise  as  much
marchandise  and  apparell  as  they  were  worth.  For  the
subjectes  of  Utina  perceived  evidently  the  necessitie
wherein  we  were,  &  began  to  use  the  like  speech  unto
us,  as  the  others  did  :  as  it  is  commonly  seene  that
neede  altereth  mens  affections.  While  these  things  were
in  doing,  a  certain  breathing  space  presented  it  selfe  for
Utina  gave  me  to  understand  that  there  was  a  king  his

62

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
subject  whose  name  was  Astina,  which  he  determined  Astina  a  king.
to  take  prisoner,  and  to  chastise  him  for  his  disobedience :
that  for  this  cause,  if  I  would  give  him  aide  with  a
certaine  number  of  my  souldiers,  he  would  bring  them
to  the  village  of  Astina,  where  there  was  meanes  to
recover  mast  and  maiz.  In  the  meane  season  he  excused
himselfe  unto  me  because  he  had  sent  me  no  more  maiz,
and  sent  me  word  that  the  little  store  that  he  had  left,
was  scarsely  sufficient  for  his  seede-corne.  Now  being
somewhat  relieved,  as  I  thought,  by  the  hope  which  I
had  of  this  offer,  I  would  not  faile  to  send  him  the
men  which  he  desired  of  me,  which  neverthelesse  were
very  evill  intreated  :  for  he  deceived  them,  and  in  stead
of  leading  them  against  Astina,  he  caused  them  to  march
against  his  other  enemies.  My  Lieutenant  which  had  the
charge  of  this  enterprise  with  Captaine  Vasseur  and  my
Sergeant  was  determined  to  be  revenged  of  Utina  and
to  cut  him  in  pieces  &  his  people  :  and  had  it  not  bene
that  they  feared  to  do  any  thing  against  my  wil,  with-
out all  doubt  they  would  have  put  their  enterprise  in
execution.  Therfore  they  would  not  passe  any  further
without  advertising  me  thereof.  Wherefore  being  come
backe  againe  unto  the  Fort,  angry  &  pricked  deepely
to  the  quicke  for  being  so  mocked,  they  made  their
complaints  unto  me,  declaring  unto  me  that  they  were
almost  dead  for  hunger.  They  told  the  whole  matter
to  the  rest  of  the  souldiers,  which  were  very  glad  that
they  had  not  entred  into  that  action,  &  resolved,
assembling  themselves  againe  together,  to  let  me  under-
stand that  they  did  persist  in  their  first  deliberation,
which  was,  to  punish  the  boldnesse  and  maliciousnes  of
the  Savages,  which  they  could  no  longer  endure,  &  were
determined  to  take  one  of  their  kings  prisoner  :  which
thing  I  was  enforced  to  grant  unto  them,  to  ye  end  to
avoid  a  greater  mischiefe,  and  the  sedition  which  I  foresaw  [in,  3^3.]
would  ensue,  if  I  had  made  refusall  thereof.  For,  sayd
they,  what  occasion  have  you  to  deny  us,  considering
the necessitie  wherein we are, and the small account

63

A.D.
1565.

Utina  taken
prisoner  in  his
village  by
Laudonniere
and  50  of  his
soldiers.

Five  or  sixe
hundred  In-
dians.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

that  they  make  of  us.  Shall  it  not  be  lawful!  for  us  to
punish  them  for  the  wrongs  which  they  doe  unto  us,
besides  that  we  know  apparantly  how  little  they  respect
us  ?  Is  not  this  sufficient  although  there  were  no
necessitie  at  all,  since  they  thus  delude  us,  and  have
broken  promise  with  us  ?  After  I  had  therefore  resolved
with  them  to  seaze  on  the  person  of  Utina,  which
besides  that  he  had  given  us  occasion  hereof,  was  also
most  able  to  help  us  to  recover  victuals,  I  departed
with  fiftie  of  my  best  souldiers  all  embarked  in  two
Barkes  &  we  arrived  in  the  dominions  of  Utina,  distant
from  our  Fort  about  40  or  50  leagues :  then  going  on
shore  we  drew  towards  his  village  situated  6  great
leagues  from  the  river,  where  we  tooke  him  prisoner,
howbeit  not  without  great  cries  and  alarmes,  and  led
him  av/ay  in  our  barkes,  having  first  signified  unto
his  Father  in  law  and  his  chiefe  subjects,  that  in  that
I  had  taken  him,  it  was  not  for  any  desire  that  I
had  to  doe  him  any  harme,  but  onely  to  relieve  my
necessitie  and  want  of  victuals  which  oppressed  me,
and  that  in  case  they  would  helpe  me  to  some,  I
would  find  meanes  to  set  him  againe  at  libertie :  that
in  the  meane  space  I  would  retire  my  selfe  into  my
Barkes  (for  I  feared  least  they  would  there  assemble
themselves  together,  and  that  some  mischiefe  might
thereof  insue)  where  I  would  stay  for  him  two  dayes
to  receive  his  answere  :  notwithstanding  that  my  mean-
ing was  not  to  have  any  thing  without  exchange  of
marchandise.  This  they  promised  they  would  doe.
And  in  very  deede  the  very  same  evening,  his  wife
accompanied  with  all  the  women  of  the  village  came
unto  the  Rivers  brinke,  and  cryed  unto  me  to  enter
into  the  barke,  to  see  her  husband  and  her  sonne,
which  I  held  both  prisoners.  I  discovered  the  next
day  five  or  sixe  hundred  Indian  archers,  which  drew
neere  unto  the  river  side,  and  came  to  me  to
signifie  unto  me  how  that  during  the  absence  of  their
king, their enemie Potanou, being thereof  advertised,

64

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.

was entred into their  village,  and had set all on fire.

They prayed me that I would succour them  : never-  The  deepe  dh-

thelesse  in  the  meane  while  they  had one  part  of  their  semblingofthe

troope in ambush, with intent to set upon me if  1 "  ^^"^'

had come on land, which was easie for mee to dis-

cerne. For seeing that I refused so to doe, they

greatly doubted that they  were discovered,  and  sought

by  all  meanes  to  remoove  out  of  my  minde  that  evill

opinion  which  I  had  conceived  of  them. They  brought

mee therefore fish in their little boates and of  their

meale of  Mast, they made also  of  their  drinke  which

they  call  cassine,  which  they  sent  to  Utina  and  me.

Now  albeit  I  had gotten this point of  them  that  I
held  their  king prisoner,  yet neverthelesse  I  could  not
get  any  great  quantitie  of  victuals  for  the  present :  the
reason  was,  because  they  thought  that  after  I  had  drawen
victuals  from  them,  I  would put their  king  to death.
For  they  measured  my  will  according  to  their  custome.  The  Indians
whereby  they  put  to  death all the men prisoners that  kill  all  the  men
they  take  in  warre. And  thus  being  out  of  all  hope  of  ^^l^^^^^^y  1^
his  libertie,  they  assembled  themselves  in  the  great  house,  .^arre.
and  having  called  all  the  people  together  they  proposed
the  election  of  a  new King,  at  which time  the Father The  election
in  lawe  of  Utina set one of  the kings young  sonnes  of  a  new
upon  the Royall  throne  : and  tooke such paynes  that
every  man  did him homage by  the  major part  of  the
voyces. This  election  had  like  to  have  bene  the  cause
of  great  troubles  among  them. For  there  was  a  kins-
man of  the kings  neere adjoyning,  which pretended a
Title  to  the  kingdome,  and  in  deede  he  had  gotten  one
part  of  the  subjects :  notwithstanding  this  enterprise  could
not  take  effect,  forasmuch as  by  a  common  consent  of
the  chiefe,  it  was  consulted  and  concluded,  that  the  sonne
was  more  meete  to  succeede  the  Father  then  any  other.
Now  all this  while  I  kept Utina  with  me,  to  whom  I
had  given  some  of  mine  apparell  to  cloth  him,  as  I  had
likewise  done  unto his sonne. But  his subjects  which
before  had an opinion that  I  would have  killed  him,

IX  65  E  .

A.D.
1565.

The  hatred
among  the  la-
vage kings  of
Florida.

Note.

[III.  344-]

Note.

Rootes.

Esquine.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

being  advertised  of  the  good  entertainment  which  I  used
towards  him,  sent  two  men  which  walked  along  the  river,
and  came  to  visite  him,  and  brought  us  some  victuals.
These  two  men  at  their  comming  were  received  by  me
with  all  courtesie,  and  entertained  according  to  the  victuals
which  I  had.  While  these  things  thus  passed,  there
arrived  from  all  quarters  many  Savages  of  the  countries
adjoyning,  which  came  to  see  Utina,  and  sought  by  all
meanes  to  perswade  me  to  put  him  to  death,  offering
that  if  I  would  do  so,  they  would  take  order  that  1
should  want  no  victuals.  There  was  also  a  King  my
neighbour  whose  name  was  Saturioua,  a  subtill  and  craftie
man,  and  one  that  shewed  by  proofe  that  he  was  greatly
practised  in  affaires.  The  King  sent  ordinarily  messengers
unto  me,  to  pray  me  to  deliver  Utina  unto  him  :  and
to  win  me  the  more  easily,  he  sent  twise  seven  or  eight
baskets  of  Maiz  or  of  Mast,  thinking  by  this  way  to
allure  me,  &  to  make  me  come  to  composition  with  him :
in  the  end  notwithstanding  when  he  saw  he  lost  his
time,  he  ceased  to  visite  me  with  ambassages  &  victuals :
&  in  the  meane  while  I  was  not  able  with  ye  same  store
of  victuals  which  I  had,  so  well  to  proportion  out  the
travaile  upon  the  ships  which  we  built  to  returne  into
France,  but  that  in  the  end  we  were  constrained  to
indure  extreme  famine,  which  continued  among  us
all  the  moneth  of  May  :  for  in  this  latter  season,
neither  Maiz  nor  Beanes,  nor  Mast  was  to  be  found
in  the  villages,  because  they  had  employed  all  for  to
sowe  their  fields,  insomuch  that  we  were  constrayned  to
eate  rootes,  which  the  most  part  of  our  men  punned
in  the  morters  which  I  had  brought  with  me  to  beate
gunnepowder  in,  and  the  graine  which  came  to  us  from
other  places :  some  tooke  the  wood  of  Esquine,  beate
it,  and  made  meale  thereof,  which  they  boyled  with
water,  and  eate  it :  others  went  with  their  harquebusies
to  seeke  to  kill  some  foule.  Yea  this  miserie  was  so
great,  that  one  was  found  that  gathered  up  among  the
filth  of  my  house,  all  the  fish  bones  that  he  could  finde,

66

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
which  he  dried and beate into powder to make bread
thereof. The effects of  this hideous famine appeared
incontinently  among  us,  for  our  bones  eftsoones  beganne
to  cleave  so  neere  unto  the  skinne,  that  the  most  part  of
the  souldiers  had  their  skinnes  peirced  thorow  with  them
in many  partes of  their  bodies : in such  sort  that  my
greatest  feare  was,  least  the  Indians  would  rise  up  against
us,  considering  that  it  would  have  bene  very  hard  for  us
to  have  defended  our  selves  in  such  extreme  decay  of  all
our forces, besides the scarsitie of  all victuals, which
fayled  us  all  at  once. For  the  very  river  had  not  such
plentie of  fish as  it  was  wont,  and  it seemed that  the
land and  water  did  fight  against  us. Now  as  we  were
thus upon termes of  dispayre, about the end of  the
moneth of  May, and the beginning of June, I was  New  come  by
advertised by certaine Indians that were my neigh-  ^^^  ^^j  rf
bours, that  in  the high Countrey  up  above the river, ^f^-T
there  was  new Maiz,  and that  that  countrey  was  most
forward  of  all. This  caused  me  to  take  upon  me  to  go
thither  with  a  certaine  number  of  my  men,  and  I  went
up  the river  to a  place  called Enecaque  :  where  I  met The  milage  of
the  sister  of  Utina  in  a  village  where  she  made  us  very  Enecaque.
good cheere  and sent us fish. We  found that  which
was  tolde  us  to  be  true :  for  the  maiz  was  now  ripe :  but
by  this  good  lucke one shrewde turne happened unto
me. For  the  most  part  of  my  souldiers  fell  sicke  with
eating  more  of  it  then  their  weakened stomackes  could
digest. We had also beene the space of  foure dayes
since  we  departed from our Fort, without eating any
thing, saving  little  pinockes,  and  a  little  fish,  which  we  A  little  greene
got  of  the fishers  which  wee met  sometimes  along  the  finite  that
river. And  yet  this  was  so  little  that  certaine  souldiers  STO'^^^h  "'  ^^^
eate privily little  whelpes which  were newly whelped.  ^^  cher'Ls  ^^
The  next  day  I  purposed  to  go  into  ye  He  of  Edelano  The  Ik  of
to  take the  king  which  had  caused  one  of  my  men  to  Edelano.
be  slaine,  as  I  have  mentioned  before :  but being  adver-
tised of  my  departing  out  of  my  Fort,  and  of  the  way
which  I  tooke  up  the  river,  he  feared  that  I  went  foorth

67

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

with  a  purpose  to  be  revenged  of  the  evill  turne  which

he played :  so  that when I came thither, I  found  the

houses emptie, for he was retyred  a  little before  with

all  his  people :  &  I  could  not  by  any  meanes  keepe  my

souldiers, being angry because they had lost one of

their companions,  from setting  the  village  on  fire. At

my departure from thence I passed backe againe by

Enecaque, where I gathered  as  much maiz  as I  could

possibly :  which  with  great diligence I  conveied  to  our

Fort  to  succour my poore men, which I had left in

great necessitie. They  therefore seeing me  a  farre  off

comming,  ranne to that side of  the river  where  they

thought I  would  come  on  land :  for  hunger  so  pinched

them  to the  heart, that they  could  not  stay untill  the

victuals  were  brought  them  to  the  Fort. And  that  they

well shewed assoone  as I was come, and that I had

distributed that  little maiz  among them, which I had

given  to  ech  man,  before  I  came  out  of  the  barke :  for

they  eate  it  before  they  had  taken  it  out  of  the  huske.

But seeing my selfe in this extreme neede,  I tooke

paines  day  by  day  to seeke some villages  where  there

was  some  food. And  as I  travailed this  way  and  that

Two  Carpen- way,  it  happened  that  two  of  my  Carpenters  were  killed  by

ters  killed  for ^j^g  ^wo  sonnes  of  king  Emola,  and  by  one  whose  name

gat  enngt.e ^^^  Casti,  as  they  went  on  walking-  to  the  village  called
Indians  maiz.  '_,  •'  r ^  •  ^  11

The  village Athore. The cause  of  this murder was,  because  they

Athore,  could not refraine themselves as  they walked  through

the  fields from gathering a little  maiz,  which as they

were  doing,  they  were taken  in the  maner  : wherof  I

was presently advertised by an Indian which a little

Nia  Cubacani  before had brought me a present from Nia Cubacani

a  Queene. Queene  of  a  village,  and  neighbour  to  our  Fort. Upon

receipt  of  this  advertisement,  I sent  my Sergeant  with

a number of  souldiers which found nothing else but

the 2 dead corpses, which they buried and returned

without  doing  any  other  exploit,  because  the  inhabitants

were  fled  away,  fearing  they  should  be  punished  for  such

a foule  fact. As  these things thus passed, & that  by

68

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
this  time  we  had  almost  driven  out  the  moneth  of  May,
two  subjects  of  king  Utina  came  unto  me  with  an
Hermaphrodite,  which  shewed  mee  that  by  this  time  the
maiz  was  ripe  in  the  greatest  part  of  their  quarters.
Whereupon  Utina  signified  unto  me  that  in  case  I
would  Carrie  him  home  to  his  house,  he  would  take
such  good  order  that  I  should  have  plentie  of  maiz  &
beanes :  and  withall,  that  the  field  which  he  had  caused
to  be  sowen  for  me,  should  be  reserved  to  my  use.
I  consulted  with  my  men  concerning  this  matter,  and
found  by  the  advice  of  all  my  company,  that  it  was  best
to  grant  him  his  request,  saying,  that  he  had  meanes  to
succour  us  with  food  sufficient  to  serve  our  turnes  for  [III.  345.]
our  embarkement,  and  that  therefore  I  might  do  well  to
carry  him  home.  Wherefore  I  caused  the  two  barks
forthwith  to  be  made  readie,  wherin  I  sailed  to  Patica,  a  Patka  a
place  distant  from  his  village  8  or  9  leagues,  where  I  "^Hl^ige-
found  no  bodie,  for  they  were  gotten  into  the  woods,
and  would  not  shew  themselves,  albeit  Utina  shewed
himselfe  unto  them,  for  as  much  as  they  imagined  that  I
should  be  constrained  to  let  him  go.  But  seeing  no  body
to  shew  themselves,  I  was  constrained  to  hazard  one  of
my  men  which  had  bene  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the
countrie,  to  whom  I  delivered  the  young  sonne  of  Utina,
and  commanded  him  to  goe  with  diligence  to  the  village
of  Utina,  unto  his  father  in  law  and  his  wife,  to  advertise
them  that  if  they  would  have  their  king  againe,  they
should  bring  me  victuals  unto  the  side  of  the  little  river
whither  I  was  gone.  At  my  mans  comming  every  one
made  much  of  the  little  childe,  neither  was  there  a  man
that  thought  not  himselfe  well  appaide  to  touch  him.  His
father  in  law  and  his  wife  hearing  of  these  newes  came
presently  towards  our  barkes,  and  brought  bread  which
they  gave  unto  my  souldiers,  they  held  me  there  three
dayes,  and  in  the  meane  while  did  all  that  they  could  to
take  me :  which  presently  I  discovered,  and  therefore  stood
diligently  upon  my  gard.  Wherefore  perceiving  they
could  not  have  their  purpose,  and  that  they  were  already

69

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1565-

discovered,  they  sent  to  advertise  me  that  as  yet  they
could  not  helpe  me  to  victuals,  and  that  the  corne  was
not  yet  ripe.  Thus  I  was  constrained  to  returne  and  to
carry  backe  Utina  home,  where  I  had  much  adoe  to  save
him  from  the  rage  of  my  souldiers :  which  perceiving  the
maliciousnes  of  the  Indians,  went  about  to  have  murdered
him.  Moreover  it  seemed  they  were  content  that  they
had  gotten  the  sonne,  &  that  they  cared  not  greatly  for
the  father.  Now  my  hope  fayling  me  on  this  side,  I
devised  to  send  my  men  to  the  villages  where  I  thought
the  maiz  *was  by  this  time  ripe  ;  I  went  to  divers  places,
and  continued  so  doing  15  dales  after,  when  as  Utina
besought  me  again  to  send  him  unto  his  village,  assuring
himselfe  that  his  subjects  would  not  sticke  to  give  me
victuals :  and  that  in  case  they  refused  so  to  do,  he  was
content  that  I  should  do  what  I  thought  good  with  him.
1  undertooke  this  voyage  the  second  time  with  the  two
barkes  furnished  as  before.  At  my  comming  unto  the
little  river,  we  found  his  subjects  there,  which  failed  not
to  come  thither  with  some  quantitie  of  bread,  beanes,  and
Desire  of  re-  fish,  to  give  my  souldiers.  Neverthelesse  returning
venge  rooted  againe  to  their  former  practise  they  sought  all  meanes  to
savages,  gj^^j-^p  jj^g^  hoping  to  cry  quittance  for  the  imprisonment
of  their  king,  if  they  might  have  gotten  the  victorie  of
me.  But  after  that  they  sawe  the  small  meanes,  which
they  had  to  annoy  me,  they  returned  to  intreaties,  and
offered  that  if  I  would  give  them  their  king  with  certaine
,  of my souldiers, they would conduct them unto the

village,  and  that  the  subjects  seeing  him,  would  be  more
willing  to  give  us  victuals.  Which  thing  notwithstanding
I  would  not  grant  unto  them  (mistrusting  their  subtilitie,
which  was  not  so  covert,  but  that  one  might  espie  day  at
a  little  hole)  untill  they  had  first  given  me  two  men  in
pledge  with  charge  that  by  the  next  day  they  should
bring  me  victuals.  Which  thing  they  granted,  and  gave
mee  two  men  which  I  put  in  chaines  for  feare  they  should
escape  away,  as  I  knew  well  they  were  instructed  to  doe.
Foure  dayes  were  spent  in  these  conferences,  at  the  end

70

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
whereof  they  declared  unto  me,  that  they  could  not  fully
and  wholly  performe  their  promise :  and  that  the  utter-
most that  they  could  doe  for  the  present,  was  to  cause
ech  subject  to  bring  his  burthen  of  mill.  To  conclude,
they  were  content  to  doe  so  on  condition  that  I  would
send  them  their  two  pledges  within  ten  dayes.  As  my
Lieutenant  was  ready  to  depart,  I  warned  him  above  all  A  necessark
things  to  take  heede  he  fell  not  into  the  Indians  hands :  admonition.
because  I  knew  them  to  be  very  subtill  and  craftie  to
enterprize  and  execute  any  thing  to  our  disadvantage.
He  departed  therefore  with  his  troope,  and  came  to  the
small  river  whereinto  we  were  accustomed  to  enter  to
approch  as  neere  as  we  could  unto  the  village  of  Utina,
being  sixe  French  leagues  distant  from  thence.  There  he
went  on  shore,  put  his  men  in  good  array,  and  drew  streight
towards  the  great  house  that  was  the  kings,  where  the
chiefe  men  of  the  countrey  were  assembled,  which
caused  very  great  store  of  victuals  to  be  brought  now
one  and  then  another,  in  doing  whereof  they  spent  not-
withstanding three  or  foure  dayes  :  in  which  meane
while  they  gathered  men  together,  to  set  upon  us  in
our  retreit.  They  used  therefore  many  meanes  to  holde  The
us  still  in  breath.  For  one  while  they  demanded  their  ^^orUians
pledges,  another  while  (seeing  my  Lieutenant  would  not  ^^  ^^  ^^^^'
yeeld  to  them,  untill  such  time  as  they  had  brought
the  victuals  unto  the  boats  ;  according  to  the  agreement
passed  betwene  us)  they  signified  unto  him  that  the
women  and  young  children  were  affraide  out  of  all
measure  to  see  fire  in  their  matches  so  neere  their
harquebuses  :  and  that  therefore  they  most  earnestly
besought  them  to  put  them  out,  that  they  might  more
easily  get  people  ynough  to  carry  the  victuals,  and  that
they  for  their  partes  would  leave  their  bowes  and
arrowes,  and  would  be  contented  that  their  servants
should  Carrie  them.  This  second  request  was  as  flatly
denied  them  as  the  former  :  For  it  was  an  easie  matter
to  smel  out  their  intention.  But  while  these  things
were  thus  in  handling,  Utina  by  no  meanes  was to be  [III.  346.]

71

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

seene,  but  hid  and  kept  himselfe  secret  in  a  little  house
apart,  where  certaine  chosen  men  of  mine  went  to  see
him  shewing  themselves  agreeved  with  him  for  the  long
delayes  of  his  subjects  :  whereunto  he  answered,  that
his  subjects  were  so  much  incensed  against  us,  that  by-
no  meanes  possible  he  was  able  to  keepe  them  in  such
obedience  as  he  willingly  would  have  done,  and  that
he  could  not  hold  them  from  waging  of  warre  against
Monsieur  de  Ottigny.  That  he  also  called  to  minde,
that  even  while  he  was  prisoner,  at  what  time  our  men
ledde  him  into  his  Country  to  obtaine  some  victuals,
A^  certaine  he  saw  along  the  high  wayes  arrowes  stucke  up,  at  the
stgne  of  warre.  q^^q^  whereof  long  haires  were  fastened,  which  was  a
certaine  signe  of  open  warre  proclaimed,  which  arrowes
the  Captaine  also  carried  with  him  to  the  fort.  He  said
further  that  in  respect  of  the  good  will  he  bare  to  the
Captaine,  he  forewarned  his  Lieutenant  that  his  subjects
were  determined  to  cut  downe  the  trees,  and  cause  them
to  fall  a  thwart  the  little  river  where  the  boates  were,  to
keepe  them  from  departing  thence,  that  they  might  fight
with  them  at  their  ease,  and  that  if  it  thus  fell  out,  he
assured  him  for  his  part  he  would  not  be  there  to
meddle  in  the  matter.  And  that  which  much  more
augmented  the  suspition  of  warre  was,  that  as  my
messengers  departed  from  Utina,  they  heard  the  voyce
of  one  of  my  men,  which  during  the  voyage  had  al-
wayes  beene  among  the  Indians,  and  whom  as  yet  they
would  never  render,  untill  they  had  gotten  their  pledges
home.  This  poore  fellow  cryed  out  a  maine  because
two  Indians  would  have  carried  him  into  the  woods
to  have  cut  his  throat  :  whereupon  he  was  succoured
and  delivered.  These  admonitions  being  well  under-
stoode,  after  ripe  deliberation  thereof  Monsieur  de
Ottigny  resolved  to  retire  himselfe  the  seven  and  twen-
tieth of  July.  Wherefore  he  set  his  souldiers  in  order,
and  delivered  to  ech  of  them  a  sacke  full  of  mill  :  and
afterward  hee  marched  toward  his  barkes,  thinking  to
prevent  the  enterprise  of  the  savages. There  is  at  the

72

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
comming  foorth  of  the  village  a  great  alley  about  three  ^«  alley  of  '^
or  foure  hundred  paces  long,  which  is  covered  on  both  °^  +  hundred
sides  with  great  trees. My  Lieutenant  disposed  his  men  ^
in  this  alley  and  set  them  in  such  order  as  they  desired
to  march  :  for  he  was  well  assured  that  if  there  were  any
ambush,  it  would  be  at  the  comming  out  of  the  trees.
Therefore  he  caused  Monsieur  de  Arlac  mine  Ensigne
to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusiers to
discover whether there were any danger  : besides he
commanded  one  of  my  Sergeants  & Corporals  to  march
on  the  out side of  the alley  with foure harquebusiers
while  he  himselfe  conducted the rest of  his company  ^  skirmish
through  it. Now  as he suspected,  so it fell out  : for  ^f^'^^^  ^^^
Monsieur de Arlac met with two or three hundred  ^^^  French.
Indians  at  the  end  of  the  alley,  which saluted  him  with
an  infinite  number  of  their  arrowes,  &  with  such  furie
that  it  was  easie  to  see  with  what  desire  they  sought  to
charge  us. Howbeit  they  were  so  well sustained  in  the
first  assault  which mine Ensigne  gave them,  that they
which  fell downe dead,  did somewhat abate the choler
of  those which remained alive. This done my Lieu-
tenant hasted to gaine ground  in  such sort  as  I  have
already said. After he had marched about foure
hundred paces, he was charged afresh with a newe  A  second  fresh
troope of Savages which were in number  about 700,  '^^'^^^^  "J
which  assayled  him  before,  while  the  rest  of  the  former
set upon him behind. This second assault was so
valiantly  sustayned,  that  I  may  justly  say  that  Monsieur
de  Ottigny  so  well  discharged  his  dutie,  as  was  possible
for a good Captaine to doe. And so it stood them
upon  : for  he  had  to  deale with  such  kind of  men,  as
knewe  well  how  to  fight  and  to  obey  their  head which
conducted them, and which knewe so well to behave
themselves in this  conflict,  as if  Ottigny had not pre-
vented  their practise,  he  had beene in danger  to have
bene defeated. Their maner in this fight was, that  TheFloridlms
when two hundred had shot, they  retyred themselves  ^^^^^"fM^-
and gave place to the rest that  were behind, and all

73

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

the  while  had  their  eye  and  foot  so quicke  and readie,
that  assoone  as  ever  they  saw  the  harquebuze  laide  to
the cheeke, so soone were they  on the ground,  and
eftsoone up to answere with their bowes and to flie
their  way, if  by  chance they perceived  we went  about
TheFlondians  to  take them  : for there is nothing that they  feare so
chiefefeare. j^iuch,  because of  our swords and daggers. This con-
flict continued and lasted from nine of  the  clocke in
the morning, untill the night  departed them. And if
Ottigny had not  bethought  himselfe to cause  his men
to  breake  the  arrowes  which  they  found  in the  way,  &
so to deprive the Savages of the means to beginne
againe,  without  all  doubt  he  should  have  had  very  much
to  do  :  for  by  this meane they  lacked arrowes,  and so
were  constrained  to  retire  themselves. During  the  time
of  the conflict  they  cryed and made signes that they
were the Captaines and Lieutenants friends  : and that
they fought for none other  cause  but  to be revenged
on the souldiers, which were their mortall enemies.
My  Lieutenant  being  come  unto  his  boates  tooke  a  re-
Two  slaine. view of his companie, and found two men wanting
which were killed,  of  whom the one was called James
Sale, and the others name was Mesureur. He found
Two'^twen-  moreover  22  of  them  wounded,  which  with much  adoe
ty  wounded, j^g  caused  to  be  brought  unto  the  boates. All  the  mill
that  he  found  among  his  company  came  but  to  two  mens
burdens, which he  devided equally among them. For
[III.  347.] assoone  as  the  conflict  began,  every  man  was  constrained
to  leave  his  sacke  to  put  his hand to his weapon. In
this  meane  while I remained at the Forte,  and caused
every  man diligently to travell,  hoping that my Lieu-
tenant  would bring us  victuals. But seeing the time
consume away, I began to suspect the truth of  that
which  fell  out,  whereof  I  was  assured  immediately  after
at their returne. Seeing therefore mine hope frustrate
Pra';^er  and ^^  ^^^  ^-^^ j  made  my  prayer  unto  God,  and  thanked
thanks  unto ,  .  r  1  •  1  •  1 1  1 1 1  1

God  for  their ^^"^  ^^  ^^^  grace  which  hee  had  shewed  unto  my  poore
deliverance. souldiers which were escaped  : Afterward I thought

74

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
upon  new  meanes  to obtaine  victuals,  aswell  for  our  re-
turne  into  France,  as  to drive  out  the time untill  our
embarking. I  was  advertised  by  certaine  of  our  company,
which  usually  went  on  hunting  into  the  woods  and  through
the  villages,  that  in  the  village Sarauahi situated  on the  T^he  village
other  side  of  the  river,  and  two  leagues  distant  from  the  ^^'i'^^^'^^-
Forte,  and  in  the  village  Emoloa  there  were  fields  wherein  ^-^^  village
the  mill  was  very  forward,  and  that  there  was  thereof  in ^^  ^^*
those  partes  in  great  abundance. Wherefore  I  caused  my
boates  to  be  made  ready,  and  sent  my  Sergeant  thither
with  certaine  souldiours,  which  used  such  diligence,  that
wee  had  good store of  mill. I sent also to the  river

which  the  Savages  call  Iracana,  named  by  Captaine  Ribault  ^-^^  river  of
,iT-)-  re  u  n u  • ^T  J  Iracana  called

the  Kiver or bomme,  where Laptame Vasseur and my , n-^ u .

Sergeant  arrived  with  two  boates  and  their  ordinary  furni-  river  of
ture,  and  found  there  a  great  assembly  of  the  Lords of  Somme.
the  countrey, among  whome was Athore the sonne of
Satourioua,  Apalou,  and  Tacadocorou,  which  were  there
assembled  to  make  merrie  :  because  that  in  this  place  are
the  fairest  maids  and  women  of  all  the  countrey. Cap-
taine Vasseur  in  my  name  gave  certaine  small  trifles  to  Cmrtesie  and
all  the  Lords,  to  the  Queene,  to  the  maids  and  women  ^f^^^^^^^^  ^^^

uBSt  771CC171BS  tO

of  the  villages. Whereupon  the  boates  were  foorthwith  ^^^/^  ^i^f^  fj^g
laden  with  mill,  after  they  had  made  our  men  as  good  savages.
cheere  as  they  could  devise. The  Queene  sent  me  two  Mostartificiall
small  Mats so artificially  wrought  as it was unpossible  '^^^''^^•^•
to  make  better. Nowe  finding  our  selves  by  this  meane
sufficiently  furnished  with  victuals,  we  began  each  of  us
in his place,  to travaile and use such diligence,  as the
desire  to  see  our  native  countrey  might  moove  us. But
because  two  of  our  Carpenters  were  slaine  by  the  Lidians
(as  heretofore I  mentioned)  John  de  Hais,  master  Car-
penter, a  man  very  worthy  of  his  vocation,  repaired  unto
me,  and  tolde  me  that  by  reason  of  want  of  men hee
was  not  able  to  make  me  up  the  ship  against  the  time
that he had promised me  : which speech caused such
a mutinie among the souldiers that very hardly he
escaped killing : howbeit I appeased  them  aswell  as I

75

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

could,  and  determined  to  worke no more  from  thence-

foorth  upon the shippe, but to content  our  selves to

repaire the Brigandine  which  I had. So we began to

The  beating beate downe  all  the  houses  that  were  without  the  Fort,

owne  ofte ^^^ Caused coles to be made of  the  timber thereof:
houses  without  ....  ,  ,  ,.  ,  .  ,  n- 1  i  • 1

ihefort,i^  the  likewise  the souldiers  beate downe the pallisade  which

Palisade. was toward the waters side, neither was I ever able

to keepe them  from doing  it. I had  also determined

to beat downe the Fort before my  departure and  to

set it on fire, for feare least some new-come guest

should have  enjoyed and possessed it. In the meane

while  there  was none of  us to whom it  was not an

extreme griefe to leave a countrey, wherein  wee had

endured so  great travailes and necessities, to discover

that  which  we  must  forsake  through  our  owne  countrey-

The  cause  why  mens  default. For if  wee  had  bene succoured  in  time

the  French  lost  ^ place, & according to the promise that was made

unto us, the  warre  which  was between us and Utina,

had not fallen out, neither should wee have had

occasion to offend the Indians, which with all paines

in the  world I entertained  in  good  amitie,  aswell  with

merchandise and apparel, as with promise of  greater

matters, and with whom I so behaved myself, that

although sometimes I  was constrained to  take  victuals

in some few villages, yet I lost not the alliance of

Eight  kings eight  Kings  and  Lords  my  neighbours,  which  continually

friends  and succoured  and  ayded  me  with  whatsoever  they  were  able

allies.  to  afford. Yea this  was  the principall  scope of  all  my

The principall  purposes, to  winne  and entertaine them,  knowing how

scope  of  plan- greatly their  amitie might  advance our  enterprise, and

ersinsiange  principally  while I discovered the commodities of  the
countrey  s.  r  r J  ir 1 •

Florida  a  rich  countrey, and sought to strengthen my selre therein.

countrey.  I leave it to  your cogitation to thinke how neere it

went  to  our  hearts,  to  leave  a  place  abounding  in  riches

(as  we  were throughly enformed  thereof) in  comming

whereunto,  and  doing service  unto our  Prince,  we  left

our  owne  countrey,  wives,  children,  parents,  and  friends,

and passed the perils of the sea, and were therein

76

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.

arrived, as in a plentifull treasure of  all our hearts
desire. As ech  of  us  were much  tormented  in  minde
with  these  or  such  like  cogitations,  the  third  of  August  ^ug.  1565.
I descried foure sayles in  the sea, as I walked upon
a little hill, whereof  I was exceeding well apaid  : I
sent immediately  one  of  them  which  were  with  me  to
advertise  those  of  the  Fort  thereof,  which  were  so  glad
of  those newes, that one would have thought them
to  bee  out  of  their  wittes  to  see  them  laugh  and  leape
for  joy. After  these  ships  had cast  anker,  we  descried
that  they  sent  one of  their  ship  boates  to  land :  where-
upon I caused one of  mine to be armed with dili-
gence to  send  to  meete  them, and  to know  who  they
were. In the meane while, fearing lest they were
Spaniards, I set my souldiers in order and  in readi-
nesse, attending the returne of  Captaine  Vasseur and
my  Lieutenant,  which  where  gone  to  meete  them,  which
brought  me  word that they  were Englishmen :  and in  [III.  348.]
trueth they had in their company one whose name
was Martine Atinas  of  Diepe, which at  that  time  was
in  their service,  which  on  the  behalfe  of  Master  John  ^-  J"^^
Hawkins their Generall came to request mee that I J^Z/f '^^
would suffer them to take fresh  water, whereof  they  Qenerdl.
stood in great neede, signifying unto me that they
had  bene  above  fifteene  dayes  on  the  coast  to  get  some.
Hee  brought  unto  mee  from the Generall  two flagons
of  wine, and bread made of  wheate  : which greatly
refreshed me, forasmuch as for seven moneths space
I never tasted a drop of  wine  : neverthelesse it was
all divided among the greatest  part of  my souldiers.
This  Martine  Atinas  had  guided  the  Enghshmen  unto
our coast, wherewith he was acquainted  : for in the
yeere 1562 he came thither with me, and therefore
the Generall sent  him to me. Therefore  after  I had
granted his request, hee signified the same unto the
Generall,  which the next  day  following  caused one  of
his  small  shippes to  enter into  the  river, and  came  to
see  me  in  a  great shipboate,  accompanied  with gentle-

77

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1565.

men  honourably  apparelled,  yet  unarmed. He  sent  for
great store  of  bread  and wine,  to distribute  thereof  to
every  one  : On my  part I made  him  the best cheere
^heepe  and \  could  possibly,  and  caused  certaine  sheepe  and  poultry
poultr'ie  caned  ^^ y^^  killed, which untill this present  I had  carefully
preserved hoping to store the countrey withall. For
notwithstanding all the necessities and sicknesse that
happened unto me, I would not suffer so much as
one  chicken  to  be killed  : by  which  meanes  in  a  short
time  I  had  gathered  together  above  an  hundred  pullets.
Nowe three dayes passed, while the English General
remained  with me,  during  which  time  the  Indians  came
in  from  all  parts  to  see  him,  and  asked  me  whether  he
An  advantage  were  my  brother :  I  tolde  them  he  was  so,  and  signified
wisely  taken. ^^^^  them,  that he was  come  to  see me  and  ayde  me
with so great store of  victuals, that from thence for-
ward I should have no neede to take any thing of
them. The  bruite  hereof  incontinently  was  spread  over
all the countrey, in such sort as Ambassadours came
unto me  from all parts, which on the behalfe of  the
kings their masters desired to  make  alliance with me:
and even they, which before sought to make warre
against me, came to offer their  friendship and service
unto me  : Whereupon I received them and gratified
them  with certaine  presents. The  General  immediately
understood  the  desire  &  urgent  occasion  which  I  had  to
returne  into  France : whereupon  he  ojffred to  transport
me  and  all  my  company  home :  whereunto  notwithstand-
ing I  would  not  agree,  being  in  doubt  upon  what  occasion
he  made  so  large  an  offer. For I  knewe  not  how  the
case  stood  betweene the French  and  the  English : and
although  hee  promised  me  on  his  faith  to  put mee on
The  French land  in  France,  before  hee  would  touch  in  England,  yet
mistrustedthat  j  stood in doubt  least he  would attempt somewhat  in
men  would Florida  in  the  name  of  his  mistresse. Wherfore  I  flatly
plant  in  refused  his  offer :  whereupon  there  arose  a  great  mutinie

Florida.  among  my  souldiers,  which  sayd  that  I  sought  to  destroy

them  all,  and  that  the  Brigandine,  wherof  I  spake  before,

78

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
was  not  sufficient  to  transport  them,  considering  the
season  of  the  yeere  wherein  wee  were.  The  bruite  and
mutiny  increased  more  and  more :  for  after  that  the
Generall  was  returned  to  his  ships,  he  told  certaine
gentlemen  and  souldiers  which  went  to  see  him,  partly
to  make  good  cheere  with  him,  hee  declared,  I  say  unto
them,  that  he  greatly  doubted  that  hardly  we  should  be
able  to  passe  safely  in  those  vessels  which  we  had :  and
that  in  case  we  should  enterprise  the  same,  we  should
no  doubt  be  in  great  jeopardy:  notwithstanding,  if  I
were  so  contented,  he  would  transport  part  of  my  men
in  his  ships,  and  that  he  would  leave  me  a  small  ship
to  transport  the  rest.  The  souldiers  were  no  sooner
come  home,  but  they  signified  the  offer  unto  their
companions,  which  incontinently  consented  together  that
in  case  I  would  not  accept  the  same,  they  would  embarke
themselves  with  him  and  forsake  mee,  so  that  he  would
receive  them  according  to  his  promise.  They  therefore
assembled  themselves  all  together  and  came  to  seeke  me
in  my  chamber,  and  signified  unto  me  their  intention,
wherunto  I  promised  to  answere  within  one  houre  after.
In  which  meane  space  I  gathered  together  the  principall
members  of  my  company,  which  after  I  had  broken  the
matter  with  them,  answered  me  all  with  one  voyce,  that
I  ought  not  to  refuse  this  offer,  nor  contemne  the
occasion  which  presented  it  selfe,  and  that  they  could
not  thinke  evill  of  it  in  France,  if  being  forsaken,  as
we  were,  we  aided  our  selves  with  such  means  as  God
had  sent  us.  After  sundry  debatings  of  this  matter,  in
conclusion  I  gave  mine  advise,  that  wee  ought  to  deliver
him  the  price  of  the  ship  which  he  was  to  leave  us,
and  that  for  my  part  I  was  content  to  give  him  the
best  of  my  stuffe,  and  the  silver  which  I  had  gathered  ^H^er found
in  the  countrey.  Wherupon  notwithstanding  it  was  ^^  P^o^i^'^-
determined  that  I  should  keepe  the  silver,  for  feare  lest
the  Queene  of  England  seeing  the  same,  should  the  rather  Note.
bee  encouraged  to  set  footing  there,  as  before  she  had
desired :  that  it was  far better to carie it into France

79

A.D.
1565.

7!^^?  great
Importance  of
this  enterprise.

[III.  349-]

The  great
humanity  and
bounty  of
Master  John
Hawkins  to
the  French.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

to  give  encouragement  unto  our  Princes  not  to  leave
off  an  enterprise  of  so  great  importance  for  our  com-
monwealth, and  that  seeing  wee  were  resolved  to  depart,
it  was  farre  better  to  give  him  our  Artillerie,  which
otherwise  we  should  be  constrained  to  leave  behind  us,
or  to  hide  it  in  the  ground  by  reason  of  the  weakenesse
of  our  men,  being  not  able  to  embarke  the  same.  This
point  being  thus  concluded  and  resolved  on,  I  went  my
selfe  unto  the  English  Generall,  accompanied  with  my
Lieutenant,  and  Captaine  Vasseur,  Captaine  Verdier,
and  Trenchant  the  Pilot,  and  my  Sergeant,  all  men  of
experience  in  such  affaires  and  knowing  sufficiently  how
to  drive  such  a  bargaine.  We  therefore  tooke  a
view  of  the  ship  which  the  Generall  would  sell,
whom  we  drew  to  such  reason,  that  he  was  content  to
stand  to  mine  owne  mens  judgement,  who  esteemed  it
to  be  worth  seven  hundreth  crowns,  whereof  we  agreed
very  friendly.  Wherefore  I  delivered  him  in  earnest  of
the  summe,  two  bastards,  two  mynions,  one  thousand
of  iron,  &  one  thousand  of  powder.  This  bargaine
thus  made,  he  considered  the  necessity  wherin  we  were,
having  for  all  our  sustenance  but  mill  and  water :
wherupon  being  moved  with  pitie,  he  offred  to  relieve
me  with  20  barels  of  meale,  sixe  pipes  of  beanes,  one
hogshead  of  salt,  and  a  hundred  of  waxe  to  make
candels.  Moreover  forasmuch  as  he  sawe  my  souldiers
goe  barefoote,  hee  offred  me  besides  fifty  paires  of
shoes,  which  I  accepted  and  agreed  of  a  price  with  him,
and  gave  him  a  bill  of  mine  hand  for  the  same,  for
which  untill  this  present  I  am  indebted  to  him.  He
did  more  then  this :  for  particularly  he  bestowed  upon
my  selfe  a  great  Jarre  of  oyle,  a  Jarre  of  vineger,  a  barell
of  Olives,  and  a  great  quantitie  of  Rice,  and  a  barell
of  white  Biscuit.  Besides  he  gave  divers  presents  to
the  principall  Officers  of  my  company  according  to  their
qualities :  so  that  I  may  say  that  we  received  as  many
courtesies  of  the  Generall,  as  it  was  possible  to  receive
of  any  man  living. Wherein  doubtlesse  he  hath  wonne

80

KENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.

the  reputation  of  a  good  and  charitable  man,  deserving
to  be  esteemed  asmuch  of  us  all  as  if  he  had  saved
all  our  lives.  Incontinent  after  his  departure  I  spared  The  departure
no  paine  to  hasten  my  men  to  make  biscuits  of  the  of  ^^^  English
meale  which  he  had  left  me,  and  to  hoope  my  caske
to  take  in  water  needfull  for  the  voyage.  A  man  may
well  thinke  what  diligence  we  used,  in  respect  of  the
great  desire  we  had  to  depart,  wherein  we  continued  so
well,  that  the  fifteenth  day  of  August  the  biscuit,  the  Ju^st  ic^.
greatest  part  of  our  water,  &  all  the  souldiers  stuffe  was
brought  aboord :  so  that  from  that  day  forward  wee  did
nothing  but  stay  for  good  windes  to  drive  us  into
France :  which  had  freed  us  from  an  infinite  number
of  mischiefes  which  afterward  wee  sufired,  if  they  had
come  as  we  desired :  but  it  was  not  Gods  good  pleasure,
as  shall  appeare  hereafter.  Being  thus  in  a  readinesse
to  set  sayle,  we  bethought  our  selves  that  it  would  doe
well  to  bring  certaine  men  and  women  of  the  countrey
into  France,  to  the  end  that  if  this  voyage  should  be
taken  in  hand  againe  they  might  declare  unto  their  Kings
the  greatnesse  of  our  King,  the  excellencie  of  our  Princes,
the  goodnesse  of  our  Countrey,  and  the  maner  of  living
of  the  Frenchmen :  and  that  they  might  also  learne  our
language,  to  serve  our  turnes  thereby  in  time  to  come.
Wherein  I  tooke  so  good  order,  that  I  found  meanes
to  bring  away  with  me  the  goodliest  persons  of  all  the
countrey,  if  our  intentions  had  succeeded  as  I  hoped
they  would  have  done.  In  the  meane  season  the  Kings
my  neighbours  came  often  to  see  and  visite  me:  which,
after  that  they  understood  that  I  would  returne  into
France,  demanded  of  mee  whether  I  meant  to  returne
againe  or  no,  and  whether  it  should  be  in  short  time.
I  signified  unto  them  that  within  tenne  Moones  (so  they  TheFlorUiam
call  their  Moneths)  I  would  visite  them  againe  with  »^^^-f»J^  ^'^^^^
such  force,  that  I  would  be  able  to  make  them  Con-  j-g^Qijidons  of
querours  over  all  their  enemies.  They  prayed  me  that  the  Moone.
I  would  leave  them  my  house,  that  I  would  forbid
my  souldiers  to  beate  downe  the  Fort  and  their  lodg-
IX  81  F

A.D.

1565-

The  arrival
of  Captaine
John  Rtbault
at  the  Fort
the  1%  of
August  1565.

'Note.

[III.  350.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ings,  and  that  I  would  leave  them  a  boate  to  ayde
them  withall  in  their  warre  against  their  enemies.
Which  I  made  as  though  I  would  grant  unto  them,
to  the  end  I  might  alwaies  remaine  their  friend  until
my  last  departure.

The third voyage of the Frenchmen made by
Captaine  John  Ribault  unto  Florida.

S  I  was  thus  occupied  in  these  conferences,
the  winde  and  the  tide  served  well  to  set
sayle,  which  was  the  eight  and  twentieth
of  August,  at  which  instant  Captaine
Vasseur  which  commanded  in  one  of
my  shippes,  and  Captaine  Verdier
which was chiefe in the other, now

ready  to  goe  foorth,  began  to  descry  certaine  sayles  at
sea,  whereof  they  advertised  mee  with  diligence :  where-
upon 1  appointed  to  arme  foorth  a  boate  in  good  order
to  goe  to  discrie  and  know  what  they  were.  1  sent  also
to  the  Centinels,  which  I  caused  to  be  kept  on  a  little
knappe,  to  cause  certaine  men  to  climbe  up  to  the
toppe  of  the  highest  trees  the  better  to  discover  them.
They  descried  the  great  boate  of  the  shippes,  which  as
yet  they  could  not  perfectly  discerne,  which  as  farre  as
they  could  judge,  seemed  to  chase  my  boate,  which  by
this  time  was  passed  the  barre  of  the  river  :  so  that
we  could  not  possibly  judge  whether  they  were  enemies
which  would  have  caried  her  away  with  them :  for
it  was  too  great  a  ken  to  judge  the  trueth  thereof.
Upon  this  doubt  I  put  my  men  in  order  and  in  such
array  as  though  they  had  beene  enemies  :  and  indeede  I
had  great  occasion  to  mistrust  the  same :  for  my  boate
came  unto  their  ship  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone,  and  sent  me  no  newes  all  that  day  long  to
put  me  out  of  doubt  who  they  should  be.  The  next
day  in  the  morning  about  eight  or  nine  of  the  clocke  1
saw  seven  boates  (among  which  mine  owne  was  one)  full
of  souldiers  enter  into  the  river,  having  every  man  his

82

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.
harquebuze  and  morion  on  his  head,  which  marched  all
in  battaile  along  the  clifFes  where  my  centinels  were,  to
whom  they  would  make  no  kind  of  answere,  notwith-
standing all  the  demandes  that  were  made  unto  them,
insomuch  as  one  of  my  souldiers  was  constrained  to
bestowe  a  shot  at  them  without  doing  hurt  neverthelesse
to  any  of  them,  by  reason  of  the  distance  between  him
and  the  boates.  The  report  hereof  being  made  unto
me,  I  placed  each  of  my  men  in  his  quarter,  with  full
deliberation  to  defend  our  selves,  if  they  had  bene
enemies,  as  in  trueth  wee  thought  them  to  have  bene :
likewise  I  caused  the  two  small  field-pieces  which  I  had
left  me,  to  be  trimmed  in  such  sort,  as  if  in  approching
to  the  Fort  they  had  not  cryed  that  it  was  Captaine
Ribault,  I  had  not  failed  to  have  discharged  the  same
upon  them.  Afterward  I  understood  that  the  cause  why
they  entred  in  this  maner,  proceeded  of  the  false  reports  F^^^s  reports
which  had  bene  made  unto  my  Lord  Admirall  by  those  ifLaudmmere
1-1  ^  j-^-o  -^1 r^i-  totheAdmirat

which  were returned mto  l*  ranee m the first shippes.  of  France

For  they  had  put  in  his  head,  that  I  played  the  Lord
and  the  King,  and  that  I  would  hardly  suffer  that  any
other  save  my  selfe  should  enter  in  thither  to  governe
there.  Thus  we  see  how  the  good  name  of  the  most
honest  is  oftentimes  assayled  by  such,  as  having  no
meanes  to  win  themselves  credit  by  vertuous  and  laud-
able endevours,  thinke  by  debasing  of  other  mens  vertues
to  augment  the  feeble  force  of  their  faint  courage,  which
neverthelesse  is  one  of  the  most  notable  dangers  which  The  danger  of
may  happen  in  a  commonwealth,  and  chiefly  among  men  of  ^^'^^^i^'^^S-
warre  which  are  placed  in  government.  For  it  is  very  hard,
yea  utterly  unpossible,  that  in  governing  of  a  company
of  men  gathered  out  of  divers  places  and  sundry  Nations,
and  namely  such  as  we  know  them  to  be  in  our  warres,
it  is,  I  say,  unpossible,  but  there  will  be  alwayes  some
of  evill  conditions  and  hard  to  be  ruled,  which  easily
conceive  an  hatred  against  him,  which  by  admonitions
and  light  corrections  endevoureth  to  reduce  them  to  the
discipline  of  warre. For they seeke nothing  else, but

83

A.D.
1565.

Aldbiades
banished  by
backbiters.

Laudonnieres
receiving  of
Captaine
Ribault.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

for  a  small  occasion  grounded  upon  a  light  pretext  to
sound  into  the  eares  of  great  Lords  that  which  mischiev-
ously they  have  contrived  against  those,  whose  execution
of  justice  is  odious  unto  them.  And  albeit  I  will  not
place  my  selfe  in  the  ranke  of  great  and  renowmed
Captaines,  such  as  lived  in  times  passed,  yet  we  may
judge  by  their  examples,  how  hurtfuU  backbiters  have
beene  unto  commonwealths.  I  will  onely  take  Alcibiades
for  witnesse  in  the  commonwealth  of  the  Athenians,
which  by  this  meane  was  cast  into  banishment,  where-
upon his  citizens  felt  the  smart  of  an  infinite  number  of
mischiefes :  insomuch  as  in  the  end  they  were  constrained
to  call  him  home  againe,  and  acknowledge  at  length  the
fault  they  had  committed  in  forgetting  his  good  services,
and  rather  beleeving  a  false  report,  then  having  had
regard  unto  so  many  notable  exploits  which  in  former
time  hee  had  atchieved.  But  that  I  loose  not  my  selfe
in  digressing  so  farre  in  this  my  justification,  I  will
returne  againe  to  my  first  course.  Being  therfore  adver-
tised that  it  was  Captaine  Ribault,  I  went  foorth  of  the
Fort  to  goe  to  meete  him,  and  to  do  him  all  the  honour
I  could  by  any  meanes,  I  caused  him  to  be  welcommed
with  the  artillery,  and  a  gentle  volley  of  my  shot,  where-
unto  he  answered  with  his.  Afterward  being  come  on
shore  and  received  honourably  with  joy,  I  brought  him
to  my  lodging,  rejoycing  not  a  little  because  that  in  this
company  I  knew  a  good  number  of  my  friends,  which  I
intreated  in  the  best  sorte  that  I  was  able,  with  such
victuals  as  I  could  get  in  the  countrey,  and  that  small
store  which  I  had  left  me,  with  that  which  I  had  of  the
English  General.  Howbeit  I  marveiled  not  a  little  when
as  all  of  them  with  one  voice  began  to  utter  unto  me
these  or  the  like  speeches.  My  Captaine,  we  praise  God
that  we  have  found  you  alive,  and  chiefly  because  we
know,  that  the  reports  which  have  bene  made  of  you,
are  false.  These  speeches  mooved  me  in  such  sort,  that
I  would  needes  out  of  hand  know  more,  mistrusting
some evill. Wherefore having  accosted Captaine  John

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
Ribault,  &  going  both  of  us  aside  together  out  of  the
Fort,  he  signified  unto  me  the  charge  which  he  had,
praying  mee  not  to  returne  into  France,  but  to  stay  with
him  my  selfe  and  my  company,  and  assured  me  that  he
would  make  it  well  thought  of  at  home.  Whereupon  I
replyed  that  out  of  this  place  I  would  do  him  all
service :  that  for  the  present  I  could  not  nor  ought  not
accept  this  offer,  since  he  was  come  for  no  other  intent
then  to  occupie  the  place  which  I  before  possessed,  that
I  could  have  no  credite  to  be  there  commanded :  that
my  friends  would  never  like  of  it,  and  that  he  would
hardly  give  me  that  counsaile,  if  in  good  earnest  I  should
demand  his  advise  therein.  He  made  me  answere,  that
he  would  not  command  me,  that  we  should  be  com-
panions, &  that  he  would  build  another  fortresse,  &  that
he  would  leave  mine  owne  unto  me.  This  notwith-
standing I  fully  advertised  him  that  I  could  not  receive  a
greater  comfort  then  the  newes  which  he  brought  me  to
returne  into  France  :  and  farther  that  though  I  should  stay
there,  yet  it  must  needes  be  that  one  of  us  both  was  to  [III.  351.]
command  with  title  of  the  Kings  Lieutenant,  that  this
could  not  well  agree  together :  that  I  had  rather  have  it
cast  in  my  teeth  to  be  the  poorest  begger  in  the  world,
then  to  be  commanded  in  that  place,  where  I  had  endured
so  much  to  inhabite  and  plant  there,  if  it  were  not  by
some  great  Lord  or  Knight  of  the  order :  and  that  in
these  respects  I  prayed  him  very  hartily  to  deliver  me
the  letters  which  my  Lord  Admirall  had  written  unto
me,  which  he  performed.

The  contents  of  those  letters  were  these.

CAptaine Laudonniere,  because some  of  them  which  Letters  of  the
are returned from Florida speake indifferently of  Lord  Admirall
the  Countrey,  the  King desireth  your presence,  to the •
end, that according to  your tryall,  he may resolve  to
bestow  great  cost thereon,  or  wholly to leave  it  :  and
therfore  I  send  Captaine  John  Ribault  to  bee  governour
there,  to  whom  you shall deliver whatsoever  vou  have

85

A.D.
1565.

Accusations
against  him.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

in charge, and informe him of all things you have

discovered. And  in  a  postscript  of  the  letter  was  thus

written. Thinke not, that  whereas I send for  you, it

is  for  any  evill  opinion  or  mistrust  that  I  have  of  you,

but  that  it  is for  your  good and for  your  credit,  and

assure  your  selfe  that  during  my  life  you  shall  find  me

your  2fOod  Master.  ^

^ °  Chastillon.

Now  after  I  had  long  discoursed  with  Captaine  Ribault,
Captaine  la  Grange  accosted  mee,  and  told  me  of  an
infinite  number  of  false  reports  which  had  bene  made  of
mee  to  my  great  hinderance :  and  among  other  things
he  informed  me,  that  my  Lord  Admirall  tooke  it  very
2.  evill  that  I  had  caried  a  woman  with  mee :  likewise  that
some  bodie  had  tolde  him  that  I  went  about  to  counter-
s' feit  the King,  and  to play  the  tyrant  :  that  I  was  too

4-  cruell  unto  the  men  that  went  with  mee  :  that  I  sought
to be advanced by other meanes then by my Lord

5-  Admirall  :  and  that  I  had  written  to  many  Lords  of  the
I- Court,  which I ought not to have done. Whereunto

Laudonmeres j  answered,  that  the  woman  was  a  poore  chambermayd,
j^^^g^  which  I  had  taken  up  in  an  Inne,  to  oversee  my  hous-

hold  businesse,  to  looke  to  an  infinite  sort  of  divers
beasts,  as  sheepe  and  poultrie  which  I  caried  over  with
me  to  store  the  countrey  withall  :  that  it  was  not  meete
to  put  a  man  to  attend  this  businesse  :  likewise,  consider-
ing the  length  of  the  time  that  I  was  to  abide  there,  mee
thought  it  should  not  offend  any  body  to  take  a  woman
with  me,  aswell  to  help  my  souldiers  in  their  sickenesses,
as  in  mine  owne,  whereinto  I  fell  afterward.  And  how
necessary  her  service  was  for  us,  ech  one  at  that  time
might  easily  perceive :  That  all  my  men  thought  so  well
of  her,  that  at  one  instant  there  were  sixe  or  seven
which  did  demand  her  of  me  in  mariage  ;  as  in  very
2.  deede  one  of  them  had  her  after  our  returne.  Touching
that  which  was  sayd  that  I  playd  the  King,  these  reports
were  made,  because  I  would  not  beare  with  any  thing
which was against the duety of my charge, and the

86

KENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565-
Kings  service.  Moreover,  that  in  such  enterprises  it  is
necessary  for  a  Governour  to  make  himselfe  knowen  and
obeyed,  for  feare  least  every  body  would  become  a  master,
perceiving  themselves  far  from  greater  forces.  And  that  3.
if  the  tale-tellers  called  this  rigour,  it  rather  proceeded
of  their  disobedience,  then  of  my  nature  lesse  subject
to  cruelty  then  they  were  to  rebellion.  For  the  two  4*
last  points,  that  I  had  not  written  to  any  of  the  Lords
of  the  Court  but  by  the  advice  &  commandement  of
my  Lord  Admirall,  which  willed  me  at  my  departure  to
send  part  of  such  things  as  I  should  find  in  the  countrey
unto  the  Lords  of  the  Counsel  :  to  the  end  that  being
mooved  by  this  meane,  they  might  deale  with  the  Queene
mother  for  the  continuance  of  this  enterprise :  that
having  bene  so  small  time  in  the  countrey,  continually
hindred  with  building  of  fortresses,  and  unlading  of  my
ships,  1  was  not  able  to  come  by  any  newe  or  rare  things
to  send  them,  whereupon  I  thought  it  best  to  content
them  in  the  meane  while  with  letters,  untill  such  time
as  I  might  have  longer  space  to  search  out  the  Countrey,
and  might  recover  something  to  sende  them  :  the  dis-
tribution of  which  letters  I  meant  not  otherwise  but  to
referre  to  my  Lord  Admirals  good  pleasure  :  that  if  the
bearer  had  forgot  himselfe  so  farre,  as  that  he  had  broken
the  covering  of  the  letters,  and  presented  them  himselfe
for  hope  of  gaine,  it  was  not  my  commandement.  And  5.
that  I  never  honoured  noble  man  so  much,  nor  did  to
any  man  more  willing  and  faithfull  service  then  to  my
Lord  Admirall,  nor  ever  sought  advancement  but  by
his  meanes.  You  see  how  things  passed  for  this  day.
The  next  day  the  Indians  came  in  from  all  parts,  to
know  what  people  these  were :  to  whom  I  signified  that
this  was  he  which  in  the  yeere  1562.  arrived  in  this
countrey,  and  erected  the  pillar  which  stood  at  the
entrie  of  the  river.  Some  of  them  knew  him  :  for  in
trueth  he  was  easie  to  be  knowen  by  reason  of  the
great  bearde  which  he  ware.  He  received  many  presents
of  them which  were  of  the villages neere adjoyning,

87

A.D.
1565.
[III.  352.]

Five  Indian
kings.

The  mountains
of  Apalatcy
wherein  are
mines  of
pe?fect  gold.

Sieroa  Pi?-a
red  mettall.

Perfect  gold.

Good  meanes
to  avoid  the
danger  of  fire.

September  4.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

among  whom  there  were  some  that  he  had  not  yet
forgotten.  The  kings  Homoloa,  Serauahi,  Alimacani,
Malica,  and  Casti  came  to  visit  him  and  welcome  him
with  divers  gifts  according  to  their  manner.  I  advertised
them  that  hee  was  sent  thither  by  the  king  of  France,
to  remaine  there  in  my  roome,  and  that  I  was  sent  for.
Then  they  demanded  and  prayed  him,  if  it  might  stand
with  his  good  pleasure,  to  cause  the  merchandise  that  hee
had  brought  with  him  to  be  delivered  them,  and  that  in
fewe  daies  they  would  bring  him  to  the  mountaines  of
Apalatcy,  whither  they  had  promised  to  conduct  me,  and
that  in  case  they  performed  not  their  promise,  that  they
were  content  to  be  cut  in  pieces.  In  those  mountaines,
as  they  sayd,  is  found  redde  copper,  which  they  call  in
their  language  Sieroa  Pira,  which  is  as  much  to  say  as
red  mettall,  whereof  I  had  a  piece,  which  at  the  very
instant  I  shewed  to  Captaine  Ribault,  which  caused  his
gold-finer  to  make  an  assay  thereof,  which  reported
unto  him  that  it  was  perfect  golde.  About  the  time
of  these  conferences,  commings  and  goings  of  the  kings
of  the  countrey,  being  weakened  with  my  former  travaile,
and  fallen  into  a  melancholy  upon  the  false  reports  that
had  bene  made  of  mee,  I  fell  into  a  great  continuall  fever,
which  held  me  eight  or  nine  dayes  :  during  which  time
Captaine  Ribault  caused  his  victuals  to  be  brought  on
shore,  and  bestowed  the  most  part  thereof  in  the  house
which  my  Lieutenant  had  built  about  two  hundred
pases  without  the  forte  :  which  hee  did  to  the  ende
they  might  bee  the  better  defended  from  the  weather,
and  likewise  to  the  intent  that  the  meale  might  bee
neerer  to  the  bake-house,  which  I  had  built  of  purpose
in  that  place,  the  better  to  avoide  the  danger  of  the
fire,  as  I  sayd  before.  But  loe  howe  oftentimes  mis-
fortune doth  search  and  pursue  us,  even  then  when
we  thinke  to  be  at  rest  !  loe  see  what  happened  after
that  captaine  Ribault  had  brought  up  three  of  his  small
ships  into  the  river,  which  was  the  fourth  of  September  !
Sixe  great  Spanish  ships  arrived  in  the  rode,  where  four

88

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
of  our  greatest  ships  remained,  which  cast  anker,  assur-
ing our  men  of  good  amity. They  asked  how  the  chiefe  ^^^  Spaniards
captaine  of  the enterprise did, & called them all by  ««f  •^"^^^

,  ^.  .  ^  ^•'  •  r • and5urpri%tng

their names  and surnames. 1 report me to you ir  it  ^  ^/^^  French.
could  be  otherwise  but  these  men  before  they  went  out
of  Spaine  must  needs  be  informed  of  the  enterprise  &
of  those that were to execute the same. About the
breake of  day they  began to make toward our men  :
but our men which trusted them never a deale, had
hoysed their sailes by night, being ready to cut the
strings  that  tyed  them. Wherefore  perceiving  that  this
making toward our men  of  the  Spaniards was not  to
doe them any pleasure, and knowing wel that their
furniture was too smal to make head against them,
because  that  the  most  part  of  their  men  were  on  shore,
they  cut their cables, left their ankers, and set saile.
The Spaniards seeing  themselves discovered,  lent  them
certaine  volleis  of  their  great  ordinance,  made  saile  after
them,  and  chased  them  all  day  long  : but  our  men  got
way  of  them still  toward the sea. And  the  Spaniards
seeing they  could not reach  them,  by reason that  the
French  ships were better  of  saile  then  theirs,  and also
because they  would not  leave the coast, turned backe
and  went  on  shore  in  the  river  Seloy,  which  we  cal  the  The  river
river of  Dolphines 8 or 10 leagues distant from the  ^^}°^  °^Jn  7
place  where  we  were. Our  men  therefore  finding  them-  '^^^^  ^^  g  ^^
selves  better  of  saile  then  they,  followed  them  to  descry 10  leagues
what  they  did,  which  after  they  had  done,  they  returned  over  land  from
unto  the  river  of  May,  where  captaine Ribault  having  {^^^f°rt--  but
descried them,  embarked himselfe in a great boat to  ^"i^ii^l'liig
know  what  newes  they  had. Being  at  the  entry  of  the  Cape  by  sea.
river he met  with the boat of  captaine Cousets ship,
wherin there was  a  good number of  men  which  made
relation  unto  him  of  all  the  Spaniards  doings  :  and  how
the great ship named the Trinitie had kept the sea,
and that she was not returned with them. They
told  him moreover that they had seen three Spanish
ships enter into the river of  Dolphins,  & the other

89

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

three remained in the rode  ; farther that they had
put their souldiers, their victuals & munition on
land. After he understood these newes hee returned
to the fortresse, and came to my chamber where I
was sick, and there  in the presence of  the  captaines,
La Grange, S. Marie, Ottigny, Visty, Yonville, and
other  gentlemen,  he  propounded,  that it was  necessary
for  the  kings  service, to  embarke himselfe  with  all  his
forces,  and with  the  three  ships  that  were  in  the  rode
to seeke  the Spanish fleete,  whereupon he asked our
advise. I  first  replyed,  and  shewed  unto  him  the  conse-
quence of  such an enterprise, advertising him among
Dangerous other  things  of  the  perilous  flawes  of  windes  that  rise  on
flazves  of  wind  ^j^^g  coast, and  that  if  it  chanced  that  hee  were  driven
Florida  in from  the  shore,  it  would  be  very  hard  for  him  to  recover
September. it  againe,  that  in  the  meane  while  they  which  should  stay
in the Forte should be in feare and danger. The
Captaines, Saint Marie, and La Grange declared unto
him  farther,  that  they  thought  it  not  good  to  put  any
such  enterprise  in  execution,  that  it  was  farre  better  to
keepe the  land, & do their best indevour to  fortifie
themselves :  And  that  after  that  the  Trinitie  (which  was
the  principall  ship)  were  returned,  there  would  be  much
more  likelyhood  to  enterprise this voyage. This not-
withstanding he  resolved  to  undertake  it,  and  that  which
King  Emola. more  is,  after  he  understoode  by  king  Emola,  one  of  our
neighbours  which arrived upon the handling of  these
matters,  that the  Spaniards  in  great  numbers  were  gone
[III.  353.] on shore,  which  had  taken  possession  of  the  houses  of
^  village  and  Seloy,  in the  most part  whereof  they had  placed  their
Xr«  °m Negros, which they had brought to labour, and also
lodged  themselves and  had  cast divers trenches  about
them. Thus  for  the  considerations  which  he  had,  and
doubting (as he might well doe) that the Spanyards
would  encampe  themselves  there  to  molest  us,  and  in  the
ende to  chase  us  out  of  the  Countrey,  he  resolved  and
continued in  his embarkment,  caused  a  Proclamation  to
be made,  that  all souldiers that  were under  his  charge

90

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.

should  presently  with  their  weapons  embarke  them,  and
that  his  two  ensignes  should march  :  which  was  put  in
execution. He  came into  my  chamber,  and  prayed  me
to lend him my Lieutenant, mine ensigne, and my
sergeant,  and  to  let  all  my  good  souldiers,  which  I  had,
goe with him, which I denied him, because  my selfe
being sicke, there was no man to stay in the fort.
Thereupon  he  answered  me  that  I  needed  not  to  doubt
at  all,  and  that  he  would  returne  the  morrow  after,  that
in  the  meane  space  Monsieur  de  Lys  should  stay  behind
to  looke  to  all  things. Then  I  shewed  unto  him  that  he
was  chiefe  in  this  Countrey,  and  that  I  for  my  part  had
no  further  authoritie  :  that  therefore  hee  would  take  good
advisement  what  hee  did,  for  feare  least  some  inconveni-
ence  might ensue. Then  he tolde me that he could
doe  no  lesse,  then  to  continue  this  enterprise,  and  that
in the letter which he had received from my Lord
Admirall,  there  was  a  postscript,  which  hee  shewed  mee
written  in  these  wordes :  Captaine  John  Ribault,  as  I  was  ^«  advertise-
enclosing  up  this  letter,  I  received  a  certaine  advice,  that  ^^^^  tf^y_
Don  Pedro  Melendes  departeth  from  Spaine  to goe to  ^^  Captaine
the  coast  of  Newe  France  :  see  you  that  you  suffer  him  not  Ribault.
to  encroch  upon  you,  no  more  then  he  would  that  you
should encroch upon him. You see (quoth he) the
charge  that  I  have, and I leave  it  unto your  selfe to
judge,  if  you  could  do  any  lesse  in  this  case,  considering
the certaine  advertisement  that we  have,  that  they  are
already  on  lande,  and  will  invade  us. This  stopped  my
mouth. Thus  therefore  confirmed  or  rather  obstinate  in
this enterprise, and having regard rather unto his
particular  opinion  then unto the  advertisments which  I
had given him, and the inconveniences of  the time
whereof  I  had  forewarned  him,  he  embarked  himselfe  the  Captaine  Ri-
eight  of  September,  and  tooke mine ensigne  and  eight  ^^^^^^  ^^~
and  thirtie  of  my  men  away  with  him. I  report  mee  to q\J"q^^
those  that  know  what  warres  meane,  if  when  an  ensigne
marcheth, any souldier that  hath  any courage in him
will  stay  behind,  to  forsake  his  ensigne :  Thus  no  man

91

A.D.
1565.

The  tenth  of
September.

A  mighty
tempest  the
tenth  of  Sept.

Laudonn'iere
hardly  used  by
Ribault.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  commandement  stayed  behind  with  mee,  for  ech  one
followed  him  as  chiefe,  in  whose  name  straight  after  his
arrivall,  all  cries  and  proclamations  were  made.  Captaine
Grange,  which  liked  not  very  well  of  this  enterprise,
was  unto  the  tenth  of  the  moneth  with  mee,  and  would
not  have  gone  aborde,  if  it  had  not  beene  for  the  instant
requestes  that  Captaine  Ribault  made  unto  him,  which
staid  two  dayes  in  the  rode  attending  untill  La  Grange
was  come  unto  him  :  Who  being  come  abord,  they  set
sayle  altogether,  and  from  that  time  forward  I  never  saw
them  more.  The  very  day  that  he  departed,  which  was
the  tenth  of  September,  there  rose  so  great  a  tempest
accompanied  with  such  stormes,  that  the  Indians  them-
selves assured  me  that  it  was  the  worst  weather  that
ever  was  scene  on  the  coast :  whereupon  two  or  three
dayes  after,  fearing  least  our  ships  might  be  in  some
distresse,  I  sent  for  Monsieur  du  Luys  unto  mee,  to
take  order  to  assemble  the  rest  of  our  people  to  declare
unto  them  what  neede  wee  had  to  fortifie  our  selves :
which  was  done  accordingly :  and  then  I  gave  them  to
understand  the  necessity  and  inconveniences  whereinto
we  were  like  to  fall,  aswel  by  the  absence  of  our  ships,  as
by  the  neerenesse  of  the  Spanyards,  at  whose  hands  we
could  looke  for  no  lesse  then  an  open  and  sufficient
proclamed  war,  seeing  they  had  taken  land  and  fortified
themselves  so  neere  unto  us.  And  if  any  misfortune
were  fallen  unto  our  men  which  were  at  Sea,  we
ought  to  make  a  full  account  with  our  selves  that  wee
were  to  endure  many  great  miseries,  being  in  so  small
number,  and  so  many  wayes  afflicted  as  we  were.  Thus
every  one  promised  mee  to  take  paines :  and  therefore
considering  that  their  proportion  of  victuals  was  small,
and  that  so  continuing,  they  would  not  bee  able  to  doe  any
great  worke,  I  augmented  their  allowance :  although  that
after  the  arrivall  of  Captaine  Ribault  my  portion  of  victuals
was  allotted  unto  mee  as  unto  a  common  souldier,  neither
was  I  able  to  give  so  much  as  part  of  a  bottell  of  wine  to
any  man which deserved it :  for  I was so farre from

92

RENE LAUDONNIERE  a.d.

1565.
having meanes to doe so, that  the Captaine himselfe
tooke  two  of  my  boates,  wherein  the  rest  of  the  meale
was,  which  was  left  me  of  the  biscuits  which  I  caused  to
bee made  to  returne  into  France :  so  that if  I  shoulde
say  that  I received more  favour at the handes  of  the
Enghshmen  beeing  Strangers  unto mee, I shoulde  say
but a trueth. Wee  beganne therefore to fortifie  our  Laudom'tere
selves and to repaire that which was broken downe,  ^'^'^  ^"  '^°^'
principally  toward  the  water  side,  where  I  caused  three-  fg^-tifig  them-
score  foote  of  trees  to  be  planted,  to  repaire  the  Palissado  selves.
with the  plankes which I caused to bee  taken of  the
Shippe which I had builded. Neverthelesse notwith-
standing all  our  diligence  and  travaile, wee  were  never
able  fully  to  repaire  it  by  reason  of  the  storm  es,  which
commonly  did  us  so  great  annoy,  that  wee could not
finish our inclosure. Perceiving my selfe in such  [HI.  354.]
extremitie  I  tooke  a  muster  of  the  men,  which  captaine  ^  muster  of
Ribault had left me, to see if  there were any that  ^-^  ^^^  fortb'^
wanted  weapon  :  I  found  nine  or  ten  of  them whereof  Ribault,
not  past  two  or  three had  ever  drawen  sword  out  of  a
scabbard,  as  I  thinke. Let  them  which  have  bene  bold
to say,  that  I had men ynough  left  me,  so  that  I  had
meanes  to  defend  my  selfe,  give  eare  a  little  now  unto
mee,  and  if  they  have  eyes  in  their  heads,  let  them  see
what  men  I  had. Of  the  nine  there  were  foure  but  yong
striplings,  which  served Captaine Ribault  and kept his
dogs,  the  fift  was  a  cooke :  among  those  that  were  without
the fort, and which were of  the foresaid company  of
Captaine Ribault, there was a Carpenter  of  threescore
yeeres  olde, one  a Beere-brewer, one olde Crosse-bow
maker,  two  Shoomakers,  and  foure  or  five  men  that  had
their wives, a player on the Virginals, two servants
of  Monsieur du  Luys,  one  of  Monsieur  de  Beauhaire,
one  of  Monsieur  de  la  Grange,  and  about  fourescore  and Fourescore
five or  sixe in all, counting  aswel  Lackeys  as women  (^nd five  left  in

and children. Behold the goodly troupe so sufficient ^^  J' ^^
,-,,  ,  ,0  ^ . ^  Laudonmere.

to  defend  themselves,  and  so couragious as they have
esteemed them to be :  and for  my  part  I  leave it  to

93

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

others  consideration  to  imagine  whether  Captaine  Ribault
woulde  have  left them with  me  to  have  borrowed my
men,  if  they  had  bene  such. Those  that  were  left  me  of
mine  owne  company  were  about  sixeteene  or  seventeene
that  coulde  beare  armes,  and  all  of  them  poore  and  leane :
the  reste  were  sicke  g,nd  maymed  in  the  conflict  which
my Lieutenant had against Utina. This view being
thus  taken,  wee  set  our  watches,  whereof  wee  made  two
Centinels,  that  the  souldiers  might  have  one  night  free.
Then  wee  bethought  our selves  of  those which  might
bee  most  sufficient,  among  whome  wee  chose two,  one
of  whom  was  named  Monsieur  Saint  Cler,  and  the  other
Monsieur  de  la  Vigne,  to whom  we delivered candles
and  Lanterns  to  goe  round  about  the  fort  to  viewe  the
watch, because of the foule and foggie weather, I
delivered them also a sandglasse or clocke, that the
Centinels  might  not  be  troubled  more  one  then  another.
In  the  meane  while  I  ceased  not,  for  all  the  foule  weather
nor  my  sicknesse  which  I  had,  to  oversee  the  Corps  de
garde. The  night  betweene  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth
of  September  La  Vigne kept  watch with  his company,
wherein  he  used  all  endevour,  although  it  rayned  without
ceasing. When  the  day  was  therefore come,  and  that
hee  saw  that  it  rayned  still  worse  then  it  did  before,  hee
pitied the Centinels so too moyled and wette  : and
thinking  the  Spanyardes  woulde  not  have  come  in  such
a strange time, hee let them depart, and to say the
trueth, hee went himselfe unto his lodging. In the
meane  while  one  which  had something to doe without
the fort, and my trumpet which went up unto the
TheSpanyards  rampart perceived a troupe of Spanyards which came
discryedtheio  ^q^j^^  from  a  little  knappe. Where incontinently  they
' beganne  to  cry  alarme,  and  the  Trumpetter  also  :  Which
assoone  as  ever  I  understoode,  foorthwith  I  issued  out,
with  my  target  and  sword  in my  hand,  and gatte mee
into  the  middest  of  the  Court,  where  I  beganne  to  crie
upon  my  souldiers. Some  of  them which were of  the
forward  sort  went  toward  the  breach,  which  was  on  the

94

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565-
Southside, and where the munitions of the artillerie
lay,  where  they  were  repulsed  and  slaine. By  the  selfe
same  place  two  ensignes  entred,  which  immediately  were  The  Spaniards
planted on the wals. Two other ensignes also entred  ^n^^'>' ^^^^  fi^t-
on the other side toward the West, where there was
another breach  : and those which were lodged in this
quarter,  &  which  shewed  themselves,  were likewise  de-
feated. As I went to succour them which were
defending  the  breach  on the southwest side,  I encoun-
tred by chance a great company of  Spaniards, which
had already  repulsed our men and were now entred,
which  drave  me  backe  unto  the  court  of  the  fort :  being
there  I  espied  with  them  one  called  Francis  Jean,  which  Francis  Jean
was one of  the Mariners which stole away  my  barks,  ^J^^^^°!^^  t°

.  fits  ttciiiott*

and had guided and conducted the Spanyards thither.
Assoone  as he sawe me,  he began  to  say,  This  is the
Captaine. This troupe was led by a captaine whose
name, as I thinke, was Don Pedro Melendes  : these  ^°^  ^^^^°
made certain pushes at me with their pikes which  fJJ^oftiig
lighted  on  my  tarket. But  perceiving  that  I  was  not  able  laniards.
to withstand so  great  a  company, and that the court
was already  wonne, and their ensignes  planted on the
ramparts,  &  that  I  had  never a man about me,  saving
one  only  whose name was Bartholomew,  I entred into
the  yard  of  my  lodging,  into  which  they  followed  me,
and  had  it  not  bene  for  a  tent  that  was  set  up,  I  had
bin  taken  : but  the  Spanyards  which followed  me  were
occupied in cutting of  the  cordes of  the tent, and in
the  meane  while  I saved  my  selfe  by  the  breach  which
was  on  the  West  side  neere  unto  my  Lieutenants  lodging,
and gate  away  into  the  woods  : where I found certain  Laudonniers
of  my  men  which  were  escaped,  of  which  number  there  ^^'^^P^-
were  three  or  foure  which  were  sore  hurt. Then  spake
I  thus  unto  them  : Sirs,  since  it  hath  pleased God  that
this  mischance  is  happened  unto  us,  we  must  needs  take
the  paines  to  get  over  the  marshes  unto  the ships  which
are  at  the  mouth of  the  river. Some would needs  go
to  a  little  village  which  was  in  the  woods,  the  rest  fol-

95

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1565.

lowed me through the reedes in the water, where
being  able  to  go  no  farther  by  reason  of  my sicknesse
which  I  had,  I  sent  two  of  my  men  which  were  with  me,
which  could  swim  well,  unto  the  ships,  to  advertise  them
of  that  which  had  happened,  and  to  send  them  word  to
come  and  helpe  me. They  were  not  able  that  day  to  get
[III.  355.] unto  the  ships  to  certifie  them  thereof: so  I  was  con-
strained to  stand  in  the  water  up  to  the  shoulders  all  that
night  long,  with  one  of  my  men  which  would  never  for-
sake me. The  next  day  morning,  being  scarcely  able  to
draw  my  breath  any  more,  I betooke  me  to  my  prayers
with  the  souldier  which  was  with  mee,  whose  name  was
John  du  Che-  John  du  Chemin  :  for  I  felt  mv  selfe  so  feeble,  that  I  was
twmf^''^''^^  afraid  I  should  die  suddenly : and  in  truth  if  he  had  not
imbraced  me  in  both  his  armes,  and  so  held  me  up,  it  had
not  bene  possible  to  save  me. After  we  had made an
ende  of  our  prayers,  I  heard  a  voyce,  which  in my  judge-
ment was  one  of  theirs  which  I  had  sent,  which  were  over
against  the  ships  and  called  for  the  ship  boat,  which  was
so  in  deed  : and  because  those  of  the  ships  had  under-
standing of  the  taking  of  the  fort  by  one  called  John  de
Hais,  master  Carpenter,  which  fled  unto  them in  a  shal-
The  diligence Jop  ;  they  had  set  saile  to  run  along  the  coast  to  see  if
of  the  Man- ^j^ might  save  any  : wherin  doubtlesse  they  did  very

nets  to  save  ■\^ ^ ■  ^  >-r^-i  • 1 ^ .  ^1  1

them  that well their endevour. 1  hey went straight  to the place

escaped  out  of  where  the  two  men  were  which I  had  sent,  and  which

the  fort.  called  them. Assoone  as  they  had  received  them  in  and

understood  where  I  was,  they  came  and  found  me  in  a

pitifull  case. Five  or  sixe  of  them  tooke  me  and  caried

me  into  the  shallop  :  for  I  was  not  able  by  any  means

to  go  one foot. After I was  brought  into  the  shallop

some of  the Mariners took their clothes from their
Anions,  these , ,  1 i 1  1  111  • j

was  J  agues backs to lend them me, and would have caned me

Morgues  presently  to  their  ships  to  give me  a  little Aqua  vitas.

painter  some-  Howbeit  I  would  not  goe  thither,  untill  I  had  first
i^^^j^J^^Z^n  gone  with  the  boat  along  the  reeds,  to  seeke  out  the
fr-^ers  in  poore soules which were scattered abroad, where we

London.  gathered  up 18 or  20  of  them. The  last that I took

96

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565.

in  was  the  nephew  of  the  Treasurer  le  Beau. After  we
were  al  come  to  the  ships,  I  comforted  them  as  well  as
I  could,  and sent back the boat  againe  with speed to
see  if  they  could  find  yet  any  more. Upon  her  returne,
the  Mariners  told  mee  how  that  captaine  James  Ribault
which  was  in  his  ship  about two muskets shot distant
from  the  fort,  had  parled  with the Spaniards,  and that
Francis Jean came unto his ship,  where hee staied  a  Francis  Jean
long space,  whereat they  greatly marveiled,  considering:  ^^^^^  of  this
hee  was  the  cause  of  this  enterprise,  how  hee  would  let
him  escape. After  I  was  come  into  the  ship  called  the
Greyhound,  captaine  James Ribault &  captaine Valvot
came  to  see  me  : and there we concluded to returne
into  France. Now  forasmuch  as  I found  the  ship  un-
furnished of  Captaine,  Pilot, Master,  and Masters-mate,
I  gave  advice  to  choose  out  one  of  the  most  able  men
among  al  the  mariners,  &  that  by  their  owne  voices. I
tooke  also  sixe  men  out  of  another  small  ship,  which  we
had sunke  because it  wanted  ballast  and could  not  be
saved. Thus I increased the furniture of the ship
wherein  I  was  my  selfe  embarked,  and  made  one,  which
had bene Masters-mate in the foresaid small ship.
Master of mine. And because I lacked a pilot, I  Thebaddeal-
prayed  James  Ribault  that he would  grant  me one of  ^n^L jf^^^
the  foure  men  that  he  had  in  his  ship,  which  I  should
name  unto  him,  to  serve  me  for  a  Pilot :  he  promised  to
give  me  them,  which  neverthelesse  he  did  not  at  the  in-
stant when  wee  were  ready  to  depart,  notwithstanding  all
the  speech  I  used  to  him,  in  declaring  that  it  was  for  the
kings  service. I  was  constrained  to  leave  the  ship  behind
me  which  I  had  bought  of  the  English Captaine,  because
I  wanted  men  to  bring  her  away. For  captaine  James
Ribault  had  taken  away  her  furniture  : I tooke  away  her
ordinance onely, which was all dismounted, whereof  I
gave  nine  pieces  to  James  Ribault  to  carrie  into  France, Our  returne
the other five I put  into my ship. The 25 of  Sep-  ^^^j^  France
tember wee set sailes to returne into France, and  ^gM^},%
Captaine James Ribault and I kept  company  all that 1565.
IX  97  G

A.D,
1565.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

day  and  the  next  untill  three  or  foure  a  clock  in  the
afternoone  :  but  because  his  ship  was  better  at  bowline
then  ours,  he  kept  him  to  the  wind  and  left  us  the
same  day.  Thus  we  continued  our  voyage,  wherein
we had marveilous flawes of wind. And about the

October  28.  eight  and  twentieth  of  October  in  the  morning  at  the
breake  of  the  day  we  discried  the  Isle  of  Flores,  one
of  the  A9ores,  where  immediatly  upon  our  approching
to  the  land  we  had  a  mightie  gust  of  wind  which
came  from  the  Northeast,  which  caused  us  to  beare
against  it  foure  dayes  :  afterward  the  wind  came  South
and  Southeast,  and  was  alwayes  variable.  In  all  the
time  of  our passage we had none other  foode  saving

Novemberio.  biscuit  and  water.  About  the  tenth  or  eleventh  of
November,  after  we  had  sailed  a  long  time,  and  sup-
posing we  were  not  farre  from  land,  I  caused  my  men
to  sound,  where  they  found  threescore  and  fifteene
fathoms  water,  whereat  we  all  rejoyced,  and  praised
God  because  we  had  sailed  so  prosperously.  Immedi-
atly after  I  caused  them  to  set  saile  again  and  so  we
continued our  way  : but forasmuch as we had borne

The  Chanel  of  too much toward the Northeast we entred into Saint

Satnt  George.  Georges  chanell,  a  place  much  feared  of  all  Sailers,  and
whereas  many  ships  are  cast  away  :  But  it  was  a  faire
gift  of  God  that  we  entred  in  it  when  the  weather  was
cleare.  We  sailed  all  the  night,  supposing  wee  had
bene  shot  into  the  narrow  Sea  betweene  England  and
France,  and  by  the  next  day  to  reach  Diepe,  but  we
were  deceived  of  our  longing  :  for  about  two  or  three
of  the  clocke  after  midnight  as  I  walked  upon  the
hatches,  I  discried  land  round  about  me,  whereat  wee
were  astonied.  Immediatly  I  caused  them  to  strike
saile  and  sound  : we  found  we  had  not under us  past

[III.  356.]  8  fathoms  of  water,  whereupon  I  commanded  them  to
stay  till  breake  of  day  :  which  being  come,  and  seeing
my  Mariners  told  me  that  they  knew  not  this  land,
I  commanded  them  to  approch  unto  it.  Being  neere
thereunto  I  made  them  cast  anker,  &  sent  the  boat  on

98

RENE LAUDONNIERE  ad.

1565-

shore  to  understand in  what  Countrey  we  were. Word

was  brought  me  that  we  were  in  Wales  a  province  of

England. I went incontinently  on  land,  where  after  I

had taken the ayre, a sickenesse tooke mee  whereof

I  thought  I  should have dyed. In  the  meane  while  I

caused  the  ship  to  be  brought  into  the  bay  of  a small

towne called Swansey,  where I found merchants  of  S.  Laudomieres

Malo,  which  lent  me  money,  wherewith  I  made  certaine  ^'"''^^^^  ^»

1 r  ir  J ' ^ r  ^1 ^  Swansea  Ba-j

apparel  tor  my  selre  and  part  or  my  company  that  was  ^^  Glamorgan-

with  me  :  and  because  there  were  no  victuals  in  the  ship,  shire  in  South

I bought  two Oxen,  and salted them,  and  a tunne of  Wales.

Beere,  which  I  delivered  into  his  hands  which  had  charge

of  the  ship,  praying  him  to  cary  it  into  France,  which  he

promised  me  to  doe  :  for  mine  owne  part  I  purposed  with

my  men  to  passe  by  land,  and  after  I  had  taken  leave  of

my  Mariners,  I departed  from  Swansey,  and  came  that

night  with  my  company  to  a  place  called  Morgan,  where

the  Lord  of  the  place,  understanding  what  I  was,  stayed  The  courtesie

me  with  him  for  the  space  of  6  or  7  dayes,  and  at  my  °f°^^  Master

departure mooved with pitie to see me  goe on foot, °^Sfl^-

especially  being so weake as I was, gave me a litle

Hackny. Thus  I  passed  on  my  journey  first  to  Bristoll,  Bristoll.

die then  to London,  where I went to doe my  duty  to  London.

Monsieur  de  Foix,  which  for  the  present  was  the  kings  Monsieur  de

Ambassador,  and  holpe  me  with  mony  in  my  necessitie. °^f ^  ^\

r  ^  J  J ^  StZciOU?' tor  trlB

From  thence  I  passed  to  Caleis,  afterward  to  Paris,  where  prench  king
I was  informed that  the king  was  gone to Molins to  in  England.
sojourne  there  :  incontinently,  &  with  all  the  hast  I  could
possibly  make,  I  gate  me  thither  with  part  of  my  com-
pany. Thus briefly  you see the discourse  of  all that  The  conclusion.
happened  in  New France  since  the  time it  pleased the
kings Majesty  to send his subjects thither  to discover
those parts. The indifi^erent and unpassionate  readers
may  easily  weigh the truth of  my  doings,  and be  up-
right judges of  the endevor  which I there  used. For
mine owne part I wil not  accuse nor excuse any  : it
sufficeth mee  to  have  followed  the  trueth  of  the his-
tory,  whereof  many are able to beare witnesse, which

99

A.D.
1565.

Thecauseswhy
the  French
lost  Florida.

The  French
Fleete  cast
away  on  the
coast  of
Florida.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

were  there  present.  I  will  plainly  say  one  thing,  That
the  long  delay  that  Captaine  John  Ribault  used  in  his
embarking,  and  the  15.  daies  that  he  spent  in  roving
along  the  coast  of  Florida,  before  he  came  to  our  fort
Caroline,  were  the  cause  of  the  losse  that  we  susteined.
For  he  discovered  the  coast  the  14  of  August,  and  .
spent  the  time  in  going  from  river  to  river,  which  had
bene  sufficient  for  him  to  have  discharged  his  ships  in,
and  for  me  to  have  embarked  my  selfe  to  returne  into
France.  I  wote  well  that  al  that  he  did  was  upon  a  good
intent  :  yet  in  mine  opinion  he  should  have  had  more
regard  unto  his  charge,  then  to  the  devises  of  his  owne
braine,  which  sometimes  hee  printed  in  his  head  so  deeply,
that  it  was  very  hard  to  put  them  out  :  which  also  turned
to  his  utter  undoing  :  for  hee  was  no  sooner  departed
from  us,  but  a  tempest  tooke  him,  which  in  fine  wrackt
him  upon  the  coast,  where  all  his  shippes  were  cast
away,  and  he  with  much  adoe  escaped  drowning,  to  fall
into  their  hands  which  cruelly  massacred  him  and  all
his  company.

The  fourth  voyage  of  the  Frenchmen  into  Florida,
under  the  conduct  of  Captaine  Gourgues,  in
the  yeere, 1567.

Aptaine  Gourgues  a  Gentleman  borne  in
the  Countrey  neere  unto  Bourdeaux
incited  with  a  desire  of  revenge,  to
repaire  the  honour  of  his  nation,  bor-
owed  of  his  friends  and  sold  ipart  of
his  owne  goods  to  set  forth  and  furnish
three  ships  of  indifferent  burthen  with
all  things  necessary,  having  in  them  an  hundred  and
fiftie  souldiers,  and  fourescore  chosen  Mariners  under
Captaine  Cazenove  his  lieutenant,  and  Francis  Bourdelois
Master  over  the  Mariners.  He  set  forth  the  22  of
August  1567.  And  having  endured  contrary  winds  and
stormes for  a  season, at  length hee  arrived and went

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  ad.

1567.
on  shore  in  the  Isle  of  Cuba. From  thence  he  passed  to
the  Cape  of  Saint  Antony  at  the  end  of  the  He  of  Cuba,
about  two  hundred  leagues  distant  from  Florida,  where
the captaine disclosed unto them his intention which
hitherto he had concealed from them, praying and
exhorting them not to leave him being so neere the
enemie,  so well  furnished,  and in  such  a  cause  :  which
they  all sware unto him, and that  with such courage
that  they  would  not  stay the  full  Moone  to passe  the
chanell of Bahama, but speedily discovered Florida,  The  chanell  of
where the Spanyards saluted them with two Canon  Bahama  be-
shot from  their  fort,  supposing  that  they  had  beene  of  ^^^  ^^^  ^sks
their  nation,  and  Gourgues  saluted  them  againe  to  enter-  ofLucayos.
taine  them  in  this  errour,  that  hee  might  surprise  them
at more  advantage, yet sailing  by  them, &  making  as
though  he  went  to  some  other  place  until  he  had  sailed
out of  sight of  the place, so that about  evening,  hee
landed 1 5 leagues  from the  fort, at  the  mouth  of  the  The  Frenck-
River  Tacatacouru, which the Frenchmen called  Seine,  ^^"^^  landing
because they thought it to bee like Seine in France, 'tacatacouru
Afterward perceiving the shore to bee covered with
Savages  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  (besides  the  signe  [III.  357.]
of  peace  and  amitie  which  he  made  them  from  his  ships)
he  sent  his  Trumpetter,  to  assure  them,  that  they  were
come thither for none other ende but  to renew the
amitie  and ancient league of the French with them.
The  Trumpetter  did  his  message  so  well  (by  reason  he
had bene there before under Laudonniere) that he
brought  backe  from  king  Satourioua,  the  greatest  of  all
the other  kings,  a  kidde  and  other  meat  to  refresh  us,
besides the offer  of  his friendship and amitie. After-
ward  they retired dansing in signe of  joy, to adver-
tise all  the  kings  Satouriouaes  kinsmen  to  repaire  thither
the next day to make a league of  amitie with the
Frenchmen. Whereupon  in  the  meane  space  our  general!
went  about  to  sound  the  chanel  of  the  river  to  bring  in
his  ships,  and  the  better  to traffike  and  deale  with  the
Savages,  of  whom  the  chiefe  the  next  day  in  the  morning

A.D.

1567.

Eight  savage
kings.

The  kings
seate.

Complaints  of
the  'lavages
against  the
Spa?iyards.

Two  chaines
of  silver  given
to  Gourgucs.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

presented  themselves,  namely  the  great  king  Satourioua,
Tacatacourou,  Halmacanir,  Athore,  Harpaha,  Helmacape,
Helicopile,  Molloua,  and  others  his  kinsmen  and  allies,
with  their  accustomed  weapons.  Then  sent  they  to
intreate  the  French  general  to  come  on  shore,  which  he
caused  his  men  to  do  with  their  swords  and  harquebusies,
which  he  made  them  leave  behind  them,  in  token  of
mutuall  assurance,  leaving  his  men  but  their  swords  only,
after  that  the  Savages  complaining  thereof  had  left  and
likewise  sent  away  their  weapons  at  the  request  of
Gourgues.  This  done  Satourioua  going  to  meet  him,
caused  him  to  sit  on  his  right  hand  in  a  seat  of  wood
of  lentisque  covered  with  mosse  made  of  purpose  like
unto  his  owne.  Then  two  of  the  eldest  of  the  company
pulled  up  the  brambles  &  other  weeds  which  were
before  them,  and  after  they  had  made  the  place  very
cleane,  they  all  sate  round  about  them  on  the  ground.
Afterward  Gourgues  being  about  to  speake,  Satourioua
prevented  him,  declaring  at  large  unto  him  the  incredible
wrongs,  and  continuall  outrages  that  all  the  Savages,  their
wives  and  children  had  received  of  the  Spanyards  since
their  comming  into  the  Countrey  and  massacring  of  the
Frenchmen,  with  their  continuall  desire  if  we  would  assist
them  throughly  to  revenge  so  shamefull  a  treason,  aswell
as  their  owne  particular  griefes,  for  the  firme  good  will
they  alwayes  had  borne  unto  the  Frenchmen.  Where-
upon Gourgues  giving  them  his  faith,  and  making  a
league  betweene  them  and  him  with  an  othe  gave  them
certaine  presents  of  daggers,  knives,  looking  glasses,
hatchets,  rings,  belles,  and  such  other  things,  trifles  unto
us,  but  precious  unto  these  kings  :  which  moreover,
seeing  his  great  liberality,  demanded  eche  one  a  shirt  of
him  to  weare  onely  on  their  festivall  dayes,  and  to  be
buried  in  at  their  death.  Which  things  after  that  they
had  received,  and  Satourioua  had  given  in  recompense  to
Captaine  Gourgues  two  chaines  of  silver  graines  which
hung  about  his  necke,  and  ech  of  the  kings  certaine
deere  skinnes  dressed after their  manner, they retired

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  a.d.

themselves  dansing  and very  jocond,  with promise to

keep  all  things  secret,  and  to  bring  unto  the  sayd  place

good  companies of  their subjects all  well  armed  to  be

avenged throughly on the Spanyards. In the meane

space Gourgues  very narrowly examined Peter  de Br6  Peter  de  Ere

borne  in Newhaven, which  being  but  a  yong stripling  J^^,^'*^^^

escaped  out  of  the  fort  into  the  woods  while  the  Span-  y^^^^j  viith

yards  murdered  the  rest  of  the  French,  &  was  afterward  Satourioua.

brought  up  with  Satourioua,  which  at  that  time  bestowed

him  on  our  generall,  whose  advise  stoode  him  in  great

steade :  Whereupon  he  sent  to  discover  the  fort  and  the

estate of the  enemies by certaine of  his men, being

guided  by  Olotacara  Satouriouaes  nephew  which  hee  had

given  him  for  this  purpose  and  for  assurance  of  Estampes

a  gentleman  of  Cominges,  and  others  which  he  sent  to

discry  the  state  of  the  enemies. Moreover  he  gave  him  ^■^f^^  pledges

a  Sonne  of  his  starke  naked  as  all  of  them  are,  and  his  ^"^^''^^^^

wife  which  he  loved  best  of  all  the  rest, of  eighteene  satourioua.

yeeres olde, apparelled  with  the  mosse of  trees,  which

for 3 dayes  space were in the  ships, untill our men

returned  from  discrying  the  state  of  the  enemie,  and  the

kings had furnished their preparation at their  rende-

vous. Their  marching  being  concluded,  and  the  Savages

rende-vous being appointed them beyond the river

Salinacani, of  our men called Somme, they  all dranke  T^^^  river  of

with  great solemnitie their drinke  called  Cassine,  made  ^^^^J'f^h

~ ,^  . .  r  • 1 i/,i  ^\.j called  Somme

or  the  juice  or  certame  hearbs  (as  they  are  wont  to  do,  u  the  French.

when  they  go  to  any  place  of  danger,)  which  hath  such

force, that it taketh  from  them hunger and  thirst for

24  houres,  and  Gourgues  was  faine  to  make  as  though

he  drank  thereof  for  company. Afterward  they  lift  up

their handes and sware all that they would never

forsake  him. Olotocara  followed  him  with  pike  in  hand.

Being  all  met  at  the  river  of  Sarauahi,  not  without  great  The  river  of

trouble,  by  reason  of  the  raine  and  places  full  of  water  ^^rauahu

which  they  must  needes  passe,  which  hindred  their  passage,

they  were  distressed  with  famine  finding  nothing  by  the

way  to  eat,  their  Bark  of  provision being  not  arrived.

lO-

A.D.

1567.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  358.]

The  river  of
Saracary,  or
Sarauahi.

which  was  to  come  unto  him  from  the  ships,  the  oversight
and  charge  whereof  he  had  left  unto  Burdelois  with  the
The  estate  of  rest  of  the  Mariners.  Now  he  had  learned  that  the
the  Spanyards  Sp^nyards  Were  foure  hundred  strong,  devided  into  three
forts  builded  and  flanked,  and  well  fortified  upon  the
river  of  May,  the  great  fort  especially  begunne  by  the
French,  and  afterward  repaired  by  them  :  upon  the  most
dangerous  and  principall  landing  place  whereof,  two
leagues  lower  and  neerer  towarde  the  Rivers  mouth,  they
had  made  two  smaller  Forts,  which  were  defended,  the
river  passing  betweene  them,  with  sixe  score  souldiers,
good  store  of  artillery  and  other  munition,  which  they
had  in  the  same.  From  Saracary  unto  these  smal  forts
was  two  leagues  space,  which  he  found  very  painful,
because  of  the  bad  waies  and  continual  raines.  After-
ward he  departed  from  the  river  Catacouru  with  10,  shot,
to  view  the  first  fort,  and  to  assault  it  the  next  day  in
the  morning  by  the  breake  of  day,  which  hee  could  not
doe,  because  of  the  foule  weather,  and  darknesse  of  the
night.  King  Helicopile  seeing  him  out  of  quiet  in  that
he  had  failed  of  his  purpose  there,  assured  him  to  guide
him  a  more  easie  way,  though  it  were  farther  about.  In-
somuch as  leading  him  through  the  woods,  he  brought
him  within  sight  of  the  fort,  where  he  discerned  one
quarter  which  was  but  begun  to  bee  entrenched.  Thus
after  he  had  sounded  the  small  river  that  falleth  downe
thereby,  hee  stayed  untill  ten  of  the  clock  in  the
morning  for  an  ebbe  water,  that  his  men  might  passe
over  there,  unto  a  place  where  he  had  scene  a  litle
grove  between  the  river  &  the  fort  (that  he  might  not
be  scene  to  passe  and  set  his  souldiers  in  array)  caus-
ing them  to  fasten  their  flasks  to  their  Morions,  &  to
hold  up  their  swords  and  kalivers  in  their  hands,  for
feare  least  the  water,  which  reached  up  to  their  girdles,
should  not  wet  them  :  where  they  found  such  abun-
dance of  great  oysters,  and  shels  which  were  so  sharpe,
that  many  had  their  legs  cut  with  them,  and  many
others lost their shoes. Notwitstanding" assoone as

104

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  a.d.

1568.

they  were  passed  over,  with  a  French  courage  they
prepared  themselves  to  the  assault  on  the  Sunday  eve
next  after  Easter  day,  in  Aprill  1568.  Insomuch  that
Gourgues  to  employ  the  ardent  heat  of  this  good
affection,  gave  twenty  shot  to  his  Lieutenant  Cazenove,
and  ten  Mariners  laden  with  pots  and  balles  of  wild
fire  to  burne  the  gate  :  and  then  he  assaulted  the  Fort  ^'^^  assault
on  another  side,  after  he  had  made  a  short  speech  unto  ff  fi  Tf  t
his  men  of  the  strange  treasons  which  the  Spanyards
had  plaid  their  companions.  But  being  discried  as  they
came  holding  downe  their  heads  within  two  hundred
paces  from  the  Fort,  the  Gunner  being  upon  the  terrace
of  the  Fort,  after  he  had  cried,  Arme,  Arme,  these  be
French  men,  discharged  twise  upon  them  a  colverine,
whereon  the  Armes  of  France  were  graven,  which  had
bin  taken  from  Laudonniere.  But  as  he  went  about  to
charge  it  the  third  time,  Olotocara,  which  had  not  "^^^  vdure  of
learned  to  keepe  his  ranke,  or  rather  moved  with  rage,  "  °'^^^^'
lept  on  the  platforme,  and  thrust  him  through  the
bodie  with  his  pike  and  slew  him.  Whereupon  Gour-
gues advanced  forward,  and  after  he  had  heard  Cazenove
cry,  that  the  Spaniards  which  issued  out  armed  at  the
cry  of  the  alarme,  were  fled,  hee  drew  to  that  part,  and
so  hemmed  them  in  betweene  him  and  his  Lieutenant,
that  of  threescore  there  escaped  not  a  man,  saving  only
fifteene  reserved  unto  the  same  death  which  they  had
put  the  French  unto.  The  Spanyards  of  the  other  fort
in  the  meanewhile  ceased  not  to  play  with  their  ordin-
ance, which  much  annoied  the  assailants  :  although  to
answere  them  they  had  by  this  placed  and  oftentimes
pointed  the  foure  pieces  found  in  the  first  Fort. Where-  ^•^^  assault

upon  Gourgues  beingr  accompanied  with  fourescore  shot  ^f*  ^^  ^"f^^
^  .  .  t/is  sccofiU  tort*

went abord the barke which met  him there to good

purpose  to  passe  into  the  wood  neere  unto  the  Fort,  out

of  which  he  supposed  the  Spanyards  would  issue  to  save

themselves  thorow  the  benefit  of  the  woods  in  the  great

fort,  which  was  not  past  one  league  distant  from  ye  same.

Afterward the Savages not staying for the returne of

105

A.D.

1568.

The  savages
great  swim-
mers.

The  Spaniards
of  the  second
Fort  all slalne.

Note.

A  notable

Spanish

subtiltie.

[HI-  359-]

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

the  bark,  lept  al  into  the  water  holding  up  their  bowes
&  arrowes  in  one  hand,  &  swimming  with  the  other,  so
that  the  Spaniards  seing  both  ye  shores  covered  with  so
great  a  number  of  men,  thought  to  flee  towards  the
woods  :  but  being  charged  by  the  French,  and  afterward
repulsed  by  the  Savages,  toward  whom  they  would  have
retired,  they  were  sooner  then  they  would  bereft  of
their  lives.  To  conclude  they  al  there  ended  their
dayes  saving  15  of  those  which  were  reserved  to  be
executed  for  the  example  of  others.  Wherupon
Captaine  Gourgues  having  caused  al  that  he  found
in  the  second  fort  to  be  transported  unto  the  first,
where  he  ment  to  strengthen  himselfe  to  take  resolu-
tion against  the  great  Fort,  the  state  whereof  hee  did
not  understand  :  in  fine  a  Sergeant  of  a  band  one  of
the  prisoners  assured  him  that  they  might  be  there  very
neere  300  wel  furnished  under  a  brave  Governor,  which
had  fortified  there,  attending  farther  succours.  Thus
having  obtained  of  him  the  platforme,  the  height,  the
fortification  and  passages  unto  it,  and  having  prepared
eight  good  lathers,  and  raised  all  the  Countrey  against
the  Spanyard,  that  he  neither  rnight  have  newes,  nor
succours,  nor  retract  on  any  side,  he  determined  to  march
forward.  In  the  meane  while  the  Governour  sent  a
Spanyard  disguised  like  a  Savage  to  spie  out  the  state  of
the  French.  And  though  he  were  discovered  by  Oloto-
cara,  yet  he  used  all  the  cunning  he  could  possibly  to
perswade  them  that  he  was  one  of  the  second  fort,  out  of
which  having  escaped,  and  seeing  none  but  savages  on
every  side,  he  hoped  more  in  ye  Frenchmens  then  their
mercy,  unto  whom  he  came  to  yeeld  himself  disguised
like  a  savage,  for  feare  lest  if  he  should  have  bin  knowen,
he  should  have  bin  massacred  by  those  Barbarians  :  but
the  spie  being  brought  face  to  face  with  the  sergeant  of
the  band,  &  convicted  to  be  one  of  the  great  fort,  was
reserved  until  an  other  time  :  after  that  he  had  assured
Gourgues  that  the  bruit  was  that  he  had  2000
Frenchmen  with him for feare of  whom the 200 and

106

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  a.d.

1568.

threescore  Spaniardes  which  remained  in  the  great  fort,
were  greatly  astonied.  Whereupon  Gourgues  being  re-
solved to  set  upon  them,  while  they  were  thus  amazed,
and  leaving  his  Standard-bearer  and  a  Captaine  with
fifteene  shot  to  keepe  the  Fort,  and  the  entry  of  the
River,  he  caused  the  Savages  to  depart  by  night  to  lye
in  ambush  within  the  woods  on  both  sides  of  the  river,
then  he  departed  in  the  Morning,  leading  the  Sergeant
and  the  spy  fast  bound  along  with  him,  to  shew  him  that
in  deede,  which  they  had  only  made  him  understand  be-
fore in  paynting.  As  they  marched  Olotocara  a  resolute
Savage  which  never  left  the  Captaine,  said  unto  him,  that
he  had  served  him  faithfully,  and  done  whatsoever  hee  had
commaunded  him,  that  he  was  assured  to  dye  in  the
conflict  at  the  great  Fort,  wherein  neverthelesse  he
would  not  faile,  though  it  were  to  save  his  life  :  but
he  prayed  him  to  give  that  unto  his  wife,  if  hee  es-
caped not,  which  he  had  meant  to  bestow  on  him,  that
shee  might  bury  the  same  with  him,  that  thereby  hee  The  cause  why
mip^ht  be  better  welcome  unto  the  village  of  the  soules  ^'^^  Flondians
or  spirits  departed.  To  whom  Captaine  Gourgues  poodszvith
answered,  after  he  had  commended  his  faithfull  valour,  them.
the  love  toward  his  wife,  and  his  noble  care  of  immortall
honour,  that  he  desired  rather  to  honour  him  alive  then
dead,  and  that  by  Gods  helpe  he  would  bring  him  home
againe  with  victorie.  After  the  discoverie  of  the  Fort,
the  Spanyards  were  no  niggards  of  their  Canon  shotte,
nor  of  two  double  Colverines,  which  being  mounted
upon  a  Bulwarke,  commaunded  all  along  the  River,
which  made  captaine  Gourgues  to  get  to  the  hill  covered
with  wood,  at  the  foot  whereof  the  Fort  beginneth,  and  Note.
the  forrest  or  wood  continueth  and  stretcheth  foorth
beyond  it  :  so  that  he  had  sufficient  coverture  to  approch
thereunto  without  offence.  He  purposed  also  to  remaine
there  untill  the  Morning,  wherein  hee  was  resolved  to
assault  the  Spaniards  by  scaling  their  walles  on  the  side
toward  the  hill,  where  the  Trench  seemed  not  suffici-
ently flanked  for  the  defence  of  the  courtains,  and  from

107

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

whence part of his men might draw  them  that  were
besieged,  which should shew  themselves  to defend the
rampart while the rest were comming up. But the
Governour  hastened  his  unhappy  destinie,  causing  three-
. score  shotte  to  sallie  foorth,  which  passing  through  the
Trenches,  advanced  forward  to  descrye  the  number  and
valour  of  the  French,  whereof  twentie  under  the  conduct
of  Cazenove,  getting  betweene  the  Fort  and  them  which
now were issued foorth, cut off  their  repassage, while
Gourgues  commanded the rest  to charge them in  the
Front,  but  not  to  discharge  but  neere  at  hand,  and  so
that  they  might  be  sure  to  hitte  them,  that  afterward  with
more ease they might cut them in pieces with their
swordes. So that turning  their backs  assoone as they
were  charged  and  compassed  in  by  his  Lieutenant,  they
The  slaughter remayned all slaine upon  the  place. Whereat  the  rest
of  the  Span- ^]^^^  were  besieged  were  so  astonied,  that  they  knew  none
^thirdFort Other  meane  to save  their  lives,  but  by  fleeing  into  the
Wooddes  adjoyning,  where neverthelesse  being  incoun-
tred  againe  by  the  arrowes  of  the  Savages  which  lay  in
wayte  there  for them (whereof  one ranne through the
target  and  body  of  a  Spanyard, which therewithall fell
downe starke dead) some were constrayned to turne
backe, choosing rather to dye by the hand of  the
French, which pursued them  : assuring themselves,
that  none  of  them  could  finde  any  favour  neyther  with
the  one  nor  the  other  Nation,  whom  they  had  alike  and
so  out  of  measure  cruelly  intreated,  saving  those  which
were  reserved  to  be  an example for  the  time  to  come.
The  taking  of  The  Fort when  it  was  taken,  was  found  well  provided
the  third  Fort.  q£  ^  necessaries  :  namely  of  five  double  Colverines,  and
foure Mynions, with divers other small pieces of  all
sorts, and eighteene grosse cakes of  gunnepowder, all
sorts  of  weapons,  which  Gourgues  caused  with  speede  to
be  imbarked,  saving  the  powder  and  other  moveables,  by
reason  it  was  all  consumed  with  fire  through  the  negli-
gence of  a  Savage,  which  in  seething  of  his  fish,  set  fire
on  a  itraine of  powder  which  was  made  and  hidden  by

108

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  a.d.

1568.

the  Spanyardes,  to  have  feasted  the  French  at  the  first
assault,  thus  blowing  up  the  store  house,  and  the  other
houses  buylt  of  Pine  trees.  The  rest  of  the  Spaniards
being  led  away  prisoners  with  the  others,  after  that  the
Generall  had  shewed  them  the  wrong  which  they  had
done  without  occasion  to  all  the  French  Nation,  were  all
hanged  on  the  boughes  of  the  same  trees,  whereon  the
French  hung :  of  which  number  five  were  hanged  by
one  Spaniard,  which  perceiving  himselfe  in  the  like
miserable  estate,  confessed  his  fault,  and  the  just  judge-
ment which  God  had  brought  upon  him.  But  in  stead
of  the  writing  which  Pedro  Melendes  had  hanged  over  The  writings
them,  importing  these  wordes  in  Spanish,  I  doe  not  this  hanged  over

as  unto  French  men,  but  as  unto  Lutherans,  Gour^ues  ^  ^ ,  It^"^ ■ ,
J 1 .  . '  , .  ,  . .  .  '  1  1 r  ^'^^  Spaniards

caused  to  be  imprmted  with  a  searmg  iron  in  a  table  or  ^kine  in

Firrewood,  I  doe  not  this  as  unto  Spaniardes,  nor  as  unto  Florida.
Mariners,  but  as  unto  Traitors,  Robbers,  and  Murtherers.
Afterward  considering  he  had  not  men  inough  to  keepe
his Forts  which he had wonne, much lesse to store
them,  fearing  also  lest  the  Spaniard  which  hath  Dominions
neere  adjoyning  should  renew  his  forces,  or  the  Savages
should prevaile against the French men, unlesse his
Majestie  would  send  thither,  hee  resolved  to  raze  them.
And  indeede, after  he  had  assembled,  and in the  ende
perswaded  all the  Savage  kings  so  to  doe,  they  caused  [III.  360.]
their  subjects  to  runne  thither  with such affection, that
they  overthrew  all the  three  Forts  flatte  even  with  the  The  three
ground  in  one  day. This  done  by  Gourgues,  that  hee ^^^^  ra-z.ed.
might  returne  to  his  Shippes  which  were  left  in  the  River
of Seyne called  Tacatacourou, fifteene leagues distant
from  thence,  he  sent  Cazenove  and  the  artillery  by  water :
afterward with fourescore harquebusiers, armed with
corslets,  and  matches  light,  followed  with  fortie  Mariners
bearing pikes,  by  reason  of  the  small  confidence  he  was
to  have  in  so  many  Savages,  he  marched  by  land  alwayes
in battell  ray,  finding  the  wayes covered  with Savages,  ^^'^^^  honour
which  came  to  honour  him  with  presents  and  prayses,  as  l^vazes  to
the  deliverer  of  all  the  countries  round  about  adjoyning. Gourgues.

109

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

An old woman among the  rest sayd  unto him, that
now  she  cared  not  any  more  to  dye,  since  she  had  scene
the  Frenchmen  once  againe  in  Florida,  and  the  Spaniards
chased  out. Briefly  being  arrived,  and  finding  his  ships
set in order,  and  every thing ready to set sayle,  hee
counselled  the  kings  to  continue  in  the  amitie  and  ancient
league  which  they had  made with  the king  of  France,
which would defend them against  all Nations : which
they  all promised, shedding teares because of  his  de-
parture. Olocotara especially:  for appeasing of  whom
he  promised  them  to  returne  within  twelve  Moones,  (so
they  count the yeeres)  and that  his king  would send
Knives  in them  an  army,  and  store  of  knives  for  presents,  and  all
great  estima- other  things  necessary. So  that  after  he  had  taken  his
leave  of  them,  and  assembled  his  men,  he  thanked  God
of  all  his  successe  since  his  setting  foorth,  and  prayed  to
The  third  of him  for  an  happy  returne. The  third  of  May  1568,  all
■^'  things  were made ready, the Rendez-vous  appoynted,

and  the  Ankers  weighed  to  set  sayle  so  prosperously,
that  in  seventeene  dayes  they  ranne  eleven  hundred
The  arrivall  leagues  :  continuing  which  course  they  arrived  at  Rochel
°R?chd^the  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  °^  J^^^'  ^^  ^o\xxt  and  thirtieth  day  after  their
sixt  of  June,  departure  from  the  River  of  May,  having  lost  but  a  small
Pinnesse  and  eight  men  in  it,  with  a  few  gentlemen  and
others  which  were  slaine  in  the  assaulting  of  the  Forts.
After  the  cheere  and  good  intertainment  which  he  re-
ceived of  those  of  Rochel,  hee  sayled  to  Burdeaux  to
informe  Monsieur  Monluc  of  the  things  above  mentioned,
albeit  hee  was  advertised  of  eighteene  Pinnesses,  and  a
great  Shippe  of  two  hundred  Tunnes  full  of  Spanyardes,
which  being  assured  of  the  defeat  in  Florida,  and  that
Che-de  Bois.  he  was  at  Rochel,  came  as  farre  as  Che-de  Bois,  the  same
day  that  he  departed  thence,  and  followed  him  as  farre  as
Blay  (but  he  was  gotten  already  to  Bordeaux)  to  make
him  yeeld  another  account  of  his  voyage,  then  that,
wherewith  hee  made  many  Frenchmen  right  glad.  The
Catholicke  king  being  afterward  informed  that  Gourgues
could not easily be taken,  offered a great summ»  of

no

DOMINIQUE DE GOURGUES  ad.

1582.

money  to  him  that  could  bring  him  his  head,  praying
moreover  king  Charles  to  doe  justice  on  him  as  of  the
authour  of  so  bloody  an  act  contrary  to  their  alliance  and
good  league  of  friendshippe.  In  so  much  as  comming  to
Paris  to  present  himselfe  unto  the  King,  to  signifie  unto
him  the  successe  of  his  Voyage,  and  the  meanes  which
hee  had  to  subdue  this  whole  Countrey  unto  his  obedi-
ence, (wherein  hee  offered  to  imploy  his  life,  and  all  his
goods)  hee  found  his  entertainment  and  answere  so  con-
trary to  his  expectation,  that  in  fine  hee  was  constrayned
to  hide  himselfe  a  long  space  in  the  Court  of  Roan,  about
the  yeere  1570.  And  without  the  assistance  of  President
Marigny,  in  whose  house  he  remayned  certaine  dayes,
and  of  the  Receiver  of  Vacquieulx,  which  alwayes  was
his  faithfull  friend,  hee  had  beene  in  great  danger.
Which  grieved  not  a  litle  Dominique  de  Gourgues,
considering  the  services  which  hee  had  done  aswell  unto
him  as  to  his  predecessours  kings  of  France.  Hee  was  The  birth,
borne  in  Mount  Marsan  in  Guyenne,  and  imployed  for  'y  and  death
the  service  of  the  most  Christian  Kings  in  all  the  Armies  ^oa^a^J
made  since  these  twentie  five  or  thirtie  yeeres :  at  last
he  had  the  charge  and  honour  of  a  Captaine,  which  in
a  place  neere  unto  Siene,  with  thirtie  Souldyers  sustayned
the  brunt  of  a  part  of  the  Spanish  Armie,  by  which  beeing
taken  in  the  assault,  and  having  all  his  men  cutte  in  pieces,
hee  was  put  into  a  Galley  in  token  of  the  good  warre  and
singular  favour  which  the  Spanyard  is  woont  to  shew  us.
But  as  the  Galley  was  going  toward  Sicillie,  beeing  taken
by  the  Turkes,  ledde  away  to  Rhodes,  and  thence  to
Constantinople,  it  was  shortly  afterwarde  recovered  by
Romeguas,  commaunder  over  the  Armie  of  Malta.  By
this  meane  returning  home,  hee  made  a  Voyage  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  whence  hee  tooke  his  course  to  Bresil,
and  to  the  South  Sea.  At  length  beeing  desirous  to
rapayre  the  honour  of  France,  he  set  upon  Florida  with
such  successe  as  you  have  heard.  So  that  being  become
by  his  continuall  warlike  actions  both  by  Land  and  Sea
no  lesse  valiant  Captaine  then  skilfull  Mariner,  hee  hath

A.D.
1582.

361.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

made  himselfe  feared  of  the  Spanyard,  and  acceptable
unto  the  Queene  of  England  for  the  desert  of  his  vertues.
To  conclude,  he  dyed  in  the  yeere  1582,  to  the  great
griefe  of  such  as  knew  him.

The  relation  of  Pedro  Morales  a  Spaniard,
which  sir  Francis  Drake  brought  from  Saint
Augustines  in  Florida,  where  he  had  remayned
sixe  yeeres,  touching  the  state  of  those  partes,
taken  from  his  mouth  by  Master  Richard
Hakluyt 1586.

Hree  score  leagues  up  to  the  Northwest
from  Saint  Helena  are  the  mountaines  of
the  golde  and  Chrystall  Mines,  named
Apalatci.

The  river  of  Wateri  is  thirtie  leagues
from  S.  Helena  Northward,  which  is  able
to receive any  Fleete of  ships  of  great
burden.

Wateri  and  Caiowa  are  two  kings,  and  two  rivers  to
the  North  of  Saint  Helena.
Oristou,

.  1 .  '  ,  Kings and Rivers to  the  South of

Ahoiaue,  > c  ■ ^  tt  1

,  '  ' bamt  Helena.

Isamacon,

Icosa  or  Dicosa

The  Spaniards  have  killed  three  hundred  of  the
subjects  of  Potanou.

The  greatest  number  of  Spaniards  that  have  bene  in
Florida  this  sixe  yeeres,  was  three  hundred,  and  now
they  were  but  two  hundred  in  both  the  Forts.

There  is  a  great  City  sixteene  or  twentie  dayes  journey
from  Saint  Helena  Northwestward,  which  the  Spaniards
call  La  grand  Copal,  which  they  thinke  to  bee  very  rich
and  exceeding  great,  and  have  bene  within  the  sight  of
it,  some  of  them.

They  have  offered  in  generall  to  the  King  to  take  no

NICHOLAS BURGOIGNON

wages  at  all  of  him,  if  he  will  give  them  leave  to  discover
this  citie,  and  the  rich  mountaines,  and  the  passage  to  a
sea  or  mighty  Lake  which  they  heare  to  be  within  foure
and  twenty  dayes  travel  from  Saint  Helena,  which  is  in
32.  degrees  of  latitude  :  and  is  that  river  which  the
French  called  Port-royal.

He  saith  also  that  he  hath  seene  a  rich  Diamond  which
was  brought  from  the  mountaines  that  lye  up  in  the
countrey  Westward  from  S.  Helena.  These  hils  seeme
wholy  to  be  the  mountaines  of  Apalatci,  whereof  the
Savages  advertised  Laudonniere,  and  it  may  bee  they
are  the  hils  of  Chaunis  Temoatam,  which  Master  Lane
had  advertisement  of.

The  relation  of  Nicholas  Burgoignon,  alias  Holy,
whom  sir  Francis  Drake  brought  from  Saint
Augustine  also  in  Florida,  where  he  had  re-
mayned  sixe  yeeres,  in  mine  and  Master
Heriots  hearing.

His  Nicholas  Burgoignon  sayth,  that
betweene  S.  Augustine  and  S.  Helen
there  is  a  Casique  whose  name  is
Casicola,  which  is  lord  of  ten  thou-
sand Indians,  and  another  casique  whose
name  is  Dicasca,  and  another  called
Touppekyn  toward  the  North,  and  a
fourth  named  Potanou  toward  the  South,  and  another
called  Moscita  toward  the  South  likewise.  Besides  these
he  acknowledgeth  Oristou,  Ahoia,  Ahoiaue,  Isamacon,
alledged  by  the  Spaniard.

He  further  affirmeth,  that  there  is  a  citie  Northwest-
ward from  S.  Helenes  in  the  mountaines,  which  the
Spaniards  call  La  grand  Copal,  and  is  very  great  and
rich,  and  that  in  these  mountains  there  is  great  store
of  Christal,  golde,  and  Rubies,  and  Diamonds  :  And
that  a  Spaniard  brought  from  thence  a  Diamond  which
was  worth  five  thousand  crownes,  which  Pedro  Melendes
IX  113  H

A.D.

1586.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1586.

the  marques  nephew  to  olde  Pedro  Melendes  that  slew
Ribault,  &  is  now  governer  of  Florida,  weareth.  He
saith  also,  that  to  make  passage  unto  these  moun-
taines,  it  is  needefull  to  have  store  of  Hatchets  to  give
unto  the  Indians,  and  store  of  Pickaxes  to  breake  the
mountaines,  which  shine  so  bright  in  the  day  in  some
places,  that  they  cannot  behold  them,  and  therefore  they
travell  unto  them  by  night.  Also  corslets  of  Cotton,
which  the  Spanyards  call  Zecopitz,  are  necessary  to  bee
had  against  the  arrowes  of  the  Savages.

He  sayth  farther,  that  a  Tunne  of  the  sassafras  of
Florida  is  solde  in  Spaine  for  sixtie  ducates  :  and  that
they  have  there  great  store  of  Turkie  cocks,  of  Beanes,
of  Peason,  and  that  there  are  great  store  of  pearles.

The  things,  as  he  reporteth,  that  the  Floridians  make
most  account  of,  are  red  Cloth,  or  redde  Cotton  to  make
baudricks  or  gyrdles :  copper,  and  hatchets  to  cut  withall.

The  Spaniards  have  all  demaunded  leave  at  their  owne
costs, to discover these mountaines, which the King
denyeth,  for feare lest the English or French would
enter  into  the  same  action,  once  knowen.
[III.  362.]  All the Spaniards would passe up by the river

of Saint Helena unto the mountaines of  golde  and
Chrystall.

The  Spaniards entring 50.  leagues  up  Saint  Helena,
found  Indians  wearing  golde  rings  at  their  nostrels  and
Oxen.  eares. They  found  also  Oxen,  but  lesse  then  ours.

Sixe  leagues  from  Saint  Helena  toward  the  North,
there  is  a  poynt  that  runneth  farre  into  the  sea,  which
is  the  marke  to  the  Seamen  to  finde  Saint  Helena  and
Waterin.

Waterin  is  a  river  fortie  leagues  distant  Northward
from  Saint  Helena,  where  any  fleete  of  great  ships  may
ride  safely.  I  take  this  river  to  be  that  which  we  call
Waren  in  Virginia,  whither  at  Christmasse  last  1585.
the  Spaniards  sent  a  barke  with  fortie  men  to  discover
where  we  were  seated :  in  which  barke  was  Nicholas
Burgoignon  the  reporter  of  all  these  things.

114

VOYAGES TO NEW MEXICO

The  Spaniards  of  S.  Augustine  have  slaine  three
hundred  of  the  subjects  of  Potanou.  One  Potassi  is
neighbour  to  Potanou.  Oratina  is  he  which  the  French
history  calleth  Olata  Outina.

Calauai  is  another  casique  which  they  knowe.

Sundry  Voyages  made  from  Nueva  Galicia,  and
Nueva  Viscaia  in  new  Spaine,  to  the  15.
Provinces  of  new  Mexico,  and  to  Quivira  and
Cibola,  all  situate  on  the  backeside  of
Guastecan,  Florida,  and  Virginia,  as  farre  as
37.  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude :  with  a
description  of  the  rivers,  lakes,  cities,  townes,
nations,  fertile  soyle,  and  temperate  ayre  in
those  partes ;  and  most  certaine  notice  of
many  exceeding  rich  silver  mines,  and  other
principall  commodities.

A  discourse  of  the  famous  Cosmographer  John
Baptista  Ramusius,  concerning  the  three
voyages  of  Frier  Marco  de  Nica,  Francis
Vasquez  de  Coronado,  and  Ferdinando  Al-
orchon  next  following :  taken  out  of  his
third  volume  of  Navigations  and  Voyages.

He  right  honourable  Don  Antonio  de
Mendo9a  being  sent  by  Charles  the
Emperour  to  be  viceroy  of  Mexico  and
Nueva  Espanna,  and  having  understood
that  Don  Ferdinando  Cortez  had  sent
many  ships  along  the  coast  of  Nueva
Espanna  to  discover  countries,  and  to
iind  out  the  Isles  of  the  Malucos,  began  himselfe  to
desire  to  do  the  like,  as  viceroy  of  Nueva  Espanna;
and  hereupon  they  fell  out :  for  Cortez  said  that  he
was  general  and  discoverer  of  the  South  sea,  and  that
it belonged to him to set forth those voyages. On

"5

A.D.

1539-

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1539-

the  other  side,  the  lord  Don  Antonio  alledged  that
it  belonged  to  him  to  make  that  discovery,  as  being
viceroy  of  Nueva  Espanna.  So  that  they  fell  at  great
variance,  and  Cortez  returned  into  Spaine  to  complaine
unto  the  Emperour.  Don  Antonio  in  the  meane
season  having  obteined  knowledge  of  the  voiage,  which
Andrew  Dorantez  (who  was  one  of  the  company  of
Pamphilo  Narvaez  that  escaped,  as  you  may  reade  in
the  relation  of  Alvaro  Nunnez,  called  Cabe9a  de  Vaca)
made ;  sent  Frier  Marco  de  Ni9a  with  a  Negro  of
the  said  Dorantez  to  discover  that  country.  Which
Frier  Marco  de  Ni9a  being  returned,  &  having  in-
formed his  lordship  of  all  his  discovery,  he  sent  captain
Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado  with  many  Spaniards  on
horsebacke  and  Indians  on  foot :  likewise  he  sent  a  fleete
by  sea,  whereof  Ferdinando  Alorchon  was  captaine,  as
may be  scene  in  the  relations  following.

An  extract  of  a  letter  of  captaine  Francis  Vasques
de  Coronado,  v^ritten  to  a  Secretary  of  the  right
noble  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a,  viceroy  of
Nueva  Espanna.  Dated  in  Culiacan,  the  8.
of  March 1539.

E saith  that  Frier  Marcus  de  Niga  arrived  in the
Province  of  Topira,  where  he  found  all  the  Indians
fled unto the mountaines for feare of  the Christians,
and that for his sake they came all downe to see
him, with great  joy & boldnesse. They are men of
good  making,  and  whiter  then  others,  and  their  women
are more beautifuU then others of the neighbour-
provinces. There  are  no great  cities  there,  yet  are  the
houses  built  of  stone,  and are  very  good,  and  in  them
Store  of  golde,  they have great store of  gold, which is as it were
silver,  and \q^\_ because they know not  what use to put it to.
precious  stones rr-.,  i  -^ t-  u  j ^l  •  • i

in  Topira -'•"^  people weare Emeralds and other precious  jewels

[III.  363.] upon  their  bodies :  they  are  valiant,  having  very  strong
armour made of  silver, fashioned after divers shapes

116

H

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

1539-
of  beasts.  They  worship  for  their  gods  such  things
as  they  have  in  their  houses,  as  namely  hearbes,  and
birdes,  and  sing  songs  unto  them  in  their  language,
which  differeth  but  litle  from  that  of  Culiacan.  They
told  the  Frier  that  they  were  willing  to  become  Chris-
tians, and  the  Emperors  subjects,  for  they  were  without
a  governour ;  with  condition  that  no  man  should  hurt
them :  and  that  they  would  change  their  golde  for  such
things  as  they  wanted.  Commandement  was  given,  that
they  should  bee  received  without  doing  them  any  dis-
pleasure. Neere  unto  this  countrey  there  is  another
Province  heretofore  discovered  by  our  men,  where  the
people  go  naked  without  any  thing  before  them :  they
are  very  hardly  reduced  to  Christianitie,  and  they  are
valiant  and  stoute.  Their  houses  are  covered  with  straw:
They  seeke  no  other  riches  but  to  feede  cattel.  They  goe
at  certaine  seasons  to  their  sacrifices  into  a  valley  situate  in
that  Province,  which  is  inhabited  with  people,  esteemed  by
those  of  the  countrey  as  saints  and  priests,  whom  they
call  Chichimecas,  which  dwell  in  the  woods  without
houses :  and  they  eate  such  things  as  they  of  the
countrey  give  them  of  almes.  They  goe  naked,  and
are  tanned  in  the  smoke,  and  tye  their  privie  member
with  a  string  unto  their  knee,  and  the  women  likewise
goe  Starke  naked.  They  have  certain  temples  covered
with  strawe,  with  small  round  windowes  full  of  the
skuls  of  dead  men  ;  before  their  temple  is  a  great
round  ditch,  the  brim  whereof  is  compassed  with  the
figure  of  a  serpent  made  of  gold  and  silver,  and  with
another  mixture  of  unknowen  metals  :  and  this  serpent
holdeth  his  tayle  in  his  mouth.  They  of  this  valley
from  time  to  time  cast  lots,  whose  lucke  it  shal  be  to
be  sacrificed,  and  they  make  him  great  cheere,  on
whom  the  lotte  falleth,  and  with  great  joy  they  crowne
him  with  flowers  upon  a  bed  prepared  in  the  sayd  ditch
all  full  of  flowres  and  sweete  hearbes,  on  which  they  lay
him  along,  and  lay  great  store  of  dry  wood  on  both
sides  of  him,  and  set  it  on  fire  on  eyther  part,  and  so

117

A.D.

1539-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

he  dyeth.  Where  he  continueth  so  quietly  without
being  bound,  as  though  hee  did  something,  wherein  he
tooke  great  pleasure.  And  they  say  that  hee  is  a
Saint,  and  doe  worshippe  him  for  that  yeere,  and  sing
prayses,  and  Hymnes  unto  him,  and  afterward  set  up
his  head  with  the  rest  in  order  within  those  windowes.
Also  they  sacrifice  their  prisoners,  whom  they  burne  in
another  deeper  ditch,  and  not  with  the  foresayde  cere-
monies. The  Spanyards  which  are  in  Xalisco  write,
that  having  good  assistance,  they  hope  that  those  people
will  become  Christians.  The  Countrey  is  very  good  and
fruitfuU,  and  hath  great  store  of  good  and  wholesome
waters.

A  Letter  of  Francis  Vazquez  de  Coronado,
Governour  of  Nueva  Galicia,  to  the  lord
Don  Antonio  de  Mendo^a,  Viceroy  of
Nueva  Espanna.  Dated  in  Saint  Michael  of
Culiacan  the  8.  of  March, 1539.

Of  the  hard  passage  from  Saint  Michael  of  Culiacan  to
Topira.  The  description  of  that  Province,  and  of
another  neere  unto  the  same,  very  rich  in  gold  and
precious  stones.  The  number  of  the  people  which
Vazquez  caried  with  him  in  his  journey  thither  ;  and
how  greatly  Frier  Marcus  of  Ni9a  is  honoured  by  the
Indians  of  Petatlan.

m

Y  the  helpe  of  God  I  meane  to  set  forward
from  this  City  of  S.  Michael  of  Culiacan
toward  Topira  the  10.  of  April  :  neither
can  I  any  sooner  set  forward,  because  the
powder  and  match  which  your  Lordship
sendeth  mee,  cannot  be  brought  thither
before  that  time,  and  I  thinke  it  be  now
Compostella. Besides this, I am to passe many

leagues  over  mightie  high  mountaines,  which  reach  up  to
the  skyes,  and  over  a  River,  which  at  this  present  is  so
bigge  and  swolne,  that  it  can  in  no  place  be  waded  over.

118

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

1539-
And  if  I  depart  at  the  time  aforesayde,  they  say  wee  may
wade  over  it. They  tolde  mee  that  from  hence  to  Topira
was  not  above  50.  leagues  ;  and  I  have  learned  since  that
it  is  above  foure  score  leagues. I  doe  not  remember  that
I  have  written  to  your  Lordshippe  the  information  which
I  have  of  Topira  :  and  though  I  had  written  thereof  unto  Topira.
you,  yet  because  that  since  that  time  I  have  learned  some-
thing more,  I  thinke  it  meete  to  signifie  the  same  unto
your  Lordship  in  these  my  letters. It  may  please  your
honour  therefore  to  understand,  that  they  tell  mee,  that
Topira  is  a  very  populous  Province,  lying  betweene  two
rivers, and that there are above 50. inhabited townes
therein. And that beyond the same there is another  Another
Countrey  Sfreater  then  it,  the  name  whereof  the  Indians  -^^^f  ^
could  not  tell  mee,  wherein  there  is  great  store  of  victuals
of  Maiz,  French peason,  Axi or  Pepper, Melons,  and
Gourds,  and  great  store  of  Hennes  of  the  countrey. The
people  weare  on  their  bodies  golde.  Emeralds,  and  other
precious  stones,  and  are  served  commonly  in  golde  and
silver, wherewith they cover their houses  : and the
chiefe  men  weare  great  chaines  of  golde  well  wrought,  ^J^-  3 04- J
about their necks, and are apparelled with paynted  j^^^g  ^%
garments,  and  have  store  of  wilde kine  ; and they  say  ^^^  Pintados
they  enter not into their  countrey,  because themselves  mentioned  by
have no great store of  people: those Indians being  Frier  Marco
many  in number, and  very  valiant. That  which here ,. q,
I say, I learned by two other relations of Indians
dwelling  neere  unto  them. I  meane  to set forward at
the  time  before mentioned,  and  I carrie with me 150.
horsemen, and twelve spare horses,  and 200.  footmen,
crossebowmen,  and  gunners. I  take  also  with  mee  live
hogs,  sheepe,  and  all  such  things  as  I  can  get  for  money  :
assure  your Lordship that I meane not  to returne to
Mexico,  until  I  be  able  to  informe  your  honour  more
perfectly,  what  the  state  of  that  place  is  : and  if  I find
ought  that  we  may  doe  good  in,  I  will  stay  there,  untill  I
have  advertised  your  Lordship,  that  you  may  command
what  you  will  have  done  :  and  if  it  fall  out  so  unluckily,

119

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539.

that  there  be  nothing  of  importance,  I  will  seeke  to  dis-
cover 100.  leagues  farther,  wherein  (I  hope  in  God)  there
will  be  something  found  in  which  your  Lordship  may
imploy  all  these  gentlemen,  and  those  which  shall  come
hither  hereafter.  I  thinke  I  cannot  chuse  but  stay  there  :
and  the  waters,  the  seasons,  and  disposition  of  the  coun-
trey,  and  other  accidents  wil  direct  mee  what  is  best  to  be
done.  Frier  Marco  de  Ni^a  entred  a  good  way  into  the
country,  accompanied  with  Stephan  Dorantez,  the  7.  of
February  last  past :  when  I  departed  from  them,  I  left
them  with  above  100.  Indians  of  Petatlan,  and  from  the
time  of  their  comming  thither  they  greatly  honoured  the
father,  shewing  him  all  the  courtesies  they  could  possibly.
I  cannot  send  you,  nor  describe  unto  you  his  entrance
among  them  better  then  I  have  done  in  all  my  relations
which  I  wrote  in  my  letters  from  Compostella,  and  I
signified  unto  you  all  things  to  the  full  from  the  citie  of
S.  Michael  :  and  though  there  be  but  the  tenth  part  of
those  things,  it  is  a  great  matter.  Herewithall  I  have
sent  your  Lordship  a  Letter,  which  I  received  from  the
said  father  :  the  Indians  tell  me,  that  all  the  people  of  the
countrey  doe  greatly  reverence  him  :  and  I  beleeve  he
may  travel  many  leagues  farther  in  that  sort.  He
saith,  that  if  he  finde  any  good  countrey,  he  will  write
to  me  thereof:  I  will  not  goe  thither  without  inform-
ing your  Lordship  of  my  journey.  I  hope  in  God,
that  by  one  way  or  other  wee  shall  discover  some  good
thing.

DON ANTONIO DE MENDOCA

A.D.

1539-

A  Letter  written  by  the  most  honourable  Lord
Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a,  Vice-roy  of  Nueva
Espanna,  to  the  Emperors  Majestie.

Of  certaine  Noblemen  which  sought  to  discover  the
end  of  the  firme  land  of  Nueva  Espanna  toward
the  North.  The  arrivall  of  Vazquez  de  Coronado
with  Frier  Marco  at  S.  Michael  of  Culiacan,  with
commission  to  the  Governors  of  those  partes,  to
pacifie  the  Indians,  and  not  to  make  them  slaves
any  more.

N  the  ships  that  went  last  from  hence
(wherof  Michael  de  Usnago  was  Admiral)
I  wrote  unto  your  Majestie,  how  I  had
sent  two  Franciscan  Friers  to  discover  the
end  of  this  firme  land,  which  stretcheth  to
the  North.  And  because  their  journey
fell  out  to  greater  purpose  then  was
looked  for,  I  will  declare  the  whole  matter  from  the  be-
ginning. It  may  please  your  Majestie  to  call  to  mind
how  often  I  wrote  unto  your  Highnesse,  that  I  desired
to  know  the  ende  of  this  Province  of  Nueva  Espanna,
because  it  is  so  great  a  countrey,  and  that  we  have  yet  no
knowledge  thereof.  Neither  had  I  onely  this  desire  ;  for
Nunno  de  Guzman  departed  out  of  this  city  of  Mexico
with  400,  horsemen,  and  14000.  Indians  footemen  borne
in  these  Indias,  being  the  best  men,  &  the  best  furnished,
which  have  bene  scene  in  these  parts  :  and  he  did  so  litle
with  them,  that  the  most  part  of  them  were  consumed  in
the  enterprize,  &  could  not  enter  nor  discover  any  more
then  already  was  discovered.  After  this  the  saide  Nunno
Guzman  beeing  Governour  of  Nueva  Galicia,  sent  Cap-
taines  and  Horsemen  foorth  divers  times,  which  sped  no
better  then  he  had  done.  Likewise  the  Marques  de  valle
Hernando  Cortez  sent  a  captaine  with  2.  ships  to  discover
the  coast :  which  2.  ships  and  the  captaine  perished.
After  that  he  sent  againe  2.  other  ships,  one  of  the  which

121

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1539-

was  divided  from  her  consort,  and  the  Master  and  cer-

taine  mariners  slue  the  captaine,  &  usurped  over  the  ship.

This  was  the After  this  they  came  to  an  Island,  where  the  Master  with

Port  of  Santa cgj-taine  mariners  going  on  land,  the  Indians  of  the  coun-

Ctu%  tn  the  o o  _ '

Isle  of  Call- ^''y  ^^^  them,  and  tooke  their  boat  :  and  the  ship  with

fornia.  those  that  were  in it,  returned  to the coast of  Nueva

Galicia,  where  it  ran  on  ground.  By  the  men  which
came  home  in  this  ship,  the  Marques  had  knowledge  of
the  countrey  which  they  had  discovered  :  and  then,  either
for  the  discontentment  which  hee  had  with  the  bishop
of  Saint  Domingo,  and  with  the  Judges  of  this  royal
audience  in  Mexico,  or  rather  because  of  his  so  pros-
perous  successe in all things here  in Nueva Espanna,

[III.  365.]  without  seeking  any  farther  intelligence  of  the  state  of
that  Island,  he  set  forward  on  that  voyage  with  3.  Ships,
and  with  certaine  footemen  and  horsemen,  not  throughly
furnished  with  things  necessary  ;  which  fell  out  so  con-
trary to  his  expectation,  that  the  most  part  of  the  people
which  he  carryed  with  him,  dyed  of  hunger.  And
although  he  had  ships,  and  a  Countrey  very  neere  him
abounding  with  victuals,  yet  could  hee  never  finde  meanes
to  conquer  it,  but  rather  it  seemed,  that  God  miracu-
lously did  hide  it  from  him  :  and  so  he  returned  home
without  atchieving  ought  else  of  moment.  After  this,
having  heere  in  my  company  Andrew  Dorantez,  which
is  one  of  those  who  were  in  the  voyage  of  Panphilo
Narvaez,  I  often  was  in  hand  with  him,  supposing  that
he  was  able  to  doe  your  Majestie  great  service,  to  imploy
him  with  fortie  or  fiftie  horses,  to  search  out  the  secret
of  those  parts :  and  having  provided  all  things  necessary
for  his  journey,  and  spent  much  money  in  that  behalfe,
the  matter  was  broken  off,  I  wot  not  how,  and  that
enterprise  was  given  over.  Yet  of  the  things  which
were  provided  for  that  purpose,  I  had  left  mee  a  Negro,
which  returned  from  the  foresayde  voyage  of  Narvaez,
with  Dorantez,  and  certaine  slaves  which  I  had  bought,
and  certaine  Indians  which  I  had  gathered  together,  who
were borne  in  those North  partes,  whome  I  sent  with

DON ANTONIO DE MENDO^A  ' ad.

1539-
Frier  Marco  de  Niga,  and  his  companion  a  Franciscan
Frier,  because  they  had  bene  long  travelled,  and  exercised
in  those  partes,  and  had  great  experience  in  the  affaires
of  the  Indies,  and  were  men  of  good  life  and  conscience,
for  whom  I  obtained  leave  of  their  superiours :  and  so
they  went  with  Francis  Vazquez  de  Coronado,  governour
of  Nueva  Galicia  unto  the  Citie  of  Saint  Michael  of
Culiacan,  which  is  the  last  Province  subdued  by  the
Spaniards  towarde  that  quarter,  being  two  hundred
leagues  distant  from  this  Citie  of  Mexico.  Assoone  as
the  governour,  and  the  Friers  were  come  unto  that
Citie,  hee  sent  certaine  of  those  Indians  which  I  had
given  him,  home  into  their  Countrey,  to  signifie,  and
declare  to  the  people  of  the  same,  That  they  were  to
understand,  that  your  Majestie  had  commaunded  they
should  not  hereafter  bee  made  slaves,  and  that  they
should  not  be  afrayd  any  more,  but  might  returne  unto
their  houses,  and  live  peaceably  in  them,  (for  before
that  time  they  had  bin  greatly  troubled  by  the  evill
dealings  which  were  used  toward  them)  and  that  your
Majestie  would  cause  them  to  be  chastened,  which  were  the
causes  of  their  vexation.  With  these  Indians  about  twentie
dayes  after  returned  about  400  men ;  which  comming
before  the  governour  said  unto  him,  that  they  came  on
the  behalfe  of  al  their  Countrey-men,  to  tell  him,  that
they  desired  to  see  and  know  those  men  which  did  them
so  great  a  pleasure  as  to  suffer  them  to  returne  to  their
houses,  and  to  sow  Maiz  for  their  sustenance :  for  by
the  space  of  many  yeres  they  were  driven  to  flee  into
the  mountaines,  hiding  themselves  like  wild  beasts,  for
feare  lest  they  should  be  made  slaves,  and  that  they  and
all  the  rest  of  their  people  were  ready  to  doe  whatso-
ever should  bee  commaunded  them.  Whom  the  gover-
nour comforted  with  good  wordes,  and  gave  them
victuals,  and  stayed  them  with  him  three  or  foure  dayes,
wherein  the  Friers  taught  them  to  make  the  signe  of
the  Crosse,  and  to  learne  the  name  of  our  Lorde  Jesus
Christ,  and  they  with  great diligence sought  to  learne

123

A.D,

1539-

Valk  de  los
Corazones
mentioned  by
Fazquez  de
Coronado
cap.  I.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  same.  After  these  dayes  hee  sent  them  home  againe,
willing  them  not  to  be  afraid,  but  to  be  quiet,  giving
them  apparel,  beades,  knives,  and  other  such  like  things,
which  I  had  given  him  for  such  purposes.  The  sayde
Indians  departed  very  well  pleased,  and  said,  that  when-
soever hee  would  send  for  them,  they  and  many  others
would  come  to  doe  whatsoever  he  would  command  them.
The  entrance  being  thus  prepared,  Frier  Marco  and  his
companion,  with  the  Negro  and  other  slaves,  and  Indians
which  I  had  given  him,  went  forward  on  their  voyage
lo.  or  12.  dayes  after.  And  because  I  had  likewise
advertisement  of  a  certaine  Province  called  Topira  situate  in
the  mountaines,  and  had  appoynted  the  governour  Vazquez
de  Coronado,  that  he  should  use  meanes  to  learne  the
state  thereof;  he  supposing  this  to  be  a  matter  of  great
moment,  determined  himselfe  to  goe  and  search  it,
having  agreed  with  the  sayd  Frier,  that  he  should
returne  by  that  part  of  the  mountaine,  to  meete  with
him  in  a  certaine  valley  called  Valle  de  los  Corazones,
beeing  120.  leagues  distant  from  Culiacan.  The  gover-
nour travelling  into  this  province  (as  I  have  written
in  my  former  letters)  found  great  scarcity  of  victuals
there,  and  the  mountaines  so  craggy,  that  he  could
finde  no  way  to  passe  forward,  and  was  inforced  to
returne  home  to  Saint  Michael  :  so  that  aswell  in
chusing  of  the  entrance,  as  in  not  being  able  to  finde
the  way,  it  seemeth  unto  all  men,  that  God  would
shut  up  the  gate  to  all  those,  which  by  strength  of
humane  force  have  gone  about  to  attempt  this  enter-
prise, and  hath  reveiled  it  to  a  poore  and  bare-footed
Frier.  And  so  the  Frier  beganne  to  enter  into  the
Land,  who  because  he  found  his  entrance  so  well
prepared,  was  very  well  received;  and  because  he  wrote
the  whole  successe  of  his  voyage,  according  to  the
instruction  which  I  had  given  him  to  undertake  the
same,  I  wil  not  write  any  more  at  large,  but  send  your
Majestie  this  copy  of  all  such  things  as  he  observed
in  the  same.

124

FRIAR MARCO DE NigA

A.D,

1539-

A relation of  the reverend father Frier Marco  [HI.  366.]
de  Ni9a,  touching  his  discovery  of  the  king-
dome  of  Cevola or  Cibola,  situate  about  30.
degrees of  latitude,  to the North of  Nueva
Espanna.

Chap. I .

Frier  Marco  de  Ni9a  departeth  from  Saint  Michael  in
the  Province  of  Culiacan,  standing  in  24.  degrees
of  Northerly  latitude :  and  comming  to  the  Towne
of  Petatlan,  receiveth  many  courtesies  of  the  Indians
there.  Departing  from  thence,  he  had  information
of  many  Islands,  and  of  a  great  countrey  inhabited
with  civil  people ;  he  commeth  to  Vacupa :  where
during  his  aboad,  he  heard  newes  of  Cevola,  and  of
the  state  of  the  7.  Cities,  and  of  other  provinces,  &
of  the  rich  Islands  of  perles,  which  extent  northward
upon  the  coast.

Frier  Marco  de  Niga  of  the  order  of
S.  Francis,  for  the  execution  of  the
instruction  of  the  right  honourable  lord
Don  Antonio  de  Mendoga,  Vice-roy
and  captaine  Generall  for  the  Emperors
Majestie  in  New  Spaine,  departed  from
the  towne  of  S.  Michael  in  the  province
of  Culiacan  on  Friday  the  7.  of  March,  in  the  yeere
1539.  having  for  my  companion  Frier  Honoratus,  and
carying  with  me  Stephan  a  Negro,  belonging  to  Andrew
Dorantez,  and  certaine  of  those  Indians  which  the  sayde
lord  Vice-roy  had  made  free,  and  bought  for  this  pur-
pose :  whom  Francis  Vazquez  de  Coronado  governour
of  Nueva  Galicia  delivered  me,  and  with  many  other
Indians  of  Petatlan,  and  of  the  towne  called  Cuchillo,
which  is  some  50.  leagues  from  Petatlan,  who  came  to
the  valley  of  Culiacan,  shewing  themselves  to  bee
exceeding glad, because they were certified by the

125

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1539-

Indians  which  had  bin  set  free,  whom  the  said  governour
had  sent  before  to  advertise  them  of  their  libertie,  that
none  of  them  from  thenceforth  should  be  made  slaves,
and  that  no  man  should  invade  them,  nor  use  them
badly;  signifying  unto  them,  that  the  Emperors  Majesty
had  willed  and  commanded  that  it  should  be  so.  With
the  foresaid  company  I  went  on  my  voyage  untill  I  came
Petatkn  a  to  the  towne  of  Petatlan,  finding  all  the  way  great  inter-
towne.  tainment,  and  provision  of  victuals,  with  roses, flowres,

and  other  such  things,  and  bowers  which  they  made  for
me  of  chalke  and  boughs  platted  together  in  all  places
where  there  were  no  houses.  In  this  towne  of  Petatlan
I  rested  3.  dayes,  because  my  companion  Honoratus  fell
so  sicke,  that  I  was  constrained  to  leave  him  there  behinde.
Then,  according  to  my  said  instruction,  I  followed
my  journey  as  the  holy  Ghost  did  leade  me,  without
any  merit  of  mine,  having  in  my  company  the  said
Stephan  the  Negro  of  Dorantez,  and  certaine  of  the
Indians  which  had  bin  set  at  liberty,  and  many  of  the
people  of  the  countrey,  which  gave  me  great  intertain-
ment  and  welcome  in  all  places  where  I  came,  and
made  mee  bowers  of  trees,  giving  me  such  victuals
as  they  had,  although  they  were  but  small  :  because
(as  they  said)  it  had  not  rained  there  in  3  yeres,
and  because  the  Indians  of  this  countrey  sought  meanes
rather  to  hide  themselves,  then  to  sowe  corne,  for
feare  of  the  Christians  of  the  Towne  of  S.  Michael,
which  were  wont  to  make  in-roades  even  to  that  place,
and  to  warre  upon  them,  and  to  cary  them  away  captives.
In  all  this  way,  which  may  be  about  25  or  30.  leagues
from  that  part  of  Petatlan,  I  saw  nothing  worthy  the
noting,  save  that  there  came  to  seeke  me  certaine  Indians
from  the  Island,  where  Fernando  Cortez  the  Marques
of  the  valley  had  bin,  of  whom  I  was  informed,  that
The  island  of  it  was  an  island,  &  not  firme  land,  as  some  suppose  it
Zatnt  lago.  ^q  ]^q^  They  came  to  ye  firme  land  upon  certaine  rafts
of  wood :  and  from  the  maine  to  the  island  is  but
halfe  a  league  by  sea,  litle  more  or  lesse. Likewise  cer-

126

FRIAR MARCO DE NICA  ad.

1539-
taine  Indians of  another  island  greater then this came  A  great  island,
to  visit  me,  which  island  is  farther  off,  of  whom  I  was  f^'^  3°-  ^^f^^^
informed  that  there  were  30.  other  smal  islands,  which  seemelobethe
were  inhabited,  but  had  smal  store  of  victuals,  saving  2.  new  Islands  of
which  have  Maiz  or  corne  of  the  countrey. These  In-  California
dians  had  about  their  necks  many  great  shels  which  were  ''''^'^f^'^'^pearles.
mother  of  Pearle. I  shewed  them  pearles  which  I  carryed
with  me  for  a  shew,  and  they  told  me  that  there  were  in
the  Islands  great  store  of  them,  and  those  very  great :
howbeit I saw none of  them. I followed  my voyage
through  a  desert  of  4.  dayes  journey,  having  in  my  com-
pany  both the Indians of  the islands, & those of  the
mountaines  which  I  had  passed,  and  at  the  end  of  this
desert  I  found  other  Indians  which  marvelled  to  see  me,
because  they  had  no  knowledge  of  any  Christians,  having
no  traffike  nor  conversation  with  those  Indians  which  I
had passed, in regard of  the great desert which was  ^  desert foure
between  them. These  Indians  interteined  me  exceeding  ^^^^^J°^^'^^y-
courteously,  &  gave  me  great  store  of  victuals,  &  sought
to  touch  my  garments,  and  called  me  Hayota,  which  in
their language signifieth A man come from heaven.
These  Indians  I  advertised  by  my  interpreter,  according  to
my  instructions,  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  God  in
heaven,  &  of  the  Emperor. In  these  countries  &  in  all
places  els  by  all  wayes  and meanes  possible,  I sought  in-  [HI.  367.]
formation  where  any  Countreys  were  of  more Cities  and
people  of  civilitie  and  understanding,  then  those  which  I
had  found  :  and  I  could  heare  no  newes  of  any  such  :
howbeit  they  tolde  mee,  that  foure  or  five  dayes  journey
within  the  Countrey,  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaines,  there
is  a  large  and  mightie  plaine,  wherein they  tolde mee,  This  was  the
that  there  were  many  great  Townes,  and  people  clad  in  !^ -^  ^
Cotton :  and  when  I  shewed  them  certaine  Metals  which  I
carryed with mee,  to learne what  riche  Metals  were  in
the  Lande,  they  tooke  the  minerall  of  Golde  and  tolde
mee,  that  thereof  were  vesselles among the people of
that  plaine,  and  that  they  carryed  certaine  round  greene
stones  hanging at their nostrilles,  and at their eares,

127

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

and  that  they  have  certaine  thinne  plates  of  that  Golde,
wherewith  they  scrape  off  their  sweat,  and  that  the
walks  of  their  Temples  are  covered  therewith,  and  that
they  use  it  in  all  their  houshold  vessels.  And  because
this  Valley  is  distant  from  the  Sea-coast,  and  my  in-
struction was  not  to  leave  the  Coast,  I  determined  to
leave  the  discovery  thereof  untill  my  returne ;  at  which
time  I  might  doe  it  more  commodiously.

Thus  I  travelled  three  dayes  journey  through  Townes

inhabited  by  the  sayde  people,  of  whome  I  was  received

as  I  was  of  those  which  I  had  passed,  and came unto

Facupaatozun  a  Towne  of reasonable bignesse,  called Vacupa,  where

40,  leagues ^hgy  shewed  mee  great  courtesies,  and  gave mee great
TTOfti  the  1jci\  /-.  .^  ~.  ~.

of  California.  Store  of  good  victuals,  because  the  soyle  is  very  fruit-
full,  and  may  bee  watered.  This  Towne  is  fortie
leagues  distant  from  the  Sea.  And  because  I  was  so
farre  from  the  Sea,  it  being  two  dayes  before  Passion
Sunday,  I  determined  to  stay  there  untill  Easter,  to
informe  my  selfe  of  the  Islandes,  whereof  I  sayde
before  that  I  had  information.  And  so  I  sent  certaine
Indians  to  the  Sea  by  three  severall  wayes,  whom  I
commaunded  to  bring  mee  some  Indians  of  the  Sea-
coast  and  of  some  of  those  Islandes,  that  I  might
receive  information  of  them  :  and  I  sent  Stephan
Dorantez  the  Negro  another  way,  whom  I  commaunded
to  goe  directly  Northward  fiftie  or  threescore  leagues,
to  see  if  by  that  way  hee  might  learne  any  newes  of
any  notable  thing  which  wee  sought  to  discover,  and  I
agreed  with  him,  that  if  hee  found  any  knowledge  of
any  peopled  and  riche  Countrey  which  were  of  great
importance,  that  hee  should  goe  no  further,  but  should
returne  in  person,  or  should  sende  mee  certaine  Indians
with  that  token  which  wee  were  agreed  upon,  to  wit,
that  if  it  were  but  a  meane  thing,  hee  should  sende
mee  a  white  Crosse  of  one  handfuU  long  ;  and  if  it
were  any  great  matter,  one  of  two  handfuls  long  ;  and
if  it  were  a  Countrey  greater  and  better  then  Nueva
Espanna,  hee  should  send  mee  a  great  crosse. So the

128

FRIAR MARCO DE NICA  ad

1539-

sayde Stephan departed from mee on Passion-sunday
after  dinner  :  and  within  foure  dayes  after  the messen-
gers of  Stephan  returned  unto  me  with  a  great Crosse
as high as a  man, and they brought me word from
Stephan,  that  I  should  foorthwith  come  away  after  him,
for  hee  had  found  people which gave him information
of  a  very  mighty  Province, and  that he had certaine
Indians in his company, which had bene in the sayd
Province, and that he had sent me one of the said
Indians. This  Indian  told  me,  that  it  was  thirtie  dayes  P^°^  ^^^«/^
journey  from  the  Towne  where Stephan was,  unto the ° ^Jlts^^^
first  Citie  of  the  sayde  Province,  which  is  called  Cevola.  journey.
Hee  affirmed  also  that  there  are  seven  great  Cities  in  this
Province,  all under one Lord,  the houses  whereof  are
made  of  Lyme  and  Stone,  and  are  very  great,  and  the
least  of  them  with  one  lofte  above  head,  and  some  of  two
and  of  three  loftes,  and  the  house  of  the  Lorde  of  the
Province  of  foure,  and  that  all  of  them  joyne  one  unto
the other  in  good order,  and  that  in  the  gates  of  the
principall houses there are many  Turques-stones cun-
ningly wrought,  whereof  hee  sayth  they  have  there  great
plentie  : also  that  the  people  of  this  Citie  goe  very  well
apparelled : and that  beyond this there are other Pro-
vinces, all  which  (hee  sayth)  are  much  greater  then  these
seven  cities. I  gave  credite  to  his  speach,  because  I  found
him  to  bee  a  man  of  good  understanding  :  but  I  deferred
my  departure  to  follow  Stephan  Dorantes,  both  because  I
thought  hee  would stay  for  mee,  and  also  to  attend  the
returne  of  my  messengers  which  I  had  sent  unto  the  Sea,
who  returned  unto  me  upon  Easter  day,  bringing  with
them  certaine  inhabitants  of  the  Sea-coast,  and  of  two  of
the  Islands. Of  whom  I  understoode,  that  the  Islandes
above  mentioned  were  scarce  of  victuals,  as  I  had  learned
before,  and  that  they  are  inhabited  by  people,  which  weare  Great  pearks
shelles  of  Pearles  upon  their  foreheads,  and  they  say  that  ^^d  much  gold
they have  great Pearles, and much Golde. They in-  "!,  ^^f  ^^^"  °f
formed  mee  of  foure  and  thirtie  Islandes,  lying  one  neere  ^^^^-^^  ar-e\d,.
unto  another  :  they  say  that  the  people  on  the  Sea-coast  in  number.
IX  129  I

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

have  small  store  of  victuals,  as  also  those  of  the  Islandes,
and  that  they  traffique  one  with  the  other  upon  raftes.
This  coast  stretcheth  Northward  as  is  to  bee  seene.
These  Indians  of  the  Coast  brought  me  certaine  Targets
made  of  Cow-hydes  very  well  dressed,  which  were  so
large,  that  they  covered  them  from  the  head  to  the  very
foote,  with  a  hole  in  the  toppe  of  the  same  to  looke  out
before :  they  are  so  strong,  that  a  Crossebow  (as  I  sup-
pose) will  not  pierce  them.

[III.  368.]  Chap. 2.

He  hath  new  information  of  the  seven  Cities  by  cer-
taine Indians  called  Pintados,  and  of  three  other
kingdomes  called  Marata,  Acus,  and  Totonteac,  being
Countreys  very  rich  in  Turqueses  and  Hides  of
cattel.  Following  his  voyage  through  those  coun-
tries, he  taketh  possession  thereof  for  the  Emperors
Majestie,  and  of  the  Indians  is  much  honoured  and
served with  victuals.

THe  same  day  came  three  Indians  of  those  which
I  called  Pintados,  because  I  saw  their  faces,
breasts  and  armes  painted.  These  dwel  farther  up
into  the  countrey  towards  the  East,  and  some  of  them
border  upon  the  seven  cities,  which  sayd  they  came  to
see  mee,  because  they  had  heard  of  me  :  and  among
other  things,  they  gave  me  information  of  the  seven
cities,  and  of  the  other  Provinces,  which  the  Indian
that  Stephan  sent  me  had  tolde  mee  of,  almost  in  the
very  same  maner  that  Stephan  had  sent  mee  worde  ;
and  so  I  sent  backe  the  people  of  the  sea-coast :  and
two  Indians  of  the  Islandes  sayde  they  would  goe  with
mee  seven  or  eight  dayes.

So  with  these  and  with  the  three  Pintados  above
mentioned,  I  departed  from  Vacupa  upon  Easter  tuesday,
the  same  way  that  Stephan  went,  from  whom  I  received
new  messengers  with  a  Crosse  of  the  bignesse  of  the
first  which he sent me  : which hastened mee forward.

FRIAR MARCO DE NICA  ad.

"  1539-

and  assured  me  that  the  land  which  I  sought  for,  was
the  greatest  and  best  countrey  in  all  those  partes.  The
sayd  messengers  told  mee  particularly  without  fayling
in  any  one  poynt,  all  that  which  the  first  messenger
had  tolde  mee,  and  much  more,  and  gave  mee  more
plaine  information  thereof  So  I  travelled  that  day
being  Easter  tuesday,  and  two  dayes  more,  the  very
same  way  that  Stephan  had  gone  :  at  the  end  of  which
3  dayes  they  tolde  mee,  that  from  that  place  a  man
might  travell  in  thirtie  dayes  to  the  citie  of  Cevola,
which  is  the  first  of  the  seven.  Neither  did  one  onely
tell  me  thus  much,  but  very  many  ;  who  tolde  me  very
particularly  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  houses,  and  of  the
fashion  of  them,  as  the  first  messengers  had  informed
me.  Also  they  told  me,  that  besides  these  seven  Cities,
there  are  3.  other  kingdomes  which  are  called  Marata,
Acus,  and  Totonteac.  I  enquired  of  them  wherefore'
they  travelled  so  farre  from  their  houses  ^  They  said
that  they  went  for  Turqueses,  and  Hides  of  kine,  and
other  things ;  and  that  of  all  these  there  was  great
abundance  in  this  Countrey.  Likewise  1  enquired  how,
and  by  what  meanes  they  obteined  these  things  ?  They
tolde  me,  by  their  service,  and  by  the  sweat  of  their
browes,  and  that  thev  went  unto  the  first  citie  of  the
Province  which  is  called  Cevola,  and  that  they  served
them  in  tilling  their  ground,  and  in  other  businesses,  and
that  they  give  them  Hydes  of  oxen,  which  they  have  in
those  places,  and  turqueses  for  their  service,  and  that  the
people  of  this  city  weare  very  fine  and  excellent  turqueses
hanging  at  their  eares  and  at  their  nostrils.  They  say  also,
that  of  these  turqueses  they  make  fine  workes  upon  the
principall  gates  of  the  houses  of  this  citie.  They  tolde
mee,  that  the  apparell  which  the  inhabitants  of  Cevola
weare,  is  a  gowne  of  cotten  downe  to  the  foote,  with  a
button  at  the  necke,  and  a  long  string  hanging  downe
at  the  same,  and  that  the  sleeves  of  these  gownes  are
as  broad  beneath  as  above.  They  say,  they  gyrd  them-
selves with gyrdles of  turqueses, and that over  these

131

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

coates  some  weare  good  apparel,  others  hides  of  kine
very  well  dressed,  which  they  take  to  bee  the  best
apparell  of  that  countrey,  whereof  they  have  there  great
quantitie.  Likewise  the  women  goe  apparelled,  and
covered  downe  to  the  foote.  These  Indians  gave  me
very  good  intertainment,  and  curiously  enquired  the  day
of  my  departure  from  Vacupa,  that  at  my  returne  they
might  provide  me  of  foode  and  lodging.  They  brought
certaine  sicke  folkes  before  mee,  that  I  might  heale  them,
and  sought  to  touch  my  apparell,  and  gave  mee  certaine
Cow-hydes  so  well  trimmed  and  dressed,  that  by  them  a
man  might  conjecture  that  they  were  wrought  by  civile
people,  and  all  of  them  affirmed,  ithat  they  came  from
Cevola.

The next day I followed my  journey, and carrying
Another  ^vith  mee  the  Pintados,  I  came  to  another  Village  where  I

village.  ^g^g  ^gj2  received  by  the  people  of  the  same  : who  like-

wise sought  to  touch  my  garments,  and  gave  mee  as
particular  knowledge  of  the  Lande  aforesayde,  as  I  had
received  of  those  which  mette  mee  before  :  and  also  tolde
mee,  that  from  that  place  certaine  people  were  gone  with
Stephan  Dorantez  foure  or  five  dayes  journey.  And
here  I  found  a  great  crosse,  which  Stephan  had  left  me
for  a  signe,  that  the  newes  of  the  good  Countrey  in-
creased, and  left  worde,  that  with  all  haste  they  should
sende  mee  away,  and  that  hee  would  stay  for  mee  at  the
ende  of  the  first  Desert  that  he  mette  with.  Heere  I  set
up  two  Crosses,  and  tooke  possession  according  to  mine
instruction,  because  that  the  Countrey  seemed  better  unto
mee  then  that  which  I  had  passed,  and  that  I  thought  it
meete  to  make  an  acte  of  possession  as  farre  as  that
place.
[III.  369.]  In  this  maner  I  travailed  five  dayes,  alwayes finding

inhabited  places  with  great  hospitalitie  and  intertainments,
and  many  Turqueses,  and  Oxe-hides,  and  the  like  report
concerning  the  countrey.  Heere  I  understood,  that  after
two  dayes  journey  I  should  finde  a  desert  where  there  is
no  foode  ; but  that  there  were certaine  gone  before  to

132

FKIAR MARCO DE NICA  a.d.

1539-
build mee lodgings, and to carrie foode for mee  :
whereupon  I  hastened  my  way,  hoping  to  finde  Stephan
at  the  ende  thereof,  because  in  that  place  hee had  left
worde  that  hee  would  stay  for  mee. Before  I  came  to
the desert, I mette with a very  pleasant Towne, by  A  pleasant
reason of  great store of  waters conveighed thither to  ^^  ^^^'
water the same. Heere 1 mette with many people
both men and women clothed in Cotton, and some
covered  with Oxe-hydes,  which generally  they  take for
better  apparell  then  that of  cotton. All  the people of
this  Village  goe  in  Caconados,  that  is  to  say,  with  Tur-
queses hanging at their nostrilles and eares  : which
Turqueses  they  call  Cacona. Amongst  others,  the  Lord
of  this  Village  came  unto  me,  and  two  of  his  brethren
very well apparelled in Cotton, who also were in
Caconados,  each  of  them  having  his  collar  of  Turqueses
about his necke  : and they presented unto mee  many
wilde  beastes,  as  Conies,  Quailes,  Maiz,  nuttes  of  Pine
trees,  and  all  in  great  abundance,  and  offered  mee  many
Turqueses, and dressed Oxe-hydes, and very fayre
vessels to drinke in, and other things  : whereof I
would receive  no whit. And having my  garment of
gray  cloth,  which  in  Spaine  is  called  9arago5a,  the  Lord
of this Village, and the other Lidians touched my
gowne  with their  handes,  and tolde mee,  that of  such
Cloth  there  was  great  store  in Totonteac,  and  that  the  Store  of  zvool-
people of  that Countrey wore the same. Whereat  I  ^'iffin'''^
laughed, and sayde that  it was nothing else but such  j^^^g^fg^c.
apparell of  Cotton  as they wore. And they replyed  :
We  would  have  thee  thinke  that  we  understand,  that  that
apparell  which thou  wearest,  and that  which we weare
are  of  divers sortes. Understand thou,  that  in Cevola
all  the  houses  are  full  of  that  apparell  which  we  weare,
but in Totonteac there are certaine litle beasts, from
whom  they  take  that  thing  wherewith such apparell  as
thou wearest,  is made. I  prayed  them  to  informe  mee
more  playnely  of  this  matter. And  they  tolde mee  that
the sayde beastes were  about the bignesse of  the  two

133

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

braches  or  spaniels  which  Stephan  caryed  with  him,  and
they  say  that  there  is  great  store  of  that  cattell  in
Totonteac.

Chap.  3.

He  entreth  into  a  desert,  and  the  Indians  suffer  him  to
want  nothing  necessary.  Following  his  Voyage,  he
commeth  into  a  fertile  valley,  and  hath  certaine  know-
ledge given  him  (as  he  had  before)  of  the  state  of
Cevola  and  of  Totonteac ;  and  that  the  coast  of  the
sea  in  35,  degrees  trendeth  much  to  the  Westward  :
and  also  of  the  kingdomes  of  Marata  and  Acus.

A  desert  of ^  \^  He  next  day  I  entred  into  the  Desert,  and  where  I

pure  dayes J[ ^^g ^^ dine, I found bowers made, and victuals

■^'  in abundance by  a  rivers side  : and at night I found

bowers  and  victuals  in  like  sort,  and  after  that  maner  I

found  for  4.  dayes  travell  : all  which  time  the  wildernesse

continueth.

J  very  popu- At  the  ende  of  these  foure  dayes,  I  entred  into  a  valley

lous  valley. ^^^^ ^^jj inhabited with people. At the first Village

there  mette  me  many  men  and  women  with  victuals,  and

all  of  them  had  Turqueses  hanging  at  their  nostrils  and

eares,  and  some  had  collars  of  turqueses  like  those  which

the  Lord  of  the  Village  before  I  came  to  the  Desert,  and

his  two  brethren  wore  : saving  that  they  ware  them but

single  about  their  neckes,  and  these  people  weare  them

Collars  of  tur-  three  or  foure  times  double,  and  goe  in  good  apparell,

queses  two  or ^^^^  skinnes  of  Oxen  :  and  the  women  weare  of  the  sayd
tfii'Bc  timss  ^  ,  J

double.  Turqueses  at  their  nostrils  and  eares,  and  very  good  wast-

coats  and  other  garments.  Heere  there  was  as  great
knowledge  of  Cevola,  as  in  Nueva  Espanna  of  Temis-
titan,  and  in  Peru  of  Cuzco:  and  they  tolde  us  particularly
the  maner  of  their  houses,  lodgings,  streetes  and  market-
places, as  men  that  had  bene  oftentimes  there,  and  as
those  which  were  furnished  from  thence  with  things
necessary  for  the  service  of  their  housholde,  as  those
also  had  done,  which  I  already  had  passed.  I  tolde
them it was impossible that the houses should be

134

FRIAR MARCO DE NI^A  ad.

1539-
made  in  such  sort  as  they  informed  mee,  and  they  for

my better understanding tooke earth or ashes, and

powred water thereupon, and shewed me how they

layd  stones  upon it,  and how the buylding  grewe up,

as they continued laying stones thereon, untill it

mounted  aloft. I  asked  them  whether  the  men  of  that

Countrey  had wings to mount up unto those  loftes  :

whereat  they  laughed,  and  shewed  mee  a Ladder  in as

good  sort  as  I  my  selfe  was  able  to  describe  it. Then

they  tooke  a Staffe and helde it over their heads,  and

said that  the  lofts were so high one above another.

Likewise  heere  I  had  information  of  the  woollen cloth  [III.  370.]

of  Totonteac,  where they  say  are houses  like those of

Cevola,  and  better  and  more  in  number,  and  that  it  is

a  great  Province,  and  hath  no  governour.

Here  I  understood  that  the  coast  of  the  sea trended
much  toward  the West  : for unto  the entrance  of  this
first desert which I passed, the coast still stretched
Northward  :  and  because  the  trending  of  the  coast  is  a  Thisgradu-
thing  of  great  importance,  I  was  desirous  to  knowe  and  ^''^/"^ "  ^^^'
see it: and I saw plainely, that in 35. degrees the  ^^Jg^/at
coast stretcheth to the West, whereat I rejoyced no  the  least.
lesse, then of  the  good newes  within land, and so I
returned  backe  to  proceede  on  my  journey.

Through  the  foresayd  valley  I  travailed  five  dayes
journey,  which  is  inhabited  with  goodly  people,  and  so
aboundeth  with  victuals,  that  it  sufiiceth  to  feede  above
three  thousand  horsemen  :  it  is  all  well  watered  and  like  a
garden  :  the  burroughs  and  townes  are  halfe  and  a
quarter  of  a  league  long,  and  in  all  these  villages,  I
found  very  ample  report  of  Cevola,  whereof  they  made
such  particular  relation  unto  me,  as  people  which  goe
yeerely  thither  to  earne  their  living.  Here  I  found  a
man  borne  in  Cevola,  who  told  me  that  he  came
thither,  having  escaped  from  the  governour  or  Lieu-
tenant of  the  towne  ;  for  the  Lord  of  these  seven
Cities  liveth  and  abideth  in  one  of  those  townes  called
Abacus, and in the rest he appoynteth lieu-tenants  Ahacm.

135

A.D.

1539-

Marata  lieth
toward  the
Southeast.

Totonteac
lyeth  West.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

under  him.  This  townesman  of  Cevola  is  a  white  man
of  a  good  complexion,  somewhat  well  in  yeeres,  and  of
farre  greater  capacitie  then  the  inhabitants  of  this  valley,
or  then  those  which  I  had  left  behind  me.  Hee  sayde
that  hee  would  goe  with  mee,  that  I  might  begge  his
pardon  :  and  of  him  I  learned  many  particulars  :  he
tolde  me  that  Cevola  was  a  great  Citie,  inhabited  with
great  store  of  people,  and  having  many  Streetes  and
Market-places  :  and  that  in  some  partes  of  this  Citie  there
are  certaine  very  great  houses  of  five  stories  high,  wherein
the  chiefe  of  the  Citie  assemble  themselves  at  certaine
dayes  of  the  yeere.  He  sayeth  that  the  houses  are  of
Lyme  and  Stone,  according  as  others  had  tolde  mee  be-
fore, and  that  the  gates,  and  small  pillars  of  the  principall
houses  are  of  Turqueses,  and  all  the  vessels  wherein  they
are  served,  and  the  other  ornaments  of  their  houses  were
of  golde  :  and  that  the  other  sixe  Cities  are  built  like
unto  this,  whereof  some  are  bigger  :  and  that  Abacus  is
the  chiefest  of  them.  Hee  sayth  that  toward  the  South-
east there  is  a  kingdome  called  Marata,  and  that  there  were
woont  to  be  many,  and  those  great  Cities,  which  were  all
built  of  houses  of  Stone,  with  divers  lofts  ;  and  that  these
have  and  doe  wage  warre  with  the  Lord  of  the  seven
cities,  through  which  warre  this  kingdome  of  Marata  is
for  the  most  part  wasted,  although  it  yet  continueth  and
mainteineth  warre  against  the other.

Likewise  he  saith,  that  the  kingdome  called  Totanteac
lyeth  toward  the  West,  which  he  saith  is  a  very  mightie
Province,  replenished  with  infinite  store  of  people  and
riches  :  and  that  in  the  sayde  Kingdome  they  weare
woollen  cloth  like  that  which  I  weare,  and  other  finer
sorts  of  woollen  cloth  made  of  the  fleeces  of  those  beastes
which  they  described  before  unto  me  :  and  that  they  are  a
very  civile  people.  Moreover  hee  tolde  me,  that  there
is  another  great  Province  and  kingdome  called  Acus  ;  for
there  is  Acus,  and  Abacus  with  an  aspiration,  which  is  the
principall  of  the  seven  cities  :  and  Acus  without  an  aspira-
tion is  a  kingdome  and  Province  of  it  selfe. He  told  me

136

FRIAR MARCO DE NigA  ad.

1539-
also,  that  the  apparel  which  they  weare  in  Cevola  is  after
the  same  maner  as  they  before  had  certified  me,  and  that
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Citie  lie  upon  beddes  raysed  a
good  height  from  the  ground,-  with  quilts  and  canopies
over  them,  which  cover  the  sayde  Beds  :  and  hee  tolde
mee  that  he  would  goe  with  me  to  Cevola  and  farther
also,  if  I  would  take  him  with  me.  The  like  relation  was
given  unto  me  in  this  towne  by  many  others,  but  not  so
particularly.  I  travelled  three  dayes  journey  through  this
valley  :  the  inhabitants  whereof  made  mee  exceeding  great
cheere  and  intertainement.  In  this  valley  I  saw  above  a
thousand  Oxe-hides  most  excellently  trimmed  and  dressed.
And  here  also  I  saw  farre  greater  store  of  Turqueses  and
chaines  made  thereof,  then  in  all  places  which  I  had
passed  ;  and  they  say,  that  all  commeth  from  the  city  of
Cevola,  whereof  they  have  great  knowledge,  as  also  of
the  kingdome  of  Marata,  and  of  the  kingdomes  of  Acus
and  Totonteac.

Chap.  4.

Of  a  very  great  beast  with  one  home  upon  his  fore-
head ;  and  of  the  courtesies  which  the  Indians
shewed  Frier  Marcus  of  Ni^a,  in  his  Voyage.
Also  how  cruelly  Stephan  Dorantez  and  his  com-
panions were  used  upon  their  arrivall  at  Cevola,  by
the  Lorde  thereof.

HEre  they  shewed  me  an  hide  halfe  as  bigge  againe  A  mlghtie
as  the  hide  of  a  great oxe,  and  tolde me  that  it  ^^^^^^^^^
was  the  skin  of  a  beast  which  had  but  one  home  upon
his forehead, & that this home bendeth toward his  [III.  371.]
breast, and that out of  the same  goeth a point right
forward,  wherein  he  hath  so  great  strength,  that  it  will
breake  any  thing  how  strong  so  ever  it  be,  if  he  runne
against  it,  and  that  there  are  great  store  of  these  beasts
in that Countrey. The  colour of  the hide is of  the
colour  of  a  great Goat-skin, and the  haire is a finger
thicke. Here I had messengers from Stephan which
brought me  word, that by this time  he  was come to

137

A.D.

1539-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  farthest  part  of  the  desert,  and  that  he  was  very
joyfullj  because  the  farther  he  went,  the  more  perfect
knowledge  he  had  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  countrey,
and  sent  me  word,  that  since  his  departure  from  me,
hee  never  had  found  the  Indians  in  any  lye  ;  for  even
unto  that  very  place  he  had  found  al  in  such  maner
as  they  had  informed  him,  &  hoped  that  he  should
find  the  like  at  his  arrivall  in  the  valley  which  he  was
going  unto,  as  he  had  found  in  the  villages  before
passed.  I  set  up  crosses,  and  used  those  acts  and
ceremonies,  which  were  to  be  done  according  to  my
instructions.  The  inhabitants  requested  me  to  stay
here  three  or  foure  daies,  because  that  from  this  place
there  were  foure  dayes  journey  unto  the  desert,  and
from  the  first  entrance  into  the  same  desert  unto  the
Ftfteene  daies  citie  of  Cevola  are  1 5  great  dayes  journey  more  ;  also
that  they  would  provide  victuals  for  me  and  other
necessaries  for  that  voyage.  Likewise  they  told  me,
that  with  Stephan  the  Negro  were  gone  above  300
men  to  beare  him  company,  and  to  carry  victuals  after
him,  and  that  in  like  sort  many  of  them  would  go
with  me  to  serve  me,  because  they  hoped  to  returne
home  rich.  I  thanked  them,  and  willed  them  to  set
things  in  order  with  speede,  and  so  I  rested  there
three  dayes,  wherein  I  alwayes  informed  my  selfe  of
Cevola,  and  of  as  many  other  things  as  I  could  learne,
and  called  many  Indians  unto  mee,  and  examined  them
severally,  and  all  of  them  agreed  in  one  tale,  and  told  me
of  the  great  multitude  of  people,  and  of  the  order  of  the
streetes,  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  houses,  and  of  the
strength  of  the  gates,  agreeing  altogether  with  that  which
the  rest  before  had  told  me.  After  three  dayes  many
assembled  themselves  to  go  with  me,  30  of  the  prin-
cipal of  whom  I  tooke,  being  very  well  apparelled,  and
with  chaines  of  turqueses,  which  some  of  them  weare
five  or  sixe  times  double,  and  other  people  to  cary
things  necessary  for  them  and  me,  and  so  set  forward
on my  voyage.

journey  from
the  end  of  the
desert  to
Cevola  or
Cwola.

FRIAR MARCO DE NigA  ad.

1539-
Thus  I  entred  into  the  second  desert  on  the  9  of  May,  The  second  de-
and  travelled  the  first  day  by  a  very  broad  and  beaten  ^^'-^  ^f^^^  the

a  ^^  ^  1  1 T J-  9-  of  May.

way,  &  we  came  to  diner  unto  a  water,  where  the  Indians

had  made  provision  for  me  : and  at  night  we  came  to

another  water,  where  I  found  a house  which  they  had

fully  made  up  for  me,  and  another  house stood made

where  Stephan  lodged  when  he  passed  that  way,  and  many

old  cottages  and  many  signes  of  fire  which  the  people  had

made  that  travelled  to  Cevola  by  this  way. In  this  sort  I

travelled  12 dayes  journey  being  alway  well  provided  of  Twelve  dayes

victuals, of  wild beasts. Hares, and Partridges of  the  J°"^"^y-

same colour and tast with those of Spaine although

they  are  not  so  big,  for  they  be  somewhat  lesse.

Here  met  us  an  Indian  the  sonne  of  one  of  the
chiefe  men  that  accompanied  mee,  which  had  gone
before  with  Stephan,  who  came  in  a  great  fright,  hav-
ing his  face  and  body  all  covered  with  sweat,  and
shewing  exceeding  sadnesse  in  his  countenance  ;  and  he
told  mee  that  a  dayes  journey  before  Stephan  came  to
Cevola  he  sent  his  great  Mace  made  of  a  gourd  by
his  messengers,  as  he  was  alwayes  woont  to  send  them
before  him,  that  hee  might  knowe  in  what  sort  hee
came  unto  them,  which  gourd  had  a  string  of  belles
upon  it,  and  two  feathers  one  white  and  another  red,
in  token  that  he  demanded  safe  conduct,  and  that  he
came  peaceably.  And  when  they  came  to  Cevola  before
the  Magistrate,  which  the  Lord  of  the  citie  had  placed
there  for  his  Lieutenant,  they  delivered  him  the  sayde
great  gourd,  who  tooke  the  same  in  his  hands,  and
after  he  had  spyed  the  belles,  in  a  great  rage  and  fury
hee  cast  it  to  the  ground,  and  willed  the  messengers
to  get  them  packing  with  speed,  for  he  knew  well
ynough  what  people  they  were,  and  that  they  should
will  them  in  no  case  to  enter  into  the  citie,  for  if  they
did  hee  would  put  them  aU  to  death.  The  messengers
returned  and  tolde  Stephan  how  things  had  passed,  who
answered  them,  that  it  made  no  great  matter,  and
would needes proceed  on  his  voyage  till  he came to

139

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

the  citie  of  Cevola  :  where  he  found  men  that  would
not  let  him  enter  into  the  towne,  but  shut  him  into  a
great  house  which  stoode  without  the  citie,  and
straightway  tooke  all  things  from  him  which  hee  caried
to  truck  and  barter  with  them,  and  certaine  turqueses,
and  other  things  which  he  had  received  of  the  Indians
by  the  way,  and  they  kept  him  there  all  that  night
without  giving  him  meate  or  drinke,  and  the  next  day
in  the  morning  this  Indian  was  a  thirst,  and  went  out
of  the  house  to  drinke  at  a  river  that  was  neere  at
hand,  and  within  a  little  while  after  he  saw  Stephan
running  away,  and  the  people  followed  him,  and  slew
certaine  of  the  Indians  which  went  in  his  company.
And  when  this  Indian  saw  these  things,  he  hid  him-
selfe  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  afterward  crossed
the  high  way  of  the  desert.  The  Indians  that  went
with  me  hearing  these  newes  began  incontinently  to
lament,  and  I  thought  these  heavie  and  bad  newes  would
cost  mee  my  life,  neither  did  I  feare  so  much  the  losse  of
mine  owne  life,  as  that  I  should  not  bee  able  to  returne
[III.  372.]  to  give  information  of  the  greatnesse  of  that  Countrey,
where  our  Lord  God  might  be  glorified  :  and  streightway
I  cut  the  cords  of  my  budgets  which  I  carried  with  me
ful  of  merchandise  for  traffique,  which  I  would  not  doe
till  then,  nor  give  any  thing  to  any  man,  and  began  to
divide  all  that  I  carried  with  mee  among  the  principall
men,  willing  them  not  to  be  afraid,  but  to  goe  forward
with  me,  and  so  they  did.  And  going  on  our  way,
within  a  dayes  journey  of  Cevola  wee  met  two  other
Indians  of  those  which  went  with  Stephan,  which  were
bloody  and  wounded  in  many  places  :  and  assoone  as  they
came  to  us,  they  which  were  with  mee  began  to  make
great  lamentation.  These  wounded  Indians  I  asked  for
Stephan,  and  they  agreeing  in  all  poynts  with  the  first
Indian  sayd,  that  after  they  had  put  him  into  the  foresayd
great  house  without  giving  him  meat  or  drinke  all  that
day  and  all  that  night,  they  tooke  from  Stephan  all  the
things  which  hee  carried  with  him. The  next  day  when

140

FRIAR MARCO DE NIQA  ad.

1539-
the  Sunne  was  a  lance  high,  Stephan  went  out  of  the
house,  and  some  of  the  chiefe  men  with  him,  and
suddenly  came  store  of  people  from  the  citie,  whom
assoone  as  hee  sawe  he  began  to  run  away  and  we  like-
wise, and  foorthwith  they  shot  at  us  and  wounded  us,
and  certaine  dead  men  fell  upon  us,  and  so  we  lay  till
night  and  durst  not  stirre,  and  we  heard  great  rumours  in
the  citie,  and  saw  many  men  and  women  keeping  watch
and  ward  upon  the  walles  thereof,  and  after  this  we
could  not  see  Stephan  any  more,  and  wee  thinke  they
have  shot  him  to  death,  as  they  have  done  all  the  rest
which  went  with  him,  so  that  none  are  escaped  but
we  onely.

Chap. 5.

The  situation  and  greatnesse  of  the  Citie  of  Cevola,
and  how  frier  Marcus  tooke  possession  thereof  and
of  other  provinces,  calling  the  same.  The  new
kingdome  of  S.  Francis,  and  how  after  his  depar-
ture from  thence  being  preserved  by  God  in  so
dangerous  a  voyage,  he  arrived  at  Compostella  in
Nueva  Galicia.

HAving  considered  the  former  report  of  the  Indians,
and  the  evill  meanes  which  I  had  to  prosecute
my  voyage  as  1  desired,  I  thought  it  not  good  wilfully
to  loose  my  life  as  Stephan  did  :  and  so  I  told  them,
that  God  would  punish  those  of  Cevola,  and  that  the
Viceroy  when  he  should  understand  what  had  happened,
would  send  many  Christians  to  chastise  them  :  but
they  would  not  beleeve  me,  for  they  sayde  that  no
man  was  able  to  withstand  the  power  of  Cevola.  And
herewithall  I  left  them,  and  went  aside  two  or  three
stones  cast,  and  when  I  returned  I  found  an  Indian  of
mine  which  I  had  brought  from  Mexico  called  Marcus,
who  wept  and  sayde  unto  me  :  Father,  these  men  have
consulted  to  kill  us,  for  they  say,  that  through  your  and
Stephans  meanes  their  fathers  are  slaine,  and  that
neither  man  nor  woman  of  them  shall  remaine  unslaine.

141

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-  ,  ■

Then  againe  I  devided  among  them  certaine  other
things  which  I  had,  to  appease  them,  whereupon  they
were  somewhat  pacified,  albeit  they  still  shewed  great
griefe  for  the  people  which  were  slaine.  I  requested
some  of  them  to  goe  to  Cevola,  to  see  if  any  other
Indian  were  escaped,  with  intent  that  they  might  learne
some  newes  of  Stephan  ;  which  I  could  not  obtaine  at
their  handes.  When  I  saw  this,  I  sayd  unto  them,  that
I  purposed  to  see  the  citie  of  Cevola,  whatsoever  came
of  it.  They  sayde  that  none  of  them  would  goe  with
me.  At  the  last  when  they  sawe  mee  resolute,  two  of
the  chiefe  of  them  sayde  they  would  goe  with  me  ;  with
whome  and  with  mine  Indians  and  interpreters  I  followed
my  way,  till  I  came  within  sight  of  Cevola,  which  is
situate  on  a  plaine  at  the  foote  of  a  round  hill,  and
maketh  shew  to  bee  a  faire  citie,  and  is  better  seated  then
any  that  I  have  seene  in  these  partes.  The  houses  are
builded  in  order,  according  as  the  Indians  told  me,  all
made  of  stone  with  divers  stories,  and  flatte  roofes,  as
farre  as  I  could  discerne  from  a  mountaine,  whither  I
ascended  to  viewe  the  citie.  The  people  are  somewhat
white,  they  weare  apparell,  and  lie  in  beds,  their  weapons
are  bowes,  they  have  Emralds  and  other  jewels,  although
they  esteeme  none  so  much  as  turqueses,  wherewith  they
adorne  the  walles  of  the  porches  of  their  houses,  and  their
apparell  and  vessels,  and  they  use  them  in  stead  of  money
through  all  the  Countrey.  Their  apparell  is  of  cotton
and  of  oxe  hides,  and  this  is  their  most  commendable  and
honourable  apparell.  They  use  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,
for  they  have  no  other  mettall,  whereof  there  is  greater  use
and  more  abundance  then  in  Peru,  and  they  buy  the
Most  rich  same  for  turqueses  in  the  province  of  the  Pintados,  where
mines  of  gold  there  are  sayd  to  be  mines  of  great  abundance.  Of  other
the  province  of  ki^gdomes  I  could  not  obtaine  so  particular  instruction.
the  Pintados.  Divers  times  I  was  tempted  to  goe  thither,  because  I
knewe  I  could  but  hazard  my  life,  and  that  I  had  offered
unto  God  the  first  day  that  I  began  my  journey  :  in  the
ende  I  began  to  bee  afraid,  considering  in  what  danger  I

142

FRIAR MARCO DE NigA  a.d.

1539-
should  put  my  selfe,  and  that  if  I  should  dye,  the  know-
ledge of  this  Countrey  should  be  lost,  which  in  my
judgement  is  the  greatest  and  the  best  that  hitherto  hath
beene  discovered  :  and  when  I  tolde  the  chief  men,  what
a  goodly  citie  Cevola  seemed  unto  mee,  they  answered  me  [III.  373.]
that  it  was  the  least  of  the  seven  cities,  and  that  Toton-  Totonteac  the

teac  is  the  greatest  and  best  of  them  all,  because  it  hath  so  SX^^^^^* ^^

1  1  111-  J r 1  most  populous

many  houses  and  people,  that  there  is  no  ende  or  them,  province.

Having  scene  the  disposition  and  situation  of  the  place,
I  thought  good  to  name  that  Countrey  El  Nuevo
reyno  de  san  Francisco  :  in  which  place  I  made  a  great
heape  of  stones  by  the  helpe  of  the  Indians,  and  on
the  toppe  thereof  I  set  up  a  small  slender  crosse  be-
cause I  wanted  meanes  to  make  a  greater,  and  sayd
that  I  set  up  that  crosse  and  heape  in  the  name  of  the
most  honourable  Lord  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo^a
Viceroy  and  Captaine  generall  of  Nueva  Espanna,  for
the  Emperour  our  Lord,  in  token  of  possession,  accord-
ing to  mine  instruction.  Which  possession  I  sayd  that
I  tooke  in  that  place  of  all  the  seven  cities,  &  of  the
kingdomes  of  Totonteac,  of  Acus,  and  of  Marata.
Thus  I  returned  with  much  more  feare  then  victuals,  He  returneth.
and  went  untill  I  found  the  people  which  I  had  left
behind  mee,  with  all  the  speede  that  I  could  make,
whome  I  overtooke  in  two  dayes  travell,  and  went  in
their  company  till  I  had  passed  the  desert,  where  I  was  A  desert.
not  made  so  much  of  as  before  :  for  both  men  and
women  made  great  lamentation  for  the  people  which
were  slaine  at  Cevola,  and  with  feare  I  hastened  from
the  people  of  this  valley,  and  travelled  tenne  leagues  A  valley.
the  first  day,  and  so  I  went  daily  eight  or  ten  leagues,
without  staying  untill  I  had  passed  the  second  desert.  -^  second
And  though  I  were  in  feare,  yet  I  determined  to  go  to  '^'^■f^^^-
the  great  plaine,  wherof  I  said  before,  that  I  had  in-
formation, being  situate  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaines,
and  in  that  place  I  understoode,  that  this  plaine  is  in-
habited for  many  dayes  journey  toward  the  East,  but
I  durst  not enter into it,  considering,  that if  hereafter

143

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

wee  shoulde  inhabite  this  other  Countrey  of  the  seven
cities,  and  the  kingdomes  before  mentioned,  that  then  I
might  better  discover  the  same,  without  putting  my  selfe
in  hazard,  and  leave  it  for  this  time,  that  I  might  give
relation  of  the  things  which  I  had  now  scene.  At  the
entrance  of  this  plaine  1  sawe  but  seven  Townes  onely  of
a  reasonable  bignesse,  which  were  a  farre  off  in  a  lowe
valley  beeing  very  greene  and  a  most  fruitful!  soyle,
out  of  which  ranne  many  Rivers.  I  was  informed  that
there  was  much  golde  in  this  valley,  and  that  the  inhabi-
tants worke  it  into  vessels  and  thinne  plates,  wherewith
they  strike  and  take  off  their  sweat,  and  that  they  are
people  that  will  not  suffer  those  of  the  other  side  of  the
plaine  to  traffique  with  them,  and  they  could  not  tell  me
the  cause  thereof.  Here  I  set  up  two  crosses,  and  tooke
possession  of  the  plaine  and  valley  in  like  sort  and  order,
as  I  did  at  other  places  before  mentioned.  And  from
thence  I  returned  on  my  voyage  with  as  much  haste  as  1
coulde  make,  untill  I  came  to  the  citie  of  Saint  Michael
in  the  province  of  Culiacan,  thinking  there  to  have  found
Francis  Vazquez  de  Coronado  governour  of  Nueva  Galicia,
and  finding  him  not  there,  I  proceeded  on  my  journey
Compostella  in  till  I  came  to  the  Citie  of  Compostella,  where  I  found
2  1.  degrees  of  \{y^^  \  write  not  here  many  other  particularities,  because
they  are  impertinent  to  this  matter  :  I  only  report  that
which  I  have  scene,  and  which  was  told  me  concerning  the
Countreys  through  which  I  travelled,  and  of  those  which
I had  information  of.

144

VASQUEZ  DE CORONADO

A.D.
1540.

The  relation  of  Francis  Vazquez  de  Coronado,
Captaine  generall  of  the  people  which  were  sent
in  the  name  of  the  Emperours  majestie  to  the
Countrey  of  Cibola  newly  discovered,  which
he  sent  to  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a  Vice-
roy of  Mexico,  of  such  things  as  happened
in  his  voyage  from  the  22.  of  Aprill  in  the
yeere  1540.  which  departed  from  Culiacan
forward,  and  of  such  things  as  hee  found  in
the  Countrey  which  he  passed.

Chap.  I .
Francis  Vazquez  departeth  with  his  armie  from  Culiacan,
and  after  divers  troubles  in  his  voyage,  arriveth  at
the  valley  of  the  people  called  Los  Caracones,  which
he  findeth  barren  of  Maiz :  for  obtaining  whereof
hee  sendeth  to  the  valley  called  The  valley  of  the
Lord :  he  is  informed  of  the  greatnesse  of  the  valley
of  the  people  called  Caracones,  and  of  the  nature  of
those  people,  and  of  certaine  Islands  lying  along
that  coast.

He  22.  of  the  moneth  of  Aprill  last  past
I  departed  from  the  province  of  Culiacan
with  part  of  the  army,  and  in  such  order
as  1  mentioned  unto  your  Lordship,  and
according  to  the  successe  I  assured  my
selfe,  by  all  likelihood  that  I  shall  not
bring  all  mine  armie  together  in  this
enterprise :  because  the  troubles  have  bene  so  great  and
the  want  of  victuals,  that  I  thinke  all  this  yeere  wil
not  be  sufficient  to  performe  this  enterprise,  &  if  it
should  bee  performed  in  so  short  a  time,  it  would  be
to  the  great  losse  of  our  people.  For  as  I  wrote  unto
your  Lordship,  I  was  fourescore  dayes  in  travailing  to  ^].  374-J
Culiacan,  in  all  which  time  I  and  those  Gentlemen  my  ^qo  kames
companions  which  were  horsemen,  carried  on  our  backs,  from  Mexico.
IX  145  K

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

and  on  our  horses,  a  little  victuall,  so  that  from  hence-
forward wee  carried  none  other  needefuU  apparell  with
us,  that  was  above  a  pound  weight :  and  all  this  not-
withstanding, and  though  wee  put  our  selves  to  such  a
small  proportion  of  victuals  which  wee  carried,  for  all
the  order  that  possibly  wee  could  take,  wee  were  driven
to  our  shifts.  And  no  marvayle,  because  the  way  is
rough  and  long :  and  with  the  carriage  of  our  Harque-
buses downe  the  mountaines  and  hilles,  and  in  the
passage  of  Rivers,  the  greater  part  of  our  corne  was
spoyled.  And  because  I  send  your  Lordship  our  voyage
drawen  in  a  Mappe,  I  will  speake  no  more  thereof  in
this  my  letter.
Frier  Marcus  Thirtie  leagues  before  wee  arrived  at  the  place  which
ofNtza.  ^j^g  father  provinciall  tolde  us  so  well  of  in  his  relation,

I  sent  Melchior  Diaz  before  with  fifteene  horses,  giving
him  order  to  make  but  one  dayes  journey  of  two,
because  hee  might  examine  all  things,  against  mine
arrivall  :  who  travailed  foure  dayes  journey  through
exceeding  rough  Mountaines  where  hee  found  neither
victuals,  nor  people,  nor  information  of  any  things,
saving  that  hee  found  two  or  three  poore  little  villages,
containing  20.  or  30.  cottages  a  piece,  and  by  the  in-
habitants thereof  hee  understoode  that  from  thence
forward  there  were  nothing  but  exceeding  rough  moun-
taines which  ran  very  farre,  utterly  disinhabited  and  voyd
of  people.  And  because  it  was  labour  lost,  I  would  not
write  unto  your  Lordship  thereof.

It  grieved  the  whole  company,  that  a  thing  so  highly
commended,  and  whereof  the  father  had  made  so  great
bragges,  should  be  found  so  contrary,  and  it  made  them
suspect  that  all  the  rest  would  fall  out  in  like  sort.
Which  when  I  perceived  I  sought  to  encourage  them  the
best  I  coulde,  telling  them  that  your  Lordshippe  alwayes
was  of  opinion,  that  this  voyage  was  a  thing  cast  away,
and  that  wee  should  fixe  our  cogitation  upon  those  seven
Cities,  and  other  provinces,  whereof  wee  had  knowledge :
that  there  should  bee the  ende  of  our  enterprise  : and

146

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad

1540.

with  this  resolution  and  purpose  wee  all  marched  cheere-

fully  through  a  very  badde  way  which  was  not  passable

but  one  by  one,  or  else  wee  must  force  out  with  Pioners

the  path  which  wee founde,  wherewith the Souldiours

were  not  a  little  offended,  finding  all  that  the  Frier  had

sayde to bee quite  contrary : for among other things

which  the  father  sayde  and affirmed,  this  was  one,  that

the  way  was plaine  and  good, and that  there  was  but

one  small  hill  of  halfe  a  league  in  length. And  yet  in

trueth  there  are  mountaines  which  although  the  way  were

well  mended  could  not  bee  passed  without  great  danger

of  breaking  the  horses  neckes  : and  the  way  was  such,

that  of  the  cattell  which  your  Lordship  sent us  for  the

provision of  our armie wee lost a great part in  the

voyage through the roughnesse of  the rockes. The

lambes  and  sheepe  lost  their  hoofes  in  the  way :  and  of

those  which I  brought  from Culiacan,  I  left  the  greater

part  at  the  River of  Lachimi,  because they could  not  T^he  river  of

keepe  company  with  us,  and  because  they  might  come  L^^^™^-

softly  after  us,  foure  men  on  horsebacke  remained  with

them  which  are  nowe  come  unto  us,  and  have  brought

us  not  past  foure  and  twentie  lambes,  and  foure  sheepe,

for  all  the  rest  were  dead with travailing  through  that

rough  passage,  although  they  travailed  but  two  leagues  a

day,  and  rested  themselves  every  day.

At  length  I  arrived  at  the  valley  of  the  people  called  The  valley  of

Caracones,  the  26.  day  of  the  moneth  of  May:  and  from  ^^^P^fPjf
„ ,.  -11 T  1-1  T  11  11  called  Lara-

Culiacan  until!  I came  thither, 1 could not helpe my  ^^^^^^

selfe,  save  onely  with  a  great  quantitie  of  bread  of  Maiz  :

for  seeing  the  Maiz in  the fieldes  were not yet ripe,

I  was  constrained  to  leave  them  all  behind  me. In  this

valley  of  the  Caracones  wee  found  more  store  of  people

then  in  any  other  part  of  the  Countrey  which  wee  had

passed,  and great store of  tillage. But I understood

that  there  was  store  thereof  in  another  valley  called  The  l^dle  del

Lords  valley,  which  I woulde  not disturbe  with force, ^^^^^°^''

but  sent  thither  Melchior  Diaz  with  wares  of  exchange

to  procure  some, and to give the  sayde Maiz to  the

147

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

Indians  our  friendes  which  wee  brought  with  us,  and
to  some  others  that  had  lost  their  cattell  in  the  way,
and  were  not  able  to  carry  their  victuals  so  farre  which
they  brought  from  Culiacan.  It  pleased  God  that  wee
gate  some  small  quantitie  of  Maiz  with  this  traffique,
whereby  certaine  Indians  were  releived  and  some
Spanyards.

And  by  that  time  that  wee  were  come  to  this  valley  of
the  Caracones,  some  tenne  or  twelve  of  our  horses  were
dead  through  wearinesse  :  for  being  overcharged  with
great  burdens,  and  having  but  little  meate,  they  could  not
endure  the  travaile.  Likewise  some  of  our  Negros  and
some  of  our  Indians  dyed  here  ;  which  was  no  small  want
unto  us  for  the  performance  of  our  enterprise.  They
The  valley  de  tolde  me  that  this  valley  of  the  Caracones  is  five  dayes
los  Caracones ^Qurnev  from  the  Westerne  Sea. I  sent  for  the  Indians

utstuftt  ■  five  "^ /*  *

da'^es  jour7iey ^^  ^^^  ^^^  coast  to  understand  their  estate,  and  while  I

from  the  Wes-  Stayed  for  them the  horses  rested : and I stayed  there

terne  sea. foure  dayes,  in  which  space  the  Indians  of  the  Sea  coast

[III-  375-] came  unto  mee :  which  told  mee,  that  two  dayes  sayling

Seven  or  eight  from  their  coast  of  the  Sea,  there were seven  or  eight

Isles,  which Islands rip-ht over against them, well inhabited with

are  the  isles  ~  ^ .  .  .

of  California, people,  but badly  furnished with victuals,  and were  a

rude  people : And  they  told  mee,  that  they had  scene

}^  ^^^^^ a  Shippe  passe by not  farre from  the shore  :  which  I

Ofl  tuB  sect  ill  J  ^  ^  ^

wote  not  what  to  thinke  whither  it  were  one  of  those
that  went  to  discover  the  Countrey,  or  else  a  Ship  of
the  Portugals.

coast.

148

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

1540.

Chap.  2.

They  come  to  Chichilticale :  after  they  had  rested  them-
selves two  dayes  there,  they  enter  into  a  Countrey
very  barren  of  victuals,  and  hard  to  travaile  for  thirtie
leagues,  beyond  which  they  found  a  Countrey  very
pleasant,  and  a  river  called  Rio  del  Lino,  they  fight
with  the  Indians  being  assaulted  by  them,  and  with
victorie  vanquishing  their  citie,  they  relieved  them-
selves of  their  pinching  hunger.

I  Departed  from  the  Caracones,  and  alwayes  kept  by
the  Sea  coast  as  neere  as  I  could  judge,  and  in  very
deed  I  still  found  my  selfe  the  farther  off:  in  such  sort
that  when I arrived at Chichilticale I found  my  selfe Chichilticale

tenne dayes iourney from the Sea: and the father  ^^'^ '^^-^^'{f^'

•  11  -^1 1 •  11  r ^  J- ney  from  the

provmciall  sayd  that  it  was  onely but  nve  leagues  dis-  ^^^^

tance,  and  that  hee  had  scene  the  same.  Wee  all
conceived  great  griefe  and  were  not  a  little  confounded,
when  we  saw  that  wee  found  every  thing  contrary  to  the
information  which  he  had  given  your  Lordship.

The  Indians  of  Chichilticale  say,  that  if  at  any  time
they  goe  to  the  Sea  for  fish,  and  other  things  that  they
carry,  they  goe  traversing,  and  are  tenne  dayes  journey
in  going  thither.  And  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  infor-
mation which  the  Indians  give  me  should  be  true.  The
sea  returneth  toward  the  West  right  over  against  the
Caracones  the  space  of  tenne  or  twelve  leagues.  Where
I  found  that  your  Lordships  ships  were  scene,  which
went  to  discover  the  haven  of  Chichilticale,  which  father  This  Chichil-
Marcus  of  Ni9a  sayd  to  bee  in  five  and  thirtie  degrees.  |^^^'?""^^J'^-^
God  knoweth  what  griefe  of  mind  I  have  sustained  :
because  I  am  in  doubt  that  some  mishappe  is  fallen  unto
them  :  and  if  they  follow  the  coast,  as  they  sayde  they
would,  as  long  as  their  victuals  last  which  they  carry  with
them,  whereof  I  left  them  store  in  Culiacan,  and  if  they
be  not  fallen  into  some  misfortune,  I  hope  well  in  God
that  by  this  they  have  made  some  good  discoverie,  and
in  this  respect  their  long  staying  out  may  be  pardoned.

149

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540-

I  rested  my  selfe  two  dayes  in  Chichilticale,  and  to
have  done  well  I  should  have  stayed  longer,  in  respect
that  here  wee  found  our  horses  so  tyred  :  but  because
wee  wanted  victuals,  wee  had  no  leasure  to  rest  any
longer  :  I  entred  the  confines  of  the  desert  Countrey  on
The  2T,.  of  Saint  Johns  eve,  and  to  refresh  our  former  travailes,  the
June.  £j.g^ dayes we founde no grasse, but worser way of

mountaines  and  badde  passages,  then  wee  had  passed
alreadie  :  and  the  horses  being  tired,  were  greatly
molested  therewith  :  so  that  in  this  last  desert  wee  lost
more  horses  then  wee  had  lost  before  :  and  some  of  my
Indians  which  were  our  friendes  dyed,  and  one  Spanyard
whose  name  was  Spinosa  ;  and  two  Negroes,  which  dyed
with  eating  certaine  herbes  for  lacke  of  victuals.  From
this  place  I  sent  before  mee  one  dayes  journey  the  master
Don  Garcia  of  the  fielde  Don  Garcia  Lopez  de  Cardenas  with  fifteene
Lopez.de Lar-  j^Qj-ges  to  discover  the  Countrey,  and  prepare  our  way:
wherein  hee  did  like  himselfe,  and  according  to  the
confidence  which  your  Lordship  reposed  in  him.  And
well  I  wote  he  fayled  not  to  do  his  part  :  for  as  I  have
enformed  your  Lordship,  it  is  most  wicked  way,  at  least
thirtie  leagues  and  more,  because  they  are  inaccessible
mountaines.
A  godly  and  ^q^  after  wee  had  passed  these  thirtie  leagues,  wee
jruttju  com-  ^^^^^  fresh  rivers,  and  grasse  like  that  of  Castile,  and
specially  of  that  sort  which  we  call  Scaramoio,  many
Nutte  trees  and  Mulberie  trees,  but  the  Nutte  trees  differ
from  those  of  Spayne  in  the  leafe  :  and  there  was  Flaxe,
but  chiefly  neere  the  bankes  of  a  certayne  river  which
Rio  del  Lino,  therefore  wee  called  El  Rio  del  Lino,  that  is  say,  the  river
of  Flaxe :  wee  found  no  Indians  at  all  for  a  dayes  travaile,
but  afterward  foure  Indians  came  out  unto  us  in  peace-
able maner,  saying  that  they  were  sent  even  to  that  desert
place  to  signifie  unto  us  that  wee  were  welcome,  and  that
the  next  day  all  the  people  would  come  out  to  meete  us
on  the  way  with  victuals  :  and  the  master  of  the  fielde
gave  them  a  crosse,  willing  them  to  signifie  to  those  of
their  citie  that  they  should not  feare,  and  they  should

150

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

1540.

rather  let  the  people  stay  in  their  houses,  because  I  came
onely  in  the  name  of  his  majestie  to  defend  and  ayd
them.

And  this  done,  Fernando  Alvarado  returned  to  adver-
tise mee,  that  certaine  Indians  were  come  unto  them  in
peaceable  maner, and  that  two  of  them stayed  for  my
comming  with  the master  of  the  fielde. Whereupon  I
went  unto  them  and  gave  them  beades  and  certaine  short
clokes,  willing  them  to  returne  unto  their  citie,  and  bid  [III.  376.]
them to stay  quiet  in their  houses,  and feare  nothing.
And  this  done  I  sent  the  master  of  the  field  to  search  -^  wisefore-
whether  there  were any  bad passage  which  the  Indians  ^^■'^'
might keepe  against us,  and that  hee should  take  and
defend  it  untill  the  next  day  that  I  shoulde  come  thither.
So  hee  went,  and  found  in  the  way  a  very  bad  passage,
where wee might have sustayned very great harme  :
wherefore there hee seated himselfe  with his company
that  were  with him  : and that  very  night the Indians
came to take that  passage to  defend  it,  and  finding  it
taken,  they  assaulted  our  men  there,  and  as  they  tell  mee,  T"^^  treason  of
they  assaulted  them  like  valiant  men  ; although  in  the  ^^^  Indians.
ende  they  retired and  fledde  away  ; for  the master  of
the  fielde  was  watchfull,  and  was  in  order  with  his  com-
pany : the  Indians in token  of  retreate  sounded on  a
certaine small trumpet, and did no hurt among the
Spanyards. The  very same night the master of the  Great  forecast

fielde certified mee hereof Whereupon the next  day  '^^'^/^^^^^
,1  1 1 T  1  1  T 1  1 •  of  the  Lampe-

m  the  best  order  that  I  could  1  departed  m  so  great  want  ,naster.

of  victuall,  that  I  thought  that  if  wee  should  stay  one  day

longer  without  foode,  wee  should  all  perish  for  hunger,

especially  the  Indians,  for  among  us  all  we  had  not  two

bushels  of  corne :  wherefore  it  behooved  mee  to  pricke

forward  without  delay. The  Indians  here  and  their  made

fires,  and  were  answered  againe  afarre  off  as  orderly  as

wee  for  our  lives  could  have  done,  to  give  their  fellowes

understanding,  how  wee  marched  and  where  we  arrived. „

Assoone  as  I  came  within  sight  of  this  citie  of  Granada,  ^^  J^  citTe  of

I sent  Don  Garcias  Lopez Campe-master, frier  Daniel, Cibola.

151

A.D.

1540.

The  arro-
ganc'ie  of  the
people  of
Cibola,

Commande-
ment  to  use
gentlenesse  to
the  Savages.

There  were
'^00  men  zoith-
in  the  towne.
Gomara,Htst.
gen.  cap.  213.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  frier  Luys,  and  Fernando  Vermizzo  somewhat  before
with  certaine  horsemen,  to  seeke  the  Indians  and  to
advertise  them  that  our  comming  was  not  to  hurt  them,
but  to  defend  them  in  the  name  of  the  Emperour  our
Lord,  according  as  his  majestie  had  given  us  in  charge:
which  message  was  delivered  to  the  inhabitants  of  that
countrey  by  an  interpreter.  But  they  like  arrogant
people  made  small  account  thereof;  because  we  seemed
very  few  in  their  eyes,  and  that  they  might  destroy  us
without  any  difficultie  ;  and  they  strooke  frier  Luys  with
an  arrow  on  the  gowne,  which  by  the  grace  of  God  did
him  no  harme.

In  the  meane  space  I  arrived  with  all  the  rest  of  the
horsemen,  and  footemen,  and  found  in  the  fieldes  a  great
sort  of  the  Indians  which  beganne  to  shoote  at  us  with
their  arrowes :  and  because  I  would  obey  your  will  and
the  commaund  of  the  Marques,  I  woulde  not  let  my
people  charge  them,  forbidding  my  company,  which
intreated  mee  that  they  might  set  upon  them,  in  any
wise  to  provoke  them,  saying  that  that  which  the  enemies
did  was  nothing,  and  that  it  was  not  meete  to  set  upon
so  fewe  people.  On  the  other  side  the  Indians  perceiving
that  wee  stirred  not,  tooke  great  stomacke  and  courage
unto  them :  insomuch  that  they  came  hard  to  our  horses
heeles  to  shoote  at  us  with  their  arrowes.  Whereupon
seeing  that  it  was  now  time  to  stay  no  longer,  and  that
the  friers  also  were  of  the  same  opinion,  I  set  upon  them
without  any  danger :  for  suddenly  they  fled  part  to  the
citie  which  was  neere  and  well  fortified,  and  other  into
the  field,  which  way  they  could  shift :  and  some  of  the
Indians  were  slaine,  and  more  had  beene  if  I  would  have
sufi^ered  them  to  have  bene  pursued.

But  considering  that  hereof  wee  might  reape  but  small
profite,  because  the  Indians  that  were  without,  were  fewe,
and  those  which  were  retired  into  the  citie,  with  them
which  stayed  within  at  the  first  were  many,  where  the
victuals  were  whereof  wee  had  so  great  neede,  I  assembled
my  people,  and  devided  them  as  I  thought  best  to  assault

152

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  a.d.

1540.

the  citie,  and  I  compassed  it  about :  and  because  the
famine  which  wee  sustained  suffered  no  delay,  my  selfe
with  certaine  of  these  gentlemen  and  souldiers  put  our
selves  on  foote,  and  commaunded  that  the  crossebowes
and  harquebusiers  shoulde  give  the  assault,  and  shoulde
beate  the  enemies  from  the  walles,  that  .they  might  not
hurt  us,  and  I  assaulted  the  walles  on  one  side,  where
they  tolde  me  there  was  a  scaling  ladder  set  up,  and  that
there  was  one  gate :  but  the  crossebowmen  suddenly
brake  the  strings  of  their  bowes,  and  the  harquebusiers
did  nothing  at  all  :  for  they  came  thither  so  weake  and
feeble,  that  scarcely  they  coulde  stand  on  their  feete :  and  ^'^0'  defend
by  this  meanes  the  people  that  were  aloft  on  the  wals  to  ^^^  ^^.i  ""^l^^
defend  the  towne  were  no  way  hindered  from  doing  us  ofHochehm.
all  the  mischiefe  they  could :  so  that  twise  they  stroke
mee  to  the  ground  with  infinite  number  of  great  stones,
which  they  cast  downe :  and  if  I  had  not  beene  defended
with  an  excellent  good  headpiece  which  I  ware,  I  thinke
it  had  gone  hardly  with  mee :  neverthelesse  my  companie
tooke  mee  up  with  two  small  wounds  in  the  face,  and  an
arrowe  sticking  in  my  foote,  and  many  blowes  with  stones
on  my  armes  and  legges,  and  thus  I  went  out  of  the
battell  very  weake.  I  thinke  that  if  Don  Garcias  Lopez
de  Cardenas  the  second  time  that  they  strooke  mee  to  the
ground  had  not  succoured  mee  with  striding  over  mee
like  a  good  knight,  I  had  beene  in  farre  greater  danger
then  I  was.  But  it  pleased  God  that  the  Indians  yeelded
themselves  unto  us,  and  that  this  citie  was  taken :  and
such  store  of  Maiz  was  found  therein,  as  our  necessitie  [III.  377.]
required.  The  Master  of  the  fielde,  and  Don  Pedro  de
Tovar,  and  Fernando  de  Alvarado,  and  Paul  de  Melgosa
Captaines  of  the  footemen  escaped  with  certaine  knocks
with  stones :  though  none  of  them  were  wounded  with
arrowes,  yet  Agoniez  Quarez  was  wounded  in  one  arme
with  the  shot  of  an  arrowe,  and  one  Torres  a  townesman
of  Panuco  was  shot  into  the  face  with  another,  and  two
footemen  more  had  two  small  woundes  with  arrowes.
And  because  my  armour  was  gilded  and  glittering, .they

153

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

all  layd  load  on  mee,  and  therefore  I  was  more  wounded
then  the  rest,  not  that  I  did  more  then  they,  or  put  my
selfe  forwarder  then  the  rest,  for  all  these  Gentlemen  and
souldiers  carried  themselves  as  manfully  as  was  looked
for  at  their  hands.  I  am  nowe  well  recovered  I  thanke
God,  although  somewhat  bruised  with  stones.  Likewise
in  the  skirmish  which  wee  had  in  the  fieldes,  two  or  three
other  souldiers  were  hurt,  and  three  horses  slaine,  one
of  Don  Lopez,  the  other  of  Viliega  and  the  third  of  Don
Alonso  Manrique,  and  seven  or  eight  other  horses  were
wounded ;  but  both  the  men  and  horses  are  whole  and
sound.

Chap.  3.

Of  the  situation  and  state  of  the  seven  cities  called  the
Kingdome  of  Cibola,  and  of  the  customes  and  quali-
ties of  those  people,  and  of  the  beasts  which  are  found
there.

T  remaineth  now  to  certifie  your  Honour  of  the  seven
cities,  and  of  the  kingdomes  and  provinces  whereof
the  Father  provinciall  made  report  unto  your  Lordship.
And  to  bee  briefe,  I  can  assure  your  honour,  he  sayd
the  trueth  in  nothing  that  he  reported,  but  all  was  quite
contrary,  saving  onely  the  names  of  the  cities,  and  great
houses  of  stone  :  for  although  they  bee  not  wrought
with  Turqueses,  nor  with  lyme,  nor  brickes,  yet  are
Excellent  they  very  excellent  good  houses  of  three  or  foure
houses foure  or  qj.  f^yg  lofts  high,  wherein  are  good  lodgings  and  faire
Jive  opes  tg  .  ^^imkioxs  with  lathers  in  stead  of  staires,  and  certaine
cellers  under  the  ground  very  good  and  paved,  which
are  made  for  winter,  they  are  in  maner  like  stooves  :
and  the  lathers  which  they  have  for  their  houses  are  all
in  a  maner  mooveable  and  portable,  which  are  taken
away  and  set  downe  when  they  please,  and  they  are
made  of  two  pieces  of  wood  with  their  steppes,  as  ours
be.  The  seven  cities  are  seven  small  townes,  all  made
with  these  kinde  of  houses  that  I  speake  of :  and
they stand all within foure leagues together,  and  they

154

I

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  a.d.

1540.
are all called the kingdome of  Cibola, and every one  Cibola  is  a
of them have their particular name : and none of  P''°^'f^'^^  ^^n-
them is called Cibola, but altogether they are called  H^^^f/^'^^^
Cibola. And this towne which I call a citie, I have
named Granada,  as well because it is somewhat like
unto  it,  as  also  in  remembrance  of  your lordship. In
this  towne  where  I  nowe  remaine,  there  may  bee  some
two hundred houses, all compassed  with walles,  and  I
thinke  that  with  the  rest  of  the  houses  which  are  not
so  walled,  they  may  be  together five  hundred. There  Five  hundred
is  another  towne  neere  this,  which  is  one  of  the  seven,  ^°^^^^  ^^
&  it  is somwhat bigger then this,  and another  of  the '^'^^  ^'
same  bignesse  that this  is of,  and  the  other foure are
somewhat  lesse  :  and  I  send  them  all  painted  unto  your  ^  painter  ne-
lordship  with  the  voyage. And  the  parchment  wherein  "^^^^y_  ^"  ^
the  picture  is,  was found here with other parchments.  "'^  ^^'•^'

The  people  of  this  towne  seeme  unto  me  of  a  reason-
able stature,  and  wittie,  yet  they  seeme  not  to  bee  such
as  they  should  bee,  of  that  judgement  and  wit  to  builde
these houses in  such  sort  as they  are. For the most
part  they  goe  all  naked,  except  their  privie  partes  which
are  covered  :  and they  have  painted  mantles  like  those  Painted
which  I  send  unto  your  lordship. They  have  no  cotton  ^'^^^^^^^
wool!  growing,  because  the  countrey  is colde,  yet they
weare  mantels thereof  as your  honour  may  see  by  the
shewe thereof:  and  true it  is  that  there was  found  in
their  houses  certaine  yarne  made  of  cotton  wooll. They
weare  their  haire  on  their  heads  like  those  of  Mexico,
and  they  are  well  nurtured  and  condicioned  :  And  they  5/or^  ofTur-
have  Turqueses  I  thinke  good  quantitie,  which  with  the  i^^^^^-
rest  of  the  goods  which  they  had,  except  their  corne,  they
had  conveyed  away  before  I  came  thither  :  for  I  found
no  women there, nor no youth under fifteene yeeres
olde, nor no olde folkes above sixtie, saving two or
three olde folkes,  who stayed behinde to  governe all
the  rest  of  the  youth  and  men  of  warre. There  were
found  in  a  certaine paper  two  poynts of  Emralds,  and  Emralds.
certaine  small  stones  broken  which  are  in  colour  some-

155

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

Grannies. what  like  Granates  very  bad,  and  other  stones  of  Christall,
Christall. which I  gave  one  of  my  servaunts  to lay up  to send
them to  your  lordship,  and  hee  hath  lost  them  as  hee
Excellent  and  telleth  me. Wee  found  heere  Guinie  cockes,  but  fewe.
very  great  ^ The  Indians  tell  mee  in  all  these  seven  cities,  that  they
eate  them  not,  but  that  they  keepe  them  onely  for  their
feathers. I  beleeve  them  not,  for  they  are  excellent  good,
and  greater  then  those  of  Mexico. The season which
is  in  this  countrey,  and  the  temperature  of  the  ayre  is
like that of Mexico  : for sometime it is hotte, and
sometime  it  raineth  : but  hitherto  I  never  sawe  it  raine,
but once  there  fell  a  little  showre with  winde,  as  they
are  woont  to  fall  in  Spaine.
[III.  378.]  The  snow  and  cold  are  woont  to  be  great,  for  so  say

the inhabitants of  the Countrey  : and  it  is  very  likely
Gomara  hist, go  to  bee,  both  in  respect  to  the  maner  of  the  Countrey,
^"^'th  'tf'Vth'  ^^"^  ^y  ^^^  fashion  of  their  houses,  and  their  furres  and
colde  is  by  rea-  Other  things  which  this  people  have  to  defend  them  from
son  of  the  high  colde. There is no kind  of  fruit nor trees of  fruite.
mountaines. The Countrey is all  plaine, and is on no side  moun-
tainous : albeit there are some hillie  and bad passages.
There  are  small store  of  Foules : the  cause  whereof  is
the colde, and because the  mountaines are not neere.
Here is no great store of wood, because they have
wood for their  fuell  sufficient foure leaugues  off  from
A  wood  of a  wood  of  small  Cedars. There  is  most  excellent  grasse
Cedars.  within  a  quarter  of  a  league  hence,  for  our  horses  as  well

zrasse  ^°  feede  them in pasture,  as to mowe  and make  hay,

whereof  wee  stoode  in  great  neede,  because  our  horses
came  hither  so  weake  and  feeble.  The  victuals  which  the
people  of  this  countrey  have,  is  Maiz,  whereof  they  have
great  store,  and  also  small  white  Pease :  and  Venison,
which  by  all  likelyhood  they  feede  upon,  (though  they
Deere,  hares,  say  no)  for  wee  found  many  skinnes  of  Deere,  of  Hares,
and  comes.  ^^-^^  Conies.  They  eate  the  best  cakes  that  ever  I  sawe,
and  every  body  generally  eateth  of  them.  They  have
the  finest  order  and  way  to  grinde  that  wee  ever  sawe
in  any  place. And  one  Indian  woman  of  this  countrey

156

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

154.0.

will  grinde  as  much  as  foure  women  of  Mexico. They
have most excellent sake in kernell, which they fetch  ^^n  S°°^
from  a  certaine  lake  a  dayes  journey  from  hence. They  ^i^W^^
have  no  knowledge  among  them  of  the  North  Sea,  nor  ^^^  within
of  the Westerne Sea,  neither  can I tell your  lordship iz,o.  kagties
to  which wee  bee nearest : But in reason they should  /"^^  Ctbola.
seeme  to bee  neerest  to  the  Westerne  Sea :  and  at  the  ^J^^^^' . .
least  I  thinke  I  am  an  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  from porkespicks,
thence :  and  the  Northerne  Sea  should  bee  much  further  mightie sheep,
off. Your lordship may see howe broad the land is  mlde  goatcs.
here. Here  are  many  sorts  of  beasts,  as  Beares,  Tigers,  ^ Boies.
Lions,  Porkespicks,  and certaine Sheep  as bigge as  an  Q^nc'es.
horse, with  very  great  homes  and  little tailes, I have  Stagges.
seene  their  homes  so  bigge,  that  it  is  a  wonder  to  be-  They  travaile
hold  their  greatnesse. Here  are  also  wilde  goates  whose  ^*  ^^y^U°^r-
heads  likewise  I  have seene,  and  the pawes  of  Beares,  ^^^  North  sea.
and  the  skins  of  wilde  Bores. There  is  game  of  Deere,  Oxe  hides
Ounces, and very  great Stagges : and all men are of  dressed  and
opinion that there are some bigger then that beast  P^"^^^^ J^n
which your lordship bestowed upon me, which once  ■^'

belonged  to  John  Melaz.  They  travell  eight  dayes
journey  unto  certaine  plaines  lying  toward  the  North
Sea.  In  this  countrey  there  are  certaine  skinnes  well
dressed,  and  they  dresse  them  and  paint  them  where
they  kill  their  Oxen,  for  so  they  say  themselves.

[Chap.  4.
157

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

Chap.  4.

Of  the  state  and  qualities  of  the  kingdomes  of  Totonteac,
Marata,  and  Acus,  quite  contrary  to  the  relation  of
Frier  Marcus.  The  conference  which  they  have  with
the  Indians  of  the  citie  of  Granada  which  they  had
taken,  which  had  fiftie  yeres  past  foreseene  the  com-
ming  of  the  Christians  into  their  countrey.  The
relation  which  they  have  of  other  seven  cities,  where-
of Tucano  is  the  principall,  and  how  he  sent  to
discover  them.  A  present  of  divers  things  had  in
these  countreys  sent  unto  the  Viceroy  Mendo9a  by
Vasques  de  Coronado.

THe kingdome of  Totonteac so much extolled by
the  Father  provinciall,  which  sayde  that  there  were
such wonderfull things there,  and such great matters,
and that they made cloth there, the Indians say is
Totonteacis an  an hotte lake, about which are five or sixe houses  ;
hotte  lake. ^^^ ^^^^ there were certaine other, but that they are
Tadouacseem- -j^^^^^ y^  ^^ -pj^^ kingdome  of  Marata is not

eth  because  it  ■, r ^  ■  1  iti-  1  ij

is  a  lake,  and to be  found, neither have the Indians any knowledge

endeth  in  ac  to  thereof.  The  kingdome  of  Acus  is  one  onely  small
have  some  citie,  where  they  gather  cotton  which  is  called  Acucu.
affinitiehere- p^^^ j  ^^^ ^j^-^ -^ ^ towne. For  Acus with an

with.  . . J  .  .  J r 1

aspiration  nor  without,  is  no  word  or  the  countrey.
And  because  I  gesse  that  they  would  derive  Acucu  of
Acus,  I  say  that  it  is  this  towne  whereinto  the  king-
Other  townes  dom  of  Acus  is  Converted.  Beyond  this  towne  they
neere  a  river.  ^^^  there  are  Other  small  townes  which  are  neere  to  a
river  which  I  have  seene  and  have  had  report  of  by
the  relation  of  the  Indians.  I  would  to  God  I  had
better  newes  to  write  unto  your  lordship :  neverthelesse
I  must  say  the  trueth  :  And  as  I  wrote  to  your  lord-
ship from  Culiacan,  I  am  nowe  to  advertise  your  honour
as  wel  of  the  good  as  of  the  bad.  Yet  this  I  would
have  you  bee  assured,  that  if  all  the  riches  and  the
treasures  of  the  world  were  heere,  I  could  have  done
no more in the service of his Majestic and of  your

158

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  a.d.

1540.
lordshippe,  then  I  have  done  in  comming  hither  whither
you  have  sent  mee,  my  selfe  and  my  companions  carry-
ing our  victuals  upon  our  shoulders  and  upon  our
horses  three  hundred  leagues  ;  and  many  dayes  going
on  foote  travailing  over  hilles  and  rough  mountaines,
with  other  troubles  which  I  cease  to  mention,  neither
purpose  I  to  depart  unto  the  death,  if  it  please  his
Majestie  and  your  lordship  that  it  shall  be  so.

Three  dayes  after  this  citie  was  taken,  certaine  Indians  [III.  379.]
of  these  people  came  to  offer mee  peace,  and  brought
mee certaine Turqueses and badde mantles, and  I re-  Turqueses.
ceived  them in his Majesties name with  all the good  •'^^'^"'^^•
speaches that I could devise, certifying them of the
purpose  of  my  comming  into  this  countrey,  which  is  in
the  name  of  his  Majestie,  and  by  the  commaundement
of  your Lordship, that they and all the rest of  the
people  of  this province should become Christians,  and
should  knowe  the  true  God  for  their  Lorde,  and  receive
his  Majestie  for  their  King,  and  earthly  Soveraigne  :  And
herewithall  they  returned  to  their  houses,  and  suddenly  The  Indians ^
the  next  day  they  set  in  order  all  their  goods  and  sub-  ^^^  1°  !^^  ^^^^
stance,  their  women  and  children,  and  fled  to  the  hilles,  ^ves  children
leaving  their townes  as  it  were abandoned,  wherein  re-  and  goods.
mained  very  fewe  of  them. When I sawe  this,  within
eight  or  tenne  dayes  after  being  recovered  of  my  woundes,
I  went  to  the  citie,  which  I  sayde to bee  greater  then  A  citie  greater
this  where  I  am,  and  found there  some  fewe  of  them,  ^henGranada.
to  whom  I  sayde  that  they  should  not  bee  afrayd,  and
that  they  should  call  their  governour  unto  mee  :  howbeit,
forasmuch  as  I  can  learne  or  gather,  none  of  them  hath
any  governour  : for  I  sawe  not  there  any  chiefe  house,
whereby  any  preeminence  of  one  over  another  might  bee
gathered. After  this  an  olde  man  came,  which  sayd  that
hee  was their  lord,  with a piece  of  a  mantle made  of
many  pieces,  with  whom  I  reasoned  that  small  while  that
hee  stayed  with  mee,  and  hee  sayd  that  within  three  dayes
after,  hee  and  the  rest  of  the  chiefe  of  that  towne  would
come  and  visite  mee,  and  give  order  what  course  should

159

A.D.

1540.

Two  tables
painted  by  the
India7is,  one
of  beasts
another  of
blrdes  and
fishes.

Anoldprophe-
cie  that  those
parts  should  he
subdued  by
Christians.
They  worship
the  water.

Seven  cities
fair e  from
Granada.

Tucano.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bee  taken  with  them.  Which  they  did:  for  they  brought
mee  certaine  mantles  and  some  Turqueses.  I  advised
them  to  come  downe  from  their  holdes,  and  to  returne
with  their  wives  and  children  to  their  houses,  and  to
become  Christians,  and  that  they  would  acknowledge  the
Emperours  majestie  for  their  King  and  lorde.  And  even
to  this  present  they  keepe  in  those  strong  holdes  their
women  and  children,  and  all  the  goods  which  they  have.
I  commaunded  them  that  they  should  paint  mee  out  a
cloth  of  ail  the  beastes  which  they  knowein  their  countrey:
And  such  badde  painters  as  they  are,  foorthwith  they
painted  mee  two  clothes,  one  of  their  beastes,  another
of  their  birdes  and  fishes.  They  say  that  they  will  bring
their  children,  that  our  religious  men  may  instruct  them,
and  that  they  desire  to  knowe  our  lawe  :  And  they  assure
us,  that  above  fiftie  yeeres  past  it  was  prophecied  among
them,  that  a  certaine  people  like  us  should  come,  and
from  that  part  that  wee  came  from,  and  that  they  should
subdue  all  that  countrey.

That  which  these  Indians  worship  as  farre  as  hitherto
wee  can  learne,  is  the  water  :  for  they  say  it  causeth
their  corne  to  growe,  and  maintaineth  their  life  ;  and  that
they  know  none  other  reason,  but  that  their  ancesters
did  so.  I  have  sought  by  all  meanes  possible  to  learne
of  the  inhabitants  of  these  townes,  whether  they  have  any
knowledge  of  other  people,  countreys  and  cities  :  And
they  tell  mee  of  seven  cities  which  are  farre  distant  from
this  place,  which  are  like  unto  these,  though  they  have
not  houses  like  unto  these,  but  they  are  of  earth,  and
small :  and  that  among  them  much  cotton  is  gathered.
The  chiefe  of  these  townes  whereof  they  have  knowledge,
they  say  is  called  Tucano  :  and  they  gave  mee  no  perfect
knowledge  of  the  rest.  And  I  thinke  they  doe  not  tell
me  the  trueth,  imagining  that  of  necessitie  I  must  speedily
depart  from  them,  and  returne  home.  But  herein  they
shall  soone  finde  themselves  deceived.  I  sent  Don  Pedro
de  Tovar  with  his  companie  of  footemen  and  with  certaine
other  horsemen to see this  towne  : And  I  would  not

160

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO

have  dispatched  this  packet  unto  your  lordship,  untill  I
had  knowen  what  this  towne  was,  if  I  had  thought  that
within  twelve  or  fifteene  dayes  I  might  have  had  newes
from  him :  for  hee  will  stay  in  this  journey  thirtie  dayes
at  least.  And  having  examined  that  the  knowledge
hereof  is  of  small  importance,  and  that  the  colde  and  the
waters  approch :  I  thought  it  my  duety  to  doe  according
as  your  lordship  gave  mee  charge  in  your  instructions,
which  is,  that  immediatly  upon  mine  arrivall  here,  I
should  signifie  so  much  unto  your  lordship,  and  so  I
doe,  sending  withall  the  bare  relation  of  that  which  I
have  scene.  I  have  determined  to  send  round  about  the
countrey  from  hence  to  have  knowledge  of  all  things,
and  rather  to  suffer  all  extremitie,  then  to  leave  this  enter-
prise to  serve  his  majestie,  if  I  may  find  any  thing  wherein
I  may  performe  it,  and  not  to  omit  any  diligence  therein,
untill  your  lordship  send  mee  order  what  I  shall  doe.
Wee  have  great  want  of  pasture :  and  your  lordship  also
shal  understand,  that  among  all  those  which  are  here,  there
is  not  one  pound  of  raisins,  nor  suger,  nor  oyle,  nor  any
wine,  save  only  one  pinte  which  is  saved  to  say  Masse:
for  all  is  spent  &  spilt  by  the  way.  Now  your  lordship
may  provide  us  what  you  thinke  needefull.  And  if  your
honour  meane  to  send  us  cattell,  your  lordship  must
understand  that  they  will  bee  a  sommer  in  comming  unto
us :  for  they  will  not  be  able  to  come  unto  us  any  sooner.
I  would  have  sent  your  lordshippe  with  this  dispatch
many  musters  of  things  which  are  in  this  countrey  :  but
the  way  is  so  long  and  rough,  that  it  is  hard  for  me  to  doe
so:  neverthelesse  I  send  you  twelve  small  mantles,  such  as
the  people  of  the  countrey  are  woont  to  weare,  and  a
certaine  garment  also,  which  seemeth  unto  me  to  bee  well
made  :  I  kept  the  same,  because  it  seemed  to  mee  to
bee  excellent  well  wrought,  because  I  beleeve  that  no  man
ever  sawe  any  needle  worke  in  these  Indies,  except  it  were
since  the  Spaniards  inhabited  the  same.  I  send  your
Lordshippe  also  two  clothes  painted  with  the  beasts  of
this  countrey,  although  as  I  have  sayde,  the  picture  bee

IX  l6l  L

A.D.

1540.

The  Spaniards
victualling  in
discoveries.

[III.  380.]
A  garment
excellently  im-
broidered  with
needle  worke.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1540.

very  rudely  done,  because  the  painter  spent  but  one  day
in  drawing  of  the  same.  I  have  seene  other  pictures
on  the  walles  of  the  houses  of  this  citie  with  farre  better
proportion,  and  better  made.  I  send  your  honour  one
Jn  oxhide.  Oxe-hide,  certaine  Turqueses,  and  two  earerings  of  the
CertaineTur-  g^j^g^  ^j^^  fifteene  combes  of  the  Indians,  and  certain
tablets  set  with  these  Turqueses,  and  two  small  baskets
made  of  wicker,  whereof  the  Indians  have  great  store.  I
send  your  lordship  also  two  roUes  which  the  women  in
these  parts  are  woont  to  weare  on  their  heads  when  they
fetch  water  from  their  welles,  as  wee  use  to  doe  in  Spaine.
And  one  of  these  Indian  women  with  one  of  these  rolles
on  her  head,  will  carie  a  pitcher  of  water  without  touching
the  same  with  her  hande  up  a  lather.  I  send  you  also
a  muster  of  the  weapons  wherewith  these  people  are  woont
to  fight,  a  buckler,  a  mace,  a  bowe,  and  certaine  arrowes,
among  which  are  two  with  points  of  bones,  the  like
whereof,  as  these  conquerours  say,  have  never  beene
seene.  I  can  say  nothing  unto  your  lordshippe  touching
the  apparell  of  their  women.  For  the  Indians  keepe  them
so  carefully  from  us,  that  hitherto  I  have  not  seene  any
of  them,  saving  onely  two  olde  women,  and  these  had
two  long  robes  downe  to  the  foote  open  before,  and
girded  to  them,  and  they  are  buttoned  with  certaine
cordons  of  cotton.  I  requested  the  Indians  to  give  me
one  of  these  robes,  which  they  ware,  to  send  your  honour
the  same,  seeing  they  would  not  shewe  mee  their  women.
And  they  brought  mee  two  mantles  which  are  these,
which  I  send  you  as  it  were  painted  :  they  have  two
pendents  like  the  women  of  Spaine,  which  hang  some-
The  death  of  what  over  their  shoulders.  The  death  of  the  Negro  is
S,uphan  the  j^igst  certaine  :  for  here  are  many  of  the  things  found
which  hee  carried  with  him  :  And  the  Indians  tell  me  that
they  killed  him  here,  because  the  Indians  of  Chichilticale
tolde  them  that  hee  was  a  wicked  villaine,  and  not  like
unto  the  Christians:  because  the  Christians  kill  no  women:
and  hee  killed  women ;  and  also  he  touched  their  women,
which  the  Indians  love  more  then  themselves ;  therefore

162

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  a.d.

1540.
they  determined  to  kill  him  :  But  they  did  it  not  after
such  sort  as  was  reported,  for  they  killed  none  of  the
rest  of  those  that  came  with  him :  neither  slewe  they  the
young  lad  which  was  with  him  of  the  province  of  Petatlan,
but  they  tooke  him  and  kept  him  in  safe  custodie  untill
nowe.  And  when  I  sought  to  have  him,  they  excused
themselves  two  or  three  dayes  to  give  him  mee,  telling
mee  that  hee  was  dead,  and  sometimes  that  the  Indians
of  Acucu  had  carried  him  away.  But  in  conclusion,  when  Acucu.
I  tolde  them  that  I  should  bee  very  angry  if  they  did
not  give  him  mee,  they  gave  him  unto  me.  Hee  is  an
interpreter,  for  though  hee  cannot  well  speake  their
language,  yet  hee  understandeth  the  same  very  well.  In
this  place  there  is  found  some  quantitie  of  golde  and  Gold  and  nl-
silver,  which  those  which  are  skilfull  in  minerall  matters  "^"'M^^  ^"
esteeme  to  be  very  good.  To  this  houre  I  could  never
learne  of  these  people  from  whence  they  have  it  :  And
I  see  they  refuse  to  tell  mee  the  trueth  in  all  things,
imagining,  as  I  have  sayde,  that  in  short  time  I  would
depart  hence,  but  I  hope  in  God  they  shall  no  longer
excuse  themselves.  I  beseech  your  lordship  to  certifie
his  Majestie  of  the  successe  of  this  voyage.  For  seeing
wee  have  no  more  then  that  which  is  aforesayd,  and  untill
such  time  as  it  please  God  that  wee  finde  that  which
wee  desire,  I  meane  not  to  write  my  selfe.  Our  Lorde
God  keepe  and  preserve  your  Excellencie.

From  the  province  of  Cibola,  and  from  this  citie  of
Granada  the  third  of  August  1540.  Francis  Vasques  de
Coronado  kisseth  the  hands  of  your  Excellencie.

The  rest  of  this  voyage  to  Acuco,  Tiguex,  Cicuic,  and
Quivira,  and  unto  the  Westerne  Ocean,  is  thus  written
in  the  generall  historie  of  the  West  Indies  by  Francis
Lopez  de  Gomara,  Chap. 214.

BEcause  they  would  not  returne  to  Mexico  without
doing  something,  nor  with  emptie  hands,  they
agreed  to  passe  further  into  the  countrey,  which  was
tolde  them  to  bee  better  and  better. So they  came  to

163

A.D.

1540.

Acuco.

The  Westerne
sea  discovered,
Tiguex.

Axa  and
Quiv'ira.

[III.  381.]

A  towne
burnt.

Another  town
assaulted.

Mantles.

Turqueses.

Feathers.

Precious

things.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Acuco  a  towne  upon  an  exceeding  strong  hill.  And
from  thence  Don  Garcias  Lopez  de  Cardenas  with
his  companie  of  horsemen  went  unto  the  Sea  :  and
Francis  Vasques  went  to  Tiguex,  which  standeth  on  the
banke  of  a  great  river.  There  they  had  newes  of
Axa  and  Quivira.  There  they  sayde  was  a  King
whose  name  was  Tatarrax,  with  a  long  beard,  horie
headed,  and  rich,  which  was  girded  with  a  Bracamart,
which  prayed  upon  a  payre  of  beades,  which  worshipped
a  Crosse  of  golde,  and  the  image  of  a  woman,  the
Queene  of  heaven.  This  newes  did  greatly  rejoyce  and
cheere  up  the  armie  :  although  some  thought  it  to  bee
false,  and  the  report  of  the  Friers.  They  determined
to  goe  thither,  with  intention  to  winter  in  so  rich  a
countrey  as  that  was  reported  to  bee.  One  night  the
Indians  ranne  away,  and  in  the  morning  they  found
thirtie  horses  dead,  which  put  the  armie  in  feare.  In
their  journey  they  burnt  a  certaine  towne  :  And  in
another  towne  which  they  assaulted,  they  killed  certaine
Spaniards,  and  wounded  fiftie  horses,  and  the  inhabi-
tants drewe  into  their  towne  Francis  de  Ovando
wounded  or  dead,  to  eate  and  sacrifice  him  as  they
thought,  or  peradventure  to  see  more  perfectly,  what
maner  of  men  the  Spaniards  were  :  for  there  was  not
found  there  any  signe  of  sacrificing  men.  Our  people
layde  siege  unto  the  towne,  but  could  not  take  it  in
more  then  five  and  fortie  dayes  space.  The  townesmen
that  were  besieged,  dranke  snowe  in  stead  of  water :  and
seeing  themselves  forlorne  they  made  a  fire,  wherein
they  cast  their  mantles,  feathers,  Turqueses  and  precious
things,  that  those  strangers  might  not  enjoy  them.
They  issued  out  in  a  squadron  with  their  women  and
children  in  the  middest,  to  make  way  by  force,  and  to
save  themselves,  but  fewe  escaped  the  edge  of  our  swordes
and  the  horses,  and  a  certaine  river  which  was  neere  the
towne.  Seven  Spaniards  were  slaine  in  this  conflict,  and
fourescore  were  wounded,  and  many  horses  :  whereby  a
man  may  see  of  what force resolution is in necessitie.

164

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  ad.

1540.
Many  Indians returned to the towne  with  the  women
and children,  and  defended  themselves,  untill  our  men
set  fire  on  the  towne. In  this  countrey  there  are  melons.  Melons.
and  white and redde cotton, whereof  they make farre  y^^'^"'
larger  mantels,  then  in  other  parts  of  the  Indies. From  (^^v^v  foure  ^'
Tigues  they  went  in  foure  dayes  journey  to  Cicuic,  which  dayes  journey
is  a  small  towne,  and  foure  leagues  from  thence  they  met  from  Tlguex,
with  a  new  kind  of  oxen  wild  and  fierce,  whereof  the  first
day  they  killed  fourescore,  which  sufficed  the  armie  with
flesh. From Cicuic they  went  to Quivira,  which  after  Qulvira.
their  accompt,  is  almost  three  hundred  leagues  distant,
through  mighty  plaines,  and  sandie  heathes  so  smooth,  and
wearisome,  and  bare  of  wood,  that  they  made  heapes  of
oxe-dung  for  want  of  stones  and  trees,  that  they  might  Heapes  of  oxe
not  lose  themselves  at  their  returne :  for  three  horses  were  dmg  made  for
lost  on  that  plaine,  and  one  Spaniard,  which  went  from  his  ^^^
companie  on  hunting. All  that  way  &  plaines  are  as  full
of  crookebacked  oxen,  as  the  mountaine  Serena  in Spaine
is  of  sheepe  :  but  there  is  no  people  but  such  as  keepe
those cattell. They were a great succour for the
hunger  and  want  of  bread  which  our  people  stoode  in.
One  day  it rayned in that plaine a  great showre  of
haile,  as  bigge  as Orenges,  which caused many  teares,
weakenesse,  and  vowes. At  length  they  came  to Qui-
vira  and  found  Tatarrax,  whome  they  sought,  an hoarie
headed  man,  naked,  and  with  a  Jewell  of  copper hang-
ing at his necke, which was all his riches. The  The  Spaniards
Spaniards seeing the false report of  so  famous riches,  returne  to  Ti-
returned to Tiguex, without seeing; either crosse or  S"-^^^/^^  ^°i°
shewe of Christianitie  : and from thence to Mexico. TkeSpaniards
In  the  ende  of  March  of  the  yeere  1542.  Francis  Vas-  wouldhavein-
quez  fell  from his horse in Tiguex,  and  with the fall  habited  the
fell  out  of  his  wits,  and  became madde. Which some  "^^^^^y-
tooke to bee for griefe, and others thought  it  to be
but counterfeited  : for they  were much oifended  with
him,  because  hee  peopled  not  the  countrey.

Quivira  is  in  fortie  degrees  :  it  is  a  temperate coun-
trey, and hath very good waters,  'and much grasse,

165

A.D.

1540.

Ships  scene  on
the  sea  coast
of  Quivira,
which  were
30.  da^es  in
sayling
thither.

Andrew  de
Campo  tra-
vailed from
Quivira  to
Panuco.

The  cause  why
the  Spaniards
peopled  not  in
Cibola.
[III.  382.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

plummeSj  mulberries,  nuts,  melons  and  grapes,  which
ripen  very  well.  There  is  no  cotton  :  and  they  apparell
themselves  with  oxe-hides  and  deeres  skinnes.  They
sawe  shippes  on  the  sea  coast,  which  bare  Alcatrarzes  or
Pellicanes  of  golde  and  silver  in  their  prows,  and  were
laden  with  marchandises,  and  they  thought  them  to  bee
of  Cathaya,  and  China,  because  they  shewed  our  men
by  signes  that  they  had  sayled  thirtie  dayes.

Frier  John  de  Padilla  stayed  behinde  in  Tigues,  with
another  of  his  companions  called  Frier  Francis,  and
returned  to  Quivira,  with  some  dozen  Indians  of
Mechuacan,  and  with  Andrew  de  Campo  a  Portugall,
the  gardiner  of  Francis  de  Solis  :  Hee  tooke  with  him
horses  and  mules  with  provision.  Hee  tooke  sheepe
and  hennes  of  Castile,  and  ornaments  to  say  Masse
withall.  The  people  of  Quivira  slewe  the  Friers,  and
the  Portugall  escaped  with  certaine  Indians  of  Mechua-
can. Who  albeit  at  that  time  he  escaped  death,  yet
could  hee  not  free  himselfe  out  of  captivitie  :  for  by
and  by  after  they  caught  him  againe.  But  ten  moneths
after  he  was  taken  captive,  hee  fled  away  with  a  couple
of  dogs.  As  hee  travailed,  hee  blessed  the  people  with
a  crosse,  whereunto  they  offered  much,  and  whereso-
ever hee  came,  they  gave  him  almes,  lodging,  and  foode.
He  came  to  the  countrey  of  the  Chichimechas,  and
arrived  at  Panuco.  When  he  came  to  Mexico,  hee
ware  his  haire  very  long,  and  his  beard  tyed  up  in  a
lace,  and  reported  strange  things  of  the  lands,  rivers
and  mountaines  that  he  had  passed.

It  grieved  Don  Antonio  de  Mendo9a  very  much  that
the  army  returned  home  :  for  hee  had  spent  above  three-
score thousand  pesos  of  golde  in  the  enterprise,  and  ought
a  great  part  thereof  still.  Many  sought  to  have  dwelt
there  ;  but  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado,  which  was  rich,
and  lately  married  to  a  faire  wife,  would  not  consent,  say-
ing, that  they  could  not  maintaine  nor  defend  themselves
in  so  poore  a  countrey,  and  so  farre  from  succour.  They
travailed  above  nine  hundred  leagues  in  this  countrey.

166

VASQUEZ DE CORONADO  a.d.

1540.

The  foresayd  Francis  Lopez  de  Gomara  in  his  generall  his-
toric of  the  West  Indies,  Chap.  215.  writeth  in  maner
following  of  certaine  great  and  strange  beasts  never
seene  nor  heard  of  in  our  knowen  world  of  Asia,
Europe,  and  Africa  :  which  somewhat  resembling  our
oxen,  having  high  bunches  on  their  backes  like  those
on  the  backes  of  Camels,  are  therefore  called  by  him
Vacas  corcobados,  that  is  to  say,  Crooke-backed  oxen,
being  very  deformed  &  terrible  in  shewe,  and  fierce
by  nature  :  which  notwithstanding  for  foode,  apparell,
and  other  necessarie  uses,  are  most  serviceable  and
beneficiall  to  the  inhabitants  of  those  countreys.  He
reported  also  in  the  same  chapter  of  certaine  strange
sheepe  as  bigge  as  horses,  and  of  dogs  which  use  to
carie  burthens  of  50.  pound  weight  upon  their
backes.

A  LI  the  way  betweene  Cicuic  and  Quivira  is  a  most
plaine  soyle,  without  trees  and  stones,  and hath  but  ^"^^^^  ^^-^
fewe  and  small  townes. The  men  clothe  and  shooe  them-  ^^lll^/^^
selves  with  lether  ;  and  the women  which  are  esteemed  Captain  Fro-
for  their  long  lockes,  cover  their  heads  and  secrets  with  bisher  brought
the  same. They  have  no  bread  of  any  kinde  of  graine,  ^'"^^  England
as they say  : which I account a very great matter.  -^"'^ .^
Their chiefest foode is flesh,  and that oftentimes they
eate rawe, either of  custome or for lacke of wood.
They eate the fatte as they take  it out of  the Oxe,
and drinke the  blood hotte, and die not therewithall,
though the  ancient  writers say  that it killeth, as Em-
pedocles  and  others affirmed,  they  drinke it  also colde
dissolved  in  water. They  seeth  not  the  flesh  for  lacke
of  pots,  but  rost  it,  or  to  say  more  properly,  warme  it
at a fire  of  Oxe-dung  : when they eate, they chawe
their  meate  but  little,  and  raven  up  much,  and  holding
the flesh  with their teeth, they cut  it with rasors of
stone, which seemeth  to be  great bestialitie  : but such
is their maner of  living and fashion. They  goe to-
gether in companies, and moove from one place to

167

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

another,  as  the  wilde  Moores  of  Barbarie  called  Alarbes

doe, following the seasons  and  the  pasture  after  their

Oxen.

The  descrip- These Oxen are of  the bignesse and colour of  our

ttonoftheoxen  g^jj^ ^^^^  ^^^-j.  y^^^^^^  ^^e  not  SO  great. They  have  a

Of  Kjuivirci  .  ^  ^  .

great  bunch upon  their  fore  shoulders,  and  more  haire

on  their  fore  part  then  on  their  hinder  part  :  and  it  is
like  wooU.  They  have  as  it  were  an  horse-mane  upon
their  backe  bone,  and  much  haire  and  very  long  from
the  knees  downeward.  They  have  great  tuffes  of  haire
hanging  downe  their  foreheads,  and  it  seemeth  that
they  have  beardes,  because  of  the  great  store  of  haire
hanging  downe  at  their  chinnes  and  throates.  The
males  have  very  long  tailes,  and  a  great  knobbe  or
flocke  at  the  end  :  so  that  in  some  respect  they  re-
semble the  Lion,  and  in  some  other  the  Camell.  They
push  with  their  homes,  they  runne,  they  overtake  and
kill  an  horse  when  they  are  in  their  rage  and  anger.
Finally,  it  is  a  foule  and  fierce  beast  of  countenance
and  forme  of  bodie.  The  horses  fledde  from  them,
either  because  of  their  deformed  shape,  or  else  because
thev  had  never  scene  them.  Their  masters  have  no
other  riches  nor  substance  :  of  them  they  eat,  they
drinke,  they  apparel,  they  shooe  themselves  :  and  of
their  hides  they  make  many  things,  as  houses,  shooes,
apparell  and  ropes  :  of  their  bones  they  make  bodkins  :
of  their  sinewes  and  haire,  threed  :  of  their  homes,
mawes,  and  bladders,  vessels  :  of  their  dung,  fire  :  and  of
their  calves-skinnes,  budgets,  wherein  they  drawe  and
keepe  water.  To  bee  short,  they  make  so  many  things
of  them  as  they  have  neede  of,  or  as  many  as  suffice  them
in  the  use  of  this  life.
^heepe  as  big  There  are  also  in  this  countrey  other  beastes  as  big
as  ojses.  ^^  horses,  which  because  they  have  homes  and  fine  wool,
they  cal  them  sheepe,  and  they  say  that  every  home  of

^..  ,. , theirs  weigheth  is  fiftie pound  weight.

M.  tSiitie  doss  '-'  '■  . ^ .

carrxing  50. There  are  also  great  dogs  which  will  fight  with  a  bull,

pound  weight, and  will  Carrie  fiftie  pound  weight  in  sackes  when  they

168

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO

goe  on  hunting,  or  when they  remoove  from place to
place  with  their  flockes  and  heards.

A.D.

1581-83.

El  Viaje  que  Hizo  Antonio  de  Espejo  en  el  [HI.  383.]
anno  de  ochenta  y  tres  :  el  qual  con  sus  com-
panneros  descubrieron  una  tierra  en  que
hallaron  quinze  Provincias  todas  llenas  de
pueblos,  y  de  casas  de  quatro  y  cinco  altos,
a  quien  pusieron  por  nombre  El  Nuevo
Mexico,  por  parecerse  en  muchas  cosas  al
viejo.  Esta  a  la  parte  del  norte,  y  se  cree
que  por  ella,  y  por  poblado,  se  puede  venir
hasta  llegar  a  la  tierra  que  llaman  del
Labrador.

Del  Nuevo  Mexico,  y  de  su  descubrimiento,  y  lo  que  del

se  sabe.

A  dixe  en  el  titulo  del  libro,  que  el  anno  T^luevo
de  mil  y  quinientos  y  ochenta  y  tres,  se  '^^^^'^°-
avian descubierto quinze Provincias,
aquien  los  inventores  llamaron  El  nuevo
Mexico en la tierra firme de Nueva
Espanna,  y  prometi  de dar noticia del
descubrimiento, como lo hare con la
mayor brevedad que sea  possible,  porque si  uviera  de
poner  difFusamente  todo  lo  que  vieron  y  supieron,  fuera
menester  hazer  dello  nueva  historia. La  substancia  dello
es, que  el  anno  de  mil  y quinientos  y ochenta  y uno,
teniendo noticia un Religioso de la Drden de sant
Francisco, que se Ilamava fray Augustin Ruyz, que  Augustin
morava en el valle de sant Bartholome, por relation  -^*^^-
de ciertos Indies. Conchos que se comunicavan con
otros sus convezinos Uamados Passaguates  :  que  hazia
la parte del Norte (caminando siempre por tierra)
avia ciertas poblaciones grandes, y nunca sabidas de
nuestros Espannoles, ni descubiertas, con zelo de
caridad,  y  de  salvacion  de  las almas,  pidio  licencia al

169

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581-83.

Conde  de  Corunna  Virey  de  la  dicha  Nueva  Espanna,
y  a  sus  mayores,  para  yr  a  elks,  a  procurar  aprender
su  lengua,  y  sabida,  bautizarlos,  y  predicarles  el  santo
Evangelic.  Alcan9ada  la  licentia  de  los  sobredichos,
tomando  otros  dos  companneros  de  su  mesma  Orden,  se
partio  con  ocho  soldados,  que  de  voluntad  le  quisieron
acompannar,  a  poner  en  execution  su  Christiano  y  zeloso
intento.  Los  quales  a  pocos  dias  de  camino  toparon
Tiguas.  con  una  Provincia,  que  se  llamava  de  los  Tiguas,  distante

de  las  minas  de  sancta  Barbola  (de  donde  comen9aron  la
Jornada)  dozientas  y  cinquenta  leguas  hazia  el  Norte,  en
la  qual  por  cierta  occasion  los  naturales  le  mataron  al
dicho  padre  uno  de  sus  dos  companneros.  El  qual,  los
soldados  que  yvan  con  el,  viendo,  y  sintiendo  el  successo,
y  temiendo  que  del  se  podria  seguir  otro  mayor  danno,
acordaron  de  comun  consentimiento  de  bolverse  a  las
minas  de  donde  avian  salido,  con  consideracion  de  que  la
gente  que  yva  era  muy  poca  para  resistir  a  los  successes
que  se  podian  offrecer  en  tanta  distancia  de  la  vivienda  de
los  Espannoles,  y  tan  lexos  del  necessario  socorro.  Los
dos  Religiosos  que  havian  quedado,  no  solo  no  vinieron
en  su  parecer,  mas  antes  viendo  la  ocasion  para  poner  en
execucion  su  buen  desseo,  y  tanta  mies  madura  para  la
mesa  de  Dios,  viendo  que  no  podian  persuadir  a  los
soldados  a  passar  adelante  en  el  descubrimiento,  se
quedaron  ellos  en  la  dicha  Provincia  con  tres  muchachos
Indios,  y  un  mestizo,  que  avain  Uevado  consigo,  pare-
ciendoles  que  aunque  quedassen  solos,  estavan  alii  seguros,
por  la  affabilidad  y  amor  con  que  los  naturales  della  los
tratavan.  Llegados  los  ocho  soldados  adonde  desseavan,
embiaron  luego  la  nueva  al  dicho  Virey  delo  succedido  a
la  ciudad  de  Mexico,  que  dista  de  las  dichas  minas  de
santa  Barbora  ciento  y  sesenta  leguas.  Sintieron  mucho
los  religiosos  de  sant  Francisco  la  quedada  de  sus
hermanos  :  y  timiendo  no  los  matassen  viendo  los  solos,
comen9aron  a  mover  los  animos  de  algunos  soldados,  para
FrmBernard-  4^^  ^^^  compannia  de  otro  Religioso  de  la  mesma  Orden
ino  Beltran. llamado fray Bernardino Beltran, tornassen a la  dicha

170

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.
Provincia,  a  sacar  de  peligro  a  los  dichos  dos  Religiosos,
y  proseguir  con  la  empresa  comen^ada.

En  esta sazon estava en las dichas minas  por  cierta
ocasion un vezino de la ciudad de Mexico, Uamado
Antonio  de  Espejo,  hombre  rico,  y  de  mucho  animo  y  Antonio  de  ^
industria,  y  zeloso  del servicio de  la  majestad  del  Rey T H^^^lna
Don  Philippe  nuestro  sennor,  natural  de Cordova. El 15 go
qual  como  entendiesse  el  desseo  delos  dichos  religiosos,  y
la  importancia  del  negocio,  se  offrecio  a  la  Jornada  y  a
gastar  en  elk  parte  de  su  hazienda,  y  a  riesgar  su  vida,
siendo  le  para  ello  concedida  licencia  de  alguna  persona
que  representasse  a  su  majestad,  la  qual  procurandola  los
dichos religiosos, le  fue dada por el Capitan Juan de
Ontiveros  Alcalde  mayor  por  su  magestad  en  los  pueblos
que  llaman  las  quatro  Cienegas,  que  son  en  la  gouver-
nacion  de  la  Nueva  Vizcaya,  setenta  leguas  de  las  dichas  [HI-  384-]

minas  de  santa  Barbora,  assi  para  que  el  pudiesse  yr,  como  -^^f'^^^

1 '  111  T  Bizcma.

para  que  juntasse  la  gente  y  soldados  pue  pudiesse,  para

que le acompannassen, y ayudassen a conseguir su

Christiano  intento.

El  dicho  Antonio  de  Espejo  tomo  el  negocio  con  tantas
veras,  que  en  muy  pocos  dias  junto  los  soldados  y  basti-
mentos  necessarios  para  hazer  la  Jornada,  gastando  en  ello
buena  parte  de  su  hazienda  :  y  partio  con  todos  ellos  del
valle  de  sant  Bartholome  a  los  diez  de  Noviembre  de  mil
y  quinientos  y  ochenta  y  dos,  llevando  para  lo  que  se
ofFreciesse  ciento  y  quinze  cavallos,  y  mulas,  y  muchas
armas,  municiones,  y  bastimentos,  y  alguna  gente  de
servicio.

Enderego  su  camino  hazia  el  Norte,  y  a  dos  jornados
topo  mucha  cantidad  de  Indios  de  los  que  llaman  Conchos  Conchas
en  Rancherias  o  poblaciones  de  casas  pagicas.  Los  quales
como  lo  supiessen,  y  tuviessen  dello  relacion  muy  de
atras,  los  salieron  a  recebir  con  muestras  de  alegria.  La
comida  destos,  y  delos  de  la  Provincia,  que  es  grande,  es
de  carne  de  conejos,  liebres,  y  venados  que  matan,  y  lo
ay  todo  en  grandissima  cantidad.  Tienen  mucho  maiz,
que  es  el  trigo  de  las  Indias,  calaba9as,  y  melones,  y  en

171

Indies.

A.D.

1581-83.

Passaguates
Indies.

Muchas  m'lnas
de  plat  a.

Tobososlndios.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

abundancia  :  y  ay  muchos  rios  que  crian  mucha  cantidad
de  pescado  muy  bueno,  y  de  diversas  suertes :  andan  casi
todos  desnudos,  y  las  armas  que  usan  son  arco  y  flecha,  y
viven  debaxo  de  govierno,  y  sennorio  de  Caciques,  como
los  Mexicanos,  y  no  les  hallaron  Idolos,  ni  pudieron
entender  que  adorassen  a  nadie,  por  lo  qual  facilmente
consintieron  en  que  les  pusiessen  los  Christianos  cruzes,
y  quedaron  muy  contentos  con  elks,  despues  de  aversido
informados  de  los  nuestros  dela  significacion  dellas,  que  se
hizo  por  interpretes  que  Uevavan,  por  cuyo  medio
supieron  de  otras  poblaciones,  para  adonde  los  dichos
Conchos  los  guiaron,  accompannandolos  mas  de  veinte  y
quatro  leguas,  que  todas  estavan  poblades  de  gente  de  su
nacion,  y  los  salian  a  recebir  de  paz,  por  aviso  que
embiavan  los  Caciques  de  unos  pueblos  a  otros.

Andadas  las  veinte  y  quatro  leguas  dichas,  toparon  otra
nacion  de  Indios,  llamados  Passaguates,  los  quales  vivian
al  modo  que  los  ya  dichos  Conchos  sus  convezinos,  y
hizieron  con  ellos  lo  proprio,  guiandolos  adelante  otras
quatro  jornados,  con  los  avisos  de  los  Caciques,  de  la
manera  ya  dicha  :  hallaron  los  nuestros  en  este  camino
muchas  minas  de  plata,  al  parecer  de  los  que  lo  entendian,
de  mucho,  y  muy  rico  metal.  Una  Jornada  destas  toparon
otra  nacion,  llamada  los  Tobosos,  los  quales  en  viendo  el
rastro  de  los  nuestros,  se  huyeron  a  las  sierras,  dexando
sus  casas  y  pueblos  desiertos.  Supose  despues  que
algunos  annos  antes  avian  acudido  por  alii  ciertos
soldados  que  yvan  en  busca  de  minas,  y  avian  llevado
cautivos  a  ciertos  naturales,  lo  qual  tenia  temerosos  y
abispados  a  los  demas.  El  Capitan  dio  orden  como  los
fuessen  a  llamar,  assegurandolos  de  que  no  les  seria  hecho
ningun  mal,  y  diose  tan  buena  manna  que  hizo  venir  a
muchos,  aquien  regalo,  y  dio  dones,  acariciandolos,  y
declarandoles  por  el  interprete,  que  no  yvan  a  hazer  mal
a  nadie,  con  lo  qual  se  bolvieron  todos  a  sossegar,  y
consintieron  les  pusiessen  Cruzes,  y  declarassen  el  mys-
terio  dellas,  mostrando  reciber  della  gran  contentamiento,
en cuya demostracion los  fueron acompannando, como

172

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.
lo avian  hecho  sus  vezinos,  hasta que  los  metieron en
tierra poblada de otra nacion differente, que distavan
de  la suya  cosa de doze  leguas  : usan arco,  y flecha,
y  andan  desundos.

Prosiguese  del  descubrimiento  del  Nuevo  Mexico.

LA  nacion  hasta  donde  los  dicho  Tobosos  los  guiaron
se  llamava  Jumanos,  a  quien  por  otro  nombre  llaman  Jumams
los  Espannoles  Patarabueyes  :  tienen  una  Provincia  ^'^^'■'^^■
grande,  y  de  muchos  pueblos  con  mucha  gente,  y  las
casas  eran  con  a90teas,  y  de  calicanto,  y  los  pueblos
tra9ados  por  buen  orden  :  tienen  todos  los  hombres  y
mugeres  los  rostros  rayados,  y  los  bra90s,  y  piernas  :
es  gente  corpulenta,  y  de  mas  policia,  que  los  que  hasta
alii  avian  visto,  y  tenian  muchos  mantenimientos,  y
mucha  ca9a  de  pie  y  de  buelo,  y  gran  cantidad  de  pes-  Rio  del  Norte.
cado,  a  causa  de  tener  grandes  rios  que  vienen  de  hazia
el  Norte,  y  alguno  tan  grande  como  Guadalquivir,  el
qual  entra  en  la  propria  mar  del  Norte.  Tiene  muchas
lagunas  de  agua  salada  que  se  quaja  cierto  tiempo  del
anno,  y  se  haze  muy  buena  sal.  Es  gente  bellicosa,  Buena  sal.
y  mostraronlo  luego,  porque  la  primera  noche  que  los
nuestros  assentaron  real,  les  flecharon,  y  mataron  cinco
cavallos,  hiriendo  muy  mal  otros  tantos,  y  no  dexaran
ninguno  a  vida,  sino  por  las  guardas  que  los  defendieron.
Hecho  este  mal  recado,  despoblaron  el  lugar,  y  se  subi-
eron  a  una  sierra  que  estava  cerca,  adonde  fue  luego
por  la  mannana  el  Capitan  con  otros  cinco  soldados
bien  armados  con  un  interprete  llamado  Pedro,  Indio
de  su  mesma  nacion,  y  con  buenas  razones  los  quieto
y  dexo  de  paz,  haziendolos  baxar  a  su  pueblo  y  casas,  y
persuadiendolos  a  que  diesten  aviso  asus  vezinos  de  [III.  385.]
que  no  eran  hombres  que  hazian  mal  a  nadie,  ni  les
yvan  a  tomar  sus  haziendas :  que  lo  alcan^o  facilmente
con  su  prudencia,  y  con  darles  a  los  Caciques  algunas
sartas  de  quentas  de  vidrio  que  Uevava  para  este  effeto,
y  sombreros,  y  otras  ninnerias  :  con  este,  y  con  el  buen
tratamiento  que  les  hazian,  se  fueron  muchos  dellos  en

173

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581-83.

compannia de los nuestros algunos dias, caminando

Rio  grande.  siempre  por  la  ribera  del  rio  grande  arriba  dicho,  por-
toda  la  qual  havia  muchos  pueblos  de  Indios  desta
nacion,  que  duraron  por  espacio  de  doze  jornadas,  en
todas  las  quales  avisados  los  unos  Caciques  de  los  otros
salian  a  recebir  a  los  nuestros  sin  arcos,  ni  flechas,  y  les

1 2  Jornadas.  trayan  muchos  mantenimientos,  y  otros  regalos  y  dadivos,
en  especial  cueros  y  camu9as  muy  bien  adere9ados,  y  que
no  les  excedian  en  esto  las  de  Flandes.  Es  gente  toda
vestida,  y  hallaron  que  tenian  alguna  lumbre  de  nuestra
sancta  Fee,  porque  sennalavan  a  Dios  mirando  al  cielo,

Apalito.  y le llaman en su lengua Apalito,  y  le conocen por

sennor,  de  cuya  larga  mano,  y  misericordia  confiessan
aver  recibido  la  vida,  y  el  ser  natural,  y  los  bienes
temporales.  Venian  muchos  dellos,  y  las  mugeres  y
ninnos,  a  que  el  Religioso,  que  diximos  que  yva  con
el  dicho  Capitan  y  soldados,  los  santiguasse,  y  echasse
la  benedicion  :  el  qual  como  les  preguntasse  de  quien
avian  entendido  aquel  conocimiento  de  Dios  que  tenian  :
respondieron,  que  de  tres  Christianos,  y  un  negro,  que
avian  passado  por  alii,  y  detenidose  algunos  dias  en  su
tierra,  que  segun  las  sennas  que  dieron,  eran  Alvar
Nunnes  Cabe9a  de  Vaca,  y  Dorantes,  y  Castillo  Mal-
donado,  y  un  negro,  que  todos  ellos  avian  escapado  de
la  armida  con  que  entro  Panfilo  de  Narbaez  en  la  Florida,
y  despues  de  aver  sido  muchos  dias  esclavos,  vinieron
a  dar  a  estos  pueblos,  haziendo  Dios  por  medio  dellos
muchos  milagros,  y  sanando  con  el  tocamento  solo  de  sus
manos  muchos  enfermos,  por  lo  qual  dexaron  gran
nombre  en  toda  aquella  tierra.  Toda  esta  Provincia
quedo  de  paz,  y  muy  sossegada,  en  cuya  demonstracion
fueron  acompannando  y  sirviendo  a  los  nuestras  algunos
dias  por  la  orilla  del  rio  que  diximos  arriba.

Otra  Pro-  A pocas dias toparon con una gran poblacion de

vincia.  Indios, adonde los salieron a recebir por nueva que

tuvieron  de  sus  vezinos,  y  les  sacaron  muchas  cosas
muy  curiosas  de  pluma  de  difFerentes  colores,  y  muchas
mantas de algodon barretadas  de  azul  y bianco, como

174

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.
las que  traen de  la China,  para  rescatarlas, y trocarlas
por otras cosas. Yvan todos, assi hombres como
mugeres,  y ninnos vestidos  de  camu9as muy  buenas  y
bien adobadas,  y nuncapudieron  los nuestros entender
que nacion era  por falta de interprete  que intendiesse
su  lengua,  aunque  por  sennas  tratavan  con ellos, a los
quales como les mostrassen algunas piedres de metal  Metal  rm.
rico,  y  les  preguntassen  si  havia  de  aquello  en  su  tierra :
Respondieron  por  las  mesmas  sennas  que  cinco  dias  de
camino  de  alii  hazia  el  Poniente,  avia  de  aquello  en  muy
gran  cantidad,  y  que  ellos  los  guiarian  para  alia,  y  se  lo
mostrarian, como lo cumplieron despues,  acompannan-
dolos  por  espacio  de  veynte  y  dos  leguas,  todas  pobladas
de  gente  de  su  mesma  nacion  : a  quien  immediatamente
se  seguia  por  el mesmo  rio  arriba otra  de mucha  mas
gente  que  la  de  la  passada,  de  quien  fueron  bien  recibidos,
y  regalados  con  muchos  presentes,  especialmente  de  pes-
cado  que  havia  infinito,  a  causa  de  unas  lagunas  grandes  Otra  pro-
que  cerca  de alii  havia,  que  lo crian en  la  abundancia  ^^'"^"^•
dicha. Estuvieron entre estos tres dias,  en los quales  ^ffJ^J
de dia, y de noche les hizieron muchos bayles a su
modo,  con  particular  signification  de  alegria : no  se  supo
como se llamava esta nacion por falta de interprete,
aunque  entendieron  que se  extendia  mucho,  y  que  era
muy grande. Entre estos hallaron un Indio Concho
de  nacion,  que  les  dixo,  y  sennalo,  que  quinze  jornadas
de  alii hazia  el  Poniente  havia  una  laguna  muy ancha,  Laguna  muy
y cerca  della muy grandes  pueblos, y casas de tres y  ^^'^h'^-
quatro  altos,  y  la  gente  bien  vestida,  y  la  tierra  de  muchos
bastimentos,  el  qual  se offrecio  de  Uevarlos  alia,  y  hol-
garan  los  nuestros  dello,  y  solo  lo  dexaron  de  poner  en
eiFecto,  pro  proseguir  el  intento  con  que  avian  comen9ado
la  Jornada, que era yr  al Norte a dar socorro a los
Religiosos  arriba  dichos.

En  esta  Provincia  lo  que  particularmente  notaron  fue,  Muchos  Me-
que  havia  muy  buen  temple,  y  muy  ricas  tierras,  y  mucha  ^^^^^  ^'^'^°^-
ca9a de pie  y buelo, y muchos  metales ricos, y otras
cosas  particulares,  y  de  provecho.

175

A.D.

1581-83.

Sal  blanca.

Rio  Turbioso
del  Norte.

Nuevo
Mexico.
[III.  386.]

Casas  de
quatro  altos.

Estafas.

Suelasdevaca.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Desta  Provincia  fueron  siguiendo  su  derrota  por
espacio  de  quinze  dias,  sin  topar  en  todos  ellos  nin-
guna  gente  por  entre  grandes  pinales  de  pinnas  y  pin-
nones,  como  los  de  Castilla :  al  cabo  de  los  quales  aviendo
caminado  a  su  parecer  ochenta  leguas,  toparon  una
pequenna  Rancheria,  o  pueblo  de  poca  gente,  y  en  sus
casas,  que  eran  pobres,  y  de  paja,  gran  cantidad  de  cueros
de  venados  tan  bien  ader9ados  como  los  de  Flandes,  y
mucha  sal  blanca,  y  muy  buena.  Hizieronles  muy  buen
hospedaje  dos  dias  que  alii  estuvieron,  despues  delos
quales  los  accompannaron  como  doze  leguas  a  unas
poblaciones  grandes,  caminando  siempre  por  el  rio  del
Norte  ya  dicho,  hasta  llegar  a  la  tierra  que  Uaman  el
Nuevo  Mexico.  Estava  toda  la  ribera  del  dicho  rio  llena
de  grandissimas  alamedas  de  alamos  blancos  y  en  partes
tomavan  quatro  leguas  de  ancho,  y  ansi  mesmo  de
muchos  nogales,  y  parrales  como  los  de  Castilla.  Avi-
endo caminado  dos  dias  por  estas  alamedas,  y  noguerales,
toparon  diez  pueblos  que  estavan  assentados  en  la  ribera
del  dicho  rio  por  ambas  partes,  sin  otros  que  se  mostra-
van  mas  desviados,  en  los  quales  les  parecio  avia  mucha
gente,  y  la  que  ellos  vieron  passavan  en  numero  de  diez
mil  animas.  En  esta  Provincia  los  regalaron  mucho  con
recebimientos,  y  con  llevarlos  a  sus  pueblos,  donde  les
davan  mucha  comida,  y  gallinas  de  la  tierra,  y  otras  cosas,
y  todo  con  gran  voluntad.  Aqui  hallaron  casas  de  quatro
altos,  y  bien  edificadas,  y  con  galanos  aposentos,  y  en
las  mas  dellas  avia  estufas  para  tiempo  de  invierno.
Andavan  vestidos  de  algodon,  y  de  cuero  de  venado,  y  el
traje,  assi  de  los  hombres,  como  de  las  mugeres,  es  al
modo  del  de  los  Indios  del  reyno  de  Mexico :  y  lo  que
les  causo  mas  estranneza,  fue  ver  que  todos  ellos,  y  ellas
andavan  cal9ados  con  9apatos  y  botas  de  buen  cuero  con
suelas  de  vaca,  cosa  que  hasta  alii  nunca  la  avian  visto.
Las  mugeres  trayan  el  cabello  muy  peynado,  y  compu-
esto,  y  sin  cosa  sobre  la  cabe9a.  En  todos  estos  pueblos
avia  Caciques  que  los  governavan  como  entre  los  Indios
Mexicanos,  con  Alguaziles para executar sus  mandami-

176

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.

entos,  los  quales  van  por  el  pueblo,  diziendo  a  vozes
la  voluntad  de  los  Caciques,  y  que  la  pongan  por  obra.
En  esta  Provincia  hallaron  los  nuestros  muchos  Idolos
que  adoravan,  y  en  especial  que  tenian  en  cada  casa
un  templo  para  el  Demonio,  donde  le  llevavan  de  ordi-
nario  de  comer,  y  otra  cosa,  que  de  la  manera  que  entre
los  Christianos  tenemos  en  los  caminos  cruzes:  assi
tienen  ellos  unas  como  capillas,  altas,  donde  dizen,
descansa,  y  se  recrea  el  Demonio,  quando  va  de  un
pueblo  a  otro :  las  quales  estan  muy  adornadas  y  pintadas.
En  todas  las  sementeras,  o  labran9as,  que  las  tienen  muy
grandes,  tienen  a  un  lado  dellas  un  portal  con  quatro
pilares,  donde  comen  los  trabajadores,  y  passan  la  siesta,
porque  es  la  gente  muy  dada  ala  labor,  y  estan  de  ordi-
nario  en  elk :  es  tierra  de  muchos  montes  y  pinales.
Las  armas  que  usan  son  arcos  muy  fuertes,  y  flechas
con  las  puntas  de  pedernal  con  que  passan  una  cota,  y
macanas,  que  son  unos  palos  de  media  vara  de
largo,  y  llanos  todos  de  pedernales  agudos,  que  bastan
a  partir  por  medio  un  hombre,  y  ansi  mesmo  unas  como
adargas  de  cuero  de  vaca  crudio.  Cuerodevaca.

Prosiguese  del  Nuevo  Mexico,  y  de  las  cosas  que  en
el  se  vieron.

DEspues  de  aver  estado  en  esta  Provincia  quatro  dias,
y  a  poca  distancia  toparon  son  otra,  que  se  Uamava
la  Provincia  de  los  Tiguas,  en  la  qual  avia  diez  y  seys  Tiguas.
pueblos :  en  el  uno  de  los  quales,  llamado  por  nombre
Poala,  hallaron  que  avian  muerto  los  indios  a  los  dichos  Poala.
dos  padres  fray  Francisco  Lopez,  y  fray  Augustin,  a
quien  yvan  a  buscar,  y  juntamene  a  tres  muchachos,  y
un  mestizo.  Quando  los  deste  pueblo,  y  sus  convezinos
vieron  a  los  nuestros,  remordiendo  les  la  propria  con-
sciencia,  y  temiendose  que  yvan  a  castigarlos,  y  tomar
vengan9a  de  las  muertes  de  los  dichos  padres,  no  los
osaron  esperar,  antes  dexando  sus  casas  desiertas  se
subieron  a  las  sierras  mas  cercanas,  de  donde  nunca  los
pudieron  hazer  baxar,  aunque  lo  procuraron  con  alagos  y

IX  177  M

A.D.
1581-83.

Metales  muy
buenos.

Nueva
Vizcaya.
Nota  diligen-
t'lssime.

Otra  pro-

vincia.

Minas  ricas.

[III.  387.]

Quires.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

mannas.  Hallaron  en  los  pueblos  y  casas  muchos  mante-
nimientos,  y  gran  infinidad  de  gallinas  de  la  tierra,  y
muchas  suertes  de  metales,  y  algunos  que  parecian  muy
buenos.  No  se  pudo  entender  claramente  que  tanta
gente  fuesse  la  desta  Provincia,  por  causa  de  averse  (como
ya  dixe)  subido  a  la  sierra.

Aviendo  hallado  muertos  a  los  que  buscavan,  entraron
en  consulta  sobre  si  se  bolverian  a  la  Nueva  Vizcaya,  de
donde  havian  salido,  o  passarian  adelante  :  en  lo  qual  uvo
diversos  pareceres  :  pero  como  alii  entendiessen,  que  a
la  parte  de  Oriente  de  aquella  Provincia,  y  muy  distante
de  alii  havian  grandes  pueblos  y  ricos,  hallandose  alii
tan  cerca,  acordo  el  dicho  Capitan  Antonio  de  Espejo
de  consentimiento  de  Religioso  ya  dicho,  llamado  fray
Bernardino  Beltran,  y  de  la  mayor  parte  de  sus  soldados,
y  companneros,  de  proseguir  con  el  descubrimiento  hasta
ver  en  que  parava,  para  poder  dar  dello  noticia  cierta
y  clara  a  su  Megestad,  como  testigos  de  vista :  y  assi
conformes  determinaron  que  quedandose  alii  el  Real,
fuessen  el  Capitan  con  dos  companneros  en  demanda  de
su  desseo,  que  lo  pusieron  por  obra.  Y  a  dos  dias  de
camino  toparon  con  una  Provincia  donde  vieron  onze
pueblos,  y  en  ellos  mucha  gente,  que  a  su  parecer  passava
en  numero  de  quarenta  mil  animas :  era  tierra  muy  fertil
y  bastecida,  cuyos  confines  estan  immediatamente  juntas
con  las  tierras  de  Cibola,  donde  ay  muchas  vacas,  de  cuyos
cueros  se  visten,  y  de  algodon :  siguiendo  en  la  manera
del  govierno  el  orden  que  guarden  sus  convezinos  :  ay
sennales  de  muchas  minas  ricas,  y  assi  hallavan  metales
dellas  en  algunas  casas  de  los  Indies,  los  quales  tienen,
y  adoran  Idolos  :  recibieronlos  de  paz,  y  dieron  les  de
comer.  Visto  esto,  y  la  disposicion  de  la  tierra,  se
bolvieron  al  real  de  donde  avian  salido,  a  dar  noticia  a  sus
companneros  de  todo  lo  sobredicho.

Llegados  al  Real  (como  esta  dicho)  tuvieron  noticia
de  otra  Provincia,  llamada  los  Quires,  que  estava  el  rio
del  Norte  arriba  seys  leguas  de  distancia,  y  como  se
partiessen para alia, y Uegassen una legua della, les

178

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.

salieron  a  recebir  de  paz  mucha  cantidad  de  Indios,  y  a
rogar  que  se  fuessen  con  ellos  a  sus  pueblos,  que  como
lo  hiziessen,  fueron  muy  bien  recebidos  y  regalados.
Vieron  solamente  cinco  pueblos  en  esta  Provincia,  en  los
quales  avia  muy  gran  cantidad  de  gente,  y  la  que  ellos
vieron  passava  de  quinze  mil  animas,  y  adoran  Idolos
como  sus  vezinos.  Hallaron  en  uno  destos  pueblos  una
Urraca  en  una  jaula,  como  se  usa  en  Castilla,  y  tira
soles,  como  los  que  se  traen  de  la  China,  pintados  en
ellos  el  sol  y  la  luna,  y  muchas  estrellas.  Donde  como
tomassen  la  altura,  se  hallaron  en  treynta  y  siete  grados
y  medio  debaxo  del  Norte.

Salieron  desta  Provincia,  y  caminando  por  el  proprio
rumbo,  y  a  catorze  leguas,  hallaron  otra  Provincia,
llamada  los  Cunames,  donde  vieron  otros  cinco  pueblos,  Cmames
y  el  principal  dellos,  y  mas  grande  se  Uamava  Cia,  que  ^p^°^-
era  tan  grande  que  tenia  ocho  pla9as,  cuyas  casas  eran
encaladas,  y  pintadas  de  colores,  y  mejores  que  las  que
havian  visto  en  las  Provincias  a-tras  :  parecioles  que  la
gente  que  vieron  passavan  de  veynte  mil  animas :  hizieron
presente  a  los  nuestros  de  muchas  mantas  curiosas,  y  de
cosas  de  comer  muy  bien  guisadas,  y  juzgaron  ser  la
gente  mas  curiosa,  y  de  mayor  policia,  de  quantas  hasta  Rkosmetaks.
alii  havian  visto,  y  de  mejor  govierno  :  monstraronles
ricos  metales,  y  unas  sierras  alii  cerca  de  donde  de  los
sacavan.  Aqui  tuvieron  noticia  de  otra  Provincia,  que
stava  hazia  el  Nordueste,  que  se  determinaron  de  yr  a
ella.

Como  uviessen  andado  como  seys  leguas,  toparon  con
la  dicha  Provincia,  que  se  llamava  de  los  Ameies,  en  Jmeies.
la  qual  havia  siete  pueblos  muy  grandes,  y  en  ellos  a  su
entender  mas  de  treynta  mil  animas.  Uno  destos  siete
pueblos  dixeron  era  muy  grande  y  hermoso,  que  le
dexaron  de  yr  a  ver,  assi  por  estar  detras  de  una  sierra,
como  por  temor  de  algun  ruyn  successo,  si  a  caso  se
dividian  los  unos  de  los  otros.  Es  gente  al  modo  de
la  Provincia  su  vezina,  y  tan  abastada  como  ella,  y  de
tan  buen  govierno.

179

A.D.
1581-83.

1 5  Leguas.

Metales.

24  leguas.
Zuny  0  Cibola.

60  Jornadas.
Lago  muy
grande  mucho
oro.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  quinze  leguas  desta  Provincia,  caminando  siempre
hazia  el  Poniente,  hallaron  un  pueblo  grande  llamado
Acoma,  era  de  mas  de  seys  mil  animas,  y  estava  essen-
tado  sobre  uno  penna  alta  que  tenia  mas  de  cinquenta
estados  en  alto,  no  teniendo  otra  entrada  sino  por  una
escalera  que  estava  hecha  en  la  propria  penna,  cosa  que
admiro  mucho  alos  nuestros  :  toda  el  agua  que  en  el
pueblo  avia  era  de  cisternas.

Vinieron  los  principales  de  paz  a  ver  a  los  Espan-
noles,  y  traxeron  les  muchas  mantas,  y  camu9as  muy
bien  adere  ^adas,  y  gran  cantidad  de  bastimentos.  Tienen
sus  sembrados  dos  leguas  de  alii,  y  sacan  el  agua  para
regarlos  de  un  rio  pequenno  que  esta  cerca,  en  cuya
ribera  vieron  muy  grandes  rosales  como  los  de  aca  de
Castilla.  Ay  muchas  sierras  con  sennales  de  metales,
aunque  no  subieron  a  verlo,  por  ser  los  Indios  dellas
muchos,  y  muy  bellicosos.  Estuvieron  los  nuestros  en
este  lugar  tres  dias,  en  uno  de  los  quales  los  naturales
les  hizieron  un  bayle  muy  solenne,  saliendo  a  el  con
galannos  vestidos,  y  con  juegos  muy  ingeniosos,  con  que
holgaron  en  se  estremo.

Veynte  y  quartro  leguas  de  aqui,  hazia  el  Poniente,
dieron  con  una  Provincia,  que  se  nombra  en  lengua  de
los  naturales  Zuny,  y  la  Uaman  los  Espannoles  Cibola,
ay  en  elk  gran  cantidad  de  Indios,  en  la  qual  estuvo
Francisco  Vazquez  Coronado,  y  dexo  muchas  Cruzes
puestas,  y  otras  sennales  de  Christianidad  que  siempre
se  estavan  en  pie.  Hallaron  ansi  mesmo  tres  Indios
Christianos  que  se  avian  quedado  de  aquella  Jornada,
cuyos  nombres  eran  Andres  de  Cuyoacan,  Caspar  de
Mexico,  y  Antonio  de  Guadalajara,  los  quales  tenian
casi  olvidada  su  mesma  lengua,  y  sabian  muy  bien  la
delos  naturales,  aunque  a  pocas  bueltas  que  les  hablaron
se  entendieron  facilmente.  De  quien  supieron  que
sesenta  jornadas  de  alii  avia  una  laguna,  o  lago  muy
grande,  en  cuyas  riberas  estavan  muchos  pueblos  grandes
y  buenos,  y  que  los  naturales  tenian  mucho  oro,  de  lo
qual era indicion el traer todos braceletes y orejeras

180

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.
dello :  y  que  como  el  sobredicho  Francisco  Vazquez  Coro-
nado  tuviesse  noticia  muy  cierta  dello,  havia  salido  desta
Provincia  de  Cibola  para  yr  alia,  y  aviendo  andado
doze  jornadas  le  falto  el  agua,  y  se  determino  de  bolver,
como  lo  hizo,  con  determinacion  de  tornar  otra  vez
mas  de  proposito  a  ello,  que  despues  no  lo  puso  en
execucion,  porque  la  muerte  le  atajo  los  passes  y  pen-
samientos.

Prosigue  del  Nuevo  Mexico.

A  La  nueva  de  la  riqueza  dicha,  quiso  a  cudir  el  dicho
Capitan  Antonio  de  Espejo,  y  aunque  eran  de  su
parecer  algunos  de  sus  companneros,  la  mayor  parte,  y
el  Religioso  fue  de  contrario :  diziendo,  era  ya  tiempo  de
bolverse  a  la  nueva  Viscaya  de  donde  havian-  salido,  a  A^«^«^f
dar  cuenta  de  lo  que  avian  visto :  que  lo  pusieron  por  frT^y'^^^oq
obra  dentro  de  pocos  dias  la  mayor  parte,  dexando  al  ^
Capitan,  con  nueve  companneros  que  lo  quisieron  seguir :
el  qual,  despues  de  haverse  certificado  muy  por  entero
de  la  riqueza  arriba  dicha,  y  de  mucha  abundancia  de
metales  que  en  ello  avia  muy  buenos,  salio  con  los  dichos
sus  companneros  desta  provincia,  y  caminando  hazia  el
proprio  Poniente,  despues  de  haver  andado  veinte  y  ocho  28  Leguas.
leguas,  hallaron  otra  muy  grande,  en  la  quel  les  parecio  9^^^'^.
havia  mas  de  cinquenta  mil  animas,  cuyos  moradores
como  supiessen  su  llegada,  les  embiaron  un  recado,
diziendo,  que  si  no  querian  que  los  matassen,  no  se
acercassen  mas  a  sus  pueblos :  a  lo  qual  respondio  el
dicho  Capitan,  que  ellos  no  les  yvan  a  hazer  mal,  como
lo  verian,  y  que  assi  les  rogavan  no  se  pusiessen  en
Uevar  adelante  su  intento,  dando  al  mensajero  algunas
cosas  de  las  que  llevava :  el  qual  supo  tan  bien  abonar
a  los  nuestros,  y  allanar  los  pechos  alborotados  de  los
Indios,  que  les  dieron  lugar  de  voluntad  para  que  en-
trassen,  que  lo  hizieron  con  ciento  y  cinquenta  Indios
amigos  de  la  provincia  de  Cibola  ya  dicha,  y  los  tres
Indios  Mexicanos,  de  quien  queda  hecha  mencion.  Una
legua  antes  que  Uegassen  al  primer  pueblo,  les  salieron  a

A.D.

1581-83.

Zaguato  0
Ahuatopuehlo.

Metales  ricos.
La  laguna
grande  arr'tba
dicha.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

recebir  mas  de  dos  mil  Indies  cargados  de  bastimentos,  a
quien  el  dicho  Capitan  dio  algunas  cosas  de  poco  precio,
que  a  ellos  les  parecio  ser  de  mucho,  y  las  estimaron  mas
que  si  fueran  de  oro.  Llegando  mas  cerca  del  pueblo,
que  se  llamava  Zaguato,  salio  a  recebirlos  gran  muche
dumbre  de  Indios,  y  entre  ellos  los  Caciques,  haziendo
tanta  demostracion  de  plazer  y  regozijo,  que  echavan
mucha  harina  de  maiz  por  el  suelo,  para  que  la  pisassen
los  cavallos  :  con  esta  fiesta  entraron  en  el,  y  fueron  muy
bien  hospedados,  y  regalados,  que  se  lo  pago  en  parte  el
Capitan,  con  dar  a  todos  los  mas  principales  sombreros,  y
quentas  de  vidrio,  y,  otras  muchas  cosas  que  llevava  para
semej antes  offrecimientos.

Despacharon  luego  los  dichos  Caciques  recados  a  todos
los  de  aquella  Provincia,  dandoles  noticia  de  la  venida  de
los  huespedes,  y  de  como  eran  hombres  muy  corteses,  y
no  les  hazian  mal  :  lo  qal  fue  bastante  para  hazer  los
venir  a  todos  cargados  de  presentes  para  los  nuestros,  y
de  que  los  importunassen,  fuessen  con  ellos  a  holgarse  a
sus  pueblos,  que  lo  hizieron,  aunque  siempre  con  recado
de  lo  que  podia  succeder.  Por  lo  qual  el  dicho  Capitan
uso  de  una  cautela,  y  fue  dezir  a  los  Caciques,  que  por
quanto  los  cavallos  eran  muy  bravos,  y  les  avian  dicho
que  los  querian  matar,  seria  necessario  hazer  un  fuerte  de
calicanto  donde  meter  lospara  evitar  el  danno  que  querian
hazer  en  los  Indios.  Creyeronlo  los  Caciques  tan  de
veras  que  dentro  de  pocas  horas  juntaron  tanta  gente  que
hizieron  el  dicho  fuerte  que  los  nuestros  querian  con  una
presteza  increyble.  Demas  desto,  diziendo  el  Capitan
que  se  queria  yr,  le  traxeron  un  presente  de  40.  mil
mantas  de  algodon  pintadas  y  blancas,  y  mucha  cantidad
de  pannos  de  manos  con  borlas  en  las  puntas,  y  otras
muchas  cosas,  y  entre  elks  metales  ricos,  y  que  mostravan
tener  mucha  plata.  Hallaron  entre  estos  Indios  muy
gran  noticia  de  la  laguna  grande  arriba  dicha,  y  con-
formaron  con  los  otros  en  lo  tocante  a  las  riquezas,  y
mucha  abundantia  de  oro.

Fiado  el  Capitan  desta  gente,  y  de  sus  buenos  animos,

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.

a  cordo  a  cabo  de  algunos  dias  de  dexar  alii  cinco  de  sus

copanneros  con los demas Indios  amigos,  para que se

bolviessen  a  la  provincia  de  Zuny  con  el  bagaje,  y  de  yrse

el  con  los  quatro  que  quedavan  a  la  ligera  en  descubri-

mento  de  cierta noticia  que  tenia  de  unas minas muy

ricas. Lo  qual  puesto  por  obra  se  partio  con  las  guias

que  llevava,  y  como  uviesse  caminado  hazia  el proprio

Poniente quarenta  y  cinco  leguas,  topo  con las dichas  45  Leguas.

minas,  y  saco  con  sus  proprias  manos  riquissimos  metales,  Ri<}^"^^^°^

y  de  mucha  plata  : y  las  minas, que  eran  de  una  veta

muy  ancha,  estavan  en  una  sierra  adonde  se  podia  subir

con  facilidad,  a  causa  de  haver  para  ello  camino  abierto.

Cerca  delas  avia  algunos  pueblos  de  Indios  serranos  que

les  hizieron  amistad,  y  los  salieron  a  recebir  con  Cruzes

en las cabe9as, y otras sennales de paz. Aqui  cerca

toparon  dos  rios  razonables,  a  cuyas  orillas  havia  muchas

patras de unas muy buenas, y  grandes noguerales, y

mucho  lino  como  lo  de  Castilla,  y  dixeron  por  sennas  que  Rio  grandissi-

detras de  aquellas  sierras  estava  uno  que  tenia  mas  de  ^°-

ocho  leguas  de  ancho,  pero  no  se  pudo  entender  que  tan

cerca,  aunque  hizieron  demonstracion  que  corria  hazia  la

mar  del  Norte,  y  que  en  las  riberas  del  de  una  y  orta  ^^r  del

banda  ay  muchos  pueblos  tan  grandes,  que  en  su  com-  ^°^^^-

paracion  a  quellos  en  que  estava  eran  barrios.

Despues  de  haver  tomado  toda  esta  relacion,  se  partio
el  dicho  Capitan  para  la  Provincia  de  Zuny,  adonde  havia
mendado  yr  a  los  dichos  companneros  :  y  como  llegasse
a  elk  con  salud,  haviendo  ydo  por  muy  buen  camino,
hallo  con  ella  a  sus  cinco  companneros,  y  al  dicho  padre
Fray  Bernardino  con  los  soldados  que  se  avian  deter-
minado  de  bolver,  como  ya  diximos,  que  aun  no  se  avian
partido,  por  ciertas  ocasiones:  a  los  quales  los  naturales  Zuni,oCibola.
havian  hecho  muy  buen  tratamiento,  y  dadoles  todo  lo
necessario  muy  complida  mente,  haziendo  despues  lo  [III,  389.]
mesmo  con  el  capitan,  y  los  que  con  el  venian,  a  quien
salieron  a  recebir  con  demonstracion  de  alegria,  y  dieron
muchos  bastimentos  para  la  Jornada  que  havian  de  hazer,
rogandoles que bolvissen con brevedad, y traxessen

183

A.D.
1581-83.

^esenta  leguas.

Huhates
Indios.

Minas  muy
ricas.  25000.

Tamos.
40000.

Thc^y  returne.
Julio.  1583.

Rio  de  las

vacas.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

muchos  Castillas  (que  assi  llaman  a  los  Espannoles)  y  que
a  todos  les  darian  de  comer.  Por  lo  qual  para  poderlo
hazer  con  comodidad  avian  sembrado  a  quel  anno  mas
trigo  y  semillas,  que  en  todos  los  passados.

En  este  tiempo  se  retificaron  en  su  primera  deter-
minacion  el  dicho  religioso,  y  los  soldados  arriba  dichos,
y  accordaron  de  bolverse  a  la  provincia  de  donde  avian
salido  con  el  designio  que  queda  dicho,  a  quien  se  junto
Gregorio  Hernandez  que  avia  sido  Alferez  en  la  Jornada  :
los  quales  partidos,  quedando  el  Capitan  con  solos  ocho
soldados,  se  resolvio  de  seguir  lo  comengado  y  correr  por
el  Rio  del  Norte  arriba,  que  lo  puso  por  obra.  Y
haviendo  caminado  como  sesenta  leguas  hazia  la  provincia
de  los  Quires  ya  dicha,  doze  leguas  de  alii  hazia  la  parte
del  Oriente,  hallaron  una  provincia  que  se  llamava  los
Hubates,  donde  los  Indios  los  recibieron  de  paz,  y  les
dieron  muchos  mantenimientos,  y  noticia  de  que  cerca  de
alii  havia  unas  minas  muy  ricas,  que  las  hallaron,  y
sacaron  dellas  metales  reluzientes  y  buenos,  con  los
quales  se  bolvieron  al  pueblo  de  donde  avian  salido.
Juzgaron  esta  provincia  por  de  hasta  veynte  y  cinco  mil
animas,  todos  muy  bien  vestidos  de  mantas  de  algodon
pintadas,  y  camu^as  muy  bien  adere  9adas.  Tienen
muchos  montes  de  pinales  y  cedros,  y  las  casas  de  los
pueblos  son  de  quatro  y  cinco  altos.  Aqui  tuvieron
noticia  que  otra  provincia  que  estava  una  Jornada  de  alii,
que  se  llamava  de  los  Tamos,  en  que  havia  mas  de
quarenta  mil  animas,  donde  como  llegassen  no  les
quisieron  dar  de  comer  los  moradores  della,  ni  admit-
irlos  en  sus  pueblos :  por  lo  qual,  y  por  el  peligro  en  que
estavan,  y  estar  algunos  soldados  enfermos,  y  ser  tan
pocos  (como  havem.os  dicho)  se  determinaron  de  yrse
saliendo  para  tierra  de  Christianos,  y  lo  pusieron  en
execucion  a  principio  de  Julio  del  anno  de  ochenta  y
tres,  siendo  guiados  por  un  Indio  que  se  fue  con  ellos,  y
los  llevo  por  camino  differente  del  que  a  la  venida  havian
traydo,  por  un  rio  abaxo,  a  quien  llamaron  de  las  vacas,
por  aver  gran  muche  dumbre  dellas  en  toda  su  ribera,  por

Rio  de  los
Conchas.

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.
donde caminaron  ciento  y veynte leguas, topando las  Ciento  y
ordinariamente  :  de  aqui  salieron  al  rio  de  los Conchos  "^V^^y^p^^^-

1  111TT11  lo  Kin  /IP  Inc

por  donde  avian  entrado,  j  del  al  Valle  de  Sant
Bertholome  de  donde  havian  salido  para  dar  principio
al  descubrimiento  :  y  ya  quando  llegaron,  hallaron  que
el  dicho  fray  Bernardino  Beltran,  y  sus  companneros  avian
llegado  a  salvamento  al  dicho  pueblo  muchos  dias  havia,
y  que  de  alii  se  avian  ydo  a  la  villa  de  Guadiana.  Hizo  Guadiana.
en  este  pueblo  el  dicho  Capitan  Antonio  de  Espejo  infor-
macion  muy  cierta  de  todo  lo  arriba  dicho,  laqual  embio
liiego  al  Conde  de  Corunna  Virey  de  aquel  Reyno,  y  el  a
su  Magestad,  y  a  los  Sennores,  de  su  Real  Consejo  de  las
Indias,  para  que  ordenassen  lo  que  fuessen  servidos,  que
lo  han  ya  hecho  con  mucho  cuydado.  Nuestro  Sennor  se
situa  de  ayudar  este  negocio,  de  modo  que  tantas  almas
redemidas  con  su  sangre  no  se  condenen,  de  cuyos  buenos
ingenios  (en  que  exceden  alos  de  Mexico  y  Peru,  segun
se  entendio  de  los  que  los  trataron)  se  puede  presumir,
abra9aran  con  facilidad  la  ley  Evangelica,  dexando  la
idolatria,  que  agora  la  mayor  parte  dellos  tiene  :  que
lo  haga  Dios  como  puede  para  honra  y  gloria  suya,
y  augmento  de  la  sancta  fe  Catholica.

Nota.

185

[A  briefe

A.D.
1581-83.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  first  voy-
age made  by
F?ierJngustin
Ruiz  to  the
province  de  los
Tiguas.
[III.  39°-]

A  briefe  relation  of  two  notable  voyages,  the
first  made  by  frier  Augustin  Ruyz  a  Fran-
ciscan, in  the  yeere  1581:  the  second  by
Antonio  de  Espejo  in  the  yeere  1583:  who
together  with  his  company  discovered  a  land
wherin  they  found  lifteene  provinces  all  full
of  townes,  conteining  houses  of  foure  and
five  stories  high,  which  they  named  New
Mexico  ;  for  that  in  many  respects  it
resembleth  the  province  of  olde  Mexico.
This  land  is  situate  to  the  North  of  Nueva
Espanna,  and  stretcheth  from  24  to  34
degrees  and  better  :  by  the  which  &  by
other  inhabited  lands  it  is  thought  that  men
may  travell  even  to  Terra  de  Labrador.
Taken  out  of  the  history  of  China  written
by  Frier  Juan  Gonzales  de  Mendo9a,  and
printed  in  Madrid 1586.

Have  now  declared  in  the  title  of  this
present  discourse,  that  in  the  yeere  1583
there  were  discovered  iifteene  provinces,
which  the  discoverers  called  New  Mexico,
situate  on  the  firme  land  of  Nueva
Espanna,  and  I  promised  to  give  notice
of  the  sayd  discovery,  which  I  will  do
with  as  much  brevity  as  is  possible  :  for  if  I  should
record  at  large  all  particulars  which  they  saw  and  came
to  the  knowledge  of,  it  would  require  a  full  history.
The  substance  thereof  is  as  followeth.

In  the  yere  of  our  Lord  158 1  a  certaine  Franciscan
frier  called  Augustin  Ruiz  which  dwelt  in  the  valley  of
S.  Bartholomew,  being  informed  by  the  report  of  certaine
Indians  called  Conchos,  which  had  dealings  and  con-
versation with other of their neighbours called Pas-

186

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.

saguates  ; that  toward  the  North,  travelling  alwayes  hy

land, there were certaine great townes not hitherto

knowen  nor  discovered  by  our  Spanyards  : mooved  with

a  zeale of  charity,  and a desire  to  save  soules,  craved

licence of  the Conde of  Corunna  as then Viceroy  of

Nueva  Espanna,  and  of  his  superiours,  to  go  to  the  sayd

townes,  and  to  indevour to  learne their  language,  and

having  learned  the  same,  to  baptize  them,  and  to  preach

the holy Gospel unto them. After he had obteined

licence  of  the  parties  aforesayd, taking  with  him  other

two  companions  of  his owne  order,  and  eight  souldiers, ^^^  '^^iefe  of

who of their owne good will ojffered to beare him "^ ~

1 ,  1 '-'  .  .,.„,.. diers  was

company,  he  departed  to  put  m  execution  his  Christian  Francisco
and zealous intent. Who after certeine dayes travell  Sanchez
come  unto  a  countrey  called  The  province  de  los  Tiguas  Xamuzcado
distant  from  the  mines  of  Santa Barbara, from whence  '^^^^^ ^^^^^  ^
they began their journey, 250 leagues towards the  ZroJvnces^^^
North  : in  which  province  the  inhabitants,  upon a  cer-  which  being
taine  occasion,  slew  one  of  the  sayd  friers  two  companions,  intercepted  is
The  souldiers that  went  with  him  seeing this mishap,  '^0^^^}°°^^'
and perceiving  the successe, and likewise fearing, that  ^ he  province
thereof  might  happen  some  greater danger,  determined  de  los  Tiguas
with  a  common  consent  to  return  unto  the  mines  from  distant  zc^o
whence  they  departed  : considering  that their  company  ^^^g^-^^^o^th-
was  too  small  to  resist the  dangers  that  might  happen,  '^^'^inesoflanta
being  so  farre distant from  the  dwellings of  the  Span-  Barbara.
yards, and from all necessary succour. But the two
friers  which  remained  alive did not onely refuse their
determination,  but  rather  seeing  fit  occasion  to  put  their
good  desire in execution, and  so great a harvest  ripe
for  the  Lords  table,  because  they  could  not  persuade  the
souldiers to proceed  any  further  in  that  discovery,  re-
mained behinde in the sayd province with three
Indian  boyes,  and  one Mestizo,  whom  they  had  caried
with  them ;  thinking  that  although  they  remained  alone,
yet  should  they  be  there  in  securitie,  by  reason  of  the
great  affability  and  love  which  the  people  of  that  place
shewed  unto  them.

187

A.D.
1581-83.

The  mines  of
SantaBarbara
160  leagues
distant  from
Mexico.

The  second
voyage.

Las  quatro
Cienegas  in
the  province
ofNueva  Bis-
caya  70
leagues  from
the  mines  of
Santa  Ba7'-
iara.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

The  eight  souldiers  being  returned  to  their  wished
home,  immediatly  sent  newes  of  all  that  had  passed  to
the  Viceroy  unto  the  city  of  Mexico,  which  is  distant
from  the  sayd  mines  of  Santa  Barbara 160  leagues.

The  friers  of  Sant  Francis  were  very  much  agrieved
at  the  staying  of  their  brethren  behinde  in  the  countrey,
and  fearing  least  the  Savages  would  kill  them  seeing
them  left  alone,  they  began  to  moove  the  minds  of
certaine  souldiers  to  make  another  voyage  to  the  sayd
province  in  the  company  of  another  frier  of  the  foresayd
Order  called  Frier  Bernardin  Beltran,  to  deliver  the
aforesayd  two  religious  men  out  of  danger,  and  to
prosecute  their  former  enterprise.

At  the  same  time  there  was  at  the  foresayd  mines
upon  some  occasion  a  citizen  of  Mexico  called  Antonio
de  Espejo,  a  rich  man,  and  of  great  courage  and  industry,
and  very  zealous  in  the  service  of  king  Philip  his
sovereine,  and  was  borne  in  Cordova.  Who  understand-
ing the  desire  of  the  foresayd  friers,  and  the  importance
of  the  action,  offered  himselfe  to  go  on  that  voyage,  and
also  to  spend  part  of  his  substance,  and  to  adventure  his
life  therein  ;  conditionally  that  licence  might  be  granted
him  to  the  same  purpose  from  some  person  sufficiently
authorised  by  his  Majestie.  Which  licence  at  the  sayd
friers  procurement  was  granted  unto  him  by  the  governour
Juan  de  Ontiveros  the  kings  Alcalde  mayor  or  chiefe
Justice  in  the  towns  called  Las  quatro  Cienegas  situate
within  the  jurisdiction  of  Nueva  Biscaya  seventy  leagues
from  the  sayd  mines  of  Santa  Barbara  ;  authorizing  him
both  to  take  in  hand  the  sayd  voyage,  and  also  to
assemble  such  people  and  souldiers  as  he  could,  which
might  accompany  and  ayde  him  in  the  performance  of
this  his  Christian intent.

The  sayd  Antonio  de  Espejo  was  so  earnest  in  this
matter,  that  in  very  few  dayes  he  had  gathered  a  company
of  souldiers,  and  made  provision  of  things  necessary  for
his  voyage,  spending  therein  a  good  part  of  his  substance.
And  he  departed  with  his  whole  company  from  the  valley

188

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.

of  S.  Bartholomew  the  tenth  of  November  1582  ;  taking  Antonio  de
with  him  (for  whatsoever  should  happen)  115  horses  and  ^^^P^P  ^"  ^^^-
mulesj  with  great  store  of  weapons,  munition,  and  victuals,  Hg^^lki^of^
and  some  Indians  to  serve  him  in  his  journey.  5.  Barthok-

Directing  his  course  toward  the  North,  after  two  dayes  mew  the  tenth
journey  he  met  with  great  store  of  the  foresayd  Indians  of 'November
called Conchos,  which dwell in villages  or  hamlets of  i  J" n  j
cottages covered with straw. Who,  so soone as they  Conchos.
understood of  his  approch,  having newes thereof  long
before,  came  foorth  to  receive  him  with  shewes  of  great
joy. The  food  of  this  people  and  of  all  the  rest  of  that
province, which is great, are conies,  hares, and deere
which  they  kill,  of  all  which  they  have  great  abundance.
Also they  have  great store of  Maiz  or Indian  wheat,
gourds,  and  melons  very  good  and  plentifull  :  and  there
are many rivers full of excellent  fish of divers  sorts.  Many  rivers.
They  goe  almost  naked,  and  the  weapons  that  they  use
are bowes & arrowes, and  live  under  the  government
and  lordship  of  Ca9iques like those of Mexico  : they
found  no  idols  among  them,  neither  could  they  under-
stand that  they  worshipped  any  thing,  whereupon  they
easily  consented  that  the  Spanyards  should  set  up  crosses,  [III.  391.]
and were  very  well  content  therewith,  after they  were
informed  by  our  friers  of  the  signification  thereof,  which
was  done  by  the  interpreters  that  they  caried  with  them  ;
by whose meanes they understood of other townes,
whither the sayd Conchos  did  conduct  them,  and  bare
them  company  above  foure  &  twenty  leagues,  all  which
way  was  inhabited with people of their owne nation  :
and  at all  places  where they  came  they  were  peaceably
received  by  advice  that  was sent  by  the  Ca9iques  from
one  towne  to  another.

Having  passed  the  foure  and  twenty  leagues  afore-
sayd,  they  came  unto  another  nation  of  Indians  called
Passaguates,  who  live  after  the  maner  of  the  foresayd  Passagimtes.
Conchos  their  borderers,  and  did  unto  them  as  the  others
had  done,  conducting  them  forward  other  foure  dayes
journey,  with advice of  the Ca9iques as before. The

A.D.

1581-83.

Ve7-y  great
and  rich  silver

Tobosos.

Jumanos  or
Patarabueyes.

Rio  turbioso
del  Norte.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Spanyards  found  in  this  journey  many  mines  of  silver,
which  according  to  the  judgement  of  skilfull  men,  were
very  plentifull  and  rich  in  metall.

A  dayes  journey  from  thence  they  met  with  another
nation  called  Tobosos,  who  so  soone  as  they  beheld  the
countenance  of  our  people  fledde  unto  the  mountaines,
leavinp'  their  townes  and  houses  desolate.  Afterward  wee
understood  that  certeine  yeeres  past  there  came  unto  that
place  certaine  souldiers  to  seeke  mines,  who  caried  away
captive  certaine  of  the  people  of  the  countrey,  which
caused  the  rest  of  them  to  be  so  shey  and  fearefull.
The  captaine  sent  messengers  to  call  them  backe  againe,
assuring  them  that  they  should  not  sustaine  any  harme,
and  handled  the  matter  so  discreetly,  that  many  of  them
returned,  whom  he  made  much  of,  and  gave  them  gifts,
using  them  kindly,  and  declaring  unto  them  by  the
interpreter,  that  their  comming  was  not  to  hurt  any
man  :  whereupon  they  were  all  quieted,  and  were  content
they  should  set  up  crosses,  and  declare  the  mystery  of
the  same,  making  shew  that  they  were  highly  pleased
therewith.  For  proofe  whereof  they  accompanied  them
on  their  voyage,  as  their  neighbours  had  done,  untill
they  had  brought  them  to  a  countrey  inhabited  by
another  nation,  which  was  distant  from  theirs  some  12
leagues. They  use  bowes  and  arrowes  and  go  naked.

The  nation  unto  which  the  sayd  Tobosos  conducted
them,  is  called  Jumanos,  whom  the  Spanyards  by  another
name  call  Patarabueyes  :  their  province  is  very  great,
conteining  many  townes  and  great  store  of  people  :  their
houses  are  flat-rooffed,  and  built  of  lime  and  stone,  and.
the  streets  of  their  townes  are  placed  in  good  order.
All  the  men  and  women  have  their  faces,  armes  and
legges  raced  and  pounced  :  they  are  a  people  of  great
stature,  and  of  better  government,  then  the  rest  which
they  had  seene  in  their  former  journeyes  :  and  are  well
provided  of  victuals,  and  furnished  with  plenty  of  wilde
beasts,  fowles  and  fishes,  by  reason  of  mighty  rivers
which  come  from  the  North,  whereof  one  is  as  great  as

190

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.

Guadalquivir,  which  falleth  into  the  North  sea  or  bay  of
Mexico.  Here  are  also  many  lakes  of  salt  water,  which
at  a  certeine  time  of  the  yere  waxeth  hard,  and  be-
commeth  very  good  salt.  They  are  a  warlike  people,  ,
and  soone  made  shew  thereof:  for  the  first  night  that
our  people  incamped  there,  with  their  arrowes  they  slew
five  horses,  and  wounded  five  other  very  sore,  nor  would
not  have  left  one  of  them  alive,  if  they  had  not  beene
defended  by  our  guard.  Having  done  this  mischiefe,
they  abandoned  the  towne,  and  withdrew  themselves  to  a
mountaine  which  was  hard  by,  whither  our  captaine  went
betimes  in  the  morning,  taking  with  him  five  souldiers
well  armed,  and  an  interpreter  called  Peter  an  Indian  of
their  owne  nation,  and  with  good  persuasions  appeased
them,  causing  them  to  descend  to  their  towne  and  houses,
and  persuading  them  to  give  advice  unto  their  neighbours,
that  they  were  men  that  would  hurt  no  body,  neither
came  they  thither  to  take  away  their  goods  :  which  he
obtained  easily  by  his  wisedome,  and  by  giving  unto  the
Cagiques  certeine  bracelets  of  glasse  beads,  with  hats  and
other  trifles,  which  he  caried  with  him  for  the  same
purpose  :  so  by  this  meanes,  and  by  the  good  intertein-
ment  which  they  gave  them,  many  of  them  accompanied
our  Spanyards  for  certeine  dayes,  alwayes  travelling  along
the  banke  of  the  great  river  abovesayd  ;  along  the  which  Rio  del  Norte.
there  were  many  townes  of  the  Indians  of  this  nation,
which  continued  for  the  space  of  twelve  dayes  travel,  all
which  time  the  Ca9iques  having  received  advice  from  one  to
another,  came  forth  to  interteine  our  people  without  their
bowes  and  arrowes,  and  brought  them  plenty  of  victuals,
with  other  presents  and  gifts,  especially  hides  and
chamois-skins  very  well  dressed,  so  that  those  of
Flanders  do  nothing  exceed  them.  These  people  are
all  clothed,  and  seemed  to  have  some  light  of  our  holy
faith  :  for  they  made  signes  of  God,  looking  up  to-
wards heaven,  and  call  him  in  their  language  Apalito,  Apdito.
and  acknowledge  him  for  their  Lord,  from  whose
bountifull  hand  and  mercy  they  confesse  that  they  have

191

A.D.
1581-83-

[III.  392.]

Pampktlo  de
Narvaex
entred  into
Florida  i  527.

Rio  del  'Norte.

Another

province.

Fery  great
quantity  of
silver.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

received  their  life  and  being,  and  these  worldly  goods.
Many  of  them  with  their  wives  and  children  came  unto
the  frier  (which  the  captaine  and  souldiers  brought  with
them)  that  hee  might  crosse  and  blesse  them.  Who
demanding  of  them,  from  whom  they  had  received  that
knowledge  of  God,  they  answered,  from  three  Christians,
&  one  Negro  which  passed  that  way,  and  remained
certaine  dayes  among  them,  who  by  the  signes  which
they  made,  were  Alvaro  Nunnez,  Cabe9a  de  Vaca,  and
Dorantes,  and  Castillo  Maldonado,  and  a  Negro  ;  all
which  escaped  of  the  company  which  Pamphilo  de
Narvaez  landed  in  Florida  ;  who  after  they  had  bene
many  dayes  captives  and  slaves,  escaped  and  came  to
these  townes,  by  whom  God  shewed  many  miracles,  and
healed  onely  by  the  touching  of  their  hands  many  sicke
persons,  by  reason  wherof  they  became  very  famous  in
all  that  countrey.  All  this  province  remained  in  great
peace  and  security  ;  in  token  whereof,  they  accompanied
and  served  our  men  certaine  dayes,  travelling  along  by
the  great  river  aforesayd.

Within  few  dayes  after  they  came  unto  another  great
province  of  Indians,  from  whence  they  came  forth  to
receive  them,  upon  the  newes  which  they  had  heard
of  their  neighbors,  and  brought  them  many  very  curious
things  made  of  feathers  of  divers  colours,  and  many
mantles  of  cotton  straked  with  blew  and  white,  like
those  that  are  brought  from  China,  to  barter  &  trucke
them  for  other  things.  All  of  them  both  men,  women
and  children  were  clad  in  chamois  skinnes  very  good
and  wel  dressed.  Our  people  could  never  understand
what  nation  they  were  for  lacke  of  an  interpreter  :  how-
beit  they  dealt  with  them  by  signes  ;  and  having  shewed
unto  them  certaine  stones  of  rich  metall,  and  inquired
whether  there  were  any  such  in  their  countrey  :  they
answered  by  the  same  signes,  that  five  dayes  journey
Westward  from  thence  there  was  great  quantity  therof,
and  that  they  would  conduct  them  thither,  and  shew
it unto them  ; as afterward they performed their

192

A,D.

1581-83.

Another  pro-
vince.

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO

promise,  &  bare  them company  22  leagues,  which was
all  inhabited  by  people  of  the  same  nation.

Next  unto  the  foresayd  province  they  came  unto
another  further  up  the  great  river  aforesayd,  being
much  more  populous  then  the  former,  of  whom  they
were  well  received,  and  welcomed  with  many  presents,
especially  of  fish,  whereof  they  have  exceeding  great
store,  by  reason  of  certaine  great  lakes  not  far  from  Great  lakes.
thence,  wherein  they  are  bred  in  the  foresayd  plenty.
They  stayed  among  these  people  three  dayes  ;  all  which
time  both  day  and  night  they  made  before  them  many
dances,  according  to  their  fashion,  with  signification  of
speciall  joy.  They  could  not  learne  the  name  of  this
nation  for  want  of  an  interpreter,  yet  they  understood
that  it  extended  very  farre,  and  was  very  great.  Among
these  people  they  found  an  Indian  of  the  foresayd  nation
of  the  Conchos,  who  told  them,  and  shewed  them  by
signes,  that  fifteene  dayes  journey  from  thence  toward
the  West  there  was  a  very  broad  lake,  and  nere  unto  A  mighty  Me
it  very  great  townes,  and  in  them  houses  of  three  or
foure  stories  high,  and  that  the  people  were  well  ap-
parelled, and  the  countrey  full  of  victuals  and  provision.
This  Concho  offered  himselfe  to  conduct  our  men  thither,
whereat  our  company  rejoyced,  but  left  off  the  enterprise,
onely  to  accomplish  their  intent  for  which  they  undertooke
the  voyage,  which  was  to  go  Northward  to  give  ayd  unto
the  two  friers  aforesayd.  The  chiefe  and  principall  thing
that  they  noted  in  this  province  was,  that  it  was  of  very
good  temperature,  and  a  very  rich  soyle,  and  had  great
store  of  wilde  beasts,  and  wilde-fowle,  and  abundance
of  rich  metals,  and  other  excellent  things,  and  very  pro-
fitable.

From  this  province  they  folowed  their  journey  for  the
space  of  fifteene  dayes  without  meeting  any  people  all  that
while,  passing  thorow  great  woods  and  groves  of  pine
trees  bearing  such  fruit  as  those  of  Castile  :  at  the  end
whereof,  having  travelled,  to  their  judgement,  fourescore
leagues,  they  came  unto  a  small  hamlet  or  village  of  fewe
IX  193  N

Rich  metals.

Woods  of  pine
trees.

A.D.
1581-83.

New  Mexico.
Woods  of
poplar  and
wahnit  trees.
Vines.

Houses  of  \
stories  high.

[in-  393-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

people,  in  whose  poore  cottages  covered  with  straw  they
found  many  deeres-skinnes  as  well  dressed  as  those  of
FlanderSj  with  great  store  of  excellent  white  salt.  They
gave  our  men  good  entertainment  for  the  space  of  two
dayes  while  they  remained  there,  after  which  they  bare
them  company  about  twelve  leagues,  unto  certaine  great
townes,  alwayes  travelling  by  the  river  called  Rio  del
Norte  abovesayd,  till  such  time  as  they  came  unto  the
countrey  called  by  them  New  Mexico.  Here  all  along
the  shore  of  the  sayd  river  grew  mighty  woods  of  poplar
being  in  some  places  foure  leagues  broad,  and  great
store  of  walnut  trees,  and  vines  like  those  of  Castillia,
Having  travelled  two  dayes  thorow  the  said  woods
of  Poplar  and  Walnut  trees,  they  came  to  ten  townes
situate  on  both  sides  of  the  sayd  river,  besides  others
which  they  might  see  further  out  of  the  way,  wherein
there  seemed  to  be  great  store  of  people,  and  those
which  they  saw  were  above  ten  thousand  persons.  In
this  province  they  received  them  very  courteously,  and
brought  them  to  their  townes,  whereas  they  gave  them
great  plenty  of  victuals  and  hennes  of  the  countrey,  with
many  other  things,  and  that  with  great  good  will.
Here  they  found  houses  of  foure  stories  high,  very
well  built,  with  gallant  lodgings,  and  in  most  of  them  were
Stooves  for  the  Winter  season.  Their  garments  were
of  Cotton  and  of  deere-skinnes,  and  the  attire  both  of
the  men  and  women  is  after  the  maner  of  the  Indians
of  the  kingdome  of  Mexico.  But  the  strangest  thing
of  all  was  to  see  both  men  and  women  weare  shooes
and  boots  with  good  soles  of  neats  leather,  a  thing
which  they  never  sawe  in  any  other  part  of  the  Indies.
The  women  keepe  their  haire  well  combed  and  dressed,
wearing  nothing  els  upon  their  heads.  In  all  these
townes  they  had  Ca9iques  which  governed  their  people
like  the  Ca9iques  of  Mexico,  with  Sergeants  to  execute
their  commandements,  who  goe  thorow  the  townes  pro-
claiming with  a  loud  voice  the  pleasure  of  the  Ca9iques,
commanding  the  same  to  be  put  in  execution. In  this

194

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.
province our men found many idols which they wor-
shipped, and particularly they had in every house an
Oratory for the divell, whereinto they ordinarily cary
him  meat : and  another  thing  they  found,  that  as  it  is  an
use  among  the  Christians  to  erect  crosses  upon  the  high
wayes,  so  have  this  people  certaine  high  chapels,  in  which
they  say  the  divell  useth  to  take  his  ease,  and  to  recreat
himselfe  as he travelleth from one towne to another ;
which  chapels  are  marvellously  well  trimmed  and  painted.
In all their arable grounds, whereof  they have great
plenty,  they  erect  on  the  one  side  a  little  cottage  or  shed
standing  upon  foure  studdes,  under  which  the  labourers
do  eat,  and  passe  away  the  heat  of  the  day,  for  they  are
a people much given to labour, and doe continually
occupy themselves therein. This countrey is full of  ^^^^^  ^sJ^
mountaines and forrests  of  Pine trees. The weapons  ^o^^^^^^^^^j"^
that  they  use  are  strong  bowes  and  arrowes  headed  with  coldnes  of  the
flints, which will pierce thorow a coat of male, and  comtrey.
macanas  which  are  clubs  of  halfe  a  yard  long, so  beset
with  sharpe  flints,  that  they  are  sufficient  to  cleave  a  man
asunder  in  the  midst :  they  use  also  a  kinde  of  targets
made  of  raw  hides.

Having  remained  foure  dayes  in  this  province,  not  The  province
farre  ofl^  they  came  to  another  called  The  province  of  °f'^^S^^^-
Tiguas  conteining  sixteene  townes,  in  one  whereof,  called
Poala,  they  understood  that  the  inhabitants  had  slaine  the  Poala.
two  fathers  aforesayd,  to  wit,  frier  Francis  Lopez,  and
frier  Augustus  Ruyz,  whom  they  went  to  seeke,  together
with  the  three  Indian  boyes,  and  the  mestizo.  So  soone
as  the  people  of  this  towne  and  their  neighbours  saw  our
men  there,  their  owne  consciences  accusing  them,  and
fearing  that  our  men  came  to  punish  them,  and  to  be
avenged  of  the  death  of  the  foresaid  fathers,  they  durst
not  abide  their  comming,  but  leaving  their  houses  desolate
they  fled  to  the  mountaines  next  adjoyning,  from  whence
they  could  never  cause  them  to  descend,  although  our
men  attempted  the  same  by  divers  devises  and  entise-
ments. They  found  in  the  townes  and  houses  good  store

195

This  draweth
toward  Vir-

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

of  victuals,  with  infinite  number  of  hennes  in  the  coun-
Very  rich  and  trey,  and  many  sorts  of  metals,  whereof  some  seemed
good  metall.  ^^  y^^  very  good.  They  could  not  perfectly  understand
what  numbers  of  people  this  province  might  conteine,
by  reason  they  were  fled  into  the  mountaines,  as  I
have  sayd  before.

Having  found  those  to  be  slaine  which  they  went  to
seeke,  they  entred  into  consultation,  whether  they  should
returne  to  Nueva  Biscaya,  from  whence  they  came,  or
should  proceed  further  in  their  journey ;  whereabout
there  were  divers  opinions :  howbeit,  understanding  there,
that  toward  the  Orient  or  East  parts  of  that  province,
and  very  far  distant  from  thence,  there  were  great  and
rich  townes :  and  finding  themselves  so  far  on  the  way,
the  sayd  captaine  Antonio  de  Espeio  with  the  consent
of  the  foresayd  frier  called  Frier  Bernardine  Beltran,  and
the  greater  part  of  his  souldiers  and  companions  deter-
mined to  proceed  on  the  discovery,  till  such  time  as
they  did  see  to  what  end  it  would  come ;  to  the  end
they  might  give  certeine  and  perfect  knowledge  thereof
to  his  Majesty,  as  eye-witnesses  of  the  same.  And  so
with  one  accord  they  determined,  that  while  the  army
lay  still  there,  the  captaine  and  two  more  of  his  company
should  prosecute  their  desire,  which  they  did  accordingly.
And  within  two  dayes  journey  they  came  unto  another
province,  where  they  found  eleven  townes,  and  much
people  in  them,  which  in  their  judgement  were  above
forty  thousand  persons.  The  countrey  was  very  fertile
and  plentifuU,  whose  confines  bordered  upon  the  territories
of  Cibola,  where  there  are  great  store  of  kine,  with  whose
hides  and  with  cotton  they  apparell  themselves,  imitating
in  the  forme  of  their  government  their  next  neighbours.
In  this  place  are  signes  of  very  rich  mines,  some  quantity
of  the  metals  whereof  they  found  in  the  houses  of  the
Indians ;  which  Indians  have  and  doe  worship  idols.
They  received  our  men  peaceably,  and  gave  them  victuals.
Having  seene  thus  much,  and  the  disposition  of  the
countrey,  they  returned  to  the  campe,  from  whence  they

196

Another  pro-
vince.

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.

departed,  to  informe  their  companions  of  the  things  above

mentioned.

Being  returned  to  the  campe  they  had  intelligence  of  Quires  border-
another  province  called  Los  Quires,  which  stood  sixe  ^/S^/^^
leagues  higher  up  the  river  called  Rio  del  Norte.  And
in  their  journey  thitherward,  being  arrived  within  a  league
of  the  place,  there  came  forth  very  many  Indians  to
receive  them  in  peace,  requesting  them  to  beare  them  com-
pany to  their  townes  :  which  they  did,  and  were  marvellous
well  interteined  and  cherished.  In  this  province  they
found  five  townes  only,  wherein  were  great  store  of
people,  and  those  which  they  saw  were  above  14000
soules,  who  worship  idols  as  their  neighbours  do.  In
one  of  these  townes  they  found  a  pie  in  a  cage  after
the  maner  of  Castile,  and  certaine  shadowes  or  canopies
like  unto  those  which  are  brought  from  China,  wherein
were  painted  the  Sunne,  the  Moone,  and  many  Starres.
Where  having  taken  the  height  of  the  pole-starre,  they
found  themselves  to  be  in  37  degrees  and  J-  of  Northerly  ^^^^^^^  decrees
latitude.  _  ^  _ and  a  half e.

They  departed  out  of  this  province,  and  keeping  still  [III.  394.]
the same Northerly course,  foureteene leagues  from
thence  they  found  another  province  called  The  Cunames, Cunames,  or
where  they  saw  other  five  townes,  the  greatest  whereof  ^««^^^-f-
was  called  Cia,  being so large,  that it conteined  eight  Cia  a  great
market-places,  the houses  whereof  being plaistered and  "^^'
painted  with  divers  colours,  were  better  then  any  which
they  had  scene  in  the  provinces  before  mentioned  : the
people  which  they  heere  saw,  they  esteemed  to  be  above
twenty  thousand  persons. They  presented to  our  men
many curious mantles, and victuals excellently well
dressed ; so that our men deemed this nation to be
more  curious,  and  of  greater  civility,  and  better  govern-
ment, then  any  other  that  hitherto  they  had  scene. They
shewed  them  rich  metals,  and -the  mountaines  also not  Rich  metais.
farre  off  whereout  they  digged  them. Heere  our  people
heard  of  another  province  standing  toward  the  Northwest,
whereunto  they  purposed  to  goe.

197

A.D.
1581-83.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Ameies,  or
Emexes.

A  coma  or  Acq
man  a  towne
conteln'ing
above  6000
persons.

Having  travelled  about  sixe  leagues,  they  came  to  the
sayd  province,  the  people  whereof  were  called  Ameies,
wherin  were  seven  very  great  townes,  conteining,  to  their
judgement,  above  thirty  thousand  soules.  They  reported
that  one  of  the  seven  townes  was  very  great  and  faire,
which  our  men  would  not  go  to  see,  both  because  it
stood  behinde  a  mountaine,  and  also  for  feare  of  some
mishappe,  if  in  case  they  should  be  separated  one  from
another.  This  people  are  like  unto  their  neighbours  of
the  former  province,  being  as  well  provided  of  all  neces-
saries as  they,  and  of  as  good  government.

About  fifteene  leagues  from  this  province,  travelling
alwayes  toward  the  West,  they  found  a  great  towne  called
Acoma,  conteining  above  sixe  thousand  persons,  and
situate  upon  an  high  rocke  which  was  above  fifty  paces
hie,  having  no  other  entrance  but  by  a  ladder  or  paire
of  staires  hewen  into  the  same  rocke,  whereat  our  people
marvelled  not  a  little  :  all  the  water  of  this  towne  was
kept  in  cisternes.  The  chiefe  men  of  this  towne  came
peaceably  to  visit  the  Spanyards,  bringing  them  many
mantles,  and  chamois-skinnes  excellently  dressed,  and  great
plenty  of  victuals.  Their  corne-fields  are  two  leagues
from  thence,  and  they  fetch  water  out  of  a  small  river
nere  thereunto,  to  water  the  same,  on  the  brinks  whereof
they  saw  many  great  banks  of  Roses  like  those  of  Castile.
Here  are  many  mountaines  that  beare  shewes  of  mettals,
but  they  went  not  to  see  them,  because  the  Indians
dwelling  upon  them  are  many  in  number,  and  very
warlike.  Our  men  remained  in  this  place  three  dayes,
upon  one  of  the  which  the  inhabitants  made  before  them
a  very  solemne  dance,  comming  foorth  in  the  same  with
gallant  apparell,  using  very  witty  sports,  wherewith  our
men  were  exceedingly  delighted.

Twenty  foure  leagues from hence  toward  the  West,

they  came  to  a  certaine  province  called  by  the  inhabitants

ZunyorSunne.  themselves  Zuny,  &  by  the  Spanyards  Cibola,  containing

great  numbers  of  Indians ; in  which  province  Francisco

Vazquez  de  Coronado  had  bene,  and  had  erected  many

Signes  of
metals.

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.
crosses  and  other  tokens  of  Christianity,  which  remained  Vasquex.  de
as yet standing. Heere also  they  found three  Indian  ^''"«^^''  ^fj
Christians  which  had  remained  there  ever  since  the  said itAx.
journy,  whose  names  were  Andrew  de  CuHacan,  Caspar
de  Mexico,  and  Antonio  de  Guadalajara,  who  had  almost
forgotten their owne language,  but could speake that
countrey speech very well ; howbeit after some small
conference with our men, they easily  understood  one
another. By  these three Indians they  were  informed,
that  threescore  dayes  journey  from  this  place  there  was  a
very  mighty  lake,  upon  the  bankes  whereof  stood  many  A  mighty  lake
great  and  good  townes,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  ^°  daiesjour-
same  had  plenty of  golde,  an  evident  argument  wherof  ^^q-JIi^
was  their  wearing  of  golden  bracelets & earrings: and  pknty  of  golde.
also  that  after  the sayd Francis  Vasquez de Coronado
had perfect intelligence thereof, hee departed out of
this  province  of  Cibola  to  goe  thither,  and  that  having
proceeded  twelve  dayes  journey,  he  began  to  want  water;
and  thereupon  determined  to  returne,  as  he  did  indeed,
with  intention  to  make a second  voyage  thither  at  his
better  opportunity  ;  which afterward  he  performed not,
being  prevented  of  his  determined  journey  by  death.

Upon  the  newes of  these riches the sayd Captaine
Antony  de  Espeio  was  desirous  to  go  thither ;  and  though
some  of  his companions  were of  his opinion,  yet the
greater  part  and the frier  were  of  the  contrary,  saying
that  it  was  now  high  time  to  returne  home  unto  New
Biscay  from  whence  they  came,  to  give  account  of  that
which  they  had  scene :  which  the  sayd  greater  part  within
few  dayes put  in execution,  leaving the captaine  with
nine  companions  onely  that  willingly  followed  him :  who
after  hee  had  fully  certified  himselfe  of  the  riches  above-
sayd,  and  of  the  great  quantity  of  excellent  mettals  that  jnother
were  about  that  lake,  departed out of  this  province  of  mightie pro-
Cibola  with  his  companions ;  and  travelling  directly  toward  ^^'»^^  West-
the  West,  after  hee had passed 28 leagues,  he found  "'"^''"^ofCtbok
another  very  great  province,  which by estimation con-  called Mo'-
teined above 50000 soules  : the inhabitants whereof  hotze.

199

A.D.
1581-83.

[III.  39S-]

Z,aguaio,  or
Ahiiato  a
toiune.

A  witty  policic
to  be  used  by
the  English  in
like  cases.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

assoone  as  they  understood  of  their  approch,  sent  them
word,  upon  paine  of  death  to  come  no  neerer  to  their
townes :  whereto  the  captaine  answered,  that  their
comming  was  in  no  wise  to  hurt  them,  as  they  should
well  perceive,  and  therefore  requested  them  not  to  molest
him  in  his  intended  voyage,  and  withall  gave  to  the
messenger  a  reward  of  such  things  as  they  brought  with
them :  who  thereupon  made  so  good  report  of  our
people,  and  so  appeased  the  troubled  minds  of  the
Indians,  that  they  granted  them  free  accesse  unto  their
townes,  and  so  they  went  thither  with  15.  Indians  their
friends  of  the  province  of  Cibola  aforesaid,  and  the  three
Mexican  Indians  before  mentioned.  When  they  were
come  within  a  league  of  the  first  towne,  there  came  forth
to  meete  them  above  2000.  Indians  laden  with  victuals,
whom  the  Captaine  rewarded  with  some  things  of  small
value,  which  they  made  great  accompt  of,  and  esteemed
more  precious  then  gold.  As  they  approched  neere
unto  the  towne  which  was  named  Zaguato,  a  great
multitude  of  Indians  came  forth  to  meete  them,  and
among  the  rest  their  Ca9iques,  with  so  great  demonstration
of  joy  and  gladnes,  that  they  cast  much  meale  of  Maiz
upon  the  ground  for  the  horses  to  tread  upon :  with
this  triumph  they  entred  the  towne,  where  they  were  very
wel  lodged  and  much  made  of,  which  the  Captaine  did  in
part  requite,  giving  to  the  chiefest  among  them  hats,
and  beads  of  glasse,  with  many  such  trifles,  which  he
caried  with  him  for  the  like  purpose.  The  said  Ca9iques
presently  gave  notice  to  the  whole  province  of  the  arrival
of  these  new  guests,  whom  they  reported  to  bee  a
courteous  people,  and  such  as  offered  them  no  harme :
which  was  occasion  sufficient  to  make  them  all  come
laden  with  presents  unto  our  people,  and  to  intreat  them
to  goe  and  make  merry  with  them  in  their  townes  ;
which  they  yeelded  unto,  though  alwayes  with  great
foresight  what  might  follow.  Whereupon  the  Captaine
used  a  certaine  policie,  making  the  Caciques  beleeve,
that forasmuch  as his  horses  were  very  fierce  (for  they

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  a.d.

1581-83.

had  told  the  Indians  that  they  would  kill  them)  there-
fore it  was  necessary  to  make  a  Fort  of  lime  and  stone
to  inclose  them,  for  the  avoyding  of  such  inconveniences
as  otherwise  might  happen  unto  the  Indians  by  them.
This  tale  was  so  stedfastly  beleeved  by  the  Caciques,
that  in  five  houres  they  assembled  such  store  of  people
together,  that  with  incredible  celeritie  they  built  the
said  Fort  which  our  men  required.

Moreover,  when  the  Captaine  saide  that  he  would
depart,  they  brought  unto  him  a  present  of  40000.
mantles  of  cotton,  both  white  and  of  other  colours,
and  great  store  of  hand-towels,  with  tassels  at  the
corners,  with  divers  other  things,  and  among  the  rest
rich  mettals,  which  seemed  to  holde  much  silver.  Rich  metals.
Among  these  Indians  they  learned  very  much  con-
cerning The  great  Lake  aforesaide,  whose  report  agreed
wholly  with  the  relation  of  the  former,  as  touching  the
riches  and  great  abundance  of  gold  about  that  lake.  Great  ahim-

The  Captaine  reposing  great  confidence  in  this  people  ^^^'''^^  "J  S°^'^-
&  in  their  good  disposition  toward  him  determined
after  certaine  dayes,  to  leave  there  five  of  his  com-
panions with  the  rest  of  his  Indian  friends,  that  they
might  returne  with  his  cariages  to  the  province  of  Zuni,
while  himselfe  with  the  foure  other  which  remained
should  ride  in  post  to  discover  certaine  very  rich  Mines,
whereof  he  had  perfect  information.  And  putting  this
his  purpose  in  execution  he  departed  with  his  guides,
and  having  traveiled  due-west  45.  leagues  he  came  unto
the  said  Mines,  and  tooke  out  of  the  same  with  his  Exceedhgrich
owne  hands  exceeding:  rich  metals  holdina:  2:reat  quantitie  ^^^^^  if
of  silver :  and  the  mines  which  were  of  a  very  broad
veine  were  in  a  mountaine  whereon  they  might  easily
ascend,  by  reason  of  an  open  way  that  led  up  to  the
same.  Neere  unto  these  mines  were  certaine  townes
of  Indians  dwelling  upon  the  mountaines,  who  shewed
them  friendship  &  came  forth  to  receive  them  with
crosses  on  their  heads,  and  other  tokens  of  peace.  Here-
about  they found two rivers of  a reasonable  bignesse.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1581-83.

upon  the  banks  whereof  grew  many  vines  bearing  excel-
lent grapes,  and  great  groves  of  walnut-trees,  and  much
A  mighty  flaxe  like  that  of  Castile:  and  they  shewed  our  men  by
River  of  eight  sjg^es,  that  behinde  those  mountaines  there  was  a  river
running  to-  a^bout  8.  leagues  broad,  but  they  could  not  learne  how
ward  the  neere  it  was:  howbeit  the  Indians  made  demonstration
ISIorth  sea.  that  it  ran  towards  the  North  sea,  and  that  upon  both
Perhaps  this  sides  thereof  stood  many  townes  of  so  great  bignesse,  that
in^to  the  Cheese-  '^^^  comparison  thereof  those  wherein  they  dwelt  were  but
piouk  bay,  or small  hamlets.

i7ito  the  great  After  he  had  received  all  this  information,  the  said
lakeofTadoac.  Captaine  returned  toward  the  province  of  Zuni,  whither
he  had  sent  his  said  companions :  and  being  arrived  there
in  safety,  having  travailed  upon  a  very  good  way,  he
found  in  the  same  place  his  5.  companions,  &  the  said
father  Frier  Bernardin  Beltran,  with  the  souldiers  which
were  determined  to  returne,  as  is  aforesaid,  but  upon
certaine  occasions  were  not  as  yet  departed :  whom  the
inhabitants  had  most  friendly  intreated,  &  furnished  with
all  things  necessary  in  abundance,  as  afterward  likewise
they  used  the  Captaine,  and  those  that  came  with  him,
comming  foorth  to  meete  them  with  shew  of  great  joy,
and  giving  them  great  store  of  victuals  to  serve  them  in
their  journey  homewards,  and  requesting  them  to  returne
againe  with  speed,  and  to  bring  many  Castilians  with  them
(for  so  they  call  the  Spaniards)  to  whom  they  promised
food  sufficient.  For  the  better  performance  whereof  they
sowed  that  yeere  more  graine  and  other  fruits,  then  they
had  done  at  any  time  before.
[III.  396.]  At this present the Frier and souldiers aforesaid

resolved  themselves  in  their  former  determination,  &
agreed  to  returne  unto  the  province  from  whence  they
came  with  intention  before  mentioned,  to  seek  the  two
Friers  that  were  slaine,  to  whom  also  Gregorio  Hernan-
dez who  had  bene  standard-bearer  in  the  journey,  joyned
himselfe.  Who  being  departed,  the  Captaine  accom-
panied onely  with  8.  souldiers,  determined  to  prosecute
his  former  attempt,  &  to  passe  up  higher  the  saide  river

DISCOVERY OF NEW MEXICO  ad.

1581-83.
called Rio del Norte,  which he  did  accordingly. And
having  traveiled about  60.  leagues  toward  the  province  60.  Leagues.
of  the  Quires  aforesaid, 1 2  leagues  from  thence  toward
the Orient or East  they found a province  of  Indians
called  Hubates,  who  received  them  peaceably,  and  gave  Hubates.
them great store of  victuals, informing them also of
very  rich  Mines  which they found,  whereout  they  got  ^er^  rich
glistering  &  good  metal,  and  therewith  returned  to the  -''^^"^^•
towne  from  whence  they  came. This  province  contained
by  their  estimation  25000.  persons  all  very  well  apparel-
led in coloured mantles of  cotton, and Chamois-skins
very well dressed. They have many mountaines full
of  Pines  and  Cedars,  and  the  houses  of  their  townes  are  Houses  of  \.
of  4. and 5. stories high. Here they had notice of  ^J^d. five  stones
another  province  distant  about  one  dayes  journey  from ^^  '
thence  inhabited  by  certaine  Indians  called  Tamos,  and  Tamos.
containing  above  40000.  soules :  whither  being  come  the
inhabitants would neither  give them any  victuals, nor
admit  them  into  their  townes : for  which  cause,  and  in
regard of  the danger  wherein  they  were, and because
some  of  the  souldiers  were  not  well  at  ease,  and  for  that
they  were so fewe (as  we have said) they  determined  Theirretume.
to  depart  thence,  and  to  returne  toward  the  land  of  the
Christians,  which  they  put  in  execution  in  the  beginning
of  July  1583,  being  guided  by  an  Indian  that  went  with
them,  who  led  them  another  way  then  they  went  forth  by,
downe  a  river,  which  they  called  Rio  de  las  vacas  ;  that  ^^0  de  las
is to say.  The river of  oxen,  in respect of  the  great  ^'^^^■^"
multitudes of  oxen  or kine that fed upon  the bankes
thereof, by the which they traveiled for the space of
120.  leagues,  still  meeting  with  store  of  the  said  cattell. izo.  Leagues.
From  hence  they  went  forward  to  the  river  of  Conchos
by  which  they entered,  and thence to  the  valley of  S.
Bartholomew,  from  whence  they  first  entered into  their
discoverie. Upon  their  comming  thither  they  found  that
the  said  Frier Bernardin  Beltran and  his  company  were
safely  arrived  at  the  said  towne  many  dayes  before,  &
were gone from  thence  to  the  towne  of  Guadiana. In  Guadiana.

203

A.D.
1581-83.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

this  towne  the  foresaid  captaine  Antony  de  Espejo  made
most  certaine  relation  of  all  that  is  aforesaid,  which
relation  presently  hee  sent  unto  the  Conde  of  Corunna
Vizroy  of  Nueva  Espanna,  who  sent  the  same  to  his
Majestie,  &  to  the  Lords  of  his  royal  counsel  of  the
Indies,  to  the  end  they  might  take  such  order  as  they
thought  best,  which  they  have  already  performed  with
great  care  and  circumspection.

Almighty  God  vouchsafe  his  assistance  in  this  busines,
that  such  numbers  of  soules  redeemed  by  his  blood  may
not  utterly  perish,  of  whose  good  capacitie,  wherein  they
exceed  those  of  Mexico  and  Peru  (as  we  be  given  to
understand  by  those  that  have  delt  with  them)  we  may
boldly  presume  that  they  will  easily  embrace  the  Gospel,
and  abandon  such  idolatrie  as  now  the  most  of  them  doe
live  in  :  which  AlmiMitie  God  grraunt  for  his  honour  and
glory,  and  for  the  increase  of  the  holy  Catholique  faith.

A  letter  of  Bartholomew  Cano  from  Mexico  the
30.  of  May  1590.  to  Francis  Hernandes  of
Sivil,  concerning  the  speedy  building  of  two
strong  Forts  in  S.  John  de  Ullua,  and  in  Vera
Cruz,  as  also  touching  a  notable  new  and  rich
discovery  of  Cibola  or  New  Mexico  400.
leagues  Northwest  of  Mexico.

T  may  please  you  Sir,  to  be  advertised
that  I  have  received  your  letters,  whereby
I  understand  that  our  ship  with  the
treasure  is  safely  arrived,  God  be  praised
therefore.  The  frigate  arrived  here  in
safetie  which  brought  the  letters  of
Advise  from  the  King  to  the  Viceroy,
She  arrived  in  S.  John  de  Ullua  the  29.  of  May,  &
departed  from  S.  Lucar  in  Spaine  the  6.  of  April.  By
which  his  Majestie  writeth  unto  the  Viceroy,  what  time
the  Fleete  shall  depart  from  hence,  and  what  course  they
shall  take,  not  as  they  had  wont  for  to  do  ;  by  reason  that

204

BAKTHOLOMEW CANO  ad.

1590.
there  are  great  store  of  men  of  war  abroad  at  the sea,
which  meane  to  encounter  with  the  Fleete. I  pray  God
sende  them  well  to  Spaine :  for  here  wee  were  troubled
very  sore  with  men  of  warre  on  this  coast. His  Majestic
hath  sent  expresse  commandement  unto  the  Marques  of  The  marques
Villa  Manrique  his  cosen,  Viceroy  of  Nova  Hispania,  that  of/^^^'^^^^^-
immediatly  upon  sight of  his  letters  he  shal  command  \f^o^a  His-
to  be  builded  in  S.  John  de  UUua,  &  in  Vera  Cruz  two  pania.
strong  Forts  for  the  defence  of  these  countries,  of  his
Majesties charges : And that there shalbe garisons in
both the  Forts  for  the  defence of  the  ships  which  ride
there,  and  for  the  strength  of  the  countrey.

There  are  departed  out  of  Mexico  and  other  townes
hereabout  by  the  commaundement  of  the  Viceroy  500.
souldiers  Spaniards,  under  the  conduct  of  Rodorigo  del
Rio  the  governour  of  Nueva  Biscaia  which  are  gone  to  [HI.  397.]
win a  great City called Cibola, which is 400. leagues  5°°-  Spatii-

beyond Mexico to the Northwest,  and  standeth  up in  '^'  ^  ^^^  J

•^  .  .  '  r  conquer  the

the  mame land. It  is  by  report  a very  great citie,  as  great  citie  of
bigge  as  Mexico,  and  a  very  rich  countrey  both  of  golde  Cibola  which
Mines  and  silver  Mines  :  and  the  King  of  the  countrey  ^^  4oo-
is a mighty  King,  and  he will not become subject to  Mfxko^mrth
his Majestic. There were certaine Spaniards sent to  westward.
that king from the Viceroy in an ambassage : It is
thought that they are slaine, for we can here no
newes  of  them.

The  other  newes  that  I  can  certifie  you  of  at  this
instant  is,  that  there  is  a  Judge  of  the  city  of  Guadala-
jara called  don  Nunno  de  villa  Inscensia  lately  maried.
Also  the  kings  Atturney  of  Guadalajara  maried  his
daughter  of  8.  yeres  old  with  a  boy  of  12.  yeres  old.
But  the  Viceroy  saith  that  he  hath  a  warrant  from  his
Majestic,  that  if  any  Judge  whatsoever  dwelling  in  that
kingdome  of  Guadalajara  should  mary  any  sonne  in
that  jurisdiction,  that  then  the  said  Viceroy  is  to  deprive
him  of  his  office.  And  therfore  he  went  about  to
deprive  the  Judge  &  the  kings  Attourney  of  their
offices. Whereupon  the  people  of  that  province  would

205

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1590.

not  thereunto  consent,  nor  suffer  them  to  be  dismissed
of  their  offices,  nor  to  be  arrested,  nor  caried  prisoners
to  Mexico.  When  the  viceroy  had  intelligence  thereof,
&  that  the  Countrey  did  resist  his  commandement,  and
would  not  suffer  them  to  be  apprehended,  he  sent
certaine  Captaines  with  souldiers  to  goe  and  apprehend
the  Judge,  the  kings  Attourney,  and  as  many  as  did
take  their  parts.  So  the  citizens  of  Guadalajara  with-
stood the  viceroies  forces,  &  put  themselves  in  defence ;
and  are  up  in  armes  against  the  viceroy  :  yet  they  do
not  rebel  against  the  king,  but  say  :  God  save  king
Philip,  and  wil  submit  themselves  to  his  Majestic,  but
A  dangerous  not  to  the  viceroy.  So  that  all  the  kingdome  of  Guadala-
ie  e  ton  in -^  ^^  -^^  armes,  and  are  all  in  a  mutinie  against  us

a  province  of  ^^  Mexico.  1  beseech  Almighty  God  to  remedy  it,  and
Bova  His-  that  it  may  be  qualified  in  time :  or  else  all  Nova  Spania
pania.  ^il  be  utterly  spoiled. I  write  this  thing,  because  it  is

publiquely  knowen  in  all  places. And  thus  I  rest,  from
Mexico  the  30.  of  May 1590.

Bartholomew  Cano.

The  first  and  second  discovery  of  the  gulfe  of
California,  and  of  the  Sea-coast  on  the  North-
west or  back  side  of  America,  lying  to  the
West  of  New  Mexico,  Cibola  and  Quivira,
together  with  Sir  Francis  Drakes  landing  and
taking  possession  upon  Nova  Albion  in  the
behalfe  of  the  Crowne  of  England,  and  the
notable  voyage  of  Francis  Gaule ;  Wherein
amongst  many  other  memorable  matters  is  set
downe  the  huge  bredth  of  the  Ocean  sea  from
China  and  Japan  to  the  Northwest  parts  of
America,  in  the 38.  and  40.  degrees.

A  relation  of  the  discovery,  which  in  the  Name
of  God  the  Fleete  of  the  right  noble  Fernando
Cortez  Marques  of  the  Vally,  made  with  three

206

FRANCIS DE ULLOA

ships;  The  one  called  Santa  Agueda  of  120.
tunnes,  the  other  the  Trinitie  of  35.  tunnes,
and  the  thirde  S.  Thomas  of  the  burthen  of
20.  tunnes.  Of  which  Fleete  was  Captaine
the  right  worshipfull  knight  Francis  de  Ulloa
borne  in  the  Citie  of  Merida,  Taken  out  of
the  third  volume  of  the  voyages  gathered  by
M.  John  Baptista  Ramusio.

A.D.

1539-

Chap.

I.

Francis  Ulloa  a  captaine  of  Cortez  departeth  with  a  Fleet
from  the  port  of  Acapulco,  and  goeth  to  discover
unknowen  lands,  he  passeth  by  the  coast  of  Sacatula
and  Motin,  and  by  tempest  runneth  to  the  river  of
Guajaval,  from  whence  he  crosseth  over  to  the  haven
of  Santa  Cruz,  along  the  coast  whereof  he  discovereth
3.  smal  Hands,  and  within  two  dayes  and  an  halfe
returning  to  the  maine  land  he  discovereth  the  river
called  Rio  de  san  Pedro  y  san  Pablo,  and  not  far
distant  from  thence  two  other  rivers  as  big  or  greater
then  that  of  Guadalquivir  which  runneth  by  Sivil,
together  with  their  head-springs.

E imbarked our  selves in the haven of  Acapuko  in
Acapulco  on  the  8.  of  July  in  the  yeere  ^1- degrees  of
of  our  Lord  1539,  calling  upon  almighty ^  ^  ^  ^•
God  to  guide  us  with  his  holy  hand  unto
such places  where he  might be served,
and his holy faith advanced. And we
sailed from the said port by  the coast
of  Sacatula and Motin, which is sweete and pleasant  The  coast  of
through  the  abundance  of  trees  that  grow  thereon,  and  Sacatula  and
rivers  which  passe  through  those  countreis,  for  the  which "  ^^'
wee  often  thanked  God  the  creatour  of  them. So  sailing
along  we  came  to  the  haven  of  S.  lago  in  the  province  5.  lago  de
of  Colima : but  before  we  arrived  there,  the  maine  mast  ^'^"^^•
of  our  ship  called  Santa  Agueda  was  broken  by  a  storme
of  winde that  tooke  us, so  as  the ship  was  forced to  [III.  398.]

207

A.D.

1539-

The  Isles  of
Xalisco.

Guajaval.

Santa  Cruz,
in  the  point  oj
California.

Three  Hands.

Rio  de  san
Pedro  y  san
Pablo.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

saile  without  her  mast  until  we  arrived  in  the  said  haven.
From  the  port  of  Acapulco  to  this  haven  of  Colima  wee
were  sayling  the  space  of  20.  dayes.  Here  wee  stayed
to  mende  our  mast  and  to  take  in  certaine  victuals,
water,  and  wood,  the  space  of  27,  dayes.  And  wee
departed  from  the  saide  haven  the  23.  of  August,  and
sayling  by  the  Isles  of  Xalisco  the  27.  or  28.  of  the
saide  moneth  wee  were  taken  with  an  extreame  tempest
wherein  wee  thought  we  should  have  perished,  and
being  tossed  and  weather-beaten,  wee  ranne  as  farre  as
the  river  of  Guajaval  in  the  Province  of  Culiacan.  In
this  storme  wee  lost  the  pinnesse  called  Sant  Thomas,
and  because  wee  had  lost  her  wee  crossed  over  to  the
port  of  Santa  Cruz  in  California :  for  while  wee  were
so  beaten  in  the  former  tempest,  the  pilot  of  the
Barke  signified  unto  us,  that  he  perceived  she  beganne
to  leake,  and  that  already  she  had  received  in  much
water,  insomuch  that  she  beganne  to  founder:  where-
upon, to  helpe  her  neede,  and  that  wee  might  meete
together  in  a  knowen  haven,  if  by  chance  the  tempest
should  separate  us,  as  it  did  indeed,  we  willed  him  to
repaire  to  the  haven  of  Santa  Cruz,  where  we  meant
to  repaire  his  harmes  and  our  owne.  Wherefore  being
all  arrived  in  this  place  of  Santa  Cruz,  wee  stayed  there
five  dayes  and  tooke  in  water,  wherein  we  heard  no
newes  of  our  Barke  which  we  had  lost :  Whereupon  the
Captaine  resolved  to  follow  on  our  voyage;  wherefore
we  set  saile  the  12.  of  September,  and  as  wee  sailed  wee
saw  along  the  coast  of  the  saide  haven  3.  Islands,  where-
of the  Captaine  made  no  great  accompt,  thinking  there
coulde  be  no  great  good  found  in  any  of  them.  These
Islands  seemed  not  to  be  great ;  wherefore  he  commanded
the  Masters  and  pilotes  to  proceed  on  their  voyage,
and  not  to  leese  time  without  any  profit.  So  sailing
over  the  gulfe  of  California,  in  two  dayes  and  an  halfe
we  came  to  the  river  of  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul,  finding
before  we  entred  into  the  same  a  small  Island  in  the
mouth-  of  the  River,  being  4.  or 5.  miles  distant  from

208

nvefs.

lakes.

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
the  maine.  On  both  sides  of  this  River  wee  beheld
goodly  and  pleasant  great  plaines  full  of  many  greene
and  beautifull  trees,  and  farther  within  the  land  we
beheld  certaine  exceeding  high  mountaines  full  of  woods
very  pleasant  to  beholde.  From  this  River  wee  sailed
still  along  the  coast  the  space  of  15.  leagues,  in  which
course  wee  found  two  other  Rivers  in  our  judgement  Two  great
as  great  or  greater  then  Guadalquivir  the  River  of
Sivilia  in  Spaine.  Al  the  coast  by  these  Rivers  is  plaine
as  the  other  which  we  had  passed,  with  many  woods :
likewise  within  the  lande  appeared  great  mountaines
covered  with  woods  very  beautifull  to  beholde,  and
beneath  in  the  plaine  appeared  certaine  lakes  of  water.
From  these  Rivers  we  sailed  18.  leagues,  and  found
very  pleasant  plaines,  and  certaine  great  lakes  whose  Certaine  great
mouthes  opened  into  the  Sea :  here  our  Captaine  thought
good  throughly  to  discover  what  those  lakes  were,  and
to  search  whether  there  were  any  good  haven  for  his
ships  to  ride  in,  or  to  harbour  themselves,  if  any  tempest
should  arise ;  and  so  hee  commaunded  a  boat  to  be
hoised  out  into  the  Sea,  with  a  Master  and  five  or  sixe
men  to  view  them,  and  to  sound  the  depth,  and  botom
of  them  :  who  went  thither,  and  found  the  coast  very
sholde,  and  the  mouthes  of  the  lakes  ;  whereupon  they
made  no  accompt  of  them,  onely  because  the  shore  was
so  shallow,  for  otherwise  the  land  was  very  pleasant.
Here  at  evening  we  saw  on  the  shore  10.  or  12.  Indians
and  fires.  The  aforesaide  two  Rivers  are  two  leagues
distant  the  one  from  the  other  little  more  or  lesse,  and
are  great,  as  I  have  saide,  and  being  in  the  last  of  them
we  went  up  to  the  ship-top,  and  saw  many  lakes,  and
one  among  the  rest  exceeding  great,  and  wee  supposed
that  they  had  their  springs  out  of  this  great  lake,  as
other  Rivers  also  have  from  other  lakes,  for  wee  sawe  the
course  of  them  severally  each  by  themselves,  having
goodly  woods  growing  all  along  their  bankes.  The  cur-
rents of  these  Rivers  might  be  discerned  three  leagues
within  the  Sea  :  and  at  the  mouthes  of  them  were  many
IX  209  o

A.D.

1539-

The  coast

runneth

'Northward.

[III.  399-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

small  stakes  set  up  for  markes  :  the  shore  here  is  plaine
and  sandie,  and  the  countrey  very  pleasant.

Chap. 2.

Sailing  along  the  coast  from  the  two  aforesaid  great
Rivers,  they  discover  three  mouthes  of  lakes  and  a
goodly  Countrey,  they  come  unto  Cabo  Roxo,  and
take  possession  of  those  countreys  for  the  Emperours
Majesty.  A  discourse  of  the  faire  havens  that  are
on  those  coastes,  and  of  very  many  Islands  which
they  saw,  before  they  came  to  the  Cape  called  Capo
de  las  Plaias.

THis  day  wee  sailed  along  the  coast  the  space  of
1 6.  leagues,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  voyage  there
is  a  Bay  very  faire  of  4.  or  5.  leagues,  having  certaine
bankes  or  fences  in  it,  in  beholding  whereof  we  tooke
great  pleasure.  The  night  following  we  road  in  20.
fadome  water.  The  next  day  we  followed  our  voyage
toward  the  North,  and  having  sailed  3.  or  4.  leagues
we  saw  3.  mouthes  of  lakes  which  entered  into  the
land,  where  they  became  like  standing  pooles.  Wee
road  a  league  distance  from  these  mouthes  in  6.  fadome
water,  to  see  what  they  were,  and  sent  our  boat  with
certaine  men,  to  see  if  there  were  any  entry  for  our
ships  :  for  halfe  a  league  from  shore  we  had  not  past
one  or  two  fadome  water.  Here  our  men  saw  7.  or  8.
Indians,  and  found  sundry  sorts  of  greene  herbes  some-
what differing  from  those  of  Nueva  Espanna.  The
Countrey  is  plaine,  but  farre  within  land  they  saw  great
and  small  hils  extending  themselves  a  great  way,  and
being  very  faire  and  pleasant  to  behold.  The  day
following  we  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  sayling  alwayes
in  sight  of  the  plaine  coast  toward  the  Northwest,  in
10.  or  15.  fadome  water.  And  having  sailed  6.  good
leagues  we  found  a  Bay  on  the  coast  within  the  land
of  about  5.  leagues  over,  from  whence  the  coast  trended
Northwest,  and  this  day  we  sailed  about  16.  leagues.
All  this  coast  is  plaine,  and  not  so  pleasant  as  that  which

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
we  had  passed  :  here  are  certaine  small  hilles,  but  not
so  high  as  those  which  we  had  found  before.  Thus  we
sailed  all  night  Northwest,  and  until  the  next  day  at
noone,  at  which  time  we  fell  with  a  headland  of  white
sand,  where  by  the  height  which  we  tooke  that  day  we
found  our  selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  27.  degrees  and
§.  This  cape  we  called  Capo  Roxo.  All  the  coast  is  Capo  Roxo.
plaine  and  faire  and  cleane  sand,  and  we  saw  within
land  some  few  trees  not  very  great,  with  certaine  moun-
taines  &  woods  3.  or  4.  leagues  distant  from  the  said
cape  :  and  here  likewise  appeared  a  mouth  of  a  river,
which  (as  far  as  we  could  discerne)  made  certaine  lakes
up  within  the  land  :  from  the  mouth  whereof  for  the
space  of  a  league  into  the  sea  it  seemed  to  be  very
sholde,  because  the  sea  did  breake  very  much.  Here
we  saw  within  the  land  3.  or  4.  rivers.  In  this  sort
we  sailed  on  our  voiage  to  the  Northward,  &  because  The  coast
we  had  not  good  weather  we  road  that  night  in  a  great  ^_^^"^f^
haven  lying  in  our  way,  where  on  the  shore  wee  saw
certaine  plaines,  and  up  within  the  land  certaine  hilles
not  very  high  :  and  continuing  our  course  toward  the
North  about  3.  leagues  from  this  haven  we  found  an
Hand  of  about  one  league  in  circuite  lying  before  the
mouth  of  the  said  haven.  And  sailing  forward  we  found
an  haven  which  hath  two  mouthes  into  the  Sea,  into
which  we  entered  by  the  Northermost  mouth,  which  hath
10.  or  12.  fadome  water,  &  so  decreaseth  till  it  come
to  5.  fadome,  where  we  anckered  in  a  poole  which  the
Sea  maketh,  which  is  a  strange  thing  to  beholde,  for
there  are  so  many  entrances  &  mouths  of  streames
and  havens,  that  we  were  all  astonied  at  the  sight
thereof;  and  these  havens  are  so  excellently  framed  by
nature,  as  the  like  are  not  to  be  seene  in  the  world,
wherein  we  found  great  store  of  fish.  Here  wee
anckered,  and  the  Captaine  went  on  shore,  and  tooke
possession,  using  all  such  ceremonies  as  thereunto  belong.
Here  also  wee  found  certaine  weares  to  catch  fish  made  i^^^  ^^^j^  ^r
by  the  Indians,  and  certaine  small  cottages,  wherein  were  Virginia.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

divers  pieces  of  earthen  pots  as  finely  made  as  those  in

Spaine.  Here  by  commandement  of  the  Captaine  a  Crosse
was  erected  upon  an  hill,  and  it  was  set  up  by  Francis
Preciado.  In  this  place  we  saw  the  Countrey  full  of
fresh  and  greene  grasse,  howbeit  differing  from  that  of
New  Spaine,  and  up  within  the  Countrey  wee  saw  many
great  and  very  greene  mountaines.  This  Countrey
seemed  very  goodly  and  delightsome  to  all  of  us,  in
regard  of  the  greennesse  and  beautie  thereof,  and  we
judged  it  to  be  very  populous  within  the  land.  From
this  haven  we  departed  and  kept  our  way  toward  the
Northwest  with  good  weather,  and  began  to  finde  hard
by  the  sea-shore  exceeding  high  mountaines  spotted  with
white,  and  in  them  we  saw  many  foules  which  had
their  nestes  in  certaine  holes  of  those  rocks,  and  sailed
lo.  leagues  until  night,  all  which  night  we  were  be-
calmed. The  next  day  we  followed  our  course  Northwest
with  good  weather  :  and  from  that  day  forward  we  began
to  see  on  the  Westerne  shore  (whereon  the  foresaid
haven  of  S.  Cruz  standeth)  certaine  Islands  or  high
lands,  whereat  we  rejoyced  not  a  little.  And  so  sayling
An  Island.  forward  we  met  with  an  Island  about  two  leagues  in
bignesse,  and  on  the  East  shore  having  still  the  maine
land  and  Islands  in  sight,  we  sailed  15.  leagues  until  the
evening,  alwayes  finding  hard  by  the  sea-coast  exceeding
high  mountaines  bare  of  trees,  the  land  appearing  still
more  plainely  unto  us  on  the  Westerne  shore.  Where-
to?;/,? take  the  upon  wee  began  to  be  of  divers  opinions,  some  thinking
land  of  Call-  ^j^^^.  ^j^-g  ^oast  of  Santa  Cruz  was  a  firme  land,  and
nothhs-but  ^^^^  ^^  joyned  with  the  continent  of  Nueva  Espanna,
Islands.  Others  thought  the  contrary,  and  that  they  were  nothing

else  but  Islands,  which  were  to  the  Westward.  And
in  this  sort  we  proceeded  forward,  having  the  land  on
both  sides  of  us,  so  farre,  that  we  all  began  to  wonder
at  it.  This  day  we  sailed  some  15.  leagues,  and  called
this  Cape  Capo  de  las  Plaias.

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-

Chap.  3.

Of  the  Streight  which  they  discovered  on  the  coast  of
Capo  de  las  Plaias,  and  of  the  pleasant  Countrey
which  they  found  before  they  came  to  the  rockes
called  Los  diamantes.  Of  the  wonderfull  whitenesse
of  that  Sea,  and  of  the  ebbing  and  flowing  thereof:
and  of  the  multitude  of  Islands  and  lands,  which
extend  themselves  Northward  from  the  haven  of
Santa  Cruz.

THe  day  folowing  we  sailed  until  night  with  so  good
weather,  that we  ran  about 20. leagues. All  this
coast  along  the  shore  is  full  of  little  hilles  without  grasse
or  trees  : and that night we  anckered in 20. fadome  [III.  4.00.]
water. The  next  day  we  followed  our  voyage  beginning
to  saile  before  breake of  day Northwestward, and we
came  into  the  midst  of  a  Streight  or  mouth  which  was  ^  Streight  of
12  leagues  broad from one land to the other,  which ^^./^'^^m
Streight  had  two  Hands in the  hiidst  thereof  being  4.  ceedin/depth
leagues  distant the one from the other  : and  here  we
discerned  the  countrey  to  be  plaine,  and  certaine  moun-
taines,  &  it seemed that a  certaine  gut of  water  like
a  brooke  ran  through  the  plaine. This  streight  (as  far
as  we  could  perceive)  was  very  deep,  for  we  could  finde
no  botome  :  and  here  we  saw  the  land  stretching  afarre
off^  from  the  one  shore  to  the  other,  and  on  the  Westerne
shore  of  the  haven  of  S.  Cruz,  the  land  was  more  high
with very bare mountaines. The day following we
passed  on  our way  toward  the  North,  and  sailed  some The  Streight
15.  leagues,  and in the  midst  of  our  way  we  found  a  here  runneth
circuit  or  bay of 6. leagues into  the  land  with  many °'' ^^'  '
cooves  or  creeks,  and  the  next  day  following  continuing
our  course we sailed  some 10. leagues, and  the  coast
in  this  dayes  journey  was  all  of  high  mountaines  naked
and  bare  without  any  tree. It is  very deepe hard  by
the  shore,  and  that  night  we  were constrained to stay
by  reason of  the contrary  winde. The next  morning
before  breake  of  day  we  sailed  still  along  the  coast  to

213

mantes.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

the  Northwest  until  evening,  and  ranne  about  some 15.

leagues.  All  along  this  shore  wee  sawe  very  goodly
mountaines  within  the  land,  and  many  plaines  and  downes
with  some  few  trees,  &  the  sea  shore  was  all  sandy.  In
Small  rocks  the  midst  of  this  dayes  course  we  found  certaine  small
called  Los  Dia-  j-gckes  in  the  sea  4.  leagues  distant  from  the  maine,  were
the  said  land  maketh  a  great  point  into  the  sea,  and  here
we  stayed  the  rest  of  the  night,  where  we  had  a  very
great  shower  of  raine.  The  day  following  we  proceeded
on  our  voyage,  and  sailed  untill  night  by  a  compasse  or
turning,  some  8.  or  9.  leagues,  and  saw  within  land  a
few  mountaines  having  no  trees  upon  them,  but  the
Sunne  shining  alwayes  very  cleare,  as  farre  as  wee  could
descry,  they  were  very  great,  on  the  Westerne  shore  of
the  haven  of  Santa  Cruz.  Here  we  stayed  all  night
because  we  found  very  shallow  water  and  sawe  the  sea
very  white,  and  in  a  maner  like  to  chalke,  so  that  we  all
beganne  to  marveile  thereat.  The  day  following  wee
went  forward  againe  along  the  coast  Northwestward,  and
sailed  eight  leagues,  and  saw  another  land  which  stretched
Northwest,  and  was  full  of  high  mountaines.  And  still
continuing  this  course  we  searched  very  diligently  to  see
if  there  were  any  passage  through  betweene  both  the
landes,  for  right  forward  wee  sawe  no  land.  And  thus
sayling  wee  alwayes  found  more  shallow  water,  and  the
Sea  thicke,  blacke,  and  very  muddie,  and  came  at  length
into  five  fadome  water  ;  and  seeing  this,  wee  determined
to  passe  over  to  the  land  which  wee  had  scene  on  the
other  side,  and  here  likewise  wee  found  as  little  depth
and  lesse,  whereupon  we  rode  all  night  in  five  fadome
water,  and  wee  perceived  the  Sea  to  runne  with  so  great  a
rage  into  the  land,  that  it  was  a  thing  much  to  be
marveilled  at,  and  with  the  like  fury  it  returned  backe
againe  with  the  ebbe  ;  during  which  time  wee  found  11.
fadome  water,  and  the  flood  and  ebbe  continued  from
sixe  to  sixe  houres.

The day  following the Captaine  and  Pilote  went  up
to  the  shippes  top,  and  sawe  all  the  lande  full  of  sand  in

214

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
a  great  round  compasse,  and  joyning  it  selfe  with  the
other  shore,  and  it  was  so  low,  that  whereas  wee  were  a
league  from  the  same  wee  could  not  well  discerne  it,
and  it  seemed  that  there  was  an  inlet  of  the  mouthes
of  certaine  lakes,  whereby  the  Sea  went  in  and  out.
There  were  divers  opinions  amongst  us,  and  some  thought
that  that  current  entered  into  those  lakes,  and  also  that
some  great  River  there  might  be  the  cause  thereof.  And
when  we  could  perceive  no  passage  through,  nor  could
discerne  the  countrey  to  be  inhabited,  the  Captaine
accompanied  with  certaine  of  us  went  to  take  possession
thereof.  The  same  day  with  the  ebbe  of  the  Sea  wee  fell
downe  from  the  other  coast  from  the  side  of  Nueva
Espanna,  though  alwayes  we  had  in  sight  the  firme  land
on  the  one  side  of  us,  and  the  other  Islands  on  our  left
hande,  on  the  side  of  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz  situate  on
the  Westerne  shore  :  for  on  that  side  there  are  so  many
Islands  and  lands,  so  farre  as  we  could  descry,  that  it
was  greatly  to  be  wondered  at  :  for  from  the  said  haven
of  Santa  Cruz,  and  from  the  coast  of  Culiacan  we  had
alwayes  in  a  maner  land  on  both  sides  of  us,  and  that  so
great  a  countrey,  that  I  suppose  if  it  should  so  continue
further  inwarde,  there  is  countrey  ynough  for  many  yeeres
to  conquer.  This  day  wee  had  the  winde  contrary,  and
cast  ancker  until  the  flood  increased,  which  was  in  the
afternoone,  and  then  wee  set  saile  likewise  with  contrary
winde  untill  midnight,  and  then  cast  ancker.

The  next  day  wee  departed,  shaping  our  course  along
the  coast  Southwest,  untill  midnight  with  little  winde,
and  wee  sawe  within  the  land  high  mountaines  with  some
openings,  and  wee  made  way  some  three  leagues,  and  all
the  next  night  wee  were  becalmed,  and  the  next  day  we
continued  our  course  but  a  little  while,  for  we  sailed  not
above  five  leagues,  and  all  the  night  were  becalmed,  and
sawe  the  lande  full  of  bare  and  high  mountaines,  and  on
our  left  hande  wee  descried  a  plaine  countrey,  and  saw
in  the  night  certaine  fires.

[Chap.  4
215

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539'

Chap  4.

[III.  401.]  They  land  upon  an  Island  to  discover  the  same,  and
there  they  see  many  fires,  which  issue  out  of
certaine  mountaines,  and  many  Seale-fishes.  Here
they  take  an  Indian,  and  can  not  understand  his
language.  Running  along  they  discover  another
Island,  and  take  possession  therof  for  the  Emperours
Majestie,  and  a  great  haven  in  the  firme  land,  which
they  call.Ancon  de  Sant  Andres,  or  The  haven  of  S.
Andrew.

THe  next  day  following  our  course  we  saw  a  great
haven  with  an  Hand  in  the  sea,  within  a  crosse-bow
shoote  of  the  firme  land,  and  in  this  Island  and  on  the
firme  land  were  scene  many  smokes  by  the  judgement  of
all  the  company  ;  wherefore  the  captaine  thought  good
that  wee  should  goe  on  land  to  know  the  certainty  of
these  smokes  and  fires,  himselfe  taking  ten  or  twelve  of
us  with  a  boate  in  his  company  :  and  going  on  shore  in
the  Island,  we  found  that  the  smokes  proceeded  out  of
Burning  certaine  mountaines  and  breaches  of  burned  earth,  where-

mountaines.  out  ascended  into  the  aire  certaine  cinders  and  ashes
which  mounted  up  to  the  middle  region  of  the  aire,  in
such  great  quantitie,  that  we  could  not  esteeme  lesse  then
twenty  lodes  of  wood  to  bee  burned  for  the  causing  of
every  of  those  smokes,  whereat  wee  were  all  not  a  little
amazed.

In  this  Island  were  such  abundance  of  Scales,  as  it
was  wonderful.  Here  we  stayed  that  day,  and  killed  a
great  number  of  these  Seals,  with  whom  we  had  some
trouble  :  for  they  were  so  many,  and  ayded  one  another
so  well,  that  it  was  strange  to  behold  ;  for  it  fell  out,  that
while  we  were  occupied  in  killing  some  of  them  with
staves,  they  assembled  twentie  or  thirty  together,  and  lifting
Abundance  of  themselves  up  assayled  us  with  their  feete  in  a  squadron,
Seales.  ^.nd,  overthrew two or three of  our company on the

ground  :  whereupon  letting  goe  those  which  they  had  in
their  hands,  they  and  the  others  escaped  us  and  went  into

216

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
the  sea,  howbeit  wee  killed  good  store  of  them,  which
were  so  fatte  as  it  was  wonderfull  :  and  when  we  opened
some of  them  to have their livers,  we found certaine
small  blacke  stones  in  their  bodies,  whereat  wee much
marveiled. The next day wee rode at anker  here  for
lacke  of  good  weather  to sayle withall  :  whereupon  the
Captaine determined  to goe  on  shore  with  nine  or  ten
in his  company,  to  see  whether  there  were  any  people
there,  or  any  signe of  people  that  had  bene  there,  and
they  found  on  the  maine  land  seven  or  eight  Indians  like
to  Chichimecas,  which  were  gone  a  fishing,  and  had  a  raft  ^  ^^fi  °f
of  canes  ;  who so  soone  as  they  espied us ranne  away  '^^^^^'
and  betooke  themselves  to  flight,  but  being  pursued  by
us,  in  the end  we  tooke  one  of  them,  whose  language
was  so  strange  that  wee  could  by  no  meanes  understand
him  ;  his  clothing  was  nothing  at  all,  for  he  was  starke
naked. These  people  caried  their  water  in  bottels  made  ^^^^^(^^  of
of  beasts  skins,  they  fished  with  hookes  of  bone,  and  wee ^Zfi\T\
found  good  store  of  their  fishes,  whereof  we  tooke  three  of  bone.
or  foure  dozen.

The  Indian  which  we  had  taken  seeing  himselfe  in  our
hands  did  nothing  but  weepe,  but  the  Captaine  called
him,  and  made  much  of  him,  giving  him  certaine  beades,
with  a  hat  and  certaine  hookes  of  ours,  and  then  let  him
goe.  And  it  seemed  that  after  hee  was  returned  to  his
companions,  he  declared  unto  them  how  we  had  done
him  no  harme  at  all,  shewing  them  the  things  which  we
had  given  him  :  whereupon  they  also  determined  to  come
unto  us  to  our  boate,  but  because  it  was  now  night,  and
that  our  shippes  were  farre  from  us,  we  forced  not  to  stay
for  them,  especially  because  it  was  a  bad  place  and  a
dangerous.  This  countrey  hath  on  the  sea-coast  high
and  bare  mountaines  with  certaine  grasse  in  some  places
like  unto  our  broomes,  or  like  unto  woods  of  rosemary.

The  next  day  wee  sayled  neere  to  the  coast  on  the
same  side,  with  very  scarce  winde,  and  in  a  manner
calme,  and  ranne  not  above  five  leagues,  and  all  the
night following we lay  becalmed,  and  we  saw  on the

217

A.D.

1539-

Ancon  de  S.
AndreSyOrThe
haven  ofS.
Andrew  in  3  2
degrees.

[III.  402.]

Two  Indiajis
of  exceeding
huge  stature.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

shore  five  or  sixe  fires.  The  land  is  high  with  very-
high  mountaines  without  grasse,  having  certaine  caves
in  them  :  the  next  day  also,  and  part  of  the  night
following  we  were  becalmed  :  and  the  morow  after  we
followed  our  course  along  the  sayd  coast,  and  passed
betweene  a  great  Island  full  of  exceeding  high  moun-
taines, and  the  maine  land,  where  we  saw  a  very  great
haven  in  the  firme  land  in  which  wee  ankered  to  see
what  it  was,  and  being  come  to  an  anker,  the  Captaine
and  some  of  us  went  on  land  the  same  day  to  see  if  there
were  any  people  and  fresh  water,  and  wee  found  certaine
small  cottages  covered  with  drie  grasse,  with  certaine
little  staves  layd  overthwart,  and  we  went  a  little  way
into  the  countrey  which  was  very  baren,  by  certaine  small
and  streight  pathes,  and  found  a  little  pond  or  pit,  but
drie  and  without  water  ;  and  here  the  Captaine  tooke
possession  for  the  Marques  of  the  valley  in  the  name  of
his  Majestic,  and  after  this  we  returned  to  our  ship,  and
that  night  we  sawe  foure  or  five  fires  on  the  land.  The
next  day  the  Captaine  determined,  because  hee  had
seene  these  fires,  to  goe  on  shore,  and  so  with  our  two
boates  we  went  fifteene  or  twenty  of  us  unto  certaine
crooked  strands  two  leagues  from  the  place  where  our
ships  rode,  and  where  we  had  seene  the  fires,  and  we
found  two  Indians  of  exceeding  huge  stature,  so  that
they  caused  us  greatly  to  wonder  ;  they  caried  their
bowes  and  arrowes  in  their  hands,  and  as  soone  as
they  saw  us  leap  on  shore  they  ran  away,  and  wee
followed  them  unto  their  dwellings  and  lodgings,  which
were  certaine  cottages  and  bowers  covered  with  boughs,
and  there  we  found  great  and  small  steps  of  many
people,  but  they  had  no  kind  of  victuals  but  onely
cuttle-fishes  which  wee  found  there.  The  countrey
toward  the  sea  side  seemed  but  barren,  for  we  saw
neither  trees  nor  greene  grasse  there,  yet  were  there
certaine  smal  pathes  not  well  beaten,  and  along  the
sea-coast  we  saw  many  tracts  of  dogges,  hares,  and
conies, and in certaine small Islands neere unto the

2T8

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
maine  we  saw  Seale-fishes. This  haven  is  called  Ancon  Jncon  de  Snnt
de  Sant  Andres.  ^'^'^''^^•

Chap. 5.

They  discover  a  mountainous  Island  very  great,  and
neere  unto  it  certaine  other  Islands  with  a  goodly
greene  and  pleasant  countrey.  They  have  sight  of
certaine  Indians  in  Canoas  of  canes,  whose  language
sounded  like  the  Flemish  tongue,  with  whome  they
could  not  have  any  traffique.

THe  next  day  we  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  sayling
betweene  the  maine  and  an  Island,  which  we  suppose  ^  S^'^'^-^
to  be  in  circuit  about  a  hundreth  or  eighty  leagues,  ■'■^"^'^«-
sayling  sometimes  within  one,  and  sometimes  within  two
leagues  of  the  maine.  The  soile  of  this  Island  is  of
certaine  mountaines  not  very  steepe  with  caves  in
them,  and  as  farre  as  wee  could  descrie  by  the  coast,
there  appeared  no  signe  of  any  plaine  countrey.  Here
from  this  day  forward  wee  began  to  bee  afraid,  con-
sidering that  we  were  to  returne  to  the  port  of  Santa
Cruz  ;  for  it  was  supposed,  that  all  along  this  mighty
gulfe  from  the  entrance  in  at  Culiacan  until  the
returning  backe  unto  the  said  haven,  was  all  firme
land,  and  also  because  wee  had  the  firme  land  alwayes
on  our  right  hand  and  it  goeth  round  circle-wise  unto
the  sayd  haven  ;  but  many  thought  and  hoped  that
we  should  finde  some  mouth  or  out-let,  whereby  wee
might  passe  through  unto  the  other  coast.  What  our
successe  was  we  will  declare  in  the  relation  following.

The  next day  being  Thursday  wee  sayled  with  scant  They  returne
winde, for it was almost calme, and passed beyond  •^^°^^  ^f\^°^~7f
that great Island, having firme land alwayes on our  of  California
right  hand,  and coasting (as I sayd) very neere unto
it. The  next  day  likewise  we  sayled  with  little  winde,
it  being in a manner calme, and passed neere unto
the  shore  by  certaine round baies,  and certaine points
which  the  land made, which was pleasant to behold
being somewhat  greene,  and there  seemed to be  some

219

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

creeke  there.  This  Friday  at  night  wee  sayled  alto-
gether with  a  fresh  gale,  and  at  breake  of  day  wee
Another  were  betweene  the  maine  land,  and  an  Island  on  our
Island,  jgf^  hand,  which  was  somewhat  big,  as  farre  as  we  could
discerne.  There  was  a  great  bay  in  the  firme  land,
and  before  it  was  a  point  which  stretched  farre  into
the  sea.  The  firme  land  seemed  to  bee  much  fresher
and  pleasanter  then  those  lands  which  we  had  passed,
having  many  bankes  and  hilles  of  indifferent  height,
and  beautifull  to  behold.

The  countrey  (as  farre  as  wee  could  discerne)  was  so
pleasant  and  delightfuU,  that  wee  all  desired  to  goe  on
shore,  and  to  search  up  into  it  two  or  three  dayes
journey,  to  see  whether  it  were  inhabited  or  not.
Wee  saw  within  the  land  of  that  bay  two  fires.  The
night  following  being  Saturday  we  sailed  continually
with  a  prosperous  and  fresh  gale,  and  the  wind  was  so
great  that  we  drew  our  bonet  to  our  maine  sayle,  and
sayled  so  till  the  morning.

On  Sunday  the  twelfth  of  October  we  found  our
selves  altogether  inclosed  with  land,  on  the  right  hand
with  the  maine,  which  compassed  us  before  and  behinde,
and  on  the  left  hand  with  an  Island  of  a  league  and
a  halfe  ;  and  betweene  the  maine  and  the  Island  in
the  midst  of  the  sea  there  lay  a  small  Islet,  and  also
betweene  the  sayd  maine  and  the  Island  there  were
two  mouthes,  through  which  there  appeared  a  passage
whereby  afterward  we  passed  through.  This  maine  was
much  more  fresh  and  greene  then  the  other  which  wee
had  passed,  and  had  certaine  plaines  and  points  of
mountaines  of  pleasant  view,  and  full  of  greene  grasse.
Here  all  this  night  we  saw  two  or  three  villages
which  were  very  great,  and  at  breake  of  day  we  saw
a  Canoa  or  boate  made  of  canes,  which  came  from  the
land  out  of  a  creeke,  and  wee  stood  still  untill  it  came
neere  unto  us  in  the  ship,  and  they  began  to  speake
in  their  language  which  no  man  understood,  whose
pronuntiation was like to the Flemings, and being

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-

called  they  returned  with  great  haste  unto  the  shore,
and  we  were  very  sory  because  our  boate  had  not
followed  them.

Here  happened  unto  us  a  very  strange  thing,  which
was,  that  as  this  Indian  returned  to  the  shore  in  [III.  403.]
certaine  of  these  creekes  where  a  number  of  his  fellow
Indians  were,  as  wee  viewed  that  part,  we  sawe  five
Canoas  issue  foorth,  which  came  toward  us :  where-
upon wee  stayed  to  see  what  they  would  doe.  In  the
meane  while  our  Admirall  came  up  unto  us,  which
was  neere  the  shore,  for  she  also  had  scene  them,  and
so  being  come  together  we  cast  anker,  expecting  what
those  Canoas  would  doe.  In  the  meane  while  our
General!  commanded  us  to  make  ready  our  boate,  and
to  furnish  the  same  with  oares  and  men,  to  trie  if
we  could  by  any  meanes  take  some  of  them,  that
we  might  come  to  some  knowledge  of  them,  and
that  wee  might  give  them  some  of  our  trifles,  and
specially  of  our  hookes  and  beads  to  winne  their  friend-
ship. The  Indians  with  their  five  Canoas  approched
within  one  or  two  stones  cast  of  us,  and  then  began
to  speake  very  loude  unto  us  in  a  very  strange  lan-
guage, alwayes  standing  upon  their  guard  to  retire
themselves  with  speede.  When  our  Captaine  saw  this,
and  that  they  would  not  come  neere  us,  but  rather
retired,  he  commanded  sixe  mariners  to  goe  into  the
boate  from  the  sterne  of  the  ship,  and  himselfe  also
went  with  them  with  all  possible  haste  toward  the
Indians.  The  Indians  returned  to  the  shore  with  so
great  celeritie,  that  they  seemed  to  flie  in  those  little
Canoas  of  canes.  Neverthelesse  our  men  used  such
diligence  that  one  of  the  Canaos  was  boorded  &
taken  ;  but  the  Indian  in  the  Canoa  seeing  himselfe
now  taken  leapt  into  the  water,  and  our  men  followed
with  their  boat  to  take  him,  but  seeing  himselfe
within  their  reach,  he  ducked  with  his  head  under
their  boate,  and  so  deceived  them,  and  then  rose  up
againe,  and with  their  oares  and  with  staves  they  gave

221

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

him  certaine  blowes,  to  amaze  him,  but  nothing  would
serve  them  ;  for  as  they  were  about  to  lay  handes
upon  him  hee  still  dived  under  water,  and  with  his
hands  and  feete  got  neere  to  the  shore  :  and  as  he
rose  up  above  the  water,  hee  called  to  his  felowes
which  stood  on  the  shore  to  behold,  crying  Belen
with  a  loud  voyce,  and  so  they  pursued  him,  and
strooke  him  sometimes  being  very  neere  the  shore,
and  he  alwayes  went  calling  the  rest  of  his  fellowes
to  come  and  helpe  him,  whereupon  within  a  short
while  after  three  other  Canoas  came  foorth  to  succour
him,  being  full  of  Indians  with  bowes  and  arrowes
in  their  handes,  crying  with  a  loude  voyce,  that  wee
should  come  on  shore :  these  Indians  were  of  great
stature  and  salvage,  fat  also  and  well  set,  and  of  a
browne  colour.  Our  Captaine  perceiving  this,  least
they  should  wound  any  of  our  people  with  their
arrowes,  returned  backe,  and  commanded  us  immediately
to  set  sayle,  and  so  foorthwith  wee  departed.

This  day  the  wind  skanted,  and  we  returned  to  anker
in  the  foresayd  place,  and  our  Admirall  rode  from  the
firme  land  toward  the  Island,  and  wee  which  were  in
the  ship  called  The  Trinitie  lay  neere  unto  the  maine,
and  before  breake  of  day  wee  departed  with  a  fresh  gale.
And  before  we  disemboqued  out  of  that  chanell  we  saw
certaine  grasse  very  high  and  greene  upon  the  maine  :
whereupon  a  mariner,  and  the  Pilot  went  up  into  the  top,
and  saw  the  mouth  of  a  river  which  ranne  through  that
greene  countrey  into  the  sea.  But  because  our  Admirall
was  under  all  her  sayles  farre  from  us,  we  could  not  tell
Port  Belen  a  them  of  this  river,  where  wee  would  have  taken  water,
■very  good  whereof  we  had  some  neede,  and  because  it  was  a  very
good  haven  to  goe  on  shore  to  take  it,  and  therefore
without  watering  we  followed  our  course.  On  munday
we  departed  from  this  haven  which  is  like  unto  a  lake,
for  on  all  sides  we  were  compassed  with  land,  having
the  continent  before,  behinde  us,  and  on  our  right  side,
and  the Island  on  our left  side,  and we passed  foorth

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

at  those  mouthes  beforementioned,  which  shewed  an
out-let  into  the  open  sea.  Thus  wee  sayled  along  still
viewing  the  situation  of  the  countrey,  rejoycing  all  of
us  at  the  sight  thereof,  for  it  alwayes  pleased  us  more
and  more,  still  appearing  more  greene  and  pleasant,  and
the  grasse  which  wee  found  neere  unto  the  shore  was
fresh  and  delectable,  but  not  very  high,  being  (to  all
our  judgements)  not  past  a  spanne  long.  Likewise  the
hilles  which  wee  saw,  which  were  many,  and  many
downes  made  a  very  pleasant  prospect,  especially  be-
cause we  judged,  that  there  were  many  valleys  and
dales  betweene  them.

Chap.  6.

They  discover  a  very  great  bay  with  foure  small  Islands
in  it,  whereas  they  take  possession.  As  they  sayle
along  and  discover  divers  Islands  they  come  at  length
to  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz,  where  not  being  able  to
get  any  knowledge  of  those  Indians,  although  they
lay  in  waite  for  them  at  a  place  called  The  well  of
Grijalva,  they  departed  thence.  They  have  a  perilous
and  long  tempest,  which  ceased,  after  they  had  scene
a  light  on  their  shrowdes.

T  our  comming  out  of  these  openings  we  began  to  -A  great
iinde  a  Bay  with  a  very  great  haven,  environed  with  '^^'"^^•
divers  small  hilles  having  upon  them  greene  woods  and
pleasant  to behold. In this bay  and strand were  two  [III.  404.]
small Islands neere unto the shore, one of  the which
was like unto a  table about  halfe a  league in bignes,
and the  other  was  a  round hill almost as big  as the
former. These  Islands  served  us  onely  to  content  our
sight,  for  we passed by them without staying,  having
but  a  slacke  wind  on  Munday  morning  :  all  which  day
we  followed  our  course  with  the  foresayd  slacke  winde,
and  within  a  while  after  it  became  flat  contrary,  so  that
we  were  constrained  to  anker  at  the sayd  point  of  the
sayd haven  ; and on Tewesday  at breake of  day we
set  sayle,  but  made  but  little  away  all  the  day,  because

223

A

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

the  winde  continued  contrary,  although  but  very  weake.
The  night  following  wee  were  becalmed  a  little  beyond
the  point  of  this  haven ;  but  about  midnight  wee  began
to  have  a  fresh  gale,  and  on  Wednesday  in  the  morning
wee  were  seven  leagues  distant  from  that  point.  This
countrey  shewed  (as  it  was  indeede)  more  plaine  then  the
rest,  with  certaine  small  woody  hilles,  and  within  the
other  point  which  was  before  descried,  the  situation
seemed  to  be  more  pleasant  and  delightsome  then  the
rest  which  we  had  passed.  And  at  the  uttermost  end
of  the  point  were  two  small  Islets.  The  sayd  Wednes-
day about  nine  of  the  clocke  the  winde  blew  a  good
gale,  and  we  sayled  by  evening  between  seven  and  eight
leagues,  and  came  over  against  a  land  not  very  high,
where  wee  saw  certaine  creekes  or  breaches  not  very
ragged,  into  every  of  which  a  river  seemed  to  fall,
because  the  soyle  was  very  greene,  and  had  certaine
trees  growing  on  it  farre  bigger  then  those  which  we
had  found  before.  Here  the  Captaine  with  five  or  sixe
men  went  on  shore,  and  taking  possession  passed  up
one  of  those  rivers,  and  found  the  footing  of  many
Indians  upon  the  sand.  On  the  bankes  of  that  river
they  saw  many  fruitful  trees,  as  cherry-trees  and  little
apple-trees,  and  other  white  trees  :  they  found  also  in
the  wood  three  or  foure  beasts  called  Adibes,  which
are  a  kind  of  dogs.  The  same  night  wee  set  sayle
with  the  winde  off  the  land,  which  blew  so  freshly,  that
it  made  us  to  strike  our  foresayle ;  and  on  the  sixeteenth
of  October  at  nine  of  the  clocke  we  came  neere  unto
a  point  of  certaine  high  mountaines,  on  which  day  being
Thursday  we  made  little  way,  because  the  winde  ceased,
but  it  rose  againe  in  the  night,  whereupon  by  the  breake
of  day  on  Friday  wee  came  before  the  sayd  point  being
sixe  or  seven  leagues  off.  The  land  seemed  to  bee  very
mountainous  with  certaine  sharpe  points  not  greatly  clad
with  grasse,  but  somewhat  bare.  On  our  left  hand  wee
saw  two  Islands,  the  one  of  a  league  and  a  halfe,  the
other  not  so  much,  and  it  seemed that  we  drew neere

224

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
to  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz,  whereat  we  were  sory,  because
we  were  alwaies  in  good  hope  to  find  some  out-let  into
the  maine  Ocean  in  some  place  of  that  land,  and  that
the  same  port  was  the  same  out-let,  and  also  that  by
the  sayd  coast  we  might  returne  to  the  foresayd  haven
of  Santa  Cruz,  and  that  we  had  committed  a  great  error,
because  we  had  not  certainely  sought  out  the  secret,
whether  that  were  a  Streit  or  a  river,  which  wee  had
left  behind  us  unsearched  at  the  bottome  of  this  great
sea  or  gulfe.

All  Friday  and  the  night  following  we  sayled  with  a
scant  winde,  and  on  Saturday  at  breake  of  day  we  were
betweene  two  points  of  land  which  make  a  bay,  wherein  -A  bay  with  4
we  saw  before  and  behinde  foure  or  five  great  and  small  °^  5  Inlands.
Islands. The  land  was  very  mountainous,  part  wherof
was  covered  with  grasse,  and part was  voide. Within
the  land  appeared  more  mountaines  and  hils,  and  in  this
place  we  were  come  neere  unto  the  haven  of  Santa  Cruz,
which  is  all  firme  land,  except  it  be  divided  in  the  very
nooke  by some streite or  great river  which  parteth it
from  the maine,  which because  we had not throughly
discovered,  all  of  us  that  were  imployed  in  this  voyage
were  not  a  little  grieved. And  this  maine  land  stretcheth
so farre in length,  that  I cannot well expresse  it : for
from  the  haven  of  Acapulco,  which  standeth  in  seven-
teene  degrees  and  twenty  minutes  of  latitude,  wee  had
alwayes  the  coast  of  the  firme  land  on  our  right  hand,  un-
till  we  came  to  the  great  current  of  the  white  &  red  sea : This  current
and  here  (as  1  have  said)  we  knew  not  the  secret  of  this '^^  ^^  3  2  de-
current,  whether  it  were  caused  by  a  river  or  by  a  streit :  ^JfJ^i^  ^white
and  so  supposing  that  the  coast  which  wee  had  on  our  and  red.
right  hand  was  closed  up  without  passage,  wee  returned
backe againe, alwayes descending Southward by our
degrees, untill wee returned unto the sayd haven of  This  returne
Santa Cruz,  finding  still along  the  coast  a goodly  and  "  mentioned
pleasant countrey, and still seeing fires made by the  '^^^'  ^"
Indians, and Canoas made of  Canes. We determined
to  take  in fresh  water  at  the haven  of  Santa  Cruz, to
IX  225  p

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

runne  along  the  outward Westerne coast,  and to see
what it  was,  if  it pleased God. Here  we  rested our
selves,  and  eat  of  the  plummes  and  fruits  called  Pithaias  :
They  arrive and  wee  entred  into  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz  on  Sunday
at  the  haven ^^  1 8  of  October  and  stayed  there  eight  daies  to  take
Q.j.^^  ^  in  wood  and  water  resting  our  selves  all  that  while,  that

our  men  might  strengthen  and  refresh  themselves. Our
captaine determined to divide  amongst us certain gar-
ments of  tafFata,  with clokes and  saies,  and  a piece  of
taffata,  and  likewise  ordained,  that  wee  should  goe  on  land
to  catch  a  couple  of  Indians,  that  they  might  talke  with
our  interpreter,  and  that  we  might  come  to  the  knowledge
of  their  language. Whereupon  thirteene  of  us  went  out
[III,  405.] of  our  ship  by  night,  and  lay  in  ambush  in  a  place  which
is  called The  well of  Grijalva,  where  we stayed untill
noone  betweene  certaine  secret  wayes,  and could never
see  or  descrie  any  one  Indian :  wherefore  wee  returned
The  Spaniards  to  our  ships,  with  two  mastive-dogs  which  we  caried  with
use  mastives ^g ^q  catch the Indians with more ease : and in our
^Vd'  f  ^  ^ returne  we  found  two  Indians  hidden  in  certaine  thickets,
which were come thither to spie what wee did : but
because wee and our dogs were weary, and thought
not  on  them,  these Indians issued  out  of  the  thickets,
and fled away,  and wee ranne after them, and our
dogges saw them not  : wherefore by reason of the
Reade  more  of  thicknes of  the  wilde  thistles,  and of  the thornes  and
these  staves bryars, and because we were weary, we could never
cap.  10.  overtake  them  : they  left  behinde them certaine  staves

so  finely  wrought  that  they  were  very  beautifull  to
behold,  considering  how  cunningly  they  were  made  with
a  handle  and  a  corde  to  fling  them.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  October  being  Wednesday,,
we  set  sayle  out  of  this  haven  of  Santa  Cruz  with  little
winde,  and  in  sayling  downe  the  chanell  our  shippe  called
the  Trinitie  came  on  ground  upon  certaine  sholdes :  this
was  at  noone  at  a  low  water,  and  with  all  the  remedy
that  we  could  use  wee  could  not  draw  her  off,  where-
upon wee  were  constrained  to  underprop  her,  and  to  stay

226

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

^539-

the  next  tide  :  and  when  the  tide  began  to  increase  wee

used  all  diligence  to  draw  her  off,  and  could  not  by  any
meanes,  whereat  all  the  company  and  the  Captaine  were
not  a  little  grieved :  for  wee  thought  wee  should  have
lost  her  there,  although  wee  ceased  not  with  all  our
might  to  labour  with  both  our  boates,  and  with  our
cable  and  capsten.  In  the  ende  it  pleased  God  about
midnight  at  a  full  sea  with  the  great  force  which
wee  used  to  recover  her,  that  wee  drew  her  off  the  sand,
for  which  we  gave  God  most  hearty  thankes,  and  rode
at  anker  all  the  rest  of  the  night,  wayting  for  day-light
for  feare  of  falling  into  any  further  danger  or  mishap.
When  day  was  come,  wee  set  forward  with  a  fresh  gale,
and  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  directing  our  prows  to
the  maine  sea,  to  see  whether  it  would  please  God  to
let  us  discover  the  secret  of  this  point.  But  whether  it
pleased  not  his  great  goodnesse,  or  whether  it  were  for
our  sinnes,  wee  spent  eight  dayes  from  this  port,  before
we  could  double  the  point,  by  reason  of  contrary  winds,
and  great  raine,  and  lightning  and  darknesse  every  night  :
also  the  windes  grew  so  raging  and  tempestuous,  that  they
made  us  all  to  quake,  and  to  pray  continually  unto  God
to  ayde  us.  And  hereupon  wee  made  our  cables  and
ankers  ready,  and  the  chiefs  Pilot  commanded  us  with  all
speede  to  cast  anker,  and  in  this  sorte  we  passed  our
troubles  :  and  whereas  wee  rode  in  no  securitie,  he  caused
us  foorthwith  to  weigh  our  ankers,  and  to  goe  whither
the  wind  should  drive  us.  And  in  this  sorte  wee  spent
those  eight  dayes,  turning  backe  by  night  the  same  way
that  wee  had  gone  by  day,  and  sometimes  making  good  in
the  night  that  which  we  had  lost  in  the  day,  not  without
great  desire  of  all  the  company  to  have  a  winde  which
might  set  us  forward  on  our  voyage,  being  afflicted  with
the  miseries  which  wee  indured  by  reason  of  the  thunders,
lightnings,  and  raine,  wherewith  we  were  wet  from  toppe
to  toe,  by  reason  of  the  toyle  which  we  had  in  weighing
and  casting  of  our  ankers,  as  neede  required.

And on one of  these nights,  which was  very  darke

227

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

and  tempestuous  with  winde  and  raine,  because  we
thought  we  should  have  perished,  being  very  neere  the
shore,  we  prayed  unto  God  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to
ayde  and  save  us  without  calling  our  sinnes  to  remem-
brance. And  straightway  wee  saw  upon  the  shrowdes  of
the  Trinity  as  it  were  a  candle,  which  of  it  selfe  shined,
and  gave  a  light,  whereat  all  the  company  greatly  rejoyced,
in  such  sort  that  wee  ceased  not  to  give  thankes  unto  God.
Whereupon  we  assured  our  selves,  that  of  his  mercie
hee  would  guide  and  save  us,  and  would  not  suffer  us
to  perish,  as  indeede  it  fell  out  ;  for  the  next  day  wee
had  good  weather,  and  all  the  mariners  sayd,  that  it
was  the  light  of  Saint  Elmo  which  appeared  on  the
shrowdes,  and  they  saluted  it  with  their  songs  and
prayers.  These  stormes  tooke  us  betweene  the  Isles  of
Saint  lago  and  Saint  Philip,  and  the  Isle  called  Isla  de
perlas  lying  over  against  the  point  of  California  sup-
posed to  be  firme  land.

Chap.  7.

Sayling  on  their  way  they  discover  a  pleasant  Countrey,
and  in  their  judgement  greatly  inhabited,  and  finde
the  Sea-coast  very  deepe.  They  went  to  discover  or
viewe  the  Isle  of  perles.  And  by  a  current  one  of
their  ships  is  separated  from  the  other,  and  with  great
joy  after  three  dayes  they  had  sight  again  of  her,  and
following  their  voyage  they  discover  certaine  great,
greene,  and  pleasant  plaines.

WE  began  to  sayle  along  the  coast  the  seventh  or
eight  of  November,  the  land  alwayes  shewing  very
greene  with  grasse  pleasant  to  behold,  and  certaine  plaines
neere  the  shore,  and  up  within  the  countrey  many
[III.  406.]  pleasant  hils  replenished  with  wood,  and  certaine  valleys,
so  that  wee  were  delighted  above  measure,  and  wondered
at  the  greatnes  and  goodly  view  of  the  countrey  :  &
every  night  we  saw  fires,  which  shewed  that  the  countrey
is  greatly  inhabited.  Thus  we  proceeded  on  our  voyage
untill  the  tenth  of  the  sayd  moneth  of  November,  having

228

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
alwayes  the  coast  of  the  maine  Ocean  on  our  right  hand,  From  hence
and  the  farther  we  sailed,  wee  alwayes  found  the  countrey  fi™ard  tkey
more  delightsome  and  pleasant,  as  well  in  beholding  the  ^^j^^j.^^  g^.
greennes  therof,  as  also  in  that  it  shewed  certaine  plaines  i^ackside  of
and  deepe  valleys,  through  which  rivers  did  fall  downe  California.
into  the  land,  within  certaine  mountaines,  and  hilles  full
of  great  woods  which  were  not  very  high,  and  appeared
within  the  countrey. Here  we  were 54  leagues  distant
from California  little  more  or  lesse,  alwayes  toward  the  California.
Southwest,  seeing  in  the  night  three  or  foure  fires,  where-
by it  appeareth  that  the  countrey  is  inhabited,  and  full  of
people,  for  the  greatnes  of  the  countrey  argueth  no  lesse  :
and  we  supposed  that  there  must  needs  bee  great  townes
inhabited  within  the  land,  although  in  this  poynt  we  were
of  divers  opinions. The  sea  is  so  deepe  on  all  this  coast
that  we  could  scarce  find  ground  in  54  fadomes. On  the
greatest  part  of  the  coast  there  are  hilles  of  very  white
sand,  and  it  seemeth  to  be  a  dangerous  coast,  because  of
the  great  and  swift  tides  which  goe  there,  for  the  sand
sheweth  so  much  for  the  space  of  ten  or  twelve  leagues,
for so the Pilots affirmed. This day  being Saturday
the  winde  increased,  and  wee had sight  of  the Isle oi  Isla  de  perlas.
pearles,  which  on  this  side  of  the  gulfe  appeareth with
a  deepe  valley  all  covered  over  with  trees,  and  sheweth
much  fairer  then  on  the  other  side,  and  wee  entred  into
the  Porte  of  Santa  Cruz. From  the  ninth  of  November
to  the  fifteenth  we  sayled  not  above  tenne  leagues,  be-
cause  we  had contrary  winds,  and great showres  : and
besides  this  we  had  another  mischance  which  did  not  a
little grieve us  : for wee lost company of the ship
called The Trinitie, and  could never see her for the
space of three dayes, whereupon wee suspected that
shee  was  returned  home  unto  New  Spaine,  or  that she
was severed from our company  : wherefore we were
grieved  out  of  measure  to  see  our  selves  so  left  alone,
and the Captaine of  all others was most sad,  though
he ceased not to encourage us to proceede on our
voyage,  saying  that notwithstanding  all this  wee ought

229

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

not  to  leave  off  this  enterprise  which  we  had  begunne,
and  that  though  we  were  left  alone  we  should  deserve
the  greater  commendation  and  credite  :  whereupon  wee
all  answered  him,  that  wee  would  not  have  him  thinke
that  any  of  us  would  ever  be  discouraged,  but  that  we
would  follow  him  untill  hee  should  thinke  it  reason-
able that  we  should  not  proceede  any  further  in  the
enterprise,  and  that  we  were  in  danger  of  perishing,  and
that  untill  then  wee  would  bee  at  his  commandement :
but  withall  we  perswaded  him  that  after  he  had  seene
any  great  difficulty  to  proceede  any  further,  he  should
doe  well  to  returne  backe  to  make  relation  of  our
successe  to  the  R.  H.  lord  the  Marques  de  valle.
Hereupon  he  made  an  Oration  unto  us  wherein  he
told  us,  that  he  could  not  beleeve,  much  lesse  could
imagine,  wherefore  the  shippe  called  the  Trinitie  should
returne  into  Newe  Spaine,  nor  why  she  should  willingly
depart  from  us,  and  goe  unto  any  other  place,  and  that  he
thought  by  all  reason,  that  some  current  had  caried  her
out  of  our  sight,  and  that  through  contrary  weather  and
tempests  she  could  not  fetch  us  up,  and  that  notwith-
standing all  that  which  we  had  done  in  the  voyage,  he
had  an  instruction,  that  if  by  chance  we  were  separated
one  from  the  other,  wee  were  to  take  this  course  to  meete
againe  together,  namely  to  returne  backe  eight  or  tenne
leagues  to  seeke  one  another,  beyond  certaine  head-lands
which  lay  out  into  the  sea,  and  that  therefore  we  should
doe  well  to  returne  to  seeke  her  up.  This  sentence
pleased  us  all,  and  so  returning  to  seeke  her,  we  espied
her  two  leagues  distant  from  us,  comming  toward  us  with
a  fresh  gale  of  winde,  whereat  we  greatly  rejoyced.

Thus  being  come  together  we  ankered  for  that  day,
because  the  weather  seemed  very  contrary,  and  the  Cap-
taine  chid  them  for  their  negligence  in  sayling,  because
they  had  in  such  sort  lost  our  company  ;  and  they  ex-
cused themselves,  that  they  could  doe  no  lesse,  because
A  current,  a  current  had  caried  them  away  above  three  leagues,
whereby  they  could  never  reach  unto us. The next  day

230

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
being  the  sixeteenth  of  November  wee  set  forward,  but

sayled  very  little,  for  the  North  and  Northwest  winds
were  against  us.  Here  we  discovered  certaine  plaines,  in
my  judgement  very  great  and  greene,  and  right  before  us
we  could  not  discerne  any  mountaines  or  woods,  whereat
wee  marveiled  to  see  so  great  a  countrey.  And  wee  met
an  Indian  in  a  Canoa  on  the  shore  whereon  the  sea  did
breake,  who  stayed  to  beholde  us  a  great  while,  and  often-
times hee  lifted  up  himselfe  to  view  us  the  better,  &
then  returned  backe  along  the  coast  :  we  used  al  dili-
gence to  see  whether  he  would  come  out  further  from
the  shore,  to  give  him  chace,  and  to  trie  whether  we
could  catch  him,  but  he  very  cunningly  viewed  us
without  comming  neere  unto  us,  and  returned  to  the
shore  with  his  Canoa.  Here  we  saw  in  the  evening
but  one  fire,  and  wist  not  whether  it  were  done  by  the
cunning  of  the  Indians,  because  they  would  not  have
us  know  that  there  were  people  there,  or  that  it  was  [III,  407.]
so  indeede.  From  the  said  16  day  of  November  untill
the  24  of  the  same  moneth  we  could  not  proceede  on
our  way  above  12  or  15  leagues:  and  looking  into
our  Sea-chart,  we  found  our  selves  distant  from  the
Xaguges  of  the  Port  of  Santa  Cruz  about  70  leagues.  They  are  70
Now  on  the  24  being  munday  very  early  in  the  morn-  ''^^g^^^ fi'om
ing  we  beganne  to  take  very  good  view  of  that  ^anta  Crux.
Countrey,  and  all  along  the  coast  we  saw  many  faire
plaines  with  certaine  furrowes  made  in  the  midst  like
unto  halfe  plaines,  the  said  plaine  still  appearing  up  into
the  Countrey,  with  pleasant  champions,  because  the
grasse  which  grew  there  was  very  beautifull,  short,  and
greene,  and  good  pasture  for  cattell.  Howbeit  because
we  rode  so  farre  off,  we  could  not  perfectly  judge  what
kind  of  grasse  it  was,  but  it  shewed  very  short  and
greene,  and  without  thornes.  These  plaines  on  the
right  hand  made  a  bay  into  a  valley  which  seemed  to
be  a  piece  of  a  mountaine  :  the  rest  shewed  to  be  al
plaines  without  any  thistles  or  weedes,  but  full  of  grasse
good  for  cattel  very  green  and  faire,  as  I  have  said.

231

A.D.

1539-

Land  running
towards  the
'Northwest.

Note.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Chap.  8.

One  of  their  ships  by  tempest  was  separated  from  the
other,  and  afterward  meeting  with  her  consort  she
reporteth  that  the  land  stretcheth  to  the  West  by
the  mouth  of  the  great  lake.  The  Pilots  are  of
divers  judgements  touching  the  state  of  this  coast
inhabited  by  Chichimecas.  They  enter  into  an  haven
to  take  in  fresh  water,  and  are  suddenly  assayled  by
two  squadrons  of  Indians.  They  defend  themselves
valiantly,  and  the  Captaine  with  some  of  his  souldiers
are  grievously  wounded.

THe  26  of  this  moneth  being  Wednesday  at  night
the  North  wind  tooke  us,  which  still  increased  more
and  more  so  greatly  that  it  put  us  to  much  trouble,
for  it  continued  two  dayes,  in  which  the  Sea  was  alwayes
boisterous  ;  and  this  night  againe  we  lost  the  Trinity
being  beaten  with  the  North  winde  aforesaid  (and  we
had  sight  of  her  on  munday  the  24)  wherewith  we  were
all  of  us  greatly  agrieved,  both  Captaines,  Souldiers  and
Mariners,  because  we  saw  we  were  left  alone,  and  our
ship  call  Santa  Agueda  wherein  we  were,  was  but  badly
conditioned,  and  this  grieved  us  more  then  the  trouble
which  we  had  with  the  boisterousnesse  of  the  Sea,  imagin-
ing that  if  we  should  leese  the  Trinity,  or  if  any  mishap
should  fall  unto  us,  we  should  not  be  able  to  follow
our  voyage  according  to  our  Captaines  and  our  owne
desire.  This  said  24  day  being  munday  we  saw  a
Countrey  with  high  mountaines  toward  the  Northwest,
and  it  seemed  that  the  land  stretched  on  still  forward,
whereat  we  exceedingly  rejoyced,  because  we  judged
that  the  lande  grew  alwayes  broader  and  broader,  and
that  wee  should  meete  with  some  speciall  good  thing.
Whereupon  we  desired  that  it  would  please  God  to  send
us  good  weather  for  our  voyage,  which  hitherto  we
found  alwayes  contrary,  so  that  in  26  dayes  we  sayled
not  above  70  leagues,  and  that  with  much  trouble,  some-
times riding  at  anker  and  sometimes  sayling,  and  seeking

232

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
the  remedies  and  benefite  of  the  shore  to  avoide  perils.
In  this  Countrey  which  we  discovered  the  26  day  we
alwayes  saw  (as  I  have  said)  along  the  shore,  and  within
the  land,  goodly  plaines  without  any  tree,  in  the  midst
wherof  was  a  lake  or  gathering  together  of  the  Sea-
water,  which  (to  our  judgement)  was  above  12  leagues
in  compasse,  and  the  sea-coast  reached  to  the  mountaines
before  mentioned.  And  this  day  we  saw  our  ship  called
the  Trinitie,  which  rode  2  leagues  distant  from  us,  which
so  soone  as  she  saw  us,  set  saile,  and  we  came  together
and  rejoyced  greatly.  They  brought  us  great  quantity  A  wmderfull
of  gray  fishes,  and  of  another  kinde  :  for  at  the  point  ff^^ngp^^^^
of  those  mountaines  they  found  a  fishing  which  was  very  y^^^^/^„^'
wonderfull,  for  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  taken  by
hand :  and  they  were  so  great  that  every  one  had  much
adoe  to  finde  roome  to  lay  his  fish  in.  They  found
also  on  the  said  point  a  fountaine  of  fresh  water  which
descended  from  those  hilles,  and  they  told  us  that  at
the  same  place  they  had  found  a  narrow  passage,  whereby
the  Sea  entered  into  the  said  lake.  They  comforted  us
much  with  the  report  of  these  things,  and  in  telling  us
that  the  lande  trended  to  the  West  ;  for  the  chiefe  Pilot
thought,  and  the  other  Pilot  was  of  the  same  opinion,
that  we  should  finde  a  good  Countrey.  This  night  we
set  saile  to  goe  to  that  point  to  take  in  fresh  water
which  we  wanted,  and  to  see  this  lake,  and  to  put  some
men  on  shore  :  and  after  midnight  the  winde  came  upon
us  so  forcibly  at  the  North  that  we  could  not  stay  there :
whereupon  wee  were  constrained  to  put  further  into  the
Sea,  and  returned  the  same  way  backe  againe  unto  the
shore  with  much  adoe,  and  came  to  an  anker  a  great
way  short  of  the  place  from  whence  we  were  driven  :
and  there  we  rode  untill  Thursday  at  noone  with  this
bitter  North  winde,  and  on  Friday  about  noone,  when  we
most  thought  it  would  have  ceased,  it  beganne  to  increase
againe,  which  grieved  us  not  a  litde  seeing  the  weather
so  contrary,  hoping  alwayes  that  it  would  cease,  and
that  some  winde  would blow from  the  shore,  whereby

233

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-
[III.  408.]  we  might  recover  the  point  of  land  to  take  in  fresh
water,  and  to  search  whether  there  were  any  people
about  that  lake.  Here  we  lay  from  the  26  of  the  saide
moneth  till  the  29,  driving  up  and  downe  the  Sea,
winding  in  by  little  and  little  untill  we  had  gotten  under
the  shelter  of  those  mountaines  :  which  being  obtayned
wee  rode  the  sayd  29  of  the  moneth  halfe  a  league
from  those  wooddy  mountaines,  which  we  had  scene  in
the  Sea.  We  stayed  in  this  place  at  our  ease  all  the
Sunday,  and  Juan  Castilio  the  chiefe  Pilot  went  that
day  in  the  bote  on  shore  with  seven  in  his  company,
and  they  landed  neere  the  Sea,  and  on  a  certaine  low
ground  they  found  foure  or  five  Indians  Chichimecas  of
great  stature,  and  went  toward  them,  who  fled  away  like
Deere  that  had  beene  chased.  After  this  the  Pilot  went
a  little  way  along  the  Sea-shore,  and  then  returned  to
his  boate,  and  by  that  time  he  was  entered  thereinto,
he  saw  about  fifteene  Indians  of  great  stature  also,  with
their  bowes  and  arrowes  which  called  unto  him  with
a  loude  and  strong  voice,  making  signes  with  their
bowes  ;  but  the  Pilot  made  no  account  of  their  gesture,
but  rather  returned  to  the  shippes,  and  declared  what  had
passed  betweene  him  and  the  Indians.  The  same  day
the  Captaine  commaunded  that  our  caske  should  be
made  readie  against  the  next  morning  to  take  in  water,
for  in  both  the  shippes  there  were  about  five  and  twentie
buttes  emptie.  The  first  of  December,  and  the  second
day  in  the  morning  the  Captaine  went  with  both  the
barkes  on  shore  with  some  dozen  souldiers,  and  the
greatest  part  of  the  Mariners  which  laboured  in  filling
of  water,  leaving  in  the  shippes  as  many  as  were  neede-
full,  and  as  soone  as  wee  were  come  on  shore  at  the
watering  place  the  Captaine  caused  the  buttes  to  be
taken  out,  to  the  ende  they  might  be  filled  with  water,
and  while  they  returned  to  fetch  the  barrels  and  hogs-
heads of  the  shippe,  the  Captaine  walked  a  turne  or  two
upon  the  shore  for  the  space  of  one  or  two  crossebow
shoots,  and  afterwarde  we  went  up  to  certaine  of  those

234

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
mountaines, to view the disposition of  the countrey,

and  in  trueth  we  found  it  in  that  place  very  bad  to
our  judgement,  for  it  was  very  ragged,  full  of  woods
and  caves,  and  so  stonie,  that  we  had  much  adoe  to  goe.
Being  come  unto  the  top  we  found  certaine  small  hilles
full  of  woods,  and  cliffes  that  were  not  so  craggie,
although  very  troublesome  to  climbe  up  ;  and  while  we
looked  from  these  little  hilles,  we  could  not  discerne
any  more  mountaines,  but  rather  judged  that  from  that
place  forward  there  were  great  plaines.  The  Captaine
would  not  suffer  us  to  goe  any  further,  because  in  those
places  we  had  scene  certaine  Indians  which  seemed  to
be  spies,  and  warning  us  thereof  he  commanded  us  to
retire  unto  the  shore,  where  we  were  to  take  in  water,
and  to  dispatch  our  businesse  quickly,  and  appointed
us  to  make  certaine  pits,  that  our  buts  might  more
easily  be  filled  with  water.  And  setting  our  Guardes
or  Centinels,  we  beganne  to  fill  water.  In  the  meane
while  the  Captaine  tooke  certaine  souldiers,  and  went  to
the  top  of  an  high  hill,  from  whence  he  descryed  a  great
part  of  the  Sea,  and  a  lake  which  is  within  the  land  :
for  the  Sea  entereth  in  the  space  of  a  league,  and  there
is  a  good  fishing  place  round  about  :  and  the  lake  was  AfisBngplace
so  great,  that  it  seemed  unto  us  to  be  very  neere  30  (^^d  a  lake  of
leagues  in  compasse,  for  we  could  not  discerne  the  end  ^°  ^'^^"'^^
thereof.  Then  we  came  downe  with  no  lesse  trouble
then  wee  had  mounted  up  unto  the  hill,  by  reason  of
the  steepenesse  of  the  place,  and  some  tumbled  downe
with  no  small  laughter  of  the  rest.  And  being  come
somewhat  late  to  our  watering  place  (for  it  was  then
past  noone)  we  set  our  selves  to  dinner,  alwayes  appoint-
ing some  of  our  company  in  Centinell,  untill  we  were
called  to  dinner,  and  when  some  were  called  two  others
were  appointed  in  their  roomes.  And  about  two  of  the
clocke  after  dinner,  the  Captaine  and  the  rest  suspecting
no  danger  of  assalt  of  Indians,  both  because  the  place
seemed  not  to  be  fit  for  it,  as  also  for  that  we  had  set
our  Centinels  at  the  passages  ;  two  squadrons  of  Indians

235

A.D.

1539-

A  sudden-
ass  alt  of  the
Indians  with
stones,  arrows,
and  staves.

[III.  409.]

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

came  upon  us  very  secretly  and  covertly,  for  one  came
by  the  great  valley  through  which  the  water  ranne  which
we  tooke,  and  the  other  came  by  a  part  of  that  great
hill  which  we  had  ascended  to  see  the  lake,  and  all  of
them  came  so  covertly,  that  our  Centinels  could  neither
see  nor  heare  them  ;  and  wee  had  not  perceived  them,
if  a  souldier  by  chance  lifting  up  his  eyes  had  not  sayde,
Arme,  Arme,  my  maisters,  for  many  Indians  come  upon
us.  When  we  heard  this  the  Captaine  leapt  up  in  a  great
rage,  because  the  guards  were  changed  out  of  their  place :
and  with  his  sword  and  target,  being  followed  by  a
souldier,  whose  name  was  Haro,  and  afterward  by
the  rest,  he  and  the  said  souldier  went  toward  a  little
gate  of  certaine  stones,  whither  the  rest  of  us  were  to
follow  him :  for  if  the  Indians  had  gotten  that  place  from
us,  we  should  have  incurred  great  danger,  and  the
greatest  part  of  us  had  like  to  have  beene  slaine,  and
none  could  have  escaped  but  such  as  by  chance  could
have  leapt  into  the  boates,  and  the  tide  went  so  high,
that  none  could  be  saved  but  such  as  were  most  excellent
swimmers.  But  at  length  the  Captaine  bestirred  himselfe
very  nimbly,  using  all  celeritie  that  was  possible.  There-
fore when  he  and  Haro  had  wonne  the  gate,  the  rest  of
the  souldiers  gate  up  after  them,  and  the  Captaine  and
Haro  turned  themselves  to  the  Indians  and  made  head
against  them,  and  the  Indians  assailed  them  with  such
numbers  of  stones,  arrowes,  &  javelins  (which  was  a
very  strange  thing)  that  they  brake  in  pieces  the  target
which  the  Captaine  had  on  his  arme,  and  besides  that
wounded  him  with  an  arrow  in  the  bending  of  his  knee,
and  though  the  wound  was  not  great,  yet  was  it  very
painefull  unto  him.  While  they  thus  stood  to  withstand
their  assalt,  they  strooke  Haro  which  was  on  the  other
side  so  forcibly  with  a  stone,  that  they  threw  him  flat
upon  the  ground :  and  by  and  by  another  stone  lighted
upon  him  which  shivered  his  Target,  and  they  hit  the
Captaine  with  another  arrow,  and  shot  him  quite  through
one of  his eares. Another  arrow came and strooke  a

236

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
souldier  called  Graviello  Marques  in  the  legge,  of  which

he  felt  great  paine  and  went  halting.  In  the  meane  space
Francis  Preciado,  and  certaine  other  souldiers  came  up
and  joyned  himselfe  with  the  rest  on  the  left  hand  of  the
Captaine,  saying  unto  him,  Sir,  withdrawe  your  selfe,  for
you  be  wounded,  but  be  you  not  dismayed,  for  they  are
but  Indians  and  cannot  hurt  us.  In  this  wise  we  beganne
to  rush  in  among  them  upon  the  side  of  a  rocke  alwayes
gayning  ground  of  them,  which  greatly  incouraged  our
mindes,  and  when  we  beganne  to  inforce  them  to  retire,
we  wanne  a  small  wooddy  hill,  where  we  sheltered  our
selves,  whereas  before  they  shot  upon  us  from  aloft,  for
they  were  on  the  higher  ground  under  covert  in  safetie,
&  then  by  no  meanes  we  could  offend  them,  but  by
running  forcibly  upon  them  with  our  targets  on  our
armes,  and  our  swords  in  our  hands.  On  the  other  side,
to  approch  and  seeke  to  overtake  them  was  a  vaine
thing,  seeing  they  were  as  swift  as  wilde  goates.  By
this  time  Haro  was  gotten  up  on  foot,  and  having  clapt
a  woollen  cloth  upon  his  head,  which  had  bled  extremely,
he  joyned  himselfe  unto  us,  of  whom  we  received  no
small  aide.  In  the  meane  space  the  Indians  fortified  them-
selves on  the  cragge  of  a  rocke,  from  whence  they  did
not  a  little  molest  us,  &  we  likewise  fortified  our  selves
upon  an  hillocke,  whereby  we  descended  into  their  Fort,
and  there  was  a  small  valley  betweene  them  &  us,  which
was  not  very  deepe  from  the  upper  part.  There  we  were
6  souldiers  &  two  Negroes  with  the  Captaine,  &  all  of
us  were  of  opinion  that  it  was  not  good  to  passe  that
place,  least  ye  Indians  being  many  might  destroy  us  all,
for  the  rest  of  our  souldiers  which  were  beneath  at  the
foote  of  the  hill,  making  head  against  the  other  squadron
of  the  Indians,  kept  them  from  hurting  those  which  tooke
in  water  on  the  strand  and  from  breaking  the  buts  of
water,  and  being  but  few,  we  concluded  to  stay  here,  and
so  we  stood  still  fortifying  our  selves  as  well  as  we  could,
especially  considering  that  we  had  no  succour  on  any
side  ;  for  Berecillo  our  Mastive-dogge  which  should  have

237

A.D,

1539-

The  Spatii-
ards  use  mas-
tives  in  their
warres  against
the  Indians.
Reade  more
hereof  cap.  12.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

aided  us  was  grievously  wounded  with  3  arrowes,  so
that  by  no  meanes  we  could  get  him  from  us :  this
mastive  was  wounded  in  the  first  assalt  when  the  Indians
came  upon  us,  who  behaved  himselfe  very  wel,  &  greatly
aided  us;  for  he  set  upon  them,  and  put  8  or  10  of  them
out  of  array,  &  made  them  run  away,  leaving  many
arrowes  behind  them  :  but  at  length  (as  I  have  said)  he
was  so  wounded,  that  by  no  meanes  we  could  get  him
to  goe  from  us  to  set  any  more  upon  the  Indians,  &
the  other  two  mastives  did  us  more  harme  then  good  :
for  when  they  went  against  them,  they  shot  at  them
with  their  bowes,  and  we  received  hurt  and  trouble  in
defending  them.  The  Captaines  legge  when  he  waxed
cold  was  so  swolne,  that  we  lapped  it  up  in  a  wollen
cloth,  and  he  halted  much  of  it :  and  while  the  Indians
thus  stood  still,  one  part  of  them  beganne  to  dance,  sing,
and  shout,  and  then  they  began  all  to  lade  themselves
with  stones,  and  to  put  their  arrowes  into  their  bowes,
and  to  come  downe  toward  us  verie  resolutely  to  assalt
us,  and  with  great  out-cries  they  beganne  to  fling  stones
and  to  shoot  their  arrowes.  Then  Francis  Preciado
turned  him  to  the  Captaine  and  said  :  Sir,  these  Indians
know  or  thinke,  that  we  be  affeard  of  them,  &  in  trueth
it  is  a  great  fait  to  give  them  this  incouragement,  it  were
better  for  us  resolutely  to  set  upon  them  with  these  dogs,
&  to  assalt  them  on  this  hill,  that  they  may  know  us
to  be  no  dastards,  for  they  be  but  Indians  and  dare
not  stande  us  ;  and  if  we  can  get  their  Fort  upon  the
hill,  God  will  give  us  victory  in  all  the  rest.  The
Captaine  answered,  that  he  liked  well  of  the  motion,  and
that  it  was  best  so  to  doe,  although  for  any  further
pursuit  up  the  hill,  he  thought  we  were  to  take  another
course.  By  and  by  Francis  Preciado  getting  his  target
on  his  arme,  and  his  sword  in  his  hand,  ranne  unto  the
other  side  of  the  valley,  which  on  that  part  was  not  very
steepe,  crying  S.  lago,  upon  them  my  masters,  and  after
him  leapt  Haro,  Terega,  Spinosa,  and  a  Crossebow-man
called  Montanno,  and  after  them  followed  the  Captaine,

238

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
though  very  lame,  with  a  Negro  and  a  souldier  which
accompanied  him,  incouraging  and  comforting  them,
wilhng  them  not  to  feare.  Thus  we  drave  them  to
the  place  where  they  had  fortified  themselves,  and  from
whence  they  descended,  and  we  tooke  another  hill  over
against  them  within  a  darts  cast  of  them.  And  having
breathed  our  selves  a  little,  the  Captaine  came  unto  us,
and  said.  Go  too  my  maisters,  upon  them  before  they
strengthen  themselves  on  this  hill,  for  now  we  see
plainely  that  they  be  affeard  of  us,  seeing  we  chase  them
continually  from  their  Forts :  &  suddenly  3  or  4  of  us
went  toward  them  well  covered  with  targets,  unto  the
foot  of  their  Fort  where  they  were  assembled,  and  the
rest  of  our  company  followed  us :  the  Indians  beganne  [III.  410.]
to  make  head  against  us,  and  to  fling  many  stones  upon
us,  and  shoot  many  arrowes,  and  we  with  our  swords
in  our  hands  rushed  upon  them  in  such  sort,  that  they
seeing  how  furiously  we  set  upon  them,  abandoned  the
fort,  and  ranne  downe  the  hill  as  swift  as  Deere,  and  fled
unto  another  hill  over  against  us,  where  the  other
squadron  of  the  Indians  stood,  of  whom  they  were
rescued,  and  they  began  to  talke  among  themselves,
but  in  a  low  voyce,  and  joyned  together  6  and  6
and  8  &  8  in  a  company,  and  made  a  fire  and  warmed
themselves,  and  we  stood  quietly  beholding  what  they
did.

[Chap.  9
239

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

Chap.  9.

After  the  skirmish  the  Captaine  being  wounded,  and
the  rest  of  the  souldiers  seeing  the  Indians  depart,
returned  unto  their  ships.  The  next  day  taking  in
fresh  water  at  the  saide  place  he  sent  mariners  to
sound  the  mouth  of  the  lake.  Departing  thence
they  came  to  the  port  called  Baya  de  Sant  Abad,
and  indured  a  dangerous  storme  at  sea.  And  after-
ward comming  neere  the  shore  to  take  fresh  water
in  the  said  haven,  they  see  certaine  peaceable
Indians.

BY  this  time  it  was  late  and  the  night  approched,
and  the  Indians  seeing  this,  within  a  short  while
after  determined  to  get  them  packing,  and  ech  of  them
or  the  greatest  part  tooke  fire-brandes  in  their  hands,  &
got  them  away  into  craggy  places.  When  the  Captaine
saw  this  he  commanded  us  to  returne  aboord  our  boats,
it  being  now  darke  night,  thanking  us  all  for  the  good
service  we  had  done  him.  And  being  not  able  to  stand
upon  his  legge,  he  leaned  with  his  arme  upon  Francis
Preciado  ;  and  thus  we  returned  to  our  boats,  where  with
much  adoe  we  got  aboord,  by  reason  of  the  great  tide
and  roughnesse  of  the  sea,  so  that  our  boats  were  filled
with  every  wave.  Thus  very  weary,  wet,  &  some
wounded  (as  is  aforesaid)  each  man  returned  unto  his
ship,  where  our  beds  which  we  found,  and  our  refreshing,
&  the  cheere  we  had  at  supper  did  not  greatly  comfort
us  in  regard  of  our  former  travels.  We  passed  that
night  in  this  sort,  and  the  next  day  being  Tuesday  the
Captaine  found  himself  greatly  payned  with  his  wounds,
&  chiefly  with  that  on  his  leg,  because  it  was  greatly
swolne  with  his  going  upon  it.  We  lacked  12  buts  to
fill  with  water,  and  the  barrels  in  both  the  ships,  and
the  Captaine  would  have  gone  out  to  cause  them  to  be
filled,  but  we  would  not  suffer  him,  and  therefore  we  left
off  the  businesse  for  that  day.  But  he  appointed  that  the
crossebowes  should  be  made  readie,  and  two  speciall  good

240

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-

harquebuzes,  &  the  next  day  being  Wednesday  very
early,  he  commanded  Juan  Castillo  chiefe  Pilot  to  goe
out  with  both  the  botes  and  with  all  the  souldiers  and
mariners  that  he  could  make,  having  the  day  before
commanded  the  Trinitie  to  go  as  neere  the  shore  as  she
might,  &  to  make  ready  some  of  her  ordinance,  that  if
the  Indians  should  shew  themselves,  they  might  affright
them,  &  doe  them  as  much  hurt  as  they  could.
Wherfore  on  the  Wednesday  al  we  that  were  souldiers,
saving  the  wounded  persons,  went  on  shore  with  certaine
mariners  in  the  best  order  that  we  could,  and  tooke  the
first  hill,  where  we  had  fortified  our  selves,  standing  all
upon  our  guard  untill  the  water  was  filled,  and  untill
we  were  called,  during  which  time  not  one  Indian  shewed
himselfe.  Thus  we  went  aboord  when  we  thought  good
our  selves,  at  least  without  any  suspition  of  the  Indians,
although  the  tide  of  the  Sea  went  so  high  y'^  it  put  us
to  great  trouble,  for  oftentimes  with  great  waves  it  beat
into  our  boats.  This  was  on  the  Wednesday  the  3  of
December.  And  to  avoide  losse  of  time  the  Captaine
commanded  Juan  Castilio  the  chiefe  Pilot  to  take  a  boat
and  certaine  mariners  as  he  should  thinke  good,  and  to
view  the  mouth  of  the  lake  to  see  whether  the  entrance
were  deepe  enough  for  to  harbour  the  ships.  He  taking
the  boat  of  the  Admirall  with  8  mariners,  and  ours  of
the  Trinity,  went  and  sounded  the  mouth,  &  on  the
shallowest  place  of  the  barre  without  they  found  3  fadome  A  special  good
depth,  and  farther  in  4,  &  up  higher  5,  alwayes  increasing  '^^^^»-
unto  10  or  12  fadomes,  when  they  were  come  into  the
two  points  of  the  said  lake,  which  was  a  league  broad
from  one  point  to  the  other,  and  all  their  sounding  was
exceeding  good  ground.  Then  they  went  over  to  the
southeast  point,  &  there  they  saw  a  great  boat  or  raft
which  they  indevoured  to  take  to  carrie  unto  their  ships.
In  ye  meane  while  they  espied  certaine  cottages,  which
the  Pilot  determined  to  goe  and  see,  and  being  come
neere  they  saw  3  other  raftes  with  3  Indians  on  them
distant  from  the  cottages  one  or  two  cross-bowes  shot,
IX  241  Q

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539.

and  he  leapt  on  land  with  4  or  5  mariners  in  his  com-

panie :  and  while  they  behelde  those  cottages,  they  saw

many  Indians  descending  downe  a  small  hill  in  warlike

manner  with  their  bowes  and arrowes,  whereupon  they

determined  to  retire  to  their boats,  and to returne to

their  ships,  and  they  were  not  gone  from  the  sea-shore

scarce  a  stones  cast,  but  the  Indians  were  come  upon  them

to  shoot  at  them  with  their  arrowes,  and because they

were  unarmed,  they  would  not  fight  with  them,  having

gone  on  shore  for  no  other  purpose,  but  to  sound  the

mouth  and  enterance  of  that  lake. On  Thursday  the  4

of  December  we set saile  with a fresh gale  of  winde,

and  sayled  some  8  or  10  leagues,  and  came  unto  certaine

[III.  411.] mouthes  or  inlets  which  seemed  to  all  of  us  as  though

they  had  beene  Hands,  and  we  entered  into  one  of  them,

Baya  del and  came  into  an  haven  which  we  called  Baya  del  Abad

a ts  100 ^  inclosed  and  compassed  with land,  being: one  of  the

the  point  of fairest  havens  that  hath  beene  scene  :  and  about  the  same,

California. especially  on  both  sides  the  lande  was  greene  and  goodly

to  behold ;  we  discryed  certaine  rivers  on  that  part  which

seemed greene, & therefore  we returned backe,  going

out  at  that mouth  wherby  we  came  in,  alwayes  having

contrary  wind : yet the Pilots  used  their  best  indevour

to make way  : and  we  saw before us  certaine  wooddy

hils,  and  beyond  them  certaine  plaines  ;  this  we  saw  from

the  Friday  the  5  of  the  said  moneth,  untill  the  Tuesday,

which  was  the  ninth. As  we  drew  neere  to  these  woods

they  seemed  very  pleasant,  and  there  were  goodly  and  large

hilles and beyond  them  towardes the sea  were  certaine

plaines,  and  through  all  the  countrey  we  saw  these  woods.

Ma7iy  great From  the  day  before,  which  was  the  Conception  of  our

smo  es,  of Lady, we saw many great smokes, whereat  we much

FrancisGualie  rn^rvelled,  being  of  diverse  opinions  among  our selves,

makeih  men- whether  those  smokes  were  made  by  the  inhabitants  of

tion.  the countrey or no. Over against these woods there

fell  every  night such  a  dew,  that every morning  when

we  rose,  the  decke  of  the  ship was so wet,  that untill

the  sunne  was  of  a  good  height,  we alwaies made  the

242

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
decke  durtie  with  going  upon  it.  We  rode  over  against
these  woods  from  the  Tuesday  morning  when  we  set
saile,  untill  Thursday  about  midnight,  when  a  cruell
Northwest  winde  tooke  us,  which,  whither  we  would  or
no,  inforced  us  to  way  our  anker ;  and  it  was  so  great,
that  the  ship  Santa  Agueda  began  to  returne  backe,
untill  her  cable  broke,  and  the  ship  hulled,  and  suddenly
with  a  great  gust  the  trinket  and  the  mizen  were  rent
asunder,  the  Northwest  winde  still  growing  more  and
more :  within  a  short  while  after  the  maine  saile  was  rent
with  a  mighty  flaw  of  winde,  so  that  we  were  inforced,
both  souldiers,  captaine,  and  all  of  us,  to  doe  our  best
indevor  to  mend  our  sailes ;  and  the  Trinitie  was  driven
to  do  the  like,  for  she  going  round  upon  her  anker,
when  she  came  a-head  of  it,  her  cable  broke,  so  that
there  we  lost  two  ankers,  each  ship  one.  We  went
backe  to  seeke  Baya  del  Abad,  for  we  were  within  20
leagues  of  the  same,  and  this  day  we  came  within  foure
leagues  of  it,  and  being  not  able  to  reach  it  by  reason
of  contrary  windes,  we  rode  under  the  lee  of  certaine
mountaines  and  hilles  which  were  bare,  and  almost  voide
of  grasse,  neere  unto  a  strand  full  of  sandie  hilles.  Neere
unto  this  road  wee  found  a  fishing-place  under  a  point  Afishingpkce.
of  land,  where  having  let  downe  our  lead  to  see  what
ground  was  there,  a  fish  caught  it  in  his  mouth,  and
began  to  draw  it,  and  he  which  held  the  sounding-lead
crying  and  shewing  his  fellowes  that  it  was  caught,  that
they  might  helpe  him,  as  soone  as  he  had  got  it  above
the  water,  tooke  the  fish,  and  loosed  the  cord  of  the
sounding-lead,  and  threw  it  againe  into  the  sea,  to  see
whither  there  were  any  good  depth,  and  it  was  caught
againe,  whereupon  he  began  to  cry  for  helpe,  and  all  of
us  made  a  shout  for  joy ;  thus  drawing  the  fish  the  rope
of  the  sounding-lead  being  very  great  was  crackt,  but  at
length  we  caught  the  fish  which  was  very  faire.  Here
we  stayed  from  Friday  when  we  arrived  there,  untill  the
Munday,  when  as  it  seemed  good  to  our  Captaine,  that
we  should repaire to  the watering place, from whence

243

uton  this  coast.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

we  were  some  sixe  leagues  distant,  to  take  in  12  buttes
of  water,  which  wee  had  drunke  and  spent,  because  he
knew  not  whither  we  should  from  thencefoorth  finde  any
water,  or  no ;  and  though  we  should  finde  water,  it  was
doubtfull  whither  we  should  be  able  to  take  it  by  reason
Great  tides  of  the  great  tide  that  goeth  upon  that  coast.  We  drewe
neere  to  that  place  on  Munday  at  night,  when  as  we
sawe  certaine  fires  of  the  Indians.  And  on  Tuesday
morning  our  Generall  commaunded  that  the  Trinitie
should  come  as  neere  our  ship  &  to  the  shore  as  it  could,
that  if  we  had  neede,  they  might  helpe  us  with  their
great  ordinance :  and  having  made  3  or  4  bourds  to  draw
neere  the  shore,  there  came  4  or  5  Indians  to  the  sea-
side ;  who  stood  and  beheld  while  we  put  out  our  boat
and  anker,  marking  also  how  our  bwoy  floated  upon
the  water ;  and  when  our  boat  returned  to  the  ship,  two
of  them  leapt  into  the  sea,  and  swamme  unto  the  bwoy,
and  beheld  it  a  great  while ;  then  they  tooke  a  cane  of
an  arrow,  and  tyed  to  the  sayd  bwoy  a  very  faire  and
shining  sea-oyster  of  pearles,  and  then  returned  to  the
shore,  neere  to  the  watering  place.

Chap. 10.

They  give  unto  the  Indians  many  trifles  which  stand  upon
the  shore  to  see  them,  and  seeke  to  parley  with  them
by  their  interpreter,  which  was  a  Chichimeco,  who
could  not  understand  their  language.  They  go  to
take  fresh  water.  Francis  Preciado  spendeth  the  time
with  them  with  many  signes,  and  trucking  and  being
afeard  of  their  great  multitude,  retireth  himselfe  wisely
with  his  companions,  returning  with  safety  to  the
ships.

'Hen  the  Captaine  and  we  beheld  this,  we  judged

these  Indians  to  be  peaceable  people ;  whereupon

the  Captaine  tooke  the  boat  with  4  or  5  mariners  carrying

[III.  412,] with  him  certain  beades to truck,  and  went to speake

with them. In the meane  while he commanded the

Indian  interpreter our Chichimeco,  to  be  called  out  of

244

w\

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1539-
the  Admirall  that  he  should  parley  with  them.  And  the
Captaine  came  unto  the  boy,  and  laid  certaine  things
upon  it  for  exchange,  &  made  signes  unto  the  Savages
to  come  and  take  them ;  and  an  Indian  made  signes  unto
our  men  with  his  hands,  his  armes,  and  head,  that  they
understood  them  not,  but  signified  that  they  should  go
aside.  Whereupon  the  Captaine  departed  a  smal  distance
from  that  place  with  his  boat.  And  they  made  signes
againe  that  he  should  get  him  further  ;  whereupon  we
departing  a  great  way  off,  the  saide  Indians  leapt  into
the  water,  came  unto  the  boy,  and  tooke  those  beades,
and  returned  backe  againe  to  land,  and  then  came  unto
the  other  three,  and  all  of  them  viewing  our  things,  they
gave  a  bowe  and  certaine  arrowes  to  an  Indian,  and  sent
him  away,  running  with  all  haste  on  the  shore,  and  made
signes  unto  us  that  they  had  sent  word  unto  their  lord
what  things  we  had  given  them,  and  that  he  would  come
thither.  Within  a  while  after  the  said  Indian  returned,
running  as  he  did  before,  and  beganne  to  make  signes
unto  us,  that  his  Lord  was  comming.  And  while  we
stayed  here,  we  saw  on  the  shore  ten  or  twelve  Indians
assemble  themselves,  which  came  unto  the  other  Indians,
and  by  and  by  we  saw  another  company  of  12  or  15  more
appeare,  who  assembled  themselves  all  together.  And
againe  they  began  to  make  signes  unto  us,  to  come  foorth-  ,
with  to  our  boates,  and  shewed  us  many  Oysters  of  pearles
on  the  top  of  certaine  canes,  making  signes  that  they  would
give  them  us.  When  we  beheld  this,  the  Captaine  com-
manded as  to  make  readie  our  boate,  and  went  aboord
it  with  the  said  mariners,  and  rowed  to  a  certaine  stone
in  forme  of  a  rocke,  which  lay  in  the  sea  neere  unto  the
shore.  And  hither  came  first  2  or  3  Indians  and  layd
downe  one  of  those  Oysters,  and  a  garland  made  of
Parats  feathers,  or  sparrowes  feathers  painted  red  ;  they
layd  downe  also  certaine  plumes  of  white  feathers,  and
others  of  blew  colour.  In  the  meane  while  we  sawe
continually  Indians  assemble  to  the  shore  by  tenne  and
tenne,  and  so  by  little  and  little  they  came  in  squadrons  ;

245

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

and  one  of  them  assoone  as  hee  sawe  the  boat  beganne  to
leape  forward  and  backeward  with  so  great  nimblenesse,
that  doubtlesse  he  seemed  to  all  of  us  a  man  of  great
agilitie,  and  we  tooke  no  small  pleasure  while  we  beheld
him  fetching  those  gambols  :  but  the  rest  of  the  Indians
which  stood  at  the  mouth  of  the  fresh  water  ranne
toward  him,  and  cryed  unto  him,  forbidding  him  to  use
those  gestures,  because  we  were  come  thither  in  peaceable
sort,  and  by  this  meanes  he  came  with  the  rest  to  the
watering  place,  where  by  little  and  little  in  this  manner
there  assembled  above  a  hundred  of  them  all  in  order,
with  certaine  staves  with  cordes  to  fling  them,  and  with
their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  they  were  all  painted.  In
the  meane  while  our  Chichimeco-interpreter  borne  in  the
He  of  California,  was  come  unto  us,  and  the  Captaine
againe  commanded  a  mariner  to  strippe  himselfe,  and  to
swimme  and  laye  upon  the  said  rocke  certaine  belles,
and  more  beades,  and  when  he  had  layd  them  there,  the
Indians  made  signes  that  he  should  goe  away  ;  and  so
they  came  thither  and  tooke  them,  and  our  men  drew
neere  with  their  boat.  The  Captaine  commanded  the
Indian  our  Chichimeco  to  speake  unto  them,  but  they
could  not  understand  him,  so  that  we  assuredly  beleeve,
that  they  understand  not  the  language  of  the  He  of
California.  This  day  being  Tuesday  untill  night  the
Indians  stayed  at  this  watering  place,  taking  some  of  our
beades,  and  giving  unto  us  their  feathers  and  other
things,  and  when  it  was  very  late  they  departed.  The
morrow  following  being  Wednesday  very  early  the
Captaine  commanded  that  our  buttes  should  be  made
ready,  that  before  breake  of  day,  and  before  the  Indians
should  take  the  hill,  which  stood  over  the  watering  place,
we  might  be  landed  in  good  order  :  which  was  put  in
execution  :  for  we  went  on  shore  with  as  many  as  could
goe,  saving  those  that  had  charge  to  take  in  the  water,
and  such  as  were  to  stay  on  ship-boord,  which  in  all  were
about  fourteene  or  fifteene  persons,  in  as  good  order  as
we  could  devise  :  for  we  were  foure  crossebowes, two

246

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
harquebuziers,  and  eight  or  nine  targets,  and  the  most
part  of  us  carryed  very  good  slings,  and  every  one
eighteene  river  stones,  which  weapon  the  Captaine  in-
vented, because  the  Indians  at  the  first  had  handled  us
very  shrewdly  with  the  multitude  of  stones  which  they
flang  at  us  :  we  had  nothing  to  defende  us  saving  our
targets,  and  to  seeke  to  winne  the  fortes  from  whence
they  indamaged  us  ;  he  therefore  thought  with  these
slings,  that  we  might  offend  them,  and  we  likewise
thought  well  of  his  opinion,  for  making  tryall  of  them,
we  threw  very  well  with  them,  and  much  farther  than  we
thought  we  could  have  done  :  for  the  slings  being  made
of  hempe,  we  flung  very  farre  with  them.  Nowe  being
come  to  the  watering  place  the  sayd  Wednesday  by
breake  of  day  we  tooke  the  fort  of  the  fountaine,  which
were  certaine  cragges  or  rockes  hanging  over  the  same,
betweene  which  there  was  an  opening  or  deepe  valley
through  which  this  water  runneth,  which  is  no  great
quantitie,  but  a  little  brooke  not  past  a  fadome  broad.
So  standing  all  in  order,  other  foure  or  five  Indians  came
thither,  who  as  soone  as  they  sawe  us  to  be  come  on
shore,  and  to  have  gotten  the  toppe  of  the  watering  place,  [III.  413.]
they  retired  unto  a  small  hill  on  the  other  side,  for  the
valley  was  betweene  them  and  us  :  neither  stayed  they
long  before  they  beganne  to  assemble  themselves  as  they
had  done  the  day  before  by  10  and  10,  and  15  and  15,
ranging  themselves  on  this  high  hill,  where  they  made
signes  unto  us.  And  Francis  Preciado  craved  license  of
the  Generall  to  parley  with  these  Indians,  and  to  give
them  some  trifles  ;  wherewith  he  was  contented,  charging
him  not  to  come  too  neere  them,  nor  to  goe  into  any
place  where  they  might  hurt  him.  Whereupon  Francis
went  unto  a  plaine  place,  under  the  hill  where  the  Indians
stood,  and  to  put  them  out  of  feare  he  layd  downe  his
sword  and  target,  having  onely  a  dagger  hanging  downe
at  his  girdle,  and  in  a  skarfe  which  he  carried  at  his  necke,
certaine  beades  to  exchange  with  them,  combs,  fishing-
hooks  and  comfits. And  he  began  to  goe  up  the  hill,  and

247

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

to  shew  them  diverse  of  his  marchandise. The  Indians

as soone as he had layd  those things on the  ground,

and  gone  somewhat  aside,  came  downe  from  the  hill  and

tooke  them,  and  carried  them  up,  for  it  seemed  that  their

Lord  was  among  them,  to  whom  they  carried  those  trifles.

Trucks traf-  Then  they  came  downe againe, and  layd  to  give  unto

fique  with  the  j^-j^ -^^ ^j^^ g^-^^ place, an oyster of  pearles, and two

Indians  for  mo- ri  vi i iri  i-  •  t-» -j

ther  ofpearle  weathers  like  naukes  reathers,  makmg  signes  to  Jrreciado
and  other  that  he  should  come  and  take  them  ;  which  he  did,  and
things.  againe  layde there  a  string  of  belles,  and  a great  fish-

hooke,  and  certaine  beades  ;  and  they  taking  the  same,
layd  there  againe  another  oyster  of  pearle,  and  certaine
feathers  :  and  he  layd  downe  other  beads,  two  fishhookes,
and  more  comfits,  and  the  Indians  came  to  take  them
up,  and  approched  much  neerer  unto  him,  then  at  other
times,  and  so  neere  that  a  man  might  have  touched  them
with  a  pike,  and  then  they  began  to  talke  together  :  and
7  or  8  more  came  downe,  unto  whom  Francis  Preciado
made  signes,  that  they  should  come  downe  no  lower,
and  they  incontinently  layd  their  bowes  and  arrowes  on
the  ground,  and  having  layd  them  downe  came  somewhat
lower,  and  there  with  signes,  together  with  them  which
came  first,  they  began  to  parle  with  him,  and  required
mariners  breeches  &  apparell  of  him,  and  above  all  things
a  red  hat  pleased  them  highly,  which  the  said  Francis
ware  on  his  head,  and  they  prayed  him  to  reach  it  unto
them,  or  to  lay  it  in  the  place  ;  and  after  this  certaine  of
them  made  signes  unto  him  to  knowe  whether  he  would
have  a  harlot,  signifying  with  their  fingers  those  villanies
and  dishonest  actions,  and  among  the  rest  they  set  before
him  an  Indian  of  great  stature  dyed  wholly  with  black,
with  certaine  shels  of  the  mother  of  pearle  at  his  necke,
and  on  his  head,  and  speaking  by  signes  to  Francis
Preciado  touching  the  foresaid  act  of  fornication,
thrusting  their  finger  through  a  hole,  they  said  unto  him,
that  if  hee  would  have  a  woman,  they  would  bring  him
one  ;  and  he  answered,  that  he  liked  well  of  it,  and  that
therfore  they  should  bring  him  one. In  the  meane  space

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-
on  the  other  side  where  the  Generall  stood  with  his
company,  another  squadron  of  Indians  shewed  them-
selves, whereupon  the  Generall  and  his  company  made  a
stirre,  and  put  themselves  in  battell  array  :  whereupon
Francis  Preciado  was  inforced  to  come  downe  from  them,
to  joyne  with  the  Generall  &  his  company  :  and  here
the  Indians  which  came  last  began  to  make  signes  that
we  should  lay  downe  something  to  truck,  and  that  they
would  give  us  some  of  their  shels  of  mother  of  pearle,
which  they  brought  upon  certaine  small  stickes,  and  here-
withall  they  came  very  neere  unto  us,  wherewith  we
were  not  well  content.  And  Francis  Preciado  said  unto
the  Captaine,  that  if  it  pleased  him,  hee  would  cause  all
the  Indians  to  come  together  and  to  stay  upon  that  high
hill  ;  and  he  answered,  that  it  was  best  to  draw  them  all
together,  for  by  this  time  our  men  had  taken  in  all  their
water,  and  stayed  for  the  boat  :  whereupon  Francis
taking  a  crowne  of  beades  went  toward  the  valley,
through  which  the  water  ran  toward  the  Indians,  and
made  signes  unto  them  to  call  the  rest,  and  to  come
all  together,  because  hee  would  goe  to  the  olde  place,
to  lay  things  on  the  ground  for  exchange,  as  at  the
first  ;  and  they  answered  that  he  should  doe  so,  and
that  they  had  called  the  others,  and  that  they  would
doe,  as  he  would  have  them,  and  so  they  did,  for  they
caused  them  to  come  unto  them,  which  they  did,  and
Francis  likewise  went  alone  towards  them,  in  which
meane  space  the  Generall  commanded  his  people  to  get
into  the  boat.  Francis  comming  unto  the  place  beganne
to  lay  downe  his  marchandise  of  trafhque,  and  afterwards
made  signes  unto  them  to  stay  there,  because  hee  would
goe  to  the  ships  to  bring  them  other  things,  and  so  he
returned  to  the  place  where  the  Captaine  was,  and  found
them  all  got  into  the  boates,  saving  the  Generall  and
three  or  foure  others,  and  the  Generall  made  as  though
he  had  given  other  trifles  to  Preciado  to  carry  unto
the  Indians,  and  when  he  was  gone  a  little  from  him,
he called him backe againe, and all this while the

249

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1539-

Indians  stood  still,  and  being  come  unto  him,  wee  went

faire  and  softly  to  our  boates,  and  got  into  them  at  our

ease, without any thronging, and thence we came

aboord  our  ship.

The  Indians  seeing  us  thus  gone  aboord  came  downe

to  the  strand  where  the  brooke  of  water  was,  and  called

unto  us  to  come  foorth  with  our  boates,  and  to  come  on

shore,  and  to  bring  our  beades,  and  that  they  would  give

us  of  their  mother  of  pearles  : but  we  being  now  set  at

[III.  414.] dinner made no account of them  : whereupon they

beganne  to  shoote  arrowes  at  the  ship,  and  although  they

fell  neere  us,  yet  they  did  not  reach  us. In  the  meane

season  certaine mariners  went out in the  boat, to  wey

the  anker,  whereupon  the  Indians  seeing  them  comming

towards them, & bringing them nothing, they

beganne  in  scorne  to  shew  them  their  buttockes,  making

signes that they  should kisse their bums : and these

seemed to be those that came last. The  Generall

seeing this,  commanded  a  musket  to  be once or  twise

shot  offy  and that they  should take their just ayme.

They seeing these shot to be  made readie, some of

them rose and went to shoot their arrowes at our

mariners,  which  were  gone  to  weigh  the  ankers,  then  the

Generall  commanded the great ordinance speedily to

be shot off, whereupon three or foure bullets were

discharged,  and we perceived that we had slaine one

of  them,  for  we  assuredly  saw  him  lye  dead  upon  the

shore  ;  and I thinke  some  of  the rest  were  wounded.

They  hearing this  noyse, and seeing  him dead  ranne

away  as  fast  as  ever  they  could,  some  along  the  shore,

and some through the vallies, dragging the dead

Indian with them, after which time none of them

appeared, save ten or twelve, which peeped  up with

their heads  among those rocks  ; whereupon another

piece of ordinance was discharged aloft against the

place  where  they  were,  after  which  time we never  saw

any  more  of  them.

250

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1539-

Chap. 1 1 .

At  the  point  of  the  Trinitie  they  spend  three  dayes
in  fishing,  and  in  other  pastime :  after  which  set-
ting sayle  they  discover  pleasant  countries,  and
mountaines  voide  of  grasse,  and  an  Hand  afterward
called  Isla  de  los  Cedros,  or  the  He  of  Cedars,
neere  which  they  suffer  sharpe  colde  and  raine,  and
to  save  themselves  they  returne  thither.

IMmediatly  we  set  saile  to  joyne  with  the  ship  Santa
Agueda,  which  was  above  halfe  a  league  in  the  high
sea  from  us,  and  this  was  on  the  Wednesday  the
seventeenth  of  December.  Being  come  together  because
the  windes  were  contrary,  we  drew  neere  to  a  head-
land, which  wee  called  Punta  de  la  Trinidad,  and  here
wee  stayed  fishing,  and  solacing  our  selves  two  or
three  dayes,  although  we  had  alwayes  great  store  of
raine.  Afterward  we  beganne  to  sayle  very  slowly,  and
at  night  we  rode  over  against  those  mountaines  where
we  had  left  our  ankers,  and  upon  knowledge  of  the
place  we  received  great  contentment  seeing  we  had
sailed  some  five  and  thirtie  leagues  from  the  place
where  we  had  taken  in  water :  neither  was  it  any
marvell  that  wee  so  rejoyced,  because  that  the  feare
which  we  had  of  contrary  windes  caused  us  to  be  so
well  appayd  of  the  way  which  we  had  made.  The
day  of  the  holy  Nativitie  of  our  Lord,  which  was  on
the  Thursday  the  five  and  twentieth  of  the  said
moneth,  God  of  his  mercy  beganne  to  shewe  us
favour  in  giving  us  a  fresh  winde  almost  in  the  poope,
which  carried  us  beyond  those  mountaines,  for  the
space  of  tenne  or  twelve  leagues,  finding  the  coast
alwayes  plaine :  and  two  leagues  within  the  land,  which
we  coasted  along,  and  betweene  these  mountaines,  there
was  a  great  space  of  plaine  ground,  which  we  might
easily  discerne  with  our  eyes,  although  others  were
of  another  opinion.  We  beganne  from  Christmas  day
to saile slowly with certaine small land-windes, and

251

A.D.

1539-

Great  appar-
ance  of  gold
and  silver.

Ja7iuary

1540.

Forty  leases.

[III.  415.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

sayled  from  morning  to  night  about  seven  or  eight
leagues,  which  wee  esteemed  no  small  matter,  alwayes
praying  to  God  to  continue  this  his  favour  toward  us,
and  thanking  him  for  his  holy  Nativitie,  and  all  the
dayes  of  this  feast  the  Frier  sayd  masse  in  the  Admirall,
and  the  father  Frier  Raimund  preached  unto  us,  which
gave  us  no  small  comfort,  by  incouraging  us  in  the  ser-
vice of  God.

On  Saturday  at  night  being  the  27  of  the  said  moneth
we  ankored  neere  unto  a  point  which  seemed  to  be
plaine  land  all  along  the  shore,  and  within  the  countrey
were  high  mountaines  with  certaine  woods,  which  woods
and  mountaines  ranne  overthwart  the  countrey,  and  con-
tinued along  with  certaine  small  hilles  sharpe  on  the
toppe,  and  certaine  little  vallies  are  betweene  those
mountaines.  And  in  truth  to  me  which  with  diligent
eyes  beheld  the  same  both  in  length  and  in  the  breadth
thereof,  it  could  not  chuse  but  be  a  good  countrey,  and
to  have  great  matters  in  it,  as  well  touching  the  in-
habiting thereof  by  the  Indians,  as  in  golde  and  silver ;
for  there  was  great  likelihood  that  there  is  store  thereof.
This  night  we  saw  a  fire  farre  within  the  lande  towards
those  mountaines,  which  made  us  thinke  that  the  coun-
trey was  throughly  inhabited.  The  next  day  being
Sunday  and  Innocents  day,  the  28  of  the  said  moneth
at  breake  of  day  we  set  sayle,  and  by  nine  or  ten  of
the  clocke  had  sayled  three  or  foure  leagues,  where  we
met  with  a  point  which  stretched  towarde  the  West,  the
pleasant  situation  whereof  delighted  us  much.  From  the
eight  and  twentieth  of  December  we  ranne  our  course
untill  Thursday  being  Newyeares  day  of  the  yeere  1 540,
and  we  ran  some  40  leagues,  passing  by  certaine  inlets
and  bayes,  and  certaine  high  mountains  covered  with
grasse  in  colour  like  rosemary  :  but  toward  the  sea-side
very  bare  and  burned,  and  toward  the  top  were  certaine
cragges  somewhat  of  a  red  colour,  and  beyond  these
appeared  certaine  white  mountaines,  and  so  all  the
countrey  shewed unto  a point which appeared beyond

252

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540.
those  burnt  white  and  red  mountaines  which  have  neither
any  grasse  nor  tree  upon  them, whereat  we marvelled
not  a little. This Newyeares day  we sawe neere the  Two  small
maine two small Hands, and reioyced greatly to see  '■^'■^ts  neere  the
them  ;  ror  we  stood  in  great  reare,  that  contrary  wmdes
would  drive us  as farre backe in one  day, as  we  had
sayled  in  tenne,  which  if  they  had  taken  us,  we  could
not  have  withstood  them. Wee  ranne  from  the  first  of
January  untill  Munday  which  were  five  dayes,  and  the
land  alwayes stretched  Northwest  from  the  mountaines
aforesaid.

And  on  the  Sunday  we  saw  a  farre  off  a-head  of  us
a  high  land  somewhat  severed  from  the  maine  shore,
and  all  of  us  beganne  to  dispute  whether  it  were  the
land  which  trended  toward  the  Northwest,  for  that  way
the  Pilots  hoped  to  discover  a  better  countrey  :  and
the  said  Munday  the  fift  of  Januarie  we  came  to
this  high  land  beforesaid,  and  it  was  two  Hands  the  one
a  small  one  and  the  other  a  great  one  :  we  coasted  these
two  Hands  some  sixe  leagues,  which  were  greene,  and
had  on  the  toppe  of  them  many  high  slender  trees ;  and
the  great  Hand  was  twentie  leagues  in  compasse.  We  -^■f'*''^  de  los  Ce-
coasted  in  6  leagues  in  length  without  seeing  or  dis-  <{ros  mentioned
covering  any  other  things,  but  we saw before  us  high  ^^'

land  which  stretched  eight  or  tenne  leagues  Northward,
where  we  rode  on  Munday  at  night. From  Thursday
being  Newyeares  day  untill  the  next  Munday  we  sayled
about  '}^^ leagues. And in this course we felt great  The  land
cold,  which  grieved us much, especially  being assailed  ^!^"^f^  ^^^^
by  two  or  three  windie  showers  which  pinched  us  much  ig^s-ues.
with  colde. We rode over against this land two  or
three  nights,  having  it  neere unto us,  alwayes  keeping
watch  by  equall  houres,  one  while  mariners,  and  another
souldiers,  all  the  night  long  with great  vigilancie. On
Tuesday  being  Twelfe  day  we  came  within  two  or  three
leagues  of  this  land, which we had descryed the day
before,  seeming  to  us  very  pleasant  for  it  shewed  greene
with  greene  trees  of  an  ordinary bignesse, and  we  saw

253

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540-

many  vallies,  out  of  which  certaine  small  mists  arose,
which  continued  in  them  for  a  long  time,  whereupon
we  gathered,  that  they  rose  out  of  certaine  rivers.  The
same  morning,  to  our  great  comfort  we  saw  great
smokes,  though  we  were  above  foure  leagues  distant
from  them,  and  the  Captaine  made  no  great  reckoning
to  approch  neere  unto  them,  nor  to  seeke  nor  serch  v/hat
the  matter  was,  and  perchance  because  he  was  not  then
in  the  Santa  Agueda,  but  was  aboord  the  Trinitie,  as
his  maner  was  to  come  and  stay  there  two  or  three
dayes,  as  well  to  passe  the  time,  as  to  give  order  for
things  that  were  needefull.  In  this  countrey  the  winter
and  raine  seemed  to  be  like  that  of  Castile.  We  rode
al  night  two  or  three  leagues  distance  from  shore,
and  toward  evening  we  saw  five  or  sixe  fires,  whereat
we  all  rejoyced,  but  did  not  marvell  thereat,  because
the  situation  of  that  countrey  shewed  to  be  habitable,
being  faire,  pleasant,  and  all  greene,  and  likewise  because
the  Hand  which  we  had  left  behind  us  being  (as  I
have  said)  twenty  leagues  in  circuit,  made  shewe  that
it  was  well  peopled.  On  the  Wednesday  we  were  3  or
4  leagues  at  sea  from  the  land,  and  began  to  see  two
fires  more,  &  therfore  we  assured  our  selves  that  the
countrey  was  very  well  inhabited  ;  and  the  farther  we
sayled,  we  alwayes  found  it  more  civill.  And  for  the
Fhting  weeds  space  of  fifty  leagues  before  we  came  hither  we  alwayes
for  ^o  leagues,  found  swimming  on  the  sea  certaine  flotes  of  weedes
of  a  ships  length,  and  of  the  bredth  of  two  ships,  being
round  and  full  of  gourds,  and  under  these  weedes  were
many  fishes,  and  on  some  of  them  were  store  of  fowles
like  unto  white  sea-meawes.  We  supposed  that  these
floting  weeds  did  grow  upon  some  rocke  under  the
Thirtie  water. We  were  now  in  30  degrees  of  Northerly  lati-

^■fj^^^i^  f tude. We  sailed from the 7 of  January untill  the  9
latitude  ^^^  ^\'^  contrary  windes  :  and  on  Fryday  about  noone

there  rose  a  North  and  Northeastern  winde,  which  forced
us  to  returne  under  the  shelter  of  that  Hand  which  we
left behind us, from whence we had sayled above

254

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540.
twentie leagues. And that Friday  at night  somewhat  Tzventie
late  wee  had  sayled  backe  above twelve  leagues  of  the  '^^S^^^ J'^-
same,  and  because  it  was night  wee stayed in  the  sea,  of  Cedars.
where  we and  our shippes were not  a  little troubled,
so  that  all that night none  of  us  slept a winke, but
watched  every one. The next  morning  betimes  being
Saturday  we  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  and  gate  under
the  shelter  of  the said  Hand,  riding in thirtie fadome
water  :  and  on that  side  where  we  ankored, we  found
high  and closed mountaines, with heapes  of  a certaine
earth which was all ashes and burned, and in other
places  skorched  and  as  blacke  as  coales,  and  like  the  rust
of  yron,  and  in  other  places  whitish,  and  here  and  there
small blacke  hilles, whereat  we marvelled exceedingly,
considering  that  when  we  passed  by,  it  seemed  unto  us
an  habitable  countrey  full  of  trees,  and  now  we  saw  not
a  sticke  growing  on  this  side.

All  of  us  supposed  that  on  the  other  side  toward
the  firme  lande  the  trees  grewe  which  we  sawe,  although
(as  I  have  sayde)  wee  sayled  foure  or  five  leagues  distant
from  the  same.

We  stayed  here  under  the  shelter  of  these  mountaines  [III.  416.]
Saturday, Sunday, and Munday, alwayes having the
Northren winde so strong, that we thinke if  it had
caught  us  in  the  sea,  wee  should  have  bene  cast  away.

Chap. 12.

They  environ  and  land  upon  the  Hand  of  Cedars,  to
discover  the  same,  and  to  seeke  water  and  wood.
They  are  assailed  of  the  Indians,  and  many  of  them
wounded  with  stones  :  but  at  length  getting  the  upper
hand,  they  goe  to  their  cottages,  and  ranging  farther
up  into  the  Hand  they  find  diverse  things  which  the
Indians  in  their  flight  had  left  behind  them.

ON  Friday  the  13  of  January  the  Captaine  com-
manded us  to  hoise  out  our  boates,  and  to  goe  on
shore,  which  was  done  accordingly,  and  we  did  row  along
the shore for the space of  a good halfe league and

255

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

entered  into  a  valley  :  for  (as  I  said)  all  this  countrey
was  full  of  high  and  bare  hils,  of  such  qualitie  as  I
mentioned  before  :  and  in  this  and  other  small  valleys
we  found  some  water  which  was  brackish,  and  not  farre
from  thence  certaine  cottages  made  of  shrubs  like  unto
broome  ;  likewise  we  found  the  footings  of  Indians  both
small  and  great,  whereat  we  much  marvelled  that  in
so  rough  and  wilde  a  countrey  (as  farre  as  we  could
discerne)  there  should  be  people.  Here  we  stayed  all
day,  making  foure  or  five  pits  to  take  in  water  which  we
wanted,  which  though  it  were  bad,  and  in  small  quantitie
we  refused  not ;  and  so  the  evening  being  come,  we
returned  to  our  boates,  and  so  came  unto  our  ships
which  rode  a  good  league  from  the  shore.  The  next
day  being  Wednesday  the  fourteenth  of  the  said  moneth
our  Generall  commanded  us  to  set  saile,  and  we  sailed
about  the  said  Hand  on  the  same  side  which  we  coasted
when  we  came  from  Nueva  Espanna  :  for  when  we
arrived  on  the  coast  we  saw  five  or  sixe  fires  ;  wherefore
he  desired  to  see  and  learne  whether  it  were  inhabited  ;
and  at  the  farthest  ende  of  this  inlet  or  bay  where  we
rode  there  came  out  before  us  a  Canoa,  wherein  were
foure  Indians  which  came  rowing  with  certaine  small
oares,  and  came  very  neere  us  to  see  what  we  were  :
whereupon  we  tolde  our  Generall,  that  it  were  best  to
send  some  of  us  out  with  our  boates  to  take  these  Indians
or  some  one  of  them  to  give  them  something  that  they
might  thinke  us  to  be  good  people  :  but  hee  would  not
consent  thereto,  because  he  minded  not  to  stay,  having
then  a  prety  gale  of  winde,  whereby  he  might  saile
about  this  Hand,  hoping  that  afterward  we  might  finde
and  take  some  others  to  speake  with  them,  and  give
them  what  we  would  to  carry  on  shore  ;  and  as  we
sayled  neere  the  land,  we  saw  a  great  hill  full  of
goodly  trees  of  the  bignesse  of  the  trees  and  Cypresses
of  Castile.  We  found  in  this  Hand  the  footing  of
wilde  beasts  and  conies,  and  saw  a  peece  of  pine
tree-wood, whereof  we gathered, that  there was store

256

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.

of  them  in  that  countrey. Thus  sayling  neere  unto  the

shore,  we  sawe  another  Canoa  comming  toward  us  with

other  foure  Indians,  but  it  came  not  very  neere  us,  and

as  we  looked forward, we sawe toward a  point  which

was  very  neere  before  us,  three  other  Canoas,  one  at  the

head  of  the  point  among  certaine  flattes,  and  the  other

two  more  into  the  sea,  that  they  might  descry  us  without

comming over neere us. Likewise betv/eene certaine

hilles  which  were neere the  point,  there appeared  here

three  and  there  foure  of  them,  and  afterward  we  saw  a

small  troope  of  some  twentie  of  them  together,  so  that

all  of  us  rejoyced  greatly  to  behold  them. On  this  side

the  land shewed greene with pieces of  plaine ground

which  was  neere the sea, and  likewise all those  coasts

of  hils  shewed  greene,  and  were  covered  with  many  trees,

although  they  grew  not  very  thicke  together. Here  at

evening we  rode neere the shore  hard upon the said

point,  to  see  if  we  could  speake  with  those  Indians,  and

likewise  to see  if  we  could  get  fresh  water,  which  now

we  wanted,  and still as soone as we  were  come  to  an

anker, we saw the Indians shew themselves on land

neere  unto  their  lodgings,  comming  likewise  to  descry  us

in  a  Canoa, by  sixe and  seven at  a  time, whereat  we

marvelled,  because  we  never  thought  that  one  of  those

Canoas  would hold so many men. In this wise we

stayed  looking  still  what  would  be  the  successe,  and  in

the  place where we rode we were two small leagues

distant  from the shore, where  we found these  Indians

in  their  Canoas  : whereupon  wee  marvelled  not  a  little

to  see so great  an  alteration in so  small  a  distance  of

countrey,  as  well  because  we  still  discovered  pleasant  land

with  trees (whereas  on  the  other  side  of  the  isle  there

were  none)  as  also  because  it  was  so  well  peopled  with

Indians,  which had  so  many  Canoas  made  of  wood,  as

we  might  discerne,  and  not  raftes  or  Balsas,  for  so  they  ^  Balsa  is  a

call  those  floats  which  are  made  all  flat  with  canes.  flat  raft  made

The  next  day  being  Thursday  the  fifteenth  of  the  said
moneth  about  breake  of  day  foure  or  five  Indians  shewed

IX  257  R

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

themselves  at  the  head  of  that  point,  who  as  soone  as
they  had  spyed  us  retired  behind  the  point,  and  hid
themselves  among  the  bushes  upon  certaine  small  hilles
[III.  417.]  that  were  there,  from  whence  they  issued  forth,  and
covered  all  the  greene  hils  and  mountaines,  which  were
along  that  coast ;  whereupon  we  gathered  that  they  had
their  dwellings  there,  in  regard  of  the  commoditie  of
the  water  and  the  defence  against  ill  weather  and  the
benefite  of  fishing-.  At  sun-risinp-  we  saw  the  Indians
appeare  in  greater  companies,  going  up  unto  the  hilles
in  small  troopes,  and  from  thence  they  stood  and  beheld
us.  Immediatly  we  saw  five  or  sixe  Canoas  come  out
into  the  sea  a  good  distance  from  us,  and  those  which
were  in  them  stood  often  on  their  tip- toes,  to  view  and
descry  us  the  better.  On  the  other  side  we  stirred  not
at  all  for  all  these  their  gestures,  but  stood  still  riding
at  anker ;  and  the  Generall  seemed  not  to  be  very  willing
to  take  any  of  them,  but  this  day  in  the  morning  very
early  commanded  the  Masters  mate  to  conveigh  him  to
our  other  shippe  called  The  Trinitie.  Things  passed  in
this  sort,  when  about  ten  of  the  clocke  we  saw  three
Canoas  lanch  farre  into  the  sea  to  fish  very  neere  unto
us,  whereat  we  tooke  great  pleasure.  At  1 2  of  the  clocke
the  Generall  returned  from  the  Trinitie  and  commanded
the  boat  &  men  to  be  made  readie,  as  well  souldiers
as  mariners,  and  that  we  should  goe  on  shore  to  see
if  we  could  get  any  wood  and  water,  and  catch  one  of
those  Indians  to  understand  their  language  if  it  were
possible :  and  so  all  the  men  that  were  readie  went  into
the  Admirals  boate,  and  went  toward  the  Trinitie  which
by  this  time  with  the  other  ship  had  a  small  gale  of
winde,  wherewith  they  entered  farther  within  the  point,
and  we  discovered  the  lodgings  and  houses  of  the
Indians,  &  saw  neere  the  waters  side  those  five  or  sixe
Canoas  which  at  the  first  came  out  to  view  us,  drawen
on  shore,  and  over  against  this  place  the  ships  cast  anker
in  30  and  35  fadome  water,  and  we  were  very  neere
the  land  ;  whereat  we  marvelled  much  to  find  so  great

258

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.
depth  of  water  so  neere the  shore. Being  gone  abord
our botes, we made toward the shore over against  a
village  of  the Indians, who as soone as they  saw  us  ^  village  of
about  to  come  on  land,  left  an  hill  whereon  they  stood  ^^^  Indians.
to  behold  what  we  did, &  came  downe to the shore,
where  we  were  prepared  to  come on  land  :  but  before
they came against us they caused their women and
children to fly into the  mountaines with their  goods,
& then came directly towards us, threatning  us with
certaine  great  staves which they  carried  in  their  handes
some  3  yardes  long  and  thicker  then  a  mans  wrest  :  but
perceiving  that  for  all  this  we  ceased  not  to  come  neere
the  sea  shore to come on land, they began  to  charge
us  with stones  and  to  fling  cruelly  at  us,  and  they  hit  "^  skirmish  of
4  or c  men,  among  whom  thev  smote  the  Generall  with  ^ ,  .^  ^^"! ,

T 1  1-11  11  111  Jignting  witn.

two  Stones. In  the meane  while  the  other  bote  landea  ^tQ^es.

a  little  beneath, whereupon when they sav/ that  they

were  forced  to  divide  themselves  to keepe the rest  of

our  company  from  comming  on  land,  they  began  to  be

discouraged,  and  did  not  assaile  the  Generals boate so

fiercely,  who  began  to  cause  his  people  to  goe  on  shore

with  no  small  trouble  ;  for  albeit  he  was  neere  the  land,

yet  as  soone  as  they  leapt  out  of  the  boat  they  sunke

downe, because they  could finde no fast  footing ;  and

thus swimming or otherwise as they could, first a

souldier called Spinosa  got on land,  and next to him

the General,  and  then  some  of  the  rest,  and  began  to

make  head  against  the Indians, and  they  came hastily

with those staves in their hands, for other kinds of

weapons we saw none, saving bowes  and arrowes of

pine-tree. After  a short  combate they  brake  in  pieces

the targets of  the Generall, and of  Spinosa. In the

meane  while those of  the other boat were  gotten on

land, but not without much difficultie, by reason of

the  multitude  of  stones  which  continually  rained  downe

upon them, and thev stroke Terazzo on the head a  ^^^  ^''^^^  ^^^

*  of  t^T9'€tS

very  shrowd  blow,  and  had  it  not  bene  for  our  targets,  against  arrows
many  of  us  had  beene  wounded,  and  in  great  distresse,  and  stones.

259

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

although  our  enemies  were  but  few  in  number.  In
this  maner  all  our  company  came  on  shore  with  swim-
ming and  with  great  difficultie,  and  if  they  had  not
holpen  one  another,  some  of  them  had  bene  drowned.
Thus  we  landed,  and  within  a  while  after  those  of  the
other  bote  were  come  on  land,  the  Indians  betooke
themselves  to  flight,  taking  their  way  toward  the
mountaines,  whether  they  had  sent  their  women,
children  and  goods :  on  the  other  side  we  pursued
them,  &  one  of  those  Indians  which  came  to  assaile
the  Generals  boat,  was  slaine  upon  the  strand,  &  two
or  three  others  were  wounded,  and  some  said  more.
While  we  pursued  them  in  this  maner  our  mastive
dogge  Berecillo  overtooke  one  of  them  not  farre  from
us  (who  because  we  were  so  wet  could  not  run  very
Theuseofmas-  fast)  and  pulled  him  downe,  having  bitten  him  cruelly,
ttves  tn  the^  ^^^  doubtlesse  he  had  held  him  till  we  had  come,
Indians  unlesse  it  had  happened  that  another  of  his  companions

had  not  followed  that  Indian  which  the  dogge  had  pulled
downe,  who  with  a  staffe  which  he  had  in  his  hands  gave
the  dogge  a  cruell  blow  on  the  backe,  and  without  any
staying  drew  his  fellow  along  like  a  Deere,  and  Berecillo
was  faine  to  leave  him  for  paine,  neither  had  he  scarse
taken  the  dogge  off  on  him,  but  the  Indian  got  up,  and
fled  so  hastily  towarde  the  mountaine,  that  within  a  short
while  hee  overtooke  his  fellowe  which  had  saved  him
from  the  pawes  of  the  dogge,  who  (as  it  appeared)  be-
tooke him  lustily  to  his  heeles,  and  thus  they  came
unto  their  fellowes  which  descended  not  downe  to  the
shore  being  about  some  twentie,  and  they  were  in  all
about  fiftie  or  sixtie.
[III.  418.]  After  we  had  breathed  our  selves  a  while,  we  viewed

their  houses  where  they  stood,  which  were  certaine
cottages  covered  with  shrubs  like  broome  and  rosemary,
with  certaine  stakes  pight  in  the  ground  ;  and  the
Generall  willed  us  to  march  all  together  without  dis-
persing of  our  selves,  a  little  way  up  those  mountaines,
to see  if  there were any  water and wood,  because  we

260

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540.

stood  in  great  neede  of  them  both.  And  while  we
marched  forward,  we  saw  in  certaine  little  vallies  the
goods  which  the  women  had  left  there  behind  them  in
their  flight :  for  the  Indians  as  soone  as  they  saw  us
pursue  them  overtooke  the  women,  and  for  feare  charged
them  to  flie  away  with  their  children  leaving  their  stuffe
in  this  place.  We  went  unto  this  booty,  and  found
good  store  of  fresh-fish,  and  dried  fish,  and  certaine  bags
containing  above  28  pound  weight  full  of  dried  fish
ground  to  pouder,  and  many  seal-skins,  the  most  part
dressed  with  a  faire  white  graine  upon  them,  and  others  Seak-skins
very  badly  dressed.  There  were  also  their  instruments  ^f ^  «^^-^-^f .
to  nsn  witnall,  as  hookes  made  or  the  prickes  or  certame  ^raine.
shrubs  and  trees.  Here  we  tooke  the  said  skins  without
leaving  any  one  in  the  place,  and  then  we  returned  to
the  sea,  because  it  was  now  night,  or  at  least  very  late,
and  found  our  botes  waiting  for  us.

Chap. 13.

A  description  of  the  Canoas  of  the  Indians  of  the  He
of  Cedars,  and  how  coasting  the  same  to  find  fresh
water  they  found  some,  and  desiring  to  take  thereof
they  went  on  shore,  and  were  diversly  molested  with
the  weapons  of  the  Indians.  They  christen  an  old
Indian,  and  returne  unto  their  ships.

THe  Canoas  which  they  had  were  certaine  thicke
trunkes  of  Cedars,  some  of  them  of  the  thicknesse
of  two  men,  and  three  fadome  long,  being  not  made
hollow  at  all,  but  being  laid  along  and  fastened  together,
they  shove  them  into  the  sea,  neither  were  they  plained
to  any  purpose,  for  we  found  no  kind  of  edge-toole,
saving  that  there  were  certaine  sharp  stones,  which  we
found  upon  certaine  rockes  that  were  very  keene,  where-
with we  supposed  that  they  did  cut  &  flea  those  seales.
And  neere  the  shore  we  found  certaine  water,  where-
with we  filled  certaine  bottles  made  of  the  skins  of  those
seales,  contayning  ech  of  them  above  a  great  paile  of
water. The next  day  our Generall commanded  us  to

261

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540-

set  saile,  whereupon  sailing  with  a  fresh  gale  about  2
leagues  from  the  shore  of  this  Hand,  trending  about  the
same  to  see  the  end  thereof,  and  also  to  approch  neere
the  firme  land,  to  informe  our  selves  of  the  state  thereof,
because  we  had  seene  5  or  6  fires,  we  compassed  the  same
about :  for  by  this  meanes  we  performed  2  or  3  good
actions,  namely,  we  returned  to  our  right  course,  and
searched  whether  any  river  fell  out  of  the  coast  of  the
firme  land,  or  whether  there  were  any  trees  there,  or
whether  any  store  of  Indians  did  shew  themselves
or  no.

In  this  maner  proceeding  on  our  way  all  the  Friday
being  the  16  of  January  at  evening,  and  seeking  to
double  the  point  of  the  Hand,  so  fierce  and  contrary  a
Northren  winde  encountered  us,  that  it  drave  us  backe
that  night  over  against  the  lodgings  and  habitations  of
the  Indians,  and  here  we  stayed  all  Saturday,  what
time  we  lost  the  Trinitie  againe,  but  on  Sunday-night
being  the  1 8  we  saw  her  againe,  and  beganne  to  proceede
on  our  way  to  compasse  that  Hand,  if  it  pleased  God
to  send  us  good  weather.

On Sunday, Munday,  and Tuesday (which was the

twentieth of  the said moneth of  Januarie) wee sailed

with  scarse  and  contrary  windes,  and  at  length  came  to

IsladelosCe-  the  cape  of  the  point  of  the  Hand,  which  we  called  Isla

dros,ortheIle  ^e  los  Cedros  or  the  He  of  Cedars,  because  that  on  the

"■^^f^^^  !J ^°P^  °^  *^^  mountaines  therein,  there  growes  a  wood  of

^ouarter.^" ^  these  Cedars  being  very  tall,  as the  nature of  them  is

to  be. This  day  the  Trinitie  descryed  a  village  or  towne

of  the  Indians,  and  found  water :  for on  Sunday  night

we  had  newly  lost  her,  and had  no  sight  of  her  untill

Tuesday,  whenas  we  found  her  riding  neere  the  shore,

not  farre from  those  cottages of  the Indians. And  as

soone  as  we  had  descryed  her,  we  made  toward  her,  and

before  we  could reach  her,  we  espied three  Canoas of

Indians  which came hard aboord the said ship called

the Trinitie, so that  they touched almost the side  of

the ship,  and gave them  of  their  fish,  and  our  people

262

quar

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540-
on  the  other  side  gave  them  certaine  trifles  in  exchange,
and  after  they  had  spoken  with  them,  the  Indians  went
backe  to  the  shore,  and  at  the  same  instant  we  came  up
unto  the  Admirall  and  rode  by  them,  and  they  all
saluted  us,  saying  that  the  Indians  were  neere  them,
and  telling  what  had  passed  betweene  them,  whereat  the
Generall  and  we  received  great  contentment.  They  told
us  moreover,  that  they  had  found  fresh  water,  whereby
they  increased  our  great  joy,  because  we  stood  in  much
neede  thereof,  for  at  the  other  place  of  the  Indians  we
could  get  but  a  little.

While  we  thus  rode  at  ankor,  we  saw  a  Canoa  with  3
Indians  put  out  into  the  sea  from  their  cottages,  and  they
went  unto  a  fishing  place,  among  certaine  great  and  high  These  mighty
weedes, which  grow  in  this  sea  am.ong certaine  rockes,  deepe  and  high
the  greatest  part  of  which  weedes  groweth  in  15  or  20  ^^^^^-^^^  i^  ^^/
fadome  depth  ;  and  with  great  celeritie  they  caught  seven  ^nd  of  this
or  eight  fishes,  and  returned  with  them  unto  the  Trinity,  treatise.
and  gave  them  unto  them,  and  they  in  recompense  gave  [^^^-  4-^9-]
the  Indians  certaine  trifles. After  this  the  Indians  stayed
at  the  Sterne  of  the  ship,  viewing  the  same  above  three
houres space, and taking the oares of  our boat  they
tryed  how  they  could  rowe  with  them,  whereat  they  tooke
great pleasure  ; and we which were in the Admirall
stirred  not  a  whit  all  this  while,  to  give  them  the  more
assurance,  that they should not flie away, but should
see,  that  we ment to  doe them no harme,  &  that  we
were  good  people. As  soone  as  we  were  come  to  anker, ,
&  beheld  all  that  had  passed  betweene  the  Indians  and
those  of  the  Trinity,  after  the  Indians  were  gone  to  the
shore  in  their  Canoas  made  of  the  bodies  of  trees,  the
General  commanded  the  boat which  was  without  to  be
brought unto him  : and when it was come, he, and
Francis Preciado,  and  two  others went  into it,  and so
we  went  aboord  the  Trinity. The  Indians  seeing  people
comming  out  of  the  other ship into  the  Trinitie,  sent
two Canoas unto the sterne  of  the  ship,  and brought
us a  bottle of  water, and we  gave unto  them  certain

263

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

beads,  and  continued  talking  with  them  a  little  while  ;
but  evening  approching  the  aire  grew  somewhat  cold.
The  Indians  returned  on  shore  to  their  lodgings,  and
the  General  and  we  to  our  ship.  The  next  day  being
Wednesday  in  the  morning,  the  General  commanded
certaine  of  us  to  take  the  bote  and  goe  ashore,  to  see
if  we  could  find  any  brooke  or  well  of  fresh  water  in
the  houses  of  the  Indians,  because  he  thought  it  un-
possible  for  them  to  dwell  there  without  any  water
to  drinke.  The  father  frier  Raimund  likewise  went
out  in  our  company,  because  the  day  before  seeing
the  Indians  came  to  the  sterne  of  the  shippe  and  par-
lying  with  us,  he  thought  he  might  have  spoken  a  little
with  them,  with  the  like  familiarity.  In  like  sort  many
mariners  and  souldiers  went  out  in  the  boat  of  the
Trinity,  and  going  altogether  with  their  weapons  toward
the  shore,  somewhat  above  the  lodgings  of  the  Indians,
very  early  in  the  morning  they  watched  the  boats,  and
perceived  that  wee  would  come  on  land,  whereupon  they
sent  away  their  women  &  children  with  certaine  of  them,
who  caried  their  goods  up  into  certaine  exceeding  steepe
mountaines  and  hilles,  and  5  or  6  of  them  came  toward
us,  which  were  excellently  well  made,  and  of  a  good
stature.  Two  of  them  had  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  other
two  2  bastonadoes  much  thicker  then  the  wrist  of  a  mans
hand,  and  other  two  with  2  long  staves  like  javelins  with
very  sharpe  points,  and  approched  very  neere  us  being
nowe  come  on  shore.  And  beginning  by  signes  very
fiercely  to  brave  us,  they  came  so  neere  us,  that  almost
they  strooke  with  one  of  those  staves  one  of  our  souldiers
called  Garcia  a  man  of  good  parentage,  but  the  General
commanded  him  to  withdraw  himselfe,  and  not  to  hurt
any  of  them.  In  the  meane  season  the  General  and  frier
Raimund  stept  foorth,  the  frier  lapping  a  garment  about
his  arme,  because  they  had  taken  up  stones  in  their  hands,
fearing  that  they  would  do  them  some  mischiefe.  Then
began  both  of  them  to  speake  unto  them  by  signes  &
words,  to  be  quiet,  signifying,  that  they  ment  them no

264

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540.

harme,  but  only  were  come  to  take  water  ;  and  the  frier
shewed  them  a  drinking-cup  ;  but  nothing  would  serve  to
make  them  leave  that  bragging,  and  flinging  of  stones  :
and  the  General  continuing  still  in  a  mind  not  to  hurt
them,  commanded  his  men  gently  to  come  neere  unto
them,  and  that  by  signes  they  should  all  shew  them,  that
they  meant  in  no  wise  to  hurt  them,  but  that  we  were
come  on  land  onely  to  take  water.  On  the  other  side
refusing  utterly  to  take  knowledge  of  these  things  they
still  insulted  more  and  more  :  whereupon  Francis  Preciado
counselled  the  General  to  give  him  leave  to  kill  one  of
them,  because  all  the  rest  would  flee  away,  wherby  at
our  ease  we  might  take  water  :  but  he  replied  that  he
would  not  have  it  so,  but  willed  them  to  looze  the  two
mastives  Berecillo  and  Achillo  :  wherefore  the  dogs  were
let  loose,  and  as  soone  as  they  saw  them,  they  vanished
immediately,  betaking  them  to  their  heeles,  and  running
up  those  cliffes  like  goates.  Also  others  which  came  The  great  use
from  the  mountains  to  succour  them,  betooke  them-  °{^.^^-T^f!l
selves  to  flight.  The  dogs  overtooke  two  of  them,  and  Indians.
bit  them  a  little,  and  we  running  after,  laid  hold  on
them,  and  they  seemed  as  fierce  as  wild  &  untamed
beasts,  for  3  or  4  of  us  held  either  of  them,  to  cherish
&  pacific  them,  and  to  seeke  to  give  them  some  thing :
but  we  availed  not,  for  they  bit  us  by  the  hands,  and
stooped  downe  to  take  up  stones  for  to  strike  us  with
them.  We  led  them  a  while  in  this  maner,  &  came
unto  their  lodgings,  where  the  Generall  gave  a  charge,
that  no  man  should  touch  any  thing  of  theirs,  command-
ing Francis  Preciado  to  see  that  this  order  were  observed,
in  not  taking  any  thing  from  them,  although  in  very  deed
there  was  little  or  nothing  there,  because  the  women  and
Indians  which  were  fled  had  caried  al  away.  Here  we
found  an  old  man  in  a  cave  so  extreamly  aged  as  it  was
wonderful,  which  could  neither  see  nor  go,  because  he
was  so  lame  and  crooked.  The  father  frier  Raimund
sayd,  it  were  good  (seeing  he  was  so  aged)  to  make  him
a  Christian ;  whereupon  we  christened  him. The  captaine

265

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

gave  the  Indians  which  we  had  taken  two  paire  of  eare-
rings,  and  certaine  counterfeit  diamonds,  and  making
much  of  them,  suffred  them  to  depart  at  their  pleasure,
and  in  this  sort  faire  and  softly  they  returned  to  the  rest
of  their  fellowes  in  the  mountaine.  We  tooke  the  matter
[III.  420.]  of  that  village  which  was  but  a  small  quantity,  and  then
the  Generall  commanded  us  to  returne  to  our  ship,  be-
cause we  had  eaten  nothing  as  yet,  and  after  our  repast
we  sayled  towards  a  bay  which  lay  beyond  that  village,
where  we  saw  a  very  great  valley,  and  those  of  the  Trinitie
sayd,  that  they  had  seene  there  good  store  of  water,  and
sufficient  for  us  ;  wherefore  wee  ankered  neere  unto  that
valley.  And  the  Generall  went  on  shore  with  both  the
boates,  and  the  men  that  went  on  land  in  the  morning
with  the  two  fathers  frier  Raimund,  and  frier  Antony :
and  passing  up  that  valley  a  crossebow-shot,  we  found  a
very  small  brooke  of  water  which  nevertheles  supplied
our  necessity  for  we  filled  two  buts  thereof  that  evening,
leaving  our  vessels  to  take  it  with  on  shore  untill  the  next
morning  :  and  we  rejoyced  not  a  little  that  we  had  found
this  water,  for  it  was  fresh,  and  the  water  which  we  had
taken  up  before  was  somewhat  brackish,  and  did  us  great
hurt  both  in  our  bodies  and  in  our  taste.

Chap. 14.

They  take  possession  of  the  Isle  of  Cedars  for  the  Em-
perours  Majestic,  and  departing  from  thence  they
are  greatly  tossed  with  a  tempest  of  the  sea,  and
returne  to  the  Island,  as  to  a  safe  harbour.

THe  next  day  being  the  two  and  twentieth  of  January
very  early  the  General  commanded  us  to  go  on
shore,  and  that  we  should  have  our  dinner  brought  us,
and  should  take  in  the  rest  of  our  water,  which  we  did,  and
filled  1 7  buts  without  seeing  any  Indian  at  al.  The  next
day  going  out  to  fill  8  or  9  vessels  which  were  not  yet
filled,  a  great  winde  at  Northwest  tooke  us,  wherupon
they  made  signes  to  us  from  the  ships,  that  with  all  haste
wee should  come  on boord againe,  for the wind  grew

266

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540-
still higher, and higher, and the Masters were affraid
that  our  cables  would  break,  thus  we  were  in  the  open
sea. Therefore being  come  aboord  againe  not without
great  trouble,  we  returned  backe  over  against  the  village
of  the  Indians,*  where  we  had  slaine  the  Indian,  and  be-  Cap.  12.
cause the wind  grew  more  calme about midnight, the
Pilots  did  not  cast  anker,  but  hulled  under the shelter
of  this  Island,  which  (as  I  have  said)  is  called  The  Isle  of  ^^^^  '^f  ^"^  C"^-
Cedars, and is one of  the -i Isles of S. Stephan, the  '^''°^ "  ^^^^  ,

.  9T£^tBSt  of  tflE

greatest  &  chiefest  of  them,  where  the  General  tooke  -iisksofS.
possession.  While  we  hulled  here,  about  midnight,  the  Stephan.
next  Friday  being  the  23  of  the  moneth,  without  our
expectation  we  had  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  from  the  South-
east, which  was  very  favourable  for  our  voyage,  &  the
longer  it  continued,  the  more  it  increased  :  so  that  be-
tweene  that  night  and  the  next  day  being  Saturday  the  24
of  the  said  moneth  we  sailed  18  great  leagues.  While  Read  cap.  w.
wee  were  thus  on  our  way,  the  wind  grew  so  contrary  ^"°^^  ^^^  ^^'^^
and  so  tempestuous,  that  to  our  great  griefe  we  were  con-
strained to  coast  about  with  our  ships,  and  returned
twenty  leagues  backe  againe,  taking  for  our  succour  the
second  time,  the  point  of  the  lodgings  of  the  Indians,
where  the  foresayd  Indian  was  slaine,  and  here  we  stayed
Munday,  Tewsday,  and  Wednesday,  during  which  time
the  Northwest  and  the  North  wind  blew  continually,
whereupon  we  determined  not  to  stirre  from  thence
untill  we  saw  good  weather,  and  well  setled  for  our
voyage  :  for  in  this  climate  these  winds  doe  raigne  so
greatly,  that  we  feared  they  would  stay  us  longer  there
then  we  would ;  and  we  were  so  weary  of  staying,  that
every  day  seemed  a  moneth  unto  us.  Under  this  shelter
we  rode  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday  untill  noone,
which  was  the  last  of  January  in  the  yeere  1540.
About  noone  the  wind  began  to  blow  softly  at  South-
west, whereupon  the  General  told  the  Pilots,  that  we
should  doe  well  to  put  over  to  the  maine  land,  where
with  some  wind  off  the  shore  we  might  by  the  grace  of
God  saile  somewhat  farther. Thus  we  hoised  our  sailes, February.

267

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

and  sailed  until  evening  three  or  foure  leagues,  for  the
wind  scanted,  and  wee  remained  becalmed.  The  night
being  come  there  arose  a  contrary  winde,  and  we  were
inforced  of  necessitie  to  retire  the  third  time  to  the  same
shelter  of  the  Isle  of  Cedars,  where  we  stayed  from  the
first  of  February  until  Shrovesunday,  in  the  which
meane  time  we  tooke  in  two  buts  of  water  which  we
had  spent.  During  the  space  of  these  eight  dayes  we
sought  to  make  sayle  two  or  three  times,  but  as  we
went  out  a  little  beyond  the  point  of  this  Isle,  we  found
the  wind  so  boystrous  and  contrary,  and  the  sea  so
growen,  that  of  force  we  were  constrained  to  returne
under  the  succour  of  the  Island,  and  often  times  wee
were  in  great  feare  that  we  should  not  be  able  to  get
in  thither  againe.  During  this  time  that  we  could  not
proceed  on  our  journey,  we  imployed  our  selves  in  catch-
ing a  few  fishes  for  the  Lent.  From  Shrovesunday  being
the  8  of  February,  on  which  day  we  set  sayle,  we  sayled
with  a  very  scant  wind,  or  rather  a  calme,  untill  Shrove-
tewsday,  on  which  we  came  within  kenne  of  the  firme
land,  from  whence  we  were  put  backe  these  twenty  leagues
(for  in  these  two  dayes  and  a  halfe  wee  sayled  some  20
small  leagues)  and  we  lay  in  sight  of  the  sayd  poynt  of
the  firme  land.  And  on  the  Tewsday  we  were  becalmed,
waiting  till  God  of  his  mercy  would  helpe  us  with  a
prosperous  wind  to  proceed  on  our  voyage.
[III.  421.]  On  Shrovesunday  at  night,  to  make  good  cheere
withall  wee  had  so  great  winde  and  raine,  that  there
was  nothing  in  our  ships  which  was  not  wet,  and  a
very  colde  ayre.  On  Ashwednesday  at  sun-rising  we
strooke  saile  neere  a  point  which  we  fel  somewhat
short  withall  in  a  great  bay  running  into  this  firme
A  great  bay  land :  and  this  is  the  place  where  we  saw  five  or  sixe
in  the  jirme  ^^-gg^  ^-^^  ^x  the  rising  of  the  sunne  being  so  neere  the
shore  that  we  might  well  descrie  and  viewe  it  at  our
pleasure  we  sawe  it  to  bee  very  pleasant,  for  wee  descried
as  farre  as  wee  could  discerne  with  our  eyes,  faire  valleys
and small  hilles, with greene shrubs very pleasant to

268

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.

behold, although there grew no trees there. The
situation shewed their length and  breadth. This day
was little winde, it being in a manner  calme, to our
no small griefe :  and  the  father  frier  Raimund  sayd  us
a drie masse, and gave us ashes, preaching unto us
according  to  the  time  and  state  wherein  we  were :  with
which  sermon  we  were  greatly  comforted. After  noone-
tide  we  had  contrary  wind,  which  still  was our  enemie
in  all  our  journey,  at  the  least  from  the  point  of  the  port  "F he  point  of
of  Santa  Cruz. Here  we  were  constrained  to  anker  in  f^J^J^i^^
five  fadome  water,  and  after  wee  rode  at  anker  wee  began  ^^//^^  p^i^na
to viewe  the  countrey,  and  tooke  delight in  beholding  de  Balenas.
how  goodly  and  pleasant  it  was,  and  neere  unto  the  sea
wee  judged  that  wee  saw  a  valley  of  white  ground. At
evening  so  great  a  tempest  came  upon  us  of  winde  and
raine,  that  it  was  so  fearefuU  and  dangerous  a  thing  that
a  greater  cannot  bee  expressed  ;  for  it  had  like  to  have
driven  us  upon  the  shore,  and  the  chiefe  Pilot  cast  out
another  great  anker  into  the  sea,  yet  all  would  not  serve,
for  both  these  ankers  could  not  stay  the  ship. Where-
upon all  of  us  cryed  to  God  for  mercy,  attending  to  see
how  he  would  dispose  of  us  ;  who  of  his  great  goodnesse,
while  we  were  in  this  danger,  vouchsafed  a  little  to  slake
the  tempest,  and  with  great  speede  the  chiefe  Pilot  com-
manded the mariners to turne the capsten, and the
Generall commanded and prayed all the souldiers to
helpe  to turne the capsten, which they were nothing
slow  to  performe  :  and  thus  we  beganne  to  weigh our
ankers,  and  in  weighing  of  one  which  was  farre  greater
then  the  other,  the  sea  was  so  boisterous  that  it  forced
the capsten in  such  sorte,  that the  men  which  were  at
it could not  rule the  same,  and  it  strooke  a  Negro  of
the  Generals  such  a  blowe,  that  it  cast  him  downe  along
upon  the  decke,  and  did  the  like  unto  another  mariner
and  one  of  the  barres  strooke  our  fire-furnace  so  violently,
that  it  cast  it  overboord  into  the  sea. Yet  for  all  these
troubles wee weighed our ankers, and set sayle, and
albeit  we  had  great  tempests  at  sea,  yet  made  wee  no

269

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

account  thereof  in  respect  of  the  joy  which  we  conceived
to  see  our  selves  freed  of  the  perill  of  being  cast  on  that
shore  with  our  ships,  especially  seeing  it  fell  out  at
midnight,  at  which  time  no  man  could  have  escaped,
but  by  a  meere  myracle  from  God.

Wee  sayled  up  and  downe  the  sea  all  Thursday,  and
untill  Friday  in  the  morning  being  the  fourteeneth
day  of  February,  and  the  waves  of  the  sea  continually
came  raking  over  our  deckes.  At  length,  on  Saturday
morning  at  breake  of  day  we  could  finde  no  remedy
against  the  contrary  windes,  notwithstanding  the  Generall
was  very  obstinate  to  have  us  keepe  out  at  sea,  although
it  were  very  tempestuous,  least  we  should  be  driven  to
put  backe  againe,  but  no  diligence  nor  remedie  prevailed :
for  the  windes  were  so  boysterous  and  so  contrary,  that
they  could  not  be  worse,  and  the  sea  went  still  higher,
and  swelled  more  and  more,  and  that  in  such  sorte,  that
we  greatly  feared  wee  should  all  perish.  Whereupon  the
Pilot  thought  it  our  best  course  to  returne  to  the  Isle  of
Cedars,  whither  wee  had  repaired  three  or  foure  times
before  by  reason  of  the  selfe  same  contrary  windes,  for  wee
tooke  this  Island  for  our  father  and  mother,  although  we
received  no  other  benefite  thereby  save  this  onely,  namely,
to  repaire  thither  in  these  necessities,  and  to  furnish  our
selves  with  water,  and  with  some  small  quantitie  of  fish.

Being  therefore  arrived  at  this  Island,  and  riding  under
the  shelter  thereof,  the  contrary  windes  did  alwayes  blow
very  strongly,  and  here  we  tooke  water  which  we  drunke,
and  wood  for  our  fewel,  and  greatly  desired,  that  the
windes  would  bee  more  favourable  for  proceeding  on  our
journey.  And  though  we  rode  under  the  shelter  of  the
Isle,  yet  felt  wee  the  great  fury  of  those  windes,  and
the  rage  of  the  sea,  and  our  ships  never  ceased  rolling.

At  breake  of  day  the  twentieth  of  February  wee  found
the  cable  of  our  Admirall  cracked,  whereupon,  to  our
great  griefe,  we  were  constrained  to  set  sayle,  to  fall
downe  lower  the  space  of  a  league,  and  the  Trinitie
came  and  rode  in  our  company.

270

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.

Chap. 15.  [III.  422.]

They  goe  on  land  in  the  isle  of  Cedars,  and  take  divers
wilde  beasts,  and  refresh  and  solace  themselves.  They
are  strangely  tossed  with  the  Northwest  winde,  and
seeking  often  to  depart  they  are  forced,  for  the
avoiding  of  many  mischiefes,  to  repaire  thither  againe
for  harbour.

THe  two  and  twentieth  of  February  being  the  second
Sonday  in  Lent,  the  General  went  on  shore  with  the
greatest  part  of  his  people  and  the  friers,  neere  unto  a
valley  which  they  sawe  before  them.  And  hearing  masse
on  land,  certaine  souldiers  and  mariners,  with  certaine
dogges  which  we  had  in  our  company  went  into  the
said  valley,  and  we  met  with  certaine  deere,  whereof  we
tooke  a  female,  which  was  little,  but  fat,  whose  haire  was
liker  the  haire  of  a  wild  goat  then  of  a  deere,  and  we
found  her  not  to  be  a  perfect  deere,  for  she  had  foure
dugs  like  unto  a  cowe  full  of  milke,  which  made  us  much
to  marveile.  And  after  we  had  flayed  off  her  skinne,
the  flesh  seemed  more  like  the  flesh  of  a  goate,  then
of  a  deere.  We  killed  likewise  a  gray  conie,  in  shape
like  unto  those  of  Nueva  Espanna,  and  another  as  blacke
as  heben-wood.  In  the  cottages  at  the  shelter  above,
where  we  brake  our  cable,  we  found  many  pine-nuts
opened,  which  (in  mine  opinion)  the  Indians  had  gathered
together  to  eate  the  kernels  of  them.  On  Munday  the
23  of  the  said  moneth  we  rode  at  anker,  taking  our
pleasure  and  pastime  with  fishing.  And  the  Northwest
winde  began  to  blow,  which  waxed  so  great  a  little  before
midnight,  as  it  was  wonderfull :  so  that  although  we
were  under  the  shelter  of  the  Island,  and  greatly  de-
fended from  that  wind,  yet  for  all  that  it  was  so  furious,
and  the  sea  became  so  raging  and  boisterous,  that  it
greatly  shook  our  ships,  and  we  were  in  great  feare  of
breaking  our  cables,  whereof  (to  say  the  trueth)  we  had
very  much  neede :  for  having  spent  longer  time  in  this
voyage then we  looked  for, wee  had broken  two,  and

271

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

lost  two  of  our  best  ankers.  This  furious  winde  con-
tinued untill  the  next  day  being  Tewsday  the  24  when
as  we  went  on  shore  with  the  friers,  who  sayd  us  masse,
recommending  our  selves  to  God,  beseeching  him  to
vouchsafe  to  succour  and  help  us  with  some  good
weather  that  we  might  proceede  on  our  voyage,  to  the
advancement  of  his  service.  And  still  the  winds  were
so  high  and  outragious,  that  the  devill  seemed  to  be
loosed  in  the  aire.  Whereupon  the  Pilots  caused  all
the  masts  to  be  let  downe,  least  they  should  be  shaken
with  the  wind,  and  tooke  off  all  the  shrowds,  and  like-
wise caused  the  cabbens  in  the  sterne  to  be  taken  away,
that  the  winds  might  have  more  free  passage,  for  the
safetie  of  the  ships :  yet  for  al  this  they  ceased  not  to
be  in  great  trouble.  On  Tewsday  the  second  of  March,
about  midnight  or  somewhat  after,  riding  under  the
Island  in  this  distresse,  there  came  a  gust  of  Northwest
winde,  which  made  the  cable  of  the  Admirall  to  slip,
and  the  Trinitie  brake  her  cable,  and  had  bene  cast
away,  if  God  of  his  mercy  had  not  provided  for  us,
together  with  the  diligence  which  the  Pilots  used,  in
hoising  the  sailes  of  the  trinkets  and  mizzen,  wherewith
they  put  to  sea,  and  rode  by  another  anker  untill  day,
when  the  men  of  both  the  ships  went  with  their  boats
to  seeke  the  anker  untill  noone,  which  at  length  they
found  and  recovered,  not  without  great  paines  &
diligence  which  they  used  in  dragging  for  it,  for  they
were  till  noone  in  seeking  the  same,  and  had  much
adoe  to  recover  it.  After  this  we  set  up  our  shrowdes,
and  all  things  necessary  to  saile,  for  to  proceede  on  our
voyage,  if  it  pleased  God,  and  not  to  stay  alwayes  in  that
place,  as  lost  and  forlorne.  Thus  on  the  Wednesday
two  or  three  houres  after  dinner  wee  set  saile,  with  a
scarce  winde  at  Southeast,  which  was  favourable  for  our
course  and  very  scant  ;  and  our  Pilots  &  all  the  rest
of  us  were  in  no  smal  feare,  that  it  would  not  continue
long.  We  began  therfore  to  set  forward,  although  we
seemed  to  see before  our eies, that at the end  of  the

272

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  a.d.

1540.

Island  we  should  meete  with  contrary  winde  at  North
and  Northwest.  This  day  about  evening  when  our  ships
had  discovered  the  point  of  this  Isle  of  Cedars,  wee
began  to  perceive  those  contrary  windes,  and  the  sea  to
goe  so  loftily,  that  it  was  terrible  to  behold.  And  the
farther  we  went,  the  more  the  winds  increased,  so  that
they  put  us  to  great  distresse,  sayling  alwayes  with  the
sheates  of  our  mainesaile  and  trinket  warily  in  our  hands,
and  with  great  diligence  we  loosed  the  ties  of  all  the
sailes,  to  save  them  the  better,  that  the  wind  might  not
charge  them  too  vehemently.  For  all  this  the  mariners
thought  it  best  to  returne  backe,  and  that  by  no  means
we  should  runne  farre  into  the  sea,  because  we  were
in  extreame  danger.  Whereupon  wee  followed  their
counsel,  turning  backe  almost  to  the  place  from  whence
we  departed,  whereat  we  were  al  not  a  little  grieved,
because  we  could  not  prosecute  our  voyage,  and  began
to  want  many  things  for  the  furniture  of  our  ships.
The  8  of  March  being  Munday  about  noone  the  Generall
commanded  us  to  set  saile,  for  a  small  gale  of  winde
blew  from  the  West,  which  was  the  wind  whereof  we
had  most  need,  to  follow  our  voyage,  whereat  wee  were
all  glad  for  the  great  desire  which  we  had  to  depart  out
of  that  place.  Therefore  we  began  to  set  saile,  &  to
passe  toward  the  point  of  the  Island,  and  to  shape  our  [III.  423.]
course  toward  the  coast  of  the  firme  land,  to  view  the
situation  thereof.  And  as  we  passed  the  Island,  and
were  betwixt  it  and  the  maine,  the  Northwest  being  a
contrary  wind  began  to  blow,  which  increased  so  by
degrees,  that  we  were  constrained  to  let  fall  the  bonets
of  our  sailes,  to  save  them,  striking  them  very  low.
And  the  Trinitie  seeing  this  bad  weather  returned  forth-
with unto  the  place  from  whence  we  departed,  and  the
Admiral  cast  about  all  night  in  the  sea,  untill  the  morn-
ing ;  and  the  chiefe  Pilot  considering  that  by  no  means
we  could  proceed  farther  without  danger,  if  we  should
continue  at  sea  any  longer,  resolved  that  wee  should
retire  our  selves  againe  to  that  shelter,  where  we  rode  at
IX  273  s

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

anker  untill  Thursday. And  on  Friday  about  noone  we

set  saile  againe  with  a  scarce  winde,  &  in  comming  forth

unto  the  point  of  the  Island,  we  met  againe  with  contrary

winde  at  Northwest  :  whereupon  running  all  night  with

the  firme  land, on Saturday in the morning being S.

Lazarus day and the 13 of  march, we came in sight

thereof, in viewing of  the  which we all  rejoyced,  and

we  souldiers  would  very  willingly  have  gone  on  shore.

This night  fel great store of  raine like the raine in

Castilia,  and we  were all  well  wet in the  morning,  &

we tooke  great  pleasure in beholding  the  situation of

Thefirmeland  that  firme  land, because  it  was  greene,  and  because  we

verygreenand  ]^^^ discovered a pleasant valley and plaines of  good

^^jf^  li largenes,  which  seemed  to  bee  environed  with  a  garland

goodly  valleys  &  '.  ^i  irr  r • c

and  plaines.  Or  mountams.  At  length  tor  reare  or  misrortunes,
seeing  the  sea  so  high,  we  durst  not  stay  here  or  approch
neere  the  land,  &  because  we  had  great  want  of  cables
and  ankers,  we  were  again  constrained  to  put  to  sea ;
and  being  in  the  same,  and  finding  the  said  contrary
windes,  the  Pilots  judged  that  we  had  none  other
remedie,  but  againe  to  retire  our  selves  to  our  wonted
shelter.  And  thus  we  returned,  but  somewhat  above
the  old  place.  On  Sunday  we  rode  here  to  the  great
grief  of  all  the  company,  considering  what  troubles  we
indured,  &  could  not  get  forward ;  so  that  this  was  such
a  corrasive,  as  none  could  be  more  intollerable.  This
day  being  come  to  an  anker  wee  had  a  mighty  gale  of
wind  at  Northwest,  which  was  our  adversary  and  capital
enemie,  and  when  day  was  shut  in,  it  still  grew  greater
and  greater,  so  that  the  ships  rouled  much.  And  after
midnight,  toward  break  of  day,  the  Trinitie  brake  her
two  cables,  which  held  the  two  ankers  which  she  had,
and  seeing  her  selfe  thus  forlorne,  she  turned  up  and
downe  in  the  sea  untill  day,  and  came  &  rode  neere
us,  by  one  anker  which  shee  had  left.  This  day  all  of
us  went  to  seeke  these  lost  ankers,  and  for  all  the
diligence  which  wee  used,  wee  could  find  but  one  of
them. We rode at anker all day until night, when

274

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.
the  Trinitie  againe  brake  a  cable,  which  certaine  rocks
had  cut  asunder  :  wherupon  the  General  commanded
that  she  should  ride  no  longer  at  anker,  but  that  shee
should  turne  up  and  downe,  as  she  had  done  before
in  sight  of  us,  which  she  did  al  day  long,  and  at  night
she  came  to  an  anker  over  ag^ainst  a  fresh  water  somewhat
lower,  and  wee  went  and  rode  hard  by  her.  On  Palme-
sunday  we  went  on  shore  with  the  fathers,  which  read
the  passion  unto  us  and  said  masse,  and  we  went  in
procession  with  branches  in  our  hands.  And  so  being
comforted,  because  we  had  received  that  holy  Sacrament,
we  returned  to  our  ships.

Chap. 1 6.

Returning  to  the  Isle  of  Cedars  weather-beaten,  and
with  their  ships  in  evil  case,  they  conclude,  that
the  ship  called  Santa  Agueda  or  Santa  Agatha  should
returne  unto  Nueva  Espanna.  Of  the  multitude
of  whales  which  they  found  about  the  point  of
California :  with  the  description  of  a  weede,  which
groweth  among  the  Islands  of  those  seas.

HEre  we  continued  untill  the  Wednesday  before
Easter  being  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  March,
on  which  day  wee  consulted  together,  that  because  the
ships  were  ill  conditioned,  and  wanted  necessary  furniture
to  proceede  any  further,  it  were  best  for  us  to  returne
backe  to  New  Spaine,  as  also  because  our  clothes  were
consumed  :  but  the  Generall  seemed  not  willing  to
returne,  but  to  proceed  on  his  voyage  :  and  in  fine  it
was  resolved,  that  seeing  both  the  ships  could  not
proceede  forwarde,  as  well  because  they  had  lost  their
necessary  furnitures,  as  also  that  the  Santa  Agatha  had
neede  of  calking,  because  she  received  much  water,  and
was  the  worst  furnished  of  the  twaine,  that  shee  should
returne  backe  to  advertize  the  Marques  of  our  successe
in  this  voyage,  and  what  hindred  our  proceeding,  and
in  what  case  wee  stoode,  and  howe  wee  were  bereft  of
our necessary  furniture. And  because  the  Trinitie  was

275

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540-

the  swifter  ship,  and  better  appointed  then  the  other,  it
was  concluded,  that  it  should  be  provided  in  the  best
maner  that  might  be,  &  that  the  General  should
proceed  on  his  journey  in  her  with  such  companie  as
he  should  make  choise  of,  and  that  the  rest  should
returne  at  their  good  leisure.  Wherefore  upon  this
determination  we  went  under  a  point  of  this  Island,
because  it  was  a  fit  place  to  carene  the  ship  :  &  in
recovering  the  same  we  spent  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and
Friday  till  noone,  and  yet  for  all  that  wee  could  not  wel
double  it,  until  Easter  day  about  noone.  Here  we
ankered  very  neere  the  shore,  and  in  a  valley  we  found
very  excellent  fresh  water,  wherof  we  made  no  smal
account,  &  here  stayed  all  the  Easter-holidayes,  to  set
our  selves  about  the  furnishing  up  of  the  Trinity :  and
[III.  424.]  after  the  worke  was  taken  in  hand  by  the  two  Masters
which  were  very  sufficient  calkers  (one  of  which  was
Juan  Castiliano  chiefe  Pilot,  and  the  other  Peruccio  de
Bermes)  they  finished  the  same  so  well  in  fives  dayes,
as  it  was  wonderfull ;  for  no  man  could  perceive  how
any  droppe  of  water  could  enter  into  any  of  the  seames.
Afterward  they  mended  the  other  ship  from  Saturday
till  Munday,  during  which  time  all  those  were  shriven
that  had  not  confessed,  and  received  the  communion,
and  it  was  resolved  by  charge  of  the  confessors,  that  all
those  seale-skins  which  they  had  taken  from  the  Indians
should  bee  restored  againe  ;  and  the  Generall  gave
charge  to  Francis  Preciado  to  restore  them  all,  charging
him  on  his  conscience  so  to  doe.  Thus  they  gathered
them  together,  and  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the
fathers,  to  bee  kept  untill  they  returned  to  the  place.
The  Santa  where  they  were  to  restore  them.  After  this  maner  on
Agueda  re-  ^^^(^a^y before noone we tooke our leaves of the

tUVtlCtll  tOT

'New-spaine  Generall Francis Ulloa,  and  of  the people  that  stayed

the  5.  of with  him,  who  at  our  departure  shed  no  small  number

Jpril.  of  teares,  and  we chose  for our  captaine in the  Santa

Agueda  master  Juan  Castiliano  the  chiefe  pilot,  as  well

of  the ship,  as  of  us all, and  set saile  the same day

276

FRANCIS DE ULLOA  ad.

1540.
being the fift of  April, having our boat tied at our
Sterne,  till  we came over  against the cottages, whence
wee had taken the  seale-skins. From  the  countrey  of  T^^^  i^^^  ?/"
the Christians and the port of  Colima  we were  now  ^^'^^^^  3°°
distant  some  three  hundreth  leagues, which  is  the  first  cfn^a
port  where  wee determined to touch  at. And having
sailed a league from the Trinitie the captaine Juan
Castiliano commanded us to salute them with three
pieces of  great Ordinance, and she answered us with "
other three, and afterward we answered one another
with  two  shot  apiece.

We sailed on Munday  & *Tewsday  til noon with  The  sixt  of
contrary  wind  in  sight  of  the  Island,  and  at  noone  we  ^1'^^^^-
had  a  fresh  gale  in  the  poupe,  which  brought  us  over
against  the  cottages  of  the  Indians  where  we  tooke  away
those  seal  skins  ;  &  there  certain  souldiers  &  mariners
with the father  frier  Antony  de Melo leapt  on shore
with the  boat, carying the skins with them,  & flung
them into the sayd cottages  out of  which they  were
taken,  and so returned to their ship. This day the  The  7  of
weather  calmed,  whereupon  we  were  driven  to  cast  anker,  ^^^'^^'
fearing  that  we  should  foorthwith  be  distressed  for  want
of  victuals, if  we should stay there any long time  :
but  God  which  is the true helper provided  better  for
us  then  we  deserved  or  imagined  ;  for  as  we  rode  here,  '^^^y  ^^^^
after  midnight  the  Wednesday following before  ten  of-^J^^^/^^^
the  clocke  wee  had  a  favourable  gale  of  winde  from  the  the  point  of
Southeast,  which put us into the sea  ; whither  being  Santa  Cruz
driven,  wee  had  the  wind  at  Northwest  so  good  and  con-  f  California
stant,  that  in  sixe  dayes  it  brought  us  to  the  cape  of  the  ^^  "^^  ^^^^^'
point  of  the  port  of  Santa  Cruz  :  for  which  so  great  blessing
of  God  we  gave  unto him infinite  thankes. And  here
we  began  to  allow our selves a greater proportion  of
victuals  then wee had done  before, for wee had  eaten
very  sparingly for feare lest our victuals would faile
us. Before  we  came  to  this  point  of  the  haven  of  Santa
Cruz  by  sixe  or  seven  leagues  we  saw  on  shore  between
certaine  valleys  divers  great  smokes. And  having  passed

277

A.D.

1540.

Punta  de

Read  more  of
these  weedes
cap.  13.

Saiit  I  ago  de
Buena  esper-
anza  in  19
degrees.

Cabo  del  En-
ganno  in  30
degrees  i^  a
halfe.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  point  of  this  port,  our  captaine  thought  it  good  to
lanch  foorth  into  the  maine  Ocean  :  yet  although  we  ran
a  swift  course,  above  500  whales  came  athwart  of  us
in  2  or  3  skuUes  within  one  houres  space,  which  were
so  huge,  as  it  was  wonderfull,  and  some  of  them  came
so  neere  unto  the  ship,  that  they  swam  under  the  same
from  one  side  to  another,  whereupon  we  were  in  great
feare,  lest  they  should  doe  us  some  hurt,  but  they  could
not  because  the  ship  had  a  prosperous  and  good  winde,
and  made  much  way,  whereby  it  could  receive  no  harme,
although  they  touched  and  strooke  the  same.

Among  these  Islands  are  such  abundance  of  those
weedes,  that  if  at  any  time  wee  were  inforced  to  sayle
over  them  they  hindred  the  course  of  our  ships.  They
growe  fourteene  or  fifteene  fadome  deepe  under  the  water,
their  tops  reaching  foure  or  five  fadome  above  the  water.
They  are  of  the  colour  of  yellow  waxe,  &  their  stalke
groweth  great  proportionably.  This  weede  is  much  more
beautifull  then  it  is  set  foorth,  and  no  marvell,  for  the
naturall  painter  and  creator  thereof  is  most  excellent.

This  relation  was  taken  out  of  that  which  Francis
Preciado  brought  with  him.

After  this  ship  the  Santa  Agueda  departed  from  the
Generall  Ulloa,  and  returned  backe  the  5  of  April,  she
arrived  in  the  port  of  Sant  lago  de  buena  esperan^a
the  18  of  the  said  moneth,  and  after  she  had  stayed
there  foure  or  five  dayes,  she  departed  for  Acapulco  :
howbeit  untill  this  present  seventeenth  of  May  in  the
yeere 1540,  I  have  heard  no  tidings  nor  newes  of  her.

Moreover  after  the  departure  of  the  Santa  Agueda
for  Nueva  Espanna,  the  General  Francis  Ulloa  in  the
ship  called  the  Trinitie  proceeding  on  his  discovery
coasted  the  land  untill  he  came  to  a  point  called  Cabo
del  Enganno  standing  in  thirty  degrees  and  a  halfe  of
Northerly  latitude,  and  then  returned  backe  to  Newspaine,
because  he  found  the  winds  very  contrary,  and  his
victuals  failed  him.

278

FERNANDO ALARCHON

A.D.

1540.

The relation of the navigation and discovery  [HI.  425.]
which Captaine  Fernando  Alarchon made  by
the  order  of  the  right  honourable  Lord  Don
Antonio  de  Mendo^a  Vizeroy  of  New  Spaine,
dated  in  Colima,  an  haven  of  New  Spaine.

Chap. I .

Fernando  Alarchon  after  he  had  suffered  a  storme,
arrived  with  his  Fleete  at  the  haven  of  Saint  lago,
and  from  thence  at  the  haven  of  Aguaiaval  :  he  was
in  great  perill  in  seeking  to  discover  a  Bay,  and
getting  out  of  the  same  he  discovered  a  river  on  the
coast  with  a  great  current,  entring  into  the  same,
and  coasting  along  he  discried  a  great  many  of
Indians  with  their  weapons  :  with  signes  hee  hath
traffique  with  them,  and  fearing  some  great  danger
returneth  to  his  ships.

N  Sunday  the  ninth  of  May  in  the  yeere
1540.  I  set  saile  with  two  ships,  the  one
called Saint Peter being Admirall, and
the  other Saint Catherine, and  wee set
forward  meaning  to  goe  to  the  haven  of
Saint  lago  of  good  hope :  but  before  we
arrived  there  wee  had  a  terrible  storme,
wherewith they which were in the ship called Saint
Catherine,  being  more  afraid  then  was  neede,  cast  over
boord nine pieces of  Ordinance, two ankers and one
cable,  and  many  other  things  as  needfuU  for  the  enter-
prise wherein  we  went,  as  the  shippe  it  selfe. Assoone
as  we  were  arrived  at  the  haven  of  Saint  lago  I  repaired  The  haven  of
my  losse  which I  had received, provided my selfe  of  ^'^'^'^^  ^^SP-
things  necessary, and tooke aboord my  people which
looked  for  my  comming,  and  directed  my  course  toward
the  haven of  Aguaiavall. And being there arrived I  The  haven  of
understood  that  the  Generall  Francis  Vazquez  de  Coro-  ^S^^^'^^^^-
nado  was  departed  with  all  his  people :  whereupon  taking

279

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

the  ship  called  Saint  Gabriel  which  carried  victuals  for
the  armie  I  led  her  with  mee  to  put  in  execution  your
Lordships  order. Afterward  I  followed  my  course  along
the  coast without departing from the same, to  see if
I  could  find  any  token  or  any  Indian  which  could  give
me  knowledge  of  him  :  and  in  sailing  so  neere  the  shore
I discovered other very good havens, for the ships
whereof  Captaine  Francis  de  UUua  was  Generall  for  the
Marquesse  de  Valle  neither  sawe  nor  found  them. And
These  skoalds when  we  were  come  to  the  flats  and  shoalds  from  whence
are  the  bottome  ^j^^  foresaid  fleete  returned,  it  seemed  aswell  to  me  as
m^o^orthe ^°  ^^  ^^^^j  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  firme  land  before  us,  and
Bay  of  Call- that  those  shoalds  were  so  perilous  and  fearefull,  that  it
forma.  was  a  thing to be considered whither  with  our skiffes

we  could  enter  in  among  them  :  and  the  Pilotes  and  the
rest  of  the  company  would  have  had  us  done  as  Captaine
UUua  did,  and  have  returned  backe  againe.  But  because
your  Lordship  commanded  mee,  that  I  should  bring  you
the  secret  of  that  gulfe,  I  resolved,  that  although  I  had
knowen  I  should  have  lost  the  shippes,  I  would  not
have  ceased  for  any  thing  to  have  seene  the  head  thereof:
and  therefore  I  commanded  Nicolas  Zamorano  Pilote
major,  and  Dominico  del  Castello  that  eche  of  them
should  take  a  boate,  and  their  lead  in  their  hands,  and
runne  in  among  those  shoalds,  to  see  if  they  could  find
out  the  chanell  whereby  the  shippes  might  enter  in :
to  whom  it  seemed  that  the  ships  might  saile  up  higher
(although  with  great  travell  and  danger)  and  in  this  sort
I  and  he  began  to  follow  our  way  which  they  had  taken,
and  within  a  short  while  after  wee  found  our  selves  fast
on  the  sands  with  all  our  three  ships,  in  such  sort  that
one  could  not  helpe  another,  neither  could  the  boates
succour  us,  because  the  current  was  so  great  that  it  was
impossible  for  one  of  us  to  come  unto  another  :  where-
upon we  were  in  such  great  jeopardie  that  the  decke  of  the
Admirall  was  oftentimes  under  water,  and  if  a  great
surge  of  the  sea  had  not  come  &  driven  our  ship  right
up,  and gave her leave as it were to breath  a  while,

FERNANDO  ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

we  had  there  bin  drowned  :  and  likewise  the  other  two
shippes  found  themselves  in  very  great  hazard,  yet  be-
cause they  were  lesser  and  drewe  lesse  water,  their  danger
was  not  so  great  as  ours.  Nowe  it  pleased  God  upon
the  returne  of  the  flood  that  the  shippes  came  on  flote,
and  so  wee  went  forward.  And  although  the  company
would  have  returned  backe,  yet  for  all  this  I  determined
to  goe  forwarde,  and  to  pursue  our  attempted  voyage  :
and  we  passed  forward  with  much  adoe,  turning  our
stemmes  now  this  way,  now  that  way,  to  seeke  to  find
the  chanel. And  it  pleased  God  that  after  this  sort  we  ThebottomeoJ

came  to  the  very  bottome  of  the  Bay  ;  where  wee  found  ^^  ^^"^  y
.,.•'.  ,  .  ,  •'  .' ,  ^ r  r  California.

a  very  mightie  river,  which  ranne  with  so  great  rury  or

a streame, that we could hardly saile against it. In
this  sort  I determined  as  wel  as  I  could  to  go  up  this
river,  and  with two boates,  leaving the  third with  the
ships,  and  twenty  men,  my  selfe  being  in  one  of  them
with Roderigo Maldonado  treasurer of  this fleet, and
Gaspar  de  Castilleia  comptroller,  and  with  certaine  small
pieces  of  artillerie I began to saile up the river,  and
charged all my company, that none of  them should  [III.  426.]
stirre  nor use any signe, but he whom  I appoynted,
although  wee  found  Indians. The  same  day,  which  was They  goe  up
Thursday the sixe  and  twentieth  of  August, following ^  ^^'"^^  ■
our  voyage  with  drawing  the  boats  with  halsers  we  went  ^^^  ^5^  ^
about some 6 leagues : and the next day which  was  August.
Friday by  the breake of  day thus following our  way
upward,  I saw  certaine  Indians  which  went  toward  cer-
taine cottages  neere  unto  the  water,  who  assoone  as  they
saw  us, ten  or  twelve  of  them rose up furiously,  and
crying  with a  loud voyce, other of  their companions
came  running  together  to  the  number  of  50  which  with
all  haste  carried  out  of  their  cottages  such  things  as  they
had, and layd them under certaine shrubs and  many
of  them  came  running toward that part whether wee
approched, making great signes unto us that we
should  goe  backe  againe,  using  great  threatnings  against
us, one while running on this side and an other

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

while  on  that  side.  I  seeing  them  in  such  a  rage,
caused  our  boates  to  lanch  from  the  shore  into  the
middes  of  the  river,  that  the  Indians  might  be  out  of
feare,  and  I  rode  at  anker,  and  set  my  people  in  as  good
order  as  I  could,  charging  them  that  no  man  should
speake,  nor  make  any  signe  nor  motion,  nor  stirre  out
of  his  place,  nor  should  not  be  offended  for  any  thing
that  the  Indians  did,  nor  should  shewe  no  token  of
warre :  And  by  this  meanes  the  Indians  came  every
foote  neere  the  rivers  side  to  see  us :  and  I  gate  by
little  and  little  toward  them  where  the  river  seemed  to
be  deepest.  In  this  meane  space  there  were  above  two
hundred  and  fiftie  Indians  assembled  together  with
bowes  and  arrowes,  and  with  certaine  banners  in  warre-
like  sort  in  such  maner  as  those  of  New  Spayne  doe
use :  and  perceiving  that  I  drewe  toward  the  shore,
they  came  with  great  cryes  toward  us  with  bowes  and
arrowes  put  into  them,  and  with  their  banners  displayed.
He  carried  an  And  I  went  unto  the  stemme  of  my  boate  with  the
interpreter  interpreter  which  I  carried  with  me,  whom  I  com-
manded to  speake  unto  them,  and  when  he  spake,
they  neither  understood  him,  nor  he  them,  although
because  they  sawe  him  to  be  after  their  fashion,  they
stayed  themselves :  and  seeing  this  I  drewe  neerer  the
shore,  and  they  with  great  cryes  came  to  keepe  mee
from  the  shore  of  the  river,  making  signes  that  I  should
not  come  any  farther,  putting  stakes  in  my  way  betweene
the  water  and  the  land :  and  the  more  I  lingered,  the
more  people  still  flocked  together.  Which  when  I  had
considered  I  beganne  to  make  them  signes  of  peace,  and
taking  my  sword  and  target,  I  cast  them  downe  in  the
boate  and  set  my  feete  upon  them,  giving  them  to  under-
stand with  this  and  other  tokens  that  I  desired  not  to
have  warre  with  them,  and  that  they  should  doe  the  like.
A  very  good  Also  I  tooke  a  banner  and  cast  it  downe,  and  I  caused
course  taken  ^^^  company  that  were  with  mee  to  sit  downe  likewise,
0  ^P^^ll and takinff  the wares  of  exchang-e  which  I  carried  with

unknowen  t 11 i 1  •  1  r 1  r

lavages.  mee,  1  called  them  to  give  them  some  or  them :  yet  ror

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

all  this  none  of  them  stirred  to  take  any  of  them,  but
rather  flocked  together,  and  beganne  to  make  a  great
murmuring  among  themselves :  and  suddenly  one  came
out  from  among  them  with  a  staffe  wherein  certayne
shelles  were  set,  and  entred  into  the  water  to  give  them
unto  mee,  and  I  tooke  them,  and  made  signes  unto  him
that  hee  should  come  neere  me,  which  when  he  had
done,  I  imbraced  him,  and  gave  him  in  recompence
certaine  beades  and  other  things,  and  he  returning  with
them  unto  his  fellowes,  began  to  looke  upon  them,  and
to  parley  together,  and  within  a  while  after  many  of
them  came  toward  me,  to  whom  I  made  signes  to  lay
downe  their  banners,  and  to  leave  their  weapons  :  which
they  did  incontinently,  then  I  made  signes  that  they
should  lay  them  altogether,  and  should  goe  aside  from
them,  which  likewise  they  did :  and  they  caused  those
Indians  which  newly  came  thither  to  leave  them,  and
to  lay  them  together  with  the  rest.  After  this  I  called
them  unto  me,  and  to  all  them  which  came  I  gave
some  smal  trifle,  using  them  gently,  and  by  this  time
they  were  so  many  that  came  thronging  about  mee,
that  I  thought  I  could  not  stay  any  longer  in  safety
among  them,  and  I  made  signes  unto  them  that  they
should  withdraw  themselves,  and  that  they  should  stand
al  upon  the  side  of  an  hill  which  was  there  betweene  a
plaine  &  the  river,  and  that  they  should  not  presse  to
me  above  ten  at  a  time.  And  immediatly  the  most
ancient  among  them  called  unto  them  with  a  loud  voyce,
willing  them  to  do  so  :  and  some  ten  or  twelve  of  them
came  where  I  was :  whereupon  seeing  my  selfe  in  some
securitie,  I  determined  to  goe  on  land  the  more  to  put
them  out  of  feare  :  and  for  my  more  securitie,  I  made
signes  unto  them,  to  sit  downe  on  the  ground  which  they
did :  but  when  they  saw  that  ten  or  twelve  of  my  com-
panions came  a  shore  after  me,  they  began  to  be  angry,,
and  I  made  signes  unto  them  that  we  would  be  friends,
and  that  they  should  not  feare,  &  herewithal  they  were
pacified,  and  sate  down  as  they  did  before,  and  I  went

283

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1540-

unto  them,  &  imbraced  them,  giving  them  certain  trifles,

commanding  mine  interpreter  to  speake  unto  them,  for

I greatly  desired to understand  their  maner  of  speech,

and the cry which they made at  mee. And that I

might  knowe  what  maner  of  foode  they  had,  I  made  a

signe  unto  them,  that  wee  would  gladly  eate,  and  they

brought mee certaine cakes of  Maiz, and a loafe of

Mizquiqui,  and they  made signes unto mee that  they

desired  to  see  an  harquebuse  shotte  off,  which  I  caused

[III.  427.]  to  be  discharged,  and  they  were  all  wonderfully  afraid,

except  two  or  three  olde  men  among  them  which  were

not  mooved  at  all,  but  rather  cried  out  upon  the  rest,

because  they  were afrayd : and through the speach of

one  of  these olde men,  they began to rise up from

the  ground,  and  to  lay  hold on  their  weapons :  whom

when  I  sought  to appease,  I  would have  given him  a

silken  girdle  of  divers  colours,  and  hee  in  a  great  rage

bitte  his  nether  lippe cruelly,  and  gave mee  a  thumpe

with  his  elbowe  on  the  brest,  and  turned  in  a  great  furie

to speake  unto his company. After that I saw them

advance  their  banners,  I  determined  to  returne  my  selfe

gently  to  my  boates,  and  with a small  gale  of  wind  I

set  sayle,  whereby  wee  might  breake the  current  which

was very  great, although my company were not well

pleased to goe any farther. In the meane space the

Indians  came  following  us  along  the  shore  of  the  river,

making  signes  that  I  should  come  on  land,  and  that  they

would give mee food to eate, some of  them sucking

their fingers, and others entred into the water with

certaine  cakes  of  Maiz,  to  give  me  them  in  my  boate.

Chap. 2.

Of  the  habite,  armour  and  stature  of  the  Indians.  A
relation  of  many  others  with  whom  he  had  by  signes
traffique,  victuals  and  many  courtesies.

IN  this sort  we  went  up  two leagues,  and I arrived
neere  a cliffe  of  an hill,  whereupon was an arbour
made newly,  where  they  made signes unto  me, crying

284

FERNANDO ALARCHON  ad.

1540.
that  I  should  go  thither,  shewing  me  the  same  with
their  handes,  and  telling  mee  that  there  was  meate  to
eate.  But  I  would  not  goe  thither,  seeing  the  place  was  Good  forecast.
apt  for  some  ambush,  but  followed  on  my  voyage,  within
a  while  after  issued  out  from  thence  above  a  thousand
armed  men  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  after  that
many  women  and  children  shewed  themselves,  toward
whom  I  would  not  goe,  but  because  the  Sunne  was
almost  set,  I  rode  in  the  middest  of  the  river.  These
Indians  came  decked  after  sundry  fashions,  some  came
with  a  painting  that  covered  their  face  all  over,  some
had  their  faces  halfe  covered,  but  all  besmouched  with  Indians  be- ^
cole,  and  every  one  as  it  liked  him  best.  Others  carried  ^^omhedwith
visards  before  them  of  the  same  colour  which  had  the
shape  of  faces.  They  weare  on  their  heads  a  piece  of
a  Deeres  skinne  two  spannes  broad  set  after  the  maner
of  a  helmet,  and  upon  it  certaine  small  sticks  with  some
sortes  of  fethers.  Their  weapons  were  bowes  and
arrowes  of  hard  wood,  and  two  or  three  sorts  of  maces
of  wood  hardened  in  the  fire.  This  is  a  mightie  people,
well  feitured,  and  without  any  grossenesse.  They  have
holes  bored  in  their  nostrels  whereat  certaine  pendents
hang :  and  others  weare  shelles,  and  their  eares  are  full
of  holes,  whereon  they  hang  bones  and  shelles.  All  of
them  both  great  and  small  weare  a  girdle  about  their
waste  made  of  diverse  colours,  and  in  the  middle  is
fastened  a  round  bunch  of  feathers,  which  hangeth
downe  behind  like  a  tayle.  Likewise  on  the  brawne  of
their  armes  they  weare  a  streit  string,  which  they  wind
so  often  about  that  it  becommeth  as  broad  as  ones  hand.
They  weare  certaine  pieces  of  Deeres  bones  fastened  to
their  armes,  wherewith  they  strike  off  the  sweate,  and
at  the  other  certaine  small  pipes  of  canes.  They  carry  Pipes  and
also  certaine  little  long  bagges  about  an  hand  broade  tyed  ^^SK^^  ofTa-
to  their  left  arme,  which  serve  them  also  in  stead  of
brasers  for  their  bowes,  full  of  the  powder  of  a  certaine
herbe,  whereof  they  make  a  certaine  beverage.  They
have  their  bodies  traced  with  coles,  their  haire  cut  before,

285

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

and  behind  it  hangs  downe  to  their  wast.  The  women
goe  naked,  and  weare  a  great  wreath  of  fethers  behind
them,  and  before  painted  and  glued  together,  and  their
haire  like  the  men.  There  were  among  these  Indians
three  or  foure  men  in  womens  apparell.  Nowe  the  next
day  being  Saturday  very  early  I  went  forward  on  my
way  up  the  river,  setting  on  shore  two  men  for  cache
boate  to  drawe  them  with  the  rope,  and  about  breaking
foorth  of  the  Sunne,  wee  heard  a  mightie  crie  of  Indians
on  both  sides  of  the  river  with  their  weapons,  but  with-
out any  banner.  I  thought  good  to  attend  their  com-
ming,  aswell  to  sec  what  they  woulde  have,  as  also  to
try  whether  our  interpreter  could  understand  them.
When  they  came  over  against  us  they  leapt  into  the
river  on  both  sides  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and
when  they  spake,  our  interpreter  understoode  them  not :
whereupon  I  beganne  to  make  a  signe  unto  them  that
they  should  lay  away  their  weapons,  as  the  other  had
done.  Some  did  as  I  willed  them,  and  some  did  not,
and  those  which  did,  I  willed  to  come  neere  me  and
gave  them  some  things  which  we  had  to  trucke  with-
all,  which  when  the  others  perceived,  that  they  might
likewise  have  their  part,  they  layd  away  their  weapons
likewise.  I  judging  my  selfe  to  be  in  securitie  leaped
on  shore  with  them,  and  stoode  in  the  middest  of  them,
who  understanding  that  I  came  not  to  fight  with  them,
Zhels  and  began  to  give  some  of  those  shels  and  beades,  and  some
beades.  brought  me  certaine  skinnes  well  dressed,  and  others
Maiz  and  a  roll  of  the  same  naughtily  grinded,  so  that
none  of  them  came  unto  me  that  brought  mee  not  some-
[III.  428.]  thing,  and  before  they  gave  it  me  going  a  little  way
from  mee  they  began  to  cry  out  amayne,  and  made  a
signe  with  their  bodies  and  armes,  and  afterward  they
approched  to  give  me  that  which  they  brought.  And
now  that  the  Sunne  beganne  to  set  I  put  off  from  the
shore,  and  rode  in  the  middest  of  the  river.  The  next
morning  before  breake  of  day  on  both  sides  of  the  river
wee heard greater cryes and of  more Indians, which

FERNANDO  ALARCHON  ad.

1540.

leaped  into  the  river  to  swimme,  and  they  came  to
bring  mee  certaine  gourdes  full  of  Maiz,  and  of  those
wrethes  which  I  spake  of  before.  I  shewed  unto  them
Wheate  and  Beanes,  and  other  seedes,  to  see  whether
they  had  any  of  those  kindes  :  but  they  shewed  mee
that  they  had  no  knowledge  of  them,  and  wondred  at
all  of  them,  and  by  signes  1  came  to  understand  that
the  thing  which  they  most  esteemed  and  reverenced  was
the  Sunne :  and  I  signified  unto  them  that  I  came  from  ^  notable
the  Sunne.  Whereat  they  marveiled,  and  then  they  P°""^-
began  to  beholde  me  from  the  toppe  to  the  toe,  and
shewed  me  more  favour  then  they  did  before  ;  and  when
I  asked  them  for  food,  they  brought  me  such  abundance
that  I  was  inforced  twise  to  call  for  the  boates  to  put
it  into  them,  and  from  that  time  forward  of  all  the  things
which  they  brought  me  they  flang  up  into  the  ayre  one
part  unto  the  Sunne,  and  afterward  turned  towards  me  to
give  mee  the  other  part :  and  so  1  was  alwayes  better
served  and  esteemed  of  them  as  well  in  drawing  of  the
boats  up  the  river,  as  also  in  giving  me  food  to  eat :  and
they  shewed  me  so  great  love,  that  when  I  stayed  they
would  have  carried  us  in  their  armes  unto  their  houses  :
and  in  no  kind  of  thing  they  would  breake  my  com-
mandement :  and  for  my  suretie,  I  willed  them  not  to
carry  any  weapons  in  my  sight :  and  they  were  so  carefull
to  doe  so,  that  if  any  man  came  newly  thither  with  them,
suddenly  they  would  goe  and  meete  him  to  cause  him
to  lay  them  downe  farre  from  mee :  and  I  shewed  them
that  I  tooke  great  pleasure  in  their  so  doing :  and  to
some  of  the  chiefe  of  them  I  gave  certaine  little  napkins
and  other  trifles  ;  for  if  I  should  have  given  somewhat  to
every  one  of  them  in  particular,  all  the  small  wares  in  Swarmes  of
New  Spayne  would  not  have  sufficed.  Sometimes  it  fell  P^°P^^-
out  (such  was  the  great  love  and  good  wil  which  they
shewed  me)  that  if  any  Indians  came  thither  by  chance
with  their  weapons,  and  if  any  one  being  warned  to  leave
them  behind  him,  if  by  negligence,  or  because  he  under-
stood them  not  at  the  first  warning,  he  had  not  layd  them

287

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1540.

away,  they  would  runne  unto  him,  and  take  them  from
him  by  force,  and  would  breake  them  in  pieces  in  my
presence.  Afterward  they  tooke  the  rope  so  lovingly,  and
with  striving  one  with  another  for  it,  that  we  had  no  need
to  pray  them  to  doe  it.  Wherefore  if  we  had  not  had  this
An  exceeding  helpe,  the  current  of  the  river  being  exceeding  great,  and
great  current ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^ being"  not  Well  acquainted

with  that  occupation,  it  would  have  beene  impossible  for
us  to  have  gotten  up  the  river  so  against  the  streame.
When  I  perceived  that  they  understood  mee  in  all  things,
and  that  I  likewise  understoode  them,  I  thought  good
to  try  by  some  way  or  other  to  make  a  good  entrance
to  find  some  good  issue  to  obtaine  my  desire :  And  I
caused  certaine  crosses  to  be  made  of  certaine  small  sticks
and  paper,  and  among  others  when  I  gave  any  thing  I
gave  them  these  as  things  of  most  price  and  kissed  them,
making  signes  unto  them  that  they  should  honour  them
and  make  great  account  of  them,  and  that  they  should
weare  them  at  their  necks :  giving  them  to  understand
that  this  signe  was  from  heaven,  and  they  tooke  them
and  kissed  them,  and  lifted  them  up  aloft,  and  seemed
greatly  to  rejoyce  thereat  when  they  did  so,  and  sometime
I  tooke  them  into  my  boate,  shewing  them  great  good
will,  and  sometime  I  gave  them  of  those  trifles  which  I
caried  with  me.  And  at  length  the  matter  grew  to  such
issue,  that  I  had  not  paper  and  stickes  ynough  to  make
crosses.  In  this  maner  that  day  I  was  very  well  accom-
panied, untill  that  when  night  approched  I  sought  to
lanch  out  into  the  river,  and  went  to  ride  in  the
middest  of  the  streame,  and  they  came  to  aske  leave
of  me  to  depart,  saying  that  they  would  returne  the
next  day  with  victuals  to  visite  me,  and  so  by  litle
and  little  they  departed,  so  that  there  stayed  not  above
fiftie  which  made  fires  over  against  us,  and  stayed  there
al  night  calling  us,  and  before  the  day  was  perfectly
broken,  they  leapt  into  the  water  and  swamme  unto
us  asking  for  the  rope,  and  we  gave  it  them  with  a
good  will,  thanking  God for the  good  provision  which

FERNANDO ALAKCHON  a.d.

1540.

hee  gave  us  to  go  up  the  river :  for  the  Indians  were
so  many,  that  if  they  had  gone  about  to  let  our  passage,
although  we  had  bene  many  more  then  wee  were,  they
might  have  done  it.

'to'

Chap.  3.

One  of  the  Indians  understanding  the  language  of  the
interpreter,  asketh  many  questions  of  the  originall
of  the  Spaniards,  he  telleth  him  that  their  Captaine
is  the  child  of  the  Sunne,  and  that  he  was  sent  of
the  Sunne  unto  them,  and  they  would  have  received
him  for  their  king.  They  take  this  Indian  into
their  boat,  and  of  him  they  have  many  informations
of  that  countrey.

IN  this  maner  we  sailed  until  Tuesday  at  night,
going  as  we  were  wont,  causing  mine  interpreter
to  speak  unto  the  people  to  see  if  peradventure  any
of  them  could  understand  him,  I  perceived  that  one  [III,  429.]
answered  him,  whereupon  I  caused  the  boates  to  be
stayed,  and  called  him,  which  hee  understoode,  charging
mine  interpreter  that  hee  should  not  speake  nor  answere
him  any  thing  else,  but  onely  that  which  I  said  unto  A  wise  devise.
him :  and  I  saw  as  I  stood  still  that  that  Indian  began
to  speake  to  the  people  with  great  furie :  whereupon  all
of  them  beganne  to  drawe  together,  and  mine  interpreter
understood,  that  he  which  came  to  the  boate  sayd  unto
them,  that  he  desired  to  knowe  what  nation  we  were,
and  whence  wee  came,  and  whither  we  came  out  of
the  water,  or  out  of  the  earth,  or  from  heaven :  And
at  this  speech  an  infinite  number  of  people  came  together,
which  marvailed  to  see  mee  speake :  and  this  Indian
turned  on  this  side  and  on  that  side  to  speake  unto
them  in  another  language  which  mine  interpreter  under-
stood not.  Whereas  he  asked  me  what  we  were,  I
answered  that  we  were  Christians,  and  that  we  came  from
farre  to  see  them  :  and  answering  to  the  question,  who
had  sent  me,  I  said,  I  was  sent  by  the  Sunne,  pointing
unto  him  by  signes  as  at  the  first,  because  they  should
IX  289  T

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

not  take  mee  in  a  lye.  He  beganne  againe  to  aske
mee,  how  the  Sunne  had  sent  me,  seeing  hee  went
aloft  in  the  skie  and  never  stoode  still,  and  seeing
these  many  yeeres  neither  he  nor  their  olde  men  had
ever  seene  such  as  we  were,  of  whome  they  ever  had
any  kind  of  knowledge,  and  that  the  Sunne  till  that
houre  had  never  sent  any  other.  I  answered  him  that
it  was  true  that  the  Sunne  made  his  course  aloft  in
the  skie,  and  did  never  stand  still,  yet  neverthelesse
that  they  might  well  perceive  that  at  his  going  downe
and  rising  in  the  morning  hee  came  neere  unto  the
earth,  where  his  dwelling  was,  and  that  they  ever  sawe
him  come  out  of  one  place,  and  that  hee  had  made
mee  in  that  land  and  countrey  from  whence  hee  came,
like  as  hee  had  made  many  others  which  hee  sent  into
other  partes,  and  that  nowe  hee  had  sent  me  to  visite
and  view  the  same  river,  and  the  people  that  dwelt  neere
the  same,  that  I  should  speake  unto  them,  and  shoulde
joyne  with  them  in  friendshippe,  and  should  give  them
things  which  they  had  not,  and  that  I  should  charge  them
that  they  should  not  make  warre  one  against  another.
Whereunto  he  answered,  that  I  should  tell  him  the
cause  why  the  Sunne  had  not  sent  mee  no  sooner  to
pacifie  the  warres  which  had  continued  a  long  time  among
them,  wherein  many  had  beene  slaine.  I  tolde  him  the
cause  hereof  was,  because  at  that  time  I  was  but  a  child.
Then  he  asked  the  interpreter  whether  wee  tooke  him
with  us  perforce  having  taken  him  in  the  war,  or  whether
he  came  with  us  of  his  own  accord.  He  answered  him
that  he  was  with  us  of  his  owne  accord,  and  was  very
wel  appaid  of  our  company.  He  returned  to  enquire,
why  we  brought  none  save  him  onely  that  understood
us,  and  wherefore  wee  understood  not  all  other  men,
seeing  we  were  the  children  of  the  Sunne :  he  answered,
that  the  Sunne  also  had  begotten  him,  and  given  him  a
language  to  understand  him,  and  me,  and  others :  that
the  Sunne  knew  well  that  they  dwelt  there,  but  that
because he had many other businesses, and because

290

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.
I  was  but  yong  hee  sent  me  no  sooner.  And  he
turning  unto  me  sayd  suddenly:  Comest  thou  therefore
hither  to  bee  our  Lord,  and  that  wee  should  serve
thee  ?  I  supposing  that  I  should  not  please  him  if  I
should  have  said  yea,  answered  him,  not  to  be  their
Lord,  but  rather  to  be  their  brother,  and  to  give  them
such  things  as  I  had.  He  asked  me,  whether  the  Sunne
had  begotten  me  as  he  had  begotten  others,  and  whether
I  was  his  kinsman  or  his  sonne  :  I  answered  him  that
I  was  his  Sonne.  He  proceeded  to  aske  me  whether
the  rest  that  were  with  me  were  also  the  children  of  the
Sunne,  I  answered  him  no,  but  that  they  were  borne
all  with  me  in  one  countrey,  where  I  was  brought  up.
Then  he  cryed  out  with  a  loud  voyce  and  sayd,  seeing
thou  doest  us  so  much  good,  and  wilt  not  have  us  to
make  warre,  and  art  the  child  of  the  Sunne,  wee  will
all  receive  thee  for  our  Lord,  and  alwayes  serve  thee,
therefore  wee  pray  thee  that  thou  wilt  not  depart  hence
nor  leave  us  :  and  suddenly  hee  turned  to  the  people,
and  beganne  to  tell  them,  that  I  was  the  child  of  the
Sunne,  and  that  therefore  they  should  all  chuse  me  for
their  Lord.  Those  Indians  hearing  this,  were  astonied
beyond  measure,  and  came  neerer  still  more  and  more
to  behold  me.  That  Indian  also  asked  mee  other
questions,  which  to  avoyd  tediousnesse  I  doe  not  recite :
and  in  this  wise  we  passed  the  day,  and  seeing  the  night
approch,  I  began  by  all  meanes  I  could  devise  to  get
this  fellow  into  our  boat  with  us  :  and  he  refusing  to
goe  with  us,  the  interpreter  told  him  that  wee  would
put  him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  upon  this
condition  hee  entred  into  our  boate,  and  there  I  made
very  much  of  him,  and  gave  him  the  best  entertayne-
ment  I  could,  putting  him  alwayes  in  securitie,  and  when
I  judged  him  to  be  out  of  all  suspition,  I  thought  it
good  to  aske  him  somewhat  of  that  countrey.  And  among
the  first  things  that  I  asked  him  this  was  one,  whether
hee  had  ever  seene  any  men  like  us,  or  had  heard  any
report  of  them. Hee  answered  mee  no,  saving  that  hee

291

A.D.

1540.

Newes  of
bearded  and
white  men.

[III.  430.]

The  Sunne
worshipped  as
God.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

had  sometime  hearde  of  olde  men,  that  very  farre  from
that  Countrey  there  were  other  white  men,  and  with
beardes  like  us,  and  that  hee  knewe  nothing  else.  I
asked  him  also  whether  hee  knewe  a  place  called  Cevola,
and  a  River  called  Totonteac,  and  hee  answered  mee
no.  Whereupon  perceiving  that  hee  coulde  not  give
mee  any  knowledge  of  Francis  Vazquez  nor  of  his
company,  I  determined  to  aske  him  other  things  of  that
countrey,  and  of  their  maner  of  life  :  and  beganne  to
enquire  of  him,  whether  they  helde  that  there  was  one
God,  creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  or  that  they  worshipped
any  other  Idol.  And  hee  answered  mee  no :  but  that
they  esteemed  and  reverenced  the  Sunne  above  all  other
things,  because  it  warmed  them  and  made  their  croppes
to  growe:  and  that  of  all  things  which  they  did  eate,
they  cast  a  little  up  into  the  ayre  unto  him.  I  asked
him  next  whether  they  had  any  Lorde,  and  hee  sayde
no :  but  that  they  knewe  well  that  there  was  a  great
Lorde,  but  they  knewe  not  well  which  way  hee  dwelt.
And  I  tolde  him  that  hee  was  in  heaven,  and  that  hee
was  called  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  went  no  farther  in  divinitie
with  him.  I  asked  him  whether  they  had  any  warre,
and  for  what  occasion.  Hee  answered  that  they  had
warre  and  that  very  great,  and  upon  exceeding  small
occasions  :  for  when  they  had  no  cause  to  make  warre,
they  assembled  together,  and  some  of  them  sayd,  let
us  goe  to  make  warre  in  such  a  place,  and  then  all  of
them  set  forward  with  their  weapons.  I  asked  them
who  commanded  the  armie  :  he  answered  the  eldest  and
most  valiant,  and  that  when  they  sayd  they  should
proceede  no  farther,  that  suddenly  they  retired  from
the  warre.  I  prayed  him  to  tell  me  what  they  did  with
those  men  which  they  killed  in  battell :  he  answered  me
that  they  tooke  out  the  hearts  of  some  of  them,  and
eat  them,  and  others  they  burned  ;  and  he  added,  that
if  it  had  not  bene  for  my  comming,  they  should  have
bin  now  at  warre :  and  because  I  commanded  them
that they should not war,  and that they  should cease

292

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

from  armes,  therefore  as  long  as  I  should  not  com-
mand them  to  take  armes,  they  would  not  begin  to
wage  warre  against  others,  &  they  said  among  them-
selves, that  seeing  I  was  come  unto  them,  they  had
given  over  their  intention  of  making  warre,  &  that
they  had  a  good  mind  to  live  in  peace.  He  complained
of  certaine  people  which  dwelt  behind  in  a  mountaine  Certalnewar-
which  made  great  war  upon  them,  and  slew  many  of  "J^^  P^'^P  ^  ^'
them  :  I  answered  him,  that  from  henceforward  they  ^^^j^^^
should  not  need  to  feare  any  more,  because  1  had
commanded  them  to  be  quiet,  &  if  they  would  not  obey
my  commandement,  I  would  chasten  them  and  kill  them.
He  enquired  of  me  how  I  could  kill  them  seeing  we
were  so  few,  and  they  so  many  in  number.  And  because
it  was  now  late  and  that  I  saw  by  this  time  he  was
weary  to  stay  any  longer  with  me,  I  let  him  goe  out
of  my  boat,  and  therewith  I  dismissed  him  very  well
content.

Chap.  4.

Of  Naguachato  and  other  chiefe  men  of  those  Indians
they  receive  great  store  of  victuals,  they  cause  them
to  set  up  a  crosse  in  their  countreys,  and  hee  teacheth
them  to  worship  it.  They  have  newes  of  many
people,  of  their  divers  languages,  and  customes  in
matrimony,  how  they  punish  adultery,  of  their
opinions  concerning  the  dead,  and  of  the  sicknesses
which  they  are  subject  unto.

THe  next  day  betimes  in  the  morning  came  the
chiefe  man  among  them  called  Naguachato,  and
wished  me  to  come  on  land  because  he  had  great  store
of  victuals  to  give  me.  And  because  I  saw  my  selfe
in  securitie  I  did  so  without  doubting  ;  and  incontinently
an  olde  man  came  with  rols  of  that  Maiz,  and  certaine
litle  gourds,  and  calling  me  with  a  loud  voyce  and  using
many  gestures  with  his  body  and  armes,  came  neere
unto  me,  and  causing  me  to  turne  me  unto  that  people,
and hee himselfe also turning unto them sayd unto

293

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

them,  Sagueyca,  and  all  the  people  answered  with  a  great
voyce,  Huj  and  hee  ofFred  to  the  Sunne  a  little  of  every
thing  that  he  had  there,  and  likewise  a  little  more  unto
me  (although  afterward  he  gave  me  all  the  rest)  and
did  the  like  to  all  that  were  with  me  :  &  calling  out
mine  interpreter,  by  meanes  of  him  I  gave  them  thanks,
telling  them  that  because  my  boats  were  litle  I  had
not  brought  many  things  to  give  them  in  exchange,
but  that  I  would  come  againe  another  time  and  bring
them,  and  that  if  they  would  go  with  me  in  my  boates
unto  my  ships  which  I  had  beneath  at  the  rivers  mouth,
I  would  give  them  many  things.  They  answered  that
they  would  do  so,  being  very  glad  in  countenance.  Here
by  the  helpe  of  mine  interpreter  I  sought  to  instruct
them  what  the  signe  of  the  crosse  meant,  and  willed
them  to  bring  me  a  piece  of  timber,  wherof  I  caused  a
great  crosse  to  be  made,  and  commanded  al  those  that
were  with  mee  that  when  it  was  made  they  should
worship  it,  and  beseech  the  Lord  to  grant  his  grace
that  that  so  great  a  people  might  come  to  the  know-
ledge of  his  holy  Catholike  faith :  and  this  done  I  told
them  by  mine  interpreter  that  I  left  them  that  signe,
in  token  that  I  tooke  them  for  my  brethren,  and  that
they  should  keepe  it  for  me  carefully  untill  I  returned,
and  that  every  morning  at  the  Sunne  rising  they  should
kneele  before  it.  And  they  tooke  it  incontinently,  &
without  suffring  it  to  touch  the  ground  they  carried  it
to  set  it  up  in  the  middest  of  their  houses,  where  all
of  them  might  beholde  it ;  and  I  willed  them  alwayes  to
worshippe  it  because  it  would  preserve  them  from  evill.
They  asked  me  how  deep  they  should  set  it  in  the
[III.  431.]  ground,  &  I  shewed  them.  Great  store  of  people  fol-
These  people  lowed  the  same,  and  they  that  stayed  behinde  inquired
^^^S'J^^h^^-  of  mee,  how  they  should  joyne  their  hands,  and  how
the  Christian  ^^1  should  kneele  to  worship  the  same  ;  and  they
faith.  seemed  to  have  great  desire  to  learne  it. This  done,  I

tooke that  chiefe  man of  the Countrey, and going  to
our  boates with him, I followed my  journey up the

294

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

River,  and  all  the  company  on  both  sides  of  the  shoare

accompanied me with great good will,  and served me

in drawing of  our boates,  and in hailing us off  the

sands,  whereupon we  often  fel : for  in  many  places  we  ^^^  '■^'^^''  ^'"^

found the river  so  shoald, that  we had no water for ffPjf"ir

'  J, , full  of  shelf es.

our  boat. As  wee  thus  went  on  our  way,  some  or  the
Indians  which I  had  left  behind me,  came  after us  to
pray  mee  that I would throughly instruct them, how
they  should  joyne  their  hands  in  the  worshipping  of  the
crosse  : others shewed  me  whether they were  well  set
in such  & such sort, so  that  they  would not  let me
be  quiet. Neere unto the other  side  of  the  river  was
greater store of people, which called unto me very
often,  that  I  would  receive  the  victuals  which  they  had
brought  me. And  because  I  perceived  that  one  envied
the  other,  because  I  would  not  leave  them  discontented,
I did  so. And  here  came  before  me  another  old  man
like unto the former with the like ceremonyes &  Another  olde
offrings  :  and  I sought to learne something  of  him  as  "^'^^'
I had done of  the other. This man said  likewise to
the  rest  of  the  people.  This  is our  lord. Now  you  see  '^^^'^''  ^^'^^■f-
how  long  apo  our  ancesters  told  us,  that  there  were  bearded  ^^!\^°r ^^
& white people in the  world, and we  laughed them  hearded  and
to  scorne. I  which  am  old  and  the  rest  which  are  here,  white  men  in
have never scene any such people as these. And  the  world.
if  you  wil not  beleeve me,  behold these  people  which
be in this river : let us give them therefore meate,
seeing  they give us of  their  victuals: let  us  willingly
serve  this  lord,  which  wisheth  us  so  well,  and  forbiddeth
us  to  make  warre,  and imbraceth  all of  us : and they
have  mouth,  handes and eyes as  we  have,  and  speake
as  we  doe. 1 gave these likewise  another  crosse  as  I
had  done  to  the  others  beneath,  and  said  unto  them  the
selfe  same  words :  which  they  listened  unto  with  a  better
will,  &  used  greater  diligence  to  learne  that  which  I  said.
Afterward as I passed farther up the river,  I found
another  people,  whom  mine interpreter understood  not  Another
a  whit :  wherefore I shewed  them  by  signes  the  selfe-  ^^t^°^'

29s

A.D.

1540.

People  of  2 '2,.
languages
dwelling  along
this  river.

Acuco  as  Go-
mara  writetk
is  on  a  strong
mountaine.

Great  houses
of  stone.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

same  ceremonies  of  worshipping  the  crosse,  which  I  had
taught  the  rest.  And  that  principal  old  man  which  I
tooke  with  me,  told  me  that  farther  up  the  river  I  should
find  people  which  would  understand  mine  interpreter :
and  being  now  late,  some  of  those  men  called  me  to
give  me  victuals,  and  did  in  all  poynts  as  the  others
had  done,  dauncing  and  playing  to  shew  me  pleasure.  I
desired  to  know  what  people  lived  on  the  banks  of  this
river :  and  1  understood  by  this  man  that  it  was  in-
habited by  23  languages,  and  these  were  bordering  upon
the  river,  besides  others  not  farre  off,  and  that  there
were  besides  these  23.  languages,  other  people  also  which
hee  knewe  not,  above  the  river.  I  asked  him  whether
every  people  were  living  in  one  towne  together :  and  he
answered  me,  No :  but  that  they  had  many  houses
standing  scattered  in  the  fieldes,  and  that  every  people
had  their  Countrey  severall  and  distinguished,  and  that
in  every  habitation  there  were  great  store  of  people.
He  shewed  me  a  towne  which  was  in  a  mountaine,
and  told  me  that  there  was  there  great  store  of  people
of  bad  conditions,  which  made  continual  warre  upon
them  :  which  being  without  a  governour,  and  dwelling
in  that  desert  place,  where  small  store  of  Maiz  groweth,
came  downe  into  the  playne  to  buy  it  in  trucke  of  Deeres
skinnes,  wherewith  they  were  apparelled  with  long  gar-
ments, which  they  did  cutte  with  rasors,  and  sewed  with
needles  made  of  Deeres  bones :  and  that  they  had  great
houses  of  stone.  I  asked  them  whether  there  were  any
there  of  that  Countrey ;  and  I  found  one  woman  which
ware  a  garment  like  a  little  Mantle,  which  clad  her  from
the  waste  downe  to  the  ground,  of  a  Deeres  skin  well
dressed.  Then  I  asked  him  whether  the  people  which
dwelt  on  the  rivers  side,  dwelt  alwayes  there,  or  els
sometime  went  to  dwell  in  some  other  place:  he  answered
mee,  that  in  the  summer  season  they  aboade  there,  and
sowed  there ;  and  after  they  had  gathered  in  their  croppe
they  went  their  way,  and  dwelt  in  other  houses  which
they  had  at  the  foote  of  the mountaine  farre  from  the

296

FERNANDO  ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

river. And  hee  shewed  me  by  signes that the  houses
were  of  wood  compassed  with  earth  without,  and  I  under-
stood that  they  made  a  round  house  wherein the men  Rou7id  houses.
and  women lived all tog-ether. I asked him  whether
their  women  were  common  or  no :  he  tolde  me  no,  and
that  hee  which  was  married,  was  to  have  but  one  wife
only. I  desired  to  know  what  order  they  kept  in  marying:
and he told me,  that  if  any  man had a daughter to
marry,  he  went  where  the  people  kept,  and  said,  I  have
a daughter to marry : is  there any  man  here  that  wil
have  her  ? And  if  there  were  any  that  would  have  her,
he  answered  that  he  would  have  her :  and  so  the  mariage
was made. And that the father  of  him  which  would
have  her,  brought  some  thing  to  give  the  yong  woman;
and  from  that  houre  forward  the  mariage  was  taken  to
be  finished,  and  that  they  sang  &  danced :  and  that  when  Dancing  and
night  came,  the  parents  tooke them,  and  left them  to-  "'^S^'^^S  ^f  ^^-
gether  in  a  place  where  no  body  might  see  them. And  ^^^Lf^
I  learned  that  brethren,  and  sisters,  and  kinsfolks  married
not  together :  and  that  maydes  before  they  were  married
conversed  not  with  men,  nor  talked  not  with  them,  but
kept  at  home  at  their houses  and  in  their possessions,  [III.  432.]
and  wrought :  and  that  if  by  chance  any  one  had  com-
pany with men before she were maried,  her husband
forsooke  her,  and  went  away  into  other  Countreyes :  and
that  those  women  which  fell  into  this  fault,  were  accompted
naughty  packs. And  that  if  after  they  were  maried,  any
man  were  taken  in  adultery  with another  woman,  they
put  him  to  death  : and  that  no  man might  have  more
then  one  wife,  but  very  secretly. They  tolde  mee  that
they  burned those  which  dyed : and  such  as  remayned  They  bume
widowes,  stayed halfe  a  yeere,  or  a  whole  yeere  before  ^'^^^^  '^^'^'^•
they  married. I  desired  to  know  what  they  thought  of
such  as  were dead. Hee told me that they  went to
another  world,  but that they had neither punishment
nor  glory. The  greatest  sicknesse  that  this  people  dye
of,  is  vomiting  of  blood  by  the  mouth  :  and  they  have
Physicions  which  cure  them  with  charmes and blowing

297

A.D.

1540.

Pipes  to  dr'inke
Tabacco  with.

Maiz,  gourds,
Mill.

Grindestones,
earthenpots,
good  fish.

This  river
overfioweth  his
banks  at  cer-
tains seasons.

Colde  and

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

which  they  make.  The  apparell  of  these  people  were
like  the  former  :  they  carried  their  pipes  with  them  to
perfume  themselves,  like  as  the  people  of  New  Spaine
use  Tabacco.  I  inquired  whether  they  had  any  governour,
and  found  that  they  had  none,  but  that  every  family
had  their  severall  governour.  These  people  have  besides
their  Maiz  certaine  gourds,  and  another  corne  like  unto
Mill :  they  have  grindstones  &  earthen  pots,  wherein
they  boyle  those  gourds,  and  fish  of  the  river,  which
are  very  good.  My  interpreter  could  goe  no  farther  then
this  place :  for  he  said  that  those  which  we  should  find
farther  on  our  way,  were  their  enemies,  and  therefore
I  sent  him  backe  very  well  contented.  Not  long  after
I  espied  many  Indians  to  come  crying  with  a  loude
voice,  and  running  after  me.  I  stayed  to  know  what
they  would  have ;  and  they  told  me  that  they  had  set
up  the  crosse  which  I  had  given  them,  in  the  midst  of
their  dwellings  as  I  had  appointed,  but  that  I  was  to
wit,  that  when  the  river  did  overflow,  it  was  wont  to
reach  to  that  place,  therefore  they  prayed  mee  to  give  them
leave  to  remove  it,  and  to  set  it  in  another  place  where
the  river  could  not  come  at  it,  nor  carry  it  away:  which
I  granted  them.

Chap. 5.

Of  an  Indian  of  that  countrey  they  have  relation  of
the  state  of  Cevola,  and  of  the  conditions  and
customes  of  these  people,  and  of  their  governour:
and  likewise  of  the  countreys  not  farre  distant  from
thence,  whereof  one  was  called  Quicoma,  and  the
other  Coama :  of  the  people  of  Quicoma,  and  of
the  other  Indians  not  farre  distant  they  receive
courtesie.

THus  sayling  I  came  where  were  many  Indians,  and
another  interpreter,  which  I  caused  to  come  with
me  in  my  boat.  And  because  it  was  cold,  &  my
people  were  wet,  I  leapt  on  shore,  and  commanded  a
fire to be made,  and as we stood thus  warming our

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

selves,  an  Indian  came  and  strooke  me  on  the  arme,
pointing  with  his  finger  to  a  wood  out  of  which  I
saw  two  companies  of  men  come  w'^  their  weapons,  &
he  told  me  that  they  came  to  set  upon  us :  &  because
I  meant  not  to  fall  out  with  any  of  them,  I  retired  my
company  into  our  boats,  &  the  Indians  which  were  with
me  swam  into  the  water,  and  saved  themselves  on  the
other  side  of  the  river.  In  the  meane  season  I  inquired
of  that  Indian  which  I  had  with  me,  what  people  they
were  that  came  out  of  ye  wood :  and  he  told  me  that
they  were  their  enemies,  and  therefore  these  others  at
their  approch  without  saying  any  word  leapt  into  the
water :  and  did  so,  because  they  meant  to  turne  backe
againe,  being  without  weapons,  because  they  brought
none  with  them,  because  they  understood  my  wil  &
pleasure,  that  they  should  cary  none.  I  inquired  the
same  things  of  this  interpreter  which  I  had  done  of  the
other  of  the  things  of  that  countrey,  because  I  under-
stood that  among  some  people  one  man  used  to  have
many  wives,  and  among  others  but  one.  Now  I  under-
stood by  him,  that  he  had  bin  at  Cevola,  and  that  it
was  a  moneths  journey  from  his  country,  and  that  from
that  place  by  a  path  that  went  along  that  river  a  man  Cevola  40
might  easily  travel  thither  in  xl.  dales,  and  that  the  dpes journey
occasion  that  moved  him  to  go  thither,  was  only  to  see  -^^^  ^^-^^^  ^
Cevola,  because  it  was  a  great  thing,  &  had  very  hie
houses  of  stone  of  3.  or  4.  lofts,  and  windowes  on  ech
side ;  that  the  houses  were  compassed  about  with  a  wall
conteining  the  height  of  a  man  &  an  halfe,  and  that  aloft
&  beneath  they  were  inhabited  with  people,  and  that  they
used  the  same  weapons,  that  others  used,  which  we  had
seene,  that  is  to  say,  bowes  &  arrowes,  maces,  staves
&  bucklers :  and  that  they  had  one  governor,  &  that
they  were  apparelled  with  mantles,  and  with  oxe-hides,  &
that  their  mantles  had  a  painting  about  them,  and  that
their  governour  ware  a  long  shirt  very  fine  girded  unto
him,  and  over  the  same  divers  mantles :  and  that  the
women ware very  long garments,  and that they  were

299

A.D.

1540.

Turqueses  in
Cevola.

[III.  433.]

This  was  the
Negro  that
went  with
Frier  Marco
de  Niza.

Quicoma.
Coatna.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

white,  and  went  all  covered :  and  that  every  day  many
Indians  wayted  at  the  gate  of  their  governor  to  serve
him,  &  that  they  did  weare  many  Azure  or  blew  stones,
which  were  digged  out  of  a  rocke  of  stone,  and  that  they  had
but  one  wife,  with  whom  they  were  maried,  and  that  when
their  governors  died,  all  the  goods  that  they  had  were  buried
with  them.  And  likewise  all  the  while  they  eate,  many
of  their  men  waite  at  their  table  to  court  them,  and  see
them  eate,  and  they  eate  with  napkins,  and  that  they
have  bathes.  On  thursday  morning  at  breake  of  day
the  Indians  came  with  the  like  cry  to  the  banke  of  the
river,  and  with  greater  desire  to  serve  us,  bringing  me
meat  to  eat,  and  making  me  the  like  good  cheere,
which  the  others  had  done  unto  me,  having  understood
what  I  was  :  &  I  gave  them  crosses,  with  the  self
same  order  which  I  did  unto  the  former.  And  going
farther  up  the  river,  I  came  to  a  country  where  I
found  better  government  :  for  the  inhabitants  are  wholy
obedient  unto  one  only.  But  returning  againe  to  con-
ferre  with  mine  interpreter  touching  the  dwellings  of
those  of  Cevola,  he  tolde  me,  that  the  lord  of  that
countrey  had  a  dog  like  that  which  I  caried  with  me.
Afterward  when  I  called  for  dinner,  this  interpreter  saw
certaine  dishes  caried  in  the  first  and  later  service,
whereupon  he  told  me  that  the  lord  of  Cevola  had
also  such  as  those  were,  but  that  they  were  greene,  and
that  none  other  had  of  them  saving  their  governour,
and  that  they  were  4.  which  he  had  gotten  together
with  that  dogge,  and  other  things,  of  a  blacke  man
which  had  a  beard,  but  that  he  knew  not  from  what
quarter  he  came  thither,  and  that  the  king  caused  him
afterward  to  be  killed,  as  he  heard  say.  I  asked  him
whether  he  knew  of  any  towne  that  was  neere  unto
that  place  :  he  tolde  me  that  above  the  river  he  knew
some,  &  that  among  the  rest  there  was  a  lord  of  a
towne  called  Quicoma,  and  another  of  a  towne  called
Coama  :  and  that  they  had  great  store  of  people  under
them. And  after  he  had  given  me  this  information,  he

300

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.
craved  leave  of  me  to  returne  unto  his  companions.
From  hence  I  began  againe  to  set  saile,  and  within  a
dayes  sayling  I  found  a  towne  dispeopled :  where  assoone
as  I  was  entredj  by  chance  there  arrived  there  500.
Indians  with  their  bowes  &  arrowes,  and  with  them
was  that  principall  Indian  called  Naguachato,  which  I
had  left  behind,  and  brought  with  them  certaine  conies  Conm  and
&  yucas  :  and  after  I  had  friendly  interteined  them  all,  W^^-
departing  from  them,  I  gave  them  license  to  returne  to
their  houses.  As  I  passed  further  by  the  desert,  I  came
to  certain  cotages,  out  of  which  much  people  came  to-
ward me  with  an  old  man  before  them,  crying  in  a
language  which  mine  interpreter  wel  understood,  and
he  said  unto  those  men  :  Brethren,  you  see  here  that
lord ;  let  us  give  him  such  as  we  have,  seeing  he  dooth
us  pleasure,  and  hath  passed  through  so  many  discour-
teous people,  to  come  to  visit  us.  And  having  thus
said,  he  offred  to  the  Sunne,  and  then  to  me  in  like
sort  as  the  rest  had  done.  These  had  certaine  great
bags  &  well  made  of  the  skins  of  fishes  called  Sea-
bremes.  And  I  understood  that  this  was  a  towne  be-
longing unto  the  lord  of  Quicoma,  which  people  came
thither  onely  to  gather  the  fruit  of  their  harvest  in
summer  ;  and  among  them  I  found  one  which  under-
stood mine  interpreter  very  well  :  whereupon  very  easily
I  gave  them  the  like  instruction  of  the  crosse  which  I  had
given  to  others  behind.  These  people  had  cotton,  but  Cotton.
they  were  not  very  carefuU  to  use  the  same  :  because
there  was  none  among  them  that  knew  the  arte  of  weav-
ing, &  to  make  apparel  thereof.  They  asked  me  how
they  should  set  up  their  crosse  when  they  were  come  to
their  dwelling  which  was  in  the  mountaine,  and  whether  A  mountaine.
it  were  best  to  make  an  house  about  it,  that  it  might  not
be  wet,  &  whether  they  should  hang  any  thing  upon  the
armes  thereof.  I  said  no  ;  &  that  it  sufficed  to  set  it  in
a  place  where  it  might  be  scene  of  all  men,  until  I  re-
turned :  and  lest  peradventure  any  men  of  warre  should
come  that  way,  they  ofFred  mee  more  men  to  goe  with

301

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

me,  saying  that  they  were  naughty  men  which  I  should
finde  above  ;  but  I  would  have  none  :  neverthelesse  20.
of  them  went  with  me,  which  when  I  drew  neere  unto
those  which  were  their  enemies,  they  warned  mee
thereof:  and  I  found  their  centinels  set  upon  their
guarde  on  their  borders.  On  Saturday  morning  I
found  a  great  squadron  of  people  sitting  under  an  ex-
ceeding great  arbour,  &  another  part  of  them  without :
and  when  I  saw  that  they  rose  not  up,  I  passed  along
on  my  voyage  :  when  they  beheld  this,  an  old  man
rose  up  which  said  unto  me,  Sir,  why  doe  you  not
receive  victuals  to  eate  of  us,  seeing  you  have  taken
food  of  others  ?  I  answered,  that  I  tooke  nothing  but
that  which  was  given  me,  &  that  I  went  to  none  but
to  such  as  requested  me.  Here  without  any  stay  they
brought  me  victuals,  saying  unto  me,  that  because  I
entred  not  into  their  houses,  and  stayed  all  day  and  all
night  in  the  river,  and  because  I  was  the  sonne  of  the
Sunne,  all  men  were  to  receive  me  for  their  lord.  I
made  them  signes  to  sit  down,  and  called  that  old  man
which  mine  interpreter  understood,  and  asked  him  whose
that  countrey  was,  and  whether  the  lord  thereof  were
there,  he  said,  yea :  and  1  called  him  to  me ;  and  when
he  was  come,  I  imbraced  him,  shewing  him  great  love  :
&  when  I  saw  that  all  of  them  tooke  great  pleasure  at
the  friendly  interteinment  which  I  gave  him,  I  put  a
shirt  upon  him,  and  gave  him  other  trifles,  and  willed
mine  interpreter  to  use  the  like  speaches  to  that  lord
which  he  had  done  to  the  rest  ;  and  that  done,  I  gave
him  a  crosse,  which  he  received  with  a  very  good  wil,
as  the  others  did :  and  this  lord  went  a  great  way  with
me,  untill  I  was  called  unto  from  the  other  side  of
the  river,  where  the  former  old  man  stood  with  much
people  :  to  whom  I  gave  another  crosse,  using  the  like
speach  to  them  which  I  had  unto  the  rest,  to  wit,  how
they  should  use  it.  Then  following  my  way,  I  mette
with  another  great  company  of  people,  with  whom  came
that  very  same  olde  man  whom  mine  interpreter  under-

302

FERNANDO ALARCHON

stood  ;  and  when  I  saw  their  lord  which  he  shewed
unto  me,  I  prayed  him  to  come  with  me  into  my  boat,
which  he  did  very  wiUingly,  and  so  I  went  still  up  the
river,  and  the  olde  man  came  and  shewed  me  who
were  the  chiefe  lords  :  and  I  spake  unto  them  alwayes
with  great  courtesie,  &  all  of  them  shewed  that  they
rejoyced  much  thereat,  &  spake  very  wel  of  my  com-
ming  thither.  At  night  I  withdrew  my  selfe  into  the
midst  of  the  river,  &  asked  him  many  things  con-
cerning that  country :  and  I  found  him  as  willing  &
wel  disposed  to  shew  them  me,  as  I  was  desirous  to
know  them.  I  asked  him  of  Cevola :  and  he  told  me
he  had  bin  there,  and  that  it  was  a  goodly  thing,  &
that  the  lord  thereof  was  very  wel  obeyed :  and  that
there  were  other  lords  thereabout,  with  whom  he  was
at  continual  warre.  I  asked  him  whether  they  had
silver  &  gold,  and  he  beholding  certaine  bels,  said  they
had  metal  of  their  colour.  I  inquired  whether  they
made  it  there,  and  he  answered  me  no,  but  that  they
brought  it  from  a  certain  mountaine,  where  an  old
woman  dwelt.  I  demanded  whether  he  had  any  know-
ledge of  a  river  called  Totonteac,  he  answered  me  no,
but  of  another  exceeding  mighty  river,  wherein  there
were  such  huge  Crocodiles,  that  of  their  hides  they
made  bucklers,  and  that  they  worship  the  Sunne  neither
more  nor  lesse  then  those  which  I  had  passed :  and
when  they  offer  unto  him  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  they
say :  Receive  hereof,  for  thou  hast  created  them,  and
that  they  loved  him  much,  because  he  warmed  them ;  and
that  when  he  brake  not  foorth,  they  were  acolde.  Herein
reasoning  with  him,  he  began  somewhat  to  complaine,  say-
ing unto  me,  I  know  not  wherefore  the  Sunne  useth  these
termes  with  us,  because  he  giveth  us  not  clothes,  nor  people
to  spin  nor  to  weave  them,  nor  other  things  which  he
giveth  to  many  other,  and  he  complayned  that  those  of  that
country  would  not  suffer  them  to  come  there,  and  would
not  give  them  of  their  corne.  I  tolde  him  that  I  would
remedie  this,  whereat  he  remayned  very  well  satisfied.

303

A.D.

1540.

[III.  434-]

Cevola  a
goodly  thing.

Gold  and  sil-
ver in  a  moun-
taine neere
Cevola.
A  mighty
river.

This  river
seemeth  to  bee
'Northward  by
the  colde.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

Chap.  6.

They  are  advertised  by  the  Indians,  wherefore  the  lorde
of  Cevola  killed  the  Negro,  which  went  with  Frier
Marco,  and  of  many  other  things  :  And  of  an  old
woman  called  Guatazaca,  which  liveth  in  a  lake  and
eateth  no  food.  The  description  of  a  beast,  of  the
skinne  whereof  they  make  targets.  The  suspition
that  they  conceive  of  them,  that  they  are  of  those
Christians  which  were  scene  at  Cevola,  and  how  they
cunningly  save  themselves.

THe  next  day  which  was  Sunday  before  breake  of  day,
began  their  cry  as  they  were  woont  :  and  this  was
the  cry  of  2.  or  3.  sorts  of  people,  which  had  lyen  all
night  neere  the  rivers  side,  wayting  for  me  :  and  they
tooke  Maiz  &  other  corne  in  their  mouth,  and  sprin-
kled me  therewith,  saying  that  that  was  the  fashion
which  they  used  when  they  sacrificed  unto  the  Sunne  :
afterward  they  gave  me  of  their  victuals  to  eat,  and
among  other  things,  they  gave  me  many  white  peason.
I  gave  them  a  crosse  as  I  had  done  to  the  rest :  and
in  the  meane  season  that  old  man  tolde  them  great
matters  of  my  doing,  and  poynted  me  out  with  his
finger,  saying,  this  is  the  lord,  the  sonne  of  the  Sunne  :
and  they  made  me  to  combe  my  beard,  &  to  set  mine
apparell  handsomely  which  I  ware  upon  my  backe.
And  so  great  was  the  confidence  that  they  had  in  me,
that  all  of  them  told  me  what  things  had  passed,  &
did  passe  among  them,  &  what  good  or  bad  mind  they
bare  one  toward  another.  I  asked  them  wherefore  they
imparted  unto  me  all  their  secrets,  and  that  old  man
answered  mee  :  Thou  art  our  lord,  &  we  ought  to  hide
nothing  from  our  lord.  After  these  things,  following
on  our  way,  I  began  againe  to  inquire  of  him  the  state
of  Cevola,  &  whether  he  knewe  that  those  of  this  coun-
trey  had  ever  scene  people  like  unto  us  :  he  answered
me  no,  saving  one  Negro  which  ware  about  his  legs
&  armes  certain  things  which  did  ring. Your  lordship

304

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

is  to  cal  to  mind  how  this  Negro  which  went  with  frier  The  Negro
Marco  was  wont  to  weare  bels,  &  feathers  on  his  armes  thatwenM^
&  legs,  &  that he  caried  plates of  divers  colours,  and  (j^eNixa shine.
that  it  was  not  much  above  a  yeere  agoe  since  he  came
into  those  parts. I demanded upon what occasion  he
was  killed ;  and  he  answered  me,  That  the  lord  of  Cevola
inquired of  him whether he had other brethren  : he
answered  that  he  had  an  infinite  number,  and  that  they
had  great  store  of  weapons  with them, and that they
were  not  very  farre  from  thence. Which  when  he  had
heard,  many  of  the  chiefe  men  consulted  together,  and
resolved  to  kil  him,  that  he  might  not  give  newes  unto  ^^e  cause
these  his  brethren, where they dwelt, & that  for  ^"^^^  "^IZtLnL
cause  they slew him, and cut  him into many  pieces,  the  Negro  was
which  were divided  among all those  chiefe  lords,  that  slaine.
they  might  know  assuredly  that  he  was  dead  ;  and  also
that  he  had  a  dogge  like  mine,  which  he  likewise  killed
a  great  while  after. I  asked  him  whether  they  of  Cevola
had  any  enemies,  and  he  said  they  had. And  he  reckoned  The;^  of
unto  me 14.  or ic.  lords  which  had  warre  with  them: Cevola  have
and  that  they  had  mantles,  and  bowes  like  those  above  i^^.'^^  ^^^^y"
mentioned :  howbeit  he  told  me  that  I  should  find  going  enemies.
up  the  river a people that  had  no  warre neither  with
their  neighbors,  nor  with  any  other. He  told  me  that
they  had  3.  or  4. sorts  of  trees  bearing  most  excellent
fruite  to  eate  :  and  that  in  a  certaine  lake  dwelt  an  olde  AnoUe woman
woman,  which  was much honoured  and  worshipped  of  '^^'-^^d.  Guatu-
1  11  1  J.  T^ii  u-1- z^c.^  in  a  lake

them  : and  that shee remayned m  a  litle  house  which o-,.^^^/^  ^qj._

was  there,  and that  she  never  did eate  any  thing  :  and  shipped.
that  there  they  made  things  which  did  sound,  and  that  [III.  435.]
many  mantles,  feathers  and  Maiz  were  given  unto  her. Anionic  dEs-
I  asked  what  her  name  was,  and  he  tolde  me  that  she  gfJ^^lL^^t
was called Guatuzaca, and that thereabout  were  many  /^^^^
lords  which  in  their  life  &  death,  used  the  like  orders
which  they  of  Cevola  did,  which  had  their dwelling  in
the  summer with painted mantles, and in the  winter
dwelt  in  houses  of  wood  of  2.  or  3.  lofts  hie  :  and  that
he  had  seene all these things, saving  the  old  woman.
IX  305  u

A.D.

1540.

200.  Ktndes
of  people.

This  might  be
the  crooke
backed  oxe
of  Quifira.

The  sea  side.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

And  when  againe  I  began  to  aske  him  more  questions,  he
would  not  answere  me,  saying  that  he  was  wearie  of  me  :
and  many  of  those  Indians  comming  about  me,  they  said
among  themselves  :  Let  us  marke  him  well,  that  we
may  knowe  him  when  he  commeth  backe  againe.  The
Monday  following,  the  river  was  beset  with  people  like
to  them,  and  I  began  to  request  the  old  man  to  tell  me
what  people  were  in  that  countrey,  which  told  me  he
thought  I  would  soone  forget  them :  and  here  he  reckoned
up  unto  me  a  great  number  of  lords,  and  people  at  the
least  200.  And  discoursing  with  him  of  their  armour,
he  said  that  some  of  them  had  certaine  very  large  targets
of  lether,  above  two  fingers  thicke.  I  asked  him  of
what  beasts  skinne  they  made  them  :  and  he  described
unto  me  a  very  great  beast,  like  unto  an  Oxe,  but
longer  by  a  great  handfull,  with  broad  feete,  the  legs  as
bigge  as  the  thigh  of  a  man,  and  the  head  seven  hand-
fulls  long,  the  forehead  of  three  spannes,  and  the  eyes
bigger  then  ones  fist,  and  the  homes  of  the  length  of
a  mans  leg,  out  of  which  grew  sharpe  poynts,  an  handfull
long,  the  forfeete  and  hinderfeete  above  seven  handfuls
bigge,  with  a  wrethed  tayle,  but  very  great ;  and  holding
up  his  armes  above  his  head,  he  said  the  beast  was
higher  then  that.  After  this  hee  gave  mee  information
of  another  olde  woman  which  dwelt  toward  the  sea  side.
I  spent  this  day  in  giving  crosses  to  those  people  as
I  had  done  unto  the  former.  This  old  man  that  was
with  me  leapt  on  shore,  &  fell  in  conference  with
another  which  that  day  had  often  called  him  ;  and  here
both  of  them  used  many  gestures  in  their  speach,  mooving
their  armes,  and  poynting  at  me.  Therefore  I  sent
mine  interpreter  out,  willing  him  to  drawe  neere  unto
them,  and  listen  what  they  said ;  and  within  a  while  I
called  him,  and  asked  him  whereof  they  talked,  and  he
sayd,  that  he  which  made  those  gestures  said  unto  the
other,  that  in  Cevola  there  were  others  like  unto  us
with  beards,  and  that  they  said  they  were  Christians,  and
that  both  of  them  sayd  that  we  were  all  of  one  company,

306

FERNANDO ALARCHON  ad.

1540.
and  that  It  were a good deede to kill us,  that those  The  lavages
others might have no knowledge of us, lest they  treasons  to  be
might come to doe them harme : and that the old  •''

man  had  answered  him,  this  is  the  sonne  of  the  Sunne,
&  our  lord,  he  doth  us  good,  and  wil  not  enter  into
our  houses,  although  we  request  him  thereunto  :  he  will
take  away  nothing  of  ours,  he  wil  meddle  with  none  of
our  women,  and  that  to  be  short,  he  had  spoken  many
other  things  in  my  commendation  and  favour  :  and  for
all  this  the  other  stedfastly  affirmed  that  we  were  all
one,  and  that  the  old  man  said.  Let  us  goe  unto  him,
and  aske  him  whether  he  be  a  Christian  as  the  other
be,  or  els  the  sonne  of  the  Sunne  :  and  the  old  man
came  unto  me,  and  sayd  :  In  the  countrey  of  Cevola  Certahe
whereof  you  spake  unto  me  doe  other  men  like  unto  ^f,^|-^
you  dwell.  Then  I  began  to  make  as  though  I  wondred,  ^^^^^  f^  "
and  answered  him,  that  it  was  impossible  ;  and  they  Cevola.
assured  me  that  it  was  true,  and  that  two  men  had  scene
them  which  came  from  thence,  which  reported  that  they
had  things  which  did  shoote  fire,  and  swords  as  we  had.
I  asked  them  whether  they  had  scene  them  with  their
owne  eyes  ?  and  they  answered  no ;  but  that  certaine  of
their  companions  had  scene  them.  Then  he  asked  mee
whether  I  were  the  sonne  of  the  Sunne,  I  answered  him
yea.  They  said  that  those  Christians  of  Cevola  said  so
likewise.  And  I  answered  them  that  it  might  well  be.
Then  they  asked  mee  if  those  Christians  of  Cevola  came
to  joyne  themselves  with  me,  whether  I  would  joyne
with  them  :  and  I  answered  them,  that  they  needed  not
to  feare  any  whit  at  all,  for  if  they  were  the  sonnes
of  the  Sunne  as  they  said,  they  must  needes  be  my
brethren,  and  would  use  towards  all  men  the  like  love
and  courtesie  which  I  used  :  whereupon  hereat  they
seemed  to  be  somewhat  satisfied.

[Chap.  7
307

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

Chap.  7.

It  is  tolde  him  that  they  are  ten  dayes  journey  distant
from  Cevola,  and  that  there  be  Christians  there,
which  make  warre  against  the  lords  of  that  countrey.
Of  the  Sodomie  which  those  Indians  use  with  foure
yong  men  appoynted  for  that  service,  which  weare
womens  apparel.  Seeing  they  could  not  send  newes
of  their  being  there  to  them  of  Cevola,  they  went
backe  againe  downe  the  river  to  their  ships.

Cevola  tenne  r  h  ^Hen  I  prayed  them  to  tel  me  how  many  dayes  that
dpes  distani J^ kingdom  of  Cevola,  which  they  spake  of,  was  distant

from  this  place, r  ^  •  ii  111

A  desej-t  of  irom  that  river:  and  that  man  answered,  that  there  was
ten  dayes  jour-  the  space  of  tenne  dayes  journey  without  habitation,
«0'-  and  that  he  made  none  accompt  of  the  rest  of  the  way,

because  there  were  people  to  be  found.  Upon  this
advertisement  I  was  desirous  to  certifie  Captaine  Francis
Vazquez  of  my  being  there,  and  imparted  my  mind
[III.  436.]  with  my  souldiers,  among  whom  I  found  none  that  was
willing  to  goe  thither,  although  I  offered  them  many
rewards  in  your  lordships  name,  onely  one  Negro  slave
though  with  an  evil  wil  offred  himselfe  unto  me  to  go
thither :  but  I  looked  for  the  comming  of  those  two
Indians  which  they  told  me  of,  and  herewithall  we  went
on  our  way  up  the  river  against  the  streame  in  such  sort
as  we  had  done  before.  Here  that  olde  man  shewed
me  as  a  strange  thing  a  sonne  of  his  clad  in  womans
apparel,  exercising  their  office  :  I  asked  him  how  many
there  were  of  these  among  them,  and  he  told  me  there
were  foure  ;  &  that  when  any  of  them  died,  there  was
a  search  made  of  all  the  women  with  child  which  were
in  the  country,  and  that  the  first  sonne  which  was  borne
of  them,  was  appoynted  to  doe  that  duetie  belonging  unto
women,  and  that  the  women  clad  him  in  their  apparell,
saying,  that  seeing  he  was  to  doe  that  which  belonged
to  them,  he  should  weare  their  apparel  :  these  yong  men
may  not  have  carnall  copulation  with  any  woman  :  but
all  the  yong  men  of  the  countrey  which  are  to  marrie,

308

FERNANDO  ALARCHON  ad.

1540.

may  company  with  them.  These  men  receive  no  kind
of  reward  for  this  incestuous  act  of  the  people  of  that
countrey,  because  they  have  libertie  to  take  whatsoever
they  find  in  any  house  for  their  food.  I  saw  likewise
certaine  women  which  lived  dishonestly  among  men  :
and  I  asked  the  old  man  whether  they  were  married,  who
answered  me  noe,  but  they  were  common  women,  which
lived  apart  from  the  married  women.  I  came  at  length
after  these  discourses  to  pray  them  to  send  for  those
Indians,  which  they  said  had  bin  at  Cevola,  &  they  told
me  that  they  were  eight  dayes  journey  distant  from  that
place,  but  that  notwithstanding  there  was  one  among
them  which  was  their  companion  and  which  had  spoken
with  them,  as  he  met  them  on  the  way,  when  they
went  to  see  the  kingdome  of  Cevola,  and  that  they
told  him  that  he  were  not  best  to  goe  any  farther,
for  he  should  find  there  a  fierce  nation  like  us,  and
of  the  same  qualities  and  making,  which  had  fought
much  with  the  people  of  Cevola,  because  they  had  killed
a  Negro  of  their  company,  saying,  Wherefore,  have  yee
killed  him  ?  what  did  he  to  you  }  did  he  take  any  bread
from  you,  or  do  you  any  other  wrong  ?  and  such  like
speach.  And  they  said  moreover,  that  these  people
were  called  Christians,  which  dwelt  in  a  great  house,  &
that  many  of  them  had  oxen  like  those  of  Cevola,  and  Oxen  of
other  litle  blacke  beasts  with  wooll  and  homes,  &  that  <^^^^^^-
some  of  them  had  beasts  which  they  rode  upon,  which
ran  very  swiftly ;  &  that  one  day  before  their  departure,
from  sunne  rising  untill  sunne  setting  these  Christians
were  all  day  in  comming  thither,  &  all  of  them  lodged
in  that  place  where  others  had  lodged,  &  that  these  two
met  with  two  Christians,  which  asked  them  whence  they
were,  &  whether  they  had  fields  sowen  with  corne ;  and
they  told  them  that  they  dwelt  in  a  farre  country,  and
that  they  had  corne,  and  that  then  they  gave  each  of
them  a  litle  cap,  and  they  gave  them  another  to  cary
to  their  other  companions,  which  they  promised  to  do,
&  departed  quickly. When  I  understood  this,  I  spoke

309

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1540.

againe  with  my  company,  to  see  if  any  one  of  them
would  go  thither,  but  I  found  them  unwiUing  as  at
the  first,  and  they  layd  against  me  greater  inconveniences.
Then  I  called  the  old  man  to  see  if  he  would  give  me
any  people  to  goe  with  me,  &  victuals  to  travel  through

A  desert,  that  wildernes,  but  he  laid  before  me  many  inconveni-
ences &  dangers,  which  I  might  incurre  in  that  voyage,
shewing  me  the  danger  that  there  was  in passing  by  a

Cumana.  lord  of  Cumana,  which  threatned  to  make  warre  upon
them,  because  his  people  had  entred  into  the  others
countrey  to  take  a  stagge,  and  that  I  should  not  therefore
depart  thence  without  seeing  him  punished.  And  when
I  replied  that  in  any  wise  I  must  needes  goe  to  Cevola,
he  willed  me  to  surcease  from  that  purpose,  for  they
looked  that  that  lord  without  al  doubt  would  come  to
annoy  them,  &  that  therefore  they  could  not  leave  their
countrey  naked  to  goe  with  me,  and  that  it  would  be
better,  that  I  would  make  an  end  of  that  warre  betweene
them,  and  that  then  I  might  have  their  company  to
Cevola.  And  upon  this  point  we  grew  to  such  variance,
that  we  began  to  grow  into  choler,  and  in  a  rage  he  would
have  gone  out  of  the  boat,  but  I  stayed  him,  and  with
gentle  speeches  began  to  pacifie  him,  seeing  that  it
imported  mee  much  to  have  him  my  friend :  but  for
all  my  courtesies  which  I  shewed  him,  I  could  not  alter
him  from  his  mind,  wherein  he  stil  remained  obstinate.
In  this  meane  while  I  sent  a  man  away  unto  my  ships
to  give  them  knowledge  of  the  journey  that  I  had  deter-
mined to  make.  After  this  I  prayed  the  old  man  that
he  would  fetch  him  backe  againe,  because  I  had  deter-
mined, that  seeing  I  saw  no  meanes  to  be  able  to  go
to  Cevola,  &  because  I  would  stay  no  longer  among
those  people,  because  they  should  not  discover  me,  and
likewise  because  I  meant  in  person  to  visit  my  ships,
with  determination  to  returne  againe  up  the  river,  carying
with  me  other  companions,  &  leave  there  some  which  I
had  sicke,  and  telling  the  olde  man  and  the  rest  that
I would  returne,  and  leaving  them  satisfied the best I

310

FERNANDO ALARCHON  ad.

1540.

could (although they alwayes said that I went away

for feare) I returned downe  the  river : and that  way

which I had  gone  against  the  streame  up the  river  in

15.  dayes  and  an  halfe,  I  made  in  my  returne  in  2.  dayes  ^^  retumeth

and  an halfe,  because the streame was  great  and  very  ^^  ']• ^l^\r

swift. In  this  wise  going  downe  the  river,  much  people  ^^  ^^-^  ^^^-^^^

came  to  the  banks,  saying,  Sir,  wherefore  doe  you  leave

us  ?  what  discourtesie  hath  bin  done  unto  you  ?  did  you

not  say that  you would remayne  continually  with us,

and be our Lord  ? And turne back againe  ? if  any  [in.  437.]

man  above  the  river  hath  done  you  any  wrong  we  will

goe  with  our  weapons  with  you  and  kill  him;  and  such

like  words  ful  of  love  and  kindnes.

Chap. 8.

When  they  came  to  their  shippes  the  Captaine  named
that  coast  La  Campanna  de  la  Cruz,  and  builded
a  Chapel  unto  our  Lady,  and  called  the  river  El
Rio  de  Buena  Guia,  and  returned  up  the  same
againe :  when  he  came  to  Quicona  and  Coama  the
Lords  of  those  places  used  him  very  courteously.

UPon  mine  arrivall  at  my  ships  I  found  all  my  people
in  health,  although  very  heavie  for  my  long  stay,
and  because  the  current  had  fretted  fower  of  their  cables,
and  that  they  had  lost  two  ankers  which  were  recovered.
After  we  had  brought  our  ships  together,  I  caused  them
to  bring  them  into  a  good  harbour,  &  to  give  the  carena
to  the  shippe  called  Sanct  Peter,  &  to  mend  all  things
that  were  needfuU.  And  here  assembling  all  my  com-
pany together,  I  opened  unto  them  what  knowledge  I
had  received  of  Francis  Vasquez ;  and  how  it  might
be  that  in  those  sixteene  dayes  space  which  I  was  in
sayling  up  the  river  he  might  peradventure  have  some
knowledge  of  me,  and  that  I  was  minded  to  returne
up  the  river  once  againe  to  try  if  I  could  finde  any
meanes  to  joyne  my  selfe  with  him :  and  although  some
spake  against  my  determination,  I  caused  al  my  boates
to  bee  made  ready,  because  the  ships  had  no  need  of

3"

A.D,

1540.

Marke  what
things  the
^paniardes
cary  with  them
in  newe  dis-
coveries.

Rio  de  buena
Guia.

Parrats  in
these  parts.

Two  moones
to  Cevola.
Another  booke
written  of  the
particulars  of
thatcountrey.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

them.  I  caused  one  of  them  to  be  filled  with  wares
of  exchange,  with  corne  and  other  seedes,  with  hennes
&  cockes  of  Castile,  and  departed  up  the  river,  leaving
order  that  in  that  province  called  Campanna  de  la  Cruz
they  should  build  an  Oratorie  or  Chapell,  and  called  it
the  Chappell  of  our  Lady  de  la  Buena  Guia,  and  that
they  should  call  this  river  Rio  de  Buena  Guia  because
that  is  your  Lordships  Devise :  I  carried  with  me  Nicolas
Zamorano  Pilote  mayor,  to  take  the  height  of  the  pole.
And  I  departed  on  tuesday  the  fourteenth  of  September,
&  on  Wednesday  I  came  unto  the  first  dwellings  of  the
first  Indians,  which  came  running  to  hinder  my  passage,
supposing  that  we  had  bene  other  people,  for  we  caried
with  us  a  fifer,  &  a  drummer,  and  I  was  clad  in  other
apparell  then  I  went  in  before,  when  they  saw  me  first
of  all :  and  when  they  knew  me  they  stayed,  though
I  could  not  grow  unto  perfect  friendship  with  them,
whereupon  I  gave  them  some  of  those  seedes  which
I  brought  with  mee  ;  teaching  them  how  they  should
sow  them :  and  after  I  had  sayled  3  leagues,  my  first
interpretour  came  even  to  my  boat  to  seeke  me  with
great  joy,  of  whom  I  demanded  wherefore  he  had  left
me,  he  tolde  me  that  certaine  companions  of  his  had
led  him  away.  I  made  him  good  countenance  and  better
intertainment,  because  he  should  beare  me  companie
againe,  considering  howe  much  it  did  importe  me  to
have  him  with  me.  He  excused  himselfe  because  he
stayed  there  to  bring  mee  certaine  feathers  of  Parrats,
which  he  gave  me.  I  asked  him  what  people  these
were,  and  whether  they  had  any  Lord  :  hee  answered  me,
yea ;  and  named  three  or  foure  unto  me,  of  foure  or
25  names  of  people  which  he  knew  and  that  they  had
houses  painted  within,  and  that  they  had  trafiicke  with
those  of  Cevola,  and  that  in  two  moones  hee  came  into
the  countrey.  He  told  me  moreover  many  other  names
of  Lords,  and  other  people,  which  I  have  written  downe
in  a  booke  of  mine,  which  I  will  bring  my  selfe  unto
your Lordship. But I thought good to deliver this.

312

FERNANDO ALARCHON  a.d.

1540-
briefe  relation  to  Augustine  Guerriero  in  this  haven of
Colima,  that  he  might  send  it  overland  to  your Lord-
shippe,  to  whom  I  have  many  other  things  to  imparte.

But  to  returne  to  my  journey,  I  arrived  at  Quicama,  Oukama.
where  the  Indians  came  forth  with  great  joy  and  gladnes
to  receive  me,  advertizing  me  that  their  Lord  waited
for  my  comming ;  to  whom  when  I  was  come  I  found
that  he  had  with  him  five  or  sixe  thousand  men  without
weapons,  from  whom  he  went  aparte  with  some  two
hundred  onely,  all  which  brought  victuals  with  them,
and  so  he  came  towards  me,  going  before  the  rest  with
great  authoritie,  and  before  him  and  on  each  side  of  him
were  certaine  which  made  the  people  stande  aside,  making
him  way  to  passe.  Hee  ware  a  garment  close  before  and
behind  and  open  on  both  sides,  fastened  with  buttons,
wrought  with  white  and  blacke  checker  worke,  it  was
very  soft  and  well  made,  being  of  the  skinnes  of  certaine
delicate  fishes  called  Sea  breams.  Assoone  as  he  was
come  to  the  waters  side  his  servants  tooke  him  up
in  their  armes,  and  brought  him  into  my  boate,
where  I  embraced  him  and  received  him  with  great
joy,  shewing  unto  him  much  kindnesse :  upon  which
intertainment  his  people  standing  by  and  beholding  the
same  seemed  not  a  litle  to  rejoyce.  This  Lord  turning
himselfe  to  his  people  willed  them  to  consider  my
courtesie,  and  that  he  being  of  his  owne  accord  come
unto  me  with  a  strange  people,  they  might  see  how
good  a  man  I  was,  and  with  how  great  love  I  had
entertained  him,  and  that  therefore  they  should  take
me  for  their  Lord,  and  that  all  of  them  should
become  my  servants,  and  doe  whatsoever  I  would  [III.  438.]
command  them.  There  I  caused  him  to  sit  downe,
and  to  eat  certaine  conserves  of  sugar  which  I  had
brought  with  mee,  and  willed  the  interpreter  to  thanke
him  in  my  name  for  the  favour  which  he  had  done
me  in  vouchsafing  to  come  to  see  mee,  recommending
unto  him  the  worshipping  of  the  crosse,  and  all
such other things as I had recommended to the

313

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

rest  of  the  Indians  ;  namely  that  they  should  live
in  peace,  and  should  leave  off  warres,  and  should
continue  alwayes  good  friendes  together :  he  answered
that  of  long  time  they  had  continued  in  warres  with  their
neighbours,  but  that  from  thence  forward  he  would
command  his  people  that  they  should  give  food  to  all
strangers  that  passed  through  his  kingdome,  and  that
they  should  doe  them  no  kinde  of  wrong,  and  that  if
any  nation  should  come  to  invade  him,  he  said  he
would  tell  them  howe  I  had  commanded  that  they
should  live  in  peace,  and  if  they  refused  the  same,  he
would  defend  himselfe,  and  promised  me,  that  he  would
never  goe  to  seeke  warre,  if  others  came  not  to  invade
him.  Then  I  gave  him  certaine  trifles,  as  well  of  the
seedes  which  I  brought,  as  of  the  hens  of  Castile,  where-
with he  was  not  a  litle  pleased.  And  at  my  departure
I  caryed  certaine  of  his  people  with  me,  to  make  friend-
ship betweene  them  and  those  other  people  which  dwelt
above  the  River :  and  here  the  interpreter  came  unto  me,
to  crave  leave  to  returne  home ;  and  I  gave  him  certaine
gifts  wherewith  he  departed  greatly  satisfied.
Coama.  The  next  day  I  came  to  Coama,  and  many  of  them
knew  me  not,  seeing  me  clad  in  other  aparrel,  but  the
old  man  which  was  there  as  soone  as  he  knew  me  leapt
into  the  water,  saying  unto  me.  Sir,  lo  here  is  the  man
which  you  left  with  me,  which  came  forth  very  joyfull
&  pleasant  declaring  unto  me  the  great  courtesies  which
that  people  had  shewed  him,  saying  that  they  had  stroven
together  who  should  have  him  to  his  house,  and  that  it
was  incredible  to  thinke  what  care  they  had  at  the  rising
of  the  Sunne  to  hold  up  their  hands  and  kneele  before
the  Crosse.  I  gave  them  of  my  seedes,  and  thanked
them  hartily  for  the  good  entertainement  which  they
had  shewed  my  man,  and  they  besought  me  that  I
would  leave  him  with  them,  which  I  granted  them
untill  my  return,  and  he  stayed  among  them  very  wil-
lingly. Thus  I  went  forward  up  the  River,  taking  that
olde man in  my companie, which told mee, that two

314

FERNANDO  ALARCHON  a.d.

1540.

Indians  came  from  Cumana  to  enquire  for  the  Christians, Cumam.

&  that  he  had  answered  them  that  he  knew  none  such,

but  that  he  knew  one  which  was  the  sonne  of  the  Sunne,

and  that  they  had  pers  waded him to  joyne with them TreaKm  of  the

to  kill  mee  and  my  companions. I  wished  him  to  lend  ^'^^^S^^-

me  two  Indians,  and  I  would  send  word  by  them,  that

I would come unto them, and was desirous of  their

friendship,  but  if  that  they  on  the  contrary  would  have

warre,  I  would  make  such  a  warre  with  them,  that  should

displease  them. And  so  I  passed  through  all  that  people,

and  some  came  and  asked  me,  why  I  had  not  given  them

Crosses  as  well  as the  rest,  and  so  I  gave  them some.

Chap. 9.

They  goe  on  land,  and  see  the  people  worship  the  Crosse
which  they  had  given  them.  The  Captaine  causeth
an  Indian  to  make  a  draught  of  the  countrey  :  hee
sendeth  a  Crosse  to  the  Lord  of  Cumana,  and  going
down  the  River  with  the  streame,  he  arriveth  at  his
ships.  Of  the  error  of  the  Pilots  of  Cortez  as  touch-
ing the  situation  of  this  Coast.

THe  next  day  I  went  on  land  to  see  certaine  cottages,
and  I  found  many  women  and  children  holding  up
their  hands  and  kneeling  before  a  Crosse  which  I  had
given  them.  When  I  came  thither  I  did  the  like  my
self;  and  conferring  with  the  old  man,  he  began  to
informe  me  of  as  many  people  and  Provinces  as  he
knew.  And  when  evening  was  come  I  called  the  old
man  to  come  and  lodge  with  mee  in  my  boate ;  hee
answered  that  hee  would  not  goe  with  mee  because  I
would  wearie  him  with  asking  him  questions  of  so  many
matters :  I  told  him  that  I  would  request  him  nothing
else  but  that  he  would  set  me  downe  in  a  charte  as
much  as  he  knew  concerning  that  River,  and  what  maner
of  people  those  were  which  dwelt  upon  the  banckes
thereof  on  both  sides  :  which  he  did  wiUingly.  And
then  he  requested  me  that  I  would  describe  my  countrey
unto him,  as  he had done  his unto  me. And  for to

315

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1540.

content  him,  I  caused  a  draught  of  certaine  things  to  be
made  for  him.  The  next  day  I  entred  betweene  certaine
very  high  mountaines,  through  which  this  River  passeth
with  a  streight  chanel,  and  the  boats  went  up  against
the  streame  very  hardly  for  want  of  men  to  draw  the
same.  Here  certaine  Indians  came  and  told  me,  that  in
the  same  place,  there  were  certaine  people  of  Cumana,
Jn  Inchanter.  and  among  the  rest  an  enchanter,  who  enquired  which
way  we  would  passe ;  &  they  telling  him  that  we  meant
to  passe  by  the  River,  he  set  certaine  canes  on  both
sides  thereof,  through  which  wee  passed,  without  re-
ceiving any  kinde  of  domage  which  they  intended  against
us.  Thus  going  forward  I  came  unto  the  house  of  the
olde  man  which  was  in  my  company,  and  here  I  caused
a  very  high  Crosse  to  be  set  up,  wherupon  I  engraved
certaine  letters  to  signifie  that  I  was  come  thither :  and
this  I  did,  that  if  by  chance  any  of  the  people  of  the
[III.  439.]  generall  Vasquez  de  Coronado  should  come  thither,  they
might  have  knowledge  of  my  being  there.  At  length
seeing  I  could  not  attaine  to  the  knowledge  of  that
which  I  sought  for,  I  determined  to  returne  backe  unto
my  ships.  And  being  ready  to  depart  there  arrived  two
Indians,  which  by  meanes  of  the  interpreters  of  the  old
man,  told  me  that  they  were  sent  to  me,  and  that  they
were  of  Cumana,  and  that  their  Lord  could  not  come
himselfe,  because  he  was  farre  from  that  place,  but  de-
sired me  to  signifie  unto  him  what  my  pleasure  was.  I
told  them,  that  I  wished  that  he  would  alwayes  imbrace
peace,  and  that  I  was  comming  to  see  that  countrey,  but
being  inforced  ,to  returne  backe  downe  the  River  I  could
not  now  doe  it,  but  that  hereafter  I  would  returne,  and
that  in  the  meane  season  they  should  give  that  Crosse
unto  their  Lorde,  which  they  promised  me  to  do,  and
they  went  directly  to  cary  him  that  Crosse  with  certaine
This  River  feathers  which  were  on  the  same.  Of  these  I  sought  to
ran  muck  far-  understand  what  people  dwelt  upward  upon  the  bankes
he  hadtra-  °^  ^^  River,  which  gave  me  knowledge  of  many  people,
veiled.  and  told  me  that  the  River  went  farre  more  up  into  the

316

FERNANDO ALARCHON  ad.

1540.

land  then  I  had  yet  seene,  but  that  they  knew  not  the
head  thereof,  because  it  was  very  far  into  the  countrey,
and  that  many  other  Rivers  fell  into  the  same.

Having  learned  thus  much  the  next  day  morning  I
returned  downe  the  River,  and  the  day  following  I  came
where  I  had  left  my  Spaniard,  with  whom  I  spake,  and
told  him  that  all  things  had  gone  well  with  me,  and
that  at  this  time  and  the  former  I  had  gone  above  30
leagues  into  the  countrey.  The  Indians  of  that  place
inquired  of  me  what  the  cause  was  of  my  departure,
and  when  I  would  returne  ;  to  whom  I  answered,  that
I  would  returne  shortly.  Thus  sayling  downe  the
streame,  a  woman  leapt  into  the  water  crying  unto  us
to  stay  for  her,  and  shee  came  into  our  boate,  and
crept  under  a  bench,  from  whence  we  could  not  make
her  to  come  out  :  I  understood  that  shee  did  this,
because  her  husband  had  taken  unto  him  another  wife,
by  whom  hee  had  children,  saying  that  she  ment  not
to  dwell  any  longer  with  him,  seeing  he  had  taken
another  wife.  Thus  shee  and  another  Indian  came  with
me  of  their  owne  accord,  and  so  I  came  into  my  ships,
and  making  them  ready  we  proceeded  home  on  our
voyage,  coasting  and  oftentimes  going  on  land,  and
entering  a  great  way  into  the  countrey,  to  see  if  I
could  learne  any  newes  of  Captaine  Francis  Vasquez
and  his  companie ;  of  whom  I  could  have  no  other
knowledge,  but  such  as  I  learned  in  the  aforesaide
River.  I  bring  with  me  many  actes  of  taking  posses-
sion of  all  that  Coast.  And  by  the  situation  of  the
River,  and  the  height  which  I  tooke,  I  finde  that  that
which  the  Masters  and  Pilots  of  the  Marquesse  tooke
is  false,  &  that  they  were  deceived  by  2  degrees,  and  I
have  sayled  beyond  them  above  4  degrees.  I  sayled  up  He  say  led  2, '^
the  River  8  5  leagues,  where  I  saw  and  learned  all  the  ^^p^^  ^P  ^^^
particulars  before  mentioned,  and  many  other  things ;
whereof  when  it  shall  please  God  to  give  mee  leave  to
kisse  your  Lordships  hands,  I  will  deliver  you  the  full
and perfect relation. I thinke my selfe to have had

317

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1540.

very  good  fortune,  in  that  I  found  Don  Luis  de  Castilia,
The  port  of  and  Augustine  Ghenero  in  the  port  of  Colima  :  for  the
Coltma.  Galiot  of  the  Adelantado  came  upon  mee,  which  was
there  with  the  rest  of  his  fleet,  and  commanded  me  to
strike  sayle,  which  seeming  a  strange  thing  unto  me,
and  not  understanding  in  what  state  things  were  in
Nueva  Espanna,  I  went  about  to  defend  my  selfe,  and
not  to  doe  it.  In  the  meane  while  came  Don  Luis  de
Castilia  in  a  boate  and  conferred  with  mee,  and  I  lay
at  anchor  on  the  other  side  of  the  haven  where  the
saide  fleete  road,  and  I  gave  unto  him  this  relation  (and
to  avoyd  striffe  I  determined  to  sayle  away  by  night)
which  relation  I  caryed  about  me  briefly  written ;  for  I
alwayes  had  a  purpose  to  send  the  same,  as  soone  as
I  should  touch  upon  Nueva  Espanna,  to  advertize  your
Lordship  of  my  proceedings.

An  extract  of  a  Spanish  letter  written  from  Pueblo
de  los  Angeles  in  Nueva  Espanna  in  October
1597,  touching  the  discoverie  of  the  rich  Isles
of  California,  being  distant  eight  dayes  sayling
from  the  maine.

E  have  scene  a  letter  written  the  eight  of  October
1597,  out  of  a  towne  called  Pueblo  de  los
Angeles  situate  eighteene leagues  from Mexico,

making  mention  of  the  Ilands  of  California  situate  two
or  three  hundreth  leagues  from  the  maine  land  of  Nueva
Espanna,  in  Mar  del  Sur :  as  that  thither  have  bene  sent
before  that  time  some  people  to  conquer  them  :  which
with  losse  of  some  twentie  men  were  forced  backe.
After  that  they  had  wel  visited  and  found  those  Islands
or  countreys  to  be  very  rich  of  gold  and  silver  mynes,
and  of  very  fayre  Orientall  pearles,  which  were  caught
in  good  quantitie  upon  one  fathome  and  an  halfe  pass-
ing in  beautie  the  pearles  of  the  Island  Margarita :  the
report  thereof  caused  the  Viceroy  of  Mexico  to  send
a  citizen  of  Mexico  with  two  hundreth  men  to  conquer

318

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578.

the  same. Therein  also was  affirmed  that  within  eight
dayes  they  could  sayle  thither  from  the  mayne.

The  course  which  Sir  Francis  Drake  held  from  [Hi.  440.]
the  haven  of  Guatulco  in  the  South  sea  on
the  backe  side  of  Nueva  Espanna,  to  the
North-west  of  California  as  far  as  fourtie
three  degrees  :  and  his  returne  back  along
the  said  Coast  to  thirtie  eight  degrees  :  where
finding  a  faire  and  goodly  haven,  he  landed,
and  staying  there  many  weekes,  and  discover-
ing many  excellent  things  in  the  countrey
and  great  shewe  of  rich  minerall  matter,  and
being  offered  the  dominion  of  the  countrey
by  the  Lord  of  the  same,  hee  tooke  posses-
sion thereof  in  the  behalfe  of  her  Majestic,
and  named  it  Nova  Albion.

Ee  kept  our  course  from  the  Isle  of
Cano  (which  lyeth  in  eight  degrees  of
Northerly  latitude,  and  within  two  leagues
of  the  maine  of  Nicaragua,  where  wee
calked  and  trimmed  our  ship)  along  the
coast  of  Nueva  Espanna,  untill  we  came
to  the  Haven  and  Towne  of  Guatulco,
which  (as  we  were  informed)  had  but  seventeene  Span-
iards dwelling  in  it,  and  we  found  it  to  stand  in  fifteene
degrees  and  fiftie  minutes.

Assoone  as  we  were  entred  this  Haven  we  landed,
and  went  presently  to  the  towne,  and  to  the  Towne
house,  where  we  found  a  Judge  sitting  in  judgement,
he  being  associate  with  three  other  officers,  upon  three
Negroes  that  had  conspired  the  burning  of  the  Towne  :
both  which  Judges,  and  prisoners  we  tooke,  and  brought
them  a  shippeboord,  and  caused  the  chiefe  Judge  to
write  his  letter  to  the  Towne,  to  command  all  the
Townesmen  to  avoid,  that  we  might  safely  water  there.

319

Pilote  set  on
land.

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

Which  being  done,  and  they  departed,  wee  ransaked  the
Towne,  and  in  one  house  we  found  a  pot  of  the  quantitie
of  a  bushell  full  of  royals  of  plate,  which  we  brought  to
our  ship.

And  here  one  Thomas  Moone  one  of  our  companie,
took  a  Spanish  gentleman  as  he  was  flying  out  of  the
Towne,  and  searching  him,  he  found  a  chaine  of  Gold
about  him,  and  other  jewels,  which  we  tooke  and  so  let
him  goe.
The  Portugal  At  this  place  our  Generall  among  other  Spaniards,  set
a  shore  his  Portugall  Pilote,  which  he  tooke  at  the  Island
of  Cape  Verde,  out  of  a  ship  of  Saint  Marie  port  of
Portugall,  and  having  set  them  a  shoare,  we  departed
thence.

Our  General  at  this  place  and  time  thinking  himselfe
both  in  respect  of  his  private  injuries  received  from  the
Spaniards,  as  also  of  their  contempts  and  indignities
ofl^ered  to  our  Countrey  and  Prince  in  generall,
sufficiently  satisfied,  and  revenged  :  and  supposing  that
her  Majestie  at  his  returne  would  rest  contented  with
this  service,  purposed  to  continue  no  longer  upon  the
Spanish  coastes,  but  began  to  consider  and  to  consult  of
the  best  way  for  his  Countrey.

He  thought  it  not  good  to  returne  by  the  Streights,
for  two  speciall  causes :  the  one,  least  the  Spaniards  should
there  waite,  and  attend  for  him  in  great  number  and
strength,  whose  handes  he  being  left  but  one  ship,  could
not  possibly  escape.  The  other  cause  was  the  dangerous
situation  of  the  mouth  of  the  Streights  of  the  South  side,
with  continuall  stormes  raining  and  blustring,  as  he  found
by  experience,  besides  the  shoals  and  sands  upon  the  coast,
wherefore  he  thought  it  not  a  good  course  to  adventure
that  way :  he  resolved  therefore  to  avoide  these  hazards,  to
goe  forward  to  the  Islands  of  the  Malucos,  and  there-
hence  to  saile  the  course  of  the  Portugales  by  the  Cape
of  Bona  Speran9a.

Upon  this  resolution,  he  began  to  thinke  of  his  best
way  for the Malucos,  and finding himselfe,  where hee

320

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1578.
now  was,  becalmed,  hee  sawe  that  of  necessitie  hee  must
bee  enforced  to  take  a  Spanish  course,  namely  to  saile
somewhat  Northerly  to  get  a  winde.  Wee  therefore  set
saile,  and  sayled  800  leagues  at  the  least  for  a  good
winde,  and  thus  much  we  sayled  from  the  16  of  Aprill
after  our  olde  stile  till  the  third  of  June.

The  fift  day  of  June  being  in  fortie  three  degrees  to-  ^/V  Franc'u
wardes the pole  Arcticke, being  speedily  come  out  of  ^^'^^^ ^^^yj^^
the extreame  heate, wee  found the  ayre  so  colde,  that  ^y^  ^j
our men being  pinched with the same,  complayned of  America,  to
the extremitie thereof, and the further we went, the  43  degrees  of
more  the  colde  increased  upon  us,  whereupon  we  thought  ^°^'_^^^jb
it  best  for  that  time  to  seeke  land,  and  did  so,  finding  it
not  mountainous,  but  low  plaine  land,  &  we  drew  backe
againe  without  landing,  til  we  came  within  thirtie  eight  38  degrees.
degrees towardes  the  line. In which height it pleased
God  to  send  us  into  a  faire  and  good  Bay,  with  a  good
winde  to  enter  the  same.

In  this  Bay  wee  ankered  the  sevententh  of  June,  and
the  people  of  the  Countery,  having  their  houses  close  by
the  waters  side,  shewed  themselves  unto  us,  and  sent  a
present  to  our  Generall.

When  they  came  unto  us,  they  greatly  wondred  at  the
things  which  we  brought,  but  our  Generall  (according  to
his  naturall  and  accustomed  humanitie)  curteously  in-
treated  them,  and  liberally  bestowed  on  them  necessarie  [III.  441.]
things  to  cover  their  nakednesse,  whereupon  they  sup-
posed us  to  be  gods,  and  would  not  be  perswaded  to  the
contrary  :  the  presentes  which  they  sent  unto  our  Generall
were  feathers,  and  cals  of  net  worke.

Their  houses  are  digged  round  about  with  earth,  and  ^  description
have  from  the  uttermost  brimmes  of  the  circle  clifts  of  '>fij^P^°P^^
wood  set  upon  them,  joyning  close  together  at  the  toppe  gfj^gj^^
like  a  spire  steeple,  which  by  reason  of  that  closenesse  are  jlbion.
very  warme.

Their  bed  is  the  ground  with  rushes  strawed  on  it,  and
lying  about  the  house,  they  have  the  fire  in  the  middest.
The  men  goe naked, the women take bulrushes and
IX  321  X

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1578.

kembe  them  after  the  maner  of  hempe,  and  thereof  make
their  loose  garments,  which  being  knit  about  their
middles,  hang  downe  about  their  hippes,  having  also
about  their  shoulders  a  skinne  of  Deere,  with  the  haire
upon  it.  These  women  are  very  obedient  and  serviceable
to  their  husbands.

After  they  were  departed  from  us,  they  came  and
visited  us  the  second  time,  and  brought  with  them
feathers  and  bags  of  Tabacco  for  presents:  And  when  they
came  to  the  toppe  of  the  hil  (at  the  bottome  whereof  wee
had  pitched  our  tents)  they  stayed  themselves,  where  one
appointed  for  speaker,  wearied  himselfe  with  making  a
long  oration,  which  done,  they  left  their  bowes  upon
the  hill  and  came  downe  with  their  presents.

In  the  meane  time  the  women  remaining  on  the  hill,
tormented  themselves  lamentably,  tearing  their  flesh  from
their  cheekes,  whereby  we  perceived  that  they  were  about
a  sacrifice.  In  the  meane  time  our  Generall,  with  his
companie,  went  to  prayer,  and  to  reading  of  the  Scrip-
tures, at  which  exercise  they  were  attentive  and  seemed
greatly  to  be  affected  with  it  :  but  when  they  were
come  unto  us  they  restored  againe  unto  us  those  things
which  before  we  had  bestowed  upon  them.

The  newes  of  our  being  there  being  spread  through
the  countrey,  the  people  that  inhabited  round  about
came  downe,  and  amongst  them  the  king  himself,  a
man  of  a  goodly  stature,  and  comely  personage,  with
many  other  tall  and  warlike  men  :  before  whose  com-
ming  were  sent  two  Ambassadours  to  our  Generall,  to
signifie  that  their  king  was  comming,  in  doing  of  which
message,  their  speech  was  continued  about  halfe  an
howre.  This  ended,  they  by  signes  requested  our
Generall  to  send  something  by  their  hand  to  their  king,
as  a  token  that  his  comming  might  bee  in  peace  :  wherein
our  Generall  having  satisfied  them,  they  returned  with
glad  tidings  to  their  king,  who  marched  to  us  with  a
princely  Majestie,  the  people  crying  continually  after  their
maner,  and as  they  drewe neere unto us,  so did they

322

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
strive to behave themselves in their actions with
comelinesse.

In  the  fore  front  was  a  man  of  a  goodly  personage,  who
bare the scepter, or mace before the king, whereupon
hanged two crownes, a  lesse  and a bigger, with three
chaines  of  a  merveilous  length  :  the  crownes  were  made  of  "^^^j^  '^'"^  ^'^^^
knit work wrought artificially with feathers of divers  '^J'^^^^^ -^
colours ;  the  chaines  were  made  of  a  bony  substance  and  Canada  and
few  be  the  persons  among  them  that  are  admitted  to  weare  Hochelage.
them  :  and  of  that  number  also  the  persons  are  stinted,  as
some ten, some twelve, &c. Next unto him which
bare the scepter, was the king himselfe, with his
Guarde  about  his  person,  clad  with Conie  skinnes,  and
other  skinnes  : after  them  followed  the naked common
sort  of  people,  every  one  having  his  face  painted,  some
with white,  some with blacke, and other colours,  and
having  in  their  hands  one  thing  or  other  for  a  present,
not  so  much as their children,  but they also  brought
their  presents.

In  the  meane  time,  our  Generall  gathered  his  men
together,  and  marched  within  his  fenced  place,  making
against  their  approching,  a  very  warlike  shewe.  They
being  trooped  together  in  their  order,  and  a  general
salutation  being  made,  there  was  presently  a  generall
silence.  Then  he  that  bare  the  scepter  before  the  king,
being  informed  by  another,  whome  they  assigned  to
that  office,  with  a  manly  and  loftie  voice,  proclaimed
that  which  the  other  spake  to  him  in  secret,  continuing
halfe  an  houre :  which  ended,  and  a  generall  Amen  as
it  were  given,  the  king  with  the  whole  number  of  men,
and  women  (the  children  excepted)  came  downe  without
any  weapon,  who  descending  to  the  foote  of  the  hill,
set  themselves  in  order.

In  comming  towards  our  bulwarks  and  tents,  the
scepter  bearer  began  a  song,  observing  his  measures  in  a
dance,  and  that  with  a  stately  countenance,  whom  the
king  with  his  Garde,  and  every  degree  of  persons  fol-
lowing, did  in  like  maner  sing  and  dance,  saving  onely

323

A.D.
1578.

[III.  442.]

The  king  re-
stgnes  his
crowne  and
kingdome  to
Sir  Francis
Drake.
Great  riches
in  Nova
Albion.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the  women  which  daunced  and  kept  silence.  The  General
permitted  them  to  enter  within  our  bulwark,  where  they
continued  their  song  and  daunce  a  reasonable  time.
When  they  had  satisfied  themselves,  they  made  signes
to  our  Generall  to  sit  downe,  to  whom  the  king,  and
divers  others  made  several  orations,  or  rather  supplica-
tion, that  he  would  take  their  province  and  kingdom
into  his  hand,  and  become  their  king,  making  signes
that  they  would  resigne  unto  him  their  right  and
title  of  the  whole  land,  and  become  his  subjects.  In
which  to  perswade  us  the  better,  the  king  and  the  rest,
with  one  consent  and  with  great  reverence,  joyfully
singing  a  song,  did  set  the  crowne  upon  his  head,  inriched
his  necke  with  all  their  chaines,  and  offered  unto  him
many  other  things,  honouring  him  by  the  name  of  Hioh,
adding  thereunto  as  it  seemed  a  signe  of  triumph  :  which
thing  our  Generall  thought  not  meete  to  reject,  because
hee  knewe  not  what  honour  and  profite  it  might  bee  to
our  countrey.  Wherefore  in  the  name,  and  to  the  use
of  her  Majestie,  he  tooke  the  scepter,  crowne  and
dignitie  of  the  said  Countrey  in  his  hands,  wishing  that
the  riches  &  treasure  thereof  might  so  conveniently  be
transported  to  the  inriching  of  her  kingdome  at  home,
as  it  aboundeth  in  the same.

The  common  sort  of  the  people  leaving  the  king  and
his  Guarde  with  our  Generall,  scattered  themselves  to-
gether with  their  sacrifices  among  our  people,  taking  a
diligent  viewe  of  every  person  ;  and  such  as  pleased
their  fancie,  (which  were  the  yongest)  they  inclosing
them  about  oifred  their  sacrifices  unto  them  with  lament-
able weeping,  scratching,  and  tearing  the  flesh  from  their
faces  with  their  nayles,  whereof  issued  abundance  of
blood.  But  wee  used  signes  to  them  of  disliking  this,
and  stayed  their  hands  from  force,  and  directed  them
upwardes  to  the  living  God,  whome  onely  they  ought  to
worshippe.  They  shewed  unto  us  their  wounds,  and
craved  helpe  of  them  at  our  handes,  whereupon  wee
gave them lotions, plaisters  and ointments  agreeing  to

324

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1578.
the  state  of  their  griefes,  beseeching  God  to  cure  their
deseases.  Every  thirde  day  they  brought  their  sacrifices
unto  us,  untill  they  understoode  our  meaning,  that  we
had  no  pleasure  in  them  :  yet  they  could  not  be  long
absent  from  us,  but  daily  frequented  our  company  to
the  houre  of  our  departure,  which  departure  seemed  so
grievous  unto  them,  that  their  joy  was  turned  into
sorrow.  They  intreated  us,  that  being  absent  wee  would
remember  them,  and  by  stelth  provided  a  sacrifice,  which
we  misliked.

Our necessarie businesse being ended, our Generall  Great  heards
with  his  companie  traveiled  up  into  the  Countrey  to  their  °f^^^r^-
villages,  where  we  found  heardes  of  Deere  by  a  thousand
in  a  companie,  being  most  large  and  fat  of  body.

We  found  the  whole  countrey  to  bee  a  warren  of  a  Abundance  of
strange  kinde  of  Conies,  their  bodyes  in  bignes  as  be  ^^^^'^^^  comes.
the  Barbary  Conies,  their  heads  as  the  heades  of  ours,
the  feet  of  a  Want,  and  the  taile  of  a  Rat  being  of  great
length :  under  her  chinne  on  either  side  a  bagge,  into
the  which  shee  gathereth  her  meate  when  she  hath  filled
her  belly  abroad.  The  people  eate  their  bodies,  and
make  great  account  of  their  skinnes,  for  their  Kings
coate  was  made  of  them.

Our  Generall  called  this  countrey.  Nova  Albion,  and  }^ova  Albim.
that  for  two  causes  : the one in respect of  the white
bankes  and  clifFes,  which  ly towardes  the  sea  :  and  the
other, because it might have some affinitie with our
Countrey  in  name,  which  sometime  was  so  called.

There is no part of earth here to bee taken up,  Golde  and
wherein  there  is  not  some  speciall  likelihood  of  gold  or  silver  in  the
silver  earth  of  1^ ova

At  our  departure  hence  our  Generall  set  up  a  monu-
ment of  our  being  there  ;  as  also  of  her  Majesties  right
and  title  to  the  same,  namely  a  plate  nailed  upon  a  faire
great  poste,  whereupon  was  ingraven  her  Majesties  name,
the  day  and  yeere  of  our  arrivall  there,  with  the  free
giving  up  of  the  Province  and  people  into  her  Majesties
hands,  together  with her  highnes  picture  and  armes,  in

325

Albion.

AD.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1578.

a  peice  of  sixe  pence  of  current  English  money  under  the
plate,  where  under  was  also  written  the  name  of  our
Generall.

It  seemeth  that  the  Spaniards  hitherto  had  never  bene
in  this  part  of  the  countrey,  neither  did  ever  discover
the  land  by  many  degrees  to  the  Southwards  of  this
place.

The  true  and  perfect  description  of  a  voyage
performed  and  done  by  Francisco  de  Gualle  a
Spanish  Captaine  and  Pilot,  for  the  Vice-roy
of  New  Spaine,  from  the  Haven  of  Acapulco
in  New  Spaine,  to  the  Islands  of  the  Lufones
or  Philippinas,  unto  the  Haven  of  Manilla,  &
from  thence  to  the  Haven  of  Macao  in  China,
and  from  Macao  backe  againe  to  Acapulco,
accomplished  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord,  1 584.

Chap.  I.

He  tenth  of  March  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lorde  1582  wee  set  sayle  out  of  the
Haven  of  Acapulco,  lying  in  the  countrey
of  New  Spaine,  directing  our  course
towards  the  Islands  of  the  Lu9ones,  or
Philippinas  West  Southwest,  running  in
that  maner  for  the  space  of  twentie  five
leagues,  till  wee  came  under  sixteene  degrees,  that  so
wee  might  shunne  the  calmes  by  sayling  close  by  the
shoare.  From  thence  forward  we  held  our  course  West
for  the  space  of  30  leagues,  &  being  there,  we  ran
West,  and  West  &  by  South,  for  the  space  of  1800
[III.  443.]  leagues,  to  the  Hand  called  Isla  del  Enganno,  which  is
the  furthest  Hand  lying  in  the  South  parts  of  ye  Hands
called  Des  los  Ladrones,  that  is.  The  Hands  of  rovers,
or  Islas  de  las  Velas,  under  13.  degrees  and  |-.  in
latitude  Septentrionall,  and  164.  degrees  in  longitude
Orientall,  upon  the fixed Meridionall  line,  which  lyeth

326

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  ad.

1584.

right  with  the  Hand  of  Ter^era.  From  thence  we  helde
our  course  Westward  for  the  space  of  280.  leagues,  till
we  came  to  the  point  called  El  capo  de  Espirito  Santo,
that  is,  The  point  of  the  holy  Ghost,  lying  in  the  Hand
Tandaya,  the  first  Hand  of  those  that  are  called  Philip-
pinas,  Lu9ones,  or  Manillas,  which  is  a  countrey  with
fewe  hilles,  with  some  mines  of  brimstone  in  the  middle
thereof.  From  the  point  aforesayde,  wee  sailed  West
for  the  space  of  eighteene  leagues  to  the  point  or  entrie
of  the  chanell,  which  runneth  in  betweene  that  Hand
and  the  Hand  of  Lu^on.  This  point  or  entrie  lieth
scarce  under  12.  degrees.  All  the  coast  that  stretcheth
from  the  entrie  of  the  chanel  to  the  point  of  El  capo
del  Spirito  santo,  is  not  very  faire.

Eight  leagues  from  the  sayde  point  lyeth  a  haven  of
indifferent  greatnesse,  called  Baya  de  Lobos,  that  is,
The  Bay  of  woolves,  having  a  small  Hand  in  the  mouth
thereof:  and  within  the  chanell  about  halfe  a  league
from  the  ende  of  the  sayd  Hand  lyeth  an  Hand  or  cliife,
&  when  you  passe  by  the  point  in  the  middle  of  the
chanell,  then  you  have  five  and  twentie  fathom  deepe,
with  browne  sand :  there  we  found  so  great  a  streame
running  Westward,  that  it  made  the  water  to  cast  a
skum  as  if  it  had  beene  a  sande,  whereby  it  put  us  in
feare,  but  casting  out  our  lead,  wee  found  five  and
twentie  fathom  deepe.

From  the  aforesayd  entrie  of  the  chanell  North,
and  North  and  by  East  about  tenne  leagues,  lyeth  the
Island  of  Catanduanes,  about  a  league  distant  from  the
lande  of  Lu9on,  on  the  furthest  point  Eastward,  and
from  the  same  entrie  of  the  chanell  towards  the  West
and  Southwest  lyeth  the  Hand  Capuli  about  sixe  leagues
from  thence,  stretching  Westsouthwest,  and  Eastnorth-
east,  being  five  leagues  long,  and  foure  leagues  broad :
and  as  wee  past  by  it,  it  lay  Northward  from  us  under
twelve  degrees  and  ^.  and  somewhat  high  lande.  Foure
leagues  from  the  aforesayd  Hand  of  Capuli  Northwest-
ward lie  the  three  Hands  of  the  haven  of  Boilon  in  the

327

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

Hand  of  Lu9ones,  stretching  North  and  South  about
foure  leagues,  distant  from  the  firme  lande  halfe  a  league,
whereof  the  furthest  Southward  lieth  under  thirteene
degrees  :  In  this  chanell  it  is  twentie  fathom  deepe,  with
white  sand,  and  a  great  streame,  running  Southeast  :
we  passed  through  the  middle  of  the  chanell.  From
this  chanell  wee  helde  our  course  Southwest,  and  South-
west and  by  West,  for  the  space  of  twentie  leagues,
untill  wee  came  to  the  West  ende  of  the  Hand  of
Tycao,  which  reacheth  East  and  West  thirteene  leagues.
This  point  or  hooke  lyeth  under  12.  degrees  and  f.
In  the  middle  betweene  this  Hand  and  the  Hand
Capuli  there  lie  three  Hands  called  the  Faranias,  and
we  ranne  in  the  same  course  on  the  Northside  of  all
the  Hands,  at  the  depth  of  22.  fathom  with  white  sand.
From  the  aforesayd  West  point  of  the  Hand  Tycao
to  the  point  of  Buryas  it  is  East  and  West  to  sayle
about  the  length  of  a  league  or  a  league  and  an  halfe :
we  put  into  that  chanell,  holding  our  course  South,  and
South  and  by  West  about  three  leagues,  untill  we  were
out  of  the  chanell  at  sixteene  fathom  deepe,  with  halfe
white  and  reddish  sande  in  the  chanell,  and  at  the
mouth  thereof,  whereof  the  middle  lyeth  under  12.
degrees  and  f .  and  there  the  streames  runne  Northward.
The  Hand  of  Buryas  stretcheth  Northwest  and  South-
east, and  is  lowe  lande,  whereof  the  Northwest  point  is
about  three  leagues  from  the  coast  of  Lugon,  but  you
cannot  passe  betweene  them  with  any  shippe,  but  with
small  foists  and  barkes  of  the  countrey.  This  shallowe
channell  lieth  under  twelve  degrees :  and  running  thorow
the  aforesaid  chanell  betweene  the  Hands  Tycao  and
Buryas,  as  I  sayd  before,  we  sayled  Southward  about
The  Isle  of  two  leagues  from  the  Hand  of  Masbate,  which  stretcheth
Masbate.  East  and  West  8.  leagues  long,  being  in  bredth  4.
leagues,  and  lyeth  under  12.  degrees  and  ^.  in  the
middle  thereof,  and  is  somewhat  high  land.

From  the sayd chanell betweene  Tycao and Buryas,
wee helde our course Westnorthwest for thirteene

328

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  a.d.

1584.
leagues,  leaving  the  Hand  Masbate  on  the  Southside,
and  the  Hand  Buryas  on  the  North  side  :  at  the  ende
of  thirteene  leagues  wee  came  by  an  Hand  called
Banton,  which  is  in  forme  like  a  hat,  under  twelve
degrees  and  f.  when  we  had  sayled  the  aforesayd
thirteene  leagues  and  eight  leagues  more,  on  the  South
side  wee  left  the  Hand  called  Rebuiam,  which  stretcheth
Northwest  and  Northwest  and  by  North,  and  Southeast,
and  Southeast  and  by  South,  for  the  space  of  eight
leagues,  being  high  and  crooked  lande,  whereof  the  North
point  lyeth  under  twelve  degrees  and  f .  and  there  you
finde  25-  fathom  deepe,  with  white  sand.

From  the  aforesayd  Hand  of  Banton  Southward  nine
leagues,  there  beginne  and  foUowe  three  Handes,  one  of
them  being  called  Bantonsilla,  which  is  a  small  Hand  in
forme  of  a  sugar  loafe:  the  second  Crymara,  being  some-
what great  in  length,  reaching  East  and  West  about  two
leagues:  the  third  Itaa,  or  the  He  of  Goates,  having  cer-
taine  hovels.  By  all  these  Hands  aforesayd  you  may  passe  [III.  444.]
with  all  sortes  of  shippes,  whereof  the  foremost  lyeth
Southward  under  twelve  degrees  and  ^.  From  the  Hand
of  Bantonsilla,  or  small  Banton,  wee  helde  our  course
Northwest  for  the  space  of  foure  leagues,  to  the  chanell
betweene  the  Hands  called  de  Vereies,  and  the  Hand
Marinduque,  the  Vereies  lying  on  the  South  side  under
twelve  degrees  and  §.  (which  are  two  small  Hands  like
two  Frigats)  and  the  Hand  Marinduque  on  the  North
side  under  twelve  degrees,  and  |.  which  is  a  great  Hand,
stretching  Westnorthwest,  and  Eastsoutheast,  having  in
length  12.  3z  in  bredth  7.  leagues.  On  the  North  side
with  the  Hand  Lugon  it  maketh  a  long  and  small  chanell,
running  somewhat  crooked,  which  is  altogether  full  of
shallowes  and  sandes,  whereby  no  shippes  can  passe
through  it.  The  furthest  point  Westward  of  the  same
Hand  lyeth  under  thirteene  degrees  and  ^.  It  is  high
lande,  on  the  East  side  having  the  forme  of  a  mine  of
brimstone  or  fierie  hill,  and  on  the  West  side  the  land
runneth  downeward  at  the  point  thereof  being  round  like

329

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

a  loafe  of  bread  :  in  the  chanell  betweene  it  and  the
VereieSj  there  are  18.  fathom  deepe  with  small  blacke
sand.

From  the  aforesayd  chanell  of  Vereies  and  Marinduque,
wee  helde  our  course  Westnorthwest  twelve  leagues  to
the  lande  of  Mindora,  to  the  point  or  hooke  called
Dumaryn,  lying  full  under  thirteene  degrees  :  Five  leagues
forward  from  the  sayde  chanell  on  the  South  side  wee  left
an  Hand  called  Isla  del  maestro  del  Campo,  that  is,  The
Hand  of  the  Colonell,  lying  under  twelve  degrees  and  £.
which  is  a  small  and  flat  Hand  :  In  this  course  we  had  45
fathom  deep,  with  white  sand.

By  this  point  or  end  of  the  Hand  Marinduque  be-
ginneth  the  Hand  of  Myndoro,  which  hath  in  length  East
and  West  five  and  twentie  leagues,  and  in  bredth  twelve
leagues,  whereof  the  furthest  point  Southward  lyeth  under
thirteene  degrees,  and  the  furthest  point  Northward  under
thirteene  degrees  and  f .  and  the  furthest  point  Westward
under  thirteene  degrees.  This  Hand  with  the  Hand  of
Lu9on  maketh  a  chanell  of  five  leagues  broad,  and  ten  or
twelve  fathom  deepe  with  muddie  ground  of  divers
colours,  with  white  sande.  Five  leagues  forward  from
Marinduque  lyeth  the  river  of  the  towne  of  Anagacu,
which  is  so  shallowe,  that  no  shippes  may  enter  into  it.
From  thence  two  leagues  further  lie  the  Hands  called
Bacco,  which  are  three  Hands  lying  in  a  triangle,  two  of
them  being  distant  from  the  land  about  three  hundred
cubits,  and  between  them  and  the  land  you  may  passe
with  small  shippes  :  And  from  the  lande  to  the  other
Hand,  are  about  two  hundred  cubites,  where  it  is  altogether
shallowes  and  sandes,  so  that  where  the  shippes  may
passe  outward  about  150.  cubites  from  the  lande,  you
leave  both  the  Hands  on  the  South  side,  running  be-
tweene the  third  Hand  and  the  river  called  Rio  del
Bacco,  somewhat  more  from  the  middle  of  the  chanel
towardes  the  Hand,  which  is  about  a  league  distant
from  the  other  :  the  chanell  is  tenne  fathom  deepe,
with mud and shelles upon the  ground  : the river  of

330

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  a.d.

1584.
Bacco  is  so  shallowe,  that  no  ships  may  enter  into  it.
From  this  Hand  with  the  same  course  two  leagues
forward,  you  passe  by  the  point  El  Capo  de  Rescaseo,
where  wee  cast  out  our  lead,  and  found  that  a  man
may  passe  close  by  the  lande,  and  there  you  shall  finde
great  strong  streames  :  and  halfe  a  league  forward  with
the  same  course,  lyeth  the  towne  of  Mindoro,  which
hath  a  good  haven  for  shippes  of  three  hundred  tunnes.
Three  leagues  Northward  from  the  same  haven  lyeth
the  Hand  called  Cafaa,  stretching  from  East  and  West,
being  hilly  ground.

From  the  sayde  towne  of  Myndoro,  wee  helde  our
course  Westnorthwest  eight  leagues,  till  wee  came  to
the  poynt  or  hooke  of  the  sandes  called  Tulen,  lying
upon  the  Hand  of  Lu9on,  which  sande  or  banke
reacheth  into  the  Sea  halfe  a  league  from  the  coast :
you  must  keepe  about  an  hundred  cubites  from  it,
where  you  finde  eight  fathom  water,  muddie  and  shellie
ground  :  you  runne  along  by  those  sandes  North,  and
North  and  by  West  for  the  space  of  two  leagues,  till
you  come  to  the  river  called  Rio  de  Anasebo  :  all  the
rest  of  the  coast  called  De  los  Limbones  to  the  mouth
or  entrie  of  the  Bay  called  Manilla,  (which  are  foure
leagues)  is  sayled  with  the  same  course.  The  Limbones
(which  are  Hands  so  called)  are  high  in  forme  like  a
paire  of  Organs,  with  good  havens  for  small  shippes,
running  along  by  the  Limbones  :  and  two  leagues  be-
yond them  on  the  South  side,  wee  leave  the  Hands  of
Fortan,  and  foure  Hands  more,  but  the  three  Hands  of
Lubao,  which  are  very  low,  lie  under  13.  degrees  and
-g-.  and  the  Limbones  lie  in  the  mouth  or  entrie  of  the
Bay  of  Manilla  under 14.  degrees  and  ^.  The  Ba'^  of

From  thence  we  ranne  Northwest  for  the  space  of  sixe  Manilla  in  ia^.

leagues to the  haven of  Cabite, keeping; along by  the ^^'^^^  ^f
111-  1 TTT  -1  1  • • 1 11 "^  1 ^^^  quarter.

land  lymg  on  the  West  side,  where  it  is  shallowe,  and
is  called  Los  Baixos  del  Rio  de  Cannas,  The  shallowes
of  the  river  of  Reedes  :  all  along  this  Bay  in  the  same
course,  there  is  from  ten  to  foure  fathom  deepe.

331

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1584.

Being  by  the  point  or  hooke  of  Cabite,  then  wee  kept
but  an  hundred  paces  from  it,  running  Southwest,  south-
southwest,  and  South,  untill  we  discovered  the  whole
[III.  445.]  mouth  or  entrie  of  the  Bay,  where  we  might  anker  at
foure  fathom  about  two  hundred  cubites  from  the  lande,
and  then  the  towne  of  Manilla  was  two  leagues  North-
ward from  us.

Chap.  2.

The  course  and  voyage  of  the  aforesayd  Francisco  Gualle
out  of  the  haven  or  roade  of  Manilla,  to  the  haven
of  Macao  in  China,  with  all  the  courses  and  situations
of  the  places.

SAyling  out  of  the  haven  of  Cabite,  lying  in  the  Bay
of  Manilla,  wee  helde  our  course  Westwarde  for  the
space  of  eighteene  leagues,  to  the  point  called  El  Cabo
de  Samballes  :  and  when  wee  were  eight  leagues  in  our
way,  wee  left  the  two  Hands  Maribillas  on  the  South
side,  and  sailed  about  a  league  from  them  :  the  point
of  Samballes  aforesayde  lyeth  under  foureteene  degrees,
and  §.  being  low  land,  at  the  end  of  the  same  coast
of  Lu9on,  on  the  West  side.

From  the  hooke  or  point  aforesayde,  wee  ranne  North,
and  North  and  by  West,  for  the  space  of  five  and  twentie
leagues  (about  a  league  from  the  coast  of  Lu9on)  to  the
point  called  Cabo  de  BuUinao  :  all  this  coast  and  Cape
is  high  and  hilly  ground,  which  Cape  lyeth  under  six-
teene  degrees  and  -|.  From  this  Cape  de  Bullinao  we
helde  our  course  North,  and  North  and  by  East,  for
45.  leagues  to  the  point  called  El  Cabo  de  Bojador,
which  is  the  furthest  lande  Northwarde  from  the  Hand
Lu9on  lying  under 19.  degrees.

The  Cape  de  Bullinao  being  past  the  lande  maketh
a  great  creeke  or  bough,  and  from  this  creeke  the  coast
runneth  North  to  the  point  of  Bojador,  being  a  land  full
of  cliffes  and  rockes  that  reach  into  the  Sea,  and  the  land
of  the  hooke  or  point  is  high  and  hilly  ground.

From the point of  Bojador, wee helde our course

332

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  a.d.

1584.
Westnorthwest  an  hundred and twentie leagues, untill
we  came  to  the  Hand  called  A  Ilha  Branca,  or  the  white
Hand,  lying in  the  beginning  of  the  coast  and Bay  of
the  river  Canton  under  two  and  twentie  degrees,  having  Canton  22.
foure  and  twentie  fathom  browne  muddie  ground.  egrees.

From  the  Hand  Hha  Branca,  wee  helde  the  aforesayde
course  of  Westnorthwest,  for  the  space  of  sixteene
leagues,  to  the  Hand  of  Macao  lying  in  the  mouth  of  ^•^^  ^^^"^  °f
the  river  of  Canton,  and  it  maketh  the  river  to  have
two  mouthes  or  entries,  and  it  is  a  small  Hand  about
three  leagues  great.

Chap.  3.

The  Navigation  or  course  of  the  aforesayd  Francisco
Gualle  out  of  the  haven  of  Macao  to  Newe  Spaine,
with  the  situation  and  stretchings  of  the  same,  with
other  notable  and  memorable  things  concerning  the
same  voyage.

WHen  we  had  prepared  our  selves,  and  had  taken
our  leaves  of  our  friends  in  Macao,  we  set  saile
upon  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  holding  our  course
Southeast,  &  Southeast  and  by  East,  being  in  the  wane
of  the  Moone  :  for  when  the  Moone  increaseth,  it  is
hard  holding  the  course  betweene  the  Hands,  because  as
then  the  water  and  streames  run  very  strong  to  the
Northwest ;  wee  travailed  through  many  narrowe  chanels
by  night,  having  the  depth  of  eight  or  ten  fathom,
with  soft  muddie  ground,  untill  wee  were  about  the  Hand
Hha  Branca,  yet  we  saw  it  not,  but  by  the  height  we  Ilha  Branca.
knew  that  we  were  past  it.

Being  beyond  it,  we  ranne  Eastsoutheast  an  hundred
and  fiftie  leagues,  to  get  above  the  sands  called  Os
Baixos  dos  Pescadores,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Hands
Lequeos  on  the  East  side,  which  Hands  are  called  As  ^^  llhasfer-
Hhas  fermosas,  that  is  to  say.  The  faire  Hands.  This  ^°^^^'
I  understoode  by  a  Chinar  called  Santy  of  Chinchon,  and
hee  sayde  that  they  lie  under  one  and  twentie  degrees
and  \.  there  it  is  thirtie  fathom deepe  : and  although

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1584.

wee  sawe  them  not,  notwithstanding  by  the  height  and
depth  of  the  water  we  knew  we  were  past  them.

Being  past  As  Ilhas  fermosas,  or  the  faire  Hands,  wee
helde  our  course  East,  and  East  and  by  North,  for  two
hundred  and  sixtie  leagues,  untill  we  were  past  the  length

Lequeos.  of  the  Hands  Lequeos,  sayling  about  fiftie  leagues  from

them  :  the  said  Chinar  tolde  me,  that  those  Hands
called  Lequeos  are  very  many,  and  that  they  have  many
and  very  good  havens,  and  that  the  people  and  inhabitants
thereof  have  their  faces  and  bodies  painted  like  the
Bysayas of  the Hands  of  Lu9on  or  Philippinas  and  are

Mines  of  gold,  apparelled  like  the  Bysayas,  and  that  there  also  are  mines
of  gold  :  Hee  sayd  likewise  that  they  did  often  come
with  small  shippes  and  barkes  laden  with  Bucks  and
Harts-hides,  and  with  golde  in  graines  or  very  small
pieces,  to  traffique  with  them  of  the  coast  of  China,
which  hee  assured  mee  to  bee  most  true,  saying  that
hee  had  bene  nine  times  in  the  small  Hands,  bringing
of  the  same  wares  with  him  to  China  :  which  I  beleeved

[III.  446.]  to  bee  true,  for  that  afterwarde  I  enquired  thereof  in
Macao,  and  upon  the  coast  of  China,  and  found  that
hee  sayde  true.  The  furthest  or  uttermost  of  these
Hands  stretching  Northwarde  and  Eastwarde,  lie  under
nine  and  twentie  degrees.

Being  past  these  Hands,  then  you  come  to  the  Hands
of  Japon, whereof  the  first  lying West and South, is

Firando.  the Iland of Firando, where the Portugals use to

traffique  :  they  are  in  length  altogether  an  hundred  and
thirtie  leagues,  and  the  furthest  Eastward  lieth  under
two  and  thirtie  degrees  :  we  ranne  still  East,  and  East
and  by  North,  untill  we  were  past  the  sayd  hundred
and  thirtie  leagues.

All  this  information  I  had  of  the  aforesayd  Chinar,
as  also  that  there  I  should  see  some  mines  of  brimstone
or  fierie  hilles,  being  seventie  leagues  beyond  them,
and  thirtie  leagues  further  I  should  finde  foure  Hands
lying  together,  which  I  likewise  found,  as  hee  had  tolde
mee  :  And  that  being  in  Japon, he  sayd  hee  had  there

334

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  a.d.

1584.
seene  certaine  men of  a  very small stature, with great
rolles of  linnen  cloth about their  heads, that brought
golde  in  small  pieces,  and  some  white  Cangas  of  cotton,
(which are pieces of cotton-linnen so called by the
Chinars) as also salte-fish like the Spanish Atun, or
Tunney,  which  hee  sayde  came  out  of  other  Ilandes  East-  ^^her  Hands
ward  from  Japon  :  and  by  the  tokens  and  markes  which  E^^^"^^^^"/
hee  shewed  mee,  I  gessed  whereabout  those  Hands  should
bee,  and found them not farre from whence he sayd
they  lay. Hee  sayd  likewise  that  all  the  Hands  of  Japon
have  good  havens  and  chanels,  being  a  Countrey  full  of
Rice,  Corne,  Fish,  and  flesh,  and  that they  are  an  in-
different and reasonable people to traffique  with, and
that  there  they  have  much  silver.

Running  thus  East,  and  East  and  by  North  about
three  hundred  leagues  from  Japon,  wee  found  a  very
hoUowe  water,  with  the  streame  running  out  of  the
North  and  Northwest,  with  a  full  and  very  broad  Sea,
without  any  hinderance  or  trouble  in  the  way  that  wee
past :  and  what  winde  soever  blewe,  the  Sea  continued
all  in  one  sort,  with  the  same  hollow  water  and  streame,
untill  wee  had  passed  seven  hundred  leagues.  About  J^P°^  9o°-
two  hundred  leagues  from  the  coast  and  land  of  newe  J^.?*^^ /^^^^^«^

iTOTH  tflB  CQUSt

Spaine wee  beganne  to lose the  sayd hollow Sea  and  of  America  in

streame  :  whereby  I  most  assuredly  thinke  and  beleeve,  37  degrees

that  there  you  shall  finde  a  channell  or  straight  passage,  <^n^  ^'^  halfe.

betweene the firme lande of newe Spaine, and the

Countreys  of  Asia  and  Tartaria. Likewise  all  this  way

from  the  aforesayde  seven  hundred  leagues,  we  found  a

great  number  of  Whale-fishes  and  other  fishes  called  by

the Spaniards Atuns or Tunnies, whereof many are

found  on  the  coast  of  Gibraltar  in  Spaine,  as  also  Alba-

coras  and  Bonitos,  which  are  all  fishes,  which  commonly

keepe  in  chanels,  straights,  and  running  waters,  there  to

disperse their  seede  when  they breede :  which maketh

mee  more  assuredly  beleeve,  that  thereabouts  is  a  chanell

or  straight  to  passe  through.

Being  by  the  same  course  upon the  coast of  newe

335

A.D.
1584.

Seven  and
thirty  deg.  and
an  halfe.
Read  Francis
Ulloa  chap.  1 6.

Cabo  de  San
Lucas  in  22.
deg.

Havens  lately
found  out.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Spaine,  under  seven  and  thirtie  degrees  and  \.  wee
passed  by  a  very  high  and  faire  lande  with  many  trees,
wholly  without  snowe,  and  foure  leagues  from  the  lande,
you  finde  thereabouts  many  drifts  of  rootes,  leaves  of
trees,  reeds,  and  other  leaves  like  figge  leaves,  the  like
whereof  wee  found  in  great  abundance  in  the  countrey
of  Japon,  which  they  eate  :  and  some  of  those  that  wee
found,  1  caused  to  bee  sodden  with  flesh,  and  being
sodden,  they  eate  like  Coleworts  :  there  likewise  wee
found  great  store  of  Seales  :  whereby  it  is  to  bee  pre-
sumed and  certainely  to  bee  beleeved,  that  there  are
many  rivers,  bayes,  and  havens  along  by  those  coastes
to  the  haven  of  Acapulco.

From  thence  wee  ranne  Southeast,  Southeast  and  by
South,  and  Southeast  and  by  East,  as  wee  found  the
winde,  to  the  point  called  El  Cabo  de  Sant  Lucas,  which
is  the  beginning  of  the  lande  of  California,  on  the  North-
west side,  lying  under  two  and  twentie  degrees,  being
five  hundred  leagues  distant  from  Cape  Mendocino.

In  this  way  of  the  aforesayde  five  hundred  leagues
along  by  the  coast,  are  many  Ilands :  and  although  they
bee  but  small,  yet  without  doubt  there  are  in  them  some
good  havens,  as  also  in  the  firme  land,  where  you  have
these  havens  following,  now  lately  found  out,  as  that
of  the  He  of  Sant  Augustine,  lying  under  thirtie  degrees
and  £.  and  the  Hand  called  Isla  de  Cedros,  scarce  under
eight  &  twentie  deg.  and  \.  and  the  Hand  lying  beneath
Saint  Martyn,  under  three  and  twentie  degrees  and  \.
All  this  coast  and  countrey,  as  I  thinke,  is  inhabited,
and  sheweth  to  be  a  very  good  countrey :  for  there  by
night  wee  sawe  fire,  and  by  day  smoke,  which  is  a
most  sure  token  that  they  are  inhabited.

From  the  poynt  or  hooke  of  Saint  Lucas,  to  the
Southeast  side  of  California,  wee  helde  our  course  East-
southeast,  for  the  space  of  80.  leagues,  to  the  point
called  El  cabo  de  las  corrientes,  that  is,  the  Cape  of  the
streames  lying  under  19.  degrees  and  f.  And  running
this  course.  Northward  about  a  league  from  us  wee  sawe

11^

•.i.vi

MAP  OF  THE  COASTS  OF  CHINA.

FRANCISCO DE GUALLE  a.d.

1584.

three  Hands  called  Las  tres  Marias,  (that  is  to  say,  The

three Maries) running  the same course. About foure

leagues from the other Hands, there are  other Hands,

reaching  about  two  or  three  leagues :  All  this  way  from  [III.  447-]

the  mouth  or  gulfe  of  California  aforesayd,  for  the  space

of  the  sayd  fourescore  leagues,  there  are  great  streames

that  run  Westward.

From  the  point  or  Cape  de  las  Corrientes,  wee  ranne

Southeast,  and  sometimes  Southeast  and  by  East,  for  the

space  of  an  hundred  and  thirtie  leagues  to  the  haven  of

Acapulco. In  this  way  of  an  hundred  and  thirtie  leagues,

being  twentie  leagues  on  the  way,  we  had  the  haven  of

Natividad,  that  is,  of  the  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mary :  and

other  eight  leagues  further,  the  haven  of  Saint  lago,  or

Saint  James : and sixe  leagues  further, the  sea Strand

called  La  Playa  de  Colima,  that  is,  the  Strand  of  Colima.

All  this  coast  from  California  to  the  haven  of  Acapulco  is  Acapulco.

inhabited  by  people  that  have  peace  and  traffique  with  the

Spaniards, and are of  condition and qualities  like  the

people  of  the  other  places  of  new  Spaine.

The  conclusion  of  the  Author  of  this  last  voyage.

A  LI  this  description  and  navigation  have  I  my  selfe
seene,  prooved,  and  well  noted  in  my  voyage  made  &
ended  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1584.  from  great  China
out  of  the  haven  and  river  of  Canton,  as  I  will  more  at
large  set  it  downe  unto  your  honour,  with  the  longitudes
and  latitudes  thereof,  as  God  shall  permit  mee  time  and
leysure,  whom  I  beseech  to  send  you  long  and  happie
dayes.

And  the  same  was  truely  translated  out  of  Spanish  into
lowe  Dutch  verbatim  out  of  the  Originall  copie,  (which
was  sent  unto  the  Viceroy  of  the  Portugall  Indies)  by
John  Huyghen  Van  Linschoten.

[Divers  voyages
IX  337  Y

A.D.

1553-

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Divers  voyages  made  by  Englishmen  to  the
famous  Citie  of  Mexico,  and  to  all  or  most
part  of  the  other  principall  provinces,  cities,
townes  and  places  throughout  the  great  and
large  kingdom  of  New  Spaine,  even  as  farre
as  Nicaragua  and  Panama,  &  thence  to  Peru :
together  with  a  description  of  the  Spaniards
forme  of  government  there :  and  sundry
pleasant  relations  of  the  maners  and  customes
of  the  natural  inhabitants,  and  of  the  mani-
fold rich  commodities  &  strange  rarities  found
in  those  partes  of  the  continent :  &  other
matters  most  worthy  the  observation.

The  voyage  of  Robert  Tomson  Marchant,  into
Nova  Hispania  in  the  yeere  1555.  with  divers
observations  concerning  the  state  of  the  Coun-
trey :  And  certaine  accidents  touching  him-
selfe.

Obert  Tomson  borne  in  the  towne  of
Andover  in  Hampshire  began  his  travaile
out  of  England  in  An.  1553.  in  the
moneth  of  March :  who  departing  out
of  the  citie  of  Bristoll  in  a  good  ship
called  The  barke  yong,  in  companie  of
other  Marchants  of  the  sayde  citie,  within
8.  dayes  after  arrived  at  Lisbone  in  Portugall,  where  the
sayd  Robert  Tomson  remained  15.  dayes,  at  the  end  of
which  he  shipped  himselfe  for  Spaine  in  the  sayd  shippe,
and  within  4.  dayes  arrived  in  the  bay  of  Cadiz  in
Andalusia,  which  is  under  the  kingdom  of  Spaine,  &
from  thence  went  up  to  the  citie  of  Sivil  by  land,  which  is
20.  leagues,  and  there  hee  repaired  to  one  John  Fields
house  an  English  Marchant,  who  had  dwelt  in  the  said
city of  Sivil 18. or 20. yeres maried with wife and

338

ROBERT TOMSON  ad.

1555-
children :  In  whose  house  the  said  Tomson  remained
by  the  space  of  one  whole  yeere  or  thereabout,  for  two
causes :  The  one  to  learne  the  Castillian  tongue,  the  other
to  see  the  orders  of  the  countrey,  and  the  customes  of
the  people.  At  the  end  of  which  time  having  scene  the
fleetes  of  shippes  come  out  of  the  Indies  to  that  citie,
with  such  great  quantitie  of  gold  &  silver,  pearles,
precious  stones,  suger,  hides,  ginger,  and  divers  other
rich  commodities,  he  did  determine  with  himselfe  to
seeke  meanes  and  opportunitie  to  passe  over  to  see
that  rich  countrey  from  whence  such  great  quantitie  of
rich  commodities  came.  And  it  fell  out  that  within
short  time  after,  the  sayd  John  Field  (where  the  sayd
Tomson  was  lodged)  did  determine  to  passe  over  into
the  West  Indies,  himselfe,  with  his  wife,  children,  and
familie,  and  at  the  request  of  the  sayde  Tomson,  he
purchased  a  licence  of  the  King  to  passe  into  the  Indies,
for  himselfe,  his  wife  and  children,  and  among  them
also  for  the  sayde  Tomson  to  passe  with  them :  so  that
presently  they  made  preparation  of  victuall  and  other
necessarie  provision  for  the  voyage.  But  the  shippes
which  were  prepared  to  perfourme  the  voyage  being
all  ready  to  depart,  upon  certaine  considerations  by  the
kings  commandement  were  stayed  and  arrested  till  further
should  bee  knowen  of  the  Kings  pleasure.  Whereupon
the  said  John  Field,  with  Robert  Tomson  departed  out  of
Sivil  and  came  down  to  S.  Lucar  15.  leagues  off,  and  [III.  448.]
seeing  the  stay  made  upon  the  ships  of  the  said  fleet,
&  being  not  assured  when  they  would  depart,  determined
to  ship  themselves  for  the  lies  of  the  Canaries,  which  are
250.  leagues  from  S.  Lucar,  and  there  to  stay  till  the  said
fleet  should  come  thither :  for  that  is  continually  their
port  to  make  stay  at  6.  or  8.  daies,  to  take  in  fresh  water,
bread,  flesh,  &  other  necessaries.

So  that  in  the  moneth  of  February  in  An.  1555.  the
sayde  Robert  Tomson  with  the  said  John  Field  and  his
companie,  shipped  themselves  out  of  the  towne  of  S.
Lucar  in  a  carvel  of  the  citie  of  Cadiz,  and  within 6.

339

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

^555-

dayes  they  arrived  at  the  port  of  the  Grand  Canaria,
where  at  our  comming  the  ships  that  rode  in  the  said
port  began  to  cry  out  of  all  measure  with  loud  voyces,  in
so  much  that  the  castle  which  stood  fast  by  began  to
shoot  at  us,  and  shot  6.  or  7.  shot  at  us,  and  strooke
downe  our  maine  maste,  before  we  could  hoise  out  our
boat  to  goe  on  land,  to  know  what  the  cause  of  the
shooting  was,  seeing  that  we  were  Spanish  ships,  and
were  comming  into  his  countrey.  So  that  being  on
lande,  and  complaining  of  the  wrong  and  damage  done
unto  us  ;  they  answered,  that  they  had  thought  we  had
bene  French  rovers,  that  had  come  into  the  said  port  to
do  some  harme  to  the  ships  that  were  there.  For  that  8.
dayes  past  there  went  out  of  the  said  port  a  carvell  much
like  unto  ours,  laden  with  sugers  and  other  marchandise
for  Spaine  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  point  of  the  sayd
Hand,  met  with  a  Frenchman  of  warre,  who  tooke  the
said  carvell,  &  unladed  out  of  her  into  the  said  French
ship  both  men  &  goods.  And  being  demanded  of  the
said  Spaniards  what  other  ships  remained  in  the  port
whence  they  came,  they  answered  that  there  remained
divers  other  ships,  &  one  laden  with  sugers  (as  they
were)  &  ready  to  depart  for  Spaine :  upon  the  which
newes  the  Frenchmen  put  30.  tall  men  of  their  ship
well  appointed  into  the  said  carvel  which  they  had  taken,
and  sent  her  backe  againe  to  the  said  port  from  whence
she  had  departed  the  day  before.  And  somewhat  late
towards  the  evening  came  into  the  port,  not  shewing
past  3.  or  4.  men,  and  so  came  to  an  anker  hard  by  the
other  ships  that  were  in  the  said  port,  and  being  seene  by
the  castle  and  by  the  said  ships,  they  made  no  reconing  of
her,  because  they  knew  her,  &  thinking  that  she  had
found  contrary  windes  at  the  sea,  or  had  forgot  some-
thing behinde  them,  they  had  returned  backe  againe
for  the  same,  and  so  made  no  accompt  of  her,  but  let  her
alone  riding  quietly  among  the  other  ships  in  the  said
port :  So  that  about  midnight  the  said  carvel  with  the
Frenchmen in  her  went  aboord  the  other  ship  that  lay

340

ROBERT TOMSON  ad.

1555-
hard  by  laden  with  sugers,  and  drove  the  Spaniards  that
were  in  her  under  hatches,  &  presently  let  slip  her  cables
and  ankers,  and  set  saile  &  carried  her  cleane  away,  and
after  this  sort  deceived  them :  And  they  thinking  or
fearing  that  we  were  the  like,  did  shoote  at  us  as  they  did.
This  being  past,  the  next  day  after  our  arrivall  in  the
sayd  port,  wee  did  unbarke  our  selves  and  went  on
lande  up  to  the  citie  or  head  towne  of  the  great  Canaria,
where  we  remained  i8.  or  20.  dayes :  and  there  found
certaine  Englishmen  marchants  servants  of  one  Anthony  Enghshfactors
Hickman  and  Edward  Castelin,  marchants  of  the  citie  ^^fj^?'^"'^
of  London  that  lay  there  in  traffique,  of  whom  wee
received  great  courtesie  and  much  good  cheere.  After
the  which  20.  dayes  being  past,  in  the  which  we  had
seene  the  countrey,  the  people,  and  the  disposition
thereof,  wee  departed  from  thence,  and  passed  to  the
next  He  of  the  Canaries  1 8 .  leagues  off,  called  TenerifFe,
and  being  come  on  land,  went  up  to  the  citie  called  La
Laguna,  where  we  remained  7.  moneths,  attending  the
comming  of  the  whole  fleete,  which  in  the  ende  came,
and  there  having  taken  that  which  they  had  neede  of,
wee  shipped  our  selves  in  a  ship  of  Cadiz,  being  one  of
the  saide  fleete,  which  was  belonging  to  an  Englishman  John  Smettng

. I . ^1  .  ■ r  r^ ^• • c •  -L  Enmshman

maried  m  the  citie  or  Cadiz  m  bpaine,  whose  name  was  ^^^^^-^^  i^
John Sweeting,  and there came  in the sayd ship for  Cadiz,sendeth
captain  also  an  Englishman  maried  in  Cadiz,  and  sonne  a  ship  of  his
in law to the sayde John Sweeting,  whose name  was  °'^"^  into  the
Leonard Chilton : there came also in the said ship  ^^^^^  ^he^con-
another Englishman which had bene a marchant of  duct  of  his
the  citie  of  Exeter,  one  of  50.  yeeres  or  thereabout,  whose  sonne  in  lawe
name was Ralph Sarre. So that wee departed from  Leonard  Chtl-
the sayd Hands in the moneth of  October the  fore-  farre
sayd  yeere, 8. ships in  our  companie, and so directed
our course towards the bay of Mexico, and by the
way  towardes  the  Hand  of  S.  Domingo,  otherwise  called
Hispaniola. So  that  within  32.  dayes  after  we  departed
from the Hes of  Canaries  wee arrived  with our ship
at the port of S. Domingo, and went in over the

341

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1555-

barre  where  our  ship  knocked  her  keele  at  her  entrie:
and  there  our  ship  rid  before  the  towne,  where  wee
went  on  land,  &  refreshed  our  selves  i6.  dayes,  where
we  found  no  bread  made  of  wheat,  but  biscuit  brought
out  of  Spaine,  and  out  of  the  bay  of  Mexico :  for
the  countrey  it  selfe  doeth  yeelde  no  kinde  of  bread
to  make  graine  withall.  But  the  bread  they  make  there,
is  certaine  cakes  made  of  rootes  called  Cassavi,  which
is  something  substantiall,  but  it  hath  but  an  unsavorie
taste  in  the  eating  thereof.  Flesh  of  beefe  and  mutton
they  have  great  store :  for  there  are  men  that  have  loooo.
head  of  cattell,  of  oxen,  bulles  and  kine,  which  they
doe  keepe  onely  for  the  hides :  for  the  quantitie  of
flesh  is  so  great,  that  they  are  not  able  to  spend  the
hundreth  part.  Hogs  flesh  is  there  good  store,  very
sweete  and  savorie,  and  so  holsome,  that  they  give  it
to  sick  folkes  to  eat  in  stead  of  hennes  and  capons,
although  they  have  good  store  of  poultrie  of  that  sort,
[III.  449.]  as  also  of  Guinycocks  &  Guinyhens.  At  the  time  of
our  being  there,  the  citie  of  S.  Domingo  was  not  of
above  500.  housholds  of  Spaniards,  but  of  the  Indians
dwelling  in  the  suburbs  there  were  more.  The  country
is  most  part  of  the  yere  very  hot,  &  very  ful  of  a
kind  of  flies  or  gnats  with  long  bils,  which  do  pricke
&  molest  the  people  very  much  in  the  night  when
they  are  asleepe,  in  pricking  their  faces  and  hands,
and  other  parts  of  their  bodies  that  lie  uncovered,  &
Many  of  our  make  them  to  swel  wonderfully.  Also  there  is  another
men  died  of  ^in^i  of  small  worme  which  creepeth  into  the  soles
at  the  takinz  °^  niens  feet  &  especially  of  the  black  Moores  and
of  Puerto  rico.  children  which  use  to  go  barefoot,  &  maketh  their
feet  to  grow  as  big  as  a  mans  head,  &  doth  so  ake
that  it  would  make  one  run  mad.  They  have  no
remedy  for  the  same,  but  to  open  the  flesh  sometimes
3.  or  4.  inches  &  so  dig  them  out.  The  countrey  yeeldeth
great  store  of  suger,  hides  of  oxen,  buls  and  kine,
ginger,  Cana  fistula  &  Salsa  perillia :  mines  of  silver
& gold there are none, but in some  rivers there is

342

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1556.
found  some  smal  quantitie  of  gold.  The  principal  coine
that  they  do  trafique  withal  in  that  place,  is  blacke
money  made  of  copper  &  brasse:  and  this  they  say
they  do  use  not  for  that  they  lacke  money  of  gold
and  silver  to  trade  withall  out  of  the  other  parts  of
India,  but  because  if  they  should  have  good  money,
the  marchants  that  deale  with  them  in  trade,  would
cary  away  their  gold  and  silver,  and  let  the  countrey
commodities  lie  still.  And  thus  much  for  S.  Domingo.
So  we  were  comming  from  the  yles  of  Canaries  to
S.  Domingo,  &  there  staying  until  the  moneth  of
December,  which  was  3.  moneths.  About  the  beginning
of  January  we  departed  thence  towards  the  bay  of
Mexico  &  new  Spaine,  toward  which  we  set  our  course,
and  so  sailed  24.  dayes  till  we  came  within  15.  leagues
of  S.  John  de  UUua,  which  was  the  port  of  Mexico  of
our  right  discharge :  And  being  so  neere  our  said  port,
there  rose  a  storme  of  Northerly  windes,  which  came  off
from  Terra  Florida,  which  caused  us  to  cast  about  into
the  sea  againe,  for  feare  least  that  night  we  should  be
cast  upon  the  shoare  before  day  did  breake,  and  so  put
our  selves  in  danger  of  casting  away :  the  winde  and
sea  grew  so  foule  and  strong,  that  within  two  houres
after  the  storme  began,  eight  ships  that  were  together
were  so  dispersed,  that  we  could  not  see  one  another.
One  of  the  ships  of  our  company  being  of  the  burthen
of  500.  tun  called  the  hulke  of  Carion,  would  not
cast  about  to  sea  as  we  did,  but  went  that  night  with
the  land,  thinking  in  the  morning  to  purchase  the
port  of  S.  John  de  Ullua,  but  missing  the  port  went
with  the  shoare  and  was  cast  away.  There  were  drowned
of  that  ship  75.  persons,  men,  women  and  children,
and  64.  were  saved  that  could  swim,  and  had  meanes
to  save  themselves :  among  those  that  perished  in  that
ship,  was  a  gentleman  who  had  bene  present  the  yere
before  in  S.  Domingo,  his  wife  and  4.  daughters  with
the  rest  of  his  servants  &  houshold.  We  with  the
other 7. ships cast about into the sea, the storme

343

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

during  10.  dayes  with  great  might,  boisterous  winds,
fogs  &  raine :  our  ship  being  old  and  weake  was  so
tossed,  that  she  opened  at  the  sterne  a  fadome  under
water,  and  the  best  remedy  we  had  was  to  stop  it
with  beds  and  pilobiers,  and  for  feare  of  sinking  we
threw  and  lightned  into  the  sea  all  the  goods  we  had
or  could  come  by :  but  that  would  not  serve.  Then
we  cut  our  maine  mast  and  threw  all  our  Ordinance
into  the  sea  saving  one  piece,  which  early  in  a  morning
when  wee  thought  wee  should  have  sunke,  we  shot  off,
and  as  pleased  God  there  was  one  of  the  ships  of  our
company  neere  unto  us,  which  we  saw  not  by  meanes
of  the  great  fogge,  which  hearing  the  sound  of  the  piece,
&  understanding  some  of  the  company  to  be  in  great
extremitie,  began  to  make  towards  us,  and  when  they
came  within  hearing  of  us,  we  desired  them  for  the  love
of  God  to  helpe  to  save  us,  for  that  we  were  all  like
to  perish.  They  willed  us  to  hoise  our  foresaile  as
much  as  we  could  &c  make  towards  them,  for  they  would
do  their  best  to  save  us,  and  so  we  did  :  And  we  had
no  sooner  hoised  our  foresaile,  but  there  came  a  gale
of  winde  &  a  piece  of  a  sea,  strooke  in  the  foresaile,
and  caried  saile  &  maste  all  overboord,  so  that  then  we
thought  there  was  no  hope  of  life.  And  then  we  began
to  imbrace  one  another,  every  man  his  friend,  every
wife  her  husband,  and  the  children  their  fathers  and
mothers,  committing  our  soules  to  Almighty  God,  think-
ing never  to  escape  alive :  yet  it  pleased  God  in  the  time
of  most  need  when  all  hope  was  past,  to  aide  us  with
his  helping  hand,  and  caused  the  winde  a  little  to  cease,
so  that  within  two  houres  after,  the  other  ship  was  able
to  come  aboord  us,  &  tooke  into  her  with  her  boat  man,
woman  and  child,  naked  without  hose  or  shoe  upon
many  of  our  feete.  I  do  remember  that  the  last  person
that  came  out  of  the  ship  into  the  boat,  was  a  woman
blacke  Moore,  who  leaping  out  of  the  ship  into  the
boat  with  a  yong  sucking  child  in  her  armes,  lept  too
short  and  fell  into  the  sea,  and  was  a  good  while  under

344

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1556.

the  water  before  the  boat  could  come  to  rescue  her,  and
with  the  spreading  of  her  clothes  rose  above  water  againe,
and  was  caught  by  the  coat  &  pulled  into  the  boate
having  still  her  child  under  her  arme,  both  of  them
halfe  drowned,  and  yet  her  naturall  love  towards  her
child  would  not  let  her  let  the  childe  goe.  And  when
she  came  aboord  the  boate  she  helde  her  childe  so  fast
under  her  arme  still,  that  two  men  were  scant  able  to
get  it  out.  So  we  departed  out  of  our  ship  &  left  it
in  the  sea :  it  was  worth  foure  hundreth  thousand  ducats,
ship  &  goods  when  we  left  it.  And  within  three
dayes  after  we  arrived  at  our  port  of  S.  John  de  Ullua
in  New  Spaine.  I  do  remember  that  in  the  great  and  [III.  450.]
boysterous  storme  of  this  foule  weather,  in  the  night,
there  came  upon  the  toppe  of  our  maine  yarde  and
maine  maste,  a  certaine  little  light,  much  like  unto  the
light  of  a  little  candle,  which  the  Spaniards  called  the
Cuerpo  santo,  and  saide  it  was  S.  Elmo,  whom  they  Cuerpo  Santo.
take  to  bee  the  advocate  of  Sailers.  At  the  which  sight
the  Spaniards  fell  downe  upon  their  knees  and  worshipped
it,  praying  God  and  S.  Elmo  to  cease  the  torment,  and
save  them  from  the  perill  that  they  were  in,  with  promising
him  that  at  their  comming  on  land,  they  would  repaire
unto  his  Chappell,  and  there  cause  Masses  to  be  saide,  and
other  ceremonies  to  be  done.  The  friers  cast  reliques  into
the  sea,  to  cause  the  sea  to  be  still,  and  likewise  said  Gospels,
with  other  crossings  and  ceremonies  upon  the  sea  to  make
the  storme  to  cease:  which  (as  they  said)  did  much  good  to
weaken  the  furie  of  the  storme.  But  I  could  not  per-
ceive it,  nor  gave  no  credite  to  it,  till  it  pleased  God
to  send  us  the  remedie  &  delivered  us  from  the  rage
of  the  same.  His  Name  be  praised  therefore.  This  light
continued  aboord  our  ship  about  three  houres,  flying
from  maste  to  maste,  &  from  top  to  top :  and  sometime
it  would  be  in  two  or  three  places  at  once.  I  informed
my  selfe  of  learned  men  afterward  what  that  light  should
be,  and  they  said,  that  it  was  but  a  congelation  of  the
winde  and  vapours of  the  Sea congealed  with the  ex-

345

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1556.

tremitie  of  the  weather,  which  flying  in  the  winde,  many-
times  doeth  chance  to  hit  on  the  masts  and  shrowds  of
the  ships  that  are  at  sea  in  foule  weather.  And  in  trueth
I  do  take  it  to  be  so :  for  that  I  have  seene  the  like  in
other  ships  at  sea,  and  in  sundry  ships  at  once.  By  this
men  may  see  how  the  Papists  are  given  to  beleeve  and
worship  such  vaine  things  and  toyes,  as  God,  to  whom
all  honour  doth  appertaine,  and  in  their  neede  and
necessities  do  let  to  call  upon  the  living  God,  who  is  the
giver  of  all  good  things.

The  16.  of  April  in  Anno  1556.  we  arrived  at  the  port
of  S.  John  de  UUua  in  new  Spaine,  very  naked  and
distressed  of  apparell,  and  all  other  things,  by  meanes
of  the  losse  of  our  foresaid  ship  and  goods,  and  from
His  arrival  at  thence  we  went  to  the  new  Towne  called  Vera  Cruz,  five
Vera  Cruz,  leagues  from  the  said  port  of  S.  John  de  UUua,  marching
still  by  the  sea  side,  where  wee  found  lying  upon  the
sands  great  quantitie  of  mightie  great  trees  with  rootes
and  all,  some  of  them  of  foure,  five,  and  sixe  cart  load
by  our  estimation,  which,  as  the  people  tolde  us,  were
in  the  great  stormy  weather,  which  we  indured  at  sea,
Florida  300.  rooted  out  of  the  ground  in  Terra  Florida,  which  is
leagues  from  three  hundreth  leagues  over  by  Sea,  and  brought  thither.
So  we  came  to  the  saide  Towne  of  Vera  cruz,  where  wee
remained  a  moneth :  and  there  the  said  John  Field
chanced  to  meete  with  an  olde  friend  of  his  acquaintance
in  Spaine,  called  Gon9alo  Ruiz  de  Cordova,  a  very  rich
man  of  the  saide  Towne  of  Vera  cruz  :  who  hearing
of  his  comming  thither  with  his  wife  and  family,  and  of
his  misfortune  by  Sea,  came  unto  him  and  received  him
and  all  his  houshold  into  his  house,  and  kept  us  there
a  whole  moneth,  making  us  very  good  cheere,  and
giving  us  good  intertainement,  and  also  gave  us  that
were  in  all  eight  persons  of  the  said  John  Fields  house,
double  apparell  new  out  of  the  shop  of  very  good  cloth,
coates,  cloakes,  hose,  shirts,  smocks,  gownes  for  the
women,  hose,  shooes,  and  al  other  necessary  apparel,  and
for  our  way  up  to  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  horses,  moiles,

346

San  Juan  de
UUua

ROBERT TOMSON  ad.

1557-
and  men,  and  money  in  our  purses  for  the  expences  by
the  way,  which  by  our  accompt  might  amount  unto  the
summe  of  400.  Crownes.  And  after  wee  were  entred
two  dayes  journey  into  the  Countrey,  I  the  saide  Robert
Tomson  fell  so  sicke  of  an  ague,  that  the  next  day  I
was  not  able  to  sit  on  my  horse,  but  was  faine  to  be
caried  upon  Indians  backes,  from  thence  to  Mexico.
And  when  wee  came  within  halfe  a  dayes  journey  of  the
Citie  of  Mexico,  the  saide  John  Field  also  fell  sicke,
and  within  three  dayes  after  we  arrived  at  the  said  Citie,
hee  died  :  And  presently  sickened  one  of  his  children,
and  two  more  of  his  houshold  people,  and  within  eight
dayes  died.  So  that  within  tenne  dayes  after  we  arrived
at  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  of  eight  persons  that  were  of  Mexico.
us  of  the  saide  company,  there  remained  but  foure  alive,
and  I  the  said  Tomson  was  at  the  point  of  death  of  the
sicknes  that  I  got  upon  the  way,  which  continued  with
mee  the  space  of  sixe  moneths.  At  the  ende  of  which
time  it  pleased  Almightie  God  to  restore  me  my  health
againe,  although  weake  and  greatly  disabled.  And  being
some  thing  strong,  I  procured  to  seeke  meanes  to  live,
and  to  seeke  a  way  how  to  profite  my  selfe  in  the
Countrey,  seeing  it  had  pleased  God  to  sende  us  thither
in  safetie.  Then  by  friendship  of  one  Thomas  Blake  a
Scottishman  borne,  who  had  dwelt  and  had  bene  married
in  the  said  Citie  above  twentie  yeeres  before  I  came
to  the  saide  Citie,  I  was  preferred  to  the  service  of  a
gentleman  a  Spaniard  dwelling  there,  a  man  of  great
wealth,  and  one  of  the  first  conquerours  of  the  said  Citie,
whose  name  was  Gongalo  Cerezo,  with  whom  I  dwelt
twelve  moneths  and  a  halfe.  At  the  ende  of  which  I
was  maliciously  accused  by  the  Holy  house  for  matters
of  Religion,  and  so  apprehended  and  caried  to  prison,
where  I  lay  close  prisoner  seven  moneths,  without  speak-
ing to  any  creature,  but  to  the  Jailer  that  kept  the  said
prison,  when  he  brought  me  my  meat  and  drinke.  In
the  meane  time  was  brought  into  the  saide  prison  one
Augustin  Boacio  an  Italian  of  Genoua also  for  matters

347

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1557-

of  Religion,  who  was  taken  at  Sacatecas  80.  leagues  to
[III.  451.]  the  Northwest  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico  :  At  the  ende  of
the  said  seven  moneths,  we  were  both  caried  to  the  high
Church  of  Mexico,  to  doe  open  penance  upon  an  high
scaffold,  made  before  the  high  Altar,  upon  a  Sunday,  in
the  presence  of  a  very  great  number  of  people,  who  were
at  the  least  five  or  sixe  thousand.  For  there  were  that
came  one  hundreth  mile  off,  to  see  the  saide  Auto  (as
they  call  it)  for  that  there  were  never  none  before,  that
had  done  the  like  in  the  said  Countrey,  nor  could  not
tell  what  Lutheranes  were,  nor  what  it  meant :  for  they
never  heard  of  any  such  thing  before.  We  were  brought
into  the  Church,  every  one  with  a  S.  Benito  upon  his
backe,  which  is  halfe  a  yard  of  yellow  cloth,  with  a  hole
to  put  in  a  mans  head  in  the  middest,  and  cast  over  a
mans  head  :  both  flaps  hang  one  before,  and  another
behinde,  and  in  the  middest  of  every  flap,  a  S.  Andrewes
crosse,  made  of  red  cloth,  sowed  on  upon  the  same,  and
that  is  called  S.  Benito.  The  common  people  before
they  sawe  the  penitents  come  into  the  Church,  were
given  to  understand  that  wee  were  heretiques,  infidels,
and  people  that  did  despise  God,  and  his  workes,  and
that  wee  had  bene  more  like  devils  then  men,  and
thought  wee  had  had  the  favour  of  some  monsters,  or
heathen  people.  And  when  they  saw  us  come  into  the
Church  in  our  players  coates,  the  women  and  children
began ne  to  cry  out,  and  made  such  a  noise,  that  it  was
strange  to  see  and  heare,  saying,  that  they  never  sawe
goodlier  men  in  all  their  lives,  and  that  it  was  not  pos-
sible that  there  could  be  in  us  so  much  evill  as  was
reported  of  us,  and  that  we  were  more  like  Angels
among  men,  then  such  persons  of  such  evill  Religion  as
by  the  Priestes  and  friers  wee  were  reported  to  be,  and
that  it  was  great  pitie  that  wee  should  bee  so  used  for
so  small  an  offence.  So  that  being  brought  into  the
saide  high  Church,  and  set  upon  the  scaffold  which  was
made  before  the  high  Altar,  in  the  presence  of  all  the
people, untill high Masse was done, and the  sermon

348

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1557.

made  by  a  frier,  concerning  our  matter,  they  did  put  us
in  all  the  disgrace  they  could,  to  cause  the  people  not
to  take  so  much  compassion  upon  us,  for  that  wee  were
heretiques,  &  people  that  were  seduced  of  the  devill,  &
had  forsaken  the  faith  of  the  Catholique  Church  of
Rome,  with  divers  other  reprochfull  wordes,  which  were
too  long  to  recite  in  this  place.  High  Masse  and
Sermon  being  done,  our  offences,  as  they  called  them,
were  recited,  every  man  what  he  had  said  and  done,  and
presently  was  the  sentence  pronounced  against  us.  That
was,  that  the  said  Augustine  Boacio  was  condemned  to
weare  his  S.  Benito  all  the  dayes  of  his  life,  and  put  into
perpetuall  prison,  where  hee  should  fulfill  the  same,  and
all  his  goods  confiscated  and  lost.  And  I  the  saide
Tomson  to  weare  the  S.  Benito  for  three  yeeres,  and
then  to  be  set  at  libertie.  And  for  the  accomplishing
of  this  sentence  or  condemnation,  we  must  be  presently
sent  downe  from  Mexico,  to  Vera  Cruz,  and  from  thence
to  S.  John  de  Ullua,  and  there  to  be  shipped  for  Spaine,
which  was  6^.  leagues  by  land,  with  strait  commande-
ment,  that  upon  paine  of  1000.  duckets,  the  Masters
every  one  should  looke  straitly  unto  us,  and  carry  us  to
Spaine,  and  deliver  us  unto  the  Inquisitors  of  the  Holy
house  of  Sivill,  that  they  should  put  us  in  the  places,
where  we  should  fulfill  our  penances  that  the  Archbishop
of  Mexico  had  enjoyned  unto  us,  by  his  sentence  there
given.  For  performance  of  the  which,  we  were  sent
downe  from  Mexico,  to  the  Sea  side,  which  was  6^.
leagues,  with  fetters  upon  our  feete,  and  there  delivered
to  the  Masters  of  the  ships,  to  be  caried  for  Spaine,
as  before  is  said.  And  it  was  so,  that  the  Italian,  fearing
that  if  he  had  presented  himselfe  in  Spaine  before  the
Inquisitors,  that  they  would  have  burned  him,  to  prevent
that  danger,  when  wee  were  comming  homeward,  and
were  arrived  at  the  yland  of  Ter9era,  one  of  the  ysles  of
the  A9ores,  the  first  night  that  we  came  into  the  said
port  to  an  ancker,  about  midnight  he  found  the  meanes
to  get  him  naked  out  of  the  ship  into  the  sea,  &  swam

349

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1558.

naked  a  shoare,  and  so  presently  got  him  to  the  further
side  of  the  yland,  where  hee  found  a  little  Carvel  ready
to  depart  for  Portugal,  in  the  which  he  came  to  Lisbone,
and  passed  into  France,  and  so  into  England,  where  hee
ended  his  life  in  the  Citie  of  London.  And  I  for  my
part  kept  still  aboord  the  ship,  and  came  into  Spaine,  and
was  delivered  to  the  Inquisitors  of  the  Holy  house  of
Sivill,  where  they  kept  me  in  close  prison,  till  I  had
fuljfilled  the  three  yeeres  of  my  penance.  Which  time
being  expired,  I  was  freely  put  out  of  prison,  and
set  at  libertie :  and  being  in  the  Citie  of  Sivil  a
casher  of  one  Hugh  Typton,  an  English  marchant
of  great  doing,  by  the  space  of  one  yeere,  it  fortuned
that  there  came  out  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  a  Spaniard,
called  John  de  la  Barrera,  that  had  bene  long  time  in
the  Indies,  and  had  got  great  summes  of  golde  and
silver,  and  with  one  onely  daughter  shipped  himselfe
for  to  come  for  Spaine,  and  by  the  way  chanced  to  die,
and  gave  all  that  hee  had  unto  his  onely  daughter,
whose  name  was  Marie  de  la  Barrera,  and  being  arrived
at  the  Citie  of  Sivil,  it  was  my  chance  to  marry  with
her.  The  marriage  was  worth  to  mee  2500.  pounds  in
barres  of  golde  and  silver,  besides  jewels  of  great  price.
This  I  thought  good  to  speake  of,  to  shew  the  good-
nes  of  God  to  all  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him,
that  I  being  brought  out  of  the  Indies,  in  such  great
misery  and  infamy  to  the  world,  should  be  provided  at
Gods  hand  in  one  moment,  of  more  then  in  all  my
life  before  I  could  attaine  unto  by  my  owne  labour.
[III.  452.]  After  we  departed  from  Mexico,  our  S.  Benitoes
were  set  up  in  the  high  Church  of  the  said  Citie,  with
our  names  written  in  the  same,  according  to  their  use  and
custome,  which  is  and  will  be  a  monument  and  a  remem-
brance of  us,  as  long  as  the  Romish  Church  doth  raigne
in  that  country.  The  same  have  bene  scene  since  by
one  John  Chilton,  and  divers  others  of  our  nation,  which
were  left  in  that  countrey  long  since,  by  Sir  John  Haw-
kins. And because  it shalbe  knowen wherefore  it  was

350

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1558.
that  I  was  so  punished  by  the  Clergies  hande,  as  before  is
mentioned,  I  will  in  briefe  words  declare  the  same.

It  is  so,  that  being  in  Mexico  at  the  table,  among  many
principall  people  at  dinner,  they  began  to  inquire  of  me
being  an  Englishman,  whether  it  were  true,  that  in  Eng-
land they  had  overthrowen  all  their  Churches  and  houses
of  Religion,  and  that  all  the  images  of  the  Saints  of
heaven  that  were  in  them  were  throwen  downe,  broken,
and  burned,  and  in  some  places  high  wayes  stoned  with
them,  and  whether  the  English  nation  denied  their  obedi-
ence to  the  Pope  of  Rome,  as  they  had  bene  certified
out  of  Spaine  by  their  friends.  To  whom  I  made  answere,
that  it  was  so,  that  in  deed  they  had  in  England  put
downe  all  the  Religious  houses  of  friers  and  monks  that
were  in  England,  and  the  images  that  were  in  their
Churches  and  other  places  were  taken  away,  and  used
there  no  more  :  for  that  (as  they  say)  the  making  of
them,  and  putting  of  them  where  they  were  adored,  was
cleane  contrary  to  the  expresse  commandement  of  Al-
mighty God,  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thy  selfe  any  graven
image,  &c.  and  that  for  that  cause  they  thought  it  not
lawfull  that  they  should  stand  in  the  Church,  which  is  the
house  of  adoration.  One  that  was  at  the  declaring  of
these  words,  who  was  my  master  Gonsalo  Cereso,  answered
and  said,  if  it  were  against  the  commandement  of  God,  to
have  images  in  the  Churches,  that  then  he  had  spent  a
great  deale  of  money  in  vaine,  for  that  two  yeres  past  he
had  made  in  the  monastery  of  Santo  Domingo,  in  the
said  citie  of  Mexico,  an  image  of  our  Lady  of  pure  silver
&  golde,  with  pearles  and  precious  stones,  which  cost  him
7000.  and  odde  pesos,  and  every  peso  is  4.S.  8.d.  of  our
money :  which  indeed  was  true,  for  that  I  have  scene  it
many  times  my  selfe  where  it  stands.  At  the  table  was
another  gentleman,  who  presuming  to  defend  the  cause
more  then  any  other  that  was  there,  saide,  that  they
knew  well  ynough  that  they  were  made  but  of  stockes
and  stones,  and  that  to  them  was  no  worship  given,
but  that  there  was  a  certaine  veneration  due  unto  them

351

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1558.

after  they  were  set  up  in  the  Church,  and  that  they
were  set  there  to  a  good  intent :  the  one,  for  that  they
were  books  for  the  simple  people,  to  make  them  under-
stand the  glory  of  the  saints  that  were  in  heaven,  &  a
shape  of  them  to  put  us  in  remembrance  to  cal  upon
them,  to  be  our  intercessors  unto  God  for  us,  for  that
we  are  such  miserable  sinners,  that  we  are  not  worthy
to  appeare  before  God,  &  that  using  devotion  to  saints
in  heaven,  they  may  obtaine  at  Gods  hands  the  sooner,
the  thing  that  we  demand  of  him.  As  for  example,
said  he,  imagin  that  a  subject  hath  offended  his  king
upon  the  earth  in  any  kind  of  respect,  is  it  for  the
party  to  go  boldly  to  the  king  in  person,  &  to  demand
pardon  for  his  offences  ?  No,  saith  he,  the  presumption
were  too  great,  &  possibly  he  might  be  repulsed,  and
have  a  great  rebuke  for  his  labour.  Better  it  is  for
such  a  person  to  seek  some  private  man  neere  the  king
in  his  Court,  and  make  him  acquainted  with  his  matter,
&  let  him  be  a  mediator  to  his  Majesty  for  him,  &
for  the  matter  he  hath  to  do  with  him,  and  so  might
he  the  better  come  to  his  purpose,  and  obteine  the
thing  which  he  doeth  demand  :  even  so  saith  he,  it  is
with  God  and  his  saints  in  heaven  :  for  we  are  wretched
sinners  :  and  not  worthy  to  appeare  nor  present  our
selves  before  the  Majesty  of  God,  to  demand  of  him
the  thing  that  we  have  need  of:  therefore  thou  hast
need  to  be  devout,  and  have  devotion  to  the  mother
of  God,  and  the  saints  of  heaven,  to  be  intercessors  to
God  for  thee,  and  so  mayest  thou  the  better  obtaine
of  God  the  thing  that  thou  dost  demand.  To  this  I
answered,  &  said,  sir,  as  touching  the  comparison  you
made  of  the  intercessors  to  the  king,  how  necessary
they  were,  I  would  but  aske  you  this  question.  Set
the  case  that  this  king  you  speak  of,  if  he  be  so  merci-
ful, as,  when  he  knoweth  that  one,  or  any  of  his
subjects  hath  offended  him,  he  send  for  him  to  his
owne  towne,  or  to  his  owne  house,  or  palace,  &  say
unto  him,  come  hither,  I  know  that  thou  hast  offended

352

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1558.
many  lawes,  if  thou  doest  know  thereof,  and  doest  re-
pent thee  of  the  same,  with  ful  intent  to  offend  no  more,
I  wil  forgive  thy  trespasse,  and  remember  it  no  more  :
said  I,  if  this  be  done  by  the  kings  owne  person,  what
then  hath  this  man  need  to  go  seeke  friendship  at  any  of
the  kings  privat  servants  hands,  but  go  to  the  principal,
seeing  that  he  is  readier  to  forgive  thee,  then  thou  art  to
demand  forgiven es  at  his  hands  ?  Even  so  is  it  with  our
gracious  God,  who  calleth  and  crieth  out  unto  us  through-
out all  the  world,  by  the  mouth  of  his  Prophets,  Apostles,
and  by  his  owne  mouth,  saying.  Come  unto  me  al  ye  that
labour  and  are  over  laden,  and  I  wil  refresh  you  :  besides
1000.  other  offers  and  proffers  which  hee  doth  make  unto
us  in  his  holy  Scriptures.  What  then  have  we  need  of
the  saints  helpe  that  are  in  heaven,  whereas  the  Lord  him-
self doth  so  freely  offer  himselfe  unto  us  ?  At  which
sayings,  many  of  the  hearers  were  astonied,  and  said,  that
by  that  reason,  I  would  give  to  understand,  that  the  in-  [III.  453.]
vocation  of  Saints  was  to  be  disanuUed,  and  by  the  Lawes
of  God  not  commanded.  I  answered,  that  they  were  not
my  words  but  the  words  of  God  himselfe  :  looke  into
the  Scriptures  your  selfe,  and  you  shall  so  finde  it.  The
talke  was  perceived  to  be  prejudiciall  to  the  Romish  doc-
trine, and  therefore  it  was  commanded  to  be  no  more
entreated  of,  and  all  remained  unthought  upon,  had  it  not
bene  for  a  villanous  Portugal  that  was  in  the  company,
who  said,  Basta  ser  Ingles  para  saber  todo  esto  y  mas :
who  the  next  day,  without  imparting  any  thing  to  any
body,  went  to  the  Bishop  of  Mexico,  and  his  Provisor,
and  said,  that  in  a  place  where  he  had  bene  the  day  be-
fore, was  an  Englishman,  who  had  said,  that  there  was  no
need  of  Saints  in  the  Church,  nor  of  any  invocation  of
Saints,  upon  whose  denomination  I  was  apprehended  for
the  same  words  here  rehearsed,  and  none  other  thing,  and
thereupon  was  used,  as  before  is  written.

Now  to  speake  somewhat  of  the  description  of  the  coun-
trey,  you shall  understand,  that  the  port  of  S.  John  de  Sam  Juan  de
Ullua  is  a  very  little  Island  low  by  the  water  side,  the  ^^'^*^-
IX  353  z

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1558.

broadest  or  longest  part  thereof  not  above  a  bow  shoote
over,  and  standeth  within  two  furlongs  of  the  firme  land.
In  my  time  there  was  but  one  house,  and  a  little  Chappel
to  say  Masse  in,  in  all  the  Island :  the  side  to  the  land
wards  is  made  by  mans  handes,  with  free-stone  and
gravel,  and  is  4.  fadome  deep  downe  right,  wherfore
the  great  ships  that  come  in  there  do  ride  so  neere  the
shoare  of  the  Island,  that  you  may  come  and  goe
aland  upon  their  beake  noses.  They  use  to  put  great
chaines  of  yron  in  at  their  halsers,  and  an  ancker  to
the  landward,  and  all  little  ynough  to  more  well  their
shippes  for  feare  of  the  Northerly  winds,  which  come
off  the  coast  of  Florida,  that  sometimes  have  caried
ships,  &  houses,  and  all  away  to  the  shoare.  The  king
was  wont  to  have  20.  great  mightie  Negroes,  who  did
serve  for  nothing  else,  but  onely  to  repaire  the  said
Island,  where  the  foule  weather  doeth  hurt  it.  The
Countrey  all  thereabout  is  very  plaine  ground,  &  a  mile
from  the  sea  side  a  great  wildernes,  with  great  quantitie
of  red  Deere  in  the  same,  so  that  when  the  mariners
of  the  ships  are  disposed,  they  go  up  into  the  wilder-
nes, and  do  kil  of  the  same,  and  bring  them  aboord  to
eate,  for  their  recreation.
The  way  and  From  this  port  to  the  next  towne,  which  is  called
distance  from y^^^  (^  ^^^ leagues  almost  by  the Sea  side,  till

IJllua  to  Vera  7°^  Come  within  one  league  of  the  place,  and  then  you
Cru%,  is  jive  turne  up  towards  the  land,  into  a  wood,  till  you  come
leagues.  to a litle river hard by the said townes side,  which

sometimes  of  the  yere  is  dry  without  water.  The
towne  of  Vera  Cruz  in  my  time,  had  not  past  300.
housholds,  and  served  but  for  the  folke  of  the  ships,
to  buy  and  bring  their  goods  aland,  and  deliver  it  to
their  owners,  as  also  the  owners  and  their  factors  to
receive  their  goods  of  the  Masters  of  the  ships.  This
towne  standeth  also  in  a  very  plaine  on  the  one  side  the
river,  and  the  other  side  is  environed  with  much  sande
blowen  from  the  sea  side  with  the  tempest  of  weather,
many  times  comming  upon  that  coast. This  towne  also

354

ROBERT TOMSON  ad.

1558.
is  subject  to  great  sicknes,  and  in  my  time  many  of  the
Mariners  &  officers  of  the  ships  did  die  with  those
diseases,  there  accustomed,  &  especially  those  that  were
not  used  to  the  countrey,  nor  knew  the  danger  therof,
but  would  commonly  go  in  the  Sunne  in  the  heat  of  the
day,  &  did  eat  fruit  of  the  countrey  with  much  disorder,
and  especially  gave  themselves  to  womens  company  at
their  first  comming :  whereupon  they  were  cast  into  a
burning  ague,  of  the  which  few  escaped.

Halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  Vera  Cruz,  towards  Ventadep,n-
Mexico,  is  a  lodging  of  five  or  sixe  houses,  called  the  '^°'^'^'^°-
Rinconado,  which  is  a  place,  where  is  a  great  pinacle
made  of  lime  and  stone,  fast  by  a  river  side,  where
the  Indians  were  wont  to  doe  their  sacrifices  unto  their
gods,  and  it  is  plaine  and  low  ground  betwixt  that  and
Vera  Cruz,  and  also  subject  to  sicknes :  but  afterward
halfe  a  dayes  journey  that  you  do  begin  to  enter  into
the  high  land,  you  shall  find  as  faire,  good,  and  sweet
countrey,  as  any  in  the  world,  and  the  farther  you  go,
the  goodlier  and  sweeter  the  countrey  is,  till  you  come
to  Pueblo  de  los  Angeles,  which  may  be  some  43  leagues  Puehlo  de  los
from  Vera  Cruz,  which  was  in  my  time  a  towne  of  600.  -^W^^^-
housholds,  or  thereabout,  standing  in  a  goodly  soile.
Betweene  Vera  Cruz  and  that  you  shall  come  through
many  townes  of  the  Indians,  and  villages,  and  many
goodly  fieldes  of  medow  grounds.  Rivers  of  fresh  waters,
forrests,  and  great  woods,  very  pleasant  to  behold.  From
Pueblo  de  los  Angeles,  to  Mexico,  is  20.  leagues  of  very
faire  way  and  countrey,  as  before  is  declared.  Mexico  Mexico.
was  a  Citie  in  my  time,  of  not  above  1500.  housholds
of  Spaniards  inhabiting  there,  but  of  Indian  people  in  the
suburbs  of  the  said  city,  dwelt  above  300000.  as  it  was
thought,  and  many  more.  This  City  of  Mexico  is  65.
leagues  from  the  North  sea,  and  75.  leagues  from  the
South  sea,  so  that  it  standeth  in  the  midst  of  the  maine
land,  betwixt  the  one  sea  and  the  other.  It  is  situated
in  the  middest  of  a  lake  of  standing  water,  and  environed
round  about  with  the  same,  saving  in  many  places,  going

355

A.D.
1558.

[in.  454.]

Don  Luis  de
Velasco.

This  is  to  be
understood  of
his  second  coni-
ming  into
Spaine.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

out  of  the  Citie,  are  many  broad  wayes  through  the  said
lake  or  water.  This  lake  and  Citie  is  environed  also
with  great  mountaines  round  about,  which  are  in  com-
passe  above  thirtie  leagues,  and  the  saide  Citie,  and  lake
of  standing  water,  doeth  stand  in  a  great  plaine  in  the
middest  of  it.  This  lake  of  standing  water  doeth  pro-
ceed from  the  shedding  of  the  raine,  that  falleth  upon
the  saide  mountaines,  and  so  gather  themselves  together
in  this  place.

All  the  whole  proportion  of  this  Citie  doeth  stand  in
a  very  plaine  ground,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  said
Citie  is  a  square  place  of  a  good  bow  shoote  over  from
side  to  side :  and  in  the  middest  of  the  said  place  is
the  high  Church,  very  faire  and  well  builded  all  through,
at  that  time  not  halfe  finished,  and  round  about  the  said
place,  are  many  faire  houses  built :  on  the  one  side,  are
the  houses  where  Mutezuma  the  great  king  of  Mexico
that  was,  dwelt,  and  now  there  lye  alwayes  the  viceroyes
that  the  King  of  Spaine  sendeth  thither  every  three
yeeres.  And  in  my  time  there  was  for  viceroy  a  gentle-
man of  Castil,  called  Don  Luis  de  Velasco.  And  on
the  other  side  of  the  saide  place,  over  against  the  same,
is  the  Bishops  house,  very  faire  built,  and  many  other
houses  of  goodly  building.  And  hard  by  the  same,  are
also  other  very  faire  houses,  built  by  the  Marques  de
Valle,  otherwise  called  Hernando  Cortes,  who  was  hee
that  first  conquered  the  saide  Citie  and  Countrey,  who
after  the  said  conquest  which  hee  made  with  great
labour  and  travaile  of  his  person,  and  danger  of  his
life,  and  being  growen  great  in  the  Countrey,  the  King
of  Spaine  sent  for  him,  saying  that  he  had  some  par-
ticular matters  to  impart  unto  him.  And  when  he  came
home,  he  could  not  bee  suffered  to  returne  backe  againe,
as  the  King  before  had  promised  him.  With  the  which,
for  sorrow  that  he  tooke,  he  died ;  and  this  he  had  for
the  reward  of  his  good  service.

The  said  Citie  of  Mexico  hath  the  streetes  made  very
broad,  and  right,  that  a man being in  the  high place,

356

ROBERT TOMSON  a.d.

1558.
at  the  one  ende  of  the  street,  may  see  at  the  least  a
good  mile  forward,  and  in  all  the  one  part  of  the  streets
of  the  North  part  of  their  Citie,  there  runneth  a  pretie
lake  of  very  cleare  water,  that  every  man  may  put  into
his  house  as  much  as  he  will,  without  the  cost  of  any
thing,  but  of  the  letting  in.  Also  there  is  a  great  cave
or  ditch  of  water,  that  commeth  through  the  Citie,  even
unto  the  high  place,  where  come  every  morning  at  the
break  of  the  day  twentie  or  thirtie  Canoas,  or  troughes
of  the  Indians,  which  bring  in  them  all  maner  of  pro-
vision for  the  citie,  which  is  made,  and  groweth  in
the  Countrey,  which  is  a  very  good  commoditie  for
the  inhabitants  of  that  place.  And  as  for  victuals  in
the  said  Citie,  of  beefe,  mutton,  and  hennes,  capons,
quailes,  Guiny-cockes,  and  such  like,  all  are  very  good
cheape :  To  say,  the  whole  quarter  of  an  oxe,  as  much
as  a  slave  can  carry  away  from  the  Butchers,  for  five
Tomynes,  that  is,  five  Royals  of  plate,  which  is  just  two
shillings  and  sixe  pence,  and  a  fat  sheepe  at  the  Butchers
for  three  Royals,  which  is  18.  pence  and  no  more.  Bread
is  as  good  cheape  as  in  Spaine,  and  all  other  kinde  of
fruites,  as  apples,  peares,  pomegranats,  and  quinces,  at
a  reasonable  rate.  The  Citie  goeth  wonderfully  forwards
in  building  of  Frieries  and  Nunneries,  and  Chappels,
and  is  like  in  time  to  come,  to  be  the  most  populous
Citie  in  the  world,  as  it  may  be  supposed.  The  weather
is  there  alwayes  very  temperate,  the  day  difFereth  but  one
houre  of  length  all  the  yere  long.  The  fields  and  the
woods  are  alwayes  greene.  The  woods  full  of  popinjayes,
and  many  other  kinde  of  birdes,  that  make  such  an  har-
monie  of  singing,  and  crying,  that  any  man  will  rejoyce
to  heare  it.  In  the  fields  are  such  odoriferous  smels  of
flowers  and  hearbs,  that  it  giveth  great  content  to  the
senses.  About  the  Citie  of  Mexico  two,  three,  or  foure
leagues  off,  are  divers  townes  of  Indians,  some  of  4000.
or  6000.  housholds,  which  doe  stand  in  such  a  goodly
soyle,  that  if  Christians  had  the  inhabitation  thereof,  it
would  be  put  to  a  further  benefite. In  my  time  were

357

A.D.
1558.

Mexico
conquered
Jnno  1519.
and  1 5  20.

CocMnilla  is
not  a  worme
nor  a  flie,  but
a  berry.

Indico.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

dwelling  and  alive  in  Mexico,  many  ancient  men  that
were  of  the  conquerours  at  the  first  conquest  with
Hernando  Cortes:  for  then  it  was  about  36.  yeeres
agoe,  that  the  said  Countrey  was  conquered.

About  Mexico  there  are  divers  Mines  of  silver,  and
also  in  other  places  there  about,  but  the  principall
Mines  that  are  in  all  New  Spaine  are  in  Sacatecas,  80.
leagues  from  Mexico,  and  the  Mines  of  S.  Martin,  thirtie
leagues,  both  to  the  Northwestward  of  Mexico,  where
is  great  store  of  gold  and  silver.  Also  there  is  a  place
called  the  Misteca,  fiftie  leagues  to  the  Northwest,  which
doth  yeeld  great  store  of  very  good  silke,  and  Cochinilla.
Wine  and  oyle  there  is  none  growing  in  the  Countrey,
but  what  commeth  out  of  Spaine.  Also  there  are  many
goodly  fruits  in  that  Countrey,  whereof  we  have  none
such,  as  Plantanos,  Guyaves,  Sapotes,  Tunas,  and  in  the
wildernes  great  store  of  blacke  cheries,  and  other  whol-
some  fruites.  The  Cochinilla  is  not  a  worme,  or  a  flye,
as  some  say  it  is,  but  a  berrie  that  groweth  upon  certaine
bushes  in  the  wilde  fielde,  which  is  gathered  in  time  of
the  yeere,  when  it  is  ripe.  Also  the  Indico  that  doeth
come  from  thence  to  die  blew,  is  a  certaine  hearbe  that
groweth  in  the  wilde  fieldes,  and  is  gathered  at  one  time
of  the  yeere,  and  burnt,  and  of  the  ashes  thereof,  with
other  confections  put  thereunto,  the  saide  Indico  is  made.
Balme,  Salsa  perilla,  Cana  fistula,  suger,  oxe  hides,  and
many  other  good  and  serviceable  things  the  Countrey
doeth  yeeld,  which  are  yeerely  brought  into  Spaine,  and
there  solde  and  distributed  to  many  nations.

Robert  Tomson.

358

ROGER BODENHAM

A.D.
1564.

A  voyage  made by M. Roger Bodenham to S.  [in.  455.]
John  de Ullua  in  the  bay  of  Mexico,  in  the
yeere 1564.

Roger  Bodenham  having  a  long  time  lived
in  the  city  of  Sivil  in  Spaine,  being  there
married,  and  by  occasion  thereof  using
trade  and  traffique  to  the  parts  of  Bar-
bary,  grew  at  length  to  great  losse  and
hinderance  by  that  new  trade  begun  by  ^  ^^'^,  ^^'^^^
me.  in  the  city  of  Fez :  whereupon  being  ^.If^fp^^^
returned  into  Spaine,  I  began  to  call  my  wits  about  mee,  ^y  ^gg^f
and  to  consider  with  my  selfe  by  what  meanes  I  might  Bodenham.
recover  and  renew  my  state ;  and  in  conclusion,  by  the
ayde  of  my  friends,  I  procured  a  ship  called  The  Barke
Fox,  perteining  to  London,  of  the  burden  of  eight  or
nine  score  tunnes ;  and  with  the  same  I  made  a  voyage
to  the  West  India,  having  obteined  good  favour  with
the  Spanish  merchants,  by  reason  of  my  long  abode,
and  marriage  in  the  countrey.  My  voyage  was  in  the
company  of  the  Generall  Don  Pedro  Melendes  for  Nova
Hispania :  who  being  himselfe  appointed  Generall  for
Terra  Firma  and  Peru,  made  his  sonne  Generall  for
New  Spaine,  although  Pedro  Melendes  himselfe  was
the  principall  man  and  directer  in  both  fleets.  We  all
departed  from  Cadiz  together  the  last  day  of  May  in
the  yere  1564:  and  I  with  my  ship  being  under  the
conduct  of  the  sonne  of  Don  Pedro  aforesayd,  arrived
with  him  in  Nova  Hispania,  where  immediatly  I  tooke
order  for  the  discharge  of  my  merchandise  at  the  port
of  Vera  Cruz,  otherwise  called  Villa  Rica,  to  be  trans-
ported thence  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  which  is  sixty  and
odde  leagues  distant  from  the  sayd  port  of  Villa  Rica.
In  the  way  are  many  good  townes,  as  namely,  Pueblo
de  los  Angeles,  and  another  called  Tlaxcalan.  The  city
of  Mexico  hath  three  great  causeyes  to  bring  men  to
it,  compassed  with  a  lake,  so  that  it  needeth  no  walles,

359

A.D,

1564.

The  place
where  Cochi-
n'tlla  groweth,
and  the  price
thereof.

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

being  so  defended  by  the  water.  It  is  a  city  plentifull
of  all  necessary  things,  having  many  faire  houses,
churches,  and  monasteries.  I  having  continued  in  the
countrey  the  space  of  nine  moneths,  returned  againe  for
Spaine  with  the  Spanish  fleet,  and  delivered  the  mer-
chandise and  silver  which  I  had  in  the  ship  into  the
Contractation  house,  and  there  received  my  fraight,  which
amounted  outwards  and  homewards  to  the  value  of
13000  ducats  and  more.  I  observed  many  things  in  the
time  of  my  abode  in  Nova  Hispania,  aswell  touching  the
commodities  of  the  countrey  as  the  maners  of  the
people  both  Spanyards  and  Indians  :  but  because  the
Spanish  histories  are  full  of  those  observations,  I  omit
them,  and  referre  the  readers  tb  the  same  :  onely  this
I  say,  that  the  commodity  of  Cochinilla  groweth  in
greatest  abundance  about  the  towne  of  Pueblo  de  los
Angeles,  and  is  not  there  woorth  above  forty  pence  the
pound.

A  notable  discourse  of  M.  John  Chilton,  touching
the  people,  maners,  mines,  cities,  riches,  forces,
and  other  memorable  things  of  New  Spaine,
and  other  provinces  in  the  West  Indies,  scene
and  noted  by  himselfe  in  the  time  of  his
travels,  continued  in  those  parts,  the  space  of
seventeene  or  eighteene  yeeres.

IN  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1561,  in  the
moneth  of  July,  I  John  Chilton  went
out  of  this  city  of  London  into  Spaine,
where  I  remained  for  the  space  of  seven
yeres,  &  from  thence  I  sailed  into
Nova  Hispania,  and  so  travelled  there,
and  by  the  South  Sea,  unto  Peru,  the
space  of  seventeene  or  eighteene  yeeres  :  and  after  that
time  expired,  I  returned  into  Spaine,  and  so  in  the  yere
1586  in  the  moneth  of  July,  I  arrived  at  the  foresayd
city  of  London  :  where  perusing  the  notes  which  I  had

360

JOHN CHILTON  a.d.

1568.

taken  in  the  time  of  my  travell  in  those  yeeres,  I  have
set  downe  as  foUoweth.

In the  yeere 1568, in the  moneth  of  March,  being 1568.
desirous  to  see  the  world,  I embarked  my selfe  in  the
bay  of  Cadiz  in  Andaluzia,  in  a shippe  bound  for  the  Cadiz.
Isles  of  the  Canaries,  where  she  tooke  in  her  lading,  &
set  forth  from  thence for the voyage, in the moneth
of  June,  the  same yere. Within a  moneth after, we
fell  with  the  Isle  of  S.  Domingo,  and  from  thence  directly
to  Nova  Hispania,  and  came  into  the  port  of  S.  John  55«  J^^»  de
de  UUua,  which  is a  litle Island standing in the sea, ^^'^'^•
about  two  miles  from  the  land,  where the king main-
teineth  about  50  souldiers,  and  captaines,  that  keepe  the
forts, and about 150  negroes, who  all  the  yeere  long
are  occupied  in  carying  of  stones  for  building,  &  other
uses,  and  to  helpe  to  make  fast  the  ships  that  come  in
there,  with  their  cables. There  are  built  two  bulwarkes
at  ech  ende  of  a  wall,  that  standeth  likewise  in  the  sayde
Island,  where  the  shippes  use  to  ride,  made  fast  to  the
sayd wall  with  their  cables,  so neere,  that  a  man  may
leape  ashore. From  this  port I  journeyed by  land to
a towne called Vera  Cruz, standing by a rivers  side,  ^-^^'^  C,ru%.
where  all  the  factours of  the  Spanish merchants  dwell,  ^ 45 o- J
which  receive  the  goods  of  such  ships  as  come  thither,
and  also  lade  the  same  with  such  treasure  and  merchandize
as  they  returne  backe  into  Spaine. They  are  in  number  ,
about  foure  hundred,  who  onely  remaine  there,  during
the  time  that  the  Spanish  fleet  dischargeth,  and  is  loden
againe,  which  is  from  the  end  of  August  to  the  beginning
of  April  following. And  then  for  the  unwholesomnesse
of  the  place  they  depart  thence  sixteene  leagues  further
up  within  the  countrey,  to  a  towne  called  Xalapa,  a  very  Xalapa  six-
healthfuU  soile. There  is never any  woman delivered  ^^^"^  leagues.
of  childe  in  this  port  of  Vera  Cruz : for  so  soone  as  they
perceive  themselves  conceived  with  child,  they  get  them
into  the  countrey,  to  avoid  the  perill  of  the  infected  aire,
although  they  use every  morning  to drive  thorow  the
towne  above  two  thousand  head  of  cattell,  to  take  away

361

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

the  ill  vapours  of  the  earth.  From  Xalapa  seven  leagues
Perota  seven  \  came  to  another  place,  named  Perota,  wherein  are
leagues.  certaine  houses  builded  of  straw,  called  by  the  name  of

ventas,  the  inhabitants  whereof  are  Spaniards,  who  ac-
custome  to  harbour  such  travellers  as  are  occasioned  to
journey  that  way  up  into  the  land.  It  standeth  in  a  great
wood  of  Pine  and  Cedar  trees,  the  soile  being  very  colde,
by  reason  of  store  of  snow  which  lieth  on  the  mountaines
there  all  the  yere  long.  There  are  in  that  place  an
infinite  number  of  deere,  of  bignesse  like  unto  great
mules,  having  also  homes  of  great  length.  From  Perota
Fuentes  de  nine  leagues,  I  came  to  the  Fuentes  of  Ozumba,  which
Ozumba  nine  f^g^tes  are  springs  of  water  issuing  out  of  certeine
rocks  into  the  midst  of  the  high  wayes,  where  likewise
are  certaine  ranges,  and  houses,  for  the  uses  before
mentioned.  Eight  leagues  oif  from  this  place  I  came
Pueblo  delos  ^q  xh^  city  of  the  Angels,  so  called  by  that  name  of  the
tl^ues^^^^^  Spanyards,  which  inhabit  there  to  the  number  of  a
thousand,  besides  a  great  number  of  Indians.  This  city
standeth  in  very  plaine  fields,  having  neere  adjoyning
to  it  many  sumptuous  cities,  as  namely  the  city  of
Tlaxcalla,  a  city  of  two  hundred  thousand  Indians,
tributaries  to  the  king,  although  he  exacteth  no  other
tribute  of  them  then  a  handfull  of  wheat  a  piece,  which
amounteth  to  thirteene  thousand  hanneges  yeerely,  as
hath  appeared  by  the  kings  books  of  account.  And  the
reason  why  he  contenteth  himselfe  with  this  tribute,  onely
for  them,  is,  because  they  were  the  occasion  that  he
tooke  the  city  of  Mexico,  with  whom  the  Tlaxcallians
had  warre  at  the  same  time  when  the  Spanyards  came
into  the  countrey.  The  governour  of  this  city  is  a
Spanyard,  called  among  them  The  Alcalde  mayor,  who
administreth  chiefest  causes  of  justice  both  unto  the
Christians  and  Indians,  referring  smaller  and  lighter
vices,  as  drunkennesse  and  such  like,  to  the  judgement
and  discretion  of  such  of  the  Indians  as  are  chosen
every  yeere  to  rule  amongst  them,  called  by  the  name
of  Alcaldes. These  Indians  from  foureteene  yeeres  olde

362

JOHN CHILTON  a.d.

1568.

upwards,  pay  unto  the  king  for  their  yerely  tribute  one
ounce  of  silver,  and  an  hannege  of  maiz,  which  is  valued
among  them  commonly  at  twelve  reals of  plate. The
widowes  among them pay halfe of  this. The  Indians
both  of  this  city,  and  of  the  rest,  lying  about  Mexico,
goe  clothed  with  mantles  of  linnen  cloth  made  of  cotton
wooU,  painted  thorowout  with  works  of  divers  and  fine
colours. It  is  distant  from  the  city  of  the  Angels  foure  Tlaxcdla
leagues  to the Northward,  & foureteene from Mexico.  ■^^^^zSS'^^
There is  another  city  a  league from  it,  called  Chetula, r^  ^^^
consisting  of  more  then  sixty  thousand  Indians,  tributaries,  Angeles.
and there dwell not above twelve Spanyards there.
From it, about two leagues, there is another, called
Acassingo, of  above fifty  thousand Indians,  and about
eight  or  twelve  Spanyards, which standeth at the foot
of  the  Vulcan  of  Mexico,  on  the  East  side. There  are  Vulcan  is  a

besides these, three other  great  cities, the one named  hill  that  con-
_, .  ' r  • TTT  •  J '-¥-'•  1  tinualh  biirn-

Tepiaca,  a  very  famous  city,  Waxazmgo,  and lichama-  ^tj^^itjijir^^

chalcho :  all  these  in  times  past  belonged  to  the  kingdome

of  Tlaxcalla: and  from  these  cities  they  bring  most of

their Cochinilla into Spaine. The distance from the  Cochinilla.

city of  the Angels,  to the city of Mexico is twenty  Pueblo  de  los

leagues. This city of Mexico  is the city of  greatest  /^^^^J^/^^

fame  in  all  the  Indies,  having  goodly  and  costly  houses  ^f^iJ^°^

in it, builded all of  lime  and  stone,  and  seven  streets

in length, and seven in breadth,  with rivers running

thorow  every  second  street, by  which they bring their

provision  in  canoas. It is  situated at the foot  of  cer-

taine hilles, which conteine in compasse by estimation

above  twenty  leagues,  compassing  the  sayd  city  on  the

one  side,  and  a  lake  which is  foureteene  leagues  about

on the  other side. Upon which lake  there are built

many notable and sumptuous cities, as the city of

Tescuco,  where  the  Spanyards  built  sixe  frigats,  at  that

time when they conquered Mexico, and where also

Fernando  Cortes  made  his  abode  five  or  six  moneths  in

curing  of  the  sicknesse of  his  people,  which  they  had

taken  at  their  comming  into  the  countrey. There  dwell

363

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

in this city about sixty thousand Indians, which pay
tribute to the king. In this city  the sayd  Fernando
built  the  finest  church  that  ever  was  built  in  the  Indies,
the  name  whereof  is  S.  Peters.
His  voyage^  After  I  had  continued two  yeeres  in  this  city,  being

from  Mexico (desirous  to see further the  countreys,  I  imployed  that

to  l4  UE^d  •  ^  •

Biscaia  which  I  had,  and  tooke  my  voyage  towards  the  provmces

of  California, in the which was discovered a certeine
countrey, by a Biscaine, whose name was Diego de
[III.  457.] Guiara,  and  called  it  after  the  name  of  his  countrey.  New
'New  Biscay. Biscay,  where  I solde  my  merchandise for  exchange of
silver,  for  there  were  there  certaine  rich  mines  discovered
by the aforesayd Biskaine. Going from Mexico I
directed my voyage somewhat toward the Southwest,
The  Silver to  certaine  mines,  called  Tamascaltepec,  and  so  travelled
mines  of  forward  the space  of  twenty  dayes  thorow  desert  places

^^p^^  ~  unhabited,  till  I  came  to  the  valley  of  S,  Bartholomew,
The  valley  of  which  joyneth  to  the  province  of  New  Biscay.  In  all
S.Bartholo-  these  places  the  Indians  for  the  most  part  go  naked,  and
mezv.  ^j.g  ^^\\^Q  people. Their  common  armour  is  bowes  and

arrowes  :  they  use  to  eate  up  such  Christians  as  they  come
by.  From  hence  departing,  I  came  to  another  province
The  haven  named  Xalisco,  and  from  thence  to  the  port  of  Navidad,
where  ye  ships  -v^rhich  is  I20  leagues  from  Mexico,  in  which  port  arrive
thePhiltmnas  ^^wayes  in  the  moneth  of  April,  all  the  ships  that  come
arrive.  out of  the  South  sea  from  China,  and  the  Philippinas,

and  there  they  lay  their  merchandise  ashore.  The  most
part  whereof  is  mantles  made  of  Cotton  wooll,  Waxe,
and  fine  platters  gilded,  made  of  earth,  and  much  golde.
The  next  Summer  following,  being  in  the  yeere  1570
(which  was  the  first  yeere  that  the  Popes  Buls  were
brought  into  the  Indies)  I  undertooke  another  voyage
towards  the  province  of  Sonsonate,  which  is  in  the
kingdome  of  Guatimala,  whither  I  caried  divers  merchan-
dize of  Spaine,  all  by  land  on  mules  backs.  The  way
thitherward  from  Mexico  is  to  the  city  of  the  Angels,
and  from  thence  to  another  city  of  Christians  80  leagues
Guaxaca. off, called Guaxaca, in which there dwelt about 50

364

JOHN CHILTON  a.d.

1570-
Spanyards,  and  many Indians. All  the  Indians  of  this
province pay  their  tribute  in  mantles of  Cotton wooll,
and  Cochinilla,  whereof  there  groweth  abundance  thorow-
out  this  countrey. Neere  to  this  place  there  lieth  a  port
in the  South  sea,  called Aguatulco,  in  the  which  there  Aguatuko.
dwell  not  above  three  or  foure  Spanyards,  with  certaine
Negroes, which the king  mainteineth there : in which
place  Sir Francis Drake  arrived in  the  yeere 1579,  in
the  moneth  of  April,  where  I  lost  with  his  being  there
above  a  thousand  duckets,  which  he tooke away,  with
much  other  goods of  other  merchants  of  Mexico  from
one  Francisco  Gomes  Rangifa,  factour  there  for  all  the
Spanish  merchants  that  then  traded  in  the  South  sea :  for
from  this  port  they  use  to  imbarke  all  their  goods  that
goe  for  Peru,  and  to  the  kingdome  of  Honduras. From
Guaxaca  I  came  to  a  towne  named  Nixapa,  which  standeth  Nixapa.
upon  certaine  very  high  hilles  in  the  province  of  Sapot-  Sapotecas.
ecas,  wherein  inhabit  about  the  number  of  twenty  Span-
yards,  by  the  King  of  Spaines  commandement,  to  keepe
that  country  in  peace :  for  the  Indians  are  very  rebellious :
and  for  this  purpose  hee  bestoweth  on  them  the  townes
& cities that  be within that  province. From hence I
went  to  a  city  called  Tecoantepec,  which  is  the  farthest Tecoantepec
towne  to  the  Eastward  in  all  Nova  Hispania,  which  some
time  did  belong  to  the  Marques  de  Valle,  and  because  it
is  a  very  fit  port,  standing  in  the  South  sea,  the  king  of
Spaine, upon a rebellion made by the sayd Marques
against  him,  tooke  it  from  him,  and  doth  now  possesse  it
as  his  owne. Heere  in  the  yeere  1572  I  saw  a  piece  of
ordinance  of  brasse,  called  a  Demy  culverin,  which  came
out  of  a  ship  called  the  Jesus  of  Lubec,  which  captaine
Hawkins  left  in  S.  John  de  UUua,  being  in  fight  with  the
Spanyards  in  the  yeere  1568  ;  which  piece  they  afterwards
caried 100  leagues  by  land  over mighty  mountaines to
the  sayd  city,  to  be  embarked  there  for  the  Philippinas.
Leaving  Tecoantepec,  I  went  still  along  by  the  South  sea
about  150  leagues  in  the  desolate  province  of  Soconusco,  Soconusco.
in  which  province  there  groweth  cacao,  which  the  Chris-

365

A.D.

1570.

Sucketepec.
Guasacapan.

Guatimala.

Sonsonate.
San  Salvador.
Acaxutla.

Nicoia  a  fort
where  ye  ships
which  goe  to
thePhilippinas
are  builded.
[III.  458.]

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

tians  cary  from  thence  into  Nova  Hispania,  for  that  it
will  not  grow  in  any  colde  countrey.  The  Indians  of
this  countrey  pay  the  king  their  tribute  in  cacao,  giving
him  four  hundred  cargas,  and  every  carga  is  24000
almonds,  which  carga  is  worth  in  Mexico  thirty  pieces
of  reals  of  plate.  They  are  men  of  great  riches,  and
withall  very  proud :  and  in  all  this  province  thorowout,
there  dwell  not  twenty  Christians.  I  travelled  thorow
another  province  called  Suchetepec  ;  and  thence  to  the
province  of  Guasacapan :  in  both  which  provinces  are
very  few  people,  the  biggest  towne  therein  having  not
above  two  hundred  Indians.  The  chiefest  merchandise
there,  is  cacao.  Hence  I  went  to  the  city  of  Guatimala,
which  is  the  chiefs  city  of  all  this  kingdome :  in  this  city
doe  inhabit  about  80  Spanyards :  and  here  the  king  hath
his  governours,  &  councell,  to  whom  all  the  people  of  the
kingdome  repaire  for  justice.  This  city  standeth  from
the  coast  of  the  South  sea  14  leagues  within  the  land,  and
is  very  rich,  by  reason  of  the  golde  that  they  fetch  out  of
the  coast  of  Veragua.  From  this  city  to  the  Eastward  60
leagues  lieth  the  province  Sonsonate,  where  I  solde  the
merchandize  I  caried  out  of  Nova  Hispania.  The  chiefest
city  of  this  province  is  called  S.  Salvador,  which  lieth  7
leagues  from  the  coast  of  the  South  sea,  and  hath  a  port
lying  by  the  sea  coast,  called  Acaxutla,  where  the  ships
arrive  with  the  merchandize  they  bring  from  Nova
Hispania  ;  and  from  thence  lade  backe  againe  the  cacao  :
there  dwell  heere  to  the  number  of  threescore  Spanyards.
From  Sonsonate  I  travelled  to  Nicoia,  which  is  in  the
kingdome  of  Nicaragua,  in  which  port  the  king  buildeth
all  the  shipping  that  travell  out  of  the  Indies  to  the
Malucos.  I  went  forward  from  thence  to  Costa  rica,
where  the  Indians  both  men  and  women  go  all  naked,
and  the  land  lieth  betweene  Panama,  and  the  kingdome
of  Guatimala :  and  for  that  the  Indians  there  live  as
warriers,  I  durst  not  passe  by  land,  so  that  here  in  a
towne  called  S.  Salvador  I  bestowed  that  which  I  caried
in  annile  (which  is  a  kinde  of  thing  to  die  blew  withall)

366

JOHN CHILTON  a.d.

1570-
which  I  caried  with  me  to  the  port  of  Cavallos,  lying  in  Puerto  deCa-
the  kingdome  of  Honduras,  which  port  is  a  mighty  huge  ^^j'^^^  ^  ^'^'^^
gulfe,  and  at  the  comming  in  on  the  one  side  of  it  there
lieth  a  towne  of  little  force  without  ordinance  or  any
other  strength,  having  in  it  houses  of  straw :  at  which
towne  the  Spanyards  use  yeerely  in  the  moneth  of
August  to  unlade  foure  ships  which  come  out  of
Spaine  laden  with  rich  merchandise,  and  receive  in  heere
againe  their  lading  of  a  kinde  of  merchandise  called
Annile  and  Cochinilla  (although  it  be  not  of  such  value
as  that  of  Nova  Hispania)  and  silver  of  the  mines  of
Tomaangua,  and  golde  of  Nicaragua,  and  hides,  and
Salsa  perilla,  the  best  in  all  the  Indies :  all  which  merchan-
dize they  returne,  and  depart  from  thence  alwayes  in  the
moneth  of  April  following,  taking  their  course  by  the
Island  of  Jamaica,  in  which  Island  there  dwell  on  the
West  side  of  it  certeine  Spanyards  of  no  great  number.
From  this  place  they  go  to  the  cape  of  S.  Anthony,  which
is  the  uttermost  part  of  the  Westward  of  the  Island  of
Cuba,  and  from  thence  to  Havana  lying  hard  by,  which  is  '^.^^  dmrip-
the  chiefest  port  that  the  king  of  Spaine  hath  in  all  the  ^Tlarze^'^^^^
countreys  of  the  Indies,  and  of  greatest  importance :  for
all  the  ships,  both  from  Peru,  Hunduras,  Porto  rico,  S.
Domingo,  Jamaica,  and  all  other  places  in  his  Indies,
arrive  there  in  their  returne  to  Spaine,  for  that  in  this
port  they  take  in  victuals  and  water,  and  the  most  part  of
their  lading :  here  they  meet  from  all  the  foresayd  places
alwayes  in  the  beginning  of  May  by  the  kings  commande-
ment :  at  the  entrance  of  this  port  it  is  so  narrow,  that
there  can  scarse  come  in  two  ships  together,  although  it
be  above  sixe  fadome  deepe  in  the  narrowest  place  of  it.
In  the  North  side  of  the  comming  in  there  standeth  a
tower,  in  which  there  watcheth  every  day  a  man  to
descrie  the  sailes  of  ships  which  hee  can  see  on  the  sea  ;
and  as  many  as  he  discovereth,  so  many  banners  he
setteth  upon  the  tower,  that  the  people  of  the  towne
(which  standeth  within  the  port  about  a  mile  from  the
tower)  may  understand  thereof. Under  this  tower  there

367

A.D.

1570.

The  smal force
of  Havana.

The  commodi-
ties of  Cuba.

Nombre  de
Dies.

Panama.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

lieth  a  sandy  shore,  where  men  may  easily  go  aland  ;  and
by  the  tower  there  runneth  a  hill  along  by  the  waters
side,  which  easily  with  small  store  of  ordinance  subdueth
the  towne  and  port.  The  port  within  is  so  large  that
there  may  easily  ride  a  thousand  saile  of  ships  without
anker  or  cable,  for  no  winde  is  able  to  hurt  them.  There
inhabit  within  the  towne  of  Havana  about  three  hundred
Spanyards,  and  about  threescore  souldiers,  which  the  king
mainteineth  there  for  the  keeping  of  a  certeine  castle
which  hee  hath  of  late  erected,  which  hath  planted  in  it
about  twelve  pieces  of  small  ordinance,  and  is  compassed
round  with  a  small  ditch,  wherethorow  at  their  pleasure
they  may  let  in  the  sea.  About  two  leagues  from
Havana  there  lieth  another  towne  called  Wanabacoa,  in
which  there  is  dwelling  about  an  hundred  Indians,  and
from  this  place  60  leagues  there  lieth  another  towne
named  Bahama,  situate  on  the  North  side  of  the  Island.
The  chiefest  city  of  this  Island  of  Cuba  (which  is  above
200  leagues  in  length)  is  also  called  Sant  lago  de  Cuba,
where  dwelleth  a  bishop  &  about  two  hundred  Spanyards ;
which  towne.  standeth  on  the  South  side  of  the  Island
about  100  leagues  from  Havana.  All  the  trade  of  this
Island  is  cattell,  which  they  kill  onely  for  the  hides  that
are  brought  thence  into  Spaine :  for  which  end  the  Span-
yards  mainteine  there  many  negroes  to  kil  their  cattell,
and  foster  a  great  number  of  hogs,  which  being  killed,
and  cut  into  small  pieces,  they  dry  in  the  Sun,  and  so
make  it  provision  for  the  ships  which  come  for  Spaine.
Having  remained  in  this  Island  two  moneths,  I  tooke
shipping  in  a  frigat,  and  went  over  to  Nombre  de  Dios,
and  from  thence  by  land  to  Panama,  which  standeth  upon
the  South  sea.  From  Nombre  de  Dios  to  Panama  is  17
leagues  distance  :  from  which  towne  there  runneth  a  river
which  is  called  the  river  of  Chagre,  which  runneth  within
5  leagues  of  Panama,  to  a  place  called  Cruzes,  thorow
which  river  they  cary  their  goods,  and  disimbarke  them
at  the  sayd  Cruzes,  and  from  thence  they  are  conveyed
on  mules  backs  to  Panama  by  land ;  where  they  againe

368

JOHN CHILTON  ad.

1570-
imbarke  them  in  certeine small ships  in the  South sea
for  all  the  coast  of  Peru. In  one  of  these  ships  I  went
to  Potossi,  and  from  thence  by  land  to  Cusco,  and  from  Potossi,
thence  to  Paita.  ^^{'^°-

Here  I  remained  the  space  of  seven  moneths,  and  then
returned  into  the  kingdome  of  Guatimala,  and  arrived
in  the  province  of  Nicoia,  and  Nicaragua.  From  Nicara-
gua I  travelled  by  land  to  a  province  called  Nicamula
(which  lieth  toward  the  North  sea  in  certaine  high
mountaines)  for  that  I  could  not  passe  thorow  the
kingdome  of  Guatimala  at  that  time  for  waters,  where-
with all  the  Low  countreys  of  the  province  of  Soconusco,
lying  by  the  South  sea,  are  drowned  with  the  raine  that
falleth  above  in  the  mountaines,  enduring  alwayes  from
April  to  September :  which  season  for  that  cause  they  call
their  Winter.  From  this  province  I  came  into  another
called  De  Vera  Paz,  in  which  the  chiefest  city  is  also  Fera  Paz.
called  after  that  name,  where  there  dwelleth  a  bishop  [III.  459.]
and  about  forty  Spanyards.  Among  the  mountaines  of
this  countrey  toward  the  North  sea,  there  is  a  province
called  La  Candona,  where  are  Indian  men  of  war  which
the  king  can  not  subdue,  for  that  they  have  townes  and
forts  in  a  great  lake  of  water  above  in  the  sayd  moun-
taines :  the  most  part  of  them  goe  naked,  and  some  weare
mantles  of  cotton  wooll.  Distant  from  this  about  80
leagues,  I  came  into  another  province  called  the  province
of  Chiapa,  wherein  the  chiefest  city  is  called  Sacatlan,  Chiapa  300
where there dwelleth a bishop and about an hundred  {^f^^f /''^^^

»  JVLcxtco

Spanyards.  In  this  countrey  there  is  great  store  of
Gotten  wooll,  whereof  the  Indians  make  fine  linnen
cloth,  which  the  Christians  buy  and  cary  into  Nova
Hispania.  The  people  of  this  province  pay  their
tribute  to  the  king  all  in  Cotton  wooll  and  Feathers.
Foureteene  leagues  from  this  city  there  is  another  called
Chiapa,  where  are  the  finest  gennets  in  all  the  Indies,
which  are  caried  hence  to  Mexico,  300  leagues  from
it.  From  this  city  I  travelled  still  thorow  hilles  and
mountaines,  till  I  came  to  the  end  of  this  province,  to
IX  369  2  A

A,D.

1570.

Ecatepec  an
hill  nine
leagues  high.

Tecoantepec.

His  journey  to
Panuco.

Mestiilan,

Clanchinolte-
pec.

Guaxutla.

Guastecan.
Tancuylabo.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

a  hill  called  Ecatepec,  which  in  English  signifieth  The
hill  of  winde :  for  that  they  say,  it  is  the  highest  hill
that  ever  was  discovered :  for  from  the  top  of  it  may
be  discovered  both  the  North  and  the  South  seas ;  and
it  is  in  height  supposed  to  be  nine  leagues.  They  which
travell  over  it,  lie  alwayes  at  the  foot  of  it  over  night,
and  begin  their  journey  about  midnight,  to  travell  to
the  top  of  it  before  the  Sunne  rise  the  next  day,  because
the  winde  bloweth  with  such  force  afterwards,  that  it  is
impossible  for  any  man  to  goe  up  :  from  the  foot  of  this
hill  to  Tecoantepec,  the  first  towne  of  Nova  Hispania,
are  about  fifteene  leagues.  And  so  from  hence  I  jour-
neyed to  Mexico.

By  and  by  after  I  came  to  Mexico  (which  was  in  the
yere  1572)  in  the  company  of  another  Spanyard,  which
was  my  companion  in  this  journey,  we  went  together
toward  the  province  of  Panuco,  which  lieth  upon  the
coast  of  the  North  sea,  and  within  three  dayes  journey
we  entred  a  city  called  Mestitlan,  where  there  dwelt
twelve  Spanyards :  the  Indian  inhabitants  there  were  about
thirty  thousand.  This  city  standeth  upon  certaine  hie
mountaines,  which  are  very  thicke  planted  with  townes
very  holesome  and  fruitfull,  having  plentifull  fountaines
of  water  running  thorow  them.  The  high  wayes  of  these
hilles  are  all  set  with  fruits,  and  trees  of  divers  kindes,
and  most  pleasant.  In  every  towne  as  we  passed  thorow,
the  Indians  presented  us  with  victuals.  Within  twenty
leagues  of  this  place  there  is  another  city  called  Clanchi-
noltepec,  belonging  to  a  gentleman,  where  there  inhabit
about  fourty  thousand  Indians ;  and  there  are  among  them
eight  or  nine  friers  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Augustine,  who
have  there  a  Monastery.  Within  three  dayes  after  we  de-
parted from  this  place,  and  came  to  a  city  called  Guaxutla,
where  there  is  another  Monastery  of  friers  of  the  same
Order :  there  dwell  in  this  towne  about  twelve  Spanyards.
From  this  place  forwards  beginneth  a  province  called
Guastecan,  which  is  all  plaine  grounds  without  any
hilles. The first towne we came unto is  called Tan-

370

JOHN CHILTON  ad.

1572.
cuylaboj  in  which  there  dwell  many  Indians,  high  of
stature,  having  all  their  bodies  painted  with  blew,  and
weare  their  haire  long  downe  to  their  knees,  tied  as
women  use  to  doe  with  their  haire-laces.  When  they
goe  out  of  their  doores,  they  cary  with  them  their  bowes
and  arrowes,  being  very  great  archers,  going  for  the
most  part  naked.  In  those  countreys  they  take  neither
golde  nor  silver  for  exchange  of  any  thing,  but  onely
Salt,  which  they  greatly  esteem e,  and  use  it  for  a  SaltapHnci-
principall  medicine  for  certaine  wormes  which  breed  in  P^^^  Jf^'-
their  lips  and  in  their  gummes.  After  nine  dayes  travell
from  this  place,  we  came  to  a  towne  called  Tampice,  Tampice  a
which  is  a  port  towne  upon  the  sea,  wherein  there  ^°^^  towne.
dwell,  I  thinke,  forty  Christians,  of  which  number
whilest  wee  abode  there,  the  Indians  killed  foureteene,
as  they  were  gathering  of  Salt,  which  is  all  the  trade  that
they  have  in  this  place :  it  standeth  upon  the  entrie  of
the  river  of  Panuco,  which  is  a  mighty  great  river ;  and  Panuco.
were  it  not  for  a  sand  that  lieth  at  the  mouth  of  it,
ships  of  five  hundred  tunne  might  goe  up  into  it  above
three  score  leagues.  From  hence  we  went  to  Panuco,
foureteene  leagues  from  Tampice,  which  in  times  past
had  bene  a  goodly  city,  where  the  king  of  Spaine  had
his  governour :  but  by  reason  that  the  Indians  there
destroyed  the  Christians,  it  lieth  in  a  maner  waste,  con-
teining  in  it  not  above  tenne  Christians  with  a  priest.
In  this  towne  I  fell  sicke,  where  I  lay  one  and  forty
dayes,  having  no  other  sustenance  then  fruit  and  water,
which  water  I  sent  for  above  sixe  leagues  off  within  the
countrey.  Here  I  remained  till  my  companion  came  to
me,  which  had  departed  from  me  another  way,  reteining
in  my  company  onely  a  slave,  which  I  brought  with  me
from  Mexico.  And  the  last  day  in  Easter  weeke  my
companion  came  to  me,  finding  me  in  a  very  weake
state,  by  reason  of  the  unholesomenesse  of  the  place.
Notwithstanding  my  weakenesse,  I  being  set  on  an
horse,  and  an  Indian  behinde  mee  to  holde  mee,  wee
went  forward  on  our  voyage  all  that  day  till  night. The

371

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1572.

next  day  in  the  morning  we  passed  over  the  river  in  a
canoa ;  and  being  on  the  other  side,  I  went  my  selfe
before  alone :  and  by  reason  there  met  many  wayes  traled
by  the  wilde  beasts,  I  lost  my  way,  and  so  travelled
thorow  a  great  wood  about  two  leagues :  and  at  length

[III.  460.]  fell  into  the  hands  of  certaine  wilde  Indians,  which  were
there  in  certaine  cottages  made  of  straw ;  who  seeing  me,
came  out  to  the  number  of  twenty  of  them,  with  their
bowes  and  arrowes,  and  spake  unto  mee  in  their  language,
which  I  understood  not :  and  so  I  made  signes  unto
them  to  helpe  mee  from  my  horse ;  which  they  did  by
commandement  of  their  lord,  which  was  there  with  them  ;
and  lighted  downe.  They  caried  me  under  one  of  their
cottages,  and  layed  me  upon  a  mat  on  the  ground :  and
perceiving  that  I  could  not  understand  them,  they
brought  unto  mee  a  little  Indian  wench  of  Mexico,  of
fifteene  or  sixteene  yeeres  of  age,  whom  they  commanded
to  aske  me  in  her  language  from  whence  I  came,  and  for
what  intent  I  was  come  among  them :  for  (sayth  she)
doest  thou  not  know  Christian,  how  that  these  people
will  kill  and  eat  thee  ?  To  whom  I  answered,  let  them
doe  with  me  what  they  will  ;  heere  now  I  am.  Shee
replied,  saying,  thou  mayest  thanke  God  thou  art  leane ;
for  they  feare  thou  hast  the  pocks :  otherwise  they  would
eate  thee.  So  I  presented  to  the  king  a  little  wine  which
I  had  with  me  in  a  bottle ;  which  he  esteemed  above
any  treasure :  for  for  wine  they  will  sell  their  wives  and
children.  Afterwards  the  wench  asked  me  what  I  would
have,  and  whether  I  would  eat  any  thing.  I  answered
that  I  desired  a  little  water  to  drinke,  for  that  the
countrey  is  very  hote :  and  shee  brought  me  a  great
Venice  glasse,  gilded,  full  of  water.  And  marvelling  at
the  glasse,  I  demanded  how  they  came  by  it. She  tolde

Shallapa.  me  that  the  Casique  brought  it  from  Shallapa,  a  great
towne  distant  30  leagues  from  this  place  on  the  hilles,
whereas  dwelt  certeine  Christians,  and  certeine  friers  of
the  Order  of  S.  Augustine,  which  this  Casique  with  his
people  on  a  night  slew ;  and  burning  the  friers  monasterie,

372

JOHN CHILTON  ad.

1572.
among  other  things  reserved  this  glasse :  and  from  thence
also  brought  me.  Having  now  bene  conversant  with
them  about  three  or  foure  houres,  they  bid  her  aske  me
if  I  would  goe  my  way.  I  answered  her,  that  I  desired
nothing  els.  So  the  Casique  caused  two  of  his  Indians  •
to  leade  me  forward  in  my  way ;  going  before  me  with
their  bowes  and  arrowes,  naked,  the  space  of  three
leagues,  till  they  brought  me  into  an  high  way:  and
then  making  a  signe  unto  me,  they  signified  that  in  short
time  I  should  come  to  a  towne  where  Christians  in-
habited, which  was  called  S.  lago  de  los  valles,  standing^  S^nt  lago  de

1 11
in plaine fields, walled about with a mud wall : the  ''°^  ^^^^^-f-

number  of  the  Christians  that  dwelt  therein,  were  not
above  foure  or  five  and  twenty,  unto  which  the  king  of
Spaine  giveth  Indians  and  townes,  to  keepe  the  countreys
subject  unto  him.  Heere  the  Christians  have  their  mighty  Mighty  mules.
mules,  which  they  cary  for  all  the  parts  of  the  Indies,
and  into  Peru,  for  that  all  their  merchandize  are  caried  by
this  meanes  by  land.  In  this  towne  aforesayd,  I  found
my  company,  which  I  had  lost  before,  who  made  no  other
account  of  me  but  that  I  had  beene  slaine  :  and  the  Chris-
tians there  likewise  marvelled  to  heare  that  I  came  from
those  kinde  of  Indians  alive,  which  was  a  thing  never
seene  nor  heard  of  before  :  for  they  take  a  great  pride
in  killing  a  Christian,  and  to  weare  any  part  of  him
where  he  hath  any  haire  growing,  hanging  it  about
their  necks,  and  so  are  accounted  for  valiant  men.  In
this  towne  I  remained  eighteene  dayes,  till  I  recovered
my  health,  and  in  the  meane  space  there  came  one
Don  Francisco  de  Pago,  whom  the  viceroy  Don  Hen-  T^on  Henrico
rico  Manriques  had  sent  for  captaine  generall,  to  open  ^annques
and  discover  a  certeine  way  from  the  sea  side  to  the  j^gjco.
mines  of  Sacatecas,  which  were  from  this  place  160
leagues,  for  to  transport  their  merchandize  by  that  way,
leaving  the  way  by  Mexico,  which  is  seven  or  eight
weeks  travell.  So  this  captaine  tooke  me  and  my  com-
pany, with  the  rest  of  his  souldiers,  to  the  number  of
forty,  which  he  had  brought  with  him,  and  five  hundred

373

A.D.
1572.

Rio  de  las
Palmas.

The  mines  of
Sacatecas.

The  valley  of
S.  Michael
Pueblo  niievo.
Mechuacan.

Copper  mines.

Campeche.
[III.  461.

Merida.

Rio  de

Tabasco.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Indians,  which  we  tooke  out  of  two  towns  in  this
province  called  Tanchipa,  and  Tamaclipa,  all  good
archers,  and  naked  men,  and  went  thence  to  the  river
de  las  Palmas,  which  is  of  great  bignesse,  parting  the
kingdome  of  Nova  Hispania  and  Florida  :  and  going
still  along  by  this  river  the  space  of  three  dayes,  seek-
ing passage  to  passe  over  ;  and  finding  none,  we  were
at  length  inforced  to  cut  timber  to  make  a  balsa  or  raft,
which  when  we  had  made,  we  sate  on  it,  the  Indians
swimming  in  the  water,  and  thrusting  it  before  them  to
the  other  side.  Within  thirty  dayes  after,  travelling
thorow  woods,  hilles,  and  mountaines,  we  came  to  the
mines  of  Sacatecas,  which  are  the  richest  mines  in  all
the  Indies,  and  from  thence  they  fetch  most  silver  :  at
which  mines  there  dwelt  above  three  hundred  Christians :
and  there  our  captaine  gave  us  leave  to  depart.  So
we  came  to  the  valley  of  S.  Michael  toward  Mexico  ;
and  from  thence  to  Pueblo  novo  ;  and  from  that  place
to  the  province  of  Mechuacan,  after  which  name  the
chiefest  city  of  that  place  is  called  :  where  there  dwelles
a  bishop,  and  above  an  hundred  Spanyards  in  it :  it
aboundeth  with  all  kind  of  Spanish  fruits,  and  hath  woods
full  of  nut  trees,  and  wild  vines.  Heere  are  many  mines
of  copper,  and  great  store  of  cattell.  It  lieth  60.  leagues
from  Mexico,  whither  we  came  within  foure  dayes  after.
The  Indians  of  this  countrey  are  very  mighty  and  big
men.

Afterwards  I  returned  another  way  to  the  province  of
Sonsonate  by  Vera  cruz,  and  so  to  Rio  Alvarado,  and
from  thence  to  the  province  of  Campeche,  which  lieth  on
the  South  side  of  the  bay  of  Mexico  :  the  chiefe  towne  of
this  province  is  called  Merida,  in  which  is  a  bishop  and
almost  100  Spanyards.  The  Indians  of  this  province  pay
all  their  tribute  in  mantles  of  cotton  wooU  and  cacao.
There  is  no  port  in  all  this  province  for  a  ship  of  100  tun
to  ride  in,  but  onely  in  the  river  of  Tabasco,  by  which
river  this  city  of  Merida  standeth.  The  chiefest  merchan-
dize which  they  lade  there  in  smaU  frigats,  is  a  certeine

374

JOHN CHILTON  ad.

1572.

wood  called  campeche,  (wherewith  they  use  to  die)  as  also
hides  and  annile.  By  this  there  lieth  the  province  of
lucatan,  nere  the  Honduras  by  the  North  sea  coast,  where  lucatan.
there  is  also  another  bishop,  and  a  towne  likewise  named
lucatan,  where  there  dwell  a  few  Spanyards.  They  have
no  force  at  all  in  all  this  coast  to  defend  themselves  with-
all,  save  only  that  the  land  is  low,  and  there  is  no  port  to
receive  any  shipping,  unlesse  they  be  frigats,  which  cary
from  thence  to  the  port  of  S.  John  de  UUua,  waxe,  cacao,
hony,  and  also  mantles  of  cotton  wool,  whereof  they
make  there  great  store,  and  of  which  kind  of  merchandize
there  is  great  trade  thence  to  Mexico  :  of  the  same  also
they  pay  their  tribute  to  the  king.

The  king  hath  tribute  brought  him  yerely  out  of  the  The greatnesse
Indies  into  Spaine  betweene  nine  and  ten  millions  of  gold  ^pJ^J^^Jlt^
and  silver  : for  he  receiveth  of  every  Indian  which  is  sub-  out  of  the  West
ject  unto  him (excepting  those  which  do  belong  to  the  Indies.
Incommenderos,  which  are  the  children of  those Span-
yards,  who  first  conquered  the  land,  to  whom  the  king
gave  and  granted  the  government  of  the  cities  and  townes
subdued for three lives) twelve reals  of  plate, and a
hannege  of  maiz,  which  is  a  wheat  of  the  countrey,  (five
of  them  making  a  quarter  of  English  measure)  and  of
every  widow  woman  he  hath  sixe  reals,  &  halfe  a  hannege
of  maiz. And  so  if  any  Indian  have  twenty  children  in
his  house,  he  payeth  for  every  one  of  them,  being  above
fifteene yeres old, after that rate. This Wheat  being
duely  brought  to  the  governour  of  every  province  and
city,  is  sold  in  Mexico  by  the kings  governours there
every  yeere  ;  so  that  the  money  received  for  it,  is  put  into
the  kings  Treasurie  there,  and  so  is  yeerely  caried  from
thence  into  Spaine. Of  the  Spanyards  which  are  owners
of  the  mines  of  gold  and  silver,  he  receiveth  the  fift  part
of  it,  which  he  calleth  his  quintas,  which  being  taken  out  The  quinto.
of  the  heape,  there  is  his  armes  set  on  it ;  for  otherwise  it
may  not  be  brought  out  of  the  land  into Spaine,  under
paine of  death. The marke of  silver, which is eight
ounces,  when  it  commeth  out  of  the  mines,  not  having

375

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572.
Tne  marke  of  the  kings  seale  upon  it,  is  woorth  three  and  forty  reals  of
silver  IS  64 plate,  and  so  it  is  current  :  and  when  they  will  bring  it  for
rea  s  oj p  ate. Sp^jj-,^^  ^y^^y  cary  it  to  the  kings  Treasure  house,  where
his  seale  is  set  upon  it ;  and  so  it  is  raised  in  value  there-
by to  threescore  and  foure  reals  of  plate  :  and  so  the  king
hath  for  his  custome  of  every  marke  of  plate  one  and
twentie  reals.

From  the  yere  of  1570,  which  was  the  yeere  that  the
Popes  buls  came  into  the  Indies,  as  is  afore  mentioned,
he  hath  received  both  of  the  Indians  which  are  tributaries
unto  him,  and  also  of  all  others  belonging  to  the  In-
commenderos,  of  every  one  being  above  twelve  yeeres  of
age,  foure  reals  of  every  bull.  Also  they  cary  other
pardons  with  them  into  the  Indies,  for  such  as  be  dead,
although  an  hundred  yeres  before  the  Spanyards  came
into  the  countrey  :  which  pardons  the  friers  in  their
preachings  perswaded  the  poore  Indians  to  take,  telling
them  that  with  giving  foure  reals  of  plate  for  a  Masse,
they  would  deliver  their  soules  out  of  purgatory.  Of
the  Christians  likewise  dwelling  there  he  hath  foureteene
reals  for  every  bull :  and  there  be  certeine  buls  brought
thither  for  the  Christians  besides  the  former,  which
serve  for  pardoning  all  such  faults  wherein  they  have
trespassed  either  against  the  king,  by  keeping  backe
his  customes,  or  one  against  another  by  any  other  in-
jury ;  for  every  hundred  crownes  whereof  a  mans
conscience  doth  accuse  him  that  he  hath  deceived  the
king  or  any  other,  he  must  give  ten  for  a  bull,  and  so
after  that  rate  for  every  hundred  which  he  hath  any
The  revenue ^^y  stollen,  and  so  is  pardoned  the  fault. The  revenue

f  /  ^  !T of  his  buls  after  this  maner  yeeldeth unto his treasury

buh  and  par-  J ^  J

dons  came  yeerely  above  three  millions  or  gold,  as  i  nave  bene
yerely  to  three  credibly  informed,  although  of  late  both  the  Spanyards
millions.  2,n^  Indians  do  refuse  to  take the buls  ; for that they

perceive  he  doth  make  a  yeerely  custome  of  it  :  onely
ech  Indian  taketh  one  pardon  for  all  his  householde,
(whereas  in  former  time  every  Indian  used  to  take  one
for every  person in  his  house) and teareth the same

376

JOHN CHILTON  a.d.

1572.

into small pieces, and giveth to every one of his

householde a little piece, saying thus, they need now

no more, seeing in that which they  bought the yeere

before they had above ten thousand yeres pardon.

These  pieces  they  sticke up  in the  wall of  the houses

where they lie. Both the Christians & Indians are

weary  with  these  infinite taxes and customes,  which of

late he hath imposed upon them, more then in the

yeeres  before  :  so  as  the  people  of  both  sorts  did  rebell  Rebellions  in

twise  in  the time that I was among them,  and would  ^^^.^  ^"'

have set up another king of themselves  ; for which  ^reat  exac-

cause  the  king  hath  commanded  upon  paine  of  death,  that  tions.

they  should  not  plant  either  wine  or  oile  there,  but  should

alwayes stand in need  of  them  to  be  brought  out of

Spaine,  although  there  would  more  grow  there  in  foure

yeeres,  then  there  groweth  in  Spaine  in  twenty,  it  is  so

fertile  a  countrey.

And  the  king  to  keepe  the  countrey  alwayes  in  sub-  [HI.  462.]

iection,  and  to  his  owne  use,  hath streightly  provided  by  ^'^^  reasons
1  •  r  J X.I. J  1  r  J ^1 ^  which  moove

lawe,  upon  pame  or  death,  and  losse  or  goods,  that  none  ^^^  ^- ^  ^r

of  these  countreys  should  traffique  with  any  other  nation,  spaine  to  forbid

although  the  people  themselves  doe  much  now  desire  to  forren  traffike

trade with  any other then  with them,  and would un-  ^"  ^f^  ^^^^

doubtedly doe, if  they feared not the perill ensuing "  ^^^'

thereupon.

About  Mexico,  and  other  places  in  Nova  Hispania,
there  groweth  a  certeine  plant  called  magueis,  which  Magueis.
yeeldeth  wine,  vineger,  hony,  and  blacke  sugar,  and  of
the  leaves  of  it  dried  they  make  hempe,  ropes,  shooes
which  they  use,  and  tiles  for  their  houses :  and  at  the  ende
of  every  leafe  there  groweth  a  sharpe  point  like  an  awle,
wherewith  they  use  to  bore  or  pearce  thorow  any
thing.

Thus  to  make  an  end,  I  have  heere  set  downe  the
summe  of  all  the  chiefest  things  that  I  have  observed  and
noted  in  my  seventeene  yeres travell  in  those  parts.

[A  relation
377

A.D.

1572.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

A  relation  of  the  commodities  of  Nova  Hispania,
and  the  maners  of  the  inhabitants,  written  by
Henry  Hawks  merchant,  which  lived  five  yeeres
in  the  sayd  countrey,  and  drew  the  same  at  the
request  of  M.  Richard  Hakluyt  Esquire  of
Eiton  in  the  county  of  Hereford, 1572.

S.  John  de l|v%^===^:^^  il  Aint  John  de  UUua  is  an  Island  not  high
IJllua.  Wlff  ^^^^€sm. above the water, where as now the

Spanyards  upon  M.  John  Hawkins  being
there,  are  in  making  a  strong  fort.  In
this  place  all  the  ships  that  come  out
of  Spaine  with  goods  for  these  parts,
do  unlade :  for  they  have  none  other
port  so  good  as  this  is.  The  comming  into  this  place
hath  three  chanels,  and  the  best  of  all  is  the  Norther-
most,  which  goeth  by  the  maine  land :  and  on  every
side  of  the  chanels  there  are  many  small  rocks  as  big
as  a  small  barrell :  they  wil  make  men  stand  in  doubt
of  them,  but  there  is  no  feare  of  them.  There  is
another  Island  there  by,  called  The  Island  of  sacrifices,
whereas  the  Spanyards  did  in  times  past  unlade  their
mrits.  goods :  and  for  that,  they  say,  there  are  upon  it  spirits
or  devils,  it  is  not  frequented  as  it  hath  bene.  In  these
places  the  North  wind  hath  so  great  dominion,  that  often-
times it  destroyeth  many  ships  and  barks.  This  place
is  given  to  great  sicknesse.  These  Islands  stand  in  18
degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  about  the  same  is  great  plenty
of  fish.

Five  leagues  from  S.  John  de  UUua  is  a  faire  river ;
it  lieth  Northwest  from  the  port,  and  goeth  to  a  little
Vera  Cruz,  towne  of  the  Spanyards  called  Vera  Cruz,  and  with  small
vessels  or  barks,  which  they  call  frigats,  they  cary  all
their  merchandize  which  commeth  out  of  Spaine,  to  the
said  towne :  and  in  like  maner  bring  all  the  gold,  silver,
cochinilla,  hides,  and  all  other  things  that  the  shippes
cary  into  Spaine  unto  them. And  the  goods  being  in

378

HENRY HAWKS  ajd.

1572.

Vera  Cruz,  they  cary  them  to  Mexico,  and  to  Pueblo
de  los  Angeles,  Sacatecas,  and  Saint  Martin,  and  divers
other  places  so  farre  within  the  countrey,  that  some  of
them  are  700  miles  off,  and  some  more,  and  some  lesse,
all  upon  horses,  mules,  and  in  waines  drawen  with  oxen,
and  in  carres  drawen  with  mules.

In  this  towne  of  Vera  Cruz  within  these  twenty  yeres,
when  women  were  brought  to  bed,  the  children  new
borne  incontinently  died ;  which  is  not  so  now  in  these
dayes,  God  be  thanked.

This  towne  is  inclined  to  many  kinde  of  diseases,  by
reason  of  the  great  heat,  and  a  certeine  gnat  or  flie  which
they  call  a  musquito,  which  biteth  both  men  and  women  Musquito.
in  their  sleepe ;  and  assoone  as  they  are  bitten,  incon-
tinently the  flesh  swelleth  as  though  they  had  bene
bitten  with  some  venimous  worme.  And  this  musquito
or  gnat  doth  most  follow  such  as  are  newly  come  into
the  countrey.  Many  there  are  that  die  of  this  annoy-
ance.

This  towne  is  situated  upon  the  river  aforesayd,  and
compassed  with  woods  of  divers  maners  and  sorts,
and  many  fruits,  as  orenges  and  limons,  guiaves,  and
divers  others,  and  birds  in  them,  popinjayes  both  small  Popinjays.
and  great,  and  some  of  them  as  big  as  a  raven,  and
their  tailes  as  long  as  the  taile  of  a  fezant.  There  are
also  many  other  kinde  of  birds  of  purple  colour,  and
small  munkeys,  marvellous  proper.  Monkeys.

This  hote  or  sicke  countrey  continueth  five  and  forty
miles  towards  the  city  of  Mexico ;  and  the  five  and  forty
miles  being  passed,  then  there  is  a  temperate  countrey,
and  full  of  tillage :  but  they  water  all  their  corne  with
rivers  which  they  turne  in  upon  it.  And  they  gather
their  Wheat  twise  a  yere.  And  if  they  should  not  Wheat  twise
water  the  ground  where  as  their  corne  is  sowen,  the  ^'^  ^  J^^^^-
country  is  so  hote  it  would  burne  all.

Before  you  come  to Mexico,  there  is  a  great  towne
called  Tlaxcalla, which  hath in it  above 1 6000  house-  Tlaxcdla  a
holds. All  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  free  by  the  kings  fi^^^^y-

379

Mexico.

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1572-

of  Spaine :  for  these  were  the  occasion  that  Mexico  was
woonne  in  so  short  time,  and  with  so  little  losse  of
[III.  463.]  men.  Wherefore  they  are  all  gentlemen,  and  pay  no
tribute  to  the  king.  In  this  towne  is  all  the  cochinilla
growing.

Mexico  is  a  great  city ;  it  hath  more  then  fifty
thousand  households,  whereof  there  are  not  past  five  or
sixe  thousand  houses  of  Spanyards :  all  the  other  are  the
people  of  the  countrey,  which  live  under  the  Spanyards
lawes.  There  are  in  this  city  stately  buildings,  and
many  monasteries  of  friers  and  nunnes,  which  the  Span-
yards  have  made.  And  the  building  of  the  Indians  is
somewhat  beautiful!  outwardly,  and  within  full  of  small
chambers,  with  very  small  windowes,  which  is  not  so
comly  as  the  building  of  the  Spanyards.  This  city
standeth  in  the  midst  of  a  great  lake,  and  the  water
goeth  thorow  all  or  the  most  part  of  the  streets,  and
there  come  small  boats,  which  they  call  canoas,  and
in  them  they  bring  all  things  necessary,  as  wood,  and
coales,  and  grasse  for  their  horses,  stones  and  lime  to
build,  and  corne.

This  city  is  subject  to  many  earthquakes,  which  often-
times cast  downe  houses,  and  kil  people.  This  city  is  very
well  provided  of  water  to  drinke,  and  with  all  maner  of
victuals,  as  fruits,  flesh  and  fish,  bread,  hennes  and
capons,  Guiny  cocks  and  hennes,  and  all  other  fowle.
There  are  in  this  city  every  weeke  three  Faires  or
Markets,  which  are  frequented  with  many  people,  aswell
Spanyards  as  the  people  of  the  countrey.  There  are
in  these  Faires  or  Markets  all  maner  of  things  that  may
be  invented,  to  sell,  and  in  especiall,  things  of  the
countrey.  The  one  of  these  Faires  is  upon  the  Munday,
which  is  called  S.  Hypolitos  faire,  and  S.  James  his  faire
is  upon  the  Thursday,  and  upon  Saturday  is  S.  Johns
faire.  In  this  city  is  alwayes  the  kings  governour  or
viceroy,  and  there  are  kept  the  Termes  and  Parliaments.
And  although  there  be  other  places  of  justice,  yet  this
is  above all : so that all men may appeale unto this

380

HENRY HAWKS  a.d.

1572-

place,  and  may  not  appeale  from  this  city,  but  onely
into  Spaine  before  the  king :  and  it  must  be  for  a
certeine  summe :  and  if  it  be  under  that  summe,  then
there  is  no  appellation  from  them.  Many  rivers  fall
into  this  lake  which  the  city  standeth  in :  but  there  was
never  any  place  found  whither  it  goeth  out.

The  Indians  know  a  way  to  drowne  the  city,  and  ^  ^^y  t°
within  these  three  yeeres  they  would  have  practised  the  "■^'^f
same :  but  they  which  should  have  bene  the  doers  of
it  were  hanged :  and  ever  since  the  city  hath  bene  well
watched  both  day  and  night,  for  feare  least  at  some  time
they  might  be  deceived :  for  the  Indians  love  not  the
Spanyards.  Round  about  the  towne  there  are  very  many
gardens  and  orchards  of  the  fruits  of  the  countrey,
marvellous  faire,  where  the  people  have  great  recreation.
The  men  of  this  city  are  marvellous  vicious ;  and  in  like
maner  the  women  are  dishonest  of  their  bodies,  more
then  they  are  in  other  cities  or  townes  in  this  countrey.

There  are  neere  about  this  city  of  Mexico  many  rivers  Crocodiles.
and  standing  waters  which  have  in  them  a  monstrous
kinde  of  fish,  which  is  marvellous  ravening,  and  a  great
devourer  of  men  and  cattell.  He  is  woont  to  sleepe
upon  the  drie  land  many  times,  and  if  there  come  in
the  meane  time  any  man  or  beast  and  wake  or  disquiet
him,  he  speedeth  well  if  he  get  from  him.  He  is  like
unto  a  serpent,  saving  that  he  doth  not  flie,  neither  hath
he  wings.

There is West out of  Mexico a port towne which  Namgation
is  on  the  South  sea,  called  Puerto  de  Acapulco,  where  'p^Jj^''/"'^
as  there  are  shippes  which  they  have ordinarily  for  the  jcapuko.
navigation of China, which they have newly found.
This  port  is  threescore  leagues  from  Mexico.

There  is  another  port  towne  which  is  called  Culiacan,
on  the  South sea,  which  lieth  West  and  by  North  out
of  Mexico,  and  is  200  leagues  from  the  same :  and  there
the  Spanyards  made  two  ships  to  goe  seeke  the  streight  The  North-
or  gulfe,  which,  as  they  say,  is  betweene  the  Newfound-  "^^^f-^^^^^S^^-
land  and  Greenland;  and  they  call  it  the  Englishmens

381

A.D.

1572.

The  more
'Northward,
the  richer
silver  mines.

Painting

earth.

Golde  mines.

[III.  464.]
Mesquiquez.

Seven  cities  by
witchcraft  not
found  of  the
seekers.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

streight :  which  as  yet  was  never  fully  found.  They
say,  that  streight  lieth  not  farre  from  the  maine  land
of  China,  which  the  Spanyards  account  to  be  marvellous
rich.

Toward  the  North  from  Mexico  there  are  great  store
of  silver  mines.  There  is  greater  quantitie  of  silver
found  in  these  mines  toward  the  North,  then  there  is
any  other  parts :  and  as  the  most  men  of  experience
sayde  alwayes,  they  finde  the  richer  mines  the  more
Northerly.  These  mines  are  commonly  upon  great  hilles
and  stony  ground,  marvellous  hard  to  be  laboured  and
wrought.

Out  of  some  of  the  mines  the  Indians  finde  a  certeine
kinde  of  earth  of  divers  colours,  wherewith  they  paint
themselves  in  times  of  their  dances,  and  other  pastimes
which  they  use.

In  this  countrey  of  Nova  Hispania  there  are  also
mines  of  golde,  although  the  golde  be  commonly  found
in  rivers,  or  very  neere  unto  rivers.  And  nowe  in  these
dayes  there  is  not  so  much  golde  found  as  there  hath
bene  heretofore.

There  are  many  great  rivers,  and  great  store  of  fish
in  them,  not  like  unto  our  kindes  of  fish.  And  there
are  marvellous  great  woods,  and  as  faire  trees  as  may
be  seene,  of  divers  sorts,  and  especially  firre  trees,  that
may  mast  any  shippe  that  goeth  upon  the  sea,  okes  and
pineapples,  and  another  tree  which  they  call  Mesquiquez :
it  beareth  a  fruit  like  unto  a  peascod,  marvellous  sweet,
which  the  wilde  people  gather,  and  keepe  it  all  the  yere,
and  eat  it  in  stead  of  bread.

The  Spanyards  have  notice  of  seven  cities  which  old
men  of  the  Indians  shew  them  should  lie  towards  the
Northwest  from  Mexico.  They  have  used  and  use
dayly  much  diligence  in  seeking  of  them,  but  they  cannot
find  any  one  of  them.  They  say  that  the  witchcraft  of
the  Indians  is  such,  that  when  they  come  by  these  townes
they  cast  a  mist  upon  them,  so  that  they  cannot  see
them.

382

HENRY HAWKS  ad.

1572.

They  have  understanding  of  another  city  which  they  PedroMorales
call  Copalla: and  in  like maner,  at my  beeinff in the ^ f
countrey,  they  have  used  much  labour  and  diligence  in  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^f^g
the  seeking  of  it : they  have  found  the lake on  which  of  Copalla.
it should stand, and a canoa, the head whereof  was
wrought  with  copper  curiously,  and  could  not  finde  nor
see  any  man  nor  the  towne  which  to  their  understand-
ing should  stand  on  the  same  water,  or  very  neere  the
same.

There  is  a  great  number  of  beasts  or  kine  in  the  The  strange
countrey  of  Cibola,  which  were  never  brought  thither  ^^J  ^
by  the  Spanyards,  but  breed  naturally  in  the  countrey.
They  are  like  unto  our  oxen,  saving  that  they  have
long  haire  like  a  lion,  and  short  homes,  and  they
have  upon  their  shoulders  a  bunch  like  a  camell,  which
is  higher  then  the  rest  of  their  body.  They  are  marvellous
wild  and  swift  in  running.  They  call  them  the  beasts
or  kine  of  Cibola.

This  Cibola  is  a  city  which  the  Spanyards  found  Cibola  ahan-
now  of  late,  without  any  people  in  the  same,  goodly  ^'"^"^^
bnildings,  faire  chimneys,  windowes  made  of  stone  &
timber  excellently  wrought,  faire  welles  with  wheeles
to  draw  their  water,  and  a  place  where  they  had  buried
their  dead  people,  with  many  faire  stones  upon  the
graves.  And  the  captaine  would  not  suffer  his  souldiers
to  breake  up  any  part  of  these  graves,  saying,  he  would
come  another  time  to  do  it.

They  asked  certeine  people  which they met,  whither
the people of  this city were gone : and they made
answere, they were gone downe a river, which was  ^  ^''^^f  ^^"^'^'^
there by, very great, and there had builded a city  ^^^'^  ^^^°^^'
which  was  more  for  their  commodity.

This  captaine  lacking  things  necessary  for  himselfe
and  his  men,  was  faine  to  returne  backe  againe,  without
finding  any  treasure  according  to  his  expectation :  neither
found  they  but  fewe  people,  although  they  found  beaten
wayes,  which  had  beene  much  haunted  and  frequented.
The  captaine  at  his  comming  backe  againe,  had  a  great

383

A.D.

1572.

Water  con-
gealed to  salt.

Dogs  of  India
described.

Cacao  a  fruit
currant  as
money.

Fruits.

Hot  springs.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

checke of  the governour, because he had not gone
forwards,  and  seene  the  end  of  that  river.

They  have  in  the  countrey,  farre  from  the  sea  side,
standing  waters,  which  are  salt :  and  in  the  moneths  of
April  and  May  the  water  of  them  congealeth  into  salt,
which  salt  is  all  taken  for  the  kings  use  and  profit.

Their  dogs  are  all  crooked  backt,  as  many  as  are  of
the  countrey  breed,  and  cannot  run  fast :  their  faces  are
like  the  face  of  a  pig  or  an  hog,  with  sharpe  noses.

In  certeine  provinces  which  are  called  Guatimala,  &
Soconusco,  there  is  growing  great  store  of  cacao,  which
is  a  berry  like  unto  an  almond :  it  is  the  best  merchandize
that  is  in  all  the  Indies.  The  Indians  make  drinke  of
it,  and  in  like  maner  meat  to  eat.  It  goeth  currantly
for  money  in  any  market  or  faire,  and  may  buy  any  flesh,
fish,  bread  or  cheese,  or  other  things.

There  are  many  kinde  of  fruits  of  the  countrey,  which
are  very  good,  as  plantans,  sapotes,  guiaves,  pinas,  aluacatas,
tunas,  mamios,  limons,  orenges,  walnuts  very  small  and
hard,  with  little  meat  in  them,  grapes  which  the  Spanyards
brought  into  the  countrey,  and  also  wilde  grapes,  which
are  of  the  countrey,  and  are  very  small,  quinses,  peaches,
figs,  and  but  few  apples,  and  very  small,  and  no  peares  :
but  there  are  melons  and  calaba9as  or  gourds.

There  is  much  hony,  both  of  bees  and  also  of  a  kind  of
tree  which  they  call  magueiz.  This  hony  of  magueiz  is
not  so  sweet  as  the  other  hony  is,  but  it  is  better  to  be
eaten  only  with  bread,  then  the  other  is  ;  and  the  tree
serveth  for  many  things,  as  the  leaves  make  threed  to
sowe  any  kinde  of  bags,  and  are  good  to  cover  and  thatch
houses,  and  for  divers  other  things.

They  have  in  divers  places  of  the  countrey  many  bote
springs  of  water  :  as  above  all  other,  I  have  seene  one  in
the  province  of  Mechuacan.  In  a  plaine  field  without
any  mountaine,  there  is  a  spring  which  hath  much  water,
&  it  is  so  hot,  that  if  a  whole  quarter  of  beefe  be  cast  into
it,  within  on  halfe  houre  it  will  be  as  well  sodden  as  it  will
be  over  a  fire  in  halfe  a  day. I  have  seene  halfe  a  sheepe

384

HENRY HAWKS  a.d.

1572.
cast  in,  and  immediatly  it  hath  bene  sodden,  and  I  have
eaten  part  of  it.

There  are  many  hares,  and  some  conies. There  are  Hares  and
no  partridges,  but  abundance  of  quailes.  ^'^^^^^-

They  have  great  store  of  fish  in  the  South  sea,  and  Seajish.
many  oisters,  and  very  great.  The  people  do  open  the
oisters,  and  take  out  the  meat  of  them,  and  dry  it  as  they
do  any  other  kinde  of  fish,  and  keepe  them  all  the  yeere  :
and  when  the  times  serve,  they  send  them  abroad  into  the
countrey  to  sell,  as  all  other  fish.  They  have  no  salmon,
nor  trowt,  nor  pele,  nor  carpe,  tench,  nor  pike  in  all  the
countrey.

There  are  in  the  countrey  mighty  high  mountaines,  and  [HI-  465-]
hilles,  and  snow  upon  them  :  they  commonly  burne  ;  and  ^^^^^"S

•  W.QtL7lt^t7lBS

twise  every  day  they  cast  out  much  smoke  and  ashes  at
certeine  open  places,  which are  in  the  tops  of  them.

There  is  among  the  wilde  people  much  manna. I  have  Manna.
gathered  of  the  same,  and  have  eaten  it,  and  it  is  good  :
for  the  Apothecaries  send  their  servants  at  certeine  times,
to gather of  the same for purgations,  and other uses.

There  are  in  the  mountaines  many  wilde  hogs,  which  Wilde  hogs,
all  men  may  kill,  and  lions  and  tygres  ;  which  tygres  do .[^
much  harme  to  men  that  travell  in  the  wildernesse.

In  this  countrey,  not  long  since,  there  were  two
poore  men  that  found  a  marvellous  rich  mine  ;  and  when
these  men  went  to  make  a  register  of  the  same  (accord-
ing to  the  law  and  custome)  before  the  kings  officers,
they  thought  this  mine  not  meet  for  such  men  as  they
were  :  and  violently  tooke  the  sayd  mine  for  the  king ;  ■^^'^^•f  dis-

and gave no part thereof  unto the two poore men.  "^^^^  '  ^f^
A1-1-  •  1  11-  rr  J  jound  agame.

And withm certame dayes the kmgs omcers resorted

thither  to labor in the mine,  &  they  found two great

mighty hilles were come together ; so they found no

place  to  worke  in. And  in  the  time  while  I  was  among

them, which was five  yerees, there  was a poore shep-  "K^^  authour

heard,  who  keeping  his  sheepe,  happened  to  finde  a  well  -^^ I^l^^^T

of  quicke-silver  ;  and  he  went  in  like  maner  to  manifest  panna.

the same, as the custome and maner is ; the kings

IX  385  2  B

A.D.
1572.

Sugar  y  con-
serves.

Description  of
the  Indians
person  and
maners.

The  people  of
Nueva  Es-
panna  great
cowards.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

officers  dealt  in  like  order  as  they  did  with  the  two
poore  men  that  found  the  rich  mine,  taking  it  quite
from  the  shepheard  :  but  when  they  went  to  fetch  home
the  quicke-silver,  or  part  thereof,  they  could  never  finde
it  againe.  So  these  things  have  bene  declared  unto  the
king,  who  hath  given  commandement,  that  nothing
being  found  in  the  fields,  as  mines,  and  such  like,  shall
be  taken  away  from  any  man.  And  many  other  things
have  bene  done  in  this  countrey,  which  men  might
count  for  great  marvels.

There  is  great  abundance  of  sugar  here,  &  they
make  divers  conserves,  &  very  good,  and  send  them
into  Peru,  where  as  they  sell  them  marvellous  well,  be-
cause they  make  none  in  those  parts.

The  people  of  the  countrey  are  of  a  good  stature,
tawny  coloured,  broad  faced,  flat  nosed,  and  given  much
to  drinke  both  wine  of  Spaine  and  also  a  certeine  kind
of  wine  which  they  make  with  hony  of  Magueiz,  and
roots,  and  other  things  which  they  use  to  put  into  the
same.  They  call  the  same  wine  Pulco.  They  are
soone  drunke,  and  given  to  much  beastlinesse,  and
void  of  all  goodnesse.  In  their  drunkennesse  they  use
and  commit  Sodomy  ;  and  with  their  mothers  and
daughters  they  have  their  pleasures  and  pastimes.  Where-
upon they  are  defended  from  the  drinking  of  wines,  upon
paines  of  money,  aswell  he  that  selleth  the  wines  as  the
Indian  that  drinketh  the  same.  And  if  this  commande-
ment were  not,  all  the  wine  in  Spaine  and  in  France  were
not  sufficient  for  the  West  Indies  onely.

They  are  of  much  simplicity,  and  great  cowards,  voide
of  all  valour,  and  are  great  witches.  They  use  divers
times  to  talke  with  the  divell,  to  whom  they  do  certeine
sacrifices  and  oblations :  many  times  they  have  bene
taken  with  the  same,  and  I  have  seene  them  most  cruelly
punished  for  that  offence.

The  people  are  given  to  learne  all  maner  of  occupa-
tions and  sciences,  which  for  the  most  part  they  learned
since  the  comming  of  the  Spanyards :  I  say  all  maner  of

386

HENRY HAWKS  ad.

1572.
arts.  They  are  very  artificiall  in  making  of  images  with
feathers,  or  the  proportion  or  figure  of  any  man,  in  all
kind  of  maner  as  he  is.  The  finenesse  and  excellency
of  this  is  woonderfuU,  that  a  barbarous  people  as  they
are,  should  give  themselves  to  so  fine  an  arte  as  this  is.
They  are  goldsmiths,  blackesmiths,  and  coppersmiths,
carpenters,  masons,  shoomakers,  tailors,  sadlers,  imbro-
derers,  and  of  all  other  kind  of  sciences :  and  they  will
do  worke  so  good  cheape,  that  poore  yoong  men  that
goe  out  of  Spaine  to  get  their  living,  are  not  set  on
worke :  which  is  the  occasion  there  are  many  idle  people
in  the  countrey.  For  the  Indian  will  live  all  the  weeke
with  lesse  then  one  groat ;  which  the  Spanyard  cannot
do,  nor  any  man  els.

They  say,  that  they  came  of  the  linage  of  an  olde  man  The  Indians
which  came  thither  in  a  boat  of  wood,  which  they  call  a  ^S"o^'^"<^^
canoa. But  they  cannot  tell  whether  it  were  before  the  -^^^  '^^^^[
flood  or  after,  neither  can  they  give  any  reason  of  the
flood, nor from whence they came. And when the
Spanyards came first among them, they did certeine
sacrifice to an image made in stone, of  their owne
invention. The  stone  was  set  upon  a  great  hill,  which
they made of  bricks of  earth :  they  call  it  their Cowa.
And  certeine  dayes  in  the  yere  they  did  sacrifice,  certeine
olde men,  and  yoong  children ;  and onely  beleeved in
the  Sunne  and  the  Moone,  saying,  that  from  them  they  The  Sun  and
had  all  things  that  were  needful  for  them. They  have  in  ^oone
these  parts  great  store  of  cotton  wooU,  with  which  they  ^^^^e  of  mm
make  a  maner  of  linnen  cloth,  which  the  Indians  weare,
both  men  and  women,  and  it  serveth  for  shirts  &  smocks,
and  all  other  kind  of  garments,  which  they  weare  upon
their  bodies  :  and  the  Spanyards  use  it  to  all  such  pur-
poses, especially such  as cannot  buy  other. And if  it
were  not  for  this  kind  of  cloth,  all  maner  of  cloth  that  [ill.  ^66.']
goeth out  of  Spaine,  I  say  linnen  cloth,  would  be  solde
out  of  all  measure.

The  wilde  people  go  naked,  without  any  thing  upon  The  wllde  In-
them. The  women  weare  the  skinne  of  a  deere  before  ^^^"^•

387

A.D.
1572.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

their  privities,  and  nothing  els  upon  all  their  bodies.
They  have  no  care  for  any  thing,  but  onely  from  day
to  day  for  that  which  they  have  need  to  eat.  They  are
big  men,  and  likewise  the  women.  They  shoot  in  bowes
which  they  make  of  a  cherry  tree,  and  their  arrowes  are
of  cane,  with  a  sharpe  flint  stone  in  the  end  of  the  same  ;
they  will  pierce  any  coat  of  maile :  and  they  kill  deere,
and  cranes,  and  wilde  geese,  ducks  and  other  fowle,  and
wormes,  and  snakes,  and  divers  other  vermin,  which  they
eat.  They  live  very  long  :  for  I  have  scene  men  that
have  beene  an  hundred  yeres  of  age.  They  have  but
very  litle  haire  in  their  face,  nor  on  their  bodies.

Friers  in  reve- The Indians  have the friers  in  great  reverence: the

rence.  occasion  is,  that  by  them  and  by  their  meanes  they  are

free  and  out  of  bondage  ;  which  was  so  ordeined  by
Charles  the  emperor :  which  is  the  occasion  that  now
there  is  not  so  much  gold  and  silver  comming  into
Europe  as  there  was  while  the  Indians  were  slaves.
For  when  they  were  in  bondage  they  could  not  chuse  but
doe  their  taske  every  day,  and  bring  their  masters  so
much  metall  out  of  their  mines :  but  now  they  must  be
well  payed,  and  much  intreated  to  have  them  worke.
So  it  hath  bene,  and  is  a  great  hinderance  to  the  owners
of  the  mines,  and  to  the  kings  quinto  or  custome.

Copper  mines.  There  are  many  mines  of  copper  in  great  quantity,
whereof  they  spend  in  the  countrey  as  much  as  serveth
their  turnes.  There  is  some  golde  in  it,  but  not  so
much  as  will  pay  the  costs  of  the  fining.  The  quantity
of  it  is  such,  and  the  mines  are  so  farre  from  the  sea,
that  it  will  not  be  worth  the  fraight  to  cary  it  into  Spaine.
On  the  other  side,  the  kings  officers  will  give  no  licence
to  make  ordinance  thereof;  whereupon  the  mines  lie
unlaboured,  and  of  no  valuation.

There  is  much  lead  in  the  countrey ;  so  that  with  it
they  cover  churches,  and  other  religious  houses :  where-

„,  fore they  shall  not  need  any  of  our  lead,  as  they  have

owners  of ^^^  need  thereor  m  times  past.

The  pompe  and  liberalitie  of  the  owners  of  the  mines

388

mtnes.

HENRY  HAWKS  a.d.

1572.
IS  marvellous  to  beholde :  the  apparell  both  of  them  and
of  their  wives  is  more  to  be  compared  to  the  apparell  of
noble  persons  then  otherwise.  If  their  wives  goe  out  of
their  houses,  as  unto  the  church,  or  any  other  place,  they
goe  out  with  great  majesty,  and  with  as  many  men  and
maids  as  though  she  were  the  wife  of  some  noble  man.  I
will  assure  you,  I  have  seene  a  miners  wife  goe  to  the
church  with  an  hundred  men,  and  twenty  gentlewomen
and  maids.  They  keepe  open  house :  who  will,  may
come  to  eat  their  meat.  They  call  men  with  a  bell  to
come  to  dinner  and  supper.  They  are  princes  in  keeping
of  their  houses,  and  bountifuU  in  all  maner  of  things.

A good owner of  mines  must  have  at  the  least  an  Things  neces-
hundred slaves  to cary and to stampe  his  metals ; he  ^'^^'y.  ^°  '^^^^^
must  have  many  mules,  and  men  to  keepe  the  mines;  he  "-f  "^^^  ^^
must  have  milles  to  stampe  his  metals ;  he  must  have
many  waines  and  oxen  to  bring  home  wood  to  fine  the
oare ;  he  must  have  much  quicke-silver,  and  a  marvellous
quantity  of  salt-brine  for  the  metals ;  and  he  must  be  at
many  other  charges. And  as  for  this  charge  of  quicke-
silver,  it  is  a  new  invention,  which  they  finde  more  profit-
able then  to  fine  their  oare  with  lead. Howbeit  the  same
is very  costly : for  there  is  never  a  hundred  of  quick-
silver but  costeth  at  the  least  threescore  pounds  sterling.
And  the  mines  fall  dayly  in  decay,  and  of  lesse  value :
and  the  occasion  is,  the  few  Indians  that  men  have  to
labour  their  mines.

There  is  in  New  Spaine  a  marvellous  increase  of  cattel.  The  plenty  of
which  dayly  do  increase,  and  they  are  of  a  greater  growth  '^^^^'^"■
then  ours  are.  You  may  have  a  great  steere  that  hath  an
hundred  weight  of  tallow  in  his  belly  for  sixteene  shil-
lings ;  and  some  one  man  hath  20000  head  of  cattel  of
his  owne.  They  sell  the  hides  unto  the  merchants,  who
lade  into  Spaine  as  many  as  may  be  well  spared.  They
spend  many  in  the  countrey  in  shooes  and  boots,  and  in
the  mines :  and  as  the  countrey  is  great,  so  is  the  in-
crease of  the  cattell  woonderfuU.  In  the  Island  of  Santo
Domingo  they  commonly  kill  the  beasts  for  their  hides

389

A.D.

1572.

Sheepe.

Wooll
Cloth.

Woad.
Alum.
Brasill.

[III.  467.]

Hogs  grease
in  stead  of  oik.

Silks  of  sun-
dry sorts.

Horses.
Mules.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  tallow ;  and  the  fowles  eat  the  carkeises :  and  so  they
do  in  Cuba  and  Porto  Rico,  whereas  there  is  much  sugar,
and  cana  fistula,  which  dayly  they  send  into  Spaine.
They  have  great  increase  of  sheepe  in  like  maner,  and
dayly  do  intend  to  increase  them.  They  have  much
wooll,  and  as  good  as  the  wooll  of  Spaine.  They  make
cloth  as  much  as  serveth  the  countrey,  for  the  common
people,  and  send  much  cloth  into  Peru.  I  have  seene
cloth  made  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  which  hath  beene  solde
for  tenne  pezos  a  vare,  which  is  almost  foure  pounds
English,  and  the  vare  is  lesse  then  our  yard.  They  have
woad  growing  in  the  countrey,  and  alum,  and  brasill,  and
divers  other  things  to  die  withall,  so  that  they  make  all
colours.  In  Peru  they  make  no  cloth :  but  heereafter
our  cloth  will  be  little  set  by  in  these  parts,  unlesse  it  be
some  fine  cloth.  The  wools  are  commonly  foure  shil-
lings every  roue,  which  is  five  &  twenty  pounds :  and  in
some  places  of  the  countrey  that  are  farre  from  the  places
where  as  they  make  cloth,  it  is  woorth  nothing,  and  doth
serve  but  onely  to  make  beds  for  men  to  lie  on.

They  make  hats,  as  many  as  doe  serve  the  Countrey,
very  fine  and  good,  and  sell  them  better  cheape,  then
they  can  be  brought  out  of  Spaine,  and  in  like  maner
send  them  into  Peru.

Many  people  are  set  on  worke  both  in  the  one  and  in
the  other :  they  spin  their  wooll  as  we  doe,  and  in  steed
of  oyle,  they  have  hogs  grease :  they  twist  not  their  threed
so  much  as  wee  doe,  neither  worke  so  fine  a  threed.
They  make  no  kersies,  but  they  make  much  cloth,  which
is  course,  and  sell  it  for  lesse  then  12.  pence  the  vare.  It
is  called  Sayall.

They  have  much  silke,  and  make  all  maner  of  sorts
thereof,  as  Taffataes,  Sattins,  Velvets  of  all  colours,  and
they  are  as  good  as  the  silkes  of  Spaine,  saving  that  the
colours  are  not  so  perfect :  but  the  blackes  are  better  then
the  blackes  that  come  out  of  Spaine.

They  have  many  horses,  and  mares,  and  mules,  which
the Spaniards brought thither. They have as good

390

HENRY HAWKS  ad.

1572.
Jennets,  as  any  are in Spaine, and better cheape then  Jennets.
they bee  in Spaine. And  with their mules they  cary
all  their  goods  from  place  to  place.

There is raine usually in this Countrey, from the
moneth  of  May, to the midst of  October, every  day,
which  time  they  call  their  winter,  by  reason  of  the  said
waters. And if  it  were not  for the  waters  which fall
in  these  hot  seasons,  their Maiz,  which is the greatest
part of their sustenance, would be destroyed. This
Maiz is the greatest maintenance which the Indian Maize  graine
hath,  and  also  all  the  common  people  of  the  Spaniards,  fi''  ^^"  ^^^.
And their  horses and mules which labour, cannot  be  ^^^^/
without  the  same. This graine is substantiall,  and in-
creaseth much blood. If the Miners should bee
without  it,  they  coulde  not  labour  their  Mines  :  for  all
their  servants  eate  none  other  bread,  but onely  of  this
Maize, and it is made in cakes, as they make oaten
cakes,  in  some  places  of  England.

The Indians pay tribute, being of  the age of 20.
yeeres,  4.  shillings  of  money,  and an hanege of  Maiz,  An  Hanega  is
which  is  worth  4.  shillings more unto the King every  ^  ^'^f^fj-  ^^^
yeere. This  is  payd  in  all  Nova  Hispania,  of  as  many  -^ '

as  be  of  the  age  of  20.  yeeres,  saving  the  Citie  of
Tlascalla,  which  was  made  free,  because  the  citizens
thereof  were  the  occasion  that  Cortes  tooke  Mexico  in
so  little  a  time.  And  although  at  the  first  they  were
freed  from  paiment  of  tribute,  yet  the  Spaniards  now
begin  to  usurpe  upon  them,  and  make  them  to  till  a
great  field  of  Maiz,  at  their  owne  costes  every  yeere
for  the  King,  which  is  as  beneficial  unto  him,  and  as
great  cost  unto  them,  as  though  they  paid  their  tribute,
as  the  others  doe.

The  ships  which  goe  out  of  Spaine  with  goods  for
Peru,  goe  to  Nombre  de  dios,  and  there  discharge  the
said  goods  :  and  from  thence  they  be  caried  over  the
necke  of  a  land,  unto  a  port  towne  in  the  South
sea,  called  Panama,  which  is  17.  leagues  distant  from
Nombre  de  dios. And  there  they  doe  ship  their  goods

391

A.D.

Salomons
Hands  sought,
and  found  in
the  South  sea
1568.

China  found
by  the  West.

*  This  is  to  he
understood  of
the  time  when
this  discourse
was  written.
Anno  1572,

China  ships
with  one  saile.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

againe,  and  so  from  thence  goe  to  Peru.  They  are  in
going  thither  three  moneths,  and  they  come  backe
againe  in  20.  dayes.  They  have  seldome  foule  weather,
and  fewe  ships  are  lost  in  the  South  sea.  Foure  yeeres
past,  to  wit  1568,  there  was  a  ship  made  out  of  Peru,
to  seeke  Salomons  Islands,  and  they  came  somewhat  to
the  South  of  the  Equinoctial,  &  found  an  Island  with
many  blacke  people,  in  such  number  that  the  Spaniards
durst  not  go  on  land  among  them.  And  because  they
had  bene  long  upon  the  voyage,  their  people  were  very
weake,  and  so  went  not  on  land,  to  know  what  commoditie
was  upon  it.  And  for  want  of  victuals,  they  arrived  in
Nova  Hispania,  in  a  port  called  Puerto  de  Navidad,  and
thence  returned  backe  againe  unto  Peru,  whereas  they
were  evil  entreated,  because  they  had  not  knowen  more  of
the  same  Island.

They  have  in  this  port  of  Navidad  ordinarily  their
ships,  which  goe  to  the  Islands  of  China,  which  are  cer-
taine  Islands  which  they  have  found  within  these  7.  yeres.
They  have  brought  from  thence  gold,  and  much  Cinamom,
and  dishes  of  earth,  and  cups  of  the  same,  so  fine,  that
every  man  that  may  have  a  piece  of  them,  will  give  the
weight  of  silver  for  it.  There  was  a  Mariner  that  brought
a  pearle  as  big  as  a  doves  Qg^'^  from  thence,  &  a  stone,
for  which  the  Viceroy  would  have  given  3000.  duckets.
Many  things  they  bring  from  thence,  most  excellent.
There  are  many  of  these  ylands,  and  the  Spaniards  have
not  many  of  them  as  yet  :*  for  the  Portugals  disturbe
them  much,  and  combate  with  them  every  day,  saying,  it
is  part  of  their  conquest,  and  to  the  maine  land  they
cannot  come  at  any  hand.  There  are  goodly  people  in
them,  and  they  are  great  Mariners,  richly  apparelled  in
cloth  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  silke  of  all  sorts,  and  goe
apparelled  after  the  maner  of  the  Turkes.  This  report
make  such  as  come  from  thence.  The  men  of  the
maine  land  have  certaine  traifique  with  some  of  these
ylanders,  and  come  thither  in  a  kind  of  ships,  which
they  have  with  one  saile,  and bring  of  such marchan-

392

HENRY HAWKS  a.d.

1572.

dize  as  they  have  need  of.  And  of  these  things  there
have  bene  brought  into  New  Spaine  both  cloth  of  gold
and  silver,  and  divers  maners  of  silks,  and  works  of  gold
and  silver,  marvellous  to  be  seene.  So  by  their  saying,
there  is  not  such  a  countrey  in  the  whole  world.  The
maine  land  is  from  the  ylands  190.  leagues  :  and  the
ylands  are  not  farre  from  the  Malucos  Northwards.
And  the  people  of  those  ylands,  which  the  Spaniards
have,  say,  that  if  they  would  bring  their  wives  and
children,  that  then  they  should  have  among  them  what
they  would  have.  So  there  goe  women  dayly,  and  the  [III.  468.]
king  payeth  all  the  charges  of  the  maried  men  and
their  wives,  that  go  to  those  ylands.  And  there  is  no
doubt  but  the  trade  will  be  marveilous  rich  in  time  to
come.  It  was  my  fortune  to  be  in  company  with  one
Diego  Gutieres,  who  was  the  first  Pilot  that  ever  went
to  that  countrey  of  the  Phillippinas.  Hee  maketh  report
of  many  strange  things  in  that  Countrey,  aswell  riches,  as
other,  and  saith,  if  there  bee  any  Paradise  upon  earth,  it
is  in  that  countrey  :  and  addeth,  that  sitting  under  a
tree,  you  shall  have  such  sweet  smels,  with  such  great
content  and  pleasure,  that  you  shall  remember  nothing,
neither  wife,  nor  children,  nor  have  any  kinde  of  appetite
to  eate  or  drinke,  the  odoriferous  smels  wil  be  so
sweete.  This  man  hath  good  livings  in  Nova  Hispania,
notwithstanding  hee  will  returne  thither,  with  his  wife
and  children,  and  as  for  treasure  there  is  abundance,  as
he  maketh  mention.  In  this  countrey  of  Nova  Hispania
there  are  many  buckes  and  does,  but  they  have  not  so
long  homes  as  they  have  here  in  England.  The  Span-
iards kill  them  with  hand-guns  and  with  grayhounds,  and
the  Indians  kill  them  with  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and
with  the  skins  they  make  chamoyce,  such  as  we  in  Eng-  Chamoke.
land  make  doublets  and  hose  of,  as  good  as  the  skins  that  Danish
are  dressed  in  Flanders,  &  likewise  they  make  marveilous  leather.
good  Spanish  leather  of  them.  There  is  a  bird  which  is  ^^diaRavem
like  unto  a  Raven,  but  he  hath  some  of  his  feathers  white  :  ^g^o^re  car-
there  is  such  abundance  of  them,  that  they  eate  all  the  rion.

393

A.D.

1572.

Wrongs  done
to  the  Indians
punished.

Justice  ye
cause  of
civilitie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

corrupt  and  dead  flesh  which  is  in  the  countrey.  Other-
wise the  abundance  of  carren  is  so  much,  that  it  would
make  a  marveilous  corrupt  aire  in  all  the  Countrey,  and
be  so  noisome,  that  no  man  could  abide  it.  Therefore  it
is  commanded  there  shall  none  of  them  be  killed.  These
birds  are  alwayes  about  Cities,  and  townes,  where  there  is
much  flesh  killed.

The  Indians  are  much  favoured  by  the  Justices  of  the
Countrey,  and  they  call  them  their  orphanes.  And  if  any
Spaniard  should  happen  to  doe  any  of  them  harme,  or  to
wrong  him  in  taking  any  thing  from  him,  as  many  times
they  doe,  or  to  strike  any  of  them,  being  in  any  towne,
whereas  justice  is,  they  are  aswell  punished  for  the  same,
as  if  they  had  done  it  one  Spaniard  to  another.  When  a
Spaniard  is  farre  from  Mexico,  or  any  place  of  justice,
thinking  to  doe  with  the  poore  Indian  what  he  list,  con-
sidering he  is  so  farre  from  any  place  of  remedy,  he
maketh  the  Indian  do  what  he  commaundeth  him,  and  if
he  will  not  doe  it,  hee  beateth  and  misuseth  him,  according
to  his  owne  appetite.  The  Indian  holdeth  his  peace,  untill
hee  finde  an  opportunitie,  and  then  taketh  a  neighbour
with  him,  and  goeth  to  Mexico,  although  it  be  20.  leagues
off,  and  maketh  his  complaint.  This  his  complaint  is
immediatly  heard,  &  although  it  be  a  knight,  or  a  right
good  gentleman,  he  is  forthwith  sent  for,  and  punished
both  by  his  goods,  and  also  his  person  is  imprisoned,  at
the  pleasure  of  the  Justice.  This  is  the  occasion  that  the
Indians  are  so  tame  and  civill,  as  they  are  :  and  if  they
should  not  have  this  favour,  the  Spaniards  would  soone
dispatch  all  the  Indians,  or  the  Indians  would  kill  them.
But  they  may  cal  them  dogs,  and  use  other  evill  words,  as
much  as  they  will,  and  the  Indian  must  needes  put  it  up,
and  goe  his  way.

The  poore  Indians  wil  go
leagues  to  a  Faire  or  market
necks,  with  as  much  fruit  or
ware,  as  cotton  wooll,  or  cadis
not  past  worth  a  pennie  :  and

394

every  day  two  or  three
with  a  childe  upon  their
rootes,  or  some  kinde  of
of  all  colours,  as  shall  be
they  wil  mainteine  them-

HENRY  HAWKS  ad.

1572.
selves  upon  the  same. For  they  live  with  a  marveilous
small  matter.

They  are  in  such  povertie,  that  if  you  neede  to  ride
into  the  Countrey,  you  shall  have  an  Indian  to  goe  with
you  all  the  day  with  your  bed  upon  his  backe,  for  one
royall  of  plate  :  and  this  you  shall  have  from  one  towne
to  another.  Here  you  are  to  understand,  that  all  men
that  traveile  by  the  way,  are  alwayes  wont  to  carry  their
beds  with  them.  They  are  great  theeves,  and  wil  steale
all  that  they  may,  and  you  shall  have  no  recompence  at
their  hands.

The  garments  of  the  women,  are  in  this  maner.  The  The  apparel
uppermost  part  is  made  almost  like  to  a  womans  smocke,  ^  ^^^  Indians.
saving  that  it  is  as  broad  above  as  beneath,  and  hath  no
sleeves,  but  holes  on  eche  side  one  to  put  out  their  armes.
It  is  made  of  linnen  cloth  made  of  cotton  wooll,  and  filled
full  of  flowers,  of  red  cadis  and  blew,  and  other  colours.
This  garment  commeth  downe  to  the  knees,  and  then
they  have  another  cloth  made  after  the  same  maner,  and
that  goeth  rounde  about  their  waste,  and  reacheth  to  their
shooes,  and  over  this  a  white  fine  sheet  upon  their  heads,
which  goeth  downe  halfe  the  legge.  Their  haire  is
made  up  round  with  an  haire  lace  about  their  head.
And  the  men  have  a  small  paire  of  breeches  of  the
same  cotton  wool,  and  their  shirts  which  hang  over
their  breeches,  and  a  broad  girdle  about  their  middles,
and  a  sheete  with  flowers  upon  their  backes,  and  with  a
knot  upon  one  shoulder,  &  an  hat  upon  their  heads,
and  a  paire  of  shooes.  And  this  is  all  their  apparell,
although  it  be  a  Casique,  which  they  use  in  all  the
Countrey.

The  wals  of  the  houses  of  the  Indians,  are  but  plaine,  The  houses  of
but  the  stones  are  layd  so  close,  that  you  shall  not  well  ^^^  Indians.
perceive  the  joynts  betweene  one  stone  and  another,  they
are  so  finely  cut  :  and  by  the  meanes  that  the  stones  are
so  workmanly  done,  and finely  joyned  together,  there  is
some  beautie  in  their  wals. They  are  marveilous  small  [ill.  469.]
and  light, as Pumie  stones. They  make  their  doores

395

A.D.
1572.

Fire  rubbed
out  of  two
stickes.

Divers
speeches.

Mutezuma,
and  his  riches.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

very  little,  so  that  there  can  go  in  but  one  man  at  a  time.
Their  windowes,  and  roomes  within  their  houses  are
small,  and  one  roome  they  have  reserved  for  their  friends,
when  they  come  to  talke  one  with  another,  and  that  is
alwayes  faire  matted,  and  kept  marveilous  cleane,  and
hanged  full  of  images,  and  their  chaires  standing  there  to
sit  in.  They  eate  their  meate  upon  the  ground,  and
sleepe  on  the  ground  upon  a  mat,  without  any  bed,  both
the  gentlemen,  and  other.

The  Indians  strike  their  fire  with  one  sticke  in  another,
aswell  the  tame  people,  as  the  wilde.  For  they  know  not
how  to  doe  it  with  an  yron,  and  a  stone.

In  Nova  Hispania  every  10.  or  12.  leagues  they  have  a
contrary  speach,  saving  onely  about  Mexico  :  so  there  is  a
number  of  speeches  in  the  Countrey.

Mutezuma  which  was  the  last  King  of  this  Countrey,
was  one  of  the  richest  princes  which  have  bene  seene  in
our  time,  or  long  before.  He  had  all  kinde  of  beasts
which  were  then  in  the  countrey,  and  all  maner  of  birds,
and  fishes,  and  all  maner  of  wormes,  which  creepe  upon
the  earth,  and  all  trees,  and  flowers,  and  herbes,  all
fashioned  in  silver  and  gold,  which  was  the  greatest  part
of  al  his  treasure,  and  in  these  things  had  he  great  joy,  as
the  old  Indians  report.  And  unto  this  day,  they  say  that
the  treasure  of  Mutezuma  is  hidden,  and  that  the  Span-
iards have  it  not.  This  King  would  give  none  of  his
people  freedome,  nor  forgive  any  of  them  that  should  pay
him  tribute,  though  he  were  never  so  poore.  For  if  it
had  bene  told  him  that  one  of  his  tributaries  was  poore,
&  that  he  was  not  able  to  pay  his  tribute  according  to  the
custome,  then  he  would  have  him  bound  to  bring  at  such
times  as  tributes  should  be  payd,  a  quill  full  of  Lice,
saying,  hee  would  have  none  free,  but  himselfe.  He  had
as  many  wives  or  concubines,  as  hee  would  have,  and
such  as  liked  him.  Alwayes  whensoever  he  went  out  of
his  Court  to  passe  the  time,  he  was  borne  upon  4.  of  his
noble  mens  shoulders  set  upon  a  table,  some  say,  of
golde,  and  very  richly  dressed  with  feathers  of  divers  and

396

HENRY HAWKS  ad.

1572.
many  colours  and  flowers. He  washed  all  his  body  every  The  Indians
day,  were  it  never  so  cold. And  unto  this  day  so  do  all  ^^•^'^  ^^^^~
the  Indians,  and  especially  the  women.  ^^^^^^  ^"^""^

The  Spaniards  keepe  the  Indians  in  great  subjection.
They  may  have  in  their  houses  no  sword  nor  dagger,  nor
knife  with  any  point,  nor  may  weare  upon  them  any
maner  of  armes,  neither  may  they  ride  upon  any  horse
nor  mules,  in  any  sadle  nor  bridle,  neither  may  they
drinke  wine,  which  they  take  for  the  greatest  paine  of
all.  They  have  attempted  divers  times  to  make  insurrec-
tions, but  they  have  bene  overthrowen  immediatly  by
their  owne  great  and  beastly  cowardlinesse.

There  remaine  some  among  the  wild  people,  that  unto  Cannybals.
this  day  eate  one  another.  I  have  scene  the  bones  of  a
Spaniard  that  have  bene  as  cleane  burnished,  as  though  it
had  bene  done  by  men  that  had  no  other  occupation.
And  many  times  people  are  caried  away  by  them,  but
they  never  come  againe,  whether  they  be  men  or
women.

They  have  in  the  Sea  ylands  of  red  salt  in  great  abun-  Island  of  salt.
dance,  whereas  they  lade  it  from  place  to  place  about  the
Sea  coast : and  they  spend  very  much  salt  with  salting
their  hides,  and  fish  : and  in  their  Mines  they  occupie
great  quantitie. They  have  much  Alume,  and  as  good  as  Alume.
any  that  is  in  all  the  Levant,  so  that  they  neede  none  of
that  commoditie. They  have  also  of  their owne  grow-
ing, much Cana fistula, & much Salsa Perilla, which  Cassia  fistula.
is  marveilous  good  for  many  kind  of  diseases.  ^^"^  Perilla.

There are in Florida many  Jarrefalcons, and many  Florida.
other kinde of  hawkes,  which the  gentlemen of  Nova
Hispania send for every yere. The Spaniards have
two forts  there, chiefly to keepe out the Frenchmen
from  planting  there.

[A  discourse

397

A.D.
1567.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

ThisFleete
consisted  of  6.
ships.

I.  The  Jesus.

[III.  470.]
2.  The  Myn-
ion.

'^.TheWilliam
and  John.

4.  The  Judith.

5.  The  Angel.

6.  The  Swal-
low.

A  discourse  written  by  one  Miles  Philips  Eng-
lishman, one  of  the  company  put  on  shoare
Northward  of  Panuco,  in  the  West  Indies
by  M.  John  Hawkins  1568.  conteining  many
special  things  of  that  countrey  and  of  the
Spanish  government,  but  specially  of  their
cruelties  used  to  our  Englishmen,  and
amongst  the  rest  to  him  selfe  for  the  space
of  15.  or  16.  yeres  together,  until  by  good
and  happy  meanes  he  was  delivered  from
their  bloody  hands,  and  returned  into  his
owne  Countrey. An. 1582.

Chap. I .

Wherein  is  shewed  the  day  and  time  of  our  departure
from  the  coast  of  England,  with  the  number  and
names  of  the  ships,  their  Captaines  and  Masters,  and
of  our  trafique  and  dealing  upon  the  coast  of  Africa.

Pen  munday  the  second  of  October  1567.
the  weather  being  reasonable  faire,  our
Generall  M.  John  Hawkins,  having  com-
manded all  his  Captaines  and  Masters
to  be  in  a  readinesse  to  make  saile  with
him,  hee  himselfe  being  imbarked  in  the
Jesus,  whereof  was  appointed  for  Master
Robert  Barret,  hoised  saile,  and  departed  from  PHm-
mouth  upon  his  intended  voyage  for  the  parts  of  Africa,
and  America,  being  accompanied  with  five  other  saile  of
ships,  as  namely  the  Mynion,  wherein  went  for  Captaine
M.  John  Hampton,  and  John  Garret  Master.  The
William  and  John,  wherein  was  Captaine  Thomas
Bolton,  and  James  Raunce  Master.  The  Judith,  in
whom  was  Captaine  M.  Francis  Drake  afterward  knight,
and  the  Angel,  whose  Master,  as  also  the  Captaine  and
Master  of  the  Swallow  I  now remember not. And so

398

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1567-
sayling  in  company  together  upon  our  voyage  untill
the  tenth  of  the  same  moneth,  an  extreeme  storme
then  tooke  us  neere  unto  Cape  Finister,  which  dured
for  the  space  of  foure  dayes,  and  so  separated  our
ships,  that  wee  had  lost  one  another,  and  our  Generall
finding  the  Jesus  to  bee  but  in  ill  case,  was  in  minde
to  give  over  the  voyage,  and  to  returne  home.  How-
beit  the  eleventh  of  the  same  moneth  the  Seas  waxing
calme,  and  the  winde  comming  faire  hee  altered  his
purpose,  and  held  on  the  former  entended  voyage  :
And  so  comming  to  the  yland  of  Gomera  being  one  of
the  ylands  of  the  Canaries,  where  according  to  an  order
before  appointed,  we  met  with  all  our  ships  which
were  before  dispersed,  wee  then  tooke  in  fresh  water
and  departed  from  thence  the  fourth  of  November,  and
holding  on  our  course,  upon  the  eightenth  day  of  the
same  moneth  wee  came  to  an  ancker  upon  the  coast  of
Africa,  at  Cape  Verde  in  twelve  fadome  water ;  and
here  our  Generall  landed  certaine  of  our  men,  to  the
number  of  160.  or  thereabout,  seeking  to  take  some
Negros.  And  they  going  up  into  the  Countrey  for
the  space  of  sixe  miles,  were  encountred  with  a  great
number  of  the  Negros  :  who  with  their  invenomed  arrowes
did  hurt  a  great  number  of  our  men,  so  that  they  were
inforced  to  retire  to  the  ships,  in  which  conflict  they
recovered  but  a  fewe  Negros,  and  of  these  our  men
which  were  hurt  with  their  envenomed  arrowes,  there
died  to  the  number  of  seven  or  eight  in  very  strange
maner,  with  their  mouths  shut,  so  that  wee  were
forced  to  put  stickes  and  other  things  into  their
mouths  to  keepe  them  open,  and  so  afterward  passing
the  time  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea,  untill  the  twelfth
of  January,  wee  obteined  by  that  time  the  number  of
150.  Negros.  And  being  ready  to  depart  from  the
Sea  coast,  there  was  a  Negro  sent  as  an  Ambassadour
to  our  Generall,  from  a  King  of  the  Negros,  which
was  oppressed  with  other  Kings  his  bordering  neigh-
bours, desiring  our  Generall  to  graunt  him  succour  and

399

A.D.
1567.

The  William
and  John
separated  and
never  after
met  with  the
fleete.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

ayde  against  those  his  enemies,  which  our  Generall
granted  unto,  and  went  himselfe  in  person  a  lande,
with  the  number  of  two  hundreth  of  our  men  or
thereabouts,  and  the  said  King  which  had  requested
our  ayde,  did  joyne  his  force  with  ours,  so  that  thereby
our  Generall  assaulted,  and  set  fire  upon  a  Towne  of  the
said  King  his  enemies,  in  which  there  was  at  the  least  the
number  of  eight  or  ten  thousand  Negros,  and  they  per-
ceiving that  they  were  not  able  to  make  any  resistance
sought  by  flight  to  save  themselves,  in  which  their  flight
there  were  taken  prisoners  to  the  number  of  eight  or  nine
hundreth,  which  our  Generall  ought  to  have  had  for  his
share :  howbeit  the  Negro  King  which  requested  our  ayde,
falsifying  his  word  and  promise,  secretly  in  the  night
conveyed  himselfe  away  with  as  many  prisoners  as  he  had
in  his  custodie :  but  our  Generall  notwithstanding  finding
himselfe  to  have  nowe  very  neere  the  number  of  500.
Negros  thought  it  best  without  longer  abode  to  depart
with  them,  and  such  marchandize  as  hee  had  from  the
coast  of  Africa,  towards  the  West  Indies,  and  therefore
commanded  with  all  diligence  to  take  in  fresh  water  and
fewel,  and  so  with  speed  to  prepare  to  depart.  Howbeit
before  we  departed  from  thence,  in  a  storme  that  wee
had,  wee  lost  one  of  our  ships,  namely  the  William
and  John,  of  which  ship  and  of  her  people,  we  heard
no  tidings  during  the  time  of  our  voyage.

Chap.  2.

Wherein  is  shewed  the  day  and  time  of  our  departure
from  the  coast  of  Africa,  with  the  day  and  time  of
our  arrivall  in  the  West  Indies,  also  of  our  trade,  and
trafique  there,  and  also  of  the  great  crueltie  that  the
Spaniards  used  towards  us,  by  the  Vice-roy  his  direc-
tion, and  appointment,  falsifying  his  faith  and  promise
given,  and  seeking  to  have  intrapped  us.

A  LI  things  being  made  in  a  readinesse,  at  our  Generall
his  appointment,  upon  the  thirde  day  of  Februarie
1568.  wee  departed  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  having  the

400

SIR  JOHN HAWKINS

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.
weather  somewhat  tempestuous,  which  made  our  passage
the  more  hard;  and  sayling  so  for  the  space  of  52.  dayes,
upon  the  27.  of  March  1568.  we  came  in  sight  of  an
yland  called  Dominica,  upon  the  coast  of  America  in  the
West  Indies,  situated  in  14.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  322.
of  longitude :  from  thence  our  Generall  coasted  from
place  to  place,  ever  making  trafique  with  the  Spaniards
and  Indians  as  hee  might,  which  was  somewhat  hardly
obtained,  for  that  the  King  had  straightly  charged  all
his  governours  in  those  parts  not  to  trade  with  any :  yet
notwithstanding,  during  the  moneths  of  April  and  May,
our  Generall  had  reasonable  trade  and  trafique,  and
courteous  entertainement  in  sundry  places,  as  at  Mar-
garita, Cora^ao,  and  else  where,  til  we  came  to  Cape
de  la  vela,  and  Rio  de  Hacha,  (a  place  from  whence
all  the  pearles  doe  come :)  the  governour  there  would
not  by  any  meanes  permit  us  to  have  any  trade  or  [III.  471.]
trafique,  nor  yet  suffer  us  to  take  in  fresh  water :  by
meanes  whereof  our  Generall  for  the  avoyding  of  famine
and  thirst  about  the  beginning  of  June,  was  enforced  to
land  two  hundreth  of  our  men,  and  so  by  maine  force
and  strength  to  obtaine  that  which  by  no  faire  meanes  hee
could  procure :  And  so  recovering  the  Towne  with  the
losse  of  two  of  our  men,  there  was  a  secret  and  peaceable
trade  admitted,  and  the  Spaniards  came  in  by  night,  and
bought  of  our  Negroes  to  the  number  of  200.  and  up-
wards, and  of  our  other  marchandize  also.  From  thence
we  departed  for  Carthagena,  where  the  Governour  was
so  straight,  that  wee  could  not  obteine  any  trafique  there,
and  so  for  that  our  trade  was  neere  finished,  our  Generall
thought  it  best  to  depart  from  thence  the  rather  for  the
avoyding  of  certaine  dangerous  stormes  called  the  Huri-
canos,  which  accustomed  to  begin  there  about  that  time
of  the  yere,  &  so  the  24.  of  July  1568.  we  departed  from
thence  directing  our  course  North :  and  leaving  the  yland
of  Cuba  upon  our  right  hand,  to  the  Eastward  of  us,  and
so  sayling  toward  Florida  upon  the  12.  of  August  an
extreeme tempest  arose, which dured for the space of

IX  401  2  0

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

8  dayes,  in  which  our  ships  were  most  dangerously  tossed
and  beaten  hither,  &  thither,  so  that  we  were  in  continuall
feare  to  be  drowned  by  reason  of  the  shallownes  of  the
coast,  and  in  the  end  we  were  constrained  to  flee  for
succour  to  the  port  of  S.  John  de  Ullua,  or  Vera  Cruz,
situated  in  19.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  in  279.  degrees  of
longitude,  which  is  the  port  that  serveth  for  the  Citie  of
Mexico :  in  our  seeking  to  recover  this  port  our  Generall
met  by  the  way  three  small  ships  that  caried  passengers,
which  hee  tooke  with  him,  and  so  the  sixtenth  of
September  1568.  wee  entered  the  saide  port  of  S.  John
de  Ullua.  The  Spaniards  there  supposing  us  to  have
bene  the  King  of  Spaines  Fleete,  the  chiefe  officers  of
the  Countrey  thereabouts  came  presently  aboord  our
Generall,  where  perceiving  themselves  to  have  made  an
unwise  adventure,  they  were  in  great  feare  to  have  bene
taken  and  stayed :  howbeit  our  Generall  did  use  them  all
very  courteously.  In  the  said  port  there  were  twelve
ships  which  by  report  had  in  them  in  treasure  to  the
value  of  two  hundreth  thousand  pound  all  which  being
in  our  Generall  his  power  and  at  his  devotion,  he  did
freely  set  at  libertie,  as  also  the  passengers  which  he  had
before  stayed,  not  taking  from  any  of  them  all  the  value
of  one  groat :  onely  hee  stayed  two  men  of  credite  and
accompt,  the  one  named  Don  Laurenzo  de  Alva,  and  the
other  Don  Pedro  de  Rivera,  and  presently  our  Generall
Mexico  60.  sent  to  the  Viceroy  to  Mexico  which  was  threescore
leagues  from  leagues  off,  certifying  him  of  our  arrivall  there  by  force
jjll  ^'^^  ^  °^  weather,  desiring  that  forasmuch  as  our  Queene  his
Soveraigne,  was  the  king  of  Spaine  his  loving  sister  and
friend,  that  therefore  hee  would,  considering  our  neces-
sities and  wants,  furnish  us  with  victuals  for  our  Navie,
and  quietly  suffer  us  to  repaire  and  amend  our  ships.
And  furthermore  that  at  the  arrival  of  the  Spanish  Fleet
which  was  there  dayly  expected  and  looked  for,  to  the
ende  that  there  might  no  quarell  arise  betweene  them,
and  our  Generall  and  his  company  for  the  breach  of
amitie,  he  humbly  requested  of  his  excellencie,  that  there

402

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1568.
might  In  this  behalfe  some  special  order  be  taken. This
message was sent  away  the 16. of  September 1568.  it
being  the  very  day  of  our  arrivall  there.

The  next  morning  being  the  sevententh  of  the  same
moneth,  wee  descried  13.  saile  of  great  shippes :  and
after  that  our  Generall  understood,  that  it  was  the  king
of  Spaines  Fleete  then  looked  for,  he  presently  sent  to
advertise  the  Generall  hereof,  of  our  being  in  the  said
port,  and  giving  him  further  to  understand,  that  before
he  should  enter  there  into  that  harbour,  it  was  requisite
that  there  should  passe  betweene  the  two  Generals  some
orders  and  conditions  to  bee  observed  on  either  part,  for
the  better  contriving  of  peace  betweene  them  and  theirs,
according  to  our  Generals  request  made  unto  the  Viceroy.
And  at  this  instant  our  Generall  was  in  a  great  perplexitie
of  minde,  considering  with  himselfe  that  if  hee  should
keepe  out  that  Fleete  from  entring  into  the  port,  a  thing
which  hee  was  very  well  able  to  doe  with  the  helpe  of
God,  then  should  that  Fleete  be  in  danger  of  present
shipwracke  and  losse  of  all  their  substance,  which
amounted  unto  the  value  of  one  million  and  eight  Itisputdowne
hundreth  thousand  pounds.  Againe  he  saw  that  if  •.  ""^^^°"^  ^^
he  suffered  them  to  enter,  hee  was  assured  that  they  ^^^^  ^^^
would  practise  by  all  maner  of  meanes  to  betray  him  relation.
and  his,  and  on  the  other  side  the  haven  was  so  little,
that  the  other  Fleete  entring,  the  shippes  were  to  ride
one  hard  aboord  of  another.  Also  hee  saw  that  if  their
Fleete  should  perish  by  his  keeping  of  them  out,  as
of  necessitie  they  must  if  he  should  have  done  so,  then
stood  hee  in  great  feare  of  the  Queene  our  Soveraignes
displeasure  in  so  waightie  a  cause :  therefore  did  he
choose  the  least  evill,  which  was  to  suffer  them  to  enter
under  assurance,  and  so  to  stand  upon  his  guard,  and  to
defend  himselfe  and  his  from  their  treasons  which  we
were  well  assured  they  would  practise,  and  so  the
messenger  being  returned  from  Don  Martin  de  Hen-
riques,  the  newe  Viceroy,  who  came  in  the  same  Fleete,
and  had  sufficient  authoritie  to  command  in  all  cases  both

403

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

by  Sea  and  by  lande  in  this  province  of  Mexico  or  new
Spaine,  did  certifie  our  Generall,  that  for  the  better
maintenance  of  amitie  betweene  the  king  of  Spaine  and
[III.  472.]  our  Soveraigne,  all  our  requests  should  bee  both  favour-
ably granted,  and  faithfully  perfourmed :  signifying
further  that  he  heard  and  understood  of  the  honest
and  friendly  dealing  of  our  Generall,  toward  the  king
of  Spaines  subjects  in  all  places  where  he  had  bene,  as
also  in  the  said  port:  so  that  to  bee  briefe  our  requests
were  articled,  and  set  downe  in  writing.  Viz.
4.  Articles  i The  first  was  that  wee  might  have  victuals  for  our

concluded money,  and  license  to  sell  as  much  wares,  as  might  suffice
iTwixttke to  furnish  our  wants.

English  y  the 2  The  Second, that  we  might  be suffered  peaceably
Spaniards ; to  repaire  our  ships.

although  the  ^  T\\Q  thirde  that  the  yland  might  bee  in  our  posses-

Zpaniards  kept  ^^°^  during  the  time  of  our  abode  there,  In  which  yland
none  of  them,  our  Generall  for  the  better  safetie  of  him  and  his,  had
alreadie  planted  and  placed  certaine  Ordinance  which  were
eleven  pieces  of  brasse,  therefore  he  required  that  the
same  might  so  continue,  and  that  no  Spaniard  should
come  to  lande  in  the  saide  yland,  having  or  wearing  any
kinde  of  weapon  about  him.

4  The  fourth  and  the  last,  that  for  the  better  and  more
sure  performance  and  maintenance  of  peace,  and  of  all  the
conditions,  there  might  twelve  gentlemen  of  credite  bee
delivered  of  either  part  as  hostages.

These  conditions  were  concluded  and  agreed  upon  in
writing  by  the  Viceroy  and  signed  with  his  hand,  and
sealed  with  his  scale,  and  10.  hostages  upon  either
part  were  received.  And  further  it  was  concluded  that
the  two  Generals  should  meet,  and  give  faith  ech  to
other  for  the  performance  of  the  premisses.  Al  which
being  done,  the  same  was  proclaimed  by  the  sound  of
a  trumpet,  &  commandement  was  given  that  none  of
either  part  should  violate  or  breake  the  peace  upon
paine  of  death :  thus  at  the  ende  of  three  dayes  all  was
concluded,  and the Fleete entred the port, the ships

404

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.
saluting  one  another  as  the  maner  of  the  Sea  doth
require  :  the  morrow  after  being  friday  we  laboured
on  all  sides  in  placing  the  English  ships  by  themselves,  &
the  Spanish  ships  by  themselves,  the  Captaines  and  in-
feriour  persons  of  either  part,  offering,  and  shewing  great
courtesie  one  to  another,  and  promising  great  amitie
upon  all  sides.  Howbeit  as  the  sequel  shewed,  the
Spaniards  meant  nothing  lesse  upon  their  parts.  For  the
Viceroy  and  governour  thereabout  had  secretly  at  land
assembled  to  the  number  of  1000.  chosen  men,  and
wel  appointed,  meaning  the  next  thursday  being  the  24.
of  September  at  dinner  time  to  assault  us,  and  set  upon
us  on  all  sides.  But  before  I  go  any  further,  I  thinke
it  not  amisse  briefly  to  describe  the  maner  of  the  yland
as  it  then  was,  and  the  force  and  strength,  that  it  is
now  of.  For  the  Spaniards  since  the  time  of  our  Gene-
rals being  there,  for  the  better  fortifying  of  the  same
place,  have  upon  the  same  yland  built  a  faire  Castle,  ^  fa"'e  castle
and  bulwarke  very  well  fortified:  this  port  was  then  at  (^nd^i^^^^rf^^
our  being  there,  a  little  yland  of  stones,  not  past  three  ^J^  '^hndof
foote  above  water  in  the  highest  place,  and  not  past  a  s^«  juan  de
bow-shotte  over  any  way  at  the  most,  and  it  standeth  Vllua.
from  the  maine  land,  two  bowshootes  or  more :  and  there
is  not  in  all  this  coast  any  other  place  for  ships  safely
to  arive  at :  also  the  North  windes  in  this  coast  are  of
great  violence  and  force,  and  unlesse  the  shippes  bee
safely  mored  in,  with  their  anckers  fastened  in  this  yland,
there  is  no  remedie,  but  present  destruction  and  ship-
wracke.  All  this  our  generall  wisely  foreseeing,  did
provide  that  he  would  have  the  said  yland  in  his  custody,
or  els  the  Spaniards  might  at  their  pleasure,  have  but
cut  our  cables,  and  so  with  the  first  Northwinde  that
blewe  we  had  had  our  passport,  for  our  ships  had  gone
a  shoore. But  to  returne  to  the  matter.

The  time  approching  that  their  treason  must  be  put
in  practise,  the  same  Thursday  morning,  some  appearance
thereof  began  to  shewe  it  selfe,  as  shifting  of  weapons
from  shippe  to  shippe,  and  planting,  and  bending  their

405

A.D.
1568.

The  value  of
aSpaniskmce-
roy  his  faith.

The  villanous
treacherie  of
the  Spaniards
and  their
crueltie.

[HI.  473.]

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Ordinance  against  our  men  that  warded  upon  the  lande,
with  great  repaire  of  people  :  which  apparant  shewes  of
breach  of  the  Viceroys  faith  caused  our  Generall  to  sende
one  to  the  Viceroy,  to  enquire  of  him  what  was  meant
thereby,  which  presently  sent  and  gave  order,  that  the
Ordinance  aforesayde,  and  other  things  of  suspicion
should  bee  remooved,  returning  answere  to  our  Generall
in  the  faith  of  a  Viceroy,  that  hee  would  bee  our
defence,  and  safetie  from  all  villanous  treacherie  :  this  was
upon  Thursday  in  the  morning.  Our  Generall  not  being
therewith  satisfied,  seeing  they  had  secretly  conveyed  a
great  number  of  men  aboord  a  great  hulke  or  ship  of
theirs  of  sixe  hundreth  tunne,  which  shippe  rode  hard
by  the  Mynion,  hee  sent  againe  to  the  Viceroy  Robert
Barret  the  Master  of  the  Jesus,  a  man  that  could  speake
the  Spanish  tongue  very  well,  and  required  that  those
men  might  bee  unshipt  againe,  which  were  in  that  great
hulke.  The  Viceroy  then  perceiving  that  their  treason
was  throughly  espied,  stayed  our  Master,  and  sounded
the  Trumpet,  and  gave  order  that  his  people  should
upon  all  sides  charge  upon  our  men,  which  warded  on
shoore,  and  else  where,  which  strooke  such  a  mase,  and
sudden  feare  among  us,  that  many  gave  place,  and  sought
to  recover  our  shippes  for  the  safetie  of  themselves.
The  Spaniards  which  secretly  were  hid  in  ambush  at
lande  were  quickly  conveyed  over  to  the  yland  in  their
long  boates,  and  so  comming  to  the  yland,  they  slewe  all
our  men  that  they  could  meete  with,  without  mercy.
The  Minion  which  had  somewhat  before  prepared  her
selfe  to  avoyd  the  danger,  haled  away  and  abode  the
first  brunt  of  the  300  men  that  were  in  the  great  hulke  :
then  they  sought  to  fall  aboord  the  Jesus,  where  was
a  cruell  fight,  and  many  of  our  men  slaine  :  but  yet
our  men  defended  themselves,  and  kept  them  out :  so
the  Jesus  also  got  loose,  and  joyning  with  the  Minion,
the  fight  waxed  hote  upon  all  sides  :  but  they  having
woon  and  got  our  ordinance  on  shore,  did  greatly  annoy
us. In this  fight  there  were  two  great shippes  of  the

406

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

Spaniards sunke, and one burnt, so that with their

shippes  they  were  not  able  to  harme  us,  but  from  the  shore

they  beat  us  cruelly  with  our  owne  ordinance,  in  such

sort  that  the  Jesus  was  very  sore  spoyled  :  and  suddenly

the  Spaniards  having  fired  two  great  ships  of  their  owne,

they  came directly against us,  which bred  among  our

men  a marveilous feare. Howbeit  the Minion which

had  made  her  sayles  ready,  shifted  for  her  selfe,  without

consent  of  the Generall, Captaine or Master, so that

very hardly  our Generall could be received into the

Minion  :  the  most  of  our  men that  were  in  the  Jesus

shifted  for  themselves,  and followed  the  Minion  in  the

boat,  and  those  which  that  small boat  was  not  able  to

receive,  were  most  cruelly  slaine  by  the  Spaniards, Of

our ships none escaped saving the Minion and the

Judith  :  and  all  such  of  our  men  as  were  not  in  them

were inforced to abide the tyrannous cruelty of the

Spaniards. For  it  is  a  certaine  trueth,  that  whereas  they

had  taken  certaine  of  our  men  ashore,  they  tooke  and  hung

them  up  by  the  armes  upon  high  postes  untill  the  blood

burst  out  of  their  fingers  ends  :  of  which  men  so  used,

there  is  one  Copstow,  and  certaine  others  yet  alive,  who  by  Copstoweoneof

the  mercifull  providence  of  the  almighty,  were  long  since  ^^^Jl^^^/J"/^

arrived  here  at  home  in  England,  carying  still  about  with  j-^g^  ^ueva

them  (and  shal  to  their  graves)  the  marks  and  tokens  of  Espanna.

those  inhumane  and  more  then  barbarous  cruell  dealings.

Chap.  3.
Wherein  is  shewed,  how '  that  after  we  were  escaped
from  the  Spaniards,  wee  were  like  to  perish  with
famine  at  the  Sea,  and  how  our  Generall,  for  the
avoiding  thereof  was  constrained  to  put  halfe  of  his
men  on  land,  and  what  miseries  wee  after  that
sustained  amongst  the  Savage  people,  and  how  againe
we  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards.

AFter  that  the  Viceroy,  Don  Martin  Henriques,  had
thus  contrary  to  his  faith  and  promise,  most  cruelly
dealt  with  our  Generall  master  Hawkins,  at  S.  John  de

407

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

Ullua,  where  most  of  his  men  were  by  the  Spaniards
slaine  and  drowned,  and  all  his  ships  sunke  and  burned,
saving  the  Minion,  and  the  Judith,  which  was  a  small
barke  of  fiftie  tunne,  wherein  was  then  Captaine  master
Francis  Drake  aforesayd :  the  same  night  the  said  barke
lost  us,  we  being  in  great  necessitie,  and  inforced  to
remoove  with  the  Minion  two  bow-shoote  from  the
Spanish  fleete,  where  we  ankered  all  that  night :  and  the
next  morning  wee  weyed  anker,  and  recovered  an  Island
a  mile  from  the  Spaniards,  where  a  storme  tooke  us  with
a  North  winde,  in  which  we  were  greatly  distressed,
having  but  two  cables  and  two  ankers  left :  for  in  the
conflict  before  we  had  lost  three  cables  and  two  ankers.
The  morrow  after,  the  storme  being  ceased  and  the
weather  faire,  we  weied,  and  set  sayle,  being  many  men
in  number,  and  but  small  store  of  victuals  to  suffice  us
for  any  long  time  :  by  meanes  whereof  we  were  in  de-
spaire  and  feare  that  we  should  perish  through  famine,
so  that  some  were  in  minde  to  yeelde  themselves  to
the  mercy  of  the  Spaniards,  other  some  to  the  Savages
or  Infidels,  and  wandring  thus  certaine  dales  in  these
unknowen  seas,  hunger  constrained  us  to  eate  hides,
cats  and  dogs,  mice,  rats,  parrats  and  munkies  :  to  be
short,  our  hunger  was  so  great,  that  wee  thought  it
savourie  and  sweete  whatsoever  wee  could  get  to  eate.
And  on  the  eight  of  October  wee  came  to  land  againe,
in  the  bottome  of  the  bay  of  Mexico,  where  we  hoped
to  have  found  some  inhabitants,  that  wee  might  have  had
some  reliefe  of  victuals,  and  a  place  where  to  repaire  our
ship,  which  was  so  greatly  bruised,  that  we  were  scarse
able  with  our  weary  armes  to  keepe  foorth  the  water  ;
being  thus  oppressed  with  famine  on  the  one  side  and
danger  of  drowning  on  the  other,  not  knowing  where
to  find  reliefe,  wee  began  to  be  in  wonderfull  despaire,
and  we  were  of  many  mindes,  amongst  whom  there  were
a  great  many  that  did  desire  our  Generall  to  set  them
on  land,  making  their  choise  rather  to  submit  themselves
to  the  mercie  of  the  Savages  or  Infidels,  then  longer  to

408

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

hazard  themselves  at sea, where they very well sawe,
that  if  they should remaine together, if  they  perished
not  by  drowning,  yet  hunger  would  inforce  them  in  the
ende  to  eate  one  another :  to  which  request  our  Generall
did  very  willingly  agree,  considering  with  himselfe  that
it  was  necessary for him to lessen his number, both
for  the  safetie  of  himselfe & the rest  : and therupon
being resolved to set halfe his  people ashore that he
had  then  left  alive,  it was a  world  to  see  how  suddenly
mens minds were altered : for  they which a  little  be-
fore desired to be set  on  land,  were  now  of  another
minde,  and  requested  rather  to  stay :  by meanes  where-  [III.  474.]
of  our  Generall  was  inforced  for  the  more  contentation
of  all mens minds,  and  to take  away  all  occasions  of
offence, to take  this  order  : First  he made choice of
such  persons  of  service  and  account,  as  were needefuU
to stay, and that being done, of  those which were
willing to  goe  he  appointed  such  as  he  thought  might
be best spared, and presently appointed that by the
boat  they  should  bee  set  on  shore,  our  Generall  promising
us that  the  next  yeere  he  would either  come  himselfe,
or  else send to  fetch us home. Here  againe  it  would
have  caused  any  stony  heart  to have  relented to  heare
the pitiful!  mone that  many did  make,  and  howe  loth
they  were  to depart : the weather  was  then  somewhat
stormy and tempestuous, and therefore we were to
passe  with great  danger,  yet  notwithstanding  there  was
no  remedy,  but  we that were appointed to goe  away,
must  of  necessitie  doe  so. Howbeit those that went  Theywereput
in  the  first  boat  were  safely  set  on  shore,  but  of  them  on  land  25
which  went in the second boate,  of  which  number  I  ^^^S.'^^^ '^^nh-
my  selfe  was  one,  the seas wrought so  high,  that  we  Panuco  the  8
could  not  attaine  to the shore,  and  therefore we  were  of  October
constrained  through  the  cruell  dealing  of  John  Hampton 1568.
captaine  of  the  Minion,  and  John  Sanders  boatswaine  of
the  Jesus, and  Thomas  Pollard  his  mate,  to leape  out
of  the boate into  the  maine  sea, having  more then a
mile  to  shore,  and  so  to  shift  for  our  selves,  and  either

409

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

to  sinke  or  swimme.  And  of  those  that  so  were  (as  it
were)  throwen  out,  and  compelled  to  leape  into  the  sea,
there  were  two  drowned,  which  were  of  captaine  Blands
men.

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  it  being  Munday
the  eight  of  October,  1568,  when  we  were  all  come  to
shore,  we  found  fresh  water,  whereof  some  of  our  men
drunke  so  much,  that  they  had  almost  cast  themselves
away,  for  wee  could  scarse  get  life  of  them  for  the  space
of  two  or  three  houres  after  :  other  some  were  so  cruelly
swollen,  what  with  the  drinking  in  of  the  salt  water,  and
what  with  the  eating  of  the  fruit  which  wee  found  on
land,  having  a  stone  in  it  much  like  an  almond  (which
Capule  a  kind  fruit  is  called  Capule)  that  they  were  all  in  very  ill  case,
of  stone  fruit,  g^  ^|^^^  ^^  were  in  a  maner  all  of  us  both  feeble,  faint
and  weake.

The  next  morning  being  Tewsday,  the  ninth  of
October,  we  thought  it  best  to  travell  along  by  the  sea
coast,  to  seeke  out  some  place  of  habitation :  (whether
they  were  Christians  or  Savages,  we  were  indifferent,
so  that  we  might  have  wherewithall  to  sustaine  our
hungry  bodies)  and  so  departing  from  an  hill  where  we
had  rested  all  night,  not  having  any  drie  threed  about
us,  (for  those  that  were  not  wet  being  not  throwen
into  the  sea,  were  thorowly  wet  with  raine,  for  all  the
night  it  rained  cruelly :)  As  we  went  from  the  hil,  and
were  come  into  the  plaine,  we  were  greatly  troubled  to
passe  for  the  grasse  and  weedes  that  grewe  there  higher
then  any  man.  On  the  left  hand  we  had  the  sea,  and
upon  the  right  hand  great  woods,  so  that  of  necessitie
we  must  needs  passe  on  our  way  Westward,  through
those  marshes ;  and  going  thus,  suddenly  we  were
assaulted  by  the  Indians,  a  warlike  kind  of  people,  which
are  in  a  maner  as  Canibals,  although  they  doe  not
feede  upon  mans  flesh  as  Canibals  doe.
Chkhimlci  a  These  people  are  called  Chichimici,  and  they  use  to
warlike  and  ^eare  their  haire  long,  even  down  to  their  knees,  they
aue  p  pe. ^^^  ^^^  colour  their  faces  greene,  yellow,  red  and  blew,

410

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1568.
which  maketh  them  to  seeme  very  ougly  and  terrible
to  beholde.  These  people  doe  keepe  warres  against
the  Spaniards,  of  whom  they  have  bene  oftentimes  very
cruelly  handled :  for  with  the  Spaniards  there  is  no
mercy.  They  perceiving  us  at  our  first  comming  on
land,  supposed  us  to  have  bene  their  enemies,  the  bor-
dering Spaniards,  and  having  by  their  forerunners  des-
cried what  number  we  were,  and  how  feeble  and  weake
without  armour  or  weapon,  they  suddenly  according  to
their  accustomed  maner,  when  they  encounter  with  any
people  in  warlike  sorte,  raised  a  terrible  and  huge  crie,  Oar  men  as-
and  so  came  running  fiercely  upon  us,  shooting  oif  their  ^^.^  -^/Z
arrowes  as  thicke  as  haile,  unto  whose  mercy  we  were
constrained  to  yeeld,  not  having  amongst  us  any  kind  of
armour,  nor  yet  weapon,  saving  one  caliver,  and  two  old
rustic  swords,  whereby  to  make  any  resistance,  or  to
save  our  selves  :  which  when  they  perceived,  that  wee
sought  not  any  other  then  favour  and  mercie  at  their
handes,  and  that  we  were  not  their  enemies  the  Spaniards,
they  had  compassion  on  us,  and  came  and  caused  us
all  to  sit  down :  and  when  they  had  a  while  surveyed,
and  taken  a  perfect  view  of  us,  they  came  to  all  such
as  had  any  coloured  clothes  amongst  us,  and  those
they  did  strip  starke  naked,  and  tooke  their  clothes
away  with  them,  but  those  that  were  apparelled  in
blacke  they  did  not  meddle  withall,  and  so  went  their
wayes,  and  left  us  without  doing  us  any  further  hurt,
onely  in  the  first  brunt  they  killed  eight  of  our  men.  Eight  of  our
And  at  our  departure,  they  perceiving  in  what  weake  ^^^  ^^^^^^•
case  we  were,  pointed  us  with  their  hands  which  way
we  should  go  to  come  to  a  towne  of  the  Spaniards,
which  as  we  afterwards  perceived,  was  not  past  ten
leagues  from  thence,  using  these  words  :  Tampice,
Tampice,  Christiano,  Tampice  Christiano,  which  is  as
much  (we  thinke)  as  to  say  in  English,  at  Tampice
you  shall  find  the  Christians.  The  weapons  that  they
use  are  no  other  but  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  their  [III.  475.]
arme  is  so  good,  that  they  very seldome misse  to  hit

411

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

any  thing  that  they  shoote  at.  Shortly  after  they  had
left  us  strlpt  (as  aforesayd)  we  thought  it  best  to  devide
our  selves  into  two  companies,  and  so  being  separ-
Anthony  ated,  halfe  of  us  went  under  the  leading  of  one  Anthony
Godard.  Qodard,  who  is  yet  a  man  alive,  and  dwelleth  at  this
instant  in  the  towne  of  Plimmouth,  whom  before  we
chose  to  be  captaine  over  us  all,  and  those  which  went
under  his  leading,  of  which  number  I  Miles  Philips  was
one,  travailed  Westward  that  way  which  the  Indians
with  their  hands  had  before  pointed  us  to  go.  The
other  halfe  went  under  the  leading  of  one  John  Hooper,
whom  they  did  choose  for  their  captain,  &  with  the
David  company  that  went  with  him,  David  Ingram  was  one,
Ingram.  ^^^  ^j^^^  tooke  their  way  and  travelled  Northward,  and
shortly  after,  within  the  space  of  two  dayes,  they  were
againe  incountered  with  the  savage  people,  and  their
captaine  Hooper  and  two  more  of  his  company  were
slaine :  then  againe  they  divided  themselves,  and  some
held  on  their  way  still  Northward,  and  other  some,
knowing  that  we  were  gone  Westward,  sought  to  meet
with  us  againe,  as  in  truth  there  was  about  the  number
of  25  or  26  of  them  that  met  with  us  in  the  space  of
foure  dayes  againe,  and  then  we  began  to  reckon
amongst  our  selves,  how  many  wee  were  that  were  set
on  shore,  and  we  found  the  number  to  be  an  hundred
and  foureteene,  whereof  two  were  drowned  in  the  sea,  and
eight  were  slaine  at  the  first  incounter,  so  that  there
remained  an  hundred  and  foure,  of  which  25  went  West-
ward with  us,  and  52  to  the  North  with  Hooper  and
Ingram  :  and  as  Ingram  since  hath  often  told  me,  there
were  not  past  three  of  their  company  slaine,  and  there
were  but  sixe  and  twenty  of  them  that  came  againe  to
us,  so  that  of  the  company  that  went  Northward,  there
is  yet  lacking,  and  not  certainely  heard  of,  the  number
of  three  and  twenty  men.  And  verely  I  doe  thinke
that  there  are  of  them  yet  alive,  and  married  in  the
said  countrey,  at  Cibola,  as  hereafter  I  purpose  (God
willing)  to  discourse  of  more  particularly,  with  the  reason

412

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

and  causes  that  make  mee  so  to  thinke  of  them  that
were  lacking,  which  were  David  Ingram,  Twide,  Browne,
and  sundry  others,  whose  names  wee  could  not  remem-
ber. And  being  thus  met  againe  together,  we  travelled
on  still  Westward,  sometime  thorow  such  thicke  woods,
that  we  were  inforced  with  cudgels  to  breake  away  the
brambles  and  bushes  from  tearing  our  naked  bodies :
other  sometimes  we  should  travel!  thorow  the  plaines,
in  such  high  grasse  that  wee  could  scarse  see  one
another,  and  as  we  passed  in  some  places,  we  should
have  of  our  men  slaine,  and  fall  downe  suddenly,  being
strooken  by  the  Indians,  which  stood  behinde  trees  and
bushes,  in  secret  places,  and  so  killed  our  men  as  they
went  by,  for  wee  went  scatteringly  in  seeking  of  fruites
to  relieve  our  selves.  We  were  also  oftentimes  greatly
annoyed  with  a  kind  of  flie,  which  in  the  Indian  tongue
is  called  Tequani,  and  the  Spaniards  called  them  Mus-
kitos.  There  are  also  in  the  sayd  countrey  a  number  of
other  kinde  of  flies,  but  none  so  noysome  as  these
Tequanies  bee  :  you  shall  hardly  see  them  they  be
so  small,  for  they  are  scarse  so  big  as  a  gnat ;  they
will  sucke  ones  blood  marveilously,  and  if  you  kill
them  while  they  are  sucking,  they  are  so  venimous
that  the  place  will  swell  extremely,  even  as  one  that
is  stoong  with  a  Waspe  or  Bee  :  but  if  you  let  them
sucke  their  fill,  and  to  goe  away  of  themselves,  then
they  doe  you  no  other  hurt,  but  leave  behinde  them
a  red  spot  somewhat  bigger  then  a  flea-biting.  At
the  first  wee  were  terribly  troubled  with  these  kinde
of  flies,  not  knowing  their  qualities,  and  resistance  wee
could  make  none  against  them,  being  naked  :  as  for
cold  wee  feared  not  any,  the  countrey  there  is  alwayes  so
warme.  And  as  we  travelled  thus  for  the  space  of  tenne
or  twelve  dayes,  our  captaine  did  oftentimes  cause  certaine
to  goe  up  into  the  toppes  of  high  trees,  to  see  if  they
could  descrie  any  towne  or  place  of  inhabitants,  but  they
could  not  perceive  any,  and  using  often  the  same  order  to
climbe  up  into  high  trees,  at  the  length  they  descried  a

413

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

great  river  that  fell  from  the  Northwest  into  the  maine
sea,  and  presently  after,  we  heard  an  harquebuze  shot  off,
which  did  greatly  incourage  us,  for  thereby  wee  knew  that
we  were  neere  to  some  Christians,  and  did  therefore  hope
shortly  to  finde  some  succour  and  comfort,  and  within  the
space  of  one  houre  after,  as  we  travelled,  we  heard  a  cocke
crowe,  which  was  also  no  small  joy  unto  us,  and  so  we
The  river  of  came  to  the  North  side  of  the  river  of  Panuco,  where  the
Panuco.  Spaniards  have  certaine  Salines,  at  which  place  it  was  that

the  harquebuze  was  shot  off,  which  before  we  heard :  to
which  place  we  went  not  directly,  but  missing  thereof,  we
left  it  about  a  bow-shot  upon  our  left  hand :  of  this  river
wee  dranke  very  greedily,  for  wee  had  not  met  with  any
water  in  sixe  dayes  before,  and  as  we  were  here  by  the
river  side  resting  our  selves,  and  longing  to  come  to  the
place  where  the  cocke  did  crowe,  and  where  the  harque-
buze was  shot  off,  we  perceived  many  Spaniards  upon  the
other  side  of  the  river,  riding  up  and  downe  on  horse-
backe,  and  they  perceiving  us,  did  suppose  that  we  had
beene  of  the  Indians  their  bordering  enemies,  the  Chichi-
meci :  the  river  was  not  past  halfe  a  bowe  shoot  over :  and
presently  one  of  the  Spaniards  tooke  an  Indian  boate
called  a  Canoa,  and  so  came  over,  being  rowed  by  two
Indians,  and  having  taken  the  view  of  us,  did  presently
[III.  476.]  rowe  over  backe  againe  to  the  Spaniards,  who  without
any  delay  made  out  about  the  number  of  twenty  horse-
men, and  imbarking  themselves  in  the  Canoas,  they  led
their  horses  by  the  reines  swimming  over  after  them,  and
being  come  over  to  that  side  of  the  river  where  we  were,
they  sadled  their  horses,  and  being  mounted  upon  them
with  their  lances  charged,  they  came  very  fiercely  running
at  us.  Our  captaine  Anthony  Godard  seeing  them  come
in  that  order,  did  perswade  us  to  submit  and  yeelde  our
selves  unto  them,  for  being  naked,  as  we  at  this  time
were,  and  without  weapon,  we  could  not  make  any
resistance,  whose  bidding  we  obeied,  and  upon  the
yeelding  of  our  selves,  they  perceived  us  to  be  Christians,
and  did  call  for  more  Canoas,  and  caried  us  over  by  foure

414

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

and  foure  In  a  boat,  and  being  come  on  the  other  side,
they  understanding  by  our  captaine  how  long  we  had  bene
without  meate,  imparted  between  two  and  two  a  loafe  of
bread  made  of  that  countrey  wheat,  which  the  Spaniards
call  Maiz,  of  the  bignesse  of  our  halfepenie  loaves,  which
bread  is  named  in  the  Indian  tongue  Clashacally.  This
bread  was  very  sweete  and  pleasant  unto  us,  for  we  had
not  eaten  any  in  a  long  time  before :  and  what  is  it  that
hunger  doth  not  make  to  have  a  savory  and  a  delicate
taste  ?  And  having  thus  parted  the  bread  amongst  us,
those  which  were  men  they  sent  afore  to  the  towne,
having  also  many  Indians  inhabitants  of  that  place  to
garde  them  :  they  which  were  yong,  as  boyes,  and  some
such  also  as  were  feeble,  they  tooke  up  upon  their  horses,
behind  them,  and  so  caried  us  to  the  towne  where  they
dwelt,  which  was  very  neere  distant  a  mile  from  the  place
where  we  came  over.

This  towne  is  well  situated,  and  well  replenished  with
all  kindes  of  fruits,  as  Orenges,  Limons,  Pomegranates,
Apricoks,  and  Peaches,  and  sundry  others,  and  is  in-
habited with  a  great  number  of  tame  Indians,  or
Mexicans,  and  had  in  it  also  at  that  time  about  the
number  of  two  hundred  Spaniards,  men,  women,  and
children,  besides  Negros.  Of  their  Salines,  which  lie  The  Salines
upon  the  West  side  of  the  river,  more  then  a  mile  distant  °fP^"^'^°-
from  thence,  they  make  a  great  profit,  for  it  is  an  excellent
good  merchandize  there :  the  Indians  doe  buy  much
thereof,  and  cary  it  up  into  the  countrey,  and  there  sell
it  to  their  owne  countrey  people,  in  doubling  the  price.
Also  much  of  the  Salt  made  in  this  place,  is  transported
from  thence  by  sea  to  sundry  other  places,  as  to  Cuba,  S.
John  de  UUua,  and  the  other  ports  of  Tamiago,  and
Tamachos,  which  are  two  barred  havens  West  and  by
South  above  threescore  leagues  from  S.  John  de  Ullua.
When  we  were  all  come  to  the  towne,  the  Governour
there  shewed  himselfe  very  severe  unto  us,  and  threatned
to  hang  us  all :  and  then  he  demanded  what  money  wee
had,  which  in  trueth  was  very  little,  for  the  Indians  which

415

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

we  first  met  withall,  had  in  a  maner  taken  all  from  us,  and
of  that  which  they  left,  the  Spaniards  which  brought  us
over,  tooke  away  a  good  part  also :  howbeit,  from
Anthony  Godard  the  Governour  here  had  a  chaine  of
gold,  which  was  given  unto  him  at  Carthagena,  by  the
Governour  there,  and  from  others  he  had  some  small
store  of  money :  so  that  wee  accounted  that  amongst
us  all  he  had  the  number  of  five  hundred  Pezos,  besides
the  chaine  of  gold.

And  having  thus  satisfied  himselfe,  when  he  had  taken
all  that  we  had,  he  caused  us  to  be  put  into  a  little  house
much  like  a  hogstie,  where  we  were  almost  smoothered :
and  before  we  were  thus  shut  up  into  that  little  coat,  they
gave  us  some  of  the  countrey  wheate,  called  Mayz,  sod-
den, which  they  feede  their  hogs  withall.  But  many  of
our  men  which  had  bene  hurt  by  the  Indians  at  our  first
comming  on  land,  whose  wounds  were  very  sore  and
grievous,  desired  to  have  the  helpe  of  their  Surgeons  to
cure  their  wounds.  The  governour,  and  most  of  them
all  answered,  that  wee  should  have  none  other  Surgeon
but  the  hangman,  which  should  sufficiently  heale  us  of
all  our  griefes :  and  thus  reviling  us,  and  calling  us
English  dogs,  and  Lutheran  heretikes,  we  remained  the
space  of  three  dayes  in  this  miserable  state,  not  knowing
what  should  become  of  us,  waiting  every  houre  to  be
bereaved  of  our  lives.

Chap.  4.

Wherin  is  shewed  how  we  were  used  in  Panuco,  and  in  what
feare  of  death  we  were  there,  and  how  we  were  caried
to  Mexico  to  the  Viceroy,  and  of  our  imprisonment
there  and  at  Tescuco,  with  the  courtesies  and  cruelties
wee  received  during  that  time,  and  how  in  the  end
wee  were  by  proclamation  given  to  serve  as  slaves  to
sundry  gentlemen  Spaniards.

UPon  the  fourth  day  after  our  comming  thither,  and
there  remaining  in  a  perplexitie,  looking  every  houre
when  we  should  suffer  death,  there  came  a  great  number

416

ftji«j«;e5r»i»;^'

u

w

O

CO

CO

W

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

of  Indians  and  Spaniards  weaponed  to  fetch  us  out  of  the

house,  and  amongst  them  wee  espied  one  that  brought

a  great  many  of  new  halters,  at  the  sight  whereof  we  were

greatly  amazed,  and  made  no  other  account  but  that  we

should  presently  have  suffered  death,  and  so  crying  and

calling  to  God  for  mercie  and  forgivenesse  of  our  sinnes,

we  prepared  our  selves,  making  us  ready  to  die :  yet  in

the  end,  as  the  sequel  shewed,  their  meaning  was  not  so :  [III.  477.]

for  when  wee  were  come  out  of  the  house,  with  those

halters  they  bound  our  armes  behind  us,  and  so  coupling

us  two  and  two  together,  they  commanded  us  to  march

on  through  the  towne,  and  so  along  the  countrey  from

place  to  place  toward  the  citie  of  Mexico,  which  is  distant

from Panuco West  and  by  South the  space of  ninetie

leagues,  having  onely  but  two  Spaniards  to  conduct  us,

they  being  accompanied  with  a  great  number  of  Indians

warding  on  either  side  with  bowes  and  arrowes,  lest  we

should  escape  from  them. And  travelling  in  this  order,

upon the  second  day  at  night  we came unto  a towne

which  the  Indians  call  Nohele,  and  the  Spaniards  call  it

Santa  Maria :  in  which  towne  there  is  a  house  of  white

friers,  which  did  very  courteously  use us,  and  gave  us

hote meat,  as mutton  and  broth,  and  garments  also  to

cover  our  selves  withal,  made  of  white  bayes :  we  fed  very

greedily  of  the  meat,  and  of  the  Indian  fruit,  called  Noc-

hole,  which  fruit  is  long  and  small,  much  like  in  fashion

to  a  little  cucumber. Our  greedy  feeding  caused  us  to

fall  sicke  of  hote  burning  agues. And  here  at  this  place

one  Thomas  Baker  one  of  our  men  died  of  a  hurt :  for  he

had  bene  before  shot  with  an  arrow  into  the  throat  at  the

first  incounter.

The  next  morrow  about  ten  of  the  clocke,  we  departed
from  thence,  bound  two  &  two  together,  and  garded  as
before,  and  so  travailed  on  our  way  toward  Mexico,  till
we  came  to  a  towne  within  forty  leagues  of  Mexico,
named  Mestitlan,  where  is  a  house  of  blacke  friers :  and
in  this  towne  there  are  about  the  number  of  three
hundred Spaniards, both men, women, and children.

IX  417  2D

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

The  friers  sent  us  meat  from  the  house  ready  dressed,
and  the  friers,  and  the  men  and  women  used  us  very
courteously,  and  gave  us  some  shirts  and  other  such
things  as  we  lacked.  Here  our  men  were  very  sicke  of
their  agues,  and  with  eating  of  another  fruit  called  in  the
Indian  tongue,  Guiaccos,  which  fruit  did  binde  us  so  sore,
that  for  the  space  of  tenne  or  twelve  dayes  we  could  not
ease  our  selves.  The  next  morning  we  departed  from
thence  with  our  two  Spaniards  and  Indian  gard,  as  afore-
sayd.  Of  these  two  Spaniards  the  one  was  an  aged  man,
who  all  the  way  did  very  courteously  intreate  us,  and
would  carefully  go  before  to  provide  for  us  both  meat
and  things  necessary  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power  :  the
other  was  a  yong  man  who  all  the  way  travelled  with  us,
and  never  departed  from  us,  who  was  a  very  cruell  caitive,
and  he  caried  a  javeline  in  his  hand,  and  sometimes  when
as  our  men  with  very  feeblenesse  and  faintnesse  were  not
able  to  goe  so  fast  as  he  required  them,  he  would  take  his
javelin  in  both  his  handes,  and  strike  them  with  the  same
betweene  the  necke  and  the  shoulders  so  violently,  that  he
would  strike  them  downe  ;  then  would  he  cry,  and  say,
Marchad,  marchad  Ingleses  perros,  Luterianos,  enemigos
de  Dios  :  which  is  as  much  to  say  in  English,  as  March,
march  on  you  English  dogges,  Lutherans,  enemies  to
God.  And  the  next  day  we  came  to  a  towne  called
Pachuca,  and  there  are  two  places  of  that  name  :  as  this
towne  of  Pachuca,  and  the  mines  of  Pachuca,  which  are
mines  of  silver,  and  are  about  sixe  leagues  distant  from
this  towne  of  Pachuca  towards  the  Northwest.

Here  at  this  towne  the  good  olde  man  our  Governour
suffered  us  to  stay  two  dayes  and  two  nights,  having  com-
passion of  our  sicke  and  weake  men,  full  sore  against  the
minde  of  the  yoong  man  his  companion.  From  thence
we  tooke  our  journey,  and  travelled  foure  or  five  dayes
by  little  villages,  and  Stantias,  which  are  farmes  or  dairie
houses  of  the  Spaniards,  and  ever  as  wee  had  neede,  the
good  olde  man  would  still  provide  us  sufficient  of  meates,
fruites,  and  water  to  sustaine  us. At  the  end  of  which

418

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1568.

five  dayes  wee  came  to  a  towne  within  five  leagues  of
Mexico,  which  is  called  Quoghliclan,  where  wee  also
stayed  one  whole  day  and  two  nights,  where  was  a  faire
house  of  gray  friers,  howbeit  wee  saw  none  of  them.
Here  wee  were  told  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  towne,  that
wee  had  not  past  fifteene  English  miles  from  thence  to
Mexico,  whereof  we  were  all  very  joyfull  and  glad,  hoping
that  when  we  came  thither,  we  should  either  be  relieved,
and  set  free  out  of  bonds,  or  els  bee  quickly  dispatched  out
of  our  lives  :  for  seeing  our  selves  thus  caried  bound
from  place  to  place,  although  some  used  us  courteously,
yet  could  wee  never  joy,  nor  be  merrie  till  wee  might  per-
ceive our  selves  set  free  from  that  bondage,  either  by
death  or  otherwise.

The  next  morning  we  departed  from  thence  on  our
journey  towards  Mexico,  and  so  travelled  till  wee  came
within  two  leagues  of  it,  where  there  was  built  by  the
Spaniards  a  very  faire  church,  called  our  Ladyes  church,
in  which  there  is  an  image  of  our  Lady  of  silver  &  gilt,
being  as  high,  &  as  large  as  a  tall  woman,  in  which
churchj  and  before  this  image,  there  are  as  many  lamps  of
silver  as  there  be  dayes  in  the  yeere,  which  upon  high
dayes  are  all  lighted.  Whensoever  any  Spaniards  passe
by  this  church,  although  they  be  on  horse  backe,  they
will  alight,  and  come  into  the  church,  and  kneele  before
the  image,  and  pray  to  our  Lady  to  defend  them  from  all
evil ;  so  that  whether  he  be  horseman  or  footman  he  will
not  passe  by,  but  first  goe  into  the  Church,  and  pray  as
aforesayd,  which  if  they  doe  not,  they  thinke  and  beleeve
that  they  shall  never  prosper  :  which  image  they  call  in  [III.  478.]
the  Spanish  tongue,  Nuestra  sennora  de  Guadalupe.  At  t^uestra
this  place  there  are  certain  cold  baths,  which  arise,  spring-
ing up  as  though  the  water  did  seeth  :  the  water  whereof
is  somewhat  brackish  in  taste,  but  very  good  for  any  that
have  any  sore  or  wound,  to  wash  themselves  therewith,
for  as  they  say,  it  healeth  many :  and  every  yeere  once
upon  our  Lady  day  the  people  use  to  repaire  thither  to
offer,  and  to  pray  in  that  Church  before  the  image,  and

419

Sennora.

A.D.
1568.

Certaine  En-
glishmen taken
prisoners  at
the  fight  at
Sant  Juan  de
Ullua.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

they  say  that  our  Lady  of  Guadalupe  doeth  worke  a
number  of  miracles.  About  this  Church  there  is  not  any
towne  of  Spaniards  that  is  inhabited,  but  certaine  Indians
doe  dwell  there  in  houses  of  their  own  countrey
building.

Here  we  were  met  with  a  great  number  of  Spaniards  on
horsebacke,  which  came  from  Mexico  to  see  us,  both
gentlemen,  and  men  of  occupations,  and  they  came  as
people  to  see  a  wonder  :  we  were  still  called  upon  to
march  on ;  and  so  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone  of  the  said  day  we  entred  into  the  citie  of  Mexico,
by  the  way  or  street  called  La  calle  Santa  Catherina  :  and
we  stayed  not  in  any  place  till  we  came  to  the  house  or
palace  of  the  Vice  Roy,  Don  Martin  Henriques,  which
standeth  in  the  middest  of  the  city,  hard  by  the  market
place,  called  La  pla9a  del  Marquese.  We  had  not  stayed
any  long  time  at  this  place,  but  there  was  brought  us
by  the  Spaniards  from  the  market  place  great  store  of
meat,  sufficient  to  have  satisfied  five  times  so  many  as  we
were  :  some  also  gave  us  hats,  &  some  gave  us  money  :
in  which  place  we  stayed  for  the  space  of  two  houres,
&  from  thence  we  were  conveyed  by  water  in  two
large  Canoas  to  an  hospital  where  as  certaine  of  our
men  were  lodged,  which  were  taken  before  the  fight  at
S.  John  de  Ullua :  wee  should  have  gone  to  our
Ladies  hospitall,  but  that  there  were  also  so  many  of
our  men  taken  before  at  that  fight  that  there  was  no
roome  for  us.  After  our  comming  thither,  many  of
the  company  that  came  with  me  from  Panuco  dyed
within  the  space  of  fourteene  dayes  :  soone  after  which
time  we  were  taken  forth  from  that  place,  and  put
altogether  into  our  Ladies  hospitall,  in  which  place  we
were  courteously  used,  and  visited  oftentimes  by  vertu-
ous  gentlemen  and  gentlewomen  of  the  citie,  who
brought  us  divers  things  to  comfort  us  withall,  as
succats  and  marmilads,  and  such  other  things,  and
would  also  many  times  give  us  many  things,  and  that
very  liberally. In  which  hospitall  we  remained  for  the

420

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

space  of  sixe  moneths,  untill  we  were  all  whole  and  sound
of  body,  and  then  we  were  appointed  by  the  Vice  Roy  to
be  caried  unto  the  town  of  Tescuco,  which  is  from
Mexico  Southwest  distant  eight  leagues  :  in  which  towne
there  are  certaine  houses  of  correction  and  punishment
for  ill  people  called  Obraches,  like  to  Bridewell  here  in
London  :  into  which  place  divers  Indians  are  sold  for  slaves,
some  for  ten  yeeres,  and  some  for  twelve.  It  was  no
small  griefe  unto  us  when  we  understood  that  we  should
be  caried  thither,  and  to  bee  used  as  slaves,  we  had  rather
be  put  to  death  :  howbeit  there  was  no  remedy,  but  we
were  caried  to  the  prison  of  Tescuco,  where  we  were  not
put  to  any  labour,  but  were  very  straitly  kept,  &  almost
famished,  yet  by  the  good  providence  of  our  mercifull
God,  we  happened  there  to  meet  with  one  Robert  Sweet-  Robert ^
ing,  who  was  the  sonne  of  an  Englishman  borne  of  a  p^^p^^S  ^"
Spanish  woman  :  this  man  could  speake  very  good  Eng-
lish, and  by  his  means  wee  were  holpen  very  much  with
victuals  from  the  Indians,  as  mutton,  hennes,  &  bread.
And  if  we  had  not  bene  so  relieved,  we  had  surely
perished  :  and  yet  all  the  provision  that  wee  had  gotten
that  way  was  but  slender.  And  continuing  thus  straightly
kept  in  prison  there  for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  at  the
length  wee  agreed  amongst  our  selves  to  breake  forth  of
prison,  come  of  it  what  would,  for  we  were  minded  rather
to  suffer  death  then  longer  to  live  in  that  miserable  state.
And  so  having  escaped  out  of  prison,  we  knew  not  what
way  to  flie  for  the  safetie  of  our  selves,  the  night  was
darke,  and  it  rained  terribly,  and  not  having  any  guide,
we  went  we  knew  not  whither,  and  in  the  morning,  at  the
appearing  of  the  day,  we  perceived  our  selves  to  be  come
hard  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  which  is  24  English  miles
from  Tescuco.  The  day  being  come  we  were  espied  by
the  Spaniards,  &  pursued,  and  taken,  and  brought  before
the  Vice  Roy  and  head  justices,  who  threatned  to  hang  EngM
us  for  breaking  of  the  kings  prison.  Yet  in  the  end  they  f"//j'^^^"
sent  us  into  a  garden  belonging  to  the  Vice  Roy,  &
comming  thither,  we  found  there  our  English  gentlemen

421

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1568.

which  were  delivered  as  hostages  when  as  our  General

was  betrayed  at  S.  John  de  UUua,  as  is  aforesaid,  and

with  them  wee  also  found  Robert  Barret,  the  Master  of

the Jesus, in which place  we  remained  labouring  and

doing  such  things  as  we  were  commanded,  for  the  space

of  4  moneths,  having  but  two  sheepe  a  day  allowed  to

Almost  an suffice  US  all,  being  very  neere  a  hundred  men,  and  for

hundred bread  we  had  every  man  two  loaves  a  day,  of  the  quantity

pr'isoners7n  °^  °"^  halfepeny  loafe. At the end of  which foure

Mexico, moneths,  they  having  remooved  our  gentlemen  hostages,

and  the  Master  of  the  Jesus  to  a  prison  in  the  Vice  Roy

his  owne  house,  did  cause  it  to  be  proclaimed,  that  what

gentleman  Spaniard  soever  was  willing,  or  would  have

any  English  man  to  serve  him,  and  be  bound  to  keepe

him  forth  comming,  to  appeare  before  the  Justices  within

one  moneth  after  notice  given,  that  they  should  repaire

to  the  said  garden,  and  there  take  their  choice  :  which

[III.  479.]  proclamation  was no sooner made, but the gentlemen

came  and  repaired  to  the  garden  amaine,  so  that  happie

was he that could soonest get one of  us.

Chap.  5.

Wherein  is  shewed  in  what  good  sort,  and  how  wealthily
we  lived  with  our  masters  untill  the  comming  of  the
Inquisition,  when  as  againe  our  sorowes  began  a  fresh  :
Of  our  imprisonment  in  the  holy  house,  and  of  the
severe  judgement  and  sentences  given  against  us,  and
with  what  rigour  and  crueltie  the  same  were
executed.

THe  gentlemen  that  thus  tooke  us  for  their  servants
or  slaves  did  new  apparell  us  through  out,  with
whom  we  abode,  doing  such  service  as  they  appointed
us  unto,  which  was  for  the  most  part  to  attend  upon
them  at  the  table,  and  to  be  as  their  chamberlaines,  &
to  waite  upon  them  when  they  went  abroad,  which  they
greatly  accounted  of;  for  in  that  countrey  no  Spaniard
will  serve  one  another,  but  they  are  all  of  them  attended
and  served  by  Indians  weekely,  and  by  Negroes  which

422

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1568.

be  their  slaves during  their  life. In this sort  we  re-
mained and served in the said citie of Mexico, and
thereabouts  for  the  space  of  a  yeere  and  somewhat  longer.
Afterwards  many  of  us  were  by our  masters  appointed
to  go  to  sundry  of  their  Mines  where  they  had  to  doe,
and  to  be  as  overseers  of  the  Negroes  and  Indians  that
laboured  there. In  which  mines  many  of  us  did  profite
&  gaine  greatly  :  for  first  we  were  allowed  three  hundred
Pezos  a man for a yeere, which is threescore  pound
sterling, and besides that the Indians and Negroes
which  wrought  under our  charge,  upon  our  well  using
&  intreating  of  them,  would  at  times  as  upon  Saturdayes
when they had  left  worke,  labour  for us,  and  blow  as
much silver  as  should  be  worth unto  us  3 markes  or
thereabouts, every marke being worth 6 Pezos, and
a halfe  of  their money, which 19  Pezos  &  a  halfe,  is
worth  4li. los.  of  our  money. Sundry  weekes  we  did
gaine  so much by  this  meanes  besides  our  wages,  that
many of  us became very  rich,  and were worth three
thousand or  foure thousand Pezos, for we  lived and
gained  thus  in  those  Mines  some  three  or  foure  yeeres.
As concerning those Gentlemen which were delivered
as  hostages,  and  that  were  kept  in  prison,  in  the  Viceroy
his house, after that we were gone from out the
garden to serve sundry gentlemen as aforesaid, they
remained  prisoners  in  the said  house for  the space of
4 moneths after their comming thither, at the end
whereof  the  fleete  being  readie  to  depart  from  S.  John
de UUua, to goe for Spaine, the said Gentlemen
v^ere sent away into Spaine with  the  fleete,  where  as
I have heard  it  credibly reported,  many  of  them  died
with  the  cruell  handling  of  the  Spaniards  in  the  Inquisi-
tion  house, as  those  which have  bene delivered home
after they  had suffered the  persecution of  that house
can  more  perfectly  declare. Robert Barret  also master
of  the  Jesus,  was  sent  away  with  the  fleete  into  Spaine
the  next  yeere following, where  afterwards  he suffered
persecution  in  the  Inquisition,  and  at  the  last  was  con-

423

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1575-

demned  to  be  burnt, and  with  him one  more  of  our
men  whose  name  was  John  Gilbert.

Now  after  that  sixe  yeeres  were  fully  expired  since
our  first  comming  into  the  Indies,  in  which  time  we
had  bene  imprisoned  and  served  in  the  said  countreys
as  is  before  truely  declared,  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
one  thousand  five  hundred  seventie  foure,  the  Inquisition
began  to  be  established  in  the  Indies,  very  much
against  the  mindes  of  many  of  the  Spaniards  them-
selves :  for  never  untill  this  time  since  their  first
conquering  and  planting  in  the  Indies,  were  they
subject  to  that  bloodie  and  cruell  Inquisition.  The
chiefe  Inquisitor  was  named  Don  Pedro  Moya  de
Contreres,  and  John  de  Bovilla  his  companion,  and
John  Sanches  the  Fischall,  and  Pedro  de  los  Rios,  the
Secretary  :  they  being  come  and  setled,  and  placed
in  a  very  faire  house  neere  unto  the  white  Friers,
considering  with  themselves  that  they  must  make  an
entrance  and  beginning  of  that  their  most  detestable
Inquisition  here  in  Mexico,  to  the  terror  of  the  whole
countrey,  thought  it  best  to  call  us  that  were  English-
men first  in  question,  and  so  much  the  rather,  for
that  they  had  perfect  knowledge  and  intelligence  that
many  of  us  were  become  very  rich,  as  hath  bene
alreadie  declared,  and  therefore  we  were  a  very  good
booty  and  pray  to  the  Inquisitors  :  so  that  now  againe
began  our  sorrowes  a  fresh,  for  we  were  sent  for,
and  sought  out  in  all  places  of  the  countrey,  and
proclamation  made  upon  paine  of  loosing  of  goods  and
excommunication,  that  no  man  should  hide  or  keepe
secret  any  Englishmen  or  any  part  of  their  goods.
By  means  whereof  we  were  all  soone  apprehended  in
all  places,  and  all  our  goods  seized  and  taken  for  the
Inquisitors  use,  and  so  from  all  parts  of  the  countrey
we  were  conveied  and  sent  as  prisoners  to  the  citie
of  Mexico,  and  there  committed  to  prison  in  sundry
darke  dungeons,  where  we  could  not  see  but  by  candle
light,  &  were  never  past  two  together  in  one  place,  so

424

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1575-
that  we  saw  not  one  another,  neither  could  one  of  us
tell  what  was  become  of  another.  Thus  we  remained
close  imprisoned  for  the  space  of  a  yeere  and  a  halfe,  [HI.  480.]
and  others  for  some  lesse  time,  for  they  came  to  prison
ever  as  they  were  apprehended.  During  which  time
of  our  imprisonment,  at  the  first  beginning  we  were
often  called  before  the  Inquisitors  alone,  and  there
severely  examined  of  our  faith,  and  commanded  to  say
the  Pater  noster,  the  Ave  Maria,*  &  the  Creed  in
Latin,  which  God  knoweth  a  great  number  of  us
could  not  say,  otherwise  then  in  the  English  tongue.
And  having  the  said  Robert  Sweeting  who  was  our  friend
at  Tescuco  alwayes  present  with  them  for  an  interpreter,
he  made  report  for  us,  y*  in  our  own  countrey  speech
we  could  say  them  perfectly,  although  not  word  for
word  as  they  were  in  Latin.  Then  did  they  proceede
to  demand  of  us  upon  our  othes  what  we  did
beleeve  of  the  Sacrament,  &  whether  there  did  remaine
any  bread  or  wine  after  the  words  of  consecration,
yea  or  no,  and  whether  we  did  not  beleeve  that
the  host  of  bread  which  the  priest  did  hold  up  over
his  head,  and  the  wine  that  was  in  the  chalice,  was
the  very  true  and  perfect  body  &  blood  of  our
Saviour  Christ,  yea  or  no  :  To  which  if  we  answered
not  yea,  then  was  there  no  way  but  death.  Then
they  would  demand  of  us  what  we  did  remember  of  our
selves,  what  opinions  we  had  held,  or  had  bin  taught
to  hold  contrary  to  the  same  whiles  we  were  in  England  :
to  which  we  for  the  safety  of  our  lives  were  constrained
to  say,  that  we  never  did  beleeve,  nor  had  bene  taught
otherwise  then  has  before  we  had  sayd.  Then  would
they  charge  us  that  we  did  not  tell  them  the  truth,
that  they  knew  the  contrary,  and  therfore  we  should
cal  our  selves  to  remembrance,  &  make  them  a  better
answer  at  the  next  time,  or  els  we  should  be  rackt,
and  made  to  confesse  the  trueth  whether  we  would
or  no.  And  so  comming  againe  before  them  the  next
time, we were still demanded of  our  beliefe  whiles  we

425

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1575-

were  in  England,  and  how  we  had  bin  taught,  &  also
what  we  thought  or  did  know  of  such  of  our  owne
company  as  they  did  name  unto  us,  so  that  we  could
never  be  free  from  such  demands,  and  at  other  times
they  would  promise  us,  that  if  we  would  tell  them
trueth,  then  should  we  have  favour  &  be  set  at  libertie,
although  we  very  wel  knew  their  faire  speeches  were
but  means  to  entrap  us,  to  the  hazard  and  losse  of
our  lives  :  howbeit  God  so  mercifully  wrought  for  us
by  a  secret  meanes  that  we  had,  that  we  kept  us  still
to  our  first  answer,  &  would  stil  say  that  we  had
told  the  trueth  unto  them,  and  knew  no  more  by  our
selves  nor  any  other  of  our  fellows  then  as  we  had
declared,  and  that  for  our  sinnes  and  offences  in  England
against  God  and  our  Lady,  or  any  of  his  blessed  Saints,
we  were  heartily  sory  for  the  same,  and  did  cry  God
mercy,  and  besought  the  Inquisitors  for  Gods  sake,
considering  that  we  came  into  those  countreys  by  force
of  weather,  &  against  our  wils,  and  that  never  in  all
our  lives  we  had  either  spoken  or  done  any  thing
contrary  to  their  lawes,  and  therfore  they  would  have
mercy  upon  us.  Yet  all  this  would  not  serve  ;  for  stil
from  time  to  time  we  were  called  upon  to  confesse,
and  about  the  space  of  3  moneths  before  they  proceeded
Our  men  are  to  their  severe  judgement,  we  were  al  rackt,  and  some
cra^//y  rackt.  enforced  to  utter  that  against  themselves,  which  after-
wards cost  them  their  lives.  And  thus  having  gotten
from  our  owne  mouthes  matter  sufficient  for  them  to
proceed  in  judgement  against  us,  they  caused  a  large
scaifold  to  be  made  in  the  middest  of  the  market  place
in  Mexico  right  over  against  the  head  church,  &  14
or  15  daies  before  the  day  of  their  judgement,  with
the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  the  noise  of  their  Attabalies,
which  are  a  kind  of  drummes,  they  did  assemble  the
people  in  all  parts  of  the  citie  :  before  whom  it  was
then  solemnely  proclaimed,  that  whosoever  would  upon
such  a  day  repaire  to  the  market  place,  they  should
heare the sentence of  the  holy  Inquisition  against  the

426

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1575.

English  heretikes,  Lutherans,  and  also  see  the  same
put  in  execution.  Which  being  done,  and  the  time
approching  of  this  cruell  judgement,  the  night  before
they  came  to  the  prison  where  we  were,  with  certaine
officers  of  that  holy  hellish  house,  bringing  with  them
certaine  fooles  coats  which  they  had  prepared  for  us,
being  called  in  their  language  S.  Benitos,  which  coats
were  made  of  yellow  cotten  &  red  crosses  upon  them,
both  before  &  behind :  they  were  so  busied  in  putting
on  their  coats  about  us,  and  bringing  us  out  into  a
large  yard,  and  placing  and  pointing  us  in  what  order
we  should  go  to  the  scaffold  or  place  of  judgement
upon  the  morrow,  that  they  did  not  once  suffer  us  to
sleepe  all  that  night  long.  The  next  morning  being
come,  there  was  given  to  every  one  of  us  for  our
breakfast  a  cup  of  wine,  and  a  slice  of  bread  fried
in  honie,  and  so  about  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  set  foorth  of  the  prison,  every  man  alone
in  his  yellow  coat,  and  a  rope  about  his  necke,  and  a
great  greene  Waxe  candle  in  his  hand  unlighted,  having
a  Spaniard  appointed  to  goe  upon  either  side  of  every
one  of  us  :  and  so  marching  in  this  order  and  maner
toward  the  scaffold  in  the  market  place,  which  was  a
bow  shoot  distant  or  thereabouts,  we  found  a  great
assembly  of  people  all  the  way,  and  such  a  throng,  that
certain  of  the  Inquisitors  officers  on  horseback  were  con-
strained to  make  way,  and  so  comming  to  the  scaffold,
we  went  up  by  a  paire  of  stayres,  and  found  seates  readie
made  and  prepared  for  us  to  sit  downe  on,  every  man
in  order  as  he  should  be  called  to  receive  his  judgement.
We  being  thus  set  downe  as  we  were  appointed,  presently
the  Inquisitors  came  up  another  paire  of  staires,  and  the
Viceroy  and  all  the  chiefe  Justices  with  them.  When
they  were  set  downe  and  placed  under  the  cloth  of  [III.  481.]
estate  agreeing  to  their  degrees  and  calling,  then  came
up  also  a  great  number  of  Friers,  white,  blacke  and
gray,  about  the  number  of  300  persons,  they  being  set
in the places for  them appointed. Then  was  there  a

427

A.D.

1575-

The  cruell
judgements  of
the  Spanish
inquisitors
upon  our  poore
countreymen.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

solemne  Oyes  made,  and  silence  commanded,  and  then
presently  beganne  their  severe  and  cruell  judgement.

The  first  man  that  was  called  was  one  Roger  the  chiefe
Armourer  of  the  Jesus,  and  hee  had  judgement  to  have
three  hundred  stripes  on  horsebacke,  and  after  condemned
to  the  gallies  as  a  slave  for lo  yeeres.

After  him  were  called  John  Gray,  John  Browne,  John
Rider,  John  Moone,  James  Collier,  and  one  Thomas
Browne  :  these  were  adjudged  to  have  200  stripes  on
horsebacke,  and  after  to  be  committed  to  the  gallies  for
the  space  of  8  yeeres.

Then  was  called  John  Keyes,  and  was  adjudged  to
have  100  stripes  on  horsebacke,  and  condemned  to
serve  in  the  gallies  for  the  space  of  6  yeeres.

Then  were  severally  called  the  number  of  53  one  after
another,  and  every  man  had  his  severall  judgement,
some  to  have  200  stripes  on  horsebacke,  and  some  100,
and  condemned  for  slaves  to  the  gallies,  some  for  6
yeeres, some for  8 and  some  for 10.

And  then  was  I  Miles  Philips  called,  and  was  adjudged
to  serve  in  a  monasterie  for  5  yeeres,  without  any  stripes,
and  to  weare  a  fooles  coat,  or  S.  Benito,  during  all  that
time.

Then  were  called  John  Storie,  Richard  Williams,
David  Alexander,  Robert  Cooke,  Paul  Horsewell  and
Thomas  Hull  :  the  sixe  were  condemned  to  serve  in
monasteries  without  stripes,  some  for  3  yeeres  and  some
for  foure,  and  to  weare  the  S.  Benito  during  all  the
said  time.  Which  being  done,  and  it  now  drawing  to-
ward night,  George  Rively,  Peter  Momfrie,  and  Cornelius
the  Irishman,  were  called  and  had  their  judgement  to
be  burnt  to  ashes,  and  so  were  presently  sent  away  to
the  place  of  execution  in  the  market  place  but  a  little
from  the  scaffold,  where  they  were  quickly  burnt  and
consumed.  And  as  for  us  that  had  received  our  judge-
ment, being  68  in  number,  we  were  caried  backe  that
night  to  prison  againe.  And  the  next  day  in  the  morning
being good Friday, the  yeere of  our Lord 1575, we

428

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1575-
were  all  brought  into  a  court  of  the  Inquisitors  pallace,
where  we  found  a  horse  in  a  readinesse  for  every  one  of
our  men  which  were  condemned  to  have  stripes,  and  to
be  committed  to  the  gallies,  which  were  in  number  60
and  so  they  being  inforced  to  mount  up  on  horsebacke
naked  from  the  middle  upward,  were  caried  to  be  shewed
as  a  spectacle  for  all  the  people  to  behold  throughout
the  chiefe  and  principall  streetes  of  the  citie,  and  had  the
number  of  stripes  to  every  one  of  them  appointed,  most
cruelly  laid  upon  their  naked  bodies  with  long  whips
by  sundry  men  appointed  to  be  the  executioners  thereof :
and  before  our  men  there  went  a  couple  of  criers  which
cried  as  they  went :  Behold  these  English  dogs,  Luther-
ans, enemies  to  God,  and  all  the  way  as  they  went  there
were  some  of  the  Inquisitors  themselves,  and  of  the
familiars  of  that  rakehel  order,  that  cried  to  the  exe-
cutioners. Strike,  lay  on  those  English  heretiks,  Luther-
ans, Gods  enemies  :  and  so  this  horrible  spectacle  being
shewed  round  about  the  citie,  they  returned  to  the
Inquisitors  house,  with  their  backes  all  gore  blood,  and
swollen  with  great  bumps,  and  were  then  taken  from
their  horses,  &  carried  againe  to  prison,  where  they
remained  untill  they  were  sent  into  Spaine  to  the  gallies,
there  to  receive  the  rest  of  their  martirdome  :  and  I
and  the  6  other  with  me  which  had  judgement,  and  were
condemned  amongst  the  rest  to  serve  an  apprentiship
in  the  monastery,  were  taken  presently  and  sent  to
certaine  religious  houses  appointed  for  the  purpose.

[Chap.  6
429

I

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1575-80.

Chap.  6.

Wherein  is  shewed  how  we  were  used  in  the  religious
houses,  and  that  when  the  time  was  expired,  that  we
were  adjudged  to  serve  in  them,  there  came  newes
to  Mexico  of  M.  Francis  Drakes  being  in  the  South
Sea,  and  what  preparation  was  made  to  take  him^
and  how  I  seeking  to  escape,  was  againe  taken  and
put  in  prison  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  how  againe  I  made
mine  escape  from  thence.

Miles  Philips  and  William  Lowe  were  appointed  to
the  blacke  Friers,  where  I  was  appointed  to  be  an
overseer  of  Indian  workmen,  who  wrought  there  in
building  of  a  new  church  :  amongst  which  Indians  I
learned  their  language  or  Mexican  tongue  very  per-
fectly, and  had  great  familiaritie  with  many  of  them,
whom  I  found  to  be  a  courteous  and  loving  kind  of
people,  ingenious,  and  of  great  understanding,  and  they
hate  and  abhorre  the  Spaniardes  with  all  their  hearts,
they  have  used  such  horrible  cruelties  against  them,  and
doe  still  keepe  them  in  such  subjection  and  servitude,
that  they  and  the  Negros  also  doe  daily  lie  in  waite  to
practise  their  deliverance  out  of  that  thraldome  and  bond-
age, that  the  Spaniardes  doe  keepe  them  in.  William
[III.  482.]  Lowe  he  was  appointed  to  serve  the  Cooke  in  the
kitchin,  Richard  Williams  and  David  Alexander  were
appointed  to  the  gray  Friers,  John  Story  and  Robert
Cooke  to  the  white  Friers  :  Paul  Horsewel  the  Secre-
tary tooke  to  be  his  servant :  Thomas  Hull  was  sent  to
a  Monastery  of  priests,  where  afterward  he  died.  Thus
we  served  out  the  yeeres  that  we  were  condemned  for,
with  the  use  of  our  fooles  coates,  and  we  must  needs
confesse  that  the  Friers  did  use  us  very  courteously :  for
every  one  of  us  had  his  chamber  with  bedding  &  diet,
and  all  things  cleane  and  neat :  yea  many  of  the  Spani-
ards and  Friers  themselves  do  utterly  abhorre  and  mislike
of  that  cruell  Inquisition,  and  would  as  they  durst  be-
waile  our  miseries,  and  comfort  us  the  best  they  could,,

430

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1575-80.

although they stood in such feare of that divelish
Inquisition,  that  they  durst  not  let  the  left  hande  know
what  the  right  doth. Now  after  that  the  time  was ex-
pired for which  we were condemned  to  serve  in  those
religious  houses,  we  were  then  brought  againe  before  the
chiefe  Inquisitor,  and  had  all  our  fooles  coates  pulled  off
and  hanged  up  in  the  head  church,  called  Ecclesia  Major,
and  every  mans  name  and  judgement  written  thereupon
with this addition. An heretike Lutheran reconciled.
And  there  are  also  all  their  coates  hanged  up,  which  were
condemned  to  the  gallies,  with  their  names  and  judge-
ments, and underneath his coat, Heretike Lutheran
reconciled. And  also  the  coats  and  names  of  the  three
that  were  burned,  whereupon  were  written.  An  obstinate
heretike  Lutheran  burnt. Then  were  we  suffered  to  goe
up  and  downe  the  countrey,  and  to  place  our  selves  as  we
could,  and  yet  not  so  free,  but  that  we  very  well knew
that  there  was  good  espiall  alwayes  attending  us  and  all
our  actions,  so  that  we  durst  not  once  speake  or  looke
awry. David  Alexander  &  Robert  Cooke  returned  to
serve  the  Inquisitor,  who  shortly  after  maried  them  both
to  two  of  his  Negro  women  :  Richard  Williams  maried
a  rich  widow  of  Biskay  with  4000  Pezos  :  Paul  Horse-
well  is  maried to  a Mestisa,  as  they  name  those  whose
fathers  were  Spaniards,  and  their  mothers Indians,  and
this  woman  which  Paul  Horsewell  hath  maried,  is sayd
to  be  the  daughter  of  one  that  came  in  with  Hernando
Cortes  the  Conquerour,  who  had  with  her  in  marriage
foure  thousand  Pezos,  and  a  faire  house  :  John  Storie  is
maried  to  a  Negro  woman  :  William  Lowe  had  leave  and
licence  to  goe  into  Spaine  where  he  is  now  married  :  for
mine  owne  part  I  could  never  throughly  settle  my  selfe
to  marry  in that  countrey,  although many faire offers
were made unto me of  such  as  were  of  great abilitie
and wealth,  but I could have no liking to live in
that place,  where I must every  where see and know
such horrible idolatrie committed, and durst not
once for my life speake against it  : and therefore

431

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580-82.

I  had  alwayes  a  longing  and  desire  to  this  my  native
countrey :  and,  to  returne  and  serve  againe  in  the
Mines  where  I  might  have  gathered  great  riches  and
wealth,  I  very  well  saw  that  at  one  time  or  another
I  should  fall  againe  into  the  danger  of  that  divelish  In-
quisition, and  so  be  stript  of  all,  with  losse  of  life  also,  and
therefore  I  made  my  choise  rather  to  learne  to  weave
Grogranes  and  Taffaties,  and  so  compounding  with  a
Silke-weaver,  I  bound  my  selfe  for  three  yeeres  to  serve
him,  and  gave  him  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Pezos  to  teach
me  the  science,  otherwise  he  would  not  have  taught  mee
under  seven  yeeres  prentiship,  and  by  this  meanes  I  lived
the  more  quiet,  and  free  from  suspition.  Howbeit  I
should  many  times  be  charged  by  familiars  of  that  divelish
house,  that  I  had  a  meaning  to  runne  away  into  England,
and  to  be  an  heretike  Lutherane  againe :  To  whom  I
would  answere  that  they  had  no  neede  to  suspect  any
such  thing  in  mee,  for  that  they  knewe  all  very  well  that
it  was  impossible  for  me  to  escape  by  any  maner  of
meanes :  yet  notwithstanding  I  was  called  before  the
Inquisitor,  and  demaunded  why  I  did  not  marrie :  I
answered  that  I  had  bound  my  selfe  at  an  occupation.
Well  said  the  Inquisitor,  I  knowe  thou  meanest  to  runne
away,  and  therefore  I  charge  thee  here  upon  paine  of
burning  as  an  heretike  relapsed,  that  thou  depart  not  out
of  this  citie,  nor  come  neere  to  the  port  of  S.  John  de
Ullua,  nor  to  any  other  port :  To  the  which  I  answered,
that  I  would  willingly  obey.  Yea  said  he,  see  thou  doe
so  and  thy  fellowes  also,  they  shall  have  the  like  charge.

So  I  remained  at  my  science  the  full  time,  and  learned
the  Art,  at  the  end  whereof  there  came  newes  to  Mexico
that  there  were  certaine  Englishmen  landed  with  a  great
power  at  the  port  of  Acapulco,  upon  the  South  sea,  and
that  they  were  comming  to  Mexico  to  take  the  spoyle
therof,  which  wrought  a  marvellous  great  feare  amongst
them,  &  many  of  those  that  were  rich,  began  to  shift  for
themselves,  their  wives  &  children :  upon  which  hurlie
burlie  the  Viceroy  caused  a  generall  muster  to  be  made  of

432

h

MII.KS ]Mf[IJi\S  A,a

I  $8082*

al]  the  Spaniarfl'i  in Mexico,  and thcr': v/';r':  found  to  he

the  number  of  7000  and odde  h(ju\li^,\'\':r\  'A'  S;/aniards

in the  citic  and '.uburlr., and of  '.ih,'/)': njen unrnaricd,

the  number  of  y/.o  ;j/id  r>f  Me.'  //>';•,,  which  are  counted

tr; be  the  Sonne-,  of Spaniarris tjorrje  of  Indian women,

twenty  thousand  persons,  and  then  was  Paul  J  f  orsewel  6d;

I Miles  J^hilips  sent  for '.'fore  the  Viceroy,  and  were

examined  if  we  did  knov/  an i  srjrdish man named  Francis

Drake,  which  was  brother  to  ''^;ipt;j,:ne  Hav/kins:  to  which

we  answered,  that  Captaine  i  fuv/kms  fjad  not  any  brother  [HI.  4^.3.]

but  one,  which  was  a  marj  of  tfie  a^re  of  threescore  yeercs

or  thereabouts,  and  y/as  no//  r/overnour  of  i-'lirnmouth  in

lsnj.dand. And  then h': : -  : ,';':d of  us if  v/e knev/e

one I^rancis  JJrake,  and v/e  ansv/ered, no.

While  these  thin^^s  were  in  doinr/,  there  came  nev/es
that  aJl  the  KngJishrnen  v/er':  ;  ^  '.^  /st,  y/ere  thsr':  '-.ir/ht
hundred  men  made  o'Jt  un-ier  ''/ie  Jea';:;'..'/  o^' -/;7';;-;.'J  ^^ap-
tains,  wherof  tv/o  ;.  ./.'Ired  v/ere  sent,  'o  - .,  ,  ;/.,-':  of  S.
John  de  UJlua,  upon  the  North  Sea  under  the  conduct  of
Don  J.uys  Suarcs,  two  hundred  v/'.r':  -/-.rX  to  Guatimala
in  the  South  sea,  who  had  for  their  ,;  ./;  ,.e  John  Cortes,
two  hundred  more  were  sent  to  Guar.  >/>  ;;  :,o;t  of  the
South  sea,  over  whom  went  for  captain e  i>»on  l^'edro  de
Robles,  and  two  hundred  more  v/ere  sent  to  AcapuJco,
the  port  where  it  was  said  that  Captaine  Drake  had  bene.
And  they  had  for  Captaine  doctor  Robles  Alcalde  de
Corte,  with  whom  J  Miles  Philips  went  as  interpreter,
having  licence  given  by  the  Inquisitors.  When  we  were
come  to  Acapulco,  we  found  that  Captaine  Drake  was
departed  from  thence,  more  then  a  rnoneth  before  we
came  thither.  But  yet  our  captaine  Alcalde  de  Corte
there  presently  embarked  himselfe  in  a  small  ship  of
threescore  tunne  or  thereabout,  having  also  in  companie
with  him  two  other  small  barkes,  and  not  past  two
hundred  men  in  all,  with  v/hom  I  went  as  interpreter  in
his  owne  ship,  which  God  knoweth  was  but  v/eake  and  ill
appointed,  so  that  for  certaine,  if  we  had  met  with
Captaine  Drake,  he  might  easily  have  taken  us  all :  We
IX  433  2  E

AD.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580-82.

being  imbarked  kept  our  course  and  ranne  Southward
towards  Panama,  keeping  still  as  nigh  the  shore  as  we
could,  and  leaving  the  land  upon  our  left  hand,  and
having  coasted  thus  for  the  space  of  eighteene  or  twentie
dayes,  and  being  more  to  the  South  then  Guatimala,  we
met  at  last  with  other  ships  which  came  from  Panama,  of
whom  we  were  certainely  informed  that  he  was  cleane
gone  off  the  coast  more  then  a  moneth  before :  and  so  we
returned  backe  to  Acapulco  againe,  and  there  landed,  our
Captaine  being  thereunto  forced,  because  his  men  were
very  sore  sea-sicke :  All  the  while  that  I  was  at  Sea,  with
them,  I  was  a  glad  man,  for  I  hoped  that  if  we  met  with
master  Drake,  we  should  all  be  taken,  so  that  then  I
should  have  beene  freed  out  of  that  danger  and  miserie
wherein  I  lived,  and  should  returne  to  mine  owne  countrey
of  England  againe.  But  missing  thereof,  when  I  sawe
there  was  no  remedie  but  that  we  must  needes  come  on
land  againe,  little  doeth  any  man  know  the  sorow  and
griefe  that  inwardly  I  felt,  although  outwardly  I  was  con-
strained to  make  faire  weather  of  it.  And  so  being
landed,  ye  next  morow  after,  we  began  our  journey
towardes  Mexico,  and  past  these  townes  of  name  in
Tuatepec,  our  way,  as  first  the  towne  of  Tuatepec,  50  leagues  from
Washaca,  Te-  Mexico,  from  thence  to  Washaca,  40  leagues  from
dT'j^^l"  Mexico:  from  thence  to  Tepiaca  24  leagues  from  Mexico,
Stapelapa.  '  ^^^  from  thence  to  Pueblo  de  los  Angeles,  where  is  a
high  hill  which  casteth  out  fire  three  times  a  day,  which
hill  is  18  leagues  in  maner  directly  West  from  Mexico,
from  thence  we  went  to  Stapelapa,  8  leagues  from  Mexico,
and  there  our  captaine  and  most  of  his  men  tooke  boat,
and  came  to  Mexico  againe,  having  bene  foorth  about  the
space  of  seven  weekes  or  thereabouts.  Our  captaine
made  report  to  the  Viceroy  what  he  had  done,  and  how
farre  he  had  travelled,  and  that  for  certaine  he  was  in-
formed that  captaine  Drake  was  not  to  be  heard  of.  To
The  Spanish  Yt^j-^Jch  the  Viceroy  replied  and  said.  Surely  we  shall  have
phecied  but  ^^"^  shortly  come  into  our  hands  driven  a  land  through
falsely.  necessitie  in  some  one  place  or  other,  for  he  being  now  in

434

MILES PHILIPS  AD

1580-82.
these  seas  of  Sur,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  get  out  of
them  againe,  so  that  if  he  perish  not  at  sea,  yet  hunger
wil  force  him  to  land.  And  then  againe  I  was  com-
manded by  the  Viceroy  that  I  should  not  depart  the  citie
of  Mexico,  but  alwaies  be  at  my  masters  house  in  a
readinesse  at  an  houres  warning,  when  soever  I  should  be
called :  for  that  notwithstanding  within  one  moneth  after
certaine  Spaniards  going  to  Mecameca,  18  leagues  from
Mexico,  to  send  away  certaine  hides  and  Cochinilla,  that
they  had  there  at  their  Stantias  or  dairie  houses,  and  my
master  having  leave  of  the  Secretarie  for  me  to  go  with
them,  I  tooke  my  journey  with  them  being  very  well
horsed  and  appointed,  and  comming  thither  and  passing
the  time  there  at  Mecameca  certaine  dayes  till  we  had
perfect  intelligence  that  the  fleete  was  readie  to  depart,  I
not  being  past  3  daies  journey  from  the  port  of  S.  John
de  Ullua,  thought  it  to  be  the  meetest  time  for  me  to
make  an  escape,  and  I  was  the  bolder,  presuming  upon
my  Spanish  tongue,  which  I  spake  as  naturally  as  any  of
them  all,  thinking  with  my  selfe,  that  when  I  came  to
S.  John  de  Ullua,  I  would  get  to  be  entertained  as  a
souldiour,  and  so  go  home  into  Spaine  in  the  same  Fleete,
and  therefore  secretly  one  evening  late,  the  moone  shining
faire,  I  conveyed  my  selfe  away,  and  riding  so  for  the
space  of  two  nights  and  two  dayes,  sometimes  in,  and
sometimes  out,  resting  very  little  all  that  time,  upon  the
second  day  at  night  I  came  to  the  towne  of  Vera  Cruz,  ^fra  Cruz
distant  from  the  port  of  S.  John  de  Ullua,  where  the  i"^^"^  5
ships  rode,  but  only  5  leagues,  and  here  purposing  to  rest  5  juan  de
my  selfe  a  day  or  two,  I  was  no  sooner  alighted,  but  Ullua.
within  the  space  of  one  halfe  houre  after,  I  was  by  ill  hap
arrested,  and  brought  before  Justices  there,  being  taken
and  suspected  to  be  a  gentlemans  sonne  of  Mexico,  that
was  runne  away  from  his  father,  who  in  trueth  was  the  [III.  484.]
man  they  sought  for :  So  I  being  arrested,  and  brought
before  the  Justices,  there  was  a  great  hurly  burly  about
the  matter,  every  man  charging  me  that  I  was  the  sonne
of  such  a  man  dwelling  in  Mexico,  which  I  flatly  denied,

435

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580-82.

affirming  that  I  knewe  not  the  man,  yet  would  they  not
beleeve  me,  but  urged  stil  upon  me  that  I  was  he  that
they  sought  for,  and  so  I  was  conveied  away  to  prison.
And  as  I  was  thus  going  to  prison,  to  the  further  increase
of  my  griefe,  it  chanced  that  at  that  very  instant  there
was  a  poore  man  in  the  presse  that  was  come  to  towne  to
sell  hennes,  who  told  the  Justices  that  they  did  me  wrong,
and  that  in  truth  he  knew  very  well  that  I  was  an
Englishman  and  no  Spaniard.  They  then  demanded  of
him  how  he  knew  that,  and  threatned  him  that  he  said  so,
for  that  he  was  my  companion,  and  sought  to  convey  me
away  from  my  father,  so  that  he  also  was  threatned  to  be
laid  in  prison  with  me :  he  for  the  discharge  of  himselfe
stood  stifly  in  it,  that  I  was  an  Englishman,  &  one  of
captaine  Hawkins  men,  and  that  he  had  knowen  me
weare  the  S.  Benito  in  the  Blacke-friers  at  Mexico,  for
3  or  4  whole  yeres  together :  which  when  they  heard,
they  forsooke  him,  and  began  to  examine  me  a  new,
whether  that  speech  of  his  were  true,  yea  or  no,  which
when  they  perceived  that  I  could  not  denie,  and  per-
ceiving that  I  was  run  from  Mexico,  &  came  thither  of
purpose  to  convey  my  selfe  away  with  the  fleete,  I  was
presently  committed  to  prison  with  a  sorrowfuU  heart,
often  wishing  my  selfe  that  that  man  which  knew  me  had
at  that  time  bene  further  off:  howbeit  he  in  sinceritie  had
compassion  of  my  distressed  estate,  thinking  by  his
speech,  and  knowing  of  me,  to  have  set  me  free  from
that  present  danger  which  he  saw  me  in :  howbeit,
contrary  to  his  expectation,  I  was  thereby  brought  into
my  extreme  danger,  and  to  the  hazard  of  my  life,  yet
there  was  no  remedy  but  patience  perforce.  And  I  was
no  sooner  brought  into  prison,  but  I  had  a  great  paire
of  bolts  clapt  on  my  legs,  and  thus  I  remained  in  that
prison  for  the  space  of  3  weekes,  where  were  also  many
other  prisoners  which  were  thither  committed  for  sundry
crimes,  &  condemned  to  the  gallies.  During  which
time  of  imprisonment  there,  I  found  amongst  those  my
prison-fellowes some that had knowen me before in

436

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1580-82.
Mexico,  and  truely  they  had  compassion  of  me,  &
would  spare  of  their  victuals  and  any  thing  els  that
they  had  to  doe  me  good :  amongst  whom  there  was
one  of  them  that  told  me  that  he  understood  by  a
secret  friend  of  his  which  often  came  to  the  prison  to
him,  that  I  shold  be  shortly  sent  backe  againe  to
Mexico  by  wagon,  so  soone  as  the  fleete  was  gone
from  S.  John  de  UUua,  for  Spaine.  This  poore  man
my  prison-fellow  of  himselfe,  &  without  any  request
made  by  me,  caused  his  said  friend  which  came  often
unto  him  to  the  grate  of  the  prison,  to  bring  him  wine
and  victuals,  to  buy  for  him  2  knives  which  had  files
in  their  backes,  which  files  were  so  wel  made  that
they  would  serve  &  suffice  any  prisoner  to  file  off
his  irons,  &  of  those  knives  or  files  he  brought  one
to  me,  &  told  me  that  he  had  caused  it  to  be  made
for  me,  and  let  me  have  it  at  that  very  price  it  cost
him,  which  was  2  Pezos,  the  value  of  8.s.  of  our
money:  which  knife  when  I  had  it,  I  was  a  joyfuU
man,  and  conveied  the  same  into  the  foote  of  my  boot,
upon  the  inside  of  my  left  leg,  and  so  within  3  or  4
dayes  after  that  I  had  thus  received  my  knife,  I  was
suddenly  called  for,  &  brought  before  the  head  Justice
which  caused  those  my  irons  with  the  round  bolt  to
be  stricken  off  and  sent  to  a  Smiths  in  the  towne,
where  was  a  new  paire  of  bolts  made  ready  for  me  of
another  fashion,  which  had  a  broad  iron  barre  comming
betweene  the  shackles,  and  caused  my  hands  to  be  made
fast  with  a  paire  of  manacles,  and  so  was  I  presently
laid  into  a  wagon  all  alone,  which  was  there  readie  to
depart  with  sundry  other  wagons,  to  the  number  of
60.  towardes  Mexico,  and  they  all  were  laden  with
sundry  merchandise  which  came  in  the  fleete  out  of
Spaine.

The  wagon  that  I  was  in  was  foremost  in  all  the
companie,  and  as  we  travelled  I  being  alone  in  the
wagon,  began  to  trie  if  I  could  plucke  my  hands  out
of  the  manacles,  and as God  would,  although  it  were

437

A.D.  THE  ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580-82.

somewhat  painefuU  for  me,  yet  my  handes  were  so
slender  that  1  could  pull  them  out,  and  put  them  in
againe,  and  ever  as  we  went,  when  the  wagon  made
most  noyse,  and  the  men  were  busiest,  I  would  be
working  to  file  ofF  my  bolts,  &  travelling  thus  for  the
space  of  8  leagues  from  Vera  Cruz,  we  came  to  an
high  hill,  at  the  entring  up  of  which  (as  God  would)
one  of  the  wheeles  of  the  wagon  wherein  I  was,  brake,
so  that  by  that  meanes  the  other  wagons  went  afore,
and  the  wagon-man  that  had  charge  of  me  set  an
Indian  Carpenter  a  worke  to  mend  the  wheele :  and
here  at  this  place  they  baited  at  an  hostrie  that  a
Negro-woman  keepes:  and  at  this  place,  for  that  the
going  up  of  the  hill  is  very  steepe,  for  the  space  of
two  leagues  and  better,  they  doe  alwaies  accustome  to
take  the  moiles  of  3  or  4  wagons,  and  to  place  them
altogether  for  the  drawing  up  of  one  wagon,  and  so
to  come  downe  againe,  and  fetch  up  others  in  that
order.  All  which  came  very  well  to  passe :  for  as  it
drew  towards  night  when  most  of  the  Wagoners  were
gone  to  draw  up  their  wagons,  in  this  sort  I  being
Mi/es  Philips  alone  had  quickly  filed  off  my  boltes,  and  so  espying
hu  last  won-  ^^^  iivsxQ  in  the  darke  of  the  evening  before  they  re-
turned downe  the  hill  againe,  I  conveyed  my  selfe  into
the  woods  there  adjoyning,  carrying  my  bolts  and  man-
[III.  485.]  acles  with  me,  &  a  few  biscuits,  and  two  small  cheeses.
And  being  come  into  the  woods,  I  threw  my  yrons
into  a  thicke  bush,  and  then  covered  them  with  mosse
and  other  things,  and  then  shifted  for  my  selfe  as  I
might  all  that  night.  And  thus  by  the  good  provi-
dence of  Almightie  God,  I  was  freed  from  mine  yrons
all  saving  the  collar  that  was  about  my  necke,  and  so
got  my  libertie  the  second  time.

438

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1580-82.

Chap.  7.

Wherein  is  shewed  how  I  escaped  to  Guatimala,  upon  the
South  sea,  and  from  thence  to  the  port  of  Cavallos,
where  I  got  passage  to  goe  into  Spaine,  and  of  our
arrivall  at  Havana,  and  our  comming  to  Spaine,
where  I  was  againe  like  to  have  bene  committed
prisoner,  and  how  through  the  great  mercy  of  God
I  escaped,  and  came  home  in  safetie  into  England
in  February 1582.

THe  next  morning  (day  light  being  come)  I  per-
ceived by  the  Sunne  rising  what  way  to  take  to
escape  their  hands,  for  when  I  fledde,  I  tooke  the  way
into  the  woods  upon  the  left  hand :  and  having  left
that  way  that  went  to  Mexico  upon  my  right  hand,  I
thought  to  keepe  my  course  as  the  woods  and  moun-
taines  lay,  still  direct  South  as  neere  as  I  could  :  by
meanes  whereof  I  was  sure  to  convey  my  selfe  farre
ynough  from  that  way  that  went  to  Mexico.  And  as
I  was  thus  going  in  the  woods,  I  saw  many  great  fires
made  to  the  North  not  past  a  league  from  the  moun-
taine  where  I  was,  and  travailing  thus  in  my  bootes
with  mine  yron  coller  about  my  necke,  and  my  bread
and  cheese,  the  very  same  forenoone  I  mette  with  a  .
company  of  Indians  which  were  hunting  of  Deere  for
their  sustenance :  to  whom  I  spake  in  the  Mexican
tongue,  and  told  them  how  that  I  had  of  a  long  time
bin  kept  in  prison  by  the  cruel  Spanyards,  and  did
desire  them  to  helpe  me  to  file  off  mine  yron  coller,
which  they  willingly  did:  rejoycing  greatly  with  me,
that  I  was  thus  escaped  out  of  the  Spanyards  hands.
Then  I  desired  that  I  might  have  one  of  them  to  guide
mee  out  of  those  desert  mountaines  towardes  the  South,
which  they  also  most  willingly  did :  and  so  they  brought
rfiee  to  an  Indian  towne  8.  leagues  distant  from  thence,
named  Shalapa,  where  I  stayed  three  dayes,  for  that  I
was  somewhat  sickely.  At  which  towne  (with  the  gold
that  I  had  quilted  in  my  dublet)  I  bought  me  an  horse

439

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1580-82.

of  one  of  the  Indians,  which  cost  mee  6.  pezos,  and  so
travailing  South,  within  the  space  of  2.  leagues  I  hap-
pened to  overtake  a  gray  Frier,  one  that  I  had  bene
familiar  withall  in  Mexico,  whom  then  I  knewe  to  be
a  zealous  good  man,  and  one  that  did  much  lament
the  crueltie  used  against  us  by  the  Inquisitors,  and
truely  hee  used  me  very  courteously :  and  I  having
confidence  in  him  did  indeede  tel  him,  that  I  was
minded  to  adventure  to  see  if  I  could  get  out  of  the
sayd  countrey  if  I  could  finde  shipping,  and  did  there-
fore pray  him  of  his  ayde,  direction,  and  advise  herein,
which  he  faithfully  did,  not  onely  in  directing  me  which
was  my  safest  way  to  travaile,  but  he  also  of  himselfe
kept  me  company  for  the  space  of  three  dayes,  and
ever  as  we  came  to  the  Indians  houses  (who  used  and
intertained  us  well)  hee  gathered  among  them  in  money
to  the  value  of  20.  pezos,  which  at  my  departure  from
him  hee  freely  gave  unto  mee.  So  came  I  to  the  citie
Guatmala  on  of  Guatimala  upon  the  South  sea,  which  is  distant  from
the  South  sea.  Mexico  about  250.  leagues,  where  I  stayed  6.  dayes,
for  that  my  horse  was  weake.  And  from  thence  I
travailed  still  South  and  by  East  seven  dayes  journey,
passing  by  certaine  Indian  townes,  untill  I  came  to  an  Indian
towne  distant  from  Mexico,  direct  South  309.  leagues.
And  here  at  this  towne  enquiring  to  go  to  the  Port  de
Cavallos  in  the  Northeast  sea,  it  was  answered  that  in
travailing  thither  I  should  not  come  to  any  towne  in
10.  or  12.  dayes  journey:  so  heere  I  hired  two  Indians
to  be  my  guides,  and  I  bought  hennes,  and  bread  to
serve  us  so  long  time,  and  tooke  with  us  things  to
kindle  fire  every  night,  because  of  wilde  beastes,  and
to  dresse  our  meate :  and  every  night  when  we  rested,
my  Indian  guides  would  make  two  great  fires,  betweene
the  which  we  placed  our  selves,  and  my  horse.  And
in  the  night  time  we  should  heare  the  Lions  roare,  with
Tygres,  Ounces,  and  other  beastes,  and  some  of  them
we  should  see  in  the  night,  which  had  eyes  shining  like
fire. And  travailing  thus  for  the  space  of  twelve  dayes,

440

MILES PHILIPS  A.D.

1580-82.

wee  came  at  last  to  the  port  of  Cavallos  upon  the  East  Puerto  de
sea,  distant  from  Guatimala  South  and  by  East,  two  G^'^^^^'^^-
hundreth  leagues,  and  from  Mexico  450.  or  thereabouts.
This  is  a  good  harborough  for  shippes,  and  is  without
either  castle  or  bulwarke.  I  having  dispatched  away
my  guides,  went  downe  to  the  Haven,  where  I  saw
certaine  ships  loden  chiefly  with  Canary  wines,  where  I
spake  with  one  of  the  Masters,  who  asked  me  what
Countrey  man  I  was,  and  I  told  him  that  I  was  borne  in
Granado,  &  he  said,  that  then  I  was  his  countreyman.  I  re-
quired him  that  I  might  passe  home  with  him  in  his  ship,
paying  for  my  passage :  and  he  said  yea,  so  that  I  had  a
safe  conduct,  or  letter  testimonial  to  shew,  that  he  might
incurre  no  danger :  for  said  he,  it  may  be  that  you  have
killed  some  man,  or  be  indebted,  and  would  therefore
run  away.  To  that  I  answered,  that  there  was  not  any
such  cause.  Wei,  in  the  end  we  grew  to  a  price,  that  for  [HI.  486.]
60.  pezos  he  would  cary  me  into  Spaine :  a  glad  man  was
I  at  this  good  hap,  and  I  quickly  solde  my  horse,  and
made  my  provision  of  hennes  and  bread  to  serve  me
in  my  passage;  And  thus  within  2.  dayes  after  we  set
saile,  and  never  stayed  untill  we  came  to  Havana,  which
is  distant  from  puerto  de  Cavallos  by  sea  500.  leagues  :
where  we  found  the  whole  fleete  of  Spaine,  which  was
bound  home  from  the  Indies.  And  heere  I  was  hired
for  a  souldier  to  serve  in  the  Admiral  ship  of  the  same
fleete,  wherein  the  General  himself  went.  There  landed
while  I  was  here  4.  ships  out  of  Spaine,  being  all  full  of
souldiers  and  ordinance,  of  which  number  there  were  200.
men  landed  here,  &  4.  great  brasse  pieces  of  ordinance,
although  the  castle  were  before  sufficiently  provided :
200.  men  more  were  sent  to  Campeche,  &  certaine
ordinance:  200.  to  Florida  with  ordinance:  and  100.
lastly  to  S.  John  Ullua.  As  for  ordinance  there  they
have  sufficient,  and  of  the  very  same  which  was  ours,
which  we  had  in  the  Jesus,  and  those  others  which  we
had  planted  in  the  place,  where  the  Vice-roy  betrayed
M.  Hawkins  our  general,  as  hath  bene  declared. The

441

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1580-82.

sending  of  those  souldiers  to  every  of  those  Ports,  and
the  strengthening  of  them,  was  done  by  commandement
from  the  king  of  Spaine,  who  wrote  also  by  them  to  the
general  of  his  fleete,  giving  him  in  charge  so  to  doe,
as  also  directing  him  what  course  he  should  keepe  in  his
comming  home  into  Spaine,  charging  him  in  any  hand  not
to  come  nigh  to  the  yles  of  A9ores,  but  to  keepe  his
course  more  to  the  Northward,  advertising  him  withal,
what  number  and  power  of  French  ships  of  warre,  and
other,  Don  Antonio  had  at  that  time  at  Ter9era,  &
the  yles  aforesaid :  which  the  general  of  the  fleete  wel
considering,  and  what  great  store  of  riches  he  had  to
bring  home  with  him  into  Spaine,  did  in  all  very  dueti-
fully  observe  and  obey :  for  in  trueth  he  had  in  his  said
fleete  37.  saile  of  ships,  and  in  every  of  them  there  was
as  good  as  30.  pipes  of  silver  one  with  another,  besides
great  store  of  gold,  Cochinilla,  sugars,  hides,  and  Cana
Fistula,  with  other  Apothecary  drugs.  This  our  general,
Don  Pedro  de  who  was  called  Don  Pedro  de  Guzman,  did  providently
Guzman.  ^^^^  order  for,  for  their  most  strength  and  defence,  if
neede  should  be,  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power,  and
commanded  upon  paine  of  death,  that  neither  passenger
nor  souldier  should  come  aboord  without  his  sword  and
harquebush,  with  shot  and  powder,  to  the  end  that  they
might  be  the  better  able  to  encounter  the  fleete  of  Don
Antonio,  if  they  should  hap  to  meete  with  them,  or  any
of  them :  and  ever  as  the  weather  was  faire,  the  said
general  would  himself  go  aboord  from  one  ship  to
another,  to  see  that  every  man  had  his  ful  provision
according  to  the  commandement  given.  Yet  to  speake
truely  what  I  thinke,  two  good  tall  ships  of  warre  would
have  made  a  foule  spoile  amongst  them.  For  in  all  this
fleete  there  were  not  any  that  were  strong  and  warlike
appointed,  saving  only  the  Admiral,  and  Vice-admiral :
And  againe  over  and  besides  the  weakenesse  and  the  ill
furnishing  of  the  rest,  they  were  all  so  deeply  laden,  that
they  had  not  bene  able  (if  they  had  bene  charged)  to  have
held  out  any  long  fight. Wel,  thus  we  set  saile,  &  had

442

MILES PHILIPS  AD.

1580-82.
a  very  ill  passage  home,  the  weather  was  so  contrary.
We  kept  our  course  in  maner  Northeast,  and  brought
our  selves  to  the  height  of  42.  degrees  of  latitude,  to  be
sure  not  to  meete  with  Don  Antonio  his  fleete,  and  were
upon  our  voyage  from  the  4.  of  June,  untill  the  10.  of
September,  and  never  saw  land  till  we  fell  with  the  Arenas
Gordas  hard  by  S.  Lucar.  And  there  was  an  order  taken
that  none  should  goe  on  shoare  untill  he  had  licence :  as
for  me,  I  was  knowen  by  one  in  the  ship,  who  told  the
Master  that  I  was  an  Englishman,  which  (as  God  would)
it  was  my  good  hap  to  heare :  for  if  I  had  not  heard  it,
it  had  cost  me  my  life.  Notwithstanding,  I  would  not
take  any  knowledge  of  it,  and  seemed  to  be  mery  &
pleasant,  that  we  were  all  come  so  wel  in  safety.
Presently  after,  licence  came  that  we  should  go  on  shoare,
and  I  pressed  to  be  gone  with  the  first :  howbeit,  the
Master  came  unto  me,  &  said,  Sirra,  you  must  goe  with
me  to  Sivil  by  water :  I  knew  his  meaning  well  inough,
&  that  he  meant  there  to  offer  me  up  as  a  sacrifice  to
the  Holy  house.  For  the  ignorant  zeale  of  a  number  of
these  superstitious  Spaniards  is  such,  that  they  thinke  that
they  have  done  God  good  service,  when  they  have  brought
a  Lutheran  heretike  to  the  fire  to  be  burnt :  for  so  do
they  account  of  us.  Wel,  I  perceiving  all  this,  tooke
upon  me  not  to  suspect  any  thing,  but  was  still  jocund
&  mery :  howbeit,  I  knew  it  stood  me  upon  to  shift
for  my  selfe.  And  so  wayting  my  time  when  the  Master
was  in  his  cabbin  asleepe,  I  conveyed  my  selfe  secretly  '

downe  by  the  shrowds  into  the  ship  boate,  and  made  no
stay  but  cut  the  rope  wherewithal  she  was  moared,  and
so  by  the  cable  haled  on  shore,  where  I  leapt  on  land,
&  let  the  boate  goe  whither  it  would.  Thus  by  the
helpe  of  God  1  escaped  that  day,  &  then  never  stayed  at
S.  Lucar,  but  went  all  night  by  the  way  which  I  had
seene  other  take  toward  Sivil :  so  that  the  next  morning
I  came  to  Sivil,  and  sought  me  out  a  workemaster,  that
I  might  fall  to  my  science,  which  was  weaving  of  taffataes ;
and  being  intertained  I  set  my  selfe  close  to  my  worke,

443

A.D.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1582.

and  durst  not  for  my  life  once  to  stirre  abroad  for  feare
of  being  knowen  :  and  being  thus  at  my  worke,  within  4.
dayes  after  I  heard  one  of  my  fellowes  say,  that  he  heard
there  was  great  inquiry  made  for  an  Englishman  that  came
home  in  the  fleete :  what  an  heretique  Lutheran  (quoth  I)
[III.  487.]  was  it,  I  would  to  God  I  might  knowe  him,  surely  I
would  present  him  to  the  Holy  house.  And  thus  I  kept
still  within  doores  at  my  worke,  and  fained  my  selfe
not  well  at  ease,  &  that  I  would  labour  as  I  might  to
get  me  new  clothes.  And  continuing  thus  for  the  space
of  3.  moneths  I  called  for  my  wages,  and  bought  me  all
things  new,  different  from  the  apparell  that  I  did  weare  at
sea,  and  yet  durst  not  be  overbold  to  walke  abroad :  and
after  understanding  that  there  were  certaine  English  ships
at  S.  Lucar  bound  for  England,  I  tooke  a  boat  and  went
aboord  one  of  them,  and  desired  the  Master  that  I  might
have  passage  with  him  to  goe  into  England,  and  told  him
secretly  that  I  was  one  of  those  which  Captaine  Hawkins
did  set  on  shore  in  the  Indies :  he  very  courteously
prayed  me  to  have  him  excused,  for  he  durst  not  meddle
with  me,  &  prayed  me  therefore  to  returne  from  whence
I  came.  Which  when  I  perceived,  with  a  sorowful  heart,
God  knoweth,  I  tooke  my  leave  of  him,  not  without
watry  cheekes.  And  then  I  went  to  S.  Mary  port,
which  is  3.  leagues  from  S.  Lucar,  where  I  put  my  selfe
to  be  a  souldier  to  goe  in  the  king  of  Spaines  Gallies,
which  were  bound  for  Majorca,  and  comming  thither  in
He  commeth  the  end  of  the  Christmas  holidayes,  I  found  there  two
home  in  an ^  English  ships,  the  one  of  London,  and  the  other  of  the
frotul^ma  ^^^^  countrey,  which  were  ready  fraighted  and  stayed
but  for  a  faire  wind.  To  the  Master  of  the  one,  which
was  of  the  West  countrey  went  I,  and  told  him  that  I
had  bene  2.  yeeres  in  Spaine  to  learne  the  language,  and
that  I  was  now  desirous  to  goe  home  and  see  my  friends,
for  that  I  lacked  maintenance :  and  so  having  agreed  with
him  for  my  passage,  I  tooke  shipping.  And  thus  through
the  providence  of  Almighty  God,  after  16.  yeeres  absence,
having  sustained many  and sundry  great troubles and

444

JOB HORTOP

miseries,  as  by  this  discourse  appeareth,  I  came  home  to
this  my  native  countrey  of  England  in  the  yeere  1582.
in  the  moneth  of  February,  in  the  ship  called  the  Landret,
and  arrived  at  Poole.

The  travailes  of  Job  Hortop,  which  Sir  John
Hawkins  set  on  land  within  the  Bay  of
Mexico,  after  his  departure  from  the  Haven
of  S.  John  de  UUua  in  Nueva  Espanna,  the
8.  of  October 1568.

Ot  untruely  nor  without  cause  said  Job
the  faithfuU  servant  of  God  (whom  the
sacred  Scriptures  tell  us,  to  have  dwelt
in  the  land  of  Hus)  that  man  being
borne  of  a  woman,  living  a  short  time,
is  replenished  with  many  miseries  :  which
some  know  by  reading  of  histories,  many
by  the  view  of  others  calamities,  and  I  by  experience
in  my  selfe,  as  this  present  Treatise  insuing  shall  shew.
It  is  not  unknowen  unto  many,  that  I  Job  Hortop
pouder-maker  was  borne  at  Bourne,  a  towne  in  Lincoln-
shire, from  my  age  of  twelve  yeeres  brought  up  in  Red-
rifFe  neere  London,  with  M.  Francis  Lee,  who  was  the
Queenes  Majesties  powder-maker,  whom  I  served,  until
I  was  prest  to  go  on  the  3.  voyage  to  the  West  Indies,
with  the  right  worshipful  Sir  John  Hawkins,  who
appointed  me  to  be  one  of  the  Gunners  in  her  Majesties
ship  called  the  Jesus  of  Lubeck,  who  set  saile  from
Plimmouth  in  the  moneth  of  October  1567.  having  with
him  another  ship  of  her  Majesties,  called  the  Minion,
and  foure  ships  of  his  owne,  namely  the  Angel,  the
Swallow,  the  Judith,  and  the  William  and  John.  He
directed  his  Vice-admiral,  that  if  foule  weather  did
separate  them,  to  meete  at  the  Hand  of  Tenerif.  After
which  by  the  space  of  seven  dayes  and  seven  nights,  we
had  such  storm es  at  sea,  that  we  lost  our  long  boats  and
a pinnesse, with some  men : comming to the  Isle  of

445

A.D.
1568.

A.D.
1568.

A  remedie
against  poi-
soned arrowes.

The  river  of
Calousa.

[III.  488.]

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

Tenerlf,  there  our  Generall  heard  that  his  Vice-admirall
with  the  Swallow,  and  the  William  and  John  were  at  the
Hand  called  Gomera,  where  finding  his  Vice-admirall,  he
anchored,  tooke  in  fresh  water,  and  set  saile  for  Cape
Blank,  where  in  the  way  wee  tooke  a  Portugal  caravel,
laden  with  fish  called  Mullets :  from  thence  we  sailed  to
cape  Verde.  In  our  course  thither  we  met  a  Frenchman
of  Rochel  called  captaine  Bland,  who  had  taken  a  Portugal
caravel,  whom  our  vice  admiral  chased  and  tooke.  Cap-
taine Drake,  now  Sir  Francis  Drake  was  made  master  &
captaine  of  the  Caravel,  and  so  we  kept  our  way  till  we
came  to  Cape  Verde,  and  there  we  anchored,  tooke  our
boates,  &  set  souldiers  on  shore.  Our  Generall  was  the
first  that  leapt  on  land,  &  with  him  Captaine  Dudley :
there  we  tooke  certaine  Negroes,  but  not  without  damage
to  our  selves.  For  our  Generall,  Captaine  Dudley,  &  8.
other  of  our  company  were  hurt  with  poysoned  arrowes  :
about  nine  dayes  after,  the  8.  that  were  wounded  died.
Our  general  was  taught  by  a  Negro,  to  draw  the  poyson
out  of  his  wound  with  a  clove  of  garlike,  whereby  he  was
cured.  From  thence  wee  went  to  Sierra  leona,  where  be
monstrous  fishes  called  Sharkes,  which  will  devoure  men.
I  amongst  others  was  sent  in  the  Angell  with  two  Pin-
nesses  into  the  river  called  Calousa,  to  seeke  two  Caravels
that  were  there  trading  with  the  Negros :  wee  tooke  one
of  them  with  the  Negros,  and  brought  them  away.

In  this  river  in  ye  night  time  we  had  one  of  our  pin-
nesses  bulged  by  a  sea-horse,  so  that  our  men  swimming
about  the  river,  were  all  taken  into  the  other  pinnesses,
except  two  that  tooke  hold  one  of  another,  and  were
caried  away  by  the  sea-horse.  This  monster  hath  the
just  proportion  of  a  horse,  saving  that  his  legs  be  short,
his  teeth  very  great,  and  a  span  in  length  :  hee  useth  in
the  night  to  goe  on  land  into  the  woods,  seeking  at
unawares  to  devoure  the  Negroes  in  their  cabbins,  whom
they  by  their  vigilancie  prevent,  and  kill  him  in  this
maner.  The  Negroes  keepe  watch,  and  diligently  attend
their  comming,  and  when  they  are  gone  into  the  woods,

446

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1568.

they  forthwith  lay  a  great  tree  overthwart  the  way,  so
that  at  their  returne,  for  that  their  legs  be  so  short,  they
cannot  goe  over  it  :  then  the  Negroes  set  upon  them
with  their  bowes,  arrowes  and  darts,  and  so  destroy  them.

From  thence  we  entred  the  river  called  the  Casserroes,
where  there  were  other  Caravels  trading  with  the  Negroes,
and  them  we  tooke.  In  this  Hand  betwixt  the  river  and
the  maine,  trees  grow  with  Oisters  upon  them.  There
grow  Palmito  trees,  which  bee  as  high  as  a  ships  maine
mast,  and  on  their  tops  grow  nuts,  wine  and  oyle,  which
they  call  Palmito  wine  and  Palmito  oyle.  The  Plantan
tree  also  groweth  in  that  countrey ;  the  tree  is  as  bigge  as
a  mans  thigh,  and  as  high  as  a  firre  pole,  the  leaves
thereof  be  long  and  broad,  and  on  the  top  grow  the  fruit
which  are  called  Plantanos :  they  are  crooked,  and  a  cubite
long,  and  as  bigge  as  a  mans  wrist,  they  growe  on
clusters :  when  they  be  ripe  they  be  very  good  and
daintie  to  eate :  Sugar  is  not  more  delicate  in  taste  then
they  be.

From  thence  with  the  Angel,  the  Judith,  and  the  two
pinnesses,  we  sailed  to  Sierra  leona,  where  our  Generall
at  that  time  was,  who  with  the  captaines  and  souldiers
went  up  into  the  river  called  Taggarin,  to  take  a  towne  of  The  river  of
the  Negroes,  where  he  found  three  kings  of  that  countrey  '^^SS^^^^-
with  fiftie  thousand  Negroes  besieging  the  same  towne,
which  they  could  not  take  in  many  yeeres  before,  when
they had  warred  with  it. Our  General  made  a  breach,
entred  &  valiantly  tooke  the  towne,  wherein  were  found
five  Portugals  which  yeelded  themselves  to  his  mercy,  and
hee saved their lives : we tooke & caried thence for
traffique  to  the  West  Indies  500. Negroes. The  three  5°°-  Negroes
kings drove 7000.  Negroes into ye sea  at low water,  ^'^'^^'^•
at  the  point  of  the  land,  where  they  were  all  drowned  in
the  Oze,  for  that  they  could  not  take  their  canoas  to  save
themselves. Wee  returned  backe  againe  in  our  pinnesses
to  the  ships,  and  there  tooke  in  fresh  water,  and  made
ready  sayle  towards  Rio  grande. At  our  comming  thither  Rio  grande.
we  entred  with  the  Angel,  the  Judith,  and  the  2  pinnesses,

447

A.D.
1568.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

and  found  there  seven  Portugal  Carvels,  which  made
great  fight  with  us.  In  the  ende  by  Gods  helpe  wee
wonne  the  victory,  and  drove  them  to  the  shore,  from
whence  with  the  Negroes  they  fled,  and  we  fetcht  the
carvels  from  the  shore  into  the  river.  The  next  morning
M.  Francis  Drake  with  his  carvel,  the  Swallow,  and  the
William  and  John  came  into  the  river,  with  captaine
Dudley  and  his  souldiers,  who  landed  being  but  a  hun-
dred souldiers,  and  fought  with  seven  thousand  Negroes,
burned  the  towne,  and  returned  to  our  Generall  with  the
losse  of  one  man.

In  that  place  there  be  many  muske-cats,  which  breed  in
hollow  trees :  the  Negroes  take  them  in  a  net,  &  put
them  in  a  cage,  &  nourish  them  very  daintily,  &  take  the
muske  from  them  with  a  spoone.

Now  we  directed  our  course  from  Guinea  towards  the
West  Indies.

And  by  the  way  died  Captaine  Dudley.

In sayling  towards  the  Indies,  the  first  land  that  we

Dominica,  escryed,  was  the  Hand  called  Dominica,  where  at  our
comming  we  ancored,  &  tooke  in  fresh  water  and  wood
for our provision : which done,  we  sayled  towards the

Margarita.  Hand  called  Margarita,  where  our  Generall  in  despite  of
the  Spaniards  anchored,  landed,  &  tooke  in  fresh  victuals.
A  mile  ofi^  the  Hand  there  is  a  rocke  in  the  sea,  wherein
doe  breede  many  fowles  like  unto  Barnacles :  in  the  night
we  went  out  in  our  boates,  and  with  cudgels  we  killed
many  of  them,  and  brought  them  with  many  of  their  egs
aboord  with  us :  their  egges  be  as  bigge  as  Turkies  egges,
and  speckled  like  them.  We  did  eate  them,  and  found
them  very  good  meate.

Burhoroata.  From  thence  wee  sayled  to  Burboroata,  which  is  in
the  maine  land  of  the  West  Indies :  there  we  came  in,
mored  our  ships,  and  taried  two  moneths  trimming  and
dressing  our  ships,  and  in  the  meane  time  traded  with
certaine  Spanyards  of  that  countrey.  There  our  Generall
sent  us  unto  a  towne  called  Placencia,  (which  stood  on  a
high  hil)  to  have  intreated  a  Bishop  that  dwelt  there  for

448

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1568.
his  favour  &  friendship  in  their  lawes,  who  hearing  of  our
comming,  for  feare  forsooke  ye  town.

In our way up the hil to Placencia, wee found  a  Placenda  in
monstrous  venemous  worme  with  two  heads :  his body  ^^^  maine.
was as  bigge  as a mans arme, and  a  yard  long : our
master Robert Barret  did cut  him in sunder  with  his
sword,  and  it  made it  as blacke  as  if  it  were  coloured
with  ynke.

Heere  be  many  Tygers,  monstrous  and  furious  beasts,
which  by  subtiltie  devoure  and  destroy  many  men :  they
use  the  traded  wayes,  &  wil  shew  themselves  twise  or
thrise  to  the  travellers,  and  so  depart  secretly,  lurking  till
they  be  past,  then  suddenly  &  at  unawares  they  leape  upon
them  and  devoure  them :  they  had  so  used  two  of  our  [III.  489.]
company,  had  not  one  of  them  looked  behind.  Our
General!  sent  three  ships  unto  the  Hand  called  Coragao,  to
make  provision  for  the  rest,  where  they  remayned  untill
his  comming.  Hee  sent  from  thence  the  Angel  and  the
Judith  to  Rio  de  Hacha,  where  we  anchored  before  the
town.  The  Spaniards  shot  three  pieces  at  us  from  the
shore,  whom  we  requited  with  two  of  ours,  and  shotte
through  the  Governours  house :  we  wayed  anchor,  &
anchored  againe  without  shot  of  the  towne,  where  wee
rid  five  dayes  in  despite  of  the  Spanyards  and  their  shot.
In  the  mean  space  there  came  a  Carvel  of  advise  from  S.
Domingo,  whom  with  the  Angel,  and  the  Judith  wee
chased  and  drove  to  the  shore :  we  fetcht  him  from  thence
in  spite  of  200.  Spaniards  hargubush  shot,  and  anchored
againe  before  the  towne,  and  rid  there  with  them,  till  our
Generals  comming,  who  anchored,  landed  his  men,  and
valiantly  tooke  the  Towne,  with  the  losse  of  one  man,  Rio  de  la
whose  name  was  Thomas  Surgeon :  wee  landed  and  ^^'^^'^  f^^^"'
planted  on  the  shore  for  our  safeties,  our  field  ordinance :
we  drove  the  Spaniards  up  into  the  country  above  two
leagues,  whereby  they  were  inforced  to  trade  with  our
General,  to  whom  he  sold  most  part  of  his  Negros.

In  this  river  we  killed  a  monstrous  Lagarto  or  Croco-
dile in  this  port  at  sunne  set :  seven  of  us  went  in  the
IX  449  2  F

A.D.
1568.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

pinnesse  up  into  the  River,  carying  with  us  a  dogge,  unto
whom  with  ropeyarne  we  bound  a  great  hooke  of  Steele,
with  a  chaine  that  had  a  swivel,  which  we  put  under  the
dogs  belly,  the  point  of  the  hooke  comming  over  his  back
fast  bound,  as  aforesaid :  we  put  him  over  boord,  and
vered  out  our  rope  by  litle  and  litle,  rowing  away  with
our  boate :  the  Lagarto  came  &  presently  swallowed  up
the  dogge,  then  did  we  rowe  hard,  till  we  had  choked
him :  he  plunged  and  made  a  wonderful  stirre  in  the
water :  we  leapt  on  shore,  and  haled  him  on  land :  he  was
23.  foote  by  the  rule,  headed  like  a  hogge,  in  body  like  a
serpent,  full  of  scales  as  broad  as  a  sawcer  :  his  taile  long
and  full  of  knots  as  bigge  as  a  fawcon  shotte :  he  hath
foure  legs,  his  feete  have  long  nailes  like  unto  a  dragon :
we  opened  him,  tooke  out  his  guts,  flayed  him,  dried  his
skinne,  and  stuffed  it  with  straw,  meaning  to  have
brought  it  home,  had  not  the  ship  bin  cast  away.  This
monster  will  cary  away  and  devoure  both  man  and  horse.
From  hence  we  shaped  our  course  to  Santa  Martha,
where  we  landed,  traded,  and  sold  certaine  Negroes :
there  two  of  our  company  killed  a  monstrous  adder,
going  towards  his  cave  with  a  Conie  in  his  mouth :  his
body  was  as  bigge  as  any  mans  thigh,  and  seven  foote
long :  upon  his  tayle  he  had  sixteene  knottes,  every  one
as  bigge  as  a  great  walnut,  which  they  say,  doe  shew  his
age  :  his  colour  was  greene  and  yellow  :  they  opened  him,
and  found  two  conies  in  his  belly.

From  thence  wee  sayled  to  Cartagena,  where  we  went
in,  mored  our  Shippes,  and  would  have  traded  with  them,
but  they  durst  not  for  feare  of  the  King :  wee  brought  up
the  Minion  against  the  Castle,  and  shotte  at  the  Castle
and  Towne :  then  we  landed  in  an  Hand,  where  were
many  gardens :  there  in  a  cave  we  found  certaine  Botijos
of  wine,  which  wee  brought  away  with  us,  in  recompence
whereof,  our  Generall  commanded  to  be  set  on  shore
woollen  and  linnen  cloth,  to  the  value  thereof.  From
hence  by  foule  weather  wee  were  forced  to  seeke  the  Port
Campeche.  of  Saint  John  de  Ullua. In  our  way  thwart  of  Campeche

450

Santa
Martha.

Cartagena.

JOB HORTOP  AD.

1568.
we  met  with  a  Spaniard,  a  small  ship,  who  was  bound  for
Santo  Domingo :  he  had  in  him  a  Spaniard  called
Augustin  de  villa  nueva,  who  was  the  man  that  betrayed
all  the  Noble  men  in  the  Indies,  and  caused  them  to  be
beheaded,  wherefore  he  with  two  Friers  fled  to  S.
Domingo :  them  we  tooke  and  brought  with  us  into
the  Port  of  S.  John  de  UUua.  Our  Generall  made  great
account  of  him,  and  used  him  like  a  Noble  man :  howbeit
in  the  ende  he  was  one  of  them  that  betrayed  us.
When  wee  had  mored  our  ships,  and  landed,  wee
mounted  the  Ordinance  that  wee  found  there  in  the
Ilande,  and  for  our  safeties  kept  watch  and  warde.  The
next  day  after  wee  discovered  the  Spanish  fleete,  whereof
Lu9on  a  Spanyard  was  Generall :  with  him  came  a  Span-
yard  called  Don  Martin  Henriquez,  whom  the  king  of  ^"^  Martin
Spaine  sent  to  be  his  Vice-roy  of  the  Indies.  He  sent  '^f  ^^^^H^^^
a  Pinnesse  with  a  flagge  of  truce  unto  our  Generall,  to  yic^-ro-i
knowe  of  what  Countrey  those  Shippes  were  that  rode
there  in  the  King  of  Spaines  Port ;  who  sayd,  they  were
the  Queene  of  Englands  ships,  which  came  in  there  for
victuals  for  their  money :  wherefore  if  your  Generall  will
come  in  here,  he  shall  give  me  victuals  and  aU  other
necessaries,  and  I  will  goe  out  on  the  one  side  of  the
Port,  and  he  shall  come  in  on  the  other  side.  The
Spanyard  returned  for  answere,  that  he  was  a  Vice-roy,
and  had  a  thousand  men,  &  therefore  he  would  come
in.  Our  Generall  sayd,  If  he  be  a  Vice-roy,  I  represent
my  Queenes  person,  &  I  am  a  Vice-roy  as  well  as  he :
and  if  he  have  a  thousand  men,  my  powder  and  shot
will  take  the  better  place.  Then  the  Vice-roy  after
counsell  among  themselves,  yeelded  to  our  Generals
demaund,  swearing  by  his  King  and  his  Crowne,  by
his  commission  and  authority  that  he  had  from  his  King,
that  hee  would  performe  it,  and  thereupon  pledges  were
given  on  both  parts.  Our  Generall  bearing  a  godly  and
Christian  minde,  voyde  of  fraude  and  deceit,  judged  the
Spanyards  to  have  done  the  like,  delivered  to  them  sixe
gentlemen,  not  doubting  to  have  received  the  like  from  [III.  490-] ;

451

A.D.
1568.

Augustine  de
villa  nueva  a
most  thanke-
lesse  iraytoui:

The  Spanish
vice-admirall
Jiered.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

them :  but  the  faithlesse  Spanyardes,  in  costly  apparell
gave  of  the  basest  of  their  company,  as  afterwardes  it
was  well  knowen.  These  things  finished,  proclamation
was  made  on  both  sides,  that  on  payne  of  death  no
occasion  should  be  given,  whereby  any  quarel  should
grow  to  the  breach  of  the  league,  and  then  they  peaceably
entred  the  port,  with  great  triumph  on  both  sides.

The  Spaniards  presently  brought  a  great  Hulke,  a
ship  of  sixe  hundred,  and  mored  her  by  the  side  of  the
Minion,  and  they  cut  out  ports  in  their  other  ships,
planting  their  ordinance  towards  us,  in  the  night  they
filled  the  Hulke  with  men,  to  lay  the  Minion  aboord,
as  the  sequel  did  shew,  which  made  our  General  doubt-
ful of  their  dealings :  wherefore,  for  that  he  could  speake
the  Spanish  tongue,  he  sent  Robert  Barret  aboord  the
Vice-roy,  to  knowe  his  meaning  in  those  dealings,  who
willed  him  with  his  company  to  come  in  to  him,  whom
he  commanded  presently  to  be  set  in  the  bilbowes,  and
forthwith  a  Cornet  (for  a  watchword  among  the  false
Spaniards)  was  sounded  for  the  enterprising  of  their
pretended  treason  against  our  Generall,  whom  Augustine
de  villa  nova  sitting  at  dinner  with  him,  should  then
presently  have  killed  with  a  poynado  which  hee  had  privily
in  his  sleeve,  which  was  espyed  and  prevented  by  one
John  Chamberlayne,  who  tooke  the  poynado  out  of  his
sleeve.  Our  General  hastily  rose  up,  and  commanded
him  to  be  put  prisoner  in  the  Stewards  roome,  &  to  be
kept  with  two  men.  The  faithlesse  Spanyards,  thinking
all  things  to  their  desire  had  bene  finished,  suddenly
sounded  a  Trumpet,  and  therewith  three  hundred
Spaniards  entred  the  Minion,  whereat  our  General  with
a  loude  and  fierce  voyce  called  unto  us,  saying,  God  and
Saint  George,  upon  those  traiterous  villaines,  and  rescue
the  Minion,  I  trust  in  God  the  day  shalbe  ours  :  and
with  that  the  Mariners  &  souldiers  leapt  out  of  the  Jesus
of  Lubeck  into  the  Minion,  and  beat  out  the  Spanyards,
and  with  a  shot  out  of  her  fiered  the  Spaniards  Vice
admirall,  where  the  most  part  of  300. Spanyards were

452

JOB HORTOP  AD.

1568.
spoyled,  and  blowen  over boord  with powder. Their
Admirall  also  was  on  fire  halfe an  houre : we  cut  our
cables,  wound  off  our  ships,  and  presently fought  with
them :  they  came  upon  us  on  every  side,  and  continued
the  fight  from  ten  of  the  clocke  until  it  was  night : they
killed  all  our  men  that  were  on  shore  in  the  Hand,  saving
three, which by swimming got aboord the Jesus of  0»^  of  those
Lubeck. They  sunke  the  Generals  ship  called  the  Angel,  *^^^  ^^^  -^"^
and tooke the Swallow : the Spaniards Admirall had  porter  herMf.
above  threescore  shot  through  her : many  of  his men
were spoyled : foure other of  their  ships  were sunke.  Foure  Spanish
There  were  in  that  fleete,  and  that  came  from  the  shore  ^^^P^  ■^^'^'^^•
to  rescue  them,  fifteene  hundred :  we  slew  of  them  five
hundred  and  fourtie,  as  we  were  credibly  informed by
a  note  that  came  to  Mexico. In  this  fight  the  Jesus  of
Lubeck  had  five  shotte  through  her  mayne  Mast : her
fore-mast  was  strooke  in  sunder  under  the  hounds  with
a chayne  shotte,  and  her  hull  was  wonderfully  pearced
with shotte, therefore it  was unpossible to bring her
away. They  set  two  of  their  owne  Shippes  on  fire,  in-
tending  therewith  to have  burnt  the  Jesus  of  Lubeck,
which  we  prevented  by  cutting  our  cables  in  the  halse,
and  winding  off  by  our  sternefast.

The  Minion  was  forced  to  set  saile  and  stand  off  from
us,  and  come  to  an  anker  without  shot  of  the  Island.
Our  Generall  couragiously  cheered  up  his  souldiers  and
gunners,  and  called  to  Samuel  his  page  for  a  cup  of
Beere,  who  brought  it  him  in  a  silver  cup,  and  hee  drink-
ing to  all  men  willed  the  gunners  to  stand  by  their
Ordinance  lustily  like  men.  He  had  no  sooner  set  the
cup  out  of  his  hand,  but  a  demy  Culverin  shot  stroke
away  the  cup  and  a  Coopers  plane  that  stoode  by  the
maine  mast,  and  ranne  out  on  the  other  side  of  the
ship :  which  nothing  dismaid  our  Generall,  for  he  ceased
not  to  incourage  us,  saying,  feare  nothing,  for  God,  who
hath  preserved  me  from  this  shot,  will  also  deliver  us
from  these  traitours  and  villaines.  Then  Captaine  Bland
meaning  to  have  turned  out  of  the  port,  had  his  maine

453

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1568.

mast  stroke  over  boord  with  a  chaine  shot  that  came  from
the  shore,  wherefore  he  ankered,  fired  his  ship,  tooke  his
pinnesse  with  all  his  men,  and  came  aboord  the  Jesus  of
Lubek  to  our  Generall,  who  said  unto  him,  that  he  thought
he  would  not  have  runne  away  from  him :  he  answered,
that  he  was  not  minded  to  have  run  away  from  him,  but
his  intent  was  to  have  turned  up,  and  to  have  laid  the
weathermost  ship  of  the  Spanish  fleete  aboord,  and  fired
his  ship  in  hope  therewith  to  have  set  on  fire  the  Spanish
fleete,  hee  said  if  he  had  done  so  he  had  done  well.
With  this,  night  came  on.  Our  Generall  commanded  the
Minion,  for  safegard  of  her  masts  to  be  brought  under
the  Jesus  of  Lubecks  lee  :  he  willed  M.  Francis  Drake
to  come  in  with  the  Judith,  and  to  lay  the  Minion
aboord,  to  take  in  men  and  other  things  needefull,  and
to  goe  out,  and  so  he  did.

At  night  when  the  wind  came  off  the  shore,  wee  set
sayle,  and  went  out  in  despite  of  the  Spanyards  and  their
shot,  where  wee  ankered,  with  two  ankers  under  the
Island,  the  wind  being  Northerly,  which  was  wonderfull
dangerous,  and  wee  feared  every  houre  to  be  driven  with
the  lee  shore.  In  the  end  when  the  wind  came  larger,  we
[III.  491,]  waied  anker,  and  set  saile,  seeking  the  river  of  Panuco
for  water,  whereof  we  had  very  little,  and  victuals  were
so  scarce,  that  we  were  driven  to  eate  hides,  cats,  rats,
parrats,  munkies,  and  dogges :  wherefore  our  Generall
was  forced  to  divide  his  company  into  two  parts,  for  there
was  a  mutinie  among  them  for  want  of  victuals :  and
some  said  that  they  had  rather  be  on  the  shore  to  shift
for  themselves  amongst  the  enemies,  then  to  sterve  on
ship-boord.  He  asked  them  who  would  go  on  shore,
and  who  would  tarry  on  ship-boord,  those  that  would  goe
on  shore,  he  willed  to  goe  on  foremast,  and  those  that
would  tarrie,  on  baft  mast :  fourescore  and  sixteene  of
us  were  willing  to  depart.  Our  Generall  gave  unto
every  one  of  us  sixe  yards  of  Roane  cloth,  and  money
^ndEnglisii-  ^°  them  that  demanded  it.  When  we  were  landed,  he
men  landed, came unto us, where friendly  imbracing every one of

454

About  an  hun-

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1568.

us,  he  was  greatly  grieved  that  he  was  forced  to  leave
us  behind  him,  he  counselled  us  to  serve  God,  and  to
love  one  another,  and  thus  courteously  he  gave  us  a
sorowful  farewell,  and  promised  if  God  sent  him  safe
home,  he  would  do  what  he  could,  that  so  many  of  us
as  lived  should  by  some  means  be  brought  into  England,
&  so  he  did.

Since  my  returne  into  England  I  have  heard  that
many  misliked  that  he  left  us  so  behind  him,  and
brought  away  Negroes :  but  the  reason  is  this,  for  them
he  might  have  had  victuals,  or  any  other  thing  needfuU,
if  by  foule  weather  hee  had  bene  driven  upon  the
Islands,  which  for  gold  nor  silver  he  could  not  have  had.

And  thus  our  Generall  departed  to  his  ship,  and  we
remained  on  land,  where  for  our  safeties,  fearing  the
wild  Indians  that  were  about  us,  we  kept  watch  all
night,  and  at  Sunne  rising  wee  marched  on  our  way,
three  and  three  in  a  ranke,  untill  that  we  came  into
a  fielde  under  a  grove,  where  the  Indians  came  upon  us,
asking  us  what  people  we  were,  and  how  we  came  there.
Two  of  our  company,  namely  Anthony  Goddard  and
John  Cornish,  for  that  they  could  speake  the  Spanish
tongue,  went  to  them,  and  said  wee  were  Englishmen,
that  never  came  in  that  countrey  before,  and  that  we
had  fought  with  the  Spaniards,  and  for  that  we  lacked
victuals,  our  Generall  set  us  on  shore :  they  asked  us
whither  we  intended  to  goe,  we  said  to  Panuco.  The
Captaine  of  the  Indians  willed  us  to  give  unto  them
some  of  our  clothes  &  shirts,  which  we  did :  then  he
bad  us  give  them  all,  but  we  would  not  so  doe,  where-
upon John  Cornish  was  then  slaine  with  an  arrow,  ^ohn  Cornish
which  an  Indian  boy  that  stoode  by  the  Captaine  shot  •^^'^^"^•
at  him,  wherefore  he  stroke  the  boy  on  the  necke  with
his  bow,  that  he  lay  for  dead,  and  willed  us  to  follow
him,  who  brought  us  into  a  great  fielde,  where  we  found
fresh  water :  hee  bad  us  sit  downe  about  the  pond  and
drinke,  and  he  with  his  company  would  goe  in  the
meane  space  to  kill  five  or  sixe  Deere,  and  bring  them

455

A.D.
1568.

Anthony
Goddai'd.

A  river.

James  Collier.

8.  Englishmen
shine.
Another  river.

Seven  dayes
travell  to
Panuco.

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

us.  We  taryed  there  till  three  of  the  clocke,  but  they
came  not :  there  one  of  our  company  whose  name  was
John  Cooke,  with  foure  other  departed  from  us  into
a  grove  to  seeke  reliefe,  where  presently  they  were  taken
by  the  Indians,  and  stript  as  naked  as  ever  they  were
borne,  and  so  returned  to  us.

Then  we  divided  our  selves  into  two  parts,  halfe  to
Anthony  Goddard,  and  the  rest  to  James  Collier,  and
thus  severally  we  sought  for  Panuco.  Anthony  Goddard
with  his  company,  bid  us  farewell,  they  passed  a  river,
where  the  Indians  robbed  many  of  them  of  their  clothes,
and  so  passing  on  their  way,  came  to  a  stony  hill,  where
they  stayed.  James  Collier  with  his  company  that  day
passed  the  same  river,  and  were  also  robbed,  and  one  of
them  slaine  by  chance :  wee  came  that  night  unto  the
hill,  where  Anthony  Goddard  and  his  company  rested,
there  we  remained  til  morning,  and  then  we  marched
altogether  from  thence,  entring  betweene  two  groves,
where  the  Indians  robbed  us  of  all  our  clothes,  and  left
us  naked,  they  hurt  many,  and  killed  eight  of  us.  Three
dayes  after  we  came  to  another  river,  there  the  Indians
shewed  us  the  way  to  Panuco,  and  so  left  us :  we  passed
the  river  into  the  wildernes,  where  we  made  wreaths  of
greene  grasse,  which  we  wound  about  our  bodies,  to
keepe  us  from  the  Sunne,  and  gnats  of  that  Countrey.
We  travelled  there  seven  dayes,  and  seven  nights,  before
wee  came  to  Panuco,  feeding  on  nothing  but  roots,  and
Guiavos,  a  fruit  like  figs.  At  our  comming  to  the  river
of  Panuco  two  Spanish  horsemen  came  over  unto  us
in  a  Canowe :  they  asked  us  how  long  we  had  bene  in
the  wildernesse,  and  where  our  generall  was,  for  they
knewe  us  to  be  of  the  company  that  had  fought  with
their  countrimen  :  we  told  them  seven  dayes  and  seven
nights,  and  for  lacke  of  victuals  our  Generall  set  us  on
shore,  &  he  was  gone  away  with  his  ships.  They
returned  to  their  Governour,  who  sent  them  with  five
Canowes  to  bring  us  all  over,  which  done,  they  set  us
in aray, where a hundred horsemen with their  lances,

456

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1568.

came  forceably  upon  us,  but  did  not  hurt  us,  they  carried

us  prisoners  to  Panuco,  where  we  remained  one  night.

In  the  river  of  Panuco  there  is  a  fish  like  a  calfe,  the

Spanyards  call  it  a  Mallatin,  hee  hath  a  stone  in  his  head,

which  the  Indians  use  for  the  disease  of  the  CoUicke,  in

the night he commeth  on  land,  and  eateth grasse. I

have  eaten  of  it,  and  it  eateth  not  much  unlike  to  bacon.

From  thence  we  were  sent  to  Mexico,  which  is  90  leagues

from  Panuco. In  our  way  thither,  20  leagues  from  the

sea  side, I  did  see white Crabs running  up  &  downe

the  sands,  I  have  eaten  of  them,  and  they  be  very  good  [III.  492.]

meat. There  groweth  a  fruit  which  the  Spanyards  call

Avocottes,  it  is  proportioned  like  an  egge,  and  as  blacke

as  a  cole,  having  a  stone  in  it,  and  it  is  an  excellent  good

fruit. There also groweth a strange tree which  they

call  Magueis,  it  serveth  them  to many uses, below  by  A  manifold  me

the  root  they  make  a  hole,  wherat  they  do  take  out  of  "f^'^S"-^"-

it  twise  every  day  a  certaine  kind  of  licour,  which  they

seeth  in  a  great  kettle,  till  the  third  part  be  consumed,

&  that it  wax  thick,  it is as sweet  as any  hony,  and

they do  eat  it. Within  20.  daies  after  that  they  have

taken  al  the  licour  from  it,  it  withereth,  &  they  cut  it

down,  &  use  it  as  we  use  our  hempe  here  in  England,

which  done,  they  convert  it  to  many  uses :  of  some  part

they  make  mantles,  ropes,  and  threed  :  of  the  ends  they

make needles to sow their saddles,  pannels, & other

furniture  for  their  horses :  of  the  rest  they  make  tyles

to  cover  their  houses,  and they  put  it to many other

purposes.

And  thus  we  came  to  Mexico,  which  is  seven  or  eight
miles  about,  seated  in  a  great  fen,  invironed  with  4  hils,
it  hath  but  two  wayes  of  entrance,  and  it  is  full  of  creeks,
in  the  which  in  their  Canowes  they  passe  from  place  to
place,  &  to  the  Islands  there  within.  In  the  Indies
ordinarily  three  times  a  yeere  bee  wonderfull  earthquakes,
which  put  the  people  in  great  feare  and  danger :  during
the  time  of  two  yeeres  that  I  was  in  Mexico,  I  saw  them
sixe times :  when they  come they  throw downe trees,

457

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1568.

houses,  and  Churches.  There  is  a  citie  25.  leagues  from
Mexico,  called  Tlaxcalla,  which  is  inhabited  with  a
hundred  thousand  Indians,  they  goe  in  white  shirts,
linnen  breeches,  and  long  mantles,  and  the  women  weare
about  them  a  garment  much  like  unto  a  flannell  petticote.
The  kings  pallace  was  the  first  place  wee  were  brought
unto  in  Mexico,  where  without  we  were  willed  to  sit
downe.  Much  people,  men,  women,  and  children  came
wondring  about  us,  many  lamented  our  misery,  &  some
of  their  clergy  asked  us  if  we  were  Christians,  we  said,
we  praised  God,  we  were  as  good  Christians  as  they :
they  asked  how  they  might  know  that,  we  said,  by  our
confessions.  From  thence  we  were  carried  in  a  Canow
to  a  Tanners  house,  which  standeth  a  little  from  the
citie:  the  next  morning  two  friers  and  two  priests  came
thither  to  us,  and  willed  us  to  blesse  our  selves,  and
say  our  prayers  in  the  Latin  tongue,  that  they  might
understand  us,  many  of  our  company  did  so,  whereupon
they  returned  to  the  viceroy,  and  told  him  that  we  were
good  Christians,  and  that  they  liked  us  well,  and  then
they  brought  us  much  reliefe,  with  clothes,  our  sicke
men  were  sent  to  their  Hospitals,  where  many  were  cured,
and  many  died.  From  the  Tanners  house  we  were  led
to  a  gentlemans  place,  where  upon  paine  of  death  we
were  charged  to  abide,  and  not  to  come  into  the  citie,
thither  we  had  all  things  necessary  brought  us :  on
Sundayes  and  holy  dayes  much  people  came,  and  brought
us  great  reliefe.

The  viceroy  practised  to  hang  us,  and  caused  a  paire
of  new  gallowes  to  be  set  up,  to  have  executed  us,
wherunto  the  noblemen  of  that  countrey  would  not
consent,  but  prayed  him  to  stay  until  the  ship  of  advise
brought  newes  from  the  king  of  Spaine,  what  should
be  done  with  us,  for  they  said  they  could  not  find  any
thing  by  us,  whereby  they  might  lawfully  put  us  to
death.

The  viceroy  then  commanded  us  to  be  sent  to  an
Island  there  by,  and  he  sent  for  the  Bishop  of  Mexico,

458

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1568.

who  sent  foure  priests  to  the  Island,  to  examine  and
confesse  us,  who  said,  that  the  viceroy  would  burne  us,
when  wee  were  examined  and  confessed  according  to  the
lawes  of  the  countrey.  They  returned  to  the  Bishop,
and  told  him  that  we  were  very  good  Christians.  The
Bishop  certified  the  viceroy  of  our  examinations  and
confessions,  and  said  that  wee  were  good  Christians,
therefore  he  would  not  meddle  with  us.  Then  the
viceroy  sent  for  our  master,  R.  Barret,  whom  he  kept
prisoner  in  his  pallace,  untill  the  fleete  was  departed  for
Spayne.  The  rest  of  us  he  sent  to  a  towne  seven  leagues
from  Mexico  called  Tescuco,  to  card  wooll  among  the
Indian  slaves,  which  drudgery  we  disdained,  and  con-
cluded to  beat  our  masters,  and  so  wee  did :  wherefore
they  sent  to  the  viceroy,  desiring  him  for  Gods  sake
and  our  Ladies,  to  send  for  us,  for  they  would  not
keepe  us  any  longer,  they  said  that  we  were  devils  and
no  men.

The  viceroy  sent  for  us,  and  imprisoned  us  in  a  house
in  Mexico,  from  thence  he  sent  Anthony  Goddard,  &
some  other  of  our  company  with  him  into  Spaine,  with
Lu9on,  the  General  that  tooke  us :  the  rest  of  us  staied  in
Mexico  two  yeres  after,  and  then  were  sent  prisoners  into
Spaine,  with  Don  Juan  de  Velasco  de  Varre,  admirall  and
generall  of  the  Spanish  fleet,  who  caried  with  him  in  his
ship,  to  be  presented  to  the  K.  of  Spaine,  the  anatomie  of
a  giant,  which  was  sent  from  China  to  Mexico,  to  the
viceroy  Don  Martin  Henriquez,  to  bee  sent  to  the  king
of  Spaine  for  a  great  wonder.  It  did  appere  by  the
anatomie,  that  he  was  of  a  monstrous  size,  the  skull  of
his  head  was  neere  as  bigge  as  halfe  a  bushel,  his  necke-
bones,  shoulder-plates,  arme-bones,  and  all  other  linea-
ments of  his  other  partes,  were  huge  and  monstrous  to
behold,  the  shanke  of  his  legge  from  the  ankle  to  the
knee  was  as  long  as  from  any  mans  ankle  up  to  his  wast,
and  of  bignesse  accordingly.

At  this  time,  and  in  this  ship,  were  also  sent  to  be
presented  to  the  king  of  Spaine,  two  chestes  full  of  earth

459

A.D.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1568.

with  ginger  growing  in  them,  which  were  also  sent  from
[III.  493.] China,  to  be  sent  to the  king  of  Spaine. The  ginger
A  description runneth  in  the  ground  like  to  liccoras,  the  blades  grow
oj  ginger. ^^^  ^£ -^  -^^  length  and  proportion  like  unto  the  blades  of
wild  garlicke,  which  they  cut  every  fifteene  dayes,  they
use  to  water  them  twise  a  day,  as  we  doe  our  herbes  here
in  England,  they  put  the  blades  in  their  pottage,  and  use
them in  their  other  meates,  whose  excellent  savour  and
tast  is  very  delightfull,  and  procureth  a  good  appetite.
1570.  When we  were  shipped  in the Port of  S. John de

UUua,  the  Generall  called  our  master  Robert  Barret  and
us  with  him  into  his  cabbin,  &  asked  us  if  wee  would
fight  against  Englishmen  if  we  met  them  at  the  sea,  we
said  that  we  would  not  fight  against  our  Crowne,  but  if
we  met  with  any  other,  we  would  do  what  we  were  able.
He  said  if  we  had  said  otherwise  he  would  not  have
beleeved  us,  and  for  that  we  should  be  the  better  used,
and  have  allowance  as  other  men  had :  and  he  gave  a
charge  to  every  one  of  us,  according  unto  our  knowledge,
Robert  Barret  was  placed  with  the  pilote,  I  was  put  in
the  gunners  roome,  William  Cawse  with  the  boat-swaine,
John  Beare  with  the  quarter-masters,  Edward  Rider,  &
Geffrey  Giles,  with  the  ordinary  mariners,  Richard  the
masters  boy  attended  on  him  and  the  pilote :  shortly  after
we  departed  from  the  port  of  S.  John  de  UUua  with  all
Havana.  the  fleete  of  Spaine,  for  the  port  called  Havana :  wee
were  26.  dayes  sayling  thither.  There  wee  came  in,
ankered,  tooke  in  fresh  water,  and  stayed  16.  dayes  for
the  fleete  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  which  is  the  fleet  that
brings  the  treasure  from  Peru.

The  Generall  of  that  fleet  was  called  Diego  Flores  de
Valdes.  After  his  comming,  when  he  had  watred  his
ships,  both  the  fleetes  joyned  in  one,  and  Don  Juan  de
Velasco  de  Varre  was  the  first  fifteen  daies  Generall  of
both  the  fleets,  who  turning  through  the  chanell  of
Bahama,  his  pilote  had  like  to  have  cast  away  all  the  fleet
upon  the  Cape  called  Cannaveral,  which  was  prevented  by
me John Hortop,  &  our  master Robert  Barret : for I

460

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1570-
being in the second  watch escried land, and called to

Robert  Barret,  bidding  him  looke  over  boord,  for  I  saw

land  under  the  lee-bow  of  the  ship : he  called  to  the  boat-

swaine,  &  bid  him  let  flie  the  fore  saile  sheat,  and  lay  the

helm  upon  the  lee,  and  cast  the  ship  about. When  we

were  cast  about,  we  were  but  in  seven  fathome  water :  we

shot  off  a  piece,  giving  advice  to  the  fleet  to  cast  about,

and so they did. For this  we were beloved of  the

Generall,  and  all  the  fleet. The  Generall  was  in  a  great

rage,  and swore  by  the  king, that  he  would  hang  his

pilote :  for  he  said,  that  twise  before  he  had  almost  cast

away  the  Admirall. When  it  was  day,  he  commanded  a

piece  to  be  shot  off,  to  call  to  councill :  the  other  Admirall

in  his  ship  came  up  to  him,  and  asked  what  the  matter

was,  he  said,  that  his  pilote  had  cast  away  his  ship  and  all

the  fleet,  had  it  not  bene  for  two  of  the  Englishmen,  and

therefore  he  would  hang  him. The  other  Admirall  with

many  faire  words  perswaded  him  to  the  contrary.

When  we  came  in the  height of  Bermuda, we dis-  A  sea-monster
covered  a  monster  in  the  sea,  who  shewed  himselfe  three  ^"  ^^^  '^^P^
times  unto  us  from  the  middle  upwards,  in  which  parts  '^  ^  "^^^'
hee  was  proportioned  like  a  man,  of  the  complection  of  a
Mulato,  or  tawny  Indian. The  Generall  did  commaund
one  of  his  clearks  to  put  it  in  writing,  and  hee  certified
the  King  and  his  Nobles  thereof. Presently  after  this,
for  the  space  of  sixteene  dayes  we  had  wonderful  foule
weather,  and  then God  sent  us  a  faire  wind,  untill  such
time  as  we  discovered  the  Hand  called  Faial.

On  S.  James  day  we  made  rackets,  wheeles,  and  other  f
fire-workes,  to  make  pastime  that  night,  as  it  is  the  order
of  the  Spanyards.  When  we  came  neere  the  land,  our
master  R.  Barret  conferred  with  us,  to  take  the  pinnesse
one  night,  when  we  came  on  the  Hand  called  Ter9era,  to
free  our  selves  from  the  danger  and  bondage  that  we  were
going  into,  whereunto  we  agreed :  none  had  any  pinnesse
asterne  then  but  our  ship,  which  gave  great  courage  to
our  enterprise  :  we  prepared  a  bagge  of  bread,  and  a  Botijo
of  water,  which  would  have  served  us  nine  dayes,  and

461

AD.  THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

1570.

provided  our  selves  to  goe :  our  Master  borrowed  a  small
compasse  of  the  Master  gunner  of  the  ship,  who  lent  it
him,  but  suspected  his  intent,  and  closely  made  the
Generall  privy  to  it,  who  for  a  time  dissembled  the
matter.  In  the  ende  seeing  our  pretense,  he  called  R.
Barret,  commanding  his  head  to  bee  put  in  the  stocks,
and  a  great  payre  of  yron  bolts  on  his  legs,  &  the  rest  of
us  to  be  set  in  the  stocks  by  the  legs.  Then  he  willed  a
peece  to  be  shot  off,  and  hee  sent  the  pinnesse  for  the
other  Admirall,  and  all  the  captaines,  masters  and  pilots  of
both  fleetes  to  come  aboord  of  him.  He  commanded  the
mayne-yard  to  be  strooke  downe,  and  to  put  2.  puUies,  on
every  yard-arme  one ;  the  hangman  was  called,  and  we
were  willed  to  confesse  our  selves,  for  he  swore  by  the
king  that  he  would  hang  us.

When  the  other  Admiral,  and  the  rest  were  come
aboord,  he  called  them  into  his  counsel-chamber,  and  told
them  that  he  would  hang  the  master  of  the  Englishmen,
and  all  his  company.  The  Admirall,  whose  name  was
Diego  Flores  de  Valdes,  asked  him  wherefore :  he  sayd,
that  we  had  determined  to  rise  in  the  night  with  the
pinnesse,  and  with  a  ball  of  fireworke  to  set  the  ship  on
fire,  and  goe  our  wayes :  therefore,  sayd  he,  I  will  have
you  the  Captaines,  Masters,  and  Pilotes,  to  set  your  hands
unto  that,  for  I  sweare  by  the  king  that  I  will  hang  them,
[III.  494.]  Diego  Flores  de  Valdes  answered,  I  nor  the  Captaines,
Masters,  and  Pilotes  wil  not  set  our  hands  to  that,  for
hee  said,  if  he  had  bin  prisoner  as  we  were,  he  would
have  done  the  like  himselfe.  He  counselled  him  to
keepe  us  fast  in  prison,  till  he  came  into  Spaine,  &  then
send  us  to  the  Contratation  house  in  Sivil,  where,  if  we
had  deserved  death  the  law  would  passe  on  us,  for  hee
would  not  have  it  said  that  in  such  a  fleet  as  that  was,
sixe  men  and  a  boy  should  take  the  pinnesse,  and  goe
away,  and  so  he  returned  to  his  ship  againe.

When  he  was  gone,  the  Generall  came  to  the  maine
mast  to  us,  and  swore  by  the  king,  that  we  should  not
come  out  of  the  stocks  til  we  came  into  Spaine :  within

462

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1570.

1 6  dayes  after  we  came  over  the  bar  of  S.  Lucar,  and  came
up  to  the  Hurcados,  then  he  put  us  into  a  pinnesse  in  the
stocks,  and  sent  us  prisoners  to  the  Contratation  house  in
Sivill. From  thence  after  one  yere  we  brake  prison,  on
S. Stevens day at night, 7. of  our company  escaped,
Robert  Barret,  I  Job  Hortop,  John  Emerie,  Humphrey
Roberts,  and  John  Gilbert  were  taken,  and  brought  backe
to  the  contratation  house,  where  we  remained  in  the  stocks
till  twelfe  tide  was  past. Then  our  keeper  put  up  a  peti-
tion to  the  Judge  of  the  contratation  house,  that  we  might
be  sent  to  the  .great  prison  house  in  Sivill,  for  that  we
broke  prison,  whereupon  we  were  presently  led  thither,
where  we  remained  one  moneth,  and  then  from  thence,  to
the  castell  of  the  Inquisition  house  in  Triana,  where  wee
continued  one  yere :  which  expired,  they  brought  us  out
in procession,  every  one of  us  having  a candle in his
hand, and the coate  with S. Andrewes  crosse on our
backs :  they  brought  us  up  on  an  high  scaffold,  that  was
set  up  in  the  place  of  S.  Francis,  which  is  in  the  chiefe
street  of  Sivill :  there  they  set  us  downe  upon  benches,
every  one  in  his  degree,  and  against  us  on  another  scaffold
sate  all  the  Judges,  and  the  Clergy  on  their  benches :  the
people  wondered, and gazed on  us,  some  pittying  our
cases,  other  said,  burne  those  heretikes. When  we  had
sit  there  two  houres,  we  had  a  sermon  made  to  us  :  after
which one  called  Bresinia, secretarie  to  the  Inquisition,
went up into the  pulpit  with the  processe,  and called
Robert  Barret  and  John  Gilbert,  whom  two  familiars  of  Robert  Barret

the Inquisition brought from the scaffold before the  ^fd^fnGil-
_,T^,  1°  .  1,  ,., bert  burned.

Judges, where the secretarie read the sentence, which

was  that  they  should  be  burnt,  and  so  they  returned  to

the  scaffold,  and  were  burnt.

Then  I  Job  Hortop,  and  John  Bone  were  called,  and  -^f^  Hortop

brought to the place, as before, where we heard  our  '^^  f^^^'^^-

sentence,  which  was,  that  we  should  go  to  the  Gallies,

and  there  row  at  the  oares  ende  ten  yeeres,  and  then  to

be  brought  backe  to  the  Inquisition  house,  to  have  the

coate  with S. Andrewes  crosse  put  on  our  backs,  and

463

AD.  THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

1570.

from  thence  to  goe  to  the  everlasting  prison  remedilesse,
and  so  we  were  returned  from  the  scaffold  from  whence
we  came.  Thomas  Marks,  &  Thomas  Ellis  were  called,
and  had  sentence  to  serve  in  the  Galleys  eight  yeeres,
and  Humphrey  Roberts,  and  John  Emery  to  serve  five
yeeres,  &  so  were  returned  to  the  benches  on  the  scaffold,
where  we  sate  till  foure  of  clocke  in  the  afternoone.
Then  we  were  led  againe  to  the  Inquisition  house,  from
whence  we  were  brought.  The  next  day  in  the  morning
Bresinia  the  treasurer  came  thither  to  us,  and  delivered
to  every  one  of  us  his  sentence  in  writing.  I  with  the
rest  were  sent  to  the  Gallies,  where  we  were  chained
foure  and  foure  together :  every  mans  daily  allowance
was  26.  ounces  of  course  blacke  bisket  and  water,  our
clothing  for  the  whole  yeere  two  shirts,  two  paire  of
breeches  of  course  canvas,  a  red  coat  of  course  cloth,
soone  on,  and  soone  off,  and  a  gowne  of  haire  with  a
friers  hood :  our  lodging  was  on  the  bare  boords,  and
banks  of  the  Gallies,  our  heads  and  beards  were  shaven
every  month,  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  and  stripes  we  lacked
none,  til  our  several  times  expired.  And  after  the  time
of  12.  yeeres,  for  I  served  two  yeeres  above  my  sen-
tence, I  was  sent  backe  to  the  Inquisition  house  in
Sivill,  and  there  having  put  on  the  coat  with  S.  Andrewes
crosse,  I  was  sent  to  the  everlasting  prison  remedilesse,
where  I  wore  the  coat  4.  yeres,  &  then  upon  great
suit,  I  had  it  taken  off  for  50  duckets,  which  Hernando
de  Soria  treasurer  of  the  kings  mint  lent  me,  whom  I
served  for  it  as  a  drudge  7.  yeres,  and  until  the  moneth
1590.  of  October  last,  1590,  and  then  I  came  from  Sivill  to
S.  Lucar,  where  I  made  meanes  to  come  away  in  a  flie-
boat,  that  was  laden  with  wines  and  salt,  which  were
Flemings  goods,  the  king  of  Spaines  subjects,  dwelling
in  Sivil,  maried  to  Spanish  women,  and  sworne  to  their
king.  In  this  moneth  of  October  last,  departing  from
S.  Lucar,  at  sea,  off  the  southermost  Cape,  we  met  an
English  ship,  called  the  Galeon  Dudley,  who  took  the
Flemming,  &  me  out  of  him,  &  brought  me  to  Ports-

464

JOB HORTOP  A.D.

1590.

mouth, where they set me on land, the 2. day of

December  last  past, 1590. From  thence  I  was  sent  by 1590,

M.  Muns  the  lieutenant  of  Portsmouth,  with  letters  to

the R.  honorable  the  Earle  of  Sussex,  who  commanded

his  secretary to take my name and examination, how

long  I  had  bene  out  of  England,  and  with  whom  I  went,

which  he  did. And  on  Christmas  even  I  took  my  leave

of  his  honor,  and  came  to  Redriffe.

The  Computation  of  my  imprisonment.

I  suffered  imprisonment  in  Mexico  two  yeeres.

In  the  Contratation  house  in  Sivill  one  yeere.

In  the  Inquisition  house  in  Triana  one  yeere.  [III.  495.]

I  was  in  the  Gallies  twelve  yeeres.

In  the  everlasting  prison  remediles,  with  the  coat  with
S.  Andrews  crosse  on  my  back  4.  yeres.

And  at  libertie  I  served  as  a  drudge  Hernando  de
Soria  3.  yeeres,  which  is  the  full  complement  of  23.
yeeres.

Since  my  departure  from  England,  untill  this  time  of
my  returne,  I  was  five  times  in  great  danger  of  death,
besides  the  many  perils  I  was  in,  in  the  Gallies.

First  in  the  Port  of  S.  John  de  UUua,  where  being
on  shore,  with  many  other  of  our  company,  which
were  all  slaine  saving  I,  and  two  other  that  by  swimming
got  aboord  the  Jesus  of  Lubek.

Secondly,  when  we  were  robbed  by  the  wild  Indians.

Thirdly,  after  we  came  to  Mexico,  the  viceroy  would
have  hanged  us.

Fourthly,  because  he  could  not  have  his  mind  to  hang
us,  he  would  have  burnt us.

Fiftly,  the  Generall  that  brought  us  into  Spaine,  would
have  hanged  us  at  sea.

Thus  having  truely  set  downe  unto  you  my  travels,
misery  and  dangers,  endured  the  space  of  23.  yeeres,  I
ende.

[A  relation
IX  465  2  G

THE  ENGLISH  VOYAGES

The  Port  of
Tecuanapa.

The  Bishop-
ricks  of

Guaxacan,  i^
Tlarcali.

Cuahintla.

Tulaningo  a
small  lake.

A  relation  of  the  Haven  of  Tecuanapa,  a  most
convenient  place  for  building  of  ships,  situate
upon  the  South  sea  not  farre  from  Nicaragua,
which  was  sent  unto  the  viceroy  of  Mexico
or  to  the  king  of  Spaine :  wherein  are  de-
scribed the  rivers  of  Ometepec,  Tlacamama,
and  Tlacolula  falling  into  the  said  Haven,  with
the  townes,  people,  and  mountaines  adjoyning
to  the  said  rivers,  and  other  things  fit  for
the  building  and  victualling  of  ships.

He  Port  and  small  harbour  of  Tecuanapa
hath  in  the  driest  time  of  Sommer  in
the  chanell  little  lesse  then  one  fathome
at  low  water,  and  at  full  sea  one  fathome
and  an  halfe :  in  the  time  of  raine,  with
the  increasing  of  the  land-water  it  hath
three  fathoms  and  more.  It  lyeth  toward
the  West,  and  there  the  Bishopricks  of  Guaxacan  and
Tlarcali  are  separated.  From  hence  toward  the  point
called  Punta  de  Intla  and  Dordaci  there  is  a  Bay  2.
leagues  distant,  which  though  it  be  no  special  harbour,
yet  upon  an  extremity  ships  may  come  and  ride  there,  as
in  times  past  they  have  done.  This  Bay  on  the  right
hand  toward  the  North  maketh  a  lake  somewhat  large
towards  the  midst  of  the  chanell,  and  in  some  parts
deepe,  but  specially  on  the  side  of  Cuahintla,  but  on
either  side  it  is  but  shallow.  As  you  passe  betweene
the  sea  &  certaine  great  and  large  woods  of  orenge
trees,  and  trees  of  other  nature  which  grow  along  the
sea  coast,  which  are  of  no  great  bredth,  al  the  countrey
appeareth  very  open :  howbeit  on  the  side  of  Cuahintla
the  mountaines  have  many  creeks  and  a  small  lake  called
Tulaningo,  and  the  countrey  cannot  be  travelled,  except
you  take  the  way  betweene  the  sea  and  the  end  of  this
lake,  which  may  be about two leagues  of  sandy  way.

466

THE HAVEN OF TECUANAPA

And on the North side  there  is  another  small  creeke.

And going  by  the  sands  side  one  quarter  of  a  league,

you  come  to  the  way  that  leadeth unto Quacapotla  a  Quacapotla.

mansion  of  Intla.

The  river  of  Ometepec  being  the  principal  river  1"^^  ^''^'^^^  °f
which  commeth  to  this  haven  hath  his  head  in  the  moun-  Ozw^/^/^c
taines  of  Xicayan  de  Touer  about  24.  leagues  from  this
haven,  from  divers  brooks  which  come  out  of  the
mountaines  of  Cacatepec,  and  beneath  a  towne  called
Suchistlahuaca  litle  more  then  3.  leagues  all  the  brooks
joyne  together:  and  from  that  place  you  may  passe
downe  to  the  sea  with  Canoas  and  Lighters ;  and  you
might  come  farther  but  for  the  fall  of  a  furious  streame
or  current  which  runneth  between  two  great  rocks,
passing  from  Cocahulapa  a  mansion  of  Ometepec  unto
Yanguitle  a  mansion  of  the  said  Ometepec.  These
inconveniences  being  past  (which  in  my  judgement  may
be  about  one  league)  the  river  is  more  navigable,  so
that  you  may  sayle  in  the  same  about  12.  leagues.
During  the  space  of  which  12.  leagues,  about  a  league
and  a  halfe  distance  from  the  waters  side,  and  in  many
other  parts  of  the  same  river  it  hath  great  quantitie  of
woods  which  use  to  grow  in  hot  soiles,  fit  for  ship-
timber,  as  Huber-trees,  &  Suchicuhitil,  whereof  they
of  Nicaragua  make  great  profit.  Also  there  be  white  Nicaragua.
okes  and  Tehegurtes  in  great  quantitie,  and  many  other
kinds  of  timber:  and  in  the  mountaines  there  be  firre-
trees,  okes,  and  cork-trees,  which  easily  may  bee
caried  downe  the  river,  because  they  may  be  cut
some  2,  3,  4,  and  5.  leagues  from  the  river,  and
may  be  brought  downe  to  the  waters  side  with  the
service  and  helpe  of  those  that  dwell  in  the  townes
thereabout.

At  the  head  of  these  brooks  where  the  river  beginneth
is the  towne  which  is  called  Xicaian,  belonging  to  the  Xkaian.
heires of  Francis de  Touer  y de Guillen, containing
about  350.  Indians  of  rude  speech  and  of  little  policie,
being 24. leagues  from the sea, little more or  lesse,

467

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

[III.  496.]

Atoanapa.

Suchistlahuaca.

O  me  tepee.

Ihualapa.

Niciecan.

Pio  a  frontier
towne  against
the  Mexicans,

The  place  it  selfe  is  hot,  although  the  mountaines  round
about  be  cold.

A  little  from  this  is  the  towne  of  Aioanapa  possessed
by  the  heires  of  Perez  Gomez,  having  in  it  about  300.
Indians  of  the  selfe  same  speach  and  qualitie.  The
countrey  is  more  subject  to  heate  then  cold;  yet  hath
it  neere  it  cold  countreys  and  mountaines.  It  is  distant
from  Xicaian  de  Touer  4.  leagues,  and  from  the  sea
20.  leagues.

Sixe  leagues  downeward  toward  the  South  is  the  towne
of  Suchistlahuaca  on  the  said  river,  and  the  inhabitants
are  of  the  same  speach  and  qualities.  The  countrey  is
more  subject  to  heate  then  cold.  It  is  in  the  charge
of  Gonzalvo  Fernandez  a  citizen  of  Mexico,  and  hath
about  150.  Indians,  and  is  15.  leagues  distant  from
the  sea.

From  this  towne  unto  the  towne  of  Ometepec  are  6.
leagues.  The  place  is  very  hot,  and  in  the  same
government,  and  is  situate  betweene  certaine  hils  one
league  from  the  river :  he  and  his  followers  have  under
them  about  700.  Indians,  which  speake  the  Ayacastecan,
Amusgan,  and  Niciecan  tongues,  and  this  place  is  from
the  sea  nine  leagues.

From  this  towne  unto  Ihualapa  are  two  great  leagues :
it  is  in  the  government  of  the  heires  of  Laurence  de
Castro,  of  the  foresaid  temperature,  and  the  people  use
the  said  language,  and  are  of  the  like  stature :  and  it
standeth  three  leagues  from  the  river,  and  from  the  sea
ten  leagues.

These  are  the  best  townes,  and  of  the  best  traffique
that  are  upon  all  this  coast.  The  Indians  are  rich  in
Cacao  and  victuals,  and  in  these  townes  doe  the  Indians
of  Niciecan  principally  trade.  And  in  the  towne  of
Ihualapa  the  chiefs  Alguazil  of  the  province  is  resident
for  the  most  part  of  the  yeere.

More  lowe  beneath  the  river  of  Tlacolula,  about  a
league  or  a  league  and  an  halfe  from  the  towne  of
Ometepec  is  the  towne  called  Pio,  which  was  wont  to  be

468

THE HAVEN OF TECUANAPA

a  towne  of  Tlacolula,  and  was  a  frontier  towne  against
the  Mexicans.  There  be  in  it  about  50.  Indians  of  the
ancient  inhabitants :  one  Graviel  de  Chiavez  a  citizen
of  Mexico  hath  the  governement  thereof:  it  is  4.  leagues
from  Ihualapa,  and 6.  from  the  sea.

A  little  below  this  is  the  towne  of  Huehuatlan  in  the  Huehuatlan.
selfe  same  governement  standing  one league from the
river  on  certaine  high  hils  :  it  hath 10.  Indians,  and is
from  the  sea  5.  leagues.

And  one  league  from  this  towne  stands  the  towne  of
Cuahucapotla  a  mansion  of  Antla  or  Intla :  it  hath  to  the  Cuahmcpotla,
number of  15. Indians; it standeth  one league  and  a
halfe  from  the  river,  and 4.  leagues from the mouth
thereof.

At  the  fountaines  or  heads  of  the  rest  of  the  brooks  is
the towne of  Cacatepec being in the  government of  Cacatepec
Raphael  de  Treyo :  he  and  his  tenants  have  under  them
some  700.  Indians  of  Niciecan :  it  is  from  the  sea  some
22.  leagues.

The  river  which  is  called  Tlacamama  commeth  from  T^^^  ^'^^^^  °f
the  mountains  of  Atoyaque  and  Amusgos,  which  are  tlacamama.
some  17.  leagues  from  the  sea.  There  it  maketh  a
formed  river,  so  big,  that  it  is  navigable  to  the  sea  with
canoas  and  lighters :  I  say  from  a  litle  below  Tolistla-
huaca  a  mansion  of  Xicaian.  It  is  navigable  8.  moneths
in  the  yeere,  and  the  other  4.  not,  because  that  the  sands
of  the  plaines  do  soke  and  drink  up  the  water  in  such
wise,  that  there  remaineth  so  little,  that  there  is  no
passage :  howbeit  in  small  lighters  timber  may  bee
brought  downe  this  river  one  league  from  the  place
where  it  is  cut,  unto  the  place  that  I  have  spoken  of;
whereas  bigger  vessels  may  bee  made ;  for  nigh  unto  that
p  ace  other  brooks  and  running  waters  doe  joyne  and
meet,  which  make  it  a  maine  river.  It  hath  nigh  unto
it  in  the  mountaines  of  Atoyaque,  Cacatepec,  and  Amus-
gos many  woods  of  pine-trees,  cork-trees,  and  okes  of
great  bignesse:  and  beneath  those  mountaines  in  the
warme countrey, neere  unto  the  rivers there  is  much

469

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Jtoiaque.

Xicaian.

Pinotespan.

The  tozvne  of
Tlacamama.

[III.  497.]

A  lake  having
hard  salt
growing  under
the  water.

timber  of  those  sorts  which  I  mentioned  before  to  be
about  the  river  of  Ometepec,  which  may  easily  be  cut
and  carried  downe  unto  Tecuanapa  in  the  time  before
specified.

This  river  hath  likewise  townes  adjoyning  to  it;  the
first  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaines  is  the  town  of
Atoiaque  belonging  to  the  king,  &  to  the  heires  of
Pronetto :  their  language  is  Niciecan,  the  countrey  hot,
the  people  politique,  &  it  is  from  the  sea  15.  leagues.
It  hath  about  200.  Indians.

One  league  from  this  towne,  and  14.  from  the  sea
is  the  towne  of  Xicaian  belonging  likewise  to  the  king,
and  to  the  heires  of  Pronetto.  They  are  Niciecan  people
and  very  comely,  and  in  a  hot  countrey.  It  hath  by
account  300.  Indians.  There  are  resident  in  it  the
Vicar  and  Justice ;  it  is  from  the  river  a  league  and  a
halfe.

A  league  from  this  towne,  and  14.  from  the  sea  is
situate  the  mansion  of  Pinotespan  subject  to  Tututepec,
which  hath  with  the  manors  subject  unto  it  500.
Indians.

Two  leagues  from  the  towne,  and  one  from  Xicayan,
and  13.  from  Tecuanapa,  and  3.  from  the  river  is  the
towne  of  Tlacamama :  the  people  are  very  comely  and
politique.  It  containeth  some  100.  Indians,  and  be-
longeth  to  the  king.

More  toward  the  South  5.  leagues  from  the  river,  and
two  from  this  towne,  and  14.  from  the  sea  is  the  towne
called  Pinotespan  del  Rey:  They  are  handsome  people,
but  of  slow  speach :  this  towne  conteineth  about  100.
Indians  like  unto  the  former.  They  be  wealthie,  because
they  make  great  quantitie  of  sake ;  for  they  have  a
lake  in  which  sake  groweth  under  the  water,  (a  thing
repugnant  to  nature,  that  two  contraries  doe  grow
and  are  conserved  together)  whereout  they  take  it  in
breaking  it  with  stones  upon  the  ground  under  the
water.

It  hath  also  the  towne  of  Amusgos,  which  is  in  the

470

THE HAVEN OF TECU ANAPA

government  of  Fernando  de  Avila,  which  may  be  from
Tecuanapa  i8.  leagues.  They  speake  the  Amusgan
tongue.  The  countrey  is  hotte :  it  standeth  on  the
high  way  from  Nicieca :  it  hath  400.  Indians,  few  more
or  lesse.

These  are  all  the  townes  of  account  situate  neere  this
river.

Neere  upon  this  river  are  two  farmes,  the  one  belong-
ing to  Pedro  Bravo,  and  the  other  to  him  that  maketh
this  relation  unto  your  Excellencie,  which  may  be  from
the  sea  some  8.  or  9.  leagues  all  plaine  ground.  And  in
this  territorie  there  is  but  one  towne  called  Quesala  Quesala.
situate  upon  the  river,  and  6.  leagues  from  the  sea;
which  in  times  past  hath  beene  a  great  towne,  and  nowe
hath  but  three  Indians  onely,  and  it  is  from  the  farmes
3.  leagues.

The  mansion  house  of  Don  Mattheo  is  more  toward
the  South,  standing  in  a  large  mountainous  and  waste
countrey,  which  aboundeth  with  cattell  being  3.  leagues
from  the  river  ;  and  as  farre  from  Tecuanapa,  as  from  the
place  where  all  the  cattell  is ;  and  the  sea  that  way  is
from  it  but  one  league.

A  little  below  this  mansion  about  4.  leagues,  and  7.
leagues  from  the  sea,  is  a  garden  of  Alonso  Pedraza  which
beareth  Cacao.

And  2.  leagues  from  this  garden,  and  6.  leagues  from
the  sea  standeth  the  towne  of  Cuahintlan  belonging  to  the  Cuahintlan
king,  a  towne  of  19  housholds,  but  very  rich,  for  they  ^^^^^y-
gather  much  Cacao  and  the  best  in  that  countrey. They
speake  the  Tlapanecan  tongue. This  towne  hath  the  sea
that  way  within  halfe  a  league.

And  this  coast  from  Cuahintlan  to  Tecuanapa,  and  the
coast  which runneth to Huatulco is  a coast  of  much  Hmtako  or
pearle,  for  in  olde  time  the  Indians  gathered  much  pearle  ^^^^^J'^°  ^"

And  2.  leagues  from  Cuahmtlan  and  4.  from  Tecuanapa
is  a  garden  of  Cacao  in  the  landes  of  Francisco  Mal-
donado,  which  is  called  Cacahu-Atoyaque.

471

THE ENGLISH  VOYAGES

These  are  the  things  worthy  of  relation  from  the
head-springs  of  this  river  of  Tlacamama  unto  the  sea :
and  this  foresaid  river  entreth  into  the  river  of  Ometepec
5.  leagues  from  Tecuanapa.
The  river  of  The  river  of  Tlacolula  springeth  within  the  boundes
Tlacolula.  ^f  Chilsiztlahuaca  subject  to  Comastlahuaca  a  towne  of
Suchistlahuaca,  neere  which  are  many  mountaines.  This
river  is  navigable  little  more  then  2.  leagues  before  it
entreth  into  the  river  of  Ometepec,  where  it  is  5.  leagues
from  the  sea.

Hard  by  it  is  the  towne  of  Tlacolula  abovenamed ;  and
Azoyoque.  3.  leagues  from  it  is  the  towne  of  Azoyoque  an  olde
manour  of  Tlapa.  The  towne  of  Chilsiztlahuaca  hath
but  3.  Indians;  and  the  towne  of  Azoyoque  hath  more
then  300.  Indians.  But  because  in  this  haven  must  bee
the  building  of  ships,  the  provinces  of  Tlapa  and  Tutu-
The  provinces  tepec  may  stand  them  in  great  stead ;  the  province  of
°and^Tlata  '^^^^^^P^c  being  neighbour  to  the  river  of  Tlacamama,
and  the  province  of  Tlapa  to  the  river  of  Tlacolula.  For
they  may,  as  I  have  sayd,  carrie  the  timber  in  lighters  or
rafts  downe  the  rivers,  and  may  use  the  Indians  in  the
townes  thereabout  to  fell,  and  draw  the  same  out  of  the
cold  mountaines;  for  in  the  warm  countreyes  the  most
is  plaine  ground,  whereas  with  very  fewe  men  and  oxen
it  may  be  brought  unto  the  place  where  it  should  be
imbarqued.

There  may  come  flat  bottomes,  and  canoas  unto  the
townes  thereabout,  and  lade  themselves  with  victuals :
For  they  have  already  come  by  that  river  to  the  rode
of  Ometepec,  &  made  there  provision  at  the  mansion  of
Don  Mattheo,  and  at  the  farmes,  at  that  time  when  his
Majestie  did  people  the  plaines  which  are  betweene  these
rivers,  conteining  a  large  and  voyde  countrey  sufficient
for  the  erecting  of  20.  manours,  being  a  countrey  well
furnished  with  water  and  pasture  without  any  danger  or
perill,  according  to  the  description  hereunto  annexed.

This  small  harbour  of  Tecuanapa  being  scene  and
viewed,  seemeth  very  commodious  for  to  build  shippes

472

THE HAVEN OF TECUANAPA

in,  by  reason  of  the  great  abundance  of  mountaines  full  Tecuanapa  a
of  good  timber  for  that  purpose,  with  the  commodities  o  i^ostfit  har-
rivers,  and  with  the  service  and  victuals  from  the  townes  ^^°!f  l-1  x,„

'  I'll  1 r  bmld  ships  pr

thereabout,  which be  very  good  tor  coast  townes.  th^  $Quth  sea.

The  desire  of  him  that  made  this  relation,  hath  bene
with  zeale  to  serve  your  excellencie  ;  who  therewithall
desireth  the  Lord  God  to  give  the  successe.

END OF VOL. IX.

^9  ft  04

MAP OF THE WORLD DY PETER PLANCIUS.

^}ftWt!trf  CLAPP

3  5002  00074  2069

Hakluyl,  Rich.ird

The  principal  navigations  voyages  iraffi

G  240  .  H2  1S03  3

Hakluyt,  R±chard, 15527-
1616,

The  principal  navlgat.lonB
voyacfe-s  t.rafflque'S  &
