Daedalus; or, Science and the Future (J. B. S. Haldane, 1924)
==========================================================
The founding text of transhumanist speculation: ectogenesis predicted in 1924. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (daedalusorscienc0000hald).

.H15 

1926 


NUNC  COGNOSCO  EX  PARTE 

THOMAS  J.  BATA  LIBRARY 
TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/daedalusorsciencOOOOhald 


DAEDALUS 

OR 

SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 


DAEDALUS 

OR 

Science  and  the  Future 


A  PAPER  READ  TO  THE  HERETICS,  CAMBRIDGE 
ON  FEBRUARY  4TH,  1923 


BY 

J.  B.  S.  HALDANE 


Seventh  1  mpression 


London 

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LTD. 
Broadway  House,  68-74,  Carter  Lane,  E.C. 


V;:rA  t 


U-  i*  t  v  i,‘  k  u  1  ; 


mftt&O 0Nf, 


First  Edition : 

Second  Impression  : 
Third  Impression  : 
Fourth  Impression  : 
Fifth  Impression  : 
Sixth  I  mpression : 
Seventh  Impression  ; 


November  1923 
March  1924 
April  1924 
July  1924 
January  1925 
May  1925 
September  1926 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by 

M.  F.  Robinson  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  at  The  Library  Press  Lowestoft. 


V2? 


Q.m.-H  15 


INTRODUCTION 


I  have  slightly  expanded  certain 
parts  of  this  paper  since  reading  it. 
It  has  therefore  probably  lost  any  unity 
which  it  may  once  have  possessed. 
It  will  be  criticized  for  its  undue 
and  unpleasant  emphasis  on  certain 
topics.  This  is  necessary  if  people  are 
to  be  induced  to  think  about  them, 
and  it  is  the  whole  business  of  a 
university  teacher  to  induce  people 
to  think. 

[vii] 


22210 


- 


DAEDALUS 

OR 

SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

As  I  sit  down  to  write  these  pages  I 
can  see  before  me  two  scenes  from  my 
experience  of  the  late  war.  The  first  is 
a  glimpse  of  a  forgotten  battle  of  1915. 
It  has  a  curious  suggestion  of  a  rather 
bad  cinema  film.  Through  a  blur  of 
dust  and  fumes  there  appear,  quite 
suddenly,  great  black  and  yellow 
masses  of  smoke  which  seem  to  be 
tearing  up  the  surface  of  the  earth  and 
disintegrating  the  works  of  man  with 
an  almost  visible  hatred.  These  form 
the  chief  parts  of  the  picture,  but  some¬ 
where  in  the  middle  distance  one  can 
see  a  few  irrelevant  looking  human 

[1] 


B 


DAEDALUS 


figures,  and  soon  there  are  fewer.  It 
is  hard  to  believe  that  these  are  the 
protagonists  in  the  battle.  One  would 
rather  choose  those  huge  substantive 
oily  black  masses  which  are  so  much 
more  conspicuous,  and  suppose  that 
the  men  are  in  reality  their  servants, 
and  playing  an  inglorious,  subordinate, 
and  fatal  part  in  the  combat.  It  is 
possible,  after  all,  that  this  view  is 
correct. 

Had  I  been  privileged  to  watch  a 
battle  three  years  later,  the  general 
aspect  would  have  been  very  similar, 
but  there  would  have  been  fewer  men 
and  more  shell-bursts.  There  would 
probably,  however,  have  been  one  very 
significant  addition.  The  men  would 
have  been  running,  with  mad  terror  in 
their  eyes,  from  gigantic  steel  slugs, 
[2] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

which  were  deliberately,  relentlessly, 
and  successfully  pursuing  them. 

The  other  picture  is  of  three  Euro¬ 
peans  in  India  looking  at  a  great  new 
star  in  the  milky  way.  These  were 
apparently  all  of  the  guests  at  a  large 
dance  who  were  interested  in  such 
matters.  Amongst  those  who  were  at 
all  competent  to  form  views  as  to  the 
origin  of  this  cosmoclastic  explosion, 
the  most  popular  theory  attributed  it 
to  a  collision  between  two  stars,  or  a 
star  and  a  nebula.  There  seem,  how¬ 
ever,  to  be  at  least  two  possible  alter¬ 
natives  to  this  hypothesis.  Perhaps  it 
was  the  last  judgment  of  some  inhabited 
world,  perhaps  a  too  successful  experi¬ 
ment  in  induced  radio-activity  on  the 
part  of  some  of  the  dwellers  there.  And 
perhaps  also  these  two  hypotheses  are 
[  3  J 


DAEDALUS 

identical,  and  what  we  were  watching 
that  evening  was  the  detonation  of  a 
world  on  which  too  many  men  came 
out  to  look  at  the  stars  when  they 
should  have  been  dancing. 

These  two  scenes  suggest,  very  briefly7, 
a  part  of  the  case  against  science.  Has 
mankind  released  from  the  womb  of 
matter  a  Demogorgon  which  is  already 
beginning  to  turn  against  him,  and 
may  at  any  moment  hurl  him  into  the 
bottomless  void  ?  Or  is  Samuel  Butler’s 
even  more  horrible  vision  correct,  in 
which  man  becomes  a  mere  parasite  of 
machinery,  an  appendage  to  the  repro¬ 
ductive  system  of  huge  and  complicated 
engines  which  will  successively  usurp 
his  activities,  and  end  by  ousting  him 
from  the  mastery  of  this  planet  ?  Is 
the  machine-minder  engaged  on 
[4] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

repetition-work  the  goal  and  ideal  to 
which  humanity  is  tending  ?  Perhaps 
a  survey  of  the  present  trend  of  science 
may  throw  some  light  on  these  questions. 

But  first  we  may  consider  for  a 
moment  the  question  whether  there 
is  any  hope  of  stopping  the  progress  of 
scientific  research.  It  is  after  all  a 
very  recent  form  of  human  activity, 
and  a  sufficiently  universal  protest  of 
mankind  would  be  able  to  arrest  it 
even  now.  In  the  middle  ages  public 
opinion  made  it  so  dangerous  as  to  be 
practically  impossible,  and  I  am  in¬ 
clined  to  suspect  that  Mr.  Chesterton, 
for  example,  would  not  be  averse  to 
a  repetition  of  this  state  of  things.  The 
late  M.  Joseph  Reinach,  an  able 
and  not  wholly  illiberal  thinker, 
publicly  advocated  it. 

[5] 


DAEDALUS 


I  think,  however,  that,  so  long  as 
our  present  economic  and  national 
systems  continue,  scientific  research 
has  little  to  fear.  Capitalism,  though 
it  may  not  always  give  the  scientific 
♦  worker  a  living  wage,  will  always  pro¬ 
tect  him,  as  being  one  of  the  geese 
which  produce  golden  eggs  for  its 
table.  And  competitive  nationalism, 
even  if  war  is  wholly  or  largely  pre¬ 
vented,  will  hardly  forego  the  national 
advantages  accruing  from  scientific 
research. 

If  we  look  at  the  other  most  probable 
alternative  the  prospect  is  little  more 
hopeful.  In  this  country  the  Labour 
Party  alone  among  political  organiza¬ 
tions  includes  the  fostering  of  research 
in  its  official  programme.  Indeed,  as 
far  as  biological  research  is  concerned, 
[6] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

labour  may  prove  a  better  master  than 
capitalism,  and  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  it  would  be  equally  friendly 
to  physical  and  chemical  research 
if  these  came  to  lead  immediately 
to  shortened  hours  rather  than  to 
unemployment.  In  particular  there  is 
perhaps  reason  to  think  that  that 
form  of  sentimentalism  which  hampers 
medical  research  in  this  country  by 
legislation  would  be  less  likely  to  flourish 
in  a  robust  and  selfish  Labour  Party  of 
the  Australian  type  than  in  parties 
whose  members  enjoy  the  leisure  which 
seems  necessary  to  the  development  of 
such  emotional  luxuries. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  civiliza¬ 
tion  may  collapse  throughout  the  world 
as  it  has  done  in  parts  of  Russia,  and 
science  with  it;  but  such  an  event  would, 

[73 


DAEDALUS 

in  all  probability,  only  postpone  the 
problem  for  a  few  thousand  years.  And 
even  in  Russia  we  must  not  forget  that 
first-rate  scientific  research  is  still  being 
carried  on. 

The  possibility  has  been  suggested — I 
do  not  know  how  seriously — that  the 
progress  of  science  may  cease  through 
lack  of  new  problems  for  investigation. 
Mr.  Chesterton  in  The  Napoleon  of 
Notting  Hill ,  a  book  written  fifteen 
years  or  so  ago,  prophesied  that  han¬ 
som-cabs  would  still  be  in  existence  a 
hundred  years  hence  owing  to  a  cessa¬ 
tion  of  invention.  Within  six  years 
there  was  a  hansom- cab  in  a  museum, 
and  now  that  romantic  but  tardy 
vehicle  is  a  memory  like  the  trireme 
the  velocipede,  and  the  1907  Voisin, 
biplane.  I  do  not  suggest  that  Mr. 

[«3 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

Chesterton  be  dragged — a  heavier 
Hector — behind  the  last  hansom  cab, 
but  I  do  contend  that,  in  so  far  as 
he  claims  to  be  a  prophet  rather 
than  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the 
wilderness,  he  may  be  regarded  as 
negligible  for  the  purpose  of  our  dis¬ 
cussion.  I  shall  try  shortly  to  show  how 
far  from  complete  are  any  branches  of 
science  at  the  present  time. 

But  first  a  word  on  Mr.  H.  G.  Wells 
might  not  be  out  of  place.  The  very 
mention  of  the  future  suggests  him. 
There  are  two  points  which  I  wish  to 
make  about  Mr.  Wells.  In  the  first 
place,  considered  as  a  serious  prophet, 
as  opposed  to  a  fantastic  romancer,  he 
is  singularly  modest.  In  1902,  for 
example,  in  a  book  called  Anticipa¬ 
tions  t  he  gave  it  as  his  personal 

[9] 


DAEDALUS 


opinion  that  by  1950  there  would  be 
heavier -than -air  flying  machines  capable 
of  practical  use  in  war.  That,  said  he, 
was  his  own  view,  though  he  was  well 
aware  that  it  would  excite  considerable 
ridicule.  I  propose  in  this  paper  to 
make  no  prophecies  rasher  than  the 
above. 

The  second  and  more  important 
point  is  that  he  is  a  generation  behind 
the  time.  When  his  scientific  ideas 
were  formed,  flying  and  radiotelegraphy 
for  example,  were  scientific  problems, 
and  the  centre  of  scientific  interest  still 
lay  in  physics  and  chemistry.  Now 
these  are  commercial  problems,  and  I 
v*  believe  that  the  centre  of  scientific 
interest  lies  in  biology.  A  generation 
hence  it  may  be  elsewhere,  and  the 
views  expressed  in  this  paper  will 
[  10] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

appear  as  modest,  conservative,  and 
unimaginative  as  do  many  of  those  of 
Mr.  Wells  to-day. 

I  will  touch  only  very  briefly  on  the 
future  of  physics,  as  the  subject  is 
inevitably  technical.  At  present 
physical  theory  is  in  a  state  of  profound 
suspense.  This  is  primarily  due  to 
Einstein — the  greatest  Jew  since  Jesus. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  Einstein’s  name 
will  still  be  remembered  and  revered 
when  Lloyd  George,  Foch,  and  William 
Hohenzollern  share  with  Charlie  Chaplin 
that  ineluctable  oblivion  which  awaits 

V - — - — 

the  uncreative  mind.  I  trust  that  I 
may  be  excused  if  I  trespass  from  the 
strict  subject  of  my  theme  to  add  my 
quota  to  the  rather  numerous  mis¬ 
statements  of  Einstein’s  views  which 
have  appeared  during  the  last  few  years, 

[»] 


DAEDALUS 


Ever  since  the  time  of  Berkeley  it 
has  been  customary  for  the  majority 
of  metaphysicians  to  proclaim  the 
ideality  of  Time,  of  Space,  or  of  both. 
But  they  soon  made  it  clear  that,  in 
spite  of  this,  time  would  continue  to 
wait  for  no  man,  and  space  to  separate 
lovers.  The  only  practical  consequence 
that  they  generally  drew  was  that 
their  own  ethical  and  political  views 
were  somehow  inherent  in  the  structure 
of  the  universe.  The  experimental 
proof  or  disproof  of  such  deductions 
is  difficult,  and — if  the  late  war  may  be 
regarded  as  an  experimental  disproof 
of  certain  of  Hegel's  political  tenets 
— costly  and  unsatisfactory. 

Einstein,  so  far  from  deducing  a  new 
decalogue,  has  contented  himself  with 
deducing  the  consequences  to  space  and 

[  12  ] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

time  themselves  of  their  ideality.  These 
are  mostly  too  small  to  be  measurable, 
but  some,  such  as  the  deflection  of 
light  by  the  sun’s  gravitational  field,  are 
susceptible  of  verification,  and  have 
been  verified.  The  majority  of  scientific 
men  are  now  being  constrained  by  the 
evidence  of  these  experiments  to  adopt 
a  very  extreme  form  of  Kantian  ideal¬ 
ism.  The  Kantian  Ding-an-sich  is  an 
eternal  four -dimensional  manifold, 
which  we  perceive  as  space  and  time, 
but  what  we  regard  as  space  and  what 
as  time  is  more  or  less  fortuitous. 

It  is  perhaps  interesting  to  speculate 
on  the  practical  consequences  of 
Einstein’s  discovery.  I  do  not  doubt 
that  he  will  be  believed.  A  prophet 
who  can  give  signs  in  the  heavens  is 
always  believed.  No  one  ever  seriously 
[  *3] 


DAEDALUS 


questioned  Newton’s  theory  after  the 
return  of  Halley’s  comet.  Einstein 
has  told  us  that  space,  time,  and  matter 
are  shadows  of  the  fifth  dimension,  and 
the  heavens  have  declared  his  glory. 
In  consequence  Kantian  idealism  will 
become  the  basal  working  hypothesis 
of  the  physicist  and  finally  of  all 
educated  men,  just  as  materialism  did 
after  Newton's  day.  We  may  not  call 
ourselves  materialists,  but  we  do  inter¬ 
pret  the  activities  of  the  moon,  the 
Thames,  influenza,  and  aeroplanes  in 
terms  of  matter.  Our  ancestors  did 
not,  nor,  in  all  probability,  will  our 
descendants.  The  materialism  (whether 
conscious  or  sub-conscious  does  not 
very  much  matter)  of  the  last  few 
generations  has  led  to  various  results  of 
practical  importance,  such  as  sanita- 
[  Hi 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

tion,  Marxian  socialism  and  the  right  of 
an  accused  person  to  give  evidence 
on  his  or  her  own  behalf.  The  reign 
of  Kantian  idealism  as  the  basal  work 
ing  hypothesis,  first  of  physics,  and 
then  of  every-day  life,  will  in  all 
probability  last  for  some  centuries.  At 
the  end  of  that  time  a  similar  step  in 
advance  will  be  taken.  Einstein  showed 
that  experience  cannot  be  interpreted 
in  terms  of  space  and  time.  This  was 
a  well-known  fact,  but  so  long  as  space 
and  time  did  not  break  down  in  their 
own  special  sphere,  that  of  explaining 
the  facts  of  motion,  physicists  con¬ 
tinued  to  believe  in  them,  or  at  any 
rate,  what  was  much  more  important, 
to  think  in  terms  of  them  for  practical 
purposes. 

A  time  will  however  come  (as  I 

[i5] 


DAEDALUS 


believe)  when  physiology  will  invade 
and  destroy  mathematical  physics,  as 
the  latter  have  destroyed  geometry. 
The  basic  metaphysical  working  hypo¬ 
thesis  of  science  and  practical  life  will 
then,  I  think,  be  something  like 
Bergsonian  activism.  I  do  not  for  one 
moment  suggest  that  this  or  any  other 
metaphysical  system  has  any  claims 
whatever  to  finality. 

Meanwhile  we  are  in  for  a  few 
centuries  during  which  many  practical 
activities  will  probably  be  conducted 
on  a  basis,  not  of  materialism,  but  of 
Kantian  idealism.  How  will  this  affect 
our  manners,  morals,  and  politic  ? 
Frankly  I  do  not  know,  though  I  think 
the  effect  will  be  as  great  as  that  of 
Newton’s  work,  which  created  most  of 
the  intellectual  forces  of  the  18th 
[  16] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

century.  The  Condorcets,  Benthams 
and  Marxs  of  the  future  will  I  think  be 
as  ruthlessly  critical  of  the  metaphysics 
and  ethics  of  their  times  as  were  their 
predecessors,  but  not  quite  so  sure  of 
their  own  ;  they  will  lack  a  certain 
heaviness  of  touch  which  we  may  note 
in  Utilitarianism  and  Socialism.  They 
will  recognise  that  perhaps  in  ethics 
as  in  physics,  there  are  so  to  speak 
fourth  and  fifth  dimensions  that  show 
themselves  by  effects  which,  like  the 
perturbations  of  the  planet  Mercury,  are 
hard  to  detect  even  in  one  generation, 
but  yet  perhaps  in  the  course  of  ages 
are  quite  as  important  as  the  three- 
dimensional  phenomena. 

If  the  quantum  hypothesis  is  gener¬ 
ally  adopted,  even  more  radical  altera¬ 
tions  in  our  thinking  will  be  necessary. 

[17] 


c 


DAEDALUS 


But  I  feel  it  premature  even  to  suggest 
their  direction  in  the  present  unsatis¬ 
factory  state  of  quantum  mechanics. 
It  may  be  that,  as  Poincare  (the 
other  Poincare)  suggested,  we  shall 
be  forced  to  conceive  of  all  change  as 
occurring  in  a  series  of  clicks,  and  all 
space  as  consisting  of  discrete  points. 
However  this  may  be,  it  is  safe  to  say 
that  a  better  knowledge  of  the  pro¬ 
perties  of  radiation  will  permit  us  to 
produce  it  in  a  more  satisfactory  manner 
than  is  at  present  possible.  Almost  all 
our  present  sources  of  light  are  hot 
bodies,  95%  of  whose  radiation  is 
invisible.  To  light  a  lamp  as  a  source 
of  light  is  about  as  wasteful  of  energy 
as  to  bum  down  one’s  house  to  roast 
one’s  pork.  It  is  a  fairly  safe  prophecy 
that  in  50  years  light  will  cost  about 

[  18] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

a  fiftieth  of  its  present  price,  and  there 
will  be  no  more  night  in  our  cities. 
The  alternation  of  day  and  night  is  a 
check  on  the  freedom  of  human  activity 
which  must  go  the  way  of  other  spatial 
and  temporal  checks.  In  the  long  run 
I  think  that  all  that  applied  physics 
can  do  for  us  is  to  abolish  these  checks. 
It  enables  us  to  possess  more,  travel 
more,  and  communicate  more.  I  shall 
not  attempt  to  predict  in  detail  the 
future  developments  of  transport  and 
communication.  They  are  limited  only 
by  the  velocity  of  light.  We  are  work¬ 
ing  towards  a  condition  when  any  two 
persons  on  earth  will  be  able  to  be 
completely  present  to  one  another  in 
not  more  than  dr  of  a  second.  We 
shall  never  reach  it,  but  that  is  the  limit 
which  we  shall  approach  indefinitely. 

[  *9  3 


DAEDALUS 


Developments  in  this  direction  are 
tending  to  bring  mankind  more  and 
more  together,  to  render  life  more  and 
more  complex,  artificial,  and  rich  in 
possibilities — to  increase  indefinitely 
man’s  powers  for  good  and  evil. 

But  there  are  two  prerequisites  for 
all  progress  of  this  kind,  namely 
continuous  supplies  of  human  and 
mechanical  power.  As  industries  be¬ 
come  more  and  more  closely  interwoven, 
so  that  a  dislocation  of  any  one  will 
paralyse  a  dozen  others  (and  that  is 
the  position  towards  which  we  are 
rapidly  moving),  the  ideal  of  the 
leaders  of  industry,  under  no  matter 
what  economic  system,  wall  be  directed 
less  and  less  to  the  indefinite  increase 
of  production  in  the  intervals  between 
such  dislocations,  and  more  and  more 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

to  stable  and  regular  production,  even 
at  the  cost  of  reduction  of  profits  and 
output  while  the  industry  is  proceeding 
normally.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
capitalism  itself  may  demand  that  the 
control  of  certain  key-industries  be 
handed  over  completely  to  the  workers 
in  those  industries,  simply  in  order  to 
reduce  the  number  of  sporadic  strikes 
in  them.  And  as  industrial  progress 
continues,  an  ever  larger  number — 
perhaps  the  majority — of  industries 
will  become  key-industries.  The  solu¬ 
tion  may  be  entirely  different — we 
may  well  see  a  return  to  feudalism.  But 
the  probability  is  that  the  problem  will 
be  solved.  This  view  may  seem 
optimistic,  but  it  is  more  likely  than  the 
alternative  thesis  which  may  be  briefly 
stated  as  follows  :  “  No  human  society 
[21  ] 


DAEDALUS 


will  ever  succeed  in  producing  a  stable 
organization  in  which  the  majority  of 
the  population  is  employed  otherwise 
than  in  agriculture,  animal-rearing, 
hunting  or  fishing.”  It  took  some 
thousands  of  years  to  produce  the  stable 
agricultural  society  which  forms  the 
basis  of  European  life  and  whose  morals 
we  are  too  apt  to  regard  as  eternal 
truths.  It  should  take  a  shorter  time  to 
evolve  a  stable  industrial  society.  The 
people  that  do  so  will  inherit  the  earth. 
In  sum,  I  believe  that  the  progress  of 
science  will  ultimately  make  industrial 
injustice  as  self -destructive  as  it  is 
now  making  international  injustice. 

As  for  the  supplies  of  mechanical 
power,  it  is  axiomatic  that  the  ex¬ 
haustion  of  our  coal  and  oil -fields  is  a 
matter  of  centuries  only.  As  it  has 
[«] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

often  been  assumed  that  their  exhaus¬ 
tion  would  lead  to  the  collapse  of 
industrial  civilization,  I  may  perhaps 
be  pardoned  if  I  give  some  of  the 
reasons  which  lead  me  to  doubt  this 
proposition. 

Water-power  is  not,  I  think,  a  pro¬ 
bable  substitute,  on  account  of  its 
small  quantity,  seasonal  fluctuation, 
and  sporadic  distribution.  It  may 
perhaps,  however,  shift  the  centre  of 
industrial  gravity  to  well-watered 
mountainous  tracts  such  as  the  Hima¬ 
layan  foothills,  British  Columbia,  and 
Armenia.  Ultimately  we  shall  have  to 
tap  those  intermittent  but  inexhaus¬ 
tible  sources  of  power,  the  wind  and  the 
sunlight.  The  problem  is  simply  one 
of  storing  their  energy  in  a  form  as 
convenient  as  coal  or  petrol.  If  a 
[23  ] 


DAEDALUS 


windmill  in  one’s  back  garden  could 
produce  a  hundredweight  of  coal  daily 
(and  it  can  produce  its  equivalent  in 
energy),  our  coal-mines  would  shut 
down  to-morrow.  Even  to-morrow  a 
cheap,  fool-proof,  and  durable  storage 
battery  may  be  invented,  which  will 
enable  us  to  transform  the  intermittent 
energy  of  the  wind  into  continuous 
electric  power. 

Personally,  I  think  that  four  hundred 
years  hence  the  power  question  in 
England  may  be  solved  somewhat  as 
follows  :  The  country  will  be  covered 
with  rows  of  metallic  windmills  working 
electric  motors  which  in  their  turn 
supply  current  at  a  very  high  voltage 
to  great  electric  mains.  At  suitable 
distances,  there  will  be  great  power- 
stations,  where  during  windy  weather 
[24] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

the  surplus  power  will  be  used  for  the 
electrolytic  decomposition  of  water  into 
oxygen  and  hydrogen.  These  gases 
will  be  liquefied,  and  stored  in  vats, 
vacuum- jacketed  reservoirs,  probably 
sunk  in  the  ground.  If  these  reservoirs 
are  sufficiently  large,  the  loss  of  liquid 
due  to  leakage  inwards  of  heat  will 
not  •  be  great ;  thus  the  proportion 
evaporating  daily  from  a  reservoir  ioo 
yards  square  by  60  feet  deep  would 
not  be  of  that  lost  from  a  tank 
measuring  two  feet  each  way.  In  times 
of  calm,  the  gases  will  be  recombined 
in  explosion-motors  working  dynamos 
which  produce  electrical  energy  once 
more,  or  more  probably  in  oxidation 
cells.  Liquid  hydrogen  is  weight  for 
weight  the  most  efficient  known  method 
of  storing  energy,  as  it  gives  about 

05] 


DAEDALUS 


three  times  as  much  heat  per  pound  as 
petrol.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  very 
light,  and  bulk  for  bulk  has  only  one- 
third  of  the  efficiency  of  petrol.  This 
will  not,  however,  detract  from  its  use 
in  aeroplanes,  where  weight  is  more 
important  than  bulk.  These  huge 
reservoirs  of  liquefied  gases  will  enable 
wind-energy  to  be  stored,  so  that  it 
can  be  expended  for  industry,  trans¬ 
portation,  heating,  and  lighting,  as 
desired.  The  initial  costs  will  be  very 
considerable,  but  the  running  expenses 
less  than  those  of  our  present  system. 
Among  its  more  obvious  advantages 
will  be  the  fact  that  energy  will  be  as 
cheap  in  one  part  of  the  country  as 
another,  so  that  industry  will  be  greatly 
decentralized  ;  and  that  no  smoke  or 
ash  will  be  produced. 

[26] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

It  is  on  some  such  lines  as  these, 
I  think,  that  the  problem  will  be  solved. 
It  is  essentially  a  practical  problem, 
and  the  exhaustion  of  our  coal-fields 
will  furnish  the  necessary  stimulus  for 
its  solution.  Even  now  perhaps  Italy 
might  achieve  economic  independence 
by  the  expenditure  of  a  few  million 
pounds  upon  research  on  the  lines 
indicated.  I  may  add  in  parenthesis 
that,  on  thermodynamical  grounds 
which  I  can  hardly  summarize  shortly, 
I  do  not  much  believe  in  the  commer¬ 
cial  possibility  of  induced  radio -activity . 

Before  I  turn  to  the  principal  part  of 
nty  subject  I  should  like  to  consider 
very  briefly  the  influence  on  art  and 
literature  of  our  gradual  conquest  of 
space  and  time.  I  think  that  the 
blame  for  the  decay  of  certain  arts 

[27  3 


DAEDALUS 


rests  primarily  on  the  defective  edu¬ 
cation  of  the  artists.  An  artist  must 
understand  his  subject-matter.  At 
»v-  present  not  a  single  competent  poet 
and  very  few  painters  and  etchers 
outside  the  Glasgow  School  understand 
industrial  life,  and  I  believe  that  there 
is  only  one  architect  of  any  real  origin¬ 
ality  who  understands  the  possibilities 
of  ferro -concrete.  I  do  not  know  his 
name,  but  he  produced  in  Soissons 
before  the  war  a  market-place  with 
the  dignity  and  daring  of  an  ancient 
Egyptian  temple.  If  I  knew  that  he 
had  been  entrusted  with  the  rebuilding 
of  Soissons,  I  could  not  regret  its 
destruction. 

Now  if  we  want  poets  to  interpret 
”*  physical  science  as  Milton  and  Shelley 
did  (Shelley  and  Keats  were  the  last 

[i8] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

English  poets  who  were  at  all  up-to- 
date  in  their  chemical  knowledge),  we 
must  see  that  our  possible  poets  are 
instructed,  as  their  masters  were,  in 
science  and  economics.  I  am  absolutely 
convinced  that  science  is  vastly  more 
stimulating  to  the  imagination  than  are 
the  classics,  but  the  products  of  this 
stimulus  do  not  normally  see  the  light 
because  scientific  men  as  a  class  are 
devoid  of  any  perception  of  literary 
form.  When  they  can  express  them¬ 
selves  we  get  a  Butler  or  a  Norman 
Douglas.  Not  until  our  poets  are  once 
more  drawn  from  the  educated  classes 
(I  speak  as  a  scientist),  will  they  appeal 
to  the  average  man  by  showing  him  the 
beauty  in  his  own  life  as  Homer  and 
Virgil  appealed  to  the  street  urchins 
who  scrawled  their  verses  on  the  walls 
of  Pompeii. 


DAEDALUS 

And  if  we  must  educate  our  poets 
and  artists  in  science,  we  must  educate 
our  masters,  labour  and  capital,  in  art. 
Personally  I  believe  that  we  may  have 
good  hopes  of  both.  The  capitalist’s 
idea  of  art  in  industry  at  present  tends 
to  limit  itself  to  painting  green  and 
white  stripes  on  the  front  of  his  factories 
in  certain  cases.  This  is  a  primitive 
type  of  decoration,  but  it  has,  I  think, 
the  root  of  the  matter  in  it.  Before  long 
someone  may  discover  that  frescoes 
inside  a  factory  increase  the  average 
efficiency  of  the  workers  by  1.03%  and 
art  will  become  a  commercial  proposi¬ 
tion  once  more.  Even  now  it  is  being 
discovered  that  artistic  advertising 
often  pays.  Similarly  I  do  not  doubt 
that  labour  will  come  to  find  that  it 
cannot  live  by  bread  (or  shall  we  sav 
[30] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

bread- and  beep?)  alone.  But  it  can 
hardly  be  expected  to  make  this 
discovery  until  it  is  assured  of  its 
supply  of  bread  and  beer. 

Applied  chemistry  has  introduced 
into  human  life  no  radical  novelty  of 
the  importance  of  the  heat-engine  or  the 
telegraph.  It  has  vastly  increased  the 
production  of  various  types  of  sub¬ 
stance,  the  most  important  being  metals. 
But  there  were  explosives ,  dyes ,  and  drugs 
before  chemistry  was  a  science,  and  its 
progress  along  present  lines  will  mainly 
alter  life  in  a  quantitative  manner. 
Perhaps  the  biggest  problems  before  it 
in  metallurgy  are  the  utilization  of 
low-grade  iron  ores,  and  the  production 
of  aluminium  from  clay,  which  contains 
up  to  24%  of  that  metal.  I  do  not  think 
that  even  when  this  is  accomplished 
[  31  ] 


DAEDALUS 

aluminium  will  oust  iron  and  steel  as 
they  ousted  bronze  and  flint,  but  it 
and  its  alloys  will  certainly  take  the 
second,  and  possibly  the  first  place  as 
industrial  metals.  There  is  just  a  hope, 
though  I  fear  little  more,  that  a  large- 
scale  production  of  perfume  may  form 
the  basis  of  a  re-education  of  our  rather 
rudimentary  sense  of  smell,  but  the 
most  interesting  possibilities  of  chemical 
invention  are  very  clearly  in  biological 
chemistry,  and  for  the  following  reasons. 

Desirable  substances  fall  on  the 
whole  into  two  classes.  The  first  are 
desirable  on  account  of  their  physical 
or  chemical  properties ,  for  example  iron, 
wood,  or  glass,  which  we  use  as  a  part 
of  systems  such  as  fires,  houses,  or 
razors,  which  procure  us  certain  benefits. 
The  second  are  desirable  on  account 

[  321 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

of  their  physiological  properties.  Such 
substances  include  foods,  drinks, 
tobacco,  and  drugs.  Colours  and 
scents  occupy  an  intermediate  position. 
The  value  of  this  second  class  of 
substances  rests  on  a  quite  special 
relationship  to  the  human  organism 
which  depends  in  the  most  intimate 
way  on  the  constitution  of  the  latter, 
and  has  not  in  general  been  at  all  fully 
explained  in  terms  of  physics  and 
chemistry.  For  example,  fires  can  be 
made  of  coal  or  peat  instead  of  wood, 
but  no  other  chemical  substance  has 
the  same  effect  as  water  or  alcohol. 
So,  unless  a  chemical  substance  has  new 
physiological  properties,  its  production 
will  serve  merely  to  improve  or  make 
possible  some  appliance  whose  use  lies 
within  the  sphere  of  applied  physics. 

[  33  ]  d 


DAEDALUS 


Within  historical  time  two  and  only 
two  substances  of  the  second  class  have 
come  into  universal  use  in  Europe, 
namely  caffeine  and  nicotine,  which 
were  introduced  into  this  country  in 
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries. 
There  are  others  of  immense  import¬ 
ance,  such  as  chloroform  and  quinine, 
but  their  use  is  not  universal.  But 
coffee,  tea,  and  tobacco,  with  alcohol, 
are  as  much  a  part  of  normal  life  as 
food  and  water.  There  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  list  of  such  substances 
is  exhausted.  During  the  war  Embden* , 
the  professor  of  physiology  in  Frank¬ 
furt  University,  discovered  that  a  dose 
of  about  7  grams  of  acid  sodium 
phosphate  increases  a  man’s  capacity 

*  Embden,  Grafe,  and  Schmitz.  Zeitschrift  fur 
physiologische  Chemie,  Vol.  113,  p.  67  1921 

[34] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 


for  prolonged  muscular  work  by 
about  20%,  and  probably  aids  in  pro¬ 
longed  mental  work.  It  can  be  taken 
over  very  lengthy  periods.  A  group 
of  coal-miners  took  it  for  nine  months 
on  end  with  very  great  effect  on  their 
output.  It  has  no  after-effects  like 
those  of  alcohol,  and  one  cannot  take 
a  serious  overdose,  as  it  merely  acts  as 
a  purgative.  (They  gave  certain  Stoss- 
truppen  too  much !)  Thousands  of 
people  in  Germany  take  it  habitually. 
It  is  possible  that  it  may  become  as 
normal  a  beverage  as  coffee  or  tea. 
It  costs  1/9  per  pound,  or  Id.  per  dose. 

The  vast  majority  of  chemical  sub¬ 
stances  with  physiological  properties 
are  unsuited  for  daily  use  like  castor 
oil,  or  dangerous  like  morphine  ;  prob¬ 
ably  none  are  without  bad  effects  in 

[35] 


DAEDALUS 


certain  cases.  Those  which  are  suscep¬ 
tible  of  daily  use  are  of  the  utmost 
social  importance.  Tobacco  has  slight 
but  definite  effects  on  the  character. 
Coffee-houses  in  London  in  the  seven¬ 
teenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  and 
cafes  in  modern  Europe  were  and  are 
civilizing  influences  of  incalculable  value. 
But  these  substances  are  profoundly 
obnoxious  to  a  certain  type  of  mind. 
It  would  perhaps  be  fantastic  to  suggest 
that  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  owed  his  death 
in  part  to  his  sovereign’s  objection  to 
tobacco.  But  if  he  is  not  its  proto - 
martyr  it  is  at  least  probable  that  more 
men  have  died  for  tobacco-smoking 
at  the  hands  of  Sikhs,  Senussis,  and 
Wahabis,  whose  religions  forbid  this 
practice,  than  died  under  the  Roman 
empire  for  professing  Christianity. 

[36] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

Should  it  ever  be  generally  realised  that 
temperance  is  a  mean,  we  may  expect 
that  mankind  will  ultimately  have  at 
its  disposal  a  vast  array  of  substances 
like  wine,  coffee,  and  tobacco,  whose 
intelligent  use  can  add  to  the  amenity 
of  life  and  promote  the  expression  of 
man’s  higher  faculties. 

But  before  that  day  comes  chemistry 
will  be  applied  to  the  production  of  a 
still  more  important  group  of  physiologi¬ 
cally  active  substances,  namely  foods. 
The  facts  about  food  are  rather  curious. 
Everyone  knows  that  food  is  ultimately 
produced  by  plants,  though  we  may  get 
it  at  second  or  third  hand  if  we  eat 
animals  or  their  products.  But  the 
average  plant  turns  most  of  its  sugar 
not  into  starch  which  is  digestible,  but 
into  cellulose  which  is  not,  but  forms 
C37l 


DAEDALUS 

its  woody  skeleton.  The  hoofed  animals 
have  dealt  with  this  problem  in  their 
own  way,  by  turning  their  bellies  into 
vast  hives  of  bacteria  that  attack 
cellulose,  and  on  whose  by-products 
they  live.  We  have  got  to  do  the  same, 
but  outside  our  bodies.  It  may  be  done 
on  chemical  lines.  Irvine  has  obtained 
a  95%  yield  of  sugar  from  cellulose, 
but  at  a  prohibitive  cost.  Or  we  may 
use  micro-organisms,  but  in  any  case 
within  the  next  century  sugar  and 
starch  will  be  about  as  cheap  as  saw¬ 
dust.  Many  of  our  foodstuffs,  including 
the  proteins,  we  shall  probably  build 
up  from  simpler  sources,  such  as  coal 
and  atmospheric  nitrogen.  I  should 
be  inclined  to  allow  120  years,  but  not 
much  more,  before  a  completely  satis¬ 
factory  diet  can  be  produced  in  this 
way  on  a  commercial  scale. 

1 38  ] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 


This  will  mean  that  agriculture  will 
become  a  luxury,  and  that  mankind 
will  be  completely  urbanized.  Person¬ 
ally  I  do  not  regret  the  probable  dis¬ 
appearance  of  the  agricultural  labourer 
in  favour  of  the  factory  worker,  who 
seems  to  me  a  higher  type  of  person 
from  most  points  of  view.  Human 
progress  in  historical  time  has  been  the 
progress  of  cities  dragging  a  reluctant 
countryside  in  their  wake.  Synthetic 
food  will  substitute  the  flower-garden 
and  the  factory  for  the  dunghill  and  the 
slaughterhouse,  and  make  the  city  at 
last  self-sufficient. 

There’s  many  a  strong  farmer  whose 
heart  would  break  in  two 
If  he  coidd  see  the  townland  that  we  are 
riding  to. 

Boughs  have  their  fruit  and  blossom  at  all 
times  of  the  year, 

Rivers  are  running  over  with  red  beer  and 
brown  beer, 


[39] 


DAEDALUS 


An  old  man  plays  the  bagpipes  in  a  golden 
and  silver  wood, 

Queens,  their  eyes  blue  like  the  ice,  are 
dancing  in  a  crowd. 

I  should  have  liked  had  time  allowed 
to  have  added  my  quota  to  the  specula¬ 
tions  which  have  been  made  with 
regard  to  inter -planetry  communication. 
Whether  this  is  possible  I  can  form  no 
conjecture  ;  that  it  will  be  attempted 
I  have  no  doubt  whatever. 

With  regard  to  the  application  of 
biology  to  human  life,  the  average 
prophet  appears  to  content  himself 
with  considerable  if  rather  rudimentary 
progress  in  medicine  and  surgery,  some 
improvements  in  domestic  plants  and 
animals,  and  possibly  the  introduction 
of  a  little  eugenics.  The  eugenic  official, 
a  compound,  it  would  appear,  of  the 
[40] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

policeman,  the  priest,  and  the  procurer, 
is  to  hale  us  off  at  suitable  intervals  to 
the  local  temple  of  Venus  Genetrix 
with  a  partner  chosen,  one  gathers,  by 
something  of  the  nature  of  a  glorified 
medical  board.  To  this  prophecy  I 
should  reply  that  it  proceeds  from  a 
type  of  mind  as  lacking  in  originality 
as  in  knowledge  of  human  nature. 
Marriage  “  by  numbers  ”,  so  to  speak, 
was  a  comparatively  novel  idea  when 
proposed  by  Plato  2,300  years  ago, 
but  it  has  already  actually  been 
practised  in  various  places,  notably 
among  the  subjects  of  the  Jesuits  in 
Paraguay.  It  is  moreover  likely,  as 
we  shall  see,  that  the  ends  proposed  by 
the  eugenist  will  be  attained  in  a  very 
different  manner. 

But  before  we  proceed  to  prophecy 

[41  ] 


DAEDALUS 


I  should  like  to  turn  back  to  the  past 
and  examine  very  briefly  the  half- 
dozen  or  so  important  biological  in¬ 
ventions  which  have  already  been  made. 
By  a  biological  invention  I  mean  the 
establishment  of  a  new  relationship 
between  man  and  other  animals  or 
plants,  or  between  different  human 
beings,  provided  that  such  relationship 
is  one  which  comes  primarily  under  the 
domain  of  biology  rather  than  physics, 
psychology,  or  ethics.  Of  the  biological 
inventions  of  the  past,  four  were  made 
before  the  dawn  of  history.  I  refer  to 
the  domestication  of  animals,  the 
domestication  of  plants,  the  domestica¬ 
tion  of  fungi  for  the  production  of 
alcohol,  and  to  a  fourth  invention, 
which  I  believe  was  of  more  ultimate 
and  far-reaching  importance  than  any 
[42] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

of  these,  since  it  altered  the  path  of 
sexual  selection,  focussed  the  attention 
of  man  as  a  lover  upon  woman’s  face 
and  breasts,  and  changed  our  idea  of 
beauty  from  the  steatapygous  Hotten¬ 
tot  to  the  modem  European,  from  the 
Venus  of  Brassempouy  to  the  Venus  of 
Milo.  There  are  certain  races  which 
have  not  yet  made  this  last  invention. 
And  in  our  own  day  two  more  have 
been  made,  namely  bactericide  and 
the  artificial  control  of  conception. 

The  first  point  that  we  may  notice 
about  these  inventions  is  that  they  have 
all  had  a  profound  emotional  and 
ethical  effect.  Of  the  four  earlier  there 
is  not  one  which  has  not  formed  the 
basis  of  a  religion.  I  do  not  know 
what  strange  god  will  have  the  hardi 
hood  to  adopt  Charles  Bradlaugh  and 
[43] 


DAEDALUS 


Annie  Besant  in  the  place  of  Triptole- 
mus  and  Noah,  but  one  may  remark 
that  it  is  impossible  to  keep  religion 
out  of  any  discussion  of  the  practices 
which  they  popularized. 

The  second  point  is  perhaps  harder 
to  express.  The  chemical  or  physical 
inventor  is  always  a  Prometheus. 
There  is  no  great  invention,  from  fire 
'  to  flying,  which  has  not  been  hailed  as 
an  insult  to  some  god.  But  if  every 
physical  and  chemical  invention  is  a 
v  blasphemy,  every  biological  invention 
is  a  perversion.  There  is  hardly  one 
which,  on  first  being  brought  to  the 
notice  of  an  observer  from  any  nation 
which  had  not  previously  heard  of 
their  existence,  would  not  appear  to 
him  as  indecent  and  unnatural. 

Consider  so  simple  and  time-honoured 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

a  process  as  the  milking  of  a  cow.  The 
milk,  which  should  have  been  an 
intimate  and  almost  sacramental  bond 
between  mother  and  child,  is  elicited 
by  the  deft  fingers  of  a  milk¬ 
maid,  and  drunk,  cooked,  or  even 
allowed  to  rot  into  cheese.  We  have 
only  to  imagine  ourselves  as  drinking 
any  of  its  other  secretions,  in  order 
to  realise  the  radical  indecency  of  our 
relation  to  the  cow.* 

No  less  disgusting  a  priori  is  the 


*  The  Hindus  have  recognized  the  special  and 
physiological  relation  of  man  to  the  cow  by  making 
the  latter  animal  holy.  A  good  Hindu  would  no 
more  kill  a  cow  than  his  foster-mother.  But  the 
holiness  of  the  cow  has  unfortunately  extended  to 
all  its  products,  and  the  extensive  use  of  cowdung 
in  Indian  religious  ceremonies  is  disgusting  to  the 
average  European.  The  latter,  however,  is  insensi¬ 
tive  to  the  equally  loathsome  injunctions  of  the 
Catholic  Church  with  regard  to  human  marriage. 
It  would  perhaps  be  better  if  both  marriage  and 
milking  could  be  secularized. 

[45] 


DAEDALUS 


process  of  corruption  which  yields  our 
wine  and  beer.  But  in  actual  fact  the 
processes  of  milking  and  of  the  making 
and  drinking  beer  appear  to  us  pro¬ 
foundly  natural ;  they  have  even 
tended  to  develop  a  ritual  of  their 
own  whose  infraction  nowadays  has 
a  certain  air  of  impropriety.  There  is 
something  slightly  disgusting  in  the 
idea  of  milking  a  cow  electrically  or 
drinking  beer  out  of  tea-cups.  And 
all  this  of  course  applies  much  more 
strongly  to  the  sexual  act. 

I  fancy  that  the  sentimental  interest 
attaching  to  Prometheus  has  unduly 
distracted  our  attention  from  the  far 
more  interesting  figure  of  Daedalus. 
It  is  with  infinite  relief  that  amidst  a 
welter  of  heroes  armed  with  gorgon’s 
heads  or  protected  by  Stygian  baptisms 

us] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

the  student  of  Greek  mythology  comes 
across  the  first  modern  man.  Beginning 
as  a  realistic  sculptor  (he  was  the  first 
to  produce  statues  whose  feet  were 
separated)  it  was  natural  that  he  should 
proceed  to  the  construction  of  an 
image  of  Aphrodite  whose  limbs  were 
activated  by  quicksilver.  After  this  his 
interest  inevitably  turned  to  biological 
problems,  and  it  is  safe  to  say  that 
posterity  has  never  equalled  his  only 
recorded  success  in  experimental 
genetics.  Had  the  housing  and  feeding 
of  the  Minotaur  been  less  expensive,  it 
is  probable  that  Daedalus  would  have 
anticipated  Mendel.  But  Minos  held 
that  a  labyrinth  and  an  annual  provi¬ 
sion  of  50  youths  and  50  virgins  were 
excessive  as  an  endowment  for  re¬ 
search,  and  in  order  to  escape  from  his 

[47  3 


DAEDALUS 


ruthless  economies,  Daedalus  was  forced 
to  invent  the  art  of  flying.  Minos 
pursued  him  to  Sicily  and  was  slain 
there.  Save  for  his  valuable  invention 
of  glue,  little  else  is  known  of  Daedalus. 
But  it  is  most  significant  that,  although 
he  was  responsible  for  the  death  of 
Zeus’  son  Minos,  he  was  neither  smitten 
by  a  thunderbolt,  chained  to  a  rock, 
nor  pursued  by  furies.  Still  less  did 
any  of  the  rather  numerous  visitors 
to  Hades  discover  him  either  in  Elysium 
or  in  Tartarus.  We  can  hardly  imagine 
him  as  a  member  of  the  throng  of 
shades  who  besieged  Charon’s  ferry 
like  sheep  at  a  gap.  He  was  the  first 
to  demonstrate  that  the  scientific 
worker  is  not  concerned  with  gods. 

The  unconscious  mind  of  the  early 
Greeks,  who  focussed  in  this  amazing 

[48] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

figure  the  dim  traditions  of  Minoan 
science,  was  presumably  aware  of  this 
fact.  The  most  monstrous  and  un¬ 
natural  action  in  all  human  legend  was 
unpunished  in  this  world  or  the  next. 
Even  the  death  of  Icarus  must  have 
weighed  lightly  with  a  man  who  had 
already  been  banished  from  Athens 
for  the  murder  of  his  nephew.  But,  if 
he  escaped  the  vengeance  of  the  gods, 
he  has  been  exposed  to  the  universal 
and  age-long  reprobation  of  a  humanity 
to  whom  biological  inventions  are 
abhorrent,  with  one  very  significant 
exception.  Socrates  was  proud  to 
claim  him  as  an  ancestor. 

The  biological  invention  then  tends 
to  begin  as  a  perversion  and  end  as  a 
ritual  supported  by  unquestioned  beliefs 
and  prejudices.  Even  now  surgical 
[49  ]  e 


DAEDALUS 


cleanliness  is  developing  its  rites  and 
its  dogmas,  which,  it  may  be  remarked, 
are  accepted  most  religiously  by  women. 
With  the  above  facts  in  your  minds  I 
would  ask  you  to  excuse  what  at  first 
sight  might  appear  improbable  or 
indecent  in  any  speculations  which 
appear  below,  and  to  dismiss  from  your 
minds  the  belief  that  biology  will  consist 
merely  in  physical  and  chemical  dis¬ 
coveries  as  applied  to  men,  animals,  and 
plants. 

I  say  advisedly  “  will  consist,”  for 
we  are  at  present  almost  completely 
*  ignorant  of  biology,  a  fact  which  often 
escapes  the  notice  of  biologists,  and 
renders  them  too  presumptuous  in 
their  estimates  of  the  present  position 
of  their  science,  too  modest  in  their 
claims  for  its  future.  If,  for  example, 
[50  ] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

we  take  a  typical  case  of  applied  biology 
such  as  the  detection  and  destruction 
of  the  cholera  bacillus,  we  find  a  great 
deal  of  science  involved,  but  the  only 
purely  biological  principle  is  the  very 
important  but  not  very  profound  one 
that  some  bacteria  kill  some  men. 
The  really  scientific  parts  of  the  process 
are  the  optical  and  chemical  methods 
involved  in  the  magnification,  staining, 
and  killing  of  the  bacilli.  When  on 
the  other  hand  we  come  to  immuniza¬ 
tion  to  typhoid,  we  find  certain  purely 
biological  principles  involved  which  are 
neither  simple  nor  at  all  completely 
understood. 

Actually  biological  theory  consists  of 
some  ancient  but  not  very  easily  stated 
truths  about  organisms  in  general, 
due  largely  to  Aristotle,  Hippocrates, 
[SO 


DAEDALUS 


and  Harvey,  a  few  great  principles 
such  as  those  formulated  by  Darwin, 
Mayer,  Claude  Bernard,  and  Mendel, 
and  a  vast  mass  of  facts  about  individ¬ 
ual  organisms  and  their  parts  which  are 
still  awaiting  adequate  generalization. 

Darwin’s  results  are  beginning  to  be 
appreciated,  with  alarming  effects  on 
certain  types  of  religion ;  those  of 
Weismann  and  Mendel  will  be  digested 
in  the  course  of  the  present  century, 
and  are  going  to  affect  political  and 
philosophical  theories  almost  equally 
profoundly.  I  need  hardly  say  that 
these  latter  results  deal  with  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  reproduction  and  heredity.  We 
may  expect,  moreover,  as  time  goes  on, 
that  a  series  of  shocks  of  the  type  of 
Darwinism  will  be  given  to  established 
opinions  on  all  sorts  of  subjects.  One 
[  52] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

cannot  suggest  in  detail  what  these 
shocks  will  be,  but  since  the  opinions 
on  which  they  will  impinge  are  deep- 
seated  and  irrational,  they  will  come 
upon  us  and  our  descendants  with  the 
same  air  of  presumption  and  indecency 
with  which  the  view  that  we  are 
descended  from  monkeys  came  to  our 
grandfathers.  But  owing  to  man’s 
fortunate  capacity  for  thinking  in 
watertight  (or  rather  idea-tight)  com¬ 
partments,  they  will  probably  not  have 
immediate  and  disruptive  effects  upon 
society  any  more  than  Darwinism 
had. 

Far  more  profound  will  be  the  effect 
of  the  practical  applications  of  biology. 
I  believe  that  the  progress  of  medicine 
has  had  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  deep 
an  effect  on  society  in  Western  Europe 
[53  3 


DAEDALUS 


as  the  industrial  revolution.  Apart 
from  the  important  social  consequences 
which  have  flowed  from  the  partial 
substitution  of  the  doctor  for  the 
priest,  its  net  result  has  been  that, 
whereas  four  hundred  years  ago  most 
people  died  in  childhood,  they  now  live 
on  an  average  (apart  from  the  late 
War)  until  forty-five.  Bad  as  our 
urban  conditions  often  are,  there  is 
not  a  slum  in  the  country  which  has 
a  third  of  the  infantile  death-rate  of 
the  royal  family  in  the  middle  ages. 
Largely  as  a  result  of  this,  religion  has 
come  to  lay  less  and  less  stress  on  a 
good  death,  and  more  and  more  on  a 
good  life,  and  its  whole  outlook  has 
gradually  changed  in  consequence. 
Death  has  receded  so  far  into  the  back¬ 
ground  of  our  normal  thoughts  that 
[54] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

when  we  came  into  somewhat  close 
contact  with  it  during  the  War  most  of 
us  failed  completely  to  take  it 
seriously. 

Similarly  institutions  which  were 
based  on  short  lives  have  almost  wholly 
collapsed.  For  example,  the  English 
land-system  postulated  that  the  land- 
owner  should  die  aged  about  forty, 
and  be  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son, 
aged  about  twenty.  The  son  had  spent 
most  of  his  life  on  the  estate,  and  had 
few  interests  outside  it.  He  managed  it 
at  least  as  well  as  anyone  else  could 
have  done.  Nowadays  the  father 
dodders  on  till  about  eighty,  and  is 
generally  incompetent  for  ten  years 
before  his  death.  His  son  succeeds 
him  at  the  age  of  fifty  or  so,  by  which 
time  he  may  be  a  fairly  competent 

[55] 


DAEDALUS 


colonel  or  stockbroker,  but  cannot  hope 
to  learn  the  art  of  managing  an  estate. 
In  consequence,  he  either  hands  it  over 
to  an  agent  who  is  deprived  of  initiative 
and  often  corrupt,  or  runs  it  un¬ 
scientifically,  gets  a  low  return,  and 
ascribes  to  Bolshevism  what  he  should 
really  lay  at  the  door  of  vaccination. 

But  to  return,  if  I  may  use  the 
expression,  to  the  future,  I  am  going 
to  suggest  a  few  obvious  developments 
which  seem  probable  in  the  present 
state  of  biological  science,  without 
assuming  any  great  new  generalizations 
of  the  type  of  Darwinism.  I  have  the 
very  best  precedents  for  introducing  a 
myth  at  this  point,  so  perhaps  I  may 
be  excused  if  I  reproduce  some  extracts 
from  any  essay  on  the  influence  of 
biology  on  history  during  the  20th 
[56] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

century  which  will  (it  is  hoped)  be  read 
by  a  rather  stupid  undergraduate 
member  of  this  university  to  his  super¬ 
visor  during  his  first  term  150  years 
hence. 

“  As  early  as  the  first  decade  of  the 
twentieth  century  we  find  a  conscious 
attempt  at  the  application  of  biology 
to  politics  in  the  so-called  eugenic 
movement.  A  number  of  earnest 
persons,  having  discovered  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  biology,  attempted  to  apply 
it  in  its  then  very  crude  condition  to 
the  production  of  a  race  of  super-men, 
and  in  certain  countries  managed  to 
carry  a  good  deal  of  legislation.  They 
appear  to  have  managed  to  prevent 
the  transmission  of  a  good  deal  of 
syphilis,  insanity,  and  the  like,  and 
they  certainly  succeeded  in  producing 
[57] 


DAEDALUS 


the  most  violent  opposition  and  hatred 
amongst  the  classes  whom  they  some¬ 
what  gratuitously  regarded  as  un¬ 
desirable  parents.  (There  was  even  a 
'  rebellion  in  Nebraska.)  However,  they 
undoubtedly  prepared  public  opinion 
for  what  was  to  come,  and  so  far 
served  a  useful  purpose.  Far  more 
important  was  the  progress  in  medicine 
which  practically  abolished  infectious 
diseases  in  those  countries  which  were 
prepared  to  tolerate  the  requisite 
amount  of  state  interference  in  private 
life,  and  finally,  after  the  league’s 
ordinance  of  1958,  all  over  the  world  ; 
though,  owing  to  Hindu  opposition, 
parts  of  India  were  still  quite  unhealthy 
up  to  1980  or  so. 

But  from  a  wider  point  of  view  the 
most  important  biological  work  in  the 
[58] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

first  third  of  the  century  was  in  ex¬ 
perimental  zoology  and  botany.  When 
we  consider  that  in  1912  Morgan  had 
located  several  Mendelian  factors  in 
the  nucleus  of  Drosophila,  and  modified 
its  sex-ratio,  while  Marmorek  had 
taught  a  harmless  bacillus  to  kill  guinea- 
pigs,  and  finally  in  1913  Brachet  had 
grown  rabbit  embryos  in  serum  for 
some  days,  it  is  remarkable  how  little 
the  scientific  workers  of  that  time,  and 
a  fortiori  the  general  public,  seem  to 
have  foreseen  the  practical  bearing  of 
such  results. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  not  until 
1940  that  Selkovski  invented  the  purple 
alga  Porphyrococcus  fixator  which  was 
to  have  so  great  an  effect  on  the 
world’s  history.  In  the  50  years  before 
this  date  the  world’s  average  wheat 
[59] 


DAEDALUS 


yield  per  hectare  had  been  approxi¬ 
mately  doubled,  partly  by  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  various  chemical  manures,  but 
most  of  all  by  the  results  of  systematic 
crossing  work  with  different  races ; 
there  was  however  little  prospect  of 
further  advance  on  any  of  these  lines. 
Porphyrococcus  is  an  enormously 
efficient  nitrogen -fixer  and  will  grow  in 
almost  any  climate  where  there  are 
water  and  traces  of  potash  and  phos¬ 
phates  in  the  soil,  obtaining  its  nitrogen 
from  the  air.  It  has  about  the  effect 
in  four  days  that  a  crop  of  vetches  would 
have  had  in  a  year.  It  could  not,  of 
course, have  been  produced  in  the  course 
of  nature,  as  its  immediate  ancestors 
would  grow  only  in  artificial  media 
and  could  not  have  survived  outside  a 
laboratory.  Wherever  nitrogen  was 
[  60  ] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

the  principal  limiting  factor  to  plant - 
growth  it  doubled  the  yield  of  wheat, 
and  quadrupled  the  value  of  grass-land 
for  grazing  purposes.  The  enormous 
fall  in  food  prices  and  the  ruin  of 
purely  agricultural  states  was  of  course 
one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  disastrous 
events  of  1943  and  1944.  The  food 
glut  was  also  greatly  accentuated  when 
in  1942  the  Q  strain  of  Porphyrococcus 
escaped  into  the  sea  and  multiplied 
with  enormous  rapidity.  Indeed,  for 
two  months  the  surface  of  the  tropical 
Atlantic  set  to  a  jelly,  with  disastrous 
results  to  the  weather  of  Europe. 
When  certain  of  the  plankton  organisms 
developed  ferments  capable  of  digesting 
it,  the  increase  of  the  fish  population  of 
the  seas  was  so  great  as  to  make  fish 
the  universal  food  that  it  is  now,  and 
[61  ] 


DAEDALUS 


to  render  even  England  self-supporting 
in  respect  of  food.  So  great  was  the 
prosperity  in  England  that  in  that 
year  the  coal-miner’s  union  entered  its 
first  horse  for  the  Derby  (a  horse-race 
which  still  took  place  annually  at  that 
time). 

It  was  of  course  as  the  result  of  its 
invasion  by  Porphyrococcus  that  the 
sea  assumed  the  intense  purple  colour 
which  seems  so  natural  to  us,  but  which 
so  distressed  the  more  aesthetically 
minded  of  our  great  grand-parents  who 
witnessed  the  change.  It  is  certainly 
curious  to  us  to  read  of  the  sea  as  having 
been  green  or  blue.  I  need  not  detail 
the  work  of  Ferguson  and  Rahmatullah 
who  in  1957  produced  the  lichen  which 
has  bound  the  drifting  sand  of  the 
world’s  deserts  (for  it  was  merely  a 
[62] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

continuation  of  that  of  Selkovski),  nor 
yet  the  story  of  how  the  agricultural 
countries  dealt  with  their  unemploy¬ 
ment  by  huge  socialistic  wind-power 
schemes. 

It  was  in  1951  that  Dupont  and 
Schwarz  produced  the  first  ectogenetic 
child.  As  early  as  1901  Heape  had 
transferred  embryo  rabbits  from  one 
female  to  another,  in  1925  Haldane  had 
grown  embryonic  rats  in  serum  for  ten 
days,  but  had  failed  to  carry  the  process 
to  its  conclusion,  and  it  was  not  till 
1940  that  Clark  succeeded  with  the  pig, 
using  Kehlmann’s  solution  as  medium. 
Dupont  and  Schwarz  obtained  a  fresh 
ovary  from  a  woman  who  was  the 
victim  of  an  aeroplane  accident,  and 
kept  it  living  in  their  medium  for  five 
years.  They  obtained  several  eggs 

[63] 


DAEDALUS 


from  it  and  fertilized  them  successfully, 
but  the  problem  of  the  nutrition  and 
support  of  the  embryo  was  more 
difficult,  and  was  only  solved  in  the 
fourth  year.  Now  that  the  technique 
is  fully  developed,  we  can  take  an  ovary 
from  a  woman,  and  keep  it  growing 
in  a  suitable  fluid  for  as  long  as  twenty 
years,  producing  a  fresh  ovum  each 
month,  of  which  90  per  cent,  can  be 
fertilized,  and  the  embryos  grown 
successfully  for  nine  months,  and  then 
brought  out  into  the  air.  Schwarz 
never  got  such  good  results,  but  the 
news  of  his  first  success  caused  an  un¬ 
precedented  sensation  throughout  the 
entire  world,  for  the  birthrate  was 
already  less  than  the  deathrate  in  most 
civilized  countries.  France  was  the 
first  country  to  adopt  ectogenesis 

[64] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

officially,  and  by  1968  was  producing 
60,000  children  annually  by  this  method. 

In  most  countries  the  opposition  was 
far  stronger,  and  was  intensified  by 
the  Papal  Bull  “  Nunquam  prius 
audito  ”,  and  the  similar  fetwa  of  the  * » 
Khalif,  both  of  which  appeared  in 
i960. 

As  we  know,  ectogenesis  is  now 
universal,  and  in  this  country  less  than  ** 
30  per  cent,  of  children  are  now  bom  of 
woman.  The  effect  on  human  psy¬ 
chology  and  social  life  of  the  separation 
of  sexual  love  and  reproduction  which 
was  begun  in  the  19th  century  and 
completed  in  the  20th  is  by  no  means 
wholly  satisfactory.  The  old  family 
life  had  certainly  a  good  deal  to  com¬ 
mend  it,  and,  although  nowadays  we 
bring  on  lactation  in  women  by  injection 

[65] 


DAEDALUS 


of  placentin  as  a  routine,  and  thus 
conserve  much  of  what  was  best  in  the 
former  instinctive  cycle,  we  must  admit 
that  in  certain  respects  our  great 
grandparents  had  the  advantage  of  us. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  generally  ad¬ 
mitted  that  the  effects  of  selection  have 
more  than  counterbalanced  these  evils. 
The  small  proportion  of  men  and 
women  who  are  selected  as  ancestors 
r  for  the  next  generation  are  so  un¬ 
doubtedly  superior  to  the  average  that 
the  advance  in  each  generation  in  any 
single  respect,  from  the  increased  out¬ 
put  of  first -class  music  to  the  de¬ 
creased  convictions  for  theft,  is  very 
startling.  Had  it  not  been  for  _ecto- 
genesis  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
civilization  would  have  collapsed  within 
a  measurable  time  owing  to  the  greater 
[66] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

fertility  of  the  less  desirable  members  of 
the  population  in  almost  all  countries. 

It  is  perhaps  fortunate  that  the  pro¬ 
cess  of  becoming  an  ectogenetic  mother 
of  the  next  generation  involves  an 
operation  which  is  somewhat  un¬ 
pleasant,  though  now  no  longer  dis¬ 
figuring  or  dangerous,  and  never 
physiologically  injurious,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  an  honour  but  by  no  means  a 
pleasure.  Had  this  not  been  the  case, 
it  is  perfectly  possible  that  popular 
opposition  would  have  proved  too 
strong  for  the  selectionist  movement. 
As  it  was,  the  opposition  was  very 
fierce,  and  characteristically  enough 
this  country  only  adopted  its  present 
rather  stringent  standard  of  selection 
a  generation  later  than  Germany, 
though  it  is  now  perhaps  more  advanced 

[67] 


DAEDALUS 


than  any  other  country  in  this  respect. 
The  advantages  of  thorough -going 
selection,  have,  however,  proved  to  be 
enormous.  The  question  of  the  ideal 
sex-ratio  is  still  a  matter  of  violent 
discussion,  but  the  modern  reaction 
towards  equality  is  certainly  strong.” 

Our  essayist  would  then  perhaps  go 
on  to  discuss  some  far  more  radical 
advances  made  about  1990,  but  I  have 
quoted  only  his  account  of  the  earlier 
applications  of  biology.  The  second 
appears  to  me  to  be  neither  impossible 
nor  improbable,  but  it  has  those 
features  which  we  saw  above  to  be 
characteristic  of  biological  inventions. 
If  reproduction  is  once  completely 
separated  from  sexual  love,  mankind 
will  be  free  in  an  altogether  new  sense. 
At  present  the  national  character  is 
[68] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

changing  slowly  according  to  quite 
unknown  laws.  The  problem  of  politics 
is  to  find  institutions  suitable  to  it. 
In  the  future  perhaps  it  may  be  possible 
by  selective  breeding  to  change  char¬ 
acter  as  quickly  as  institutions.  I  can 
foresee  the  election  placards  of  300 
years  hence,  if  such  quaint  political 
methods  survive,  which  is  perhaps 
improbable,  “  Vote  for  Smith  and 
more  musicians  ”,  “  Vote  for  O’Leary 
and  more  girls  ”,  or  perhaps  finally 
“  Vote  for  Macpherson  and  a  prehensile 
tail  for  your  great-grandchildren  ”. 
We  can  already  alter  animal  species 
to  an  enormous  extent,  and  it  seems 
only  a  question  of  time  before  we  shall 
be  able  to  apply  the  same  principles  to 
our  own. 

I  suggest  then  that  biology  will 

[69) 


DAEDALUS 


probably  be  applied  on  lines  roughly 
resembling  the  above.  There  are 
perhaps  equally  great  possibilities  in 
the  way  of  the  direct  improvement  of 
the  individual,  as  we  come  to  know 
more  of  the  physiological  obstacles  to 
the  development  of  different  faculties. 
But  at  present  we  can  only  guess  at 
the  nature  of  these  obstacles,  and  the 
line  of  attack  suggested  in  the  myth  is 
the  one  which  seems  most  obvious  to 
a  Darwinian.  We  already  know,  how¬ 
ever,  that  many  of  our  spiritual  faculties 
can  be  manifested  only  if  certain 
glands,  notably  the  thyroid  and  sex- 
glands,  are  functioning  properly,  and 
that  very  minute  changes  in  such 
glands  affect  the  character  greatly. 
As  our  knowledge  of  this  subject 
increases  we  may  be  able,  for  example, 

[70] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

to  control  our  passions  by  some  more 
direct  method  than  fasting  and  flagella¬ 
tion,  to  stimulate  our  imagination  by 
some  reagent  with  less  after-effects  then 
alcohol,  to  deal  with  perverted  instincts 
by  physiology  rather  than  prison.  Con¬ 
versely,  there  will  inevitably  arise  possi¬ 
bilities  of  new  vices  similar  to  but  even 
more  profound  than  those  opened  up 
by  the  pharmacological  discoveries  of 
the  19th  century. 

The  recent  history  of  medicine  is  as 
follows.  Until  about  1870  medicine 
was  largely  founded  on  physiology,  or, 
as  the  Scotch  called  it,  “  Institutes  of 
medicine.”  Disease  was  looked  at 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  patient, 
as  injuries  still  are.  Pasteur’s  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  nature  of  infectious 
disease  transformed  the  whole  outlook, 
[  71  ] 


DAEDALUS 


and  made  it  possible  to  abolish  one 
group  of  diseases.  But  it  also  diverted 
scientific  medicine  from  its  former 
path,  and  it  is  probable  that,  were 
bacteria  unknown,  though  many  more 
people  would  die  of  sepsis  and  typhoid, 
we  should  be  better  able  to  cope  with 
kidney  disease  and  cancer.  Certain 
diseases  such  as  cancer  are  probably 
not  due  to  specific  organisms,  whilst 
others  such  as  phthisis  are  due  to 
forms  which  are  fairly  harmless  to  the 
average  person,  but  attack  others  for 
unknown  reasons.  We  are  not  likely 
to  deal  with  them  effectually  on 
Pasteur’s  lines ;  we  must  divert  our  view 
from  the  micro-organism  to  the  patient. 
Where  the  doctor  cannot  deal  with 
the  former, he  can  often  keep  the  patient 
alive  long  enough  to  be  able  to  do  so 

[72] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

himself.  And  here  he  has  to  rely 
largely  on  a  knowledge  of  physiology. 
I  do  not  say  that  a  physiologist  will 
discover  how  to  prevent  cancer.  Pas¬ 
teur  started  life  as  a  crystallographer. 
But  whoever  does  so  is  likely  at  least 
to  make  use  of  physiological  data  on  a 
large  scale. 

The  abolition  of  disease  will  make 
death  a  physiological  event  like  sleep. 
A  generation  that  has  lived  together 
will  die  together.  I  suspect  that 
man’s  desire  for  a  future  life  is  largely 
due  to  two  causes,  a  feeling  that 
most  lives  are  incomplete,  and  a  desire 
to  meet  friends  from  whom  we  have 
parted  prematurely.  A  gentle  decline 
into  the  grave  at  the  end  of  a  completed 
life’s  work  will  largely  do  away  with 
the  first,  and  our  contemporaries  will 
[73] 


DAEDALUS 


rarely  leave  us  sorrowing  for  long. 

Old  age  is  perhaps  harder  on  women 
than  on  men.  They  live  longer,  but 
their  life  is  too  often  marred  by  the 
sudden  change  which  generally  over¬ 
takes  them  between  forty  and  fifty,  and 
sometimes  leaves  them  a  prey  to  disease, 
though  it  may  improve  their  health. 
This  change  seems  to  be  due  to  a  sudden 
failure  of  a  definite  chemical  substance 
produced  by  the  ovary.  When  we  can 
isolate  and  synthesize  this  body  we 
shall  be  able  to  prolong  a  woman’s 
youth,  and  allow  her  to  age  as  grad¬ 
ually  as  the  average  man. 

Psychology  is  hardly  a  science  yet. 
Like  biology,  it  has  arrived  at  certain 
generalizations  of  a  rather  abstract 
and  philosophic  character,  but  these 
are  still  to  some  extent  matters  of 

[  74] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

controversy.  And  although  a  vast 
number  of  most  important  empirical 
facts  are  known,  only  a  few  great 
generalizations  from  them — such  as  the 
existence  of  the  subconscious  mind — 
have  yet  been  made.  But  anyone  who 
has  seen  even  a  single  example  of  the 
power  of  hypnotism  and  suggestion 
must  realise  that  the  face  of  the  world 
and  the  possibilities  of  existence  will 
be  totally  altered  when  we  can  control 
their  effects  and  standardize  their 
application,  as  has  been  possible,  for 
example,  with  drugs  which  were  once 
regarded  as  equally  magical.  Infinitely 
greater,  of  course,  would  be  the  results 
of  the  opening  up  of  systematic  com¬ 
munication  with  spiritual  beings  in 
another  world,  which  is  claimed  as  a 
scientific  possibility.  Spiritualism  is 
[751 


DAEDALUS 

already  Christianity’s  most  formidable 
enemy,  and  we  have  no  data  which 
allows  us  to  estimate  the  probable 
effect  on  man  of  a  religion  whose  dog¬ 
mas  are  a  matter  of  experiment,  whose 
mysteries  as  prosaic  as  electric  lighting, 
whose  ethics  are  based  on  the  observed 
results  in  the  next  world  of  a  good  or 
bad  life  in  this.  Yet  that  is  the  prospect 
before  us  if  spiritualism  obtains  the 
scientific  verification  which  it  is  now 
demanding,  not  perhaps  with  great 
success. 

I  have  only  been  able,  in  the  time  at 
my  disposal,  to  traverse  a  very  few  of 
the  possible  fields  of  scientific  advance. 
If  I  have  convinced  anyone  present 
that  science  has  still  a  good  deal  up  her 
sleeve,  and  that  of  a  sufficiently 
startling  character,  I  shall  be  amply 

[  76  ] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

repaid.  If  anything  I  have  said  appears 
to  be  of  a  gratuitously  disgusting 
nature,  I  would  reply  that  certain 
phenomena  of  normal  life  do  seem  to 
many  to  be  of  that  nature,  and  that 
these  phenomena  are  of  the  utmost 
scientific  and  practical  importance. 

I  have  tried  to  show  why  I  believe 
that  the  biologist  is  the  most  romantic 
figure  on  earth  at  the  present  day.  At 
first  sight  he  seems  to  be  just  a  poor 
little  scrubby  underpaid  man,  groping 
blindly  amid  the  mazes  of  the  ultra- 
microscopic,  engaging  in  bitter  and 
lifelong  quarrels  over  the  nephridia  of 
flat  worms,  waking  perhaps  one  morning 
to  find  that  someone  whose  name  he 
has  never  heard  has  demolished  by  a  few 
crucial  experiments  the  work  which  he 
had  hoped  would  render  him  immortal. 

[77] 


DAEDALUS 


There  is  real  tragedy  in  his  life,  but  he 
knows  that  he  has  a  responsibility 
which  he  dare  not  disclaim,  and  he  is 
urged  on,  apart  from  all  utilitarian 
considerations,  by  something  or  some¬ 
one  which  he  feels  to  be  higher  than 
himself. 

The  conservative  has  but  little  to 
fear  from  the  man  whose  reason  is  the 
servant  of  his  passions,  but  let  him 
beware  of  him  in  whom  reason  has 
become  the  greatest  and  most  terrible 
of  the  passions.  These  are  the  wreckers 
of  outworn  empires  and  civilizations, 
doubters,  disintegrators,  deicides.  In 
the  past  they  have  been,  in  general, 
men  like  Voltaire,  Bentham,  Thales, 
Marx,  and  very  possibly  the  divine 
Julius,  but  I  think  that  Darwin 
furnishes  an  example  of  the  same 

178) 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

relentlessness  of  reason  in  the  field  of 
science.  I  suspect  that  as  it  becomes 
clear  that  at  present  reason  not  only 
has  a  freer  play  in  science  than  else¬ 
where,  but  can  produce  as  great  effects 
on  the  world  through  science  as  through 
politics,  philosophy,  or  literature,  there 
will  be  more  Darwins.  Such  men  are 
interested  primarily  in  truth  as  such, 
but  they  can  hardly  be  quite  un¬ 
interested  in  what  will  happen  when 
they  throw  down  their  dragon’s  teeth 
into  the  world. 

I  do  not  say  that  biologists  as  a 
general  rule  try  to  imagine  in  any 
detail  the  future  applications  of  their 
science.  The  central  problems  of  life 
for  them  may  be  the  relationship 
between  the  echinoderms  and  brachio- 
pods  and  the  attempt  to  live  on  their 
f  79  J 


DAEDALUS 


salaries.  They  do  not  see  themselves 
as  sinister  and  revolutionary  figures. 
They  have  no  time  to  dream.  But  I 
suspect  that  more  of  them  dream  than 
would  care  to  confess  it. 

I  have  given  above  a  very  small 
selection  from  my  dreams.  Perhaps 
they  are  bad  dreams.  It  is  of  course 
almost  hopeless  to  attempt  any  very 
exact  prophecies  as  to  how  in  detail 
scientific  knowledge  is  going  to 
revolutionize  human  life,  but  I  believe 
that  it  will  continue  to  do  so,  and  even 
more  profoundly  than  I  have  suggested. 
And  though  personally  I  am  Victorian 
enough  in  my  sympathies  to  hope  that 
after  all  family  life,  for  example,  may 
be  spared,  I  can  only  reiterate  that  not 
one  of  the  practical  advances  which  I 
have  predicted  is  not  already  fore- 
[80] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

shadowed  by  recent  scientific  work. 
If  a  chemist  or  physicist  living  at  the 
end  of  the  seventeenth  century  had  been 
asked  to  predict  the  future  application 
of  his  science,  he  would  doubtless  have 
made  many  laughable  errors  in  the 
best  Laputan  style,  but  he  would  have 
been  certain  that  it  would  somehow  be 
applied,  and  his  faith  would  have  been 
justified. 

We  must  regard  science,  then,  from 
three  points  of  view.  First,  it  is  the 
free  activity  of  man’s  divine  faculties 
of  reason  and  imagination.  Secondly, 
it  is  the  answer  of  the  few  to  the 
demands  of  the  many  for  wealth,  com¬ 
fort  and  victory,  for  “  votrwi/  r  ax elpovg 
kci'i  paKpalowas  filovg  ”  gifts  which  it  will 
grant  only  in  exchange  for  peace, 
security,  and  stagnation.  Finally  it  is 
[81] 


DAEDALUS 


man’s  gradual  conquest,  first  of  space 
and  time,  then  of  matter  as  such,  then 
of  his  own  body  and  those  of  other 
living  beings,  and  finally  the  subjuga¬ 
tion  of  the  dark  and  evil  elements  in 
his  own  soul. 

None  of  these  conquests  wilL ever  be 
complete,  but  all,  I  believe,  will  be 
progressive.  The  question  of  what  he 
will  do  with  these  powers  is  essentially 
a  question  for  religion  and  aesthetic. 
It  may  be  urged  that  they  are  only 
fit  to  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  being 
who  has  learned  to  control  himself, 
and  that  man  armed  with  science  is 
like  a  baby  with  a  box  of  matches. 

The  answer  to  this  contention  may, 
I  think,  be  found  in  the  daily  papers. 
For  scores  of  centuries  idealists  had 
urged  that  wars  must  cease  and  all 
[82] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

the  earth  be  united  under  one  rule. 
As  long  as  any  other  alternative  was 
possible  it  was  persisted  in.  The 
events  of  the  last  nine  years  constituted 
a  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  war,  but 
when  we  ask  who  was  responsible  for 
this  we  shall  find  that  it  was  not  the 
visionaries,  but  men  like  Black,  Kekule, 
and  Langley,  who  enlarged  man’s 
power  over  nature  until  he  was  forced 
by  the  inexorable  logic  of  facts  to 
form  the  nucleus  of  an  international 
government. 

We  have  already  reacted  against  the 
frame  of  mind  that  engendered  the 
league  of  nations,  but  we  have  not 
reacted  at  all  completely.  The  League 
exists  and  is  working,  and  in  every 
country  on  earth  there  are  many 
people,  and  ordinary  normal  people, 

[  83  ] 


DAEDALUS 

who  favour  the  idea  in  one  form  or 
another  of  a  world -state.  I  do  not 
suggest  that  a  world-state  will  arise 
from  the  present  League — or  for  the 
matter  of  that  from  the  Third  Inter¬ 
national.  I  merely  observe  that  there 
is  a  widespread  and  organized  desire 
for  such  an  institution,  and  several 
possible  nuclei  of  it.  It  may  take 
another  world -war  or  two  to  convert 
the  majority.  The  prospect  of  the 
next  world -war  has  at  least  this  satis¬ 
factory  element.  In  the  late  war  the 
most  rabid  nationalists  were  to  be 
found  well  behind  the  front  line.  In 
the  next  war  no  one  will  be  behind  the 
front  line.  It  will  be  brought  home  to 
all  whom  it  may  concern  that  war  is 
a  very  dirty^business. 

No  doubt  there  is  a  fair  chance  that 

[84] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

the  possibility  of  human  organization 
on  a  planetary  scale  may  be  rendered 
impossible  by  such  a  war.  If  so,  man¬ 
kind  will  probably  have  to  wait  for  a 
couple  of  thousand  years  for  another 
opportunity.  But  to  the  student  of 
geology  such  a  period  is  negligible. 
It  took  man  250,000  years  to  transcend 
the  hunting  pack.  It  will  not  take  him 
so  long  to  transcend  the  nation. 

I  think,  then,  that  the  tendency  of 
applied  science  is  to  magnify  injustices 
until  they  become  too  intolerable  to 
be  borne,  and  the  average  man  whom 
all  the  prophets  and  poets  could  not 
move  turns  at  last  and  extinguishes 
the  evil  at  its  source.  Marx’  theory 
of  industrial  evolution  is  a  particular 
example  of  this  tendency,  though  it 
does  not  in  the  least  follow  that  his 

[85] 


DAEDALUS 

somewhat  artificial  solution  of  the 
problem  will  be  adopted. 

It  is  probable  that  biological  progress 
will  prove  to  be  as  incompatible  with 
certain  of  our  social  evils  as  industrial 
4  progress  has  proved  to  be  with  war  or 
certain  systems  of  private  ownership. 
To  take  a  concrete  example,  it  is  clear 
that  the  second  biological  invention 
considered  by  my  future_  essayist  would 
be  intolerable  in  conjunction  with  our 
present  system  of  relations  between 
classes  and  sexes.  Moral  progress  is 
so  difficult  that  I  think  any  develop¬ 
ments  are  to  be  welcomed  which  present 
it  as  the  naked  alternative  to  des¬ 
truction,  no  matter  how  horrible  may 
be  the  stimulus  which  is  necessary 
before  man  will  take  the  moral  step 
in  question. 


[86] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

To  sum  up,  then,  science  is  as  yet  in 
its  fancy,  and  we  can  foretell  little 
of  the  future  save  that  the  thing  that 
has  not  been  is  the  thing  that  shall  be  ; 
that  no  beliefs,  no  values,  no  institu¬ 
tions  are  safe.  So  far  from  being  an 
isolated  phenomenon,  the  late  war  is 
only  an  example  of  the  disruptive  ^ 
results  that  we  may  constantly  expect 
from  the  progress  of  science.  The 
future  will  be  no  primrose  path.  It 
will  have  its  own  problems.  Some  will 
be  the  secular  problems  of  the  past, 
giant  flowers  of  evil  blossoming  at  last 
to  their  own  destruction.  Others  will 
be  wholly  new.  Whether  in  the  end 
man  will  survive  his  accessions  of 
power  we  cannot  tell.  But  the  problem 
is  no  new  one.  It  is  the  old  paradox 
of  freedom  re-enacted  with  mankind 

[87] 


DAEDALUS 


for  actor  and  the  earth  for  stage.  To 
those  who  believe  in  the  divinity  of 
that  part  of  man  which  aspires  after 
knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  who  are 
able,  in  the  words  of  Boethius  : 

“  te  cernere  finis 

“  Principium,  vector,  dux,  semita, 
terminus  idem  ” 

the  prospect  will  appear  most  hopeful. 
But  it  is  hopeful  only  if  mankind  can 
adjust  its  morality  to  its  powers.  If 
we  can  succeed  in  this,  then  science 
holds  in  her  hands  one  at  least  of  the 
keys  to  the  thorny  and  arduous  path 
of  moral  progress,  then  : 

“  Per  cruciamina  leti 
“  Via  panditur  ardua  justis, 

“  Et  ad  astra  doloribus  itur  ”. 

That  is  possibly  a  correct  large-scale 

[88] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

view,  but  it  is  only  for  short  periods 
that  one  can  take  views  of  history 
sufficiently  broad  to  render  the  fate 
of  one’s  own  generation  irrelevant. 
The  scientific  worker  is  brought  up 
with  the  moral  values  of  his  neighbours. 
He  is  perhaps  fortunate  if  he  does  not 
realize  that  it  is  his  destiny  to  turn  good 
into  evil.  The  moral  and  physical 
(though  not  the  intellectual)  virtues 
are  means  between  two  extremes. 
They  are  essentially  quantitative.  It 
follows  that  an  alteration  in  the  scale 
of  human  power  will  render  actions 
bad  which  were  formerly  good.  Our 
increased  knowledge  of  hygiene  has 
transformed  resignation  and  inaction  in 
face  of  epidemic  disease  from  a  religious 
virtue  to  a  justly  punishable  offence. 
We  have  improved  our  armaments,  and 

[89] 


DAEDALUS 


patriotism,  which  was  once  a  flame 
upon  the  altar,  has  become  a  world- 
devouring  conflagration. 

The  time  has  gone  by  when  a  Huxley 
could  believe  that,  while  science  might 
indeed  remould  traditional  mythology, 
traditional  morals  were  impregnable 
and  sacrosanct  to  it.  We  must  learn 
not  to  take  traditional  morals  too 
seriously.  And  it  is  just  because  even 
the  least  dogmatic  of  religions  tends 
to  associate  itself  with  some  kind  of 
unalterable  moral  tradition,  that  there 
can  be  no  truce  between  science  and 
religion. 

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any 
particular  reason  why  a  religion  should 
not  arise  with  an  ethic  as  fluid  as 
Hindu  mythology,  but  it  has  not  yet 
arisen.  Christianity  has  probably  the 

[90] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

most  flexible  morals  of  any  religion, 
because  Jesus  left  no  code  of  law 
behind  him  like  Moses  or  Muhammad, 
and  his  moral  precepts  are  so  different 
from  those  of  ordinary  life  that  no 
society  has  ever  made  any  serious 
attempt  to  carry  them  out,  such  as 
was  possible  in  the  case  of  Israel  and 
Islam.  But  every  Christian  church  has 
tried  to  impose  a  code  of  morals  of 
some  kind  for  which  it  has  claimed 
divine  sanction.  As  these  codes  have 
always  been  opposed  to  those  of  the 
gospels,  a  loophole  has  been  left  for 
moral  progress  such  as  hardly  exists 
in  other  religions.  This  is  no  doubt 
an  argument  for  Christianity  as  against 
other  religions,  but  not  as  against 
none  at  all,  or  as  against  a  religion 
which  will  frankly  admit  that  its 
[  91  J 


DAEDALUS 


mythology  and  morals  are  provisional. 
That  is  the  only  sort  of  religion  that 
would  satisfy  the  scientific  mind,  and 
it  is  very  doubtful  whether  it  could 
properly  be  called  a  religion  at  all. 

No  doubt  many  people  hope  that 
such  a  religion  may  develop  from 
Christianity.  The  human  intellect  is 
feeble,  and  there  are  times  when  it  does 
not  assert  the  infinity  of  its  claims. 
But  even  then  : 

“  Though  in  black  jest  it  bows  and  nods 

ifc  Sfc  H!  Jfc  * 

I  know  it  is  roaring  at  the  gods 

Waiting  the  last  eclipse.” 

The  scientific  worker  of  the  future 
will  more  and  more  resemble  the 
lonely  figure  of  Daedalus  as  he  becomes 
[92] 


SCIENCE  AND  THE  FUTURE 

conscious  of  his  ghastly  mission  and 
proud  of  it. 

“  Black  is  his  robe  top  to  toe, 

His  flesh  is  white  and  warm  below, 
All  through  his  silent  veins  flow  free 
Hunger  and  thirst  and  venery, 

But  in  his  eyes  a  still  small  flame 
Like  the  first  cell  from  which  he  came 
Burns  round  and  luminous,  as  he  rides 
Singing  my  song  of  deicides.” 


TO-DAY  AND 
TO-MORROW 


Each,  pott  8 vo,  boards,  2/6  net 


'"THIS  series  of  books,  by  some  of  the 
most  distinguished  English  thinkers, 
scientists,  philosophers,  doctors,  critics, 
and  artists,  was  at  once  recognized 
as  a  noteworthy  event.  Written  from 
various  points  of  view,  one  book  frequently 
opposing  the  argument  of  another,  they 
provide  the  reader  with  a  stimulating 
survey  of  the  most  modern  thought  in 
many  departments  of  life.  Several 
volumes  are  devoted  to  the  future  trend 
of  Civilization,  conceived  as  a  whole ; 
while  others  deal  with  particular  pro¬ 
vinces.  It  is  interesting  to  see  in  these 
neat  little  volumes,  issued  at  a  low  price, 
the  revival  of  a  form  of  literature,  the 
Pamphlet,  which  has  been  in  disuse  for 
many  years. 


Published  by 

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LTD. 
Broadway  House  :  68-74  Carter  Lane,  London,  E.C.4 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


FROM  THE  REVIEWS 

Times  Literary  Supplement  :  “  An  entertaining 

series  of  vivacious  and  stimulating  studies  of 
modern  tendencies.” 

Spectator  :  “  Scintillating  monographs.” 

Observer  :  “  There  seems  no  reason  why  the 

brilliant  To-day  and  To-morrow  Series  should 
come  to  an  end  for  a  century  of  to-morrows. 
At  first  it  seemed  impossible  for  the  publishers 
to  keep  up  the  sport  through  a  dozen  volumes, 
but  the  series  already  runs  to  more  than  two 
score.  A  remarkable  series  .  .  .” 

Daily  Telegraph  :  “  This  admirable  series  of 

essays,  provocative  and  brilliant.” 

Nation  :  “  We  are  able  to  peer  into  the  future 

by  means  of  that  brilliant  series  [which]  will 
constitute  a  precious  document  upon  the 
present  time.” — T.  S.  Eliot. 

Manchester  Dispatch  :  “  The  more  one  reads  of 
these  pamphlets,  the  more  avid  becomes  the 
appetite.  We  hope  the  list  is  endless.” 

Irish  Statesman  :  “  Full  of  lively  controversy.” 

Daily  Herald  :  “  This  series  has  given  us  many 
monographs  of  brilliance  and  discernment.  .  .  . 
The  stylistic  excellencies  of  this  provocative 
series.” 

Field  :  “  We  have  long  desired  to  express  the 

deep  admiration  felt  by  every  thinking 
scholar  and  worker  at  the  present  day  for  this 
series.  We  must  pay  tribute  to  the  high 
standard  of  thought  and  expression  they 
maintain.  As  small  gift-books,  austerely  yet 
prettily  produced,  they  remain  unequalled 
of  their  kind.  We  can  give  but  the  briefest 
suggestions  of  their  value  to  the  student, 
the  politician,  and  the  voter.  .  .  .” 

New  York  World :  “  Holds  the  palm  in  the 

speculative  and  interpretative  thought  of  the 
age." 


[2] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 
VOLUMES  READY 


Daedalus,  or  Science  and  the  Future. 
By  J.  B.  S.  Haldane,  Reader  in 
Biochemistry,  University  of  Cambridge. 
Seventh  impression. 

“  A  fascinating  and  daring  little  book.” 
— Westminster  Gazette.  “  The  essay  is  brilliant, 
sparkling  with  wit  and  bristling  with 
challenges.” — British  Medical  Journal. 

“  Predicts  the  most  startling  changes.” 
— Morning  Post. 

Callinicus,  a  Defence  of  Chemical  War¬ 
fare.  By  J.  B.  S.  Haldane.  Second 
impression. 

“  Mr  Haldane’s  brilliant  study.” — Times 
Leading  Article.  “  A  book  to  be  read  by  every 
intelligent  adult.” — Spectator.  “  This  brilliant 
little  monograph.” — Daily  News. 

Icarus,  or  the  Future  of  Science.  By 
Bertrand  Russell,  f.r.s.  Fourth 
impression. 

“  Utter  pessimism.”  —  Observer.  “  Mr 
Russell  refuses  to  believe  that  the  progress 
of  Science  must  be  a  boon  to  mankind.” — 
Morning  Post.  “  A  stimulating  book,  that 
leaves  one  not  at  all  discouraged.” — Daily 
Herald. 

What  I  Believe.  By  Bertrand  Russell, 
f.r.s.  Third  impression. 

“  One  of  the  most  brilliant  and  thought- 
stimulating  little  books  I  have  read — a  better 
book  even  than  Icarus.” — Nation.  "  Simply 
and  brilliantly  written.” — Nature.  “  In 
stabbing  sentences  he  punctures  the  bubble  of 
cruelty,  envy,  narrowness,  and  ill-will  which 
those  in  authority  call  their  morals.” — New 
Leader. 

[3] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Tantalus,  or  the  Future  of  Man.  By 
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.,  Fellow  of 
Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.  Second 
impression. 

“  They  are  all  ( Daedalus ,  Icarus,  and 
Tantalus)  brilliantly  clever,  and  they  supple¬ 
ment  or  correct  one  another.” — Dean  Inge, 
in  Morning  Post.  “  Immensely  valuable  and 
infinitely  readable.” — Daily  News.  “  1  he 
book  of  the  week.” — Spectator. 

Cassandra,  or  the  Future  of  the  British 
Empire.  By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc. 

“  We  commend  it  to  the  complacent  of  all 
parties.” — Saturday  Review.  “  The  book  is 
small,  but  very,  very  weighty ;  brilliantly 
written,  it  ought  to  be  read  by  all  shades  of 
politicians  and  students  of  politics.” — York¬ 
shire  Post.  “  Yet  another  addition  to  that 
bright  constellation  of  pamphlets.” — Spectator. 

Quo  Vadimus  ?  Glimpses  of  the  Future. 
By  E.  E.  Fournier  d’Albe,  D.Sc., 
Second  Impression. 

“  A  wonderful  vision  of  the  future.  A  book 
that  will  be  talked  about.” — Daily  Graphic. 
“  A  remarkable  contribution  to  a  remarkable 
series.” — Manchester  Dispatch.  “  Interesting 
and  singularly  plausible.” — Daily  Telegraph. 

Thrasymachus,  the  Future  of  Morals. 
By  C.  E.  M.  Joad,  author  of  “  The 
Babbitt  Warren, ’’etc.  Second  impression. 

"  His  provocative  book.” — Graphic. 

'  Written  in  a  style  of  deliberate  brilliance.” 
— Times  Literary  Supplement.  “  As  outspoken 
and  unequivocal  a  contribution  as  could  well 
be  imagined.  Even  those  readers  who  dissent 
will  be  forced  to  recognize  the  admirable 
clarity  with  which  he  states  his  case.  A  book 
that  will  startle." — Daily  Chronicle. 

[4] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Lysistrata,  or  Woman’s  Future  and 
Future  Woman.  By  Anthony  M. 
Ludovici,  author  of  “A  Defence  of 
Aristocracy,”  etc.  Second  Impression. 

“  A  stimulating  book.  Volumes  would  be 
needed  to  deal,  in  the  fullness  his  work  pro¬ 
vokes,  with  all  the  problems  raised." — Sunday 
Times.  “  Pro-feminine  but  anti-feministic.” 
— Scotsman.  “  Full  of  brilliant  common- 
sense." — Observer. 

Hypatia,  or  Woman  and  Knowledge.  By 
Mrs  Bertrand  Russell.  With  a 
frontispiece.  Third  impression. 

An  answer  to  Lysistrata.  “  A  passionate 
vindication  of  the  rights  of  woman." — 
Manchester  Guardian.  “  Says  a  number  of 
things  that  sensible  women  have  been  wanting 
publicly  said  for  a  long  time." — Daily  Herald. 

Hephaestus,  the  Soul  of  the  Machine. 
By  E.  E.  Fournier  d’Albe,  D.Sc. 

“  A  worthy  contribution  to  this  interesting 
series.  A  delightful  and  thought-provoking 
essay.” — Birmingham  Post.  “  There  is  a 
special  pleasure  in  meeting  with  a  book  like 
Hephaestus.  The  author  has  the  merit  of  really 
understanding  what  he  is  talking  about.” 
— Engineering.  “  An  exceedingly  clever 
defence  of  machinery." — Architects'  Journal. 

The  Passing  of  the  Phantoms  :  a  Study 
of  Evolutionary  Psychology  and  Morals. 
By  C.  J.  Patten,  Professor  of  Anatomy, 
Sheffield  University.  With  4  Plates. 

“  Readers  of  Daedalus,  Icarus  and  Tantalus, 
will  be  grateful  for  an  excellent  presentation 
of  yet  another  point  of  view.” — Yorkshire 
Post.  “  This  bright  and  bracing  little  book." 
Literary  Guide.  “  Interesting  and  original.” 
— Medical  Times. 

[5] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


The  Mongol  in  our  Midst :  a  Study  of 
Man  and  his  Three  Faces.  By  F.  G. 
Crookshank,  m.d.,  f.r.c.p.  With  28 
Plates.  Second  Edition,  revised. 

“  A  brilliant  piece  of  speculative  induction.” 
— Saturday  Review.  "  An  extremely  interest¬ 
ing  and  suggestive  book,  which  will  reward 
careful  reading.” — Sunday  Times.  “  The 
pictures  carry  fearful  conviction.” — Daily 
Herald. 

The  Conquest  of  Cancer.  By  H.  W.  S. 
Wright,  m.s.,  f.r.c.s.  Introduction 
by  F.  G.  Crookshank,  m.d. 

“  Eminently  suitable  for  general  reading. 
The  problem  is  fairly  and  lucidly  presented. 
One  merit  of  Mr  Wright’s  plan  is  that  he  tells 
people  what,  in  his  judgment,  they  can  best 
do,  here  and  now.” — From  the  Introduction. 

Pygmalion,  or  the  Doctor  of  the  Future. 
By  R.  McNair  Wilson,  m.b. 

“  Dr  Wilson  has  added  a  brilliant  essay 
to  this  series.” — Times  Literary  Supplement. 
“  This  is  a  very  little  book,  but  there  is  much 
wisdom  in  it.” — Evening  Standard.  “  No 
doctor  worth  his  salt  would  venture  to  say  that 
Dr  Wilson  was  wrong.” — Daily  Herald. 

Prometheus,  or  Biology  and  the  Ad¬ 
vancement  of  Man.  By  H.  S.  Jennings, 
Professor  of  Zoology,  Johns  Hopkins 
University. 

"  This  volume  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
that  has  yet  appeared  in  this  series .  Certainly 
the  information  it  contains  will  be  new  to  most 
educated  laymen.  It  is  essentially  a  discussion 
of  .  .  .  heredity  and  environment,  and  it 
clearly  establishes  the  fact  that  the  current 
use  of  these  terms  has  no  scientific 
justification.” — Times  Literary  Supplement. 
‘‘An  exceedingly  brilliant  book.” — New  Leader. 

[6] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Narcissus  :  an  Anatomy  of  Clothes.  By 
Gerald  Heard.  With  19  illustrations. 

“  A  most  suggestive  book.” — Nation. 
“  Irresistible.  Reading  it  is  like  a  switchback 
journey.  Starting  from  prehistoric  times  we 
rocket  down  the  ages.” — Daily  News. 
“  Interesting,  provocative,  and  entertaining.” 
— Queen. 

Thamyris,  or  Is  There  a  Future  for 
Poetry  ?  By  R.  C.  Trevelyan. 

“  Learned,  sensible,  and  very  well-written.” 
— Affable  Hawk ,  in  New  Statesman.  “  Very 
suggestive.”  —  /.  C.  Squire,  in  Observer. 
“  A  very  charming  piece  of  work,  I  agree 
with  all,  or  at  any  rate,  almost  all  its  con¬ 
clusions." — J .  St  Loe  Strachey,  in  Spectator. 

Proteus,  or  the  Future  of  Intelligence. 
By  Vernon  Lee,  author  of  “  Satan  the 
Waster,”  etc. 

“  We  should  like  to  follow  the  author's 
suggestions  as  to  the  effect  of  intelligence  on 
the  future  of  Ethics,  Aesthetics,  and  Manners. 
Her  book  is  profoundly  stimulating  and  should 
be  read  by  everyone.” — Outlook.  “  A  concise, 
suggestive  piece  of  work." — Saturday  Review. 

Timotheus,  the  Future  of  the  Theatre. 
By  Bonamy  DobrLe,  author  of‘‘Restor- 
ation  Drama,”  etc. 

"  A  witty,  mischievous  little  book,  to  be 
read  with  delight.” — Times  Literary  Supple¬ 
ment.  “  This  is  a  delightfully  witty  book.” 
— Scotsman.  “  In  a  subtly  satirical  vein  he 
visualizes  various  kinds  of  theatres  in  200  years’ 
time.  His  gay  little  book  makes  delightful 
reading.” — Nation. 


[7] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Paris,  or  the  Future  of  War.  By  Captain 
B.  H.  Liddell  Hart. 

“  A  companion  volume  to  Callinicus. 
A  gem  of  close  thinking  and  deduction.” 
— Observer.  “  A  noteworthy  contribution  to 
a  problem  of  concern  to  every  citizen  in  this 
country.” — Daily  Chronicle.  “  There  is  some 
lively  thinking  about  the  future  of  war  in 
Paris,  just  added  to  this  set  of  live-wire 
pamphlets  on  big  subjects.” — Manchester 
Guardian. 

Wireless  Possibilities.  By  Professor 
A.  M.  Low.  With  4  diagrams. 

"  As  might  be  expected  from  an  inventor 
who  is  always  so  fresh,  he  has  many  inter¬ 
esting  things  to  say.” — Evening  Standard. 
“  The  mantle  of  Blake  has  fallen  upon  the 
physicists.  To  them  we  look  for  visions,  and 
we  find  them  in  this  book.” — New  Statesman. 

Perseus  :  of  Dragons.  By  H.  F.  Scott 
Stokes.  With  2  illustrations. 

“  A  diverting  little  book,  chock-full  of  ideas 
Mr  Stokes’  dragon-lore  is  both  quaint  and 
various.” — Morning  Post.  “  Very  amusingly 
written,  and  a  mine  of  curious  knowledge  for 
which  the  discerning  reader  will  find  many 
uses.” — Glasgow  Herald. 

Lycurgus,  or  the  Future  of  Law.  By 
E.  S.  P.  Haynes,  author  of  “  Concerning 
Solicitors,”  etc. 

"  An  interesting  and  concisely  written  book.” 
—  Yorkshire  Post.  “  He  roundly  declares  that 
English  criminal  law  is  a  blend  of  barbaric 
violence,  medieval  prejudices  and  modem 
fallacies.  ...  A  humane  and  conscientious 
investigation.” — T.P.’s  Weekly.  “  A  thought¬ 
ful  book — deserves  careful  reading.” — Law 
Times. 

[8] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Euterpe,  or  the  Future  of  Art.  By 
Lionel  R.  McColvin,  author  of  “  The 
Theory  of  Book-Selection.” 

“  Discusses  briefly,  but  very  suggestively, 
the  problem  of  the  future  of  art  in  relation  to 
the  public.” — Saturday  Review.  “  Another 
indictment  of  machinery  as  a  soul-destroyer 
.  .  .  Mr  Colvin  has  the  courage  to  suggest 
solutions.” — Westminster  Gazette.  “  This  is 
altogether  a  much-needed  book.” — New 
Leader. 

Pegasus,  or  Problems  of  Transport. 
By  Colonel  J.  F.  C.  Fuller,  author  of 
“  The  Reformation  of  War,”  etc.  With 
8  Plates. 

“  The  foremost  military  prophet  of  the  day 
propounds  a  solution  for  industrial  and 
unemployment  problems.  It  is  a  bold  essay 
.  .  .  and  calls  for  the  attention  of  all  con¬ 
cerned  with  imperial  problems.” — Daily 
Telegraph.  “  Practical,  timely,  very  inter¬ 
esting  and  very  important.” — J.  St  Loe 
Strachey ,  in  Spectator. 

Atlantis,  or  America  and  the  Future. 
By  Colonel  J.  F.  C.  Fuller. 

“  Candid  and  caustic.” — Observer.  “  Many 
hard  things  have  been  said  about  America, 
but  few  quite  so  bitter  and  caustic  as  these.” 
— Daily  Sketch.  “  He  can  conjure  up  possi¬ 
bilities  of  a  new  Atlantis.” — Clarion. 

Midas,  or  the  United  States  and  the 
Future.  By  C.  H.  Bretherton,  author 
of  “  The  Real  Ireland,”  etc. 

A  companion  volume  to  Atlantis.  "  Full  of 
astute  observations  and  acute  reflections  .  .  . 
this  wise  and  witty  pamphlet,  a  provocation 
to  the  thought  that  is  creative." — Morning 
Post.  “  A  punch  in  every  paragraph.  One 
could  hardly  ask  for  more  ‘meat.’" — Spectator. 

[9] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Nuntius,  or  Advertising  and  its  Future. 

By  Gilbert  Russell. 

“  Expresses  the  philosophy  of  advertising 
concisely  and  well.” — Observer.  “  It  is  doubt¬ 
ful  if  a  more  straightforward  exposition  of 
the  part  advertising  plays  in  our  public  and 
private  life  has  been  written.” — Manchester 
Guardian. 

Birth  Control  and  the  State  :  a  Plea 
and  a  Forecast.  By  C.  P.  Blacker, 
M.C.,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P. 

"  A  very  careful  summary.” — Times  Literary 
Supplement.  “  A  temperate  and  scholarly 
survey  of  the  arguments  for  and  against  the 
encouragement  of  the  practice  of  birth  control.” 
— Lancet.  “  He  writes  lucidly,  moderately, 
and  from  wide  knowledge ;  his  book  un¬ 
doubtedly  gives  a  better  understanding  of  the 
subject  than  any  other  brief  account  we  know. 
It  also  suggests  a  policy.” — Saturday  Review. 

Ouroboros,  or  the  Mechanical  Extension 
of  Mankind.  By  Garet  Garrett. 

"  This  brilliant  and  provoking  little  book.” 
— Observer.  “  A  significant  and  thoughtful 
essay,  calculated  in  parts  to  make  our  flesh 
creep.” — Spectator.  “  A  brilliant  writer,  Mr 
Garrett  is  a  remarkable  man.  He  explains 
something  of  the  enormous  change  the  machine 
has  made  in  life.” — Daily  Express. 

Artifex,  or  the  Future  of  Craftsmanship. 
By  John  Gloag,  author  of  “  Time, 
Taste,  and  Furniture.” 

“  An  able  and  interesting  summary  of  the 
history  of  craftsmanship  in  the  past,  a  direct 
criticism  of  the  present,  and  at  the  end  his 
hopes  for  the  future.  Mr  Gloag’s  real  con¬ 
tribution  to  the  future  of  craftsmanship  is 
his  discussion  of  the  uses  of  machinery.” 
— Times  Literary  Supplement. 

[TO] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Plato’s  American  Republic.  By  J. 

Douglas  Woodruff.  Third  impression. 

“  Uses  the  form  of  the  Socratic  dialogue 
with  devastating  success.  A  gently  malicious 
wit  sparkles  in  every  page." — Sunday  Times. 
“  Having  deliberately  set  himself  an  almost 
impossible  task,  has  succeeded  beyond  belief." 
■ — Saturday  Review.  “  Quite  the  liveliest 
even  of  this  spirited  series." — Observer. 

Orpheus,  or  the  Music  of  the  Future.  By 
W.  J.  Turner,  author  of  “  Music  and 
Life,”  Second  impression. 

“  A  book  on  music  that  we  can  read  not 
merely  once,  but  twice  or  thrice.  Mr  Turner 
has  given  us  some  of  the  finest  thinking  upon 
Beethoven  that  I  have  ever  met  with.” — 
Ernest  Newman  in  Sunday  Times.  “  A 
brilliant  essay  in  contemporary  philosophy.” 
— Outlook.  “  The  fruit  of  real  knowledge  and 
understanding." — New  Statesman. 

Terpander,  or  Music  and  the  Future.  By 
E.  J.  Dent,  author  of  “Mozart's  Operas.” 

“  In  Orpheus  Mr  Turner  made  a  brilliant 
voyage  in  search  of  first  principles.  Mr  Dent's 
book  is  a  skilful  review  of  the  development  of 
music.  It  is  the  most  succinct  and  stimulating 
essay  on  music  I  have  found.  .  .  ." — Musical 
News.  “  Remarkably  able  and  stimulating.” 
— Times  Literary  Supplement.  “  There  is  hardly 
another  critic  alive  who  could  sum  up  contem¬ 
porary  tendencies  so  neatly.” — Spectator. 
Sibylla,  or  the  Revival  of  Prophecy.  By 
C.  A.  Mace,  University  of  St.  Andrew’s. 

"An  entertaining  and  instructive  pamphlet." 
—Morning  Post.  “  Places  a  nightmare  before 
us  very  ably  and  wittily.” — Spectator. 
“  Passages  in  it  are  excellent  satire,  but  on 
the  whole  Mr  Mace's  speculations  may  be 
taken  as  a  trustworthy  guide  ...  to  modern 
scientific  thought.” — Birmingham  Post. 

[II] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


Lucullus,  or  the  Food  of  the  Future.  By 
Olga  Hartley  and  Mrs  C.  F.  Leyel, 
authors  of  “The  Gentle  Art  of  Cookery.” 

“  This  is  a  clever  and  witty  little  volume 
in  an  entertaining  series,  and  it  makes  enchant¬ 
ing  reading.” — Times  Literary  Supplement. 
“  Opens  with  a  brilliant  picture  of  modern 
man,  living  in  a  vacuum-cleaned,  steam- 
heated,  credit-furnished  suburban  mansion 
‘  with  a  wolf  in  the  basement  ’ — the  wolf  of 
hunger.  This  banquet  of  epigrams.” — 
Spectator. 

Procrustes,  or  the  Future  of  English 
Education.  By  M.  Alderton  Pink. 

“  Undoubtedly  he  makes  out  a  very  good 
case." — Daily  Herald.  “  This  interesting 
addition  to  the  series.” — Times  Educational 
Supplement.  “  Intends  to  be  challenging  and 
succeeds  in  being  so.  Ail  fit  readers  will  find 
it  stimulating." — Northern  Echo. 

The  Future  of  Futurism.  By  John 
Rodker. 

“  Mr  Rodker  is  up-to-the-minute,  and  he 
has  accomplished  a  considerable  feat  in  writing 
on  such  a  vague  subject,  92  extremely  inter¬ 
esting  pages.” — T.  S.  Eliot,  in  Nation. 
“  There  are  a  good  many  things  in  this  book 
which  are  of  interest.” — Times  Literary 
Supplement. 

Pomona,  or  the  Future  of  English.  By 
Basil  de  Sislincourt,  author  of  “  The 
English  Secret  ”,  etc. 

“  The  future  of  English  is  discusssed  fully 
and  with  fascinating  interest.” — Morning 
Post.  “  Full  of  wise  thoughts  and  happy 
words.” — Times  Literary  Supplement.  “  His 
later  pages  must  stir  the  blood  of  any  man 
who  loves  his  country  and  her  poetry.  J.  C. 
Squire,  in  Observer.  “  His  finely-conceived 
essay.” — Manchester  Guardian. 

[  12] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 

Balbus,  or  the  Future  of  Architecture 
By  Christian  Barman,  editor  of  “  The 
Architects'  Journal 

“  A  really  brilliant  addition  to  this  already 
distinguished  series.  The  reading  of  Balbus 
will  give  much  data  for  intelligent  prophecy, 
and  incidentally,  an  hour  or  so  of  excellent 
entertainment.” — Spectator.  “  Most  readable 
and  reasonable.  We  can  recommend  it 
warmly.” — New  Statesman.  “  This  intriguing 
little  book.” — Connoisseur. 

Apella,  or  the  Future  of  the  Jews.  By 

A  Quarterly  Reviewer. 

“  Cogent,  because  of  brevity  and  a  magni¬ 
ficent  prose  style,  this  book  wins  our  quiet 
praise.  It  is  a  fine  pamphlet,  adding  to  the 
value  of  the  series,  and  should  not  be  missed.” 
— Spectator.  “  A  notable  addition  to  this 
excellent  series.  His  arguments  are  a  provoca¬ 
tion  to  fruitful  thinking.” — Morning  Post. 

The  Dance  of  Qiva,  or  Life’s  Unity  and 
Rhythm.  By  Collum. 

“  It  has  substance  and  thought  in  it.  The 
author  is  very  much  alive  and  responsive  to 
the  movements  of  to-day  which  seek  to  unite 
the  best  thought  of  East  and  West,  and  dis¬ 
cusses  Mussolini  and  Jagadis  Bose  with 
perspicacity.  ’ ' — Specta  tor . 

Lars  Porsena,  or  the  Future  of  Swearing 
and  Improper  Language.  By  Robert 
Graves.  Second  impression. 

“  Goes  uncommonly  well,  and  deserves 
to." — Observer.  “  Not  for  squeamish  readers." 
— Spectator.  “  No  more  amusingly  unexpected 
contribution  has  been  made  to  this  series. 
A  deliciously  ironical  affair." — Bystander. 
“  His  highly  entertaining  essay  is  as  full  as 
the  current  standard  of  printers  and  police 
will  allow.” — New  Statesman.  “  Humour  and 
style  are  beyond  criticism.” — Irish  Statesman . 

[  13  ] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 

Socrates,  or  the  Emancipation  of  Man¬ 
kind.  By  H.  F.  Carlill. 

“  Devotes  a  specially  lively  section  to  the 
herd  instinct.” — Times.  “  Emancipation  ” 
comes  through  knowledge.  The  process 
making  for  this  freedom  is  described  with 
wit  and  sanity  in  Socrates.” — Scotsman. 
“  Deals  with  the  trend  of  modem  psychology 
in  a  way  that  grips  the  interest.  We  trust 
it  will  gain  a  wide  circulation.” — Clarion. 

Delphos,  or  the  Future  of  International 
Language.  By  E.  Sylvia  Pankhurst. 

“  Equal  to  anything  yet  produced  in  this 
brilliant  series.  Miss  Pankhurst  states  very 
clearly  what  all  thinking  people  must  soon 
come  to  believe,  that  an  international  language 
would  be  one  of  the  greatest  assets  of  modern 
civilization.”— Spectator.  “  A  most  readable 
book,  full  of  enthusiasm,  an  important  con¬ 
tribution  to  this  thorny  subject.” 

— International  Language. 

Gallio,  or  the  Tyranny  of  Science.  By 
J.  W.  N.  Sullivan,  author  of  “A 
History  of  Mathematics.” 

“  So  packed  with  ideas  that  it  is  not  possible 
to  give  any  adequate  resume  of  its  contents.” 
— Times  Literary  Supplement.  “  His  remark¬ 
able  monograph,  his  devastating  summary  of 
materialism,  his  insight  into  the  puerilities  of 
many  psycho-analysts.  .  .  .  This  pocket 
Novum  Organum.” — Spectator. 

Apollonius,  or  the  Future  of  Psychical 
Research.  By  E.  N.  Bennett,  author 
of  “  Problems  of  Village  Life,”  etc. 

“  A  sane,  temperate  and  suggestive  survey 
of  a  field  of  inquiry  which  is  slowly  but  surely 
pushing  to  the  front.” — Times  Literary  Supple¬ 
ment.  “  His  exposition  of  the  case  for  psychic 
research  is  lucid  and  interesting.” — Scotsman. 
"  Displays  the  right  temper,  admirably  con¬ 
ceived,  skilfully  executed." — Liverpool  Post. 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 

Aeolus,  or  the  Future  of  the  Flying 
Machine.  By  Oliver  Stewart. 

“  Both  his  wit  and  his  expertness  save  him 
from  the  nonsensical-fantastic.  There  is 
nothing  vague  or  sloppy  in  these  imaginative 
forecasts.” — Daily  News.  “  He  is  to  be  con¬ 
gratulated.  His  book  is  small,  but  it  is  so 
delightfully  funny  that  it  is  well  worth  the 
price,  and  there  really  are  sensible  ideas 
behind  the  jesting." — Aeroplane. 

Stentor,  or  the  Press  of  To-Day  and 
To-Morrow.  By  David  Ockham. 

“  This  provocative  volume,  of  which  the  chief 
point  is  the  growing  danger  of  newspaper  com¬ 
bines.” — Liverpool  Post.  “  What  pleases  me 
most  is  his  protests  against  ‘  bastard  journal¬ 
ism.’  ” — Financial  News. 

Rusticus,  or  the  Future  of  the  Country¬ 
side.  By  Martin  S.  Briggs,  f.r.i.b.a. 

“  Any  attempt  to  stem  the  tide  of  ugliness 
which  is  sweeping  over  our  countryside 
deserves  our  gratitude,  and  it  is  with  especial 
pleasure  that  we  hail  the  appearance  of 
Rusticus,  a  brief  but  vigorous  onslaught  on 
our  stupidity.  Few  of  the  fifty  volumes  [of 
this  series]  capture  our  imagination  as  does 
this  one." — Daily  Telegraph. 

Janus,  or  the  Conquest  of  War.  By 

William  McDougall,  m.b.,  f.r.s. 

Reviews  all  the  chief  causes  of  war  and 
shows  their  roots  to  lie  in  the  fear  of  aggression. 
Surveys  all  the  more  important  suggestions 
for  the  avoidance  of  war,  and  shows  them  to 
be  either  impossible,  useless,  or  dangerous. 
Finally  recommends  an  international  air-force 
as  the  only  remedy  and  answers  all  objections 
to  it. 


[15] 


TO-DAY  AND  TO-MORROW 


NEARLY  READY 


Vulcan,  or  the  Future  of  Labour.  By 

Cecil  Chisholm. 

This  stimulating  book  considers  industry 
from  the  point  of  view  of  methods  of  efficiency 
and  industrial  organization. 

Clio,  or  the  Future  of  History.  By 

AndrL  Maurois. 

A  whimsical  and  fantastic  picture  of  the 
world  in  the  not-so-far  distant  future,  showing 
the  power  of  a  world  press  organization. 

Hymen,  or  the  Future  of  Marriage.  By 

Norman  Haire. 


IN  PREPARATION 

Caledonia,  or  the  Future  of  the  Scots. 

By  G.  M.  Thomson. 

Lares  et  Penates,  or  the  Future  of  the 
Home.  By  H.  J.  Birnstingl. 

Bacchus,  or  the  Future  of  Wine.  By 

P.  Morton  Shand. 

Mercurius,  or  the  World  on  Wings. 

By  C.  Thompson  Walker. 

The  Future  of  Chemistry.  By  T.  W. 

Jones. 

The  Future  of  India.  By  T.  Earle 
Welby. 

The  Future  of  Films.  By  Ernest 
Betts. 


[16] 


DATE  DUE 


-trrt 

FFB 

c: 

cc 

fe 

APR:  f 

fi  <337 

»  «n 

n  4  1997 

APP 

~mr 

’  "> 

FEt 

j  0  8  2000 

CARR  McLEAN,  TORONTO  FORM  #38-297 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


0  1 


64  0 


01354  9 


3-3  ZL  /O 


