Vegetable Staticks (Stephen Hales, 1727)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1727 first edition (https://archive.org/details/vegetablestatick00hale). Stephen Hales (1677-1761) - the founding text of plant physiology: transpiration and root pressure measured.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1 
PY ©, 
» ce : » 
pee of : - 
“an ° Foo. « 
. ; 
a s wy: ; ced ‘ 
> & ‘ . » 
Pilates wo Seine RE eee a 
st : a} it Clea. aah ontaahhiateynT Ss men seer) e — —o, J a .- —_ sett ater” - papain ‘ 
y be ; ae RS $ ~ ; oly Se en Wim ieee pom nnn kk Foose bm vent run ; 
ame wean , tah aiateenenal 
ws " * : 
7 ; x, hg i ane 4 ‘ was alt , fi ™ a - 
% Lids. Ae NS EN, i Ae 4 ‘ ; 1 ae Ss. 
4 ane ft b Oe ‘aaa rhage <5) 
7 a SNe " De a ean 
Boi et Re RIS oh sien 7 ok ee 
x iS p > =) 4 
. bait 
’ ‘ 
4 : 
* 
: Si gS Sangh Se ETN Lect ninneipencge pene Senet ei at San - 
ac avenge on) sett eh er ae Seo ptentnge rant mecee af ™, 
wk a ey) AS oe Mes : 
a “5 wy gts z . 4 a 
Aer aN — eh “ly Ses a ~e. ‘ 
Se Rist 4 ea a eee ee ewe : aa <— 
re = ad ic : 
' ise =I i 
j 2S 
q # 
eS : Lat 
a = < 
+ ~ uh 
. Ss eb * 
-* ae .e Ne 
> ne *, ; 
% = . 
S ¥ seo Ss 
. . Ms _ 
v oe 
= a” Pe me 
er ay st 
aw = amen ns Fe 
: ~ i 
a wa 
ae . 
Fes 
_~ 
og 
, 
ae 
é F 
w SS . 
aa % : 
~ 
“= 
< f s 
SNS = ‘ 
oS. 
ee 
- yt, 
= matte ae ict arora penetra oarsmen a dane eer eee RRR Se en SR NA 
2 content oon terete rn Se 
le" y > oe As " . : + . 
; i ’ Yea com Pe 
‘ - ; “< o ’ al 
es y . - pn So ‘. 
“ys z < “1 . ™ 
> ’ . ‘ ‘ % PJ 
ws - * ‘ ; “ oes aS 
oe \k* . Se et . o * #* _ “<I ? R= 
ry Pa . 1 = x ‘ . : ends 
Se we es ‘ ~, s ~ ~ s ~~ * winapi 
nary’. : o i 5 ‘ y BT 
one > a F 2 Y ' a ea s% 
P ~ mr gue . . -_ a = ~. 
—~** - S \ 
s ~ 
, 
s ‘ 
‘ t . _ 
. ees . ; : hes aie de ES TE 
. g a ' ae - "T° at ne LEI OEI 
2 el went tnwaeemite gat encn er at ea pees cmt angie AA tems ped Paar . my ¥\ —— ~ anarut tina x m= ‘ 
—amaaionys : ’ ~ - 
; ; 
ang pines bGes Neer _—— “ _— = 


ve div diethe n gellenlig Wate dd BE Ft. cwnfig wee nrer or 4 


pus 


; 


a. "3 


The Dibner Library 
of the History of 
Science and Technology 


SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARIES 


VEGETABLE STATICKS: 


Or, An Account of fome 


Statical Experiments 
ON foe | 


SAP in VEGETABLES: 


Being an ESSAY towards a 
Natural Hiftory of Vegetation. 


Alfo, a SPECIMEN of 


An AtremprT to Analyfe the Arr, 
By a great Variety of 
CHYMI1O-STATICAL EXPERIMENTS; 


Which were read at feveral Meetings. before 
the ROYAL SOCIETY. 


Quid eft in his, in quo non nature ratio tatelligentis appa- 
reat? Tul. de Nat. Deor. 

wm Eteninm Experimentorum longe major eft fubtilitas, 
quam fenfis ipfitsmmes Itaque eo rem deducimus, ut fenfus 
tantum de Experimento, Experimentum de re gudicet. 
Fran. de Verul. Inftauratio magna. 


Py STEPH. PALES; Be Dy FIRS. 
Rector of Farringdon, Hamppore and Minifter of 
Teddington, pla 


LONDON: 


Printed for W. and J. Innys, at the Weft End of St. Paul's; 
and T. W. OODWARD, over-againit St. Dun/fan’s Church 
in Fleetftreet. M, DCC, XXVIL. 


Feb. 16, 1725. Lwprimaiur 


Isaac NEWTON, Pr. Reg, Soe, 


QK 


1 O 


His Royal Highnefs 


Ger OR re 


Prince of W ALES. 


May it pleafe your Royal Highnefs, 
_ Humbly offer the follow- 


& ing Experiments to Your 
Highnefs’s Patronage, to pro- 
teck them from the reproaches 

i 2 that 


DEDICATION. 


that the ignorant are apt 
unreafonably to caft on re- 
fearches of this kind, notwith- 
ftanding they are the only fo- 
lid and rational means where- 
by we may ever hope to make 
any real advance in the know- 
ledgeof Nature: A knowledge 
worthy the attainment of 
Princes. 

And as Solomon, the greatett 
and wifeft of men, deigned 
not to inquire into the nature 
of Plants, from the Cedar in 
Lebanon, to the FLyffop that 
Springeth out of the wall: So it 
will not, | prefume, be an un- 
acceptable entertainment to 


Your 
eS tee 


DY¥ODICAT £0 N. 
Your Royal Highnefs, at 
leaft at Your leifure hours ; 
but will rather add to the plea- 
fure, with which vegetable 
Nature in her prime verdure 
charms us: To fee the fteps 
fhe takes in her productions, 
and the wonderful power fhe 
therein exerts: The adinirable 
provifion fhe has made for 
them, not only vigoroufly to 
draw to great heights plen- 
ty of nourifhment from the 
earth ; but alfo more fublimed 
and exalted food from the air, 
that wonderful fluid, which is 
of fuch importance to the life 
of Vegetables and Animals: 

a 2 And 


DEDICATION. 
And which by infinite com- 
binations with natural bodies, 
produces innumerable furpriz- 
ing effects ; many inftances 
of which I have nets: pro- 
duced. 

The fearching into the works 
of Nature, whileit delightsand 
inlarges the mind, and {trikes 
us with the ftrongeft aflurance 
of the wifdom and power of 
the divine Architect, in fram- 
ing for us fo beautiful and 
well regulated a world, it does 
at the fame time convince us 
of his conftant benevolence 
and goodnefs towards us.. 


That 


DEDICATION. 
_ That this great Author of 
Nature may fhower down on 
Your Royal Highnefs an a- 
bundance of his Bleffings, both 
Spiritual and Temporal, is 
the fincere prayer of 


Your Royal Highnefs’s 
Moft Obedient 


Alumble Servant, 


STEPHEN Hates. 


A 4 HiME 


T fe & 


PREFACE 


HERE have been within lefs than a 
Century very great and ufeful difco- 
vertes made in the amazingly beautiful ftruc- 
ture and nature of the animal economy ; neither 
have Plants palfed unobferved in this mqui- 
fitive age, which has with fuch diligence ex- 
tended its inquiries in fome degree, into almoft 
every branch of nature's inexbauftible fund 
of wonderful works. 


We find in the P hilofophical Tranfactzons, 


and in the Hiiftory of the Royal Academy of 
Sciences, accounts of many curious Experi- 
ments and Obfervations made from time to 
time on Vegetables, by feveral ingenious and 
enquifitive Perfons: But our countryman 
‘Dr. Grew and Malpighi were the firft, who, 
tho’ in very diftant countries, did nearly at 
the fame time, unknown to each other, ngage 
in avery diligent and thorough inquiry into 
the firucture of the veffels of Plants ; a pro- 
vince, which till then had layn uncultivated. 

They 


en 


ST he APaRaiE PAC E. il 


They have givenus very acenrate and faithful 
accounts of the firucture of the parts, which 
they carefully traced, from their firft minute 
origin, the feminal Plants, to their fullgrowth 
and maturity,thro their Roots, Trunk, Bark, 
Branches, Gems, Shoots, Leaves, Bloffoms 
and Fruit. Inall which they obferved anexadt 
and regular [ymetry of Parts moft curioufly 
wrought in fuch manner, that the great work 
of Vegetation might effectually be carried on, 
by the uniform co-operation of the feveral 
Parts, according to the different offices affign- 
ed them by nature. — | 
Had they fortuned tohave fallen into this 
ftatical way of inquiry, perfons of their great 
application and fagacity had doubtlefs made 
confiderable advances in the knowledge of the 
nature of Plants. This is the only fure way 
to meafure the feveral quantities of nourz{b- 
ment, which Plants tmbibe and perfpire, and 
thereby to fee what influence the different flates 
of Air have on them. This is the likelieft me- 
thod to find out the Sap’s velocity, andthe 
force with which it is imbibed: As alfo to 
eftimate the great power that nature exerts 
an extending and pufhing forth her produétions, 

by the expanfion of the Sap. 
About 


ili The? RSPAS 
About 20 years fince, I made feveral he- 
maftatical Experiments onDogs, ana 6 years 
afterwards repeated the fame on Horfes and 
ether Animals, in order to find out the real 
force of the blood in the Arteries, fome of 
which are mentioned im the third chapter of 
this book: At which times I wifhed I could 
have made the like Experiments, to difcover 
the force of the Sap in Vegetables; but def- 
paired of ever effecting it, till about feven 
years fince, by mere. accident I hit upon it, 
while I was endeavouring by feveral ways te 
flop the bleeding of an old fiem of a Vine, which 
was cut too near the bleeding feafon, which I 
feared might killit : Having, after other means 
proved ineffectual, tyed a piece of bladder over 
the tranfverfe cut of the Stem, I found the 
Jere ce of the Sap did greatly extend the bladder ; 
evhence I concluded, that if a long glafs Tube 
cuere fixed there in the fame manner, as I had 
before done to the Arteries of feveral living 
Animals, I fhould thereby obtain the real af- 
cending force of the Sap tn that Stem, which 
fucceeded according to my expettation, and 
hence it is, that I have been infenfibly led on, 
to make farther and farther refearches by va- 
riety of Experiments. 
As 


the DRE A GE iv 

‘As the art of Phyfick has of late years been 
much improved by a greater knowledge of the 
animal economy ; [0 doubtlefs a farther infight 
into the vegetable economy muft needs pvro- 
portionably improve our skill in Agriculture 
and Gardening, which gives me reafon to 
hope, that inquiries of this kind will be ac- 
ceptable to many, who are intent upon impro- 
ving thofe innocent, delightful, and beneficial 
Arts : Since they cannot be infenfible that the 
moft rational ground for Succefs za this lau- 
dable purfuit muft arife from a greater in- 
fight into the nature of Plants. 

Finding by many Experiments in the Kae 
chapter, that the Aw is plentifully infpired 
by Vegetables, not only at their roots, but 
alfa thro’ feveral parts of their Trunks and 
Brauches ; this put me upon making a more 
particular znquary into the nature of the Air; 
and to. difcover, if poffible, wherein its great 
tmportance to the life and fupport of Kege- 
tables might confit ; on which account I was 
obliged to delay the publication of the reft of 
thefe Experiments, which were read two years 
face befove the Royal Society, t2ll I had made 
Some progref{s in. this inquiry. An account of 
which L have given in the fixth chapter. 

I Where 


= Them EYE * AY ee. 
Where wt appears by many chymio ftatical 
Experiments, that there zs diffufed thro all 
natural, mutually attracting bodies, a large 
proportion of particles, which, as the firft great 
Author of this important difcovery, Sir Waac 
Newtono“/erves, are capable of being thrown 
off from denfe bodies by heat or fermentation 
into a vigoroufly elaftick and permanently re- 
peliing ftate: And alfo of returning by fer- 
mentation and fometimes without it, into 
denfe bodies; It 1s by this amphibious pro- 
perty of the air, that the main and principal 
operations of Nature are carried on; for a 
mals of mutually attracting particles, with- 
out being blended with a due proportion of 
elaftick repelling ones, would inmany cafes foon 
coalefce into a fluggifh lump. It 2s by thefe pro- 
perties of the particles of matter that he folves 
the principal Phenomena of Nature. AndDr. 
Freind has from the fame principles given a 
very ingenious Rationale of the chief opera- 
tions in Chymifiry. It is therefore of impor- 
tance to have thefe very operative properties of 
natural bodies further afcertained by more 
Experiments and Obfervations: And it zs 
with fatisfaction that we fee them more and 
more confirmed to us, by every farther enquiry 
we 


athe BORGELE AWC TE. vi 


wemake; asthe following Experiments will 
plainly prove, by foewing how great the power 
of the attraction of acid fulphureous partichs 
muft be at fome little diftance from the point 
of contact, to be able moft readily to fubdue 
and fix elaftick aereal particles, which repell 
with a force fuperior to vaft incumbent pref- 
fares: Which particles we find are thereby 
changed from a ftrongly repelling, to as 
ftrongly an attracting ftate: And that ela- 
fticity is no immutable property of atr, is fur- 
ther evident from thefe Experiments ;becaufe 
it were impoffible for [uch great quantities of 
it to be confined in the fubjtances of Animals 
and Vegetables, in an elaftick flate, without 
rending their conflituent parts with a vaft 
explofion. 

I have been careful in making, and faithful 
an relating the refult of thefe Experiments, and 
wifh I could be as happy in drawing the pro- 
per inferences from them. However I may fall 
faort at firft fetting out in this fiatical way of 
inquiring into the nature of Plants, yet there is 
good reafon to believe that confiderable advan. 
ces in the knowledge of their nature may in 
procefs of time be made, by refearches of this 
kind. 

4 Ana 


vil Thé PRES A GO 


And I hope the publication of this Specimen 
of what I have hitherto done, will put others 
upon the fame purfuzts, there being in fo Jarge 
a field, and among {uch aninnumerable variety 
of fubjects, abundant room for many heads 
and hands to be employed in the work: Kor 
the wonderful and fecret operations of Nature 
are foinvolved ana intricate, fo far out of the 
reach of our fenfes, as they prefent themfetves 
to us in their natural order, that it is im- 

polficle for the moft fagacious and penetrating 
genius to pry into them, unlefs he will be at 
the pans of analyling Nature, by a numerous 
and regular feries of :xpertments ; which are 
the only folid foundation whence we may rea- 
fonably expect to make any advance, in the 

real knowledge of the nature of things. 

Luft not omit here publickly to acknowledge, 
that I have in feveral refpects been much ob- 
liged to my ingenious and learned neighbour 
and friend Robert Mathers of the Middle 
Temple, E/q; for bis affiftance herein. 


Ei RRA LS. 


AGE 30. for 3, read 3. p. 32. 1. 6. 1. harden, p. 46.1.9. ©. Fig. 8. 
p. 48. 1, 12. r. were grafted the. p. 62. 1. 6 t. myrtles. p. 74. 1. 26,27- 
r. bunches. p. 84.1, 11. dele above. p. 111. 1. 3.7. ede? os pe 
345. 1.6.1. disbarked. ibid. 1. 13. ©. ae P: 176. 1. 18. 4. nearly 2 = Pe 


247. 1. 22.1. Experiment cyiii. p. 341, iig ate ae bony oF. Pp» 344. 


i, ‘18. dele 8. 
The 


i Dads se ow 


CONTENTS. 
GHA Pe ol 
¥ \Xperiments, foewimg the quantities of 


Ls mozfture tmbibed and perfpired by Plants 
ana Trees. ps 4: 


CHAP. IL 


Experiments, whereby to find out the force 
with which Trees imbibe moifiure. p.76.— 


OF 5 p< i ati Gh 


Experiments, foewing the force of the fap 
an the Vine inthe bleeding feafon. pp. 100. 


(CA PV, 


Experiments, fhewing the ready lateral mo- 
tion of the Sap, and confequently, the la- 
terval communicationof the Sap-veffels. The 
free paffage of it, from the {mall Branches 


towards 


ThesC OuN.T: E ais: 


towards the Stem, as well as from the 
Stem to the Branches, with an account 
of fome, Experiments, relating to the Cir- 
culation, or Non-Circulation of the Sap. 

p28 


C HiA 2 ¥. 
Experiments, whereby to prove, that a con- 
fiderable quantity of air is infpired by 
Plants. p. 148. 


Coit Ack vie 
Al Specimen of an attempt to analyfe the 
Aur by chymio-ftatical Experiments, which 
foew, in how great a proportion Air is 
wrought into the compofition of Animal, 
Vegetable and Mineral Subftances: And 
withal, how readily it refumes its elaf- 
tick State, when in the dzffolution of thofe 
Subfiances tt is difingaged from them. 


P. 155- 

CHA Pavia. 
Of Vegetation. p. Jize 
The Conclufion. | p. 358. 


T He 


DH E 


INTRODUCTION. 


HE farther refearches we make in- 

to this admirable fcene of things, 

the more beauty and harmony we 
feein them: And the ftronger and clearer 
convictions they give us, of the being, power 
and wifdom of the divine Archite@, who 
has made all things to concur with a won- 
derful conformity, in carrying on, by va- 
rious and innumerable combinations of mat- 
ter, fuch a circulation of caufes, and effets, 


as was neceflary to the great ends of na- 
ture. 


And fince weare aflured that the all wife 
Creator has obferved the moft cxa& propor- 
tions, of number, weight and meafure, in 
the make of all things; the moft likely way 
therefore, to get any infight into the na- 
ture of thofe parts of the creation, which 
come within our obfervation, muft in all 
reafon be to number, weigh and meafure. 
And we have much encouragement to pur- 

B fue 


‘5 Vegetable Staticks. 


fue this method, of fearching into the nature 
of things, from the great fuccefs that has 
attended any attempts of this kind. 

Thus, in relation to thofe Planets which 
revolve about our Sun, the great Philofo- 
pher of our age has, by numbering and 
meafuring, difcovered the exact proportions 
that are obferved in their periodical revo- 
lutions and diftances from their common 
centers of motion and gravity: And that 
God has not only comprehended the duft 
of the earth ina meafure, and weighed the 
mountains in f[cales, and the hills in a ba- 
lance, Ufa. xl. 12. but that he alfo holds the 
vatt revolving Globes, of this our folar Sy- 
ftem, moft exa&ly poifed on their common 
center of gravity. 

And if we refleé& upon the difcoveries 
that have been made in the animal cecono- 
my, we fhall find that the moft confider- 
able and rational accounts of it have been 
chiefly owing to the ftatical examination 
of their fuids, vze. by enquiring what quan- 
tity of fluids, and folids diflolved into fluids, 
the animal daily takes in for its fupport 
and nourifhment: And with what force 
and different rapidities thofe fluids are car- 

ried 


Legetable Staticks. > 
ried about in their proper channels, accord- 
ing to the different fecretions that are to 
be made from them: And in what pro- 
portion the recrementitious fluid is convey- 
ed away, tomake room for frefh fupplies ; 
and what portion of this recrement na- 
ture allots to be carried off, by the feveral 
kinds of emundctories and excretory duéts. 
And fince in vegetables, their growth and 
the prefervation of their vegetable life is 
promoted and maintained, as in animals, 
by the very plentiful and regular motion 
of their fluids, which are the vehicles or- 
dained by nature, to carry proper nutriment 
to every part; it is therefore reafonable to 
hope, that in them alfo, by the fame me- 
thod of inquiry, confiderable difcoveries 
may in time be made, there being, in ma- 
ny ref{pects, a great analogy between plants 
and animals. Wipe le 


B 2 CHAP: 


4 Vegetable Staticks. 


CHORRRAR Brow: 


Lixperiments, foewing the quantities imbibed — 
and perfpired by Plants and Trees. 


ExPERIMENT I. 


ULY 3.1724. in order to find out the 
quantity imbibed and perfpired by the 

Sun-Flower, I took a garden-pot (Fig. 1.) 
with a large Sun-Flower, a, 3 feet + + high, 
which was purpofely planted in it when 
young. | 

I covered the pot with a plate of thin 
milled lead, and cemented all the joints faft, 
foas no vapor could pafs, but only air, thro’ 
a {mall glafstubed nine inches long, which 
was. fixed purpofely near the ftem of the. 
plant, to make a free communication with: 
the outward air, and that under.the leaden 
plate. 
I cemented alfo another fhort glafs tube 

ito the plate, two inches long and one 
ie in diameter. Thro’ this tube I watered 
i e plant, and then flopped it up with a cork; 
I Ropped up aifo the holes z, / at the bottom 
of the pot with corks, 


a 
o 


I weighed 


Vegetable Staticks. | 5 


I weighed this pot and plant morning 
and evening, for fifteen feveral days, from 
Fuly 3. to Aug. 8. after which I cut off the 
plant clofe to the leaden plate, and then 
covered the ftump well with cement; and 


upon weighing found there perfpired thro’ 
the unglazed porous pot two ounces every 


twelve hours day, which being allowed in 
the daily weighing of the plant and pot, I 
found the egreateft perfpiration of twelve 
hours in a very warm dry day, to be one 
pound fourteen ounces; the middle rate of 
perfpiration one pound four ounces. The 
per{piration of a dry warm night, without 
any fenfible dew, was about three ounces; 
but when any fenfible, tho’ fmall dew, then 
the perfpiration was nothing; and when a 
large dew, or fome little rain in the night, 
the plant and pot was increafed in weight 
two orthreeounces. N. B. The weights I 
made ufe of were Avoirdupoife wezghts. 

I cut off all the leaves of this plant, and 
laid them in five feveral parcels, according 
to their feveral fizes, and then meafured 
the furface of a leaf of each parcel, by lay- 
ing over it a large lattice made with threads, 
in which the little fquares were 4 of an inch 

B 3 | each ; 


6 Fegetable Staticks. 


each; by numbering of which I had the fur- 
face of the leaves in f{quare inches, which 
multiplied by the number of the leaves in 
the correfponding parcels, gave me the area 
of all the leaves ; by which means I found 
the furface of the wholeplant, above ground, 
to be equal to §616 f{quare inches, or 39 
{quate icet. 

I dug up another Sun-flower, nearly of 
the fame fize, which had eight main roots, 
reaching fifteen inches deep and fideways 
from the ftem: It had befides a very thick 
bufh of lateral roots, from the eight main 
roots, which extended every way in a He- 
mifphere, about nine inches from the fem 
and main roots, 

In order to get an eftimate of the length 
of all the roots, Itook one of the main roots, 
with its laterals, and meafured and weighed 
them,and then weighed the other feven roots, 
with their laterals, by which means I found 
the fum of the length of allthe roots to be 
no lefsthan 1448 feet. 

And fuppofing the periphery of thefe roots 
ata medium, tobe 74 of aninch, then their 
furface will be 2286 fquare inches, or 15. 8 

{quare 


Vegetable Staticks. 7 


f{quare feet; that is, equal to 4 of the furface 
of the plant above ground. 

If, as above, twenty ounces of water, at 
a medium, perfpired in twelve hours day 
(z. e.) thirty four cubick inches of water 
(a cubick inch of water weighing 254. grains) 
then the thirty four cubick inches divided 
by the furface of all the roots, is = 2286 
{quare inches; (Z. e.) s#$<is == 37, this gives 
the depth of water imbibed by the whole 
furface of the roots viz. 4; part of aninch. 

And the furface of the plant above ground, 
being 5616 f{quare inches, by which divid- 
ing the 34 cubick inches, viz. <i¢5 == +15, 
this givesthe depth perfpired by the whole 
furface of the plant above ground, viz. zis 
part of an inch. | 

Hence, the velocity with which water 
enters the furface of the roots to fupply the 
expence of perfpiration, is to the velocity, 
with which the fap perfpires, as 165 : 67, 
Of,a8. spi res, Or nearly ass : 2. 

The area of the tranfverfe cut of the mid- 
dle of the ftem is a {quare inch; therefore 
the areas, on the furface of the leaves, the 
roots, and ftem, are 5616, 2286. t. 

The velocities, in the furface of the leaves, 

B 4 roots, 


8 Vegetable Staticks. 


roots, and tranfyerfe cut of the ftem, are 
gained by a reciprocal proportion of the 
furfaces. 


leaves = s616 2m) eee iG (iach 


: I 
G. 
S < roots —= 2286. | 3 (== ee 
<x 2) ° 
s had = 
flem: = I ce BB 34. inch. 


Now, their perfpiring 34 cubick inches in 
twelve hours day, there muft fo much pafs 
thro’ the ftem in that time; and the velo- 
city would be at the rate of 34 inches in 
twelve hours, if the ftem were quite hollow, 

In order therefore to find out the quanti- 
ty of folid matter in the ftem, Fuly 27th at 
7. a.m. 1 cut up even with the ground a 
Sunflower ; it weighed 3 pounds, in thirty 
days; it was very dry, and had wafted in all 
2 pounds 4 ounces; that is+ of its whole 
weight: So here is a fourth part left for 
folid parts in the ftem, (by throwing a piece 
of green Sun-flower ftem into water, I found 
it very near of the fame {fpecifick gravity 
with water) which filling up fo much of the 
fiem, the velocity of the fap muft be increaf- 
ed proportionably, uzz. ; part more, (by 

| | reafon 


Vegetable Staticks. 9 
reafon of the reciprocal proportion) that 34 
cubick inches may pafs the ftem in twelve 
hours; whence its velocity in the ftem will be 
45+ inches in twelve hours, fuppofing there 
be no circulation nor return of the {ap 
downwards. 

If there be added to 34, (which is én leaft 
velocity) + of it—= 114, this gives the greateft 
velocity, vzz. 453. The fpaces being as 35 
aso the velocitiesowill’be*4 23°: 4533 34. 

But if we fuppofe the pores in the fur- 
face of the leaves to bear the fame propor- 
tion, as the area of the fap veffels in the 
ftem do to the area of the ftem; then the 
velocity, both in the leaves, root and ftem, 
will be increafed in the fame proportion. 

A pretty exa&t account having been ta- 
ken, of the weight, fize, and furface of this 
plant, and of the quantities it has imbibed 
and perfpired, it may not be improper here, 
to enter into a comparifon, of what is taken 
in and perfpired by a human body, and this 
plant. 

The weight of a well fale man is 160 
pound: The weight of the Sunflower is 
three pounds, fo their weights are to each 
Omer as 160 73, or as's3 2: ts 

s oe The 


10 Vegetable Staticks. 


The furface of fuch human body is 15 
fquare feet, or 2160 fquare inches. 

The furface of the Sun-flower is 5616 
fquare inches, fo its furface is to the furface 
of a human body as 26: 10. 

The quantity perfpir’'d by aman in twen- 
ty four hours is 31 ounces, as Dr. Kez// found, 
vide Medicina Statica Britannica, p. 14. 

The quantity per{pired by the plant, in the 
{fame time, is 22 ounces, allowing two ounces 
for the perfpiration of the beginning, and 
ending of the night in Fu/y, viz. after even- 
ing and before morning weighing, juft be- 
fore and after night. 

So the perfpiration of a man to the Sun- 
flower is aS 141: 100. 

Abating the fix ounces of the thirty one 
ounces, to be carried off by refpiration from 
the lungs in the twenty four hours; (which 
I have found by certain experiment tobe fo 
much if not more) the twenty five ounces 
multiplied by 437 -- 2. the number of grains 
in an ounce Avoirdupois, the produ@ is 
10037+ grains; which divided by 254, the 
number of grains in acubick inch of water 
gives 43 cubick inches perfpired by a man: 
Which divided He the furface of i his body, 


VIZ. 


Vegetable Staticks. a1 
Vig. 2160 f{quare inches, the quotient is 
2 part ofa cubick inch perfpired off a {quare 
inch in twenty four hours. Therefore in 
equal furfaces and equal times the man per- 
{pires ==, the plant 72;, or as 50: 15. 
Which excefs in the man is occafioned 
by the very different degrees of heat in each: 
For the heat of the plant cannot be greater 
than the heat of the circum-ambient air, 
which heat in fummer is from 25 to 35 de- 
grees above the freezing point, (ude Exp. 
20.) but the heat of the warmeft external 


parts of a man’s body is 54 fuch degrees; 
and the heat of the blood 64 degrees; 


Which is nearly equal to water heated to 
fuch a degree, as aman can well bear to hold 
his hand in, ftirring it about ; which heat is 
fufficient to makea plentiful evaporation. 
Qu. Since then the perfpirations of equal 
areas, 1N a man anda Sunflower, areto each 
other as 165: 50. or as 3+: 13 andfince the 
degrees of heat areas 2: 1, muft not the fum 
Or quantity of the areas of the pores lying 
in equal furfaces, in the man and Sunflower, 
be as 16 : 1? for it feems that the quantities 
of the evaporated fluid will beas the degrees 
of heat, and the {um of the areas of the pores 
taken together, = 1 Dr. 


12 Vegetable Staticks. 

Dr. Keil/, by eftimating the quantities of 
the feveral evacuations of his body, found 
that he eat and drank, every 24 hours, 4 
pounds 10 ounces. 

The Sunflower imbibed and perfpired in 
the fame time twenty two ounces, fo the 
man’s food, to that of the plant, is as 74 
ounces to 22 ounces, or as 7: 2. 

But compared bulk for buik, the plant im- 
bibes feventeen times more frefh food than 
the man: For deducting five ounces, whick 
Dr. Kezl allows for the feces alvz, there 
will remain fixty nine ounces of frefh li- 
quor, which enters a man’s veins; and an 
equal quantity pafles off every 24 hours. 
Then it will be found, that feventeen times 
more new fluid enters the fap veffels of the 
plant, and paffes off in 24 hours, than there 
enters the veins of a man, and paffes off in 
the fame time. 

And fince, compared bulk for bulk, the 
plant perfpires feventeen times more than 
the man, it wastherefore very neceffary, by 
giving it an extenfive furface, to make a large 
provilion for a plentiful perfpiration in the 
plant, which has no other way of difcharg- 
ing fuperfluities; whereas there is provifion 

. | | made 


Vegetable Staticks. 13 
made in man, to carry off above half of 
what he takesin, by other evacuations. 
For fince neither the furface of his body 
was extenfive enough to caufe fufficient ex- 
halation, nor the additional wreak , arifing 
from the heat of his blood, could carry off a- 
bove half the fluid, which was neceflary to be 
difcharged every twenty four hours; there 
was a neceflity of providing the kidneys, 
to percolate the other half thro’. 

And whereas it is found, that feventeen 
times more “enters, bulk for bulk, into the 
fap .veflels of the plant, than into the veins 
of aman, and goes off intwenty four hours: 
One reafon of this greater plenty of frefh 
fluid, in the vegetable than the animal body, 
may be, becaufe the fluid which is filtrated 
thro’ the roots immediately from the earth, 
is not near fo full fraighted with nutritive 
particles as the chyle which enters the lacteals 
of animals; which defect it was neceflary to 
fupply by the entrance of a much greater 
quantity of fluid. 

And the motion of the fap is thereby much 
accelerated, which in the heartlefs vege- 
table would otherwife be very flow; it ha- 

y ving 


14 Vegetable Staticks. 
ving probably only a progreflive and not a 
circulating motion, as in animals. 

Since then a plentiful perfpiration is 
found fo neceffary for the health of a plane 
or tree, ‘tis probable that many of their dif- 
tempers are owing to a ftoppage of this 
perfpiration, by inclement air. 

The perfpiration in men is often ftopped 
to a fatal degree; not only by the incle- 
mency of the air, but by intemperance, and 
violent heats and colds. But the more tem- 
perate vegetable’s perfpiration can be ftopped 
only by inclement air; unlefs by an un- 
kindly foil, or want of genial moifture it is 
deprived of proper or fufficient nourifhment. » 

As Dr. Kezll obferved in himfelf a con-. 
fiderable latitude of degrees of healthy pers. 
fpiration, froma pound and halfto 3 pounds ; 
I have alfo obferved, a healthy latitude of 
perfpiration in this Sun-flower, from fixteen 
to twenty cight ounces in twelve hours day. 
The more it was watered, the more plenti- 
fully it perfpired, (ceteris paribus) and with. 
fcanty watering the per{piration much abated. 


ExPERIMENT JI. 


From July 34. to Aug. 34.1 weighed 
for 


Vegetable Staticks. iy 


for nine feveral mornings and evenings a 
middle fized Cabbage plant, which grew in 
a garden pot, and was prepared with a leaden 
cover as the Sunflower, Exper. 1/7. Its 
greateft perfpiration in 12 hours day was 1 
pound 9 ounces; its middle perfpiration 
pound 3 ounces, == 32 cubick inches. Its 
furface 2736 {quare inches, or 19 {quare feet. 
Whence dividing the 32 cubick inches by 
2736 {quare inches, it will be found that 
a little more than the + ofan inch depth 
perfpires off its furface in 12 hours day. 
The area of the middle of the Cabbage 
ftem is?$¢ of a fquare inch; hence the ve- 
locity of the fap in the ftem, isto the ve- 
locity of the perfpiring fap, on the furface 
@b ENC CAVES, 25,2730, 222.) 420805) 
ZAGS. KX 156 
wore 
ance is to be made for the folid parts of the 
ftem, (by which the paflage is narrowed) the 
velocity will be proportionably increafed. 
The length ofall its roots 470 feet, their 
periphery at a medium, of an inch, hence 
their area will be 256 {quare inches nearly; 
which being fo {mall, in proportion to the 
area of the leaves, the fap muft go with 
| near 


for —- 4268. But ifan allow- 


16 Vegetable Staticks. 


near eleven times the velocity thro’ the fur: 
face of the roots, that it does thro’ the fur- 
face of the leaves. 

And fetting the roots at a medium at 12 
inches long, they muft occupy a hemifphere 
of earth two feet diameter, that is 2.1 cu- 
bick feet of earth. 

By comparing the furfaces of the roots of 
plants, with the furface of the fame plant 
above ground, we fee the neceflity of cut- 
ting off many branches, from atran{planted 
tree : for if 256 fquare inches of root in 
furface was neceffary to maintain this Cab- 
bage in a healthy natural ftate: fuppofe upon 
digging it up, in order totranfplant, half the 
roots be cut off (which is the cafe of moft 
young tranfplanted trees) then it’s plain, that 
but half the ufual nourifhment can be car- 
ried up, through the roots, on that account ; 
and a very much lefs proportion on account 
of the {mall hemifphere of earth, the new 
planted fhortened roots occupy ; and on ac-_ 
count of the loofe pofition of the new turn- 
ed earth, which touches the roots at firit 
but in few points, ‘This (as well as ex- 
perience) ftrongly evinces the great necet- 
firy of well watering new plantations. 

Which 


Vegetable Staticks. 17 
Which yet muft be done with caution, 
for the skilful and ingenious Mr. Pdzlip 
Miller, Gardiner of the Botanick garden at 
Chelfea, in his very ufeful Gardiners and 
Florifts Dictionary, fays, “ That he has often 
<< feen trees, that have had too much water 
‘« given them after planting, which has rotted 
<< all the young fibres, as faft as they have 
‘ been pufhed an and fo many times has 
‘ killed the tree.” Supplement Vol. Me of 
planting. And I obferved, that the dwarf 
pear-tree, whofe root was fet in water, in 
Fixper. 7. decreafed very much daily in the 
quantity imbibed ; wzz. becaufe the fap vef- 
fels of the roots, like thofe of the cut off 
boughs, in the fame experiment, were fo 
faturated and clogged with moifture, by ftand- 
ing in water, that more of ir could not be 
drawn up to fupport the leaves. 


w 


A 


EXPERIMENT HII. 


From July 28. to Aug.25. 1 weighed for 
twelve feveral mornings and evenings, a 
thriving Vzme growing in a pot; I was fur- 
nifhed, with this and other trees, from his 
Majefty’s garden at Alampton-court, by the 

C favour 


13 Vegetable Staticks. 


favour of the eminent Mr. Wife. This 
vine was preparcd with a cover, as the Sun- 
flower was. Its greateft perfpiration in 12 
hours day, was 6 ounces -+ 240 grains; its 
middle perfpiration 5 ounces -+- 240 grains 
==> .to.9. /cubick .mehes. 

The furface ofits leaves was 1820 {quare 
inches, or 12 iquare feet -++- 92 fquare 
inches; whence dividing 9% cubick inches, 
by the area of the leaves, it is found that 
s$x part of an inch depth, perfpires off ip 
12 hours day. 

The area of a tranfverfe cut of its ftem, 
Was equal to +; of a {quare inch: hence the 
{fap’s velocity here to its velocity on the fur- 
face of the leaves, will be as1820 % 4 == 
7280:1. Then the real velocity of the fap’s 
motion.in the: tiem. is =— 45> ==<3'S taenes 
in twelve hours. 

This is fuppofing the ftem to be a hollow 
tube: but by drying a large vine branch (in 

chimney corner) which I cut off, in the 
bleeding feafon, I found the folid parts were 
f the ftem; hence the cavity thro’ which 
he fap pailes, being fo much narrowed, its 
velocity will be 4 times ag great, WS. 152 
inches in 12 hours. 


; 
soy 


But 


Vegetable Staticks, 19 


But it is further tobe confidered, that if 
the fap moves in the form of vapor and 
not of water, being thereby rarified, its ve- 
locity will be increafed in a dire@ propor- 
tion of the fpaces, which the fame quan- 
tity of water and vapor would occupy : 
And if the vapor is fuppofed to occupy 10 
times the {pace which it did, when in the 
form of water, then it muft move 10 times 
fatter; fo that the fame quantity or weight 
of each may pafs in the fame time, thro’ 
the fame bore or tube: And {uch allow- 
ance ought to be made in all thefe calcu- 
lations concerning the motion of the fap in 
vegetables. 


EXPERIMENT IV. 


From Fuly 29. to Aug. 25. 1 weighed 
for 12 feveral mornings and cyenings, a pa- 
radife ftock Apple-tree, which grew in a 
garden pot, covered with lead, as the Sun- 
flower: it hadnot a bufhy head full of leaves, 
but thin fpread, being in all but 163 leaves; 
whofe furface was equal to 1589 fquare 
inches, or 11 {quare feet -+- 5 fquare inches, 

The greateft quantity it perfpired in 12 

C 2 hours 


20 Vegetable Staticks. 


hours day, was 11 ounces, its middle quan- 
tity 9 ounces, or 153 cubick inches. 

The 15% cubick inches perfpired, divid- 
-ed by the furface 1589 fquare inches, gives 
the depth perfpired off the furface in 12 hours 
day, vz. <>; 0f an inch. 

The area of a tranfverfe cut of its ftem, L of 
an inch fquare, whence the fap’s velocity 
here, will be to its velocity on the furface 
of the leaves as 1589 X 4== 6356: 1. 


EXPERIMENT V. 


From Fuly 28. to Aug. 25. 1 weighed for 
ro feveral mornings and evenings a very 
thriving Lzmon-tree, which grew in a gar- 
den pot, and was covered as above: Its great- 
eft per{piration in 12 hours day was 8 ounces, 
its middle perfpiration 6 ounces, equal to 
ro2 cubick inches. In the night it perfpired 
fometimes half an ounce, fometimes no- 
thing, and fometimes increafed 1 or 2 oun- 
ces in weight, by large dew or rain. 

The furface of its leaves was 2557 
{quare inches, or 17 fquare feet + 59 
fquare inches ; dividing then the 102 cubick 
inches perfpired by this fyrface, gives the 

4 depth 


Vegetable Staticks. 2Y 


depth perfpired in 12 hours day, vz. s33 
of an inch. 

r rsx inthe vinein 12 
hours’ day. 
s>in a man, ina day 
and a night. 
rzy in a Sunflower, 
So the feveralfore- | in a day-and night. 
going perfpirations 4 +-in acabbage, in 12 
in equal areas are, | hours day. 
| 1-7 in an apple-tree, 
u 


in 12 hours day. 
>¢7 in a limon-tree, 
in 12 hours day. 


The area of the tranfverfe cur of the ftem 
- GE tis imon tree’ was ——' ¢' 44 “of a 
fquare inch; hence the fap’s velocity here, 
will be to its velocity on the furface of the 
25$7 XK TOO 
14.4 

This is fuppofing the whole ftem to be a hol- 
low tube; but the velocity will be increafed 
both in the ftem andthe leaves, in propor- 
tion as the paffage of the fap is narrowed by 

the folid parts. 
By comparing the very different degrees 
of perfpiration, in thefe 5 plants andtrees, 
C 3 we 


leaves, aS.1768: 1 for goes 


22 Vegetable Staticks. 


we may obferve, that the limon-tree, which 
is an ever-green, perfpires much lefs than the 
Sunflower, or than the Vine or theApple-tree, 
whofe leaves fall off in the winter; and as 
they perfpire lefs, fo are they the better able 
to furvive the winter’s cold, becaufe they 
Want proportionably but a very {miall fup- 
ply of frefh nourifhment to fupport them : 
Like the exangueous tribe of animals, frogs, 
toads, tortoifes, ferpents, infects, &e. which 
as they perfpire little; fo do they live the 
whole winter without food. And this I 
find holds true in 14 other different forts 
of ever-greens, on which I have made Ex- 
periments. 

The above mentioned Mr. AdiHer made 
the like experiments in the Botanick-gar- 
den at Chelfeaz, ona plantain-tree, an aloe; 
anda paradife apple-tree; which he weigh- 
ed morning, noon, and night, for feve- 
ral fucceflive days. I fhall here infert the di- 
aries of them, as he communicated them to 
mic, that the influence of the different tem- 
peratures of the air, on the perfpiration of 
thefe plants, may the better be feen. 

The pots which he made ufe of were 
glazed, and had noholesin their bottoms, as 

eu garden 


Vegetable Static 


ks. 2% 


garden pots ufually have; fo that all the 


moifture, which was wanting 


inthem upon 


weighing , muft neceflarily be imbibed, by 
the roots of thofe plants, and thence per- 


{pired off thro’ their leaves. 


“4 diary of the perfpiration of 


the Mufa Ar: 


bor, or Plantain-tree of tHe Weft-Indies. 
The whole furface of the plant was 14 
Square feet, 8 -+ 7 inches. The diffe- 


rent degrees of heat of the 


air, are here 


noted by the degrees above the freezing 
point in my Thermom. defcriv'd in Exp. 20. 


1726 Weight a Weight] 4 [Weight 4 


Sr =a 
at 5 GOP abiz ile | at-6 g 
May.|Morn. |2 |Noon.|3 | Even. |3 


pd. ou. pd. ou. |pd. ou. 
17/38 5 131 8 o [38 137 14 134 
18 37 15 129 7 52,45 137 37,31 


19 37 4 132 [37 2 35 i370 131 
20 136 14 [34 136 12 |48 |36 rt 136 
21 |36 10 [39 [37 © [5° 136 15 144 


2z |36 14 [31 36 11435 
23/36 6 [32 [36 a bel We 5 31 | 


This evening 12 ounces of water were poured in 


N, B. This plane 
(tood in a flove, witha 
{mall fire init; the af- 
pe& of the flove was 
South-eaft, 


A hot clear day. This 
morning he obferved, 
large drops of water at 
the exitémity of every 
leaf, and we may obferve 
‘hat it perfpires very 
much this day. 

An extream hotclear 


ay. 
Moderately hot but clear. 
This morn, 12 ounces of 
water poured into the 
por. Mixture of Sun and 
Clouds. 

Much thunder; fome rain 
and hail at a diftance. 

A gloomy day but ne 
rain. 


to the por; and it was 


removed from the ftove into acool roum, whereit hada free air but no 


Gun, the windows being North-weft. 


C 4 


Calm 


24 


1726|Weight 


at 6 
May.| Morn. 


pd. ou. 


Vegetable Staticks. 


27 136 104,23 |36 
28 136 6 [223/36 


35 10 }282135 
35 00 426 534 


at 12 72" pat 


Some rain and cloudy 
At this time, the undef 
leaves of the plant be- 
gan to witherand decay 5 
and the top leaf to un- 
fold and fpread abroad ; 
but they are obferved ne- 
ver to grow bigger, af- 
ter they are fully opened. 
A temperate day. 
Temperate weather not 
very clear, 


Some rain. The whole 
plant begins to change 
colour, and appear fickly. 


He then removed the 
pelave into the ftove 
again inordertorecover . 
it; butic continued to 
fade, and in twoor three 
days dyed. 

4 gp Jats 234 : ee cee 

2 y3 

sc) calle ac tl | 9 hee plant decayed. 


We may obferve from this diary, that 
this plant, when in the ftove, ufually per- 
fpired more in 6 hours before noon than 
in 6 hours afternoon; and that it per{pired 
much lefsin the night than in the day time: 
find fometimes increafed in weight in the 
night, by imbibing the moifture of the 
ambient air; and that both in the flove and 


In 


Vegetable Staticks. 25 


in the cool room. Upon making an cfti- 
mate, of the quantity perfpired off a {quare 
inch of this plant, in 12 hours day, it comes 
but to =, of a cubick inch; on the 
18t day of May, when by far its greateft 
perfpiration was; for on feveral other days 


it was much lefs. 


Al diary of the Aloe Africana Caulefcens 
folits [pinofis, macults ab utraque parte Al. 
bicantibus notatis, Commelini hort. Amft. 
commonly called the Carolina Aloe. It 
was a large plant of its kind. It ftood 
in a glafs-cafe, which had a South 5 i 


without a fire. 


1726 Weight 4 Weight 4 Weight 4 

hat6/e at 6 |8 | at 6 |B 
May. Morn. |3 |Noon. | 3 |Night. 15 | 

'pd. ou. 

Loew Go Vecrlay. 2,136 \45 3: 1305 
19 41 ale 14 {315/40 12 30 
20 '40 123|2 LOWIZE 140) 85 292 
21 '40 931/27 abe 63:30 |40 bate | 
2z2 140 6 253/40 55129 140 4 i273" This evening promif- 


| ing fome rain, he fet 
‘the pot out, to receive 
ia litle, and then wip- 
jing the leaden furface of 
the pot dry, he fet it 
‘into the glafs-cafe a- 
‘gain. 
1! 1 Now the pot broke, 
25 141 10 (247/41 Be (*" 5 7? and fgalieed any fur- 
| ther obfervations. 


We may obferve, that this Aloe increafed 
in weight moft nights, and perfpired moft 
in the morning. A diary 


26 Vegetable Staticks. 


A dary of a {mall Paradife-Apple, with one 
upright fem 4 feet high; and two [mall 
lateral branches about & inches long. This 
plant flood under a cover of wood whith 
was open on all fides. 


1726) | 
May. 
18 [37 41137 3 [22 [37 1 [20 
ee as FOG? 38 Se ee 
2 18236 10,5423 | 20351 Ne eee ee 
22) (3° Je 22 3K a hig Le 9 i. and become fpeckled for 
z1 j36 717 Bo 5 i743 3 4 20 iwant of dew. 
ZZ 4370 3218; 30 I [24 136 2,223 Then he removed the 
{ | plant into the ftove. 
to try what effect thae 
would have on its per- 
fpirtion. 
£ i ar aa ~ =f a4 i P . . 
24 36 00 26 35 «8 137-35 52342] Acthis time theleaves 
Sareg | {|  |were withered with the 
i : -c 
heatand hung down as if 
| | they would fall off. 
| 
Beige A lao! 2G SECabaes Go) 26 At this time feveral 
tee Fe ues 2 35 3 inf ¢ ' of the leaves began to 
fall off. 
26 134 Q |285 34 6,|34 34 1% 32] Ail the leaves fallen 
Ros a1428 | off; except a few {mall 
cof 133 Y fae Ay tae eos ane 
ones, at the extremities 


f the branches which 
had put out, finee the 
plant was in the ftove. 
The earth it food in 
[was very moift all the 
time. 


In Oéfober 1725. Mr. Miller took up 
an African Briony-root, which when cleared 
romthe mould weighed 8 pound ounce ; 
he laid it on a fhelf in the ftove, where 
ir remained till the March following ; when 
upon weighing he found it had loft of its 
E weight, 


5. 


Vegetable Staticks. 27 
weight. In April it fhot out 4 branches, 
two of which were 33 feet long, the other 
two were Oneofthem 14 inches, the other 
9 inches, in length: Thefe all produced 
fair large leaves, it had loft 14 ounce in 
weight, and in three wéek$ more it loft 
2% ounces more; and was much withered, 


EXPERIMENT VI. 


Spéat-mint veing a plant that thrives mot 
kindly in water, (in order the more ac- 
curately to obferve what water it would 
imbibe, and perfpire by night and day, in 
wet or dry wéather) f cemented at r a plant 
of it m, into the inverted fyphon ry x 6 
(Fig. 2.) the fyphon was ¢ inch diam. at 4, 
but larger at r. 

I filled it full of water, the plant imbib- 
ed the water fo as to make it fall in the 
day, (in March) near an inch and half from 
$tof;and inthe night ¢ inch from ¢ to z: 
but one night, when it was fo cold, as to 
make the Thermometer fink to the freezing 
point, then the mint imbibed nothing, but 
hung down its head; as did alfo the young 
beans in the garden, their fap being great 

ly 


28 Vegetable Staticks. 


ly condenfed by cold. In a rainy day the 
mint imbibed very little. 

I purfued this Experiment no farther, Dr. 
Woodward having long fince, from feveral 
curious experiments and obfervations, given 
an account in the Philofophical Tranfactions, 
of the plentiful perfpirations of this plant. 


EXPERIMENT VII. 


In Auguft, 1 dug up a large dwarf Pear- 
tree, which weighed 71 pounds 8 ounces s 
I fet its root in a known quantity of wa- 
ter; it imbibed 15 pounds of water in 10 
hours day, and perfpired at the fame time 
15 pounds 8 ounces. 

In Fuly and Auguft, I cut off feveral 
branches of Apple-trees, Pear, Cherry, and 
Apricock-trees, two of a fort; they were of 
feveral fizes from 3 to 6 feet long, with pro- 
portional lateral branches; and the tran{verfe 
cut of the largeft part of their ftems was a- 
bout an inch diameter. 

I ftripped the leaves off of one bough of 
each fort, and then fet their ftems in fepa- 
rate glafles, pouring in known quantities of 
water. ee 

The 


a \ 


A i, \ 


NI 


n feulps. 


z 


J. Gribel, 


\ 
\ 


Ry OE 


1 tie 


en ae 


hoor 


poem ig echelon nm al 


Vegetable Staticks. 29 


The boughs with leaves on them im- 
bibed fome I5 ounces, fome 20 ounces, - 
25 or 30 Ounces in 12 hours day, more or 
lefs in proportion to the quantity of leaves 
they had; and when I weighed them at night 
they were lighter than in the morning. 

While thofe without leaves imbibed but 
one ounce, and were heavier in the even- 
ing thanin the morning, they having per- 
{pired little. 

The quantity imbibed by thofe with leaves 
decreafed very much every day, the fap 
veflels being probably fhrunk, at the tranf- 
verfe cut, andtoo much faturate with wa- 
ter, to let any more pafs; fo that ufually in 
4. or 5 days the leaves faded and withered 
much, 

I repeated the fame experiment with Elm- 
branches, Oak, Ofier, Willow, Sallow,Afpen, 
Curran,Goosberry, and Philbud branches; but 
none of thefe imbibed fo much as the fore- 
going, and feveral forts of ever-greens very 
much lefs. 


EXPERIMENT VIII. 


Avguft 15, l cut off alarge Ruffet-pippin, 
With 


30 Levetable Staticks. 

with two inches ftem, and its 12 adjoining 
leaves; 1 fet the ftem ina little viol of wa- 
tcr it imbibed and perfpired in three days 
# of an ounce. 

Atthe fame time I cut off from the fame 
tree another bearing twig of the fame 
length, with 12 leaves on it, but no apple; 
it imbibed in the fame three daysnear 2 of 
an ounce. 

About the fame time I fet in a viol of 
water a fhore ftem of the fame tree, with 
two largeappies on it without leaves; they 
imbibed near 2 ounce in two days. 

So in thisExperiment, the apple and the 
leaves imbibe * ounce; the leayes a- 
Jone near ;, but the two large apples impbib- 
ed and perfpired but $ part fo much asthe 
12 leaves; then one apple imbibed the = parr 
of what was imbibed by the 12 leaves, there- 
fore two leaves imbibe and per{pire as much 
as one apple; whence their perfpirations 
fecm to be proportionable to their furfaces ; 
the furface of the apple being nearly equal 
to the fum of the upper and under furfaces 
of the two leaves. 

Whence it is probable, that the ufe of 
thefe leaves, (which are placed, juft where 

| the 


Vegetable Staticks. 31 
the fruit joinsto the tree) is to bring nou- 
rifhment to the fruit. And accordingly I 
obferve that the leaves, next adjoining to 
bloffoms, are, in the fpring, very much ex- 
panded, when the other leaves, on barren 
thoots, are but beginning to fhoot: And 
that all peach leaves are pretty large before 
the bloffom goes off: And that in apples 
and pears the leaves are one third or half 
crown, before the bloflom blows: So pro- 
vident is nature in making timely provifion, 
for the nourifhing the yet embrio-fruit. 


EXPERIMENT IX, 


Fuly 15. [cut off two thriving Hop-vines 
near the ground, in a thick fhady part of 
the garden, the pole ftill ftanding; I ftrip- 
ed the leaves off one of thefe vines, and {er 
both their ftems, in known quantities of 
Water, in. little bottles; that .with, leaves 
imbibed in 12 hours day 4 ounces, and that 
without leaves 4 ounce. 

I took another hop pole with its vines 
On it, and carried it out of the hop ground, 
into a free open expofure; thefe imbibed 
and perfpired as much more as the former 

in 


32 Vegetable Staticks. 


in the hop-ground: Which is doubtlefs 
the reafon why the hop-vines on the out- 
fides of gardens, where moft expofed to the 
air, are fhort and poor, in comparifon of 
thofe in the middle of the ground; vzz. be- 
caufe being much dried, their fibres hardens 
fooner, and therefore they cannot grow fo 
kindly as thofe in the middle of the ground; 
which by fhade are always kept moifter, and 
more dudtile. 

Now there being 1ooohills in an acre 
of hop-ground, and each hill having three 
poles, and each pole three vines, the num- 
ber of, vines will be 9000; each of which 
imbibing 4 ounces, the fum of all the oun- 
ces, imbibed in an acre in 12 hours day, will 
be 36000 ounces, == 15750000 grains = 
62007 cubick inches or 220 gallons; which 
divided by 6272640, the number of {quare 
inchesin an acre, it will be found, that the 
quantity of liquor perfpired by all the hop- 
Vines, will be equal to an area of liquor, 
as broad as an acre, and -; part of aninch 
deep, befides what evaporated from the 
earth. | 

And this quantity of moifture in a kind- 
ly ftate of the air is daily carried off, in 

a fufh- 


Vegetable Staticks. 33 
a fufficient quantity, to keep the hops in 
a healthy ftate; but in a rainy moift ftate 
of air, without a due mixture of dry wea- 
ther, too much moifture hovers about the 
hops, fo as to hinder in a good meafure the 
kindly perfpiration of the leaves, whereby 
the ftagnating fap corrupts, and breeds mol- 
dy fen, which often fpoils vaft quantities 
of flourifhing hop-grounds. This was the cafe 
in the year 1723, when 10 or 14 days al- 
moft continual rains fell, about the latter 
half of Fuly, after 4 months dry weather ; up- 
- on which the moft flourifhing and promifing 
hops were all infected with mold or fen, 
in their leaves and fruit, while the then 
poor and unpromifing hops efcaped, and pro. 
duced plenty ; becaufe they being {mall, did 
not perfpire fo great a quantity as the others; 
nor did they confine the perfpired vapor , 
fo much as the large thriving vines did, in 
their fhady thickets. | 
This rain on the then warm earth made 
the grafs fhoot out, as faft as if it were in a 
hot bed; and the apples grew fo precipitate- 
ly, that they were of avery flafhy conflitu- 
tion, fo asto rot more remarkably than 
had ever been remembred. 
D ‘The « 


34 Vegetable Staticks. 


The planters obferve, that when a mold or 
fen has once feized any part of the ground, 
it foon runs over the whole; and that the 
grafs and other herbs, under the hops, are 
infeed with it. 

Probably becaufe the fmall feeds of this 
quick growing mold, which foon come to 
maturity, are blown over the whole ground - 
Which {preading of the feed may be the 
reafon why fome grounds are infected with 
fen for feveral years fucceflively; uz. from 
the feeds of the laft years fen: Might it not 
then be advifeable to burn the fenny hop- 
Vines as {oon as the hops are picked, in hopes 
thereby to deftroy fome ef the feed of the 
mold? 

“ Mr. Auftin of Canterbury obferves fen — 
to be more fatal to thofe grounds that 
““ are low and fheltered, than to the high 
« and opengrounds; to thofe that are fhel- 
“ ving to the North, than to the fhelving 
“ to the South; to the middle of grounds, 
«‘ than to the outfides; to the dry and 
gentle grounds, than to the moiftand ftiff 
grounds. This was very apparent through. 
és out the Plantations, where the land had 
‘‘ the fame workmanfhip, and help beftow- 

t4 ed 


€ 


~ 


-“ 
wm 


at 
ey 


eg 
av oo 


Vegetable S. taticks, gue 


« ed upon it, and was wrought at the fame 
“< time; but if in either of thefe cafes there 
<¢ was a difference, it had a different effect ; 
< and the low and gentle grounds, that lay 
<¢ neglected, were then feen lefs diftemper- 
“ed, than the open and moift, that were 
“ carefully managed and looked after. 

< The honey dewsare obferved to come 
* about the 11 of Zune, which by the middle 
“ of Fuly turn the leaves black, and make 
« them ftink. 

I have in Fw/ly (the feafon for fire blatfts, 
as the planters call them) feen the vines in 
the middle of a hop-ground all fcorched 
up almoft from one end of a large ground 
to the other, when a hot gleam of Sun- 
fhine has come immediately after a fhower 
of rain; at which time the vapors are of- 
ten feen withthe naked eye, but efpecially 
with reflecting Telefcopes, to afcend fo 
plentifully, as to make a clear and difting 
object become immediately very dim and 
tremulous. Nor wasthere any dry gravel- 
ly vein in the ground, along the courfe of 
| this fcorch. It was therefore probably ow_ 
ing to the much greater quantity of {corch- 
ing vapors, in the middle than outfides of 

Diz the 


36 Vegetable Staticks. 


the ground, and that being a denfer medi- 
um, it was much hotter than a more rare 
medium. 

And perhaps, the great volume of afcend- 
ing vapor might make the Sun-beams con- 
verge a little toward the middle of the ground, 
that being a denfer medium, and thereby 
increafe the heat confiderably ; for I obferv- 
ed, that the courfe of the fcorched hops 
was in aline at right angles, tothe Sun- 
beams about a 11 a clock, at which time 
the hot gleam was: The hop-ground was 
in a valley which run from South-weft to 
North-eaft: And to thebeft of my remem- 
brance, there wasthen but little wind, and 
that in the courfe of the fcorch; but had 
there been fome other gentle wind, either 
North or South, ‘tis not improbable but 
that the North wind gently blowing the 
Volume of rifing wreak on the South-fide 
of the ground, that fide might have been 
moft fcorched, and fo vice verfa. 

As to particular fire-blafts, which fcorch 
here and there a few hop-vines, or one Or 
two branches of a tree, without damaging 
the next adjoining; what A/fronomers ob- 


ferve, may hint | co us a no very improbable 
caufe 


Fegetable Staticks. 37 


caufe of it; vwsg. They frequently obferve 
(efpecially with the refleting Telefcopes) 
(mall feparate portions of pellucid vapors 
floating in the air; whichtho’ not vifible to 
the naked eye, are yet confiderably denfer 
thanthe circumambient air: And vapors of 
fuch a degree of denfity may very proba- 
bly, cither acquire fuch a {calding heat from 
the Sun, as will fcorch what plants they 
touch, efpecially the more tender: An effect, 
which the gardiners about London have too 
often found to their coft, when they have 
incautioufly put beil-glafies over their Colly- 
flowers, early in a frofty morning, before 
the dew was evaporated off them; which 
dew being raifed by the Sun’s warmth, and 
confined within the glafs, did there form a 
denfe tranfparent fcalding vapor, which burnt 
and killed the plants. Or perhaps, the up- 
per or lower furface of thefe tranfparent fe- 
parate flying volumes of vapors may, among 
the many forms they revolve into, femetimes 
approach fo near to ahemifphere, or hemi- 
cylinder, as thereby to make the Sun-beams 
converge enough, often to icorch the more 
tender plants they fhall falion: And fome- 
times alfo, parts of the more hardy plants 

YP +2 and 


38 Vegetable S. taticks, 


and trees, in proportion to the greater or 
lefs convergency of the Sun’s rays. 


The learned Boerhaave, in his Theory of 


PE PHTT: p. 245. obferves, ‘* That thofe 


€¢ 


‘ white clouds which appear in fummer- 
time, are as it were fo many mirrours, 
and occafion exceffive heat. Thefe cloudy 
Mirrours are fometimes round, fome- 
times concave, polygonous, dc. when 
the face of heaven is covered with fuch 
white clouds, the Sun fhining among 
them, muft of neceffity produce a vehe- 
ment heat; fince many of his rays, which 
would otherwitfe, perhaps, never touch 
our earth, are hereby refle&ed to us; thus 
if the Sun be on one fide, and the clouds 
on the oppofite one, they will be per- 
fe& burning glafles. And hence the phz- 
nomena of thunder. 

«I have fometimes (continues he) ob- 
ferved a kind of hollow clouds, full of 
hail and fnow, during the continuance 
of which the heat was extreme; fince by 
{uch condenfation they were enabled to 
refie& much more ftrongly. After this 


‘ came a fharp cold, and then the clouds 


diicharged their hail in great quantity; 
te) 


Vegetable Staticks. 39 


“ to which fucceeded a moderate warmth. 
<¢ Frozen concave cjouds therefore, by their 
‘< great reflections, produce a vigorous hear, 
‘and the fame when refolved exceflive 
<¢ ‘¢okd. 

Whence we fee that blafts may be occa-. 
fioned by the refleGtions of the clouds, as 
well as by the above mentioned refraction 
of denfe tran{parent vapors. 

Fuly 21. T obferved that at that feafon 
the top of the Sunflower being tender, and 
the flower near beginning to blow, that if 
the Sun rife clear the flower faces towards 
the Eaft, and the Sun continuing to fhine, 
at noon, it faces to the South, and at 6 in 
the evening to the Weft: And this not 
by turning round with the Sun, but by nu- 
tation; the caufe of which is, that the fide 
of the ftem next the Sun perfpiring moft, it 
fhrinks, and this plant perfpires much. 

I have obferved the fame in the tops of 
ferufalem -artichokes and of garden- beans 
in very hot Sun-fhine. 


EXPERIMENT X. 


fuly 27. 1 fixed an Apple-branch m, 3 
D 4 feet 


40 Vegetable Staticks, 


feet long + inch diameter, full of leaves, 
and lateral fhoots to the tube ¢, 7 feet 
long s diameter. (Fig. 3.) I filled the tube 
with water, and then immerfed the whole 
branch as far as over the lower end of the 
- tube, into the veffel wu full of water. 
The water fubfided 6 inches the firft 
two hours (being the firft filling of the 


fap veffels) and 6 inches the following night, | 


4 inches the next day; and 2 -+ } the fol- 
lowing night. 

The third day in the morning I took 
the branch out of the water; and hung 
it with the Tube afhxed to it in the open 
air; it imbibed this day 27 -|-% inches in 
12 hours. 

This Experiment fhews the great power 
of perfpiration ; fince when the branch 
was immerfed in the veffel of water, the 
7 feet column of water in the tube, above 
the furface of the water, could drive very 


little thro’ the leaves, till the branch was 


expofed to the open air. 

This alfo proves, that the perfpiring mat- 
ter of trees is rather actuated by warmth, 
and fo exhaled, than protruded by the 
force of the fap upwards. 


And 


—— 


Vegetable Staticks. AY 

And this holds true in animals, for the 
perfpiration in them is not always ereateft 
in the greateft force of the blood; but then 
often leatt of all, as in fevers. 

I have fixed many other branches in the 
fame manner to long tubes, without im. 
merfing them in water ; which tubes, being 
filled with water, I could fee precifely, by 
the defcent of the water in the tube 7, how 
faft it perfpired off ; and how very little per- 
fpired in a rainy day, or when there were 
no leaves on the branches. 


EXPERIMENT XI. 


Aug. 17. At’ 11 a: m, | cemented to 
the tube a 6 (Fig. 4.) 9 feet long, and 4 inch 
diameter an Apple-branch ds feet long « 
inch diameter; I poured water into the tube, 
which it imbibed plentifully, at the rate of 
3 feet length of the tube in an hour. At 
1 aclock I cut off the branch at ¢, 13 inches 
below the glafs-tube. To the bottom of 
the remaining ftem I tyed a glafs ciftern z, 
covered with ox-gut, to keep any of the 
water which droped from the ftem cd from 
evaporating. At the fame time I fet the 

branch 


42 Vegetable Staticks. 


branch dr which I had cut off ina known 
quantity of water, in the veffel x, (Fig. 5.) 
the branchin the veffel x imbibed 18 oun- 
ces of water, in 18 hours day and 12 hours 
night; in which time only 6 ounces of wa- 
ter had paffed thro’ the ftem ¢ 4 (Fig. 4.) 
which had a column of water 7 feet highs 
prefling upon it all the time. 

This again fhews the great power of per- 
f{piration ; to draw three times more. water; 
in the fame time, thro’ the long flender 
parts of the branch 7 (fig. 5.) than was 
preffed thro’alarger fteme 6 (Fig. 4.) of the 
fame branch; but 13 inches long with 7 
feet preffure of water uponit, in the tubeaé. — 

I tryed in the fame manner another ap- 
ple-branch, which in 8 hours day imbibed 
20 ounces, while only 8 ounces paffed thro’ 
the ftem ¢4, (Fig. 4.) which had the column 
of water on it. 

The fame I tried with a quince branch, 
which in 4 hours day imbibed 2 ounces +- 
=, While but } ounce paffed thro’ the fem 
cb (Fig. 4.) which had 9 feet weight of wa- 
ter prefling on it. 

Note, All thefe (under this Experiment 
11.) were made the firft day, before the 

fiem 


\\ 


Vegetable Staticks. 43 


fiem could be any thing faturate with wa- 
ter, or the fap-veflels fhrunk fo as to hin- 
der its paflage. 


ExPERIMENT XII, 


I cut off from a dwart Apple-tree ew the 
top of the branch / (Fig. 6.) which was an 
inch diameter, and fixed to the ftem JZ, the 
glafs-tube 74: then I poured water into 
the tube, which the branch would imbibe, 
fo as to drink down 2 or 3 pints in aday, 
efpecially if I fucked with my mouth at 
the top of the tube 4, fo as that afew air 
bubbles were drawn out of the ftem /; then 
the water was imbibed fo faft, that if I im- 
mediately {crewed on the mercurial gage, 
mry x, the mercury would be drawn up 
to r, 12 inches higher than in the other 
leg. 

At another time I poured into the tube /, 
fixed to a golden Renate-tree, a quart of 
high rectified {pirit of wine, camphorated, 
which quantity the ftem imbibed in 3 hours 
{pace ; this killed one half of the tree: this I 
didtotry if I could give a flavour of cam- 
phire to the apples which were in great 

plenty 


AA Vegetable Staticks. 


plenty on the branch. I could not perceive 
any alteration in the tafte of the apples, tho’ 
they hung feveral weeks after; but the fmell 
of the camphire was very firong in the 
ftalks of the leaves, and in every part of the 
dead branch. 

I made the fame experiment on a vine, 
with ftrongly f{cented orange-flower-water 3 
the event was the fame, it did not penetrate 
into the grapes, but very fenfibly into the 
wood and ftalks of the leaves. 

I repeated the fame experiment on two 
diftant branches of a large Catharine pear- 
tree, with ftrong decoctions of faffafras, 
and of elder flowers, about 30 days before 
the pears were ripe; but I could not per- 
ceive any tafte of the decodtions in the pears, 

Tho’ in all thefe cafes the fap-veflels of 
the ftem were firongly impregnated with 
a good quantity of thefe liquors; yet the 
capillary fap-veflels near the fruit were fo 
fine, that they changed the texture of, and 
aflimilatedto their own fubfiance thofe high 
tafted and perfumed liquors; in the fame 
manner as graffs and buds change the very 
different fap of the flock to that of their 
own fpecifick nature. 

This 


Vegetable Staticks. AS 


This experiment may fafely be repeated 
with well fcented and perfumed common 
water, which trees will imbibe at /7 without 
any danger of killing them, 


ExPERIMENT XIII. 


In order to try whether the capillary fap- 
veffels had any power to protrude fap out 
at their extremities, and in what quantity, I 
made the three following experiments, viz. 

In Auguft 1 took a cylinder of an apple- 
branch, 12 inches long 3 diameter: I fet ic 
with its great end downwards in a mint glafs, 
(full of water) tyed over with ox-gut. The . 
top of the ftick was moift for 10 days, while 
another ftick of the fame branch (but out 
of water ) was very dry. It evaporated an 
ounce of water in thofe 1o days, 


EXPERIMENT XIV. | 


In Sept. Infix’d. a tube ¢:( Fig: 7. )..7 feet 
long, toalikeftem f, asthe former, and 
fer the ftem in water x, to try if, asthe wa- 
ter evaporated out of the top of the ftemr, 
it would rife co any height in the tube ¢ ; but 

it 


46 Vegetable Staticks. 


it did not rife at all in the tube, tho’ the 
top of the ftem was wet: I then filled the 
tube with water, but it paffed freely into 
the veffel x. 


EXPERIMENT XV. 


Sept. 10. 2 +2 feet from the ground, I 
cut off the top of a half ftandard Duke Cherry- 
free againfta wall, and cemented on it the 
neck of a Florence flask f, (Fig. 3.) and to 
that flask neck a narrow tube g, 5 feet 
long, in order to catch any moifture that 
fhould arife out of the trunk »; but none 
arofe in 4 hours, except a little vapor that 
was on the flask’s neck. 

I then dug up the tree by the roots, and 
fet the root in water, with the glaffes affixed 
to the top of the ftem; after feveral hours 
nothing rofe but a little dew, which hung 
on the infide of f; yet it is certain by many 
of the foregoing experiments, that if the 
top and leaves of this tree had been on, 
many ounces of water would in this time 
have paffed thro’ the rrunk, and been eva- 
porated thro’ the leaves. 


1 have 


Vegetable Staticks. 47 


I have tryed the fame experiment with 
feveral vine branches cut off, and fet in 
water thus, but no water rofe into f- 

Thefe three laft experiments all fhew, that 
tho’ the capillary fap veflels imbibe moifture 
plentifully ; yet they have little power to 
protrude it farther, without the afliftance of 
the perfpiring leaves, which do greatly pro- 
mote its progrefs. 


EXPERIMENT XVI. 
In order to try whether any fap rofe in 


the winter, I took in Fanuary feveral par- 
cels of Filberd-fuckers, Vine- branches, green 


Jeffamine-branches,Philarea andLaurel-bran- 


ches, with their leaves on them, and dip- 
ped their tranfverfe cuts in melted cement, 
to prevent any moifture’s evaporating thro’ 
the wounds; I tyed them in feparate bun- 
dles and weighed them. 

The Philberd-fuckers decreafed in 8 days 
(fome part of which were very wet, but 
the laft 3 or 4 days drying winds) the rith 


part of their whole weight. 


The vine-cuttings in the fame time the 
re paft. 
¥ 4 Th 


gp 


48 Vegetable Staticks. 


The Jeffamine in the {ame time the Z part. 

The Philarea decreafed the } part in 5 
days. 

The Laurel the part in 5 days, and more. 

Here is a confiderable daily wafte of fap, 
which muft therefore neceflarily be fupplied 
from the root; whence it is plain that fome 
fap rifes all the winter, to fupply this conti- 
nual wafte, tho’ in much lefs quantity than 
in fummer. 

Hence we fee good reafon why the Ilex, 
(and the Cedar of Zzbanus, which were the 
firft on an Exngizfh-oak, the other on the Larix) 
were verdant all the winter, notwithffand- 
ing the oak and Larix leaves were decayed 
and fallen off; for tho’.when the winter 
came on, there did not fap enough rife to 
maintain the Oak and Larix leaves, yet by 
this prefent experiment we fee, that fome 
fap is continually rifing all the winter; and 
by experiment the sth on the Lime-tree, and 
by feveral other the like experiments, on 
many forts of ever-greens, we find that they 
perfpiring little, live and thrive with little 
nourifhment; the Uex and Cedar might 
well therefore continue green all the win- 
ter, notwithftanding the leaves of the trees 

4. they 


Vegetable Staticks. 49 
they were grafted on fell off. See the cu- 
riousand induftrious Mr. Fazrchild's account 
of thefe graftings in Mr. Miller's, Gardt- 
ners Dittionary. Vol. If. Supplement fap. 


EXPERIMENT XVIL. 


Having by many evident proofs in the 
foregoing experiments feen the great quan- 
tities of liquor that were imbibed and per- 
{pired by trees, I was defirous to try if I could 
get any of this perfpiring matter; and in 
order to it; I tock feveral glafs chymical 
retorts, ap (Fig.9.) and put the boughs 
of feveral forts of trees, as they were grow- 
ing with their leaves on, into the retorts, 
ftoping up the mouth p of the retorts with 
bladder. By this means I got feveral ounces 
of the perfpiring matter of Vines, Fig-trees, 
Apple-trees,Cherry-trees, Apricot and Peach- 
trees; Rue, Horfe-radifh, Rheubarb, Parfnip, 
and Cabbage leaves: the liquor of all of 
them was very clear, nor could I difcover 
any different tafte in the feveral liquors : 
But if the retort ftand expofed to the hot 
fun, the liquor will tafte of the .coddled 
leaves, Its eevee gravity, was nearly the 

E fame 


50 Vegetable Staticks. 


fame with that of common water; nor 
did I find many air bubbles in it, when placed | 
in the exhaufted receiver, which I expeéed 
to have found; but when referved in open 
Viols, it ftinks fooner than common water; 
an argument that it isnot pure water, but has 
fome heterogeneous mixtures with it. 

I put alfo a large Sun-flower full blown, 
and as it was growing, into the head of a 
glafs-ftill, and put its roftrum into a bottle, 
by which means there diftilled a good quan- 
tity of liquor into the bottle. It will be 
very eafy in the fame manner to colle& the 
perfpirations of {weet {cented Flowers, tho’ 
the liquor will not long retain its grateful 
odor, but ftink in few days. 

This experiment would be very proper 
to begin the learned Boerhaave's clear and 
very rational chymical proceffes with, as be- 
ing a degree more fimple than his firft pro- 
cefs, the diftillation in acold ftill: For this 
is undifturbed nature’s own method of diftil- 


ling. 
EXPERIMENT XVIIL 


In order to find out what ftores of moi- 
fture 


a 
ner ee 
ae 
i 
—— 
re 


is}! 
Y/ 


«a | 
al 


N 
i\ 


\ 


yr a): 


i : Soh TRS A 
; oa Seki tee * oe eee ie 
it Ray rahi p ve tem Ng a re rh 


v. Y Ni ¥ 


Vegetable Staticks. 5% 
fture nature had provided in the earth, (a- 
gainft the dry fummer feafon,) that might 
anfwer this great expence of it, which is fo 
neceflary for the produétion and {upport of 
vegetables, | | 

Fuly 31. 1724. I dug up a cubick foot of 
earth in an alley, which was very little tram- 
pled on; it weighed (after deducting the 
weight of the containing veflel) 104 pounds 
+ 4 ounces + 3. A cubick foot of water 
weighs 59 -- 3, which is little more than half 
the fpecifick gravity of earth. This was a 
dry feafon, with a mixture of fome few fhow- 
ers, fothat the grafs-plat adjoyning was not 
burnt up. 

At the fame time I dug up another cu- 
bick foot of earth, fromthe bottom of the 
former, it weighed 106 pound -- 6 ounces; 
+4, 

I dug up alfo a third cubick foot of earth; 
at the bottom of the two former, it weighed 
TIT pounds -- 3. 

Thefe three feet depth were a good brick 
earth, next to which was gravel, in which 
at 2 feet depth, viz. 5 feet below the fur- 
face of the earth, the {prings did then run. 

When the firft cubick foot of earth was 

|p {9 


52 Vegetable Staticks. 


fo dry and dufty, as to be unfit for vegeta- 
tion I weighed it, and found it had loft 
6 pound -+ 11 ounces, or 194 cubick in- 
ches of water, near 3 part of its bulk. 

Some days after, the fecond cubick foot 
being dryer than either the firft or third, was 
_decreafed in weight 10 pounds. 

The third cubick foot, being very dry and 
dufty, had loft § pounds -}- 8 ounces, or 247 
cubick inches, vzz. 7 part of its bulk. 

Now fuppofing the roots of the Sun-flower 
(the longeft of which reached 15 inches 
every way from the ftem) to occupy and 
draw nourifhment from 4 cubick feet of 
earth, and fuppofe each cubick foot of earth 
to afford 7 pounds of mioifture, before it be 
too dry for vegetation ; the Plant imbibing 
and perfpiring 22 ounces every 24 hours, that 
will be 28 pounds of water, which will be 
drawn off in 21 days and 6 hours; after 
which the Plant would perifh, if there were 
not frefh fupplies to thefe 4 cubick feet of 
earth, either from dew or moifture arifing 
from below 15 inches (the depth of the 
roots} up into the earth occupied by the 
roots. 


E x- 


Vegetable Staticks. 52 


EXPERIMENT XIX. 


In order to find out the quantity of Dew 
that fellin the night, Aug. 15. at 7. p.m. I 
chofe two glazed earthen Pans, which were 
three inches deep, and 12 inches diameter in 
furface; I filled them with pretty moift earth 
taken off the furface of the earth ; they in- 
creafed in weight by the night’s dew 180 
grains, anddecreafed in weight by the evapo- 
ration of the day 1 ounce -+- 282 grains. 

N. B. J fet thefe Pans in other broader 
Pans, to prevent any moifture from the earth 
_fticking to the bottoms of them. The moi- 
fier the earth, the more Dew there falls on 
it in a night, and more than adouble quan- 
tity of Dew falls on a furface of water, than 
there does on an equal furface of moaift earth. 
The evaporation of a furface of water in 9 
hours winter's dry. day. is’, of anoinch. 
The evaporation of a furface of Ice, fet in 
the fhade during nine hours day, was 3%. 

So here are 540 grains more evaporated 
from the earth every 24 hours in fummer, 
than falls in Dew in the night ; that is, in 21 
days near 26 ounces, from a circular area 

E 3 of 


ee ee 
oetunne 


54 Vegetable Staticks. 


of afoot diameter; and circles being as the 
{quares of their diameters 10 pounds + 2 
ounces, willin 21 days be evaporated from 
the hemifphere of 30 inches diameter, which 
the Sunflower’s root occupies: Which with 
the 29 pounds drawn off by the Plant in 
the fame time, makes 39 pounds, that is 9 
pounds and 3 out of every cubick foot of 
earth, the Plant’s roots occupying more than 
4 cubick feet ; but this isa much greater de- 
gree of drynefs than the furface of the earth 
ever fuffers for 15 inches depth, even in the 
dryeft feafons in this country. 

In a long dry feafon, therefore, efpecially 
within the Tropicks, we muft have recourfe 
for fufficient moifture (to keep Plants and 
Trees alive) to the moift ftrata of earth, 
which lay next below that in which the 
roots are. Now moift bodies always com- 
municate of their moifture to more dry 
adjoyning bodies; but this flow motion of 
the afcent of moifture is much accelerated 
by the Sun’s heat to confiderable depths in 
ihe earth, as is probable from the following 
zoth experiment. 

Now 180 grains of Dew falling in one 
aight, onacircle of a foot diameter, = 

113 f{quare 


Vegetable Staticks. 55 


113 {quare inches; thefe 180 grains being 
equally fpread on this furface, its depth will 
AES Wound 
113 x 294 
the depth of Dew in a winter night to be the 
go part of an inch; fothat if weallow 151 
nights for the extent of thefummer’s Dew, it 
will in that time arife to one inch depth. And 
reckoning the remaining 214 nights, for the 
extent of the winters Dew, it will produce 
2. 39 inches depth, which makes the Dew 
of the whole year amount to 3. 39 inches 
depth. 

And the quantity which evaporated in a 
fair fummier’s day from the fame {furface, 
being 1 ounce -+- 282 grains, gives 7 part 
ef an inch depth for evaporation, which 
is four times as much as fell at night. 

I found, by the fame means, the evapo- 
ration of a winter’s day to be nearly the 
fame as ina fummer’s day ; for the earth 
being in winter more faturate with moi- 
fture, that excefs of moifture anf{wers tothe 
excefs of heat in fummer. : 

Nic. Cruquins Ne 381. of the Philofo- 
phical Tranfa@ions, found that 28 inches 
depth evaporated in a whole year from wa- 

E 4 ter, 


be .$, part of aninch = 


56 Vegetable Staticks. 


ter, z.e. #, of an incheach day, at a mean 
rate; but the earth in a f{ummer’s day evapo- 
rates 45 of an inch; fo the cvaporation of 
a furface of water, is to the evaporation of 
a furface of earth in fummer, as 10:3. 

The quantity of Rain and Dew which 
falls in a year is at a medium 22 inches: 
The quantity of the carth’s evaporation in 
a year is at leaft 9 -+- 2 inches, fince that 
is the rate; at which it evaporates in a fum- 
mer’s day : From which 9 -+ 3 inches is to 
be deducted 3. 39 inches for circulating 
daily Dew; there remains 6. 2 inches, which 
6. 2 inches deducted from the quantity of 
Rain which falls in a year, there remains 
at leaft 16 inches depth, to replenifh the 
earth with moifiure for vegetation, and to 
fupply the Springs and Rivers. 

In the cafe of the hop-ground, the eva- 
poration from the hops may be confidered 
only for 3 months at +¢+ part of an inch 
each day, which will be =+ of an inch; 
but before we allow 6. 2 inches vapor to eva- 
porate from the furface of the ground, 
which added to 2 inch gives, 7. I inches, 
which is the utmoft that can be evaporat- 
ed from a furface of hop-ground in a year. 

: So 


Ve egetable Staticks, 57 


So that of 22 inches depth of rain, there re- 
mains 15 inches to fupply fprings; which 
are more or lefs exhaufted, according to 
the drynefs or wetnefs of the year. Hence 
we find that 22 inches depth of rain in a 
year is fufficient for all the purpofes of na- 
ture, in fuch flat countries as this about 
Teddington near Hampton-court. But in 
the hill countries, asin Lanca/bzre, there falls 
42 inches depth of rain-water ; from which 
deducting 7 inches for evaporation, there 
remains 35 inches depth of water for the 
{prings; befides great fupplics from much 
more plentiful dews, than fall in plain coun- 
tries: Which vaft ftores feem fo abundantly 
fufficient to anfwer the great quantity of 
water, which is conveyed away, by {prings 
and rivers, from thofe hills, that we need 
not have recourfe, for fupplics, to the great 
Abyfs, whofe furface, at high water, is fur- 
mounted fome hundreds of feet by ordi- 
nary hills, and fome thoufands of feet by 
thofe vaft hills, from whence the longeft and 
greateft rivers take their rife. 


EXPER, 


¢8 Vegetable Staticks. 


EXPERIMENT XxX. 


I provided me 6 Thermometers, whofe 
ftems were of different lengths, vzz. from 
18 inches to 4 feet. I graduated them all 
by one proportional fcale, beginning from 
the freezing point; which may well be 
fixed, as the utmoft boundary of vegetation 
on the fide of cold, where the work of ve- 
ectation ceafes, the watry vehicle beginning 
then to condenfe and be fixed; tho’ many 
trees, and fome plants, as grafs, mofs, cre: 
do furvive it; yet they do not vegetate at 
that time. 

The greateft degree of heat, which I mark- 
ed on my Thermometers, was equal to that 
of water, when heated to the greateft de- 
gree, that could bear my hand in it, with. 
it about. A degree of heat, 
which is the middle, between the freezing 
int, andthe heat of boiling water, which 
aie too great for vegetation, may there- 
f e fixed, as the utmoft boundary of 
vegetation, onthe warm fide ; beyond which 
its will rather fade than vegetate, fuch 
cree of heat feparating and difperfing, 

infleatl 


‘@) 


Vegetable Staticks. 59 


inftead of congregating, and uniting the nu- 
tritive particles. 

This fpace I divided into 90 degrees on 
all the Thermometers, beginning to number 
from the freezing point. Sixty four of thefe 
degrees is nearly equal to the heat of the 
blood ofanimals; which I found by therule 
given in the Philofophical Tranfattions, Vol. 
IL. p. 1. of Mr. Motte's Abridgment, viz. by 
placing one of the Thermometers in water 
heated to the greateft degree, that I could 
bear my hand in it, ftirring it about: And 
which I was further affured of, by placing 
the ball of my Thermometer in the flow- 
ing blood of an expiring Ox. The heat of 
the blood to that of boiling water is as 14 
a Tr tO 33. 

By placing the ball of one of thefe Ter- 
mometers in my bofom, and under an arm- 
pit, I found the external heat of the body 
54 of thefe degrees. The heat of milk, 
as it comes from the Cow, is 55 degrees, 
which is nearly the fame with that for 
hatching of eggs. The heat of urine 58 
_ degrees. The common temperate point in 
Thermometers is about 18 degrees. 


4 The 


60 Vegetable Staticks, 


tae hoiteft Sun-fhine in the year 1724, 
gave to the Thermometer, expofed to it, a 
co equal to that of the blood of animals, 
viz. 64 degrees: And tho’ plants endure 
this and a confiderably greater heat, with- 
in the tropicks, for fome hours each day, 
yet the then hanging of the leaves of ma- 
ny of them fhews that they could not long 
fublift under it, were they not frequently 
refrefhed by the fucceeding evening and 
night. 

The common noon-tide heat in the Sun 

in fuly is about so degrees; The heat of 
the air inthe fhade in Fu/y is ata medium 
38 degrees. The A/ay and Fune heat is, 
from 17 to 30 degrees; the moft genial 
heat, for the generality of plants, in which 
they flourilh moft, and make the greateft 
progrefs in their growth. The autumnal 
and vernal. heat may be reckoned from 10 
to 20 degrees. The winter heat from the 
freezing point toro degrees. 
_ The fcorching heat of a hot bed of horfe- 
dung, when too hot for plants, is 75 de- 
grees and more, and hereabout is proba- 
bly the heat of blood in high fevers. 


The 


Vegetable Staticks. Gr 


The due healthy heat of a hot bed of 
horfe-dung, in the fine mold, where the 
roots of thriving Cucumber-plants were, in 
Feb. was 56 degrees, which is nearly the 
bofom heat, and that for hatching of eggs. 
The heat of the air under the glafs-frame 
of this hot-bed was 34 degrces; fo the roots 
had 26 degrees more heat, than the plants 
above ground. The heat of the open air 
was then 17 degrees, 

It is now grown a common and very 
reafonable practice; to regulate the heat 
of ftoves and green-houfes, by means of 
Thermometers, hung up inthem. And for 
greater accuracy, many have the names of 
fome of the principal exoticks, written up- 
on their Thermometers, over-againtt, the fe- 
veral degrees of heat, which are found by 
experience to be propereft for them. And 
I am informed that many of the moft curi- 
rious Gardiners about London have agreed 
to make ufe of Thermometers of this fort. 
which are made by Mr. Yohn Fowler in 
Swithins-alley, near the Royal-Exchange; 
which have the names of the following 
plants, oppofite to their refpe@tive moft kind- 
ly degrees of heat; which in my Thermome- 

fers 


62 Vegetable Staticks. 


fers an{wer nearly to the following de- 
grees of heat above the freezing point, viz, 
Melon-thiftle 31, Ananas 29, Piamento 26, 
Euphorbium 24, Cereus 213, Aloe 19, In- 
dian-fig 167, Ficoides 14, Oranges 12, 
Miftles 9. 

Mr. Boyle, by placing a Thermometer in 
a cave which was cut firait into the bot- 
tom of a cliff, fronting the Sea, to the depth 
of 130 feet, foundthe fpirit ftoo’d both in 
winter and fummer at a fmall divifion a 


bove temperate; the cave had 80 feet depth. 


of earth above it. Boyle’s Works, Vol. Il, 
p- 54. 

I marked my 6 Thermometers numerical- 
Wy lx25i 195 453-3565, (Phe, 1) herntonmenes 
numb. 1. which was fhorteft, I placed with 
a South afpeét, in the open air; the ball 
of numb. 2, I fet two inches under ground ; 
that of numb. 3, four inches under ground, 
numb. 4, $8 inches; numb. 5, 16 inches; and 
numb. 6, 24 inches under ground. And that 
the heat of the earth, at thefe feveral depths, 
may the more accurately be Known, it is 
proper to place near each Thermometer a 


glafs-tube fealed at both ends, of the fame 


length with the ftems of the feveral Ther- 
mometers 5 


es 


Vegetable Staticks. 63 
swometers; and with tinged fpirit of wine 
in them, to the fame height, as in each 
correfponding Thermometer ; the tcale of 
degrees, of each Thermometer , being mark- 
ed on a fliding ruler, with an index at the 
back of it, pointing to the correfponding 
tube. When at any time an obfervation is 
to be made, by moving the index, to point 
to the top of the fpirit in that tube, an ac- 
curate allowance is hereby made, for the 
very different degrees of heat and cold, on 
the ftems of the Thermometers, at all depths 3 
by which means the fcale of degrees will 
fhew truly the degrees of heat in the balls 
ofthe Thermometers, and confequently, the 
refpective heats of the earth, at the feve- 
ral depths where they are placed, The ftems 
of thefe DPhermometers, which were above 
ground, were fenced from weather and in- 
juries, by fquare wooden tubes; the ground 
they were placed in was a brick earth in 
the middle of my garden. 

 -Fuly 30. I began to keep a regifter of 
their rife and fall. During the following 
month of Auguff, 1 obferved that when 
the fpirit in the Thermometer numb. 1, 
(which was expofed to the Sun) was 
about 


64 Vegetable Staticks. 


about noon rifen to 48 degrees, then 
the fecond Thermometer was 45 degrees, 
the sth 33, and the 6th 31, the 3d andath 
at intermediate degrees. The sth and 6th 
Thermometer kept nearly the fame degree of 
heat, both night and day, till towards the lat- 
ter end of the month; when as the days grew 
fhorter and cooler, and the nights longer 
and cooler, they then fellto 25 and 27 
degrees. 

Now, fo confiderable a heat of the Sun, | 
at two feet depth, under the earth’s furface, 
muft needs have a itrong influence, in raif- 
ing the moifture at that and greater depths ; 
whereby a very great and continual wreak 
muit always be afcending, during the warm 
fummer feafon, by night as well as day; for 
the heat attwo feet depth is nearly the fame 
night and day: The impulfeofthe Sun-beams 
ee ing the moifture of the earth a brisk undu- 
lating motion, which watery particles, when 
feparated and rarified by heat, do afcend 
inthe form of vapour: And the vigour of 
warm and confined vapour, (fuch as is that 
which is 1,2, or 3 feet deep in the earth) 
muft be very confiderable, fo as to pene- 
trate the roots with fome vigour; as we 

Z may 


Vegetable Staticks, 6s 


may teafonably fuppofe, from the vaft force 
of confined vapor in ¢ Zolpiles, in the di- 
gefter of bones, and the engine to raife wa- 
ter by fire. 

If plants were not in this manner fup- 
plied with moifture, it were impoflible for 
them to fubfit, under the fcorching heats, 
within the tropicks, where they have no 
rain for many months together: For tho’ 
the dews are much greater there, than in 
thefe more Northern climates ; yet doubtlefs 
where the heat fo much exceeds ours, the 
whole quantity evaporated in a day there; 
does as far exceed the quantity that falls. 
by night in dew, as the quantity evaporat- 
ed here ina fummer’s day, is found to ex- 
ceed the quantity of dew which falls in the 
night. But the dew, which falls in a hot 
fummer feafon, cannot poflibly be of any 
benefit to the roots of trees; becaufe it is 
remandéd back from the earth, by the fol- 
lowing day’s heat, before fo {mall a quanti- 
ty of moifture can have foaked to any con- 
fiderable depth. The great benefit there- 
fore of dew, in hot weather, muft be, by 
being plentifully imbibed into vegetables ; 
thereby not only refrefhing them for the 

F prefent, 


66 Vegetable Staticks. 


prefent, but alfo furnifhing them with a 
frefh fupply of moifture towards the great 

expences of the fucceeding day. © 
Tis therefore probable, that the roots of 
trees and plants are thus, by means of the 
Sun’s-warmth, conftantly irrigated with 
frefh fupplies of moifture; which, by the 
fame means, infinuates it felf with fome 
vigour into the roots. For if the moifture 
ofthe earth were notthus aQuated, the roots 
muft then receive all their nourifhment 
meerly by imbibing the next adjoining 
moifture from the earth; and confequent- 
ly the fhell of earth, next the furface of the 
roots, would always be confiderably drier 
the nearer it isto the root; whichI have noe 
obferved tobe fo. And by Exper. 18 and 
19, the roots would be very hard put to ir, 
to imbibe fufhcient moifture in dry fum- 
mer weather, if it were not thus conveyed ~ 
to them, by the penetrating warmth of the 
Sun: Whence by the fame genial heat, in 
conjundion with the attra&ion of the capil- 
lary fap veflels,° it is carried up thro’ the 
bodies and branches of vegetables, and 
thence pafling into the leaves, it is there 
mof yigoroufly acted upon, in thofe thin 
plates, 


Vegetable Staticks. 67 


plates, and put into an undulating motion, 
by the Sun’s warmth, whereby it is moft 
plentifully thrown off, and perfpired thro’ 
their furface; whence, as foon as it is dif- 


_intangled, it mounts with great rapidity in 


the free air. 
But when, towards the latter end of Oc¢- 
tober, the vigour of the Sun’s influence is 


fo much abated, that the firt Thermometer 


was fallen to 3 degrees above the freezing 
point, the fecond to 10 degrees, the fifth to 
14. degrees, and the fixth Thermometer to 
16 degrees; then the brisk undulations of the 
moifture of the earth, and alfo of the af- 
cending fap, much abating, the leaves fad- 
ed and fell off. 

The greateft degree a cold, in the fol- 
lowing winter, were in the firft 12 days of 
November; during which time, the {pirit in 
the firft Thermometer was fallen 4 degrees 
below the freezing point, the deepeft 7 er- 
mometer 10 degrees, the ice on ponds was 
an inch thick, the Sun’s greateft warmth, at 
the winter folftice, in a very ferene, calm, 
frofty-day, was, againft a South afpect of a 
wall, 19 degrees, and ina free open air, but 
a1 degrees above the freezing point, From 

F 2 the 


68 Vegetable Staticks. 


the roth of Zanuary to the aoth of March 
was a very dry feafon; when the green 
Wheat was generally the fineft that was 
ever remembred. But from the 29th of 
March 1725, to the 29th of September fol- 
lowing, it rained more or lefs almoft e- 
very day, except 10 or 12 days, about the 
beginning of Fuly; and that whole feafon 
continued fo very cool, that the fpirit in 
the firft Thermometer rofe but to 24 degrees, 
except now and then a fhort interval of 
Sunfhine; the fecond only to 20 degrees; 
the fifth and fixth to 24 and 23 degrees, 
with very little variation: So that during 
this whole fummer, thofe parts of roots 
which were two feet under ground, had 3 
or 4 degrees more warmth than thofe 
which were but two inches under ground: 
And ata medium the general degree of heat, 
thro’ this whole fummer, both above and 
under ground, was not greater than the heat 

of the middle of the preceding September. 
The year 1725, having been both in this 
Ifland, and in the neighbouring Nations, 
moft remarkably wet and cold; and the | 
year 1723, in the other extream, as remar-_ 
ably dry, as hasever been known; it may 
not. 


Vegetable Staticks. 69 


not be improper here to give a fhort ac- 
count of them, andthe influence they had 
on their productions. 


« Mr. A@ller, in the account which he 
took of the year 1723, obferved that the 
Winter was mild and dry, except that in 
February it rained almoftevery day , which 
kept the {pring backward. March, April, 
May, Fune, to the middle of Fuly, proved 
extreamly dry, the wind North-eaff mott 
part of the time. The fruits were for- 
ward and pretty good; but kitchen-ftuff, 
efpecially Beans and Peafe, failed much. 
The latter half of a/y the weather prov- 
ed very wet, which caufed the fruits to 
grow fo faft, that many of them rotted 
on the trees; fo that the autumn fruits 
were not good. There were great plenty 
of Melons, very large, but not well tafted. 
Great plenty of Apples; many kinds of 
fruits bloomed in 4uguff, which produc- 
ed many {mall Apples and Pears in Oc- 
tober, as alfo Strawberries and Rafpber- 
ries in great plenty. Wheat was good, 
little Barley, much of which was very un- 
equally ripe, fome not at all, becaufe fowa 


‘ late, and no timely rain to fetch it up, 


PNG « There 


1 70 Vegetable Staticks. 


(a4 


€ 


“ 


ce 


“7~ 
~ 


Lay 
n~ 


~ 
Cay 


“ 
ay 


There were innumerable Wafps; how it 
fared with the hops this dry year, is men- 
tioned under Exper, 9. 

“ The following winter 1724, proved 
very mild; the {pring was forward in 
Fanuary, {othat the Snow-drops Crocus’s, 
Polyanthus’s, Hepatica’s, and Narciflus’s, 
werein Flower. And it was remarkable, 
that moft of the Colliflower plants were 
deftroyed by the mildew, of which there 
was more, all this winter, than had been 
known inthe memory of man, In Febra- 
ary we had cold fharp weather, which 
did fome damage to the early crops, and 
it continued variable till Aprz/; fo that 
much of the early Wall-fruit was cut off : 
And again the 6th of May was a very 
fharp froft, which much injured tender 
plants and fruits. The fummer in gene- 
ral was moderately dry, the common fruits 
proved pretty good, but late: Melons 
and Cucumbers were good for little: 
Kitchen-ftuff was in great plenty in the 
markets. 

In the very wet and cold year 1725, moft 


things were a full month backwarder than 
ufual. Not half the Wheat in by the 24th 


of 


Vegetable Si taticks. 71 
of Augu/t,in the Southern pats of Englands 


very few Melonsor Cucumbers, and thofe 
not good. The tender Exoticks fared but ills 
{carce any Grapes, thofe fmall, and of very 
unequal fizes, on the fame bunch, not ripes 
Applesand Pears green andinfipids no frui 
mor products of the ground good, but crude: 
Pretty good plenty of Wheat tho’ coarfe, 
and long ftraw; Barley coarfe, but plenty of 
it in the uplands. Beans and Peafe, moft 
flourifhing and plentiful; few Waflps oro- 
ther infects, except Flies on hops. Hops 
were very bad thro’ the whole Kingdom. 
Mr. Auftin of Canterbury {ent me the fol- 
lowing particular account, how it fard 
with themthere; where they had more than 

at Farnham, and mof other places, viz. 
“At mid-pril not half the fhoots ap- 
“ peared above ground; fo that the plan- 
“ ters knew not how to pole them to the 
€ beft advantage. This defe& of the fhoot, 
«* upon opening the hills, was found to be 
“ owing to the multitude and variety of 
vermin that lay preying upon the root ; 
“ the increafe of which was imputed to 
s¢ thelong and almoft uninterrupted feries 
“ of dry weather, for three months paft: 
Bo“ Towards 


€c 


7% Vegetable Staticks. 


<< Towards the end of 4pri/, many of the 
<< hop-vines were infefted with the Flies. 
<¢ About the zoth of May there was a 
<< very unequal crop, fome Vines being 
<¢ run feven feet, others not above three or 
< four feet ; fome juft tied to the poles, and 
“ fome not. vifible: And this difpropor- 
“ tionate inequality in their fize conti- 
¢* nued thro’ the whole time of their growth. 
«* The Flies now appeared upon the leaves 
<< of the forwardeft Vines, but not in fuch 
«© numbers here, as they did in moft other 
<< places. About the middle of Fume, the 
Flies increafed, yet not fo as to endan. 
“ ser the crop; but in diftant planta- 
<* tions they were exceedingly multiplied, 
‘© fo as to {warm towards the end of the 
s¢ month. Fane 27th fome fpecks of fen” 
«© appeared: From this day, to the oth of 
«¢ Fuly, was very fine dry weather. At this 
¢* time, when it was faid that the hops in 
«* moft other parts of the Kingdom look- 
«< ed black and fickly, and feemed paft re- 
** covery, ours held it out pretty well, ins 
«¢ the opinion of the moft skilful Planters. 
** The great leaves were indeed difcolour- 
ed and a little withered, and the fen was 
“ fome- 


“ 
wn 


Vegetable Staticks. 73 


fomewhat increafed. From the oth of 
Fuly to the 23d the Fen increafed a good 
deal, but the Flies and Lice decreafed, it 
raining daily much: In a week more the 
Fen, which feemed to be almoft at a ftand, 
was confiderably increafed, efpecially in 
thofe grounds where it firft appeared. A- 
bout the middle of 4uguf?, the Vines had 
done growing both in ftem and branch ; 
and the forwardeft began to be in Hop, 
the reft in Bloom: the Fen continued 
fpreading, where it was not before per- 
ceived, and not only the leaves, but many 
of the Burrs alfo were’ tainted with it. 
About the 20th of Juguff, fome of the 
Hops were infected with the Fen, and 
whole branches corrupted by it. Half the 
Plantations had hitherto pretty well ef- 
caped, and from this time the Fen increa- 
fed but little: But feveral days violent 
wind and rain, in the following week, fo 
difordered them, that many of them be- 
gan to dwindle, and at laft came to no- 
thing; and of thofe that then remained 
in bloom, fome neverturned to Hops ; 
and of the reft which did, many of them 


« were fo {malJ, that they very little ex- 


* ceeded 


74 Vegetable Staticks. 


“« ceeded the bignefs of a good thriving 
“ Burr. We did not begin to pick till the 
‘ sthof September, which was 18 days later 
<< than we began the year before: The crop 
“« was little above two hundred on an acre 
<“* round, and not good.” The beft Hops 
fold this year at Vay-Hiil Fair for fixteen 
pounds the hundred. 

The almoft uninterrupted wetnefs and 
coldnefs of the year 1725, very much af- 
feted the produce of the Vines the enfu- 
ing year; and we have fufficient proof 
from the obfervations that the 4 or 5 laft 
years afford us, that the moifture or drynefs 
of the preceding year, has a confiderable in- 
fluence on the produdtions of the Vine the 
following year. Thus inthe year 1722, there 
was a dry feafon, from the beginning of 
Auguft thro the following autumn and 
Winter, and the next fummer there was 
good plenty of Grapes. The year 1723 
was a remarkably dry year,-and in the fol- 
lowing year 1724, there was an unufual 
plenty of Grapes. The year 1724 was mo- 
derately dry, and the following {pring the 
Vines produced a fufficient quantity of bran- 
ches, but by reafon of the wetnefs and cold- 

nefs 


“ 


Vegetable Staticks. 75 


nefs of the year 1725 they proved abortive, 
and produced hardly any Grapes. This very 
wet year had an ill effect, not only upon its 
own productions, but alfo on thofe of the 
following year: For notwithftanding there 
was a kindly {pring and blooming feafon in 
the year 1726. yet there were few bunches 
produced, except here and there in fome 
very dry foils. This, many Gardiners forefaw 
early, when upon pruning of the Vines, they 
obferved the bearing fhoots to be crude and 
immature ; which was the reafon why they 
were not fruitful. The firft crop thus failing 
in many places, the Vines produced a fe- 
cond, which had not time to come to matu- 
rity, before the cold weather came on. 

I have often obferved from thefe Ther- 
mometers, when that kind of hovering lam- 
bent Fog arifes, (either mornings or eve- 
nings) which frequently betokens fair wea- 
ther, that the air which inthe preceding 
day was much warmer, has upon the abfence 
of the fun become many degrees cooler than 
the furface of the earth; which being near 
1500 times denfer than the air, cannot be 
fo foon affeGted with the alternacies of hot 
and cold ; whence tis probable, that thofe 

vapours 


76  Wegetable Staticks. 


vapours which are raifed by the warmth of 
the earth, are by the cooler air foon con- 
denfed into a vifible form. And I have ob- | 
ferved the fame difference between the cool- 
nefs of the air, and the warmth of water in 
a pond, by putting my Thermometer, which 
hung all night in the open air in fummer 
time, into the water, juft before the rifing of 
the fun, when the like reek or fog was rifing 
on the furface of the water. 


CH; AsPo2 Kl. 


Experiments, whereby to find out the force 
with which Trees imbibe moifture. 


A VIN G inthe rft chapter feen many 

proofs of the great quantities of li- 
quor imbibed and perfpired by vegetables, 
i propofe inthis, to enquire with what force 
they do imbibe moifture. 

Tho’ vegetables (which are inanimate ) 
have not an engine, which, by its alternate 
dilatations and contractions, does in animals 
forcibly drive the blood through the arte- 
ties and veins; yet has nature wonderfully 
contrived other means, moft powerfully to 
raife and keep in motion the fap, as will 

in 


Vegetable Staticks. 79 


in fome meafure appear by the experiments 
in this and the following chapter. 

I fhall begin with an experiment upon 
roots, which nature has providently taken 
care tO cover with a very fine thick ftrai- 
ner; that nothing fhall be admitted into 
them, but what can readily be carryed off 
by perfpiration, vegetables having no o- 
ther provifion for difcharging their recre- 
ment. 


EXPERIMENT XXI. 


Augufe tz. In the very dry year 1723, 
I dug down 2 -|- 3 feet deep to the root 
of a thriving baking ‘Pear-tree, and lay- 
ed bare a root 4 inch diameter #. (Fig. 10.) 
I cut off the end of the root at z, and put 
the remaining ftump z # into the glafs tube 
dr, whichwas an inch diameter and 8 inches 
long, cementing it faft atr; the lower pant 
of the tube d = was 18 inches long, and: 2 
inch diameter in bore. 

Then I turned the lower end of the tube 
= uppermoft, and filled it full of water, and 
then immediately immerfed the {mall end z= 
into the ciftern of mercury x; taking away 

my 


~, 


78 Vegetable Staticks. 


my finger, which ftopped up the end of the 
tube =z. 

The root imbibed the water with fo 
much vigor, that in 6 minutes time the mer- 
cury was raifed up the tube d = as high as 
&, viz. § inches. 

The next morning, at 8 a clock, the mer- 
cury was fallen to 2 inches height, and 2 
inches of the end of the root z were yet 
immerfed in water. As the root imbibed 
the water, innumerable air bubbles iffued 
out at z, which occupied the upper part of 
the tube at 7 as the water left it. 


EXPERIMENT XXII. 


The eleventh experiment fhews, with 
what great force branchesimbibe water,where 
a branch with leaves imbibed much more 
than a column of 7 feet height of water 
could in the fame time drive thro’ 13 in- 
ches length of the biggeft part of its ftem. 
And in the following experiments we fhall 
find a further proof of their {trong imbi- 
bing power. 

May 25,1 cut off a branch of a young 
thriving Apple-tree 0, (Fig. 11.) about 3 

feet 


Vegetable Staticks. 79 


feet long, with lateral branches; the diame- 
ter of the tranfverfe cut z, where it was cut 
off, was 2 of aninch: The great end of this 
branch I put into the cylindrical glafs e7, 
which was an inch diameter within, and 
eight inches long. 

I then cemented faft the joynt r, firft fold- 
ing a ftrap of fheeps skin round the ftem, 
fo as to make it fit well to the tube atr; 
then I cemented faft the joynt with a mixture 
of Bees-wax and turpentine melted together 
in fuch a proportion, as tomake a very ftiff 
clammy Pafte when cold, and overthecement 
I folded feveral times wet Bladders, binding 
it firm with Pack-thread. 

At the lower end of the large tube e was 
cemented, on a leffer tube = e, } inch dia- 
meter in bore, and 18 inches long: The 
fubftance of this tube ought to be full 4 of 
an inch thick, elfe it will too eafily zest 
in making this experiment. 

Thefe two tubes were cemented together 
at e, firft with common hard brick-duft ce- 
ment to keep the tubes firm to each other ; 
butthis hard cement would, by the different 
dilatations and contractions of the glafs and 
cement, feparate from the glafsin hot wea- 

4. ther, 


80 Vegetable Staticks. 


ther, fo as to let in air; to prevent which in- 
convenience, I further fecured the joynt 
with the cement of Bees-wax and Turpen- 
tine, binding a wet bladder over all. 

When the branch was thus fixed, I turned 
it downwards, and the glafs tube upwards, 
and then filled both tubes full of water ; 
upon which limmediately applied the end of 
my finger to clofe up the end of the {mall 
tube, and immerfed it as faft as I could into 
the glafs ciftern x, which was full of mer- 
cury and water. 

When the branch was now uppermoft, and 
placed as in this figure, then the lower end 
of the branch was immerfed 6 inches in 
water, viz. from 7 toz. 

Which water was imbibed by the branch, — 
at its tranfverfe cut z; and as the water af- 
cended up the fap veflels. of the branch, 
fo the mercury afcended up the tubee 2 
from the ciftern «; fo as in half an houtr’s 
time the mercury was rifen 5 inches and 
< high up to 2. 

And this height of the mercury did in 
fome meatfure fhew the force with which the 
fap was imbibed, tho’ not near the whole 
force; for while the water was imbibing, 

4 the 


Vegetable Staticks. Q 


the tranfverfe cut of the branch, was co- 
vered with innumerable little hemifpheres of 
air, and many air bubbles iffued out of 
the fap veflels, which air did in part fill 
the tube er, asthe water was drawn out of 
it; fothat the height of the mercury could 
only be proportionable to the excefs of the 
quantity of water drawn off, above the quan- 
tity of air which iffued out of the wood. 

And if the quantity of air, which iffued 
from the wood into the tube, had been equal 
to the quantity of water imbibed, then the 
mercury would not rife at all; becaufe there 
would be no rooin for it in the tube. 

But if 9 parts in 12 of the water be im- 
bibed by the branch, and in the mean time 
but 3 fuch parts of air iffue into the tube, 
then the mercury muft needsrife near 6 inches, 
and fo proportionably in different cafes. 

I obferved in this, and moft of the follow- 
ing experiments of this fort, that the mer: 
cury rofé higheft, when the fun was very 
clear and warm; and towards evening ir 
would fubfide 3 or 4 inches, and rife again 
the next day as it grew warm, but feldom 
to the fame height it did at firft. For I 
have always found the fap veficls grow every. 

‘oe day; 


82 Vegetable Staticks. 


day, after cutting, lefs pervious, not only for 
water, but alfo for the fap of the yine, which 
never pafles to and fro fo freely thro’ the 
tran{verfe cut, after it has been cut 3 or 4 
days, as at firft; probably, becaufe the cut 
capillary veffels are fhrunk, the veficles alfo, 
and interftices between them, being faturate 
and dilated with extravafated fap, much more 
than they are in a natural ftate. 

If I cut an inch or two off the lower 
part of the ftem, which has been much {atu- 
zated by ftanding in water, then the branch 
will imbibe water again afrefh; tho’ not al- 
together fo freely, as when the branch was 
firft cut off the tree. 

I repeated the fame experiment as this 22d, 
upon a great variety of branches of feveral 
fizes and of different kinds of trees, fome 
of the principal of which are as follow, 
UZ. 


ExPERIMENT XXIII. 


Fuly 6th and sth, I repeated the fame ex- 
periment with feveral green fhoots of the 
Vine, of this year’s growth, each of them 
full two yards long. 

The 


Vegetable Staticks. 83 


The mercury rofe much more leifurely in 
thefe experiments, than with the Apple-tree 
branch; the more the fun was upon it, the fa@ 
ter and higher the mercury rofe, but the Vine- 
branches could not draw it above 4 inches 
the firft day, and 2 inches the third day. 

And asthe fun fet, the mercury fometimes 
fubfided wholly, and would rife again the 
next day, as the fun came on the Vine- 
branch. 

And I obferved, that where fome of thef 
Vine-branches were fix'd on the north fide 
of the large trunk of a Pear-tree, the mer- 
cury then rofe moft in the evening abour 6a 
clock, asthe fun came onthe Vine-branch, 


ExPERIMENT XXIV. 


Auguft 9, at 10 ante Merzd. (very hot fun- 


- fhine ) Ifixed in the (ame manner as Exp. 22. 


a Non-pareil branch, which had 20 Apples 


 onit; it was 2 feet high, with lateral bran- 
| ches, its tranfverfe cut % inch diameter: It 


immediately began to raife the mercury moft 
vigoroufly, fo asin 7 minutes it was got 
up to & 12 inches high. 


G2 Mer- 


84 | Vegetable Staticks. 


Mercury being 13 -+ § times fpecifically 
heavier than water, it may eafily be eftima- 
ted to what height the feveral branches in 
thefe experiments would raife water; for if 
any branch can raife mercury 12 inches, it 
will raife water 13 feet -- 8 inches: A 
further allowance being alfo made for the 
perpendicular height of the water in the 
tubes, between r and & the top of the co- 
lum of mercury, for that column of water is 
above lifted up by the mercury, be it more 
or lefs. 

At the fame time, I tryed a Golden Re- 
ate branch 6 feet long, the mercury rofe 
but 4 inches, it rifing higher or lower in 
branches nearly of the fame fize and of the 
fame kind of tree, according as the air if- 
fued thro’ the fem, more or lefs freely. 
In the preceding experiment on the Non- 
pareil branch, I had fucked a little with my 
mouth at the {mall end of the tube, to get 
fome air bubbles. out of it, before I im- 
merfed it in the mercury ; (but thefe air 
bubbles are beft got out by a fmall wire 
run to and fro in the tube) and this fuce 
tion made air bubbles arife out of the tran& 
verie cut of the branch ; but tho’ the quan- 

i  eeiey 


Vegetable Staticks. 8 


tity of thofe air bubbles thus fucked out, 
was but fmall; yet in this and many other 
experiments, I found that after fuch fuc- 
tion, the water was imbibed by the: branch, 
much more grecdily, and in much greater 
quantity than the bulk of the air was, which 
was fucked out. Probably therefore, thefe 
air bubbles, when in the fap veffels, do flop 
the free afcent of the water, as is the cafe 
of little portions of air got between the wa- 
ter in capillary glafs tubes. 

When the mercury is raifed to its greateft 
height, by precedent fuG@iion with the 
mouth, ( which height it reaches fometimes 
in 7 minutes, fometimes in half an hour or 
an hour) then from that time it begins to 
fall, and continues fo to do, till it is fallen 
§ or 6 inches, the height the branch would 
have drawn it to, without fucking with the 
- mouth. . 

But when in avery warm day, the mer- 
cury is drawn up 5 or 6 inches, ( without 
precedent fuction with the mouth ) then it 
will ufually hold up to that height for fe- 
veral hours, vzz. during the vigorous warmth 
of the fun; becaufe the fun is all that time 
ftrongly exhaling moifture from the branch 

G 3 thro’ 


86 Vegetable Staticks. 


thro’ the leaves, on which account it muft 
therefore imbibe water the more greedily, 
as is evident by many experiments in the firft 
chapter. 

When a branch is fixed to a glafs tube 
fet in mercury, and the mercury fubfides at 
night, it will not rife the next morning 
(as the warmth of the fun increafes upon it) 
unlefs you fill the tube firft full of water : 
For if half or 4 of the large tube ¢ r be full 
of air, that air will be rarified by the fun; 
which rarefa@ion will deprefs the water in 
the tube, and confequently the mercury 
cannot rife. 

But where little water is imbibed the 
firft day, (as in the cafe of the green fhoots 
of the Vine, Exper. XXIII.) then the mer- 
cury will rifethe fecond and third day, as 
the warmth of the fun comes on, without 
refilling the little water that was imbibed. 


EXPERIMENT XXV. 


In order to make the like  experi- 
ment on larger branches (when I expec- 
ted the mercury would have rifen much 
higher than in {mall ones) I caufed glaf 

{es 


Vegetable Staticks. 87 


fes to be blown of the fhape of this here 
defcribed (Fig. 12.) of feveral dimenfions 
at r, from two to five inches diameter, with 
a proportionably large cavity ¢: the ftem 2 
as near 4 inch diameter as could be, the 
length of the ftem 16 inches. 

I cemented one of thefe glafs veffels to 
a large {mooth barked thriving branch of an 
Apple-tree, which was 12 feet long, 1 + 4 
inch diameter at z: I filled the glafs tube 
With water, and immerfed the fmall end in 
the mercury x, which rofe but 4 inches, 
yet it imbibed water plentifully ; but the 
air iflued too faft out of the branch at z, 
for the mercury to rife high. 

This, and many other experiments of this 
kind, convince me that branches of 2, 3, 
or 4 years old, are the beft adapted to draw 
the mercury higheft: The veffels of thofe 
that are older being too large and pervious 
to the air, which paffes moft freely thro’ 
the bark, efpecially at old eyes: As will be 
more fully proved in the fifth chapter. 


EXPERIMENT XXVI. 


Sey 30th at noon, a mixture of fun and 
G 4 clouds, 


88 Vegetable Staticks. 


clouds, the day and night before; 24 hours: 
continual rain: I cut of a branch ef a Gol, © 
den P ippin-iree, 6 b (Fig. 13.) about3 feet 
lons, with feveral large lateral branches 5 its 
diameter at the great end p near an inch; 
which end I cemented well, and tyed over 
it a piece of wet bladder. 

Then I cut off at z the main tep twig, 
where it was + inch diameter: I cemented 
the glafs tube 27, to the remaining branch 
g7, and tiicn filing the tube with water; 
fet its lower end in the mercury: Se 
that now the braach was placed with its 


top zdownwards inthe water, in the Ageca- 
mercurial gaze. 


Ir imbibed the water with fuch firength, 
as to raife the mercury with an almoft e- 
uable —— 11 -|- ¢ inches by 3 a 

¢ fun fhining then very warm) 
ag ern time the water in the tube rz 
being all imbibed; fo that the end of the 
branch Was out of the water, then the air 
pubbics pafling more freely down toz, and 

i 


o water being imbibed, the mercury fub- 
fided 2 or 3 inches in an hour. ~~ 
At a quarter pait 4 a clock, I refilled the 


gage with water, upon which the mercury 
| rofe 


¥ ‘ ni 
arte Shans ah Se om ON * 


eer 


Vegetable Staticks. 89 


rofe afrefh from the ciftern, vzz. 6 inches 
the firt + of an hour, and in an hour more 
the mercury reached the fame height as be- 
fore, vig. 11 --+ % inches: Andin an hour 
and } more it rofe + inch more than at firft; 
but in half an hour after this it began gent- 
ly to fubfide ; viz. becaufe the fun declining 
and fetting, the perfpiration of the leaves 
decreafed, and confequently the imbibing 
of the water at 7 abated, for the end z was 
then an inch in water. 

Fuly 31. It raining all this day, the 
mercury rofe but 3 inches, which height 
it flood at all the next night. Auguft ik 
fair fun-fhine; this day the mercury rofe to 
$ inches: This fhews again the influence 
of the fun, in raifing the mercury. 

This Experiment proves that branches 
will ftrongly imbibe from the fmall end 
immerfed in water to the ‘great end; as 
well as from the great end immerfed in 
water to the fmall end; and of this we 
fall have furthez proof in the fourth chapter. 


EXPERIMENT XXVII. 


In order to try, whether branches would 
imbibe 


90 Vegetable Staticks. 


imbibe with the like force, with the bark 
off, I took two branches which I call 17 
and WN; 1 fixed M/ in the fame manner as 
the branch in the foregoing Experiment, 
with itstop downwards, but firt I took off 
all the bark from ztor. Then I fix’d in the 
fame manner the branch N, but with its 
great end downwards, having alfo taken off 
all the bark from 2 to rs both the branches 
drew the mercury up to 2, 8 inches; fo 
they imbibed with equal ftrength at either 
end, and that without bark. 


EXPERIMENT XXVIII. 


Augufe 13. 1 ftripped the leaves off an 
Apple tree branch, and then fixed the great 
end of the ftem in the gage; it raifed the 
mercury 2 -+ z inches, but it foon {ubfided, 
for want of the plentiful perfpiration of 
the leaves, fo that the air came in almoft as 
faft as the branch imbibed water, 


EXPERIMENT XXIX. 


I tryed alfo with what force branches 
would imbibe, at their fmall ends, as they 
4 are 


Vegetable Staticks. ox 
are in their natural {tate growing to the 
trees. 

Auguft 2d 1 cemented faft the gage rzz 
(Fig. 14.) tothe pliant branch 4, of a dwarf 
Golden P ippin-tree, the fame from which I 
cut the branch in Experiment 26: As the 
tran{verfe cut z imbibed the water, the mer- 
cury rofe 5 inches obliquely in the tube z, 
and 4 inches perpendicular. 

In this, as alfo in many of the preced- 
ing Experiments there were feveral wounds, 
in that part of the branch which was with- 
in the large tube rz; which were made by 
cutting off little lateral twigs, and {welling 
eyes, that the branch might eafily enter the 
tube: And if thefe wounds ( thro’ which the 
air always iffued plentifully) were well co- 
vered with fheeps-gut, bound over with pack- 
thread, it would in a good meafure prevent 
the inconvenience: But I always found that 
my Experiments of this kind {ucceeded bef, 
when that part of the branch which was to 
enter the tube 7 z, was clear of all knots 
or wounds; for when there were no knots, 
the liquor paffed moft freely, and lefs air 
iftuediont, > 2. 


The 


92 Vegetable Staticks. 

» The fame day I fixed in the fame man. 
ner a gage to an Apricock-tree, it raifed the 
mercury 3 inches; and tho’ all the water 
was foon imbibed, yet the mercury rofe 
every day an’inch, for many days, andfub.- 
fided at night ; fo thatthe branch muft daily - 
imbibe thus much air, and remit it at night. 


EXPERIMENT XXX. 


We have a further proof of the influ: 
ence of the leaves in raifing the fap in this 
following Experiment. 

g Aagife thy I cut off a large Ruffet Pippin 
a aii Big: 15.) with a ftalk 1-1 # inch long, 
and 12 adjoyning leaves g growing to it. - 

I cemented the flalk faft into the upper 
end of the tube d,. which tube was 6 ine 
ches long,-and 3 inch diameter; as the ftalk 
imbibed the w ater, it raifed the mercury to 
z, four inches high. 

I fix’danother Apple of the fame fize and 
tree, in the fame manner, but firft pulled 
off the leaves; it raifedthe mercury but one 
inch; I fixed in the fame manner a like 
bearing twig with 12 leaves on it, but no 
apple; it raifed the mercury 3 inches. 

I then 


= 


\ = 


<> 


} 
SAY 
Fy Z 


AZ, 


diehibivcas 


sep Set 


sa alae 


* 


Prpvbbtr et Re 


eee 


Par : Ss a ee rg i i 5‘ 
, - an hate ca mF nte ce rem eye inn B ir forvene we 
: : 


Vegetable Staticks. 53 


I then took a like bearing twig, without 
either leaves or apple, it raifed the mer- 
cury ~ inch. 

Soatwig, with an apple and leaves rai 
ed the mercury 4 inches, one with leaves 
only 3 inches, one with an apple without 
Jeaves 1 inch. 

A Quince which had two leaves, juft at 
the twig’s infertion into it, raifed the mer- 
cury 2 -| }-inches, and held it up a confi- 
derable time. 

A {prig of Mint fix’d in the fame manner, 
raifed the mercury 3 -+- % inch, equal to 
4 feet +- 5 inches height of water. i 


EXPERIMENT XXXI. 


I tryed alfo the imbibing force of a great 
variety of trees, by fixing Aqueo-mercurial 
gages to branches of them cut off, as in Ex- 
periment 22. 

The Pear, Quince, Cherry, Walnut, Peach, 
Apricock, Plumb, Black-thorns, White- 
thorns, Goofeberry, Water-Elder, Sycamore, 
raifed the mercury from 6 to 3 inches high : 
Thofe which imbibed water moft freely, in 
the Experiments of ithe firt chapter, raifed 

the 


94 Vegetable Staticks. 


the mercury higheft in thefe Experiments, 
except the Horfe-Chefnut, which tho’ it 
imbibed water moft freely, yet raifed the 
mercury but one inch, becaufe the air pafled 
very faft thro’ its fap-veffels into the gage. 

The following raifed the mercury but 1 
or 2 inches, vzz. the Elm, Oak, Horfe- 
Chefnut, Filberd, Fig, Mulberry, Willow, 
Sallow, Ofier, Afh, Lynden, Currans. 

The Evergreens, and following trees and 
plants, did not raife it at all. The Laurel, 
Rofemary, Laurus-Tinus, Philarea, Fuz, Rue, 
Berberry, Jeflamine, Cucumber- branch, Pum- 
kin, Jerufalem Artichoke. 


ExPERIMENT XXXII, 


We have a further proof of the great 
force, with which vegetables imbibe moi- 
fture, in the following Experiment, vuzz. I 
filled near full with Peafe and Water, the 
iron Pot (Fig. 37.) and layed on the Peafe 
a leaden cover, between which, and the fides 
of the Pot, there was room for the air which 
came from the Peafe, to pafs freely. I 
then layed one hundred eighty four pounds 


weight on them, which (as the Peafe di- 
| lated 


Vegetable Staticks. 95 


jated by imbibing the water) they lifted 
up. The dilatation of the Peafe is always 
equal to the quantity of water they imbibe : 
For if a few Peafe be put into a Veffel, and 
that Veffel be filled full of water, tho’ the . 
Peafe dilate to near double their natural 
fize ; yet the water will not flow over the 
Veffel, or at moft very inconfiderably, on 
account of the expanfion of little air bub- 
bles, which are iffuing from the Peafe. Be- 
ing defirous to try, whether they would 
yaife a much greater weight, by means of a 
lever with weights at the end of it, Icom- 
preffed feveral frefh parcels of Peafe in the 
fame Pot, with a force equal to 1600, 800, 
and 4.00 pounds ; in which Experiments, tho’ 
the Peafe dilated, yet they did not raife the 
lever, becaufe what they increafed in bulk 
was, by the great incumbent weight, preffed 
into the interftices of the Peafe, which they 
adequately filled up, being thereby formed 
into pretty regular Dodecahedrons. 

We fee in this Experiment the vaft force 
with which fwelling Peafe expand, and ’tis 
doubtlefs a confiderable part of the fame 
force which is exerted, not only in puth- 
ing the Plume upwards into the air, but 

alfo 


96 Vegetable Staticks. 


alfo in enabling the firft fhooting radicle of 
the Pea, and ali its fubfequent tender Fibres, © 
to penetrate and fhoot into the earth. — 


EXPERIMENT XXXII. 


We fee, in the Experiments of this chap- 
ter, many inftances of the great efficacy of 
attraction ; that univerfal principle which 
is fo operative in all the very different 
works of nature ; and is moft eminently fo 
in vegetables, all whofe minuteft parts are 
curioufly ranged in fuch order, as is beft 
adapted by their united force, to attract pro- 
per nourifhment. 

And we fhall find in the following Ex- 
periment, that the diffevered particles of 
vegetables, and of other bodies, have a 
ftrong attractive power when they lay con- 
fufed. 

That the particles of wood are fpecifi- 
cally heavier than water (and can there- 
fore ftrongly attra& it) is evident, becaufe 
feveral forts of wood fink immediately ; o- 
thers (even cork) when their interftices are 
well foaked, and filled with water; others 
( as the Peruvian Bark ) fink when very finely 

pulve- 


Vegetable Staticks. 97 
pulverized, becaufe all their cavities, which 
made them fwim, are thereby deftroyed. 

In order to try the imbibing power of 
eommon wood abhes, I filled a glafs tube 
cri,3 feet long, and 2 of an inch diameter 
(Fig. 16.) with well dryed and fifted wood 
afhes; prefling them clofe with a rammer, I 
tyed a piece of linen over the end of the 
tube at z, to keep the afhes from falling outs 
I then cemented the tube ¢ faft at.r to the 
Aqueo-mercurial gage r z, and when I 
had filled the gage full of water, I immet- 
fed it im the ciftern’ of mercury 4%: Then 
to the upper end of thetube ¢, at o If{crewed 
on the mercurial gage a 6. | 

The afhes as they imbibed the water drew 
the mercury up 3 or 4.inchesin a few hours 
towards 2; but the three following days it 
rofe but 1 inch, ¢ inch, and 4, and fo lefs 
and lefs, fo that in 5 or 6 days it ceafed ri. 
fing: The higheft it rofe was 7 inches, 
which was equal to raifing water 8 feet 
high. 

This had very little effe& on the mer- 
cury in the gage a 6, unlefs it were, that ig 
would rife a little, wze. an inch or little 
More in the gage ata, as it were by the fuc- 

Pe 3 tion. 


98 Vegetable Staticks. 


tion of the afhes, to fupply fome of the air 


bubbles which were drawn out at z. 


But when I feparated the tube ¢ 0 from | 


the gage r 2, and fet the end z in. water, 
then the moifture (being not reftrained as 
before) rofe fafter and higher in the afhes 
co, and depreffed the mercury at a, fo as 
to be 3 inches lower than in the leg 4, by 
driving the air upwards, which was inter- 
mixed with the afhes. 

- I filled another tube 8 feet long, and? 
inch diameter with red lead; and affixed it 
in the place of ¢ 0 to the gagesa db, r z, 
The mercury rofe gradually 8 inches to s. 

In both thefe Experiments, the end z was 
covered with innumerable air bubbles, many 
of which continually paffed off, and were 
{ucceeded by others, as at the tran{verfe cuts 
in the Experiments of this chapter. And as 
there, fo in thefe, the quantity of air bub- 
bles decreafed every day, fo as at laft to have 
very few: The part z immerfed in the wa- 
ter, being become fo faturate therewith, as 
to leave no zoom for air to pafs. 

After 20 days I picked the minium oug 
of the tube, and found the water had rifen 
2 feet 7 inches, and would no doubt have 

| rifen 


eh 


Vegetable Staticks, 99 


rifen higher, if it had not been clogged 
by the mercury in the gage 2. For which* 
reafon the moifture rofe but 20 inches in 
the afhes, where it would otherwife have 
rifen 30 or 40 inches. 


And as Sir L/zac Newton (in his Op- 


ticks query 31.) obferves, ‘‘ The water rifes 


4 
°¢4 
€e 
€< 


<¢ 


€¢ 


ce 


4 


wn 


6 


row 


up to this height, by the a@ion only of 
thofe particles of the afhes which are 
upon the furface of the elevated water ; 
the particles which are within the water, 
attrading or repelling it as much down- 
wards as upwards ; and therefore the ac- 
tion of the particles is very ftrong: But 
the particles of the afhes being not fo 
denfe and clofe together as thofe of 
glafs, their action is not fo ftrong as that 
of glafs, which keeps quick-filver fufpen- 
ded to the height of 60 or 70 inches, 
and therefore acts with a force, which 
would keep water fufpended to the height 
of above 6o feet. | 
<¢ By the fame principle, a {ponge fucks 
in water, and the glands in the bodies of 
animals, according to their feveral na- 
tures and difpofitions, fuck in various~ 
juices from the blood.” 

iz And 


100 Vegetable Staticks. 


And by the fame principle it is, that we 
fee in the preceding Experiments plants 
imbibe moifture fo vigoroufly up their fine 
capillary veflels ; which moifture, as it is car- 
ryed off in per{piration, (by the action of 
warmth,) thereby gives the fap veffels li- 
berty to be almoft continually attraGing 
of frefh fupplies, which they could not do, 
if they were full faturate with moifture: For 
without perfpiration the fap muft neceffarily 
ftagnate, notwithftanding the fap veffels are 
fo curioufly adapted by their exceeding fine- 
nefs, to raife the fap to great heights, in 
a reciprocal proportion to their very minute 
diameters. 


Ge A: Pj alk 
Experiments, fbewing the force of the fap 
an the Vine in the bleeding feafon. 


eee in the firft chapter fhewn 
many inftances of the great quanti- 
ties imbibed, and perfpired by trees, and in. 
the fecond chapter, feen the force with 
which they do imbibe moifture ; I propofe 
next, to give an account of thofe Experi- 
ments, which prove with what great force 

I the 


Vegetable Staticks. IOL 


the fap of the Vine is pufhed forth, in the 
bleeding feafon. 


EXPERIMENT XXXIV. ° 


March 30th at 3 p. m. I cut off a Vine 
on a weftern afpect, within feven inches of 
the ground, the remaining ftump ¢ (Fig. 17) 
had no lateral branches: It was 4 or 5 years 
old, and 4 inch diameter. I fix’d to the top 
of the flump, by means of the brafs col- 
lar 6, the glafstube 6 f, feven feet long, and 
+ inch diameter; I fecured the joynt 6 with 
fiiff cement made of melted Beeswax and 
Turpentine, and bound it faft over with f{e- 
veral folds of wet bladder and pack-thread : 
I then {crewed a fecondtube f g to the 
firft, and then a third g ato 25 feet height. 

The ftem not bleeding into the tube, I 
filled the tube two feet high with water, 
the water was imbibed by the ftem within 
3 inches of the bottom, by 8 a clock that 
evening. Inthe night it rained a {mall 
fhower. The next morning at 6 -++- ;, the 
water was rifen three inches above what it 
was fallen to laft night at eight a clock, 
The Thermometer which hung in my porch 

H 3 was 


102 Vegetable Staticks. 


was It degrees above the freezing point, 
March 31% from 6 +-}4m,to 10p. m. the fap 
role 8 -- finches, April tft at 6 am. Thermo 
meter 3 degrees above the freezing point, 
and a white hoar froft, the fap rofe from 
tena clock laft night 3 +- 4 inches more 5 
and fo continued rifing daily till it was a- 
bove 21 feet high, and would very proba- 
bly have rifen higher, if the joynt @ had not 
feveral times leaked : After ftopping of which 
it would rife fometimes at the rate of an- 
inch in 3 minutes, fo as to rife 10 feet or 
more in a day. In the chief bleeding {cafon 
it would continue rifing night and day, but 
much more in the day than night, and moft 
of all in the greateft heat of the day; and 
what little finking it had of 2 or 3 inchcs 
was always after fun fet, which I fulpeé 
was principally occafioned by the fhrink- 
ing and contraction of the cement at 4, 

it grew cool). 

When the fun fhined hot upon the Vine, 
there was always a continued feries of air 
bubbles, conftantly afcending from the ftem 
thro’ the fap in the tube, in fo great plenty 
as to make a large froth on the top of | 
the fap, which fhews the great quantity of 
alr 


Vegetable Staticks. 103 


air which is drawn in thro’ the roots and 
fiem. 

From this Experiment we find a confide- 
rable energy in the root to pufh up fap in 
the bleeding feafon. 

This put me upon trying, whether I could 
find any proof of fuch an energy, when the 
bleeding feafon was over, in order to which 


ExpERIMENT XXXV. 


_ Fuly 4th at noon, I cut off within 3 in- 
ches of the ground, another Vz#e on a fouth 
afpe&, and fixed to it a tube 7 feet high, as 
in the foregoing Experiment ; I filled the tube 
With water, which was imbibed by the root 
the firft day, at the rate of a foot in an hour, 
but the next day much more flowly, yet ic 
Was continually finking, fo that at noon day 

I could not fee it fo much as ftationary. 
Yet by Experiment the 3d, on the Vine 
in the garden pot, it is plain, that a very 
confiderable quantity of fap was daily pref- 
fing thro’ this ftem, to fupply the perfpira- 
tion of the leaves, before I cut the vine off. 
And if ‘this great quantity were carried up by 
H 4 pulfion 


104 Vegetable Staticks. 


pulfion or trufion, it muft needs have rifen 
out of the ftem into the tube. 

Now fince this flow of fap ceafes at once, 
as foon as the Vine was ¢ut off the fiem, 
the principal caufe of its rife muft at the 
fame time be taken away, viz. the great 
perfpiration of the leaves. 

For tho’ it is plain by many Experiments, 
that the fap enters the fap veffels of plants 
with much vigour, and is probably carried 
up to great heights in thofe veffels, by the 
vigorous undulations of the fun’s warmth, 
which may reciprocally canfe vibrations in 
the veficles and fap veffels, and thereby make 
them dilate and centra& alittle; yet it feems 
as plain (from many Experiments, as parti- 
cularly Exper.’ 13,<r4;-15.. and <Exper. 433 
where tho’ we are aflured that a great quan- 
tity of water paffed by the notch cut 2 or 3 
treet above the end of the ftem; yet was the 
notch very dry, becaufe the attraction of the 
per{piring leaves was much greater than the 
torce of trufion from the column of water , 
From theie Experiments, I fay, it feems 
evident, that the capillary fap veffels, out of 
the bleeding fcafon, have little power to pro- 

oe 


Vegetable Staticks. oo 
trude fap in any plenty beyond their orifices. 
but as any fap is evaporated off, they can 
by their ftrong attraction (aflifted by the 
genial warmth of the fun) fupply the great 
quantities of fap drawn off by perfpiration. 


EXPERIMENT XXXVI. 


April 6th at 9. 2m. rain the evening be- 
fore, I cut off a Vine on a fouthern af- 
pect, at 2 (Fig. 18.) two feet nine inches 
from the ground, the remaining ftem a 4, 
had no lateral branches, it was 2 inch dia- 
meter, I fixed on it the mercurial gage ay. 
At 11 4 m. the mercury was rifen to z, 15 
inches higher than in the leg x, being pufhed 
down atx, by the force of the fap which 
came out of the ftem at a. 

At 4p. m. it was funk aninch in the leg 2 y. 

April 7that 8 a.m. rifen very little, a 
fog: at it 4.m. tis 17 incheshigh, andthe 
fog gone. 

April roth at 7 4. m= mercury 18 inches 
high; I then added more mercury, fo as to 
make the furface 2 23 inches higher than x ; 
the fap retreated very little into the ftem, 
upon this additional weight, which fhews 

7 with 


106 | Kegetable Staticks. 
with what an abfolute force it advances: a¢ 
noon it was funk one inch. | 

April 11th at7 4. m.24 +- 3 inches high, 
fun-fhine : at 7 p. #. 18 inches high. 

April 14th at 7 4. m. 20 + inches high, 
at 9 a. m. 22 - 5, fine warm {un- thine ; ; 
here we fee that the warm morning fun 
gives a frefh vigour to the fap. At 11 a.m. 
the fame day 16 +- ,- the great perfpira- 
tion of the ftem makes it fink. 

April v6th at 64. m. 19 +3 rain. Ata 
p. m. 13 inches. The fap (in the foregoing 
Experiment, numb, 34) rifen this day fince 
noon 2 inches, while this funk by the per- 
{piration of the ftem; which there was lit- 
tle room for, in the very fhort ftem of the 
other. 

April iz at tt a.m. 24 + % inch high, 
rain and warm; at 7 p. m. 29 -1 i, fine 
warm rainy weather, which made the fap 
rife all day, there being litele perfpiration 
by reafon of the rain. 

April 18th at 7 4. m. 32 + } inches 
high, and would have rifen higher, if there 
had been more mercury in the gage; it be- 
ing all forced into the leg y g. From this 


time toMay sth, the force gradually decreafed, 
The 


WW 


2 WY) 
x\\ \\\ NN 
VALS 
A\\ 
\ ' 
i, 
i 
M\\i 
A 


Vegetable Staticks. 107 


The greateft height of the mercury be. 
ing 32 +4 inches; the force of the fap 
was then equal to 36 feet 5 -| } inches 
height of water. 

Here the force of the rifing fap in the mor- 
ning is plainly owing to the energy of the 
root and ftem. In another like mercurial! 
gage, (fixed near the bottom of a Vine which 
run 20 feet high) the mercury was raifed by 
the force of the fap 38 inches equal to 43 
feet 4- 3 inches.-| } height of water. 

W aich force is near five times greater than 
the force of the blood in the great crural ar- 
tery of a Horfe; feven times greater than 
the force of the blood in the like artery of 
a Dog; and eight times greater than the 
blood’s force in the fame artery of a fallow 
Doe: Which different forces I found by 
tying thofe feveral animals down alive upon 


their backs; and then laying open the great 


left crural artery, where it firft enters the 
thigh , I fixed to it (by means of two brafs 
pipes, which run one into the other) a glafs 
tube of above ten feet long, and th of an 
inch diameter in bere: In which tube the 
blood of one Horfe rofe eight feet, three in- 
ches, and - blood . another Horfe eight 

feet, 


108 Vegetable Staticks. 


feet nine inches. The blood of a little Dog 
fix feet and half high: Ina large Spaniel fe- 
ven feet high. The blood of the fallow Doe 
mounted five feet feven inches. 


EXPERIMENT XXXVIL. 


Aprit 4th, I fixed three mercurial gages 
(Fig. 19.) 4, 6,¢to aVine, on a fouth-eaft 
afpecdt, which was so feet long, from the 
root tothe endr#. The top of the wall 
was 11 -|- + feet high; from to &, 8 fect; 
from & toe, 6 feet-+ +; frometo a, 1 foot 
-|- 10 inches; from e to 0,7 feet; From oa to 
6,5 ++ + feet; from o to ¢, 22 feet 9 inches 5 
from 0 to #, 32 feet 9 inches. 

The branches to which a and ¢ were fixed 
were thriving fhoots two years old, but the 
branch e¢ 6 was much older. | 

When I firft fixed them, the mercury was 
pufhed by the force of the fap, in all the 
gages down the legs 4, 5, 13, foastorife nine 
inches higher in the other legs. 

The next morning at 7 a. m. the mercury 
in @ was pufhed 14 -|- j inches high, in 6 12 


a ike JX 
—— +3 lhl C 13 -~ 2° 


, 


ee 


we 


N 


/| S 
/ \ 


} if 
LiL 
aa iaaiianiaiés tag 


oy 


~ 
“ 


NS 
S 


~~ \ 
NR 
Sail 


SUA 
) 
i 


oi 


“ 


Ree ee 


_o ch tee 
7 Sos Dima ue i 
si 


Tian MeN ; mA XK tere Sees SY IL a2 or renee dipin-he armani SSL ele 
Wire ent a i Sree a ESTA Ss na) alec " 
Gert * 


Vegetable Sratiebs. ' 109 


The greateft height to which they pufhed 
the fap feverally was ¢ 21 inches, 6 26 inches, 
€ 26 inches. 

The mercury conftantly fubfided by the 
retreat of the fap about 9 or 1o inthe 
morning, when the Sun grew hot; but in 
a very moift foggy morning the fap was 
later before it retreated, vzz.+tiH noon, or 
fome time after the fog was gone. 

About 4 or 5 a clock in the afternoon, 
when the Sun went off the Vine, the fap 
began to pufh afrefh into the gages, fo as 
to make the mercury rife in the open legs; 
but it always rofe fafteft from Sun rife till 
9 or 10 inthe morning. 

The fap in 6 (the oldeft ftem) plaid the 
moft freely to and fro, and was therefore 
fooneft affected with the changes from hot 
to cool, or from wet to dry, and vice verfa. 

And April 10, toward the end of the bleed- 
ing feafon, 4 began firft to fuck up the 
mercury from 6 to 5, fo as to be 4 inches 
higher in that leg than the other. But 
April 24, after a night’s rain, 6 pufhed the 
mercury 4 inchesup the other leg, @ did not 
begin to fuck till April 29, v7z. 9 days after 
4;c¢ did not begin to fuck till May 3. viz. 

13 days 


110 Vegetable Staticks. 


13 days after b, and 4 days after 4. May s. 
at 7 4. m. @ pufhed 1 inch, ¢1 +4, bue 
towards noon they all three fucked. — 

I have frequently obferved the fame dif- 
ference in other Vines, where the like gages 
have been fixed at the fame time, to old 
and young branches of the fame Vine, viz. 
the oldeft began firft to fuck. 

In thisExperiment we fee the great force 
of the fap, at 44 feet 3 inches diftance from 
the root, equal to the force of acolumnof 
water 30 feet 4- 11 inches 4- 4 high. 

From this Experiment we fee too, that 
this force is not from the root only, but 
muft alfo proceed from fome power, in the 
fem and branches: For the branch 6 was 
much fconer influenced by changes from 
warm toe cool, or dry to wet, and vce ver- 
fa,than the other two branches 2 ore; and 
@ was in an imbibing flate, 9 days before 
a, which was all that time in a ftate of pufh- 
ing fap; ande¢ pufhed 13 days after @ had 
ceafed pufhing, and was in an imbibing 
ftate. 

Which imbibing ftate Vines and Apple- 
trees continue in all the fummer, in every 

branch, 


Vegetable Staticks. IEE 


branch, as I have found by fixing the like 
gages to them in July. 


EXPERIMENT XXXIX, 


March 10, at the beginning of the bleed- 
ing feafon, (which is many days fooner or 
later, according to the coldnefs or warmth, 
moifture or drynefs of the feafon) I then 
cut off a branchof a vine b fc g at 6, (Fig. | 
20.) which was 3 or 4 years old, and ce- 
mented faft on it a brafs-collar, with a 
{crew in it; tothatI {crewed another brafs- 
collar, which was cemented faft to the glafs 
tube, 7 feet long and zinch diam. (which 
I find to be the propereft diam.) to that 
I {crewed others, to 38 feet height. Thefe 
tubes were fafiened and fecurd in long 
wooden tubes, 3 inches fquare, one fide of 
which was a door opening upon hinges; 
the ufe of thofe wooden tubes was to pre- 
ferve the glafs tubes from being broke by 
the freezing of the fap in them in the 
night. But when the danger of hard frofts 
was pretty well over, as at the beginning of 
April, then I ufually fixt the glafles with- 
out the wooden tubes, fattening them to 

2 hese | sage | {caffold 


112 Vegetable Staticks. 
{caffold poles, or twolong iron {pikes drove 
into the wall. 

Before I proceed to give an account of 
the rife and fall of the fap, in the tubes, 1 
will firft defcribe the manner of cement- 
ing on the brafs-collar 4, to the ftem of the 
Vine in which I have been often difappoint- 
ed, and have met with difficulties; it mutt 
therefore be done with great care. 

Where I defign to cut the ftem, I firft 
pick off all the rough ftringy bark careful- 
ly with my nailsto avoid making any wound 
thro’ the green inner bark; thenI cut off 
the branch at z, (Fig. 21.) and immediately 
draw over the {tem a piece of dried fheeps- 
gut, which Itye faft, as near the end of the 
ftem as I can, fothat no fap can get by it; 
the fap being confined in the gut z f: Then 
I wipe the ftemat z very dry witha warm 
cloth, and tye round the ftem a ftiff paper 
funnel x z, binding it faft at x to the ftem; 
and pinning clofe the folds of the paper from 
xtoz: Then I flide the brafs collar r over 
the gut, and immediately pour into the pa- 
per funnel melted brickduft cement, and 
then fet the brafs-collar into it; which col- 
Jar is warmed, and dipped before in the ce- 
ment 3 


— 


Py ae ey ken hats 


Vegetable Statzcks. Ei3 


cement, that it may the better now adhere: 
When the cement is cold, I pull away the 
gut, and {crew on the glafs tubes. 

_ But finding fome inconvenience in this 
hot cement (becaufe its heat kills the fap 
veflels near the bark, as is evident by their 
being difcoloured) I have fince made ufe of 
the cold cement of Bees-wax and Turpen- 
tine, binding ic faft over with wet blad- 
der and-packthread, as in E'xper. 34. 

Inftead of brafs-collars, which fcrewed 
into each other , I often (efpecially with the 
Syphons in Exper. 37, and 38.) made ufe 
of two brafs-collars, which were turned 4 
little tapering, fo that one entered and ex- 
actly fitted the other. 

This joining of the two collars was ef- 
fectually fecured from leaking, by firft a- 
nointing them with a foft cement; and 
they were fecured from being disjoined, by 
the force of the afcending fap, by twifting 
pack-thread round the protuberant knobs 
on the fides of the collars. When I would 
feparate the collars, Ifound it neceffary 
(except in hot Sunfhine) to melt the foft 
cement by applying hot irons on the out 
fide of the collars. 

I It 


TI4 Vegetable Staticks, 


It is needful to fhade all the cemented 
joints from the Sun with loofe folds of 
paper, elfe its heat, will often melt them, 
and fo dilate the cement, as to make it 
be drove forcibly up the tube, which de- 
feats the Experiment. 

The Vines to which the tubes in this Ex- 
periment werefixed, were 20 feet high from 
the roots to their top; andthe glafs tubes 
fixed at feveral heights 6 from the ground, 
from-fix to two feet. 

The fap would rife in the tube the firt 
day, according to the different vigor of the 
bleeding ftate of the Vine, either 1, 2, 5, 
12,15,0r25 feet; but when it had got to its 
greateft height for that day, if it was in the 
morning, it would conftantly begin to fub- 
fide towards noon. 

Ifthe weather was very cool about the 
middle of the day, it would fubfide only 
from LI or 13, to two in the afternoon; 
but if it were very hot weather, the fap 
would begin to fubfide at 9 or 10 a clock, 
and continue fubfiding till 4, 5, or 6 inthe 
evening, and from that time it would con- 
tinue ftationary for an hour or two; after 
which it would begin to rife a little, bue 

not 


Vegetable Staticks. IIS 


not muchin the night, nor till after the Sun 
Was up in the morning, at which time it 
rofe fafteft. 

The frefher the cut of the Vine was, and 
the warmer the weather, the more the fap 
would rife, and fubfide in a day, as 4 or 6 
feet. 

But ifit were 5 or 6 days fince the Vine 
was cut, it would rife or fubfide but littles 
the fap-veffels at the tranfverfe cut being 
faturate and contracted. 

But if I cut off a joint or two off the 
ftem, and new fixed the tube, the fap would 
then rife and fubfide vigoroufly. 

Moifture and warmth made the fap mof: 
vigorous. 

If the beginning or middle of the bleed- 
ing feafon being very kindly, had made the 
motion of the fap vigorous; that vigour 
would immediately be greatly abated by 
cold eafterly winds. 

If in the morning, while the fap was in 
arifing ftate, there was acold wind witha 
mixture of funfhine and cloud; when the 
Sun was clouded, the fap would immediate- 
ly vifibly fubfide, at the rate of.an inch in 
a minute for feveral inches, if the Sun con- 

M2 tinued 


116 Vegetable Staticks, 


tinued fo long clouded: Butasfoon as the 
Sun-beams broke out again, the fap would 
immediately return to its then rifing ftate, 
juft as any liquor in a Thermometer rifes 
and falls with the alternacies of heat and 
cold; whence ‘tis probable, that the plen- 
tiful rife of the fap in the Vine in the bleed- 
ing feafon is effected in the fame manner. 
When three Tubes were fixed at the 
fame time to Vines onan eaftern, a fouth- 
ern, and a weftern Afpedt, round my porch; 
the fap would begin to rife in the morn- 
ing, firft in the eaftern-tube, next in the 
fouthern, and laf in the weftern-tube : And 
towards noon it would accordingly begin 
to fubfide, firft in the eaftern-tube, next in the 
fouthern, and laft in the weftern-tube. 
Where two branches arofe from the fame 
old weftern trunk, 15 inches from the 
ground; and one of thefe branches was 
fpread on a fouthern, and the other on a 
weftern Afpect; and glafs-tubes were at the 
fame time fixed to each of them; the fap 
would inthe morning, asthe Sun came on, 
rife firftin the fouthern, then in-the-weftern- 
tube ; and would begin-to fubfide, firft in the 


fouthern, thenin the weftern-tube. 
Rain 


Vegetable Staticks. 107 


Rain and warmth, after cold and dry, 
would make the fap rife all the next day, 
without fubfiding, tho’ it would rife then 
floweft about noon; becaufe in this 
cafe the quantity imbibed bythe roor, and 
raifed from it, exceeded the quantity per- 
fpired. 

The fap begins to rife fooner in the morn. 
ig in cool weather, than after hot days; 
the reafon of which may be, becaufe in hot 
weather much being evaporated, it is not 
fo foon fupplied by the roots as in cool wea- 
ther, when lefs is evaporated. 

In a prinre bleeding feafon I fixt a tube 
25 feet long to a thriving branch two years 
old, andtwo feet fromthe ground, where 
it was cut off; the fap flowed fo briskly, 
asin two hours to flow over the top of the 
Tube, which was 7 fect above the top of 
the Vine ; and doubtlefs would have rifen 
higher, if I had been prepared to lengthen 
the tube. 

When at the diftance of 4 or 5 days, 
tubes were affixed to two different branches, 
which came from the fame ftem, the fap 
would rife higheft in that which was laft fix- 
ed; yetif in the fixing the {econd tube there 

| 1 3 eS 


118 Vegetable Staticks. 


was much {ap loft, the fap would fubfide in 
thefirfttube; but they would not afterwards 
have their fap in Equilibrio; z. e. the furface 
of the fap in each was at very unequal heights; 
the reafon of whichis, becaufe of the difh- 
culty with which the fap paffes thro’ the 
almoft faturate and contracted Capillaries 
of the firft cut ftem. 

In very hot weather many air bubbles 
would rife, fo as to make a froth an inch 
deep, on the top of the fap in the tube. 

I fixt a {mall air Pump to the top of a 
long Tube, which had 12 feet height of fap 
init; whenI pumped, great plenty of bub- 
bles arofe, tho’ the fap did not rife, but fall 
a little, after I had done pumping. 

In Experiment 34. ( where a Tube was 
fixed to a very fhort ftump of a Vine, with- 
out any lateral branches) we find the fap 
rofe all day, and fafteft of all in the greateft 
heat of the day: But by many obfervations 
under the 37th and this 38th Experiments, 
we find the fap in the tubes conftantly fub- 
fided as the warmth came on towards the 
middle of the day, and fafteft in the greateft 
heat of the day. Whence we may reafon- 
ably conclude, (confidering the great per- — 

{pitas 


Vegetable S: taticks. 119 


fpirations of trees, fhewn in the firft chapter) 
that the fall of the fap, in thefe fap gages, 
in the middle of the day, efpecially in the 
warmer days, is owing to the then greater 
perfpiration of the branches, which perfpi- 
ration decreafes, as the heat decreafes to- 
wards evening, and probably wholly ceafes 
when the dews fall. 

- But when towards the latter end of April, 
the {pring advances, and many young fhoots 
are come forth, and the furface of the Vine 
is greatly increafed, and enlarged by the 
expanfion of feveral leaves; whereby the 
perfpiration is much increafed, and the fap 
more plentifully exhaufted, itthen ceafesto 
flow ina vifible manner, till the return of 
the following fpring. 

Amdsias..in. the,Vine, {01s the cafe the 
fame in all the bleeding trees, which ceafe 
bleeding as foon asthe young leaves begin to 
expand encugh, to perfpire plentifully, and 
to draw off the redundant fap. Thus the bark 
of Oaks and many other trees moft eafily fe- 
parates, while it islubricated with plenty of 
fap: But as {oon as the leaves expand {uffici- 
ently to perfpire off plenty of fap, the bark 
will then nolongerrun (asthey termit) but 


acheres moft flumiy to the wood. 
De Ex: 


120 Vegetable Staticks. 
EXPERIMENT XXXIX. 


In order to try if I could perceive the 
ftem of the Vine dilate and contrat with 
heat or cold, wet or dry, a bleeding or not 
bleeding feafon, fome time in February, I 
fixt to the ftem of a ze an inftrument in 
fuch a manner, that if the Stem had dilat- 
ed or contracted but the one hundredth 
part of an inch, it would have made the 
end of the infrument, (which was a picce of 
{trong brafs-wire, eighteen inches long) rife 
or fall very fenfibly about one tenth of an 
inch ; but I could not perceive the inftru- 
ment to move, either by heat or cold, a 
bleeding ocr not bleeding feafon. Yet 
whenever it rained the ftem dilated fo as to 
raife the end of the infrument or lever 
of an inch; and when the fiem was dry 
it fubfided as mitch. 

This Expériment fhews, that the fap (even 
in the bleeding feafon) is confined in its pros 
per vefiels, and that it does not confufedly 
pervade every inteérftice of the flem, as the 
rain does, which entering at the per{piring 
pores, foaks into the intérftices, and thére= 
by dilates the ftem. 

| CHAP. 


Vegetable Statiks. xr 


CoH RR): TV, 

Experiments, fhewing the ready lateral mo- 
tion of the fap, and confequently the late- 
ral communication of the fap veffels. The 
free paljage of it from the fimall branches 
towards the ftem, as well as fromibe ftem 
to the branches. With an account of fome 
Experiments, relating to the circulation or 
non circulation of the fap. 


EXPERIMENT XL: 


N order to find whether there was any 
lateral communication of the fap and 
fap veflels, as there is of the blood in a- 
nimals, by means of the ramifications, and 
lateral communications of their veffels: 
Auguft 15th, Itook a young Oak brauch 
3 inches diameter, at its tranverfe cut, 6 feet 
high, and full of leaves. Seven inches from 
the bottom, I cut a large gap to the pith, 
an inch long, and of an equal depth the 
whole length: And 4 inches above that, on 
the oppofite fide, I cut fuch another gap; I 
fet the great end of the ftem in water: It 
imbibed and perfpired in two nights and two 
Gays 


122 Vegetable Staticks. 


days 13 ounces, while another like oak 
branch, fomewhat bigger than this, but with 
no notch cut in its ftem, imbibed 25 ounces 
of water. 

At the fame time I tryed the like Exper. 
with a ‘Duke-Cherry branch; it imbibed and 
perfpired 23 ounces in 9 hours the firft day, 
and the next day 15 ounces. 

At the fame time I took another Dyke- 
Cherry branch, and cut 4 fuch f{quare gaps 
to the pith, 4 inches above each other ; the 
1ft North, 2d Eaft, 3d South, 4th Weft: le 
had a long flender ftem, four feet length, 
without any branches, only at the very top; 
yet it imbibed in 7 hours day 9 ounces, and 
in two days and two nights 24 ounces. 

We feein thefe Experiments a moft free 
Jateral communication of the fap and fap 
veffels, thefe great quantities of liquor ha. 
ving paffed laterally by the gaps; for by 
Experiment 13, 14, 15. (on Cylinders of 
wood ) little evaporated at the gaps. 

And in order to try, whether it would 
not be the fame in branches as they grew 
on trees, I cut two fuch oppofite gaps ina 
Duke-Cherry branch, 3 inches diftant from 
each other: The leaves of this branch con- 

Pee 


Vegetable Staticks. 123 


tinued green, within 8 or 10 days, as long 
as the leaves on the other branches of the 
ganic CCE. 

The fame day, viz. Auguft 15th, I cut 
two fuch oppofite gaps 4 inches diftant, in 
an horizontal young thriving Oak-branch ; 
it was 1 inch diameter, 18 days after many 
of the leaves begun to turn yellow, which 
none of the leaves of other boughs did then. 

The fame day I cut off the bark for one 
inch length, quite round alike branch of the 
fame Oak; 18 days after the leaves were as 
green asany onthe fame tree; but the leaves 
fell off this and the foregoing branch early 
in the winter ; yet continued on all the reft 
of the boughs of the tree (except the top 
ones) all the winter. | 

The fame day I cut four fuch gaps, 2 in- 
ches wide, and 9 inches diftant from each 
other, in the upright arm of a Golden-Re- 
nate tree; the diameter of the branch was 
2-+-7 inch, the gaps faced the 4 cardinal 
points of the compafs; the apples and leaves 
on this branch flourifhed as well as thofe 
on other branches of the fame tree. 

Here again we fee the very free lateral 

paflage 
4 | 


124 Vegetable Staticks. | 
paflage of the fap, where the dire& paffage 
is feveral times intercepted. 


EXPERIMENT XLT. 


Auguft +3. Atnoonl tooka large branch 
of an Apple-tree, (Fig. 22.) and cemented 
up the tranf{verfe cut, at the great end w, and 
tyed a wet bladder over it: I then cut off 
the main top branch at 6; where it was ¢ 
inch diameter, and fet it thus inverted into 
the bottle of water 6. 

In three days and two nights it ae: 
and perfpired 4 pounds -+- 2 ounces ++ ¢ 
water, and the leaves continued green ; se 
leaves of a bough cut off the fame tree at 
the fame time with this, and not fet in 
water, had been withered 40 hours before. 
This, as well as the great quantities imbibed 
and perfpired, fhews, that the water was 
drawn from 6 moft freely to e, fg, 4, and 
from thence down their refpedtive branches, 
and fo perfpired off by the leaves. 

This Paes may ferve to explain the 
reafon, why the branch 4, ( Fig. 23.) which 
grows out of the root ¢ x, thrives very well, 
7 notwith- 


LZZZZZZZ 


1 Seaosppealometi a kan — 
f oe 
oe 
rots 


Vegetable Staticks. 125 


notwithftanding the root ¢ x is here fup- 
pofed to be cut off at ¢, and to be out of 
the ground: For by many Experiments in 
the firft and fecond chapters, it is evident, 
thar the branch @ attrad&s fap at x with 
great force: And by this prefent Experi- 
ment, ’tis as evident, that fap will be drawn 
as freely downwards from the tree tow, as 
from c tox, in cafe the end ¢ of the root 
were in the ground; whence ‘tis no won- 
der, that the branch 6 thrives well, tho’ 
there be no circulation of the fap. 

This Experiment 41, and Experiment 26, 
do alfo fhew the reafon why, where thefe 
trees (Fig.24) are inarched, and thereby 
incorporated at x and 2, the middle tree 
will then grow, tho’ it be.cut off from its 
roots; or the root be dug out of the ground, 
and fufpended in the air; wzz. becaufe:the 
middle tree 4 attraéts nourifhment ftrongly 
at x and g, from the adjoyning trees ac, in 
the fame manner as we fee the inverted 
boughs imbibed water in thefe Exper. 26, 
and 41, 

And from ‘the fame reafon it is that El- 
ders, Sallows, Willows, -Briars, Wines, and 

4. moft 


126 Vegetable Staticks. 


moft Shrubs will grow in an inverted ftate, 
with their tops downwards in the earth. 


EXPERIMENT XLII. 


Fuly 27th, I repeated Monfieur Perault’s 
Experiment, vz. I took Duke Cherry, Ap- 
ple and Curran-Boughs, with two branches 
each, one of whichac (Fig. 25.) Ll immer- 
fed in the large veffel of watered, the o- 
ther branch hanging in the open air: I hung 
on a rail, at the fame time, other branches 
of the fame forts, which were then cut off. 
After three days, thofe on the rails were very 
much withered and dead, but the branches 
6 were very green; in 8 days the branch 6 
of the ‘Duke-Cherry was much withered ; 
but the Currans and Apple-branch 6 did not 
fade till the eleventh day : Whence ‘tis plain, 
by the quantities that muft be perfpired in 
eleven days, to keep the leaves 4 green fo 
long, and by the wafte of the water, out of 
the veffel, that thefe boughs 6 muft have 
drawn much water, from and thro’ the o- 
ther boughs and leaves ¢, which were im- 


merfed in the veflel of water. 
| I re- 


er ig es ee oY i 
Nn Do ne tom A i prigk Lal psa Silent ecene inp ae ie 


Ai 
} 4 


Vegetable Staticks. 127 


I repeated the like Experiment on the 
branches of Vines and Apple-trees, by run- 
ning their boughs as they grew into large 
glafs chymical retorts full of water, where 
the leaves continued green for feveral weeks, 
and imbibed confiderable quantities of water. 

This fhews how very probable it is, that 
rain and dew is imbibed by vegetables, efpe- 
cially in dry feafons. 

Which is further confirmed by Experi- 
ments lately made on new planted trees; 
where by frequently wafhing the bodies 
of the moft unpromifing, they have out-ftrip- 
ped the other trees of the fame plantation. 

And Mr. Miller advifes “ Now and then 
-& in an evening to water the head, and with 

<¢ a brufh to wafh and fupple the bark all 
—& yound the trunk, which (fayshe) Ihave 
«<< often found very ferviceable.” Supplement 
to his Gardener's DiGtionary, Vol. II. under 
Planting. 


ExPERIMENT XLIII. 


Auguft 20th at 1 p.m. I took an Apple- 
branch 6, (Fig. 26.) nine feet long, 1 -+- 
¢ inch diameter, with proportional lateral 

branches, 


128 Vegetable Staticks. | 
branches, I cemented it faft to the tube g _ 
by means of the leaden Syphon /: But firft 
I cut away the bark, and Jaft year’s ringlet of 
wood, for 3 inches length tor. I then fil- | 
led the tube with water, which was 12 feet © 
long, and } inch diameter, having firft cut — 
agap at y thro’the bark, and laft year’s wood, 
z2 inches from the lower end of the ftem: 
the water was very freely imbibed, vze. at 
the rate of 3 -+ 4 inches in a minute. In 
half and‘hour'stime I could plainly perceive 
the lower part of the gap y to be moifter 
than before; when, at the fame time, the up- 
per part of the wound looked white and dry. 
Now inthis cafe the water muft neceffa- 
rily afeend from the tube, thro’ the inner- 
moft wood, becaufe the laft year’s wood was 
cut away, for 3 inches length all round the 
ftem; and confequently, if the fap in its na- 
tural courfe defcended by the laft year’s ring- 
let of wood, and between that and the bark 
(as many have thought) the water fhould 
have defcended by the laft.year’s wood,or the 
bark, and fo have firft moiftened the upper 
‘part of the gap y; but on the contrary, the 
lower part was moiften’d, and not the upper 
part. 
| Tre 


Vegetable Staticks. 129 


I repeated this Experiment with a large 
Duke-Cherry branch, but could not perceive 
more moifture at the upper, than the lower 
part of the gap, which ought to have been, 
if the fap defcends by the laft year’s wood 
or the bark. 

It was the fame in a Quince-branch as 
the “Duke Cherry. 

N. B. When I cut a notch in either of 
thefe branches, 3 feet abover, at gq, I could 
neither fee nor feel any moifture, notwith- 
ftanding there was at the fame time a great 
quantity of water pailing by ; forthe branch 
imbibed at the rate of 4, 3 or 2 inches per 
minute, of a column of water which was 
half inch diameter. 

The reafon of which drynefs of the notch 
g is evident from Experiment 11, vz. 
becaufe the upper part of the branch above 
the notch imbibed and perfpired 3 or 4 
pines more. water,’ than a column of 7 
feet height of water in the tube could im- 
pell from the botrom of the ftem to Y> 
which was 3 feet length of ftem; and con- 
fequently, the notch muft neceflarily be 
dry, notwithftandine fo large a ftream of 
water was pafling by ; viz. becaufe the branch 

K : and 


130 Vegetable Staticks. 
and ftem above the notch was ina flrongly 


imbibing flate, in order to fupply the great 
perfpiration of the leaves. 


EXPERIMENT XLIV. 


luguft othat 10 4. m. I fix’d in the fame 
manner (as in the ‘foregoing Experiment) 
aDuke.Cherry branch 5 fect high, andi inch 
diameter, but did not cut away any of the 
bark or wood at the great end; I filled the 
tube with water, and then cut a flice off the 
bark an inch long, 3 inches above the great 
end ; it bled at the lower part moit freely, 
while the upper part continued dry. 

The fame day I tryed the fame Experi- 
ment on an App/le-branch, and it had the 
fame effec. 

Fromthefe Experiments ’tis probabie that 
the fap afcends between the bark and wood, 
as well as by other parts. 

And fince by other Experiments it is found 
that the greateft part of the fap is raifed by 
the warmth of the Sun on the leaves, which | 
feem to be made broad and thin for. that | 
purpofe ; for the fame reafon, it's moft pro- | 
bable, it fhould rife alfo in thofe parts | 

fs wa which 


Vegetable Staticks. 131 


which are moft expofed to the Sun, as the 
bark ts. 

And when we confider, that the fap vef- 
fels are fo very fine, as to reduce the {2p al- 
moft toa vapour, before it can enter them, 
the Sun’s warmth on the bark fhould moft 
eafily difpofe fuch rarified fap to afcend, 
inftead of defcending. 


EXPERIMENT XLY. 


Fuly 27th, took feveral branches of Cur- 
rans, Vines, Cherry, Apple, Pear and Plum- 
tree, and fet the great ends of each in veffels 
of water x, (Fig. 31.) but firft took the bark | 
for an inch off one of the branches, as at s, 
to try whether the leaves above 2 at 6 
would continue green longer than the leaves 
of any.of the other branches 4, c, 7; but I 
could find no difference, the leaves wither- 
ing all at the fame time: Now, if the re- 
turn of the fap was ftopped at g, then it 
would be expected, that rhe leaves at  fhould 
continue gercen, longer than thofe on the o- 
ther branches, which did not happen, neither 
was there any moifture at =. 


Ks 3 EXPE- 


ra 2 Vegetable Staticks. 


# 


EXPERIMENT XLVI 


In Auguft, 1 cut off the bark for an inch 
round, of a young thriving Oak-branch, on 
the North-Weft fide of the tree. The leaves 
of this and another branch, which had the 
bark cut at the fame time, fell early, vzz. 
about the latter end of Odfeber, when the 
leaves of all the other branches of the fame 
tree, except thofe at the very top of the 
tree, continued on all the winter. 

This is a further proof, that lefs fap goes 
to branches which have the bark cut off, 
than to others. 

The roth of Apr following, the buds of 
this branch were 5 or 7 days forwarder than 
thofe of other branches of the fame tree; 
the reafon of which may probably be, be- 
_ caufe lefs frefh crude fap coming to this 
branch than the others, and the per{pirati- 
ons in all branches being ceteris paribus 
nearly equal, the leffer quantity of fap in 
this branch muft fooner be infpiflated into 
a glutinous fubfiance, fit for new produc- 
tions, than the fap of other branches, that 

abounded 


Vegetable Staticks. 133 


abounded with a greater plenty of freth thin 
fap. 

The fame is the reafon why Apples, 
Pears, and many other fruits, which have 
fome of their great fap veffels eaten afunder 
by infects bred in them, are ripe many days 
before the reft of the fruit on the fame trees ; 
As alfo that fruit, which is gathered fome 
time before it is ripe, will ripen fooner than 
if it had hung on the tree, tho’ it will not 
be fo good; becaufe inthefe cafes the worm- 
eaten frnit is deprived of part of its nourifh- 
ment, and the green gathered fruit of all. 

And for the fame reafon fome fruits are 
fooner ripe towards the tops of the trees, 
than the other fruit on the fame tree ; vz. 
not only, becaufe they are more expofed to 
the fun; but alfo, becaufe being at a greater 
diftance from the root, they have fome- 
what lefs nourifhment. 

And this is, doubtlefs, one reafon why 
plants and fruits are forwarder in dry, fandy 
or gravelly foils, than in moifter foils; vzz. 
not only, becaufe thofe foils are warmer 
on account of their drynefs; but alfo, be- 
caufe lefs plenty of moifture is conveyed up 
the plants; which plenty of moifiure, tho 

K 3 it 


134 | Vegetable Staticks. 


ic promotes their growth, yet retards their 
coming to maturity. And for the fame 
reafon, the uncovering the roots of trees 
for fome time, will make the fruit be confi- 
derally the forwarder. 

And on the other hand, where trees a- 
bound with too great a plenty of frefh drawn 
fap, as is the cafe of trees whofe roots are 
planted too deep in cold moilft earth, as 
alfo of too luxuriant Peach and other 
Wall trees; or which comes almoft to the 
fame, where the fap cannet be perfpired of 
in a due proportion ; asin Orchards, where 
trees ftand too hear each other, fo as to hin- 
cer per{piration, whereby the fap is kept in 
too thin and crude a flate; in all thefe caies 
little or no fruit is produced. 

Hence alfo in moderately dry fummers, 
céteris paribus, there is ufually greateft plenty 
of fruit; becaufe the fap in the bearing 
twigs and buds is more digefted, and brought 
to a better confiftence, for fhooting out with 
vigour and firmne(fs, than it is in cool moift 
fummers: And this obfervation has been 
verified in the years 1723, 1724, and 1725, 
See an account of them under it. Axp. 20. 


But 


Vegetable Staticks. 135 

But to return to the fubject of the mo- 
tion of the fap; when the fap has firft pafied 
thro’ that thick and fine firainer, the bark of 
the root, we then find it in greateft quanti- 
ties, in the moft lax part, between the bark 
and wood, and ¢/at the fame thro’ the whole 
fee. And if in the early {pring,; the Oak 
and feveral cther trees were to be examined 
near the cop and bottom, when the fap firft 
begins to move, fo as to make the bark ea- 
fily ran, or peel off, I believe it would be 
found, that the lower bark is firii moiftened ; 
whereas the bark of the top branches ought 
firft to be moiftened, if the fap defcends by 
the bark: As tothe Vine, I am pretty well 
aflured that the lower bark is firft moifened. 

We fee in many of the foregoing Expe- 
riments, what quantitics of moifture trees 
do daily imbibe and perfpire: Now the ce- 
lerity of the fap muft be very great, if that 
quantity of moifture muf,; moft of it, af 
cend to the top oi the tree, then defcend, 
and afcend again, before it is carried off by 
per{piration. 

The defe& of a Fe Ones iil vegetables 
feems in fome meafure to be applied by 
the much greater quantity of liquor, which 

K 4. the 


136 Vegetable Staticks. 

the vegetable takes in, than the animal, 
whereby its motion is accelerated; for by Ex- 
periment ft, we find the Sunflower, bulk 
for bulk, imbibes and perfpires 17 times 
more frefh liquor than a man every 24 hours. 

Befides, nature's great aim in vegetables 
being only that the vegetable life be carried 
on and maintained , there was no occafion 
to give its fap the rapid motion, which was 
neceflarv for the blood of animals. 

In animals, it is the heart which fets the 
blood in motion, and makes it centinually 
circulate ; but in vegetables, we can difco- 
ver no other caufe of the fap’s motion, but 
the ftrong attra@ion of the capillary fap 
veffels, aflifted by the brisk undulations and 
vibrations, caufed by the fun’s warmth, where- 
by the fap is carried up to the top of the 
talieft trees, and is there perfpired off thro” 
the leaves : But when the furface of the tree 
is greatly diminifhed by the lo{s of its leaves, 
then alfo the perfpiration and motion of the 
fap is proportionably diminifhed, as is plain 
from many of the foregoing Experiments: 
So that the afcending velocity of the fap is 
principally accelerated by the plentiful per- 
{piration of the leaves, thereby making room 

for 


Vegetable Staticks. t37 
for the fine capillary veflels to exert their 
vaftly attracting power, which perfpiration 
is effected by the brisk rarifying vibrations 
of warmth: A power that does not feem 
to be any ways weil adapted, to make the 
fap defcend from the tops of vegetables by 
different veffels to the root. 

If the fap circulated, it muft needs have 
been feen defcending from the upper part 
of large gafhes, cut in branches, fet in wa- 
ter, and with columns of water prefling on 
their bottomsin long glafstubes, in Exp. 43, 
and 44. In both which cafes, it is certain 
that great quantities of water paffed thro’ 
the item, fo that it muft needs have been 
feen defcending, if the return of the fap 
downwards were by trufion or pulfion, 
whereby the blood in animals is returned 
thro’ the veins to the heart: And that pul- 
fion, if there were any, muft neceffarily be 
exerted with prodigious force, to be able 
to drive the fap thro’ the finer capillaries, 
So that if there be areturn of the fap down- 
wards, it muft be by attraction, and that 
a very powerful onc, as we may {ce by many 

f thefe Experiments, and particularly by 
Experiment 11. But it is hard to conceive, 
what 


138 Vegetable Staticks. 

wnat and where that power is which can 
be equivaicnt to that provifion nature has 
has made for the afcent of the fap in confe- 
quence of the great perfpiration of the leaves, 

The inftances of the Jeffamine tree, and 
of the Paflion tree, have been looked up- 
on as rong proofs of the circulation of the 
fap, becaufe their branches, which were far 
below the inoculated Bud, were gilded : 
But we have many vilible proofsin the Vine 
and other biceding trees of the fap’s reced- 
ing back, and pufhing forwards alternately, 
at different times of the day and night. And 
there is great reafon to think, that the fap 
of all other trees has fuch an alternate, re- 
ceding and progreilive motion, occafioned 
by the alternacies of day and night, warm 
and cool, moift and dry. 

For the fap in all vegetables does proba- 
bly recede in fome meafure from the tops 
of branches, as the Sun leaves them; be- 
caufe its rarifying power then ceafing, the 
ereatly rarified fap, and air mixt with it, 
will condenfe and take up lefs room than 
they did, and the dew and rain will then 
be firongly imbibed by the leaves, as is pro- 
bable from Exper. 42, and feveral others; 

whereby 


Vegetable Staticks. 139 


whereby the body and branches of the ve- 
getable which have been much exhaufted by 
the great evaporation of the day, may at 
night imbibe fap and dew from the leaves; 
for by feveral Experiments in the firft chap- 
ter, plants were found to increafe confider- 
ably in weight, in dewy and moift nights. 
And by other Experiments on the Vine in 
the third chapter, it was found, that the 
trunk.and-branches of Vines wese always 
in an imbibing flate, caufed by the great pez- 
{piration of the leaves, except in the bleed- 
ing feafon; but when at night that perfpir- 
ing power ceafes, then the contrary imbib- 
ing power will prevail and draw tne fap 
and dew from the leaves, as well as moifture 
from the roots. 

And we have a further proof of this ia 
Experiment 12, where by fixing mercurial 
gages to the flems of feveral trees, which 
do not bleed, it is found, that they are al- 
ways in a ftrongly imbibing fate, by draw- 
ing up the mercury feveral inches: Whence 
it is cafic to conceive, how fome of the par- 
ticles of the gilded Bud, in the inoculated 
Jeflamine, may be abforbed by it, and there- 
by communicate their gilding Miafma to the 

a fap 


140 Vegetable Staticks. 4 
fap of other branches; efpecially when fome 
months after the inoculation, the ftock of 
the inoculated Jeffamine is cut off a lit- 
tle above the Bud; whereby the ftock, 
which was the counter ating part to the ~ 
ftem, being taken way, the ftem attraGts — 
more vigoroufly from the Bud. 

Another argument for the circulation of 
the fap, is, that fome forts of graffs will 
infe& and canker the ftocks they are grafted 
on: But by Exper. 12 and 37, where mer- 
curial gages were fixed to frefh cut ftems of 
trees, it is evident, that thofe ftems were 
in a ftrongly imbibing ftate; and confe- 
quently the cankered ftocks might very like- 
ly draw fap from the graff, as well as the 
graff alternately from the ftock; juftin the 
fame manner as leaves and branches do 
from each other, in the viciflitudes of day 
and night. And this imbibing power of the 
ftock is fo great, where only fome of the 
branches of a tree are grafted, that the re- 
maining branches of the ftock will, by their 
firong attraction, flarve thofe grafts; for 
which reafon it is ufual to cut off the great- 
eft part of the branches of the ftock, leav- 


ing 


Vegetable Staticks. I4t 
ing only a few {mall ones to draw up the 
fap. 

The inftance of the Ilex grafted upon the 
Englifo Oak, feems to afford a very con- 
‘fiderable argument againfta circulation. For 
if there were a free uniform circulation of 
the fap thro’the Oak and Ilex, why fhould 
the leaves of the Oak fallin winter, and not 
thofe of the Ilex? 

Another argument, againft a uniform cir- 
culation of the fap in trees as in animals, 
may be drawn from Exper. 37. where it 
was found by the three mercurial gages fixt 
to the fame Vine, that while fome of its 
branches changed their ftate of protruding 
fap into a ftate of imbibing, others con- 
tinued protruding fap, one nine, and the 
other thirteen days longer. 

In the fecond Vol. of Mr. Lowthor ry’s 
Abridgment of the Philof: Tranfac. p. 708. 
is becied an Experiment of Mr. Brother- 
ton’s, viz. A young Hazel nw, Fig. 27, was 
cut into the body at xz witha deep gafh; 
the parts of the body below art z, and a- 
bove at x, were cleft upwards and down- 
wards, and the fplinters x 2 by wedges were 
kept off from touching each other, or the 

4. reft 


IA2 Vegetable Staticks. 


reft of the body. The following year, the 


upper {plinter « was grown very much, but 
the lower fplinter = did not grow, but the 
reft of the body grew,as if there had been no 
gafh made: I have not yet fucceeded in ma- 
king this Experiment, the wind having 
broken at x & all the trees I prepared for 
it: But if there wasa Bud at x which thot 
out leaves, and none at &, then by Exper. 
41. “tis plain, that thofe leaves might draw 
much nourifhment thro ¢ x, and thereby 
make it grow; andI believe, if, vice verfa, 
there were a leaf bearing Bud at s, and none 
at x, thar then the fplinter = would grow 
more than x. 

The reafon of my conjecture, I ground 
upon this Experiment, vzz. 1 chofe two 
thriving fhoots of a dwarf Pear-tree i / aa. 
Fig. 28,29. At three quarters of an inch 
diftance I took half an inch breadth of bark 
off each of them, in feveral places, viz. 
2, 4, 6, 8, and. at ro, 12, L4.. every one of 
the remaining ringlets of bark had a leaf 


bearing bud, which produced leaves the fal- 


lowing fummer, except the ringlet 13, which 
had no fuch Bud, The ringler 9 and rr 
ef aa grew and fwelled at their bottoms, 

till 


Vegetable Staticks. 143 
till Auguf?, but the ringlet 13 did not in- 
creafeatall, and in Jaguft the whole fhoog 
4awithered and dyed; but the fhoot //, 
lives and thrives well, each of its ringlets 
{welling much at the bottom: Which fwel.- 
lings at their bottoms muft be attributed 
to fome other caufe than the floppage of 
the fap in its return downwards, becaufe in 
the fhoot //, its return downwards is in- 
tercepted three feveral times by cutting a- 
way the bark at 2,4, 6. The larger and 
more thriving the leaf bearing Bud was, and 
the more leaves it had on it, fo much the 
more did the adjoining bark fwell at the 
bottom. 

_ Fig. 30. Reprefents the profile of one of the 
divifions in Fig, 28. fplitin halves, in which 
may be feen the manner of the growth of 
the laft year’s ringlet of wood fhooting a lit- 
tle upwards at x «; and fhooting down- 
wards and {welling much more at = 33 
where we may obferve, that what is fhot 
endways, is plainly parted from the wood 
of the preceding year, by the narrow in- 
terftices x 7, 27, whence it fhould feem, 
that the growth, of the yearly new ringlets 

of 


144 Vegetable Staticks. 
of wood confifts in the fhooting of their fi- 
bres lengthways under the bark. 

That the fap does not defcend between the 
bark and the wood, as the favourers of a cir- 
culation fuppofe, feems evident from hence, 
viz. that if the bark be taken off for 3 or 
4. inches breadth quite round, the bleeding of 
the tree above that bared place will much 
abate, which ought to have the contrary 
effect, by intercepting the courfe of the re- 
fluent fap, if the fap defcended by the bark. 

But the reafon of the abatement of the 
bleeding in this cafe may well be account- 
ed for, from the manifeft proof we have 
in thefe Experiments, that the fap is ftrong- 
ly attracted upwards by the vigorous opera- 
tion of the perfpiring leaves, and attracting 
Capillaries: But when the bark is cut off 
for fome breadth below the bleeding place, 
then the fap, which is between the bark and 
the wood below that disbarked place, is 
deprived of the ftrong attragting power of 
the leaves, gc. and confequently the bleed- 
ing wound cannot be fupplied fo faft with 
fap, as it was before the bark was taken off. 

Hence alfo we have a hint for a probable 
conjecture why in the alternately disbarked 

oe fticks, 


Vegetable Staticks. 145 
fticks, 77 aa Fig. 28, 29. the bark fwelled 
more at the upper part of the disbarked 
places than at the lower, vzz. becaufe thofe 
lower parts were thereby deprived of the 
plenty of nourifhment which was brought 
to the upper parts of thofe difabled places, 
by the firong attra@tion of the leaves on 
the Buds 7, ¢c. of which we have a fur- 
ther confirmation in the ringlet of bark 
New T3 Fic. .20: which ringlet did not fwell 
or grow at either end, being not only de- 
prived of the attraction of the fuperior leaves, 
by the bared placed N°. 13. but alfo with- 
out any leaf Bud ofits own, whofe branch- 
ing fap Veflels, being like thofe of other leaf 
Buds rooted downwards in the wood, might 
thence draw fap, for the nourifhment of its 
felf and the adjoining bark N°. 13. But had 
thefe rooting fap veflels run upwards, in- 
ftead of downwards, ’tis probable, that in 
that cafe the upper part of each ringlet of 
bark, andnot the lower, would have fwelled, 
by having nourifhment thereby brought to 
it from the inmoft wood. 

We may hence alfo fee the reafon why, 
when a tree is unfruitful, it is brought to 
bear fruit, by the taking ringlets of bark off 

L from 


146 Vegetable Staticks, 


from its branches, vzz. becaufe thereby a 
Iefs quantity of fap arifing, it is better di- 
digefted and prepared for the nourifhment 
of the fruit; which from the greater quan- 
tity of oil, that is ufually found in the feeds, 
and their containing veffels, than in other 
parts of plants, fhews that more fulphur and 
air is requifite for their produétion, than there 
is for the production of wood and leaves. 

But the moft confiderable objection a- 
gainft this progreflive motion of the fap, 
without a circulation, arifes from hence, viz. 
that it is too precipitate a courfe, for a due 
digeftion of the fap, in order to nutrition : 
Whereas in animals nature has provided, 
that many parts of the blood fhall run a 
long courfe, before they are either applied 
to nutrition, or difcharged from the animal. 

But when we confider, that the great 
work of nutrition, in vegetables as well as 
animals, (I mean after the nutriment is got 
into the veins and arteries of animals) is chief- 
ly carricd on in the fine capillary veffels, 
where nature felects and combines, as fhall 
beft fuit her different purpofes, the feveral 
mutually attracting nutritious particles, which 
were hitherto kept disjoined by the motion 

of 


| A RR ORR Gen NRE ROTO eT eR eT IRRIR RI 1 AO Co RRR. A NR REN et War po 


——_ 
hs beecen WS ELUM LNT UT ERMA Ayn hy 
sie : i —= 


\ 


~ bee 
Wi, 
=e ee 


Nt 
SS 


SSN 


RR RS 


Vegetable Staticks. 147 


of their fluid vehicle; we fhall find that 
nature has made an abundant provifion 
for this work in the ftructure of vegetables ; 
all whofe compofition is made up of no- 
thing elfe but innumerable fine capillary 
veffels, and glandulous portions or veiicles. 

Upon the whole, Ithink we have, from 
thefe experiments and obfervations, fuflici- 
ent ground to believe that there is no circu- 
lation of the fap in vegetables ; notwith- 
ftanding many ingenious perfons have been 
induced to think there was, from feveral cu- 
rious obfervations and experiments, which 
evidently prove, that the fap does in fome 
meafure recede from the top towards the 
lower parts of plants, whence they were 
with good probability of reafon induced to 
think that the fap circulated. 

The likelieft method effe€tually and con- 
Vincingly to determine this difficulty, whe- 
ther the {ap circulates or not, would be by 
ocular infpection, if that could be attained: 
And I fee no reafon we have ta defpair of 
it, fince by the great quantities imbibed and 
perfpiced, we have good ground to think, 
that the progreflive motion of the fap is 
confiderable in the largeft fap veflels of 

lL 2 the 


148 Vegetable Staticks. 


the tranfparent ftems of leaves: And if our 
eyes, aflifted with microfcopes, could come 
at this defirable fight, I make no doubt, 
but that we fhould fee the fap, which was 
progreflive in the heat of the day, would on 
the coming on of the coo] evening, andthe 
falling dew be retrograde in the fame veffels. 


CHa aN 


Experiments, whereby to prove, that a con- 
fiderable quantity of air is infpired by 
Plants. 


T is well known that air is a fine ela- 
{tick fluid, with particles of very diffe- 
rent natures floating init, whereby it is ad- 
mirably fitted by the great author of nature, 
to be the breath of life, of vegetables, as 
well as of animals, without which they can 

no more live, nor thrive than animals can. 
In the Experiments on Vines, chapter III. 
we faw the very great quantity of air, which 
Was continually afcending from the Vines, 
thro’ the fap in the tubes ; which manifeftly 
fhews what plenty of it istaken in by vegeta- 
bles, and is perfpired off with the fap thro’ 
the leaves. | 
EXPE- 


VY egetable Staticks. 149 


EXPERIMENT XLYII. 


Sept. oth, ato a. m. I cemented an Apple- 
branch 6 (Fig. 11.) to the glafs tube rz 
ez: 1 put no water in the tube, but fet the 
end of it in the ciftern of water x. Three 
hours after I found the water fucked up in 
_the tube many inches to 2; which fhews, 
that a confiderable quantity of air was im- 
bibed by the branch; out of the tube rzez: 
And in like manner did the Apricock- 
branch (Exper. 29.) daily imbibe air. 


EXPERIMENT XLVIIL. 


I took a cylinder of Birch with the bark 
on, 16 inches long and 4 diameter, and ce- 
mented it faft at 2; (Fig. 32.) to the hole 
in the top of the air pump receiver p p, 
fetting the lower end of it in the ciftern 
of water x; the upper end of it at 2 was 
well clofed up with melted cement. 

I then drew the air out of the receiver, 
upon which innumerable air bubbles iffued 
continually out of the ftick into the wa-- 
ter x. I kept the receiver exhaufted all that 

L 3 day, 


150 Vegetable Staticks. 


day, and the following night, and till the 
next day at noon, the air all the while if- 
fuing into the water x: I continued it thus 
long in this ftate, that I might be well af 
fured, that the air muft pafs in thro’ the 
bark, to fupply that great and long flux of 
air at x. I then cemented up 5 old eyes in 
the ftick, between sg and m, where little 
fhoots had formerly been, but were now pe- 
rifhed, yet the air ftill continued to flow 
freely, at 4: 

It was obfervable in this, and many of 
the Experiments on flicks of other trees, 
that the air which could enter only thro 
the bark between = and z, did not iffue in- 
to the water, at the bottom of the flick, 
only at or near the bark, but thro’ the whole 
and inmoft fubftance of the wood, and that 
chiefly, as I guefs by the largenefs of the 
bafes of the hemifpheres of air thro’ the 
largeft veffels of the wood; which obfer- 
vation corroborates Dr. Grew’s and Mal- 
pight’s opinion, that they are air veffels. 

I then cemented upon the receiver the 
cylindrical glafs y y,.and filled it full of wa- 
ter, fo as to ftand an inch above the top #% 
of the flick 

The 


Vegetable Staticks. I§t 


The air ftill continued to flow. at x, but 
in an hour’s time it very much abated, and 
in two hours ceafed quite; there being now 
no paflage for frefh air to enter, and fupply 
what was drawn out of the ftick. 

I then, with a glafs crane drew off the 
water out of the cylinder 7 y, yet the air did 
not iffue thro’ the wood at wx. 

I therefore took the receiver with the 
ftick in it, and held ic near the fire, till the 
bark was well dryed; after which I fet it 
upon the air pump, and exhaufted the air, 
upon which the air iffued as freely at » as 
it did before the bark had been wetted, and 
continued foto do, tho’I kept the receiver 
exhaafted for many hours. 

I fixed in the fame manner, as the pre- 
ceding Birch ftick, three joynts of a Vine 
branch, which was two years old, the upper- 
moft knotr being within the receiver; when 
I pumped the air paffed moft freely intothe | 
water x x. 

I cemented faft the upper end of the ftick 
and then pumped, the air ftill iffued out at x, 
tho’ I pumped very long, but there did not 
‘now pafs the!2oth part of the air which 
paffed when the end 2 was not cemented. 

4 I then 


Y pz Vegetable Staticks. 


Ithen inverted the ftick, placing # fix in- 
ches deep in the water, and covered all the 
bark from the furface of the water to g 
the top of the receiver with cement; then 
pumping the air which entered at the top of 
the flick, pafled thro’ the immerfed part of 
the bark: When I ceafed pumping for fome 
time, and the air had ceafed iffuing out; 
upon my repeating the pumping it would 
again iffue out. 

I found the fame event in Bérch and 
Mulberry fiicks, in both which it ifflued moft 
plentifully at old eyes, as if they were the 
chief breathing places for trees. 

And Dr. Grew obferves, that ‘“ the pores 
‘are {o very large in the trunks of fome 
< plants, as in the better fort of thick walk- 
ing canes, that they are vilible to a good 
eye, without a glafs; but with a glafs the 
cane feems as if it were fltuck top full 
of holes, with great pins, being fo large 
as very well to refemble the pores of the 
¢ skin, in the end of the fingers and ball 
“ of the hand. 

“ In the leaves of Pine they are like- 
‘ wiic, through a glafs, a very elegant fhew, 
‘ flanding all moft exactly in rank and file, 

| | | « thro’ 


Vevetable Staticks. 153 
« thro’ the length of the leaves.” Grew’s 
Anatomy of Plants. p. 127. 

Whence it is very probable, that the air 
freely enters plants, not only with the prin- 
cipal fund of nourifhment by the roots, 
but alfo thro’ the furface of their trunks and 
leaves, efpecially at night, when they are 
changed from a_ perfpiring to a ftrongly 
imbibing ftate. : 

I fix’d in the fame manner to the top of 
the air pump receiver, but without the cy- 
lindrical glafsyy, the young fhoots of the 
Vine, Apple-tree and Honyfuckle, both e- 
rected and inverted, but found little or no 
air came cither frombranches or leaves, ex- 
cept what air lay in the furrows, and the 
innumerable little pores of the leaves, which 
are plainly vifible with the microfcope. I 
tryed alfo the fingle leaf of a Yzue, both by 
immoerfing the leaf in the water x, and let- 
ting the ftalk ftand out of the receiver, as. 
alfo by placing the leaf out of the receiver, 
and the ftalk in the glafs of water x; but 
little or no air came either way. 

I obferve in all thefe Experiments, thar 
the air enters very flowly at the bark of young 
fhoots and branches, but much more frecly 

thro’ 


154 Vegetable Staticks. 


thro’ old bark: And in different kinds of 
trees it has very different degrees of more 
or lefs free entrance. 

I repeated the fame Experiment upon fe- 
veral roots of trees: The air paffed mof 
freely from # to x; and when the glafs vef- 
fel y y was full of water, and there was no 
waterin x, the water paffed at the rate of 
3 ounces in 5 minutes; when the upper 
end # was cemented up, and no water in y y, 
fome air, tho’ not in great plenty, would 
enter the bark at 2 f, and pafs thro’ the wa- 
ter atx. 

And that there is fome air both in an 
elaftick and unelaftick ftate, mix’d with the 
earth, ( which may well enter the roots with 
the nourifhment) I found by putting into 
the inverted glafs = 24a full of water 
(Fig. 35.) fome earth dug up in an alley in 
the garden, which after it had ftood foak- 
ing for feveral days, yielded a little elaftick 
air, tho the earth was not half diffolved. 
And in Experiment 68. we find that a cu- 
Dick inch of earth yielded 43 cubick in- 
ches of air by diftillation, a good part of 
which was roufed by the action of the fire 
irom a fix’d to an claftick flate. 
: I fixed 


3 


Oe 


sah 
a 


) 


% === — VEN \y 


1 


\ 


Vn 


S)) 
Ny 
§} 
N 


| 


HN) 


cake 


, 4° 
TPN erin 


( 


‘ie 


ida 
Vag 


Analyfis of the Aur. 15s 


I fixed alfo in the fame manner young 
tender fibrous roots, with the {mall end 
upwards at #, and the veffel y y full of wa- 
ter; then upon pumping large drops of wa- 
ter followed each other faft, and fell into 
the ciftern x, which had no water in it, 


] 
. 
. 


Con Ae NE 


A fpecimen of an attempt to analyze the Air 
by a great variety of chymio-ftatical Ex- 
periments, whith fhew in how great a pro- 
portion Air is wrought into the coupofi- 
tion of animal, vegetable, and mineral 
Subftances, and withal how readtly it re- 
fumes its former elaftick ftate, when in the 
diffolution of thofe Subftances it is difin- 
gaged from them. 


AVING in the preceding chapter 

produced many Experiments, to prove 
that the Air is freely infpired by. Vegetables, 
not only at their roots, but alfo thro’ {e- 
veral parts of their trunks and branches, which 
Air was moft vifibly {een afcending in great 
plenty thro’ the fap of the Vine, in tubes 
which were afhxed to them in the bleeding 
feafon ; this put me upon making a more 
: 3 parti. 


156 LAnalyfis of the Aur. 
particular inquiry into the nature of'a Fluid, 
which is fo abfolutely neceflary for the fup- 
port of the life and growth of Animals and 
Vegetables. 

The excellent Mr. Boyle made many 
Experiments on the Air, and among other 
difcoveries, found that a good quantity of 
Air was producible from Vegetables, by put- 
ting Grapes, Plums, Goofeberries, Cher- 
ries, Peafe, and feveral other forts of fruits 
and grains into exhaufted and unexhaufted 
receivers, where they continued for feveral 

ays emitting great quantities of Air. 

Being defirous to make fome further re- 
fearches into this matter, and to find what 
proportion of this Air I could obtain out 
of the different fubftances, in which it was 
lodged and incorporated, I made the follow- 
ing chymio-fiatical .Experiments:: For as; 

dvance has here been made in 

he knowledge of the nature of Vegetables, 
has been owing to ftatical Experiments, fo 
fince nature, in all her operations, acts con- 
formably to thofe mechanick laws, which 
were efiablifhed at her firft inftitution ; it is 
therefore reafonable to conclude, that the 
ikelielt way to enquire, by chymical ope- 
rations, 


= 


EY narcey cr a 


Analyfis of the Air. 157 


rations, into the nature of a fluid, too fine 
to be the obje& of our fight, muft be by 
finding out fome means to eftimate what 
influence the ufual methods of analyfing 
the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms, 
has on that fubtile fluid; and this I effected 
by affixing to retorts and boltheads hydro- 
ftatical gages in the following manner, vz. 
In order to make an eftimate of the quan- 
tity of Air, which arofe from any body by 
diftillation or fufion, I firft put the matter 
which I intended to diftill into the {mall re- 
tort r (Fig. 33.) and then at a2 cemented 
faft to it the glafs veflela 6, which was very 
capacious at 6, with a hole in the bottom. 
I bound bladder over the cement which was 
made of tobacco-pipe clay and bean flower, 
well mixed with fome hair, tying over all 
four {mall fticks, which ferved as {plinters 
to ftrengthen the joynt; fometimes, inftead 
of the glafs veffel 2 6, I made ufe of a large 
bolthead, which had around hole cut, with 
a red hot iron ring at the bottom of it; 
through which hole was put one Ieg of an 
inverted fyphon, which reached up as far 
as z. Matters being thus prepared, holding 
the retort uppermoft, I immerfed the bolt- 
head 


158 Analyfis of the. Atv. 

head into a large veffel of water, to a the 
top of the bolthead; as the water rufhed in 
at the bottom of the bolthead, the Air was 
driven out thro’ the. fyphon : When the 
bolthead was full of water to zs, then I clofed 
the outward orifice of the fyphon with the 
end of my finger, and at the fame time drew 
the other leg of it out of the bolthead, by 
which means the water continued up to 2, 
and could not fubfide. Then I placed under 
the bolthead, while it was in the water, the 
veffel x x, which done, I lifted the veffel x x 
with the bolthead in it out of the water, 
and tyed a waxed thread at & to mark the 
height of the water: And then approached 
the retort gradually to the fire, taking care 
to fcreen the whole bolthead from the heat 
of the fire. 

The defcent of the water in the balthead 
fhewed the fums of the expanfion of the 
Air, and of the matter which was diftil- 
ling: The expanfion of the Air alone, when 
the lower part of the retort was beginning 
to be red hot, was at a medium, nearly 
equal to the capacity of the retorts, fo that 
it then took up a double fpace; and in a 
white and almoft melting heat, the Air took 


cs 


Analyfis of the Air. 159 
up a tripple {pace or fomething more: For 
which reafon the leaft retorts are beft for 
thefe Experiments. The expanfion of the 
diftilling bodies was fometimes very little, 
and fometimes many times greater than that 
of the Air in the retort, according to their 
different natures. 

When the matter was fufficiently diftilled, 
the retort vc. was gradually removed from 
the fire, and when cool enough, was carried 
into another room, where there was no fire. 
When all was throughly cold, either the 
following day, or fometimes 3 or 4 days af- 
ter, I marked the furface of the water y, 
where it then ftood ; if the furface of the 
water was below =, then the empty {pace 
between y and z fhewed how much Air was 
generated, or raifed from a fix’d to an elaf- 
tick ftate, by the action of the fire in diftil- 
lation: But if y the furface of the water 
was above 2, the fpace between 2 and y, 
which was filled with water, fhewed the quan- 
tity of Air which had been abforbed in the 
operation, 7. e. was changed from a repel- 
ling elaftick to a fix’d ftate, by the ftrong 
attraGtion of other particles, which I there- 
fore call abforbing. 


When 


160 Aualryfis of the Air. 


When I would meafure the quantity of 
this new generated Air, I {eparated the bolt- 
head from the retort, and putting a cork in- 
to the {mall end of the bolthead, I inverted 
it, and poured in water to =. Then from 
another veffel (in which I had a khown 
quantity of water by weight) I poured in 
water to y; fothe quantity of water which 
was wanting, upon weighing this veffel a- 
gain, was equal to the bulk of the new ge- 
nerated Air. I chofe to meafure the quanti- 
ties of Air, and the matter from whence it 
arofe, by one common meafure of cubick 
inches, eftimated from the fpecifick gravi- 
ties of the feveral fubftances, that thereby 
the proportion of one to the other might 
the more readily be feen. 

I made ufe of the following means to 
meafure the great quantities of Air, which 
were either raifed and gencrated, or abforbed 
by the fermentation arifing from the mix- 
ture of variety of folid and fluid fubftan- 
ces, whereby I could eafily eftimate the fur- 
prifing effedts of fermentation on the air, vzz. 

I putintothe bolthead 6 (Fig. 34.) the 
ingredients, and then run the long neck of 
the bolthead into the deep cylindrical glafsay, 

z and 


\ \\ \ 


‘0 


e 


STN SCSRUEA RIED 


iy 
M0 


2 


Hi) 
Mi 


} 


ie r \y ’ . & 
" Ne ee er 


rls a bet un oe aid se ey Ren 


es , " - : ) 


Analy fis of the Ay. 464 


and inclined the inverted glafs 2 y, and 
bolthead almoft horizontally in a large vef- 
fel of water, that the water might run in- 
to the glafs 4 3 when it was almoft up to 
a the top of the bolthead, I then immerfed 
the bottom of the bolthead, and lower part 
y of the cylindrical glafs under water, rai- 
fing at the fame time the end a uppermoft. 
Then before I took them out of the water; 
1 fet the bolthead and lower part of the cy- 
lindrical glafs a y into the earthen veffel x 
full of water, and having lifted all out of 
the great veffel of water, I marked the fur- 
face = of the water in the glafs a ¥. 

If the ingredients in the bolthead, is 
fermenting onesie Air, then thie water 
would fall from & to ¥, and the empty ipa ce 
2 y was equal to the bulk 668 dig e quantity 
of Air generated: But if the ingredient 
upon fermentation did abforbe or fix the 
active particles of Air, then the furface of 
the water would afcend from ‘stow, and 
the fpace =, which was filled with water, 
Was equal to the bulk of Air, which was 
abforbed by the ingredients, or by the fume 
arifing from them: When the quantities of 
Air, either generated or abforbed, were very 
| M great, 


<2) 


162  Analy/is of the Arr. 


great, then Imadeufe of large chymical recei- 
vers inftead of the glafs a y: But if thefe 
quantities were very {mall, then inftead of the 
bolthead and deep cylindrical glafs a y, I 
made ufe of a fmall cylindrical glafs, or a 
common beer glafs inverted, and placed 
under it a Viol or Jelly glafs, taking care 
that the water did not come at the ingredi- 
ents in them, which was eafily prevented 
by drawing the water up under the inverted 
glafs to what height I pleafed by means of 
a fyphon; I meafured the bulk of the {paces 
zy or 3”, by pouring in a known quan- 
tity of water, as in the for¢going Experi- 
ment, and making an allowance for the 
bulk of the neck of the bolthead, within 
the {pace 2 y. 

When I would take an eftimate of the 
quantity of Air abforbed and fix’d, or ge- 
nerated by a burning candle, burning brim- 
ftone or nitre, or by the breath of a living 
animal, ¢ye. I firft placed a high fland, or 
pedeftal in the veffel full of water ~ x; 
(Fig. 35.) which pedeftal reached a little 
higher than 2 zg. On this pedeftal I placed 
the candle, or living animal, and then 
whelmed overitthe largeinverted glafsz aa, 

which 


Analyfis of the Air. 163 


which was fufpended by a cord,. fo as to 
have its mouth rr three or four inches un- 
der water; then with a fyphon I fucked 
the Air out of the glafs veffel till the water 
rofeto z % But when any noxious thing, as 
burning brimftone, aquafortis, or the like» 
were placed under the glafs ; then by affix- 
ing to the fyphon the nofe of a large pair of 
bellows, whofe wide fucking orifice was 
clofed up, as the bellows were enlarged, 
they drew the Air briskly out of the glafs 
= 2aathro’ the fyphon; the other leg of 
which fyphon I immediately drew from un- 
der the glafs veffel, marking the height of 
the water 2 z. | 
When the materials on the pedeftal ge- 
nerated Air, then the water would fubfide 
from 22% toa@a, which fpace 3 za awas 
equal to the quantity of Air generated : 
But when the materials deftroyed any part cf 
the Air’s elafticity, then the water would 
rife from aa (the height that I in that cafe 
at firft fucked it to) to 22, and the {pace 
aa 2% 2 Was equal to the quantity of Air, 
whofe elafticity was deftroyed. 
I fometimes fired the materials on the 
pedeftal by means of a burning glafs, vzz. 
M 2 fuch, 


164 Analy fis of the ir. 

fuch as phofphorus and brown paper dipped 
in water, ftrongly impregnated with nitre 
and then dryed. 

Sometimes I lighted the candle or large 
matches of brimftone before I whelmed the 
slafs g = @ a over them, in which cafe I 
inftantly drew up the water to a 4, which 
by the expanfien of the heated Air would 
at firft fubfide a little, but then immediately 
turned to arifing ftate, notwithftandiag the 
flame continued to heat and rarify the Air 
for 2 or 3 minutes: As foon as the flame 
was out, I marked the height of the wa- 
tcr & &; after which the water would for 
20 or 30 hours continue rifing a great deal 
above & 2: i 

Sometimes when I would pour violently 
fermenting liquors, as aquafortis, @c. on 
any materials, I fufpended the aquafortis in 
aviolat the top of the glafs veflel = 3 aa, 
in fuch manner, that by means of a ftring, 
which came down. into the veflel x x, I 
could by inverting the viol pour the aqua- 
fortis on the materials, which were in a 
vefiel on the pedeftal. 

I fhall now proceed to give an account 


of the event of agreat many Experiments, 
which 


Analryfis of the “hr. | 165 


which I made by means of thefe inftru- 
ments, which I have here at firft de{cribed, 
to avoid the frequent repetition of a defcrip- 
tion of ‘em, It is confonant to the right 
method of philofophifing, firft, to analize 
the fubje&, whofe nature and properties we 
intend to make any refearches into, by a 
regular and numerous {cricsof Experiments : 
And then by laying the event of thofe Ex- 
periments before us in one view, thereby to 
fee what light their united and concurring 
evidence will give us. How rational this 
method is, the fequel of thefe Experiments 
will fhew. 

The illuftrious Sir L/aac Newton ( query 
31ft of his Opticks) obferves, that ‘ true 
<< permanent Air arifes by fermentation or 
“ heat, from thofe bodies which the chy- 
“ mifts call fixed, whofe particles adhere by 
<< a ftrong attraction, and are not therefore 
“ feparated and rarified without fermenta- 
< tion. Thofe particles receding from one 
« another with the greateft repulfive force, 
“ and being moft difficultly brought toge- 
*¢ ther, which upon conta& were moft ftrong- 
« ly united. And query 30. denfe bodies by 
‘¢ fermentation rarify into feveral forts of 

M 3 a Air, 


166  Analyfis of the Air. 


« Air; and this Air by fermentation, and 
¢¢ {omctimes without it, returns into denfe 
“ bodies.” Of the truth of which we have 
evident proof from many of the following 
Experiments, vzz. 

That I might be well affured that no part 
of the new Air which was produced in di- 
ftillation of bodies, arofe either from the 
sreatly heated Air in the retorts, or from 
the fubffance of the heated retorts, I fir 
gave ared hot heat both to an empty glafs 
retort, and alfo to an iron retort made of a 
musket barrel ; when all wascold, I found 
the Air took up no more room than _be- 
fore it was heated: whence I was aflured, 
that no Air arofe, either from the fubftance 
of the retorts, or from the heated Air. 

As to antmal fubftances, a very confide- 
rable quantity of permanent Air was pro- 
duced by 4iftillation, not only from the 
blood and fat, but alfo from the moft folid 
parts of animals. 


EXPERIMENT XLIX. 


A cubick inch of Hog’s blood, diftilled to 
dry {coria, produced thirty three cubick 
inches 


Analyfis of the Air. 167 


inches of Air, which Air did not arife till 
the white fumes arofe ; which was plain to 
be feen by the great defcent of the water at 
that time, in the receiver a 2 y (Fig. 33.) 


EXPERIMENT. L. 


Lefs than a cubick inch of Tallow, being 
all diftilled over into the receiver aa y 
(Fig. 33.) produced 18 cubick inches of 
Air. 


EXPERIMENT LI. 


241 Grains, or half a cubick inch of the 
tip of a fallow Deer's horn, being diftilled 
in the iron retort, made of a musket bar- 
rel, which was heated at a {mith’s forge, pro- 
duced 117 cubick inches, that is, 234 times 
its bulk of Aig, which did not begin to 
rife till the white fumes arofe; but then 
rufhed forth in great abundance, and in good 
plenty, alfo with the foetid oil which came 
laft. The remaining calx was two thirds 
black, the reft afh coloured; it weighed 128 
grains, fo it was not half wafted, whence 
there muft remain much fulphur in it; the 

M 4 weight 


168 Analysis of the Air. 

weisht of water to Air, being nearly as 
$85 to one, as Mr. Hawksbee found it, by 
an accurate Experiment. A cubick inch of 
Air will weigh 4 of a grain, whence the 
weight of Air in the horn was 33 grains, 
that is, mear > part of the whole horn. 

We may obferve in this, as alfo in the 
preceding Experiment, and many of the 
following ones, that the particles of new 
Air were detached from the blood and 
horn, at the fame time with the white fumes, 
which confitute the volatile falc: But this 
volatile falt, which mounts with great adti- 
vity in the Air, is fo far from generating 
true elaftick Air, that on the contrary it 
abforbs it, asl found by the following Ex- 
periment. 


EXPERIMENT LI: 


A dram of volatile falt of fal iwi 
foon diftilled over with a gentle heat ; but 
tho’ the expanfion in the receiver was dou- 
ble that of heated Air alone, yet no Air 


was generated, but two and an half cubick 
inches were abforbed, 


EXPE- 


Analyfis of the Aur. 169 


ExPERIMENT LIL. 


Half a cubick inch of Oy/erfbell, or 266 
grains diftilled in the iron retort, generated 
162 cubick inches, or 46 grains, which is a 
little more than % part of the weight of the 
fhell. 


ExPERIMENT LIV. 


Two grains of Phofphorus cafily melted 
at fome diftance from the fire, flamed and 
filled the retort with white fumes, it ab- 
forbed three cubick inches of Air. A like 
quantity of Phofphorus, fired in a large re- 
ceiver (Fig. 35.) expanded into a {pace equal 
to fixty cubick inches, and abforbed 28 cu- 
bick inches of Air: When 3 grains of Phof- 
phorus were weighed, foon after it was 
burnt, it had loft half a grain of its weight ; 
but when two grains of Phofphorus was 
weighed, fome hours after it was burnt, 
having run more per deliquium by abforbing 
the moifture of the Air, it had increafed a 
grain in weight, 


EXPE- 


170 Analyfis of the Aur. 


EXPERIMENT LY. 


As to vegetable Subftances, from half a 
cubick inch, or 135 grains of heart of Oaks 
frefh cut from the growing tree, was gene- 
rated 108 cubick inches of Air, z. e. a quan- 
tity equal to 216 times the bulk of the 
picce of Oak, its weight was above 30 grains, 
4 part of the weight of 135 grains of Oak. 
I took a like quantity of thin fhavings from 
the fame piece of Oak, and dryed them 
gently at fome diftance from a fire for 24 
hours, in which time 44 grains weight of 
moifture had evaporated; which being de- 
ducted from the 135 grains, there remains 91 
grains for the folid part of the Oak: Then 
the 30 grains of Air, will be 3 of the weight 
of the folid part of the Oak. 

Eleven days after this Air was made, I 
put a live Sparrow into it, which died in- 
ftantly. 


EXPERIMENT LYI. 


From 388 grains weight of Indian Wheat, 


which grew in my garden, but was not 
come 


Analyfis of the Au. I7E 
come to full maturity, was generated 270 
cubick inches of Air, the weight of which 
Air was 77 grains, vzz. 4 of the weight 


of the Wheat. 


EXPERIMENT LVIL 


From a cubick inch, or 318 grains of 
Peafe, was generated 396 cubick inches of 
Air or 113 grains, z.e. fomething more than 
3 of the weight of the Peaf/e. 

Nine days after this Air was made, f 
lifted the inverted mouth of the receiver 
which contained it, out of the water, and 
put a lighted candle under it, upon which 
it inftantly flafhed: Then I immediately im-_ 
merfed the mouth of the receiver in the wa- 
ter, to extinguifh the fame. This I repeated 
Siof 10 times, and it as often fathed,: ak 
ter which it ceafed, all the fulphureous {pi- 
rit being burnt. It was the fame with Air 
of diftilled Oyfterfhell and Amber, and with 
new diftilled Air of Peafe and Bees-wax. I 
found it the fame alfo with another like 
quantity of Air of Peafe; notwithftanding I 
wafhed that Air no lefs than eleven times, 
by pouring it fo often under water, up- 

wards, 


172 Analyfis of the Air. 
wards, out of the containing veffel, into 
another inverted receiver full of water. | 


EXPERIMENT LYIII. 


There was raifed from an ounce or 437 
grains of Muftard-feed 270 cubick inches 
of air, or 77 grains, which is fomething 
more than ¢ part of the ounce weight. 
There was doubtlefs much more air in the 
feed; but it rofe in an unelaftick flate, be- 
ing not difentangled from the Oil, which was 
in fuch plenty within the gun-barrel, that 
when I heated the whole barrel red hot in 
order to burn it out, it flamed vigoroufly 
out at the mouth of the barrel. Oil alfo 
adhered to the infide of the barrel, in the 
diftillation of many of the other animal, ve- 
getable and mineral fubftances; fo that the 
elaftick air, which I meafured in the recei- 
ver, was not all the air contained in the 
feveral diftill’d fubftances; fome remaining 
in the Oil, for there is unelaftick air in 
Oil, part being alfo reforbed by the ful- 
phurcous fumes in the receiver. 


E x- 


Analyfis of the Aer. 173 


ExPERIMENT LIX. 


From half a cubick inch of Amber, or 
135 grains, was raifed 135 cubick inches 
of air, or 38 grains, wz. = part of its 
weight. 


ExPERIMENT LX. 


From 142 grains of dry Tobacco was raifed 
153 cubick inches of air, which is little 
lefs than } of the whole weight of the To- 
bacco; yet it was not all burnt, part being 
out of the reach of the fire. 


EXPERIMENT LXI. 


Camphire is a moft volatile fulphureous 
fubfiance, fublimed from the Rofin of atree 
in the Ha/t-Indies. A dram of it, melted 
into a clear liquor, at fome diftance from 
the fire, and fublimed inthe form of white 
chryftals, a little above the liquor, it made 
a very {mall expanfion, and neither gene- 
- rated nor abforbed air. The fame Mr. Boyle 
found, when he burnt it zz vacuo. Vol. 2. 
p: 695. eae 4: Bx 


174 Analyfis of the Air. 
EXPERIMENT LXIL. 


From about a cubick inch of chymical 
Oilof Annifeed, Labtained 22 cubick inches 
of air; and from a like quantity of Oil of 
Olives 88 cubick inches of air. The rea- 
fon of which difference was, as I fuppofe, 
this, vz. finding that the Oil of Annifeed 
came plentifully over into the receiver, in 
the diftillation of the Oil of Olives,-I raif- 
ed the neck of the retort a foot higher, 
by which means the Oil could not fo eafi- 
ly afcend, but fell back again into the hot- 
eft part of the retort, whereby more air 
was feparated; yet in this cafe good ftore 
of Oil came over into the receiver; in 
which there was doubtlef$ plenty of un- 
elaftick air: Whence by comparing this 
with Experiment 58. we fee that air is in 
greater plenty feparated from the Oil, when 
in the Muftard-feed, than it is from expreff- 
ed or chymical Oil. 


€ 


EXPERIMENT TXT 


From a cubick inch, or 359 grains of Ho- 
me), 


Analyfis of the Aur. 75 


wey, mixed with calx of. bones, there arofe 
144 cubick inches of air, or 41 grains, viz. 
a little more than 5 part of the weight of 
the whole. 


EXPERIMENT LXIY. 


From a cubick inch of yellow Bees-wax, 
or 243 grains, therearofe 54 cubick inches 
Di air, Or 15 grains; the 7, part of the 
whole. 


EXPERIMENT LXV. 


From 373 grains, or a cubick inch of 
the coarfeft Sugar, which is the effential 
falt of the fugar-cane, there arofe 126 cubick 
inches of air, equal to 36 grains, a little 
more than 4 part of the whole. 


EXPERIMENT LXVI. 


I found very little air in 54 cubick inches 
of Brandy, but in a like quantity of Well- 
water 1 foundone cubick inch. In Pzer_ 
mont-waier there is near twice as much air, 
as in Kam or common water, which air 

2 con- 


176 AMnalyfis of the Air. 


contributes to the brisknefs of that and ma- 
ny other mineral waters. I found thefe 
feveral quantities of air, by inverting the 
nofes of bottles, full of thefe feveral liquors, 
into {mall glafs cifterns full of the fame 
liquor. And then fetting them all together 
in a boyler, where having an equal heat, 
the air was thereby feparated and afcended 
to the upper parts of the bottles. 


ExPERIMENT LXVIL. 


By the fame means alfo, I found plenty 
of air might be obtained from munerals, 
Half a cubick inch, or 158 grains of New- 
caftle coal, yielded 180 cubick inches of air, 
which arofe very faft from the coal, efpe- 
cially when the yellowifh fumes afcended. 
The weight of this air is 51 grains, which: 
is nearly + of the weight of the coals. 


ExPERIMENT LXYVIIL 


A cubick inch of frefh dug wntried 
earth off the common, being well burnt 
in diftillation, produced 43 cubick inches of 
air. Fromchalk alfo, I obtained air in the 
fame manner. 

I , e Ex 


Analyfis of the Air. 477 


ExpERIMENT LXIX. 


From a quarter of a cubick inch of 4p- 
timony, 1 obtain’d 28 times its bulk of air. 
It was diftilled in a glafs retort, becaufe it 
will demettalize iron. | 


EXPERIMENT LXX. 


I procured a hard, dark, gray Pyrites, 4 
mineral fubftance, which was found 7 feet 
under ground, in digging for {fprings on 
Walton-heath, for the fervice of the Right 
Honourable the Earl of Lizco/n, at his beau- 
tiful feat at Oatlands in Surrey; this mine- 
ral abounds not only with fulphur, which 
has been drawn from it in good plenty, 
but alfo with faline particles, which 
fhoot vilibly onits furface, A cubick inch 
of this mzneral yiclded in diftillation 83 cu- 
bick inches of air. 


EXPERIMENT LXXI. 


Half a cubick inch of well decrepitated 
fea-falt mixt with double its quantity of 
calx of bones generated 32 times its bulk 
of air: It had fo great a heat given it, that 
N all 


178  Analy/fis of ibe A. 

all being diftilled over, the remaining {coria 
did not run per deliguium. 1 cleared the 
gun-barrel of thefe and the like fcoria, by 
ftriking long on the outfide with a hammer. 


EXPERIMENT LXXIUL. 


From 211 grains or half a cubick inch 
of Nztre, mixed with calx of bones, there 
arofe 90 cubick inches of air, z. e. a quan- 
tity equal to 180 timesitsbulk ; fo the weight 
of air in any quantity of nitre is about + part. 
Vitriol diftilled in the fame manner yields’ 
air too. 


EXPERIMENT LXXIUI. 


From a cubick inch or 443 grains of 
Renifo Tartar, there arofe very faft 504 cu- 
bick inches of air; fo the weight of the air 
in this Tartar was 144 grains, 2. ¢. 3 part 
of the weight of the whole: The re- 
maining fcoria which was very little, rua 
per deliguiwm, an argument that there re- 
mained fome S¢/ Tartar, and confequently 
more air; for 


EXPERIMENT LXXIV. 


Half a cubick inch or 304 grains of Sa/ 
Tartar, 


Analyfis of the Aur. 179 
Tartar, made with nitre and tartar, and 
mixed with a double quantity cof calx of 
bories, yielded in diftillation 112 cubick 
inches of air; that is, 224 times its bulk of 
air, which 112 cubick inches weighing 32 
grains, is mearly + part of the weight of 
the Sa/ Tartar, There is amore intenfe de- 
grce of heat required to raife the air from 
Sal Tartar than from nitre. 

Hence we fee, that the preportion of 
air in equal bulks of Sa/Tartar and nitre is 
as 224 to1gso. But weight for weight, nitre 
contains a little more air in it, than this 
Sal Tartar made with nitre. But Sal Tartar 
made without nitre, lias probably a little more 
air in it than this had, becaufe itis found 
to make a greater explofion in the Pufuzs 
Fulminans, than the nitrated S2{Tartar. But 
fuppofing, as is found by this Experimene, 
that Sa/ Tartar, according to its {pecifick gra- 
Vity, contains + part more init than nitre ; 
yet this excefs of air is not fufiicient to 
account for the vaftly greater explofion of 
dat Tartar than of nitre ; which feems prin- 
cipally to axife from the more fixt nature 
of Sal Tartar; which therefore requires 2 
More intenfe degrecof fire, to feparate the 


N 2 a08 


180 Analy fis of the Aur. 

air from the ftrongly adhering particles ; 
than is found requifite to raife the air from 
nitre. Whence the air of Saf Zartar mutt 
neceffari.y thereby acquire a greater elaftick 
force, and make a more violent explofion, 
than that of nitre. And from the fame rea- 
fon it is, that Aurum Fulmimans gives a 
louder explofion than Pualvis Fulminans. 
The fcoria of this operation did not run per 
deliquinm, a proof thatall the Sal Tartar was 
diftilled over. 

From the little quantity of air which is 
obtained by the diftillation of fea-falt in Ex- 
periment 71. in comparifon of what arifes 
fromnitreand Sa/ Tartar, we fee the reafon 
why it will not go off with an explofive 
force, like thofe when fired. And at the 
fame time we may hence obferve, that the 
air included in nicre and Sa/Tartar, bears a 
confiderable part in their explofion. For fea- 
falt contains an acid {pirit as well as nitre ; 
and yet that without a greater proportion — 
of air docs not qualify it for explofion, tho’ 
mixed like nitre in the compofition of gun- 
powder, with fulphur and charcoal. 

Mr. Boyle found that Agua-fortis pour- 
edona firong folution of jale of tartar did 

not 


Analyfis of the chr. ei 


not fhoot into fair cryftals of falt-petre, till 
it had been long expofed to the open air, 
whence he fufpected that the air contribut- 
ed to that artificial produdtion of falt-petre. 
And fays, ‘* whatever the air hath to do in 
¢ this Experiment, we have known fuch 
«¢ changes made in fome faline concretes, 
<¢ chiefly by the help of the open air, as 
«© very few would be aptto imagine.” Vol. 
Pp. 302. and Vol 3. -p. 80. 

We fee from the great quantity of air, 
which is found in falts, of what ufe it is 
in their cryftalization and formation, and 
particularly how neceflary it is in making 
falt-petre from the mixture of falt of tartar 
and {pirit of nitre. For fince by Experiment 
72, and 73, a great deal of air flies away, in 
the making of Sa/ Tartar, either from nitre 
and tartar, or from tartar alone: It mutt 
needs be neceflary, in order to the forming 
of nitre from the mixture of Sal Tartar and 
fpirit of nitre, that more air fhould be in- 
corporated with it, than is contained either 
in the Sa/ Tartar or {piric of nitre. 


ht 


182 Analyfis of the Air. 


EXPERIMENT LXXKY. 


Near half a cubick inch of compound A- 
fortes, which bubbled and made a con- 
gle expanticn in diftillation was foon 
aut iee off: As it cooled the expanfion 
ted very fafi, and a little air was abforb- 
cd. Whence it is evident that the air ge- 
nerated by the diftillation of nitre, did not 
arife from the volatile {pirituous particles. 
dence alfo it is probable that there is 
fome air in acid {pirits, which is reforbed 
and fixt by them in diftijlation. Aad this 
is further confirmed from the many air bub- 
bles which arife from 4gua-regia, in 
the folution of gold; for fince gold lofes 
nothing of its weight in being diffolved, the 
air cannot arife from the metalline part of 
tne gold, but muft cither arife from the 
Agusa-regia ox from latent air in the pores 
of the gald, 


= 


ExPERIEMENT LXXVIJ. 


A cubick inch of common Brzmffone ex- 
panied very little in diftillation in a glafs 
retort $ 


Analysis of the Aur. 182 
retort; notwithftanding it hada great heat 
given it, and was all diftilled over into the 
receiver without flaming. It abforbed fome 
air, but flaming brimftone by Experiment 
103, abforbs much air. 

A good part of the air thus raifed from 
feveral bodies by the force of fire, was apt 
gradually to lofe its elafticity, in ftanding 
feveral days; the reafon of which was (as 
will appear more fully hereafter) that the 
acid fulphureous fumes raifed with that air, 
did reforb and fix the elaftick particles. 


EXPERIMENT LXXVII, 


To prevent which I made ufe of the fol- 
lowing method of diftillation, we. I fixe 
- aleaden fyphon, Fig. 38. tothe nofe of the 
iron retort r 7; and then having immerfed 
the fyphon in the veffel of water x» x, I 
placed over the open end of the fyphon 
the inverted chymical receiver 46 which was 
full of water; fo that asthe air which was 
raifed in diftillation, pafled thro’ the water 
up to the top of the receiver 26, a good 
part of the acid {pirit and fulphureous fumes 
were by this means intercepted and retain- 

Ne. ed 


134 Analyfis of the Air. 


ed in the water; the confequence of which 
was, that the new generated air continued 
in a more permanently elaftick fiate, very 
little of it lofing its elafticity, viz. not a- 
bove a 1sth or 18th part, and that chiefly 
the firft 24 hours; after which the remain- 
der continued in a conftantly elaftick ftate ; 
excepting the air of tartar, which in 6 or 
8 days loft conftantly above one-third of 
its elafticity ; after which the remainder was 
permanently elaftical. 

That the great quantities of air which are 
thus obtained from thefe feveral fubftances 
by diftillation are true air, and nota mere 
flatulent vapour, I was aflured by the fol- 
lowing tryals; vzz. I filled a large receiver 
which contained 540 cubick inches, with air 
of tartar; and when it was cool, I fufpend- 
ed the receiver while its mouth was invert- 
ed in water. Then upon lifting the mouth 
of the receiver out of water, I immedi- 
ately covered it by tying a piece of bladder 
over it. WhenI had found the exact weight, 
i blew out all the air of tartar with a pair 
of bellows which had a long additional nofe 
that reached to the bottom of the receiver. 
And then tying the bladder on, I weighed 

it 


Finalyfis of the Aur. 185 
it again, but could find no difference in 
the fpecifick cravity of the two airs, and it 
wasthe fame with an air of tartar which 
was 10 days old. 

As to the other property of the air, clafti- 
city, Ifound it exaétly the fame in the air of 
tartar, which was 15 daysold, and common 
air; by filling two equal tubes with thefe 
different airs, the tubes were roinches long 
and fealed at one’ end; I placed them art 
the fame time in a cylindrical glafs condent- 
ing receiver, where I compreffed them with 
two additional atmofpheres, taking care to 
fecure myfelf from danger in cafe the giafs 
fhould burft, by placing it in a deep wocd- 
en veflel, the water rofe to equal heights in 
both tubes. This receiver was gently an- 
nealed and thereby toughened, by being 
boiled in Urine where it lay till all was 
cold. 

I put alfo into the fame tubes fome new 
made air of tartar, both the tubes ftanding 
in cifterns of water; the air of one of thefe 
tubes I compreffed in the condenfing en- 
gine for fome days, to try whether in that 
comprefied ftate, more of the air’s elafticiry 
would be deftroyed by the abforbing va- 

pours 


186 Aualyfis of the Aur. 


pours than in an uncomprefied tate; but I 
did not perceive any fenfible difference, 

Lemery, in his courfe of chymiftry, p. $92. 
obtained in the diftillation of 48 ounces of 
Tartar, 4 ounces of phlegm, 8 of fpirits, 
3 of oil, and 32 of Scoria, 2 e. two thirds 
of the whole, fo one ounce was lof in the 
operation. 

In my diftillation of 443 grains of Tar- 
tar in Exper. 73. there remained but az 
grains of Scoria, which is little more than 
* of the Yartar; and in this remainder, 
there was by Exper. 74 Air, for there was 
Sal Tartar, it cunning per deliguinm. 

Whence by comparing Lemery’s and my 
diftillation together, we fhall find, that there 
remained in this 32 ounces of Scoria, and 
in the ounce that was loft, ( which was 
doubtlefs moft of it air} fubffance enough 
to account for the great quantity of air, which 
in Exper. 73. was raifed from Tartar; efpe- 
cially, if we take into the account the pro- 
portion of air, which was contained in the 
oil, which was *, part of the whole Zar- 
tar, for there is much air in oil. 

The bodies which I diftilled in this man- 
ner (Fig. 38.) were Horn, calculus humanus, 

Oyfter- 


Analyfis of the Air. 187 


Oyfterfhell, Oak, Muftard. feed, Indian- wheat, 
Peafe, Tobacco, oil of Annifeed, oil of Olives, 
Honey, Wax, Sugar, Amber, Coal, Earth, 
Walton Mineral, fea Salt, Salt-petre, Tar- 
tar, Sel Zertar, Lead, Minium. The greateft 
part of the Air obtained from all which bo- 
dies was very permanent, except what the 
Air of Tartar loft in ftanding feveral days. 
Particularly, that from nitre loft little of 
its elafticiry, whereas moft of the Air ob. 
tained from nitre, in diftilling with the re- 
ceiver (Fig. 33.) was reforbed in a few days, 
as was alfo the Air which was generated from 
detonized nitre in Experiment 102. Hence 
alfo we fee the reafon, why 19 parts in 20, 
of the Air which was generated, by the firing 
of Gunpowder, was in 18 days reforbed by 
the fulphureous fumes of the Gunpowder, 
As Mr. Hawksbee obferved, in his phyfico- 
mechanical Experiments, page 83. 

In the diftillation of Horn, it was obfer- 
vable, that when towards the end of the ope- 
ration the thick foetid oil arofe, it formed 
very large bubbles, with tough undiuousskins, 
which continued in that flate fome time ; 
and when they broke, there arofe out of 
them volumes of {moak, as out of a chimney, 

and 


188 fnalyfis of the Air. 
and it was the fame in the diftillation of 
Mutftard-feed. 


AN ACCOUNT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS MADE 
ON STONES TAKEN OUT OF HUMAN URINE 
AND GALL BLADDERS. 


AVIVG, while thefe Sheets were 

printing off, procured by the favour 
of Mr. Ranby, Surgeon to His Majefty’s- 
Fioufbold, forme calculi humani, | made the 
following Experiments with them, which I 
fhall here infert, vzg. 

I diftilled a calculus in the iron retort 
(Fig. 38.) It weighed 230 grains, which ts 
fomething lefs in bulk than ¢ of a cubick 
inch: There arofe from it very briskly, in 
diftillation, 516 cubick inches of elaftick Air, 
that is, a bulk equal to 645 times the bulk 
of the Stone; fo that above half the Stone 
was raifed by the aGion of the fire into elaf- 
tick Air; which is a much greater propor- 
tion of Air, than I have ever obtained by 
fire, from any other fubftances, whether a- 
nimal, vegetable or mineral. The remaining 
calx weighed 49 grains, that is =>, part 
of tne calculus; which is nearly the fame 

3 seul 


Analyfis of the Aur. 189 
propottion of calx, that the worthy Dr. S/are 
found remaining, after the diftilling and 
calcining two ounces of calculus, “one ounce; 
<¢ and three drams of which (he fays) eva- 
<¢ porated in the open fire (a material cir- 
«© cumftance, which the Chymifts rarely en- 
« quire after) of which we have no ac- 
‘ count.” Philof: Tranfact. Lowthorp’s A- 
bridgment. Vol. lll. p. 179. The greateft 
part of which was, we fee by the prefent 
Experiment, raifed into permanently claf- 
tick Air, 

By comparing this diftillation of the ca/- 
culus with that of Renifh Tartar in Exper. 
73. we fee that they both afford more Air 
in diftillation, than any other fubftances : 
_ And it isremarkable, that a greater propor- 
tion of this new raifed Air from thefe two 
fubftances, is reforbed and lofes its elafti- 
city, in ftanding a few days, than that of any 
other bodies, which are firong fymptoms 
that the calculus is a true animal Tartar. 
And as there was very confiderably lefs oil, 
in the diftillation of Renzfb Tartar,than there 
was in the diftillation of the Seeds and folid 
parts of vegetables; fo I found that this 
calculus contained much lefs oil than the 
blood or folid parts of animals. I 


A 


190 Analyfis of the Aur, 

I diftilled in the fame manner, as the 
above mentioned calculus, fome ftones taken 
out-of a human gall bladder, they weighed 
$2 grains, fo their bulk was equal to 4 part 
of a cubick inch, as I found by taking thei 
{pecifick gravity. ‘There was 108 cubick in- 
ches of elaftick Air raifed from them in di- 
ftillation, a quantity equal to 648 times their 
bulk ; much the fame quantity that was 
raifed from the calculus. About = part of 
this elaftick Air was in 4 days reduced in- 
to a fixd ftate. There arofe much more 
oil in the diftillation of thefe Stones, than 
from the Calculus, part of which oil did 
arife from the Gall which achered to, and 
was dryed on the furfaces of the Stones, 
which oil! formed large bubbles, like thofe 
which arofe in the diftillation of Deers Horm 
py ¥87.- 

A {mall Stone of the Gall Bladder, which 
Was: as ne s a Pea, was diffolved in a Lix- 
ivium: of Sal Tartar in feven days, which 
Lixisium will alfo diffolve Tartar; yet it 
will not diffolve the Calcz/us, which is more 
firmly united in its parts. 

A quantity of Calculus equal to one half 


of what was diflilled, vis. 14s grains, did, 
when 


Anabyfis of the Air. IQE 
when 2 cubick inch of fpirit of nitre was 
poured on it, diffolve in 2 or 3 hours, with 
a large froth, and generated 48 cubick inches 
of Air, none of which loft its elafticity, tho’ 
it ftood many days in the glafs veflel. (Fig, 
34.) And alike quantity of Zartar being 
mixed with {pirit of nitre, was in the fame 
time diffolved, but no elaftick Air was ge- 
nerated, notwithftanding Tartar abounds fo 
much with Air. 

Small pieces of Tartar and Calculus were 
in r2 or 14 days both diffolved by oil of 
Vitriol ; the like pieces of Tartar and Calcu- 
Jus were diflolved in a few hours by oil of 
Vitriol, into whch there was gradually 


poured near an equal quantity of fpirit of — 


Harts-horn, made with Lime, which caufed 
a confiderable ebullition and heat. 

Tho’ the remaining calx of the diftillation 
of Tartar, in Exper. 73. run per deliquinm, 
and had therefore Sal Tartar in it; and 
tho’ the calx of the diftilled Calculus did 
not run per deliquium, and had conf{equently 
no Sa/ Tartar in it; yet it cannot thence 
be inferred, that the Calculus is not a tar- 
tazine fubftance: Becaufe by Exper. 74, it 
ys evident, that Sa/ Tartar it felf, when 

2 , (OS mined 


192  Amalyfis of the Air. 

mixed with an animal calx, diftills all over, 
fo that the calx will not afterwards run 
per deliquium. 

By the great fimilitude there is therefore 
in fo many refpedts between thefe two fub- 
ftances, we may well look upon the Cal 
eulus, and the Stone in the Gall Bladder, 
as true animal Tartars, and doubtlefs Pr | 
concretions are the fame. | 

From the great quantities of Air, that 
are found in thefe Tartars, we fee that un-— 
elaftick Air particles, which by their ftrongly 
attracting property are fo inftrumental in 
forming the nutritive matter of Animals and 
Vegetables, is by the fame attraGtive. power 
apt fometimes to form anomalous concre- 
tions, asthe Stone, ce. in Animals, efpe- 
cially in thofe places where any animal 
fluids are ina ftagnant flate, as in the Urine 
and Gall Bladders. The like tartarine con- 
cretions are alfo frequently formed in fome 
fruits, particularly in Pears; but they do 
then efpecially coalefce in greateft plenty, 
when the vegetable juices are in a ftagnant 
ftate, as in wine veffels, ¢>c. 

This great quantity of ftrongly attracting, 
Teelatick air. particles, which we find in rhe 

Cal- 


Analyfis of the Aur. 193 
Calculus, fhould rather encourage than dif 
courage us, in fearching after fome proper 
diffolvent of the Stone in the Bladder, which, 
upon the analyfis of it; is found to be well 
ftored with active principles, fuch-as are 
the principal agents in fermentation. For 
Mr. Boyle found therein 2 good quantity of 
volatile falt, with fome oil; and we fee by 
the prefent Experiment, that there is ftore of 
unelaftick air particles in it. The difficulty 
feems chiefly to lay, in the over proportion 
of thefe laft mentioned particles, which are 
firmly united together by fulphur and falt, 
the proportion of caput mortuum, ox earth 
being very {mall. 


EXPERIMENT LXXVIII. 


One eighth of a cubick inch of Mercury 
made a very infenfible expanfion in diftilla- 
tion, notwithftanding the iron retort had 
an almoft meiting heat given it, at a {mith’s 
forge, fo that it made an ebullition, which 
could be heard at fome diftance, and withal 
fhook the retort and receiver. There was 
no air generated, nor was there any expans 
fion of air in the following Exper. wz. 

O EXPE- 


194  Analyfis of the Aur: 


EXPERIMENT LXXIX. 


I put into the fame retort half a cubick 
inch of Mercury, athxing to the retort a very 
capacious receiver, which had no hole in 
the bottom. The wide mouth of the recei- 
ver was adapted to the {mall neck of the 
retort (which was made of a musket barrel) 
by means of two large pieces of cork which 
entered and filled the mouth of the receiver, 
they having holes bored in them of a fit fize 
for the neck of the retort; and the junc. 
ture was farther fecured, by a dry fupple 
bladder tyed over it : For I purpofely.avoided 
making ufe of any moift lute, and took 
care to wipe the infide of the receiver very 
dry with a warm cloth. 

The Mercury madea great ebullition, and 
came fome of it over into the receiver, as 
foon as the retort had a red heat given it, 
which was increafed to a white and almoft 
nelting heat, in which ftate it continued 
for half an hour. During which time, I fre- 
quently cohobated fome part of the Mer- 
cury, Which condenfed, and was lodged on 
an horizontal level, about the middle of 

the 


| 
‘ 


Aualyfis of the Aur, 195 
the neck of the retort: And which upon 
raifing the receiver, flowed down into the 
bottom of the retort, and there made a frefh 
ebullition, which had ceafed, when all the 
Mercury was diftilled from the bottom of 
the retort. When ali was cool, I found about 
two drams of Mercury in. the retort, and loft 
in the whole 43 grains, but there was not 
the leaft moifture in the receiver. 

Whence itistobe fufpedted that Mr. Boyle 
and others were deceived by fome unheeded 
circumftance, when they thought they.cb- 
tained a water from Mercury in the diftilla- 
tion of it; which he fays he did once, but 
could not make the like Eee iment after- 
terwards fuceced. Boyle Vol. lll. p. 416. 

I remember that about 20 years fince I 
was concerned with feveral others, in mak- 
ing this Experiment at the elaboratory in 
Trinity College Cambridge, when imagining 
there would be a very great expanfion, we 
luted a German earthen retort, to 3 or 4 
large Alodals, and a capacious receiver; as 
Mr. Wilfon did in his courfe of Chymifiry. 
Four pounds of Mercury was poured by lit- 
tle and little into the red hod retort, thro’ 
a tobacco-pipe purpofely affixed to it. The 

O 2 event 


196 Analyfis of the Air. 

“event was, that we found fome fpoons full 
_ of water with the Mercury in the Alodals, 
_ which I then fufpe&ted to arife from the 
-moifture of the earthen retort and lute, and 
am now confirmed in that fufpicion. It rained 
inceffantly all the day, when I made this 
prefent Experiment; fo that when water is 
obtained in the diftillation of Mercury, it 
cannot be owing to a moifter temperature 
of the Air. 


The effeéts of Fermentation on the Air. 


AVING from the foregoing Experi- 
ments feen very evident proof of the 
produdion of confiderable quantities of true 
elaftick air, from liquors and folid bodies, 
by means of fire ; we fhall find in the fol- 
lowing Experiments many inftances of the 
production ; and alfo of the fixing or abforb- 
ing of great quantities of air by the fermen- 
tation arifing from the mixture of variety of 
folids and fluids: Which method of pro- 
ducing and of abforbing, and fixing the elaf- 
tick particles of air, by fermentation, feems 
to be more according to nature’s ufual way 

of proceeding, than the other of fire. 
E XP E- 


Analyfis of the chr. 197 


EXPERIMENT LXXX., 


I put into the bolthead 0 (Fig, 34.) 16 cu- 
bick inches of Sheeps blood, with a little 
water to make it ferment the better. I 
found by the defcent of the water from z 


to y that in 18 days fourteen cubick inches 
of air were generated. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXI. 


Volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac, placed in 
an open glafs ciftern, under the inverted 
glafs zs 2aa (Fig. 35.) neither generated 
nor abforbed air. Neither did feveral other 
volatile liquors, as {pirits of Harts-horn, {pi- 
ritsof Wine, nor compound Aquafortis, ge- 
nerate any air. But Sal Ammoniac, Sal 
Zartar, and {piris of Wine mixed together, 
generated 26 cubick inches of air, two of 
which wasin 4 days reforbed, and after that 
generated again. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXH. 


Half a cubick inch of Sal Ammoniac, and 
OG: double 


r98 Analyfis af the Air. 
double that quantity of oz/ of Vtriol, geine- 
rated the firft day 5 or 6 cubick inches: But 
the following days it abforbed 15 cubick 
inches, and continued many days in. that 
ftate. 

Equal sear of {pirits of 7; rpentiney 
and otf of Vitriol, had near the fame effect, 
except that it was fconer in an abforbing: 
fiate than the other. | 

Mr. Geeffroy fhews, that the mixture of 
any Vitriolic falts, with inflammable fubftan- 
ces, Wil yield common Brimftone; and by 
the different compolitions he has made of 
falphur; and particularly from o// of Vtriol, 
and of of Turpentine; and by the Analyfis 
thercof, when thus prepared, he difcovered 

t to be nothing but vitriolic falt, united with 
the combuftible fubftance. Frey, a Memoirs, 
Anno 1704. p. 381,01 Boyle's Works, Vol. Ill, 


NI (~ 
Pp. 273.- sWotes. 


EXPERIMENT -~ LXXXUL 


In February I poured on fix cubick inches 
of powdered Oyfierfbell, an equal quantity 
ef common white-wine Vimegar. In 5 or 6 
minute S it generated’ 17 cubick inches of 
ait, 


Analyfis of the Aur. 199 


air, and in fome hours 12 cubick inches 
more, in all 29 inches. In nine days it had 
flowly reforbed 21 cubick inches of air. The 
ninth day I poured warm water into the vef- 
fel x x, (Fig. 34.) and the following day, 
when all was cool, I found that it had re- 
forbed the remaining 8 cubick inches. Hence 
we fee that warmth will fometimes promote 
areforbing, as well as a generating ftate, uzz. 
by raifing the reforbing fumes, as will appear 
more hereafter. | 

Half a cubick inch of Oyfferfhell, and a 
cubick inch of o7/ of Vrtriol, generated 32 
cubick inches of air. 

Ovfterfhell, and 2 cabick inches of four 
Rennet, of a Calve’s ftomach, generated in 
4. days 11 cubick inches. But Oy/ferfhell, 
with fome of the Liquor of a Calve’s ftomach, 
which had fed much upon hay, did not ge- 
merate air. It was the fame with Oyfter foell 
and Ox-gall, Urine and Spittle. 

Half acubick inch of Oyfferfbell and Sevil 
Orange juice generated the firft day 13 cu- 
bick inches of air, and the following days 
it reforbed that, and 3 or 4 more cubick 
inches of air, and would fometimes generate 
again. te was the fame with Limon j juice. 

O 4 Ov fter. 


200 Analyfis of the Air. 


Oyfterfbell and Milk generated a little air: 
But Limon juice and Mik did at the fame 
time abforb a little air; as did alfo Calves 
Rennet and Vinegar ; fome of the fame Rennet 
alone generated a little air, and reforbed it 
again the following day. It had the fame 
eifec&t when mixed with crums of bread. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXIV. 

A cubick inch of Limon juice, and neat 
an equal quantity of /périis of Harts-horn, 
per fe, t. e. not made with Lime, did in 4 
hours abforb 3 or 4 cubick inches of air ; 
and the following day it remiteed or ge- 
nerated two cubick inches of air: The third 
day turning from very warm to cold, it a- 
gain reforbed that air, and continued in an 
abforbing ftate for a day or two. 

That there is great plenty of air incor 
porated into the fubftance of Vegetables, 
which by the action of fermentation is rouzed 
into an elaftick ftate, is evident by thefe fol- 
lowing Experiments, wvzz. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXY. 


March the 2d, 1 poured into the bolt- 
head @ (Fig. 34.) forty two cubick inches 
of 


Analyfis of the Air. 207 


of Ale from the Tun, which had been there 
fet to ferment 34 hours before: From that 
time to the oth of Zune it generated 639 
cubick inches of air, with a very unequal 
progreflion, more or lefs as the weather 
was warm, cool, or cold, and fometimes upon 
achange from warm to cool, it reforbed 
air, in all 32 cubick inches. 


ExPERIMENT LXXXVI. 


March the 2d, 12 cubick inches of Maz- 
laga Raifins, with 18 cubick inches of wa- 
ter generated by the 16th of Apra/ 411 cu- 
bick inches of air, and then in 2 or 3 cold 
days it reforbed 35 cubick inches. From 
the 2rth of April to the 16th of May it 
generated 78 cubick inches; after which to 
the oth of Fune it continued ina reforbing 
ftate, fo as to reforb 13 cubick inches ; 
there were at this feafon many hot days, 
with much Thunder and Lightning, which 
deftroys the air’s elafticiry; fo there was ge- 
nerated in all 489 cubick inches, of which 
48 were reforbed. The liquor was at laft 
yery vapid, 


From 


202  Analfis of the Air. 


From the great quantity of air generated 
from Apples, in the following Experiment, 
‘tis probable, that much more air would 
have rifen from the laxer texture of ripe 
undryed Grapes, than did from thefe Rai- 
fins. 

We fee from thefe Experiments on Rai- 
fins and Ale, that in warm weather Wine 
and Ale do not turn vapid by imbibing 
air, but by fermenting and generating too 
much, whereby they are deprived of their 
enlivening principle, the air; for which rea- 
fon thefe liquors are beft preferved in cool 
cellars, whereby this active invigorating 
principle is kept within due bounds, which 
when they exceed, Wines are upon the 
fret and in danger of being {poiled. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXVIIL 


Twenty-fix cubick inches of Apples be- 
ing mafthed Augufi 10. they did in 13 days 
senerate 968 cubick inches of air, a quan- 
rity ¢ ae to 48 times their bulk ; after which 
ion did in 3 or 4 days reforb a quantity 
equal to their bulk, notwithftanding it was - 
ery hot weather; after which they were 

I ftationary, 


Analyfis of the Aur. 203 
ftationary, neither reforbing nor generating 
air in many days. 

A very coarfe brown-fugar, with an equal 
quantity of water, generated nine times its 
bulk of air; Azce-flower fix times its bulk ; 
Scurvy-grafs leaves generated and abforbed 
air; Peafe, Wheat and Barley did in Fer- 
mentation alfo generate great quantities of 
exit. - 

That this Air, which arifes in fuch great 
quantities from fermenting and diflolving 
vegetables is true permanent Air, is certain, 
by its continuing in the fame cxpanded 
elaftick ftate for many weeks and months; 
which expanding watry vapours will not 
do, but foon condenfe when cool. And 
that this new generated air is elaftical is 
plain, not only by its dilating and contra@- 
ing with heat and cold, as common air does, 
but alfo by its being compreflible, in propor- 
tion tothe incumbent weight, as appears by 
the two following Experiments, which fhew 
what the great force of thefe aerial parti- 
cles is, at the inftant they efcape from the 
fermenting vegetables, | 


Ex- 


204 Analyfis of the Air. 
EXPERIMENT LXXXYVIII. 


I filled the ftrong Hungary-water Bottle 
be Fig. 36. near half full of Peafe, and then 
full of water, pouring in firft half an inch 
depth of Mercury; then I {crewed at 6 in- 
to the bottle the long flender tube a 2, 
which reached down to the bottom of the 
bottle ;the water wasin two or three daysall 
imbibed by the Pcafe, and they thereby much 
dilated; the Mercury was alfo forced up the 
{lender glafs tube near 80 inches high; in 
which ftate the new generated Air in the 
bottle was compreffed with a force equal 
to more than two Atmofpheres and an half; 
if tne bottle and tube were fwung too and 
fro, the Mercury would make long vibra- 
tions in the tube between = and 9%, which 
proves the great elafticity of the compreffed 
sir in the bottle. 


EXPERIMENT LXXXIX. 


I found the like elaftick force by the fol- 
iowing Experiment, uzg. I provided a flrong 
iron pot aéed Fig. 37. which was2 and4 

| ee inches 


Analyfis of the Abr. 205 
inches diameter within fide; and five inches 
deep. I poured into it half an inch depth 
of Mercury; then I put a little coloured 
honey at x, into the bottom of the glafs- 
tube 2 x, which was fealed at the top. I fet 
this tube in the iron cylinder 2”, to fave 
it from breaking by the {welling of the Peafe. 
The pot being filled with Peafeand water, 
I put a leathern collar between the mouth 
and lid of the pot, which were both ground 
even, and then preffed the lid hard down 
in a Cyder-prefs: The third day I opened 
the pot and found all the water imbibed by 
the Peafe; the Honey was forced up the 
glafs-tube by the Mercury to 2, (for fo far 
the glafs was dawbed) by which means I 
found the preflure had been equal to two 
atmofpheres and 4; andthe diameter of the 
pot being 2 -| + inches, its area was fix 
{quare inches, whence the dilating force of 
the air againft the lid of the pot was equal 
to 189 pounds. 

And that the expanfive force of new ge- 
nerated air is vaftly fuperior to the power 
with which it acted on the Mercury in thefe 
two Experiments is plain from the force 
with which fermenting Muft will burft the 

I ftrongeft 


206 Analyfis. of the Air. 

ftrongeft veflels; and from the vatt explofis ve 
force with which the air generated from 
nitre in the firing of gun-powder, wil! burt 
afunder the ftrongeft bombs or cannon, and 
whirl fortifications into the air. 


This fort of mercurial gage, made ufe of 


in Experiment 89, with fome un@uous mat- 
ter, as Honey, Treacle, or the like, on the 
Mercury in the tube, to note how high it 
rifes there, might probably be of fervice, 
in finding out unfathomable depths of the 
Sea, viz. by fixing this {ea-gage to fome 
buoyant body which fhould be funk by a 
weight fxt to ir, which weight might by 
an eafie contrivance be detschel from the 
buoyant body, as foon asit touched the bot- 
tom of the fca; fothat the buoyant body 
and gage would immediately afcend tothe 


furface of the water; the buoyant body. 


ought to be pretty large, and much lighter 
than the water, that by its greater eminence 
above the water it might the better be feen; 
For ‘tis probable that from great depths it 
may rife ata confiderable diftance from the 
fhip, tho’ in acalm. re 

For greater accuracy it will be needful, 


firft to try this fea-gage, at fey eral different 


, depths, 


a ae 


Fey 
OT 
sess 


| 
fs 


be 
/ Cle 


é 


S:Gribelin 


Analyfis of the Aur. 207 
depths, down to the greateft depth that a 
line will reach, thereby to difcover, whe- 
ther or how much the {pring of the air is 
difturbed or condenfed, not only by the 
ereat preffure of the incumbent water, but 
alfo by its coldnefs at great depths; and in 
what proportion, at different known depths, 
and in different lengths of time , that an al- 
lowance may accordingly be made for it 
at unfathomable depths. 

This gage will alfo readily fhew the de- 
grees of comprefiion in the condenfing en- 
gine. 

But to return to the fubject of the two laft 
Experiments, which prove the elafticity of 
this new generated air; which elafticity is 
fuppofed to coniift in the ative aerial par- 
ticles repelling each other with a force, 
which is reciprocally proportional to their 
diftances. That illuftrious Philofopher, Sir 
Lfaac Newton, in accounting how air and 
vapour is produced, Opticks Quer. 31. fays, 
«¢ The particles when they are fhaken off 
‘¢ from bodies by heat or fermentation fo 
<< foon as they are beyond the reach of the 
** attraction of the body receding from it, 
*« as alfo from one another, with great 

Le “ ftrength 


208: Aualyfis of the Air. 
« ftrength and keeping at a diftance, fo a3 
< fometimes to take up above a million of 
<¢ times more fpace than they did before in 
«the form of a denfe body , which vaft 
«« contraction and expanfion feems unintel- 
«¢ ligible, by feigning the particles of Air 
“« to be fpringy and ramous, or rolled up 
« like hoops, or by any other means than 
“ by a repulfive power.” The truth of 
which is further confirmed by thefe Expe- 
timents, which fhew the great quantity 
of air emitted from fermenting bodies ; 
which not only proves the great force with 
which the parts of thofe bodies muft be 
diftendeds but fhews alfo how very much 
the particles of air muft be coiled up in 
that ftate, if they are, as has been fuppofed, 
ipringy and ramous. 
To inftance in the cafe of the pounded 
Apples which generated above 48 times 
their bulk of Air; this air, when in the Ap- 
ples, muft be compreffed into lefs than a 
forty eighth part of the fpace it takes up, 
when freed from them, and it will con- 
fequently be 48 times more denfe; and 
fince the force of compreffed air is propor- 
tional to its denfity, that force which com- | 
| preffes 


Analyfis of the Air. 209 
preffes and confines this air in the Apples, 
mutt be equal to the weight of 48 of our 
atmofpheres, when the Mercury in the Ba- 
-rometer ftands at fair, that is 30 inches high. 

Now a cubick inch of Mercury weigh- 
ing 3580 grains, thirty cubick inches (which 
is equal to the weight of our atmo{phere on 
an area of a cubick inch) will weigh 15 
pounds, 5 ounces, 215 grains; and 48 of 
them will weigh above 736 pounds; which 
is therefore equal to the force with whichan 
inch fquare of the furface of the Apple 
would comprefs the air, fuppofing there 
were no other fubftance but air in the Ap- 
ple: And if we take the furface of an Ap- 
ple at 16 {quare inches, then the whole 
force with which that furface would com- 
prefs the included air, would be 11776 pounds, 
And fince a@ion and re-adtion are equal, this 
would be the force, with which the air in 
the Apple would endeavour to expand it felf, 
if it were there in an elaftick and ftrongly 
compreffed ftate: But fo great an expanfive 
force in an Apple would certainly rend the 
fubftance of it with a ftrong explofion, ef 
pecially when that force was increafed, by 
the vigorous influence of the Sun’s: warmth, 

P : We 


210 ©. Lally is of the Ar. 


We may make a like eftimate alfo, from 
the great quantities of air which arofe ei- 
ther by fermentation, or the force of fire 
from feveral other bodies. Thus in Exp. 55. 
there arofe from a piece of heart of Oak, 
216 times its bulk of air. Now 216 cubick | 
inches of air, compreffed into the fpace of - 
one cubick inch, would, if it continued there — 
in an elaftick ftate, prefs againft one fide of 
the cubick inch, with an expanfive force - 
equal to 3310 pounds weight, fuppofing 
there were no other fubftance but air con- 
tained in it; and it would prefs againft the 
fix fides of the cube, with a force equal to 
19860 pounds, a force fufficient to rend 
the Oak with a vaft explofion : ’tis very 
reafonable therefore to conclude, that meft 
of thefe now aétive particles of the new — 
generated air, were in a fix'd flate in the Ap. 
ple and Oak before they were roufed, and — 
put into an active repelling ftate by fermens — 
tation and fire. 

The weight of a cubick inch of Apple | 
being 191 grains, the weight of a cubick © 
inch of air > of a grain, 48 times that weight | 
of air is nearly equal to the fourteenth part 
of the weight of the Apple, | | 
And | 


Analyfis of the Air, 2x 

And if to the air thus generated from 4 
veflel of any vegetable liquor, by fermenta- 
tion, we add the air that might afterwards 
be obtained from it, by heat or diftillation ¢ 
and to that alfo the vaft quantity of air; 
which by Experiment 73 is found to be con- 
tained in its Tartar, which adheres to the 
fides of the veffel; it would by this means 
be found that air makes a very confidera- 
ble part of the fubftance of Vegetables, as 
well as of Animals. 

But tho’ from what has been faid, it is 
teafonable to think, that many of thefe par- 
ticles of air were in a fixt ftate, ftrongly ad 
hering to and wrought into tlie fubftance 
of Apples; yet on the other handit is mot 
evident from Exper. 34 and 38; where in- 
numerable bubbles of air inceflantly arofe 
through the fap of Vines, that there is a 
confiderable quangity of air in Vegetables, 
upon the wing; and in a very active flate, 
efpecially in warm weather, which enlarges 
the {phere of their adtivity. 


212 Analy fis of the fur. 


The effects of the rabeisandled of mineral 


Suoftances on the Air. 


| HAVE above fhewn that air may be 
‘4& produced from mineral Subftances, by 
the action of fire indiftillation. And we have 
in the following Experiments many inftan- 
ces of the great plenty of air, which is gene- 
rated by fome fermenting mixtures, abforbed 
by cthers, and by others alternately gene- 
rated and abforbed. 


ExPERIMENT XC, 


I poured upon a middle fized Gold Ring, 
beat into a thin plate, two cubick inches 
of Agua Regia; the Gold was all diflolved 
the next day, when I found 4 cubick in- 
ches of air generated; for air bubbles were 
continually arifing during the folution: But 
fince Gold lofes nothing of its weight in 
being thus diflolved , the 4 cubick faces of 
air, which weighed more than a grain, muft 
arife either out of the pores of the Gold, 
or from the Agua Regia, which makes it 
probable, that there are air particles in acid 

{pirits 5 


j 


Analyfis of the cir, 213 


J 
{pirits; for by Experiment 75, they abforb 
air, which air particles regained their elafti- 
city, when the acid fpirits which adhered to 
them were more ftrongly attraéied by the 
gold, than by the air particles. 


EXPERIMENT XCI. 


A quarter of a cubick inch of Antimony, 
and two cubick inches of 4gua-regia, gene- 
rated 38 cubick inches of air, the firft 3 or 
4 hours, and then abforbed 14 cubick in- 
ches in an hour ortwo; after which it was 
{tationary, till Ilet into the glafs veffel a y 
(Fig. 34.) about a quart of frefh air: Upon 


which it abforbed fo faft, as to make the 
water rife very vifibly in @ y, whereby it ab- 


forbed 30 cubick inches more. It is very ob- 
fervable, that air was generated while the 
ferment was imall, on the firft mixing of the 
ingredients: But when the ferment. was 
greatly increafed, fo that the fumes rofe 
very vifibly, then there was a change made 
from a generating toan abforbing Mate ; that 
is, there was more air abforbed than gene- 
rated. | 


Ps That 


214 Analyfis of the Air. 

That I might find whether the air was ab- 
forbed by the fumes only of the Aqua-regia, 
or by the acid fulphureous vapours, which 
afcended from the Antzmony, I put a like 
quantity of gua-regia into a bolthead 6, 
(Fig. 34.) and heated it by pouring a large 
quantity of hot water into the ciftern x x, 
which ftood in a larger veffel, that retained 
the hot water about it, but no air was ab- 
forbed; for when all was cald, the water 
ftood at the point z, where I firft placed it: 
Yet in the diftillation of compound Aqua- 
fortis, Exper. 75. a little was abforbed. Hence 
therefore it is probable, that the greateft 
part, if nor all the air, was abforbed by 
the fumes, which arofe from the Antimony. 


EXPERIMENT XCIL. 


Some time in February, the weather very 
cold, I poured upon a quarter of a cubick 
inch of powdered Antzmony, a cubick inch 
of compound or douole Aqua-fortis in the 
bolthead 4, ( Fig. 34.) in the firft 20 hours 
it generated about 8 cubick inches of air 5 
after that, the weather being fomewhat 
warmer, it fermentec fafter, fo as in 2 or 3 

Tw 


Analyfis of the Aur. 215 
hours to generate 82 cubick inches of ait 
more; but the following night being very 
cold, little was generated : So the next morn- 
ing I poured hot water into the veffel x x; 
which renewed the ferment, fo that it ge- 
nerated 4 cubick inches more, in all 130 cu- 
bick inches, a quantity equal to 520 times 
the bulk of the Antimony. 

The fermented mafs looked like Brim- 
ftone, and when heated over the fire, there 
fublimed into the neck of the bolthead a 
red fulphur, and below it a yellow, which 
fulphur, as Mr. Boyle obferves, Vol. IIl- 
p. 272. cannot be obtained by the bare ac 
tion of fire, without being firft well digefted 
in oil of Vitriol, or {pirit of Nitre. And by 
comparing the quantity of air obtained by 
fermentation in this Experiment, with the 
quantity obtained by the force of fire in 
Exper. 69. we find that five times more air 
was generated by fermentation than by fire,. 
which fhews fermentation to be a more fub- 
tile diffolvent than fire; yet in fome cafes 
there is more air generated by fire than by 
fermentation. | 

Half a cubick inch of os of Antimony, 
ha an equal quantity of compound Aqua- 

P 4 fortis, 


216 Analyfis of the Air. 

fortis, generated 36 cubick inches of elaf 
tick air, which was all reforbed the follow- 
ing day. 


EXPERIMENT XCIIL 


Some time in February, a quarter of a 
cubick inch of fvzmgs of Lrow, and a cubick 
inch of compound Agua-fortis, without any 
water, did in 4 days abforb 27 cubick inches 
of air. Ir having ceafed to abforb, I poured 
hot water into the veflel » x, totry if] 
could renew the ferment. The effed of this 
was, that it generated 3 or 4 cubick inches 
of air, which continued in that ftate for 
fome days, and was then again reforbed. 

l repeated the fame Experiment in warm 
weather in 4pr7f, when it more-briskly ab- 
forbed 12 cubick inches in an hour. 


EXPERIMENT XGIYV. 


iMarch 12th, + ofa cubick inch of flings 
of Jvez, with a cubick inch of compound 
Agua-fortis, and an equal quantity of water, 
for the firt half hour abforbed 5 or 6 cubick 
inches of air; but in an hour more it had 
emitted 


Analyfis of the Aur. 217 


emitted that quantity of air; and in two 
hours more it again reforbed what had been 
juft before emitted. The day following it 
continued abforbing, in all 12 cubick in- 
ches: And then remained ftationary for 15 
or 2c hours. The third day it had again re- 
mitted or generated 3 or 4 cubick inches 
of air, and thence continued ftationary for 
five or fix days. 

A like quantity of fizngs of Iron, and oil 
of Vitriol, made no fenfible ferment, and 
generated a very little air ; but upon pouring 
in an equal quantity of water, it generated 
in 21 days 43 cubick inches of air; and in 
3 or 4 days more it reforbed 3 cubick in- 
chesofair; when the weather turned warmer 
it was generated again, which was again re- 
forbed when it grew cool. 


4th Of a cubick inch of jiléngs of Iron, 
and a cubick inch of o#/ of Vetriol, with | 
three times its quantity of Vater, Boece 
108 cubick inches of air. 

Filings of Iron, with fpirit of Nitre, 
either with an equal quantity of water, or 
without water, abforbed air, but moft with- 
out water. 


sth Of 


218 Analyfis of the Abr. 


4th Of a cubick inch of flings of Iron, 
and a cubick inch of Limon juice, abforbed 
two cubick inches of air. 

It is remarkable, that the fame mixtures 
fhould change from generating to ab{orbing, 
and from abforbing to generating ftates ; 
fometimes with, and fometimes without any 
fenfible alteration of the temperature of the 


alr, 
EXPERIMENT XCV. 


Half a cubick inch of /pirits of Harts- 
horn, with filings of Iron abforbed 1 -+ 2 
cubick inches of air, with filings of Copper 
double that quantity of air, and made a 
very deep blue tincture, which it retained 
long, when expofed to the open air. It was 
the fame with /pirzt of Sal Ammontac, and 
filings of Copper. 

A quarter of a cubick inch of filings of 
fron, with a cubick inch of powdered Brzm- 
ftone, made into a pafte with a little water, 
abforbed 19 cubick inches of air in two days. 
WN. B. I poured hot water into the ciftern x x, 
(Fig. 24.) to promote the ferment. 


A like 


Analyfis of the Air. 219 


A like quantity of fngs of Iron, and 
powdered Newceaftle Coal, did in 3 or 4 
days generate 7 cubick inches of air. I could 
not perceive any fenfible warmth in this 
- mixture, as was in the mixture of row and 
Brimftone. 

Powdered Brimftone and Neweaftle Coal 
neither generated nor abforbed. 

Filings of Iron and Water abforbed 3 or 
4 cubick inches of air, but they do not ab- 
forb fo much when immerfed deep in wa- 
ter; what they abforb is ufually the firt 3 
or 4 days. 

Filings of Iron, and the above mentioned 
Walton Pyrites in Exper. 70. abforbed in 4 
days a quantity of air nearly equal to dou- 
ble their bulk. 

Copper Oar, and compound Aqua-fortzs, 
neither generated nor abforbed air, but mix- 
ed with wafer it abforbed air. 

A quarter of a cubick inch of Tim, and 
double that quantity of compound Agua- 
fortis, generated two cubick inches of air; 
part of the Zz was diffolved into a very 
white fubitance, 


Exe 


220 Aualyfis of the Air, 


EXPERIMENT XCYI. 


April 16th, A cubick inch of the afore- 
mentioned Walton Pyrites powder'd, with 
a cubick inch of compound Aqua-fortis, ex- 
panded with great violence heat and fume 
into a {pace equal to 200 cubick inches, and 
in a little time it condenfed into its former 
{pace, and then abforbed 85 cubick inches 
of air. GON 

But the like quantity of the fame Mineral, 
with equal quantities of compound Aqua-for- 
tis and Water, fermented more violently, 
and generated above 80 cubick inches of air. 
I repeated thefe Experiments feveral times, 
both with and without wafer, and found 
conftantly the fame effet. 

Yet oil of Vitriol and Water, with fome 
of the fame Mineral, abforbed air. It was 
very warm, but did not make a great ebul- 
iition. | 


EXPERIMENT XCVIJ. 


I chofe two equal fized boltheads, and 
put into each of them a cubick inch of 
POW= 


Analyfis of the Aur. 221 
powdered Walton Pyrites, with only a cu- 
bick inch of compound Aqua-fortis into one, 
and a cubick inch of Water and compound 
Agua-fortis into the other: Upon weighing 
all the ingredients and vefieis exactly, both 
before and after the fermentation, I found 
the bolthead with compound Aqua-fortis alone 
had loft in fumes 1 dram 5 grains: But the 
other bolthead with Water and compound 
Aqua-fortis, which fumed much more, had 
loft 7 drams, 1 fcruple, 7 grains, which is 
fix times as much as the other loft. 


ExPERIMENT XCVIII 


A cubick inch of Newcaftle Coal pow- 
dered, and an equal quantity of compound 
Agua-fortis poured on it, did in 3 days 
abforb 18 cubick inches of air; and in 3 
days more it remitted and generated 12 cu- 
bick inches of air; and on pouring warm 
qwater into the veflel « x~ (Fig. 34.) it res 
mitted all that had been abforbed. 

Equal quantities of BSrimjtone and com- 
pound Agua-fortzs neither generated nor 
abforbed any air, notwithfanding hot wa- 
ter was poured into the veffel x x. 

Late 3 . A cu: 


222 Analyfis of the Air. 

A cubick inch of finely powdered Fit; 
and an equal quantity of compound Aqua- 
| fortis, abforbed in 5 or 6 days 12 cubick 


inches of air. 


Equal quantities of powdered Bri/fol Dia-« 
mond, and compound Aqua-fortis, and Water 
abforbed 16 times their bulk of air. 

The like quantities without water ab- 
forbed more flowly 7 times their bulk of 


air. 

Powdered Briffol Marble (viz. the thell 
in which thofe Déamonds lay) covered 
pretty deep with water, neither generated 
nor abforbed air; and it is well known that 
Briftol water does not fparkle like fome 
other Mineral waters. 


ExPERiMENT XCIX. 


When Agua-regia was poured on Oleum 
Tartari per Deliquinm much air was gene- 
rated, and that probably chiefly from the 
Oleum Tartari; for by Exper. 74. Sal Tar- 
tar has plenty of air in it. 

It was the fame when of! of Vitriol was 
_ poured on OL. Tartari; and O/. Tartari drop- 


ped on boyling Zartar generated much air. 
When 


Analyfis of the Air. 223 


When equal quantities of Water and oz 
of Vitriol were poured on the fea falt it 
abforbed 15 cubick inches of air; but when 
in the like mixture the quantity of water — 
was double to that of the o¢/ of Vztriol, then 
but half fo much air was abforbed. 


EXPERIMENT ©; 


I will next thew, what effets feveral 4/- 
kaline Mineral bodies had on the air in fer- 
menting mixtures. 

A folid cubick inch of unpowdered Chalk, 
with an equal quantity of o7/ of Vztriol, fer- 
mented much at firft, and in fome degree 
for 3 days; they generated 31 cubick inches 
of air. The Chalk was only a little diffolved 
on its furface. 

Yet Lime made of the fame Chalk abforb- 
ed much air; when o7/ of Vitriol was poured 
On it, and the ferment fo violent that ic. 
breaking the glafs veffels, I was obliged to put 
the ingredients in an Lvon vefiel. 

Two cubick inches of frefh Lime, and 
four of common white wine Vinegar ab- 
forbed in.15 days 22 cubick inches of air. 


he The. 


224  Analyfis of the Air, 

The like quantity of frefh Lime and Wa- 
ter abforbed in 3 days 10 cubick inches 
of air. 

Two cubick inches of Lzme, and an equal 
quantity of Sa/ Ammoniac abforbed 115 cux 
bick inches. 

A quart of nateket Live left for 44 
days, to flaken gradually by it felf without 
any mixture, abforbed no air. 

March 34, A cubick inch of powdered 
Belemnitis, taken from a C@atk pit, and an 
equal quantity of of of Vetriol, generated 
in 5 minutes 35 cubick inches of air. March 
sth, it had generated 70 more. March oth, 
it being a hard froft, it ice 12 cubick 
a es fo it generated 1 in‘all 128 inches, and 
reforbed 12. 

Powdered Belemmnitis and Limon juice ge- 
nerated plenty of air too; as did alfo the 
Star Stone, Lapis Fudaicus, and Selenstis 
with o7/ of Vitriol. 


ExpERIMENT Cl, 


Gravelled, that is well burnt, Wood-afbes, 
decrepitated Salt, and Colcothar of Vitriol, 
piacd feverally underthe inverted glafszzaa@ 

(Fig. 35.) 


| Analyfis of the Air, 2A 5. 
| (Fig. 35.) increafed in weight by imbibing 
the floating moifture of the air: But they 

abforbed no elaftick air. It was the fame with 
the remaining Axivzous Salt of a diftillation 
of Notre. 

But 4 or 5 cubick inches of powdered 
freth Cynder of Newcaftle Coal did in feven 
days abforb 5 cubick inches of elaftick air. 
And 13 cubick inches of air were in s days 
abforbed by Pulvis Urens, a powder which 
immediately kindles into a live Cole, upon 
‘being expofed to the open air. 


EXPERIMENT CII. 


What effect burning and flaming bodies, 
and the refpiration of Animals have on the 
air, we fhall fee in the following Experi- 
ments, U7%. : 

I fix'd upon the pedeftal under the inver- 
ted clais = 2 aa (Fig. 35.) a piece of 
Brown Paper, which had been dipped in a 
folution of Nztre, and then well dryed; I 
fet fire to the Paper by means of a bur- 
ning glafs: The Nitre detonized and burnt 
briskly for fome time, till the glafs zz 44 
was very full of thick fumes, which extin- 

Q guifhed 


226  Analyfis of the Aur. 


guifhed it. The expanfion caufed by the 
burning Nitre, was equal to more than twe 
quarts: When all was cool, there was near 
so cubick inches of new generated air, which 
arofe froma {mall quantity of detonized Nz- 
tre ; but the elafticity of this new air daily 
decreafed, in the fame manner as Mr. Hauk/- 
bee obferved the air of fired Gunpowder to 
do, Phyfico-mechanical Exper. p.83. {fo that 
he found 19 of 20 parts occupied by this 
air to be deferted in 18 days, and its {pace 
filled by the afcending water ; at. which fta- 
tion it refted, continuing there for 8 days 
without alteration: And in like manner, I 
found that a confiderable part of the air, 
which was produced by fire in the diftil- 
lation of feveral fubftances, did gradually 
lofe its elafticity in a few days after the 
diftillation was over; but it was not fo 
when I diftilled air thro’ water, as in Expe- 
riment 77: (Fiz. 3.82) 


EXPERIMEN ® CII. 


I placed on the fame pedeftal large Matches 
made of linen rags dipped in melted Brim- 
ftone: The capacity of the veffel, (Fig. 35.) 
3 ' above 


Analyfis of the Aur. 227 


above = 2 the furface of the water, was 
equal to 2024 cubick inches. The quantity 
of air which was abforbed by the burning 
Match was 198 cubick inches, equal to 4 
part of the whole air in the veffel. 

I made the fame Experiment in a leffer 
veflel g 2 aa (Fig. 35.) which contained 
but 594 cubick inches of air, in which 150 
cubick inches were abforbed, z. e. full 4 
part of the whole air in the receiver: So 
that tho’ more air is abforbed by burning 
Matches in large veflels, where they burn 
longeft, than in {mall ones, yet more air, in 
proportion to the bulk of the veffe!, is ab- 
forbed in {mall than in large veffels: If a 
frefh Match were lighted, and put into this 
infected air, tho’ it would not burn ; pare 
of the time that the former Match burnt 
in frefh untainted air, yet it would abforb 
near as much air in that fhort time; and it 
was the fame with Candles. . 


EXPERIMENT CIV, 


Equal quantities of filings of Iron and 
Brimftone, when let fall on a hot Iron on 
the pedeftal under the inverted glafs zzaa, 


Q2 (Fig. 35.) 


228 Analy fis of the Aur. 

(Fie. 35.) did in burning abforb much air; 
and it was the fame with Antimony and 
Lrim/ffone : Whence it is probable, that Val 


cano’s, whofe fewel confift chiefly of Brzm- 
ffone, mix’d with feveral mineral and me- 


taline {ubf@ances, do not generate, but rather 
abforb air. 

We find in the foregoing Experiment 102 
on Nitre, that a great part of the new ge- 
nerated air is in a few days reforbed, or 
lofes its elafticity: But the air which is ab- 
forbed by burning Brim/ffone, or the flame 
of a Candle, does not recover its ‘clafticity 
again, at leaft, not while confined in my 
glafles. 


EXPERIMENT CY. 


I made feveral attempts to try, whether 


air full of the fumes of burning Brzm-_ 


ftone wasas comprefiible as common frefh 
air, by comprefling at the fame time tubes 
full of each of thefe airs in the condenfing 
engine; and I found that clear air 1s very 
little more comprefiibie, than air with fumes 
of Brimftone in it: But I could not come to 


an exact certainty in the matter, becaufe the 
fumes 


——s 


Analyfis of the chr. 229 


fumes Were at the fame time deflroying the 
elafticity of the air. I took care to make 


‘the air in both tubes of the fame tempera- 


ture, by firft immerfing them in cold water, 
before I comprefled them. 


EXPERIMENT CVI. 


I fet a lighted tallow Candle, which was 
about & of an inch diameter, under the in- 
verted receiver & = 44, (Fig. 35.) and with 
a fyphon I immediately drew the water up 
to = =: Then drawing out the fyphon, the 
water would defcend for a quarter of a mi- 
nute, and after that afcend, notwithftand- 
ing the Candle continued burning, and heat- 
ing the air for near 3 minutes. It was ob- 
fervable in this Experiment, that the fur- 
face of the water & @ did not afcend with 
an equal progreflion, but would be fome- 
times ftationary; and it would fometimes 
move with a flow, and fometimes with an 
accelerated motion ; but the denfer the fumes 
the fafter it afcended. As foon as the Can- 
dle was out, I marked the height of the 
water above 2 s, which difference was e- 
qual to the quantity of air, whofe elaf- 


Q 3 ticity 


230 Aualyfis of the Air. 


ticity was deftroyed by the burning Candle. 
As the air cooled and condenfed in the re- 
ceiver, the water would continue rifing a- 
bove that mark, not only till all was cool, 
but for 20 or 30 hours after that, which 
height it kept, tho’ it ftood many days; which. 
fhews that the air did not recover the elafti- 
city which it had loft. 

The event was the fame, when for grea- 
ter accuracy I repeated this Experiment by 
lighting the Candle after it was placed un- 
der the receiver, by means of a burning glafs, 
which fet fire to a {mall piece of brown pa- 
per fixed to the wick of the Candle, which 
paper had been firft dipped in a ftrong folu- 
tion of Nztre in Water, and when well 
dryed, part of it was dipped in melted Brzm- 
ftone; it will alfo light the Candle without 
being dipped in Brzmftone. Dr. Mayow, 
found the bulk of the air leflened by # part, 
but does not mention the fize of the glafs 
veflel under which he put the lighted Can- 
dle, ‘De Sp. Nitro-aerco. p. 101. The capa- 
city of the veflel above = z, in which the 
Candle burnt in my Experiment, was equal 
to 2024 cubick inches; and the elafticity of 
the 2, part of this air was deftroyed. | 

The 


Analyfis of the Air. 231 

The Candle cannot be lighted again in 
this infected air by a burning glafs: But if 
I firft lighted it, and then put it into the 
fame infeéted air, tho’ it was extinguifhed 
in } part of the time, that it would burn in 
the fame veflel, full of frefh air; yet it 
would deftroy the elafticity of near as much 
air in that fhort time, as it did in five times 
that {pace of time in frefh airs this 1 re- 
peated feveral times, and found the fame 
event: Hence a grofs air which is loaded 
with vapours, is more apt in equal times to 
lofe its elafticity in greater quantities, than 
a clear alr. | 

I obferve that where the veflels are equal, 
and the fize of the Candles unequal, the e- 
lafticity of more air will be deftroyed by 
the large than by the {mall Candle: And 
where Candles are equal, there moft air in 
proportion to the bulk of the veffel will 
be abforbed in the fmalleft veflel: Tho’ 
with equal Candles there is always moft 
elaftick air deftroyed in the largeft veffel, 
where the Candle burns longeft. 

I found alfo in fermenting liquors, that 
cateris paribus, more air was either gene- 
ratcd ox abforbed in large, than in fmall 

, Q 4 veflels 


wee Analyfis of the Air. 

veffels, by generating or abforbing mixtures. 
As in the mixture of 4gua regia and Anti- 
mony in Experiment 91, by enlarging the 
bulk of the air in the veffel, a greater quan- 
tity of air was abforbed. . Thus alfo filings 
of Iron and Brzm/tone, which in a more ca- 
pacious veflel abforbed 19 cubick inches 
of air, abforbed very little when the bulk. 
of air above the ingredients was but 3 or 
4. cubick inches: For I have often obferved, 
that when any quantity of air is faturated 
with abforbing vapours to a certain degree, 
then no more elaftick air is abforbed: Not- 
withfanding the fame quantity of abforb- 
ing fubfiances would, in a larger quantity 
of air, have abforbed much more air; and 
this is the reafon why I was never able to 
deftroy the whole elafticity of any included 
bulk of air, whether it was common air, 
Of new generated air. 


EXPERIMENT CVI. 


May 18, which was a very hot day, I 
repeated Dr. M/ayow’s Experiment, to find 
how much air is abforbed by the breath of 
Animals inclofedin glaffes, which he found 

ith a moufe to be 4 part of the whole 
air 


Analyfis of the Aur. 233 
air in the glafs veflel De Sp. Nitro-aerco, 
| f 104. 

__ I placed on the pedeftal, under the inver- 
ted glafs zs 2 aa, (Fig. 35.) a full grown 
Rat. At firft the water fubfided a little, 
which was occafioned by the rarifaGtion of 
the air, caufed by the heat of the Animal’s 
body. But after a few minutes the water 
began to rife, and continued rifing as long 
asthe Rat lived, which was about 14 hours. 
The bulk of the Air in which the Rat 
lived fo many hours was 2024 cubick inches; 
the quantity of elaftick air which was ab- 
forbed was 73 cubick inches, above ;*, part 
of the whole, nearly what was abforbed 
by a Candle in the fame veffel, in Experi- 
ment 106. 

I placed at the fame time in the fame 
manner another almoft half grown Rat 
under a veffel, whofe capacity above the 
furface of the water 2 & (Fig. 35.) was but. 
$94 cubick inches, in which it lived 10 
hours; the quantity of elaftick Air which 
was abforbed, was equal to 45 cubick 
inches, wz. 2; part of the whole air, 
which the Rat breathed in: A Cat of 3 
months old lived an hour in the fame re- 


= 


SEVIS 
Gest GED 


224 Analyfis of the Aur. 


ceiver, and abforbed 16 cubick inches of air} 
vi%. s» part of the whole; an allowance 
being made in this eftimate, for the bulk 
of the Cat’s body. A candle in the fame 
veffel continued burning but one minute, 
and abforbed 54 cubick inches, 4 ip of 
the whole air. 

And as in the cafe of burning Brim/tone 


and Candles, more air was found to be ab- 
forbed in large veffels, than in {mall ones; 


and vice verfa, more Air in proportion to 
the capacity of the veflel was abforbed 
in fmall, than in large veffels; fo the fame 
holds true here too in the cafe of ani- 
mals. 


EXPERIMENT CVIII. 


The following Experiment will fhew, 
that the elafticity of the Air is greatly de- 
ftroyed by the re/piration of human LUNES; 
Viz. 

I made a bladder very fupple by wetting 
of it, and then cut off fo much of the neck, 
as would make a hole wide enough for the 
biggeft end of a large foffet to enter, to which 
the bladder was bound faft. The bladder 

3 ; and 


Analyfis of the Aur. 235 


| and foffet contained 74 cubick inches. Hav. 


| 
| 
| 


ing blown up the bladder, I put the ee all 


end of the foflet into my mouth; and at 


the fame time pinched my noftrils clofe 
that no air might pafs that way, fo that 
I could only breath to and fro the air 
contained in the bladder. In lefs than half 
a minute I found a confiderable difficulty 
in breathing, and was forced after that to 
fetch my breath very faft;.and at the end of 
the minute, the {uffocating uneafinefs was 
fo great, that 1 was forced totake away the 
bladder from my mouth. Towards the end 
of the minute, the bladder was become fo 
flaccid, that I could not blow it above half 
full with the greateft expiration that I could 
make: And at the fame time I could plain- 
ly perceive that my lungs were much fallen, 
juft in the fame manner as when we breath 
eut of them all'‘the air we can at ‘once. 
Whence it is plain that a confiderable quan- 
tity of the elafticity of the air contained 
in my lungs, and in the bladder was de- 
firoyed: Which fuppofing it to be 20 cu- 
bick inches, it will be #7; part of the whole 
Air, which I breathed to and fro; for the 
bladder contained 74 cubick inches, and the 

lungs 


236 Analyfis of the Air. 
lungs by the following Experiment aboue 
166 cubick inches, in all 240. 

Thefe effects of refpiration on the elafti- 
city of the air, put me upon making anat- 
tempt to meafure the inward furface of the 
lungs , which by a wonderful artifice are 
admirably contrived by the divine artificer, 
{o as to make their inward furface to be 
commenfurate to an expanfe of Air many 
times greater than the animal’s body ; as will 
appear from the following eftimate, viz. 


EXPERIMENT CIX, 


I took the lungs of a Calf and cut off 
the heart and windpipe an inch above its 
branching into the lungs ; I got nearly the 
{pecifick gravity of the fubftance of the lungs, 
(which is a continuation of the branchings 
of the windpipe, and blood veflels) by find- 
ing the fpecifick gravity of the windpipe, 
which I had cut off; it was to Well-water 
as 1.05 to 1, And a cubick inch of water 
weighing 254 grains; I thence found by 
weighing the lungs the whole of their fo- 
lid fubftance to be equal to 37 ++ = cubick 
inches. 


3 I then 


| 


Analyfis of the Aur. i 

I then filled a large earthen veffel brim 
full of water, and put the lungs in, which 
I blew up keeping them under water with 
a pewter plate. Then taking the lungs out 
and letting the plate drop to the bottom of 
the water, I poured in a knownquantity of 
water, till the veffel was brimful again; that - 
water was7 pounds 6 ounces and 3 equal 
to 204 cubick inches ; from which deduéts 
ing the {pace occupied by the folid fub- 
fiance of the lungs, wz. 37 -+- = cubick 
inches, there remains 166 ++ + cubick inches 
for the cavity of the lungs. But as the Pul- 
monary Veins, Arteries and Lymphaticks 
will, when they are ina natural ftate re-_ 
pleat with blood and lymph, occupy more 
fpace than they do in their prefent empty 
ftate; therefore fome allowance muft al- 
fo be made, out of the above taken caviry 
of the lungs, for the bulk of thofe fluids ; 
for which 25 -+-7 cubick inches feems to 
be a fufficient proportion, out of the 166 
+ + cubick inches; fo there remains 141 
cubick inches for the cavity of the lungs. _ 
I poured as much water into the Bron- 
chie asthey would take in, which was r 
pound 8 ounces, equal to 41 cubick inches ; 
this 


238 Analyfis of the Aur. 


this deducted from the above found cavity 
of the lungs, there remains 100 cubick inches 
for the fum of the cavity of the veficles, 

Upon viewing fome of thefe veficles with 
a microfcope, a middle fized one feems to 
be about vss part of an inch diameter; then 
the fum of the furfaces in a cubick inch 
of thefe {mall velicles (fuppofing them tobe 
fo many little cubes, for they are not {phe- 
rical) will be 300 fquare inches; which mul- 
tiplied by the fum ofthe cavity of all the 
veliclesin the lungs, vzz. 100 cubick inches, 
will produce 30000 fquare inches; one 
third of which muft be dedu&ted, to make 
an allowance for the abfence of two fides 
in each little veficular cube, that. there 
might be a free communication among 
them for the Air to pafs to and fro; fo 
there remains 20000 fquare inches for the 
fum of the furface of all the veficles. 

And the &renchig containing 41 cubick 
inches, fuppofing them at a medium to 
be cylinders of +. of an inch diameter, their 
furface will be 1635 {fquare inches, which 
added to the furface of the veficles makes 
the fum of the furface of the whole 


lungs to be 21635 {quare inches, ofr 
bate) 


Analyfis of the Ar. 239 
150 fquare fect, which is equal to ro times 
the furface of a man’s body, which at a me- 
dium is computed at 15 fquare feet. 

Ihave not had an opportunity to take 
in the fame mannerthe capacity and dimen- 
fions of human lungs; the bulk of which 
Dr. James Keill in his Tentamina Medico- 
phyfica, p. 80. found to be equal to 226 cu- 
bick inches. Whence he eftimated the fum 
of the furface of the veficles to be 21906 
{quare inches, which is nearly the fame 
with my eftimate of the Calve’s lungs. But 
the bulk of human lungs is much more ca- 
pacious than 226 cubick inches: For Dr. 
Furi, by an accurate Experiment, found 
that he breathed out, at one large expirati- 
on, 220 cubick inchesof Air; and I found 
it nearly the fame, when I repeated the like 
Experiment in another manner: So that 
there muft be a large allowance made for 
the bulk of the remaining Air, which could 
not be expired from the lungs; and alfo 
for the fubftance of the lungs, 

‘Suppofing then, that according to Dr. 
Furin’s cttimate (in Mott's Abridgment of 
the Philofophical Tranfac. Vol. 1. p. 415.) 
we draw in at each common infpiration 40 

cubick 


240 Analyfis of the Aur. 
cubick inches of air, that will be 48000 cu: 
bick inches in aa hour, at the rate of 20 in- 
fpirations in a minute. A confiderable part 
of the clafticity of which air is, we fee 
by the foregoing Experiment, conftantly de- 
ftroyed, and that chiefly among the vefi- 
“eles, where it is charged with much vapour. 
But it is not eafie to determine how much 
is deftroyed. I attempted to find it out by 
the following Experiment, which I fhall here 
give an account of, tho’ it did not fucceed 
fo well as I could have withed, for want of 
much larger veflels; for if it was repeated 
with more capacious veffels, it would de- 
termine the matter pretty accurately; becaufe 
by this artifice frefh air is drawn into the 
Jungs at every infpiration, as well as in the 
free open air. 


EXPERIMENT CX. 


I made ufe of the fyphon (Fig. 39.) tak- 
ing away the bladders, and diaphragms 2 2 
mo: 1 fixed by means of a bladder one 
end of a fhort leaden fyphon to the lateral 
feflet7z: Then I faftened the large fyphon 
in a veficl, and filled i¢ with water, till it 

| rofe 


Analyfis of the Aur. 241 
rofe within two inches of a and covered 
the other open end of the fhort.fyphon, | 
which was depreffed for that purpofe. Over 
this orifice I placed a large inverted chymi- 
cal receiver full of water; and over the 
other legos of the great fyphon, I whelmed 
another large empty receiver, whofe capacity 
was equal to 1224 cubick inches ; the mouth 
of the receiver being immer(fed in the water, 
and gradually let down lower and lower by 
an afliftant, as the water afcended in it. Then 
ftopping my noftrils, I drew in breath at a, 
thro’ the fyphon from the empty receiver: 
And when that breath was expired, the va!- 
ve 62 ftopping its return down thro’ the fy- 
phon, it was forced thro’ the valve r, and 
thence thro’ the {mall leaden fyphon into 
the inverted receiver full of water, which 
water def{cended asthe breath afcended. In 
this manner I drew all the air, except 5 or 
6 cubick inches, out of the empty receiver at 
o, the water at the fame time afcending 
into it and filling it; by which means all 
the air in the empty receiver, as alfoall the 
air in the fyphon os 6, was infpired into 
my lungs, and breathed ont thro’ the valve 
y jnto the receiver, which was at firft full 

R of 


242  Mnalyfis of the Air. 


of water. I marked the boundary of air 
and water, and then immerfed the whole 
receiver, Which had the breath in it, under 
water, and there gradually poured the con- 
tained breath up into the other full receiver, 
which ftood inverted over 0 5; whereby I 
could readily find, whether the air had loft 
any of its elafticity : And for greater furety, 
I alfo meafured the bulk of breath by filling 
the receiver with a known quantity of water 
up to the above mentioned mark; making 
alfo due allowance for a bulk of air, equal 
to the capacity of the large fyphon oa s 6, 
which was at laft fucked full of water. 

The event was, that there was 18 cubick 
inches of air wanting ; but as thefe receivers 
were much too {mall to make the Experi- 
ment with accuracy; that fome allowance 
may be made for errors, I will fet the lofs 
of elaftick air at 9 cubick inches, which is 
but + part of the whole air refpired, which 
Will amount to 353 cubick inches in one 
hour, or 100 grains, at the rate of 48000 
cubick inches infpired in an hour, or one 
ounce and a half in twenty four hours. 

By pouring the like quantity of air to and 
fro under water, I found that little or none 

of 


Analyfis of the Air. 243 


of it was loft; fo it was not abforbed by 
the water : To make this tryal accurately, the 
air muft be detained fome time under water, 
to bring it firfttothe fame temperature with 
the water. Care alfo muft be taken in mak- 
ing this Experiment, that the lungs be in the 
fame degree of contraction, at the laft breath- 
ing, as at the firft, elfe a confiderable error 
may arife from thence. 

But tho’ this be not an exact eftimate, yet 
it is evident from the foregoing Experiments 
on refpiration, that fome of the elafticity of 
the air, which is infpired, is deftroyed; and 
that chiefly among the veficles, where it is 
moft loaded with vapours; whence probably 
fome of it, together with the acid {pirits, 
with which the air abounds, are conveyed 
to the blood, which we fee is by an admi- 
rable contrivance there {pread into a vaift 
expanfe, commenfurate to a very large fur- 
face of air, from which it is parted by very 
thin partitions; fo very thin, as thereby 
probably to admit the blood and air particles 
(which are there continually changing from 
an elaftick to a firongly attrafting ftate) 
within the rach of each other’s attraction, 

R 2 whereby 


244 Analy fis of the Air. 


whereby a continued fucceflion of frefh air 
may be abforbed by the blood. 

And in the analyfis of the blood, either 
by fire or fermentation in Exper. 49 and 80, 
we find good plenty of particles ready to re- 
fume the elaftick quality of air: But whe- 
ther any of thefe air particles enter the | 
blood by the lungs, is not eafie to deter- | 
mine; becaufe there is certainly great ftore 
of air in the food of animals, whether it be 
vegetable or animal food. Yet when we 
confider how much air continually lofes 
its elafticity in the lungs, which feem pur- 
pofely framed into innumerable minute me- 
anders, that they may thereby the better 
feize, and bind that volatile Hermes: It 
- makes it very probable, that thofe particles 
which are now changed from an elaftick re- 
pulfive, to a ftrongly attra@ting ftate, may 
eafily be attracted thro’ the thin partition of 
the veficles, by the fulphureous particles 
which abound in the blood. 

And nature feems to make ufe of the like 
artifices in vegetables, where we find that 
air is freely drawn in; not,only with the 
principal fund of nourifhment at the root, 

but 


Analy fis of the “ur. 245 


but alfo thro’ feveral parts of the body of 
the vegetable above ground, which air was 
feen to afcend inan elaftick ftate moft frecly 
and vifibly thro’ the larger trachee of the 
Vine; and is thence doubtlefs carried with 
the fap into minuter veffels, where being 
intimately united with the fulphureous, fa- 
line and other particles, it forms the nutri- 
tive dudtile matter, out of which all. the 
parts of vegetables do grow. 


EXPERIMENT CX. 


It is plain from thefe effects of the fumes 
of burning Brim/ffone, lighted Candle, and 
the breath of Animals on the elafticity of 
the air, that its elafticity in the veficles of 
the lungs muft be continually decreafing, 
by reafon of the vapours it is there loaded 
with ; fo that thofe veficles would in a lit- 
tle time fubfide and fall flat, if they were 
not frequently replenifhed with frefh elaf- 
tick air at every infpiration, thro’ which the 
inferior heated vapour and air afcends, and 
leaves room for the frefh air to defcend in- 
to the veficles, where the heat of the lungs 
make it perpen about $ part ; which degree 

KR 3 of: 


246 Analyfis of the Aw. 


of expanfion of a temperate air, I found by 
inverting a fmall glafs bubble in water, a 
little warmer than a Thermometer is, by ha- 
ving its ball held fome time in the mouth, 
which may reafonably be taken for the de- 
sree of warmth in the cavity of the lungs. 
When the bubble was cool, the quantity 
of water imbibed by it was equal to % of 
the cavity of the whole bubble. | 

But when inftead of thefe frequent re- 
crnits of frefh air, there is infpired an air, 
furcharged with acid fumes and vapours, 
which not only by their acidity contra& the 
exquifitely fenfible veficles, but alfo by their 
grof{nefs much retard the free ingrefs of the 
air into the veficles, many of which are ex- 
ceeding fmall, fo as not to be vifible with- 
Out a microfcope; which fumes are alfo con- 
tinually rebating the elafticity of that air, 
then the air in the veficles, will by Exp. 107 
and 108 lofe its elafticity very faft, and con- 
fequently the veficles will fall flat, notwith- 
fianding the endeavours of the extending 
Thorax to dilate them as ufual; whereby 
the motion of the blood thro’ the lungs, be- 
ing ftopped, inftant death enfues. 


Which 


Analyfis of the Air. 247 


Which fudden and fatal effect of thefe 
noxious vapours, has hitherto been fuppofed 
to be wholly owing to the lofs and wafte of 
the vivifying fpirit of air; but may not 
unreafonably be alfo attributed to the lofs 
of a confiderable part of the air’s elafticity, 
and the groffnefs and denfity of the vapours, 
which the air is charged with; for mutu- 
ally attracting particles, when floating in fo 
thin a medium as the air, will readily coa- 
lefce into groffer combinations: Which 
effe& of thefe vapours, having not been duly 
obferved before , it was concluded, that 
they did not affect the air’s elafticity ; and 
that confequently, the lungs muft needs be 
as much dilated in infpiration by this, as 
by a clear air. 

But that the lungs will not rife, and di- 
late as ufual, when they draw in fuch noxi- 
ous air, which decreafes faft in its elafticity, 
I was affured by the Experiment I made on 
my felf in Exper. 107. for when towards 
the latter end of the minute, the fuffocating 
quality of the air in the bladder was grea- 
teft, it was with much difficulty’ that I 
could dilate my lungs a very little. 


R 4 From 


248 Analyfis of the Air. 


From this property in the vapours, arifing 
from animal bodies, to rebate and deftroy 
part of the elafticity of the air, a probable 
account may be given, of what becomes of 
a redundant quantity of air, which may at 
any time have gotten into the cavity of the 
Thorax ; either by a wound,or by fome defect 
in the fubftance of the lungs, or by very 
violent exercife. Which if it was to con- 
tinue always in that expanded ftate, would 
very much incommode refpiration, by hin- 
dering thedilatation of the lungs in infpira- 
tion. But if the vapours, which do con- 
tinually arife in the cavity of the Thorax, 
deftroy fome part of the elafticity of the air, 
then there will be room for the lungs to 
heave: And probably, it is in the fame man- 
ner, that the winds are reforbed, which in 
their claftick ftate fly from one part of the 
body or limbs to another, caufing by their 
ciftention of the veffels much pain. 


EXPERIMENT CXII. 


Ihave by the following Experiment found, 
that the air will pafs here and there thro’ the 


fubftance of the lungs, with a very {mall 
force, U7Z. I cut 


Analyfis of the Aur. 249 

I cut afunder the bodies of feveral young 
and {mall anzmals juft below the Diaphragm, 
and then taking care not to cut any veffel 
belonging to the lungs, I layed the Thorax 
open by taking away the “Diphragm, and 
fo much of the ribs, as was needful to ex- 
pofe the lungs to full view, when blown 
up. And having cut off the head, I faftned 
the windpipe to a very fhort inverted leg of 
a glafs fyphon; and then placed the inver- 
ted lungs and fyphon in a large and deep 
glafs veffel x full of water (Fig. 32.) un- 
der the air pump recciver p p, and pafling 
the longer leg of the fyphon thro’ the top of 
the receiver, where it was cemented faft at 
z, as 1 drew the air out of the receiver, the 
lungs dilated, having a free communica- 
tion with the outward air, by means of the 
glafs fyphon; fome of which air would 
here and there pafs in a few places thro’ 
the fubftance of the lungs , and rife in {mall 
fireams thro’ the water, when the receiver 
was exhaufted no more than to make the 
Mercury in the gage rife lefs than two inch- 
es. When I exhaufted the receiver, fo as 
to raife the Mercury 7 or 8 inches, tho’ it 
made the air rufh with much more violence 
thro’ 


250 Analyfis of the Abr. 

thro’ thofe {mall apertures in the furface 
of the lungs, yet I did not perceive that the 
number of thofe apertures were increafed, 
or at leaft very little. An argument that 
thofe apertures were not forcibly made by 


exhaufting the receiver lefs than two inches, 
but were originally in the live animal ; and | 
that the lungs of living animals are fome- | 


times raifed with the like force, efpecially 


in violent exercife, I found by the follow; | 


ing Experiment, viz. 


EXPERIMENT CXIIL 


Ityed down alive Dog on his back, near the 
edge of a Table, and then made a {mall hole 
thro’ the intercoftal mufcles into his Zho- 
rax, near the Diaphragm. 1 cemented faft 
into this hole the incurvated end ofa glafs 


tube, whofe orifice was covered with a lit- | 


tle cap full of holes, that the dilatation of | 
the Iungs might not at once ftop the ori- | 
fice of the tube. A fmall vial full of {pirit | 
of Wine was tyed to the bottom of the | 
perpendicular tube, by which means the | 
tube and vial could eafily yield to the mo- | 


tion of the Dog’s body, without danger of | 


breaking 


; 
i 
t 
f 


Analyfis of the Aur. 251 


_ breaking the tube, which was 36 inches long. 
| The event was, that in ordinary in{pirations, 
the fpirit rofe about fix inches in the tube; 
but in great and laborious infpirations, it 
would rife 24 and 30 inches, vz. when I 
_ ftopped the Dog’s noftrils and mouth, fo that 
he could not breathe: This Experiment fhews 
the force with which the lungs are raifed by 
the dilatation of the T/orax, either in ordi- 
nary or extraordinary and laborious in{pira- 
tions. When I blew air with fome force in- 
to the Thorax, the Dog was juft ready to 
expire. 

By means of another fhort tube, which 
had a communication with that which was 
fixed to the Thorax near its infertion into 
the Thorax, I could draw the air out of the 
Thorax, the height of the Mercury, inftead 
of fpirit in the tube, fhewing to what degree 
the Thorax. was cxhaufted of air : Ehe Mer- 
cury was hereby, raifed nine inches, which 
would gradually fubfide as the air got into 
the Thorax thro’ the lungs. ! 

Ithen layed bare the windpipe, and ha- 
ving cut it off a little below the Larynx, I 
affixed to it a bladder full of air, and then 
continued fucking air out of the Thorax, 

with 


252 Analyfis of the Air. 


with a force fufficient to keep the lungs 
pretty much dilated. As the Mercury fub- 
fided in the gage, Irepeated the fuétion for 
a quarter of an hour, till a good part of the 
air in the bladder was either drawn thro’ 
the fubftance of the lungs into the Thorax, 
or had loft its elafticity. When I preffed the 
bladder, the Mercury fubfided the fafter; the 
Dog was all the while alive, and would 
probably have lived much longer, if the 
Experiment had been continued ; as is likely 
from the following Experiment, vz. 


EXPERIMENT CXIV. 


I tyed a middle fized Dog down alive on 

a table, and having layed bare his windpipe, 
I cut it afunder juft below the Larynx, and 
fixed faft to it the fmall end of a common 
foffet; the other end of the foffet had a 
large bladder tyed to it, which contained 
162 cubick inches ; and to the other end of 
the bladder was tyed the great end of ano- 

‘ther foffet, whofe orifice was covered with 
a valve, which opened inward, fo as to ad- 
mit any air that was blown into the bladder, 
but none could return that way; yet for fur- 
ther 


Analyfis of the Air. 253 


ther fecurity, that paflage was alfo ftopped 
with a {piggot. 

As foon as the firft foffet was tyed faft to 
the windpipe, the bladder was blown full of 
air thro’ the other foffet ; when the Dog had 
breathed the air in the bladder to and fro . 
for a minute or two, he then breathed very 
faft, and fhewed great unealine{s, as being 
almoit fuffocated. 

Then with my hand I preffed the blad- 
derhard, fo asto drive the air into his lungs 
with fome force; and thereby make his 46- 
domen rife by the preffure of the Dzaphragm, 
as in natural breathings : Then taking alter- 
nately my hand off the bladder, the lungs 
with the Abdomen fubfided ; I continued in 
this manner, to make the Dog breathe for 
an hour; during which time I was ob- 
liged to blow frefh air into the bladder every 
five minutes, three parts in four of that air 
being either abforbed by the vapours of the 
lungs, or e{caping thro’ the ligatures, upon 
my prefling hard on the bladder. 

During this hour, the Dog was frequently 
near expiring whenever I preffed the air 
but weakly into his lungs; as I found by 
his pulfe, which was very plain to be fele 

in 


254 Analyfis of the Air. 
in the great crural artery near the groin; 
which place an afliftant held his finger on 
moft part of the time; but the languid pulfe 
was quickly accelerated, fo as to beat faft ; 
foon after I dilated the lungs much, by pref- 
fing hard upon the bladder, efpecially when 
the motion of the lungs was promoted by 
prefling alternately the Abdomen and the 
bladder, whereby both the contraGtion and 
dilatation of the lungs was increafed. 

And I could by this means roufe the Jan- 
guid pulfe whenever I pleafed, not only at 
the end of every 5 minutes, when more air 
was blown into the bladder from a man’s 
lungs, but alfo towards the end of the 5 
minutes, when the air was fulleft of fumes. 

At the end of the hour, I intended to try 
whether I could by the fame means have 
Kept the Dog alive fome time longer, when 
the bladder was filled with the fumes of bur- © 
ning Brimjtone: But being obliged to ceafe © 
for a little time from prefling the air into | 
his lungs, while matters were preparing for | 
thisadditional Experiment, inthe meantime 
the Dog dyed, which might otherwife have 
lived longer, if I had continued to force the 
air into his lungs. 

Now, 


Analyfis of the Aur. 255 


Now, tho’ this Experiment was fo fre- 
quently difturbed, by being obliged to blow 
more air into the bladder twelve times du- 
ting the hour; yet fince he was almoft fuf- 
focated in lefs than two minutes, by breath- 
ing of himfelf to and fro the firft air in the 
bladder, he would by Experiment 106 on 
Candles, have dyed in lefs than two minutes, 
when one fourth of the old air remained 
in the bladder, immediately to taint the 
new admitted air from a man’s lungs; fo 
that his continuing to live thro’ the whole 
hour, muft be owing to the forcible dilata- 
tion of the lungs, by comprefling the blad- 
der, and not to the uzusfying fpirit of air. 
For without that forcible dilatation, he had, 
after the firft 5 or 10 minutes, been certainly 
dead in lefs than a minute, when his pulfe was 
fo very low and weak, which I did not 
find to be revived barely by blowing 3 
parts in 4 of new air from the lungs of a 
“man into the bladder: But it was conftant- 
ly roufed and quickned, whenever I increafed 
the dilatations of the lungs, by comprefling 
the bladder more vigoroufly ; and that whe- 
ther it was at the beginning or end of each 
§ minutes, yet it was more cafily quickned, 

4 when 


256  Analbyfis of the Air. 


when the bladder was at any time newly 
filled, than when it was near empty. 

From thefe violent and fatal effe@s of 
very noxious vapours on the refpiration and 
life of animals, we may fee how the refpi- 
yation is proportionably incommoded, when 
the air is loaded with leffer degrees of va- 
pours, which vapours do in fome meafure 
clog and lower the air’s elafticity ; which it 
beft regains by having thefe vapours dif- 
pelled by the ventilating motion of the 
free open air, which is rendered wholefome 
by the agitation of winds: Thus what we 
call a clofe warm air, fuch as has been long 
confined in a room, without having the va- 
pours in it carried off by communicating 
with the open air, is apt to give us more 
or lefs uneafinefs, in proportion to the quan- 
tity of vapours. which are floating in it. 
For which reafon the German ftoves, which 
heat the air in a room without a free 
admittance of frefh air to carry off the va- 
pours that are raifed, as alfo the modern 
invention to conyey heated air into rooms 
thro’ hot flues, feem not fo well contrived, 
to favour a free refpiration, as our common 
method of fires in open chimneys, which 

4. | fires 


Aualyfis of the Aur. 257 
fires are continually carrying a large ftream 
of heated air out of the rooms up the chime 
ney, which ftream muft neceffarily be fup- 
plied with equal quantities of frefh air, 
thro’ the doors and windows, or the cranics 
of them. 

And thus many of thofe who have weak 
lungs, but can breath well enough in the 
frefh country air, are greatly incommoded 
in their breathing, when they come into 
large cities where the air ts full of fuliginous 


vapours, arifing from innumerable coal fires, 


and ftenches from filthy lay-ftalls and fewers: 
And even the moft robuft and healthy in 
changing from a city to a country air, find 
an exhilarating pleafure, arifing from a more 
free and kindly infpiration, whereby the 
lungs being lefs loaded with condenfing air 
and vapours, and thereby the veficles more 
dilated, with a clearer and more claftick 
air, a freer courfe is thereby given to the 
blood, and probably a purer air mixed with 
it; andthis is one reafon why in the coun- 
my a ferene dry conttitution of the air is 

more exhilarating than a moift thick air. 
And for the fame reafon, “tis no wonder, 
that peftilential, and other noxious epide- 
S mical 


el 
VY 


258  Aualyfis of the Arr. 


mical infe@ions are conveyed by the breath 
tothe blood (when we confider what great 
quantities of the airy vehicle lofes its ela- 
fticity among the veficles, whereby the in- 
fectious Mza/ma is lodged in the lungs. 
When I refle&t on the great quantities 
of elaftick air, which are deftroyed by bur- 
ning fulphur; it feems to me not improba- 
ble, that when an animial is killed by light- 
ning without any vifible wound, or imme- 
diate ftroke, that it may be done by the 
air’s elafticity, being inftantly deftroyed by 
the fulphureous lightning near the animal, 
whereby the Jungs will fall flat, and caufe 
fudden death; which is further confirmed 
by the flatnefs of the lungs of animals thus 
killed by lightning, their veficles being found 
upon difleétion to be fallen flat, and to have 
no air in them: The burfting alfo of glafs 
windows outwards, feems to be from the 
fame effect of lightning on the air’s elaf- 
ticity. = 
It is likewife by deftroying the air’s elaf 
ticity in fermented liquors, that lightning 
renders them flat and vapid: Fer fince ful- 
phureous fteams held near or under veffels 
will check redundant fermentation, as well 
as 


Analyfis of the Air, 259 
as the putting of fulphureous mixtures into 
the liquor, ‘tis plain, thofe fteams can eafily 
penetrate the wood of the containing vef- 
fels. No wonder then, that the more fub- 
tile lightning fhould have the like effe&. I 
know not whether the common practice of 
Jaying a bar of iron on a veffel, be a good 
prefervative againft the ill effects of lightning 
on liquors I fhould think that the covering 
a veflel with a large cloth dipped in a ftrong 
brine, would be a better prefervative; for 
falts are known to be ftrong attracters of 
fulphur. 

The certain death which comes on the ex- 
plofion of Mines, feems to be effetted in 
the fame manner: For tho’ at firft there is 
a great expanfion of the air, which muft 
dilate the lungs, yet that air is no fooner 
filled with fuliginous vapours, but a good 
deal of its elafticity is immediately deftroyed : 
As in the cafe of burning Matches in Ex- 
periment 103, the heat of the flame at firft 
expanded the air; but notwithftanding the 
flame continued burning, it immediately 
contracted, and loft much of its elafticity, 
as foon as fome quantity of fulphureous 


ficams afcended in it. 
SZ W hich 


260 Analy fis of the Aur. 


Which fteams have doubrlefs the fame 
effect on the air, in the lungs of Animals 
held over them; asin the Grotto di cani, 
or when a clofe room is filled with them, 
where they certainly fuffocate. 

It is found by Experiments 103, 106, 
and 107, that an air greatly charged with 
vapours lofes much of its elaflicity, which 
-is the reafon why fubterrancous damps fuf- 
focate Animals, and extinguifh the flame of 
Candles. And by Experiment 106, we fee 
that the fooner a Candle goes out, the faft- 
er the air lofes its elafticity. 


EXPERIMENT CXV. 


This put me upon attempting to find fome 
means to qualify and rebate the deadly noxi- , 
ous quality of thefe vapours : And in order 
to it, I put thro’ the hole, in the top of the 
air pump receiver (Fig. 32.) which con- 
tained two quarts, cone leg of an iron fyphon 
made of a gun barrel, which reached near 
to the bottom of the receiver: It was ce- 
mented faft at z, I tyed three folds of wool- 
Jen cloth over the orifice of the fyphon, 
which was in the receiver. The Candle went’ 
out in lefs than two minutes, tho’ I conti- | 

4 nued 


Analyfis of the Air. 261 


nued pumping all the while, and the air 
pafled fo freely thro’ the folds of cloth in- 
to the receiver, that the Mercury in the 
gage did not rife above an inch. 

When I put the other end of the fyphon 
into a hotiron pot, with burning Brim/ffone 
in it; upon pumping, the Candle went out 
in 15 feconds of a minute ; but when I took 
away the 3 folds of cloth, and drew the 
fulphureous ftcams thro’ the open fyphon, 
the light of the Candle was inftantly extin- 
guifhed; whence we fee the 3 folds of cloth 
preferved the Candle alight 15 “. And where 
the deadly quality of vapours in Mines is 
not fo ftrong as thefe fulphurcous ones were, 
‘the drawing the breath thro’ many folds of 
woollen cloth may be a means to preferve 
life a little longer, in proportion to the more 
or lefs noxious quality of the damps. 

When, infiead of the 3 folds of cloth, I 
immerfed the end of the fyphon 3 inches 
deep in water in the veffel w, (Fig. 32.) tho’ 
upon pumping the fulphureous fumes did 
afcend vifibly thro’ the water, yet the Can- 
dle continued burning half a minute, z.e. dou- 
ble the time that it did when fumes pafied 

thro’ folds cf woollen cloth. 
7 S 3 Ex- 


262 Analyfis of the Air. 


EXPERIMENT CXVI. 


I bored a hole in the fide of a large wooden 
foffet a4, (Fig. 39.) and glewed into it the 
great end of another foffet #z, covering the 
orifice with a bladder valve r: Then I fit- 
ted a valve 8 z, to the orifice of the iron 
fyphon ff; fixing the end of the fyphon 
faft at 6 into the foflet 24: Then by means 
of narrow hoops I placed four Dzaphragms 
of flannel at half an inch diftance from each 
other, into the broad rim of a fieve, which 
was about 7 inches diameter. The fieve was 
fixed to, and had a free communication with 
both orifices of the fyphon, by means of 
two large bladders in no. 

The inftrument being thus prepared, pinch- 
ing my noftrils clofe, when I drew in breath 
with my mouth at a, the valve z 6 being 
thereby lifted up, the air paffed freely thro 
the fyphon from the bladders, which then 
{ubfided, and fhrunk confiderably : But when 
I breathed air out of my lungs, then the 
valve z 6 clofing the orifice of the fyphon, the - 
, alr paffed thro’ the valve r into the blad- 
ders, and thereby dilaced them; by which 

arti- 


HN 


( 1 
Na \ 


SSS SS 


Sug 


Re TINS il 


WC 
= 


at att || 


LALLA HM 


ATEN 


| 


| 


W\y\y 


is 
3 
5 

; 


‘ 


* 


ie a ae! 7 ee 


Analyfis of the Aur. 263 
artifice the air which I expired muft necef- 
farily pafs thro’ all the Dzaphragms, before 
it could be infpired into my lungs again. 
The whole capacity of the bladders and {y- 
phon was 4 or 5 quarts. 

Common fea falt, and Sa/ Totes being 
ftrong imbibers of fulphureous fteams, I dip- 
ped the four Diaphragms in firong folu- 
tions of thofe falts, as alfo in white wine 
vinegar, which is looked upon as a goad 
anti-peftilential: Taking care after each of 
thefe Experiments to cleanfe the fyphon 
and bladder well from the foul/air, by fil- 
ling them with.water. 

I could breath ‘too and fro the air inclofed 
in this infrument for a minute and half, 
when there‘ were no Diaphragms i in it; when 
the 4 Diaphragms were dipped in vinegar, 
3 minutes ; whetkdipped i in a ftrong folution 
»-of fea falt, 3. minutes and/an half. In.a Lixi- 
vium of Sal Tartar, 3 minutes; when the 
‘Diaphragms were dipped in the like Lixi- 
vium, and then well dryed, 5 minutes; and 
once 8 -++ + minutes, with very highly cal- 
cined Sal Tartar ; but whether this was ow- 
ing to the Zartar’s being greatly calcined, 
whereby it might more ftrongly attrac ful- 

S 4 phureous. 


2164 Analyfis of the Air. 


phureous grofs vapours, or whether it was 
occafioned by fome unheeded paffage for the 
air thro’ the ligatures, I am uncertain; nei- 
ther did I care to afcertain the matter by re- 
peated Experiments, fearing I might thereby 
fome way injure my lungs, by frequently 
breathing in fuch grofs vapours. 

Hence Sal Tartar fhould be the beft pre- 
fervative againft noxious vapours, as being a 
very ftrong imbiber of fulphureous, acid and 
watry vapours, as is fea falt alfo: For ha- 
ving carefully weighed the 4 Diaphragms, 
before I fixt them in the inftrument, I found 
that they had increafed in weight 30 grains 
in five minutes; and it was the fame in two 
different tryals; fo they increafed in weight 
at the rate of I9 Ounces in 24 hours. From 
which deducting ~ part for the quantity of 
moifture, which I found thofe ‘Dzaphragms 
attracted in 5 minutes in the open air; there 
remains t5 -+ # ounces, for the weight of 
the moifture from the breath in 24 hours: 
But this is probably too great an allowance, 
confidering that the ‘Diphragms might at- 
tract more than 2 part from the moifture of 
the bladders and of the fyphon. 


I have 


Analyfis of the Aur. 265 


I have found that when the Diaphragms 
had fome fmall degree of dampnefs, they 
increafed in weight fix grains in 3 minutes; 
but they made no increafe in weight jn 
the fame time, when in the open air: which 
fix grains in 3 minutes, is at the rate of a- 
bout 6 +- + ounces in 24 hours; and this 
is nearly the fame proportion of moifture 
that I obtained by breathing into a large 
receiver full of {fpunges. Burt the 6 grains 
imbibed by the four Dzaphragms in 3 mi-- 
nutes, was not near all the vapours which 
were in that bulk of inclofed air; for at 
the end of the 3 minutes, the often refpi- 
red air was fo loaded with vapours, whicle 
in that floating ftate were cafily, by their 
mutual attraction, formed into combina- 
tions of particles, too grofs to enter the mi_ 
nute veficles of the lungs, and was therefore 
unfit for refpiration ; fo that it is not eafic 
to determine what proportion is carried off 
by refpiration, efpecially confidering that 
fome of the infpired air, which has loft its 
ejafticity in the lungs, is mingled with it. 
But fuppofing 6 + + ounces to be the quan- 
tity of moifture carried off by refpiration 
in 24 hours, then the furface of the lungs 
| being 


266  Analyfis of the Air: 


being kanes as above 21635 fquare inches 
only - part of an inch depth, will be 
_ evaporated off their inward furface in that 
“time, which is but ;4 part of the depth of 
what is perfpired off the furface of a man’s 
body in that time. 

If then life can by this means be fup- 
ported for 5 minutes with 4 Dzaphragms 
and a gallon of air, then doubtlefs, with 
double that quantity ofair and 8 Diaphragms 
we might well expect to live at leaft ro 
minutes. It was a confiderable difadvantage 
that I was obliged to make ufe of bladders, 
which had been often wetted and dried, fo 
that the unfavory fumes from them muft 
needs have contributed much to the unfitting 
the included air for refpiration: Yet there 
isa neceflity for making ufe of either blad- 
der or leather in thefe cafes; for we can- 
not breath to and fro the air of a veffel, — 
whofe fides will not dilate and contra in 
conformity with the expirations and in- 
{pirations, unlefs the veffel be very large, and 
too big to be conveniently portable. 

Having {topped up the wide fucking orifice © 
of a large pair of kitchen bellows, they be- 
ing firft dilated, I could breathe to and fro 

at 


Analyfis of the Air. es, 


at their nofe, theair contained in them for 
3 minutes, without much inconvenience, 
they heaving and falling very eafily by the 
action of refpiration. Some fuch like in- 
ftrument might be of ufe in any cafe where 
a room was filled with {uffocating vapours, - 
where it might be necefflary to enter for 
a few minutes, in order to remove the 
caufe of them, or to fetch any perfon or 
thing out ; as in the cafe when honfes are 
firft beginning to fire, in the chymifts ela- 
boratories; and in many other cafes where 
places were filled with noxious deadly va- 
pours, as inthe cafe of ftink pots thrown 
into fhips, in mines, gre. 

But in every apparatus of this kind great 
care muft always be taken, that the inf{pira- 
tion be as free as poffible, by making large 
paffages and valves to play moft eafily. For 
tho’ aman by a peculiar a¢tion of his mouth 
and tongue may fuck Mercury 22 inches, 
and fome men 27 or 28 high; yet I have 
found by experience, that by the bare in. 
fpiring ation of the Diaphragm, and dilat- 
ing Thorax, 1 could fcarcely raife the Mer- 
eury 2 inches. At which time the Dyza- 
phragm muftact with a force equal to the 

weight 


268 Analyfis of the Air. 


weight of a Cylinder of Mercury, whofe bafe 
is commenfurate to the area of the ‘Dia- 
phragm, and its height 2 inches, whereby the 
Diaphragm mut at that time fuftain a 
weight equalto many pounds. Neither are 
its counter-acting mufcles, thofe of the 4bdo- 
men, able to exert a greater force. 

For notwithftanding a man, by ftrongly 
comprefling a quantity of air included in his 
mouth, may raife a column of Mercury in 
an inverted fyphon, to 5 or 7 inches height, 
yet he cannot with his utmoft ftrainings 
raife it above 2 inches, by the contracting 
force of the mufcles of the Abdomen; 
whence we fee that our loudeft vociferations 
are made with aforceof air nogreater than 
this. So that any fmall impediment in 
breathing will haften the {uffocation, which 
confifts chiefly in the falling flat of the 
lungs, occafioned by the grofinefs of the 
particles of a thick noxious air, they being 
in that floating ftate moft eafily attratted by 
each other: As we find in the foregoing 
experiments that fulphur and the elaftick 
repelling particles of air do: And confe- 
quently unelaftick, fulphureous, faline and 
other floating particles will moft eafily 

-_coalefee, 


me 


/ 


Analyfis of the Air. 269 


coalefce, whereby they are rendred too grofs 
to enter the minute velicles; which are alfo 
much contracted, as well by the lofs of the 
elafticity of the contained air, as by the con- 
traction occafioned by the flimulating, acid, 
fulphureous vapours. And ’tis not impro- 
bable that one great defign of nature, in the 
firucture of this important and wonderful 
vifcus, was to frame its veficles fo very 
minute, thereby effectually to hinder the 
ingrefs of grofs feculent particles, which 
might be injurious to the animal oeconomy. 
This quality of falts ftrongly to attraé 
fulphureous, acid and other noxious particles, 
might make them very beneficial to man- 
kind in many other refpects. Thus in fe- 
yeral unwholfome trades, as the fmelters 
of metals, the cerufs-makers, the plumbers, 
gre. it might not unlikely be of good {exvice 
to them in preferving them in fome meafure 
at leaft, from the noxious fumes of the ma- 
terials they deal in, which by many of the 
foregoing experiments we are affured muft 
needs coalefce with the elaftick air in the 
Jungs, and be lodged there; to prevent 
which inconvenience the workmen might; 
while they are at work, make ufe of pretty 
broad 


270 Analyfis of the fur. 


broad mufflers, filled with 2,4, or more 
Diaphragms of flannel or cloth dipped in — 
a folution of Sa/ Tartar, or Pot-afb, or Sea 
Salt and then dryed. 

The like mufflers might alfo be of fervice 
in many cafes where perfons may have urgent 
occafion to go fora fhort time into an in- 
fectious air: Which mufflers might, by an 
eafy contrivance, be fo made as-to draw 
in breath thro’ the Dzaphragms, and to 
breathe it out by another vent. 

In thefe andthe like cafes this kind of 
mufflers may be very ferviceable; but in 
the cafe of the damps of mines they are by ~ 
mo means to be depended on, becaufe they 
are not a fufficient fcreen from fo very 


noxious vapours. 


EXPERIMENT CXVIL. 


We have from the following Experiment 
a good hint, to make thefe Salts of fervice 
tousin fome other refpetts, oc. 

i feta lighted Candle under a large re- 
ceiver (Fig. 35.) which contained about 
4 gallons, it continued burning for 3 +-¢ 


minutes, in which time it had abforbed about 
a 


 Analyfis of the Air. 271 
= oe of air. I then filled the receiver 
with frefh air, by pouring it full ‘of water, 
and then emptying of it; when having wiped 

it dry, I lined “all the infide with a 
piece of flannel dipped in a lixivium of Sa/ 
Tartar, and then dryed; the flannel was ex- 
tended with little hoops made of pliant twigs. 
The Candle continued burning under the re- 
ceiver thus prepared 3 -+- 3 minutes, yet it 
abforbed but two thirds of the quantity of 
air, wjfich it abforbed when there was no 

flangic in the receiver. 
The reafon of which difference in the 
, quantities of elaftick air abforbed, appears 
"from Experiment 106. where leaft air was 
always abforbed in leaft receivers, which 
was the prefent cafe: For the flannel lining, 
befides the {pace it took up, could not be fo 
clofely adapted, but that there was left a full 
third of the capacity of the receiver, between 
the lining and the receiver: So that the 
Candle burnt in a bulk of air lefS by one 
third thanthe whole capacity ofthe receiver; 
for which reafon lefs air alfo was abforbed. 
And we may further obferve, that fince 
the Candle continued burning as long in a 
quantity of alr, equal but to two thirds of 
the. 


272  Mnalyfis of the Abr. 


the receiver, as in the whole air of the re- 
ceiver ; this muft be owing to the Sal Tartar 
in the flannel lining, which muft needs have 
abforbed one third of the fuliginous vapours, 
which arofe from the burning Candle. Hence 
we may not unreafonably conclude, that the 
pernicious quality of noxious vapours in the 
air might, in many cafes, be much rebated 
and qualified by the ftrongly abforbing power 
of Salts. , 

Whether Saits will have a good effe& in 
all, or any of thefe cafes, experience will 
beft inform us. There is certainly fufficient 
ground, from many of the foregoing Experi- 
ments, to encourage us to make the tryal, 
and they may at leaft be hints for further im- | 
provements. | 

We fee that Candles and burning Brim- | 

ffone do in a much greater degree deftroy 
the elafticity of the air, than the breath of 
Animals; becaufe their vapours are more. 
plentiful, and abound more with acid fal- 
phureous particles, and are alfo lefs diluted 
with watry vapours, than the breath of Ant- 
mals is: In which alfo there are fulphureous 
patticles, tho’ in lefler degrees, for the ani- 
mial fluids, as well as folids, are ftored with 

them: 


Analyft s of the Aur. 273 
them: And therefore the Candle and Matches 
ceafing to burn, foon after they are confined 
in a {mall quantity of air, feems not to be 
owing to their having rendred that air effete, 
by having confumed its vevefying fpirit ; but 
fhould rather be owing to the great quantity 
of acid fuliginous vapours, with which that 
air is charged, which deftroy a good deal of 
its clafticity, and very much clog and retard 
the claftick motion of the remainder. 

And the effect the half exhaufting of a 
receiver has upon the elafticity of the re- 
maining half of the air, feems to be the rea- 
fon why the flame of a Candle does not 
continue burning, till it has filled the recei- 
ver it ftands in with fumes, but goes out 
the quicker, the fooner the air is drawn out 
to that degree ; which feems therefore to be 
owing to this, that an dir rarified to double 
its fpace, will not expand fo briskly with 
the warmth of flame, as a more condenfed 
air will da: And confequently ation and 
re-action being reciprocal, will not give fo 
brisk a motion to the flame, which fubfifts 
by a conftant fucceffion of freth air, to fup- 
ply the place of the either abforbed, or much 
dilated air, which is continually flying off. 

T And 


274  Analy/is of the Air. 


And the quicker the fucceflion of this frefh 
air is, by blowing, the more vigoroufly does 
a fire burn. 
If the continuance of the burning of the 
Candle be wholly owing to the vivsfying 
fpirit, then fuppofing in the cafe of a recei- 
ver, capacious enough for a Candle to burn 
a minute in it, that half the vzvzfying /pirit 
be drawn out with half the air, in ten fe- 
conds of time; then the Candle fhould not 
go out at the end of thofe ro feconds, but 
burn 20 feconds more, which it does not; 
therefore the burning of the Candle is not 
wholly owing to the vivifying fpirit, but 
to certain degrees of the air’s elafticity. | 
When a wholly exhaufted receiver was by 
means of a burning glafs firft filled with the 
fumes of brown paper with N7¢re, and then 
filled with frefh air, the nitrous paper upon 
applying the burning glafs did freely deto- 
nize; and a Candle put into a like air, burnt 
for 28”; which in a frefh air, in the famey 
receiver, burnt but 43 “; but when the fame 
receiver with air in it, was filled full of 
fumes of detonized Nztre, and a Candle 
placed in that thick vapour, it went out 
inftantly, for a Candle will not burn, nor 
the 


Ainalyfis of the Ar. 275 
the Nitre detonize in a very rare, nor a 
very thick air; whence the reafon why the 
Nitre detonized, and the Candle burnt, 
when placed in the receiver, after frefh air 
was let in upon the fumes which were 
made 7” vacuo, was that thofe fumes were 
much difperfed and condenfed on the fides 
of the glafs, upon the rufhing in of the 
frefh air, for the fumes were then much 
more rare aud tranfparent, than before the 
air was let in. 

That a Fire which is fupplied with a hot 
air will not burn fo briskly as a Fire which 
is fed by a cool air is evident from hence ; 
that when the Suz fhines on a Fire, and there- 
by too much rarifies the ambient air, that 
Fire will not burn well, nor will a fmall 
Fire burn fo well near a large one as at 
fome diftance from it. And e confra, it isa 
common obfervation, that in very cold frofty 
weather Fires burn moft briskly ; the reafon 
of which f{eems to be this, that the elaftick 
expanfion of the cold condenfed air to a 
rarified ftate, when it enters the Fire,.ismuch 
brisker than that of an air already rarified in 
a good meafure by heat, before it enters the 
Fire ; and confequently a continued fuc- 

T 2 ceflion 


276 Analy fis of the Aur. 

ceffion of cold air muft give a brisker motion 
to the Fire, than the like fucceflion of hot 
air: And fuch colder and more condenfed 
air will alfo (as Sir I/aac Newton obferves, 
qu. ir.) by its greater weight check the 
afcent of the vapours and exhalations of the 
Fire, more than a warmer lighter air. So 
that between the attion and re-action of the 
air and f{ulphur of the fuel, and of the colder 
and denfer cirumambient air, which rarifies 
much upon entering the Fire, the heat of 
the Fire is greatly increafed. 

This continual fupply of frefh air to the 
fuel feems hence alfo very necefflary for 
Keeping a Fire alive; becaufe it is found, that 
a Brimfione Match will not take Fire in 
avacuum, but only boil and {moak; nor will 
Nitre incorporated into Brown Paper then 
detonize, except here and there a fingle grain, 
that part only of the Paper turning black 
on which the focus of the burning glafs falls; 
nor would they burn when a half exhaufted 
receiver with fumes in it was filled with 
frefh air added to thofe fumes: In which 
cafe it is plain, that a good quantity of the 
fuppofed vzvifying fpirit of air muft enter 
the receiver with the frefh air, and confe- 

quently 


Analyfis of the Air. 277 
quently thofe f{ubftances fhould take fire, 
and burn fora fhort time at leaft, which yet 
they did not. 

And that the air’s clafticity conduces much 
to the intenfe burning of Fires, feems evident 
from hence; that Spirzt of Nitre (which 
by Experiment 75 has but little elaftick air 
init) when poured upon live Coa/s, ex- 
tinguifhes inftead of invigorating them: 
But Sprit of Nitre, when by being mixt with 
Sal Tartar itis reduced to Nitre, will then 
flame, when thrown into the Fire, vzz. be- 
caufe Sal Tartar abounds with elaftick aereal 
particles, as appears by Experiment 74, where 
224 times its bulk of air arofe from a quan- 
tity of Sal Tartar. And for the fame reafon 
it is that common N7tre, when thrown into 
the Fire, flames, tho’ its Sprit will not, vzz. 
becaufe there is much elaftick air in it, as 
appears from Experiment 72, as well as from © 
the great quantity of it, generated in the 
firing of Gun-powder. | 

The reafon why Sa/ Fartar, when thrown 
on live Coals, does not detonize and flame 
like Notre, (notwithftanding by Experiment 
74. plenty of elaftick particles did arife from 
it) is this, wz. becaufe by the fame Experi- 

T 3 ment, 


278 Analysis of the Air. 

ment, compared with Experiment 72, it is 
found, that amuch more intenfe degree of 
heat was required to extricate the elaftick 
air from Sa/ Tartar, the more fix’d body, 
than from N7tre; the great degree of Fire 
vith which Sf Tartar is made, rendering 
the cohefion of its parts more firm: For it is” 
well known that fire, inftead of difuniting, 
does in many cafes infeparably unite the parts 
of bodies: And hence it is that Pulvss 
fulminans, which isa mixture of Sa/ Tartar, 
Nitre and fulphur, gives a greater explofion 
than Gun-powder: Becaufe the particles of 
the Sa/ Tartar, cohering more firmly in a 
fix’d ftate than thofe of Nitre, they are there- 
fore thrown off with a greater repulfive 
force, by the united action and re-ation of 


all thofe ingredients armed each with its 
acid Sporit. 


Bae RIMENT CXVIIL 


Which acid Spérits confifting of a volatile 
acid Sa/¢ diluted in phlegm do contribute 
much tothe force of explofion ; for when heat- 
€d to a certain degree, they make a great exe 
plofion, like water heated to the fame degree, 

as 


Analyfis of the Aur. 279 
asI found by dropping a few drops of Spzrst 
of Nitre, oil of Vitriol, water, and fpittle 
on an Anvil; and then holding over thofe 
drops a piece of ron which had a white heat 
given it; upon firiking down the hot Iron 
with a large Hammer, there was a very great 
explofion made by each of thofe liquors: 
But frothy fpittle, which had air init, made a 
louder expiofion than water; which fhews 
that the vaft explofion of the Notre and Sal 
Tartar, which are compofed of elaftick air 
particles, included in an acid Spzrzt, is owing 
to their united force. 

We may therefore from what has been 
faid, with good reafon conclude, that Fire is 
chiefly invigorated by the action and re-ac- . 
tion of the acid fulphureous particles of the 
fuel, and the elaftick ones which arife and en- 
ter the Fire, either from the fuelin which 
they abound, or from the circumambient 
air: For by Experiment 103, and many 
others, acid fulphureous particles a@t vi- 
goroufly on air; and finceadtion and re-action 
are reciprocal, fo muft air on fulphur; and 
there is, we fee, plenty ofboth, as well in 
mineral as vegetable fuel, as alfo in animal 
fubftances, for which reafon they will burn. 
rt 4 But 


280 Analyfis of the Ahir. 


But when the acid fulphur, which we fee 
acts vigoroufly on air, is taken out of any 
fuel, the remaining Sa/t, Water and Earth 
are not inflammable, but on the contrary 
quench and retard fire; and as air cannot 
produce fire without fulphur, fo neither can 
fulphur burn without air: Thus Charcoal 
heated to anintenfe degree for many hours 
in a clofe veffel will not burnasin the open 
air, it will only be red hot all the time like a 
mats of Gold without wafting: But no 
fooner is it expofed to the free air, but the 
fulphur, by the violent action and re-action 
between that andthe elaftick air, is {oon fe- 
parated and carried off from the Salt and 
Earth, which are thereby reduced from a 
folid and hard to a foft impalpable calx. 

And when a Brimftone Match which was — 
placed in an exhaufted receiver was heated 
by the focus of a burning glafs fo asto melt 
the Brimftone, yet it did not kindle into 
fire nor confume, notwithftanding the 
ftrength and vigour of the action and re-aGtion 
that is obferved between light and fulphure- 
ous bodies. Which is afligned by the illuf 
trious Sir Ifzac Newton, as “ one reafon 
‘< why fulphureous bodies take fire more 

« readily, 


&&> 


Analyfis of the Au. 281 


readily, and burn more vehemently than 


“ other bodies do, qu. 7. What his notion 
of fire and flame is, he gives us in qu. 
9.and 10, qu. 9. “Is not fire a body heated 
<¢ fo hot as to emit light copioufly? For 


€¢ 


€ 


~ 


¢¢ 


a4 


o 


€ 


cc 


€£ 


what elfe is a red hot frog than fire? And 
what elfe is a burning Coa/, than red hor 
Wood? Qu. 10. Is not flame a vapour, 
fume or exhalation heated red hot, that is, 
{o hot as to flame? For bodiesdo not flame 
without emitting a copious fume, and 
this fume burns in the flame.——Some 
bodiesheated by motion or fermentation, 
if the heat grow intenfe, fume copioufly, 
and ifthe heat be great enough, the fumes 
will fhine and become flame: Metalsin 
fufion do not flame for want of a copious 
fume,except {pelter which fumes-copioufly, 
and thereby flames: All flaming bodies, 
as Oil, Tallow, Wax, Wood, foflil Coals, - 
Pitch, Sulphur, by flaming wafte and vanifh 
into burning {moak; which {moak, if the 
flame be put out, is very thick and vifible, 
and fometimes {mells ftrongly, but in 
flame lofes its fmell by burning; and ac- 
cording to the nature of the {moak the 


flame is of feveral colours, as that of 
* fulphur, 


282. Analyfis of the Air. 


“ 
~ 


Aw 
n~ 


cé 
ee 


€¢ 


fulphur, blue; that of copper opened with 
{ublimate, green; that of tallow, yellow; 
that of camphire, white; fmoak paffing 
thro’ flame cannot but grow red hot, and 
red hot {moak can have no other appea- 
rance than that of flame.” 

But Mr. Lemery the younger fays, “ that 
the matter of light produces fulphur, be- 
ing mixt with compofitions of falt, earth 
and water, and that all inflammable mat- 
ters are fuch only in vertue of the par- 
ticles of fire which they contain. For in 
the Analyfis, fuch inflammable bodies 
produce falt, earth, water, and a certain 
fubtle matter, which paffes thro’ the clofeft 
veffels, fo that what pains foever the ar- 
tift ufes, not to lofe any thing, he ftill 
finds a confiderable diminution of weight. 
‘¢ Now thefe principles of falt, earth and 
water are inactive bodies, and of no ufe, 
in the compofition of inflammable bo- 
dies, but to detain and arreft the parti- 
cles of fire, which are the real and only 
matter of flame. 

<< It appears therefore to be the matter 
of flame that the artift lofes in decom- 
pounding inflammable bodies, Mem. de 
L Acad. Anno 1713.” But 


Analyfis of the Aur. 28 3 


But by many of the preceding Experi- 


ments, it is evident, that the matter loft 


in the Analyfis of thefe bodies was elaf- 
fick. aig, «4, very. achive principle, in fire, 
but not an elemental fire, as he fuppofes, 

<< Mr. Geoffrey compounded fulphur of 
< acid Salt, Bitumen, a little Earth and o7/ 
< of Tartar.” Mem. del Acad. Anno 1703. 
In which oi/ of Tartar there is much air by 
Experiment 74, which air was doubtlefs by 
its elafticity very inftrumental in the inflam- 
mability of this artificial fulphur. 

Iffire was a particular diftinG kind of body 
inherent in fulphur, as Mr. Homberg, Mr. 
Lemery, and fome others imagin, then fuch 
fulphureous bodies, when ignited, fhould 
rarify and dilate all the circumambient air ; 
whereas it is found by many of the preced- 
ing Experiments, that acid fulphureous fuel 
conftantly attracts and condenfes a confide- 
rable part of the circumambient claftick air. 
An argument, that there is no fire endued 
with peculiar properties inherent in fulphur, 
and alfo that the heat of fire confifts prin- 
cipally in the brisk vibrating aG@tion and re- 
action, between the elaftick repelling air, 
and the ftrongly attracting acid fulphur,which 

fulphur 


284 | Analysis of the Air. 


falphur in its Analyfis is found to contain 
an inflammable oil, an acid Salt, avery fixt 
earth, and a little metal. 


Now fulphur and air are fuppofed to be 


acted by that ethereal medium, “ by which 


é¢ 


ce 


€é 


€é 


€ 


~ 


ee 


ce 


€€ 


(the great Sir L/aac Newton {uppofes ) 
light is refraéted and reflected, and by 
whofe vibrations light communicates heat 
to bodies, and is put into fits of eafic 
reflection, and eafie tranf{miflion: And 
do not the vibrations of this medium 
in hot bodies contribute to the intenfe- 
nefs and duration of their heat? And do 
not hot bodies communicate their heat 
to contiguous cold ones, by the vibra- 


‘tions of this medium, propagated from 


them into cold ones? And is not this 
medium exceedingly more rare and fub- 
tle than the air, and exceedingly more 
elaftick and active? And does it not rea- 
dily pervade all bodies, Optick qu. 18. 


‘ The elaftick force of this medium, in 


proportion to its denfiry, muft be above 
499,000,000,000 times greater than the 
elaftick force of the air is, in propor- 


tion to its ‘denfity, ibid, qu. 21.” A force 
ba 
Sufficient to give ‘an intenfe degree of heat, 


3 ie efpecially 


Analyfis of the Aur. rte 


efpecially when its elafticity is much increaf- 
ed by the brisk action and re-action of par- 
ticles of the fuel and ambient air. 

From this manifeft attraction, action and 
reaction, that there is between the acid, ful- 
phureous and elaftick aereal particles, we 
may not unreafonably conclude, that what 
we call the fire particles in Lime, and feve- 
ral other bodies, which have undergone the 
fire, are the fulphurcous and elaftick parti- 
cles of the fire fixt in the Lime ; which par- 
ticles, while the Lime was hot, were in a 
very active, attraéting and repelling ftate ; 
and being, as the Lime cooled, detained in 
the folid body of the Lime, at the feveral 
attraGting and repelling diftances, they then 
happened to be at, they muft neceflarily 
continue in that fixt ftate, notwithftanding 
the ethereal medium, which is fuppofed 
freely to pervade all bodies, be continu- 


ally folliciting them to action: But when > 


the folid fubftance of the Lime is diffolved, 
by the affufion of fome liquid, being there- 
by emancipated, they are again at liberty 
to be influenced and agitated by each other's 
attraction and repulfion, upon which a vio- 
lent ebullition enfues; from the adtion and 

| | re-action 


286 Analyfis of the Aur, 


re-action of thefe particles, which ebullition 
ceafes not, till one part of the elaftick par- 
ticles are {ubdued and fix’d by the ftrong 
attration of the fulphur, and the other part 
is got beyond the fphere of its attraction, 
and thereby thrown off into true permanent 
air: And that this is a probable folution 
of the matter, there is good reafon to con- 
clude, from the frequent inftances we have 
in many of the foregoing Experiments, that 
plenty of elaftick air is at the fame time 
both generated and abforbed by the fame 
fermenting mixture ; fome of which were 
obferved to generate more air than they ab- 
forbed, and others e contra abforbed more 
than they generated, which was the cafe 


of Lime. 


EXPERIMENT CXIX, 


And that the fulphureous and aereal par- 
ticles of the fire are lodged in many of thofe 
bedies which it a&s upon, and thereby con- 
fiderably augments their weight, is very evi- 
dent in Minium or Red Lead, which is ob- 
ferved to increafe in weight about 3, part 
in undergoing the ation of the fire. The 

| acquired 


Analyfis of the Aur. 28% 


acquired rednefs of the Minium, indicating 
the addition of plenty of fulphur in the o- 
peration: For fulphur, as it is found to a& 
moft vigoroufly on light, fo it is apt to 
refle& the ftrongeft, uzz. the red rays; and 
that there is good ftore of air added to the 
Minium, I found by diftilling firft 1922 
grains of Lead, from whence I obtained 
only feven cubick inches of air; but from 
1922 grains, which was a cubick inch of 
Red Lead, there arofe in the like {pace of 
time 34 cubick inches of air; a great part 
of which air was doubtlefs abforbed by the 
fulphureous particles of the fuel, in the 
reverberatory furnace, in which the Mi- 
nium was made; for by Experiment 106. 
the more the fumes of a fire are confined, 
the greater quantity of elaftick air they ab. 
forb. : 
It was therefore doubtlefs this quantity 
of air in the Minium which burft the her- 
metically fealed glafles of the excellent Mr. 
Boyle, when he heated the Minium con- 
tained in them by a burning glafs; but 
the pious and learned Dr. Neeuwentyt at- 
tributes this effect wholly to the expan- 
fion of the fire particles lodged in the Mi- 
3 nlum, 


288 Analyfis of the fur. 

nium, ‘ he fuppofing fire to be a parti- 
<< cular fluid matter, which maintains its 
“ owneflence, and figure, remaining always 
“ fire, tho’ not always burning. Religious 
«« Philofopher, p. 310.” 

To the fame caufe alfo, exclufive of the 
air, he attributes the vaft expanfion of a 
mixture of compound Aqua-fortzs and oil of 
Carraways, whereas by Exper. 62. there is 
a great quantity of air in all o/s. And by 
pouring fome compound Aqua-fortis on oil 
of Cloves, the mixture expanded into a 
fpace equal to 720 times the bulk of the 
oil, that part of the expanfion, which was 
owing to the watry part of the oz/ and /pi- 
rit was foon contracted ; whereas the other 
part of the expanfion, which was owing to 
the elaftick air of the o#/, was not all con- 
tracted, till the next day, by which time 
the fulphureous fumes had reforbed it. 

The learned Boerhaave would have it, 
that putrefaction is the effe& of inherent 
fire. He fays, ‘ that vegetables alone are 
‘the fubje&t of fermentation, but both 
‘« vegetables and animals of putrefaétion ; 
‘¢ which operations he attributes to very 
‘ different caufes, the immediate caufe of 

fermen- 


a 


{am 


Analy fis of the Aur: 285 
é« ferrhentation is (he fays) the motion of 
*¢ the air intercepted between the fluid and 
*¢ vifcous parts of the fermenting liquor 5 
<‘ but the caufe of putrefaétion is fire it 
<< felf, collected or included within the 
*« putrefying fubje&, Proce/s. 77.” Butl do 
not fee why thefe may not reafonably e- 
nough be looked upon as the effects of dif. 
ferent degrees of fermentation ; nutrition 
being the genuine effet of that degree of 
it, in which the fum of the attraG@ing ac- 
tion of the particles is much fuperior to 
the fum of their repulfive power: But when 
their repelling force far exceeds their attrac- 
tive, then the component parts of vegeta 
blesare diffolved. Which diffolving fubftances, 
when they are diluted with much hquor, do 
not acquire a great heat in the diffolution, 
the brisknefs of the inteftine motion being 
checked by the liquor: But when they are 
only moift, like green and damp Hay, in a 
Jarge heap, then they acquire a violent heat, 
fo as to fcorch, burn and flame, whereby 
the union of their conftituent parts being 
more throughly diffolved, they will neither 
produce a vinous, nor an acid fpirit: Which 
great degree of {olution may well be effected 


U bY, 


290 Analy/is of the Ai. 
by this means, without the action ofa fire; 
fuppofed to be included within the putre- 
fying fubje@. Wherefore according to the 
old Axiom, Lutia non funt temere neque 
abfque neceffitate multiplicanda. 

If the notion of fermentation be reftrained 
to the greater repelling degrees of fermen- 
tation, in which denfe it has commonly 
been underftood; thenit is as certain, that 
the juices of vegetables and animals do not 
ferment in a healthy ftate, asitis, that they 
do not at the fame time coalefce and difu- 
nite: But if fermentation be taken in a 
larger fenfe, for any the {malleft to the grea- 
teft degree of inteftine motion of the par- 
ticles of a fluid, then all vegetable and ani- 
mal fluids are in a natural ftate, in fome 
degree of ferment, for they abound both with 
elaftick and fulphureous particles: And it 
may with as much reafon be argued, that 
there is no degree of warmth in animals 
and vegetables, becaufe a great degree of — 
heat will caufe a folution of continuity, as _— 
to fay, there is no degree of ferment in the 
fluids of thofe bodies, becaufe a great repel- 
ling degree of ferment will moft certainly 
diffolve them. | J 

: | That 


Analyfis of the Aur. 291 
That illuftrious Philofopher Sir I/aac New- 


tov, in his thoughts about the nature of a- 
cids, gives this rational account of the na- 
ture of fermentation. ‘¢ The particles of 


ce 
€¢ 
é¢ 
Ce 
GE 
i 4 
é¢ 
c¢ 
(49 


ce 


acids——-are endewed with a great attractive 
force, in which force their adtivity con- 
fits——By this attraGtive force they get 
about the particles of bodies, whether 
they be of a metallick or ftony nature, 
and adhere to them moft clofely on all 
fides, fo that they can fcarce be feparated 
from them, by diftillation or fublimation ; 
when they are attracted and gathered to- 


‘gether about the particles of bodies, they 


raife, disjoyn, and fhake them one from 
another, that is, they diflolve thofe bodies. 
“ By their attractive force alfo, by which 
they rufh towards the particles of bodies, 
they move the fluid, and excite heat, and 
they fhake afunder fome particles, fo much 
as to turn them into air, and generate 
bubbles : And thisis the reafon of diffo- 
lution, and all violent fermentation. Hare 
ris Lexicon Tech, Vol. U1. introduétion.” 

Thus we have from thefe Experiments 


many manifeft proofs of confiderable quan- 
tities Of true permanent air, which are by 


U2 means 


292 Analy fis of the Aur. 


means of fire and fermentation raifed from, 
and abforbed by animal, vegetable and mi- 
nieral fubftances. 

That this air confifts of particles which are 
in a very active ftate, repelling each other 
with force, and thereby conftituting the fame 
kind of elaftick fluid with common air, is 
plain from its raifing the Mercury in Expe-_ 
riment 88 and 89, and from its continu- 
ing in that elaftick ftate for many months, 
tho’ cooled by fevere frofts ; whereas watry 
vapours, tho’ they expand much with hear, 
yet are found immediately to condenfe in- 
to their firft dimenfions when cold. 

The air generated by fire was not, in 
many inftances, feparated without great vio- 
Tenice. from the fix’d ‘bodies; “in weichae 
Was incorporated; as in the cafe of Nitre, 
Tartar, SalTartar and Copperas: whence it 
fhould feem, that the air generated from 
thefe Salts, may probably be very inftru- 
mental in the union of Salts, as well as that 
central, denfer and compacter particle of 
earth, which, Sir L/aac Newton obferves, 
does by its attraction make the watry acid - 
flow round it, for compofing the particles of 
Salt. qd. 31. For fince upon the diffolution 

of 


Analyfis of the Air. 293 


of the conftituent parts of Salt by fire, it is 
found, that upon feparating and volatilizing 
the acid f{pirit, the air particles do in great 
abundance rufh forth from a fixt to a re- 
pelling elaftick ftate ; it muft needs be, that 
thefe particles did in their fixt ftate ftrongly 
attract the acid fpirits, as well as the ful- 
phureous earthy parts of the Salt; for the 
moft ftrongly repelling and elaftick parti- 
cles are obferved, in a fixt ftate, to be the 
moft ftrongly attracting. 

But the watry acid, which when feparated 
from Salt by the action of fire, makes a very 
corrofive fuming {pirit, will not make elaf- 
tick air, tho’ its parts were put into a brisk 
motion by fire in Exper. 75. And the event 
was the fame with feveral other volatile | 
fubftances, as volatile Salt of Sal Ammoni- 
ac, Camphire and Brandy, which tho’ di- 
tilled over with a confiderable heat, yet 
generated no elaftick air, in Exper. 52, 61) 
66. Whence ’tis plain, the acid vapours in 
the air only float in it like the watry va- 
pours; and when ftrongly attracted by the 
elaftick particles of the air, they firmly ad- 
here to them, and make Salts, 


U3 Thus 


294 Analyfis of the Air. 


Thus in Experiment 73 we fee by the vaft 


quantity of air there is found in Tartar, 


that tho’ it contains the other principles of 
vegetables, yet air with fome volatile Salt 


feems to make up a confiderable part of its 


compofition ; which air, when by the aGion 


of fire it is more firmly united with the — 


earth, and acid fulphureous particles, requires 
a more intenfe degree of heat, to extricate 
it from thofe adhering fubftances, as we find 
in the diftillation of Sa/ Tartar, Exper. 74. 
which Air and volatile Salt are moft readily 
feparated by fermentation. 

And by Experiment 72, plenty of air arifes 
alfo from Nitre, at the fame time that the 
acid {pirit is feparated from it by the action 
of fire. 

We find alfo by Experiment 71, that 
fome air is by the fame means obtained 
from common fea Salt, tho’ not in fo great 
plenty, nor fo eafily, as from Tartar and Nz- 
tre, it being a more fixt body, by reafon of 
the fulphur which abounds in it; neither 
is it fo eafily charged in animal bodies, as 
other Salts are, yet fince it fertilizes ground, 
it muft needs be changed by vegetables. 


There 


Analyfis of the Air. 295 

There is good reafon alfo to fufpect, that 
thefe acid fpirits are not wholly free from 
air particles, notwithftanding there were no 
elaftick ones produced, when they were put 
into a brisk motion, by the action of fire in 
Experiment 75. which might be occafioned 
by the great quantity of acid fpirit, in which 
they were involved. For we fee in Expe- 
riment 90, that when the acid fpirit of 
Agua Regia was more ftrongly attracted by 
the diffolying gold, than by the air particles, 
then plenty of air particles, which were 
thus freed from the acid fpirit, did continu- 
ally arife from the Agua Regia, and not 
from the gold, at leaft not from the metal- 
lick particles of the gold, for that lofes no- 
thing of its weight in the folution ; fothat 
if any does arife from the gold, it muft be 
what may be latent in the pores of the gold. 
Whence it is probable, that the air which 
is obtained by the fermenting mixture of 
acid and alkaline fubftances may not arife 
wholly from the diffolved alkaline body, but 
in part alfo from the acid. Thus the great 
quantity of elaftick air, which in Exper. 83. 
is generated from the mixture of Vinegar 
and Oyfterfhell, may as well arife in part 
U 4 from 


196 Aualyfis of the chr. 

from the Tartar, to which Vinegar owes 
its acidity, as from the diffolved Oyfterfhell. 
And what makes it further probable is, that 
the Vinegar lofesits acidity in the ferment, 
chat is its Tartar : for diffolving menftruums 
are generally obferved to be changed in fer- 
mentation, as well as the diflolved body. 

Have we not reafon alfo hence to con- 
clude, that the energy of acid {pirits may in 
fome meafure be owing to the ftrongly at- 
tracting air particles in them;. which adtive 
principles may give an impetus to the acid 
fpicule, as well as the earthy oily matter, 
which is found in thefe acid {pirits? 

There are we fee alfo great ftore of air 
particles found in the Analyfis of the blood, 
which arifes doubtelefs as well form the /erum 
as from the eraffamentum, forall the animal 
fluids and folids have air, and fulphur in 
them: Which ftrongly attraGting principles 
feem to be more intimately united together 
in the more perfe& and elaborate part of it, 
its red globules; fo that we may not unrea- 
fonably conclude, that air isa band of union 
here, as well as in Salts: And accordingly 
we find the greateft plenty of air in the moft 
_ folid parts of the body, where the cohefion 
of 


Analyfis of the Aur. 297 
| pf the parts is the ftrongeft : For by compa. 
‘ring Experiment 49 and 51. we fee that 
‘much more air was found in the diftilla- 
tion of horn than of blood. And the co- 
hefion of animal fubftances was not, as we 
find by the fame Experiment, diffolved even 
in the blood, without confiderable violence — 
of fire ; tho’ it is fometimes done to a fa. 
tal degree in our blood, by that more {ub- 
tile diffolvent fermentation: But we may 
obferve, that volatile Salts, Spirits, and ful- 
phureous Oil, which are at the fame time 
feparated from thefe fubftances, will not 
make elaftick air. 


EXPERIMEN E°CXX. ! 


As elaftick air is thus generated by the 
force of fire, from thefe and many other 
{ubftances ; fo isthe elafticity of the air great- 
ly deftroyed by fulphureous bodies. Sir I/aac 
Newton obferves, “ that as light a&s upon 
“ fulphur, fo fince all action is mutual, ful- 
«< phurs ought to act moft upon light.” And 
the fame may be obferved of air and ful2 
phur; for by Experiment 103; it is found 
that burning {ulphur, which is avery ftrongly 

attracting 


298 Analyfis of the Air. 


attracting fubftance, powerfully attraéts and 
fixes the elaftick particles of air; fo that there 
muft needs be agood quantity of un-elaftick 
air particles in oil and flower of fulphur : 
The firft of which is made by burning ful- 
phur under a bell, the other by fublimation : 
In further confirmation of this it is obferved, 
that Oleum Sulphuris per Campanam is with 
more difficulty made in a dry than a moift 
air; and I have found by Experiment purpofe- 
ly made, that a Candle which burnt 70” ina 
very dry receiver, burnt but 64” in the fame 
receiver, When filled with the fumes of hot 
water; and yet abforbed one fifth part more 
air, than when it burnt longer in the dry air. | 
Sulphur not only abforbs the air when 
burning in a homogeneal mafs, but alfo in 
many fermenting mixtures; and as Sir J/aac 
Newton obferved the attractive and refraétive 
power of bodies to be greater or lefs, as they 
partook more or lef{s of fulphureous oily par- 
ticles; fo there is good reafon from thefe 
Experiments to attribute the fixing of the 
elaftick particles of the air to the ftrong 
attraction of the fulphureous particles with 
which he fays it’s probable that all bodies 
abound moreorlef&, 
or That 


Analyfis of the Air. 199 


That great plenty of air is united with 
fulphur in the oil of vegetables, is evident 
from the quantity of air that arofe from the 
diftillation of oils of Annifeeds and Olives, 
in Experiment 62. When by fermentation 
the conftituent parts of a vegetable are {e- 
parated, part of the air flies off in fermen- 
tation into anelaftick ftate; part unites with 
the effential Salt, Water, Oil and Earth, which | 
conftitute the Tartar which adhere to the 
fides of the veffel; the remainder which 
continues in the fermented liquor, is there, 
fome of it, in a fix’d, and fome in an elaftick 
ftate, which gives brisknefs to the liquor ; 
their expanding bubbles rifing of a very 
vifible fize when the weight of the incum- 
bent air istaken off the liquor ina vacuum, 
And as there was found a greater quantity 

of air in the deer’s horn, than in blood; 
we may alfo obferve it to be in a much 
sreater proportion in the more folid parts of 
vegetables, than in their fluid: For we find 
in Experiment 55. 57. and 60. that near 
one third part of the fubftance of the Peafe, 
heart of Oak and Tobacco, were by the ac- 
tion of fire changed from an un-elaftick 
ftate, to an claftick air; And fince a much 
: greater 


300 Analyfis of the Aur. 


greater proportion of air is found in the 
folid than the fluid parts of bodies; may we 
not with good reafon conclude, that it is very 
inftrumental, as a band of union in thofe 
bodies, ‘* Thofe particles (as Sir Ifaac 
Newton obferves) <* receding from one 
« another with the greateft repulfive force, 
«¢ and being moft difficultly brought together, 
«¢ which upon contact cohere moft ftrongly. 
gu. 31.” And if the attraction of cohefion 
of anun-elaftick air particle be proportion- 
able to its repulfive force in an elaftick ftate ; 
then fince its elaftick force is found to be 
fo vaftly great, fo muft that of its cohefion 
be alfo. Sir Lfaac Newton calculates from 
the infleGtion of the rays of light, that the 
attracting force of particles, near the point of 
contact, is 10000,0000,0000,c000 greater 
than the force of gravity. 
Sulphur in a quiefcent fix’d ftate in a large 

body doesnot abforb the elaftick air, for 
a hard roll of Brimftone does not abforb 
air: But when fome of that Brimftone, by 
being powdered and mixt with filings of 
fron, is {et a fermenting, and thereby reduced 
into very minute particles, whofe attraction 
increafes, as their fize decreafes; then it 

abforbs 


Analyfis of the Air. 301 


abforbs elaftick air vigoroufly : As may be 
feen in many inftances under Experiment 95. 

The Walton mineral, in which there is a 
good quantity of fulphur, did, when Com- 
pound Agua-fortis was pour'd on it, in Ex- 
periment 96, make a confiderable fermen- 
tation, and abforb a great quantity of elaftick 
air: But when the ferment was much in- 
creafed, by adding an equal quantity of 
water to the like mixture, then inftead of 
abforbing 85 cubick inches as before, it. 
generated 80 cubick inches of air: So that 
fermenting mixtures, which have fulphur in 
them, donot always abforb, but fometimes 
generate air: The reafon of which in the 
Experiment now under confideration feems 
to be this, veg. in the firft cafe a good quan- 
tity of elaftick air was generated, by the 
inteftine motion of the fermenting ingre- 
dients; but there arifing thence a thick, acid 
fulphureous fume, this fume abforbed a 
greater quantity of elaftick air than was be- 
fore generated: And we find by Experiment 
103 that the fulphureous particles which fly 
off in the air, do by their attraftion deftroy its 
élafticity ; for in that Experiment burning 
Brimftone greatly deftroyed the air’s elafticity ; 
I which 


_- 


302 Analyfis of the Air. 


which muft be done by the flame, and af 
cending fumes; becaufe in the burning of 
any quantity of Brimftone, the whole mafs 
is ina manner watted, there remaining only 
avery little dry Earth: And therefore the 
abforbed air cannot remain there, but muft 
be abforbed by the afcending fumes which 
then attra&t moft ftrongly, when  re- 
duced ad minima: And ’tis well known | 
that a Candle in burning flies all off into 
flame and vapour, fo that what air it abforbs _ 
muft be by thofe fumes. 


OEXPERIMENT CXXI. 


And further Ihave found that thefe fumes — 
deftroy the air’s elafticity, for many hours © 
after the Brimftone Match, which made | 
them, was taken out of theveffel, sz ag: 
(Fig. 35.) Thofe fumes being firft cooled — 
by immerfing that veffel and its ciftern x x, 
or an inverted wine Flask, full of the fumes, 
under cold water for fome time; then mark- 
ing the furface of the water = 2 I immerfed 
the veflels in warm water: And when all 
was cold again the following day, I found 
agood quantity ofthe air’s elafticity was de- 

ftroyed 


Analyfis of the Aur. 302 
ftroyed by the water's afcending above zz. 
And the event was the fame upon frequent 
repetitions of the fame Experiment. 

But if inftead of the fumes of burning 
Birmftone, I filled a Flask full of fumes from 
the fmoak of wood, after it had done flam- 
ing, then there was but half as much air 
abforbed by thofe fumes, as there was by 
the fumes of Brimftone; vzzg. becaufe 
the {moak of wood was much diluted with 
the watry vapour which afcended with it 
outofthe wood. And this is doubtlefs the 
reafon why the fmoak of wood, tho’ it in- 
commodes the lungs, yet it will not fuffocate | 
like that of Charcoal, which is withal more 
fulphureous, without any mixture of watry 
vapours. 

And that new generated elaftick air is re- 
forbed by thefe fumes, I found by attempting 
to fire a Match of Brimftone with a burn- 
ing glafs, by means of a pretty large piece 
of Brown Paper which had been dipped 
ina ftrong folution of Nitre, and then 
dryed: Which Nitre in detonizing generated 
neartwo quatts of air, which quantity of air, 
and a great deal more, was abforbed, when 
the Brimftone took fire and flamed vigoroufly. 

3 2g 


304 Analy/is of the Aur. 

So that the 85 cubick inches of air, Experi* 
ment 96, which I found upon meafuring was 
-abforbed by the Walton mineral and com- 
pound Aqua-fortis, was the excefs of what 
was abforbed by thofe fumes above what 
was generated by the fermenting mixture. 


And the reafon is the fame in filings of 


Iron and Spirit of Nitre, Experiment 94, 
which alfo abforbed more than they generat- 


ed, whether with or without water: The rea~ 


fon of which will appear prefently. 


Hence alfo we fee the reafon why filings — 


of Iron and compound gua-fortis in the | 


fame 94 Experiment abforbedair ; and why 
when mixed with an equal quantity of water 
it moftly abforbed, but did fometimes gene- 
rate, and then abforb again: And it was the 
fame with Oil of Vitriol, filings of Iron and 
Water, and New-ca/ftle Coal and compound 
Aqua-fortis and others: uzz. At firft, when 
the ferment was brisk, the abforbing fumes 
rofe fafteft, whereby more air was abforbed 


than generated ; but as the ferment abated, to 


fuch a degree as to be able ftill to generate 


elaftick air, but not to fend forth a propor- 


tionable quantity of fumes, in that cafe more 
aix would be generated than abforbed. 


And 


Analyfis of the ftir. ers 


And in Experiment 95, there are feveral 
inftances of the air’s being in like manner 
abforbed in leffer degrees, by other ferment- 
ing mixtures: Asin the mixture of Spirit 
of Harts-horn with filings of Iron, and with 
filings of Copper: And Spirit of Sal 4Am- 
montac with filings of Copper; and alfo 
filings of Iron and Water; powdered Flint 
and Compound Agua-fortis ; powdered Bri- 
ftol Diamond with the {ame liquor. 

It is probable from Experiment 103 and 
106, where it was found that the thicker 
the fuliginous vapours were, the fafter they 
abforbed the air, that ifthe above-mentioned 
fermenting mixtures had not been confined 
in clofe veffels, but in the open air, where 
the vapours would have been le({s denfe, that 
in that cafe much lefs air would have been 
abforbed, perhaps a great deal lefs than was 
generated. 

Inthe fecond cafe of the Wa/ten mineral, 
Experiment 96, when inftead of abforbing, 
it generated air, the parts of the Compound 
Aqua fortis were then more at liberty to 
ac by being diluted with an equal quantity 
of water; whereby the ferment being 
more violent, the particles which conft- 

x . tuted 


306 Mnaly/is of the Air. 


tuted the new claftick air were thereby 
thrown off in greater plenty, and perhaps 
with a greater degree of elafticity, which 
might carry them beyond the fphere of at- 
traction of the fulphureous particles. 

This is further illuftrated by Experiment 
94, where filings of Iron and oil of Vitriol 
alone generated very little; but the like 
quantities of filings of Iron, with an equal 
quantity of water, generated 4.3 cubick inches 
of air; andthe like ingredients, with three 
times that quantity of water, generated 108 
cubick inches. 

And tho’ the quantity of the afcending 
fumes (which was in this cafe of the Walton 
mineral very great) muft needs in their afcent 
abforb a good deal of elaftick air, for they 
will abforb air; yet if where the ferment was 
fo much greater, more elaftick air was ge- 
nerated by the fermenting mixture than was 
abforbed by the afcending fumes; then the 
quantity of new generated air, which I found 
between 2zand aa, (Fig. 35.) when 1 mea- 
fured it, was equal to the excefs of what was 
generated above what was abforbed. 

And probably inthis cafe the air was not 
abforbed fo much in proportion to the denfity 

4 of 


Analyfis of the Aur. 307 


of the fumes asin the firft cafe ; becaufe here 
the fulphureous fumes were much blended 
With watry vapours: For we find in Experi- 
ment 97, that fix times more was wafted in 
fumes inthis cafe than in the other; and there. 
fore probably a good part of the cubick inch of 
water afcended with the vapour, and might 
thereby weaken its abforbing power: For 
watry vapours do not abforb elaftick air 
as the fulphureous ones do; tho’ by Experi- 
ment 120 ,a Candle abforbed more in a damp 
than in a dry air. 

And’tis from thefe diluting watry vapours 
that filingsof Iron with Spirit of Nitre and 
Water, abforbed lefs than with Spirit of Nitre 
alone, for in both cafes it abforbs more than 
it generates. | 

Thus alfo oil of Vitriol and Chalk ge- 
nerate air, their fume being {mall, and that 
much diluted with the watry vapours in the 
Chalk. 

But Lime with oil of Vitriol, or White- 
Wine Vinegar or Water, make a confiderable 
fume, and abforb good quantities of air: 
Lime alone left to flaken gradually, as it 
makes no fume, fo it abforbs no air. 

We fee in Experiment 92, where the fer- 
XK 2 ment 


308 Analy fis of the Aur. 


ment was not very fudden nor violent, nor 
the quantity of abforbing fumes large, that 
the Antimony and Agua-fortis generated a 
quantity of air equal to 520 times the bulk 
of the Antimony ; thus alfo in the mixture 
of Aqua-regia and Antimony, in Experiment 
91, while at firftthe ferment was fmall, then 
air was generated; but when with the increaf- 
ing ferment plenty of fumes arofe, then there 
was a change from a generating to an abforb- 
ing ftate. 

Since we find fuch great quantities of 
elaftick air generated in {olution of animal 
and vegetable fubftances; it muft need sbe 
that a good deal does conftantly arife, from 
the diffolving of thefe alimentsin the ftomach 
and bowels, which diflolution it greatly pro- 
motes: Some of which may very probably 
be re-forbed again, by the fumes which arife 
with them; for we fee in Experiment 83 
that Oyfter-fhell and Vinegar, Oyfter-fhell 
and Rennet, Oyfter-fhell and Orange juice, 
Rennet alone, Rennet and Bread, firft generat- 
ed andthen abforbed air; but Oyfter-fhell with 
fome of the liquor of a Calve’s ftomach which 
had fed much upon Hay, did not generate air ; 
and it was the fame with Oyfter-fhell and 

Ox 


Analyfis of the Air. 309 
Ox gall, and fpittle, and urine; Oyfter-fhell 
and Milk generated a little air, but Limon 
juice and Milk did at the fame time abforb a 
little: Thus we fee that the variety of mix- 
tures in the ftomach appear fometimes to 
generate, and fometimes to abforb air ; that 
is, there is fometimes more generated than 
abforbed, and fometimes an equal quantity, 
and fometimes lefs according to the propor- 
tion the generating power of the diffolving 
aliments bears to the abforbing power of the 
fumes which arife from them. In atrue kindly 
digeftion, the generating power exceeds the 
abforbing power but alittle : But whenever 
the digeftion deviates in fome degree from 
this natural ftate, to generate a greater pro- 
portion of elaftick air, then are we trou- 
bled more or lefs with diftending Filatus’s 
I had intended to make thefe and many more 
Experiments relating tothe nature of digef 
tion in a warmth equal tothat ofthe ftomach, 
but have been hitherto prevented by purfu- 
ing other Experiments. 

Thus we fee that all thefe mixtures do 
in fermentation generate elaftick air, bur 
thofe which emit thick fumes, charged with 
fulphur, rceforb more than was generated 

7 ee 3 in 


310 Analy/is of the “ur. 


in proportion to the fulphureoufnefs and 
thicknefs of thofe fumes. 

I have alfo fhewn in many of the fore 
going Experiments, that plenty of true per- 
manent elaftick air is generated from the 
fermenting mixtures of acid and alkaline fub- 
ftances, and efpecially from the fermenta- 
tion and diffolution of animal and vegeta- 
ble bodies: Into whofe fubftances we fee it 
is ina great proportion intimately and firmly 
incorporated; and confequently, great quan- 
tities of elaftick air muft be continually ex- 
pended in their produdtion, part of which 
does we fee refume its elaftick quality, when 
briskly thrown off from thofe bodies by fer- 
mentation, in the diffolution of their texture. 
But part may probably never regain its elaf- 
ticity, or at leaft not in many centuries, that 
efpecially which is incorporated into the 
more durable parts of animals and ve- 
eetables. However we may with pleafure 
fee what immenfe treafures of this noble 
and important element, endued with a 
moft active principle, the all- wife Providence 
of the great Author of nature has provided ; 
the conftant wafte of it being abundantly 
fupplyed by heat and fermentation from in- 

numerable 


Analyfis of the Air. Bag 


numerable denfe bodies ; and that probably 
from many of thofe bodies, which when 
they had their afcending fumes confined in 
my Glaffes, abforbed more air than they 
generated, but would in a more free, open 
{pace gencrate more than they abforbed. 

I made fome attempts both by fire, and | 
alfo by fermenting and abforbing mixtures, 
to try if I could deprive all the particles of 
any quantity of elaftick air of their eclafticity, 
but I could not effe& it: There is therefore 
no dire& proof from any of thefe Experi- 
ments, that all the elaftick air may be ab- 
forbed, tho’ tis very probable it may, fince 
we find it is in fuch great plenty generated 
and abforbed; it may well therefore be 
all abforbed and changed from an elaf- 
tick to a fixt ftate: For as Sir Isaac New- 
TON obferves of light, “ that nothing more 
€ is requifite for producing all the variety of 
“ colours, and degrees of refrangibility, than 
«¢ that the raysof light be bodies of different 
“ fizes; the lcaft of which may make the | 
“ weakeft and darkeft of the colours, and 
“< be more eafily diverted, by refracting fur- 
* faces from the right courfe; and the reft, 
* as they are bigger and bigger, may make 

ar o chic 


gue Aualyfis of the hr. 


“ the ftronger and more lucid colours—— 
‘¢ and be more and more difficultly diverted. 
“ Qu. 29. So Qu. 30, he obferves of air, that 
«¢ denfe bodies by fermentation rarify into 
<¢ feveral forts of air, and this air, by fer- 
“ mentation,and fometimes without, returns 
< into denfe bodies.” And fince we find 
in fact from thefe Experiments, that air a- 
rifes from a great variety of denfe bodies, 
both by fire and fermentation, it is probable 
that they may have very different degrees of 
elafticity, in proportion to the different fize 
and denfity of its particles, and the different 
force with which they were thrown off in- 
to an elaftick flate. ‘* Thofe particles (as 
«* Sir Isaac NewrTon obferves) receding 
<¢ from one another, with the greateft re- 
«© pulfive force, and being moft difficultly - 
« brought together, which upon contaé& 
« cohere moft ftrongly.”. Whence thofe of 
the weakefi elafticity, will be leaft able to 
refift a counter-acting power, and will there- 
fore be fooneft changed from an elaftick 
to a fixt flate. And ‘tis confonant to reafon 
to think, that the air may confift of infinite 
degrees of thefe, from se moft elaftick and 
repelling, till we come tothe more fluggifh, 
) watry 


Analyfis of the Aur. 313 
watry and other particles, which float in 
the air ; yet the repelling force of the leaft 
elaftick particle, near the furface of the carth, 
while it continues in that elaftick ftate, mutt 
be fuperior to the incumbent preffure of a 
column of air, whofe height is equal to that 
of the atmofphere, and its bafe to the fur- 
face of the fphere of its elaftick activity. 
Thus upon the whole, we fee that air a- 
boundsin animal, vegetable and mineral fub- 
ftances; in all which it bears a confiderable. 
part: if all the parts of matter were only 
endued.with a ftrongly attracting power, 
whole nature would then immediately be- 
come one unactive cohering lump; where- 
fore it was abfolutely neceffary, in order to 
the actuating and enlivening this vaft mafs of 
attracting matter, that there fhould be every 
where intermixed with it a due proportion 
of ftrongly repelling elaftick particles, which 
might enliven the whole mafs, by the in- 
ceffant action between them and the at- 
tracting particles: And fince thefe elaftick 
particles are continually in great abundance 
reduced by the power of the ftrong attracters, 
from an elaftick, to a fixt ftate ; it was there- 
fore neceffary that thefe particles fhould be 
endued 


314 Analyfis of the Aur: 


endued with a property of refuming their 
elaftick ftate, whenever they were difenga- 
ged from that mafs, in which they were 
fixed; that thereby this beautiful frame of 
things might be maintained, in a continual 
round of the production and diffolution of 
animal and vegetable bodies. 

The air is very inftrumental in the pro- 
du@ion and growth of animals and vegeta- 
bles, both by invigorating their feveral juices, 
while in an elaftick ative ftate, and alfo by 
greatly contributing in a fix’d ftate to the 
union and firm conne&ion of the feveral 
conftituent parts of thofe bodies, vz. their 
water, falt, fulphur and earth. This band of 
union, in conjunction with the external air, 
is alfo a very powerful agent in the diffolu- 
tion and corruption of the fame bodies, for 
it makes one in every fermenting mixture, 
the action and re-adtion of the aereal and ful- 
phureous particles is in many fermenting 
mixtures fo great, as to excite a burning 
heat, and in others a fudden flame: And 
it is we fee by the like ation and re-ac- 
action of the fame principles, in fuel and the 
ambient air, that common culinary fires are 
produced and maintained. 

Tho’ 


Analyfis of the Aur. 315 


Tho’ the force of its elafticity is fo great, 
as to be able to bear a prodigious preffure, 
without lofing that elafticity, yet we have 
from the foregoing Experiments evident 
proof, that its elafticity is eafily, and in great 
abundance deftroyed; and isthereby reduced. 
to a fixt ftate, by the ftrong attraction of the 
acid fulphureous particles, which arife either 
from fire or from fermentation : And there- 
fore elafticity is not an effential immutable 
property of air particles; but they. are, we 
fee, eafily changed from an elaftick to a fixt 
{tate, by the ftrong attraction of the acid, ful- 
phurcous and faline particles which abound 
in the air. Whence it is reafonable to con- 
clude, that our atmofphere is a Chaos, con- 
fitting not only of elaftick, but alfo of un- 
elaftick air particles, which in great. plenty 
float in it, as well as the fulphureous, fa- 
line, watry and earthy particles, which are 
no ways capable of being thrown off intoa 
permanently elaftick flate, like thofe parti- 
cles which conftitute true permanent air. 

Since then air is found fo manifeftly to 
abound in almoft all natural bodies; fince 
we find it fo operative and active a principle 
in every chymical operation, fince its con- 

ftituens 


316 Analyfis of the Aur. 


ftituent parts are of fo durable a nature, 
that the moft violent action of fire, or fer- 
mentation, cannot induce fuch an alteration 
of its texture, as thereby to difqualify it 
from refuming, either by the means of fire, 
or fermentation, its former elaftick fiate3 
unlefs in the cafe of vitrification, when with 
the vegetable Salt and Nitre, in which it is 
incorporated, it may perhaps fome of it 
with other chymical principles be immuta- 
bly fixt: Since then this is the cafe, may 
we not with good reafon adopt this now fixt, 
now volatile Proteus among the chymical 
principles, andthat avery active one, as well as 
acid fulphur; notwithftanding it has hither- 
to been overlooked and rejected by Chymifts, 
as no way intitled to that denomination? 

If thofe who unhappily fpent their time 
and fubftance in fearch after an imaginary 
production, that was to reduce all things to 
gold, had, inftead of that fruitlefs purfuit, 
beftowed their labour in fearching after this 
much neglected volatile Hermes, who has fo 
often efcaped thro’ their burft receivers, in 
the difguife of a fubtile fpirit, a meer fla- 
tulent explofive matter; they would then 
inftead of reaping vanity, have found their 

refearches 


Of Vegetation. 317 
refearches rewarded with very confiderable 
and ufeful difcoveries. 


CH A Bo Wil: 
Of Vegetation. 


E are but too fenfible, that our rea- 
fonings about the wonderful and 
intricate operations Of nature are fo full 
of uncertainty, that as the wife-man truly 
obferves, hardly do we guefs aright at the 
things that are upon earth, and with labour 
do we find the things that are before us. 
Wifdom Chap. ix. v. 16. And this obferva- 
tion we find fufficiently verified in vege- 
table nature, whofe abundant produdtions, 
tho’ they are moft vilible and obvious to us, 
yet are we much in the dark about the nature 
of them, becaufe the texture of the veflels of 
plants is fo intricate and fine, that we can 
trace but few of them, tho’ aflifted with the 
beft microfcopes. We have however good 
reafon to be diligent in making farther and 
farther refearches; for tho’ we can never hope 
to come to the bottom and firft principles of 
things, yet in fo inexhauftible a fubject, where 
3 every 


318 Of Vegetation, 

every the fmalleft part of this wonderful 
fabrick is wrought in the mof curious and 
beautiful manner, we need not doubt of 
having our inquiries rewarded, with fome 
further pleafing difcovery ; but if this fhould 
not be the reward of our diligence, we are 
however fure of entertaining our minds 
after the moft agreeable manner, by feeing 
in every thing, with furprifing delight, fuch 
plain fignatures of the wonderful hand of 
the divine architect, as muft neceffarily dif 
pofe and carry our thoughts to an act of ado- 
ration, the beft and nobleft employment and 
entertainment of the mind. 

What I fhall here fay, will be chiefly found- 
ed on the following experiments; and on 
feveral of the preceding ones, without re- 
peating what has already been occafionally 
obferved on the fubject of vegetation. 

We find by the chymical analyfis of vege- 
tables, that their fubftance is compofed of 
fulphur, volatile falt, water and earth; which 
principles are all endued with mutually 
attracting powers, and alfo of a large portion 
of air, which has a wonderful property of 
ftrongly attraGting in a fixt ftate, or of re- 
pelling in an elaftick ftate, with a power 

which 


Of Vegetation. 319 
which is fuperior to vaft comprefling forces ; 
and it is by the infinite combinations, action 
and re-action of thefe principles, that all 
the operations in animal and vegetable 
bodies are effected. 

Thefe active aereal particles are very fer- 
viceable in carrying on the work of vegeta- 
tion to its perfection and maturity. Not 
only in helping by their elafticity to diftend 
each ductile part, but alfo by enlivening and 
invigorating their fap, where mixing with 
the other mutually attracting principles they 
are by gentle heat and motion fer at liberty 
to affimilate into the nourifhment of the re- 
{pective parts: “ The foft and moift nourifh- 
«© ment eafily changing its texture by gentle 
“heat and motion, which congregates 
* homogeneal bodies, and feparates hete- 
“* rogeneal ones.” Newton's Opticks, qu. 
31. The fum of the attra@ting power of thefe 
mutually acting and re-acting principles 
being, while in this nutritive ftate, fuperior 
tothe fum of their repelling power, where- 
by the work of nutrition is gradually adyanc- 
ed by the nearer and nearer union of thefe 
principles, from a lefler to a greater degree 
of confiftency, till they are advanced to that 

vifcid 


320 Of Vegetation. 

vifcid ductile ftate, whence the feveral parts 
of vegetables are formed; and are at length 
firmly compacted into hard fubftances, by 
the flying off of the watry diluting vehicle; 
fooner or later, according to the different 
degrees of cohefion of thefe thus compacted 
principles. 

But when the watry particles do again 
foak into and dif-unite them, and their repel- 
lingpower is thereby become {uperior to their 
attracting power; then is the union of the 
parts of vegetables thereby fo throughly dif- 
folved, that this ftate of putrefaction does 
by a wife order of Providence fit them to 
refufcitateagain,in newvegetable productions; 
whereby the nutritive fund of nature can 
never be exhaufted: Which being the fame 
both in animals and vegetables, it is thereby 
admirably fitted by a little alteration of its 
texture to nourifh either. 

Now, tho’ all the principles of vegeta- 
bles are in their due proportion neceffary 
to the production and perfection of them ; 
yet we generally find greater proportions 
of Oil in the more elaborate and exalted 
parts of vegetables: And thus Seeds are found 
to abound with Oil, and confequently with 

ae fulphur 


Of Vesetation. Z2¥ 


fulphur and air, as we fee by Exper. 56, 
$7, 58. which Seeds containing the rudi- 
ments of future vegetables, it was neceffary 
that they fhould be well ftored with princi- 
ples that would both preferve the Seed from 
putrefaction, and alfo be very active in pro- 
moting germination and vegetation. Thus 
alfo by the grateful odours ef flowers we 
are aflured, that they are ftored with a very 
fubtile, highly fublimed Oil, which perfumes 
the ambient air, and the fame may be ob- 
ferved from the high taftes of fruits. 

And as Oil is an excellent prefervative 
againft the injuries of cold, fo it is found 
to abound in the fap of the more northern 
trees; and it is this which in ever-greens 
keeps their leaves from falling. 

But plants of a lefs durable texture, as 
they abound with a greater proportion of 
Salt and Water, which is not fo ftrongly 
attracting as fulphur and air, fo are they lefs 
able to endure the colds; and as plants are 
obferved to have a greater proportion of Salt 
and Waiter in them in the fpring, than in 
the autumn, fo are they more eafily injured 
by coldinthe {pring, than ina more advanced 

! xX age, 


322 Of Vegetation. 
age, when their quantity of oil is increafed, 
with their greater maturity. 

Whence we find that nature’s chief bufi- 
nefs, in bringing the parts of a vegetable, 
efpecially its fruit and feed to maturity, is 
_ to combine together in a due proportion, 
the more ative and noble principles of ful- 
phur and air, that chiefly conftitute oil, 
which in its moft refined flate is never found 
without fome degree of earth and falt in it. 

And the more perfe& this maturity is, the 
more firmly are thefe noble principles united. 
Thus Rhenifh Wines, which grow in a more 
northern climate, are found to yield their 
Tartar, z. e. by Exper. 73. their incorpora- 
ted air and fulphur in greater plenty, than 
the ftronger Wines of hotter countries, in 
which thefe generous principles are more 
firmly united: And particularly in Adadera 
Wine, they are fixt to fuch adegree, that 
that Wine requires a confiderable degree of 
warmth, fuch as would foure many. other 
Wines, to keep it in order, and give it a 
generous tafte; and ‘tis from zhe fame rea- 
fon, that fmall French Wines are found.to 
yicld more fpirit in diftillation, than firong 
Spanifa Wines. But 


Of Fegetation. 223 
But when, on the other hand, the crude 
watry part of the nutriment bears too great 
a proportion to the more noble principles, 
either in a too luxuriant ftate of a plant, or 
when its roots are planted too deep, or it 
fiands in too fhady a pofition, or in a very 
cold and wet fummer; then it is found, 
that cither no fruit is produced, or if there 
be any, yet it continues in a crude watry 
{ftate; and never comes fo that degree of 
maturity, which a due proportion cf the 
more noble principles would bring it to. 
Thus we find in this, and every other 
part of this beautiful {cene of things, when 
we attentively confider them, that the great 
Auther of nature has admirably tempered 
the conftituent principles of natural bodies, 
in fuch due proportions as might beft fit 
them for the ftate and purpofes they were 
intended for. 
It is very plain from many of the fore- 
going Experiments and Obfervations, that 
the leaves are very ferviceable in this work 
of vegetation, by being inftrumental in bring- 
ing nourifhment from the lower parts, within 
the reach of the attraction of the growing 
fruit; which like young animals is furnifhed 
a a ae 2 with 


344 Of Vegetation. 
with proper inftruments to fuck it thence. 
But the leaves feem alfo defigned for many 
other noble and important fervices ; for 
nature admirably adapts her inftruments fo. 
‘as to be at the fame time ferviceable to 
many good purpofes. Thus the leaves, in 
which are the main excretory ducts in vege- 
tables, feparate and carry off the redundant 
watry fluid, which by being long detained, 
would turn rancid and prejudicious to the 
plant, leaving the more nutritive parts to 
coalefce ; part of which nourifhment, we 
have good reafen to think, is conveyed into 
vegetables thro’ the leaves, which do plenti- 
fully imbibe the Dew and Rain, which con- 
tain Salt, Sulphur, gc. For the air is full 
of acid and fulphureous particles, which 
when they abound much, do by the action 
and re-action between them and the elaftick 
air caufe that fulrry heat, which ufually 
ends in lightning and thunder: ~And thefe 
new combinations of air, fulphur and acid 
fpirit, which are conftantly forming in the 
air, are doubtlefs very ferviceable, in promo- 
ting the work of vegetation ; when being 
imbibed by the leaves, they may not im- 
probably be the materials out of which the 
: ae — 


Of Megetation, ay 
more fubtile and refined principles of ve- 
getables are formed: For fo fine a fluid as’ 
the air feems to be a more proper medium, 
wherein to prepare and combine the more 
exalted principle of vegetables, than the grof- 
fer watry fluid of the fap; and for the fame 
reafon, ‘tis likely, that the moft refined and, 
active principles of animals arc alfo prepared 
In the air, and thence conveyed thro’ the 
lungs into the blood; and that there is plenty. 
of thefe fulphureo-aereal partigles in the 
leaves, is evident from the fulphureous exu. 
dations, which are found at the edges of 
leaves, which Bees are obferved to make 
their waxen cells of, as well as of the duft 
of flowers: And that wax abounds with ful- 
phur is plain from its burning freely, @e. 

We may therefore reafonably conclude, 
that one great ufe of leaves is what has 
been long fufpeted by many, vuzz. to per- 
form in fome meafure the fame oflice for 
the fupport of the vegetable life, that the 
lungs of animals do, for the fupport of the 
animal life; Plants very probably drawing 
thro’ their leaves fome part of their nou- 
rifhment from the air. 


Vos, i) BME 


326 Of Vegetation. 

But as plants have nota dilating and con- 
tracing Thorax, their infpirations and expi- 
rations will not be fo frequent as thofe of 
Animais, but depend wholly on the alter- 
nate changes from hot to cold, for infpira- 
tion, and vice verfa for expiration ; and ’tis 
not improbable, that plants of more rich 
and racy juices may imbibe and aflimilate 
more of this aereal food into their conftitu- 
tions, than others, which have more watry 
vapid juices. We may look upon the Vine 
as a good inftance of this, which in Exper. 3. 
perfpired lefs than the Apple-tree. For as it 
delights not in drawing much watry nourifh- 
ment from the earth by its roots, fo it 
muft therefore neceffarily be brought to a 
more ftrongly imbibing flate at night, than 
other trees, which abound more with watry 
nourifhment; and it will therefore confe- 
quently imbibe more from theair. And likely 
this may be the reafon, why plants in hot 
countries abound more with fine aromatick 
principles, than the more northern plants, 
for they do undoubtedly imbibe more dew. © 

And if this conjecture be right, then it 
gives us a farther reafon, why trees which 
abound with moifture, cither from too fhaded 

ft a a po- 


Of Vegetation. 327 
a pofition, or a foo luxurious ftate are un- 
fruitful, vz. becaufe, being in thefe cafes 
more replete with moifture, they cannot im- 
bibe fo ftrongly from the air, as others do, 
thag great blefling the dew of Heaven. 

And as the moft racy generous taftes of 
fruits, and the grateful odours of flowers, 
do not improbably arife from thefe refined 
aereal principles, fo may the beautiful co- 
lours of flowers be owing in a good mea- 
fure to the fame original; for itis a known 
obfervation, that a dry foil contributes much 
more to their variegation than a ftrong moitft 
one docs. ABO 
~ And may not light alfo, by freely entring 
the expanded furfaces of leaves and flowers, 
contribute much to the ennobling the prin- 
ciples of vegetables; for Sir L/aae Newton, 
puts it as avery probable query, “ Are 
“ not grofs bodies and light convertible into 
¢¢ one another? and may not bodies receive 
‘* much of their activity from the particles 
‘«¢ of light, which enter their compofition ? 
** The change of bodies into light, and of 
“ light into bodies, is very conformable to 
*« the courfe of nature, which feems de- 
“¢ lighted with tranfmutations. Opt. qu. 30.” 

Y 4 E x: 


328 Of Vegetation. 
EXPERIMENT CXXII. 


That the leaves of plants do imbibe elaf 
tick ait, I have fome reafon to fufpect from 
the following Experiment, vzz. In May I 
fet fome well rected plants of fpear-mint 
in two glafs ciferns full of water, which 
cifterns were fet on pedeftals, and had in- 
verted cnymical receivers put over them, as 
in (Fig. 35.) the water being drawn up to 
4a, half ue their necks: In this inclofed 
moilt ftate the plants looked pretty florid 
for a month, and made, as _I think, dome 
few weak lateral fhoots, tho’ they did not 
Brow. in height; they were not quite dead 
till after fix weeks, when it was found that 
the watcr was rifen in both glafies from 
44 towards s zg, ian bulk about 20 cubick 
inches: But as there was not fo exact an ae- 
count taken of the different temperature of 
the air, as to heat and cold, as there ought 
to have been, I am not certain, whether 
that rifting of the water might not be owing 
to a greater coolnefs of the air at the fix 
weeks end, than when they were firft placed 
under the glaffes ; and therefore do not. de- 


pend 


Of Vegetation. 329 
pend on this Experiment; but thought it 
proper to mention it, as well deferving to 
be repeated with greater accuracy, both with 
Mint, and other proper plants, by noting the 
temperature of the air on a Thermometer, 
hanging near the receivers, and obferving 
after fome time, whether the water g a be 
rifen, notwithftanding the air be no cooler 
than when the Mint was firft placed under 
the glafs. And for greater certainty, it will 
be advifeable to fufpend in the fame manner 
another like receiver with no Mini, but 
only water init, up to @ a. 


ExPERIMENT CXXIII. 


In order to find out the manner of the — 
srowth of young fhoots, I firft prepared the 
following inftrument, vzz. I took a {mall 
ftick a, (Fig. 40.) and at aquarter of an 
inch diftance from each other, I run the 
points of five pins, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, thro’ the 
{tick, fo faras to ftand 4 of an inch from the 
ftick, then bending down the great ends of 
the pins, I bound them all faft with waxed 
thread; I provided alfo fome red lead mixed 
with oil. 

| In 


330 Of Vegetation. 

In the fpring, when the Vimes had made 
fhort fhoots, I dipped the points of the pins 
in the paint, and then pricked the young 
fhoot of a Vine, (Fig. 41.) with the five 
points at once, from ¢ to p: I then took 
off the marking inftrument, and placing the 
Joweft point of itin the hole p, the upper- 
moft mark, I again pricked frefh holes from 
p to /, and then marked the two other 
points z 4 ; thus the whole fhoot was marked 
every < inch, the red paint making every 
point remain vifible. 

(Fig. 42.) fhews the true proportion of 
the fame fhoot, when it was full grown, the 
September following ; where every corre- 
{ponding point is noted with the fame let- 


The difiance from ¢ to s was not en- 
larged above # part of aninch; from s tog, 
the 7, of an inch; from gto p, 33 from p 
to0, 23 from eto”, 4.3) fromiv to was s 


from mtol, 1 -- # of aninch; from/to 
z,1-+ % Inch nearly; and fromzto Athree 


In this Experiment we fee that the firft 
joint to r extended very little; it being al- 
moft hardened, and come near to its full 

growth, 


Of Vegetation. 321 
srowth, whenI marked it: The next joint, 
from r tom, being younger, extended fome- 
thing more; andthe third joynt from x tok 
extended from 3 of an inch, to 3 -+ 4} 
inches; but from & to #, the very tender 
joynt, which was but } inch long, when I 
marked it, was when full grown three inches 
long. : 

We may obferve, that nature in order 
to furnifh thefe young growing fhoots with 
plenty of ductile matter is very careful to 
furnifh at fmall diftances the young fhoots 
of all forts of trees, with many leaves 
throughout their whole length, which ferve 
as fo many joyntly acting powers placed at 
different flations, thereby to draw with more 

eafe plenty of fap to the extending fhoor. 
The like provifion has nature made in 
the Corn, Grafs, Cane, and Reed kind; the 
leafy {pires, which draw the nourifhmene 
to each joynt, being provided long before 
the ftem fhoots, which flender ftem in 
its tender duétile ftate would moft eafily 
break and dry up too foon, fo as to pre- 
vent its due growth, had not nature to 
prevent both thefe inconveniences provided 
{trong Thecas or Scabbards, which both fup- 
port 


332 Of Fegetation. 
port and keep long in a fupple duétile 
{tate the tender extending ftem. ) 

I marked in the fame manner as the Vine, 
at the proper fcafons, young Honeyfuckle 
fhoots, young A/paragas, and young Swan- 
pfowers; and I found in them all a gradual 
fcale of unequal extenfions, thofe parts ex- 
tending moft which were tendereft. The 
white part of the A/paragus, which was un- 
der ground, extended very little in length, 
and accordingly we find the fibres of the 
white part very tough and ftringy : But the 
greateft extenfion of the tender green part, 
avhich was about 4 inches above the ground 
when I marked it, feparated the marks from 
a quarter of an inch, to twelve inches dif- 
tance; the greateft diftenfion of the Syz- 
flower was from Zinch, to four inches dif- 
tance. 

From thefe Experiments, it is evident, 
that tne growth of a young bud to a fhoot 
confifts in the gradual dilatation and exten- 
fion of every part; the knots of a fhoot 
being very near cach other in the bud, as 
may plainly and diftin@ly be feen in the flit 
bud of the Vine and Fig tree; but by this 
gradual diftention of every part, they are ex- 

2 tended 


Of Vegetation. 333 
tended to their full length. And we may 
eafily conceive how the longitudinal capil- 
lary tubes ftill retain their hollownefs, not- 
withftanding their being diftended, from the 
like effet in melted glafs tubes, which re- 
tain a hollownefs, tho’ drawn out to the 
fineft thread. 

The whole progrefs of the fir joynt r 
is very fhort in comparifon of the other 
joynts ; becanfe, at firft fetting out its leaves 
being very {mall, and the feafon then cooler 
than afterwards; ‘tis probable, that but lit- 
tle fap is conveyed to it, and therefore it ex- 
tending but flowly, its fibres are in the 
mean time grown tough and hard, before 
it can arrive to any confiderable length. 
But as the feafon advances, and the leaves 
inlarge, greater plenty of nourifhment be- 
ing thereby conveyed, the fecond joynt 
grows longer than the firft, and the 3d and 
4th ftill on gradually longer than the pre- 
ceding; thefe do therefore in equal times 
miake greater advances than the former. 

The wetter the feafon, the longer and 
larger fhoots do vegetables ufually make ; 
becaufe their foft dudtile parts do then con- 
tinue longer in a moift, tender ftate ; but 

in 


334 Of Vegetation. 
in adry feafon the fibres fooner harden, and 
ftop the further growth of the fhoot; and 
this may probably be one reafon why the 
two or three laft joynts of every fhoot are 
ufually fhorter than the middle joynts; wiz. 
becaufe they fhooting ont in the more advan- 
ced hot dry fummer feafon, their fibres are 
foon hardened and dryed, and are withal 
checked in their growth by the cool 
autumnal nights: I had a vine fhoot of one 
years growth which was 14 feet long, and 
had 39 joynts, all pretty nearly of an equal 
length, except fome of the firft and laft. 
And forthe fame reafon, Beans and many 
other plants, which ftand where they are 
much fhaded, being thereby kept continually 
moilt, do grow to unufual heights, and are 
drawnup asthey call it by theover fhadow- 
ing Trees, their parts being kept long, foft 
and du@tile: But this very moift fhaded ftate 
is ufually attended with fterility ; very long. 
joynts of vines are alfo obferved to be un- 
fruitful. Sith 
This Experiment, which fhews the manner 
of the growth of fhoots, confirms Borel. 
/?s opinion, who in his Book De motu 
Animalinm, part fecond Chap. 13, fup- 
pofes 


Of Vegetation. 335° 


pofes the tender growing fhoot to be diftend- 
ed like foft wax by the expanfion of the 
moifture in the fpongy pith; which dilating 
moifture, he with good reafon concludes 
is hindered from returning back, while it 
expands by the fponginefs of the pith, 
without the help of valves. For ’tis very 
probable that the particles of water, which 
immediately adhere to, and are ftrongly 
imbibed into, and attracted by every fibre 
of the {pongy pith, will fuffer fome degree 
of expanfion before they can be detached 
by the fun’s warmth from each attracting 
fibre, and confequently the mafs of {pongy 
fibres, of which the pith confifts, muft there- 
by be extended. 

And that the pith may be the more fervice- 
able for this purpofe, nature has provided in 
moft fhoots a ftrong partition at every knot, 
which partitions ferve not only as plinths, or 
abutments for the dilating pith to exert its 
force on, but alfoto prevent the rarified fap’s 
too free retreat from the pith. 

But a dilating fpongy fubftance, by 
equally expanding it {elf every way, wouid 
not produce an oblong fhoot, but rather a 
globofe one, like an Apple; to prevent which 

Z inconvenience 


336 Of Vegetation. 
inconvenience we may obferve, that nature 
has provided feveral Diaphragms, befides 
thofe at cach knot, which are placed at. 
fmall diftances acrofs the pith ; thereby pre- 
venting its too great lateral dilatation. Thefe 
are very plain to be feen in Walnut-tree 
fhoots; and the fame we may obferve in the 
pith of the branches of the fun-fiower, and 
of feveral other plants; where tho’ thefe Dia- 
phragm are not to be diftinguifhed while the 
pith is full and replete with moifture, yet 
when it drys up, they are often plain to be 
feen; and it is further obferved, that where 
the pith coniifts of diftinG veficles, the fibres 
of thofe veficles are often found to run 
horizontally, whereby they can the better 
refift the too great lateral dilatation of the 
fhoot. | : 
We may obferve that nature makes ufe of 
the fame artifice, in the growth ofthe feathers 
of Birds, which is very vifible in the great 
pinion feathers of the wing, the {maller and 
upper partof which is extended by a fpongy 
pith, but the lower and bigger quill part, by 
a feries of large veficles, which when replete 
with dilating moifture do extend the quill; 
but when the quill is full grown, thefe 
<yelicles 2 


Of Vegetation. 337 
veficles are always dry; in which ftate we 
may plainly obferve every velicle to be con- 
tracted at each end by a Diaphragm or Sphin- 
éter, whereby its too great laterai dilatation 
is prevented, but not its diftenfion lengthwife. 

And as this pith in the quill grows dry 
and nfelefs after the quill is full grown, 
we may obfervethe fame inthe pith of trees, 
which is always fucculent and full of moifture 
while the fhoot is growing, by the expanfion 
of which the tender cudtile fhoot is diftended 
in every part, its fibres being at the fame time 
kept f{upple by this moifture; but when 
each year’s fhoot is full grown, then the pith 
gradually drys up, and continues for the 
future dry and kikfey, its veficles being ever 
after empty ; nature always carefully pro- 
viding for the fucceeding year’s growth by 
preferving a tender ductile part in the bud 
replete with fuceulent pith. 

And as in vegetables, fo doubtiefs in ani- 
mals, the tender ductile bones of young 
animals are gradually increafed in every part, 
that is not hardened and offified; but fince 
it was inconfiftent with the motion of the 
joynts to have the ends of the bones foft 
and ductile as in vegetables; therefore na- 

& ture 


338 Of Vegetation, 
ture makes a wonderful provifion for this 
at the glutinous ferrated joyning of the heads 
to the fhanks of the bones; which joyning 
while it continues dudile the animal grows, 
but when it oflifies then the animal can no 
longer grow. AsI wasaflured by the following 
Experiment, vzz. Itook a half grown Chick, 
~ whofe leg-bone was then two inches long, 
and with a fharp pointed Iron at half an inch 
diftance I pierced two {mall holes through the 
middle of the fcaly covering of the leg, and 
shin-bone; two months after I killed the 
Chick, and upon laying the bone bare, I 
found on it obfcure remains of the two 
marks I had made at the fame diftance of 
half an inch: So that that part of the bone 
had not at all diftended lengthwife, fince 
the time that I marked it : Notwithftanding 
the bone was in that time grown an inch 
more in length, which growth was moftly 
at the upper end of the bone, where a won- 
erful provifion is made for its growth atthe 
joyning of its head to the fhank, called by 
Anatomifts Symphyfis. 
And as the bones grow in length and fize; 
fo muft the membranous, the mufelar, the 
eS og 2) Se eRWOns, 


Of Vegetation. 338 
nervous, the cartilaginous and ¢afcular fibres 
ofthe animal body neceflarily extend and 
expand, from the du@ile nutriment. which 
nature furnifhes every part withal ; in which 
repects animal bodies do as truly vegetate as 
do the growing vegetables. Whence it muft 
needs be of the greateft confequenee, that 
the growirg animal be fupplied with pro- 
per nourifhment for that purpofe, in order 
to form a fitrong athletick conftitution: 
For when growing nature is deprived of 
proper materials for this purpofe, then is fhe 
under anecefiity of drawing out very Nender 
threads of life, as is too often the cafe of 
young growing perfons, who by indulging in 
{pirituous liquors, or other excefics, do there- 
by greatly deprave the nutritive dnétile 
matter, whence all the diftending fibres of 
the body are fupplied, 

Since we are by thefe Experiments aflured 
that the longitudinal fibres, and fap veffels 
of wood in its firft year’s growth, do thus 
diftendin length by the extenfion of every 
part; and fince nature in fimilar productions 
makes ufe of the fame or nearly the fame 
methods: Thefe confiderations make it not 


unreafonable to think, that the fecond and 
Ly 2 following 


340 Of Vegetation. 

foilowing years additional ringlets of wooed 
are not formed by a meerly horizontal 
dilatation of the veffels 5 for it isnot eafy to 
conceive, how longitudinal fibres and tubu- 
lar fap-vetlels fhould thus be formed; but 
rather by the fhooting of the longitudinal 
fibres lengthways under the bark as young 
fibrous fhoots of roots do, in the folid 
Earth. The obfervations on the manner ofthe 
growth of the ringlets of wood in Experi- 
ment 46 (Fig. 30.) do further confirm this. 
I intended to have made father refearches 
into this matter by proper Experiments, but 
have not yet found time for it. 

But whether it be by an horizontal or 
longitudinal fhooting, we may obferve that 
nature has taken great care to keep the parts 
between the bark and wood always very 
fupple with flimy moifture, from which 
ductile matter the woody fibres, veficles and 
buds are formed. 

Thus we fee that nature, in order to the 
production and growth of all the parts of 
animals and vegetables, prepares her dudtile 
matter : In doing of which fhe fele&ts and 
combines particles of very different degrees 
of mutual attraction, curioufly proportion- 


ing 


Of Vegetation, 341 
ing the mixture according to the many 
different purpofes fhe defigns it for ; either 
for long or more lax fibres of very different 
degrees in animals, or whether it be tor the 
forming of woody or more foft fibres of 
various kinds in vegetables. 

The great variety of which different fub- 
{tances in the fame vegetable prove, that 
there are appropriated veffels for conveying 
very different forts of nutriment. And in 
many vegetables fome of thofe appropriate 
veflels are plainly to be feen replete either 
with milky, yellow, or red nutriment. 

Dr. Kez/l,in his account of animal fecre- 
tion, page 49, obferves, that where nature 
intends to feparate a vifcid matter from 
the blood, fhe contrives very much to retard 
its motion, whereby the inteftine motion of 
the blood being allayed, its particles can the 
better coalefce in order to form the vifcid 
fecretion. And Dr. Grew, before him, ob- 
ferved an inftance of the fame contrivance 
in vegetables where a fecretion is intended, 

that is to compofe a hard {ubftance, vzz. in 
the kernell or feed of hard ftone fruits, 
which does not immediately adhere to, and 
grow from the upper part of the ftone, 

eh 3 which 


342 Of Vegetation. 

which would be the fhorteft and neareft 
way to convey nourifhment to it ; bat the 
fingle umbilical veflel, by which the kernel 
is nourifhed, fetches a compafs round the 
concave of the ftone, and then enters the 
kernel near its cone, by which artifice this 
veffel being much prolonged, the motion of 
the fap is thereby retarded, and a vifcid 
nutriment conveyed to the feed, which turns 
to hard fubfiance. 

The like artifice of nature we may obferve 
in the long capillary fibrous veffels which 
lic between the green hull, and the 
hard fhell of the Walnut, which are 
analogous tothe florous Mace of Nutmegs, 
the ends of whofe hairy fibres are inferted 
into the angles of the furrows inthe Walnut- 
fhell: Their ufe is therefore doubtlefs to 
carry in thofe long diftinG veffels the very 
vifcous matter which turns, when dry, toa 
hard fhell; whereas were the fhell immedi- 
ately nourifhed from the foft pulpous hull 
that furrounds it, ic would certainly be of 
the fame foft conftitution: The ufe of the 
hull being only to keep the fhell in a fofe 
ductile flate till the Nut-has done growing. 

We may obferve the like effed of a flower 

motion 


Of Vegetation. 343 
motion of the fap in Ever-greens, which per- 
fpiring little, their fap moves much more 
flowly than in more perfpiring Trees; and 
is therefore much more vifcid, whereby they 
are betrer enabled to outlive the winter’s 
cold. It is obferved that the fap of Ever- 
greens in hot Countries is not fo vifcous as 
the fap of more Northern Ever-greens, as 
the fir, @c. forthe fap in hotter Countries 
muft nave a brisker motion, by means of 
its greater perfpiration. 


EXPERIMENT CXXIV. 


In order to enquire into the manner of 
the expanfion of leaves, I provided a little 
Oaken board or fpatula, 2 6 cd of this fhape 
and fize, (Fig. 43.) thro’ the broad part at 
a quarter Of an inch diftance from each other; 
I run the points of 25 pins « » which ftood 
# inch thro’, and divided a fquare inch 
into 16. equal parts. 7 

With this inftrument in the proper fea- 
fon, when leaves were very young, I pricked 
feveralofthem thro’ at once, with the points 
of all thefe pins, dipping them firft in the 
red lead, which made lafting marks, 

| Z 4 ( Fig. 


344 Of Vegetation. 

(Fig. 44.) reprefents the fhape and fize 
of a young Fig-leaf, when firft marked 
with rec points, $ inch diftance from each 
other. | | 

(Fig. 45.) reprefents the fame full grown 
leaf, and the numbers an{wer to the corre- 
fponding numbers in the young leaf : 
Whereby may be feen how the feveral points 
of the growing leaf were feparated from 
each other, and in what proportion, vzz. 
from a quarter of an inch, to about three 
quarter’s of an inch diftance. 

In this Experiment we may obferve that 
the growth and expanfion of the leaves is 
owing to the dilatation of the veficles in 
every part, as the srowth of a young fhoot 
was fhewn tobe owing to the fame caufe 
in the foregoing Experiment 8 ; and doubt- 
lefs the cafe is the fame in all fruits. 

If thefe Experiments on leaves were fur- 
ther purfucd, there might probably be many 
curious obfervations made in relation to 
the fhape of leaves: By obferving the dif- 
ference of the progreflive and lateral motions 
of thefe points in different leaves, that were 
ef very diiferent lengths in proportion to 
their breadths. 

That 


’ ¢ 
f 
i 
a eed 
— eA 


Of Vegetation. 345 

That the force of dilating fap and air, in- 
eluded in the innumerable little veficles of 
young tender fhoots and !eaves, is abundantly 
fufficient for the extending of fhoots, and ex- 
panding of leaves, we have evident proof 
from the great force we find in the fap of 
the Vine, chap. 3d. and from the vaft force, 
with which infinuating moifture expanded 
the Peafe. Experiment 32. we {ee the great 
power of expanding water, when heated in 
the engine to raife water by fire: And wa- 
ter with air and other active particles in ca- 
pillary tubes, and innumerable {mall veficles, 
do doubtiefs act with a great force, tho’ ex- 
panded with no more heat than what the 
Sun’s warmth gives them. 

And thus we fee that nature exerts a con- 
fiderable, tho: fecret and filent power, in car- 
rying on all her productions; which demon- 
ftrates the wifdom of the Author of nature 
in giving fuch due proportion and direétion 
to thefe powers, that they uniformly con- 
cur to the produdtion and perfeétion of na- 
tural Beings; whereas were fuch powers 
under no guidance, they muft neceflarily 
produce a Chaos, inttead of that regular and 
beautiful fyftem of nature which we {ee. 

3 | We 


346 OF Vegetation. : 

We may plainly fee the influence of the 
Sun’s warmth in expanding the fap in all 
the partsof vegetables, as well in the roots 
as the body that is above ground, by the 
influence it has on the fix Thermometers 
defcribed under Experiment 20, five of which 
were fixed at different depths from two in. 
ches, to two feet under ground, the other 
being expofed to the open air. 

When in the greateft noon tide heat the 
fpirit cf that which was expofed to the Sun 
was rifen, fince the early morning, from 21 
to48 degrees; thenthe {pirit in the fecond 
Thermometer, whofe ball was two inches 
under ground, was at 45 degrees, and the 
3d, ath, and sth Thermometers were gradu- 
ally of lefs and lefs degrees of heat, as they 
were placed lower in the ground to the fixth 
Thermometer, which was two feet under 
ground, in which the fpirit was 31 degrees 
high. In this fate of heat on all the parts 
of the vegetable, we fee the Sun muft have 
a very confidcrable influence in expanding 
the fap in all its parts. The warmth was 
much greater on the body above ground, 
than on the roots which were two feet deep 5 
thofe roots, and parts of roots which are 

- deepeft, 


Of Vegetation. 347 


deepeft, as they feel much lefs of the Sun’s 
warmth, fo are they not fo foon, nor fo 
much affected by the alternacies of day and 
night, warm and cold: But that part of ve- 
getables, which is above ground, muft have 
its fap confiderably rarified, when the heat 
increafed from morning to two aclock after- 
noon, fo much as to raife the f{pirit in the 
ift Thermometer from 21 to 48 degrees a. 
bove the freezing point. 
When in the coldeft days of the winter 
724, the froft was fo intenfe, as to freeze 
Ka furface of ftagnant water near an inch 
thick, then the fpiritc in the Thermometer 
which was expofed to the open air, was fal- 
len four degrees below the freezing point ; 
the fpirit of that whofe ball was two inches 
under ground, was four degrees above the 
freezing point; the 3d, 4th and sth TZer- 
mometers were proportionably fallen lefs 
and lefs, as they were deepcr, to the 6th 
Thermometer, which being two feet under 
ground, the {pirit was 10 degrees above the 
freezing point. In this ftate of things the 
work of vegetation feemed to be wholly at 
a ftand, at leaft within the rcach of the 
froft, 
: But 


348 Of Vegetation. 

But when the cold was fo far relaxed, as 
to have the fpirit in the firtt Thermometer 
but 5 degrees above the freezing point, the 
fecond 8 degrees, and the 6th 13 degrees, 
tho’ it was fill very cold, yet this being 
fome advance from freezing towards warm, 
and there being confequently fome expan- 
fion of the fap, feveral of the hardy vege- 
tables grew, vzz. fome Ever-greens, Snow- 
drops, Crocus’s, gc. which forward hardy 
plants do probably partake much of the na- 
ture of Ever-greens in perfpiring little; and 
the motion of their fap being confequently 
very flow, it wili become more vifcous, as 
in Ever-greens; and thereby the better able 
to refit the winter’s cold: And the {mall 
expanfive force, which this fap acquires in 
the winter, is moftly exerted in extending 
the plant, little of ic being wafted in pro- 
portion to the fummer’s per{piration. 

Supported by the evidence of many of 
the foregoing Experiments, I will now trace 
the vegetation of a tree from its firft femi- 
nal plant in the Seed to its full maturity and 
produdtion of other Seeds, without entring 
into a particular defcription of the ftruature 
ef the parts of vegetables, which has al- 

ready 


Of Vegetation. 349 


ready been accurately done by Dr. Grew 
and Malpight. 

We fee by Experiment 56, 57, $8, on 
diftilled Wheat, Peafe and Muttard.feed, 
what a wonderful provifion nature has made, 
that the Seeds of Plants fhould be well ftored 
with very active principles, which princi- 
ples are there compacted together by him, 
who curioufly adapts all things to the pur- 
pofes for which they are intended, with 
fuch a juft degree of cohefion as retains them 
im that ftate till the proper feafon of ger- 
mination; for if they were of a more lax 
conftitution, they would too foon diffolve 
like the other tender annual parts of plants : 
And if they were more firmly connected, as 
in the heart of Oak, they muft neceffarily 
have been many years in germinating, tho’ 
fuppled with moifture and warmth. 

When a Seed is fown in the ground, in 
a few days it imbibes fo much moifture, as 
to {well with very great force ; as we fee 
in the Experiment on Peafe in an iron pot, 
this forcible {welling of the lobes of the 
Seed ar, ar (Fig. 46.) does probably pro- 
trude moifture and nourifhment from the 
capillary veffels yr, which are called the 

Seed 


350 Of Fegetatzon. 

Seed roots, into the radiclec, 2, d, which 
radicle, when it has fhot fome length into 
the ground, does then imbibe nourifhment 
from thence; and after it has acquired fuf 
ficient ftrength, as this tender duétile root 
is extending from 2 to c, it muf neceffa- 
rily carry the expanding Seed-lobes upwards, 
at the fame time that the dilating from z 
to @ makes it fhoot downwards ;. and when 
the root is thus far grown, it fupplies the 
Plume 4 with nourifhment, which thereby 
{welling and extending opens the lobes ar, 
ar, which are at the fame time raifed a- 
bove ground with the Plume; where they 
by expanding and growing thinner turn to 
green leaves, (except the Seeds of the pulfe 
kind) which leaves are of {uch importance 
to the yet tender Plume, that it perifhes, 
or will not thrive if they are pulled off; 
which makes it probable, that they do the 
fame office to the Plume, that the leaves 
adjoyning to Apples, Quinces and other 
fruitsdotothem, vzz. they draw fap within 
the reach of their attra@tion; fee Exper. 8 
and 30. But when the Plume is fo far ad- 
vanced in growth, as to have branches and 
expanded leaves to draw up nourifhment ; 
| then 


aT ie” 
A 


TAS 


“. 


£ 


a4 
: 


fag 


Maite 
oe 


Of Vegetation. 351 

then thefe fupplemental feminal leaves, ar,ar, 
being of no farther ufe, doperifh; not only 
becaufe the now grown and more expanded 
leaves of the young plant or tree, do fo 
everfhadow the fupplemental leaves, that 
their former more plentiful perfpiration is 
much abated ; and thereby alfo their power 
of attracting fap fails; but alfo becaufe the 
fap is drawn from them by the leaves, and 
they being thus deprived of nourihment, 
do perifh. 
- As the tree advances in ftature, the firft, 
fecond, third, and fourth order of lateral 
branches fhoot out, each lower order being 
longer than thofe immediately above them ; 
not only on account of primogeniture, but 
alfo becaufe being inferted in larger parts 
of the trunk, and nearer the root, they 
have the advantage of being ferved with grea- 
ter plenty of fap, whence arifes the beau- 
tiful parabolical figure of trees. 

Buc when trees ftand thick together in 
Woods or Groves, this their natural fhape 
isaltered, becaufe the lower lateral branches 
being much fhaded, they can perfpire little ; 
and therefore drawing little nourifhment, 
‘they perifh; but the top branches, being 
expofed 


32 Of Vegetation. 

expofed to a free drying air, they perfpire 
plentifully, and thereby drawing the fap to 
the top, they advance much in height: But 
vice verfa, if when fuch a Grove of tall 
trees is cut down, there be left here and 
there a fingle tree, that tree will then fhoot 
out lateral branches ; the leaves of which 
branches now perfpiring freely, will at- 
tract plenty of fap, on which account 
the top being deprived of its nourifhmente, 
it ufually dies. 

And as trees in a Grove or Wood grow 
only inlength; becaufe all the nourifhment 
is by the leaves drawn to the top; mof of 
the {mall lateral fhaded branches in the mean 
time perifhing for want of perfpiration and 
nutrition ; fo the cafe is the very fame in the 
branches of a tree, which ufually making 
an angle of about 45 degrees with the ftem 
of the tree, do thereby beautifully fill up at 
equal and proper diftances the {pace between 
the lower branches, andthe top of the tree, 
forming thereby as it were a parabolical 
Grove, or Thicket; which fhading the arms, 
the {mall lateral fhoots of thofe arms ufually 
perifh for want of due perfpiration; and 
therefore the arms continue naked like the 

bodies 


Of Vegetation: 353 
bodies of Trees in a grove; all the nourifh- 
ment being drawn up to the tops of the 
feveral branches by the leaves which are 
there expofed to the warm fun and free 
drying air; whereby the branches of Trecs 
expand much. 

And where the lateral branches are very 
vigorous, fo as to make ftrong fhoots, and 
atcract the nourifhment plentifully, there the 
tree ufually abates in its height: But where 
the tree prevails in height, as in groves, there 
commonly its lateral branches are {malleft. 
So that we may look upon atree as a com- 
plicated Engine which has as many different 
powers as it has arms and branches, each 
drawing from their common fountain of 
life the root: And the whole of each yearly 
growth of the tree will be proportionable 
to the {um of their attrafting powers, and the 
quantity of nourifhment the root affords - 
But this attracting power and nourifhment 
will be more or lefs, according to the differ- 
ent ages of the tree, and the more or lefs 
kindly feafons of the year. 

And the proportional growth of their 
lateral and top branches, in relation to each 
other, will much depend on the difference 

A a of 


354 Of Vegetation, 

of their feveral attracting powers. If the 
perfpiration and attraction of the lateral 
branches is little or nothing, asin woods and 
groves, then the top branches will mightily 
prevail ; but when in a free open air, the 
perfpiration and attraction of the lateral 
branches comes nearer to an equality with 
that of the top, then are the afpirings ofthe 
top branches greatly checked. And the cafe 
is the fame in moft other vegetables, which 
when they ftand thick together, grow much 
in length with very weak lateral fhoots. 

And as the leaves are thus ferviceable 
in promoting the growth of a tree, we may 
obferve that nature has placed the pedals of 
the leaves-ftalks where moft nourifhment is 
wanting, to produce leaves, fhoots and fruir ; 
and fome fuch thin leafy expanfion is fo 
neceflary for this purpofe, that nature pro- 
vides {mall thin expanfions, which may be 
called primary leaves, that ferve to protec 
and draw nourifhment to the young fhoor 
and leaf-buds before the leaf it felf is ex- 
panded. 

And herein we fee the admirable con- 
trivance of the Author of nature in adapting 
her different ways of conveying nourifh- 

ment 


OF Vegetation. 355 
ment to the different circumftances of her 
productions. For in this embrio ftate of the 
buds a fuitable provifion is made to bring 
nourifhment to them in a quantity fufficient 
for their then {mall demands: But when 
they are in fome degree increafed and formed, 
a much greater quantity of nourifhment, is 
neceflary, in proportion to their greater in- 
ereafe: Nature, that fhe may then no longer 
fupply with a {canty hand, immediately 
changes her method, in order to convey 
nourifhment with amore liberal hand to her 
productions; which fupply daily increafes by 
the greater expanfion of the leaves, and con- 
fequently the more plentiful attration and 
fupply of fap, as the greater eon and de- 
mand for it increafes. 

We find a much more elaborate and 
beautiful apparatus, forthe like purpofe, in 
the curious expantftons of bloffoms and flow- 
ers, which feem to be appointed by na- 
ture not only to protec, but alfo to draw and 
convey nourifhment to the embrio fruit and 
feeds. But as foon as the Calzx is formed into 
a {mall fruit, now impregnated with its 
Minute feminal tree, furnifhed with its 
Secondine, Corton and Amnion, (which 

mite Aaz new 


356 Of Vegetation. 

new fet fruit may in that ftate be looked 
upon asa compleat egg of the tree, con- 
taining its young unhatched tree, yet in em- 
brio) then the bloflom falls off, leaving this 
new formed egg, or firft fet fruit in this infant 
ftate, to imbibe nourifhment fufficient for, 
it felf, and the Foetus with which it is im- 
pregnated: Which nourifhment is brought 
within the reach and power of its fution 
by the adjoyning leaves. 

If I may be allowed to indulge conjeGure 
in a cafe, in which the moft diligent in- 
quirers are as yet, after all their laudable re- 
fearches, advanced but little farther than 
meer conjecture, I would propofe it to their 
confideration, whether from the manifeft 
proof we have that fulphur flrongly attra@s 
air, a hint may not be taken, to confider 
whether this may not be the primary ufe of 
the Farina fecundans, to attra& and unite 
with it felf elaftick or other refined active 
particles. That this Farznma abounds with 
fulphur, and that avery refined fort, is pro. 
bable from the fubtile oil which chymifts 
obtain from the chives of faffron. And if this 
be the ufe of it, was it poffible that it could 
be more aptly placed for the purpofe on very 

A moveable 


_ Of Kegetation. 257 
moveable Apsces fixt on the flender points 
of the Stamina, whereby it might eafily with 
the leaft breath of wind be difperfed in the 
air, thereby {urrounding theplant, as it were, 
with an Atmofphere of fublimed fulphur- 
eous pounce? for many trees and plants abound 
with it, which uniting with the air particles, 
they may perhaps be infpired at feveral parts 
of the plant, and efpecially at the Pz/?z//um, 
and be thence conveyed to the Cap/ula 
feminalis, {pecially towards evening, and in 
the night when the beautiful Petala of the 
flowers are clofed up, and they, with all 
the other parts of the vegetable, are in a 
ftrongly imbibing ftate. And if to thefe 
united fulphureous and aereal particles we 
fuppofe fome particles of light to be joyned, 
for Sir [/aac Newton has found that fulphur 
attracts light firongly, then the refult of 
thefe three by far the moft active principles 
in nature will be a Punctum Saliens to 
invigorate the femznal plant: And thus we 
are at laft conducted by the regular Analyfis 
of vegetable nature to the firft enlivening 
principle of their minuteft origin. 


A a3 The 


358 


The Concluhan. 


E have from the foregoing Experi- 

ments many proofs of the very great 
and different quantities of moifture imbibed 
and perfpired by different kinds of Trees, 
and alfo of the infiuence of the feveral ftates 
of the air, asto warm or cold, wet or dry, 
have on that perfpiration. We fee alfo what 
ftores of moifture nature has provided in 
the Earth againft a dry feafon, to anfwer 
this great expence of it in the produ€tion 
and fupport of vegetables; how far the 
dew can contribute to this fupply, and how 
infufficient its fmall quantity is towards 
making good the great demands of perfpira- 
tion: And that plants can plentifully imbibe 
moifture thro’ their ftems and leaves as well 
as perfpire it. 

We fee with what degrees of warmth the 
fun, that kindly natural genius of vegetation, 
acts on the feveral parts of vegetables, from 
their tops down to their roots two feet under 
ground. 

_ We have alfo many proofs of the great 
force with which plants and their feveral 
branches and leaves imbibe moifture, up 

their 


The Conclufion. 359 
their capillary fap veflels : The great influence 
the perfpiring leaves have in this work, and 
the care nature has taken to place them in 
fuch order, and at fuch proper diftances, as 
may render them moft ferviceable to this 
purpofe, efpecially in bringing plenty of nou- 
rifhment to the young growing fhoots and 
fruit whofe ftem isufually furrounded with 
them near the fruit’s infertion into the twig. 

We fee here too that the growth of fhoots, 
leaves and fruit, confifts in the extenfion of 
every part ; for the effecting of which, na- 
ture has provided innumerable little veficles, 
which being replete with dilating moifture, 
it does thereby powerfully extend, and draw 
out every ductile part. 

We have here alfo many inftances of the 
great force of the afcending fap in the vine 
in the bleeding feafon; asalfo of the fap’s 
freely either afcending or defcending, as it 
fhall happen to be drawn by the perfpiring 
leaves; and alfo of its ready lateral motion 
thro’ the laterally communicating fap veffels; 
together with many proofs of the greae 
plenty of air drawn in and mixed with the 
fap and incorporated into the fubftance of 
vegetables. 


If therefore thefe Experiments and Obfer-- 
erie aa vations 


360 = The Conclufton. 


vations give us any farther infight into the 
nature of plants, they will then doubtlefs 
be of fome ufe in Agriculture and Garden- 
ing, either by ferving to reGtify fome miftaken 
notions, or by helping farther to explain the 
reafons of many kinds of culture, which 
long repeated experience has found to be good; 
and perhaps by leading us to make fome advan- 
cestherein : But as it requires along feries and 
great variety of frequently repeated Experi- 
ments and Obfervations, to make a very 
{mall advance in the knowledge of the 
nature of vegetables; fo proportionably we 
are from thence only to expe& fome graduai 
improvements in the culture of them. 

-The fpecifick differences of vegetables, 
which are all fuftained and grow from the 
fame nourifhment, is doubtle{s owing to the 
very different formation of their minute 
veffels, whereby an almoft infinite variety of 
combinations of the common principles of 
vegetables is made; whence fome abound 
more with fome principles and fome with 
others. Hence fome are ofa warmer and more 
fulphureous, others of a more watry, faline, 
therefore colder nature; fome of a more 
firm and lafting, others of a more lax and 
perifhable conftitution. Hence alfo it is that 
| fome 


The Conclufion. 361 


fome plants flourifh beft in one climate, and 
others in another;that much moifture is kind- 
ly to fome, and hurtful to others ; that fome 
require aftrong, rich, and othersa poor, fandy 
foil ; fome do beft in the fhade, and others in 
the fun, @vc. And could our eyes attain toa 
fight of the admirable texture of the parts on 
which the {pecifick differences in plants de- 
pends, what an amazing and beautiful fcene 
of inimitable embroidery fhould we behold? 
what a variety of mafterly ftrokes of machi- 
nery? what evident marks of confummate 
wifdom fhould we be entertained with 3} 

We may obferve that the conftitution of 
plants is curioufly adapted to the prefent 
ftate of things, fo as to be moft flourifhing 
and vigorous in a middle flate of the air, vz. 
when there is adue mixture and proportion 
of warm and cold, wet anddry ; but when the 
feafons deviate far to any extream of thefe, 
then arethey lefs or more injurious to the 
feveral forts of vegetables according to the 
very different degrees of hardinefs, or healthy 
latitude they enjoy. 

The different feafonsin which plantsthrive 
beft, feemsto depend, among other caufes, 
onthe very different quantities imbibed and 
perfpired by different kinds 


362 The Conclufion. 

kinds of plants. Thus the Ever-greens per- 

fpiring little, and having thereby a thick, 

viicid, oily fap, they can the better endure 

the winter's cold, and fubfift with little frefh 

nourifhment: They feem many of them to 

flourifh moft in the temperate feafons of the 

year, but not fo wellin the hotteft part of 
Summer, becaufe their perfpiration is then 
fomewhat too great,in proportion tothe low 
afcent of the fap, which makes fome of them 
at that feafon to abate of their vigor: Thus 
fome plants, which grow and thrive with 
the flow perfpiration of Fanuary and Fe- 

bruary, perifh as the {pring advances, and the 
~ warmth and per{piration is too great fog 
them. And thus Garden Peafeand Beans, 

which are fown in what is found to be their 
proper feafon, viz. in November, Fanuary, 

or February, tho’ they make but a flow pro- 

grefsin their growth upwards, during the 

cold feafon, yet their roots, as alfo thofe of 
Winter corns, do in the mean time fhoot well 
into the warmer Earth, fo as to be able to 
afford plenty of nourifhment when the fea- 
fon advances, and there is a greater demand 

of it both for nutrition and perfpiration. But 

when Peafe are fown in Fume, in order for a 

crop 


The Conclufion. 363 


ctop in September, they rarely thrive well, 
unlefs in a cool moift fummer, by reafon of 
the too great perfpiration caufed by the fum- 
mer’s heat, which drys and hardens their 
fibres before they are full grown. 

Tho’ we have from thefe Experiments, 
and from common obfervation, many proofs 
of the great expanfive force, with which the 
fibrous roots of plants fhoot, yet the lefs 
refiftance thefe tender fhoots meet with, the 
greater progrefs they will certainly make in 
equal times: And therefore one confidera- 
ble ufe of fallowing and trenching ground, 
and of mixing therewith feveral forts of com. 
poft, as Chalk, Lime, Marle, Mold, ge. 
is not only thereby to replenifh it with rich 
manure, but alfo to loofen and mellow the 
foil, not only that the air may the more 
eafily penetrate to the roots, but alfo thar 
the roots may the more readily make vigo- 
rous fhoots. And the greater proportion the 
furface of the roots bears to the furface of 
the plants above ground, fo much the greater 
quantity of nourifhment they will afford, 
and confequently the plants will be the more 
vigorous, and better able to weather it out, 
againft unkindly feafons, than thofe plants 

whole 


364 The Conclufion. 


whofe roots have made much fhorter fhoots. 
Herein therefore confifts the great care 
and skill of the Husbandman, to adapt 
his different forts of Husbandry to the 
very different foils, feafons and kinds of 
grain; that the feveral forts of earth, from 
the very ftiff and ftrong ground, to the 
loofe light earths, may be wrought to the 
beft temper they are capable of, for the 
kindly fhooting and nourifhing of the roots. 
And probably the Husbandman might get 
many ufeful hints, to direct him in adapt- 
ing the feveral kinds of manure, and dif- 
ferent forts and feafons of culture to his 
different foils and grains: If in the feve- 
ral ftages and growth of his Corn, he would 
not only make his obfervations, on what 
appears above ground, but would alfo fre- 
quently dig up, compare and examin the 
roots of plants of each fort, efpecially of 
thofe which grew in different foils, and were 
any how cultivated in a different manner 
from each other ; this would inform them. 
alfo, whether they fowed their Corn too 
thick or too thin, by comparing the branch- 
ings and extent of each root, with the {pace 
of ground allotted it to grow in. 


And 


The Conclufion. 365 


And fince we find fo great a quantity of 
air infpired and mixt with the fap, and 
wrought into the fubftance of vegetables , 
the advantage of ploughing and fallowing 
ground feems to arife not only from the 
killing the weeds, and making it more mel- 
low, for the {hooting of the roots of Corn; 
but it is thereby alfo the better expofed to 
have the fertilizing, fulphureous, aereal and 
acid particles of the air mixt with it, which 
make land fruitful, as is evident from the 
fertility which the {word or furface of land 
acquires, by being long expofed to the air, 
without any culture or manure whatever. 

We have feen many proofs of the great 
quantities of liquor imbibed and perfpired 
by plants, and the very fenfible influence 
which different ftates of the air had on their 
more or lefs free perfpiration : A main 
‘intention therefore to be attended to in 
the culture of them, is to take due care, 
that they be fown or planted in proper 
feafons and foils, fuch as will afford them 
their due proportion of nourifhment ; which 
foils, as they are exhaufted, ‘mutt, as ‘tis well 
known, from time to time, be replenifhed 
with frefh compoft, {uch as is full of faline, 

fulphu- 


366 The Conclufion. 

fulphureous and aereal particles, with which 
common dung, lime, afhes, fword, or burn 
bated turf abound: As alfo fuch manures 
as have nitrous and other falts in them; for 
tho’ neither nitre nor common falt be found 
in vegetables; yet fince they are obferved 
to promote fertility, it is reafonable to con- 
clude, that their texture is greatly altered 
in vegetation, by having their acid volatile 
falts feparated from the attracting central 
air and earthy particles, and thereby mak- 
ing new combinations: with the nutritive 
juice ; and the probability of this is further 
confirmed from the great plenty of air and 
volatile falt, which is found in another com- 
bination of them, vzz. in the Tartar of fer- 
menting liquors: For it is the opinion of 
Chymifts, that there is but one volatile fale 
in nature, out of which all other kinds of 
falts are formed by very different combi- 
nations, all which nutritive principles do 
by various combinations with the cultivated 
earth, compofe that nutritive ductile mat- 
ter, out of which the parts of vegetables 
are formed, and without which the watry 
vehicle alone cannot render a barren foil 
fruitful. 

r Nog 


= 


The Conclufion. 367 

Nor is this the only care, the thriving 
and fertility of plants and trees depends much 
upon the happy influence and concurrence 
of a great variety of other circumftances. 
Thus many trees are unfruitful by being 
planted too deep, whereby their roots being 
in too moift a ftate, and too far from the 
proper influence of the Sun, whofe power 
greatly decreafes the deeper we go, as we 
fee in Experiment 20. they imbibe roo much 
crude moifture, which tho’ productive of 
wood, is yet unkindly for fruit. 

Or if when not planted too deep, they 
are full of crude fap, either by being too 
luxurious, or too much fhaded ; or are plan- 
ted in a moift, when they delight in a dry 
foil, then the fap is not fo fufficiently di- 
gefted by the Sun’s warmth, as to be in 
that ductile ftate, which is proper for the 
producing of fruit. 

And thus the Vine, which is known to 
thrive well in a dry, gravelly, rocky foil, 
will not be fo fruitful in a moift, ftiff, clay 
ground: And accordingly we may obferve 
in Experiment the 3d, that tho’ the Vine 
imbibed and perfpired more than the Ever- 
grecn, yet it perfpired lefs than the Apple- 

tree, 


368 The Couclufion. 


tree, which delights in, and bears beft in 4 
{trong brick-earth clay; for tho’ the Vine 
bleeds moft freely in its feafon, produces 
many long fucculent fhoots, and bears great 
plenty of a very juicy frait, yet from thar 
Experiment it is plain, that it is not a great 
perfpirer, and therefore thrives beftina dry, 
rocky, or gravelly foil. | 

The confiderable quantity of moifture, 
which by Experiment 16. is perfpired from 
the branches of trees, during the cold win- 
ter feafon, plainly fhews the reafon, why in 
a long feries of cold north-eafterly winds, 
the bloffoms, and tender young fet fruit and 
leaves, are in the early {pring fo frequently 
blafted, vzz. by having the moiiture exhaled 
fafter than it can be fupplied from the trees ; 
for doubtlefs that. moifture rifes the flower 
from the root, the colder the feafon is, tho’ 
it rifes in fome degree all the winter, as is 
evident from the fame Experiment. 

And from the fame caufe it is, that the 
leafy fpires of Corn are by thefe cold dry- 
ing winds often faded and turned yellow; 
which makes the Husbandman, on thefe oc- 
cafions, with for {now ; which tho’ it be very 
cold, yet it not only defends the root from 

being 


The Couclufion. = — 369 
being frozen, but alfo {creens the Corn 
from thefe drying winds, and keeps it in a 
moift, florid, fupple ftate. 

It feems therefore to be a very reafonable 
dire@ion which is given by fome of the 
Authors who write on Agriculture and Gar- 
dening, vzz. during thefe cold drying winds, 
when little dew falls, to water the trees in 
dry foils, in the bloffoming feafon, and while 
the young fet fruit is tender; and provided 
there is no immediate danger of a froft, or 
in cafe of continued froft, to take care to 
cover the trees well, and ‘at the fame time 
to {prinkle them with water, which is imi- 
tating nature’s method of watering every part: 
But if the fuccefs of this pra€tice in cold 
weather may be thought a little doubtful s 
yet the {prinkling the bodies and leaves of 
trees, in a very hot anddry fummer {eafon, 
feems moft reafonable, for by Exper. 42, 
they will imbibe much moifture. 

As to floping fhelters over Wall-trees, I 
have often found, that when they are fo 
broad as to prevent any rain or dew com- 
ing at the trees, they do more harm than 
good, in thefe long eafterly drying winds, 
becaufe they prevent the rain and dews 
falling on thém, which would not only 
. Bb refrefh 


370 The Conclufion. 

refrefh and fupple them, but alfo convey 
nourifhment to them: But in the cafe of 
fharp frofts after fhowers of rain, thefe fhel. 
ters and other fences muft needs be of ex- 
cellent ufe to prevent the almoft total de- 
firuction which is occafioned by the freez- 
ing of the tender parts of vegetables, when 
they are full faturate with rain. 

The full proof we have from thefe Ex- 
periments, ofthe ferviceablenefs of the leayes 
in drawing up the fap, and the care we fee 
nature takes, in furnifhing the twigs with 
plenty of them, principally, near the fruit, 
may inftruct us on the one hand, not to be 
too lavifh in pruning them off, and to be 
ever mindful to leave fome on the branch 
beyond the fruit ; and on the other hand, to 
be as careful to cut off all fuperfluous fhoots, 
which we are affured do draw off in wafte 
great quantity of nourifhment. And might 
it not be advifeable, among many other ways 
which are prefcribed, to try whether the 
too great luxuriancy of a tree or branch 
could not be much checked by pulling off 
fome of its leaves? How many experience 
will beft teach us, the pulling all off will 
endanger the killing the branch or tree. 

There is another very confiderable ufe of 

3 the 


The Conclufion. 371 


the leaves, vzz. to keep the growing fruit in 
a fupple dudile ftate, by defending it from 
the Sun and drying winds, which by tough- 
ning and hardening its fibres {poil its growth, 
when too much expofedto them; but when 
full grown, or near it, a little more Sun 
is often very needful to ripen it. In hot- 
ter climates fruits want more fhade than 
in this country, and here too, more fhade 
is needful in a hot dry fummer, than in a 
Wet cool one. 

The confideration of the ftrong imbibing 
power of the branches of trees, and the rea- 
dinefs with which we fee t he fap paffes to and 
fro, te follow the ftrongeft attraction, may per- 
haps give fome ufeful hints to the Gardiner, 
in the pruning and fhaping of his trees, in 
checking the too luxuriant, andhelping and 
encouraging the unthriving partsof trees. 

It is a conftant rule among Gardiners,foun- 
ded on long experience, to prune weak trees 
early in the winter, becaufe they find that 
late pruning checks them; and for the 
fame reafon to prune luxuriant trees late in 
the f{pring, in order to check their luxuri- 
ancy. Now it is evident that this check does 
not proceed from any confiderable lofs of 
fap at the wounds of the pruned tree, ex- 

Bb z cepting 


272 The Couclufion. 


cepting the cafe of a few bleeding trees when 
cut in that feafon, but muft arife from fome 
other caufe; for by Experiment 12 and 37. 
where mercurial gages were fixed to the ftems 
of frefh cut trees, thofe wounds were con- 
{tantly in a ftrongly imbibing ftate, except 
the Vine in the bleeding feafon. | 

When a weak tree is pruned early in the 
beginning of the winter, the orifices of the 
fap-veffels are clofed uplong before the {pring 
as is evident from many Experiments in the 
rft, 2d and 3d chapters; and confequently 
when in the {pring and fummer the warm 
weather advances, the attracting force of the 
perf{piring leaves is not then weakened by 
many inlets from frefh wounds, but is wholly 
exerted in drawing fap from the root. Where- 
as on the other hand, when a luxuriant 
tree is pruned late in the fpring, the force 
Oi its leaves to attract fap from the root 
will be much fpent and loft at the feveral 
frefh cut inlets. 

Befides, the early pruned tree being eafed 
of feveral of its twigs or branches, has: there- 
by the advantage of ftanding thro’ the whole 
Winter, with a head better proportioned to 
its weak root. And fince by Exper. 16. the 
fap is found to afcend in the winter, lefs of 

that 


The Conclufion. 373 


that than cold crude juice is drawn thro’ 
the roots and ftem, to fupply the perfpi- 
ration of the remaining boughs, whereby 
the fap of the tree is probably lefs depau- 
perated than it would have been, if all 
the boughs had remained on. For thefe rea. 
fons, early pruning fhould in the main, and 
excepting fome eafes, be better than late. 
And the reafonablenefs of this practice 
is further confirmed by the experience of 
Mr. Palmer, a curious Gentleman of Chel- 
fea, who has found, that by pruning his 
Vines, and pulling all the leaves off them in 
September,as foon asthe fruit was off, they have 
born greater plenty of Grapes than other 
Vines, particularly in the year 1726. when 
by reafon of the extreme wetnefs and cold_ 
nefs of the preceding fummer, the unripe 
fhoots produced generally very little fruit. 
From many Experiments in the fecond 
Chapter, the Gardiner will fee with what 
force his grafts imbibe fap from the ftock, 
efpecially that ductile nourifhment from be- 
tween the barkand wood; which correfpond- 
ing parts he well knows by conftant expe- 
rience mutt be carefully adapted to each other 
in grafting, thofe grafts being always beft 
whofe buds are not far afunder, vz. be- 
caule 


374 The Couclufion. 


caufe their expanding leaves; can therefore 
draw up fap the more vigoroufly. 

The great quantities of moifture which 
we find by Experiment 12 are imbibed at 
wounds where branches are cut off, fhews 
the reafonablenefs of the caution ufed by 
many who are defirous to preferve their trees, 
viz. either by plaiftring or covering with 
Sheet-lead the very large wounds of trees, 
to defend their trunks from being rotted by 
the foaking in of rain. 

And from the fame 12th Experiment a 
hint may be taken to make fome attempts 
to give an artificial tafte to fruits, by making 
trees imbibe in the fame manner fome 
ftrongly tinged or perfumed liquor, which 
is not fpirituous, for that we fee will kill the 
tree. I have made the ftem of a branch of a 
tree imbibe two quarts of water without 
killing it; If any are defirous to make this 
Experiment they fhould take care to cut the 
ftump which is to imbibe the liquor as long 
as they can, that there may be the more 
room, from time to time, to cut off an inch 
er two ofthe top, when it is grown fo faturate 
with liquor that more will not pafs. 

Tho’ Ever-greens are found to imbibe and 
perfpire much lefs than other trees, yet is 
| ; the 


The Conclufion. 375 
the quantity they perfpire fo confiderable, 
that it has always been one of the greateft 
difficulties in the ordering of a Green-houfe 
to let in frefh air enough without expofing 
the plants to too much cold. For fince the 
perfpiration of trees will not be free and 
kindly in aclofe damp air, the fap will be 
apt to ftagnate, which will make the plants 
stow moldy, or they will be fickly, by im- 
bibing fuch damp rancid vapours; for by 
Mr. Miller’s curious obfervations on the 
perfpiration of the Péantam tree of the 
Weft-Indies, and of the A/ve under Experi- 
ment 5, plants will often imbibe moifture in 
the night as well in ftoves as common Green- 
houfes without fire ; it is certainly of as great 
importance tothe life of the plants to dif- 
charge that infected rancid air, by the ad- 
mittance of frefh, as it is to defend them from 
the extream cold of the outward air, which 
will deftroy them if let in immediately upon 
them. It feems therefore to be a very reafon- 
able method which fome ufe, vze. to cover 
fome of the inlets of their Green-houfes on 
all fides with canvafs, and in extream cold 
weather with fhutters made of reed or ftraw; 
through which the air can only pafs in little 
fireams: The like contrivance would pro= 

bably 


376 The Couclufion. 


bably alfo be of good fervice to purify 
gradually the thick rancid fumes which arife 
from the dung of hot beds, and are often 
very deftrudtive of the tender plants: This is 
‘to imitate nature, which while fhe provides 
for the defence of living creatures againft 
the cold, by agood covering of Hair, Wool, 
or Feathers, at the fame time fhe takes care 
that the air may have admittance through 
innumerable narrow meanders in fuch quan- 
tities as may be fufficient to carry off the 
per{piring matter. 

I have here, and as occafion offered under 
feveral of the foregoing Experiments, only 
touched upon a few of the moft obvious 
inftances, wherein thefe kind of refearches 
may poflibly be of fervice in giving us ufe- 
ful hints in the culture of plants: Tho’ I 
am very fenfible, that it is from long ex- 
perience chiefly that we are to expect the 
moft certain rules of practice, yet it is with- 
al to be remembred, that the likelieft method 
to enable us to make the moft judicious 
obfervations, and to put us upon the moft 
probable means of improving any art, isto 
get the beft infight we can into the nature 
and properties of thofe things which we are 
defirous to cultivate and improve. 

EIN IS, 


oe 


Tat 


penta 


» Ore 


> 4 - 5 
ey Ne ELA 


ae ; aie” 


Yo) ea aa 

Larry mieten ees 
“e c ca , 4 , 
“ey 7: 48 ‘ fis G : ‘ 


Lap Saat haan 1 
eer, 


‘ 
¥ 
pees a 
Td es hb vate’ 
7 ae : 


pen, =
