A Modeft Enquiry

Into the Nature- of

l

AND

i How Pcrfons Guilty of that Crime
1 may be ConvitteJ : And the means
; u.ccl ior .their Dikrovery Dilcuffedj

j both Negatively and Affirmatively*

according t<^ SCRIPIVR’P and
r X P E 'K I E N C B.

By $ale,

Pahor oi The Church ofChrM in Bevtrfa
An*o Df'winr 1^7-'

_ ___ j , r | n -

U Familiar . r.:l ante tfi^itjkat f «?,««

i I To the Lav an,! to the TtBimon^ t( -they }ft*k
not aeeordin^ to tins word* it it btial&tbtri is no
light in 1 faith VI 11* 1

T hat wf/tch V 1 n?t t**cb thou me. Job 34 3’ 2 ’ 1

B OS TO N in N. E
. Printed- by B. Green, and 7* ?%'*> * nl
l Benjamin Eliot under the TeWn Hnute. 170?

Title Page

Page 1

A Modest Enquiry Into the Nature of Witchcraft, AND How
Persons Guilty of that Crime may be Convicted: And the means
used for their Discovery Discussed, both Negatively and
Affirmatively, according to SCRIPTURE and EXPERIENCE. By John
Dale, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Beverley, Anno Domini
1697. When they say unto you, seek unto them that have
Familiar Spirits and unto Wizzards, that peep, and c To the Law
and to the Testimony; if they speak not according, to this word,
it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah VIII. 19, 20. That
which I see not teach thou me, Job 34. 32. BOSTON in N. E.
Printed by B. Green, and J. Alten, for Benjamin Eliot under the
Town House. 1702.

Page 2

Any general Custom against the Law of God is void. St. Germans
Abridgment of Common Law. Lib. 1. C. 6. Omnium legum est
inanis censura nisi Divin legis imaginem gerat. Finch of Common
Law. Lib. 4. C. 3. Where a Law is grounded upon a Presumption,
if the Presumption fail the Law is not to be holden in Conscience.
Abridgment of C. Law. Lib. 1. C. 19.

To the Reader

Page 3

An Epistle to the READER. It hath been said of Old, That Time is
the Mother of Truth, and Truth is the Daughter of Time. It is the
Prerogative of the God of Truth, to know all the truth in all things
at once and together: It is also his Glory to conceal a
matter, Prov. 25. 2. And to bring the truth to light in that manner
and measure, and the times appointed, as it pleaseth him; it is
our duty in all humility, and with fear and trembling to search
after truth, knowing that secret things belong to God, and only
things revealed belong to us, and so far as they are revealed; for
in many things it may be said what God is doing we know not
now; but we, or others that succeed us; shall know hereafter.
Omitting other Examples, I shall Instance only in the matter of
Witchcraft, which on the Humane side, is one of the most hidden
Works of Darkness, managed by the Rulers of the darkness of
this World, to the doing of great spoil amongst the Children of
men: And on the Divine side, it is one of the most awful and
tremendous

Page 4

Judgments of God which can be inflicted on the Societies of men,
especially when the Lord shall please for his own Holy Ends to
Enlarge Satans Commission in more than an ordinary way. It is
known to all men, that it pleased God some few years ago, to
suffer Satan to raise much trouble amongst us in that respect,
the beginning of which was very small, and looked on at first as
an ordinary case which had fallen out before at several times in
other places, and would be quickly over. Only one or two persons
belonging to Salem Village about five miles from the Town being
suspected, were Examined, and c. But in the progress of the
matter, a multitude of other persons both in that and other
Neighbour Towns, were Accused, Examined, Imprisoned, and
came to their Trials, at Salem, the County Town, where about
Twenty of them Suffered as Witches; and many others in danger
of the same Tragical End: and still the number of the Accused
increased unto many Scores; amongst whom were many Persons
of unquestionable Credit, never under any grounds of suspicion
of that or any other Scandalous Evil. This brought a general
Consternation upon all sorts of People, doubting what would be
the issue of such a dreadful Judgment of God upon the Country;
but the Lord was pleased suddenly to put a stop to those
proceedings, that there was no further trouble, as hath been
related by others. But it left in the minds of men a sad
remembrance of that sorrowful time; and a Doubt whether some
Innocent Persons might not

Page 5

Suffer, and some guilty Persons Escape. There is no doubt but
the Judges and Juries proceeded in their Integrity, with a zeal of
God against Sin, according to their best light, and according to
Law and Evidence; but there is a Question yet unresolved.
Whether some of the Laws, Customs and Principles used by the
Judges and Juries in the Trials of Witches in England (which were
followed as Patterns here) were not insufficient and unsafe. As
for my Self, being under the Infirmities of a decrepit Old Age, I
stirred little abroad, and was much disenabled (both in body and
mind) from knowing and judging of Occurrents and Transactions
of that time: But my Reverend Brother Mr. Hale, having for
above Thirty Years, been Pastor of the Church at Beverly (but
Two Miles from Salem, where the Tryals were) was frequently
present, and was a diligent Observer of all that passed, and being
one of a Singular Prudence and Sagacity, in searching into the
narrows of things: He hath (after much deliberation) in this
Treatise, related the Substance of the Case as it was, and given

Reasons from Scripture against some of the Principles and
Practises then used in the Tryals of Witchcraft; and said
something also in a Positive way, and shewing the right
Application that is to be made of be whole, and all this in such a
pious and modest manner, as cannot be offensive to any, but
may be generally acceptable to all the lovers of Truth and Peace.

Page 6

I am the more willing to accompany him to the Press, because I
am perswaded such a Treatise as this is needful and useful, upon
divers accounts. As, 1. That the Works of God may be known;
and that God may be more acknowledged and adored, in his
Justice, and in his Mercy: in his Justice, by letting loose Evil
Angels, to make so great a spoyl amongst us as they did, for the
Punishment of a declining People: And in his Mercy, by
Countermanding of Satans Commission, and keeping of him in
Chains of restraint, that he should proceed no further Psal 83.
last. 2. That the Truth of things may be more fully known, so far
as God shall please to reveal the same in the use of lawful
means; for the Judgments of God are a great deep, and he is
wont to make known truth by degrees; and Experience teacheth
us, there is need of more to be said than hath been yet, for the
clearing up of difficulties about the matter of Witchcraft. We
ought to be fellow helpers to the truth. 3 Epistle of John 8. v. 3
That whatever Errors or Mistakes we fell into, in the dark hour of
Temptation that was upon us, may be (upon more light) so
discovered, acknowledged and disowned by us, as that it may be
matter of Warning and Caution to those that come after us, that
they may not fall into the like. 1 Cor. 10. 11. Faelix quern faciunt
aliena pericula cautum. 4. And that it may Occasion the most
Learned and Pious men to make a further and fuller Enquiry

Page 7

into the matter of Witchcraft, especially into the positive part,
How Witches may be so discovered, that innocent persons may
be preserved, and none but the guilty may suffer. Prov 17. 15.
Verily whosoever shall by the Grace of God be en abled to
Contribute further light in this matter, will do good Service to
God and Men in his Generation. I would also propound and leave
it as an Object of Consideration to our Honoured Magistrates and
Reverend Ministers, Whether the /Equity of that Law in Leviticus,
Chap. 4 for a Sin offering for the Rulers and for the
Congregation, in the case of Sins of Ignorance, when they come
to be known, be not Obliging, and for direction to us in a Gospel
way. Now the Father of Lights and Mercies grant unto us, that
Merey and Truth may meet together, that righteousness and

peace may kiss each other, that the Glory of God may dwell in
our Land; and that it may be said of New England;The Lord Bless
thee, 0 Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness. Finally,
That the Blessing of Heaven may go along with this little Treatise
to attain the good Ends thereof, is, and shall be the Prayer of
him who is daily waiting for his Change, and looking for the
Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life: March 23d,

1697, 8. John Digginson, Pastor of the Church, of Salem. /Etatis
82.

Preface

Page 8

The Preface TO THE Christian READER. The Holy Scriptures
inform us that the Doctrine of Godliness is a great
Mystery, containing the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven:
Mysteries which require great search for the finding out: And as
the Lord hath his Mysteries to bring us to Eternal Glory; so Satan
hath his Mysteries to bring us to Eternal Ruine: Mysteries not
easily understood, whereby the depths of Satan are managed in
hidden wayes. So the Whore of Babylon makes the Inhabitants of
the Earth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, by the Mystery
of her abominations, Rev. 17. 2. And the man of Sin hath his
Mystery of iniquity whereby he deceiveth men through the
working of Satan in signes and lying wonders, 2 Thes. 2 3, 7, 9.
And among Satans Mysteries of iniquity, this of Witchcraft is one
of the most difficult to be searched out by the Sons of men; as
appeareth

Page 9

by the great endeavours of Learned and Holy men to search it
out, and the great differences that are found among them, in the
rules laid down for the bringing to light these hidden works of
darkness. So that it may seem presumption in me to undertake
so difficult a Theam, and to lay down such rules as are different
from the Sentiments of many Eminent writers, and from the
Presidents and practices of able Lawyers; yea and from the
Common Law it self. But my Apology for this undertaking is; 1.
That there hath been such a dark dispensation by the Lord,
letting loose upon us the Devil, Anno. 1691. and 1692. as we
never experienced before: And thereupon apprehending and
condemning persons for Witchcraft; and nextly acquitting others
no less liable to such a charge; which evidently shew we were in
the dark, and knew not what to do; but have gone too far on the
one or other side, if not on both. Hereupon I esteemed it
necessary for some person to Collect a Summary of that affair,

with some animadversions upon it, which might at least give
some light to them which come after, to shun those Rocks by
which we were bruised, and narrowly escaped Shipwrack upon.
And I have waited five years for some other person to undertake
it, who might doe it better than I can, but find none; and judge it
better to do what I can,

Page 10

than that such a work should be left undone. Better sincerely
though weakly done, then not at all, or with such a byas of
prejudice as will put false glosses upon that which was managed
with uprightness of heart, though there was not so great a spirit
of discerning, as were to be wished in so weighty a
Concernment. 2. I have been present at several Examinations
and Tryals, and knew sundry of those that Suffered upon that
account in former years, and in this last affair, and so have more
advantages than a stranger, to give account of these
Proceedings. 3. I have been from my Youth trained up in the
knowledge and belief of most of those principles I here question
as unsafe to be used. The first person that suffered on this
account in New England, about Fifty years since, was my
Neighbour, and I heard much of what was charged upon her, and
others in those times; and the reverence I bore to aged, learned
and judicious persons, caused me to drink in their principles in
these things, with a kind of Implicit Faith. Quo semel est imbuta
recens servabit odorem, Testa diu A Child will not easily forsake
the principles he hath been trained up in from his Cradle. But
observing the Events of that sad Catastrophe, Anno 1692. I was
brought to a more strict scanning of the principles I had imbibed,
and by scanning, to question, and by questioning

Page 11

at length to reject many of them, upon the reasons shewed in
the ensuing Discourse. It is an approved saying. Nihil certius,
quam quod ex dubio fit certum: No truth more certain to a man,
than that which he hath formerly doubted or denied, and is
recovered from his error, by the convincing evidence of Scripture
and reason. Yet I know and am sensible, that while we know but
in part, man is apt in flying from a discovered error, to run into
the contrary extream. Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare
Charybdim. The middle way is commonly the way of truth. And if
any can shew me a better middle way than I have here laid
down, I shall be ready to embrace it: But the conviction must not
be by vinegar or drollery, but by strength of argument. 4. I have
had a deep sence of the sad consequence of mistakes in matters
Capital; and their impossibility of recovering when compleated.

And what grief of heart it brings to a tender conscience, to have
been unwittingly encouraging of the Sufferings of the innocent.
And I hope a zeal to prevent for the future such sufferings is
pardonable, although there should be much weakness, and some
errors in the pursuit thereof. 5. I observe the failings that have
been on the one hand, have driven some into that which is
indeed an extream on the other hand,

Page 12

and of dangerous consequence, vix. To deny any such persons to
beunder theNew Testament, who by the Devils aid discover
Secrets, or do work wonders. Therefore in the latter part of this
discourse, I have taken pains to prove the Affirmative, yet with
brevity, because it hath been done already by Perkins of
Witchcraft. Glanvil his Saduciscus Triumphatus. Pt. 1. p. 1. to 90.
and Pt.2. p 1 to 80. Yet I would not be understood to justify all
his notions in those discourses, but acknowledge he hath
strongly proved the being of Witches. 6. I have special reasons
moving me to bear my testimony about these matters, before I
go hence and be no more; the which I have here done, and I
hope with some assistance of his Spirit to whom I commit my
self and this my labour, even that God whose I am and whom I
serve: Desiring his Mercy in Jesus Christ to Pardon all the Errors
of his People in the day of darkness; and to enable us to sight
with Satan by Spiritural Weapons, putting on the whole Armour
of God. And tho' Satan by his Messengers may busset Gods
Children, yet there's a promise upon right Resisting, he shall flee
from them, Jam. 4. 7. And that all things shall work together for
the good of those that Love the Lord, Rom. 8. 28. So that I
believe Gods Children shall be gainers by the affaults of Satan,
which occasion'd this Discourse; which that they may, is the
Prayer of, Thine in the Service of the Gospel. Beverly, Decemb.
15th. 1697 JOHN HALE

Chapter 1

Page 13

A Modest Enquiry, Into the Nature of WITCHCRAFT. CHAPTER I.
Sect. 1. The Angels who kept not their First Estate, by Sin
against God, lost their primitive purity, and glorious Excellency,
as to their moral qualifications, and became unclean, wicked,
envious, lyars, and full of all wickedness, which as Spirits they
are capable of. Yet I do not find in Scripture that they lost their
natural abilities of under, standing or power of Operation. 1. As
for their Understanding, they are called Daimon (which we
Translate Devil) because they are full of wisdom, cunning, skill,

subtilty and knowledge. He hath also the name of Serpent from
his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And his knowledge in the Scriptures,

Page 14

and wittiness to pervert them, appears by his quoting Scripture
to our Saviour When he tempted him Mat. 4. And as there be
many Devils, and these active, quick, swift and piercing Spirits,
so they going to and fro in the earth, and walking up and down
in it, have advantages to know all the actions of the Children of
men, both open and secret, their discourses, consultation and
much of the inward affections of men thereby; though still its
Gods prerogative immediately to know the heart. Jer. 17. 10. 2.
As to their natural power as Spirity, its very great, if not equal to
that of the Holy Angels: For, 1. They are called Principalities and
Powers Rom. 8. 38. Eph. 6. 12 Col. 2, 14, 15. compared with
Heb. 2 14. 15. Now these are names given to the Holy Angels
Eph. 1. 21. and 3. 10. 2. They are called, Rulers of the darkness
of this world, the Prince of the power of the Air. Eph. 6 12 and 2.
2. 3. Such was their power that they contended with Michael and
the Angels about the Body of Moses. 2 Pet. 2. 11. Jude 9. That
is, as I conceive, about preventing the Burial of the Body of
Moses. For it's said, Dent. 34. 6. The Lord buried him, and no
man knoweth of his Sepulcher to this day. That is, he did it by
the Ministry of Angels (for the Lord gave

Page 15

the Law, Exod. 20. 1 and that it was by the Ministry of Angels,
see Gal. 3. 19. so probably was the burial of Moses's Body) and
the Devils endeavour if possible, to discover Moses's Body, or
place of its burial, that they might draw Israel to commit Idolatry
in worshipping at his Tomb (as our Popish Fore-fathers did at
Thomas Beckets in Kent) from the Veneration they had to him as
their Law giver. 4. The Devils actings against Job, Chap. 1. and
2. and what he did to the Gadarens Swine, and c. Shew his great
power. So that we may conclude, had the Devils liberty to reveal
all that they know of the affairs of mankind, or to do all that is in
their power to perform, they would bring dreadful confusions and
de solations upon the World. Sect 2. The way God governs Devils
is by Chains. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6 ver. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 7, 8. whereby
they are kept Prisoners. Men are governed by Laws, by
convictions of Conscience. Rom. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. By Scripture
Rules, Humane Laws, and also by Gods Spirits 1 John 2. 20. But
Devils have no such Laws, or tenderness of Conscience to bridle
or restrain them. But the Lord hath his Chains, which are called
Everlasting, and are always lasting; so that they are never

wholly without a Chain. This Chain is somesimes greater and
shorter, other times lesser and

Page 16

longer, as the Lord pleaseth, for his own Glory, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 7,

8 For as the wrath of man praiseth the Lord, and the remainder
of wrath be doth restrain; Psal. 76. 10. So may we say of the
Devils wrath. Sect. 3. The Devil is full of malice against man, and
frames his designs against him, chiefly to destroy his Soul, as, 1
Pet. 5. 8 2 Cor. 11. 3 and other Scriptures abundantly testify.
Hence probably at sometimes he doth not all the hurt to mans
Body that he could, lest thereby he should awaken man to
repentance and prayer; he seeks to keep men in a false peace.
Luk. 11. 21. Yet at other times he disturbs and afflicts men in.
Body and Estate; as Scripture and experience shew. Among the
Devices Satan useth to ruine man, one is to allure him into such
a familiarity with him, that by Sorceries, Inchantments,
Divinations, and such like, he may lead them Captive at his
pleasure. This snare of his we are warned against. Deut. 18. 10,
11. and in other Scriptures. This Sin of men hearkening after
Satan in these ways is called Witchcraft; of which it is my
purpose to treat: But first I shall speak something Historically
what hath been done in New England, in prosecution of persons
suspected of this Crime. Sect. 4. Several persons have been
Charged

Page 17

with and suffered for the Crime of Witchcraft in the Governments
of the Massachusetts, New Haven, or Stratford and Connecticut,
from the year 1646. to the year 1692. Sect. 5. The first was a
Woman+ of Charlestown, Anno. 1647. or 48. She was suspected
partly because that after some angry words passing between her
and her Neighbours, some mischief befel such Neighbours in
their Creatures, or the like: partly because some things supposed
to be bewitched, or have a Charm upon them, being burned, she
came to the fire and seemed concerned. The day of her
Execution, I went in company of some Neighbours, who took
great pains to bring her to confession and repentance. But she
constantly professed her self innocent of that crime: Then one
prayed her to consider if God did not bring this punishment upon
her for some other crime, and asked, if she had not been guilty
of Stealing many years ago; she answered, she had stolen
something, but it was long since, and she had repented of it, and
there was Grace enough in Christ to pardon that long agoe; but
as for Witchcraft she was wholly free from it, and so she said
unto her Death. Sect. 6. And ther that suffered on that account

some time after, was a Dorchester Woman. And upon the day of
her Execution

Page 18

Mr. Thompson Minister at Brantry, and J. P. her former Master
took pains with her to bring her to repentance And she utterly
denyed her guilt of Witchcraft; yet justifyed God for bringing her
to that punishment: for she had when a single woman play'd the
harlot, and being with Child used means to destroy the fruit of
her body to conceal her sin and shame, and although she did
noteffect it, yet she was a Murderer in the sight of God for her
endeavours, and shewed great penitency for that sin; but owned
nothing of the crime laid to her charge. Sect. 7. Another
suffering in this kind was a Woman of Cambridge, against whom
a principal evidence was a Watertown Nurse, who testsityed, that
the said Kendal (so was the accused called) did bewitch to Death
a Child of Goodman Genings of Watertown; for the said Kendal
did make much of the Child, and then the Child was well, but
quickly changed its colour and dyed in a few hours after. The
Court took this evidence among others, the said Genings not
knowing of it. But after Kendal was Executed (who also denyed
her guilt to the Death,) Mr. Rich Brown knowing and hopeing
better things of Kendal, asked bid Genings if they suspected her
to bewitch their Child, they answered No. But they judged the
true cause of the Childs Death to be this, viz. The Nurse had the
night before carryed out the Child and

Page 19

kept it abroad in the Cold a long time, when the red gum was
come out upon it, and the Cold had struck in the red gum, and
this they judged the cause of the Childs death. And that said
Kendal did come in that day and make much of the Child, but
they apprehended no wrong to come to the Child by her. After
this the said Nurse was put into Prison for Adultery, and there
delivered of her base Child, and Mr. Brown went to her and told
her, It was just with God to leave her to this wickedness, as a
punishment for her Murdering goody Kendal by her false witness
bearing. But the Nurse dyed in Prison, and so the matter was not
farther inquired into. There was another Executed, of Boston
Anno 1656. for that crime. And two or three of Springfield, one
of which confessed; and said the occasion of her familiarity with
Satan was this: She had lost a Child and was exceedingly
discontented at it, and longed; Oh that she might see her Child
again! And at last the Devil in likeness of her Child came to her
bed side and talked with her, and asked to come into the bed to
her, and she received it into the bed to her that night and

several nights after, and so entred into covenant with Satan and
became a Witch This was the only confessor in these times in
this Government. Sect. 8. Another at Hartford, viz, Mary

Page 20

Johnson, mentioned in Remarkable Providences, P. 62, 63
Confessed her self a Witch. Who upon discontent and
sleuthfulness agreed with the Devil to do her work for her, and
fetch up the Swine. And upon her immoderate laughter at the
running of the Swine, as the Devil drove them, as she her self
said, was suspected and upon examination confessed. I have
also heard of a Girl at New Haven or Stratford, that confessed
her guilt. But all others denyed it unto the death unless one
Greensmith, at Hartford. Sect. 9. But it is not my purpose to give
a full relation of all that have suffered for that Sin, or of all the
particulars charged upon them, which probably is now
impossible, many witnessing Viva voce, those particulars which
were not fully recorded. But that I chiefly intend is to shew the
principles formerly acted upon in Convicting of that Crime; which
were such as these. 1. The first great principle laid down by a
person Eminent for Wisdom, Piety and Learning was; That the
Devil could not assume the shape of an innocent person in doing
mischiefs unto mankind: for if the Lord should suffer him in this,
he would subvert the course of humane Justice, by bringing men
to suffer for what he did in their Shapes. 2. Witchcraft being an
habitual Crime, on single witness to one Act of Witchcraft, and
another

Page 21

single witness to another such fact, made two witnesses against
the Crime and the party suspected. 3. There was searching of
the bodies of the suspected for such like teats, or spots (which
writers speak of) called the Devils marks; and if found, these
were accounted a presumption at least of guilt in those that had
them. 4. I observed that people laid great weight upon this;
when things supposed to be bewitched were burnt, and the
suspected person came to the fire in the time of it. Although that
Eminent person above said condemned this way of tryal, as
going to the Devil to find the Devil. 5. If after anger between
Neighbours mischief followed, this oft bred suspicion of
Witchcraft in the matter. In fine, the presumptions and
convictions used in former times were for substance the same
which we may read of in Keeble of the Common Law, and in
Bernard, and other Authors of that subject. Sect. 10. About 16 or
17. years since was accused a Woman of Newbury, and upon her
tryal the Jury brought her in Guilty. Yet the Governour Simon

Bradstreet Esq and some of the Magistrates repreived her, being
unsatisfyed in the Verdict upon these grounds. 1. They were not
satisfyed that a Specter doing mischief in her likeness, should be
imputed to her person, as a ground of guilt.

Page 22

2. They did not esteem one single witness to one fact, and
another single witness to another fact, for two witnesses, against
the person in a matter Capital. She being reprived, was carried
to her own home, and her Husband, (who was esteemed a
Sincere and understanding Christian by those that knew him)
desired some Neighbour Ministers, of whom I was one, to meet
together and discourse his Wife; the which we did: and her
discourse was very Christian among us, and still pleaded her
innocence as to that which was laid to her charge. We did not
esteem it prudence for us to pass any definitive Sentance upon
one under her circumstances, yet we inclined to the more
charitable side. In her last Sickness she was in much darkness
and trouble of Spirit, which occasioned a Judicious friend to
examine her strictly, Whether she had been guilty of Witchcraft,
but she said No: But the ground of her trouble was some
impatient and passionate Speeches and Actions of hers while in
Prison, upon the account of her suffering wrongfully; whereby
she had provoked the Lord, by putting some contempt upon his
word. And in fine, she sought her pardon and comfort from God
in Christ, and dyed so far as I understood, praying to and resting
upon God in Christ for Salvation. Sect. 11. The next that
Suffered was an Irish

Chapter 2

Page 23

Woman of Boston, suspected to bewitch John Goodwins Children,
who upon herTryal did in Irish (as was testified by the
Interpreters) confess her self guilty, and was condemned out of
her own mouth; (as Christ saith, Luk. 19.22. Out of thine own
mouth will I Judge thee.) The History of which is published by
Mr. Cotton Mather, (and attested by the other Ministers of
Boston and Charlstown,) in his Book, Entituled, Memorable
Providences, Printed Anno 1689. Thus far of the History of
Witches before the year, 1692. CHAPTER II. I. In the latter end
of the year 1691. Mr. Samuel Paris, Pastor of the Church in
Salem-Village, had a Daughter of Nine, and a Neice of about
Eleven years of Age, sadly Afflicted of they knew not what
Distempers; and he made his application to Physitians, yet still
they grew worse: And at length one Physitian gave his opinion,

that they were under an Evil Hand. This the Neighbours quickly
took up, and concluded they were bewitched. He had also an
Indian Man servant, and his Wife who afterwards confessed, that
without the knowledge of their Master or Mistress, they had
taken some of the Afflicted persons Urine, and mixing it with
meal had made a Cake, and baked it, to find out the Witch, as
they said.

Page 24

After this, the Afflicted persons cryed out of the Indian Woman,
named Tituba, that she did pinch, prick, and grievously torment
them, and that they saw her here and there, where no body else
could. Yea they could tell where she was, and what she did,
when out of their humane sight. These Children were bitten and
pinched by invisible agents; their arms, necks, and backs turned
this way and that way, and returned back again, so as it was
impossible for them to do of themselves, and beyond the power
of any Epileptick Fits, or natural Disease to effect. Sometimes
they were taken dumb, their mouths stopped, their throats
choaked, their limbs wracked and tormented so as might move
an heart of stone, to sympathize with them, with bowels or
compassion for them. I will not enlarge in the description of their
cruel Sufferings, because they were in all things afflicted as bad
as John Goodwins Children at Boston, in the year 1689. So that
he that will read Mr. Mathers Book of Memorable Providences,
page 3. and c may Read part of what these Children, and
afterwards sundry grown persons suffered by the hand of Satan,
as Salam Village, and parts adjacent, Anno 1691, 2 Yet there
was more in these Sufferings, than in those at Boston, by pins
invisibly stuck into their flesh pricking with Irons. (As in part
published in a Book Printed 1693. viz. The Wonders of the
Invisible World)

Page 25

Mr. Paris seeing the distressed condition of his Family, desired
the presence of some Worthy Gentlemen of Salem, and some
Neighbour Ministers to consult together at his House; who when
they came, and had enquired diligently into the Sufferings of the
Afflicted, concluded they were preternatural, and feared the hand
of Satan was in them. II. The advice given to Mr. Paris by them
was, that he should sit still and wait upon the Providence of God
to see what time might discover; and to be much in prayer for
the discovery of what was yet secret. They also Examined Tituba,
who confessed the making a Cake, as is above mentioned, and
said her Mistress in her own Country was a Witch, and had
taught her some means to be used for the discovery of a Witch

and for the prevention of being bewitched, and c. But said that
she her self was not a Witch. III. Soon after this, there were two
or three private Fasts at the Ministers House, one of which was
kept by sundry Neighbour Ministers, and after this, another in
Publick at the Village, and several days afterwards of publick
Humiliation, during these molestations, not only there, but in
other Congregations for them. And one General Fast by Order of
the General Court, observed throughout the

Page 26

Golony to seek the Lord that he would rebuke Satan, and be a
light unto his people in this day of darkness. But, I return to the
History of these troubles. In a short time after other persons who
were of age to be witnesses, were molested by Satan, and in
their fits cryed out upon Tituba and Goody 0. and S. G. that they
or Specters in their Shapes did grievously torment them;
hereupon some of their Village Neighbours complained to the
Magistrates at Salem, desiring they would come and examine the
afflicted and accused together; the which they did: the effect of
which examination was, that Tituba confessed she was a
Witch, and that she with the two others accused did torment and
bewitch the complainers, and that these with two others whose
names she knew not, had their Witchmeeting together; relating
the times when and places where they met, with many other
circumstances to be seen at large. Upon this the said Tituba and
0. and S. G. were committed to Prison upon suspicion of acting
Witchcraft. After this the said Tituba was again examined in
Prison, and owned her first confession in all points, and then was
her self afflicted and complained of her fellow Witches
tormenting of her, for her confession, and accusing them, and
being searched by a Woman, she was found to have upon her
body the marks of the Devils wounding of her.

Page 27

IV. Here were these things rendred her confession credible. (1.)
That at this examination she answered every question just as
she did at the first. And it was thought that if she had feigned
her confession, she could not have remembred her answers so
exactly. A lyar we say, had need of a good memory, but truth
being always consistent with it self is the same to day as it was
yesterday. (2.) She seemed very penitent for her Sin in
covenanting with the Devil. (3.) She became a sufferer her self,
and as she said for her confession. (4.) Her confession agreed
exactly (which was afterwards verified in the other confessors)
with the accusations of the afflicted. Soon after these afflicted
persons complained of other persons afflicting of them in their

fits, and the number of the afflicted and accused began to
increase. And the success of Tituba's confession encouraged
those in Authority to examine others that were suspected, and
the event was, that more confessed themselves guilty of the
Crimes they were suspected for. And thus was this matter driven
on. V. I observed in the prosecution of these affairs, that there
was in the Justices, Judges and others concerned, a
conscientious endeavour to do the thing that was right. And to
that end they consulted the Presidents of former times and
precepts laid down by Learned Writers about

Page 28

Witchcraft. As Keeble on the Common Law, Chapt. Conjuration,
(an Author approved by the Twelve Judges of our Nation.) Also
Sir. Mathew Hales tryal of Witches, Printed Anno 1682. Glanvils
Collection of sundry tryals in England and Ireland, in the years
1658, 61, 63, 64, and 81. Bernards guide to Jurymen, Baxter
and R. Burton, their Histories about Witches and their
discoveries. Cotton Mather's Memorable Providences relating to
Witchcrafts, Printed Anno 1689. VI. But that which chiefly carried
on this matter to such an height, was the increasing of
confessors till they amounted to near about Fifty: and four or six
of them upon their tryals owned their guilt of this crime, and
were condemned for the same, but not Executed. And many of
the confessors confirmed their confessions with very strong
circumstances: As their exact agreement with the accusations of
the afflicted; their punctual agreement with their fellow
confessors; their relating the times when they covenanted with
Satan, and the reasons that moved them thereunto; their Witch
meetings, and that they had their mock Sacraments of Baptism
and the Supper, in some of them; their signing the Devils book:
and some shewed the Scars of the wounds which they said were
made to fetch blood with, to sign the Devils book; and some said
they had

Page 29

Imps to suck them, and shewed Sores raw where they said they
were sucked by them. VII. I shall give the Reader a tast of these
things in a few Instances. The Afflicted complained that the
Spectres which vexed them, urged them to set their Hands to a
Book represented to them (as to them it seemed) with
threatnings of great torments, if they signed not, and promises
of ease if they obeyed. Among these D. H. did as she said (which
sundry others confessed afterwards) being overcome by the
extremity of her pains, sign the Book presented, and had the
promised ease; and immediately upon it aSpectre in her Shape

afflicted another person, and said, I have signed the Book and
have ease, now do you sign, and so shall you have ease. And
one day this afflicted person pointed at a certain place in the
room, and said, there is D. H. upon which a man with his Rapier
struck at the place, though he saw no Shape; and the Afflicted
called out, saying, you have wounded her side, and soon after
the afflicted person pointed at another place, saying, there she
is; whereupon a man struck at the place, and the afflicted said,
you have given her a small prick about the eye. Soon after this,
the said D H. confessed her self to be made a Witch by signing
the Devils Book as above said; and declared

Page 30

that she had afflicted the Maid that complained of her, and in
doing of it had received two wounds by a Sword or Rapier, a
small one about the eye, which she shewed to the Magistrates,
and a bigger on the side of which she was searched by a discreet
woman, who reported, that D. H had on her side the sign of a
wound newly healed. This D H. confessed that she was at a
Witch Meeting at Salem Village, where were many persons that
she named, some of whom were in Prison then or soon after
upon suspicion of Witchcraft: And the said G. B. preached to
them, and such a Woman was their Deacon, and there they had
a Sacrament. VIII. Several others after this confessed the same
things with D H. In particular Goody F said (Inter alia) that she
with two others (one of whom acknowledged the same) Rode
from Andover to the same Village Witch meeting upon a stick
above ground, and that in the way the stick brake, and gave the
said F. a fall: whereupon, said she, I got a fall and hurt of which
I am still sore. I happened to be present in Prison when this F.
owned again her former confession to the Magistrates. And then
I moved she might be further questioned about some particulars:
It was answered, the Magistrates had not time to stay longer;
but I should have liberty to Examine her far

Page 31

ther by my self; The which thing I did; and I asked her if she
rode to the Meeting on a Stick; she said, yea. I enquired what
she did for Victuals; she answered, that she carried Bread and
Cheese in her pocket, and that she and the Andover Company
came to the Village before the Meeting began, and sat down
together under a tree and eat their food, and that she drank
water out of a Brook to quench her thirst. And that the Meeting
was upon a plain grassy place, by which was a Carr path, and
sandy ground in the path, in which were the tracks of Florses
feet. And she also told me how long they were going and

returning. And some time after told me, she had some trouble
upon her spirit, and when I enquired what? she said, she was in
fear that G. B. and M. C. would kill her; for they appeared unto
her (in Spectre, for their persons were kept in other Rooms in
the Prison) and brought a sharp pointed iron like a spindle, but
four square, and threatned to stab her to death with it; because
she had confessed her Witchcraft, and told of them, that they
were with her, and that M. C. above named was the person that
made her a Witch. About a month after the said F. took occasion
to tell me the same Story of her fears that G. B. and E. C. would
kill her, and that the thing was much for her Spirits.

Page 32

IX. It was not long before M. L. Daughter of said F confessed that
she rode with her Mother to the said Witch Meeting, and
confirmed the substance of her Mothers Confession. At another
time, M L. junior the Grand Daughter, aged about seventeen
years, confesseth the substance of what her Grand mother and
Mother had related, and declareth, that when they, with E. C.
rode on a stick or pole in the Air, She the said Grand-Daughter
with R C. Rode upon another; (and she said R. C. acknowledged
the same) and that they sat their hands to the Devils Book. And
(in ter alia) said, 0 Mother, why did you give me to the Devil?
twice or thrice over. The Mother said, she was sorry at the heart
for it, it was through that wicked one. Her Daughter bid her
repent and call upon God: And said Oh Mother, your wishes are
now come to pass, for how often have you wished that the Devil
would fetch me away alive? And then said Oh! my heart will
break within me; Then she wept bitterly, crying out, 0 Lord
comfort me and bring out all the Witch's And she said to her
Grandmother, 0 Grandmother, why did you give me to the
Devil? Why did you perswade me, 0 Grandmother do not deny it.
Then the Grandmother gave account of several things about their
confederates and acts of Witchcraft too long to rehearse.

Chapter 3

Page 33

CHAPTER III. Nextly I will insert the Confession of a man about
Forty years of Age, W. B. which he wrote himself in Prison and
sent to the Magistrates, to confirm his former Confession to
them, viz God having called me to Confess my sin and Apustasy
in that fall in giving the Devil advantage over me appearing to
me like a Black, in the evening to set my hind to his Book, as I
have owned to my shame He told me that I should not want so
doing. At Salem Village, there being a little off the MeetingHouse, about and hundred five Blades, some with Rapiers by
their side, which was called and might be more for ought I know
by B and Bu. and the Trumpet sounded, and Bread and Wine
which they called the Sacrament, but I had none; being carried
over all on a Stick, never being at any other Meeting. I being at
Cart a Saturday last, all the day, of Hay and English Corn, the
Devil brought my Shape to Salem, and did afflict M. S. and R F.
by ditching my hand; and a Sabbath day my Shape afflicted A. M
and at night afflicted M S. and A. M. E. I. and A. F. have been my
Enticers to this great abomination, as one have owned and
charged her and her Sister with the same. And the design was to
destroy Salem Village, and to begin at the Ministers House, and to
destroy the Church of God, and to it up Satans Kingdom, and
then all will be well.

Page 34

And now I hope God in some meaesure has made me something
sensible of my sin and apostasy, begging pardon of God, and of
the Honourable Magistrates and all Gods people, hoping and
promising by the help of God, to set to my heart and hand to do
what in me lyeth to destroy such wicked worship, humbly
begging the prayers of all Gods People for me, I may walk
humbly under this great affliction, and that I may procure to my
self, the sure mercies of Divid and the blessing of Abraham.
Concerning this Confession. (1) Noteiz was his own free act in
Prison. (2) He faith the Devil like a Black] This he had before
explained to be like a Black man (3) That on a certain day was
heard in the Air the sound of a Trumpet at Salem Village nigh the
Meeting House, and upon all enquiry it could not be found that
any mortal man did found it. (4) The three persons he saith the
Devil in his Shape afflicted, had been as to the times and manner
afflicted as he confesseth (5) That E. I. confessed as much as W.
B chargeth her with. (6) Many others confessed a Witch Meeting,
or Witch meetings at the Village as well as he. Note also that
these Confessors did not only witness against themselves, but
against one another; and against many if not all those that
Suffered for that Crime. As for example when G. B was Tryed,
seven or eight of these Confessors severally called, said, they
knew the said B. and saw him at a Witch Meeting

Page 35

at the Village, and heard him exhort the Company to pull down
the Kingdom of God, and set up the Kingdom of the Devil. He
denied all, yet said he justified the Judges and Jury in
Condemning of him; because there were so many positive
witnesses against him: But said he dyed by false Witnesses. I

seriously spake to one that witnessed (of his Exhorting at the
Witch Meeting at the Village) saying to her; you are one that
bring this man to Death, if you have charged any thing upon him
that is not true, recal it before it be too late, while he is alive.

She answered me, she had nothing to charge her self with, upon
that account. M. C. had to witness against her, two or three of
her own Children, and several of her Neighbours that said they
were in confederacy with her in their Witchcraft. A. F. Had three
of her Children, and some of the Neighbours, her own Sister, and
a Servant, who confessed themselves Witches, and said, she was
in confederacy with them. But alas, I am weary with relating
particulars; those that would see more of this kind, let them
have recourse to the Records. By these things you see how this
matter was carried on, vix. chiefly by the complaints and
accusations of the Afflicted, Bewitched ones, as it was supposed,
and then by the Confessions of the Accused, condemning
themselves,

Page 36

and others. Yet experience shewed that the more there were
apprehended, the more were still Afflicted by Satan, and the
number of Confessors increasing, did but in crease the number of
the Accused, and the Executing some, made way for the
apprehending of others; for still the Afflicted complained of being
tormented by new objects as the former were removed. So that
those that were concerned, grew amazed at the numbers and
quality of the persons accused and feared that Satan by his wiles
had inwrapped innocent persons under the imputation of that
Crime. And at last it was evidently seen that there must be a
stop put, or the Generation of the Children of God would fall
under that condemnation Henceforth therefore the Juries
generally acquitted such as were Tried, fearing they had gone too
far before. And Sir William Phips Governour, Reprieved all that
were Condemned, even the Confessors, as well as others. And
the Confessors generally fell off from their Confessions; some
saying, they remembred nothing of what they said; others said
they had belied themselves and others. Some brake Prison and
ran away, and were not strictly searched after, some acquitted,
some dismissed and one way or other all that had been accused
were set or left at liberty. And although had the times been calm,
the

Chapter 4

Page 37

condition of the Confessors might have called for a melius
inquirendum; yet considering the combustion and confusion this
matter had brought us unto; it was thought safer to under do
than over do, especially in matters Capital, where what is once
compleated cannot be retrieved: but what is left at one time,
may be corrected at another, upon a review and clearer
discovery of the state of the Case. Thus this matter issued
somewhat abruptly. CHAPTER IV. Here was generally
acknowledged to be an error (at least on the one hand) but the
Querie is, Wherein? A. 1. I have heard it said, That the
Presidents in England were not so exactly followed, because in
those there had been previous quarrels and threatnings of the
Afflicted by those that were Condemned for Witchcraft; but here,
say they, not so. To which I answer. 1. In many of these cases
there had been antecedent personal quarrels, and so occasions
of revenge; for some of those Condemned, had been suspected
by their Neighbours several years, because after quarrelling with
their Neighbours, evils had befallen those Neighbours. As may be
seen in the Printed Tryals of S. M. and B. B. and others: See
Wonders of the Invisible World, Page 105. to 137. And

Page 38

there were other like Cases not Printed. 2. Several confessors
acknowledged they engaged in the quarrels of other their
confederates to afflict persons. As one Timothy Swan suffered
great things by Witchcrafts, as he supposed and restifyed. And
several of the confessors said they did so torment him for the
sake of one of their partners who had some offence offer'd her
by the said Swan And others owned they did the like in the
behalf of some of their confederates. 3. There were others that
confessed their fellowship in these works of darkness, was to
destroy the Church of God (as is above in part rehearsed) which
is a greater piece of revenge, then to be avenged upon one
particular person. 2. It may be queried then, How doth it appear
that there was a going too far in this affair? A 1. By the numbers
of the persons accused which at length increased to about an
hundred, and it cannot be imagined that in a place of so much
knowledge, so many in so small a compass of Land should so
abominably leap into the Devils lap at once. 2. The quality of
several of the accused was such as did bespeak better things,
and things that accompany Salvation. Persons whose blameless
and holy lives before did testify for them. Persons that had taken
great pains to bring up their Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord: Such as we had Charity for, as for our

Page 39

own Souls: and Charity is a Christian duty commended to us. 1
Cor. 13. Chapt. Col. 3. 14. and in many other Scriptures. 3. The
number of the afflicted by Satan dayly increased, till about Fifty
persons were thus vexed by the Devil. This gave just ground to
suspect some mistake, which gave advantage to the accuser of
the Brethren to make a breach upon us. 4. It was considerable
that Nineteen were Executed, and all denyed the Crime to the
Death and some of them were knowing persons, and had before
this been accounted blameless livers. And it is not to be
imagined, but that if all had been guilty, some would have had
so much tenderness as to seek Mercy for their Souls in the way
of Confession and sorrow for such a Sin. And as for the
condemned confessors at the Bar, (they being reprieved) we had
no experience whether they would stand to their Selfcondemning confessions, when they came to dye. 5. When this
prosecution ceased, the Lord so chained up Satan, that the
afflicted grew presently well. The accused are generally quiet,
and for five years since, we have no such molestations by them.
6 It sways much with me that I have since heard and read, of
the like mistakes in other places. As in Suffolk in England about
the year 1645. was such a prosecution, until they

Page 40

saw that unless they put a stop it would bring all into blood and
confusion. The like hath been in France, fill 900 were put to
Death. And in some other places the like; So that N. England is
not the only place circumvented by the wiles of the wicked and
wisely Serpent in this kind. Wierus de Praestigiis Demonum, p.
678 Relates, That an Inquisitor in the Subilpine Valleys, enquired
after Women Witches, and consumed above an hundred in the
Flames, and daily made new offerings to Vulcan of those that
needed Flelebore more than Fire Until the Country people rose
and by force of Arms bindred him, and refer the matter to the
Bishop. Their Flusbands men of good Faith affirmed that in that
very time they said of them, that they played and danced under
a tree, they were in bed with them. R. Burton of Witches and c.
p. 158 Saith,That in Chelmsford in Essex, Anno 1645 were Thirty
tryed at once before Judge Coniers, and Fourteen of them
hanged, and an hundred more contained in several Prisons in
Suffolk and Essex. If there were an Error in the proceedings in
other places, and in N. England, it must be in the principles
proceeded upon in prosecuting the suspected, or in the
misapplication of the principles made use of. Now as to the case
at Salem, I conceive it proceeded from some mistaken principles
made use of; for the evincing whereof. I shall instance some
principles made

Chapter 5

Page 41

use of here, and in other Countrys also, which I find defended by
learned Authors writing upon that Subject. CHAPTER. V. 1. It
hath been believed that Satan cannot assume the Shape of an
Innocent person, and in that Shape doe mischief to the bodies,
or estates of mankind. This maxim hath been as the Primum
mobile, turning the wheel of accusation upon persons
condemned for this Crime in England and else where, (so far as
my reading goeth.) See Baxter and Glanvil, and other Authors on
this Subject. For the inference drawn from hence was, That when
a person suffers by Diabolical agents and is supposed to be
bewitched, and in their sufferings see a Spectre in the exact
image of any person, that person so represented must be
accounted the Witch. Keeble on the Common Law, gives this for
a ground to suspect a person for a Witch. Their Apparition to the
sick party in their sits and c. In opposition to this Maxim, I shall
lay down three Propositions. 1. Satan may and often hath
represented to the Imaginations of persons under bodily
afflictions by him, the shape or image of innocent persons
hurting them. 2. Satan can represent himself to mankind in a
bodily visible likeness.

Page 42

3. Satans representing himself to the fight of men in the shape
of innocent persons doing mischief to man, may be without
prejudice to or perverting of Gods Ordinance of Civil Justice. 1.
Satan may represent himself to the Imaginations and c. I say
Imagination; for the Apparition of a person to the sick (or
obsessed) person in their sits, may be often times only to their
Imaginations. Some of our afflicted persons have when they
come out of their fits declared, that in them they saw an army of
men in rank and file; other times the representation of heavenly
beauty, white men; and then again fire and hellish torments.

Now all these might be only the working of their Phantasies, by
Satans presentations to Imagination, and the like may be of other
things and persons. Yea some such have complained of their own
Parents seeming to them to torment them, which might be the
abuse of Phantasie. Yea persons not under such Diabolical
impressions, may by some disease or sores and vapours thence
ascending, have the Images of persons represented to their
Imagination. Mr. John Phillips of Boston, told me, That be had a
sore swelled Legg, and lying in the warm bed with Eyes open, he
saw, as he thought, Women in silk cloathing come to his bed

side, and spake to them: but a man that stood by said there
were no Women; whereupon he suspected the man of Conjuring

Page 43

tricks; which moved him to send for a Physician three Miles off
(for it was nigh Black point) and all the time the Messenger was
gone, was he haunted with these Women, as they seemed to
him. The Physitian sent word, that the vapours ascending from
his sore Legg had caused a water in his Eyes, and disturbance in
his Braines, by means whereof he was troubled with such
Visions; and sending an eye water to wash his eyes with, and a
cordial to take inwardly; upon the use of these, this disturbance
vanished in half a quarter of an hour. If a disease may do this,
what may Satan working upon bodily distempers and vapours
impose upon the Imaginations? 2. Prop. Satan can assume a
bodily likeness and represent himself therein to mans bodily
eyes, that is, if the Lord permit him. 1. He that could make a fire
in the Air to come down upon Jobs Sheep, and c. Job 1. 16. Can
make a visible Shape and appear, and act in it as he did in that
fire to consume Servants and Sheep: But so did Satan.

Therefore. 2. He that could by Pharaohs Sorcerers represent to
him Serpents, Froggs and Blood; and to Saul dead Samuels
Shape; can assume a bodily likeness, and c. but so did Satan, as
Exod. 7. and 8. Chap. 1 Sam. 28 of which more hereafter, and c.
3. Our Saviour signifies that a Spirit may appear in likeness of a
man. Math. 14 26, 27. v. compar'd with Luk. 24.

36,37,38,39,40. For, (1.) The disciples supposed the Person of
Christ

Page 44

to be a Spirit. Phantasma, that is a Spectre. Pneuma, a Spirit i.
e. in bodily likeness, which shews they had such an apprehension,
that a Spirit could assume a visible bodily likeness. (2.) Christ in
answer doth not say, there can be no such visible representation;
but seeks to satisfy them, by convincing them that it is himself:
And therefore shews them his hands and feet. Luk. 24. thereby
to convince them that he is not a Spirit. (3.) Christ speaks of a
Spirit in general, which comprehends an evil Spirit as well as a
good one. 4. That Satan appeared to our Saviour when tempted,
Mat. 4. 3. at the end of forty days in a visible Shape, I prove by
these arguments. 1. It's said Christ was tempted of Satan all the
forty days, Mark 1. 13. and Luk. 4. 2. yet Mat. 4. 2, 3. It's said
when he had fasted fourty days, and was hungry, the Tempter
came to him (prosethion auto) which implies another manner of
coming to him, and tempting of him, than had been the fourty
days before, and now he spake. Eipen. Mat. 4, 3, 6, 9. Legei.

These expressions note Satan speaking with an audible voice,
which implies a visible bodily shape speaking. 2. He said these
Stones. Mat. 4 and Luke 4. This Stone, as if he had pointed with
the finger, or bodily Organ at some peculiar Stone or Stones, as
a corporeal agent. 3. It is said, Satan taketh Christ up into the
Holy City, setteth him on the Pinacle, taketh

Page 45

him up into an high Mountain, and sheweth him, brought him to
Jerusalem. These words Taking, Bringing, Setting, (in Greek,
[Greek omitted]) are words which are used to note the actings of
one bodily agent to another usually. 5. Satan sheweth to the Man
Christ, all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, in a
moment of time (En stigme Chronou) in one poynt of time. Now
we know the World is round, and that a man can see but a small
part of it at once. Therefore that which Satan set before the eyes
of Christ, was not all the Kingdoms of the World themselves, but
an image and representation of them, and of their Glory, which
Satan had framed. And of these might Satan say, as, Luk. 4 6.

All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. If then
Satan can make an Image of the Kingdoms of the World, and of
their glory which is the greater, then can he make the Image of
a man, which is the lesser, and appear to man in such an image:
And so appearing can speak and act in and by it as he spake and
acted of old by the Serpent unto Eve, and by the Possessed in
the Gospel. Whether Satan makes such a visible body by
gathering the rays called Species Visibiles, which flow from every
body, whereby its shadow is represented in a Looking-glass and
Water, or

Page 46

as the rays of the Sun invisibly scattered in the Air are by a
burning glass contracted and condensed so as to kindle a Fire, or
by other means, I determine not. But History as well as the
Scripture abundantly testifie, that such Spirits, or Aieral Bodies
have appeared unto men, called Apparitions or Ghosts. See
Increase Mathers Remarkable Providences, Baxter of Apparitions,
and other Authors. I have also spoken with very credible persons
of discretion and piety that have told me they have seen such
Apparitions when in their perfect health and senses. But I spare
to enlarge. 2. Proposition is, Satan may represent himself doing
mischief in the shape of an innocent person, without prejudice
to, or perverting of Gods Ordinance of Civil Justice. 1. If Satan
(can assume the likeness of a man, as is above proved) then it's
alike easy in it self for him to personate an innocent, as a guilty

person, if we look to his natural power: For according to natural
causes by which he worketh, ones Image is as easily formed as
the others. And no doubt he will sometimes personate the
innocent, unless the Lord restrain him. 2. That Satan hath so
done is proved by Mr. Increase Mather, in his Cases of
Conscience, Printed Anno 1693. by several Histories. To which I
shall add one out of Wierus de Prestigus, and c. p. 661.

Page 47

Among us (saith he) A Pretor went to a Conjurer, and by his
discovery apprehended many Women, and had them burned
(that is for Witches) at last the Conjurer told him, be would shew
him one Witch more if he would not take it amiss, and
impeached the Pretors Wife, and prefixed an hour, when he
should see her in a Dance with other Witches. The Pretor
consents and calls his friends and kindred to feast with his Wife
at that time, and rising from the Table, commands his Wife and
Friends to sit still at the Table till he returned. Being carried by
the Conjurer where he pleased, he shewed him a Company of
Witches is their Dances and unlawful pleasures, and the Pretors
Wife with them. Then returning home, he found his friends in the
same order he left them, and his Wife with them, and by the
testimony of all present, found upon studious enquiry that his
Wife had kept her place in his absence. He opened the mater to
them repenting for punishing the innocent. Satan personating
the innocent in doing mischief is no prejudice to Civil Justice, if it
can be found out that the mischief so done is the act of Satan,
and not the act of the person represented. For what wickedness
Satan doth, Satan shall be judged for, and what man doth, man
must be judged for. Every one shall bear his own burthen. Gal 6
5. And Satans wickedness herein may be found, (most
commonly, if not always) by such means as these, if thorough
care and diligence be used.

Page 48

1. If it can be proved that the party represented was in another
place at that time. As was the case of the Pretors Wife above
mentioned. 2. If when the afflicted complain they see John or
Thomas upon them, pinching, or hurting of them or others, can
neither see any person there, nor by feeling perceive any flesh or
bones, they may conclude there's not the very person
complained of, but either an abused Imagination, or the Devil
personating to the afflicted the person complained of. For Christs
rule is, Luk 24. 39 A Spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have. 3. If the supposed person come into the room through the
Key hole, or when there is no place open for a person to come in

by, then conclude, its not the person but the Devil seen there. A
Spectre can come in by a pin-hole: but Satan cannot bring in the
body of a man or woman in at such a place: for if so then Satan
could work a miracle properly so called, which he cannot do.
When Christ came bodily into the midst of the room the doors
being shut. Joh 20 19, 20. It was a miracle beyond all Satans
signs and lying wonders. The Gospel is confirmed by Gods
testimony with signs and wonders and divers miracles. Such
Satan cannot do, for then he could subvert our Gospels
confirmation. 4. When a supposed person is seen in their

Page 49

full proportion and then changed into the form of another
Creature, as a Cat, and c. This is a Spectre not the person. The
turning Lots Wife into a pillar of Salt was a proper Miracle beyond
the power of Devil or Angel of themselves to perform. But a
Spectre can change its shape like the Wind under Ice sunning
upon the water. This well weighed will confute many fond Stories
that have passed, that such a Woman is a Witch, for she was
seen in her full proportion, and then turned into a Cat, and back
at last into a Woman; for all this was either a phantasie in the
brains, or a Phantasma before the Eyes 5 If a person (or so
esteemed) pass by us on the soft Snow, or dirt, and leave no
footsteps behind them, this is to be esteemed a Spectre, and not
the real person, unless the person were carried by Satan in the
Air. This was brought for an Evidence against a Woman, that she
was seen nigh Malden in a Moonshiny night passing on the Snow,
and left no footsteps behind her; when she might be in her
House at Newbury, and either the Phantasie of the Witness was
abused, or a Spectre passed by him in her Image. Yet if it had
been her person so carried by Satan, this would not prove her a
Witch, unless her consent were given to it. Goodwins Children
were carried in the Air by Satan, as saith Memorable
Providences. P. 14, 15.

Page 50

6. If the prints of biting of teeth, pinching with fingers, pricking
with pins or irons be made on the Bodies of the Afflicted, and no
hand, mouth or Body can be seen or felt to do it, this is to be
imputed to Satan, and not to a real person doing of it. By these
or such like means, due circumspection being used, when Satan
personates the innocent, his fallacy and malice may be
discovered, at least ordinarily. Yet if the Lord should suffer Satan
so to act, and not be discovered after all means used to find the
fallacy (which I never yet read or heard he did) this must be
reckoned among the unsearchable acts of Divine Soveraignty,

which men may humbly admire; but not make rules upon such a
supposal for humane judicature to proceed upon. These premises
considered we may infer, That if Satan may personate an
innocent party to one tormented by him; then if the Lord permit
it, to two, yea to ten And if once he may do so, then twice, yea
twenty times, if suffered, and yet the person so represented be
innocent. And all the danger of injustice being done to that
innocent party ariseth not from Satans acting, so much as from
mans mistaken faith and suspicion about Satans act. Hence then
we may confute a vulgar error of people, that will conclude, that
such a Woman is, or was a Witch, for she was seen in

Chapter 6

Page 51

the Air one night flying Southward, another time to a Vessel, and
other times up into the Country. When all this time the Devil
thro' Divine permission either did it, or imposed upon the
Imaginations of the Spectators. And here we may take notice,
that a true faith is so pleasing to the Lord, that he doth great
things for his Servants, for their faiths sake; so that Christ saith,
Mat. 8. 13 As thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. All
things are possible to him that believeth. Great is thy faith, be it
unto thee, as thou wilt. Thy faith hath made thee whole. Mark 9.
25. and 10 5.2. and 15. 28. Why may not a false faith in these
matters provoke the Lord to say unto us, As you believe, be it
unto you? And let Satan loose to do strange things as the
Accuser of the Brethren, to mislead them to accuse one another.
CHAPTER VI. Another Principle much insisted on, is; That the
Devil when he doth harm to persons in their Body or Estate, it is
(at least most commonly, generally and frequently) by the help
of our Neighbour: That is, some Witch or Conjurer, or such like in
Covenant with the Devil. Sir Matthew Hale, in his Printed
Observations upon the Tryal of those. Witches he Condemned,
(Printed Anno 1682.) draws this inference from hence, That

Page 52

the Devil when he hurts the Body or Goods of men, is in some
sort subject to Humane Justice, though not in himself, yet in his
Covenant Servants, by whom he is set a work to do such
mischiefs. The unsoundness of this principle appeareth by the
Scripture instances of Satans so afflicting man when we read of
no Witch to set him on work. As, 1. When God let Satan loose to
try Jobs patience, Job 1. and 2 Chap. 2. When Satan bound the
Body of a Daughter of Abraham eighteen years. 3. When Satan
tryed the affections of the Gergesens, and was Gods Instrument

to punish their Worldliness by drowning their Swine, who ran
violently down a steep place (as if they had been bewitched,
according to the opinion of many now a days) into the Sea, being
driven of the Devils. 4 We have many Instances of the possessed
with the unclean Spirits that were tormented and vexed by
Satan, to quicken men to prayer, Mat. 17. 21. and to shew
Christs power. 5. Some by their own presumptuous dealing with
Satan, have given him power, or at least opportunity to strip and
wound them; as the Exorcists, Acts 19 13. and c. Seeing then we
have so many instances of Satans afflicting without Witches help,
and no clear Scripture instance of his afflicting

Page 53

mankind in Body, or Estate by Witchcraft; It's unsafe to conclude
generally that those that are under Diabolical molestations are
bewitched. For when persons are perswaded their Relations are
bewitched, they presently enquire, who is the Witch? and who
should they fasten their suspicions upon, but on these that the
Afflicted cry out against in their fits? Q. But is it not evident, that
the Afflicted at Salem Village, and parts adjacent, Anno 1691, 2.
were Bewitched? A. Whether those Sufferings by Satan
proceeded at first from Witchcraft or no, I shall leave to a further
disquisition. But as for the most of those Sufferers, I conceive
they were such as in the Gospel are called, Daimonizomenoi.

Mat. 4 24. Daemoniaci Daemoniacks: I do not mean in that
degree of Internal Possession, as those out of whom the Spirits
were cast out. Mat. 8. 16. But with such a degree of external
possession or obsession of Satan, which rendred them like the
Demoniacks mentioned, in many things. 1. As they were
grievously vexed with the Devil. ([Greek omitted].) as the
Damsel. Matt 15. 22. compare this with Mark 7. 25. She had an
unclean Spirit. So were ours vexed with invisible agents, biting,
pricking, pinching and vexing of them. I will not say but among
so many thus Suffering, some of them at some time might

Page 54

counterfeit part of their Sufferings, and it might be from Satans
policy to intangle the whole affair. But for the most part they
were as those we read of, Luk. 6. 18. Vexed with unclean Spirits.
2. We read, Mat. 17. 15. of them that ofttimes fell into the fire
and into the water, being Lunatick; but were cast this way and
that by all Evil Spirit. Mark 9, 17, to 30. So were some of ours by
an evil spirit transported from place to place, and in danger of
being burnt, or drowned, but that Satan was restrained, as in
case above said The possessed man, Mark. 5. 4. had than
humane strength in breaking fetters and chains. So some of

these in their fits performed that which was above their own
strength. 4 The possessed damsel, Act. 16. 16 did by the Devil
soothsay; that is, discover secrets in a prophetical way: (she did
manteuein.) So some of these did by the Devils means tell of
persons and things, absent and future, as when such another fit
should come again, and c. where such a person absent was, and
what he did insomuch that had they been Sui juris, person free
from Diabolical obsession, and overpowering force, they might
justly have been questioned for dealing with a familiar Spirit. But
the force they were under was their vindication's it was here,
Act. 16. 16.

Page 55

5. The possessed of old were some of them exceeding fierce.

Mat. 8. 28. So were some of these afflicted persons fierce,
troublesome and mischievous in their fits, beyond their natural
temper and behaviours at other times. From these things
compared together, why may we not judge these demoniacks, as
well as those in the Gospel? And that its possible for Satan in
these times to afflict thus without Witches, as well as in those?
Seeing these did also in their fits fome, gnash their teeth and
pine away, as he did, Mark 9. 18. And here we may observe the
weakness of the signs given by the Common Law, to know who
is bewitched; (which signs as Keeble saith, are taken out of the
tryals in Lanchashire, and from Bernard:) For the first sign given
is; The wasting of a person and the cause unknown: This sign is
very fallible: for, 1. The wasting may proceed from an unknown
disease. And the ignorance of Physitians may ascribe that to
Witchcraft which proceeds from a natural hidden disease. 2. Jobs
sore boyles from head to foot came from Satan without
Witchcraft, and the cause of them was most probably hidden
from the common practice of Physitians. The second sign they
give is, When two persons are taken together in the like strange
fits. This may be a sign of persons possessed, and

Page 56

hapned often in the experiences at Salem, among the persons
possessed, as abovesaid. The third sign given is, When the
afflicted party truly telleth what the suspected person is doing at
a distance. This is rather a sign of a person possessed. And we
find the two men possessed, Matth. 8. 28 and c. had like fits, for
both kept among the Tombs, both were exceeding fierce, so as
to hinder persons passing that way, both together made the
same outcry to Jesus, that he should not torment them. These
things shew a unity among the Devils afflicting them: but no
unity of Witches joyning with them. Fourth sign is, When the

afflicted out of their fits know nothing what they did, or said in
them. But this (if our obsessed or possessed persons said truly)
often fell out in the tormented at Salem. Fifth sign, Supernatural
strength in their fits. Now this is a sign of the possessed, Mark 5.
4. Who in their fits brake chaines and fetters. Sixth sign is, When
the afflicted vomit pins, nailes, irons, and c. To this I say,
whether these pins, nailes, and c are by the Devil brought
invisibly to the mouths of the persons so vomiting and so cast
out from their mouths, but not out of their stomacks or throats;
or whether they are insensibly conveyed by the working of Satan
into the stomacks or throats of the persons vomiting, and so
vomited forth, neither the one

Page 57

nor the other, can certainly prove the vomiter bewitched, unless
it be made manifest that Satan doth thus vex the party by
confederacy with a Witch. But where Satan hath a permission to
vex and possess a person he may do these things, as well as
other things he did unto the possessed mentioned in the
Gospels. The seventh sign is, The afflicted person having the
sight of the apparition of the suspected party, and when the
mischief of a fit or the like following shortly after. Now it having
been already proved, that Satan can represent, to those that are
possessed, innocent persons: it is not to be wondered that Satan
should represent to the eyes or imagination of a possessed
sufferer, a Spectre representing a suspected innocent person just
before he casteth them into a fit, especially seeing hereby he
gaines upon the credulity of the possessed, and their friends, for
the accusing an innocent, and it may be a godly person; for this
helps forward his design as the accuser of the brethren. Rev. 12.
10. I would then from these considerations infer, That if a party
handled as in the seven particulars above expressed, cannot
thereby be said to be bewitched, Then there is no need, unless
somewhat else appear, to trouble our selves to enquire who is
the Witch that troubleth such a party.

Chapter 7

Page 58

CHAPTER. VII. 3. Another principle improved in these Enquiries
is, When the party suspected looks upon the parties supposed to
be bewitched, and they are thereupon struck down into a fit, as if
struck with a Cudgel. This bewitching by the eye is an opinion
Seventeen Hundred years old, Nescio quis teneros oculis mihi
fascinat agnos. Virgil. Mr. Gaul in his Book, Printed 1648. page
128. Saith, Some Witches by inspecting, or looking on, but to a

glance, or squint, or peep at with an envious eye, is sufficient to
effascinate. And we may find much use made of this experiment
in Tryals in England mentioned by Baxter, Glanvil and Burton.

And however this seemed a presumption at Salem Village, yet at
length it was apparent to be a delusion of Satan. For this
experiment was found at the Tryals of persons when the Accused
sought to clear themselves, and it cannot be conceived that then
they would act Witchcraft to hasten their own Condemnation:

And no person can be said to act Witchcraft against their own will
and consent. Again, we read, Mark 9. 20. That when the
possessed was brought unto Christ, and saw Christ, then the
Spirit tare him, and he fell to the ground and wallowed foaming.
So

Page 59

that the Devil chose this time and place to cast the possessed
into a fit even in the presence of Christ. Let us then consider
these Afflicted to be Demoniacks, and we must own, it's in
Satans power to cast them into a fit in the presence, and upon
the sight of the Accused. And if this may increase the suspicion
against the Accused, it's for his interest to chuse such a time. 4.
Another presumption made use of hath been to cause the
suspected to touch the party supposed to be bewitched, and if
that touch bring the party out of their fit, this hath been
esteemed by many a strong suspicion at least, as may be read in
some of the fore cited Authors. And Mr. Glanvil supposeth a
Philosophical reason for it, viz. that the Witch by the cast of her
eye sends forth a Malefick Venome into the Bewitched to cast
him into a fit, and therefore the touch of the hand doth by a
sympathy cause that venome to return into the Body of the
Witch again. As when a person is stung by a Snake, the
application of the Body or flesh of the same Snake to the wound
will draw back the poyson into its former fountain. But the truth
is both these effects depend upon the Devils free agency: And he
frames his things much according to the opinion of the
Spectators, with intent to deceive. I never could see reason to
justify

Page 60

such a kind of Tryal (though allowed by Bernard as lawful to be
used;) but since have more considered it, I look upon it very
unwarrantable to be used, being as it were the putting a staff
into the hand of Satan, to try what he will do with it. For the
recovery of the party out of the Fit hereby must be from a
natural or divine cause, or from the Devil We cannot prove either
of the two former and if the third, its but the Devils testimony,

and therefore not to be used by us. 5. Another practice hath
been when the party suspected is in Prison, and the Afflicted cry
out they are miserably tormented by them: If then the suspected
party be bound, and the afflicted person thereupon, have ease or
release of their fits, then this is a presumption that the suspected
party is guilty. This was used at Isanhal, Anno 1661. (see
Glanvil, page 168.) and the success answered the expectation.
But this is no ground so much as of suspicion, because it
depends either upon some physical efficacy in binding to give the
party ease, or upon the precontract of the suspected made with
Satan, or from the voluntary act of the Devil ceasing to afflict at
such a time; neither of the two former can be proved : not any
physical vertue in the binding the party; for how can cords bind a
Spirit, and as for the

Chapter 8

Page 61

Contract with Satan, that remains yet to be proved, and if such
there be, yet the terms of it are to us unknown; and the Devil
being a Lyar from the beginning, will keep or break his own
promises, so as suites the interest of his Kingdom. So that in
such cases we can ascribe the release of the afflicted only to
Satans agency and policy by such a vile abusing the mischief of
those which make the tryal. 6 The like is to be said when a
Demoniack finds ease of their fits upon the apprehending, or
condemning, or Execution of the person complained against. For
that ease may come by Satans policy, desisting his rage to
consum our error: or from Divine Favour in answer of prayer, or
pity to the distressed. CHAPTER. VIII. 7. A seventh principle is, If
the party suspected appear in Spectre to the afflicted, and the
afflicted give a blow with a knife, sword, and c. unto the Spectre
(or some other in their behalf) and the Spectre seems wounded,
or bleeding, or to have their garment torn, or slit by the blow
received. And that the party Spectrally represented be presently
searched, and there is found upon their body a wound, or blood,
and c. on the same part of their body, or a rent, or cut upon the
same part of

Page 62

the garment, which appeared upon the Spectre unto the
afflicted. This hath been counted a strong evidence to prove the
party suspected to be a confederate with Satan in afflicting the
complainer. As by Judge Archer in Coxes case, Executed at
Taunton, Anno 1663. (See Glanvil part 2. p. 196) But let us
search this to the bottom; and there is no ground of suspicion in

such a kind of probation. For the ground of the suspicion ariseth
hence viz. That what wound or mark is given to the Spectre (that
is to the Devils aerial assumed body) is translated thence unto
the person setting this Spectre on work to afflict; or to their
garments, if the mark be on that. But we have no sufficient
ground to know this. 1. For if it must be so, it must be either (1.)
From some sympathy in nature between the Spectre and the
party represented by it. But this we have no ground in reason to
conclude; for whence or how should such a sympathy be
between an humane body, and the Devil in the Image or likeness
of it? Or if it were, how can there come such a sympathy
between the garment of a person and the Devil appearing in the
likeness of that garment? Surely the garment was not in any
league with Satan? (2) Or this comes to pass by vertue of the
Covenant between Satan and this confederate: if so we say, I
ask how come we to know there is such an article in the bargain
with the Devil?

Page 63

or if we know there were such an article in their agreement, how
can we tell, that the Devil will stand to his own Covenant? Or,

(3.) This comes to pass by the Immediate hand of God making
such a translation of a wound and c. unto a Witch that they may
thereby be discovered; which if so, it is preternatural if not
supernatural. And we have no ground from Scripture to expect
such a sign from God; and therefore to expect it is to be guilty of
the sin of that Wicked Generation, that sought after a sign. Math.
16. 4. Which should not be given to them. Or (4) This translation
cometh (if there be any such) from the Devil as a free and
powerful Spirit, afflicting the body or affecting the garment so
marked: And if it be from hence, its the Devils testimony which
ought to be no credit with mankind. 2. The true state of this case
seems to be this; That the person or garment so represented to
the Afflicted by a Spectre was wounded, or bleeding, or cut or
rent before. And the Devil knowing this, represents to the
afflicted (or striker at the Spectre) that part of the Spectre which
answers the Body wounded, or garment rent or torn, the
Searchers finding such wounds upon, or rents about the person
suspected are ready to conclude it was done by the stroke at the
Spectre which was done before. I shall confirm this by instances.
There was at Chelmsford, an Afflicted person,

Page 64

that in her fits cryed out against a Woman, a Neighbour, which
Mr. Clark, the Minister of the Gospel there could not believe
guilty of such a Crime. And it hapned while that woman was

milking her Cow, the Cow struck her with one horn upon her
Forehead and fetched blood, and while she was bleeding, a
Spectre in her likeness appeared to the party Afflicted, who
pointing at the Spectre, one struck at the place, and the Afflicted
said, you have made her forehead bleed. Hereupon some went to
the woman, and found her fore head bloody, and acquainted Mr.
Clark with it; who forthwith went to the woman, and asked how
her sorehead became bloody, and she answered by a blow of the
Cows horn, as above said; whereby he was satisfied that it was a
design of Satan to render an innocent person suspected. Another
instance was at Cambridge, about fourty years since: There was
a man much troubled in the night with Cats, or the Devil in their
likeness haunting of him, whereupon he kept a light burning, and
a Sword by him as he lay in bed; for he suspected a Widow
woman to send these Cats or Imps by Witch: craft to bewitch
him. And one night as he lay in bed, a Cat or Imp came within
his reach, and he struck her on the back; and upon enquiry
heard this Widow had a sore back: this confirmed his suspicion of
the Widow,

Page 65

he supposing that it came from the wound he gave the Cat. But
Mr. Day the Widows Chyrurgeon cleared the matter; saying, this
Widow came to him and complained of a sore in her back, and
because she could not see it, desired his help; and he found it to
be a Boyl, and ripened and healed it as he used to do other Boyls
But while this was in cure, the supposed Cat was wounded as
already rehearsed. But some may say when such wounds or
rents come, it's not the Spectre that's struck but the real person
or garment is there present, but by vertue of the Charm, or
Witchcraft, a mist is cast between the Witch and Spectators in
the room, whereby the person becomes invisible to all of them
except the bewitched Sufferer. As some juglers have seemed to
creep through a Tree or Log, when indeed its only upon the Tree
or Log; but by inchantment a shadow of the Log or Cloud is cast
over the Log between the Jugler and Spectators, whereby they
are deceived. I Answer, If it were so, then those that strike with
Sword, or other Instrument, and wound the party might feel
some body, or garment stopping the force of their blow; for a
Body can be felt if it cannot be seen, as above shewed. But when
the stricken instrument feels no harder substance than Air to
stop its force, and there seems to be a person in the

Chapter 9

Page 66

way to the Afflicted's eye: We may conclude its but a Spectre, or
deluded imagination. CHAPTER IX. 8. If after Cursing there
follows Death, or at least some mischief: This saith Perkins (in
his Discourse of Witchcraft, Chap. 7. Sect. 2.) This is a
presumption. For Witches are wont to practise their mischievous
facts by cursing and banning. This also is a sufficient matter of
Examination. I acknowledge when persons curse or threaten
others to kill them, or do other mischief to their Bodies or
Estates, and the mischief threatned is performed as threatned;
here is ground so far to suspect the threatner, as to question
them about it, unless it appeareth to be performed by some
other person or cause. So if after Cursing there follows Death,
and c. And it appeareth to be done by Witchcraft, this is a
ground to suspect and examine the threatner, unless there be
grounds to suspect some other Author of the Witchcraft. But as
the proposition is laid down generally by Mr. Perkins, as a
general rule I conceive it's unsafe. 1 Because such death, on
mischiefs oftimes proceed from other causes, so that there is no
ground to impute them to Witchcraft. For, 1. Some persons are
of such hasty spirits and

Page 67

unruly tongues, that their mouth is dayly full of cursing and
bitterness, Rom. 3. 14. 2. There be few House-keepers, where
are many in Family and a Stock about them; but that by the
hand of God, Death at some times enters upon some person in
the Family, and Cattel sometimes dye by Diseases and
Casualties: Who is there that hath an Estate, but at some times
they meet with losses? 3. Hence it falls out that these calamities,
some of them happen at or nigh some one time of their angry
neighbours cursing, who had cursed them ten times before, or
threatned them, and yet no such calamity ensued. And this their
last threatning had no more influence upon the evil befalling the
Family, than the ten causeless Curses that went before, as Prov.
26. 2. What then doth all this prove? A tongue set on fire, and it
may be from hell; but not a Covenant with Hell to procure the
calamities that befal their Neighbours. Again, some are of such a
suspicious temper, that they are apt to impute all sad accidents
that do befal them, to proceed from Witchcraft, and thereby in
suffering times are apt to be jealous of their Neighbours that
come frequently to their Houses in their day of adversity, as
causers of these afflictions by some charming or inchantment.
Again, It may be Queried, Whether Satan may not sometimes
take advantage upon the

Page 68

times when neighbours contend with, and threaten those that
live by them, to do some hurt to the Bodies or Goods of those
threatned, that thereby he may cast upon the party threatned,
the imputation of Sorcery. Doubtless as he is the Accuser of the
Brethren, Rev. 12 He would so do if the Lord will permit him to
indanger the life of the threatner. And who can tell but that the
Lord may permit him at sometimes so to do, for a just
punishment to such unbridled tongues? I remember, that above
fourty years ago, when there was a great discourse about
Witches; A very holy man heard his Wife say, she desired a
sucking Pig; and be going to a Neighbours house, saw a Sow
with a litter of Pigs, and took a phantasie to one of them in
particular for his Wife, and asked the Owner for that Pig; the
Owner denied him: Hereupon be went away in a great passion,
very unsuitable to such a person. And that very Pig left its dam
and Company, and followed this man to his home. This was
observed in the day of it, it was supposed Satan might have
some hand in it, taking advantage upon the passion of so good a
man, to render him suspected by such an accident if he could. 9.
If any person, man or woman be notoriously defamed for such a
party. This Perkins (eodem loco) makes a presumption. But in
truth there is no weight in this, unless those neighbours among
whom the suspected party

Page 69

lived had good grounds for their suspicion: Because many
persons have drunk in false principles about the tokens by which
a Witch is to be known; and judge of persons accordding to
those false principles (some of which are above recited) which
may asperse the most innocent and righteous person living. Our
Saviour was slandered as if he cast out Devils by Belzebub the
Prince of Devils, Mat. 12. 24. And the Difciple is not above his
Master, Mat. 10. 25. Some persons will put an evil construction
upon an innocent action, and so raise an evil fame against a
person; and then others believing it, are apt to look upon other
actions with a squint eye, and through the multiplying glass of
their own jealousies, make a Mole-hill seem a Mountain, to
render an hated or despised neighbour evil spoken of. 10. If the
party suspected be the Son or Daughter, or Man-servant, or Maid
servant, or familiar friend, near Neighbour, or old Companion of
a known and convicted Witch. This may be a presumption, saith
Perkins. But unto all these it may be said, there is no more
ground to suspect any person of this crime upon such relations
or circumstances, then there is to presume a person is a Thief, or
Murderer, or Drunkard, and c. because he is the Child, Servant,

Neighbour, and c. of a Thief, Murderer, Drunkard, or the like,
convicted

Page 70

Criminal. Which may be, or may not be if the Lord incline the
heart of him or her that is so related, to abhor such wickedness.
As the Wheat and Tares grow together in the same Field: So
Good and Wicked in the same Neighbourhood, Family; yea, and
lying in the same Bed, so that one shall be taken, and the other
left, Mat. 24. 40, 41. Luk. 17. 34, 35, 36 The Lord saith, The Son
shall not dye for the sin of the Father, Ezek. 18. 14 and 21. ver.

If the Son, (Servant or Neighbour, or Companion) seeth the sins
of his Father, and c. and doth not the like, and c. he shall not
dye, and c. which shews that these so related may and
sometimes do see and abhor the ways of wickedness, those so
near unto them walk in, and abhor them, therefore they are not
to be suspected, meerly upon that account. 11. Some make this
a presumption. If a person sick and dying, doth take it upon his
or her Death, that such an one hath bewitched them. See
Perkins Chap. 7. page 210. So Keeble on the Common Law,
saith, the testimony of the person hurt upon their death
complaining against a person, that they appeared to them and
bewitched them. Now in this ease it must be considered whether
this dying person were not under Diabolical Molestations, or an
abused phantasie, or under ungrounded suspicions of the party
they complained of before they were so sick. And the grounds of

Chapter 10

Page 71

their suspicions are to be thorowly considered, before the
survivers make this a ground of suspicion. Sure all this may
proceed from false principles (as there Expressed) drunk in by a
well meaning, but mistaken dying person. CHAPTER X. 12. Some
saith Perkins, do add this for a presumption. If the party
suspected be found to have the Devils mark: for it is commonly
thought, when the Devil maketh his Covenant with them, he
always leaveth his mark behind him. Bernard makes it a ground
of Conviction. (Gaul only a presumption.) And Tertullian (who
lived above 1400 years ago) says, It's the Devils custom to mark
his; and note, saith Bernard, That this mark is insensible, and
being pricked, it will not bleed, sometimes like a teat (and the
Devil sucks, or toucheth them:) sometimes but a blewish spot,
sometimes a red one, and sometimes the flesh sunk. I conceive
such a mark is neither ground of conviction or suspicion. 1.
Because the Lord sometimes in anger, and sometimes for tryal of

his Servants, sends such marks upon the Bodies of men, as are
unusual; as the Emerods upon the Philistins, 1 Sam. 5, 6, 7.
Which made those Heathens say, The Hand of the God of Israel
is sore upon us. And

Page 72

Deut. 28. 27, 35. God threatens to punish his people for their
sins, with a botch, emerods and with the Itch whereof they could
not be healed. So then some of these sores might constantly be
moist as if they had been sucked. 2. Many persons have
naturally, or by some sickness or hurt, received some sores,
like, if not the same with those they call the Devils marks, I knew
a man, that lived and dyed without the least suspicion of that
crime, that told me he had a natural issue upon his breast from
his youth up, which distilled about a drop or two in twenty four
hours, so that it was alwayes moist, and conduced much to his
health. And as for the weaker Sex; The Lord hath said unto Eve,
and her Daughters, In sorrow shall be thy Conception; but
instanceth not in the particulars. But experience hath shewed
upon some sober and pious women, after hard Travels and the
like, that they have had those Excrescences which are called, Pils
Uteri. And I have been informed by a skilful Midwife that hath
known venuous women that have had those Piles, and that they
are without sence of feeling, sometimes and after cold, handling,
and c. are apt to draw up into the Body. Satan knows who hath
(by the hand of God) such suspected marks, which the Lord lays
on them as their affliction, and if he can by other means get
them to be suspected, and their Bodies searched, he will hereby
expose them to greater

Page 73

suspicion, if not Condemnation; if we take this for a ground of
conviction or presumption of guilt. But if he attains not that, yet
hereby shall sober and innocent persons be exposed to the
reproach of such, who when they understand God hath loosed
their cord, and afflicted them, will as Job speaks, marr their
path, set forward their calamity, and not spare to spst in their
face. Job 30. 10, 11, 12, 13. For he or she that is ready to slip
with his or her foot, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him
that is at ease. And there may be such Excrescences from a
natural cause, which yet Learned Physitians cannot find out, the
reason of. Man knows but in part the Works of God, Eccles 11. 5.
For he doth great things, and unsearchable; marvellous things
without number. 3 If we enquire how these are known to be the
marks of one in league with Satan? It must come from the
Confession of Witches, that have owned such things. Now among

the many Confessors at Salem, there were sundry declared they
had such marks on them: one in her head which she said the
Devil in likeness of a bird came daily, and pecked, or sucked. I
saw the sore place and there was nothing to be seen to make it
to differ from another sore coming by natural causes. Another
said, she had the Devils mark upon her leg, which was a blew
spot as broad as a Shilling: her Husband testifyed, that he saw
the spot, but little suspected it to be the Devils

Page 74

mark. Others had sores on other parts of their bodies, which they
said the Devil sucked; but by all that, I could learn by those that
saw them, there was nothing to demonstrate that they came in a
preternatural way by Satan; but only the parties own
affirmation: which whether true or false I leave to God and time
farther to discover. And I suppose we had as many confessions
and demonstrations to render what they laid credible, as hath
been known at any one time in some Ages But be it so, that by
the confessions of known Witches there have been upon some of
the baser sort (as Bernard saith) of them, such teats, or marks.
These may come by natural causes, or violent casualties, and by
Satan be perverted to such an use. But if they come from Satan
immediately as the confessors acknowledge. This can only tend
to the conviction of those that so confess, and where those
marks are found: but make nothing to the proof, or suspicion of
other persons to be guilty of that crime, who having such marks
deny the crime, and ascribe these bodily marks to other causes.
So that its far more safe wholly to lay aside the practice of
searching after suspected persons teats or Witch marks, unless in
those who confess themselves to have them, and that for tryal to
see whether they say true or not; then by using it to lay stress
upon a fallible sign.

Page 75

13. Another unsafe principle is to lay weight upon the testimony
of Ghosts, as they are called; that is to say, Spectres appearing
in the shape of the dead, and personating them. Satan by his
wiles in this kind hath gained too much credit, in hours of
Temptation. For it hath so happened, that when in the death of
some persons there was any notice of a circumstance which
might give unto a jealous eye, any colour for suspicion, that any
one was accessary to their death; the Spectre personating them
hath cryed out to the afflicted for vengeance against such an one
for murdering them, telling the manner how, by relating the
circumstances of their death: and presently people were ready to
say, I remember those very circumstances in the dying of such a

person. Well, it is very probable such an one murdered the party.
And hereby the person suspected is accused of Witchcraft and
Murder together, and by joyning these accusations together,
both seem the more probable and credible. But that there is no
reason to hearken to such accusations will appear if we consider.
1. That Satan can assume the shape of living innocents, as
above shewed, and therefore of the dead also; as of dead
Samuel: and that shape being assumed can say what he
pleaseth, or seem to the Imagination of daimoniacal persons so
to speak. And he being a Lyar from the beginning, Joh. 8, 44. By
his lyes he fastens what

Page 76

accusation he pleaseth of murder, or other crime upon the living.
And if hearkened unto will, as the deceived Eve, by falsely
accusing God, deceive us by falsely accusing our Neighbour to
us. I know Hystories speak of Ghosts discovering murders, at
sometimes, and moneys lost or acts of injustice done in the life
time of the person represented by the said Ghost; which some
have conceived to be the very Soul of the deceased: (and by this
opinion many Papists have been confirmed in the error of
Purgatory:) Some a good Angel sent in that Similitude to procure
justice to be done: and some have conceived it to be the Devil
compelled, Volens Nolens, to discover injustice, or tranforming
himself into an Angel of Light, as 2 Cor. 11. 14 by seeming
zealous for justice. I should digress too far from my intended
scope to discuss, what may be said pro or con in this matter. It
sufficeth in the case, Anno 1692. To say we have had so much
experience of the wiles of Satan appearing in the likeness of the
living, that we have no reason to believe him in the likeness of
the dead. 2. The hearkening after Ghosts, if we take not heed,
may hurry us unawares into that sin forbidden, Isai. 8. 19. Viz.
Seeking for the living to the dead? What? shall we hearken to or
enquire of the dead, what they can say against the living? This
hath a tendency to that inst

Chapter 11

Page 77

quity forbidden, Deut. 18. 11. by the name of Necromancy: in
Hebrew it is, Vedoresh-el Hammethim. A seeker unto the dead. A
like unto this deceit of Satan, was another of his devices. Viz. He
would appear Spectrally in the shape of a Neighbour unto the
afflicted, and say, I killed such and such a person, and relate in
that shape the manner of the deceased's departure out of the
world, by plausible and seemingly true circumstances which was

in the day of it, too much credited to augment Suspicions against
the accused: But the invalidity of such accusations appears by
what is already spoken concerning the Apparition of Ghosts.
CHAPTER. XI. 14. Some have laid great weight upon this, When
something supposed to be bewitched, or to contain the charm by
which the inchantment is wrought is burned in the fire, and the
party suspected comes to the fire, or seems to be burnt after it,
or by such like ways concerned; this hath been esteemed a
farther presumption that they are guilty. As in Sir Mathew Hale
his condemning Amy Duny, Printed Anno 1682. A toad found in
the blanket of Durent (said to be bewitched) was held in the fire
till it made an horrible noise, and the next day Amy Duny (who
was suspected to bewitch Durent) was found all grievously
scorched

Page 78

with the fire. The use of such experiments is justly condemned
by Perkins and others, as after a sort a practice of Witchcraft:

Yet the seeming discovery hereby made hath found
entertainment by those that oppose the means used. But before
we give credence to such a discovery, we must be very
circumspect least we be deceived by humane knavery; as
happened in a case nigh Richmond Island, circiter Anno 16 59.
One Mr. Thorpe a drunken Preacher, was gotten in to Preach at
Black point under the appearance and profession of a Minister of
the Gospel, and boarded at the house of Goodman Bayly, and
Bayly es Wife observed his Conversation to be contrary to his
calling, gravely told him his way was contrary to the Gospel of
Christ, and desired him to reform his Life or leave her house. So
he departed from the house, and turned her Enemy, and found
an opportunity to do her an injury: and it so fell out that Mr.
Jordan of Spurwink had a Cow dyed, and about that time Goody
Bayly had said, she intended such a day to travel to Casco Bay.
Mr. Thorpe goes to Mr Jordans man or men and saith, the Cow
was bewitched to death, and if they would lay the carcass in a
place he should appoint, he would burn it, and bring the Witch:
and accordingly the Cow is laid by the path that led from Black
point to Casco, and set on sire that day Goody Bayly was to
travel that way, and so she came by while the Carcass was in
burning, and Thorpe had her questioned

Page 79

for a Witch: But Mr. Jordan interposed in her behalf: and said his
Cow dyed by his Servants negligence, and to cover their own
fault they were willing to have it imputed to Witchcraft; and Mr.
Thorpe knew of Goody Baylyes intended Journey, and orders my

Servants (said he) without my approbation, to burn my Cow in
the way where Bayly is to come; and so unriddled the knavery,
and delivered the innocent. But suppose the case where there is
no such deceit, and the suspected party comes to it, when such a
thing is burned, or seems extraordinarily hurt or concerned at
such a time, how will this prove the party guilty of the crime, he
or she is suspected of? If any way, it must (1.) Proceed from
some natural cause, or sympathy in nature, between the thing
burned, and the Witches Body; but no reason can be given of
this; for a charm is wrought by the Devils power, and not by any
natural power of the Sorcerer, conveying any natural venome
from their own body, which by the operation of the fire should
revert back into it again, as to its center or fountain. (2) Or from
the immediate hand of God, causing this effect for discovery of
the Guilty; which we have no warrant from the Word of God to
expect (as was said in another case, Chapt. 8.) (3) Or by means
of the person burning the thing, and using it as a charm to find
out the person that aid the inchantment upon the thing burnt;

Page 80

which if it be affirmed truly, would rather prove the burner the
Sorcerer; and so tend to clear the suspected. (4.) Or it proceed
from the Compact made between the Devil and the Sorcerer;
which if any affirm, I ask how know you there is any such
Covenant made? that is first to be proved, and then that this is
one article in that Covenant, and that the Devil will attend to,
and keep his part of the Covenant inviolable. Neither of which
can be demonstrated. (5) Or this suffering is a meer phantasie,
or the free agency of the Devil, who is a lyar from the beginning,
and therefore not to be heeded. This Experiment is like the ways
of trying by water, fire, bottling of Urine, and c. all which have
been justly condemned as a sort of charms to be rejected by
Christians. Among the Confessors, Anno 1692 was a Negro
Woman, who charged two women to make her a Witch,
describing how she see her mark in the Devils Book. And said, if
she might be permitted, she would fetch the things whereby she
tormented the afflicted complainers. And accordingly brought an
Handkerchief, wherein several knots were tyed, raggs of Cloth, a
piece of Cheese and a piece of grass. And as I was credibly
informed, some compelled her to swallow the grass, and that
night she was burned in her flesh; and one took a piece of her
ragg and burnt it in the fire, and one of

Page 81

the Afflicted that had complained of her, was presently burned
on the hand. Another piece of her rags was put under water, and

then others complainants were choaked, and strived for breath
as if under water: And another ran to the River as if she would
drown her self. Here note, that the raggs on which, as the
Confessor said, the Witchcraft was laid, did when put into fire
and water, affect the persons supposed to be thereby bewitched
more than the Charmer her self. And probably the cause may be,
that Satan, the Lord permitting him, may inflict his mischief on
the person, the Spectators or Actors herein suppose to be
concerned, suiting hereby his design to mans faith about it. And
if so, the reason why any suspected person is hereby concerned
is not because they are guilty, but because they are suspected.
15. If the above named Signs singly taken, are not sufficient to
prove a person guilty of this Crime; then when many, or most of
these suspicions above named center upon the same person,
they cannot prove them guilty. Nay, all of them may be fixed
upon the same person, by the wiles of the Devil, and yet the
person be innocent. For if Satan can assume and afflict any one
in the shape of an innocent, as hath been already proved, he
may also in shape of a Ghost of the deceased accuse them, and
so

Page 82

act over the suspicions mentioned. Quae singula non prosunt
junct a non juvant. I find in the tryals and condemnations that
have been in England and Ireland, several of them have
proceeded upon sundry of these suspicions put together; and so
the total thence arising hath amounted to a condemnation. See
Glanvil, part 2 pag 118. to 209. In particular in the case of Julian
Cox before Judge Archer, An 1663. pag. 191. But probably it
may be said, that the method which I except against have been
used with good success, for by such things Witchcrafts and
Witches have been discovered, and some brought to confession
and repentance, and given undeniable demonstrations of the
reality of their guilt, and recovery after it out of that snare of the
Devil and therefore such ways of discovery are still to be used.
Ans. 1. Let us take it for granted, that these means have
occasioned the discovery of Witches; yet if any of them are
unlawful they are not to be used because of former success.

Many things have been done irregularly which God hath turned
to a good event; as the lying of Jacob to get the birthright; the
Selling of Joseph by his Brethren. Yea, the diabolical divination of
Nebucadnezar. Ezek. 21. 21. to 2 vers proved prosperous to him.
And Baladm inchantments to procure a curse, God turned into a
blessing to Israel. Yet none of these

Page 83

things are to be imitated by us upon hope of the like event to
follow. 2. If the discovery abovesaid hath followed upon the use
and dependance upon the means abovesaid, it may be said to
come from Satan over-ruled by the Lord to subserve his glorious
purposes) as the instrument of discovery, who exposeth at some
times his own Vassals to humane justice, that he may cut them
off from the earth: and therefore assumes their shapes or
otherwise renders them suspected to their Neighbours upon such
kind of presumptions, as may wrap in the guilty and innocent
together, and thereby working upon the erroneous principles of
men, doth (as we use to say, kill two birds with one stone,)
deliver up his own Servant to quine, and give occasion for the
condemnation thereby of an innocent person. But Satan is not to
be trosted when he speaks truth, or doth that which eventually
proveth good, because his aim is always to do mischief thereby.
Our Saviour Christ would not accept Satans worship and
testimony when he spake true. Mark 5 6, 7, 8 And Paul was
grieved in spirit when the Devil gave an high testimony of him to
be the Servant of the most high God. Act. 16. 16, 17, 18.

Chapter 12

Page 84

CHAPTER. XII. 16. Bernard saith, Witches may be convicted by
their Extasies: with the delight whereof, Witches are so taken,
that they will hardly conceal the same: or however at some time
or other they may be found in them. But the insufficiency of this
kind of proof will appear by considering the various sorts of
Extasies, and the diverse subjects of them. Extasies are either
natural, divine or diabolical. 1. Natural, which proceeds from the
constitution of the body, and some violent disease, a Feaver, and
c. whereby the imagination is strangely transported, and the
party conceiveth himself to be in some glorious place and
company and c. which proves but a meer dream of a man eating
and drinking, but when he awaketh his soul is empty. Isa 29 8.

2. Divine, as the trances of Peter, Act. 10.10 and of Paul, Act 22
17 3. Or Diabolical, of Witches, persons Obsessed or Possessed.
Some Histories speak of strange Extasies of confessed Witches.

R. B. of the kingdom of darkness, p. 69, 70. Tells us of a Woman
confessing her self a Witch, who pretended she had been turned
into a Wolf and killed a Sheep and Cow in that shape, and the
Cow and Sheep were killed at that time. And of a man Wolf that
was suspected

Page 85

in that shape, to devour Cattle, and his face had several
scratches and hurts, which they said were given him by the Dogs
that took him for a Wolf, and he confest himself, that twice a
year he was changed from a man to a Wolf. But this change
could not be real, but an abuse of Phantasie, either from a
distracting Melancholy called Lycanthropia, whereby he imagined
he was transformed into a Wolf. Or else, if he were indeed a
Wizzard, the Devil cast him into a profound trance, whereby he
imagined he was killing Cattle as a Wolf; while the mischief done
was other wise, and probably by a real Wolf. But those that have
been obsessed have had strange Extasies; as some of our
afflicted persons have had their trance fits; in which they lay
long time in a Swound, and when they came out of them
declared they had been carried to delectable places, and had
seen glorious sights of Men and Angels; as is in part declared
above, Chapt. 5. So that its easier to find a person possessed or
distracted by such Extasies, than to prove a person hereby in
voluntary league with the Devil. 17. I come next to consider the
testimony of such as confessing themselves to be Witches, do
witness against others as partners with them in the same crime.
This hath been accounted sufficient proof by the Common Law,
See Keeble.

Page 86

Ibidem. And Glanvil. Ibidem, p 141. and c. The ground of it is
from the received Maxim, That Socii criminis, partners in a crime
confessing their own guilt, and discovering their companions, are
sit and sufficient witnesses against those their companions. As is
frequently proved in cases of Murder, Treason, Robbery, Theft
and c. and why not as well in Witchcraft? Perkins makes this only
a presumption. But Bernard makes it a convictive evidence,
when one or more fellow. Witches, confessing their own
Witchcraft and bearing witness against others if they can make
good the truth of their witness, and give sufficient proof of it: As
that they have seen them with their Spirits; [Illegible word] or
that they have been together in their meetings and such like.

Now in the Examinations and tryals at Salem, there was great
plenty of this kind of Testimony; for about Fifty confessing they
most of them if not all accused others as partners with them at
their Witch meetings; as at a great Pond nigh Andover, some of
them said, they met together, and some at Newbury-falls, and
were Baptized there by Satan. And some at Salem Village as
above shewed, Chap. 2. and 3. Some said, they stole an horse
and rode upon it in the air from Andover to Salem Prison, and
there through the grate discoursed with one whom they accused.

Another declared that she with widow S. went to Capt. W. and
she said S. gave him a blow with a great

Page 87

stick, and yet were to him invisible: Capt. W. declared he had a
sore blow as if with a great stick, but saw no body. Widow S.
denyed that she struck him; then M. G. the confessor very boldly
looked up in her face, and said, G. S. you know you did strike
him, and I saw you do it, and then told the manner how it was
done, and how they came to him and returned. There were many
such instances which seemed exceeding demonstrative in that
day. Yet upon an after review of the whole these confessors
testimony appeareth to be very doubtful, if not utterly false. Yet
I would not deny all evidence of confessors to be rejected: for
the case may be so that persons may give such infallible signs of
their own guilt of this, (as well as other crimes) and such tokens
of real repentance for the same, as may render their testimony
notwithstanding their former transgression as credible, as the
testimony of any other confessing Malefactor. As Manasseh who
used Witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar Spirit; and afterward
besought the Lord and humbled himself greatly and c. 2 Chron.
33. 6, 12, 13. Was as fit (had he been a Subject) to be a
competent witness in any Court of Judicature, against those that
had been partners with him in those abominations, as any other
man. Here we must distinguish between Penitent Confessors,
and Impenitent Magicians. It a Magician or white Witch (as they
are

Page 88

called) come in to discover and testify against another to be a
Witch; This (as Perkins saith, Chap. 7. p. 209.) is no more then
the Devils testimony, because by the Devils help be revealeth
the Witch. And indeed such are but the Devils tools to do his
work at his beck, and so will as readily accuse the innocent as
the guilty. But the reasons that sway with me to question the
truth of the confessors, Anno 1692. notwithstanding their
seeming repentance for such crimes, are such as these. 1 These
confessors by their plausible confessions and accusations of
others begetting credit, have been a great if not the greatest
Engine of Satan to carry on the accusing and apprehending of
others, until this matter came to such an height, that if it had not
been stopped might have brought the best Christians in the
Country, under the imputation of that abomination, and have
involved all in confusion or blood. The kingdom of Satan being so
evident in the winding up of that whole contrivance, leads us to
see his singer in this principal means, for the managment of it. 2.

Some of these confessors were first under diabolical vexations,
(as the other afflicted or obsessed persons were) and under
those torments did, as they say, sign to a Book presented to
them, real or imaginary, by which they obtained ease of their
pains: And then Satan in their shapes afflicted others who
accused them

Page 89

until they confessed. And after such confessions against
themselves, they also accused others, as being with them, and
they were afflicted themselves, as they had been at the first and
complained against their Neighbours as others did. So that these
persons may justly be esteemed Daimonizomenoi, under some
kind of obsession and delusion of Satan all this time, and so their
Phantasies and Sences abused by him all the while; Satan
sometimes tearing of them as a devouring Lyon, and at other
times beguiling of them, as a Subtil Serpent. 3. Others that were
not so afflicted before their Confessing, were so presently after
it, and so may be reckoned in the same predicament with the
others. 4. I am jealous, and I hope with a godly jealousie, that
some by these their accusations of others, hoped to gain time,
and get favour from the Rulers. And that some of the inferiour
sort of people did ill Offices, by promising them favour thereby
more than they had ground to engage. And that some under
these temptations regarded not as they should what became of
others, so that they could thereby serve their own turns. And I
have been credibly informed, that some have since
acknowledged so much. 5. These Confessors since deny their
Confessions, and accusing of others, or say they remember
nothing of what they said or did in

Page 90

that day, whether truly or not, will be more manifest another
day. We may then well question the validity of those Testimonies
which the Testifiers themselves do not stand to justify now the
scean is changed. 18. I come in the next place to consider a
persons evidence against him or her self by their Confession
upon examination and tryal This is by Scripture declared to be
sufficient Evidence against persons Compotes mentis, of a sound
understanding, Luk. 19. 22. Out of thine own mouth will I
condemn, or judge thee. Yea, sufficient to justify an Execution
upon it, whether the person speak truly or not. As David said to
the Amalekite that affirmed he had killed Saul. Thy mouth hath
testified against thee, 2 Sam. 1. 16. Yet its very probable that
Saul slew himself without the help of any other. 1 Sam. 31. 4, 5.
But there have been excepted, sell accusers when distracted,

demoniacks, Lunauck, under witted, over watched, and persons
surprized upon sudden fear or hope of favour to be thereby
gained. So that we may hope some of those at Salem belied
themselves. 1. Those that being grievously vexed with the Devil
did, and said they well understood not what themselves. As
above said. 2. It's probable, some being accused, and their own
Relations among others, suspecting them, and vehemently
urging them to confess

Chapter 13

Page 91

themselves guilty, were so surprized and amazed, that they
confessed that in their haste, which they have cause to repent at
leisure. And having once accused themselves, they feared to
retract it presently left a worse thing should come upon them.

But since they have recanted, those Confessions, and some such
there were, whose conversations before and since that day have
been sober and blameless, and give cause to hope better things
of them. 3 But there were others, whose Confessions seemed
more free and demonstrative of reality, and some who confessed
upon real or pretended horrour of Conscience; and these
attended with such circumstances, that some will say, there is no
believing mankind confessing their guilt of any Crime, if these
must not be believed. But I leave the true stare of their case, to
a farther discovery, when the Lord please, in this life, or when
God shall Judge the secrets of men. CHAPTER XIII. Having
spoken of many supposed presumptions to discover a Witch, and
shewed the invalidity of them. I shall enquire what is meant by a
Witch. Exod. 22 18. For the clearing whereof, I shall enquire who
are the Criminals condemned, Deut. 18. 10, 11. Concerning
whom.

Page 92

1. Observe, That they were all Heathens who being ignorant of
the true God, worshipped the Devil instead of God; so that all the
crimes there condemned, are crimes which so far as they related
to any Deity, respected the Devil as their God. 2. That all the
nine crimes there condemned were of a like nature in general,
and are either divers names for the same thing, or set forth sins
very like one to another. (1.) This appeareth in the frequent
putting of sundry of them together, when they are prohibited or
condemned, as, Lev. 19. 31. and 20. 6, 31. The Wizard, and him
that hath a familiar spirit are condemned together; and Mic. 5.

12. Witchcrafts and Soothsayers. And Jer. 27. 9. Diviners,
Dreamers, Enchanters and Sorcerers, that is Witches, are put

together. Dan. 2. 2, 27. Magicians, Sorcerers, Astrologers,
Soothsayers are conjoyned. So, Isa 47. 9, 12, 13. and 1 Sam.

28. 3, 8, 9. Isa. 8. 19. and 19. 3. (2.) The same persons are
frequently charged with the guilt of the abominations, signified
by several of these names together. As Manasseh is charged with
six of these abominations. 2 Chron 33. 6. viz. Causing his
children to pass thorow the fire, observing times, using
Enchantments, using Witchcrafts, dealing with a familiar spirit,
dealing with Wizards. Ahaz is charged. 2 Chron. 28 3 with the
first of these. The ten Tribes are charged with three of these
abominations, 2 King. 17.

Page 93

17. viz, Divination, Enchantments, and causing their Children to
pass through the fire (3,) Sundry of these crimes are ranked with
the gross Idolatrous worshipping of false Gods of the Apostates
from the true God in Israel. As Manasseh, is charged with
worshipping Baalim and the Host of Heaven, and chen with
observing times, and c. 2 Chron, 33 2, 3, 5, 6, So Ahaz, 2 Chron,
28, 3,4,23,25. So the ten Tribes. 2 King, 17. 7, 8, 11, 12, 16,

17. And Judah, isa. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. They are said to be like the
Philistins in Soothsayings, and worship Idols, and c, See Psal.

106. 35, 36, 37, 38. 2 King. 23. 5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 24. (4.) There
seems then in all these abominations to be some idolatrous
worship of the Heathen Gods, that is the Devil, whereby some
special service was done to him; and that in expectation of some
great good or benefit they expected to receive from him thereby.
So the Egyptians in their distress sought to the Idols, Charmers,
Wizards, and to them that had familiar spirits. Isa. 19. 3. That is
that by those persons and means they might implore and obtain
the assistance of their Gods, to deliver them from the calamities
felt or feared. 1. The first then is making thy Son to pass through
the Fire; that is to Moloch, or any false God, forbidden and
condemned, Lev. 18. 21. and 10. 2. The sin of Ahaz, 2 King. 16.
3. and of Manasseh. 2 King. 21, 6. who observed times, used

Page 94

inchantments, dealt with familiar spirits and Wizards, ards, used
Witchcrafts, 2 Chron. 33. 6. So that we may observe this iniquity
hath some affinity with Witchcraft and the sins mentioned, Deut.

18. 10, 11. partly because joyned with them in this place; and
also because this and Manassehs Witchcrafts, and c are joyned
together in the places above mentioned. And this sin is also
reckoned with the Divinations and Enchantments of the Ten
Tribes. 2 King 17. 17, 30, 31. Judah tell to it. This iniquity was a
solemn dedication, or tacrificing their Sons and Daughtery to the

Devil, -Psal. 106 37. though under-the name of a God, as of
Moloch, Lev. 20. 2. or some other false Gods. Deut. 12 30 31,
And this Dedication was as the Ancients describe it, of two kinds.

1. By burning their Children to death in the Fire, as a Sacrifice to
the Devil; which seems to be signified by the burning in the fire,
Deut 12 31. and Psal 106, 37, 38. For they shed the innocent
blood of their children. So the Graecians sacrificed to Diana,
Agamemnons Daughter, to procure a good Wind for their Fleet.
Ovid Metamorphosis, lib. 13 This Sacrificing by the apostate
Jews, in Jeremiah's time, was in Tophet, in the Valley of the Son
of Hinnom. Jer. 7. 31. and 19. 5, 6. From hence it is that Hell is
called in the Greek, Geenna. Mat. 5. 22, 29 30. From the hebrew
Gebinnom, and Tophat. Isa 30. 33. God hereby shewing the
detestation

Page 95

he had of their Idolatry and Cruelty in those Sacrifices. 2. There
was another sort of passing thro' the Fire; when the Child passed
between two fires, as a solemo dedication of him to that false
God they sacrificed unto. This probably was Manasseh's sin. 2
Chron 33. 6. For it's said, he caused his children to pass thorow
the fire. But he did not sacrifice to death all his Children; Though
he might by such a dedication, consecrate them to the host of
Heaven, or to the Heathen Gods. By either or both these ways,
such Idolaters did make or confirm a Govenant with the Devil by
sacrifice. As Gods people did make a Covenant with God, by
sacrificing to him, Psal. 50. 5. And did thereby shew their
seeking help from the Devil, their invocation of him, and
dependance upon him for some great things they supposed he
could supply them with. So that here was one kind of charming
or inchantment used to a false God, which was condemned to
death. Exod. 22. 20, For by the using these abominable
Ceremonies, they did invocate the Devil to do them some great
good As the Graecians sacrificed Agamemnons Daughter to
procure a Wind for their Navy, and having a fail Wind, after
wards imputed it unto their Sacrifice. And by that Law, Lev. 20.

2, 3. He that giveth any of his seed to Moloch, shall surely be put
to death, These Sacrificers in Israel, ought to dye.

Page 96

2. The second Sin foretold, Deut. 18 10. is That useth Divination.
Kosem Kesaamim in Hebrew, from the verb Kasam, to divine,
which is in its derivatives sometimes used in a good sence. Prov.
16. 10. Isa. 3. 2. Kosem, The prudent. But Deut. 18. 10. used in
an evil sence And Ezek 12. 24. for a flattering divination such
was Balaam, Josh 13. 22. A soothsayer, or diviner: the Philistine

Priests, 1 Sam. 6. 2. Judahs false Prophets, Ezek. 13 6, 7, 23.

Jer. 14 14. Ezek. 22. 28. Micah 3. 6, 11. Zech. 10. 2 Jer. 29. 8.
Though they prophecied in the Name of the Lord: but false and
vain visions Applyed also to the Babylonish Priests, Ezek. 24 21.
23. and to their diviners, Isa. 44. 25. And Sauls rebellion is
compared to the sin of Witchcraft, 1. Sam. 15. 23. Or of Kosem,
that is divination, which shews it was a great sin: whether the
divining were by, or in the Name of the true God, or a false God:
And it was a prophecying of things to come true or false, or using
means whereby they might fore-know future contingencies, and
so be able to foretell them, as Ezek 21. 21, 23. 3. Is an observer
of times. Hebr. Megnonen. Always used to shew a wicked
practice, as 2 Chrou 33. 6. Tis one of the sins of Manasseh Tis
forbidden, Lev. 19 26. Neither shall ye observe times. A sin of
the Philistines, imitated by the wicked Jews, Isa 2. 6. there
translated Sooth sayers: and from this, some of them are called

Page 97

Sons of the Sorceress, Isai. 57. 2. Of Gnonenah. A sin of the
Amonites, Moabites, and other heathens condemned, Jer. 27. 3,
9, 10. translated Enchanters; when they prophecved a lye to
them; saying, ye shall not serve the King of Babylon. Some of
the Hebrew Doctors derive the word from Gnajin, an eye, and
interpret it of them that hold and abuse the eyes, so as to make
men think, they see what is not really so. Some others derive it
from Gnanan, a cloud, and hold it to be a kind of divining by the
clouds. And others from Gnon, time, who by their pretended skill
foretel what times are good, or evil to attend any weighty
business in. Such are called Soothsayers, Micah 5 12 And
observer of times, Deut. 18. 14. The Greek translation (which
was before the birth of Christ) call him Cledonizomenos; a
foreteller of things to come, or a fortune-teller. 4. Name is an
Enchanter. Menachesh of the verb Nichesh, which is used in a
lawful sence, Gen 30. 27. I have learned by experience. And of
Josephs divining by his cup, Gen 44 5, 15. Which Ainsworth
rendereth, searching, search diligently (that is) by this cup: Or
(as it may be translated) make tryal of you; that is, whether you
are such men as you profess your selves to be. And indeed by
this cup in Benjamins sack did Joseph try and search out his
brethren, to prove what love they did bear to their father Jacob
and brother Benjamin, which

Page 98

I understand to be the divining of Joseph there intended. But
mostly the word is used to signify some wicked practice: As for
the enchantments of Balaam, Numb. 24, 1. and 23. 23; Of

Manasseh, 2Chron 33. 6. Of the ten tribes, 2 King 17. 17. And is
condemned, Lev. 19 26. 5. Abomination is a Witch. Mechasheph
Note this word is always used to set forth some wicked
abomination, and the worker of it. The Egyptian sorcerers are
charged with it Exod. 7. 11. Who are called Sorcerers, or
Witches. Mechashepim. And Manasseh, 2 Chron. 33 6 used
Witchcraft: and the wise men of Babylon that Nebucadnezer sent
for to tell and interpret his dream, are called, Dan. 2. 2.
Mechashepim Witches, or as tis translated Sorcerers. Such also
were the Prophets of the Edomites and heathen Nations, Jer. 27.
9. called there Sorcerers. And the Babylonians are charged as
guilty of Witchcrafts, called Sorcerys, Isa 47. 9, 12. And Ninveh
is called a Mistress of Witchcrafts, Nahum 3 4. And Jezabel is
charged by Jehu with this wickedness, 2 King 9. 22. And Judah
also is charged with this abomination, Micah 5. 12 Yea after their
return from Babylon, Mai 3. 5 Where the Lord threatens to be a
swift witness against the Sorcerers, or witches among them The
Septuagint Greek translation render this word, which is by us
called in the Scripture Witch and Sorcerer, by the name
Pharmacos, and their Witchcrafts and Sorcerys, they call
Pharmaca

Page 99

and Pharmaceia: and so these Greek names are in the NewTestament translated, [Illegible word] which very much follows
this Greek translation in quoting the Scriptures of the old
Testament) Gal. 5. 20. Witchcraft, Sorcerys, Rev. 9. 21. and 18.
23. And Sorcerers, Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15. 6. The sixth iniquity
here condemned is, A Charmer. Hebr. Chobe Chaber; a Chaimer
of Charms: of Chaber, to joyn together in Society. Sometimes
used for a lawful Associating; but in Deuteronomy and other
places, for a wicked joyning Society, as Isa 47. 9, 12. translated
Enchantment: stand now to thine Enchantments, and c. And
Psal. 58. 5. used to express the Charming of a Serpent. The
Greek call such an one, Epaiodan Epaioden: the Charmer of a
Charm. 7. The seventh word is, A consulter with familiar Spirits.
Hebr. its Shod Oh, that asketh of Ob, the familiarSpirit; rendred
by Buxtorf,Pytho, a sin forbidden, Lev 19.31. So that the
regarding hose that have familiar Spirits is prohibited, Lev. 19
31. and Lev. 20. 27. The man or woman that hath Ob, that is, a
familiar Spirit, shall be put to death. See Lev. 20 6 This was one
of Manassehs sins, 2 Chron 33 6. 2 King. 21. 6. And for going to
such a Woman the Lord killed Saul, 1 Chron. 10. 13. See of
these, Isa. 8 19. and 19. 3 and 29. 4. Such as these are
commonly joyned with Wizards, as in the Scriptures quoted. And

such Saul cut off,l Sam. 28.3,9. and yet after that sought to
such an one to his

Page 100

own destruction, 1 Sam. 28 7, to 21. namely to the Witch at
Endor. The Greek translator in the Scriptures above quoted, call
them, Eggastrimuthai: persons that speak in or from their
bellies, because of old time as Histories mentioned, those who
prophecyed or spake by inspiration of the Devil, or heathen
Gods, spake a from their bellies, when they gave answers to the
people from their heathen oracles. Which probably is pointed at,
Isa. 8. 19 Where such are said to peep and mutter; and Isa. 29
4. 1 speak out of the ground, and out of the dust. 8 The Eighth
name for these abominable persons is, A Wizard, Hebr,
Jaddegnoni; of Jadang to know. But here notes such an art and
way of knowing as is wicked, not allowed or by God, and
therefore not proceeding from nature, or lawful art, or divine
Revelation therefore from Satan. Such are condemned as worthy
of death. Lev 20. 27 And it was one of the Iniquities of
Manasseh, 2 Chron 33.6 He dealt with Wizards, Gnashah
Jiddegnoni; He prepared, obtained or made use of Wizards This
name is commonly joyned with the having familiar spirits; as,
Levit 19 31 and 20 6, 27, 1 Sam. 28. 39 2 King. 9. 21. 6. and 27
24. Isa. 8. 19 and 19. 3. So that it seems to be another name to
signifie one that hath a familiar spirit, for his knowledge
thereby, or at least to agree in the main with such. 9. Name is, A
Necromancer, Doresh El. Hammethim,

Page 101

a Seeker to the Dead. This was the sin of the Witch at Endor to
seek unto dead Samuel to give counsel to living Saul, 1 Sam. 28.
which is also condemned. Isa 8. 19 Should a people seek for the
living to the dead? This opinion was among the Heathen, that the
Dead might be raised, and give them advice. So Pomphey in his
distress desired the Ghost of a dead Souldier might come to him,
to give him counsel what to do. And by such means, the Devil
counterfeiting himself, this or that dead person, often deceived
them And by such kind of Apparitions, the Doctrine of Purgatory,
and other Superstitions have been much rivetted among the
vulgar with the Papists. By viewing the crimes condemned, Deut.
18. 10, 11. as they are mentioned in other Scriptures, we shall
find, they all speak of sins very like one to another, and some of
them but divers names for the same crime. The Lord aiming in
this place to condemn all those diabolical Artists, by whatever
names they were known among the Israelites, or Canaanites. For
we shall find several of these names fixed upon the same person,

as on Manasseh, 2 Chron. 33 6. Six of these names, or crimes are
fastened upon him. And the Witch at Endor is mentioned, 1 Sam.
28 as one that was a Necromancer, a Wizard, and having a
familiar spirit, and a Diviner by it. See also, Isa. 47. 9 12, 13.

Jer. 27. 9. Hence then the way to understand the

Page 102

crimes pointed at in the prohibitions mentioned in Deut. 18. is to
examine what were the crimes those stand charged with in
Scripture who are branded with any of these names. I begin with
the Sorcerers or Witches of Egypt, Exod. 7. These did imitate the
real Miracles of Moses, in making frogs, and turning his Staff into
a Serpent, and water into blood: And this was done by these
Sorcerers either by some humane power, art and dexterity, or by
the assistance of the Gods of Egypt (mentioned, Numb. 33 4. 2
Sam. 7. 23.) that is by the Devils aid. But they could not do
these things by humane power, art, or dexterity; therefore by
the Egyptian Gods, i.e the Devils. This will appear, if we consider
what was the case between Moses and Pharaoh and why Pharoah
sent for his Sorcerers. Moses by the Lords commission said to
Pharoah, Exo 5. 1. And the Lord (or Jehovah, for so it is in
Hebrew) the God of Israel saith, Let my people go, and c.

Pharoah answered, Who is Jehovah that I should obey his voice?
As if he had said, I know not this Jehovah, I worship other Gods
even the Gods of Egypt. Now then Moses must prove Jehovah
ought to be obeyed, and that must be by working a Miracle as a
sign so Pharoah. This Pharoah asketh of Moses, and God
promiseth that he will do for and by Mosses, Exod. 7. 3, 5, 9.

The case between Pharaoh and Moses, was somewhat like the
case between

Page 103

Elijah and Baals Prophets. 1 King. 18. whose God should be
worshipped? and this must be tryed by some sign, as here by
frogs, lice, locusts, and c. So there by fire fetcht from Heaven to
consume the Sacrifice; and in both cases, the Lord shews he is
greater than all Gods, as Jethro acknowledged; For in the thing
wherein they dealt proudly, the Lord was above them. In
prosecution of this Commission, Moses and Aaron turn their Rod
into a Serpent, and the water of Egypt into blood, and bring
frogs to cover the land of Egypt: Here were real Miracles, which
prove that Jehovah ought to be obeyed. For that Message which
is confirmed by evident Miracles, comes from the God of Power
and Truth, and therefore ought to be obeyed. Pharoah now will
try if his Sorcerers cannot do as much as Moses and Aaron, that
he may invalidate the Miracles of Moses, and it's said, they did in

like manner, Exo. 7. 11, 12, 22. and 8. 7. Gnashashu Chen. They
did somewhat like to what Aaron had done. If it were by humane
power and dexterity only, then it must be by bringing Serpents,
Blood and Frogs under their garments, or the like, and by slight
of hand, slipping them down before the company with such
celerity, that the things first presented, might seem to be
transformed into another nature. But that it was not so appears,
1. In that they could not be provided before

Page 104

hand with Serpents, blood and frogs, to present before Pharoah
at those times, because no humane art could tell them beforehand, what Miracles Aaron would work, to inable them to stock
themselves with such provision before hand. 2. Had they so done
by meer humane art, there had been no comparison between the
actings of Moses and theirs; and so no argument to direct whose
God was to be obeyed, whet ther Jehovah, or the Gods of Egypt.
For Pharoah and his Courtiers, yea, and Moses also could easily
discover such legerdemain, and indeed it would have rendred the
Magicians ridiculous, and Pharoah for improving of them. For
Pharoah was convicted that what Aaron did was a reality; for
Aarons rod devoured the Magicians rods, and the blood was so
over all the land of Egypt, that the fish died, and the River stank,
and the Egyptians wanted drink, and the frogs so covered the
Land of Egypt, that Pharoah acknowledged they came by
Jehovah. For be requesteth Moses and Aaron to intreat Jehovah
to take the frogs away, Chap. 8. 8. 3. If they had only brought
Serpents, Frogs and c. from other places, and thrown them down
by jugling slight of hand; then when Aaron brought lice upon
man and beast, they could have taken lice also, and scattered
them about; for they tryed by their inchantments to bring forth
lice, but could not: and yet lice

Page 105

were as easily, if not more easily obtained than frogs and
serpents, and they were men still, and had their hands and feet
to act with now as well as before: But now they are convinced
and confess, This is the finger of God; that is of a greater God
than any we worship and work by. 4. The Magicians brought
frogs up upon the land of Egypt, ver. 7 which shews they
produced frogs in more places than just where they stood and
acted; and therefore did not act meerly by slight of hand. Hence
we may conclude, that the Serpents, Blood, and Frogs the
Magicians shewed, were effects above mans power, and not by
Jehovah, therefore by the Devil, the God of Egypt. Whether the
Devil did only delude the sight, and bewitch the eyes of Pharoah,

and the Egyptians, or make real frogs and serpents out of the
putrid matter in Egypt, or make aerial bodies like them, or that it
was the Devils assuming such like shapes, I determine not: But
we may observe, that here the Devil, and his Magicians went
very far, and farther than at other times; for now Moses is at
hand to overcome their delusions by the power of Jehovah, and
to convince beholders, that there is no God of the Heathen, can
work like the God of Israel. Yet for a time the true Miracles of
Moses, and the seeming ones of the Magicians seem to be pretty
much alike. For it's said,

Page 106

they cast down every man his rod, and they became Serpents. It
is not said, and they shuffled in Serpents instead of their rods,
but their rods were serpents, at least in outward appearance.
These effects then so like to Moses real Miracles, might move the
Magicians to try a fourth time if they could not by their
inchantments produce lice, but here their power failed. And the
true reason was, their God was in chains, and the Lord bound
him that he should proceed no further to delude men by his
pretended miraculous power. 2. I Enquire what was the Crime of
the Woman at Endor, that had a familiar spirit? 1 Sam. 28. 7.
and c. A. She was such an one as Saul had cut off as being a
Wizard, and having a familiar spirit, ver. 3. and 9. In hebrew
they are called, Eth Haobeth; that is, those that have Oh. and
ver. 7. Esheth bagnalath Oh. A woman that is mistress of Oh.
that is rendred one that is Mistress of Pytho, a Prophecying
Spirit. Enggastrimuthos as above declared; one that speaks as
from her belly by help of the Devil. Q. What then was this Pytho,
or Ob? A. It was a divining spirit; to divine by the Devil. Whence
the possessed Damosel, Acts 16. 16. is said to have the spirit of
Pytho, which was the Devil that possessed her, by whom she did
Soothsay. The Jewish Rabbi, Aben Esra saith, they were called
Oh, because

Page 107

from a belly swelled like a bottle, they gave out their Oracles.

And Oboth is translated bottles, Job 32. 19. Ainsworth on Deut.
18. 11. saith, such Magicians are so called, because they speak
with an hollow voice as out of a bottle. This Woman at Endor was
then one that only plaid tricks with a bottle, or one that was
mistress of Ob the Devil as her familiar spirit to wait upon her;
not the former, therefore the latter. For (1) By this her Spirit, she
offers to bring up to Saul whom he desired, v. 11. (2) She brings
up the supposed Samuel, (i. e. as I conceive, the Devil in
Samuels likeness) That doth so much resemble Samuel for his

Age, Complexion, Mantle and Voice, that Saul takes him to be
real Samuel: And makes answer to him as if he were the real
Samuel, ver. 15. And receives a sad message from him, as if it
had been spoken by Samuel himself, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. So that
this Woman was a Necromancer in raising up dead Samuel, or
the Devil in his likeness. Some indeed do plead that this woman
only plaid tricks with a bottle, and a cunning knave assisting of
her, counterfeited the voice of Samuel, and deceived Saul
thereby. And they plead that Oboth is in one place translated
bottles, viz. Job 32. 19. Whether truly or not, I now stay not to
discuss; but if it were truly translated so here, yet in fourteen
other places, Ob. and Oboth is

Page 108

translated a familiar spirit, or spirits; and we are to compare this
in 1 Sam. 28. with those many Scriptures where it's rendred so
as referring to an Evil Spirit. But say they Manasseh, 2 Chron.

33. 6. deal with a familiar spirit: hebrew, 'tis Gnashah Ob which
they would render he made Ob. Now say they he could not make
a familiar spirit although he might a bottle. To which I answer. 1.
The verb Gnashah, signifies to get, obtain or set up (as the
Dutch translate it) so that here is nothing in this place to make
for their turn; for though he could not make a familiar spirit, yet
he could obtain, or set up a familiar spirit. 2 Manasseh his sin in
this was like his Sacrificing his Children through the fire, which
was certainly a kind of invocation of a falseGod,i.e. the Devil;
and the description of his apostasy v. 3 to 8 shews that he was
turned from the true God to the Gods of the heathen, to worship,
and invocate them, and why not to have a spirit to obtain
answers by, called Ob? But that this Witch at Endor did more
than play tricks with a bottle, appeareth. (1) Because her sin was
a capital crime, and they that sought to such persons were
cursed of God, Lev. 19 31 and 20 6, 27. Isa. 8 19. And it cannot
be apprehended that she and others would hazzard their lives
meerly to play tricks with a bottle

Page 109

or that the people heathens and Israelites should be so
exceedingly addicted to follow such, as to need such severe
prohibitions, and punishments therefore. (2.) Saul had put many
such to death for having Ob: And its not likely this woman after
this would keep such a bottle to play with to the hazard of her
life. (3) Saul and his Courtiers that had cut off so many of them,
must necessarily know what the crime was, they were put to
death for. (4) Saul sought not for one that could play tricks with
a bottle; but for one that by the help of her familiar could raise

Samuel (or a Spirit in his likeness) which was agreeable to a
corrupt opinion among them, that they might seek help from the
dead: forbidden Isa. 8. 19 Should a people seek for the living to
the dead, i e. to the Souls of the Dead. (5.) If she had only playd
tricks with a bottle, how could she or any other personate
Samuel, as he did speaking to Saul, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19? If it
be said, she had a man, a knave, to come in such a garb to
personate the voice and mantle of Samuel: Then I ask, how in
the night time this woman without notice given could have a
counterfeiting knave and mantle in such a readiness? For Saul
came to her in the night, and without warning, v 8, 9. (6) A meer
juggling knave or quean could not prophecy the victory of the
Philistians, the death of Saul and his Sons, Jonathan and the
rest, as the supposed Samuel did. But Satan

Page 110

might so know and prophesy (as I may farthe shew hereafter.)
For Saul dyed for this very sin, in going to ask counsel of one
that had a familiar Spirit, to enquire of it, 1 Chron. 10. 13 14.

And this the Lord might discover to Satan for the punishment of
Saul, as he did the death of Ahab unto Satan, upon a like
account. As Micaiah was shewed in a vision, 1 King. 22.19 to 23.

3 I enquire, What was the profession and practice of the
Babylonian Sorcerers mentioned, Isa. 47. 9 12, 13, 14 Ezek. 21.
21. Dan. 2. 2. A. 1. They were like the Sorcerers of Egypt, for
they have the same general names of Sorcerers and wise men.

2. They were Chatsim bacochabim; that is Prophets by the Stars:
(translated Stargazers) for Chotseh is used to signify a Propher,
or Seer Isa. 30. 10. 2 Sam. 24 11. 1 Chorn, 21 9. and 25 5. 2
Cbron 9 29 and 12. 15. and 19.2. and 29.25 and 35. 15. Amos 7.
12. Here are ten times or places where this word is used to
signify a Prophet; which give light unto this place, to shew that
these Stargazers did prophesy by the Stars And it cannot be
understood of any foretelling by them, of signs, seasons, days
and years, which God ordained them for, Gen. 1. 14. For that is
a knowledge lawful and commendable, and attainable by lawful
art and study: but what the Prophet chargeth them with here
was unlawful, and therefore such a kind of prophecying, as

Page 111

proceeded from a false God, that is the Devil. 3. They are called
Monthly Prognosticators. Modignim lechadashim, knowers by the
months; Modignim proceeds from the same Radix with
Jiddeguoni, a Wizard, and hath some affinity with it here. These
then were a sort of foretellers of things to come, by the Months
or Moon. 4. Add to this, that v. 9. and 12. they are charged with

the guilt of Sorcerys or Witchcrafts, and Inchantments, which
shews what kind of Prophets they were. 2. They used Witchcraft
in a way of operation, whereby they endeavoured to deliver their
Country from the evils coming on them. This appeareth, (1.) By
the challenge Isaiah makes to them, v. 12. Stand now to thine
inchantments, and c. if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be
thou mayest prevail, q d. They hoped to put off the mischief and
desolation that was to come upon them, by their Witchcrafts,
and c. (2.) He tells them, their Astrologers and c. should not
save them from the things coming on them; but should be as
stubble and the fire should burn them and c. v. 13, 14, 15.

Which intimates, that these Astrologers and c. did strive and
endeavour it with hopes to prevail; but the Lord would overrule
and disappoint their endeavours. 3. Compare this with Ezek. 21.
21. Where their diviners used divinations to know secret
futurities, viz. Whether they should go to Jerusalem

Page 112

and prosper, or to Rabbath and prosper. That this was a
diabolical divination may be seen, if we consider. (1.) The thing
they sought for was a future contingent event to man unknown.
(2.) The means they use to discover it is secret were, by Images
orTeraphin (which were the Devils oracles,) and by arrowes, and
by looking into the liver, for signs of direction to know which of
these places they should first go to, and whether they should
prosper in their way. And these means had no vertue in them to
make any such discovery (3) Therefore they did by these rites
and ceremonies invocate their gods to reveal these things to
them The Lord indeed did unknown to them over-rule the
divination so that according to their Superstitious imaginations
they were inclined to go against Jerusalem, and God made it to
prosper; not thereby approving, or excusing their invocating
false Gods: but that thereby he might use them, as the rod of his
wrath against the people of his wrath. (4.)By comparing these
two Scriptures above, we may see of what stamp the wise men
of Babylon were, who were sent for by Nebuchadnezar, to tell
and interpret his dream, Dan. 2. 2. And to interpret his other
dream, Dan. 4, 6, 7. And by Belshazzer, to read the hand writing
and interpret it, Dan 5. 7. viz. Men that had peculiar intimacy
with, and special aid from their false Gods, as the Sorcerers and
diviners mentioned,

Page 113

Isa. 47. and Ezek 21. For (1.) They have the same name,
Michashpim Sorcerers and Witches: and Chartuminim,one of the
names of the Sorcerers of Egypt, Exed. 7. 11. (2) This was

agreeable to the end those Kings sent for them. viz. to discover
secrets which other men could not. And they confidently profess
a skill to interpret the Dream, if they may know what it is Dan 2
6. Which stem, to hold forth that they depended upon a power
superhumane, to discover to them the interpretation of Dreams;
yet they confess they cannot reveal the dream it self. And good
season, for the Gods they served knew it not. Yet they say the
Gods whose dwelling is not with flesh, could reveal it. Which
shews they acknowledge a Divine Power that knew the greatest
secrets, who is indeed the true God unknown to them. And when
Daniel had revealed the Dream and its interpretation. Dan 2. And
afterwards interpreted another dream Dan. 4. He is
acknowledged to excel all the Wise men of Babylon in that, in him
was the spirit of the Holy Gods. Dan. 4. 8 and 5 11. That is, the
spirit of a God above their Gods; a God that was as
Nebuchadnezzar confesseth, Dan. 2. 47. A God of Gods, and a
Revealer of secrets. The High God. Dan 4. 2. Yet this hinders not
but that the Magicians, and c. had more of the spirit of their
Gods, than others had, though not equal to Daniel.

Page 114

Q. 2. What was the sin of the Sorcerers, and c. of Edom and
other Nations, for which Jeremiah warns them not to hearken to
them? Jer 27. 3, 9 A. It was a prophecying a lye unto them in
the name of their false Gods, saving to them ye shall not serve
the King of Babylon, which was the way to destroy them, ver 10,
11. I say, in the name of false Gods: For they attended to
dreams (not to your dreamers) as a way of Revelation whereby
they were perswaded so to prophesy. Dreams are either, (1.)
Natural, as Eccles, 5. 3 7. Isa. 29 8. Job 7. 14 (2) Or Divine, as
the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel, Joseph, and c Or (3)
Diabolical, Deut. 13 1. 2 Zach. 10 2. The Diviners have told false
dreams. But the dreams of the Sorcerers Jer. 27. 9, were not
Divine, nor Natural, therefore Diabolical, and so from a false
God. Here note, that Divining or Prophecying by diabolical and
false dreams, is one way of Sorcery and Witchcraft: And that
these false Prophets are Sorcerers, in undertaking to reveal
things to come, by a false God, though what they reveal do not
come to pass. They no doubt sought to their God for help in this
matter, and went as far as they could. So I conceive all Baals
four hundred and fifty Prophets, 1 King. 18. 26. were Sorcerers,
in seeking with all earnestness to Baal to bring down fire from
heaven (though they could not perform it) for they did all they
could to oblige

Page 115

the Devil to help them; but their God wanted power, and so the
wonder was not wrought at that time. These Prophets of Baal
deserved therefore to dye by the Law. Exod. 22. 18. and by the
Law. Deut. 18. 20. The Prophet that shall speak in the name of
other Gods, even that Prophet shall dy. As also by the Law. Exod
22 20 He that sacrificeth to any God, save unto the Lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed: For those sacrificed to Baal. But if any
would thence conclude, that all the Heathen Sacrificing Priests
should be put to death: I say, it follows not, for the Heathen
among the Heathen know no better. But these did it in Israel,
where they had the means to know the true God, and
professedly endeavoured to draw men from the Lord unto Baal.

Q 3 What was the sin of the Prophets in Judah, who are called
dreamers, Jer. 29 8 9. and said to use divination, Jer. 14. 14.
Ezek. 13. 6, 7, 9. 23. and in other Scriptures? A. They are not
called, Mechashepim, Witches, as the false Prophets of the
Heathen; yet they were very like them. As (1.) Both sorts used
wicked divinations. (2) As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses;
so these withstood the counsel of God spoken by Jeremiah, Jers
27 3. to 11. and 29 8, 9. (3.) The divinations of both sorts of
Prophets were false, as to the matter of them; they divined a
lye. Jer.

Page 116

27. 10. with 29 8, 9. Ezek. 13 6, 7. (4) As the Heathen diviners
were guided by dreamers, which came from a lying spirit. Jer.

27. 9. Nor to the dreamers of dreams, and c. so these hearkened
to false dreams which they dreamed, Jer. 29 8 which came by
Inspiration or instigation of Satan. Yet they differed in this;

Those prophesied in the name of a false God, but these
prophesied a lye in the name of the true God. So that these
deserved to dye by the Law. Deut. 18. 20. But the Prophet which
shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not
commanded him to speak, even that Prophet shall dye Q 4 What
were the Witchcrafts Jehu charged Jezebel with? 2 King 9 22. A.
1. Either they were some practices of Witchcraft she used, not
expresly mentioned in Scripture; or they were her protecting and
providing for, and maintaining of Baals Prophets who were
Witches, and her making their cause her own; as see, 1 Kings
16, 31. and 18. 19 and 19 1, 2 She seems to be guilty of both. 1
King 21. 25 26 She made the Prophets of Baal's Sin her own. As
David is said to slay Uriah, when he did it not in his own person;
but contrived how it should be done by others. And we may note
that one reason why the false Prophetess in Thyatira is called
Jezebel, is, because she called her self a Prophetess, and taught
the people to eat things sacrificed to Idols; which

Chapter 14

Page 117

was thereby to commit Idolatry. So that Ahabs Jezebel might be
one of the Devils Prophetesses among the Israelites, and so be
guilty of Witchcrafts that way; as a teacher of Idolatrous
worshipping Baal. And we may note that the false Gods had their
female Prophetesses and Diviners as well as Males, as we see the
Witch at Endor. CHAPTER. XIV. Having spoken of the Scripture
use of those evils condemned, Deut. 18. 10, 11. And of the
persons charged with those abominations, we may hence see
who those Witches, Sorcerers, Diviners and c. among the
Heathen were, viz. they were a sort of Priests and Prophets of
the Heathen Gods, who had a more special dedication and
approaches to them, than the ordinary sort of Heathen had,
whereby they obtained or at least endeavoured to obtain special
help from those Gods, who were indeed the Devils. 1. Note, they
were reckoned among the Priests and Prophets of those Idol
Gods, as 1 Sam. 6. 2. The Philistans called for their Priests and
diviners. And Jer. 27. 9, 10. they are commanded not to hearken
to their Prophets, nor Diviners, nor Enchanters, nor Sorcerers or
Witches. So when Josiah put away the Priests of the false Gods,
he together with them put away them that had familiar Spirits,
Wizards, Teraphim

Page 118

and Idols, 2 King. 23. 5,10, 14. And when the ten Tribes are
condemned for their heathenish Idolatries, and Sacrificing their
Children through the fire; their divinations and enchantments are
reckoned with these abominations, 2 King. 17. 10, 11, 12, 16,

17. And the false Prophets of the Jews in Chaldia, though they
prophecyed by the true God, yet prophecying falsely, are called
Diviners, Jer. 29. 8,9. Though they pretended a Warrant from
Jehovah, because of their likeness to the heathen Prophets and
diviners. So Zech. 10 2. Mich. 3. 5,6, 7. Those Prophets are
called Diviners 2. Hence as Gods people were to have recourse to
the Lords Priests and Prophets, to seek and know the mind of
God, and to obtain help from him by them, 2 Chron. 20. 20. Mai.
2.7 1 King. 22. 7. So the Devil had his Priests and prophets by
whom the people did enquire, and to whom they came in difficult
cases, as to the God of Ekron, 2 King. 1. 2. So Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezer, Belshazer and c. Send for their wisemen and
Sorcerers to consult with and help in their great cases; as the
Servants of the Lord sent to their wise men, the Priests and
Prophets of the most High God, to consult with and help in their
difficult cases. Note, All the Heathens were worshippers of the

Devil, 1 Cor. 10. 20. Yet all were not Sorcerers, diviners,
soothsayers, and c. but some peculiar ones. So Balaam among
the Midianites, was a Soothsayer or diviner,

Page 119

and a Prophet, Josh. 13. 22 with 2 Pet. 2.2. Baal had his
prophets four hundred and fifty, 1 King. 12. 22. And the Prophets
of Egypt, Isa. 19.3. are called Charmers, Wizards and c. to whom
they sought. As among Gods worshippers all are not Prophets, 1
Cor. 12 29. 3. As the gifts and attainments of the Lords Prophets
were differing, and so their operations, as 1 Cor. 12 4, 5, 6. So
Satan, who is the god of this world, doth act like the most high,
in distributing his gifts, and c. to his devoted Servants. As had
Moses and Aaron, the gifts of miracles, so Satan had the
magicians of Egypt that shall come by counterfeit or seeming
miracles, as near or like to Gods Prophets as he can. Hath the
Lord his Prophets to prophesy of things to come? So Satan hath
in some degree like them, who shall give a sign or a wonder that
some times shall come to pass, Deut. 13.1,2, 3. Did the Lord
reveal himself to some of his Servants by dreams? So Satan
reveals himself to some of his prophets by dreams at some
times, as Deut. 13. 1. If there arise a prophet or a dreamer of
dreames. So the Sorcerers of the Heathen, Jer. 27. 9. had their
dreams or dreamers. Did the Lord give to some the gift of
interpretating dreams, as to Joseph and Daniel? So Satan had his
officers that pretended at least a skill to interpret dreams, as
Dan 2 7. Did the Lord call Abraham and his Priest to Sacrifice his
Son Isaac, Gen. 22 2. So Satan had

Page 120

his Priests by whom the Heathen did Sacrifice their Sons and
Daughters to him; and cause them to pass through the fire, and
c. Lev. 18. 21. Psal. 106 35, 36, 37, 38. And this may be the
reason why causing Children to pass through the fire is so often
in Scripture mentioned with Witches and Witchcraft. Because this
was one abominable way whereby the Sorcerers Sacrificed, to
their Devil gods, to implore their help. And as the Lord did more
freely and familiarly reveal himself and his counsel to some more
than others: As to Moses Exod 33. 11. To whom the Lord spake
face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend So Satan had some
of these his devoted Servants, to whom he was more open and
familiar in converse. And such were those that had a familiar
Spirit to appear at their call as the woman at Endor, by her
familiar Spirit divining, brings up the counterfeit Samuel. And as
the people did seek unto Moses, and such Prophets of the Lord
as had more especial acquaintance with the Lord. So the heathen

did seek unto those that had these familiar Spirits, as persons
that had more especial intimacy with their gods than themselves
had. Hereupon the Lord strictly forbids the Israelites seeking
unto such, Lev. 19. 31. and 20. 6. Isa. 8. 19. And from this
intimacy between the Magicians and their god, and Satan their
god, being as it were, at their call or beck; she that had a
familiar Spirit is called Bagnalath Ob, 1 Sam.

Page 121

28. 7. rendred, that hath a familiar Spirit, but if signifies a
mistress of Ob: The spirit being subservient to the Witch, as if
she were his mistress. And hereupon it is that Writers speak of
Witches being in Covenant with Satan, explicit or implicit;
because Satan is so ready to act at the call of a Witch: as to
make or bring frogs real or seeming, and other things at the
Magicians of Egypts endeavour, and to bring up Gods Elohim, i e
Spirits invisible, likeness or shapes out of the earth, at the call of
the Witch at Endor. But some have denyed all such famaliarity
with the Devil, because say they, The Devil being a Spirit there
cannot be such commerce or intimacy between Men and Spirits,
as amounts to a Covenant engagement between them? To which
I answer, there may be a covenant engagement between Men
and Spirits. For, 1. There may be a Covenant between God and
man: All Israel was in Covenant with God, Deut. 29. 12, and c.
That thou shouldest enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God.
And all Gods people did make a Covenant with God by Sacrifice,
Psal. 50. 5. And before Moses and Aaron wrought their Miracles
before Pharaoh, they were not only in covenant with God, but
God had especially covenanted with, or promised to them, that
upon their doing as he commanded and directed them, these
miraculous

Page 122

effects should follow, Exod 7. 10. and c. Why then may not men
be in covenant with Satan who is but a finite Spirit? And as an
effect and token of it come after the working of Satan with all
power and signs and lying wonders 2 Thes. 2. 9. 2. The Lord
forbids his people making a Covenant with the Heathen Gods,
Exod. 23.32. Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with
their Gods, that is, with the Devils, Deut. 32.17 If there had
been no danger of Israels making such Covenants, they would
not have had such a prohibition. 3. Satan discoursing with the
Man Christ Jesus, Math. 4 8, 9 Offers to make a bargain or
covenant with Him, wherein he promiseth Quid pro Quo. Satan
offers on his part to give all the kingdoms of the World, and the
Glory of them; and the condition he proposeth on Christs part,

is, That Christ shall fall down and worship him. Had our blessed
Saviour agreed to these propositions there had been a bargain;
but that was not possible, for when the Prince of this world came
to our Saviour, he found nothing in him; that is, no matter for
his temptations to work upon, Job. 14. 30. But alas, how many
wicked men and woman are there in the world, that would accept
of such bargains? Some have been so set, upon obtaining their
desired ends, that to have their wills, they will do as he said in
the Poet.

Page 123

Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. If I cannot obtain
my wish and will from God, I will to Hell to fetch it thence. And if
persons are prepared for it, and Satan sees it as interest, he will
offer conference with them, as he did with Eve, Gen. 3. And
readily promise them all the world can afford them according to
their hearts desire, to the uttermost of his power, and make no
scruple of lying, and if mankind believes him, Satan profers some
condition to be performed on mans part, as he did to Christ; If
thou wilt worship me. And when mankind believes and accepts
the seeming good desired and offered, upon performance of the
conditions required, here's a Covenant explicit or implicit. But
say some, what ever Satan is bid to do or reveal by a Witch,
cannot he do the same things without a Witch? A. 1. Satan hath
done great things without Witches, as in the afflicting Job, and
the possessed, as abovesaid. 2. Yet Satan doth also do and
discover things by magicians, and c. as in the cases of the
Egpytian Sorcerers, and woman at Endor, above expressed. And
this may proceed, (1) Partly from the righteous Judgment of
God, giving Satan both permission and commission at such
times, to do great things in punishment to those that seek unto
him in that way. As when Ahab goes to the Prophets that were
not the Prophets of Jehovah or the Lord, 1 King. 22. 7,

Page 124

but of the Devil, to enquire, whether he shall go to Ramoth
Gilead: The Lord gives the Devil a commission to deceive Ahab,
who by going to these Prophets went to the Devil, 1 King 22. 20,
21, 22, 23. Who will perswade Ahab And a Spirit said, I will
perswade him,— I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of his
Prophets. Now hear Satans commission: Thou shalt perswade
him and prevail also: go forth and do so. (2) Satan may in pollicy
do many things (the Lord permitting) at the devotion of his
Votarys, which he will not do at other times if he could, because
hereby he carrys on his design of destroying Souls; both of his
Votarys, and of them that go unto them. For there be many that

have so much natural Conscience in them, and so much
aversation from the Devil, and horror at his presence, that they
will not seek immediately to the Devil, who yet will be drawn to
seek unto Wizards, and such as have familiar Spirits, and so fall
into the Snare of the Devil to the ruine of their Souls. We know
Satan is called the God of the World, and by imitating the Lords
methods in shewing mercy to man, he seemed to the Heathen to
be like the Most High: As Lucifer said, Isa. 14. 12, 14. Had the
Lord his Ark Temple, and c where to give answers to his people?
So Satan had his Temples and Oracles, and Priests, whereby to
give answers to his Worshippers, as at Ekron, at Delphos, and

Page 125

elsewhere; see Acts 14 13. Did the Lord require faith in them
that came to him? So Satan requires especial faith in them that
seek to him for help. Doth the Lord hearken to the voice of a
man in working wonders? Josh. 10. 14. So Satan will hearken to
the voice of his Magicians, and c. Doth the Lord require particular
actions to be done by his Servants, when they work wonders in
his Name? As Aaron must cast down his rod at one time, smite
the cock with it at another time, speak to the rock at another
time. Elijah prays at one time on his face between his knees, at
another time other wise, 1 King. 18 42. So Satan had his various
ceremonies, words and actions to be observed by those that
obtained special help from him. As Charmings, Mutterings,
Peepings, speaking low, and c Isa. 8. 19 and 29. 4 And divers
Sacrifices made to him, whereby he was honoured by the
Heathen as a God. Deut. 32. 47. And Satan being thus served by
them, did also some things for them, and'that not only in way of
operation, as for the Egyptian Magicians; but also to some he did
reveal truly some future events; as appeareth by the warning
given, Deut. 13. 1, 2, 3. where it's shewed that a Prophet in the
name, and by the help of a false God, may foretel a Sign that
shall come to pass. And doubtless Belzebub did it at Ekron
Sometimes foretel truly future evens, or else Ahaziah

Page 126

would not have sent to him to know whether he should recover
at that time or not. But the essence of their being a Witch or
Sorcerer did not consist in their obtaining the desired assistance
from their God; but rather in them putting themselves into that
way of endeavoring to get help of their Gods. For the
Astrologers, and c of Babylon are called Sorcerers and Witches,
Isa 47.12. Though by their Inchantments and Sorceries they
could not prove themselves. And the Prophets of Edom, and
other heathens, Jer. 27.3, 9. are called Sorcerers for prophecying

by Satan, though they prophecyed falsely. And so I conceive the
Four hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, did abuse Sorcery or
Inchantments in their invocation of Baal, and using actions they
esteemed acceptable to him, that they might procure him fire
from Heaven to consume their Sacrasice, although they could not
obtain it. 1 King 18. 22. to 30. And so justly deserved death by
the Law. Exod. 22. 18 and by the Law. Exodus 22 20. For
Sacrificing to a false God. Thus we see who were the Witches,
among the Heathen: We may then query, Who were the Witches
among the Israelites that were to be put to death? A. 1. Those
that having the knowledge of the true God, or at least the means
whereby they might know him, did so far forsake the true God,
as to sue unto, and depend upon the

Page 127

Devil, or another God, as the Heathen Priests and Prophets that
were Sorcerers did. As by having a familiar spirit as the Witch at
Endor had; or by using Witchcrafts as Manasseh did. These as
Apostates from God, and Votaries of the Devil, were to dye by
the Laws. Exod. 22. 18,20. As is said of Baals Prophets. And such
if they prophecyed in the name of those false Gods (whether the
Prophesie were true or false,) were to dye by the Law. Deut. 18.
20. The Prophet that shall presume to speak in the name of
other Gods, that Prophet shall dye. 2. Those persons who did
prophecy a falsehood in the name of the Lord; or prophecy in his
name when he sent them not, are called Diviners, though they
pretended to speak (not in the name of false Gods, but) in the
name of the true God; as, Jer. 28. 8, 9. Mich. 3. 7. Though they
are not indeed called Witches or Sorcerers, but Diviners, which
note a crime near to the former. Because they were so like unto
the Diviners of the Heathen in prophecying falsly, and were alike
capital offenders by that Law. Deut. 18. 20, 22. The Prophet
which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have
not commanded him to speak, shall dye, and c. So that although
they are not called Witches, but Diviners, yet they were to dye
by the Law, as well as the other. Here then we may observe,
who is to be, esteemed a Capital Witch among Christians

Page 128

viz. those that being brought up under the means of the
knowledge of the true God, yet being in their right mind, or free
use of their reason, do knowingly and willingly depart from the
true God, so as to devote themselves unto and seek for their
help from another God, or the Devil, as did the Devils Priests,
and Prophets of old that were Magicians. The end of such
devoting to another God is for some supposed benefit. As, 1. To

get help from him; So Ahaz seems to be a Witch or Sorcerer, in
that he sacrificed to the God of Syria, that he might obtain help
by them 2 Chron. 28. 3, 23. His burning his Children in the fire,
after the Heathen abomination, is also a sin reckoned with
Witchcraft; see, Deutr 18. 11. He was if not a Witch in sacrificing
himself, yet at least one that did seek after Wizards and the like,
in Sacrifice for him. 2. Another end in seeking help, is thereby to
do strange things, as did the Egyptian Sorcerers as aboveshewed.And such a Sorcerer the beast, Rev. 13. 13,14
prophecyed of, seems to be, for he maketh fire to come down
from Heaven, on the Earth in the sight of men And this was the
work of Satan upon Jobs Sheep and Servants, Job 1. 16. 3.
Another end is for the discovery of Se crets; as above shewed,
from Deut. 13.1, 2,3. and 1 Sam 28. 4. Another end is to
prevent or remove

Page 129

some evil felt, or feared; as the Sorcerers of Babylon, that by
their Sorceries sought to prevent, or save them from the evils
coming upon them. And though they did not obtain the help
aimed at from their Gods, yet they are stiled Sorcerers, Isa. 47.
12, 13, 14. and 44 25. 2. I say, brought up under the means of
the knowledge of the true God; for though many Witches were
among the Heathen Nations, yet they were not to be put to
death, because they knew not the true God, they knew no
better. But as for thee, saith God, The Lord thy God hath not
suffered thee so to do; and there shall not be found among you
an Enchanter, Witch, and c. Deut. 18. 9, 10, 14. And therefore
the Lord made this Law, as an hedge to keep his people from
going away from him to Devils, to Gods whom they knew not,
and whom their fathers feared not, Deut. 32. 16, 17. And so this
Law hath some affinity with that capital Law, the next verse, but
one step, Exod 22. 20. He that Sacrificeth to any God, save unto
Jehovah only, shall be put to death. So that Daniel did well in
seeking to save the Babylonian Wise men, though Witches,

Dan. 214 and c. For they fell not under the Law. Exod. 22. 18.

But being ignorant of the true God, needed to live and be
instructed, that thereby they might be made sensible of their evil
practices, and turn unto the living God. 3. The object sought
unto is the Devil, or

Page 130

another God. Some of the Heathen did not seek to the Devil, as
a Devil, that is, as a malicious, wicked, and unclean spirit: but as
to their God whom they thought ought to be Worshipped by
them. And some of the Israelites had an opinion of many Gods,

as Ahax, 2 Chr 28. 23. Manasseh and Amaziah, Chap 25. 14 and
33 3, 4, 6. And so sacrificed to the Heathen Gods, as well as to
their own. And this was very abominable to the Lord to be
ranked thus with Idols and Devils, Isa. 42. 8. Jehovah will not
give his Glory to another. 4. The person I say, that hath the free
use of their reason; hereby are exempted from the guilt of this
crime, persons possessed or obsessed of the Devil, who did by
the power of Satan, strange things, as breaking chains, and
Lunatick persons, upon whom the Devil took advantage by
reason of their Lunacy. 5. They devote themselves to Satan, or
their other God, and to seek to him; which was done divers
ways; as by enchantments, charmings, peepings, muttering,
sacrificing, cutting themselves, prayers, and c. And though of
later times Satan as a cunning Fisher changeth his baits, yet still
all that seek to him, as his peculiar Votaries, have their
Ceremonies, Ordinances by which Satan is invocated and
worshipped. Here we must distinguish between those that go and
seek to Satan immediately, and those that seek to him by the
mediation of a

Page 131

Wizard, and c. as Saul by the Witch at Exdor. The former sort
only are called Witches, or dealers with familiar spirits: But the
latter is a great sin prohibited and condemned, Lev. 19. 31. and
20. 6. and elsewhere. 6. I say; do knowingly and willingly seek,
and c. And here I excuse a tanto, though not a toto, those that
ignorantly use charms, spells, writings or forms of words, and c
being taught them by others, which are a kind of Witchcraft; but
those that use them are not sensible, that they are but various
ceremonies to invocate the Devil, and that the effects following
these charms, and c. are done by the Devil. So some have pulled
fish bones out of a wound, cured sooth ach, agues, warts, and
stopped blood by such devillish means. Such have an implicit
faith that the means used, shall produce the effect desired, but
consider not how; and so are beguiled by the Serpent that lies in
the grass unseen. I knew a man in the East, who professed the
art of curing wounds, and stenching blood by form of words. I
discoursed him about it, and he told me, he had been in the
practice of it; and believed it to be the gift of healing given him
from God, upon the use of some scripture words he used, as he
had been taught by an Old woman, and had tried it upon
himself; having cut his leg almost half through with an Adds, and
only bound up the wound

Page 132

with a cloth, and said over the wound those words, and without
other means the wound was cured in a few days. I desired to
hear the words, and he related them to me; and found him
almost as ignorant in Scriptures, as an Heathen, and found he
could not read Whereupon I informed him that part of his words
were Scripture, and part not; and that those words upon which
the greatest stress was laid in order to the cure, were a perverse
addition to the Scriptures: a meet fiction of mans invention; and
declared to him, that is any such healing followed upon such a
form of words, it could not come from the efficacy of the words
themselves, or from a divine concurrence working a wonder,
because of those words, which were indeed a lye in the additions
made; therefore if any vertue were in them, it came by the
Devil, and so those words a kind of Sorcery. The man hereby
seemed convinced of his error, and promised reformation. I do
not believe this man was a Wizard (though in danger of it)
because he did it ignorantly in misbelief. I fear some young
persons through a vain curiosity to know their suture condition,
have tampered with the Devils tools, so far that hereby one door
was opened to Satan to play those pranks; Anno 1692. I knew
one of the Afflicted persons, who (as I was credibly in formed)
did try with an egg and a glass to

Chapter 15

Page 133

find her future Husbands Calling; till there came up a Coffin, that
is a Spectre in likeness of a Coffin. And she was afterward
followed with diabolical molestation to her death; and so dyed a
single person A just warning to others, to take heed of handling
the Devils weapons, lest they get a wound thereby. Another, I
was called to pray with, being under sore fits and vexations or
Satan. And upon examination I found she had tryed the same
charm: and after her confession of it and manifestation of
repentance for it, and our prayers to God for her, she was
speedily released from those bonds of Satan. This iniquity though
I take it not to be the Capital crime condemned, Exod. 22.
Because such persons act ignorantly, not considering they
hereby go to the Devil; yet borders very much upon it: and is too
like Sauls going to the Witch at Endor, and Ahaziah sending to
the God of Ekron to enquire. CHAPTER. XV. I proceed now to
speak of some kinds of these Devilish artists not by an exact
distribution of them into their several species. For though they
are distinguished by several names and practices, yet they all
agree in the general crime of Witchcraft, and being thereby as it
were the Devils Priests and Prophets, depending upon his aid and
oracles; so that he that is

Page 134

of one kind may be also of another, or all the rest, according to
their several ends for which and ways by which they make their
applications to the Prince of darkness: and as he is pleased to
communicate of his skill or power to the answering of their
expectations for a reward of their dependance upon him. And as
of old, they had several names, as Magicians, Diviners, and c. So
of late times, they have their several names, and in part several
kinds of skill, or power, as Conjurers, Astrologers, Cunning men;
Mathematicians, Witches, and c. But all of them if they have their
knowledge, or skill, or working by the Devil, are in Satans black
list of Witches. Some such there have been who divine by
representing a person, or coffin, or thing sought after in a
looking glass, to discover to the person enquiring somewhat
secret, or future. I have heard several credible Stories of such
Conjurers; and shall relate one here that I suppose was never in
Print. An ancient Woman related to me, That when she was a
Maid, she had a curiosity to know who should be her Husband,
and was informed of a Doctor that would shew Maids their future
Husbands in a glass: To him therefore she went with her Money
in her hand, to know who should be her Husband; and he
carryed her to a great looking glass, where she saw a man in his
full proportion whom she never saw before. And a while after
met this man (represented in the glass) in the street, and having
on the same

Page 135

Cloaths he was represented with from bead to face; and soon
after he came a Suitor to her, and she was Married to him, and
was her Husband when she made this Relation. In this relation
observe. 1. It was no doubt a truth, for she told me this in way
of craving my advice, whether she had done well or evil in going
to the Dr. and I told her, she did evil in going thereby to the
Devil. 2. It was no delusion of her phantafie, or affection working
toward any person; for it was one she never saw before, that
was now shewed unto her. 3. The Dr. could not bring into the
glass the shadow of a man absent and unknown, by any natural
cause, or means by him used. Therefore it was from
theDevil,who raised this Spectre in likeness of a man then
unknown. 4. And the Dr. doing this frequently for his Money,
must know he did it by a familiar Spirit, and therefore was a
Conjurer in some league explicite, or implicite with Satan. And I
have heard and read of other Stories of this kind very credible,
which satisfy me, that this was not the only Conjurer in England.
But it may be queried, Q. How could Satan foretal this woman

who should be her Husband, it being then a future contingent
thing? A. In this case, it might be easy for Satan to give a very
probable conjecture; for the man was a Newfoundlander that
came to England for a Wife, as directed by his friends unto this

Page 136

young woman: And the Devil knew of his coming, he being at
that time upon the Sea thitherwards, or newly come on shoat;
and the Devil knew his errand, and the quality and conditions of
both parties (as he is a discerning, peircing spirit;) and so knew
it very probable to be a Match. And by this representation in the
glass imposeth upon her Superstitious, ignorance, a kind of belief
of a necessity to accept him when he came. But in other cases,
its not so easy. Q. Here then we may enquire, How can the Devil
know things to come? Is not this Gods prerogative? Isa 41. 22,
23. A. Its true that the Lord alone knows things to come, so that
neither man or Angel can know suture events, unless the Lord
make them known, or afford means whereby the creature may
attain to know them: Shew us things to come hereafter, that we
may know that ye are Gods. Of that day and hout knoweth no
man, no not the Angels of Heaven, Math. 24. 30. Rev. 5. 3, 4.
None in heaven, or earth, or under the earth, was able to open
the book (sealed with seven seals) and to loose the seales
thereof. Many other Scriptures, speak of our ignorance of things
and times to come, Prov. 27. 1. Eccl. 8. 7. and 6. 12. 2. Yet God
affordeth means whereby men, who are far less discerning than
Spirits, come to know many futurities certainly, and of others
probably to guess, so as generally or for

Page 137

the most part it proves according to mans foresight. A wise man
fore-seeth the evil, Prov. 22. and 27. 12. 1. By visions and
revelations and such like, to God revealed to Abraham and
David, the conditions of their Posterity for a great while to come,
2 Sam. 7. 19. 2. The Prophecyes, promises and threatnings in
Scripture are a standing revelation of futurities, in matters
religious, civil, political and natural, as the changes of seasons,
and c. Gen 8. 22. 3. Many things are fore known by their causes.
As that wood thrown into the fire will be burnt, and c. And thus
many Physitians foresee the death of a person sick of an
incurable disease, when neither they nor their relations are
sensible of it. 4 Many things are fore known by the usual signes
that go before them, which though they are not proper causes of
the effects following, yet are concurrent with them. As when the
Fig trees branch is tender Summer is nigh, Math. 24. 32. A red
skie in the evening is a sign of a fair morning; and a red skie in

the morning lowring of foul weather, and so it comes to pass,
Math. 16. 1, 2, 3. Luk. 12. 54, 55, 56. 5. Some things men
foresee very probable to come to pass, because themselves or
others have intended and contrived how to bring them to pass.

As Saul sore tells to Jabesh-Gilead; They shall have help to
morrow by that time the Sun be

Page 138

hot, 1 Sam. 11. 9 Because he intended and contrived it. 6. By
observation and experience of the usual events of providence, in
the way of Gods governing the world; a wise man fore knows
probably at least, what will come to pass under like
circumstances. And among men, one fore seeth things to come
farther than another, as he excels another in prudence. As the
prudent fore seeth, when the simple pass on and are punished,
Prov. 22. 3. Or hath had a larger experience than another, Eccl.

8. 5. A wise mans heart discerneth time and judgment. 1. In all
the above mentioned ways, except the first, Satan hath the
same advantage to know future events as man hath; and many
advantages above man. (1.) As he is more knowing, wise, and of
a larger understanding than man. (2.) In that as a Spirit, he
pierces more into the insides and secrets of persons, actions and
things. He cannot know the heart of man immediately, that is
Gods prerogative, Jer. 17. 10. Yet so far as the heart discovers it
self by its operations, upon the senses, external and internal, and
other members of the body, Satan will sand it out. (3.) By the
swiftness and multitude of those Legions of unclean Spirits; they
are present in all Companies, Counsils, Cabals, and affairs of the
Children of men, even with the Sons of God when they worship
God; and with the

Page 139

Sons of men in all the compass of the earth. Job 1. 6, 7. (4)

They have their experiences of five thousand years standing. (5.)
When they intend and contrive any design upon the children of
men, they are not in danger of being prevented by death (as
men often are) for Spirits cannot dye; and so more probably
foretel the events of their own counsels. And by all the means
and advantages above-said, Satan can fore-see future contingent
events much farther off than man can, and so foretell the Lord
suffering) a sign or wonder which shall after come to pass. 2.
Satan hath also the advantage of foreknowing, and fore shewing
future things by some way of divine revelation at some times, for
the punishment of men. So God by some means (the way
whereby to us unknown) lets the Devil know the death of Saul
and his Sons, and reveal it to Saul for his punishment in going to

seek to Satan; and so Satan knows the way to destroy Ahab, and
that from God; and contrives a way to bring it about, viz. by
being a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets. 3. Yea, the
Lord succeeds the diabolical divinations of the King of Babylon, to
prophecy success unto him against Judah, for the punishment of
Judahs sins. Ezek. 21. 18. to 25. From this place observe, (1.)
That the King of Babylon intending War against Rabbath and

Page 140

Jerusalem, knew not which to go first unto. (2.) Therefore he
useth divination by arrows, by consulting an Image orTeraphim,
and by looking into the liver of some beasts (always used by the
heathen) so that if the divination favour the right hand, he will
go first to Jerusalem: If the left, to Rabbah. (3) These divinations
had no natural power in them to direct them, but they were
means whereby they enquire of their Gods, that is the Devil (4)
The Lord so over rules the divination that is the Devils Oracle by
the Image, and c that the answer shall be, Go to Jerusalem and
prosper; and accordingly he goes and prospers (5) The Lord
grants such success (not appointing the sin) unto these devillish
divinations for the punishment of his apostate people. But when
ever the Lord pleaseth, he disappoints all the Devils Ordinances.
So that the Devil cannot know, or cannot discover to his Vassals
what shall come to pass. Isa. 44. 25. He frustrateth the tokens of
the lyars, and maketh diviners mad, and maketh their knowledge
foolish. 1. Then Inchantments, Sorceries, Astrologers, and c.
shall not be able to save from evil, or to profit, Isa. 47. 12, 13,
14. 4. If all the ways above-said so fail the Devil, that he cannot
foretel what shall be hereafter, he hath an art by the ambiguity
of his answers, to salve his credit, be the event which way it will.
So 1 King. 22. 6. He tells Ahab;

Page 141

The Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King; but doth not
determine which King, whether of Syria, or Israel. So in his
Oracles of old to Cresus. Cresus Halyn penetrans magnam
disperdet opum vim. Like the Scphism used against King Edward
the Second. To shed King Edwards Blood refuse to fear, I count it
good. And this shall suffice to speak of this kind of Divining 2.
Another sort of Diviners are they that reveal secrets, as where
Stollen Goods are hid, or how Persons and Vessels do at Sea, or
in other Countries, which they pretend to know by the Stars, and
Positions of the Heavens; but indeed by a familiar spirit. These
are by way of distinction called, Astrologers, Mathematicians,
and c. Such, Isai. 47. 13 are called, Heberei Shamajim,

Observers of the Heavens, (translated Astrologers) And

Hachotsim Bechochabim, Beholders of the Stars, or Star gazers.
But whatever men pretend, the Stars cannot reveal such secrets.
1. Suppose two men go to Sea in the same Ship, from England
to Barbadoes, and one dyeth, and another liveth; they go out,
continue at Sea, and come to the Island both of them under the
same position of the Stars. How then can the Heavenly Bodies
tell the Astrologer in England, that one man is dead, and the
other alive? So Perkin and Paulet steal each an Horse out of the
same Stable, at the same

Page 142

time; Perkin carries his stollen Horse to Bristol, and Paulet
carries his to Exeter, both at one time; how can the Stars direct
the Mathematician to find one Horse at Exeter, and the other in
Bristol? they cannot, but the Devil can. 2. The Stars have their
regular motion continued the same, according to the Law God
laid upon them at first, Psa. 19. 4, 5, 6. and 104 19. The fixed
Stars continue in their orb, and the planets in theirs, whether
men steal or be honest, go abroad or stay at home, are sick or
well. They are for signs and seasons; but not to point out the
arbitrary actions of or contingent events upon men. Mr. Lee, the
late learned Minister of the Gospel in New Bristol, related a
credible Story of a Gentleman in Hartford-shire, 'Who had
studied the Rules of Astrology, and being much urged, tryed by
them to find for his friend a stolen Horse; but when by all the
rules of his art, he could find nothing, sat musing with his eyes
shut, and just such a Horse as the man described, was
represented to his Imagination, going with two men into a
Stable, at such an Inn, in such a Town: He directs the man to go
thither: he did so, and found his Horse, and returned to thank
the artist. The Astrologer told him it was the Devil suggested it
to his Imagination, and thereupon resolved never more to
meddle with that art.'

Page 143

3. The insufficiency of these rules of themselves appear, in that
those that seek for help by these artists, must have a belief, that
they can help them, or else they cannot discover any thing to
them. But if it were by pure art, the rules would be as effectual
when people come without such a faith, as with it. 'I knew a very
pious Matron, who when she was young in England, had lost
some goods, and in her ignorance, went to a cunning man to find
them. He told her he could not help her, unless she did believe
he could. She answered, she believed in God, (or hoped in God)
he could. Nay replied he, if you believe in God, I cannot help
you. And so she returned without her goods, but with a

conviction that she had gone to the Devil for help, and was not
aware of it. Another relation like this, Mr. Sherman of Boston told
me concerning himself. 'He being in England was unawares
brought into the Company of such a Mathematician, to whom
diverse came and gave him Money, to tell them, how, and where
their friends and vessels were, that went over sea. And he alter
he had raised his Scheams, and made his calculations, gave them
such informations as they were satisfyed in. And at length,
understanding Mr. Sherman was a New England man, asked, if
he would know the state of his friends in New England. Sherman
replyed, there were none of his Art

Page 144

'in New England: (Oh that it may be always so said of us!) but he
had heard of this profession: it was said, they could inform none
that did not believe they could help them: And he did not
believe. The Artist replyed, he did it by pure Art, and would have
Sherman try him, which at last he did. Tell me, said he, where
my Father and Mother now are, and how they do The Astrologer
asked him many questions, and after he had tryed the rules of
his Art, said; They were both alive in good health in Boston in
New England. This is not so, said Sherman, for they were both
dead before I came thence; and I told you, that you could not
help me unless I did believe.' These two Relations agree with
what Mr. Perkins urgeth against Judicial Astrologers. Chap. 3 p
80. Viz. That they cannot help those that come doubting of their
ability, or in a way to tempt the Astrologer. 3. A third sort of
these Diviners are such as pretend to tell persons their Fortunes
(as they call it) or future Condition by looking into their hands. I
have been acquainted with some who have acquainted me with
strange futurities, these Fortune tellers have informed them of,
which after came to pass; such as man could not foretel but by
the Devil, no nor the Devil, but by some Judicial Act of God over
ruling their Predictions, as he did the

Page 145

divinations of Nebachadnezzar. Ezek. 21. 21. above mentioned.
The vanity and falshood of the pretended Art of Chyromancy to
predict by, appeareth. (1) In that there is no such variety of
strokes or marks in the hands or faces of men and women, as
there be variety of conditions in mans life which they pretend to
find out by these marks. (2) If there were any such predicting
Characters stamped by nature upon the bodies of persons; these
Fortunetellers are the most unlikely to know them; they being
generally illiterate, ignorant of nature, art, religion,
reason, history, and experience, and scarce a degree above bruit

beasts. Let all be warned then of the great sin and snare that is
in hearkening to such Soothsayers; the scope of their profession
being to draw men off from dependance upon God and his
guiding Providence in obedience to his Scripture Commands, with
faith resting upon his promises, to lean upon the predictions of
Fortune tellers, who whether they prophecy good or evil, ensnare
those exceedingly that enquire of them: for if they prophecy
good, they are eagerly lifted up with doubtful expectations of its
accomplishment. If it be evil, they are hanging upon a wrack of
doubtful fears and terrors which rob them of the comfort of their
times of health and prosperity, contrary to the advice given
them, Eccl. 2.24 and 3.12,22. These above-named use
Witchcrafts in way of divination.

Page 146

4 There be a fourth sort, whose exercise is more in operation,
viz. such as cast a mist before the eyes of others by their
Witchcrafts who are alluded unto, Gal. 3 1. by the Greek word
Bascaino quasi phaesi Kaino. They have their eyes so held or
darkened, that they cannot see things as they are; So the false
teachers did bemist the eyes of the Galatians, viz the eyes of
their minds, that they could not see Christ Crucifyed before their
eyes. Alike unto these are they who raise the Devil, or Spectres
in divers forms, doing strange things thereby. Of this sort was
Dr. Lamb the notorious Conjurer, killed by the Mobile in London,
in Charles the first his Reign. Mr. Baxter of Spirits, Chap. 7 p.
155-156. Relates a well attested Story of Dr. Lamb, his raising in
the middle of a room, a Tree, little follows, apes, baskets, and c.
all which soon vanished. I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter, for the
Story at large. 5. Another sort are such as they call white
Witches; that by spells, charms, and c will cure Diseases, and
that more easily than men can, and fetch fish bones out of mens
hands, and c. (1) Note here that the Devil hath more skill in the
knowledge of all healing medicines than any man: and more
ability and dexterity to convey them insensibly unto any sore,
than any mortal creature. (2) That some have such an ambition
to excel in Physick, and curing variety of wounds and diseases,
that they will rather

Chapter 16

Page 147

go to the Devil, then fail of their desired skill and honour
thereby. Many credible Histories I have heard of this kind; but I
spare to enlarge in these things which have been so fully handled
by Perkins, and others. CHAPTER. XVI. I come now to speak

concerning those that are called Black Witches, or Malefick
Witches, who by their enchantments do call in the Devils aid, for
revenge, to do hurt to the bodies, and health of their neighbours,
or to their cattle, goods, and the like. These are the persons
commonly called Witches, and against whom the spirits of men
and the laws of men are most bent, for their prosecution and
punishment. Now that: I have concerning such to say, I shall
comprehend in the ensuing Propositions. Prop. 1. There have
been many evils that have befallen man and beast, which have
been ungroundedly ascribed to Witchcraft, and so to Witches,
which proceed from other causes: As from natural operations
tho' hidden from those that so suspect: or from the hand of God
immediately, or from the hand of Satan without the concurrence
of man kind; as hath been in part shewed already in this enquiry
above. Should an herd of Swine run violently down a steep place
into the Sea in these days and perish in the waters, as did the
Gergesens Swine,

Page 148

Math. 8. 32. People would conclude they perished by Witchcraft;
and yet there was no such cause of the destruction. Prop. 2.
Melancholly and Imagination hath fancied many things to
proceed from Witches, when there is no ground for it. Prop. 3.
Many impossible things for Witches, or the Devil to do by them,
are related to be done by Witches: As the transmutation of
bodies from men to beasts, and c. The going in Spirit to places
far distant, and leaving their bodies behind; as if the Devil could
separate the Soul from the body, and restore it again at
pleasure, which is to ascribe to him a divine power to restore the
dead. Such things are either devised fictions, or abuses of the
imaginations of them that so say of themselves: they, being only
laid in a trance or dream, and so conceiting a change in them
that never was. So some have affirmed they have been carryed
many hundred miles through the air, to remote places and
brought back again in an hour or two, which cannot be without a
miracle; for so swift a motion through the air, would take away
the breath of a person so transported, without an almighty
power to sustain them. Prop. 4 It must be granted that there is
no clear instance of any such Malefick or Black Witch in
Scriptures. The Magicians of Egypt or Babyion, or those
mentioned Act. 8. 9, 10, 11. and 13. 8, 9, 10. Jer. 27. 9. Isa. 47.
Dan. 2. and

Page 149

4. and 5. chap, are not charged with any such crimes. The only
instance I remember given of such an one in Scripture is

Balaam: but he cannot be proved to be such an one. (1) Its
pleaded that Balak sent to him to come; For I wot, (faith he) that
be whom thou cursest is cursed. And this indeed shews what an
opinion Balak had of him, Numb 22, 6 But when Balaam answers
the messengers, he tells them; As the Lord, i. e. Jehovah, shall
speak to me, I will bring you word: And Jehovah refuseth to give
me leave: And the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall
I speak, v 8, 13, 38 So that whatever opinions Balaam might
have of plurality of Gods, yet he owns he could not curse Israel
but by the true God. See Numb 23 1, 3 with Deut. 23. 4, 5. Josh.
24 9, 10. The Scripture shews that Balaam sought not to curse
Israel, but by the everliving God. (2) And if it be said, that
Balaam saying, There is no inchantment against Jacob, neither
divination against Israel, Cap. 23. 23. Intimateth, That there
may be inchantment and divination also against other people;
yet it doth not signify that Balaam used to curse any without the
assistance of the true God. For he saith, v. 8. How shall I curse
whom God hath not cursed or how shall I defy, whom the Lord
hath not defied? He speaks as a man convinced, that the power
of all false Gods was unable to bring a curse without Gods leave.
And if Balak would give him an house full of Silver and Gold,

Page 150

he saith, he cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, or Jehovah,
my God, to do less or more. Where note, that Balaam openly
professeth to these heathen, that Jehovah is his God, and him he
will obey, Numb 22. 18. And when the Angel of Jehovah
opposeth him, he submits so far to him as to offer, if it
displeased him, he would go back again. And when he comes to
sacrificing, still it is to Jehovah. For he said, Chap 23, 3. after he
had offered, Peradventure Jehovah will come and meet me, and
c. and where God met him, He said unto him, i. e. to Jehovah. I
have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram, and this was
repeated again, and still Balaam went to meet Jehovah, and
Jehovah met him once and again, and put a word in his mouth.
And Balaam spake the word Jehovah put into his mouth: and
when Balaam saw it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, Chap. 24.

1. All the circumstances of the place shew that all his addresses
were unto the living God, that by him he might procure such a
curse upon Israel, which might do more against Israel then all
the armies of Balak could do. Q. Why then is Balaam called a
Soothsayer or Diviner, and said to use Inchantments? and what
are those Enchantments? and why so called? A. These
inchantments were the Sacrifices mentioned, Chap 24. which
were offered to the true God For its said, He went not as at other
times to seek for Enchantments: This plainly refers

Page 151

to the times when he sacrificed as above-said.
Heb.Chepagnam,bepagnam, i. e. not this time as the former
time; namely the times when he sacrificed. Thus Ainsworth in
locum; all his former altars and sacrifices were by the art of
inchantment, or observing fortunes. But how these were
inchantments, seeing they were not as the heathen
inchantments to a false God, and that sacrificing was an
Ordinance of God, is a difficulty to understand. But I conceive
they are so called, because Balaam did pervert the end and use
of Gods Ordinance, and therein imitate the Heathen. For God had
said to him, Thou shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed
Yet Balaam by these Sacrifices will try to curse them. So heathen
nations are said to do, before they warred against any people to
endeavour by prayers, sacrifices and enchantments to turn the
favour of God from them. Before the Heathen Romans Besieged
any City, their Priests, called out the God, under whose tutelage
the City was, that he would forsake the people, Temples and holy
things, and be Provost unto them, and accept of their City, and
c. vowing to him, if he would so do, to honour him with Temples,
and c. And then offered Sacrifices to the Dictator or Emperour,
devoted, or cursed the Enemies Cities and Armies, that they
might be filled with fear, terror, and c. Balaam acts his like.

These and like the Charmers, Maimony speaks of, who whisper
over a wound, or read a verse

Page 152

out of the Bible: likewise he that readeth over an infant, that it
may not be frighted; or that layeth the Bible, or the Phylacteries
upon a child that it may sleep: Such faith he, are In. chanters or
Charmers, because they make the words of the Scripture,
medicine for the body, whereas they are not, but medicine for
the Soul. So Balaam makes a charm of an Ordinance ofGod: For
neither Balak nor Balaam aimed to give honour and glory to God
thereby, but to use them as it were a bribe, to try if thereby they
could prevail with the Lord to reverse his word, whereby he had
said of Isra el, They are blessed. For when he sees he cannot
prevail, he faith, God is not a man that he shouldly; and he hath
blessed, and I cannot reverse it. Again, what Balaam did herein,
it was not sincerely for God, but for his hire, Neh 13. 2. Even for
rewards of Divination, Numb. 22. 7. For the wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2, 15. Possibly also there might be
somewhat like inchantment in the manner of his sacrificing; as
Sacrificing in the high places of Baal, and on the top of Peor,
places formerly dedicated to Baal. Peor. Thus Balaam by his

Enchantments deserved the title of a Soothsayer or Diviner and
mad Prophet. Prop. 5. Though there be no plain example of a
Malifick Witch; yet from what the Scripture faith of the power of
Satan and his malice against man, and of the wickedness that is
in the

Page 153

heart of man; we may see there is a possibility of such
abominable creatures to be found in the black list of Satans
guard. For, 1. Satan hath power when the Lord permits him, to
do mischief to the bodies and estates of mankind, as already
proved in the instances of Job and others. 2. There be some
persons so wicked that Ahaz like, they will sacrifice to and serve
the Devil, that he may help them. And if in other things, why not
in revenging them upon those they hate, as well as in other
matters? As Israel flew their brethren in a rage that reached up
to heaven: so some will pursue their adversaries with a rage
reaching down to hell. And excess of anger gives great
advantage to the Devil, Eph 4. 26, 27. Let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath; neither give place to the Devil. If sinful anger
gives the Devil a place, how much more such a rage as whereby
men go to hell for aid against their foes? When men seek to
Satan for revenge, he will be ready to further them in it; by
discoursing with them, (as he did with Eve, yea with Christ
himself, Math. 4.) to see what he may gain upon them thereby:
or by tempting them to sacrifice to him, or use his ceremonies
and ordinances, whereby, Satan is implicitely at least invoked for
to do his utmost on their behalf. And Satan that promised to the
spotless Lamb of God, all the kingdoms of the world, will be
ready

Page 154

to promise such miscreants to revenge them on their
adversaries, or any mischief they desire, if they will serve him.
And at some times to perform his promise if the Lord suffer him,
as the roaring Lyon that seeks to devour: or at least will pretend
himself author, of the harms the envyed person sustaines. But if
he cannot, yet he can answer such deluded creatures, that either
they did not observe his direction, or that God hath set an hedge
about the party maligned, or the like, and so keep up his credit
still. Mrs. Got, a very credible and pious woman told me, That
her father Mr. Palmer lived nigh a man that acknowledged
himself to be a Conjurer On a certain day there came a violent
wind upon Mr. Palmers house, as if it would blow it down: but it
only blew down an Elm tree that stood in his Court yard. In
process of time this Conjurer came to Mr. Palmer and confessed,

that he had a grudge against him, and thereupon did invocate
the Devil to do Palmer a mischief, and he promised to blow down
Palmers house; but only blew down the Elm: whereupon the
Conjurer taxed the Daemon with breach of promise: But he
answered, Palmer was a Praying man, and God had set an hedge
about all that he had need of, and so he had no power over his
house; but the Elm being only for shew and recreation, he had
power over that. As for matters of fact, I must refer to histories
that speak of Malefick Witchcraft, wherein though many things
are certain or fabulous,

Chapter 17

Page 155

there may be truth in some of those relations, And by the abovementioned, and other such histories, we meet with of that kind,
we may gather, That when persons will seek to the Devil for
revenge, he will either do harm to those they hate, or it the Lord
inflict by his hand upon such persons hated by the Conjurers,
Satan will perswade the Conjurer, that he effected it in
persuance of their quarrel. But if the desired mischief be not
effected, the Devil will have a plea to excuse himself. But
however they which by themselves immediately invocate the
Devil to help them, to avenge themselves on those they hare,
are hereby Malefick Witches, whether they obtain his help or not.
CHAPTER XVII. Having said thus much to shew what the Witches
condemned by Scripture are, I shall reflect upon some assertions
laid down in a Book dispersed about Salem, Anno 1695.

Entituled, Truth held forth and c. Published, by Thomas
Maul, pag. 221. He faith, What is the Devil, or Hell but nothing?
that God never created them, for they were Non Entity, a not
being, which is contrary and perfectly opposite to Entity and
Being: And this might be the Devil that dwelt in Adam which
seduced him, Pag. 185. He insinuates, That if people keep Gods
Commands, or are righteous persons, they

Page 156

cannot be possessed or bewitched by the Devil or his
instruments; for the cause of their being possessed, or
bewitched, hath been through a life of disobedience to God, Pag.
190. Saith The way to know one that is a Witch from one that is
not a Witch, is by that wisdom, by which the Damosel, Acts 16.
16. was known to be a Witch, Unto these assertions, I answer
(1.) By the said Thomas Maul and his Wife: For when B. B. was
upon herTryal, the said Mauls Wife came in and testified against
the said B.B. to prove her a Witch, in order to her Condemnation

for Witchcraft: And the same day said B. was Executed, T. Maul
said in my hearing, that if he had been desired to pray with her
at her Execution, he would not; for he believed she was guilty of
that sin the Scripture faith, we must not pray for it; for he
believed she was a Witch, and had covenanted with the Devil,
and forsaken God; and that was the sin we ought not to pray
for.He said also that he could have come in a witness against
her, if he would; and that he believed she had bewitched to
death a Child of his And he believed most of those in Prison were
Witches. From hence I gather, that in the year 1692, T. Maul did
believe the Devil to be an Entity, and that a Witch by him had
power to bewitch to death the Child of him that he esteemed a
righteous person; believing as others did, save that he counted a
Witch guilty of the unpardonable sin. But when

Page 157

others find an error in proceeding too far in these matters, he
comes to see it also: And to avoid it, runs into another extream;
which I prove by the ensuing Propositions. Prop. 1. The Devils
were once holy Angels, created by God, and so Entities. This
appeareth by many Scriptures before mentioned: As by his
tempting our Saviour, Mat 4. Who had no corrupt quality within
him; being the spotless Lamb of God; yet him did Satan tempt,
yea take him up into the holy City, and set him on the pinacle of
the Temple, and into an high mountain, and shew him all the
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them. These things
could not be done by aNon Ens. I shall add some farther
confirmation from other places, (1) fude 6 Angels were created
by God. The Devils are Angels. (2) They that left their own
habitation are Entities. But the Devils left their own habitation:
Therefore Entities. (3) They that sinned, and for their sin are
delivered into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto
Judgment, are Entities: But so did the Devil, 2 Pet 2 4 Therefore,
and c (4) He that is the Prince of this World, the God of this
World, the Prince of the power of the Air; be that goeth to and
fro in the earth, and walketh up and down in it, is a Being, an
Entity. But such is the Devil. Job 1 7 Joh 14 30. 2 Cor 4 4. Eph
2.2 Therefore So then the denying the Entity of the Devil, is a
reviving the old Doctrine of the Sadduces Act 22. 8. Who said.
There is neither Angel nor Spirit.

Page 158

Prop. 2. There was no Devil dwelt in Adam to seduce him before
he was tempted by Eve to eat of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil The Devil, faith he, is not a Being, yet dwelt in Adam,
and seduced him: By this Devil in Adam then, he meaneth a

sinful quality in Adam before he was tempted to eat, or it was a
name without signification. But there could be no such evil
quality in Adam before so tempted. For if it were, it must be
created with him, or enter into him before Eve did tempt him:

But neither of these, therefore not at all. Not the former, for he
was created upright, Eccl 7. 29 Very good, and in Gods Image,
Gen 1. 26, 27, 31 Not the latter, for the Scripture gives no
intimation of any evil in Adam before seduced by the woman (2)
Nay the Devil that seduced him was without him, even the
Serpent or Devil in the Serpent, that seduced Eve first by talking
with her, and by her was he deceived, Gen 3. 1. to 6. 2 Cor. 11
3. 1 Tim. 2. 14 Adam was not deceived (that is first) but the
woman, and c. (3) The Lord in punishing that first sin, doth
distinctly punish Adam, Eve and the Serpent (in which is
comprehended the Devil that old Serpent. Gen. 3. 14,15. with 2
Cor. 11 3. Rev. 20. 2. as three distinct Entities or Beings; therefore
the Devil was without, ad extra, before Adam was beguiled.

Prop. 3. All wicked men are not Witches as T. Maul holds forth, p.
183. and 193. and c. Saying,

Page 159

All that live a life of disobedience are Witches in some degree,
with more to that effect. For if all wicked persons were Witches
in the sence intended, Exod. 22 18. Deut. 18. 10. Then all
wicked men should have been put to death by the law of Moses
But there was no such thing. Nay all the heathen Idolaters were
not called Witches, or Sorcerers in Egypt or Babylon, but only
some peculiar persons among them. And of all had
familiarSpirits, there had not been that need of such a warning
Regard not them which have familiar Spirits, nor seek after
Wizards, and c. Prop 4 God hath no where promiled all people
that keep Gods Commands, or are righteous persons, that they
shall not be possessed or bewitched by the Devil or his
Instruments. Indeed it is sometimes so, a. Numb, 23, 21, 23 There
is no inchantment against Jacob, neither any divination against
Israel; when God hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, nor seen
perverseness in Israel. And our best shield against Satan is faith
in Christ, with prayer and an holy life. Yet Job a perfect man did
suffer more in his Bode, Goods, Servants and Children then most
wicked men in the World have done And it was a Daughter of
Abraham whom Satan bound eighteen years, Luk, 13 16. And a
Mother of whom it is said, 0 woman great is thy faith be it unto
thee even as thou wilt; who had a Daughter grievously vexed
with a Devil possessing of her. So that God in his Soveraignty
makes all things come alike to all

Page 160

when he pleaseth; so that no man knoweth love or hatred by any
thing that is before him. Prop 5. The bewitching spoken of, Gal 3.
It is not to be understood of a proper or literal bewitching, but in
a Metaphorical sence where by way of allusion, the false
Teachers are compared to Witches, as being like them; for as
Witches have bewitched the eyes of the Body so they bewitched
the eyes of the mind. And though Witchcraft be one kind of the
work of the flesh mentioned, Gal 5 19,20,21. Yet the Text doth
not say, all the works of the Flesh are Witchcraft: But this is
distinct from Murder, Drunkenness and the rest, as they are
dislinct each from other. Prop. 6 The Wisdom of God doth no
where say, that the Damosel mentioned, Act. 16 16 was a Witch.
But it describeth her to be a person possessed with a spirit of
divination, or having a spirit of Python within her: Whom Paul in
the name of Christ commanded to come out of her, and so he
was cast out. That Spirit that calleth her a Witch, doth
consequentially at least call the Damosel, Mark 7 25. a Witch,
because she had an unclean spirit; and so would render all the
possessed in the Gospel, worthy of death by Moses Law; which is
to subvert all the Scriptures which condemn that abomination. It
was therefore a blasphemous comparison which he made, who
said, There was as great mistakes in the Scripture, as in T. Mauls

Page 161

Book; presuming therein to equalize to the lively Oracles of God,
a Book abounding with gross mistakes in Doctrine and History.

Q. How may a Witch, Sorcerer or Conjurer be proved to be such
as being legally convicted to receive the punishment appointed?
Exod 27 18. A. I answer from 1 Sam. 28 Chap. We find here that
Saul put away those that had familiar spirits, and Wizards out of
the Land, vers. 3 Yet one was lest at Endor, v. 7. Saul then had a
way to convict them; and the Woman atEndor points at the way,
v. 9. For Saul had said to her, Divine unto me by the familiar
spirit, and bring me him up whom I shall name unto thee: The
Woman answers, Wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life,
to cause me to dye? 9.d If it be proved by sufficient witness, that
I Divine by a familiar Spirit, and raise a Ghost from the Dead, I
must dy by the Law. But Saul sweareth to her by the Lord, As
Jehovah liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this
thing. And then she proceeds. Note, that this woman tho' she
dealt with and by the Devil, hath so much knowledge of Jehovah,
and confidence in an Oath made by him, that she ventures her
life upon it. Again, v. 21. After she had raised the supposed
Samuel, she said unto Saul; I have obeyed thy voice, and have

put my life in my band. As if she had said, I have done that in
obedience to thee; that were it proved against me, would take
away my life. Here then we see

Page 162

that if it can be proved against any, that they have divined by a
familiar spirit, or done such like act of communion with the Devil,
or raised the Dead by him that is the Devil in likeness of the
Dead; then such a person is proved to be a Witch that ought to
die: So in like manner, if any be proved to use Sorceries (as did
the Magicians of Egypt) among Christian people, such ought to
dye, or proportionably by familiarity with the Devil to do, or
come to know strange things, or work signs, lying wonders, or
miracles by him, as they are called 2 They 2 9 Rev. 13 13, 14.
Deut 13. 1, 2. Q But by what way may such Divinations and
Sorceries be proved? A In the same way that Murder, Thest, and
such like crimes are provable. As (1.) By the testimony of two
Witnesses, that the party suspected hath used Sorcery, and c,

(2) Confession may in some cases be taken in this crime as well
as others, as hath been above-shewed; If the person, be
compote mentis, and give as clear demonstration of their guilt of
the fact, as Baaneh and Rechab did of their slaying Ishbosheth,
when they brought his head to David, 2 Sam. 4 6, and c (3) The
testi mony of partners in the crime in some cases, as above
shewed, Chap. 11. (4.) Circumstances antecedent to,
concomitant with, or suddenly consequent upon such acts of
Sorcery, have like force to fasten a suspicion of this crime upon
this or that person; as the like

Page 163

circumstances have to fasten a suspicion upon any for another
crime attended with them; putatis mutandis. Here it may be
enquired, Whether persons obsessed, possessed, or under bodily
torments or vexations by Satan, are sit witnesses? I answer in
the ensuing Propositions. Prop. 1. Those whose Bodies are sorely
afflicted by the Devil, and yet their understandings clear and
free, are fit to be Witnesses as well as others. As was Job, who
when Satan had smitten him with sore boyls from head to foot,
yet was a fit witness for God. Job 42. 7. Speaking of God the
thing that was right. Prop. 2. Some under these molestations of
Satan have their understandings so darkened and phantasies so
abused, that they are not in their right mind, till delivered from
Satan, as was the case of the man among the Tombs, Mark. 6 2,
3, 15. So the Damosel, Acts 16 16, 17. Though she gave a true
testimony concerning Paul and Silas, yet she was no sit
witness, because he spake by the instigation of Satan, and not of

her own knowledge. So it may be proportionably in persons
under the influence of inchantment, or obsession by Satan,
although in a lesser degree. Prop. 3. Hence it may follow, that a
person under these assaults of hell, may be fit for a witness at
one time, when free from these fits, which darken his
understanding: But not another

Page 164

time, viz when the sences are beclouded by the violence of their
fits. Again, they may be fit to testifie to some things; namely to
what they feel and suffer upon their own Bodies: But not of what
they see at some distance, or about external and remoter
objects; because their eye and phantasies may be under some
kind of fascination (as I may call it) of the Devil; so as to mistake
one thing for another. Obj But is it not then according to the
principle laid down above, impossible to prove any person to be
a Witch; seeing the workings between Satan and them are so
secret? How can they be discovered? A. Other Malefactors work
secretly and in the dark, hoping never to be discovered. Job 24
14, 15,16,17. The Murderer, Thief, Adulterer, say no eye shall see
me, and disguise their faces, dig in the dark, and c. But the Lord
searcheth out such Malefactors, when settled on their lees with
his candle of judgment, though they dig deep to hide themselves
from men; yea, and if it were possible, from God himself. They
say Who seeth us? who knoweth us, Zeph 1 12 Isa 29 15,16. Yet
the Lord brings all to light before men when he pleaseth, So
theLord can and doth discover Sorcerers, Magicians, and all sorts
of Witches, when, and as oft as he pleaseth; and sometimes
leaves them to discover and betray themselves: And sometimes
over-rules their Master whom they serve, to intrap and deceive
them, Pro. 26, 26. Whose hatred it covered by deceit,

Chapter 18

Page 165

his wickedness shall be shewed before the whole Congregation
Which is to be understood when the Lord pleaseth to bring to
light these hidden works of darkness. CHAPTER XVIII. I Shall
conclude this Discourse with some Application of the whole. 1.

We may hence see ground to fear, that there hath been a great
deal of innocent blood shed in the Christian World, by proceeding
up: on unsafe principles, in condemning persons for Malefick
Witchcraft. 2. That there have been great sinful neglects in
sparing others, who by their divinings about things future, or
discovering things secret, as stollen Goods, and c or by their
informing of persons and things absent at a great distance, have

implored the assistance of a familiar spirit, yet coloured over
with specious pretences, and have drawn people to enquire of
them: A sin frequently forbidden in Scripture, as Lev. 19 31 and
20. 6. Isa. 8, 19, 20. and yet let alone, and in many parts of the
World, have been countenanced in their diabolical skill and
profession; because they serve the interest of those that have a
vain curiosity, to pry into things God hath forbidden, and
concealed from discovery by lawful means. And of others that by
their inchantments, have raised mists, strange sights,

Page 166

and the like, to beget admiration, and please Spectators, and c.
When as these divinations and operations are the Witchcraft
more condemned in Scripture than the other. 3. But to come
nigher home, we have cause to be humbled for the mistakes and
errors which have been in these Colonies, in their Proceedings
against persons for this crime, above fourty years ago and
downwards, upon insufficient presumptions and presidents of our
Nation whence they came. I do not say, that all those were
innocent, that suffered in those times upon this account. But that
such grounds were then laid down to proceed upon, which were
too slender to evidence the crime they were brought to prove;
and thereby a foundation laid to lead into error those that came
after. May we not say in this matter, as it is, Psal 105 6. We
have sinned with our fathers? And as, Lam 5 7. Our fathers have
sinned and are not and we have born their iniquities? And
whether this be not one of the sins the Lord hath been many
years contending with us for, is worthy our serious enquiry. If
the Lord punished Israel with famine three years for a sin of
misguided zeal fourty years before that, committed by the
breach of a Covenant made four hundred years before that: 2
Sam, 21. 1, 2. Why may not the Lord visit upon us the
misguided zeal of our Predecessors about Witchcraft above fourty
years ago, even when that Generation is gathered to their
Fathers.

Page 167

4. But I would come yet nearer to our own times, and bewail the
errors and mistakes that have been in the year 1692. In the
apprehending too many we may believe were innocent, and
executing of some, I fear, not to have been condemned; by
following such traditions of our fathers, maxime of the Common
Law, and Presidents and Principles, which now we may see
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, are found too light. I
heartily concur with that direction for our publick prayers,
emitted December 17, 1696 by our General Assembly, in an

order for a general Fast, viz. That God would shew us what we
know not, and help us wherein we have done amiss, to do so no
more: And especially that whatever mistakes on either hand,
have been fallen into, either by the body of this people, or any
order of men, referring to the late tragedy raised among us by
Satan and his Instruments, through the awful Judgment of God:
He would humble us therefore, and pardon all the errors of his
Servants and People, that desire to love his Name, and be
attoned to his land. I am abundantly satisfyed that those who
were most concerned to act and judge in those matters, did not
willingly depart from the rules of righteousness. But such was
the darkness of that day, the tortures and lamentations of the
afflicted, and the power of former presidents, that we walked in
the clouds, and could not see our way. (And we have most cause
to be humbled for error on

Page 168

that hand, which cannot be retrieved. So that we must beseech
the Lord, that if any innocent blood hath been shed, in the hour
of temptation, the Lord will not lay it to our charge, but be
merciful to his people whom he hath redeemed, Deut. 21. 8. And
that in the day when he shall visit, he will not visit this sin upon
our land, but blot it out, and wash it away with the blood of
Jesus Christ. 5. I would humbly propose whether it be not
expedient, that some what more should be publickly done then
yet hath, for clearing the good name and reputation of some that
have suffered upon this account, against whom the evidence of
their guilt was more slender, and the grounds for charity for
them more convincing, And this (in order to our obtaining from
the Lord farther reconciliation to our land,) and that none of their
surviving relations, may suffer reproach upon that account. I
have both read and heard of several in England, that have been
executed for Capital crimes, and afterwards up on sence of an
error in the process against them, have been restored in blood
and honour by some publick act. My Lord Cook relates a story. A
man going to correct a Girle his Neice, for some offence, in an
upper room, the Girle strove to save her self, till her nose bled,
and wiping it with a cloath, threw the bloody cloath out at the
window, and cryed Murder; and then ran down staires, got away
and hid her self. Her Uncle was prosecuted

Page 169

by her friends upon suspicion of Murdering her, because she
could not be found. He declared that she made her escape, as
above said. Then time was allowed him to bring her forth, but he
could not hear of her within the time, and fearing he should dy if

she could not be found, procures another Girle very like her, to
appear in Court, and declare she was his Neice that had been
missing: But her relations examine this counterfeit, until they
find her out, and she confesseth she was suborned and
counterfeited the true Neice. Upon these presumptions the man
was found guilty of Murdering his Neice, and thereupon
executed. And after his execution his true Neice comes abroad
and shews her self alive and well. Then all that saw it were
convinced of the Uncles innocency, and vanity of such
presumptions. The Printing and Publishing of this relation
Vindicates the good name of the Uncle, from the imputation of
the crime of Murder. And this is one end of this present
discourse, to take off (so far as a discourse of this nature can)
infamy from the names and memory of such sufferers in this
kind, as do not deserve the same. 6. Here it may be suitable for
us to enquire, What the Lord speaks to us by such a stupendeous
providence, in his letting loose Satan upon us in this unusual
way? Ans. 1. We may say of this, as our Saviour said of his
washing his disciples feet, Job. 13. What I do thou knowest not
now but thou shalt know hereafter. The Judgments of the Lord
are a great deep, Psal. 36,6, How unsearchable are

Page 170

his judgments, and his ways past finding out? 2. Yet somewhat
of his counsel at present for our instruction may be known, by
comparing the Word and works of God together. 1. As when
Joshua the high Priest though an holy chosen man of God, stood
before the Angel, Satan Stood at his right hand to resist him or
to be his adversary: And the advantage Satan had was by the
filthy garments Joshua was clothed with before the Angels: That
is, some iniquity which yet was not passed away, Zech, 3,1, 3,4.
So we may say here were among Gods own Children filthy
garments. The sins of Luke-warmness, loss of our first love,
unprofitableness under the Gospel, slumbering and sleeping in
the wise, as well as foolish Virgins, worldliness, pride, carnal
security, and many other sins. By these and such like sins the
accuser of the Brethren got advantage to stand at our right hand
(the place of an Accuser in Courts of Justice) and there accuse us
and resist us. 2. When the Egrptians refused to let. Israel go to
sacrifice and keep a feast to the Lord in the Wilderness: The Lord
cast upon the fierceness of his wrath, by sending Evil Angels
among them Psal. 78, 49 Egypts sins were (1.) Covereousness,
they would not let Israel go, because they gained by their
labours. (2.) Contempt of God and his Instituted Worship, and
Ordinances. They did not count them of such concernment, that
Israel should go into the Wilderness

Page 171

to observe them. Both these sins have too much increased in our
Land. (1.) Coveteousness, an inordinate love of the World gave
Satan advantage upon us. (2.) Contempt of Gods Worship and
Instituted Ordinances. The Errand of our Fathers into this
Wilderness, was to Sacrifice to the Lord; that is, to worship God
in purity of heart and life, and to wait upon the Lord, walking in
the faith and order of the Gospel in Church fellowship; that they
might enjoy Christ in all his Ordinances. But these things have
been greatly neglected and despised by many born, or bred up in
the Land. We have much forgotten what our Fathers came into
the Wilderness to see. The sealing Ordinances of the Covenant of
Grace in Church-Communion have been much slighted and
neglected; and the fury of this Storm raised by Satan hath fallen
very heavily upon many that lived under these neglects. The
Lord sends Evil Angels to awaken and punish our negligence:

And to my knowledge some have been hereby excited to enter
into the Chamber of Gods Ordinances, to hide themselves, until
the indignation be over past. 3. David when he removed the Ark
from Kirjathjearim, had the Ark put into a new Cart, which
should have been carried by the Kohathites. Numb. 3 31. And
David thought this was right, until the Lord slew Uzza for
touching the Ark: But then he looked more exactly into

Page 172

the will of God; and confesseth that the Lord made a breach
upon them, because they sought him not after the due order, 1
Chron. 13. 5,7,9,10. and 15, 11, 12, 13. Had not the Lord made
that breach up on them, they had persisted securely in their
error. So I may say in this case. In the prosecution of Witchcraft,
we fought not the Lord after the due order; but have proceeded
after the methods used in former times and other places, until
the Lord in this tremendous way made a breach upon us, And
hereby we are made sensible that the methods formerly used are
not sufficient to prove the guilt of such a crime. And this I
conceive was one end of the Lords letting Satan loose to torment
and accuse so many; that hereby we may search out the truth
more exactly. For had it not been for this dreadful dispensation,
many would have lived and dyed in that error, which they are
now convinced of. 4. The Lord delivered into the hand of Satan,
the Estate, Children, and Body of Job, for the tryal of Jobs faith
and patience, and proof of his perfection and uprightness. So the
Lord hath delivered into Satans hand mens Children and Bodies,
yea names and estates into Satans hand for the tryal of their
faith and patience, and farther manifestation of the sincerity of

their professions. 7. From that part of the discourse which shews
the power of Satan to torment the bodies,

Page 173

and disturb the minds of those, he is let loose upon, Chap. 6. I
would infer, that Satan may be suffered so to darken the minds
of some pious Souls, as to cause them to destroy them-selves by
drowning, hanging, or the like. And when he hath so far
prevailed upon some, that formerly lived a Christian life, but
were under the prevalency of a distracting Melancholy at their
latter end: We may have Charity that their Souls are Saved,
notwithstanding the sad conclusion of their lives. I speak not to
excuse any that having the free use of their reason willingly
destroy themselves, out of pride, discontent, impatience, and c.
Achitophel who out of heigth of Spirit because his Counsel was
not followed, and to prevent Davids executing of him, for his
rebellion and treason, destroyed himself, hath left his name to
stink unto all generations. And Judas who for his unparalelled
treachery in betraying his Master, and the Lord of life, was justly
left to hange himself; and the rope breaking or slipping he fell
down head long, or with his face down ward, so that he burst
asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, Math. 27. 5.
with Act. 1. 18. left by his sin and punishment in the last act of
his life the black character of a Son of perdition. But those that
being out of their right minds, and hurried by an evil Spirit, as
persons under a force to be their own executioners, are not
always to be ranked with these.

Page 174

8. Seeing we have been too fierce against supposed Malefick
Witchcraft; let us take heed we do not on the contrary become
too favourable to divining Witchcraft And become like Saul who
was too zealous against the Gibeonites, and at last turned to
seek after one that had a familiar Spirit, to his own destruction.
Let us not, it we can help it, suffer Satan to set up an ensuring
office for stolen Goods. That after he hath brought the curse of
God into the house of the thief, by tempting him to steal: he may
not bring about the curse into the houses of them from whom
the goods were stolen; by alluring them to go to the god of
Ekron to enquire. That men may not give their Souls to the Devil
in exchange, for his restoring to them their goods again, in such
a way of divination. The Lord grant it may be said of New
Englasd, as is prophecyed of Judah, Mic. 5 12. I will cut off
Witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou shalt have no more
soothsayers. 9. Anothe: extream we must beware of, is, viz.
Because our fathers in the beginning times of this Land; did not

see so far into these mysteries of iniquity, as hath been since
discovered. Let us not undervalue the good foundations they laid
for God and his people, and for us in Church and Civil
Government. For Paul that eminent Apostle knew but in part; no
wonder then, it out Fathers were imperfect men. In the purest
times in Isreal, there were

Page 175

some Clouds of ignorance over shadowing of them. Abraham,
David, and the best Patriarchs were generally ignorant of the sin
of Polygamy. And although Solomon far exceeded Nebemiab in
wisdom; yet Nehemiah saw farther into the evil of Marrying
Outlandish Women, than that wisest of Kings, and meer fallen
men. Neb. 13. 26. Josiah kept the Passe-over more exactly, than
David, and all the Reforming Kings of Judah, 2 Chron. 35. 18. All
the godly Judges and Kings of Judab were unacquainted with,
and so negligent of the right observation of the feast of
Tabernacles, until it came to Nebemiabs time: And he
understood and revived an ordinance of God, that lay buried in
oblivion, near about a thousand years. Now he that shall reject
all the good in doctrine and practice, which was maintained,
professed and practiced by so many Godly leaders, because of
some few errors found among them, will be found to fight
against God. A dwarf upon a giants shoulders, can see farther
than the giant. It was a glorious enterprize of the beginners of
these Colonies, to leave their native Country to propagate the
Gospel: And a very high pitch of faith, zeal, and courage that
carryed them forth, to follow the Lord into this wilderness, into a
land that was not sown. Then was New England holiness to the
Lord, and all that did devour them, or attempted so to do, did

Page 176

offend, and evil did come upon them, And the Lord did graciously
remember this kindness of their Youth, and love of their
Espousals; In granting them many eminent tokens of his favour;
by his presence with them in his Ordinance for the Conversion of
Souls, and edifying and comforting the hearts of his Servants: By
signal answering their prayers in times of difficulty: By protecting
them from their Enemies: By guiding of, and providing for them
in a Desart. And the Lord will still remember this their kindness
unto their Posterity, unless that by their Apostaty from the Lord,
they vex his Holy Spirit, to turn to be their Enemy: And thereby
cut off the Entail of his Covenant Mercies; which God forbid. Oh
that the Lord mar be with us, as he was with our Fathers; and
that he may not leave us, nor forsake us! FINIS.
