VERS

RARY

OU 214321

CD ^
73 <

> m

73 73

OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
Gall No. /£}/ Accession No. 1/

Author // <%. A J-/

Title \sceu) Q (L A&U/1

This book should be returned on or before the date
last marked below.

VIEW

OF

THE STATE OF EUROPE

DURING

THE MIDDLE AGES.

BY HENKY HALLAM, LL.D, F.R.A.S,

FOREIGN ASSOCIATE OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE.

IN THREE VOLUMES. — VOL. III.

TWELFTH EIJITWX

LONDON:

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET,

1860.

The right of Translation is reserved.

XON'Ixjn :

PJUNTKD BIT W, CJjOWKM AM) SONS, KTAMFOltD STRF.KT ,
AJs’D CIIABING C1EOSK.

CONTENTS

OF

THE THIRD VOLUME.

CHAPTER VIII.

Part III.

THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION.

Reign of Edward I. — Confirmatio Chartarum — Constitution of Parlia-
ment — the Prelates — the temporal Peers — Tenure by Barony — its
Changes — Dillieulty of the Subject — Origin of Representation of the
Commons — Knights of Shires — their Existence doubtfully traced
through the Reign of Henry 111. — Question whether Representation
was confined to Tenants in capite discussed — State of English Towns
at the Conquest and afterwards — their Progress — Representatives
from them summoned to Parliament by Earl of Leicester — Improba-
bility of an earlier Origin — Cases of St. Albans and Barnstaple consi-
dered — Parliaments under Edward I. — Separation of Knights and
Burgesses from the Peers — Edward II. — Gradual Progress of the
Authority of Parliament traced through the reigns of Edward III. and
his Successors down to Henry IV. — Privilege of Parliament — the
early Instances of it noticed — Nature of Borough Representation —
Rights of Election — other Particulars relative to Election — House of
Lords — Baronies by Tenure — by Writ — Nature of the latter dis-
cussed — Creation of Peers by Act of Parliament and by Patent —
Summons of Clergy to Parliament — King’s Ordinary Council — its
Judicial aud other Power — Character of the Plantagenet Government
— Prerogative — its Excesses — erroneous Views corrected — Testi-
mony of Sir John Fortescue to the Freedom of the Constitution —
Causes of the superior Liberty of England considered — State of Society
in England — Want of Police — Villenage — its gradual Extinction —
Latter Years of Henry VI. — Regencies — Instances of them enume-
rated — Pretensions of the House of York, and War of the Roses —
Edward IV. — Conclusion Page 1

Notes to Chatter VIII., Part III 204

b 2

IV

CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

CHAPTER IX.

ON THE STATE OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.

Part I.

Introduction — Decline of Literature in the latter Period of the Roman
Empire — Its Causes — Corruption of the Latin Language — Means
by which it was effected — Formation of new Languages — General
Ignorance of the Dark Ages — Scarcity of Books — Causes that pre-
vented the total Extinction of Learning — Prevalence of Superstition
and Fanaticism — General Corruption of Religion — Monasteries —
their Effects — Pilgrimages — Love of Field Sports — State of Agri-
culture — of Internal and Foreign Trade down to the end of the
Eleventh Century — Improvement of Europe dated from that Age

Page 208

Tart II.

Progress of Commercial Improvement in Germany, Flanders, and Eng-
land — in the North of Europe — in the Countries upon the Mediter-
ranean Sea — Maritime Laws — Usury — Banking Companies — Pro-
gress of Refinement in Manners — Domestic Architecture — Ecclesias-
tical Architecture — State of Agriculture in England — Value of Money
— Improvement of the Moral Character of Society — its Causes —
Police — Changes in Religious Opinion — Various Sects — Chivalry —
its Progress, Character, and Influence — Causes of the Intellectual
Improvement of European Society — 1. The Study of Civil Law —
2. Institution of Universities — their Celebrity — Scholastic Philosophy
* — 3. Cultivation of Modern Languages — Provencal Poets — Norman
Poets — French Prose Writers — Italian — early Poets in that Lan-
guage — Dante — Petrarch — English Language — its Progress —
Chaucer — 4. Revival of Classical Learning — Latin Writers of the
Twelfth Century — Literature of the Fourteenth Century — Greek
Literature — its Restoration in Italy — Invention of Printing . 318

Notes to Chapter IX 474

Index 487

YI E W

OF

THE STATE OF EUROPE

DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.

CHAPTER VIII.

TART III.

THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION.

Reign of Edward 1. — Confirmatio Chartarum — Constitution of Parliament — the
Prelates — the Temporal Peers — Tenure by Barony — its Changes — Difficulty
of the Subject — Origin of Representation of the Commons — Knights of Shires —
their Existence doubtfully traced through the Reign of Henry III. — Question
whether Representation was confined to Tenants in capite discussed — State of
English Towns at the Conquest and afterwards — their Progress — Representa-
tives from them summoned to Parliament by Earl of Leicester — Improbability
of an earlier Origin — Cases of St. Albans and Barnstaple considered — Parlia-
ments under Edward I. — Separation of Knights and Burgesses from the Peers —
Edward 11. — gradual Progress of the Authority of Parliament traced through
the Reigns of Edward III. and his Successors down to Henry IV. — Privilege of
Parliament — the early Instances of it noticed — Nature of Borough Representa-
tion — Rights of Election — other Particulars relative to Election — House of
Lords — Baronies by Tenure — by Writ — Nature of the latter discussed —
Creation of I*eers by Act of Parliament and by I'atent — Summons of Clergy to
Parliament — King’s Ordinary Council — its Judicial and other Power — Cha-
racter of the Plan tagenet Government — Prerogative — its Excesses — erroneous
View s corrected — Testimony of Sir John Fortescue to the Freedom of the Con-
stitution — Causes of the superior Liberty of England considered — State of
Society in England — Want of Police — Villenage — its gradual Extinction —
latter Years of Henry VI. — Regencies — Instances of them enumerated —
Pretensions of the House of York, and War of the Hoses — Edward IV. — Con-
clusion.

Though the undisputed accession of a prince like
Edward I. to tlio throne of his father does not Accession of
seem so convenient a resting-place in history Kdward *•
as one of those revolutions which interrupt the natural
chain of events, yet the changes wrought during his
reign make it properly an epoch in the progress of these
inquiries. And, indeed, as ours is emphatically styled a
VOL. in. B

2

CONFIRMATION OF Chap. VIII. Tart III.

government by king, lords, and commons, wo cannot,
perhaps, in strictness carry it further back than the ad-
mission of the latter into parliament ; so that if the con-
stant representation of tho commons is to be referred to
the age of Edward I., it will be nearer the truth to date
the English constitution from that than from any earlier
era.

The various statutes affecting the law of property and
administration of justice which have caused Edward I.
to be named, rather hyperbolieally,tho English Justinian,
bear no immediate relation to our present inquiries. In
Confimia- a cons titnt ] ’onal point* of view the principal
tionofthc object is that statute entitled tho Confirmation
Charter*. 0 f q le Charters, which was very reluctantly
conceded by the king in the 25th year of his reign. I
do not know that England has ever produced any patriots
to whose memory she owes more gratitude than Hum-
phrey Bohun, earl of Hereford and Essex, and Eoger
Bljjocl, earl of Norfolk. In the Great Charter the base
spirit and deserted condition of J ohn tako off something
from the glory of the triumph, though they enhance the
moderation of those who pressed no further upon an
abject tyrant. But to withstand the measures of Edward,
a prince unequalled by any who had reigned in England
since the Conqueror, for prudence, valour, and success,
required a far more intrepid patriotism. Their provoca-
tions, if less outrageous than those received from John,
were such as evidently manifested a disposition in Edward
to reign without any control ; a constant refusal to con-
firm the charters, which in that age were hardly deemed
to bind the king without his actual consent ; heavy im-
positions, especially one on the export of wool, and other
unwarrantable demands. He had acted with such un-
measured violence towards the clergy, on account of
their refusal of further subsidies, that, although the ill-
judged policy of that class kept their interests too dis-
tinct from those of the people, it was natural for all to bo
alarmed at the precedent of despotism. 6 These encroach-

a The fullest account we possess of Carte, but extremely well told by Hume,
those domestic transactions from 1294 to the first writer who had the merit of ex-
1296 is in Walter Hemingford, one of posing the character of Edward I. Seo
the historians edited by Jlearne, p. 52- too Knygbton in Twysden’s Decern Scrip-
168. They have been vilely perverted by tores, coU 2492.

English Const.

THE CHARTERS.

3

ments made resistance justifiable, and the circumstances
of Edward made it prudent. His ambition, luckily for
the people, had involved him in foreign warfare, from
which lie could not recede without disappointment and
dishonour. Thus was wrested from him that famous
statute, inadecpiately denominated the Confirmation of
the Charters, because it added another pillar to our
constitution, not less important than the Great Charter
itself. b

It was enacted by the 25 Edw. I. that the charter of
liberties, and that of the forest, besides being explicitly
confirmed, c should be sent to all sheriffs, justices in eyre,
and other magistrates throughout the realm, in order to
their publication before the people ; that copies of them
should be kept in cathedral churches, and publicly read
twice in the year, accompanied by a solemn sentence of
excommunication against all who should infringe them ;
that any judgment given contrary to these charters should
be invalid, and hidden for nought. This authentic pro-
mulgation, those awful sanctions of the Great Charter,
would alone render the statute of which we are speaking
illustrious. But it went a great deal further. Hitherto
the king’s prerogative of levying money by name of tall-
age or prise from his towns and tenants in demesne had
passed unquestioned. Some impositions, that especially
on the export of wool, affected all his subjects. It was
now the moment to enfranchise the people, and give that
security to private property which Magna Charta had
given to personal liberty. By the 5th and 6th sections of
this statute “ the aids, tasks, and prises,” before taken are
renounced as precedents ; and the king “ grants for him
and his heirs, as well to archbishops, bishops, abbots,
priors, and other folk of holy church, as also to earls,
barons, and to all commonalty of the land, that, for no busi-
ness from henceforth we shall take such manner of aids,
tasks, nor prises, but by the common assent of the realm,

b Walsingham, in Camden's Scriptorcs Hemingford, they blessed the king on
Her. Anglicarum, p. 71-7H. seeing the charters with the great seal

c Edward would not confirm the affixed; but when they heard the cap-
charters, notwithstanding his promise, tious conclusion, they cursed him in-
without the words, salvo jure corona) stead. At the next meeting of parlia-
nostrie; on which the two earls retired ment, the king agreed to omit these
from court. When the confirmation was insidious words, p. 168.
read to the people at St. Paul's, says

4

CONSTITUTION OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

and for the common profit thereof, saving the ancient aids
and prises due and accustomed.” The toll upon wool,
so far as levied by the king’s mere prerogative, is ex-
pressly released by the seventh section . 41

We come now to a part of our subject exceedingly im-
Constitu portant, but more intricate and controverted than
tioTi of any other, the constitution of parliament. 1 have
parliament. fo x ] cen I10 notice of this in the last section, in order
to present uninterruptedly to the reader the gradual pro-
gress of our legislature down to its complete establish-
ment under the Edwards. No excuse need be made for
the dry and critical disquisition of the following pages ;
but among such obscure inquiries I cannot feel myself
as secure from error as I certainly do from partiality.

One constituent branch of the great councils held by
The spiritual William the Conqueror and all his successors
peers. was composed of the bishops and the heads of
religious houses holding their temporalities immediately
of the crown. It has been frequently maintained that
these spiritual lords sat in parliament only by virtue of
their baronial tenure. And certainly they did all hold
baronies, which, according to the analogy of lay peer-
ages, were sufficient to give them such a share in the
legislature. Nevertheless, I think that this is rather too
contracted a view of the rights of the English hierarchy,

d The supposed statute, De Tallagio
non concedondo, is considered by Black-
stone (Introduction to Charters, p. 67)
as merely an abstract of the Confirmatio
Chartarum. By that entitled Articuli
super Chartas, 28 Edw. I., a court was
erected in every county, of three knights
or others, to be elected by the commons
of the shire, whose sole province was to
determine offences against the two char-
ters, with the power of punishing by tine
and imprisonment; but not to extend
to any case wherein a remedy by writ
was already provided. The Confirmatio
Chartarum is properly denominated a
statute, and always printed as such ; but
in form, like Magna Charta, it is a charter,
or letters patent, proceeding from the
crown, without even reciting the consent
of the realm. And its “teste” is at
Ghent, 2 Nov. 1297 ; Edward having en-
gaged, conjointly with the count of

Flanders, in a war with Philip the Fair.
But a parliament had been held at London,
when the barons insisted on these conces-
sions. The circumstances are not'wholly
unlike those of Magna Charta.

The Lords’ Committee do not seem to
reject the statute “ de tallagio non conce-
deiulo” altogether, but say that, “if the
manuscript containing it (in Corpus
Christi College, Cambridge) is a truo
copy of a statute, it is undoubtedly a
copy of a statute of the 25 11), and not of a
statute of the 34th of Edward J ” p. 230.
It seems to me on comparing the two,
that the supposed statute de tallagio is
but an imperfect transcript of the king’s
charter at Ghent. But at least, as one
exists in an authentic form, and the
other is only found in an unauthorized
copy,’ there can be no question which
ought to be quoted.

English Const.

THE SPIRITUAL PEERS.

5

and, indeed, by implication, of the peerage. For a great
council of advice and assent in matters of legislation or
national importance was essential to all the northern
governments. And all of them, except, perhaps, the
Lombards, invited the superior ecclesiastics to their
councils ; not upon any feudal notions, which at that
time had hardly begun to prevail, but chiefly as repre-
sentatives of the church and of religion itself; next, as
more learned and enlightened counsellors than the lay
nobility ; and in some degree, no doubt, as rich proprietors
of land. It will bo remembered also that ecclesiastical
and temporal affairs were originally decided in the same
assemblies, both upon the continent and in England. The
Norman Conquest, which destroyed the Anglo-Saxon
nobility, and substituted a new race in their stead,
could not affect the immortality of church possessions.
The bishops of William’s age were entitled to sit in his
councils by the general custom of Europe, and by the
common law of England, which the Conquest did not
overturn. 0 Some smaller arguments might be urged
against the supposition that their legislative rights are
merely baronial ; such as that the guardian of the spirit-
ualities was commonly summoned to parliament during
the vacancy of a bishopric, and that the five sees created
by Henry VIII. have no baronies annexed to them ; f but
the former reasoning appears less technical and confined. s

Next to these spiritual lords are the earls and barons,
or lay peerage of England. The former dignity was,
perhaps, not so merely official as in the Saxon times,
although the earl was entitled to the third penny of all
emoluments arising from the administration of justice in
the county-courts, and might, perhaps, command the
militia of his county, when it was called forth. b Every

® Hody (Treatise on Convocations, Dialogue de Scaccario, 1. i. c. 17. Lyt-
p. 126) states the matter thus: in the telton's Henry II. vol. ii. p. 217. The
Saxon times all bishops and abbots sat last of these writers supposes, contrary
and voted in the state councils, or parlia- to Selden, that the earls continued to
ment, as such, and not on account of be governors of their counties under
their tenures. After the Conquest the Henry II. Stephen created a few titular
abbots sat there not as such, but by virtue earls, with grants of crown lands to sup-
of their tenures, as barons; and the port them; but his successor resumed
bishops sat in a double capacity, as the grants, and deprived them of their
bishops, and as barons. earldoms,

f Hody, p. 128. In Rymcr’s Foedera, vol. i. p. 3, we

g [Note I.] find a grant of Matilda, creating Milo of

h Madox, Baronia Anglica, p. 138. Gloucester earl of Hereford, with the

6

QUESTION AS TO THE Chap. VIII. Part III.

earl was also a baron, and held an honour or barony of
the crown, for which he paid a higher relief than an
ordinary baron, probably on account of the profits of his
earldom. I will not pretend to say whether titular earl-
doms, absolutely distinct from the lieutenancy of a
county, were as ancient as the Conquest, which Madox
seems to think, or were considered as irregular so late
as Henry II., according to Lord Lyttelton. In Dugdale’s
Baronage I find none of this description in the first
N orman reigns ; for even that of Clare was connected
with the local earldom of Hertford.

It is universally agreed that the only baronies known
for two centuries after the Conquest were in-
Questum aa c 'j ( ] en £ p[ ie tenure of land held immediately

baronies f ^’ om ^ 10 crown. There are, however, material
difficulties in the way of rightly understanding
their nature which ought not to be passed over, because
the consideration of baronial tenures will best develop
the formation of our parliamentary system. Two of our
most eminent legal antiquaries, Seldcn and Madox, have
entertained different opinions as to the characteristics
and attributes of this tenure.

According to the first, every tenant in chief by knight-
Theory of service was an honorary or parliamentary baron
Sdden; by reason of his tenure. All these were sum-
moned to the king’s councils, and were peers of his court.
Their baronies, or honours, as they were frequently
called, consisted of a number of knight’s fees ; that is, of
estates, from each of which the feudal service of a knight
was due ; not fixed to thirteen fees and a third, as has
been erroneously conceived, but varying according to
the extent of the barony and the reservation of service
at the time of its creation. W ere they more or fewer,
however, their owner was equally a baron, and sum-
moned to serve tbe king in parliament with his advice
and judgment, as appears by many records and passages
in history.

But about tbe latter end of John’s reign, some only of
the most Eminent tenants in chie£ were summoned by

moat and castle of that city in fee to him the service of three tenants in chief, with
and his heirs, the third penny of the all their fiefs ; to be held with all privi-
rent of the city, and of the pleas in the leges and liberties as fully as ever any
county, three manors And a forest, and earl in England had possessed them.

English Const.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

7

particular writs; the rest by one general summons
through the sheriffs of their several counties. This is
declared in the Great Charter of that prince, wherein he
promises that, whenever an aid or scutage shall be re-
quired, faciemus summoneri archiepiscopos, episcopos,
abbates, comites et majores barones regni sigillatim per
literas nostras. Et praiterea faciemus summoneri in
generali per vicecomites et ballivos nostros omnes alios
qui in capite tenent de nobis. Thus the barons are dis-
tinguished from other tenants in chief, as if the former
name were only applicable to a particular number of the
king’s immediate vassals. But it is reasonable to think
that, before this charter was made, it had been settled by
the law of some other parliament, how these greater
barons should be distinguished from the lesser tenants
in chief; else what certainty could there be in an ex-
pression so general and indefinite ? And this is likely
to have proceeded from the pride with which the ancient
and wealthy barons of the realm would regard those
newly created by grants of escheated honours, or those
decayed in estate, who yet were by their tenures on an
equality with themselves. They procured therefore two
innovations in their condition ; first that these inferior
barons should be summoned generally by the sheriff,
instead of receiving their particular writs, which made
an honorary distinction ; and next, that they should pay
relief, not, as for an entire barony, one hundred marks ;
but at the rate of five pounds for each knight’s fee w r hich
they held of the crown. This changed their tenure to
one by mere knight-service, and their denomination to
tenants in chief. It was not difficult, afterwards, for the
greater barons to exclude any from coming to parliament
as such without particular writs directed to them, for
which purpose some law was probably enacted in the
reign of Henry III. If indeed we could place reliance
on a nameless author whom Camden has quoted, this
limitation of the peerage to such as were expressly sum-
moned depended upon a statute made soon after the
battle of Evesham. But no one has ever been able to
discover Camden’s authority, and the change was, pro-
bably, of a much earlier date. 1

» Selden's Works, vol. Hi. p. 713-743.

8

QUESTION AS TO THE Chap. VIII. Part III.

Such is the theory of Selden, which, if it rested less
upon conjectural alterations in the law, would
0 a ox ’ undoubtedly solve some material difficulties
that occur in the opposite view of the subject. According
to Madox, tenure by knight-service in chief was always
, distinct from that by barony. It is not easy,

vatious however, to point out the characteristic differ-

•on both. ences of the two ; nor has that eminent anti-
quary, in his large work, the Baronia Anglica, laid down
any definition, or attempted to explain the real nature of
a barony. The distinction could not consist in the num-
ber of knight’s fees ; for the barony of Hwayton consisted
of only three ; while John de Baliol held thirty fees by
mere knight-service. k Nor does it seem to ha we consisted
in the privilege or service of attending parliament, since
all tenants in chief were usually summoned. But what-
ever may have been the line between these modes of
tenxlre, there seems complete proof of their separation
long before the reign of John. Tenants in chief are
enumerated distinctly from earls and barons in the
charter of Henry I. Knights, as well as barons, are
named as present in the parliament of Northampton in
1165, in that held at the same town in 1176, and upon
other occasions.™ Several persons appear in the Liber
Niger Scaccarii, a roll of military tenants made in the
age of Henry II., who held single knight’s fees of the
crown. It is, howover, highly probable, that, in a lax
sense of the word, these knights may sometimes have
been termed baroils. The author of the Dialogus de
Scaccario speaks of those holding greater or lesser
baronies, including, as appears by the context, all tenants
in chief. 11 The former of these seem to be the majores
barones of King John’s Charter. And the secundse
dignitatis barones, said by a contemporary historian to
have been present in the parliament of Northampton,
were in all probability no other than the knightly tenants
of the crown. 0 For the word baro, originally meaning

k Lyttelton’s Henry II. vol. ii. p. 212. name was sometimes improperly applied.
m Hody on Convocations, p. 222, 234. This was very consistent with their opi*
n Lib. ii. c. 9. nion, that the commons were a part of

° Hody and Lord Lyttelton maintain parliament at that time. But Hume,
these “barons of the second rank” to assuming at once the truth of their in-
have been the sub- vassals of the crown; terpretation in this instance, and the
tenants of the great barons to whom the falsehood of their system, treats it as a

English Const.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

9

only a man, was of very large significance, and is not
unfrequently applied to common freeholders, as in the
phrase of court-baron. It was used too for the magis-
trates or chief men of cities, as it is still for the judges
of the exchequer, and the representatives of the Cinque
Ports. 1 *

The passage however before cited from the Great
Charter of J ohn affords one spot of firm footing in the
course of our progress. Then, at least, it is evident that
all tenants in chief were entitled to their summons ; the
greater barons by particular writs, the rest through one
directed to their sheriff. The epoch when all, who,
though tenants in chief, had not been actually sum-
moned, were deprived of their right of attendance in
parliament, is again involved in uncertainty and con-
jecture. The unknown writer quoted by Camden seems
not sufficient authority to establish his assertion, that
they were excluded by a statute made after the battle of
Evesham. The principle was most likely acknowledged
at an earlier time. Simon do Montfort summoned only
twenty-three temporal peers to his famous parliament.
In the year 1255 the barons complained that many of
their number had not received their writs according to
the tenor of the charter, and refused to grant an aid to
the king till they were issued.^ But it would have been
easy to disappoint this mode of packing a parliament, if
an unsummoned baron could have sat by mere right of
his tenure. The opinion of Selden, that a law of exclu-
sion was enacted towards the beginning of Henry’s reign
is not liable to so much objection. But perhaps it is
unnecessary to frame an hypothesis of this nature.
Writs of summons seem to have been older than the
time of John ; r and when this had become the customary
and regular preliminary of a baron’s coming to parlia-
ment, it was a natural transition to look upon it as an
indispensable condition ; in times when the prerogative
was high, the law unsettled, and the service in parlia-

deviation from the established rule, and clause to that effect, contained in his
a proof of the unsettled state of the con- father's charter, had been omitted,
stitution. r Henry II., in 1175, forbad any of

P [Note II.] those who had been concerned in the

<1 M. Paris, p. 785. The barons even late rebellion to come to his court with-
tell the king that this was contrary to out a particular summons. Carte, voLii.
his charter, in which nevertheless the d. 249.

10

TENANTS IN CHIEF. Chap. VIII. Part III.

ment deemed by many still more burthensorae than
honourable. Some omissions in summoning the king’s
tenants to former parliaments may perhaps have pro-
duced the above-mentioned provision of the Great
Charter, which had a relation to the imposition of taxes
wherein it was deemed essential to obtain a more uni-
versal consent than was required in councils held for
state, or even for advice.*

It is not easy to determine how long the inferior
Whether tenants in chief continued to sit personally in
S e chi^ uailts P ar kament. I* 1 ike charters of Henry III., the
attended clause which we have been considering is
mider ment omitted : and 1 think there is no express proof
Henry in. remaining that the sheriff was over directed to
summon the king’s military tenants within his county, in
the manner which the charter of J ohn required. It ap-
pears however that they were in fact members of parliar-
ment on many occasions during Henry’s reign, which
shows that they were summoned either by particular
writs or through the sheriff ; and the latter is the more
plausible conjecture. There is indeed great obscurity
as to the constitution of parliament in this reign ;
and the passages which I am about to produce may
lead some to conceive that the freeholders were represented
even from its beginning. 1 rather incline to a different
opinion.

In the Magna Charta of 1 Henry III, it is said : Pro

hac donatione et concessione archiepiscopi, epis-

copi, comites, barones, milites, et liber& tenentes, et
omnes de regno nostro, dederunt nobis quintam decimam
partem omnium bonorum suonnn mobilium. 1 So in a
record of 19 Henry III. : Comites, et barones, et omnes
alii de toto regno nostro Angliae, spontanea voluntate
sua concesserunt nobis efficax auxilium." The largeness
of these words is, however, controlled by a subsequent
passage, which declares the tax to be imposed ad man-
datum omnium comitum et baronum et omnium alioram
qui de rvobis tenent in capite. And it seems to have been a
general practice to assume the common consent of all ranks

• Upon the subject of tenure by ba- England, vol. ii. p. 247.
rony, besides the writers already quoted, t Hody on Convocations, p. 293.

see West's Inquiry into the Method of u Brady, Introduction to History of

creating Peers, and Carte's History of England. Appendix, p. 43.

English Const. PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.

11

to that which had actually been agreed by the higher.
In a similar writ, 21 Henry ILL, the ranks of men are
enumerated specifically ; archiepiscopi, episcopi, abbates,
priorcs, et clerici terras liabentes quae ad ecclesias suas
non pertinent, comites, barones, milites, et liberi homines,
pro so et suis villanis, nobis concesserunt in auxilium
tricesimam partem omnium mobilium.* In the close roll
of the same year, we have a writ directed to the arch-
bishops, bishops, abbots, priors, earls, barons, knights,
and freeholders (liberi homines) of Ireland, in which an
aid is desired of "them, and it is urged that one had been
granted by his fideles Angliae/

But this attendance in parliament of inferior tenants in
chief, some of them too poor to have received knighthood,
grew insupportably vexatious to themselves, and was not
well liked by the king. He knew them to be dependent
upon the barons, and dreaded the confluence of a multi-
tude, who assumed the privilege of coining in arms to
the appointed place. So inconvenient and mischievous
a scheme could not long subsist among an advancing
people, and fortunately the true remedy was discovered
with little difficulty.

The principle of representation, in its widest sense, can
hardly be unknown to any government not origin and
purely democratical. In almost every country process of
the sense of the whole is understood to be ary^ep^ 1 "
spoken by a part, and the decisions of a part are station,
binding upon the whole. Among our ancestors the lord
stood in the place of his vassals, and, still more un-
questionably, the' abbot in that of his monks. The
system indeed of ecclesiastical councils, considered as
organs of the church, rested upon the principle of a vir-
tual or an express representation, and had a tendency
to render its application to national assemblies more
familiar.

The first instance of actual representation which occurs
in our history is only four years after the Conquest;
when William, if we may rely on Hoveden, caused
twelve persons skilled in the customs of England to be
chosen from each county, who were sworn to inform him
rightly of their laws ; and these, so ascertained, were rati-

* Brady’s History of England, vol. i. Appendix, p. 182.
r Brady’s Introduction, p. 94.

12

ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

fied by the consent of the great council. This, Sir
Matthew Hale asserts to he u as sufficient and effectual a
parliament as ever was held in England/ 7 1 But there is
no appearance that these twelve deputies of each county
were invested with any higher authority than that of
declaring their ancient usages. No stress can he laid at
least on this insulated and anomalous assembly, the
existence of which is only learned from an historian of a
century later.*

We find nothing that can arrest our attention, in search-
ing out the origin of county representation, till we come
to a writ in the fifteenth year of John, directed to all the
sheriffs in the following terms: Rex Vicecomiti N.,
salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod omnes milites ballivas
tuse qui summoniti fuerunt esse apud Oxoniam ad Nos a
die Omnium Sanctorum in quindecim dies venire facias
cum armis suis : corpora vero baronum sine armis singu-
lariter, et quatuor discretes milites de comitatu tuo, illuc
venire facias ad eundem terminum, ad loquendum nobis-
cum de negotiis regni nostri. For the explanation of
this obscure writ 1 must refer to what Prvnne has said ; b
but it remains problematical whether these four knights

* Hist of Common Law, vol. i. p. 202. manifest that they were chasten by the

* This assembly is mentioned in the people; the word summoneri fecit is first
preamble, and afterwards, of the spurious used ; and afterwards, elect is de (not in)
laws of Edward the Confessor ; and I singulis totius pa true comitatibus, This
have been accused of passing it over too might be construed of the king’s selec-
slightly. The fact certainly does not tion; but perhaps the common inter-
rest on the authority of Hoveden, who pretation is rattier the better,
transcribes these laws rerhattm; and they William, the compiler informs us,
are in substance an ancient document having heard some of the Danish laws.
There seems to me somewhat rather was disposed to confirm them in pre-
suspicions in this assembly of delegates; ference to those of England; but yielded
it looks like a pious fraud to maintain to the supplication of the delegates,
the old Saxon jurisprudence, which was omnes compatriot®, qui leges naira-
giving way. But even if we admit the verant, that he would permit them to
fact as here told, 1 still adhere to the retain the customs of their ancestors,
assertion that there is no appearance that imploring him by the soul of King
these twelve deputies of each county Edward, cujug erant leges, nec alioram
were invested with any higher authority exterorum. The king at length gave
than that of declaring their ancient way, by the advice and request of big
usages. Any supposition of a real legis- barons, consilio et precatu baronum,
lative parliament would be inconsistent These of course were Normans; but
with all that we know of the state of what inference can be drawn In favour
England under the Conqueror. And of parliamentary representation in
what an anomaly, upon every constitu- England from the behaviour of the
tional principle, Anglo-Saxon or Nor- rest ? They were supplicants, not legiB-
man, would be a parliament of twelve lators.

from each county! Nor is. It perfectly b 2 Piyxme'B Register, p. 1&

English Const. PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.

13

(the only clause which concerns our purpose) were to be
elected by the county or returned in the nature of a jury,
at the discretion of the sheriff. Since there is no suffi-
cient proof whereon to decide, we can only say with
hesitation, that there may have been an instance of county
representation in the fifteenth year of J ohn.

We may next advert to a practice, of which there is
very clear proof in the reign of Henry III. Subsidies
granted in parliament were assessed, not as in former
times by the justices upon their circuits, but by knights
freely chosen in the county court. This appears by two
writs, one of the fourth and one of the ninth year of
Henry III. C At a subsequent period, by a provision of
the Oxford parliament in 1258, every county elected four
knights to inquire into grievances, and deliver their
inquisition into parliament. 11

The next writ now extant, that wears the appearance
of parliamentary representation, is in the thirty-eighth of
Henry III. This, after reciting that the earls, barons,
and other great men (casteri magnates) were to meet at
London three weeks after Easter, with horses and arms,
for the purpose of sailing into Gascony, requires the

c Brody's Introduction, Appendix, pp. the measure might lead to conciliate the
41 and 44. “The language of these minds of those who would otherwise
writs implies a distinction between such have had no voice in the legislative as-
as were styled barons, apparently in- sembly.” Report of Lords’ Committee,
eluding the earls and the four knights p. 61.

who were to come from the several This would be a remarkable fact, and
counties ad loquendum, and who were the motive is by no means improbable,
also distinguished from the knights sum- being perhaps that which led to the large
xnoned to attend with arms, in per- provisions for summoning tenants in
formance, it should seem, of the military chief, contained in the charter of John,
service due by their respective tenures ; and afterwards passed over. But this
and the writs, therefore, apparently dis- parley of the four knights from each
tinguished certain tenants in chief by county, for they are only summoned ad
knight-service from barons, if the knights loquendum, may not amount to bestow-
so summoned to attend with arms were ing on them any legislative power. It is
required to attend by reason of their re- nevertheless to be remembered that the
spective tenures in chief of the king, word parliament meant, by its etymology,
How the four knights of each county nothing more ; and the words, ad loquen-
who were thus summoned to confer with dum, may have been used in reference to
the king were to be chosen, whether by that. It is probable that these writs were
the county, or according to the mere not obeyed; w r e have no evidence that
will of the sheriff, does not appear ; but they were, and it was a season of great
It seems most probable that they were confusion, very little before the granting
intended by the king as representatives of the charter of Henry III.
of the freeholders of each county, and to d Brady's Hist, of England, voL i,
balance the power of the hostile nobles, Appendix, p. 227.
who were then leagued against him ; and

14

ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

sheriff to compel all within his jurisdiction, who hold
twenty pounds a year of the king in chief, or of those in
ward of the king, to appear at the same time and place.
And that besides those mentioned he shall cause to come
before the king’s council at Westminster, on the fifteenth
day after Easter, two good and discreet knights of his
county, whom the men of the county shall have chosen
for this purpose, in the stead of all and each of them, to
consider, along with the knights of other counties, what
aid they will grant the king in such an emergency. 0 In
the principle of election, and in the object of the assem-
bly, which was to grant money, this certainly resembles
a summons to parliament. There are indeed anomalies
sufficiently remarkable upon the face of the writ which
distinguish this meeting from a regular parliament. But
when the scheme of obtaining money from the commons
of shires through the consent of their representatives had
once been entertained, it was easily applicable to more
formal councils of the nation/

A few years later there appears another writ analogous
to a summons. During the contest between Henry III. and
the confederate barons in 1261, they presumed to call a
sort of parliament, summoning three knights out of every
county, secum tractaturos super communibus negotiis
regni. This we learn only by an opposite writ issued
by the king, directing the sheriff to enjoin these knights
who had been convened by the earls of Leicester and
Gloucester to their meeting at St. Alban’s, that they
should repair instead to the king at Windsor, and to no
other place, nobiscum super pnemissis colloquium habi-
turos. g It is not absolutely certain that these knights
were elected by their respective counties. But even if
they were so, this assembly has much less the appear-
ance of a parliament, than that in the thirty-eighth of
Henry III.

® 2 Prynne, p. 23. record now extant, of an attempt to sub-

t “ This writ tends strongly to show stitute representatives elected by bodies
that there then elisted no law by which of men for the attendance of the indi-
a representation either of the king’s vidual so to be represented, personally
tenants in capite or of others, for the or by their several procurators, in an
purpose of constituting a legislative as- assembly convened for the purpose ot
sembly, or for granting an aid, was spe- obtaining an aid." lteport, p. 95.
daily provided ; and it seems to have 8 2 Prynne, p. 27.
been the first instance appearing on any

English Const. PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION. 15

At length, in the year 1265, the forty-ninth of Henry
III., while he was a captive in The hanHs of Simon de
Montfort, writs were issued in his name to a ll tKe sEeritfs,
(IiTOTtTIg iKehTtoTelurh two knightsfor tFe^i^y of their
county, with two cittz ms or burgesses for every city and
c’ontainefwrFKiffitr'^

aT*wm^ of the commons hecomea

indisputably manifest ; even should^w^reject altogether
tlie more equivocal instances of it which have just been
enumerated.

If indeed the knights were still elected by none but
the kings military tenants, if the mode of re- whether the
presentation was merely adopted to spare them knights were
the inconvenience of personal attendance, the treehoMers
immediate innovation in our polity was not very in general,
extensive. This is an interesting, but very obscure,
topic of inquiry. Spelman and Brady, with other writers,
have restrained tlie original right of election to tenants
in cliief, among whom, in process of time, those holding
under mesne lords, not being readily distinguishable in
the hurry of an election, contrived to slide in, till at
length their encroachments were rendered legitimate by
the statute 7 Hen. IV. c. 1 5, which put all suitors to the
county court on an equal footing as to the elective fran-
chise. The argument on this side might be plausibly
urged with the following reasoning.

The spirit of a feudal monarchy, which compelled
every lord to act by the advice and assent of his imme-
diate vassals, established no relation between him and
those who held nothing at his hands. They were in-
cluded, so far as he was concerned,^ in their superiors;
and the feudal incidents were due to him from the whole
of his vassal’s fief, whatever tenants might possess it by
sub-infeudation. In England the tenants in chief alone
were called to the great councils before representation
was thought of, as is evident both by tho charter of John,
and by the language of many records ; nor were any
others concerned in levying aids or escuages, which were
only due by virtue of their tenure. These military ten-
ants were become, in the reign of Henry III., far more
numerous than they had been under the Conqueror. If
we include those who held of the king ut de honore,
that is, the tenants of baronies escheated or in ward, who

16

ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF Chai>. VIII. Part III.

may probably have enjoyed the same privileges, being
subject in general to the same burdens, their number
will be greatly augmented, and form no inconsiderable
portion of the freeholders of the kingdom. After the
statute commonly called Quia emptores in the eighteenth
of Edward I. they were likely to increase much more,
as every licensed alienation of any portion of a fief by a
tenant in chief would create a new freehold immediately
depending upon the crown. Many of these tenants in
capite held very small fractions of knight’s fees, and
were consequently not called upon to receive knight hood.
They were plain freeholders holding in chief, and the
liberi homines or libere tenentes of those writs which
have been already quoted. The common form indeed of
writs to the sheriff directs the knights to be chosen de
communitate comitatus. But the word communitas, as
in boroughs, denotes only the superior part : it is not
unusual to find mention in records of communitas populi
or omnes de regno, where none are intended hut the
barons, or at most the tenants in chief. If we look at-
tentively at the earliest instance of summoning knights
of shires to parliament, that in 88 Henry III., which has
been noticed above, it will appear that they could only
have been chosen by military tenants in chief. The
object of calling this parliament, if parliament it were,
was to obtain an aid from the military tenants, who,
lidding less than a knight’s fee, were not required to do
personal service. None then, surely, but the tenants in
chief could be electors upon this occasion, which merely
respected their feudal duties. Again, to come much
lower down, we find a series of petitions in the reigns of
Edward III. and Bichard II., which seem to lead us to
a conclusion that only tenants in chief were represented
by the knights of shires. The writ for wages directed
the sheriff to levy them on the commons of the county,
both within franchises and without (tarn intra libertatos
quam extra). But the tenants of lords holding by
barony endeavoured to exempt themselves from this
burthen, in which they seem to have been countenanced
by the king. This led to frequent remonstrances from
the commons, who finally procured a statute, that all
lands which had been accustomed to contribute towards
the wages of members should continue to do so, even

English Const. PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION.

17

though they should be purchased by a lord. h But, if
these mesne tenants had possessed equal rights of voting
with tenants in chief, it is impossible to conceive that
they would have thought of claiming so unreasonable an
exemption. Yet, as it would appear harsh to make any
distinction between the rights of those who sustained an
equal burthen, we may perceive how the freeholders
holding of mesne lords might on that account obtain
after the statute a participation in the privilege of tenants
in chief. And without supposing any partiality or con-
nivance, it is easy to comprehend that, while the nature
of tenures and services was so obscure as to give rise to
continual disputes, of which the ancient records of the
King’s Bench are full, no sheriff could be very accurate
in rejecting the votes of common freeholders repairing
to the county court, and undistinguishable, as must he
allowed, from tenants in capite upon other occasions,
such as serving on juries, or voting on the election of
coroners. To all this it yields some corroboration, that
a neighbouring though long hostile kingdom, who bor-
rowed much of her law from our own, has never admitted
any freeholders, except tenants in chief of the crown, to
a suffrage in county elections. These attended the par-
liament of Scotland in person till 1428, when a law of
James I. permitted them to send representatives. 5

Such is, I think, a fair statement of the arguments that
might be alleged by those who would restrain the right
of election to tenants of the crown. It may be urged on
the other side that the genius of the feudal system was
never completely displayed in England ; much less can
we make use of that policy to explain institutions that
prevailed under Edward I. Instead of aids and scutages
levied upon the king’s military tenants, the crown found
ample resources in subsidies upon moveables, from which
no class of men was exempted. But the statute that
abolished all unparliamentary taxation led, at least in
theoretical principle, to extend the elective franchise to
as large a mass of the people as could conveniently exer-
cise it. It was even in the mouth of our kings that
what concerned all should be approved by all. Nor is

h 12 Rlc. II. c. 12. Prynne’s 4th Re- p. 120, 357. But this law was not re-
plater. gularly acted upon till 1587. p. 368.

1 Pinkerton's Hist, of Scotland, vol. i.

VOL. Ill,

C

13 PARLIAMENTARY REPRESENTATION. Chap. VilL Part III.

the language of all extant writs less adverse to the sup-
position that the right of suffrage in county elections was
^ limited to tenants in chief. It seems extraordinary that
such a restriction, if it existed, should never be deducible
from these instruments; that their terms should inva-
riably be large enough to comprise all freeholders. Yet
no more is ever required of the sheriff than to return two
knights chosen by the body of the county. For they are
not only said to bo returned pro communitate, but
“ per communitatem,” and 4 4 de assensu totius communi-
tatis. ,, Nor is it satisfactory to allege, without any
proof, that this word should bo restricted to the tenants
in chief, contrary to what must appear to be its obvious
meaning.* Certainly, if these tenants of the crown had
found inferior freeholds usurping a right of suffrage, wo
might expect to find it the subject of some legislative
provision, or at least of some petition and complaint.
And, on the other hand, it would have been considered
as unreasonable to levy the wages due to knights of the
shire for their service in parliament on those who had no
share in their election. But it appears by writs at the
very beginning of Edward II.’s reign, that wages were
levied u de communitate comitatus.” m It will scarcely
be contended that no one was to contribute under this
writ but tenants in chief ; and yet the word commu-
nity can hardly be applied to different persons, when
it occurs in the same instrument and upon the same
matter. The series of petitions above mentioned relative
to the payment of wages rather tends to support a con-
clusion that all mesne tenants had the right of suffrage,
if they thought fit to exercise it, since it was earnestly
contended that they were liable to contribute towards

k What can one who adopts this
opinion of Dr. Brady say to the follow-
ing record? Rex militibus, liberis bo-
minibus, et toti communitati comitatus
Wygomi® tam intra liberates quam
extra, salutem. Cum comites, barones,
milites, liberi homines, et communi ta-
les comitatuum regni nostri vicesimam
omnium bonorum suorurn mobilium, ci-
vesque et burgenses et community tes
omnium civitatum et burgorum ejusdem
regni, necnon tenentes de antiquis do-
mlnicia corona? nostra quindecimam bo-

norum suorum mobilium nobis concesso-
runt. Pat. Hot 1 E. II. in Rot Pari,
vol. i. p. 442 . See also p. 24 ] and p. 269 .
If the word commnnitas is here used in
any precise sense, which, when possible,
we are to suppose in construing a legal
instrument, it must designate, not the
tenants in chief, but the inferior class,
who, though neither freeholders nor free
burgesses, were yet contributable to the
subsidy on their goods.

m Madox, Firma Burgi, p. 99 and p. 102
ncte Z.

English Const.

PROGRESS OF TOWNS.

19

that expense. No* does there appear any reason to doubt
that all freeholders, except those within particular fran-
chises, were suitors to the county court — an institution
of no feudal nature, and in which elections were to be
made by those present. As to the meeting to which
knights of shires were summoned in 38 Henry III., it
ought not to be reckoned a parliament, but rather one oi
those anomalous conventions which sometimes occurred
in the unfixed state of government. It is at least the
earliest known instance of representation, and leads us to
no conclusion in respect of later times, when the com-
mons had become an essential part of the legislature, and
their consent was required to all public burthens.

This question, upon the whole, is certainly not free
from considerable difficulty. The legal antiquaries are
divided. Prynne does not seem to have doubted but
that the knights were “ elected in the full county, by and
for the whole county,” without respect to the tenure of
the freeholders. 0 But Brady and Carte are of a different
opinion. 0 Yet their disposition to narrow the basis of
the constitution is so strong, that it creates, a sort of pre-
judice against their authority. And if I might offer an
opinion on so obscure a subject, I should be much inclined
to believe that, even from the reign of Heniy III., the
election of knights by all freeholders in the county-court,
without regard to tenure, was little, if at all, different
from what it is at present. 1 *

The progress of towns in several continental countries,
from a condition bordering upon servitude to Progress of
wealth and liberty, has more than once attracted towns *
our attention in other parts of the present work. Their
growth in England, both from general causes and imi-
tative policy, was very similar and nearly coincident.
Under the Anglo-Saxon line of sovereigns wo scarcely
can discover in our scanty records the condition of their
inhabitants, except retrospectively from the great survey
of Domesday Book, which displays the state of England
under Edward the Confessor. Some attention to com-
merce had been shown by Alfred and Athelstan ; and a
merchant who had made three voyages beyond sea was

n Prynne 's 2nd Register, p. 50.' enssed with much ability in the Edin-

° Carte’s Hist, of England, ii, 250. burgh Review, vol. xxvi. p. 341. [Ntyra

p The present question lias been dis- HI.]

c 2

20

PROGRESS OF TOWNS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

raised by law of tlie latter monarch to the dignity of a
Thane , q This privilege was not perhaps often claimed ;
but the burgesses of towns were already a distinct class
from the ceorls or rustics, and, though hardly free ac-
cording to our estimation, seem to have laid the foundation
of more extensive immunities. It is probable, at least,
that the English towns had made full as great advances
towards emancipation as those of France. At the Con-
quest we find the burgesses or inhabitants of towns
living under the superiority or protection of the king, or
of some other lord, to whom they paid annual rents, and
determinate dues or customs. Sometimes they belonged
to different lords, and sometimes the same burgess paid
customs to one master, while he was under the jurisdic-
tion of another. They frequently enjoyed special privi-
leges as to inheritance; and in two or three instances
they seem to have possessed common property, be-
longing to a sort of guild or corporation, and in some
instances, perhaps, had a municipal administration by
magistrates of their own choice/ Besides the regular

Wilkins, p. 71.

r Burgensis Exon i a 1 urbis habent extra
civitatem terrain duodeeim carucatarum :
quae null am consuQtudincm reddunt nisi
ad ipsam civitatem. Domesday, p. 100.
At Canterbury the burgesses had forty-
five houses without, the city, de quibus
ipsi habebant gablum et consnetudinem,
rex autem socam et sacam ; ipsi quoque
bur ge uses habebant de rege triginta tres
acras prati in gildam, suam. p. 2. In
Lincoln and Stamford some resident pro-
prietors, called Lagemanni, had jurisdic-
tion (socam et sacam) over their tenants.
But nowhere have I been able to discover
any trace of municipal self-government ;
unless Chester may be deemed an excep-
tion, where we read of twelve judices
civitatis ; but by whom constituted does
not appear. The word lageman seems
equivalent to judex. The guild men-
tioned above at Canterbury was, in ail
probability, a voluntary association : so
at Dover we find the burgesses’ guild-
hall, gihalla burgensium. p. 1.

Many of the passages in Domesday
relative to the state of burgesses are col-
lected in Brady's History of Boroughs ;
a work which, if read with due suspicion

of the author’s honesty, will convey a
great deal of knowledge.

Since the former part of this note was
written, 1 have met with a charter
granted by Henry II. to Lincoln, which
seems to refer, more explicitly than any
similar instrument, to municipal privi-
leges of jurisdiction enjoyed by the citi-
zens under Edward the Confessor. These
charters, it is well known, do not always
recite what is true; yet it is possible
that the citizens of Lincoln, which had
been one of the five Danish towns, some-
times mentioned with a sort of distinc-
tion by writers before the Conquest, might
be in a more advantageous situation than
the generality of burgesses. Sciatis me
concessisse civibus meis Lincoln, omnes
liberates et consuetudines et leges tmas,
quas habuerunt tempore Edward! et
Will, et Henr. regum Anglice, et gildam
suam mercatoriam de hominibus civitatis
et de aliis mercatoribus comitatus, sicut
illam habuerunt tempore pmlictormn,
antecessorum nostrorum, regum Anglia*,
melius et liberius. Fit omnes homines
qui infra quatuor divisas civitates manent
et mereatum deducunt, sint. ad gildas, et
consuetudines et ossisas civitatis, sicut

English Const. TOWNS LET IN FEE-FARM.

21

payments, which were in general not heavy, they were
liable to tallages at the discretion of their lords. This
burthen continued for two centuries, with no limitation,
except that the barons were latterly forced t<? ask permis-
sion ot the king before they set a tallage on their tenants,
which was commonly done when he imposed one upon
his own . 8 Still the towns became considerably richer;
for the profits of their traffic were undiminished by com-
petition, and the consciousness that they could not be
individually despoiled of their possessions, like the vil-
leins of the country around, inspired an industry and
perse verance which all the rapacity of Tsorman kings and
barons was unable to daunt or overcome.

One of the earliest and most important changes in the
condition of the burgesses was the conversion Towns let
of their individual tributes into a perpetual rent iri foe-farm,
from the whole borough. The town was then said to be
affinned, or let in fee-farm, to the burgesses and their
successors for ever . 1 Previously to such a grant the lord
held the town in his demesne, and was the legal proprietor
of the soil and tenements ; though I by no means appre-
hend that the burgesses were destitute of a certain estate
in their possessions. But of a town in fee-farm he only
kept the superiority and the inheritance of the annual
rent, which he might recover by distress . 11 The burgesses
held their lands by burgage-tenure, nearly analogous to,
or rather a species of, free socage.* Perhaps before the
pant they might correspond to modem copyholders. It
is of some importance to observe that tho lord, by such
a grant of the town in fee-farm, whatever wo may think
of its previous condition, divested himself of his property,

melius fuerunt temp. Edw. et Will, et tion, and I think it perfectly clear that
Hen. regum Anglia?. Itymer, t. i. p. 40 the guilds maae by-laws for the regu-
(edit. 1816). lation of their members. Yet this is

I am indebted to the friendly remarks something different from municipal juris-
of the periodical critic whom 1 have be- diction over all the inhabitants of a town,
fore mentioned for reminding me of other [Note IV.]

charters of the same age, expressed in a • Madox, Hist of Exchequer, c. 17.
similar manner, which in my haste I had t Madox, Firms Burgi, p. 1. There Is

overlooked, though printed in common one instance, I know not if any more
books. But whether thege general words could be found, of a flrma burgi before
ought to outweigh the silence of Domes- the Conquest. It was at Huntingdon
day Book I am not prepared to decide. Domesday, p. 203.

I have admitted below that the posses- u Madox, p. 12, 13.
sion of corporate property implies an * Id. p, 21.
elective government for its administra-

22

CHARTERS OF INCORPORATION. Chap. VIII. Part III

or lucrative dominion over the soil, in return for the per-
petual rent ; so that tallages subsequently set at his own
discretion upon the inhabitants, however common, can
hardly be considered as a just exercise of the rights of
proprietorship.

Under such a system of arbitrary taxation, however, it

Charters of was ev ^ en ^ mos * tyrant that the

incorpora- wealth of his burgesses was his wealth, and
tion. their prosperity his interest ; much more were
liberal and sagacious monarchs, like Henry II., inclined
to encourage them by privileges. From the time of
William Rufus there was no reign in which charters were
not granted to different towns of exemption from tolls on
rivers and at markets, those lighter manacles of feudal
tyranny ; or of commercial franchises ; or of immunity
from the ordinary jurisdictions ; or, lastly, of internal
self-regulation. Thus the original charter of Henry I.
to the city of London y concedes to the citizens, in addi-
tion to valuable commercial and fiscal immunities, the
right of choosing their own sheriff and justice, to the
exclusion of every foreign jurisdiction. 2 These grants,
however, were not in general so extensive till the reign
of John. a Before that time the interior arrangement of
towns had received a new organization. In the Saxon
period we find voluntary associations, sometimes re-
ligious, sometimes secular ; in some cases for mutual
defence against injury, in others for mutual relief in

y I have read somewhere that this seems problematical,
charter was granted in 1101. But the 2 This did not, however, save the
instrument itself, which is only preserved citizens from paying one hundred marks
by an Inspeximus of Edward IV., does to the king for this privilege. Mag.
not contain any date. Eymer, t. i. p. 31 Rot. 5 Stepb. apud Madox, Hist. Ex-
(edifc. 1816). Could it be traced so high, chequer, t. xi. I do not know that the
the circumstance would be remarkable, charter of Henry 1. can be suspected;
as the earliest charters granted by but Brady, in his treatise of Boroughs
Louis VT., supposed to be the father of (p. 38, edit. 1777), does not think proper
these institutions, are several years later, once to mention it; and indeed uses

It is said by Mr. Thorpe (Ancient many expressions incompatible with its
Laws of England, p. 267), that, though existence.

there are ten witnesses, he only finds one a Blomefleld, Hist, of Norfolk, vol. ff.
who throws any light on the date: namely, p, 16, says that Henry J. granted the
Hugh Bigod, who succeeded his brother same privileges by charter to Norwich in
William in 1120. But Mr. Thorpe does 1122 which London possessed. Yet it
not mention in what respect he succeeded, appears that the king named the port-
It was as dapifer regis ; hut he is not so reeve or provost; but Blomefleld Bug*
named in the charter. Dugdale’s Ba- gests that he was probably recommended
ronage, p. 132. The date, therefore, still by the citizens, the office being annual

English Const. CHARTERS OF INCORPORATION.

23

poverty. These were called guilds, from the Saxon verb
gildan , to pay or contribute, and exhibited the natural, if
not the legal, character -of corporations . 11 At the time of
the Conquest, as has been mentioned above, such volun-
tary incorporations of the burgesses possessed in some
towns either landed property of their own, or rights of
superiority over that of others. An internal elective
government seems to have been required for the ad-
ministration of a common revenue, and of other busi-
ness incident to their association . 0 They became more
numerous and more peculiarly commercial after that era,
as well from the increase of trade as through imitation
of similar fraternities existing in many towns of France.
The spirit of monopoly gave strength to those institu-
tions, each class of traders forming itself into a body, in
order to exclude competition. Thus were established
the companies in corporate towns, that of the Weavers in
London being perhaps the earliest ; d and these were suc-

b Madox. Firma Burgi, p. 23. Hickes
has given us a bond of fellowship among
the thanes of Cambridgeshire, containing
several curious particulars. A composi-
tion of eight pounds, exclusive, I conceive,
of the usual weregild, was to be enforced
from the slayer of any fellow. If a fellow
(gilda) killed a man of 1200 shillings
weregild, each of the society was to con-
tribute half a marc ; for a ceorl, two ora?
(perhaps ten shillings) ; for a Welshman,
one. If however this act was committed
wantonly, the fellow had no right to call
on the society for contribution. If one,
fellow killed another, he was to pay the
legal weregild to his kindred, and also
eight pounds to the society. Harsh words
used by one fellow towards another, or
even towards a stranger, incurred a fine.
No one was to eat or drink in the com-
pany of one who had killed his brother
fellow, unless in the presence of the king,
bishop, or alderman. Dissertutio Episto-
lary, p. 21.

We find in Wilkins’s Anglo-Saxon
Laws, p. 05, a number of ordinances
sworn to by persons both of noble and
ignoble rank (ge eorlisce ge ceorlisce),
arid confirmed by king Athelstan. These
are in the nature of by-laws for the re-
gulation of certain societies that had been
formed for the preservation of public
order. Their remedy was rather violent:

to kill aud seize the effects of all who
should rob any member of the associa-
tion. This property, after deducting the
value of the things stolen, was to be
divided into two parts; one given to the
criminal's wife if not an accomplice, the
other shared between the king and the
society.

In another fraternity among the clergy
and laity of Exeter ev^ry fellow was
entitled to a contribution in case of taking
a journey, or if hie house was burned.
Thus they resembled, in some degree,
our friendly societies ; and display an in-
teresting picture of manners, which has
induced me to insert this note, though
not greatly to the present purpose. See
more of the Anglo-Saxon guilds in
Turner’s History, vol. ii. p. 102. Socie-
ties of the same kind, for purposes of
religion, charity, or mutual assistance,
rather than trade, may be found long
afterwards. Blomefield’s Hist of Nor-
folk, vol. iii. p. 494.

c See a grant from Turstin, archbishop
of York, in the reign of Henry I., to the
burgesses of Beverley, that they may
have their hanshus (i. e. guildhall) like
those of York, et ibi sua statuta pertrac-
tent ad honorem Dei, &c. Rymer, t i. p.
10, edit. 1816.

d Madox, Firma Burgi, p. 189.

24 PROSPERITY OF ENGLISH TOWNS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

cessively consolidated and sanctioned by charters from
the crown. In towns not large enough to admit of dis-
tinct companies, one merchant guild comprehended the
traders in general, or the chief of them ; and this, from
the reign of Henry II. downwards, became the subject of
incorporating charters. The management of their internal
concerns, previously to any incorporation, fell naturally
enough into a sort of oligarchy, which the tenor of the
charter generally preserved. Though the immunities
might be very extensive, the powers were more or less
restrained to a small number. Except in a few places,
the right of choosing magistrates was first given by king
John; and certainly must rather be ascribed to his
poverty than to any enlarged policy, of which he 'was
utterly incapable.®

From the middle of the twelfth century to that of the
piw ^ rl thirteenth the traders of England became more
of English and more prosperous. The towns on the southern
towns. coast exported tin and other metals in exchange
for the wines of France ; those on the eastern sent corn
to Norway — the Cinque Ports bartered wool against the
stuffs of Flanders/ Though bearing no comparison with
the cities of Italy or the Empire, they increased suffi-
ciently to acquire importance at home. That vigorous
prerogative of the Norman monarchs, which kept down
the feudal aristocracy, compensated for whatever infe-
riority there might be in the population and defensible
strength of the English towns, compared with those on
the continent. They had to fear no petty oppressors, no
local hostility ; and if they could satisfy the rapacity
of the crown, were secure from all other grievances.

London London, far above the rest, our ancient and
n on ' noble capital, might, even in those early times,
be justly termed a member of the political system. This
great city, so admirably situated, was rich and populous
long before the Conquest. Bede, at the beginning of
the eighth century, speaks of London as a great market,
wnich traders frequented by land and sea. K It paid
15,000/. out of 82,000/., raised by Canute upon the
kingdom. 11 If we believe Kogcr Hoveden, the citizens

§ Idem, passim. A few of an earlier vol. ii. p. 170. Macpherson's Annals of
date may be found in the new edition of Commerce, vol. i. p. 331.

Kymer. s Marpherson, p. 245.

! Lyttelton’s History of Henry II., k Id. p. 282.

English Const.

LONDON.

25

of London, on the death of Ethelred II., joined with
part of the nobility in raising Edmund Ironside to the
throne. 1 Harold I., according to better authority, the
8axon Chronicle and William of Malmsbury, was elected
by their concurrence/ Descending to later history, we
find them active in the civil war of Stephen and Matilda.
The famous bishop of Winchester tells the Londoners
that they are almost accounted as noblemen on account
of the greatness of their city ; into the community of
which it appears that some barons had been received." 1
Indeed, the citizens themselves, or at least the principal
of them, were called barons. It was certainly by far
the greatest city in England. There have been different
estimates of its population, some of which are extrava-
gant ; but I think it could hardly have contained less
than thirty or forty thousand souls within its walls ; and
the suburbs were very populous." These numbers, the

* Gives Lundinenses, et pars nohiUum
qui eo tempore consistebant Lumlonia\
Clitonem Eudmundum tmanimi consensu
in regem levavere. p. 249.

k Chron. Saxon, p. 154. Malmsbury,
p, 76. He says the people of London
were become almost barbarians through
their intercourse with the Danes; propter
frequentem convictum.

m Lohdinenses, qui sunt quasi opti-
ma tes pro magnitudi no civitatis in Angli&.
Malmsb. p. 189. Tims too Matthew
Parish civcR Londinenses, qnos propter
dvitatis dignitatem et civium antiquam
libertatem Barones consuevimus appel-
lare. p. 744. And in another place : totius
civitatis fives, quos barones vocant. p.
835. Spelman says that the magistrates
of several other towns were called barons.
Glossary, Barones de London.

A singular proof of the estimation 'in
which the citizens of London held them-
selves in the reign of Richard 1. occurs
in the Chronicle of Jocelyn de Brake-
londe (p. 56— Camden Society, 1840).
They claimed to be free from toll in
every part of England, and in every
Jurisdiction, resting their immunity on
the antiquity of London (which was
coeval, they said, with Rome), and on its
rank as metropolis of the kingdom. Et
dicebant d ves Lundonienses fuisse quietos
de theloneo in omni foro, et semper et

nbique, per totam Angliam, h tempore
quo Roma primo fundata fuit, et civi-
tatem Lundonia*, eodem tempore fun-
datam, talem debere habere libertatem
per totam Angliam, et ratione civitatis
privilegiata* quae olim metropolis fuit et
caput regni, et ratione antiquitatis. Pal-
grave inclines to think that London
never formed part of any kingdom of the
Heptarchy. Introduction to Rot. Cur.
Regis, p. 95. But this seems to imply a
republican city in the midst of so many
royal states, which seems hardly pro-
bable. Certainly it seems strange, though
I cannot explain it away, that the capital
of England should have fallen, as we
generally suppose, to the small and ob-
scure kingdom of Essex. Winchester,
indeed, may be considered as having
become afterwards the capital during
the Anglo-Saxon monarchy, so far as
that it was for the most part the resi-
dence of our kings. But London was
always more populous;

n Drake, the historian of York, main-
tains that Loudon was less populous,
about the time of the Conquest, than that
city ; and quotes Hardynge, a writer of
Henry V/s age, to prove that the in-
terior part of the former was not closely
built. Eboracum, p. 91. York however
does not appear to have contained more
than 10,000 inhabitants at the accession

26

LONDON.

Ciiap. VIII. Part III,

enjoyment of privileges, and the consciousness of
strength, infused a free and even a mutinous spirit into
their conduct . 0 The Londoners were always on the
barons’ side in their contests with the crown. They
bore a part in deposing William Longohanip, the chan-
cellor and justiciary of Richard I. p They were distin-
guished in the great struggle for Magna Charta; the
privileges of their city are expressly confirmed in it ;
and the mayor of London was one of the twenty-five
barons to whom the maintenance of its provisions was
delegated. In the subsequent reign the citizens of
London were regarded with much dislike and jealousy
by the court, and sometimes suffered pretty severely at
its hands, especially after the battle of Evesliam. q

Notwithstanding the influence of London in these
seasons of disturbance, we do not perceive that it was
distinguished from the most insignificant town by greater
participation in national councils. Rich, powerful,
honourable, and high-spirited as its citizens had become,

of the Conqueror; and the very exagge- ° This seditious, or at least refractory
rations as to the populousness of I»ndon character of the Londoners, wa^displaycd
prove that it must have far exceeded that in the tumult headed by William Long-
number. Fitz-Steplien, the contemporary beard in the time of Richard I., and that
biographer of Thomas h Bucket, tells us under Constantine in 1222, the patriarchs
of 80,000 men capable of bearing amis of a long line of city demagogues. Hove*
within its precincts; where however his den, p. 7f>5. M. Paris, p. 154.
translator, Pegge, suspects a mistake of p Hoveden's expressions are very pre-
the MS. in the numerals. And this, with cise, and show that the share taken by
similar hyperboles, so imposed on the the citizens of London (probably the
judicious mind of Lord Lyttelton, that, mayor and aldermen) in this measure
finding in Peter of Blois the inhabitants was no tumultuary acclamation, but a
of London reckoned at quadragintamillia, deliberate concurrence with the nobility,
be has actually proposed to read quadrin- Cornea Johannes, et fere omnes episcopi,
genta. Hist Henry II., vol. iv. ad flnem. et comites AngUae eftdem die intraverant
It is hardly necessary to observe that Londonias ; et in crastino praidictus Jo-
the condition of agriculture and internal hannes frater regis, et archiepiscopus Ro-
communication would not have allowed thomagensis, et omnes episcopi, et co-
half that number to subsist. mites et barones, et cives Londonienses

The subsidy-roll of 1377, published in cum illis convenerunt in atrio ecclestae
the Archueologia, vol. vii., would lead to S. Pauli . . . Placuit ergo Johaimi fratri
a conclusion that all the inhabitants of regis, et omnibus eplscopis, et comitibus
London did not even then exceed 35,000. *et baronibus regrd, et civibus Londo-
If this be true, they could not have niarum, quod cancellarius illo depone-
amounted, probably, to so great a number retur, et deposuerunt eum, &c. p. 701.
two cor three centuries earlier. But the q The reader may consult, for a more
numbers given in that document have full account of the English towns before
been questioned as to Norwich upon the middle of the thirteenth century,
very plausible grounds, and seem rather Lyttelton's History of Henry II. vol. ii.
suspicious in the present instance, p. 174; and Macpherson's Annals of Com-
[Nor«V.] merce.

English Const. EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS.

27

it was very long before they found a regular place in
parliament. The prerogative of imposing tallages at
pleasure, unsparingly exercised by Henry III. even over
London/ left the crown no inducement to summon the
inhabitants of cities and boroughs. As these indeed
were daily growing more considerable, they were cer-
tain, in a monarchy so limited as that of England
became in the thirteenth century, of attaining, sooner
or later, this eminent privilege. Although therefore the
object of Simon de Mont fort in calling them to his par-
liament after the battle of Lewes was merely to
strengthen his own faction, which prevailed among the
commonalty, yet their permanent admission into the
legislature may be ascribed to a more general cause.
For otherwise it is not easy to see why the innovation
of an usurper should have been drawn into precedent,
though it might perhaps accelerate what the course of
affairs was gradually preparing.

It is well known that the earliest writs of summons
to cities and boroughs, of which we can prove First ram-
the existence, are those of {Simon de Montfort, moningof
earl of Leicester, bearing date 12th of Decern- paruamcnt,
her, 1 264, in the forty-ninth year of Henry III/ in 49 H -
After a long controversy almost all judicious inquirers
seem to have acquiesced in admitting this origin of
popular representation/ The argument may be very

r Frequent proofs of this may be
found in Madox. Hist, of Exchequer,
c. 17, as well as in Matt. Paris, who
laments it with indignation. Gives Loii-
dinenses, contra eonsuetudinem ct liber-
tfttem civitatis, quasi servi ultimo* con-
dition^, non sub nomine out titulo liberi
adjutorii, sod tallagii, quod multum eos
angebat, regi, licet inviti et renitentes,
numerare sunt coacti. p. 492. Hen ubi
est Londinensis. toties empta, toties con-
cessa, toties scrlpta, toties jurata libertas !
&c. p. 627. The king sometimes sus-
pended their market, that is, I suppose,
their right of toll, till his demands were
paid.

* These writs are not extant, having
perhaps never been returned; and con-
sequently we cannot tell to what par-
ticular places they were addressed. It
appears however that the assembly was

intended to be numerous ; for the entry
runs: scribitur civibus Ebor, civibus
Lincoln, et ca'teris burgis Anglia?. It
is singular that no mention is made of
Ivondon, which must have had some
special summons. Rymer, t. i. p. 803.
Ihigdalo, Summon! tioncs ad Parliameu-
tum, p. 1.

t It would ill repay any reader's dili-
gence to wade through the vapid and
diluted pages of Tyrrell; but whoever
would know what can be best pleaded
for a higher antiquity of our present
parliamentary constitution may have
recourse to llody on Convocations, and
Lord Lyttelton’s History of Henry II.
vol. ii. p. 276, and voL iv. p. 79-106. I
do not conceive it possible to argue the
question more ingeniously than has been
done by the noble writer last quoted.
Wbitelocke, in his commentary on the

28

EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS. Chap, VIII. Part III.

concisely stated. We find from innumerable records
tliat tbe king imposed tallages upon bis demesne
towns at discretion." No public instrument previous
to the forty-ninth of Ilenry III. names the citizens
and burgesses as constituent parts of parliament;
though prelates, barons, knights, and sometimes free-
holders, are enumerated;* while, since the undoubted
admission of the commons, they are almost invariably
mentioned. No historian speaks of representatives ap-
pearing for the people, or uses the word citizen or
burgess in describing those present in parliament. Such
convincing, though negative, evidence is not to be invar
lidated by some general and ambiguous phrases, whether
in writs and records or in historians/ Those monkish
annalists are poor authorities upon any point where
their language is to be delicately measured. But it is
hardly possible that, writing circumstantially, as Roger
de Iloveden and Matthew Paris sometimes did, concern-
ing proceedings in parliament, they could have failed to
mention the commons in unequivocal expressions, if any
representatives from that order had actually formed a
part of the assembly.

Two authorities, however, which had been supposed
Authorities to P rove a greater antiquity than we havo
in favour of assigned to the representation of the commons,
date arh<?r are deserving of particular consideration ; -the
st Albans, cases of St. Albans and Barnstaple. The bur-
gesses of St. Albans complained to the council in the
eighth year of Edward 11., that, although they held of
the king in capite, and ought to attend his parliaments
whenever they are summoned, by two of their number,
instead of all other services, as had been their custom in
all past times, which services the said burgesses and

parliamentary writ, has treated it very
much at length, but with no critical dis-
crimination. [Noth VII.]
u Madox, Hist of Exchequer, c. 17.

* The only apparent exception to this
Is in the letter addressed to the pope by
the parliament of 1246 ; the salutation
of which runs thus: Barones, proceres,
et magnates, ac nobUes portuum marts
haJbitatores , necnon et clerus et popuius
uuiversus, salutem. Matt Paris, p. 696.
It is plain, I think, from these words,

that some of the chief inhabitants of the
Cinque Ports, at tliat time very nourish-
ing towns, were present in this parlia-
ment But whether they sat as repro-
sentatives, or by a peculiar writ of sum-
mons, is not so evident; mid the latter
may be the more probable hypothesis of
the two.

y Thus Matthew Paris tells us that in
1237 the whole kingdom, regni totius
universitas, repaired to a parliament of
Henry III. p. 367.

English Const.

ST. ALBANS.

29

their predecessors had performed as well in the time of
the late king Edward and his ancestors as in that of the
present king until the parliament now sitting, the names
of their deputies having been constantly enrolled in
chancery, yet the sheriff of Hertfordshire, at the instiga-
tion of the abbot of tit. Albans, had neglected to cause
an election and return to be made ; and prayed remedy.
To this petition it was answered, “ Let the rolls of
chancery be examined, that it may appear whether the
said burgesses were accustomed to come to parliament,
or not, in the time of the king’s ancestors ; and let right
be done to them, vocatis evocandis, si necesse fuerit.” I
do not translate these words, concerning the sense of
which there has been some dispute, though not, appa-
rently, veiy material to the principal subject . 2

This is, in my opinion, by far the most plausible testi-
mony for the early representation of boroughs. The
burgesses of tit. Albans claim a prescriptive right from
the usage of all past times, and more especially those of
the late Edward and his ancestors. Could this be
alleged, it has been said, of a privilege at the utmost of
fifty years’ standing, once granted by an usurper, in the
days of the late king's father, and afterwards discon-
tinued till about twenty years before the date of their
petition, according to those who refer the regular appear-
ance of the commons in parliament to the twenty-third
of Edward I. ? Brady, who obviously felt the strength
of this authority, has shown little of his usual ardour
and acuteness in repelling it. It was observed, how-
ever, by Madox, that the petition of St. Albans contains
two very singular allegations : it asserts that the town
was part of the king’s demesne, whereas it had invariably
belonged to the adjoining abbey ; and that its burgesses
held by the tenure of attending parliament, instead of
all other services, contrary to all analogy, and without
parallel in the condition of any tenant in capite through-
out the kingdom. “ It is no wonder, therefore,” says
Hume, “ that a petition which advances two falsehoods
should contain one historical mistake, which indeed
amounts only to an inaccurate expression.” But it must
bo confessed that wo cannot so easily set aside the

Brady’s Introduction to IILst. of England, p. 38.

30

EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS. Chap. VIII. Part 111.

whole authority- of this record. For whatever assurance
the people of St. Albans might show in asserting what
was untrue, the king’s council must have been aware
how recently the deputies of any towns had been
admitted into parliament. If the lawful birth of the
House of Commons were in 1205, as is maintained by
Brady and his disciples, is it conceivable that, in 1315,
the council would have received a petition, claiming the
elective franchise by prescription, and have referred to
the rolls of chancery to inquire whether this had been
used in the days of the king’s progenitors ? I confess
that 1 see no answer which can easily he given to this
objection by such as adopt the latest epoch of borough
representation, namely, the parliament of 23 E. I.
But they are by no means equally conclusive against the
supposition that the communities of cities and towns,
having been first introduced into the legislature during
Leicester’s usurpation, in the forty-ninth year of Henry
III., were summoned, not perhaps uniformly, but
without any long intermission, to succeeding parlia-
ments. There is a strong presumption, from the
language of a contemporary historian, that they sat in
the parliament of 1269, four years after that convened
by Leicester. 11 It is more unequivocally stated by
another annalist that they were present in the first par-
liament of Edward I. held in 1 27 l. b Is or does a similar
inference want some degree of support from the pre-
ambles of the statute of Marlebridge in 51 II. 111., of
Westminster I. in the third, and of Gloucester in the
sixth, year of Edward L c And the writs are extant

a Convocatis universis Angliae prolatis thorities loss unquestionable are adduced
et magnatibus, necnon cunctatum rogni for the same purpose. Both this assembly
sui civitatum et burgorum potentiorlhus. and that mentioned l>y Wykes in 1269
Wykcs, in Gale, XV Scrip tores, t ii. were certainly parliaments, and acted at*
p. 88. I am indebted to Hody on Con- such, particularly the former, though
vocations for this reference, which seems summoned lor purposes riot strictly par-
to have escaped most of our constitu- liamentary.

tional writers. c T he statute of Marlebridge is said

b Hoc anno . . . convene runt archi- to be made eon vocal is discretioribus,
episcopl, episcopi, comites et baronet*, tarn majnribus qniim minoribus; that of
abba tea et priores, et de quolibet co- Westminster primer, par son conseil,
mitatu quatuor roilites, et de qu&libet et par rassentements des archievesques,
ci vitate quatuor. Annales Waverleienses e vesques, ablres, pri< >rs, cou rites, barons, et
in Gale, t. ii. p. 227. 1 was led to this tout le comniinality de la terre lllonques
passage by Atterbury, Rights of Con- summaries. T'he statute of Gloucester
vocations, p. 310, where some other au- runs, appelles les plus discretes de son

English Const.

ST. ALBANS.

31

which summon every city, borough, and market town to
send two deputies to a council in the eleventh year of
his reign. 1 call this a council, for it undoubtedly was
not a parliament. The sheriffs were directed to summon
personally all who held more than twenty pounds a year
of the crown, as well as four knights for each county in-
vested with full powers to act for the commons thereof.
The knights and burgesses thus chosen, as well as\he
clergy within the province of Canterbury, met at
Northampton; those within the province of York, at
that city. And neither assembly was opened by the
king. d This anomalous convention was nevertheless
one means of establishing the representative system, and,
to an inquirer free from technical prejudice, is little less
important than a regular parliament. X or have we long
to look even for this. In the same year, about eight
months after the councils at Northampton and York,
writs were issued summoning to a parliament at Shrews-
bury two citizens from London, and as many from each
of twenty other considerable towns.® It is a slight cavil

royaume, auxibien des graudes come des
mcinders. These preambles seem to have
satisfied Mr. Prvnne that tin* commons
were then represented, though the writs
are wanting; and certainly no one could
be less disposed to exaggerate their an-
tiquity. 2nd Register, p. 30.

d Brady’s Hist, of Englaritl, vol. ii.
Appendix ; Carte, vol. ii. p. 257.

1 ‘ This is commonly denominated the
parliament of Acton Burnell ; the clergy
and commons having sat in that town,
while the barons passed judgment upon
David prince of Wales at Shrewsbury.
The towns which were honoured with
the privilege of representation, and may
consequently be supposed to have been
at that time the most considerable in
England, were York, Carlisle, Scar-
borough, Nottingham, Grimsby, Lincoln,
Northampton, Lynn, Yarmouth, Col-
chester, Norwich, Chester, Shrewsbury,
Worcester, Hereford, Bristol, Canterbury,
Winchester, and Exeter. Kymer, t, ii.
p. 247.

“ Tiiis [the trial and judgment of
Llewellin] seems to have been the only
business transacted at Shrewsbury ; for
the bishops and abbots, and four ktiights

of each shire, and two representatives
of London mid nineteen other trading
towns, summoned to meet the same day
in parliament, are said to have sat at
Acton Burnell ; and thence the law made
f<»r the more easy recovery of the debts
of merchants is called the Statute of
Acton Burnell. It was probably made
at the request of the representatives of
the cities and boroughs present in that
parliament, authentic copies in the king’s
name being sent to seven of those trading
towns; but it runs only in the name
of the king and his council.” Carte, ii.
195, referring to Rot Wall. 11 Edw. I.
m. 2nd.

As the parliament was summoned to
meet at Shrewsbury, it may be presumed
that the Commons adjourned to Acton
Burnell. The word " statute ” implies
that some consent was given, though
the enactment came from the king and
council. It is entitled in the Book of
the Exchequer— des Estatus de Slopbury
ke sunt appele Actone Burnel. Ces
sunt les Estatus fez at Salopsebur, al
parlement procliein apres la fete Seint
Michel, Tan del reigne le Rey Edward,
Fit* ie Rey Henry, unaiine. Report cf

32 EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS. Ciiap. VIII. Part III.

to object that these were not directed as usual to the
sheriff of each county, but to the magistrates of each
place. Though a very imperfect, this was a regular and
unequivocal representation of the commons in parlia-
ment. But their attendance seems to have intermitted
from this time to the twenty-third year of Edward’s
reign. 1

Those to whom the petition of St. Albans is not satis-
factory will hardly yield their conviction to
Barnstaple. ^ Barnstaple. This town set forth in the

eighteenth of Edward III. that, among other franchises
granted to them by a charter of Athelstan, they had ever
since exercised the right of sending two burgesses to
parliament. The said charter, indeed, was unfortunately
mislaid ; and the prayer of their petition was to obtain
one of the like import in its stead. Barnstaple, it must
be observed, was a town belonging to Lord Audley, and
had actually returned members ever since the twenty-
third of Edward I. Upon an inquisition directed by the
king to be made into the truth of these allegations, it
was found that “ the burgesses of the said town were
wont to send two burgesses to parliament for the com-
monalty of the borough ; ” but nothing appeared as to
the pretended charter of Athelstan, or the liberties
which it was alleged to contain. The burgesses, dis-
satisfied with this inquest, prevailed that another should
be taken, which certainly answered better their wishes.
The second jury found that Barnstaple was a free
borough from time immemorial ; that the burgesses had
enjoyed under a charter of Athelstan, which had been
casually lost, certain franchises by them enumerated,
and particularly that they should send two burgesses to
parliament ; and that it would not be to the king’s pre-

Lords’ Committee, p. 191. The enact- afford a voucher for what is said iti my
ment by the king and council founded text, which has been controverted by a
on the consent of the estates was at learned antiquary.* It is certain that
Acton Burnell. And the Statute of the lords were at Shrewsbury in their
Merchants, 13 Edw. I., refers to that of judicial character condemning Llewelliu;
the 11th, as made by the king, a son but whether they proceeded afterwards
parlement que il tint h Acton Burnell, to Acton Burnell, and joined in the
and again mentions t’avant dit statu t statute, is not quite so clear,
fait h Acton Burnell. This seems to f [Note VI.J

Archaeological Journal, voi. ii. p. 337, by the Rev. W. HartslioruA

English Const.

BARNSTAPLE.

33

judice if he should grant them a fresh charter in terms
equally ample with that of his predecessor Athelstan.
But the following year we have another writ and another
inquest ; the former reciting that the second return had
been unduly and fraudulently made ; and the latter
expressly contradicting the previous inquest in many
points, and especially finding no proof of Athelstan’ s
supposed charter. Comparing the various parts of this
business, we shall probably be induced to agree with
Willis, that it was but an attempt of the inhabitants of
Barnstaple to withdraw themselves from the jurisdiction
of their lord. For the right of returning burgesses,
though it is the main point of our inquiries, was by no
means the most prominent part of their petition, which
rather went to establish some civil privileges of devising
their tenements and electing their own mayor. The
first and fairest return finds only that they were accus-
tomed to send members to parliament, which an usage
of fifty years (from 23 E. 1. to 18 E. 111.) was fully suf-
ficient to establish, without searching into more remote
antiquity/

It has, however, probably occurred to tho reader of
these two eases, St. Albans and Barnstaple, that the
representation of the commons in parliament was not
treated as a novelty, even in times little posterior to
those in which we have been supposing it to have
originated. In this consists, I think, the sole strength
of the opposite argument. An act in the fifth year of
Bichard 11. declares that, if any sheriff shall leave out
of his returns any cities or boroughs which be bound
and of old times were wont to come to the parliament,
he shall be punished as was accustomed to be done in
the like case in time past/ In the memorable assertion
of legislative right by the commons in the second of
Henry V. (which will be quoted hereafter) they affirm
that “ the commune of the land is, and ever has been , a
member of parliament.” 4 And the consenting suffrage
of our older law-books must be placed in the same scale.
The first gainsayers, I think, were Camden and Sir
Henry Spelman, who, upon probing the antiquities of

8 Willis, Notitia Parliamentaria, vol. h 5 Ric. II. stat. 2 , c. iv.
il. jk 312; Lyttelton’s Hist, of Hen. II., i Rot. Pari. vol. iv. p. 22 .
vol. iv. p. 89.

VOL. 111.

D

34

EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

our constitution somewhat more exactly than their pre-
decessors, declared that they could find no signs of the
commons in parliament till the forty-ninth of Henry III.
Prynne, some years afterwards, with much vigour and
learning, maintained the same argument, and Brady
completed the victory. But the current doctrine of
Westminster Hall, and still more of the two chambers of
parliament, was certainly much against these antiqua-
ries; and it passed at one time for a surrender of
popular principles, and almost a breach of privilege, to
dispute the lineal descent of the House of Commons
from the witenagemot. k

The true ground of these pretensions to antiquity was
a very well-founded persuasion that no other argument
would be so conclusive to ordinary minds, or cut short
so effectually all encroachments of the prerogative. The
populace of every country, but none so much as the
English, easily grasp the notion of right, meaning there-
by something positive and definite ; while the maxims
of expediency or theoretical reasoning pass slightly over
their minds. Happy indeed for England that it is so !
But we have here to do with the fact alone. And it
may be observed that several pious frauds were prac-
tised to exalt the antiquity of our constitutional liber-
ties. These began, perhaps, very early, when the
imaginary laws of Edward the Confessor were so ear-
nestly demanded. They were carried further under
Edward I. and his successor, when the fable of privileges

k Though such an argument would
not be conclusive, it might afford some
ground for hesitation, if the royal burghs
of Scotland were actually represented in
their parliament more than half a cen-
tury before the date assigned to the first
representation of English towns. Lord
Hailes concludes from a passage in
Fordun “that as early as 1211 bur-
gesses gave suit and presence in the great
council of the king’s vassals ; though the
contrary has been asserted with much
confidence by various authors." Annals
of Scotland, vol. i. p. 139. Fordun's words,
however, so far from importing that they
formed a member of the legislature,
which perhaps Lord Hailes did not mean
by the quaint expression “ gave suit and
presence,” do not appear to me conclusive

to prove that they were actually present
Hoc anno Rex Scotia? Willelmus magnum
tenuit consilium. Ubi, petito ab opti-
matibus auxilio, promise runt se daturos
decern miile marcas: prater burgenses
regni, qui sex millia promiserunt. Those
who know the brief and incorrect style
of chronicles will not think it unlikely
that the offer of 6000 marks by the bur-
gesses was not made in parliament, but
in consequence of separate requisitions
from the crown. Pinkerton is of opinion
that the magistrates of royal burghs
might upon this, and perhaps other occa-
sions, have attended at the bar of parlia-
ment with their offers of money. But
the deputies of towns do not appear as a
part of parliament till 1326. Hist of
Scotland, vol. L p. 352,371.

English Const. DEPUTIES FROM BOROUGHS.

35

granted by the Conqueror to the men of Kent was
devised; when Andrew Horn tilled his Mirrour of
Justices with fictitious tales of Alfred ; and, above all,
when the 14 Method of holding parliaments in the time
of Ethelred ” was fabricated, about the end of Kichard
II. ’s reign ; an imposture which was not too gross to
deceive Sir Edward Coke. m

There is no great difficulty in answering the question
why the deputies of boroughs were finally and Causeg of
permanently ingrafted upon parliament by Ed- summoning
ward L n The government was becoming con- fn!m tleB
stantly more attentive to the wealth that com- troughs,
merce brought into the kingdom, and the towns were
becoming more flourishing and more independent. But
chiefly there was a much stronger spirit of general
liberty and a greater discontent at violent acts of pre-
rogative from the era of Magna ilmrta; after which au-
thentic recognition of free principles many acts which
had seemed before but the regular exercise of authority
weie looked upon as infringements of the subject’s
right. Among these the custom of setting tallages at
discretion would naturally appear the most intolerable;
and men were unwilling to remember that the bur-
gesses who paid them were indebted for the rest of their
possessions to the bounty of the crown. In Edward I/s
reign, even before the great act of Confirmation of the
Charters had rendered arbitrary impositions absolutely
unconstitutional, they might perhaps excite louder
murmurs than a discreet administration would risk.
Though the necessities of the king, therefore, and his
imperious temper often led him to this course, ° it was a

m [Note VI I.]

n These expressions cannot appear too
strong. But it is very remarkable that
to the parliament of 18 Edward 111. the
writs appear to have summoned none of
the towns, but only the counties. Willis,
Notit. Parliament, vol. i. Preface, p. 13.
Prynne’s Register, 3rd part, p. 144. Yet
the citizens and burgesses are once, but
only once, named as present in the par-
liamentary roll ; and there is, in general,
a chasm in place of their names, where
the different ranks present are enume-
rated. Rot. Pari. vol. ii. p. 146. A sub-
sidy was granted at this parliament ; so

that, if the citizens and burgesses were
really not summoned, it is by far the
most violent stretch of power during the
reign of Edward III. But 1 know of
no collateral evidence to illustrate or dis-
prove it.

° Tallages were imposed without con-
sent of parliament in 17 E. I. Wykes,
p. 117; and in 32 E. I. Brady’s Hist
of Eng. vol. ii. In the latter instance
the king also gave leave to the lay and
spiritual nobility to set a tallage on their
own tenants. This was subsequent to
the Confirmatio Chartarum, and unaues
tionably illegal.

36

DEPUTIES FROM BOROUGHS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

more prudent counsel to try the willingness of his
people before he forced their reluctance. And the
success of his innovation rendered it worth repetition.
Whether it were from the complacency of the commons
at being thus admitted among the peers of the realm, or
from a persuasion that the king would take their money
if they refused it, or from inability to withstand the
plausible reasons of his ministers, or from the private
influence to which the leaders of every popular assembly
have been accessible, much more was granted in sub-
sidies after the representation of the towns commenced
than had ever been extorted in tallages.

To grant money was, therefore, the main object of
their meeting ; and if the exigencies of the administrar
tion could have been relieved without subsidies, the
citizens and burgesses might still have sat at home and
obeyed the laws which a council of prelates and* barons
enacted for their government. But it is a difficult ques-
tion whether the king and the peers designed to make
room for them, as it were, in legislation ; and whether
the power of the purse drew after it immediately, or
only by degrees, those indispensable rights of consenting
to laws which they now possess. There are no sufficient
means of solving this doubt during the reign of Edward
I. The writ in 22 E. I. directs two knights to be chosen
cum plena potestate pro se et tota communitate eomi-
tatus praedicti ad consulendum et consentiendum pro se
et communitate ilia, his quae comites, barones, et pro-
ceres praedicti concorditer ordinaverint in pimmissis.
That of the next year runs, ad faciendum tunc quod de
communi consilio ordinabitur in praemissis. The same
words are inserted in the writ of 26 E. I. In that of
28 E. I. the knights are directed to be sent cum plena
potestate audiendi et faciendi quae ibidem ordinari con-
tigerint pro communi commodo. Several others of the
same reign have the words ad faciendum. The diffi-
culty is to pronounce whether this term is to be inter-
preted in the sense of performing or of enacting ; whether
the representatives of the commons were merely to
learn from the lords what was to be done, or to bear
their part in advising upon it. The earliest writ, that
of 22 E. I., certainly implies the latter; and I do not
know that any of the rest are conclusive to the contrary.

English Const. TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.

37

In tho reign of Edward II. the words ad consentiendum
alone, or ad faciendum et consentiendum, begin; and
from that of Edward III. this form has been constantly
used. p It must still, however, be highly questionable
whether the commons, who had so recently taken their
place in parliament, gave anything more than a con-
structive assent to the laws enacted during this reign.
They are not even named in the preamble of any statute
till the last year of Edward I. Upon more than one
occasion the sheriffs were directed to return the same
members who had sat in the last parliament, unless pre-
vented by death or infirmity. 4

It has been a very prevailing opinion that parliament
was not divided into two houses at the first ad- Atwhat
mission of the commons. If by this is only meant time pariia-
that the commons did not occupy a separate Jvkjed^
chamber till some time in the reign of Edward into two
III., the proposition, true or false, will be of little boilses -
importance. They may have sat at the bottom of Westmin-
ster Hall, while the lords occupied the upper end. But
that they were ever intermingled in voting appears incon-
sistent with likelihood and authority. The usual object
of calling a parliament was to impose taxes ; and these for
many years after the introduction of the commons were
laid in different proportions upon the three estates of
the realm. Thus in the 23 E. I. the earls, barons, and
knights gave the king an eleventh, the clergy a tenth ;
while he obtained a seventh from the citizens and bur-
gesses ; in the twenty -fourth of the same king the two
former of these orders gave a twelfth, the last an eighth ;
in the thirty-third year a thirtieth was the grant of the
barons and knights and of the clergy, a twentieth of the
cities and towns ; in the first of Edward II. the counties
paid a twentieth, the towns a fifteenth ; in the sixth of
Edward III. the rates were a fifteenth and a tenth/
These distinct grants imply distinct grantors ; for it is
not to be imagined that the commons intermeddled in

** Prynne's 2nd Register. It may be assemblies. Id. p. 92.
remarked that writs of summons to great q 28 E. I., fb Prynne’s 4th Register,

councils never ran ad faciendum, but ad p. 12 ; 9 E. II. (a great council), p. 48 .
tractandum, consulendum et consentien- r Rrady’s Hist of England, vol. ii.
dum ; from which some would infer that p. 40; Parliamentary History, vol. L
faciendum had the sense of enacting; p. 206 ; Rot Pari. t. ii. p. 66.
since statutes could not be passed m such

38

DIVISION OF PARLIAMENT Chap. VIII. Part III.

those affecting the lords, or the lords in those of the
commons. In fact, however, there is abundant proof of
their separate existence long before the seventeenth of
Edward III., which is the epoch assigned by Carte," or
even the sixth of that king, which has been chosen by
some other writers. Thus the commons sat at Acton
Burnell in the eleventh of Edward I., while the upper
house was at Shrewsbury. In the eighth of Edward II.
“ the commons of England complain to the king and
his council, &c.’ M These must surely have been the
commons assembled in parliament, for who else could
thus have entitled themselves ? In the nineteenth of
the same king we find several petitions, evidently pro-
ceeding from the body of the commons in parliament,
and complaining of public grievances. 1 * The roll of 1 E.
III., though mutilated, is conclusive to show that sepa-
rate petitions were then presented by the commons,
according to the regular usage of subsequent times.*
And indeed the preamble of 1 E. III., stat. 2, is appa-
rently capable of no other inference.

As the knights of shires correspond to the lower
nobility of other feudal countries, we have less cause to
be surprised that they belonged originally to the same
branch of parliament as the barons, than at their subse-
quent intermixture with men so inferior in station as
the citizens and burgesses. It is by no means easy to
define the point of time when this distribution was
settled ; but I think it may be inferred from the rolls of
parliament that the houses were divided as they are at
present in the eighth, ninth, and nineteenth years of
Edward II. y This appears, however, beyond doubt in
the first of Edward III.* Yet in the sixth of the same
prince, though the knights and burgesses are expressly
mentioned to have consulted together, the former taxed
themselves in a smaller rate of subsidy than the latter.*

The proper business of the House of Commons was to
petition for redress of grievances, as much as to provide
for the necessities of the crown. In the prudent fiction
of English law no wrong is supposed to proceed from

• Carte, vol. li. p. 451 ; Parliamentary x I'd. vol. if. p. 7.

History, vol. i. p. 234. J Id. p. 2*9, 351, 430.

t Rot Pari. vol. i. p. 289. * Id. p. 5.

* Id. p. 430. m Id. p. 86

English Const.

INTO TWO HOUSES.

39

the source of right. The throne is fixed upon a pin-
nacle, which perpetual beams of truth and justice irra-
diate, though corruption and partiality may occupy the
middle region and cast their chill shade upon all below.
In his high court of parliament a king of England was
to learn where injustice had been unpunished and
where right had been delayed. The common courts of
law, if they were sufficiently honest, were not suffi-
ciently strong, to redress the subject’s injuries where the
officers of the crown or the nobles interfered. To par-
liament he looked as the great remedial court for relief
of private as well as public grievances. For this cause
it was ordained in the fifth of Edward II. that the king
should hold a parliament once, or, if necessary, twice
every year; “that the pleas which have been thus
delayed, and those where the justices have differed,
may be brought to a close.” b And a short act of 4 Ed-
ward III., which was not very strictly regarded, pro-
vides that a parliament shall be held “ every year, or
oftener, if need be.” c By what persons, and under what
limitations, this jurisdiction in parliament was exercised
will come under our future consideration.

The efficacy of a king’s personal character in so im-
perfect a state of government was never more strongly

b Rot. Pari. vol. i. p. 285.

c 4E.H1. c. 14. Annual sessions of
parliament seem fully to satisfy the
words, and still more the spirit, of this
act, and of 36 K. 111. c. 10; which how-
ever are rej>euled by implication from the
provisions of 6 Will. III. c. 2. But it
was very rare under the Rlantagenet
dynasty for a parliament to continue
more than a year.

It has been observed that this provi-
sion “had probably in view the admi-
nistration of justice by the king's court in
parliament” Report of L. C. p. 301.
And in another place:— “It is clear
that the word parliament in the reign of
Edward 1. was not used only to describe
a legislative assembly, but was the com-
mon appellation of the ordinary assembly
of the king’s great court or council ; and
that the legislative assembly of the realm,
composed generally, in and after the 23rd
of Edward 1., of lords spiritual and tem-
poral, and representative^ of the com-

mons, was usually convened to meet the
king’s council in one of these parlia-
ments.” p. 171.

Certainly the commons could not de-
sire to have an annual parliament in
order to make new statutes, much less to
grant subsidies. It was, however, im-
portant to present their petitions, and to
set forth their grievances to this high
court. AVe may easily reconcile the
anxiety so often expressed by the com-
mons to have frequent sessions of parlia-
ment, with the individual reluctance of
members to attend. A few active men
procured these petitions, which the ma-
jority could not with decency oppose,
since the public benefit was generally
admitted. Put when the writs came
down, every pretext was commonly made
use of to avoid a troublesome and ill-
remunerated journey to AVestminster.
For the subject of annual parliaments
see a valuable article by Allen in the
2sth volume of the Edinburgh Review.

40

EDWARD II.

Chap. VJ II. Part III.

exemplified than in the two first Edwards. The father,
a little before his death, had humbled his boldest oppo-
nents among the nobility ; and as for the commons, so
Edward II. ® ir f rom claiming a right of remonstrating, we
Petitions of have seen cause to doubt whether they were
Suringhis 1 accounted effectual members of the legislature
reign. for any purposes but taxation. But in the
very second year of the son's reign they granted the
twenty-fifth penny of their goods, 44 upon this condition,
that the king should take advice and grant redress upon
certain articles wherein they are aggrieved.” These
were answered at the ensuing parliament, and are entered
with the king’s respective promises of redress upon the
roll. It will be worth while to extract part of this re-
cord, that we may see what were the complaints of the
commons of England, and thdir notions of right, in 1309.
I have chosen on this as on other occasions to translate
very literally, at the expense of some stiffness, and per-
haps obscurity, in language.

44 The good people of the kingdom who are come hither
to parliament pray our lord the king that he will, if it
please him, have regard to his poor subjects, who are
much aggrieved by reason that they are not governed
as they should be, especially as to the articles of the
Great Charter ; arid for this, if it please him, they pray
remedy. Besides which, they pray their lord the king
to hear what has long aggrieved his people, and still
does so from day to day, on the part of those who call
themselves his officers, and to amend it, if he pleases.”
The articles, eleven in number, are to the following pur-
port : — 1. That the king’s purveyors seize great quantities
of victuals without payment ; 2. That new customs are
set on wine, cloth, and other imports ; 3. That the cur-
rent coin is not so good as formerly ; d 4, 5. That the
steward and marshal enlarge their jurisdiction beyond
measure, to the oppression of the people ; C>. That the
commons find none to receive petitions addressed to the
council ; 7. That the collectors of the king’s dues (per-
nours des prises) in towns and at fairs take moie than is

A This article is so expressed as to currency, and the whole tenor of these
make it appear that the grievance was articles relates to abuses of government,
the high price of commodities. Hut as I think it must have meant what I have
this was the natural effect of a degraded said in the text

English Const. PETITIONS OF PARLIAMENT.

41

lawful; 8. That men are delayed in their civil suits by
writs of protection ; 9. That felons escape punishment
by procuring charters of pardon ; 10. That the constables
of the king’s castles take cognizance of common pleas;
11. That the king’s escheators oust men of lands held by
good title, under pretence of an inquest of office.®

These articles display in a short compass the nature of
those grievances which existed under almost all the
princes of the Flantagenet dynasty, and are spread over
the rolls of parliament for more than a century after this
time. Edward gave the amplest assurances of putting an
end to them all, except in one instance, the augmented cus-
toms on imports, to which he answered, rather evasively,
that he would take them off till he should perceive
whether himself and his people derived advantage from
so doing, and act thereupon as he should be advised.
Accordingly, the next year, he issued writs to collect
these new customs again. But the Lords Ordainers
superseded the writs, having entirely abrogated all
illegal impositions/ It does not appear, however, that,
regard had to the times, there was anything very tyran-
nical in Edward’s government. He set tallages some-
times, like his lather, on his demesne towns, without
assent of parliament/ In the nineteenth year of his
reign the commons show that, ‘‘whereas we and our
ancestors have given many tallages to the king’s ances-
tors to obtain the charter of the forest, which charter we
have had continued by the present king, paying him
largely on our part ; yet the king’s officers of the forest
seize on lands, and destroy ditches, and oppress the
people, for which they pray remedy, for the sake of God
and his father’s soul.” They complain at the same time
of arbitrary imprisonment, against the law of the land/*
To both these petitions the king returned a promise of
redress ; and they complete the catalogue of customary
grievances in this period of our constitution.

During the reign of Edward 11. the rolls of parliament
are imperfect, and we have not much assistance from
other sources. The assent of the commons, which fre-
quently is not specified in the statutes of this age,'

c Pry nne’s 2nd Register, p. 68. Pari. vol. i. p. 449.

t Id. p. 1 5. Rot Pari. vol. i. p. 430.

* Madox, Firma Burgi, p. C ; Rot. i It is however distinctly specified in

42

EDWAKD III.

Chap. VIII. Pakt III.

appears in a remarkable and revolutionary proceeding,
the appointment of the Lords Ordainers in 1312. in
this case it indicates that tho aristocratic party then
combined against the crown were desirous of conciliating
popularity. An historian relates that some of the com-
mons were consulted upon the ordinances to be made for
the reformation of government.” 1

During the long and prosperous reign of Edward III.
va a in the efforts of parliament in behalf of their
The com- country were rewarded with success in esta-
“Kmi blushing upon a firm footing three essential
rights. principles of our government— the illegality of
raising money without consent ; the necessity that tho
two houses should concur for any alterations in the law ;
and, lastly, the right of the commons to inquire into
public abuses, and to impeach public counsellors. By
exhibiting proofs of each of these from parliamentary
records 1 shall be able to substantiate the progressive
improvement of our free constitution, which was prin-
cipally consolidated during the reigns of Edward 111.
and his two next successors. Brady, indeed, Carte, and
the authors of the Parliamentary History, have trod
already over this ground ; but none of the three can be
considered as familiar to the generality of readers, and 1
may at least take credit for a sincerer love of liberty
than any of their writings display.

In the sixth year of Edward III. a parliament was
Kemon- called to provide for the emergency of an Irish
» trances rebellion, wherein, “ because the king could not
levying send troops and money to Ireland without the
“St aid of h' K P e °pl e > the prelates, earls, barons,
consent, and other great men, and the knights of shires,

*tat 7 Edw. II. and in 12 Edw. II., and of prelates, earls, and barons.” p. 259.
equivalent words are found in other sta- We have no record of this parliament ;
tutes. Though often wanting, the testi- but in that of 5 Edw. 11. it is recited—
mony to the constitution of parliament is Come le seizieme jour de Mara Tan de
sufficient and conclusive. notre regne tierce, a I’honeur de JDieu

k Hot ParL vol. i. p. 281. et pour le bien de nous et de nostre

*n Walsingbam, p. 97. The Lords’ roiaume, eussions grants de notre franche
committee “ have found no evidence of votont^, par nos iettres ouvertes aux
any writ issued for election of knights, prelatz, countes, et barons, et communes
citizens, and burgesses to attend the same de dit roiaumt, qu’ils pulssent eslire cer-
meetingB ; from the subsequent docu- tain persones de« prelate, corates, et
ments it seems probable that none were barons, Ac. Rot. Pari. I. 281. The in-
issned, and that the parliament which ference. therefore of the committee seems
assembled at Westminster consisted only erroneous. [Note VIII.]

English Const. REMONSTRANCES OF PARLIAMENT.

43

and all the commons, of their free will, for the said
purpose, and also in order that the king might live
of his own, and not vex his people by excessive prises,
nor in other manner, grant to him the fifteenth penny,
to levy of the commons," and the tenth from the cities,
towns, and royal demesnes. And the king, at the re-
quest of the same, in ease of his people, grants that the
commissions lately made to certain persons assigned to
set tallages on cities, towns, and demesnes throughout
England shall be immediately repealed ; and that in
time to come he wrill not set such tallage, except as it
has been done in the time of his ancestors, and as he
may reasonably do.” °

These concluding words are of dangerous implication ;
and certainly it was not the intention of Edward, in-
ferior to none of his predecessors in the love of power, to
divest himself of that eminent prerogative, which, how-
ever illegally since the Confirmatio Chartarum, had been
exercised by them all. But the parliament took no
notice of this reservation, and continued with unshaken
perseverance to insist on this incontestable $nd funda-
mental right, which he was prone enough to violate.

In the thirteenth year of tliil reign the lords gave
their answor to commissioners sent to open the parlia-
ment, and to treat with them on the king’s part, in a
sealed roll. This contained a grant of the tenth sheaf,

n “ La commonaltee ” seems in this tallage set without their consent? The
place to mean the tenants of land, or silence of the rolls of parliament would
commons of the counties, in contradis- furnish but a poor argument. But in
tinction to citizens and burgesses. fact their language is expressive enough.

° Rot Pari. vol. ii. p. 66. The Lords’ The several ranks of lords and commons
committee observe on this passage in the grant the fifteenth penny from the corn-
roll of parliament., that “ the king's right monalty, and the teuth from the cities,
to tallage his cities, boroughs, and de- boroughs, and demesnes of the king, “ that
mesnes seems not to have been ques- our lord the king may live of his own,
tioned by the parliament, though the and pay for his expenses, and not aggrieve
commissions for setting the tallage were his people by excessive (outraiouses)
objected to.” p. 305. But how can we prises, or otherwise.” And upon this
believe that after the representatives of the king revokes the commission in the
these* cities and borouglis had sat, at least words of the text Can anything be clearer
at times, for two reigns, and after the ex- than that the parliament, though in a
plicit renunciation of ail right of tallage much gentler tone than they came after-
by Edward 1. (for it was never pretended wards to assume, intimate the illegality
that the king could lay a tallage on any of the late tallage ? As to any other
towns which did not hold of himself), objection to the commissions, which the
there could have been a parliament which committee suppose to have been taken.
*' did not question” the legality of a nothing appears on the roiL

44 REMONSTRANCES OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

fleece, and lamb. But before they gave it they took care
to have letters patent showed them, by which the com-
missioners had power 44 to grant some graces to the great
and small of the kingdom.” 4 4 And the said lords,” the
roll proceeds to say, “will that the imposition (male-
toste) which now again has been levied upon wool be
entirely abolished, that the old customary duty be kept,
and that they may have it by charter, and by enrolment
in parliament, that such custom be never more levied,
and that this grant now made to the king, or any other
made in time past, shall not turn hereafter to their charge,
nor be drawn into precedent.” The commons, who gave
their answer in a separate roll, declared that they could
grant no subsidy without consulting their constituents ;
and therefore begged that another parliament might be
summoned, and in the mean time they would endeavour,
by using persuasion with the people of their respective
counties, to procure the grant of a reasonable aid in the
next parliament. 17 They demanded also that the imposi-
tion on wool and lead should be taken as it used to be in
former times, 44 inasmuch as it is enhanced without assent
of the commons, or of the lords, as we understand ; and
if it be otherwise demanded, that any one of the com-
mons may refuse it (le puisse arester), without being
troubled on that account (saunz estre chalange .)” H

Wool, however, the staple export of that age, was too
easy and tempting a prey to be relinquished by a prince
engaged in an impoverishing war. Seven years after-
wards, in 20 E. 111., we find the commons praying
that the great subsidy of forty shillings upon the sack of
wool be taken off ; and the old custom paid as heretofore
was assented to and granted. The government spoke
this time in a more authoritative tone. 44 As to this
point,” the answer runs, 44 the prelates and others, see-
ing in what need the king stood of an aid before his
passage beyond sea, to recover his rights and defend his
kingdom of England, consented, with the concurrence of
the merchants, that he should have in aid of his said
war, and in defence of his said kingdom, forty shillings
of subsidy for each sack of wool that should be exported
beyond sea for two years to come. And upon this grant

P Rot. Pari. vol. ii. p. 104.

<* Id.

English Const. REMONSTRANCES OF .PARLIAMENT.

45

divers merchants have made many advances to our lord
the king in aid of his war ; for which cause this sub-
sidy cannot be repealed without assent of the king and
his lords.” r

It is probable that Edward’s counsellors wished to
establish a distinction, long afterwards revived by those
of James L, between customs levied on merchandise at
the ports and internal taxes. The statute entitled Con-
firmatio Chartarum had manifestly taken away the
prerogative of imposing the latter, which, indeed, had
never extended beyond the tenants of the royal demesne.
But its language was not quite so explicit as to the
former, although no reasonable doubt could be enter-
tained that the intention of the legislature was to abrogate
every species of imposition unauthorized by parliament.
The thirtieth section of Magna Charta had provided that
foreign merchants should be free from all tributes, ex-
cept the ancient customs ; and it was strange to suppose
that natives were excluded from the benefit of that enact-
ment. Yet, owing to the ambiguous and elliptical
style so frequent in our older laws, this was open to dis-
pute, and could, perhaps, only be explained by usage.
Edward I., in despite of both these statutes, had set a
duty of threepence in the pound upon goods imported
by merchant strangers. This imposition was noticed as
a grievance in the third year of his successor, and re-
pealed by the Lords Ordainers. It was revived, how-
ever, by Edward III., and continued to be levied ever
afterwards."

Edward was led by the necessities of his unjust and
expensive war into another arbitrary encroachment, of
which we find as many complaints as of his pecuniary
extortions. The commons pray, in the same parliament
of 20 E. III., that commissions should not issue for
the future out of chancery to charge the people with
providing men-at-arms, hobelers (or light cavalry),
archers, victuals, or in any other manner, without con-

r Rot. I’arl. vol. ii. p. 161. cloth exported, on the pretence that, ae

• Caw of impositions in Howell’s State the wool must have paid a tax, he had a
Trials, vol. ii. p. 371-519; particularly right to place the wrought and unwrought
the argument of Mr. Hakewill. Hale’s article on an equality. The commons
Treatise on the Customs, in Hargrave’s remonstrated against this; but it was
Tracts, vol. i. not repealed. This took place about

Edward III. imposed another duty on 23 K. III. Hale’s Treatise, p. 175.

46 REMONSTRANCES OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

sent of parliament. It is replied to this petition, that
“ it is notorious how in many parliaments the lords and
commons had promised to aid the king in his quarrel
with their bodies and goods as far as was in their power ;
wherefore the said lords, seeing the necessity in which
the king stood of having aid of men-at-arms, hobelers,
and archers, before his passage to recover his rights be-
yond sea, and to defend his realm of England, ordained
that such as had five pounds a year, or more, in land on
this side of Trent should furnish men-at-arms, hobelers,
and archers, according to the proportion of the land they
held, to attend the king at his cost ; and some who would
neither go themselves nor find others in their stead were
willing to give the king wherewithal he might provide
himself with some in their place. And thus the thing
has been done, and no otherwise. And the king wills
that henceforth what has been thus done in this neces-
sity be not drawn into consequence or example.” 1

The commons were not abashed by these arbitrary pre-
tensions ; they knew that by incessant remonstrances
they should gain at least one essential point, that of pre-
venting the crown from claiming these usurpations as
uncontested prerogatives. The roll of parliament in the
next two years, the 21st and 22nd of Edw. III., is full
of the same complaints on one side, and the same alle-
gations of necessity on the other. u In the latter year
the commons grant a subsidy, on condition that no illegal
levying of money should take place, with several other
remedial provisions ; “and that these conditions should
be entered on the roll of parliament, as a matter of re-
cord, by which they may have remedy, if anything should
be attempted to the contrary in time to come.” From
this year the complaints of extortion become rather less
frequent; and soon afterwards a statute was passed, “ That
no man shall be constrained to find men-at-arms, hobe-
lers, nor archers, other than those which hold by such
services, if it be not by common assent and grant made
in parliament.” x Yet, even in the last year of Edward’s
reign, when the boundaries of prerogative and the rights
of parliament were better ascertained, the king lays a
sort of claim to impose charges upon his subjects in cases

Rot. Pari. p. 160.

p. 161, 166, 201.

25 E. III. stat v. c. 8.

English Const. REMONSTRANCES OF PARLIAMENT.

47

of great necessity, and for the defence of lib kingdom.*
But this more humble language indicates a change in
the spirit of government, which, after long fretting im-
patiently at the curb, began at length to acknowledge
the controlling hand of law.

These are the chief instances of a struggle between the
crown and commons as to arbitrary taxation ; but there
are two remarkable proceedings in the 45th and 40th of
Edward, which, though they would not have been
endured in later times, are rather anomalies arising out
of the unsettled state of the constitution and the recency
of parliamentary rights than mere encroachments of the
prerogative. In the former year parliament had granted
a subsidy of fifty thousand pounds, to be collected by an
assessment, of twenty-two shillings and threepence upon
every parish, on a presumption that the parishes in Eng
land amounted to forty-five thousand, whereas they were
hardly a fifth of that number. This amazing mistake
was not discovered till the parliament had been dissolved.
Upon its detection the king summoned a great council,
consisting of one knight, citizen, and burgess, named by
himself out of two that had been returned to the last
parliament. 2 To this assembly the chancellor set forth
the deficiency of the last subsidy, and proved by the
certificates of all the bishops in England how strangely
the parliament had miscalculated the number of parishes;
whereupon they increased the parochial assessment, by
their own authority, to one hundred and sixteen shil-
lings. 11 It is obvious that the main intention of parlia-
ment was carried into effect by this irregularity, which
seems to have been the subject of no complaint. In the
next parliament a still more objectionable measure was
resorted to ; after the petitions of the commons had been
answered, and the knights dismissed, the citizens and
burgesses were convened before the prince of Wales and
the lords in a room near the white chamber, and solicited
to renew their subsidy of forty shillings upon the tun of
wine, and sixpence in the pound upon other imports, for
safe convoy of shipping, during one year more, to which
they assented, “ and so departed.” b

y IU>t Pari. vol. ii. p. 366. b lh>t, Pari. p. 310. In the mode of

* Prynne’s 4th Register, p. 289. levying subsidies a remarkable Improve-

• Hot. ParL p. 304. wont took place early in the reign of

48 CONCURRENCE OF BOTH HOUSES Chap. VIII. Part III.

The second constitutional principle established in the
The con re ^S n °f Edward 11 1. was that the king and two
currence houses of parliament, in conjunction, possessed
houses 1 in exclusively the right of legislation. Laws were
legislation now declared to be made by the king at the
necessary. re q ues t 0 f the commons, and by the assent of
the lords and prelates. Such at least was the general
form, though for many subsequent ages there was no
invariable regularity in this respect. The commons,
who till this reign were rarely mentioned, were now as
rarely omitted in the enacting clause. In fact, it is evi-
dent from the rolls of parliament that statutes were
almost always founded upon their petition. 0 These peti-
tions, with the respective answers made to them in the
king’s name, were drawn up after the end of the session
in the form of laws, and entered upon the statute-roll.
But here it must be remarked that the petitions were
often extremely qualified and altered by the answer,
insomuch that many statutes of this and some later reigns
by no means express the true sense of the commons.
Sometimes they contented themselves with showing their
grievance, and praying remedy from the king and his
council. Of this one eminent instance is the great
statute of treasons. In the petition whereon this act is
founded it is merely prayed that, “ whereas the king’s
justices in different counties adjudge persons indicted
before them to be traitors for sundry matters not known
by the commons to be treason, it would please the king
by his council, and by the great and wise men of the
land, to declare what are treasons in this present parlia-
ment.” The answer to this petition contains the existing
statute, as a declaration on the king’s part. d But there

Edward III. Originally two chief taxors
were appointed by the king for each
county, who named twelve persons in
every hundred to assess the moveable
estate of all inhabitants according to its
real value. But in 8 E. III., on complaint
of parliament that these taxors were
partial, commissioners were sent round to
compound with every town and parish
for a gross sum, which was from thence-
lorth the fixed quota of subsidy, and
raised by the inhabitants themselves.
Brady on Boroughs, p. 81.

c Laws appear to have been drawn up,
and proposed to the two houses by the
king, down to the time of Edward JL
Ilale’s Hist, of Common Ijiw, p. 1G.

Sometimes the representatives of par-
ticular places address separate petitions
to the king and council ; as the citizens
of London, the commons of Devonshire,
Ac. These are intermingled with the
general petitions, and lx/lh together are
for the most part very numerous. In the
roll of 50 Kdw. ill. they amount to 140.
d Rot Pari. p. 239.

English Const. IN LEGISLATION NECESSARY. 49

is no appearance that it received the direct assent of the
lower house. In the next reigns we shall find more
remarkable instances of assuming a consent which was
never positively given.

The statute of treasons, however, was supposed to be
declaratory of the ancient law : in permanent and mate-
rial innovations a more direct concurrence of all the
estates was probably required. A new statute, to be
perpetually incorporated with the law of England, was
regarded as no light matter. It was a very common
answer to a petition of the commons, in the early part of
this reign, that it could not be granted without making
a new law. After the parliament of 14 E. III. a certain
number of prelates, barons, and counsellors, with twelve
knights and six burgesses, were appointed to sit from day
to (lay in order to turn such petitions and answers as
were fit to be perpetual into a statute ; but for such as
wore of a temporary nature Ihe king issued his letters
patent/* This reluctance to innovate without necessity,
and to swell the number of laws which all were bound
to know and obey with an accumulation of transitory
enactments, led apparently to the distinction
between statutes and ordinances. The latter tinKuiSied*"
are indeed defined by some lawyers to be regu- ^™ ances
lations proceeding from the king and lords
without concurrence of the commons. But if this be
applicable to some ordinances, it is certain that the word,
even when opposed to statute, with which it is often
synonymous, sometimes denotes an act of the wdiole
legislature. In the 37th of Edward III., when divers
sumptuary regulations against excess of apparel were
made in full parliament, “ it was demanded of the lords
and commons, inasmuch as the matter of their petitions
was novel and unheard of before, whether they would
have them granted by way of ordinance or of statute.
They answered that it would be best to have them by
way of ordinance and not of statute, in order that any-
thing which should need amendment might be amended
at the next parliament.” f So much scruple did they
entertain about tampering with the statute law of the
land.

0 liot. ParL p. 113.

VOL. III.

c p. 2 SC.

E

50

STATUTES DISTINGUISHED Chap. VIII. Pabt III.

Ordinances which, if it were not for their partial or
temporary operation, could not well be distinguished from
laws, 8 were often established in great councils. These
assemblies, which frequently occurred in Edward's reign,
were hardly distinguishable, except in name, from par-
liaments ; being constituted not only of those who were
regularly summoned to the house of lords, but of depu-
ties from counties, cities, and boroughs. Several places
that never returned burgesses to parliament have sent
deputies to some of these councils. 1 * The most remark
able of these was that held in the 27th of Edward 111.,
consisting of one knight for each county, and of two
citizens or burgesses from every city or borough wherein
the ordinances of the staple were established.* These
were previously agreed upon by the king and lords, and
copies given, one to the knights, another to the burgesses.
The roll tells us that they gave their opinion in writing
to the council, after much deliberation, and that this was
read and discussed by the great men. These ordinances
fix the staple of wool in particular places within Eng-
land, prohibit English merchants from exporting that
article under pain of death, inflict sundry other penalties,
create jurisdictions, and in short have the effect of a new
and important law. After they were passed the deputies
of the commons granted a subsidy for three years, com-
plained of grievances, and received answers, as if in a
regular parliament. But they were aware that these
proceedings partook of some irregularity, and endea-
voured, as was their constant method, to keep up the
legal forms of the constitution. In the last petition of
this council the commons pray, “ because many articles
touching the state of the king and common profit of his
kingdom have been agreed by him, the prelates, lords,
and commons of his land, at this council, that the said
articles may be recited at the next parliament, and
entered upon the roll ; for this cause, that ordinances and

8 “If there be any difference between Pari. voLTiLp. If ; vol. iv. p. 35.
an ordinance and a statute, as some have h These may be found in Willis’s
collected, it is but only this, that an Notitia Parliamentaria. In 28 E 1. the
ordinance is but temporary till confirmed universities were summoned to send
and made perpetual, but a statute is members to a great council in order to
perpetual at first, and so have some or- defend the king’s right to the kingdom oi
diuances also been.” Whitelocke on Par- Scotland. 1 Prynnc.
liafciciit* r v Writ, vol ii. p. 297. See Rot. i Rot. Pari. ii. 206.

English Const.

FROM ORDINANCES.

51

agreements made in council are not of record, as if they
liad been made in a general parliament.” This accord-
ingly was done at the ensuing parliament, when these
ordinances were expressly confirmed, and directed to he
“ holden for a statute to endure always.” k

It must be confessed that the distinction between ordi-
nances and statutes is very obscure, and perhaps no
precise and uniform principle can be laid down about it.
But it sufficiently appears that whatever provisions
altered the common law or any former statute, and were
entered upon the statute-roll, transmitted to the sheriffs,
and promulgated to the people as general obligatory
enactments, were holden to require the positive assent of
both houses of parliament, duly and formally summoned.

Before we leave this subject it will be proper to take
notice of a remarkable stretch of prerogative, which, if
drawn into precedent, would have effectually subverted
this principle of parliamentary consent in legislation. In
the 15th of Etlward III. petitions were presented of a
bolder and more innovating cast than was acceptable to
the court : — That no peer should be put to answer for
any trespass except before his peers ; that commissioners
should be assigned to examine the accounts of such as
had received public moneys ; that the judges and ministers
should be sworn to observe the Great Charter and other
laws ; and that they should be appointed in parliament.
The last of these was probably the most obnoxious; but
the king, unwilling to defer a supply which was granted
merely upon condition that these petitions should prevail,
suffered them to pass into a statute with an alteration
which did not take off much from their efficacy — namely,
that these officers should indeed be appointed by the
king with the advice of his council, but should surrender
their charges at the next parliament, and be there respon-
sible to any who should have cause of complaint against
them. The chancellor, treasurer, and judges entered
their protestation that they had not assented to the said
statutes, nor could they observe them, iii case they should
prove contrary to the laws and customs of the kingdom,
which they were sworn to maintain. 111 This is the first
instance of a protest on the roll of parliament against the.

k Rot. Pari. ii. 253, 25?. m Id* p. 131;

E 2 .

52

STATUTES AND ORDINANCES. Chap. VIII. Part 111

passing of an act. Nevertheless they were compelled to
swear on the cross of Canterbury to its observance . 11

This excellent statute was attempted too early for
complete success. Edward’s ministers plainly saw that
it left them at the mercy of future parliaments, who
would readily learn the wholesome and constitutional
principle of sparing the sovereign while they punished
his advisers. They had recourse therefore to a violent
measure, but which was likely in those times to be
endured. By a proclamation addressed to all the sheriffs
the king revokes and annuls the statute, as contrary to
the laws and customs of England and to his own just
rights and prerogatives, which he had sworn to preserve ;
declaring that he had never consented to its passing, but,
having previously protested that he would revoke it, lest
the parliament should have been separated in wrath, had
dissembled, as was his duty, and permitted the great seal
to be affixed ; , and that it appeared to the earls, barons,
and other learned persons of his kingdom with whom he
had consulted, that, as the said statute had not proceeded
from his own good will, it was null, and could not have
the name or force of. law.° This revocation of a statute,
as the price of which a subsidy had been granted, was a
gross infringement of law, and undoubtedly passed for
such at that time ; for the right was already clear, though
the remedy was not always attainable. Two years after-
wards Edward met his parliament, when that obnoxious
statute was formally repealed. 1 *

Notwithstanding the king’s unwillingness to permit
this control of parliament over his administration, he
suffered, or rather solicited, their interference in matters

“ Rot. Pari. ii. p. 128. of his crown and royalty, and against the

° Rymer, t. r. p. 282. This instru- law of the land in many points, he bad
ment betrays in its language Edward’s repealed it. But he would have the
consciousness of the violent step he was articles of the said statute examined, and
taking; and his wish to excuse it as much what should be found honourable and
as possible. profitable to the king and his people put

P The commons in the 17th of Edw. into a new statute, and observed in
III. petition that the statutes made two future/ 1 Rot. Pari. ii. 139. But though
years before be maintained in their force, this is inserted among the petitions, it
having granted for them the subsidies appears, from the roll a little before
which they enumerate, “which was a (p. 139, n. 23), that the statute was
great spoiling (ran^n) and grievous actually repealed by common consent;
charge for them.” But the king an- such consent at least being recited
swered that, “ perceiving the said statute whether truly or not
to be against his oath, and to the blemish

English Const. ADVICE OF PARLIAMENT NECESSARY. 53

which have since been reckoned the exclusive pro-
vince of the crown. This was an unfair trick Advice of
of his policy. He was desirous, in order to parliament
prevent any murmuring about subsidies, to mattenfo? 11
throw the war upon parliament as their own war and
act, though none could have been commenced peace ‘
more selfishly for his own benefit, or less for the advantage
of the people of England. It is called “ the war which our
lord the king has undertaken against his adversary of
France by common assent of all the lords and commons
of his realm in divers parliaments.” q And he several
times referred it to them to advise upon the subject of
peace. But the commons showed their humility or dis-
cretion by treating this as an invitation which it would
show good manners to decline, though in the eighteenth
of the king’s reign thoy had joined with the lords in
imploring the king to make an end of the war by a battle
or by a suitable peace/ “ Most dreaded lord,” they say
upon one occasion, “as to your war, and the equipment
necessary for it, we are so ignorant and simple that we
know not how, nor have the power, to devise ; wherefore
we pray your grace to excuse us in this matter, and that
it please you, with advice of the great and wise persons
of your council, to ordain what seems best to you for the
honour and profit of yourself and your kingdom; and
whatever shall be thus ordained by assent and agreement
for you and your lords we readily assent to, and will
hold it firmly established.” 8 At another time, after their
petitions had been answered, “it was shewed to the lords
and commons by Bartholomew de Burgliersh, the king’s
chamberlain, how a treaty had been set on foot between
the king and his adversary of France ; and how he had
good hope of a final and agreeable issue with God’s help ;
to which he would not come without assent of the lords
and commons. Wherefore the said chamberlain inquired
on the king’s part of the said lords and commons whether
they would assent and agree to the peace, in case it
might be had by treaty between the parties. To which
the said commons with one voice replied, that whatever
end it should please the king and lords to make of the
treaty would be agreeable to them. On which answer

*> Rymer, t v. p. 165.

r p. UH.

* 21 E. III. p. 165.

54

BIGHT OF COMMONS Chap. VIII. Part HI.

the chamberlain said to the commons, Then you will
assent to a perpetual treaty of peace if it can bo had.
And the said commons answered at once and unanimously,
Yes, yes,”* The lords were not so diffident. Their
great station as hereditary councillors gave them weight
in all deliberations of government ; and they seem to have
pretended to a negative voice in the question of peace.
At least they answer, upon the proposals made by David
king of Scots in 1368, which were submitted to them in
parliament, that, 4 4 saving to the said David and his heirs
the articles contained therein, they saw no way of making
a treaty which would not openly turn to the disherison
of the king and his heirs, to which they would on no
account assent ; and so departed for that day.” u A few
years before they had made a similar answer to some
other propositions from Scotland/ It is not improbable
that, in both these cases, they acted with the concurrence
and at the instigation of the king; but the precedents
might have been remembered in other circumstances.

A third important acquisition of the house of commons
night of the during this reign was the establishment of their
commons to right to investigate and chastise the abuses of
pubUc e mt0 administration. In the fourteenth of Edward
abuses. III. a committee of the lords’ house had been
appointed to examine the accounts of persons responsible
for the receipt of the last subsidy ; but it does not appear
that the commons were concerned in. this/ The unfortu-
nate statute pf the next year contained a similar provision,
which was annulled with, the rest. Many years elapsed
before the commons tried the force of their vindictive
arm. We must pass onward an entire generation of man,
and look at the parliament assembled in the ^fiftieth of
Edward III. Nothing memorable as to the interference
of the commons in government occurs before, unless it be
their request, in the forty-fifth of the king, that no
clergyman should be made chancellor, treasurer, or other
great officer ; to which the king answered that he would
do what best pleased his council.*

* 28 E. III. p. 261. tion of the commons doing this in the

u 28 E. III. p. 295. Carte says, “ the roll of parliament,
lords and commons, giving this advice x Bymer, p. 289.
separately, declared,” &c. Hist, of Eng- ^ p. 114.
land, vol. ii. p. 518. I can find no men- a p. 304.

English Const. TO INQUIRE INTO ABUSES.

55

It will be remembered by every one who has read
otir history that in the latter years of Edward’s Parliament
life his fame was tarnished by the ascendancy of 60 E.ui.
of the duke of Lancaster and Alice Ferrers. The
former, a man of more ambition than his capacity seems
to have warranted, even incurred the suspicion of medi-
tating to set aside the heir of the crown when the
Black Prince should have sunk into the grave. Whether
he were wronged or not fey these conjectures, they cer-
tainly appear to have operated on those most concerned
to take alarm at them. A parliament met in April,
1376, wherein the general unpopularity of the king’s
administration, or the influence of the prince of Wales,
led to very remarkable consequences. 14 After granting
a subsidy, the commons, 44 considering the evils of the
country, through so many wars and other causes, and
that the officers now in the king’s service are insufficient
without further assistance for so great a charge, pray
that the council be strengthened by the addition of ten
or twelve bishops, lords, and others, to be constantly at
hand, so that no business of weight should be despatched
without the consent of all ; nor smaller matters without
that of four or six.” b The king pretended to come with
alacrity into this measure, which was followed by a
strict restraint on them and all other officers from taking
presents in the course of their duty. After this, “ the
said commons appeared in parliament, protesting that
they had the same good will as ever to assist the king
with their lives and fortunes ; but that it seemed to
them, if their said liege lord had always possessed about
him faithful counsellors ani good officers, he would have
been so rich that he would have had no need of charg-
ing his commons with subsidy or tallage, considering
the great mnsoms of the French and Scotch kings, and
of so many.other prisoners ; and that it appeared to be
for the private advantage of some near the king, and of

a Most of our general historians have
slurred over this important session. The
best view, perhaps, of its secret history
will be found in Lowth’s Life of Wyke-
ham; an instructive and elegant work,
only to be blamed for marks of that
academical point of honour which makes
* fellow of a college too indiscriminate

56 RIGHT OF COMMONS Chap. VIII. Pabt III.

o^era by their collusion, that the king and kingdom
"aSHi' so impoverished, and the commons so ruined. And
they promised the king that, if he woujd do speedy
justice on such as should be found guilty, and take from
them what law and reason permit, with what had been
already granted in parliament, they will engage that he
should be rich enough to maintain his warn for a long
.time, without much charging his people in any manner.”
They next proceeded to allege three particular griev-
ances ; the removal of the staple from Calais, where it
had been fixed by parliament, through the procurement
and advice of the said private "counsellors about the
king ; the participation of the same persons in lending
money to the king at exorbitant usury ; and their pur-
chasing at a low rate, for their own benefit, old debts
from the crown, the whole of which they had afterwards
induced the king to repay to themselves. For these and
for many more misdemeanours the commons accused
and impeached the lords Latimer and Is evil, with four
merchants, Lyons, Ellis, Peachey, and Bury. 0 Latimer
had been chamberlain, and Nevil held another office.
The former was the friend and creature of the duke of
Lancaster. N or was this parliament at all nice in
touching a point where kings least endure their inter-
ference. An ordinance was made, that, “ whereas many ,
women prosecute the suits of others in courts of justice
by way of maintenance, and to get profit thereby, which
is displeasing to the king, ho forbids any woman hence-
forward, and especially Alice Ferrers, to do so, on pain
of the said Alice forfeiting all her goods, and suffering
banishment from the kingdom. ” d

part which the prince of Wales, who had ever
been distinguished for his respectful demeanour towards
Edward, bore in this unprecedented opposition, is strong
evidence* of the jealousy with which he regarded the
duke of Lancaster ; and it was led in the house of com-
mons by Peter de la Mare, a servant of the earl of
March, who, by his marriage with Philippa, heiress of
Lionel duke of Clarence, stood next after the young
prince Eichard in lineal succession to the crown. The
proceedings of this session were indeed highly popular.

c Rainer, p. 322.

d p. 320.

ENGLISH €onst. TO INQUIRE INTO ABUSES.

57

But no house of commQns would have gone such lengths,
on the mere support of popular opinion, unless instigated
and encouraged by higher authority. Without this
their petitions might perhaps have obtained, for the sake
of subsidy, an immediate consent ; but those who took
the lead in preparing them must have remained un-
sheltered after a dissolution, to abide the vengeance of
the crown, with no assurance that another parliament
would espouse their cause as its own. Such, indeed,
was their fate in the present instance. Soon after the
dissolution of parliament, the prince of Wales, who, long
sinking by fatal decay, had rallied his expiring energies
for this domestic combat, left his inheritance to a child
ten years old, Kichard of Bordeaux. Immediately after
this event Lancaster recovered his influence ; and the
former favourites returned to court. Peter de la Mare
was confined at Nottingham, where he remained’ two
years. The citizens indeed attempted an insurrection,
and threatened to burn the Savoy, Lancaster’s residence,
if de la Mare was not released; but the bishop of
London succeeded in appeasing them.® A parliament
met next year which overthrew the work of its prede-
ceasor, restored thoso who had been impeached, and
repealed the ordinance against Alice Perrers/ So little
security will popular assemblies ever afford against arbi-
trary power, when deprived of regular leaders and the
consciousness of mutual fidelity.

The policy adopted by the prince of Wales and earl of
March, in employing the house of commons as an en-
gine of attack against an obnoxious ministry, was per-
fectly novel, and indicates a sensible change in the
character of our constitution. In the reign of EdwardlL
parliament had little share in resisting the government;
much more was effected by the barons through risings
of their feudal tenantry. Fifty years of authority better
respected, of law better enforced, had rendored these
more perilous, and of a more violent appearance than
formerly. A surer resource presented itself in the in-
creased weight of the lower house in parliament. And

® Anonym. Hist Edw. IH. ad ealeem six or seven of the knights who had sat
Hemingford, p. 444, 448. Walsingham in the last parliament were returned to
gives a different reason, p. 192. this, as nppears by the write in Prynne’a

f Rot I’arl. p. 374. Not more than 4th Register, p. 302, 311.

58

INCREASE OF THE Chap. VIII. Part III.

this indirect aristocratical influence gave a Surprising
impulse to that assembly, and particularly tended to
establish beyond question its control over public
abuses. It is no less just to remark that it also tended
to preserve the relation and harmony between each part
and the other, and to prevent that jarring of emulation
and jealousy which, though generally found in the divi-
sion of power between a noble and a popular estate, has
scarcely ever caused a dissension, except in cases of
little moment, betwoen our two houses of parliament.

The commons had sustained with equal firmness and
Richard ii. discretion a defensive war against arbitrary
Great power under Edward III. : they advanced with
Grower very different steps towards his successor,
of the Upon the king’s death, though Bio hard s coro-
0 s * nation took place without delay, and no proper
regency was constituted, yet a council of twelve, whom
the great officers of state were to obey, supplied its place
to every effectual intent. Among these the duke of
Lancaster was not numbered ; and he retired from court
in some disgust. In the first parliament of the young
king a large proportion of the knights who had sat in
that which impeached the Lancastrian party w ere re-
turned . 8 Peter de la Mare, now released from prison,
was elected speaker; a dignity which, according to
some, he had filled in the Good Parliament, as that of
the fiftieth of Edward III. was popularly styled ; though
the rolls do not mention either him or any other as bear-
ing that honourable name before Sir Thomas Hungerford
in the parliament of the following year. h The prosecu-
tion against Alice Perrers was now revived ; not, as far
as appears, by direct impeachment of the commons; but
articles were exhibited against her in the house of
lords on the king’s part, for breaking the ordinance
made against her. intermeddling at court; upon which
she received judgment of banishment and forfeiture . 1 At
the request of the lower house, the lords, in the king’s
name, appointed nine persons of different ranks — three

8 Walsingham, p. 200, says pene om- and all the lawyers of England; yet by
ties ; but the list published in Prynne's the perseverance of these knights she
4th Register induces me to qualify this was convicted,
loose expression. Alice Perrers had h Rot. Pari. vol. ii. p. 374.

bribed, be tells us, many of the lords i vol. iil p. 12.

XCngush Const. POWER OF THE COMMONS.

59

bishops, two earls, two bannerets, and two bachelors — to
be a permanent council about the king, so that no busi-
ness of importance should be transacted without their
unanimous consent. The king was even compelled to
consent that, during his minority, the chancellor, trea-
surer, judges, and other chief officers, should be made in
parliament ; by which provision, combined with that of
the parliamentary council, the whole executive govern-
ment was transferred to the two houses: A petition
that none might bo employed in the king’s service, nor
belong to his council, who had been formerly accused
upon good grounds, struck at lord Latimer, who had
retained some degree of power in the new establishment.
Another, suggesting that Gascony, Ireland, Artois, and
the Scottish marches were in danger of being lost for
want of good officers, though it was so generally worded
as to leave the means of remedy to the king’s pleasure,
yet shows a growing energy and self-confidence in that
assembly which not many years before had thought the
question of peace or war too high for their deliberation.
Their subsidy was sufficiently liberal ; but they took
care to pray the king that fit persons might be assigned
for its receipt and disbursement, lest it should any way
be diverted from the purposes of the war. Accordingly
Walworth and Philpot, two eminent citizens of London,
were appointed to this office, and sworn in parliament to
its execution . 11

But whether through the wastefulness of government,
or rather because Edward’s legacy, the French war, like
a ruinous and interminable lawsuit, exhausted all public
contributions, there was an equally craving demand for
subsidy at the next meeting of parliament. The com-
mons now made a more serious stand. The speaker, Sir
James Pickering, after the protestation against giving
offence which has since become more matter of form
than, perhaps, it was then considered, reminded the lords
of the council of a promise made to the last parliament,
that, if they would help the king for once with a large
subsidy, so as to enable him to undertake an expedition
against the enemy, he trusted not to call on them again,
but to support the war from his own revenues ; in faith

Jk Rot. Pari. voL iii. p. 12,

60

INCREASE OF THE Chap. VIII. Part III

of which promise there had been granted the largest
mm that any king of England had ever been suffered to
levy within so short a time, to the utmost loss and incon-
venience of the commons, part of which ought still to
remain in the treasury, and render it unnecessary to
burthen anew the exhausted people. To this Scrope,
lord steward of the household, protesting that he knew
not of any such promise, made answer by order of the
king, that, “ saving the honour and reverence of our lord
the king, and the lords there present, the commons did
not speak truth in asserting that part of the last sub-
sidy should be still in the treasury; it being notorious
that every penny had gone into the hands of Walworth
and Philpot, appointed and sworn treasurers in the last
parliament, to receive and expend it upon the purposes
of the war, for which they had in effect disbursed the
whole.” Not satisfied with this general justification, the
commons pressed for an account of the expenditure.
Scrope was again commissioned to answer, that, “ though
it had never been seen that of a subsidy or other grant
made to the king in parliament or out of parliament by
the commons any account had afterwards been rendered
to the commons, or to any other except the king and his
officers, yet the king, to gratify them, of his own accord,
without doing it by way of right, would have Walworth
along with certain persons of the council exhibit to them
in writing a clear account of the receipt and expenditure,
upon condition that this should never be used as a prece-
dent, nor inferred to be done otherwise than by the king’s
spontaneous command.” The commons were again urged
to provide for the public defence, being their own concern
as much as that of the king. But they merely shifted
their ground and had recourse to other pretences. They
requested that five or six peers might come to them, in
order to discuss this question of subsidy. The lords
entirely rejected this proposal, and affirmed that such a
proceeding had never been known except in the three last
parliaments ; but allowed that it had been the course to
elect a committee of eight or ten from each house, to
confer easily and without noise together. The commons
acceded to this, and a committee of conference was
appointed, though no result of their discussion appears
upon the roll.

English Const. POWER OF THE COMMONS. 01

Upon examining the accounts submitted to them, these
sturdy commoners raised a new objection. It appeared
that large sums had been expended upon garrisons in
France and Ireland and other places beyond the kingdom,
of which they protested themselves not liable to bear the
charge. It was answered that Gascony and the king's
other dominions beyond sea were the outworks of Eng-
land, nor could the people ever be secure from war at
their thresholds, unless these were maintained. They
lastly insisted that the king ought to be rich through the
wealth that had devolved on him from his grandfather.
But this was affirmed, in reply, to be merely sufficient
for the payment of Edward’s creditors. Thus driven
from all their arguments, the commons finally consented
to a moderate additional imposition upon the export of
wool and leather, which were already subject to con-
siderable duties, apologizing on account of their poverty
for the slenderness of their grant." 1

The necessities of government, however, let their cause
be what it might, were by no means feigned ; and a new
parliament was assembled about seven months after the
last, wherein the king, without waiting for a petition,
informed the commons that the treasurers were ready to
exhibit their accounts before them. This was a signal
victor^ 7 after the reluctant and ungracious concession made
to the last parliament. Nine persons of different ranks
were appointed at the request of the commons to investi-
gate the state of the revenue and the disposition which
had been made of the late king’s personal estate. They
ended by granting a poll-tax, which they pretended to
think adequate to the supply required." But in those
times no one possessed any statistical knowledge, and
every calculation wdiich required it was subject to enor-
mous error, of which we have already seen an eminent
example. 0 In the next parliament (3 Eic. II.) it was set
forth that only 22,000/. had been collected by the poll-
tax, while the payof the king’s troops hired for the expe-
dition to Britany, the pretext of the grant, had amounted
for but half a year to 50,000/. The king, in short, was
more straitened than ever. His distresses gave no small
advantage to the commons. Their speaker was instructed

m Rot Part p. 36-38. n Id. p. 67.

° See p. 47 of this volume

g2 INCREASE OF THE Chap. VIII. Part ID.

to declare that, as it appeared to them, if the affairs of
their liege lord had been properly conducted at home and
abroad, he could not have wanted aid of his commons,
who now are poorer than before. They pray that, as the
king was so much advanced in age and discretion, his
perpetual council (appointed in his first parliament)
might be discharged of their labours, and that, instead of
them, the five chief officers of state, to wit, the chancellor,
treasurer, keeper of the privy seal, chamberlain, and
steward of the household, might be named in parliament,
and declared to the commons, as the king’s sole coun-
sellors, not removable before the next parliament. They
required also a general commission to be made out, similar
to that in the last session, giving powers to a certain
number of peers and other distinguished persons to inquire
info the state of the household, as well as into all receipts
and expenses since the king’s accession. The former
petition seems to have been passed over ; p but a commis-
sion as requested was made out to three prelates, three
earls, three bannerets, three knights, and three citizens.’
After guarding thus, as they conceived, against malver-
sation, but. in effect rather protecting their posterity than
themselves, the commons prolonged the last imposition
on wool and leather for another year.

It would be but repetition to make extracts from the
rolls of the two next years ; we have still the same fide —
demand of subsidy on one side, remonstrance and endea-
vours at reformation on the other. After the tremen-
dous insurrection of the villeins in 1382 a parliament
was convened to advise about repealing the charters of
general manumission, extorted from the king by the
pressure of circumstances. In this measure all con-
curred; but the commons were not afraid to say that
the late risings had been provoked by the burthens
which a prodigal court had called for in the preced-
ing session. Their language is unusually bold. 44 It
seemed to them, after full deliberation,’’ they said,
“ that, unless the administration of the kingdom were

p Nevertheless, the commons repeated * p. 73. In Rymer, t vUL p. 250, the
it in their schedule of petitions ? and re- archbishop of York’s name appears among
ceived an evasive answer, referring to an these commissioners, which makes their
ordinance made in the first parliament of number sixteen. Bat it is plain fcy the
the king, the application of which is in- instrument that only fifteen were meant
definite. Rot. ParL p. 82. to be appointed.

English Const. POWER OF THE COMMONS.

63

speedily reformed, the kingdom itself would he utterly
lost and ruined for ever, and therein their lord the
king, with all the peers and commons, which God for-
bid. For true it is that there are such defects in the
said administration, as well about the king’s person and
his household as in his courts of justice ; and by griev-
ous oppressions in the country through maintainers of
suits, who are, as it were, kings in the country, that
right and law are come to nothing, and the poor commons
are from time to time so pillaged and ruined, partly
by the king’s purveyors of the household, and others
who pay nothing for what they take, partly by the
subsidies and tallages raised upon them, and besides by
the oppressive behaviour of the servants of the king and
other lords, and especially of the aforesaid maintainers
of suits, that they are reduced to greater poverty and
discomfort than ever they were before. And moreover,
though great sums have been continually granted by and
levied upon them, for the defence of the kingdom, yet
they are not the better defended against their enemies,
but every year are plundered and wasted by sea and
land, without any relief. Which calamities the said
poor commons, who lately used to live in honour and
prosperity, can no longer endure. And to speak the
real truth, these injuries lately done to the poorer com-
mons, more than they ever suffered before, caused them
to rise and to commit the mischief done in their late
riot ; and there is still cause to fear greater evils, if suf-
ficient remedy be not timely provided against the out-
rages and oppressions aforesaid. Wherefore may it
please our lord the king, and the noble peers of the
realm now assembled in this parliament, to provide such
remedy and amendment as to the said administration,
that the state and dignity of the king in the first place,
and of the lords, may be preserved, as the commons
have always desired, and the commons may be put in
peace ; removing, as soon as they can be detected, evil
ministers and counsellors, and putting in their stead the
best and most sufficient, and taking away all the bad
practices which have led to the last rising, or else none
can imagine that this kingdom can longer subsist with-
out greater misfortunes than it ever endured. And for
G od’s sake let it not be forgotten that there be put

64

POWEK OF THE COMMONS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

about the king, and of his council, the best lords and
knights that can be found in the kingdom.

“ And be it known (the entry proceeds) that, after the
our lord with the peers of the realm and his coun-
cil had taken advice upon those requests made to him
for his good and his kingdom s as it really appeared to
him, willed and granted that certain bishops, lords, and
others should be appointed to survey and examine in
privy council both the government of the king s person
and of his household, and to suggest proper remedies
wherever necessary, and report them to the king. And
it was said by the peers in parliament, that, as it seemed
to them, if reform of government were to take place
throughout the kingdom, it should begin by the chief
member, which is the king himself, and so from person
to person, as well churchmen as others, and place to
place, from higher to lower, without sparing any
degree.”' A considerable number of commissioners
were accordingly appointed, whether by the king alone,
or in parliament, does not appear ; the latter , however,
is more probable. They seem to have made some pro-
gress in the work of reformation, lor we find that tho
officers of the household were sworn to observe their
regulations. But in all likelihood these were soon
neglected.

It is not wonderful that, with such feelings of resent-
ment towards the crown, the commons were backward
in gran ting subsidies. Perhaps the king would not have
obtained one at all if he had not withheld his charter of
pardon for all offences committed during the insurrec-
tion. This was absolutely necessary to restore quiet
among the people ; and though the members of the
commons had certainly not been insurgents, yet ine-
vitable irregularities had occurred in quelling tho
tumults, which would have put them too much in the
power of those unworthy men who filled the benches
of justice under Richard. The king declared that it
was unusual to grant a pardon without a subsidy ; the
commons still answered that they would consider about
that matter; and the king instantly rejoined that he
would consider about his pardon (s’aviseroit de ea dite

Rot Pari. 5 R. JL p. 100.

English Const. CHARACTER OF RICHARD II. 65

grace) till they had done what they ought. They re*
newed at length the usual tax on wool and leather.*

This extraordinary assumption of power by the com-
mons was not merely owing to the king’s poverty. It
was encouraged by the natural feebleness of a disunited
government. The high rank and ambitious spirit of
Lancaster gave him no little influence, though contend-
ing with many enemies at court as well as the ill-will of
the people. Thomas of Woodstock, the king’s youngest
uncle, more able and turbulent than Lancaster, became,
as he grew older, an eager competitor for power, which
he sought through the channel of popularity. The earls
of March, Arundel, and Warwick bore a considerable
part, and were the favourites of parliament. Even Lan-
caster, after a few years, seems to have fallen into
popular courses, and recovered some share of public
esteem. He was at the head of the reforming commis-
sion in the fifth of Richard II., though he had been stu-
diously excluded from those preceding. We cannot
hope to disentangle the intrigues of this remote age, as
to which our records are of no service, and the chroni-
clers are very slightly informed. So far as we may con-
jecture, Lancaster, finding his station insecure at court.,
began to solicit the favour of the commons, whose
hatred of the administration abated their former hostility
towards him/

The character of Richard II. was now developing
itself, and the hopes excited by his remarkable ciiaracter
presence of mind in confronting the rioters on of Richard.
Blaekheath were rapidly destroyed. Not that he was
wanting in capacity, as has been sometimes imagined.
For if we measure intellectual power by the greatest
exertion it ever displays, rather than by its average
results, Richard H. was a man of considerable talents.
He possessed, along with much dissimulation, a decisive
promptitude in seizing the critical moment for action.
Of this quality, besides his celebrated behaviour towards
the insurgents, he gave striking evidenoe in several

• Hot P&rl. 5 R. II. p. 104. years before. The insurgents of 1382 are

* The commons granted a subsidy, 1 R. said to have compelled men to swear that
II., to support Lancaster's war in Castile, they would obey king Richard and the
R. P. p. 284. Whether the populace commons, and that they would accept
changed their opinion of him I know no king named John. Walsinghara,
not He was still disliked by them two p. 248.

VOL. III.

F

66

POWER OF RICHARD II. Chap. VIII. Past III.

circumstances which we shall have shortly to notice.
But his ordinary conduct belied the abilities which on
these rare occasions shone forth, and rendered them in-
effectual for his security. Extreme pride and violence,
with an inordinate partiality for the most worthless
favourites, were his predominant characteristics. In
the latter quality, and in the events of his reign, he
forms a pretty exact parallel to Edward II. Scrope,
lord chancellor, who had been appointed in parliament,
and was understood to be irremovable without its con-
currence, lost the great seal for refusing to set it to
some prodigal grants. Upon a slight quarrel with arch-
bishop Courtney the king oixlered his temporalities to
be seized, the execution of which, Michael de la Pole,
his new chancellor, and a favourite of his own, could
hardly prevent. This was accompanied with indecent
and outrageous expressions of anger, unworthy of his
station and of those whom he insulted. u

Though no king could be less respectable than
Richard, yet the constitution invested a sove-
reign with such ample prerogative, that it was
far less easy to resist his personal exercise of
minority. p 0wer {han the unsettled councils of a mi-
nority. In the parliament 6 R. II., sess. 2, the com-
mons pray certain lords, whom they name, to be assigned
as their advisers. This had been permitted in the two
last sessions without exception.* But the king, in
granting their request, reserved his right of naming any
others/ Though the coinmons did not relax in their
importunities for the redress of general grievances, they
did not venture to intermeddle as before with the con-
duct of administration. They did not even object to
the grant of the marquisate of Dublin, with almost a
princely dominion over Ireland ; which enonnous dona-
tion was confirmed by act of parliament to Vere, a
favourite of the king. 2 A petition that the officers of
state should annually visit and inquire into his house-
hold was answered that the king would do what he
pleased/ Yet this was little in comparison of their
former proceedings.

u Walking. p. 290, 31$, 317. * p. 145.

* Hot Pari. 5 E. IL p. 100 ; 6 Ii. II. * Hot. ParL 9 R. II. p. 209.
eem, 1, p. 134. a lb. p. 213. It i* however aa&ertdd

English Const. PROCEEDINGS OF PARLIAMENT. 67

There is nothing, however, more deceitful to a
monarch, unsupported by an armed force, and proceedings
destitute of wary advisers, than this submission of pariia-
of his people. A single effort was enough to tenth ™f the
overturn his government. Parliament met in Richard,
the tenth year of his reign, steadily determined to re-
form the administration, and especially to punish its
chief leader, Michael de la Pole, earl of Suffolk and lord
chancellor. According to the remarkable narration of a
contemporary historian, b too circumstantial to be re-
jected, but rendered somewhat doubtful by the silence
of all other writers and of the parliamentary roll, the
king was loitering at his palace at Eltham when he re-
ceived a message from the two houses, requesting the
dismissal of Suffolk, since they had matter to allege
against him that they could not move while he kept the
office of chancellor. Kichard, with his usual intemper-
ance, answered that he would not for their request re-
move the meanest scullion from his kitchen. They re-
turned a positive refusal to proceed on any public busi-
ness until the king should appear personally in parlia-
ment and displace the chancellor. The king required
forty knights to be deputed from the rest to inform him
clearly of their wishes. But the commons declined a
proposal in which they feared, or affected to fear, some
treachery. At length the duke of Gloucester and
Arundel bishop of Ely were commissioned to speak the
sense of parliament ; and they delivered it, if we may
still believe what we read, in very extraordinary lan-
guage, asserting that there was an ancient statute,
according to which, if the king absented himself from
parliament without just cause during forty days, which
he had now exceeded, every man might return without
permission to his own country; and, moreover, there
was another statute, and (as they might more truly say)
a precedent of no remote date, that if a king, by bad
counsel, or his own folly and obstinacy, alienated him-
self from his people, and would not govern according to

in the articles of impeachment against bold, and reform whatever was amiss.
Suffolk, and admitted by his defence, But nothing of this appears in the
that nine lords had been appointed folL

in the last parliament, viz. 9 R. II., b Kay gh ton, in Twysdon x. Script
to inquire into the Btate of the house- col, 2680.

F 2

68

IMPEACHMENT OF SUFFOLK. Chap. VIII. Part III.

the laws of the land and the advice of the peers , but
madly and wantonly followed his own single will , it
should be lawful for them, with the common assent of
the people, to expel him from his throne, and elevate to
it some near kinsman of the royal blood. By this dis-
course the king was induced to meet his parliament,
where Suffolk was removed from his office,' and the im-
peachment against him commenced . 0

The charges against this minister, without being
wholly frivolous, were not so weighty as the
memof clamour of the commons might have led us to
Suffolk. expect. Besides forfeiting all his grants from
the crown, he was committed to prison, there to remain
till he should have paid such fine as the king might
impose ; a sentence that would have been outrageously
severe in many cases, though little more than nugatory
in the present .* 1

This was the second precedent of that grand constitu-
Commissiou tional resource, parliamentary impeachment :
of reform. and more remarkable from the eminence of
the person attacked than that of lord Latimer in the
fiftieth year of Edward III.® The commons were con-
tent to waive the prosecution of any other ministers;
but they rather chose a scheme of reforming the ad-
ministration, which should avert both the necessity of
punishment and the malversations that provoked it.

c Upon full consideration, I am nmdps
inclined to give credit to this passage of
Knyghton, as to the main facts; and
perhaps even the speech of Gloucester
and the bishop of Ely is more likely to
have been made public by them than in-
vented by so jejune an historian. Wal-
eingham Indeed says nothing of the
matter ; but he is so unequally informed
and so frequently defective, that we can
draw no strong inference from his silence.
What most weighs with me is that par-
liament met on Oct. 1, 138T, and was
not dissolved till Nov. 28; a longer
period than the business done in it seems
to have required ; and also that Suffolk,
who opened the session as chancellor, is
styled *' darrein chancellor "in the arti-
cles of impeachment against him ; so
that he must have been removed in the
interval, which tallies with Knyghton 't

sUot. Besides, it is* plain, from the
Shawns questions subsequently put by the
king to his judges at Nottingham, that
both the right of retiring without a
regular dissolution, and the precedent of
Edward II., had been discussed in par-
liament, which does not appear any-
where else than in Knyghton.
d Rot. Pari. vol. iii. p. 219.
e Articles had been exhibited by the
chancellor before the peers, in the seventh
of the king, against Spencer, bishop of
Norwich, who had led a considerable
army in a disastrous expedition against
the Flemings, adherents to the anti-pope
Clement in the schism. This crusade
had been exceedingly popular, but its ill
success had the usual effect. The com-
mons were not parties in this proceeding.
Rot. Pari. p. 153.

English Cosst. COMMISSION OF REFORM.

69

They petitioned the king to ordain in parliament certain
chief officens of his household and other lords of his
council,, with power to reform those abuses, by which
his crown was so much blemished that the laws were
not kept and his revenues were dilapidated, confirming
by a statute a commission for a year, and forbidding,
under heavy penalties, any one from opposing, in pri.
vate or openly, what they should advise/ With this
the king complied, and a commission founded upon the
prayer of parliament was established by statute. It
comprehended fourteen persons of the highest eminence
for rank and general estimation ; princeB of the blood
and ancient servants of the crown, by whom its preroga-
tives were not likely to be unneoessarily impaired. In
fact the principle of this commission, without looking
back at the precedents in the reign of John, Henry III.,
and Edward II., which yet were not without their
weight as constitutional analogies, was merely that
which the commons had repeatedly maintained during
the minority of the present king, and which had pro-
duced the former commissions of reform in the third and
fifth years of his reign. These were upon the whole
nearly the same in their operation. It must be owned
there was a more extensive sway virtually given to the
lords now appointed, by the penalties imposed on any
who should endeavour to obstruct what they might ad-
vise ; the design as well as tendency of which was no
doubt to throw the ^shole administration into their
hands during the period of this commission.

Those who have written our history with more or less
of a Tory bias exclaim against this parliamentary com-
mission as an unwarrantable violation of the king’s
sovereignty, and even impartial men are struck at first
sight by a measure that seems to overset the natural
balance of our constitution. But it would be unfair to
blame either those concerned in this commission, some
of whose names at least have been handed down with
unquestioned respect, or those high-spirited representa-
tives of the people whose patriot firmness has been
hitherto commanding all our sympathy and gratitude,
unless we could distinctly pronounce by what gentler

t Rot. Pari. p. 221.

70

COMMISSION OF REFORM. Chap. VIII. Part III.

means they could restrain the excesses of government.
Thirteen parliaments had already met since the accession
of Richard; in all the same remonstrances had been
repeated, and the same promises renewed. Subsidies,
more frequent than in any former reign, had been granted
for the supposed exigencies of the war ; but this was no
longer illuminated by those dazzling victories which give
to fortune the mien of wisdom ; the coasts of England
were perpetually ravaged, and her trade destroyed;
while the administration incurred the suspicion of divert-
ing to private uses that treasure which they so feebly
and unsuccessfully applied to the public service. No
voice of his people, until it spoke in thunder, would stop
an intoxicated boy in the wasteful career of dissipation.
He loved festivals and pageants, the prevailing folly of
his time, with unusual frivolity ; and his ordinary living
is represented as beyond comparison more showy and
sumptuous than even that of his magnificent and chival-
rous predecessor. Acts of parliament were no adequate
barriers to his misgovemment. “ Of what avail are
statutes,” says Walsingham, “ since the king with his
privy council is wont to abolish what parliament has just
enacted ?” 8 The constant prayer of the commons in
every session, that former statutes might be kept in force,
is no slight presumption that they were not secure oi
being regarded. It may be true that Edward IIL’s go-
vernment had been full as arbitrary, though not so
unwise, as his grandson’s ; but this is the strongest
argument that nothing less than an extraordinary remedy
could preserve the still unstable liberties of England.

The best plea that could be made for Hi chard was his
inexperience, and the misguided suggestions of favourites.
This, however, made it more necessary to remove those
false advisers, and to supply that inexperience. Un-
questionably the choice of ministers is reposed in the
sovereign ; a trust, like every other attribute of legiti-
mate power, for the public good ; not, what no legitimate

S wer can ever be, the instrument of selfishness or caprice.

Lere is something more sacred than the prerogative, or
even than the constitution ; the public weal, for which
all powers are granted, and to which they must all be

8 Rot. Pail. p. 28L

English Const. COMMISSION OF REFORM.

71

referred. For this public weal it is confessed to be
sometimes necessary to shake the possessor of the throne
out of his seat ; could it never be permitted to suspend,
though but indirectly and for a time, the positive exer-
cise of misapplied prerogatives? He has learned in a
very different school from myself, who denies to parlia-
ment at the present day a preventive as well as vindic-
tive control over the administration of affairs ; a right of
resisting, by those means which lie within its sphere,
the appointment of unfit ministers. These means are
now indirect; they need not to be the less effectual, and
they are certainly more salutary on that account. But
we must not make our notions of the constitution in its
perfect symmetry of manhood the measure of its infan-
tine proportions, nor expect from a parliament just
struggling into life, and “ pawing to get free its hinder
parts,” the regularity of definite and habitual power.

It is assumed rather too lightly by some of those his-
torians to whom I have alluded that these commissioners,
though but appointed for a twelvemonth, designed to
retain longer, or would not in fact have surrendered, their
authority. There is certainly a danger in these delega-
tions of pre-eminent trust ; but I think it more formid-
able in a republican form than under such a government
as our own. The spirit of the people, the letter of the
law, were .both so decidedly monarchical, that no glaring
attempt of the commissioners to keep the helm continually
in their hands, though it had been in the king’s name,
would have had a fair probability of success. And an
oligarchy of fourteen persons, different in rank and pro-
fession, even if we should impute criminal designs to all
of them, was ill calculated for permanent union. Indeed
the facility with which Richard ro-assumed his full
powers two years afterwards, when misconduct had
rendered his circumstances far more unfavourable, gives
the corroboration of experience to this reasoning. By
yielding to the will of his parliament and to a temporary
suspension of prerogative, this unfortunate prince might
probably have reigned long and peacefully ; the contraiy
course of acting led eventually to his deposition and
miserable death.

Before the dissolution of parliament Richard made a
verbal protestation that nothing done therein should be

72 ANSWERS TO RICHARD’S QUESTIONS. Chap. VIII. Part lit

in prejudice of his rights ; a reservation not unusual when
Answers of an y remar hable concession was made, but which
to^udgesto could not decently be interpreted, whatever
R uesSLns m i&kt mean, as a dissent from the sta-

68 ° ns ’ tute just passed. Some months had inter-
vened when the king, who had already released Suffolk
from prison and restored him to his favour, procured
from the judges, whom he had summoned to Nottingham,
a most convenient, set of answers to questions concerning
the late proceedings in parliament. Tresilian and Bel-
knap, chief justices of the King’s Bench and Common
Pleas, with several other judges, gave it under their
seals that the late statute and commission were deroga-
tory to the prerogative ; that all who procured it to be
passed, or persuaded or compelled the king to consent
to it, were guilty of treason ; that the king’s business
must be proceeded upon before any other in parliament ;
that he may put an end to the session at his pleasure ;
that his ministers cannot be impeached without his con-
sent ; that any members of parliament contravening the
three last articles incur the penalties of treason, and
especially he who moved for the sentence of deposition
against Edward II. to be read ; and that the judgment
against the earl of Suffolk might be revoked as altogether
erroneous.

These answers, .perhaps extorted by menaces, as all the
judges, except Tresilian, protested before the
revokitiwu 1 next parliament, were for the most part servile
and unconstitutional. The indignation which
they excited, and the measures successfully taken to
withstand the king’s designs, belong to general history ;
but I shall pass slightly over that season of turbulence,
which afforded no legitimate precedent to our constitu-
tional annals. Of the five lords appellants, as they were
called, Gloucester, Derby, Nottingham, Warwick, and
Arundel, the three former, at least, have little claim to
our esteem ; but in every age it is the sophism of malig-
nant and peevish men to traduce the cause of freedom
itself, on account of the interested motives by which its
ostensible advocates have frequently been actuated. The
parliament, who had the country thoroughly with them,
acted no doubt honestly, but with an inattention to the
rules of law, culpable indeed, yet from which the most

English Const. SUBSEQUENT REVOLUTION.

73

civilized of their successors, in the heat of passion and
triumph, have scarcely been exempt. Whether all with
whom they dealt severely, some of them apparently of
good previous reputation, merited such punishment, is
more than, upon uncertain evidence, a modern writer can
profess to decided

Notwithstanding the death or exile of all Richard’s
favourites, and the oath taken not only by parliament,
but by every class of the people, to stand by the lords
appellants, we find him, after about a year, suddenly
annihilating their pretensions, and snatching the reins
again without obstruction. The secret cause of this
event is among the many obscurities that attend the his-
tory of his reign. It was conducted with a spirit and
activity which broke out two or three times in the course
of his imprudent life ; but we may conjecture that he
had the advantage of disunion among his enemies. For
some years after this the kings administration was pru-
dent. The great seal, which he took away from arch-
bishop Arundel, he gave to Wykeham bishop of Win-
chester, another member of the reforming commission,
but a man of great moderation and political experience.
Some time after he restored the seal to Arundel, and
reinstated the duke of Gloucester in the council. The
duke of Lancaster, who had been absent during the
transactions of the tenth and eleventh years of the king,
in prosecution of his Castilian war, formed a link be-
tween the parties, and seems to have maintained some
share of public favour.

There was now a more apparent harmony between the
court and the parliament. It seems to have
been tacitly agreed that they should not inter-
fere with the king’s household expenses; and between the
they gratified him in a point where his honour £«u<!Sent.
had been most wounded, declaring his prero-
gative to be as high and unimpaired as that of his prede-
cessors, and repealing the pretended statute by virtue of
which Edward II. was said to have been deposed. 1 They
were provident enough, however, to grant conditional

b The Judgment against Simon de IV.; a fair presumption of its injustice.
Burley, one of those who were executed Rot. Pari. vol. iii. p. 464.
on this occasion, upon impeachment of * Rot. Pari. 14 R. II. p. 279 ; 15 R. II
the commons, was reversed under Henry p. 286.

74 DISUNION AMONG LEADING PEERS. Chap. VIII. Part IH.

subsidies, to be levied only in case of a royal expedition
against the enemy; and several were accordingly re-
mitted by proclamation, this condition not being fulfilled,
Richard never ventured to recall his favourites, though
he testified his unabated affection for Yere by a pompous
funeral. Few complaints, unequivocally affecting the
ministry, were presented by the commons. In one par-
liament the chancellor, treasurer, and counsel resigned
their offices, submitting themselves to its judgment in
case any matter of accusation should be alleged against
them. The commons, after a day’s deliberation, probably
to make their approbation appear more solemn, declared
in full parliament that nothing amiss had been found in
the conduct of these ministers, and that they held them
to have faithfully discharged their duties. The king
reinstated them accordingly, with a protestation that
this should not be made a precedent, and that it was his
right to change his servants at pleasure. 11

Rut this summer season was not to last for ever.
Disunion ^chard had but dissembled with those con-
aniong some cemed in the transactions of 1388, none of
leading. whom he could ever forgive. These lords in

lapse of time were divided among each other.
The earls of Derby and Nottingham were brought into
the king’s interest. The earl of Arundel came to an open
breach with the duke of Lancaster, whose pardon he was
compelled to ask for an unfounded accusation in parlia-
ment. 1 " Gloucester’s ungovemed ambition, elated by
popularity, could not brook the ascendency of his brother
Lancaster, who was much less odious to the king. He
had constantly urged and defended the concession of
Guienne to this prince to be held for life, reserving only
his liege homage to Richard as king of France ; n a grant
as unpopular among the natives of that country as it was
derogatory to the crown ; but Lancaster was not much
indebted to his brother for assistance which was only
given in order to diminish his influence in England. The
truce with France, and the king’s French marriage, which
Lancaster supported, were passionately opposed by
Gloucester. And the latter had given keener provoca-
tion by speaking contemptuously of that misalliance

k Rot Pari. 13 R. II. p. 258. m 17 R II. p. 313.

B Ryuier, t viL p. 583, 659.

English Const. PROSECUTION OF HAXEY.

75

with Katherine Swineford which contaminated the blood
of Plantagenet. To the parliament summoned in the
20th of liichard, one object of which was to legitimate
the duke of Lancaster’s ante-nuptial children by this lady,
neither Gloucester nor Arundel would repair. There
passed in this assembly something remarkable, as it
exhibits not only the arbitrary temper of the king, a
point by no means doubtful, but the inefficiency of the
commons to resist it without support from political con-
federacies of the nobility. The circumstances are thus
related in the record.

During the session tho king sent for the lords into
parliament one afternoon, and told them how Ricbard , g
he had heard of certain articles of complaint prosecution
made by the commons in conference with them of Haxey *
a few days before, some of which appeared to the king
against his royalty, estate, and liberty, and commanded
the chancellor to inform him fully as to this. The
chancellor accordingly related the whole matter, which
consisted of four alleged grievances ; namely, that
sheriffs and escheators, notwithstanding a statute, are con-
tinued in their offices beyond a year ;° that the Scottish
marches were not well kept ; that tho statute against
wearing great men’s liveries was disregarded ; and,
lastly, that the excessive charges of tho king’s house-
hold ought to be diminished, arising from the multitude
of bishops and of ladies who are there maintained at
his cost.

Upon this information the king declared to the lords
that through God’s gift he is by lineal right of inherit-
ance king of England, and will have the royalty and
freedom of his crown, from which some of these articles
derogate. The first petition, that sheriffs should never
remain in office beyond a year, he rejected ; but, passing
lightly over the rest, took most offence ’ that the com-

° Ilume has represented this as if the is unfortunate that Hume relied so much,
commons had petitioned for the continu- The passage from Walsingham in the
ance of sheriffs beyond a year, and same note is also wholly perverted ; a a
grounds upon this inistake part of his the reader will discover without further
defence of Richard II. (Note to vol. ii. observation. An historian must be
p. 270, 4 to. edit) For this ho refers to strangely warped who quotes a passage
Cotton’s Abridgment ; whether rightly or explicitly complaining of illegal acts in
not I cannot say, being little acquainted order to infer that those very acts were
with that inaccurate book, upon which it legal.

76

PROSECUTION OF HAXEY. Chap. VIII. Part III.

mons, who are his lieges, should take on themselves to
make any ordinance respecting his royal person or
household, or those whom hfe might please to have about
him. He enjoined therefore the lords to declare plainly
to the commons his pleasure in this matter ; and espe-
cially directed the duke of Lancaster to make the
speaker give up the name of the person who presented
a bill for this last article in the lower house.

The commons were in no state to resist this unex-
pected promptitude of action in the king. They surren-
dered the obnoxious bill, with its proposer, one Thomas
Haxey, and with great humility made excuse that they
never designed to give offence to his majesty, nor to
interfere with his household or attendants, knowing
well that such things do not belong to them, but to the
king alone ; but merely to draw his attention, that he
might act therein os should please him best. The king
forgave these pitiful suppliants; but Haxey was ad-
judged in parliament to suffer death as a traitor. As,
however, he was a clerk, p the archbishop of Canterbury,
at the head of the prelates, obtained of the king that his
life might be spared, and that they might have the
custody of his person; protesting that this was not
claimed by way of right, but merely of the king’s
grace.* 1

This was an open defiance of parliament, and a de-
claration of arbitrary power. For it would be impossible
to contend that, after the repeated instances of control
over public expenditure by the commons since the 50th
of Edward III., this principle was novel and unautho-

P The church would perhaps have in- de volonte du roy Richard en contre droit
terfered in behalf of Haxey if he had et la course quel avoit rate devant en
only received the tonsure. But it seems parlement p. 480. There can be no
that he was actually in orders ; for the doubt with any man who looks atten-
record calls him Sir Thomas Haxey, a tively at the passages relative to Haxey
title at that time regularly given to the that he was a member of parliament ;
parson of a parish. If this be so, it is a though this was questioned a few years
remarkable authority for the clergy's ca- ago by the committee of the house of
parity of sitting in parliament commons, who made a report on the right

** Hot Pari. 20 R. IL p. 339. In of the clergy to be elected ; a right
Henry IV.'s first parliament the Com- which, I am inclined to believe, did exist
moits petitioned for Haxey's restoration, down to the Reformation, as the grounds
and truly say that his sentence was en alleged for Nowell's expulsion in the first,
aneantiseement des custumes de la com- of Mary, besides this instance of Haxey
unnte. p. 434. His Judgment was re- conspire to prove, though it has since
versed by both houses, as having passed been lost by disuse.

English Const. ARBITRARY MEASURES OF RICHARD II. 77

rized by the constitution, or that the right of free speech
demanded by them in every parliament was not a real
and indisputable privilege. * The king, however, was
completely successful, and, having proved the feebleness
of the commons, fell next upon those he more Arbitra
dreaded. By a skilful piece of treachery he meastlreJof
seized the duke of Gloucester, and spread con- ^ king -
8temation among all his party. A parliament was
summoned, in which the only struggle was to outdo the
king’s wishes, and thus to efface their former transgres-
sions/ Gloucester, who had been murdered at Calais,
was attainted after his death ; Arundel was beheaded,
his brother the archbishop of Canterbury deposed and
banished, Warwick and Cobham sent beyond sea. The
commission of the tenth, the proceedings in parliament
of the eleventh year of the king, were annulled. The
answers of the judges to the questions put at Notting-
ham, "which had been punished with death and exile,
were pronounced by parliament to be just and legal.
It was declared high treason to procure the repeal of any
judgment against persons therein impeached. Their
issue male were disabled from ever sitting in parliament
or holding place in council. These violent ordinances,
as if the precedent they were then overturning had not
shielded itself with the same sanction, were sworn to
by parliament upon the cross of Canterbury, and con-
firmed by a national oath, with the penalty of excom-
munication denounced against its infringers. Of those
recorded to have bound themselves by this adjuration
to Richard, far the greater part had touched the same
relics for Gloucester and Arundel ten years before,
and two years afterwards swore allegiance to Henry of
Lancaster/

In the fervour of prosecution this parliament could
hardly go beyond that whose acts they were annulling ;
and each is alike unworthy to be remembered in the
way of precedent. But the leaders of the former, though
vindictive and turbulent, had a concern for the public
interest ; and, after punishing their enemies, left the
government upon its right foundation. In this all re-

r This assembly, if we may trust the by the king’s troops, p. 133.
anonymous author of the Life of Richard • Rot. Pari. 21 J3L II. p. 347.

II., published by Heame, was surrounded

78 ARBITRARY MEASURES OF RICHARD II. Ch. YIII. Pt. III.

gard for liberty was extinct '; and the commons set the
dangerous precedent of granting the king a subsidy
upon wool during his life. Their remarkable act of
severity was accompanied by another, less unexampled,
but, as it proved, of more ruinous tendency. The peti-
tions of the commons not having been answered during
the session, which they were always anxious to con-
clude, a commission was granted for twelve peers and six
commoners to sit after the dissolution, and “ examine,
answer, and fully determine, as well all the said peti-
tions, and the matters therein comprised, as all other
matters and things moved in the king’s presence, and
all things incident thereto not yet determined, as shall
seem best to them.”* The “ other matters ” mentioned
above were, I suppose, private petitions to the kings
council in parliament, which had been frequently de-
spatched after a dissolution. For in the statute which
establishes this commission, 21 K. II. c. 16, no powers
are committed but those of examining petitions : which,
if it does not confirm the charge afterwards alleged
against Kichard, of falsifying the parliament roll, must
at least be considered as limiting and explaining the
terms of the latter. Such a trust had been committed
to some lords of the council eight years before, in very
peaceful times; and it was even requested that the
same might be done in future parliaments." But it is
obvious what a latitude this gave to a prevailing faction.
These eighteen commissioners, or some of them (for
there were who disliked the turn of affairs), usurped
the full rights of the legislature, which undoubtedly
were only delegated in inspect of business already com-
menced/ They imposed a perpetual oath on prelates

t 21 R. II. p. 369. minimfc expedites. Cujtia concession!*

° 13 R. II. p. 256. colore persons sic dcputeta* processcrunt

* This proceedingwas made one of the ad alia general iter parliamentum illud
articles of charge against Richard in the tangentia ; et hoc de voluntatc regis; in
following terms: Item, in parliamento derogationera statfiK parliament!, et in
ultimo celebrate apud S&lopiam, idem magnum inconimodum fotius regni et
rex proponens opprimere popuium suum peniiciosum exemplum. Et ut super
procuravit subtiliter et fecit concedi, quod factis eonim hujusmodi aliquem colorem
potestaa parliament! de consensu omnium et auctoritatem viderentur habere, rex
statuum regni sui remaneret apud quas- fecit rotulos parliament! pro vote suo
dam certas personas ad terminanduin, muteri et deieri, contra effectual con-
dissolute parliamento, certas petitiones senslonis pradicta*. Rot part 1 H. IV.
In eodem parliamento porrectas protunc vcl iii. p. 418. Whether the last accuse

English Const. QUARREL OF HEREFORD AND NORFOLK. 79

and lords for all time to come, to be tafcen before obtain-
ing livery of their lands, that they would maintain the
statutes and ordinances made by this parliament, or
44 afterwards by the lords and knights having power
committed to them by the same.” They declared it
high treason to disobey their ordinances. They an-
nulled the patents of the dukes of Hereford and Norfolk,
and adjudged Henry Bowet, the former’s chaplain, who
had advised him to petition for his inheritance, to the
penalties of treasons And thus, having obtained a
revenue for life, and the power of parliament being
notoriously usurped by a knot of his creatures, the king
was little likely to meet his people again, and became
as truly absolute as his ambition could require.

It had been necessary for this purpose to subjugate
the ancient nobility. For the English constitu-
tion gave them such paramount rights that it thedSes of
was impossible either to make them surrender ^[^rfoik.
their country’s freedom, or to destroy it with-
out their consent. But several of the chief men had
fallen or were involved with the party of Gloucester.
Two who, having once belonged to it, had lately
plunged into the depths of infamy to ruin their former
friends, were still perfectly obnoxious to the king, who
never forgave their original sin. These two, Henry of
Bolingbroke, earl of Derby, -and Mowbray, earl of Not-
tingham, now dukes of Hereford and Norfolk, the most
powerful of the remaining nobility, were, by a singular
conjuncture, thrown, as it were, at the king’s feet. Of
the political mysteries which this reign affords, none is
more inexplicable than the quarrel of these peers. In
the parliament at Shrewsbury, in 1398, Hereford was
called upon by the king to relate what had passed be-
tween the duke of Norfolk and himself in slander of his
majesty. He detailed a pretty long and not improbable
conversation, in which Norfolk had asserted the king’s
intention of destroying them both for their old offence in
impeaching his ministers. Norfolk had only to deny the

tion, of altering the parliamentary roll, have drawn a parallel between this self-
bo true of not, there is enough left in it deputed legislative commission and that
to prove everything I have asserted in appointed by parliament to reform the
the text From this it is sufficiently administration eleven years before,
manifest how unfairly Carte and Hume J Rot. Pari, p. 372, 385.

80 NECESSIT Y FOR DEPOSING RICHARD. Chap. VIII. Part HI.

charge and throw his gauntlet at the accuser. It was
referred to the eighteen commissioners who sat after the
dissolution, and a trial by combat was awarded. But
when this, after many delays, was about to take place at
Coventry, Bichard interfered and settled the dispute by
condemning Hereford to banishment for ten years and
Norfolk for life. This strange determination, which
treated both as guilty where only one could be so,
seems to admit no other solution than the king’s desire
to rid himself of two peers whom he feared and hated at
a blow. But it is difficult to understand by what means
he drew the crafty Bolingbroke into his snare. 1 How-
ever this might have been, he now threw away all ap-
pearance of moderate government. The indignities he
had suffered in the eleventh year of his reign were still
at his heart, a desire to revenge which seems to have
been the mainspring of his conduct. Though a general
pardon of those proceedings had been granted, not only
at the time, but in his own last parliament, he made use
of them as a pretence to extort money from seventeen
counties, to whom he imputed a share in the rebellion.
He compelled men to confess under their seals that
they had been guilty of treason, and to give blank obli-
gations, which his officers filled up with large sums. 11
Upon the death of the duke of Lancaster, who had pas-
sive! y complied throughout all these transactions,
Bichard refused livery of his inheritance to Hereford,
whose exile implied no crime, and who had letters
patent enabling him to make his attorney for that pur-
Necessity P ose during its continuance. In short, his
for deposing government for nearly two years was altogether
Richard il tyrannical ; and, upon the same principles that
cost James II. his throne, it was unquestionably far more
necessary, unless our fathers would have abandoned all

* Besides the contemporary historians, discover. It is strange that Carte should
we may read a full narrative of these expresg surprise at the sentence upon the
proceedings In the Rolls of Parliament, duke of Norfolk, while he seems to con-
vol. iii. p. 382. It appears thftt Mowbray sider that upon Hereford os very equi-
was the most offending party, since, inde- table. But he viewed the whole of this
pendently of Hereford's accusation, he is reign, and of those that ensued, with the
charged with openly maintaining the jaundiced eye of Jacobitism.
appeals made in the false parliament of a Rot. Pari, l H. IV. p. 420, 426 ;
the eleventh of |he king. But the ban- Walsinghani, p. 853, 3ft7 ; Ottertram, p.
ishment of his Accuser was wholly un- 199; Vita Ilic. II. p. 147.
justifiable by any motives that we can

English Const. ACCESSION OF HENRY IV. SI

thought of liberty, to expel Eichard II. Far be it from
us to extenuate the treachery of the Percies towards
this unhappy prince, or the cruel circumstances of his
death, or in any way to extol either his successor or the
chief men of that time, most of whom were ambitious
and faithless; but after such long experience of the
king’s arbitrary, dissembling, and revengeful temper, I
see ifo other safe course, in the actual state of the con-
stitution, than what the nation concurred in pursuing.

The reign of Eichard II. is, in a constitutional light,
the most interesting part of our earlier history ; and it
has been the most imperfectly written. Some have
misrepresented the truth through prejudice, and others
through carelessness. It is only to be understood, and,
indeed, there are great difficulties in the way of under-
standing it at all, by a perusal of the rolls of parliament,
with some assistance from the contemporary historians,
Walsingham, Knyghton, the anonymous biographer
published by Hearn e, and Froissart. These, I must
remark, except occasionally the hist, are extremely hos-
tile to Eichard ; and although w r e are far from being
bound to acquiesce in their opinions, it is at least un-
warrantable in modern writers to sprinkle their margins
with references to such authority in support of positions
decidedly opposite. b

The revolution which elevated Henry IV. to the
throne was certainly so far accomplished by Circum _
force, that the king was in captivity, and those stances
who might still adhere to him in no condition Henry i§7s
to support his authority. But the sincere con- accession,
currence which most of the prelates and nobility, with
the mass of the people, gave to changes that could not
have been otherwise effected by one so unprovided with
foreign support as Henry, proves this revolution to have
been, if not an indispensable, yet a national act, and
should prevent our considering the Lancastrian kings as
usurpers of the throne. Nothing indeed looks so much
like usurpation in the whole transaction as Henry’s

*> It is fair to observe that Froissart’s 1395, 1. iv. c. 62, where he gives a very
testimony makes most in favour of the indifferent character of the duke of Glou
king, or rather against his enemies, where cester. In general this writer is ill-in*
it is most valuable ; that is, in his account formed of English affairs, and undeserving
of what he heard in the English oourt in to be quoted as an authority.

vol. in. a

82 CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING Chap. VIII. Part III.

remarkable challenge of the crown, insinuating, though
not avowing, as Hume has justly animadverted upon it,
a false and ridiculous title by right line of descent, and
one equally unwarrantable by conquest. The course of
proceedings is worthy of notice. As the renunciation
of Eichard might well pass for the effect of compulsion,
there was a strong reason for propping up its instability
by a solemn deposition from the throne, founded upon
specific charges of misgovemment. Again, as the right
of dethroning a monarch was nowhere found in the
law, it was equally requisite to support this assumption
of power by an actual abdication. But as neither one
nor the other filled up the duke of Lancaster’s wishes,
who was not contented with owing a crown to election,
nor seemed altogether to account for the exclusion of
the house of March, he devised this claim, which was
preferred in the vacancy of the throne, Kichard’s cession
having been read and approved in parliament, and the
sentence of deposition, “ out of abundant caution, and
to remove all scruple,” solemnly passed by seven com-
missioners appointed out of the several estates. “ After
which challenge and claim,” says the record, “ the
lords spiritual and temporal, and all the estates there
present, being asked, separately and together, what they
thought of the said challenge and claim, the said estates,
with the whole people, without any difficulty or delay,
consented that the said duke should reign over them.”"
The claim of Henry, as opposed to that of the earl of
March, was indeed ridiculous; but it is by no means
evident that, in such cases of extreme urgency as leave
no security for the common weal but the deposition of a
reigning prince, there rests any positive obligation upon
the estates of the realm to fill his place with the nearest
heir. A revolution of this kind seems rather to defeat
and confound all prior titles ; though in the new settle-
ment it will commonly be prudent, as well as equitable,
to treat them with some regard. Were this otherwise it
would be hard to say why William III. reigned to the
exclusion of Anne, or even of the Pretender, who had
surely committed no offence at that time; or why (if
such indeed be the true construction of the Act of Settle-

c Hot. ParL p. 423.

English Const.

HENRY IV.’S ACCESSION.

83

ment) the more distant branches of the royal stock,
descendants of Henry VII. and earlier kings, have been
cut off* from their hope of succession by the restriction to
the heirs of the princess Sophia.

In this revolution of 1399 there was as remarkable an
attention shown to the formalities of the constitution,
allowance made for the men and the times, as in that of
1688. The parliament was not opened by commission;
no one took the office of president; the commons did
not adjourn to their own chamber ; they chose no
speaker; the name of parliament was not taken, but
that only of estates of the realm. But as it would have
been a violation of constitutional principles to assume a
parliamentary character without the king’s commission,
though summoned by his writ, so it was still more
essential to limit their exercise of power to the necessity
of circumstances. Upon the cession of the king, as
upon his death, the parliament was no more ; its exist-
ence, as the council of the sovereign, being dependent
upon his will. The actual convention summoned by
the writs of Richard could not legally become the par-
liament of Henry ; and the validity of a statute declaring
it to bo such would probably have been questionable in
that age, when the power of statutes to alter the original
principles of the common law was by no means so tho-
roughly recognised as at the Restoration and Revolution.
Yet Henry was too well pleased with his friends to part
with them so readily ; and he had much to effect before
the fervour of their spirits should abate. Hence an ex-
pedient was devised of issuing writs for a new parlia-
ment, returnable in six days. These neither were nor
could be complied with ; but the same members as had
deposed Richard sat in the new parliament, which was
regularly opened by Henry’s commissioner as if they
had been duly elected. 11 In this contrivance, more than
in all the rest, we may trace the hand of lawyers.

If we look back from the accession of Henry IV. to
that of his predecessor, the constitutional authority of
the house of commons will be perceived to have made
surprising progress during the course of twenty-two

d If proof could be required of tiny- persons, it may be found in their writs of
thing so self-evident as that these as- expenses, as published by Prynne, 4th
sembiics consisted of exactly the same Register, p. 450.

G 2

84 ADVANCES OF THE CONSTITUTION Chap. VIII. Part III.

years. Of th§ three capital points in contest while
Retrospect reigned, that money could not be levied,

of thTpro- or laws enacted, without the commons , consent,
institution an< ^ ^at the administration of government was
Tinder subject to their inspection and control, the
Richard ii. £ rS £ was absolutely decided in their favour,
the second was at least perfectly admitted in principle,
and the last was confirmed by frequent exercise. The
commons had acquired two additional engines of immense
efficiency ; one, the right of directing tlio application of
subsidies, and calling accountants before them ; the
other, that of impeaching the king’s ministers for mis-
conduct. All these vigorous shoots of liberty throve
n d . anccg more and more under the three kings of the
under the 08 house of Lancaster, and drew such strength
house of and nourishment from the generous heart of
England, that in after-times, and in a less pros-
perous season, though checked and obstructed in their
growth, neither tho blasts of arbitrary power could
break them off, nor the mildew of servile opinion cause
them to wither. I shall trace the progress of parliament
till the civil wars of York and Lancaster : 1. in main-
taining the exclusive right of taxation ; 2. in directing
and checking the public expenditure ; 3. in making
supplies depend on the redress of grievances ; 4. in se-
curing the people against illegal ordinances and inter-
polations of the statutes; 5. in controlling the royal
administration ; 6. in punishing bad ministers ; and
lastly, in establishing their own immunities and pri-
vileges.

1. The pretence of levying money without consent of
parliament expired with Edward 111., who had asserted
it, as we have seen, in the very last year of his reign.
A great council of lords and prelates, summoned in the
second year of his successor, declared that* they could
advise no remedy for the king’s necessities without lay-
ing taxes on the people, which could only be granted in
parliament. 6 Nor was Richard ever accused of illegal
tallages, the frequent theme of remonstrance under
Edward, unless we may conjecture that this charge is
implied in an act (11 R. II. c. 9) which annuls all

2 It IL p. 55.

English Const. UNDER THE HOUSE OF LANCASTER.

85

impositions on wool and leather, without consent of par*
liament, if any there bej Doubtless his innocence in this
respect was the effect of weakness ; and if the revolu-
tion of 1399 had not put an end to his newly acquired
despotism, this, like every other right of his people,
would have been swept away. A less palpable means of
evading the consent of the commons was by the extor-
tion of loans, and harassing those who refused to pay by
summonses before the council. These loans, the fre-
quent resource of arbitrary sovereigns in later times, are
first complained of in an early parliament of Richard II. ;
and a petition is granted that no man shall be compelled
to lend the king money. 6 But how little this was re-
garded we may infer from a writ directed, in 1386, to
some persons in Boston, enjoining them to assess every
person who had goods and chattels to the amount of
twenty pounds, in his proportion of two hundred pounds,
which the town had promised to lend the king ; and
giving an assurance that this shall be deducted from the
next subsidy to be granted by parliament. Among other
extraordinary parts of this letter is a menace of forfeiting
life, limbs, and property, held out against such as should
not obey these commissioners. 11 After his triumph over
the popular party towards the end of his reign, he
obtained large sums in this way.

Under the Lancastrian kings there is much less
appearance of raising money in an unparliamentary
course. Henry IY. obtained an aid from a great council
in the year 1400; but they did not pretend to charge
any besides themselves; though it seems that some
towns afterwards gave the king a contribution. 1 A few
years afterwards he directs the sheriffs to call on the
richest men in their counties to advance the money voted
by parliament. This, if any compulsion was threatened,
is an instance of over-strained prerogative, though con-
sonant to the practice of the late reign. k There is, how-

t is positively laid down by the way to the statute-book,
a ssar ters of civil liberty, in the great case h Rymer, t. vii. p. 644.
of impositions (Howell’s State Trials, * Carte, vol. ii. p. 640. Sir M. Hale
vol. ii. p. 443, 607), that no precedents observes that he finds no complaints of
for arbitrary taxation of exports or im- illegal impositions under the kings of the
ports occur from the accession of Richard house of Lancaster. Hargrave’s Tracts,
H. to the reign, of Mary. L P* 184.

g 2 R, II. p. 62. This did not find its k Rymer, t. viii. p. 412, 488.

86 CONDITIONS OF SUPPLY. Chap. VIII. Part 1IL

ever, an instance of very arbitrary conduct with respect
to a grant of money in the minority of Henry VI. A
subsidy had been granted by parliament upon goods im-
ported under certain restrictions in favour of the mer-
chants, with a provision that, if these conditions be not
observed on the king’s part, then the grant should be
void and of no effect. 1 ” But an entry is made on the roll
of the next parliament, that, “ whereas some disputes
have arisen about the grant of the last subsidy, it is
declared by the duke of Bedford and other lords in par-
liament, with advice of the judges and others learned in
the law, that the said subsidy was at all events to be col-
lected and levied for the king’s use ; notwithstanding
any conditions in the grant of the said subsidy con-
tained.” “ The commons, however, in making the grant
of a fresh subsidy in this parliament, renewed their
former conditions, with the addition of another, that “ it
ne no part thereof be beset ne dispensed to no other use,
but only in and for the defense of the said roialme.” 0
2. The right of granting supplies would have been
very incomplete, had it not been accompanied
tion oF with that of directing their application. The
supplies, principle of appropriating public moneys began,
as w e have seen, in the minority of Kichard ; and was
among the best fruits of that period. It was steadily
maintained under the new dynasty. The parliament of
6 H. IV. granted two fifteenths and two tenths, with a
tax on skins and wool, on condition th&t it should be ex-
pended in the defence of the kingdom, and not other-
wise, as Thomas lord Furnival and Sir John Pelham,
ordained treasurers of war for this parliament, to receive
the said subsidies, shall account and answer to the com-
mons at the next parliament. These treasurers were
sworn in parliament to execute their trusts. p A similar
precaution was adopted in the next sessions

3* The commons made a bold attempt in the second
Attempt to y ear Henry IV. to give the strongest security
make supply to their claims of redress, by inverting the ugtol
course of parliamentary proceedings. It was
grievances, usual to answer their petitions on the last day
of :|||$ session, which put an end to all further discussion

m Rot. Purl, vol. iv. p. 216. n Id. p. 301 . ° Id. p. 302.

P Id. vol. ill. p. 646. *1 Id. p. 668.

English Const. RIGHTS Or IHE COMMONS.

87

upon them, and prevented their making the redress of
grievances a necessary condition of supply. They now
requested that an answer might be given before they
made their grant of subsidy. This was one of the
articles which Richard IL’s judges had declare^ it high
treason to attempt. Henry was not inclined to make
a concession which would virtually have removed the
' chief impediment to the ascendency of parliament* He
first said that he would consult with the lords, and
answer according to their advice. On the last day of
the session the commons were informed that “ it had
never been known in the time of his ancestors that they
should have their petitions answered before they had
done all their business in parliament, whether of grants
ing money or any other concern ; wherefore the king
will not alter the good customs and usages of ancient
times.” r

Notwithstanding the just views these parliaments
appear generally to have entertained of their power over
the public purse, that of the third of Henry V. followed
a precedent from the worst times of Richard II., by
granting the king a subsidy on wool and leather during
his life/ This, an historian tells us, Henry IY. had
vainly laboured to obtain ; 1 but the taking of Harfleur
intoxicated the English with new dreams of conquest in
France, which their good sense and constitutional jealousy
were not firm enough to resist. The continued expenses
of the war, however, prevented this grant from becoming
so dangerous as it might have been in a season of tran-
quillity* Henry V., like his father, convoked parliament
almost in every year of his reign.

4. It had long been out of all question that the legis-
lature consisted of the king, lords, and com-
mons ; or, in stricter language, that the king rights of the
could not make or repeal statutes without the ^{SSIU.
consent of parliament. But this fundamental
mfxim was still frequently defeated by various acts of
elision or violence ; which, though protested against as
illegal, it was a difficult task to prevent. The king some-
times exerted a power of suspending the observance of
statutes, as in the ninth of Richard II., when a petition

r Rot. Purl. vol. iii. p. 453. 8 Id. vol. iv. p. 63.

t Walsingham, p. 379.

DISPENSING POWER Chap. VIII. Part III.

£8

that all statutes might be confirmed is granted, with an
exception as to one passed in the last parliament, forbid-
ding the judges to take fees, or give counted in eases
where the king was a party ; which, “ because it was
too severe and needs declaration, the king would have of
no effect till it should be declared in parliament.” u The
apprehension of the dispensing prerogative and sense of
its illegality are manifested by the wary terms wherein
the commons, in one of Richard’s parliaments, “assent
that the king make such sufferance respecting tho statute
of provisors as shall seem reasonable to him, so that tho
said statute be not repealed ; and, moreover, that the
commons may disagree thereto at the next parliament,
and resort to the statute with a protestation that this
assent, which is a novelty and never done before, shall
not be drawn into precedent ; praying the king that, this
protestation may be entered on the roll of parliament.*
A petition, in one of Henry IY.’s parliaments, to limit
the number of attorneys, and forbid filazers and protho-
notaries from practising, having been answered favour-
ably as to the first point, we find a marginal entry in the
roll that the prince and council had respited the execu-
tion of this act. T _ ,

The dispensing power, as exercised in favour of indi-
viduals, is quite of a different character from
powerof tlio this general suspension of statutes, but indi-
enwn. rectly weakens the sovereignty of the legisla-
ture. This power was exerted, and even recognised,
throughout all the reigas of the Tlantagenets. In the
first of Henry V. the commons pray that the statute for
driving aliens out of the kingdom bo executed. The
king assents, saving his prerogative and his right of
dispensing with it when he pleased. To which the com-
mons replied that their intention was never otherwise,
nor, by God’s help, ever should be. At the same time
one Bees ap Thomas petitions tho king to modifym dis-
pense with the statute prohibiting Welchmen from pur-
chasing lands in England, or the English towns Jn

o W ateingham , p. 210. Ruffbead ob- * 15 R. II. p. 285. See, too, 16 R. II.
the margin upon this statute, p. 301, where the same power is renewed
8 R. ifT c / 3, that it is repealed, but In H. IV.’s parliaments,
does not take notice what sort of repeal J 13 H. 1 V. p. 64X

English Const.

OF THE CROWN.

8ft

Wales ; which the king grants. In the same parliament
the commons pray that no grant or protection he made
to any one tin contravention of the statute of provisors,
saving the king’s prerogative. He merely answers, “ Let
the statutes be observed evading any allusion to his
dispensing power . 2

It has been obsetved, under the reign of Edward III.,
that the practice of leaving statutes to be drawn up by
the judges, from the petition and answer jointly, after a
dissolution of parliament, presented an opportunity of
falsifying the intention of the legislature, whereof advan-
tage was often taken. Some very remarkable instances
of this fraud occurred in the succeeding reigns.

An ordinance was put upon the roll of parliament, in
the fifth of Richard II., empowering sheriffs of counties
to arrest preachers of heresy and their abettors, and
detain them in prison till they should justify themselves
before the church. This was introduced into the statutes
of the year ; but the assent of lords and commons is not
expressed. In the next parliament the commons, recit-
ing this ordinance, declare that it was never assented to
or granted by them, but what had been proposed in this
matter was without their concurrence (that is, as I con-
ceive, had been rejected by them), and pray that this
statute be annulled ; for it was never their intent to bind
themselves or their descendants to the bishops more than
their ancestors had been bound in times past. . The king
returned an answer, agreeing to this petition. Never-
theless the pretended statute was untouched, and remains
still among our laws ; H unrepealed, except by desuetude,
and by inference from the acts of much later times.

This commendable reluctance of the commons to let
the clergy forge chains for them produced, as there is
much appearance, a similar violation of their legislative
rights in the next reign. The statute against heresy in
the second of Henry IV. ls not grounded upon any

* Rot Pari. V. 4 H. V. p. 6, 9. 13 R. II. stat. 1, c. 15, that the king's

* ft R. II. stat 2, c. 5; Rot Pari, castles and gaols which had been sepa-
6 R. II. p. 141. Some other instances rated from the body of the adjoining
of the commons attempting to prevent counties should be reunited to them, 18
these unfair practices are adduced by not founded upon any petition that ap-
Ruffhead, in his preface to thd Statutes, pears on the roll ; and probably, by
and in Prynne’s preface to Cotton's making search, other instances equally
Abridgment of the Records. The act flagrant might be discovered.

90

DISPENSING POWER Chap. VIII. Part IIL

e tition of the commons, but only upon one of the clergy.

is said to be enacted by consent of the lords, but no
notice is taken of the lower house in the parliament roll,
though the statute reciting the petition asserts the com-
mons to have joined in it. b The petition and the statute
are botfi in Latin, which is unusual in the law's of this
time. In a subsequent petition of the commons this act
is styled “ the statute made in the second year of your
majesty’s reign at the request of the prelates and clergy
of your kingdom which affords a presumption that it
had no regular assent of parliament . 1 And the spirit of
the commons during this whole reign being remarkably
hostile to the church, it w r ould have been hardly possible
to obtain their consent to so penal a law against heresy.
Several of their petitions seem designed indirectly to
weaken its efficacy . 4

These infringements of their most essential right were
resisted by the commons in various ways, according to
the measure of their power. In the fifth of Richard II.
they request the lords to let them sec a certain ordinance
before it is engrossed . 15 At another time they procured
some of their own members, as well as peers, to be pre 1
sent at engrossing the roll. At length they spoke out
unequivocally in a memorable petition, which, besides
its intrinsic importance, is deserving of notice as the
earliest instance in which the house of commons adopted
the English language. I shall present its venerable
orthography without change.

“ Oure soverain lord, youre humbly and trew r e lieges
that ben come for the comune of youre lond bysechyn
onto youre rizt riztwesnesse, That so as hit hath ever be
thair libte and fredom, that thar sholde no statutno lawe
be made offlasse than they yaf therto their assent ; con-
sideringe that the comune of youre lond, the whiche that

b There had been, however, a petition
of the commons on the same subject, ex-
pressed in very general terms, on which
this terrible superstructure might art-
fully be raised, p. 4T4.

c p. 626 .

d We find a remarkable petition in
8 H. IV., professedly aimed against the
Lollards, but intended, as 1 strongly sus-
pect, in their favour. It condemns per-
sona preaching against the catholic faith

or sacraments to imprisonment till tho
next parliament, where they wen; to abide
such judgment as should be rendered by
the king and jkten of the realm. This
seems to supersede the burning statute
of 2 H. I V., and the spiritual cognizance
of heresy. Rot. Pari. p. 583. See, too,
p. 626. The petition was expressly
granted; but the clergy, I suppose, pre-
vented its appearing on the statute roll.

0 Rot Pari. vol. iii. p. 102.

English Const,

OF THE CROWN.

91

is, and ever hath be, a membre of youre parlemente, ben
as well assenters as peticioners, that fro this tyme fore-
ward, by compleynte of the comune of any myschief
axknyge remedie by mouthe of their speker for the
comune, other ellys by petition writen, that ther never
be no la we made tlieruppon, and engrossed as statut and
lawe, nother by addicions, nother by diminucions, by no
manner of terme ne termes, the whiche that sholde
chaunge the sentence, and the entente axked by the
speker mouthe, or the petitions beforesaid yeven up yn
writyng by the manere forsaid, withoute assent of the
forsaid comune. Consideringo, oure soverain lord, that
it is not in no wyse the entente of youre eomunes, zif yet
be so that they axke you by spekyng, or by writyng,
two tliynges or three, or as rnanye as they in lust : But
that ever it stande in the fredom of youre hie regalie, to
graunte whiche of thoo that you lust, and to werune the
remanent.

44 The kyng of his grace especial grauntetli that fro
hensforth nothyng be enacted to the peticions of his
comune that be contrarie of hir askyng, wharby they
shuld be boundo withoute their assent. Savyng alwey
to our liege lord his real prerogatif, to graunte and denye
what him lust of their petitions and askynges afore-
said.’^

Notwithstanding the fulness of this assent to so impor-
tant a petition we find no vestige of either among the
statutes, and the whole transaction is unnoticed by those
historians who have not looked into our original records.
If the compilers of the statute-roll were able to keep out
of it the very provision that was intended to cheek their
fraudulent machinations, it was in vain to hope for
redress without altering the established practice in this
respect; and indeed, where there was no design to
falsify the roll it was impossible to draw up statutes
which should be in truth the acts of the whole legisla-
ture, so long as the king continued to grant petitions in
part, and to engraft new matter upon them. Such was

f Rot Pari. voi. iv. p. 22. It is Instead of which they give, as their
curious that the authors of the* Parlia- fashion is, impertinent speeches out of
mentary History say that the roll of this Holingshed, which are certainly not
parliament is lost, and consequently sup- genuine, and would be of no value if
press altogether this important petition, they were so.

92 CROWN’S DISPENSING POWER. Chap. VIII. Part III.

still the case till the commons hit upon an effectual
expedient for screening themselves against these en-
croachments, which has lasted without alteration to the
present day. This was the introduction of complete
statutes under the name of bills, instead of the old
petitions ; and these containing the royal assent and the
whole form of a law, it became, though not quite imme-
diately, 8 a constant principle that the king must admit
or reject them without qualification. This alteration,
which wrought an extraordinary effect on the character
of our constitution, was gradually introduced in Henry
VI.’s reign. h

From the first years of Henry V., though not, I think,
earlier, the commons began to concern themselves with
the petitions of individuals to the lords or council. The
nature of the jurisdiction exercised by the latter will be
treated more fully hereafter; it is only necessary to
mention in this place that many of the requests preferred
to them were such as could not be granted without trans-
cending the boundaries of law. A just inquietude as to
the encroachments of the king’s council had long been
manifested by the commons ; and finding remonstrances
ineffectual, they took measures for preventing such
usurpations of legislative power by introducing their own
consent to private petitions. These were now presented
by the hands of the commons, and in very many instances

8 Henry VI. and Edward IV. in some
cases passed bills with sundry provisions
annexed by themselves. Thus the act
for resumption of grants, 4 E. IV., was
encumbered with 289 clauses in favour
of so many persons whom the king meant
to exempt from its operation ; and the
same was done in other acts of the same
description. Rot Pari. vol. v. p. 617.

h The variations of each statute, as
now printed, from the parliamentary
roll, whether in form or substance, are
noticed in Cotton’s Abridgment It
may be worth while to consult the pre-
face to Ruffbead’s edition of the Statutes,
where this subject is treated at some
length.

Perhaps the triple division of our
legislature may be dated from this in-
novation. For as it is impossible to
deny that, while the king promulgated a

statute founded upon a mere petition, be
was himself the real legislator, so I think
it is equally fair to assert, notwithstand-
ing the formal preamble of our statutes,
that laws brought into either house of
parliament in a perfect shape, and re-
ceiving first the assent of lords and com-
mons, and finally that of the king, who
has no power to modify them, must be
deemed to proceed, and derive their effi-
cacy, from the joint concurrence of all
the three. It is said, indeed, at a much
earlier time, that le ley de la terre est
fait en parlemcnt par le roi, et les
seigneurs espirituels et temporals, et tout
la comniunautd du royaume. Rot Part
vol. iii. p. 293. But this, I must allow,
was in the violent session of 11 Ric. II.,
the constitutional authority of which if
not to be highly prized.

English Const.

ROYAL EXPENDITURE.

93

passed in the form of statutes with the express assent of
all parts of the legislature. Such was the origin of pri-
vate bills, which occupy the greater part of the rolls in
Henry V. and VL’s parliament. The commons once
made an ineffectual endeavour to have their consent to
all petitions presented to the council in parliament ren-
dered necessary by law; if I rightly apprehend the
meaning of the roll in this place, which seems obscure
or corrupt.*

5. If the strength of the commons had lain merely in
the weakness of the crown, it might be inferred Interference
that such harassing interference with the ad- ofpariia-
rninistration of affairs as the youthful and unroyal* 1
frivolous hi chard was compelled to endure expenditure,
would have been sternly repelled by his experienced
successor. But, on the contrary, the spirit of Eichard
might have rejoiced to see that his mortal enemy suffered
as hard usage at the hands of parliament as himself.
After a few years the government of Henry became ex-
tremely unpopular. Perhaps his dissension with the
great family of Percy, which had placed him on the
throne, and was regarded with partiality by the people, k
chiefly contributed to this alienation of their attachment.
The commons requested, in the fifth of his reign, that
certain persons might be removed from the court ; the
lords concurred in displacing four of these, one being
the king’s confessor. Henry came down to parliament
and excused these four persons, as knowing no special
cause why they should be removed; yet, well under-
standing that what the lords and commons should ordain
would be for his and his kingdom’s interest, and there-
fore anxious to conform himself to their wishes, consented
to the said ordinance, and charged the persons in ques-
tion to leave his palace ; adding, that he would do as
much by any other about his person whom he should
find to have incurred the ill affection of his people. 111 It
was in the same session that the archbishop of Canter-
bury was commanded to declare before the lords the
king’s intention reflecting his administration ; allowing
that some things had been done amiss in his court and

i g H. V. vol. iv. p. 127 . whom, as it proved, he had just cause to

k The house of commons thanked the suspect. 6 H. IV. p. 525.
king for pardoning Northumberland, m 5 H. IV. p. 595.

94 INTERFERENCE OF PARLIAMENT Chap. VIII. Part III.

household ; and therefore, wishing to conform to the will
of God and laws of the land, protested that he would let
in future no letters of signet or privy seal go in disturb-
ance of law, beseeched the lords to put his household in
order, so that every one might be paid, and declared that
the money granted by the commons for the war should
be received by treasurers appointed in parliament, and
disbursed by them for no other purpose, unless in case
of rebellion. At the request of the commons he named
the members of his privy council ; and did the same,
with some variation* of persons, two years afterwards.
These, though not nominated with the express consent,
seem to have had the approbation of the commons, for a
subsidy is granted in 7 H. IV., among other causes, for
u the great trust that the commons have in the lords
lately chosen and ordained to be of the king’s continual
council, that there shall be better management than
heretofore.” *

In the sixth year of Henry the parliament, which
Sir E. Coke derides as unlearned because lawyers were
excluded from it, proceeded to a resumption of grants
and a prohibition of alienating the ancient inheritance of
the crown without consent of parliament, in order to ease
the commons of taxes, and that the king might live on
his own." This was a favourite though rather chimerical
project. In a later parliament it was requested that the
king would take his council’s advice how to keep within
his own revenue ; he answered that he would willingly
comply as soon as it should be in his power. p

But no parliament came near, in the number and bold-
ness of its demands, to that held in the eighth year of
Henry IV. The commons presented thirty -one articles,
none of which the king ventured to refuse, though press-
ing very severely upon bis prerogative. He was to name
sixteen counsellors, by whose advice he was solely to be
guided, none of them, to be dismissed without conviction
of misdemeanor. The chancellor and privy seal to pass
no grants or other matter contrary to law. Any persons
about the court stirring up the king or queen’s minds
against their subjects, and duly convicted thereof, to lose
their offices and.be fined. The king’s ordinary revenue

n Rot. I’arl. vol. iii. p. 529, 568, 573. °*p. 547.

P 13 H JV. p 624.

ENGM8H Const. WITH ROYAL EXPENDITURE.

95

was wholly appropriated to his household and the pay-
ment of his debts ; no grant of wardship or other profit
to be made thereout, nor any forfeiture to be pardoned.
The king, “ considering the wise government of other
Christian princes, and conforming himself thereto,” was
to assign two days in the week for petitions, u it being
an honourable and necessary thing that his lieges, who
desired to petition him, should be heard.” No judicial
officer, nor any in the revenue or household, to enjoy his
place for life or term of years. No petition to be pre-
sented to the king, by any of his household, at times
when the council were not Sitting, The council to de-
termine nothing cognizable at common law, unless for a
reasonable cause and with consent of the judges. The
statutes regulating purveyance were affirmed — abuses of
various kinds in the council and in courts of justice enu-
merated and forbidden — elections of knights for counties
put under regulation. The council and officers of state
were sworn to observe the common law and all statutes,
those especially just enacted. q

It must strike every reader that these provisions were
of themselves a noble fabric of constitutional liberty, and
hardly perhaps inferior to the petition of right under
Charles I. We oannot account for the submissiQn of
Henry to conditions far more derogatory than ever were
imposed on Richard, because the secret politics of his
reign are very imperfectly understood. Towards its close
he manifested more vigour. The speaker, Sir Thomas
Chaucer, having made the usual petition for liberty of
speech, the king answered that he might speak as others
had done in the time of his ("Henry’s) ancestors, and his
own, but not otherwise ; for lie would by no means have
any innovation, but be a£ much at his liberty as $ny of
his ancestors had ever been. Some time after he sent a
message to the commons, complaining of a law passed at
the last parliament infringing liis liberty and prerogative,
which he requested their consent to repeal. To this the
commons agreed, and received the king’s thanks, who
declared at the same time that he would keep as much
freedom and prerogative as any of his ancestors. It does
not appear what was the particular subject of complaint ;

q Rot. Pari. 8 II. IV. p. 585.

96

POPULARITY OF HENRY Y. Ciur. VIII. Par? HI.

but there had been much of the same remonstrating spirit
in the last parliament that was manifested on preceding
occasions. The commons, however, for reasons we cannot
eisplain, were rather dismayed. Before their dissolution
they petition the king, that, whereas he was reported to
the offended at some of his subjects in this and in the
preceding parliament, he would openly declare that he
held them all for loyal subjects. Henry granted this
of his special grace;” and thus concluded his reign
more triumphantly with respect to his domestic battles
than he had gone through it/

Power deemed to be ill gotten is naturally precarious ;
Henry v. an< ^ instance of Henry IV. has been well
Hispopu* quoted to prove that public liberty flourishes
Umy * with a bad title in the sovereign. None of our
kings seem to have been less beloved ; and indeed lie
had little claim to affection. But what men denied to
the reigning king they poured in fuB pleasure upon the
heir of his throne. The virtues of the prince of Wales
are almost invidiously eulogized by those parliaments
who treat harshly his father ; * and these records afford
a strong presumption that some early petulance or riot
has been much exaggerated by the vulgar minds of our
chroniclers. One can scarcely understand at least that
a prince who was three years engaged in quelling the
dangerous insurrection of Glendower, and who in the
latter time of his father’s reign presided at the council,
was so lost in a cloud of low debauchery as common fame
represents. 1 Loved he certainly was throughout his life,
as so intrepid, affable, and generous a temper well de-
served ; ana this sentiment was heightened to admiration
by successes still more rapid and dazzling thaii those of
Edward III. During his reign there scarcely appears
any vestige of dissatisfaction in parliament — a circum-
stance very honourable, whether we ascribe it to the
justice of his administration or to the affection of his
people. Perhaps two exceptions, though they are rather
one in spirit, might be made: the first, a petition to the
duke of Gloucester, then holding parliament as guardian

r 13 H. IV. p. 648, 658. aware that the same opinion had been

• Rot. ParL vol. iii. p. 549, 568, 574, elaborately maintained by Mr. Luders,

01 h in one of his valuable essays upon points

* This passage was written before I was of constitutional history.

English Const. INFLUENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

97

of England, that he would move the king and queen to
return, as speedily as might please them, in relief and
comfort of the commons ; u the second, a request that their
petitions might not be sent to the king beyond sea, but
altogether determined “ within this kingdom of England,
during this parliament,” and that this ordinance might
be of force in all future parliaments to be held in Eng-
land.* This prayer, to which the guardian declined to
accede, evidently sprang from the apprehensions, excited
in their minds by the treaty of Troyes, that England
might become a province of the French crown, which led
them to obtain a renewal of the statute of Edward III.,
declaring the independence of this kingdom/

It has been seen already that even Edw&rd III. con-
sulted his parliament upon the expediency of Parliament
negociations for peace, though at that time the conBi^ nt
commons had jfcot acquired boldness enough to
tender their advifee. In Ilichard II.’s reign they
answered to a similar proposition with a little more con-
fidence, that the dangers each way were so considerable
they dared not decide, though an honourable peace would
be the greatest comfort they could have, and concluded
by hoping that the king would not engage to do homage
for Calais or the conquered country.* The parliament ot
the tenth of his reign was expressly summoned in order
to advise concerning the king’s intended expedition
beyond sea — a great council, which had previously been
assembled at Oxford, having declared their incompetence
to consent to this measure without the advice of parlia-
ment .' 1 Y et a few years afterwards, on a similar reference,
the commons rather declined to give any opinion/ They
confirmed the league of Henry V. with the emperor
Sigismund ; c and the treaty of Troyes, which was so
fundamentally to change the situation of Henry and his
successors, obtained, as it evidently required, the sanction
of both houses of parliament/ These precedents con-
spiring with the weakness of the executive government,
in the minority of Henry VI., to fling an increase of
influence into the scale of the commons, they made their

u Rot Pari. 8 H. V. vol. iv. p. 125. a p. 2J5.

* p. 128. b 17 R. II. p. 315.

y p. 130. 0 4 H. V. vol. iv. p. 98.

* 7 R. II. vol. lii. p. 170. d p. 135.

VOL. III.

H

98

INFLUENCE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

concurrence necessary to all important business both of
a foreign and domestic nature. Thus commissioners were
appointed to treat of the deliverance of the king of Scots,
the duchesses of Bedford and Gloucester were made
denizens, and mediators were appointed to reconcile the
dukes of Gloucester and Burgundy, by authority of the
three estates assembled in parliament.® Leave was given
to the flukes of Bedford and Gloucester, and others in
the king's behalf, to treat of peace with France, by both
houses of parliament, in pursuance of an article in the
treaty of Troyes, that no treaty should be set on foot with
the dauphin without consent of the three estates of both
realms/ This article was afterwards repealed. 8

Some complaints are made by the commons, even
during the first years of Henry’s minority, that the
king’s subjects underwent arbitrary imprisonment, and.
were vexed by summonses before the council and by the
newly-invented writ of subpoena out of chancery.* 1 But
these are not so common as formerly ; and so far as the
rolls lead us to any inference, there was less injustice
committed by the government under Henry VI. and his
father than at any former period. Wastefulness indeed
might justly be imputed to the regency, who had scanda-
lously lavished the king’s revenue. 1 This ultimately led
to an act for resuming all grants since his accession,
founded upon a public declaration of the great officers of
the crown that his debts amounted to 372,000/,, and the
annual expense of the household to 24,000/., while the
ordinary revenue was not more than 5000Z. k

6, But before this time the sky had begun to darken,
impeach- discontent with the actual administration
mentJBof pervaded every rank. The causes of this are
ministers. f am yi ar — the unpopularity of the king’s mar-
riage with Margaret of Anjou, and her impolitic violence

• Rot Part 4 H. V. vol iv. p. 211, 242,
277.

f p, 371.

* 23 H. VI. vol v. p. 102. There is
rather a curious instance in 3 H. VI. of
the Jealousy with which the commons
regarded *any proceedings in parliament
where they were not concerned A con-
troversy arose between the earls marshal
and of Warwick respecting their pre-
cedence; founded upon the royal blood

of the first, and long possession of the
second. In this the commons could not
affect to interfere Judicially ; but they
found a singular way of meddling, by
petitioning the king to confer the duke-
dom of Norfolk on the earl marshal,
vol. iv. p. 273.

h Rot Pari. 1 H. VI. p. 189; 3 II VI.
p. 292; 8H. VL p.343.

* vol. v. 18 H. VL p. 17.
k 28 H. VI. p. 186.

English Const. IMPEACHMENTS OF MINISTERS.

99

in the conduct of affairs, particularly the imputed murder
of the people’s favourite, the duke of Gloucester. This
provoked an attack upon her own creature, the duke of
Suffolk. Impeachment had lain still, like a sword in the
scabbard, since the accession of Henry IV., when the
commons, though not preferring formal articles of accu-
sation, had petitioned the king that Justice RickhiU, who
had been employed to take the former duke of Glouces-
ter’s confession at Calais, and the lords appellants of
Richard II. last parliament, should be put on their
defence before the lords.® In Suffolk’s case the commons
seem to have proceeded by bill of attainder, or at least
to have designed the judgment against that minister to
be the act of the whole legislature ; for they delivered a
bill containing articles against him to the lords, with a
request that they would pray the king’s majesty to enact
that bill in parliament, and that the said duke might be
proceeded against upon the said articles in parliament
according to the law and custom of England. These
articles contained charges of high treason, chiefly relating
to his conduct in France, which, whether treasonable or
not, seems to have been grossly against the honour and
advantage of the crown. At a later day the commons
presented many other articles of misdemeanor. To the
former he made a defence, in presence of the king as well
as the lords both spiritual and temporal ; and indeed the
articles of impeachment were directly addressed to the
king, which gave him a reasonable pretext to interfere
in the judgment. But from apprehension, as it is said,
that Suffolk could not escape conviction upon at least
some part of these charges, Henry anticipated with no
slight irregularity the course of legal trial, and, sum-
moning the peers into a private chamber, informed the
duke of Suffolk, by mouth of his chancellor, that, inas-
much as he had not put himself upon his peerage, but
submitted wholly to the royal pleasure, the king, ac-
quitting him of the first articles containing matter of
treason, by his own advice and not that of the lords, nor
by way of judgment, not being in a place where judg-
ment could be delivered, banished him for five years
from his dominions. The lords then present besought

h 2

m Rot Pari. vol. Hi. p. 430, 449.

100

PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

the king to let their protest appear on record, that neither
they nor their posterity might lose their rights of peerage
by this precedent. It was justly considered as an arbi-
trary stretch of prerogative, in order to defeat the privi-
leges of parliament and screen a favourite minister from
punishment. But the course of proceeding by bill of
attainder, instead of regular impeachment, was not judi-
ciously chosen by the commons. 0

7. Privilege of parliament, an extensive and singular
Privilege of branch of our constitutional law, begins to
pariiaasent. attract attention under the Lancastrian princes.
It is true indeed that we can trace long before by records,
and may infer with probability as to times whose records
have not survived, one considerable immunity — a freedom
from arrest for persons transacting the king’s business in
his national council. 0 Several authorities may be found
in Mr. Hatsell’s Precedents ; of which one, in the 9th of
Edward II., is conclusive. 11 But in those rude times
members of parliament were not always respected by tho
officers executing legal process, and still less by the vio-
lators of law. After several remonstrances, which the
crown had evaded/ the commons obtained the statute 1 1
Henry YI. c. 11, for the punishment of such as assault
any on their way to the parliament, giving double
damages to the party/ They had more difficulty in
establishing, notwithstanding the old precedents in their
favour, an immunity from all criminal process except in
charges of treason, felony, and breach of the peace, which
is their present measure of privilege. The truth was,
that, with a right pretty clearly recognised, as is admitted
by the judges in Thorp’s case; the house of commons
had no regular compulsory process at their command.
In the cases of Lark, servant of a member, in the 8th of
Henry YI./ and of Clerke, himself a burgess, in the 39th
of the same king/ it was thought necessary to effect their

B Rot Pari 28 H. VL vol. v. p. 178. Wilkins, Leges Anglo-Saxon, p. 2.

° If this were to rest upon antiquity P Hatsell, vol. i. p. 12.
of precedent, one might be produced that 8 Rot. Pari, fi H. I V. p. 641.

would challenge all competition. In r The clergy had got a little prece-

the laws of Ethelbert, the first Christian dence in this. An act passed 8 H. VI.
king of Kent, at the end of the sixth c. 1, granting privilege from arrest for
century, we find this provision : “ If the themselves and servants on their way to
king call his people to him (i. e. in the convocation,
witenagemot), and any one does an in- • Rot. Pari. vol. lv. p. 367.
jury to one of them, let him pay a fine.” t vol. v. p. 374

English Const. 1 KIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT.

101

release from a civil execution by special acts of parlia-
ment. The commons, in a former instance, endeavoured
to make the law general that no members nor their
servants might be taken except for treason, felony, and
breach of peace ; but the king put a negative upon this
part of their petition.

The most celebrated, however, of these early cases of
privilege is that of Thomas Thorp, speaker of the com-
mons in 31 Henry VI. This person, who was moreover
a baron of the exchequer, had been imprisoned on an
execution at suit of the duke of York. The commons
sent some of their members to complain of a violation of
privilege to the king and lords in parliament, and to
demand Thorp’s release. It was alleged by the duke of
York’s counsel that the trespass done by Thorp was since
the beginning of the parliament, and the judgment
thereon given in time of vacation, and not during the
sitting. The lords referred the question to the judges,
who said, after deliberation, that “they ought not to
answer to that question, for it hath not be used aforetyme
that the judges should in any wise determine the privi-
lege of this high court of parliament ; for it is so high
and so mighty in his nature that it may make law, and
that that is law it may make no law ; and the determina-
tion and knowledge of that privilege belongeth to the
lords of the parliament, and not to the justices.” They
went on, however, after observing that a general writ of
supersedeas of all processes upon ground of privilege had
not been known, to sav that, “if any person that is a
member of this high court of parliament be arrested in
such cases as be not for treason, or felony, or surety of
the peace, or for a condemnation had before the parlia-
ment, it is used that all such persons should be released
of such arrests and make an attorney, so that they may
have their freedom and liberty freely to intend upon the
parliament.”

Notwithstanding this answer of the judges, it was con-
cluded by the lords that Thorp should remain in prison,
without regarding the alleged privilege ; and the com-
mons were directed in the king’s name to proceed “ with
all goodly haste and speed ” to the election of a new
speaker. It is curious to observe that the commons,
forgetting their grievances, or content to drop them,

102

PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

made such, haste and speed according to this command,
that they presented a new speaker for approbation the
next day. u

This case, as has been strongly said, was begotten by
the iniquity of the times. The state was verging fast to-
wards civil war ; and Thorp, who afterwards distinguished
himself for the Lancastrian cause, was an inveterate
enemy of the duke of York. That prince seems to have
been swayed a little from his usual temper in procuring
so unwarrantable a determination. In the reign of
Edward IV. the commons claimed privilege against any
civil suit during the time of their session ; but they had
recourse, as before, to a particular act of parliament to
obtain a writ of supersedeas in favour of one Atwell, a
member, who had been sued. The present law of privi-
lege seems not to have been fully established, or at least
effectually maintained, before the reign of Henry VIII. X

No privilege of the commons can be so fundamental as
liberty of speech. This is claimed at the opening of
every parliament by their speaker, and could never be
infringed without shaking the ramparts of the constitution.
Richard II.’s attack upon Haxey has been already men-
tioned as a flagrant evidence of his despotic intentions.
No other case occurs until the 33rd year of Henry VI.,
when Thomas Young, member for Bristol, complained to
the commons, that, “for matters by him showed in the
house accustomed for the commons in the said parlia-
ments, he was therefore taken, arrested, and rigorously
in open wise led to the Tower of London, and there
grievously in great duress long time imprisoned against
the said freedom and liberty with much more to the
like effect. The commons transmitted this petition to
the lords, and the king “ willed that the lords of his
council do and provide for the said suppliant as in their
discretions shall be thought convenient and reasonable.”
This imprisonment of Young, however, had happened six
years before, in consequence of a motion made by him
that,, the king then having no issue, the duke of York
might be declared heir-apparent to the crown. In the
present session, when the duke was protector, he thought
it well-timed to prefer his claim to remuneration. 7

u Rot ParL vol. v. p. 239 ; Hatseil's have recourse to Hat-sell's Precedents,
Precedents, p. 29. vol. 1 . chap. l.

* Upon this subject the reader should T Rot ParL vol v. p. 337 ; W. Wor-

English Const. PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT.

103

There is a remarkable precedent in the 9th of Henry
IV., and perhaps the earliest authority for two eminent
maxims of parliamentary law — that the commons possess
an exclusive right of originating money bills, and that
the king ought not to take notice of matters pending in
parliament. A quarrel broke out between the two houses
upon this ground ; and as we have not before seen the
commons venture to clash openly with their superiors,
the circumstance is for this additional reason worthy of
attention. As it has been little noticed, I shall translate
the whole record.

“Friday the second day of December, which was the
last day of the parliament, the commons came before the
king and the lords in parliament, and there, by command
of the king, a schedule of indemnity touching a certain
altercation moved between the lords and commons was
read; and on this it was commanded by our said lord
the king that the said schedule should be entered of
record in the roll of parliament ; of which schedule the
tenor is as follows : Be it remembered, that on Monday
the 21st day of November, the king our sovereign lord
being in the council- chamber in the abbey of Gloucester, 1
the lords spiritual and temporal for this present parlia-
ment assembled being then in his presence, a debate took
place among them about the state of the kingdom, and
its defence to resist the malice of the enemies who
on every side prepare to molest the said kingdom and its
faithful subjects, and how no man can resist this malice,
unless, for the safeguard and defence of his said king-
dom, our sovereign lord the king has some notable aid
and subsidy granted to him in his present parliament.
And therefore it was demanded of the said lords by way
of question what aid would be sufficient and requisite in
these circumstances ? To which question it was answered
by the said lords severally, that, considering the necessity
of the king on one side, and the poverty of his people on
the other, no less aid could be sufficient than one tenth
and a half from cities and towns, and one fifteenth and a
half from all other lay persons ; and, besides, to grant a
continuance of the subsidy on wool, woolfells, and

cester, p. 4*75. Mr.Hatwdl seems to have freedom of speech in parliament, vol. i.
overlooked this case, for he mentions p. 85.

that of Strickland, in 1571, as the earliest * This parliament sat at Glouces-
lngtance of the crown’s interference w ith ter.

104 PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

leather, and of three shillings on the tun (of wine), and
twelve pence on the pound (of other merchandise), from
Michaelmas next ensuing' for two years thenceforth.
Whereupon, by command of our said lord the king, a
message was sent to the commons of this parliament to
cause a certain number of their body to come before our
said lord the king and the lords, in order to hear and
report to their companions what they should be com-
manded by our said lord the king. And upon this the
said commons sent into the presence of our said -lord the
king and the said lords twelve of their companions ; to
whom, by command of our said lord the king, the said
question was declared, with the answer by the said lords
severally given to it. Which answer it was the pleasure
of our said lord the king that they should report to the
rest of their fellows, to the end that they might take the
shortest course to comply with the intention of the said
lords. Which report being thus made to the said com-
mons, they were greatly disturbed at it, saying and
asserting it to be much to the prejudice and derogation
of their liberties. And after that our said lord the king
had heard this, not willing that anything should be done
at present, or in time to come, that might anywise turn
against the liberty of the estate for which they are come
to parliament, nor against the liberties of the said lords,
wills and grants and declares, by the advice and consent
of the said lords, as follows : to wit, that it shall be law-
ful for the lords to debate together in this present parlia-
ment, and in every other for time to come, in the king’s
absence, concerning the condition of the kingdom, and
the remedies necessary for it. And in like manner it
shall be lawful for the commons, on their part, to debate
together concerning the said condition and remedies.
Provided always that neither the lords on their part, nor
the commons on theirs, do make any report to our said
lord the king of any grant granted by the commons, and
agreed to by the lords, nor of the communications of the
said grant, before that the said lords and commons are of
one accord and agreement in this matter, and then in
manner and form accustomed — that is to say, by the
mouth of the speaker of the said commons for the time
being — to the end that the said lords and commons may
have what they desire (avoir puissent leur gree) of our

English Const. PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT.

105

said lord the king. Onr said lord the king willing more-
over, by the consent of the said lords, that the communi-
cation had in this present parliament as above be not
drawn into precedent in time to come, nor be turned to
the prejudice or derogation of the liberty of the estate
for which the said commons are now come, neither in
this present parliament nor in any other time to come.
But wills that himself and all the other estates should be
as free as they were before. Also, the said last day of
parliament, the said speaker prayed our said lord the
king, on the part of the said commons, that he would
grant the said commons that they should depart in as
great liberty as other commons had done before. To
which the king answered that this pleased him well, and
that at all times it had been his desire.” a

Every attentive reader will discover this remarkable
passage to illustrate several points of constitutional law.
For hence it may be perceived — first, that the king was
used in those times to be present at debates of the lords,
personally advising with them upon the public business ;
which also ayipears by many other passages on record ;
and this practice, I conceive, is not abolished by the
king’s present declaration, save as to grants of money,
which ought to be of the free will of parliament, and
without that fear or influence which the presence of so
high a person might create : secondly, that it was
already the established law of parliament that the lords
should consent to the commons’ grant, and not the com-
mons to the lords’ ; since it is the inversion of this order
whereof the commons complain, and it is said expressly
that grants are made by the commons, and agreed to by
the lords : thirdly, that the lower house of parliament is
not, in proper language, an estate of the realm, but
rather the image and representative of the commons of
England ; who, being the third estate, with the nobility
and clergy make up and constitute the people of this
kingdom and liege subjects of the crown. b

* Rot Pari. vol. iii. p. 611 . mons in parliament do the third. This

b A notion is entertained by many is contradicted by the general tenor of
people, and not without the authority of our ancient records and law-books; and
some very respectable names, that the indeed the analogy of other governments
king is one ^of the three estates of the ought to have the greatest weight, even
realm, the lords spiritual and temporal if more reason for doubt appeared upon
fo rming together the second, as the com- the face of our own authorities. But the

106 PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

At the next meeting of parliament, in allusion pro-
bably to this disagreement between the houses, the king
told them that the states of parliament were come
together for the common profit of the king and kingdom,
and for unanimity’s sake and general consent ; and
therefore he was sure the commons would not attempt
nor say anything but what should be fitting and condu-
cive to unanimity ; commanding them to meet together
and communicate for the public service. 0

It was not only in money bills that the originating
power was supposed to reside in the commons. The
course of proceedings in parliament, as has been seen,
from the commencement at least of Edward III.’s reign,

instances where the three estates are de-
clared or implied to be the nobility, clergy,
and commons, or at least their repre-
sentatives in parliament, are too nume-
rous for insertion. This land standeth,
says the Chancellor Stillington, in 7 th
Edward XV., by three states, and above
that one principal, that is to wit, lords
spiritual, lords temporal, and commons,
and over that, state royal, as our sove-
reign lord the king. Rot. Part. vol. v.
p. $22. Thus, too, it is declared that the
treaty of Staples in 1492 was to be con-
firmed per tres status regni Angliae rith
et debits convocatos, videlicet per pre-
lates et clerum, nobiles et community tea
qjusdem regni. Rymer, t xii. p. 508.

I will not, however, suppress one
passage, and the only instance that has
occurred in my reading, where the king
does appear to have been reckoned among
the three estates. The commons say, in
the 2nd of Henry IV., that the states of
the realm may be compared to a trinity,
that is, the king, the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons. Rot. Pari,
vol. ill. p. 459. In this expression, how-
ever, the sense shows that by estates of
the realm they meant members, or neces-
sary parts, of the parliament.

Whitelocke, on the Parliamentary Writ,
voL ii. p. 43, argues at length, that the
three estates are king, lords, and commons,
which seems to have been a current doc-
trine among the popular lawyers of the
seventeenth century. His reasoning is
chiefly grounded on the baronial tenure
of bishops, the validity of acts passed

against their consent, and other argu-
ments of the same kind ; which might go
to prove that there are only at present
two estates, but can never turn the king
into one.

The source of this error is an inatten-
tion to the primary sense of the word
estate (status), which means an order or
condition into which men are classed by
the institutions of society. It is only in
a secondary, or rather an elliptical appli-
cation, that it can be referred to their
representatives in parliament or national
councils. The lords temporal, indeed, of
England are identical with the estate
of the nobility; hut the house of com-
mons is not, strictly speaking, the estate
of commonalty, to which its members
belong, and from which they are deputed.
So the whole body of the clergy are pro-
perly speaking one of the estates, and are
described as such in the older authori-
ties, 21 Ric. II. Rot. Pari. vol. Hi. p. 348,
though latterly the lords spiritual in par-
liament acquired, with less correctness,
that appellation. Hody on Convocations,
p. 426. The bishops, indeed, may be
said, constructively, to represent the
whole of the clergy, with whose griev-
ances they are supposed to be best ac-
quainted, and whose rights it is their
peculiar duty to defend. And I do not
find that the inferior clergy had any
other representation in the cortes of Cas-
tile and Aragon, where the ecclesiastical
order was always counted among the
estates of the realm.

c Rot. ParL voL ill. p. 623.

English Const. PRIVILEGE OP PARLIAMENT.

107

was that the commons presented petitions, which the
lords, by themselves, or with the assistance of the coun-
cil, having duly considered, the sanction of the king was
notified or withheld. This was so much according to
usage, that, on one occasion, when the commons
requested the advice of the other house on a matter
before them, it was answered that the ancient custom
and form of parliament had ever been for the commons
to report their own opinion to the king and lords, and
not to the contrary; and the king would have the
ancient and laudable usages of parliament maintained/
It is singular that in the tenor of innovation the lords
did not discover how materially this usage of parliament
took otf from their own legislative influence. The rule,
however, was not observed in succeeding times ; bills
originated indiscriminately in either house ; and indeed
some acts of Henry V., which do not appear to be
grounded on any petition, may be suspected, from
the manner of their insertion in the rolls of parliament,
to have been proposed on the king's part to the
commons.® But there is one manifest instance in the
18 th of Henry VI., where the king requested the
commons to give their authority to such regulations f as

d Rot Pari. 8 R. II. p. 100.

® Stat 2H.V.C. 6, 7, 8, 9 ; 4 H. VL
c. 7.

f Rot Pari. vol. v. p. 7. It appears
by a case in the Year Book of the
33rd of Henry VI., that, where the
lords made only some minor alterations
in u bill sent up to them from the com-
mons, even if it related to a grant of
money, the custom was not to remand
it for their assent to the amendment
Brooke’s Abridgment : Parliament 4.
The passage is worth extracting. In order
to illustrate the course of proceeding in
parliament at that time. Case fuit que
Sir J. P. fuit attaint de certeyn trespaa
par acte de parliament dout les commons
furent assentus, que sii ne vient eins per
tiel Jour que il forfeytera tiel summe, et
les seigneurs done plus longe jour, et le
bil nient rebaile al commons arrere ; et
per Kirby, clerk des roles del parliament
Puse del parliament est, que si bil vieut
primes a ies commons, et its passent ceo,
U est use d'endorser ceo en tiel forme,

Soifc bayle as seigniors; et si les seig-
niors ne h roy ne alteront le bil, donques
est use a liverer ceo al clerke del parlia-
mentedestre enrol saunz endorser ceo. . .
Et si les seigniors volent alter un bil in
ceo que poetestoyer oi'e le bil, ils poyent
saunz remandre ceo al commons, come si
les aanraons graunte poundage, pur qua-
tuor aus, et ies grantent nisi par deux
ans, ceo ne serra rebayie al commons;
mes si les commons grauntent nisi pur
deux ans, et les seigneurs pur quatre ans,
la ceo serra reliver al commons, et en
cest case les seigniors doyent faire un
sedule de lour intent, ou d'endorser le
bil en ceste forme, Les seigneurs ceo
assentent pur durer par quatuor ans ; et
quant les commons ount le bil arrere, et
ne volent assenter a ceo, ceo ne poet
estreun actre ; mes si les commons volent
assenter, donques ils indorse leur respong
sur le mergent ne basse deins le bil en
tiel forme, Les commons sont assentans
al sedul des seigniors, a mesme cesty bil
annexe, et donques sera bayle ad clerke

108

PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

his council might provide for redressing the abuse of
purveyance ; to which they assented.

If we are to choose constitutional precedents from
seasons of tranquillity rather than disturbance, which
surely is the only means of preserving justice or con-
sistency, but little intrinsic authority can be given to
the following declaration of parliamentary law in the
1 1th of Richard II. : “In this parliament (the roll says)
all the lords as well spiritual and temporal there
present claimed as their liberty and privilege, that the
great matters moved in this parliament, and to be
moved in other parliaments for time to come, touching
the peers of the land, should be treated, adjudged, and
debated according to the course of parliament, and not
by the civil law nor the common law of the land, used
in the other lower courts of the kingdom ; which claim,
liberty, and privileges, the king graciously allowed and
granted them in full parliament/’ g It should be remem-
bered that this assertion of paramount privilege was
made in very irregular times, when the king was at the
mercy of the duke of Gloucester and his associates, and
that it had a view to the immediate object of justifying
their violent proceedings against the opposite party, and
taking away the restraint of the common law. It stands
as a dangerous rock to be avoided, not a lighthouse to
guide us along the channel. The law of parliament, as
determined by regular custom, is incorporated into our
constitution ; but not so as to warrant an indefinite, un-
controllable assumption of power in any case, least of
all in judicial procedure, where the form and the essence
of justice are inseparable from each other. And, in fact,
this claim of the lords, whatever gloss Sir E. Coke may
put upon it, was never intended to bear any relation to
the privileges of the lower house. I should not, per-
haps, have noticed this passage so strongly if it had not

del parliament, ut supra. Et si un bil
soit primes liver al seigniors, et le bil
passe eux.ils ne usont de fayre ascun en-
dorsement, mess de mitter le bil as com-
mons; et donques,8i le bil passe les com-
mons, 11 est use destre issint endorce,
Les commons sont assentants; et ceo
prove que ii ad passe les seigniors devant,
et lour assent est a cest passer del seig-

niors ; et ideo cest acte supra nest bon,
pur ceo que ne (hit rebaile os commons.

A singular assertion is made in the
Year Book 21 E. IV. p. 48 (Maynard’s
edit.), that a subsidy granted by the
commons without assent of the peers is
good enough. This cannot surely have
been law at that time.

6 Rot. Pari. vol. ill. p. 244.

English Const.

CONTESTED ELECTIONS.

109

been made the basis of extravagant assertions as to the
privileges of parliament ; h the spirit of which exaggera-
tions might not be ill adapted to the times wherein Sir
E. Coke lived, though I think they produced at several
later periods no slight mischief, some consequences of
which we may still have to experience.

The want of all judicial authority, either to issue pro-
cess or to examine witnesses, together with the
usual shortness of sessions, deprived the house elections
of commons of what is now considered one of dimmed
its most fundamental privileges, the cognizance
of disputed elections. Upon a false return by the
sheriff, there was no remedy but through the king or his
council. Six instances only, I believe, occur, during
the reigns of the Plantagenet family, wherein the mis-
conduct or mistake of the sheriff is recorded to have
called for a specific animadversion, though it was
frequently the ground of general complaint, and even of
some statutes. The first is in the 12th of Edward II.,
when a petition was presented to the council against
a falso return for the county of Devon, the petitioner
having been duly elected. It was referred to the court
of exchequer to summon the sheriff before them. 1 The
next occurs in the 36th of Edward III., when a writ
was directed to the sheriff of Lancashire, after the disso-
lution of parliament, to inquire at the county-court into
the validity of the election ; and upon his neglect a
second writ issued to the justices of the peace to satisfy
themselves about this in the best manner they could, and
report the truth into chancery. This inquiry after the
dissolution was on account of the wages for attendance,
to which the knights unduly returned could have no pre-
tence. 11 We find a third case in the 7th of Richard II.,
when the king took notice that Thomas de Camoys, who
was summoned by writ to the house of peers, had been
elected knight for SuiTey, and directed the sheriff to re-
turn another. m In the same year the town of Shaftes-
bury petitioned the king, lords, and commons against a
false return of the sheriff of Dorset, and prayed them to
order remedy. Nothing further appears respecting this

h Coke’s 4th Institute, p. 15. k 4 Prynne, p. 261.

i Glanvil’s Reports of Elections, edit ™ Glanvil’s Reports, ibid, from
1774 ; Introduction, p. 12. Prynne.

110

CONTESTED ELECTIONS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

petition." This is the first instance of the commons being
noticed in matters of election. But the next case is more
material ; in the 5th of Henry IV. the commons prayed
the king and lords in parliament, that, because the writ
of summons to parliament was not sufficiently returned
.by the sheriff of Rutland, this matter might be examined
in parliament, and in case of default found therein an
exemplary punishment might be inflicted ; whereupon
the lords sent for the sheriff and Oneby, the knight re-
turned, as well as for Thorp, who had been duly elected,
and, having examined into the facts of the case, directed
the return to be amended, by the insertion of Thorp’s
name, and committed the sheriff to the Fleet till he
should pay a fine at the king’s pleasure. 0 The last pas-
sage that I can produce is from the roll of 18 H. VI.,
where “it is considered by the king, with the advice
and assent of the lords spiritual and temporal,” that,
whereas no knights have been returned for Cambridge-
shire, the sheriff shall be directed, by another writ, to
hold a court and to proceed to an election, proclaiming
that no person shall come armed, nor any tumultuous
proceeding take place ; something of which sort appears
to have obstructed the execution of the first writ. It is
to be noticed that the commons are not so much as
named in this entry . p But several provisions were
made by statute under the Lancastrian kings, when seats
in parliament became much more an object of competi-
tion than before, to check the partiality of the sheriffs
in making undue returns. One act (11 II. IV. c. 1)
gives the justices of assise power to inquire into this
matter, and inflicts a penalty of one hundred pounds on
the sheriff. Another (6 H. VI. c. 4 ^ mitigates the
rigour of the former, so far as to permit the sheriff or
the knights returned by him to traverse the inquests be-
fore the justices ; that is, to be heard in their own
defence, which, it seems, had not been permitted to
them. Another (23 H. VI. c. 14) gives an additional
penalty upon false returns to the party aggrieved. These
statutes conspire with many other testimonies to mani-
fest the rising importance of the house of commons, and
the eagerness with which gentlemen of landed estates

" Glanvil’s Reports, ibid, from Prynne. ° Id. ibid, and Rot Part vol. Si. p. 530.

P Rot Pari. vol. v. p. 7.

English Const. RIGHT OF VOTING FOR KNIGHTS.

Ill

(whatever might be the case in petty boroughs) sought
for a share in the national representation.

Whoever may have been the original voters for county
representatives, the first statute that regulates In whom
their election, so far from limiting the privilege the right of
to tenants in capite, appears to place it upon a knight
very large and deraocratical foundation. For resided.

(as I rather conceive, though not without much hesita-
tion), not only all freeholders, but all persons whatever
present at the county-court, were declared, of rendered,
capable of voting for the knight of their shire. Such at
least seems to be the inference from the expressions of
7 H. IV. c. 15, “ all who are there present, as well
suitors duly summoned for that cause as others.” q And
this acquires some degree of confirmation from the later
statute, 8 H. VI. c. 7, which, reciting that “ elections
of knights of shires have now of late been made by very
great, outrageous, and excessive number of people dwell-
ing within the same counties, of the which most part
was people of small substance and of no value,” confines
the elective franchise to freeholders of lands or tenements
to the value of forty shillings.

The representation of towns in parliament was founded
upon two principles — of consent to public Elections of
burthens, and of advice in public measures, burgesses.

q 3 Prynne’8 Register, p. 187. This led to that inundation of voters without
hypothesis, though embraced by lYynne, property which rendered the subsequent
is, I confess, much opposed to generai art of Henry VI. necessary. That of
opinion ; and a very respectable living Henry IV. had itself been occasioned by
writer treats such an interpretation of an opposite evil, the close election of
the statute 7 H. IV. as chimerical. The knights by a few persons in the name of
words cited in the text, “as others," the county.

mean only, according to him, suitors not ’ Yet the consequence of the statute of
duly summoned. Heywood on Elections, Henry IV. was not to let in too many
vol. i. p. 20. But, as I presume, the voters, or to render elections tumultuous,
summons to freeholders was by general in the largest of English counties, what-
proclumation ; so that it is not easy ever it might be in others. Prynne
to perceive what difference there could has published some singular sheriff’s in*
be between summoned and unsummoned dentures for the county of York, all
suitors. And if the words are supposed during the interval between the acts of
to glance at the private summonses to Henry IV. and Henry VI., which are
a few friends, by means of which the sealed by a few persons calling them-
sheriffg were accustomed to procure a selves the attorneys of some peers and
clandestine election, one can hardly ima- ladies, who, as far as appears, had solely
gine that such persons would be styled returned the knights of that shire,
“duly summoned." It Is not unlikely, 3 Prynne, p. 162. What degree of weight
however, that these large expressions these anomalous returns ought to possess
were inadvertently used, and that they 3 leave to the reader.

112

ELECTIONS OF BURGESSES. Chap. VIII. Part HI,

especially such as related to trade and shipping. Upon
both these accounts it was natural for the kings who first
summoned them to parliament, little foreseeing that
such half-emancipated burghers would ever clip the
loftiest plumes of their prerogative, to make these
assemblies numerous, and summon members from eveiy
town of consideration in the kingdom. Thus the writ
of 23 E. I. directs the sheriffs to cause deputies to be
elected to a general council from every city, borough,
and trading town. And although the last words are
omitted in subsequent writs, yet their spirit was pre-
served ; many towns having constantly returned mem-
bers to parliament by regular summonses from the
sheriffs, which were no chartered boroughs, nor had
apparently any other claim than their populousness
or commerce. These are now called boroughs by pre-
scription/

Besides these respectable towns, there were some of a
less eminent figure which had writs directed to them
as ancient demesnes of the crown. During times of
arbitrary taxation the crown had set tallages alike upon
its chartered boroughs and upon its tenants in demesne.
When parliamentaiy consent became indispensable, the
free tenants in ancient demesne, or rather such of them
as inhabited some particular vills, were called to par-
liament among the other representatives of the commons.
They are usually specified distinctly from the other
classes of representatives in grants of subsidies through-
out the parliaments of the first and second Edwards,

r The majorl ty of prescriptive boroughs
have prescriptive corporations, which
carry the legal, which is not always the
moral, presumption of an original charter.
But “ many boroughs and towns in Eng-
land have burgesses by prescription, that
never were incorporated.” Ch. J. Hobart
in Dungannon Case, Hobart’s Reports,
p. 15. And Mr. Luders thinks, I know not
how justly, that in the age of Edward I.,
which is most to our immediate purpose,
M there were not perhaps thirty corpo-
rations in the kingdom.” Reports of
Elections, vol. i. p. 98. But I must
allow that, in the opinion of many sound
lawyers, the representation of unchar-
tered, or at least unincorporated boroughs

was rather a real privilege, and founded
upon tenure, than one arising out of their
share in public contributions. Ch. J. Holt
in Ashby v. White, 2 Ld. Raymond, 951.
Hey wood on Borough Elections, p. 11.
This inquiry is very obscure ; and per-
haps the more so, because the learning
directed tow r ards it has more frequently
been that of advocates pleading for their
clients than of unbiassed antiquaries. If
this be kept in view, the lover of con-
stitutional history will find much in-
formation in several of the reported cases
on controverted elections; particularly
those of Tewksbury and Liskeard, in
Peckweil's Reports, voL L

English Const.

POWER OF SHERIFF.

113

till, about the beginning of the third's reign, they were
confounded with ordinary burgesses.* This is the foun-
dation of that particular species of elective franchise
incident to what we denominate burgage tenure ; which,
however, is not confined to the ancient demesne of the
crown. 1

The proper constituents therefore of the citizens and
burgesses in parliament appear to have been — 1. All
chartered boroughs, whether they derived their privi-
leges from the crown, or from a mesne lord, as several
in Cornwall did from Richard king of the Romans ; u
2. All towns which were the ancient or the actual
demesne of the crown ; 3. All considerable places,
though unincorporated, which could afford to defray the
expenses of their representatives, and had a notable
interest in the public welfare. But no parliament ever
perfectly corresponded with this theory. The writ was
addressed in general terms to the sheriff, requir- Vovfer of
ing him to cause two knights to be elected out of the sheriff
the body of* the county, two citizens from every ^wghs.
city, and two burgesses from every borough. It
rested altogether upon him to determine what towns
should exercise this franchise ; and it is really incre-
dible, with all the carelessness and ignorance of those
times, what frauds the sheriffs ventured to commit in
executing this trust. Though parliaments met almost
every year, and there could be no mistake in so noto-
rious a fact, it was the continual practice of sheriffs to
omit boroughs that had been in recent habit of electing
members, and to return upon the writ that there were
no more within their county. Thus in the 12th of
Edward III. the sheriff of Wiltshire, after returning two
citizens for Salisbury, and burgesses for two boroughs,
concludes with these words : — 44 There are no other
cities or boroughs within my bailiwick.” Yet in fact
eight other towns had sent members to preceding par-
liaments. So -in the 6th of Edward II. the sheriff of
Bucks declared that he had no borough within his
county except Wycomb; though Wendover, Agmondes-
ham, and Marlow had twice made returns since that

• Brady on Boroughs, p. 75, 80, and ‘ Littleton, s. 162, 163,

163. Caso of Tewksbury, in Peck well's u Brady, p. 97.

Reports, vol. i. p. 178.

VOL. HI. 1

114

POWER OF SHERIFF. Chap. VIII. Part III.

king’s accession.* And from this cause alone it has
happened that many towns called boroughs, and having
a charter and constitution as such, have never returned
members to parliament ; some of which are now among
the most considerable in England, as Leeds, Birming-
ham, and Macclesfield/

It has been suggested, indeed, by Brady, 1 that these
returns may not appear so false and collusive if we
suppose the sheriff to mean only that there were, no
resident burgesses within these boroughs fit to be re-
turned, or that the expense of their wages would be too
heavy for the place to support. And no doubt the latter
plea, whether implied or not in the return, was very
frequently an inducement to the sheriffs to spare the
smaller boroughs. The wages of knights were four
shillings a lay, levied on all freeholders, or at least on
all holding by knight-service, within the county/ Those
of burgesses were half that sum ; b but even this pittance

* Brady on Boroughs, p. 110. 3Prynne,
p. 231. The latte? even argues that this
power of omitting ancient boroughs was
legally vested In the sheriff before the
6th of Richard II. ; and though the lan-
guage of that act implies the contrary
of this position, yet it is more than
probable that most of our parliamentary
boroughs by prescription, especially such
as were then unincorporated, are in-
debted for their privileges to the exercise
of the sheriffs discretion ; not founded
on partiality, which would rather have
led hjm to omit them, but on the broad
principle that they were sufficiently opu-
lent and important to send representa-
tives to parliament.

y Willis, Notitia Parliamentarian vol. i.
preface, p. 35.

* p. 117.

* It is a perplexing question whether
freeholders In socage were liable to con-
tribute towards the wages of knights;
and aathoriti<8 might be produced on
both sides. The more probable sup-
position Is, that they were not exempted.
See the various tit ions relating to the
payment of wages in Prynne’s fourth
Register. This is not unconnected with
th£ question as to their right of suffrage.
See p. 1 15 of this volume. Freeholders
within franchises made repeated endea-

vours to exempt themselves from pay-
ment of wages. Thus in # H. IV. it
was settled by parliament that, to put
an end to the disputes on this subject
between the people of Cambridgeshire
and those of the Isle of Ely, the latter
should pay 200Z. and be quit in future
of all charges on that account Rot.
Pari. voL iv. p. 383. By this means the
inhabitants of that franchise seem to
have purchased the right of suffrage,
which they still enjoy, though not, I
suppose, suitors to the county-court In
most other franchises, and in many dties
erected into distinct counties, the same
privilege of voting for knights of the
shire is practically exercised ; but whe-
ther this has not proceeded as much from
the tendency of returning officers and of
parliament to favour the right of election
in doubtful cases, as from the merit!* if
their pretensions, may be a question.

b The wages of knights and burgesses
were first reduced to this certain sum
by the writs De levandis expends, 16
K. II. Prynne's fourth Register, p. 63.
These were issued at the request of those
who had served, after the . dissolution of
parliament, and included a certain num-
ber of days, according to the distance of
the county whence they came, for going
and returning. It appears by these that

English Const. RELUCTANCE TO SEND MEMBERS.

115

was raised with reluctance and difficulty from miserable
burghers, little solicitous about political franchises.
Poverty, indeed, seems to have been accepted as a legal
excuse. In the 6th of E. II. the sheriff of Northumber-
land returns to the writ of summons that all his knights
are not sufficient to protect the county; and in the
1st of E. III. that they were too much ravaged by their
enemies to send any members to parliament.® The
sheriffs of Lancashire, after several returns that they
had no boroughs within their county, though Wigan,
Liverpool, and Preston were such, alleged at length
that none ought to be called upon on account of
their poverty. This return was constantly made, from
36 E. III. to the ^eign of Henry VI. 4

The elective franchise was deemed by the boroughs
no privilege or blessing, but rather, during the Reluctance
chief part of this period, an intolerable grievance. 0 f boroughs
Where they could not persuade the sheriff to
omit sending his writ to them, they set it at
defiance by sending no return. And this seldom failed
to succeed, so that, after one or two refusals to comply,
which brought no punishment upon them, they were left
in quiot enjoyment of their insignificance. The town of
Torrington, in Devonshire, went further, and obtained
a charter of exemption from sending burgesses, grounded
upon what the charter asserts to appear on the rolls of
chancery, that it had never been represented before the
21st of E. HI. This is absolutely false, and is a proof
how little we can rely upon tho voracity of records,
Torrington having made not less than twenty-two re-
turns before that time. It is curious that in spite of
this charter the town sent members to the two ensuing

thirty-five or forty miles were reckoned
a day’s journey ; which may correct the
exaggerated notions of bad roads and
tardy locomotion that are sometimes
entertained. See Prynne’s fourth Regis-
ter, and Willis's Notitia Parliamentaria,
passim.

The latest entries of writs for expenses
in the dose roils are ol 2 H. V. ; but they
may be proved to have issued much
longer; and Prynne traces them to the
end of Henry VlII.’s reign, p. 495. With-
out the formality of this writ a very
few instances of towns remunerating their

burgesses for attendance in parliament
are known to have occurred iu later
times. Andrew Marvel is commonly
said to have been the last who received
this honourable salary. A modem book
asserts that wages were paid in some
Cornish boroughs as late as the eighteenth
century. Lysons’s Cornwall, preface,
p. xxxii. ; but the passage quoted in
proof of this is not precise enough to
support so unlikely a fact
c 3 Prynne, p. 165.
d 4 Prynne, p. 317.

i 2

116

ELECTORS IN BOROUGHS. Chap. VIII. Part III,

parliaments, and then ceased for ever . 0 Richard II.
gave the inhabitants of Colchester a dispensation from
returning burgesses for five years, in consideration of
the expenses they had incurred in fortifying the town . 1
But this immunity, from whatever reason, was not re-
garded, Colchester having continued to make returns as
before.

The partiality of sheriffs in leaving out boroughs,
which were accustomed in old time to come to the
parliament, was repressed, as far as law could repress it,
by a statute of Richard II., which imposed a fine on
them for such neglect, and upon any member of parlia-
ment who should absent himself from his duty . 8 But it
is, I think, highly probable that a great part of those
who were elected from the boroughs did not trouble
themselves with attendance in parliament. The sheriff
even found it necessary to take sureties for their exe-
cution of so burthensome a duty, whose names it was
usual, down to the end of the fifteenth century, to en-
dorse upon the writ along with those of the elected . 11
This expedient is not likely to have been very success-
ful ; and the small number, comparatively speaking, of
writs for expenses of members for boroughs, which have
been published by Prynne, while those for the knights
of shires are almost complete, leads to a strong pre-
sumption that their attendance was very defective. This
statute of Richard II. produced no sensible effect.

By what persons the election of burgesses was usually
who the ma< ^° * 8 a question of great obscurity, which is
eiectorsln still occasionally debated before committees of
werT 8 * 1 * P ar li am ent. It appears to have been the common
practice for a very few of the principal members
of the corporation to make the election in the county-
court, and their names, as actual electors, are generally
returned upon the writ by the sheriff/ But w f e cannot
surely be warranted by this to infer that they acted in
any other capacity than as deputies of the whole body,
and indeed it is frequently expressed that they chose

e 4 Prynne, p. 320.
f 3 Prynne, p. 241.

* 5 R. IL s tat ii. c. 4.
h Luders's Report*, voL I. p. 15. Some-
times an elected burgess absolutely re-

fused to go to parliament, and drove his
constituents to a fresh choice. 3 Prynne.
p. 277.

i 3 Prynne, p. 252.

English Const. MEMBERS OF THE COMMONS.

117

such and such persons by the assent of the community ; k
by which word, in an ancient corporate borough, it
seems natural to understand the freemen participating
in its general franchises, rather than the ruling body,
which, in many instances at present, and always perhaps
in the earliest age of corporations, derived its authority
by delegation from the rest. The consent, however, of
the inferior freemen we may easily believe to have been
merely nominal ; and, from being nominal, it would in
many places come by degrees not to be required at all ;
the corporation, specially so denominated, or municipal
government, acquiring by length of usage an exclusive
privilege in election of members of parliament, as they
did in local administration. This, at least, appears to
me a more probable hypothesis than that of Dr. Brady,
who limits the original right of election in all corporate
boroughs to the aldermen or other capital burgesses.®
The members of the house of commons, from this occa-
sional disuse of ancient boroughs as well as ,
from the creation of new ones, underwent some the house of
fluctuation during the period subject to our re- commons *
view. Two hundred citizens and burgesses sat in the
parliament held by Edward I. in his twenty-third year,
the earliest epoch of acknowledged representation. But
in the reigns of Edward III. and his three successors
about ninety places, on an average, returned members,
so that we may reckon this part of the commons at one

k 3 Prynne, p. 257, de asscnsu totius
communltatis pranlictae elegerunt R. W. ;
bo in several other instances quoted in
the ensuing pages.

m Brady on Boroughs, p. 132, Ac.
Mr. Allen, than whom no one of equal
learning was ever less inclined to de-
preciate popular rights, inclines more
•than we should expect to the school of
Brady in this point. “There is reason
to believe that originally the right of
election in boroughs was vested in the
governing part of these communities, or
in a select portion of the burgesses ; and
that, in the progress of the house of
commons to power and importance, the
tendency lias been in general to render
the elections more popular. It is certain
that for many years burgesses# were
elected in the county courts, and appa-

r^itly by delegates from the boroughs,
who were authorised by their fellow-
burgesses to elect representatives for
them in parliament In the reigns of
James I. and Charles L, when popular
principles were in their greatest vigour,
there was a strong disposition in the
house of commons to extend the right
of suffrage in boroughs, and in many
instances these efforts were crowned with
success.'’ Edin. Rev. xxviii. 145. But an
election by delegates chosen for that pur-
pose by the burgesses at large is very
different from one by the governing part
of the community. Even in the latter
case, however, this part had generally
been chosen, at a greater or less interval
of time, by the entire body. Sometimes,
indeed, corporations fell into self-election
and became close.

118

MEMBERS OF THE Chap. VIII. Part III.

hundred and eighty . 11 These, if regular in their duties,
might appear an over-balance for the seventy-four knights
who sat with them. But the dignity of ancient lineage,
territorial wealth, and military character, in times when
the feudal spirit was hardly extinct and that of chivalry
at its height, made these burghers vail their heads to the
landed aristocracy. It is pretty manifest that the knights,
though doubtless with some support from the representa-
tives of towns, sustained the chief brunt of battle against
the crown. The rule and intention of our old constitu-
tion was, that each county, city, or borough, should elect
deputies out of its own body, resident among themselves,
and consequently acquainted with their necessities and
grievances . 0 It would be very interesting to discover at
what time, and by what degrees, the practice of election
swerved from this strictness. But I have not been able
to trace many steps of the transition. The number of
practising lawyers who sat in parliament, of which there
are several complaints, seems to afford an inference that
it had begun in the reign of Edward HI. Besides several
petitions of the commons that none but knights or re-
putable squires should be returned for shires, an ordi-
nance was made in the forty -sixth of his reign that no
lawyer practising in the king’s court, nor sheriff during
his shrievalty, be returned knight for a county ; because
these law3'crs put forward many petitions in the name of
the commons which only concerned their clients. p Ibis
probably was truly alleged, as we may guess from the
vast number of proposals for changing the course of legal
process which fill the rolls during this reign. It is not
to be doubted, however, that many practising lawyers
were men of landed estate in their respective counties.

An act in the first year of Henry V. directs that none
be chosen knights, citizens, or burgesses, who are not
resident within the place for which they are returned on*

« Willis, Notitia Parliamentaria, vol. became very common. In 19 E.H. there
iii. p. 96, Ac. ; 3 Prynne, p. 224, Ac. were twenty-eight members returned

© in '4 Edw. II. the sheriff of Rutland from shires who were not knights, and
made this return : Eligi feci in pleno but twenty-seven who were such. The
oomitatu, loco duorum militum, eo quod former had at this time only two shillings
militea non aunt in hoc comitatu commo* or three shillings a day for their wages,
rantes, duos homines de comitatu Rut- while the real knights had four shillings,
l aq d, de discretloribus et ad laborandum 4 IVynne, p. 63. 74. But In the next
potentlorlbus, Ac. 3 Prynne, p. 170. But reign©their wages were put on a levcL
this deficiency of actual knights soon p Rot ParL vol. it p. 310.

English Const.

HOUSE OF COMMONS.

119

the day of the date of the writ/ This statute apparently
indicates a point of time when the deviation from tlxe line
of law was frequent enough to attract notice, and yet not
so established as to pass for an unavoidable irregularity.
It proceeded, however, from great and general causes,
which new laws, in this instance very fortunately, are
utterly incompetent to withstand. There cannot be a
more apposite proof of the inefficacy of human institutions
to struggle against the steady course of events than this
unlucky statute of Henry V., which is almost a solitary
instance in the law of England wherein the principle of
desuetude has been avowedly set up against an unre-
pealed enactment. I am not aware, at least, of any other,
which not only the house of commons, but the court of
king’s bench, has deemed itself at liberty to declare
unfit to be observed/ Even at the time w r hen it was
enacted, the law had probably, as such, very little effect.
But still the plurality of elections were made according
to ancient usage, as well as statute, out of the constituent
body. The contrary instances were exceptions to the
rule ; but exceptions increasing continually, till they
subverted the rule itself. Prynne has remarked that we
chiefly find Cornish surnames among the representatives
of Cornwall, and those of northern families among the
returns from the North. Nor do the members for shires
and towns seem to have been much interchanged ; the
names of the former belonging to the most ancient
families, while those of the latter have a more plebeian
cast/ In the reign of Edward IV., and not before, a
very few of the burgesses bear the addition of esquire in
the returns, which became universal in the middle of the
succeeding century/

9 Rot Pari. 1 H. V. c. 1.
r See the case of Dublin university in
the first volume of Peckweil's Reports
of contested elections. Note I>, p. 53.
The statute itself was repealed by 14 G.
III. c. 68.

• By 23 H. VI. c. 15, none but gen-
tlemen born, generosl a nativitate, are
capable of sitting in parliament as knights
of counties; an election was set aside
39 H. VI. because the person returned
was not of gentle birth. Prynne's third
Register, p. 161.

* Willis, Notitia Parliamentary,
Prynne's fourth Register, p. 1184. A
letter in that authentic and interesting
accession to our knowledge of ancient
times, the Paston collection, shows that
eager canvass was sometimes made by
country gentlemen in Edward IWs
reign to represent boroughs. This letter
throws light at the same time ou the
creation or revival of boroughs. The
writer tells Sir John Paston, “ If ye miss
to be burgess of Malden, and my lord
chamberlain will, ye may be in another

120

INFLUENCE ON ELECTIONS. Ciiap. VIII. Part III.

Even county elections seem in general, at least in the
irregularity fourteenth century, to have been ill-attended
of elections, and left to the influence of a few powerful and
active persons. A petitioner against an undue return in
the 12th of Edward II. complains that, whereas he had
been chosen knight for Devon by Sir William Martin,
bishop of Exeter, with the consent of the county, yet the
sheriff had returned another. 11 In several indentures of
a much later date a few persons only seem to have been
concerned in the election, though the assent of the com-
munity be, expressed/ These irregularities, which it
would be exceedingly erroneous to convert, with Hume,
into lawful customs, resulted from the abuses of the
sheriff’s power, which, wdien parliament sat only for a
few weeks with its hands full of business, were almost

Influence of 8lire *° esca P e with impunity. They were
the crown sometimes also countenanced, or rather insti-
upon them. g a t ec ^ fry the crown, which, having recovered
in Edward IL’s reign the prerogative of naming the
sheriffs, surrendered by an act of his father/ filled that
office with its creatures, and constantly disregarded the
statute forbidding their continuance beyond a year.
Without searching for every passage that might illustrate
the interference of the crown in elections, I will mention
two or three leading instances. When Richard II. was
meditating to overturn the famous commission of reform,
he sent for some of the sheriffs, and required them to
permit no knight or burgess to be elected to the next
parliament without the approbation of the king and his
council. The sheriffs replied that the commons would
maintain their ancient privilege of electing their own
representatives. 2 The parliament of 1897, which at-
tainted his enemies and left the constitution at his mercy,
was chosen, as we are told, by dint of intimidation and
influence/ Thus also that of Henry VI., held at Coventry

place; there be a dozen towns in England bin county in the Anglo-Saxon period;
that choose no burgess, which ought to no instance of this however, according to
do it: ye may be set in for one of those lord Lyttelton, occurs after the Conquest,
towns an’ ye be friended.” This was in Shrievalties were commonly sold by the
1412. vol. ii. p. 107. Norman kings. Hist of Henry IL voLii.

u Glanvil's Kflpprts of Elections, edl* p. 921.

1774, Introdncdon, p. xii. * Vita Rieardi II. p. 85.

* Prynne’s third Register, p. 171. R Otterbourne, p. 101. He says of the

T 28 JE. I. c. 8 ; 9 E. II. It is said that knights returned on this occasion, that
the sheriff was elected by the people of they were not elected per community torn,

English Const,

HOUSE OF LORDS,

121

in 1460, wherein the duke of York and his party were
attainted, is said to have been unduly returned by the
like means. This is rendered probable by a petition pre-
sented to it by the sheriffs, praying indemnity for all
which they had done in relation thereto contrary to law. b
An act passed according to their prayer, mid in confirma-
tion of elections. A few years before, in 1455, a singular
letter under the king’s signet is addressed to the sheriffs,
reciting that “ we be enfourmed there is busy labour made
in sondry wises by certaine persons for the chesyng of

the said knights, of which labour we marvaille

greatly, insomuche as it is nothing to the honour of the
laborers, but ayenst their worship ; it is also ayenst the
lawes of the lande,” with more to that effect ; and en-
joining the sheriff’ to let elections be free and the peace
kept. c There was certainly no reason to wonder that a
parliament, which was to shift the virtual sovereignty of
the kingdom into the hands of one whose claims were
known to extend much further, should be the object of
tolerably warm contests. Thus in the Paston letters we
find several proofs of the importance attached to parlia-
mentary elections by the highest nobility/

The house of lords, as we left it in the reign of

Henry HI., was entirely composed of such „ . ,

_ ‘ ■» it* i j *v i 1 Constitution

persons holding lands by barony as were of the house

summoned by particular writ of parliament.® oflord »-

Tenure and summons were both essential at this time in

order to render any one a lord of parliament— the first

by the ancient constitution of our feudal monarchy from

the Conquest, the second by some regulation or usage of

doubtful origin, which was thoroughly established before

the conclusion of Henry IXI/s reign. This* produced, of

course, a very marked difference between the greater and

the lesser or unparliamentary barons. The tenure of the

latter, however, still subsisted, and, though too incon-

ut mos exigit, Bed per regiaxn volun-
tatem.

b Prynne’s second Reg. p. HI ; Rot
Pari. vol. v. p. 367. -

c Prynne’s second Reg. p. 450.

«1 vol. i. p. 96, 98; vol. ii. p. 99, 105;
vol. ii. p. 243.

* Upon this dry and obscure subject
of Inquiry, the nature and constitution of
the house of lords during this period, I

have been much indebted to the first
part of Prynne’s Register, and to West’s
Inquiry into the Manner of creating
Peers; which, though written with a
party motive, to serve the ministry of
1719 in the peerage MB, deserves, for
the perspicuity of the method and style,
to be reckoned among the best of our
constitutional dissertations.

122 TENURE OF LORDS SPIRITUAL. Chap. VIII. Part IIL

siderable to be members of the legislature, they paid
relief as barons, they might be challenged on juries, and,
as I presume, by parity of reasoning, were entitled to
trial by their peerage. These lower barons, or more
commonly tenants by parcels of baronies/ may be dimly
traced to the latter years of Edward 111.® But many of
them were successively summoned to parliament, and
thus recovered the former lustre of their rank, while the
rest fell gradually into the station of commoners, as
tenants by simple knight-service.

As tenure without summons did not entitle any one to
Baronial privileges a lord Parliament, so no
tenure* spiritual person at least ought to have been
ZXnt summoned without baronial tenure. The prior
spiritual, of, St. James at Northampton, having been sum-
moned in the twelfth of Edward II., was discharged
upon his petition, because he held nothing of the king
by barony, but only in frankalmoign. The prior of Brid-
lington, after frequent summonses, was finally left out,
with an entry made in the roll that he held nothing of
the king. The abbot of Leicester had been called to fifty
parliaments ; yet, in the 25th of Edward III., he obtained
a charter of perpetual exemption, reciting that he held
no lands or tenements of the crown by barony or any
such service as bound him to attend parliaments or
councils. 11 But great irregularities prevailed in the rolls
of chancery, from which the writs to spiritual and tem-
poral peers were taken — arising in part, perhaps, from

f Baronies were often divided by de-
scent among females into ihany parts,
each retaining its character as a frac-
tional member of *• barony. The tenants
in such case were said to hold of the
king by the third, fourth, or twentieth
part of a barony, and did service or paid
relief in such proportion.

g Madox, Baronia Anglica, p. 42 and
58 ; West's Inquiry, p. 28, 33. That a
baron could only be tried by his fellow
borons was probably a rule as old as the
trial per pais of a commoner. In 4 K III.
Sir Simon Hereford having been accused
before the lord* in parliament of aiding
and advising Mortimer in his treasons,
they. declared with one voice that he
was not their peer; wherefore they were
not bound to judge him as a peer of the

land ; but. Inasmuch as it was notorious
that be had been concerned in usurpa-
tion of royal powers and murder of the
liege lord (as they styled Edward JI.) f
the lords, as judges of parliament, by
assent of the king in parliament, awarded
and adjudged him to be hanged. A like
sentence with a like protestation w as
passed on Mau tracers and Ooumay.
There is a very remarkable anomaly in
the case of Ix/rd Berkley, who, though
undoubtedly a baron, his ancestors hav-
ing been summoned from the earliest
date of w rits, put himself on his trial in
parliament, by twelve knights of the
county of Gloucester. Rot. Pari. vol. iL
p.53; Rymer, t. lv. p. 734.

b Prynne, p. 142, Ac.; West’s In-
quiry.

English Const. BARONS CALLED BY WRIT.

123

negligence, in part from wilful perversion; so that many
abbots and priors, who like these had no baronial tenure,
were summoned at times and subsequently omitted, of
whose actual exemption we have no fecord. Out of one
hundred and twenty-two abbots and forty-one priors who
at some time or other sat in parliament, but twenty-five
of the former and two of the latter were constantly sum-
moned : the names of forty occur only once, and those of
thirty* six others not more than five times . 1 Their want
of baronial tenure, in all probability, prevented the repe-
tition of writs which accident or occasion had caused to
issue.*

The ancient temporal peers are supposed to have been
intermingled with persons who held nothing of BttroIlg
the crown by barony, but attended in parliament called by
solely by virtue of the king's prerogative exer- writ *
cised in the writ of summons . 111 These have been called
barons by writ ; and it seems to be denied by no one
that, at least under the first three Edwards, there were
some of this description in parliament. But after all the
labours of Dugdale and others in tracing the genealogies
of our ancient aristocracy, it is a problem of much diffi-
culty to distinguish these from the territorial barons. As
the latter honours descended to female heirs, they passed
into new families and new names, so that w r e can hardly
decide of one summoned for the first time to parliament
that he did not inherit the possession of a feudal barony.
Husbands of baronial heiresses were frequently sum-
moned in their wives’ right, but by their own names.

> Prynne, p. 141.

k It is worthy of observation that the
spiritual peers summoned to parliament
were in general considerably more nu-
merous than the temporal. Prynne,
p. 1 14. This appears, among other causes,
to have saved the church from that
sweeping reformation of its wealth, and
perhaps of its doctrines, which the com-
mons were thoroughly inclined to make
under Richard 11. and Henry IV. Thus
the reduction of the spiritual lords by
the dissolution of monasteries was indis-
pensably required to bring the eccle-
siastical order into due subjection to the
state.

w Perhaps it can hardly be said that

the king’s prerogative compelled the
party summoned, not being a tenant by
barony, to take his seat. But though
several spiritual persons appear to have
been discharged from attendance on ac-
count of their holding nothing by barony,
as has been Justly observed, yet there is,
1 believe, no instance of any layman’s
making such an application. The terms
of the ancient writ of summons, however,
in fide et homcigio quibus nobis tenemini,
afford a presumption that a feudal tenure
was, in construction of law, the basis of
every lord’s attendance in parliament.
This form was not finally changed to the
present, in fide et ligeantid, till the 46th of
Edw. III. Prynne ’s first Register, p. 206.

124

BARONS CALLED BY WRIT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

They even sat after the death of their wives, as tenants
by the courtesy . 11 Again, as lands, though not the subject
of frequent transfer, were, especially before the statute de
donis n not inalienable, we cannot positively assume that
all the right Jmirs of original barons had preserved those
estates upon which their barony had depended . 0 If we
judge, however, by the lists of those summoned, accord-
ing to the best means in our power, it will appear, accord-
ing at least to one of our most learned investigators of
this subject, that the regular barons by tenure were all
along very far more numerous than those called by writ;
and that from the end of Edward III.’s reign no spiritual
persons, and few if any laymen, except peers created by
patent, 'were summoned to parliament who did not hold
territorial baronies. p

With respect to those who were indebted for their seats
among the lords to the king’s writ, there are two material
questions : whether they acquired an hereditary nobility
by virtue of the writ ; and, if this be determined against
them, whether they had a decisive or merely a delibera-
tive voice in the house. Now, for the first question, it
seems that, if the writ of summons conferred an estate of
inheritance, it must have done so either by virtue of its
terms or by established construction and precedent. But
the writ contains no words by which such an estate can
in law be limited ; it summons the person addressed to
attend in parliament in order to give his advice on the
public business, but by no means implies that his advice
will be required of his heirs, or even of himself on any
other occasion. The strongest expression is “vobiscum
et cceteris praelatis, magnatibus et proceribus,” which
appears to place the party on a sort of level with the
peers. But the words magnates and proceres are used
very largely in ancient language, and, down to the time
of Edward III., comprehend the king’s ordinary council,

® Collins's Proceedings on Claims of entailed by the owners on their heirs
Baronies, p. 24 and 73. male, the heirs general have been ex*

° Prynne speaks of “ the alienation eluded from inheriting the dignity,
of baronies by sale, gift, or marriage, P Prynne’s first Register, p. 237. This
after which the new purchasers were must be understood to mean that no new
summoned instead,” as if it frequently families were summoned; for the de-
happened. First Register, p. 239. And scendants of Borne who are not supposed
several instances are mentioned in the to have held land-baronies may con-
Bergavenny case (Collins’s Proceedings, stantly be found in later lists. [Nor*
p. H3) where, laud-baronies having been IX.]

English Const. BARONS CALLED BY WRIT* 125

as well as his barons. Nor can these, at any rate, be
construed to pass an inheritance, which in the grant of a
private person, much more of a king, would require
express words of limitation. In a single instance, the
writ of summons to Sir Henry de Bromflete / (27 H. VI.),
we find these remarkable words : Volumus enim vos et
liseredes vestros masculos de corpora vestro legitime
exeuntes barones de Yescy existere. But this Sir Henry
de Bromflete was the lineal heir of the ancient barony de
Vesei. q And if it were true that the writ of summons
conveyed a barony of itself, there seems no occasion to
have introduced these extraordinary words of creation or
revival* Indeed there is less necessity to urge these
arguments from the nature of the writ, because the
modern doctrine, which is entirely opposite to what has
here been suggested, asserts that no one is ennobled by
the mere summons unless he has rendered it operative by
taking his seat in parliament ; distinguishing it in this
from a patent of peerage, which requires no act of the
party for its completion/ But this distinction could be
supported by nothing except long usage. If, however,
we recur to the practice of former times, we shall find
that no less than ninety-eight laymen were summoned
once only to parliament, none of their names occurring
afterwards ; and fifty others two, three, or four times.
Some were constantly summoned during their lives, none
of whose posterity ever attained that honour/ The
course of proceeding, therefore, previous to the accession
of Henry VII., by no means warrants the doctrine which
was held in the latter end of Elizabeth’s reign, 1 and has
since been too fully established by repeated precedents
to be shaken by any reasoning. The foregoing observa-
nt West's Inquiry. Prynne, who takes synge, who strenuously contends against
rather lower ground than West, and was the writ of summons conferring an here-
not aware of Sir Henry de Bromflete’s ditary nobility, is of opinion that the
descent, admits that a writ of summons party summoned, was never omitted in
to any one, naming him baron, or domi- subsequent parliaments, and conse-
nts, as Baroni de Greystoke, domino de qnently was a peer for life. p. 43. But
Furnival, did give an inheritable peer- more regard is due to Prynne’s later in-
age ; not so a writ generally worded, quiries.

naming the party knight or esquire, un- 1 Case of Willoughby, Collins, p. 8 ;
less lie held by barony. of Dacres, p. 41 ; of Abergavenny, p. 119.

r Lord Abergavenny’s case, 12 Coke’s But see the case of Grey de Ruthin,
Reports; and Collins's Proceedings on p. 222 and 230, where the contrary
Claims of Baronies by Writ, p. 01. position is stated by Selden upon bettor

• Prynne’s first Register, p. 232. El- grounds.

126

BANNERETS SUMMONED Chap. VIII. Part III.

tions relate to the more ancient history of our constitution,
and to the plain matter of fact as to those times, without
considering what political cause there might be to pre-
vent the crown from introducing occasional counsellors
into the house of lords. u

It is manifest by many passages in these records that

Bannerets ^ annere ^ ;vere frequently summoned to the
summoned upper house of parliament, constituting a dis-
tinct class inferior to barons, though generally
named together, and ultimately confounded,
with them. 1 Barons are distinguished by the appellation
of Sire, bannerets have only that of Monsieur, as le Sire
de Berkeley, le Sire de Fitzwalter, Monsieur Richard
Scrop, Monsieur Richard Stafford. In the 7th of Ricliard
II. Thomas Camoys having been elected knight of
the shire for Surrey, the king addresses a writ to the
sheriff, directing him to proceed to a new election, cum
hujusmodi banneretti ante haec tempora in milites comi-
tatus ratione alicujus parliament! eligi minime consue-
verunt. Camoys was summoned by writ to the same
parliament. It has been inferred from hence by Selden
that he was a baron, and that the word banneret is merely
synonymous. 5 " But this is contradicted by too many
passages. Bannerets had so far been considered as com-
moners some years before that they could not be chal-
lenged on juries.* But they seem to have been more
highly estimated at the date of this writ.

u It seems to have been admitted by terity have sat in parliament as peers.”
Lord Redesdaie, in the case of the barony p. 233.

of LTsle, that a writ of summons, with * Rot Pari. vol. ii. p. 147, 300 ; vol. Hi.
sufficient proof of having sat by virtue p. 100, 386, 424 ; vol. iv. p. 374. Kymer,
of it in the house of lords, did in feet t vii. p. 161.

create an hereditary peerage from the y Selden’s Works, vol. iii. p. 764.
fifth year of Richard II., though he re* Selden’s opinion that bannerets in the
{dated this with respect to claimants who lords’ house were the same as barons
could only deduce their pedigree from may seem to call on me for some con-
an ancestor summoned by one of the trary authorities, in order to support my
three Edwards. Nicolas’s Case of Barony own assertion, besides the passages above
of L'Isle, p. 200. The theory, therefore, quoted from the rolls, of which he would
of West, which denies peerage by writ naturally be supposed a more competent
even to those summoned in several later Judge. I refer therefore to Spelman's
reigns, must be taken with limitation. Glossary, p. 74; Whiteiocke on Par-
** I am informed,” it is said by Mr, Hart, liamentary Writ, vol. i. p.313; and
arguendo, “that every person whose Elsynges Method of holding Parlia-
name appears in the writ of summons meats, p. 65.

of 6 Ric. 11 was again summoned to * Puis un fut chalengd puree qu'il fat
the following parliament, and their pos- a bannierc, et non allocatur ; cor all soil

English. Const.

TO HOUSE OF LORDS.

127

The distinction, however, between barons and ban*
nerets died away by degrees. In the 2nd of Henry Vl. u
Scrop of Bolton is called le Sire de Scrop ; a proof that
he was then reckoned among the barons. The bannerets
do not often appear afterwards by that appellation as
members of the upper house. Bannerets, or, as they are
called, banrents, are enumerated among the orders of
Scottish nobility in the year 1428, when the statute
directing the common lairds or tenants in capite to send
representatives was enacted ; and a modem historian
justly calls them an intermediate order between the peers
and lairds. b Perhaps a consideration of these facts,
which have frequently been overlooked, may tend in
some measure to explain the occasional discontinuance,
or sometimes the entire cessation, of writs of summons to
an individual or his descendants ; since we may conceive
that bannerets, being of a dignity much inferior to that
of barons, had no such inheritable nobility in their blood
as rendered their parliamentary privileges a matter of
right. But whether all those who without any baronial
tenure received their writs of summons to parliament
belonged to the order of bannerets I cannot pretend to
affirm ; though some passages in the rolls might rather
lead to such a supposition. 0

The second question relates to the right of suffrage

E ossessed by these temporary members of the upper
ouse. It might seem plausible certainly to conceive
that the real and ancient aristocracy would not permit
their powers to be impaired by numbering the votes of
such as the king might please to send among them, how-
ever they might allow them to assist in their debates.
But I am much more inclined to suppose that they were

a bannlere, et ne tient pas par baronie, il does not follow that banneret was then
sera en l'assise. Year-book 22 Edw. III. considered as a name of dignity dis-
fol. 18 a. apud West's Inquiry, p. 22. tinct from that honourable knighthood
* Rot Pari. vol. iv. p. 201. under the king’s banner in the field of

b Pinkerton’s Hist, of Scotland, voL t. battle, to which precedence of all other
p. 357 and 365. knights was attributed." p. 342. But

0 The lords’ committee do not like, did the committee really believe that all
apparently, to admit that bannerets were the bannerets of whom we read in the
summoned to the house of lords as a reigns of Richard II. and afterwards
distinct class of peers. ** It is observ- had been knighted at Crecy and Poic-
able,” they say, “ that this statute (5 tiers ? The name is only found in par-
Rlc. II. c. 4) speaks of bannerets as well Hamentary proceedings during compa-
aa of dukes, earls, and barons, as persons ratively pacific times,
bound to attend the parliament; but it

128 BANNERETS SUMMONED Chap. VIII. Part III.

in all respects on an equality with other peers during
their actual" attendance in parliament. For, — 1. They
are summoned by the same writ as the rest, and their
names are confused among them in the lists ; whereas the
judges and ordinary counsellors are called by a separate
writ, vobiscum et cseteris de consilio nostro, and their
names are entered after those of the peers/ 2. Some,
who do not appear to have held land-baronies, were con-
stantly summoned from father to son, and thus became
hereditary lords of parliament through a sort of prescrip-
tive right, which probably was the foundation of extend-
ing the same privilege afterwards to the descendants of
all who had once been summoned. There is no evidence
that the family of Scrope, for example, which was emi-
nent under Edward III. and subsequent kings, and gave
rise to two branches, the lords of Bolton and Masharn,
inherited any territorial honour. 1 ' 3. It is very difficult to
obtain any direct proof as to the right of voting, because
the rolls of parliament do not take notice of any debates ;
but there happens to exist one remarkable passage in
which the suffrages of the lords are individually speci-
fied. In the first parliament of Henry IV. they were
requested by the earl of Northumberland to declare what
should be done with the late king Richard. The lords

<1 West, whose business it was to re-
present the barons by writ as mere as-
sistants without suffrage, cites the writ
to them rather disingenuously, as if it
ran vobiscnm et cum prelatis, maguatibus
ac proceribus, omitting the important
word cfflteris. p. 35. Prynne, however,
from whom West has borrowed a great
part of his arguments, does not seem to
go the length of denying the right of
suffrage to persons so summoned. First
Register, p. 237.

0 These descended from two persons,
each named Geoffrey le Scrope, chief
justices of K.B. and C.B. at the begin-
ning off Edward IIL’b reign, The name
of one of them is once found among the
barons, but I presume this to have been
an accident, or mistake in tbe roll; as
he is frequently mentioned afterwards
among the Judges. Scrope, chief Justice
of K.B., was made a banneret in 14 E. X 1 1.
He was the fafher of Henry Scrope of
Masharn, a considerable person in Ed-

ward III. and Richard II.'s government,
whose grandson, I^ord Scrope of Masharn,
was beheaded for a conspiracy against
Henry V. There was a family of Scrape
as old as the reign of Henry II. ; but it
is not clear, notwithstanding Jhigdale's
assertion, that the Scrapes descended from
them, or at least that they held the same
lands : nor were the Scrapes l»arons, as
appears by their paying a relief of only
sixty marks for three knights' fees. Dug-
dale’s Baronage, p. 654.

The want of consistency in old records
throws much additional difficulty over
this intricate subject. Thus Scrope of
Masharn, though certainly a boron, and
tried next year by the peers, is called
chevalier in an instrument of 1 H. V.
Rymer, t. ix. p. 13. So in the indict*
ment against Sir John Oldcastle he is con-
stantly styled knight, though he had been
summoned several times as lord Cob-
ham, in right of his wife, who inherited
that barony. Rot. Farl. vol iv. p. lot.

English Const.

TO HOUSE OF hORDS.

129

then present agreed that he should be detained in safe
custody ; and on account of the importance of this matter
it seems to have been thought necessary to enter their
names upon the roll in these words : — The names of the
lords concurring in their answer to tbo said question here
follow ; to wit, the archbishop of Canterbury and four-
teen other bishops; seven abbots; the prince of Wales,
the duke of York, and six earls ; nineteen barons, styled
thus — le Sire de Roos, or,le Sire de Grey de Ruthyn.
Thus far the entry has nothing singular; but then follow
these nine names : Monsieur Henry Percy, Monsieur
Richard Scrop, le Sire Fitz-hugh, le Sire de Bergeveny,
le Sire de Lomley, le Baron de Greystock, le Baron de
Hilton, Monsieur Thomas Erpyngham, chamberlayn,
Monsieur Mayhewe Goumay. Of these nine five were
undoubtedly barons, from whatever cause misplaced in
order. Scrop was summoned by writ ; but his title of
Monsieur, by which he is invariably denominated, would
of itself create a strong suspicion that he was no baron,
and in another place we find him reckoned among the
bannerets. The other three do not appear to have been
summoned, their writs probably being lost. One of them,
Sir Thomas Erpyngham, a statesman well known in the
history of those times, is said to have been a banneret ; f
certainly he was not a baron. It is not unlikely that the
two others, Henry Percy (Hotspur) and Gournay, an
officer of the household, were also bannerets ; they can-
not at least be supposed to be barons, neither were they
ever summoned to any subsequent parliament. Yet in
the only record we possess of votes actually given in the
house of lords they appear to have been reckoned among
the rest. 8

The next method of conferring an honour of peerage
was by creation in parliament. This was Creationof
adopted by Edward III. in several instances,' peere by
though always, I believe, for the higher titles statute *
of duke or earl. It is laid down by lawyers that what-
ever the king is said in an ancient record to have done
in full parliament must be taken to have proceeded
from the whole legislature. As a question of fact, in-
deed, it might be doubted whether, in many proceedings

f Blomefleld’s Hist of Norfolk, vol iii. p. 645 (folio edit).

6 Rot. ParL vol. iii. p. 427.

YOL. III.

K

130

CREATION OF PEERS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

where this expression is used, and especially in the
creation of peers, the assent of the commons was specific-
ally and deliberately given. It seems hardly consonant
to the circumstances of their order under Edward III.
to suppose their sanction necessary in what seemed so
little to concfem their interest. Yet there is an instance
in the fortieth year of that prince where the lords indi-
vidually, and the commons with one voice, are declared
to have consented, at the king’s request, that the lord
de Coucy, who had married his daughter, and was
already possessed of estates in England, might be raised
to the dignity of an earl, whenever the king should de-
termine what earldom he would confer upon him. b
Under Richard II. the marquisate of Dublin is granted
to Vere by full consent of all the estates. But this instru-
ment, besides the unusual name of dignity, contained an
extensive jurisdiction and authority over Ireland . 4 In
the same reign Lancaster was made duke of Guienne,
and the duke of York’s son created earl of Rutland, to
hold during his father’s life. The consent of the lords
and commons is expressed in their patents, and they are
entered upon the roll of parliament . 11 Henry V. created
his brothers dukes of Bedford and Gloucester by request
of the lords and commons. 1 * But the patent of Sir John
Cornwall, in the tenth of Henry VI., declares him to be
made lord Fanhope, “ by consent of the lords, in the
presence of the three estates of parliament;” as if it
were designed to show that the commons had not a
legislative voice in the creation of peers.*

The mention I have made of creating peers by act of
And by parliament has partly anticipated the modem
patent, form of letters patent, with which the other
was nearly allied. The first instance of a barony con-
ferred by patent was in the tenth year of Richard II.,
when Sir John Holt, a judge of the Common Pleas, was
created lord Beauchamp of Kidderminster. Holt’s
patent, however, passed while Richard was endeavour-
ing to act in an arbitrary manner ; and in fact he never
sat in parliament, having been attainted in that of the
next year by the name of Sir John Holt. In a number
of subsequent patents down to the reign of Henry VII.

h Rot ParL vol, il. p. 290. * voL iii. p. 209. k Id. p, 263, 264.

m v«l. Iv. p. 17. n Id. p. 401.

English Const. CLERGY SUMMONED TO PARLIAMENT. 131

the assent of parliament is expressed, though it fre-
quently happens that no mention of it occurs in the
parliamentary roll. And in some instances the roll
speaks to the consent of parliament where the patent
itself is silent. 0

It is now perhaps scarcely known by many persons
not unversed in the constitution of their coun-
try, that, besides the bishops and baronial ab- summoned
bots, the inferior clergy were regularly sum- U)
moned at every parliament. In the writ of par * men *
summons to a bishop he is still directed to cause the
dean of his cathedral church, the archdeacon of his dio-
cese, with one proctor from the chapter of the former,
and two from the body of his clergy, to attend with him
at the place of meeting. This might, by an inobservant
reader, be confounded with the summons to the convo-
cation, which is composed of the same constituent parts,
and, by modem usage, is made to assemble on the same
day. But it may easily be distinguished by this differ-
ence — that the convocation is provincial, and summoned
by the metropolitans of Canterbury and York ; whereas
the clause commonly denominated pramunientes (from
its first word) in the writ to each bishop proceeds from
the crown, and enjoins the attendance of the clergy at
the national council of parliament. p

The first unequivocal instance of representatives
appearing for the lower clergy is in the year 1255,
when they are expressly named by the author of the
Annals of Burton. q They preceded, therefore, by a
few years the house of commons ; but the introduction
of each was founded upon the same principle. The

° West’s Inquiry, p. 65. This writer
does not allow that the king possessed
the prerogative of creating new peers
without consent of parliament. But
Prynne (1st Register, p. 225), who ge-
nerally adopts the same theory of peerage
os West, strongly asserts the contrary;
and the party views of the latter's trea-
tise, which I mentioned above, should be
kept in sight. It was his object to prove
that the pending bill to limit the num-
bers of the peerage was conformable to
the original constitution.

P Hody's History of Convocations,

p. 12. Disaertatio de antiquft et mo-
dernA Synodi Anglican! Constitutione,
prefixed to Wilkins’s Concilia, t 1.

2 Gaie, Scriptures Iter. Anglic, t. ii.
p. 355 ; Hody, p. 345. Atterbury (Rights
of Convocations, p. 265, 315) endeavours
to show that the clergy had been repre-
sented in parliament from the Conquest
as well as before it Many of the pas-
sages he quotes are very inconclusive;
but possibly there may be some weight
in one from Matthew I*arfs, ad ann. 1241
and two or three writs of the reign of
Henry HI.

132

CLERGY SUMMONED Chap. VIII. Part III.

king required the clergy’s money, but dared not take it
without their consent/ In the double parliament, if so
we may call it, summoned in the eleventh of Edward I.
to meet at Northampton and York, and divided accord-
ing to the two ecclesiastical provinces, the proctors of
chapters for each provinco, but not those of the diocesan
clergy, were summoned through a royal writ addressed
to the archbishops. Upon account of the absence of any
deputies from the lower clergy these assemblies refused
to grant a subsidy. The proctors of both descriptions
appear to have been summoned by the pnemunientes
clause in the 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 28th, and 35th years of
the same king ; but in some other parliaments of his
reign the pnemunientes clause is omitted/ The same
irregularity continued under his successor ; and the
constant usage of inserting this clause in the bishop’s
writ is dated from the twenty-eighth of Edward III/

It is highly probable that Edward I., whose legisla-
tive mind was engaged in modelling the constitution on
a comprehensive scheme, designed to render the clergy
an effective branch of parliament, however their conti-
nual resistance may have defeated the accomplishment
of this intention. 11 We find an entry upon the roll of
his parliament at Carlisle, containing a list of all the
proctors deputed to it by the several dioceses of the
kingdom. This may be reckoned a clear proof of their
parliamentary attendance during his reign under the
pnemunientes clause ; since the province of Canterbury
could not have been present in convocation at a city
beyond its limits.* And indeed, if we were to found our
judgment merely on the language used in these writs, it
would be hard to resist a very strange paradox, that the
clergy were not only one of the three estates of the
realm, but as essential a member of the legislature by
their representatives as the commons/ They are sum-

r Hody, p, 381 ; Atterbury'a Rights of ation, petitioned that, " according to the
Convocations, p. 231. tenor of the king s writ, and the ancient

• Hody, p. 383 ; Atterbury, p. 222. customs of the realm, they might have

t Hody, p. 381. room and place and be associated with

“ Gilbert's Hist of Exchequer, p. 47. the commons in the nether bouse of this

* Rot PlarL vol. L p. 189 ; Atierbuiy, present parliament as members of the

p. 229. commonwealth and the king’s most bom-

V The lower boose of convocation, in ble subjects,” Burnet's Hist of Re-
124? , terrified at the progress of reform- formation, voL it ; Appendix. No. IT.

English Const, TO ATTEND PARLIAMENT.

133

moned in the earliest year extant (23 E. I.) ad tractan-
dum, ordinandum et faciendum nobiscum, et cum cse-
teris praelatis, proceribus, ac aliis incolis regni nostri ;
in that of the next year, ad ordinandum de quantitate et
modo subsidii ; in that of the twenty-eighth, ad facien-
dum et consentiendum his, quae tunc de communi con-
silio ordinari contigerit. In later times it ran sometimes
ad faciendum et consentiendum, sometimes only ad con-
sentiendum ; which, from the fifth of Richard II., has
been the term invariably adopted. 2 Now, as it is usual
to infer from the same words, when introduced into the
wilts for election of the commons, that they possessed
an enacting power, implied in the words ad faciendum,
or at least to deduce the necessity of their assent from
the words ad consentiendum, it should seem to follow
that the clergy were invested, as a branch of the parlia-
ment, with rights no less extensive. It is to be consi-
dered how we can reconcile these apparent attributes of
political power with the unquestionable facts that
almost all laws, even while they continued to attend,
were passed without their concurrence, and that, after
some time, they ceased altogether to comply with the
writ. a

The solution of this difficulty can only be found in
that estrangement from the common law and the tem-
poral courts which the clergy throughout Europe were
disposed to effect. In this country their ambition de-
feated its own ends : and while they endeavoured by
privileges and immunities to separate themselves from
the people, they did not perceive that the line of de-
marcation thus strongly traced would cut them oft' from
the sympathy of common interests. Everything which
they could call of ecclesiastical cognizance was drawn
into their own courts ; w hile the administration of what

t

This assertion that the clergy had ever shop’s wrU of summons was so far re-
been associated as one body with the garded down to the Reformation, that
commons is not borne out by anything proctors were elected, and their names
that appears on our records, and is con- returned upon the writ ; though the
tradicted by many passages, but it is clergy never attended from the beginning
said that th$ clergy were actually so of the fifteenth century, and gave their
united with the commons in the Irish money only in convocation. Since the
parliament till the Reformation. Gil- Reformation the clause has been pre-.
bert’s Hist of the Exchequer, p. 57. served for form merely in the writ.

* Hody, p. 392. Wilkins, Disscrtatio, ubi supra.

• The prasmunientes clause in a bi-

134

CLERGY SUMMONED Chap. VIII. Part III.

they contemned as a barbarous system, the temporal law
of the land, fell into the hands of lay judges. But
these were men not less subtle, not less ambitious, not
less attached to their profession than themselves ; and
wielding, as they did in the courts of Westminster, the
delegated sceptre of judicial sovereignty, they soon
began to control the spiritual jurisdiction, and to esta-
blish the inherent supremacy of the common law. From
this time an inveterate animosity subsisted between the
two courts, the vestiges of which have only been effaced
by the liberal wisdom of modern ages. The general
love of the common law, however, with the great weight
of its professors in the king’s council and in parliament,
kept the clergy in surprising subjection. None of our
kings after Henry III. were bigots; and the constant
tone of the commons serves to show that the English
nation was thoroughly averse to ecclesiastical influence,
whether of their own church or the see of Koine.

It was natural, therefore, to withstand the interference
of the clergy summoned to parliament in legislation, m
much as that of the spiritual court in temporal jurisdic-
tion. With the ordinary subjects, indeed, of legislation
they had little concern. The oppressions of the king’s
purveyors, or escheators, or officers of the forests, the
abuses or defects of the common law, the regulations
necessary for trading towns and seaports, were matters
that touched them not, and to which their consent was
never required. And, as they well knew there was no
design in summoning their attendance but to obtain
money, it was with great reluctance that they obeyed
the royal writ, -which was generally obliged to be en-
forced by an archiepiscopal mandate. b Thus, instead of
an assembly of deputies from an estate of the realm,
they became a synod or convocation. And it seems
probable that in moa$, if not all, instances where the
clergy are said in the roll of parliament to have pre-
sented their petitions, or are otherwise mentioned as a
deliberative body, we should suppose the convocation

b Hody, p. 398, 403, Ac. In 1314 the that the English clergy had not been
clergy protest even against the recital of accustomed, nor ought by right, to be
the king's writ to the archbishop direct- convoked by the king’s authority. Atter*
in ft him to summon the clergy of his pro- bury, p. 230.

Vince in his letters mandatory, declaring

English Const. TO ATTEND PARLIAMENT.

135

alone of the province of Canterbury to be intended.®
For that of York seems to have been always considered
as inferior, and even ancillary, to the greater province,
voting subsidies, and even assenting to canons, without
deliberation, in compliance with the example of Canter-
bury ; d the convocation of which province consequently
assumed the importance of a national council. But in
either point of view the proceedings of this ecclesiastical
assembly, collateral in a certain sense to parliament,
yet very intimately connected with it, whether sitting
by virtue of the praemunientes clause or otherwise, de-
serve some notice in a constitutional history.

In the sixth year of Edward III. the proctors of the
clergy are specially mentioned as present at the speech
pronounced by the king’s commissioner, and retired,
along with the prelates, to consult together upon the
business submitted to their deliberation. They proposed
accordingly a sentence of excommimi cation against dis-
turbers of the peace, which was assented to by the lords
and commons. The clergy are said afterwards to have
had leave, as well as the knights, citizens, and burgesses,
to return to their homes ; the prelates and peers con-
tinuing with the king.® This appearance of the clergy
in full parliament is not, perhaps, so decisively proved
by any later record. But in the eighteenth of the same
reign several petitions of the clergy are granted lay the
king and his council, entered on the roll of parliament,
and even the statute roll, and in some respects are still
part of our law/ To these it seems highly probable that
the commons gave no assent ; and they may be reckoned
among the other infringements of their legislative rights.
It is remarkable that in the same parliament the com-
mons, as if apprehensive of what was in preparation,
besought the king that no petition of the clergy might

0 Hody, p. 425. Atterbury, p* 42, 233. d Atterbury, p. 46.

The latter seems to think that the clergy e Rot Pari, vol ii. p. 64, 65.

of both provinces never actually met In a f 18 E. III. stat 3. Rot Pari. vol. ii.
national council or house of parliament, p. 151. This Is the parliament in which
under the pncmuuientes writ, after the it is very doubtful whether any deputies
reign of Edward II., though the proctors from cities and boroughs had a place,
were duly returned. But Hody does not The pretended statutes were therefore
go quite so far, and Atterbury had a par- every way null ; being falsely imputed
ticuiar motive to enhance the influence to an incomplete parliament
of the convocation of Canterbury.

136

CLERGY SUMMONED Chap. YIII. Part III.

be granted till he and his council should have consi-
dered whether it would turn to the prejudice of the
lords or commons.**

A series of petitions from the clergy, in the twenty-
fifth of Edward III., had not probably any real assent
of the commons, though it is once mentioned in the
enacting words, when they were drawn into a statute. 1 *
Indeed the petitions correspond so little with the general
sentiment of hostility towards ecclesiastical privileges
manifested by the lower house of parliament, that they
would not easily have obtained its acquiescence. The
convocation of the province of Canterbury presented
several petitions in the fiftieth year of the same king,
to which they received an assenting answer ; but they
are not found in the statute-book. This, however,
produced the following remonstrance from the commons
at the next parliament: “ Also the commons beseech
their lord the king, that no statute nor ordinance be
made at the petition of the clergy, unless by assent of
your commons ; and that your commons be not bound
by any constitutions which they make for their own
profit without the commons’ assent. For they will
not be bound by any of your statutes or ordinances
made without their assent.” * The king evaded a direct
answ||r to this petition. But the province of Canter-
bury did not the less present their own grievances to
the king in that parliament, and two among the
statutes of the year seem to be founded upon no other
authority. k

In the first session of Richard II. the prelates and
clergy of both provinces arc said to have presented their
schedule of petitions which appear upon the roll, and
three of which are the foundation of statutes unassented
to in all probability by the commons. 1 " If the clergy of
both provinces were actually present, as is here asserted,
it must of course have been as a house of parliament,
and pot of convocation. It rather seems, so far as we

8 Rot Pari. vol. if. p. 161. m Rot Pari. vol. iii. p. 25. A nostre

b 25 E. III. gtat 3. tres excellent seigneur le roy suppliant

i p. 368. The word they is ambiguous ; humblement ses devotes ora tours, les
Whiteiocke (on Parliamentary Writ, voL prelats et la dergie de la province do
ii. p. 346) interprets it of the commons: Canterbirsetd’Everwyk. Stat. 1 Richard
i should rather suppose it to mean the II. c. 13, 14, is. But see Hody, p. 425;
clergy. k 50 K HI. c. 4 & 5. Attcrbury, p. 329.

English Const. TO ATTEND PARLIAMENT.

137

can trust to the phraseology of records, that the clergy
sat also in a national assembly under the king’s wiit in
the second fear of the same king . 0 Upon other occasions
during the same reign, where the representatives of the
clergy are alluded to as a deliberative body, sitting at
the same time with the parliament, it is impossible to
ascertain its constitution ; and, indeed, even from those
already cited we cannot draw any positive inference . 0
But whether in convocation or in parliament, they
certainly formed a legislative council in ecclesiastical
matters by the advice and consent of which alone, without
that of the commons (I can say nothing as to the lords),
Edward III. and even Richard II. enacted laws to bind
the laity. I have mentioned in a different place a still
more conspicuous instance of this assumed prerogative ;
namely, the memorable statute against heresy in the
second of Henry IV. ; which can hardly be deemed any-
thing else than an infringement of the rights of parlia-
ment, more clearly established at that time than at the
accession of Richard II. Petitions of the commons
relative to spiritual matters, however frequently pro-
posed, in few or no instances obtained the king’s assent

n Rot. Pari. vol. lii. p. 37.

° It might be argued, from a passage
In the parliament-roll of 21 R. II., that
the clergy of both provinces were not
only present, but that they were ac-
counted an essential part of parliament
in temporal matters, which is contrary to
the whole tenor of our laws. The com-
mons are there said to have prayed that,
“ whereas many judgments and ordi-
nances formerly made in parliament had
been annulled bemuse the estate of clergy
had not Inert present thereat , the prelates
and clergy might make a proxy wutli
sufficient power to consent in their name
to all things done in this parliament’'
Whereupon the spiritual lords agreed to
Intrust their powders to Sir Thomas Percy,
and gave him a procuration commencing
in the following words : “ Nos Thomas
Cantuar’ et Robertus Ebor'archiepiscopi,
ac prrolati et clervs utri usque prcnrindcc.
Cantuar' et Etmr' jure ecclesiarum nostra-
rum et temporalium earundem hahentes
jus interrssendi in singulis parlia mentis
domini nostri regis et regni Angllte pro

tempore celebrandis, necnon tract&ndi et
expediendi in eisdem quantum ailingula
in instant! parliament) pro statu et
honore domini nostri regis, necnon re-
galia* suae, ac qniete, pace, et tranquilli-
tate regni judicialiter jnstificandis, vene-
rnbili viro domino Thom® de Percy
militi, nostrum plenarie commit tirnus
potestatem.” It may be perceived by
these expressions, and more unequivo-
cally by the nature of the case, that it
was the judicial power of parliament
which the spiritual lords delegated to
their proxy. Many impeachments for
capital offences w’ere coming on, at which,
by their canons, the bishops could not
assist. But it can never be conceived
that the inferior clergy bad any share in
this high judicature. And, upon looking
attentively at the words above printed in
italics, it wiilbe evident that the spiritual
lords holding by barony are the only
persons designated ; whatever may have
been meant by the singular phrase, as
applied to them, elerus utriusque pro-
vince. Rot. Pari. vol. iii. p. 348.

138

JURISDICTION OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

so as to pass into statutes, unless approved by the
convocation/ But, on the other hand, scarcely any
temporal laws appear to have passed by the concurrence
of the clergy. Two instances only, so far as I know,
are on record : the parliament held in the eleventh of
Kichard II. is annulled by that in the twenty-first of
his reign, “ with the assent of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the proctors of the clergy, and the com-
mons ;” q and the statute entailing the crown on the
children of Henry IV. is said to be enacted on the peti-
tion of the prelates, nobles, clergy, and commons/ Both
these were stronger exertions of legislative authority
than ordinary acts of parliament, and were very likely
to be questioned in succeeding times.

The supreme judicature, which had been exercised by
Jurisdiction king’s court, was diverted, about the reign of
of thetdng'g John, into three channels ; the tribunals of King’s
council. Bench, Common Pleas, and the Exchequer/
These became the regular fountains of justice, which
soon almost absorbed the provincial jurisdictions of the
sheriff and lord of manor. But the original institution,
having been designed for ends of state, police, and
revenue, full as much as for the determination of private
suits, still preserved the most eminent parts of its
authority. For the king’s ordinary or privy council,
which is the usual style from the reign of Edward 1.,
seems to have been no other than the king’s court
(curia regis) of older times, being composed of the same
persons, and having, in a principal degree, the same
subjects of deliberation. It consisted of the chief
ministers; as the chancellor, treasurer, lord steward,
lord admiral, lord marshal, the keeper of the privy seal,
th# chamberlain, treasurer, and comptroller of the
household, the chancellor of the exchequer, the master
of the wardrobe ; and of the judges, king’s serjeant, and
attorney-general, the master of the rolls, and justices in
eyre, who at that time were not the same as the judges

P Atterbury, p. 346. ■ The ensuing sketch of the Jurisdic-

3 21 R. II. c. 12. Burnet's Hist of tion exercised by the king’s council hue
Reformation (vol. ii. p. 47) led me to been chiefly derived from Sir Matthew
Ibis act, which I had overlooked. Hale’s Treatise of the Jurisdiction of the

r Ret ParL voL iii. p. 682. Atterbury, Lords’ House In Parliament, published
p. 61. by Mr. Hargrave.

English Const.

THE KING'S COUNCIL.

139

at Westminster. When all these were called together,
it was a full council ; but where the business was of a
more contracted nature, those only who were fittest to
advise were summoned ; the chancellor and judges for
matters of law ; the officers of state for what concerned
the revenue or household. 1

The business of this council, out of parliament, may
be reduced to two heads ; its deliberative office as a
council of advice, and its decisive power of jurisdiction.
With respect to the first, it obviously comprehended all
subjects of political deliberation, which were usually
referred to it by the king: this being in fact the ad-
ministration or governing council of state, the distinction
of a cabinet being introduced in comparatively modem
times. But there were likewise a vast number of peti-
tions continually presented to the council, upon which
they proceeded no further than to sort, as it were, and
forward them by endorsement to the proper courts, or
advise the suitor what remedy he had to seek. Thus
some petitions are answered, “ this cannot be done
without a new law;” some were turned over to the
regular court, as the chancery or king’s bench ; some of
greater moment were endorsed to be heard “ before the
great council some, concerning the king’s interest,
were referred to the chancery, or select persons of the
council.

The coercive authority exercised by this standing
council of the king was far more important. It may be
divided into acts, legislative and judicial. As for the
first, many ordinances were made in council ; sometimes
upon request of the commons in parliament, who felt
themselves better qualified to state a grievance than a
remedy; sometimes without any pretence, unless the
usage of government, in the infaney of our constitution,

t The words u privy council ” are said
not to be used till after the reign of
Henry VI.; the former style was " ordi-
nary ” or “ continual council.’* But a
distinction had always been made, ac-
cording to the nature of the business ;
the great officers of state, or, as we might
now say, the ministers, had no occasion
for the presence of Judges or any law yens
in the secret councils of the CTown. They

become, therefore, a council of govern-
ment, though always members of the
consilium ordinanum ; and, in the former
capacity, began to keep formal records of
their proceedings. The acts of this
council, though, as I have just said, it
bore as yet no distinguishing name, are
extant from the year 1386, and for seventy
years afterwards are known through the
valuable publication of Sir Harris Nicolas.

140

JURISDICTION OF -Chap. VIII. Pabt III,

may be thought to afford one. These were always of a
temporary or partial nature, and were considered as re-
gulations not sufficiently important to demand a new
statute. Thus, in the second year of Richard II., the
council, after hearing read the statute-roll of an act
recently passed, confirming a criminal juiisdiction in
certain cases upon justices of the peace, declared that the
intention of parliament, though not clearly expressed
therein, had been to extend that jurisdiction to certain
other cases omitted, which accordingly they cause to be
inserted in the commissions made to these justices under
the great seal. u But they frequently so much exceeded
what the growing spirit of public liberty would permit,
that it gave rise to complaint in parliament. The com-
mons petition in 13 K. II. that “neither the chancellor
nor the king’s council, after the close of parliament, may
make any ordinance against the common law, or the
ancient customs of the land, or the statutes made hereto-
fore or to be made in this parliament ; but that the com-
mon law have its course for all the people, and no judg-
ment be rendered without due legal process.” The king
answers, “ Let it be done as has been usual heretofore,
saving the prerogative ; and if any one is aggrieved, let
him show it specially, and right shall be done him.” *
This unsatisfactory answer proves the arbitrary spirit in
which Richard was determined to govern.

The judicial power of the council was in some instances
founded upon particular acts of parliament, giving it
power to hear and determine certain causes. Many
jietitions likewise were referred to it from parliament,
especially where they were left unanswered by reason of
a dissolution. But, independently of this delegated
authority, it is certain that the king s council did an-
ciently exercise, as well out of parliament as in it, a very
great jurisdiction, both in causes criminal and civil.
Some, however, have contended, that whatever they did
in this respect was illegal, and an encroachment upon
the common law and Magna Charta. And be the common
law what it may, it seems an indisputable violation of the
charter in its most adjjiirable and essential article, to drag
men in questions of their freehold or liberty before a

M Rot P&rL vol. iil p. 84

Ibid. p. 286.

English Const.

THE KING’S COUNCIL.

141

tribunal which neither granted them a trial by their
peers nor always respected the law of the land. Against
this usurpation the patriots of those times never ceased
to lift their voices. A statute of the fifth year of Edward
III. provides that no man shall be attached, nor his
property seized into the king’s hands, against the form of
the great charter and the law of the land. In the
twenty-fifth of the same king it was enacted, that “ none
shall be taken by petition or suggestion to the king or
his council, unless it be by indictment or presentment,
or by writ original at the common law, nor shall be put
out of his franchise or freehold, unless he be duly put to
answer, and forejudged of the same by due course of
law.” y This was repeated in a short act of the twenty-
eighth of his reign ; 2 but both, in all probability, were
treated with neglect ; for another was passed some years
afterwards, providing that no man shall be put to answer
wi .hout presentment before justices, or matter of record,
or by due process and writ original according to the old
law of the land. The answer to the petition whereon
this statute is grounded, in the parliament-roll, expressly
declares this to be an article of the great charter . 11 No-
thing, however, would prevail on the council to surren-
der so eminent a power, and, though usurped, yet of so
long a continuance. Cases of arbitrary imprisonment
frequently occurred, and were remonstrated against by
the commons. The right of every freeman in that car-
dinal point was as undubitable, legally speaking, as at

y 25 E. III. 8 tat 5, c. 4. Probably
thin fifth statute of the 25 th of Edward
III. is the most extensively beneficial act
in the whole body of our laws. Jt esta-
blished certainty fn treasons, regulated
purveyance, prohibited arbitrary impri-
sonment and the determination of plena
of freehold before the council, took away
the compulsory finding of men-at-arms
and other troops, confirmed the- reason-
able aid of the king’s tenants fixed by 3
1C. I., and provided that the king’s pro-
tection should not hinder civil process or
execution.

* 2* E. III. c. 3.

» 42 K. III. c. 3, and Rot Pari. vol. it
p. 265. It is not surprising that the king’s
council should have persisted in these

transgressions of their lawful authority,
when we find a similar jurisdiction
usurped by the officers of inferior persons.
Complaint is made in the 18th of Richard
11. that men were compelled to answer
before the • council of divert lords and
ladies , for their freeholds and other
mat ters cognizable at common law, and a
remedy for this abuse is given by peti-
tion in chancery, stal 15 R. II. c. 12.
This act is confirmed with a penalty on
its contraveners the next year, 16 R. II.
c. 2. The private gaols which some lords
were permitted by law to possess, and
for which there was always a provi-
sion* in their castles, enabled them, to
render this oppressive jurisdiction effec-
tual

142

JURISDICTION OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

this day ; but the courts of law were fcfraid to exercise
their remedial functions in defiance of so powerful a
tribunal. After the accession of the Lancastrian family,
these, like other grievances, became rather less frequent •
but the commons remonstrate several times, even in the
minority of Henry VI., against the council’s interference
in matters cognizable at common law. b In these later
times the civil jurisdiction of the council was principally
exercised in conjunction with the chancery, and accord-
ingly they are generally named together in the complaint.
The chancellor having the great seal in his custody, the
council usually borrowed its process from his court.
This was returnable into chancer}’ even where the busi-
ness was depending before the council. Nor were the
two jurisdictions less intimately allied in their diameter,
each being of an equitable nature ; and equity, as then
practised, being little else than innovation and encroach-
ment on the course of law. This part, long since the
most important of the chancellor’s judicial function,
cannot be traced beyond the time of ltichard II., when,
the practice of feoftmen ts to uses having been introduced,
without any legal remedy to secure the cestui que use,
or usufructuary, against his feoffees, the court of chan-
cery undertook to enforce this species of contract by
process of its own. c

Such was the nature of the king’s ordinary council in
itself, as the organ of his executive sovereignty, and
such the jurisdiction which it habitually exercised. But

b Rot Pari. 17 R. II. voL iii. p. 318;

4 H. IV. p. 507; 1 H. VI. vol. iv. p. 189;

5 H. VI. p. 292 ; 8 H. VL p. 343 ; 10 H.
VL p. 403 ; 15 H. VI p. 501. To one of
these (10 H. VI.), “ that none should be
put to answer for his freehold in parlia-
ment, nor before any court or council
where such things are not cognizable by
the law of the land.” the, king gave a
denial. As it was less usual to refuse
promises of ttaiB kind than to forget
them afterwards, I do not understand the
motive of this.

* Hale's Jurisdiction of Lords' House,
p. 4 & Coke, 2 Inst p. 653. The last
author places this a little later. There
Is a petition of the commons, in the roll
of the 4th of Henry IV. p. 511, that,
whereas many grantees and feoffees in

trust for their grantors and feoffors
alienate or charge the tenements granted,
in which ant Overt u no remedy unleu
one is ordered by parliament, that the
king and lords would provide a remedy.
This petition is referred to the king's
council to advise of a remedy against the
ensuing parliament. It may perhaps be
inferred from hence that the writ of
subpoena out of chancery had not yet
been applied to protect the cestui que
use. But it is equally possible that the
commons, being disinclined to what they
would deem an illegal innovation, were
endeavouring to reduce these fiduciary
estates within the pale of the common
law, as was afterwards done by the
statute of uses. [Not* X.]

English Const. THE KING'S COUNCIL. 143

it is also to be considered in its relation to the parlia-
ment, during whose session, either singly or in conjunc-
tion with the lords’ house, it was particularly conspicu-
ous. The great officers of state, whether peers or not,
the judges, the kings serjeant, and attorney-general,
were, from the earliest times, as the latter still continue
to be, summoned by special writs to the upper house.
But while the writ of a peer runs ad tractandum nobis-
cum et cum caeteris prselatis, magnatibus et proceribus,
that directed to one of the judges is only ad tractandum
nobiscum et cum caiteris de consilio nostro ; and the
seats of the latter are upon the woolsacks at one extremity
of the house.

In the reigns of Edward I. and II. the council appear
to have been the regular advisers of the king in passing
laws to which the houses of parliament had assented.
The preambles of most statutes during this period express
their concurrence. Thus the statute Westm. I. is said
to be the act of the king by his council, and by the
assent of archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, earls,
barons, and all the commonalty of the realm being hither
summoned. The statute of escheators, 29 E. I., is said
to be agreed by the council, enumerating their names,
all whom appear to be judges or public officers. Still
more striking conclusions are to be drawn from the
petitions' addressed to the council by both houses of
parliament. In the eighth of Edward II. there are four
petitions from the commons to the king and his council,
one from the lords alone, and one in which both appear
to have joined. Later parliaments of the same reign
present us with several more instances of the like nature.
Thus in 18 E. II. a petition begins, “To our lord the
king, and to his council, the archbishops, bishops, pre-
lates, earls, barons, and others of the commonalty of
England, show,” &c. d

But from the beginning pf Edward III.’s reign it
seems that the council and the lords’ house in parliament
were often blended together into one assembly. This was
denominated the great council, being the lords spiritual
and temporal, with the king’s ordinary council annexed
to them, as a council within a council. And even in

d Rot Pari, vol i. p. 416.

144

JURISDICTION OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

much, earlier times the lords, as hereditary counsellors,
were, either whenever they thought fit to attend, or on
special summonses by the king (it is hard to say which),
assistant members of this council, both for advice and
for jurisdiction. This double capacity of the peerage, as
members of the parliament or legislative assembly and
of the deliberative and judicial council, throws a very
great obscurity over the subject. However, we find that
private petitions for redress were, even under Edward I.,
presented to the lords in parliament as much as to the
ordinary council. The parliament was considered a high
court of justice, where relief was to be given in cases
where the course of law was obstructed, as well as where
it was defective. Hence the intennission of parliaments
was looked upon as a delay of justice, and their annual
meeting is demanded upon that ground. 4i The king,”
says Fleta, “ has his court in his council, in his parlia-
ments, in the presence of bishops, earls, barons, lords,
and other wise men, where the doubtful cases of judg-
ments are resolved, and new remedies are provided against
new injuries, and justice is rendered to every man ac-
cording to his desert.”* In the third year of Edward II.
receivers of petitions began to be appointed at the open-
ing of every parliament, who usually transmitted them
to the ordinary, but in some instances to the great
council. These receivers were commonly three for
England, and three for Ireland, Wales, Gascony, and
other foreign dominions. There were likewise two cor-
responding classes of auditors or triers of petitions.
These consisted partly of bishops or peers, partly of
judges and other members of the council ; and they seem
to have been instituted in order to disburthen the council
by giving answers to some petitions. But about the
middle of Edward III.’s time they ceased to act juridi-
cally in this respect, and confined themselves to trans-
mitting petitions to the lords of the council.

The great council, according to the definition wo have
given, consisting of the lords spiritual and temporal, in
conjunction with the ordinary council, or, in other words,
of all who were severally summoned to parliament, exei*
cised a considerable jurisdiction, as welbcivil as criminal.

* L. ii. c. 2.

English Const. THE KING’S COUNCIL. 145

In this jurisdiction it is the opinion of Sir M. Hale that
the council, though not peers, had right of suffrage ; an
opinion very probable, when we recollect that the council
by themselves, both in and out of parliament, possessed
in fact a judicial authority little inferior ; and that the
king’s delegated sovereignty in the administration of
justice, rather than any intrinsic right of the peerage, is
the foundation on which the judicature of the lords must
bo supported. But in the time of Edward III. or
Richard II. the lords, by their ascendency, threw the
judges and rest of the council into shade, and took the
decisive jurisdiction entirely to themselves, making use
of their former colleagues but as assistants and advisers,
as they still continue to be held in all the judicial pro-
ceedings of that house/

Those statutes which restrain the king’s ordinary
council from disturbing men in their freehold rights, or
questioning them for misdemeanours, have an equal
application to the lords’ house in parliament, though we
do not frequently meet with complaints of the encroach-
ments made by that assembly. There was, however,
one class of cases tacitly excluded from the operation of
those acts, in which the coercive jurisdiction of this high
tribunal had great convenience ; namely, where the
ordinary course of justice was so much obstructed by the
defending party, through riots, combinations of mainte-
nance, or overawing influence, that no inferior court
would find its process obeyed. Those ages, disfigured in
their quietest season by rapine and oppression, afforded
no small number of cases that called for this interposition
of a paramount authority. 8 Another indubitable branch

r [Note XI.]

8 This is remarkably expressed in one
of the articles agreed in parliament 8 II.
VI. for the regulation of the council.
“ Item, that alle the hi Ilea that compre-
hend matters terminable a ttc the common
lawe shall be remitted ther to be deter-
mined; but if so be that the diBcresion
of the counsel U fele to grete myght on
that 5 syde, and un myght on that other,
or elles other cause resonable yat shal
move him.” Itot Pari. ipoi. iv. p. 343.
Mr. Bruce has well observed of the arti-
cles agreed upon In 8 Hen. VI., or rather
of “ those in 5 Hen. VL, which were
VOL. III.

nearly the same, that in theory nothing
could be more excellent. In turbulent
times, it is scarcely necessary to remark,
great men were too apt to weigh out
Justice for themselves, and with no great
nicety ; a court, therefore, to which the
people might fly for relief against
powerful oppressors, was most especially
needfel Law charges also were con-
sideraole; and this, * the poor man’s
court, in which he might have right
without paying any money' (Sir T.
Smith’s Commonwealth, book iii. ch! 7),
was dn institution apparently calculated
to be of unquestionable utility. It was
L

146

THE KING’S COUNCIL. Chap. VIII. Part III.

of this jurisdiction was in writs of error ; but it may be
observed that their doteimination was very frequently
left to a select committee of peers and councillors. These,
too* cease almost entirely with Henry IV. ; and were
scarcely revived till the accession of James I.

Some instances occur in the reign of Edward III.
where records have been brought into parliament, and
annulled with assent of the commons as well as the rest
of the legislature . 11 But these were attainders of treason,
which it seemed gracious and solemn to reverse in the
most authentic manner. Certainly the commons had
neither by the nature of onr constitution nor the practice
of parliament any right of intermeddling in judicature,
save where something was required beyond the existing
law, or where, as in the statute of treasons, an authority
of that kind was particularly reserved to both houses.
This is fully acknowledged by themselves in the first
year of Henry IV . 1 But their influence upon the balance

the comprehensiveness of the last clause apprehend that the proviso must be un-
— the * other cause resonable which dcrstood to mean cases legally detcnnin*
was Its ruin.” Archieologia, vol. xxv. able; the words, I think, will bear no
p. 318. The statute 31 Hen. VI. c. 2, other construction. But as all the of*
which is Mi printed in Ruff head’s edi- fences enumerated were indictable, we
tion, is very important, as giving a legal must either hold the proviso to be utterly
authority to the council, by writs under inconsistent with the rest of the statute,
the great seal, and by writs of procUma- or suppose that the Words “ other form ”
tion to the sheriffs, on parties making were intended to prohibit the irregular
default, to compel the attendance of any process usual w ith the council ; secret ex-
persons complained of for “ great riots, amination of witnesses, torture, neglect
extortions, oppressions, and grievous of- of technical formality in specifying
fences/* under heavy penalties; in case charges, punishments not according to
of a peer, “ the loss of his estate, and the course of law, and other violations of
name of lord, and his place in parlia- fair and free trial, which constituted the
ment," and all his lands for the term of greatest grievance In the proceedings of
his life ; and fine at discretion in the case the council.

of other persons. A proviso is added h The Judgment against Mortimer vm
that no matter determinable by the law reversed at the unit of hfs son, 28 E. III.,
of the realm should be determined in because he had riot been put on his trial,
other form than after the course of law The peers had uttyidged him to death in
in the king’s courts. Sir Francis Palgrave his absence, upon common notoriety of
(Essay on the King’s Council, p. 84) his guilt. 4 E. III. p. 63. In the same
observes that this proviso “ would in no session of 28 E. III. the earl of Arundel’s
way interfere tvith the effective Jurisdic- attainder was also revensed, which had
tion of the council, inasmuch as it could passed in 1 E. III., when Mortimer was
always be alleged in the bills which were at the height of his power. These preco-
preferred before it that the oppressive dents tab^n together seem to have re-
and grievous offences of which they com- suited Brora no partiality, bnt a true
plained were not determinable by the sense of Justice in respect of treasons,
ordinary course of the common law ” animated by the recent statute. Rot.
p. 86. But this takes the word "deter- Pari. vol. ii. p. 258 .
minabie ” to mean in fact ; whereas I i Rot. Part. voL iii. p, 427.

English Const. CHARACTER OF GOVERNMENT.

147

of government became bo commanding in a few years
afterwards, that they contrived, as has been mentioned
already, to have petitions directed to them, rather than
to the lords or council, and to transmit them, either with
a tacit approbation or in the form of acts, to the upper
house. Perhaps this encroachment of the commons may
have contributed to the disuse of the lords' jurisdiction,
who would rather relinquish their ancient and honour-
able but laborious function than share it with such bold
usurpers.

Although the restraining hand of parliament was con-
tinually growing more effectual, and the notions General
of legal right acquiring more precision, .from character
the time of Magna Cliarta to the civil wars government
under Henry VI., we may justly say that the in these
general tone of administration was not a little ages *
arbitrary. The whole fabric of English liberty rose step
by step, through much toil and many sacrifices, each
generation adding some new security to the work, and
trusting that posterity would perfect the labour as well
as enjoy the reward. A time, perhaps, was even then
foreseen in the visions of generous hope, by tha brave
knights of parliament and by the sober sages of justice,
when the proudest ministers of the crown should recoil
from those harriers which were then daily pushed aside
with impunity.

There is a material distinction to he taken between the
exerefce of the king’s undeniable prerogative, however
repugnant to our improved principles of freedom, and the
abuse or extension of it to oppressive purposes. For we
cannot fairly consider as part of our ancient constitution
what the parliament was perpetually remonstrating
against, and the statute-book is full of enactments to
repress. Doubtless the cont inual acquiescence of a nation
in arbitrary government may ultimately destroy all privi-
leges of positive institution, and leave them to recover,
by such means as opportunity shall offer, the natural and
imprescriptible rights for which human societies were
established. And* this may perhaps be the case at present
with many European kingdoms. But it would be neces-
sary to shut our eyes with deliberate prejudice against
the whole tenor of the most unquestionable authorities,
against the petitions of the commons, the acts of the legis-

l 2

148

CHARACTER OF GOVERNMENT. Chap. VIII. Part III.

lature, the testimony of historians and lawyers, before we
could assert that England acquiesced in those abuses and
oppressions which it must be confessed she was unable
fully to prevent.

The word prerogative is of a peculiar import, and
scarcely understood by those who come from the studies
of political philosophy. We cannot define it by any
theory of executive functions. All these may be com-
prehended in it; but also a great deal more. It is best,
perhaps, to be understood by its derivation, and has been
said to be that law in case of the king which is law in
no case of the subject.* Of the higher and more sove-
reign prerogatives 1 shall here say nothing ; they result
from the nature of a monarchy, and have nothing very
peculiar in their character. But the smaller rights of
the crown show better the original lineaments of our con-
stitution. It is said commonly enough that all preroga-
tives are given for the subject’s good. I must confess
that no part of this assertion corresponds with my view
of the subject. It neither appears to me that these
prerogatives were ever given nor that they necessarily
redound to the subject’s good. Prerogative, in its old
sense, might be defined an advantage obtained by the
crown over the subject, in cases where their interests
came into competition, by reason of its greater strength.
This sprang from the nature of the Norman government,
which rather resembled a scramble of wild beasts, where
the strongest takes the best share, than a system fdfcnded
upon principles of common utility. And, modified as the
exercise of tnost prerogatives has been by the more liberal
tone which now pervades our course of government,
whoever attends to the common practice of courts of
justice, and, still more, whoever consults the law-books,
will not only be astonished at their extent and multi-
plicity, but very frequently at their injustice and severity.

The real prerogatives that might formerly be exerted
were sometimes of so injurious a nature, that
eyancc * we can hardly separate them from their abuse :
a striking instance is that of purveyance, which will at
one© illustrate the definition above given of a prerogative,
the limits within which it was to be exercised, and its

k Blacks tone's Comment from Finch, vol. i. c. 7.

English Const.

PURVEYANCE.

149

tendency to transgress them. This was a right of pur-
chasing whatever was necessary for the king’s household,
at a fair price, in preference to every competitor, and
without the consent of the owner. By the same prero-
gative, carriages and horses were impressed for the king’s
journeys, and lodgings provided for his attendants. This
was defended on a pretext of necessity, or at least of
great convenience to the sovereign, and was both of high
antiquity and universal practice throughout Europe.
But the royal purveyors had the utmost temptation, and
doubtless no small store of precedents, to stretch this
power beyond its legal boundary ; and not only to fix
their own price too low, but to seize what they wanted
without any payment at all, or with tallies which were
carried in vain to an empty exchequer.” This gave rise
to a number of petitions from the commons, upon which
statutes wore often framed ; but the evil was almost
incurable in its nature, and never ceased till that prero-
gative was itself abolished. Purveyance, as I have
already said, may serve to distinguish the defects from
the abuses of our constitution. It was a reproach to the
law that men should be compelled to send their goods
without their consent; it was a reproach to the ad-
ministration that they were deprived of them without
payment.

The right of purchasing men’s goods for the use of the
king was extended by a sort of analogy to their labour.
Thus Edward III. announces to all sheriffs that William
of Walsingham had a commission to collect as many
painters as might suffice for “ our works in St. Stephen’s
chapel, Westminster, to be at our wages as long as shall be
necessary,” and to arrest and keep in prison all who should
refuse or be refractory ; and enjoins them to lend their

m Letters are directed to all the sheriffs, des of his French war, went still greater
2 E. I., enjoining them to send up a lengths, and seized larger quantities of
certain number of beeves, sheep, capons, wool, which he sold beyond sea, as well
&c., for the king's coronation. Rymer, as provisions for the supply of his army,
vol ii. p. 21. By the statute 21 E. III. In both cases the proprietors had tallies,
c. 12, goods taken by the purveyors were or other securities; but their despair of
to be paid for on the spot if under twenty obtaining payment gave rise, in 1338, to
shillings’ value, or within three months' an insurrection. There is a singular
time if above that value. But it is not apologetic&l letter of Edward to the arch-
to be Imagined that this law was or could bishops on this occasion. Rymer, t v.
be observed. p. 10 ; see also p. 73, and Knygbton, coJL

Edward III., Impelled by the exigen- 2570.

150

ABUSES OF FEUDAL RIGHTS. Chap. VIII. Part III.

assistance." Windsor Castle owes its massive magni-
ficence to labourers impressed from every part of the
kingdom. There is even a commission from Edward IY.
to take as many workmen in gold as were wanting, and
employ them at the king’s cost upon the trappings of
himself and his household . 0

Another class of abuses intimately connected with un-
Abuses of <l ues ti ona kle though oppressive rights of the
feudal crown originated in the feudal tenure which
nghte. bound all the lands of the kingdom. The king
had indisputably a right to the wardship of his tenants
in chivalry, and to the escheats or forfeitures of persons
dying without heirs or attainted for treason. But his
officers, under pretence of wardship, took possession of
lands not held immediately of the crown, claimed es-
cheats where a right heir existed, and seized estates as
forfeited which were protected by the statute of entails.
The real owner had no remedy against this disposition
but to prefer his petition of right in chancery, or, which
was probably more effectual, to procure a remonstrance
of the house of commons in his favour. Even where
justice was finally rendered to him he had no recom-
pence for his damages ; and the escheators were not less
likely to repeat an iniquity by which they could not
personally suffer.

The charter of the forests, granted by Henry III. along

Forest laws. Wl ^ Charta, p had been designed to crush

ores aws. flagitious system of oppression which pre-
vailed in those favourite haunts of the Norman kings.
They had still, however, their peculiar jurisdiction,
though, from the time at least of Edward III., subject
in some measure to the control of the King’s Bench. q
The foresters, I suppose, might find a compensation for

n Rymer, t. vi. p. 41?.

° Idem, t. xi. p. 862.

P Matthew Paris asserts that John
granted a separate forest-charter, and
supports his position by asserting that of
Henry III. at full length. In fact, the
clauses relating to the forest were incor-
porated with the great charter of John.
Such an error as this shows the precari-
ous!) ess of historical testimony, even
where it seems to be best grounded.

** Coke, fourth Inst. p. 294. The forest

domain of the king, says the author of
the Dialogue on the Exchequer under
Henry II., is governed by its own laws,
not founded on the common law of the
land, but the voluntary enactment of
princes : so that whatever is done by that
law is reckoned not legal in itself, but
legal according to forest law, p. 29, non
justum absolute, sed Justum secundum
legem forest® dicatur. I believe my
translation of justum is right; for he is
not writing satirically.

English Const. CONSTABLE AND MARSHAL, 151

their want of the common law in that easy and licentious
way of life which they affected ; but the neighbouring
cultivators frequently suffered from the king’s officers
who attempted to recover those adjacent lands, or, as
they were called, purlieus, which had been disafforested
by the charter and protected by frequent perambulations.
Many petitions of the commons relate to this grievance.

The constable and marshal of England possessed a
jurisdiction, the proper limits whereof were Juri8diction
sufficiently narrow, as it seems, to have ex- of constable
tended only to appeals of treason committed and mar * ihal *
beyond sea, which were determined by combat, and to
military offences within the realm. But these high
officers frequently took upon them to inquire of treasons
and felonies cognizable at common law, and even of civil
contracts and trespasses. This is no bad illustration of
the state in which our constitution stood under the Flan-
tagenets. No colour of right or of supreme prerogative
was set up to justify a procedure so manifestly repugnant
to the great charter. For all remonstrances against these
encroachments the king gave promises in return ; and a
statute was enacted, in the thirteenth of Bichard II.,
declaring the bounds of the constable and marshal’s
jurisdiction/ It could not be denied, therefore, that all
infringements of these acknowledged limits were illegal,
even if they had a hundred fold more actual precedents
in their favour than can be supposed. But the abuse by no
means ceased after the passing of this statute, as several
subsequent petitions that it might be better regarded will
evince. One, as it contains a special instance, I shall
insert. It is of the fifth year of Henry IY. : “ On several
supplications and petitions made by the commons in par-
liament to our lord the king for Bennet Wilman, who is
accused by certain of his ill-wishers and detained in
prison, and put to answer before the constable and
marshal, against the statutes and the common law of
England, our said lord the king, by the advice and assent
of the lords in parliament, granted that the said Bennet
should be treated according to the statutes and common
law of England, notwithstanding any commission to the
contrary, or accusation against him made before the con-

r 13 R. IX. c. 2 .

152

CONSTABLE AND MARSHAL. Chap. VIII. Part 111.

stable and marshal.” And a writ was sent to the justices
of the King’s Bench with a copy of this article from the
roll of parliament, directing them to proceed as they
shall see fit according to the laws and customs of Eng-
land . 9

It must appear remarkable that, in a.case so manifestly
within their competence, the court of King’s Bench
should not have issued a writ of habeas corpus, without
waiting for what may be considered as a particular act
of parliament. But it is a natural effect of an arbitrary
administration of government to intimidate courts of
justice/ A negative argument, founded upon the want
of legal precedent, is certainly not conclusive when it
relates to a distant period, of which all the precedents
have not been noted ; yet it must strike us that in the
learned and zealous arguments of Sir Robert Cotton, Mr.
Sclden, and others, against arbitrary imprisonment, in
the great case of the habeas corpus, though the statute
law is full of authorities in their favour, we find no
instance adduced earlier than the reign of Henry VII. ,
where the King’s Bench has released, or even bailed,
persons committed by the council or the constable, though
it is unquestionable that such committals were both
frequent and illegal . 11

• Rot Pari. vol. ill. p. 530.

* The apprehension of this compliant
spirit in the ministers of justice led to an
excellent act in 2 E. III. c. 8, that the
judges shall not omit to do right for any
command under the great or privy seal.
And the conduct of Richard II., who
sought absolute power by corrupting or
intimidating them, produced another
statute in the eleventh year of his reign
(e. 10), providing that neither letters of
the king's signet nor of the privy seal
should from thenceforth be sent in dis-
turbance of the law. An ordinance of
Charles V., king of France, in 1369,
directs the parliament of Paris to pay no
regard to any letters under his seal sus-
pending the course of legal procedure,
but to consider them as surreptitiously
obtained. Villaret, t x. p. 176. This
ordinance, which was sedulously observed,
tended very much to confirm the inde-
pendence and integrity of that tribunal.

■ Cotton's Posthuma, p, 221. Howell's

State Trials, vol. iii. p. 1. Hume quotes
a grant of the office of constable to the
earl of Rivers in 7 E. IV., and infers, un-
warrantably enough, that “its authority
was in direct contradiction to Magna
Charta; and it is evident that no regular
liberty could subsist with It. It involved
a full dictatorial power, continually sub-
sisting in the state." Hist, of England,
C. 22. But by the very words of this
patent the jurisdiction given was only
over such causes qtne in curift constabu-
larii Anglian ab antiqno, vis. tempore
dicti Gulielmi conqutestoris, seu aliquo
tempore citra, trart&ri, audiri, exurninari,
aut decidi consueverunt aut jure debue~
rant aut dtbent. These are expressed,
though not very perspicuously, in the
statute 13 R. II. c. 2, that declares the
constable's jurisdiction. And the chief
criminal matter reserved by law to the
court of this officer was treason com-
mitted out of the kingdom. In violent
and revolutionary seasons, such os the

' English Const. CHARACTER OF THE CONSTITUTION. 153

If I have faithfully represented thus far the history of
our constitution, its essential character will appear to be
a monarchy greatly limited by law, though retaining
much power that was ill calculated to promote the public
good, and swerving continually into an irregular course,
which there was no restraint adequate to correct. But
of all the notions that have been advanced as to the
theory of this constitution, the least consonant to law
and history is that which represents the king as merely
an hereditary executive magistrate, the first officer of the
state. What advantages might result from such a form
of government this is not the place to discuss. But it
certainly was not the ancient constitution of England.
There was nothing in this, absolutely nothing, of a re-
publican appearance. All seemed to grow out of the
monarchy, and was referred to its advantage and honour.
The voice of supplication, even in the stoutest disposition
of the commons, was always humble; the prerogative
was always named in large and pompous expressions.
Still more naturally may we expect to find in the law-
books even an obsequious deference to power, from
judges who scarcely ventured to consider it as their duty
to defend the subject’s freedom, and who beheld the
gigantic imago of prerogative, in the full play of its
hundred arms, constantly before their eyes. Through
this monarchical tone, which certainly pervades all out
legal authorities, a writer like Hume, accustomed to
philosophical liberality as to the principles of govern-
ment, and to the democrat ical language which the modem
aspect of the constitution and the liberty of printing
have produced, fell hastily into the error of believing
that all limitations of royal power during the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries were as much unsettled in law
and in public opinion as they were liable to bo violated
by force. Though a contrary position has been suffi-
ciently demonstrated, I conceive, by the series of parlia-
mentary proceedings which I have already produced, yet
there is a passage in Sir John Fortescue’s treatise De
Laudibus Jjegum Anglise, so explicit and weighty, that

commencement of Edward IV.’s reign, tribunal, though one of the abuses of the
acme persons were tried by martial law times, cannot be said to warrant the strong
before the constable. But, in general, language adopted by Hume,
the exercise of criminal justice by this

154 SIR J. FORTESCUE’S DOCTRINE Chap. VIII. Part III.

no writer on the English constitution can be excused
from inserting it. This eminent person, having been
chief justice of the King’s Bench under Henry VL, was
governor to the young prince of Wales during his retreat
in France, and received at his hands the office of chan-
cellor. It must never be forgotten that, in a treatise
purposely composed for the instruction of one who hoped
to reign over England, the limitations of government are
enforced as strenuously by Fortescue, as some succeeding
lawyers have inculcated the doctrines of arbitrary pre-
rogative.

“ A king of England cannot at his pleasure make any
Sir John alterations in the laws of the land, for the na-
Fortescue’s ture of his government is not only regal, but
^Engiteh 0 political. Had it been merely regal, he would
constitution, have a power to make what innovations and
alterations he pleased in the laws of the kingdom, im-
pose tallages and other hardships upon the people whether
they would or no, without their consent, which sort of
government the civil laws point out when they declare
Quod principi placuit, legis liabet vigorem. But it is
much otherwise with a king whose government is poli-
tical, because he can neither make any alteration or
change in the laws of the realm without the consent of
the subjects, nor burthen them, against their wills with
fitrange impositions, so that a people governed by such
laws as are made by their own consent and approbation
enjoy their properties securely, and without the hazard
of being deprived of them, either by the king or any
other. The same things may be effected under an abso-
lute prince, provided he do not degenerate into the.
tyrant. Of such a prince, Aristotle, in the third of his
Politics, says, 4 If is better for a city to be governed by a
good man than by good laws.’ But because it does not
always happen that the person presiding over a people
is so qualified, St. Thomas, in the book which he writ to
the king of Cyprus, Deliegimine Principum, wishes lhat
a kingdom could be so instituted as that the king might
not be at liberty to tyrannize over his people ; which
only comes to pass in the present case ; that is, when
the sovereign power is restrained by political laws.
Eejoice, therefore, my good prince, that snch is the law
of the kingdom which you are to inherit, because it will

English Const. AS TO OUR CONSTITUTION. 15$

afford, both to yourself and subjects, the greatest security
and satisfaction/’*

The two great divisions of civil rule, the absolute, or
regal as he calls it, and the political, Fortescue proceeds
to deduce from the several originals of conquest and
compact. Concerning the latter he declares emphatic-
ally a truth not always palatable to princes, that such
governments were instituted by the people, and for the
people’s good ; quoting St. Augustin for a similar defini-
tion of a political society. “ As the head of a body
natural cannot change its nerves and sinews, cannot deny
to the several parts their proper energy, their due pro-
portion and aliment of blood ; neither can a king, who
is the head of a body politic, change the laws thereof,
nor take from the people what is theirs by right against
their consent. Thus you have, sir, the formal institu-
tion of every political kingdom, from whence you may
guess at the power which a king may exercise with
respect to the laws and the subject. For he is appointed
to protect his subjects in their lives, properties, and
laws ; for this very end and purpose he has the delega-
tion of power from the people, and he has no just claim
to any other power but this. Wherefore, to give a
brief answer to that question of yours, concerning the
different powers which kings claim over their subjects,
I am firmly of opinion that it arises solely from the
different natures of their original institution, as you
may easily collect from what has been said. So the
kingdom of England had its original from Brute, and the
Trojans, who attended him from Italy and Greece, and
became a mixed kind of government, compounded of the
regal and political /’ 7

it would occupy too much space to quote every other
passage of the same nature in this treatise of ErroneoU8
Fortescue, and in that entitled, Of the Differ- views taken
ence between an Absolute and Limited Mo- by Hume <
narchy, which, so far as these points are concerned, is
nearly a translation from the former.* But these, cor-

x Fortescue, De Laudibus Legum An- be anxious not to offend, and whom in
glife, c. 9. fact he took some pains to conciliate both

y Id. c. 13. in this and other writings, it is evident

* The latter treatise having been that the principles of limited monarchy
written under Edward IV., whom For- were as fully recognised In his reign,
tescue, as a restored Lancastrian, would whatever particular acts of violence

156 ERRONEOUS VIEWS OF HUME. Chap. VIII. Part III.

roborated as they are by the statute-book and by the
rolls of parliament, are surely conclusive against the
notions which pervade Mr. Hume’s History. I have
already remarked that a sense of the glaring prejudice
by which some Whig writers had been actuated, in
representing the English constitution from the earliest
times as nearly arrived at its present perfection, con-
spired with certain prepossessions of his own to lead this
'eminent historian into an equally erroneous system on
the opposite side. And as he traced the stream back-
wards, and came last to the times of the Plantagenet
dynasty, with opinions already biassed and even pledged
to the world in his volumes of earlier publication, he
was prone to seize hold of, and even exaggerate, every
circumstance that indicated immature civilization, and
law perverted or infringed. 8 To this his ignorance of
English jurisprudence which certainly in some measure
disqualified him from writing our history , did not a little
contribute ; misrepresentations frequently occurring in
his work, which a moderate acquaintance with the law
of the land would have prevented. b

It is an honourable circumstance to England that the
history of no other country presents so few
iik^?on- f instances of illegal condemnations upon poli-
demnation tical charges. The judicial torture was hardly
known and never recognised by law. c The

might occur, as they had been uuder the Year-hooks of those times, he would have
Lancastrian princes. been surprised, not only at the utmost

* The following is one example of accuracy , but at a subtle refinement in
these prejudices : In the 9th of Richard II. verbal logic, which none of his own
a tax on wool granted till the ensuing metaphysical treatises could surpass,
feast of St. John Baptist was to be inter- b [Note XII.]
mitted from thence to that of St. Peter, c [luring the famous process against
and then to recommence; that it might the knights templars in the reign of
not be claimed as a right. Rot Pari. Edward II., the archbishop of York,
vol. iii. p. 214. Mr. Hume has noticed having taken the examination of certain
this provision, as “ showing an accuracy templars in his province, felt some
beyond what was to be expected in those doubts which he propounded to several
rude times." In this epithet we see the monasteries and divines. Most of these
foundation of his mistakes. The age of relate to the main subject. But one
Richard IL might perhaps be called rude question, fitter indeed for lawyers than
in some respects. But assuredly in theologians, was, whereas many would
prudent and circumspect perception of not confess without torture, whether he
consequences, and an accurate use of lan- might make use of this means, licet hoc
guage, there could be no reason why it in regno Angliat n unquam visum, fuerit
should be deemed inferior to our owe. Mel auditumf Et si torquendl sunt,
If Mr. Hume had ever deigned to glance utrum per clericos vel laioos ? Et dato,
at the legal decisions reported in the qubd nullut omnino tortor invmiri

English Const. ILLEGAL CONDEMNATION RARE. 157

sentence in capital crimes, fixed unalterably by custom,
allowed nothing to vindictiveness and indignation.
There hardly occurs an example of any one being noto-
riously put to death without form of trial, except in
moments of flagrant civil war. If the rights of juries
were sometimes evaded by irregular jurisdictions, they
were at least held sacred by the courts of law : and
through all the vicissitudes of civil liberty, no one ever
questioned the primary right of every freeman, handed
down from his Saxon forefathers, to the trial by his peers.
A just regard for public safety prescribes the necessity
of severe penalties against rebellion and conspiracy ; but
the interpretation of these offences, when intrusted to
sovereigns and their counsellors, has been the most
tremendous instrument of despotic power. In rude
ages, even though a general spirit of political liberty
may prevail, the legal character of treason will commonly
be undefined ; nor is it the disposition of lawyers to give
greater accuracy to this part of criminal jurisprudence.
The nature of treason appears to have been subject to
much uncertainty in England before the statute of
Edward III. If that memorable law did not give all
possible precision to the offence, which we must certainly
allow, it prevented at least those stretches of vindictive
tyranny which disgrace the annals of other countries.
The praise, however, must be understood as comparative.
Some cases of harsh if not illegal convictions could
hardly fail to occur in times of violence and during
changes of the reigning family. Perhaps the circum-
stances have now and then been aggravated by historians.
Nothing could be more illegal than the conviction of the
earl of Cambridge and lord Scrope in 1415, if it be
true, according to Carte and Hume, that they were not
heard in their defence. But whether this is to be abso-
lutely inferred from the record d is perhaps open to
question. There seems at least to have been no sufficient
motive for such an irregularity ; their participation in a
treasonable conspiracy being manifest from their own

valeat in Anglia, ntmm pro tortoribua learned 4 Reading on the Use of Torture
mittendum sit ad partes transmarinas? in tbe Criminal Law of England, by
Walt. Hemingford, p. 256, Instances, David Jardine, Esq., 1837.’
however, of its use are said to have d Rot Tarl. vol. iv p. 65.
occurred in the 15th century. See a

158 ILLEGAL CONDEMNATION RAKE. Chap. VIII. Part III.

confession. The proceedings against Sir John Mortimer
in the 2nd of Henry VI.* are called by Hume highly
irregular and illegal. They were, however, by act of
attainder, which cannot well be styled illegal. Nor are
they to be considered as severe. Mortimer had broken
out of the Tower, where he was confined on a charge of
treason. This was a capital felony at common law ; and
the chief irregularity seems to have consisted in having
recourse to parliament in order to attaint him of
treason, when he had already forfeited his life by
another crime.

I would not willingly attribute to the prevalence of
Tory dispositions what may be explained otherwise,
the progress which Mr. Humes historical theory as to
our constitution has been gradually making since its
publication. The tide of opinion, which since the
Revolution, and indeed since the reign of James I., had
been flowing so strongly in favour of the antiquity of
our liberties, now seems, among the higher and more
literary classes, to set pretty decidedly the other way.
Though we may still sometimes hear a demagogue chat-
tering about the witenagemot, it is far more usual to find
sensible and liberal men who look on Magna Cliarta it-
self as the result of an uninteresting squabble between
the king and his barons. Acts of force and injustice,
which strike the cursory inquirer, especially if he derives
his knowledge from modem compilations, more than the
average tenor of events, are selected and displayed as
fair samples of the law and of its administration. We
are deceived by the comparatively perfect state of our
present liberties, and forget that our superior security is
far less owing to positive law than to the control which
is exercised over government by public opinion through
the general use of printing, and to the diffusion of
liberal principles in policy through the same means.
Thus disgusted at a contrast which it was hardly candid
to institute, we turn away from the records that attest
the real, though imperfect, freedom of our ancestors ; and
are willing to be persuaded that the whole scheme of
English polity, till the commons took on themselves to
assert their ratural rights against James I., was at best

* Rot Pari vol iv. p. 202.

English Const. CAUSES OF THE CONSTITUTION.

159

but a mockery of popular privileges, hardly recognised
in theory, and never regarded in effect/

This system, when stripped of those slavish inferences
that Brady and Carte attempted to build upon it, admits
perhaps of no essential objection but its want of histori-
cal truth. God forbid that our rights to just and free
government should bo tried by a jury of antiquaries !
Yet it is a generous pride that intertwines the conscious-
ness of hereditary freedom with the memory of our
ancestors ; and no trifling argument against those who
seem indifferent in its cause, that the character of the
bravest and most virtuous among nations has not
depended upon the accidents of race or climate, but
been gradually wrought by the plastic influence of civil
rights, transmitted as a prescriptive inheritance through
a long course of generations.

By what means the English acquired and preserved
this political liberty, which, even in the fif-
teenth century, was the admiration of judicious Sing to
foreigners, 6 is a very rational and interesting
inquiry. Their own serious and steady attach-
ment to the laws must always be reckoned among the
principal causes of this blessing. The civil equality of
all freemen below the rank ef peerage, and the subjec-
tion of peers themselves to the impartial arm of justice,
and to a due share in contribution to public burthens,
advantages unknown to other countries, tended to iden-
tify the interests and to assimilate the feelings of the
aristocracy with those of the people; classes whose
dissension and jealousy has been in many instances the
surest hope of sovereigns aiming at arbitrary power.
This freedom from the oppressive superiority of a privi-
leged order was peculiar to England. In many king-
doms the royal prerogative was at least equally limited.
The statutes of Aragon are more full of remedial
provisions. The right of opposing a tyrannical govern-
ment by arms was more frequently asserted in Castile.
But nowhere else did the people possess by law, and I
think, upon the whole, in effect, so much security for

t This was written In 1811 or & Philip de Comines takes several op-
1812 ; and is among many passages portunities of testifying his esteem for
which the progress of time has some- the English government. See particu-
what falsified. larly L iv. c. i. and 1. v. c. xix.

160

CAUSES TENDING TO FORM

Chap. VIII. Part III.

their personal freedom and property. Accordingly, the
middling ranks flourished remarkably, not only in com-
mercial towns, but among the cultivators of the soil.
“ There is scarce a small village,” says Sir J* Fortescue,
“ in which you may not find a knight, an esquire, or
some substantial householder (paterfamilias), commonly
called a frankleyn, 11 possessed of considerable estate ; be-
sides others who are called freeholders, and many yeo-
men of estates sufficient to make a substantial$ury . ” I
would, however, point out more particularly two causes
which had a very leading efficacy in the gradual develop-
ment of our constitution ; first, the schemes of con-
tinental ambition in which our government was long
engaged; secondly, the manner in which feudal prin-
ciples of insubordination and resistance were modified
by the prerogatives of the early Norman kings.

1. At the epoch when William the Conqueror ascended
the throne, hardly any other power was possessed by
the king of France than what he inherited from the great
fiefs of the Capetian family. War with such a potentate
was not exceedingly to be dreaded, and' William, besides-
his immense revenue, could employ the feudal services
of his vassals, which were extended by him to continental
expeditions. These circumstances were not essentially
(dianged till after the loss of Normandy ; for the acqui-
sitions of Henry II. kept him fully on an equality with
the French crown, and the dilapidation which had taken
place in the royal demesnes was compensated by several
arbitrary resources that filled the exchequer of these
inonarchs. But in the reigns of John and Henry III.,
the position of England, or rather of its sovereign, with
respect to France, underwent a very disadvantageous
change. The loss of Normandy severed the connexion
between the English nobility and the continent ; they
had no longer estates to defend, and took not sufficient

h By a frankleyn in this place we are
to understand what we call a country
squire, like the frankleyn of Chaucer;
for the word esquire in Fortescue’ s time
was only used in its limited sense, for
the sons of peers and knights, or such as
had obtained the title by creation or some
other legal means.

The mention of Chaucer leads me to

add that the prologue to his Canterbury
Tales is of itself a continual testimony to
the plenteous and comfortable situation
of the middle ranks in England, as well
as to that fearless independence and fre-
quent originality of character amongst
them, which liberty and competence have
conspired to produce.

English Const. THE CONSTITUTION. 161

interest in the concerns of Guienne to fight for that pro-
vince at their own cost. Their feudal service was now
commuted for an escuage, which fell very short of the
expenses incurred in a protracted campaign. Tallages
of royal towns and demesne lands, extortion of money
from the Jews, every feudal abuse and oppression, were
tried in vain to replenish the treasury, which the defence
of Eleanor’s inheritance against the increased energy of
France i|as constantly exhausting. Even in the most
arbitrary^ reigns, a general tax upon landholders, in any
cases but those prescribed by the feudal law, had not
been ventured ; and the standing bulwark of Magna
Charta, as well as the feebleness and unpopularity of
Henry III., made it more dangerous to violate an esta-
blished principle. Subsidies were therefore constantly
required ; but for these it was necessary for the king to
meet parliament, to hear their complaints, and, if he
could not elude, to acquiesce in their petitions. These
necessities came still more urgently upon Edward I.,
whose ambitious spirit could not patiently endure the
encroachments of Philip the Fair, a rival not less ambi-
tious, but certainly less distinguished by personal prowess,
than himself. What advantage the friends of liberty
reaped from this ardour for continental warfare is strongly
seen in the circumstances attending the Confirmation of
the Charters.

But after this statute had rendered alf tallages without
consent of parliament illegal, though it did not for some
time prevent their being occasionally imposed, it was
still more difficult to carry on a war with France or
Scotland, to keep on foot naval armaments, or even to
preserve the courtly magnificence which that age of
chivalry affected, without perpetual recurrence to the
house of commons. Edward III. very little consulted
the interests of his prerogative when he stretched forth
his hand to seize the phantom of a crown in France. It
compelled him to assemble parliament almost annually,
and often to hold more than one session within the year.
Here the representatives of England learned the habit
of remonstrance and conditional supply ; and though, in
the meridian of Edward’s age and vigour, they often
failed of immediate redress, yet they gradually swelled
the statute 7 roll with provisions to secure their country’s

VOL* III. M

162

CAUSES TENDING TO FORM Chap. VIII. Part III.

freedom ; and acquiring self-confidence by mutual inter-
course, and sense of the public opinion, they became
able, before the end of Edward’s reign, and still more
in that of his grandson, to control, prevent, and punish
the abuses of administration. Of all these proud and
sovereign privileges, the light of refusing supply was
the key-stone. But for the long wars in which our
kings were involved, at first by their possession of
Guienne, and afterwards by their pretension# upon the
crown of France, it would have been easy to suppress
remonstrances by avoiding to assemble parliament. For
it must be confessed that an authority was given to the
king’s proclamations, and to ordinances of the council,
which differed but little from legislative power, and
would very soon have been interpreted by complaisant
courts of justice to give them the full extent of statutes.

It is common indeed to assert that the liberties of
England were bought with the blood of our forefathers.
This is a very magnanimous boast, and in some degree
is consonant enough to the truth. But it is tar more
generally accurate to say that they were purchased by
money. A great proportion of our best laws, including
Magna Charta itself, as it now stands confirmed by
Henry III., were, in the most literal sense, obtained by
a pecuniary bargain with the crown. In many parliar
ments of Edward III. and Richard II. this sale of redress
is chaffered for as distinctly, and with as little apparent
sense of disgrace, as the most legitimate business between
two merchants would be transacted. So little was there
of voluntary benevolence in what the loyal courtesy of
our constitution styles concessions from the throne ; and
so little title have these sovereigns, though we cannot
refuse our admiration to the generous virtues of Edward
III. and Henry V., to claim the gratitude of posterity as
the benefactors of their people !

2. The relation established between a lord and his
vassal by the feudal tenure, far from containing prin-
ciples of any servile and implicit obedience, permitted
the compact to be dissolved in case of its violation by
either party. This extended as much to the sovereign
as to inferior lords ; the authority of the former in
France, where the system most flourished, being for
sevoral ages rather feudal than political. If a vassal

English Const.

THE CONSTITUTION.

163

was aggrieved, and if justice was denied him, he sent a
defiance, that is, a renunciation of fealty to the king, and
was entitled to enforce redress at the point of his sword.
It then became a contest of strength as between two
independent potentates, and was terminated by treaty,
advantageous or otherwise, according to the fortune of
war. This privilege, suited enough to the situation of
France, the great peers of which did not originally
intend tc admit more than a nominal supremacy in the
house of Capet, was evidently less compatible with the
regular monarchy of England. The stem natures of
W illiam the Conqueror and his successors kept in con-
trol the mutinous spirit of their nobles, and reaped the
profit of feudal tenures without submitting to their
reciprocal obligations. They counteracted, if I may so
say, the centrifugal force of that system by the application
of a stronger power ; by preserving order, administering
justice, checking the growth of baronial influence and
riches, with habitual activity, vigilance, and severity.
Still, however, there remained the original principle,
that allegiance depended conditionally upon good treat-
ment, and that an appeal might be lawfully made to
arms against an oppressive government. Nor was this,
we may be sure, left for extreme necessity, or thought to
require a long enduring forbearance. In modem times
a king compelled by his subjects’ swords to abandon any
pretension would be supposed to have ceased to reign ;
and the express recognition of such a right as that of
insurrection has been justly deemed inconsistent with
the majesty of law. But ruder ages had ruder senti-
ments. Force was necessary to repel force ; and men
accustomed to see the king’s authority defied by private
riot were not much shocked when it was resisted in
defence of public freedom.

The Great Charter of John was secured by the election
of twenty -five barons as conservators of the compact. If
the king, or the justiciary in his absence, should trans-
gress any article, any four might demand reparation, and
on denial carry their complaint to the rest of their body.
“ And those barons, with all the commons of the land,
shall distrain and annoy us by every means in their
power ; that is, by seizing our castles, lands, and posses-
sions, and every other mode, till the wrong shall be

164 :

CAUSES TENDING TO FOKM Chap. VIII. Part III.

repaired to their satisfaction ; saving our person, and our
queen and children. And when it shall be repaired they
shall obey us as before.” 1 It is amusing to see the com-
mon law of distress introduced upon this gigantic scale;
and the capture of the king’s castles treated as analogous
to impounding a neighbour’s horse for breaking fences..

A very curious illustration of this feudal principle is
found in the conduct of William earl of Pembroke, one
of the greatest names in our ancient history, towards
Henry HI. The king had defied him, which was tanta-
mount to a declaration of war ; alleging that he had made
an inroad upon the royal domains. ‘Pembroke maintained
that he was not the aggressor, that the king had denied
him justice, and been the first to invade his territory ; on
which account he had thought himself absolved from his
homage, and at liberty to use force against the malignity
of the royal advisers. “ Nor would it be for the king’s
honour, ’’the earl adds, “that I should submit to his will
against reason, whereby I should rather do wrong to him
and to that justice which he is bound to administer
towards his people ; and I should give an ill example to
all men in deserting justice and right in compliance with
his mistaken will. For this would show that I loved my
worldly wealth better than justice.” These words, with
whatever dignity expressed, it may be objected, prove
only the disposition of an angry and revolted earl. But
even 14 Qnry fully admitted the right of taking anns
against himself if he had meditated his vassal’s destruc-
tion, and disputed only the application of this maxim to
the earl of Pembroke. 11

These feudal notions, which placed the moral obliga-
tion of allegiance very low, acting under a weighty
pressure from the real strength of the crown, were
favourable to constitutional liberty. The great vassals of
France and Germany aimed at living independently on
their fiefs, with no further concern for the rest than as
useful allies having a common interest against the crown.
But in England, as there was no prospect of throwing off
subjection, the barons endeavoured only to lighten its
burthen, fixing limits to prerogative by law, and securing
their observation by parliamentary remonstrances or by

i Brady’s Hist. vol. I.; Appendix, p. 148.
k Matt Paris, p. 330 ; Lyttelton’s Hist of Henry II. voL iv. p. 4L

English Const.

THE CONSTITUTION.

165

dint of arms. Hence, as all rebellions in England were
directed only to coerce the government, or at the utmost
to change the succession of the crown, without the
smallest tendency to separation, they did not impair the
national strength nor destroy the character of the consti-
tution. In all these contentions it is remarkable that
the people and clergy sided with the nobles against the
throne. No individuals are so popular with the monkish
annalists, who speak the language of the populace, as
Simon earl of Leicester, Thomas earl of Lancaster, and
Thomas duke of Gloucester, all turbulent opposers of the
royal authority, and probably little deserving of their
panegyrics. Very few English historians of the middle
ages are advocates of prerogative. This may be ascribed
both to the equality of our laws and to the interest which
the aristocracy found in courting popular favour, when
committed against so formidable an adversary as the
king. And even now, when the stream that once was
hurried along gullies and dashed down precipices hardly
betrays upon its broad and tranquil bosom the motion
that actuates it, it must still be accounted a singular
happiness of our constitution that, all ranks graduating
harmoniously into one another, the interests of peers and
commoners are radically interwoven ; each in a certain
sense distinguishable, but not balanced like opposite
weights, not separated like discordant fluids, not to be
secured by insolence or jealousy, but by mutual adherence
and reciprocal influences.

From the time of Edward I. the feudal system and all
the feelings connected with it declined very Influence
rapidly. But what the nobility lost in the wfakii the
number of their military tenants w r as in some
degree compensated by the state of manners, gave the
The higher class of them, who took the chief noblllty '
share in public affairs, were exceedingly opulent; and
their mode of life gave wealth an incredibly greater
efficacy than it possesses at present. Gentlemen of large
estates and good families who had attached themselves to
these great peers, who bore offices which we should call
menial in their households, and sent their children thither
for education, were of course ready to follow their banner
in rising, without much inquiry into the cause. Still
less would the vast body of tenants and their retainers,

166 INFLUENCE OF THE NOBILITY. Chap. VIII. Part III.

who were fed at the castle in time of peace, refuse to
carry their pikes and staves into the field of battle.
Many devices were used to preserve this aristocratic
influence, which riches and ancestry of themselves ren-
dered so formidable. Such was the maintenance of suits,
or confederacies for the purpose of supporting each other’s
claims in litigation, which was the subject of frequent
complaints in parliament, and gave rise to several prohi-
bitory statutes. By help of such confederacies parties
were enabled to make violent entries upon the lands they
claimed, which the law itself ccTuld hardly be said to dis-
courage ." 1 Even proceedings in courts of justice were
often liable to intimidation and influence.” A practice
much allied to confederacies of maintenance, though
ostensibly more harmless, was that of giving liveries to
all retainers of a noble family ; but it had an obvious
tendency to preserve that spirit of factious attachments
aiid animosities which it is the general policy of a wise
government to dissipate. From the first year of Richard
II. we find continual mention of this custom, with many
legal provisions against it, but it was never abolished till
the reign of Henry YII.°

m If a man was disseised of his land,
he might enter upon the disseisor and
reinstate himself without course of law.
In what case this right’ of entry was
taken away, or tolled, as it was expressed,
by the death or alienation of the dis-
seisor, is a subject extensive enough to
occupy two chapters of Littleton. Wbat
pertains to our inquiry is, that by an
entry in the' old law-books we must
understand an actual repossession of tbe
disseisee, not a suit in ejectment, as it is
now interpreted, but which is a compa-
ratively modem proceeding. The first
remedy, says Britton, of the disseisee is
to collect a body of his friends (recoilier
amys et force), and without delay to cast
out tbe disseisors, or at least to maintain
himself in possession along with them,
c. 44. This entry ought indeed by
5 R. II. stat. i. c. 8, to be made peace-
ably; and the justices might assemble
the posse comitatus to imprison persons
entering on lands by violence (15 R. II.
c. 2), but these laws imply the facts that
Slade them necessary.
n No lord, or other person, by 20

R. II. c. 3, was permitted to sit on the
bench with the justices of assise. Trials
were sometimes overawed by armed
parties, who endeavoured to prevent
their adversaries from appearing. Paston
Letters, voL iii. p. 118 ,

° From a passage in the Paston Let-
ters (vol. ii. p. 23) it appears that, far
from these acts being regarded, it was
considered as a mark of respect to the
king, when he came into a county, for
the noblemen and gentry to meet him
with as many attendants in livery as they
could muster. Sir John Paston was to
provide twenty men in their livery-
gowns, and the duke of Norfolk two
hundred. This illustrates the well-known
story of Henry VII. and the earl of
Oxford, and shows the mean and op-
pressive conduct of the king in that
affair, which Hume has pretended to
justify.

In the first of Edward TV. it fs said
in the roll of parliament (vol. v. p. 407),
that, “ by yeving of liveries and signets,
contrary to the statutes and ordinances
made afore tyme, maintenaunce of quar-

English Const. PREVALENCE OF RAPINE.

167

These associations under powerful chiefs were only
incidentally beneficial as they tended to with- Prevalent
stand the abuses of prerogative. In their more hawtstf
usual course they were designed to thwart the rapine *
legitimate exercise of the king’s government in the
administration of the laws. All Europe was a scene of
intestine anarchy during the middle ages; and though
England was far less exposed to the scourge of private
war than most nations on the continent, we should find,
could we recover the local annals of every country, such
an accumulation of ’petty rapine and tumult as would
almost alienate us from the liberty which served to
engender it. This was the common tenor of manners,
sometimes so much aggravated as to find a place in
general history, 1 * more often attested by records during
the three centuries that the house of Plantagenet sat on
the throne. Disseisin, or forcible dispossession of free-
holds, makes one of the most considerable articles in our
law-books . 1 Highway robbery was from the earliest

re Is, extortions, robberies, murders been
multiplied and continued within this
reame, to the grete diaturbaunce and in-
quietatiou of the same.”

P Thus to select one passage out of
many: Eodem anno (1332) quidam ma-
ligni, fulti quorundam magnatum priesi-
dio, regis adolescentiam spement.es, et
regnum perturbare intendentes, in tantam
turban) creverunt, nemora et saltua occu-
paverunt, ita quod toti regno terrori es-
sent. Walsingbam, p. 132.

^ I am aware that in many, probably
a great majority of reported cases, this
word was technically used, where some
unwarranted conveyance, such as a feoff-
ment by the tenant for life, was held to
have wrought a disseisin ; or where the
plaintiff was allowed, for the purpose of
a more convenient remedy, to feign him-
self disseised, which was called disseisin
by election. But several proofs might
be brought from the parliamentary peti-
tions, and I doubt not, if nearly looked
at, from the Year-books, that in other
cases there was an actual and violent
expulsion. And the definition of dis-
seisin in all the old writers, such as
Britton and Littleton, is obviously framed
upon its primary meaning ofi violent dis-
possession, which the word had probably

acquired long before the more peaceable
disseisins, if I may use the expression,
became the subject of the remedy by

assise.

I would speak with deference of Lord
Mansfield’s elaborate judgment in Tay-
lor dem. Atkins v. Horde, 1 Burrow, 107,
&c. ; but some positions in it appear
to me rather too strongly stated; and
particularly that the acceptance of the
disseisor as tenant by the lord was neces-
sary to render the disseisin complete ; a
condition which I have not found hinted
in any law-book. See Butler’s note on
Co. Litt p. 330; where that eminent
lawyer expresses similar doubts as to
Lord Mansfield’s reasoning. It may how-
ever be remarked, that constructive or
elective disseisins, being of a technical
nature, were more likely to produce
cases in the Year-books than those ac-
companied with actual violence, which
would commonly turn only on matters
of fact, and be determined by a jury.

A remarkable instance of violent dis-
seisin, amounting in effect to a private
war, may be found in the Pas ton Letters,
occupying most of the fourth volume.
One of the Paston family, claiming a
right to Caistor Castle, kept possession
against the duke of Norfolk, who brought

168 PREVALENT HABITS Chap. VIII. Part III.

times a sort of national crime. Capital punishments,
though very frequent, made little impression on a bold
and a licentious crew, who had at least the sympathy of
those who had nothing to lose on their side, and flattering
prospects of impunity. We know how long the outlaws
of Sherwood lived in tradition — men. who, like some* of
their betters, have been permitted to redeem by a few
acts of generosity the just ignominy of extensive crimes.
These, indeed, were the heroes of vulgar applause ; but
when such a judge as Sir J ohn Fortescue could exult that
more Englishmen were hanged for ‘robbery in one year
than French in seven, and that, “if an Englishman be
poor, and see another having riches which may be taken
from him by might, he will not spare to do so,” r it may
be perceived how thoroughly these Sentiments had per-
vaded the public mind.

Such robbers, 1 have said, had flattering prospects of
impunity. Besides the general want of communication,
which made one who had fled from his own neighbourhood
tolerably secure, they had the advantage of extensive
forests to facilitate their depredations and prevent detec-
tion. When outlawed or brought to trial, the worst
offenders could frequently purchase charters of pardon,
which defeated justice in the moment of her blow.* Nor

a large force, and laid a regular siege to
the place, till It surrendered for want of
provisions. Two of the besiegers were
killed. It does not appear that any legal
measures were taken to prevent or punish
this outrage.

r Difference between an Absolute and
Limited Monarchy, p. 99.

• The manner in which these were
obtained, in spite of law, may be noticed
among the violent courses of prerogative.
By statute 2 E. III. c. 2, confirmed by
10 E. III. c. 2, the king's power of grant-
ing pardons was taken away, except in
cases of homicide per infortunium.
Another act, 14 E. Hi. c. 16, reciting that
the former laws in this respect have not
been kept, declares that all pardons con-
trary to them shall be holden as null.
This however was disregarded like the
rest; and the commons began tacitly to
recede from them, and endeavoured to
compromise the question with the crown.
By 27 E. HL stat. 1, c. 2, without advert-

ing to the existing provisions, which may
therefore seem to be repealed by implica-
tion, it is enacted that in every charter
of pardon, granted at any one’s sugges-
tion, the suggestor’s name and the grounds
of his suggestion shall be expressed, that
if the same be found untrue it may be
disallowed. And in 13 K. II. stat. 2, c. 1,
wx* are surprised to find the commons
requesting that pardons might not be
granted, as if the subject were wholly
unknown to the law ; the king protest-
ing in reply that he will save his liberty
and regality, as his progeuitors had
done before, but conceding some regula-
tions, far less remedial than what were
provided already by the 27th of Ed-
ward II. Pardons make a pretty large
head in Brooke's Abridgment, and were
undoubtedly granted without scruple by
every one of our kings. A pardon ob*
tained in a case of peculiar atrocity is
the subject of a specific remonstrance In
23 H. VI. Rot. ParL vol. v. p. 111.

English Const.

OF RAPINE.

169

were the nobility ashamed to patronise men guilty of
every crime. Several proofs of this occur in the rolls.
Thus, for example, in the 22nd of Edward III,, the com-
mons pray that, “ whereas it is notorious how robbers
and malefactors infest the country, the king would charge
the great men of the land that none such be maintained
by them, privily or openly, but that they lend assistance
to arrest and take such ill-doers.” 1

It is perhaps the most meritorious part of Edward I.’s
government that he bent all his power to restrain these
breaches of tranquillity. One of his salutary provisions
is still in constant use, the statute of coroners. Another,
more extensive, and, though partly obsolete, the founda-
tion of modem laws, is the statute of \V inton, which,
reciting that u from day to day robberies, murders, burn-
ings, and theft be more often used than they have been
heretofore, and felons cannot be attainted by the oath of
jurors which had rather suffer robberies on strangers to
pass without punishment than indite the offenders, of
whom great part be people of the same country, or at
least, if the offenders be of another country, the receivers
be of places near,” enacts that hue and cry shall be made
upon the commission of a robbeiy, and that the hundred
shall remain answerable for the damage unless the felons
be brought to justice. It may be inferred from this pro-

t Rot. Pari. x-ol. li. p. 201. A strange excluded from bearing offices in Wales
policy, for which no rational cause can be The English living in the English towns
alleged, kept Wales and even Cheshire of Wales earnestly petition, 23 H. VJ.
distinct from the rest of the kingdom. Rot, Pari. vol. v. p. 104, 154, that this
Nothing could be more injurious to the exclusion may be kept in force. Com-
adjacent counties. Upon the credit of plaints of the disorderly state of the
their immunity from the jurisdiction of Welsh frontier are repeated as late as
the king’s courts, the people of Cheshire 12 E. IV. vol. vi. p. 8.
broke with armed bands into the neigh- It is curious that, so early as 15 E. II.,
bouring counties, and perpetrated all the a writ was addressed to the earl of
crimes in their power. Rot. I’arl. vol. ill. Arundel, justiciary of Wales, directing
p. 81, 20], 440; Stat. 1 H. IV. c. 18. As him to cause twenty-four discreet persons
to the Welsh frontier, it was constantly to l>e chosen from the north, and as many
almost in a state of war, which a very from the south of that principality, to
little good sense and benevolence in any serve in parliament Rot Pari. vol. i.
one of our shepherds would have easily p. 456. And we find a similar writ in
prevented, by admitting the conquered the 20th of the same king. Prynne’s
people to partake in equal privileges Register, 4th part, p. 60. Willis says
with their feilow-sutjects. Instead of that he has seen a return to one of these
this, they satisfied themselves with precepts, much obliterated, but from
aggravating the mischief by granting which it appears that Conway, Beaumaris,
legal reprisals upon Welshmen. Stat 2 and Carnarvon returned members. Noti-
H IV. c. 16. Welshmen were absolutely tia Farliamentaria, vol. i. preface, p. 15.

170

PREVALENT HABITS Chap. VIII. Part III.

vision that the ancient law of frank-pledge, though
retained longer in form, had lost its efficiency. By the
same act, no stranger or suspicious person was to lodge
even in the suburbs of towns ; the gates were to be kept
locked from sunset to sunrising ; every host to be
answerable for his guest; the highways to be cleared of
trees and underwood for two hundred feet on each side ;
and every man to keep arms according to his substance
in readiness to follow the sheriff on hue and ciy raised
after felons. u The last provision indicates that the rob-
bers plundered the country in formidable bands. One of
these, in a subsequent part of Edward’s reign, burned
the town of Boston during a fair, and obtained a vast
booty, though their leader had the ill fortune npt to
escape the gallows.

The preservation of order throughout the country was
originally intrusted not only to the sheriff, coroner, and
constables, but to certain magistrates called conservators
of the peace. These, in conformity to the democratic
character of our Saxon government, were elected by the
freeholders in their county court.* But Edward I. issued
commissions to carry into effect the statute of Winton ;
and from the beginning of Edward III.’s reign the
appointment of conservators was vested in the crown,
their authority gradually enlarged by a series of statutes,
and their titles changed to that of justices. They were
empowered to imprison and punish all rioters and other
offenders, and such as they should find by indictment or
suspicion to be reputed thieves or vagabonds, and to take
sureties for good behaviour from persons of evil fame. 7
Such a jurisdiction was hardly more arbitrary than, in a
free and civilized age, it has been thought fit to vest in
magistrates; but it was ill endured by a people who
placed their notions of liberty in personal exemption
from restraint rather than any political theory. An act
having been passed (2 R. II. stat. 2, c. 6), in consequence
of unusual riots and outrages, enabling magistrates to

u The statute of Winton was confirmed, 34 E. III. c. 1 ; 7 R. II. c. 5. The insti-
and proclaimed afresh by the sheriffs, 7 R. tution excited a good deal of ill-will, even
II. c, 6, after an era of great disorder. before these strong acts were passed.

* Blackstone, vol. i. c. 9 ; Carte, voi. ii. Many petitions of the commons in the
p. 203. 28th E. 111., and other years, complain of

7 l E. IIL stat 2, c. 16 ; 4 E. III. c. 2 ; it Rot. TarL voL ii.

English Const.

OF RAPINE.

171

commit the ringleaders of tumultuary assemblies without
waiting for legal process till the next arrival of justices of
gaol delivery, the commons petitioned next year against
this “horrible grievous ordinance/’ by which “every
freeman in the kingdom would be in bondage to these
justices/’ contrary to the great charter, and to many
statutes, which forbid any man to be taken without due
course of law. 2 So sensitive was their jealousy of arbi-
trary imprisonment, that they preferred enduring riot
and robbery to chastising them by any means that might
afford a precedent to oppression, or weaken men’s rever-
ence for Magna Charta.

There are two subjects remaining to which this retro-
spect of the state of manners naturally leads us, and
which I would not pass unnoticed, though not perhaps
absolutely essential to a constitutional history ; because
they tend in a very material degree to illustrate the pro-
gress of society, with which civil liberty and regular
government are closely connected. These are, first, the
servitude or villenage of the peasantry, and their gradual
emancipation from that condition; and, secondly, the
continual increase of commercial intercourse with foreign
countries. But as the latter topic will fall more conve-
niently into the next part of this work, I shall postpone
its consideration for the present.

In a former passage 1 have remarked of the Anglo-
Saxon ceorls that neither their situation nor Villenage
that of their descendants for the earlier reigns of the g
after the Conquest appears to have been mere ^nature
servitude. But from the time of Henry II., as and gradual
we learn from Glanvil, the villein, so called, extmctlon *
was absolutely dependent upon his lord’s will, com-
pelled to unlimited services, and destitute of property,
not only in the land he held for his maintenance, but in
his own acquisitions.® If a villein purchased or in-
herited land, the lord might seize it ; if he accumulated
stock, its possession was equally precarious. Against
his lord he had no right of action ; because his indem-

* Rot. Pari. vol. iii. p. 65. It may be ingly call It an ordinance in their present
observed that this act, 2 E. II. c. 16, was petition. This naturally increased their
not founded on a petition, but on the animosity in treating it as an infrlnge-
king's answer ; so that the commons ment of the subject’s right,
were not real parties to it, and accord- a Glanvil, L v. c. 5.

172

VILLENAGE OF Chap. VIII. Part III

nity in damages, if he could have recovered any, might
have been immediately taken away. If he fled from his
lord’s service, or from the land which he held, a writ
issued de nativitate probanda, and the master recovered
his fugitive by law. His children were bom to the
same state of servitude ; and, contrary to the rule of the
civil law, where one parent was free and the other in
villenage, the offspring followed their father’s condition. 6

This was certainly a severe lot ; yet there are circum-
stances which materially distinguish it from slavery.
The condition of villenage, at least in later times, was
perfectly relative ; it formed no distinct order in the
political economy. No man was a villein in the eye
of law, unless his master claimed him : to all others he
was a freeman, and might acquire, dispose of, or sue for
property without impediment. Hence Sir E. Coke
argues that villeins are included in the 29th article of
Magna Charta : “No freeman shall be disseised nor im-
prisoned.” 0 For murder, rape, or mutilation of his
villein, the lord was indictable at the king’s suit ; though
not for assault or imprisonment, which were within the
sphere of his seignorial authority/

b According to Bracton, the bastard ever as a villein. But, on the contrary,
of a nief, or female villein, was bom in we find in Britton, a century later, that
servitude ; and where the parents lived the nief herself by such a marriage be-
on a villein tenement, the children of a came free during the coverture, c. 31.
uief, even though married to a freeman, [Notk XIII.]

were villeins, 1. iv. c. 21 ; and see Beames’s C I must confess that I have some
translation of Glanvil, p. 109. But Lit- doubts how far this was law at the epoch
tleton lays down an opposite doctrine, of Magna Charta. Glanvil and Bracton
that a bastard was necessarily free ; be- both speak of the status villenagii, as
cause, being the child of no father in the opposed to that of liberty, and seem to
contemplation of law, he could not be consider it as a civil condition, not a
presumed to inherit servitude from any merely personal relation. The civil law
one ; and makes no distinction as to the and the French treatise of Beaumanoir
parent's residence. Sect 188. I merely hold the same language. And Sir Robert
take notice of this change in the law be- Cotton maintains without hesitation that
tween the reigns of Henry III. and Ed- villeins are not within the 29th section
ward IV. as an instance of the bias which of Magna Charta, “ being excluded by the
the judges showed in favour of personal word liber.” Cotton’s Posthuma, p. 223.
freedom. Another, if we can rely upon Britton, however, a little after Bracton,
it, is more important. In the reign of says that in an action the villein is
Henry II. a freeman marrying a nief, ansWerable to all men, and all men to
and settling on a villein tenement, lost him. p.79. And later judges, in favorein
the privileges of freedom during the time libertatis, gave this construction to the
of his occupation ; legem terrai quasi villein’s situation, which must therefore
nativus amittit Glanvil, 1. v. c. 6. This be considered as the clear law of England
was consonant to the customs of some in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
other countries, some of which went d Littleton, sect. 189, 190, speaks only
urther, and treated such a person for of an appeal in the two former cases;

English Const.

THE PEASANTRY.

173

This class was distinguished into villeins regardant,
who had been attached from time immemorial to a cer-
tain manor, and villeins in gross, where such territorial
prescription had never existed, or had been broken. In
the condition of these, whatever has been said by some
writers, I can find no manner of difference ; the distinc-
tion was merely technical, and affected only the mode
of pleading. 0 The term in gross is appropriated in our
legal language to property held absolutely and without
reference to any other. Thus it is applied to rights of
advowson or of common, when possessed simply and not
as incident to any particular lands. And there can be
no doubt that it was used in the same sense for the pos-
session of a villein/ But there was a class of persons,
sometimes inaccurately confounded with villeins, whom
it is more important to separate. Villenage had a
double sense, as it related to persons or to lands. As
all men were free or villeins, so all lands were held by
a free or villein tenure. As a villein might be en-
feoffed of freeholds, though they lay at the mercy of his
lord, so a freeman might hold tenements in villenage.
In this case his personal liberty subsisted along with
the burthens of territorial servitude. He was bound to
arbitrary service at the will of the lord, and he might
by the same will be at any moment dispossessed ; for
such was the condition of his tenure. But his chattels

but an indictment is h fortiori ; and he field’s Norfolk, vol. iii. p. 860. Mr. Har-
says, sect. 194, that an indictment, grave supposes that villeins in gross
though not an appeal, lies against the were never numerous (Case of Somerset,
lord for maiming his villein. Howell’s State Trials, vol. xx. p. 42) ;

e Gurdon, on Courts Baron, p.592, sup- drawing this inference from the few cases
poses the villein in gross to have been relative to them that occur in the Year-
the Lazzus or Servus of early times, a books. And certainly the form of a writ
domestic serf, and of an inferior species de nativitate probanda, and the peculiar
to the cultivator, or villein regardant, evidence it required, which may be found
Unluckily Bracton and Littleton do not in Fitzhcrbert's Natura Brevium, or in
confirm this notion, which would be con- Mr. H.’s argument, are only applicable
venient enough ; for in Domesday Book to the other species. It is a doubtful
there is a marked distinction between point whether a freeman could, in con-
the Servi and Villani. Blackstone ex- templation of law, become a villein in
presses himself inaccurately when he says gross ; though his confession in a court
the villein in gross was annexed to the of record, upon a suit already commenced
person of the lord, and transferable by (for this was requisite), would estop him
deed from one owner to another. By from claiming his liberty ; and hence
this means indeed a villein regardant Bracton speaks of this proceeding as a
would become a villein in gross, but all mode by which a freeman might fall into
villeins were alike liable to be sold by servitude,
their owners. Littleton, sect. 181 . Blome- f FNote XIV.]

174

VILLENAGE OF Chap. VIII. Part III.

were secure from seizure, his person from injury, and he
might leave the land whenever he pleased/

From so disadvantageous a condition as this of villen-
age it may cause some surprise that the peasantry of
England should have ever emerged. The law incapa-
citating a villein from acquiring property, placed, one
would imagine, an insurmountable barrier in the way of
his enfranchisement. It followed from thence, and is
positively said by Glanvil, that a villein could not buy
his freedom, because the price he tendered would
already belong to his lord. h And even in the case of
free tenants in villenage it is not easy to comprehend
how their uncertain and unbounded services could ever
pass into slight pecuniary commutations; much less
how they could come to maintain themselves in their
lands, and mock the lord with a nominal tenure accord-
ing to the custom of the manor.

This, like many others relating to the progress of
society, is a very obscure inquiry. We can trace the
pedigree of princes, fill up the catalogue of towns be-
sieged ai^d provinces desolated, describe even the whole
pageantry of coronations and festivals, but we cannot
recover the genuine history of mankind. It has passed
away with slight and partial notice by contemporary
writers ; and our most patient industry can hardly at
present put together enough of the fragments to suggest
a tolerably clear representation of ancient manners and
social life. I cannot profess to undertake what would
require a command of books as well as leisure beyond
my reach ; but the following observations may tend a
little to illustrate our immediate subject, the gradual
extinction of villenage.

If we take what may be considered as the simplest
case, that of a manor divided into demesne lands of the
lord’s occupation and those in the tenure of his villeins,
performing all the services of agriculture for him, it is
obvious that his interest was to maintain just so many
of these as his estate required for its cultivation. Land,
the cheapest of artioles, was the price of their labour;
and though the law did not compel him to pay this or
any other price, yet necessity, repairing in some degree

8 Bracton, 1. ii. c. 8 ; 1. iv. c. 28 ; Littleton, sect. If2*
h Glanvil, 1. iv. c. 6.

English Const.

THE PEASANTRY.

175

the law’s injustice, made those pretty secure of food and
dwellings who were to give the strength of their arms
for his advantage. But in course of time, as alienations
of small parcels of manors to free tenants came to pre-
vail, the proprietors of land were placed in a new situa-
tion relatively to its cultivators. The tenements in
villenage, whether by law or usage, were never sepa-
rated from the lordship, while its domain was reduced
to a smaller extent through subinfeudations, sales, or
demises for valuable rent. The purchasers under these
alienations had occasion for labourers ; and these would
be free servants in respect of such employers, though in
villenage to their original lord. As he demanded less
of their labour, through the diminution of his domain,
they had more to spare for other masters ; and retaining
the character of villeins and the lands they held by that
tenure, became hired labourers in husbandry for the
greater part of the year. It is true that all their earn-
ings were at the lord’s disposal, and that he might have
made a profit of their labour when he ceased to require
it for his own land. But this, which the rapacity of
more commercial times would have instantly suggested,
might escape a feudal superior, who, wealthy beyond
his wants, and guarded by the haughtiness of ancestry
against the desire of such pitiful gains, was better
pleased to win the affection of his dependants than to
improve his fortune at their expense.

The services of villenage were gradually rendered less
onerous and uncertain. Those of husbandry, indeed,
are naturally uniform, and might be anticipated with no
small exactness. Lords of generous tempers granted
indulgences which were either intended to be or readily
became perpetual. And thus, in the time of Edward 1.,
we find the tenants in some manors bound only to stated
services, as recorded in the lord’s book. 1 Some of these,
perhaps, might be villeins by blood ; but free tenants in
villenage were still more likely to obtain this precision

i Dugdale's Warwickshire, apud Eden's III., the jury present, that W. 0., a vil-
State of the Poor, vol. i. p. 13. A pas- lein by blood, was a rebel and ungrateful
sage in another local history rather seems toward his lord, for which all his tene-
to indicate that some kind of delinquency 1 men Is were seized. His offence was the
was usually alleged, and some ceremony having said that the lord kept four stolen
employed, before the lord entered on the sheep in his field. Blomefield’s Norfolk,
Villein’s land In Gissing manor, 39 E. vol i. p. 114.

176

VILLENAGE OF Chap. VIII. Pari III.

in their services ; and from claiming a customary right
to be entered in the court-roll upon the same terms as
their predecessors, prevailed at length to get copies of
it for their security. k Proofs of this remarkable trans-
formation from tenants in villenage to copyholders are
found in the reign of Henry III. I do not know, how-
ever, that they were protected, at so early an epoch, in
the possession of their estates. But it is said in the
Year-book of the 42nd of Edward III. to be “ admitted
for clear law, that, if the customary tenant or copyholder
does not perform his services, the lord may seize his
land as forfeited.”” 1 It seems implied herein, that, so
long as the copyholder did continue to perform the re-
gular stipulations of his tenure, the lord was not at
liberty to divest him of his estate ; and this is said to
be confirmed by a passage in Britton, which has escaped
my search ; though Littleton intimates that copyholders
could have no remedy against their lord." However,
in the reign of Edward IY. this was put out of doubt by
the judges, who permitted the copyholder to bring his
action of trespass against the lord for dispossession.

While some of the more fortunate villeins crept up
into property as well as freedom under the name of
copyholders, the greater part enfranchised themselves in
a different manner. The law, which treated them so
harshly, did not take away the means of escape ; nor
was this a matter of difficulty in such a countiy as
England. To thitf, indeed, the unequal progression of
agriculture and population in different counties would
have naturally contributed. Men emigrated, as they
always must, in search of cheapness or employment,

k Gurdon on Courts Baron, p. 574. latter might not be permitted to sue his

m Brooke's Abridgm. Tenant par superior, yet it does not follow that lie
copie, 1. By the extent-roll of the manor might not bring his action against any
of Brisingham in Norfolk, in 1254, it person acting under the lord’s direction,
appears that there were then ninety- in which the defendant could not set up
four copyholders and six cottagers in an illegal authority; just as, although
villenage; the former performing many, no writ runs against the king, his mi-
but determinate services of labour for nisters or officers are not justified in act-
the lord. Blomefield’s Norfolk, vol. i. ing uuder his command contrary to law.
p, 34. I wish tliis note to be considered as eor-

» LittL sect. 11. A copyholder with- recting one in my first volume, p. 200,
out legal remedy may seem little better where I have said that a similar law in
than a tenant in mere villenage, except France rendered the distinction between
in name. But though, from the relation a serf and a homme de poote little more
between the lord and copyholder, the than theoretical.

English Const.

THE PEASANTRY

177

according to the tide of human necessities. But the
villein, who had no additional motive to urge his steps
away from his native place, might. well hope to be for-
gotten or undiscovered when he breathed a freer air,
and engaged his voluntary labour to a distant master.
The lord had indeed an action against him ; but there
was so little communication between remote parts of the
country, that it might be deemed his fault or singular
ill-fortune if he were compelled to defend himself. Even
in that case the law inclined to favour him; and so
many obstacles were thrown in the way of these suits
to reclaim fugitive villeins, that they could not have
operated materially to retard their general enfranchise-
ment. 0 In one case, indeed, that of unmolested residence
for a year and a day within a walled city or borough,
the villein became free, and the lord was absolutely
barred of his remedy. This provision is contained even
in the laws of William the Conqueror, as contained in
Hoveden, and, if it be not an interpolation, may be
supposed to have had a view to strengthen the popu-
lation of those places which were designed for garrison^.
This law, whether of William or not, is unequivocally
mentioned by Glanvil. p Nor was it a mere letter.
According to a record in the sixth of Edward II., Sir
John Clavering sued eighteen villeins of his manor of
Cossey, for withdrawing themselves therefrom with
their chattels ; whereupon a writ was directed to them ;
but six of the number claimed to be freemen, alleging
the Conqueror’s charter, and offering to prove that they
had lived in Norwich, paying scot and lot, about thirty
years ; which claim was admitted.* 1

By such means a large proportion of the peasantry
before the middle of the fourteenth century had become
hired labourers instead of villeins. We first hear of them
on a grand scale in an ordinance made by Edward III.
in the twenty-third year of his reign. This was just
after the dreadful pestilence of 1348, and it recites that,
the number of workmen and servants having been

° See the rules of pleading and evi- Q Blomefield’s Norfolk, vol. i. p. 667.
dence in questions of villenage fully I know not how far this privilege was
stated in Mr. Hargrave’s argument in supposed to be impaired by the statute
the case of Somerset. Howell’s State 34 E. III. c. 11; which however might,
Trials, vol. xx. p. 38. I should conceive, very well stand along

Uv.c.v. with it.

VOL* III.

N

178 REGULATION OF WAGES. Chap. VIII. Part. III.

greatly reduced by that calamity, the remainder de-
manded excessive wages from their employers. Such
an enhancement in the price of labour, though founded
exactly on the same principles as regulate the value of
any other commodity, is too frequently treated as a sort
of crime by lawgivers, who seem to grudge the poor
that transient* melioration of their lot which the progress
of population, or other analogous circumstances, will,
without any interference, very rapidly take away. This
ordinance therefore enacts that every man in England,
of whatever condition, bond or free, of able body, and
within sixty years of age, not living of his own, nor by
any trade, shall be obliged, when required, to serve any
master who is willing to hire him at such wages as
were usually paid three years since, or for some time
preceding ; provided that the lords of villeins or tenants
in vilienage shall have the preference of their labour, so
that they retain no more than shall bo necessary for
them. More than these old wages is strictly forbidden
to be offered, as well as demanded. No one is permitted,
under colour of charity, to give alms to a beggar. And,
to make some compensation to the inferior classes for
these severities, a clause is inserted, as wise, just, and
practicable as the rest, for the sale of provisions at
reasonable prices/

This ordinance met with so little regard that a statute
was made in parliament two years after, fixing the wages
of all artificers and husbandmen, with regard to the
nature and season of their labour. From this time it
became a frequent complaint of the commons that the
statute of labourers was not kept. The king had in
this case, probably, no other reason for leaving their
grievance unredressed than his inability to change the
order of Providence. A silent alteration had been
wrought in the condition and character of the lower
classes during the reign of Edward III. This was the
effect of increased knowledge and refinement, which
had been making a considerable progress for full half a
century, though they did not readily permeate the cold
region of poverty and ignorance. It was natural that
the country people, or uplandish folk, as they were
called, should repine at the exclusion from that enjoy-

r Stat. 23 E. III.

English {}onst.

POPULAR OUTBREAKS.

179

ment of competence, and security for tlie fruits of their
labour, which the inhabitants of towns so fully possessed.
The fourteenth century was, in many parts of Europe,
the age when a sense of political servitude was most
keenly felt. Thus the insurrection of the Jacquerie in
France about the year 1358 had the same character, and
resulted in a great measure from the same* causes, as that
of the English peasants in 1382. And we may account
in a similar manner for the democratical tone of the
French and Flemish cities, and for the prevalence of a
spirit of liberty in Germany and Switzerland. 8

I do not know whether we should attribute part
of this revolutionary concussion to the preaching of
Wiclifle’s disciples, or look upon both one and the other
as phenomena belonging to that particular epoch in the
progress of society. Kew principles, both as to civil
rule and religion, broke suddenly upon the uneducated
mind, to render it bold, presumptuous, and turbulent.
But at least I make little doubt that the dislike of
ecclesiastical power, which spread so rapidly among the
people at this season, connected itself with a spirit of
insubordination and an intolerance of political subjec-
tion. Both were nourished by the same teachers, the
lower secular clergy ; and however distinct we may
think a religious reformation from a civil anarchy, there
was a good deal common in the language by which the
populace were inflamed to either one or the other.
Even the scriptural moralities which were then ex-
hibited, and which became the foundation of our theatre,
afforded fuel to the spirit of sedition. The common
original and common destination of mankind, with
every other lesson of equality which religion supplies to
humble or to console, were displayed with coarse and
glaring features in these representations. The famili-
arity of such ideas has deadened their effects upon our
minds ; but when a rude peasant, surprisingly destitute
of religious instruction during that corrupt age of the
church, was led at once to these impressive truths,
v e cannot be astonished at the intoxication of mind
they produced. 4

• [Note XV.] ascribing this effect to Wicliffe’s inriova-

t I nave been more influenced by tions, because the historians are preju-
natural probabilities than testimony in diced witnesses against him. Several of

180

CAUSES OF

Chap. VIII.-Part III.

Though I believe that, compared at least with the
aristocracy of other countries, the English lords were
guilty of very little cruelty or injustice, yet there were
circumstances belonging to that period which might
tempt them to deal more hardly than before with their
peasantry. The fourteenth century was an age of greater
magnificence than those which had preceded, in dress,
in ceremonies, in buildings ; foreign luxuries were known
enough to excite an eager demand among the higher
ranks, and yet so scarce as to yield inordinate prices;
while the landholders were, on the other hand, impover-
ished by heavy and unceasing taxation. Hence it is
probable that avarice, as commonly happens, had given
birth to oppression ; and if the gentry, as I am inclined
to believe, had become more attentive to agricultural
improvements, it is reasonable to conjecture that those
whose tenure obliged them to unlimited services of hus-
bandry were more harassed than under their wealthy and
indolent masters in preceding times.

The storm that almost swept away all bulwarks of
civilized and regular society seems to have been long in
collecting itself. Perhaps a more sagacious legislature
might have contrived to disperse it : but the commons
only presented complaints of the refractoriness with
which villeins and tenants in villenage rendered their
due services ; u and the exigencies of government led to
the fatal poll-tax of a groat, which was the proximate
cause of the insurrection. By the demands of these
rioters we perceive that territorial servitude was far from
extinct ; but it should not be hastily concluded that they
were all personal villeins, for a large proportion were
Kentish-men, to whom that condition could not have
applied ; it being a good bar to a writ de nativitate pro-
band^ that the party’s father was bom in the county of
Kent.*

them depose to the connexion between The sermon of this priest, as related
his opinions and the rebellion of 1382; by Walsingham, p. 275, derives its argu-
especially Walsingham, p. 288. This ment for equality from the common
implies ncrTPeflection upon WiclifFe, any origin of the species. He is said to have
more than the crimes of the anabaptists been a disciple of Wicliffe. Turner's
in Munster do upon Luther. Every one Hist, of England, vol. ii. p. 420.
knows the distich of John Ball, which u Stat. 1 R. II. c. 6; Rot. Pari. vol. iiL
comprehends the essence of religious p. 21.

democracy : x 30 E. I., in Fitzherbert. Villenage,

" When Adam delved and Eve span, apud Lam bard's Perambulation of Kent*

Where was then the gentleman ? ' p. 632. Somner on Gavelkind, p. 72.

English Const.

POPULAR OUTBREAKS.

181

After this tremendous rebellion it might be expected
that the legislature would use little indulgence towards
the lower commons. Such unhappy tumults are doubly
mischievous, not more from the immediate calamities
that attend them than from the fear and hatred of the
people which they generate in the elevated classes. The
general charter of manumission extorted from the king
by the rioters of Blackheath was annulled by proclama-
tion to the sheriffs/ and this revocation approved by the
lords and commons in parliament ; who added, as was
very true, that such enfranchisement could not be made
without their consent ; “ which they would never give
to save themselves from perishing all together in one
day.” z Eiots were turned into treason by a law of the
same parliament/ By a very harsh statute in the 1 2th
of Bichard II. no servant or labourer could depart, even
at the expiration of his service, from the hundred in
which he lived without permission under the king’s seal ;
nor might any who had been bred to husbandry till
twelve years old exercise any other calling/ A few
years afterwards the commons petitioned that villeins
might not put their children to school in order to ad-
vance them by the church ; ‘ ‘ and this for the honour of
all the freemen of the kingdom.” In the same parlia-
ment they complained that villeins fly to cities and
boroughs, whence their masters cannot recover them';
and, if they attempt it, are hindered by the people ; and
prayed that the lords might seize their villeins in such
places without regard to the franchises thereof. But on
both these petitions the king put in a negative/

From henceforward we find little notice taken of vil-
lenage in parliamentary records, and there seems to have
been a rapid tendency to its entire abolition. But the

y Rymer, t vji. p. 316, &c. The king b 12 R. II. c. 3.
holds tliis bitter language to the villeins c Rot Pari. 16 R. II. voL iii. p. 294,
of Essex, after the death of Tyler and 296. The statute 7 H. IV. c. 17, enacts
execution of the other leaders had dis- that no one shall put his son or daughter
concerted them: Itustici quidem fuistis apprentice to any trade in a borough,
et estis, in bondagio permanebitis, non unless he have land or rent to the va^ue
ut liactenus, sed incomparabiliter viliori, of twenty shillings a year, hut that any
&c. Walsingham, p. 269. one may put his children to school.

* Rot Pari. vol. iii. p. 100. The reason assigned is the scarcity of

* 6 R II. c. 7. The words are, riot labourers in husbandly, in consequence
et rumour n' autres semblables ; rather a of people living in Upland apprenticing
general way of creating ft new treason; their children-

but panic puts an end to jealousy.

182

MANUMISSION OF VILLEINS, Chap. VlIL Part III.

fifteenth century is barren of materials ; and we can only
infer that, as the same causes which in Edward III.’s
time had converted a large portion of the peasantry into
free labourers still continued to operate, they must
silently have extinguished the whole system of personal
and territorial servitude. The latter, indeed, was essen-
tially changed by the establishment of the law of copy-
hold.

I cannot presume to conjecture in what degree volun-
tary manumission is to be reckoned among the means
that contributed to the abolition of villenage. Charters
of enfranchisement were very common upon the continent.
They may perhaps have been less so in England. In-
deed the statute de donis must have operated very in-
juriously to prevent the enfranchisement of villeins
regardant, who were entailed along with the land.
Instaiices, however, occur from time to time, and we
cannot expect to discover many. One appears as early
as the fifteenth year of Henry III., who grants to all
persons born or to be born within his village of Contis-
hall, that they shall be free from all villenage in body
and blood, paying an aid of twenty shillings to knight
the king’s eldest son, and six shillings a year as a quit-
rent/ So in the twelfth of Edward III. certain of the
king’s villeins are" enfranchised on payment of a fine.*
In strictness of law, a fine from the villein for the sake of
enfranchisement was nugatory, since all he could pos-
sess was already at his lord’s disposal. But custom and
equity might easily introduce different maxims ; and it
was plainly for the lord’s interest to encourage his
tenants in the acquisition of money to redeem them-
selves, rather than to quench the exertions of their
industry by availing himself of an extreme right. Deeds
of enfranchisement occur in the reigns of Mary and Eliza-
beth ; f and perhaps a commission of the latter princess
in 1574, directing the enfranchisement of her bopdmen
and bondwomen on certain manors upon payment of a

d Blomefleld’s Norfolk, vol. iii. p. 571. that no instance exists in records of an

® Rymer, t. v. p. 44. estate sold with the labourers and their

f Gurdon on Courts Baron, p. 696 ; families attached to the soil. Pinker-
Madox, Formulare Anglicanum, p. 420 ; ton’s Hist, of Scotland, vol. i. p. 147. But
Barrington on Ancient Statutes, p. 278. Mr. Chalmers, in his Caledonia, has
It is said in a modem book that villen- brought several proofs that this assertion
age was very rare in Scotland, and even is too general.

English Const*

REIGN OF HENRY YI.

183

fine, is the last unequivocal testimony to the existence of
villenage ; g though it is highly probable that it existed
in remote parts of the country some time longer. h

From this general view of the English constitution, as
it stood about the time of Henry VI., we must Reign of
turn our eyes to the political revolutions which Henr y vi.
clouded the latter years of his reign. The minority of
this prince, notwithstanding the vices and dissensions of
his court and the inglorious discomfiture of our arms in
Franco, was not perhaps a calamitous period. The
country grew more wealthy ; the law was, on the whole,
better observed ; the power of parliament more complete
and effectual than in preceding times. But Henry’s
weakness of understanding, becoming evident as he
reached manhood, rendered his reign a perpetual mi-
nority. His marriage with a princess of strong mind,
but ambitious and vindictive, rather tended to weaken
the government and to accelerate his downfall ; a certain
reverence that had been paid to the gentleness of the
king’s disposition being overcome by her unpopularity.
By degrees Henry’s natural feebleness degenerated al-
most into fatuity ; and this unhappy condition seems to
have overtaken him nearly about the time when it became
an arduous task to withstand the assault in preparation
against his government. This may properly introduce a
great constitutional subject, to which some peculiar cir-
cumstances of our own age have imperiously directed the
consideration of parliament. Though the proceedings of
1788 and 1810 are undoubtedly precedents of far more
authority than any that can be derived from our ancient
history, yet, as the seal of the legislature has not yet been
set upon this controversy, it is not perhaps altogether
beyond the possibility of future discussion ; and at least
it cannot be uninteresting to look back on those parallel
or analogous cases by which the deliberations of parlia-
ment upon the question of regency were guided.

8 Barrington, ubi supra, from Rymer. ment was in no case given in favour

h There are several later cases re- of the plea; so that we can infer no-
ported wherein villenage was pleaded, thing as to the actual continuance of
and one of them as late as the 15th of villenage,

James I. (Noy, p. 27.) See Hargrave's It is remarkable, and may be deemed
argument, State Trials, vol. xx. p. 41. by some persons a proof of legal pedantry,
But these are so briefly stated, that it that Sir E. Coke, while he dilates on the
is difficult in general to understand law of villenage, never intimates that it
them. It is obvious, however, that judg- was become antiquated.

184

HISTORICAL INSTANCES Chap. VIII. Part Ilf!

While the kings of England retained their continental
Historical dominions, and were engaged in the wars to
instances of which those gave birth, they were of course
regencies: frequently absent from this country. Upon
such occasions the administration seems at first to have
devolved officially on the justiciary, as chief servant of
the crown. But Henry III. began the practice of ap-
pointing lieutenants, or guardians of the realm (custodes
regni), as they were more usually termed, by
aiwenceof way of temporary substitutes. They were
France 1 #* in usually nominated by the king without consent
’ of parliament ; and their office carried with it
the right of exercising all the prerogatives of the crown.
It was of course determined by the king’s return ; and a
distinct statute was necessary in the reign of Henry V.
to provide that a parliament called by the guardian of
the reakn during the king’s absence should not be dis-
solved by that event.* The most remarkable circum-
stance attending those lieutenancies was that they were
sometimes conferred on the heir apparent during his
infancy. The Black Prince, then duke of Cornwall, was
left guardian of the realm in 1339, when he was but ten
years old ; k and Richard his son, when still younger,
in 1372, during Edward III.’s last expedition into
France.™

These do not however bear a very close analogy to
regencies in the stricter sense, or substitutions during
the natural incapacity of the sovereign. Of such there
had been several instances before it became necessary
at the to supply the deficiency arising from Henry’s
accession of derangement. 1 . At the death of J ohn, William
Henry hi.; eai q 0 f Pembroke assumed the title of rector
regis et regni, with the consent of the loyal barons who
had just proclaimed the young king, and probably con-
ducted the government in a great measure by their
advice. n But the circumstances were too critical, and
the time is too remote, to give this precedent any material
weight. 2. Edward I. being in Sicily at his
o war . , Other’s the nobility met at the Temple

i 8 H. V. c. 1. 13 E. III. vol. ii. p. 10?.

k This prince having been sent to m Rymer, t. vi. p. 748.
Antwerp, six commissioners were ap- n Matt. l*aris, p. 243.
pointed to open parliament. Hot. Pari.

English Const.

OF REGENCIES.

185

church, as we are informed by a contemporary writer,
and, after making a new great seal, appointed the arch-
bishop of York, Edward earl of Cornwall, and the earl of
Gloucester, to be ministers and guardians of the realm ;
who accordingly conducted the administration in the
king’s name until his return. 0 It is here observable that
the earl of Cornwall, though nearest prince of the blood,
was not supposed to enjoy any superior title to the
regency, wherein he was associated with two other per-
sons. But while the crown itself was hardly acknow-
ledged to be unquestionably hereditary, it would be
strange if any notion of such a right to the regency had
been entertained. 3. At the accession of Edward III.,
then fourteen years old, the parliament, which _
was immediately summoned, nominated tour v

bishops, four earls, and six barons as a standing council,
at the head of which the earl of Lancaster seems to have
been placed, to advise the king in all business of govern-
ment. It was an article in the charge of treason, or, as
it was then styled, of accroaching royal power, against
Mortimer, that he intermeddled in the king’s household
without the assent of this councils They may be deemed
therefore a sort of parliamentary regency, though the
duration of their functions does not seem to be defined.
4. The proceedings at the commencement of

D i v t* j j i * of Richard II.;

the next reign are more worthy ot attention.

Edward III. dying June 21, 1377, the keepers of the
great seal next day, in absence of the chancellor beyond
sea, gave it into the young king’s hands before his coun-
cil. He immediately delivered it to the duke of Lancas-
ter, and the duke to Sir Nicholas Bode for safe custody.
Four days afterwards the king in council delivered the
seal to the bishop of St. David’s, who affixed it the same
day to divers letters patent. 9 Bichard was at this time
ten years and six months old; an age certainly veiy
unfit for the personal execution of sovereign authority.
Yet he was supposed capable of reigning without the aid
of a regency. This might be in virtue of a sort of magic
ascribed by lawyers to the great seal, the possession of
which bars all further inquiry, and renders any govern-
ment legal. The practice of modern times requiring the

Matt. WcRtmonast ap. Brady’s History of England, vol. ii. p. 1.

P Rot. Pari. vol. ii. p N 52. *1 Rymer, t. vii. p. 171.

186 HISTORICAL INSTANCES Chap. VIII. Part III.

constant exercise of the sign manual has made a public
confession of incapacity necessary in many cases where
it . might have been concealed or overlooked in earlier
periods of the constitution. But though no one was
invested with the office of regent, a council of twelve was
named by the prelates and peers at the king’s coronation,
July 16, 1377, without whose concurrence no public
measure was to be carried into effect. I have mentioned
in another place the modifications introduced from time
to time by parliament, which might itself be deemed
a greati council of regency during the first years of
Kichard.

5. The next instance is at the accession of Henry VI.

This prince was but nine months old at his
°i emy * father’s death ; and whether from a more evi-
dent incapacity for the conduct of government in his
case than in that of Bichard II., or from the progress of
constitutional principles in tho forty years elapsed since
the latter’s accession, far more regularity and delibera-
tion were shown in supplying the defect in the executive
authority. Upon the news arriving that Henry V. was
dead, several lords spiritual and temporal assembled, on
account of the imminent necessity, in order to preserve
peace, and provide for the exercise of officers apper-
taining to the king. These peers accordingly issued
commissions to judges, sheriffs, escheators, and others,
for various purposes, and writs for a new parliament.
This was opened by commission under the great seal
directed to the duke of Gloucester, iii the usual form,
and with the king’s teste/ Some ordinances were made
in this parliament by the duke of Gloucester as commis-
sioner, and some in the king’s name. The acts of the
peers who had taken on themselves the administration,
and summoned parliament, were confirmed. On the
twenty-seventh day of its session, it is entered upon the
roll that the king, “ considering his tender age, and
inability to direct in person the concerns of his realm,
by assent of lords and commons, appoints the duke of
Bedford, or, in his absence beyond sea, the duke of
Gloucester, to be protector and defender of the kingdom
and English church, and the king’s chief counsellor.”

r Rot. Pari. vol.iv. p. 1G9.

English Const.

OF REGENCIES.

187

Letters patent were made out to this effect, the appoint-
ment being however expressly during the king’s pleasure.
Sixteen councillors were named in parliament to assist
the protector in his administration ; and their concur-
rence was made necessary to the removal and ap-
pointment of officers, except some inferior patronage
specifically reserved to the protector. In all impoiiant
business that should pass by order of council, the
whole, or major part, were to be present ; “ but if it
were such matter that tho king hath been accustomed to
be counselled of, that then the said lords proceed not
therein without the advice of my lords of Bedford or
Gloucester .” 8 A few more councillors were added by
the next parliament, and divers regulations established
for their observance . 1

This arrangement was in contravention of the late
king’s testament, which had conferred -the regency on
the duke of Gloucester, in exclusion of his elder brother.
But the nature and spirit of these proceedings will be
better understood by a remarkable passage in a roll of a
later parliament ; where the house of lords, in answer to
a request of Gloucester that he might know what autho-
rity he possessed as protector, remind him that in the
first parliament of the king u “ ye desired to have had ye
govemaunce of yis land ; affermyng yat hit belonged unto
you of rygzt, as well by ye mene of your birth as by ye
lasto wylle of ye kyng yat was your broyer, whome God
assoile ; alleggyng for you such groundes and motyves as
it was yought to your discretion made for your intent ;
whereupon, the lords spiritual and temporal assembled
there in parliament, among which were there my lordes
your uncles, the bishop of Winchester that now liveth,
and the duke of Exeter, and your cousin the earl of
March that be gone to God, and of Warwick, and other
in great number that now live, had great and long
deliberation and advice, searched precedents of the
govemail of the land in time and case semblable, when

> Rot. Pari. vol. iv. p. 174, 176.
t Ibid. p. 201.

u I follow the orthography of the roll,
which I hope will not be inconvenient
to the reader. Why this orthography,
from obsolete and difficult, so frequently
becomes almost modern, as will appear

in tbe course of these extracts, I cannot,
conjecture. The usual irregularity of
ancient spelling is hardly sufficient to
account for such variations ; but if there
be any error, it belongs to the super-
intendents of that publication, and is not
mine.

188

HISTORICAL INSTANCES Chap. VIII. Part III.

kings of this land have been tender of age, took also in-
formation of the laws of the land, of such persons as be
notably learned therein, and finally found your said
desire not caused nor grounded in precedent, nor in the
law of the land ; the which the king that dead is, in his
life nor might by his last will nor otherwise altre, change,
nor abroge, without the assent of the three estates, nor
commit or grant to any person governance or rule of this
land longer than he lived ; but on that other behalf, the
said lords found your said desire not according with the
laws of this land, and against the right and fredome of
the estates of the same land. Howe were it that it be
not thought that any such thing wittingly proceeded of
your intent ; and nevertheless to keep peace and tran-
quillity, and to the intent to ease and appease you, it
was advised and appointed by authority of the king,
assenting the three estates of this land, that ye, in absence
of my lord your brother of Bedford, should be chief of
the king s council, and devised unto you a name different
from other counsellors, not the name of tutor, lieutenant,
governor, nor of regent, nor no name that should import-
authority of governance of the land, but the name of
protector and defensor, which importeth a personal duty
of attendance to the actual defence of the land, as well
against enemies outward, if case required, as against
rebels inward, if any were, that God forbid ; granting
you therewith certain power, the which is specified and
contained in an act of the said parliament, to endure as
long as it liked the king. In the which, if the intent of
the said estates had been that ye more power and autho-
rity should have had, more should have been expressed
therein ; to the which appointment, ordinance, and act,
ye then agreed you as for your person, making never-
theless protestation that it was not your intent in any
wise to deroge or do prejudice unto my lord your
brother of Bedford by your said agreement, as toward
any right that he would pretend or claim in the govern-
ance of this land ; and as toward any pre-eminence that
you might have or belong unto you as chief of council,
it is plainly declared in the said act and articles, sub-
scribed by my said lord of Bedford, by yourself, and the
other lords of the council. But as in parliament to
which ye be called upon your faith and ligeance as duke

English Const*

OF REGENCIES.

189

of Glocester, as other lords be, and not otherwise, we
know no power nor authority that ye have, other than
ye as duke of Glocester should have, the king being in
parliament, at years of mest discretion: We marvailing
with all our hearts that, considering the open declaration
of the authority and power belonging to my lord of
Bedford and to you in his absence, and also to the king’s
council subscribed purely and simply by my said lord of
Bedford and by you, that you should in any wise be
stirred or moved not to content you therewith or to pre-
tend you any other : Namely, considering that the king,
blessed be our Lord, is, sith the time of the said power
granted unto you, far gone and grown in person, in wit,
and understanding, and like with the grace of God to
occupy his own royal power within few years : and for-
asmuch considering the things and causes abovesaid,
and other many that long were to write, We lords afore-
said pray, exhort, and require you to content you with
the power abovesaid and declared, of the which my lord
your brother of Bedford, the king’s eldest uncle, con-
tented him : and that ye none larger power desire, will,
nor use ; giving you this that is aboven written for our
answer to your foresaid demand, the which we will
dwell and abide with, withouten variance or changing.
Over this beseeching and praying you in our most
humble and lowly wise, and also requiring you in the
king’s name, that ye, according to the king’s command-
ment, contained in his writ sent unto you in that behalf,
come to this his present parliament, and intend to the
good effect and speed of matters' to be demesned and
treted in the same, like as of right ye owe to do.” x
It is evident that this plain, or rather rude address to
the duke of Gloucester, was dictated by the prevalence
of cardinal Beaufort’s party in council and parliament.
But the transactions in the former parliament are not
unfairly represented - and, comparing them with the
passage extracted above, we may perhaps be entitled to
infer: 1. That the king does not possess any constitu-
tional prerogative of appointing a regent during the
minority of his successor ; and 2. That neither the heir
presumptive, nor any other person, is entitled to exercise

Rot. Pari. 6 H. VI. vol. iv. p. 326.

190 DERANGEMENT OF HENRY VI. Chap. VIII. Part III.

the royal prerogative during the king’s- infancy (or, by
parity of reasoning, his infirmity), nor to any title that
conveys them ; the sole right of determining the persons
by whom, and fixing the limitations under which, the
executive government shall be conducted in the king s
name and behalf, devolving upon the great council of
parliament.

The expression used in the lords’ address to the duke
of Gloucester, relative to the young king, that he was far
gone and grown in person, wit, and understanding, was
not thrown out in mere flattery. In two years the party
hostile to Gloucester’s influence had gained ground
enough to abrogate his office of protector, leaving only
the honorary title of chief counsellor/ For this the
king’s coronation, at eight years of age, was thought a
fair pretence ; and undoubtedly the loss of that exceed-
ingly limited authority which had been delegated to the
protector could not have impaired the strength of govern-
ment. This was conducted as before by a selfish and
disunited council ; but the king’s name was sufficient to
legalize their measures, nor does any objection appear to
have been made in parliament to such a mockery of the
name of monarchy.

In the year 1454, the thirty-second of Henry’s reign,

, his unhappy malady, transmitted perhaps from
mental de- his maternal grandfather, assumed so decided a
rangement. character of derangement or imbecility, that
parliament could no longer conceal from itself the neces-
sity of a more efficient ruler. This assembly, which had
been continued by successive prorogations for nearly a
year, met at Westminster on the 14th of February, when
the session was opened by the duke of York, as king’s
commissioner. Kemp, archbishop of Canterbury and
chancellor of England, dying soon afterwards, it was
judged proper to acquaint the king at Windsor by a
deputation of twelve lords with this and other subjects
concerning his government. In fact, perhaps, this was
a pretext chosen in order to ascertain his real condition.
These peers reported to the lords’ house, two days after-
wards, that they had opened to his majesty the several
articles of their message, but “ could get no answer ne

y Rot. Pari, 8 II. VL vol. iv. p. 330.

English Const. DUKE OF YORK PROTECTOR* 191

sign for no prayer ne desire,” though they repeated their
endeavours at three different interviews. This report,
with the instruction on which it was founded, was, at
their prayer, entered of record in parliament. Upon so
authentic a testimony of their sovereign’s in-
firmity, the peers, adjourning two days for York made
solemnity or deliberation, “ elected and nomi- P rotector -
nated Iiichard duke of York to be protector and defender
of the realm of England during the king’s pleasure.”
The duke, protesting his insufficiency, requested “ that
in this present parliament, and by authority thereof, it
be enacted that, of yourself and of your ful and mere
disposition, ye desire, name, and call me to the said
name and charge, and that of any presumption of myself
I take them not upon me, but only of the duo and
humble obeisance that I owe to do unto the king our
most dread and sovereign lord, and to you the peerage
of this land, in whom by the occasion of the infirmity
of our said sovereign lord resteth the exercise of his
authority, whose noble commandments I am as ready to
perform and obey as any of his liegemen alive, and that,
at such time as it shall please our blessed Creator to
restore his most noble person to healthful disposition, it
shall like you so to declare and notify to his good grace.”
To this protestation the lords answered that, for his and
their discharge, an act of parliament should bo made
conformably to that enacted in the king’s infancy, since
they were compelled by an equal necessity again to
choose and name a protector and defender. And to the
duke of York’s request to be informed how far th$
power and authority of his charge should extend, they
replied that he should be chief of the king’s council,
and “ devised therefore to the said duke a name different
from other counsellors, not the name of tutor, lieutenant,
governor, nor of regent, nor no name that shall import
authority of governance of the land ; but the said name
of protector and defensor and so forth, according to
the language of their former address to the duke of
Gloucester. An act was passed accordingly, consti-
tuting the duke of York protector of the church and
kingdom, and chief counsellor of the king, during the
latter’s pleasure ; or until the prince of Wales should
attain years of discretion, on whom the said dignity was

192

DUKE OF YORK PROTECTOR. Chap. VIII. Part IIL

immediately to devolve. The patronage of certain
spiritual benefices was reserved to the protector accord-
ing to the precedent of the king’s minority, which parlia*
ment was resolved to follow in every particular. 2

It may be conjectured, by the provision made in
favour of the prince of Wales, then only two years old,
that the king’s condition was supposed to be beyond
hope of restoration. But in about nine months he re-
covered sufficient speech and recollection to supersede
the duke of York’s protectorate. 11 The succeeding trans-
actions are matter of familiar, though not, perhaps,
very perspicuous history. The king was a prisoner in
his enemies’ hands after the affair at St. Albans, b when
parliament met in July, 1455. In this session little was
done, except renewing the strongest oaths of allegiance
to Henry and his family. But the two houses meeting
again after a prorogation to November 12, during which
time the duke of York had strengthened his party,
and was appointed by commission the king’s lieutenant
to open the parliament, a proposition was made by the
commons that, “ whereas the king had deputed the duke
of York as his commissioner to proceed in this parliar
ment, it was thought by the commons that, if the king
hereafter could not attend to the protection of the
country, an able person should be appointed protector,
to whom they might have recourse for redress of in-
juries ; especially as great disturbances had lately arisen
in the west through the feuds of the earl of Devonshire
and Lord Bonvile.” c The archbishop of Canterbury
answered for the lords that they would take into con-
sideration what the commons had suggested. Two days

2 Rot. Pari. vol. v. p. 241. And the nature of the action, which was

a Paston Letters, vol. i. p. 81. The a sudden attack on the town of St. Albans,
proofs of sound mind given in this letter without any pitched combat, renders the
are not very decisive, but the wits of larger number improbable. Whetham*-
sovereigns are never weighed in golflen stede, himself abbot of St. Albans at the
scales. time, makes the duke of York’s army

b This may seem an improper appel- but 3000 fighting men. p. 352. This
lation for what is usually termed a account of the trifling loss of life in the
battle, wherein 5000 men are said to battle of St. Albans is confirmed by a
have fallen. But I rely here upon my contemporary letter, published in the
faithful guide, the Paston Letters, p. 100, Archaeologia (xx. 519). The whole num-
one of which, written immediately after ber of the slain was but forty-eight, in-
the engagement, says that only sixscore eluding, however, several lords,
were killed. Surely this testimony out- c See some account of these in Paston
weighs a thousand ordinary chroniclers. Letters, voL i. p. 114 .

English Const.

DUKE OF VORK PROTECTOR.

193

afterwards the latter appeared again with a request con-
veyed nearly in the same terms. Upon their leaving the
chamber, the archbishop, who was also chancellor, moved
the peers to answer what should be done in respect of the
request of the commons ; adding that “ it is understood
that they will not further proceed in matters of parlia-
ment, to the time that they have answer to their desire
and request.” This naturally ended in the reappoint-
ment of the duke of York to his charge of protector.
The commons indeed were determined to bear no delay.
As if ignorant of what had been resolved in consequence
of their second request, they urged it a third time, on
the next day of meeting ; and received for answer that
“ the king our said sovereign lord, by the advice and
assent of his lords spiritual and temporal being in this
present parliament, had named and desired the duke of
York to be protector and defensor of this land.” It is
worthy of notice that in these words, and indeed in
effect, as appears by the whole transaction, the house of
peers * assumed an exclusive right of choosing the pro-
tector, though, in the act passed to ratify their election,
the commons’ assent, as a matter of course, is introduced.
The last year’s precedent was followed in the present
instance, excepting a remarkable deviation; instead of
the words “ during the king’s pleasure,” the duke was
to hold his office “ until he should be discharged of it
by the lords in parliament .” 11

This extraordinary clause, and the slight allegations
on which it was thought fit to substitute a vicegerent
for the reigning monarch, are sufficient to prove, even
if the common historians were silent, that whatever
passed as to this second protectorate of the duke of
York was altogether of a revolutionary complexion.
In the actual circumstances of civil blood already spilled
and the king in captivity, we may justly wonder that
so much regard was shown to the regular forms and
precedents of the constitution. But the duke’s natural
moderation will account for part of this, and the temper
of the lords for much more. That assembly appears for
the most part to have been faithfully attached to the house
of Lancaster. The partisans of Richard were found in

VOL. III.

d Rot. ParL voL v. p. 284-290.

0

194 DUKE OF YORK’S CLAIM Chap. VIII. Part III.

the commons and among the populace. Several months
elapsed after the victory of St. Albans before an
attempt was thus made to set aside a sovereign, not
labouring, so far as we know, under any more notorious
infirmity than before. It then originated in the com-
mons, and seems to have received but an unwilling
consent from the upper house. Even in constituting the
duke of York protector over the head of Henry, whom
all men despaired of ever seeing in a state to face the
dangers of such a season, the lords did not forget the
rights of his son. By this latter instrument, as well as
by that of the preceding year, the duke’s office was to
cease upon the prince of Wales arriving at the age of
discretion.

But what had long been propagated in secret, soon
Duke of became familiar to the public ear; that the
York’s claim duke of York laid claim to the throne. He
to the crown. wag unquestionably heir general of the royal
line, through his mother, Anne, daughter of Roger
Mortimer earl of March, son of Philippa, daughter of
Lionel duke of Clarence, third son of Edward III.
Roger Mortimer’s eldest son, Edmund, had been de-
clared heir presumptive by Richard II. ; but his infancy
during the revolution that placed Henry IY. on the
throne had caused his pretensions to be passed over in
silence. The new king however was induced by a
jealousy natural to his situation to detain the earl of
March in custody. Henry Y. restored his liberty ; and,
though he had certainly connived for a while at the
conspiracy, planned by his brother-in-law the earl of
Cambridge and Lord Scrope of Masham to place the
crown on his head, that magnanimous prince gave him
a free pardon, and never testified any displeasure. The
present duke of York was honoured by Henry VI. with
the highest trusts in France and Ireland ; such as
Beaufort and Gloucester could never have dreamed of
conferring on him if his title to the crown had not
been reckoned obsolete. It has been very pertinently
remarked that the crime perpetrated by Margaret and
her counsellors in the death of the duke of Gloucester
was the destruction of the house of Lancaster.* From

Hall, p. 210.

Enoljbh Const.

TO THE CROWN.

195

this time the duke of York, next heir in presumption
while the king was childless, might innocently contem-"
plate the prospect of royalty ; and when such ideas had
long been passing through his mind, we may judge how
reluctantly the birth of prince Edward, nine years after
Henry’s marriage, would be admitted to disturb them.
The queen’s administration unpopular, careless of na-
tional interests, and partial to his inveterate enemy the
duke of Somerset ; f the king incapable of exciting fear
or respect ; himself conscious of powerful alliances and
universal favour ; all these circumstances combined
could hardly fail to nourish those opinions of hereditary
right which he must have imbibed from his infancy.

The duke of York preserved through the critical season
of rebellion such moderation and humanity that we
may pardon him that bias in favour of his own preten-
sions to which he became himself a victim. Margaret
perhaps, by her sanguinary violence in the Coventry
parliament of 1460, where the duke and all his adherents
were attainted, left him not the choice of remaining a
subject with impunity. But with us, who are to weigh
these ancient factions in the balance of wisdom and
justice, there should be no hesitation in deciding that
the house of Lancaster were lawful sovereigns of
England. I am, indeed, astonished that not only such
historians as Carte, who wrote undisguisedly upon a
Jacobite system, but even men of juster principles, have
been inadvertent enough to mention the right of the
house of York. If the original consent of the nation, if
three descents of the crown, if repeated acts of parlia-
ment, if oaths of allegiance from the whole kingdom,
and more particularly from those who now advanced a
contrary pretension, if undisturbed, unquestioned pos-
session during sixty years, could not secure the reigning
family against*^ mere defectnn their genealogy, when
were the people to expect tranquillity? Sceptres were
committed, and governments were instituted, for public
protection and public happiness, not certainly for the
benefit of rulers, or for the security of particular dynas-
ties. No prejudice has less in its favour, and none has
been more fatal to the peace of mankind, than that

f The ill-will of York and the queen an unequivocal testimony, a letter of that
began as eirly as 1449 , as we learn from date in the Paston collection, vol. i. p. 26 .

0 2

196 YORK’S CLAIM TO THE CROWN. Ciiap. VIII. Pakt III.

which regards a nation of subjects as a family’s private
inheritance. For, as this opinion induces reigning
princes and their courtiers to look on the people as
made only to obey them, so, when the tide of events
has swept them from their thrones, it begets a fond hope
of restoration, a sense of injury and of imprescriptible
rights, which give the show of justice to fresh disturb-
ances of public order, and rebellions against established
authority. Even in cases of unjust conquest, which are
far stronger than any domestic revolution, time heals
the injury of wounded independence, the forced submis-
sion to a victorious enemy is changed into spontaneous
allegiance to a sovereign, and the laws of God and
nature enjoin the obedience that is challenged by re-
ciprocal benefits. But far more does every national
government, however violent in its origin, become legi-
timate, when universally obeyed and justly exercised,
the possession drawing after it the right ; not certainly
that success can alter the moral character of actions,
or privilege usurpation before the tribunal of human
opinion, or in the pages of history, but that the recogni-
tion of a government by the people is the binding pledge
of their allegiance so long as its corresponding duties
are fulfilled. 8 And thus the law of England has been
held to annex the subject’s fidelity to the reigning
monarch, by whatever title he may have ascended the
throne, and whoever else may be its claimant. 11 But
the statute of 11th of Henry VII. c. 1, has furnished an
unequivocal commentary upon this principle, when,
alluding to the condemnations and forfeitures by which
those alternate successes of the white and red roses had
almost exhausted the noble blood of England, it enacts
that “ no man for doing true and faithful service to the
king for the time being be convict or attaint of high
treason, nor of other offences, by act ?of parliament or
otherwise.”

Though all classes of men and all parts of England
were divided into factions by this unhappy contest, yet
the strength of the Yorkists lay in London and the
neighbouring counties, and generally among the mid-

* Upon this great question the fourth h Hale’s Fleas of the Crown, vol. i. p.
discourse in Sir Michael Foster’s Reports 61, 101 (edit. 1?36).
ought particularly to be read.

English Const.

WAK OF THE HOSES.

197

dling and lower people. And this is what might na-
turally be expected. For notions of hereditary
right take easy hold of the populace, who feel an Lamas- the
honest sympathy for those whom they consider triaiis and
as injured ; while men of noble birth and high Yorkists *
station have a- keener sense of personal duty to their
sovereign, and of the baseness of deserting their allegi-
ance. Notwithstanding the wide-spreading influence of
the Nevils, most of the nobility were well affected to the
reigning dynasty . We have seen how reluctantly they
acquiesced in the second protectorate of the duke of York
after the battle of St. Albans. Thirty-two temporal peers
took an oath of fealty to Henry and his issue in the
Coventry parliament of 1460, which attainted the duke
of York and the earls of Warwick and Salisbury.' And
in the memorable circumstances of the duke’s claim
personally made in parliament, it seems manifest that
the lords complied not only with hesitation but unwill-
ingness, and in fact testified their respect and duty for
Henry by confirming the crown to him during his life. k
The rose of Lancaster blushed upon the banners of the
Staffords, the Percies, the Veres, the Hollands, and the
Courtneys. All these illustrious families lay crushed for
a time under the ruins of their party. But the course of
fortune, which has too great a mastery over crowns and
sceptres to be controlled by men’s affection, invested
Edward IV. with a possession which the general consent
of the nation both sanctioned and secured. This was
effected in no slight degree by the furious spirit of Mar-
garet, who began a system of extermination by acts of
attainder and execution of prisoners that created abhor-
rence, though it did not prevent imitation. And the
barbarities of her northern army, whom she led towards
London after the battle of Wakefield, lost the Lancastrian
cause its former friends, m and might justly convince

i Rot. Pari. vol. v. p. 351.
it Id. p. 375. Tills entry in the roll
is highly interesting and important. It
ought to be read in preference to any
of our historians. Hume, who drew from
inferior sources, is not altogether accurate.
Yet one remarkable circumstance, told
by Hall and other chroniclers, that the
duke of York stood by the throne, as if

to claim it, though omitted entirely in
the roll, is confirmed by Whethamstede,
abbot of St. Albans, who was probably
then present, (p. 484, edit Hearne.)
This shows that we should only doubt,
and not reject, unless upon real grounds
of suspicion, the assertions of secondary
writers.

m The abbey of St. Albans was stripped

198

EDWAfD IV.

Chap. VIII. Part III.

reflecting men that it were better to risk tl^e chances of
a new dynasty than trust the kingdom to an exasperated
faction.

A period of obscurity and confusion ensues, during
which we have as little insight into constitu-
Edward IV. ^ Qna j ag g enera l history. There are no con-
temporary chroniclers of any value, and the rolls of
parliament, by whose light we have hitherto steered,
become mere registers of private bills, or of petitions
relating to commerce. The reign of Edward IV. is the
first during which no statute was passed for the redress
of grievances or maintenance of the subject’s liberty.
Nor is there, if I am correct, a single petition of this
nature upon the roll. Whether it were that the commons
had lost too much of their ancient courage to present any
remonstrances, or that a wilful omission has vitiated the
record, is hard to determine ; but we certainly must not
imagine that a government cemented with blood poured
on the scaffold, as well as in the field, under a passionate
and unprincipled sovereign, would afford no scope for
the just animadversion of parliament." The reign of
Edward IV. was a reign of terror. One half of the noble
families had been thinned by proscription ; and though
generally restored in blood by the reversal of their
attainders — a measure certainly deserving of much appro-
bation — were still under the eyes of vigilant and inveterate
enemies. f The opposite faction would be cautious how
they resisted a king of their own creation, while the
hopes of their adversaries were only dormant. And
indeed, without relying on this supposition, it is com-
monly seen that, when temporary circumstances have
given a king the means of acting in disregard of his sub-
jects’ privileges, it is a very difficult undertaking for
them to recover a liberty which has no security so effec-
tual as habitual possession.

by the queen and her army after the n There are several instances of vio-
second battle fought at that place, Feb. lence and oppression apparent on the
17, 1461 ; which changed Whethamstede rolls during this reign, but not proceed-
the abbot and historiographer from a ing from the crown. One of a remark-
violent Lancastrian into a Yorkist His able nature (vol. v. p. 173) was brought
change of party is quite sudden, and forward to throw an odium on the duke
amusing enough. See too the Paston of Clarence, who had been concerned in
Letters, voL i. p. 206. Yet the Paston it. Several passages indicate the cha-
family were originally Lancastrian, and racter of the duke of Gloucester,
returned to that side in 1470.

English Const.

EDWARD IV.

199

Besides the severe proceedings against the Lancastrian
party, which might be extenuated by the common pre-
tences, retaliation of similar proscriptions, security for
the actual government, or just punishment of rebellion
against a legitimate heir, there are several reputed
instances of violence and barbarity in the reign of Edward
IV. which have not such plausible excuses. Every one
knows the common stories of the citizen who was attainted
of treason for an idle speech that he would make his son
heir to the crown, the house where he dwelt ; and of
Thomas Burdett, who wished the horns of his stag in the
belly of him who had advised the king to shoot it. Of
the former I can assert nothing, though I do not believe
it to be accurately reported. But certainly the accusa-
tion against Burdett, however iniquitous, was not con-
fined to these frivolous words ; which indeed do not
appear in his indictment , 0 or in a passage relative to his
conviction in the roll of parliament. Burdett was a ser-
vant and friend of the duke of Clarence, and sacrificed as
a preliminary victim. It was an article of charge against
Clarence that he had attempted to persuade the people
that “ Thomas Burdett his servant, which was lawfully
and truly attainted of treason, was wrongfully put to
death.” p There could indeed be no more oppressive
usage inflicted upon meaner persons than this attainder
of the duke of Clarence — an act for which a brother could
not be pardoned had he been guilty, and which deepens
the shadow of a tyrannical age, if, as it seems, his offence
toward Edward was but levity and rashness.

But whatever acts of injustice we may attribute, from
authority or conjecture, to Edward’s government, it was
very far from being unpopular. His love of pleasure, his
affability, his courage and beauty, gave him a credit with
his subjects which he had no real virtue to challenge.
This restored him to the throne, even against the prodi-

0 See in Cro. Car. 120, the indictment
against Burdett for compassing the king’s
death, and for that purpose conspiring
■with Stacie and Blake to calculate his
nativity and his son’s, ad sciendum quando
iidem rex et Edwardus ejus fllius mori-
entur : Also for the same end dispersing
divers rhymes and ballads de murmura-
tionibus, seditionibus et proditoriis ex-

citationibus, factaa et fabricatas apud
Holboum, to the intent that the people
might withdraw their love from the king
and desert him, ac erga ipsum regem
insurgerent, et guerram erga ipsum
regem levarent, ad final em destruc-
tionem ipsorum regis ac domini prin-
cipis, &c.

V Rot ParL vol. vi. p. 193.

200

EDWARD IV.

Chap. VIII. Part 1IL

gious influence of Warwick, and compelled Henry VII.
to treat his memory with respect, and acknowledge him
as a lawful king/ The latter years of his reign were
passed in repose at home after scenes of unparalleled
convulsions, and in peace abroad after more than a cen-
tury of expensive warfare. His demands of subsidy were
therefore moderate, and easily defrayed by a nation
which was making rapid advances towards opulence.
According to Sir John Fortescue, nearly One fifth of the
whole kingdom had come to the king’s hand by forfeiture
at some time or other since the commencement of his
reign/ Many indeed of these lands had been restored,
and others lavished away in grants, but the surplus
revenue must still have been considerable.

Edward IV. was the first who practised a new method
of taking his subjects’ money without consent of parlia-
ment, under the plausible name of benevolences. These

The rolls of Henry VII.’s first par- then was king after the death of Edward
liament are full of an absurd confusion in IV.? And was his son really illi giti-
thought and language, which is rendered mate, as an usurping uncle pretended ?
odious by the purposes to which it is Or did the crime of Richard, though
applied. Both Henry VI. and Edward punished in him, enure to the benefit of
IV. are considered as lawful kings ; ex- Henry ? These were points which, like
cept in one instance, frhere Alan Cot- the fate of the young princes in the
terell, petitioning for the reversal of his Tower, he chose to wrap in discreet
attainder, speaks of Edward, “ late called silence. But the first question he seems
Edward IV.” (vol. iv. p. 290.) But this to have answered in his own favcur.
is only the language of a private Lancas- For Richard himself, Howard duke of
trian. And Henry VI. passes for having Norfolk, Lord Lovel, and some others,
been king during bis short restoration in are attainted (p. 276) for “ traiterously
1470, when Edward had been nine years intending, compassing, and imagining ”
upon the throne. For the earl of Oxford the death of Henry ; of course before or
is said to have been attainted “ for the at the battle of Bosworth ; and while his
true allegiance and service he owed and right, unsupported by possession, could
did to Henry VI. at Barnet field and have rested only on an hereditary title
otherwise.” (p. 281.) This might be which it was an insult to the nation to
reasonable enough on the true principle prefer. These monstrous proceedings ex-
that allegiance is due to a 1ft ng de facto ; plain the necessity of that conservative
if indeed we could determine who was statute to which I have already alluded,
the king de facto on the morning of the which passed in the eleventh year of his
battle of Barnet But this principle was reign, and afforded as much security for
not fairly recognised. Richard III. is men following the plain line of rallying
always called, “ in deed and not in right round the standard of their country as
king of England.” Nor was this merely mere law can offer. There is some ex-
founded on his usurpation as against his traordinary reasoning upon this act in
nephew. For that unfortunate boy is Carte’s History (vol. ii. p. 844), for the
little better treated, and in the act of purpose of proving that the adherents of
resumption, X H. VII., while Edward IV. George II. would not be protected by it
is styled “ late king,” appears only with on the restoration of the true blood,
the denomination of “Edward his son, r Difference of Absolute and Limited
late called Edward V.” (p. 336.) Who Monarchy, p. 83.

English Const.

EDWARD IV.

201

came in place of the still more plausible loans, of former
monarchs, and were principally levied on the wealthy
traders. Though no complaint appears in the parlia-
mentary records of his reign, which, as has been observed,
complain of nothing, the illegality was undoubtedly felt
and resented. In the remarkable address to Richard by
that tumultuary meeting which invited him tq assume
the crown, we find, among general assertions of the state’s
decay through misgovemrnent, the following strong pas-
sage : — “ For certainly we be determined rather to aven-
ture and committe us to the perill of owre lyfs and
jopardie of detli, than to lyve in such thraldome and
bondage as we have lyved long tyme heretofore, oppressed
and injured by extortions and newe impositions ayenst
the lawes of God and man, and the libertie, old polieie,
and lawes of this realme, whereyn every Englishman is
inherited.”* Accordingly, in Richard III.’s only parlia-
ment an act was passed which, after reciting in the
strongest terms the grievances lately endured, abrogates
and annuls for ever all exactions under the name of
benevolence.* The liberties of this country were at least
not directly impaired by the usurpation of Richard. But
from an act so deeply tainted with moral guilt, as well as
so violent in all its circumstances, no substantial benefit
was likely to spring. Whatever difficulty there may be
in deciding upon the fate of Richard’s nephews after they
were immured in the Tower, the more public parts of the
transaction bear unequivocal testimony to his ambitious
usurpation." It would therefore be foreign to the purpose
of this chapter to dwell upon his assumption of the
regency, or upon the sort of election, however curious
and remarkable, which gave a pretended authority to his
usurpation of the throne. Neither of these has ever been
alleged by any party in the way of constitutional prece-
dent.

At this epoch I terminate these inquiries into the Eng-
lish constitution ; a sketch very imperfect, I fear, and

• Rot. Pari. vol. vi. p. 241. on that of Walpole, Carte, Henry, and

t l R. III. c. 2. Laing, who maintain that the duke of

u The long-debated question os to the York, at least, was in some way released
murder of Edward and his brother seems from the Tower, and reappeared as
to me more probably solved on the com- Perkin Warbeck. But a very strong
mon supposition that it was really per- conviction either way is not readily at-
petrated by the orders of Richard, than tainable.

202

CONCLUSION.

Chap. VIII. Part III.

unsatisfactory, but which may at least answer the purpose
of fixing the reader’s attention on the principal
Conclusion, and of guiding him to the purest foun-

tains of constitutional knowledge. From the accession of
the house of Tudor a new period is to be dated in our
history, far more prosperous in the diffusion of opulence
and the preservation of general order than the preceding,
but less distinguished by the spirit of freedom and
jealousy of tyrannical power. We have seen, through
the twilight of our Anglo-Saxon records, a form of civil
policy established by our ancestors, marked, like the
kindred governments of the continent, with aboriginal
Teutonic features ; barbarous indeed, and insufficient for
the great ends of society, but capable and worthy of the
improvement it has received, because actuated by a
sound and vital spirit, the love of freedom and of justice.
From these principles arose that venerable institution,
which none but a free and simple people could have con-
ceived, trial by peers — an institution common in some
degree to other nations, but which, more widely extended,
more strictly retained, and better modified among our-
selves, has become perhaps the first, certainly among the
first, of our securities against arbitrary government. We
have seen a foreign conqueror and his descendants
trample almost alike upon the prostrate nation and upon
those who had been companions of their victory, intro-
duce the servitudes of feudal law with more than their
usual rigour, and establish a large revenue by continual
precedents upon a system of universal and prescriptive
extortion. But the Norman and English races, each
unfit to endure oppression, forgetting their animosities in
a common interest, enforce by arms the concession of a
great charter of liberties. Privileges wrested from one
faithless monarch are preserved with continual vigilance
against the machinations of another ; the rights of the
people become more precise, and their spirit more mag-
nanimous, during the long reign of Henry III. With
greater ambition and greater abilities than his father,
Edward I. attempts in vain to govern in an arbitrary
manner, and has the mortification of seeing his preroga-
tive fettered by still more important limitations. The
great council of the nation is opened to the representatives
of the commons. They proceed by slow and cautious

English Const.

CONCLUSION.

203

steps to remonstrate against public grievances, to check
the abuses of administration, and sometimes to chastise
public delinquency in the officers of the crown. A num-
ber of remedial provisions are added to the statutes ;
every Englishman learns to remember that he is the
citizen of a free state, and to claim the common law as
his birthright, even though the violence of power should
interrupt its enjoyment. It were a strange misrepre-
sentation of history to assert that the constitution had
attained anything like a perfect state in the fifteenth
century ; but I know not whether there are any essen-
tial privileges of our countrymen, any fundamental
securities against arbitrary power, so far as they depend
upon positive institution, which may not be traced to the
time when the house of Plantagenet filled the English
throne.

204

PRIVILEGES OF

Notes to

NOTES TO CHAPTER VIII.

(Part III.)

Note I. Page 5.

It is rather a curious speculative question, and such
only, we may presume, it will long continue, whether
bishops are entitled, on charges of treason or felony, to
a trial by the peers. If this question be considered
either theoretically or according to ancient authority, I
think the affirmative proposition is beyond dispute.
Bishops were at all times members of the great national
council, and fully equal to lay lords in temporal power
as well as dignity. Since the Conquest they have held
their temporalities of the crown by a baronial tenure,
which, if there be any consistency in law, must une-
quivocally distinguish them from commoners — since any
one holding by barony might be challenged on a jury,
as not being the peer of the party whom he was to try.
It is true that they take no share in the judicial power
of the house of lords in cases of treason or felony ; but
this is merely in conformity to those ecclesiastical canons
which prohibited the clergy from partaking in capital
judgment, and they have always withdrawn from the
house on such occasions under a protestation of their
right to remain. Had it not been for this particularity,
arising wholly out of their own discipline, the question
of their peerage could never have come into dispute.
As for the common argument that they are not tried as
peers because they have no inheritable nobility, I con-
sider it as very frivolous, since it takes for granted the
precise matter in controversy, that an inheritable nobility
is necessary to the definition of peerage, or to its inci-
dental privileges.

If we come to constitutional precedents, by which,

Ciup. VIII.

SPIRITUAL PEERS.

205

when sufficiently numerous and unexceptionable, all
questions of this kind are ultimately to he determined,
the weight of ancient authority seems to he in favour of
the prelates. In the fifteenth year of Edward III. (1340),
the king brought several charges against archbishop
Stratford. He came to parliament with a declared inten-
tion of defending himself before his peers. The king
insisted upon his answering in the court of exchequer.
Stratford however persevered, and the house of lords,
by the king’s consent, appointed twelve of their number,
bishops, earls, and barons, to report whether peers ought
to answer criminal charges in parliament, and not else-
where. This committee reported to the king in full
parliament that the peers of the land ought not to be
arraigned, nor put on trial, except in parliament and by
their peers. The archbishop upon this prayed the king,
that, inasmuch as he had been notoriously defamed, he
might be arraigned in full parliament before the peers,
and there make answer ; which request the king granted.
(Rot. Pari. vol. ii. p. 127. Collier’s Eccles. Hist. vol. i.
p. 543.) The proceedings against Stratford went no
further ; but I think it impossible not to admit that his
right to trial as a peer was fully recognised both by the
king and lords.

This is, however, the latest, and perhaps the only
instance of a prelate’s obtaining so high a privilege. In
the preceding reign of Edward II., if we can rely on the
account of Walsingham (p. 119), Adam Orleton, the
factious bishop of Hereford, had first been arraigned
before the house of lords, and subsequently convicted by
a common jury ; but the transaction was of a singular
nature, and the king might probably be influenced by
the difficulty of obtaining a conviction from the temporal
peers, of whom many were disaffected to him, in a case
where privilege of clergy was vehemently claimed.
But about 1357 a bishop of Ely, being accused of har-
bouring one guilty of murder, though he demanded a
trial by the peers, was compelled to abide the verdict of
a jury. (Collier, p. 557.) In the 31st of Edw. III.
(T358) the abbot of Missenden was hanged for coining.
(2 Inst. p. 635.) The abbot of this monastery appears
from Dugdale to have been summoned by writ in the
49th of Henry III. If he actually held by barony, I do

206

PRIVILEGES OF

Notes to

not perceive any strong distinction between his case and
that of a bishop. The leading precedent, however, and
that upon which lawyers principally found their denial
of this privilege to the bishops, is the case of Fisher,
who was certainly tried before an ordinary jury ; nor am
I aware that any remonstrance was made by himself, or
complaint by his friends, upon this ground. Cranmer
was treated in the same manner ; and from these two,
being the most recent precedents, though neither of them
in the best of times, the great plurality of law-books
have drawn a conclusion that bishops are not entitled to
trial by the temporal peers. Nor can there be much
doubt that, whenever the occasion shall occur, this will
be the decision of the house of lords.

There are two peculiarities, as it may naturally appear,
in the above-mentioned resolution of the lords in Strat-
ford’s case. The first is, that they claim to be tried, not
only before their peers, but in parliament. And in the
case of the bishop of Ely it is said to have been objected
to his claim of trial by his peers, that parliament was not
then sitting. (Collier, ubi sup.) It is most probable,
therefore, that the court of the lord high steward, for the
special purpose of trying a peer, was of more recent insti-
tution — as appears also from Sir E. Coke’s expressions.
(4 Inst. p. 58. ) The second circumstance that may strike
a reader is, that the lords assert their privilege in all
criminal cases, not distinguishing misdemeanors from
treasons and felonies. But in this they were undoubtedly
warranted by the clear language of Magna Charta, which
makes no distinction of the kind. The practice of trying
a peer for misdemeanors by a jury of commoners, con-
cerning the origin of which I can say nothing, is one of
those anomalies which too often render our laws capri-
cious and unreasonable in the eyes of impartial men. ^

Since writing the above note I have read Stillingfleet s
treatise on the judicial power of the bishops, in capital
cases — a right which, though now, I think, abrogated by
non-claim and a course of contrary precedents, he proves
beyond dispute to have existed by the common law and
constitutions of Clarendon, to have been occasionally
exercised, and to have been only suspended by their
voluntary act. In the course of this argument he treats
of the peerage of the bishops, and produces abundant

Chap. VIII.

SPIRITUAL PEERS.

207

evidence from the records of parliament that they were
styled peers, for which, though convinced from general
recollection, I had not leisure or disposition to search.
But if any doubt should remain, the statute 25 E. III.
c. 6, contains a legislative declaration of the peerage of
bishops. The whole subject is discussed with much
perspicuity and force by Stillingfleet, who seems however
not to press very greatly the right of trial by peers, aware
no doubt of the weight of opposite precedents. (^Stilling-
fleet’s Works, vol. iii. p. 820.) In one distinction, that
the bishops vote in their judicial functions as %arons, but
in legislation as magnates, which Warburton has brought
forward as his own in the Alliance of Church and State,
Stillingfleet has perhaps not taken the strongest ground,
nor sufficiently accounted for their right of sitting in
judgment on the impeachment of a commoner. Parlia-
mentary impeachment, upon charges of high public
crimes, seems to be the exercise of a right inherent in
the great council of the nation, some traces of which
appear even before the Conquest (Chron. Sax. p. 164,
169), independent of and superseding that of trial by
peers, which, if the 29th section of Magna Charta be
strictly construed, is only required upon indictments at
the king’s suit. And this consideration is of great weight
in the question, still unsettled, whether a commoner can
be tried by the lords upon an impeachment for treason.

The treatise of Stillingfleet was written on occasion of
the objection raised by the commons to the bishops voting
on the question of Lord Danby’s pardon, which he
pleaded in bar of his impeachment. Burnet seems to
suppose that their right to final judgment had never been
defended, and confounds judgment with sentence. Mr.
Hargrave, strange to say, has made a much greater
blunder, and imagined that the question related to their
right of voting on a bill of attainder, which no one, I
believe, e^er disputed. (Notes on Co. Litt. 134 b.)

Note II. Page 9.

The constitution of parliament in this period, ante-
cedent to the Great Charter, has been minutely and
scrupulously investigated by the Lords’ Committee on

208

NATURE OF BARONIES.

Notes to

the Dignity of a Peer in 1819. Two questions may be
raised as to the lay portion of the great council of the
nation from the Conquest to the reign of John : — first,
Did it comprise any members, whether from the counties
or boroughs, not holding themselves, nor deputed by
others holding in chief of the crown by knight-service
or grand serjeanty? secondly, Were all such tenants
in capite personally, or in contemplation of law, assisting,
by advice and suffrage, in councils held for the purpose
of laying on burthens, or for permanent and important
legislation?

The former pf these questions they readily determine.
The committee have discovered no proof, nor any like-
lihood from analogy, that the great council, in these
Norman reigns, was composed of any who did not hold
in chief of the crown by a military tenure, or one in grand
serjeanty ; and they exclude, not only tenants in petty
serjeanty and socage, but such as held of an escheated
barony, or, as it was called, de horwre .

They found more difficulty in the second question.
It has generally been concluded, and I may have taken
it for granted in my text, that all military tenants in
capite were summoned, or ought to have been summoned,
to any great council of the realm, whether for the purpose
of levying a new tax, or any other affecting the public
weal. The committee, however, laudably cautious in
drawing any positive inference, have moved step by
step through this obscure path with a circumspection as
honourable to themselves as it renders their ultimate
judgment worthy of respect.

“ The council of the kingdom, however composed
(they are adverting to the reign of Henry I.), must have
been assembled by the king’s command ; and the king,
therefore, may have assumed the power of selecting the
persons to whom he addressed the command, especially
if the object of assembling such a council waanot to im-
pose any burthen on any of the subjects of the .realm
exempted from such burthens except by their own free
grants. Whether the king was at this time considered
as bound by any constitutional law to address such
command to any particular persons, designated by law
as essential parts of such an assembly for all purposes,
the committee have been unable to ascertain. , It has

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

209

generally been considered as the law of the land that
the king had a right to require the advice of any of his
subjects, and their personal services, for the general
benefit of the kingdom ; but as, by the terms of the
charters of Henry ai*d of his father, no aid could be
required of the immediate tenants of the crown by
military service, beyond the obligation of their respective
tenures, if the crown had occasion for any extraordinary
aid from those tenants, it must have been necessary,
according to law, to assemble all persons so holding,
to give their consent to the imposition. Though the
numbers of such tenants of the crown were hot originally
very great, as far as appears from Domesday, yet, if it
was necessary to convene all to form a constitutional
legislative assembly, the distances of their respective
residences, and the inconvenience of assembling at one
time, in one. spot, all those who thus held of the crown,
and upon whom the maintenance of the Conquest itself
must for a considerable time have importantly depended,
must have produced difficulties, even in the reign of the
Conqueror ; and the increase of their numbers by sub-
division of tenures must have greatly increased the
difficulty in the reign of his son Henry: and at length,
in the reigns of his successors, it must have been almost
impossible to have convened such an assembly, except
by general summons of the greater part of the persons
who were to form it ; and unless those who obeyed the
summons could bind those who did not, the powers of
the assembly when convened must have been very
defective.” (p. 40.)

Though 1 do not perceive why we should assume any
great subdivision of tenures before the statute of Quia
JUmptores, in 18Edw. I., which prohibited subinfeudation,
it is obvious that the committee have pointed out the
inconvenience of a scheme which gave all tenants in
capite (more numerous in Domesday than they perhaps
were aware)’ a right to assist at great councils. Still, as
it is manifest from the early charters, and explicitly
admitted by the committee, that the king could raise no
extraordinary contribution from his immediate vassals
by his own authority, and as there was no feudal
subordination between one of these and another, however
differing in wealth, it is clear that they were legally

von. m. p

210

NATURE OF BARONIES.

Notes to

entitled to a voice, be it through general or special sum-
mons, in the imposition of taxes which they were to pay.
It will not follow that they were summoned, or had
an acknowledged right to be summoned, on the few
other occasions when legislative measures were in con-
templation, or in the determinations taken by the king’s
great council. This can only be inferred by presumptive
proof or constitutional analogy.

The eleventh article of the Constitutions of Clarendon
in 1164 declares that archbishops, bishops, and all per-
sons of the realm who hold of the king in capite , possess
their lands as a barony, and are bound to attend in the
judgments of the king’s court like other barons. It is
plain, from the general tenor of these constitutions, that
44 universse personee regni ” must be restrained to eccle-
siastics ; and the only words which can be important in
the present discussion are 44 sicut barones caeteri.” 44 It
seems,” says the committee, “ to follow that all those
termed the king’s barons were tenants in chief ' t>f the
king ; but it does not follow that all tenants in chief of
the king were the king’s barons, and as such bound to
attend his court. They might not be bound to attend
unless they held their lands of the king in chief 4 sicut
baroniam,’ as expressed in this article with respect to the
archbishops and other clergy.” (p. 44.) They conclude,
however, that 44 upon the whole the Constitutions of
Clarendon, if the existing copies be correct, afford strong
ground for presuming that owing suit to the king’s great
court rendered the tenant one of the king’s barons or
members of that court, though probably in general none
attended who were not specially summoned. It has been
already observed that this would not include all the
king’s tenants in chief, and particularly those who did
not hold of him as of his crown, or even to all who did
hold of him as of his crown, but not by knight-service or
grand serjeanty, which were alone deemed military and
honourable tenures ; though, whether all who held of the
king as of his crown, by knight-service or grand ser-
jeanty, did originally owe suit to the king’s court, or
whether that obligation was confined to persons holding
by a particular tenure, called tenure per baroniam , as has
been asserted, the Constitutions of Clarendon do not
assist to ascertain.” (p. 45.) But this, as they point out,

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

21 X

involves the question whether the Curia Regis , mentioned
in these constitutions, was not only a judicial but a legis-
lative assembly, or one competent to levy a tax on mili-
tary tenants, since by the terms of the charter of Henry
I., confirmed by that of Henry II., all such tenants were
clearly exempted from taxation, except by their own
consents.

They touch slightly on the reign of Richard I. with
the remark that “ the result of all which they have
found with respect to the constitution of the legislative
assemblies of the realm still leaves the subject in great
obscurity. 5 ’ (p. 49.) But it is remarkable that they have
never alluded to the presence of tenants in chief, knights
as well as barons, at the parliament of Northampton
under Henry II. They come, however, rather suddenly
to the conclusion that “ the records of the reign of John
seem to give strong ground for supposing that all the
king’s tenants in chief by military tenure, if not all
the tenants in chief, a were at one time deemed neces-
sary members of the common councils of the realm, when
summoned for extraordinary purposes, and especially for
the purpose of obtaining a grant of any extraordinary
aid to the king ; and this opinion accords with what has
generally been deemed originally the law in France, or
other countries where what is called the feudal system of
tenures has been established.” (p. 54.) It cannot surely
admit of a doubt, and has been already affirmed more
than once by the committee, that for an extraordinary
grant of money the consent of military tenants in chief
was required long before the reign of John. Nor was
that a reign, till the enactment of the Great Charter, when
any fresh extension of political liberty was likely to have
become established. But the difficulty may still remain
with respect to “extraordinary purposes” of another
description.

They observe afterwards that “ they have found no
document before the Great Charter of John in which the
term 4 majores barones ’ has been used, though in some

This hypothetical clause is somewhat might be some by petty seijeanty. Yet
remarkable. Grand serjeanty is of course the committee, as we have Just seen,
included by parity under military service, absolutely exclude these from any share
But did any hold of the king in socage, in the great councils of the Conqueror
except on his demesne lands? There and his immediate descendants.

p 2

212

NATURE OF BARONIES.

Notes to

subsequent documents words of apparently similar im-
port have been used. From the instrument itself it
might be presumed that the term ‘ majores barones ’ was
then a term in some degree understood ; and that the
distinction had, therefore, an earlier origin, though the
committee have not found the term in any earlier instru-
ment.” (p. 67.) But though the Dialogue on the Exche-
quer, generally referred to the reign of Henry 11. , is not
an instrument, it is a law-book of sufficient reputation,
and in this we read — “ Quidarn de rege tenent in capite
quse ad coronam pertinent; baronias scilicet majores seu
minores.” (Lib. ii. cap. 10.) It would be trifling to
dispute that the tenant of a baronia major might be called
a baro major . And what could the secundce dignitatis barones at
Northampton have been but tenants in capite holding fiefs
by some line or other distinguishable from asuperior class ? b

It appears, therefore, on the whole, that in the judg-
ment of the committee, by no means indulgent in their
requisition of evidence, or disposed to take the more
popular side, all the military tenants in capite were con-
stitutionally members of the commune concilium of the realm
during the Norman constitution. This commune concilium
the committee distinguish from a magnum concilium , though
it seems doubtful whether there were any very definite
line between the two. But that the consent of these
tenants was required for taxation they repeatedly acknow-
ledge. And there appears sufficient evidence that they
were occasionally present for other important purposes.
It is, however, very probable that writs of summons were
actually addressed only to those of distinguished name,
to those resident near the place of meeting, or to the
servants and favourites of the crown. This seems to be
deducible from the words in the Great Charter, which
limit the king’s engagement to summon all tenants in
chief, through the sheriff, to the case of his requiring an
aid or scutage, and still more from the withdrawing of

Mr. Spence has ingeniously conjec-
tured, observing that in some passages of
Domesday (he quotes two, but I only
find one) the barons who held more than
six manors paid their relief directly to
the king, while those who had six or less
paid theirs to the sheriff (Yorkshire, 298,
b), that « this may tend to solve the dis-
puted question as to what constituted one

of the greater barons mentioned in the
Magna Charta of John and other early
Norman documents; for, by analogy to
the mode in which the relief was paid,
the greater barons were summoned by
particular write, the rest by one general
summons through the sheriff.” History
of Equitable Jurisdiction, p. 40.

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

213

this promise in the first year of Henry III. The privi-
lege of attending on such occasions, though legally
general, may never have been generally exercised.

The committee seem to have been perplexed about the
word magnates employed in several records to express part
of those present in great councils. In general they
interpret it, as well as the word proceres , to include per-
sons not distinguished by the name 44 barones a word
which in the reign of Henry III. seems to have been
chiefly used in the restricted sense it has latterly ac-
quired. Yet in one instance, a letter addressed to the
justiciar of Ireland, 1 Hen. III., they suppose the word
magnates to 44 exclude those termed therein 4 alii quam-
plurimi; , and consequently to be confined to prelates,
earls, and barons. This may be deemed important in
the consideration of many other instruments in which the
word magnates has been used to express persons constitut-
ing the 4 commune concilium regni/ ” But this strikes
me as an erroneous construction of the letter. The words
are as follows :< — 44 Convenerunt apud Glocestriam plures
regni nostri magnates, episcopi, abbates, comites, et
barones, qui patri nostro viventi semper astiterunt fide-
liter ct devote, et alii quamplurimi; applaudentibus
clero et populo, &c., publice fuimus in regem Anglise
inuncti et coronati.” (p. 77.) I think that magnates is a
collective word, including the 44 alii quamplurimi.” It
appears to me that magnates, and perhaps some other
Latin words, correspond to the witan of the Anglo-
Saxons, expressing the legislature in general, under
which were comprised those who held peculiar dignities,
whether lay or spiritual. And upon the whole we may
be led to believe that the Norman great council was
essentially of the same composition as the witenagemot
which had preceded it ; the king’s thanes being replaced
by the barons of the first or second degree, who, what-
ever may have been the distinction between them, shared
one common character, one source of their legislative
rights — the derivation of their lands as immediate fiefs
from the crown.

The result of the whole inquiry into the constitution
of parliament down to the reign of John seems to be —
1. That the Norman kings explicitly renounced all pre-
rogative of levying money on the immediate military
tenants of the crown, without their consent given in a

214

NATURE OF BARONIES.

Notes to

great council of the realm ; this immunity extending also
to their sub-tenants and dependants. 2. That all these
tenants in chief had a constitutional right to attend, and
ought to be summoned ; but whether they could attend
without a summons is not manifest. 3. That the sum-
mons was usually directed to the higher barons, and to
such of a second class as the king pleased, many being
omitted for different reasons, though all had a right to it.
4. That on occasions when money was not to be de-
manded, but alterations made in the law, some of these
second barons, or tenants in chief, were at least occa-
sionally summoned, but whether by strict right or usage
does not fully appear. 5. That the irregularity of pass-
ing many of them oyer when councils were held for the
purpose of levying money, led to the provision in the
Great Charter of John by which the king promises that
they shall all be summoned through the sheriff on such
occasions ; but the promise does not extend to any other
subject of parliamentary deliberation. 6. That even this
concession, though but the recognition of a known right,
appeared so dangerous to some in the government that it
was withdrawn in the first charter of Henry III.

The charter of John, as has just been observed, while
it removes all doubt, if any could have been entertained,
as to the right of every military tenant in capite to be
summoned through the sheriff, when an aid or scutage
was to be demanded, will not of itself establish their
right of attending parliament on other occasions. We
cannot absolutely assume any to have been, in a general
sense, members of the legislature except the prelates and
the majores barones . But who were these, and how dis-
tinguished? For distinguished they must now have
become, and that by no new provision, since none is
made. The right of personal summons did not constitute
them, for it is on majores barones , as already a determinate
rank, that the right is conferred. The extent of property
afforded no definite criterion; at least some baronies,
which appear to have been of the first class, compre-
hended very few knights’ fees ; yet it seems probable
that this was the original ground of distinction. 0

c See quotation from Spence’s Equitable which was afterwards reduced to three.
Jurisdiction, a little above. The barony Nicolas's Report of Claim to Barony of
of Berkeley was granted In 1 Ric. L, to Lisle, Appendix, p. 318.
be holden by the service of five knights,

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF BARONIES.

215

The charter, as renewed in the first year of Henry III.,
does not only omit the clause prohibiting the imposition of
aids and scutages without consent, and providing for the
summons of all tenants in capite before either could be
levied, but gives the following reason for suspending
this and other articles of king John's charter: — “Quia
vero qusedam capitula in priori carta continebantur, quae
gravia et dubitabilia videbantur, sicut de scutagiis et auxiliis
cusbidendis .... placuit supra-dictis praelatis et magnatibus
ea esse in respectu, quousque plenius consilium habueri-
mus, et tunc faciemus plurissime, tarn de his quam de
aliis quae occurrerint emendanda, quae ad communem
omnium utilitatcm pertinuerint, et pacem et statum
nostrum et regni nostri.” This charter was made but
twenty-four days after the death of J ohn ; and we maj r
agree with the committee (p. 77) in thinking it extra-
ordinary that these deviations from the charter of Run-
nymede, in such important particulars, have been so
little noticed. It is worthy of consideration in what
respects the provisions respecting the levying of money
could have appeared grave and doubtful. We cannot
believe that the earl of Pembroke, and the other barons
who were with the young king, himself a child of nine
years old and incapable of taking a part, meant to
abandon the constitutional privilege of not being taxed
in aids without their consent. But this they might
deem sufficiently provided for by the charters of former
kings and by general usage. It is not, however, impos-
sible that the government demurred to the prohibition of
levying scutage, which stood on a different footing from
extraordinary aids ; for scutage appears to have been
formerly taken without consent of the tenants ; and in
the second charter of Henry III. there is a clause that
it should be taken as it had been in the time of Henry II.
This was a certain payment for every knight’s fee ; but
if the original provision of the Runnymede charter had
been maintained, none could have been levied without
consent of parliament.

It seems also highly probable that, before the prin-
ciple of representation had been established, the greater
barons looked with jealousy on the equality of suffrage
claimed by the inferior tenants in capite . That these
were constitutionally members of the great council, at
least in respect of taxation, has been sufficiently shown ;

216 ELECTION OF KNIGHTS. Notes to

but they had hitherto come in small numbers, likely to
act always in subordination to the more potent aristo-
cracy. It became another question whether they
should all be summoned, in their own oounties, by a
writ selecting no one through favour, and in its terms
compelling all to obey. And this question was less for
the crown, which might possibly find its advantage in
the disunion of its tenants, than for the barons them-
selves. They would naturally bo jealous of a second
order, whom in their haughtiness they held much be-
neath them, yet by whom they might be outnumbered
in those councils where they had bearded the king. No
effectual or permanent compromise could be made but
by representation, and the hour for representation was
not come.

Note III. Page 19,

The Lords’ committee, though not very confidently,
take the view of Brady and Blackstone, confining the elec-
tors of knights to tenants in capite . They admit that “ the
subsequent usage, and the subsequent statutes founded
on that usage, afford ground for supposing that in the 49th
of Henry III. and in the reign of Edward I. the knights
of the shires returned to parliament were elected at the
county courts and by the suitors of those courts. If the
knights of the shires were so elected in the reigns of
Henry III. and Edward I., it seems- important to dis-
cover, if possible, who were the suitors of the county
courts in these reigns” (p. 149). The subject, they are
compelled to confess, after a discussion of some length,
remains involved in great obscurity, which their in-
dustry has been unable to disperse. They had, how-
ever, in an earlier part of their report (p. 30), thought
rfr^ighly probable that the knights of the shires in the
reign of Edward III. represented a description of persons
who might in the reign of the Conqueror have been
termed barons. And the general spirit of their subse-
quent investigation seems to favour this result, though
they finally somewhat recede from it, and admit at least
that, before the close of Edward III.’s reign, the elective
franchise extended to freeholders.

The question, as the committee have stated it, will
turn on the character of those who were suitors to the

Ciiap. VIII.

ELECTION OF KNIGHTS.

217

county court. And, if this may be granted, I must own
that to my apprehension there is no room for the hypo-
thesis that the county court was differently constituted
in the reign of Edward I. or of Edward III. from what
it was very lately, and what it was long before those
princes sat on the throne. In the Anglo-Saxon period
we find this court composed of thanes, but not exclu-
sively of royal thanes, who were comparatively few.
In the laws of Henry 1. we still find sufficient evidence
that the suitors of the court were all who held freehold
lands, terrarum domini ; or, even if we please to limit this
to lords of manors, which is not at all probable, still
without distinction of a mesne or immediate tenure.
Vavassors, that is, mesne tenants, are particularly men-
tioned in one enumeration of barons attending the court.
In some counties a limitation to tenants in capite would
have left this important tribunal very deficient in num-
bers. And as in all our law-books we find the county
court composed of freeholders, we may reasonably de-
mand evidence of two changes in its constitution, which
the adherents to the theory of restrained representation
must combine — one which excluded all freeholders ex-
cept those who held immediately of the crown ; another
which restored them. The notion that the county court
was the kings court baron (Report, p. 150), and thus
bore an analogy to that of the lord in every manor,
whether it rests on any modem legal authority or not,
seems delusive. The court baron was essentially a
feudal institution ; the county court was from a different
source ; it was old Teutonic, and subsisted in this and
other countries before the feudal jurisdictions had taken
root. It is a serious error to conceive that, because
many great alterations were introduced by the Normans,
there was nothing left of the old system of society . d

It may, however, be naturally inquired why, if the

d A charter of Henry I., published in rarum, si est inter barones meos domini-
the new edition of Rymer (i. p. 12), cos, tractetur placitum in curea mea. Et
fully confirms what is here said. Scia- si est inter vavassores duorum domino*
tis quod concede et praecipio, ut a mode rum, tractetur in comitatu. Et hoc
eomitatus mei et hundreda in illis locis duello fiat, nisi in eis remanserit Et
et iisdem terminis sedeant, sicut sederunt volo et praecipio, ut omnes de comitatu
in tempore regia Edwardi, et non aliter. eant ad eomitatus et hundreda, sicut
Ego enim, quando voluero, faciam ea fecerunt in tempore regis Edwardi. But
satis summoned propter mea dominica it is also easily proved from the Leges
necessaria ad voluntatem meam. Et si Hcnrici Primi.
modo exurgat placitum de divisiuue ter-

218

ELECTION OF KNIGHTS.

Notes to

king’s tenants in chief were exclusively members of the
national council before the era of county representation,
they did not retain that privilege; especially if we con-
ceive, as seems on the whole probable, that the knights
chosen in 38 Henry III. were actually representatives
of the military tenants of the crown. The answer might
be that these knights do not appear to have been elected
in the county court ; and when that mode of choosing
knights of the shire was adopted, it was but consonant
to the increasing spirit of liberty, and to the weight
also of the barons, whose tenants crowded the court, that
no freeholder should be debarred of his equal suffrage.
But this became the more important, and we might
almost add necessary, when the feudal aids were re-
placed by subsidies on movables ; so that, unless the
mesne freeholders could vote at county elections, they
would have been taxed without their consent and placed
in a worse condition than ordinary burgesses. I his of
itself seems almost a decisive argument to prove that
they must have joined in the election of knights of the
shire after the Confirmatio Chartarum. If we were to go
down so late as Richard II., and some pretend that the
mesne freeholders did not vote before the reign of
Henry IV., we find Chaucers franklin, a vavassor,
capable even of sitting in parliament for his shire. For
I do not think Chaucer ignorant of the proper meaning
of that word. And Allen says (Edinb. Rev. xxviii.
145 )_>In the earliest records of the house of com-
mons we have found many instances of suh- vassals who
have represented their counties in parliament.

If, however, it should be suggested that the practice
of admitting the votes of mesne tenants at county elec-
tions may have crept in by degrees, partly by the con-
stitutional principle of common consent, partly on ac-
count of the broad demarcation of tenants in capite by
knight-service from barons, which the separation of the
houses of parliament produced, thus tending, by dimin-
ishing the importance of the former, to bring them down
to the level of other freeholders; partly, also, through
the operation of the statute Quia Emptores (18 Edward
I.), which, by putting an end to subinfeudation, created
a new tenant of the crown upon every alienation of
land, however partial, by one who was such already,

Chap. VIII.

municipal rights.

219

and thus both multiplied their numbers and lowered their
dignity ; this supposition, though incompatible with the
argument built on the nature of the county court, would be
sufficient to explain the facts, provided we do not date the
establishment of the new usage too low. The Lords’ com-
mittee themselves, after much wavering, come to the con-
clusion that “ at length, if not always, two persons were
elected by all the freeholders of the county, whether
holding in chief of the crown or of others ” (p. 331).
This they infer from the petitions of the commons that
the mesne tenants should be charged with the wages of
knights of the shire ; since it would not be reasonable
to levy such wages from those who had no voice in the
election. They ultimately incline to the hypothesis
that the change came in silently, favoured by the grow-
ing tendency to enlarge the basis of the constitution,
and by the operation of the statute Quia Emptores , which
may not have been of inconsiderable influence. It ap-
pears by a petition in 51 Edward III. that much confu-
sion had arisen with respect to tenures ; and it was fre-
quently disputed whether lands were held of the king
or of other lords. This question would often turn on
the date of alienation ; and, in the hurry of an election,
the bias being always in favour of an extended suffrage,
it is to be supposed that the sheriff would not reject a
claim to vote which he had not leisure to investigate.

Note IV. Page 21.

It now appears more probable to me than it did that
some of the greater towns, but almost unquestionably
London, did enjoy the right of electing magistrates with
a certain jurisdiction before the Conquest. The notion
which I found prevailing among the writers of the last
century, that the municipal privileges of towns on the
continent were merely derived from charters of the
twelfth century, though I was aware of some degree of
limitation which it required, swayed me too much in
estimating the condition of our own burgesses. And I
must fairly admit that I have laid too much stress on
the silence of Domesday Book ; which, as has been
justly pointed out, does not relate to matters of internal

220

MUNICIPAL RIGHTS

Notes ro

government, unless when they involve some rights of
property.

I do not conceive, nevertheless, that the municipal
government of Anglo-Saxon boroughs was analogous to
that generally established in our corporations from the
reign of Henry II. and his successors. - The real pre-
sumption has been acutely indicated by Sir F. Palgrave,
arising from the universal institution of the court-1 eet,
which gave to an alderman, or otherwise denominated
officer, chosen by the suitors, a jurisdiction, in conjunc-
tion with themselves as a jury, over the greater part
of civil disputes and criminal accusations, as well as
general police, that might arise within the hundred.
Wherever the town or borough was too large to be
included within a hundred, this would imply a distinct
jurisdiction, which may of course be called municipal.
It would be similar to that which, till lately, existed in
some towns — an elective high bailiff or principal magis-
trate, without a representative body of aldermen and
councillors. But this is more distinctly proved with
respect to London, which, as is well known, does not
appear in Domesday, than as to any other town. It was
divided into wards, answering to hundreds in the
county ; each having its own wardmote, or leet, under
its elected alderman. “ The city of London, as w r ell
within the v/alls, as its liberties without the walls, has
been divided from time immemorial into wards, bearing
nearly the same relation to the city that the hundred
anciently did to the shire. Each ward is, for certain
purposes, a distinct jurisdiction. The organisation of
the existing municipal constitution of the city is, and
always has been, as far as can be traced, entirely
founded upon the ward system.” (Introduction to
the French Chronicle of London. — Camden Society,
1844 .)

Sir F. Palgrave extends this much further: — “ There
were certain districts locally included within the
hundreds, which nevertheless constituted independent
bodies politic. The burgesses, the tenants, the resiants
of the king’s burghs and manors in ancient demesne,
owed neither suit nor service to the hundred leet.
They attended at their own leet, which differed in no
essential respect from the leet of the hundred. The

Chap. VIII.

OF TOWNS.

221

principle of frank-pledge required that each friborg
should appear by its head as its representative; and
consequently, the jurymen of the leet of the burgh or
manor are usually described under the style of tlie
twelve chief pledges. The legislative and remedial
assembly of the burgh or manor was constituted by the
meeting of the heads of its component parts. The port-
reeve, constable, headborough, bailiff, or other the
chief executive magistrate, was elected or presented by
the leet jury. Offences against the law were repressed
by their summary presentments. They who were
answerable to the community for the breach of the
peace punished the crime. Eesponsibility and autho-
rity were conjoined. In their legislative capacity they
bound their fellow-townsmen by making by-laws.”
(Edin. Itov. xxxvi. 309.) “ Domesday Book,” he says

afterwards, “ does not notice the hundred court, or the
county-court ; because it was unnecessary to inform the
king or his justiciaries of the existence of the tribunals
which were in constant action throughout all the land.
It was equally unnecessary to make a return of the leets
which they knew to be inherent in every burgh. Where
any special municipal jurisdiction existed, as in Chester,
Stamford, and Lincoln, then it became necessary that
the franchise should be recorded. The twelve lagemen
in the two latter burghs were probably hereditary aider-
men. In London and in Canterbury aldermen occa-
sionally held their sokes by inheritance.® The negative
evidence extorted out of Domesday has, therefore, little
weight.” (p. 313.)

It seems, however, not unquestionable whether this
representation of an Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Norman
municipality is not urged rather beyond the truth. The
portreeve of London, their principal magistrate, appears
to have been appointed by the crown. It was not till
1188 that Henry Fitzalwyn, ancestor of the present
Lord Beaumont/ became the first mayor of London. But

0 See the ensuing part of this The name Ahvyn appears rather Saxon
note. than Norman, so that we may presume

f This pedigree is elaborately , and with the first mayor to have been of English
pious care, traced by Mr. Stapleton, in descent ; but whether he were a merchant,
his excellent introduction to the old or a landholder living in the city, must
chronicle of London, already quoted, be undecided.

222

MUNICIPAL RIGHTS

Notes to

he also was nominated by the crown, and remained
twenty-four years in office. In the same year the first
sheriffs are said to have been made ( facti ). But John,
immediately after his accession in 1199, granted the
citizens leave to choose their own sheriffs. And his
charter of 1215 permits them to elect annually their
mayor. (Maitland’s Hist, of London, p. 74, 76.) We
read, however, under the year 1200, in the ancient
chronicle lately published, that twenty-five of the most
discreet men of the city were chosen and sworn to
advise for the city, together with the mayor. These
were evidently different from the aldermen, and are the
original common council of the city. They were
perhaps meant in a later entry (1229): — “ Omnes
aldermanni et magnates civitatis per assensum univer-
sorurn civium,” who are said to have agreed never to
permit a sheriff to remain in office during two consecu-
tive years.

The city and liberties of London were not wholly
under the jurisdiction of the several wardmotes and
their aldermen. Landholders, secular and ecclesiastical,
possessed their exclusive sokes, or jurisdictions, in parts
of both. One of these has left its name to the ward of
Portsoken. The prior of the Holy Trinity, in right of
this district, ranked as an alderman, and held a regular
wardmote. The wards of Farringdon are denominated
from a family of that name, who held a part of them by
hereditary right as their territorial franchise. These
sokes gave way so gradually before the power of the
citizens, with whom, as may be supposed, a perpetual
conflict was maintained, that there were nearly thirty
of them in the early part of the reign of Henry III., and
upwards of twenty in that of Edward I. With the
exception of Portsoken, they were not commensurate
with the city wards, and we find the juries of the wards,
in the third of Edward I., presenting the sokes as
liberties enjoyed by private persons or ecclesiastical
corporations, to the detriment of the crown. But, though
the lords of these sokes trenched materially on the ex-
clusive privileges of the city, it is remarkable that, no
condition but inhabitancy being required in the thir-
teenth century for civic franchises, both they and their •
tenants were citizens, having individually a voice in

Chap. VIII.

OF TOWNS.

223

municipal affairs, though exempt from municipal juris-
diction. I have taken most of this paragraph from a
valuable though short notice of the state of London in
the thirteenth century, published in the fourth volume
of the Archaeological Journal (p. 273).

The inference which suggests itself from these facts
is that London, for more than two centuries after the
Conquest, was not so exclusively a city of traders, a
democranc municipality, as we have been wont to con-
ceive. And as this evidently extends back to the
Anglo-Saxon period, it both lessens the improbability
that the citizens bore at times a part in political affairs,
and exhibits them in a new light, as lords and tenants of
lords, as well as what of course they were in part,
engaged in foreign and domestic commerce. It will
strike every one, in. running over the list of mayors and
sheriffs in the thirteenth century, that a large proportion
of the names are French ; indicating, perhaps, that the
territorial proprietors whose sokes were intermingled
with the city had influence enough, through birth and
wealth, to obtain an election. The general polity,
Saxon and Norman, was aristocratic ; whatever infusion
there might be of a more popular scheme of government,
and much certainly there was, could not resist, even if
resistance had been always the people's desire, the joint
predominance of rank, riches, military habits, and
common alliance, which the great baronage of the realm
enjoyed. London, nevertheless, from its populousness,
and the usual character of cities, was the centre of a
democratic power, which, bursting at times into pre-
cipitate and needless tumult easily repressed by force,
kept on its silent course till, near the end of the
thirteenth century, the rights of the citizens and bur-
gesses in the legislature were constitutionally esta-
blished. [1848.]

Note Y. Page 26.

If Fitz-Stephen rightly informs us that in London
there were 126 parish churches, besides 13 conventual
ones, we may naturally think the population much

224 POPULATION OF LONDON. Notes to

underrated at 40,000. But the fashion of building
churches in cities was so general, that we cannot apply
a standard from modem times. Norwich contained
sixty parishes.

Even under Henry II., as we find by Fitz-Stephen, the
prelates and nobles had town houses. “ Ad haec omnes
fere episcopi, abbates, et magnates Anglise, quasi cives
et municipes sunt urbis Lundoniae ; sua ibi Jiabentes
ledificia prseclara ; ubi se recipiunt, ubi divites impensas
faciunt, ad concilia, ad conventus celebres in urbem
evocati, a domino rege vel metropolitano suo, seu pro-
priis tracti negotiis.” The eulogy of London by this
writer is very curious ; its citizens were thus early
distinguished by their good eating, to which they added
amusements less congenial to later liverymen, hawking,
cock-fighting, and much more. The word cockney is not
improbably derived from cocayne> the name of an imagi-
nary land of ease and.jollity.

The city of London within the walls was not wholly
built, many gardens and open spaces remaining. And
the houses were never more than a single story above the
ground-floor, according to the uniform type of English
dwellingr in the twelfth and following centuries. On
the Qfner hand, the liberties contained many inhabit-
ants ; tb£ streets were narrower than since the fire of
1666 ; and the vast spaces now occupied by warehouses
might* have been covered by dwelling-houses. Forty
thousand, on the whole, seems rather a low estimate for
these two centuries ; but it is impossible to go beyond
the vaguest conjecture.

The population of Paris in the middle ages has been
estimated with as much diversity as that of London.
M. Dulaure, on the basis of the taille in 1313, reckons
the inhabitants at 49,110. g But he seems to have made
unwarrantable assumptions where his data ’were defi-
cient. M. Guerard, on the other hand (Documens
In&lits, 1841), after long calculations, brings the
population of the city in 1292 to 215,861. 'This is
certainly very much more than we could assign to
London, or probably any European city ; and, in fact,
his estimate goes on two arbitrary postulates. The

8 Hist de Paris, vol. Ui. p. 231.

Chap. VIII. EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS. 225

extent of Paris in that age, which is tolerably known,
must be decisive against so high a population. 1 *

The Winton Domesday, in the possession of the
Society of Antiquaries of London, furnishes some im-
portant information as to that city, which, as well as
London, does not appear in the great Domesday Book.
This record is of the reign of Henry I. Winchester had
been, as is well known, the capital of the Anglo-Saxon
kings. It has been observed that “ the opulence of the
inhabitants may possibly be gathered from the frequent
recurrence of the trade of goldsmith in it, and the popu-
lousness of the town from the enumeration of the
streets.” (Cooper’s Public Records, i. 226.) Of these
we find sixteen. “ In the petition from the city of
Winchester to king Henry VI. in 1450, no less than
nine of these streets are mentioned as having been
ruined.” As York appears to have contained about
10,000 inhabitants under the Confessor, we may pro-
bably compute the population of Winchester at nearly
twice that number.

Note VI. Page 32.

The Lords’ committee extenuate the presumption that
either knights or burgesses sat in any of these parlia-
ments. The “ cunctarum regni civitatum pariter et bur-
gorum potentiores,” mentioned by AVikes in 1269 or 1270,
they suppose to have been invited in order to witness
the ceremony of translating the body of Edward the
Confessor to his tomb newly prepared in Westminster
Abbey (p. 161). It is evident, indeed, that this assembly
acted afterwards as a parliament in levying money. But
the burgesses are not mentioned in this. It cannot,
nevertheless, be presumed from the silence of the his-
torian, who had previously informed us of their presence
at Westminster, that they took no part. It may be,

h John of Troyes says, in 1467, that thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the
from sixty to eighty thousand men ap- houses were still cottages: only four
peared in arms. Dulaure (Hist, de Paris, streets were paved; they were very
vol. iii. p. 605) says this gives 120,000 narrow and dirty, and often inundated
for the whole population ; but it gives by the Seine. Ib. p. 108.
double,' which is incredible* In the
VOL. HI.

Q

226

EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS.

Notes to

perhaps, more doubtful whether they were chosen by
their constituents or merely summoned as “ potentiores.”

The words of the statute of Marlbridge (51 Hen. III.),
which are repeated in French by that of Gloucester
(6 Edw. I.), do not satisfy the committee that there
was any representation either of counties or boroughs.
“ They rather import a selection by the king of the most
discreet men of every degree ” (p. 183). And the statutes
of 13 Edw. I., referring to this of Gloucester, assert it to
have been made by the king, “ with prelates, earls,
barons, and his council,” thus seeming to exclude what
would afterwards have been called the lower house.
The assembly of 1271, described in the Annals of Wa-
verley, “ seems to have been an extraordinary conven-
tion, warranted rather by the particular circumstances
under which the country was placed than by any con-
stitutional law” (p. 173). It was, however, a case of
representation ; and following several of the like nature,
at least as far as counties were concerned, would render
the principle familiar. The committee are even unwilling
to admit that “ la communautd de la terre illocques sum-
mons” in the statute of Westminster I., though expressly
distinguished from the prelates, earls, and barons, ap-
peared in consequence of election (p. 173). But, if not
elected, we cannot suppose less than that all the tenants
in chief, or a large number of them, were summoned;
which, after the experience of representation, was hardly
a probable course.

The Lords* committee, I must still incline to think,
have gone too far when they come to the conclusion
that, t on the whole view of the evidence collected on the
subject, from the 49th of Hen. III. to the 18th of Edw. I.,
there seems strong ground for presuming that, after the
49th of Hen. III., the constitution of the legislative
assembly returned generally to its old course ; that the
writs issued in the 49th of Henry III., being a novelty,
were not afterwards precisely followed, as far as appears,
in any instance ; and that the writs issued in the 11th of
Edw. I., “ for assembling two conventions, at York and
Northampton, of knights, citizens, burgesses, and repre-
sentatives of towns, without prelates, earls, and barons,
were an extraordinary measure, probably adopted for the
occasion, and never afterwards followed ; and that the

Chap. VIII.

EARLIEST WRITS TO TOWNS.

227

writs issued in the 18th of Edw. I., for electing two or
three knights for each shire without corresponding writs
for election of citizens or burgesses, and not directly
founded on or conformable to the writs issued in the
49th of Henry III., were probably adopted for a particular
purpose, possibly to sanction one important law [the
statute Quia Emptores ], and because the smaller tenants
in chief of the crown rarely attended the ordinary legis-
lative assemblies when summoned, or attended in such
small numbers that a representation of them by knights
chosen for the whole shire was deemed advisable, to give
sanction to a law materially affecting all the tenants in
chief, and those holding under them ” (p. 204).

The election of two or three knights for the parliament
of 1 8th Edw. I., which I have overlooked in my text,
appears by an entry on the close roll of that year, directed
to the sheriff of Northumberland ; and it is proved from
the same roll that similar writs were directed to all the
sheriffs in England. We do not find that the citizens
and burgesses were present in this parliament ; and it is
reasonably conjectured that, the object of summoning it
being to procure a legislative consent to the statute Quia
Emptores , which put an end to the subinfeudation of lands,
the towns were thought to have little interest in the
measure. It is, however, another early precedent for
county representation ; and that of 22nd of Edw. I. (see
the writ in Beport of Committee, p. 209) is more regular.
We do not find that the citizens and burgesses were sum-
moned to either parliament.

But, after the 23rd of Edward I., the legislative con-
stitution seems not to have been unquestionably settled,
even in the essential point of taxation. The Confirma-
tion of the Charters, in the 25th year of that reign, while
it contained a positive declaration that no “ aids, tasks,
or prises should be levied in future, without assent of the
realm,” was made in consideration of a grant made by an
assembly in which representatives of cities and boroughs
do not appear to have been present. Yet, though the
words of the charter or statute are prospective, it seems
to have long before been reckoned a clear right of the
subject, at least by himself, not to be taxed without his
consent. A tallage on royal towns and demesnes, never-
theless, was set without authority of parliament four

q 2

228

ANTIQUITY OF

Notes to

years afterwards. This “ seems to show, either that the
king’s right to tax his demesnes at his pleasure was not
intended to be included in the word tallage in that
statute [meaning the supposed statute de tallagio non con-
cedendo], or that the king acted in contravention of it.
But if the king’s cities and boroughs were still liable to
tallage at the will of the crown, it may not have been
deemed inconsistent that they should be required to send
representatives for the purpose of granting a general aid
to be assessed on the same cities and boroughs, together
with the rest of the kingdom, when such general aid was
granted, and yet should be liable to be tallaged at the
will of the crown when no such general aid was granted”
(p. 244).

If in these later years of Edward’s reign the king could
venture on so strong a measure as the imposition of a
tallage without consent of those on whom it was levied,
it is less surprising that no representatives of the com-
mons appear to have been summoned to one parliament,
or perhaps two, in his twenty-seventh year, when some
statutes were enacted. But, as this is merely inferred
from the want of any extant writ, which is also the case
in some parliaments where, from other sources, we can
trace the commons to have been present, little stress
should be laid upon it.

In the remarks which I have offered in these notes on
the Report of the Lords’ Committee, I have generally
abstained from repeating any which Mr. Allen brought
forward. But the reader should have recourse to his
learned criticism in the Edinburgh Review. It will
appear that the committee overlooked not a few im-
portant records, both in the reign of Edward I. and that
of bis son.

Note YII. Page 35.

Two considerable authorities have, since the first
publication of this work, placed themselves, one very
confidently, one much less so, on the side of our older
lawyers and in favour of the antiquity of borough repre-
sentation. Mr. Allen, who, in his review of my volumes
(Edinb. Rev. xxx. 169), observes, as to this point, — -
M We are inclined, in the main, to agree with Mr.

Chap. VIII. BOROUGH REPRESENTATION. 229

Hallam,” lets us know, two or three years afterwards,
that the scale was tending the other way, when, in his
review of the Eeport of the Lords’ Committee, who give
a decided opinion that cities and boroughs were on no
occasion called upon to assist at legislative meetings
before the forty-ninth of Henry III., and are much dis-
posed. to believe that none were originally summoned to
parliament, except cities and boroughs of ancient de-
mesne, or in the hands of the king at the time when they
received the summons, he says, — “ We are inclined to
doubt the first of these propositions, and convinced that
the latter is entirely erroneous.” (Edinb. Eev. xxxv. 30.)
He allows, however, that our kings had no motive to
summon their cities and boroughs to the legislature, for
the purpose of obtaining money, “this being procured
through the justices in eyre, or special commissioners ;
and therefore, if summoned at all, it is probable that the
citizens and burgesses were assembled on particular
occasions only, when their assistance or authority was
wanted to confirm or establish the measures in contem-
plation by the government.” But as he alleges no proof
that this was ever done, and merely descants on the
importance of London and other cities both before and
after the Conquest, and as such an occasional summons
to a great council, for the purpose of advice, would by
no means involve the necessity of legislative consent, we
can hardly reckon this very acute writer among the
positive advocates of a high antiquity for the commons
in parliament.

Sir Francis Palgrave has taken much higher ground,
and his theory, in part at least, would have been hailed
with applause by the parliaments of Charles I. Ac-
cording to this, we are not to look to feudal principles
for our great councils of advice and consent. They were
the aggregate of representatives from the courts-leet of
each shire and each borough, and elected by the juries
to present the grievances of the people and to suggest
their remedies. The assembly summoned by William
the Conqueror appears to him not only, as it did to lord
Hale, “a sufficient parliament,” but a regular one;
“ proposing the law and giving the initiation to the bill
which required the king’s consent.” (Ed. Eev. xxxvi.
327.) “ We cannot,” he proceeds, “ discover any essen-

230

ANTIQUITY OF

Notes to

tial difference between the powers of these juries and the
share of the legislative authority whigh was enjoyed by
the commons at a period when the constitution assumed
a more tangible shape and form.” This is supported with
that copiousness and variety of illustration which dis-
tinguish his theories, even when there hangs over them
something not quite satisfactory to a rigorous inquirer,
and when their absolute originality on a subject so beaten
is of itself reasonably suspicious. Thus we come in a few
pages to the conclusion — “ Certainly there is no theory
so improbable, so irreconcilable to general history or to
the peculiar spirit of our constitution, as the opinions
whioh are held by those who deny the substantial
antiquity of the house of commons. No paradox is so
startling as the assumption that the knights and burgesses
who stole into the great council between the close of the
reign of John and the beginning of the reign of Edward
should convert themselves at once into the third estate
of the realm, and stand before the king and his peers in
possession of powers and privileges which the original
branches of the legislature could neither dispute nor
withstand” (p. 332). “It must not be forgotten that
the researches of all previous writers have been directed
wholly in furtherance of the opinions which have been
held respecting the feudal origin of parliament. No one
has considered it as a common-law court.”

I do not know that it is necessaiy to believe in a
properly feudal origin of parliament, or that this hypo- .
thesis is generally received. The great council of the
Norman kings was, as in common with Sir F. Palgrave
and many others I believe, little else than a continuation
of the witenagemot, the immemorial organ of the Anglo-
Saxon aristocracy in their relation to the king. It might
be composed, perhaps, more strictly according to feudal
principles ; but the royal thanes had always been con-
senting parties. Of the representation of courts-leet we
may require better evidence : aldermen of London, or
persons bearing that name, perhaps as landowners rather
than citizens (see a former note), may possibly have been
occasionally present ; but it is remarkable that neither
in historians nor records do we find this mentioned ; that
aldermeny in the municipal sense, are never enumerated
among the constituents of a witenagemot or a council,

Chap. VIII.

BOROUGH REPRESENTATION.

231

though they must, on the representative theory, have
composed a large portion of both. But, waiving this
hypothesis, which the author seems not here to insist
upon, though he returns to it in the Rise and Progress of
the English Commonwealth, *why is it “ a startling
paradox to deny the substantial antiquity of the house
of commons ” ? By this I understand him to mean that
representatives from counties and boroughs came regu-
larly, or at least frequently, to the great councils of
Saxon and Norman kings. Their indispensable consent
in legislation I do not apprehend him to affirm, but rather
the reverse : — “ The supposition that in any early period
the burgesses had a voice in the solemn acts of the legis-
lature is untenable.” (Rise and Progress, &c., i. 314.)
But they certainly did, at one time or other, obtain this
right, “ or convert themselves,” as he expresses it, “ into
the third estate of the realm;” so that upon any hypo*
thesis a great constitutional change was wrought in the
powers of |lie commons. The revolutionary character
of Montfort’s parliament in the 49th of Hen. III. would
sufficiently account both for the appearance of repre-
sentatives from a democracy so favourable to that bold
reformer and for the equality of power with which it was
probably designed to invest them. But whether in the
more peaceable times of Edward I. the citizens or bur-
gesses were recognised as essential parties to every legis-
lative measure, may, as I have shown, be open to much
doubt.

I cannot upon the whole overcome the argument from
the silence of all historians, from the deficiency of all
proof as to any presence of citizens and burgesses, in a
representative character as a house of commons, before
the 49th year of Henry III. ; because after this time
historians and chroniclers exactly of the same character
as the former, or even less copious and valuable, do not
omit to mention it. We are accustomed in the sister
kingdoms, so to speak, of the continent, founded on the
same Teutonic original, to argue against the existence of
representative councils, or other institutions, from the
same absence of positive testimony. No one believes
that the three estates of France were called together
before the time of Philip the Fair. No one strains the
representation of cities in the cortes of Castile beyond the

232

AUTHORITY OF THE

Notes to

date at which we discover its existence by testimony. It
is true that unreasonable inferences may be made from
what is usually called negative evidence ; but how
readily and how often are we deceived by a reliance on
testimony ! In many instances the negative conclusion
carries with it a conviction equal to a great mass of
affirmative proof. And such I reckon the inference from
the language of Roger Hoveden, of Matthew Paris, and
so many more who speak of councils and parliaments full
of prelates and nobles, without a syllable of the burgesses.
Either they were absent, or they were too insignificant
to be named ; and in that case it is hard to perceive any
motive for requiring their attendance.

Note YIII. Page 42.

A record, which may be read in Brady’s History of
England (vol. ii. Append, p. 66) and in ltymer (t. iv.
p, 1237), relative to the proceedings on Edward II.’s
flight into Wales and subsequent detention, recites that,
“ the king having left his kingdom without government,
and gone away withnotorious enemies of the queen, prince,
and realm, divers prelates, earls, barons, and knights,
then being at Bristol in the presence of the said queen
and duke (prince Edward, duke of Cornwall), by the assent
of the whole commmalty of the realm there being , unanimously
elected the said duke to be guardian of the said kingdom ;
so that the said duke and guardian should rule and
govern the said realm in the name and by the authority
of the king his father, he being thus absent.” But the
king being taken and brought back into England, the
power thus delegated to the guardian ceased of course ;
whereupon the bishop of Hereford was sent to press the
king to permit that the great seal, which he had with
him, the prince having only used his private seal, should
be used in all things that required it. Accordingly the
king sent the great seal to the queen and prince. The
bishop is said to have been thus commissioned to fetch
the seal by the prince and queen, and by the said prelates
and peers, with the assent of the said commonalty then being at
Hereford . It is plain that these were mere words of
course ; for no parliament had been convoked, and np

Chap. VIII.

HOUSE OF COMMONS.

233

proper representatives could have been either at Bristol
or Hereford. However, this is a very curious record,
inasmuch as it proves the importance attached to the
forms of the constitution at this period.

The Lords’ committee dwell much on an enactment
in the parliament held at York in 15 Edw. II. (1322),
which they conceived to be the first express recognition
of the constitutional powers of the lower house. It was
there enacted that “for ever thereafter all manner of
ordinances or provisions made by the subjects of the king
or his heirs, by any power or authority whatsoever, con-
cerning the royal power of the king or his heirs, or
against the estate of the crown, should be void and of no
avail or force whatsoever ; but the matters to be esta-
blished for the estate of the king and of his heirs, and for
the estate of the realm and of the people, should be
treated, accorded, and established in parliament by the
king, and by the assent of the prelates, earls, and
barons, and the commonalty of the realm, according
as had been before accustomed. This proceeding, there-
fore, declared the legislative authority to reside only in
the king, with the assent of the prelates, earls, and
barons, and commons assembled in parliament ; and that
every legislative act not done by that authority should
be deemed void and of no effect. By whatever violence
this statute may have been obtained, it declared the Con-
stitutional law of the realm on this important subject.”
(p. 282.) The violence, if resistance to the usurpation of
a subject is to be called such, was on the part of the king,
who had just sent the earl of Lancaster to the scaffold,
and the present enactment was levelled at the ordinances
which had been forced upon the crown by his faction.
The lords ordainers, nevertheless, had been appointed
with consent of the commons, as has been mentioned in
the text; so that this provision in 15 Edward II. seems
rather to limit than to enhance the supreme power of
parliament , if it were meant to prohibit any future enact-
ment of the same kind by its sole authority. But the
statute is declaratory in its nature ; nor can we any more
doubt that the legislative authority was reposed in the
king, lords, and commons before this era than that it was
so ever afterwards. Unsteady as the constitutional usage
had been through the reign of Edward L, and willing as

234

BARONS IN PARLIAMENT :

Notes to

both he and his son may have been to prevent its com-
plete establishment, the necessity of parliamentary con-
sent both for levying money and enacting laws must have
become an article of the public creed before his death.
If it be true that even after this declaratory statute laws
were made without the assent or presence of the commons,
as the Lords’ committee incline to hold (p. 285, 286,
287), it was undeniably an irregular and unconstitutional
proceeding ; but this can only show that we ought to be
very slow in presuming earlier proceedings of the same
nature to have been more conformable to the spirit of the
existing constitution. The Lords’ committee too often
reason from the fact to the right, as well as from the
words to the fact ; both are fallacious, and betray them
into some vacillation and perplexity. They do not, how-
ever, question, on the whole, but that a new constitution
of the legislative assemblies of the realm had been intro-
duced before the 15th year of Edward II., and that “ the
practice had prevailed so long before as to give it, in the
opinion of the parliament then assembled, the force and
effect of a custom, which the parliament declared should
thereafter be considered as established law.” (p. 293.)
This appears to me rather an inadequate exposition of the
public spirit, of the tendency towards enlarging the basis
of the constitution, to which the “ practice and custom ”
ovfed. its origin ; but the positive facts are truly stated.

Note IX. Page 124.

Writs are addressed in 11th of Edw. II. “comitibus,
majoribus baronibus, et prselatis,” whence the Lords’
committee infer that the style used in John’s charter
was still preserved (Report, p. 277), And though in
those times there might be much irregularity in issuing
writs of summons, the term “ majores barones” must
have h^d an application to definite persons. Of the
irregularity we may judge by the fact that under Edward
I. about eighty were generally summoned ; under his son
never so many as fifty, sometimes less than forty, as may
be seen in Dugdale’s Summonitiones ad Parliamentum.
The committee endeavour to draw an inference from this
against a subsisting right of tenure. But if it is meant

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF THEIR SUMMONS.

235

that the king had an acknowledged prerogative of omit-
ting any baron at his discretion, the higher English
nobility must have lost its notorious privileges, sanctioned
by long usage, by the analogy of all feudal governments,
and by the charter of John, which, though not renewed
in terms, nor intended to be retained in favour of the
lesser barons, or tenants in capite , could not, relatively to
the rights of the superior order, have been designedly
relinquished.

The committee wish to get rid of tenure as conferring
a right to summons ; they also strongly doubt whether
the summons conferred an hereditary nobility ; but they
assert that, in the 15th of Edward III., “ those who may
have been deemed to have been in the reign of J ohn
distinguished as majores barones by the honour of a personal
writ of summons, or by the extent and influence of their
property, from the other tenants in chief of the crown,
were now clearly become, with the earls and the newly
created dignity of duke, a distinct body of men denomi-
nated peers of the land, and having distinct personal
rights; while the other tenants in chief, whatsoever
their rights may have been in the reign of John, sunk
into the general mass.” (p. 314.)

The appellation “ peers of the land” is said to occur
for the first time in 14 Edw. II. (p. 281), and we find
them very distinctly in the proceedings against Bereford
and others at the beginning of the next reign. They
were, of course, entitled to trial by their own order.
But whether all laymen summoned by particular writs to
parliament were at that time considered as peers, and
triable by the rest as such, must be questionable, unless
we could assume that the writ of summons already
ennobled the blood, which is at least not the opinion of
the committee. If, therefore, the writ did not constitute
an hereditary peer, nor tenure in chief by barony give a
right to sit in parliament, we should have a difficulty in
finding any determinate estate of nobility at all, exclusive
of earls, who were, at all times and without exception,
indisputably noble ; an hypothesis manifestly paradoxical,
and contradicted by history and law. If it be said that
prescription was the only title, this maybe so far granted
that the majores barones had by prescription, antecedent to
any statute or charter, been summoned to parliament;

236

BARONS IN PARLIAMENT :

Notes to

but this prescription would not be broken by the omission,
through negligence or policy, of an individual tenant by
barony in a few parliaments. The prescription was pro-
perly in favour of the class, the majores barones generally,
and as to them it was perfect, extending itself in right,
if not always in fact, to every one who came within its
scope.

In the Third Report of the Lords’ Committee, appar-
ently drawn by the same hand as the Second, they “ con-
jecture that after the establishment of the commons’
house of parliament as a body by election, separate and
distinct from the lords,' all idea of a right to a writ of
summons to parliament by reason of tenure had ceased,
and that the dignity of baron, if not conferred by patent,
was considered as derived only from the king’s writ of
summons.” (Third Report, p. 226.) Yet they have not
only found many cases of persons summoned by writ
several times whose descendants have not been summoned,
and hesitate even to approve the decision of the house on
the Clifton barony in 1673, when it was determined that
the claimant’s ancestor, by writ of summons and sitting
in parliament, was a peer, but doubt whether “ even at
this day the doctrine of that case ought to be considered
as generally applicable, or may be limited by time and
circumstances.” 1 (p. 33.)

It seems, with much deference to more learned investi-
gator’s, rather improbable that, either before or after the
regular admission of the knights and burgesses by repre-
sentation, and consequently the constitution of a distinct
lords’ house of parliament, a writ of summons could have
been lawfully withheld at the king’s pleasure from any
One holding such lands by barony as rendered him noto-
riously one of the majores barones . Nor will this be much

» This doubt was soon afterwards
changed into a proposition, strenuously
maintained by the supposed compiler of
these Reports, lord Redesdale, on the
claim to the barony of L’Isle in 1829.
The ancestor had been called by writ to
several parliaments of Edw. III. ; and
having only a daughter, the negative
argument from the omission of his pos-
terity is of little value; for though the
husbands of heiresses were frequently
summoned, this does not seem to have

been an universal practice. It was held
by lord Redesdale, that, at least until
the statute of 5 Richard II. c. 4, no here-
ditary or even personal right to the
peerage was created by the writ of sum-
mons. The house of lords rejected the
claim, though the language of their reso-
lution is not conclusive as to the prin-
ciple. The . opinion of lord R. has
been ably impugned by Sir Harris Ni-
colas, in his Report of the L’Isle Peerage,
1829 .

Chap. VIII. NATURE OF THEIR SUMMONS. 237

affected by arguments from the inexpediency or supposed
anomaly of permitting the right of sitting as a jpeer of
parliament to be transferred by alienation. The Lords’
committee dwell at length upon them. And it is true
that, in our original feudal constitution, the fiefs of the
crown could not be alienated without its consent. But
when this was obtained, when a barony had passed by
purchase, it would naturally draw with it, as an incident
of tenure, the privilege of being summoned to parliament,
or, in language more accustomed in those times, the
obligation of doing suit and service to the king in his
high court. Nor was the alienee, doubtless, to be taxed
without his own consent, any more than another tenant
in capite. What incongruity, therefore, is there in the
supposition that, after tenants in fee simple acquired by
statute the power of alienation without previous consent
of the crown, the new purchaser stood on the same footing
in all other respects as before the statute ? It is also
much to be observed that the claim to a summons might
be gained by some methods of purchase, using that word,
of course, in, the legal sense. Thus the husbands of
heiresses of baronies were frequently summoned, and sat
as tenants by courtesy after the wife’s death ; though it
must be owned that the committee doubt, in their Third
Beport (p. 47), whether tenancy by courtesy of a dignity
was ever allowed as a right. Thus, too, every estate
created in tail male was a diversion of the inheritance by
the owner’s sole will from its course according to law.
Yet in the case of the barony of Abergavenny, even so
late as the reign of James I., the heir male, being in
seisin of the lands, was called by writ as baron, to the
exclusion of the heir general. Surely this was an
authentic recognition, not only of baronial tenure as the
foundation of a right to sit in parliament, but of its alien-
ability by the tenant. 11

If it be asked whether the posterity of a baron aliening
the lands which gave him a right to be summoned to
the king’s court would be entitled to the privileges of
peerage by nobility of blood, it is true that, according

The Lords' committee (Second Re- the Fanes for the particular barony in
port, p. 436) endeavour to elude the force question ; though some satisfaction was
of this authority ; but it manifestly ap- made to the claimant of the latter family
pears that the Nevilles were preferred to by calling her to a different peerage.

238

BARONS IN PARLIAMENT :

Notes to

to Collins, whose opinion the committee incline to fol-
low, there are instances of persons in such circumstances
being summoned. But this seems not to prove any-
thing to the purpose. The king, no one doubts, from
the time of Edward I., used to summon by writ many
who had no baronial tenure ; and the circumstance of
having alienated a barony could not render any one
incapable of attending parliament by a different title.
It is very hard to determine any question as to times of
much irregularity ; but it seems that the posterity of one
who had parted with his baronial lands would not, in
those early times, as a matter of course, remain noble.
A right by tenure seems to exclude a right by blood ;
not necessarily, because two collateral titles may co-
exist, but in the principle of the constitution. A feudal
principle was surely the more ancient ; and what could
be more alien to this than a baron, a peer, an hereditary
counsellor, without a fief? Nobility, that is, gentility
of birth, might be testified by a pedigree or a bearing ;
but a peer was to be in arms for the crown, to grant his
own money as well as that of others, to lead his vassals,
to advise, to exhort, to restrain the sovereign. ‘The new
theory came in by degrees, but in the decay of every
feudal idea ; it was the substitution of a different pride
of aristocracy for that of baronial wealth and power ; a

{ )ride nourished by heralds, more peaceable, more indo-
ent, more accommodated to the rules of fixed law and
vigorous monarchy. It is difficult to trace the progress
of this theory, which rested on nobility of blood, but
yet so remarkably modified by the original principle of
tenure, that the privileges of this nobility were ever
confined to the actual possessor, and did not take his
kindred out of the class of commoners. This sufficiently
demonstrates that the phrase is, so to say, catachrestic,
not used in a proper sense; inasmuch as the actual
seisin of the peerage as an hereditament, whether by
writ or by patent, is as much requisite at present for
nobility, as the seisin of an estate by barony was in the
reign of Henry III.

Tenure by barony appears to have been recognised by
the house of lords in the reign of Henry VI., when the
earldom of Arundel was claimed as annexed to the
“ castle, honour, and lordship aforesaid.” The Lords 1

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF THEIR SUMMONS.

239

committee have elaborately disproved the allegations of
descent and tenure, on which this claim was allowed.
(Second Keport, p. 406-426.) But all with which we
are concerned is the decision of the crown and of the
house in the 11th year of Henry VI., whether it were
right or wrong as to the particular facts of the case. .
And here we find that the king, by the advice and
assent of the lords, “ considering that Richard Fitzalan,
&c., was seised of the castle, honour, and lordship in fee,
and by reason of his possession thereof, without any
other reason or creation, was earl of Arundel, and held
the name, style, and honour of earl of Arundel, and the
place and seat of earl of Arundel in parliament and
councils of the king,” &c., admits him to the same seat
and place as his ancestors, earls of Arundel, had held.
This was long afterwards confirmed by act of parlia-
ment (3 Car. I.), reciting the dignity of earl of Arundel
to be real and local, &c., and settling the title on certain
persons in tail, with provisions against alienation of the
castle and honour. This appears to establish a tenure
by barony in Arundel, as a recent determination had
done in Abergavenny. Arundel was a very peculiar
instance of an earldom by tenure. For we cannot doubt
that all earls were peers of parliament by virtue of that
rank, though, in fact, all held extensive lands of the
crown. But in 1669 a new doctrine, which probably
had long been floating among lawyers and in the house
of lords, was laid down by the king in council on a
claim to the title of Fitzwalter. The nature of a barony
by tenure having been discussed, it was found “ to have
been discontinued for many ages, and not in being”
(a proposition not very tenable, if we look at the Aber-
gavenny case, even setting aside that of Arundel as
peculiar in its character, and as settled by statute);
“ and so not fit to be received, or to admit any pretence
of right to succession thereto.” It is fair to observe
that some eminent judges were present on this occasion.
The committee justly say that “this decision” (which,
after all, was not in the house of lords) “ may perhaps
be considered as amounting to a solemn opinion that,
although in early times the right to a writ of summons
to parliament as a baron may have been founded on
tenure, a contrary practice had prevailed for ages, and

240

BARONS IN PARLIAMENT :

Notes to

that, therefore, it was not to be taken as then forming
part of the constitutional law of the land.” (p. 446.)
Thus ended barony by tenure. The final decision, for
such it has been considered, and recent attempts to
revive the ancient doctrine have been defeated, has
prevented many tedious investigations of claims to
baronial descent, and of alienations in times long past.
For it could not be pretended that every fraction of a
barony gave a right to summons; and, on the other
hand, alienations of parcels, and descents to co-parceners,
must have been common, and sometimes difficult to dis-
prove. It was held, indeed, by some, that the caput
baronwe, or principal lordship, contained, as it were, the
vital principle of the peerage, and that its owner was
the true baron ; but this assumption seems uncertain.

It is not very easy to reconcile this peremptory denial
of peerage by tenure with the proviso in the recent
statute taking away tenure by knight-service, and, in-
asmuch as it converts all tenure into socage, that also
by barony, “ that this act shall not infringe or hurt any
title of honour, feudal or other, by which any person
hath or may have right to sit in the lords’ house of
parliament, as to his or their title of honour, or sitting
in parliament, and the privilege belonging to them as
peers.” (Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 24, s. 11.)

Surely this clause was designed to preserve the inci
dent to baronial tenure, the privilege of being summoned
to parliament, while it destroyed its original root, the
tenure itself. The privy council, in their decision on
the Fitzwalter claim, did not allude to this statute,
probably on account of the above proviso, and seem to
argue that, if tenure by barony was no longer in being,
the privilege attached to it must have been extinguished
also. It is, however, observable that tenure by barony
is not taken away by the statute, except by implication.
No act indeed can be more loosely drawn than this, which
was to change essentially the condition of landed pro-
perty throughout the kingdom. It literally abolishes
all tenure in capite; though this is the basis of the
crown’s right to escheat, and though lands in common
socage, which the act with a strange confusion opposes
to socage in capite , were as much holden of the king or
other lord as those by knight-service. Whether it was

CjaAP. VIII.

COURT OF CHANCERY.

241

intended by the silence about tenure by barony to pass
it over as obsolete, or this arose from negligence alone,
it cannot be doubted that the proviso preserving the
right of sitting in parliament by a feudal honour was
introduced in order to save that privilege, as well for
Arundel and Abergavenny as for any other that might
be entitled to it. m

Note X. Page 142.

The equitable jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery
has been lately traced, in some respects, though not for
the special puipose mentioned in the text, higher than
the reign of Eichard II. This great minister of the
crown, as he was at least from the time of the Conquest,”
always till the reign of Edward III. an ecclesiastic of
high dignity, and honourably distinguished as the keeper
of the king’s conscience, was peculiarly intrusted with
the duty of redressing the grievances of the subject, both
when they sprung from misconduct of the government,
through its subordinate officers, and when the injury
had been inflicted by powerful oppressors. He seems
generally to have been the chief or president of the
council, when it exerted that jurisdiction which we have
been sketching in the text, and which will be the subject

m The continuance of barony by tenure
has been controverted by Sir Harris
Nicolas, in some remarks on such a
claim preferred by the present earl
Fitzharding while yet a commoner, in
virtue of the possession of Berkeley
castle, published as an Appendix to his
Report of the L’lsle Peerage. In the
particular case there seem to have been
several difficulties, independently of the
great one, that, in the reign of Charles II.,
barony by tenure had been finally con-
demned. But there is surely a great
general difficulty on the opposite Bide, in
the hypothesis that, while it is acknow-
ledged that there were, in the reigns of
Edward I. and Edward II., certain known
persons holding by barony and called
peers of the realm, it could have been
agreeable to the feudal or to the English
c institution that the king, by refusing to
VOL. III.

the posterity of such barons a writ of
summons to parliament, might deprive
them of their nobility, and reduce them
for ever to the rank of commoners.

n It has been doubted, notwithstand-
ing the authority of Spelman, and some
earlier but rather precarious testimony,
whether the chancellor before the Con-
quest was any more than a scribe or
secretary. Palgrave, in the Quarterly
Review, xxxiv. 291. The Anglo-Saxon
charters, as far as 1 have observed, never
mention him as a witness; which seems
a very strong circumstance. Ingulfus,
indeed, has given a pompous account of
chancellor Turketul ; and, if the history
ascribed to Ingulfus be genuine, the office
must have been of high dignity. Lord
Campbell assumes this in his Lives of
the Chancellors.

R

242

JURISDICTION OF THE

NO'I ES TO

of another note. But he is more prominent when pre-
siding in a separate tribunal as a single judge.

The Court of Chancery is not distinctly to be traced
under Henry III. For a passage in Matthew Paris, who
says of Radulfus de Nevil — “ Erat regis fidelissimus
oancellarius, et inconoussa columna veritatis, singulis
sua jura, prsecipue pauperibus, juste reddens et indilate,”
may be construed of his judicial conduct in the council.
This province naturally, however, led to a separation of
the two powers. And in the reign of Edward I. we find
the king sending certain of the petitions addressed to
him, praying extraordinary remedies, to the chancellor
and master of the rolls, or to either separately, by writ
under the privy seal, which was the usual mode by
which the king delegated the exercise of his prerogative
to his council, directing them to give such remedy as
should appear to be consonant to honesty (or equity,
hmestati ). “ There is reason to believe,’’ says Mr. Spence
(Equitable Jurisdiction, p. 335), “ that this was not a
novelty.” But I do not know upon what grounds this
is believed. Writs, both those of course and others,
issued from Chancery in the same reign. (Palgrave’s
Essay on Kings Council, p. 15.) Lord Campbell has
given a few specimens of petitions to the council, and
answers endorsed upon them, in the reign of Edward I.,
communicated to him by Mr. Hardy from the records of
the Tower. In all these the petitions are referred to
the chancellor for justice. The entry, at least as given
by lord Campbell, is commonly so short that we cannot
always determine whether the petition was on account
of wrongs by the crown or others. The following is
rather more clear than the rest: — “ 18 Edw. I. The
king’s tenants of Aulton complain that Adam Gordon
ejected them from their pasture, contrary to the tenor of
the king’s writ. Eesp. Yeniant partes coram cancellario,
et ostendat ei Adam quare ipsos ejecit, et fiat iis justitia.”
Another is a petition concerning concealment of dower,
for which, perhaps, there was no legal remedy.

In the reign of Edward II. the peculiar jurisdiction
af .the chancellor was still more distinctly marked.
H From petitions and answers lately discovered, it ap-
pears that during this reign the jurisdiction of the
Court of Chancery was considerably extended, as the

Chap. VIII.

COURT OF CHANCERY.

243

* consuetudo eancellarise ’ is often familiarly mentioned.
We find petitions referred to the chancellor in his court,
either separately, or in conjunction with the king's
justices, or the king’s seijeants ; on disputes respecting
the wardship of infants, partition, dower, rent-charges,
tithes, and goods of felons. The chancellor was in full
possession of his jurisdiction over charities, and he
superintended the conduct of coroners. Mere wrongs,
such as malicious prosecutions and trespasses to personal
property , are sometimes the subject of proceedings be-
fore him ; but I apprehend that those were cases where,
from powerful combinations and confederacies, redress
could not be obtained in the courts of common law.”
(Lives of Chanc. vol. i. p. 204.)

Lord Campbell, still with materials furnished by Mr.
Hardy, has given not less than thirty-eight entries dur-
ing the reign of Edward II., where the petition, though
sometimes directed to the council, is referred to the
chancellor for determination. One only of these, so far
as we can judge from their very brief expression, implies
anything of an equitable jurisdiction. It is again a case
of dower, and the claimant is remitted to the Chancery ;
“etfiatsibi ibidem justitia, quia non potest juvari per
communem legem per breve de dote.” This case is in
the Rolls of Parliament (i. 340), and had been previously
mentioned by Mr. Bruce in a learned memoir on the
Court of Star-Chamber. (Archseologia, xxv. 345.) It is
difficult to say whether this fell within the modem rules
of equity, but the general principle is evidently the
same.

. Another petition is from the commonalty of Suffolk to
the council, complaining of false indictments and pre-
sentments in courts-leet. It is answered — “ Si quis
sequi voluerit adversus falsos indicatores et procurators
de falsis indictamentis, sequatur in Cancell, et habebit
remedium consequent. ” Several other entries in this list
are illustrative of the jurisdiction appertaining, in fact at
least, to the council and the chancellor ; and being of so
early a reign form a valuable accession to those which
later records have furnished to Sir Matthew Hale and
others.

The Court of Chancery began to decide causes as a
court of equity, according to Mr. Hardy, in the reign of

r 2

244

JURISDICTION OF THE

Notes to

Edward III., probably about 22 Edw. III. (Introduction
to Close Rolls, p. 28.) Lord Campbell would carry this
jurisdiction higher, and the instances already mentioned
may be sufficient just to prove that it had begun to exist.
It certainly seems no unnatural supposition that the
great principle of doing justice, by which the council
and the chancellor professed to guide their exereise of
judicature, may have led them to grant relief in some of
those numerous instances where the common law was
defective or its rules too technical and unbending. But,
as has been observed, the actual entries, as far as quoted,
do not afford many precedents of equity. Mr. Hardy,
indeed, suggests (p. 25) that the Curia Regis in the Nor-
man period proceeded on equitable principles ; and that
this led to the removal of plaints into it from the county-
court. This is, perhaps, not what we should naturally
presume. The subtle and technical spirit of the Norman
lawyers is precisely that which leads, in legal procedure,
to definite and unbending rules ; while in the lower
courts, where Anglo-Saxon thanes had ever judged by
the broad rules of justice, according to the circumstances
of the case, rather than a strict line of law which did not
yet exist, we might expect to find all the . uncertainty
and inconsistency which belongs to a system of equity,
until, as in England, it has acquired by length of time
the uniformity of law, but none at least of the techni-
cality so characteristic of our Norman common law, and
by which the great object of judicial proceedings was so
continually defeated. This, therefore, does not seem to
me a probable cause of the removal of suits from the
county-court or court-baron to those of W estminster.
The true reason, as I have observed in another place,
was the partiality of these local tribunals. And the
expense of trying a suit before the justices in eyre might
not be very much greater than in the county-court.

I conceive, therefore, that the three supreme courts at
Westminster proceeded upon those rules of strict law
which they had chiefly themselves established ; and this
from the date of their separation from the original Curia
Regis . But whether the king’s council may have given
more extensive remedies than the common law afforded,
as early at least as the reign of Henry HI., is what we
are not competent, apparently, to affirm or deny. We

Chap, VIII.

COURT OF CHANCERY.

245

are at present only concerned with the Court of Chancery.
And it will be interesting to quote the deliberate opinion
of a late distinguished writer, who has taken a different
view of the subject from any of his predecessors.

“After much deliberation,” says lord Campbell, “I
must express my clear conviction that the chancellor’s
equitable jurisdiction is as indubitable and as ancient as
his common-law jurisdiction, and that it may be traced
in a manner equally satisfactory. The silence of Bracton,
Glanvil, Fleta, and other early juridical writers, has been
strongly relied upon to disprove the equitable jurisdic-
tion of the chancellor ; but they as little notice his com-
mon-law jurisdiction, most of them writing during the
subsistence of the Aula Regia ; and they all speak of
the Chancery, not as a court, but merely as an office for
the making and sealing of writs. There are no very early
decisions of the chancellors on points of law any more
than of equity, to be found in the Year-books or old

abridgments By 4 equitable jurisdiction’ must be

understood the extraordinary interference of the chan-
cellor, without common-law process or regard to the
common-law rules of proceeding, upon the petition of a
party grieved who was without adequate remedy in a
court of common law ; whereupon the opposite party was
compelled to appear and to be examined, either personally
or upon written interrogatories : and evidence being
heard on both sides, without the interposition of a jury,
an order was made secundum ceguum et bonum , which was
enforced by imprisonment. Such a jurisdiction had
belonged to the Aula Regia , and was long exercised by
parliament ; and, when parliament was not sitting, by
the king’s ordinary council. Upon the dissolution of the
Aula Regia many petitions, which parliament or the
council could not conveniently dispose of, were referred
to the chancellor, sometimes with and sometimes without
assessors. To avoid the circuity of applying to parlia-
ment or the council, the petition was very soon, in many
instances, addressed originally to the chancellor himself.”
(Lives of Chancellors, i. 7.)

In the latter part of Edward III.’s long reign this
equitable jurisdiction had become, it is likely, of such
frequent exercise, that we may consider the following
brief summary by lord Campbell as probable by analogy

246

JURISDICTION OF THE

Notes to

and substantially true, if not sustained in all respects by
the evidence that has yet been brought to light : — “ The
jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery was now established
in all matters where its own officers were concerned, in
petitions of right where an injury was alleged to be done
to a subject by the king or his officers in relieving against
judgments in courts of law (lord C. gives two instances),
and generally in cases of fraud, accident, and trust.”
(p. 291.)

In the reign of Richard II. the writ of subpoena was in-
vented by John de Waltham, master of the rolls ; and
to this a great importance seems to have been attached
at the time, as we may perceive by the frequent com-
plaints of the commons in parliament, and by the tra-
ditionary abhorrence in which the name of the inventor
was held. “ In reality,” says lord Campbell, “ he first
framed it in its present form when a clerk in Chancery
in the latter end of the reign of Edward III. ; but the
invention consisted in merely adding to the old clause,
Quibusdam certis de causis , the words ‘ Et hoc sub poena
centum librarum nullatenus omittas ; 9 and I am at a loss to
conceive how such importance was attached to it, or
how it was supposed to have brought about so complete
a revolution in equitable proceedings, for the penalty
was never enforced ; and if the party failed to appear,
his default was treated, according to the practice prevail-
ing in our own time, as a contempt of court, and made
the foundation of compulsory process.” (p. 296.)

The commons in parliament, whose sensitiveness to
public grievances was by no means accompanied by an
equal sagacity in devising remedies, had, probably with-
out intention, vastly enhanced the power of the chancel-
lor by a clause in a remedial act passed in the thirty-sixth
year of Edward III., that, “ If any man that feeleth him-
self aggrieved contrary to any of the articles above
written, or others contained in divers statutes, will come
into the Chancery, or any for him, and thereof make his
complaint, he shall presently there have remedy by
force of the said articles or statutes, without elsewhere
pursuing to have remedy.” Yet nothing could be more
obvious than that the breach of any statute was cog-
nizable before the courts of law. And the mischief of
permitting men to be sued vexatiously before the chan-

Chap. VIII.

COURT OF CHANCERY.

247

cellor becoming felt, a statute was enacted, thirty years
indeed after this time (17 Ric. II. c. 6}, analogous
altogether to those in the late reign respecting the juris-
diction of the council, which, reciting that “people be
compelled to come before the king’s council, or in the
Chancery, by writs grounded on untrue suggestions,”
provides that “ the chancellor for the time being, pre-
sently after that such suggestions be duly found and
proved untrue, shall have power to ordain and award
damages, according to his discretion, to him which is so
troubled unduly as aforesaid.” “ This remedy,” lord
Campbell justly remarks, “ which was referred to the
discretion of the chancellor himself, whose jurisdiction
was to be controlled, proved, as might be expected,
wholly ineffectual ; but it was used as a parliamentary
recognition of his jurisdiction, and a pretence for refusing
to establish any other check on it.” (p. 247.)

A few years before this statute the commons had
petitioned (13 Ric. II., Rot. Pari, iii, 269) that the chan-
cellor might make no order against the common law, and
that no one should appear before the chancellor where
remedy was given by the common law. “ This carries
with it an admission,” as lord C. observes, “ that a
power of jurisdiction did reside in the chancellor,, so long
as he did not determine against the common law, nor
interfere where the common law furnished a remedy.
The king’s answer, ‘ that it should continue as the usage
had been heretofore,’ clearly demonstrates that such an
authority, restrained within due bounds, was recognised
by the constitution of the country.” (p. 305.)

The act of 17 Ric. II. seems to have produced a greater
regularity in the proceedings of the court, and put an
end to such hasty interference, on perhaps verbal sug-
gestions, as had given rise to this remedial provision.
From the very year in which the statute was enacted we
find bills in Chancery, and the answers .to them, regu-
larly filed ; the grounds of demanding relief appear, and
the chancellor renders himself in every instance respon-
sible for the orders he has issued, by thus showing that
they came within his jurisdiction. There are certainly
many among the earlier bills in Chancery, which,
according to the statute law and the great principle that
they were determinable in other courts, could not have

248

COURT OF CHANCERY.

Notes to

been beard ; but we are unable to pronounce bow far tbe
allegation usually contained or implied, that justice
could not be bad elsewhere, was founded on the real
circumstances. A calendar of these early proceedings
(in abstract) is printed in the Introduction to the first
volume of the Calendar of Chancery Proceedings in the
Reign of Elizabeth, and may also be found in Cooper’s
Public Records, i. 356.

The struggle, however, in behalf of the common law
was not at an end. It is more than probable that the
petitions against encroachments of Chancery, which fill
the rolls under Henry IV., Henry V., and in the minority
of Henry VI., emanated from that numerous and jealous
body whose interests as well as prejudices were so deeply
affected. Certain it is that the commons, though now
acknowledging an equitable jurisdiction, or rather one
more extensive than is understood by the word “ equit-
able,” in the greatest judicial officer of the fcrown, did
not cease to remonstrate against his transgression of these
boundaries. They succeeded so far, in 1436, as to obtain
a statute (15 Hen. VI. c. 4) in these words : — “For that
divers persons have before this time been greatly vexed
and grieved by writs of subpoena , purchased for matters
determijiable by the common law of this land, to the great
damage of such persons so vexed, in suspension and im-
pediment of the common law as aforesaid ; Our lord the
king doth command that the statutes thereof made shall
be duly observed, according to the form and effect of the
same, and that no writ of subpoena be granted from hence-
forth until surety be found to satisfy the party so grieved
and vexed for his damages and expenses, if so be that the
matter cannot be made good which is contained in the
bill.” It was the intention of the commons, as appears
by the preamble of this statute, and more fully. by their
petition in Rot. Pari. (iv. 101), that the matters con-
tained in the bill on which the subpoena was issued should
be not only true in themselves, but such as could not be
determined at common law. But the king’s answer
appears rather equivocal.

The principle seems nevertheless to have been gene-
rally established, about the reign of Henry VI., that the
Court of Chancery exercises merely a, remedial jurisdic-
tion, not indeed controllable by courts of law, unless

Chap. VIII.

THE KING’S COUNCIL.

249

possibly in snch circumstances as cannot be expected,
but bound by its general responsibility to preserve the
limits which ancient usage and innumerable precedents
have imposed. It was at the end of this reign, and not
in that of Richard II., according to the writer so often
quoted, that the great enhancement of the chancellor’s
authority, by bringing feoffments to uses within it,
opened a new era in the history of our law. And this
the judges brought on themselves by their narrow ad-
herence to technical notions. They now began to dis-
cover this ; and those of Edward IV., as. lord Campbell
well says, were “very bold men,” having repealed the
statute de donis by their own authority in Taltarum’s case
— a stretch of judicial power beyond any that the Court
of Chancery had ventured upon. They were also ex-
ceedingly jealous of that court ; and in one case, reported
in the Year-books (22 Edw. IV. 37), advised a party to
disobey an injunction from the Court of Chancery, telling
him that, if the chancellor committed him to the Fleet,
they would discharge the prisoner by habeas corpus .
(Lord Campbell, p. 394.) The case seems to have been
one where, in modern times, no injunction would have
been granted, the courts of law being competent to apply
a remedy.

Note XI. Page 145.

This intricate subject has been illustrated, since the
first publication of these volumes, in an Essay upon the
original Authority of the King’s Council, by Sir Francis
Palgrave (1834), written with remarkable perspicuity
and freedom from diffusiveness. But I do not yet assent
to the judgment of the author as to the legality of pro-
ceedings before the council, which I have represented as
unconstitutional, and which certainly it was the object
of parliament to restrain.

“ It seems,” he says, “ that in the reign of Hemy III.
the council was considered as a court of peers within the
terms of Magna Charta ; and before which, as a court of
original jurisdiction, the rights of tenants holding in capite
or by barony were to be discussed and decided, and it v
unquestionably exercised a direct jurisdiction over all
the king’s subjects ” (p. 34). The first volume of Close

250

JURISDICTION OF

Notes th

Rolls, published by Mr. Hardy since Sir F. Palgrave’i
Essay, contains no instances of jurisdiction exercised by
the council in the reign of John. But they begin imme*
diately afterwards, in the minority of Henry III. ; so that
we have not only the fullest evidence that the council
took on itself a coercive jurisdiction in matters of law at
that time, but that it had not done so before : for the
Close Rolls of John are so full as to render the negative
argument satisfactory. It will, of course, be understood
that I take the facts on the authority of Mr. Hardy (Intro-
duction to Close Rolls, vol. ii.), whose diligence and
accuracy are indisputable. Thus this exercise of judicial
power began immediately after the Great Charter. And
yet, if it is to be reconciled with the twenty-ninth section,
it is difficult to perceive in what manner that celebrated
provision for personal liberty against the crown, .which
has always been accounted the most precious jewel in
the whole coronet, the most valuable stipulation made at
Runnymede, and the most enduring to later times, could
merit the fondness with which it has been regarded.
“ Non super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi
per legale judicium parium suorum, vel per legem terree.”
If it is alleged that the jurisdiction of the king’s council
was the law of the land, the whole security falls to the
ground and leaves the grievance as it stood, unredressed.
Could the judgment of the council have been reckoned, as
Sir F. Palgrave supposes, a “ judicium parium suorum,”
except perhaps in the case of tenants in chief? The
word is commonly understood of that trial per pais which,
in one form or another, is of immemorial antiquity in our
social institutions.

“ Though this jurisdiction,” he proceeds, “ was more
frequently called into action when parliament was sitting,
still it was no less inherent in the council at all other
times ; and until the middle of the reign of Edward III.
no exception had ever been taken to the form of its pro-
ceedings.” He subjoins indeed in a note, “ Unless the
statute of 5 Edw. III. c. 9, may be considered as an
earlier testimony against the authority of the council
This, however, is by no means clear, and there is no cor
responding petition in the parliament roll from whicl
any further information could be obtained ” (p. 34).

The irresistible conclusion from this passage is, that

Chap. VIII.

THE KING'S COUNCIL.

251

we have been wholly mistaken in supposing the com-
mons under Edward III. and his successors to have
resisted an illegal encroachment of power in the king’s
ordinary council, while it had in truth been exercising
an ancient jurisdiction, never restrained by law and never
complained of by the subject. This would reverse our
constitutional theory to no small degree, and affect so
much the spirit of my own pages, that I cannot suffer it
to pass, coming on an authority so respectable, without
some comment. But why is it asserted that this juris-
diction was inherent in the council? Why are we to
interpret Magna Charta otherwise than according to the
natural meaning of the words and the concurrent voice
of parliament ? The silence of the commons in parlia-
ment under Edward II. as to this grievance will hardly
prove that it was not felt, when we consider how few
petitions of a public nature, during that reign, are on the
rolls. But it may be admitted that they were not so
strenuous in demanding redress, because they were of
comparatively recent origin as an estate of parliament,
as they became in the next long reign, the most important,
perhaps, in our early constitutional history.

It is doubted by Sir F. Palgrave whether the statute
of 5 Edw. III. c. 9, can be considered as a testimony
against the authority of the council. It is, however, very
natural so to interpret it, when we look at the subsequent
statutes and petitions of the commons, directed for more
than a century to the same object. “ No man shall be
taken,” says lord Coke (2 Inst. 46), “ that is, restrained
of liberty, v by petition or suggestion to the king or to his
council, unless it be by indictment or presentment of
good and lawful men, where such deeds be done. This
branch and divers other parts of this act have been
wholly explained by divers acts of parliament, &c.,
quoted in the margent.” He then gives the titles of six
statutes, the first being this of 5 Edw. III. c. 9. But
let us suppose that the petition of the commons in
25 Edw. III. demanded an innovation in law, as it cer-
tainly did in long-established usage. And let us admit
what is justly pointed out by Sir F. Palgrave, that the
king’s first answer to their petition is not commensurate
to its request, and reserves, though it is not quite easy
to see what, some part of its extraordinary jurisdio-

252

JURISDICTION OF

Notes to

tion.° Still the statute itself, enacted on a similar petition
in a subsequent parliament, is explicit that “ none shall
be taken by petition or suggestion to the king or his coun-
cil, unless it be by indictment or presentment ” (in a cri-
minal charge), “ or by writ original at the common law”
(in a civil suit), “ nor shall be put out of his franchise
of freehold, unless he have been duly put to answer, and
forejudged of the same by due course of law.”

Lord Hale has quoted a remarkable passage from a
Year-book, not long after these statutes of 25 Edw. III.
and 28 Edw. III., which, if Sir F. Palgrave had not
overlooked, he would have found not veiy favourable to
his high notions of the king’s prerogative in council.
“ In after ages,” says Hale, “the constant opinion and
practice was to disallow any reversals of judgment by
the council, which appears by the notable case in Year-
book, 39 Edw. III. 14.” (Jurisdiction of Lords’ House,
p. 41 . ) It is indeed a notable case, wherein the chancellor
before the council reverses a judgment of a court of law.
“ Mes les justices nepristoient nul regard al reverser de-
vant le council, par ceo que ce ne fust place ou jugement
purroit estre reverse.” If the council could not exercise
this jurisdiction on appeal, which is not perhaps expressly
taken away by any statute, much less against the lan-
guage of so many statutes could they lawfully entertain
any original suit. Such, however, were the vacillations
of a motley assembly, so steady the perseverance of go-
vernment in retaining its power, so indefinite the limits
of ancient usage, so loose the phrases of remedial statutes,
passing sometimes by their generality the intentions of

° The words of the petition and answer
are the following:—

“ Item, que nul franc homme ne soit
mys a respond re de son franc tenement,
ne de riens qui touche vie et membre,
fyns ou redemptions, par apposailles de-
vant le conseil notre seigneur le roi,
ne devant sea ministres queconques, si-
noun par proces de ley de ces en arere
use.”

•« H plest a notre seigneur le roi que
les leies de son roialme soient tenuz et
gardez en lour force, et que nul homme
soit tenu a respondre de son fraunk tene-
ment, sinoun par processe de ley : mes
de chose que touche vie ou membre, con*

temptz on excesse, soit fail come ad este
use ces en arere.” Rot. Par. ii. 228.

It is not easy to perceive what was re-
served by the words ” chose que touche
vie ou membre ; ” for the council never
determined these. Possibly it regarded
accusations of treason or felony, which
they might entertain as an inquest,
though they would ultimately he tried
by a jury. Contempts are easily under-
stood ; and by excesses were meant riota
and seditions. These political offences,
which could not b$ always safely tried
in a lower court, ft was the constant
intention of the government to reserve
for the council.

Chap. VIII.

THE KING'S COUNCIL.

253

those who enacted them, so useful, we may add, and
almost indispensable, was a portion of those prerogatives
which the crown exercised through the council and
chancery, that we find soon . afterwards a statute (37
Edw. III. c. 18), which recognises in some measure those
irregular proceedings before the council, by providing
only that those who make suggestions to the chancellor
and great council, by which men are put in danger
against the form of the charter, shall give security for
proving them. This is rendered more remedial by
another act next year (38 Edw. III. c. 9), which, how-
ever, leaves the liberty of making such suggestions
untouched. The truth is, that the act of 25 Edw. III.
went to annihilate the legal and equitable jurisdiction of
the Court of Chancery — the former of which had been
long exercised, and the latter was beginning to spring
up. But the 42 Edw. III. c. 3, which seems to go as far
as the former in the enacting words, will be found,
according to the preamble, to regard only criminal
charges.

Sir Francis Palgrave maintains that the council never
intermitted its authority, but on the contrary “ it con-
tinually assumed more consistency and order. It is
probable that the long absences of Henry Y. from Eng-
land invested this body with a greater degree of import-
ance. After every minority and after every appointment
of a select or extraordinary council by authority of the
legislature, we find that the ordinary council acquired a
fresh impulse and further powers. Hence the next reign
constitutes a new era 99 (p. 80). He proceeds to give
the same passage which I have quoted from Rot. Pari.
8 Hen. VI., vol. v. p. 343, as well as one in an earlier
parliament (2 Hen. VI. p. 28). But I had neglected to
state the whole case where I mention the articles settled
in parliament for the regulation of the council. In the
first place, this was not the king’s ordinary council, but
one specially appointed by the lords in parliament for
the government of the realm during his minority. They
consisted of certain lords spiritual and temporal, the
chancellor, the treasurer, and a few commoners. These
commissioners delivered a schedule of provisions “ for
the good and the governance of the land, which the lords
that be of the king’s council desireth ” (p. 28). It does

254

JURISDICTION OF

Notes to

not explicitly appear that the commons assented to these
provisions ; but it may be presumed, at least in a legal
sense, by their being present and by the schedule being
delivered into parliament, “ baillez en memo le parle-
ment.” But in the 8 Hen. VI., where the same pro-
vision as to the jurisdiction of this extraordinary council
is repeated, the articles are said, after being approved by
the lords spiritual and temporal, to have been read
“ coram domino rege in eodem parliamento, in presentia
trium regni statuum ,, (p. 343). It is always held that
what is expressly declared to be done in presence of all
the estates is an act of parliament.

We find, therefore, a recognition of the principle which
had always been alleged in defence of the ordinary
council in this parliamentary confirmation — the prin-
ciple that breaches of the law, which the law could not,
through the weakness of its ministers, or corruption, or
partiality, sufficiently repress, must be reserved for the
strong arm of royal authority. “ Thus,” says Sir Francis
Pal grave, “ did the council settle and define its prin-
ciples and practice. A new tribunal was erected, and
one which obtained a virtual supremacy over the common
law. The exception re&rved to their ‘ discretion’ of
interfering wherever their lordships felt too much might
on one side, and too much unmight on the other, was of
itself sufficient to embrace almost every dispute or trial”

(p. 81).

But, in the first place, this latitude of construction was
not by any means what the parliament meant to allow,
nor could it be taken, except by wilfully usurping powers
never imparted ; and, secondly, it was not the ordinary
council which was thus constituted during the king’s
minority ; nor did the jurisdiction intrusted to persons
so specially named in parliament extend to the regular
Officers of the crown. The restraining statutes were sus-

E ended for a time in favour of a new tribunal. But I
ave already observed that there was always a class of
cases precisely of the same kind as those mentioned in
t$e act creating this tribunal, tacitly excluded from the
operation of those statutes, wherein the coercive juris-
diction of the king’s ordinary council had great conve-
nience, namely, where the course of justice was obstructed
by riots, combinations of maintenance, or overawing in-

Chap. VIII.

THE KING’S COUNCIL.

255

fluence. And there is no doubt that, down to the final/
abolition of the Court of Star Chamber (which was no
other than the consilium ordinarium under a different name),
these offences were cognizable in it, without the regular
forms of the common law. p

44 From the reign of Edward IY. we do not trace any
further opposition to the authority either of the chancery
or of the council. These courts had become engrafted
0| the constitution; and if they excited fear or jealousy,
there was no one who dared to complain. Yet addi-
tional parliamentary sanction was not considered as un-
necessary by Henry VII., and in the third year of his
reign an act was passed for giving the Court of Star
Chamber, which had now acquired its determinate name,
further authority to punish divers misdemeanours.”
(Palgrave, p. 97.;

It is really more than we can grant that the jurisdic-
tion of the consilium ordinarium had been engrafted on the
constitution, when the statute-book was full of laws to
restrain, if not to abrogate it. The acts already men-
tioned, in the reign of Henry VI., by granting a, tempo-
rary and limited jurisdiction to the council, demonstrate
that its general exercise was not acknowledged by
parliament. We can only say that it may have
continued without remonstrance in the reign of Edward
IV. I have observed in the text that the Bolls of
Parliament under Edward IV. contain no complaints of
grievances. But it is not quite manifest that the coun-
cil did exercise in that reign as much jurisdiction as it
had once done. Lord Hale tells us that “ this jurisdic-
tion was gradually brought into great disuse, though
there remain some straggling footsteps of their proceed-
ings till near 3 Hen. VII. ,, | (Hist, of Lords’ Jurisdic-
tion, p. 38.) And the famous statute in that year, which
erected a new court, sometimes improperly called the
Court of Star Chamber, seems to have been prompted by
a desire to restore, in a new and more legal form, a
jurisdiction, which was become almost obsolete, and,
being in contradiction to acts of parliament, could not
well be rendered effective without one. q

We cannot but discover, throughout the learned and

P See Note in p. 145, for the statute 31 H. VI. c. 2.

See Constitutional History of England, vol. i p, 49. (1842.)

256

THE KING’S COUNCIL.

Notes to

luminous Essay on tlie Authority of the King’s Council,
a strong tendency to represent its exercise as both
constitutional and salutary. Tho former epithet cannot,
I think, be possibly applicable in the face of statute
law ; for what else determines our constitution ? But it
is a problem with some, whether the powers actually
exerted by this anomalous court, admitting them to have
been, at least latterly, in contravention of many statutes,
may not have been rendered necessary by the disorderly
condition of society and the comparative impotence of
the common law. This "cannot easily be solved with the
defective knowledge that*we possess. Sometimes, no
doubt, the “ might on one side, and unmight on the
other,” as the answer to a petition forcibly expresses it,
afforded a justification which, practically at least, the
commons themselves were content to allow. But were
these exceptional instances so frequent as not to leave a
much- greater number wherein the legal remedy by suit
before the king’s justices of assise might have been
perfectly effectual ? For we are not concerned with tike
old county-courts, which were perhaps tumultuary and
partial enough, but with the regular administration,
civil and criminal, before the king’s justices of oyer and
terminer and of gaol delivery. Had not they, generally
speaking, in the reign of Edward III. and his successors,
such means of enforcing the execution of law as left bo
sufficient pretext fpr recurring to an arbitrary tribunal ?
Liberty, we should remember, may require the sacrifice
of some degree of security against private wrong, which
a despotic government, with an unlimited power of
restraint, can alone supply. If |*o one were permitted
to travel on the high road without a licence, or, as now
so usual, without a passport, if no one could keep arms
without a registry, if J every one might be indefinitely
detained on suspioion/the evil doers of society would be
materially impeded, but at the expense, to a* certain
degree, of every man’s freedom and enjoyment. Free-
dom being but a means to the greatest good, times might
arpe^when it must yield to the security of still higher
blessings ; but the immediate question is, whether such
were theiitate of society in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. Now, that it was lawless and insecure, com
paratively with our own times or the times of our father*

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF THE MONARCHY.

257

is hardly to M disputed. But if it required that arbi-
trary government which the king’s council were anxious
to maintain, the representatives of the commons in
parliament, knights and burgesses, not above the law,
and much interested in the conservation of property,
must have complained yery unreasonably for more than
a hundred years. They were apparently as well able to
judge as out writers can he ; and if they reckoned a trial
bjyury at nisi prius more likely, on the whole, to insure a
just adjudication bf A civil suit, than one before the great
, officers of state afcd other' constituent members of the
ordinary council, it does not seem clear to me that we
have a right to assert the contrary. This mode of trial
by jury, as has been seen in another place, had aoquired,
by the beginning of the fifteenth century,- its present
form ; and considering) the great authority of the judges
of assise, it may not, probably, have given very fre-
quent ocoasion for complaint of partiality or corrupt
influence.

Note XIL Page 156.

The, learned Author of the Inquiry into the Eise and
Growth of the Royal Prerogative in England has
founded his historical theory on the confusion which he
supposes to have gi;own up between the ideal king of
the constitution and the personal king on the throne.
By the former he means the personification of abstract
principles, sovereign power, and absolute justice, which
the law attributes to the genus king, but which flattery
or other motives have Jjptnsferred to the possessor of the
crown for the time being,' and have thus changed the
Teutonic cyning, the first max* of the commonwealth, the
man of the highest, weregild, the plan who was so much
responsible that he might be sued for damages in his own
courts or deposed, for misgpverhment, into the sole irre-
sponsible person of indefeasible prerogatives, of attributes
almost, divine, whom Bracton and along series of sub-
sequent lawyers raised up to ** height far beyond the
theory of our early constitution. ^ *

*Thi| is supported with great acuteness and learning;
nor Js*. possible to deny that the king of England, as
the law-books represent hi&C M considerably different

VOL. III. 8

258 NATURE OF THE MONARCH V. Notes to

fronj what we generally conceive an ancient German
chieftain to have been. Yet I doubt whether Mr. Allen
has not laid too much stress on this, and given to the
fictions of law a greater influence than they possessed in
those times to which his inquiry relates ; and whether,
also, what he calls the monarchical theory ivas so much
derived from foreign sources as he apprehends. We
have no occasion to seek, in the systems of civilians or
the dogmas of churchmen, what arose frpm a deep-seated
principle of human nature. A king is a person ; to per-
sons alone we attach the attributes of power and wisdom ;
on persons we bestow our affection of our ill-will. An
abstraction, a politic idea of royalty* is convenient for
lawyers ; it suits the speculative reasoner, but it never
can become so familiar to a people, especially one too
rude to have listened to such reasoners, as the simple
image of the king, the one man whom we are to love
and to fear. The other idea is assort of monarchical
pantheism, of which the vanishing point is a republic,,
And to this the prevalent theory, “that kings are to reign
byt not to govern, cannot but lead. It is a plausible,
and in the main, perhaps, for the times we have reached;
a necessary theory ; but it renders monarchy ultimately
scarcely possible. And it was neither the sentiment of
the Anglo-Saxons, nor of the Norman baronage; the
feudal relation was essentially and exclusively personal ;
and if we had not enough, n| a more universal feeling
of human nature, to account for loyalty, we could not
mistake iis inevitable connexion with the fealty and
homage of the vassal. The influence of Boman notions
was not inconsiderable upon the continent'; but -they
never prevailed very much here ; and though, after the
close alliance between the church and state established
by the Reformation, the whole weight of the former was
thrown into the scale of tRe crown, the mediaeval clergy,
as I have observed in the text, were anything rather
than upholders of despotic power.

It may be very true that, by considering the monarchy
as a merely political institution, the scheme of prudent
men to avoid confusion, and confer the minimum of per-
sonal authority on the reigning prince, the principle of
his irresponsibility seems t$^e better maintained! # But
the question to which tore' are turning our eyes is not a

Chap. VIII.

NATURE OF THE MONARCHY.

259

political on© ; it relates to the positive law and positive
sentiments of the English nation in the mediaeval period.
And here I cannot put a few necessary fictions grown up
in the courts, such as, the king never dies, the king can
do no wrong, the king is everywhere, against the tenor
of our constitutional language, which implies an actual
and active personality. Mr. Allen acknowledges that
the act against the Despensers under Edward II., and
reconfirmed after its repeal, for promulgating the
doctrine that allegiance had more regard to the crown
than to the person of the king, “ .seems to establish, as
the deliberate opinion of the legislature, that allegiance
is due to the person of the king generally, and not
merely to his crown or politic capacity, so as to be
released and destroyed by his misgovernment of the
kingdom ” (p. 14) ; which, he adds, is not easily recon-
cilable with the deposition of Richard II. But that was
accomplished by force, with whatever formalities it may
have been thought expedient to surround it.

' We cannot, however, infer from the declaration of the
legislature, that allegiance is due to the king’s person
and not to his politic capacity, any such consequence as
that it is not, in any possible case, to be released by bis
misgovernment. This was surely not in the spirit of
any parliament under Edward II. or Edward III. ; and
it is precisely because allegiance is due to the person,
that, upon either feudal <k natural principles, it might
be cancelled by personal misconduct. A contrary lan-
guage was undoubtedly held under the Stuarts ; hut it
was not that of the mediaeval period.

The tenet of our law, that all the soil belongs theo-
retically to the king, is undoubtedly an enormous fiction,
and very Repugnant to the barbaric theory preserved by
the Saxons, that all unappropriated land belonged to the
folk, and was unalienable without ifs consent/ It was,
however, hut an extension of the feudal tenure to the
whole kingdom, and rested on the personality of feudal
homage. William established it more by his power than
by any theory of lawyers ; though doubtless his succes-
sors often found lawyers as ready to shape the acts of
power into a theory as if they had originally projected

IF 1 - t ;

f It las been mentioned in a former^fokland had acquired the appellation terra ,
note, on Mr. Allen’s authority, that the rtgis before tbeConauest.

S 2

260

VILLENAGE OF

Notes to

them. And thus grew up the high schemes of preroga-
tive, which, for many centuries, were in conflict with
those of liberty. We are not able, nevertheless, to
define the constitutional authority of the Saxon kings ; it
was not legislative, nor was that of William and his
successors ever such ; it was not exclusive of redress
for private wrong, nor was this ever the theory of
English law, though the method of remedy might not be
sufficiently effective ; yet it had certainly grown before
the Conquest, with no help from Roman notions, to
something very unlike that of the German kings in
Tacitus.

Note XIII. Page 172.

The reduction of the free ceorls into villenage, espe-
cially if as general as is usually assumed, is one of the
most remarkable innovations during the Anglo-Norman
period ; and one which, as far as our published records
extend, we cannot wholly explain. Observations have
been made on it by Mr. Wright, in the Archseologia
(vol. xxx. p. 225). After adverting to the oppression of
the peasants in Normandy, which produced several
rebellions, he proceeds thus “ These feelings of hatred
and contempt for the peasantry were brought into our
island by the Norman barons in the latter half of the
eleventh century. The Saxon laws and customs con-
tinued ; but the Normans acted as the Franks had done
towards the Roman coloni ; they enforced with harsh-
ness the laws which were in their own favour, and
gradually threw aside, or broke through, those which
were in favour of the miserable serf. ,,

In the Daws of Henry I. we find the weregild of the
twyhinder, or villein, set at 200 shillings in Wessex,
“ quae caput regni est et legum (c. 70). But this ex-
pression argues an Anglo-Saxon source ; and, in fact, so
much in that treatise seems to be copied, without regard
to the change of times, from old authorities, mixed up
with provisions of a feudal or Norman character, that
we hardly* know how to distinguish what belongs to
each period. It is far s from improbable that villenage,
in the sense the word afterwards bore, that is, an abso-
lutely servile tenure of lands, not only without legal

Chap. VIII.

THE PEASANTRY.

261

-rights over them, but with an incapacity of acquiring
either immovable or movable property against the lord,
may have made considerable strides before the reign of
Henry II/ * But unless light should be thrown on its
history by the publication of more records, it seems
almost impossible to determine the introduction of pre-
dial villenage more precisely than to say it does not
appear in the laws of England at the Conquest, and it
does so in the time of Glanvil. Mr. Wright’s Memoir
in the Archaeologia, above quoted, contains some in-
teresting matter ; but he has too much confounded the
theowy or Anglo-Saxon slave, with the ceorl; not even
mentioning the latter, though it is indisputable that
villanus is the equivalent of ceorl, and serous of them .

But I suspect that we go a great deal too far in set-
ting down the descendants of these ceorls, that is, the
whole Anglo-Saxon population except thanes and bur-
gesses, as almost universally to be counted such villeins
as we read of in our law-books, or in concluding that
the cultivators of the land, even in the thirteenth Cen-
tury, were wholly, or at least generally, servile. It is
not only evident that small freeholders were always nu-
merous, but we are, perhaps, greatly deceived in fancy-
ing that the occupiers of villein tenements were usually
villeins. Terre-tenants en villenage and tenants par copie ,
who were undoubtedly free, appear in the early Year-
books, and we know not why they may not always
have existed. 4 This, however, is a subject which I am
not sufficiently conversant with records to explore ; it
deserves the attention of those well-informed and dili-
gent antiquaries whom we possess. Meantime it is to
be observed that the lands occupied by villam or bordarii,
according to the Domesday survey, were much more ex-
tensive than the copyholds of the present day; and

8 A presumptive proof of this may be rior villein, nearly similar to what Glan-
drawn from a chapter in the Laws of vil and later law-books call 6uch.

Henry I. c. 81, where the penalty pay- t Th£ following passage in the Chro-
able by a villein for certain petty offences nide of Brakelond does not mention any
is set at thirty pence ; that, of a cotset at manumission of the ceorl on whom abbot
fifteen ; and of a theow at six. The Samson conferred a manor : — Unum
passage is extremely obscure; and this solum manerium carta sua conflrmavit
proportion of the three classes of men is cuidain Anglico natione, g/lebfv adscripto,
almost the only part that appears evident, de cujus fidelitate plenius confldebat quia
The cotset, who is often mentioned in bonus agricola erat, et quia nesciebat lo-
Domeaday, may thus have been on infe* qui (rallied, p. 24.

262

VILLENAGE OF

Notes to

making every allowance for enfranchisements, we ca,n
hardly believe that all these lands, being, in fact, by far
the greater part of the soil, were the mllenagia of
GlanviTs and Bracton’s age. It would be interesting to
ascertain at what time the latter were distinguished
from libera tenementa ; at what time, that is, the distinc-
tion of territorial servitude, independent as it was of the
personal state of the occupant, was established in Eng-
land.

Note XIV. Page 173.

This identity of condition between the villein re-
gardant and in gross appears to have been, even lately,
called in question, and some adhere to the theory which
supposes an inferiority in the latter. The following
considerations will prove that I have not been mistaken
in rejecting it : —

I. It will not be contended that the words “ regar-
dant” and “in gross” indicate of themselves any
specific difference between the two, or can mean any-
thing but the title by which the villein was held ; pre-
scriptive and territorial in one case, absolute in the
other. For the proof, therefore, of any such difference
we require some ancient authority, which has not been
given. II. The villein regardant might be severed
from the manor, with or without land, and would then
become a villein in gross. If he was sold as a domestic
serf, he might, perhaps, be practically in a lower condi-
tion than before, but his legal state was the same. If
he was aliened with lands, parcel of the manor, as in
the case of its ^descent to coparceners who made parti-
tion, he would no longer be regardant, because that im-
plied a prescriptive dependence on the lord, but would
occupy the same tenements and be in exactly the same
position as before. “ Villein in gross,” says Littleton,
“ is where a man is seised of a manor whereunto a villein
is regardant, and granteth the same villein by deed to
another ; then he is a villein in gross, and not regar-
dant.” (Sect. 181.) III. The servitude of all villeins
was so complete that we cannot conceive degrees in it.
No one could purchase lands or possess goods of his
own; we do not find that any one, being strictly a

Chap. VIII.

THE PEASANTRY

263

villein, held by certain services; “be must have
regard,” says Coke, “ to that which is commanded unto
him ; or, in the words of Bracton, 4 a qu6 praestandum
servitium incertum et indeterminatum, ubi scire non
poterit vespere quod servitium fieri debet mane/ ” (Co.
Lit. 120, b.) How could a villein in gross be lower
than this? It is true that the villein had one inesti-
mable advantage over the American negro, that he was
a freeman, except relatively to his lord; possibly he
might be better protected against personal injury ; but
in his incapacity of acquiring secure property, or of re-
fusing labour, he was just on the same footing. It may
be conjectured that some villeins in gross were de-
scended from the servi , of whom we find 25,000 enume-
rated in Domesday. Littleton says, “ If a man and
his ancestors, whose heir he is, have been seised of a
villein and of his ancestors, as of villeins in gross, time
out of memory of man, these are villeins in gross.”
(Sect. 182.)

It has been often asserted that villeins in gross seem
not to have been a numerous class, and it might not be
easy to adduce distinct instances of them in the four-
teenth and fifteenth centuries, though we should scarcely
infer, from the pains Littleton takes to describe them,
that none were left in his time. But some may be
found in an earlier age. In the ninth of John, William
sued Ralph the priest for granting away lands which he
held to Canford priory. Ralph pleaded that they were
his freehold. William replied that he held them in
villenage, and that he (the plaintiff) had sold one of
Ralph’s sisters for four shillings. (Blomefield’s Nor-
folk, vol. iii. p. 860, 4to. edition.) And Mr. Wright has
found in Madox’s Formulare Anglicanum not less than
five instances of villeins sold with their family and chat-
tels, but without land. (Archseologia, xxx. 228.) Even
where they were sold along with land, unless it were a
manor, they would, as has been observed before, have
been villeins in gross. I have, however, been informed
that in valuations under escheats in the old records a
separate value is never put upon villeins ; their aliena-
tion without the land was apparently not contemplated.
Few cases concerning villeins in gross, it has been said,
occur in the Year-books ; but villenage of any kind

264

POPULAR POETRY.

Notes to

does not furnish a great many ; and in Beveral I do not
perceive, in consulting the report, that the party can be
shown to have been regardant. One reason why villeins
in gross should have become less and less numerous was
that they could, for the most part, only be claimed by
showing a written grant, or by prescription througn
descent ; so that, if the title-deed were lost, or the de-
scent improved, the villein became free.

Manumissions were often, no doubt, gratuitous; in
some cases the villein seems to have purchased his free-
dom. For though in strictness, as Glanvil tells us, ho
could not “ libertatem snam suis denariis quaerere,” in-
asmuch as all he possessed already belonged to the lord,
it would have been thought a meanness to insist on so
extreme a right. In order, however, to make the deed
more secure, it was usual to insert the name of a third
person as paying the consideration-money for the enfran-
chisement. (Archaeologia, xxx. 228.)

It appears not by any means improbable that regular
money payments, or other fixed liabilities, were often
substituted instead of uncertain services for the benefit
of the lord as well as the tenant. And when these had
lasted a considerable time in any manor, the villenage of
the latter, without any manumission, would have ex-
pired by desuetude. But, perhaps, an entry of his
tenure on the court-roll, with a copy given to himself,
would operate of itself, in construction of law, as a ma-
numission. This I do not pretend to determine.

Note XV. Page 179.

The public history of Europe in the middle ages inade-
quately represents the popular sentiment, or only when
it is expressed too loudly to escape the regard of writers
intent sometimes on less important subjects. But when
we descend below the surface, a sullen murmur of dis-
content meets the ear, and we perceive that mankind
was not more insensible to wrongs and sufferings than
at present. Besideer^the various outbreaking® of the
people in several counties, and their complaints in par-
liament, after the commons obtained a representation,
we gain a conclusive insight into the spirit of the times

Chap. VIII.

POPULAR POETRY.

265

by their popular poetry. Two very interesting collec-
tions of this kind b^ve been lately published by the
Camden Society, through the diligence of Mr. Thomas
Wright ; one, the Poems attributed to Walter Mapes ;
the other, the Political Songs of England, from John to
Edward II.

Mapes lived under Henry II., and has long been
known as the reputed author of humorous Latin verses ;
but it seems much more probable, that the far greater
part of the collection lately printed is not from his
hand. They may pass, not for the production of a single
person, but rather of a class, during many years, or, in
general words, a century, ending with the death of
Henry III. in 1272. Many of them are professedly
written by an imaginary Golias.

“ They are not the expressions of hostility of one
man against an order of monks, but of the indignant
patriotism of a considerable portion of the English
nation against the encroachments of civil and ecclesias-
tical tyranny.” (Introduction to Poems ascribed to
Walter Mapes, p. 21.) The poems in this collection
reflect almost entirely on the pope and the higher
clergy. They are all in rhyming Latin, and chiefly,
though with exceptions, in the loose trochaic metre
called Leonine. The authors, therefore, must have been
clerks, actuated by the spirit which, in a church of
great inequality in its endowments, and with a very
numerous body of poor clergy, is apt to gain strength,
but certainly, as ecclesiastical history bears witness,
hot one of mere envious malignity towards the prelates
and the court of Home. These deserved nothing better,
in the thirteenth century, than biting satire and in-
dignant reproof, and the poets were willing enough to
bestow both.

But this popular poetry of the middle ages did not
confine itself to the church. In the collection entitled
‘ Political Songs ’ we have some reflecting on Henry III.,
some on the general administration. The famous song
on the battle of Lewes in 1264 is the earliest in English ;
but in the reign of Edward I. several occur in that
language. Others are in French or in Latin ; one com-
plaining of the taxes is in an odd mixture of these two
languages ; which, indeed, is not without other examples

266

POPULAR POETRY.

Notes to

in mediaeval poetry. These Latin songs could not, of
course, have been generally understood. But what the
priests sung in Latin, they said in English ; the lower
clergy fanned the flame, and gave utterance to what
others felt. It may, perhaps, be remarked, as a proof of
general sympathy with the democratic spirit which was
then fermenting, that we have a song of exultation on
the great defeat which Philip IY. had just sustained at
Courtrai, in 1302, by the burgesses of the Flemish cities,
on whose liberties he had attempted to trample (p. 187).
It is true that Edward I. was on ill terms with France,
but the political interests of the king would not, perhaps,
have dictated the popular ballad.

It was an idle exaggeration in him who said that, if
he could make the ballads of a people, any one might
make their laws. Ballads, like the press, and especially
that portion of the press which bears most analogy to
them, generally speaking, give vent to a spirit which
has been at work before. But they had, no doubt, an
influence in rendering more determinate, as well as
more active, that resentment of wrong, that indignation
at triumphant oppression, that belief in the vices of the
gre^f, which, too often for social peace and their own
happiness, are cherished by the poor. In comparison,
indeed, with the efficacy of the modem press, the power
of ballads is trifling. Their lively sprightliness, the
humorous tone of their satire, even their metrical form,
sheathe the sting ; and it is only in times when political
bitterness is at its height that any considerable influence
can be attached to them, and then it becomes undis-
tinguishable from more energetic motives. Those which
we read in the collection above mentioned appear to
me rather the signs of popular discontent than greatly
calculated to enhance it. In that sense they are very
interesting, and we cannot but desire to see the promised
continuation to the end of Richard II.’s reign. u They
acre said to have become afterwards less frequent,
though the wars of the Roses were likely to bring them
forward.

Some of the political songs are written in France,

tt Mr. Wright hag given a few sped- Middle Ages, vol. 1. p.257. In factwe may
mens in Essays on the Literature and reckon Hers Plowman an instance of po-
Popular Superstitions of England in the pular satire, though far superior to the rest.

Chap. VIII.

POPULAR POETRY.

267

though relating to our kings John and Henry III.
Deducting these, we have two in Latin for the former
reign ; seven in Latin, three in French (or what the
editor calls Anglo-Norman, which is really the same
thing), one in a mixture of the two, and one in English,
for the reign of Henry III. In the reigns of Edward I,
and Edward II. we have eight in Latin, three in French,
nine in English, apd four in mixed languages ; a style
employed probably for amusement. It must be observed
that a large proportion of these songs contain panegyric
and exultation on victory rather than satire ; and that of
the satire much is general, and much falls on the church ;
so that the animadversions on the king and the nobility
are not very frequent, though with considerable bold-
ness ; but this is more shown in the Latin than the
English poems.

INTRODUCTION.

Chap. IX. Part I.

2«8

CHAPTER IX.*

ON THE STATE OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.

PART I.

Introduction — Decline of Literature in the latter Period of the Roman Empire —
Its Causes — Corruption of the Latin Language — Means by which it was effected
— Formation of new Languages — General Ignorance of the Dark Ages — Scarcity
of Books — Causes that prevented the total Extinction of Learning — Prevalence
of Superstition and Fanaticism — General Corruption of Religion — Monasteries
— their Effects — Pilgrimages — Love of Field Sports — State of Agriculture
of Internal and Foreign Trade down to the End of the Eleventh Century — Im-
provement of Europe dated from that Age.

It has been the object of every preceding chapter of
this work, either to trace the civil revolutions of states
during the period of the middle ages, or to investigate,
with rather more minute attention, their political insti-
tutions. There remains a large tract to be explored, if
we would complete the circle of historical information,
and give to our knowledge that copiousness and clear
perception which arise from comprehending a subject
under numerous relations. The philosophy of history
embraces far more than the wars and treaties, the
factions and cabals of common political narration; it
extends to whatever illustrates the character of the
human species in a particular period, to their reasonings
and sentiments, their arts and industry. Nor is this
comprehensive survey merely interesting to the specu-
lative philosopher ; without it the statesman would form
very erroneous estimates of events, and find himself
constantly misled in any analogical application of them
to present circumstances. Nor is it an uncommon source

a The subject of the present chapter, so the Introduction to the History of Lite-
for as it relates to the condition of litera- ratiire in the Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and
tore In the middle ages, has been again Seventeenth Centuries. Some things will
treated by me in the first and second be found in it more exactly stated, others
chapters of a work, published in 1836, newly supplied from recent sources.

State of Society.

INTRODUCTION.

269

of error to neglect the general signs of the times, and to
deduce a prognostic from some partial coincidence with
past events, where a more enlarged comparison of all
the facts that ought to enter into the combination would
destroy the whole parallel. The philosophical student,
however, will not follow the antiquary into his minute
details; and though it is hard to say what may not
supply matter for a reflecting mind, there is always
some danger of losing sight of grand objects in historical
disquisition, by too laborious a research into trifles. I
may possibly be thought to furnish, in some instances*
an example of the error I condemn. But in the choice
and disposition of topics to which the present chapter
relates, some have been omitted on account of their
comparative insignificance, and others on account of
their want of connexion with the leading subject. Even
of those treated I can only undertake to give a transient
view ; and must bespeak the reader’s candour to re-
member that passages which, separately taken, may
often appear superficial, are but parts of the context of a
single chapter, as the chapter itself is of an entire work.

The Middle Ages, according to the division I have
adopted, comprise about one thousand years, from the
invasion of France by Clovis to that of Naples by
Charles VIII. This period, considered as to the state
of society, has been esteemed dark through ignorance,
and barbarous through poverty and want of refinement.
And although this character is much less applicable to
the last two centuries of the period than to those which
preceded its commencement, yet we cannot expect to
feel, in respect of ages at best imperfectly civilized and
slowly progressive, that interest which attends a more
perfect development of human capacities, and more bril-
liant advances in improvement. The first moiety indeed
of these ten ages is almost absolutely barren, and pre-
sents little but a catalogue of evils. The subversion of
the Roman empire, and devastation of its provinces, by
barbarous nations, either immediately preceded, or were
coincident with the commencement of the middle period.
We begin in darkness and calamity; and though the
shadows grow fainter as we advance, yet we are to
break off our pursuit as the morning breathes upon us,
and the twilight reddens into the lustre of day.

270

DECLINE OF LEARNING Chap. IX. Past I.

No circumstance is so prominent on the first survey
of society during the earlier centuries of this
karoing°L period as the depth of ignorance in which it
Rom ££ was i mmerse( l ; and as from this, more than

empire, any single cause, the moral and social evils

which those ages experienced appear to have been de-
rived and perpetuated, it deserves to occupy the first
place in the arrangement of our present subject. We
must not altogether ascribe the ruin of literature to the
barbarian destroyers of the Eoman empire. So gradual,
and, apparently, so irretrievable a decay had long before
spread over all liberal studies, that it is impossible to
pronounce whether they would not have been almost
equally extinguished if the august throne of the Caesars
had been left to moulder by its intrinsic weakness.
Under the paternal sovereignty of Marcus Aurelius the
approaching declension of learning might be scarcely
perceptible to an incurious observer. There was much
indeed to distinguish his times from thgse of Augustus ;
much lost in originality of genius, in correctness of
taste, in the masterly conception and consummate finish
of art, in purity of the Latin, and even of the Greek
language. But there were men who made the age
famous, grave lawyers, judicious historians, wise philo-
sophers; the name of learning was honourable, its
professors were encouraged ; and along the vast surface
of the Roman empire there was perhaps a greater
number whose minds were cultivated by intellectual
discipline than under the more brilliant reign of the
first emperor.

It is not, I think, very easy to give* a perfectly

its use 8atisfactor y solution of the rapid downfall of

ts causes. literature between the ages of Antonine and

nf Diocletian. Perhaps the prosperous condition of the
empire from Trajan to Marcus Aurelius, and the patron-
age which those good princes bestowed on letters, gave
an artificial health to them for a moment, and suspended
the operation of a disease which had already begun
to undermine their vigour. Perhaps the intellectual
energies of mankind can never remain stationary; and
a nation that ceases to produce original and inventive
minds, bom to advance the landmarks of knowledge or
skill, will recede from step to step, till it loses even the

271

State of Society. IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

secondary merits of imitation and industry. During
the third century, not only there were no great writers,
but even few names of indifferent writers have been
recovered by the diligence of modem inquiry. 1 * Law
neglected, philosophy perverted till it became contemp-
tible, history nearly silent, the Latin tongue growing
rapidly barbarous, poetry rarely and feebly attempted,
art more and more vitiated ; such were the symptoms
by which the age previous to Constantine announced
the decline of human intellect. If we cannot fully
account for this unhappy change, as I have observed,
tve must, however, assign much weight to the degrada-
tion of Rome and Italy in the system of Severus and
his successors, to the admission of barbarians into the
military and even civil dignities of the empire, to the
discouraging influence of provincial and illiterate sove-
reigns, and to the calamities which followed fjpr half " a
century the first invasion of the Goths and the defeat of
Decius. To this sickly condition of literature the fourth
century supplied no permanent remedy. If under the
house of Constantine the Roman world suffered rather
less from civil warfare or barbarous invasions than in
the preceding age, yet every other cause of decline just
enumerated prevailed with aggravated force ; and the
fourth century set in storms, sufficiently destructive in
themselves, and ominous of those calamities which
humbled the majesty of Rome at the commencement of
the ensuing period, and overwhelmed the Western
Empire in absolute and final ruin before its termination.

The diffusion of literature is perfectly distinguishable
from its advancement ; and whatever obscurity we may
find in explaining the variations of the one, there are a
few simple causes which seem to account for the other.
Knowledge will be spread over the surface of a nation in
proportion to the facilities of education ; to the free cir-
culation of books ; to the emoluments and distinctions
which literary attainments are found to produce; and
still more to the reward which they meet in the general
respect and applause of society. This cheering incite-

The authors of Histoire Litteraire authority; two of whom are now lost
de la France, t i., can only find three In the preceding century the number wa
writers of Gaul, no inconsiderable part of considerably greater,
the Roman Empire, mentioned upon any

272 DECLINE OF LEARNING Chap, IX, Part I.

ment, the genial sunshine of approbation, has at all times
promoted the cultivation of literature in small republics
rather than large empires, and in cities compared with
the country. If these are the sources which nourish
literature, we should naturally expect that they must
have become scanty or dry when learning languishes or
expires. Accordingly, in the later ages of the Koman
empire a general indifference towards the cultivation of
letters became the characteristic of its inhabitants. Laws
were indeed enacted by Constantine, Julian* Theodosius,
and other emperors, for the encouragement of learned
men and the promotion of liberal education. But these
laws, which would not perhaps have been thought neces-
sary in better times, were unavailing to counteract the
lethargy .of ignorance in which even the native citizens
of the empire were contented to repose. This alienation
of men from their national literature may doubtless be
imputed in some measure to its own demerits. A jargon
of mystical philosophy, half fanaticism and half imposture,
a barren and inflated eloquence, a frivolous philology,
were not among those charms of wisdom by which man
is to be diverted from pleasure or aroused from indolence.

In this temper of the public mind there was little pro-
bability that new compositions of excellence would be
produced, and much doubt whether the old would be
preserved. Since the invention of printing, the absolute
extinction of any considerable work seems a danger too
improbable for apprehension. The press pours forth in
a few days a thousand volumes, which, scattered like
seeds in the air over the republic of Europe, could hardly
be destroyed without the extirpation of its inhabitants.
But in the times of antiquity manuscripts were copied
with cost, labour, and delay; and if the diffusion of
knowledge be measured by the multiplication of books,
no unfair standard, the most golden ages of ancient
learning could never bear the least comparison with the
three last centuries. The destruction of a few libraries
by accidental fire, the desolation of a few provinces by
unsparing and illiterate barbarians, might annihilate
eveiy vestige of an author, or leave a few scattered copies,
which, from the public indifference, there was no induce-
ment to multiply, exposed to similar casualties in succeed-
ing times.

State op Society. IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 273

We are warranted by good authorities to assign as a
collateral cause of this irretrievable revolution the neglect
of heathen literature by the Christian church. I am not
versed enough in ecclesiastical writers to estimate the
degree of this neglect ; nor am I disposed to deny that
the mischief was beyond recovery before the accession of
Constantine. From the primitive ages, however, it seems
that a dislike of pagan learning was pretty general
among Christians. Many of the fathers undoubtedly
were accomplished in liberal studies, and we are indebted
to them for valuable fragments of authors whom we have
lost. But the literary character of the church is not to
be measured by that of its more illustrious leaders. Pro-
scribed and persecuted, the early Christians had not
perhaps access to the public schools, nor inclination to
studies which seemed, very excusably, uncongenial to
the character of their profession. Their prejudices, how-
ever, survived the establishment of Christianity. The
fourth council of Carthage in 398 prohibited the reading
of secular books by bishops. Jerome plainly condemns
the study of them except for pious ends. All physical
science especially was held in avowed contempt, as incon-
sistent with revealed truths. Nor do there appear to
have been any canons made in favour of learning, or any
restriction on the ordination of persons absolutely illite-
rate.® There was indeed abundance of what is called
theological learning displayed in the controversies of the
fourth and fifth centuries ; and those who admire such
disputations may consider the principal champions in
them as contributing to the glory, or at least retarding
the decline, of literature. But I believe rather that pole-
mical disputes will be found not only to corrupt the
genuine spirit of religion, but to degrade and contract
the faculties. What keenness and subtlety these may
sometimes acquire by such exercise is more like that
worldly shrewdness we see in men whose trade it is to
outwit their neighbours than the clear and calm discrimi-
nation of philosophy. However this may be, it cannot be
doubted that the controversies agitated in the church

0 Mosheim, Cent 4. Tiraboschi en- bishops in the general councils of Epbe-
deavoura to elevate higher the learning bus and Chalcedon could not write their
of the early Christians, t it p. 328. Jor- names. Remarks on Ecclesiaat Hist
tin, however, asserts that many of the vol. ii. p. 417.

274

DECLINE OF LEARNING. Chap. IX. Part I.

during these two centuries must have diverted studious
minds from profane literature, and narrowed more and
more the circle of that knowledge which they were
desirous to attain.

The torrent of irrational superstitions which carried
all before it in the fifth century, and the progress of
ascetic enthusiasm, had an influence still more decidedly
inimical to learning. I cannot indeed conceive any state
of society more adverse to the intellectual improvement
of mankind than one which admitted of no middle line
between gross dissoluteness and fanatical mortification.
An equable tone of public morals, social and humane,
verging neither to voluptuousness nor austerity, seems
the most adapted to genius, or at least to letters, as it is
to individual comfort and national prosperity. After the
introduction of monkery and its unsocial theory of duties,
the serious and reflecting part of mankind, on whom
science most relies, were turned to habits which, in the
most favourable view, could not quicken the intellectual
energies ; and it might be a difficult question whether
the cultivators and admirers of useful literature were
less likely to be found among the profligate citizens of
Eome and their barbarian conquerors or the melancholy
recluses of the wilderness.

Such therefore was the state of learning before the
subversion of the Western Empire. And we may form
some notion how little probability there was of its pro-
ducing any excellent fruits, even if that revolution had
never occurred, by considering what took place in Greece
during the subsequent ages ; where, although there was
some attention shown to preserve the best monuments of
antiquity, and diligence in compiling from them, yet no
one original writer of any superior merit arose, and
learning, though plunged but for a short period into mere
darkness, may be said to have languished in a middle
region of twilight for the greater part of a thousand
years.

But not to delay ourselves in this speculation, the final
settlement of barbarous nations in Gaul, Spain, and Italy
consummated the ruin of literature. Their first irrup-
tions were uniformly attended with devastation ; and if
some of 1 the Gothic kings, after their establishment,
proved humane and civilized sovereigns, 1 yet the nation

State of Society.' CORRUPTION OF LATIN.

275

gloried in its original rudeness, and viewed witli no
unreasonable disdain arts which had neither preserved
their cultivators from corruption nor raised them from
servitude. Theodoric, the most famous of the Ostrogoth
kings in Italy, could not write his name, and is said to
have restrained his countrymen from attending those
schools of learning by which he, or rather perhaps his
minister Cassiodorus, endeavoured to revive the studies
of his Italian subjects. Scarcely one of the barbarians,
so long as they continued unconfused with the native
inhabitants, acquired the slightest tincture of letters;
and the praise of equal ignorance was soon aspired to
and attained by the entire mass of the Roman laity.
They, however, could hardly have divested themselves
so completely of all acquaintance with even the elements
of learning, if the language in which books were written
had not ceased to be their natural dialect. This remark-
able change in the speech of France, Spain, and Italy is
most intimately connected with the extinction of learn-
ing ; and there is enough of obscurity as well as of interest
in the subject to deserve some discussion.

It is obvious, on the most cursory view of the French
and Spanish languages, that they, as well as the tion
Italian, are derived from one common source, of the Latin
the Latin. That must therefore have been at langTiage '
some period, and certainly not since the establishment of
the barbarous nations in Spain and Gaul, substituted in
ordinary use for the original dialects of those countries
which are generally supposed to have been Celtic, not
essentially differing from those which are spoken in
Wales and Ireland. Rome, says Augustin, imposed not
only her yoke, but her language, upon conquered nations.
The success of such an attempt is indeed very remarkable.
Though it is the natural effect of conquest, or even of
commercial intercourse, to ingraft fresh words and foreign
idioms on the stock of the original language, yet the
entire disuse of the latter, and adoption of one radically
different, scarcely takes place in the lapse of a far longer
period than that of the Roman dominion in Gaul. Thus,
in part of Britany the people speak a language which
has perhaps sustained no essential alteration from the
revolution of two thousand years ; and we know how 1
steadily another Celtic dialect has kept its ground iu

t 2

276

ANCIENT LATIN

Chap. IX. Part I.

Wales, notwithstanding English laws and government,
and the long line of contiguous frontier which brings the
natiyes of that principality into contact with Englishmen.
Nor did the Romans ever establish their language (I
know not whether they wished to do so) in 'this island,
as we perceive by that stubborn British tongue which has
survived two conquests. 4

In Gaul and in Spain, how r ever, they did succeed, as
the present state of the French and peninsular languages
renders undeniable, though by gradual changes, and not,
as the Benedictine authors of the Histoire Litteraire de la
France seem to imagine, by a sudden and arbitrary inno-
vation.® This is neither possible in itself, nor agreeable
to the testimony of Irenams, bishop of Lyons at the end
of the second century, who laments the necessity of
learning Celtic/ But although the inhabitants of these
provinces came at length to make use of Latin so com-
pletely as their mother tongue that few vestiges of their
original Celtic could perhaps be discovered in their com-
mon speech, it does not follow that they spoke with the
pure pronunciation of Italians, far less with that con-
formity to the written sounds which we assume to lie
essential to the expression of Latin words.

It appears to be taken for granted that the Romans
Ancient pronounced their language as we do at present,
Latin pro- so far at least as the enunciation of all the con-
nunciation. 60nan ^ however we may admit our deviations
from the classical standard in propriety of sounds and in
measure of time. Yet the example of our own language,
and of French, might show us that orthography may
become a very inadequate representative of pronunciation.

d Gibbon roundly asserts that “ the
language of Virgil and Cicero, though
with some inevitable mixture of corrup-
tion, was so universally adopted in Africa,
Spain, Gaul, Great Britain, and Pahnonia,
that the faint traces of the Punic or
Celtic idioms were preserved only in the
mountains or among the peasants. 0 De-
cline and Fall, vol i. p. 60 (8vo. edit.).
For Britain he quotes Tacitus's Life of
Agricola as his voucher. But the only
passage in this work that gives the least
eolour to Gibbon’s assertion is one in
which Agricola is said to have encou-
raged the children of British chieftains

to acquire a taste for liberal studies, and
to have succeeded so much by judicious
commendation of their abilities, ut qui
modo linguam Roman am abnuebant, elo-
quentiam concupiscorerit. (c. 21.) This,
it is sufficiently obvious, is very different
from the national adoption of Latin as a
mother tongue.

* t vii. preface.

f It appears, by a passage quoted from
the digest by M. Bonamy, M&n. de
l'Acad. des Inscriptions, t xxiv. p. 589,
that Celtic was spoken In Gaul, or at
least parts of it, as well as Punk in
Africa.

State of Society.

PRONUNCIATION.

277

It is indeed capable of proof that in the purest ages of
Latinity some variation existed between these two.
Those numerous changes in spelling which distinguish
the same words in the poetry of Ennius and of Virgil are *
best explained by the supposition of their being accom-
modated to the current pronunciation. Harsh combina-
tions of letters, softened down through delicacy of eaf or
rapidity of utterance, gradually lost their place in the
written language. Thus eafregit and adrogavit assumed
a form representing their more liquid sound; and* auctor
was latterly spelled autor , which has been followed in
French and Italian. Autor was probably so pronounced
at all times; and the orthography was afterwards cor-
rected or corrupted, whichever we please to say, according
to the sound. We have the best authority to assert that
the final rn was very faintly pronounced, rather it seems
as a rest and short interval between two syllables than
an articulate letter ; nor indeed can we conceive upon
what other ground it was subject to elision before a vowel
in verse, since wo cannot suppose that the nice ears of
Rome would have submitted to a capricious rule of
poetry for which Greece presented no analogy. 8

A decisive proof, in my opinion, of the deviation which
took place, through the rapidity of ordinary elocution,
from the strict laws of enunciation, may be found in the
metre of Terence. His verses, which are absolutely
refractory to the common laws of prosody, may be readily
scanned by the application of this principle. Thus, in
the first act of the Heautontimorumenos, a part selected
at random, I have found, I. Vowels contracted or dropped
so as to shorten the word by a syllable ; in ret, vid, diutius,
ei, solius , earn, unius , suam, divitias, senex , voluptatem, ilUus,
Kernel ; II. The proceleusmatic foot, or four short sylla-
bles, instead of the dactyl ; seen. i. v. 59, 73, 76, 88, 109 ;
seen. ii. v. 36 ; III. The elision of s in words ending
with us or is short, and sometimes even of the whole
syllable, before the next word beginning with a vowel ;
in seen. i. v. 30, 81, 98, 101, 116, 119 ; seen. ii. v. 28.

* Afcque eadem ilia liters, quoties ui- pene enjusdam nov® liter® sonumreddat.
Uma eat, et vocalem verbi sequentis ita Neque enim eximitur, sed obscuratur, et
oontingit, lit in earn transire possit, etiam tanttim aliqua inter duos rocales velut
si scribitur, taraen parum exprimitur, ut notaest,neips® coeant Quintilian, Insti-
Multum ilk, et Quantum erat : adeo ut tut. 1. ix. c. 4, p. 585, edit Capperonie*

278

CORRUPTION OF

Chap. IX. Part I.

IY. The first syllable of ille is repeatedly shortened, and
indeed nothing is more usual in Terence than this
licence ; whence we may collect how ready this word
was for abbreviation into the French and Italian articles.
Y. The last letter of apud is cut off, seen. i. v. 120; and
seen. ii. v. 8. VI. Hodie is used as a pyrrhichius, in
seen. ii. v. 11. VII. Lastly, there is a clear instance of a
short syllable, the antepenultimate of hnpulerim , length-
ened on account of the accent at the 113th verse of the
first scene.

These licences are in all probability chiefly colloquial,

its corm an< ^ not b ave k een adopted in public

tionby the harangues, to which the precepts of rhetorical
populace, writers commonly relate. But if the more
elegant language of the Bomans, since such vre must
suppose to have been copied by Terence for his higher
characters, differed so much in ordinary discourse from
their orthography, it is probable that the vulgar went
into much greater deviations. The popular pronuncia-
tion errs generally, we might say perhaps invariably, by
abbreviation of words, and by liquefying consonants, as
is natural to the rapidity of colloquial speech.* 1 It is by
their knowledge of orthography and etymology that the
more educated part of the community is preserved from
these corrupt modes of pronunciation. There is always
therefore a standard by which common speech may be
rectified ; and in proportion to the diffusion of knowledge
and politeness the deviations from it will be more slight
and the and gradual. But in distant provinces, and
provincials, especially where the language itself is but of
recent introduction, many more changes may be expected
to occur. Even in France and England there are pro-
vincial dialects, which, if written with all their anomalies
of pronunciation as well as idiom, would seem strangely
out of unison with the regular language ; and in Italy, as

*» The following passage of Quintilian natio, ita omnes com pu tare et vcltit admi*
is an evidence both of the omission of merare literag, molestum et odiosum.-—
harsh or superfluous letters by the best Nam et vocales frequenttssimb coeunt, et
speakers, and of the corrupt abbreviations consonant! um qusedam insequente vocal!
usual with the worst Dilucida vero erit dissimulantur; ntrlusque exeroplum po>
pronunciatio primum, si verba tota exe- suimus ; Multum ille et terris. Vitatur
gerit, quorum pars devorari, pars destitui etiam duriorum inter se congressns, unde
solet pleriaque extremes syllabus non pro- ptUexit et collegit, et qu* alio loco dicta
ferentibus, dam priorum sono indulgent sunt. 1. ii. c. 3, p. 696.

Ut est autem necessaria verbomm expla-

State op Society. LATIN PRONUNCIATION.

279

is well known, the varieties of dialect are still more
striking. Now, in an advancing state of society, and
especially with such a vigorous political circulation as
we experience in England, language will constantly ap-
proximate to uniformity, as provincial expressions are
more and more rejected for incorrectness or inelegance.
But, where literature is on the decline, and public mis-
fortunes contract the circle of those who are solicitcus
about refinement, as in the last ages of the Boman tm-

{ )irb, there will be no longer any definite standard of
iving speech, nor any general desire to conform to it if
one could be found ; and thus the vicious corruptions of
the vulgar will entirely predominate. The niceties of
ancient idiom will be totally lost, while new idioms will
be formed out of violations of grammar sanctioned by
usage, which, among a civilized people, would have been
proscribed at their appearance.

Such appears to have been the progress of corruption
in the Latin language. The adoption of words from the
Teutonic dialects of the barbarians, which took place
very freely, would not of itself have destroyed the
character of that language, though it sullied its purity.
The worst law Latin of the middle ages is still Latin, if
its barbarous terms have been bent to the regular inflec-
tions. It is possible, on the other hand, to write whole
pages of Italian, wherein every word shall be of unequi-
vocal Latin derivation, though the character and per-
sonality, if I may so say, of the language be entirely
dissimilar. But, as I conceive, the loss of literature
took away the only check upon arbitrary pronunciation
and upon erroneous grammar. Each people innovated
through caprice, imitation of their neighbours, or some
of those indescribable causes which dispose the organs of
different nations to different sounds. The French melted
down the middle consonants ; the Italians omitted the
final. Corruptions arising out of ignorance w r ere mingled
with those of pronunciation. It would have been mar-
vellous if illiterate and semi-barbarous provincials had
preserved that delicate precision in using the inflections
of tenses which our best scholars do not clearly attain.
The common speech of any people whose language is
highly complicated will be full of solecisms. The French
inflections are not comparable in number or delicacy to

280

CORRUPTION OF

Chap. IX. Part I

the Latin, and yet the vulgar confuse their most ordinary
forms.

But, in all probability, the variation of these deriva-
tive languages from popular Latin has been considerably
less than it appears. In the purest ages of Latinity the
citizens of Home itself made use of many terms which
we deem barbarous, and of many idioms which we should
reject as modem. That highly complicated grammar,
which the best writers employed, was too elliptical and
obscure, too deficient in the connecting parts of speech,
for general use. We cannot indeed ascertain in what
degree the vulgar Latin differed from that of Cicero or
JSeneca. It would be highly absurd to imagine, as some
are said to have done, that modem Italian was spoken at
Rome under Augustus. 1 But I believe it may be asserted
not only that much the greater part of those words in the
present language of Italy which strike us as incapable
of a Latin etymology are in fact derived from those
current in the Augustan age, but that very many phrases
which offended nicer ears prevailed in the same ver-
nacular speech, and have passed from thence into the
modem French and Italian. Such, for example, was the
frequent use of prepositions to indicate a relation be-
tween two parts of a sentence which a classical writer
would have made to depend on mere inflection. 11

From the difficulty of retaining a right discrimination
of tense seems to have proceeded the active auxiliary
verb. It is possible that this was borrowed from the
Teutonic languages of the barbarians, and accommodated
both by them and by the natives to words of Latin origin.
The passive auxiliary is obtained by a very ready reso-
lution of any tense in that mood, and has not been alto-
gether dispensed with even in Greek, while in Latin it
is use^ much more frequently. It is not quite so easy to
perceive the propriety of the active habeo or teneo, one

i Tiraboschi (Storia delL Lett Ital. boy would have told him. This essay,
t. iii. preface, p. v.) imputes this paradox which by some accident had escaped my
to Bembo and Quadrio ; but 1 can hardly notice till 1 had nearly finished the ob-
beiieve that either of them could main- servations in my text, contains, I think,
tain it in a literal sense. the best view that I have seen of the pro-

k M. Bonamy, in an essay printed in cess of transition by which Latin was
Mdm. de l’Acaddmie des Inscriptions, changed into French and Italian. Add
t xxiv., has produced several proofs of however, the preface to Tiraboschi’s third
this from the classical writers on agri- volume and the thirty -second dissertation
culture and other arts, though some of his of Muratori.
instances arc not in point, as any school-

State of Society LATIN PRONUNCIATION.

281

or both of which all modem languages have adopted as
their auxiliaries in conjugating the verb. But in some
instances this analysis is not improper ; and it may be
supposed that nations, careless of etymology or correct-
ness, applied the same verb by a rude analogy to cases
where it ought not strictly to have been employed. 1 "

Next to the changes founded on pronunciation and to
the substitution of auxiliary verbs for inflections, the
usage of the definite and indefinite articles in nouns
appears the most considerable step in the transmutation
of Latin into its derivative languages. None but Latin,
I believe, has ever wanted this part of speech ; and the
defect to which custom reconciled the .Romans would
be an insuperable stumbling-block to nations who were
to translate their original idiom into that language. A
coarse expedient of applying unus , ipse , or tile to the pur-
poses of an article might perhaps be no un frequent
vulgarism of the provincials ; and after the Teutonic
tribes brought in their own grammar, it wad natural that
a corruption should become universal, which in fact
supplied a real and essential deficiency.

That the quantity of Latin syllables is neglected, or
rather lost, in modem pronunciation, seems to pr 0nuilcia .
be generally admitted. Whether, indeed, the tion no
ancient Romans, in their ordinary speaking, rented
distinguished the measure of syllables with such by quantity,
uniform musical accuracy as we imagine, giving a cer-
tain time to those termed long, and exactly half that
duration to the short, might very reasonably be ques-
tioned ; though this was probably done, or attempted to
be done, by every reader of poetry. Certainly, however,
the laws of quantity were forgotten, and an accentual
pronunciation came to predominate, before Latin had
ceased to be a living languago. A Christian writer
named Commodiajms, who lived before the end of the
third century according to some, or, as others think, in
the reign of Constantine, has left us a philological
curiosity, in a series of attacks on the pagan superstitions,
composed in what are meant to be verses, regulated
by accent instead of quantity, exactly as we read Virgil
at present"

m See L&nzi, Sagglo della Lingua ® No description can give so adequate
Etrusea, t i. c. 431 ; Mdm. de l’ Acad, des a notion of this extraordinary perform-
Inscrip, t xxiv. p. 632. once as a short specimen. Take the in*

282 PRONUNCIATION NOT REGULATED Chap. IX. Part I,

It is not improbable that Commodianus may have
written in Africa, the province in which more than any
the purity of Latin was debased. At the end of the
fourth century St. Augustin assailed his old enemies, the
Donatists, with nearly the same arms that Commodianus
had wielded against heathenism. But as the refined and
various music of hexameters was unlikely to be relished
by the vulgar, he prudently adopted a different measure . 0
All the nations of Europe seem to love the trochaic
verse ; it was frequent on the Greek and Boman stage ;
it is more common than any other in the popular poetry
of modem languages. This proceeds from its simplicity,
its liveliness, and its ready accommodation to dancing
and music. In St. Austin’s poem he united to a trochaic
measure the novel attraction of rhyme.

As Africa must have lost all regard to the rules of
measure in the fourth century, so it appears that Gaul
was not more correct in the next two ages. A poem
addressed by Auspicius bishop of Toul to count Arbo-
gastes, of earlier date probably than the invasion of
Clovis, is written with no regard to quantity. 1 * The

troductory lines ; which really, prejudices
of education apart, are by no means in-
harmonious -

Praefatio nostra viam erranti demon-
strat,

Respectumque bonnm, cum venerit
sieculi meta,

Sternum fieri, quod discredunt inscia
corda.

Ego similiter erravi tempore multo,

Fana prosequendo, parentibus insciis
ipsis.

Abstuli me tandem inde, legendo de
lege.

Testificor Dominum, doleo, proh ! ci-
vica turba

Inscia quod perdit, pergens deos quae-
rere vanos.

Ob ea perdoctus ignoros instruo verum.

Commodianus however did not keep
up this excellence in every part. Some
of his lines are not reducible to any pro-
nunciation, without the summary rules
of Procrustes; as for instance —

Paratus ad epulas, et refugiscere prae-
cepta; or, Capillos inficitis, oculos full-
gine relinitis.

It must be owned that this text is
exceedingly corrupt, and I should not
despair of seeing a truly critical editor,
unscrupulous as his fraternity are apt to
be, improve his lines into unblemished

hexameters. Till this time arrives, how-
ever, we must consider him either as
utterly ignorant of metrical distinctions,
or at least as aware that the populace
whom he addressed did not observe them
in speaking. Commodianus is published
by Dawes at the end of his edition of
Minucius Felix. Some specimens are
quoted in Harris’s Philological Inquiries.

0 Archroologia, vol. xiv. p. 188. The
following are tile first lines : —

Abundantia peceatorum solefc fratres
conturhare ;

Propter hoc Dominus nos ter voluit nos
prsemonere,

Comparans regnum coelorum reticulo
misso in mare,

Congregant! muitos pieces, omne genus
hinc et inde,

Quos cum traxissent ad littus, tunc
cceperunt separare,

Bonos in vasa miserunt, reliquos malos
in mare.

This trash is much below the level of
Augustin; but it could not have been
later than his age.

P Recueil des Historiens, t. 1. p. 814 ;
it begins in the following manner : —

Praacelso expectabili his Arbogasto
comiti

Auspicius, qui diUgo, salutem dioo
plurimam. Magna*

State of Society.

BY QUANTITY.

283

bishop by whom this was composed is mentioned by his
contemporaries as a man of learning. Probably he did
not choose to perplex the barbarian to whom he was
writing (for Arbogastes is plainly a barbarous name) by
legitimate Roman metre. In the next century Gregory
of Tours informs ns that Chilperio attempted to write
Latin verses ; but the lines could not be reconciled to
any division of feet ; his ignorance having confounded
long and short syllables together. q Kow Chilperic must
have learned to speak Latin like other kings of the
Franks, and was a smatterer in several kinds of literature.
If Chilperic therefore was not master of these distinc-
tions, we may conclude that the bishops and other
Romans with whom he conversed did not observe them ;
and that his blunders in versification arose from ignorance
of rules, which, however fit to be preserved in poetry,
were entirely obsolete in the living Latin of his age.
Indeed the frequency of false quantities in the poets
even of tho fifth, but much more of the sixth century, is
palpable. Fortunatus is quite full of them. This seems
a decisive proof that the ancient pronunciation was lost.
Avitus tells us that few preserv ed the proper measure of
syllables in singing. Yet lie was bishop of Yienne,
where a purer pronunciation might be expected than in
the remoter parts of Gaul. r

Defective, however, as it had become in respect of
pronunciation, Latin was still spoken in France Cbange of
during the sixth and seventh centuries. We Latin into
have compositions of that time, intended for the Romance *
people, in grammatical language. A song is still extant
in rhyme and loose accentual measure, written upon a
victory of Clotaire II. over the Saxons in 622, and ob-
viously intended for circulation among the people/ For-

Magnas coelesti Domino rependo corde
gratias

Quod te Tullensi proxime magnum in
urbe vidimus.

Multis me tuis artibus leetificabas
an tea.

Bed nunc feeisti maxirao me exultare
gaudio.

Chilpericus rex . . . , . . confecit
duos libros, quorum verelculi debiles nui-
lts pedibus subsistere possunt : in quibus,
dum non intelligebat, pro longis syllabus
breves posuit, et pro brevibus longas sta-
tuebat 1. vi. c. 46.

r Mdm. de I’Acad&nie des Inscrip-
tions, t xvii. Hist Littdraire de la
France, t. ii. p. 28. It seems rather pro-
bable that the poetry of Avitus belongs
to the fifth century, though not very far
from its termination. He was the cor-
respondent of Sidonius Apoilinaris, who
died in 489, and we may presume his
poetry to have beeu written rather early
in life.

8 One stanza of this song will suffice
to show that the Latin language was yet
unchanged : — De

284

LATIN BECOMES ROMANCE. Chap. IX. Part L

tunatus says, in his Life of St. Aubin of Angers, that he
should take care not to use any expression unintelligible
to the people . 1 Baudemind, in the middle of the seventh
century, declares, in his Life of St. Amand, that he writes
in a rustic and vulgar style, that the reader may be
excited to imitation . 11 Not that these legends were
actually perused by the populace, for the very art of
reading was confined to a few. But they were read
publicly in the churches, and probably with a pronun-
ciation accommodated to the corruptions of ordinary
language. Still the Latin syntax must have been toler-
ably understood ; and we may therefore say that Latin
had not ceased to be a living language, in Gaul at least,
before the latter paid of the seventh century. Faults
indeed against the rules of grailtmar, as well as unusual
idioms, perpetually occur in the best writers of the Me-
rovingian period, such as Gregory of Tours ; while char-
ters drawn up by less expert scholars deviate much
further from purity.*

The corrupt provincial idiom became gradually more
and more dissimilar to grammatical Latin ; and the lingua
Romana rustica, as the vulgar patois (to borrow a word
that I cannot well translate) had been called, acquired a
distinct character as a new language in the eighth cen-
tury . 7 Latin orthography, which had been hitherto
pretty well maintained in books, though not always in
charters, gave way to a new spelling, conformably to the
current pronunciation. Thus we find lui, for illius, in
the Formularies of Marculfus ; and Tu lo juva in a liturgy
of Charlemagne’s age, for Tu ilium juva. When this
barrier was once broken down, such a deluge of innova-
tion poured in that all the characteristics of Latin were

I)e Cldtario est canere rege Franconim,
Qui ivi pugnare cum gente Saxonum,
Quam graviter provenisset missis Sax-
onum,

Si non fuisaet inclitus Faro de gente
Burgundionum.

t Proc&vendum est, ne ad aures po-
jyuli minus aliquid inteliigibile profe-
ratur. M&n. de l’Acad. t xvii. p. 712.

u Rnstko et plebeio sermone propter
esemplum et imit&tionem. Id. ibid.

* Hist Littdraire de la France, t. iii. p. 5.
M6m. de l'Acadgmie, t xxiv. p. ei 7. Nou-
veau TraiUde Diplomatique, t iv. p. 485.

y Hist Litt^raire de la France, t vii.
p. 12. Tbe editors say that it is men-
tioned by name even in tbe seventh cen-
tury, which is very natural, as the cor-
ruption of Latin had then become
striking. It is familiarly known that
illiterate persons understand a more cor-
rect language than they use themselves;
so that the corruption of Latin might
have gone to a considerable length among
tbe people, while sermons were preached,
and tolerably comprehended, in a purer
grammar. *

State op Society. ITS CORRUPTION IN ITALY.

285

effaced in writing as well as speaking, and the existence
of a new language became undeniable. In a council held at
Tours in 813 the bishops are ordered to have certain homi-
lies-of the fathers translated into the rustic Roman, as well
as the German tongue. 2 After this it is unnecessary to
multiply proofs of the change which Latin had undergone.

In Italy the progressive corruptions of the Latin
language were analogous to those which oc- Ita corrap .
curred in France, though we do not find in tion in ltal r-
writings any unequivocal specimens of a new formation
at so early a period. But the old inscriptions, even of
the fourth and fifth centuries, are full of solecisms and
corrupt orthography. In legal instruments under the
Lombard kings the Latin inflections are indeed used,
but with so little regard to propriety that it is obvious
the writers had not the slightest t incture of grammatical
knowledge. This observation extends to a very large
proportion of such documents down to the twelfth
century, and is as applicable to France and Spain as
it is to Italy. In these charters the peculiar charac-
teristics of Italian orthography and grammar frequently
appear. Thus we find, in the eighth century, diveatis
for debeatis, da for de in the ablative, avendi for
habendi, dava for dabat, cedo a deo, and ad ecclesia,
among many similar corruptions. 14 Latin was so changed,
it is said by a writer of Charlemagne’s age, that scarcely
any part of it was popularly known. Italy indeed had
suffered more than France itself by invasion, and was
reduced to a lower state of barbarism, though probably,
from the greater distinctness of pronunciation habitual
to the Italians, they lost less of their original language
than the French. I do not find, however, in the
writers who have treated this subject, any express
evidence of a vulgar language distinct from Latin
earlier than the close of the tenth century, when it is
said in the epitaph of Pope Gregory V., who died in
999, that he instructed the people in three dialects —
the Frankish or German, the vulgar, and the Latin. b

* Mdra. de l’Acad. des Insc. t xvli. b Usue FranclscA, vulgari, et voc®

See two memoirs In this volume by du LatinIL

Clos and le Boeuf, especially the latter, Instituit populos eloquio tripid.

as well as that already mentioned in Fontanini dell’ Eloquenaa It ali a aa,
t xxiv. p. 682, by M. Bonaray. p. 15. Muratori, Dissert xxxit

• Muratori, Dissert i. and xliii. *

286

IGNORANCE CONSEQUENT ON Chap. IX. Part 1.

When Latin had thus ceased to he a living language,
the whole treasury of knowledge was looked up
consequent from the eyes of the people. The few who
on the disuse might have imbibed a taste for literature, if
of ^ books had been accessible to them, were re-
duced to abandon pursuits that could only be cultivated
through a kind of education not easily within their reach.
Schools, confined to cathedrals and monasteries, and ex-
clusively designed for the purposes of religion, afforded
no encouragement or opportunities to the laity.® The
worst effect was, that, as the newly-formed languages
were hardly made use of in writing, Latin being still
preserved in all legal instruments and public correspond-
ence, the very use of letters, as well as of books, was
forgotten. For many centuries, to sum up the account
of ignorance in a word, it was rare for a layman, of
whatever rank, to know how to sign his name. d Their
charters, till the use of seals became general, were sub-
scribed with the mark of the cross. Still more extraor-
dinary it was to find one who had any tincture of
learning. Even admitting every indistinct commenda-
tion of a monkish biographer (with whom a knowledge
of church-music would pass for literature*), we could
make out a very short list of scholars. None certainly
were more distinguished as such than Charlemagne and
Alfred. But the former, unless we reject a very plain
testimony, was incapable of writing ; f and Alfred found

c Histoire Littbrairede la France, t vi. his learned vassal: Noveritis, demines
p. 20. Mura tori, Dissert xliil. quod rex Hliteratus est asinus coronatus.

d Nouveau Traits de Diplomatique, Gesta Comitum Andegavensium. In the
t ii. p. 419. This became, the editors same book, Geoffrey, father of our
say, much less unusual about the end of Henry II., is said to be optime literatus;
the thirteenth century ; a pretty late which perhaps imports little more learo-
period l A few signatures to deeds &p- * n g than his ancestor Fuik possessed,
pear in the fourteenth century; in the f The passage in Eginhard, which has
next they are more frequent Ibid. The occasioned so much dispute, speaks for
emperor Frederic Barbarossa could not itself: Tentabat et scribere, tabulasque
read (Struvius, Corpus Hist German, et codicilios ad hoc in lecticula sub
tip. 377), nor John king of Bohemia cervicalibus clrcumferre solebat, ut, cum
in the middle of the fourteenth century vacuum tempus esset, manum effigiandis
(SismondJ, t v. p. 206), nor Philip the literis assuefaceret ; sed parum prosper^
Hardy, king of France, although the son successit labor praepos terns ac serb in-
of St Louis. (Velly, t vi. p. 426.) choatua.

• Louis IV., king of France, laugh- Many are still unwilling to believe
ing at Falk count of Anjou, who sung that Charlemagne could not write. M.
anthems among the choristers of Tours, Ampbre observes that the emperor asserts
received the following pithy, epistle from himself to' have been the author of the

State op Society. THE DISUSE OF LATIN.

287

difficulty in making a translation from the pastoral in-
struction of St. Gregory, on account of his imperfect
knowledge of Latin. 8

Whatever mention, therefore, we find of learning and
the learned during these dark ages, must be understood
to relate only to such as were within the pale of clergy,
which indeed was pretty extensive, and comprehended
many who did not exercise the offices of religious
ministry. But even the clergy were, for a long period,
not very materially superior, as a body, to the unin-
structed laity. A cloud of ignorance overspread the
whole face of the church, hardly broken by a few glim-
mering lights, who owe much of their distinction to the
surrounding darkness. In the sixth century the best
writers in Latin were scarcely read ; h and perhaps from
the middle of this age to the eleventh there was, in a
general view of literature, little difference to be discerned.
If we look more accurately, there will appear certain
gradual shades of twilight on each side of the greatest
obscurity. France reached her lowest point about the
beginning of the eighth century ; but England was at
that time more respectable, and did not fall into com-
plete degradation till the middle of the ninth. There
could be nothing more deplorable than the state of
letters in Italy and in England during the succeeding
century ; but France cannot be denied to have been
uniformly, though very slowly, progressive from the time
of Charlemagne.'

Libri Carolini, and is said by some to
have composed verses. Hist Lltt de la
France, iii. 37. But did not Henry VIII.
claim a book against Luther, which was
not written by himself? Qux facit per
alium,facit per se, is in all cases a royal
prerogative. Even if the book wer^
Charlemagne’s own, might he not have
dictated it? I have been informed that
there is a manuscript at Vienna with
autograph notes of Charlemagne in the
margin. But is there sufficient evidence
of their ‘genuineness? The great diffi-
tnlty is to get over the words which I
U&ve quoted from Eginhard. M. Ampfcre
fcgeniously conjectures that the passage
km not relate to simple common writing,
lat to calligraphy ; the art of delineating
iuuracten in a beautiful manner, prac-

tised by the copyists, and of which a
contemporaneous specimen may be seen
in the well-known Bible of the British
Museum. Yet it must be remembered
that Charlemagne s early life passed in
the depths of ignorance; and Eginhard
gives a fair reason why he failed in
acquiring the art of writing, that he
began too late. Fingers of fifty are not
made for a new skill. It is not, of
course, implied by the words that he
could not write his own name ; but that
he did not acquire such a facility as he
desired. [1848.]

8 Spelman, Vit Alfred. Append.

h Hist Litteraire de la France, t lit
p. 5.

i These four dark centuries, the eighth,
ninth, tenth, and eleventh, occupy five

288

GENERAL IGNORANCE. Chap. IX. Part I.

Of this prevailing ignorance it is easy to produce
abundant testimony. Contracts were made verbally, for
want of notaries capable of drawing up charters; and
these, when written, were frequently barbarous and un-
grammatical to an incredible degree. For some con-
siderable intervals scarcely any monument of literature
lias been preserved, except a few jejune chronicles, the
vilest legends of saints, or verses equally destitute of
Spirit and metre. In alihost every council the ignorance
of the clergy forms a subject for reproach. It is asserted
by one held in 992 that scarcely a single person was to
be found in Borne itself who knew the first elements of
letters. 11 Not one priest of a thousand in Spain, about
the age of Charlemagne, could address a common letter
of salutation to . another.” 1 In England, Alfred declares
that ho could not recollect a single priest south of the
Thames (the most civilized part of England), at the time
of his accession, who understood the ordinary prayers,
or could translate Latin into his mother tongue. n Nor
was this better in the time of Dunstan, when, it is said,
none of the clergy knew how to write or translate a
Latin letter. 0 The homilies which they preached were

large quarto volumes of the Lfterary
History of France, by the fathers of St
Maur. But the most useful part will
be found in the general view at the com-
mencement of each volume; the re-
mainder ia taken up with biographies,
into which a reader may dive at random,
and sometimes bring up a curious fact
I may refer also to the 14 th volume of
Leber, Collections Relatives & l'Histoire
de France, where some learned disserta-
tions by the Abbds Lebeuf and Goujet, a
little before the middle of the last cen-
tury, are reprinted [Note L]
Tiraboscbi, Storia della Letteratura,
t. HL, and Muratori’s forty-third Disser-
tation, are good authorities for the con-
dition of letters in Italy; but I cannot
easily give references to all the books
which I have consulted
k Tiraboscbi, t iii. p. 198.

® Mabillon, De Re Diplomatic!!, p. 55.
fbe reason alleged, indeed, is that they
irefe wholly occupied with studying
Arabic, in order to carry on a controversy
iritb the Saracens. But, as this is not
very credible, we may rest with the main

fiict that they could write no Latin.

n Spelman, Vit. Alfred. Append. The
whole drift of Alfred's preface to this
translation is to defend the expediency
of rendering books into English, on ac-
count of the general ignorance of Latin.
The zeal which this excellent prince
shows for literature is delightful. Let
us endeavour, he says, that all the Eng-
lish youth, especially the children of
those wbb are fres-born, and can educate
them, may lean) to read English before
they take to any employment. After-
wards such as please may be instructed
sin Latin. Before the Danish invasion
indeed, he tells us, churches were well
fumighed with books; but the priests
got little good from them, being written
in a foreign language w'hich they could
not understand.

° Mabillon, I>c Re Diplomatic^, p. M.
Ordericus Vitalis, a more candid judge of
our unfortunate ancestors than other
contemporary annalists, says that the
English were, at the Conquest, rude and
almost illiterate, which he ascribes to
the Danish invasion. Du Chesne, Hist

State of Society. SCARCITY OF BOOKS. 289

compiled for their use by some bishops, from former
works of the same kind, or the writings of the fathers.

This universal ignorance was rendered unavoidable,
among other causes, by the scarcity of books, * scarcity of
which could only be procured at an immense ?XX)ks -
price. From the conquest of Alexandria by the Saracens
at the beginning of the seventh century, when the
Egyptian papyrus almost ceased to be imported into
Europe, to the close of the eleventh, about which time
the art of making paper from cotton rags seems to have
been introduced, there were no materials for writing ex-
cept parchment, a substance too expensive to be readily
spared for mere purposes of literature . 11 Hence an un-
fortunate practice gained ground, of erasing a manuscript
in order to substitute another on the same skin. This
occasioned the loss of many ancient authors, who have
made way for the legends of saints, or other ecclesiastical
rubbish.

If we would listen to some literary historians, we
should believe that the darkest ages contained
many individuals, not only distinguished among eminent
their contemporaries, but positively eminent
for abilities and knowledge. A proneness to
extol every monk of whose production a few letters or a

Norm. Script, p. 518. However, Ingulfus
tells us that the library of Croyland
contained above three hundred volumes,
till the unfortunate fire that destroyed
that abbey in 1091. Gale, XV Scriptores,
t i. 93. Such a library was very extra-
ordinary in the eleventh century, and
could not have been equalled for some
ages afterwards, Ingulfus mentions at
the same time a nadir, as he calls it, or
planetarium, executed in various metals.
This had been presented to abbot Tur-
ketul in the tenth century by a king of
France, and was, I make no doubt, of
Arabian or Greek manufacture.

P Parchment was so scarce that none
could be procured about 1120 for an il-
luminated copy of the Bible. Warton’s
Hint, of English Poetry, Dissert II. I
suppose the deficiency was of skins beau-
tiful enough for this purpose ; it cannot
be meant that there was no parchment
for legal instruments.

Manuscripts written on papyrus as
VOL. III.

may be supposed from the fragility of
the material, as well as the difficulty of
procuring it, are of extreme rarity. That
in the British Museum, being a charter
to a church at Ravenna in 572, is in
every respect the most curious : and in-
deed both Mabillon and Muratori seem
never to have seen anything written on
papyrus, though they trace its occasional,
use down to the eleventh or twelfth cen-
turies. Mabillon, De Re Diplomatic^,
1. it ; Muratori, AntichitA Italiane, Dis-
sert xliii. p. 602. But the authors of
the Nouveau Traits de Diplomatique
speak of several manuscripts on this
material as extant in France and Italy,
t i. p. 493.

As to the general scarcity and high
price of books in the middle ages, Ro-
bertson (Introduction to Hist Charles V.
note x.), and Warton in the above-cited
dissertation, not to quote authors less
acoessible, have collected some of the
le ad in g facts ; to whom I refer the reader.

U

290

WANT OF LITERARY EMINENCE. Chap. IX. Part I.

devotional treatise survives, eveiy bishop of whom it is
related that he composed homilies, runs through the
laborious work of the Benedictines of St. Maur, the
Literary History of France, and, in a less degree, is
observable even in Tiraboschi, and in most books of this
class. Bede, Alcuin, Hincmar, Raban, and a number of
inferior names, become real giants of learning in their
uncritical panegyrics. But one might justly say that
ignorance is the smallest defect of the writers of these
dark ages. Several of them were tolerably acquainted
with books ; but that wherein they are uniformly defi-
cient is original argument or expression. Almost every
qne is a compiler of scraps from the fathers, or from such
semi-classical authors as Boethius, Cassiodorus, or Mar-
tianus Capella. q Indeed I am not aware that there
appeared more than two really considerable men in the
republic of letters from the sixth to the middle of the
eleventh century — John, sumamed Scotus or Erigena, a
native of Ireland ; and Gerbert, who became pope by
the name of Silvester II. : the first endowed with a bold
and acute metaphysical genius; the second excellent,
for the time when he lived, in mathematical science and
mechanical inventions/

Lest I should seem to have spoken
too peremptorily, I wish it to be under-
stood that I pretend to hardly any direct
acquaintance with these writers, and
found my censure on the authority of
others, chiefly indeed on the admissions
of those who are too disposed to fall into
a strain of panegyric. See Histoire
Littdraire de la France, t iv. p. 281 et
alibi.

r John Scotus, who, it is almost need-
less to say, must not be confounded with
the still more famous metaphysician
Duns Scotus, lived under Charles the
Bald, in the middle of the ninth century.
It admits of no doubt that John Scotus
was, in a literary and philosophical sense,
the most remarkable man of the dark
ages ; no one else had his boldness, his
subtlety in threading the labyrinths of
metaphysical speculations which, in the
west of Europe, had been utterly disre-
garded. But it is another question
whether he can be reckoned an original
writer ; those who have attended most to
his treatise De Divisione Nature, the

most abstruse of his works, consider it as
the development of an oriental philo-
sophy, acquired during his residence in
Greece, and nearly coinciding with some
of the later Platonism of the Alexandrian
school, but with a more unequivocal
tendency to pantheism. This manifests
itself in some extracts which have latterly
been made from the treatise De Divisione
Naturae ; but though Scotus had not the
reputation of unblemished orthodoxy, the
drift of his philosophy was not understood
in that barbarous period. He might, in-
deed, have excited censure by bis intre-
pid preference of reason to authority.
“ Authority," he says, *' springs tram
reason, not reason from authority— true
reason needs not be continued by any
authority." La veritable importance
historlque, says Ampfere, de Scot Eri-
g&ne n’est done pas dans sea opinions;
celles-cl n'ont d’autre intdrSt qne leur
date et le lien oh ellesapparaissent Sans
doute, 11 est piquant et bizarre de voir
ces opinions orientates et alexandrines
snrgir an IX* slfcde, h Paris, fc 1* cour de

Mate of Society. PRESERVATION OF LEARNING. 291

If it be demanded by what cause it happened that a
few sparks of ancient learning survived through-
out this long winter, we can only ascribe their pre^atSn
preservation to the establishment of Christianity.

Keligion alone made a bridge, as it were, across ° D '
the chaos, and has linked the two periods of ancient and
modern civilization. Without this connecting principle,
Europe might indeed have awakened to intellectual pur-
suits, and the genius of recent times needed not to be
invigorated by the imitation of antiquity. But the
memory of Greece and Borne would have been feebly
preserved by tradition, and the monuments of those
nations might have excited, on the return of civilization,
that vague sentiment of speculation and wonder with
which men now contemplate Persepolis or the Pyramids.
It is not, however, from religion simply that we have
derived this advantage, but from religion as it was
modified in the dark ages. Such is the complex recipro-
cation of good and evil in the dispensations of Providence,
that we may assert, with only an apparent paradox, that,
had religion been more pure, it would have been less
permanent, and that Christianity has been preserved by
means of its corruptions. The sole hope for literature
depended on the Latin language ; and I do not see why
that should not have been lost, if three circumstances in
the prevailing religious system, all of which we are
justly accustomed to disapprove, had not conspired to
maintain it — the papal supremacy, the monastic institu-
tions, and the use of a Latin liturgy. 1. A continual
intercourse was kept up, in consequence of the first,
between Borne and the several nations of Europe ; her
laws were received by the bishops, her legates presided
in councils ; so that a common language was as necessary
in the church as it is at present in the diplomatic rela-
tions of kingdoms. 2. Throughout the whole course of

Charles 1e Chauve ; mais ce qui n’est ment actuate de son point de vne
pas settlement piquant et bizarre, ce qui phllosophique, ti est un ddvancier
intdresse le ddveloppement de l'esprit de la philosophic moderne. Hist Litt
h amain, c’est que la question ait dtd ili. 146.

poade, dfcfl lore, si nettement entre l’au- Silvester II. died in 1003. Whether
toritd et la raison, et si dnergiquement he first brought the Arabic numeration
rdaolue en favour de la seconde. En un into Europe, as has been commonly said,
mot, par ses iddes, Soot Erigdne est seems uncertain; it was at least not
encore un philoeophe l’antiquitd much practised for some centuries after
Grecque; et par l’inddpendanoe haute- his death.

U 2

292

CAUSES OF THE

Chap. IX. Part I.

the middle ages there was no learning, and very little
regularity of manners, among the parochial clergy.
Almost every distinguished man was either the member
of a chapter or of a convent. The monasteries were sub-
jected to strict rules of discipline, and held out, at the
worst, more opportunities for study than the secular
clergy possessed, and fewer for worldly dissipations.
But their most important service was as secure reposi-
tories for books. All our manuscripts have been
preserved in this* manner, and could hardly have
descended to us* by any other channel ; at least there
were intervals when I do not conceive that any royal or
private libraries existed/ 3. Monasteries, however,
would probably have contributed very little towards the
preservation of learning, if the Scriptures and the liturgy
had been translated out of Latin when that language
ceased to be intelligible. Every rational principle of
religious worship called for such a change ; but it would
have been made at the expense of posterity. One might
presume, if such refined conjectures were consistent with
historical caution, that the more learned and sagacious
ecclesiastics of those times, deploring the gradual cor-
ruption of the Latin tongue, and the danger of its abso-
lute extinction, were induced to maintain it as a sacred
language, and the depository, as it were, of that trujh
and that science which would be lost in the barbarous

• Charlemagne had a library at Aix- than what Is mentioned ? The Rhetoric
la-Chapelle, which he directed to be sold of Cicero was probably the spurious
at his death for the benefit of the poor, books Ad Herennium. But other libraries
His aon Louis is said to have collected must have, been somewhat better fur-
some books. But this rather confirms, nished than this; else the Latin authors
on the whole, my supposition that, in would have been still less known in the
some periods, no royal or private libraries ninth century than they actually were,
existed, since there were not always In the gradual progress of learning, a
prinoes or nobles with the spirit of very small number of princes thought It
Charlemagne, or even Louis the Debonair, honourable to collect books. Perhaps no

** We possess a catalogue/' says M. earlier Instance can be mentioned than
Ampfere (quoting d’Achery’s Spicilegium, that of a roost respectable man, William
ft 310), “of the library in the abbey of III., duke of Guienne, in the first part
•St Riquier, written in 831 ; it consists of the eleventh century. Fult dux iste,
of 266 volumes, some containing several says a contemporary writer, a pueritia
works. Christian writers are in great doctus literis, et satis notitiam Scrip-
majority; but we find also the Eclogues turanim habuit; librorum copiara in
of Virgil, the Rhetoric of Cicero, the palatio suo servavit; et si forte a fra*
History of Homer, that is, the works quentia causarum et tumultu vacaret,
ascribed to Diet ya and Dares." Ampere, lectioni per seipsum operotn dabat longi-
liL 236. Can anything be lower than oribus noctibus elucubrans in libris, donee
this, if nothing is omitted more valuable somno vlnceretur. Bee. des Hist x. 186.

State op SocifcTY. PRESERVATION OF LEARNING. 293

dialects of the vulgar. But a simpler explanation is*
found in the radical dislike of innovation which is
natural to an established clergy. Nor did they want as
good pretexts, on the ground of convenience, as are
commonly alleged by the opponents of reform. They
were habituated to the Latin words of the church-
service, which had become, by this association, the
readiest instruments pf devotion, and with the majesty
of which the Romance jargon could bear no comparison.
Their musical chants were adapted td these sounds, and
their hymns depended, for metrical effect, on the marked
accents and powerful rhymes which the Latin language
affords. The vulgate Latin of the Bible was still more
venerable. It was like a copy of a lost original ; and a
copy attested by one of the most eminent fathers, and by
the general consent of the church. These are certainly
no adequate excuses for keeping the people in ignorance ;
and the gross corruption of the middle ages is in a great
degree assignable to this policy. But learning, and
consequently religion, have eventually derived from it
the utmost advantage.

In the shadows of this universal ignorance a thousand
superstitions, like foul animals of night, were supersti-
propagated and nourished. It would be very tions.
unsatisfactory to exhibit a few specimens of this odious
brood, when the real character of those times is only to
be judged by their accumulated multitude. In every
age it would be easy to select proofs of irrational super-
stition, which, separately considered, seGm to degrade
mankind from its level in the creation ; and perhaps the
contemporaries of Swedenborg and Southcote have no
right to look very contemptuously upon the fanaticism of
their ancestors. There are many books from which a
sufficient number of instances may be collected to show
the absurdity and ignorance of the middle ages in this
respect. I shall only mention two, as affording more
general evidence than any local or obscure superstition.
In the tenth century an opinion prevailed everywhere
that the end of the world wag approaching. Many
charters begin with these words, “ As the world is now
drawing to its close.” An army marching under the
emperor Otho I. was so terrified by an eclipse of the
sun, which it conceived to announce this consummation,

294

SUPERSTITIONS.

Chap. IX. Part l

as ix> disperse hastily on all sides. As this notion seems
to have been founded on some confused theory of the
millennium, it naturally died away when the seasons
proceeded in the eleventh century with their usual regu-
larity.* A far more remarkable and permanent super-
stition was the appeal to Heaven in judicial controversies,
whether through the means of combat or of ordeal. The
principle of these was the same ; but in the former it
was mingled with feelings independent of religion — the
natural dictates of resentment in a brave man unjustly
accused, and the sympathy of a warlike people with the
display of skill and intrepidity. These, in course of time,
almost obliterated the primary character of judicial com-
bat, and ultimately changed it into the modem duel, in
which assuredly there is no mixture of superstition .* 1
But, in the various tests of innocence which were called
ordeals, this stood undisguised and unqualified. It is
not necessary to describe what is so well known — the
ceremonies of trial by handling hot iron, by plunging
the arm into boiling fluids, by floating or sinking in cold
water, or by swallowing a piece of consecrated bread.
It is observable that, as the interference of Heaven was
relied upon as a matter of course, it seems to have been
reckoned nearly indifferent whether such a test was
adopted as must, humanly considered, absolve all the
guilty, or one that must convict all the innocent. The
ordeals of hot iron or water were, however, more com-
monly used ; and it has been a perplexing question by
what dexterity these tremendous proofs were eltidea.
They seem at least to have placed the decision of all
judicial controversies in the hands of the clergy* who

* Robertson, Introduction to Hist the king interfered to prevent the en-
Charles V. note 13; Schmidt Hist des gagement Villaret* t ix. p. 71. The
Allemands, t. ii. p. 380; Hist Littlraire barbarous practice of wearing swords as
de la France, t vi. a part of domestic drew, which tended

tt Duelling, in the modem sense of the very much to the frequency of duelling,
word, exclusive of casual frays and single was not introduced till the latter part of
combat during war, was unknown before the 15th century. I can only find one
the sixteenth century. But we find one print in Montfaucun’s Monuments of the
anecdote which seems to illustrate its French monarchy where a sword is worn
derivation from the judicial cdtnbat without armour before the reign of
The dukes of Lancaster and Brunswick, Charles VIII. : though a few, as early
having some differences, agreed to decide as the reign of Charles VI., have abort
them by duel before John king of France, daggers in their girdles. The excep-
Tbe lists were prepared with the tion is a figure of Charles VII. t iii.
solemnity of a real trial by battle ; but pi. 47.

STatk of Society. ENTHUSIASTIC RISINGS.

295

must have known the secret, whatever that might be, of
satisfying the spectators that an accused person had held
a mass of burning iron with impunity. For several
centuries this mode of investigation was in great repute,
though not without opposition from some eminentbishops.
It does discredit to the memory of Charlemagne that he
was one of its warmest advocates.* But the judicial
combat, which indeed might be reckoned one species of
ordeal, gradually put an end to the rest ; and as the
church acquired better notions of law, and a code of her
own, she strenuously exerted herself against all these
barbarous superstitions/

But the religious ignorance of the middle ages some-
times burst out in ebullitions of epidemical en- Enthusiastic
thusiasm, more remarkable than these super- risings,
stitious usages, though proceeding in fact from similar
causes. For enthusiasm is little else than superstition
put in motion, and is equally founded on a strong con-
viction of supernatural agency without any just concep-
tions of its nature, hi or has any denomination of
Christians produced, or even sanctioned, more fanaticism
than the church of Rome. These epidemical frenzies,
however, to which I am alluding, were merely tumul-

* Bftlnrii Capitularia, p. 444. It was eleventh century (Bouquet, txL p.430),
prohibited by Ixmis the Debonair ; a man, nor in England till the reign of Henry
as 1 have noticed in another place, not II L Some of the stories we read, where-
inferior, as a legislator, to his father, in accused persons have passed triumph-
Ibid. p. 668. •' The spirit of party,” says antly through these severe proofs, are
a late writer, “has often accused the perplexing enough; and perhaps it is
church of having devised these barbar- safer, as well as easier, to deny than to
ous methods of discovering truth — the explain them. For example, a writer in
duel and the ordeal; nothing can be more the Archieologia (voL xv. p. 172) has
unjust. Neither one nor the other is shown that Emma, queen of Edward the
derived from Christianity ; they existed Confessor, did net perform her trial by
long before in the Germanic usages.” stepping between, as Blackstone imagines,
Ampfere, Hist Litt de la France, iii. but upon nine red-hot ploughshares. But
180. Any one must have been very ig« he seems not aware that the whole story
nor&nt who attributed the Invention of is unsupported by any contemporary or
ordeals to the church. But during the even respectable testimony. A similar
dark ages they were always sanctioned, anecdote is related of Cunegunda, wife of
Agobard, from whom M. Ampfere gives a the emperor Henry 1L, which probably
quotation, in the reign of Louis the Debo- gave rise to that of Emma. There are,
nair wrote strongly against them ; but this however, medicaments, as is well known,
was the remonstrance of a superior man in that protect the skin to a certain degree
an age that was ill-inclined to hear him. against the effect of fire. This pheno-

f Ordeals were not actually abolished menon would pass for miraculous, and
In France, notwithstanding the law of form the basis of those exaggerated stories
Louis above-mentioned, so late as the in monkish books.

296

ENTHUSIASTIC RISINGS. Chap. IX. Part L

tuoufl, though certainly fostered by the creed of perpetual
miracles which the clergy inculcated, and drawing a
legitimate precedent for religious insurrection from the
crusades. For these, among other evil consequences,
seem to have principally excited a wild fanaticism that
did not sleep for several centuries.*

The first conspicuous appearance of it was in the reign
of Philip Augustus, when the mercenary troops, dis-
missed from the pay of that prince and of Henry XL,
committed the greatest outrages in the south of France.
One Durand, a carpenter, deluded it is said by a con-
trived appearance of the Virgin, put himself at the head
of an army of the populace, in order to destroy these
marauders. His followers were styled Brethren of the
White Caps, from the linen coverings of their heads.
They bound themselves not to play at dice nor frequent
taverns, to wear no affected clothing, to avoid perjury and
vain swearing. After some successes over the plunderers,
they went so far as to forbid the lords to take any dues
from their vassals, on pain of incurring the indignation
of the brotherhood. . It may easily be imagined that they
were soon entirely discomfited, so that no one dared to
own that he had belonged to them.*

During the captivity of St. Louis in Egypt, a more
extensive and terrible ferment broke out in Flanders,
and spread from thence over great part of France. An
impostor declared himself commissioned by the Virgin to
preach a crusade, not to the rich and noble, who for their
pride had been rejected of God, but the poor. His dis-
ciples were called Pastoureaux, the simplicity of shep-
herds having exposed them more readily to this delusion.
In a short time they were swelled by the confluence of
abundant streams to a moving mass of a hundred thousand
men, divided into companies, with banners bearing a
cross and a lamb, and commanded by the impostor’s

f The most singular effect of this cru- not anticipated, they goon dispersed in
sading spirit was witnessed in 1211, when various directions. Thirty thousand ar-
il multitude, amounting, as some say, to rived at Marseille*, where part were raur-
90,000, chiefly composed of children, and dered, part probably starved, and the rest
commanded by a child, set out for the sold to the Saracens. Annall dl Mu-
purpose of recovering the Holy I .and. ratori, a..d. 1311; Vetiy, Hist, de France,
They came for the most part from Ger- t Iv. p. 306.

many, and reached Genoa without harm. * Velly, t ill. p. 205 ; Du Cange, v.
But. finding there an obstacle which their Capuciati.
imperfect knowledge of geography hod

State of Society ENTHUSIASTIC RISINGS.

297

lieutenants. He assumed a priestly character, preaching,
absolving, annulling marriages. At Amiens, Bourges,
Orleans, and Paris itself, he was received as a divine
prophet. Even the regent Blanche, for a time, was led
away by the popular tide. His main topic was reproach
of the clergy for their idleness and corruption — a theme
well adapted to the ears of the people, who had long
been uttering similar strains of- complaint. In some
towns his followers massacred the priests and plundered
the monasteries. The government at length began to
exert itself; and the public sentiment turning against
the authors of so much confusion, this rabble was put to
the sword or dissipated. b Seventy years afterwards an
insurrection, almost exactly parallel to this, burst
out under the same pretence of a crusade. These insur-
gents, too, bore the name of Pastoureaux, and their short
career was distinguished by a general massacre of the
Jews/

But though the contagion of fanaticism spreads much
more rapidly among the populace, and in modem times
is almost entirely confined to it, there were examples, in
the middle ages, of an epidemical religious lunacy, from
which no class was exempt. One of these occurred abotit
the year 12G0, when a multitude of every rank, age, and
sex, marching two by two in procession along the streets
and public roads, mingled groans and dolorous hymns
with the sound of leathern scourges which they exercised
upon their naked backs. From this mark of penitence,
which, as it bears at least all the appearance of sincerity,
is not uncommon in the church of Borne, they acquired
the name of Flagellants. Their career began, it is said,
at Perugia, whence they spread over the rest, of Italy,
and into Germany and Poland. As this spontaneous
fanaticism met with no encouragement from the church,
and was prudently discountenanced by the civil magis-
trate, it died away in a very short time. d But it is more
surprising that, after almost a century and a half of con-
tinual improtement and illumination, another irruption
of popular extravagance burst out under circumstances

b Velly, Hist, de France, tv. p. 7 ; funms snbitfc evanuit tota ilia commotio.
Du Cange, v. Pastorelli. Spicitegium, t ill. p. 77.

c Velly, Hist, de France, t vlii. p. 09. d Velly, tv. p. 279 j Du Cange, v.
The cootinuator of Nangis says, sicut Verberatio.

298 PRETENDED MIRACLES. Chap. IX. Part L

exceedingly similar.® “ In the month of August 1399/*
says a contemporary historian, “ there appeared all over
Italy a description of persons, called Bianchi, from the
white linen vestment that they wore. They passed from
province to province, and from city to city, crying out
Misericordia ! with their faces covered and bent towards
the ground, and bearing before them a great crucifix.
Their constant song was, Stabat Mater dolorosa. This
lasted three months ; and whoever did not attend their
procession was reputed a heretic. ,,f Almost every Italian
writer of the time takes notice of these Bianchi; and
Muratori ascribes a remarkable reformation of manners
(though certainly a veiy transient one) to their influence®
Nor were they confined to Italy, though no such meri-
torious exertions are imputed to them in other countries.
In France their practice of covering the face gave such
opportunity to crimes as to be prohibited by the govern-
ment; 11 and we have an act on the rolls of the first par-
liament of Henry IV., forbidding any one, “ under pain
of forfeiting all his worth, to receive the new sect in
white clothes, pretending to great sanctity,” which had
recently appeared in foreign parts. 1

The devotion of the multitude was wrought to this
Pretended feverish height by the prevailing system of the
miracles, clergy. In that singular polytheism, which
had been grafted on Christianity, nothing was so con-
spicuous as the belief of perpetual miracles — if indeed
those could properly be termed miracles which, by their
constant recurrence, even upon trifling occasions, might
seem within the ordinary dispensations of Providence.
These superstitions arose in what are called primitive
times, and are certainly no part of popery, if in that
word we include any especial reference to the Boman
see. But successive ages of ignorance swelled the delu-

* Something of a similar kind is men* not be snrprised at their sometimes
tinned by G. Viliam, under the year becoming in a manner national. Aza*
1310. 1. viU. c. 122. rius, a chronicler of Milan, after describ-

f AnnaL Mediolan. in Murat Script ing the almost incredible dissoluteness of
Her. It&L t xvt pi. 832; G. Stella. Ann. Pavia, gives an account of an instant**
Gentler*, t xvii. p. 1072 ; Chron. Foro* neons reformation wrought by the
liviense, t xix. p. 874; Ann. Bonin* preaching of a certain friar. This waa
oontri, t xxi. p. 79. about 1350. Script Rer. Ital. t xvt

f Dissert 75. Sudden transitions from p. 375.
profligate to austere manners were so h Villaret, t xii. p. 827.
common among individuals, that we can- t Rot Part v. iil. p. 428.

State op Socifcrr. MISCHIEFS OF SUPERSTITION.

290

sion to such an enormous pitch, that it was as difficult to
trace, we may say without exaggeration, the real religion
of the Gospel in the popular belief of the laity, as the
real history of Charlemagne in the romance of Turpin.
It must not be supposed that these absurdities were pro-
duced, as well as nourished, by ignorance. In most
cases they were the work of deliberate imposture. Every
cathedral or monastery had its tutelar saint, and every
saint his legend, fabricated in order to enrich the
churches under his protection, by exaggerating his
virtues, his miracles, and consequently his power of
serving those who paid liberally for his patronage. k
Many of those saints were imaginary persons ; some-
times a blundered inscription added a name to the
calendar, and sometimes, it is said, a heathen god was
surprised at the company to which he was introduced,
and the rites with which ho was honoured. 1 "

It would not be consonant to the nature of the present
work to dwell upon the erroneousness of this Mischiefe
religion ; but its effect upon the moral and in- ariSng 6 ”
tellectual character of mankind was so promi- ^°“ r g^ t | 0n
nent, that no one can take a philosophical view BUpers 1 ° n '
of the middle ages without attending more than is at
present fashionable to their ecclesiastical history. That
the exclusive worship of saints, under the guidance of
an artful though illiterate priesthood, degraded the under-
standing and begot a stupid credulity and fanaticism, is
sufficiently evident. But it was also so managed as to
loosen the bonds of religion and pervert the standard of
morality. If these inhabitants of heaven had been repre-
sented as stem avengers, accepting no slight atonement
for heavy offences, and prompt to interpose their control
over natural events for the detection and punishment of
guilt, the creed, however impossible to be reconciled with
experience, might have proved a salutary check upon a
rude people, and would at least have had the only pallia-
tion that can be offered for a religious imposture, its
political expediency. In the legends of those times, on

k This is confessed by the authora of His- m Middleton’s Letter from Rome.* If
tolre Littdraire de la France, t li. p. 4 , some of our eloquent countryman’s posi-
«nd Indeed by many catholic writers. I tions should be disputed, there are still
need not quote Moeheim, who more than abundant catholic testimonies that ima-
oonflrms every word of my text. ginary saints have been canonized.

300

MISCHIEFS OF SUPERSTITION. Chap. IX. Pabt L

the contrary, they appeared only as perpetual interces-
sors, so good-natured and so powerful, that a sinner was
more emphatically foolish than he is usually represented
if he failed to secure himself against any had conse-
quences. For a little attention to the saints, and espe-
cially to the Virgin, with due liberality to their servants,
had saved, he would be told, so many of the most atro-
cious delinquents, that he mighf equitably presume upon
similar luck in his own case.

This monstrous superstition gre# to its height in the
twelfth century. For the advance that learning then
made was by no means sufficient to counteract the vast
increase of monasteries, and the opportunities which the
greater cultivation of modem languages afforded for
the diffusion of legendary tales. It was now, too, that the
veneration paid to the Virgin, in early times very great,
rose to an almost exclusive idolatry. It is difficult to
conceive the stupid absurdity and the disgusting pro-
faneness of those stories which were invented by the
monks to do her honour. A few examples have been
thrown into a note. 11

n Le Grand d’Aussy has given ns, in Cologne, lived a monk perfectly dissolute
the fifth volume of his Fabliaux, several and irreligious, but very devout towards
of the religious tales by which the monks the Apostle. Unluckily he died sud-
endeavoured to withdraw the people denly without confession. The fiends
from romances of chivalry. The follow- came as usual to seize his souL St
Ing specimens will abundantly confirm Peter, vexed at losing so faithful a votary,
my assertions, which may perhaps appear besought God to admit the monk into
harsh and extravagant to the reader. Paradise. His prayer was refused ; and

There was a man whose occupation though the whole body of saints, apos-
was highway robbery; but whenever he ties, angels, and martyrs joined at his
set out on any such expedition, he was request to make interest, it was of no
careful to address a prayer to the Virgin, avail. In this extremity he had recourse
Taken at last, he was sentenced to be to the Mother of God. “ Fair lady,” he
banged. While the cord was round his said, “ my monk is lost if you do not
neck he made his usual prayer, nor was interfere for him ; but what is impossible
it ineffectual. The Virgin supported for us will be hut sport to you, if you
his feet “with her white hands,” and please to assist us. Your Son, if you but
thus kept him alive two days, to the no speak a word, must yield, since it is in
small surprise of the executioner, 4£bo your power to command him." The
attempted to complete his work with Queen Mother assented, and, followed by
strokes of a sword. But the same in- all the virgins, moved towards her Son.
visible hand turned aside the weapon, He who had himself given the precept,
and the executioner was compelled to Honour thy father and thy mother, no
release his victim, acknowledging the sooner saw his own parent approach
miracle. The thief retired into a mo- than be rose to receive her; and taking
nastery, which is always the termination her by the hand inquired her wishes,
of these deliverances. The rest may be easily conjectured.

At the monastery of St. Peter, near Compare the gross stupidity, or rather

State of Society. NOT UNMIXED WITH GOOD.

301

Whether the superstition of these dark ages had
actually passed that point when it becomes
more injurious to public morals and the welfare altogether
of society than the entire absence of all religi- unmixed
ous notions is a very complex question, upon
which I would by no means pronounce an affirmative
decision . 0 A salutary influence, breathed from the spirit
of a more genuine religion, often displayed itself, among
the corruptions of a degenerate superstition. In the
original principles o&monastic orders, and the rules by
which they ought at least to have been governed, there
was a character of meekness, self-denial, and charity that

the atrocious impiety of this tale, with
the pure theism of the Arabian Nights,
aod judge whether the I>eity was better
worshipped at Cologne or at Bagdad.

It is unnecessary to multiply instances
of this kind. In one tale the Virgin
takes the shape of a nun, who had
eloped from the convent, and performs
her duties ten years, till, tired of a liber-
tine life, she returns unsuspected. This
was iu consideration of her having never
omitted to say an Ave as she passed the
Virgin s image. In another, a gentle-
man, in love with a handsome widow',
consents, at the instigation of a sorcerer,
to renounce God and the saints, but
cannot be persuaded to give up the
Virgin, well knowing that if he kept
her his friend he should obtain pardon
through her means. Accordingly she in-
spired his mistress with so much passion
that he married her within a few days.

These tales, it may be said, were the
production of ignorant men, and circu-
lated among the populace. Certainly
they would have excited contempt and
indignation in the more enlightened
clergy. But I am concerned with the
general character of religious notions
among the people: and for this it is
better to take such popular compositions,
adapted to what the laity already be-
lieved, than the writings of comparatively
learned and reflecting men. However,
stories of the same cast arc frequent in
the monkish historians. Matthew Paris,
one of the most respectable of that class,
and no friend to the covetousness or re-
laxed lives of the priesthood, tells us of a
knight who was on the point of being
damned for frequenting tournaments, but

saved by a donation he had formerly
made to the Virgin, p. 290.

° This hesitation about so important
a question is what I w'ould by no means
repeat. Beyond every doubt, the evils of
superstition in the middle ages, though
separately considered very serious, are
not to be weighed against the benefits of
the religion with which they were so
mingled. The fashion of the eighteenth
century, among protestants especially,
was to exaggerate the crimes and follies
of mediaeval ages— perhaps 1 have fallen
into it a little too much ; in the present
we seem more in danger* of extenuating
them. We still want an inflexible impar-
tiality in all that borders on ecclesiastical
history, which, 1 believe, has never beet
displayed on an extensive scale. A more
captivating book can hardly be named
than the Mores Catholici of Mr. Digby ;
and it contains certainly a great deal of
truth ; but the general effect is that of a
mirage , which confuses and deludes the
sight. If those “ages of faith” were as
noble, as pure, as full of human kindness,
as he has delineated them, w e have had
a bad exchange in the centuries since the
Reformation. And those who gaze at
Mr. Digby's enchantments will do well
to consider how they can better escape
thMfconsequence than he has done. Dr.
Maitland’s Letters on the Dark Ages,
and a great deal more that comes from
the pseudo-Anglican or Anglo-catholic
press, converge to the same end ; a strong
sympathy with the mediaeval church, a
great indulgence to its errors, and indeed
a reluctance to admit them, with a corre-
sponding estrangement from all that has
passed in the last three centuries. [11*48.]

302

EFFECTS OF SUPERSTITION. Chap. IX. Part I.

could not wholly be effaced. These virtues, rather than
justice and veracity, were inculcated by the religious
ethics of the middle ages ; and in the relief of indigence
it may, upon the whole, be asserted that the monks did
not fall short of their professions This eleemosynary
spirit indeed remarkably distinguishes both Christianity
and Mohammedism from the moral systems of Greece and
Rome, which were very deficient in general humanity
and sympathy with suffering. Nor do we find in any
single instance during ancient times, if I mistake not,
those public institutions for the alleviation of human
miseries which have long been scattered over every part
of Europe. The virtues of the monks assumed a still
higher character when they stood forward as protectors
of the oppressed. By an established law, founded on
very ancient superstition, the precincts of a church
afforded sanctuary to accused persons. Under a due
administration of justice this privilege would have been
simply and constantly mischievous, as we properly con-
sider it to be in those countries where it still subsists.
But in the rapine and tumult of the middle ages the right
of sanctuary might as often be a shield to innocence as an
immunity to crime. We can hardly regret, in reflecting
on the desolating violence which prevailed, that there
should have been some green spots in the wilderness
where the feeble and the persecuted could find refuge.
How must this right have enhanced the veneration for
religious institutions ! How gladly must the victims of
internal warfare have turned their eyes from the baronial
castle, the dread and scourge of the neighbourhood, to
those venerable walls within which not even the clamour
of arms could be heard to disturb the chant of holy men
and the sacred service of the altar ! The protection of

P I am inclined to acquiesce in this
general opinion; yet an account of ex*
ponses at Bolton Abbey, about the reign
of Edward II., published in Whitaker’s
History of Craven, p. 61, makes a very
scanty show of almsgiving in this opu-
lent monastery. Modi, however, was
no doubt given in victuals. But it is a
strange error to conceive that English
monasteries before the dissolution fed the
indigent part of the nation, and gave that
general relief which the poor-laws are

intended to afford.

Piers Plowman is indeed a satirist; but
he plainly charges the monks with want
of charity.

Little bad lordes to do to give landes
from their beires

To religious that have no ruthe though
it raine on their aultres ;

In many places there the parsons be
themself at ease,

Of the poor they have no pltie, and that
is their poor charitie.

State of Society VICES OF MONKS AND CLERGY. 30 g

the sanctuary was never withheld A son of Chilperio
king of France having fled to that of Tours, his father
threatened to ravage all the lands of the church unless
they gave him up. Gregory the historian, bishop of the
city, replied in the name of his clergy that Christians
could not be guilty of an act unheard of among pagans.
The king was as good as his word, and did not spare the
estate of the church, but dared not infringe its privileges.
He had indeed previously addressed a letter to St.
Martin, which was laid on his tomb in the church,
requesting permission to take away his son by force ; but
the honest saint returned no answer/

The virtues indeed, or supposed virtues, which had
induced a credulous generation to enrich so Vices of the
many of the monastic orders, were not long monks and
preserved. We must reject, in the excess of fclergy *
our candour, all testimonies that the middle ages present,
from the solemn declaration of councils and reports of
judicial inquiry to the casual evidence of common fame
in the ballad or romance, if we would extenuate the
general corruption of those institutions. In vain new
rules of discipline were devised, or the old corrected by
reforms. Many of their worst vices grew so naturally
out of their mode of life, that a stricter discipline could
have no tendency, to extirpate them. Such were the
frauds I have already noticed, and the whole scheme of
hypocritical austerities. Their extreme licentiousness
was sometimes hardly concealed by the cowl of sanctity,
I know not by what right we should disbelieve the
reports of the visitation under Henry VIII., entering as
they do into a multitude of specific charges both probable
in their nature and consonant to the unanimous opinion
of the world/ Doubtless there were many communities,
as well as individuals, to whom none of these reproaches

1 Schmidt, Hist des Allemands, t. i. Veneris execranda prostibula, sed lasci-
p. 374. vorum et impudicomm juvenum ad libi-

r See Fosbrooke’s British Monachism dines explendas receptacula? ut idem sit
(vol. 1. p. 127, and vol. ii. p. 8) for a bodie puellam velare, quod et publicb ad
farrago of evidence against the monks, scortandum exponere. William Prynne,
Clemangis. a French theologian of con* from whose records (vol. ii. p. 229) 1
siderable eminence at the beginning of have taken this passage, quotes it on
the fifteenth century, speaks of nunneries occasion of a charter of king John, banish*
in the following terms . — Quid aliud sunt ing thirty nuns of Ambresbury Into
hoc tempore puellarum monasteria, nisi different convents, propter vit» suae tar*
qusedam non dico Del sanctuaria, sed pitudlnem.

304

VICES OF THE

Chap. IX. Part I

would apply. In the very best view, however, that can
be taken of monasteries, their existence is deeply injurious
to the general morals of a nation. They withdraw men
of pure conduct and conscientious principles from the
exercise of social duties, and leave the common mass of
human vice more unmixed. Such men. are always
inclined to form schemes of ascetic perfection, which can
only be fulfilled in retirement ; but in the strict rules of
monastic life, and under the influence of a grovelling
superstition, their virtue lost all its usefulness. They
fell implicitly into the snares of crafty priests, who made
submission to the church not only the condition but the
measure of all praise. “He is a good Christian,” says
Eligius, a saint of the seventh century, “ who comes
frequently to church ; who presents an oblation that it
may be offered to God on the altar ; who does not taste
the fruits of his land till he has consecrated a part of them
to God ; who can repeat the Creed or the Lord’s Prayer.
Redeem your souls from punishment while it is in your
power; offer presents and tithes to churches, light
candles in holy places, as much as you can afford, come
more frequently to church, implore the protection of the
saints ; for, if you observe these things, you may come
with security at the day of judgment to say, Give unto
us, Lord, for we have given unto thee. ,, *

* Mosheim, cent. vii. c. 3. Robertson Maclaine, mistook this, and WTote, in
baa quoted this passage, to whom per- consequence, the severe note which Ro-
haps 1 am immediately indebted for it bertson has copied. 1 have seen the
Hist Charles V., vol. i. note 11. whole passage in d’Achery’s Spicilegium

I leave this passage as it stood in (vol. v. p. 213, 4to. edit.;, and can testify
former editions. But it is doe to Justice that Dr. Ling&rd Is perfec tly correct
that this extract from Eligius should Upon the whole, this is a striking proof
never be quoted In future, as the trans- how dangerous it is to take any autbo-
lator of Mosheim has induced Robertson rities at second-hand .— Note to Fourth
and many others, as well as myself, to do. Edition. Much clamour has been made
Dr. ling&rd has pointed out that it is a about the mistake of Maclaine, which waa
very imperfect representation of what innocent and not unnatural. It has been
Eligius has written; for though he has commented upon, particularly by Dr.
dwelled on these devotional practices as Arnold, as a proof of the risk we run of
parte of the definition of a good Christian, misrepresenting authors by quoting them
be certainly adds a great deal more to at second-hand. And this is perfectly
which no one could object. Yet no one true, and ought to be constantly remem-
is, in fact, to blame for this migrepre- bered. But, so long as we acknowledge
sentation, which, being contained In the immediate source of our quotation,
pop ula r books, has gone forth so widely, no censure is due, since in works of con-
Mosheim, as will appear on referring to siderable extent this use of secondary
Him, did not quote the passage as con- authorities is absolutely Indispensable, nut
tuning a complete definition of the to mention the frequent difficulty of pro*
C hristian character His translator, curing access to original authors. [1848.]

State or Society. MONKS AND CLERGY.

305

With such a definition of the Christian character, it is
not surprising that any fraud and injustice became
honourable when it contributed to the riches of the
clergy and glory of their order. Their frauds, however,
were less atrocious than the savage bigotry with which
they maintained 'their own system and infected the laity.
In Saxony, Poland, Lithuania, and the countries on the
Baltic Sea, a sanguinary persecution extirpated the
original idolatry. The J ews were everywhere the objects
of popular insult and oppression, frequently of a general
massacre, though protected, it must be confessed, by the
laws of the church, as well as in general by temporal
princes. 1 Of the crusades it is only necessary to repeat
that they began in a tremendous eruption of fanaticism,
and ceased only because that spirit could not be con -
stantly kept alive. A similar influence produced tho
devastation of Languedoc, the stakes and scaffolds of the
Inquisition, and rooted in the religious theory of Europe
those maxims of intolerance which it has so slowly, and
still perhaps so imperfectly, renounced.

From no other cause are the dictates of sound reason
and the moral sense of mankind more confused than by
this naiTow theological bigotry. For as it must often
happen that men to whom the arrogance of a prevailing
faction imputes religious error are exemplary for their
performance of moral duties, these virtues gradually cease
to make their proper impression, and are depreciated by
the rigidly orthodox as of little value in comparison with
just opinions in speculative points. On the other hand,
vices are forgiven to those who are zealous in the faith.
I speak too gently, and with a view to later times ; in
treating of the dark ages it would be more correct to say
that crimes were commended. Thus Gregory of Tours,
a saint of the church, after relating a most atrocious story

* Mr. Turner has collected many curious
facts relative to the condition of the
Jews, especially in England. Hist, of
England, vol. il. p. 05. Others may be
found dispersed in Velly's History of
France ; and many in the Spanish writers,
Mariana and Zurita. The following are
fhim Vaissette’s History of Languedoc.
It was the custom at Toulouse to give a
blow on the face to a Jew every Easter;
this was commuted in the twelfth cen-
VOL. III.

tury for a tribute, t ii. p. 151. At
Beziers another usage prevailed, that of
attacking the Jews’ houses with stones
from Palm Sunday to Easter. No other
weapon was to be used ; but it generally
produced bloodshed. The populace were
regularly instigated to the assault by a
sermon from the bishop. At length a
prelate wiser than the rest abolished this
ancient practice, but not without receiv-
ing a good sum from the Jews. p. 485.

X

308

COMMUTATION OF PENANCES. Chap. IX. Part I.

of Clovis — the murder of a prince whom he had previously
instigated to parricide — continues the sentence : “For
God daily subdued his enemies to his hand, and increased
his kingdom ; because he walked before him in upright-
ness, and did what was pleasing in his eyes.” u

It is a frequent complaint of ecclesiastical writers

Commuta- ^at r *S orous P enances imposed by the
tion of 1 primitive canons upon delinquents were com-
penances. mu ted in a laxer state of discipline for less
severe atonements, and ultimately indeed for money/
We must not, however, regret that the clergy should
have lost the power of compelling men to abstain fifteen
years from qating meat, or to stand exposed to public
derision at the gates of a church. Such implicit sub-
missiveness could only have produced superstition and
hypocrisy among the laity, and prepared the road for a
tyranny not less oppressive than that of India or ancient
Egypt. Indeed the two earliest instances of ecclesiastical
interference with the rights of sovereigns — namely, the
deposition of Wamba in Spain and that of Louis the
Debonair — were founded upon this austere system of
penitence. But it is true that a repentance redeemed by
money or performed by a substitute could have no salu-
tary effect on the sinner; and some of the modes of
atonement which the church most approved were parti-
cularly hostile to public morals. None was so usual as
pilgrimage, whether to Jerusalem or Borne, which were
the great objects of devotion ; or to the shrine of some
national saint — a James of Compostella, a David, or a
Thomas a Becket. This lioensed vagrancy was naturally

u Greg. Tur. 1. ii. c. 40. Of Theode- cheat him of an estate, which is told with
bert, grandson of Clovis, the same his- much approbation. Gale, Script. Anglic,
torian says, Magnum se et in omni t. i. p. 441. Walter de Hemingford
bonitate praecipuum reddidit. In the recounts with excessive delight the
next paragraph we find a story of his well-known story of the Jews who were
having two wives, and looking so ten- persuaded by the captain of their vessel
derly on the daughter of one of them, to walk on the sands at low water, till
that her mother tossed her over a bridge the rising tide drowned them ; and adds
into the river. L iii. c. 25. This indeed that the captain was both pardoned and
is a trifle to the passage in the text, rewarded for It by the king, gratiam
There are continual proofs of immorality promeruit et prseraium. This is a mis-
in the monkish historians. In the history take, inasmuch as he was hanged ; but it
of Ramsey Abbey, one of our best do- exhibits the character of the historian,
cuments for Anglo-Saxon times, we have llemingford, p. 21.
an anecdote of a bishop who made a * Fleury, Troisibme . Discours sur
Danish nobleman drunk, that he might l'Histoire Ecclesiastique.

State of Society. WANT OF LAW.

30t

productive of dissoluteness, especially among the women.
Our English ladies, in their zeal to obtain the spiritual
treasures of Rome, are said to have relaxed the necessary
caution about one that was in their own custody. 7 There
is a capitulary of Charlemagne directed against itinerant
penitents, who probably considered the iron chain around
their necks an expiation of future as well as past
offences. 2

The crusades may be considered as martial pilgrimages
on an enormous scale, and their influence upon general
morality seems to have been altogether pernicious. Those
who served under the cross would not indeed have lived
very virtuously at home ; but the confidence in their own
merits, which the principle of such expeditions inspired,
must have aggravated the ferocity and dissoluteness of
their ancient habits. Several historians attest the de-
pravation of morals which existed both among the cru-
saders and in the states formed out of their conquests/

While religion had thus lost almost every quality that
renders it conducive to the good order of so- want of
ciety, the control of human law was still less tow-
efficacious. But this part of my subject has been antici-
pated in other passages of the present work ; and I shall
only glance at the want of regular subordination, which
rendered legislative and judicial edicts a dead letter, and
at the incessant private warfare, rendered legitimate by
the usages of most continental nations. Such hostilities,
conducted as they must usually have been with injustice
and cruelty, could not fail to produce a degree of rapa
cious ferocity in the general disposition of a people. And
this certainly was among the characteristics of every
nation for many centuries.

It is easy to infer the degradation of society during the
dark ages from the state of religion and police. Degradation
Certainly there are a few great landmarks of ° f morals,
moral distinctions so deeply fixed in human nature, that
no degree of rudeness can destroy, nor even any super-

y Henry, Hist of England* vol. U. et capitale crimen commiserint, in uno
c. t. loco perm erne ant laborantes et servientes

* Du Cange, v. Peregrinatio. Non et pcenitentiam agentes, secundum quod
sinantur vagari isti nudi cum ferro, qui canonic^ iis impositum ait
dicunt se data pcenitenti& ire vagantes. * I. de Vitriaco, in Gesta Dei per
Melius videtur.ut siaUquodinconauetum Francos, t. i. ; Villani, 1. vii. c. 144.

x 2

308

DEGRADATION OF MORALS. Chap. IX. Part I.

stition remove them. Wherever an extreme corruption
has in any particular society defaced these sacred arche-
types that are given to guide and correct the sentiments
of mankind, it is in the course of Providence that the
society itself should perish by internal discord or the
sword of a conqueror. In the worst ages of Europe there
must have existed the seeds of social virtues, of fidelity,
gratitude, and disinterestedness, sufficient at least to
preserve the public approbation of more elevated prin-
ciples than the public conduct displayed. Without these
imperishable elements there could have been no restora-
tion of the moral energies ; nothing upon which reformed
faith, revived knowledge, renewed law, could exercise
their nourishing influences. But liistoiy, which reflects
only the more prominent features of society, cannot
exhibit the. virtues that were scarcely able to struggle
through the general depravation. I am aware that a
tone of exaggerated declamation is at all times usual with
those who lament the vices of their own time ; and
writers of the middle ages are in abundant need of allow-
ance on this score. J\or is it reasonable to found any
inferences as to the general condition of society on single
instances of crimes, however atrocious, especially when
committed under the influence of violent passion. Such
enormities are the fruit of every age, and none is to be
measured by them. They make, however, a strong im-
pression at the moment, and thus find a place in contem-
porary annals, from which modem writers are commonly
glad to extract whatever may seem to throw light upon
manners. I shall, therefore, abstain from producing any
particular cases of dissoluteness or cruelty from the
records of the middle ages, lest I should weaken a gene-
ral proposition by offering an imperfect induction to
support it, and shall content myself with observing that
times to which men sometimes appeal, as to a golden
period, were far inferior in every moral comparison to
those in which we are thrown. b One crime, as more

b Henry has taken pains in drawing a Malmsbury, who does not spare them,
picture, not very favourable, of Anglo- Their civil history, indeed, and their
Saxon manners. Book II. chap. 7. This laws, speak sufficiently against the cha-
perhaps is the best chapter, as the volume racter of that people. But the Normans
Is the best volume, of his unequal work, had little more to boast of in respect of
His account of the Anglo-Saxons is de- moral correctness. Their luxurious and
rived in a great degree from William of dissolute habits are as much noticed as

State op Society. LOVE OF FIELD SPORTS. 309

universal and characteristic than others, may be parti-
cularly noticed. All writers agree in the prevalence of
judicial perjury. It seems to have almost invariably
escaped human punishment ; and the barriers of super-
stition were in this, as in every other instance, too feeble
to prevent the commission of crimes. Many of the
proofs by ordeal were applied to witnesses as well as
those whom they accused; and undoubtedly trial by
combat was preserved in a considerable degree on ac-
count of the difficulty experienced in securing a just
cause against the perjury of witnesses. Robert king of
France, perceiving how frequently men forswore them-
selves upon the relics of saints, and less shocked appa-
rently at the crime than at the sacrilege, caused an empty
reliquary of crystal to be used, that those who touched
it might incur less guilt in fact, though not in intention.
Such an anecdote characterizes both the man and the
times. c

The favourite diversions of the middle ages, in the
intervals of war, were those of hunting and Lo Ve of
hawking. The former must in all countries be field s P° rt *-
a source of pleasure ; but it seems to have been enjoyed
in moderation by the Greeks and the Romans. With
the northern invaders, however, it was rather a predo-
minant appetite than an amusement ; it was their pride
and their ornament, the theme of their songs, the object
of their laws, and the business of their lives. Falconry,
unknown as a diversion to the ancients, became from the
fourth century an equally delightful occupation . 41 From
the Salic and other barbarous codes of the fifth century
to the close of the period under our review, every age
would furnish testimony to the ruling passion for these
two species of chace, or, as they were sometimes called,

their insolence. Vid. Ordericus Vitalis, It has been observed, that Quid mores
p. 602 ; Johann. Sarisburlensls Poiicrati- sine legibus ? is as just a question as that
cus, p. 194; Velly, Hist de France, t iii. of Horace; and that bad laws must
p. 59. The state of manners in France produce bad metals. The strange prao-
nnder the first two races of kings, and in tice of requiring numerous compurgators
Italy both under the Lombards and the to prove the innocence of an accused
subsequent dynasties, may be collected person had a most obvious tendency to
from thjir histories, their laws, and those increase perjury,
miscellaneous ihcts which books of every d Muratori, Dissert 23, t i. p. 30*

description contain. Neither Velly, nor (Italian); Beckman's Hist of Inven-
Muratori, Dissert 23, are so satisfactory lions, vol. i. p. 319 ; Vie privde det
as we might desire. Fran^ais, t iL p. 1.

° VeUjr, Hist de France, t it p. 335.

610

LOVE OF FIELD SPORTS. Chap. IX. Part I.

the mysteries of woods and rivers. A knight seldom
stirred from his house without a falcon on his wrist or a
greyhound that followed him. Thus are Harold and his
attendants represented, in the famous tapestry of Bayeux.
And in the monuments of those who died anywhere but
on the field of battle, it is usual to find the greyhound
lying at their feet, or the bird upon their wrists. Nor
are the tombs of ladies without their falcon; for this
diversion, being of less danger and fatigue than the
chace, was shared by the delicate sex. 0

It was impossible to repress the eagerness with which
the clergy, especially after the barbarians were tempted
by rich bishoprics to take upon them the sacred func-
tions, rushed into these secular amusements. Prohibitions
of councils, however frequently repeated, produced little
effect. In some instances a particular monastery obtained
a dispensation. Thus that of St, Denis, in 774, repre-
sented to Charlemagne that the flesh of hunted animals
was salutary for sick monks, and that their skins would
serve to bind the books in the library/ Reasons equally
cogent, we may presume, could not be wanting in every
other case. As the bishops and abbots were perfectly
feudal lords, and often did not scruple to lead their
vassals into the field, it was not to be expected that they
should debar themselves of an innocent pastime. It was
hardly such indeed, when practised at the expense of
others. Alexander III., by a letter to the clergy of
Berkshire, dispenses with their keeping the archdeacon
in dogs and hawks during his visitation.* This season
gave jovial ecclesiastics an opportunity of trying different
countries. An archbishop of York, in 1321, seems to
have carried a train of two hundred persons, who were
maintained at the expense of the abbeys on his road, and
to have hunted with a pack of hounds from parish to
parish. 11 The third council of Lateran, in 1180, had pro-
hibited this amusement on such journeys, and restricted
bishops to a train of forty or fifty horses/

Though hunting had ceased to be a necessary means
of procuring food, it was a very convenient resource, on

e Vie prirde des Fran^ais, t i. p.320; b Whitaker** Hi*t of Craven, p. 340,
t ii. p. 11. and of WhaUey. p. If 1.

t Ibid. tip. 324. i Velly, Hist de France, t ill p.

e Ryxner, t i p.' 61. 236.

Statu of Society. LOVE OF FIELD SPORTS. 311

which the wholesomeness and comfort, as well as the
luxury, of the table depended. Before the natural pas-
tures were improved, and new kinds of fodder for cattle
discovered, it was impossible to maintain the summer
stock during the cold season. Hence a portion of it was
regularly slaughtered and salted for winter provision.
We may suppose that, when no alternative was offered
but these salted meats, even the leanest venison was
devoured with relish. There was somewhat more excuse
therefore for the severity with which the lords of forests
and manors preserved the beasts of chace than if they
had been considered as merely objects of sport. The
laws relating to preservation of game were in every
country uncommonly rigorous. They formed in England
that odious system of forest laws which distinguished the
tyranny of our Norman kings. Capital punishment for
killing a stag or wild boar was frequent, and perhaps
warranted by law, until the charter of John. k The
French code was less severe, but even Henry IY. enacted
the pain of death against the repeated offence of chasing
deer in the royal forests. The privilege of hunting was
reserved to the nobility till the reign of Louis EX., who
extended it in some degree to persons of lower birth .” 0

This excessive passion for the sports of the field pro-
duced those evils which are apt to result from it — a
strenuous idleness which disdained all useful occupa-
tions, and an oppressive spirit towards the peasantry.
The devastation committed under the pretence of destroy-
ing wild animals, which had been already protected in
their depredations, is noticed in serious authors, and has
also been the topic of popular ballads . 0 What effect this

■k John of Salisbury inveighs against able preface to the eleventh volume,
the game-laws of his age, with an odd p. 181. This continued to be felt in
transition from the Gospel to the Pan- France down to the revolution, to which
dects. Nec veriti sunt hominem pro unit it did not perhaps a little contribute,
bestiolfi perdere, quem unigentius Dei (See Young’s Travels in France.) The
Filins sanguine redemit suo. Quae ferse monstrous privilege of free-warren (mon-
naturae sunt, et de Jure occupantium strous, I mean, when not originally
flunt, slbi audet humana temaritas vindi- founded upon the property of the soil) is
care, &c. Polycraticon, p. 18. recognised by our own laws ; though, in

m Le Grand, Vie privde des Francois, this age, it is not often that a court and
t, i. p. 325. jury will sustain its exercise. Sir Walter

0 For the injuries which this people Scott’s ballad of the Wild Huntsman,
sustained from the seigniorial rights of from a German original, is well known ;
the chace, in the eleventh century, see and, I believe, there are several others in
the Recueil dee Historiens, in the v&lu- that country not dissimilar in subject

312 . BAD STATE OF AGRICULTURE, Chap. IX. Pabt I*

must have had on agriculture it is easy to conjecture*
The levelling of forests, the draining of morasses, and the
extirpation of mischievous animals which inhabit them,
are the first objects of man’s labour in reclaiming the
earth to his use ; and these were forbidden by a landed
aristocracy, whose control over the progress of agricul-
tural improvement was unlimited, and who had not yet
learned to sacrifice their pleasures to their avarice.

These habits of the rich, and the miserable servitude
Bad state of those who cultivated the land, rendered its
agriculture; fertility unavailing. Predial servitude indeed,
in some of its modifications, has always been the great
bar to improvement. In the agricultural economy of
Rome the labouring husbandman, a menial slave of some
wealthy senator, had not even that qualified interest in
the soil which the tenure of villenage afforded to the
peasant of feudal ages. Italy, therefore, a country pre-
senting many natural impediments, was but imperfectly
reduced into cultivation before the irruption of the bar-
barians . 0 That revolution destroyed agriculture with
every other art, and succeeding calamities during five or
six centuries left the finest regions of Europe unfruitful
and desolate. There are but two possible modes in which
the produce of the earth can be increased ; one by ren-
dering fresh land serviceable, the other by improving the
fertility of that which is already cultivated. The last is
only attainable by the application of capital and of skill
to agriculture, neither of which could be expected in the
ruder ages of society. The former is, to a certain extent,
always practicable while waste lands remain ; but it was
checked by laws hostile to improvement, such as the
manorial and commonable rights in England, and by the
general tone of manners.

Till the reign of Charlemagne there were no towns in
Germany, except a few that had been erected on the
Rhine and Danube by the Romans. A house with its
stables and farm-buildings, surrounded by a hedge or
enclosure, was called a court, or, as we find it in our
law-books, a curtilage ; the toft or homestead of a more
genuine English dialect. One of these, with the adja-

0 Muratori, Dissert 21. This dis* least in the northern parts, both before the
eertation contains ample evidence of the irruption of the barbarianB.and.inamuch
wretched state of culture in Italy, at greater degree, under the Lombard kings.

313

Br'^tE of Society. AND OF INTERNAL TRADE.

©ent domain of arable fields and woods, bad tbe name of
a villa or manse. Several manses composed a march ;
and several marches formed a pagns or district. 1 * From
these elements in the progress of population arose vil-
lages and towns. In France undoubtedly there were
always cities of some importance. Country parishes
contained several manses or farms of arable land, around
a common pasture, where every one was bound by
custom to feed his cattle. 9

The condition even of internal trade was hardly pre-
ferable to that of agriculture. There is not 0 f internal
a vestige perhaps to be discovered for several trade »
centuries of any considerable manufacture ; I mean, of
working up articles of common utility to an extent
beyond what the necessities of an adjacent district
required/ Rich men kept domestic artisans among their
servants ; even kings, in the ninth century, had their
clothes made by the women upon their farms ;• but the
peasantry must have been supplied with garments and
implements of labour by purchase ; and every town, it
cannot be doubted, had its weaver, its smith, and its
currier. But there were almost insuperable impedi-
ments to any extended traffic — the insecurity of moveable
wealth, and difficulty of accumulating it ; the ignorance
of mutual wants; the peril of robbery in conveying
merchandise, and the certainty of extortion. In the
domains of every lord a toll was to be paid in passing
his bridge, or along his highway, or at his market/

P Schmidt, Hist, des Allem. t 1.
p. 408. The following passage seems to
illustrate Schmidt’s account of German
villages In the ninth century, though
relating to a different age and country.
“A toft,” says I>r. Whitaker, “is a
homestead in a village, so called from
the small tufts of maple, elm, ash, and
other wood, with which dwelling-houses
were anciently overhung. Even now it
is impossible to enter Craven without
being struck with the insulated home-
steads, surrounded by their little garths,
and overhung with tufts of trees. These
are the genuine tofts and crofts of our
ancestors, with the substitution only of
stone for the wooden crocks and thatched
roofs of antiquity.” Hist, of Craven,
p. 380.

^ It is laid down in the Speculum
Saxoniciim, a collection of feudal cus-
toms which prevailed over most of Ger-
many, that no one might have a separate
pasture for his cattle unless he possessed
three mansi Du Cange, v.Mansus. There
seems to have been a price paid, I sup-
pose to the lord, for agistment in the
common pasture.

r The only mention of a manufacture,
as early as the ninth or tenth centuries,
that I remember to have met with, is in
Schmidt, t. ii. p. 146, who says that
cloths were exported from Friesland to
England and other parts. He quotes no
authority, but 1 am satisfied' that he has
not advanced the fact gratuitously.

• Schmidt, t. i. p. 411 ; t ii. p. 146.

t Du Cange, Pedagium, Pontaticum.

314 BAD STATE OF INTERNAL TRADE, Chap. IX. Pakt I.

These customs, equitable and necessary in their prin-
ciple, became in practice oppressive, because they were
arbitrary, and renewed in every petty territory which
the road might intersect. Several of Charlemagne’s
capitularies repeat complaints of these exactions, and
endeavour to abolish such tolls as were not founded on
prescription. u One of them rather amusingly illustrates
the modesty and moderation of the landholders. It is
enacted that no one shall be compelled to go out of
his way in order to pay toll at a particular bridge, when
he can cross the river more conveniently at another
place.* These provisions, like most others of that age,
were unlikely to produce much amendment. It was
only the milder species, however, of feudal lords who
were content with the tribute of merchants. The more
ravenous descended from their fortresses to pillage the
wealthy traveller, or shared in the spoil of inferior
plunderers, whom they both protected and instigated.
Proofs occur; even in the later periods of the middle
ages, when government had regained its energy, and
civilization had made considerable progress, of public
robberies systematically perpetrated by men of noble
rank. In the more savage times, before the twelfth
century, they were probably too frequent to excite much
attention. It was a custom in some places to waylay
travellers, and not only to plunder, but to sell them as
slaves, or compel them to pay a ransom. Harold son of
Godwin, having been wrecked on the coast of Ponthieu,
was imprisoned by the lord, says an historian, according
to the custom of that territory. 7 Germany appears to
have been, upon the whole, the country where down-
right robbery was most unscrupulously practised by the
great. Their castles, erected on almost inaccessible
heights among the woods, became the secure receptacles
of predatory bands, who spread terror over the country.
From these barbarian lords of the dark ages, as from a
living model, the romances are said to have drawn
their giants and other disloyal enemies of true chivalry.

Teloneum, Mercatum, Stallagium, La*- diosius illud flumes transire potest p. 764
tagium, Ac. et alibi. <

° Baluz. Capii p. 621 et alibi. 7 Eadmer apod Bacoeil de* Histories*

* Ut nullus cogatur ad pontem ire ad de* Gaules, t zi. preface, p. 192. Pro
fluvium trau*eundum propter telosei ritu illtas loci, a domino terr» captivitati
causa* qtrnndo ilie in alio loco coxnpen- addicitur.

State of Society. AND OF FOREIGN COMMERCE. 315

Robbery, indeed, is the constant theme both of the
Capitularies and of the Anglo-Saxon laws ; one has more
reason to wonder at the intrepid thirst of lucre, which
induced a very few merchants to exchange the products
of different regions, than to ask why no general spirit of
commercial activity prevailed.

Under all these circumstances it is obvious that very
little oiiental commerce could have existed in andof
these western countries of Europe. Destitute foreign
as they have been created, speaking compara- commerce *
tively, of natural productions fit for exportation, their
invention and industry are the great resources from
which they can supply the demands of the East.
Before any manufactures were established in Europe,
her commercial intercourse with Egypt and Asia must
of necessity have been very trifling ; because, whatever
inclination she might feel to enjoy the luxuries of those
genial regions, she wanted the means of obtaining them.
It is not therefore necessary to rest the miserable con-
dition of oriental commerce upon the Saracen conquests,
because the poverty of Europe is an adequate cause ;
and, in fact, what little traffic remained was earned on
with no material inconvenience through the channel of
Constantinople. Venice took the lead in trading with
Greece and more eastern countries.* Amalfi had the
second place in the commerce of those dark ages. These
cities imported, besides natural productions, the fine
clothes of Constantinople; yet as this traffic seems to
have been illicit, it was not probably extensive.* Their
exports were gold and silver, by which, as none was
likely to return, the circulating money of Europe was
probably less in the eleventh century than at the sub-

* Heeren has frequently referred to a prand’s relation of his embassy from the

work published in 1789, by Marini, in- Emperor Otho to Nicephoros Fhocas.
titled, Storia civile e politics del Com- The Greeks making a display of their
merzio de' Veneziani, which casts a new dress, he told them that in Lombardy
light upon the early relations of Venice the common people wore as good clothes
with the East. Of this book I know as they. How, they said, can you pro-
nothing; but a memoir by de Guignes, cure them? 'Through the Venetian and
In the thirty-seventh volume of the Amalflt&n dealers, he replied, who gain
Academy of Inscriptions, on the com- their subsistence by selling them to us.
merce of France with the East before The foolish Greeks were very angry, and
the crusades, Is singularly uuproduo- declared that any dealer presuming to
live ; the fault of the sutyect, not of the export their fine clothes should be flogged,
author. ‘ Luitprandi Opera, p. 155, edit Antwerp,

• There is an odd passage in Luit- 1640.

316

GENERAL IMPROVEMENT. Chap. IX. Part L

version of tbe Roman empire ; furs, which were obtained
from the Sclavonian countries ; and arms, the sale of
which to pagans or Saracens was vainly prohibited by
Charlemagne and by the Holy See. b A more scandalous
traffic, and one that still more fitly called for prohibitory
laws, was carried on in slaves. It is an humiliating
proof of the degradation of Christendom, that the Vene-
tians were reduced to purchase the luxuries of Asia by
supplying the slave-market of the Saracens . 0 Their
apology would perhaps have been, that these were
purchased from their heathen neighbours ; but a slave-
dealer was probably not very inquisitive as to the faith
or origin of his victim. This trade was not peculiar to
Venice. In England it was very common, even after
the Conquest, to export slaves to Ireland, till, in the
reign of Henry II., the Irish came to a non-importation
agreement, which put a stop to the practice .* 1
From this state of degradation and poverty all the
countries of Europe have recovered, with a progression
in some respects tolerably uniform, in others more un-
equal; and the course of their improvement, more
gradual and less dependent upon conspicuous civil re-
volutions than their decline, affords one of the most
interesting subjects into which a philosophical mind can
inquire. The commencement of this restoration has
usually been dated from about the close of the eleventh
century; though it is unnecessary to observe that the

b Baluz. Capital, p. 775. One of the
main advantages which the Christian
nations possessed over the Saracens was
the coat of mail, and other defensive
armour; so that this prohibition was
founded upon very good political reasons.

c Schmidt, Hist des Allem. t ii.
p. 146; Heeren, but l’lnfluence des
Croisades, p. 316. In Baluze we find a
law of Carloman, brother to Charle-
magne: Ut mancipia Christiana paganis
non vendantar. C&pitularia, t i p. 160,
vide iquoque, p. 361.

d William of Malmsbury accuses the
Anglo-Saxon nobility of selling their
female servants, even when pregnant by
them, as slaves to foreigners, p. 102. I
hope there were not many of these Yari-
ooes; and should not perhaps have given
credit to an historian rather prejudiced

against the English, if I had not found
too much authority for the general prac-
tice. In the canons of a council at
London in 1102 we read, Let no one
from henceforth presume to carry on that
wicked traffic by which men of England
have hitherto been sold like brute ani-
mals. Wilkins’s Concilia, t i. p. 383.
And Giraldus Cambrensis says that the
English before the Conquest were gene-
rally in the habit of selling their children
and other relations to be slaves in Ire-
land, without having even the pretext of
distress or famine, till the Irish, in a
national synod, agreed to emancipate all
the English slaves in the kingdom. Id.
p. 471. This seems to have been de-
signed to take away all pretext for the
threatened invasion of Henry II. Lyt-
telton, voL ill. p. 70.

State op Society'. GENERAL IMPROVEMENT.

317

subject does not admit of anything approximating to
chronological accuracy. It may, therefore, be some-
times not improper to distinguish the first six of the ten
centuries which the present work embraces under the
appellation of the dark ages ; an epithet which I do not
extend to the twelfth and three following. In tracing
the decline of society from the subversion of the Koman
empire, we have been led, not without connexion, from
ignorance to superstition, from superstition to vice and
lawlessness, and from thence to general rudeness and
poverty. I shall pursue an inverted order in passing
along the ascending scale, and class the various im-
provements which took place between the twelfth and
fifteenth centuries under three principal heads, as they
relate to the wealth, the manners, or the taste and
learning of Europe. Different arrangements might pro-
bably be suggested, equally natural and convenient;
but in the disposition of topics that have not always
an unbroken connexion with each other, no method can
be prescribed as absolutely more scientific than the
rest. That which I have adopted appears to me as
philosophical and as little liable to transitions as any
other.

318

WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE Chap. IX. Part II.

PART II.

Progress of Commercial Improvement in Germany, Flanders, and England — in the
North of Europe — in the Countries upon the Mediterranean Sea — Maritime
Laws — Usury — Banking Companies — Progress of Refinement in Manners —
Domestic Architecture — Ecclesiastical Architecture — State of Agriculture
in England — Value of Money — Improvement of the Moral Character of
Society — its Causes — Police — Changes in Religious Opinion — Various Sect*

— Chivalry — its Progress, Character, and Influence — CauseB of the Intellectual
Improvement of European Society — 1. The Study of Civil Law — 2. Institution
of Universities — their Celebrity — Scholastic Philosophy — 3. Cultivation of
Modern Languages — Provencal Poets — Norman Poets — French Prose Writers

— Italian — early Poets in that Language — Dante — Petrarch — English Lan-
guage — its Progress — Chaucer — 4. Revival of Classical Learning — Latin
Writers of the Twelfth Century — Literature of the Fourteenth Century — Greek
Literature — it* Restoration in Italy — Invention of Printing.

The geographical position of Europe naturally divides its
European maritime commerce into two principal regions —
commerce. one comprehending those countries which bor-
der on the Baltic, the German and the Atlantic oceans ;
another, those situated around the Mediterranean Sea.
During the four centuries which preceded the discovery
of America, and especially the two former of them, this
separation was more remarkable thair at present, inasmuch
as their intercourse, either by land or sea, was extremely
limited. To the first region belonged the Netherlands,
the coasts of France, Germany, and Scandinavia, and the
maritime districts of England. In the second we may
class the provinces of Valencia and Catalonia, those of
Provence and Languedoc, and the whole of Italy.

1. The former, or northern division, was first ani-
mated by the woollen manufacture of Flanders.
It is not easy either to discover the early be-
ginnings of this, or to account for its rapid
advancement. The fertility of that province and
its facilities of interior navigation were doubtless neces-
sary causes; but there must have been some tempo-
rary encouragement from the personal character of its
, sovereigns, or other accidental circumstances. Several
testimonies to the flourishing condition of Flemish

State op Society.

OF FLANDERS.

319

manufactures occur in the twelfth century, and some
might perhaps be found even earlier. 6 A writer of the
thirteenth asserts that all the world was clothed from
English wool wrought in Flanders . b This, indeed, is an
exaggerated vaunt ; but the Flemish stuffs were probably
sold wherever the sea or a navigable river permitted
them to be carried. Cologne was the chief trading city
upon the Rhine ; and its merchants, who had been con-
siderable even under the emperor Henry IV., established
a factory at London in 1220. The woollen manufac-
ture, notwithstanding frequent wars and the impolitic
regulations of magistrates, 0 continued to flourish in the
Netherlands (for Brabant and Hainault shared it in some
degree with Flanders), until England became not only
capable of supplying her own demand, but a rival in all
the marts of ’ Europe. “ All Christian kingdoms, and
even the Turks themselves,” says an historian of the
sixteenth century, “ lamented the desperate war between
the Flemish cities and their count Louis, that broke out
in 1380. For at that time Flanders was a market for the
traders of all the world. Merchants from seventeen
kingdoms had their settled domiciles at Bruges, besides
strangers from almost unknown countries who repaired
thither.” d During this war, and on all other occasions,
the weavers both of Ghent and Bruges distinguished
themselves by a democratical spirit, the consequence, no
doubt, of their numbers and prosperity.® Ghent was' one
of the largest cities in Europe, and, in the opinion of

• Macphereon’s Annals of Commerce, Though the seditious spirit of the
vol i. p. 270. Meyer ascribes the origin Weavers' Company had perhaps justly
of Flemish trade to Baldwin count of provoked them, such a tax on their staple
Flanders in 958, who established markets manufacture was a piece of madness,
at Bruges and other cities. Exchanges when English goods were just coming
were in that age, he says, chiefly effected into competition.

by barter, little money circulating in d Terrft marique mercatura, rerumque
Flanders. Annales Flandrici, fol. 18 commercia et quiestus peribant Non
(edit 1561). solum totius Europ® mercatores, verum

b Matthew Westmonast apud Mao etiam ipsi Turc® aliseque seposit® na-
pherson’s Annals of Commerce, vol. L tiones ob bellum istud Flandri® magno
p. 4 i 5 . afflciebantur dolore. Erat nempe Flao

c Such regulations scared away those dria totius prope orbis stabile mercatort-
Flemish weavers who brought their art bus emporium. Septemdecim regnorum
into England under Edward III. Mao negotiatores turn Brugissuacertahabuere
pherson, p. 467, 494, 646. Several years domicilia ac sedes, prater complures ii*
later the magistrates of Ghent are said cognitas prene gentes qu® undique con*
by Meyer (Annales Flandrici, fol 166) fluebant Meyer, fol. 205, ad ann. 1386.
to have imposed a tax on every loom. 6 Meyer; Froissart; Comines.

320

WOOL TRADE OF ENGLAND. Chap. IX. Part IL

many, the best situated/ But Bruges, though in circuit
but half the former, was more splendid in its buildings,
and the seat of far more trade ; being the great staple
both for Mediterranean and northern merchandise. 8
Antwerp, which early in the sixteenth century drew
away a large part of this commerce from Bruges, was not
considerable in the preceding ages ; nor were the towns
of Zealand and Holland much noted except for their
fisheries, though those provinces acquired in the fifteenth
century some share of the woollen manufacture.

For the first two centuries after the Conquest our Eng-
of lish towns, as has been observed in a different
wooTfrom place, made some forward steps towards im-
Engiaod. provement, though still very inferior to those
of the continent. Their commerce was almost confined
to the exportation of wool, the great staple commodity
of England, upon which, more than any other, in its
raw or manufactured state, out wealth has been founded.
A woollen manufacture, however, indisputably existed
under Henry II. ; h it is noticed in regulations of Itich-
ard I.; and by the importation of woad under John it
may be inferred to have still flourished. The disturbances
of the next reign, perhaps, or the rapid elevation of the
Flemish towns, retarded its growth, though a remark-
able law was passed by the Oxford parliament in 1261,
prohibiting the export of wool and the importation of
cloth. This, while it shows the deference paid by the
discontented barons, who predominated in that parlia-
ment, to their confederates the burghers, was evidently

f It contained, according to Ludovico by no means present# the decay and di-
Ouictiardini, 35,000 houses, and the cir- lapidation of several Italian towns,
cult of Its walls was 45,640 Roman feet. % Guicciardini, p. 362; M&n. de Co-
Description des Pais Bas, p. 350, Ac. mines, L v. c. It ; Meyer, fol. 354 ; Mac-
(edit 1609). Part of this enclosure was pherson's Annals of Commerce, voL i.
not built upon. The population of Ghent p. 647, 651.

is reckoned by Guicciardini at 70,000, b Blomefield, the historian of Norfolk,
but in his time it bad greatly declined, thinks that a colony of Flemings settled
Jt is certainly, however, much exag- as early as this reign at Worsted, a vil-
gerated by ^arlier historians. And 1 lage in that county, and Immortalized
entertain some doubts as to Guicciar- its name by their manufacture. It soon
dini's estimate of the number of houses, reached Norwich, though not conspicuous
If at least he was accurate, more than till the reign of Edward I. Hist of
half of (be city must since have been Norfolk, voLii. Macpherson speaks of
demoliahedor become uninhabited, which it for the first time in 1327. There were
its present appearance does not indicate ; several guilds of weavers in the time of
for Ghent, though not very flourishing, Henry II. Lyttelton, voL ii. p. 174.

ST 4 tfe or Society. ITS WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE. 321

too premature to be enforced. We may infer from it,
however, that cloths were made at home, though not
sufficiently for the people’s consumption. 1

Prohibitions of the same nature, though with a dif-
ferent object, were frequently imposed on the trade
between England and Flanders by Edward 1. and his
son. As their political connexions fluctuated, these
princes gave full liberty and settlement to the Flemish
merchants, or banished them at once from the country , k
Nothing could be more injurious to England than this
arbitrary vacillation. The Flemings were in every
respect our natural allies ; but besides those connexions
with France, the constant enemy of Flanders, into which
both the Edwards occasionally fell, a mutual alienation
had been produced by the trade of the former people
with Scotland, a trade too lucrative to be resigned at
the king of England’s request.” 1 An early instance of
that conflicting selfishness of belligerents and neutrals,
which was destined to aggravate the animosities and
misfortunes of our own time.”

A more prosperous era began with Edward III., the
father, as he may almost be called, of English
commerce, a title not indeed more glorious, but woollen
by which he may perhaps claim more of our gra-
titude than as the hero of Crecy. In 1331 he
took advantage of discontents among the manufacturers
of Flanders to invite them as settlers into his domi-
nions. 0 They brought the finer manufacture of -woollen
cloths, which had been unknown in England. The dis-
contents alluded to resulted from the monopolizing spiri t of
their corporations, who oppressed all artisans Without the

* Macpherson’s Annals of Commerce,
vol. i. p. 412, from Walter Hemingford.
I am considerably indebted to this labo-
rious and useful publication, which has
superseded that of Anderson.

k Rymer, t ii. p. 32, 50, 737, 849, 965 ;
t ill. p. 533, 1106, et alibi.

m Rymer, t iii. p. 759. A Flemish
factory was established at Berwick about
1286. Macpberson.

n In 1295 Edward I. made masters of
neutral ships in English ports find secu-
rity not to trade with France. Rymer,
t ii. p. 679.

VOL. III.

° Rymer, t. iv. p. 491, &c. Fuller
draws a notable picture of the induce-
ments held out to the Flemings. “ Hero
they should feed on fat beef and mutton,
till nothing but their fulness should stint
their stomachs ; their beds should be good,
and their bedfellows better, seeing the
richest yeomen in England would not
disdain to marry their daughters untc
them, and such the English beauties
that the most envious foreigner could
not but commend them.’ ’ Fuller’s Church
History, quoted in Blomefield’s Hist of
Norfolk.

Y

322

ENGLISH COMMERCE. Chap. IX. Part II.

pale of their community. The history of corporations
brings home to our minds one cardinal truth, that political
institutions have very frequently but a relative and tem-
porary usefulness, and that what forwarded improvement
during one part of its course may prove to it in time a
most pernicious obstacle. Corporations in England, we
may be sure, wanted nothing of their usual character ; and
it cost Edward no little trouble to protect his colonists
from the selfishness and from the blind nationality of the
vulgar. p The emigration of Flemish weavers into Eng-
land continued during this reign, and we find it men-
tioned, at intervals, for more than a century.

Commerce now became, next to liberty, the leading
increase of °^j ec ^ parliament. * For the greater part of
English our statutes from the accession of Edward III.
commerce. b ear relation to this subject ; not always well
devised, or liberal, or consistent, but by no means worse
in those respects than such as have been enacted in sub-
sequent ages. The occupation of a merchant became
honourable ; and, notwithstanding the natural jealousy <rf
the two classes, he was placed, in some measure, on a foot-
ing with landed proprietors. By the statute of apparel,
in 37 Edw. III., merchants and artificers who had five
hundred pounds value in goods and chattels might use
the same dress as squires of one hundred pounds a year.
And those who were worth more than this might dress
like men of double that estate. Wool was still the prin-
cipal article of export and source of revenue. Subsidies
granted by every parliament upon this article were, on
account of the scarcity of money, commonly taken in
kind. To prevent evasion of this duty seems to have been
the principle of those multifarious regulations which fix
the staple, or market for wool, in certain towns, either
in England, or, more commonly, on the continent. To
these all wool was to be carried, and the tax was there
collected. It is not easy, however, to comprehend the
drift of all the provisions relating to the staple, many of
which tend to benefit foreign at the expense of English
merchants. By degrees the exportation of woollen cloths
increased so as to diminish that of the raw material, but
the latter was not absolutely prohibited during the period

Rymer, t v. p. 137, 430, 540.

STATfe OF SOCIETY. CONTINENTAL MANUFACTURES.

323

tinder review ; q although, some restrictions were imposed
upon it by Edward IV. For a much earlier statute, in
the 11th of Edward III., making the exportation of wool
a capital felony, was in its terms provisional, until it
should be otherwise ordered by the council ; and the
king almost immediately set it aside/

A manufacturing district, as we see in our own coun-
try, sends out, as it were, suckers into all its Mamifac-
neighbourhood. Accordingly, the woollen ma- tures of
nufaeture spread from Flanders along the Q™mLy nd
banks of the Rhine and into the northern pro-
vinces of France. 8 I am not, however, prepared to trace
its history in these regions. In Germany the privileges
conceded by Henry V. to the free cities, and especially
to their artisans, gave a soul to industry ; though the
central pails of the empire were, for many reasons, very
ill-calculated for commercial enterprise during the mid-
dle ages/ But the French towns were never so much

9 In 1409 woollen cloths formed great Rot. Pari. t. v. p. 275. The exportation
part of our exports, and were extensively of sheep was prohibited in 1 338— Rymer,
used over Spain and Italy. And in 1449, t. v. p. 36 ; and by act of Parliament in
English cloths having been prohibited by 1425—3 H. VI. c. 2. But this did not
the duke of Burgundy, it was enacted prevent our importing the wool of a
that, until he should repeal this ordi- foreign country, to our own loss. It is
nance, no merchandise of his dominions worthy of notice that English wool was
should be admitted into England. 27 II. superior to any other for fineness during
VI. c. 1. The system of prohibiting the these ages. Henry II., in his patent to
import of foreign wrought goods was the Weavers’ Company, directs that, if
acted upon very extensively in Edward any w eaver mingled Spanish wool with
IV.’s reign. English, it should be burned by the lord

r Stat 11 E. III. c. 1. Blackstone says mayor. Macpherson, p. 382. An English
that transporting wool out of the king- flock transported into Spain about 1348 is
dom.to the detriment of our staple manu- said to have been the source of the fine
facture, was forbidden at common law Spanish w’ool. Ibid. p. 539. But the
(vol. iv. c. 19), not recollecting that we superiority of English wool, even as late
had no staple manufactures in the ages as 1438, is proved by the laws of B&rce-
when the common law w’as formed, and Iona forbidding its adulteration, p. 654.
that the export of wool was almost the Another exportation of English sheep to
only means by which this country pro- Spain took place about 1465, in conse-
cured silver, or any other article of which quence of a commercial treaty. Rymer,
it stood in need, from the continent. In t. xi. p. 534 et alibi. In return, Spain
fact, the landholders were so far from supplied England with horses, her breed
neglecting this source of their wealth, of which was reckoned the best in
that a minimum was fixed upon it, by a Europe; so that the exchange was toler-
atatute of 1343 (repealed indeed the next ably fair. Macpherson, p. 596. The best
year, 18 E. III. c, 3), below which price horses had been very dear in England,
it was not to be sold ; from a laudable being imported from Spain and Italy,
apprehension, as it seems, that foreigners Ibid,
were getting it too cheap. And this was * Schmidt, t iv. p. 18.
revived In the 32nd of H. VI., though the t Considerable woollen manufactures

act is not printed among the statutes, appear to have existed in Picardy about

Y 2

324

BALTIC TRADE.

Chap. IX. Part II.

emancipated from arbitrary power as those of Germany
or Flanders ; and the evils of exorbitant taxation, with
those produced by the English wars, conspired to retard
the advance of manufactures in France. That of linen
made some little progress; but this work was still,
perhaps, chiefly confined to the labour of female ser-
vants. 11

The manufactures of Flanders and England found a
Baltic market, not only in these adjacent countries,
trade. but in a part of Europe which for many ages
had only been known enough to be dreaded. In the
middle of the eleventh century a native of Bremen, and
a writer much superior to most others of his time, was
almost entirely ignorant of the geography of the Baltic ;
doubting whether any one had reached Russia by that
sea, and reckoning Esthonia and Courland among its
islands.* But in one hundred years more the maritime
regions of Mecklenburg and Pomerania, inhabited by a
tribe of heathen Sclavonians, were subdued by some
German princes; and the Teutonic order some time
afterwards, having conquered Prussia, extended a line
of at least comparative civilization as far as the gulf of
Finland. The first town erected on the coasts of the
Baltic was Lubec, which owes its foundation to Adol-
phus count of Holstein, in 1140. After several vicissi-
tudes it became independent of any sovereign but the
emperor in the thirteenth century. Hamburgh and
Bremen, upon the other side of the Cimbrie peninsula,
emulated the prosperity of Lubec ; the former city pur-
chased independence of its bishop in 1225. A colony
from Bremen founded Riga in Livonia about 1162. The
city of Dantzic grew into importance about the end of
the following century. Konigsberg was founded by
Ottocar king of Bohemia in the same age.

But the real importance of these cities is to be datod

1315. Macpherson ad annum. Capmany, and as late as 14 It the fine linen used in
t. iii. part 2, p. 151. England was imported from France and

u The sheriffs of Wiltshire and Sussex the Low Countries. Macpherson, from
are directed in 1253 to purchase for the Rymer, t ix. p. 334. Velly’s history is
king 1000 ells of fine linen, line® tel® defective in giving no account of the
pulchr® et delicate. This Macpherson French commerce and manufactures, or
supposes to be of domestic manufacture, at least none that is at all satisfactory,
which, however, is not demonstrable. * Adam Bremensis, de Situ D&ni®, p.
linen was made at that time in Flanders ; 13. (Elzevir edit.)

State of Society.

BALTIC TRADE.

325

from their famous union into the Hanseatic confederacy.
The origin of this is rather obscure, but it may certainly
be nearly referred in point of time to the middle of the
thirteenth century, 7 and accounted for by the necessity
of mutual defence, which piracy by sea and pillage by
land had taught the merchants of Germany. The nobles
endeavoured to obstruct the formation of this league,
which indeed was in great measure designed to with-
stand their exactions. It powerfully maintained the
influence which the free imperial cities were at this time
acquiring. Eighty of the most considerable places con-
stituted the Hanseatic confederacy, divided into four
colleges, whereof Lubec, Cologne, Brunswic, and Dant-
zic were the leading towns. Lubec held the chief rank,
and became, as it wei'e, the patriarchal see of the
league ; whose province it was to preside in all general
discussions for mercantile, political, or military pur-
poses, and to carry them into execution. The league
had four principal factories in foreign parts, at London,
Bruges, Bergen, and Novogorod; endowed by the sove-
reigns of those cities with considerable privileges, to
which every merchant belonging to a Hanseatic town
was entitled. 1 In England the German guildhall or
factory was established by concession of Henry IH. ;
and in later periods the Hanse traders were favoured
above many others in the capricious vacillations of our
mercantile policy . a The English had also their factories
on the Baltic coast as far as Prussia and in the dominions
of Denmark. 1 *

This opening of a northern market powerfully accele-
rated the growth of our own commercial opu-
lence, especially after the woollen manufacture ^esso?™*
had begun to thrive. From about the middle
of the fourteenth century we find continual evi-
dences of a rapid increase in wealth. Thus, in 1363, Picard,
who had been lord mayor some years before, entertained
Edward III. and the Black Prince, the kings of France,
Scotland, and Cyprus, with many of the nobility, at his

' Schmidt, t iv. p. 8. Macpherson, p. 18; tv. p. 512; Macpherson’s Annals,
p. 392. The latter writer thinks they vol. i. p. 693/
were not known by the name of Hanse a Macpherson, vol. i. passim,
ao early. b Ilymer, t viii. p. 360.

* Pfeffel, t 1. p. 443; Schmidt, t. iv.

326

PROGRESS OF ENGLISH TRADE. Chap. IX. Part II.

own house in the Vintry, and presented them with
handsome gifts. 0 Philpot, another eminent citizen in
Richard II. ’s time, when the trade of England was con-
siderably annoyed by privateers, hired 1000 armed men,
and despatched them to sea, where they took fifteen
Spanish vessels with their prizes/ Wo find Richard
obtaining a great deal from private merchants and trad-
ing towns. In 1379 he got 5000/. from London, 1000
marks from Bristol, and in proportion from smaller
places. In 1386 London gave 4000/. more, and 10,000
marks in 1397.® The latter sum was obtained also for
the coronation of Henry VI/ Nor were the contribu-
tions of individuals contemptible, considering the high
value of money. Hinde, a citizen of London, lent to
Henry IV. 2000/. in 1407, and* Whittington one half of
that sum. The merchants of the staple advanced 4000/.
at the same time. 8 Our commerce continued to be regu-
larly and rapidly progressive during the fifteenth cen-
tury. The famous Canynges of Bristol, under Henry
VI. and Edward IV., had ships of 900 tons burthen/
The trade and even the internal wealth of England
reached so much higher a pitch in the reign of the last-
mentioned king than at any former period, that we may
perceive the wars of York and Lancaster to have pro-
duced no very serious effect on national prosperity.
Some battles were doubtless sanguinary ; but the loss of
lives in battle is soon repaired by a flourishing nation ;
and the devastation occasioned by armies was both par-
tial and transitory.

A commercial intercourse between these northern
and southern regions of Europe began about
withS 1 ^ 6 the early part of the fourteenth century, or, at
Euro ° f mo8 t> & httle sooner. Until, indeed, the use of

urope * the magnet was thoroughly understood, and a
competent skill in marine architecture, as well as navi-
gation, acquired, the Italian merchants were scarce
likely to attempt a voyage perilous in itself and ren-
dered more formidable by the imaginary difficulties
which had been supposed to attend an expedition be-
yond the straits of Hercules. But the English, accus -

c Macpfoerson (who quotes Stow), p. 415. f Rymer, i x. p. 461.

d Walsingham, p. 211. 8 Rymer, t. vill. p. 488.

• Rymer, t. vii. p. 210, 341 ; t vill p. 9. h Macpbereon, p. §67.

State of Society. COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE.

327

tomed to tlieir own rough seas, were always more in-
trepid, and probably more skilful navigators. Though
it was extremely rare, even in the fifteenth century, for
an English trading vessel to appear in the Mediterra-
nean, 1 yet a famous military armament, that destined for
the crusade of Eichard I., displayed at a very early time
the seamanship of our countrymen. In the reign of
Edward II. we find mention in Eymer’s collection of
Genoese ships trading to Flanders and England. His
son was very solicitous to preserve the friendship of that
opulent republic ; and it is by his letters to his senate,
or by royal orders restoring ships unjustly seized, that
we come by a knowledge of those facts which historians
neglect to relate. Pisa shared a little in this traffic, and
Venice more considerably; but Genoa was beyond all
competition at the head of Italian commerce in these
seas during the fourteenth century. In the next her
general decline left it more open to her rival ; but I
doubt whether Venice ever maintained so strong a con-
nexion with England. Through London and Bruges,
their chief station in Flanders, the merchants of Italy
and of Spain transported oriental produce to the farthest
parts of the north. The inhabitants of the Baltic coast
were stimulated by the desire of precious luxuries
which they had never known ; and these wants, though
selfish and frivolous, are the means by which nations

1 Richard III., in 1485, appointed a
Florentine merchant to be English consul
at Pisa, on the ground that some of his
subjects intended to trade to Italy. Mac-
pherson, p. 705, from Rymer. Perhaps
we cannot positively prove the existence
of a Mediterranean trade at an earlier
time; and even this instrument is not
conclusive. But a considerable presump-
tion arises from two documents in Rymer,
of the year 1412, which inform us of a
great shipment of wool and other goods
made by some merchants of London for
the Mediterranean, under supercargoes,
whom, it being a new undertaking, the
king expressly recommended to the
Genoese republic. But that people, im-
pelled probably by commercial jealousy,
seized the vessels and their cargoes;
which induced the king to grant the
owners letters of reprisal against all

Genoese property. Rymer, t. viii. p. 717,
773. Though it is not perhaps evident
that the vessels were English, the cir-
cumstances render it highly probable.
The bad success, however, of this at-
tempt, might prevent its imitation. A
Greek author about the beginning of the
fifteenth century reckons the lyyXyvoi
among the nations who traded to a port
in the Archipelago. Gibbon, voL xii.
p. 52. But these enumerations are gene-
rally swelled by vanity or the love of
exaggeration; and a few English sailors
on board a foreign vessel would justify
the assertion. Bepjamin of Tudela, a
Jewigh traveller, pretends that the port
of Alexandria, about 1160, contained
vessels not only from England, but from
Russia, and even Cracow . Harris's Voy-
ages, voL i. p. 554.

328

COMMERCE OF THE

Chap. IX. Part II,

acquire civilization, and the earth is rendered fruitful
of its produce. As the carriers of this trade the Han-
seatic merchants resident in England and Flanders
derived profits through which eventually of course
those countries were enriched. It seems that the Italian
vessels unloaded at the marts of London or Bruges,
and that such part of their cargoes as were intended for
a more northern trade came there into the hands of the
German merchants. In the reign of Henry VI. Eng-
land carried on a pretty extensive traffic with the coun-
tries around the Mediterranean, for whose commodities
her wool and woollen cloths enabled her to pay.

The commerce of the southern division, though it did
Commerce no L ^ think, produce more extensively bene-
Metftter e ^ ec ^ upon the progress of society, was

ranean both earlier and more splendid than that of
countries. England and the neighbouring countries. Be-
sides Venice, which has been mentioned already, Amalfi
Amalfi kept U P th© commercial intercourse of Christen-
raa * dom with the Saracen countries before the first
crusade. k It was the singular fate of this city to have
filled up the interval between two periods of civilization,
in neither of which she was destined to be distinguished.
Scarcely known before the end of the sixth century,
Amalfi ran a brilliant career, as a free and trading repub-
lic, which was checked by the arms of a conqueror in
the middle of the twelfth. Since her subjugation by
Boger king of Sicily, the name of a people who for a

k The Amalfi tans are thus described
by William of Apulia, apfld Muratori,
Dissert. 30.

Urbs hfiec dives opum, populoque re-
ferta videtur.

Nulla magis locuples argento.vestibus,
auro.

Partibus innumeris ac plurimus urbe
moratur *

Nauta, maris ccelique vlas aperire pe-
ri tus.

Hue et Alexandri diversa fenmtur ab
urbe,

Regis et Antiochl. H«ec [etiam ?] freta
plurima transit.

Hie Arabes, Indi, Siculi noscuntur, et
AfrL

Hsec gens est totum prope nobilitata
per orbem,

Et mercanda ferens, et amans mercata
referre.

[There must be, I suspect, some exag-
geration about the commerce and opu-
lence of Amalfi, in the only age when
she possessed any at all. The city could
never have been considerable, as we may
judge from its position immediately under
a steep mountain ; and what is still more
material, has a very small port. Accord-
ing to our notions of trade, she could
never have enjoyed much; the lines
quoted from William of ApuliA are to
be taken as a poet’s panegyric. It is of
course a question of degree ; Amalfi was
no doubt a commercial republic to the
extent of her capacity; but those who
have ever been on the coast must be
aware how limited that was. At present
she has, I believe, no foreign trade at alL
1848.]

State op Society. MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES. 329

while connected Europe with Asia has hardly been
repeated, except for two discoveries falsely imputed to
them, those of the Pandects and of the compass.

But the decline of Amalfi was amply compensated to
the rest of Italy by the constant elevation of piga
Pisa, Genoa, and Venice in the twelfth and en- Genoa,
suing ages. The crusades led immediately to Venice *
this growing prosperity of the commercial cities. Besides
the profit accruing from so many naval armaments which
they supplied, and the continual passage of private
adventurers in their vessels, they were enabled to open
a more extensive channel of oriental traffic than had
hitherto been known. These throe Italian republics
enjoyed immunities in the Christian principalities of
Syria; possessing separate quarters in Acre, Tripoli,
and other cities, where they were governed by their own
laws and magistrates. Though the progress of commerce
must, from the condition of European industry, have
been slow, it was uninterrupted ; and the settlements in
Palestine were becoming important as factories, an use
of which Godfrey and Urban little dreamed, when they
were lost through the guilt and imprudence of their
inhabitants .” 1 Villani laments the injury sustained by
commerce in consequence of the capture of Acr$*
“ situated, as it was, on the coast of the Mediterranean,
in the centre of Syria, and, as we might say, of the
habitable world, a haven for all merchandize, both from
the East and the West, which all the nations of the
earth frequented for this trade.” n But the loss was soon
retrieved, not perhaps by Pisa and Genoa, but by
Venice, who formed connexions with the Saracen
governments, and maintained her commercial inter-
course with Syria and Egypt by their licence, though
subject probably to heavy exactions. Sanqto, a Venetian
author at the beginning of the fourteenth century, has
left a curious account of the Levant trade which his
countrymen carried on at that time. Their imports it is
easy to guess, and it appears that timber, brass, tin, and
lead, as well as the precious metals, were exported to

m The inhabitants of Acre were noted, Mohammedan prince, and, refusing re-
in an age not very Bore, for the excess of paration, the city was besieged and taken
their vices. In *891 they plundered by storm. Muratori, ad aim. Gibbon, c. 59.
gome of the subjects of a neighbouring n Villani, X vii c. 144.

330 COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES OF Chap. IX. Part IL

Alexandria, besides oil, saffron, and some of the produc-
tions of Italy, and even wool and woollen cloths . 0 The
European side of the account had therefore become
respectable.

The commercial cities enjoyed as great privileges at
Constantinople as in Syria, and they bore an eminent
part in the vicissitudes of the Eastern empire. After
the capture of Constantinople by the Latin crusaders, the
Venetians, having been concerned in that conquest,
became, of course, the favoured traders under the new
dynasty ; possessing their own district in the city, with
their magistrate or podestii, appointed at Venice, and
subject to the parent republic. When the Greeks reco-
vered the seat of thfir empire, the Genoese, who, from
jealousy of their rivals, had contributed to that revolu-
tion, obtained similar immunities. This powerful and
enterprising state, in the fourteenth century, sometimes
the ally, sometime^ the enemy, of the Byzantine court,
maintained its independent settlement at Pera. From
thence she spread her sails into the Euxine, and, plant-
ing a colony at Caffa in the Crimea, extended a line of
commerce with the interior regions of Asia, which even
the «kill and spirit of our own times has not yet been
able to revived

Tfthe French provinces which border on the Mediter-
ranean Sea partook in the advantages which it offered.
Not only Marseilles, whose trade had continued in a
certain degree throughout the worst ages, but Narbonne,

° Macphereon, p. 490.

P Capmany, Memorias Historieas, t. iii.
preface, p. 11; and part 2 ( p. 131. His
authority is Balducci Pegalotti, a Floren-
tine writer upon commerce about 1340,
whose work 1 have never seen. It appears
from Balducci that .the route to China
was from Asoph to Astrakan, and thence,
by a variety of places which cannot be
found in modem maps, to Cambalu, pro-
bably Pekin, the capital city of China,
which he describes as being one hundred
miles in circumference. The journey was
of rather more than eight months, going
and returning; and he assures us it was
perfectly secure, not only for caravans,
but for a single traveller with a couple
of interpreters and a servant. The Vene-
tians had also a settlement in the Crimea,

and appear, by a passage in Petrarch’s
letters, to have possessed some of the
trade through Tartary. In a letter
written from Venice, after extolling In
too rhetorical a manner the commerce of
that republic, he mentions a particular
ship that had Just sailed for the Black
Sea. Et ipsa quidem Tanaim it visura,
nostri enim maris navigatio non ultra
tenditur ; eorum vero aliqui, quos h»c
fert, illic iter [instituent] earn egressuri,
nec antea substituri, qukm Gauge et
Caucaso superato, ad Indos atque ex-
tremos Seres et Orientalein perveniatur
Oce&num. En quo ardens et inexplebilis
habendi sitis hominum mentes rapit!
Petr&rc® Opera, Senil. 1. ii. ep. 3, p. 760
edit. 1581. V

State op Society. MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES. 331

Nismes, and especially Montpelier, were distinguished
for commercial prosperity . q A still greater activity pre-
vailed in Catalonia. From the middle of the thirteenth
century (for we need not trace the rudiments of its
history) Barcelona began to emulate the Italian cities in
both the branches of naval energy, war and commerce.
Engaged in frequent and severe hostilities with Genoa,
and sometimes with Constantinople, while their vessels
traded to every part of the Mediterranean, and even of
the English Channel, the Catalans might justly be
reckoned among the first of maritime nations. The
commerce of Barcelona has never since attained so great
a height as in the fifteenth century/

The introduction of a silk manufacture at Palermo, by
Roger Guiscard in 1148, gave perhaps the ear- Thdr
liest impulse to the industry of Italy, Nearly muimfac-
about the same time the Genoese plundered two tures -
Moorish cities of Spain, from which they derived the
same art. In the next age this became a staple manu-
facture of the Lombard and Tuscan republics, and the
cultivation of mulberries was enforced by their laws. 8
Woollen stuffs, though the trade was perhaps less con-
spicuous than that of Flanders, and though many of the
coarser kinds were imported from thence, employed a
multitude of workmen in Italy, Catalonia, and the south
of France. 1 Among the trading companies into which
the middling ranks were distributed, those concerned
in silk and woollens were most numerous and honour-
able/

A property of a natural substance, long overlooked

** Hist de Languedoc, t. iii. p. 631 ;
t iv. p. 617. Mem. de l'Acad. des In-
scriptions, t. xxxvii.

r Capmany, Memoriae •Historicas de
Barcelona, t i. part 2. See particularly
p. 36.

• Muratori, Dissert 30. Denina, Rlvo-
luzione d’ltalla, 1. xiv. c. 11. The latter
writer is of opinion that mulberries were
not cultivated as an important object till
after 1300, nor even to any great extent
till after 1600 ; the Italian manufacturers
buying most of their silk from Spain or
the Levant

t The history of Italian states, and
especially Florence, will speak for the

first country; Capmany attests the
woollen manufacture of the second —
Mem. Hist de Barcel. t. i. part 3, p. 7, &c. ;
andVaissette that of Carcassonne and its
vicinity— -Hist de Lang, t iv. p. 617.

u None were admitted to the rank of
burgesses in the town of Aragon who
used any manual trade, with the excep-
tion of dealers in fine cloths. The
woollen manufacture of Spain did not at
any time become a considerable article
of export, nor even supply the internal
consumption, as Capmany has well
shown. Memories Historicas, t iii. p.
325 et seqq., and Edinburgh Review,
vol. X.

332 THE MARINER’S COMPASS. Chap. IX. Part II.

even though it attracted observation by a different pecu-
liarity, has influenced by its accidental disco-
of the tlon very the fortunes of mankind more than all
.mariner's the deductions of philosophy. It is, perhaps,
compass. j m p 0gg jki e to ascertain the epoch when the
polarity of the magnet was first known in Europe. The
common opinion, which ascribes its discovery to a citizen
of Amalfi in the fourteenth century, is undoubtedly
erroneous. Guiot de Provins, a French poet, who lived
about the year 1200, or, at the latest, under St. Louis,
describes it in the most unequivocal language. James
de Vitry, a bishop in Palestine, before the middle of the
thirteenth century, and Guido Guinizzelli, an Italian
poet of the same time, are equally explicit. The French,
as well as Italians, claim the discovery as their own ;
but whether it were due to either of these nations, or
rather learned from their intercourse with the Saracens,
is not easily to be ascertained.* For some time, perhaps,
even this wonderful improvement in the art of navigation
might not be universally adopted by vessels sailing with-

x Boucher, the French translator of
II Consolato del Mare, says that Edrissi,
a Saracen geographer who lived about
1100, gives an account, though in a con-
fused manner, of the polarity of the
magnet t ii. p. 280. However, the lines
of Ouiot de Provins are decisive. These
are quoted in Hist. Littdraire de la
France, t. ix, p. 199; Mdra. de l'Acad.
des Inscript t xxi. p. 192 ; and several
other works. Guinizzelli lias the follow-
ing passage, in a canzone quoted by
Ginguene, Hist Litt^raire de l’ltalie, t.
L p. 413 : —

In quelle parti sotto tram on tana,

Sono Ii monti della calamita,

Che dan virtute all’ aere

Di trarre ii ferro; ma perch& Ion tana,

Vole di sirail pietra aver aita,

A far lo adoper&re,

£ dirizzar lo ago in ver la Stella.

We cannot be diverted, by the nonsensical
theory these lines contain, from perceiv-
ing the positive testimony of the last
verse to the poet's knowledge of the
polarity of the magnet But if any
doubt could remain, Tiraboschi (t. lv. p.
171) has fully established, from a series
of passages, that this phenomenon was

well known in the thirteenth century;
and puts an end altogether to the preten-
sions of Flavio Gioja, if such a person
ever existed. See also Macpherson’s
Annals, p. 364 and 418. It is provoking
to find an historian like Robertson assert-
ing, without hesitation, that this citizen
of Amalfi was the inventor of the
compass, and thus accrediting an error
which had already been detected.

It is a singular circumstance, and only
to be explained by the obstinacy with
which men are apt to reject improve-
ment, that the magnetic needle was not
generally adopted in navigation till very
long after the discovery of its properties,
and even after their peculiar importance
had been perceived. The writers of the
thirteenth century, who mention the
polarity of the needle, mention also its
use in navigation; yet Capmany has
found no distinct proof of its employ-
ment till 1403, and does not believe that
it was frequently on board Mediterranean
ships at the latter part of the preceding
age. Memorial Historicas, t ill. p. 70.
Perhaps however he has inferred too
much from his negative proof ; and this
sutject seems open to further inquiry.

State of Society.

MARITIME LAWS.

333

in the Mediterranean, and accustomed to their old
system of observations. But when it became more esta-
blished, it naturally inspired a more fearless spirit of
adventure. It was not, as has been mentioned, till the
beginning of the fourteenth century that the Genoese
and other nations around that inland sea steered into the
Atlantic Ocean towards England and Flanders. This
intercourse with the northern countries enlivened their
trade with the Levant by the exchange of productions
which Spain and Italy do not supply, and enriched the
merchants by means of whose capital the exports of
London* and of Alexandria were conveyed into each
other's harbours.

The usual risks of navigation, and those incident to
commercial adventure, produce a variety of Maritime
questions in every system of jurisprudence, laws *
which, though always to be determined, as far as possible,
by principles of natural justice, must in many cases
depend upon established customs. These customs of
maritime law were anciently reduced into a code by the
Bhodians, and the Boman emperors preserved or re-
formed the constitutions of that republic. It would be
hard to say how far the tradition of this early juris-
prudence survived the decline of commerce in the
darker ages ; but after it began to recover itself, neces-
sity suggested, or recollection prompted, a scheme of
regulations resembling in some degree, but much more
enlarged than those of antiquity. This was formed into
a written code, II Consolato del Mare, not much earlier,
probably, than the middle of the thirteenth centuiy ;
and its promulgation seems rather to have proceeded
from the citizens of Barcelona than from those of Pisa
or Venice, who have also claimed to be the first legis-
lators of the sea/ Besides regulations simply mercantile,

y Boucher supposes it to have been Giannone seems to think the collection
compiled at Barcelona about 900 ; but was compiled about the reign of Louis
his reasonings are inconclusive, t. i. p. 72 ; IX. I. xi.e. 6. Capmany, the last Spanish
and indeed Barcelona at that time was editor, whose authority ought perhaps to
little, if at all, better than a fishing-town, outweigh every other, asserts and seems
Some arguments might be drawn in to prove them to have been enacted by
favour of Pisa from the expressions of the mercantile magistrates of Barcelona,
Henry IV.’s charter granted to that city under the reign of James the Conqueror
in t#81. Consuetudines, quas habent de which is much the some period. Codigb
mart, sic. iia observabimus sicut illorum de las Costumbres Maritimas de Baroe-
est eonsuetudo. Muratori, Dissert 45. Iona, Madrid, 1791. But, by whatever

334 PIKACY. Chap. IX. Part II.

this system has defined the mutual rights of neutral and
belligerent vessels, and thus laid the basis of the positive
law of nations in its most important and disputed cases.
The king of France and count of Provence solemnly
acceded to this maritime code, which hence acquired a
binding force within the Mediterranean Sea; and in
most respects the law merchant of Europe is at present
conformable to its provisions. A set of regulations,
chiefly borrowed from the Consolato, was compiled in
France under the reign of Louis IX., and prevailed in
their own country. These have been denominated the
laws of Oleron, from an idle story that they were
enacted by Eichard I., while his expedition to the Holy
Land lay at anchor in that island. 2 Nor was the north
without its peculiar code of maritime jurisprudence;
namely, the Ordinances of Wisbuy, a town in the isle
of Gothland, principally compiled from those of Oleron,
before the year 1400, by which the Baltic traders were
governed. 11

There was abundant reason for establishing among
Frequency maritime nations some theory of mutual rights,
of piracy, and for securing the redress of injuries, as far
as possible, by means of acknowledged tribunals. In
that state of barbarous anarchy which so long resisted
the Coercive authority of civil magistrates, the sea held
out even more temptation and more impunity than the
land ; and when the laws had regained their sovereignty,
and neither robbery nor private warfare was any longer
tolerated, there remained that great common of mankind,
unclaimed by any king, and the liberty of the sea was
another name for the security of plunderers. A pirate,
in a well-armed quick-sailing vessel, must feel, I suppose,
the enjoyments of his exemption from control more ex-

nation they were reduced into their
present form, these laws were certainly
the ancient and established usages of the
Mediterranean states : and Pisa may very
probably have taken a great share in
first practising what a century or two
afterwards was rendered more precise at
Barcelona.

* Macpherson, p. 358. Boucher sup-
poses them to be registers of actual de-
cisions.

* I have only the authority of Boucher

for referring the Ordinances of Wisbuy
to the year 1400. Beckman imagines
them to be older than those of Oleron.
But Wisbuy was not enclosed by a wall
till ?288, a proof that it could not have
been previously a town of much import-
ance. It flourished chiefly in the first
part of the fourteenth century, and was
at that time an independent republic,
but fell under the yoke of Denmark
before the end of the same age.

State of Society. LAW OF REPRISALS.

335

quisitely than any other freebooter ; and darting along
the bosom of the ocean, tinder the impartial radiance of
the heavens, may deride the dark concealments and
hurried flights of the forest robber. His occupation is,
indeed, extinguished by the civilization of later ages, or
confined to distant climates. But in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, a rich vessel was never secure from
attack; and neither restitution nqr punishment of the
criminals was to be obtained from governments who
sometimes feared the plunderer and sometimes connived
at the offence. b Mere piracy, however, was not the only
danger. The maritime towns of Flanders, France, and
England, like the free republics of Italy, prosecuted their
own quarrels by arms, without asking the leave of their
respective sovereigns. This practice, exactly Law of
analogous to that of private war in the feudal reprisals,
system, more than once involved the kings of France and
England in hostility. 0 But where the quarrel did not
proceed to such a length as absolutely to engage two
opposite towns, a modification of this ancient right of
revenge formed part of the regular law of nations, under
the name of reprisals. Whoever was plundered or in-
jured by the inhabitant of another town obtained autho-
rity from his own magistrates to seize the property of
any other person belonging to it, until his loss should be
compensated. This law of reprisal was not confined to
maritime places ; it prevailed in Lombardy, and probably
in the German cities. Thus, if a citizen of Modena was
robbed by a Bolognese, he complained to the magistrates
of the former city, who represented the case to those of
Bologna, demanding redress. If this were not imme-
diately granted, letters of reprisals were issued to plunder
the territory of Bologna till the injured party should be
reimbursed by sale of the spoil. d In the laws of Mar-
seilles it is declared, u If a foreigner take anything from

b Hugh Despenser seized a Genoese
vessel valued at 14,300 marks, for which
no restitution was ever made. Rym. t.
iv. p. 701. Macpherson, a.d. 1336.

c The Cinque Ports and other trading
towns of England were in a constant
state of hostility with their opposite
neighbours during the reigns of Edward
I. and IL One might quote almost half

the instruments in Rymer in proof of
these conflicts, and of those with the
mariners of Norway and Denmark.
Sometimes mutual envy produced frays
between different English towns. Thus,
in 1264 the Winchelsea mariners attacked
a Yarmouth galley, and killed some of
her men. Matt. Paris, apud Macpherson,
d Muratori, Dissert 63.

336

LIABILITY OF ALIENS. Chap. IX. Part II.

a citizen of Marseilles, and he who has jurisdiction over
the said debtor or unjust taker does not cause right to be
done in the same, the rector or consuls, at the petition of
the said citizen, shall grant hiin reprisals upon all the
gbods of the said debtor or unjust taker, and also upon
the goods of others who are under the jurisdiction of him
who ought to do justice, and would not, to the said
citizen of Marseilles. ,, e Edward III. remonstrates, in an
instrument published by Rymer, against letters of marque
granted by the king of Aragon to one Berenger de la
Tone, who had been robbed by an English pirate of
2000/., alleging that, inasmuch as he had always been
ready to give redress to the party, it seemed to his coun-
sellors that there was no just cause for reprisals upon the
king’s or his subjects’ property/ This passage is so far
curious as it asserts the existence of a customary law of
nations, the knowledge of which was already a sort of
learning. Sir E. Coke speaks of this right of private
reprisals as if it still existed ; g and, in fact, there are
instances of granting such letters as late as the reign of
Charles I.

A practice, founded on the same principles as reprisal,
Liability though rather less violent, was that of attaching
of aliens the goods or persons of resident foreigners for
other's** the debts of their countrymen. This indeed,
debtB. i n England, was not confined to foreigners
until the statute of Westminster I. c. 28, which enacts
that “ no stranger who is of this realm shall be distrained
in any town or market for a debt wherein he is neither
principal nor surety.” Henry III. had previously granted
a charter to the burgesses of Lubec, that they should
“ not be arrested for the debt of any of their country-
men, unless the magistrates of Lubec neglected to compel
payment.” h But by a variety of grants from Edward II.
the privileges of English subjects under the statute of
Westminster were extended to most foreign nations/

e Du Cange, voc. Laudum. taken In favourof the captors, t. vi. p. 14.

t Rymer, t iv. p. 576. Videtur sapien- 8 27 E. IIL stat. ii. c. It, 2 Inst p.
tibus et peritis, quod causa, de jure, non 205.
subfuit marcbam seu reprisallam in nos- b Rymer, t i. p. 839.
tris, seu subditorum nostrorum, bonis i Idem, t iii. p. 458, 647, 678, et infra,
concedendi. See too a case of neutral See too the ordinances of the staple, in
goods on board an enemy's vessel claimed 27 Edw. III., which confirm this among
by the owners, and a legal distinction other privileges, and contain manifold

337

State of Society. "GREAT PROFITS OF TRADE.

This unjust responsibility had not been confined to civil
cases. One of a company of Italian merchants, the Spini,
having killed a man, the officers of justice seized the
bodies and. effects of all the rest, k

If under all these obstacles, whether created by bar-
barous manners, by national prejudice, or by the at
fraudulent and arbitrary measures of princes, profit* of
the merchants of different countries became so trade *
opulent as almost to rival the ancient nobility, it must
be ascribed to the greatness of their commercial profits.
The trading companies possessed either a positive or a
virtual monopoly, and held the keys of those eastern
regions, for the luxuries of which the progressive refine-
ment of manners produced an increasing demand. It is
not easy to determine the average rate of profit ; m but
we know that the interest of money was ex- andhj h
ceedingly high throughout the middle ages, rate of
At Verona, in 1228, it was fi^ed by law at interest
twelve and a half per cent. ; at Modena, in 1270, it seems
to have been as high as twenty." The republic of Genoa,
towards the end of the fourteenth century, when Italy
had grown wealthy, paid only from seven to ten per cent,
to her creditors. 0 But in France and England the rate
was far more oppressive. An ordinance of Philip the Fair,
in 1311, allows twenty per cent, after the first year of tho
loan. p Under Henry III., according to Matthew Paris,
the debtor paid ten per cent, every two months ; q but this
is absolutely incredible as a general practice. This was
not merely owing to scarcity of money, but to the dis-
couragement which a strange prejudice opposed to one
of the most useful and legitimate branches of commerce.
Usury, or lending money for profit, was treated as a
crime by the theologians of the middle ages ; and though
the superstition has been eradicated, some part of the
prejudice remains in our legislation. This trade in

evideuce of the regard paid to commerce
in that reign.

It Bymer, t. ii. p. 891. Madox, Hist.
Exchequer, c. 3qdi. s. 7.

m In the ^remarkable speech of the
Doge Mocenigo, quoted in another place,
vol i. p. 465, the annual profit made by
Venice on her mercantile capital is
reckoned at forty per cent.

VOL. III.

* Muratori, Dissert. 16 .

° Bizarri, Hist. Genuens. p. 797. The
rate of discount on bills, which may not
have exactly corresponded to the average
annual interest of money, was ten per
cent, at Barcelona in 1435. Capmany,
t i. p. 209.

P Du Cange, v. Usura.

9 Muratori, Diss. 16.

Z

338 MONEY DEALINGS Chap. IX. Part II.

money, and indeed a great part of inland trade in gene-

Monc ral, had originally fallen to the J ews, who were

dealings of noted for their usury so early as the sixth cen-

thc Jews. tury. r For several subsequent ages they con-
tinued to employ their capital and industry to the same
advantage, with little molestation from the clergy, who
always tolerated their avowed and national infidelity,
and often with some encouragement from princes. In
the twelfth century we find them not only possessed of
landed property in Languedoc, and cultivating the studies
of medicine and Kabbinical literature in their own aca-
demy at Montpelier, under the protection of the count
of Toulouse, but invested with civil offices. 8 Raymond
Roger, viscount of Carcasonne, directs a writ “ to his
bailiffs, Christian and Jewish.”* It was one of the con-
ditions imposed by the church on the count of Toulouse,
that he should allow no Jews to possess magistracy in
his dominions. 11 But in Spain they were placed by some
of the municipal laws on the footing of Christians, with
respect to the composition for their lives, and seem in no
other European country to have been so numerous or
considerable.* The diligence and expertness of this
people in all pecuniary dealings recommended them to
princes who were solicitous about the improvement of
their revenue. We find an article in the general charter
of privileges granted by Peter III. of Aragon, in 1283,
that no J ew should hold the office of a bayle or judge.
And two kings of Castile, Alonzo XI. and Peter the
Cruel, incurred much odium by employing Jewish mi-
nisters in their treasury. But, in other parts of Europe,
their condition had, before that time, begun to change
for the worse — partly from the fanatical spirit of the
crusades, which prompted the populace to massacre, and
partly from the jealousy which their opulence excited.
Kings, in order to gain money and popularity at once,
abolished the debts due to the children of Israel, except
a part which they retained as the price of their bounty.
One is at a loss to conceive the process of reasoning in
an ordinance of St. Louis, where, “ for the salvation of
his own soul and those of his ancestors, he releases to all

r Greg. Turon. 1. iv, u Id. p.163.

8 Hist, de Languedoc, t ii. p. 517; x Marina, Ensayo Historico-Critico,
t. iii. p. 631. p. 143.

* Id. t iii. p. 121.

State of Society.

OF THE JEWS.

339

Christians a third part of what was owing by them to
Jews.” 7 Not content with such edicts, the kings of
France sometimes banished the whole nation from their
dominions, seizing their effects at the same time ; and a
season of alternative severity and toleration continued
till, under Charles VI., they were finally expelled from
the kingdom, where they never afterwards possessed any
legal settlement. 2 They were expelled from England
under Edward I., and never obtained any legal permis-
sion to reside till the time of Cromwell. This decline of
the Jews was owing to the transference of their trade in
money to other hands. In the early part of the thirteenth
century the merchants of Lombardy and of the south of
France a took up the business of remitting money by bills
of exchange, 1 * and of making profit upon loans. The
utility of this was found so great, especially by the
Italian clergy, who thus in an easy manner drew the
income of their transalpine benefices, that in spite of
much obloquy, the Lombard usurers established them-
selves in every country, and the general progress of
commerce wore off the bigotry that had obstructed their
reception. A distinction was made between moderate
and exorbitant interest; and though the casuists did
not acquiesce in this legal regulation, yet it satisfied,
even in superstitious times, the consciences of provident
traders. 0 The Italian bankers were frequently allowed
to farm the customs in England, as a security perhaps

y Martenne Thesaurus Anecdotorum,
t i. p. 984.

* Velly, t. iv. p. 136.
a The city of Cahors, in Quercy, the
modem department of the Lot, produced
a tribe of money-dealers. The Caursini
are almost as often noticed as the Lom-
bards. See the article in I)u Cange. In
Lombardy, Asti, a city of no great note
in other respects, was famous for the
same department of commerce.

b There were three species of paper
credit in the dealings of merchants: l.
General letters of credit, not directed to
any one, which are not uncommon in the
Levant: 2. Orders to pay money to a
particular person : 3. Bills of exchange
regularly negotiable. Boucher, t. ii. p.
621. Instances of the first are mentioned
by Macpherson about 1200, p. 367. The

second species was introduced by the
Jews, about 1183 (Capmany, t. i. p. 297) ;
but it may be doubtful whether the last
stage of the progress was reached nearly
so soon. An Instrument in Rymer, how-
ever, of the year 1364 (t. vi. p. 495),
mentions literse cambitoria\ which seem
to have been negotiable bills; and by
1400 they were drawn in sets, and worded
exactly as at present. Macpherson, p.
614, and Beckman, History of Inventions,
vol. iii. p. 430, give from Capmany an
actual precedent of a bill dated in 1404.

c Usury was looked upon with horror
by our English divines long after the
Reformation. Fleury, in his Institutions
au Droit EccMsiastique, t. ii. p. 129, has
shown the subterfuges to which men
had recourse in order to evade this pro-
hibition. It is an unhappy truth, that

z 2

340 BANKS OF GENOA AND OTHERS. Chap. IX. Pabt II

for loans which were not very punctually repaid. 1 * In
1345 the Bardi at Florence, the greatest company in
Italy, became bankrupt, Edward III. owing them, in
principal and interest, 900,000 gold florins. Another,
the Peruzzi, failed at the same time, being creditors to
Edward for 600,000 florins. The king of Sicily owed
100,000 florins to each of these bankers. Their failure
involved, of course, a multitude of Florentine citizens,
and was a heavy misfortune to the state.®

The earliest bank of deposit, instituted for the accom-
modation of private merchants, is said to have
Genoa and been that of Barcelona, in 1401/ The banks
others. 0 f y en i ce and Genoa were of a different descrip-
tion. Although the former of these two has the advan-
tage of greater antiquity, having been formed, as we are
told, in the twelfth century, yet its early history is not
so clear as that of Genoa, nor its political importance so
remarkable, however similar might be its origin. 8 During
the wars of Genoa in the fourteenth century, she had
borrowed large sums of private citizens, to whom the
revenues were pledged for repayment. The republic of
Florence had set a recent, though not a very encouraging
example of a public loan, to defray the expense of her
war against Mastino della Scala, in 1336. The chief
mercantile firms, as well as individual citizens, furnished
money on an assignment of the taxes, receiving fifteen
per cent, interest, which appears to have been above the

great part of the attention devoted to
the best of sciences, ethics and juris-
prudence, has been employed to weaken
principles that ought never to have been
acknowledged.

One species of usury, and that of the
highest importance to commerce, was
always permitted, on account of the risk
that attended it This was marine in-
surance, which could not have existed,
until money was considered, in itself, as
a source of profit The earliest regula-
tions on the subject of insurance are
those of Barcelona in 1433 ; but the prac-
tice was, of course, earlier than these,
though not of great antiquity. It is not
mentioned in the Consolato del Mare,
nor in any of the Hanseatic laws of the
fourteenth century. Beckman, vol. I

p. 388. This author, not being aware of
the Barcelonese laws on this subject pub-
lished by Capmany, supposes the first
provisions regulating marine assurance
to have been made at Florence in 152a
d Macpherson, p. 487, et alibi. They
had probably excellent bargains: in 1329
the Bardi farmed all the customs in
England for 20Z. a day. But in 1282
the customs had produced 8411 and
half a century of great improvement had
elapsed.

e Viliani, 1. xii. c. 55, 87. He callB
these two banking-houses the pillars
which sustained great part of the com*
merce of Christendom.
f Capmany, t. i. p. 213.

8 Macpherson, p. 341, from Sanuto.
The bank of Venice is referred to 1171.

State of Society. DOMESTIC EXPENDITURE.

341

rate of private usury. h The state was not unreasonably
considered a worse debtor than some of her citizens, for
in a few years these loans were consolidated into a
general fund, or rnmte , with some deduction from the
capital and a great diminution of interest; so that an
original debt of one hundred florins sold only for twenty-
five.* But I have not found that these creditors formed
at Florence a corporate body, or took any part, as such,
in the affairs of the republic. The case was different at
Genoa. As a security, at least, for their interest, the
subscribers to public loans were permitted to receive
the produce of the taxes by their own collectors, paying
the excess into the treasury. The number and distinct
classes of these subscribers becoming at length incon-
venient, they were formed, about the year 1407, into a
single corporation, called the bank of St. George, which
was from that time the sole national creditor and mort-
gagee. The government of this was intrusted to eight
protectors. It soon became almost independent of the
state. Every senator, on his admission, swore to main-
tain the privileges of the bank, which were confirmed by
the pope, and even by the emperor. The bank interposed
its advice in every measure of government, and generally,
as is admitted, to the public advantage. It equipped
armaments at its own expense, one of which subdued the
island of Corsica ; and this acquisition, like those of our
great Indian corporation, was long subject to a company
of merchants, without any interference of the mother
country. k

The increasing wealth of Europe, whether derived from
internal improvement or foreign commerce, dis- ^ f
played itself in more expensive consumption, domestic
and greater refinements of domestic life. But ex P enditure *
these effects were for a long time very gradual, each
generation making a few steps in the progress, which are
hardly discernible except by an attentive inquirer. It is
not till the latter half of the thirteenth century that an
accelerated impulse appears to be given to society. The
just government and suppression of disorder under St.

n G. Villani, L xL c. 49. k Bizarri, Hist. Genuens. p. 797 (Ant-

i Matt Villani, p. 227 (in Muratori, werp, 1679); Machiavelli, Storia Fioren-
Script Rer. Ital. t xiv.). tina, 1. viii.

342

DOMESTIC EXPENDITURE. Chap. IX. Part II.

Louis, and the peaceful temper of his brother Alfonso,
count of Toulouse and Poitou, gave France leisure to
avail herself of her admirable fertility. England, that
to a soil not greatly inferior to that of France united the
inestimable advantage of an insular position, and was
invigorated, above all, by her free constitution and the
steady industriousness of her people, rose with a pretty
uniform motion from the time of Edward I. Italy,
though the bettor days of freedom had passed away in
most of her republics, made a rapid transition from
simplicity to refinement. “ In those times,” says a writer
about the year 1300, speaking of the age of Frederic II.,
44 the manners of the Italians were rude. A man and his
wife ate off the same plate. There was no wooden-
hand] ed knives, nor more than one or two drinking cups
in a house. Candles of wax or tallow were unknown ; a
servant held a torch during supper. The clothes of men
were of leather unlined : scarcely any gold or silver was
seen on their dress. The common people ate flesh but
three times a week, and kept their cold meat for supper.
Many did not drink wine in summer. A small stock of
corn seemed riches. The portions of women were small ;
their dress, even after marriage, was simple. The pride
of men was to be well provided with arms and horses ;
that of the nobility to have lofty towers, of which all the
cities in Italy were full. But now frugality has been
changed for sumptuousness; every thing exquisite is
sought after in dress ; gold, silver, pearls, silks, and rich
furs. Foreign wines and rich meats are required. Hence
usury, rapine, fraud, tyranny,” &c. m This passage is
supported by other testimonies nearly of the same time.
The conquest of Naples by Charles of Anjou in 1266
seems to have been the epoch of increasing luxury
throughout Italy. His Provencal knights with their
plumed helmets and golden collars, the chariot of his

m Ricobaldus Ferrarensis, apud Murat
Dissert. 23; Francisc. Pippinus, ibidem.
Mura tori endeavours to extenuate the
authority of this passage, on account of
some more ancient writers who complain
of the luxury of their times, and of some
particular instances of magnificence and
expense. But Ricobaldi alludes, as Mura-
tori himself admits, to the mode of living

in the middle ranks, and nof? to that of
courts, which in all ages might occa-
sionally display considerable splendour.
I see nothing to weaken so explicit a
testimony of a contemporary, which in
fact is confirmed by many writers of the
next age, who, according to the practice
of Italian chroniclers, have copied it as
their own.

State of Society.

SUMPTUARY LAWS.

343

queen covered with blue velvet and sprinkled with, lilies
of gold, astonished the citizens of Naples.* Provence had
enjoyed a long tranquillity, the natural source of luxurious
magnificence ; and Italy, now liberated from the yoke of
the empire, soon reaped the same fruit of a condition
more easy and peaceful than had been her lot for several
ages. Dante speaks of the change of manners at Florence
from simplicity and virtue to refinement and dissolute-
ness, in terms very nearly similar to those quoted above . 0

Throughout the fourteenth century there continued to
be a rapid but steady progression in England of what we
may denominate elegance, improvement, or luxury; and
if this was for a time suspended in France, it must be
ascribed to the unusual calamities which befell that
country under Philip of Valois and his son. Just before
the breaking out of the English wars an excessive fond-
ness for dress is said to have distinguished not only the
higher ranks, but the burghers, whose foolish emulation
at least indicates their easy circumstances. 1 * Modes of
dress hardly perhaps deserve our notice on their own
account ; yet so far as their universal prevalence was a
symptom of diffused wealth, we should not overlook
either the invectives bestowed by the clergy on the fan-
tastic extravagances of fashion, or the sumptuary laws by
which it was endeavoured to restrain them.

The principle of sumptuary laws was partly derived
from the small republics of antiquity, which sumptuary
might perhaps require that security for public in-
spirit and equal rights — partly from the austere and
injudicious theory of religion disseminated by the clergy.
These prejudices united to render all increase of general
comforts odious under the name of luxury ; and a third
motive more powerful than either, the jealousy with

n Murat. Dissert. 23.

° Bellincion Berti vid’ io andar cinto
Di cuojo e d' osso, e venir dallo speo
chio

La donna sua senza T viso dipinto,

E vidi quel di Nerli, e quel del
Vecchio

Esser contenti alia pelle scoverta,

E sue donne al fuso ed al pennechio,
Paradis, canto xv.

See too the rest of this canto. But
this is put in the mouth of Cacciaguida,
the poet’s ancestor, who lived in the

former half of the twelfth century. The
change, however, was probably subse-
quent to 1250, when the times of wealth
and turbulence began at Florence.

p Velly, t. xiii. p. 352. The second
continuator of Nangis vehemently in-
veighs against the long beards and short
breeches of bis age ; after the introduc-
tion of which novelties, he judiciously
observes, the French were much more
disposed to run away from their enemiet
than before. Spicilegium, t. iii. p. 105,

344

DOMESTIC MANNERS Chap. IX. Part II.

which the great regard anything like imitation in those
beneath them, co-operated to produce a sort of restrictive*
code in the laws of Europe. Some of these regulations
are more ancient ; but the chief part were enacted, both
in France and England, during the fourteenth century,
extending to expenses of the table as well as apparel.
The first statute of this description in our own country
was, however, repealed the next year ; q and subsequent
provisions were entirely disregarded by a nation which
valued liberty and commerce too much to obey laws
conceived in a spirit hostile to both. Laws indeed
designed by those governments to restrain the extrava-
gance of their subjects may well justify the severe indig-
nation which Adam Smith has poured upon all such
interference with private expenditure. The kings of
France and England were undoubtedly more egregious
spendthrifts than any others in their dominions ; and
contributed far more by their love of pageantry to excite
a taste for dissipation in their people than by their ordi-
nances to repress it.

Mussus, an historian of Placentia, has left a pretty
Domestic C0 P^ 0US account of the prevailing manners among
mannereof his countrymen about 1388, and expressly con-
Italy * trasts their more luxurious living with the style
of their ancestors seventy years before, when, as we have
seen, they had already made considerable steps towards
refinement. This passage is highly interesting, because
it shows the regular tenor of domestic economy in an
Italian city rather than a mere display of individual
magnificence, as in most of the facts collected by our own
and the French antiquaries. But it is much too long for
insertion in this place/ No other country, perhaps,
could exhibit so fair a picture of middle life : in France
the burghers, and even the inferior gentry, were for the
most part in a state of poverty at this period, which they
concealed by an affectation of ornament; while our
English yeomanry and tradesmen were more anxious to

8 37 E. III. Rep. 38 E. III. Several Velly, t. vii. p. 64 ; t. xi. p. 190. These
other statutes of a similar nature were attempts to restrain what cannot be re-
passed in this and the ensuing reign. In strained continued even down to 1700.
France, there were sumptuary laws as De la Mare, Traitd de la Police, t. i.
Old as Charlemagne, prohibiting or tax- 1. iii.

Ing the use of furs; but the first extensive r Muratori, Antichith Italiane, Dis-
regulation was under Philip the Fair, sert 23, t L p. 326.

State of Society.

OF ITALY.

345

invigorate their bodies by a generous diet than to dwell
in well furnished houses, or to find comfort in cleanliness
and elegance. 8 The German cities, however, had acquired
with liberty the spirit of improvement and industry.
From the time that Henry Y. admitted their artisans to
the privileges of free burghers they became more and
more prosperous ;* while the steadiness and frugality of
the German character compensated for some disadvantages
arising out of their inland situation. Spire, Nuremberg,
Ratisbon, and Augsburg were not indeed like the rich
markets of London and Bruges, nor could their burghers
rival the princely merchants of Italy ; but they enjoyed
the blessings of competence diffused over a large class of
industrious freemen, and in the fifteenth century one of
the politest Italians could extol their splendid and well
furnished dwellings, their rich apparel, their easy and
affluent mode of living, the security of their rights and
just equality of their laws. u

No chapter in the history of national manners would
illustrate so well, if duly executed, the progress of social

• “ These English/* said the Spaniards
who came over with Philip II., “have
their houses made of sticks and dirt, but
they fare commonly so well as the king.”
Harrison’s Description of Britain, pre-
fixed to Holingshed, vol. i. p. 315 (edit.
1807).

t Pfeffel, t i. p. 293.

u iEneas Sylvius, de Moribus Ger-
manorum. This treatise is an amplified
panegyric upon Germany, and contains
several curious passages: they must bo
taken perhaps with some allowance ; for
the drift of the whole is to persuade the
Germans, that bo rich and noble a country
could afford a little money for the poor
pope. Civitates quas vocant liberas, cum
Imperatori solhm subjiciuntur, cujus ju-
gum est instar libertatis; nec profeefcb
usquam gentium tanta libertas est, quanta
fruuntur hqjuscemodi civitates. Nam
populi quos Itali vocant liberos, hi potis-
simum serviunt, sive Venetias inspectes,
sive Flore'ntiam aut Caenas, in qnibus
dves, praeter paucos qui reliquos ducunt,
loco mancipiorum habentur. Cum nec
rebus suis uti, ut libet, vel fari quae
velint, et gravissimis opprimuntur pecu-
niarum exactionibus. Apud Germanos
omnia beta sunt, omnia jucunda ; nemo

suis privatur bonis. Salvo cuique sua
haereditas est, nulli nisi nocenti magis-
tratus nocent. Nec apud eos factiones
sicut apud Italas urbes grassantur. Sunt
autem supra centum civitates hfic liber-
tate fruentes. p. 1058.

In another part of his work (p. 719)
he gives a specious account of Vienna.
The houses, he says, had glass windows
and iron doors. Fenestrae undique vitreae
perlucent, et ostia plerumque ferrea. In
domibus multaet munda supellex. Alt®
domus magnificaeque visuntur. Unum id
dedecori est, quod tecta plerumque tigno
contegunt, pauca latere. Caetera sedi-
ficia muro lapideo consistunt. Piet®
domus et exterius et interius splendent
Civitatis populus 50,000 communicantium
creditur. I suppose this gives at least
double for the total population. He
proceeds to represent the manners of the
city in a less favourable point of view,
charging the citizens with gluttony and
libertinism, the nobility with oppression,
the judges with corruption, &c. Vienna
probably had the vices of a flourishing
city; but the love of amplification ih so
rhetorical a writer as iEneas Sylvius
weakens the value of his testimony, on
whichever side it is given.

Chap. IX Part II.

346 PROGRESS OF

life as that dedicated to domestic architecture. The
Civil archi- fashions* of dress and of amusements are gene-
tecture. rally capricious and irreducible to rule; but
every change in the dwellings of mankind, from the rudest
wooden cabin to the stately mansion, has been dictated
by some principle of convenience, neatness, comfort, or
magnificence. Yet this most interesting field of research
has been less beaten by our antiquaries than others com-
paratively barren. I do not pretend to a complete know-
ledge of what has been written by these learned inquirers ;
but I can only name one book in which the civil archi-
tecture of our ancestors has been sketched, loosely indeed,
but with a superior hand, and another in which it is
partially noticed. I mean by the first a chapter in the
Appendix to Dr. Whitaker’s History of Whalley ; and by
the second Mr. King’s Essays on Ancient Castles in the
Archaeologia.* Of these I shall make free use in the
following paragraphs.

The most ancient buildings which we can trace in this
island, after the departure of the Romans, were circular
towers of no great size, whereof many remain in Scotland,
erected either on a natural eminence or on an artificial
mound of earth. Such are Conisborough Castle in York-
shire and Castleton in Derbyshire, built perhaps, accord-
ing to Mr. King, before the Conquest/ To the lower
chambers of those gloomy keeps there was no admission
of light or air except through long narrow loop-holes and
an aperture in the roof. Regular windows were made in
the upper apartments. Were it not for the vast thickness
of the walls, and some" marks of attention both to conve-
nience and decoration in these structures, we might be
induced to consider them as rather intended for security

x Vols. iv. and vi. Conquest But if the engravings of the

7 Mr. Lysons refers Castleton to the decorative parts in the Arcbaaologia, voL
age of William the Conqueror, but with- vi. p. 244, are not remarkably inaccurate,
out giving any reasons. Lysons’s Per- the architecture is too elegant for the
byshire, p. ccxxxvi. Mr. King had satis- Danes, much more for the unconverted
fied himself that it was built during the Saxons. Both these castles are enclosed
Heptarchy, and even before the conver- by a court or ballium, with a fortified
sion of the Saxons to Christianity ; but entrance, like those erected by the Kor-
in this he gave the reins, as usual, to his mans.

imagination, which as much exceeded [No doubt Is now entertained but that
his learning, as the latter did his judg- Conisborough was built late in the Nor-
ment. Conisborough should seem, by man period. Mr. King’s authority, which
the name, to have been a royal residence, I followed for want of a better, is by no
which it certainly never was after the means to be depended upon. 1848.]

State of Society.

CIVIL ARCHITECTURE.

347

during the transient inroad of an enemy than for a chief-
tain’s usual residence. They bear a close resemblance,
except by their circular form and more insulated situa-
tion, to the peels, or square towers of three or four
stories, which are still found contiguous to ancient
mansion-houses, themselves far more ancient, in the
northern counties, 2 and seem to have been designed for
places of refuge.

In course of time, the barons who owned these castles
began to covet a more comfortable dwelling. The keep
was either much enlarged, or altogether relinquished as
a place of residence except in time of siege ; while more
convenient apartments were sometimes erected in the
tower of entrance, over the great gateway, which led to
the inner ballium or court-yard. Thus at Tunbridge
Castle, this part of which is referred by Mr. King to the
beginning of the thirteenth century, there was a room,
twenty-eight feet by sixteen r on each side of the gate-
way; another above of the same dimensions, with an
intermediate room over the entrance; and one large
apartment on the second floor occupying the whole space,
and intended for state. The windows in this class of
castles were still little better than loop-holes on the
basement story, but in the upper rooms often large and
beautifully ornamented, though always looking inwards
to the court. Edward I. introduced a more splendid and
convenient style of castles, containing many habitable
towers, with communicating apartments. Conway and
Carnarvon will be familiar examples. The next innova-
tion was the castle-palace — of which Windsor, if. not
quite the earliest, is «the most magnificent instance. Aln-
wick, Naworth, Harewood, Spofforth, Kenilworth, and
Warwick, were all built upon this scheme during the
fourteenth century, but subsequent enlargements have
rendered caution necessary to distinguish their original
remains. “ The odd mixture,” says Mr. King, “ of con-
venience and magnificence with cautious designs for
protection and defence, and with the inconveniences of
the former confined plan of a close fortress, is very
striking.” The provisions for defence became now, how-
ever, little more than nugatory ; large arched windows,

z Whitaker's Hist of Whalley ; Lysons’s Cumberland, p. ccvi.

348

PROGRESS OF

Chap. IX. Part II.

like those of cathedrals, were introduced into halls, and
this change in architecture manifestly bears witness to
the cessation of baronial wars and the increasing love of
splendour in the reign of Edward III.

To these succeeded the castellated housesof the fifteenth
century, such as Herstmonceux in Sussex, Haddon Hall
in Derbyshire, and the older part of Knowle in Kent. a
They resembled fortified castles in their strong gateways,
their turrets and battlements, to erect which a royal
licence was necessary ; but their defensive strength could
only have availed against a sudden affray or attempt at
forcible dispossession. They were always built round
one or two court-yards, the circumference of the first,
when they were two, being occupied by the offices and
servants' rooms, that of the second by the state-apart-
ments. Regular quadrangular houses, not castellated,
were sometimes built during the same &ge, and under
Henry VII. became universal in the superior style of
domestic architecture . b The quadrangular form, as well
from security and convenience as from imitation of con-
ventual houses, which were always constructed upon
that model, was generally preferred— even where the
dwelling-house, as indeed was usual, only took up one
side of die enclosure, and the remaining three contained
the offices, stables, and farm-buildings, with walls of
communication. Several veiy old parsonages appear to
have been built in this manner. 0 It is, however, not very
easy to discover any large fragments of houses inhabited
by the gentry before the reign, at soonest, of Edward III.,
jor even to trace them by engravings in the older topo-
graphical works, not only from the dilapidations of time,
but because very few considerable mansions had been
erected by that class. A great part of England affords
no stone fit for building, and the vast though unfor-
tunately not inexhaustible resources of her oak forests
were easily applied to less durable and magnificent
structures. A frame of massive timber, independent of
walls and resembling the inverted hull of a large ship,
formed the skeleton, as it were, of an ancient hall — the
principal beams springing from the ground naturally

a The ruins of Herstmonceux are, I Haddon Hall is of the fifteenth century,
believe, tolerably authentic remains of o Archaeologia, vol vi.

Henry VL’s age, but only a part of c Blomefield’s Norfolk, vol. iii. p. 242.

State of Society.

CIVIL ARCHITECTURE.

349

curved, and forming a Gothic arch overhead. The
intervals of these were filled up with horizontal planks ;
but in the earlier buildings, at least in some districts,
no part of the walls was of stone. d Stone houses are,
however, mentioned as belonging to citizens of London,
even in the reign of Henry II. ; e and, though not often
perhaps regularly hewn stones, yet those scattered over
the soil or dug from flint quarries, bound together with
a very strong and durable cement, were employed in the
construction of manerial houses, especially in the western
counties and other parts where that material is easily
procured/ Gradually even in timber buildings the in-
tervals of the main beams, which now became perpen-
dicular, not throwing off their curved springers till they
reached a considerable height, were occupied by stone
walls, or where stone was expensive, by mortar or plaster,
intersected by horizontal or diagonal beams, grooved into
the principal piers . 8 This mode of building continued
for a long time, and is still familiar to our eyes in the
older streets of the metropolis and other towns, and in
many parts of the country / 1 Early in the fourteenth
century the art of building with brick, which had been
lost since the Roman dominion, was introduced probably
from Flanders. Though several edifices of that age are
constructed with this material, it did not come into gene-
ral use till the reign of Henry VI/ Many considerable
houses as well as public buildings were erected with
bricks during his reign and that of Edward IV., chiefly
in the eastern counties, where the deficiency of stone was
most experienced. Few, if any, brick mansion-houses
of the fifteenth century exist, except in a dilapidated
state ; but Queen’s College and Clare Hall at Cambridge,
and part of Eton College, are subsisting witnesses to the
durability of the material as it was then employed.

It is an error to suppose that the English gentry were

d Whitaker’s Hist of Whalley. and for the most part, of strong timber,

® Lyttelton, t iv. p. 130. in framing whereof our carpenters have

f Harrison says, that few of the houses been and are worthily preferred before
of the commonalty, except here and there those of like science among all other
in the west country towns, were made of nations. Howbeit such as are lately
stone, p. 314. This was about 1670. builded are either of brick or hard stone,
8 Hist of Whalley. or both." p. 316.

h “ The ancient manors and houses of * Archeeologia, voL i. p. 143 ; voL iv.
our gentlemen,” says Harrison, “ are yet, p. 91.

Chap. IX. Part II*

350 PROGRESS OF

lodged in stately or even in well-sized houses. Generally

speaking, their dwellings were almost as in-
ofTrdhmry ferior to those of their descendants in capacity
mansion- ag they were in convenience. The usual

houses. J , . , •, r i

arrangement consisted ot an entrance-passage
running through the house, with a hall on one side, a
parlour beyond, and one or two chambers above, and on
the opposite side, a kitchen, pantry, and other offices. k
Such was the ordinary manor-house of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, as appears not only from the docu-
ments and engravings, but as to the latter period, from
the buildings themselves, sometimes, though not very
frequently, occupied by families of consideration, more
often converted into farm-houses or distinct tenements.
Larger structures were erected by men of great estates
during the reigns of Henry IV. and Edward IV. ; but
very few can be traced higher ; and such has been the
effect of time, still more through the advance or decline
of families and the progress of architectural improve-
ment, than the natural decay of these buildings, that I
should conceive it difficult to name a house in England,
still inhabited by a gentleman and not belonging to the
order of castles, the principal apartments of which are
older than the reign of Henry VII. The instances at
least must be extremely few. m

France by no means appears to have made a greater
progress than our own country in domestic architecture.
Except fortified castles, I do not find in the work of a
very miscellaneous but apparently diligent writer," any
considerable dwellings mentioned before the reign of
Charles VII., and very few of so early a date ! 0 Jacques

k Hist, of Whailey. In Strutt’s View othbque, par M. de Pauimy, t. iii. et
of Manners we have an inventory of fur- xxxi. It is to be regretted that Le
niture in the house of Mr. Richard Fer- Grand d’Aussy never completed that part
mor, ancestor of the earl of Pomfret, at of his Vie privde des Franpais which
Easton in Northamptonshire, and another was to have comprehended the history of
in that of Sir Adrian Foskewe. Both civil architecture. Villaret has slightly
these houses appear to have been of the noticed its state about 1380. t ii. p. 141.
dimensions and arrangement mentioned. 0 Chenonceaux in Touraine was built

m Single rooms, windows, doorways, by a nephew of Chancellor Duprat;
&c., of an earlier date may perhaps not Gftillon in the department of Eure by
unfrequently be found ; but such in- Cardinal Amboise ; both at the beginning
stances are always to be verified by their of the sixteenth century. These are now
intrinsic evidence, not by the tradition considered, in their ruins, as among the
of the place. [Note II.] most ancient houses in France. A work

n Melanges tirds dune grande bibli- by Ducerceau (Les plus excellens Bati-

State op Society. CIVIL ARCHITECTURE.

351

Cocur, a famous merchant unjustly persecuted by that
prince, had a handsome house at Paris, as well as another
at Bourges. p It is obvious that the long calamities which
France endured before the expulsion of the English must
have retarded this eminent branch of national improve-
ment.

Even in Italy, where from the size of her cities and
social refinements of her inhabitants, greater elegance
and splendour in building were justly to be expected,
the domestic architecture of the middle ages did not
attain any perfection. In several towns the houses were
covered with thatch, and suffered consequently from
destructive fires. Costanzo, a Neapolitan historian near
the end of the sixteenth century, remarks the change of
manners that had occurred since the reign of Joanna II.
one hundred and fifty years before. The great families
under the queen expended all their wealth on their
retainers, and placed their chief pride in bringing them
into the field. They were ill lodged, not sumptuously
clothed, nor luxurious in their tables. The house of
Caracciolo, high steward of that princess, one of the most
powerful subjects that ever existed, having fallen into
the hands of persons incomparably below his station,
had been enlarged by them, as insufficient for their ac-
commodation .* 1 If such were the case in the city of
Naples so late as the beginning of the fifteenth century,
we may guess how mean were the habitations in less
polished parts of Europe.

The two most essential improvements in architecture
during this period, one of which had been Jnvention
missed by the sagacity of Greece and Rome, ofeWmneyB
were chimneys and glass windows. Nothing
apparently can be more simple than the former ;

mens de France, 1607) gives accurate
engravings of thirty houses; but with
one or two exceptions, they seem all to
have been built in the sixteenth century.
Even in that age, defence was naturally
an object in constructing a French man-
sion-house ; and where defence is to be re-
garded, splendour and convenience must
give way. The namo of chtiteau was
not retained without meaning.

P Mdlanges tirds, &c. t. iii. For the
prosperity and downfall of J acques Cceur,

see Villaret, t xvi. p. 11 ; but more es-
pecially M&n. de l’Acad. des Inscript,
t. xx. p. 609. His mansion at Bourges
still exists, and is well known to the
curious in architectural antiquity. In
former editions I have mentioned a house
of Jacques Coeur at Beaumont-sur-Oise ;
but this was probably by mistake, as I
do not recollect, nor can find, any autho-
rity for it.

9 Giannone, 1st. di Napoli, t. iii. p,
280.

35 $ INVENTION OF CHIMNEYS. Chap. IX. Part II.

yet the wisdom of ancient times had been content to let
the smoke escape by an aperture in the centre of the
goof; and a discovery, of which Vitruvius had not a
glimpse, was made, perhaps in this country, by some
forgotten semi-barbarian. About the middle of the four-
teenth century the use of chimneys is distinctly mentioned
in England and in Italy ; but they are found in several
of our castles which bear a much older date/ This
country seems to have lost very early the art of making
glass, which was preserved in France, whence artificers
were brought into England to furnish the windows in
some new churches in the seventh century/ It is said
that in the reign of Henry III. a few ecclesiastical build-
ings had glazed windows/ Suger, however, a century
before, had adorned his great work, the abbey of St.

r Muratori, Antich. Ital. Dissert 25,
p. 390. Beckman, in his History of In-
ventions, voL i., a work of very great re-
search, cannot trace any explicit mention
of chimneys beyond the writings of John
Villani, wherein however they are not
noticed as a new invention. Piers Plow-
man, a few years later than Villani,
speaks of a “chambre with a chimney”
in which rich men usually dined. But
in the account-book of Bolton Abbey,
under the year 1311, there is a charge
pro faciendo camino in the rectory -house
of Gargrave. Whi taker’s Hist, of Craven,
p. 331. This may, I think, have been
only an iron stove or fire-pan ; though
Df. W. without hesitation translates it a
chimney. However, Mr. King, in his
observations on ancient castles, Archaxd.
vol, vi., and Mr. Strutt, in his View of
Manners, vol. i., describe chimneys in
castles of a very old construction. That
at Conisborough in Yorkshire is pecu-
liarly worthy of attention, and carries
back this important invention to a re-
mote antiquity.

In a recent work of some reputation, it
Is said ' “ There does not appear to be
any evidence of the use of chimney-shafts
In England prior to the twelfth century.
In Rochester Castle, which is in all pro-
bability the work of William Corbyl,
about 1130, there are complete fireplaces
with semicircular backs, and a shaft in
each jamb, supporting a semicircular arch
Over the opening, and that is enriched
with the zigzag moulding ; some of these

project slightly from the wall ; the flues,
however, go only a few feet up in the
thickness of the wail, and are then turned
out at the back, the apertures being small
oblong holes. At the castle, Hedingbam,
Essex, which is of about the same date,
there are fireplaces and chimneys of a
similar kind. A few years later, the
improvement of carrying the flue up the
whole height of the wall appears ; as at
Christ Church, Hants; the keep at New-
castle ; Sherborne Castle, &c. The early
chimney-shafts are of considerable height,
and similar ; afterwards they assumed a
great variety of forms, and during the
fourteenth century they are frequently
very short.” Glossary of Ancient Ar-
chitecture, p. 100, edit 1845. It is said,
too, here that chimneys were seldom used
in halls till near the end of the fifteenth
century ; the smoke took its course, if it
pleased, through a hole in the roof.

Chimneys are still more modem in
Trance ; and seem, according to Paulmy,
to have come into common use since the
midd le of the seventeenth century. J adls
nos pbres n’avoient qu’un unique chauf-
foir, qui dtoit commun h toute une famille,
et quelquefois h plusieurs. t. iii. p. 133.
In another place, however, he says: II
parait que les tuyaux de chemindes dtaient
d<$jh trfcs en usage en France, t xxxi.
p. 232.

• Du Cange, v. Vitrese ; Ben tham’s His-
tory of Ely, p. 22.

t Matt. Paris; Vine Abbatum St Alb.

122 .

353

State of Society. FURNITURE OF ROUSES.

Denis, with windows, not only glazed but pointed ; u and
I presume that other churches of the same class, both in
France and England, especially after the lancet-shaped'
window had yielded to one of ampler dimensions, were
generally decorated in a similar manner. Yet glass
said not to have been employed in the domestic architec-
ture of France before the fourteenth century ; x and its
introduction into England was probably by no means
earlier. Nor indeed did it come into general use during
the period of the middle ages. Glazed windows were
considered as moveable furniture, and probably bore a
high price. When the earls of Northumberland, as late
as the reign of Elizabeth, left Alnwick Castle, the win-
dows were taken out of their frames, and carefully laid
by . 7

But if the domestic buildings of the fifteenth century
would not seem very spacious or convenient at Furniture
present, far less would this luxurious genera- of houses,
tion be content with their internal accommodations. A
gentleman’s house containing three or four beds was
extraordinarily well provided ; few probably had more
than two. The walls were commonly bare, without
wainscot or even plaster ; except that some great houses
were furnished with hangings, and that perhaps hardly
so soon as the reign of Edward IY. It is unnecessary to
add, that neither libraries of books nor pictures could
have found a place among furniture. Silver plate was
very rare, and hardly used for the table. A few inven-
tories of furniture that still remain exhibit a miserable
deficiency . 2 ’ And this was incomparably greater in pri-
vate gentlemen’s houses than among citizens, and espe-
cially foreign merchants. We have an inventory of the
goods belonging to Contarini, a rich Venetian trader, at

u Recueil dee Hist t xii. p. 101. Rolls of Parliament. A carpenter’s stock

* Paulmy, t. iii. p. 132. Yillaret, t. xi. was valued at a shilling, and consisted of

p. 141. Macpherson, p. 679. five toolf. Other tradesmen were almost

y Northumberland Household Book, as poor ; but a tanner’s stock, if there is
preface, p. 16. Bishop Percy sayB, on no mistake, was worth 91. Is. 10&, more
the authority of Harrison, that glass was than ten times any other. Tanners were
not commonly used in the reign of principal tradesmen, the chief part of
Henry VIII. dress being made of leather. A few

* See some curious valuations of fur- silver cups and spoons are the Only #rti-
nitnre and stock in trade at Colchester in cles of plate ; and as the former are va.
1296 and 1301. Eden’s Introduct to lued but at one or two shiUinp, they, had,
State of the Poor, p. 20 and 25, from the I suppose, but a little silver on the rim,

VOL. HI. 2 A

354

FURNITURE OF HOUSES. Chap. IX. Part II,

his house in St. Botolph’s Lane, a.d. 1481. There ap-
pear to have been no less than ten beds, and glass win-
dows are especially noticed as moveable furniture. No
mention however is made of chairs or looking-glasses. 11
If we compare this account, however trifling in our
estimation, with a similar inventory of furniture in
Skipton Castle, the great honour of the earls of Cumber-
land, and among the most splendid mansions of the
north, not at the same peiiod, for I have not found any
inventory of a nobleman’s furniture so ancient, but in
1572, after almost a century of continual improvement,
we shall be astonished at the inferior provision of the
baronial residence. There were not more than seven or
eight beds in this great castle ; nor had any of the cham-
bers either chairs, glasses, or carpets. b It is in this
sense, probably, that we must understand iEneas Sylvius,
if he meant any thing more than to express a traveller’s
discontent, when he declares that the kings of Scotland
would rejoice to be as well lodged as the second class of
citizens at Nuremberg. 0 Few burghers of that town had
mansions, I presume, equal to the palaces of Dumferliii

a Nicholl's Illustrations, p. 119. In table and a few chairs; the chambers
this work, among severalinteresting facts above had two best beds, and there was
of the same class, we have another inven- one servant's bed; but the inferior
tory of the goods of “ John Port, late the servants had only mattresses on the
king's servant,” who died about 1524 : he floor. The best chambers had window
seems to have been a man of some con- shutters and curtains. Mr. Fermor, being
sideration and probably a merchant The a merchant, was probably better supplied
house consisted of a hall, parlour, buttery, than the neighbouring gentry. His plate
and kitchen, with two chambers, and one however consisted only of sixteen spoons,
smaller, on the floor above ; a napery, or and a few goblets and ale pots. Sir
linen room, and three garrets, besides a Adrian Poskewe’s opulence appears to
shop, which was probably detached, have been greater ; he had a service of
There were five bedsteads in the house, silver plate, and his parlour was fur-
and on the whole a great deal of fumi- nished with hangings. This was in 1539 ;
ture for those times'; much more than I it is not to be imagined that a knight of
have seen in any other inventory. His the shire a hundred years before would
plate is valued at 94Z.; Ms'jewels at 23Z. ; have rivalled even this scanty provision
his funeral expenses come to 73 Z. 6s. 8 d. of moveables. Strutt's View of Manners,
p, 119. vol. iii. p. 63. These details, trifling as

b Whitaker’s Hist of Craven, p. 289. they may appear, are absolutely neces-
A. better notion of the accommodations sary in order to give an idea with some
usual in the rank immediately below precision of a state of national wealth so
may be collected from two inventories totally different from the present,
published by Strutt, one of Mr. Fermor's c Cuperent tarn egregib Scotorum reges
bouse at Easton, the other Sir Adrian qukm medicares Nuremberg® cives habi-
Foskewe's. I have mentioned the size of tare. iEn. Sylv. apud Schmidt, Hist, des
these gentlemen’s houses already. In Allem. t. v. p. 510.
the former, Hie parlour had wainscot, a

FARM-HOUSES,

State op Society.

355

or Stirling, but it is not unlikely that they were better
furnished.

In the construction of farm-houses and cottages, es-
pecially the latter, there have probably been Farm-houses
fewer changes ; and those it would be more and cottages,
difficult to follow. No building of this class can be sup-
posed to exist of the antiquity to which the present work
is confined ; and I do not know that we have any docu-
ment as to the inferior architecture of England, so
valuable as one which M. de Paulmy has quoted for
that of France, though perhaps more strictly applicable
to Italy, an illuminated manuscript of the fourteenth
century, being a translation of Crescentio’s work on
agriculture, illustrating the customs, and, among other
things, the habitations of the agricultural class. Accord-
ing to Paulmy, there is no other difference between an
ancient and a modem farm-house than arises from the in-
troduction of tiled roofs. d In the original work of Cres-
centio, a native of Bologna, who composed this treatise
on rural affairs about the year 1300, an Italian farm-
house, when built at least according to his plan, appears
to have been commodious both in size and arrangement.®
Cottages in England seem to have generally consisted of
a single room without division of stories. Chimneys
were unknown in such dwellings till the early part of
Elizabeth’s reign, when a very rapid and sensible im-
provement took place in the comforts of our yeomanry
and cottagers/

It must be remembered that I have introduced this
disadvantageous representation of civil archi- Ecclesiastical
tecture, as a proof of general poverty and back- architecture,
wardness in the refinements of life. Considered in its
higher departments, that art is the principal boast of the
middle ages. The common buildings, especially those
of a public kind, were constructed with skill and atten-
tion to durability. The castellated style displays these

<* t. iii. p. 127.

e Crescentius ill Commodum Kura-
lium. (Lovanice, absque anno.) This
old edition contains many coarse wooden
cuts, possibly taken from the illumi-
nations which Paulmy found in his manu-
script

i Harrison's account of England, pre-

fixed to Hollingshed s Chronicles. Chim-
neys were not used in the farm-houses of
Cheshire till within forty years of the
publication of King's Vale-royal (1650);
the fire was in the midst of the house,
against a hob of clay, and the oxen lived
under the same roof. Whitaker’s Craven,
p. 334.

2 A 2

356

ECCLESIASTICAL ARCHITECTURE. Chap. IX. Part II.

qualities in great perfection ; the means are well adapted
to their objects, and its imposing grandeur, though
chiefly resulting no doubt from massiveness and histori-
cal association, sometimes indicates a degree of architec-
tural genius in the conception. But the most remarkable
works of this art are the religious edifices erected in the
twelfth and three following centuries. These structures,
uniting sublimity in general composition with the beauties
of variety and form, intricacy of parts, skilful or at least
fortunate effects of shadow and light, and in some
instances with extraordinary mechanical science, are
naturally apt to lead those antiquaries who are most
conversant with them into too partial estimates of the
times wherein they were founded. They certainly are
accustomed to behold the fairest side of the picture. It
was the favourite and most honourable employment of
ecclesiastical wealth, to erect, to enlarge, to repair, to
decorate cathedral and conventual churches. An im-
mense capital must have been expended upon these
buildings in England between the Conquest and the
Reformation. And it is pleasing to observe how the seeds
of genius, hidden as it were under the frost of that dreary
winter, began to bud in the first sunshine of encourage-
ment. In the darkest period of the middle ages, espe-
cially after the Scandinavian incursions into France and
England, ecclesiastical architecture, though always far
more advanced than any other art, bespoke the rudeness
and poverty of the times. It began towards the latter
part of the eleventh century, when tranquillity, at least
as to former enemies, was restored, and some degree of
learning re-appeared, to assume a more noble appearance.
The Anglo-Norman cathedrals were perhaps as much dis-
tinguished above other works of man in their own age,
as the more splendid edifices of a later period. The
science manifested in them is not, however, very great ;
and their style, though by no means destitute of lesser
beauties, is upon the whole an awkward imitation of
Roman architecture, or perhaps more immediately of the
Saracenic buildings in Spain and those of the lower
Greek empire. 8 But about the middle of the twelfth

* B The Saracenic architecture was once occur, I believe, in any Moorish build-
conceived to have been the parent of the ings ; while the great mosque of Cordova,
Gothic. But the pointed arch does not built in the eighth century, resembles,

State op Society. ECCLESIASTICAL ARCHITECTURE. 357

century, this manner began to give place to what is
improperly denominated the Gothic architecture ; 11 of
which the pointed arch, formed by the segments of two
intersecting semicircles of equal radius and described
about a common diameter, has generally been deemed
the essential characteristic. We are not concerned at
present to inquire whether this style originated in France
or Germany, Italy or England, since it was certainly
almost simultaneous in all these countries ; * nor from

except by its superior beauty and magni-
ficence, one of our oldest cathedrals ; the
nave of Gloucester, for example, or
Durham. Even the vaulting is similar,
and seems to indicate some imitation,
though perhaps of a common model.
Compare Archaeologia, vol. xvii. plate I
and 2, with Murphy’s Arabian Antiqui-
ties, plate 6. The pillars indeed at
Cordova are of the Corinthian order,
perfectly executed, if we may trust the
engraving, and the work, I presume, of
Christian architects ; while those of our
Anglo-Norman cathedrals are generally
an imitation of the Tuscan shaft, the
builders not venturing to trust their roofs
to a more slender support, though Corin-
thian foliage is common in the capitals,
especially those of smaller ornamental
columns. In fact, the Roman architec-
ture is universally acknowledged to have
produced what we call the Saxon or
Norman; but it is remarkable that it
should have been adopted, with no varia-
tion but that of the singular horse-shoe
arch, by the Moors of Spain.

The Gothic, or pointed arch, though
very uncommon in the genuine Saracenic
of Spain and the Levant, may be found
in some prints from Eastern buildings;
and is particularly striking in the fa 9 ade
of the great mosque at Lucknow, in Salt’s
designs for Lord Valentia’s Travels.
The pointed arch buildings in the. Holy
Land have all been traced to the age of
the Crusades. Some arches, if they de-
serve the name, that have been referred
to this class, are not pointed by their
construction, but rendered such by cutting
off and hollowing the projections of hori-
zontal stones. *

h Gibbon has asserted, what might
Justify this appellation, that “ the image
of Theodoric’s palace at Verona, still ex-
tant on a coin, represents the oldest and

most authentic model of Gothic archi-
tecture.” vol. vii. p. 33. For this he
refers to Maffei, Verona lllustrata, p. 31,
where we find an engraving, not indeed
of a coin, but of a seal ; the building re-
presented on which is in a totally dissi-
milar style. The* following passages in
Cassiodorus, for which I am indebted to
M. Ginguend, Hist. Littdr. de l’ltalie, t. i.
p. 55, would be more to the purpose;
Quid dicamus columnarum junceam pro-
ceritatem ? moles illas sublimissimas fa-
bricaram quasi quibusdam erectis hasti-
libus contineri. These columns of reedy
slenderness, so well described by juncea
proceritas, are said to be found in the
cathedral of Montreal in Sicily, built in
the eighth century. Knight’s Principles
of Taste, p. 162. They are not however
sufficient to justify the denomination of
Gothic, which is usually confined to the
pointed arch style.

i The famous abbot Suger, minister of
Louis VI., rebuilt St. Denis about 1140.
The cathedral of Laon is said to have
been dedicated in 1114. Hist. Litteraire
de la France, t ix. p. 220. I do not know
in what style the latter of these churches
is built, but the former is, or rather was,
Gothic. Notre Dame at Paris was begun
soon after the middle Of the twelfth
century, and completed under St Louis.
Melanges tires d'une grande bibliothfeque,
t xxxi. p. 108. In England, the earliest
specimen I have seen of pointed arches
is in a print of St Botolphe’s Priory at
Colchester, said by Strutt to have been
built in 1110. View of Manners, vol. i.
plate 30. These are apertures formed
by excavating the space contained by
the intersection of semicircular, or Saxon
arches ; which are perpetually disposed,
by way of ornament, on the outer as well
as inner surface of old churches, so 68 to
cut each other* and consequently to pro*

.358

ECCLESIASTICAL AGRICULTURE. Chap. IX. Pabt IJ.

what source it was derived — a question of no small diffi-
culty. I would only venture to remark, that whatever
may be thought of the origin of the pointed arch,' for
which there is more than one mode of accounting, we
must perceive a very oriental character in the vast pro-
fusion of ornament, especially on the exterior surface,
which is as distinguishing a mark of Gothic buildings as
their arches, and contributes in an eminent degree both
to their beauties and to their defects. This indeed is
rather applicable to the later than the earlier stage of
architecture, and rather to continental than English
churches. Amiens is in a far more florid style than Salis-
bury, though a contemporary structure. The Gothic
species of architecture is thought by most to have reached
its perfection, considered as an object of taste, by the
middle or perhaps the close of the fourteenth century, or
at least to have lost something of its excellence by the
corresponding part of the next age ; an effect of its early
and rapid cultivation, since arts appear to have, like
individuals, their natural progress and decay. The me-

duce the figure of a Gothic arch ; and if The circular and pointed forms, instead
there is no mistake in the date, they are of one having at once supplanted the
probably among the most ancient of that other, were concurrent in the same build-
style in Europe. Those of the church of ing, through Germany, Italy, and Swit-
St. Cross. near Winchester are of the reign zerland, for some centuries. I will just
of Stephen ; and generally speaking, the add to the instances mentioned by Mr.
pointed style, especially in vaulting, the Hope and others, and which every tra-
taost important object in the construction veller may corroborate, one not very well
of a building, is' not considered as older known, perhaps as early as any,— the
than Henry II. The nave of Canterbury crypt of the cathedral at Basie, built
cathedral, of the erection of which by a under the reign of the emperor Henry
French architect about 1176 we have a II., near the commencement of the
full account in Gervase (Twysden, Decern eleventh century, where two pointed
Senptores, col. 1289), and the Temple with three circular arches stand toge-
church, dedicated in 1183, are the, most ther, evidently from want of space
ancient English buildings altogether in enough to preserve the same breadth
the Gothic manner. with the necessary height. The same

The subject of ecclesiastical architec- circumstance will be found, I think, in
ture in the middle ages has been so fully the crypt of St Denis, near Paris, which,
discussed by intelligent and observant however, is not so old. The writings of
writers since these pages were first pub- Hope, Rickman, Whewell,and Willis are
lished, that they require some correction, prominent among many that have thrown
The oriental theory for the origin of the light on this subject. The beauty and
pointed architecture, though not given magnificence of the pointed style is ao-
up, has not generally stood its ground; knowledged on all sides; perhaps the
there seems more reason to believe that imitation of it has been too servile, and
it was first adopted in Germany, a a Mr. with too much forgetfulness of some very
Hope has shown; but at first in single important changes in our religious aspect
arches, not in the construction of the rendering that simply ornamental which
entire building. was once directed toa great object [1848.]

359

State op Societt. PROGRESS OF AGRICULTURE.

chanical execution, however, continued to improve, and
is so far beyond the apparent intellectual powers of those
times, that some have ascribed the principal ecclesiastical
structures to the fraternity of freemasons, depositaries of
a concealed and traditionary science. There is probably
some ground for this opinion ; and the earlier archives
of that mysterious association, if they existed, might
illustrate the progress of Gothic architecture, and per-
haps reveal its origin. The remarkable change into this
new style, that was almost contemporaneous in every
part of Europe, cannot be explained by any local cir-
cumstances, or the capricious taste of a single nation. k

It would be a pleasing task to trace with satisfactory
exactness the slow, and almost perhaps insen-
sible progress of agriculture and internal im- ^med*
provement during the latter period of the & ree P ro “

x x CTCSfilVG

middle ages. But no diligence could recover
the unrecorded history of a single village ; though con-
siderable attention has of late been paid to this inte-
resting subject by those antiquaries, who, though
sometimes affecting to despise the lights of modem
philosophy, are unconsciously guided by their effulgence.
I have already adverted to the wretched condition of
agriculture during the prevalence of feudal tenures, as
well as before their general establishment .” 1 Yet even

k The curious subject of freemasonry
has unfortunately been, treated only by
panegyrists or calumniators, both equally
mendacious. I do not wish to pry into
the mysteries of the craft ; but it would
be interesting to know more of.their
history during the period when they
were literally architects. They are
charged by an act of parliament, 3 H.
VI. c. i., with fixing the price of their
labour In their annual chapters, contrary
to the statute of labourers, and such
chapters are consequently prohibited.
This is their first persecution; they
have sifice undergone others, and are
perhaps reserved for still more. It is
remarkable, that masons were never
legally incorporated, like other traders ;
their bond of union being stronger than
any charter. The article Masqnry in
the Encyclopaedia Britannica is worth
reading.

m I cannot resist the pleasure of tran-

scribing a lively and eloquent passage
from Dr. Whitaker. “Could a curious
observer of the present day carry himself
nine or ten centuries back, and ranging
the summit of Pendle survey the forked
vale of Calder on one side, and the bolder
margins of Ribble and Hadder on the
other, instead of populous towns and
villages, the castle, the old tower-built
house, the elegant modem mansion, the
artificial plantation, the inclosed park
and pleasure ground: instead of unin-
terrupted inclosures which have driven
sterility almost to the summit of the fells,
how great must then have been the con-
trast, when ranging either at a distance,
or immediately beneath, his eye must
have caught vast tracts of forest ground
stagnating with bog or darkened by
native woods, where the wild ox, the roe,
the stag, and the wolf, had scarcely
learned the supremacy of man, when,
directing his view to the intermediate

360

PROGRESS OF AGRICULTURE. Chap. IX. Part II,

in the least civilized ages, there were not wanting
partial encouragements to cultivation, and the ameliora-
ting principle of human industry struggled against
destructive revolutions and barbarous disorder. The
devastation of war from the fifth to the eleventh century
rendered land the least costly of all gifts, though it must
ever be the most truly valuable and permanent. Many
of the grants to monasteries, which strike us as enormous,
were of districts absolutely wasted, which would pro-
bably have been reclaimed by no other means. We owe
the agricultural restoration of great part of Europe to
the monks. They chose, for the sake of retirement,
secluded regions which they cultivated with the labour
of their hands . 11 Several charters are extant, granted to

spaces, to the windings of the valleys, or
the expanse of plains beneath, he could
only have distinguished a few insulated
patches of culture, each encircling a
village of wretched cabins, among which
would still be remarked one rude man-
sion of wood, scarcely equal in comfort
to a modern cottage, yet then rising
proudly eminent alxwe the rest, where
the Saxon lord, surrounded by his faith-
ful cotarii, enjoyed a rude and solitary
independence, owning no superior but
his sovereign.” Hist, of Whalley, p. 133.
About a fourteenth part of this parish of
Whalley was cultivated at the time of
Domesday. This proportion, however,
would by no means hold in the counties
south of Trent

a “ Of the Anglo-Saxon husbandry we
may remark,” says Mr. Turner, “ that
Domesday Survey gives us some indica-
tion that the cultivation of the church
lands was much superior to that of any
other order of society. They have much
less wood upon them, and less common
of pasture : and what they had appears
often in smaller and more irregular pieces ;
white their meadow was more abundant,
and in more numerous distributions.”
Hist, of Anglo-Saxons, vol. ii. p. 167.

It was the glory of St Benedict’s re-
form, to have substituted bodily labour
for the supine indolence of oriental as-
ceticism. In the East it was more diffi-
cult to succeed in such an endeavour,
though it had been made. “ The Bene-
dictine have been,” says Guizot, “ the

great clearers of land in Europe. A
colony, a little swarm of monks, settled
in places nearly uncultivated, often in
the midst of a pagan population, in
Germany, for example, or in Britany;
there, at once missionaries and labourers,
they accomplished their double service
through peril and fatigue.” Civilig. en
France, Le$on 14. The north-eastern
parts of France, as far as the Lower Seine,
were reduced into cultivation by the dis-
ciples of St. Columban, in the sixth and
seventh centuries. The proofs of this are
in Mabillon’s Acta Sanctorum Ord.
Bened. See Mdm. de l’Acad. des Sciences
Morales et Politiques, iii. 708.

Guizot has appreciated the rule of St.
Benedict with that candid and favourable
spirit which he always has brought fc>
the history of the church : anxious, as it
seems, not only to escape the imputation
of Protestant prejudices by others, but
to combat them in his own mind ; and
aware, also, that the partial misrepre-
sentations of Voltaire had sunk into the
minds of many who were listening to his
lectures. Compared with the writers of
the eighteenth century, who were too
much alienated by the faults of the clergy
to acknowledge any redeeming virtues,
or even with Sismondi, who, coming in a
moment of reaction, feared the returning
influence of mediaeval prejudices, Guizot
stands forward as an equitable and indul-
gent arbitrator. In this spirit he says
of the rule of St. Benedict— La pensee
morale et la discipline gendrale en sont

State of Society. PROGRESS OF AGRICULTURE. 361

convents, and sometimes to laymen, of lands which they
had recovered from a desert condition, after the ravages
of the Saracens . 0 Sopie districts were allotted to a body
of Spanish colonists, who emigrated, in the reign of
Louis the Debonair, to live under a Christian sovereign. 1 *
Nor is this the only instance of agricultural colonies.
Charlemagne transplanted part of his conquered Saxons
into Flanders, a country at that time almost unpeopled ;
and at a much later period, there was a remarkable
reflux from the same country, or rather from Holland to
the coasts of the Baltic Sea. In the twelfth century,
great numbers of Dutch colonists settled along the whole
line between the Ems and the Vistula. They obtained
grants of uncultivated land on condition of fixed rents,
and were governed by their own laws under magistrates
of their own election.*

There cannot be a more striking proof of the low con-
dition of English agriculture in the eleventh century,
than is exhibited by Domesday Book. Though almost
all England had been partially cultivated, and we find
nearly the same manors, except in the north, which exist
at present, yet the value and extent of cultivated ground
are inconceivably small. With every allowance for the
inaccuracies and partialities of those by whom that

sgvbres ; mais dans le detail de la vie elle
est humaine et moderge ; plus humaine,
plus moddrde que les lois barbares, que les
moeurs generates du temps; et je ne
doute pas que les frbres, renfermds dans
Tinterieur d’un monastbre, n’y fussent
gouvernds par une autorite, & tout
prendre, et plus raisonnable, et d'une
manibre moins dure qu’ils ne l’eussent
dtd dans la society civile.

0 Thus, in Marca Hispanica, Appendix,
p. YtO, we have a grant from Lotbaire L
in 834, to a person and his brother, of
lands which their father, ab eremo in
Septimanift trahens, had possessed by a
charter of Charlemagne. See too p. 773 ,
and other places. Du Cange, v. Eremus,
gives also a few instances.

P Du Cange, v. Aprisio. Baluze, Ca-
pitularia, t. i. p. 549. They were per-
mitted to decide petty suits among
themselves, but for more important

matters were to repair to the county-
court. A liberal policy runs through
the whole charter. See more on the
same subject, id. p. 569.

* I owe this fact to M. Heeren, Essai
sur l’lnfluenee des Croisades, p. 226. An
inundation in their own country is sup-
posed to have immediately produced this
emigration ; but it was probably succes-
sive, and connected with political as well
as physical causes of greater permanence.
The first instrument in which they are
mentioned is a grant from the bishop of
Hamburgh in 1106. This colony has
affected the local usages, as well as the
denominations of things and places along
the northern coast of Germany. It must
be presumed that a" large proportion of
the emigrants were diverted from agri*
culture to people the commercial cities
which grew up in the twelfth century
upon that coast.

362

LOW CONDITION OF Chap. IX. Part II.

famous survey was completed/ we are lost in amazement
at the constant recurrence of two or three carucates in
demesne, with other lands occupied by ten or a dozen
villeins, valued altogether at forty shillings, as the
return of a manor, which now would yield a competent
income to a gentleman. If Domesday Book can be con-
sidered as even approaching to accuracy in respect of
these estimates, agriculture must certainly have made a
very material progress in the four succeeding centuries.
This however is rendered probable by other documents.
Ingulfus, abbot of Croyland under the Conqueror, sup-
plies an early and interesting evidence of improvement.*
Kichard de Kules, lord of Deeping, he tells us, being
fond of agriculture, obtained permission from the abbey
to inclose a large portion of marsh for the purpose of
separate pasture, excluding the Welland by a strong
dike, upon which he erected a town, and rendering
those stagnant fens a garden of Eden. 1 In imitation
of this spirited cultivator, the inhabitants of Spalding
and some neighbouring villages by a common resolu-
tion divided their marshes amongst them ; when some
converting them to tillage, some reserving them for
meadow, others leaving them in pasture, they found a
rich soil for every purpose. The abbey of Croyland
and villages in that neighbourhood followed this ex-
ample." This early instance of parochial inclosure is
not to be overlooked in the history of social progress.
By the statute of Merton, in the 20th of Henry III.,
the lord is permitted to approve, that is, to inoiose the
waste lands of his manor, provided he leave sufficient
common of pasture for the freeholders. Higden, a

* Ingulfus tellp* us that the commis- terras Integra continente ; that is. It was
sioners were pious enough to favour as general and conclusive as the last
Croyland, returning its possessions inac- judgment will be,
curately, both as to measurement and • This of course is subject to the doubt
value; non ad verum pretium, nec ad as to the authenticity of Ingulfus.
verum spatium nostrum monaaterium * 1 Gale, XV Script p, 77.
librabant misericorditer, praecaventes in u Communi plebiscite viritim inter se
futurum regiB exactionibus. p.79. I may diviseront, et quidam suas portiones agri-
Jusfc Observe by the way, that Ingulfus colantes, quidam ad fcenum eonservantes,
gives the plain meaning of the word quidam ut prius ad pasturam suorum
Domesday, which has been disputed, animalium, separaiiter jacere permit-
The book was so called, he says, pro su& tentes, terrain pinguem et uberem re-
generalitate omnia tenement* lotius perenmt p. 94.

State of Society. AGRICULTURE IN ENGLAND.

363

writer who lived about the time of Richard II., says,
in reference to the number of hydes and vills of Eng-
land at the Conquest, that by clearing of woods, and
ploughing up wastes, there were many more of each
m his age than formerly/ And it might be easily pre-
sumed , independently of proof, that woods were cleared,
marshes drained, and wastes brought into tillage, during
the long period that the house of Plantagenet sat on
the throne. From manerial surveys indeed and similar
instruments, it appears that in some places there was
nearly as much ground cultivated in the reign of Edward
III. as at the present day. The condition of different
counties however was very far from being alike, and in
general the northern and western parts of England were
the most backward/

The culture of arable land, was very imperfect. Fleta
remarks, in the reign of Edward I. or II., that unless an
acre yielded more than six bushels of com, the farmer
would be a loser, and the land yield no rent . 2 And Sir
John Cullum, from very minute accounts, has calculated
that nine or ten bushels were a full average crop on an
acre of wheat. An amazing excess of tillage accompa-
nied, and partly, I suppose, produced this imperfect
cultivation. In Hawsted, for example, under Edward I.,
there were thirteen or fourteen hundred acres of arable,
and only forty-five of meadow ground. A similar dis-
proportion occurs almost invariably in every account we
possess/ This seems inconsistent with the low price of
cattle. But we must recollect, that the common pasture,
often the most extensive part of a manor, is not included,
at least by any specific measurement, in these surveys.
The rent of land differed of course materially ; sixpence
an acre seems to have been about the average for arable
land in the thirteenth century, b though meadow was at

* I Gale, XV Script, p. 201. a Cullum, p. 100, 220. Eden’s State

7 A good deal of infbrmation upon the of Poor, &c. p. 48. Whitaker’s Craven,

former state of agriculture will be found p. 45, 336.

in Cullum’s History of Hawsted. Blome- b I infer this from a number of pas-
field’s Norfolk is in this respect among sages in Blomefleld, Cullum, and other
the most valuable of our local histories, writers. Hearne says, that an acre was
Sir Frederic Eden, in the first part of his often called Solidata terras ; because the
excellent work on the poor, has collected yearly rent of one on the best land was a
several interesting facts. shilling. Lib. Nig. Scacc.p. 31.

* L ii. c. 8.

364

AGRICULTURE IN

Chap. IX. Part II.

double or treble that sum. But the landlords were
naturally solicitous to augment a revenue that became
more and more inadequate to their luxuries. They grew
attentive to agricultural concerns, and perceived that a
high rate of produce, against which their less enlightened,
ancestors had been used to clamour, would bring much
more into their coffers than it took away. The exporta-
tion of com had been absolutely prohibited. But the
statute of the 15 th Henry VL e. 2, reciting that “on
this account, farmers and others who use husbandry,
cannot sell their com but at a low price, to the great
damage of the realm,” permits it to be sent any where
but to the king’s enemies, so long as the quarter of
wheat shall not exceed 6$, 8rf. in value, or that of
barley 3s.

The price of wool was fixed in the thirty-second year
of the same reign at a minimum, below which no person
was suffered to buy it, though he might give more ; c a
provision neither wise nor equitable, but obviously sug-
gested by the same motive. Whether the rents of land
were augmented in any degree through these measures,

I have not perceived ; their great rise took place in the
reign of Henry VIII., or rather afterwards. 41 The usual
price of land under Edward IV. seems to have been ten
years’ purchase.®

It may easily be presumed that an English writer can
its condition f urn i s k vei 7 little information as to the state
in France of agriculture in .foreign countries. In such
and Italy. wor k s relating to France as have fallen within
my reach, I have found nothing satisfactory, and cannot
pretend to determine, whether the natural tendency of
mankind to ameliorate their condition had a greater
influence in promoting agriculture, or the vices inherent
in the actual order of society, and those public misfor-
tunes to which that kingdom was exposed, in retarding
it/ The state of Italy was far different; the rich

c Rot. Pari. vol. v. p. 275. husbandmen, and milked thirty cows, on

d A passage in Bishop Latimer’s ser- a farm of three or four pounds a year,
mans, too often quoted to require repeti- It is not surprising that he lived m
tion, shows that land was much underlet plentifully as his son describes,
about the end of the fifteenth century. • Rymer, t. xii. p. 204.

His father, he says, kept half a dozen t Veily and Villaret scarcely mention

State of Societt. FRANCE AND ITALY,

365

Lombard plains, still more fertilized by irrigation, be-
came a garden, and agriculture seems to have reached
the excellence which it*still retains. The constant war-
fare indeed of neighbouring cities is not very favourable
to industry ; and upon this account we might incline to
place the greatest territorial improvement of Lombardy
at an era rather posterior to that of her republican
government; but from this it primarily sprung; and
without the subjugation of the feudal aristocracy, and
that perpetual demand upon the fertility of the earth
which an increasing population of citizens produced,
the valley of the Po would not have yielded more to
human labour than it had done for several preceding
centuries. 8 Though Lombardy was extremely populous
in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, she exported
large quantities of com. h The very curious treatise of
Crescentius exhibits the full details of Italian husbandry
about 1300, and might afford an interesting comparison
to those who are acquainted with its present state. That
state indeed in many parts of Italy displays no symptoms
of decline. But whatever mysterious influence of soil
or climate has scattered the seeds of death on the western
regions of Tuscany, had not manifested itself in the
middle ages. Among uninhabitable plains, the traveller
is struck by the ruins of innumerable castles and villages,
monuments of a time when pestilence was either unfelt,
or had at least not forbad the residence of mankind.
Yol terra, whose deserted walls look down upon that
tainted solitude, was once a small but free republic;
Siena, round whom, though less depopulated, the ma-
lignant influence hovers, was once almost the rival of
Florence. So melancholy and apparently irresistible
a decline of culture and population through physical
causes, as seems to have gradually overspread that por-
tion of Italy, has not perhaps been experienced in any
other part of Europe, unless we except Iceland.

The Italians of the fourteenth century seem to have
paid some attention to an art, of which, both as
related to cultivation and to architecture, our ftr e ng *

this subject; and Le Grand merely tells state of neglect, might be interesting,
us that it was entirely neglected ; but £ Muratori, Dissert. 21.
the details of sucK an art, even in its h Penina, 1. xt. c. 7.

366

CHANGES IN THE Chap. IX. Past II,

own forefathers were almost entirely ignorant. Crescen-
tius dilates upon horticulture, and gives .a pretty long
list of herbs both esculent and medicinal. 1 His notions
about the ornamental department are rather beyond
what we should expect, and I do not know that his
scheme of a flower-garden could be much amended. His
general arrangements, which are minutely detailed with
evident fondness for the subject, would of course appear
too formal at present ; yet less so than those of subse-
quent times ; and though acquainted with what is called
the topiary art, that of training or cutting trees into
regular figures, he "does not seem to run into its extra-
vagance. Regular gardens, according to Paulmy, were
not made in France till the sixteenth or even seventeenth
century ; k yet one is said to have existed at the Louvre,
of much older construction. 1 " England, I believe, had
nothing of the ornamental . kind, unless it were some
trees regularly disposed in the orchard of a monastery.
Even the common horticultural art for culinary purposes,
though not entirely neglected, since the produce of
gardens is sometimes mentioned in ancient deeds, had
not been cultivated with much attention." The esculent
vegetables now most in use were introduced in the reign
of Elizabeth, and some sorts a great deal later.

I should leave this slight survey of economical history
Chan es in more imperfect, were I to make no obser-
vaiu” g of n vation on the relative values of money. Without
money. something like precision in our notions upon this
subject, every statistical inquiry becomes a source of con-
fusion and error. But considerable difficulties attend the
discussion. These arise principally from two causes ; the
inaccuracy or partial representations of historical writers,
on whom we are accustomed too implicitly to rely, and
the change of manners, which renders a certain command
over articles of purchase less adequate to our wants than
it was in former ages.

The first of these difficulties is capable of being re-
moved by a circumspect use of authorities. When this
part of statistical history began to excite attention,

i Benina, 1. Vi.

k t iii. p. 145 ; t xxxi. p. 258. m De la Mare, Traits do la Police, t. iii. p. 380.

n Eden's State of Poor, vel. i, p. 51.

State of Society. VALUE OF MONEY.

367

which was hardly perhaps before the publication of
Bishop Fleetwood’s Chronicon Preeiosum, so few au-
thentic documents had been published with respect to
prices, that inquirers were glad to have recourse to
historians, even when not contemporary, for such facts
as they had thought fit to record. But these historians
were sometimes too distant from the times concerning
which they wrote, and too careless in their general
character, to merit much regard ; and even when contem-
porary, were often credulous, remote from the concerns
of the world, and, at the best, more apt to register some
extraordinary phenomenon of scarcity or cheapness, than
the average rate of pecuniary dealings. The one ought,
in my opinion, to be absolutely rejected as testimonies,
the other to be sparingly and diffidently admitted . 0 For
it is no longer necessary to lean upon such uncertain
witnesses. During the last century a very laudable in-
dustry has been shown by antiquaries in the publication
of account-books belonging to private persons, registers
of expenses in convents, returns of markets, valuations
of goods, tavern-bills, and in short every document,
however trifling in itself, by which this important subject
can be illustrated. A sufficient number of such autho-
rities, proving the ordinary tenor of prices rather than
any remarkable deviations from it, are the true basis of
a table, by which all changes in the value of money should

0 Sir F. Eden, whose table of prices,
though capable of some improvement, is
perhaps the best that has appeared,
would, I think, have acted better, by
omitting all references to mere historians,
and relying entirely on regular docu-
ments. I do not however include local
histories, such as the Annals of Dun-
staple, when they record the market-
prices of their neighbourhood, in respect
of which the book last mentioned is
almost in the nature of a register. Dr.
Whitaker remarks the inexactness of
Stowe, who says that wheat sold in
London, a.d. 1514, at 20s. a quarter:
whereas it appears to have been at 9s. in
Lancashire, where it was always dearer
than in the metropolis. Hist, of Wballey,
p. 97. It is an odd mistake, into which
Sir F. Eden has fallen, when he asserts

and argues on 4 the supposition, that the
price of wheat fluctuated in the thirteenth
century, from Is. to 6 1. 8s. a quarter, vol.
i. p. 18. Certainly, if any chronicler had
mentioned such a price as the latter,
equivalent to 150?. at present, we should
either suppose that his text was corrupt,
or reject it as an absurd exaggeration.
But, in fact, the author has, through
haste, mistaken 6s. 8 d. for 6 1. 8s., as will
appear by referring to his own table of
prices, where it is set down rightly. It
is observed by Mr. Macpberson. a very
competent judge, that the arithmetical
statements of the best historians of the
middle ages are seldom correct, owing
partly to their neglect of examination,
and partly ,to blunders of transcribers.
Annals of Commerce, vol. i. p. 423.

368 CHANGES IN THE Chap. IX. Part II.

be measured. I have little doubt but that such a table
might be constructed from the data we possess with
tolerable exactness, sufficient at least to supersede one
often quoted by political economists, but which appears
to be founded upon very superficial and erroneous in-
quiries. p

It is by no means required that I should here offer
such a table of values, which, as to every country except
England, I have no means of constructing, and which,
even as to England, would be subject to many difficulties.**
But a reader unaccustomed to these investigations ought
to have some assistance in comparing the prices of ancient
times with those of his own. I will therefore, without
attempting to ascend very high, for we have really no
sufficient data as to the period immediately subsequent
to the Conquest, milch less that which preceded, endea-
vour at a sort of approximation for the thirteenth and
fifteenth centuries. In the reigns of Henry III. and
Edward L, previously to the first debasement of the coin
by the latter in 1301, the ordinary price of a quarter of
wheat appears to have been about four shillings, and that
of barley and oats in proportion. A sheep was rather
sold high at a shilling, and an ox might be reckoned at
ten or twelve/ The value of cattle is, of course, depen-
dent upon their breed and condition, and we have un-

P The table of comparative values by
Sir George Shuckburgh (Philosopk.
Transact, for 1198, p. 196) is strangely
incompatible with every result to which
my own reading has led me. It is the
hasty attempt of a man accustomed to
different studies; and one can neither
pardon the presumption of obtruding
such a slovenly performance on a subject
where the utmost diligence was required,
nor the affectation with which he apolo-
gizes for “descending from the dignity
of philosophy.’ *

9 M. Guerard, editor of “ Paris sous
Philippe le Bel,” in the Docnmens Inedits
(1841, p. 365), after a comparison of the
prices of corn, concludes that the value
of silver has declined since that reign, in
the ratio of five to one. This is much
less than we allow in England. M.
Leber (Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript.

Nouvelle Stfrie, xiv. 230) calculates the
power of silver under Charlemagne, com-
pared with the present day, to have been
as nearly eleven to one. It fell after-
wards to eight, and continued to sink
during the middle ages ; the average of
prices during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, taking corn as the standard,
was six to one; the comparison is of
course only for France. This is an in-
teresting paper, and contains tables
worthy of being consulted.

r Blomefield's History of Norfolk, and
Sir J. Cullum’s of Hawsted, furnish
several pieces even at this early period.
Most of them are collected by Sir F.
Eden. Fleta reckons 4s. the average
priee of a quarter of wheat in his time.
. LAi. c. 84. This writer has a digression
on agriculture, whence however less is to
be collected than we should expect

State of Society.

VALUE OF MONEY.

369

luckily no early account of butcher’s meat ; but we can
hardly take a less multiple than about thirty for animal
food and eighteen or twenty for com, in order to bring
the prices of the thirteenth century to a Jevel with those
of the present day. 6 Combining the two, and setting the
comparative dearness of cloth against the cheapness of
fuel and many other articles, we may perhaps consider
any given sum under Henry HI. and Edward 1. as equiva-
lent in general command over commodities to about
twenty -four or twenty-five times their nominal value at
present. Under Henry VI. the coin had lost one-third
of its weight in silver, which caused a proportional in-
crease of money prices; 1 but, so far as I can perceive,
there had been no diminution in the value of that metal.
We have not much information as to the fertility of the
mines which supplied Europe during the middle ages ;
but it is probable that the drain of silver towards the
East, joined to the ostentatious splendour of courts,
might fully absorb the usual produce. By the statute
15 H. VI., c. 2, the price up to which wheat might be
exported is fixed at 6s. 8 d., a point no doubt above the

* The fluctuations of price have un- similar spirit at the successive reductions
fortunately been so great of late years, in value which the coin experienced from
that it is almost as difficult to determine the year 1300. The connexion however
one side of our equation as the other, between commodities and silver was well
Any reader, however, has it in his power understood. Wykes, an annalist of Ed-
to correct my proportions, and adopt a ward I/s age, tells us, that the Jews
greater or less multiple, according to his clipped our coin, till it retained hardly
own estimate of current prices, or the half its due weight, the effect of which
changes that may take place from the was a general enhancement of prices,
time when this is written [1816]. and decline of foreign trade: Mercatores

t I have sometimes been surprised at transmarini cum mercimoniis suis reg-
the facility with which prices adjusted num Angiiae minus solito frequentabant ;
themselves to the quantity of silver con- necnon quod omnimoda venaUum genera
tained in the current coin, in ages which incomparabiliter solito fuerunt cariora.
appear too ignorant and too little com- 2 Gale, XV Script, p. 107. Another
mercial for the application of this mer- chronicler of the same age complains of
cantile principle. But the extensive bad foreign money, alloyed with copper ;
dealings of the Jewish and Lombard nec erat in quatuor aut quinque ex iis

usurers, who had many debtors in almost pondus unius denarii argentii

all parts of the country, would of itself Eratque pessimum sieculum pro tali
introduce a knowledge, that silver, not moneta, et flebant commutationes plu-
its stamp, was the measure of value. I rimse in emptione etvenditione rerum.
have mentioned in another place (vol. i. Edward, as the historian informs us,
p. 211) the heavy discontents excited by bought in this, bad money at a rate
this debasement of the coin in FrahCe ; below its value, in order to make a
but the more gradual enhancement df profit ; and fined some persons who in-
nominal prices in England seems to have terfered with his traffic. W. Heming-
prevented any strong manifestations of a lord, ad ann. 1299.

VOL. III. 2 B

370

CHANGES IN THE

Chap. IX. Part II.

average ; and the private documents of that period, which
are s uffi ciently numerous, lead to a similar result. " Six-
teen will he a proper multiple when we would bring the
general value of money in this reign to our present
standard. * [1816.]

But after ascertaining the proportional values of
money at different periods by a comparison of the prices
in several of the chief articles of expenditure, which is
the only fair process, we shall sometimes be surprised at
incidental facts of this class which seem irreducible to
any rule. These difficulties arise not so much from the
relative scarcity of particular commodities, which it is
for the most part easy to explain, as from the change in
manners and in the usual mode of living. We have
reached in this age so high a pitch of luxury that we
can hardly believe or comprehend the frugality of
ancient times* and have in general formed mistaken
notions as to the habits of expenditure which then pre-
vailed. Accustomed to judge of feudal and chivalrous
ages by works of fiction, or by historians who embel-
lished their writings with accounts of occasional festivals
and tournaments, and sometimes inattentive enough to
transfer the manners of the seventeenth 'to the fourteenth
century, we are not at all aware of the usual simplicity
with which the gentry lived under Edward I. or even
Henry YI. They drank little wine; they had no

u These will chiefly be found in Sir
F. Eden’s table of prices; the following
may be added from the account-book of
a convent between 1415 and 1425.

Wheat varied from 4s. to 6s.— barley
from 3*. 2d. to 4*. 10& — oats from Is. 8d.
to 2s. 4d. — oxen from 12s. to les.— sheep
from 1«. 2d. to Is. 4d.— butter fd. per lb.

— eggs twenty-five for id. — cheese id.
per lb. Lansdowne MSS., vol. i. No. 28
and 29. TheBe prices do not always agree
with those given in other documents of
equal authority in the same period ; but
the value of provisions varied in different
counties, and still more so in different
seasons of the year.

’ * I insert the following comparative
table of English money from Sir Fre-
derick Eden. The unit, or present
value refers of course to that of the
•hilling before the last coinage which
reduced it

Value of

pound

Propor-

sterling,

present

money.

tion.

£. 8. d<

Conquest, 1066

2 18 li

2*906

28 E. I. 1300

2 17 5

2*871

18 E. III. 1344

2 12 51

2*622

20 E. III. 1346

2 11 8

2*583

27 E. III. 1353

2 6 6

2*325

13 H. IV. 1412

1 18 9

1*937

4 E. IV. 1464

1 11 0

1*55

18 H. VIII. 1527

1 7 6f

1*378

34 H. VIII. 1543

1 3 31

1*163

36 H. VIII. 1545

0 13 11*

0*698

37 H. VIII. 1546

0 9 3i

0*466

fi E. VI. 1551

0 4 7f

0*232

6 E. VI. 1562

1 0 64

1*028

1 Mary 1553

1 0 64

1*024

2 Eliz. 1560

10 8

1*033

43 Elis. * 1601

10 0

1*000

State of Society.

VALUE OF MONEY.

371

foreign luxuries; they rarely or never kept male ser-
vants expept for husbandry; their horses, as we may
guess by the price, were indifferent ; they seldom tra-
velled beyond their county. And even their hospitality
must have been greatly limited, if the value of manors
were really no greater than we find it in many surveys.
Twenty-four seems a sufficient multiple when we would
raise a sum mentioned by a writer under Edward I. to
the same real value expressed in our present money,
but an income of 10 1 . or 201 was reckoned a competent
estate for a gentleman ; at least the lord of a single
manor would seldom have enjoyed more. A knight
who possessed 150/. per annum passed for extremely
rich.* Yet this was not equal in command over commo-
dities to 4000/. at present. But this income was compa-
ratively free from taxation, and its expenditure lightened
by the services of his villeins. Such a person, how-
ever, must have been among the most opulent of country
gentlemen. Sir John Fortescue speaks of five pounds a
year as “ a fair living for a yeoman,” a class of whom
he is not at all inclined to diminish the importance.*
So, when Sir William Drury, one of the richest men in
Suffolk, bequeaths in 1493 fifty marks to each of his
daughters, we must not imagine that this was of greater
value than four or five hundred pounds at this day, but
remark the family pride and want of ready money which
induced country gentlemen to leave their yoipger
children in poverty. 11 Or, if we read that the expense
of a scholar at the university in 1514 was but five
pounds annually, we should err in supposing that he had
the liberal accommodation which the present age. deems
indispensable, but consider how much could be afforded
for about sixty pounds, which will be not far from the
proportion. And what would a modern lawyer say to
the following entry in the churchwarden’s accounts of
Stl Margaret, Westminster, for 1476 : “ Also paid to
Eoger Fylpott, learned in the law, for his counsel
giving, 35. 84, with four-pence for his dimer” ? h Though

f Macpherson's Annals, p. 424, from b Nicholls’s Illustrations, p. 2. One
Matt Paris. fact of this class did, I own, stagger me.

* Difference of Limited and Absolute The great earl of Warwick writes to a
Monarchy, p. 133. private gentleman, Sir Thomas Tuden-

tt Hist, of Hawsted, p. 141. ham, begging the loan of ten or twenty

O O

372

PAY OF LABOURERS.

Ghap. IX. Part II

fifteen times the fee might not seem altogether inade*
quate at present, five shillings would hardly furnish the
table of a barrister, even if the fastidiousness of our
manners would admit of his accepting such a dole.
But this fastidiousness, which considers certain kinds of
remuneration degrading to a man of liberal condition,
did not prevail in those simple ages. It would seem
rather strange that a young lady should learn needle-
work and good breeding in a family of superior rank,
paying for her board ; yet such was the laudable custom
of the fifteenth and even sixteenth centuries, as we per-
ceive by the Paston Letters, and even later authorities/
There is one very unpleasing remark which every one

labourers w ^° a ff en ^ s t° the subject of prices will be
better ^paid induced to make, that the labouring classes,
present especially those engaged in agriculture, were
better provided with the means of subsistence
in the reign of Edward III. or of Henry VI. than they
are at present. In the fourteenth century Sir John
Cullum observes a harvest man had fourpence a day,
which enabled him in a week to buy a comb of wheat ;
but to buy a comb of wheat a man must now (1784)
work ten or twelve days/ So, under Henry VI., if
meat was at a farthing and a half the pound, which I sup-
pose was about the truth, a labourer earning threepence a
day, or eighteen pence in the week, could buy a bushel
of wheat at six shillings the quarter, and twenty-four
pounds of meat for his family. A labourer at present,
earning twelve shillings a week, can only buy half a
bushel of wheat at eighty shillings the quarter, and
twelve pounds of meat at seven-pence/ Several acts of

pounds to make up a sum he had to pay. “ have overlooked the distinction between
Paston Letters, veil. i. p. 84. What way the reigns of Edw. III. and Henry VIII.
shall we make this commensurate to the (perhaps a misprint for VI.), with regard
present value of money ? But an in- to the state of the labouring classes. The
genious friend suggested, what I do not two periods appear to have been essen-
question is the case, that this was one of tially different in this respect.” Prin-
many letters addressed to the adherents ciples of Political Economy, p. 293, 1st
of Warwick, in order to raise by their edit He conceives that the earnings of
contributions a considerable sum. It is the labourer in com were unusually low
curious, in this light, as an illustration of in the latter years of Edward III., which
manners. appears to have been effected by the sta-

c Paston Letters, vol. i. p. 224 ; Cul- tute of labourers (25 E. III.), imme-
jium’s Hawsted, p. 182. ddately after the great pestilence of 1350,

d Hist, of Hawsted, p. 22R. though that mortality ought, in the na-

•* Mr. Malthus observes on this, that I tural course of things, to have consider-

State op Society.

PAY OF LABOURERS.

373

parliament regulate the wages that might be paid to
labourers of different kinds. Thus the statute of la-
bourers in 1350 fixed the wages of reapers during har-
vest at three-pence a-day without diet, equal to five
shillings at present; that of 23 H. VI., c. 12, in 1444,
fixed the reapers’ wages at five-pence and those of com-
mon workmen in building at 3 -Jd, equal to 65. Sd. and
45. 8 d.; that of 11 H. VII., c. 22, in 1496, leaves the
wages of labourers in harvest as before, but rather in-
creases those of ordinary workmen. The yearly wages
of a chief hind or shepherd by the act of 1444 were
1 L 4s., equivalent to about 20L, those of a common ser-
vant in husbandry 18s. 4c?., with meat and drink ; they
were somewhat augmented by the statute of 1496/
Yet, although these wages are regulated as a maximum
by acts of parliament, which may naturally be supposed
to have had a view rather towards diminishing than en-
hancing the current rate, I am not fully convinced that
they were not rather beyond it; private accounts at
least do not always correspond with these statutable
prices. 8 And it is necessary to remember that the un-
certainty of employment, natural to so imperfect a state
of husbandry, must have diminished the labourers’
means of subsistence. Extreme dearth, not more owing
to adverse seasons than to improvident consumption,

ably raised the real wages of labour. The
result of his researches is that, in the
reign of Edward III., the labourer could
not purchase half a peck of wheat with a
day’s labour; from that of Richard II.
to the middle of that of Henry VI., he
could purchase nearly a peck; and from
thence to the end of the century, nearly
two pecks. At the time when the pas-
sage in the text was written [1816], the
labourer could rarely have purchased
more than a peck with a day's labour, and
frequently a good deal less. In some
parts of England this is the case at pre-
sent [1846]; but in many counties the
real wages of agricultural labourers are
considerably higher than at that time,
though not by any means so high a s, ac-
cording to Malthus himself, they were in
the latter half of the fifteenth century.
The excessive fluctuations in the pride of
corn, even taking averages of along term

of years, which we find through the mid-
dle ages, and indeed much later, account
more than any other assignable cause for
those in real wages of labour, which do
not regulate themselves very promptly
by that standard, especially when coercive
measures are adopted to restrain them.

f See these rates more at length in
Eden's State of the Poor, vol. i. p. 32, &c.

8 In the Archaeologia, vol. xviii. p. 281,
we have a bailiff’s account of expenses in
1387, where it appears that a ploughman
had sixpence a week, and five shillings
a year, with an allowance of diet; which
seems to have been only pottage. These
wages are certainly not more than fifteen
shillings a week in present value [1816];
which, though materially above the ave-
rage rate of agricultural labour, is less to
than some of the statutes would lead us
to expect. Other facts may be found of
a similar nature.

374

IMPROVEMENT IN MORAL Chap. IX. Part II.

was frequently endured. 11 But after every allowance of
this kind I should find it difficult to resist the conclu-
sion that, however the labourer has derived benefit from
the cheapness of manufactured commodities and from
many inventions of common utility, he is much inferior
in ability to support a family to his ancestors three or
four centuries ago. I know not why some have sup-

f )osed that meat was a luxury seldom obtained by the
abourer. Doubtless he could not have procured as
much as he pleased. But, from the greater cheapness
of cattle, as compared with com, it seems to follow that
a more considerable portion of his ordinary diet con-
sisted of animal food than at present. It was remarked
by Sir John Fortescue that the English lived far more
upon animal diet than their rivals the French ; and it
was natural to ascribe their superior strength and courage
to this cause. 1 I should feel much satisfaction in being
convinced that no deterioration in the state of the la-
bouring classes has really taken place ; yet it cannot, I
think, appear extraordinary to those who reflect, that
the whole population of England in the year 1377 did
not much exceed 2,300,000 souls, about one-fifth of the
results upon the last enumeration, an increase with
which that of the fruits of the earth cannot be supposed
to have kept an even pace. k

The second head to which I referred, the improve-
improve- nients of European society in the latter period
meat in th© of the middle ages, comprehends several
Scter changes, not always connected with each other,
Europe. which contributed to inspire a more elevated
tone of moral sentiment, or at least to restrain the com-
mission of crimes. But the general effect of these upon
the human character is neither so distinctly to be traced,

h See that singular hook, Piers Plow-
man’s Vision, p, 145 (Whitaker's edi-
tion), for the different modes of living be-
fore and after harvest. The passage may
be found in Ellis's Specimens, vol. i. p. 151.

i Fortescue's Difference between Abs.
and Lim. Monarchy, p. 19, The passages
In Fortescue, which bear on his favourite
theme, the liberty and consequent happi-
ness of the English, are very important,
and triumphantly refute those superficial
writers who would make us believe that

they were a set of beggarly slaves.

k Besides the books to which I have
occasionally referred, Mr. Ellis’s Speci-
mens of English Poetry, vol. i. chap. 13,
contain a short digression, but from well-
selected materials, on the private life of
the English in the middling and lower
ranks about the fifteenth century. [I
leave the foregoing pages with little al-
teration, but they may probably contain
expressions which I would not now
adopt. 1850**

State of Society. CHARACTER OF EUROPE.

375

nor can it Toe arranged with so much attention to chro-
nology, as the progress of commercial wealth or of the
arts that depend upon it. We cannot from any past
experience indulge the pleasing vision of a constant and
parallel relation between the moral and intellectual
energies, the virtues and the civilization of mankind.
Nor is any problem connected with philosophical history
more difficult than to compare the relative characters of
different generations, especially if we include a large
geographical surface in our estimate. Refinement has
its evils as well as barbarism ; the virtues that elevate a
nation in one century pass in the next to a different
region ; vice changes its form without losing its essence;
the marked features of individual character stand out in
relief from the surface of history, and mislead our judg-
ment as to the general course of manners ; while poli-
tical revolutions and a bad constitution of government
may always undermine or subvert the improvements to
which more favourable circumstances have contributed.
In comparing, therefore, the fifteenth with the twelfth
century, no one would, deny the vast increase of naviga-
tion and manufactures, the superior refinement of man-
ners, the greater diffusion of literature. But should I
assert that man had raised himself in the latter period
above the moral degradation of a more barbarous age, I
might be met by the question whether history bears
witness to any greater excesses of rapine and inhumanity
than in the wars of France and England under Charles
VII., or whether the rough patriotism and fervid passions
of the Lombards in the twelfth century were not better
than the systematic treachery of their servile descendants
three hundred years afterwards. The proposition must
therefore be greatly limited ; yet we can scarcely hesitate
to admit, upon a comprehensive view, that there were
several changes during the last four of the middle ages,
which must naturally have tended to produce, and some
of which did unequivocally produce, a meliorating effect,
within the sphere of their operation, upon the moral
character of society.

The first and perhaps the most important of these, was
the gradual elevation of those whom unjust Elevatlonof
systems of polity had long depressed ; of the the lower
people itself, as opposed to the small number ranks *

376

POLICE.

Chap. IX. Part II.

of rich and noble, by the abolition or desuetude of do-
mestic and predial servitude, and by the privileges
extended to corporate towns. The condition of slavery
is indeed perfectly consistent with the observance of
moral obligations; yet reason and experience will justify
the sentence of Homer, that he who loses his liberty loses
half his Virtue. Those who have acquired, or may hope
to acquire, property of their own, are most likely to
respect that of others ; those whom law protects as a
parent are most willing to yield her a filial obedience ;
those who have much to gain by the good-will of their
fellow citizens are most interested in the preservation of
an honourable character. I have been led, in different
parts of the present work, to consider these great revolu-
tions in the order of society under other relations than
that of their moral efficacy ; and it will therefore be
unnecessary to dwell upon them ; especially as this
efficacy is indeterminate, though I think unquestionable,
and rather to be inferred from general reflections than
capable of much illustration by specific facts.

We may reckon in the next place among the causes of

Police moral improvement, a more regular administra-
tion of justice according to fixed laws, and a
more effectual police. Whether the courts of judica-
ture were guided by the feudal customs or the Roman
law, it was necessary for them to resolve litigated
questions with precision and uniformity. Hence a more
distinct theory of justice and good faith was gradually
apprehended ; and the moral sentiments of mankind were
corrected, as on such subjects they often require to be, by
clearer and better grounded inferences of reasoning.
Again, though it cannot be said that lawless rapine was
perfectly restrained even at the end of the fifteenth cen-
tury, a sensible amendment had been every where expe-
rienced. Private warfare, the licensed robbery of feudal
manners, had been subjected to so many mortifications
by the kings of France, and especially by St. Louis, that
it can hardly be traced beyond the fourteenth century.
In Germany and Spain it lasted longer; but the various
associations for maintaining tranquillity in the former
country had considerably diminished its violence before
the great national measure of public peace adopted under

State of Society.

POLICE.

377

Maximilian / 11 Acts of outrage committed by powerful
men became less frequent as the executive government
acquired more strength to chastise them. We read that
St. Louis, the best of French kings, imposed a fine upon
the lord of Vernon for permitting a merchant to be
robbed in his territory between sunrise and sunset. For
by the customary law, though in general ill observed,
the lord was bound to keep the roads free from depre-
dators in the day-time, in consideration of the toll he
received from passengers/ The same prince was with
difficulty prevented from passing a capital sentence on
Enguerrand de Coucy, a baron of France, for a mur-
der/ Charles the Fair actually put to death a nobleman
of Languedoc for a series of robberies, notwithstanding
the intercession of the provincial nobility/ The towns
established a police of their own for internal security,
and rendered themselves formidable to neighbouring
plunderers. Finally, though not before the reign of
Louis XI., an armed force was established for the pre-
servation of police/ Various means were adopted
in England to prevent robberies, which indeed were not
so frequently perpetrated as they were on the continent,
by men of high condition. None of these perhaps had
so much efficacy as the frequent sessions of judges under
commissions of gaol delivery. But the spirit of this
country has never brooked that coercive police which
cannot exist without breaking in upon personal liberty

m Besides the German historians, see
Du Cange, v. Ganerbium, for the con-
federacies in the empire, and Herman-
datum for those in Castile. These appear
to have been merely voluntary associa-
tions, and perhaps directed as much
towards the prevention of robbery, as of
what is strictly called private war. But
no man can easily distinguish offensive
war from robbery except by its scale ; and
where this was so considerably reduced,
the two modes of injury almost coincide.
In Aragon, there was a distinct institu-
tion for the maintenance of peace, the
kingdom being divided into unions or
juntas, with a chief officer, called Supra-
Junctarius, at their head. Du Cange, v.
Juncta.

n Henault, Abrdgd Chronol. h l’an.

1255. The institutions of Louis IX.
and his successors relating to police form
a part, though rather a smaller part than
we should expect from the title, of an
immense work, replete with miscel-
laneous information, byDelamare, Traits
de la Police, 4 vols. in folio. A sketch of
them may be found in Velly, t v. p. 349,
t. xviii. p. 437.

° Velly, t. v. p. 162, where this inci-
dent is told,in an interesting manner from
William de Nangis. Boulainvilliers has
taken an extraordinary view of the king’s
behaviour. Hist, de l’Ancien Gouveme-
ment, t. ii. p. 26. In his eyes princes
and plebeians were made to be the Blaves
of a feudal aristocracy.

P Velly* t viii. p. 132.

<1 Id. xviii. p. 437.

378

RELIGIOUS SECTS.

Chap. IX. Part II*

by irksome regulations, and discretionary exercise of
power ; the sure instrument of tyranny, which renders
civil privileges at once nugatory and insecure, and by
which we should dearly purchase some real benefits
connected with its slavish discipline.

I have some difficulty in adverting to another source
Religious moral improvement during this period, the
sects- growth of religious opinions adverse to those
of the established church, both on account of its
great obscurity, and because many of these heresies
were mixed up with an excessive fanaticism. But they
fixed themselves so deeply in the hearts of the inferior
and more numerous classes, they bore, generally speak-
ing, so immediate a relation to the state of manners, and
they illustrate so much that more visible and eminent
revolution which ultimately rose out of them in the
sixteenth century, that I must reckon these among the
most interesting phenomena in the progress of European
society.

Many ages elapsed, during which no remarkable in-
stance occurs of a popular deviation from the prescribed
line of belief ; and pious Catholics console themselves by
reflecting that their forefathers, in those times of igno-
rance, slept at least the sleep of orthodoxy, and that
their darkness was interrupted by no false lights of
human reasoning/ But from the twelfth century this
can no longer be their boast. An inundation of heresy
broke in that age upon the church, which no persecution
was able thoroughly to repress, till it finally overspread
half the surface of Europe. Of this religious innovation
we must seek the commencement in a different part of
the globe. The Manicheans afford an eminent example
of that durable attachment to a traditional creed, which so
many ancient sects, especially in the East, have cherished
through the vicissitudes of ages, in spite of persecution
and contempt. Their plausible and widely extended sys-
tem had been in early times connected with the name of
Christianity, however incompatible with its doctrines and
its history. After a pretty long obscurity, the Manichean
theory revived with some modification in the western
parts of Armenia, and was propagated in the eighth and

r Fleury, 3 me Discours sur l’Hlst. Ecclis.

State of Society.

RELIGIOUS SECTS.

379

ninth centuries by a sect denominated Paulicians. Their
tenets are not to be collected with absolute certainty,
from the mouths of their adversaries, and no apology of
their own survives. There seems however to be suf-
ficient evidence that the Paulicians, though professing
to acknowledge and even to study the apostolical writings,
ascribed the creation of the world to an evil deity,
whom they supposed also to be the author of the Jewish
law, and consequently rejected all the Old Testament.
Believing, with the ancient Gnostics, that our Saviour
was clothed on earth with an impassive celestial body,
they denied the reality of his death and resurrection/
These errors exposed them to a long and cruel persecu-
tion, during which a colony of exiles was planted by one
of the Greek emperors in Bulgaria/ From this settlement
they silently promulgated their Manichean creed over the
western regions of Christendom. A large part of the com-
merce of those countries with Constantinople was carried
on for several centuries by the channel of the Danube.

8 The most authentic account of the his body from heaven. 3. They re-
Paulicians is found in a little treatise of jected the Lord’s Supper. 4. And the
Petrus Siculus, who lived about 870, adoration of the cross. 6. They denied
under Basil the Macedonian. He had the authority of the Old Testament, but
been employed on an embassy to Te- admitted the New, except the epistles of
phrica, the principal town of these here- St. Peter, and, perhaps, the Apocalypse,
tics, so that he might easily be well 6. They did not acknowledge the order
informed; and, though he is sufficiently of priests.

bigoted, I do not see any reason to ques- There seems every reason to suppose
tion the general truth of his testimony, that the Paulicians. notwithstanding their
especially as it tallies so well with what mistakes, were endowed with sincere and
we learn of the predecessors and sue- zealous piety, and studious of the Scrip-
oessors of the Paulicians. They had re- tures. A Paulician woman asked a young
jected several of the Manichean doc- man if he had read the Gospels: he replied
trines, those, I believe, which were bor- that laymen were not. permitted to do so,
rowed from the Oriental, Gnostic, and but only the clergy: ovk «£e<mv rffilv
Cabbalistic philosophy of emanation ; rots xocr/uocots overt ravra avayivuxrKeiv,
and therefore readily condemned Manes, et /xrj tois Upevct /ttovotf. p. 57. A curious
*po0vpua>? apa9efiarC^ov<n Mantra. But proof that the Scriptures were already
they retained his capital errors, so far forbidden in the Greek church, which I
as regarded the principle of dualism, am inclined to believe, notwithstanding
which he had taken from Zerdusht’s the leniency with which Protestant
religion, and the consequences he had writers have treated it, was always
derived from it Petrus Siculus enu- more corrupt and more intolerant than
xnerates six P aqlician heresies. 1. They the Latin.

maintained TEe existence of two deities, t Gibbon, c. 54. This chapter of the
the one evil, and the creator of this historian of the Decline and Fall upon
world ; the other good, called rrarrip the Paulicians appears to be accurate, as
«*roup<mot, the author of that which is to well as luminous, and is at least far
come. 2. They refused to worship the superior to any modern work on the
Virgin, and asserted that Christ brought subject

380

RELIGIOUS SECTS.

Ciiap. IX. Part IL

This opened an immediate intercourse with the Pauli-
cians, who may be traced up that river through Hungary
and Bavaria, or sometimes taking the route of Lombardy
into Switzerland and France . 11 In the last country, and
especially in its southern and eastern provinces, they
became conspicuous under a variety of names; such
as Catharists, Picards, Paterins, but above all, Albigensos.
It is beyond a doubt that many of these sectaries owed
their origin to the Paulicians ; the appellation of Bul-
garians was distinctively bestowed upon them ; and,
according to some writers, they acknowledged a primate
or patriarch resident in that country .V The tenets
ascribed to them by all contemporary authorities coincide

u It is generally agreed, that the
Manicbeans from Bulgaria did not pene-
trate into the west of Europe before the
year 1000 ; and they seem to have been
in small numbers till about 1140. We
find them, however, early in the eleventh
century. Under the reign of Hebert in
1007 several heretics were burned at
Orleans for tenets which are represented
as Manichean. Velly, t. ii. p. 307. These
are said to have been imported from
Italy ; and the heresy began to strike root
In that country about the same time.
Muratori, Dissert 60 ( Antichi ta Italiane,
t iii. p. 304). The Italian Manicheans
were generally called Paterini, the mean-
ing of which word has never been ex-
plained. We find few traces of them in
France at this time ; but about the be-
ginning of the twelfth century, Guibert,
bishop of Soissons, describes the heretics
of that city, who denied the reality of
the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, and rejected the sacraments. Hist.
Littdraire de la France, t x. p. 451.
Before the middle of that age, theCathari,
Henricians, Petrobussians, and others
appear, and the new opinions attracted
universal notice. Some of these sec-
taries, however, were not Manicheans.
Mosheim, vol. iii. p. 116.

The acts of the inquisition of Toulouse,
published by Limborch, from an ancient
manuscript, contain many additional
proofs that the Albigenses' held the Mani-
chean doctrine. Limborch himself will
guide the reader to the principal passages,
p. 30. In fact, the proof of Manicbeism
among the heretics of the twelfth century

is so strong (for I have confined myself
to those of Languedoc, and could easily
have brought other testimony as to the
Cathari), that I should never have
thought of arguing the point, but for the
confidence of some modern ecclesiastical
writers.— What can we think of one who
says, “ It was not unusual to stigmatize
new sects with the odious name of Mani-
chees, though I know no evidence that
there were any real remains of that
ancient sect in the twelfth century ” ?
Milner’s History of the Church, vol. iii.
p. 380. Though this writer was by no
means learned enough for the task he
undertook, he could not be ignorant of
facts related by Mosheim and other com-
mon historians.

I will only add, in order to obviate
cavilling, that I use the word Albigenses
for the Manichean sects, without pre-
tending to assert that their doctrines
prevailed more in the neighbourhood of
Albi than elsewhere. The main position
is, that a large part of the Languedocian
heretics against whom the crusade was
directed had imbibed the Paulician opi-
nions. If any one chooses rather to call
them Catharists, it will not be material.

x M. Paris, p. 267. (a.d. 1223.) Circa
dies istos, haeretici Albigenses consti-
tuerunt sibi Antipapam in flnibus Bul-
garorum, Croatia* et Dalmatise, nomine
Bartbolomseum, Ac. We are assured by
good authorities that Bosnia was full of
Manicheans and Arians as late as tfie
middle of the fifteenth century. ACneas
Sylviusi p. 407 ; Spondanus, ad an. 1460;
Mosheim.

State of Society.

RELIGIOUS SECTS.

381

so remarkably with those held by the Paulicians, and in
earlier times by the Manicbeans, that I do not see how
we can reasonably deny what is confirmed by separate
and nncontradicted testimonies, and contains no intrinsic
want of probability/

7 There has been so prevalent a dis-
position among English divines to vindi-
cate not only the morals and sincerity,
but the orthodoxy of these Aibigenses,
that I deem it necessary to confirm what
I have said in the text by some autho-
rities, especially as few readers have it in
their power to examine this very obscure
subject Petrus Monachus, a Cistercian
monk, who wrote a history of the crusades
against the Aibigenses, gives an account
of the tenets maintained by the different
heretical sects. Many of them asserted
two principles or creative beings : a good
one for things invisible, an evil one for
things visible ; the former author of the
New Testament, the latter of the Old.
Novum Testamentum benigno deo, vetus
vero maligno uttribuebant ; et illud om-
nin£> repudiabant, printer quasdain aue-
toritates, quee de Veteri Tcstamento
Novo sunt insert®, quas ob Novi reve-
rentiam Testament! recipere dignum
jfistimabant. A vast number of strange
errors are imputed to them, most of
which are not mentioned by Alanus, a
more dispassionate writer. Du Chesne,
Scriptores Francorum, t. v. p. 556. This
Alanus de Insulis, whose treatise against
heretics, written about 1200, was pub-
lished by Masson at Lyons, in 1612, has
left, I think, conclusive evidence of the
Manicheism of the Aibigenses. He states
their argument upon every disputed
point as fairly as possible, though his
refutation is of course more at length.
It appears that great discrepancies of
opinion existed among these heretics, but
the general tenor of their doctrines is
evidently Manichean. Aiunt haeretici
temporis nostri quod duo sunt principia
rerum, principium lucis et principium
tenebrarum, &c. This opinion, strange
as we may think it, was supported by
Scriptural texts ; so insufficient is a mere
acquaintance with the sacred writings to
secure unlearned and prejudiced minds
from the wildest perversions of their
meaning! Some denied the reality of
Christ’s body ; others his being the Son

of God ; many the resurrection of the
body ; some even of a future state.
They asserted in general the Mosaic law
to have proceeded from the devil, proving
this by the crimes committed during its
dispensation, and by the words of St.
Paul, “ the law entered that sin might
abound.” They rejected infant baptism,
but were divided as to the reason ; some
saying that infants could not sin, and did
not need baptism ; others, that they could
not be saved without faith, and conse-
quently that it w'as useless. They held
sin after baptism to be irremissible. It
does not appear that they rejected either
of the sacraments. They laid great
stress upon the imposition of hands,
which seems to have been their distinc-
tive rite.

One circumstance, which both Alanus
and ltobertus Monachus mention, and
which other authorities confirm, is their
division into two classes ; the Perfect,
and the Credentes, or Consolati, both of
which appellations are used. The former
abstained from animal food, and from
marriage, and led, in every respect an
austere life. The latter were a kind of
lay brethren, living in a secular manner.
This distinction is thoroughly Mani-
chean, and leaves no doubt as to the
origin of the Aibigenses. See Beau-
sobre, Hist, du Manich&sme, t. ii. p. 762
and 777. This candid writer represents
the early Manicheans as a harmless and
austere set of enthusiasts, exactly what
the Paulicians and Aibigenses appear to
have been in succeeding ages. As many
calumnies were vented against one as the
other.

The long battle as to the Manicheism
of the Albigensian sectaries has been
renewed since the publication of this
work, by Dr. Maitland on one side, and
Mr. Faber and Dr. Gilly on the other ;
and It is not likely to reach a termina-
tion ; being conducted by one party with
far less regard to the weight of evidence
than to the bearing it may have on the
theological hypotheses of the writers, I

382

WALDENSES.

Chap. IX. Part II.

But though the derivation of these heretics called
Albigenses from Bulgaria is sufficiently proved, it is by
no means to be concluded that all who incurred the
same imputation either derived their faith* from the
same country, or had adopted the Manichean theory of
the Paulicians. From the very invectives of their ene-
mies, and the acts of the Inquisition, it is manifest that
almost every shade of heterodoxy was found among
these dissidents, till it vanished in a simple protestation
against the wealth and tyranny of the clergy. Those
who were absolutely free from any taint of Manicheism
are properly called Waldenses ; a name perpe-
Waidenses. con f 0 unded in later times with that of

Albigenses, but distinguishing a sect probably of sepa-
rate origin, and at least of different tenets. These, accord-
ing to tike majority of writers, took their appellation from
Peter Waldo, a merchant of Lyons, the parent, about the
year 1160, of a congregation of seceders from the church,
who spread very rapidly over France and Germany.*

have seen no reason for altering what is valent terras ; and it can hardly be
said in the text. doubted that the poor men of Lyons

The chief strength of the argument were the disciples of Waldo. Alanus,
seems to me to lie in the independent the second book of whose treatise against
testimonies as to the Manicheism of the heretics is an attack upon the Waldenses.
Paulicians, in Petrus Siculus and Pho- expressly derives them from Waldo,
tins, on the one hand, and as to that of Petrus Monachus does the same. These
the Langnedocian heretics in the Latin seem strong authorities, as it is not easy
writers of the twelfth and thirteenth cen- to perceive what advantage they could
turies on the other ; the connexion of the derive from misrepresentation. It has
two sects through Bulgaria being esta- been however a position zealously main-
blished by history, but the latter class of taiued by some modern writers of respect-
writers being unacquainted with the able name, that the people of the valleys
former. It is certain that the probability had preserved a pure faith for several
of general truth in these concurrent test!- ages before the appearance of Waldo. I
monies is greatly enhanced by their in- have read what is advanced on this head
dependence. And it will be found that by Leger (Histoire des Kglises Vaudoises)
those who deny any tinge of Manicheism and by Allix (Remarks on the Eccle-
in the Albigenses, are equally confident siastical History of the Churches of
as to the orthodoxy of the Paulidans. Piedmont), but without finding any snf-
[1848.] flcient proof for this supposition, which

* The contemporary writers seem uni- nevertheless is not to be rejected as abeo*
formly to represent Waldo as the founder lutely improbable. Their best argument
of the Waldenses ; and I am not aware is deduced from an ancient poem called
that they refer the locality of that sect to La Noble Loi^on, an original manuscript
the valleys of Piedmont, between Exiles of which is in the public library of Cam*
and Pignerol (see Leger's map), which bridge, and another in that of Geneva,
have so long been distinguished as the This poem is alleged to bear date in 1100,
native country of the Vaudois. In the more than half a century before the
acts of the Inquisition, we find Waldenses, appearance of Waldo. But the lines that
sive panperea de Lugduno, used as equi- contain the date are loosely expressed.

State of Society,

WALDENSES,

383

According to others, the original Waldenses were u race
of uncorrupted shepherds, who in the valleys of the
Alps had shaken off, or perhaps never learned, the sys-
tem of superstition on which the Catholic church de-
pended for its ascendency. I am not certain whether
their existence can be distinctly traced beyond the
preaching of Waldo, but it is well known that the
proper seat of the Waldenses or Yaudois has long conti-
nued to be in certain valleys of Piedmont. These pious
and innocent sectaries, of whom the very monkish histo-
rians speak well, appear to have nearly resembled the
modem Moravians. They had ministers of their own
appointment, and denied the lawfulness of oaths and of
capital punishment. In other respects their opinions
probably were not far removed from those usually
called Protestant. A simplicity of dress, and especially
the use of wooden sandals, was affected by this people/

and may very well suit with any epoch
before the termination of the twelfth
oentury.

Ben ha mil et cent ana compli entier*
ament.

Che fu scritta loro qne sen al derier
temp.

Eleven hundred years are now gone
and past,

Since thus it was written ; These times
are the last

See Literature of Europe in
15th, 16th, and l?th Centuries,
chap. 1, $ 33.

I have found however a passage in a late
work, which remarkably illustrates the
antiquity of Alpine protestantism, if we
may depend on the date it assigns to the
quotation. Mr. Pianta’s History of Swit-
aerland, p. 93, 4to. edit, contains the fol-
lowing note “ A curious passage, sin-
gularly descriptive of the character of
the Swiss, baa lately been discovered in a
MS. chronicle of the Abbey of Corvey,
which appears to have been written
about the beginning of the twelfth
century. Religionem nostram.et omnium
Latins ecclesire Christianorum fldem,
laid ex Suavift, Suicift, et Bavaria hu-
mlliare voluenmt ; homines seducti ab
antiquft progenie simplicium hominum,
qui Alpes et viciniam habitant, et semper
amant antiqua. In Suaviam, Bavariam
et ltaliam borealem ssepe intrant illorum

(ex Soicia) merca tores, qui biblia edis-
cunt memoriter, et ritus ecclesiie aver-
santur, quos credunt esse novos. Nolunt
imagines venerari, reliquias sanctorum
aversantur, olera comedunt, rarb masti-
cantes camem, alii nunquam. Appel-
lam us eos idcircb Manichseos. Horum
quidam ab Hungaria ad eos convenemnt,
Ac." It is a pity that the quotation
has been broken off, as it might have
illustrated the connexion of the Bul-
garians with these sectaries.

* The Waldenses were always consi-
dered as much less erroneous in their
tenets than the Albigenses, or Mani-
cheans. Kraut praeterea alii hssretici,
says Robert Mon&chus in the passage
above quoted, qui Waldenses dicebantur,
a qnodam Waldio nomine Lugdunensi.
Hi qnidem mali erant, sed comparatione
aliorum haereticorum longb minus per-
versi ; in multis enim nobiscum conve-
niebant, in quibusdam dissentiebant The
only faults he seems to impute to them
are the denial of the lawfulness of oaths
and capital punishment, and the wearing
wooden shoes. By this peculiarity’ of
wooden sandals (sabots) they got the
name of Sabbatati or lnsabbatati. (Du
Cange.) William du Puy, another his-
torian of the same time, makes a similar
distinction. Erant quidam Ariani, qui-
dam Mankhaei, quidam eti&m Waldenses

384

WIDE DIFFUSION

Chap. IX. Part II.

I have already had occasion to relate the severe perse-
cution which nearly exterminated the Albigenses of
Languedoc at the close of the twelfth century* and in-
volved the counts of Toulouse in their ruin. The
Catharists, a fraternity of the same Paulician origin,
more dispersed than the Albigenses, had previously sus-
tained a similar trial. Their belief was certainly a
compound of strange errors with truth; but* it was
attended by qualities of a far superior lustre to ortho-
doxy, by a sincerity, a piety, and a self-devotion that
almost purified the age in which they lived. b It is

sive Lugdunenses, qni licet inter se dis-
sidentes, omnes tamen in animamm per-
niciem contra fidem Catholicam conspira-
bant; et illi quidem Waldenses contra
alios acutissimb disputant I>u Chesne,
t v. p. 666. Alarms, in his second book,
where he treats of the Waldenses, charges
them principally with disregarding the
authority of the church and preaching
without a regular mission. It is evident
however from the acts of the Inquisition,
that they denied the existence of purga-
tory ; and 1 should suppose that, even at
that time, they had thrown off most of
the popish system of doctrine, which is
so nearly connected with clerical wealth
and power. The difference made in
these records between the Waldenses and
the Manichean sects shows that the im-
putations cast upon the latter were not
indiscriminate calumnies. See Limborch,
p. 201 and 228.

The History of Languedoc, by Vais-
aette and Vich, contains a very good
account of the sectaries in that country ;
but I have not immediate access to the
book. 1 believe that proof will be found
of the distinction between the Waldenses
and Albigenses in t iii. p. 446. But 1
am satisfied that no one who has looked
at the original authorities will dispute the
proposition. These Benedictine historians
represent the Henricians, an early set of
reformers, condemned by the council of
Lombez, in 1 165, as Manichees. Mosheim
considers them as of the Vaudois school.
They appeared some time before Waldo.

b The general testimony of their ene-
mies to the parity of morals among the
Languedocian and Lyonese sectaries Is
abundantly sufficient. One Regnier, who
lad lived among them, and became after-

wards an inquisitor, does them justice in
tli is respect. See Tumor’s History of
England for several other proofs of this.
It must be confessed that the Catharists
are not free from the imputation of pro*
mlscuous licentiousness. But whether
this was a mere calumny, or partly
founded upon truth, 1 cannot determine.
Their prototypes, the ancient Gnostics,
are said to have been divided into two
parties, the austere and the relaxed ; both
condemning marriage for opposite rea-
sons. Alanus, in the book above quoted,
seems to have taken up several vulgar
prejudices against the Cathari. He gives
an etymology of their name k catto ; quia
osculantur posteriora catti ; in cujus spe-
cie, ut aiunt appareret iis Lucifer, p, 146.
This notable charge was brought after-
wards against the Templars.

As to the Waldenses, their innocence
is out of all doubt No book can be
written in a more edifying manner than
La Noble Loi^on, of which large extracts
are given by Leger, in his Histoire des
Eglises Vaudoises. Four lines are quoted
by Voltaire (Hist Universelle, c. 69), as
a specimen of the Proven^ language,
though they belong rather to the patois
of the valleys. But as he has not copied
them rightly, and as they illustrate the
subject of this note, I shall repeat them
here from Leger, p. 28.

Que sel se troba alcun bon que vollia
amar Dio e temer Jeshu Xrist,

Que non vollia maudire, ni Jura, ni
mentir,

Ni avontrar, ni aucire, ni penre de
l’autruy,

Ni venjar se de li sio ennemie,

Hli dison quel es Vaudes e degne de
ntorir.

State of Society. OF THE NEW SECTS.

385

always important to perceive that these high moral ex-
cellences have no necessary connexion with speculative 1
truths; and upon this aceountrf have been more dis- j
posed to state explicitly the real Manieheism of the
Albigenses ; especially as Protestant writers, considering
all the enemies of Eome as their friends, have been apt
to place the opinions of these sectaries in a very false
light. In the course of time, undoubtedly, the system
of their Paulician teachers would have yielded, if the
inquisitors had admitted the experiment, to a more accu-
rate study of the Scriptures, and to 'the knowledge
which they would have imbibed from the church itself.
And, in fact, we find that fhe peculiar tenets of Mani-
cheism died away after the middle of the thirteenth
century, although a spirit of dissent from the established
creed broke out in abundant instances during the two
subsequent ages.

We are in general deprived of explicit testimonies in
tracing the revolutions of popular opinion. Much must
therefore be left to conjecture; but I am inclined to
attribute a very extensive effect to the preaching of
these heretics. They appear in various countries nearly
during the same period, in Spain, Lombardy, Germany,
Flanders, and England, as well as France. Thirty un-
happy persons, convicted of denying the sacraments, are
said to nave perished at Oxford by cold and famine in tbe
reign of Henry II. In every country the new sects
appear to have spread chiefly among the lower people,
which, while it accounts for the imperfect notice of
historians, indicates a more substantial influence upon
the moral condition of society than the conversion of a
few nobles or ecclesiastics. c

c It would be difficult to specify all
the dispersed authorities which attest the
existence of the sects derived from the
Walden sea and Paulicians in the twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries. Be-
sides Mosheim, who has paid considerable
attention to the subject, I would mention
some articles in Du Cange which supply
gleanings ; namely, Beghardi, Bulgari,
Lollardi, Paterini, Picardl, Pifli, Popu-
lic&ni.

Upon the subject of the Waldensea and
Albigenses generally, I have bon owed
VOL. III.

some light from Mr. Turner’s History
of England, vol. ii. p. 3 11 , 393. This
learned writer has seen some books that
have not fallen into my way ; and I am
indebted to him for a knowledge of Ala-
nus's treatise, which I have since read.
At the same time I must observe, that
Mr. Turner has not perceived the essen-
tial distinction between the two leading
sects.

The name of Albigenses does not fre-
quently occur after tbe middle of the
thirteenth century ; but the Waldensea.

2 c

386

TRANSLATIONS OF Chap. IX. Part II.

But even where men did not absolutely enlist under
the banners of any new sect, they were stimulated by
the temper of their age to a more zealous and inde-
pendent discussion of their religious system. A curious
illustration of this is furnished by one of the letters of
Innocent III. He had been informed by the bishop of
Metz* as he states to the clergy of the diocese, that no
small multitude of laymen and women, having procured
a translation of the gospels, epistles of St. Paul, the
psalter, Job, and other books of Scripture, to be made for
them into French, meet in secret conventicles to hear
them read, and preach to each othor, avoiding the com-
pany of those who do not join in their devotion, and
having been reprimanded for this by some of their
parish priests, have withstood them, alleging reasons
from the Scriptures, why they should not bo so forbidden.
Some of them too deride the ignorance of their ministers,
and maintain that their own books teach them more
than they can learn from the pulpit, and that they can
express it better. Although the desire of reading the
Scriptures, Innocent proceeds, is rather praiseworthy
than reprehensible, yet they are to be blamed for fre-
quenting secret assemblies, for usurping the office of

or sects bearing that denomination, were thought himself safe. It was believed
dispersed over Europe. As a term of that many were accused for the sake of
different reproach was derived from the their possessions, which were confiscated
w:ord Bulgarian, so vauderie, or the pro- to the use of the church. At length the
fession of the Vaudois, was sometimes duke of Burgundy interfered, and put a
applied to witchcraft. Thus in the pro- stop to the persecutions. The whole
ceediftgs of the Chambre Bruiante at narrative in Du Clercq is interesting, as
Arras, in 1459, against persons accused a curious document of the tyranny of
of sorcery, their crime is denominated bigots, and of the facility with which it
vauderie. The fullest account of this re- is turned to private ends,
markable story is found in the Memoirs To return to the Wa Menses : the prin-
of Du CleTcq, first published in the ge- cipal course of their emigration is said to
neral collection of Historical Memoirs, have been into Bohemia, where, in the
t ix. p. 430, 4U. It exhibits a com- fifteenth century, the name was home by
plete parallel to the events that happened one of the seceding sects. By their pro-
in 1682 at Salem in New England. A fession of faith, presented to Ladislans
few obscure persons were accused of mu- I’osthumus, it appears that they acknow-
derie, or witchcraft. After their con- lodged the corporal presence in the eu-
demnation, which was founded on con- cliarist, but rejected purgatory and other
feast ons obtained by torture, and after- Romish doctrines. See it in the Fasci-
wards retracted, an epidemical contagion cuius Rerum expeteudarura et fugienda-
of superstitions dread was diffused all rum, a collection of treatises illustrating
around. Numbers were arrested, burned the origin of the Reformation, originally
alive by order of a tribunal instituted for published at Cologne in 1535, and re-
the detection of this offence, or detained printed at London in 1690.
in prison; so that no person in Arras

State of Society. THE SCRIPTURES.

387

preaching, deriding their own ministers, and scorning
the company of such as do not concur in their novelties.
He presses the bishop and chapter to discover the author
of this translation, which could not have been made
without a knowledge of letters, and what were his in-
tentions, and what degree of orthodoxy and respect for
the Holy See those who used it possessed. This letter
of Innocent HI., however, considering the nature of the
man, is sufficiently temperate and conciliatory. It
seems not to have answered its end; for in another
letter lie complains that some members of this little
association continued refractory and refused to obey
either the bishop or the pope/

In the eighth and ninth centuries, when the Vulgate
had ceased to be generally intelligible, there is no rea-
son to suspect any intention in the church to deprive
the laity oi the Scriptures. Translations were freely
made into the vernacular languages, and perhaps read in
churches, although the acts of saints were generally
deemed more instructive. Louis the Debonair is said
to have caused a German version of the New Testament
to he made. Otfrid, in the same century, rendered the
gospels, or rather abridged them, into German verse.
Ibis work is still extant, and is in several respects an
object of curiosity. 6 In the eleventh or twelfth century
we find translations of the Psalms, Job, Kings, and the
Maccabees into French/ But after the diffusion of here-
tical opinions, or, what was much the same thing, of
free inquiry, it became expedient to secure the orthodox
faith from lawless interpretation. Accordingly, the
council of Toulouse in 1229 prohibited the laity from
possessing the Scriptures ; and this precaution was fro*
quently repeated upon subsequent occasions.*

d Opera Innocent. III. p, 46^, 53 7. A been said that our church maintained
translation of the Bible had been made the privilege of having part of the daily
by direction of Peter Waldo ; but whether service in the mother tongue. “Even
this used in Lorr&in was the same, does the mass itself/' says Lappenberg. “was
not appear. Meta was Ml of Bie Vau- not read entirely in Latin.” Hist of
dels, as we find by other authorities. England. voL i. p. 202. This, however,
6 Schilteri Thesaurus Antiq. Teutoni- is deuled by Lingsid, whose authority is
coruxn * probably superior. Hist, of Ang.-Sax.

f Mdm. de i’Acad. des Inscript t xvit. Church, L 307. But he allows that the
P* Epistle and Gospel were Tend in English,

* The Anglo-Saxon versions are de- which implies an authorised translation,
serving of particular remark, it has And we may adopt in a great measure

2 c 2

388

LOLLARDS.

Chap. IX. Part II.

The ecclesiastical history of the thirteenth or four-
teenth centuries teems with new sectaries and schis-
matics, various in their aberrations of opinion, but all
concurring in detestation of the established chureh. h
They endured severe persecutions with a sincerity and
firmness which in any cause ought to command respect.
But in general we find an extravagant fanaticism among
them ; and I do not know how to look for any ameliora-
tion of society from the Franciscan seceders, who quib-
bled about the property of things consumed by use, or
from the mystical visionaries of dilferent appellations,
whose moral practice was* sometimes more than equi-
vocal. Those who feel any curiosity about such sub-
jects, which are by no means unimportant, as they illus-
trate the history of the human mind, will find them
treated very fully by Mosheim. But the original
sources of information are not always accessible in this
country, and the research would perhaps be more fatigu-
ing than profitable.

I shall, for an opposite reason, pass lightly over the
Lollards of great revolution in religious opinion wrought
England. i n England by Wicliffe, which will generally
be familiar to the reader from our common historians.
Nor am I concerned to treat of theological inquiries, or
to write a history of the church. Considered in its
effects upon manners, the sole point which these pages
have in view, the preaching of this new sect certainly
produced an extensive reformation. But their virtues

Lappenberg’s proposition, which follows
the above passage : “ The numerous ver-
sions and paraphrases of the Old and
New Testament made those books known
to the laity and more familiar to the
clergy.”

We have seen a little above, that the
laity were not permitted by the Greek
Chnrch of the ninth century, and pro-
bably before, to read the Scriptureg, even
in the original. This shows how much
more honest and pious the Western
Chnrch was before She became corrupted
by ambition and by the captivating hope
of keeping the laity in servitude by means
of ignorance. The translation of the four
Books of Kings into French has been
published in the Collection de Document;
Inddits, 1841. It is in a northern dialect,

but the age seems not satisfactorily
ascertained; the close of the eleventh
century is the earliest date that can be
assigned. Translations into the Pro-
vencal by the Waldonsian or other here-
tics were made in Hie twelfth; several
manuscripts of them are in existence,
and one has been published by Dr. Gilly.
[ 1848 .]

b The application of the visions of the
Apocalypse to the corruptions of Rome
has commonly been said to have been
first made by the Franciscan seceders.
But it may be traced higher, and is re-
markably pointed out by Dante.

Di voi paster s’ accorse *1 Vangelista,
Quando colei, chi si (Hie sovra 1* acque,
Puttaneggiar co’ regi a lui fh vista.

inferno, cant. xix.

State of Society.

HUSSITES.

389

were by no means free from some unsocial qualities, in
which, as well as in their superior attributes, the Lol-
lards bear a very close resemblance to the Puritans of
Elizabeth’s reign; a moroseness that proscribed all
cheerful amusements, an uncharitable malignity that
made no distinction in condemning the established
clergy, and a narrow prejudice that applied the rules of
the Jewish law to modem institutions . 1 Some of their
principles were far more dangerous to the good order of
society, and cannot justly be ascribed to the Puritans,
though they grew afterwards out of the same soil. Such
was the notion, which is imputed also to the Albigenses,
that civil magistrates lose their right to govern by com-
mitting sin, or, as it was quaintly expressed in the
seventeenth century, that dominion is founded in grace.
These extravagances, however, do not belong to the
learned and politic Wicliffe, however they might be
adopted by some of his enthusiastic disciples.* Fostered
by the general ill-will towards the church, his principles
made vast progress in England, and, unlike those of
earlier sectaries, were embraced by men of rank and
civil influence. Not withstanding the check they sus-
tained by the sanguinary law of Henry IV., it is highly
probable that multitudes secretly cherished them down
to the era of the liefonnation.

From England the spirit of religious innovation was
propagated into Bohemia; for though John Hussites of
Huss was very far from embracing all the doc- Bohemia,
trinal system of Wicliffe, it is manifest that his zeal had
been quickened by the waitings of that reformer .* 11 Infe-

i Walsingham, p. 238; lewis's Life of
Pecock, p. 65. Bishop Pecoek’s answer
to the Lollards of his time contains pas-
sages well worthy of Hooker, both for
weight of matter and dignity of style,
setting forth the necessity and import-
ance of “ the moral law of klnde, or moral
philosophic," in opposition to those who
derive all morality from revelation.

This great man fell afterwards under
the displeasure of the church for propo-
sitions, not indeed heretical, but repug-
nant to her scheme of spiritual power.
He asserted, indirectly, {he right of pri-
vate judgment, and wrote on theological
Subjects in English, which gave much

offence. In fact, Pecock seems to have
hoped that his acute reasoning would
convince the people, without requiring
an implicit faith. But he greatly mis-
understood the principle of an infallible
church. Lewis's Life of Pecock does jus-
tice to his character, which, I need not
say, is unfairly represented by such his-
torians as Collier, and such antiquaries
as Thomas Heame.

k Lewis's Life* of Wicliffe, p. 115;
Leufant, Hist, du Concile de Constance,
L i. p. 213.

m Huss does not appear to have re-
jected any of the peculiar tenets of
popery. Lenfant, p. 414. He embraced.

890

INSTITUTION OF CHIVALRY. Chap. IX. Part II

nor to the Englishman in ability, but exciting greater
attention by his constancy and sufferings, as well as by
the memorable war which his ashes kindled, the Bohe-
mian martyr was even more eminently the precursor
of the Reformation. But still regarding these dissen-
sions merely in a temporal light, I cannot assign any
beneficial effect to the schism of the Hussites, at least in
its immediate results, and in the country where it ap-
peared. Though some degree of sympathy with their
cause is inspired by resentment at the ill faith of their
adversaries, and by the associations of civil and religious
liberty, we cannot estimate the Taborites and other secta-
ries of that description but as ferocious and desperate fa-
natics. 1 * Perhaps beyond the confines of Bohemia more
substantial good may have been produced by the influ-
ence of its reformation, and a better tone of morals in-
spired into Germany. But I must again repeat that
upon this obscure and ambiguous subject I assert nothing
definitely, and little with confidence. The tendencies
of religious dissent in the four ages before the Reforma-
tion appear to have generally conduced towards -the
moral improvement of mankind ; and facts of this nature
occupy a far greater space in a philosophical view of
society during that period, than we might at first ima-
gine ; but every one who is disposed to prosecute this
inquiry will assign their character according to the
result of his own investigations.

But the best school of moral discipline which the
institution middle ages afforded was the institution of chi-
of chivalry, yalry. There is something perhaps to allow for
the partiality of modem writers upon this interesting
subject; yet our most sceptical criticism must assign a
decisive influence to this great source of human improve-
ment. The more deeply it is considered, the more we
shall become sensible of its importance.

There are, if I may so say, three powerful spirits which

like Wicliffe, the predestin&rian system history and doctrine of Huns and bis
of Augustin, without pausing at any followers will be found in Lenfant’s three
of those inferences, apparently deductible works on the councils of Pisa, Constance,
from it, which, in the heads of enthu- and Basle.

shuts, may produce such extensive mis- n Lenfant, Hist de la Guerre dcs
chief. These were maintained by Huss Hussites et duConcilede Basle; Schmidt,
(Id. p. 328), though not perhaps so crudely Hist, des AUemanda, t v.
as by Luther. Everything relative to the

State op Society. ORIGIN OF CHIVALRY.

391

have from time to time moved over the face of the
waters, and given a predominant impulse to the moral
sentiments and energies of mankind. These are the
spirits of liberty, of religion, and of honour. It was the
principal business of chivalry to animate and cherish
the last of these three. And whatever high magna-
nimous energy the love of liberty or religious zeal has
ever imparted was equalled by the exquisite sense of
honour which this institution preserved.

It appears probable that the custom of receiving arms
at the age of manhood with some solemnity ^
was of immemorial antiquity among the nations Ite ongiu *
that overthrew the Roman empire. For it is mentioned
by Tacitus to have prevailed among their German an-
cestors ; and his expressions might have been used with
no great variation to describe the actual ceremonies of
knighthood . 0 There was even in that remote age a sort
of public trial as to the fitness of the candidate, which,
though perhaps confined to his bodily strength and
activity, might be the genn of that refined investigation
which was thought necessary in the perfect stage of
chivalry. Proofs, though rare and incidental, might be
adduced to show that in the time of Charlemagne, and
even earlier, the sons of monarchs at least did not
assume manly arms without a regular investiture. And
in the eleventh century it is evident that this was a
general practice . 11

This ceremony, however, would perhaps of itself have
done little towards forming that intrinsic principle
which characterized the genuine chivalry. But in the
reign of Charlemagne w*e find a military distinction that
appears, in fact as well as in name, to have given birth
to that institution. Certain feudal tenants, and I sup-
pose also alodial proprietors, were bound to serve on

° Nihil neque publics neque private
rd nisi armati agunt Sod anna sumere
lMp ante cuiquam mods, qu&m ci vitas
Buffecturum probaverit Turn in ipso
concilto, vel prindpum aliqnis, vel pater,
vel propinquus, sen to frameftque Juvenem
oroant; h*c apod eos toga, hie primus
Juvente bonos; ante hoc do mils pars vi-
dentur, mox reipublic®. De Moribus
German, c. 13.

P William of Malrasbnry says that
Alfred conferred knighthood on Athel-
stan, don&tum cbiamyde coccinefi, gem-
mate balteo, ense S&xonico cum vagi nil
aureA I. ii. c. 6. St. Palnye (Mdmolres
sur la Che valerie, p. 2) mentions other
instances ; which may also be found in
I)u Cange’s Glossary, r. Arma, and in his
22nd dissertation on Joinville.

392

CHIVALRY.

Chap. IX. Part II.

horseback, equipped with the coat of mail. These were
called Caballarii, from which the word chevaliers H an
obvious corruption.* But he who fought on horseback,
and had been invested with peculiar arms in a solemn
manner, wanted nothing more to render him a knight.
Chivalry therefore may, in a general sense, be referred
to the age of Charlemagne. We may, however, go fur-
ther, and observe that these distinctive advantages
above ordinary combatants were probably the sources of
that remarkable valour and that keen thirst for glory,
which became the essential attributes of a knightly cha-
racter. For Confidence in our skill and strength is the
usual foundation of courage; it is by feeling ourselves
able to surmount common dangers, that we become ad-
venturous enough to encounter those of a more extra-
ordinary nature, and to which more glory is attached.
The reputation of superior personal prowess, so difficult
to be attained in the course of modem warfare, and
so liable to erroneous representations, was always
within the reach of the stoutest knight, and was founded
on claims which could be measured with much accuracy.
Such is the subordination and mutual dependence in a
modem army, that every man must be content to divide
his glory with his comrades, his general, or his soldiers.
But the soul of chivalry was individual honour, coveted
in so entire and absolute a perfection that it must not
be shared with an army or a nation. Most of the
virtues it inspired were what we may call independent,
as opposed to those which are founded upon social rela-
tions. The knights-errant of romance perform their
best exploits from the love of renown, or from a sort of
abstract sense of justice, rather than from any solicitude
to promote the happiness of mankind. If these springs
of action are less generally beneficial, they are, however,
more connected with elevation of character than the
systematical prudence of men accustomed to social life.
This solitary and independent spirit of chivalry, dwell-
ing,* as it were, upon a rock, and disdaining injustice 0*
falsehood from a consciousness of internal dignity, with-

* Comitea et vaasalli nostrf qul bene* rati. Capitularia, jld. 807, In Balusct
fifia habere no8cuntur*et caballarii omnes t. i. p. 460.
ad piacitum nostrum veniant bene prepa*

State of Society.

CHIVALRY.

393

out any calculation of their consequences, is not unlike
what we sometimes read of Arabian chiefs or the North
American Indians.' These nations, so widely remote
from each other, seem to partake of that moral energy,
which, among European nations far remote from both
of them, was excited by the spirit of chivalry. But the
most beautiful picture that was ever portrayed of this
character is tho Achilles of Homer, the representative of
chivalry in its most general form, with all its sincerity
and unyielding rectitude, all its courtesies and munifi-
cence. Calmly indifferent to the cause in which he is
engaged, and contemplating with a serious and un-
shaken look the premature death that awaits him, his
heart only beats for glory and friendship. To this sub-
lime character, bating that imaginary completion by
which the creations of the poet, like those of the sculp-
tor, transcend all single works of nature, there were
probably many parallels in the ages of chivalry ; espe-
cially before a set education and the refinements of
society had altered a little the natural unadulterated war-
rior of a ruder period. One illustrious example from this
earlier age is the Cid Buy Diaz, whose history has fortu-
nately been preserved much at length in several chro-
nicles of ancient date and in one valuable poem; and
though I will not say that the Spanish hero is altogether
a counterpart of Achilles in gracefulness and urbanity,
yet was he inferior to none that ever lived in frankness,
honour, and magnanimity.*

T We must take for this the more The two principal persons in the Iliad,
favourable representations of the Indian if I may digress into the observation, ap-
nations. A deteriorating Intercourse with pear to me representatives of the heroic
Europeans, ot a race of European ex- character in its two leading varieties; of
traction, has tended to efface those virtues the energy which has Its sole principle of
which possibly were rather exaggerated action within itself, and of that which
by earlier writers. borrows its impulse from external rela-

• Since this passage was written, I tions ; of the spirit of honour, in short,
have found a parallel drawn by Mr. and of patriotism. As every sentiment
Sharon Turner, In his valuable History of of Achilles is independent and self-sup-
Kngjaad, between Achilles and Richard ported, so those of Hector all bear re-
CoMur do Lion; the superior justness of ference to his kindred and his country,
which I readily acknowledge. The real The ardour of the one might have been
hero does not indeed excite so much in- extinguished for want of nourishment in
terest in me as the poetical ; but the Thessaly ; but that of the other might,
marks of resemblance are very striking, we fancy, have never been kindled but
whether we consider their passions, thoir for the dangers of Troy. Peace could
talents, their virtues, their vices, or the have brought no delight to the one but
waste of their heroism. from the memory of war; war had no

394

CHIVALRY.

Chap. IX. Part iL

In the first state of chivalry, it was closely connected
with the military service of fiefs. The Cabal-
nexionwith larii in the Capitularies, the Milites of the
feudal ser- eleventh and twelfth centuries, were landhold-
***■ ers who followed their lord or sovereign into
the field. A certain value of land was termed in Eng-
land a knight’s fee, or in Normandy feudum loricee, fief
de haubert, from the coat of mail which it entitled and
required the tenant to wear ; a military tenure was said
to be by service in chivalry. To serve as knights,
mounted and equipped, was the common duty of vassals ;
it implied no personal merit, it gave of itself a claim
to no civil privileges. But this knight-service founded
upon a feudal obligation is to be carefully distinguished
from that superior chivalry, in which all was indepen-
dent and voluntary. The latter, in fact, could hardly
flourish in its full perfection till the military service of
feudal tenure began to decline ; namely, in the thir-
teenth century. , The origin of this personal chivalry
I should incline to refer to the ancient usage of
voluntary commendation, which I have mentioned in
Thkcon a f ormer chapter. Men commended them-
™ion n ~ selves, that is, did homage and professed
broken, attachment to a prince or lord ; generally indeed
for protection or the hope of reward, but sometimes
probably for the sake of distinguishing themselves in his
quarrels. When they received pay, which must have
been the usual case, they were literally his soldiers, or
stipendiary troops. Those who could afford to exert
their valour without recompense were like the knights
of whom we read in romance, who served a foreign
master through love, or thirst of gloi ry, or gratitude.
The extreme poverty of the lower nobility, arising from
the subdivision of fiefe, and the politic generosity of rich
lords, made this connexion as strong as that of territorial
dependence. A younger brother, leaving the paternal
estate, in which he took a slender share, might look to

alleviation to the other but from the
Images of peace. Compare, for example,
the two speeches, beginning 11 . Z. 441,
and IL n. 49 ; or rather compare the
two characters throughout the Iliad. So
wonderfully were those two great springs

of human sympathy, variously interest-
ing according to the diversity of onr
tempers, first touched by that ancient
patriarch,

h quo, ceu fonte perenni,
.Vatum Pieriis ora rigantur aquia.

State of Society.

CHIVALRY.

395

wealth and dignity in the service of a powerful count.
Knighthood, which he could not claim as his legal right,
became the object of his chief ambition. It raised him
in the scale of society, equalling him in dress, in arms,
and in title, to the rich landholders. As it was due to
his merit, it did much more than equal him to those
who had no pretensions but from wealth ; and the terri-
torial knights became by degrees ashamed of assuming
the title till they could challenge it by real desert.

This class of noble and gallant cavaliers serving com-
monly for pay, but on the most honourable footing,
became far more numerous through the crusades ; a great
epoch in the history of European society. In Effect (if tbe
these wars, as all feudal service was out of the crusades on
question, it was necessary for the richer barons chiva,ry *
to take into their pay as many knights as they could
afford to maintain ; speculating, so far as such motives
operated, on an influence with the leaders of the expe-
dition, and on a share of plunder, proportioned to the
number of their followers. During the period of the
crusades, we find the institution of chivalry acquire its
full vigour as an order of personal nobility ; and its
original connexion with feudal tenure, if not altogether
effaced, became in a great measure forgotten in the
splendour and dignity of the new form which it wore.

The crusaders, however, changed in more than one
respect the character of chivalry. Before that
epoch it appears to have had no particular
reference to religion. Ingulfus indeed tells *: iLhreli -
us that the Anglo-Saxons preceded the ceremony 810B#
of investiture by a confessiOT. of their sins, and other
pious rites, and they received the order at the hands of
a priest, instead of a knight. But this was derided by
the Normans as effeminacy, and seems to have proceeded
from the extreme devotion of the English before the
Conquest.* We can hardly perceive indeed why the
assumption of arms to be used in butchering mankind
should be treated as a religious ceremony. The clergy,
to do them justice, constantly opposed the private wars
in which the courage of those ages wasted itself ; and

* Ingulfus, In Gale, XV Scriptures, ti. looks as if the ceremony was not abso-
p. 70. William Rufus, however, was lutely repugnant to the Norman prac-
knighted by Archbishop Lanfranc, which tice.

396

CHIVALRY.

Chap. IX. Part II.

all bloodshed was subject in strictness to a canonical pen-
ance. But the purposes for which me^ bore arms in a
crusade so sanctified their use, that chivalry acquired
the character as much of a religious as a military insti-
tution. For many centuries, the recovery of the Holy
Land was constantly at the heart of a brave and super-
stitious nobility ; and every knight was supposed at his
creation to pledge himself, as occasion should arise, to
that cause. Meanwhile, the defence of God's law against
infidels was his primary and standing duty. A knight,
whenever present at mass, held the point of his sword
before him while the gospel was read, to signify his
readiness to support it. Writers of the middle ages
compare the knightly to the priestly character in an
elaborate parallel, and the investiture of the one was
supposed analogous to the ordination of the other.
The ceremonies upon this occasion were almost wholly
religious. The candidate passed nights in prayer among
priests in a church; he received the sacraments; he
entered into a bath, and was clad with a white robe, in
allusion to the presumed purification of his life ; his
sword was solemnly blessed ; every thing, in short, was
contrived to identify his new condition with the defence
of religion, or at least of the church. 0

To this strong tincture of religion which entered into
the composition of chivalry from the twelfth century,
And with was added another ingredient equally distin-
gaiiantry. guishing. A great respect for the female sex
had always been a remarkable characteristic of the
Northern nations. The ^German women were high-
spirited and virtuous ; qualities which might be causes
or consequences of the veneration with which they were
regarded. I am not sure that we could trace very
minutely the condition of women for the period between
the subversion of the Roman empire and the first crusade ;
but apparently man did not grossly abuse his superiority;
and in point of civil rights, and even as to the inherit-
ance of property, the two sexes were placed perhaps as

■ Du Cange, v. Miles, and 22nd Dis- other chivalrous principles, will be found
sertation on Joinville, St Palaye, M&a. in l’Ordene de Cbevaleric, a long me-
snr la Chevalerie* part iL A curious trical romance published in Barbazan’s
original illustration of this, as weU as of Fabliaux, t. L p. 59 (edit 1808).

State of Society.

CHIVALRY.

397

nearly on a level as the nature of such warlike societies
would admit. There seems, however, to have been more
roughness in the social intercourse between the sexes
than we find in later periods. The spirit of gallantry
which became so animating a principle of chivalry, must
be ascribed to the progressive refinement of society
during the twelfth and two succeeding centuries. In a
rude state of manners, as among the lower people in all
ages, woman has not full scope to display those fascinat-
ing graces, by which nature has designed to counter-
balance the strength and energy of mankind. Even
wherq those jealous customs that degrade alike the two
sexes have not prevailed, her lot is domestic seclusion;
nor is she fit to share in the boisterous pastimes of
drunken merriment to which the intercourse of an un-
polished people is confined. But as a taste for the more
elegant enjoyments of wealth arises, a taste which it is
always her policy and her delight to nourish, she obtains
an ascendency at first in the lighter hour, and from thence
in the serious occupations of life. She chases, or brings
into subjection, the god of wine, a victory which might
seem more ignoble were it less difficult, and calls in the
aid of divinities more propitious to her ambition. The
love of becoming ornament is not perhaps to be regarded
in the light of vanity; it is rather an instinct which
woman has received from nature to give effect to those
charms that are her defence ; and when commerce began
to minister more effectually to the wants of luxury, the
rich furs of the North, the gay silks of Asia, the wrought
gold of domestic manufacture, illumined the halls of
chivalry, and cast, as if by the spell of enchantment,
that ineffable grace over beauty which the choice and
arrangement of dress is calculated to bestow. Courtesy
had always been the proper attribute of knighthood;
protection of the weak its legitimate duty ; hut these
were heightened to a pitch of enthusiasm when woman
became their object. There was little jealousy shown in
the treatment of that sex, at least in France, the fountain
of chivalry ; they were present at festivals, at tourna-
ments, and sat promiscuously in the halls of their castle.
The romance of Perceforest (and romances have always
been deemed good witnesses as to manners) tells of a

398

CHIVALRY.

Chap. IX. Part II.

feast where eight hundred knights had each of them a
lady eating off’ his plate.* For to eat off the same plate
was an usual mark of gallantry or friendship.

Next therefore, or even equal to devotion, stood gal-
lantry among the principles of knighthood. But all
comparison between the two was saved by -blending them
together. The love of God and the ladies was enjoined
as a single duty. He who was faithful and true to his
mistress was held sure of salvation in the theology of
castles though not of cloisters. 7 Froissart announces
that he had undertaken a collection of amorous pqetry
with the help of God and of love ; and Boecace returns
thanks to each for their assistance in the Decameron.
The laws sometimes united in this general homage to the
fair. “ We will,” says James 11. of Aragon, “ that every
man, whether knight or no, who shall be in company
with a lady, pass safe and unmolested, unless he be guilty
of murder.”* Louis II., duke of Bourbon, instituting
the order of the Golden Shield, enjoins his knights to
honour above all the ladies, and not to permit any one to
slander them, “because from them after God comes all
the honour that men can acquire.” a

The gallantry of those ages, which was very often
adulterous, had certainly no right to profane the name of
religion ; but its union with valour was at least more
natural, and became so intimate, that the same word has
served to express both qualities. In the French and
English wars especially, the knights of each country
brought to that serious conflict the spirit of romantic
attachment which had been cherished in the hours of
peace. They fought at Poitiers or Verneuil as they had
fought at tournaments, bearing over their armour scarves
and devices as the livery of their mistresses, and assert-
ing the paramount beauty of her they served in vaunting
challenges towards the enemy. Thus in the middle of a

* Y etit buit cen a chevaliers sdant A Memoires from the first edition in 1759,
table ; et si n'y eust ceiui qui n’eust une which is not tbe best
dame on une pucelle a son ecueile. In z Statuimus, quod omnia homo, sive
Launcelot du Lac, a lady, who was miles sive alius, qui iverlt cum dominfi
troubled with a jealous husband, com-, gene remit, salvna sit atque securus, nisi
plains that it was a long time since a fuerit homidda. De Marca, Afarca His-
knigbt had eaten off her plate. Le Grand, panica, p. 1428.

t L p. 24. * Le Grand, t i. p. 120 ; St Palaye,

y Le Grand, Fabliaux, t Hi. p. 438; t i. p. 13, 134, 221 ; Fabliaux, Romances,
St Palaye, t i. p. 41. I quote St Palaye's &c., passim.

State of Society.

CHIVALRY.

399

keen skirmish at Cherbourg, the squadrons remained
motionless, while one knight challenged to a single com-
bat the most amorous of the adversaries. Such a defiance
was soon accepted, and the battle only recommenced
when one of the champions had lost his life for his love. b
In the first campaign of Edward's war some young Eng-
lish knights wore a covering over one eye, vowing, for
the sake of their ladies, never to see with both till they
should have signalized their prowess in the field. 0 These
extravagances of chivalry are so common that they form
part of its general character, and prove how far a course
of action which depends upon the impulses of sentiment
may come to deviate from common sense.

It cannot be presumed that this enthusiastic veneration,
this devotedness in life and death, were wasted upon un-
grateful natures. The goddesses of that idolatry knew
too well the value of their worshi ppers. There has seldom
been such adamant about the female heart, as can resist the
highest renown for valour and courtesy, united with the
steadiest fidelity. “ He loved," says Froissart of Eustace
d'Auberthicourt, “ and afterwards married lady Isabel,
daughter of the count of Juliers. This lady too loved
lord Eustace for the great exploits in arms which she
heard told of him, and she sent him horses and loving
letters, which made the said lord Eustace more bold than
before, and he wrought such feats of chivalry, that all in
his company were gainers ." d It were to be wished that
the sympathy of love and valour had always been as ho-
nourable. But the morals of chivalry, we cannot deny,
were not pure. In the amusing fictions which seem to
have been the only popular reading of the middle ages,
there reigns a licentious spirit, not of that slighter kind
which is usual in such compositions, but indicating a
general dissoluteness in the intercourse of the sexes.
This has often been noticed of Boccaccio and the early
Italian novelists ; but it equally characterized the tales
and romances of France, whether metrical or in prose,
and all the poetry of the Troubadours.® The violation of

b St Palaye, p. 222. venial morality may be collected from

c Froissart, p. 33. MiHot, Hist des Troubadours, passimf

d St Palaye, p. 268. and from Sismondi, Literature du Midi,

6 The romances will speak for them- & i. p. 179, &c. See too St Palaye, t ii
selves $ and the character of the Pro- p. 62 and 68.

400

CHARACTERISTIC VIRTUES Chap. IX. Part II.

marriage vows passes in them for an incontestable pri-
vilege of the brave and the fair ; and an accomplished
knight seems to have enjoyed as undoubted prerogatives,
by general consent of opinion, as were claimed by the
brilliant courtiers of Louis XV.

But neither that emulous valour which chivalry ex-
cited, nor the religion and gallantry which were its
animating principles, alloyed as the latter were by the
corruption of those ages, could have rendered its institu-
tion materially conducive to the moral improvement of
society. ‘There w^ere, however, excellences of a very
high class which it equally encouraged. In the books
professedly written to lay down the duties of knighthood,
they appear to spread over the whole compass of human
obligations. But these, like other books of morality,
strain their schemes of perfection far beyohd the actual
practice of mankind. A juster estimate of chival-
rous manners is to be deduced from romances. Yet in
these, as in all similar fictions, there must be a few ideal
touches beyond the simple truth of character ; and the
picture can only be interesting when it ceases to present
images of mediocrity or striking imperfection. But they
referred their models of fictitious heroism to the existing
standard of moral approbation ; a rule, which, if it gene-
rally falls short of what reason and religion prescribe, is
always beyond the average tenor of human conduct.
From these and from histoiy itself we may infer the
tendency of chivalry to ejevate and purify the moral
Virtues f ee ^ n g 8 - Three virtues may particularly be
deeSes- noticed as essential in the estimation of man-
chTvairy 0 ki n< ^ character of a knight; loyalty,

courtesy, and munificence.

The first of these in its original sense may be defined,
fidelity to engagements ; whether actual pro-
yalty ‘ mises, or such tacit obligations as bound a
vassal to his lord and a subject to his prince. It was
applied also, and in the utmost strictness, to the fidelity
of a lover towards the lady he served. Breach of faith,
and especially of an express promise, was held a disgrace
that no valour could redeem. False, perjured, disloyal,
recreant, were the epithets which he must be compelled
to endure who had swerved from a plighted engagement

State of Society.

OF CHIVALRY.

401

even towards an enemy. This is one of the most striking
changes produced by chivalry. Treachery, the usual
vice of savage as well as corrupt nations, became infamous
during the vigour of that discipline. As personal rather
than national feelings actuated its heroes, they never
felt that hatred, much less that fear of their enemies,
which blind men to the heinousness of ill faith. In the
wars of Edward III., originating in no real animosity,
the spirit of honourable as well as courteous behaviour
towards the foe seems to have arrived at its highest point.
Though avarice may have been the primary motive of
ransoming prisoners instead of putting them to death,
their permission to return home on the word of honour
in order to procure the stipulated sum — an indulgence
never refused — could only be founded on experienced
confidence in the principles of chivalry/

A knight was unfit to remain a member of the order if
he violated his faith; he was ill acquainted
with its duties if he proved wanting in courtesy. Tirte8y '
This word expressed the most highly refined good
breeding, founded less upon a knowledge of ceremonious
politeness, though this was not to be omitted, than on
the spontaneous modesty, self-denial, and respect for
others, which ought to spring from his heart. Besides
the grace which this beautiful virtue threw over the
habits of social life, it softened down the natural rough-
ness of war, and gradually introduced that indulgent
treatment of prisoners which was almost unknown to
antiquity. Instances of this kind are continual in the
later period of the middle ages. An Italian writer blames
the soldier who wounded Eccelin, the famous tyrant of
Padua, after he was taken. “ He deserved,” says he,
“ no praise, but rather the greatest infamy for his base-
ness ; since it is as vile an act to wound a prisoner,
whether noble or otherwise, as to strike a dead body.” R
Considering the crimes of Eccelin, this sentiment is a
remarkable proof of generosity. The behaviour of
Edward III. to Eustace de Ribaumont, after the capture

f St Palaye, part 'ii.

* Non laudem meruit sed sumnwe
potius opprobrium vilitatis; nam idem
facinus esfc putandum captum nobilem
VOL. III.

vel ignobilem offender©, vel ferire, qukm
gjpdfo csedere cadaver. Rolandinus, in
Script Rer. Ital. t vlii. p. 351.

2 D

402

CHARACTERISTIC VIRTUES Chap. IX. Part II.

of Calais, and that, still more exquisitely beautiful, of tho
Black Prince to his royal prisoner at Poitiers, are such
eminent instances of chivalrous virtue, that I omit to
repeat them only because they are so well known. Those
great princes too might be imagined to have soared far
above the ordinary track of mankind. But in truth, the
knights who surrounded them and imitated their excel-
lences, were only inferior in opportunities of displaying
the same virtue. After the battle of Poitiers, “ the
English and Gascon knights,” says Froissart, “ having
entertained their prisoners, went homo each of them with
the knights or squires he had taken, whom he then ques-
, tioned upon their honour what ransom they could pay
without inconvenience, and easily gave them credit ; and
it was common for men to say, that they would not
straiten any knight or squire so that he should not live
well and keep up his honour.” h Liberality, in-
Uberahty. an( j 0 f money, might be reckoned,

as I have said, among the essential virtues of chivalry.
All the romances inculcate the duty of scattering their
wealth with profusion, especially towards minstrels,
pilgrims, and the poorer members of their own order.
The last, who were pretty numerous, had a constant
right to succour from the opulent ; the castle of every
lord, who respected the ties of knighthood, was open
with more than usual hospitality to the traveller whose
armour announced his dignity, though it might also
conceal his poverty . 1

Valour, loyalty, courtesy, munificence, formed collec-
tively the character of an accomplished knight, so far as
was displayed in the ordinary tenor of his life, reflect-
ing these virtues as an unsullied mirror. Yet something
more was required for the perfect idea of chivalry, and
enjoined by its principles ; an active sense of
Justice, jugtice, an ardent indignation against wrong, a

h Froissart, i. L c. 161. He remarks was the custom in Great Britain, (says
in another place that all English and the romance of Perceforest, speaking of
French gentlemen treat their prisoners course in an imaginary history ,) that
well; not so the Germans, who put them noblemen and ladies placed a helmet on
in fetters, in order to extort more money, the highest point of their castles, as a
c. 136. sign that all persons of such rank trap

* St Paiaye, port Iv. p. 312, 367, Ac.;- Telling that road might boldly enter their
Le Grand, Fabliaux, tip. 115, 167. It house# like their own. St Paiaye, p. 367

State of Society.

OF CHIVALRY.

403

determination of courage to its best end, the prevention
or redress of injury. It grew up as a salutary antidote
in the midst of poisons, while scarce any law but that
of the strongest obtained regard, and the rights of terri-
torial property, which are only rights as they conduce
to general good, became the means of general oppres-
sion. The real condition of society, it has sometimes
been thought, might suggest stories of knight-errantry,
which were wrought up into the popular romances of
the middle ages. A baron, abusing the advantage of
an inaccessible castle in the fastnesses of the Black Fo-
rest or the Alps, to pillage the neighbourhood and con
fine travellers in his dungeon, though neither a giant
nor a Saracen, was a monster not less formidable, and
could perhaps as little be destroyed without the aid of
disinterested bravery. Knight-errantry, indeed, as a
profession, cannot rationally be conceived to have had
any existence beyond the precincts of romance. Yet
there seems no improbability in supposing that a knight,
journeying through uncivilized regions in his way to
the Holy Land, or to the court of a foreign sovereign,
might find himself engaged in adventures not very dis-
similar to those which are the theme of romance. We
cannot indeed expect to find any historical evidence of
such incidents.

The characteristic virtues of chivalry bear so much
resemblance to those which eastern writers of Resemblance
the same period extol, that I am a little dis- ofch wairous
posed to suspect Europe of having derived
some improvement from imitation of Asia.

Though the crusades began in abhorrence of in-
fidels, this sentiment wore off in some degree before
their cessation; and the regular intercourse of com-
merce, sometimes of alliance, between the Christians of
Palestine and the Saracens, must have removed part of
the prejudice, while experience of their enemy’s cou-
rage and generosity in war would with those gallant
knights serve to lighten the remainder. The romancers
expatiate with pleasure on the merits of Saladin, who
actually received the honour of knighthood from Hugh
of Tabaria, his prisoner. An* ancient poem, entitled the
Order of Chivalry, is founded upon this story, and con-

2 d 2

404 ,

EVILS PRODUCED BY THE Chap. IX. Part II.

tains a circumstantial account of the ceremonies, as well
as duties, which the institution required. 11 One or two
other instances of a similar kind bear witness to the
veneration in which the name of knight was held among
the eastern nations. And certainly the Mohammedan
chieftains were for the most part abundantly qualified
to fulfil the duties of European chivalry. Their man-
ners had been polished and courteous, while the western
kingdoms were comparatively barbarous.

The principles of chivalry were not, I think, natu-
rally productive of many evils. For it is unjust
bTthe to class those acts of oppression or disorder
*hivi among the abuses of knighthood, which were

c va ry ‘ committed in spite of its regulations, and were

only prevented by them from becoming more extensive.
The licence of times so imperfectly civilized could not
be expected to yield to institutions, which, like those of
religion, fell prodigiously short in their practical result
of the reformation which they were designed to work.
Man’s guilt and frailty have never admitted more than a
partial corrective. But some bad consequences may be
more fairly ascribed to the very nature of chivalry. I
have already mentioned the dissoluteness which almost
unavoidably resulted from the prevailing tone of gal-
lantry. And yet we sometimes find in the writings of
those times a spirit of pure but exaggerated sentiment ;
and the most fanciful refinements of passion are mingled
by the same poets with the coarsest immorality. An
undue thirst for military renown was another fault that
chivalry must have nourished; and the love of war,
sufficiently pernicious in any shape, was more founded,
as 1 have observed, on personal feelings of honour, and
less on public spirit, than in the citizens of free states.
A third reproach may be made to the character of
knighthood, that it widened the separation between the
different classes of society, and confirmed that aristocra-
tical spirit of high birth, by which the large mass of
mankind were kept in mijust degradation. Compare
the generosity of Edward III. towards Eustace de Ribau-
mont at the siege of Calais with the harshness of his
conduct towards the citizens. This may be illustrated

k Fabliaux de Barbasan, t. i.

State of Society.

SPIRIT OF CHIVALRY.

405

by a story from Joinville, who was himself imbued with
the full spirit of chivalry, and felt like the best and
bravest of his age. He is speaking of Henry count of
Champagne, who acquired, says he, very deservedly,
the surname of Liberal, and adduces the following proof
of it. A poor knight implored of him on his knees one
day as much money as would serve to marry his two
daughters. One Arthault de Nogent, a rich burgess,
willing to rid the count of this importunity, but rather
awkward, we must own, in the turn of his argument,
said to the petitioner ; My lord has already given away
so much that he has nothing left. Sir Villain, replied
Henry, turning round to him, you do not speak truth in
saying that I have nothing left to give, when I have got
yourself. Here, Sir Knight, 1 give you this man and
warrant your possession of him. Then, says Joinville,
the poor knight was not at all confounded, but seized
hold of the burgess fast by the collar, and told him he
should not go till he had ransomed himself. And in
the end he was forced to pay a ransom of five hundr ed
pounds. The- simple-minded writer who brings this
evidence of the count of Champagne’s liberality is not
at all struck with the facility of a virtue that is exer-
cised at the cost of others.®

There is perhaps enough in the nature of this institu-
tion and its congeniality to the habits of a war-
like generation to account for the respect in sEeTtend-
which it was held throughout Europe. But se-
veral collateral circumstances served to invigo-
rate its spirit. Besides the powerful efficacy with which
the poetry and romance of the middle ages stimulated
those susceptible minds which were alive to no other
literature, we may enumerate four distinct causes tend-
ing to the promotion of chivalry.

The first of these was the regular scheme of educa-
tion, according to which the sons of gentlemen
from the age of seven years, were brought up education
in the castles of superior lords, where they at { 1 ° ( J 0 £ uight ‘
once learned the whole discipline of their
future profession, and imbibed its emulous and enthu-
siastic spirit. This was an inestimable advantage to
the poorer nobility, who could hardly otherwise have

m Joinville in Collection des M&noires, 1 i. p. 43.

406 ENCOURAGEMENT OF PRINCES. Chap. IX. Part II

given their children the accomplishments of their station.
From seven to fourteen these boys were called pages
or varlets; at fourteen they bore the name of esquire.
They were instructed in the management of arms, in
the art of horsemanship, in exercises of strength and
activity. They became accustomed to obedience and
courteous demeanour, serving their lord or lady in
offices which had not yet become derogatory to honour-
able birth, and striving to please visitors, and especially
ladies, at the ball or banquet. Thus placed in the
centre of all that could awaken their imaginations, the
creed of chivalrous gallantry, superstition, or honour
must have made indelible impressions. Panting for the
glory which neither their strength nor the established
rules permitted them to anticipate, the young scions of
chivalry attended their masters to the tournament, and
even to the battle, and riveted with a sigh the armour
they were forbidden to wear. n

It was the constant policy of sovereigns to encourage
Encourage- this institution, which furnished them with
mentof faithful supports, and counteracted the inde-
?wnL pendent spirit of feudal tenure. Hence they
ments. displayed a lavish magnificence in festivals

and tournaments, which may be reckoned a second
means of keeping up the tone of chivalrous feeling.
The kings of France and England held solemn or plenary
courts at the great festivals, or at other times, where the
name of knight was always a title to admittance ; and
the masque of chivalry, if I may use the expression, was
acted in pageants and ceremonies fantastical enough in
our apprehension, but well calculated for those heated
understandings. Here the peacock and the pheasant,
birds of high fame in romance, received the homage of
all true knights. 0 The most singular festival of this
kind was that celebrated by Philip duke of Burgundy,
in 1453. In the midst of the banquet a pageant was
introduced, representing the calamitous state of religion
in consequence of the recent capture of Constantinople.
This was followed by the appearance of a pheasant,
which was laid before the duke, and to which the
knights present addressed their vows to undertake a

• St Palaye, part i. ville. St Palaye, tip. 87, 11 B. La

° Da Cange, 5™* Diaaertation ewr Join- Grand, t i. p. 14.

State of Society.

TOURNAMENTS.

407

crusade, in the following very characteristic preamble :
I swear before God my Creator in the first place, and
the glorious Virgin his mother, and next before the
ladies and the pheasants Tournaments were a still
more powerful incentive to emulation. These may be
considered to have arisen about the middle of the
eleventh century ; for though every martial people have
found diversion in representing the image of war, yet
the name of tournaments, and the laws that regulated
them, cannot be traced any higher. q Every scenic per-
formance of modem times must be tame in comparison
of these animating combats. At a tournament, the space
enclosed within the lists was surrounded by sovereign
princes and their noblest barons, by knights of estab-
lished renown, and all that rank and beauty had most
distinguished among the fair. Covered with steel, and
known only by their emblazoned * shield or by the
favours of their mistresses, a still prouder bearing, the
combatants rushed forward to a strife without enmity,
but not without danger. Though their weapons were
pointless, and sometimes only of wood, though they
were bound by the laws of tournaments to strike only
upon the strong armour of the trunk, or, as it was called,
between the four limbs, those impetuous conflicts often
terminated in wounds and death. The church uttered
her excommunications in vain against so wanton an ex-
posure to peril ; but it was more easy for her to excite
.than to restrain that martial enthusiasm. Victory in a
tournament was little less glorious, and perhaps at the
moment more exquisitely felt, than in the field ; since
no battle could assemble such witnesses of valour.
“ Honour to the sons of the brave,” resounded amidst the
din of martial music from the lips of the minstrels, as
the conqueror advanced to receive the prize from his
queen or his mistress ; while the surrounding multitude
acknowledged in his prowess of that day an augury of
triumphs that might in more serious contests be blended
with those of his country/

P St, Palaye, 1 1. p. 191. sense. The Germans ascribe them to

Godfrey de Preuilly, a French knight, Henry the Fowler ; hut this, according to
is said by several contemporary writers Du Cange, is on no authority. 6™ Die-
to have invented tournaments; which scrtation sur Join villa,
mast of course be understood in a limited r St. Palaye, part ii. and part ill. au

408

KNIGHTHOOD.

Chap. IX, Part II.

Both honorary and substantial privileges belonged to
Privileges of the condition of knighthood, and had of course
knighthood. a material tendency to preserve its credit. A
knight was distinguished abroad by his crested helmet,
his weighty armour, whether of mail or plate, bearing
his heraldic coat, by his gilded spurs, his horse barded
with iron, or clothed in housing of gold ; at home, by
richer silks and more costly furs than were permitted to
squires, and by the appropriated colour of scarlet. He
was addressed by titles of more respect/ Many civil
offices, by rule or usage, were confined to his order.
But perhaps its chief privilege was to form one distinct
class of nobility extending itself throughout great part
of Europe, and almost independent, as to its rights and
dignities, of any particular sovereign. Whoever had
been legitimately dubbed a knight in one country
became, as it were, a citizen of universal chivalry, and
might assume most of its privileges in any other. Nor
did he require the act of a sovereign to be thus dis-
tinguished. It was a fundamental principle that any
knight might confer the order ; responsible only in his
own reputation if he used lightly so high a prerogative.
But as all the distinctions of rank might have been con-
founded, if this right had been without limit, it was an
equally fundamental rule, that it could only be exercised
in favour of gentlemen/

commencement. Du Cange, Dissert. 6
and 7 : and Glossary, v. Torneamentum.

Le Grand, Fabliaux, tip. 184.

• St Palaye, part iv. Seiden’s Titles
of Honour, p. 806. There was not, how-
ever, so much distinction in England as
in Prance.

t St Palaye, vol. i. p. 70, has forgotten
to make this distinction. It is, however,
capable of abundant proof. Gunther, in
his poem called Ligurintts, observes of
the Milanese republic :

Qnosllbet ex huxniU vulgo, quod Gallia
fend am

Jodicat, accingi gladio concedit eques-
tri.

Otho of Frisingen expresses the same in
prose. It is said, in the Establishments
of St Louis, that if any one not being
a gentleman on the father’s side was
knighted, the king or baron in whose
territory he resides, may hack off his

spurs on a dunghill, c. 130. The count
de Nevere, having knighted a person who
was not noble exparte pate roll, was fined
in the king’s court The king, however,
(Philip III.) confirmed the knighthood.
Daniel, Hist de la Milice Fra^obe, p.
98. Fuit proposition (says a passage
quoted by Daniel) contra com item Flan-
driensem, qaod non poterat, nec debebat
facere de viliano militem, sine auctoritate
regia, ibid. Statuimus, says James I. of
Aragon, in 1234, ut nullus faclat militem
nisi filium militia. Marca Hisp&nica,
p. 1428. Selden, Titles of Honour, p.
692, produces other evidence to the same
effect And the emperor Sigfsmund
having conferred Knighthood, during his
stay in Paris in 1416, on a person incom-
petent to receive it for want of nobility,
the French were indignant at his conduct,
as an assumption of sovereignty. Villaret,
t xiii. p. 397. We are told, however, toy

State of Society.

MILITARY SERVICE.

409

The privileges annexed to chivalry were of peculiar
advantage to the vavassors, or inferior gentry, as they
tended to counterbalance the influence which territorial
wealth threw into the scale of their feudal suzerains.
Knighthood brought these two classes nearly to a level ;
and it is owing perhaps in no small degree to this in
stitution that the lower nobility saved themselves, not-
withstanding their poverty, from being confounded with
the common people.

Lastly, the customs of chivalry were maintained by
their connexion with military service. After Conncxion
armies, which we may call comparatively regu- 0 f chfvairy
lar, had superseded in a great degree the feudal ^
militia, princes were anxious to bid high for
the service of knights, the best-equipped and bravest
warriors of the time, on whose prowess the fate of bat-
tles was for a long period justly supposed to depend.
War brought into relief the generous virtues of chivalry,
and gave lustre to its distinctive privileges. The rank
was sought with enthusiastic emulation through heroic
achievements, to which, rather than to mere wealth and
station, it was considered to belong. In the wars of
France and England, by far the most splendid period of
this institution, a promotion of knights followed every
success, besides the innumerable cases where the same

Qi&nnone, 1. xx. c. 3, that nobility was
not in fact required for receiving chivalry
at Naples, though it was in France.

<The privilege of every knight to asso-
ciate qualified persons to the order at his
pleasure, lasted very long in France;
certainly down to the English wars of
Charles VII. (Monstrelet, part ii. folio
50), and, if I am not mistaken, down to
the time of Francis I. But in England,
where the spirit of independence did not
prevail so much among the nobility, it
soon ceased. Selden mentions one re-
markable instance in a writ of the 29th
year of Henry III. summoning tenants in
caplte to come and receive knighthood
from the king, ad recipiendum a nobis
arma militaria; and tenants of mesne
lords to be knighted by whomsoever they
pleased, ad recipiendum arma de quibus-
cunque voluerint Titles of Honour,
p. 792. But soon after this time, it
became an established principle of our

law that no sutyect can confer knight-
hood except by the king's authority.
Thus Edward III. grants to a burgess of
Lyndia in Guienne (I know not what
place this is) the privilege of receiving
that rank at the hands of any knight, his
want of noble birth notwithstanding.
Rymer, t v. p. 623. It seems, however,
that a different law obtained in some
places. Twenty-three of the chief in-
habitants of Beaucaire, partly knights,
partly burgesses, certified in 1298, that
the immemorial usage of Beaucaire and
of Provence had been, for burgesses to
receive knighthood at the hands of noble-
men, without the prince's permission.
Vaissette, Hist, do Languedoc, t. iii. p.
530. Burgesses, in the great commercial
towns, were considered as of a superior
class to the roturiers, and possessed a
kind of demi-nobility. Charles V. appears
to have conceded a similar indulgence to
the citizens of Paris. Villaret.t x. p. 248.

410 BANNERETS AND BACHELORS. Chap. IX. Part II.

honour rewarded individual bravery , u It may here be
mentioned that an honorary distinction was made be-
tween knights-bannerets and bachelors.* The
bannerets former were the richest and best accompanied.

man CO uld properly be a banneret unless
he possessed a certain estate, and could bring a
certain number of lances into the field. 7 His distin-
guishing mark was the square banner, carried by a
squire at the point of his lance; while the knight-ba-
chelor had only the coronet or pointed pendant. When
a banneret was created, the general cut off this pendant
to render the banner square.* But this distinction, how-
ever it elevated the banneret, gave him no claim to
military command, except over his own dependents or
men at arms. v Chandos was still a knight-baclielor when
he led part of the prince of Wales’s army into Spain.
He first raised his banner at the battle of Navarette;
and the narration that Froissart gives of the ceremony
will illustrate the manners of chivalry and the character
of that admirable hero, the conqueror of Du Guesclin
and pride of English chivalry, whose fame with posterity
has been a little overshadowed by his master’s laurels.*
What seems more extraordinary is, that mere squires
had frequently the command over knights. Proofs of
this are almost continual in Froissart. But the vast esti-
mation in which men held the dignity of knighthood led

tt St. Palaye, part iii. passim.

* The word bachelor has been some-
times derived from baa chevalier; in
opposition to banneret But this cannot
be right We do not find any authority
for the expression bag chevalier, nor any
equivalent in Latin, baccalaureus cer-
tainly' not suggesting that sense; and it
is strange that the corruption should ob-
literate every trace of the original term.
Bachelor is a very old word, and is used
in early French poetry for a young man,
as bachelette is for a girl. So also in
Chancer;

** A yonge Squire,

A lover, and a lusty bachelor.”

* Da Conge, Dissertation *nr
Joinvilie. The number of men at arms,
whom a banneret ought to command, was
properly fifty. But Olivier de la Marche

speaks of twenty-five as sufficient ; arfd it
appears that, in fact, knights-banneret
often did not bring so many.

* Ibid. Olivier de la Marche (Col-
lection dea M&uoires, t viii. p. 337)
gives a particular example of this ; and
makes a distinction between the bachelor,
created a banneret on account of his
estate, and the hereditary banneret, who
took a public opportunity of requesting
the sovereign to unfold his family banner
which he had before borne wound round
bis lance. The first was said relever
banniere ; the second, entrer cn bannfere.
This difference Is more folly explained
by Daniel, Hist, de la Milice Francois*,
p. 1 16. Ch&ndos's banner was unfolded,
not cut, at Navarette. We read some-
times of esquire-bannereta, that is, of
bannerets by descent, not yet knighted.

* Froissart, part i. c, 341.

State of Society. DECLINE OF CHIVALRY.

411

them sometimes to defer it for great part of their lives,
in hope of signalizing their investiture by some eminent
exploit.

These appear to have been the chief means of nou-
rishing the principles of chivalry among the Decline of
nobility of Europe. But notwithstanding all chivalry,
encouragement, it underwent the usual destiny of human
institutions. St. Palaye, to whom we are indebted for
so vivid a picture of ancient manners, ascribes the
decline of chivalry in France to the profusion with
which the order was lavished under Charles VI., to the
establishment of the companies of ordonnance by Charles
VII., and to the extension of knightly honours to law-
yers, and other men of civil occupation, by Francis I. b
But the real principle of decay was something different
from these three subordinate circumstances, unless so
far as it may bear some relation to the second. It was
the invention of gunpowder that eventually overthrew
chivalry. From the time when the use of fire-arms
became tolerably perfect the weapons of former warfare
lost their efficacy, and physical force was reduced to a
very subordinate place in the accomplishments of a
soldier. The advantages of a disciplined infantry be-
came more sensible ; and the lancers, who continued till
almost the end of the sixteenth century to charge in a
long line, felt the punishment of their presumption and
indiscipline. Even in the wars of Edward III., the dis-
advantageous tactics of chivalry must have been percep-
tible; but the military art had not been sufficiently
studied to overcome the prejudices of men eager for
individual distinction. Tournaments became less fre-
quent ; and, after the fatal accident of Henry II., were
entirely discontinued in France. Notwithstanding the
convulsions of the religious wars, the sixteenth century
was more tranquil than any that had preceded ; and thus
ft large part of the nobility passed their lives in pacific
habits, and if they assumed the honours of chivalry,
forgot their natural connexion with military prowess.
This is far more applicable to England, where, except
from the reign of Edward III. to that of Henry VI.,
chivalry, as a military institution, seems not to have

b Mem. snr la Cbevalerie, part v.

412

DECLINE OF CHIVALRY. Chap. IX. Part IL

found a very congenial soil.® To these circumstances,
immediately affecting the military condition of nations,
we must add the progress of reason and literature, which
made ignorance discreditable even in a soldier, and
exposed the follies of romance to a ridicule which they
were very ill calculated to endure.

The spirit of chivalry left behind it a more valuable
successor. The character of knight gradually subsided
in that of gentleman ; and the one distinguishes Euro-
pean society in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
as much as the other did in the pregeding ages. A jea-
lous sense of honour, less romantic, but equally elevated,
a ceremonious gallantry and politeness, a strictness in
devotional observances, a high pride of birth and feeling
of independence upon any sovereign for the dignity it
gave, a sympathy for martial honour, though more sub-
dued by civil habits, are the lineaments which prove an
indisputable descent. The cavaliers of Charles I. were
genuine successors of Edward’s knights ; and the resem-
blance is much more striking, if we ascend to the civil
wars of the League. . Time has effaced much also of
this gentlemanly, as it did before of the chivalrous cha-
racter. From the latter part of the seventeenth century
its vigour and purity have undergone a tacit decay, and
yielded, perhaps in every country, to increasing com-
mercial wealth, more diffused instruction, .the spirit of
general liberty in some, and of servile obsequiousness in
others, the modes of life in great cities, and the levelling
customs of social intercourse .* 1

c The prerogative exercised by the countries above named ; for chivalry was
kings of England of compelling men always in high repute among us, nor did
sufficiently qualified in point of estate to any nation produce more admirable spe-
take on them the honour of knighthood cimens of its excellences,
was inconsistent with the true spirit of I am not minutely acquainted with
chivalry. This began, according to Lord the state of chivalry in Spain, where it
Lyttelton, under Henry III. Hist, of seems to have flourished considerably.
Henry IL vol. ii. p. 238. Independently Italy, except in Naples, and perhaps
of this, several causes tended to render Piedmont, displayed little of its spirit ;
England less under the influence of chi- which neither suited the free republics of
valrous principles than France or Ger- the twelfth aud thirteenth, nor the jealous
many; such as, her comparatively peace- tyrannies of the following centuries. Yet
ful state, the smaller share she took in even here we find enough to furnish
the crusades, her inferiority in romances Muratori with materials for his 63id Dis-
of knight-errantry, but above all, the sertation. «

democrat! cal character of her laws and d The well-known Memoirs of St.
government Still this is only to be Palaye are the best repository of interest-
understood relatively to the two other ing and illustrative facts respecting chi-

State op Society.

LITERATURE.

413

It is now time to pass to a very different subject.
The third head under which I classed the im-
provements of society during the four last cen- Literaturc *
turies of the middle ages was that of literature. But I
must apprise the reader not to expect any general view
of literary history, even in the most abbreviated manner.

valry. Possibly he may have relied a
little too much on romances, whose pic-
tures will naturally be overcharged.
Froissart himself has somewhat of this
partial tendency, and the manners of
chivalfous times do not make so fair an
appearance in Monstrelet. In the Me-
moirs of la Tremouille (Collect, des Mdm.
t. xiv. p. 169), we have perhaps the ear-
liest delineation from the life of those
severe and stately virtues in high-born
ladies, of which our own country fur-
nished so many examples in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, and which
were derived from the influence of chi-
valrous principles. And those of Bayard
in the same collection (t xiv. and xv.)
are a beautiful exhibition of the best
effects of that discipline.

It appears to me that M. Guizot, to
whose judgment I owe all deference, has
dwelt rather too much on the feudal
character of chivalry. Hist, de la Civili-
sation eu France, Le9on 36. Hence he
treats the institution as in its decline
during the fourteenth century, when, if
we can trust either Froissart or the ro-
mancers, it was at its height. Certainly,
if fcere knighthood was of right both in
England and the north of France, a terri-
torial dignity, which bore with it no
actual presumption of merit, it was
sometimes also conferred on a more
honourable principle. It was not every
knight who possessed a flef, nor in prac-
tice did every possessor of a fief receive
knighthood.

Guizot justly remarks, as Sismondi has
done, the disparity between the lives of
most knights and the theory of chival-
rous rectitude. But the same has been
seen in religion, and can be no reproach
to either principle. Partout la pensde
morale des homines s’dl&ve et aspire fort
an dessus de Leur vie. Et gardez vous
de croire que parce qu’elle ne gouvemait
pas immediatement les actions, parceque
la pratique ddmontait sans cesse et

dtrangement la thdorie, l’influence de la
theorie fut nulie et sans valeur. C’est
beaucoup que le jugement des homines
sur les actions humaines ; tot ou tard il
devient efflcace.

It may be thought by many Bevere
judges, that I have over-valued the effi-
cacy of chivalrous sentiments in elevating
the moral character of the middle ages.
But I do not see ground for withdrawing
or modifying any sentence. The com-
parison is never to be made with an ideal
standard, or even with one which a purer
religion and a more liberal organization
of society may have rendered effectual,
but with the condition of a country where
neither the sentiments of honour nor
those of right prevail. And it seems to
me that 1 have not veiled the deficiencies
and the vices of chivalry any more than
its beneficial tendencies.

A very fascinating picture of chival-
rous manners has been drawn by a writer
of considerable reading, and still more
considerable ability, Mr. Kenelm Digby,
in his Broad Stone of Honour. The
bravery, the courteousness, the munifi-
cence, above all, the deeply religious
character of knighthood and its reverence
for the church, naturally took hold of a
heart so susceptible of these emotions,
and a fancy so quick to embody them.
St. Palaye himself is a less enthusiastic
eulogist of chivaLry, because he has seen
it more on the side of mere romance, and
been less penetrated with the conviction
of its moral excellence. But the progress
of still deeper impression seems to have
moderated the ardour of Mr. Digby’s
admiration for the historical character of
knighthood; he has discovered enough
of human alloy to render unqualified
praise hardly fitting, in his judgment,
for a Christian writer ; and in the Mores
Catbolici, the second work of this amiable
and gifted man, the colours in wliich chi-
valry appears are by no means so brilliant.
[1848.]

414

CIVIL LAW.

Chap. IX. Part II.

Such an epitome would not only be necessarily superfi-
cial, but foreign in many of its details to the purposes
of this chapter, which, attempting to develope the cir-
cumstances that gave a new complexion to society, con-
siders literature only so far as it exercised a general and
powerful influence. The private researches, therefore,
of a single scholar, unproductive of any material effect
in his generation, ought not to arrest us, nor indeed
would a series of biographical notices, into which
literary history is apt to fall, be very instructive to a
philosophical inquirer. But I have still a more decisive
reason against taking a large range of literary history
into the compass of this work, founded on the many
contributions which have been made within the last
forty years in that department, some of them even since
the commencement of my own labour.® These have
diffused so general an acquaintance with the literature
of the middle ages, that I must, in treating the subject,
either compile secondary information from well-known
books, or enter upon a vast field of reading, with little
hope of improving upon what has been already said, or
even acquiring credit for original research. I shall,
therefore, confine myself to four points: the study of
civil law; the institution of universities; the applica-
tion of modem languages to literature, and especially to
poetry ; and the revival of ancient learning.

The Roman law had been nominally preserved ever
since the destruction of the empire ; and a
Civil law. g rea ^. p 0r fci 0n 0 f the inhabitants of France and
Spain, as well as Italy, were governed by its provisions.
But this was a mere compilation from the Theodosian
code ; which itself contained only the more recent laws
promulgated after the establishment of Christianity,
with some fragments from earlier collections. It was

® Four very recent publications (not
to mention that of Buhle on modem
philosophy) enter much at large into the
middle literature; those ofM. Ginguend
and M. Sismondi, the history of England
by Mr. Sharon Turner, and the Literary
History of the Middle Ages by Mr. Be-
ringfcon. All of these contain more or
less useful information and judicious re-
marks; but that of Ginguene is among
the most learned and important works of

this century. I have no hesitation to
prefer it, as far as its subjects extend, to
Tiraboschi.

[A subsequent work of my own, Intro-
duction to the History of Literature in
the 15th, 16th, and l?th Centuries, con-
tains, in the first and second chapters,
some additional illustrations of the ante-
cedent period, to which the reader may
be referred, as complementary to these
pages. 1848.]

State of Society. CIVIL LAW. 4X5

made by order of Alaric king of the Visigoths about the
year 500, and it is frequently confounded with the The-
odosian code by writers of the dark ages / The code of
Justinian, reduced into system after the separation of
the two former countries from the Greek empire, never
obtained any authority in them ; nor was it received in
the part of Italy subject to the Lombards. But that
this body of laws was absolutely unknown in the West
during any period seems to have been too hastily sup-
posed. Some of the more eminent ecclesiastics, as Hinc-
mar and Ivon of Chartres, occasionally refer to it, and
bear witness to the regard which the Roman church had
uniformly paid to its decisions/

The revival of the study of jurisprudence, as derived
from the laws of Justinian, has generally been ascribed
to the discovery made of a copy of the Pandects at
Amalfi, in 1135, when that city was taken by the Pisans.
This fact, though not improbable, seems not to rest
upon sufficient evidence/ But its truth is the less
material, as it appears to be unequivocally proved that
the study of Justinian’s system had recommenced before
that era. Early in the twelfth century a professor
named Imerius 1 opened a school of civil law at Bologna,
where he commented, if not on the Pandects, yet on the
other books, the Institutes and Code, which were suffi-
cient to teach the principles and inspire the love of that
comprehensive jurisprudence. The study of law, having
thus revived, made a surprising progress ; within fifty
yfcars Lombardy was full of lawyers, on whom Frederic
Barbarossa and Alexander III., so hostile in every other
respect, conspired to shower honours and privileges.
The schools of Bologna were pre-eminent throughout
this century for legal learning. There seem also to have
been seminaries at Modena and Mantua ; nor was any
considerable city without distinguished civilians. In
the next age they became still more numerous, and their
professors more conspicuous, and universities arose at

f Heineccius, Hist. Juris German, c. 1.
«. 15.

S Giannone, 1. iv. c. 6. Selden, ad
Fletam, p; 1071.

* Tiraboschi, t. iii. p. 359. Ginguend,
Hist Litt. de l’ltaiie, t. i. p. 155.

* Imerius is sometimes called Guar-
nerius, sometimes Wamerms : the Ger-
man W is changed into Gu by the
Italians, and occasionally omitted, espe-
cially in latinizing, for the sake of eu-
phony or purity.

CIVIL LAW.

416

Chap. IX. Past II.

Naples, Padua, and othpr places, where the fioman law
was the object of peculiar regards

There is apparently great justice in the opinion of
Tiraboschi, that by acquiring internal freedom and the
right of determining controversies by magistrates of
their own election, the Italian cities were led to require
a more extensive and accurate code of written la*ws than
they had hitherto possessed. These municipal judges
were chosen from among the citizens, and the succession
to offices was usually so rapid, that almost every free-
man might expect in his turn to partake in the public
government, and consequently in the Administration of
justice. The latter had always indeed been exercised
in the sight of the people by the count and his as-
sessors under the Lombard and Carlovingian sove-
reigns ; but the laws were rude, the proceedings tumul-
tuary, and the decisions perverted by violence. The
spirit of liberty begot a stronger sense of right ; and
right, it was soon perceived, could only be secured by a
common standard. Magistrates holding temporary
offices, and little elevated in those simple times above
the citizens among whom they were to return, could
only satisfy the suitors, and those who surrounded their
tribunal, by proving the conformity of their sentences
to acknowledged authorities. And the practice of
alleging reasons in giving judgment would of itself in-
troduce some unifonnity of decision and some adherence
to great rules of justice in the most arbitrary tribunals ;
while, on the other hand, those of a free country lose
part of their title to respect, and of their tendency to
maintain right, whenever, either in civil or criminal
questions, the mere sentence of a judge is pronounced
without explanation of its motives.

The fame of this renovated jurisprudence spread very
rapidly from Italy over other parts of Europe. Students
flocked from all parts of Bologna ; and some eminent
masters of that school repeated its lessons in distant
countries. One of these, Placentinus, explained the
Digest at Montpelier before the end of the twelfth cen-
tury; and the collection of Justinian soon came to
supersede the Theodosian code in the dominions of

k Tiraboschi, t, iv. p. 38 \ t. v. p. 55.

CIVIL LAW.

417

State op Society

Toulouse.* Its study continued to flourish in the uni-
versities of Both these cities ; and hence the Roman law,
as it is exhibited in the system of Justinian, became the
rule of all tribunals in the southern provinces of France.
Itk authority in Spain is equally great, or at least is
only disputed by that of the canonists ; n and it forms
the acknowledged basis of decision in all the Germanic
tribunals, sparingly modified by the ancient feudal cus-
tomaries, which the jurists of the empire reduce within
narrow bounds . 0 In the northern parts of France,
where the legal standard was sought in local customs,
the civil law met natufally with less regard. But the
code of St. Louis borrows from that treasury many of its
provisions, and it was constantly cited in pleadings
before the parliament of Paris, either as obligatory by
way of authority, or at least as written wisdom, to
which great deference was shown. p Yet its study was
long prohibited in the university of Paris, from a dispo-
sition of the popes to establish exclusively their decretals,
though the prohibition was silently disregarded .* 1

As early as the reign of Stephen, Vacarius, a lawyer
of Bologna, taught at Oxford with great sue- Jtg introduc .
cess ; but the students of scholastic theology tion into
opposed themselves, from some unexplained England *
reason, to this new jurisprudence, and his lectures were
interdicted.J About the time of Henry III. and Edward
I. the civil law acquired some credit in England ; but a
system entirely incompatible with it had established
itflelf in our courts of justice ; and the Roman juris-
prudence was not only soon rejected, but became
obnoxious . 11 Every where, however, the clergy com-

m Tiraboschi, t v. Vaissette, Hist, de I understand Denisart, (Dictionnaire des
Languedoc, t. ii. p. 517; t iii. p. 527 ; Decisions, art. Droit-^crii,) the affirmative
t. iv. p. 604. prevailed. It is plain at least by the

“ Duck, de Hsu Juris Civilis, 1. ii. c. 6. Causes Celbbres, that appeal was con-

° Idem, l. ii. 2. tinually made to the principles of the

P Duck, 1. ii. c. 6, s. 30, 31. Fleury, civil law in the argument of Parisian
Hist du Droit Franpois, p. 74 (prefixed advocates.

to Argou, Institutions au Droit BYan^ia, f i Crevier, Hist de l'Universite de
edit. 1787), says that it was a great Paris, t. i. p, 316 ; t. ii. p. 276.
question among lawyers, and still unde- r Johan. Salisburienais, apud Selden ad
cided (i. e. in 1674), whether the Roman Fletam, p. 1082.
law was the common law in the pays 8 Selden, ubi supra, p. 1096-1104. This

eoutumiers, as to those points wherein passage is worthy of attention. Yet,
their local customs were silent. And, if notwithstanding Selden’ a authority, I ms
VOL. III. 2 E

418

CIVIL LAW.

Chap. IX. Part I).

bined its study with that of their own canons ; it was a
maxim that every canonist must be a civilian, and that
no one could be a good civilian unless he were also a
canonist. In all universities, degrees are granted in
both laws conjointly ; and in all courts of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, the authority of Justinian is cited, when
that of Gregory or Clement is wanting.*

I should earn little gratitude for my obscure diligence.

The eider were ^ 011 the forgotten teachers of a

dviikns r science that attracts so few. These elder pro-
1Ht d a e fessors of Roman jurisprudence are infected, as
gar e ' we are told, with the fcults and ignorance of
their time; failing in the exposition of ancient law
through incorrectness of manuscripts and want of sub-
sidiary learning, or perverting their sense through the
verbal subtleties of scholastic philosophy. It appears
that, even a hundred years since, neither Azzo and
Accursius, the principal civilians of the* thirteenth cen-
tury, nor Bartolus and Baldus, the more conspicuous
luminaries of the next age, nor the later writings of
Accolti, Fulgosius, and Panonnitanus, were greatly
regarded as authorities ; unless it were in Spain, where
improvement is always odious, and the name of Bartolus
inspired absolute deference . 11 In the sixteenth century,
Alciatus and the greater Cujacius became, as it were,
the founders of a new and more enlightened academy of
civil law, from which the latter jurists derived their
lessons. The laws of Justinian, stripped of their im-
purer alloy, and of the tedious glosses' of their commtfm
tators, will form the basis of other systems, and mingling,
as we may hope, with the new institutions of philoso-
phical legislators, continue to influence the social
relations of mankind, long after their direct authority
shall have been abrogated. The ruins of ancient Rome
supplied the materials of a new city ; and the fragments

not satisfied that he has not extenuated
the effect of Bracton’s predilection for
the maxims of Roman jurisprudence. No
early lawyer has contributed so much to
form our own system as Bracton ; and if
his definitions and rules are sometimes
borrowed from the civilians, as all admit,
our cotnmop law may have indirectly re-
ceived greater modification from that in

fluence, than its professors were ready to
acknowledge, or even than they knew.
A full view of this subject is still, I think,
a desideratum In the history of English
law, which it would illustrate in a very
interesting manner.

» Duck, De Usu Juris Civilis, l. i. c. 87.

u Gravina, Origlnes Juris Civilis, p,
196,

State of Society. PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN FRANCE. 419

of* her law, which have already been wrought into the
recent codes of France and Prussia, will probably, tinder
other names, guide far distant generations by the
sagacity of Modestinus and Ulpian. x

The establishment of public schools in France is owing
to Charlemagne. At his accession, we are as- Public
sured that no means of obtaining a learned schools esta-
education existed in his dominions; 7 and in SaUe d - by -
order to restore in some degree the spirit of magne.
letters, he was compelled to invite strangers from
countries where learning was not so thoroughly extin-
guished. Alcuin of England, Clement of Ireland, Theo-
dulf of Germany, were the true Paladins who repaired
to his court. With the help of these he revived a few
sparks of diligence, and established schools in different
cities of his empire; nor was he ashamed to b6 the
disciple of that in his own palace under the care of Al-
cuin/ His two next successors, Louis the Debonair
and Charles the Bald, were also encouragers of letters ;

* Those who feel some curiosity about
the civilians of the middle ages will find
a concise and elegant account in Gravina,
De Origine Juris Civilis, p. 16(5-206.
(Lips. 1708.) Tiraboschi contains perhaps
more information; but his prolixity is
very wearisome. Besides this fault, it is
evident (hat Tiraboschi knew very little
of law, and had not read the civilians of
whom he treats; whereas Gravina dis-
cusses their merits not only with legal
knowledge, but with an acuteness of criti-
cism which, to say the truth, Tiraboschi
never shows except on a date or a name.

[The civil lawyers of the mediaeval
period are not at all forgotten on the
continent, as the great work of Savigny,
History of Roman Law in the Middle
Ages, sufficiently proves. It is certain
that the civil law must always be studied
in Europe, nor ought the new codes to
supersede it, seeing they are iu great
measure derived from its fountain ; though
1 have heard that it is less regarded in
France than formerly. In my earlier
editions I depredated the study of the
civil law too much, and with too exclusive
an attention to English notions.]
y Ante ipsum dominum Carolum
regem in GalLift nullum fuit studium
liberalium artium. Monacbus Engolis-

mensis, apud Launoy, De Scholls per
occidentem instauratis, p. 5. See too
Histoire Littdraire de la France, t iv.
p. 1. “Studia, liberalium artium” in
this passuge, must be understood to ex-
clude literature, commonly so called, but
not a certain measure of very ordinary
instruction. For there were episcopal
and conventual schools in the seventh
and eighth centuries, even in France,
especially Aquitaine; we need hardly
repeat that in England, the former of
these ages produced Bede and Theodore,
and the men trained under them; the
Lives of the Saints also lead us to take
with some limitation the absolute denial'
of liberal studies before Charlemagne.
See Guizot, Hist, de la Civilis. en France,
Le^on 16; and Ampere, Hist. Litt. de
la France, ill. p. 4. But, perhaps, phi-
lology, logic, philosophy, and even the-
ology were not taught, as sciences, in
any of the French schools for these two
centuries ; and consequently those esta-
blished by Charlemagne justly make an
epoch.

* 1<J. Ibid. There was a sort of lite-
rary club among them, where the mem-
bers assumed ancient names. Charle-
magne was called David ; AJcuin, Horace
another, Dametas, &o.

2 e 2

420

UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. Chap. IX. Part II.

and the schools of Lyons, Fulda, Corvey, Rheims, and
some other cities, might be said to flourish in the ninth
century . a In these were taught the trivium and quad-
rivium, a long-established division of sciences : the first
comprehending grammar, or what we now call philology,
logic, and rhetoric ; the second, music, arithmetic,
geometry, and astronomy. b But in those ages scarcely
anybody mastered the latter four ; and to be perfect in
the three former was exceedingly rare. All those studies,
however, were referred to theology, and that in the
nari'o west manner ; music, for example, being reduced
to church chanting, and astronomy to the calculation of
Easter/ Alcuin was, in his old age, against reading the
poets ; d and this discouragement of secular learning was
very general ; though some, as for instance Raban, per-
mitted a slight tincture of it, as subsidiary to religious
instruction/

About the latter part of the eleventh century a greater
University ardour for intellectual pursuits began to show
of Paris. itself in Europe, which in the twelfth broke out
into a flame. This was manifested in the numbers who
repaired to the public academies or schools of philosophy.
None of these grew so early into reputation as that of
Paris. This cannot indeed, as has been vainly pretended,
trace its pedigree to Charlemagne. The first who is said
to have read lectures at Paris was Remigius of Auxerre,
about the year 900/ For the two next centuries the
history of this school is very obscure ; and it would be
hard to prove an unbroken continuity, or at least a de-
pendence and connexion of its professors. In the year
1100 we find William of Champeaux teaching logic, and
apparently some higher parts of philosophy, with much

Abelard cre< ^’ But preceptor was eclipsed by his
disciple, afterwards his rival and adversary,
Peter Abelard, to whose brilliant and hardy genius the
university of Paris appears to be indebted for its rapid
advancement. Abelard was almost the first who awak-

* Hist Littdraire, p. 211, Ac. p. 126.

b This division of the sciences is os* <1 Crevier, Hist do V Uni vend te de Paris,
cribetj to St Augustin ; and we certainly t i. p. 28.

find it established early in the sixth cen- e Brucker, t Hi. p. 612. Raban Maurus
tury. Brucker, Historia Critica Philo- was chief of the cathedral school at Fulda,
Sophias, t Hi. p. 667. in the ninth century.

* Schmidt, Hist, des Allemands, t it f Crevier, p. 66.

State of Society ABELARD. 421

ened mankind in the ages of darkness to a sympathy with
intellectual excellence. His bold theories, not the less
attractive perhaps for treading upon the bounds of heresy,
his imprudent vanity, that scorned the regularly acquired
reputation of older men, allured a multitude of disciples,
who would never have listened to an ordinary teacher.
It is said that twenty cardinals and fifty bishops had
been among his hearers. 8 Even in the wilderness, where
he had greeted the monastery of Paraclete, he was sur-
rounded by enthusiastic admirers, relinquishing the
luxuries, if so they might be called, of Paris, for the
coarse living and imperfect accommodation which that
retirement could afford. h But the whole of Abelard’s life
was the shipwreck of genius ; and of genius, both the
source of his own calamities and unserviceable to pos-
terity. There are few lives of literary men more
interesting or more diversified by success and adversity,
by glory and humiliation, by the admiration of mankind
and the persecution of enemies ; nor from which, I may
add, more impressive lessons of moral prudence may be
derived. 1 One of Abelard’s pupils was Peter Lombard,
afterwards archbishop of Paris, and author of a work
called the Book of Sentences, which obtained the highest
authority among the scholastic disputants. The resort
of students to Paris became continually greater ; they
appear, before the year 1169, to have been divided into
nations ; k and probably they had an elected rector and
voluntary rules of discipline about the same time. This,
however, is not decisively proved ; but in the last year
of the twelfth century they obtained their earliest charter
from Philip Augustus." 1

* Crevier, p. 171 ; Brucker, p. 677 ;
Tiraboschi, t. iii. p. 275.
h Bruckr, p. 750.

i A great Interest has been revived in
France for the philosophy, as well as the
personal history of Abelard, by the pub-
lication of his philosophical writings, iu
1836, under so eminent an editor as M.
Cousin, and by the excellent work of M.
de Remusat, in 1845, with the title Abe-
lard, containing a copious account both
of the life and writings of that most re-
markable mau, the father, perhaps, of the
theory os to the nature of universal ideas,
now so generally known by the name of

conceptualism.

k The faculty of arts in the university
of Paris was divided into four nations;
those of France, Picardy, Normandy, and
England. These had distinct suffrages
in the affairs of the university, and con-
sequently, when united, outnumbered the
three higher faculties of theology, law,
and medicine. In 1169, Henry II. of
England offers to refer bis dispute with
Becket to the provinces of the school of
Paris.

® Crevier, t i. p. 279. The first
statute regulating the discipline of the
university was given by Robert de Cour-

422

OXFORD.

Chap. IX. Part II,

The opinion which ascribes the foundation of the
Univewity university of Oxford to Alfred, if it cannot be
of Oxford, maintained as a truth, contains no intrinsic
marks of error. Ingulfus, abbot of Croyland, in the
earliest authentic passage that can be adduced to this
point, 1 ' declares that he was sent from Westminster to the
school at Oxford, where he learned Aristotle, with the
first and second books of Tully’s Ehetoric . 0 Since a
school for dialectics and rhetoric subsisted at Oxford, a
town of but middling size and not the seat of a bishop,
we are naturally led to refer its foundation to one of our
kings, and none who had reigned after Alfred appears
likely to have manifested such zeal for learning. How-
ever, it is evident that the school of Oxford was fre-
quented under Edward the Confessor. There follows an
interval of above a century, during which we have, I
believe, no contemporary evidence of its continuance.
But in the reign of Stephen, Vacarius read lectures there
upon civil law ; and it is reasonable to suppose that a
foreigner would not have chosen that city, if he had not
found a seminary of learning already established. It was
probably inconsiderable, and might have been interrupted
during some part of the preceding century. 1 * In the reign

(Jon, legate of Honorius III., in 1215, id. be rejected as spurious. In the Gesta
p. 206. Comitum Andegavensinm, Fulk, count

“ No one probably would choose to of Anjou, who lived about 020, is said to
rely on a passage found in one manu- have been skilled Ari stole lids et Cice-
script of A8serius, which has all appear- ronianis ratiocinationibus.
auce of an interpolation. It is evident [The authenticity of Ingulfus has been
from an anecdote in Wood’s History of called in question, not only by Sir Francis
Oxford, vol. i. p. 23 (Gutch’s edition), Palgrave, but by Mr. Wright. Biogr.
that Camden did not believe in the Liter., Anglo-Norman Periodj p. 29. And
authenticity of this passage, though he this implies, apparently, the spuriousness
thought proper to insert it in the Bri- of the continuation ascribed to Peter of
tannia. Blois, in which the passage about Aver-

0 1 Gale, p. 75. The mention of Aris- roes throws doubt upon the whole. 1
totle at so early a period might seem to have, in the Introduction to the History
throw some suspicion on this passage, of Literature, retracted the degree of
But it is impossible to detach it from the credence here given to the foundation
context; and the works of Aristotle in- of the university of Oxford by Alfred,
tended by Ingulfus were translations of If Ingulfus is not genuine, we have no
parts of his Logic by Boethius and Vic- proof of its existence as a school of
torin. Bracker, p. 678. A passage in- learning before the middle of the twelfth
deed in Peter of Blols's continuation of century.]

Ingulfus, where the study of Averroes is p It may be remarked, that John of
said to have taken place at Cambridge Salisbury, who wrote in the first years
some years before he was born, is of a of Henry IL’s reign, since his Polycra-
different complexion, and must of course tiegn is dedicated to Becket, before he

State of Society.

BOLOGNA.

423

of Henry H., or at least of Kichard I., Oxford became a
very flourishing university, and in 1201, according to
Wood, contained 3000 scholars.* 1 The earliest charters
were granted by John.

If it were necessary to construe the word university
in the strict sense of a legal incorporation, university
Bologna might lay claim to a higher antiquity of Bologna,
than either Paris or Oxford. There are a few vestiges
of studies pursued in that city even in the eleventh cen-
tury ; r but early in the next the revival of the Koman
jurisprudence, as has been already noticed, brought a
throng of scholars round the chairs of its professors.
Frederic Barbarossain 1158, by his authentic, or rescript,
entitled Habita, took these under his protection, and
permitted them to be tried in civil suits by their own
judges. This exemption from the ordinary _
tribunals, and even from those of the church, me^glven
was naturally coveted by other academies ; it ^ ti ^ iver ’
was granted to the university of Paris by its
earliest charter from Philip Augustus, and to Oxford by
John. From this time the golden age of universities
commenced ; and it is hard to say whether they were
favoured more by their sovereigns or by the see of Rome.
Their history indeed is full of struggles with the muni-
cipal authorities, and with the bishops of their several
cities, wherein they were sometimes the aggressors, and
generally the conquerors. From all parts of Europe
students resorted to these renowned seats of learning
'with an eagerness for instruction which may astonish
those who reflect how little of what we now deem useful
could be imparted. At Oxford, under Henry III., it is
said that there were 30,000 scholars ; an exaggeration
which seems to imply that the real number was very
great.* A respectable contemporary writer asserts that

became archbishop, makes no mention of
Oxford, which he would probably have
done if it had been an eminent seat of
learning at that time.

9 Wood’s Hist, and Antiquities of
Oxford, p. 177. The Benedictines of
St Maur say, that there was an eminent
school of canon law at Oxford about the
end of the twelfth century, to which many
students repaired from Paris. Hist Litt
de La France, t ix. p. 216.

r Tiraboschi, t ill. p. 259, et alibi ;
Muratori, Dissert 43.

• “ But among these,” says Anthony
Wood, “ a company of varlets, who pre-
tended to be scholars, shuffled themselves
in, and did act much villany in the uni-
versity by thieving, whoring, quarrelling,
&c. They lived under no discipline,
neither had they tutors; but only for
fashion’s sake would sometimes thrust
themselves into the schools at ordinary

424

ENCOURAGEMENT GIVEN Chap. IX. Part II.

there were full 10,000 at Bologna about the same time.
I have not observed any numerical statement as to Paris
during this age ; but there can be no doubt that it was
more frequented than any other. At the death of Charles
VII. in 1453, it is said to have contained 25,000 students. 11
In the thirteenth century other universities sprang up in
different countries; Padua and Naples under the patron-
age of Frederic II., a zealous and useful friend to letters, 51
Toulouse and Montpelier, Cambridge and Salamanca/
Orleans, which had long been distinguished as a school
of civil law, received the privileges of incorporation
early in the fourteenth century, and Angers before the
expiration of the same age. r Prague, the earliest and
most eminent of German universities, was founded in
1350; a secession from thence of Saxon students, in con-
sequence of the nationality of the Bohemians and the
Hussite schism,, gave rise to that of Leipsic.* The
fifteenth century produced several new academical foun-
dations in France and Spain.

A large proportion of scholars in most of those institu-
tions were drawn by the love of science from foreign
countries. The chief universities had their own paiii-
cular departments of excellence. Paris was unrivalled
for scholastic theology ; Bologna and Orleans, and after-
wards Bourges, for jurisprudence ; Montpelier for medi-
cine. Though national prejudices, as in the case of

lectures, and when they went to perform
any mischief, then would they be ac-
counted scholars, that so they might free
themselves from the jurisdiction of the
burghers." p. 206. If we allow three
varlets to one scholar, the university will
still have been very fully frequented by
the latter.

t Tiraboschi, t. iv. p. 4 *1. Azarius,
about the middle of the fourteenth cen-
tury, says the number was about 13,000
in his time. Muratori, Script Her. Ital.
t xvi. p. 325.

u Villaret, Hist de France, t. xvi.
p. 341. This may perhaps require to be
taken with allowance. But Paris owes
a great part of its buildings on the
southern bank of the Seine to the uni-
versity. The students are said to have
been about 12,000 before 1480. Crevier,
t iv. p. 410.

* Tiraboschi, t iv. p. 43 and 46.

y The earliest authentic mention of
Cambridge as a place of learning, if I«
mistake not, is in Matthew Paris, who
informs us, that in 1209, John having
caused three clerks of Oxford to be
hanged on suspicion of murder, the whole
body of scholars left that city, and emi-
grated, some to Cambridge, some to
Reading, in order to carry on their stu-
dies (p. 191, edit. 1684). But it may be
conjectured with some probability, that
they were led to a town so distant as
Cambridge by the previous establishment
of academical instruction in that place.
The incorporation of Cambridge is in
1231 (15 Hen. HI.), so that there is no
great difference In the legal antiquity of
our two universities.

* Crevier, Hist de l’Universitd de
Paris, t ii. p. 216 ; t ill. p. 140.

a Pfeffel, Abrdgd Chronologique da
l'Hist. de l’AUemagne, p. 550, 607.

State op Society.

TO UNIVERSITIES.

425

Prague, sometimes interfered with this free resort of
foreigners to places of education, it was in general a wise
policy of government, as well as of the universities them-
selves, to encourage it. The thirty-fifth article of the
peace Qf Bretigni provides for the restoration of former
privileges to students respectively in the French and
English universities . 11 Various letters patent will he
found in Kymer’s collection, securing to Scottish as well
as French natives a safe passage to their place of educa-
tion. The English nation, including however the
Flemings and Germans , 0 had a separate vote in the
faculty of arts at Paris. But foreign students were not,
I believe, so numerous in the English academies.

If endowments and privileges are the means of quick-
ening a zeal for letters, they were liberally bestowed in
the last three of the middle ages. Crevier enumerates
fifteen colleges founded in the university of Paris during
the thirteenth century, besides one or two of a still
earlier date. Two only, or at most three, existed in that
age at Oxford, and but one at Cambridge. In the next
two centuries these universities could boast, as every one
knows, of many splendid foundations, though much ex
ceeded in number by those of Paris. Considered as
ecclesiastical institutions it* is not surprising that the
universities obtained, according to the spirit of their
age, an exclusive cognizance of civil or criminal suits
affecting their members. This jurisdiction was, how-
ever, local as well as personal, and in reality encroached
on the regular police of their cities. At Paris the pri-
vilege turned to a flagrant abuse, and gave rise to many
scandalous contentions , 11 Still more valuable advantages
were those relating to ecclesiastical preferments, of which
a large proportion was reserved in France to academical
graduates. Something of the same sort, though less ex-
tensive, may still be traced in the rules respecting
plurality of benefices in our English church.

This remarkable and almost sudden transition from a
total indifference to all intellectual pursuits CallgeBOf
cannot be ascribed perhaps to any general their ce-
causes. The restoration of the civil, and the lebrity *
formation of the canon law, were indeed eminently con-

b Rymer, t vi. p. 292, 0 Crevier, t il. p. 398.

d Crevier and Vitlaret, passim.

426

SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY. Chap. IX. Part II.

dueive to it, and a large proportion of scholars in most
universities confined themselves to jurisprudence. But
Scholastic the chief attraction to the studious was the new
philosophy, scholastic philosophy. The love of contention,
especially with such arms as the art of dialectics supplies
to an acute understanding, is natural enough to mankind.
That of speculating upon the mysterious questions of
metaphysics and theology is not less so. These disputes
and speculations, however, appear to have excited little
interest till, after the middle of the eleventh century,
Roscelin, a professor of logic, revived the old question of
the Grecian schools respecting universal ideas, the reality
of which he denied. This kindled a spirit of metaphy-
sical discussion, which Lanfranc and Anselm, succes-
sively archbishops of Canterbury, kept alive ; and in the
next century Abelard and Peter Lombard, especially the
latter, completed the scholastic system of philosophizing.
The logic of Aristotle seems to have been partly known
in the eleventh century, although that of Augustin was
perhaps in higher estimation ; e in the twelfth it obtained
more decisive influence. His metaphysics, to which the
logic might be considered as preparatory, were intro-
duced through translations from the Arabic, and perhaps
also from the Greek, early in- the ensuing centuiy. f This
work, condemned at first by the decrees of popes and
councils on account of its supposed tendency to atheism,

• Brucker, Hist. Crlt Philosophise, t iii.
p. 678.

t Id. Ibid. Tiraboschi conceives that
the translations of Aristotle made by
command of Frederic II. were directly
from the Greek, t iv. p. 146 ; and cen-
sures Brucker for the contrary opinion.
Buhle, however (Hist, de la Philosophic
Moderne, t. i. p. 696), appears to agree
with Brucker. It is almost certain that
versions were made from the Arabic
Aristotle: which itself was not imme-
diately taken from the Greek, but from a
Syriac medium. Ginguene, Hist. Litt.
de lltalie, t. i. p. 212 (on the authority
of M. L&ngles).

It was not only a knowledge of Aris-
totle that the scholastics of Europe de-
rived from the Arabic language. His
writings had produced in the flourishing
Mohammedan kingdoms a vast number

of commentators, and of metaphysicians
trained in the same school. Of these
Averroes, a native of Cordova, who died
early In the thirteenth century, was the
most eminent It would be curious to
examine more minutely than has hitherto
been done the original writings of these
famous men, which no doubt have suf-
fered in translation. A passage from A!
Gazel, which Mr. Turner has rendered
from the Latin, with all the disadvantage
of a double remove from the author's
words, appears to state the argument in
favour of that class of Nominalists, called
Conceptualists, with more clearness and
precision than any thing I have seen
from the schoolmen. Al Gazel died in
1126, and consequently might have sug-
gested this theory to Abelard, which
however Is not probable. Turner’s Hist
of Engl. voL i. p. 513.

State or Society SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY.

427

acquired by degrees an influence, to which even popes
and councils were obliged to yield. The Mendicant
Friars, established throughout Europe in the thirteenth
century, greatly contributed to promote the Aristotelian
philosophy ; and its final reception into the orthodox
system of the church may chiefly be ascribed to Thomas
Aquinas, the boast of the Dominican order, and certainly
the most distinguished metaphysician of the middle ages.
His authority silenced all scruples as to that of Aristotle,
and the two philosophers were treated with equally im-
plicit deference by the later schoolmen. 6

This scholastic philosophy, so famous for several ages,
has since passed away and been forgotten. The history
of literature, like that of empire, is full of revolutions.
Our public libraries are cemeteries of departed reputa-
tion, and the dust accumulating upon their untouched
volumes speaks as forcibly as the grass that waves over
the ruins of Babylon. Few x very few, for a hundred years
past, have broken the repose of the immense works of
the schoolmen. None perhaps in our own country have
acquainted themselves particularly with their contents.
Leibnitz, however, expressed a wish that some one con-
versant with modem philosophy would undertake to
extract the scattered particles of gold which may be
hidden in their abandoned mines. This wish has been
at length partially fulfilled by three or four of those
industrious students and keen metaphysicians, who do
honour to modem Germany. But most of their works
are unknown to me except by repute, and as they all
appear to be formed on a very extensive plan, I doubt
whether even those laborious men could afford adequate
time for this ungrateful research. Yet we cannot pretend
to deny that Roscelin, Anselm, Abelard, Peter Lombard,
Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and
Ockham, were men of acute and even profound under-
standings, the giants of their own generation. Even

8 Brucker, Hist Crit. Philosophise,
t. Hi. 1 have found no better guide than
Brucker. But he confesses himself not
to have read the original writings of the
scholastics; an admission which every
reader will perceive to be quite neces-
sary. Consequently, he gives us rather
a verbose declamation against their

philosophy than any cleor view of its
character. Of the valuable works lately
published in Germany on the history of
philosophy, I have only seen that of
Buhle, which did not fall Into my hands
till I had nearly written these pages.
Tiedemanu and Tennemann are I be-
lieve, still untranslated.

428

SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY. Chap. IX. Part 11,

with the slight knowledge we possess of their tenets,
there appear through the cloud of repulsive technical
barbarisms rays of metaphysical genius which this age
ought not to despise. Thus in the works of Anselm is
found the celebrated argument of Des Cartes for the
existence of a Deity, deduced from the idea of an infinitely
perfect, being. One great object that most of the school-
men had in view was, to establish the principles of natural
theology by abstract reasoning. This reasoning was
doubtless liable to great difficulties. But a modem
writer, who seems tolerably acquainted with the subject,
assures us that it would be difficult to mention any theo-
retical argument to prove the divine attributes, or any
objection capable of being raised against the proof, which
we do not find in some of the scholastic philosophers . 11
The most celebrated subjects of discussion, and those
on which this class of reasoners were most divided, were
the reality of universal idea§, considered as extrinsic to
the human mind and the freedom of will. These have
not ceased to occupy the thoughts of metaphysicians . 1

But all discovery of truth by means of these contro-

h Buhle, Hist. de la Philos. Modeme,
t. i. p. 723. This author raises upon the
whole a favourable notion of Anselm and
Aquinas ; but be hardly notices any other.

> Mr. Turner has with his character-
istic spirit of enterprise examined some
of the writings of our chief English
schoolmen, Duns Scotus and Ockham
(Hist, of Eng. vol. i.), and even given
Us some extracts from them. They seem
to me very frivolous, so far as I can col-
lect their meaning. Ockham in par-
ticular falls very short of what I had
expected ; and his nominalism is strangely
different from that of Berkeley. We
can hardly reckon a man in the right,
who is so by accident, and through so-
phistical reasoning. However, a well-
known article in the Edinburgh Review,
No. liii. p. 204, gives, from Tenne-
mann, a more favourable account of
Ockham.

Perhaps I may have imagined the
scholastics to be more forgotten than they
really are. Within a short time I have
met with four living English writers who
have read parts of Thomas Aquinas ; Mr.
Turner, Mr. Bertngton, Mr. Coleridge,

and the Edinburgh Reviewer. Still I
cannot bring myself to think that there
are four more in this country who can
say the same. Certain portions, how-
ever, of his writings are still read in the
course of instruction of some Catholic
universities.

[I leave this passage as it was written
about 1814. But it must be owned
with regard to the schoolmen, as well as
the jurists, that I at that time under-
rated, or at least did not anticipate, the
attention which their works have at-
tracted in modem Europe, and that the
passage in the text is more applicable to
the philosophy of the eighteenth century
than of the present For several years
past the metaphysicians of Germany
and France have brushed the dust from
the scholastic volumes ; Tennemann and
Buhle, Degerando, but more than all
Cousin and Rdmusat, in their excellent
labour* on Abelard, have restored the
mediaeval philosophy to a place in trans-
cendental metaphysics, which, during
the prevalence of the Cartesian school,
and those derived from it, had been
refused. 1848.J

State of Society. SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY.

429

versies was rendered hopeless by two msmmomtable
obstacles, the authority of Aristotle and that of the church.
Wherever obsequious reverence is substituted for bold
inquiry, truth, if she is not already at hand, will never
be attained. The scholastics did not understand Aris-
totle, whose original writings they could not read; k but
his name was received with implicit faith. They learned
his peculiar nomenclature, and fancied that he had given
them realities. The authority of the church did them
still more harm. It has been said, and probably with
much tmth, that their metaphysics were injurious to
their theology. But I must observe in return that their
theology was equally injurious to their metaphysics.
Their disputes continually turned upon questions either
involving absurdity and contradiction, or at best inscru-
table by human comprehension. Those who assert the
greatest antiquity of the Roman Catholic doctrine as to
the real presence, allow that both the word and the defi-
nition of transubstantiation are owing to the scholastic
writers. Their subtleties were not always so well re-
ceived. They reasoned at imminent peril of being
charged with heresy, which Roscelin, Abelard, Lombard,
and Ockham did not escape. In the virulent factions
that arose out of their metaphysical quarrels, either party
was eager to expose its adversary to detraction and per-
secution. The Nominalists were accused, one hardly
sees why, with reducing, like Sabellius, the persons of
the Trinity to modal distinctions. The Realists, with
more pretence, incurred the imputation of holding a
language that savoured of atheism . 411 In the controversy
which the Dominicans and Franciscans, disciples re-
spectively of Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus, main-
tained about grace and freewill, it was of course still

k Roger Bacon, by far the truest phi- egregious errors in both respects. And
losopher of the middle ages, complains of there is so much misapprehension and
the ignorance of Aristotle’s translators, obscurity in the Aristotelian writings as
Every translator, he observes, ought to thus translated, that no one understands
understand his author's subject, and the them. Opus Majus, p. 45.
two languages from which and into which m Brucker, p. 733, 912. Mr. Turner

he is to render the work. But none has fallen into some confusion as to this
hitherto, except Boethius, have suffi- point, and supposes the nominalist sys*
cJently known the languages; nor has tem to have had a pantheistical tendency,
one, except Robert (3 rostete (the famous not clearly apprehending its character-
bishop of Lincoln), had a competent ac- istics, p, 512.
quaintance with science. The rest make

430

SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY. Chap. IX. Part II.

more easy to deal in mutual reproaches of heterodoxy.
But the schoolmen were in general prudent enough not
to defy the censures of the church ; and the popes, in
return for the support they gave to all exorbitant pre-
tensions of the Holy See, connived at this factious
wrangling, which threatened no serious mischief, as it
did not proceed from any independent spirit of research.
Yet with all their apparent conformity to the received
creed, there was, as might he expected from the circum-
stances, a great deal of real deviation from orthodox)^
and even of infidelity. The scholastic mode of dispute,
admitting of no termination and producing no conviction,
was the sure cause of scepticism ; and the syst em of Aris-
totle, especially with the commentaries of Averroes, bore
an aspect very unfavourable to natural religion. 0 The
Aristotelian philosophy, even in the hands of the Master,
was like a barren tree that conceals its want of fruit by pro-
fusion of leaves. But the scholastic ontology was much
worse. What could be more trifling than disquisitions
about the nature of angels, their modes of operation,
their means of conversing, or (for these were distin-
guished) the morning and evening state of their under-
standings ?° Into such follies the schoolmen appear to
have launched, partly because there was less danger of
running against a heresy in a matter where the church
had defined so little— partly from their presumption,
which disdained all inquiries into the human mind, as
merely a part of physics — and in no small degree through
a spirit of mystical fanaticism, derived from the oriental
philosophy and the later Platonists, which blended itself
with the cold-blooded technicalities of the Aristotelian
school. p But this unproductive waste of the faculties

n Petrarch gives a curious account of have been introduced into Europe by
the irreiigion that prevailed among the John Scot us, whom Buble treats as the
learned at Venice and Padua, in con- founder of the scholastic philosophy ;
sequence of their unbounded admiration though, as it made no sensible progress
for Aristotle and Averroes. One of this for two centuries after his time, it seems
school, conversing with him, after ex* more natural to give that credit to Eos*
pressing much contempt for the Apostles ceiin and Anselm. Scotus, or Erigena,
and Fathers, exclaimed: Utinam tu as he is perhaps more frequently called,
Averroim pati posses, ut videres quanto took up, through the medium of a spu-
me tute his nugatoribus major sit ! Mem. rious work, ascribed to Dionysius the
de Pdtrarque, t ill p. 159. Tiraboschl, Areopagite, that remarkable system,
t v. p. 162. which has from time immemorial pre-

o Brucker, p. 898. vailed in some schools of the East,

P This mystical philosophy appears to wherein all external phenomena, as well

State of Society. SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY.

431

could not last for ever. Men discovered that they had
given their time for the promise of wisdom, and been
cheated in the bargain. What J ohn of Salisbury observes
of the Parisian dialecticians in his own time, that, after
several years' absence, he found them not a step ad-
vanced and still employed in urging and parrying the
same arguments, was equally applicable to the period of
centuries. After three or four hundred years, the scho-
lastics had not untied a single knot, nor added one
unequivocal truth to the domain of philosophy. As this
became more evident, the enthusiasm for that kind of
learning declined ; after the middle of the fourteenth
century few distinguished teachers arose among the
schoolmen, and at the revival of letters their pretended
science had no advocates left, but among the prejudiced
or ignorant adherents of established systems. How dif-
ferent is the state of genuine philosophy, the zeal for
which will never wear out by length of time or change
of fashion, because the inquirer, unrestrained by autho-
rity, is perpetually cheered by the discovery of truth in
researches, which the boundless riches of nature seem to
render indefinitely progressive ! q

Yet, upon a general consideration, the attention paid
in the universities to scholastic philosophy, may be
deemed a source of improvement in the intellectual
character, when wo compare it with the perfect igno-

as all subordinate intellects, are con*
# aidered as emanating from the Supreme
Being, into whose essence they are here-
after to be absorbed. This system, re-
produced under various modifications,
and combined with various theories of
philosophy and religion, is perhaps the
most congenial to the spirit of solitary
speculation, and consequently the most
extensively diffused of any which those
high themes have engendered. It ori-
ginated no doubt in sublime conceptions
of divine omnipotence and ubiquity.
But clearness of expression, or indeed of
ideas, being not easily connected with
mysticism, the language of philosophers
adopting the theory of emanation is
often hardly distinguishable from that of
the pantheists. Brucker, very unjustly,
as I imagine from the passages he quotes,
accuses John Erigena of pantheism.
Hist. Grit Philos, p. 620. The charge

would, however, be better grounded
against some whovse style might deceive
an unaccustomed reader. In fact, the
philosophy of emanation leads very nearly
to the doctrino of an universal substance,
which begot the atheistic system of Spi-
noza, and which appears to have revived
with similar consequences among the
metaphysicians of Germany. How very
closely the language of this oriental phi-
losophy, or even that which regards the
Deity as the soul of the world, may
verge upon pantheism, will be perceived
(without the trouble of reading the fimt
book of Cudworth) from two famous
passages of Virgil and Lucan. Georg.
1. iv. v. 219 ; and Pharsalia, 1. viii. v. 578.

<1 This subject, as well as some othere
in this part of the present chapter, has
been touched in my Introduction to the
Literature of. the 15th, 16th, and 17th
Centuries.

432 SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY. Chap. IX. Part IL

ranee of some preceding ages . Whether the same industry
' wuld hot have been more profitably directed if the love
of metaphysics had not intervened, is another question.
Bhljfclogy, or the principles of good taste, degenerated
through the prevalence of school-logic. The Latin com-
positions of the twelfth century are better than those of
the three that followed —at least on the northern side of
the Alps. I do not, however, conceive that any real
correctness of taste or general elegance of style was
likely to subsist in so imperfect a condition of society.
These qualities seem to require a certain harmonious
correspondence in the tone of manners before they can
establish a prevalent influence over literature. A more
real evil was the diverting of studious men from mathe-
matical science. * ** Early in the twelfth century several
persons, chiefly English, had brought into Europe some
of the Arabian writings on geometry and physics. In
the thirteenth the works of Euclid were commented upon
by Campano/ and Roger Bacon was fully acquainted with
them.* Algebra, as far as the Arabians knew it, ex-
tending to quadratic equations, was actually in the hands
of some Italians at the commencement of the same age,
and preserved for almost three hundred years as a secret,
though without any conception of its importance. As

* Tlraboschi, t Iv. p. I5<r.

• There is a very copious and sensible
account of Roger Bacon in Wood’s History
of Oxford, vol. i. p. 332 (Gutcb’s edition).
I am a little surprised that Antony should
have found out Bacon’s merit.

The resemblance between Roger Bacon
and his greater namesake is very re-
markable. Whether Lord Bacon ever
read the Opus Majus, I know not; but it
is singular, that his favourite quaint ex-
pression, prerogatives sdentiarum, should
be found in that work, though not used
with the same allusion to the Roman
comida. And whoever reads the sixth

**f>art of the Opus Majus, upon expe-
rimental science, must be struck by it as
the prototype, in spirit, of the Novum
Organum. The same sanguine and
sometimes rash confidence in the effect
of physical discoveries, the same fondness
for experiment, the same preference of
inductive to abstract reasoning, pervade
both works Roger Bacon’s pliiloso

phical spirit may be illustrated by the
following passage: Duo sunt modi cog-
noscendi; scilicet per argmnentum et
experimentum. Argumentum concludlt^
et facit nos conclndere qutestionm ; set!
non certiflcat neque removet dubitap
tionem, ut quiescat animus in intuitu
veritatis, nisi earn inveniat vitl expe-
riential ; quia multi habent argumenta
ad scibilia, sed quia non habent expe-
rientiam, negligunt ea, neque vltant no-
dva nec persequuntur bona. Si enirn
aliquis homo, qui nunquam vidit ignem,
probavit per argumenta suffidentia quod
ignis comburit et iaedit res et destruit,
nunquam propter hoc quiescerct animus
audientis, nec ignem vitaret antequam
poneret manum vel rem combustibilem
ad ignem, ut per experientiam pro-
baret quod argumentum edocebat ; sed
assumtA experientlA corahustionis cer-
tificatur animus et quiesdt in fulgore
veritatis, quo argumentum non sufficit,
sed experientia. p. 446.

;jtate of Society. THE ROMANCE LANGUAGE.

433

abstract mathematics require no collateral aid, they may
reach the highest perfection in ages of general barbarism ; -
and there seems to be no reason why, if the qiemrse of
study had been directed that way, there should not have
arisen a Newton or a La Place, instead of an Aquinas or
an Ockham. The knowledge displayed by Roger ‘Bacon
and by Albertus Magnus, even in the mixed mathematics,
under every disadvantage from the imperfection of instru-
ments and the want of recorded experience, is sufficient
to inspire us with regret that their contemporaries were
more inclined to astonishment than to emulation. These
inquiries indeed were subject to the ordeal of fire, the
great purifier of books and men ; for if the metaphysician
stood a chance of being burned as a heretic, the natural
philosopher was in not less jeopardy as a magician. 1

A far more substantial cause of intellectual improve-
ment was the development of those new lan- _ 1A . .

guages that sprang out ot the corruption of of the new
Latin. For three or four centuries after what langimgey>
was called the Romance tongue was spoken in France,
there remain but few vestiges of its employment in
writing ; though we cannot draw an absolute ^
inference from our want ol proof, and a critic t he Romance
of much authority supposes translations to tongue mu)
have been made into it for religious purposes
from the time of Charlemagne. 11 During this period the
language was split into two very separate dialects, the
regions of which may be considered, though by no
means strictly, as divided by the Loire. These were
called the Langue d’Oil and the Langue d’Oc ; or in
more modem terms, the French and Provencal dialects.
In the latter of these I know of nothing which can even
by name be traced beyond the year 1100. About that
time Gregory de Bechada, a gentleman of Limousin,
recorded the memorable events of the first crusade, then
recent, in a metrical history of great length/ This

t See the fate of Cecco d’Ascoli in matemft linguft rhythmo vulgar!, ut po-
Tiraboschi, t. v. p. 174. pulus pleniter intelligent, ingens volu-

u Le Bceuf, Mdm. de l’Aoad. des men decenter composuit, et ut vera et
Inscript t xvii p. 711. faceta verba proferret, duodecim annorum

* Gregorius, cognomento Bechada, de spatium super hoc opus operam dedit
Castro de Turribus, profession® miles, Ne verd vilesceret propter vcrbum vul-
aubtiU»siiniiugeniivir,aliquantulum im- gare, non sine pra?oepto episcopi Eus-
bntus Uteris, horum gesta prceUorum torgii, et consilio Gauberti Normam-d*

VOL. III. 2 F

434

TROUBADOURS.

Chap. IX.. Part IL

poem has altogether perished ; which, considering the
popularity of its subject, as M. Sismondi justly remarks,
would probably not Lave been the case if* it had pos-
sessed any merit. But very soon afterwards a multi-
tude of poets, like a swarm of summer insects, appeared
Troubadours ha the southern provinces of France. These
of Provence, were the celebrated Troubadours, whose fame
depends far less on their positive excellence than on
the darkness of preceding ages, on the temporary sensa-
tion they excited, and their permanent influence on the
state of European poetry. From William count of
Poitou, the earliest troubadour on record, who died in
1126, to their extinction, about the end of the next cen-
tury, there were probably several hundred of these
versifiers in the language of Provence, though not always
natives of France. Millot has published the lives of one
hundred and forty-two, besides the names of many more
whose history is unknown ; and a still greater number,
it cannot be doubted, are unknown by name. Among
those poets are reckoned a king of England (KichardL),
two of Aragon, one of Sicily, a dauphin of Auvergne, a
count of Foix, a prince of Orange, many noblemen and
several ladies. One can hardly pretend to account for
this sudden and transitory love of verse ; hut it is mani-
festly one symptom of the rapid impulse which the
human mind received in the twelfth century, and con-
temporaneous with the severer studies that began to
flourish in the universities. It was encouraged by the
prosperity of Languedoc and Provence, undisturbed,
comparatively with other countries, by internal warfare,
and disposed by the temper of their inhabitants to feel
with voluptuous sensibility the charm of music and
amorous poetry. But the tremendous storm that fell
upon Languedoc in the crusade against the Albigeois
shook off the flowers of Provencal verse ; and the final
extinction of the fief of Toulouse, with the removal of
the counts of Provence to Naples, deprived the trou-
badours of their most eminent patrons. An attempt
was made in the next century to revive them, by distri-
buting prizes for the best composition in the Floral
Games of Toulouse, which have sometimes been errone-

hoc opus aggressm eat I transcribe this 447; whose reference is to LabW, BI*
from Heeren's Essai sur les Crolsades, p. bliotheca nova BISS, t li. j>. 29®.

State op Society.

TROUBADOURS.

435

ously referred to a higher antiquity/ This institution

S erhaps still remains ; but even in its earliest period it
id not establish the name of any Provencal poet. Nor
can wo deem these fantastical solemnities, styled Courts
of Love, where ridiculous questions of metaphysical
gallantry were debated by poetical advocates, under
the presidency and arbitration of certain ladies, much
calculated to bring forward any genuine excellence.
They illustrate, however, what is more immediately my
own object, the general ardour for poetry and the man-
ners of those chivalrous ages . 2

The great reputation acquired by the troubadours, and
panegyrics lavished on some of them by Dante Thdr
and Petrarch, excited a curiosity among literary <*i e c L£° e *
men, which has been a good deal disappointed racter *
by further acquaintance. An excellent French anti-
quary of the last ago, La Cume de St. Palaye, *spent
great part of his life in accumulating manuscripts of
Provencal poetry, very little of which had ever been
printed. Translations from part of this collection, with
memorials of the waiters, were published by Millot ; and
we certainly do not often meet with passages in his
three volumes which give us any poetical pleasure/
Some of the original poems have since been published,
and the extracts made from them by the recent histo-
rians of southern literature are rather superior. The
troubadours chiefly confined themselves to subjects of
Jove, or rather gallantry, and to satires (sirventes),
which are sometimes keen and spirited. No romances
of chivalry, and hardly any tales, are found among their
works. There seems a general deficiency of imagination,
and especially of that vivid description which distin-
guishes works of genius in the rudest period of society.
In the poetry of sentiment, their favourite province,
they seldom attain any natural expression, and con-
sequently produce no interest. I speak, of course, on
the presumption that the best specimens have been ex-

y De Sade, Vie de Pdtrarque r t ip. 155. hate never had patience to look at the
Siamondi, Litt du Midi, t. i p. 228. older writers who have treated thte tire-
* For the Courts of Love, see De Bade, some enttfect
Vie de Pdtrarque, t ii. note 19. Le * Histoire Littdraire dee Troubadours.
Grand, Fabliaux, t i. p. 270. Roquefort, Paris, 17*74.

Etat de la Podsie Fran^ise, p. 94. I

436

NORTHERN FRENCH

Chap. IX. Fart II.

hibited by those who have undertaken the task. It
must be allowed, however, that we cannot judge of the
troubadours at a greater disadvantage than through the
prose translations of Millot. Their poetry was entirely
of that class which is allied to music, and excites the
fancy or feelings rather by the power of sound than any
stimulancy of imagery and passion. Possessing a
flexible and harmonious language, they invented a
variety of metrical arrangements, perfectly new to the
nations of Europe. The Latin hymns were striking, but
monotonous, the metre of the northern French unvaried ;
but in Provencal poetry, almost every length of verse,
from two syllables to twelve, and the most intricate dis-
position of rhymes, were at the choice of the troubadour.
The canzoni, the sestine, all the lyric metres of Italy and
Spain were borrowed from his treasury. With such a
command of poetical sounds, it was natural that he
should inspire delight into ears not yet rendered familiar
to the artifices of verse ; and even now the fragments of
these ancient lays, quoted by M. Sismondi and M. Gin-
guene, seem to possess a sort of chaim that has eva-
porated in translation. Upon this harmony, and upon
the facility with which mankind are apt to be deluded
into an admiration of exaggerated sentiment in poetry,
they depended for their influence. And however vapid
the songs of Provence may seem to our apprehensions,
they were undoubtedly the source from which poetry
for many centuries derived a great portion of its habi-
tual language. 5

It has been maintained by some antiquaries, that the
Northern I10 ^ ern Romance, or what we properly call
French 11 French, was not formed until the tenth century,
P rose y 4111(1 common dialect of all France having pre-
p b * viously resembled that of Languedoc. This

h Two very modern French writers, not imputable to himself, though Ritson,
M. Ginguend (Histoire Littoraire d'ltalie, as I remember, calls him, in his own
Paris, 1 811) and M. Sismondi (Literature polite style, “a blockhead/’ it will always
du Midi de l’Europe, Paris, 1813), have be useful to the inquirer into the manners
revived the poetical history of the trou- and opinions of the middle ages, from the
badours. To them, still more than to numerous illustrations it contains of two
Millot and Tiraboschi, I would acknow- general facts; the extreme dissoluteness
ledge my obligations for the little I have of morals among the higher ranks, and
learned in respect of this forgotten school the prevailing animosity of all classes
of poetry. Notwithstanding, however, against the clergy,
the heaviness of Millot’s work, a fault

State of Society 1 . POETRY AND PROSE. 437

hypothesis may not be indisputable ; but the question is
not likely to be settled, as scarcely any written specimens
of Romance, even of that age, have survived. 0 In the
eleventh century, among other more obscure productions,
both in prose and metre, there appears what, if unques-
tioned as to authenticity, would be a valuable monument
of this language ; the laws of William the Conqueror.
These are preserved in a manuscript of lngulfus’s.
History of Croyland, a blank being left in other copies
where they should be inserted. 11 They are written in an
idiom so far removed from the Provencal, that one would
be disposed to think the separation between these two
species of Romance of older standing than is commonly
allowed. But it has been thought probable that these
laws, which in fact were nearly a repetition of those of
Edward the Confessor, were originally published in
Anglo-Saxon, the only language intelligible to the people,
and translated, at a subsequent period, by some Norman
monk into French. 6

The use of a popular language became more common
after the year 1100. Translations of some books of
Scripture and acts of saints were made about that time,
or even earlier, and there are French sermons of St.
Bernard, from which extracts have been published, in
the royal library at Paris. 1 ' In 1126, a charter was
granted by Louis YI. to the city of Beauvais in French. 8

c Hist. Litt de la France, t vii. p. 58.
Le Boeuf, according to these Benedictines,
has published some poetical fragments of
the tenth century ; and they quote part
of a charter as old as 940 in Romance,
p. 59. But that antiquary, in a memoir
printed in the seventeenth volume of the
Academy of Inscriptions, which throws
more light on the infancy of the French
language than anything within my know-
ledge, says only that the earliest speci-
mens of verse in the royal library are of
the eleventh century au plus tard. p. 7 1 7 .
M. de la Rue is said to have found some
poems of the eleventh century in the
British Museum, Roquefort, Etat de la
Podsie Fran^oise, p. 206. Le Boeuf s
fragment may be found in this work,
p. 379 ; it seems nearer to the Provenpal
than the French dialect
d Gale, XV Script, t. i. p. 88.

e Ritson’s Dissertation on Romance,
p. 66. [The laws of William the Con-
queror, published in Ingulfus, are trans-
lated from a Latin original ; the French
is of the thirteenth century. It is now
doubted whether any French, except a
fragment of a translation of Boethius, in
verse, is extant of an earlier age than the
twelfth. Introduction to Hist of Literal,
3rd edit. p. 28.]

f Hist Litt. t. ix. p. 149 ; Fabliaux par
Barbasan, vol. i. p. 9, edit 1808; Mdm.
de l’Acaddmie des Inscr. t. xv. and xvii.
p. 714, &c.

8 Mabillon speaks of this as the oldest
French instrument he had seen. But the
Benedictines quote some of the eleventh
century. Hist. Litt. t vii. p. 59. This
charter is supposed by the authors of
Nouveau Traitd de Diplomatique to be
translated from the Latin, t. iv. p. 519.

French

438 FRENCH METRICAL TRANSLATIONS. Chap. IX. Part II.

Metrical compositions are in general the first literature
of a nation, and even if no distinct proof could be
adduced, we might assume their existence before the
twelfth century. There is however evidence, not to
mention the fragments printed by Le Bceuf, of certain
lives, of saints translated into French verse by Thibault
de Vernon, a canon of Rouen, before the middle of the
preceding age. And we are told that Taillefer, a
Norman minstrel, recited a song or romance on the deeds
of Roland, before the army of his countrymen, at the
battle of Hastings in 1066. Philip de Than, a Norman
subject of Henry I., seems to be the earliest poet whose
works as well as name have reached us, unless we admit
a French translation of the work of one Marbode upon
precious stones to be more ancient.* 1 This De Than
wrote a set of rules for computation of time and an
account of different calendars. A happy theme for in-
spiration without doubt ! Another performance of the
same author is a treatise on birds and beasts, dedicated
to Adelaide, queen of Henry I. 1 But a more famous
votary of the muses was Wace, a native of Jersey, who
about the beginning of Henry II.’s reign turned Geoffrey
of Monmouth’s history into French metre. Besides this
poem, called le Brut d’Angleterre, he composed a series
of metrical histories, containing the transactions of the
dukes of Normandy, from Kollo, their great progenitor,
who gave name to the Roman de Rou, down to his own
age. Other productions are ascribed to Wace, who was
at least a prolific versifier, and, if he seem to deserve no
higher title at present, has a claim to indulgence, and
even to esteem, as having far excelled his contempo-
raries, without any superior advantages of knowledge.
In emulation, however, of his fame, several Norman
writers addicted themselves to composing chronicles, or
devotional treatises in metre. The court of our Norman
kings was to the early poets in the Langue d’Oil, what
those of Arles and Toulouse were to the troubadours.
Henry I. was fond enough of literature to obtain the

French charters, they say, are not com- his reign, but hardly ever before.
mon before the age of Louis IX.; and h Ravalifere, R^vol. de la Langue Fran-
this is confirmed by those published 9oise, p. 116 , doubts the age of this trails-
In Martenne’s Thesaurus Anecdotorum, lation.

which are very commonly in French from i Archeeologia, vols. xii. and xiii.

State op Society. NORMAN ROMANCES AND TALES. 430

surname of Beauclerc ; Henry II. was more indisputably
an encourager of poetry ; and Kiehard I. has left compo-
sitions of his own in one or other (for the point is doubt-
ful) of the two dialects spoken in France.

If the poets of Normandy had never gone beyond
historical and religious subjects, they would probably
have had less claim to our attention than their brethren
of Provence. But a different, and far more Nomiftll T0 .
interesting species of composition began to be manoes and
cultivated in the latter part of the twelfth cen- tales *
tury. Without entering upon the controverted question
as to the origin of romantic fictions, referred by one
party to the Scandinavians, by a second to the Arabs, by
others to the natives of Britany, it is manifest that the
actual stories upon which one early and numerous class
of romances was founded are related to the traditions of
the last people. These are such as turn upon the fable
of Arthur ; for though wo are not entitled to deny the
existence of such a personage, his story seems chiefly the
creation of Celtic vanity. Traditions current in Britany,
though probably derived from this island, became the
basis of Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Latin prose, which, as
has been seen, was transfused into French metre by
Wace. m The vicinity of Normandy enabled its poets to
enrich their narratives with other Armorican fictions, all
relating to the heroes who had surrounded the table of
the son of Uther.“ An equally imaginary history of

k Millofc says that Richard's sirventes
(satirioal songs) have appeared in French
as well as Prove^al, but that the former
is probably a translation. Hist, des
Troubadours, voL i. p. 54. Yet I have
met with no writer who quotes them in
the. latter language, and M. Ginguend,
as well as Le Grand d’Aussy, considers
Richard as a trouveur.

[Raynouard has since published, in
Proven 9 al, the song of Richard on his
captivity, which had several times ap-
peared in French. It Is not improbable
that he wrote it in both dialects. Leroux
de Lincy, Chants Historiques Fran^ais,
voL i. p. 55. Richard also composed
verees in the Poitevin dialect, spoken at
that time in Maine and Anjou, which
resembles the Langue d’Oc more than
that of northern France, though, espe-

cially in the latter countries, it gave way
not long afterwards. Id. p. 77.]
m This derivation of the romantic
stories of Arthur, which Le Grand
d’Aussy ridiculously attributes to the
Jealousy entertained by the English of
the renown of Charlemagne, is stated in a
very perspicuous and satisfactory manner
by Mr, Ellis, in his Specimens of Early
English Metrical Romances.

n [Though the stories of Arthur were
not invented by the English out of jea-
lousy of Charlemagne, it has been inge-
niously conjectured and rendered highly
probable by Mr. Sharon Turner, that the
history by Geoffrey of Monmouth was
composed with a political view to dis-
play the independence and dignity of the
British crown, and was intended, conse-
quently, as a counterpoise to that of

440 ROMAN DE LA ROSE. Chap. IX. Part II.

Charlemagne gave rise to a new family of romances*
The authors of these fictions were called Trouveurs, a
name obviously identical with that of Troubadours.
But except in name there was no resemblance between
the minstrels of the northern and southern dtelecjte The
invention of one class was turned to description, that of
the other to sentiment ; the first were epic in their form
and style, the latter almost always lyric. We cannot
perhaps give a better notion, of their dissimilitude, than
by saying that one school produced Chaucer, and the
other Petrarch. Besides these' romances of chivalry, the*
trouveurs displayed their powers of lively narration in
comic tales or fabliaux, (a name sometimes extended to
the higher romance,) which have aided the imagination
of Boccace and La Fontaine. These compositions are
certainly more entertaining than those of the trouba-
dours ; but, contrary to what I have said of the latter,
they often gain by appearing in a modern dress. Their
versification, which doubtless had its charm when
listened to around the hearth of an ancient castle, is very
languid and prosaic, and suitable enough to the tedious
prolixity into which the narrati ve is apt to fall ; and
though we find many sallies of that arch and sprightly
simplicity which characterizes the old language of
France as well as England, it requires, upon the whole,
a factitious taste to relish these N orman tales, considered
as poetry in the higher sense of the word, distinguished
from metrical fiction.

A manner very different from that of the fabliaux was
Roman de la adopted in the Roman de la Rose, begun by
Ro«e. William de Loris about 1250, and completed by
John de Meun half a century later. This poem, which
contains about 10,000 lines in the usual octo-syllable
verse, from which the early French writers seldom
deviated, is an allegorical vision, whorein love and the
other passions or qualities connected with it pass over
the stage, without the intervention, I believe, of any less
abstract personages. Though similar allegories were not
unknown to the ancients, and, which is more to the pur-
pose, maybe found in other productions of the thirteenth

Turpin, which never became popular in much from Armorican traditions as lie
England. It is doubtful, in my judg- pretended.1
ment, whether Geoffrey borrowed ao

State of Society*. WORKS IN FRENCH PROSE. 441

century, none had been constructed so elaborately as
that of the Roman de la Rose. Cold and tedious as we
now consider this species of poetry, it originated in the
creative power of imagination, and appealed to more
refined feeling than the common metrical jiarratives could
excite. This poem was highly popular in the middle
ages, aiid became the source of those numerous allegories
which had not ceased in the seventeenth century.

The French language was employed in prose m well
as in metro. Indeed it seems to have had Worte ^
almost an exclusive privilege in this respect. French
“The language of Oil,” says Dante, in his prose ’
treatise on vulgar speech, “ prefers its claim to be ranked
above those of Oc and Si (Provencal and Italian), on the
ground that all translations or compositions in prose have
been written therein, from its greater facility and grace,
such as the books compiled from the Trojan and Roman
stories, the delightful fables about Arthur, and many
other works of history and, science.” ° I have mentioned
already the sermons of St. Bernard and translations from
Scripture. The laws of the kingdom of Jerusalem pur-
port to have been drawn up immediately after the first
crusade, and though their language has been materially
altered, there seems no doubt that they were originally
compiled in French.? Besides some charters, there are
said to have been prose romances before the year 1200. q
Early in the next age Yille Hardouin, seneschal of Cam-
•pagne, recorded the capture of Constantinople in the
fourth crusade, an expedition, the glory and reward of

0 Prose e Rime di Dante, Venez. 175R,
t. iv. p. 261. Dante’s words, biblia cum
Trojanorum Romanorumque gestibus
com pi lata, seem to bear no other mean-
ing than what I have given. But there
may be a doubt whether biblia is ever
used except for the Scriptures ; and the
Italian translator renders it, ciofc la bibbia,
i fatti de i Trojani, e de i Romani. In
this case something is wrong in the ori-
ginal Latin, and Dante will have alluded
to the translations of parts of Scripture
made into French, as mentioned in the
tekt.

P The A ssises de Jerusalem have under-
gone two revisions; one, in 1250, by
order of John d’lbelin, count of Jaffa,

and a second in 1369, by sixteen com-
missioners chosen by the states of the
kingdom of Cyprus. Their language
seems to be such as might be expected
from the time of the former revision.

9 Several prose romances were written
or translated from the Latin about 1170,
and afterwards. JMr Ellis seems in-
clined to dispute their antiquity. But,
besides the authorities of La Ravalibre
and Tressan, the latter of which is not
worth much, a late very extensively in-
formed writer seems to have put this
matter out of doubt. Roquefort Fla-
mericourt, Etat de la Podsie Fran9ai.se
dans les 12 me et 13 1 * 16 sifccies, Paris, 1815,
p. 147.

442

SPANISH LANGUAGE.

Chap. IX. Part II,

which, he had personally shared, and, as every original
work of prior date has either perished or is of small
importance, may be deemed the father of French prose.
The Establishments of St. Louis, and the law treatise of
Beaumanoir, fill up the interval of the thirteenth century,
and before its conclusion we must suppose the excellent
memoirs of Joinville to have been composed, since they
are dedicated to Louis X. in 1315, when the author could
hardly be less than ninety years of age. Without prose-
cuting any further the history of French literature, I
will only mention the translations of Livy and Sallust,
made in the reign and by the order of John, with those
of Caesar, Suetonius, Ovid, and parts of Cicero, which are
due to his successor Charles V. r

I confess myself wholly uninformed as to the original
Spanish formation of the Spanish language, and as to
language, the epoch of its separation into the two prin-
cipal dialects of Castile and Portugal, or Gallicia ; # nor
should I perhaps have alluded to the literature of that
peninsula, were it not for a remarkable poem which
shines out among the minor lights of those times. This
is a metrical life of the Cid Buy Diaz, written in a bar-
barous style and with the rudest inequality of measure,
but with a truly Homeric warmth and vivacity of de-
lineation. It is much to be regretted that the author’s
name has perished; but its date has been referred by
some to the middle of the twelfth century, while the
hero’s, actions were yet recent, and before the taste of

r Villaret, Hist, de France, t. xi. p. 121 ;
De Sade, Vie de Pdtrarque, t. iii. p. 648.
Charles V. had more learning than most
princes of his time. Christine de Pisan,
a lady who has written memoirs, or
rather an eulogy of him. says that his
father le fist introdire en lettres moult
suffisamment, et tant que competemment
entendoit son Latin, et souffisamment
scavoit les regies de grammaire ; la quelle
chose pleust a dieu qu’ainsi fust accou-
tumde entre les princes. Collect, de M&n.
t v. p. 103, 190, kc.

9 The earliest Spanish that I remember
to have seen is an instrument in Mar-
tenne, Thesaurus Anecdotorum, t. i. p.
263 ; the date of which is 1095. Persons
more conversant with the antiquities of

that country may possibly go further
back. Another of 1101 is published in
Marina’s Teoria de las Cortes, t. iii. p. 1.
It is in a Vidimus by Peter the Cruel,
and cannot, I presume, have been a trans-
lation from the Latin. Yet the editors
of Nouveau Tr. de Diplom. mention a
charter of 1243, as the earliest they are
acquainted with in the Spanish language,
t iv. p. 625.

Charters in the German language, ac-
cording to the same work, first appear
in the time of the emperor Rodolpb,
after 1272, and became usual in the
next century, p. 523. But Struvius
mentions an instrument of 1235, as the
earliest in German. Corp. Hist Germ,
p. 457.

State of Society. EARLY ITALIAN WRITERS.

443

Spain had been corrupted by the Provengal troubadours,
whose extremely different manner would, if it did not

f iervert the poet’s genius, at least have impeded his popu-
arity. A very competent judge has pronounced the
poem of the Cid to be “ decidedly and beyond comparison
the finest in the Spanish language.” It is at least supe-
rior to any that was written in Europe before the appear-
ance of Dante.*

A strange obscurity envelops the infancy of the Italian
language. Though it is certain that gram- E
matical Latin had ceased to be employed in writers in
ordinary discourse, at least from the time of theltalian *
Charlemagne, we have not a single passage of undisputed
authenticity, in the current idiom, for nearly four cen-
turies afterwards. Though Italian phrases are mixed up
in the barbarous jargon of some charters, not an instru-
ment is extant in that language before the year 1200,
unless we . may reckon one in the Sardinian dialect
(which I believe was rather Provencal than Italian),
noticed by Muratori. u Nor is there a vestige of Italian
poetry older than a few fragments of Ciullo d’Alcamo, a
Sicilian, who must have written before 1193, since he
mentions Saladin as then living.* This may strike us as
the more remarkable, when we consider the political
circumstances of Italy in the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies. From the struggles of her spirited republics
against the emperors and their internal factions, we
jnight, upon all general reasoning, anticipate the early
use and vigorous cultivation of their native language.
Even if it were not yet ripe for historians and philo-
sophers, it is strange that no poet should have been
inspired with songs of triumph or invective by the various
fortunes of his country. But, on the contrary, the poets of
Lombardy became troubadours, and wasted their genius
in Provencal love strains at the courts of princes. The

* An extract from this poem was pub- sages in the third volume of his History
lished in 1808 by Mr. Southey, at the of Southern Literature. This popular and
end of his “ Chronicle of the Cid,” the elegant work contains some interestingv
materials of which it partly supplied, and not very common information as to
accompanied by an excellent version by the early Spanish poets in the Provencal
a gentleman, who is distinguished, among dialect, as well as those who wrote in
many other talents, for an unrivalled Castilian,
felicity in expressing the peculiar manner u Dissert. 32.
of authors whom he translates or imi- x Tirabosclii, t. iv. p. 340.
tates. M. Sismondi has given other pas-

444

EARLY ITALIAN WRITERS.

Chap. IX. Part II.

Milanese and other Lombard dialects were, indeed, ex-
ceedingly rude ; but this rudeness separated them more
decidedly from Latin : nor is it possible that the Lom-
bards could have employed that language intelligibly for
any public or domestic purpose. And indeed in the
earliest Italian compositions that have been published,
the new language is so thoroughly formed, that it is
natural to infer a very long disuse of that from which it
was derived. The Sicilians claim the glory of having
first adapted their own harmonious dialect to poetry.
Frederic II. both encouraged their art and cultivated it ;
among the very first essays of Italian verse we find his
productions and those of his chancellor Piero delle Vigne.
Thus Italy was destined to owe the beginnings of her
national literature to a foreigner and an enemy. These
poems are very short and few; those ascribed to St.
Francis about the same time are hardly distinguishable
from prose ; but after the middle of the thirteenth century
the Tuscan poets awoke to a sense of the beauties which
their native language, refined from the impurities of
vulgar speech/ could display, and the genius of Italian
literature was rocked upon the restless waves of the
Florentine democracy. Kicordano Malespini, the first
historian, and nearly the first prose writer in Italian,
left memorials of the republic down to the year 1281,
which was that of his death, and it was continued by
Giacchetto Malespini to 1286. These are little inferior
in purity of style to the best Tuscan authors ; for it i$
the singular fate of that language to have spared itself
all intermediate stages of refinement, and, starting the
last in the race, to have arrived almost instantaneously
at the goal. There is an interval of not much more than
half a century between the short fragment of Ciullo
d’Alcamo, mentioned above, and the poems of Guido
Guinizzelli, Guitone d’Arezzo, and Guido Cavalcante,

r Dante, in his treatise De vulgari Eio- Allowing for the metaphysical obsni-
quentift, reckons fourteen or fifteen dia- rity in which Dante chooses to envelop
lects, spoken in different parte of Italy, the subject, this might perhaps be said
all of which were debased by impure at present. The Florentine dialect has
modes of expression. But the “noble, its peculiarities, which diatinguish it from
principal, and courtly Italian idiom,” was the general Italian language, though
that which belonged to every city, and these are seldom discerned by foreigners,
seemed to belong to none, and which, if nor always by natives, with whom Tus-
Italy had a court, would be the language can is the proper denomination of their
of tliat court p. 274, 277. national tongue.

State op Society.

DANTE.

445

which, in their diction and turn of thought, are some-
times not unworthy of-Petrarch.*

But at the beginning of the next age arose a much
greater genius, the true father of Italian poetry,
and the first name in the literature of the middle Dante *
ages. This was Dante, or Durante Alighieri, bom in
1205, of a respectable family at Florence. Attached to
the Guelf party, which had then obtained a final ascend-
ency over its rival, he might justly promise himself the
natural reward of talents under a free government, public
trust and the esteem of his compatriots. But the Guelfs
unhappily were split into two factions, the Bianchi and the
Neri, with the former of whom, and, as it proved, the
unsuccessful side, Danto was connected. In 1300 he
filled the office of one of the Priori, or chief magistrates
at Florence ; and having manifested in this, as was
alleged, some partiality towards the Bianchi, a sentence
of proscription passed against him about two years after-
wards, when it became the turn of the opposite faction to
triumph. Banished from his country, and baffled in
several efforts of his friends to restore their fortunes, he
had no resource but at the courts of the Scalas at Verona,
and other Italian princes, attaching himself in adversity
to the Imperial interests, and tasting, in his own lan-
guage, the bitterness of another’s bread.* In this state of
exile he finished, if he did not commence, his great
poem, the Divine Comedy ; a representation of the three
kingdoms of futurity, Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise,
divided into one hundred cantos, and containing about
14,000 lines. He died at Ravenna in 1321.

* Tirabosehl, t. iv. p. 309-377. Gin-
guend, vol. i. c. 6. The stylo of the
Vita Nuova of Dante, written soon after
the death of his Beatrice, which hap-
pened in 1290, is hardly distinguishable,
by a foreigner, from that of Machiavel
or Castiglione. Yet so recent was the
adoption of this language, that the cele-
brated master of Dante, Brunetto Latini,
had written his Tesoro in French ; and
gives as a reason for it, that it was a
more agreeable and useful language than
hds own. Et se aucuns demandoit pour-
quoi chis livre est ecris en Romans, selon
la raison de France, pour chose que nous
summes Ytalien, je diroie que ch’est pour

chose que nous sommes en France;
l'autre pour chose que la parletire en est
plus delitable et plus commune a toutes
gems. There is said to be a manuscript
history of Venice down to 1275, in the
Florentine library, written in French by
Martin de Canale, who says that he has
chosen that language, pareeque la langue
franceise cort parmi le monde, et est la
plus delitable a lire et a oir que nulle
autre. Ginguend, vol. i. p. 384.

* Tu proverai si (says Cacciaguida to
him) come sa di sale
II pane altrui, e come h duro calle
II scendere e T salir per altrui scale.

Paradis, cant. 16.

446

DANTE.

Chap. IX. Part II.

Dante is among the very few who have created the
national poetry of their country. For notwithstanding
the polished elegance of some earlier Italian verse, it had
been confined to amorous sentiment ; and it was yet to be
seen that the language could sustain, for a greater length
than any existing poem except the Iliad, the varied style
of narration, reasoning, and ornament. Of all writers he
is the most unquestionably original. Virgil was indeed
his inspiring genius, as he declares himself, and as may
so m etimes be perceived in his diction j but his tone is so
peculiar and characteristic, that few readers would be
willing at first to acknowledge any resemblance. He
possessed, in an extraordinary degree, a command of
language, the abuse of which led to his obscurity and
licentious innovations. No poet ever excelled him in
conciseness, and in the rare talent of finishing his pictures
by a few bold touches ; the merit of Pindar in his better
hours. How prolix would the stories of Francesca or of
Ugolino have become in the hands of Ariosto, or of Tasso,
or of Ovid, or of Spenser ! This excellence indeed is
most striking in the first part of his poem. Having
formed his plan so as to give an equal length to the three
regions of his spiritual world, he found himself unable to
vary the images of hope or beatitude, and the Paradise is
a continual accumulation of descriptions, separately
beautiful, but uniform and tedious. Though images
derived from light and music are the most pleasing, and
can be borne longer in poetry than any others, their
sweetness palls upon the sense by frequent repetition,
and we require the intermixture of sharper flavours. Yet
there are detached passages of great excellence in this
third part of Dante’s poem ; and even in the long theo-
logical discussions which occupy the greater proportion
of its thirty-three cantos, it is impossible not to admire
the enunciation of abstract positions with remarkable
energy, conciseness, and sometimes perspicuity. The
first twelve cantos of the Purgatory are an almost con-
tinual flow of soft and brilliant poetry. The last seven
are also very splendid ; but there is some heaviness in
the intermediate parts. Fame has justly given the pre-
ference to the Inferno, which displays throughout a more
vigorous and masterly conception ; but the mind of
Dante cannot be thoroughly appreciated without a perusal
of his entire poem.

State of Society.

DANTE.

447

The most forced and unnatural turns, the most bar-
barous licences of idiom, are found in this poet, whose
power of expression is at other times so peculiarly happy.
His style is indeed generally free from those conceits of
thought which discredited the other poets of his country ;
but no sense is too remote for a word which he finds
convenient for his measure or his rhyme. It seems
indeed as if ho never altered a line on account of
the necessity of rhyme, but forced another, or perhaps a
third, into company with it. For many of his faults no
sufficient excuse can be made. But it is candid to
remember, that Dante, writing almost in the infancy of a
language which he contributed to create, was not to
anticipate that words which he borrowed from the Latin,
and from the provincial dialects, would by accident, or
through the timidity of later writers, lose their place in
the classical idiom of Italy. If Petrarch, Bembo, and a
few more, had not aimed rather at purity than copious-
ness, the phrases which now appear barbarous, and are
at least obsolete, might have been fixed by use in poetical
language.

The great characteristic excellence of Dante is eleva-
tion of sentiment, to which his compressed diction and
the emphatic cadences of his measure admirably corre-
spond. We read him, not as an amusing poet, but as a
master of moral wisdom, with reverence and awe. Fresh
from the deep and serious, though somewhat barren
studies of philosophy, and schooled in the severer disci-
pline of experience, he has made of his poem a mirror of
his mind and life, the register of his solicitudes and
sorrows, and of the speculations in which he sought to
escape their recollection. The banished magistrate of
Florence, the disciple of Brunetto Latini, the statesman
accustomed to trace the varying fluctuations of Italian
faction, is for ever before our eyes. For this reason,
even the prodigal display of erudition, which in an epic
poem would be entirely misplaced, increases the respect
we feel for the poet, though it does not tend to the
reader’s gratification. Except Milton, he is much the
most learned of all the great poets, and, relatively to his
age, far more learned than Milton. In one so highly
endowed by nature, and so consummate by instruction,
we may well sympathise with a resentment which exile
and poverty rendered perpetually fresh. The heart of

448

DANTE.

Chap. IX. Part II.

Dante was naturally sensible, and even tender ; his poetry
. is full of simple comparisons from rural life ; and the
sincerity of his early passion for Beatrice pierces through
the veil of allegory which surrounds her. But the
memory of his injuries pursues him into the immensity
of eternal light; and, in the company of saints and
angels, his unforgiving spirit darkens at the name of
Florence. 6

This great poem was received in Italy with that enthu-
siastic admiration which attaches itself to works of genius
only in ages too rude to listen to the envy of competitors,
or the fastidiousness of critics. Almost every library in
that country contains manuscript copies of the Divine
Comedy, and an account of those who have abridged or
commented upon it would swell to a volume. It was
thrice printed in the year 1472, and at least nine times
within the fifteenth century. The city of Florence in
1373, with a magnanimity which almost redeems her
original injustice, appointed a public professor to read
lectures upon Dante ; and it was hardly less honourable
to the poet's memory that the first person selected for
this office was Boccaccio. The universities of Pisa and
Piacenza imitated this example ; but it is probable that
Dante’s abstruse philosophy was often more regarded in
their chairs than his higher excellences. 0 Italy indeed,
and all Europe, had reason to be proud of such a master.
Since Claudian, there had been seen for nine hundred
years no considerable body of poetry, except the Spanish
poem of the Cid, of which no one had heard beyond the
peninsula, that could be said to pass mediocrity ; and we
must go much further back than Claudian to find any one
capable of being compared with Dante. His appearance
made an epoch in the intellectual history of modern
nations, and banished the discouraging suspicion which
long ages of lethargy tended to excite, that nature had
exhausted her fertility in the great poets of Greece and
Rome. It was as if, at some of the ancient games, a
stranger had appeared upon the plain, and thrown his
quoit among the marks of former casts which tradition
had ascribed to the demigods. But the admiration of
Dante, though it gave a general impulse to the human

b Paradise, cant 16.

c Velli, Vita di Dante. Tiraboschi.

State of Society.

PETRARCH,

449

mind, did not "produce imitators. I am unaware at least
of any writer, in whatever language, who can be said to
have followed the steps of Dante : I mean not so much
in his subject as in the character of his genius and style.
His orbit is still all his own, and the track of his wheels
can never be confounded with that of a rival. d

In the same year that Dante was expelled from Flo
rence, a notary, by name Petracco, was involved Petrarch
in a similar banishment. Eetired to Arezzo, he
there became the father of Francis Petrarch. This great
man shared of course, during his early years, in the
adverse fortune of his family, which he was invincibly
reluctant to restore, according to his father’s wish, by
the profession of jurisprudence. The strong bias of
nature determined him to polite letters and poetry. These
are seldom the fountains of wealth ; yet they would per-
haps have been such to Petrarch, if his temper could
have borne the sacrifice of liberty for any worldly ac-
quisitions. At the city of Avignon, where his parents
had latterly resided, his graceful appearance and the
reputation of his talents attracted one of the Colonna
family, then bishop of Lombes in Gascony. In him,
and in other members of that great house, never so illus-
trious as in the fourteenth century, he experienced the
union of patronage and friendship. This, however, was
not confined to the Colonnas. Unlike Dante, no poet
was ever so liberally and sincerely encouraged by the
^great ; nor did any perhaps ever carry to that perilous
intercourse a spirit more irritably independent, or more
free from interested adulation. He praised his friends
lavishly because he loved theiA ardently ; but his temper
was easily susceptible of offence, and there must have
been much to tolerate in that restlessness and jealousy of
reputation which is perhaps the inevitable failing of a
poet.® But every thing was forgiven to a man who was

d The source from which Dante de-
rived the scheme and general idea of his
poem has been a subject of inquiry in
Italy. To his original mind one might
have thought the sixth AOneid would have
sufficed. But besides several legendary
visions of the 12th and 13th centuries, it
seems probable that he derived hints from
the Tesoretto of his master in philoso-
VOL. HI.

phical studies, Brunetto Latini. Gin-
guend, t ii. p. 8.

® There is an unpleasing proof of thin
quality in a letter to Boccaccio on Dante,
whose merit he rather disingenuously ex-
tenuates ; and whose popularity evidently
stung him to the quick. De Sade, t. Hi.
p. 612. Yet we judge so ill of ourselves,
that Petrarch chose envy as the vice from
2 G

450

PETRARCH.

Chap. IX. Part II.

the acknowledged boast of his age and country. Clement
YI. conferred one or two sinecure benefices upon Pe-
trarch, and would probably have raised him to a bishop-
ric if he had chosen to adopt the ecclesiastical profession.
But he never took orders, the clerical tonsure being a
sufficient qualification for holding canonries. The same
pope even afforded him the post of apostolical secretary,
and this was repeated by Innocent VI. I know not
whether we should ascribe to magnanimity or to a politic
motive the behaviour of Clement VI. towards Petrarch,
who had pursued a course as vexatious as possible to the
Holy See. For not only he made the residence of the
supreme pontiffs at Avignon, and the vices of their court,
the topic of invectives, too well founded to be despised,
but he had ostentatiously put himself forward as the
supporter of Nicola di Eienzi in a project which could
evidently have no other aim than to wrest the city of
Borne from the temporal sovereignty of its bishop. Nor
was the friendship and society of Petrarch less courted
by the most respectable Italian princes ; by Robert king
of Naples, by the Visconti, the Correggi of Parma, the
famous doge of Venice, Andrew Dandolo, and the Carrara
family of Padua, under whose protection he spent the
latter years of his life. Stories are related of the respect
shown to him by men in humbler stations which are
perhaps still more satisfactory/ But the most conspieu-

which of all others he was most free. In
his dialogue with St Augustin, he says:
Quicquid libuerit, dicito; modo me non
accuses invidiae. Aug. Utinam non tibi
magis superbia quam invidia nocuisset :
nam hoc crimine, me judice, liber ea.
De Contemptu Mundi, edit. 1581,
p. 3412.

I have read in some modern book, but
knqw not where to seek the passage, that
Petrarch did not intend to allude to
Dante in the letter to Boccaccio men-
tioned above, but rather to Zanobi Strata,
a contemporary Florentine poet, whom,
however forgotten at present, the bad
taste of a party in criticism preferred to
himself.— Matteo Villani mentions them
together as the two great ornaments of
his age. This conjecture seems probable,
for some expressions are not in the least
applicable to Dante. But whichever was

intended, the letter equally shows tb'*
irritable humour of Petrarch.

f A goldsmith of Bergamo, by name
Henry Capra, smitten with an enthusi-
astic love of letters, and of Petrarch,
earnestly requested the honour of a visit
from the poet The house of this good
tradesman was full of representations of
his person, and of inscriptions with lii# .
name and arms. No expense had been
spared in copying all bis works as they
appeared. He was received by Capra
with a princely magnificence ; lodged in
a chamber hung with purple, and a
splendid bed on which no one before or
after him was permitted to sleep. Gold-
smiths, as we may judge by this Instance,
were opulent persons ; yet the friends of
Petrarch dissuaded him from the visit, os
derogatory to his own elevated station.
De Sade, t iii. p. 498.

State or Society.

PETRARCH.

451

ons testimony of public esteem was bestowed by the city
of Rome, in his solemn coronation as laureat poet in the
Capitol. This ceremony took place in 1341 ; and it is
remarkable that Petrarch had at that time composed no
works which could, in our estimation, give him preten-
sions to so singular an honour.

The moral character of Petrarch was formed of dispo-
sitions peculiarly calculated for a poet. An enthusiast
in the emotions of love and friendship, of glory, of
patriotism, of religion, he gave the rein to all their im-
pulses ; and there is not perhaps a page in his Italian
writing which does not bear the trace of one or other of
these affections. By far the most predominant, and that
which has given the greatest celebrity to his name, is his
passion for Laura. Twenty years of unrequited and
almost unaspiring love were lightened by song ; and the
attachment, which, having long survived the beauty of
its object,* 5 seems to have at one time nearly passed from
the heart to the fancy, was changed to an intenser feeling,
and to a sort of celestial adoration, by her death. Laura,
before the time of Petrarch’s first accidental meeting with
her, was united in marriage with another; a fact which,
besides some more particular evidence, appears to me
deducible from the whole tenor of his poetry , h Such a
passion is undoubtedly not capable of a moral defence ;
nor would I seek its palliation so much in the prevalent
manners of his age, by which however the conduct of
.even good men is generally not a little influenced, as in
the infirmity of Petrarch’s character, which induced him
both to . obey and to justify the emotions of his heart.
The lady too, whose virtue and prudence we are not to
question, seems to have tempered the light and shadow
of her countenance so as to preserve her admirer from
-despair, and consequently to prolong his sufferings and
servitude.

8 See the beautiful sonnet, Erano i ca- the contraction ptbus, which leaves the
pei d’oro all' aura sparsi. In a famous matter open to controversy. De Sade
passage of his Confessions, he says : Cor- contends that “ crebris " is less applicable
pus iilud egregium morbis et crebris par- to “ perturbationibus " than to “ partn
tubus exhaustum, multum pristini vigoris bus.” I do not know that there is much
omisit Those who maintain the virginity in this ; but I am clear that corpus ex*
of Laura are forced to read perturbationi - haustuin partubus is much the more
6«a, instead of partubus. Two manu- elegant Latin expression of the two.
scripts in the royal library at Paris have h [Note III.]

2 a 2

452

PETRARCH.

Chap. I&. Part II.

The general excellences of Petrarch are his command
over the music of his native language, his correctness of
style, scarcely two or three words that he has used hav-
ing been rejected by later writers, his exquisite elegance
of diction, improved by the perpetual study of Virgil;
but, far above all, that tone of pure and melancholy
sontiment which has something in it unearthly, and
forms a strong contrast to the amatory poems of antiquity.
Most of these are either licentious or uninteresting ; and
those of Catullus, a man endowed by nature with deep
and serious sensibility, and a poet, in my opinion, of
greater and more varied genius than Petrarch, are con-
taminated above all the rest with the most degrading
grossness. Of this there is not a single instance in the
poet of Vaucluse ; and his strains, diffused and admired
as they have been, may have conferred a benefit that
criticism cannot estimate, in giving elevation and refine-
ment to the imaginations of youth. Tho great defect of
Petrarch was his want of strong original conception,
which prevented him from throwing off the affected and
overstrained manner of the Provencal troubadours, and
of the earlier Italian poets. Among his poems the
Triumphs are perhaps superior to the Odes, as the latter
are to the Sonnets ; and of the latter, those written sub-
sequently to the death of Laura are in general the best.
But thgtt constrained and laborious measure cannot equal
the graceful flow of the canzone, or the vigorous com-
pression of the terza rima. The Triumphs have also a*
claim to superiority, as the only poetical composition of
Petrarch that extends to any considerable length. They
are in some degree perhaps an imitation of the dramatic
Mysteries, and form at least the earliest specimens of a
kind of poetry not uncommon in later times, wherein
real and allegorical personages are intermingled in^u*-
masque or scenic representation . 1

None of the principal modem languages was so late in
English lan- its formation, or ip its application to the pur-
guage. . poses of literature, as the English. This arose,
as is well known, out of the Saxon branch of the Great

» [I leave this as it stood. But my whether the latter are superior to the
own taste has changed. I retract alto- Sonnets. This at least is not the opi-
gether the preference here given to the nion of Italian critics, who ought to be
Triumphs above the Canzoni, and doubt the most competent. 1848.]

. State op Society. ENGLISH LANGUAGE.

453

Teutonic stock spoken in England till after the Conquest.
From this mother dialect our English differs less in
respect of etymology, than of syntax, idiom, and flexion.
In so gradual a transition as probably took place, and
one so sparingly marked by any existing evidence, we
oannot well assign a definite origin to our present lan-
guage. The question of identity is almost as perplexing
in languages as in individuals. But, in the reign of
Henry II., a version of Wace’s poem of Brut, by one
Layamon, a priest of Emly-upon-Sevem, exhibits as it
were the chrysalis of the English language, in a very
corrupt modification of the Anglo-Saxon. 1 " Yery soon
afterwards the new formation was better developed ; and
some metrical pieces, referred by critics to the earlier
part of the thirteenth century, differ but little from our
legitimate grammar.™ About the beginning of Edward T/s
reign, Robert, a monk of Gloucester, composed a metri-

k A sufficient extract from this work although gradually yielding to the influ-
of Layamon has been "published by Mr. ence of the popular forms of speech. We
Ellis, in his Specimens of Early English find in it, as in the later portion of the
Poetry, voL i. p. 01. This extract con- Saxon Chronicle, marked indications of
tains, he observes, no word which we are a tendency to adopt those terminations and
under the necessity of ascribing to a sounds which characterize a language in
French origin. a state of change, and which are apparent

[Layamon, as is now supposed, wrote also in some other branches of the Teu-
in the reign of John. See Sir Frederick tonic tongue. The use of a as an article
Madden's edition, and Mr. Wright’s Bio- —the change of the Anglo-Saxon ter-
graphia Literaria. The best reason seems minations a and an into e and en, as well
to be that he speaks of Eleanor, queen of as the disregard of inflections and genders
Henry, as then dead, which took place —the masculine forms given to neuter
in 1204. But it requires a vast know- nouns in the plural— the neglect of the
ledge of the language to find a date by feminine terminations of adjectives and
the use or disuse of particular forms; the pronouns, and confusion between the de-
idiom of one part of England not being finite and indefinite declensions— the in-
aimilar to that of another in grammatical troduction of the preposition to before
flexions. See Quarterly Review for April infinitives, and occasional use of weak
1848. preterites of verbs and participles instead

The entire work of Layamon contains of strong— the constant recurrence of
uMsmall number of words taken from the er for or in the plurals of verbs — together
French ; about fifty in the original, text, with the uncertainty of the rule for the
and about forty more in that of a manu- government of prepositions— all these
script, perhaps half a century later, and variations, more or less visible in the two
very considerably altered in consequence texts of Layamon, combined with the
of the progress of our language.. Many * vowel-changes, which are numerous,
of these words derived from tb/VrencU though not altogether arbitrary, will show
express new ideas, as admiral, astronomy 1 , At once the progress made in two centuries,
baron, mantel, &c. “ The language of # in departing from the ancient and purer
Layamon," says Sir Frederick Madden, grammatical forms, as found in Anglo-
“ belongs to that transition period in Saxon manuscripts," Preface, p. xxviiLj
which the groundwork of Anglo-Saxon m Warton'a Hist, of English Poetrv
phraseology and grammar still existed, Ellis's Specimens.

454

SLOW PROGRESS OF

Chap. IX. Past 'II.

cal chronicle from the history of Geoffrey of Monmouth,
which he continued to his own time. This work, with a
similar chronicle of Robert Manning, a monk of Brunne
(Bourne) in Lincolnshire, nearly thirty years later, stand
at the bead of our English poetry. The romance of Sir
Tristrcm, ascribed to Thomas of Erceldoune, surnamed
the Rhymer, a Scottish minstrel, has recently laid claim
to somewhat higher antiquity." In the fourteenth cen-
tury a great number of metr ical romances were translated
from the French. It requires no small portion of indul-
gence to speak favourably of any of these early English
productions. A poetical line may no doubt occasionally
be found ; but in general the narration is as heavy and
prolix as the versification is unmusical." The first
English writer who can be read with approbation is
William Langland, the author of Piers Plowman’s Vision,
a severe satire upon the clergy . Thougji his measure is
more uncouth than that of his predecessors, there is real
energy in his conceptions, which he caught not from the
chimeras of knight-errantry, but the actual manners and
opinions of his time.

The very slow progress of the English language, as
an instrument of literature, is chiefly to be
S;T P ?" to ascribed to the effects of the Norman conquest,
gress. j n degrading the native inhabitants and trans-
ferring all power and riches to foreigners. The barons,
without perhaps one exception, and a large proportion
of the gentry, were of French descent, and preserved
among themselves the speech of their fathers. This
continued much longer than we should naturally have
expected ; even after the loss of Normandy had snapped
the thread of French connexions, and they began to
pride themselves in the name of Englishmen, and in the
inheritance of traditionary English privileges. Robexfc
of Gloucester has a remarkable passage, which proves
that in his time, somewhere about 1290, the superior
ranks continued to use the French language. 51 Ralph

n This conjecture of Scott has not been short passages, where the original is
favourably received by later critics. “ rather above its usual mediocrity, with

0 Warton printed copious extracts from his own lively analysis,
some of these. Ritson gave several of p The evidences of this general em-
them entire to the press. And Mr. Ellis ployment and gradual disuse of French
has adopted the only plan which could in conversation and writing are collected
render them palatable, by intermingling by Tyrwhitt, in a dissertation on the

State of Society. THE EN GLISH .LANGUAGE.

455

Higden, about the early part of Edward III.’s reign,
though his expressions do not go the same length,
asserts, that “ gentlemen’s children are taught to speak
French from the time they are rocked in their cradle ;
and uplandish (country) or inferior men will liken
themselves to gentlemen, and learn with great business
for to speak French, for to be the more told of.” Not-
withstanding, however, this predominance of French
among the higher class, I do not think that some modern
critics are warranted in concluding that they were in
general ignorant of the English tongue. Men living
upon their estates among their tenantry, whom they
welcomed in their halls, and whose assistance they were
perpetually needing in war and civil frays, would hardly
have permitted such a barrier to obstruct their inter-
course. For we cannot, at the utmost, presume that
French was so well known to the English commonalty
in the thirteenth century as English is at present to the
same class in Wales and the Scottish Highlands. It
may be remarked also, that the institution of trial by
jury must have rendered a knowledge of English almost
indispensable to those who administered justice. There
is a proclamation of Edward I. in Rymer, where he en-
deavours to excite his subjects against the king of
France by imputing to him the intention of conquering
the country and abolishing the English language (lin-
guam delere Anglicanam), and this is frequently re-
peated in the proclamations of Edward III. q In his
time, or perhaps a little before, the native language had
become more familiar than French in common use, even
with the court and nobility. Hence the numerous trans-
lations of metrical romances, which are chiefly referred
to his reign. An important change w&s effected in 13G2
Ay a statute, which enacts that all pleas in courts of
justice shall be pleaded, debated, and judged in English.
But Latin was by this act to be employed in drawing
the record; for there seems to have still continued; a
sprt of prejudice against the use of English as a written
language. The earliest English instrument known to exist

Ancient English language, prefixed to the p. 70.

fourth volume of his edition of Chaucer’s 9 Rymer, t v. p. 490 ; t vi. p. 642,
Canterbury Tales ; and by Ritson, in the et alibi
preface to his Metrical Romances, voL l

CHAUCER,

Chap. IX. Paht II.

456

is said to bear the date of 1343/ And there are but few
entries in our own tongue upon the rolls of parliament
before the reign of Henry VI., after whose accession its
use becomes very common. 1 Sir John Mandevile, about
1356, may pass for the father of English prose, no ori-
} ginal work being so ancient as his Travels. But the
translation of the Bible and other writings by Wicliffe,
nearly thirty years afterwards, taught us the copiousness
and energy of which our native dialect was capable;
and it was employed in the fifteenth century by two
writers of distinguished merit, Bishop Pecock and Sir
John Fortescue.

But the principal ornament of our English literature
chanoer was Cr eo ® re y Chaucer, who, with Dante and
^ Petrarch, fills up the triumvirate of great poets
in the middle ages. Chaucer was born in 1328, and his
life extended to the last year of the fourteenth century.
That rude and ignorant generation was not likely to feel
the admiration of native genius as warmly as the compa-
triots of Petrarch ; but he enjoyed the favour of Edward
III., and still more conspicuously of John duke of
Lancaster ; his fortunes were far more prosperous than
have usually been the lot of poets ; and a reputation was
established beyond competition in his lifetime, from
which no succeeding generation has withheld its sanc-
tion, I cannot, in my own taste, go completely along
with the eulogies that some have bestowed upon Chaucer,
who seems to me to have wanted grandeur, where he is
original, both in conception and in language. * But in
vivacity of imagination and ease of expression, he is
above all poets of the middle time, and comparable per-
haps to the greatest of those who have followed. He
invented, or rather introduced from France, and
employed with facility the regular iambic couplet ; anc^
though it was not to be expected that he should perceive
the capacities latent in that measure, his versification,
to which he accommodated a very licentious and arbi-
trary pronunciation, is uniform and harmonious/ It is

r Ritson, p. 80. There is one in Ry- Tales. The opinion of this eminent
mer of the year 1385. critic has lately been controverted by Dr.

* [Note IV.] Nott, who maintains the versification of

t See Tyrvvhitt’s essay on the language Chaucer to have been wholly founded on
and versification of Chaucer, in the fourth accentual and not syllabic regularity.# I
volume of his edition of the Canterbury adhere, however, to Tyrwhitt's doctrine.

State op Society. REVIVAL OF ANCIENT LEARNING. 457

chiefly, indeed, as a comic poet, and a minute observer
of manners and circumstances, that Chaucer excels. Iii
serious and moral poetry he is frequently languid and
diffuse ; . but he springs like Antaeus from the earth,
when his subject changes to coarse satire, or merry nar-
rative. Amon^ his more elevated compositions, the*
Knight’s Tale is abundantly sufficient to immortalize
Chaucer, since it would be difficult to find any where a
story better conducted, or told with more animation and
strength of fancy. The second place may be given to
his Troilus and Creseide, a beautiful and interesting
poem, though enfeebled by expansion. But perhaps the
most eminent, or at any rate the most characteristic
testimony to his genius will be found in the prologue to
his Canterbury Tales ; a work entirely and exclusively
his own, which can seldom be said of his poetry, and
the vivid delineations of which perhaps very few writers
but Shakspeare could have equalled. As the first
original English poet, if we except Langland, as the
inventor of our most approved measure, as an improver,
though with too much innovation, of. our language, and
as a faithful witness to the manners of his age, Chaucer
would deserve our reverence, if he had not also intrinsic
claims for excellences; which do not depend upon any
collateral considerations.

The last circumstance which I shall mention, as hav-
ing contributed to restore society from the in- Revival of
tellectual degradation into which it had fallen ancient
during the dark ages, is the revival of classical karning '
learning. The Latin language indeed, in which all
legal instruments were drawn up, and of which all
ecclesiastics availed themselves in their epistolary inter-
course, as well as in their more solemn proceedings, had
never ceased to be familiar. Though many solecisms
and barbarous words occur in the writings of what were
called learned men, they possessed a fluency of expres-
sion in Latin which does not often occur at present.
During the dark ages, however, properly so called, or
the period from the sixth to the eleventh century, we
chiefly meet with quotations from the Yulgate or from
theological writers. Nevertheless, quotations from the
Latin poets are hardly to be called unusual. Virgil,
Ovid, Statius, and Horace, are brought forward by those

4:58

REVIVAL OF

Chap. IX. Part II.

who aspired to some literary reputation, especially dur-
ing the better periods of that long twilight, the reigns
of Charlemagne and his son in France, part of the tenth
century in Germany, and the eleventh in both. The
prose writers of Rome are not so familiar, but in quota-
tions we are apt to find the poets preferred ; and it is
certain that a few could be named who were not
ignorant of Cicero, Sallust, and Livy. A considerable
in the change took place in the course of the twelfth
twelfth cen- century. The polite literature, as well as the
tury; abstruser science of antiquity, became the sub-
ject of cultivation. Several writers of that age, in
different parts of Europe, are distinguished more or
less for elegance, though not absolute purity of Latin
style ;• and for their acquaintance with those ancients,
who are its principal models. Such were John of Salis-
bury, the acute and learned author of the Polycraticon,
William of Malmsbury, Giraldus Cambrensis, Roger
Hoveden, in England ; and in foreign countries, Otho of
Frisingen, Saxo Grammaticus, and the best perhaps of
all I have named as to style, Falcandus, the historian of
Sicily. In these we meet with frequent quotations from
Livy, Cicero, Pliny, and other considerable writers of
antiquity. The poets were now admired and even imi-
tated. All metrical Latin before the latter part of the
twelfth century, so far as I have seen, is of little value ;
but at this time, and early in the succeeding age, there
appeared several versifiers who aspired to the renown of.
following the steps of Virgil and Statius in epic poetry.
Joseph Iscanus, an Englishman, seems to have been the
earliest qf these ; his poem on the Trojan war containing
an address to Henry II. He wrote another, entitled
Antiocheis, on the third crusade, most of which has
perished. The wars of Frederic Barbarossa were cel**!*
brated by Gunther in his Ligurinus ; and not long after-
wards, Guillelmus Brito wrote the Philippis, in honour
of Philip Augustus, and Walter de Chatillon the Alex-
andreis, taken from the popular romance of Alexander.
None of these poems, I believe, have much intrinsic
merit; but their existence is a proof of taste that could
relish, though not of genius that could emulate antiquity."

® Warton’s Hist, of English Poetry, de la Po&sie Fran^aise du douzi&me Si&cle
voL 1. Dissertation IL Roquefort, EM p. 16. The following lines from the be-

State of Society.

ANCIENT LEARNING.

459

In tlie thirteenth century there seems to have been
some decline of classical literature, in consequence pro-
bably of the scholastic philosophy, which was then in
its greatest vigour ; at least we do not find so many good
writers as in the preceding age. But about the much
middle of the fourteenth, or perhaps a little thefour-
sooner, an ardent zeal for the restoration of an- teenth *
cient learning began to display itself. The copying of
books, for some ages slowly and sparingly performed in
monasteries, had already become a branch of trade ; x and
their price was consequently reduced. Tiraboschi
denies that the invention of making paper from Inventi
linen rags is older than the middle of that of linen
century ; and although doubts may be justly paper *
entertained as to the accuracy of this position, yet the
confidence with which so eminent a scholar advances it
is at least a proof that paper manuscripts of an earlier
date are very rare. y Princes became far more attentive

ginning of the eighth book of the Thilip-
pis seem a fair, or rather a favourable
specimen of these epics. But I am very
superficially acquainted with any of them.

Solverat interea zephyris melioribus
annum

Frigure depulso veris tepor, et reno-
vari

Cceperat et viridi gremio juvenescere
telius ;

Cum Rea laeta Jovis ridqret ad oscula
mater,

Cum jam post tergum Phryxi vectore
relicto

Solis Agenorei premeret rota terga ju-
venci.

The tragedy of Eccerinus (Eccelin da
Romano), by Albertinus Mussatus, a
Paduan, and author of a respectable his-
tory, deserves some attention, as the first
Atftempt to revive the regular tragedy. It
was written soon after 1300. The lan-
guage by no means wants animation,
notwithstanding an unskilful conduct of
the fable. The Eccerinus is printed in the
tenth volume of Muratori’s collection.

* Booksellers appear in the latter part
of the twelfth century. Peter of Blois
mentions a law book which he had pro-
jcured a quodam publico mangone libro-
rura. Hist. Littdraire de la France, t. ix,
p. 84. In tbe thirteenth century there
ttere many copyists by occupation in the

Italian universities. Tiraboschi, t. iv.
p. 72. The number of these at Milan
before the end of that age is said to have
been fifty. Ibid. But a very small pro-
portion of their labour could have been
devoted to purposes merely literary. By
a variety of ordinances, the first of which
bears date in 1275, the booksellers of
Paris were subjected to tbe control of
the university. Crcvier, t. ii. p. 67, 286.
The pretext of this was, lest erroneous
copies should obtain circulation. And
this appears to have been the original of
those restraints upon the freedom of pub-
lication, which since the invention of
printing have so much retarded the dif-
fusion of truth by means of that great
instrument.

y Tiraboschi, t. v. p. 85. On the con-
trary side are Montfaucon, Mabillon, and
Muratori ; the latter of whom carries up
the invention of our ordinary paper to the
year 1000. But Tiraboschi contends that
the paper used in manuscripts of so
early an age was made from cotton rags,
and, apparently from the inferior durabi-
lity of that material, not frequently em-
ployed. The editors of Nouveau Trait©
dq Diplomatique are of the same opinion,
and doubt the use of linen paper before
the year 1300. t. i. p. 517, 521. Meer-
man, well known as a writer upon the

460 LIBRARIES. Chap. IX. Part H

to literature when it was no longer confined to meta-
physical theology and canon law. I have already men-
tioned the translations from classical authors, made by
command of John and Charles Y. of France. These
French translations diffused some acquaintance with
ancient history and learning among our own country-
Libraii men ** The public libraries assumed a more
** respectable appearance. Louis IX. had formed
one at Paris, in which it does not appear that any work
of elegant literature was found. 14 At the beginning of
the fourteenth century, only four classical manuscripts
existed in this collection ; of Cicero, Ovid, Lucan, and
Boethius/ The academical library of Oxford, in 1300,
consisted of a few tracts kept in chests under St Mary’s
church. That of Glastonbury Abbey, in 1240, contained
four hundred volumes, among which were Livy, Sallust,
Lucan, Virgil, Claudian, and other ancient writers. 0 But
no other, probably, of that age was so numerous or so
valuable. Bichard of Bury, chancellor of England, and
Edward III., spared no expense in collecting a library,
the first perhaps that any private man had formed.
But the scarcity of valuable books was still so great, that
he gave the abbot of St. Albans fifty pounds weight of
silver for between thirty and forty volumes/ Charles Y

antiquities of printing, offered a reward
for the earliest manuscript upon linen
paper, and, in a treatise upon the subject,
fixed the date of its invention between
1270 and 1300. But M. Schwandner of
Vienna is said to have found in the im-
perial library a small charter bearing the
date of 1243 on such paper. Macpher-
sou’s Annals of Commerce, vol. i. p. 394.
Tiraboschi, if he had known this, would
probably have maintained the paper to
be made of cotton, which he says it is
difficult to distinguish. He assigns the
invention of linen paper to Pace da Fa-
biano of Treviso. But more than one
Arabian writer asserts the manufacture
of linen paper to have been carried on at
Samarcand early in the eighth century,
having beeu brought thither from China.
And what is more conclusive, Casiri po-
sitively declares many manuscripts in
the Escuiial of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries to be written on that sub-
stance. Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispanica,

t ii. p. 9. This authority appears much
to outweigh the opinion of Tiraboschi in
favour of Pace da Fabiano, who must
perhaps take bis place at the table
of fabulous heroes with Bartholomew
Schwartz and Flavio Gioja. But the
material point, that paper was very little
known in Europe till the latter part of
the fourteenth century, remains as be-
fore. See Introduction to History of
Literature, c. i. $ 58.

* Warton’s Hist, of English Poetry*
vol il p. 122.

a Velly, t. v. p. 202; Crevier, til,
p. 36.

b Warton, vol i.; Dissert II.
c Ibid.

d Warton, vol. i. Dissert IL Fjfty-
eight books were transcribed Id this abbey
under one abbot, about the year 1300.
Every considerable monastery had a
room, called Scriptorium, where this
work was performed. More than eighty
were transcribed at St Albans under

State of Society,

MANUSCRIPTS,

461

increased the royal library at Paris to nine hundred
volumes, which the duke of Bedford purchased and
transported to London.® His brother Humphrey duke
of Gloucester presented the university of Oxford with
six hundred books, which seem to have been of extraor-
dinary value, one hundred and twenty of them having
been estimated at one thousand pounds. This indeed
was in 1440, at which time such a library would not
have been thought remarkably numerous beyond the
Alps/ but England had made comparatively little pro-
gress in learning. Geimany, however, was probably
still less advanced. Louis, Elector Palatine, bequeathed
in 1421 his library to the university of Heidelberg, con-
sisting of one hundred and fifty-two volumes. Eighty-
nine of these related to theology, twelve to canon and
civil law, forty-five to medicine, and six to philo-
sophy. 8

Those who first undertook to lay open the stores of
ancient learning found incredible difficulties T ranscrip-
from the scarcity of manuscripts. So gross and tionofma-
supino was the ignorance of the monks, within imscril)ts -
whoso walls these treasures were concealed, that it was
impossible to ascertain, except by indefatigable re-
searches, the extent of what had been saved out.of the
great shipwreck of antiquity. To this inquiry Petrarch
devoted continual attention. He spared no means to
preserve the remains of authors, who were perishing
from neglect and time. This danger was by no means

Whethamstede, in the time of Henry VI. equivalent to near forty pounds at present
ibid. See also Du Cange, V Scriptores. Whitaker’s Hist, of Craven, p. 330.
Nevertheless we must remember, first, * Ibid. ; Villaret, t. xi. p. 117.
that the far greater part of these books f Niccolo Niccoli, a private scholar,
were mere monastic trash, or at least who contributed essentially to the re-
useless in our modem apprehension ; se- storation of ancient learning, bequeathed
wfidiy, that it depended upon the cha- a library of eight hundred volumes to
racter of the abbot, whether the scripto- . the republic of Florence. This Niccoli
rium should be occupied or not. Every hardly published any thing of his own ;
head of a monastery was not a Whetham- but earned a well-merited reputation by
Btede. Ignorance and jollity, such as we copying and correcting manuscripts. Ti-
flnd in Bolton Abbey, were their more raboschi, t. vi. p. 114 ; Shepherd’s Pog-
usual characteristics. By the account gio, p. 319. In the preceding century,
books of tills rich monastery, about the Coliuccio Salutato had procured as many
beginning of the fourteenth century, as eight hundred volumes. Ibid. p. 23,
three books only appear to have been Roscoe’s Lorenzo de’ Medici, p. 65.
purchased in forty years. One of those « Schmidt, Hist- des Allemands, L v
was the Liber Sententiarum of Peter p. 620.

Lombard, which cost thirty shillings,

462

INDUSTRY OF THE

Chap. IX. Past II.

passed in the fourteenth century. A treatise of Cicero
upon Glory, which had been in nis possession, was after*
wards irretrievably lost. h He declares that he had seen
in his youth the works of Varro ; but all his endeavours
to recover these and the second Decad of Livy were
fruitless. He found, however, Quintilian, in 1350, of
which there was no copy in Italy. 1 Boccaccio, and a
man of less general fame, Colluceio Salutato, were dis-
tinguished in the same honourable task. The diligence
of these scholars was not confined to searching for manu-
scripts. Transcribed by slovenly monks, or by ignorant
persons who made copies for sale, they required the
continual emendation of accurate critics.* Though much
certainly was left for the more enlightened sagacity of
later times, we owe the first intelligible text of the Latin
classics to Petrarch, Poggio, and their contemporary
labourers in this vineyard for a hundred years before
the invention of printing.

What Petrarch began in the fourteenth century was
industry of carr ^ on by a new generation with unabating
the fifteenth industry. The whole lives of Italian scholars
century. the fifteenth century were devoted to the

recovery of manuscripts and the revival of philology.
For this they sacrificed their native language, which
had made such surprising shoots in the preceding age,
and were content to trace, in humble reverence, the
footsteps of antiquity. For this too they lost the hope
of permanent glory, which can never remain with
imitators, or such as trim the lamp of ancient sepulchres.
No writer perhaps of the fifteenth century, except
Politian, can aspire at present even to the second class,
in a just marshalling of literary reputation. But we
owe them our respect and gratitude for their taste and
diligence. The discovery of an unknown manuscript*
says Tiraboschi, was regarded almost as the conquest
of a kingdom. The classical writers, he adds, were
chiefly either found in Italy, or at least by Italians;
they were first amended and first printed in Italy, and
in Italy they were first collected in public libraries.*"

b He had lent it to a needy man of > Tiraboschi, p. 89.
letters, who pawned the book, which k Idem, t v. p. 83; De Sade, .1 i.
was never recovered. De Sade, t. i. p. 88.

, p .67. m Tiraboschi. p. 101.

State op Society. FIFTEENTH CENTURY.

463

This is subject to some exception, when fairly consi-
dered; several ancient authors were never lost, and
therefore cannot be said to have been discovered ; and
we know that Italy did not always anticipate other
countries in classical printing. But her superior merit is
incontestable. Poggio Bracciolini, who stands
perhaps at the head of the restorers of learn- og ^°‘
mg, in the earlier part of the fifteenth century, dis-
covered in the monastery of St. Gall, among dirt and
rubbish in a dungeon scarcely fit for condemned crimi-
nals, as he describes it, an entire copy of Quintilian,
and part of Valerius Flaccus. This was in 1414; and
soon afterwards, he rescued the poem of Silius Italicus,
and twelve comedies of Plautus, in addition to eight
that were previously known ; besides Lucretius, Colu-
mella, Tertullian, Ammianus Marcellinus, and other
writers of inferior note." A bishop of Lodi brought to
light the rhetorical treatises of Cicero. Not that we
must suppose these books to have been universally
unknown before; Quintilian, at least, is quoted by
English writers much earlier. But so little intercourse
prevailed among different countries, and the monks had'
so little acquaintance with the riches of their conventual
libraries, that an author might pass for ldst in Italy,
who was familiar to a few learned men in other parts
of Europe. To the name of Poggio we may add a
number of others, distinguished in this memorable
resurrection of ancient literature, and united, not
always indeed by friendship, for their bitter animosities
disgrace their profession, but by a sort of common
sympathy in the cause of learning ; Filelfo, Laurentius
Valla, Niccolo Niccoli, Ambrogio Traversari, more com-
monly called II Camaldolense, and Leonardo Aretino.

From the subversion of the Western Empire, or at
least from the time when Rome ceased to pay Greek ^
obedience to the exarchs of Ravenna, the Greek guage un-
language and literature had been almost en-
tirely forgotten within the pale of the Latin
church. A very few exceptions might be found, espe-
cially in the earlier period of the middle ages, while
the eastern emperors retained their dominion over

n Tiraboschi, t. vi. p. 104; and Shepherd'* Life of Poggio, p. 106 110; Kos»
ooe’s Lorenzo de’ Medici, p. 38.

464

GREEK LANGUAGE. Chap. IX. Part It

part of Italy . 0 Thus Charlemagne is said to have
established a school for Greek at Osnaburg. p John
Scotus seems to have been well acquainted with the
language. And Greek characters may occasionally,
though very seldom, be found in the writings of learned
men ; such as Lanfranc or William of Malmsbury.** It
is said that Roger Bacon understood Greek ; and that
his eminent contemporary, Robert Grostete, bishop of
Lincoln, had a sufficient intimacy, with it to translate
a part of Suidas. Since Greek was spoken with consi-
derable purity by the noble and well educated natives
of Constantinople, we may wonder that, even as a living
language, it was not better known by the western
nations, and especially in so neighbouring a nation as
Italy. Yet here the ignorance was perhaps even more
complete than in France or England. In some parts
indeed of Calabria, which had been subject to the

0 Schmidt, Hist, des Allemands, t. ii. St Ambrose, he was forced to ask the
p. 374; Tiraboschi, t iii. p. 124, et alibi, meaning of one John Sarasin, an Eng-
Bode extols Theodore primate of Canter- lishman, because, says he, none of our
bury and Tobias bishop of Rochester masters here (at Paris) understand Greek,
for their knowledge of Greek. Hist Paris, indeed, Crevier thinks, could not
Eccles. c. 9 and 24. But the former of furnish any Greek scholar in that age
these prelates, if* not the latter, was a except Abelard and Heloise, and pro-
native of Greece. bably neither of them knew much. Hist.

P Hist Littdraire de la France, t iv. de l’Univers, de Paris, t, i. p. 259.
p. 12. The ecclesiastical language, it may be

9 Greek characters are found in a observed, was full of Greek words La-
charter of 943, published in Martenne, tinized. But this process had taken
Thesaurus Anecdot. t. i. p. 74. The title place before the fifth century; and most
of a treatise Trepi Qvcreow fxepitrixov, and of them will be found in the Latin dic-
the word fleoro/eos, occur in William of tionaries. A Greek word was now and
Malmsbury, and one or two others in then borrowed, as more imposing than
Lanfranc’s Constitutions. It is said that the correspondent Latin, Thus the
a Greek psalter was written in an abbey English and other kings sometimes called
at Touraay about 1105. Hist. Litt. de themselves Basileus, instead of Rex.
la France, t. ix. p. 102. This was, I It will not be supposed that I have
should think, a very rare instance of a professed to enumerate all the persons
Greeks manuscript, sacred or profane, of whose acquaintance with the Greek
copied in the western parts of Europe tongue some evidence may be found;
before the fifteenth century. But a nor have I ever directed my attention to
Greek psalter written in Latin charac- the subject with that view. Doubtless
ters at Milan in the 9th century was the list might be more than doubled,
sold some years ago in London. John But, if ten times the number could be
of Salisbury is said by Crevier to have found, we should still be entitled to say,
known a little Greek, and he several that the language was almost unknown,
times uses technical words in that lan- and that it could h$ve had no influence
guage. Yet he could not have been on the condition of literature. [See In-
much more learned than his neighbours ; troduction to Hist, of Literature, chap* 2,
since, having found the word w<ri a in $ 7.]

State of Society. GREEK LANGUAGE.

465

©astern empire till near the year 1100, the liturgy was
still performed in Greek ; and a considerable acquaint-
ance with the language was of course preserved. But
for the scholars of Italy, Boccaccio positively asserts,
that no one understood so much as the Greek characters.'
Nor is there probably a single line quoted from any
poet in that language from the sixth to the fourteenth
century.

The first to lead the way in restoring Grecian learning
in Europe were the same men who had revived
the kindred muses of Latium, Petrarch and vitlsYn the"
Boccaccio. Barlaam, a Calabrian by birth, ^ r t Jf enth
during an embassy from. the court of Constan- cenury ‘
tinople in 1335, was persuaded to become the preceptor
of the former, with whom he read the works of Plato. 8
Leontius Pilatus, a native of Thessalonica, was en-
couraged some years afterwards by Boccaccio to give
public lectures upon Homer at Florence. 1 Whatever
might be the share of general attention that he excited,
he had the honour of instructing both these great
Italians in his nativm language. Neither of them per-
haps reached an advanced degree of proficiency; but
they bathed their lips in the fountain, and enjoyed the
pride of being the first who paid the homage of a new
posterity to the father of poetry. For some time little
fruit apparently resulted from their example ; but Italy
had imbibed the desire of acquisitions in a new sphere
of knowledge, which, after some interval, she was
abundantly able to realize. A few years before the ter-
mination of the fourteenth century, Emanuel Chrysoloras,
whom the emperor John Palseologus had previously
sent into Italy, and even as far as England, upon one
of those unavailing embassies, by which the Byzantine
court strove to obtain sympathy and succour from
Europe, returned to Florence as a public teacher of
Grecian literature." His school was afterwards removed

r Nemo est qui Graecas literas nor it ; t iii. p. 634. Hody de Greeds Illust.
at ego in hoc Latinitati compatior, quae p. 2. Boccace speaks modestly of his
sic omnino Graeca abjecit studia, ut etiam own attainments in Greek : etsi non satis
non noscamus characteres literarum. Ge- plen& perceperim, percepi tamen quan-
nealogire Deorom, apud Hodium de turn potui ; nec dubium, si permansisset
Grads Illustribus, p. 3. homo ille vagus diutius penes nos. quin

• Mdm. de Fetrarque, t. J. p. 407. plenius percepissera. id. p. 4.

t M&n. de Pctrarque, t. i. p. 447 ; u Hody places the commencement of

VOL. III. 2 H

466

STATE OF LEARNING Chap. IX. Part II.

successively to Pavia, Venice, and Rome; and during
nearly twenty years that he taught in Italy, most of those
eminent scholars whom I have already named, and who
distinguish the first half of that century, derived from
his instruction their knowledge of the Greek tongue.
Some, not content with being the disciples of Chryso-
loras, betook themselves to the source of that literature
at Constantinople ; and returned to Italy, not only with
a more accurate insight into the Greek idiom than they
could have attained at home, but with copious treasures
of manuscripts, few, if any, of which probably existed
previously in Italy, iyhero none had ability to read or
value them; so that the principal authors of Grecian
antiquity may be considered as brought to light by
these inquirers, the most celebrated of whom are Guarino
of Verona, Aurispa, and Filelfo. The second of these
brought home to Venice in 1423 not less than two
hundred and thirty-eight volumes/

The fall of that eastern empire, which had so long
state of outlived all other pretensions to respect that
learning in it scarcely retained that funded upon its an-
Greece. tiquity, seems to have been providentially de-
layed till Italy was ripe to nourish the scattered seeds of
literature that would have perished a few ages earlier in
the common catastrophe. From the commencement of
the fifteenth century even the national pride of Greece
could not blind her to the signs of approaching ruin. It
was no longer possible to inspire the European republic,
distracted by wars and restrained by calculating policy,
with the generous fanaticism of the crusades ; and at the
council of Florence, in 1439, the court and church of
Constantinople had the mortification of sacrificing their
long-cherished faith, without experiencing any sensible
return of protection or security. The learned Greeks
were perhaps the first to anticipate, and certainly not the
last to avoid, their country’s destruction. The council
of Florence brought many of them into Italian connexions,
jftnd held out at least a temporary accommodation of their
conflicting opinions. Though the Roman pontiffs did
nothing, and probably could have done nothing effectual,

Chrygoloras’s teaching as early as 1391. 1396 or beginning of 1397, t. vn. p. 126.
p. 3. But Tiraboscbi, whose research x Tiraboschi, t. yi. p. 102 ; Roscoe’s
was more precise, fixes it at the end of Lorenzo de' Medici, voL i. p. 43.

State of Society. AMONG THE GREEKS.

467

for the empire of Constantinople, they were very ready
to protect and reward the learning of individuals. To
Eugenius IV., to Nicolas V., to Pius II., and some other
popes of this age, the Greek exiles were indebted for a
patronage which they repaid by splendid services in the
restoration of their native literature throughout Italy.
Bessarion, a disputant on the Greek side in the council
of Florence, was well content to renounce the doctrine
of single procession for a cardinal’s hat — a dignity which
he deserved for his learning, if not for his pliancy.
Theodore Gaza, George of Trebizond, and Gemistus
Pletho, might equal Bessarion in merit, though not in
honours. They all, however, experienced the patronage
of those admirable protectors of letters, Nicolas V.,
Cosmo de’ Medici, or Alfonso king of Naples. These
men emigrated before the final destruction of the Greek
empire ; Lascaris and Musurus, whose arrival in Italy
was posterior to that event, may be deemed perhaps still
more conspicuous ; but as the study of the Greek lan-
guage was already restored, it is unnecessary to pursue
the subject any further.

The Greeks had preserved, through the course of the
middle ages, their share of ancient learning with more
fidelity and attention than was shown in the west of
Europe. Genius indeed, or any original excellence,
could not well exist along with their cowardly despotism,
and their contemptible theology, more corrupted by
frivolous subtleties than that of the Latin church. The
hpirit of persecution, natarally allied to despotism and
bigotry, had nearly, during one period, extinguished the
lamp, or at least reduced the Greeks to a level with the
most ignorant nations of the West. In the age of Jus-
tinian, who expelled the last Platonic philosophers,
learning began rapidly to decline ; in that of Heraclius
it had reached a much lower point of degradation ; and
for two centuries, especially while the worshippers of
images were persecuted with unrelenting intolerance,
there is almost a blank in the annals of Grecian lite-
rature. 7 But about the middle of the ninth century it

y The authors most conversant with period, such as the eighth century, and
Byzantine learning agree in this. Never- those who correspond to them in the
theless, there is one manifest difference West Sy ocellus, for example, is of great
between the Greek writers of the worst use in chronology, because he was ao

2 h 2

468

BYZANTINE WRITERS. Chap. IX. Part II

revived pretty suddenly, and with considerable success/
Though, as I have observed, we find in very few instances
any original talent, yet it was hardly less important to
have had compilers of such erudition as Photius, Suidas,
Eustathius, and Tzetzes. With these certainly the Latins
of the middle ages could not place any names in com-
parison. They possessed, to an extent which we cannot
precisely appreciate, many of those poets, historians, and
orators of ancient Greece, whose loss we have long re-
gretted and must continue to deem irretrievable. Great
havoc, however, was made in the libraries of Constanti-
nople at its capture by the Latins — an epoch from which
a rapid decline is to be traced in the literature of the
eastern empire. Solecisms and barbarous terms, which
sometimes occur in the old Byzantine writers, are said
to deform the style of the fourteenth and fifteenth cen-
turies.® The Turkish ravages and destruction of mo-

quainted with many ancient histories
now no more. But Bede possessed
nothing which we have lost; and his
compilations are consequently altogether
unprofitable. The eighty century, the
Saeculum Iconoclasticum of Cave, low as
it was in all polite literature, produced
one man, John Damascenus, who has
been deemed the founder of scholastic
theology, and who at least set the ex-
ample of that style of reasoning in the
East. This person, and Michael Psellus,
a philosopher of the eleventh century,
are the only considerable men, as ori-
ginal writers, in the annals of Byzantine
literature.

z The honour of restoring ancient or
heathen literature is due to the Caesar
Bardas, uncle and minister of Michael II.
Cedrenus speaks of it in the following
terms: eneixeXrjQr) Be xa\ 777 s e£u> cro(/jta?,
(rji/ yap ix ir<5\Aov \P° V °v trapappuctaa,
icai irpoc Tjj firfBev oAw? x w P T ? oratra r V
riov KparovvTtav apyitf. /cal ap-adiy) 6ia-
rpt/3a? e/cacnrp tS>v emcrrrjpuiv d^opicras.
rwv pev aWttiv oiqj irep erv^e. rJj? B' errl
iraorwv <7 ro\ov <fn\o<ro<f>ia$ tear’ avra ra
/3acrtAe ta ev rfj Mayva vpy xal oil too
e£ exeevov awqfido'Keiv at eirurrrfpai fjp~
favTo. k. r. A. Hist. Byzant. Script.
(Lutet) t. x. p. 647. Bardas found out
and promoted Photius, afterwards patri-
arch of Constantinople, and equally
famous in the annals of the church and

of learning. Gibbon passes perhaps too
rapidly over the Byzantine literature,
chap. 53. In this, as in many other places,
the masterly boldness and precision of his
outline, which astonish those who have
trodden parts of the same field, are apt
to escape an uninformed reader.

u Du Cange, Pr«efatio ad Glossar.
Grsecitatis Medii Evi. Anna Comnena
quotes some popular lines, which seem
to be the earliest specimen extant of the
Romaic dialect, or something approach-
ing it, as they observe no grammatical
inflexion, and bear about the same re-
semblance to ancient Greek that the
worst law-charters of the ninth and tenth
centuries do to pure Latin. In fact, the
Greek language seems to have declined
much in the same manner as the I .atm
did, and almost at as early a period. In
the sixth century, Damascius, a Platonic
philosopher, mentions the old language
as distinct from that which was ver-
nacular, Tqv apx<x tav yKtorrav vnep rqv
iBuorqv pekerovai. I)u Cange, ibid. p. 11.
It is well known that the popular, or
political verses of Tzetzes, a writer of
the twelfth century, are accentual ; that
is, are to be read, os the modern Greeks
do, by treating every acute or circumflex
syllable as long, without regard to its
original quantity. This innovation, which
must have produced still greater con*
fusion of metrical rules than it did in

State of Society. CLASSICAL LITERATURE.

469

nasteries ensued; and in the cheerless intervals of
immediate terror there was no longer any encouragement
to preserve the monuments of an expiring language, and
of a name that was to lose its place among nations. b

That ardour for the restoration of classical literature
which animated Italy in the first part of the Llterat
fifteenth century, was by no means common to no t much 6
the rest of Europe. Neither England, nor
France, nor Germany, seemed aware of the y y ‘
approaching change. VVe are told that learning, by which
I believe is only meant the scholastic ontology, had begun
to decline at Oxford from the* time of Edward III, 0 And
the fifteenth century, from whatever cause, is particularly
barren of writers in the Latin language. The study of
Greek was only introduced by Grocyn and Linacer under

Latin, is much older than the age of
Tzetzes ; if, at least, the editor of some
notes subjoined to Meursius's edition of
the Themata of Constantine Porphyro-
genitus (Lugduni, 1617) is right in
ascribing certain political verses to that
emperor, who died in 959. These verses
are regular accentual trochaics. But I
believe they have since been given to
Constantine Manasses, a writer of the
eleventh century.

According to the opinion of a modem
traveller (Hobbouse’s Travels in Albania,
letter 33) the chief corruptions which dis-
tinguish the Romaic from its parent
stock, especially the auxiliary verbs, are
not older than the capture of Constanti-
nople by Mahomet IL But it seems
difficult to obtain any satisfactory proof
of this; and the auxiliary verb is so
natural and convenient, that the ancient
Greeks may probably, in some of their
local idioms, have fallen into the use of
it; as Mr. H. admits they did with re-
spect to the future auxiliary 0«Aw. See
some instances of this in Lesbonax, irepl
(rxrifi&T(i)v, ad fiuem Ammonii, curd
ValckenaSr.

b Photius (I write on the authority of
M. Heeren) quotes Theopompus, Arrian's
History of Alexander’s Successors, and of
Pkrthia, Ctesias, Agatharcides, the whole
of Diodorus Siculus, Polybius, and Diony-
sius of Halicarnassus, twenty lost ora-
tions of Demosthenes, almost two hundred
of Lycias, sixty-four of Iseeus, about fifty

of Hyperides. Heeren ascribes the loss
of these works altogether to the Latin
capture of Constantinople, no writer sub-
sequent to that time having quoted them.
Essai sur les Croisades, p. 413. It is diffi-
cult however not to suppose that some
part of the destruction was left for the
Ottomans to perform. -Eneas Sylviqp
bemoans, in his speech before the diet of
Frankfort, the vast losses of literature by
the recent subversion of the Greek em-
pire. Quid de libris dicam, qui illic
erant iimumerabiles, nondum Latinis

cogniti ! Nunc ergo, et Homero et

Pindaro et Menandro et omnibus illus-
trioribus poetis, secunda mors erit But
nothing can be inferred from this de-
clamation, except, perhaps, that he did
not know whether Menander still existed
or not iEu. Sylv. Opera, p. 7x5 ; also
p. 881. Harris’s Philological Inquiries,
part iii. c. 4. It is a remarkable proof,
however, of the turn which Europe, and
especially Italy, was taking, that a pope’s
legate should, on a solemn occasion, de-
scant so seriously on the injury sustained
by profane literature.

An useful summary of the lower
Greek literature, taken chiefly from the
Bibliotheca Graaea of Fabricius, will be
found in Berington’s Literary History of,
the Middle Ages, Appendix I. ; and one
rather more copious in Schoell, Abr^gd
de la Litterature Grfecque. (Paris, 1812.)

c Wood’s Antiquities of Oxford, voLi
p. 537.

470

CLASSICAL LITERATURE. Chap. IX. Part II.

Henry VII., and met with violent opposition in the uni-
versity of Oxford, where the unlearned party styled
themselves Trojans, as a pretext for abusing and insulting
the scholars. 4 Nor did any classical work proceed from
the respectable press of C&xton. France, at the begin-
ning of the fifteenth age, had several eminent theolo-
gians; but the reigns of Charles VII. and Louis XI.
contributed far more to her political than her literary
renown. A Greek professor was first appointed at Paris
in 1458, before which time the language had not been
publicly taught, and was little understood.® Much less
had Germany thrown off her ancient rudeness. iEneas
Sylvius, indeed, a deliberate flatterer, extols every cir-
cumstance in the social state of that country ; but Cam-
pano, the papal legate at Katisbon in 1471, exclaims
against the barbarism of a nation, where very few pos-
sessed any learning, none any elegance/ Yet the pro-
gress of intellectual cultivation, at least in the two former
countries, was uniform, though silent ; libraries became
more numerous, and books, after the happy invention of
paper, though still very scarce, might be copied at less
expense. Many colleges were founded in the English as
well as foreign universities during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries. Nor can I pass over institutions that
have so eminently contributed to the literary reputation
of this country, and that still continue to exercise so
conspicuous an influence over her taste and knowledge,
as the two great schools of grammatical learning, Win-
chester and Eton — the one founded by William of Wyke-
ham, bishop of Winchester, in 1373; the other in 1432,
by King Henry the Sixth. 6

d Roper's Vita Mori, ed.Heame, p. 75. the terms of treaties he employs the old

• Crevier, t. iv. p. 243 ; see too p. 46. Roman forms ; exercitum trajicito— op-

t Incredibilis ingeniorum barbaries est ; pida pontiflcis sunto, Ac. And with a
rarissimi literas nOrunt, nulli elegantiam. most absurd pedantry, the ecclesiastical
Papienais Epistolse, p. 377. Campano’s state is called Romanum imperium.
notion of elegance was ridiculous enough. Campani Vita Braccli, in Muratori Script
Nobody ever carried further the pedantic Rer. Itai. t xix.

affectation of avoiding modem terms in 6 A letter from Master William Paston
his Latinity. Thus, in the life of Braccio at Eton (Paston Letters, vol. i. p. 299)
da Montone, he renders his meaning proves that Latin versification was taught
almost unintelligible by excess of clas- there as early as the beginning of Edward
steal purity. Braccio boasts se numquam IV.'s reign. It is true that the specimen
deorum immortalium templa vioiasse. he rather proudly exhibits does not much
Troops committing outrages in a city are differ from what we denominate non**
accused virgines vestales incestftsse. In sense verses. But a more material ob-

State of Society. INTENTION OF PRINTING.

471

But while the learned of Italy were eagerly exploring
their recent acquisitions of manuscripts, de- invention of
cyphered with difficulty and slowly circulated printing,
from hand to hand, a few obscure Germans had gradually
perfected the most important discovery recorded in the
annal/s of mankind. The invention of printing, so far
from being the result of philosophical sagacity, does not
appear to have been suggested by any regard to the
higher branches of literature, or to bear any other relation
than that of coincidence to their revival in Italy. The
question why it was struck out at that particular time
must be referred to that disposition of unknown causes
which we call accident. Two or three centuries earlier,
we cannot but acknowledge the discovery would have
been almost equally acceptable. But the invention of
paper seems to have naturally preceded those of en-
graving and printing. It is generally agreed that playing
cards, which have been traced far back in the fourteenth
century, gave the first notion of taking off impressions
from engraved, figures upon wood. The second stage, or
rather second application of this art, was the repre-
sentation of saints and other religidus devices, several
instance** of which are still extant. Some of these are
accompanied with an entire page of illustrative text, cut
into the same wooden block. This process is indeed far
removed from the invention that has given immortality
to the names of Fust, Schaeffer, and Gutenburg, yet it
probably led to the consideration of means whereby
it might be rendered less operose and inconvenient.
Whether moveable wooden characters were ever em-
ployed in any entire work is very questionable — the
opinion that referred their use to Laurence Coster, of
Haarlem, not Having Stood the test of more accurate
investigation. They appear, however, in the capital
letters of some early printed books. But no expedient
of this kind could have fulfilled the great purposes of
this invention, until it was perfected by founding metal
types in a matrix or mould, the essential characteristic
of printing, as distinguished from other arts that bear
some analogy to it.

The first book that issued from the presses of Fust

serration is, that the sons of country tance were already sent to public schools
gentlemen living at a considerable dis* for grammatical education.

472

EARLY PRINTED WORKS,

Chap. IX. Part IL

*nd Ms associates at Mentz was an edition of the Vulgate,
commonly called the Mazarine Bible, a copy having been
discovered in the library that owes its name to Cardinal
Mazarin at Paris. This is supposed to have been printed
between the years 1450 and 1455. h In 1457 an edition
of the Psalter appeared, and in this the invention was
announced to the world in a boasting colophon, though
certainly not unreasonably bold. 1 Another edition of the
Psalter, one of an ecclesiastical book, Durand’s account
of liturgical offices, one of the Constitutions of Pope
Clement V., and one of a popular treatise on general
science, called the Catholicon, filled up the interval till
1462, when the second Mentz Bible proceeded from the
same printers.* This, in the opinion of some, is the
earliest book in which cast types were employed — those
of the Mazarine Bible having been cut with the hand.
But this is a controverted point. In 1465 Fust and
Schoeffer published an edition of Cicero’s Offices, the first
tribute of the new art to polite literature. Two pupils
of their school, Sweynheim and Pannart^, migrated the
same year into Italy, and printed Donatus’s grammar
and the works of Lactantius at the monastery of Subiaco,
in the neighbourhood of Rome. m V enice had the honour
of extending her patronage to John of Spira, the first who
applied, the art on an extensive scale to the publication
of classical writers. 0 Several Latin authors came forth
from his press in 1470 ; and during the next ten years a
multitude of editions were published in various parts of
Italy. Though, as we may judge from their present
scarcity, these editions were by no means numerous in
respect of impressions, yet, contrasted with the dilatory
process of copying manuscripts, they were like a new
mechanical power in machinery, and gave a wonderfully
accelerated impulse to the intellectual cultivation of
mankind. From the era of these first editions proceeding
from the Spiras, Zarot, Janson, or Sweynheim and Pan-
nartz, literature must be deemed to have altogether

h De Bure, 1 1. p. 30. Several copies Pfister at Bamberg in 1459.
of this book have come to light since its m Tiraboschi, t vi p. 140.
discovery. n Sanuto mentions an order of the

» Id., p. 71. senate in 1469, that John of Spira should

k M«5m. de l’Acad. des Inscriptions, t print the epistles of Tully and Pliny for
xiv. p. 265. Another edition of the Bible five years, and that no one else should do
is supposed to have been printed by so. Script Rerum Italic, t. xxii. p. 1189.

State of Society. REVIVAL OF LEARNING.

473

revived in Italy. The sun was now fully above the
horizon, though countries less fortunately circumstanced
did not immediately catch his beams ; and the restoration
of ancient learning in France and England cannot be
considered as by any means effectual even at the expira-
tion of the fifteenth century. At this point, however, I
close the present chapter. The last twenty years of the
middle ages, according to the date which I have fixed
for their termination in treating of political history,
might well invite me by their brilliancy to dwell upon
that golden morning of Italian literature. But, in the
history of letters, they rather appertain to the modem
than the middle period ,* nor would it become me to tres-
pass upon the exhausted patience of my readers by
repeating what has been so often and so recently told,
the story of art and learning, that has employed the com-
prehensive research of a Tiraboschi, a Ginguene, and a
Roscoe.

474

THE DARK AGES,

Notes to

NOTES TO CHAPTER IX.

Note I. Page 288.

A rapid decline of learning began in tbe sixth century,
of which Gregory of Tours is both a witness and an
example. It is, therefore, properly one of the dark ages,
more so by much than the eleventh, which concludes
them ; since very few were left in the church who pos-
sessed any acquaintance with classical authors, or who
wrote with any command of the Latin language. Their
studies, whenever they studied at all, were almost ex-
clusively theological ; and this must be understood as to
the subsequent centuries. By theological is meant the
vulgate Scriptures and some of the Latin fathers ; not,
however, by reasoning upon them, or doing much more
than introducing them as authority in their own words.
In the seventh century, and still more at the beginning
of the eighth, very little even of this remained in France,
where we find hardly a name deserving of remembrance
in a literary sense ; but Isidore, and our own Bede, do
honour to Spain and Britain.

It may certainly be said for France and Germany, not-
withstanding a partial interruption in the latter part of
the ninth and beginning of the tenth century, that they
were gradually progressive from the time of Charlemagne,
But then this progress was so very slow, and the men in
front of it so little capable of bearing comparison -with
those of later times, considering their writings positively
and without indulgence, that it is by no means unjust to
call the centuries dark which elapsed between Charle-
magne and the manifest revival of literary pursuits
towards the end of the eleventh century. Alcuin, for
example, has left us a good deal of poetry. This is su-
perior to what we find in some other writers of the

Chap. IX. THE DARK AGES. 475

obscure period, and indicates both a correct ear and a
familiarity with the Latin poets, especially Ovid. Still
his verses are not as good as those which schoolboys of
fourteen now produce, either in poetical power or in
accuracy of language and metre. The errors indeed are
innumerable. Aldhelm, an earlier Anglo-Saxon poet,
with more imaginative spirit, is further removed from
classical poetry. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, early in the
ninth century, in some of his epistles writes tolerable
Latin, though this is far from being always the case ; he
is smitten with a love of classical literature, quotes
several poets and prose writers, and is almost as curious
about little points of philology as an Italian scholar of
the fifteenth century. He was continually borrowing
books in order to transcribe them — a proof, however, of
their scarcity and of the low condition of general learn-
ing, which is the chief point we have to regards But his
more celebrated correspondent, Eginhard, went beyond
him. Both his Annals and the Life of Charlemagne are
very well written, in a classical spirit, unlike the church
Latin ; though a few words and phrases may not be of
the best age, I should place Eginhard above Alcuin and
Lupus, or, as far as I know, any other of the Caroline
period.

The tenth century has in all times borne the worst
name. Baronius calls it, in one page, plumbeum , obscu-
rum , infelix (Annales, a.d. 900). And Cave, \flio dubs
all his centuries by some epithet, assigns ferreum to the
tenth. Nevertheless, there was considerably less igno-
rance in France and Germany during the latter part of
this age than before the reign of Charlemagne, or even
in it ; more glimmerings of acquaintance with the Latin
classics appear ; and the schools, cathedral and conven-
tual, had acquired a more regular and uninterrupted
scheme of instruction. The degraded condition of papal
Borne has led many to treat this century rather worse
than it deserves ; and indeed Italy was sunk very low in
ignorance. As to the eleventh century, the upward pro-

a The writings of Lupus Servatus, than Gregory of Tours, but quite as
abbot of Ferribres, were published by much inferior to Sidonius Apollinaris.
B&luze; and a good account of them I have observed in Lupus quotations
will be found in Ampbre's Hist Litt. from Horace, Virgil, Martial, Cicero,
(vol. Hi. p. 237), as well as in older Aulus Geliius; and Trogus Pompelus
works. He is a much better writer (meaning probably Justin),

47 G

THE DARK AGES.

Notes to

gress was extremely perceptible. It is commonly
l’eckoned among the dark ages till near its close ; but
these phrases are of course used comparatively, and
because the difference between that and the twelfth was
more sensible than we find in any two that are consecu-
tive since the sixth.

The state of literature in England was by no means
parallel to what we find on the continent. Our best age
was precisely the worst in France ; it was the age of the
Heptarchy — that of Theodore, Bede, Aldhelm, Caedmon,
and Alcuin ; to whom, if Ireland will permit us, we may
desire to add Scotus, who came a little afterwards, but
whose residence in this island at any time appears an
unauthenticated tale. But we know how Alfred speaks
of the ignorance of the clergy in his own age. Nor was
this much better afterwards. Even the eleventh century,
especially before the Conquest, is a very blank period in
the literary annals of England. No one can have a con-
ception how wretchedly scanty is the list of lif erary
names from Alfred to the Conquest, who does not look
to Mr. Turner’s History of the Anglo-Saxons, or to Mr.
Wright’s Biographia Literaria.

There could be no general truth respecting the past, as
it appeared to me, more notorious, or more incapable of
being denied with any plausibility, than the characteristic
ignorance of Europe during those centuries which we
commonly style the Dark Ages. A powerful stream,
however, of what, as to the majority at least, I must call
prejudice, has been directed of late years in an opposite
direction. The mediaeval period, in manners, in arts, in
literature, and especially in religion, has been regarded
with unwonted partiality; and this favourable temper
has been extended to those ages which had lain most
frequently under the ban of historical and literary
censure.

A considerable impression has been made on the pre-
disposed by the Letters on the Dark Ages, which we owe
to Dr. Maitland. Nor is this by any means surprising ;
both because the predisposed are soon convinced, and
because the Letters are written with great ability, accu-
rate learning, a spirited and lively pen, and conse-
quently with a success in skirmishing warfare which
many readily mistake for the gain of a pitched battle.

Chap. IX.

THE DARK AGES.

477

Dr. Maitland is endowed with, another quality, far more
rare in historical controversy, especially of the ecclesi-
astical kind : I believe him to be of scrupulous integrity,
minutely exact in all that he asserts ; and indeed the
wrath and asperity, which sometimes appear rather more
than enough, are only called out by what he conceives
to be wilful or slovenly misrepresentation. Had I,
therefore, the leisure and means of following Dr. Mait-
land through his quotations, I should probably abstain
from doing so from the reliance I should place on his
testimony, both in regard to his power of discerning
truth and his desire to express it. But I have no call
for any examination, could I institute it ; since the result
of my own reflections is that every thing which Dr. M.
asserts as matter of fact — I do not say suggests in all his
language — may be perfectly true, without affecting the
great proposition that the dark ages, those from the sixth
to the eleventh, were ages of ignorance. Nor does he, as
far as I collect, attempt to deny this evident truth ; it is
merely his object to prove that they were less ignorant,
less dark, and in all points of view less worthy of con-
demnation than many suppose. I do not gainsay this
position; being aware,. as I have observed both in this
and in another work, that the mere ignorance of these
ages, striking as it is in comparison with earlier and
later times, has been sometimes exaggerated; and that
Europeans, and especially Christians, could not fallback
into the absolute barbarism of the Esquimaux. But what
a man of profound and accurate learning puts forward
with limitations, sometimes expressed, and always present
to his own mind, a heady and shallow retailer takes up,
and exaggerates in conformity with his own prejudices.

The Letters on the Dark Ages relate principally to the
theological attainments of the clergy during that period,
which the author assumes, rather singularly, to extend
from a.d. 800 to 1 200 ; thus excluding midnight from
his definition of darkness, and replacing it by the break
of day. And in many respects, especially as to the
knowledge of the vulgate Scriptures possessed by the
better-informed clergy, he obtains no very difficult vic-
tory over those who have imbibed extravagant notions,
both as to the ignorance of the Sacred Writings in those
times and the desire to keep them away from the people.

478

THE DARK AGES.

Notes to

This latter prejudice is obviously derived from a confu-
sion of the subsequent period, the centuries preceding
the Reformation, with those which we have immediately
before us. But as the word dark is commonly used, either
in reference to the body of the laity or to the general
extent of liberal studies in the church, and as it involves
a comparison with prior or subsequent ages, it cannot be
improper in such a sense, even if the manuscripts of the
Bible should have been as common in monasteries as
Dr. Maitland supposes ; and yet his proofs seem much
too doubtful to sustain that hypothesis.

There is a tendency to set aside the verdict of the most
approved writers, which gives too much of a polemical
character, too much of the tone of an advocate who fights
every point, rather than of a calm arbitrator, to the
Letters on the Dark Ages. For it is not Henry, or
Jortin, or Robertson, who are our usual testimonies, but
their immediate masters, Muratori, and Fleury, and
Tiraboschi, and Brucker and the Benedictine authors of
the Literary History of France, and many others in
France, Italy, and Germany. The latest who has gone
over this rather barren ground, and not inferior to any
in well-applied learning, in candour or good sense, is
M. Ampere, in his Histoire Litteraire de la France avant
le douzieme siecle (3 vols. Paris, 1840). No one will
accuse this intelligent writer of unduly depreciating the
ages which he thus brings before us ; and by the perusal
of his volumes, to which Heeren and Eichhom may be
added for Germany, we may obtain a clear and correct
outline, which, considering the shortness of life compared
with the importance of exact knowledge on such a sub-
ject, will suffice for the great majority of readers. I by
no means, however, would exclude the Letters on the
Dark Ages, as a spirited pleading for those who have
often been condemned unheard.

I shall conclude by remarking that one is a little
tempted to inquire why so much anxiety is felt by the
advocates of the mediaeval church . to rescue her from the
charge of ignorance. For this ignorance she was not,
generally speaking, to be blamed. It was no crime of
the clergy that the Huns burned their churches, or the
Normans pillaged their monasteries. It was not by their
moans that the Saracens shut up the &uj)ply of papyrus,

Chap. IX.

DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE.

47 S

and that sheep-skins bore a great price. Europe was
altogether decayed in intellectual character, partly in
consequence of the barbarian incursions, partly of other
sinister influences acting long before. We certainly owe
to the church every spark of learning which then glim-
mered, and which she preserved through that darkness
to re-kindle the light of a happier age — Snippa nypog
crwCovc ra. Meantime, what better apology than this
ignorance can be made by Protestants, and I presume
Dr. Maitland is not among those who abjure the name,
for the corruption, the superstition, the tendency to
usurpation, which they at least must impute to the church
of the dark ages? Not that in these respects it was
worse than in a less obscure period ; for the reverse is
true ; but the fabric of popery was raised upon its foun-
dations before the eleventh century, though not displayed
in its full proportions till afterwards. And there was so
much of lying legend, so much of fraud in the acquisition
of property, that ecclesiastical historians have not been
loth to acknowledge the general ignorance as a sort of
excuse. [1848.]

Note II. Page 350.

The account of domestic architecture given in the text
is very superficial ; but the subject still remains, compara-
tively with other portions of mediaeval antiquity, but
imperfectly treated. The best sketch that has hitherto
been given is in an article with this title in the Glossary
of Ancient -Architecture (which should be read in an
edition not earlier than that of 1845), from the pen of
Mr. Twopeny, whose attention has long been directed to
the subject. “ There is ample evidence yet remaining
of the domestic architecture in this country during the
twelfth century. The ordinary manor-houses, and even
houses of greater consideration, appear to have been
generally built in the form of a parallelogram, two stories
high, b the lower story vaulted, with no internal commu-

b This is rather equivocal, but it is Mayors and Sheriffs,” published in the
certainly not meant that there were ever Archaeological Journal (vol. iv. p. 273),
two j floors above that on the ground. In we read — “ The he -lses in London, of
the review pf the “ Chronicles of the whatever material, seem never to have

480

DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE.

Notes to

ideation between the two, the upper story approached by
a flight of steps on the outside ; and in that story was
sometimes the only fireplace in the whole building. It
is more than probable that this was the usual style of
houses in the preceding century.” Instances of houses
partly remaining are then given. We may add to those
mentioned by Mr. Twopeny one, perhaps older than any,
and better preserved than some, in his list. At South-
ampton is a Norman house, perhaps built in the first
part of the twelfth century. It is nearly a square, the
outer walls tolerably perfect ; the principal rooms appear
to have been on the first (or upper) floor ; it has in this
also a fireplace and chimney, and four windows placed
so as to indicate a division into two apartments ; but
there are no lights below, nor any appearance of an in-
terior staircase. The sides are about forty feet in length.
Another house of the same age is near to it, but much
worse preserved. 6

The parallelogram house, seldom containing more
than four rooms, with no access frequently to the upper
which the family occupied, except on the outside, was
gradually replaced by one on a different type: — the
entrance was on the ground, the staircase within ; a
kitchen and other offices, originally detached, were
usually connected with the hall by a passage running

exceeded one story in height” (p. 282.)
But, Boon afterwards — 44 The ground
floor of the London houses at this period
was aptly enough called a cellar, the
upper story a solar.” It thus appears
that the reviewer does not mean the same
thing as Mr. Twopeny by the word
story, which the formeT confines to the
floor above that on the ground, while the
latter includes both. The use of lan-
guage, ns we know, supports, in some
measure, either meaning; but perhaps it
is more correct, and more common, to
call the first story that which is reached
by a staircase from the ground-floor. The
solar, or sleeping-room, raised above the
cellar, was often of wood.

c See afuli description in the Archae-
ological Journal, voL iv. p. 11. Those
who visit Southampton may seek this
house, near a gate in the west wall. We
may add to the contribution of Mr.
Twopeny one published in the Proceed-

ings of the Archaeological Institute, by
Mr. Hudson Turner, Nov. 184T. This is
chiefly founded on documents, as that of
Mr. Twopeny is on existing remains.
These give more light where they can be
found; but the number is very small.
Upon the whole, it may be here ob-
served, that we are frequently misled by
works of fiction as to the domestic con-
dition of our forefathers. The house of
Cedric the Saxon in lvanhoe, with its
distinct, and numerous apartments, is
very unlike any that remain or can be
traced. This is by no means to be cen-
sured in the romancer, whose aim is to
delight by images more splendid than
truth; but, especially when presented by
one who possessed in some respects a
considerable knowledge of antiquity,
and was rather fond of displaying it,
there is some danger lest the, reader
should believe that he has a faithful pic-
ture before him.

Chap. IX.

DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE.

481

through the house ; one or more apartments on the lower
floor extended beyond the hall; there was seldom or
never a third floor over the entire house, but detached
turrets for sleeping-rooms rose at some of the angles.
This was the typical form which lasted, as we know, to
the age of Elizabeth, or even later. The superior houses
of this class were sometimes quadrangular, that is,
including a court-yard, but seldom, perhaps, with more
than one side allotted to the main dwelling; offices,
stables, or mere walls filled the other three.

Many dwellings erected in the fourteenth century
may be found in England ; but neither of that nor the
next age are there more than a very few, which are
still, in their chief rooms, inhabited by gentry. But
houses, which by their marks of decoration, or by
external proof, are ascertained to have been formerly
occupied by good families, though now in the occupation
of small farmers, and built apparently from the reign of
the second to that of the fourth Edward, are common
in many counties. They generally bear the name of
court, hall, or grange ; sometimes only the surname
of some ancient occupant, and very frequently have
been the residence of the lord of the manor.

The most striking circumstance in the oldest houses
is not so much their precautions for defence in the out-
side staircase, and when that was disused, the better
safeguard against robbery in the moat which frequently
environed the walls, the strong gateway, the small
window broken by mullions, which are no more than
we should expect in the times, as the paucity of apart-
ments, so that both sexes, and that even in high rank,
must have occupied the same room. The progress of
a regard to decency in domestic architecture has been
gradual, and in some respects has been increasing up to
our own age. But the mediaeval period shows little of
it; though in the advance of wealth, a greater division
of apartments distinguishes the houses of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries from those of an earlier period.

The French houses of the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries were probably much of the same arrangement
as the English ; the middle and lower classes had but
one hall and one chamber ; those superior to them had
the solarium or upper floor, as with us. See Archaeolo-

YOL. III. 2 I

482

PETRARCH’S LAURA.

Notes to

gical Journal (vol. i. p. 212), where proofs are adduced
from the fabliaux of Barbasan. [1848.]

Note III. Page 451.

The Abbe de Sade, in those copious memoirs of the
life of Petrarch, which illustrate in an agreeable though
rather prolix manner the civil and literary history of
Provence and Italy in the fourteenth century, endea-
voured to establish his own descent from Laura, as the
wife of Hughes de Sade, and bom in the family de
Noves. This hypothesis has since been received with
general acquiescence by literary men ; and Tiraboschi
in particular, whose talent lay in these petty biographical
researches, and who had a prejudice against every thing
that came from France, seems to consider it as decisively
proved. But it has been called in question in a modem
publication by the late Lord Woodhouselee. (Essay on
the Life and Character of Petrarch, 1810.) I shall
not offer any opinion as to the identity of Petrarch's
mistress with Laura de Sade ; but the main position of
Lord W.’s essay, that Laura was an unmarried woman,
and the object of an honourable attachment in her lover,
seems irreconcileable with the evidence that his writings
supply. 1. There is no passage in Petrarch, whether of
poetry or prose, that alludes to the virgin character of
Laura, or gives her the usual appellations of unmarried
women, puella in Latin, or donzella in Italian ; even in
the Trionfo della Castita, where so obvious an opportu-
nity occurred. Yet this was naturally to be expected
from so ethereal an imagination as that of Petrarch,
always inclined to invest her with the halo of celestial
purity. We know how Milton took hold of the mystical
notions of virginity; notions more congenial to the
religion of Petrarch than his own :

Quod tibi perpetuus pudor, et sine labe juventas
Pura fuit, quod nulla tori libata voluptas,

En etiam tibi virginei servantur honores.

Epitaphium Damonis.

2. The coldness of Laura towards so passionate and
deserving a lover, if no insurmountable obstacle inter-

Chap. IX. PETRARCH'S LAURA. 483

vened during his twenty years of devotion, would be at
least a mark that his attachment was misplaced, and
show him in rather a ridiculous light. It is not sur-
prising, that persons believing Laura to be unmarried,
as seems to have been the case with the Italian com-
mentators, should have thought his passion affected, and
little more than poetical. But upon the contrary sup-
position, a thread runs through the whole of his poetry,
and gives it consistency. A love on the one side,
instantaneously conceived, and retained by the suscep-
tibility of a tender heart and ardent fancy ; nourished
by slight encouragement, and seldom presuming to hope
for more ; a mixture of prudence and coquetry on the
other, kept within bounds either by virtue or by the
want of mutual attachment, yet not dissatisfied with
fame more brilliant and flattery more refined than had
ever before been the lot of woman — these are surely
pretty natural circumstances, and such as do not render
the story less intelligible. Unquestionably such a pas-
sion is not innocent. But Lord Woodhouselee, who is
so much scandalized at it, knew little, one would think,
of the fourteenth century. His standard is taken not
from Avignon, but from Edinburgh, a much better place,
no doubt, and where the moral barometer stands at a
very different altitude. In one passage (p. 188) he
carries his strictness to an excess of prudery. From all
we know of the age of Petrarch, the only matter of
astonishment is the persevering virtue of Laura. The
troubadours boast of much better success with Proven-
gal ladies. 3. But the following passage from Petrarch’s
dialogues with St. Augustin, the work, as is well known,
where he most unbosoms himself, will leave no doubt, I
think, that his passion could not have been gratified
consistently -with honour. At mulier ista Celebris,
quam tibi certissimam ducem fingis, ad superos cur non
hfiesitantem trepidumque direxerit, et quod cmcis fieri
solet, manu apprehensum non tenuit, quo et gradiendum
foret admonuit ? Petr. Fecit hoc ilia quantum potuit.
Quid enim aliud egit, cum nullis mota precibus, nullis
victa blanditiis, muliebrem tenuit decorem, et adversus
suam semel et meam setatem, adversus multa et varia
quae fleetere adamantium spiritum debuissenV inexpug-
nabilis et firma permansit ? Profecto animus iste foemi-

2 i 2

484 EARLY LEGISLATIVE USE OF Notes tc

neus quid virum decuit admonebat, proestabatque ne in
sectando pudicitiae studio, ut verbis utar Senecae, aut
exemplum aut convitium deesset ; postremo cum lorifra-
gum ac preecipitem videret,, deserere maluit potius quam
sequi. August. Turpe igitur aliquid interdum voluisti,
quod supra negaveras. At iste vulgatus amantium, vel,
ut dicam verius, amantium furor est, ut omnibus merito
dici possit : volo nolo, nolo volo. Yobis ipsis quid ve-
litis, aut nolitis, ignotum est. Pet. Invitus in laqueum
offendi. Si quid tamen olim aliter forte voluissem, amor
mtasque coegerunt; nunc quid velim et cupiam scio,
firmavique jam tandem animum labentem ; contra autem
ilia propositi tenax et semper una permansit, quare
constantiam foemineam quo magis intelligo, magis ad-
miror: idque sibi consilium fuisse, si unquam debuit,
gaudeo nunc et gratias ago. Aug. Semel fallenti,
non facile rursus fides habenda est: tu prius mores
atque habitum, vitamque mutavisti, quam animum
mutasse persuadeas ; mitigatur forte si tuus leniturque
ignis, extinctus non est. Tu verb qui tantum dilectioni
tribuis, non animadvertis, illam absolvendo, quantum
te ipse condemnas ; illam fateri libet fuisse sanctissimam
dum te insanum scejestumque fateare. — Be Contemptu
Mundi, Dialog. 3, p. 367, edit. 1581.

Note IV. Page 456.

The progress of our language in proceedings of the
legislature is so well described in the preface to the
authentic edition of Statutes of the Realm, published by
the Record Commission, that I shall transcribe the
passage, which I copy from Mr. Cooper’s useful account
of the Public Records (vol. i. p. 189) : —

The earliest instance recorded of the use of the Eng-
lish language in any parliamentary proceeding is in 36
Edw. III. The style of the roll of that year is in French
as usual, but it is expressly stated that the causes of
summoning the- parliament were declared en Engbis ; and
the like^ is noted in 37 and 38 Edw. IIL d

In the 5th year of Richard II., the chancellor is stated

d References are given to the Rolls of Parliament throughout this extract.

Chap. IX.

THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.

485

to have made m bom collacion en Engleys (introductory, a s
was then sometimes the usage, to the commencement of
business), though he made use of the common French
form for opening the parliament. A petition from the
4 Folk of the Mercerye of London/ in the 10th year of
the same reign, is in English ; and it appears also that
in the 17th year the Earl of Arundel asked pardon of the
Duke of Lancaster by the award of the King and Lords,
in their presence in parliament, in a form of English
words. The cession and renunciation of the crown by
Richard II. is stated to have been read before the estates
of the realm and the people in Westminster Hall, first in
Latin and afterwards in English, but it is entered on
the parliament roll only in Latin. And the challenge
of the crown by Henry IV., with his thanks after the
allowance of his title, in the same assembly, are recorded
in English, which is termed his maternal tongue. So
also is the speech of ‘Lord William Thyming, the Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, to the late King Richard,
announcing to him the sentence of his deposition, and
the yielding up, on the part of the people, of their
fealty and allegiance. In the 6th year of the reign of
Henry IV. an English answer is given to a petition of
the Commons, touching a proposed resumption of cer-
tain grants of the crown to the intent the king might
live of his own. The English language afterwards
appears occasionally, through the reigns of Henry IY.
and Henry Y. In the first and second and subsequent
years of Henry VI., the petitions or bills, and in many
cases the answers also, on which the statutes were
afterwards framed, are found frequently in English;
but the statutes are entered on the roll in French or
Latin. From the 23rd year of Henry VI. these peti-
tions or bills are almost universally in English, as is
also sometimes the form of the royal assent ; but the
statutes continued to be enrolled in French or Latin.
Sometimes Latin and French are used in the same
statute, 8 as in 8 Hen. VI., 27 Hen. VI., and 39 Hen. VI.
The last statute wholly in Latin on record is 33 Hen.
VI. c. 2. The statutes of Edward IV. are entirely in
French. The statutes of Richard III. are in many

* All the acts passed in the same ference of language was in separate
session are legally one statute ; the dif- chapters or acts.

486

STATUTES IN ENGLISH. Notes to Chap. IX.

manuscripts in French in a complete statute form ; and
they were so printed in his reign and that of his
successor. In the earlier English editions a translation
was inserted in the same form ; but in several editions,
since 1618, they have been printed in English, in a dif-
ferent form, agreeing, so far as relates to the acts
printed, with the inrolment in Chancery at the Chapel
of the Kolls. The petitions and bills in parliament,
during these two reigns, are all in English. The
statutes of Henry VII. have always, it is believed, been
published in English ; but there are manuscripts con-
taining the statutes of the first two parliaments, in his
first and third year, in French. From the fourth year
to the end of his reign, and from thence to the present
time, they are universally in English.”

INDEX.

%* The Roman Numerals refer to the Volumes — the Arabic Figure t to the Pages of

each Volume.

ABBAJ3SIDE8,

Abbassides, encouragement of science
and art by the, ii. 121 — progress of
their dynasty, 122— -its decadence, 123.

Abdalrahman proclaimed khalif of Cor-
dova, ii. 122.

Abelard (Peter), enthusiasm excited by
the teachings of, iii. 420— -his erratic
career, 421.

Acre, consequences to commerce by the
capture of, iii. 329— vices of its inha-
bitants, ib. note m .

Adorni and Fregosi factions, disruption
of Genoa by the, i. 496.

Adolphus of Nassau elected emperor of
Germany, ii. 82.

Adrian II. (pope), attempts to overawe
Charles the Bald, ii. 173.

Adrian IV. (the only English pope), in- i
solence or, towards Frederic Barba-
rossa, ii. 105— his system of mandats,
212 .

Adventurers (military). See. Military
Systems.

AEneas Sylvius (afterwards Pius II.),
instance of the political foresight of, i.
504— he abets the war against the
Turks, ii. 137— specimen of his ora- :
tory, 138, note— his singular suggestion
to Mahomet II., ib. note— he plays
into the hands of the pope, 253— he
obtains the repeal of the Pragmatic
Sanction, 255— his sketch of Vienna,
Hi. 345, note u .

Agriculture, cause of the low state of,
iii. 312, 359, and note “—superior cul-
tivation of church lands, 360 — exem-
plary labours of the Benedictines, ib.
note "—agricultural colonies, 361 and
notes P and <J — early enclosures and
clearances, 362— exportation of corn,
how limited, 364— usual prices of land,
<6.— high state of Italian agriculture,
ib .— effects of pestilence, 365— ex-
cellence of the Italian gardens, ib. —
neglect of horticulture in England,
366.

Alaric, tolerance of, towards his catholic
subjects, i. 3, note f — defeated by
Clovis, 4— laws compiled by his order,
iii. 414.

Albert I. of Germany, ii. 82— his rule
in Switzerland, 108— his expulsion and

ALFONSO X.

assassination, 109— the French crown
offered to him, 231.

Albert II. succeeds Sigismund as emperor
of Germany, ii. 88.

Albigensian heresy, spread of the, i. 28
—massacre of the AlbigeoiB, ib., 29,
notes. See Religious Sects.

Albizi, ascendency in Florence regained
by the, i. 496 — Cosmo de’ Medici
banished at their instigation, 499—
their overthrow, ib . — exclusion of their
family from the magistracy, 499.

Alcuin teaches Charlemagne, iii. 419 —
he discourages secular learning, 420
—character of his poetry, 474.

Alexander II. (pope), election of, ii. 184
—he deposes the English prelates, 305,
note h.

Alexander III. (pope), supports Thomas
h Becket, ii. 195— adopts the system of
mandats, 212.

Alexander V. elected pope, ii. 243— his
successor, ib.

Alexander III. king of Scotland, oppo-
sition to papal domination by, ii. 217.

Alexius Comnenus attacks the Turks,
ii. 128— he recovers the Greek terri-
tories, ib. and note.

Alfonso I. of Aragon bequeaths his king-
dom to the Knights Templars, ii. 8.

Alfonso III. of Aragon compelled to
apologise to his people, ii. 45.

Alfonso V. of Aragon (the Magnanimous),
i. 490 — adopted by Joanna II. of
Naples, ib . — she revokes the adoption,
491 — his accession, ib .— his imprison-
ment by the Genoese, 492 — his alliance
with Milan, ib., 493— his virtues and
patronage of the arts, 493— his literary
medicine, 494 note — his love of Na-
ples, ii. 42.

Alfonso V. and VI. of Castile, townfl in-
corporated by, ii. 6.

Alfonso VII. of Castile, unwise division
of his dominions by, ii. 9.

Alfonso X. of Castile, scientific acquire-
ments and governmental deficiencies
of, ii. 12— law promulgated by him,
37— his election as emperor of Ger-
many, 76— tithes established in his
reign, 146, note "—clerical encroach-
ments favoured hy him, 220, note 1

488

INDEX.

ALFONSO XI.

— he exempts the clergy from civil
jurisdiction, 226.

Alfonso XI. of Castile assassinates his
cousin, ii. 14 — his disregard of law, 36.

Alfred the Great, rescue of the Anglo-
Saxon monarchy by, ii. 271— his al-
leged division of the kingdom into
counties, &c. 280— ascription of trial
by jury to him, 285— his high claim
to veneration, 289 — extent of his ac-
quaintance with Latin, iii. 286 — his
declaration of the ignorance of the
clergy, 288— his zeal for learning, ib.
note ",

Aliens held liable for each other’s debts,
iii. 336.

Almamun and Almansor, khalifs of Bag-
dad, patronage of letters by, ii. 121.

Alodial tenure, characteristics of, i. 147,
148 and notes — converted into feudal
tenure, 163— except in certain locali-
ties, 164 and note-— causes of the con-
version, 317, 318— alodial proprietors
evidently freemen, 324.

Alvaro de Luna. See Luna.

Amadeus (duke of Savoy), elected pope,

ii. 248.

Amalfi, early commercial eminence of,

iii. 328 and note— its decline, ib.—
alleged invention of the mariner's com-
pass there, 332 and note — discovery of
the Pandects, 415.

Amurath I., progresses of the Turkish
arms under, ii. 132.

Amurath II., rout of the Hungarians
by, ii. 106 — reunion of the Ottoman
monarchy under him, 135— he per-
fects the institution of the Janizaries,
137.

Anastasius confers the dignity of consul-
ship on Clovis, i. 107— elucidatory ob-
servations thereon, 107-111.

Andalusia, conquest of, by Ferdinand III.,
ii. 9.

Andrew of Hungary married to Joanna
of Naples, i. 486— his murder imputed
to Joanna, ib.

Anglo-Normans. See England.

Anglo-Saxons, divisions of England under
the, il 270— their Danish assailants,
271— Alfred and his successors, 272,
273 — descent of the crown, 273 — in-
fluence of provincial governors, 274
-r-thanes and ceorls, 275— condition of
the ceorls, ib.— privileges annexed to
their possession of land, 276— position
of the socage tenants, 277— condition
of the British natives, ib.— absence of
British roots in the English language,
278 and vote £ — constitution of the
Wltenageraot, 279, 374-379— adminis-
tration of justice, and divisions of the
land for the purpose, 280— hundreds
and. their probable origin, 280, 281,
379-381 — the tything-man and alder-
man, 282 , and 283 note u — the county

ARCHITECTURE.

court and its jurisdiction, 2 82— contem-
porary report of a suit adjudicated in
the reign of Canute, 283, 284 and note f
—trial by jury and its antecedents,
285-288— introduction of the law of
frankpledge, 289, 290 — turbulence of
the Anglo-Saxons, 290— progress of the
system of frankpledges, 291 — respon-
sibilities and uses of the tythings, 292,
293, and notes— probable existence of
feudal tenures before the Conquest,
299-301, 408-410 — observations on the
change of the heptarchy into a mo-
narchy, 352-356— consolidation of the
monarchy, 356-358 — condition of the
eorls and ceorls further elucidated,
358-371— proportion of British natives
under the Anglo-Saxon rule, 371-374
—judicial functions of the Anglo-Saxon
kings, 381— analogy between the
French and Anglo-Saxon monarchies,
383 — peculiar jurisdiction of the king’s
court, 384-386.

Anjou (Louis, duke of), seizure of
Charles V.'s treasures by, 1. 65, 66—
his claim as regent, 68 and note— his
attempt on the crown of Naples, and
death, 69. See Charles of Anjou.

Anselm (archbishop), cause of his quar-
rel with William II. and Henry I., ii.
194 — Descartes’s argument on the
Deity anticipated by him, iii. 428.

Appanages, effect of the system of, i. 88.

Aquinas (Thomas), metaphysical emi-
nence of, iii. 427 — comparative obso-
leteness of his writings, 428 note i.

Aquitaine, extent of the dominions so
called, i. 116 — character of its people,
116, 117 — effect of the wars of the
Merovingian kings, 282.

Arabia and the Arabs. See Mohammed.

Aragon, bequest of to the Templars by
Alfonso I., and reversal thereof, ii. 8 —
rise of the kingdom in political im-
portance, 39— struggle for the succes-
sion to its crown, 39-41—- points of
interest in its form of government, 43
—privileges of its nobles and people,
43, 44— its natural defects and political
advantages, 45— statistics of its wealth,
population, &c., ib. vote r — grant of the
“ privilege of union,” 46 — supersession
thereof, 48 — the office of justiciary, ib.
—instances of that officer's integrity
and courage, 49, anpl of the submission
of kings to his decrees, 53, 54— dura-
tion and responsibilities of the office,
54— the Cortes of Aragon, 56— social
condition of the kingdom, 58— its union
with Castile, ib.— its burgesses, iii. 331,
note u .

Archers (English), invincibility of the,
at Crecy and Poitiers, i. 54. See Mi-
litary Systems.

Architecture, as illustrative of domestic
progress, Ui. 346 — early castles in Eng-

INDEX.

489

ARIAN.

land, ib.— improvements thereon 34 7
— early houses, 348— revival of toe use
of bricks, 349— arrangement of ordi-
nary mansion-houses, 350 — dwellings
in France and Italy, 350, 351— intro-
duction of chimneys and glass windows,
351-353 and notes— house furniture and
domestic conveniences, 353, 354, and
notes — farmhouses and cottages, 355—
ecclesiastical architecture, its grandeur
and varieties, 355-359 and notes— do-
mestic architecture of the 12th and
14th centuries, 479-482.

Arian sovereigns, tolerance of the, i. 3,
and note f.

Aribert declared king of Aquitaine, i. 115.

Aristocracy. See Nobility.

Aristotle, writings of, how first known in
Europe, iii. 426 and note ignorance
of his translators, 429 and note ^ — cha-
racter of the Aristotelian philosophy,
430 — its influence on religion, ib. notes.

Armagnac (count of) opposes the duke
of Burgundy, i. 71— massacre of him-
self and partizans, 72 — assassination of
a later count of Armagnac, 89.

Armagnacs, rise of the faction of the, i.
71— tactics of the dauphin towards
them, 72— their league with Henry
IV. of England, 74— their defeat by
the Swiss, ii. 112.

Armorial bearings, general introduction
of, i. 190— instances of their earliest
use, 191 note.

Armorican republic, questionable exist-
ence of the, i. 2 — hypothesis of Dubos
relative thereto, ib. note — further elu-
cidation thereof, 103 — supposed extent
of its territories, 103, 104.

Armour. See Military Systems.

Artois. See Robert of Artois.

Arundel (bishop and archbishop), re-
monstrates With Richard II., iii. 67 —
deprived of, and reinvested with, the
great seal, 73— his subsequent depriva-
tion and banishment, 77.

Arundel (earl of, temp, Richard II.),
favoured by the parliament, iii. 65 —
his conduct as a lord appellant, 72—
his breach with the duke of Lancaster,
74 — refuses to aid in legitimating Lan-
caster’s children, 75— his decapitation,
77.

Aschaffenburg, concordats of, ii. 253.

Athens (duke of). See Brienne.

Augustin (St), specimen of the verses
of, iii. 282 note °.

Aulic council, powers and jurisdiction of
the, ii. 99.

Auspicius (bishop of Toul), character of
the poetry of, iii. 282— specimen
thereof, ib. note.

Anstrasia, characteristics of the people
of, i. 118.

Auxiliary verb active, probable cause of
the, iii. 280.

BENEFICES.

Averroes, error relative to, iii. 422, note 0
— his eminence as a philosopher, 426
note f— tendency of his commentaries,
430.

Avignon, removal of the papal court to,
ii. 233— rapacity of its popes, 237, 238
—its abandonment by the popes, 240.

Azincourt (battle of), i. 74 and note.

Bacon (Roger), a true philosopher, iii.
429 note k — his acquaintance with ma-
thematics, 432 — parallel between him
and Lord Bacon, ib. note *— his know-
ledge of Greek, 464.

Bagdad, celebrity of the early khalifa of,

ii. 121— character of its later khalifs,

122— frequency of their assassination,

123— defection of its provinces, 124.

Bajazet, military successes of, ii. 132—

defeated and captured by the Tartars,
134.

Baltic trade. See Trade.

Banks and bankers of Italy, Iii. 340, 341.

Barbiano (Alberic di), militaiy eminence
of, i. 474— his pupils, 481.

Barcelona, feudal submission to France
of the counts of, i. 10, note — its early
commercial eminence, iii. 331 — its code
of maritime laws, 333 and note ; and
of marine insurance, 339 note c — its
bank of deposit, 340.

Bardas, revival of Greek literature by,

iii. 468 note z .

Bardi, Florentine bankers, English cus-
toms fanned by the, iii. 340 note d.

Barons (in France), occasional assem-
blages of the, i. 219 — consequences of
their non-attendance at the royal
council, 222— they become subject to
the monarch, 223 — their privileges cur-
tailed by Philip IV., 226. See Nobility.

Barristers’ fees in the 15th century, iii.
371.

Basie, council of. See Council.

.Beaumanoir, definition of the three con-
ditions of men by, i. 197, 200.

Bedford fduke of), regent for Henry VL,
L 76 — nis character, 77 — his successes
in France, ib. — overthrow of his forces
by Joan of Arc, 76.

Belgrade, siege and relief of, ii. 106.

Benedict XI. reconciles Philip the Fair to
the holy see, ii. 232— he rescinds the
bulls of Bouiface VIII., 233.

Benedict XII., purport of his letter to
Edward III., i. 51, note— his rapacity,
ii. 237.

Benedict XHI. elected pope by the
Avignon cardinals, ii. 242 — deposed
by the council of Pisa, 243— Spain sup-
ports him, ib.

Benedictines, exemplary agricultural la-
bours of the, iii. 360 note n .

Benefices, grants of land so called, 1. 159
—conditions annexed to them, ib.—
their extent, 160 and note— their char

490

INDEX.

BENEVOLENCES.

racter under Charlemagne and Louis
the Debonair, 313 — views of various
writers concerning their nature, 313-31 5
—character of hereditary benefices, 320
—their regenerative effects upon the
French people, ib.

Benevolence^, by whom first levied in
England, ill. 200.

Berenger I. and II. See Italy.

Bermudo III. (king of Leon), killed in
battle, ii. 4.

B«nard (grandson of Charlemagne), de*
pri ved of sight by judicial sentence, 1 14.
Berry (duke of), appointed guardian of
Charles VI., i. 65— his character, 69,
Bianchi. See Superstitions.

Bianchi and Neri, factions of, i. 402, UL
445.

Bigod (Roger, earl of Norfolk), patriotism
of, iii. 2.

Bills. See Parliament
Birth, privileges of. See Nobility.
Bishops. See Church, Clergy.

Blanchard (Alain), unjustifiable execu-
tion of, i. 84.

Blanche of Castile, acts as regent during
the minority of Ix>uis IX., i. 30 — quells
the rebellion of the barons, ib.— in-
stance of her undue influence over
Louis, 32.

Boccaccio, occasion of the Decamerone of,
i. 57— appointed to lecture on Dante,
iii. 448.

Boccanegra (Simon), first doge of Genoa,
story of the election of, i. 451.

Bocland, nature of, ii. 294, 408.

Bohemia, nature of its connection with
Germany, iL 100— its polity, 101—
the Hussite controversy and its results,
102, 103.

Bohun (Humphrey, earl of Hereford),
patriotism of, iii. 2.

Bolingbroke (earl of Derby and duke
of Hereforo), made lord appellant,
Iii 72— he sides with the king, 74—
his quarrel with the duke of Norfolk,
79— advantage taken of it by Richard
IL, 80 and note *— his accession to the
throne, 81. See Henry IV.

Bolognese law-schools, iii. 415.

Boniface (St.). See Winfrid.

Boniface VIII. suspected of fraud towards
Celestine V., iL 228— his extravagant
pretensions, ib. and note — disregard of
nis bulls by Edward L, 229— nis dis-
putes with Philip the Fair, 230*232—
success of Philip’s stratagem against
him, 232— his death, ib.— rescindment
of his bulls, 23$ — Ockham's dialogue
against him, 236 note “—rejection of
his supremacy by the English barons,
239.

Boniface IX., elected pope, iL 242— his
traffic in benefices, 245, 246— his ra-
pacity in England checked, 250, 251.
Books and booksellers. See Learning.

BURGUNDY.

Boroughs. See Municipal Institutions,
Parliament, Towns.

Braccio di Montone, rivalry of, with
Sforza, i. 481.

Brienne (Walter de, duke of Athens),
invested with extreme powers in
Florence, i. 427— his tyranny and ex-
cesses, 428— his overthrow, 429.
Britany, origin of the people of, i. 98
and note — grant of the duchy to
Montfort, 99 — its annexation to the
crown, 100— alleged existence of a
king of Britany, 103— right of its dukes
to coin money, 206.

Brunehaut, queen of Austrasia, 1, 5 —
her character and conduct, note 6— her
mayor, Protadius, 114— her scheme of
government, 117— she falls into the
bands of Clotaire II., and is sentenced
to death, 119— cause of her overthrow,
note 157, 293, 309— pope Gregory I.’a
adulation towards her, ii. 162, note %
Buchan (earl of)» made constable of
France, i. 78.

Burdett (Thomas), cause of the execution
of, iii. 199, and note °.

Burgesses. See Parliament
Burgesses of the palisades, origin of the,
ii. 92.

Burgundians, Roman provinces occupied
by the, L 1 — their tolerance, 3, note *—
theiT mode of dividing conquered pro-
vinces, 146— elucidatory observations
thereon, 275-278.

Burgundy ( JSudes , duke of), undertakes
the protection of his niece Jane, i. 45
—he betrays her cause, 46.

Burgundy (duke of), named guardian of
Charles vL, i. 65— loses his ascen-
dency over the king, 69— regains it,
ib.— his death, 70.

Burgundy (John, duke of, 4 ‘ Sans-peur ”),
assassinates the duke of Orleans, i. 70
—his supposed provocation, ib. note —
obtains pardon for the crime, 71 — con-
sequence of his reconciliation with the
court, 71, 72— is assassinated, 73 and
note— his (defeat at Nicopolis, il. 133,
note.

Burgundy ( Philip , duke of), allies him-
self with Henry V., L 76— his French
predilections, 82— and • treaty with
Charles VII., ib., 90 note r , 91 note # —
splendour of his court, 91— Jealousy of
his subjects concerning taxation, 93
note x .

Burgundy (Charles, duke of)» character
and ambitious designs of, i. 91, and
note 92— his contumacious subjects, 92
—his rash enterprises and failures, 93
—is defeated and killed, 94— adven-
tures of his diamond, ib. note.

Burgundy (Mary, duchess oD» defends
her rights against Louis XI., i 94,
and notes 95— marries Maximilian of
Austria; her death, 96.

INDEX.

491

CABALLEROS.

Caballeros of Spain, privileges enjoyed
by the, ii. 8.

Calais, abject condition of the citizens of,
i. 58, note k — terms of instruments
signed there, 60.

Calixtins, tenets of the, ii. 103.

Calixtus II. (pope), compromise effected
by, ii. 188 — he abolishes feudal services
by bishops, 189.

Calverley (Sir Hugh), characteristic anec-
dote of, i. 65.

Cambridge university, first mention of,
iii. 424, note y.

Canon law, promulgation of the, ii. 203
— its study made imperative, 204.

Capet (Hugh), usurpation of the French
throne by, i. 18 — antiquity of his fa-
mily, ib. note r — state of France at his
accession, 22 — opposition to, and ulti-
mate recognition of his authority, 23
and note 8 — period of his assumption of
regal power, 128 — degree of authority
exercised by his immediate descend-
ants, 24, 136— his sources of revenue,
208.

Capitularies, what they were, i. 215 —
their latest date, 218 and note.

Caraccioli, favourite of Joanna H. of
Naples, i. 489— his assassination, 491
note.

Carloman, inheritance of the children of,
usurped by Charlemagne, i. 9, note y.

Carlovingian dynasty, extinction of the,
i. 17.

Carrara (Francesco da), Verona seized
by, i. 464 — killed in prison, 465.

Carroccio, the, i. 467 and note d.

Castile ‘and Leon united into one king-
dom, ii. 4 — their subsequent redivision
and reunion, 9 — composition and cha-
racter of the corteB of Castile [see
Cortes], the council and its functions,
33, 34— administration of Justice, 35-
violations of law by the kings, 36-
confederacies of the nobility, 37— simi-
larity of its polity to that of England,
38 — establishment of tithes in Castile,
146 note tt .

Castle, graphic description of a, i. 322.

Castruccio Castrucani, success of, i. 410.

Catalonia, character of the people of, ii.
57 — severity of the state of villenage
there, ib. note c .

Catharists, religious tenets held by the,

ill. 384.

Catholics, treatment of the, by their
Gothic conquerors, i. 3, note f.

Cava (count Julian's daughter), legend
of the seduction of, ii. 62.

Celestine V., fraud of Boniface VIH.
towards, ii. 228.

Champ de Mars. See Field of March.
Charlemagne, reunion of the Frankish
empire under, i. 9, and note y — his
victories in Italy and Spain, 9, 10 —
obstinate resistance and ultimate sub-

CHAKLES VI.

mission of the Saxons to his rule, 10—
his Sclavonian conquests, 11— extent
of his dominions, ib.- — his coronation as
emperor, ib. and note c — its conse-
quences, 12— his intellectual acquire-
ments and domestic improvements, ib.
and note e — his vices, cruelties, re-
ligious edicts, 13— his sons and suc-
cessors, 14— his control over the clergy,
16 — degeneracy of his descendants, 17
—state of the people under his rule,
18— his dread of the Normans, 21— his
alleged election by the Romans as em-
peror discussed, 122-124— question of
succession involved in his elevation to
the imperial title, 124-126— his wise
provisions relative to fugitive serfs, 198
note *1 — his revenue, how raised, 208 —
peculiarities of his legislative assem-
blies, 215, 216 — French ignorance oi
hiB character in the 14th century, 228
—his capitulary relative to tithes, ii.
145, 146 and note 2 — his authority over
the popes, 182— state of his education,

. iii. 286 and note f— his library, 292
note — his encouragement of ordeals,
295— his agricultural colonies, 361 —
public schools in France due to him,
418— becomes a disciple of Alcuin, ib.

Charles the Bad. See Charles of Navarre.

Oharles the Bald, share of empire allotted
to, i. 16, and note on p. 17— ravages of
the Normans during hiB reign, 21 — his
imbecile government and its conse-
quences, 135 — his slavish submission
to the church, ii. 156, 157— he disobeys
pope Adrian II., 173, 174.

Charles the Fat, accession and deposition
of, i. 17 — position of Germany at his
death, ii. 66 — arrogance of pope John
VIII. towards him, 174.

Charles the Simple, policy of, towards
the Normans, i. 22.

Charles IV. (the Fair) ascends the throne
. pursuant to the Salic law, i. 48— con-
duct of Edward ILL of England after
his death, ib.

Charles V. (the Wise) submits to the
peace of Bretigni, i. 59— his summons
to Edward the Black Prince, 63— his
treaty with Henry of Caatile, ib. note 1
—his successes against the English, 64
— his premature death and character,
65— seizure of his treasures by the
duke of Anjou, 65, 66— expenses of his
household, 68 note 2 — his conflicts with
the States-General, 230, 231— he im-
poses taxes without their consent,
232.

Charles VI„ accession of, i. 65— state dt
France during his reign, 66— defeats
the citizens of Ghent, 67— misapplica-
tion of taxes during his minority, 68
and note *— his seizure with insanity,
69— disgraceful conduct of his queen,
ib. and note— his death, 76— his sub-

492

INDEX.

CHARLES VII.

mission to the remonstrances of the
States-General, 232.

Charles VII., state of France at the ac-
cession of, i. 77— his impoverished ex-
chequer, 78 — his Scotch auxiliaries, ib.
— his character, and choice of favourites,
79 — change wrought in his fortunes by
Joan of Arc, 79, 80— his connection
with Agnes Sorel, 80 note * — restores
Richemont to power, 80 — is reconciled
with the duke of Burgundy, 82 — re-
conquers the provinces ceded to the
English crown, 83— his cruelty to
English captives, 84 — consolidation of
liis power, 85— insurrection of Guienne
against taxation, 86 and note — his con-
duct relative to the States-General,

234— he levies taxes of his own will,

235— he enacts the Pragmatic Sanction
of Bourges, ii, 255.

Charles VII L, accession of,i. 98— contest
for the regency during his minority, ib.

236— marries Anne of Britany, 100-
consolidation of the French monarchy
under his sway, 100, 101, and notes —
proceedings of the States-General dur-
ing his minority, 236, 237.

Charles of Anjou (I. of Naples), seizure
of the crown of Naples by, i. 406 — he
puts Conradin, the heir, to death, 407
— he defeats the Ghibelins and governs
Tuscany, ib. and note— revolt of his
subjects, 410.

Charles II. of Naples, war of the Sicilians
against, i. 485— his death, ib.

Charles of Durazzo (III. of Naples), im-
plicated in the murder of Andrew, i.
486 mote 9 — puts queen Joanna to
death, 487 — his assassination, 488.

Charles IV. of Germany, singular cha-
racter of, 11. 85— his Golden Bull, 86
and note e — he alienates the imperial
domains, 94 — advancement of Bohemia
under his rule, 102.

Charles Martel, conquest of the Saracens
by, i. 7— site and importance of the

. battle, ib. note ^ — its object, 12— his
spoliation of the church, ii. 146.

Charles of Navarre (the Bad), tumults in
France excited by, i. 56— his crimes,
57— allies himself with Edward IIL,
ib.

Chartered towns. See Municipal Insti-
tutions, Towns.

Chaucer (Geoffrey), testimony borne by
his writings, Hi. 166 note— character of
his works, 456, 457.

Chaucer (Sir Thomas), rebuked by Henry
IV., Hi. 95.

Ghildebert (son of Clovis), dominions
allotted to, i. 4 and note * — his proposal
relative to Clodomir’s children, 311,
note.

Cbilderic HI., deposition of, i. 8.

Children, crusade undertaken by, iii. 296
note*.

CLARENCE.

Chilperio, guilty conduct of Fredegonde,
the queen of, i. 5, 119 — oppressive
taxes levied by him, 306 — tumult
which ensued, ib. — what followed after
his death, ib. — his attempts at poetry,
iii. 283— his attack on the sanctuary,
303.

Chimneys. See Architecture.

Chivalry, as a school of moral discipline,
iii. 390 — remoteness of its origin, 391
—individual honour its keystone, 392
— types of chivalry, 392 and note * —
its original connection with feudal
service, 394— effect of the crusades, 395
—its connection with religion, 395, 396
— enthusiasm inspired by gallantry,
396-398 — licentiousness incident to
chivalry, 399— virtues inculcated by it,
400— practice of courtesy, liberality,
and justice, 401-403 — obligations of
chivalry to the East, 403— its attendant
evils, 404— education preparatory to
knighthood, 405 — chivalrjc festivals,

406— tournaments and their dangers,

407— privileges of knighthood, 408 —
who were admissible thereto, ib. and
note — military service: knights and
bachelors, 409, 410 and notes— causes
of the decline of chivalry, 411 — in*
fluences by which it was superseded,
412 and note 0.

Christianity, impetus given to the for-
mation of civic institutions by, i. 121
— its beneficial effect upon the Nor-
mans, 136.

Church, wealth of the, under the empire,
ii. 140 — its position after the irruption
of the barbarians, 141 — source of its
legitimate wealth, 142— its religious
extortions, 143 — privileges attached to
its property, 144— institution of tithes,
144-146 and notes— liability of church
property to spoliation, 146— origin of
precarice, 147 note d — extent of the
church's landed possessions, 148 and
note i— its participation in the adminis-
tration of justice, 149— limitations in-
terposed by Justinian, 150, 151— its
political influence, 152— source thereof,
163— its subjection to the state, ib . —
Charlemagne's edicts relative to its
affairs, 154, 155, and notes — its assump-
tion of authority over the French kings,
156, 157— obsequiousness of England
to its pretensions, 158— investiture of
its bishops with their temporalities,
181— their slmoniacal practices, ib. and
note 9 — canons and chapters, 191 —
liberties of the Gallican church, 266-
high church principles always dan-
gerous, 257 note *— privileges of sanc-
tuary, iii. 302, 303. See Clergy, Mo-
nasteries, Papal Power.

Clan service notbasedon feudality, i. 387.

Clarence (duke of), put to death by Ed-
ward IV., iii. 199.

INDEX.

493

CLARENDON.

Clarendon, constitutions of, ii. 221 —
their influence on Thomas a Becket's
quarrel with Henry II., 223.

Cistertian monk, blasphemous saying
attributed to a, i. 29 note t.

Cities. See Municipal Institutions and
Towns.

Civil Law. See Laws.

Clement IV., effect of a bull promul-
gated by, ii. 215— opposition of the
Scotch king to his edict, 217.

Clement V. ratifies Robert’s claim to the
crown of Naples, i. 485 — his maxim
relative to benefices, ii. 215— he re-
moves the papal court to Avignon, 233
—his contests with the emperor Louis,
234— England remonstrates with him,
238, 239 notes — his outrageous edict
against Venice, 260.

Clement VI. acquits Joanna of Naples of
murder, i. 487— his licentiousness, ii.
238.

Clement VII., circumstances relative to
his election as pope, ii. 240 — division
of the papacy thereupon, 242 — proceed-
ings after his death, 242, 243.

Clergy, ascendency of the (temp. Charles
the Bald), i. 135 — their privileges under
the feudal system, 195, 196— fighting
prelates, 195 note f — their participation
in legislative proceedings, 213, 215 —
privileges of their tenants, 319 —
bishops in Lombardy and their tem-
poralities, 364, 366 and note x — share
of the citizens in their election, 366
and note >’ — a robber archbishop, ii. 95

— immense territorial possessions of
the clergy, 148 and notes — their acqui-
sition of political power, 152, 153 —
their neglect of the rule of celibacy,
176, 177 — sulferirigs of the married
clergy, 177 and note d— lax morality
of the English clergy, 178, 179 notes —
practice of simony, 179 — consent of the
laity required in the election of bishops,
ib. — interference of the sovereigns
therein, 180 and note "—character of
the clergy of Milan, 187 note & — taxa-
tion of the clergy by the kings, 216-
tribute levied on them by the popes,
216, 217 — their disaffection towards
Rome, 218 — their exemption from
temporal jurisdiction, 219-221— extor-
tions of Edvvardl., 229 — effects of
Wicliff's principles, 252 — priests exe-
cuted for coining, ib. note e — spiritual
peers in the English parliament, iii. 4,
5 — their qualifications, 122 — clergy
summoned to send representatives, 131
— cause of their being summoned, 132

— result of their segregating them-
selves from the commons, 133 — in-
stances of their parliamentary ex-
istence, 135-138 — right of bishops to
be tried by the peers, 204-207— medie-
val clergy not supporters of despotism,

CONRAD III.

258 — their ignorance of letters, 287-289
— their monastic vices, 303 — why a
bishop made a Danish nobleman drunk,
306 note u . See Church, Monasteries,
Papal Power, Superstition.

Clisson (constable de), immense wealth
amassed by, i. 69. *

Clodomir (son of Clovis), dominions al-
lotted to, i. 4 — proposed alternative
relative to his children, 311 note.

Clotaire, portion of dominions allotted to,
i. 4 — union of the whole under him, 5
— re-division amongst his sons, ib. —
criminality of his character, 119.

Clotaire II., reunion of the French do-
minions under, i. 5 — nature of the
authority exercised by him, 117.

Clotilda converts her husband to Christi-
anity, i. 3 — her sons, 4.

Clovis invades Gaul and defeats Syagrius,
i. 2 — accepts the title of consul, ib. and
note d— defeats the Alemanni, 3— his
conversion to Christianity, ib.— defeats
Alaric, 4— his last exploits and san-
guinary policy, ib. and*»w£e 8 — division
of his dominions amongst his sons, 4*
5, and notes— the last of his race, 8 —
his alleged subjection to the emperors
discussed, Note III. 106-111 — his li-
mited authority : story of the vase of
Soissons, 155 — theory built on the story,
301, 302 — crimes of himself and his
grandson, iii. 306 and note u .

Clovis II., accession of, i. 120.

Cobham, lord (temp. Richard II.), ba-
nished, iii. 77.

Coining, extensive practice of, amongst
the French nobles, i. 205 — debased
money issued by them, 206 — sys-
tematic adulteration of coin by the
kings, 210, 228, 231— measures adopted
for remedying these frauds, 211 note h
— grant of taxes made conditional on
restoration of the coin, 230 — priests
executed for coining, ii. 252, note e —
an abbot hanged for the same offence,
iii. 205— clipping of coins by the Jews,
369 note t.

Cologne, antiquity of the municipal in-
stitutions of, i. 350.

Colon!, characteristics and privileges of
the, i. 325.

Combat. See Trial.

Comines (Philip de), characteristic note
on taxation by, i. 236.

Commodianus, literary remains of, iii.
281 — specimen thereof, ib. note n .

Comnenus. See Alexius.

Conrad (duke of Franconia), elected em-
peror of Germany, ii. 67.

Conrad II. (the Salic), important edict
of, relative to feuds, i. 166, 167, and
notes— elected emperor of Germany, ii.
68— his ancestry, ib. note f.

Conrad III. joins in the second crusade,
i.38— elected emperor of Germany, U.72.

494

INDEX.

OOJ5BAD IV.

Conrad IV., accession of, i. 392 — his
struggles for dominion in Italy, and
death, ib. — his difficulties in Germany,
ii. 76.

Conradin (son of Conrad IV.) attempts
to regain his inheritance, i. 407 — put
to death by Charles of Anjou, ib.

Constance, council of. See Council.

Constance, treaty of, i. 376.

Constantine V. dethroned by his mother,

i. 122. *

Constantinople, advantageous position of,

ii. 125 — its resistance to the Moslem
assaults, 126— its capture by the La-
tins, 128— its magnificence and popu-
lousness, 129, 130— Vandalism of its
conquerors, 130— its recapture by the
Greeks, 131 — besieged by Bajazet,
132, and by Amurath, 135— attacked
by Mahomet IL, 136— its fall, 136,
137 — unrealised schemes for its re-
covery, 137, 138.

Constitution of England. See English
Constitution.

Cordova taken from the Moors, ii. 9 — its
extent and wealth* ib. note In .

Com. See Agriculture, Trade.

Cortes of Castile, original composition of
the, ii. 20 — dwindling down of their
numbers, 21 — their remonstrance
against corruption, 22— spiritual and
temporal nobility, 22, 23, and notes—
control of the Cortes over the taxes,
24, 25 — their resolute defence of their
right, 26— their control over expendi-
ture, 27 — its active exercise, 28 —
their forms of procedure, 29 — their
legislative rights, and attempted limi-
tations thereon by the kings, 29-32—
their right to a voice In the disposal of
the crown, 33, 34 — position of the
clergy therein, iiL 106, note.

Corvinus (Matthias) elected king of
Hungary, ii 106— his patronage of
literature, 107 and note d.

Council of Basle, enmity of the, towards
the papal court, ii. 247 — reforms
effected by it, 248 and note — its indis-
cretions, ib. and 250 note.

Council of Constance condemns John
Huss and Jerome of Prague to be
burned, ii. 102— deposes John XXIII.,
243 — preponderance of Italian inte-
rests therein, 244 — French opposition
to the English deputies, to. note —
tactics of the cardinals, 246— national
divisions in the council, ib,— its breach
of faith relative to Huss and Jerome
canvassed, 250 and note.

Council of Frankfort convoked by Saint
Boniface; Si 165 — its importance in
papal history, ib.

Connell of Lyons, 1 391 ; ii. 75.

Council of Pavia, it 247.

Council of Pisa, proceedings at the, ii.
243.

DU GUESCLIN.

Cours pldnibres, character of the, i. 220.

Courtney (archbishop), despoiled of his
temporalities, iii. 66.

Crecy, battle of, i. 55.

Crescentius put to death by Otho HX,
i. 359 and note.

Crusades, origin of the, i. 33 — energetic
appeals of Peter the Hermit, 34 —
inducements offered to those who
joined in them, 35— crimes and mi-
series attendant on them, 36 — results
of the first crusade, 37 — second cru-
sade, 38 — its failure, ib. and notes —
origin of the third crusade, 40 — its
famous commanders and inconclusive
results, ib. — crusades of St. Louis and
their miserable ending, 41 and note —
cause of the cessation of crusades, iii
305 — their demoralizing influence, 307.

Cyprian’s views relative to church go-
vernment, ii. 159, note h — farther ob-
servations thereon, 267, 268.

Dagobert L, insignificance of the succes-
sors of, i. 6— nature of the authority
exercised by him, 117 — progress of
the arts in his reign, 119.

Dagobert IL, name of, how restored to
history, i. 112.

Damascus, degeneracy of the khalifs of,

ii. 120, 121.

Danes, England first infested by the,
i. 21.

Dante Alighieri expelled from Florence,
i. 402 — his birth, iii. 445— style of
his Vita Nuova, ib. note — charac-
teristics of his great poem, 446-448 —
enthusiasm which attended its publica-
tion, 448.

Dauphind annexed to the French crown,
i. 100 — its origin, 101, note K

Defiance, institution of the right of, ii
95 — its abolition, 96.

De la Marc (Peter), opposes the duke of
Lancaster, iii. 56 — conduct of the
citizens on his imprisonment, 57 —
elected speaker of the commons, 68.

Della Bella (Giano), improves the Flo-
rentine constitution, i. 424— driven
into exile, 425.

Derby (earl of). See Bolingbroke.

Diet See Council.

Diet of Worms, important changes ef-
fected by the, ii. 94 — abolishes the
right of defiance, 96— establishes the
imperial chamber, 97-99.

Domesday Book, origin of the term, iii.
362, note r .

Domestic life in the middle ages, iii. 341-
345— income and style of living, 370.

Douglas (earl of) aids Charles Vu., i. 78.

Duelling, introduction of the practice of,

iii. 294 and note u .

Du Guesclin (Bertrand), proceeds to
Castile, i. 58— his character, 64— he

INDEX.

495

DUNSTAN.

serves against Peter the Cruel, ii. 15
— is taken prisoner, ib.

Dunstan and Odo, and their treatment of
Edwy and Eigiva, ii. 158 —elucidatory
remarks relative thereto, 264-267.

Earl, origin of the title of, ii. 274, note P.
Ebroin, exercise of supreme power by,
i. 6, 115, 120.

Eccelin da Romano, tyrannic exercise of

S ower by, i. 389— pretexts to which
is infamous cruelty gave birth, ib.
note f— his fall, 406.

Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. See Church,
Clergy, Papal Power.

Edessa, extent of the principality of, i.
37 and note f.

Edward the Confessor, popularity of the
laws of, ii. 324, 351.

Edward I. offends Philip IV. of France,
i. 43 and note— his brother Edmund
outwitted by Philip, 44— he curbs the
power of the clergy, ii. 224 — his
tyranny towards them, 228— his reign
a constitutional epoch, iii. 1— his de-
spotic tendencies, 2 — he confirms the
charters, 3 and note c .

Edward II. marries Isabel of France, i.

45— he yields to the pope, ii. 239.
Edward III. lays claim to the French
throne, i. 48— its injustice shown,
ib. and note 49— his policy prior to
resorting to arms, 49— his chances of
success, 51 — attempt of the pope to
dissuade him from the attempt, ib.
note — principal features in his cha-
racter* 52 — extent of his resources,
53, 54, and notes — excellence of his
armies, 55 and note— his accmisition
after the battles of Crecy and Poitiers,
56— his alliance with Charles the Bad,
67 — conditions of the peace of Bre-
tigni, 69— his stipulation relative to
Aquitaine, 61 and note P — liis reverses
and their causes, 62, 63 and notes — his
opposition to the pope, ii. 239— pro-
gress of parliament under him, iii. 42
— his attempts at encroachment, 44-
47 — ascendency of Lancaster and
Alice Perrers over him, 55 — ordinance
against Alice, 56 — repeal thereof, 67 —
revival of the prosecution against her,
68 and note 8— his debts to Italian
bankers, 340.

Edward the Black Prince, character of,
i. 52 — his victory at Poitiers, 55 —
created prince of Aquitaine, 61— bis
impolitic conduct in Guienne, 63 —
summoned before the peers of France,
ib. and note t — machinations relative
to his heir, iii. 65 and note * — his
jealousy of the duke of Lancaster, 66
—his death, 57.

Edward IV. accepts a pension from
Louis XI., i. 89— his military force, ib.
note P — Louis’s reasons for declining

ENGLAND.

a visit from him, 90— his accession to
the throne, iii. 198— his inexcusable
barbarities, 199 — popularity of his
government, ib . — his system of bene-
volences, 200.

Edwy and Eigiva. See Dunstan.

England, first infested by the Danes,
i. 21 — its resources under Edward
III., 63, 54 — causes of the success
of its armies, 65, 77 — high payment
to its men-at-arms, 77, note t— dis-
comfiture of its troops by Joan of Arc,
79 — impolicy touching its relations
with France, 82 — deprived of its
French possessions by Charles VII.,
83 — its obsequiousness to the hier-
archy, ii. 158 — its opposition to ec-
clesiastical jurisdiction, 222-225 — its
protest against the exactions of the
church, 238, 239, and notes — its share
in the council of Constance, 244 and
note — enactment of the statute of prre-
munire, 251— effect of WiclifFs prin-
• ciples, 252 — progress of the country
under the Anglo-Saxons [see Anglo-
Saxons] — its state mt the period of the
Norman conquest, 302, 303— fruitless
resistance of its people to Norman
rule, 304 and notes— expulsion of its
prelates and maltreatment of its nobles,
305 and note — attempted suppression
of its language, 306 and note — whole-
sale spoliation of property, 308— abject
condition of English occupiers, 309,
310 — vastness of the Norman estates
explained, 310 — conquered England
compared with conquered Gaul, 311 —
forest devastations and forest laws,
311, 312, and notes — depopulation of
the towns, 312 — establishment of
feudal customs, 314— preservation of
the public peace, 315 — difference be-
tween feudalism in England and in
France, 316, 317— hatred by the Eng-
lish of the Normans* 318 — oppres-
sions and exactions of the Norman go-
vernment, 318, 320 — nature of the
taxes then levied, 321, 322— laws
and charters of the Norman kings, 323,
324 — banishment of Longchamp by
the barons, 325 — establishment of
Magna Charta, 326— difficulty of over-
rating its value, 327 — outline of its
provisions, 327, 328 — confirmation

thereof by Henry III., 329 — constitu-
tional struggles between him and his
barons, 331, 334 — limitations on the
royal prerogative/ 334, 335, and notes
— institution of the various courts of
law, 336-338 — origin of the common
law, 339-341— character and defects of
the English law, 341-343 — hereditary
right of the crown established, 343-346
— legal position of the gentry, 346-
348 — causes of civil equality, 348-361
—character of its government, iiL 147

496

INDEX..

ENGLISH.

—prerogatives of its kings, 147*150 —
mitigation of the forest laws, 150 and
note— jurisdiction of its constable and
marshal, 151, 152, and notes-— spirit of
independence exhibited in mediaeval
ballads, 265-267— its customs farmed
by Italian bankers, 339, 340, note d.

English constitution, character of the,
iii. 152— Sir John Fortescue's doctrine,
153-155— Hume's erroneous views re-
garding it, 155, 158— causes tending to
its formation, 159 — effect of the loss
of Normandy, 160 — real source of
English freedom, 162 — principle in-
volved in the relationship between
lords and their vassals, id.— right of
distress on the king's property, 163—
feudal sources of constitutional liberty,
164— influence of the nobility, 165—
salutary provisions of Edward I., 169
— nature and gradual extinction of
villenage, 171-183 — instances of re-
gencies and principles whereon they
are founded, 184-190— doctrine of pre-
rogative, 257-260, See Anglo-Saxons,
England, Feudal System, Parliament.

Erigena. See Scotus (John).

Ethelwolf, grant of, relative to tithes, iL
146, note tt , 263.

Eudea elected king by the Franks, i. 127
— his qualifications for the dignity, ib.

Eudes (duke of Burgundy). See Bur-
gundy.

Eudon signally defeats the Saracens, i.
116 — receives aid from Charles Martel,
ib.

Eugenius iy. (cardinal Julian) advises
y ladislaus to break faith with Amu-
rath, ii. 105 — its fatal consequences,
106 — other instances of his perfidy, 210
note c — his contests with the councils,
247— his deposition by the council of
Basle, 247 and note 9,

Euric, harsh 'treatment of his catholic
subjects by, l. 3 note U

False Decretals. See Isidore.

Famines in the middle ages, frequency
and extreme severity of, i. 328.

Felix V. (pope), election and superses-
sion of, it 248.

Ferdinand confirmed in his succession to
the crown of Naples, i. 494 — attempt
of John of Calabria to oust him, ib. —
his odious rule, 603 and note.

Ferdinand I. of Aragon, independence of
the Catalans towards, ii. 57.

Ferdinand II. of Aragon marries Isabella
of Castile, ii 18— they succeed to the
Castilian throne, ib. — Ferdinand in-
vested with the crown* of Aragon, 42 —
arrangement of ,the united govern-
ments, 58, 69 — conquest of Granada,
69, 60.

Ferdinand III. of Castile, capture of Cor-
dova by, ii 9.

FEUDAL.

Ferdinand IV. of Castile, prevalence of
civil dissensions in the reign of, ii. 12,
13— his gross violation Of justice and
remarkable death, 36.

Feudal system, rise of the, i. 145— nature
of alodial and salic lands, 147-149 and
notes — distinction of laws, 151— origin
of nobility, 157-159, 189— fiscal lands
or benefices, their nature, condition,
and extent, 159, 160— introduction of
subinfeudation, 161— origin of feudal
tenures, 163— custom of personal com-
mendation, 164 — its character, ib. 165

— edict of Conrad II., 166, 167, and
notes — principle of a feudal relation,
167— rights and duties of vassals, ib . —
ceremonies of homage, fealty, and in-
vestiture, 169— obligations of the vas-
sal to his lord, 170— military service,
its conditions and extent, 171 and notes
— feudal incidents: origin of reliefe,
172, 173 — of fines on alienation, 174—
the custom of fr&age in France, 176
—escheats and forfeitures, 177— objects
for which aids were levied, ib. — limita-
tions thereof by Magna Charta, 178-
institution of wardships, ib. — their
vexatious character in later times, 179

— extortionate and oppressive prac-
tices relative tb marriages, 179, 180 —
introduction of improper feuds, 181 —
fiefs of office, their nature and variety,
181, 182, and notes— feudal law-books,
182 — the Milanese collection, 183 —
difference between that and the French
and English systems, 183, 184 — the
feudal system not of Roman origin,
185, 186— localities over which it ex-
tended, 187, 188— privileges of nobility,
191-194— difference between a French
roturier and an English commoner, 191
note P — condition of the clergy, 195,
196— of the classes below the gentry,
196— assemblies of the barons, 219 —
the cours plenieres, 220, 248 — legis-
lative and judicial assemblies [see
Legislation, States-General, Justice]
— decline of the feudal system, 249 —
its causes : increase of the domains of
the crown, 253, 254 — rise of the char-
tered towns, 255-261 [see Towns]
— commutation of military service, 261
[see Military Systems] — decay of feudal
principles, 268— influence of feudalism
upon the institutions of England and
France, 269— civil freedom promoted
by it, 270 — its tendency to exalt war-
like habits, 271— its value as an ele-
ment of discipline, ib. — and as produc-
ing sentiments of loyalty, 272 — the
mundium, 318 note — essentials of the
feudal system, 319— its principles aris-
tocratic and exclusive, 321— Guizot’s
description of a feudal castle, 322-
laxity of feudal tenures in Italy, 365
f — question of their existence in Eng-

INDEX,

497

FEUDS.

land prior to the Conquest, ii. 293-301
— feudalism under the Normans, 314 —
innovation introduced by William I.,
315 — difference between the feudal
policy of England and France, 316,318
— tenure of folcland and bocland, 406-
410 — abuses of feudal rights, iii. 150.

Feuds, nature of, and derivation of the
word, i. 316.

Fiefs. See Benefices, Feudal System.

Field of March (or Champ de Mars),
origin of the assemblies so termed, i.
212, 213— their character, 213, 214 —
not attended by the Roman inhabitants
of Gaul, 282 — how often held, 308.

Field Sports. See Sports.

Fines, extent and singularity of, under
the Anglo-Norman kings, ii. 320.

Fire-arms. See Military Systems.

Fiscal lands. See Benefices.

Flanders, fraudulent conduct of Philip IV.
towards the count of, i. 44— successful
resistance of its people, ib. — large cap-
ture of gilt spurs by them, ib. note H —
their commerce with England, 54 —
their rebellion against count Louis, 66,
67, and notes — their insubordination,
92 — their resistance to taxation, 93
and note — their woollen manufacture,
iii. 318, 319— their settlement in Eng-
land, 320, note h — its policy relative
thereto, 321 and note °. See Trade.

Florence, curtailment of the power of,
by Frederic Barbarossa, i. 420— exclu-
sion of the Ghibelins from offices of
trust, ib.— Dante’s simile relative to
its unsettled state, ib.— corporations of
the citizens, 421— its magistracy, ib. —
curious mode of election, 422— the con-
siglio di popolo, 423 -defiance of law
by the nobility, 42 4 — Giano della Bella
reduces them to obedience, 424, 425-
rise of the plebeian aristocracy, 426 —
Walter de Brienne invested with extra-
ordinary powers, 42 7 — his tyranny and
excesses, 428 — his overthrow, 429 —
singular ordinances relative to the
nobles, 430— machinations of the Guelfs
and persecutions of the Ghibelins,
431-433 ahd note c — prostration of the
Guelfs, 434— insurrection of the Ciompi
and elevation of Lando, 435 — his judi-
cious administration, 436— restoration
of the Guelfs, 437— comparative secu-
rity of the Florentines, 438— their ter-
ritorial acquisitions, revenue, popula-
tion, &c., 439, 440, and notes — Pisa
bought by them, 443 — further dis-
quietudes in their government, 496 —
rise of the Medici [see Medici]— first
Florentine voyage to Alexandria, 499
and mte~~ Florentine bankers and their
transactions, iii. 340 and nates.

Folcland, nature of, ii. 406.

Foreigners invested with power in Italian
states, i. 397, 416, 421, 427, 449.

VOL. III.

FREDERIC

Forest laws of the Anglo-Norman kings,
ih 3127-mitigation of their severity, ip.
150 — 'punishments inflicted, 311.

Fortescue (Sir John), on the English
constitution, iii. 154.

France, policy observed in the territorial
division of, i. 4, note » — insignificance of
its early monarchs, 6 and note m — loss
of the English possessions in, 27 — in-
crease of the French domains, 42-45—
its state at the commencement of hos-
tilities by Edward III., 51— its condi-
tion after the battle of Poitiers, 56 —
assembly of the States-General, ib.—
desolation of the kingdom by famine,
57 and note — ravaged by banditti, 58 —
the Jacquerie insurrection, ib. and
note k — stale of the country under
Charles V. and VI., 65, 66 — under
Charles VII., 77, 84— consolidation of
its dominions, 100 — its historians, 101,
note ra — its deplorable state under
Charles the Bald, 135 — its provincial
government under the Merovingian
kings, 152— succession to its monarchy,
154 and 217 note — its progress from
weakness to strength, 204 — revenue of
its kings, how raised, 208— its coinage,
210, 211 — taxation, 211, 212 — its con-
stitution never a free one, 229, note i»
—designs of its kings upon Naples,
503 et seq.

Franconia, rise of the House of, ii 68—
its extinction, 71.

Frankfort, council of. See Council.

Fran k s, territories occupied by the, i. 2
and note c — their probable origin. Note
11.104, 105 — their position under Pepin,
117, 118 — their promise to Pepm, 127,
154 — character of their church digni-
taries, 150 note 9 — increase of the
power of their kings, 155— serfdom
and villenage amongst them, 198-200 —
extent to which they participated in
legislation, 213 and note — origin of the
Ripuarian Franks and Salian Franks,
279— their numbers during the reign
of Clovis, 291, 292 — presumed infre-
quency of marriages between them
and the Romans, 296— extent of power
possessed by their kings, 301-309.

Fredegonde, queen. See Chilperic.

Frederic I. (Frederic Barbarossa), third
crusade undertaken by, i. 40 — title •
conferred by him on the archbishop
of Lyons, 45 — commencement of his
career in Italy, 37 1— he besieges Milan,

372 — subjugation and second rise of. its
citizens, ib. — destruction of their city,

373 — league of Lombardy against him,

374 — his defeat and flight, 375 — peace
of Constance, 376 — his policy relative
to Sicily, 378 — His response to Roman
oratory, 415 and note — his accession to
the German throne, ii. 73— Henry the
Lion’s ingratitude towards him, 74

2 K

498

INDEX.

FREDERIC II.

and note he institutes the law of
defiance, 95— his forced submission to
pope Adrian IV., 195— his limitation
on the acquisition of property by the
clergy, 227— his intellectual acquire-
ments, iii. 286 note— his patronage of
learning, 422.

Frederic II., position of, at his accession,
i. 385— cause of his excommunication
by Gregory IX., 386— rancour of papal
writers against him, ib. note c — result
of his crusade, 387— his wars with the
Lombards, ib.— his successes and de-
feats, 390 — animosity of the popes to-
wards him, 390, 391— sentence of the
council of Lyons against him, 391— his
accession to the German throne, ii. 75
—his deposition, 76— he restrains the
right of defiance, 96— his imperial tri-
bunal, 97 —his poetry, iii. 442.

Frederic III. of Germany, character of
the reign of, ii. 88 and note— his signi-
ficant motto, 89 note >— objects of his
diets, 96, 97— he betrays the empire
to the pope, 253.

Freemasonry, and its connection with
architecture, iii. 359, note K

Freemen, existence of, prior to the tenth
century, L 323— alodial proprietors
evidently of this class, 324 — other free-
men, 325 — consequence of their mar-
riage with serfs, 333.

Fregosi and Adomi factions, i. 496.

Froissart, value of the Chronicles of, i.
67, note \

Fulk's saucy reproof of Louis IV., iii.
286, note e .

Gandia (duke of), claims the throne of
Aragon, ii. 41— his death and failure of
his son, ib. note e .

Gaul invaded by Clovis, L 2 — condition
of its Roman natives, 149— privileges
of the “ oonviva regis," 150 note r , 281
and note 9 — retention of their own laws
by the Romans, 282 — their cities, 286—
their subjection to taxation, 287— their
accession to high offices, 293 — their
rij$ht to adopt the laws of the Franks,
293, 294— presumed infrequency of
marriage between the two races, 296.

Genoa, early history of, i. 444— her wars
with Pisa dnd Venice, ib.— victory of
her fleet over Pisani, 445 — insolence of
her admiral towards the Venetian am-
bassadors, 446 — her subsequent re-
verses, 447 — surrender of her forces to
Venice, 448— decline of her power, 449
—her government and its various
changes, tb,— dissensions of the Guelfs
and Ghibelins, 450— her first doge, 451
— frequent revolutions of her citizens,
ib. — the Adomi and Fregosi factions,
496— commercial dealings of the Ge-
noese, Hi. 329— their position in Con-
stantinople, 330— their manufactures,

GREEK.

331— their* money transactions, 337,
340— state security taken by their
bankers, 341.

Germany oonquered by Charlemagne, i.
9, 10— held by Louis his grandson, 16
—passes away from his family, 17— its
Hungarian assailants, 19— its first
apostles, 121— political state of ancient
Germany, 145 — mode in which kings
were chosen, ib. — lands in conquered
provinces, how divided, 146 — customs
respecting alodial and salic lands, 147-
149 and notes — superior position of its
rulers as compared with those of
France, 204— causes of the reversal of
tliis state of things, ib. — degree of re-
liance due to Tacitus's accounts of
German institutions, 273-275 — cha-
racter of its governments, 302 — limited
power of its kings, 302-304 — its posi-
tion at the dekth of Charles the Fat, ii.
66 — election of its emperors, in whom
vested, 77-80 — partitions of territory
amongst its princes, 83, 84— import-
ance of its free cities, 90 — privileges
conferred on them, ib. — their warfare
with the nobles, 91— the sanctuary of
the palisades, 92 — league of the cities,
ib.— polity of the principalities, 93 —
extent of the imperial domains, ib,—
their gradual alienation by the em-
perors, ib. — the diet of Worms and its
results, 94-98— limits of the German
empire at various periods, 1 00— absence
of towns, iii. 312— pre-eminence of its
robber chiefs, 314. See Diet, Justice.

Ghent, populousness and impregnability
of, i. 92, 93 — policy of its people re-
lative to taxation, 93 note— its trading
eminence, iii. 319— its houses and po-
pulation, 320 note t.

Ghibelins, origin of the word, ii. 73. See
Guelfs.

Giovanni di Vicenza, singular success of
the exhortations of, i. 403— result of
his attempts at sovereignty, 404.

Gloucester, duke of (temp. Richard II.),
speaks for the parliament, iii. 67, 68
note c — made lord appellant, 72— re-
instated in the council, 73— his ani-
mosity towards the duke of Lancaster,
74, 75— his seizure by the king, 76— his
murder and posthumous attainder, ib.

Godfrey of Boulogne, eastern domains
assigned to, i. 38— his* reasons for re-
fusing the title of king, ib. note 6— his
feats of strength, ib. note K

Granada, fertility and importance of, ii.
60— its unavailing resistance to Fer-
dinand, ib.

Gratian, character of the Decretum com-
piled by, ii. 203.

Greek church, marriage of priests per-
mitted bv the, ii. 176.

Greek empire, degeneracy of the, it 120
—its theological dissensions, ib.— re*

INDEX.

499

GREGORY I.

vtval of its power, 124 — tactics of its
emperors, 125 and note n — exploits of
celebrated usurpers, 126— results of
the first crusade, 127— expeditions of
Alexius Comnenus, 128— sacking of
the capital, 128-130— partition of the
empire, 130— its declining state, 132—
lukewarmness of the western Chris-
tians, 135— fall of the empire, 136— the
last of the Caesars, ib.— Greek anti-
exportation anecdote, iii. 315 note a .
See Constantinople.

Gregory I., character of, ii. 161 — he
establishes the appellant jurisdiction,
162, note r .

Gregory II., design of, for placing Rome
under Charles Martel's protection, i.
122 .

Gregory IV. and V., submission of, to
imperial authority, ii. 182.

Gregory VII., projection of the crusades
by, i. 34 — his obligations to the
countess Matilda, 380— his ascendency
over the clergy, ii. 183, 184 — elected
pope, 184 — his differences with, and
excommunication of, Henry IV. of Ger-
many, 184, 185, and note— rigorous hu-
miliation imposed by him on Henry,
186— his exile and death, 187— his de-
claration against investitures, 189 — his
illimitable ambition and arrogance, 192
— his despotism towards ecclesiastics,
193 — his arrogance eclipsed by In-
nocent III., 228.

Gregory IX., excommunications of Fre-
deric II. by, i. 387, 391— his further
designs against Frederic, ib. — Decretals
published by his order, ii. 203 — his en-
croachments on the English church,
212— his pretext for levying contribu-
tions, 216 — immense sum extorted by
him from England, 217.

Gregory X., tax levied on the church by,
ii. 218.

Gregory XL reinstates the papal court at
Rome, ii. 240.

Gregory XIL elected and deposed, ii.
242.

Grimoald, usurpation of supreme power
by, i. 6.

Grosstete (Robert, bishop of Lincoln),
notices oi,ii. 217, note t ; iii. 429, note *,
464.

Guamieri (duke), systematic levy of
contributions bv, i. 471 — success of
his operations, ib.

Guelfs and Ghibelins, origin of the rival
factions of, i. 382— their German an-
tecedents, 383 and note — character-
istics of the two parties, 384— irra-
tionality of the distinctions, 406-
temporary union of the factions, ib.
— expulsion of the Ghibelins from
Florence, '407— revival of their party,
410— origin of the name Guelfs, ii. 73.
See Florence, Genoa.

HENRY III.

Gui de Lusignan, cause of his flight from
France, i.^36. 9

Guienne, seized by Philip IV., i. 43 —
restored to England, 44 — insurrection
of its people against Charles VII.,
86 and note — Buspicious death of
Charles duke of, 89 and note.

Gmscard (Robert), territorial conquests
of, i. 363 — he takes Leo IX. prisoner,
ib. — his English opponents at Con-
stantinople, ii 307.

Guiscard (Roger), conquers Sicily, i.

363 — declared king by Innocent II.,

364 — he shelters Gregory VII., ii.
187— he subjugates Amalfi, iii. 328 —
he introduces silk manufactures at
Palermo, 331.

Gunpowder. See Military Systems.

Hair, length of, a mark of .nobility, i.
310 — Childebert’s proposal relative to
Clodomir's children, 311, note.

Hanse towns, confederacy of the, iii.
325.

Haroun Alraschid, magnificence of the
rule of, it 121 — African principalities
in his reign, 122.

Hastings, lord (temp. Edward IV.), re-
ceives bribes from Louis XI., i. 90 — his
reason for refusing to give receipts for
the same, ib. note \

Hawkwood (Sir John), military renown
acquired by, i. 472— gratitude of the
Florentines towards him, ib.— his skill
as a general, 473.

Haxey (Thomas), surrendered by the
commons to the vengeance of Richard
II., iii. 76, 102— important principles
involved in his case, 76, notes.

Henry II. of Castile rebels against Peter
the Cruel, ii. 14r— his defeat and sub-
sequent victory, 15 — his voy to pre-
serve justice, 36.

Henry III. of Castile marries John of
Gaunt’s daughter, ii. 15.

Henry IV. of Castile, despicable cha-
racter of, ii. 17 — deposed by a con-
spiracy of nobles, ib. — futile efforts
of his daughter to succeed him, 18 —
contests after his death, ib. — his re-
proof by the Cortes of Ocana, 33.

Henry I. of England, extortions on the
church by, ii. 216.

Henry IL marries the repudiated wife
of Louis VII., i. 25 — opposes the
tyranny of the church of Rome, ii.
222 — cause of his dispute with Thomas
h Becket, 223.

Henry HI. allows Italian priests in
English benefices, ii. 213— abets papal
taxation on the clergy, 217— his sub-
missiveness, 226— provisions contained
in his charter, 327, 328 — worthless-
ness of his character, 329— his per-
juries, 330 — his pecuniary difficulties
and extortions, 331 — his expensive

500

INDEX.

HENRV IV.

foreign prqjects, 332 — demands of the
pope and resolute conduct of the
barons, 333— his quarrel with the earl
of Pembroke, iii. 164.

Henry IV., policy and views of, towards
France, i. 65, 74 — circumstances at-
tending his succession, iii. 81 — in-
validity of his hereditary title, 82 —
his tactics towards the parliament, 83
—aid granted to him in 1400,85 —
policy of the commons towards him,
86, 87— limitations imposed on him,

93, 94 — he comes to terms with them,

94. See Bolingbroke.

Henry V., his exorbitant demands
on proposing to marry Catherine of
France, i. 74 and note n — invasion of
France by, ib. and note 0 — his nego-
tiations with the duke of Burgundy,
75— his marriage and death, 76— life
subsidies granted to him, iii. 87— im-
probability of his alleged dissoluteness,
96 — his claims on popular affection, ib.
—his clemency to the earl of March,
194.

Henry VI., parliamentary policy during
the minority of, iii. 97, 98 — unpopu-
larity of his marriage, 98— his conduct
on Suffolk's impeachment, 99— state of
the kingdom during his minority, 183
—his imbecility, ib. — solemnities ob-
served in nominating a regency during
his infancy, 186-190 — provisions in
consequence of his mental infirmities,
190-194.

Henry VII., conduct of, towards the
memory of his predecessors, lil 200
and note T

Henry I. of France, alleged large army
levied by, i. 24, note 6 — extent of au-
thority exercised by him, 137.

Henry I. the Fowler, elected emperor
of Germany, ii, 67— his scheme for im-
proving his territories, ib. note d.

Hemy II. of Bavaria, elected emperor
of Germany, ii. 68.

Henry III. of Germany, imperial influ-
ence extended by, ii. 68— instances of
his exercise' of absolute power, 69,
95— his Judicious nomination of popes,
183.

Henry IV. of Germany, primary cause
of the misfortunes of, ii. 69— con-
spiracy against him during his In-
fancy, 70, note k — his abduction by
Hanno, ib.— his excommunication and
its consequences, ib. and note a — his
remains insulted by Rome, 71— zeal
of the cities in his cause, 90— his con-
tests with Gregory VII., 184, 185— his
humiliation by Gregory, 186 — the
tables turned, 187— animosity of Gre-
gory's successors towards him, 187,
188.

Henry V. of Germany, accession and
death of, H. 71— privilege granted by

INNOCENT III,

him to the cities, 90 — his compromise
with the popes, 188.

Henry Vi. of Germany, repudiates ar-
rangements between his predecessor
and the popes, i. 381 — production of
his alleged will, ib.— his ambitious
project, ii. 74— his death, 75.

Henry VII. of Germany, acquires Bo-
hemia for his son, ii. 85— his opposi-
tion to the papal power, 234.

Henry the Proud, ancestry and posses-
sions of, ii. 72 — consequences of his
disobedience to the emperor's sum-
mons, 72, 73.

Henry the Lion restored to his birth-
right, ii. 73— fatal results of his in-
gratitude, 74.

Hereditary' succession, how far observed
among the Franks, i. 154, note f, 299
— disregarded by the Anglo-Saxons,

ii. 273— establishment of the principle
in England, 343-346 — elucidatory
note upon the subject, 425-428.

Hereford (earl and duke of)- Bo-
bun, Bolingbroke.

He re ward, brave resistance of, to William
the Conqueror, ii. 304, note t.

Hilary deposed by Leo the Great, ii.
161, not* P.

Hildebrand. See Gregory VII.

Honorius III., establishment of mendi-
cant orders by, ii. 206— refusal of his
requests by France and England, 213.

Hugh the Great of France, procures the
election of Louis IV., i. 128.

Hugh Capet. See Capet.

Hungarians, ravages in Europe by the,
L 20— their ferocity towards the clergy,
ib., note a — their conversion to Chris-
tianity, ii. 104 — their wars with the
Turks, 105-107.

Hungary, kings and chiefs of. See An-
drew, Corvinus, Hunniades, I^adislaus,
Louis of Hungary, Sigismund, Uladis-
laus.

Hungerford(Sir Thomas), elected speaker,

iii. 68.

Hunniades (John), heroic career of, Ii
105, 106— his death, 106.

Huas (John), burned to death, iL 102—
oharacteri sties of bis schism and his
followers, iii. 389 and note ro , 390.

Innocent III., persecution of the Albi-
geois by, i. 28— his ambitious policy,
379— his significant production of the
will of Henry VI. of Germany, 381—
—position of the Italian cities towards
him, ib.— use made by him of his
guardianship of Frederic II., 385 — in-
crease of temporal authority under
him, 416 — his accession to the papal
chair, ii. 195 — extravagance of his
pretensions, 196 — bis scheme of uni-
versal arbitration, 197 — his decrees
and Interdicts, 199 — his interference

INDEX.

501

INNOCENT IV.

with the German emperors, 200— his
claim to nominate bishops, 212 —
cause of his anger with the chapter of
Poitiers, 213— he levies taxes on the
clergy, 216 — his pretext for exercising
jurisdiction, 220 — he exempts the
clergy from criminal process, 221 —
his arrogance eclipsed by Boniface
VIII., 228.

Innocent IV., outrageous proceedings of,
against Frederic II., i. 391— his con-
duct towards Frederic’s successors,
392 — he quarters Italian priests on
England, ii. 213 — height of papal
tyranny during his pontificate, 217—
his disjK>sal of the crown of Portugal,
231 note S — anecdote of him, 238,
note T .

Innocent VI. elected pope, ii. 242.

Interdicts, ii. 172, 260 note 8, and 261.
See Papal Power.

Ireland a mediaeval slave depdt, iii. 316
and note d.

Irene, dethronement of Constantine V.
by, i. 122— Leo III.’s project of mar-
riage between her and Charlemagne,
ib.

Isabel of Bavaria (queen of Charles VI.),
infamous conduct of, towards her hus-
band, i. 69— her hatred of Armagnac,
and its consequences, 72— joins in the
treaty with Henry V., 76.

Isabel of France, marries Edward II. of
England, i. 45.

Isabella of Castile. See Ferdinand II.

Isidore, publication of the False Decretals
of, ii. 166 — their character and object,
166, 167 and notes — authority accorded
to them by Gratian, 203.

Italy, occupied by the Ostrogoths, i. 1
— its subjection by the Lombards, 8 —
conquests of Pepin and Charlemagne,
9— its king Bernard, 14 — its state
at the end of the ninth century, 355
— authorities referred to for its history,
ib. note— its monarchs Berenger 1. and
II., 357 and note c — assumption of
power Jjy Otho the Great, ib.— execu-
tion of CJrescentius by Otho III., 359 —
election and subsequent troubles of
Ardoin, ib. — condition of its people
under Henry II., 360 — cause of its sub-
jection to German princes, ib. — acces-
sion of Conrad II., and consolidation
of Germanic influences, 360, 361— its
Greek provinces, 361, 362— incursions
and successes of the Normans, 362-364
— progress of the Lombard cities [see
Lombards] — accession of Frederic Bar-
barossa, 370 [see Frederic I.}— cause
of the decadence of Italy, 377, 378 —
Its domestic manners, iii. 342, 344.

Jacquerie, insurrection of the, i. 58, and
note K

lames IX of Aragon, renounces the Si-

JOHN IL

cilian crown, i. 485— invested with the
Sardinian crown, ii. 231, note 8.

Jane of Navarre, treaty entered into on
behalf of, i. 45— betrayal of her cause
by the duke of Burgundy, 47— she re-
covers Navarre, ib. note s.

Janizaries, institution of the, ii. 137.

Jerome of Prague, burned to death, ii.

102 .

Jerusalem, foundation of the kingdom of,
i. 38— its conquest by Saladin, 40 —
restored to the Christians by the Sara-
cens, 41 — oppressive system of mar-
riages there, under the feudal system,
180 — title of the kings of Naples to
sovereignty over it, 386 note d.

Jews, wealth amassed and persecutions
endured by the, i. 209— their early
celebrity as usurers, ib. note b — their
final expulsion from France, 210 and
note d—ordinances against them, 222
— exorbitant rates paid by them in
England, ii. 320 — their massacre by the
Pastoureaux, iii. 297— their liability to
maltreatment, 305 — barbarous customs
regarding them, ib. note— the Jew-
drowning story, 306 note u — their early
money dealings, 338 — toleration vouch-
safed to them, ib. — decline of their
trade, 339 — their addiction to coin-
clipping, 369 note t.

Joan of Arc, character, successes, and
fate of, L 79, 80 — her betrayer, 84 note f
—her name and birthplace, 143— great
merit of Southey’s poem, ib.

Joanna of Naples, married to Andrew of
Hungary, i. 486 — her husband’s murder
imputed to her, ib. and note 9— s he
dies by violence, 487.

Joanna II. of Naples, and her favourites,

i. 489— her vacillation relative to her
successors, 490 — puts Caraccioli to
death, 491 note.

John I. of Castile, accession of, ii. 15 —
his merited defeat by the, Portuguese,
16.

John II. of Castile, wise government by
the guardians of, during his infancy,'

ii. 15, 16 — he disgraces and destroys his
favourite Alvaro de Luna, 16, 17 — his
death, 17— its results, 58.

John (king of England), cited before*
Philip Augustus, i. 26— results of bis
contumacy, 27 — singular fines levied
by him, ii. 320— his rapacity, 326 and
note 9 — Magna Charta, 326, 329—?
curious instance of the unpopularity of
his name, iii. 65 note K

John I. of France, birth and death of, i.
46 and note e .

John II. of France, character of, i. 53—
taken prisoner at Poitiers, 56 — bestows
his daughter on Charles of Navarre,
67 — submits to the peace of Bretigni,
59— his response to the citizens of
Rochelle, 63.

502

INDEX.

JOHN. I . LAWS.

John of Procida, designs of, on Sicily, i. ] of Sir F. Palgrave on the sutyeci,
483 — result of his intrigues, 484. I 249*257.

John VII L (pope), insolence of, towards Knighthood. See Chivalry.

Charles the Fat, ii. 174 — asserts a right Knights Templars, institution of tho
to nominate the emperor, ib. order of, i. 40 — their large possession i

John XXII. (pope), claims supremacy and rapacity, ib. and note * — question
over the empire, ii. 235— his dispute of their guilt or innocence, 138, 139—

with Louis of Bavaria, ib.— he per- Count Purgstall's charges against them,

secutes the Franciscans, 237— his ini- j 139-142 — liaynouard’s attempted re-

mense treasures, 238 — his imposts on futation, 142 — their estates and re-
the clergy, 238 note *. i markable influence in Spain, ii 8.

John XXltl. (pope), convokes and is Koran, characteristics of the, ii. 114-11 7.
deposed by the council of Constance,

ii. 243. Labourers, amount of wages paid to, iii.

Joinville (the chronicler), refuses to ac- j 372, 373— degree of comfort thereby
company St. Louis in his last crusade, 1 indicated, 373, 374 and notes.

i. 42 note. Ladislaus of Naples, accession of, i. 488

Judith of Bavaria, marries Louis the De- ! — energy displayed by him, 489— his

bonair, i. 16. j death, ib.

Julian's betrayal of Spain to the Moors : Ladislaus of Hungary, defeat of the par-
credibility of the legend, ii. 62-65. tisans of, ii. 105— his accession to the

Jury. See Trial by Jury. throne, ib. — his death, ib. — suspicions

Justice, administration of, under Charle- relative thereto, 106 note.
magne, i. 238 — various kinds of feudal Lambertazzi (Imiida de), pathetic story
jurisdiction, 239— judicial privileges of, i. 402.

assigned to the owners of fiefs, 240— Lancaster (duke of), ascendency of, over
cruel custom in Aragon, 241 note <1 Edw. III. iii. 55— his ambitious pro-

— trial by combat, 242, 243 and notes — jects, ib.— cause of his retirement from

the Establishments of St. Louis, 244 — court, 58— he curries favour with the
limitations on trial by combat, 245, 246, commons, 65 and note t— his quarrel

247 note P— royal tribunals and their with Arundel and Gloucester, 74 — hiB

jurisdiction, 246 — the court of peers, marriage with Katherine Swineford,
247— the parliament of Paris and its ib.— his antenuptial children by her,

lawyers, 248— jurisdiction of the oourt 75— conduct of Richard II. on his

of the palace, 336, 337 — its constitution, death, 80.

337 — imperial chamber of the empire, Lancastrians and Yorkists, wars of the,

ii. 97 — its functions and jurisdiction, iii. 197.

98— the six circles and the Aulic Landp (Michel di), cause of the eleva-

council, 99— character of the king’s tion of, i. 435— his just exercise of

court in England, 336, 420-425— im- power, 436— sent into exile, 438.

portance of the office of chief justiciary, Landwehr, antiquity of the, i. 263 note c .
336 note r — functions of the court of Lanfranc (archbishop), arrogant conduct
exchequer, 336 and note *, 425 — insti- of, ii. 305 note

tution of justices of assize, 337— esta- Languages, difficulty of accounting for
blishment of the court of common pleas, the change of, i. 284, 285 — principles

338— origin of the common law, 339— deducible from difference of language,

difference between the Anglo-Saxon 290, 291.

and Anglo-Norman systems of juris- Languedoc, spread of the Albigensian be-
prudence, 339, 340— complicated cha- resy in, i. 28 and note— devastation

racter of English laws, 341— necessity of the country by the papal forces, 28,

for a reformation of the statute-book, 29 and notes— its cession to the crown

342 and note—, jurisdiction of the king's of France, 29— its provincial assembly,

council, iii. 138-147, 249-257 -safe- 234.

guard for the independence of judges, Latimer (lord), impeached by the com*
152 note* — rarity of instances of illegal mons, iii. 56— their further tactics re*

condemnation, 156-158 — origin and garding him, 69.

jurisdiction of the court of chancery, Latin tongue, corruption of the, Hi. 275.
241-249. See Learning.

Laura (Petrarch’s mistress). See Pc*
King’s council (England), jurisdiction of trarch,
the, iii. 138— its composition, t'6.— its Laws, characteristics of, at certain periods,
encroachments, 140 — limitations on its i. 297— study of the civil law, iii. 414—

power, 141 — remonstrances of the fame of the Bolognese school, 415 —

commons, ib.— -its legislative status, necessity for legal knowledge in mo-

143— its frequent junction with the dieeval magistrates, 416— unpopularity

lords’ house, 144-146 and notes— views of the Roman law in England, 417—

INDEX.

503

LEARNING.

neglect of the elder civilians, 418, 419
and note x . See Justioe.

Learning, causes of the decline of, iil
270— neglect of pagan literature by the
early Christians, 273 — blighting in-
fluence of superstition and asceticism,
27 4, — cdtrupuon of the Latin tongue,
275— rules observed in its pronuncia-
tion, 276-278— errors of t^e populace,
278 — changes wrought by the Italians
and French, 279, 280— neglect of quan-
tity, 281 — specimens of verses by St
Augustin and others, 282-284 notes—
change of Latin into Romance, 283 —
Italian corruptions of the Latin, 285 —
effect of the disuse of Latin, 286 — igno-
rance of various sovereigns, ib. notes —
extent of Charlemagne's and Alfred's
learning, 286 and note f— ignorance of
the clergy, 287, 288, and notes— scarcity
of books, 289 and note P — erasure of
manuscripts, 289 — lack of eminent
learned men, ib. — John Scotus and
Silvester 1L, 290 and note r — preserva-
tive effects of religion on the Latin
tongue, 29 1-293— non-existence of libra-
ries, 292, note — prevalence of supersti-
tions, 29(1-295 — revival of literature,
413 — study of civil law, 414-419 — esta-
blishment of public schools, 419—
Abelard and the university of Paris,
420, 421— Oxford university and its
founders, 422, 423, and notes — rapid
increase of universities, 423-425 — causes
of tbeir celebrity, 425— spread of the
scholastic philosophy, 426— its eminent
disputants, 427— influence of Aristotle
and of the church, 429, 430— unprofit-
ableness of the scholastic discussions,
430, 431— labours of Roger Bacon and
Albertus Magnus, 432 and note ■ 433-
cultivation of the new languages, 433
—the troubadours and their produc-
tions, 434-436 — origin of the French
language, 436— early French composi-
tions, 437, 438— Norman tales and ro-
mances, 439 — the Roman de la Rose,
440— French prose writings, 441, 442
and notes — formation of the Spanish
language : the Cid, 442, 443, and notes
— rapid growth of the Italian language,
443, 444 — excuses of Italians for writing
in French, 445, note *— Dante and his
Divine Comedy, 445-449— Petrarch and
his writings, 449-452— dawn of the
English tongue, 452 — Layamon's Brut,
453 and note * — Robert of Gloucester
and other metrical writers, 453 — merit
of Piers Plowman's Vision, 454 — cause
of the slow progress of the English
language, ib. — earliest compositions in
English, 455 — pre-eminence of Chaucer,
456— revival of classical learning, 457
— eminent cultivators thereof, 458— in-
vention of paper, 459— transcribers and
booksellers, ib. note *— rarity and dear-

LOMBARDS.

ness of books, 460 — recovery of classical
manuscripts, 461— eminent labourers
in this field, 462 , 463 — revival of the
study of Greek, 465, 466— state of
learning in Greece, 466 — services ren-
dered by the medieval Greeks, 467-469
and notes — opposition to the study of
Greek at Oxford, 470 — fame due to
Eton and Winchester schools, ib . —
invention of printing, 471— first books
issued from the press, ib.— first print-
ing presses in Italy, 472— elucidatory
note on the state of learning in the dark
ages, 474-476 — Dr. Maitland’s views
thereon, 476-479— earliest use of the
English language in public documents,
484-486.

Legislation under the early French kings,

i. 212— the "Champ de Mars” or
Field of March, 213, 214 — participation
of the people in legislative proceedings,
214, 333-336 — Charlemagne’s legislative
assemblies, 215 — cessation of national
assemblies, 218 — assemblies of the
barons, 219— the cours plenieres, 220 —
limitation of the king’s power, 221—
substitutes for legislative authority,
ib. — ecclesiastical councils and their
encroachments, 222— general legisla-
tion, when first practised, ib. — increase
of the legislative power of the crown,
and its causes, 223, 224— convocation
of the States-General, 224 — constitu-
tion of the Saxon witenagemot, ii. 279—
Anglo-Norman legislation, 322, 323 and
note — prerogatives of the crown, 410 —
custom of the Anglo-Saxon kings, 412.
See Justice, Parliament, States-General.

Leo the Great deposes Hilary, ii. 161,
note P.

Leo III. invests Charlemagne with the
imperial insignia, i. 11— his design of
marrying Charlemagne to Irene, 122—
Charlemagne’s authority over him, ii.
182.

Leo VIII. confers on the emperor the
right of nominating popes, ii. 182 and
note x .

Leo IX. leads his army in person, i. 363
—devotion of his conquerors towards
him, 363, 364. See Papal Power.

Leon, foundation of the kingdom of, ii. 3
—its king killed in battle, 4— its union
with Castile, 9.

Leopold of Austria defeated by the Swiss,

ii. 109.

Libraries in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, iii. 460, 461, and notes.

Literature. See Learning.

Lollards, rise of the, iii. 388— their re-
semblance to the Puritans, 389.

Lombards, original settlement of the, i.
8 and note t — extension of their domi-
nions, ib. — defeated by Pepin and
Charlemagne, 9— their mode of legis-
lating, 212— position of their Romau

INDEX.

w. , -7

LONGCHAMP.

subjects, 295— progress of their citleB,
395— frequency of wars between them,
<6.— acquisition of territories by them,
368— democratic tyranny of the larger
cities, 369— destruction of Lodi by the
Milanese, ib. and note h— courage of
the citizens of Como, 370-exclusion of
royal palaces from Lombard cities, ib.
— siege and subjugation of Milan by
Frederic Barbarossa, 371, 372— efforts
of the Milanese to regain their freedom,
372— destruction of Milan, 373— league
of the Lombard cities, 374-rdefeat and
flight of Barbarossa, 375— peace of Con-
stanae, 376— their successful Twistance
a lesson to tyrants, 376, 3ft— their
wars with Frederic IL, 367 — jparty
nature of these struggles, 388— arrange-
ment of the Lombard cities, 398, 389 —
chequered results of their conflicts with
Frederic, 390— their papal supporters,
ib. — causes of their success, 392— their
means of defence, 394, 395— internal
government of their cities, 395— revival
of the office of podesta, 396 — position
of aristocratic offenders amongst them,
397— duties and disabilities of the po-
desta, 397, 398— their internal dissen-
sions, 398, 399— artisan clubs and aris-
tocratic fortifications, 400 — vindictive-
ness of conquerors of all classes, 401—
inflammatory nature of private quarrels,
jand their disastrous results, 402— effect
of Giovanni di Vicenza's exhortations,
403, 404 — moral deducibie from the
fall of the lombard republics, 408, 409
—the Visconti in Lombardy, 464. See
Visconti.

Longchamp (William, bishop of Ely),
constitutional precedent established by
the banishment of, ii. 325..

London, early election of the magistrates
of, iii. 219— its municipal divisions,
220— its first lord mayor, 221— not ex-
clusively a city of traders, 223— its
extent and population, ib.— comparison
with Paris, 224.

Loria (Roger di), naval successes of, i.
484.

Lothaire (son of Louis the Debonair),
associated in power with bis father, i.

15— his jealousy of his half-brother,

16 — territories allotted to him, 16, 17,
and notes ° P — cause of his excommuni-
cation, ii. 169, 170.

Lothaire (duke of Saxony), elected em-
peror oi Germany, ii. 71 and note P—
failure of his scheme of succession, 72
—the picture and couplet relative to
his coronation, 195, note 8.

Louis of Bavaria, emperor of Germany,
ii. 85 — his contest with the popes,
234 — he aids the ViscontJ, 235— he
dies unabsolved, 236.

Louis I. (the Debonair) succeeds Charle-
mague ; his cruelty to his nephew, i.

LOUIS XI.

14— his character, 15— associates his
sons in power with him, ib.— his second
marriage and its consequences, 16—
enmity of the clergyagainst him, ib.—
his practice relativa to the hearing of
causes, 239, note lV-his attempted de-
position by the bishops, ii. 155, 156—
be prohibits trial by ordeal, 4ii. 295,
note »

Louis of Germany (son of the above)
made king of Bavaria by his father,
L 15— share of empire allotted to him
on Ms father's death, 16,

Louis IL (the Stammerer), conditiora ex-
acfced by the French nobles fMwv'126.

Louis IV. (“ Outrenser ") elected king,
i. 128— iNilk’s saucy retort, iii. 286,
note ®.

Louis V., f. 18, 128.

Louis VI., state of France at the seces-
sion of, i. 24 — his contests with the
Norman princes, 25— his participation
in judicial matters, 244, note c . *

Louis VU* untoward marriage of, add
its oonsequenoes, t 25— confirms the
rights of the clergy, 27— Joins in the
second crusade, 38— his submissiveness
to Rome, ii. 223.

Louis VIIL opposes Raymond of Tou-
louse, L 39— issues an ordinance against
the JewC 222.

Louis IX. (Saint Louis), accession of, L
30 — revolt of the barons against him,
^.—excellences of his character, his
rare probity, Ac., 31, 32— undue in-
fluence exercised over him by his
mother, 82— his superstition, 33 and
note— he embarks in the crusades, 33—
calamitous results of his first crusade,
41— hijs fcecond expedition and death, ib.
—his Establishments, 222, 224, 244 —
his open-air administrations of justice,
24 4 — the Pragmatic Sanction and its
provisions, ii. 214 and note — his sub-
missiveness to the church, 226— his
restraint on the church holding land,
227 and note.

Louis X. (Louis Hu tin), accession and
death of, i. 45 — treatment of his queen
and family by Philip the lx>ng, 46 — his
edict for the abolition of serfdom, 202
— he renounces certain taxes, 227.

Louis XL, accession of, i. 86— his cha-
racter and policy, 86, 87 — bestows
Normandy on his brother as an appan-
age, 88— and then deprives him of it,
89— grants pensions to the English
♦king and his nobles, 89, 90— bis con-
tests with Charles of Burgundy, 90, 91,
and notes— and with Mary of Burgundy,
94, 95, and notes— his last sickness and
its terrors, 96 — his belief in, relics, 97
and note— court boast relative to his
encroachments, 235 — civic liberty en-
couraged by him, 352 — he repeals the
Pragmatic Sanction, ii. 255— his people

INDEX.

505

louis'xii.

oppose the repeal, t b . — his treatment
of cardinal Barae. 258, note c .

Louis XII. See Orleans.

Louis of Hungary invades Naples, i. 486.

Louis of Anjou adopted by Joanna of
Naples, i. 487— fflldeath, 488.

Louis LL of Apjou and Naples, acces-
sion of, L 488— subdued by Ladis-
laus, ib.

Louis IIL of Anjou and Naples called in
by Joanna II., i. 489— nis doubtful
prospects, and death, 491.

Lucius 11. (pope), cause of the death of,
i.41*.

Luna (Alvaro de), influence exercised
by, n. 16— disgraced and beheaded,
17— law on which his opponents re-
lied, 38.

Luna (Antonio de) assassinates the arch-
bishop of Saragossa, ii. 41.

Luna (Frederic count of) claims the
throne of Aragon, iL 41— care taken of
his interests by the court, ib.

Lttna (Peter WeL See Benedict XIII.

, Lupus ServatuA literary performances
of, iii. noum,

Lu xem bus* (J ohn ,cf) , execution of pri-
soners 'm r war by, i. 84— betrays Joan
of Arc to tM fiuglish. ii/. note K

Magna Chart* See England.

Mahomet the prophet. See Mohaijixned.

Mahomet II. attacks the Venetians, i.
493 — his success, 495 — failure of his
assault upon Belgrade, ii. 106 — he cap-
tures Constantinople, 136— unrealised
schemes for his expulsion, 136, 137 —
his European successes and reverses,
138— ASneas Sylvius’s odd proposal, ib.
mote.

Mandats and their abuses, ii. 212.

Manfred, brave retention of the imperial
throne by, i. 392 — killed, 406.

Manicheans. See Religious Sects.

Manners. See Chivalry, Domestic Life,
Learning, Superstition.

Manufactures. See Trade.

Manuscripts. See Learning. ,

Marcel (magistrate of Paris), Why assas-
sinated, i. 232.

March (Roger, earl of) opposes the duke
of Lancaster, iii. 56— his significant po-
licy, 57— his popularity with the par-
liament, 65— his exclusion from the
throne, 82, 194^- clemency of Henry V.'
towards him, 194.

Margaret of Anjou married to Henry VI.,
iii. 98 — consequences of her impolicy,
194, 197. See Henry VI.

Mariner’ s compass, tradition of the in-
vention of the, iii. 332, 333.

Maritime laws of early times, iii. 333-
prevalence of piracy, 334 — law of re-
prisals, 335.

Marriages, capricious decrees of the popes

MILITARY.

concerning, ii. 208— dispensations and
their abuses, ib.

Martin (prince of Aragon) marries the
queen of Sicily, i. 49o— his death, ib.

Martin (king or Aragon) succeeds to his
son's Sicilian dominions, i. 490 — con-
tests for the Aragonese throne at his
death, ii. 39.

Martin V. elected pope, ii. 246— he con-
vokes the council of Pavia, 247— his
anger at the English statute of praemu-
nire, 251, note his concordat with
England, 361— powers reserved to him
by the German concordats, 252, 253
—rejection of his concordat by prance,
254. 1

Mary of Burgundy. See Burgundy.

Matilda (countess) bequeaths her domi-
nions tp Rome, i. 380.

Matthias Corvinus. See Corvinus.

Maximilian of Austria marries Mary of
Burgundy, i. 96— becomes king of the
Romans, ii. 89 and notes — ascends the
German throne, 94— he extinguishes
the robber-nobles, 96 — institutes the
Aulic council, 99— extent of the empire
at his accession, 100.*

Mayor of the palace, importance of the
office of, i. 6, 113-115, 157. See Charles
Martel, Pepin Heristal, Ebroip.

Medici (Salvestro de’) proposes to miti-
gate the severity of the law in Flo-
rence, i. 434 — rise of his family, 498—-
character of Giovanni, ib. and note —
banishment and recall of Cosmo, 499—
his death : his sen Piero, 500— death of
Julian : popularity and princely career
of Lorenzo, 501 — his bankruptcy re-
paired at the cost of the state, 602 and
note 9 — his , title to esteem, 503.

Mendicant friars, first appearance of the,
ii. 205— success of their preachings,
206— th&ir extensive privileges, 206,
207, ana note*.

Mercenary troops. See Military Sys-
tems.

Merovingian dynasty, character of the
times during which it ruled, L 5 —
chronological sketch of its career, 118-
120 .

Middle ages, period comprised under the
term, iii. 269.

Milan, resolute conduct of the people of
in the choice of a bishop, i. 366 and
note y— its siege by Frederic 1., 372-
destruction of the city, 373 — its sta-
tistics in the 13th century, 393 — its
public works, 394— creation of the
duchy of Milan, 412 — lax conduct of
the Milanese clergy, ii. 187, note 6. See
Lombards.

Military systems of the middle ages,
character of the English troops at
Crecy, Poitiers, and Azincourt, i. 55,
77— disadvantages of feudal obligations
in long campaigns, 262— substitution of

506

INDEX.

MOCEU1GO.

mercenaries, 264 7 - Canute s soldiers*
and his institutes respecting them, 264
and note 6 — the mercenaries of the
Anglo-Norman kings, 265— advantages
of mercenary troops, ib.— high rate of
pay to English soldiers, 77 and note f ,
266 — establishment of a regular force
by Charles VII., 267 — military re-
sources of the Italian cities, 467-
importance of their carroccio, 467 and
note d — their foreign auxiliaries, 468 —
arms and armour, 469 and note ^ — citi-
zens excused from service, 469 — com-
panies of adventurers : Guarnieri’s sys-
tematic levies, 471— spirited refusal of
tribute by Florence, 472— Sir John
Hawkwood's career [see HawkwoodJ
— eminent Italian generals and their
services, 474, 476— probable first in-
stance of half-pay, 475 and note
small loss of life In mediaeval warfare,
476, 477, and notes— long bows and
cross bows, 477, 478 — advantages and
disadvantages of armour, 478— intro-
duction of gunpowder, 479— clumsiness
of early artillery aud firearms, 480—
increased efficiency of infantry, 481.

Mocenigo (doge), dyLng prophecy of, L
465, 466, and note. '

Moguls, ravages of the, ii. 131 — their ex-
ploits under Timur, 133.

Mohammed, advent of, ii. 114 — state of
Arabia at the time, 115— dearth of
materials for his history, ilk note —
characteristics of his w ritings, 115, 116
—his knowledge of Christianity whence
derived, 116, note c — martial spirit of
his system, 117, 118 — career of his fol-
lowers. See Abbassides, Moors, Otto-
mans, Saracens, Turks.

Monarchy in France, character of the, i.
217, note — means by which it became
absolute, 223— its power of enacting
laws unlimited, 229, note K

Monasteries, cultivation of waste lands
by, ii. 142— less pure sources of in-
come, 144 — their exemption from epis-
copal control, 168 and note f— preserva-
tion of books by them, iii. 292 — extent
of their charities, 302 and note— vices
of their inmates, 303 — their anti-social
influence, 304 — their agricultural exer-
tions, 360 and note.

Money, high interest paid for, iii. 337—
establishment of paper credit, 339 and
note b — banks of Italy, 340 — securities
for public loans, 341— changes in the
value of money, 366-369 — comparative
table of value, 370, note. See Coining.

Montagu (minister of Charles VI.), arrest
of, 1 . 68, note *.

Montfort (Simon de), heads the crusade
against the Albigeois, i. 29.

Montfort (Simon de, earl of Leicester),
his writs of summons to the towns of
England, iii 27.

| NEC STRIA.

Montfort (ally of Edward IIL) obtains
the duchy of Britany, i. 99.

Moors, successes of the Spaniards against
the, ii. 3— victories of Alfonso VI., 5 —
Cordova taken from them, 9 -its fabu-
lous extent and wealth, ib. note m —
cause of their non-expulsion from
Spain, 10, 11.

Moaheim, error of, relative to Louis IX.,
i 33, note *.

Mowbray (earl of Nottingham and duke
of Norfolk), thade lord appellant, iii.
72— he espouses the king's interest, 74
— his quarrel with Bolingbroke and its
results, 79, 80 and note *.

Municipal institutions of the Roman
provincial cities, i. 338— importance of
the office of defensor civitatis, 340—
duties appertaining to it, 340— respon-
sibilities of the decurions, 341 — the
senatorial orders, 342-344 — civic posi-
tion of the Frank bishops, 345— muni-
cipal government of the Frank cities,
345*347— corporate towns of Spain, 347
—of France, 348— their struggles for
freedom, 348, 349— early independence
of the Flemish and Dutch cities, 349
—origin of the French communes, 350,
351— growth of the burgages, 352-
policy of Louis XL relative to civic
liberty, ib.— Italian municipalities, 353,
354 [see Lombards]— free cities of
Germany [see Germany]. See Parlia-
ment, Towns,

Murder, gradation of flues levied as
punishment for, amongst the Franks,
i, 150, 151, and notes, 198 and rioted,
28 ] — rates of compensation amongst
the Anglo-Saxons, ii. 275.

Naples subjugated by Roger Guiscard, i.
363, 364 — contest for its crown between
Manfred and Charles of Anjou, 406 —
murder of the rightful heir by Charles,
407— schemes relative to the severance
of Sicily, 483 [see Sicily]— accession
of Robert, 485— queen Joanna and her
murdered husband, 486 and note 1 —
Louis of Anjou and Charles 111., 488 —
reign of Louis II., ib .— ambition of the
young king Ladislaus, 489— his death,
ib .— Joanna II., her vices and her fa-
vourites, 489, 490, and 491, note— career
of Alfonso, 492 [see Alfonso V.}—
invasion of the kingdom by John of
Calabria, 494 — his failure, ib.— Ferdi-
nand secured on the throne, 495— bis
odious rule, 503.

Navarre, origin of the kingdom of, il. 3,4.

Neustria, extent of the dominions so
termed, i. 6, note its peculiar features
as distinguished from Austrasia, 118—
when first erected into a kingdom, 119
and note — destruction of its indepen-
dence, 120.

INDEX.

507

NEVIL.

Nevil (lord) impeached by the commons,
iii. 56.

Nicolas II. (pope), innovations introduced
by, ii. 183.

Nobility, origin of, in France, i. 157, 158
and note , 189— privileges conferred on
the class, 191 — consequences of marri-
age with plebeians, 192— letters of
nobility when first granted, 193- dif-
ferent orders, and rights belonging to
each, 194 — their gal low's distinctions,
ib. note c — their right to coin money,
205, 206— to levy private war, 207—
characteristics of the early Frank no-
bility, 309-3 12— excesses of the Floren-
tine nobility, 423, 424— turbulence of
the Spanish nobles, ii. 13— contests of
the German nobles with the cities, 91,
92— rural nobility, how' supported, 94,
95— their career, how’ checked, 95 —
source of the influence of the English
nobility, iii. 165— their patronage of
robbers, 169— German robber lords, 314
— legislative province of the English
nobility [see Parliament}.

Norfolk (earl and duke of). See Bigod,
Mowbray.

Normans, piratical pursuits of the, i. 20
— their plan of warfare, 21 — sufferings
of the clergy at their hands, 22— their
conversion and settlement in France,
ib. — terror excited by their audacity,
134, 135— beneficial effects of their
conversion* 135— their incursions into
Italy, 363 and note m — successes of
their leaders, 363, 364— their invasion
of England [see England}.

Nottingham (earl of). See Mowbray.

Oaths, papal dispensations from, ii. 210
— notable instances thereof, ib. note c .

Odo (archbishop). See Dunstan.

Oleron, laws of, iii. 334.

Ordeals, nature of, iii. 294, 295— stories
of queens Emma and Cunegunda, 295,
note y— instance of a failure of the
water ordeal and its consequences, ii.
339, note b.

Orleans (Louis, duke of), alleged amours
of, with queen Isabel, 69, note '—loses
his popularity,? 0 — his assassination and
its probable causes, ib. and notes —
commotions which ensued, 71, 72.

Orleans (D>u is, duke of, afterwards
Louis XII.) claims the regency during
the minority of Charles vlll., i. 98—
instigates the convocation of the States-
General, 236.

Ostrogoths, occupation of Italy by the,

1. 1— annihilation of their dominion, 8
—Roman jurisprudence adopted by
them, 151.

Othman. See Ottomans.

Otho I. (the Great), benefits conferred
upon Germany by, 1L 67.

PAPAL.

Otho II. and III. chosen emperors of
Germany, ii, 67.

Otho IV. aided by the Milanese, i. 382 —
enmity of the pope towards him, 384 —
its consequences, ii. 75— obtains a dis-
pensation from Innocent III., 209-
rights surrendered by him to Innocent,
211, 212 and note f.

Ottoman dynasty, founded by Othman,
if. 132— their European conquests, ib.
— their reverses and* revival under
Amurath, 134, 135 — they capture' Con-
stantinople, 136— European alarm ex-
cited thereby, ib.— institution of the
Janizaries, 137— suspension of Ottoman
conquests, 138.

Oxford university. See Learning.

Pagan superstitions, cause of the limited
influence of, i. 136.

Palaces (royal), why excluded from
Lombard cities, i. 370.

Palermo, loundation of silk manufacture
in, ill 331.

Palestine, commercial value of the set-
tlements in, iii. 329. See Crusades.

Pandects, discovery of the, iii. 414.

Papal power, first germ of the, ii. 158,

159— preceded by the patriarchate,

160 — character of Gregory I., 161 — his
wan,’ proceedings, 162 and notes— con-
vocation of the synod of Frankfort by
Boniface, 165, 166 and notes — effect
produced by the False Decretals, 166,
167, and notes, 221— papal encroach-
ments on the hierarchy, 167— exemp-
tion of monasteries from episcopal
control, 168 and note f— kings com-
pelled to succumb to papal supremacy,
169— origin of excommunications, 170
— helpless position of excommunicated
persons, 171— interdicts and their dis-
astrous consequences, 172— further in-
terference with regal rights by the
popes, ib.— scandalous state of the
papacy in the tenth century, 174— Leo
IX.’s reformatory efforts, 177— prero-
gatives of the emperors relative to
papal elections, 182 -innovations of
pope Nicolas II., 183 — election and
death of Alexander II., 184— career of
Gregory VII. [see Gregory VII.}—
contests of his successors with Henry
IV. and V. of Germany, 188- Calixtus

II. and the concordat of Worms, ib . —
papal opposition to investitures, 181,
188, 189, and notes— abrogation of ec-
clesiastical independence, 193— papal
legates and their functions, 194— Alex-
ander 111. and Thomas a Becket, 195
— career of Innocent III. [see Innocent

III. }— height of the papal power in the
13th century, 202— promulgation of the
canon law, 203— its analogy to the
Justinian code, 204 and notes— estab-
lishment of the mendicant friars, 205

508

INDEX.

PAPER.

—dispensations of marriage, 208 and
no^es— dispensations from oaths, 210 —
encroachments on episcopal elections,
211 —and on rights of patronage, 212-
mandats and their abuse, ib.— the
Pragmatic Sanction, 214 and note -pre-
texts for taxing the clergy, 215, 216-
clerical disaffection towards the popes,
218 -progress of ecclesiastical jurisdic-
tion, 219-221— opposition theroto by
England, 222 and notes— faint opposi-
tion of France, 225— career of Boniface
VIIL [see Boniface VI 11. J— decline of
the papacy, 232 -removal of the papal
court to Avignon, 233 — its contests
with Louis of Bavaria, 234 — growing
resistance to the popes, 236 — rapacity
of the Avignon popes, 237— participa-
tion of the French kings in the plunder,
238— independent conduct of England,
ib. and notes — return of the popes to
Rome, 240— contest between Urban
VI. and Clement VII M ib . — the two
papal courts, 242— three contemporary
popes, ib. — proceedings at the councils
of Pisa, Constance, and Basle, 243
[see Councils] — reflections pertinent
thereto, 248-251 — effects of the con-
cordat of Asehaffenburg, 253— papal
encroachments in Castile, 254— re-
straints thereon in France, 254-256—
further limits on ecclesiastical juris-
diction 257-259 and notes— decline of
papal influence in Italy, and its causes,
259 — despicable nature of later inter-
dicts, 260, note. See Church, Clergy,
Monasteries.

Paper from linen, when invented, iii. 459
and note L

Paris, seditions at,L 66 — defeat and harsh
treatment of its citizens, 67 and notes —
their fear of the Normans, 134 — popu-
lation of the city in early times, iii.
224. See Parliament of Paris.

Parishes, origin of, ii. 144, and note r —
their slow growth, 145.

Parliament of England, constituent ele-
ments of the, iii. 4— right by which the
spiritual peers sit, 4, 5, 122— earls and
barons, 5, 6 — theories of Selden and
Madox, 6-9 — tenants in chief in parlia-
ment, 10, 11— first germ of representa-
tion, 11, 12, and note •— county repre-
sentation, 12— parliaments of Henry
III,, 13, 14, and notes— knights of the
shire, how elected, 15-19 — first sum-
moning of towns to parliament, 27
and note * — question of an earlier date
discussed, 28-30 and notes — the parlia-
ment of Acton Burnell, 31, note ® — the
Barnstaple petition, 32— cause of sum-
moning deputies from boroughs, 35-37
—division of parliament into two
houses, 37— proper business of the
house of commons, 38 — complaint of
the commons in 1309, 40— rights es-

PARLI AMENT.

tablished by them, 42 — their struggles
with the king relative to taxation, 42-47
—concurrence of both houses in legis-
lation made necessary, 48 — distinction
between statutes and ordinances, 49-52
— interference of parliament in matters
of war and peace, 53, 54 — right to in-
quire into public abuses, 54 — increase
of the power of the commons under
Richard II., 58— their protests against
lavish expenditure, 69-61— success of
their demands for accounts, 61 — bold-
ness of their remonstrances, 62-64 —
they aid the duke of Lancaster, 65,
note t — their charges against the earl
of Suffolk, 67, 68 — submission of
Richard to their demands, 69-71 —
they come to an understanding with
him, 73, 74^— they fall under his dis-
pleasure, 75— servility of their sub-
mission, 76-78 — necessity for deposing
Richard, 80— cautious proceedings of
parliament thereupon, 82 , 83 — rights
acquired by the commons during his
reign, 83 — their constitutional advances
under the house of Lancaster, 84 — their
exclusive right of taxation, 84-86 —
their right of granting and controlling
supplies, 86— and to make same depend
on redress of grievances, 86, 87— es
tablishment of their legislative rights,
87-88 — falsification of their intentions
how accomplished, 88-90— their first
petition in English, 90— introduction
of bills, public and private, 91, 92-
legislative divisions of king, lords, and
commons, 92, note h— parliamentary
interference with royal expenditure. 93
— limitations laid ou Henry IV., 93, 94
— re-establishment of a good under-
standing with him, 95— harmony be-
tween Henry V. and the parliament,
96— parliamentary advice sought on
public affairs, 97 — their right to im-
peach ministers, 98— Henry VI. 's mode
of evading Suffolk’s impeachment, 99
—assertion of the privilege of parlia-
ment, 100— cases of Lark and Clerke,
ib.— principles involved in Thorp’s
case, 101— infringements on liberty of
speech, 102— privilege of originating
money-bills, 103-106 — the three estates
of the realm, 105, note b— -course of
proceeding on other bills, 106, 107 —
instance of excess of privilege, 108—
contested elections and proceedings
thereon, 109, 110 — county franchise, in
whom vested, 111 and note — represen-
tation of towns, 111, 112— partial omis-
sion of boroughs, 113, 114, and notes —
reluctance of boroughs to send mem-
bers, 115— in whom the right to vote
was vested, 116, 117, and note m —
status of the members, 117— exclusion
of lawyers from the commons’ bouse,
118— members originally compelled to

INDEX.

509

PARLIAMENTS.

be residents, 118, 119— election irregu-
larities and crown interference, 120,
121 — constitution of the house of lords,

12 1— qualification of spiritual barons,

122— barons by writ, 123-126 and notes
—distinction between barons and ban-
nerets, 126-129— creation of peers by
statute and by patent, 129, 130 — clergy
summoned to send representatives,
131-138— remonstrances of the com-
mons against the encroachments of the
council, 140-142.

Parliament of Paris, constitution and
sittings of the, i. 248— progress of its
jurisdiction, 250 — enregistration of
royal decrees confided to it, 251 — rts
spirited conduct in reference thereto,
ib. — interference of the kings with its
privileges, 251 — establishment of its
independence by Louis XL, 252 — its
claims on the respect of posterity, ib.
— important ordinance of Charles V.,
iii. 162, note t.

Paschal II. (pope), opposition to investi-
tures by, ii. 187 , note i, and 18 9, note 0
— his animosity against Henry IV. of
Germany, 188.

Pastoureaux. See Superstitions.

Paulicians. See Religious Sects.

Pauperism, slavery chosen as a refuge
from the miseries of, i. 328.

Pecocke (bishop), character of, iii. 389,
note «.

Peers of England. See Nobility, Parlia-
ment

Peers of France, original constitution of
the, i. 249.

Pelagiua II. and the bishop of Arles, ii.
164.

Pembroke (William, earl of), resolute
defiance of Henry III. by, iii. 164.

People, state of the, temp. Charlemagne
and his successors, i. 18, 19, et seq.—
their lawlessness, iii. 307— their genera!
immorality, ib.

Pepin Heristal, usurpation of supremacy
by, i. 7— his influence over the destinies
of France, 117— he restores the national
council, 216.

Pepin (son of Charles Martel) deposes
Childeric III., i. 8— ascends the throne,
tb.— subdues the Lombards, 9— his le-
gislative assemblies, 215.

Perjury, prevalence of, in the middle
ages, iii. 309.

Perrers (Alice). See Edward HI.

Peter the Great compared with Charle-
magne, i. 13.

Peter the Cruel, succession of crimes
perpetrated by, ii. 14 — his apologists,
ib. and note — his discomfiture and
death, 15.

Peter the Hermit. See Crusades.

Peter H. of Aragon surrenders his king-
dom to the pope, ii. 200, 231.

Peter HL of Aragon assists John of Pro-

PIRACY,

cida, i. 483— he accepts the crown of
Sicily, 484.

Peter IV. of Aragon, character and reign
of, ii. 39 — consequences of his attempts
to settle the crown on his daughter, ib.

Petrarch on the state of France in 1360,
i. 59, note — his extravagant views re-
lative to Rome, 4l8,wote— his personal
characteristics, iii. 449 and note e . — his
great popularity, 450— his goldsmith
host, ib. note t — his passion for Laura,
451— character of his poetry, 452 and
note — his efforts for the preservation
of manuscripts, 461 — was Laura mar-
ried or single? 482-484.

Philip Augustus, accession of, i. 26— he
cites John king of England before him,
ib.— deprives the English crown of its
French possessions, 27— joins in the
third crusade, 40 — his request to an
abbot relative to coinage, 206— pope
Gregory’s menaces towards him,ii. 192
his fear of Innocent III., 197 — takes
back his repudiated wife, 199.

Philip III. (the Hold), accession of, i. 42
— his conauct towards the archbishop
of Lyons, 45 — he taxes the clergy, ii.
219 Tiotc

Philip IV. (the Fair), accession of, i. 43-
policy adopted by him, ib.— his resent-
ment against the English king, ib.
note — his fraudulent conduct towards
him, 44 — successful resistance of the
Flemings against his attacks, 44 and
note a — his further acquisitions, 44,
and siege of Lyons, 45— claims a right
to debase the coin, 206, note 3_kis
character according to Guizot, 224, note
— he convokes the States-General, 225
and note — his motives in embodying
the deputies of towns, 226*— he taxes
the clergy, ii. 228— he arrests the pope’s
legate, 230 — be burns the pope’s bulls,
ib.— retaliation of the pope, 231— his
stratagem against the pope, 232— its
consequences, ib.

Philip V. (the Long), assumption of the
regency of France by, i. 45— violates
his treaty with his brother's widow, 46
—Salic law confirmed in his reigb, 48
decrees the abolition of serfdom, 202 —
result of his attempt at an excise on
S&lt 228.

Philip VL (of Valois) regency and coro-
nation of, i. 48— sketch of his character,
53— his debasements of the coin, 228.

Philip of Suabia elected emperor of Ger-
many, ii. 76— his assassination, ib.

pbocas, supposed concession to the popes
by, ii. 162, note *.

Pickering (Sir James), tenor of a speech
made by, iii. 59.

Piedmont, comparative obscurity of the
history of, i. 390, note.

Piracy, temptations to the practice of, iii.
334— difficulty of repressing it, 335.

510

INDEX.

PISA* I “ RIDING THE CITY.’*

Pisa, early naval and commercial ira-

S jrtance of, 1. 441 —her wars with
enoa, 442 — her reverses and sale to
Florence, 443 — effect "of the crusades
on her prosperity, iii. 329.

Pisani (Vittor) defeated by the Genoese,
and imprisoned by the Venetians, i. 445
— his triumphant recall from prison, 446.
Pius II. See -Eneas Sylvius.

Podesth, peculiarities of the office of, i.
397, 398.

Podiebrad (George), vigorous rule of
Bohemia by, ii. 104 — suspected of
poisoning Ladislaus, 106, note 0 .

Poggio Bracciolini, services of, in the re-
vival of learning, iii. 463.

Poitiers, battle of. See Edward III.
Poland, polity of, not based on feudality,
i. 187.

Pole (Michael de 1a, earl of Suffolk), suc-
ceeds Scrone as chancellor, iii. 66-
refusal of Richard II. to dismiss him, 67
— his impeachment and sentence, 68 —
subsequent proceedings relative to him,
72.

Porcaro, revolt and death of, i. 419.
Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges, ii. 255 —
repealed by Louis XI., ib. — its popu-
larity with the people, ib. — liberties
secured by it, 256.

Pragmatic Sanction of S. Louis, enactment
of the, ii. 214 and note.

Prague university, opposition of the nobles
to the institution of, ii- 102, note* —
fate of its rector, ib.

Precarious, origin of the adjective, ii. 147
note d.

Prerogative of the kings of England, ob-
servations on the, iii. 147, 257-2 60. See
English Constitution.

Prices of commodities, iii. 368-370.
Printing, invention of, iii- 471— first books
printed, tb.— Italian presses, 472. See
Learning.

Protadius, oppressive conduct of, i. 114.
Provence annexed to the French domi-
nions, i. 100— note upon its history, 103 .
Public weal, origin of toe war of the, i. 85
— object of its chiefs, 87, 88 and note n
—their fate, 89.

Punishments amongst the Franks for mur-
der, i. 150, 151 and notes, 198 and note 9,
281— amongst the Burgundians, 151 and
note 9 .

Purveyance, oppressive operation of the
prerogative of, iii. 148, and 149, note, i

Races, turbulence of the Carlovingian
period ascribed to the antipathy be-
tween, i. 128-134.

Rachimburgii, the, i. 214 — difference
between them and the Scabini, 216,
note*.

Ravenna, conquest and reconquest of, i.
8 , 9 .

Raymond VI. (count of Toulouse) ex-

communicated by Innocent III., i. 28-
reverses of his son Raymond, 29.

Regencies, rule in France relative to, i.
68 and note 14 — instances of regencies
in England, and principles dedueible
therefrom, iii. 184-190.

Religious sects, moral improvement ac-
celerated by the growth of, iii. 378-
tenets of the Manicheans and Paulicians,
378,379 and notes— the Albigenses, and
controversies respecting them, 380, 381
and note — origin of the Waldenses, 382,
383 and notes — morality of their life, 384,
note b—Manicheism of the Albigenses,

385 — persecutions at Oxford, ib. and
note — secret readings of the scriptures,

386 — persecutions for witchcraft, ib.
note — permissions and prohibitions
concerning the sacred writings, 387 —
continued spread of heresies, 388 —
strictnesses of Lollardism, 389— schism
of the Hussites, 389, 390 and note m .

Representation of the towns. See Parlia-
ment, States-General.

Representative legislation, first germ of-
i. 216. See Parliament

Revenues of the kings of France, how
derived, i. 208-212. See Taxation.

Richard I., non-success of, against Philip
Augustus, i. 26 — joins with Philip in
the crusades, 40— his prowess; terror
excited by his name, ib. and note* —
his refusal relative to the right of
private war, 207, note t— his submission
to the pope, ii. 197— deposition of his
chancellor, 325 — enactment of the law s
of Oleron imputed to him, iii. 334— his
character as a troubadour, 439 and
note K

Richard II. loses ground in France, i. 64,
65— his coronation, iii. 56 — his council
during his minority, ib. — his struggles
with parliament, 62-64— sketch of his
character, 65— his dependence on fa-
vourites, 66— his refusal to dismiss de
la Pole, duke of Suffolk, 67 — determined
conduct of the commons towards him,
67, 68 — he yields to their demands,
69— his further attempts at indepen-
dent rule, 73 — hip complaint against
the commons, 75— their submission, 76
—bis seizure of the duke of Gloucester
and other arbitrary acts, 77-79— neces-
sity for bis deposition, 80 — progress of
the constitution during his reign, 83-
extent of his malpractices relative to
the raising of money, 84, 85 — his attack
upon Haxey, 76, 102.

Richard (earl of Cornwall), chosen em-

’ peror of Germany, ii. 76— absurdity of
the choice, 77.

Richard (duke of York). See York.

Richer (a mediaeval historian), degree of
value due to the testimony of, i. 1 30.

“ Riding the city,” meaning of the phrase,
L 429.

INDEX.

511

RIENZI.

Rtenzi (Nicola di), sudden accession to
power of. i. 417— his exile, recall, and
death, 418 — Petrarch's enthusiasm to-
wards him, ib. note.

Robert of Artois, impolitic act of forgery
committed by, i. 47, note

Robert of Gloucester, and other metrical
writers, iii. 453.

Robert of Naples, wise rule of, i. 485-
singular provision made by him, ii.
226, note \

Robert (count palatine) supersedes Wen-
ceslaus as emperor of Germany, ii. 87.

Robertson (the historian), value of his
treatise on private warfare, i. 207,
note t.

Rochelle, patriotism of the citizens of, i.
63.

Roderick the last of the Goths, credibi-
lity of the legend relative to, ii. 62-66.

Rodolph of Hapsburg elected emperor of
Germany, ii. 81 — Austria conferred
upon his son, ib.— his ascendency in
Switzerland, 107.

Rollo of Normandy, conversion of, i. 22.

Romance language, ascendency in the
Frank dominions of the, i. 131. See
Learning.

Romano (Eccelin da). See Eccelin.

Rome, subversion of the empire of, i. 1—
its division by barbarous races, ib . —
portion which remained subject to it,
2 — partition of its provinces amongst
their conquerors, 146, 276-278 — its
municipal institutions, 339, 340 — its
internal state in the tenth .century, 358
— infamous conduct of candidates for
the papal chair, 369 — execution of the
consul Crescentius, 359 and note —
schemes of Innocent III. for aggrandiz-
ing the holy see, 381, 382— increase of
the temporal authority of the popes,
414— the Roman orator and Frederic
Barbarossa, 416 and note — expulsion
of popes by the citizens, 416 — the
senators and their jurisdiction, ib . —
mutual animosities of the nobles, 417
— rise and fall of Rienzi, ib., 418 —
transient revival of the republican
spirit, 418— miscarriage of Porcaro’s
revolutionary projects, 419. See Papal
Power.

Romeo and Juliet, parallel to the story
of, i. 402 and note.

Saint Bathilda, character of, i. 112.

Saint Boniface. See Winfrid.

Saint Denis, sum paid for redeeming the
abbot of, i. 22.

Saint John of Jerusalem, knights of, i. 4b
— their saint, who he was, ib. note r —
their enormous possessions, ib. and
note*.

Saint Louis. See Louis IX. I

Saint Medard, parentage of, i. 296. j

Saint Pol (count of), anecdote of, i 84, 1

SERFDOM.

' note {— executed on the scaffold, 89-
anecdote of his distrust of Louis XL
97, note.

Saint Wilfrid, historical service rendered
by, i. 112.

Saints, great addition to the calendar of,
in the time of Clovis and his sons, i.
HI — historical value of their lives, ib.
—extent of their title to canonization,
112, 113.

Saladin, conquest of Jerusalem by, i. 40.

Salic lands, characteristics of, i. 147-149
and notes.

Salic law, circumstances which led to the
confirmation of the, i. 47, 48— date of
its enactment, 278, 279 — its incom-
pleteness as a code, 280.

Sancho the Great bestows Castile on his
second son, ii. 4 — he incorporates
Naxara, 6.

Sancho IV. assassinates Don Lope, ii. 13 —
clerical encroachments encouraged by,
220, note r .

Sanctuary, institution of the privilege, of,
iii. 302.

Saracens, expulsion of the, from France,
i. 7 and note 9-— their inroads upon
Italy, 19 and note u — Eudon’s great vic-
tory over theffi, lie — their conflicts
with* the Christians [see Crusades] —
they conquer Spain, ii. 2— encroach-
ments of tfie Christians on their terri-
tories, 3— mainspring of their heroism,
117— their eastern conquests, 119 —
their triumphs in the west, ib.— effect
of their successes, ib. — their internal
dissensions, 121. See Crusades, Moors.

Saragosa taken from the Moors, ii. 5.

Sardinia* conquered by the Pisans, L 441
— its cession to the king of Aragon, 443.

Saxons, obstinate resistance to Charle-
magne by the, i. 10 — enormous num-
ber beheaded by him, 13— true cause
of their wars with the Franks, 120 —
their early kings, 303. See Anglo-
Saxons.

Scubini, representative character of the,
i. 216— difference between them and
the Rachimburgii, ib. note 2 — their
functions, 238 and notes.

Scanderbeg, protracted opposition to the
Turks by, ii. 138.

Scandinavia and her Sea Kings, ii. 271.

Sclavonians, territories occupied by the,
i. 19.

Scotus (Duns), notices of, iii. 427, 428,
note i, 429.

Scotus (John), an exception to the igno-
rance of his times, iii. 290 and note r —
character of the philosophy introduced
by him, 430, note?.

Scrope (lord steward), answers to the
commons by, iii. 60 — cause of his
dismissal from office, 66.

Serfdom and villenage, distinctive fea-
tures of, i. 197-200. See Villeins.

INDEX.

612

8BBVTT0DE.

Servitude enforced upon the cultivators
of the soil in the middle aces, L 328,
329 — contrary hypothesis or M, Gu3-
rard, 329-331.

Sforza Attendolo, rise to distinction of,
i, 48l— his tactics relative to the crown
pf Naples, 489, 490.

Sforza (Francesco), powerful position
achieved by, i. 482— becomes duke of
Milan, ib. — joins in the quadruple
league, 493 — his policy towards Na-
ples, 604— accession and assassination
of his eon Galeazzo, 496— policy of
“Ludovico Sforza, tb.— he directs the
French king's attention towards N aples,
S05 — short-sightedness of his views,
ib.

Sheriffs, partiality of, in elections, iii.
113— how originally appointed, 12 o and
note L

Sicily, conquest of, by Roger Guiscard,
i. 363— its subsequent fortunes, 378—
its rebellion against Charley of Anjou,
483— the Sicilian Vespers, 464 and note
—opposition of the Sicilians to Charles
II, of Naples, 484 — settlement of the
crown on Frederic, 486— Sicilian pos-
sessions of the Cbipunonti, 400 —
union of Sicily with Aragon, ib.

Sigismund elected emperor of Germany,
II. 87 and note his safe-conduct
violated, 102— acquires |he crown of
Hungary, 104— his conduct at the coun-
cil of Constance, 249.

Silk manufacture established in Palermo,
iii. 331. 1

Silvester II, (pope), scientific acquire,
ments of, iii. 290, 291, note.

Simony. See Church, Clergy.

Slavery, existence of, in ancient times, i.
197— its features amongst the Franks,
198 andraote ^voluntarily submitted
to from superstitious motives, 109 —
edicts for its abolition, 202— submitted
to by the poof for subsistence’ sake, 328
—Venetian and English slave-trading,
iiL 318 and note 4.

Society* state of. See Architecture, Chi-
Valry/Clergy, Feudal System, Learning,
Superstition, Trade, Villenage.

Sorel (Agnes), examination of the story
of, i. sS/note *.

Southey's Joan of Arc, eulogium of a
French writer upon, L 143.

Spain, character of the Visigothic king-
doms in, ii. 1 — Its conquest by the
Saracens, 2— kingdoms of Leon, Na-
varre, Aragon, and Castile, 3, 4— re-
verses of the Saracens, 6— chartered
towns, 6, 7, 8— establishment of mili-
tary orders, ' 8— non-expulsion of the
Moors, 10 —its probable cause, 11 —
Alfonso X. and his shortcomings, 12
—.frequent deletion of the nobles, 13
—Peter the Gruel, 14— accession of the
Trastamare Unc, 16 — disgrace and |

I SWITZERLAND.

execution of Alvaro de Luna, 16, 17—

| contest* after Henry PVYs death, 18—

I constitution of the national councils,
19— composition of the Cortes, 21— its

| trade relations with England, iiL 327.
See Aragon, Castile, Cortes.

Spelman (Sir Henry), remarkable mistake
of, i. 166, mte a .

Sports of the field, popularity of, iii. 309
— addiction of the clergy thereto, 310-
evils attendant thereon, 311.

States-General of France, memorable re-
sistance to taxation by the, l. 66—
convoked by Philip IV., 225, 226 —
probability of their earlier convocation
canvassed, ib. note — Philip’s politic
reasons for summoning them, 226-
extent of their rights as to taxation,
227, 228, and notes — their resolute pro-
ceedings in 1355 -and 1356, 228— their
protest against the debasement of the
coin, 230 and notes-—' disappointment
occasioned by their proceedings in
1357, 231— they compel Charles VI. to
revoke all illegal taxes, 232— effect of
their limited functions, 233— theoreti-
cal respect attached to their sanction,
234 — provincial estates and their juris-
diction, ib. — encroachments of Louis
XI., 235— the States-General of Tours,
236 — means by which their delibera-
tions were jeopardized, ib. — unpalat-
able nature of their remonstrances,
237. .

Stephen (king), cruel treatment of the
people in his reign, ii. 319, note.

Stratford (archbishop), circumstances at-
tending the trial of, iii, 205.

Succession to kingly and other dignities.
See Hereditary Succession.

Suevf, part of the Roman empire held
by the, i. 1.

Suffolk (duke of), impeachment of, iii.
99

Suffolk (eari of). See Pole.

Sumptuary laws, enactment and disre-
gard of, iiL 343, 344, and notes..

Superstition, learning discouraged by, iii.
274 — its universal prevalence, 293—
instances of its results, 294— ordeals,
294, 295, and fanatical gather-

ings: the White Capa, 296— the Pas-
toureaux, ib,— the Flagellants, 297—
the Uiancbi, 298— pretended miracles,
and their attendant evils, 298, 290 —
miracles ascribed to the Virgin, 300 and
note— redeeming features of the sys-
tem, 301— penances and pilgrimages,
306, 307. See Religious Sects.

Surnames, introduction of, i. 190.

Sweden, semi-feudal custom in, relative
to military service, 188, note 8. .

Swineford (Katherine), proceedings rela-
tive tb the marriage of, iii. 74, 75.

Switzerland, early liistory of, ii. 107.—
ascendency of Rodolph, ib* — expulsion
