TRENT  UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

VIEW

OF

2.  y  .

THE  STATE  OF  EUROPE

DURING

THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

By  HENRY  IIALLAM,  LL.D.,  F.R.A.S.,

FOREIGN  ASSOCIATE  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE.

IN  THREE  VOLUMES.
VOLUME  II.

NEW  YORK:

SIIELDON  AND  COMPANY.
BOSTON:

WILLIAM  VEAZIE.

18C3.

('J

CAMBRIDGE:

STEREOTYPED  BY  II.  O.  HOUGUTOX

boston:

PRINTED  BY  JOIIN  WILSON  AND  SON.

CONTENTS

OF

THE  SECOND  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  IV.

THE  HISTORY  OF  SPAIN  TO  THE  CONQUEST  OF  GRANADA.

Kingdom  of  the  Visigoths — Conquest  of  Spain  by  the  Moors  —  Gradual
Revival  of  the  Spanish  Nation — Kingdoms  of  Leon,  Aragon,  Navarre,
and  Castile  successively  formed  —  Chartered  Towns  of  Castile  —  Mili¬
tary  Orders  —  Conquest  of  Ferdinand  III.  and  James  of  Aragon  —
Causes  of  the  Delay  in  expelling  the  Moors  —  Histoiy  of  Castile  con¬
tinued —  Character  of  the  Government  —  Peter  the  Cruel  —  House  of
Trastamare  —  John  II.  —  Henry  IV.  —  Constitution  of  Castile  —  Na¬
tional  Assemblies  or  Cortes  —  Their  constituent  Parts  —  Right  of  Taxa¬
tion  —  Legislation  —  Privy  Council  of  Castile  —  Laws  for  the  Protection
of  Liberty  —  Imperfections  of  the  Constitution  —  Aragon  —  its  History
in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Centuries  —  Disputed  Succession  —  Con¬
stitution  of  Aragon  —  Free  Spirit  of  its  Aristocracy  —  Privilege  of  Union
—  Powers  of  the  Justiza — Legal  Securities  —  Illustrations  —  Other  Con¬
stitutional  Laws  —  Valencia  and  Catalonia — Union  of  two  Crowns  by
the  Maiflage  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  —  Conquest  of  Granada.  Page  7

Note  to  Chapter  IV .  63

CHAPTER  V.

HISTORY  OF  GERMANY  TO  THE  DIET  OF  WORMS  IN  1495.

Sketch  of  German  History  under  the  Emperors  of  the  House  of  Saxony  —
House  of  Franconia  —  Henry  IV.  —  House  of  Suabia  —  Frederic  Bar
barossa  —  Fall  of  Henry  the  Lion  —  Frederic  II.  —  Extinction  of  House
of  Suabia  —  Changes  in  the  Germanic  Constitution  —  Electors — Terri¬
torial  Sovereignty  of  the  Princes  —  Rodolph  of  Ilapsburgh  —  State  of
the  Empire  after  his  Time  —  Causes  of  Decline  of  Imperial  Power  —

72825

iv

CONTENTS  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.

House  of  Luxemburg  —  Charles  IV.  —  Golden  Bull  —  House  of  Austria

—  Frederic  III.  —  Imperial  Cities  —  Provincial  States  —  Maximilian  —

Diet  of  Worms  —  Abolition  of  private  Wars  —  Imperial  Chamber — Aulic
Council — Bohemia — Hungary  —  Switzerland .  Page  67

CHAPTER  VI.

HISTORY  OF  THE  GREEKS  AND  SARACENS.

Rise  of  Mohammedism —  Causes  of  its  Success  —  Progress  of  Saracen
Arms  —  Greek  Empire  —  Decline  of  the  Khalifs  —  The  Greeks  recover
Part  of  their  Losses  —  The  Turks  —  The  Crusades  —  Capture  of  Con¬
stantinople  by  the  Latins  —  its  Recovery  by  the  Greeks  —  The  Moguls

—  The  Ottomans  —  Danger  at  Constantinople  —  Timur  —  Capture  of

Constantinople  by  Mahomet  II.  —  Alarm  of  Europe .  112

CHAPTER  VU.

HISTORY  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POWER  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

Part  I.

Wealth  of  the  Clergy  — its  Sources  —  Encroachments  on  Ecclesiastical
Property  —  their  J urisdiction  —  arbitrative  —  coercive  —  their  political
Power — Supremacy  of  the  Crown  —  Charlemagne  —  Change  after  his
Death,  and  Encroachments  of  the  Church  in  the  Ninth  Ccntuiy  —
Primacy  of  the  See  of  Rome  —  its  early  Stage — Gregory  I.  —  Council
of  Frankfort  —  False  Decretals  —  Progress  of  Papal  Authority  —  Effects
of  Excommunication  —  Lothaire — State  of  the  Church  in  the  Tenth
Centuiy  — Marriage  of  Priests  —  Simony  —  Episcopal  Elections  —  Im¬
perial  Authority  over  the  Popes  —  Disputes  concerning  Investitures  —
Gregory  VII.  and  Henry  IV.  —  Concordat  of  Calixt us  —  Election  by
Chapters  —  General  System  of  Gregory  VII. — Progress  of  Papal  Usur¬
pations  in  the  Twelfth  Centuiy  —  Innocent  III.  —  his  Character  and
Schemes .  136

Part  II.

Continual  Progress  of  the  Papacy  —  Canon  Law  —  Mendicant  Orders  —
Dispensing  Power  —  Taxation  of  the  Clergy  by  the  Popes  —  Encroach¬
ments  on  Rights  of  Patronage  —  Mandats,  Reserves,  &c.  —  General  Dis¬
affection  towards  the  See  of  Rome  in  the  Thirteenth  Century  —  Progress
of  Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction  —  Immunity  of  the  Clergy  in  Criminal
Cases _ Restraints  imposed  upon  their  Jurisdiction  —  upon  their  Ac¬

quisition  of  Property  —  Boniface  VIII. —  his  Quarrel  with  Philip  the
Pair  —  its  Termination  —  Gradual  Decline  of  Papal  Authority  —  Louis
of  Bavaria  —  Secession  to  Avignon  and  Return  to  Rome  —  Conduct  of

CONTENTS  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.

v

Avignon  Popes  —  Contested  Election  of  Urban  and  Clement  produces
the  great  Schism  —  Council  of  Pisa  —  Constance  —  Basle  —  Methods
adopted  to  restrain  the  Papal  Usurpations  in  England,  Germany,  and
France  —  Liberties  of  the  Gallican  Church  —  Decline  of  the  Papal  In¬

fluence  in  Italy .  Page  193

Notes  to  Chapter  VII .  249

CHAPTER  VIII.

THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.

Part  I.

The  Anglo-Saxon  Constitution — Sketch  of  Anglo-Saxon  History  —  Suc¬
cession  to  the  Crown — Orders  of  Men  —  Thanes  and  Ceorls — Witen-
agemot  —  Judicial  System  —  Division  into  Hundreds  —  County-Court

—  Trial  by  Jury  —  its  Antiquity  investigated  —  Law  of  Frank-pledge  —
its  several  Stages — Question  of  Feudal  Tenures  before  the  Conquest.  255

Part  II.

THE  ANGLO-NORMAN  CONSTITUTION

The  Anglo-Norman  Constitution  —  Causes  of  the  Conquest  —  Policy  and
Character  of  William  —  his  Tyranny  —  Introduction  of  Feudal  Services

—  Difference  between  the  Feudal  Governments  of  France  and  England

—  Causes  of  the  great  Power  of  the  first  Norman  Kings  —  Arbitrary
Character  of  their  Government  —  Great  Council  —  Resistance  of  the
Barons  to  John  —  Magna  Charta  —  its  principal  Articles — Reign  of
Hemy  III.  —  The  Constitution  acquires  a  more  liberal  character  —
Judicial  System  of  the  Anglo-Normans  —  Curia  Regis,  Exchequer,  &c.

—  Establishment  of  the  Common  Law  —  its  Effect  in  fixing  the  Con¬
stitution —  Remarks  on  the  Limitation  of  Aristocratieal  Privileges  in

England .  286

Notes  to  Chapter  VIII.,  Parts  I.  and  II .  332

VIEW

OF

THE  STATE  OF  EUROPE

DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

CHAPTER  IY.

THE  HISTORY  OF  SPAIN  TO  THE  CONQUEST  OF  GRANADA.

Kingdom  of  the  Visigoths  —  Conquest  of  Spain  by  the  Moors  —  Gradual  Revival  of
the  Spanish  Nation  —  Kingdoms  of  Leon.  Aragon,  Navarre,  and  Castile,  succes¬
sively  formed  —  Chartered  Towns  of  Castile  —  Military  Orders  —  Conquest  of  Fer¬
dinand  III.  and  James  of  Aragon  —  Causes  of  the  Delay  in  expelling  the  Moors  —
History  of  Castile  continued  —  Character  of  the  Government  —  Peter  the  Cruel  —
House  of  Trastamare  —  John  IT .  —  Henry  IV.  —  Constitution  of  Castile  —  National
Assemblies  or  Cortes  —  their  constituent  Parts  —  Right  of  Taxation  —  Legislation
—  Privy  Council  of  Castile  —  Laws  for  the  Protection  of  Liberty  —  Imperfections
of  the  Constitution  —  Aragon — its  History  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Cen¬
turies —  disputed  Succession  —  Constitution  of  Aragon  —  Free  Spirit  of  its  Aris¬
tocracy —  Privilege  of  Union — Powers  of  the  Justiza  —  Legal  Securities  —  Illus¬
trations —  other  Constitutional  Laws  —  Valencia  and  Catalonia — Union  of  two
Crowns  by  the  Marriage  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  —  Conquest  of  Granada.

The  history  of  Spain  during  the  middle  ages  ought  to
commence  with  the  dynasty  of  the  Visigoths;  a  Kln(?llomof
nation  among  the  first  that  assaulted  and  over-  Visigoths  in
threw  the  Roman  Empire,  and  whose  establish-  Spaln'
ment  preceded  by  nearly  half  a  century  the  invasion  of
Clovis.  Vanquished  by  that  conqueror  in  the  battle  of
Poitiers,  the  Gothic  monarchs  lost  their  extensive  dominions
in  Gaul,  and  transferred  their  residence  from  Toulouse  to
Toledo.  But  I  will  not  detain  the  reader  by  naming  one  sov¬
ereign  of  that  obscure  race.  It  may  suffice  to  mention  that
the  Visigothic  monarchy  differed  in  several  respects  from  that
of  the  Franks  during  the  same  period.  The  crown  was  less
hereditary,  or  at  least  the  regular  succession  was  more  fre¬
quently  disturbed.  The  prelates  had  a  still  more  command¬
ing  influence  in  temporal  government.  The  distinction  of

8

CONQUEST  BY  TIIE  SARACENS.

Chap.  IV.

Romans  and  barbarians  was  less  marked,  the  laws  more  uni¬
form,  and  approaching  nearly  to  the  imperial  code.  The
power  of  the  sovereign  was  perhaps  more  limited  by  an
aristocratical  council  than  in  France,  but  it  never  yielded
to  the  dangerous  influence  of  mayors  of  the  palace.  Civil
wars  and  disputed  successions  were  very  frequent,  but  the
integrity  of  the  kingdom  was  not  violated  by  the  custom  of

partition.

Spain,

Conquest
by  the
Saracens.

after  remaining  for  nearly  three  centuries  in  the
possession  of  the  Visigoths,  fell  under  the  yoke  of
the  Saracens  in  712.  The  fervid  and  irresistible
enthusiasm  which  distinguished  the  youthful  period
of  Mohammedism  might  sufficiently  account  for  this  conquest,
even  if  we  could  not  assign  additional  causes  —  the  factions
which  divided  the  Goths,  the  resentment  of  disappointed  pre¬
tenders  to  the  throne,  the  provocations,  as  has  been  generally
believed,  of  count  Julian,  and  the  temerity  that  risked  the
fate  of  an  empire  on  the  chances  of  a  single  battle.1  It  is
more  surprising  that  a  remnant  of  this  ancient  monarchy
should  not  only  have  preserved  its  national  liberty  and  name
in  the  northern  mountains,  but  waged  for  some  centuries  a
successful,  and  generally  an  offensive  warfare  against  the  con¬
querors,  till  the  balance  was  completely  turned  in  its  favor,
and  the  Moors  were  compelled  to  maintain  almost  as  obstinate
and  protracted  a  contest  for  a  small  portion  of  the  peninsula.
Rut  the  Arabian  monarchs  of  Cordova  found  in  their  succe.-s
mid  imagiued  security  a  pretext  for  indolence ;  even  in  the
cultivation  of  science  and  contemplation  of  the  magnificent
architecture  of  their  mosques  and  palaces  they  forgot  their
poor  but  daring  enemies  in  the  Asturias ;  while,  according  to
the  nature  of  despotism,  the  fruits  of  wisdom  or  bravery  in
one  generation  were  lost  in  the  follies  and  effeminacy  of  the
next.  Their  kingdom  was  dismembered  by  successful  rebels,
who  formed  the  states  of  Toledo,  Iluesca,  Saragosa,  mid  others
less  eminent ;  and  these,  in  their  own  mutual  contests,  not
only  relaxed  their  natural  enmity  towards  the  Christian
but  sometimes  sought  their  alliance.*

to  endanger  the  revr  ‘
that  of  Almanzor,

princes,

The  last  attack  which  seemed
Kinpiom  monarchy  of  Spain  was
of  Leon.  illustrious  vizir  of  Ilaccham  II.,  towards  the  end

the

»  [Not«.]

*  Cardonae,  Hlstoire  de  l'AMqu*  et  de  l'E« payne.

Spain.

LEON,  NAVARRE,  ARAGON.

9

of  the  tenth  century,  wherein  the  city  of  Leon,  and  even  the
shrine  of  Compostella,  were  burned  to  the  ground.  For  some
ages  before  this  transient  reflux,  gradual  encroachments  had
been  made  upon  the  Saracens,  and  the  kingdom  originally
styled  of  Oviedo,  the  seat  of  which  was  removed  to  Leon  in
914,  had  extended  its  boundary  to  the  Douro,  and  even  to
the  mountainous  chain  of  the  Guadarrama.  The  province  of
Old  Castile,  thus  denominated,  as  is  generally  supposed,  from
the  castles  erected  while  it  remained  a  march  or  frontier
against  the  Moors,  was  governed  by  hereditary  counts,  elected
originally  by  the  provincial  aristocracy,  and  virtually  inde¬
pendent,  it  seems  probable,  of  the  kings  of  Leon,  though
commonly  serving  them  in  war  as  brethren  of  the  same  faith
and  nation.1

While  the  kings  of  Leon  were  thus  occupied  in  recovering
the  western  provinces,  another  race  of  Christian  Kingdomg
princes  grew  up  silently  under  the  shadow  of  the  of  Navarro
Pyrenean  mountains.  Nothing  can  be  more  oh-  and  Arag0“'
scure  than  the  beginnings  of  those  little  states  which  were
formed  in  Navarre  and  the  country  of  Soprarbe.  They  might
perhaps  be  almost  contemporaneous  with  the  Moorish  con¬
quests.  On  both  sides  of  the  Pyrenees  dwelt  an  aboriginal
people,  the  last  to  undergo  the  yoke,  and  who  had  never  ac¬
quired  the  language,  of  Rome.  We  know  little  of  these
intrepid  mountaineers  in  the  dark  period  which  elapsed  under
the  Gothic  and  Frank  dynasties,  till  we  find  them  cutting  otf
the  rear-guard  of  Charlemagne  in  Roncesvalles,  and  main¬
taining  at  least  their  independence,  though  seldom,  like  the
kings  of  Asturias,  waging  offensive  war  against  the  Saracens.
The  town  of  Jaca,  situated  among  long  narrow  valleys  that
intersect  the  southern  ridges  of  the  Pyrenees,  was  the  capital
of  a  little  free  state,  which  afterwards  expanded  into  the  mon¬
archy  of  Aragon.2  A  territory  rather  more  extensive  be-

l  According  to  Roderic  of  Toledo,  one
of  the  earliest  Spanish  historians,  though
not  older  than  the  beginning  of  the  thir¬
teenth  century,  the  nobles  of  Castile,  in
ti»e  reign  of  Froila,  about  the  year  924,
•ibi  et  posteris  providerunt,  et  duos
milites  non  de  potentioribus,  sed  de  pru-
dentioribus  elegerunt,  quos  et  judices
statucrunt,  ut  dissensiones  patriieet  que-
relantiuin  causa*  suo  judicio  sopirentur.
1.  ▼.  c.  1.  Several  other  passages  in  the
same  writer  prove  that  the  counts  of
Castile  were  nearly  independent  of  Leon,

at  leash  from  the  time  of  Ferdinand  Gon-
salvo  about  the  middle  of  the  tenth  cen¬
tury.  Ex  quo  iste  suscepit  flu®  pa  trim
comitatum,  cessaverunt  reges  Asturiarum
insolescere  in  Castellam.  et  a  Huniino
Pisorici  nihil  nmplius  vindic&ruot,  1.  v.
c.  2.  Marina,  in  his  Ensayo  Hlstorieo-
Critico,  is  disposed  to  controvert  this
fact.

a  The  Fneros,  or  written  laws  of  Jaca.
were  perhaps  more  ancient  than  any  local
customary  in  Europe.  Alfonso  III.  con¬
firms  them  by  name  of  the  ancient  usages

10

CAPTURE  OF  TOLEDO  AND  SARAGOSA.  Chat.  IV.

longed  to  Navarre,  the  kings  of  which  fixed  their  seat  at
Pampelona.  Biscay  seems  to  have  been  divided  between
this  kingdom  and  that  of  Leon.  The  connection  of  Aragon
or  Soprarbe  and  Navarre  was  very  intimate,  and  they  were
often  united  under  a  single  chief.

At  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century,  Sancho  the
Kingdom  of  Great,  king  of  Navarre  and  Aragon,  was  enabled
Castile.  t0  render  his  second  son  Ferdinand  count,  or,  as
he  assumed  the  title,  king  of  Castile.  This  effectually  dis¬
membered  that  province  from  the  kingdom  of  Leon ;  but
their  union  soon  became  more  complete  than  ever,  though
with  a  reversed  supremacy.  Bermudo  III.,  king  of  Leon,
fell  in  an  engagement  with  the  new  king  of  Castile,  who  had
married  his  sister ;  and  Ferdinand,  in  her  right,  or  in  that
of  conquest,  became  master  of  the  united  monarchy.  This
cessation  of  hostilities  between  the  Christian  states  enabled
them  to  direct  a  more  unremitting  energy  against  their  ancient
enemies,  who  were  now  sensibly  weakened  by  the  various
causes  of  decline  to  which  I  have  already  alluded.  During
the  eleventh  ceutury  the  Spaniards  were  almost  always  supe¬
rior  in  the  field ;  the  towns  which  they  began  by  pillaging,
they  gradually  possessed ;  their  valor  was  heightened  by  the
customs  of  chivalry  and  inspired  by  the  example  of  the  Cid ;
and  before  the  end  of  this  age  Alfonso  VI.  recovered  the
Capture  of  ancient  metropolis  of  the  monarchy,  the  city  of  To-
Toiedo,  ledo.  This  wsis  the  severest  blow  which  the  Moors
had  endured,  and  an  unequivocal  symptom  of  that  change
in  their  relative  strength,  which,  from  being  so  gradual,  was
the  more  irretrievable.  Calamities  scarcely  inferior  fell  uj>on
them  in  a  different  quarter.  The  kings  of  Aragon  (a  title
belonging  originally  to  a  little  district  upon  the  river  of  that
name)  had  been  cooped  up  almost  in  the  mountains  by  the

of  Jiet.  They  prescribe  the  descent  of
land*  and  movables,  a*  well  ns  the  elec-
tion  of  municipal  magistrate*.  The  fol¬
lowing  law,  which  enjoins  the  rising  in
anus  on  a  sudden  emergency,  illustrate*,
with  a  sort  of  romantic  wildneM,  the
manner*  of  a  pastoral  but  warlike  people,
and  remind*  us  of  a  well-known  paaaage
in  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.  De  appelliti*
ita  statuimus.  Cum  homines  tie  villi*,
vel  qui  *tant  in  raontani*  cutn  sui*  gnnati*
[gregibua],  audierint  appellitum;  outrun
rrt plant  anna,  et  dlinl*M*  ganatin,  et  om¬
nibus  alii*  sui*  tiudendl*  [negntila]  «e-
quautur  appellitum.  Kt  ci  ill!  qui  fueriut

magi*  remotl,  Invenerint  in  villa  magi*
proxima  appellito,  [deeat  ali.juid?)  omnra

aui  nonduin  fueriut  egre**i  tunc  villam
lam,  quits  tardiu*  Pccuta  eat  appellitum,
pecent  [solvaut]  unam  baccam  [vaccainj;
ct  unuaquiaque  homo  ex  tlli*  qui  tardiu*
per utu*  eat  appellitum,  et  quern  magif
remotl  priWiPgilll.  peeet  tre*  aolidoa,
uomodo  nobia  videbitur,  partiendo*.
amen  In  JacA  et  in  alii*  villi*
allqul  nomlnati  et  certi,  quo*  elegerlnt
conaulea,  qui  remaneant  ad  villa*  cuato-
dien  da*  et  drfendcnda*.  Bit  nr*  Coal¬
men  taria,  In  Schotti  illepania  Illuftrmta,
p.  696.

•  •

Spain.

MODE  OF  SETTLING  CONQUESTS.

11

small  Moorish  states  north  of  the  Ebro,  especially  that  of
Huesca.  About  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century  they
began  to  attack  their  neighbors  with  success ;  the  Moors  lost
one  town  after  another,  till,  in  1118,  exposed  and  weakened
by  the  reduction  of  all  these  places,  the  city  of  Saragosa,  in
which  a  line  of  Mohammedan  princes  had  flour-  and  Sara-
ished  for  several  ages,  became  the  prize  of  Al-  s°sa-
fonso  I.  and  the  capital  of  his  kingdom.  The  southern  parts
of  what  is  now  the  province  of  Aragon  were  successively
reduced  during  the  twelfth  century;  while  all  new  Castile
and  Estremadura  became  annexed  in  the  same  gradual  man¬
ner  to  the  dominion  of  the  descendants  of  Alfonso  VI.

Although  the  feudal  system  cannot  be  said  to  have  obtained
in  the  kingdoms  of  Leon  and  Castile,  their  pecu-
liar  situation  gave  the  aristocracy  a  great  deal  of  settling  the
the  same  power  and  independence  which  resulted
in  France  and  Germany  from  that  institution.  The
territory  successively  recovered  from  the  Moors,  like  waste
lands  reclaimed,  could  have  no  proprietor  but  the  conquerors,
and  the  prospect  of  such  acquisitions  was  a  constant  incite¬
ment  to  the  nobility  of  Spain,  especially  to  those  who  had
settled  themselves  on  the  Castilian  frontier.  In  their  new
conquests  they  built  towns  and  invited  Christian  settlers,  the
Saracen  inhabitants  being  commonly  expelled  or  voluntarily
retreating  to  the  safer  provinces  of  the  south.  Thus  Burgos
was  settled  by  a  count  of  Castile  about  880 ;  another  fixed
his  seat  at  Osma ;  a  third  at  Sepulveda ;  a  fourth  at  Sala¬
manca.  These  cities  were  not  free  from  incessant  peril  of  a
sudden  attack  till  the  union  of  the  two  kingdoms  under  Fer¬
dinand  I.,  and  consequently  the  necessity  of  keeping  in  exer¬
cise  a  numerous  and  armed  population,  gave  a  character  of
personal  freedom  and  privilege  to  the  inferior  classes  which
they  hardly  possessed  at  so  early  a  period  in  any  other  mon¬
archy.  Villeinage  seems  never  to  have  been  established  in
the  Ilispano-Gothic  kingdoms,  Leon  and  Castile ;  though  I
confess  it  was  far  from  being  unknown  in  that  of  Aragon,
which  had  formed  its  institutions  on  a  different  pattern.
Since  nothing  makes  us  forget  the  arbitrary  distinctions  of
rank  so  much  as  participation  in  any  common  calamity,  every
man  who  had  escaped  the  great  shipwreck  of  liberty  and  re¬
ligion  in  the  mountains  of  Asturias  was  invested  with  a  per¬
sonal  dignity,  which  gave  him  value  in  his  own  eyes  and

12

CHARTERED  TOWN'S

Chap.  IV.

Chartered
tow  ns  or
communi¬
ties.

those  of  his  country.  It  is  probably  this  sentiment  transmit¬
ted  to  posterity,  and  gradually  fixing  the  national  character,
that  has  produced  the  elevation  of  manner  remarked  by  trav¬
ellers  in  the  Castilian  peasant.  But  while  these  acquisitions
of  the  nobility  promoted  the  grand  object  of  winning  back  the
peninsula  from  its  invaders,  they  by  no  means  invigorated  the
government  or  tended  to  domestic  tranquillity.

A  more  interesting  method  of  securing  the  public  defence
was  by  the  institution  of  chartered  towns  or  com¬
munities.  These  were  established  at  an  earlier
period  than  in  France  and  England,  and  were,  in
some  degree,  of  a  peculiar  description.  Instead
of  purchasing  their  immunities,  and  almost  their  personal
freedom,  at  the  hands  of  a  master,  the  burgesses  of  Castil¬
ian  towns  were  invested  with  civil  rights  and  extensive  prop¬
erty  on  the  more  liberal  condition  of  protecting  their  country.
The  earliest  instance  of  the  erection  of  a  community  is  in
1020,  when  Alfonso  V.  in  the  cortes  at  Leon  established  the
privileges  of  that  city  with  a  regular  code  of  laws,  by  which
its  magistrates  should  be  governed.  The  citizens  of  Carrion,
Llanes,  and  other  towns  were  incorporated  by  the  same
prince.  Sanehothe  Great  gave  a  similar  constitution  to  Nax-
ara.  Sepulveda  had  its  code  of  laws  in  1076  from  Alt'on-o
VI. ;  in  the  same  reign  Logrono  and  Sahagun  acquired  their
privileges,  and  Salamanca  not  long  afterwards.  The  fuero,
or  original  charter  of  a  Spanish  community,  was  properly  a
compact,  by  which  the  king  or  lord  granted  a  town  and  adja¬
cent  district  to  the  burgesses,  with  various  privileges,  and  es¬
pecially  that  of  choosing  magistrates  and  a  common  council,
who  were  bound  to  conform  themselves  to  the  laws  prescribed
by  the  founder.  These  laws,  civil  as  well  as  criminal,  though
essentially  derived  from  the  ancient  code  of  the  Visigoths,
which  continued  to  be  the  common  law  of  Castile  till  the  four¬
teenth  or  fifteenth  century,  varied  from  each  other  in  particu¬
lar  usages,  which  had  probably  grown  up  and  been  established
in  these  districts  before  their  legal  confirmation.  The  terri¬
tory  held  by  chartered  towns  was  frequently  very  extensive,
far  beyond  any  comparison  with  corjMjrations  in  our  own
country  or  in  France ;  including  the  estates  of  private  land¬
holders,  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  and  control  of  the  munici¬
pality  as  well  as  its  inalienable  demesnes,  allotted  to  the
maintenance  of  the  magistrates  and  other  public  expenses.

Spain.

OK  COiDIUXITIES.

13

In  every  town  the  king  appointed  a  governor  to  receive  the
usual  tributes  and  watch  over  the  police  and  the  fortified
places  within  the  district ;  but  the  administration  of  justice
was  exclusively  reserved  to  the  inhabitants  and  their  elected
judges.  Even  the  executive  power  of  the  royal  officer  was
regarded  with  jealousy  ;  he  was  forbidden  to  use  violence  tow¬
ards  any  one  without  legal  process ;  and,  by  the  fuero  of
Logrono,  if  he  attempted  to  enter  forcibly  into  a  private
house  he  might  be  killed  with  impunity.  These  democrati-
cal  customs  were  altered  in  the  fourteenth  century  by  Al¬
fonso  XI.,  who  vested  the  municipal  administration  in  a  small
number  of  jurats,  or  regidors.  A  pretext  for  this  was  found
in  some  disorders  to  which  popular  elections  had  led  ;  but  the
real  motive,  of  course,  must  have  been  to  secure  a  greater
influence  for  the  crown,  as  in  similar  innovations  of  some
English  kings.

lu  recompense  for  such  liberal  concessions  the  incorporated
towns  were  bound  to  certain  money  payments,  and  to  military
service.  This  was  absolutely  due  from  every  inhabitant,
without  dispensation  or  substitution,  unless  in  case  of  infirm¬
ity.  The  royal  governor  and  the  magistrates,  as  in  the  sim¬
ple  times  of  primitive  Rome,  raised  and  commanded  the
militia ;  who,  in  a  service  always  short,  and  for  the  most  part
necessary,  preserved  that  delightful  consciousness  of  freedom,
under  the  standard  of  their  fellow  citizens  and  chosen  leaders,
which  no  mere  soldier  can  enjoy.  Every  man  of  a  certain
property  was  bound  to  serve  on  horseback,  and  was  exempt¬
ed  in  return  from  the  payment  of  taxes.  This  produced  a
distinction  between  the  ccibulleros,  or  noble  class,  and  the
peckeros,  or  payers  of  tribute.  But  the  distinction  appears
to  have  been  founded  only  upon  wealth,  as  in  the  Roman
equites,  and  not  upon  hereditary  rank,  though  it  most  likely
prepared  the  way  for  the  latter.  The  horses  of  these  Cabal¬
leros  could  not  be  seized  for  debt  ;  in  some  cases  they  were
exclusively  eligible  to  magistracy ;  and  their  honor  was  pro¬
tected  by  laws  which  rendered  it  highly  penal  to  insult  or
molest  them.  But  the  civil  rights  of  rich  and  poor  in  courts
of  justice  were  as  equal  as  in  England.1

1  I  am  indebted  for  this  account  of  Marina,  a  canon  of  the  church  of  St.
municipal  towns  in  Castile  to  a  book  Isidor,  entitled,  Ensayo  Ilistorico-Critico
published  at  Madrid  in  1808,  imme*ii*  sobre  la  anti^ua  leKislacion  y  principals
aieiy  alter  the  revolution,  by  the  Doctor  cuerpoa  legales  de  loa  reyuos  de  Lyon  y

14

MILITARY  ORDERS.

Chap.  IV.

The  progress  of  the  Christian  arms  in  Spain  may  in  part
Military  be  ascribed  to  another  remarkable  feature  in  the

orders.  constitution  of  that  country,  the  military  orders.

These  had  already  been  tried  with  signal  effect  in  Palestine  ;
and  the  similar  circumstances  of  Spain  easily  led  to  an  adop¬
tion  of  the  same  policy.  In  a  very  few  years  after  the  first
institution  of  the  Knights  Templars,  they  were  endowed  with
great  estates,  or  rather  districts,  won  from  the  Moors,  on  con¬
dition  of  defending  their  own  and  the  national  territory.
These  lay  cliiefiy  in  the  parts  of  Aragon  beyond  the  Ebro,
the  conquest  of  which  was  then  recent  and  insecure.1  So
extraordinary  was  the  respect  for  this  order  and  that  ot  St
John,  and  so  powerful  the  conviction  that  the  hope  of  Chris¬
tendom  rested  upon  their  valor,  that  Altonso  the  First,  king
of  Aragon,  dying  childless,  bequeathed  to  them  his  whole
kingdom  ;  an  example  of  liberality,  says  Mariana,  to  surprise
future  times  and  displease  his  own.*  The  suites  ot  Aragon
annulled,  as  may  be  supposed,  this  strange  testament ;  but
the  successor  of  Alfonso  was  obliged  to  pacify  the  ambitious
knights  by  immense  concessions  of  money  and  territory ;  stip¬
ulating  even  not  to  make  peace  with  the  Moors  against  their
will.8  In  imitation  of  these  great  military  orders  common  to
all  Christendom,  there  arose  three  Spanish  institutions  of  a
similar  kind,  the  orders  of  Calatrava,  Santiago,  and  Alcan¬
tara.  The  first  of  these  was  established  in  1158  ;  the  second
and  most  famous  had  its  charter  from  the  pope  in  1175,
though  it  seems  to  have  existed  previously  ;  the  third  branch¬
ed  off  from  that  of  Calatrava  at  a  subsequent  time.4  These

were  military  colleges,  having  their  walled  towns  in  different
parts  of  Castile,  and  governed  by  an  elective  grand  master,
whose  influence  in  the  state  was  at  least  equal  to  that  ot  any
of  the  nobility.  In  the  civil  dissensions  ot  the  fourteenth
and  fifteenth  centuries,  the  chiefs  of  these  incorporated
knights  were  often  very  prominent.

7in»i  union  The  kingdoms  of  Leon  and  Castile  were  un-
of  1.DI1  ami  wisely  divided  anew  by  Alfonso  \  II.  between  his
sons  Sancho  and  Ferdinand,  and  this  produced  not

Castilla.,  espocialmonto  nob  re  el  eodigo  burgh  Review,  No.  XI.IIT.,  will  convey
de  D.  Alonso  el  Sabio,  ronocido  con  el  a  sufficient  notion  of  it*  content*
notnbre  de  las  Siete  Partldnii.  This  work  >  Mariana,  Ulat.  Ul'pan.  1.  X.  c.  10.

L<  perhaps  not  readily  to  be  procured  in  >  I.  x.  e.  15.

England :  but  an  article  in  the  Kdin-  *  1.  x.  e.  IS.

♦  1.  xl.  c.  6, 13 ;  1.  xii.  e.  8.

Spain.

EXPULSION  OF  THE  MOORS.

15

only  a  separation  but  a  revival  of  the  ancient  jealousy  with
frequent  wars  for  near  a  century.  At  length,  in  1238,  Fer¬
dinand  III.,  king  of  Castile,  reunited  forever  the  two  branches
of  the  Gothic  monarchy.  He  employed  their  joint  strength
against  the  Moors,  whose  dominion,  though  it  still  embraced
the  finest  provinces  of  the  peninsula,  was  sinking  by  internal
weakness,  and  had  never  recovered  a  tremendous  defeat  at
Banos  di  Toloso,  a  few  miles  from  Baylen,  in  Conriuestof
1210.1  Ferdinand,  bursting  ipto  Andalusia,  took  Andalusia,
its  great  capital  the  city  of  Cordova,  not  less  en-  A  D' li36'
nobled  by  the  cultivation  of  Arabian  science,  and  by  the
names  of  Avicenna  and  Averroes,  than  by  the  splendid
works  of  a  rich  and  munificent  dynasty.2  In  a  few  years
more  Seville  was  added  to  his  conquests,  and  the  Moors  lost
their  favorite  regions  on  the  banks  of  the  Guad-  and  Vaien-
alquivir.  James  I.  of  Aragon,  the  victories  of  cia'
whose  long  reign  gave  him  the  surname  of  Conqueror,
reduced  the  city  and  kingdom  of  Valencia,  the  Balearic  isles,
and  the  kingdom  of  Murcia ;  but  the  last  was  annexed,  ac¬
cording  to  compact,  to  the  crown  of  Castile.

It  could  hardly  have  been  expected  about  the  middle  of
the  thirteenth  century,  when  the  splendid  conquests  Expulsiou
of  Ferdinand  and  James  had  planted  the  Chris- of  the
tian  banner  on  the  three  principal  Moorish  cities,  J1"”™  jong
that  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  were  yet  to  elapse
before  the  rescue  of  Spain  from  their  j  oke  should  be  com¬
pleted.  Ambition,  religious  zeal,  national  enmity,  could  not
be  supposed  to  pause  in  a  career  which  now  seemed  to  be  ob¬
structed  by  such  moderate  difficulties  ;  yet  we  find,  on  the
contrary,  the  exertions  of  the  Spaniards  begin  from  this  time
to  relax,  and  their  acquisitions  of  territory  to  become  more

l  A  letter  of  Alfonso  IX.,  who  gained
this  victory,  to  Pope  Innocent  III.,  puts
the  loss  of  the  Moors  at  180,000  men.
The  Arabian  historians,  though  without
specifying  numbers,  seem  to  confirm  this
immense  slaughter,  which  nevertheless
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  before  the  in¬
vention  of  gunpowder,  or  indeed  since.
Cardonne,  t.  ii.  p.  827.

*  If  we  could  rely  on  a  Moorish  author
quoted  by  Cardonne  (t.  i.  p.  337),  the
city  of  Cordova  contained,  I  know  not
exactly  in  what  century,  260,000  houses,
000  mosques,  and  900  public  baths.
There  were  12,000  towns  and  villages  on
the  banks  of  the  Guadalquivir.  This,

however,  must  be  greatly  exaggerated,  as
numerical  statements  generally  are.  The
mines  of  gold  and  silver  were  very  pro¬
ductive.  And  the  revenues  of  the  khalifs
of  Cordova  are  said  to  have  amounted  to
130,000,000  of  French  money ;  besides
large  contributions  that,  according  to  the
practico  of  oriental  governments,  were
paid  in  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  Other
proofs  of  the  extraordinary  opulence  and
splendor  of  this  monarchy  are  dispersed
in  Cardonmrs  work,  from  which  they
have  been  chiefly  borrowed  by  later
writers.  The  splendid  engravinm*  iu
Murphy's  Moorish  Antiquities  of  Spain
illustrate  this  sulyect.

16

EXPULSION  OF  THE  MOORS.

CiiAr.  IV.

slow.  One  of  the  causes,  undoubtedly,  that  produced  this
unexpected  protraction  of  the  contest  was  the  superior  means
of  resistance  which  the  Moors  found  in  retreating.  Their
population,  spread  originally  over  the  whole  of  Spain,  was
now  condensed,  and,  if  I  may  so  say,  become  no  further
compressible,  in  a  single  province.  It  had  been  mingled,  in
the  northern  and  central  parts,  with  the  Mozarabic  Chris¬
tians,  their  subjects  and  tributaries,  not  perhaps  treated  with
much  injustice,  yet  naturally  and  irremediably  their  enemies.
Toledo  and  Saragosa,  when  they  fell  under  a  Christian  sov¬
ereign,  were  full  of  these  inferior  Christians,  whose  long  in¬
tercourse  with  their  masters  has  infused  the  tones  and  dialect
of  Arabia  into  the  language  of  Castile.1  But  in  the  twelfth
century  the  Moors,  exasperated  by  defeat  and  jealous  of  se¬
cret  disaffection,  began  to  persecute  their  Christian  subjects,
till  they  renounced  or  fled  for  their  religion ;  so  that  in  the
southern  provinces  scarcely  any  professors  of  Christianity
were  left  at  the  time  of  Ferdinand’s  invasion.  An  equally
severe  policy  was  adopted  on  the  other  side.  The  Moors  had
been  permitted  to  dwell  in  Saragosa  as  the  Christians  had
dwelt  before,  subjects,  not  slaves ;  but  on  the  capture  of  Se¬
ville  they  were  entirely  expelled,  and  new  settlers  invited
from  every  part  of  Spain.  The  strong  fortified  towns  of  An¬
dalusia,  such  as  Gibraltar,  Algeciras,  Tariffa,  maintained  a  bo
a  more  formidable  resistance  than  had  been  experienced  in
Castile;  they  cost  tedious  sieges,  were  sometimes  recovered
by  the  enemy,  and  were  always  liable  to  his  attacks.  But
the  great  protection  of  the  Spanish  Mohammedans  was  found
in  the  alliance  and  ready  aid  of  their  kindred  beyond  the
Straits.  Accustomed  to  hear  of  the  African  Moor-  only  as
pirates,  we  cannot  easily  conceive  the  powerful  dynasties,  the
warlike  chiefs,  the  vast  armies,  which  for  seven  or  eight  cen¬
turies  illustrate  the  annals  of  that  people.  Their  assistance
was  always  afforded  to  the  true  believers  in  Spain,  though
their  ambition  was  generally  dreaded  by  those  who  stood  in
need  of  their  valor.2

Probably,  however,  the  kings  of  Granada  were  most  in¬
debted  to  the  indolence  which  gradually  became  characteristic
of  their  enemies.  By  the  cession  of  Murcia  to  Ca-tile,  the
kingdom  of  Aragon  shut  itself  out  from  the  possibility  of

1  Mariana,  1.  xl-  c.  1 ;  Gibbon,  o.  51.

*  Cardonne,  t.  U.  and  iii.  paaaim.

Spain.

ALFONSO  X.

17

extending  those  conquests  which  had  ennobled  her  earlier
sovereigns ;  and  their  successors,  not  less  ambitious  and  en¬
terprising,  diverted  their  attention  towards  objects  beyond  the
peninsula.  The  Castilian,  patient  and  undesponding  in  bad
success,  loses  his  energy  as  the  pressure  becomes  less  heavy,
and  puts  no  ordinary  evil  in  comparison  with  the  exertions
by  which  it  must  be  removed.  The  greater  part  of  his  coun¬
try  freed  by  his  arms,  he  was  content  to  leave  the  enemy  in  a
single  province  rather  than  undergo  the  labor  of  making  his
triumph  complete.

If  a  similar  spirit  of  insubordination  had  not  been  found
compatible  in  earlier  ages  with  the  aggrandizement  of  the
Castilian  monarchy,  we  might  ascribe  its  want  of  Alfonso  x.
splendid  successes  against  the  Moors  to  the  con-  A  D- 1252-
tinued  rebellions  which  disturbed  that  government  for  more
than  a  century  after  the  death  of  Ferdinand  III.  His  son,
Alfonso  X.,  might  justly  acquire  the  surname  of  Wise  for  his
general  proficiency  in  learning,  and  especially  in  astronomi¬
cal  science,  if  these  attainments  deserve  praise  in  a  king  who
was  incapable  of  preserving  his  subjects  in  their  duty.  As  a
legislator,  Alfonso,  by  his  code  of  the  Siete  Partidas,  sacri¬
ficed  the  ecclesiastical  rights  of  his  crown  to  the  usurpation
of  Rome  ; 1 2  and  his  philosophy  sunk  below  the  level  of  ordi¬
nary  prudence  when  he  permitted  the  phantom  of  an  impe¬
rial  crown  in  Germany  to  seduce  his  hopes  for  almost  twenty
years.  For  the  sake  of  such  an  illusion  he  would  even  have
withdrawn  himself  from  Castile,  if  the  states  had  not  remon¬
strated  against  an  expedition  that  would  probably  have  cost
him  the  kingdom.  In  the  latter  years  of  his  turbulent  reign
Alfonso  had  to  contend  against  his  son.  The  right  of  repre¬
sentation  was  hitherto  unknown  in  Castile,  which  had  bor¬
rowed  little  from  the  customs  of  feudal  nations.  By  the
received  law  of  succession  the  nearer  was  always  preferred
to  the  more  remote,  the  son  to  the  grandson.  Alfonso  X.
had  established  the  different  maxim  of  representation  by  his
code  of  the  Siete  Partidas,  the  authority  of  which,  however,
was  not  universally  acknowledged.  The  question  soon  came
to  an  issue :  on  the  death  of  his  elder  son  Ferdinand,  leaving
two  male  children,  Sancho  their  uncle  asserted  his  claim,
founded  upon  the  ancient  Castilian  right  of  succession ;  and

1  Marina,  Knaayo  Historlco-Critico,  p.  272,  &o.

2

VOL.  II.

/

18  CIVIL  DISTURBANCES  OF  CASTILE.  Chap.  IV.

this,  chiefly  no  doubt  through  fear  of  arms,  though  it  did  not
want  plausible  arguments,  was  ratified  by  an  assembly  of
the  cortes,  and  secured,  notwithstanding  the  kings  reluctance,
by  the  courage  of  Sancho.  But  the  descendants  of  Ferdi¬
nand,  generally  called  the  infants  of  la  Cerda,  by  the  protec¬
tion  of  France,  to  whose  royal  family  they  were  closely
allied,  and  of  Aragon,  always  prompt  to  interfere  in  the  dis¬
putes  of  a  rival  people,  continued  to  assert  their  pretensions
for  more  than  half  a  century,  and,  though  they  were  not  very
successful,  did  not  fail  to  aggravate  the  troubles  of  their
country.

The  annals  of  Sancho  IV.  and  his  two  immediate  succes¬
sors,  Ferdinand  IV.  and  Alfonso  XI.,  present  a
series  of  unhappy  and  dishonorable  civil  dissen¬
sions  with  too  much  rapidity  to  be  remembered
or  even  understood.  Although  the  Castilian  no¬
bility  had  no  pretence  to  the  original  independence
of  the  French  peers,  or  to  the  liberties  of  feudal
tenure,  they  assumed  the  same  privilege  of  rebel¬
ling  upon  any  provocation  from  their  sovereign.
When  such  occurred,  they  seem  to  have  been  permitted,  by
legal  custom,  to  renounce  their  allegiance  by  a  solemn  instru¬
ment,  which  exempted  them  from  the  penalties  of  treason.1
A  very  few  families  composed  an  oligarchy,  the  worst  ami
most  ruinous  condition  ot  political  society,  alternately  the
favorites  and  ministers  of  the  prince,  or  in  arms  against  him.
If  unable  to  protect  themselves  in  their  walled  towns,  and  by
the  aid  of  tbeir  faction,  these  Christian  patriots  retired  to
Aragon  or  Granada,  and  excited  an  hostile  power  against
their  country,  and  perhaps  their  religion.  Nothing  is  more
common  in  the  Castilian  history  than  instances  of  such  de¬
fection.  Mariana  remarks  coolly  of  the  hunily  ot  Castro,
that  they  were  much  in  the  habit  of  revolting  to  the  Moors.®
This  house  and  that  of  Lara  were  at  one  time  the  great
rivals  for  power;  but  from  the  time  of  Alfonso  X.  the  former
seems  to  have  declined,  and  the  sole  family  that  came  in
competition  with  the  Laras  during  the  tempestuous  period
that  followed  was  that  of  Haro,  which  possessed  the  lordship
of  Biscay  by  an  hereditary  title.  The  evils  of  a  weak  gov-

Civil  dift-
tu  rbancefl
of  Caatile.
Sancho  IV.
ad.  1284.
Ferdinand
1\

a.d.  1295.
Alfoni*o  XI.
ad.  1312.

1  Mariana,  1.  xiil.  C.  11.

*  Alvaro*  Caatriu*  patril  allqoanto
til  tea,  uti  moris  erat,  renunciall.  — Caa-

tria  jr*n»  per  lure  tempore  ad  Mauroa
Mt»pe  drfrciw  vine  eat.  1.  all.  e.  12.
abo  chapter*  17  and  19.

Spain.

PETER  THE  CRUEL.

19

ernment  were  aggravated  by  the  unfortunate  circumstances
in  which  Ferdinand  IV.  and  Alfonso  XI.  ascended  the
throne ;  both  minors,  with  a  disputed  regency,  and  the  in¬
terval  too  short  to  give  ambitious  spirits  leisure  to  subside.
There  is  indeed  some  apology  for  the  conduct  of  the  Laras
and  Haros  in  the  character  of  their  sovereigns,  who  had  but
one  favorite  method  of  avenging  a  dissembled  injury,  or
anticipating  a  suspected  treason.  Sancho  IV.  assassinates
Don  Lope  Haro  in  his  palace  at  Valladolid.  Alfonso  XI.
invites  to  court  the  infant  Don  Juan,  his  first-cousin,  and
commits  a  similar  violence.  Such  crimes  may  be  found  in
the  history  of  other  countries,  but  they  were  nowhere  so
usual  as  in  Spain,  which  was  far  behind  France,  England,
and  even  Germany,  in  civilization.

But  whatever  violence  and  arbitrary  spirit  might  be  im¬
puted  to  Sancho  and  Alfonso  was  forgotten  in  the  Poter  th
unexampled  tyranny  of  Peter  the  Cruel.  A  sus-  Cruel .
picion  is  frequently  intimated  by  Mariana,  which  A'D'  13o°'
seems,  in  more  modern  times,  to  have  gained  some  credit,  that
party  malevolence  has  at  least  grossly  exaggerated  the  enor¬
mities  of  this  prince.1  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  believe
that  a  number  of  atrocious  acts  unconnected  with  each  other,
and  generally  notorious  enough  in  their  circumstances,  have
been  ascribed  to  any  innocent  man.  The  history  of  his
reign,  chiefly  derived,  it  is  admitted,  from  the  pen  of  an
inveterate  enemy,  Lope  de  Ayala,  charges  him  with  the
murder  of  his  wife,  Blanche  of  Bourbon,  most  of  his  broth¬
ers  and  sisters,  with  Eleanor  Gusman,  their  mother,  many
Castilian  nobles,  and  multitudes  of  the  commonalty ;  besides
continual  outrages  of  licentiousness,  and  especially  a  pre¬
tended  marriage  with  a  noble  lady  of  the  Castrian  family.
At  length  a  rebellion  was  headed  by  his  illegitimate  brother,

1  There  is  in  general  room  enough  for  day,  within  the  recollection  of  many  per-
scepticism  as  to  the  characters  of  men  sons  living  when  he  wrote  ?  There  may
who  are  only  known  to  us  through  their  be  a  question  whether  Richard  III.
enemies.  History  is  full  of  calumnies,  smothered  his  nephews  in  the  Tower;
fend  of  calumnies  that  can  never  be  but  nobody  can  disjnt.  t  hit  Henry  VIII.
effaced.  Rut  I  really  see  no  ground  for  cut  off  Anna  Bolcyn’s  head,
thinking  charitably  of  Peter  the  Cruel.  The  passage  from  Matteo  Villani  above
Froissart,  part  i.  c.  230,  and  Matteo  Vil-  mentioned  is  as  follows : — Comincid  aspra-
lani  (in  Script.  Kerum  Italic,  t.  xiv.  mente  a  se  far  ubbidire,  perchd  temendo
p.  53),  the  latter  of  whom  died  before  the  de’  suoi  baroni,  trovo  modo  di  far  infamare
rebellion  of  Henry  of  Trastamare,  speak  V  uno  1?  altro,  e  prendendo  cagione,  gli
of  him  much  in  the  same  terms  as  the  comincid  ad  uccidere  con  le  sue  mani.  E
Spanish  historians.  And  why  should  in  brieve  tempo  ne  fece  morire  25  o  tre
Ayala  be  doubted,  when  he  gives  a  long  suoi  fratelli  fece  morire,  &c.
list  of  murders  committed  in  the  lace  of

20

HOUSE  OF  TRASTAMARE.

Chap.  IV.

Henry  count  of  Trastamare,  with  the  assistance  of  Aragon
and  Portugal.  This,  however,  would  probably  have  failed
of  dethroning  Peter,  a  resolute  prince,  and  certainly  not
destitute  of  many  faithful  supporters,  if  Henry  bad  not  in¬
voked  the  more  powerful  succor  of  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,
and  the  companies  of  adventure,  who,  after  the  pacification
between  France  and  England,  had  lost  the  occupation  of
war,  and  retained  only  that  of  plunder.  With  mercenaries
so  disciplined  it  was  in  vain  for  Peter  to  contend  ;  but,
abandoning  Spain  for  a  moment,  he  had  recourse  to  a  more
powerful  weapon  from  the  same  armory.  Edward  the  Black
Prince,  then  resident  at  Bordeaux,  was  induced  by  the  prom¬
ise  of  Biscay  to  enter  Spain  as  the  ally  of  Castile ;  and  at

„  ,0,-7  the  great  battle  of  Navarette  he  continued  lord  of
the  ascendant  over  those  who  had  so  often  already
been  foiled  by  his  prowess.  Du  Guesclin  was  made  prisoner ;
Henry  fled  to  Aragon,  and  Peter  remounted  the  throne.
But  a  second  revolution  was  at  hand :  the  Black  Prince,
whom  he  had  ungratefully  offended,  withdrew  into  Guienne ;
and  he  lost  his  kingdom  and  life  in  a  second  short  contest
with  his  brother.

A  more  fortunate  period  began  with  the  accession  of
ifnus,*  nf  Henry.  His  own  reign  was  hardly  disturbed  by
Tra.«taimire.  any  rebellion  ;  and  though  his  successors,  John  1.

and  Henry  III.,  were  not  altogether  so  unmolested,
Joh,>ir9  especially  the  latter,  who  ascended  the  throne  in
Heury  in.  his  minority,  yet  the  troubles  of  their  time  were
a.d.  1890.  slight  in  comparison  with  those  formerly  excited
by  the  houses  of  Lara  and  Haro,  both  of  which  were  now
happily  extinct.  Though  Henry  II.’s  illegitimacy  left  him
no  title  but  popular  choice,  his  queen  was  sole  representative
of  the  Cerdas,  the  offspring,  as  has  been  mentioned  above,
of  Sancho  IV.’s  elder  brother,  and,  by  the  extinction  of  the
younger  branch,  unquestioned  heiress  of  the  royal  line.
Some  years  afterwards,  by  the  marriage  of  Henry  111.  with
Catherine,  daughter  of  John  of  Gaunt  and  Constance,  an
illegitimate  child  of  Peter  the  Cruel,  her  pretensions,  such
as  they  were,  became  merged  in  the  crown.

No  kingdom  could  be  worse  prepared  to  meet  the  di-orders
John  IT.  of  a  minority  than  Castile,  and  in  none  did  the
a.d.  1406.  circumstances  so  frequently  recur.  John  II.  was
but  fourteen  months  old  ut  his  accession ;  and  but  for  the

Spa  ix.

ALVARO  DE  LUNA.

21

disinterestedness  of  his  uncle  Ferdinand,  the  nobility  would
have  been  inclined  to  avert  the  danger  by  placing  that  prince
upon  the  throne.  In  this  instance,  however,  Castile  suffered
less  from  faction  during  the  infancy  of  her  sovereign  than  in
his  maturity.  The  queen  dowager,  at  first  jointly  with  Fer¬
dinand,  and  solely  after  his  accession  to  the  crown  of  Aragon,
administered  the  government  with  credit.  Fifty  years  had
elapsed  at  her  death  in  1418  since  the  elevation  of  the  house
of  Tra-tamare,  who  had  entitled  themselves  to  public  affec¬
tion  by  conforming  themselves  more  strictly  than  their  pred¬
ecessors  to  the  constitutional  laws  of  Castile,  which  were
never  so  well  established  as  during  this  period.  In  external
affairs  their  reigns  were  not  what  is  considered  as  glorious.
They  were  generally  at  peace  with  Aragon  and
Granada ;  but  one  memorable  defeat  by  the  Portu¬
guese  at  Aljubarrota  disgraces  the  annals  of  John  I.,  whose
cause  was  as  unjust  as  his  arms  were  unsuccessful.  This
comparatively  golden  period  ceases  at  the  majority  of  John
II.  His  reign  was  filled  up  by  a  series  of  conspiracies  and
civil  wars,  headed  by  his  cousins  John  and  Henry,  the  infants
of  Aragon,  who  enjoyed  very  extensive  territories  in  Castile,
by  the  testament  of  their  father  Ferdinand.  Their  brother
the  king  of  Aragon  frequently  lent  the  assistance  of  his  arms.
John  himself,  the  elder  of  these  two  princes,  by  marriage
witli  the  heiress  of  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  stood  in  a  double
relation  to  Castile,  as  a  neighboring  sovereign,  and  as  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  native  oligarchy.  These  conspiracies  power
were  all  ostensibly  directed  against  the  favorite  of  sui  of  ai-
Jolin  II.,  Alvaro  de  Luna,  who  retained  for  five-
and-thirty  years  an  absolute  control  over  his  fee¬
ble  master.  The  adverse  faction  naturally  ascribed  to  this
powerful  minister  every  criminal  intention  and  all  public
mischiefs.  lie  was  certainly  not  more  scrupulous  than  the
generality  of  statesmen,  and  appears  to  have  been  rapacious
in  accumulating  wealth.  I5ut  there  was  an  energy  and
courage  about  Alvaro  de  Luna  which  distinguishes  him  from
the  cowardly  sycophants  who  usually  rise  by  the  favor  of
weak  princes ;  and  Castile  probably  would  not  have  been
happier  under  the  administration  of  his  enemies.  Ilis  fate
is  among  the  memorable  lessons  of  history.  After  a  life  of
troubles  endured  for  the  sake  of  this  favorite,  sometimes  a
fugitive,  sometimes  a  prisoner,  his  son  heading  rebellions

22

HENRY  IV.

Chap.  IV.

against  him,  John  II.  suddenly  yielded  to  an  intrigue  of  the
palace,  and  adopted  sentiments  of  dislike  towards  the  man  he
had  so  long  loved.  No  substantial  charge  appears  to  have
been  brought  against  Alvaro  de  Luna,  except  that  general
malversation  which  it  was  too  late  for  the  king  to  object  to
him.  The  real  cause  of  John’s  change  of  affection  was,
most  probably,  the  insupportable  restraint  which  the  weak
are  apt  to  find  in  that  spell  of  a  commanding  understand¬
ing  which  they  dare  not  break ;  the  torment  of  living  subject
to  the  ascendant  of  an  inferior,  which  has  produced  so  many
examples  of  fickleness  in  sovereigns.  That  of  John  II.  is
not  the  least  conspicuous.  Alvaro  de  Luna  was  brought  to
a  summary  trial  and  beheaded  ;  his  estates  were  confiscated,
lie  met  his  death  with  the  intrepidity  of  Stratford,  to  whom
he  seems  to  have  borne  some  resemblance  in  character.

John  II.  did  not  long  survive  his  minister,  dying  in  1454,
IV  after  a  reigu  that  may  be  considered  as  inglorious,
Kenry  1  '  compared  with  any  except  that  of  his  successor.
If  the  father  was  not  respected,  the  son  fell  completely  into
contempt.  lie  had  been  governed  by  Pacheco,  marquis  of
Villena,  as  implicitly  as  John  by  Alvaro  de  Luna.  1  his
influence  lasted  for  some  time  afterwards.  But  the  king  in¬
clining  to  transfer  his  confidence  to  the  queen  Joanna  of
Portugal,  and  to  one  Bertrand  de  Cueva,  upon  whom  com¬
mon  fame  had  fixed  as  her  paramour,  a  powerful  confederacy
of  disaffected  nobles  was  formed  against  the  royal  authority.
In  what  degree  Henry  IV.’s  government  had  been  improvi¬
dent  or  oppressive  towards  the  people,  it  is  hard  to  deter¬
mine.  The  chiefs  of  that  rebellion,  Carillo  archbishop  of
Toledo,  the  admiral  of  Castile,  a  veteran  leader  of  faction,
and  the  marquis  of  Villena,  so  lately  the  king’s  favorite,  were
undoubtedly  actuated  only  by  selfish  ambition  and  revenge.

j  They  deposed  Henry  in  an  assembly  of  their  fac-
A  D  tion  at  Avila  with  a  sort  of  theatrical  pageantry

which  has  often  been  described.  But  modern  historians,
struck  by  the  appearance  of  judicial  solemnity  in  this  pro¬
ceeding,  are  sometimes  apt  to  speak  of  it  as  a  national  act ;
while,  on  the  contrary,  it  seems  to  have  been  reprobated  by
the  majority  of  t he  Castilians  as  an  audacious  outrage  upon
a  sovereign  who,  with  many  defects,  had  not  been  guilty  of
any  excessive  tyranny.  The  confederates  set  up  Alfonso,
the  king’s  brother,  and  a  civil  war  of  some  duration  ensued,

Spain.

HENRY  IV.

23

in  which  they  had  the  support  of  Aragon.  The  queen  of
Castile  had  at  this  time  borne  a  daughter,  whom  the  enemies
of  Henry  IV.,  and  indeed  no  small  part  of  his  adherents,
were  determined  to  treat  as  spurious.  Accordingly,  after  the
death  of  Alfonso,  his  sister  Isabel  was  considered  as  heiress
of  the  kingdom.  She  might  have  aspired,  with  the  assist¬
ance  of  the  confederates,  to  its  immediate  possession  ;  but,
avoiding  the  odium  of  a  contest  with  her  brother,  Isabel
agreed  to  a  treaty,  by  which  the  succession  was  absolutely
settled  upon  her.  This  arrangement  was  not  long  A  D
afterwards  followed  by  the  union  of  that  princess
with  Ferdinand,  son  of  the  king  of  Aragon.  This  marriage
was  by  no  means  acceptable  to  a  part  of  the  Castilian  oli¬
garchy,  who  had  preferred  a  connection  with  Portugal.  And
as  Henry  had  never  lost  sight  of  the  interests  of  one  whom
he  considered,  or  pretended  to  consider,  as  his  daughter,  he
took  the  first  opportunity  of  revoking  his  forced  disposition
of  the  crown  and  restoring  the  direct  line  of  succession  in
favor  of  the  princess  Joanna.  Upon  his  death,  in  1474,  the
right  was  to  be  decided  by  arms.  Joanna  had  on  her  side
the  common  presumptions  of  law,  the  testamentary  disposi¬
tion  of  the  late  king,  the  support  of  Alfonso  king  of  Portu¬
gal,  to  whom  she  was  betrothed,  and  of  several  considerable
leaders  among  the  nobility,  as  the  young  marquis  of  Villena,
the  family  of  Mendoza,  and  the  archbishop  of  Toledo,  who,
charging  Ferdinand  with  ingratitude,  had  quitted  a  party
which  he  had  above  all  men  contributed  to  strengthen.  For
Isabella  were  the  general  belief  of  Joanna’s  illegitimacy,  the
assistance  of  Aragon,  the  adherence  of  a  majority  both  among
the  nobles  and  people,  and,  more  than  all,  the  reputation  of
ability  which  both  she  and  her  husband  had  deservedly  ac¬
quired.  The  scale  was  however  pretty  equally  balanced,  till
the  king  of  Portugal  having  been  defeated  at  Toro  in  1476,
Joanna’s  party  discovered  their  inability  to  prosecute  the  war
by  themselves,  and  successively  made  their  submission  to
Ferdinand  and  Isabella.

The  Castilians  always  considered  themselves  Constltu.
as  subject  to  a  legal  and  limited  monarchy.  For  tion  of
several  ages  the  crown  was  elective,  as  in  most  guc™!*si0n
nations  of  German  origin,  within  the  limits  of  one  of  the
royal  family.1  In  general,  of  course,  the  public

1  Defuncto  in  pare  principe,  primates  cessorum  re^nl  conrilio  comrauni  con-
totius  regal  umk  cum  sacrrdotibus  sue-  stituaut.  Coucil.  Tulctau.  IV.  c.  75,

24

NATIONAL  COUNCILS.

Chap.  IV.

choice  fell  upon  the  nearest  heir ;  and  it  became  a  prevailing
usage  to  elect  a  son  during  the  lifetime  of  his  father,  till  about
the  eleventh  century  a  right  of  hereditary  succession  was
clearly  established.  But  the  form  of  recognizing  the  heir
apparent’s  title  in  an  assembly  of  the  cortes  has  subsisted
until  our  own  time.1

In  the  original  Gothic  monarchy  of  Spain,  civil  as  well  as
ecclesiastical  affairs  were  decided  in  national  councils,  the
National  acts  of  many  of  which  are  still  extant,  and  have
councils.  been  published  in  ecclesiastical  collections.  To
these  assemblies  the  dukes  and  other  provincial  governors,
and  in  general  the  principal  individuals  of  the  realm,  were
summoned  along  with  spiritual  persons.  This  double  aris¬
tocracy  of  church  and  state  continued  to  form  the  great  coun¬
cil  of  advice  and  consent  in  the  first  ages  of  the  new  king¬
doms  of  Leon  and  Castile.  The  prelates  and  nobility,  or
rather  some  of  the  more  distinguished  nobility,  appear  to
have  concurred  in  all  general  measures  of  legislation,  as  we
infer  from  the  preamble  of  their  statutes.  It  would  be  against
analogy,  as  well  as  without  evidence,  to  suppose  that  any  rep¬
resentation  of  the  commons  had  been  formed  in  the  earlier
period  of  the  monarchy.  In  the  preamble  of  laws  passed  in
1020,  and  at  several  subsequent  times  during  that  and  the
ensuing  century,  we  find  only  the  bishops  and  magnats  re-
Admiiwion  cited  as  present.  According  to  the  General  Clirou-
or  deputies  icle  of  Spain,  deputies  from  the  Castilian  towns
from  towns  forme,i  a  part  ()f  cortes  ill  1100,  a  dale  not  to  be
rejected  as  incompatible  with  their  absence  in  1178.  How¬
ever,  in  1188,  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Alfonso  IX.,
they  are  expressly  mentioned ;  and  from  that  eru  were  con¬
stant  and  necessary  parts  of  those  general  assemblies.*  It
has  been  seen  already  that  the  corporate  towns  or  districts  of

apnd  Marina,  Teoria  de  las  Cork*,  t.  II.
p.  2:  This  important  work,  by  the  author
of  the  Ensayo  Ilimtoriro-Oritico,  quoted
above,  contain*  an  ample  digest  of  the
parliamentary  law  of  Castile,  drawn  from
original  and.  in  a  great  decree,  unpub¬
lished  records.  I  have  l»wn  favored
with  the  Qss  of  a  copy,  from  which  I  am
the  more  disposed  to  make  extract*,  a*
the  book  l*  likely,  through  it*  UUt.iI
principle*,  to  become  almost  a*  *car re  In
Ppaln  a*  in  England.  Marina'*  former
work  (the  Enaayo  IIi«t.-Orit.)  furnl*h««
a  *erie«  of  testimonies  ,c.  *W)  to  the
elective  character  of  the  monarchy  from

Pelayo  downwards  to  the  twelfth  cen¬
tury.

l  Teoria  do  la*  Cortes,  t.  II.  p.  7.

*  Knsayo  Hist. -Chit.  p.  77 ;  Teoria  de
la*  Cortes,  t.  i.  p.  0*5.  Marina  *retn«
to  have  somewhat  changed  hi*  opinion
since  the  publication  of  the  former  work,
where  he  Inc  Hues  to  assert  that  the  com¬
mon*  were  from  the  earliest  time*  ad-
the  legislature.  In  11-".
the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Alfonso  IX.,
we  find  positive  mention  of  la  uiuche-
dumhre  do  las  c Unlade*  6  embiados  de
cada  cibdat.

Spain.

NATIONAL  COUNCILS.

25

Castile  liad  early  acquired  considerable  importance,  arising
less  from  commercial  wealth,  to  which  the  towns  of  other
kingdoms  were  indebted  for  their  liberties,  than  from  their
utility  in  keeping  up  a  military  organization  among  the  peo¬
ple.  To  this  they  probably  owe  their  early  reception  into
the  cortes  as  integrant  portions  of  the  legislature,  since  we
do  not  read  that  taxes  were  frequently  demanded,  till  the
extravagance  of  later  kings,  and  their  alienation  of  the
domain,  compelled  them  to  have  recourse  to  the  national
representatives.

Every  chief  town  of  a  coneejo  or  corporation  ought  per¬
haps,  by  the  constitution  of  Castile,  to  have  received  its  regu¬
lar  writ  for  the  election  of  deputies  to  cortes.1  But  there
does  not  appear  to  have  been,  in  the  best  times,  any  uniform
practice  in  this  respect.  At  the  cortes  of  Burgos,  in  1315,
we  find  one  hundred  and  ninety-two  representatives  from
more  than  ninety  towns ;  at  those  of  Madrid,  in  1391,  one
hundred  and  twenty-six  were  sent  from  fifty  towns ;  and  the
latter  list  contains  names  of  several  places  which  do  not  ap¬
pear  in  the  former.2  No  deputies  were  present  from  the  king¬
dom  of  Leon  in  the  cortes  of  Alcala  in  1348,  where,  among
many  important  enactments,  the  code  of  the  Siete  Partidas  first
obtained  a  legislative  recognition.8  "We  find,  in  short,  a  good
deal  more  irregularity  than  during  the  same  period  in  Eng¬
land,  where  the  number  of  electing  boroughs  varied  pretty
considerably  at  every  parliament.  Yet  the  cortes  of  Castile
did  not  cease  to  be  a  numerous  hotly  and  a  fair  representa¬
tion  of  the  people  till  the  reign  of  John  II.  The  first  princes
of  the  house  of  Trastamare  had  acted  in  all  points  with  the
advice  of  their  cortes.  But  John  II.,  and  still  more  his  son
Henry  IV.,  being  conscious  of  their  own  unpopularity,  did
not  venture  to  meet  a  full  assembly  of  the  nation.  Their
writs  were  directed  only  to  certain  towns  —  an  abuse  for
which  the  looseness  of  preceding  usage  had  given  a  pre¬
tence.4  It  must  be  owned  that  the  people  bore  it  in  general
very  patiently.  Many  of  the  corporate  towns,  impoverished

1  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  p.  139.  *  Sepades  (says  John  II.  in  1442)  que

*  Id.  p.  148.  Geddes  gives  a  list  of  en  el  ayuntamiento  que  yo  flee  en  la

one  hundred  and  twenty -seven  deputies  noble  viila  de  Valladolid  ....  los  pro-
from  forty -eight  towns  to  the  cortes  at  curadores  de  ciertas  cibdades  6  villas  tie
Madrid  in  1390.  —  Miscellaneous  Tracts,  mis  reynos  que  por  mi  mandado  fuoron
NL  iii.  llamados.  This  language  i*  repeated  us

*  Id.  p.  154.  to  subsequent  meetings,  p.  150.

26

NATIONAL  COUNCILS.

Chap.  TV.

by  civil  warfare  and  other  causes,  were  glad  to  save  the  cost
of  defraying  their  deputies’  expenses.  Thus,  by  the  year
1480,  only  seventeen  cities  had  retained  privilege  of  repre¬
sentation.  A  vote  was  afterwards  added  for  Granada,  and
three  more  in  later  times  for  Palencia,  and  the  provinces  of
Estremadura  and  Galicia.1  It  might  have  been  easy  perhaps
to  redress  this  grievance  while  the  exclusion  was  yet  fresh
and  recent  But  the  privileged  towns,  with  a  mean  and
preposterous  selfishness,  although  their  zeal  for  liberty  was  at
its  height,  could  not  endure  the  only  means  of  effectually
securing  it,  by  a  restoration  of  elective  franchises  to  their
fellow-citizens.  The  cortes  of  1506  assert,  with  one  of  those
bold  falsifications  upon  which  a  popular  body  sometimes  ven¬
tures,  that  “  it  is  established  by  some  laws,  and  by  imme¬
morial  usage,  that  eighteen  cities  of  these  kingdoms  have  the
right  of  sending  deputies  to  cortes,  and  no  more ;  ”  remon¬
strating  against  the  attempts  made  by  some  other  towns  to
obtain  the  same  privilege,  which  they  request  may  not  be
conceded.  This  remonstrance  is  repeated  in  1512.*

From  the  reign  of  Alfonso  XI.,  who  restrained  the  gov¬
ernment  of  corporations  to  an  oligarchy  of  magistrates,  the
right  of  electing  members  of  cortes  was  confined  to  the  ruling
body,  the  bailiffs  or  regidores,  whose  number  seldom  exceeded
twenty-four,  and  whose  succession  was  kept  up  by  close  elec¬
tion  among  themselves.*  The  people  therefore  had  no  direct
share  in  the  choice  of  representatives.  Experience  proved,
as  several  instances  in  these  pages  will  show,  that  even  upon
this  narrow  basis  the  deputies  of  Castile  were  not  deficient
in  zeal  for  their  country  and  its  liberties.  But  it  must  be
confessed  that  a  small  body  of  electors  is  always  liable  to  cor¬
rupt  influence  and  to  intimidation.  John  II.  and  Henry  IV.
often  invaded  the  freedom  of  election  ;  the  latter  even  named
some  of  the  deputies.4  Several  energetic  remonstrances  were
made  in  cortes  against  this  flagrant  grievance.  Laws  were
enacted  and  other  precautions  devised  to  secure  the  due  re-

1  The  citie*  which  retained  their  rep-  adjacent  town*  Thtu  Torn  rota]  for  l*»-
rrrenution  in  corteii  were  Hur^*,  To-  lencta  and  the  kingdom  of  Galicia.  U>f«.re
l*do  (there  wn.i  a  constant  ill*put«  for  they  obtained  rep* nit*  rote*;  Salamanca
precedence  between  there  two),  Lami,  for  moot  of  Katreinadura ;  GuasUlavara
Granada,  ('ordnva.  Murcia.  Jaen,  Zamora,  for  $iguenca  and  four  hundred  other
Toro,  Soria,  Valladolid,  Salamanca,  8e-  town*  Teoria  de  la*  Cortes*,  p.  10u,
govia,  Avila,  Madrid.  Guutlalaxara.  and  *  Mem,  p.  Ml
Cuenca.  The  reprerentatlre*  of  there  »  Mem.  p.  W.  197.

were  r*  up  pored  to  vote  not  only  Ibr  their  *  Idem,  p.  199.

immediate  coojtitueuti,  but  for  other

Spain.

CONSTITUTION  OF  CORTES.

27

turn  of  deputies.  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  evil,  of  course,
was  aggravated.  Charles  and  Philip  corrupted  the  members
by  bribery.1  Even  in  1573  the  cortes  are  bold  enough  to
complain  that  creatures  of  government  were  sent  thither,
“  who  are  always  held  for  suspected  by  the  other  deputies,
and  cause  disagreement  among  them.”2

There  seems  to  be  a  considerable  obscurity  about  the  con¬
stitution  of  the  cortes,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  two
higher  estates,  the  spiritual  and  temporal  nobility,  andtempo-
It  is  admitted  that  down  to  the  latter  part  of  the
thirteenth  century,  and  especially  before  the  intro¬
duction  of  representatives  from  the  commons,  they  were  sum¬
moned  in  considerable  numbers.  But  the  writer  to  whom  I
must  almost  exclusively  refer  for  the  constitutional  history
of  Castile  contends  that  from  the  reign  of  Sancho  IV.  'they
took  much  less  share  and  retained  much  less  influence  in  the
deliberation  of  cortes.8  There  is  a  remarkable  protest  of  the
archbishop  of  Toledo,  in  1295,  against  the  acts  done  in  cortes,
because  neither  he  nor  the  other  prelates  had  been  admitted
to  their  discussions,  nor  given  any  consent  to  their  resolutions,
although  such  consent  was  falsely  recited  in  the  laws  enacted
therein.4  This  protestation  is  at  least  a  testimony  to  the  con¬
stitutional  rights  of  the  prelacy,  which  indeed  all  the  early
history  of  Castile,  as  well  as  the  analogy  of  other  govern¬
ments,  conspires  to  demonstrate.  In  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries,  however,  they  were  more  and  more  ex¬
cluded.  None  of  the  prelates  were  summoned  to  the  cortes
of  1299  and  1301  ;  none  either  of  the  prelates  or  nobles  to
those  of  1370  and  1373,  of  1480  and  1505.  In  all  the  latter
cases,  indeed,  such  members  of  both  orders  as  happened  to
be  present  in  the  court  attended  the  cortes  —  a  fact  which
seems  to  be  established  by  the  language  of  the  statutes.8

l  Teoria  tie  laa  Cortes,  p.  213.

*  p.  202.

»  p.  67.

*  Proteatamos  quo  deade  aqul  Tonimoa
non  fuemo*  U&mndo*  4  conaejo,  ni  4  loa
tratadns  aooro  loa  fechos  del  reyno,  ni
Bobre  lan  otraa  coana  que  hi  fueron  trac-
tadus  at  fecha*,  et  aenimla*  lament*  aohre
loa  foe  ho*  de  lot  conaejoa  de  lan  her-
nmndadea  et  de  In*  poticlonea  que  fueron
lee  1 1 an  de  au  part**,  et  aobre  Ioh  otorgn-
tnentos  que  lea  fleloron,  et  aobre  loa  pre-
Tilegioa  que  por  eata  nazon  lea  fueron
otorgados;  man  ante  fuemoa  elide  apar-

tados  et  eatrannadoa  et  aeeados  oxpreaa-
meute  non  et  loa  ofcroa  perladoa  et  ricoa
homes  et  loa  fljosdalgo ;  et  non  fue  111
coaa  fechii  con  nueatro  conaejo.  Otroal
proteatamoa  por  razon  do  aquello  que
dice  on  loa  prevllegioa  que  lea  otorgaron,
que  fueron  loa  porladoa  ll&madoe,  et  que
eran  otorgados  de  conaentimlento  et  de
Toluntad  deltas,  que  non  fuemoa  hi  pre¬
sentee  nl  Uamadoa  nln  fu£  fecho  con
nueatra  roluntad,  nln  couaentiemoa,  nin
conaentimos  en  elloa.  &c.  p.  72.

8  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  p.  74.

28

CONSTITUTION  OF  COKTES.

Chat.  IV,

Other  instances  of  a  similar  kind  may  be  adduced.  Never¬
theless,  the  more  usual  expression  in  the  preamble  of  laws
reciting  those  summoned  to  and  present  at  the  cortes,  though
subject  to  considerable  variation,  seems  to  imply  that  all  the
three  estates  were,  at  least  nominally  and  according  to  legiti¬
mate  forms,  constituent  members  of  the  national  assembly.
And  a  chronicle  mentions,  under  the  year  1406,  the  nobility
and  clergy  as  deliberating  separately,  and  with  some  ditler-
ence  of  judgment,  from  the  deputies  of  the  commons.1  A
theory,  indeed,  which  should  exclude  the  great  territorial  ar¬
istocracy  from  their  place  in  cortes,  would  expose  the  dignity
and  legislative  rights  of  that  body  to  unfavorable  inferences.
But  it  is  manifest  that  the  king  exercised  very  freely  a  pre¬
rogative  of  calling  or  omitting  persons  of  both  the  higher
orders  at  his  discretion.  The  bishops  were  numerous,  and
many  of  their  sees  not  rich ;  while  the  same  objections  of
inconvenience  applied  perhaps  to  the  ricoshombres,  but  far
more  forcibly  to  the  lower  nobility,  the  hijosdalgo  or  Caballe¬
ros.  Castile  never  adopted  the  institution  of  deputies  from
this  order,  as  in  the  States  General  of  France  ami  some  other
countries,  much  less  that  liberal  system  of  landed  representa¬
tion,  which  forms  one  of  the  most  admirable  peculiarities  in

1 1.  ii.  p.  234.  Marina  is  influenced  by  villa*  A  logarc*  de  Ion  nuestros  revnos.
a  prejudice  in  favor  of  the  al»ortive  (Ordinance*  of  Toro  in  1371.)  KsUnho
Spanish  constitution  of  1812,  which  ex-  hi  con  61  el  infante  Don  Fermndo,  &c.,  A
eluded  the  temporal  and  spiritual  aristoc-  otros  perlndos  6  conde*  6  ricos  home*  A
racy  from  ft  place  in  the  legislature,  to  otros  rahollero*  6  escudcm*.  A  los  proru-
imagine  a  similar  form  of  government  in  radon  s  de  las  cibdadcs  A  vill ««  e  logares
nncient  time*.  But  hi*  own  work  fur-  de  su*  rvynos.  (Cortes  of  1391.)  I
nishes  abundant  reasons,  if  I  am  not  tree  e-tad.*-  que  dehen  venir  ft  In*  cortes
mistaken,  to  modify  this  opinion  very  A  nyuntamiento*  segunt  so  drbe  fiicer  6  es
essentially .  A  few  out  of  many  instance*  de  bnena  rostumhre  antigun.  (Cortes
mav  1m*  adduced  from  the  enacting  worth  of  1393.)  Thin  last  passage  i*  nppnnutiy
of  statute*,  which  we  con  aider  in  England  conclusive  to  prove  that  three  estate*,
na  good  evidence*  to  establish  a  con-tit  u-  the  superior  clergy,  the  nobility,  and  the
tioual  theory.  S«*padM  que  yo  hube  coni uious.  were  essential  members  of  the
n»io  acuenlo  A  raio  consejo  con  mloe  her-  l.**gi*Uturr  in  Castile,  as  they  wen*  in
mauos  A  los  nrzobispos,  6  low  obispos,  A  France  and  England;  and  one  is  aston-
con  los  ricos  home*  de  Castella.  6  de  ished  to  rend  in  Marina  that  no  faitamn
Leon,  6  con  homes  buenos  de  Us  villas  de  A  ninguna  de  las  formalidadee  de  derseho
Castella,  A  de  Leon,  que  fueron  con migo  los  monarcas  que  no  tuvieron  por  opor*
en  \alladolit.  Sob  re  muchas  cosas,  8c  c.  tuno  llamar  A  cortes  para  seuiejunto*  artus
Alfonso  X.  In  1258.)  Maudainos  envUr  ni  al  clero  ni  A  U  nobleza  tii  A  las  p«r-
llama  por  cartas  del  rei  A  nuestras  A  lus  sonas  singula  res  de  uno  y  otro  eslado.
Infantes  6  per lai los  6  rfaos  homes  A  in-  t.  1.  p.G9.  That  great  citisen,  Jevellanns’
fa  intone*  A  caballero*  6  homes  buenos  de  appears  to  have  had  much  wiser  notions
las  rib  lades  6  de  las  villas  de  los  rev  nos  of  the  ancient  government  of  his  country,
de  Castilla  et  de  Toledo  A  de  Leon  A  tie  as  well  as  of  the  sort  of  reformation
la*  E'tramaduras,  A  de  Oallicla  A  de  las  which  she  wanted  :  as  we  may  infer  from
Asturias  A  del  Andalusia  (Writ  of  sum-  passages  in  his  Memoria  A  sus  coin  pat  rl-
nions  to  cortes  of  Burgos  in  1315.)  Con  Ota*,  Coruna,  1811,  quoted  by  Mariua  for
acuerdo  de  los  per  lad  os  A  de  los  ricos  the  purpose  of  censure,
homes  A  procured  ores  de  las  cibdades  A

Spain.

RIGHT  OF  TAXATION.

29

our  own  constitution.  It  will  be  seen  hereafter  that  spiritual
and  even  temporal  peers  were  summoned  by  our  kings  with
much  irregularity ;  and  the  disordered  state  of  Castile  through
almost  every  reign  was  likely  to  prevent  the  e>tablishment  of
any  fixed  usage  in  this  and  most  other  points.

The  primary  and  most  essential  characteristic  of  a  limited
monarchy  is  that  money  can  only  be  levied  upon  Right  of
the  people  through  the  consent  of  their  represent-  UlXiltion'
atives.  This  principle  was  thoroughly  established  in  Castile ;
and  the  statutes  which  enforce  it,  the  remonstrances  which
protest  against  its  violation,  bear  a  lively  analogy  to  corre¬
sponding  circumstances  in  the  history  of  our  constitution.
The  lands  of  the  nobility  and  clergy  were,  I  believe,  always
exempted  from  direct  taxation  —  an  immunity  which  perhaps
rendered  the  attendance  of  the  members  of  those  estates  in
the  cortes  less  regular.  The  corporate  districts  or  concejos,
which,  as  I  have  observed  already,  differed  from  the  com¬
munities  of  France  and  England  by  possessing  a  large  extent
of  territory  subordinate  to  the  principal  town,  were  bound  by
their  charter  to  a  stipulated  annual  payment,  the  price  of  their
franchises,  called  moneda  forera.1  Beyond  this  sum  nothing
could  be  demanded  without  the  consent  of  the  cortes.  Al¬
fonso  VIII.,  in  1177,  applied  for  a  subsidy  towards  carrying
on  the  siege  of  Cuenca.  Demands  of  money  do  not  however
seem  to  have  been  very  usual  before  the  prodigal  reign  of
Alfonso  X.  That  prince  and  his  immediate  successors  were
not  much  inclined  to  respect  the  rights  of  their  subjects ;  but
they  encountered  a  steady  and  insuperable  resistance.  Fer¬
dinand  IV.,  in  1307,  promises  to  raise  no  money  beyond  his
legal  and  customary  dues.  A  more  explicit  law  was  enacted
by  Alfonso  XI.  in  1328,  who  bound  himself  not  to  exact  from
his  people,  or  cause  them  to  pay  any  tax,  either  partial  or  gen¬
eral,  not  hitherto  established  by  law,  without  the  previous
grant  of  all  the  deputies  convened  to  the  cortes.2  This  aboli¬
tion  of  illegal  impositions  was  several  times  confirmed  by  the
same  prince.  The  cortes,  in  1393,  having  made  a  grant  to

1  Marina,  Ensavo  Hist.-Crit.  cap.  158;  et,  mihi  cum  bond  voluntate  vestril  fece-
Teoria  do  Uu»  Cortea,  t.  ii.  p.  387.  This  ritis,  nullum  serritium  fnciatis.
is  expressed  in  one  of  their  fueros,  or  2  Do  los  con  echnr  nin  mandar  pagar
charter*  :  Liberi  et  ingenui  semper  ma-  pecho  dcsafomdo  ninguno,  especial  niu
ncatis.  reddendo  mihi  et  successoribus  general,  en  toda  mi  tierra,  sin  scr  llama-
xneis  in  unoquoque  anno  in  die  Pente-  dos  priuiernmente  &  cortes  6  otorjfado  por
codtes  de  uuuquaque  douio  12  denarius ;  todo*  log  procurudore*  que  hi  renieren.

p.  3S8.

30

RIGHT  OF  TAXATION.

Chap.  IV

Ilenry  III.,  annexed  this  condition,  that  “since  they  had
granted  him  enough  for  his  present  necessities,  and  even  to
lay  uj)  a  part  for  a  future  exigency,  he  should  swear  before
one  of  the  archbishops  not  to  take  or  demand  any  money,
service,  oc  loan,  or  anything  else,  of  the  cities  and  towns,  nor
of  individuals  belonging  to  them,  on  any  pretence  of  necessity,
until  the  three  estates  of  the  kingdom  should  first  be  duly
summoned  and  assembled  in  cortes  according  to  ancient  usage.
And  if  any  such  letters  requiring  money  have  been  written,
that  they  shall  be  obeyed  and  not  complied  with." 1  His  son,
John  II.,  having  violated  this  constitutional  privilege  on  the
allegation  of  a  pressing  necessity,  the  cortes,  in  1420,  pre¬
sented  a  long  remonstrance,  couched  in  very  respectful  but
equally  firm  language,  wherein  they  assert  “  the  good  custom,
founded  in  reason  and  in  justice,  that  the  cities  and  towns  of
your  kingdoms  shall  not  be  compelled  to  pay  taxes  or  requi¬
sitions,  or  other  new  tribute,  unless  your  highness  order  it  by
advice  and  with  the  grant  of  the  said  cities  and  towns,  and  of
their  deputies  for  them.”  And  they  express  their  apprehen¬
sion  lest  this  right  should  be  infringed,  because,  as  they  say,
“  there  remains  no  other  privilege  or  liberty  which  can  be
profitable  to  subjects  if  this  be  shaken.”2  The  king  gave
them  as  full  satisfaction  as  they  desired  that  his  encroach¬
ment  should  not  be  drawn  into  precedent.  Some  fresh  abuses
during  the  unfortunate  reign  of  Henry  IV.  produced  another
declaration  in  equally  explicit  language,  forming  part  of  the
sentence  awarded  by  the  arbitrators  to  whom  the  differences
between  the  king  and  his  people  had  been  referred  at  Medina
del  Campo  in  1465.*  The  catholic  kings,  as  they  are  emi¬
nently  called,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  never  violated  this

1  Obedocidas  4  non  cumplida*.  Thin
expansion  occur*  frequently  in  pro-
Tin  ion*  made  against  illegal  arU  of  the
crown ;  and  U  characteriitic  of  the  singu¬
lar  respect  with  which  the  Spaniard*
always  thought  it  right  to  treat  their
sovereign,  while  they  were  resisting  the
abuses  of  his  authority.

*  La  buena  cost  timbre  4  possession
fundada  eu  rason  4  on  justicia  que  las
cibdades  4  villa*  de  ruostros  rclun*  tenia n
do  no  ser  mandado  coger  moneda*  4  pe-
didos  nin  otro  tributo  nuevo  alguno  en
los  Tuestros  re l no*  sin  que  la  ruestra  se-
fioria  lo  fagm  4  ordene  de  consejo  4  coo
otorgamiento  de  las  cibdades  e  villas  de
los  vuestros  relnoe  4  de  sus  proruradores
on  su  nombre  •  •  •  •  no  queda  otro

previlegio  ni  libortad  de  que  los  suhditos
puedaii  goxarni  aproveohar  quvbrantado
el  sobre  dlcho.  t.  ill.  p.  80.

*  Declaramos  4  ordenamoe,  que  el
dlcho  setlor  rei  nin  loe  otroe  reyes  que
despues  del  ftieren  non  echan  nin  repar¬
ian  nin  pldan  pedidos  nin  nioncla*  en  sus
reynos,  salvo  por  gran  neecsstdad,  4  *ey-
endo  pritnero  accord  ado  con  los  perlados
4  grande*  de  sus  reynos,  4  coo  los  otroe
que  4  la  sason  residierin  en  su  con*q)o,  4
eeyendo  para  ello  Hamad* mi  los  procura-
dorve  de  las  cibdades  4  villas  de  su*  rey¬
nos,  que  para  las  tales  coeas  ae  suelen  4
am*  turn  bran  llamar,  4  seyendo  per  los
die  ho*  proruradores  otorgado  el  dicho
pedimento  4  monedas.  t.  11.  p.  381.

Spain.

POWER  OF  THE  CORTES.

31

part  of  the  constitution ;  nor  did  even  Charles  I.,  although
sometimes  refused  money  by  the  cortes,  attempt  to  exact  it
without  their  consent.1  In  the  Recopilacion,  or  code  of  Cas¬
tilian  law  published  by  Philip  II.,  we  read  a  positive  declara¬
tion  against  arbitrary  imposition  of  taxes,  which  remained
unaltered  on  the  face  of  the  statute-book  till  the  present  age.2
The  law  was  indeed  frequently  broken  by  Philip  II. ;  but
the  cortes,  who  retained  throughout  the  sixteenth  century  a
degree  of  steadiness  and  courage  truly  admirable  when  we
consider  their  political  weakness,  did  not  cease  to  remonstrate
with  that  suspicious  tyrant,  and  recorded  their  unavailing
appeal  to  the  law  of  Alfonso  XI.,  “  so  ancient  and  just,  and
which  so  long  time  has  been  used  and  observed.”  8

The  free  assent  of  the  people  by  their  representatives  to
grants  of  money  was  by  no  means  a  mere  matter  of  Oontro,  of
form.  It  was  connected  with  other  essential  rights  cortes  over
indispensable  to  its  effectual  exercise ;  those  of  ex-  exPendlture-
amining  public  accounts  and  checking  the  expenditure.  The
cortes,  in  the  best  times  at  least,  were  careful  to  grant  no
money  until  they  were  assured  that  what  had  been  already
levied  on  their  constituents  had  been  properly  employed.4
They  refused  a  subsidy  in  1390  because  they  had  already
given  so  much,  and,  “  not  knowing  how  so  great  a  sum  had
been  expended,  it  would  be  a  great  dishonor  and  mischief  to
promise  any  more.”  In  1406  they  stood  out  a  long  time,  and
at  length  gave  only  half  of  what  was  demanded.6  Charles  I.
attempted  to  obtain  money  in  1527  from  the  nobility  as  well
as  commons.  But  the  former  protested  that  “  their  obligation
was  to  follow  the  king  in  war,  wherefore  to  contribute  money

1  Marina  has  published  two  letters
from  Charles  to  the  city  of  Toledo,  in
1542  and  1648,  requesting  them  to  instruct
their  deputies  to  consent  to  a  further
grant  of  money,  which  they  had  refused
to  do  without  leave  of  their  constituents,
t.  in.  p.  180. 187.

*t.  ii.  p.  393.

s  En  las  cortes  dc  ano  de  70  y  cn  las
de  76  pedimos  4  v.  in.  fuese  servide  de  no
poner  nuevos  impuestos,  rentas,  pec h os,
ni  derechos  ni  otros  trihutos  particularcs
ni  generates  sin  junta  del  reyno  en  cortes.
como  cst4  dispuesto  por  lei  del  seBor  rei
Don  Alonso,  y  se  signified  4  ▼.  m.  el  da  no
grande  que  con  las  nuevas  rentas  hahia
rescibido  el  reino,  suplicando  4  ▼.  m.
fuese  servido  de  mandarle  aliviar  y  des-
cargar,  y  que  en  lo  de  adelante  se  lea
hiciesse  m  creed  de  guard&r  las  die  has

leyea  reales,  y  que  ne  se  impusiessen
nuevas  rentas  sin  su  asisteucia ;  pues
podria  v.  m.  estar  satisfecho  de  que  el
reino  sirve  en  las  cosas  necessarias  con
toda  lealtad  y  hasta  ahora  no  se  ha  pro-
veido  lo  susodicho ;  y  el  reiuo  por  la
obligacion  que  tiene  4  pedir  4  v.  m.
guardo  la  dicha  lei,  y  que  no  solamente
han  cessado  las  necessidadcs  de  los  sub-
ditos  y  naturales  de  v.  m.  pero  antes
crecen  de  cada  dia  :  vuelvo  4  suplicar  4
v.  m.  sea  servido  concederle  lo  susodicho,
y  que  las  nuevas  rentas  pechos  y  dere¬
chos  se  quiten,  y  que  de  aqui  adelante
se  guarde  la  dicha  lei  del  sefior  rei  Don
Alonso,  como  tan  antigua  y  justa  y  que
tanto  tiernpo  se  usd  y  guardd.  p.  396*
This  petitiou  was  in  1579.

*  Marina,  t.  ii.  p.  404, 406.

*p.  409.

32

POWER  OF  TIIE  CORTES.

Chap.  IV.

was  totally  against  their  privilege,  and  for  that  reason  they
could  not  acquiesce  in  his  majesty’s  request.”  1  The  commons
also  refused  on  this  occasion.  In  1538,  on  a  similar  proposi¬
tion,  the  superior  and  lower  nobility  (los  grandes  y  Caballeros)
“  begged  with  all  humility  that  they  might  never  hear  any
more  of  that  matter.”  2

The  contributions  granted  by  eortes  were  assessed  and
collected  by  respectable  individuals  (hombres  buenos)  of  the
several  towns  and  villages.8  This  repartition ,  as  the  French
call  it,  of  direct  taxes  is  a  matter  of  the  highest  importance  in
those  countries  where  they  are  imposed  by  means  of  a  gross
assessment  on  a  district.  The  produce  was  paid  to  the  royal
council.  It  could  not  be  applied  to  any  other  purpose  than
that  to  which  the  tax  had  been  appropriated.  Thus  the  eortes
of  Segovia,  in  1407,  granted  a  subsidy  for  the  war  against
Granada,  on  condition  “  that  it  should  not  be  laid  out  on  any
other  service  except  this  war;”  which  they  requested  the
queen  and  Ferdinand,  both  regents  in  John  II.’s  minority,  to
confirm  by  oath.  Part,  however,  of  the  money  remaining
unexpended,  Ferdinand  wished  to  apply  it  to  his  own  object
of  procuring  the  crown  of  Aragon  ;  but  the  queen  first  obtained
not  only  a  release  from  her  oath  by  the  pope,  but  the  consent
of  the  eortes.  They  continued  to  insist  upon  this  appropria¬
tion,  though  ineffectually,  under  the  reign  of  Charles  I.4

The  eortes  did  not  consider  it  beyond  the  line  of  their  duty,
notwithstanding  the  respectful  manner  in  which  they  always
addressed  the  sovereign,  to  remonstrate  against  profuse  ex¬
penditure  even  in  his  own  household.  They  told  Alfonso  X.
in  1258,  in  the  homely  style  of  that  age,  that  they  thought  it
fitting  that  the  king  and  his  wife  should  eat  at  the  rate  of  a
hundred  and  fifty  maravedis  a  day,  and  no  more  ;  and  that  the
king  should  order  his  attendants  to  eat  more  moderately  than
they  diil.8  They  remonstrated  more  forcibly  again-t  the  pro¬
digality  of  John  II.  Even  in  1559  they  spoke  with  an  un¬
daunted  Castilian  .spirit  to  Philip  II. :  —  “  Sir,  the  expenses  of
your  royal  establishment  and  household  are  much  increased  ;
and  we  conceive  it  would  much  redound  to  the  good  of  these
kingdoms  tliat  your  majesty  should  direct  them  to  be  lowered,

l  Pero  que  eontribuir  A  U  gnerm  con  *  Marina,  t.  H.  p.  411.
riertii*  suinan  era  totalmentc  oput*to  A  •  Marian,  t.  U.  p.
sun  prerilegios.  A  que  no  poilrian  4  p.  41*2.
aronirrimrse  A  lo  que  s.  m.  de*caba.  —  Ip.  417.
p.  411.

Spain.

THEIR  FORMS.

33

both  as  a  relief  to  your  wants,  and  that  all  the  great  men  and
other  subjects  of  your  majesty  may  take  example  therefrom  to
restrain  the  great  disorder  and  excess  they  commit  in  that
respect.” 1

The  forms  of  a  Castilian  cortes  were  analogous  to  those  of
an  English  parliament  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Forms  of
They  were  summoned  by  a  writ  almost  exactly  co-  the  cortes-
incident  in  expression  with  that  in  use  among  us.2  The  ses¬
sion  was  opened  by  a  speech  from  the  chancellor  or  other
chief  officer  of  the  court.  The  deputies  were  invited  to  con¬
sider  certain  special  business,  and  commonly  to  grant  money.8
After  the  principal  affairs  were  despatched  they  conferred  to¬
gether,  and,  having  examined  the  instructions  of  their  re¬
spective  constituents,  drew  up  a  schedule  of  petitions.  These
were  duly  answered  one  by  one ;  and  from  the  petition  and
answer,  if  favorable,  laws  were  afterwards  drawn  up  where
the  matter  required  a  new  law,  or  promises  of  redress  were
given  if  the  petition  related  to  an  abuse  or  grievance.  In
the  struggling  condition  of  Spanish  liberty  under  Charles  I.,
the  crown  began  to  neglect  answering  the  petitions  of  cortes,
or  to  use  unsatisfactory  generalities  of  expression.  This  gave
rise  to  many  remonstrances.  The  deputies  insisted  in  1523
on  having  answers  before  they  granted  money.  They  repeat¬
ed  the  same  contention  in  1525,  and  obtained  a  general  law
inserted  in  the  Recopilacion  enacting  that  the  king  should
answer  all  their  petitions  before  he  dissolved  the  assembly.4
This,  however,  was  disregarded  as  before  ;  but  the  cortes,
whose  intrepid  honesty  under  Philip  II.  so  often  attracts  our
admiration,  continued  as  late  as  1586  to  appeal  to  the  written
statute  and  lament  its  violation.8

According  to  the  ancient  fundamental  constitution  of  Castile,
the  king  did  not  legislate  for  his  subjects  without  Right  of
their  consent.  The  code  of  the  Visigoths,  called  cortes  in
in  Spain  the  Fuero  Jusgo,  was  enacted  in  public  legIslatl0n-
councils,  as  were  also  the  laws  of  the  early  kings  of  Leon,
which  appears  by  the  reciting  words  of  their  preambles.*  This

1  8enhor,  las  gastos  de  vuestro  real  desorden  y  exccssos  qu©  hacen  en  las
estado  y  sod  muy  crescidos,  y  en-  cosns  sobredichas.  p.  437.

tcndemos  quo  convernia  inucho  al  bien  3  Marina,  t.  i.  p.  175 ;  t.  iii.  p.  103.
de  estos  reinos  que  v.  m.  los  uiaudasae  *  t.  i.  p.  278.
modern r,  asi  para  algun  remedio  de  sus  *  p.  301.
necessidade*.  como  para  que  de  r.  m.  to-  6  p.  288-304.

men  egempld  toto*  lot*  grandes  y  cabal-  ®  fc.  ii.  p.  202.  The  acts  of  the  cortes
leroa  y  otros  subditos  de  v.  in.  en  la  gran  of  Leon  in  1020  run  thus  :  Omnos  pou-

VOL.  II.  3

34

LEGISLATIVE  RIGHT

Chap.  TV.

consent  was  originally  given  only  by  the  higher  estates,  who
might  be  considered,  in  a  large  sense,  as  representing  the  na¬
tion,  though  not  chosen  by  it ;  but  from  the  end  of  the  twelfth
century  by  the  elected  deputies  of  the  commons  in  cortes.
The  laws  of  Alfonso  X.  in  1258,  those  of  the  same  prince  in
1274,  and  many  others  in  subsequent  times,  are  declared  to
be  made  with  the  consent  (con  acuerdo)  of  the  several  orders
of  the  kingdom.  More  commonly,  indeed,  the  preamble  of
Castilian  statutes  only  recites  their  advice  (consejo)  ;  but  I
do  not  know  that  any  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  this  circumstance.
The  laws  of  the  Siete  Parti  das,  compiled  by  Alfonso  X.,  did
not  obtain  any  direct  sanction  till  the  famous  cortes  of  Alcala,
in  1348,  when  they  were  confirmed  along  with  several  others,
forming  altogether  the  basis  of  the  statute-law  of  Spain.1
Whetlier  they  were  in  fact  received  before  that  time  has  been
a  matter  controverted  among  Spanish  antiquaries,  and  upon
the  question  of  their  legal  validity  at  the  time  of  their  pro¬
mulgation  depends  an  important  point  in  Castilian  history,  the
disputed  right  of  succession  between  Sancho  IV.  and  the  in¬
fants  of  la  Cerda ;  the  former  claiming  under  the  ancient
customary  law,  the  latter  under  the  new  dispositions  of  the
Siete  Partidas.  If  the  king  could  not  legally  change  the  es¬
tablished  laws  without  consent  of  his  cortes,  as  seems  most
probable,  the  right  of  representative  succession  did  not  exist
in  favor  of  his  grandchildren,  and  Sancho  I  \  •  cannot  be  con¬
sidered  as  an  usurper.

It  appears,  upon  the  whole,  to  have  been  a  constitutional
principle,  that  laws  could  neither  be  made  nor  annulled  ex¬
cept  in  cortes.  In  1506  this  is  claimed  by  the  deputies  as  an
established  right.®  John  I.  had  long  before  admitted  that
what  was  done  by  cortes  anti  general  assemblies  could  not  be
undone  by  letters  missive,  but  by  such  cortes  and  assemblies
alone.®  For  the  kings  of  Castile  had  adopted  the  English

tlflced  abbatee  et  optimate*  regnl  III*-  publication  of  three  two  *njh*.  In  the
pania*  juMu  ip-iua  regi*  talia  decreta  tic-  former  of  which  ho  contend*  for  the  pro-
crevimu*  qua*  flrmitcr  tenemntur  futuri*  viou*  authority  of  the  Slot*  I  arthla*,  aud
temporibu*.  So  thnao  of  Salamanca,  In  In  ffcTor  of  the  infinite  of  la  Cerda.

1178:  Ego  rex  Fernandu*  Inter  c®tcra  *  Lo*  rove*  eatablicieron  quo  cuando
qu®  cum  eplucopi*  ct  abbatibu*  ragnl  hubinwn  do  hater  lava*.  para  quo  fuoacn
noHtri  et  quampluriini*  alii*  relirioiia,  provochoaa*  4  *u*  ray  no*  y  cada  prorlu-
cum  comitibu*  terror um  et  prindpibua  cia*  tommu  provclda*,  llama** n  corto*
et  rectorlbu*  prorinclarum,  toto  poane  y  procurmdore*  quo  entendWen  en  alia*,
tenenda  statuimu*  apud  Salamancam.  T  por  eato  ae  oatableclo  lei  qua  no  a*
l  Enaayo  Illat-Ciit.  p  &r>3;  Taorlft  da  hlcWen  nl  renoraaen  icyaaaino  oocorte*.
la*  Cortti,  t.  11.  p  77.  Marina  **em*  to  Tooria  de  la*  Corf**,  t.  U.  p.  218.
have  changed  hi*  opinion  between  tbo  *  to  qua  e*  fee  ho  por  cortae  *  por

Spaix.

OF  THE  CORTES.

35

practice  of  dispensing  with  statutes  by  a  non  obstante  clause
in  their  grants.  But  the  cortes  remonstrated  more  steadily
against  this  abuse  than  our  own  parliament,  who  suffered  it  to
remain  in  a  certain  degree  till  the  Revolution.  It  was  sever¬
al  times  enacted  upon  their  petition,  especially  by  an  explicit
statute  of  Ilenry  II.,  that  grants  and  letters-patent  dispensing
with  statutes  should  not  be  obeyed.1  Nevertheless,  John  II.,
trusting  to  force  or  the  servility  of  the  judges,  had  the  assur¬
ance  to  dispense  explicitly  with  this  very  law.2  The  cortes  of
Valladolid,  in  1442,  obtained  fresh  promises  and  enactments
against  such  an  abuse.  Philip  I.  and  Charles  I.  began  to
legislate  without  asking  the  consent  of  cortes  ;  this  grew  much
worse  under  Philip  II.,  and  reached  its  height  under  his  suc¬
cessors,  who  entirely  abolished  all  constitutional  privileges.8
In  1555  we  find  a  petition  that  laws  made  in  cortes  should  be
revoked  nowhere  else.  The  reply  was  such  as  became  that
age :  “  To  this  we  answer,  that  we  shall  do  what  best  suits
our  government.”  But  even  in  1619,  and  still  afterwards,
the  patriot  representatives  of  Castile  continued  to  lift  an  un¬
availing  voice  against  illegal  ordinances,  though  in  the  form
of  very  humble  petition  ;  perhaps  the  latest  testimonies  to  the
expiring  liberties  of  their  country.4  The  denial  of  exclusive
legislative  authority  to  the  crown  must,  however,  be  under¬
stood  to  admit  the  legality  of  particular  ordinances  designed
to  strengthen  the  king’s  executive  government.6  These,  no
doubt,  like  the  royal  proclamations  in  England,  extended
sometimes  very  far,  and  subjected  the  people  to  a  sort  of  ar¬
bitrary  coercion  much  beyond  what  our  enlightened  notions  of
freedom  would  consider  as  reconcilable  to  it.  But  in  the
middle  ages  such  temporary  commands  and  prohibitions  were
not  reckoned  strictly  legislative,  and  passed,  perhaps  rightly,
for  inevitable  consequences  of  a  scanty  code  and  short  sessions
of  the  national  council.

The  kings  were  obliged  to  swear  to  the  observance  of  laws
enacted  in  cortes,  besides  their  general  coronation  oath  to
keep  the  laws  and  preserve  the  liberties  of  their  people.  Of
this  we  find  several  instances  from  the  middle  of  the  thir-

avuntamientos  que  non  Be  pueda  disfarer  4  Ila  suplicado  el  reino  &  t.  m.  no  w
por  la*  talee  cartas,  salvo  por  ayunta-  promulguen  nuevas  leyes.  ni  eu  todo  ni
mientos  6  cortes.  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  en  parte  las  antiguas  so  alteren,  sin  que
i  11  j>  216.  sea  por  cortes  .  ...  y  por  ser  de  tnnta

1  p.  216.  importancia  ruelve  el  reino  4  suplicarlo

9  p.  216 ;  t.  Hi.  p.  40.  humilmente  4  v.  m.  p.  220.

•  t.  ii.  p.  218.  6  p.  207.

36

RIGHTS  OF  THE  CORTES.

Chap.  TV.

teenth  century,  and  the  practice  continued  till  the  time  of
John  II.,  who,  in  1433,  on  being  requested  to  swear  to  the
laws  then  enacted,  answered  that  he  intended  to  maintain
them,  and  consequently  no  oath  was  necessary ;  an  evasion
in  which  the  cortes  seem  unaccountably  to  have  acquiesced.1
The  guardians  of  Alfonso  XI.  not  only  swore  to  observe  all
that  had  been  agreed  on  at  Burgos  in  1315,  but  consented  that,
if  any  one  of  them  did  not  keep  his  oath,  the  people  should
no  longer  be  obliged  to  regard  or  obey  him  as  regent.*

It  was  customary  to  assemble  the  cortes  of  Castile  for
other  rights  man7  purposes  besides  those  of  granting  money
of  the  8  *  and  concurring  in  legislation.  They  were  sum-
cortes.  moned  in  every  reign  to  acknowledge  and  confirm
the  succession  of  the  heir  apparent ;  and  upon  his  accession
to  swear  allegiance.3  These  acts  were,  however,  little  more
than  formal,  and  accordingly  have  been  preserved  for  the
sake  of  parade  after  all  the  real  dignity  of  the  cortes  was
annihilated.  In  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  they
claimed  and  exercised  very  ample  {towers.  They  assumed
the  right,  when  questions  of  regency  occurred,  to  limit  the
prerogative,  as  well  as  to  designate  the  persons  who  were  to
use  it/  And  the  frequent  minorities  of  Castilian  kings,
which  were  unfavorable  enough  to  tranquillity  and  subordina¬
tion,  served  to  confirm  these  parliamentary  privileges.  The
cortes  were  usually  consulted  upon  all  material  business.  A
law  of  Alfonso  XI.  in  1328,  printed  in  the  Recopilacion  or
code  published  by  Philip  II.,  declares,  “  Since  in  the  arduous
affairs  of  our  kingdom  the  counsel  of  our  natural  subjects  is
necessary,  especially  of  the  deputies  from  our  cities  and  towns,
therefore  we  ordain  and  command  that  on  such  great  occa¬
sions  the  cortes  shall  be  assembled,  and  counsel  shall  be  taken
of  the  three  estates  of  our  kingdoms,  as  the  kings  our  fore¬
fathers  have  been  used  to  do.”5  A  cortes  of  John  II.,  in
1419,  claimed  this  right  of  being  consulted  in  all  matters  of
importance,  with  a  warm  remonstrance  against  the  alleged
violation  of  so  wholesome  a  law  by  the  reigning  prince ;  who
answered,  that  in  weighty  matters  he  had  acted,  and  would
continue  to  act,  in  conformity  to  it.*  What  should  be  intend¬
ed  by  great  and  weighty  affairs  might  be  not  at  all  agreed

l  Teoria  de  laa  Cortot,  1. 1.  p.  806.
1 1.  tU.  p.  62.

•  1. 1.  p.  83;  t.  U.  p.  24.

»p  280.

*t.  I  p  81.
•p  84.

Spain.

COUNCIL  OF  CASTILE.

37

upon  by  the  two  parties ;  to  each  of  whose  interpretations
these  words  gave  pretty  full  scope.  However,  the  current
usage  of  the  monarchy  certainly  permitted  much  authority
in  public  deliberations  to  the  cortes.  Among  other  instances,
which  indeed  will  continually  be  found  in  the  common  civil
histories,  the  cortes  of  Ocana,  in  1469,  remonstrate  with  Hen¬
ry  IV.  for  allying  himself  with  England  rather  than  France,
and  give,  as  the  first  reason  of  complaint,  that,  “  according  to
the  laws  of  your  kingdom,  when  the  kings  have  anything  of
great  importance  in  hand,  they  ought  not  to  undertake  it
without  advice  and  knowledge  of  the  chief  towns  and  cities
of  your  kingdom.”  1  This  privilege  of  general  interference
was  asserted,  like  other  ancient  rights,  under  Charles,  whom
they  strongly  urged,  in  1548,  not  to  permit  his  son  Philip  to
depart  out  of  the  realm.2  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,
that,  in  such  times,  they  had  little  chance  of  being  regarded.

The  kings  of  Leon  and  Castile  acted,  during  the  interval
of  the  cortes,  by  the  advice  of  a  smaller  council,  council  of
answering,  as  it  seems,  almost  exactly  to  the  CastiIe-
king’s  ordinary  council  in  England.  In  early  ages,  before  the
introduction  of  the  commons,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  dis¬
tinguish  this  body  from  the  general  council  of  the  nation ;
being  composed,  in  fact,  of  the  same  class  of  persons,  though
in  smaller  numbers.  A  similar  difficulty  applies  to  the  Eng¬
lish  history.  The  nature  of  their  proceedings  seems  best  to
ascertain  the  distinction.  All  executive  acts,  including  those
ordinances  which  may  appear  rather  of  a  legislative  nature,
all  grants  and  charters,  are  declared  to  be  with  the  assent
of  the  court  (curia),  or  of  the  magnats  of  the  palace,  or  of
the  chiefs  or  nobles.8  This  privy  council  was  an  essential
part  of  all  European  monarchies  ;  and,  though  the  sovereign
might  be  considered  as  free  to  call  in  the  advice  of  whomso¬
ever  he  pleased,  yet,  in  fact,  the  princes  of  the  blood  and
most  powerful  nobility  had  anciently  a  constitutional  right  to
be  members  of  such  a  council,  so  that  it  formed  a  very  mate¬
rial  check  upon  his  personal  authority.

The  council  underwent  several  changes  in  progress  of  time,
which  it  is  not  necessary  to  enumerate.  It  was  justly  deemed

1  Porque,  sogunt  leyea  de  nuostroa  *  t.  ill.  p.  183.

reynoe,  cuando  los  reyea  turn  de  facer  8  Cum  iiasenau  magnatum  palatii :  Cum

algunn  coaa  de  gran  im  porta  no  in,  non  lo  consilio  curia*  men* :  Cum  conailio  et  bene-
deben  facer  ain  consejo  £  aabiduria  de  laa  placito omnium  principummeoruni.  nullo
cibdades  e  villoa  principulca  de  vueatroa  contradiccutu  nee  reclamente.  Teoria  do
reyuoa.  Teoria  de  laa  Cortes,  t.  U.  p.  241.  laa  Cortes,  t.  Ui.  p.  326.

38

ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.

Chap.  IV.

an  important  member  of  the  constitution,  and  the  cortes
showed  a  laudable  anxiety  to  procure  its  composition  in  such
a  manner  as  to  form  a  guarantee  for  the  due  execution  of
laws  after  their  own  dissolution.  Several  times,  especially  in
minorities,  they  even  named  its  members  or  a  part  of  them;
and  in  the  reigns  ot  Henry  III.  and  John  II.  they  obtained
the  privilege  of  adding  a  permanent  deputation,  consisting
of  four  persons  elected  out  of  their  own  body,  annexed  as  it
were  to  the  council,  who  were  to  continue  at  the  court  dur-
ing  the  interval  ot  cortes  and  watch  over  the  due  observance
ot  the  laws.1  lhis  deputation  continued  as  an  empty  formal¬
ity  in  the  sixteenth  century.  In  the  council  the  king  was
bound  to  sit  personally  three  days  in  the  week.  Their  ^busi¬
ness,  which  included  the  whole  executive  government,  was
distributed  with  considerable  accuracy  into  what  might  be
despatched  by  the  council  alone,  under  their  own  seals  and
signatures,  and  what  required  the  royal  seal.2  The  consent
of  this  body  was  necessary  for  almost  every  act  of  the  crown :
for  pensions  or  grants  of  money,  ecclesiastical  und  political
promotions,  and  for  charters  of  pardon,  the  easy  concession
of  which  was  a  great  encouragement  to  the  homicides  so
usual  in  those  ages,  and  was  restrained  by  some  of  our  own
laws.8  But  the  council  did  not  exercise  any  judicial  authori¬
ty,  if  we  may  believe  the  well-informed  author  from  whom  I
have  learned  these  particulars ;  unlike  in  this  to  the  ordi¬
nary  council  of  the  kings  of  England.  It  was  not  until  the
days  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  that  this,  among  other  inno¬
vations,  was  introduced.4

Civil  and  criminal  justice  was  administered,  in  the  first
AdminU-  instance,  by  the  alcaldes,  or  municipal  judges  of
justice  °f  towns>  elected  within  themselves,  originally,  by
the  community  at  large,  but,  in  subsequent  times,
by  the  governing  body.  In  other  places  a  lord  possessed  the
right  of  jurisdiction  by  grant  from  the  crown,  not,  what  we
find  in  countries  where  the  feudal  system  was  more  thorough¬
ly  established,  as  incident  to  his  own  territorial  superiority
The  kings,  however,  began  in  the  thirteenth  century  to  ap¬
point  judges  of  their  own,  called  corregidores,  a  name  which
seems  to  express  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  regidores,
or  ordinary  magistrates.4  The  cortes  frequently  remoustrat-

>  Tcnria  lie  l&a  Cortes,  t.  U.  p.  848.
«  p.  854.

*  p.  380,  382,  372.

*  *.  U.  p.  875,  879.

*  Alfnnao  X.  uii,  Nlnijun  om<  a«k  a**  lo
Ja*fir  plejtoa,  K  do  fucra  alcaUo  puuto

Spain.

ACTIONS  OF  CASTILIAN  KINGS.

30

ed  against  this  encroachment.  Alfonso  XI.  consented  to
withdraw  his  judges  from  all  corporations  by  which  he  had
not  been  requested  to  appoint  them.1  Some  attempts  to  in¬
terfere  with  the  municipal  authorities  of  Toledo  produced
serious  disturbances  under  Henry  III.  and  John  II.2  Even
where  the  king  appointed  magistrates  at  a  city’s  request,  he
was  bound  to  select  them  from  among  the  citizens.8  From
this  immediate  jurisdiction  an  appeal  lay  to  the  adelantado
or  governor  of  the  province,  and  from  thence  to  the  tribunal
of  royal  alcaldes.4  The  latter,  however,  could  not  take  cog¬
nizance  of  any  cause  depending  before  the  ordinary  judges;
a  contrast  to  the  practice  of  Aragon,  where  the  justiciary’s
right  of  evocation  (juris  firma)  was  considered  as  a  principal
safeguard  of  public  liberty.5  As  a  court  of  appeal,  the  royal
alcaldes  had  the  supreme  jurisdiction.  The  king  could  only
cause  their  sentence  to  be  revised,  but  neither  alter  nor  re¬
voke  it.8  They  have  continued  to  the  present  day  as  a  criminal
tribunal ;  but  civil  appeals  were  transferred  by  the  ordinances
of  Toro  in  1371  to  a  new  court,  styled  the  king’s  audience,
which,  though  deprived  under  Ferdinand  and  his  successors
of  part  of  its  jurisdiction,  still  remains  one  of  the  principal
judicatures  in  Castile.7

No  people  in  a  half-civilized  state  of  society  have  a  full
practical  security  against  particular  acts  of  arbi-  ]  ^  t
trary  power.  They  were  more  common  perhaps  action  of
in  Castile  than  in  any  other  European  monarchy  s')n',;
which  protessed  to  be  tree,  haws  indeed  were  not
wanting  to  protect  men’s  lives  and  liberties,  as  well  as  their
properties.  Ferdinand  IV.,  in  1299,  agreed  to  a  petition
that  “justice  shall  be  executed  impartially  according  to  law
and  right;  and  that  no  one  shall  be  put  to  death  or  imprison¬
ed,  or  deprived  of  his  possessions,  without  trial,  and  that  this
be  better  observed  than  heretofore.” 8  He  renewed  the  same
law  in  1307.  Nevertheless,  the  most  remarkable  circum¬
stance  of  this  monarch’s  history  was  a  violation  of  so  sacred

pol  el  rey.  Id.  fol.  27.  This  seems
encroachment  on  the  municipal  ll
tot  rated.

1  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  t.  ii.  p.  251.

9  p.  255.  Mariana,  1.  xx.  c.  13.

*  p.  255.

«  p.  286.
ft  p.  260.

•  p.  287,  304.

T  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  t.  ii.  p.  202-302.

The  use  of  the  present  tense,  in  this  and

many  other  passages,  will  not  confuse
the  attentive  reader.

8  Que  mandase  facer  la  justicia  en
aquellos  que  la  merecen  comunalmento
con  fuero  6  con  derecho  6  los  homes  que
non  dean  inuertos  nin  presosnin  tornados
lo  que  han  sin  ser  oidos  por  derecho  6
por  fuero  de  aquel  logar  do  acaesciere.
h  que  sea  guardado  inejor  que  se  guardo
fusta  aqui.  Marina,  £nsayo  Hist.-Critico,
p.  148

40

CONFEDERACIES  OF  NOBILITY.

Chap.  IV.

and  apparently  so  well-established  a  law.  Two  gentlemen  hav¬
ing  been  accused  of  murder,  Ferdinand,  without  waiting  for
any  process,  ordered  them  to  instant  execution.  They  sum¬
moned  him  with  their  last  words  to  appear  before  the  tribunal
ot  (_rod  in  thirty  days ;  and  his  death  within  the  time,  which
has  given  him  the  surname  of  the  Summoned,  might,  we  may
hope,  deter  succeeding  sovereigns  from  iniquity  "so  flagrant.
But  from  the  practice  of  causing  their  enemies  to  be  assas¬
sinated,  neither  Law  nor  conscience  could  withhold  them.
Alfonso  XI.  was  more  than  once  guilty  of  this  crime.  Yet
he  too  passed  an  ordinance  in  1325  that  no  warrant  should
issue  for  putting  any  one  to  death,  or  seizing  his  property,
till  he  should  be  duly  tried  by  course  of  law.  Henry  II.
repeats  the  same  law  in  very  explicit  language.1  But  the
civil  history  ol  Spain  displays  several  violations  of  it.  An
extraordinary  prerogative  of  committing  murder  appears  to
have  been  admitted  in  early  times  by  several  nations  who  did
not  acknowledge  unlimited  power  in  their  sovereign.3  Before
any  regular  j>olice  was  established,  a  powerful  criminal  might
have  been  secure  from  all  punishment,  but  for  a  notion,  as
barbarous  as  any  which  it  served  to  counteract,  that  he  could
be  lawfully  killed  by  the  personal  mandate  of  the  king.  And
the  frequent  attendance  of  sovereigns  in  their  courts  of  ju¬
dicature  might  lead  men  not  accustomed  to  consider  the
indispensable  necessity  of  legal  forms  to  confound  an  act  of
assassination  with  the  execution  of  justice.

Though  it  is  very  improbable  that  the  nobility  were  not
Confedo  considered  as  essential  members  of  the  cortes,  they
o“',uSt>fU“  c,  rl:lillly  attended  in  smaller  numbers  than  we
should  expect  to  find  from  the  great  legislative  and
ieliberative  authority  of  that  assembly.  This  arose  chiefly
from  the  lawless  spirit  of  that  martial  aristocracy  which  plac¬
ed  less  confidence  in  the  constitutional  methods  of  resisting
arbitrary  encroachment  than  in  its  own  armed  combinations.*
Such  confederacies  to  obtain  redress  of  grievances  bv  force,
of  which  there  were  five  or  six  remarkable  instances,  were
called  Herman  dad  (brotherhood  or  union),  and,  though  not

•  81  quia  hominiTn  per  Juaeiouem  regia
*el  dui-la  aui  orriderit,  non  requlratur
et,  nee  «lt  hM«u>,  quia  juaalo  dumlnl  nul
full,  et  non  potuit  rontrmdk'ere  juaeionem.
l«**ea  Hajura riorum,  Ut.  U.  in  Balua.
OnoHniufbv.

*  Teoria  de  laa  Cortea,  1. 11.  p.  Vlt>.

i  Que  non  mandnnna  malar  nln  pren-
der  nln  llalar  uin  draperhar  nln  tomnr  1
aiguno  nlnguna  roaa  do  to  auvo,  ain  aer
ante  Uamado  i  oido  t  Tenrklo'  por  fuero
d  por  derwho,  por  querella  nln  por  que-
reilaa  que  1  noa  fucaen  dadaa,  aegunt  que
e*tn  eati  ordenado  por  el  rei  dou  Alonao
iiue«iro  padre.  Teoria  de  laa  Cortea,  t.  U.
p.  287.

Spain.

CONFEDERACIES  OF  NOBILITY.

41

so  explicitly  sanctioned  as  they  were  by  the  celebrated
Privilege  of  Union  in  Aragon,  found  countenance  in  a
law  of  Alfonso  X.,  which  cannot  be  deemed  so  much  to  have
voluntarily  emanated  from  that  prince  as  to  be  a  record  of
original  rights  possessed  by  the  Castilian  nobility.  “  The
duty  of  subjects  towards  their  king,”  he  says,  “  enjoins  them
not  to  permit  him  knowingly  to  endanger  his  salvation,  nor
to  incur  dishonor  and  inconvenience  in  his  person  or  family,
nor  to  produce  mischief  to  his  kingdom.  And  this  may  be
fulfilled  in  two  ways  :  one  by  good  advice,  showing  him  the
reason  wherefore  he  ought  not  to  act  thus ;  the  other  by
deeds,  seeking  means  to  prevent  his  going  on  to  his  own
ruin,  and  putting  a  stop  to  those  who  give  him  ill  counsel :
forasmuch  as  his  errors  are  of  worse  consequence  than  those
of  other  men,  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  subjects  to  prevent
his  committing  them.1  To  this  law  the  insurgents  appealed
in  their  coalition  against  Alvaro  de  Luna ;  and  indeed  we
must  confess  that,  however  just  and  admirable  the  principles
which  it  breathes,  so  general  a  license  of  rebellion  was  not
likely  to  preserve  the  tranquillity  of  a  kingdom.  The  depu¬
ties  of  towns  in  a  cortes  of  1445  petitioned  the  king  to
declare  that  no  construction  should  be  put  on  this  law  incon¬
sistent  with  the  obedience  of  subjects  towards  their  sove¬
reign  :  a  request  to  which  of  course  he  willingly  acceded.

Castile,  it  will  be  apparent,  bore  a  closer  analogy  to  Eng¬
land  in  its  form  of  civil  polity  than  France  or  even  Aragon.
But  the  frequent  disorders  of  its  government  and  a  barbar¬
ous  state  of  manners  rendered  violations  of  law  much  more
continual  and  flagrant  than  they  were  in  England  under  the
Plantagenet  dynasty.  And  besides  these  practical  mischiefs,
there  were  two  essential  defects  in  the  constitution  of  Castile,
through  which  perhaps  it  was  ultimately  subverted.  It
wanted  those  two  brilliants  in  the  coronet  of  British  liberty,
the  representation  of  freeholders  among  the  commons,  and
trial  by  jury.  The  cortes  of  Castile  became  a  congress  of
deputies  from  a  few  cities,  public-spirited  indeed  and  intrepid,
as  we  find  them  in  bad  times,  to  an  eminent  degree,  but  too
much  limited  in  number,  and  too  unconnected  with  the  terri¬
torial  aristocracy,  to  maintain  a  just  balance  against  the
crown.  Yet,  with  every  disadvantage,  that  country  possessed
a  liberal  form  of  government,  and  was  animated  with  a  noble
spirit  for  its  defence.  Spain,  in  her  late  memorable  though
1  Eusayo  Hist.-Critico,  p.  312.

42

AFFAIRS  OF  ARAGOX.

Chap.  IV.

short  resuscitation,  might  well  have  gone  back  to  her  ancient
institutions,  and  perfected  a  scheme  of  j>olicy  which  the  great
example  ot  England  would  have  shown  to  be  well  adapted  to
the  security  of  freedom.  What  she  did,  or  rather  attempted,
instead,  I  need  not  recall.  May  her  next  effort  be  more
wisely  planned,  and  more  happily  terminated  ! 1

Though  the  kingdom  of  Aragon  was  very  inferior  in  ex-
Affaira  of  tent  to  that  of  Castile,  yet  the  advantages  of  a
Aragon.  better  form  of  government  and  wiser  sovereigns,
with  those  of  industry  and  commerce  along  a  line  of  sea-
coast,  rendered  it  almost  equal  in  imj>ortance.  Castile  rarely
intermeddled  in  the  civil  dissensions  of  Aragon  ;  the  kings  of
Aragon  frequently  carried  their  arms  into  the  heart  of  Castile.
During  the  sanguinary  outrages  of  Peter  the  Cruel,  and  the
stormy  revolutions  which  ended  in  establishing  the  house  of
Trastamare,  Aragon  was  not  indeed  at  peace,  nor  altogether
well  governed ;  but  her  political  consequence  rose  in  the
eyes  of  Europe  through  the  long  reign  of  the  ambitious  and
wily  Peter  IV.,  whose  sagacity  mid  good  fortune  redeemed,
according  to  the  common  notions  of  mankind,  the  iniquity
with  which  he  stripped  his  relation  the  king  of  Majorca  of
the  Balearic  islands,  and  the  constant  perfidiousness  of  his
character.  I  have  mentioned  in  another  place  the  Sicilian
war,  prosecuted  with  so  mueh  eagerness  for  many  years  by
Peter  III.  and  his  son  Alfonso  III.  After  this  object  was
relinquished  James  II.  undertook  an  enterprise  less  splendid,
but  not  much  less  difficult :  the  conquest  of  Sardinia.  That
island,  long  accustomed  to  independence,  cost  an  incredible
expense  of  blood  and  treasure  to  the  kings  of  Aragon  dur¬
ing  the  whole  fourteenth  century.  It  was  not  fully  subdued
till  the  commencement  of  the  next,  under  the  reign  of  Martin.

At  the  death  of  Martin  king  of  Aragon,  in  1410,  a  mem-
Deputed  orable  question  arose  as  to  the  right  of  succession.
an^r‘the°U  though  Petronilla,  daughter  of  Ramiro  II.,  had
doatb  of  reigned  in  her  own  right  from  1137  to  1172,  an
opinion  seems  to  have  gained  ground  from  the
thirteenth  century  that  femides  could  not  inherit  the  crown
ot  Aragon.  Peter  IV.  had  excited  a  civil  war  by  attempting
to  settle  the  succession  upon  his  daughter,  to  the  exclusion
of  his  next  brother.  The  birth  of  a  son  about  the  same  time
suspended  the  ultimate  decision  of  this  que-tion  ;  but  it  was
tacitly  understood  that  what  is  called  the  Salic  law  ought  to
>  The  first  edition  of  thi*  work  ni  published  in  1818.

Spain.

DISPUTED  SUCCESSION.

43

prevail.1  Accordingly,  on  the  death  of  John  I.  in  1395,  his
two  daughters  were  set  aside  in  favor  of  his  brother  Martin,
though  not  without  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  elder,  whose
husband,  the  count  of  Foix,  invaded  the  kingdom,  and  de¬
sisted  from  his  pretension  only  through  want  of  force.  Mar¬
tin’s  son,  the  king  of  Sicily,  dying  in  his  father’s  lifetime,  the
nation  was  anxious  that  the  king  should  fix  upon  his  successor,
and  would  probably  have  acquiesced  in  his  choice.  But  his
dissolution  occurring  more  rapidly  than  was  expected,  the
throne  remained  absolutely  vacant.  The  count  of  Urgel  had
obtained  a  grant  of  the  lieutenancy,  which  was  the  right  of
the  heir  apparent.  This  nobleman  possessed  an  extensive
territory  in  Catalonia,  bordering  on  the  Pyrenees.  He  was
grandson  of  James,  next  brother  to  Peter  IV.,  and,  according
to  our  rules  of  inheritance,  certainly  stood  in  the  first  place.
The  other  claimants  were  the  duke  of  Gandia,  grandson  of
James  II.,  who,  though  descended  from  a  more  distant  ances¬
tor,  set  up  a  chiim  founded  on  proximity  to  the  royal  stock,
which  in  some  countries  was  preferred  to  a  representative
title  ;  the  duke  of  Calabria,  son  of  Violante,  younger  daughter
of  John  I.  (the  countess  of  Foix  being  childless);  Frederic
count  of  Luna,  a  natural  son  of  the  younger  Martin  king  of
Sicily,  legitimated  by  the  pope,  but  with  a  reservation  ex¬
cluding  him  from  royal  succession;  and  finally,  Ferdinand,
infant  of  Castile,  son  of  the  late  king’s  sister.3  The  count  of

i  Zurita,  t.  ii.  f.  188.  It  was  pretended  that  women  were  excluded  from  the
crown  in  England  as  well  as  France :  and  this  analogy  seems  to  have  had  some  in¬
fluence  in  determining  the  Aragonese  to  adopt  a  Salic  law.

*  The  subjoined  pedigree  will  show  more  clearly  the  respective  titles  of  the  com¬
petitors  : —

James  n.  died  1327.

Alfonso  IV.  d.  1336.

D.  of  Gandia.

Peter  IV.  d.  1337.

James
C.  of  Urgel.

Eleanor  Q.  of  Castile.  John  I.  d.  1395.  Martin,  Peter

| _  I  d.  1410.  C.  of  Urgel.

Henry  III.  Ferdinand.
K.  of  Castile.

Martin

C.  of  Urgel.

|  K.  of  Sicily,  1409.

Joanna  Violante
John  IT.  Countess  Q.  of  Naples.
K.  of  Castile,  of  Foix.

Frederic
C.  of  Luna.

Louis  D.  of
Calabria.

44

DISPUTED  SUCCESSION.

Chap.  IV.

Urgel  was  favored  in  general  by  the  Catalans,  and  he  seemed
to  have  a  powerful  support  in  Antonio  de  Luna,  a  baron  of
Aragon,  so  rich  that  he  might  go  through  his  own  estate  from
France  to  Castile.  Hut  this  apparent  superiority  frustrated
his  hopes,  lhe  justiciary  and  other  leading  Aragonese  were
determined  not  to  suffer  this  great  constitutional  question  to
be  decided  by  an  appeal  to  force,  which  might  sweep  away
their  liberties  in  the  struggle.  Urge],  confident  of  his  right,
and  surrounded  by  men  of  ruined  fortunes,  was  unwilling  to
submit  his  pretensions  to  a  civil  tribunal.  Ilis  adherent,
Antonio  de  Luna,  committed  an  extraordinary  outrage,  the
assassination  of  the  archbishop  of  Saragosa,  which  alienated
the  minds  of  good  citizens  from  his  cause.  On  the  other
hand,  neither  the  duke  of  Giuidia,  who  was  very  old,1  nor  the
count  of  Luna,  seemed  fit  to  succeed.  The  party  of  Ferdi¬
nand,  therefore,  gained  ground  by  degrees.  It  was  determined
however,  to  render  a  legal  sentence.  The  cortes  of  each
nation  agreed  upon  the  nomination  of  nine  persons,  three
Aragonese,  three  Catalans,  and  three  Valencians,  who  were
to  discuss  the  pretensions  of  the  several  competitors,  and  by
a  plurality  of  six  votes  to  adjudge  the  crown.  Nothing  could
be  more  solemn,  more  peaceful,  nor,  in  appearance,  more
equitable  than  the  proceedings  of  this  tribunal.  They  sum¬
moned  the  claimants  before  them,  and  heard  them  by  counsel.
One  of  these,  Frederic  of  Luna,  being  ill  defended,  the  court
took  charge  of  his  interests,  and  named  other  advocates  to
maintain  them.  A  month  was  passed  in  hearing  arguments ;
a  second  was  allotted  to  considering  them ;  and  at  the  expira¬
tion  of  the  prescribed  time  it  was  announced  to  the  people,
by  the  mouth  of  St  Vincent  Ferrier,  that  Ferdinand  of  Cas¬
tile  had  ascended  the  throne.4

1  This  duke  of  Gandia  died  during  the
Interregnum.  HU  non,  though  not  *o
objectionable  on  the  ecore  of  age,  deemed
to  hare  a  worse  claim  j  yet  he  became  a
competitor.

*  Itiancji*  Comraentarla,  in  Schott!  Ma¬
nia  IlluMtrata,  t.  ii.  Zurita,  t.  iii.  f.
74.  Vincent  Ferrier  wan  the  meet  dln-
tinguinhed  churchman  of  hi*  time  in
Spain.  HU  influence,  a.«  one  of  the  nine
judge*,  U  «aid  to  hare  been  eery  instru¬
mental  in  procuring  the  crown  for  Ferdi¬
nand.  Fire  others  coted  the  *ame  way  ;
one  for  the  count  of  Urgel;  one  doubt¬
fully  between  the  count  of  Urgel  and
duke  of  Oaudia  ;  the  ninth  declined  to

▼ote.  Zurita,  t.  Iii .  f.  71.  It  la  curfouj
enough  that  John  king  of  Cantile  wan  al¬
together  disregarded  ;  though  hU  claim
wait  at  leant  an  plaunihle  an  that  of  hi*
uncle  Ferdinand.  Indeed,  upon  the  prin¬
ciples  of  inheritance  to  which  we  are  ac¬
customed,  Louia  duke  of  Calabria  had  a
prior  right  to  Ferdinand,  admitting  the
rule  which  It  wa*  Decennary  for  both  of
them  to  entablinh  ;  namely,  that  a  right  of
OTCfW—ion  might  be  tra  uninit  ted  through
female*,  which  female*  could  not  person¬
ally  enjoy.  ThU,  an  in  well  known,  had
been  advanced  in  the  preceding  age  by
Edward  III.  an  the  foundation  of  hi*
claim  to  the  crown  of  France.

Spain.

KINGS  OF  ARAGON.

45

In  this  decision  it  is  impossible  not  to  suspect  that  the
judges  were  swayed  rather  by  politic  considera- Decision  in
tions  than  a  strict  sense  of  hereditary  right.  It
was,  therefore,  by  no  means  universally  popular,  of  Castile,
especially  in  Catalonia,  of  which  principality  the  A-D- 1412-
count  of  Urgel  was  a  native  ;  and  perhaps  the  great  rebellion
of  the  Catalans  fifty  years  afterwards  may  be  traced  to  the
disaffection  which  this  breach,  as  they  thought,  of  the  lawful
succession  had  excited.  Ferdinand  however  was  well  received
in  Aragon.  The  cortes  generously  recommended  the  count
of  Urgel  to  his  favor,  on  account  of  the  great  expenses  he  had
incurred  in  prosecuting  his  claim.  But  Urgel  did  not  wait
the  effect  of  this  recommendation.  Unwisely  attempting  a
rebellion  with  very  inadequate  means,  he  lost  his  estates,  and
was  thrown  for  life  into  prison.  Ferdinand’s  successor  was
his  son,  Alfonso  V.,  more  distinguished  in  the  his-  Alfonso  v.
tory  of  Italy  than  of  Spain.  For  all  the  latter  A  D- 1410-
years  of  his  life  he  never  quitted  the  kingdom  that  he  had
acquired  by  his  arms ;  and,  enchanted  by  the  delicious  air  of
Naples,  intrusted  the  government  of  his  patrimonial  territories
to  the  care  of  a  brother  and  an  heir.  John  II.,  John  n.
upon  whom  they  devolved  by  the  death  of  Alfonso  1458-
without  legitimate  progeny,  had  been  engaged  during  his  youth
in  the  turbulent  revolutions  of  Castile,  as  the  head  of  a  strong
party  that  opposed  the  domination  of  Alvaro  de  Luna.  By
marriage  with  the  heiress  of  Navarre  he  was  entitled,  accord¬
ing  to  the  usage  of  those  times,  to  assume  the  title  of  king,
and  administration  of  government,  during  her  life.  But  his
ambitious  retention  of  power  still  longer  produced  events

which  are  the  chief  stain  on  his  memory.  Charles  ....

•  .  ,  .  '  r  IT  A-».  1420.

prince  of  Viana  was,  by  the  constitution  of  Na¬
varre,  entitled  to  succeed  his  mother.  She  had  requested
him  in  her  testament  not  to  assume  the  government  without
his  father’s  consent.  That  consent  was  always  ^  144-)

withheld.  The  prince  raised  what  we  ought  not
to  call  a  rebellion  ;  but  was  made  prisoner,  and  remained  for
some  time  in  captivity.  John’s  ill  disposition  towards  his  son
was  exasperated  by  a  step-mother,  who  scarcely  disguised  her
intention  of  placing  her  own  child  on  the  throne  of  Aragon
at  the  expense  of  the  eldest-born.  After  a  life  of  perpetual
oppression,  chiefly  passed  in  exile  or  captivity,  the  prince  of
Viana  died  in  Catalonia,  at  a  moment  when  that  province

4G

CONSTITUTION  OF  ARAGON.

Chap.  IV.

was  in  open  insurrection  upon  bis  account.  Though  it  hardly
a  d  1461  seems  that  the  Catalans  had  any  more  general  pro¬
vocations,  they  persevered  for  more  than  ten  years
with  inveterate  obstinacy  in  their  rebellion,  offering  the
sovereignty  first  to  a  prince  of  Portugal,  and  afterwards  to
Regnier  duke  of  Anjou,  who  was  destined  to  pass  his  life  in
unsuccessful  competition  for  kingdoms.  The  king  of  Aragon
behaved  with  great  clemency  towards  these  insurgents  on
their  final  submission.

It  is  consonant  to  the  principle  of  this  work  to  pass  lightly
over  the  common  details  of  history,  in  order  to  fix  the  reader’s
c'onstitu-  attention  more  fully  on  subjects  of  philosophical  in-
tion  of  quiry.  Perhaps  in  no  European  monarchy  except
our  own  was  the  form  of  government  more  inter¬
esting  than  in  Aragon,  as  a  fortunate  temperament  of  law
and  justice  with  the  royal  authority.  So  far  as  anything
Originally  a  0311  pronounced  of  its  earlier  period  before  the
aX'toc  Saragosa  in  1118,  it  was  a  kind  of

ans  ocnuy.  re^aj  aristocracy,  where  a  small  number  of  power¬
ful  barons  elected  their  sovereign  on  every  vacancy,  though,
as  usual  in  other  countries,  out  of  one  family ;  and  considered
him  as  little  more  than  the  chief  of  their  confederacy.1

Pr)Til  These  were  the  ricoshombres  or  barons,  the  first
of  the  ricoB-  order  of  the  state.  Among  these  the  kings  of
hombreaor  Anigon,  in  subsequent  times,  as  they  extended
their  dominions,  shared  the  conquered  territory  in
grants  of  honors  on  a  feudal  tenure.2  For  this  system  was
fully  established  in  the  kingdom  of  Aragon.  A  ricohombre,
as  we  read  in  Vitalis  bishop  of  Huesca,  about  the  middle  of
the  thirteenth  century,8  must  hold  of  the  king  an  honor  or
barony  capable  of  supporting  more  than  three  knights ;  and

1  Alfonso  HI.  complained  that  hi*  bar¬
ons  wanted  to  bring  back  old  times,
qnando  havia  en  el  reyno  tantos  reyes
como  rieoe  hombrea.  Biancas  Commen-
taria,  p.  787.  The  form  of  election  sup*
posed  to  hare  been  need  by  these  bold
barons  la  well  known.  “  We,  who  are
as  good  as  you.  choose  yon  tor  our  king
and  lord,  provided  that  you  observe  our
laws  and  privileges ;  and  if  not,  not.”
But  I  do  not  much  believe  the  authen¬
ticity  of  this  form  of  words.  See  ltob-
ertson’s  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  note  81.  It
Is.  however,  sufficiently  agreeable  to  the
Spirit  of  the  old  government.

*  Los  rieoe  hombrea,  por  loa  feu  Jos  que

tenian  del  rey,  ernn  obllgados  de  seguir
al  rey,  si  yva  en  persona  i  la  guerre,  y
residir  en  ella  tree  mesas  en  cadaun  ano.
Zurita,  t.  t.  fol  48.  (Saragosa.  1610.)  A
fief  was  usually  called  In  Aragon  an
honor,  que  en  Castilla  llama  van  tiem,  y
en  el  priucipado  de  Cataluna  feudo.  tol.
46.

*  I  do  not  know  whether  this  work  of
Vltalls  has  been  printed;  but  there  are
large  extracts  from  it  in  Blancas '*  history,
and  also  in  Du  Cange.  under  the  words
Infhneia,  Mesnadarius,  fce.  Several  ilius-
trations  of  these  military  tenures  may  be
found  In  the  Y ueros  de  Aragon,  especial.

ly  lib.  7.

Spain.

CONSTITUTION  OF  ARAGON.

47

this  he  was  bound  to  distribute  among  his  vassals  in  military
fiefs.  Once  in  the  year  he  might  be  summoned  with  his  feu-
dataries  to  serve  the  sovereign  for  two  months  (Zurita  says
three)  ;  and  he  was  to  attend  the  royal  court,  or  general
assembly,  as  a  counsellor,  whenever  called  upon,  assisting  in
its  judicial  as  well  as  deliberative  business.  In  the  towns
and  villages  of  his  barony  he  might  appoint  bailiffs  to  ad¬
minister  justice  and  receive  penalties ;  but  the  higher  crimi¬
nal  jurisdiction  seems  to  have  been  reserved  to  the  crown.
According  to  Vitalis,  the  king  could  divest  these  ricoshombres
of  their  honors  at  pleasure,  after  which  they  fell  into  the
class  of  mesnadaries,  or  mere  tenants  in  chief.  But  if  this
were  constitutional  in  the  reign  of  James  I.,  which  Blancas
denies,  it  was  not  long  permitted  by  that  high-spirited  aris¬
tocracy.  By  the  General  Privilege  or  Charter  of  Peter  III.
it  is  declared  that  no  barony  can  be  taken  away  without  a
just  cause  and  legal  sentence  of  the  justiciary  and  council
of  barons.1  And  the  same  protection  was  extended  to  the
vassals  of  the  ricoshombres.

Below  these  superior  nobles  were  the  mesnadaries,  cor¬
responding  to  our  mere  tenants  in  chief,  holding  Lower
estates  not  baronial  immediately  from  the  crown ;  nobilit7‘
and  the  military  vassals  of  the  high  nobility,  the  knights  and
infanzones ;  a  word  which  may  be  rendered  by  gentlemen.
These  had  considerable  privileges  in  that  aristocratic  govern¬
ment  ;  they  were  exempted  from  all  taxes,  they  could  only
be  tried  by  the  royal  judges  for  any  crime;  and  offences
committed  against  them  were  punished  with  addi-  Burgcsses
tional  severity.4  The  ignoble  classes  were,  as  in  and
other  countries,  the  burgesses  of  towns,  and  the  pu'‘'*antry-
villeins  or  peasantry.  The  peasantry  seem  to  have  been
subject  to  territorial  servitude,  as  in  France  and  England.
Vitalis  says  that  some  villeins  were  originally  so  unprotected
that,  as  he  expresses  it,  they  might  be  divided  into  pieces  by
sword  among  the  sons  of  their  masters,  till  they  were  pro¬
voked  to  an  insurrection,  which  ended  in  establishing  certain
stipulations,  whence  they  obtained  the  denomination  of  villeins
de  parada,  or  of  convention.®

Though  from  the  twelfth  century  the  principle  Liberties
of  hereditary  succession  to  the  throne  superseded,  Amgonese
in  Aragon  as  well  as  Castile,  the  original  right  kingdom.

>  Bianca:  Comm.  p.  730.  *  p.  732.  *  Biancao  Comm.  p.  729.

48

PRIVILEGES  OF  ARAGON.

Chap.  IV.

of  choosing  a  sovereign  within  the  royal  family,  it  was
still  founded  uj>on  one  more  sacred  and  fundamental,  that
of  compact.  No  king  of  Aragon  was  entitled  to  assume
that  name  until  he  had  taken  a  coronation  oath,  administered
by  the  justiciary  at  Saragosa,  to  observe  the  laws  and  liber¬
ties  of  the  realm.1 * *  Alfonso  III.,  in  1285,  being  in  France
at  the  time  of  his  father’s  death,  named  himself  king  in  ad¬
dressing  the  states,  who  immediately  remonstrated  on  this
premature  assumption  of  his  title,  and  obtained  an  apology.®
Thus,  too,  Martin,  having  been  called  to  the  crown  of  Ara¬
gon  by  the  cortes  in  1395,  was  specially  required  not  to
exercise  any  authority  before  his  coronation.®

Blancas  quotes  a  noble  passage  from  the  acts  of  cortes  in
1451.  ‘‘We  have  always  heard  of  old  time,  and  it  is  found
by  experience,  that,  seeing  the  great  barrenness  of  this  land,
and  the  poverty  of  the  realm,  if  it  were  not  for  the  liberties
thereof,  the  folk  would  go  hence  to  live  and  abide  in  other
realms  and  lands  more  fruitful.” 4  This  high  spirit  of  free¬
dom  had  long  animated  the  Aragonese.  After  several  con¬
tests  with  the  crown  in  the  reign  of  James  L,  not  to  go  back
General  to  ear^er  times,  they  compelled  Peter  III.  in  1283

Privilege  to  grant  a  law,  called  the  General  Privilege,  the

Magna  Charta  of  Aragon,  and  perhaps  a  more
full  and  satisfactory  basis  of  civil  liberty  than  our  own.  It
contains  a  series  of  provisions  against  arbitrary  tallages,
spoliations  of  property,  secret  process  after  the  manner
of  the  Inquisition  in  criminal  charges,  sentences  of  the
justiciary  without  assent  of  the  cortes,  appointment  of
foreigners  or  Jews  to  judicial  offices ;  trials  of  accused  per¬
sons  in  places  beyond  the  kingdom,  the  use  of  torture,

1  Zurita^  A nales  de  Aragon ,  1. 1,  fol.  104,  Aragon  wm,  in  lact,  »  poor  country,
t.  iii.  fol.  76.  barren  and  ill-peopled.  The  king*  were

*  Iliancce  Comm.  p.  661.  They  a c-  forced  to  go  to  Catalonia  for  money,  and
knowledged,  at  the  name  time,  that  he  indeed  were  little  able  to  maintain  ei*
wax  their  natural  lord,  and  entitled  to  penxire  content*.  The  war*  of  Peter  IV.
reign  a*  lawful  heir  to  hi*  father  —  so  in  Sardinia,  and  of  Alfonxo  V.  with
oddly  were  the  hereditary  and  elective  Oenoa  and  Naplee,  Impoeerixhed  their
title*  jumbled  together.  Zurita,  t.  i.  people.  A  hearth-tax  haring  been  iiu-
fol.  908.  pored  in  1401,  it  wax  found  that  there

•Zurita.  t  ii  fol.  PJI  were  42.688  bou*e*  In  Aragon,  which,

4  Slempre  havemoe  oydo  dezir  antiga-  according  to  moat  calculation*,  will  give
ment.  4  *e  troba  por  e*q»erienrla,  que  at-  low  than  810,000  inhabitant*.  In  1429,
tendida  la  grand  xterilldad  de  aquexta  a  aimllar  tax  being  laid  on.  it  la  Raid  that
tierra,  4  pobrem  de  aqueate  regno,  xi  the  number  of  houxe*  wax  diminished  in
non  fue*  por  la*  llbertade*  de  aquel,  ae  consequence  of  war.  Zurita,  t.  lli.  f<»l  1-j.
yrian  4  blrir,  y  habitar  la*  gent**  4  otro*  It  contain*  at  present  between  000, CM)
regno*,  4  tierra*  max  frutivra*.  p.  671.  and  700,000  inhabitant*.

Spain.

REVOLT  AGAINST  PETER  IV.

49

except  in  charges  of  falsifying  the  coin,  and  the  bribery
of  judges.  These  are  claimed  as  the  ancient  liberties  of
their  country.  “Absolute  power  (mero  imperio  e  mixto),
it  is  declared,  never  was  the  constitution  of  Aragon,  nor
of  Valencia,  nor  yet  of  Ribago^a,  nor  shall  there  be  in
time  to  come  any  innovation  made ;  but  only  the  law,  custom,
and  privilege  which  has  been  anciently  used  in  the  aforesaid
kingdoms.1

The  concessions  extorted  by  our  ancestors  from  John,
Henry  III.,  and  Edward  I.,  were  secured  by  the  privilege
only  guarantee  those  times  could  afford,  the  deter-  of  ,Juion-
mination  of  the  barons  to  enforce  them  by  armed  confedera¬
cies.  These,  however,  were  formed  according  to  emergencies,
and,  except  in  the  famous  commission  of  twenty-five  con¬
servators  of  Magna  Charta,  in  the  last  year  of  John,  were
certainly  unwarranted  by  law.  But  the  Aragonese  estab¬
lished  a  positive  right  of  maintaining  their  liberties  by  arms.
This  was  contained  in  the  Privilege  of  Union  granted  by
Alfonso  III.  in  1287,  after  a  violent  conflict  with  his  subjects ;
but  which  iv as  afterwards  so  completely  abolished,  and  even
eradicated  from  the  records  of  the  kingdom,  that  its  precise
words  have  never  been  recovered.2  According  to  Zurita,
it  consisted  of  two  articles:  first,  that  in  the  case  of  the
king’s  proceeding  forcibly  against  any  member  of  the  union
without  previous  sentence  of  the  justiciary,  the  rest  should
be  absolved  from  their  allegiance ;  secondly,  that  he  should
hold  cortes  everyyear  in  Saragosa.8  During  the  two  subsequent
reigns  of  James  IL  and  Alfonso  IV.  little  pretence  seems  to
have  been  given  for  the  exercise  of  this  right.  But  dissen¬
sions  breaking  out  under  Peter  IV.  in  1347,  rather  on
account  of  his  attempt  to  settle  the  crown  upon  his  daughter
than  of  any  specific  public  grievances,  the  nobles  had  recourse
to  the  Union,  that  last  voice,  says  Blancas,  of  an  Keyolt
almost  expiring  state,  full  of  weight  and  dignity,  against
to  chastise  the  presumption  of  kings.4  They  as-  1>BterI  ’

1  Fuoros  de  Aragon,  fol.  9 ;  Zurita,  t.  i.  8  Zurita,  t.  i.  fol.  322.
fol.  266.  *  Priflcam  iliam  Unionis,  quasi  mo-

8  Blancas  says  that  he  had  discovered  rientis  rei  public®  extreniam  vocem,  auc-
a  copy  of  the  Privilege  of  Union  in  the  tnritatis  et  gravitatis  plenum,  regum  in-
archives  of  the  see  of  Tarragona,  and  solentiie  apertum  vindicem  exciturunfc,
would  gladly  have  published  it,  but  for  summit  ac  singulari  bonorum  omnium
his  deference  to  the  wisdom  of  former  consensione.  p.  €09.  It  is  remarkable
nges,  which  had  studiously  endeavored  that  such  strong  language  should  have
to  destroy  all  recollection  of  that  dan-  been  tolerated  under  Philip  II.
gerous  law.  p.  602.

VOL.  IL

4

50

PRIVILEGE  OF  UNION'  ABOLISHF.D.

ClTAl'.  IV.

sembled  at  Saragosa,  and  used  a  remarkable  seal  for  all  their
public  instruments,  an  engraving  from  which  may  be  seen
in  the  historian  I  have  just  quoted.  It  represents  the  king
sitting  on  his  throne,  with  the  confederates  kneeling  in  a
suppliant  attitude  around,  to  denote  their  loyalty  and  unwil¬
lingness  to  offend.  But  in  the  background  tents  and  lines  of

spears  are  discovered,  as  a  hint  of  their  ability  and  resolution
to  defend  themselves.  The  legend  is  Sigillum  Unionis  Ara-
gonum.  This  respectful  demeanor  towards  a  sovereign
against  whom  they  were  waging  war  reminds  us  of  the
language  held  out  by  our  Long  Parliament  before  the  Pres¬
byterian  party  was  overthrown.  And  although  it  has  been
lightly  censured  as  inconsistent  and  hypocritical,  this  tone  is
the  safest  that  men  can  adopt,  who,  deeming  themselves
under  the  necessity  of  withstanding  the  reigning  monarch,
are  anxious  to  avoid  a  change  of  dynasty,  or  subversion  of
their  constitution.  These  confederates  were  defeated  by  the
king  at  Epila  in  1348.1  But  his  prudence  and  the  remaining
strength  of  his  opponents  inducing  him  to  pursue  a  moderate
course,  there  ensued  a  more  legitimate  and  permanent  balance
of  the  constitution  from  this  victory  of  the  royalists.  The
Privilege  of  Union  was  abrogated,  Peter  himself
cutting  to  pieces  with  his  sword  the  original  instru¬
ment.  But  in  return  many  excellent  laws  for  the
security  of  the  subject  were  enacted;8  and  their
preservation  was  intrusted  to  the  greatest  officer
of  the  kingdom,  the  justiciary,  whose  authority  and  pre¬
eminence  may  in  a  great  degree  be  dated  from  this  period.*
That  watchfulness  over  public  liberty,  which  originally  be¬
longed  to  the  aristocracy  of  ricosliombres,  always  apt  to
thwart  the  crown,  or  to  oppress  the  people,  and  which  was
afterwards  maintained  by  the  dangerous  Privilege  of  Union,
became  the  duty  of  a  civil  magistrate,  accustomed  to  legal
rules  and  responsible  for  his  actions,  whose  office  and  fune-

Privily

of  Union

abolished.

Other

provisions

instituted.

1  Zuritn  observe*  that  the  battle  of
Epila  was  the  last  fought  In  defence  of
public  liberty,  for  which  it  was  held  law¬
ful  of  old  to  take  up  arms,  and  resist  the
king,  by  virtue  of  the  Privilege*  of  Union.
Kor  the  authority  of  the  justiciary  bring
afterward*  established,  the  former  con¬
tention*  and  war*  came  to  an  end  ;  mean*
being  found  to  put  the  weak  on  a  level
with  the  powerful.  In  which  consist*  the
peace  and  tranquillity  of  all  atate* ;  aud

from  thence  the  name  of  Union  wa*.  by
common  consent,  proscribed,  t.  U.  fol.
22*3.  Blanca*  also  remark*  that  nothin*
could  have  turned  out  more  advantageous
to  the  Aragonese  than  their  ill  fortune  at
Epila.

*  Kuero*  de  Aragon.  IV  lis,  qua?  Do¬
minos  rex.  fol.  14,  et  alibi  passim.

*  Blanc.  Comm.  p.  071,  oil ;  Zurita.
t.  U.  fol.  22U.

Spain.

OFFICE  OF  JUSTICIARY.

51

tions  are  tlie  most  pleasing  feature  in  the  constitutional
history  of  Aragon.

The  justiza  or  justiciary  of  Aragon  has  been  treated  by
some  writers  as  a  sort  of  anomalous  magistrate,  office  of
created  originally  as  an  intermediate  power  be-  jU8ticiitry.
tween  the  king  and  people,  to  watch  over  the  exercise  of
royal  authority.  But  I  do  not  perceive  that  his  functions
were,  in  any  essential  respect,  different  from  those  of  the  chief
justice  of  England,  divided,  from  the  time  of  Edward  I.,
among  the  judges  of  the  King’s  Bench.  We  should  under¬
value  our  own  constitution  by  supposing  that  there  did  not
reside  in  that  court  as  perfect  an  authority  to  redress  the  sub¬
ject’s  injuries  as  was  possessed  by  the  Aragonese  magistrate.
In  the  practical  exercise,  indeed,  of  this  power,  there  was  an
abundant  difference.  Our  English  judges,  more  timid  and
pliant,  left  to  the  remonstrances  of  parliament  that  redress  of
grievances  which  very  frequently  lay  within  the  sphere  of
their  jurisdiction.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  recorded  instance
of  a  habeas  corpus  granted  in  any  case  of  illegal  imprison¬
ment  by  the  crown  or  its  officers  during  the  continuance  of
the  Plantagenet  dynasty.  We  shall  speedily  take  notice  of  a
very  different  conduct  in  Aragon.

The  office  of  justiciary,  whatever  conjectural  antiquity
some  have  assigned  to  it,  is  not  to  be  traced  beyond  the  cap¬
ture  of  Saragosa  in  1118,  when  the  series  of  magistrates
commences.1  But  for  a  great  length  of  time  they  do  not  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  particularly  important ;  the  judicial  author¬
ity  residing  in  the  council  of  ricoshombres,  whose  suffrages
the  justiciary  collected,  in  order  to  pronounce  their  sentence
rather  than  his  own.  A  passage  in  Yitalis  bishop  of  Huesca,
whom  I  have  already  mentioned,  shows  this  to  have  been  the
practice  during  the  reign  of  James  I.2  Gradually,  as  notions
of  liberty  became  more  definite,  and  laws  more  numerous,  the
reverence  paid  to  their  permanent  interpreter  grew  stronger,
and  there  was  fortunately  a  succession  of  prudent  and  just
men  in  that  high  office,  through  whom  it  acquired  dignity  and
stable  influence.  Soon  after  the  accession  of  James  II.,  on

i  Bianca*  Comment,  p.  638.  ing  of  Yitalls,  his  testimony  seems  to  be

*  Id.  p.  77*2.  Zurita  indeed  refers  the  beyond  dispute.  By  the  General  Privi-
justiciary’s  preeminence  to  an  earlier  lege  of  1283,  the  justiciary  was  to  advise
date,  namely,  the  reign  of  Peter  II.,  who  with  the  ricoshombres,  in  all  cases  where
took  away  a  great  part  of  the  local  juris-  the  king  was  a  party  against  any  of  his
dictions  of  the  ricoshombres.  t.  i.  (bl.  102.  subjects.  Zurita,  f.  281.  See  also  f.
But  if  I  do  not  misunderstand  the  mean*  180.

52

PROCESSES  OF

Chap.  IV.

some  dissensions  arising  between  the  king  and  his  barons,  he
called  in  the  justiciary  as  a  mediator  whose  sentence,  says
Blancas,  all  obeyed.1  At  a  subsequent  time  in  the  same
reign  the  military  orders,  pretending  that  some  of  their  privi¬
leges  were  violated,  raised  a  confederacy  or  union  against  the
king.  James  otfered  to  refer  the  dispute  to  the  justiciary,
Ximenes  Salanova,  a  man  of  eminent  legal  knowledge-  The
knights  resisted  his  jurisdiction,  alleging  the  question  to  be  of
spiritual  cognizance.  He  decided  it,  however,  against  them
in  lull  cortes  at  Saragosa,  annulled  their  league,  and  sen¬
tenced  the  leaders  to  punishment.4  It  was  adjudged  also  that
no  appeal  could  lie  to  the  spiritual  court  from  a  sentence  of
the  justiciary  passed  with  assent  of  the  cortes.  James  II.  is
said  to  have  frequently  sued  his  subjects  in  the  justiciary’s
court,  to  show  his  regard  for  legal  measures ;  and  during  the
reign  of  this  good  prince  its  authority  became  more  established.*
Yet  it  was  not  perhaps  looked  upon  as  fully  equal  to  maintain
public  liberty  against  the  crown,  till  in  the  cortes  of  1 348,
after  the  Privilege  of  Union  was  forever  abolished,  such  laws
were  enacted,  and  such  authority  given  to  the  justiciary,  as
proved  eventually  a  more  adequate  barrier  against  oppression
than  any  other  country  could  boast.  All  the  royal  as  well
as  territorial  judges  were  bound  to  apply  for  his  opinion  in
case  of  legal  dilhculties  arising  in  their  courts,  which  he  was
to  certify  within  eight  days.  By  subsequent  statutes  of  the
same  reign  it  was  made  penal  for  any  one  to  obtain  letters
from  the  king,  impeding  the  execution  of  the  justiza’s  process,
and  they  were  declared  null.  Inferior  courts  were  lorbid-
den  to  proceed  in  any  business  after  his  prohibition.*  Many
other  laws  might  be  cited,  corroborating  the  authority  of  this
great  magistrate;  but  there  are  two  parts  of  his  remedial  ju¬
risdiction  which  deserve  special  notice.

ProcewM  or  These  are  the  processes  of  jurisfirma,  or  finna  del
an.i'ma'iii-1*  derecho,  and  of  manifestation.  The  former  bears
faution.  some  analogy  to  the  writs  of  pone  and  certiorari

1  Zurita,  p.  663.  surname  of  Just,  el  Justiciero,  by  his  fWir

*  Zurita.  t.  1.  f.  4^3;  t.  II.  f.  34;  Blau,  dealings  towards  his  subject*.  Zurita,
p.  OW.  The  assent  of  the  cortee  seems  t.  U.  fol.  82.  Kl  Justiciero  properly  tie-
to  render  this  in  the  nature  of  a  legis-  notes  his  exercise  of  deli  and  criminal
latlre,  rather  than  a  judicial  proceeding ;  Justice.

but  it  is  diflicult  to  pronounce  anything  «  Kueros  de  Aragon  :  Quod  in  dubiis
about  a  transaction  so  remote  in  time,  non  crmssli.  (a  d  1348.)  Quod  im petra na
and  in  a  foreign  country,  the  native  hie-  (1372),  he.  Zurita,  t.  U.  fol  22^.  Blanc
torts  ns  writing  rather  concisely.  p.  671  and  811.

Biaac.  p.  668.  James  acquired  the

Spain.

JURISFIRMA  AND  MANIFESTATION

53

in  England,  through  which  the  Court  of  King’s  Bench  exer¬
cises  its  right  of  withdrawing  a  suit  from  the  jurisdiction
of  inferior  tribunals.  But  the  Aragonese  jurisfirma  was  of
more  extensive  operation.  Its  object  was  not  only  to  bring
a  cause  commenced  in  an  inferior  court  before  the  jus¬
ticiary,  but  to  prevent  or  inhibit  any  process  from  issuing
against  the  person  who  applied  for  its  benefit,  or  any  mo¬
lestation  from  being  offered  to  him ;  so  that,  as  Blancas  ex¬
presses  it,  when  we  have  entered  into  a  recognizance  (firme
et  graviter  asseveremus)  before  the  justiciary  of  Aragon  to
abide  the  decision  of  law,  our  fortunes  shall  be  protected,
by  the  interposition  of  his  prohibition,  from  the  intolerable
iniquity  of  the  royal  judges.1  The  process  termed  manifesta¬
tion  afforded  as  ample  security  for  personal  liberty  as  that  of
jurisfirma  did  for  property.  “To  manifest  any  one,”  says
the  writer  so  often  quoted,  “  is  to  wrest  him  from  the  hands
of  the  royal  officers,  that  he  may  not  suffer  any  illegal  vio¬
lence  ;  not  that  he  is  at  liberty  by  this  process,  because  the
merits  of  his  case  are  still  to  be  inquired  into ;  but  because  he
is  now  detained  publicly,  instead  of  being  as  it  were  con¬
cealed,  and  the  charge  against  him  is  investigated,  not  sud¬
denly  or  with  passion,  but  in  calmness  and  according  to  law,
therefore  this  is  called  manifestation.”  2  The  power  of  this

1  p.  751.  Fueros  de  Aragon,  f.  137.

*  Est  apud  nos  manifestare,  reum
suhito  sunn-re.  atque  e  regiis  manibus
extorquere,  no  qua  ipsi  contra  jus  vis  in-
fer&tur.  Non  quod  tunc  reus  judicio
liberetur ;  nihilominus  tamcn,  ut  loqui-
mur,  de  mentis  causie  ad  plenum  cog.
noscitur.  Bed  quod  deinceps  manifesto
teneatur.  quasi  antea  celatus  extitisset ;
nocesseque  deinde  sit  de  ipsius  culpft,
non  iuipetu  et  cum  furore,  sed  solatia
prorsus  animis,  et  juxta  constitutor  leges
judicari.  Ex  eo  autem,  quod  hujusmodi
judicium  manifesto  deprehensum.  omni¬
bus  jam  patere  debeat.  Manifestatiouis
sibi  nomen  arripuit.  p.  675.

Ipsi  us  Manifestation!*  potestas  tam
soli  da  est  et  repentina,  ut  liomini  jam
collum  in  laqueuin  insereiiti  subveniat.
Illius  enim  presidio,  d  unnatus.  dum  j»er
leges  licet,  quasi  experiendi  juris  gratis,
de  manibus  judicum  confestim  extor-
quetur,  et  in  carcerem  duciturad  id  aedi-
ticatum,  ibidemque  asservatur  timdiu,
quaindiu  jurene.  an  injuril,  quid  in  e£
caus4  (actum  fuerit,  judicatur.  Prop-
tcrea  career  hie  vulgari  lingui,  la  carcel
de  los  manifesLvlos  uuncupatur.  p.  751.

Fueros  de  Aragon,  fol.  60.  De  Mani¬

festo  t  ion  ib  us  personarum.  Independently
of  this  right  of  manifestation  by  writ  of
the  justiciary,  there  are  several  statutes
iu  the  Fueros  against  illegal  detention,  or
unnecessary  severity  towards  prisoners
(De  Custodia  reorum,  f.  163.)  No  judge
could  proceed  secretly  in  a  criminal  pro¬
cess  ;  an  indispensable  safeguard  to  pub¬
lic  liberty,  and  one  of  the  most  salutary,
as  well  as  most  ancient,  provisions  in  our
own  constitution.  (De  judie.iis.)  Tor¬
ture  was  abolished,  except  in  cases  of
coining  false  money,  and  then  only  in
respect  of  vagabonds.  (General  Privi¬
lege  of  1283.)

Zurita  has  explained  the  two  processes
of  jurisfirma  and  manifestation  so  per¬
spicuously,  that,  as  the  subject  is  very
iuteresting.and  rather  out  of  the  common
way,  I  shall  both  quote  and  translate  the
passage.  Con  firuiar  de  derecho,  que  es
dar  caution  4  estar  4  justiciu,  se  consedeu
literas  inhibitoriaa  por  el  justicia  de
Aragon,  para  que  no  puedan  sur  presog,
ni  privados,  ni  despojados  de  su  posses¬
sion,  hasta  que  judicialmente  sc  conozca,
y  declare  sobre  la  pretension,  y  justicia  de
las  partes,  y  parezea  por  processo  Icgiriino,
que  6e  deve  revocar  la  tal  inliibitiou.

54

PROCESSES  OF

Chap.  IV.

writ  (if  I  may  apply  our  term)  was  such,  as  he  elsewhere  as¬
serts,  that  it  would  rescue  a  man  whose  neck  was  in  the  hal¬
ter.  A  particular  prison  was  allotted  to  those  detained  for
trial  under  this  process.

Several  proofs  that  such  admirable  provisions  did  not  re¬
instates  main  a  dead  letter  in  the  law  of  Aragon  appear
of  their  in  the  two  historians,  Blancas  and  Zurila,  whose

application.  110jjje  attachment  to  liberties,  of  which  they  had
either  witnessed  or  might  foretell  the  extinction,  continually
displays  itself.  I  cannot  help  illustrating  this  subject  by  two
remarkable  instances.  The  heir  apparent  of  the  kingdom  of
Aragon  had  a  constitutional  right  to  the  lieutenancy  or  re¬
gency  during  the  sovereign’s  absence  from  the  realm.  The
title  and  oilice  indeed  were  permanent,  though  the  functions
must  of  course  have  been  superseded  during  the  personal  ex¬
ercise  of  royal  authority.  But  as  neither  Catalonia  nor  Va¬
lencia,  which  often  demanded  the  king’s  presence,  w  ere  con¬
sidered  as  parts  of  the  kingdom,  there  were  pretty  frequent
occasions  for  this  anticipated  reign  of  the  eldest  prince.
Such  a  regulation  was  not  likely  to  diminish  the  mutual  and
almost  inevitable  jealousies  between  kings  and  their  heirs
apparent,  which  have  so  often  disturbed  the  tranquillity  of  a
court  and  a  nation.  Peter  IV.  removed  his  eldest  son,  after¬
wards  John  L,  from  the  lieutenancy  of  the  kingdom.  The

Estafat  la  supremay  principal  autoridad
del  Justiria  do  Aragond  e*de  quo  este
magistrado  tuvo  origen,  y  lo  que  llama
manifestation ;  porque  ansi  como  la  Anna
de  derecho  por  privilegio  general  del
reyno  impide,  quo  no  puode  ninguno  per
preso,  6  agraviado  contra  razon  y  jus-
tioia,  de  la  ini-ma  mnnera  la  manifesta-
cion.  quo  otro  privilegio,  y  retnedia
muy  principal,  tiene  fuerca,  quaudo  al-
guno  ea  preso  sin  p recede r  proceeso  le-
gitimo,  &  quaudo  lo  prenden  do  hocho  ain
y  en  eatoa  caaoa  solo
©1  Juaticia  de  Arngon,  quando  ae  tiene
recurao  al  el,  »e  interpone,  manifests ndo
U  preao,  quo  os  tomarlo  4  au  niano,  de
poder  de  qualquiera  joes,  aunque  aoa  el
in.i>  s  u  promo ;  yea  obiigudo  el  Juaticia
de  Aragon,  y  aua  lugarteniente*  de  pro-
Toor  la  manifeatariou  en  el  miamo  in-
ataute,  aue  lea  es  pedida  aiu  preceder
inforniarlon  ;  y  basta  que  ae  pida  por
qualuuiere  persona  que  ae  diga  procura¬
tor  del  que  qulere  que  lo  teugan  por
manifesto,  t.  ii.  fol.  386.  “  Upon  a

Arina  de  derecho,  which  is  to  give  se¬
curity  for  abiding  the  decision  of  the  law,
the  Justiciary  of  Aragon  issues  letters

inhibiting  all  persons  to  arrest  the  party,
or  deprive  him  of  his  possession,  until
the  matter  shall  be  judicially  Inquired
into,  and  it  shall  appear  that  such  inhi¬
bition  ought  to  be  revoked.  This  pro¬
cess  und  that  which  is  called  manifesta¬
tion  have  been  the  chief  powers  of  the
justiciary,  ever  since  the  commencement
of  that  magistracy.  And  as  the  Anna  de
derecho  by  the  general  privilege  of  the
realm  secures  every  man  from  being  ar¬
rested  or  molested  against  reason  and
justice,  so  the  manifestation,  which  is
another  principal  and  remedial  right
takes  place  when  any  one  is  actually  ar¬
rested  without  lawful  process  :  and  io
such  cases  only  the  Justiciary  of  Aragon,
when  recourse  is  had  to  him.  interpose*
by  man i fitting  the  person  arrested,  th.it
is,  by  taking  him  Into  his  own  hands,  out
of  the  power  of  any  judge,  however  high
In  authority  ;  and  this  manifestation  the
justiciary,  or  his  deputies  in  his  absence,
are  bound  to  Issue  at  the  same  instant  if
Is  demanded,  without  further  inquiry;
and  It  may  be  demanded  by  any  one  as
attorney  of  the  party  requiring  to  be
manifested."

Spain.

JUKISITRMA  AND  MANIFESTATION.

55

prince  entered  into  a  firma  del  derecho  before  the  justiciary,
Dominic  de  Cerda,  who,  pronouncing  in  his  favor,  enjoined
the  king  to  replace  his  son  in  the  lieutenancy  as  the  undoubt¬
ed  right  of  the  eldest  born.  Peter  obeyed,  not  only  in  tact,
to  which,  as  Blancas  observes,  the  law  compelled  him,  but
with  apparent  cheerfulness.1  There  are  indeed  no  private
persons  who  have  so  strong  an  interest  in  maintaining  a  free
constitution  and  the  civil  liberties  of  their  countrymen  as  the
members  of  royal  families,  since  none  are  so  much  exposed,
hi  absolute  governments,  to  the  resentment  and  suspicion  of
a  reigning  monarch.

John  I.,  who  had  experienced  the  protection  of  law  in  his
weakness,  had  afterwards  occasion  to  find  it  interposed  against
his  power.  This  king  had  sent  some  citizens  of  Saragosa  to
prison  without  form  of  law.  They  applied  to  Juan  de  Cerda,
the  justiciai'y,  for  a  manifestation.  He  issued  his  writ  ac¬
cordingly  ;  nor,  says  Blancas,  could  he  do  otherwise  without
being  subject  to  a  heavy  fine.  The  king,  pretending  that  the
justiciary  was  partial,  named  one  of  his  own  judges,  the
vice-chancellor,  as  coadjutor.  This  raised  a  constitutional
question,  whether,  on  suspicion  of  partiality,  a  coadjutor  to
the  justiciary  could  be  appointed.  The  king  sent  a  private
order  to  the  justiciary  not  to  proceed  to  sentence  upon  this
interlocutory  point  until  he  should  receive  instructions  in  the
council,  to  which  he  was  directed  to  repair.  But  he  instantly
pronounced  sentence  in  favor  of  his  exclusive  jurisdiction
without  a  coadjutor.  He  then  repaired  to  the  palace.  Here
the  vice-chancellor,  in  a  long  harangue,  enjoined  him  to  sus¬
pend  sentence  till  he  had  heard  the  decision  of  the  council.
Juan  de  Cerda  answered  that,  the  case  being  clear,  he  had
already  pronounced  upon  it.  This  produced  some  expres¬
sions  of  anger  from  the  king,  who  began  to  enter  into  an  ar¬
gument  on  the  merits  of  the  question.  But  the  justiciary
answered  that,  with  all  deference  to  his  majesty,  he  was  bound
to  defend  his  conduct  before  the  cortes,  and  not  elsewhere.
On  a  subsequent  day  the  king,  having  drawn  the  justiciary  to
his  country  palace  on  pretence  of  hunting,  renewed  the  con¬
versation  with  the  assistance  of  his  ally  the  vice-chancellor ;
but  no  impression  was  made  on  the  venerable  magistrate,
whom  John  at  length,  though  much  pressed  by  his  advisers
to  violent  courses,  dismissed  with  civility.  The  king  was

1  Zurita,  ubi  supra.  Blancas,  p.  673.

56

RESPONSIBILITY  OF  JUSTICIARY.

Chap.  IV.

probably  misled  throughout  this  transaction,  which  I  have
thought  fit  to  draw  from  obscurity,  not  only  in  order  to  il¬
lustrate  the  privilege  of  manifestation,  but  as  exhibiting  an
instance  of  judicial  firmness  and  integrity,  to  which,  in  the
fourteenth  century,  no  country  perhaps  in  Europe  could  offer
a  parallel.1 * *

Before  the  cortes  of  1348  it  seems  as  if  the  justiciary
Office  of  might  have  been  displaced  at  the  king’s  pleasure.

ieidfor'ufe  .^rom  t,lut  ti,ne  lie  ,lelJ  his  station  for  life.  But
in  order  to  evade  this  law,  the  king  sometimes  ex¬
acted  a  promise  to  resign  upon  request.  Xinienes  Cerdan,
the  justiciary  in  1420,  having  refused  to  fulfil  this  engage¬
ment,  Alfonso  V.  gave  notice  to  all  his  subjects  not  to°obey
him,  and,  notwithstanding  the  alarm  which  this  encroachment
created,  eventually  succeeded  in  compelling  him  to  quit  his
office.  In  1439  Alfonso  insisted  with  still  greater  severity
iqton  the  execution  of  a  promise  to  resign  made  by  another
justiciary,  detaining  him  in  prison  until  his  death.  But  the
cortes  of  1442  proposed  a  law,  to  which  the  king  reluctantly
acceded,  that  the  justiciary  should  not  be  compellable  to  re¬
sign  his  office  on  account  of  any  previous  engagement  he
might  have  made.4

But  lest  these  high  powers,  imparted  for  the  prevention
Rcponot-  ot  abuses,  should  themselves  be  abused,  the  justi-
biiity  of  this  ciary  was  resi>onsible,  in  case  of  an  unjust  sen-
ma^trutc.  tence>t0  t|ie  extent  Qf  tjie  injury  inflicted;*  and

was  also  subjected,  by  a  statute  of  1390,  to  a  court  of  inqui¬
ry,  composed  of  four  persons  chosen  by  the  king  out  of  eight
named  by  the  cortes ;  whose  office  appears  to  have  been  that
of  examining  and  reporting  to  the  tour  estates  in  cortes,  by
whom  he  was  ultimately  to  be  acquitted  or  condemned.  This
superintendence  of  the  cortes,  however,  being  thought  dilato¬
ry  and  inconvenient,  a  court  of  seventeen  persons  was  ap¬
pointed  in  1461  to  hear  complaints  against  the  justiciary.
Some  alterations  were  afterwards  made  in  this  tribunal.4
The  justiciary  was  always  a  knight,  chosen  from  the  second

1  Bianca*  Oommentar.  ubi  «upr».  Zu-
rita  relate*  tile  utory,  but  not  no  fully.

5  Fuero*  de  Aragon,  fol.  22;  Zurita,  t.
Hi.  fol.  140,  256,  272  ;  Blanc.  Comment,
p.  701.

*  Fuero*  de  Aragon,  fol.  25.

4  Blanca* ;  Zurita.  t.  Ui.  fol.  321 ;  t.  It.
t  108.  Those  regulation*  were  Tory  ac¬
ceptable  to  the  nation.  In  fact,  the' ju*.

tl*n  of  Aragon  had  poor***,]  much  more
unlimited  power*  than  ought  to  oe  in¬
tro,  ted  to  any  *ingle  magi.trete.  The
Court  of  Kiug'*  Bench  In  Kngland.  be¬
tide*  lu  co tub. ting  of  four  cirdlnate
judge*,  i*  checked  by  Uie  appellant  jurl*-
dirtion*  of  the  Kxcher)Uer  Chamber  and
House  of  lcpb,  and  *1111  more  irnpor-
tanUy  by  the  right*  of  juries.

Spaix.

RIGHTS  OF  LEGISLATION,  ETC.

57

order  of  nobility,  the  barons  not  being  liable  to  personal  pun¬
ishment.  He  administered  the  coronation  oath  to  the  king  ;
and  in  the  cortes  of  Aragon  the  justiciary  acted  as  a  sort  of
royal  commissioner,  opening  or  proroguing  the  assembly  by
the  king’s  direction.

No  laws  could  be  enacted  or  repealed,  nor  any  tax  impos¬
ed,  without  the  consent  of  the  estates  duly  assem-  lights  of
bled.1  Even  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Peter  II.,  in  ^fjslation
1205,  that  prince  having  attempted  to  impose  a  taxation,
general  tallage,  the  nobility  and  commons  united  for  the  pres¬
ervation  of  their  franchises ;  and  the  tax  was  afterwards
granted  in  part  by  the  cortes.2  It  may  easily  be  supposed
that  the  Aragonese  were  not  behind  other  nations  in  statutes
to  secure  these  privileges,  which  upon  the  whole  appear  to
have  been  more  respected  than  in  any  other  monarchy.8
The  general  privilege  of  1283  formed  a  sort  of  groundwork
for  this  legislation,  like  the  Great  Charter  in  England.  By
a  clause  in  this  law,  cortes  were  to  be  held  every  year  at
Saragosa.  But  under  James  II.  their  time  of  meeting  was
reduced  to  once  in  two  years,  and  the  place  was  left  to  the
king’s  discretion.4  Nor  were  the  cortes  of  Aragon  less  vigi¬
lant  than  those  of  Castile  in  claiming  a  right  to  be  consulted
in  all  important  deliberations  of  the  executive  power,  or  in
remonstrating  against  abuses  of  government,  or  in  superin¬
tending  the  proper  expenditure  of  public  money.6  A  vari-

'Majorca'  nosfcri,  qua  da  omnibus
etatuemla  esseut,  noluerunt  juberi.  veta-
rive  posse,  nisi  vocntis,  descriptisque
ordinihus,  ac  cunctia  eoruni  adhibitis
sutfrngiis.  re  ipsA  cognitA  et  promulgate.
Unde  perpetuum  illud  nobis  comparatum
est  jus,  ut  communes  et  public*©  leges
neque  tolli,  neque  rogari  possint,  nisi
prius  uni  versus  populus  una  voce  comitiis
institutis  suum  eA  de  re  liberum  sufTra-
giurn  ferat;  idque  postea  ipsius  regis
asscnsu  comprobetur.  Biancse,  p.  761.

*  Zurita,  t.  i.  fob  92.

*  Fueros  de  Aragon :  Quod  sissro  in
AragoniA  removeantur.  ( a.i>.  1372.)  De
prohibition©  staaarum.  (139H.)  De  con¬
servation©  patrimonii.  (1461.)  I  have
only  remarked  two  instances  of  arbitrary
taxation  in  Zurita's  history,  which  is
singularly  full  of  information  ;  one,  in
1343,  when  Peter  IV.  collected  money
from  various  cities,  though  not  without
opposition;  and  the  other  a  remonstrance
of  the  cortes  in  1383  against  heavy  taxes ;
and  it  is  not  clear  Hint  this  refers  to
general  unauthorized  taxation.  Zurita,

t.  ii.  f.  168  and  382.  Blancas  montions
that  Alfonso  V.  set  a  tailing©  upon  his
towns  for  the  marriage  of  his  natural
daughters,  which  he  might  have  done
had  they  been  legitimate;  but  they  ap¬
pealed  to  the  justiciary’s  tribunal,  and
the  king  receded  from  his  demand,  p.  701.

Some  instances  of  tyrannical  conduct
in  violation  of  the  constitutional  laws
occur,  as  will  naturally  be  supposed,  in
the  annals  of  Zurita.  The  execution  of
Bernard  Cabrera  under  Peter  IV.,  t.  ii.
f.  336,  and  the  severities  inflicted  on
qneen  Forcia  by  her  son-in-law  John  I.,
f.  391,  are  perhaps  as  remarkuble  as  any.

*  Zurita.  t.  i.  f.  426.  In  general  the
session  busted  from  four  to  six  months.
One  assembly  was  prorogued  from  time
to  time,  and  continued  six  years,  from
1446  to  1452,  which  was  complained  of  as
a  violation  of  the  law  for  their  biennial
renewal,  t.  iv.  f.  6.

5  The  Sicilian  war  of  Peter  III.  waa
very  unpopular,  because  it  had  been  un¬
dertaken  without  consent  of  the  barons,
contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  kingdom  ;

53

CORTES  OF  ARAGON.

Chap.  IV.

ety  of  provisions,  intended  to  secure  these  parliamentary
privileges  and  the  civil  liberties  of  the  subject,  will  be  found
dispersed  in  the  collection  of  Aragonese  laws, 1  which
may  be  favorably  compared  with  those  of  our  own  statute-
book.

Four  estates,  or,  as  they  were  called,  arms  (brazos),  form-
Cortes  of  ed  the  cortes  of  Aragon  —  the  prelates  and  corn-
Arugoii.  manders  of  military  orders,  who  passed  for  eccle¬

siastics  ; 2  the  barons  or  ricoshombres ;  the  equestrian  order
or  infanzones,  and  the  deputies  of  royal  towns.*  The  two
former  had  a  right  of  appearing  by  proxy.  There  was  no
representation  of  the  infanzones,  or  lower  nobility.  But  it
must  be  remembered  that  they  were  not  numerous,  nor  was
the  kingdom  large.  Thirty-five  are  reckoned  by  Zurita  as
present  in  the  cortes  of  1395,  and  thirty-three  in  those  of
1412 ;  and  as  upon  both  occasions  an  oath  of  fealty  to  a  new
monarch  was  to  be  taken,  I  presume  that  nearly  all  the  no¬
bility  of  the  kingdom  were  present.4  The  ricoshombres  do
not  seem  to  have  exceeded  twelve  or  fourteen  in  number.
The  ecclesiastical  estate  was  not  much,  if  at  all,  more  numer¬
ous.  A  few  principal  towns  alone  sent  deputies  to  the  cortes;
but  their  representation  was  very  full;  eight  or  ten,  and
sometimes  more,  sat  for  Saragosa,  and  no  town  appears  to
have  had  less  than  four  representatives.  During  the  interval
of  the  cortes  a  permanent  commission,  varying  a  good  deal
as  to  numbers,  but  chosen  out  of  the  four  estates,  was  em¬
powered  to  »it  with  very  considerable  authority,  receiving

porque  ningun  negocio  arduo  ©mpren-
tlian,  rin  aruerdo  y  consejo  *u*  ricos-
h  ombre*.  Zurita,  t.  i.  fol.  2*54.  The
eorU»*,  he  telle  u*.  were  usually  divi .led
Into  two  parti©*,  whig*  and  tori©*  ;  estara
ordinariament©  diridUla  ©n  do*  parta*.  la
una  que  pcosara  procurar  ©1  beneflcio
del  rev  no,  y  la  otra  que  el  serricio  del
rey.  t.  iii.  fol.  321.

1  Fuero*  y  olwerrancias  del  revno  da
Aragon.  2  rol*.  in  fol.  Saragoaa'.  1*567.
The  uio*t  important  of  these  are  collected
by  Blanca*,  p.  750.

*  It  l*  aaid  by  Mine  writer*  that  the
ecclesiastical  arm  »ai  not  added  to  the
cortes  of  Aragon  till  about  the  >w*r  1800.
But  I  do  not  find  mention  in  Zurita  of
any  such  constitutional  change  at  that
time  ;  and  the  prelate*,  a*  we  might  ex¬
pect  from  the  analogy  of  other  countries,
appear  a*  members  of  the  national  coun¬
cil  long  before.  Queen  Petronilla,  in  1142,

summoned  A  los  perlados,  ricoshombres,
y  cavallero*.  y  proruradorv*  de  las  clu-
dade*  v  villa*,  que  le  junta*«en  A  cortes
general©*  ©u  la  ciudad  de  lloesca  Zurita,
t.  1.  fol.  71.  So  in  the  cortes  of  1275,  ami
on  other  occa*ions.

*  Popular  representation  was  more
ancient  in  Aragon  than  in  any  other
mouarrhy.  The  deputies  of  towns  ap-

r  in  the  cortes  of  1 133.  a*  Kohertson
remarked  from  Zurita.  Hist,  of
Cliarles  V.  note  32.  And  thl*  cannot
well  be  called  in  question,  or  treated  as
an  anomaly;  for  we  find  them  men¬
tioned  In  1142  (the  passage  cited  In  the
la*t  note),  and  again  In  1164,  when  Zu¬
rita  ^enumerate*  many  of  their  name*,
fol.  74.  The  institution  of  coosejos,  or
corporate  district*  under  a  pnwidlug
town,  prevailed  in  Aragon  as  it  did  in
Castiie.

•  Zurita,  t.  ii.  f.  490 ;  t.  Iii.  f.  76.

Spain.

VALENCIA  AND  CATALONIA.

59

and  managing  the  public  revenue,  and  protecting  the  justi¬
ciary  in  his  functions.1

The  kingdom  of  Valencia,  and  principality  of  Catalonia,
having  been  annexed  to  Aragon,  the  one  by  con¬
quest,  the  other  by  marriage,  were  always  kept  of°\?ieucl"
distinct  from  it  in  their  laws  and  government,  andCata-

T-'  i  i  i  •  ,  „  ,  °  „  loma.

tvich  had  its  cortes,  composed  ot  three  estates,  tor
the  division  of  the  nobility  into  two  orders  did  not  exist  in
either  country.  The  Catalans  were  tenacious  of  their  an¬
cient  usages,  and  averse  to  incorporation  with  any  other
people  of  Spain.  Their  national  character  was  high-spirited
and  independent ;  in  no  part  of  the  peninsula  did  the  terri¬
torial  aristocracy  retain,  or  at  least  pretend  to,  such  extensive
privileges,2  and  the  citizens  were  justly  proud  of  wealth  ac¬
quired  by  industry,  and  of  renown  achieved  by  valor.  At
the  accession  of  Ferdinand  I.,  which  they  had  not  much  de¬
sired,  the  Catalans  obliged  him  to  swear  three  times  succes¬
sively  to  maintain  their  liberties,  before  they  would  take  the
reciprocal  oath  of  allegiance.8  For  Valencia  it  seems  to  have
been  a  politic  design  of  James  the  Conqueror  to  establish  a
constitution  nearly  analogous  to  that  of  Aragon,  but  with
such  limitations  as  he  should  impose,  taking  care  that  the
nobles  of  the  two  kingdoms  should  not  acquire  strength  by
union.  In  the  reigns  of  Peter  III.  and  Alfonso  III.,  one  of
the  principal  objects  contended  for  by  the  barons  of  Aragon
was  the  establishment  of  their  own  laws  in  Valencia ;
to  which  the  kings  never  acceded.4  They  permitted,  how¬
ever,  the  possessions  of  the  natives  of  Aragon  in  the  latter
kingdom  to  be  governed  by  the  law  of  Aragon.6  These
three  states,  Aragon,  Valencia,  and  Catalonia,  were  perpetu¬
ally  united  by  a  law  of  Alfonso  III.;  and  every  king  on  his
accession  was  bound  to  swear  that  he  would  never  separate
them.®  Sometimes  general  cortes  of  the  kingdoms  and  prin¬
cipality  were  convened ;  but  the  members  did  not,  even  in
this  case,  sit  together,  and  were  no  otherwise  united  than  as
they  met  in  the  same  city.7

*  Bianca?,  p.  762  ;  Zurita,  t.  iii.  f.  76,  originally  a  justiciary  in  the  kingdom  of

f.  182  et  alibi.  Valencia,  f.  281;  but  this,  I  believe,  did

*  Zurita,  t.  ii.  f.  860.  The  villenage  of  not  Ion*?  continue,
the  peasantry  in  some  parts  of  Cata-  &  Zurita,  t.  ii.  f.  488*

Ionia  wan  very  severe,  even  near  the  end  0  t.  ii.  f.  91.

of  the  fifteenth  century,  t.  iv.  f.  327.  7  Bianca*.  Comment,  p.  700;  Zurita,

s  Zurita.  t.  iii.  f.  81.  t.  iii.  fol.  239.

*  Id.  t.  1.  f.  281,  310,  883.  There  wa s

60

UNION  OF  CASTILE  AND  ARAGON.

Chap.  IV.

I  do  not  mean  to  represent  the  actual  condition  of  society
State  of  in  Aragon  as  equally  excellent  with  the  constitu-

poiiee.  tional  laws.  Relatively  to  other  monarchies,  as

I  have  already  observed,  there  seem  to  have  been  fewer  ex¬
cesses  of  the  royal  prerogative  in  that  kingdom.  But  the
licentious  habits  of  a  feudal  aristocracy  prevailed  very  long.
We  find  in  history  instances  of  private  war  between  the
great  families,  so  as  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  whole  nation,
even  near  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century.1  The  right  of
avenging  injuries  by  arms,  and  the  ceremony  of  diffidation,
or  solemn  defiance  of  an  enemy,  are  preserved  by  the
laws.  We  even  meet  with  the  ancient  barbarous  usage  of
paying  a  composition  to  the  kindred  of  a  murdered  man.4
The  citizens  of  Saragosa  were  sometimes  turbulent,  and  a
refractory  nobleman  sometimes  defied  the  ministers  of  jus¬
tice.  But  owing  to  the  remarkable  copiousness  of  the  prin¬
cipal  Aragonese  historian,  we  find  more  frequent  details  of
this  nature  than  in  the  scantier  annals  of  some  countries.
The  internal  condition  of  society  ivas  certainly  far  from
peaceable  in  other  parts  of  Europe.

By  the  marriage  of  Ferdinand  with  Isabella,  and  by  the
Union  of  death  of  John  II.,  in  1479,  the  two  ancient  and
Aragou'ud  r‘va'  kingdoms  of  Castile  and  Aragon  were  for¬
ever  consolidated  in  the  monarchy  of  Spain.
There  had  been  some  difficulty  in  adjusting  the  respective
rights  of  the  husband  and  wife  over  Castile.  In  the  middle
ages  it  was  customary  for  the  more  powerful  sex  to  exercise
all  the  rights  which  it  derived  from  the  weaker,  as  much  in
sovereignties  as  in  private  possessions.  But  the  Castilians
were  determined  to  maintain  the  positive  and  distinct  pre¬
rogatives  of  their  queen,  to  which  they  attached  the  indepen¬
dence  of  their  nation.  A  compromise  therefore  was  con¬
cluded,  by  which,  though,  according  to  our  notions,  Ferdinand
obtained  more  than  a  due  share,  he  might  consider  himself
as  more  strictly  limited  than  his  father  had  been  in  Navarre.
The  names  of  both  were  to  appear  jointly  in  their  stvle  and
upon  the  coin,  the  king’s  taking  the  precedence  in  respect  of
his  sex.  But  in  the  royal  scutcheon  the  arras  of  Castile
were  preferred  on  account  of  the  kingdom’s  dignify.  Isabella
had  the  appointment  to  all  civil  offices  in  Castile  ;  the  nom-

i  Zurita,  t.  It.  tot.  189.

*  Fueroe  ile  Aragon,  f.  1000,  he.

Spaist.

CONQUEST  OF  GRANADA.

61

ination  to  spiritual  benefices  ran  in  the  name  of  both.  The
government  was  to  be  conducted  by  the  two  conjointly  when
they  were  together,  or  by  either  singly  in  the  province  where
one  or  other  might  happen  to  reside.1  This  partition  was
well  preserved  throughout  the  life  of  Isabel  without  mutual
encroachments  or  jealousies.  So  rare  an  unanimity  between
persons  thus  circumstanced  must  be  attributed  to  the  superior
qualities  of  that  princess,  who,  while  she  maintained  a  con¬
stant  good  understanding  with  a  very  ambitious  husband,
never  relaxed  in  the  exercise  of  her  paternal  authority  over
the  kingdoms  of  her  ancestors.

Ferdinand  and  Isabella  had  no  sooner  quenched  the  flames
of  civil  discord  in  Castile  than  they  determined  to  conquest  of
give  an  unequivocal  proof  to  Europe  of  the  vigor  GrauaJa-
which  the  Spanish  monarchy  was  to  display  under  their  gov¬
ernment.  For  many  years  an  armistice  with  the  Moors  of
Granada  had  been  uninterrupted.  Neither  John  II.  nor
Henry  IV.  had  been  at  leisure  to  think  of  aggressive  hostili¬
ties  ;  and  the  Moors  themselves,  a  prey,  like  their  Christian
enemies,  to  civil  war  and  the  feuds  of  their  royal  family,  were
content  with  the  unmolested  enjoyment  of  the  finest  province
in  the  peninsula.  If  we  may  trust  historians,  the  sovereigns
of  Granada  were  generally  usurpers  and  tyrants.  But  I
know  not  how  to  account  for  that  vast  populousness,  that
grandeur  and  magnificence,  which  distinguished  the  Moham¬
medan  kingdom  of  Spain,  without  ascribing  some  measure  of
wisdom  and  beneficence  to  their  governments.  These  south¬
ern  provinces  have  dwindled  in  later  times  ;  and  in  fact  Spain
itself  is  chiefly  interesting  to  many  travellers  for  the  monu¬
ments  which  a  foreign  and  odious  race  of  conquerors  have  left
behind  them.  Granada  was,  however,  disturbed  by  a  series
of  revolutions  about  the  time  of  Ferdinand’s  accession,  which
naturally  encouraged  his  designs.  The  Moors,  contrary  to
what  might  have  been  expected  from  their  relative  strength,
were  the  aggressors  by  attacking  a  town  in  Andalusia.2  Pred¬
atory  inroads  of  this  nature  had  hitherto  been  only  retaliated
by  the  Christians.  But  Ferdinand  was  conscious  that  his
resources  extended  to  the  conquest  of  Granada,  the  consum¬
mation  of  a  struggle  protracted  through  nearly  eight  centuries.
Even  in  the  last  stage  of  the  Moorish  dominion,  exposed  on

1  Zurita,  t.  It.  fbl.  224  ;  Mariana,  1.  xxir.  c.  6.

s  Zurita,  t.  It.  fol.  314.

62

CONQUEST  OF  GRANADA.

Chap.  IV.

every  side  to  invasion,  enfeebled  by  civil  dissension  that  led
one  party  to  abet  the  common  enemy,  Granada  was  not  sub¬
dued  without  ten  years  of  sanguinary  and  unremitting  contest.
Fertile  beyond  all  the  rest  of  Spain,  that  kingdom  contained
seventy  walled  towns ;  and  the  capital  is  said,  almost  two  cen¬
turies  before,  to  have  been  peopled  by  200,000  inhabitants.1
Its  resistance  to  such  a  force  as  that  of  Ferdinand  is  perhaps
the  best  justification  of  the  apparent  negligence  of  earlier
monarchs.  But  Granada  was  ultimately  to  undergo  the  yoke.
The  city  surrendered  on  the  2nd  of  January  1402  —  an  event
glorious  not  only  to  Spain  but  to  Christendom  —  and  which,
in  the  political  combat  of  the  two  religious,  seemed  almost
to  counterbalance  the  loss  of  Constantinople.  It  raised
the  name  of  Ferdinand  and  of  the  new  monarchy  which
he  governed  to  high  estimation  throughout  Europe.  Spain
appeared  an  equal  competitor  with  France  in  the  lists  of
ambition.  These  great  kingdoms  had  for  some  time  felt  the
jealousy  natural  to  emulous  neighbors.  The  house  of  Aragon
loudly  complained  of  the  treacherous  policy  of  Louis  XI.
lie  had  fomented  the  troubles  of  Castile,  and  given,  not  indeed
an  effectual  aid,  but  all  promises  of  support,  to  the  princess
Joanna,  the  competitor  of  Isabel.  Rousillon,  a  province  be¬
longing  to  Aragon,  had  been  pledged  to  France  by  John  II.
for  a  sum  of  money.  It  would  be  tedious  to  relate  the  sub¬
sequent  events,  or  to  discuss  their  respective  claims  to  its
possession.4  At  the  accession  of  Ferdinand,  Louis  XI.  still
held  Rousillon,  and  showed  little  intention  to  resign  it.  But
Charles  VIII.,  eager  to  smooth  every  impediment  to  his
Italian  expedition,  restored  the  province  to  Ferdinand  in
1493.  Whether  by  such  a  sacrifice  he  was  able  to  lull  the
king  of  Aragon  into  acquiescence,  while  he  dethroned  his
relation  at  Naples,  and  alarmed  for  a  moment  all  Italy  with
the  apprehension  of  French  dominion,  it  is  not  within  the
limits  of  the  present  work  to  inquire.

1  Ztirlta,  t.  It.  tot.  814.  I*  the  most  Impartial  French  writer  I

J  For  tlicac  transaction*  see  Garnier,  hare  ever  read,  in  matters  where  hUowu
nut.  do  France,  or  Gaillard,  Riraliti  de  country  U  concerned.

Franco  et  d'Kspagnc,  t.  lit.  The  Utter

Notes  to  Chap.  IT.  COUNT  JULIAN.

63

NOTE  TO  CHAPTER  IV.

Note.  Page  2.

The  story  of  Cava,  daughter  of  count  Julian,  whose  se¬
duction  by  Roderic,  the  last  Gothic  king,  impelled  her  father
to  invite  the  Moors  into  Spain,  enters  largely  into  the  cycle
of  Castilian  romance  and  into  the  grave  narratives  of  every
historian.  It  cannot,  however,  be  traced  in  extant  writings
higher  than  the  eleventh  century,  when  it  appears  in  the
Chronicle  of  the  Monk  of  Silos.  There  are  Spanish  histori¬
ans  of  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries  ;  in  the  former,  Isidore
bishop  of  Beja  (Pacensis),  who  wrote  a  chronicle  of  Spain ;
in  the  latter,  Paulus  Diaconus  of  Merida,  Sebastian  of  Sala¬
manca,  and  an  anonymous  chronicler.  It  does  not  appear,
however,  that  these  dwell  much  on  Roderic’s  reign.  (See
Masdeu,  Historia  Critica  de  Espana,  vol.  xiii.  p.  882.)  The
most  critical  investigators  of  history,  therefore,  have  treated
the  story  as  too  apocryphal  to  be  stated  as  a  fact.  A  sensible
writer  in  the  History  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  published  by
the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Knowledge,  has  de¬
fended  its  probability,  quoting  a  passage  from  Ferre ras,  a
Spanish  writer  of  the  eighteenth  century,  whose  authority
stands  high,  and  who  argues  in  favor  of  the  tradition  from
the  brevity  of  the  old  chroniclers  who  relate  the  fall  of  Spain,
and  from  the  want  of  likelihood  that  Julian,  who  had  hitherto
defended  his  country  with  great  valor,  would  have  invited  the
Saracens,  except  through  some  strong  motives.  This,  if  we
are  satisfied  as  to  the  last  fact,  appears  plausible ;  but  another
hypothesis  has  been  suggested,  and  is  even  mentioned  by
one  of  the  early  writers,  that  Julian,  being  of  Roman  descent,
was  ill-affected  to  the  Gothic  dynasty,  who  had  never  attached
to  themselves  the  native  inhabitants.  This  I  cannot  but
reckon  the  less  likely  explanation  of  the  two.  Roderic,  who
became  archbishop  of  Toledo  in  1208,  and  our  earliest  au-

64

COUNT  JULIAN.

Note  to

thoritv  after  the  monk  of  Silos,  calls  Julian  “  vir  nohilis  de
nobili  Gothorum  prosapia  ortus,  illustris  in  officio  Palatino,
in  arinis  exercitatus,”  &c.  (See  Schottus,  Hispania  Illustrata,
ii.  63.)  Few,  however,  of  those  who  deny  the  truth  of  the
story  as  it  relates  to  Cava  admit  the  defection  of  count  Julian
to  the  Moors,  and  his  existence  has  been  doubted.  The  two
parts  of  the  story  cohere  together,  and  we  have  no  better
evidence  for  one  than  for  the  other.

Southey,  in  his  notes  to  the  poem  of  Roderic,  says,  “  The
best  Spanish  historians  and  antiquaries  are  persuaded  that
there  is  no  cause  for  disbelieving  the  uniform  and  concurrent
tradition  of  both  Moors  and  Christians.”  But  this  is  on  the
usual  assumption,  that  those  are  the  best  who  agree  best  with
ourselves.  Southey  took  generally  the  credulous  side,  and
his  critical  judgment  is  of  no  superlative  value.  Masdeu,  in
learning  and  laboriousness  the  first  Spanish  antiquary,  calls
the  story  of  Julian’s  daughter  “a  ridiculous  tale,  framed  in
the  age  of  romance,  when  histories  were  thrust  aside  (arrin-
conadas)  and  any  love-tale  was  preferred  to  the  most  serious
truth.”  (Mist.  Crit.  de  Espafia,  vol.  x.  p.223.)  And  when,
in  another  passage  (vol.  xii.  p.  6),  he  recounts  the  story  at
large,  he  says  that  the  silence  of  all  writers  before  the  monk
of  Silos  “  should  be  sufficient  in  my  opinion  to  expel  from  our
history  a  romance  so  destitute  of  foundation,  which  the  Ara¬
bian  romancers  doubtless  invented  for  their  ballads.”

A  modern  writer  of  extensive  learning  says,  “  This  fable,
which  has  found  its  w  ay  into  most  of  the  sober  histories  of
Spain,  was  first  introduced  by  the  monk  of  Silos,  a  chronicler
of  the  eleventh  century.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  bor¬
rowed  it  from  the  Arabs,  but  it  seems  hard  to  believe  that  it
was  altogether  a  tale  of  their  invention.  There  are  facts  in  it
which  an  Arab  could  not  have  invented,  unless  he  drew  them
from  Christian  sources;  and,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter,  the
Arabs  knew  and  consulted  the  writings  of  the  Christians.”
(Gayiuigos,  History  of  the  Mohammedan  Dynasties  of  Spain,
vol.  i.  p.  513.)  It  does  not  appear  to  be  a  conclusion  from
this  passage  that  the  story  is  a  fable.  For  if  a  chronicler  of
the  eleventh  century  l»orrowed  it  from  the  Arabs,  and  they
again  from  Christian  sources,  we  get  over  a  good  deal  of  the
chasm  of  time.  But  if  writers  antecedent  to  the  monk  of
Silos  have  related  the  Arabian  invasion  and  the  fall  of  Rod¬
eric  without  alluding  to  so  important  a  point  as  the  treachery

Chap.  IV.

COUNT  JULIAN.

65

of  a  great  Gothic  noble,  it  seems  difficult  to  resist  the  infer¬
ence  from  their  silence.

Gajangos  investigates  in  a  learned  note  (vol.  i.  p.  537)  the
following  points:  —  By  whom  and  when  was  the  name  of
Ilyan,  the  Arabic  form  of  Julian,  first  introduced  into  Spanish
history  ?  Did  such  a  man  ever  exist  ?  What  were  his  coun¬
try  and  religion?  Was  he  an  independent  prince, or  a  tribu¬
tary  to  the  Gothic  monarchs  ?  What  part  did  he  take  in  the
conquest  of  Spain  by  the  Arabs  ?

The  account  of  Julian  in  the  Chronicon  Silense  appears  to
Gayangos  indisputably  borrowed  from  some  Arabian  author¬
ity;  and  this  he  proves  by  several  writers  from  the  ninth
century  downwards,  “  all  of  whom  mention,  more  or  less  ex¬
plicitly,  the  existence  of  a  man  living  in  Africa,  and  named
Ilyan,  who  helped  the  Arabs  to  make  a  conquest  of  Spain;  to
which  I  ought  to  add  that  the  rape  of  Ilyan’s  daughter,  and
the  circumstances  attending  it,  may  also  be  read  in  detail  in
the  Mohammedan  authors  who  preceded  the  monk  of  Silos.”
The  result  of  this  learned  writer’s  investigation  is,  that  Ilyan
really  existed,  that  he  was  a  Christian  chief,  settled,  not  in
Spain,  but  on  the  African  coast,  and  that  he  betrayed,  not  his
country  (except  indeed  as  he  was  probably  of  Spanish  de¬
scent),  but  the  interests  of  his  religion,  by  assisting  the  Sara¬
cens  to  subjugate  the  Gothic  kingdom.1

The  story  of  Cava  is  not  absolutely  overthrown  by  this
hypothesis,  though  it  certainly  may  be  the  invention  of  some
Christian  or  Arabian  romancer.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  of
itself  it  contains  no  apparent  improbability.  Injuries  have
been  thus  inflicted  by  kings,  and  thus  resented  by  subjects.
But  for  this  very  reason  it  was  likely  to  be  invented ;  and  the
unwillingness  with  which  many  seem  to  surrender  so  romantic
a  tale  attests  the  probability  of  its  obtaining  currency  in  an
uncritical  period.  We  must  reject  it  as  false  or  not,  according
as  we  lay  stress  on  the  negative  argument  from  the  silence  of
very  early  writers  (an  argument,  strong  even  as  it  is,  and
which  would  be  insuperable  if  they  were  less  brief  and  im-

1  The  Arabian  writer  whom  Gayangos
translates,  one  of  late  date,  speaks  of
Ilyan  as  governor  of  Ceuta,  but  tells  the
story  of  Cava  in  the  usual  manner.  The
Goths  may  very  probably  have  possessed
aome  of  the  African  coast;  so  that  the
YuL.  EL  5

residence  of  Julian  on  that  side  of  the
straits  would  not  be  incompatible  with
his  being  truly  a  Spaniard.  Ilyan  is
evidently  not  an  European  form  of  the
name.

66

COUNT  JULIAN.

Note  to  Chap.  IV.

perfect)  and  on  the  presumptions  adduced  by  Gayangos  that
Julian  was  not  a  noble  Spaniard ;  but  we  cannot  receive  this
celebrated  legend  at  any  rate  with  more  than  a  very  sceptical
assent,  not  sufficient  to  warrant  us  hi  placing  it  among  the
authentic  facts  of  history.

Germany.

SEPARATION  FROM  FRANCE.

07

CHAPTER  Y.

HISTORY  OF  GERMANY  TO  THE  DIET  OF  WORMS  IN  1495.

Sketch  of  German  History  under  the  Emperors  of  the  nouse  of  Saxony  —  House
of  Franconia  —  Henry  IV. —  House  of  Suabia — Frederic  Barbarossa  —  Fall  of
Ilenrv  the  Lion — Frederic  II.  —  Extinction  of  House  of  Suabia  —  Changes  in
the  Germanic  Constitution  —  Electors  —  Territorial  Sovereignty  of  the  Princes

—  Rodolph  of  Hapsburg  —  State  of  the  Empire  after  his  Time  —  Causes  of
Decline  of  Imperial  Power  —  House  of  Luxemburg  —  Charles  IV.  —  Golden
Bull  —  House  of  Austria  —  Frederic  III.  —  Imperial  Cities  —  Provincial  States

—  Maximilian  —  Diet  of  Worms  —  Abolition  of  Private  Wars  —  Imperial  Chamber

—  Aulic  Council  —  Bohemia  —  Hungary  —  Switzerland.

After  the  deposition  of  Charles  the  Fat  in  888,  which
finally  severed  the  connection  between  France  and  Germany,1
Arnulf,  an  illegitimate  descendant  of  Charlemagne,  obtained
the  throne  of  the  latter  country,  in  which  he  was  Separation
succeeded  by  bis  son  Louis.*  But  upon  the  death  of  Germany
of  this  prince  in  911,  the  German  branch  of  that from  trauce’
dynasty  became  extinct.  There  remained  indeed  Charles
the  Simple,  acknowledged  as  king  in  some  parts  of  France,
but  rejected 'in  others,  and  possessing  no  personal  claims  to
respect.  The  Germans  therefore  wisely  determined  to  choose
a  sovereign  from  among  themselves.  They  were  at  this  time
divided  into  five  nations,  each  under  its  own  duke,  and  distin¬
guished  by  difference  of  laws,  as  well  as  of  origin  ;  the  Franks,
whose  territory,  comprising  Franconia  and  the  modern  Pala¬
tinate,  was  considered  as  the  cradle  of  the  empire,  and  who
seem  to  have  arrogated  some  superiority  over  the  rest,  the
Suabians,  the  Bavarians,  the  Saxons,  under  which  name  the

1  There  can  be  no  question  about  this
in  a  general  sense.  But  several  German
writers  of  the  time  assert  that  both
Kudes  and  Charles  the  Simple,  rival
kings  of  France,  acknowledged  the  feudal
superiority  of  Arnulf.  Charles,  says  Re-
giuo,  regnum  quod  usurpaverit  ex  manu
ejus  percepit.  Struvius,  Corpus  Hist.
German,  p.  202.  203  This  acknowledg¬
ment  of  sovereignty  in  Arnulf  king  of
Germany,  who  did  not  even  pretend  to
be  emperor,  by  both  the  claimants  of
the  throne  of  France,  for  such  it  virtually
was,  though  they  do  not  appear  to  have
reudered  homage,  cannot  affect  the  in¬

dependence  of  the  crown  in  that  age,
which  had  been  established  by  the  treaty
of  Verdun  in  843,  but  proves  the  weak¬
ness  of  the  competitors,  and  their  want
of  patriotism.  In  Eudes  it  is  more  re¬
markable  than  in  Charles  the  Simple,  a
man  of  feeble  character,  and  a  Carlovin-
gian  by  birth.

a  The  German  princes  had  some  hesita¬
tion  about  the  choice  of  Louis,  but  their
partiality  to  the  Carlovingian  line  pro-
Wflij.  Struvius,  p.  2"'s  :  quia  n/«s
Francorum  semper  ex  uno  genere  pro-
cedebant,  says  an  archbishop  Uatto,  in
writing  to  the  pope.

C8

IIOUSE  OF  SAXONY.

Chat.  V.

Saxony.

Henry  the
Fowler.
A.D.  919.
Otho  I.
a.d.  938.
Otho  II.
A.n.  973.
Otho  III.
a.d.  983.

inhabitants  of  Lower  Saxony  alone  and  Westphalia  were  in¬
cluded,  and  the  Lorrainers,  who  occupied  the  left  bank  of  the
Election  of  Rhine  as  far  as  its  termination.  The  choice  of
Conrad.  these  nations  in  their  general  assembly  fell  upon
a.d.  9li.  Corn-ad,  duke  of  Franconia,  according  to  some
writers,  or  at  least  a  man  of  high  rank,  and  descended  through
females  from  Charlemagne.1

Conrad  dying  without  male  issue,  the  crown  of  Germany
House  of  was  bestowed  upon  Henry  the  Fowler,  duke  of
Saxony,  ancestor  of  the  three  Othos,  who  followed
him  in  direct  succession.  To  Henry,  and  to  the
first  Otho,  Germany  was  more  indebted  than  to
any  sovereign  since  Charlemagne.  The  conquest
of  Italy,  and  recovery  of  the  imperial  title,  are  in¬
deed  the  most  brilliant  trophies  of  Otho  the  Great ;
but  he  conferred  far  more  unequivocal  benefits
upon  his  own  country  by  completing  what  his  father  had
begun,  her  liberation  from  the  inroads  of  the  Hungarians.
Two  marches,  that  of  Misnia,  erected  by  Henry  the  Fooler,
and  that  of  Austria,  by  Otho,  were  added  to  the  Germanic
territories  by  their  victories.3

A  lineal  succession  of  four  descents  without  the  least
opposition  seems  to  show  that  the  Germans  were  di-posed
to  consider  their  monarchy  as  fixed  in  the  Saxon  family.
Otho  II.  and  III.  had  been  chosen  each  in  his  father’s  life¬
time,  and  during  legal  infancy.  The  formality  ot  election
subsisted  at  that  time  in  every  European  kingdom ;  and  the
imperfect  rights  of  birth  required  a  ratification  by  public
assent  If  at  least  France  and  England  were  hereditary
monarchies  in  the  tenth  century,  the  same  may  surely  l>e
said  of  Germany ;  since  we  find  the  lineal  succession  fully
as  well  observed  in  the  last  as  in  the  former,  llut  upon  the
early  and  unexpected  decease  of  Otho  III.,  a  momentary  op-
Henrr  ii.  position  was  offered  to  Henry  duke  ot  Bavaria,  a
a.d.  iou2.  collateral  branch  of  the  reigning  family.  He  ob-

1  Schmidt,  Hint,  do*  Allenmnd*.  t.  It.
p.  288.  Struvlu*,  Corpu*  HI»tori»  Ger¬
manic®,  p.  210.  Tho  former  of  the*o
writer*  doo*  not  eo nidiler  Conrad  a*  duke
of  Franconia.

J  Many  town*  in  Germany,  e*peclally
on  the  Saxon  frontier,  were  built  by
Henry  I.,  who  i*  naid  to  hare  rom(ielled
every  ninth  man  to  take  up  hi*  renideuee
In  them.  Thi*  had  a  remarkable  ten¬

dency  to  promote  the  Improvement  of
that  territory,  and,  combined  with  the
dineovery  of  the  gold  and  vilver  mine*
of  Gnelar  under  Otho  I.,  rendered  It  tho
riehent  and  moot  Important  part  of
the  empire.  Struvluj.  p  226  and  2M.
Sehuildt.  t.  II.  p.  822.  Putter,  Hi»«orte*I
Development  of  the  German  ConetitU-
tkm,  yol.  1.  p.  116.

Germany.

HOUSE  OF  FRANCONIA.

69

tained  the  crown,  however,  by  what  contemporary  historians
call  an  hereditary  title,1  and  it  was  not  until  his  death  in
1024  that  the  house  of  Saxony  was  deemed  to  be  extin¬
guished.

No  person  had  now  any  pretensions  that  could  interfere
with  the  unbiassed  suffrages  of  the  nation;  and  H ^
accordingly  a  general  assembly  was  determined  Franconia,
by  merit  to  elect  Conrad,  sumamed  the  Salic,  a  Conratl  n
nobleman  of  Franconia.2  From  this  prince  sprang  a.d.  1024.
three  successive  emperors,  Henry  III.,  IV.,  and  fYIYox)1’
V.  Perhaps  the  imperial  prerogatives  over  that  Hen<r
insubordinate  confederacy  never  reached  so  high  a  Henry  v.
point  as  in  the  reign  of  Henry  HI.,  the  second  em-  A  D- U06,
peror  of  the  house  of  Franconia.  It  had  been,  as  was  natural,
the  object  of  all  his  predecessors,  not  only  to  render  their
throne  hereditary,  which,  in  effect,  the  nation  was  willing  to
concede,  but  to  surround  it  with  authority  sufficient  to  control
the  leading  vassals.  These  were  the  dukes  of  the  four
nations  of  Germany,  Saxony,  Bavaria,  Suabia,  and  Franco¬
nia,  and  the  three  archbishops  of  the  Rhenish  cities,  Mentz,
Treves,  and  Cologne.  Originally,  as  has  been  more  fully
shown  in  another  place,  duchies,  like  counties,  were  temporary
governments,  bestowed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  crown.  From
this  first  stage  they  advanced  to  hereditary  offices,  and  finally
to  patrimonial  fiefs.  But  their  progress  was  much  slower  in
Germany  than  in  France.  Under  the  Saxon  line  of  empe¬
rors,  it  appears  probable  that,  although  it  was  usual,  and
consonant  to  the  prevailing  notions  of  equity,  to  confer  a
duchy  upon  the  nearest  heir,  yet  no  positive  rule  enforced
this  upon  the  emperor,  and  some  instances  of  a  contrary
proceeding  occurred.®  But,  if  the  royal  prerogative  in  this
respect  stood  higher  than  in  France,  there  was  a  counter¬
vailing  principle  that  prohibited  the  emperor  from  uniting  a
fief  to  his  domain,  or  even  retaining  one  which  he  had  pos¬
sessed  before  his  accession.  Thus  Otho  the  Great  granted

1  A  maxim!  multitudine  vox  una  re-  *  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p.  393.  403.  Struvius.
epondit ;  Ilenricum,  Christi  adjutorio,  et  p.  214,  supposes  the  hereditary  rights  of
jure  haereditario,  reimaturum.  Ditmar  dukes  to  have  commenced  under  Conrad
apod  Struvium,  p.  273.  See  other  pas-  I.;  but  Schmidt  is  perhaps  a  better  au-
aap'S  quoted  in  the  same  place.  Schmidt,  thority  ;  and  Struvius  afterwards  men-
t.  li.  j)  41".  Hobs  fin  refusal  of  Otho  I.  tograiit  the

*  Conrad  was  descended  from  a  daugh-  duchy  of  Bavaria  to  the  sons  of  the  lass
ter  of  Otho  the  Great,  and  also  from  duke,  which,  however,  excited  a  rebel-
Conrad  I.  His  first-cousin  was  duke  of  lion.  p.  235.

Franconia.  Struviua  ;  Schmidt ;  Pfdlel.

70

HOUSE  OF  FRANCONIA.

Chap.  V.

away  his  duchy  of  Saxony,  and  Henry  IT.  that  of  Bavaria.
Otho  the  Great  endeavored  to  counteract  the  effects  of  this
custom  by  conferring  the  duchies  that  fell  into  his  hands
upon  members  of  his  own  family.  This  policy,  though  appar¬
ently  well  conceived,  proved  of  no  advantage  to  Otho,  his
son  and  brother  having  mixed  in  several  rebellions  against
him.  It  was  revived,  however,  by  Conrad  II.  and  Henry
III.  The  latter  was  invested  by  his  father  with  the  two
duchies  of  Suabia  and  Bavaria.  Upon  his  own  accession
he  retained  the  former  for  six  years,  and  even  the  latter  for
a  short  time.  The  duchy  of  Franconia,  which  became  va¬
cant,  he  did  not  regrant,  but  endeavored  to  set  a  precedent
of  uniting  fiefs  to  the  domain.  At  another  time,  after  sen¬
tence  of  forfeiture  against  the  duke  of  Bavaria,  he  bestowed
that  great  province  on  his  wife,  the  empress  Agnes.1  He
put  an  end  altogether  to  the  form  of  popular  concurrence,
which  had  been  usual  when  the  investiture  of  a  duchy  was
conferred ;  and  even  deposed  dukes  by  the  sentence  of  a  few
princes,  without  the  consent  of  the  diet.2  If  we  combine
with  these  proofs  of  authority  in  the  domestic  administration
of  Henry  III.  his  almost  unlimited  control  over  papal  elec¬
tions,  or  rather  the  right  of  nomination  that  he  acquired,  we
must  consider  him  as  the  most  absolute  monarch  in  the
annals  of  Germany.

These  ambitious  measures  of  Henry  III.  prepared  fifty
_  _  .  ,  years  of  calamity  for  his  son.  It  is  easy  to  per-

reign  or  cetve  that  the  misfortunes  ol  llenry  IV.  were
Ueno  iv.  primarily  occasioned  by  the  jealousy  with  which
repeated  violations  of  their  constitutional  usages  had  inspired
the  nobility.*  The  mere  circumstance  of  Henry  IV.’s  mi¬
nority,  under  the  guardianship  of  a  woman,  was  enough  to
dissipate  whatever  jiower  his  father  had  acquired.  Ilanno,
archbishop  of  Mentz,  carried  the  young  king  away  by  force
from  his  mother,  and  governed  Germany  in  his  name ;  till
another  archbishop,  Adalbert  of  Bremen,  obtained  greater
influence  over  him.  Through  the  neglect  of  his  education,
Henry  grew  up  with  a  character  not  well  fitted  to  retrieve
the  mischief  of  so  unprotected  a  minority ;  brave  indeed,

1  Schmidt,  t.  111.  p.  26,  87.  of  Aschaffonborg  to  hare  formed  a  coo-

*  Id.  p.  207.  splracy  to  depose  him,  oat  of  resentment

*  In  the  Terr  flr»t  yenr  of  Henry’*  for  the  injuries  they  hod  ■!]. tallied  from
reign,  while  he  was  bat  fix  year*  old.  the  ht«  father  Strurius,  p.  #Ai.  St.  Marc,
prince*  of  Saxony  are  said  by  UunLert  t.  111.  p.  248.

Germany.

HOUSE  OF  FRANCONIA.

71

well-natured,  and  affable,  but  dissolute  beyond  measure,  and
addicted  to  low  and  debauched  company.  He  was

•  11*  l  J  i  r*  A.D.

soon  involved  m  a  desperate  war  with  the  Saxons,
a  nation  valuing  itself  on  its  populousness  and  riches,  jealous
of  the  house  of  Franconia,  who  wore  a  crown  that  had
belonged  to  their  own  dukes,  and  indignant  at  Henry’s  con¬
duct  in  erecting  fortresses  throughout  their  country.

In  the  progress  of  this  war  many  of  the  chief  princes
evinced  an  unwillingness  to  support  the  emperor.1  Not¬
withstanding  this,  it  would  probably  have  terminated,  as
other  rebellions  had  done,  with  no  permanent  loss  to  either
party.  But  in  the  middle  of  this  contest  another  far  more
memorable  broke  out  with  the  Roman  see,  concerning  eccle¬
siastical  investitures.  The  motives  of  this  famous  quarrel
will  be  explained  in  a  different  chapter  of  the  present  work.
Its  effect  in  Germany  was  ruinous  to  Henry.  A  A  D  10_-
sentence,  not  only  of  excommunication,  but  of
deposition,  which  Gregory  VII.  pronounced  against  him,
gave  a  pretence  to  all  his  enemies,  secret  as  well  as  avowed,
to  withdraw  their  .allegiance.2  At  the  head  of  these  was
Rodolph  duke  of  Suabia,  whom  an  assembly  of  revolted
princes  raised  to  the  throne.  We  may  perceive,  in  the  con¬
ditions  of  Rodolph’s  election,  a  symptom  of  the  real  principle
that  animated  the  German  aristocracy  against  Henry  IV.  It
was  agreed  that  the  kingdom  should  no  longer  be  hereditary,
not  conferred  on  the  son  of  a  reigning  monarch,  unless  his
merit  should  challenge  the  popular  approbation.8  The  pope
strongly  encouraged  this  plan  of  rendering  the  empire  elec¬
tive,  by  which  he  hoped  either  eventually  to  secure  the
nomination  of  its  chief  for  the  Holy  See,  or  at  least,  by
sowing  the  seed  of  civil  dissensions  in  Germany,  to  render

1  Struvius.  Schmidt.

*  A  party  had  been  already  formed,
who  were  meditating  to  depose  Henry.
Hi#  excommunication  came  just  in  time
to  confirm  their  resolution#.  It  appears
clearly,  upon  a  little  consideration  of
Henry  IV. ’s  reign,  that  the  ecclesiastical
quarrel  was  only  secondary  in  the  eyes
of  Germany.  The  contest  against  him
was  a  struggle  of  the  aristocracy,  jealous
of  the  imperial  prerogatives  which  Con-
rtl  II.  and  Henry  III.  had  strained  to
the  utmost.  Those  who  were  in  rebellion
against  Henry  were  not  pleased  with
Gregory  VII.  Bruno,  author  of  a  histo¬
ry  of  tiie  Saxon  war,  a  furious  invective,

manifests  great  dissatisfaction  with  the
court  of  Home,  which  he  reproaches  with
dissimulation  and  venality.

8  Hoc  ctiam  ibi  consensu  communi
comprobatum,  Romani  pontificis  auc-
toritate  est  corroboratum,  ut  regia  po-
testas  nulli  per  haereditatem,  sicut  anten
fuit  consuetudo,  cederet,  sed  fllius  regis,
etiamsi  valde  digitus  essct.  per  electioncm
spontaneam,  non  per  successionis  lineam,
rex  proveniret :  si  vero  non  esset  dignua
regis  fllius,.  vel  si  nollet  eum  pop  ulus,
quern  regem  facere  vellet,  haberet  in
potestate  populus.  Bruno  de  Bello  Sax-
onico,  apud  Struvium,  p.  327.

72

ELECTION  OF  LOTHAIRE.

Chap.  V.

Italy  more  independent.  Henry  IV.,  however,  displayed
greater  abilities  in  his  adversity  than  his  early  conduct  had
promised.  In  the  last  of  several  decisive  battles,  Rodolph,
,ao.  though  victorious,  was  mortally  wounded ;  and  no
one  cared  to  take  up  a  gauntlet  which  was  to  be  won
with  so  much  trouble  and  uncertainty.  The  Germans  were
sufficiently  disposed  to  submit ;  but  Rome  persevered  in  her
unrelenting  hatred.  At  the  close  of  Henry’s  long  reign  she
excited  against  him  his  eldest  son,  and,  after  more  than  thirty
years  of  hostility,  had  the  satisfaction  of  wearing  him  down
with  misfortune,  and  casting  out  his  body,  as  excommunicated,
from  its  sepulchre.

In  the  reign  of  his  son  Henry  V.  there  is  no  event  worthy
Extinction  of  ot  much  attention,  except  the  termination  of  the
the  house  of  great  contest  about  investitures.  At  his  death  iu
Franconia.  ^125  the  male  line  of  the  Franconian  emper¬
ors  was  at  an  end.  Frederic  duke  of  Suabia,  grandson  by
his  mother  of  Henry  IV.,  had  inherited  their  pat-
a.d.  1125.  rimonial  estates,  and  seemed  to  represent  their
dynasty.  But  both  the  last  emperors  had  so  many  enemies,
and  a  disposition  to  render  the  crown  elective  prevailed  so
Election  of  strongly  among  the  leading  princes,  that  Lothaire
Lothaire.  duke  of  Saxony  was  elevated  to  the  throne,  though
rather  in  a  tumultuous  and  irregular  manner.1  Lothaire,  who
had  been  engaged  in  a  revolt  against  Henry  V.,  and  the  chiet
of  a  nation  that  bore  an  inveterate  hatred  to  the  house  of
Franconia,  was  the  natural  enemy  of  the  new  family  that
derived  its  importance  and  pretensions  from  that  stock.  It
was  the  object  of  his  reign,  accordingly,  to  oppress  the  two
brothers,  Frederic  and  Conrad,  of  the  Hohenstauffen  or
Suabian  family.  By  this  means  he  expected  to  secure  the
succession  of  the  empire  for  his  son-in-law.  Henry,  sur-
named  the  Proud,  who  married  Lothaire's  only  child,  was
fourth  in  descent  from  Welf,  son  of  Azon  marquis  of  L*te,
by  Cunegonda,  heiress  of  a  distinguished  family,  the  ells
of  Altorf  in  Suabia.  Her  son  was  invested  with  the  duchy

1  See  an  account  of  Lothalre’a  election  fundamental  principle  of  the  flermanio
by  a  contemporary  writer  In  8truviu«,  countitution  from  the  accretion  of  Lo-
p.  ar>7.  See  alao  proof*  of  the  dlnaatia-  thalre.  Previously  to  that  era,  birth
faction  of  the  ariatocracy  at  the  Franco-  aeema  to  hare  given  not  only  a  fair  title
Ulan  government.  8c\imidt,  t.  ill.  p.  to  preference,  but  a  tort  of  inchoate
328.  It  waa  evidently  their  determination  right,  aa  in  France,  8paln,  and  England,
to  render  the  empire  truly  elective  (Id.  Ixdhaire  signed  a  capitulation  at  hi*  ac-
p.  335) :  and  perhapa  we  may  date  that  ceaaion.

Germant.

HOUSE  OF  SUABIA.

73

of  Bavaria  in  1071.  His  descendant,  Henry  the  Proud,
represented  also,  through  his  mother,  the  ancient  dukes  of
Saxony,  surnamed  Billung,  from  whom  he  derived  the  duchy
of  Luneburg.  The  wife  of  Lothaire  transmitted  to  her
daughter  the  patrimony  of  Henry  the  Fowler,  consisting  of
Hanover  and  Brunswic.  Besides  this  great  dowry,  Lothaire
bestowed  upon  his  son-in-law  the  duchy  of  Saxony  in  addi¬
tion  to  that  of  Bavaria.1

This  amazing  preponderance,  however,  tended  to  alienate
the  princes  of  Germany  from  Lothaire’s  views  in  favor  of
Henry ;  and  the  latter  does  not  seem  to  have  possessed  abili¬
ties  adequate  to  his  eminent  station.  On  the  death  of  Lo¬
thaire  in  1138  the  partisans  of  the  house  of  Suabia  made  a
hasty  and  irregular  election  of  Conrad,  in  which  the  Saxon
faction  found  itself  obliged  to  acquiesce.'2  The  new  emperor
availed  himself  of  the  jealousy  which  Henry  the  House  of
Proud’s  aggrandizement  had  excited.  Under  pre-  Iir
tence  that  two  duchies  could  not  legally  be  held  by
the  same  person,  Henry  was  summoned  to  resign  A'E' 1138,
one  of  them ;  and  on  his  refusal,  the  diet  pronounced  that  he
had  incurred  a  forfeiture  of  both.  Henry  made  but  little
resistance,  and  before  his  death,  which  happened  soon  after¬
wards,  saw  himself  stripped  of  all  his  hereditary  as  well  as
acquired  possessions.  Upon  this  occasion  the  0rigin  of
famous  names  of  Guelf  and  Ghibelin  were  first  Guelfs  and
heard,  which  were  destined  to  keep  alive  the  flame  Ublboliu8-
of  civil  dissension  in  far  distant  countries,  and  after  their
meaning  had  been  forgotten.  The  Guelfs,  or  Welfs,  were,  as
I  have  said,  the  ancestors  of  Henry,  and  the  name  has  be¬
come  a  sort  of  patronymic  in  his  family.  The  word  Ghibelin
is  derived  from  Wibelung,  a  town  in  Franconia,  whence  the
emperors  of  that  line  are  said  to  have  sprung.  The  house
of  Suabia  were  considered  in  Germany  as  representing  that
of  Franconia;  as  the  Guelfs  may,  without  much  impropriety,
be  deemed  to  represent  the  Saxon  line.8

Though  Conrad  III.  left  a  son,  the  choice  of  the  electors
fell,  at  his  own  request,  upon  his  nephew  Frederic  Frederic
Barbarossa.4  The  most  conspicuous  events  of  this  BjLrhlirossa-
great  emperor’s  life  belong  to  the  history  of  Italy.  At  home

1  PfeflW,  Abr6g6  Chronolocrique  de  2  Schmidt.
l'HUtoire  d'Allema^ne,  t.  i.  p.  2fJy.  (Pa-  *  Struvius,  p.  870  and  378.
ris,  1777.)  Oibboa’s  Antiquities  of  the  4  Struviu*.

House  of  Brunswic.

74

HOUSE  OF  SUABIA.

Chap.  V.

he  was  feared  and  respected ;  the  imperial  prerogatives  stood
as  high  during  his  reign  as,  after  their  previous  decline,  it
was  possible  for  a  single  man  to  carry  them.1  But  the  only
circumstance  which  appears  memorable  enough  for  the  pres-
Fnii  of  ent  sketch  is  the  second  fall  of  the  Guelfs.  Henry

Henry  the  the  Lion,  son  of  Henry  the  Proud,  had  been  re¬

stored  by  Conrad  III.  to  his  father’s  duchy  of
a.d.  ii,8.  Saxony,  resigning  his  claim  to  that  of  Bavaria,
which  had  been  conferred  on  the  margrave  of  Austria  This
renunciation,  which  indeed  was  only  made  in  his  name  during
childhood,  did  not  prevent  him  from  urging  the  emperor
Frederic  to  restore  the  whole  of  his  birthright;  and  Fred¬
eric,  his  first-cousin,  whose  life  he  had  saved  in  a  sedition  nt
Rome,  was  induced  to  comply  with  this  request  in  1156.  Far
from  evincing  that  political  jealousy  which  some  writers  im¬
pute  to  him,  the  emperor  seems  to  have  carried  his  generosity
beyond  the  limits  of  prudence.  For  many  years  their  union
was  apparently  cordial.  But,  whether  it  was  that  Henry  took
umbrage  at  part  of  Frederic’s  conductor  that  mere  ambition
rendered  him  ungrateful,  he  certainly  abandoned  his  sover¬
eign  in  a  moment  of  distress,  refusing  to  give  any  assistance
in  that  expedition  into  Lombardy  which  ended  in  the  unsuc¬
cessful  battle  of  Legnano.  Frederic  could  not  forgive  this
injury,  and,  taking  advantage  of  complaints,  which  Henry’s
power  and  haughtiness  had  produced,  summoned  him  to  an¬
swer  charges  in  a  general  diet.  The  duke  refused  to  appear,
and,  being  adjudged  contumacious,  a  sentence  of  confiscation,
similar  to  that  wliich  ruined  his  father,  fell  upon  his  head  ;
and  the  vast  imperial  fiefs  that  he  possessed  were  shared
among  some  potent  enemies.8  He  made  an  ineffectual  resist¬
ance  ;  like  his  father,  he  appears  to  have  owed  more  to  for¬
tune  than  to  nature  ;  and  after  three  years’  exile,  was  obliged
to  remain  content  with  the  restoration  of  his  alodial  estates
in  Saxony.  These,  fifty  years  afterwards,  were  converted
into  imperial  fiefs,  and  became  the  two  duchies  of  the  house

1  Pfeffel,  p.  841.  oust  of  the  Guelfk,  and  as  illegally  pro-

»  Frederic  had  obtained  the  succession  northed  by  the  diet.  But  the  provocations
of  Wolf  marquis  of  Tueoany.  unrle  of  he  had  given  Frederic  are  undeniahle ;
Henry  the  Lion,  who  probably  considered  and,  without  pretending  to  decide  on  a
hluieelf  ae  entitled  to  expect  It.  Schmidt,  question  of  German  history,  I  do  not  ere
P-  427.  that  there  was  any  precipitancy  or  inanl-

*  Putter,  in  hie  Hietorioal  Development  fret  breach  of  justice  in  the  course  of
of  the  Constitution  of  the  German  Km-  proceedings  against  him.  Schmidt,  Pf.  f-

tire,  is  inclined  to  consider  Henry  the  fel,  and  Struviu*  do  not  represent  the
ion  ae  sacrificed  to  the  emperor's  jeal-  condemnation  of  Henry  as  unjust

Germany.

HOUSE  OF  SUABIA.

75

of  Brunswic,  the  lineal  representatives  of  Henry  the  Lion,
and  inheritors  of  the  name  of  Guelf.1

Notwithstanding  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  German
oligarchy,  Frederic  Barbarossa  had  found  no  difficulty  in
procuring  the  election  of  his  son  Henry,  even  during  infancy,
as  his  successor.2  The  fall  of  Henry  the  Lion  iim,ry  vi.
had  greatly  weakened  the  ducal  authority  in A  D-  2lyu-
Saxony  and  Bavaria ;  the  princes  who  acquired  that  title,
especially  in  the  former  country,  finding  that  the  secular  and
spiritual  nobility  of  the  first  class  had  taken  the  opportunity
to  raise  themselves  into  an  immediate  dependence  upon  the
empire.  Henry  VI.  came,  therefore,  to  the  crown  with  con¬
siderable  advantages  in  respect  of  prerogative;  and  these
inspired  him  with  the  bold  scheme  of  declaring  the  empire
hereditary.  One  is  more  surprised  to  find  that  lie  had  no
contemptible  prospect  of  success  in  this  attempt:  fifty-two
princes,  and  even  what  appears  hardly  credible,  the  See  of
Koine,  under  Clement  III.,  having  been  induced  to  concur  in
it.  But  the  Saxons  made  so  vigorous  an  opposition,  that
Henry  did  not  think  it  advisable  to  persevere.*  lie  procured,
however,  the  election  of  his  son  Frederic,  an  infant  only  two
years  old.  But,  the  emperor  dying  almost  immediately,  a
powerful  body  of  princes,  supported  by  Hope  Innocent  TIL,
were  desirous  to  withdraw  their  consent.  Philip  pil|,|p  ftnd
duke  of  Suabia,  the  late  king’s  brother,  unable  to  Otho  iv,
secure  his  nephew’s  succession,  brought  about  his  A  11J7’
own  election  by  one  party,  while  another  chose  Otho  of
Brunswic,  younger  son  of  Henry  the  Lion.  This  double
election  renewed  the  rivalry  between  the  Guelfs  and  Ghibe-
lms,  and  threw  Germany  into  confusion  for  several  years.
Philip,  whose  pretensions  appear  to  be  the  more  legitimate
of  the  two,  gained  ground  upon  his  adversary,  notwithstand¬
ing  the  opposition  of  the  pope,  till  he  was  assassinated  in
consequence  of  a  private  resentment.  Otho  IV.  reaped  the
benefit  of  a  crime  in  which  he  did  not  participate,  and  became
for  some  years  undisputed  sovereign.  But,  having  offended
the  pope  by  not  entirely  abandoning  his  imperial  a  d  ^g
rights  over  Italy,  he  had,  in  the  latter  part  of  his
reign,  to  contend  against  Frederic,  son  of  Henry  VI.,  who,

1  Patter,  p.  220  tom,  dlfttlnctA  proxlmorurn  puureppione.

*  StruviuM,  p.  418.  tmnplret,  et  pic  in  Ippo  termlnup  eppet

*  Btruviup,  p.  424.  Tmpetrfttlt  ft  tab-  electlonip,  principlumquo  puccoh-Ivit  (llg-
dlMp.  ut  c«*««uiU»  prfptinA  Palntinorum  nltutld.  Gerriui.  Tllburien*.  Ibldeiu.
election*,  luiperlum  In  Ipiiup  poaterlta*

76

RICHARD  OF  CORNWALL.

Chap.  V.

having  grown  up  to  manhood,  came  into  Germany  as  heir  of
the  house  of  Suabia,  and,  what  was  not  very  usual  in  his  own
history,  or  that  of  his  family,  the  favored  candidate  of  the
Holy  See.  Otho  IV.  had  been  almost  entirely  deserted  except
by  his  natural  subjects,  when  his  death,  in  1218,  removed
every  difficulty,  and  left  Frederic  II.  in  the  peaceable  posses-

Frcderic  II.

sion  of  Germany.

The  eventful  life  of  Frederic  II.  was  chiefly  passed  in
It;dy.  To  preserve  his  hereditary  dominions,  and
chastise  the  Lombard  cities,  were  the  leading  ob¬
jects  of  his  political  and  military  career.  He  paid  therefore
but  little  attention  to  Germany,  from  which  it  was  in  vain
for  any  emperor  to  expect  effectual  assistance  towards  objects
of  his  own.  Careless  of  prerogatives  which  it  seemed  hardly
worth  an  effort  to  preserve,  he  sanctioned  the  independence
of  the  princes,  which  may  be  properly  dated  from  his  reign.
In  return,  they  readily  elected  his  son  Henry  king  of  the
Romans ;  and  on  his  being  implicated  in  a  rebellion,  deposed
him  with  equal  readiness,  and  substituted  his  brother  Conrad
at  the  emperor’s  request.1  But  in  the  latter  part  of  Fred¬
eric’s  reign  the  deadly  hatred  of  Rome  penetrated  beyond
the  Alps.  After  his  solemn  deposition  in  the  coun¬
cil  of  Lyons,  he  was  incapable,  in  ecclesiastical
eyes,  of  holding  the  imperial  sceptre.  Innocent
IV.  found,  however,  some  difficulty  in  setting  up  a
rival  emperor.  Henry  landgrave  of  Thuringia
made  an  indifferent  figure  in  this  character.  Upon
his  death,  William  count  of  Holland  was  chosen  by  the  party
adverse  to  Frederic  and  his  son  Conrad  ;  and  after  the  em¬
peror’s  death  he  had  some  success  against  the  latter.  It  is
hard  indeed  to  say  that  any  one  was  actually  sovereign  for
twenty-two  years  that  followed  the  death  of  Frederic  II.:

a  period  of  contested  title  and  universal  anarchy,
which  is  usually  denominated  the  grand  interreg¬
num.  On  the  decease  of  William  of  Holland,  in
1256,  a  schism  among  the  electors  produced  the
double  choice  of  Richard  earl  of  Cornwall,  and
Alfonso  X.  king  of  Castile.  It  seems  not  easy  to
determine  which  of  these  candidates  had  a  legal  majority  of
votes ; 4  but  the  subsequent  recognition  of  almost  all  Germany,

Conse¬
quences  of
the  council
of  Lyons.

A.D.  1245.

a.d.  1248.

(Iran  i  in¬
terregnum.
A.D.  1250.

a.d.  1272.

Richard  of
Cornwall.

1  Strurius,  p.  457.  of  Treses,  haring  got  possession  of  tha

*  The  election  ought  legally  to  hare  town,  shut  out  the  archhiahops  of  Menta
been  made  at  Frankfort.  But  the  elector  and  Cologne,  and  the  count  palatine,  on

Germany.

GERMANIC  CONSTITUTION.

77

and  a  sort  of  possession  evidenced  by  public  acts,  which  have
been  held  valid,  as  well  as  the  general  consent  of  contem¬
poraries,  may  justify  us  in  adding  Richard  to  the  imperial
list.  The  choice  indeed  was  ridiculous,  as  he  possessed  no
talents  which  could  compensate  for  his  want  of  power ;  but
the  electors  attained  their  objects ;  to  perpetuate  a  state  of
confusion  by  which  their  own  independence  was  consolidated,
and  to  plunder  without  scruple  a  man,  like  Didius  at  Rome,
rich  and  foolish  enough  to  purchase  the  first  place  upon
earth.

That  place  indeed  was  now  become  a  mockery  of  great¬
ness.  For  more  than  two  centuries,  notwithstand¬
ing  the  temporary  influence  of  Frederic  Barbarossa  l^manic*6
and  his  son,  the  imperial  authority  had  been  ®?0uastltu'
in  a  state  of  gradual  decay.  From  the  time  of
Frederic  II.  it  had  bordered  upon  absolute  insignificance;
and  the  more  prudent  German  princes  were  slow  to  canvass
for  a  dignity  so  little  accompanied  by  respect.  The  changes
wrought  in  the  Germanic  constitution  during  the  period  of
the  Suabian  emperors  chiefly  consist  in  the  establishment  of
an  oligarchy  of  electors,  and  of  the  territorial  sovereignty  of
the  princes.

1.  At  the  extinction  of  the  Franconian  line  by  the  death
of  Henry  V.  it  was  determined  by  the  German  _  .

,  ...  '  ,  ,  .  .  •  ,1  ,  •  Electors.

nobility  to  make  their  empire  practically  elective,
admitting  no  right,  or  even  natural  pretension,  in  the  eldest
son  of  a  reigning  sovereign.  Their  choice  upon  former  oc¬
casions  had  been  made  by  free  and  general  suffrage.  But  it
may  be  presumed  that  each  nation  voted  unanimously,  and
according  to  the  disposition  of  its  duke.  It  is  probable,  too,
that  the  leaders,  after  discussing  in  previous  deliberations  the
merits  of  the  several  candidates,  submitted  their  own  resolu¬
tions  to  the  assembly,  which  would  generally  concur  in  them
without  hesitation.  At  the  election  of  Lothaire,  in  1124,  we

pretence  of  apprehending  violence.  They
met  under  the  walls,  and  there  elected
Richard.  Afterwards  Alfonso  was  chosen
by  the  votes  of  Treves,  Saxony,  and
Brandenburg.  Historians  differ  about
the  vote  of  Ottocar  king  of  Bohemia,
which  would  turn  the  scale.  Some  time
after  the  election  it  is  certain  that  he
was  on  the  side  of  Richard.  Perhaps  we
may  collect  from  the  opposite  statements
in  Struvius,  p.  504,  that  the  proxies  of

Ottocar  had  voted  for  Alfonso,  and  that
he  did  not  think  fit  to  recognize  their
act.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Richard
was  de  facto  sovereign  of  Germany  ;  and
it  is  singular  that  Struvius  should  assert
the  contrary,  on  the  authority  of  an  in¬
strument  of  Rodolph.  which  expressly
designates  him  king,  per  quondam
Richardum  regem  iilustrem.  Struv.  p.
502.

78

GERMANIC  CONSTITUTION.

Chap.  V.

find  an  evident  instance  of  this  previous  choice,  or,  as  it  was
called,  prcetaxation,  from  which  the  electoral  college  of  Ger¬
many  has  been  derived.  The  princes,  it  is  said,  trusted  the
choice  of  an  emperor  to  ten  persons,  in  whose  judgment  they
promised  to  acquiesce.1  This  precedent  was,  in  all  likeli¬
hood,  followed  at  all  subsequent  elections.  The  proofs  indeed
are  not  perfectly  clear.  But  in  the  famous  privilege  of
Austria,  granted  by  Frederic  I.  in  1  loti,  he  bestows  a  rank
upon  the  newly-created  duke  of  that  country,  immediately
after  the  electing  princes  (post  principes  electores);2  a  strong
presumption  that  the  right  of  pretaxation  was  not  only  estab¬
lished,  but  limited  to  a  few  definite  persons.  In  a  letter  of
Innocent  III.,  concerning  the  double  election  of  Philip  and
Otho  in  1 198,  he  asserts  the  latter  to  have  had  a  majority  in
his  favor  of  those  to  whom  the  right  of  election  chiefly  be¬
longs  (ad  quos  principaliter  spectat  electio).*  And  a  law  of
Otho  in  1208,  if  it  be  genuine,  appears  to  fix  the  exclusive
privilege  of  the  seven  electors.4  Nevertheless,  so  obscure  is
this  important  part  of  the  Germanic  system,  that  we  find
four  ecclesiastical  and  two  secular  princes  concurring  with
the  regular  electors  in  the  act,  as  reported  by  a  contemporary
writer,  that  creates  Conrad,  son  of  Frederic  II.,  king  of  the
Romans.5  This,  however,  may  have  been  an  irregular  de¬
viation  from  the  principle  already  established.  But  it  is
admitted  that  all  the  princes  retained,  at  least  during  the
twelfth  century,  their  consenting  suffrage ;  like  the  laity  in
an  episcopal  election,  whose  approbation  continued  to  be
necessary  long  after  the  real  power  of  choice  had  been
withdrawn  from  them.®

It  is  not  easy  to  account  for  all  the  circumstances  that
gave  to  seven  spiritual  and  temporal  princes  this  distinguish¬
ed  preeminence.  The  three  archbishops,  Mentz,  Treves,  and
Cologne,  were  always  indeed  at  the  head  of  the  German
church.  But  the  secular  electors  should  naturally  have  been
the  dukes  of  four  nations:  Saxony,  Franconia,  Suabia,  and
Bavaria.  We  find,  however,  only  the  first  of  these  in  the

l  Struciua,  p.  867.  Schmidt,  t.  ill.  the  atyle  of  the  act  of  election  from  the
p.  831.  Chronicle  of  Krancia  Pippin.

>  Schmidt,  t.  111.  p.  890.  •  Thin  ia  manifest  by  the  carlo n»  pa*.

>  Pf.-ff.-l,  p.  860.  aagea  relating  to  the  elertiona  of  Philip

*  Schmidt,  t.  ir.  p.  80.  and  Otho,  quoted  by  Strurlu*.  p.  4‘Jl,

•  Thia  ia  not  mentioned  in  Struct ui,  or  43).  See,  too,  Pfcflel,  ubl  aupm.  Schmidt,
the  other  German  writers.  But  Oenlna  t.  It.  p.  79.

(Kivoluzioui  d'ltalia,  1.  lx.  e.  9)  quote*

Germany.

GERMANIC  CONSTITUTION.

79

undisputed  exercise  of  a  vote.  It  seems  probable  that,  when
the  electoral  princes  came  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rest,
their  privilege  was  considered  as  peculiarly  connected  with
the  discharge  of  one  of  the  great  offices  in  the  imperial
court.  These  were  attached,  as  early  as  the  diet  of  Mentz
in  1184,  to  the  four  electors,  who  ever  afterwards  possessed
them:  the  duke  of  Saxony  having  then  officiated  as  arch-
marshal,  the  count  palatine  of  the  Rhine  as  arch-steward,
the  king  of  Bohemia  as  arch-cupbearer,  and  the  margrave
of  Brandenburg  as  arch-chamberlain  of  the  empire.1  But
it  still  continues  a  problem  why  the  three  latter  offices,  with
the  electoral  capacity  as  their  incident,  should  not  rather  have
been  granted  to  the  dukes  of  Franconia,  Suabia,  and  Bavaria.
I  have  seen  no  adequate  explanation  of  this  circumstance;
which  may  perhaps  lead  us  to  presume  that  the  right  of  pre¬
election  was  not  quite  so  soon  confined  to  the  precise  number
of  seven  princes.  The  final  extinction  of  two  great  original
duchies,  Franconia  and  Suabia,  in  the  thirteenth  century,
left  the  electoral  rights  of  the  count  palatine  and  the  mar¬
grave  of  Brandenburg  beyond  dispute.  But  the  dukes  of
Bavaria  continued  to  claim  a  vote  in  opposition  to  the  kings
of  Bohemia.  At  the  election  of  Rodolpli  in  1272  the  two
brothers  of  the  house  of  Wittelsbach  voted  separately,  as
count  palatine  and  duke  of  Lower  Bavaria.  Ottocar  was  ex¬
cluded  upon  this  occasion;  and  it  was  not  till  1290  that  the
suffrage  of  Bohemia  was  fully  recognized.  The  Palatine
and  Bavarian  branches,  however,  continued  to  enjoy  their
family  vote  conjointly,  by  a  determination  of  Rudolph  ;  upon
which  Louis  of  Bavaria  slightly  innovated,  by  rendering  the
suffrage  alternate.  But  the  Golden  Bull  of  Charles  IV.  put
an  end  to  all  doubts  on  the  rights  of  electoral  houses,  and  ab¬
solutely  excluded  Bavaria  from  voting.  The  limitation  to
6even  electors,  first  perhaps  fixed  by  accident,  came  to  be  in¬
vested  with  a  sort  of  mysterious  importance,  and  certainly
was  considered,  until  times  comparatively  recent,  as  a  funda¬
mental  law  of  the  empire.4

2.  It  might  appear  natural  to  expect  that  an  oligarchy  of
seven  persons,  who  had  thus  excluded  their  equals  Primes  and
from  all  share  in  the  election  of  a  sovereign,  would  Jtriornu-"1
assume  still  greater  authority,  and  trespass  fur-  biUt-)1'-

l  Sehmldt.  t.  It.  p.  78.

«  Ibid  p  78,  668  ;  Putter,  p.  274;  Pfeffel,  p.  435,  565  ;  Strurius,  p.  511.

80

GERMANIC  CONSTITUTION.

Chap.  V.

ther  upon  the  less  powerful  vassals  of  the  empire.  But
while  the  electors  were  establishing  their  peculiar  privilege,
the  class  immediately  inferior  raised  itself  by  important  acqui¬
sitions  of  power.  The  German  dukes,  even  after  they  be¬
came  hereditary,  did  not  succeed  in  compelling  the  chief  nobil¬
ity  within  their  limits  to  hold  their  lands  in  fief  so  completely
as  the  peers  of  France  had  done.  The  nobles  of  Suabia  re¬
fused  to  follow  their  duke  into  the  field  against  the  emperor
Conrad  II.1  Of  this  aristocracy  the  superior  class  were  de¬
nominated  princes;  an  appellation  which,  after  the  eleventh
century,  distinguished  them  from  the  untitled  nobility,  most  of
whom  were  their  vassals.  They  were  constituent  parts  of  all
diets ;  and  though  gradually  deprived  of  their  original  partici¬
pation  in  electing  an  emperor,  possessed,  in  all  other  respects,
the  same  rights  as  the  dukes  or  electors.  Some  of  them  were
fully  equal  to  the  electors  in  birth  as  well  as  extent  of  domin¬
ions  ;  such  as  the  princely  houses  of  Austria,  Hesse,  Brunswic,
and  Misnia.  By  the  division  of  Henry  the  Lion’s  vast  terri¬
tories,*  and  by  the  absolute  extinction  of  the  Suabian  family
in  the  following  century,  a  great  many  princes  acquired  ad¬
ditional  weight.  Of  the  ancient  duchies,  only  Saxony  and
Bavaria  remained ;  the  former  of  which  especially  was  so  dis¬
membered,  that  it  was  vain  to  attempt  any  renewal  of  the
ducal  jurisdiction.  That  of  the  emperor,  formerly  exercised
by  the  counts  palatine,  went  almost  equally  into  disuse  during
the  contest  between  Philip  and  Otho  IV.  The  princes  ac¬
cordingly  had  acted  with  sovereign  independence  within  their
own  fiefs  before  the  reign  of  Frederic  II. ;  but  the  legal  rec¬
ognition  of  their  immunities  was  reserved  for  two  edicts  of
that  emperor;  one,  in  1220,  relating  to  ecclesiastical,  and  the
other,  in  1232,  to  secular  princes.  By  these  he  engaged  nei¬
ther  to  levy  the  customary  imperial  dues,  nor  to  permit  the
jurisdiction  of  the  palatine  judges,  within  the  limits  of  a  state
of  the  empire  ; 8  concessions  that  amounted  to  little  less  than
an  abdication  of  his  own  sovereignty.  From  this  epoch  the
territorial  independence  of  the  states  may  be  dated.

A  class  of  titled  nobility,  inferior  to  the  princes,  were  the
counts  of  the  empire,  who  seem  to  have  been  separated  from
the  former  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  to  have  lost  at  the  same

1  Pfeffcl,  p.  200.  quit*  a  new  (hr*  to  Germany,  In  Pfeffcl,

*  See  (he  arrangement*  made  in  conae-  p.  234 ;  alao  p.  437.
quence  of  lienry's  forfeiture,  which  gave  *  Pfeffel,  p.  8b4;  Putter,  p.  233.

Germany.

RODOLPII  OF  HAPSBURG.

81

time  their  right  of  voting  in  the  diets.1  In  some  parts  of
Germany,  chiefly  in  Franconia  and  upon  the  Rhine,  there
always  existed  a  very  numerous  body  of  lower  nobility ;  unti¬
tled  at  least  till  modern  times,  but  subject  to  no  superior  ex¬
cept  the  emperor.  These  are  supposod  to  have  become  im¬
mediate,  after  the  destruction  of  the  house  of  Suabia,  within
whose  duchies  they  had  been  comprehended.2

A  short  interval  elapsed  after  the  death  of  Richard  of  Corn¬
wall  before  the  electors  could  be  induced,  by  the
deplorable  state  of  confusion  into  which  Germany  Rodolph  of
had  fallen,  to  fill  the  imperial  throne.  Their  choice  ”^127?'
was  however  the  best  that  could  have  been  made.

It  fell  upon  Rodolph  count  of  Ilapsburg,  a  prince  of  very  an¬
cient  family,  and  of  considerable  possessions  as  well  in  Switz¬
erland  as  upon  each  bank  of  the  Upper  Rhine,  but  not  suffi¬
ciently  powerful  to  alarm  the  electoral  oligarchy.  Rodolph  was
brave,  active,  and  just ;  but  his  characteristic  quality  appears
to  have  been  good  sense,  and  judgment  of  the  circumstances
in  which  he  was  placed.  Of  this  he  gave  a  signal  proof  in
relinquishing  the  favorite  project  of  so  many  preceding  em¬
perors,  and  leaving  Italy  altogether  to  itself.  At  home  he
manifested  a  vigilant  spirit  in  administering  justice,  and  is
said  to  have  destroyed  seventy  strongholds  of  noble  robbers  in
Thuringia  and  other  parts,  bringing  many  of  the  criminals  to
capital  punishment.8  But  he  wisely  avoided  giving  offence  to
the  more  powerful  princes ;  and  during  his  reign  there  were
hardly  any  rebellions  in  Germany.

It  was  a  very  reasonable  object  of  every  emperor  to  ag¬
grandize  his  family  by  investing  his  near  kindred  investment
with  vacant  fiefs;  but  no  one  was  so  fortunate  in  5ubel8t“"th
his  opportunities  as  Rodolph.  At  his  accession,  duchy  of
Austria,  Styria,  and  Carniola  were  in  the  hands  of  Au9t  '
Ottocar  king  of  Bohemia.  These  extensive  and  fertile  coun¬
tries  had  been  formed  into  a  march  or  margraviate,  after  the
victories  of  Otho  the  Great  over  the  Hungarians.  Frederic
Barbarossa  erected  them  into  a  duchy,  with  many  distinguish¬
ed  privileges,  especially  that  of  female  succession,  hitherto

1  In  the  instruments  relating  to  the  *  Pfeffcl,  p.  456;  Putter,  p.  254;  Stru-
eleetion  of  Otho  IV.  the  prince*  sign  vius.  p.  611.

their  names,  Ego  N.  clegi  et  subscripsi.  3  Struvius,  p.  630.  Coxe’s  Hist,  of
But  the  counts  only  as  follows  :  Ego  N.  House  of  Austria,  p.  57.  This  valuable
couseusi  et  subscripsi.  Pfeflel,  p.  300.  work  contains  a  full  and  interesting  uo-

count  of  Kodolph’s  reign.

VOL.  II.

G

82

THE  EMPIRE  AFTER  RODOLPH.

Chap.  V.

possession
a.d.  1283.

unknown  in  the  feudal  principalities  of  Germany.1  Upon
the  extinction  of  the  house  of  Bamberg,  which  had  enjoyed
this  duchy,  it  was  granted  by  Frederic  II.  to  a  cousin  ol  his
own  name ;  after  whose  death  a  disputed  succession  gave  rise
to  several  changes,  and  ultimately  enabled  Ottocar  to  gain
of  the  country.  Against  this  king  of  Bohemia
Rodolph  waged  two  successful  wars,  and  recovered
the  Austrian  provinces,  which,  as  vacant  fiefs,  he
conferred,  with  the  consent  of  the  diet,  upon  his  son  Albert.'1

Notwithstanding  the  merit  and  popularity  of  Rodolph,
star.,  or  tho  **le  electors  refused  to  choose  his  son  king  of  the
empire  after  Romans  in  his  lifetime ;  and,  after  his  death,  de-
liodotph.  termined  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  hereditary
succession,  put  Adolphus  of  Nassau  upon  the  throne.  There
is  very  little  to  attract  notice  in  the  domestic  history
of  the  empire  during  the  next  two  centuries.  From
Adolphus  to  Sigismund  every  emperor  had  either  to
struggle  against  a  competitor  claiming  the  majority
of  votes  at  his  election,  or  against  a  combination
of  the  electors  to  dethrone  him.  The  imperial
authority  became  more  and  more  ineffective  ;
yet  it  was  frequently  made  a  subject  of  reproach
against  the  emperors  that  they  did  not  main¬
tain  a  sovereignty  to  which  no  one  was  disposed  to
submit.

It  may  appear  surprising  that  the  Germanic  confederacy
under  the  nominal  supremacy  of  an  emperor  should  have
been  preserved  in  circumstances  apparently  so  calculated  to
dissolve  it.  But,  besides  the  natural  effect  of  prejudice  and  a
famous  name,  there  were  sufficient  reasons  to  induce  the  elec¬
tors  to  preserve  a  form  of  government  in  which  they  bore  so

Adolphus.
a.t>.  1292.
Albert  I.
A.n.  1298.
Henry  VII.
a.d.  1308.
Louis  IV.
a.i>.  1314.

Charles  IV.
A.n.  1347.
‘Wenoeslaufl.
A.n.  1378.
Kobert.

A.n.  1400.
&igismund.
A.n.  1414.

1  The  privileges  of  Austria  were  granted
to  the  margrave  Henry  in  1168,  by  way
of  indemnity  for  his  restitution  of  Bava¬
ria  to  Henrv  the  Lion.  The  territory
between  the  Inn  and  the  Kins  wa*  sepa¬
rated  from  the  latter  province,  and  an¬
nexed  lo  Austria  at  this  time.  The
duke*  m  Austria  are  declared  equal  in
rank  to  the  palatine  archdukes  (archi-
duclbus  palatinis).  This  expression  gave
a  hint  to  the  duke  Kodolph  IV.  to  as¬
sume  the  title  of  archduke  of  Austria.
Schmidt,  t.  111.  p.  390  Frederic  11.  even
created  the  duke  of  Austria  king :  a  very
curious  fact  though  neither  he  nor  his
successors  ever  assumed  the  title.  Stru-

▼ins,  p.  483.  The  Instrument  runs  as
follows:  Ducat  us  Austria*  et  8tyrla\
cum  pertiuentiis  et  tenninis  suls  quot
hartenu*  hahuit.  ad  nomen  et  honorrm
regium  transferentes,  te  hartenus  duc.i-
tuum  pnrdictorum  ducem,  de  potestatis
uostne  plenitudlne  et  magnificently
special!  promoveinus  In  regem,  per  liber-
tales  et  Jura  pnedlcturo  regnum  tuum
prtrsentis  epignunmatia  auctoritate  do-
nan  tes,  qua*  ntriam  deceant  dignitatem;
ut  tamrn  ex  honora  quern  tibi  libenter
addimus,  nihil  honoris  et  juris  nostri
diadrmatl*  aut  Imperil  subtrahatur.

*  Struvius,  p.  626;  8c timid t  ;  Coze.

Germany.

CUSTOM  OF  PARTITION.

83

decided  a  sway.  Accident  had  in  a  considerable  degree  re¬
stricted  the  electoral  suffrages  to  seven  princes.  Without
the  college  there  were  houses  more  substantially  powerful
than  any  within  it.  The  duchy  of  Saxony  had  been  subdi¬
vided  by  repeated  partitions  among  children,  till  the  electoral
right  was  vested  in  a  prince  who  possessed  only  the  small
territory  of  Wittenberg.  The  great  families  of  Austria,  Ba¬
varia,  and  Luxemburg,  though  not  electoral,  were  the  real
heads  of  the  German  body ;  and  though  the  two  former  lost
much  of  their  influence  for  a  time  through  the  pernicious
custom  of  partition,  the  empire  seldom  looked  for  its  head  to
any  other  house  than  one  of  these  three.

While  the  duchies  and  counties  of  Germany  retained  their
original  character  of  offices  or  governments,  they  custom  of
were  of  course,  even  though  considered  as  hered-  partition,
itary,  not  subject  to  partition  among  children.  When  they
acquired  the  nature  of  fiefs,  it  was  still  consonant  to  the  prin¬
ciples  of  a  feudal  tenure  that  the  eldest  son  should  inherit
according  to  the  law  of  primogeniture ;  an  inferior  provision
or  appanage,  at  most,  being  reserved  for  the  younger  children.
The  law  of  England  favored  the  eldest  exclusively ;  that  of
France  gave  him  great  advantages.  But  in  Germany  a  dif¬
ferent  rule  began  to  prevail  about  the  thirteenth  century.1
An  equal  partition  of  the  inheritance,  without  the  least  regard
to  priority  of  birth,  was  the  general  law  of  its  principalities.
Sometimes  this  was  effected  by  undivided  possession,  or  ten¬
ancy  in  common,  the  brothers  residing  together,  and  reigning
jointly.  This  tended  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  dominion ;
but  as  it  was  frequently  incommodious,  a  more  usual  practice
was  to  divide  the  territory.  From  such  partitions  are  derived
those  numerous  independent  principalities  of  the  same  house,
many  of  which  still  subsist  in  Germany.  In  1589  there  were
eight  reigning  princes  of  the  Palatine  family;  and  fourteen,
in  1675,  of  that  of  Saxony.2  Originally  these  partitions  were
in  general  absolute  and  without  reversion  ;  but,  as  their  effect
in  weakening  families  became  evident,  a  practice  was  intro¬
duced  of  making  compacts  of  reciprocal  succession,  by  which
a  fief  was  prevented  from  escheating  to  the  empire,  until  all

1  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.  66.  Pfeflel,  p.  280,  Tided  into  two  branches,  Baden  and
maintains  that  partitions  were  not  intro-  Hochberg,  in  1190,  with  righto  of  mutual
duced  till  the  latter  end  of  the  thirteenth  reversion.

century.  This  may  be  true  as  a  general  *  Pfeffel,  p.  289;  Putter,  p.  180.
rule ;  but  1  find  the  house  of  Baden  di-

81

HOUSE  OF  LUXEMBURG.

Chap.  V.

the  male  posterity  of  the  first  feudatory  should  be  extinct.
Thus,  while  the  German  empire  survived,  all  the  priuces  of
Ilesse  or  of  Saxony  had  reciprocal  contingencies  of  succes¬
sion,  or  what  our  lawyers  call  cross-remainders,  to  each  other’s
dominions.  A  different  system  was  gradually  adopted.  By
the  Golden  Bull  of  Charles  IYT.  the  electoral  territory,  that
is,  the  particular  district  to  which  the  electoral  suffrage  was
inseparably  attached,  became  incapable  of  partition,  and  was
to  descend  to  the  eldest  son.  In  the  fifteenth  century  the
present  house  of  Brandenburg  set  the  first  example  of  estab¬
lishing  primogeniture  by  law ;  the  principalities  of  Anspach
and  Bayreuth  were  dismembered  from  it  for  the  benefit  of
younger  branches ;  but  it  was  declared  that  all  the  other  do¬
minions  of  the  family  should  for  the  future  belong  exclusively
to  the  reigning  elector.  This  politic  measure  was  adopted  in
several  other  families ;  but,  even  in  the  sixteenth  century,
the  prejudice  was  not  removed,  and  some  German  princes
denounced  curses  on  their  posterity,  if  they  should  introduce
the  impious  custom  of  primogeniture.1  Notwithstanding  these
subdivisions,  and  the  most  remarkable  of  those  which  I  have
mentioned  are  of  a  date  rather  subsequent  to  the  middle  ages,
the  antagonist  principle  of  consolidation  by  various  means  of
acquisition  was  so  actively  at  work  that  several  princely
houses,  especially  those  of  Ilohenzollern  or  Brandenburg,  of
Ilesse,  Wirtemburg,  and  the  Palatinate,  derive  their  impor¬
tance  from  the  same  era,  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,
in  which  the  prejudice  against  primogeniture  was  the  strong¬
est.  And  thus  it  will  often  be  found  in  private  patrimonies;
the  tendency  to  consolidation  of  property  works  more  rapidly
than  that  to  its  disintegration  by  a  law  of  gavelkind.

Weakened  by  these  subdivisions,  the  principalities  of  Ger¬
many  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  shrink  to  a
more  and  more  diminutive  size  in  the  scale  of  nations.  But
Honae  of  one  family,  the  most  illustrious  of  the  former  age,
Luxemburg,  was  less  exposed  to  this  enfeebling  system.  Henry
VII.  count  of  Luxemburg,  a  man  of  much  more  personal
merit  tluin  hereditary  imjnjrtance,  was  elevated  to  the  empire
in  1308.  Mast  part  of  his  short  reign  he  passed  in  Italy ;
but  he  had  a  fortunate  opportunity  of  obtaining  the  crown  of
Bohemia  for  his  son.  John  king  of  Bohemia  did  not  himself

I  Pfcffel,  p.  2S0.

Germany.

GOLDEN  BULL.

85

wear  the  imperial  crown  ;  but  three  of  his  descendants  pos¬
sessed  it,  with  less  interruption  than  could  have  been  expected.
His  son  Charles  IV.  succeeded  Louis  of  Bavaria  in  1347;
not  indeed  without  opposition,  for  a  double  election  and  a  civil
war  were  matters  of  course  in  Germany.  Charles  IV.  has
been  treated  with  more  derision  by  his  contemporaries,  and
consequently  by  later  writers,  than  almost  any  prince  in  his¬
tory  ;  yet  he  was  remarkably  successful  in  the  only  objects
that  lie  seriously  pursued.  Deficient  in  personal  courage,
insensible  of  humiliation,  bending  without  shame  to  the  pope,
to  the  Italians,  to  the  electors,  so  poor  and  so  little  reverenced
as  to  be  arrested  by  a  butcher  at  Worms  for  want  of  paying
his  demand,  Charles  IV.  affords  a  proof  that  a  certain  dex¬
terity  and  cold-blooded  perseverance  may  occasionally  supply,
in  a  sovereign,  the  want  of  more  respectable  qualities.  He
has  been  reproached  with  neglecting  the  empire.  But  he
never  designed  to  trouble  himself  about  the  empire,  except
for  his  private  ends.  He  did  not  neglect  the  kingdom  of
Bohemia,  to  which  he  almost  seemed  to  render  Germany  a
province.  Bohemia  had  been  long  considered  as  a  fief  of
the  empire,  and  indeed  could  pretend  to  an  electoral  vote  by
no  other  title.  Charles,  however,  gave  the  states  by  law  the
right  of  choosing  a  king,  on  the  extinction  of  the  royal  family,
which  seems  derogatory  to  the  imperial  prerogative.1  It  was
much  more  material  that,  upon  acquiring  Brandenburg,  partly
by  conquest,  and  partly  by  a  compact  of  succession  in  1373,
he  not  only  invested  his  sons  with  it,  which  was  conformable
to  usage,  but  tried  to  annex  that  electorate  forever  to  the
kingdom  of  Bohemia.2  He  constantly  resided  at  Prague,
where  he  founded  a  celebrated  university,  and  embellished
the  city  with  buildings.  This  kingdom,  augmented  also  dur¬
ing  his  reign  by  the  acquisition  of  Silesia,  he  bequeathed  to
his  son  Wenccslaus,  for  whom,  by  pliancy  towards  the  elec¬
tors  and  the  court  of  Rome,  he  had  procured,  against  all
recent  example,  the  imperial  succession.8

The  reign  of  Charles  IV.  is  distinguished  in  the  constitu¬
tional  history  of  the  empire  by  his  Golden  Bull ;  Golden  null,
an  instrument  which  finally  ascertained  the  pre-  4  D'  1355‘
rogatives  of  the  electoral  college.  The  Golden  Bull  ter¬
minated  the  disputes  which  had  arisen  between  different

l  Strnvius,  p.  641.

1  Pfetfel,  p.  675:  Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  696.

*  Struvius,  p.  037.

86

DEPOSITION  OF  WENCESLAUS.

CiiAr.  V.

members  of  the  same  house  as  to  their  right  of  suffrage,
which  was  declared  inherent  in  certain  definite  territories.
The  number  was  absolutely  restrained  to  seven.  The  place
of  legal  imperial  elections  was  fixed  at  F rankfort ;  of  coro¬
nations,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  ;  and  the  latter  ceremony  was  to
be  performed  by  the  archbishop  of  Cologne.  These  regula¬
tions,  though  consonant  to  ancient  usage,  had  not  always  been
observed,  and  their  neglect  had  sometimes  excited  questions
as  to  the  validity  of  elections.  The  dignity  of  elector  was
enhanced  by  the  Golden  Bull  as  highly  as  an  imperial  edict
could  carry  it ;  they  were  declared  equal  to  kings,  and  con¬
spiracy  against  their  persons  incurred  the  penalty  of  high
treason.1  Many  other  privileges  are  granted  to  render  them
more  completely  sovereign  within  their  dominions.  It  seems
extraordinary  that  Charles  should  have  voluntarily  elevated
an  oligarchy,  from  whose  pretensions  his  predecessors  had
frequently  suffered  injury.  But  he  had  more  to  apprehend
from  the  two  great  families  of  Bavaria  and  Austria,  whom
he  relatively  depressed  by  giving  such  a  preponderance  to
the  seven  electors,  than  from  any  members  of  the  college.
By  his  compact  with  Brandenburg  he  had  a  fair  prospect  of
adding  a  second  vote  to  his  own ;  and  there  was  more  room
for  intrigue  and  management,  which  Charles  always  preferred
to  arms,  with  a  small  number,  than  with  the  whole  hotly  of
princes.

The  next  reign,  nevertheless,  evinced  the  danger  of  in-
Dcposttion  vesting  the  electors  with  such  preponderating
of  Wencea-  authority.  Wenceslaus,  a  supine  and  voluptuous
man,  less  respected,  and  more  negligent  of
Germany,  if  possible,  than  his  father,  was  regularly  deposed
by  a  majority  of  the  electoral  college  in  1400.  This  right,
if  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  right,  they  had  already  used
against  Adolphus  of  Nassau  in  1298,  and  against  Louis  of
Bavaria  in  1346.  They  chose  Robert  count  palatine  instead
of  Wenceslaus ;  and  though  the  latter  did  not  cease  to  have
some  adherents,  Iiol>ert  has  generally  been  counted  among
the  lawful  emperors.*  Upon  his  death  the  empire  returned

1  Pfeflel,  p.  Wifi:  Putter,  p.  271;  *  Many  of  the  cities  besides  wm

Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  668.  The  Oolden  BuU  prince*,  continued  to  recognise  Wenov,-
not  only  fixed  the  Palatine  rote,  in  ab-  Liu*  throughout  the  life  of  Robert ;  and
solute  exclusion  of  Bararia.  but  nettled  the  latter  «m«  »o  much  con*l  lered  a*  an
a  controrersy  of  long  standing  between  usurper  by  foreign  state*,  that  his  am.
the  two  branches  of  the  house  of  Saxony,  baasador*  were  refused  admittance  at  the
Wittenberg  and  Lauenburg,  in  lator  of  council  of  Pisa.  Struvius,  p.  668.
the  former.

Germ  ast.

HOUSE  OF  AUSTRIA.

87

to  the  house  of  Luxemburg;  Wenceslaus  himself  waiving
his  rights  in  favor  of  his  brother  Sigismund  of  Hungary.1

The  house  of  Austria  had  hitherto  given  but  two  emperors
to  Germany,  Rodolph  its  founder,  and  his  son  House  of
Albert,  whom  a  successful  rebellion  elevated  in  Austria-
the  place  of  Adolphus.  Upon  the  death  of  Henry  of  Lux¬
emburg,  in  1313,  Frederic,  son  of  Albert,  disputed  the
election  of  Louis  duke  of  Bavaria,  alleging  a  majority  of
genuine  votes.  This  produced  a  civil  war,  in  which  the
Austrian  party  were  entirely  worsted.  Though  they  ad¬
vanced  no  pretensions  to  the  imperial  dignity  during  the  rest
of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  princes  of  that  line  added  to
their  possessions  Carinthia,  Istria,  and  the  Tyrol.  As  a
counterbalance  to  these  acquisitions,  they  lost  a  great  part  of
their  ancient  inheritance  by  unsuccessful  wars  with  the  Swiss.
According  to  the  custom  of  partition,  so  injurious  to  princely
houses,  their  dominions  were  divided  among  three  branches :
one  reigning  in  Austria,  a  second  in  Styria  and  Albert  n.
the  adjacent  provinces,  a  third  in  the  Tyrol  and  A  D- 1438-
Alsace.  This  had  in  a  considerable  degree  eclipsed  the
glory  of  the  house  of  Hapsburg.  But  it  was  now  its  destiny
to  revive,  and  to  enter  upon  a  career  of  prosperity  which  has
never  since  been  permanently  interrupted.  Albert  duke  of
Austria,  who  had  married  Sigismund’s  only  daughter,  the
queen  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  was  raised  to  the  imperial
throne  upon  the  death  of  his  father-in-law  in  1437.  He  died
in  two  years,  leaving  his  wife  pregnant  with  a  son,  Ladislaus
Posthumus,  who  afterwards  reigned  in  the  two  kingdoms  just
mentioned ;  and  the  choice  of  the  electors  fell  upon  F rederic
duke  of  Styria,  second-cousin  of  the  last  emperor,  from
whose  posterity  it  never  departed,  except  in  a  single  instance,
upon  the  extinction  of  his  male  line  in  1740.

Frederic  III.  reigned  fifty-three  years,  a  longer  period
than  any  of  his  predecessors ;  and  his  personal  RpjKn  of
character  was  more  insignificant.  With  better  Frederic  hi.
fortune  than  could  be  expected,  considering  both
these  circumstances,  he  escaped  any  overt  attempt

1  This  election  of  Sigismund  was  not  was  not  crowned  at  Frankfort,  has  never
nncontested  :  Jo*.**,  or  Jodoou*,  margrave  been  reckoned  among  the  emperors,
of  Moravia,  having  been  chosen,  a*  far  though  modern  critics  agree  that  his
aa  appears,  by  a  legal  majority.  Ilowev-  title  was  legitimate.  Struvius,  p.  684;
er,  hi*  death  within  three  month*  re-  Pfeflel.  p.  612.
moved  the  difficulty ;  and  Joe.*e,  who

88

FREDERIC  III.

Chap.  T.

to  depose  him,  though  such  a  project  was  sometimes  in  agi¬
tation.  He  reigned  during  an  interesting  age,  full  of
remarkable  events,  and  big  with  others  of  more  leading
importance.  The  destruction  of  the  Greek  empire,  and
appearance  of  the  victorious  crescent  u|>on  the  Danube,  gave
an  unhappy  distinction  to  the  earlier  years  of  his  reign,  and
displayed  his  mean  and  pusillanimous  character  in  circum¬
stances  which  demanded  a  hero.  At  a  later  season  he  was
drawn  into  contentions  with  France  and  Burgundy,  which
ultimately  produced  a  new  and  more  general  combination
ot  European  politics.  Frederic,  always  poor,  and  scarcely
able  to  protect  himself  in  Austria  from  the  seditions  of  his
subjects,  or  the  inroads  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  was  yet
another  founder  ot  his  family,  and  left  their  fortunes  incom¬
parably  more  prosperous  than  at  his  accession.1  The  mar¬
riage  of  his  son  Maximilian  with  the  heiress  of  Burgundy
began  that  aggrandizement  of  the  house  of  Austria  which
Frederic  seems  to  have  anticipated.'  The  electors,  who  had

1  Ranke  has  drawn  the  character  of
Frederic  III.  more  favorably,  on  the
whole,  than  preceding  historians,  and
with  a  discrimination  which  enables  us
to  accouut  better  for  his  success  in  the
objects  which  he  had  at  heart.  44  From
his  youth  he  had  been  inured  to  trouble
and  adversity.  When  compelled  to  yield,
he  never  gave  up  a  point,  and  always
gained  the  mastery  in  the  end.  The
maintenance  of  his  prerogatives  was  the
governing  principle  of  all  his  actions,  the
more  because  they  acquired  an  ideal
value  from  their  connection  with  the  im¬
perial  dignity.  It  cost  him  a  long  and
severe  struggle  to  allow  his  son  to  be
crowned  king  of  the  Romans  ;  he  wished
to  take  the  supreme  authority  undivided
with  him  to  the  grave:  in  no  case  would
he  grant  Maximilian  any  independent
share  in  the  administration  of  govern¬
ment  ;  but  kept  him,  even  after  he  was
king,  still  as ‘son  of  the  house’;  nor
would  he  ever  give  him  anything  but
the  count-hip  of  Oftlll ;  ‘for  the  re*t  he
would  have  time  enough.’  His  frugality
bordered  on  avarice,  his  slowness  on  in¬
ertness.  his  stubtarnness  on  the  most
determined  selfishness;  yet  all  these
faults  are  removed  from*  vulgarity  by
high  qualities,  lie  had  at  bottom  a  sober
depth  of  judgment,  a  sc'late  and  inflex¬
ible  honor ;  the  aged  prince,  even  when
a  fugitive  imploring  succor,  had  a  per¬
sonal  bearing  which  uevcr  allowed  the
majesty  of  the  empire  to  sink.*’  Hist.
Reformation  (Translation),  rol.  U.  p.  ]o3.

A  character  of  such  obstinate  passivo
resistance  was  well  fitted  for  his  station
In  that  age;  spite  of  his  poverty  and
weakness,  he  was  hereditary  sovereign
of  extensive  and  fertile  territories ;  he
was  not  loved,  feared,  or  respected,  but
he  was  necessary  ;  he  was  a  German,  and
therefore  not  to  l*»  exchanged  for  a  king
of  Hungary  or  Bohemia  ;  he  was,  not  as
Frederic  of  Austria,  but  as  elected  em¬
peror,  the  sole  hope  for  a  more  settled
rule,  for  public  |*ace,  for  the  mainte¬
nance  of  a  confederacy  so  ill  held  togeth¬
er  by  any  other  tie.  Ilence  he  succeeded
in  what  seemed  so  difficult  —  in  pro¬
curing  the  election  of  .Maximilian  as
king  of  the  Romans:  and  interested  the
German  diet  in  maintaining  the  Burgun¬
dian  inheritance,  the  western  provinces  of
the  Netherlands,  which  the  laff.  r's  mar¬
riage  brought  Into  the  house  of  Austria.

*  The  famous  device  of  Austria.  A.  K.
I.  0.  U.,  was  first  used  by  Frederic  III.,
who  adopted  it  on  his  piate,  l**>ks,  and
buildings.  These  initials  stand  for,
Austria*  Est  liuperare  Orbi  Universe  ;
or.  In  German,  Allcs  Krdreich  1st  Oster-
relch  Unterthao  :  a  bold  assumption  for
a  man  who  was  not  safe  in  an  inch  of
his  dominions.  Strurius,  p.  7*22.  ||e

confirmed  the  arehtducal  title  of  his
family,  which  might  seem  implied  in  the
original  grant  of  Frederic  I.;  and  be¬
stowed  other  high  privilege  above  all
princes  of  the  empire.  These  are  enu¬
merated  In  Coxe's  House  of  Austria.
Tol.  i.  p.  288.

Germany.

FREE  IMPERIAL  CITIES.

89

lost  a  good  deal  of  their  former  spirit,  and  were  grown
sensible  of  the  necessity  of  choosing  a  powerful  sovereign,
made  no  opposition  to  Maximilian’s  becoming  king  of  the
Romans  in  his  father’s  lifetime.  The  Austrian  provinces
were  reunited  either  under  Frederic,  or  in  the  first  years  of
Maximilian;  so  that,  at  the  close  of  that  period  which  we
denominate  the  Middle  Ages,  the  German  empire,  sustained
by  the  patrimonial  dominions  of  its  chief,  became  again  con¬
siderable  in  the  scale  of  nations,  and  capable  of  preserving
a  balance  between  the  ambitious  monarchies  of  F ranee  and
Spain.

The  period  between  Rodolph  and  Frederic  III.  is  distin¬
guished  by  no  circumstance  so  interesting  as  the  prosperous
state  of  the  free  imperial  cities,  which  had  attained  their
maturity  about  the  commencement  of  that  interval.  Pr0KreS9  of
We  find  the  cities  of  Germany,  in  the  tenth  cen-  (Wimpo-
tury,  divided  into  such  as  depended  immediately  a  u  e  '
upon  the  empire,  which  were  usually  governed  by  their
bishop  as  imperial  vicar,  and  such  as  were  included  in  the
territories  of  the  dukes  and  counts.1  Some  of  the  former,
lying  principally  upon  the  Rhine  and  in  Franconia,  acquired
a  certain  degree  of  importance  before  the  expiration  of  the
eleventh  century.  Worms  and  Cologne  manifested  a  zealous
attachment  to  Henry  IV.,  whom  they  supported  in  despite  of
their  bishops.*  Ilis  son  Ilenry  V.  granted  privileges  of  en¬
franchisement  to  the  inferior  townsmen  or  artisans,  who  had
hitherto  been  distinguished  from  the  upper  class  of  freemen,
and  particularly  relieved  them  from  oppressive  usages,  which
either  gave  the  whole  of  their  movable  goods  to  the  lord
upon  their  decease,  or  at  least  enabled  him  to  seize  the  best
chattel  as  his  lieriot.8  lie  took  away  the  temporal  authority
of  the  bishop,  at  least  in  several  instances,  and  restored  the
cities  to  a  more  immediate  dependence  upon  the  empire.
The  citizens  were  classed  in  companies,  according  to  their
several  occupations ;  an  institution  which  was  speedily  adopted
in  other  commercial  countries.  It  does  not  appear  that  any
German  city  had  obtained,  under  this  emperor,  those  privi¬
leges  of  choosing  its  own  magistrates,  which  were  conceded

1  Pfeffel,  p.  187.  The  Othos  adopted  to  the  lay  aristocracy.  Putter,  p.  136;
the  fame  policy  in  Germany  which  they  Struviu*.  p.  262.
had  introduced  in  Italy,  conferring  the  *  Schmidt,  t.  ili.  p.  289.

temporal  government  of  cltiee  upon  the  8  Schmidt,  p.  242  ;  Pfeffel,  p.  293:  T)u-

bUhops;  probably  as  a  counterbalance  mont,  Corps  Diplomatique,  t.  1.  p.  64.

I

90

FREE  IMPERIAL  CITIES.

Chap.  V.

about  the  same  time,  in  a  few  instances,  to  those  of  France.1
Gradually,  however,  they  began  to  elect  councils  of  citizens,
as  a  sort  ot  senate  and  magistracy.  This  innovation  might
perhaps  take  place  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Frederic  I. ;  *  at
least  it  was  fully  established  in  that  of  his  grandson.  They
were  at  first  only  assistants  to  the  imperial  or  episcopal
bailiff,  who  probably  continued  to  administer  criminal  justice.
But  in  the  thirteenth  century  the  citizens,  grown  richer  and
stronger,  either  purchased  the  jurisdiction,  or  usurped  it
through  the  lord’s  neglect,  or  drove  out  the  bailiff  by  force.*
The  great  revolution  in  Franconia  and  Suabia  occasioned  by
the  fall  of  the  Ilohenstauffen  family  completed  the  victory
of  the  cities.  Those  which  had  depended  upon  mediate  lords
became  immediately  connected  with  the  empire;  and  with
the  empire  in  its  state  of  feebleness,  when  an  occasional
present  of  money  would  easily  induce  its  chief  to  acquiesce
in  any  claims  of  immunity  which  the  citizens  might  prefer.

It  was  a  natural  consequence  of  the  importance  which  the
free  citizens  had  reached,  and  of  their  immediacy,  that  they
were  admitted  to  a  place  in  the  diets,  or  general  meetings
of  the  confederacy.  They  were  tacitly  acknowledged  to  be
equally  sovereign  with  the  electors  and  princes.  No  proof
exists  of  any  law  by  which  they  were  adopted  into  the  diet.
We  find  it  said  that  Rodolph  of  Hapsburg,  in  1291,  renewed
his  oath  with  the  princes,  lords,  and  cities.  Under  the  em¬
peror  Henry  VII.  there  is  unequivocal  mention  of  the  three
orders  composing  the  diet;  electors,  princes,  and  deputies
from  cities.4  And  in  1344  they  appear  as  a  third  distinct
college  in  the  diet  of  Frankfort.®

The  inhabitants  of  these  free  cities  always  preserved  their
respect  for  the  emperor,  and  gave  him  much  less  vexation
than  his  other  subjects.  He  was  indeed  their  natural  friend.
But  the  nobility  and  prelates  were  their  natural  enemies ;
and  the  western  parts  of  Germany  were  the  scenes  of  irrec¬
oncilable  warfare  between  the  possessors  of  fortified  castles

*  Schmidt,  p.  245.  »  Schmidt,  t.  !t.  p.  96 ;  Pfcflrl.  p.  441.

*  Iu  the  charter  granted  by  Frederic  I.  *  M  a  unit  ibl  rex  m*x  hcbdoin  adibua
to  Spire  in  1182,  confirming  and  enlnrg-  cum  principibmi  rlectoribns  ct  aids  prin-
Ing  that  of  Henry  V.,  though  no  *xpr*»*n  ciplbu*  ft  nritatyrn  nuntna.  d«*  *uo  tran
mention  la  made  of  any  municipal  jurU-  nitu  et  dt  prieatandU  nerritlh  in  Italian*
diction,  yet  it  iwuu  implied  in  the  fol-  dUponeudo.  Auctor  apud  Schmidt,  t.  vl
lowing  word*:  Cau«am  in  clritat*  jain  p.  31.

lfite  content/* turn  non  epincopu*  aut  alia  *  i’frflel,  p.  662.
pote«ta m  extra  ciritatcm  determiuari
com  pel  let.  Dumont,  p.  Iu8.

Germany.

LEAGUES  OF  TIIE  CITIES.

91

and  the  inhabitants  of  fortified  cities.  Eacli  party  was  fre¬
quently  the  aggressor.  The  nobles  were  too  often  mere
robbers,  who  lived  upon  the  plunder  of  travellers.  But  the
citizens  were  almost  equally  inattentive  to  the  rights  of  others'.
It  was  their  policy  to  offer  the  privileges  of  burghership  to
all  strangers.  The  peasantry  of  feudal  lords,  Hying  to  a
neighboring  town,  found  an  asylum  constantly  open.  A
multitude  of  aliens,  thus  seeking  as  it  were  sanctuary,  dwelt
in  the  suburbs  or  liberties,  belween  the  city  walls  and  the
palisades  which  bounded  the  territory.  Hence  they  were
called  Pfahlbiirger,  or  burgesses  of  the  palisades ;  and  this
encroachment  on  the  rights  of  the  nobility  was  positively,
but  vainly,  prohibited  by  several  imperial  edicts,  especially
the  Golden  Bull.  Another  class  were  the  Ausbiirger,  or
outburghers,  who  had  been  admitted  to  privileges  of  citizen¬
ship,  though  resident  at  a  distance,  and  pretended  in  conse¬
quence  to  be  exempted  from  all  dues  to  their  original  feudal
superiors.  If  a  lord  resisted  so  unreasonable  a  claim,  he
incurred  the  danger  of  bringing  down  upon  himself  the  ven¬
geance  of  the  citizens.  These  outburghers  are  in  general
classed  under  the  general  name  of  Pfahlbiirger  by  contem¬
porary  writers.1

As  the  towns  were  conscious  of  the  hatred  which  the
nobility  bore  towards  them,  it  was  their  interest  Leagues  of
to  make  a  common  cause,  and  render  mutual  tlie  citles-
assistance.  From  this  necessity  of  maintaining,  by  united
exertions,  their  general  liberty,  the  German  cities  never
suffered  the  petty  jealousies,  which  might  no  doubt  exist
among  them,  to  ripen  into  such  deadly  feuds  as  sullied  the
glory,  and  ultimately  destroyed  the  freedom,  of  Lombardy.
They  withstood  the  bishops  and  barons  by  confederacies  of
their  own,  framed  expressly  to  secure  their  commerce  against
rapine,  or  unjust  exactions  of  toll.  More  than  sixty  cities,
with  three  ecclesiastical  electors  at  their  head,  formed  the
league  of  the  Rhine,  in  1255,  to  repel  the  inferior  nobility,
who,  having  now  become  immediate,  abused  that  independence
by  perpetual  robberies.1  The  Hanseatic  Union  owes  its  ori¬
gin  to  no  other  cause,  and  may  be  traced  perhaps  to  rather  a
higher  date.  About  the  year  1370  a  league  was  formed,

1  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.  98;  t.  vl.  p.  70;  *  Struvius,  p.  498;  Schmidt,  t.  iv.

PfcfTel.  p.  402.  Du  Cange,  Glo*.«.  y.  p.  101;  Pfoflel,  p.  416.

Pfahlbdrger.  Faubourg  is  derived  from
this  word.

92

PROVINCIAL  STATES.

Chap.  V.

which,  though  it  did  not  continue  so  long,  seems  to  have
produced  more  striking  effects  in  Germany.  The  cities  of
Suabia  and  the  Rhine  united  themselves  in  a  strict  con¬
federacy  against  the  princes,  and  especially  the  families  of
Wirtcmburg  and  Bavaria.  It  is  said  that  the  emperor
Weuceslaus  secretly  abetted  their  projects.  The  recent
successes  of  the  Swiss,  who  had  now  almost  established  their
republic,  inspired  their  neighbors  in  the  empire  with  expec¬
tations  which  the  event  did  not  realize ;  for  they  were  de¬
feated  in  this  war,  and  ultimately  compelled  to  relinquish
their  league.  Counter-associations  were  formed  by  the  no¬
bles,  styled  Society  of  St.  George,  St.  William,  the  Lion,  or
the  Panther.1

The  spirit  of  political  liberty  was  not  confined  to  the  free
Provincial  immediate  cities.  In  all  the  German  principalities
states  of  the  a  form  of  limited  monarchy  prevailed,  reflecting,
on  a  reduced  scale,  the  general  constitution  of  the
empire.  As  the  emperors  sliared  their  legislative  sovereignty
with  the  diet,  so  all  the  princes  who  belonged  to  that  assem¬
bly  had  their  own  provincial  states,  composed  of  their  feudal
vassals  and  of  their  mediate  towns  within  their  territory.  No
tax  could  be  imposed  without  consent  of  the  states ;  and,  in
some  countries,  the  prince  was  obliged  to  account  for  the
proper  disposition  of  the  money  granted.  In  all  matters  of
importance  affecting  the  principality,  and  especially  in  cases
of  partition,  it  was  necessary  to  consult  them ;  and  they
sometimes  decided  between  competitors  in  a  disputed  succes¬
sion,  though  this  indeed  more  strictly  belonged  to  the  emperor.
The  provincial  states  concurred  with  the  prince  in  making
laws,  except  such  as  were  enacted  by  the  general  diet.  The
city  of  \Y  urtzburg,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  tells  its  bishop
that,  if  a  lord  would  make  any  new  ordinance,  the  custom  is
that  he  must  consult  the  citizens,  who  have  always  op|K>sed
his  innovating  upon  the  ancient  laws  without  their  consent.8

The  ancient  imperial  domain,  or  possessions  which  be-
AUenatfon  l°n"e(l  to  the  chief  of  the  empire  as  such,  had
of  the  irn-  originally  been  very  extensive.  Besides  large
p«ri>i  do-  estates  in  every  province,  the  territory  upon  each
bsink  of  the  Rhine,  afterwards  occupied  bv  the
counts  palatine  and  ecclesiastical  electors,  was,  until  the

1  Struvtmi,  p.  849  ;  Pfrflbl,  p.  686  ;  Schmidt,  t.  v.  p.  10;  t.  vi.  p.  78.  Putter,  p.  293.
>  Schmidt,  t.  vi.  p.  8.  Putter,  p.  236.

Germany.

DIET  OF  'WORMS.

93

thirteenth  century,  an  exclusive  property  of  the  emperor.
This  imperial  domain  was  deemed  so  adequate  to  the  sup¬
port  of  his  dignity  that  it  was  usual,  if  not  obligatory,  for
him  to  grant  away  his  patrimonial  domains  upon  his  election.
But  the  necessities  of  Frederic  II.,  and  the  long  confusion
that  ensued  upon  his  death,  caused  the  domain  to  be  almost
entirely  dissipated.  Rodolph  made  some  efforts  to  retrieve
it,  but  too  late ;  and  the  poor  remains  of  what  had  belonged
to  Charlemagne  and  Otho  were  alienated  by  Charles  IV.1
This  produced  a  necessary  change  in  that  part  of  the  con¬
stitution  which  deprived  an  emperor  of  hereditary  possessions,
It  was,  however,  some  time  before  it  took  place.  Even
Albert  I.  conferred  the  duchy  of  Austria  upon  his  son,  when
he  was  chosen  emperor.'2  Louis  of  Bavaria  was  the  first
who  retained  his  hereditary  dominions,  and  made  them  his
residence.8  Charles  IV.  and  Wenceslaus  lived  almost  wholly
in  Bohemia,  Sigismund  chiefly  in  Hungary,  Frederic  III.  in
Austria.  This  residence  in  their  hereditary  countries,  while
it  seemed  rather  to  lower  the  imperial  dignity,  and  to  lessen
their  connection  with  the  general  confederacy,  gave  them
intrinsic  power  and  influence.  If  the  emperors  of  the  houses
of  Luxemburg  and  Austria  were  not  like  the  Conrads  and
Frederics,  they  were  at  least  very  superior  in  importance  to
the  Williams  and  Adolphuses  of  the  thirteenth  century.

The  accession,  of  Maximilian  nearly  coincides  with  the
expedition  of  Charles  VHI.  against  Naples ;  and  Accession  of
I  should  here  close  the  German  history  of  the  J)tetofUlaiI‘
middle  age,  were  it  not  for  the  great  epoch  which  worms,
is  made  by  the  diet  of  Worms  in  1495.  This  A  D' 1495'
assembly  is  celebrated  for  the  establishment  of  a  perpetual
public  peace,  and  of  a  paramount  court  of  justice,  the  Im¬
perial  Chamber.

The  same  causes  which  produced  continual  hostilities
among  the  French  nobility  were  not  likely  to
operate  less  powerfully  on  the  Germans,  equally  moot  of
warlike  with  their  neighbors,  and  rather  less publlc  pcaco'
civilized.  But  while  the  imperial  government  was  still
vigorous,  they  were  kept  under  some  restraint.  We  find
Henry  III.,  the  most  powerful  of  the  Franconian  emperors,

*  Pfeflel.  p.  680.  he  should  retain  any  escheated  fl«»f  for

*  Id.  p.  4&4.  Struvius,  p.  646.  the  domain,  instead  of  grunting  it  away  ;

*  Struvius,  p.  611.  In  the  capitulation  so  completely  was  the  public  policy  of
of  Robert  it  was  expressly  provided  that  the  empire  reversed.  Schmidt,  t.  v.  p.  44.

94

PUBLIC  PEACE.

Chap.  V.

forbidding  all  private  defiances,  and  establishing  solemnly  a
general  peace.1  After  bis  time  the  natural  tendency  of  man¬
ners  overpowered  all  attempts  to  coerce  it,  and  private  war
raged  without  limits  in  the  empire.  Frederic  I.  endeavored
to  repress  it  by  a  regulation  which  admitted  its  legality.
This  was  the  law  of  defiance  (jus  diffidationis),  which  required
a  solemn  declaration  of  war,  and  three  days’  notice,  before
the  commencement  of  hostile  measures.  All  persons  contra¬
vening  this  provision  were  deemed  robbers  and  not  legiti¬
mate  enemies.4  Frederic  II.  carried  the  restraint  further,
and  limited  the  right  of  self-redress  to  cases  where  justice
could  not  be  obtained.  Unfortunately  there  was,  in  later
times,  no  sufficient  provision  for  rendering  justice.  The
German  empire  indeed  had  now  assumed  so  peculiar  a
character,  and  the  mass  of  states  which  comjtosed  it  were
in  so  many  respects  sovereign  within  their  own  territories,
that  wars,  utdess  in  themselves  unjust,  could  not  be  made  a
subject  of  reproach  against  them,  nor  considered,  strictly
speaking,  as  private.  It  was  certainly  most  desirable  to  put
an  end  to  them  by  common  agreement,  tuid  by  the  only
means  that  could  render  war  unnecessary,  the  establishment
of  a  supreme  jurisdiction.  *  War  indeed,  leg-ally  undertaken,
was  not  the  only  nor  the  severest  grievance.  A  very  large
proportion  of  the  rural  nobility  lived  by  robbery.*  Their
castles,  as  the  ruins  still  bear  witness,  were  erected  upon
inaccessible  hills,  and  in  defiles  that  command  the  public
road.  An  archbishop  of  Cologne  having  built  a  fortress  of
this  kind,  the  governor  inquired  how  he  was  to  maintain
himself,  no  revenue  having  been  assigned  for  that  purpose :
the  prelate  only  desired  him  to  remark  that  the  castle  was
situated  near  the  junction  of  four  roads.4  As  commerce  in¬
creased,  and  the  example  of  French  and  Italian  civilization
rendered  the  Germans  more  sensible  to  their  own  rudeness,
the  preservation  of  public  peace  was  loudly  demanded.
Every  diet  under  Frederic  III.  professed  to  occupy  itself
with  the  two  great  objects  of  domestic  reformation,  peace

1  Pfrflel,  p.  212.  aent.  Pet.  de  Andlo.  apud  Schmidt,  t.  v

»  Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  108,  et  Infra ;  PfefTel,  p.  400.
p  840 ;  Putter,  p  206  *  Quem  cum  ofllciatu*  «uun  Interro-

J  lirnnan!  atque  Alemannl,  qulhu*  garni,  de'  quo  centrum  deberet  retinere,
cennue  patrimonii  ml  rlctum  nuppetlt.  et  cuin  annum  carp  ret  rnlltibua,  diritur
bon  qui  prncul  urblbue,  aut  qui  cantelli*  nnpoudinee  ;  Quatuor  The  aunt  tram
et  oppldulla  dnmlnantur,  ifuorum  mag-  centrum  eltuatje.  Auctorapud  Schmidt,
na  par*  latrocimo  ilrditur,  nubile*  con-  p.  402.

Germany.

IMPERIAL  CHAMBER.

95

and  law.  Temporary  cessations,  during  -which  all  private
hostility  was  illegal,  were  sometimes  enacted;  and,  if  ob¬
served,  which  may  well  be  doubted,  might  contribute  to
accustom  men  to  habits  of  greater  tranquillity.  The  leagues
of  the  cities  were  probably  more  efficacious  checks  upon  the
disturbers  of  order.  In  1486  a  ten  years’  peace  was  pro¬
claimed,  and  before  the  expiration  of  this  period  the  per¬
petual  abolition  of  the  right  of  defiance  was  happily  accom¬
plished  in  the  diet  of  Worms.1

These  wars,  incessantly  waged  by  the  states  of  Germany,
seldom  ended  in  conquest.  Very  few  princely  houses  of  the
middle  ages  were  aggrandized  by  such  means.  That  small
and  independent  nobility,  the  counts  and  knights  of  the  em¬
pire  whom  the  revolutions  of  our  own  age  have  annihilated,
stood  through  the  storms  of  centuries  with  little  diminution

of  their  numbers.  An  incursion  into  the  enemy’s  territory,  a
pitched  battle,  a  siege,  a  treaty,  are  the  general  circumstances
of  the  minor  wars  of  the  middle  ages,  as  far  as  they  appear
in  history.  Before  the  invention  of  artillery,  a  strongly  forti¬
fied  castle  or  walled  city,  was  hardly  reduced  except  by
famine,  which  a  besieging  army,  wasting  improvidently  its
means  of  subsistence,  was  full  as  likely  to  feel.  That  in¬
vention  altered  the  condition  of  society,  and  introduced  an
inequality  of  forces,  that  rendered  war  more  inevitably  ruin¬
ous  to  the  inferior  party.  Its  first  and  most  beneficial  effect
was  to  bring  the  plundering  class  of  the  nobility  into  control ;
their  castles  were  more  easily  taken,  and  it  became  their  in¬
terest  to  deserve  the  protection  of  law.  A  few  of  these  con¬
tinued  to  follow  their  old  profession  after  the  diet  of  Worms;
but  they  were  soon  overpowered  by  the  more  efficient  police
established  under  Maximilian.

The  next  object  of  the  diet  was  to  provide  an  effectual
remedy  for  private  wrongs  which  might  supersede  imperial
all  pretence  for  taking  up  arms.  The  administra-  Ch:tmbur-
tion  of  justice  had  always  been  a  high  prerogative  as  well  as
bounden  duty  of  the  emperors.  It  was  exercised  originally
by  themselves  in  person,  or  by  the  count  palatine,  the  judge
who  always  attended  their  court.  In  the  provinces  of  Ger¬
many  the  dukes  were  intrusted  with  this  duty ;  but,  in  order
to  control  their  influence,  Otho  the  Great  appointed  provin¬
cial  counts  palatine,  whose  jurisdiction  was  in  some  respects

i  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.  116;  t.  v.  p.  338,  871 ;  t.  vi.  p.  84  ;  Putter,  p.  292,  348.

96

IMPERIAL  CHAMBER.

Chap.  V.

exclusive  of  that  still  possessed  by  the  dukes.  As  the  latter
became  more  independent  of  the  empire,  the  provincial
counts  palatine  lost  the  importance  of  their  office,  though
their  name  may  be  traced  to  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth
centuries.1  The  ordinary  administration  of  justice  by  the
emperors  went  into  disuse ;  in  cases  where  states  of  tho
empire  were  concerned,  it  appertained  to  the  diet,  or  to  a
special  court  of  princes.  The  first  attempt  to  reestablish  an
imperial  tribunal  was  made  by  Frederic  II.  in  a  diet  held  at
Mentz  in  1235.  A  judge  of  the  court  was  appointed  to  sit
daily,  with  certain  assessors,  half  nobles,  half  lawyers,  and
with  jurisdiction  over  all  causes  where  princes  of  the  empire
were  not  concerned.*  liodolph  of  Ilapsburg  endeavored  to
give  efficacy  to  this  judicature ;  but  after  his  reign  it  under¬
went  the  fate  of  all  those  parts  of  the  Germanic  constitution
which  maintained  the  prerogatives  of  the  emperors.  Sigis-
mund  endeavored  to  revive  this  tribunal ;  but  as  he  did  not
render  it  permanent,  nor  fix  the  place  of  its  sitting-*,  it  pro¬
duced  little  other  good  than  as  it  excited  an  earnest  anxiety
for  a  regular  system.  This  system,  delayed  throughout  the
reign  of  Frederic  III.,  was  reserved  for  the  first  diet  of
his  son.*

The  Imperial  Chamber,  such  was  the  name  of  the  new
tribunal,  consisted,  at  its  original  institution,  of  a  chief  judge,
who  was  to  be  chosen  among  the  princes  or  counts,  and  of
sixteen  assessors,  partly  of  noble  or  equestrian  rank,  partly
professors  of  law.  They  were  named  by  the  emperor  with
the  approbation  of  the  diet.  The  functions  of  the  Imperial
Chamber  were  chiefly  the  two  following.  They  exercised
an  appellant  jurisdiction  over  causes  that  had  been  decided
by  the  tribunals  established  in  states  of  the  empire,  llut
their  jurisdiction  in  private  causes  was  merely  appellant.
According  to  the  original  law  of  Germany,  no  man  could  be
sued  except  in  the  nation  or  province  to  which  he  belonged.
The  early  emperors  travelled  from  one  part  of  their  domin¬
ions  to  another,  in  order  to  render  justice  consistently  with
this  fundamental  privilege.  When  the  Luxemburg  emperors
fixed  their  residence  in  Bohemia,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  im¬
perial  court  in  the  first  instance  would  have  ceased  of  itself

%

1  Pfrflel,  p.  iso.

*  Idem.  p.  886 ;  Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  66.

•  PfcffcJ,  «.  il.  p.  66.

Germany.

ESTABLISHMENT  OF  CIRCLES.

97

by  the  operation  of  this  ancient  rule.  It  was  not,  however,
strictly  complied  with ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  emperors  had
a  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  provincial  tribunals  even
in  private  causes.  They  divested  themselves,  nevertheless,
of  this  right  by  granting  privileges  de  non  evocando  ;  so  that
no  subject  of  a  state  which  enjoyed  such  a  privilege  could  be
summoned  into  the  imperial  court.  All  the  electors  possess¬
ed  this  exemption  by  the  terms  of  the  Golden  Bull ;  and  it
was  specially  granted  to  the  burgraves  of  Nuremberg,  and
some  other  princes.  This  matter  was  finally  settled  at  the
diet  of  Worms ;  and  the  Imperial  Chamber  was  positively
restricted  from  taking  cognizance  of  any  causes  in  the  first
instance,  even  where  a  state  of  the  empire  was  one  of  the
parties.  It  was  enacted,  to  obviate  the  denial  of  justice  that
appeared  likely  to  result  from  the  regulation  in  the  latter
case,  that  every  elector  and  prince  should  establish  a  tribunal
in  his  own  dominions,  where  suits  against  himself  might  be
entertained.1

The  second  part  of  the  chamber’s  jurisdiction  related  to
disputes  between  two  states  of  the  empire.  But  these  two
could  only  come  before  it  by  way  of  appeal.  During  the
period  of  anarchy  which  preceded  the  establishment  of  its
jurisdiction,  a  custom  was  introduced,  in  order  to  prevent  the
constant  recurrence  of  hostilities,  of  referring  the  quarrels  of
states  to  certain  arbitrators,  called  Austregues,  chosen  among
states  of  the  same  rank.  This  conventional  reference  be¬
came  so  popular  that  the  princes  would  not  consent  to  aban¬
don  it  on  the  institution  of  the  Imperial  Chamber ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  it  was  changed  into  an  invariable  and  universal
law,  that  all  disputes  between  different  states  must,  in  the
first  instance,  be  submitted  to  the  arbitration  of  Aus¬
tregues.2

The  sentences  of  the  chamber  would  have  been  very  idly
pronounced,  if  means  had  not  been  devised  to  carry  Esteblish.
them  into  execution.  In  earlier  times  the  want  of  mentof
coercive  process  had  been  more  felt  than  that  of circ  ts'
actual  jurisdiction.  For  a  few  years  after  the  establishment
of  the  chamber  this  deficiency  was  not  supplied.  But  in
1501  an  institution,  originally  planned  under  Wenceslaus,
and  attempted  by  Albert  II.,  was  carried  into  effect.  The

1  Schmidt,  t.  r.  p.  373  j  Putter,  p.  372.  1  Putter,  p.  861 ;  Pfuffel,  p.  452.

VOL.  II.  7

98

AULIC  COUNCIL.

Chap.  V.

empire,  with  the  exception  of  the  electorates  and  the  Austrian
dominions,  was  divided  into  six  circles ;  each  of  which  had  its
council  of  states,  its  director  whose  province  it  was  to  convoke
them,  and  its  military  force  to  compel  obedience.  In  1512
four  more  circles  were  added,  comprehending  those  states
which  had  beeu  excluded  in  the  first  division.  It  was  the
business  of  the  police  of  the  circles  to  enforce  the  execution  of
sentences  pronounced  by  the  Imperial  Chamber  against  re
fractory  states  of  the  empire.1

As  the  judges  of  the  Imperial  Chamber  were  appointed
Auiic  with  the  consent  of  the  diet,  and  held  their  sittings

Council.  jn  a  free  imperial  city,  its  establishment  seemed

rather  to  encroach  on  the  ancient  prerogatives  of  the  emperors.
Maximilian  expressly  reserved  these  in  consenting  to  the  new
tribunal.  And,  in  order  to  revive  them,  he  soon  afterwards
instituted  an  Auiic  Council  at  Vienna,  composed  of  judges
appointed  by  himself,  and  under  the  political  control  of  the
Austrian  government.  Though  some  German  patriots  re¬
garded  this  tribunal  with  jealousy,  it  continued  until  the  dis¬
solution  of  the  empire.  The  Auiic  Council  had,  in  all  cases,
a  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  Imperial  Chamber ;  an  ex¬
clusive  one  in  feudal  and  some  other  causes,  But  it  was
equally  confined  to  cases  of  appeal ;  and  these,  by  multiplied
privileges  de  non  appellando,  granted  to  the  electoral  and  su¬
perior  princely  houses,  were  gradually  reduced  into  moderate
compass.*

The  Germanic  constitution  may  be  reckoned  complete,  as
to  all  its  essential  characteristics,  in  the  reign  of  Maximilian.
In  later  times,  and  especially  by  the  treaty  of  Westphalia,  it
underwent  several  modifications.  Wlmtever  might  be  its  de¬
fects,  and  many  of  them  seem  to  have  been  susceptible  of  re¬
formation  without  destroying  the  system  of  government,  it
had  one  invaluable  excellence  :  it  protected  the  rights  of  the
weaker  against  the  stronger  powers.  The  law  of  nations  was
first  taught  in  Germany,  and  grew  out  of  the  public  law  of
the  empire.  To  narrow,  as  far  as  possible,  the  rights  of
war  and  of  conquest,  was  a  natural  principle  of  those  who  be¬
longed  to  petty  states,  and  had  nothing  to  tempt  them  in  am¬
bition.  No  revolution  of  our  own  eventful  age,  except  the
fall  of  the  ancient  French  system  of  government,  has  been  so

>  Putter,  p.  856,  t.  U.  p.  100.

«  Putter,  p.  867;  PfcOel,  p.  108.

Germany.

LIMITS  OF  TILE  EMTIItE.

90

extensive,  or  so  likely  lo  produce  important  consequences,  as
the  spontaneous  dissolution  of  the  German  empire.  Whether
the  new  confederacy  that  has  been  substituted  for  that  vener¬
able  constitution  will  be  equally  favorable  to  peace,  justice,
and  liberty,  is  among  the  most  interesting  and  difficult  prob¬
lems  that  can  occupy  a  philosophical  observer.1

At  the  accession  of  Conrad  I.  Germany  had  by  no  means
reached  its  present  extent  on  the  eastern  frontier.  Limits  of
Henry  the  Fowler  and  the  Othos  made  great  ac-  theemPire-
quisitions  upon  that  side.  But  tribes  of  Sclavonian  origin,
generally  called  Yenedic,  or  less  properly,  Vandal,  occupied
the  northern  coast  from  the  Elbe  to  the  Vistula.  These  were
independent,  and  formidable  both  to  the  kings  of  Denmark
and  princes  of  Germany,  till,  in  the  reign  of  Frederic  Barba-
rossa,  two  of  the  latter,  Henry  the  Lion,  duke  of  Saxony,  and
Albert  the  Bear,  margrave  of  Brandenburg,  subdued  Meck¬
lenburg  and  Pomerania,  which  afterwards  became  duchies  of
the  empire.  Bohemia  was  undoubtedly  subject,  in  a  feudal
sense,  to  Frederic  I.  and  his  successors  ;  though  its  connection
■with  Germany  was  always  slight.  The  emperors  sometimes
assumed  a  sovereignty  over  Denmark,  Ilung-ary,  and  Poland.
But  what  they  gained  upon  this  quarter  was  compensated  by
the  gradual  separation  of  the  Netherlands  from  their  domin¬
ion,  and  by  the  still  more  complete  loss  of  the  kingdom  of
Arles.  The  house  of  Burgundy  possessed  most  part  of  the
former,  and  paid  as  little  regard  as  possible  to  the  imperial
supremacy ;  though  the  German  diets  in  the  reign  of  Maxi¬
milian  still  continued  to  treat  the  Netherlands  as  equally  sub¬
ject  to  their  lawful  control  with  the  states  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Rhine.  But  the  provinces  between  the  Rhone  and  the
Alps  were  absolutely  separated ;  Switzerland  had  completely
succeeded  in  establishing  her  own  independence  ;  and  the
kings  of  France  no  longer  sought  even  the  ceremony  of
an  imperial  investiture  for  Dauphine  and  Provence.

Bohemia,  which  received  the  Christian  faith  in  the  tenth
century,  was  elevated  to  the  rank  of  a  kingdom  BoUemia_
near  the  end  of  the  twelfth.  The  dukes  and  kings  its  constitu-
of  Bohemia  were  feudally  dependent  upon  the  em-  °“‘
perors,  from  whom  they  received  investiture.  They  possessed,
in  return,  a  suffrage  among  the  seven  electors,  and  held  one

1  The  first  edition  of  this  work  was  published  early  in  1818.

100

IIOUSE  OF  LUXEMBURG.

Chap.  V.

of  the  great  offices  in  the  imperial  court.  But  separated  by  a
rampart  of  mountains,  by  a  difference  of  origin  and  language,
and  perhaps  by  national  prejudices  from  Germany,  the  Bohe¬
mians  withdrew  as  far  as  possible  from  the  general  politics  of
the  confederacy.  The  kings  obtained  dispensations  from  at¬
tending  the  diets  of  the  empire,  nor  were  they  able  to  re¬
instate  themselves  in  the  privilege  thus  abandoned  till  the
beginning  of  the  last  century.1  The  government  of  this  king¬
dom.  in  a  very  slight  degree  partaking  of  the  feudal  character,*
bore  rather  a  resemblance  to  that  of  Poland ;  but  the  nobility
were  divided  into  two  classes,  the  baronial  and  the  equestrian,
and  the  burghers  formed  a  third  state  in  the  national  diet.  For
the  peasantry,  they  were  in  a  condition  of  servitude,  or  predial
villeinage.  The  royal  authority  was  restrained  by  a  corona¬
tion  oath,  by  a  permanent  senate,  and  by  frequent  assemblies
of  the  diet,  where  a  numerous  and  armed  nobility  appeared
to  secure  their  liberties  by  law  or  force.*  The  sceptre  passed,
in  ordinary  times,  to  the  nearest  heir  of  the  royal  blood  ;  but
the  right  of  election  was  only  suspended,  and  no  king  of  Bo¬
hemia  ventured  to  boast  of  it  as  his  inheritance.4  This  mix¬
ture  of  elective  and  hereditary  monarchy  was  common,  as  we
have  seen,  to  most  European  kingdoms  in  their  original  con¬
stitution,  though  few  continued  so  long  to  admit  the  participa¬
tion  of  popular  suffrages.

The  reigning  dynasty  having  become  extinct  in  1306,  by
Houw  of  the  death  of  Wenceslaus,  son  of  that  Ottocar  who,
Luxemburg.  after  extending  his  conquests  to  the  Baltic  Sea,
and  almost  to  the  Adriatic,  had  lost  his  life  in  an  unsuccessful
contention  with  the  emperor  Rudolph,  the  Bohemians  chose
John  of  Luxemburg,  son  of  Henry  VII.  Under  the  kings  of
this  family  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  especially  Charles
IV.,  whose  character  appeared  in  a  far  more  advantageous
light  in  his  native  domains  than  in  the  empire,  Bohemia  im¬
bibed  some  portion  of  reliuement  and  science.4  An  university

1  Pfrfkl,  t.  H.  p.  497.  of  the  king*,  about  the  year  1300,  *ent

*  Bona  lpftoruin  totA  BoheuiiA  plera-  for  an  Italian  lawyer  to  compile  a  cotie.

que  omnia  hwreditaria  aunt  *eu  Hindi-  But  the  nobility  refused  to  consent  to
alia,  perpauca  fcudalia.  8tran*ky,  Re«p.  this :  aware,  probably,  of  the  conee-
Bohcinira,  p.  392.  Straunky  wa*  a  Bo-  queue**  of  letting  In  the  prerogative
hetman  protectant,  who  fled  to  Holland  doctrine*  of  the  civilian*.  They  oppoeed,
after  the  *ubver*ion  of  the  civil  and  re-  at  the  same  time,  the  institution  of  an
ligiou*  liberties  of  hi*  country  by  the  university  at  Prague;  which,  however,
fatal  battle  of  Prague  In  1H21.  took  place  afterward*  under  Charles  IT.

*  Duhraviu*,  the  Bohemian  historian,  «  £tran*ky,  Kr«p.  Hob  cm  Coxe'fl
relate*  (lib.  xrili.)  that,  the  kingdom  House  of  Austria,  p.  487.

having  uo  written  law*,  Weucealau*,  one  *  Schmidt;  Coxa.

Germany.

THE  HUSSITES.

101

erected  by  Charles  at  Prague,  became  one  of  the  most  cele¬
brated  in  Europe.  John  Huss,  rector  of  the  uni-  John  Husg.
versity,  who  had  distinguished  himself  by  opposi- A  D-
tion  to  many  abuses  then  prevailing  in  the  church,  repaired  to
the  council  of  Constance,  under  a  safe-conduct  from  the  em¬
peror  Sigismund.  In  violation  of  this  pledge,  to  the  indelible
infamy  of  that  prince  and  of  the  council,  he  was  condemned
to  be  burned ;  and  his  disciple,  Jerome  of  Prague,  underwent
afterwards  the  same  fate.  Ilis  countrymen,  aroused  by  this
atrocity,  flew  to  arms.  They  found  at  their  head
one  of  those  extraordinary  men  whose  genius,  USS1  e  ”ar'
created  by  nature  and  called  into  action  by  fortuitous  events,
appears  to  borrow  no  reflected  light  from  that  of  others.
John  Zisca  had  not  been  trained  in  any  school  TohnZisca
which  could  have  initiated  him  in  the  science  of
war ;  that  indeed,  except  in  Italy,  was  still  rude,  and  nowhere
more  so  than  in  Bohemia.  But,  self-taught,  he  became  one
of  the  greatest  captains  who  had  appeared  hitherto  in  Europe.
It  renders  his  exploits  more  marvellous  that  he  was  totally
deprived  of  sight.  Zisca  has  been  called  the  inventor  of  the
modern  art  of  fortification  ;  the  famous  mountain  near  Prague,
fanatically  called  Tabor,  became,  by  his  skill,  an  impregna¬
ble  entrenchment.  For  his  stratagems  he  has  been  compared
to  Hannibal.  In  battle,  being  destitute  of  cavalry,  he  dis¬
posed  at  intervals  ramparts  of  carriages  filled  with  soldiers,  to
defend  his  troops  from  the  enemy’s  horse.  His  own  station
was  by  the  chief  standard ;  where,  after  hearing  the  cir¬
cumstances  of  the  situation  explained,  he  gave  his  orders  for
the  disposition  of  the  army.  Zisca  was  never  defeated ;  and
his  genius  inspired  the  Hussites  with  such  enthusiastic  affec¬
tion,  that  some  of  those  who  had  served  under  him  refused  to
obey  any  other  general,  and  denominated  themselves  Orphans
in  commemoration  of  his  loss.  He  was  indeed  a  ferocious
enemy,  though  some  of  his  cruelties  might,  perhaps,  be  ex¬
tenuated  by  the  law  of  retaliation  ;  but  to  his  soldiers  affable
and  generous,  dividing  among  them  all  the  spoil.1

Even  during  the  lifetime  of  Zisca  the  Hussite  sect  was
disunited ;  the  citizens  of  Prague  and  many  of  the  caitxtins.
nobility  contenting  themselves  with  moderate  de-  AD- 1424-
mands,  while  the  Taborites,  his  peculiar  followers,  were  actu-

l  Lenfant,  Uixt.  de  la  Guerre  des  Hussites;  Schmidt;  Coxe.

102

HUNGARY.

Chap.  V

ated  by  a  most  fanatical  frenzy.  The  former  took  the  name
of  Calixtins,  from  their  retention  of  the  sacramental  cup.  of
which  the  priests  had  latterly  thought  lit  to  debar  laymen ;
an  abuse  so  totally  without  pretence  or  apology,  that  nothing
less  than  the  determined  obstinacy  of  the  Romish  church
could  have  maintained  it  to  this  time.  The  Taborites,  though
no  longer  led  by  Zisca,  gained  some  remarkable  victories,  but
were  at  last  wholly  defeated  ;  while  the  Catholic  and  Calixtin
parties  came  to  an  accommodation,  by  which  Sigismund  was
acknowledged  as  king  ot  Bohemia,  which  he  had  claimed  by
the  title  of  heir  to  his  brother  Wenceslaus,  and  a  few  indul-
A.D.  1433.  gences,  especially  the  use  of  the  sacramental  cup,
conceded  to  the  moderate  Hussites.  But  this  com¬
pact,  though  concluded  by  the  council  of  Basle,  being  ill
observed,  through  the  perfidious  bigotry  of  the  see  of  Rome,
the  reformers  armed  again  to  defend  their  religions  liberties,
and  ultimately  elected  a  nobleman  of  their  own  party,  by
a.d.  1458.  na“e  George  Podiebrad,  to  the  throne  of  Bohemia,
which  he  maintained  during  his  life  with  great
vigor  and  prudence.1  Upon  his  death  they  chose  Uladislaus,
a.d.  1471.  i**11  of  Casimir  king  of  Poland,  who  afterwards

a  d  1527  obtained  also  the  kingdom  of  Hungary.  Both

these  crowns  were  conferred  on  his  son  Louis,
after  whose  death,  in  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Mohacz,  Fer¬
dinand  of  Austria  became  sovereign  of  the  two  kingdoms.

The  Hungarians,  that  terrible  people  who  laid  waste  the
Hungary.  Italian  and  German  provinces  of  the  empire  in
the  tenth  century,  became  proselytes  soon  after¬
wards  to  the  religion  of  Kurope,  and  their  sovereign,  St.
Stephen,  was  admitted  by  the  pope  into  the  list  of  Christian
kings.  Though  the  Hungarians  were  of  a  nice  perfectly
distinct  from  either  the  Gothic  or  the  Sclavonian  tribes,  their
system  ot  government  was  in  a  great  measure  analogous.
ISone  indeed  could  be  more  natural  to  rude  nations  who  hud
but  recently  accustomed  themselves  to  settled  possessions,
l lain  a  territorial  aristocracy,  jealous  of  unlimited  or  even
hereditary  janver  in  their  chieftain,  and  subjugating  the  infe¬
rior  people  to  that  servitude  which,  in  such  a  state  of  society,
is  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  poverty.

The  marriage  of  an  Hungarian  princess  with  Charles  II.

1  Lenfant;  8chml<lt ;  Com,

Germany.

BATTLE  OF  WARNA.

103

king  of  Naples,  eventually  connected  her  country  far  more
than  it  had  been  with  the  affairs  of  Italy.  I  have  mentioned
in  a  different  place  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the  inva¬
sion  of  Naples  by  Louis  king  of  Hungary,  and  the  wars  of
that  powerful  monarch  with  Venice.  By  marrying  the  eldest
daughter  of  Louis,  Sigismund,  afterwards  emperor,  sigismund.
acquired  the  crown  of  Hungary,  which  upon  her  A  D- I3tf2-
death  without  issue  he  retained  in  his  own  right,  and  was  even
able  to  transmit  to  the  child  of  a  second  marriage,  and  to  her
husband  Albert  duke  of  Austria.  From  this  commencement
is  deduced  the  connection  between  Hungary  and  ^  _

Austria.  In  two  years,  however,  Albert  dying  left  A'n'  ''
his  widow  pregnant ;  but  the  states  of  Hungary,
jealous  of  Austrian  influence,  and  of  the  intrigues
of  a  minority,  without  waiting  for  her  delivery,  bestowed  the
crown  upon  Uladislaus  king  of  Poland.  The  birth  of  Albert’s
posthumous  son,  Ladislaus,  produced  an  opposition  in  behalf
of  the  infant’s  right;  but  the  Austrian  party  turned  out  the
weaker,  and  Uladislaus,  after  a  civil  war  of  some  duration,
became  undisputed  king.  Meanwhile  a  more  formidable
enemy  drew  near.  The  Turkish  arms  had  subdued  all
Servia,  and  excited  a  just  alarm  throughout  Christendom.
Uladislaus  led  a  considerable  force,  to  which  the  presence  of
the  cardinal  Julian  gave  the  appearance  of  a  crusade,  into
Bulgaria,  and,  after  several  successes,  concluded  an  B,lttlc  of
honorable  treaty  with  Amurath  II.  But  this  he
was  unhappily  persuaded  to  violate,  at  the  instiga-  A'D'
tion  of  the  cardinal,  who  abhorred  the  impiety  of  keeping
faith  with  infideb.1  Heaven  judged  of  this  otherwise,  if  the
judgment  of  Heaven  was  pronounced  upon  the  field  of  Warna.
In  that  fatal  battle  Uladislaus  was  killed,  and  the  Hungarians
utterly  routed.  The  crown  was  now  permitted  to  rest  on  the
head  of  young  Ladislaus ;  but  the  regency  was  allotted  by
the  states  of  Hungary  to  a  native  warrior,  John  Iluuiliules
Hunniades.2  This  hero  stood  in  the  breach  for

>  .Eneas  Sylvius  lays  this  perfidy  on  viufl,  p.  898.)  And  the  Greeks  impute
Pope  KupMi ins  IV.  Scripsit  cardinal!,  the  same  to  him,  or  at  least  desertion  of
nullum  Valero  foedus.  quod  st  inronsulto  his  troops,  at  Coesova,  where  he  was  de-
cum  hostihus  religion  is  percussum  ease t,  feated  in  1448.  (Spondanus,  ad  aim.
p.  397.  The  words  in  italics  arc  slipped  1448.)  Probably  he  was  one  of  those
in,  to  give  a  slight  pretext  for  breaking  prudently  brave  men  who,  when  victory
the  treaty.  is  out  of  their  power,  reserve  themselves

1  Hunniades  was  a  Wallachian,  of  a  to  fight  another  day  ;  which  is  the  char-
small  family.  The  poles  charged  him  acter  of  all  partisans  accustomed  to
with  cowardice  ut  Wurua.  (JSueu  Syl-  desultory  warfure.  This  is  the  apology

104

RELIEF  OF  BELGRADE.

Chap.  V.

twelve  years  against  the  Turkish  power,  frequently  defeated
but  unconquered  in  defeat  If  the  renown  of  Hunniades  may
seem  exaggerated  by  the  partiality  of  writers  who  lived  under
the  reign  ot  his  son,  it  is  confirmed  by  more  unequivocal  evi¬
dence,  by  the  dread  and  hatred  of  the  Turks,  whose  children
were  taught  obedience  by  threatening  them  with  his  name,
and  by  the  deference  ot  a  jealous  aristocracy  to  a  man  of  no
distinguished  birth.  He  surrendered  to  young  Ladislaus  a
trust  that  he  had  exercised  with  perfect  fidelity;  but  his  merit
was  too  great  to  be  forgiven,  and  the  court  never  treated  him
with  cordiality,  ihe  last  and  the  most  splendid  service  of
Relief  of  Hunniades  was  the  relief  of  Belgrade.  That  strong
t!t^  ''iUS  besi,eged  b?  Mahomet  II.  three  years  after
the  fall  of  Constantinople ;  its  capture  would  have
laid  open  all  Hungary.  A  tumultuary  army,  chiefly  collected
by  the  preaching  of  a  friar,  was  intrusted  to  Hunniades  :  he
penetrated  into  the  city,  and,  having  repulsed  the  Turks  in  a
fortunate  sally  wherein  Mahomet  was  wounded,  had  the  honor
of  compelling  him  to  raise  the  siege  in  confusion.  The  relief
of  Belgrade  was  more  important  in  its  effect  than  in  its  imme¬
diate  circumstances.  It  revived  the  spirits  of  Kurope,  which
had  been  appalled  by  the  unceasing  victories  of  the  infidels.
Mahomet  himself  seemed  to  acknowledge  the  importance  of
the  blow,  and  seldom  afterwards  attacked  the  Hungarians.
Hunniades  died  soon  after  this  achievement,  and  was  followed
by  the  king  Ladislaus.1  'Ihe  states  of  Hungary,  although
the  emperor  Frederic  III.  had  secured  to  himself,  a*  he
thought,  the  reversion,  were  justly  averse  to  his  character,
Mat th in*  and  to  Austrian  connections.  They  conferred  their
A.D.'iVis.  1  ro" n  on  Matthias  Corvinus,  son  of  their  great
Hunniades.  This  prince  reigned  above  thirty
years  with  considerable  reputation,  to  which  his  patronage

HtwI  uuiler  Matthian.  Bonflulim,  an
Ii&Uau  compiler  of  the  name  agt*,  h»\»

Germany.  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  SWITZERLAND.

105

of  learned  men,  who  repaid  his  munificence  with  very  pro¬
fuse  eulogies,  did  not  a  little  contribute.1  Hungary,  at  least
in  his  time,  was  undoubtedly  formidable  to  her  neighbors,
and  held  a  respectable  rank  as  an  independent  power  in  the
republic  of  Europe.

The  kingdom  of  Burgundy  or  Arles  comprehended  the
whole  mountainous  region  which  we  now  call  Switzerland.
It  was  accordingly  reunited  to  the  Germanic  empire  by  the
bequest  of  Rodolph  along  with  the  rest  of  his  dominions.  A
numerous  and  ancient  nobility,  vassals  one  to  another,  or  to
the  empire,  divided  the  possession  with  ecclesias-  gwUzerland
tical  lords  hardly  less  powerful  than  themselves.  —  its  early
Of  the  former  we  find  the  counts  of  Zahringen,

Kyburg,  Hapsburg,  and  Tokenburg,  most  conspic¬
uous  ;  of  the  latter,  the  bishop  of  Coire,  the  abbot  of  St.
Gall,  and  abbess  of  Seckingen.  Every  variety  of  feudal
rights  was  early  found  and  long  preserved  in  Helvetia ;  nor
is  there  any  country  whose  history  better  illustrates  that  am¬
biguous  relation,  half  property  and  half  dominion,  in  which
the  territorial  aristocracy,  under  the  feudal  system,  stood  with
respect  to  their  dependents.  In  the  twelfth  century  the  Swiss
towns  rise  into  some  degree  of  importance.  Zurich  was
eminent  for  commercial  activity,  and  seems  to  have  had
no  lord  but  the  emperor.  Basle,  though  subject  to  its
bishop,  possessed  the  usual  privileges  of  municipal  govern¬
ment.  Berne  and  Friburg,  founded  only  in  that  century,
made  a  rapid  progress;  and  the  latter  was  raised,  along  with
Zurich,  by  Frederic  II.  in  1218,  to  the  rank  of  a  free  im¬
perial  city.  Several  changes  in  the  principal  Helvetian
families  took  place  in  the  thirteenth  century,  before  the  end
of  which  the  house  of  Hapsburg,  under  the  politic  and  en¬
terprising  Rodolph  and  his  son  Albert,  became  possessed,
through  various  titles,  of  a  great  ascendency  in  Switzer¬
land.2

Of  these  titles  none  was  more  tempting  to  an  ambitious

'  Spondnnus  frequently  blames  the  an  Italian  litterateur,  De  diefcis  et  faetis
Italians,  who  received  pensions  from  Matlihe,  though  it  often  notices  »n  ordi-
Matthias,  or  wrote  at  his  court,  for  ex-  nary  saying  as  jocose  or  facets  dictum,
aggeratiog  his  virtues,  or  dissembling  gives  a  favorable  impression  of  Matthiaa:s
his  misfortunes.  And  this  was  probably  ability,  and  also  of  his  integrity,
the  cane.  However,  Spondatius  has  *  Planta’s  History  of  the  Helvetic
rather  contracted  a  prejudice  against  the  Confederacy,  vol.  i.  chaps.  2-5.

Corviui.  A  treatise  of  Galeotus  Marti  us,

10G

TIIE  SWISS.

Chap.  V.

Albert  of
Austria.

chief  than  that  of  advocate  to  a  convent.  That
specious  name  conveyed  with  it  a  kind  of  indefi¬
nite  guardianship,  and  right  of  interference,  which  fre¬
quently  ended  in  reversing  the  conditions  of  the  ecclesiasti¬
cal  sovereign  and  its  vassal.  Hut  during  times  of  feudal
anarchy  there  was  perhaps  no  other  means  to  secure  the  rich
abbeys  from  absolute  spoliation;  and  the  free  cities  in  their
early  stage  sometimes  adopted  the  same  jx»licy.  Among
The  SwtM.  °*her  advocacies,  Albert  obtained  that  of  some
convents  which  had  estates  in  the  valleys  of
Schweitz  and  Underwald.  These  sequestered  regions  in
the  heart  of  the  Alps  had  been  for  ages  the  habitation  of
a  pastoral  race,  so  happily  forgotten,  or  so  inaccessible  in
their  fastnesses,  as  to  have  acquired  a  virtual  independence,
regulating  their  own  affairs  in  their  general  assembly  with
a  perfect  equality,  though  they  acknowledged  the  sovereignty
of  the  empire.1  The  people  of  Schweitz  had  made  Rodolph
their  advocate.  They  distrusted  Albert,  whose  successiou  to
his  father’s  inheritance  spread  alarm  through  Helvetia.  It
soon  appeared  that  their  suspicions  were  well  founded.  Be¬
sides  the  local  rights  which  his  ecclesiastical  advocacies  gave
him  over  part  of  the  forest  cantons,  he  pretended,  after  his
election  to  the  empire,  to  send  imperial  bailiffs  into  their  val¬
leys,  as  administrators  of  criminal  justice.  Their  oppression
of  a  people  unused  to  control,  whom  it  was  plainly  the  design
of  Albert  to  reduce  into  servitude,  excited  those  generous  emo¬
tions  of  resentment  which  a  brave  and  simple  race  have  sel-
Tii.-ir  tn*ur-  dom  the  discretion  to  repress.  Three  men,  Stauf-
r, -.urn..  facher  of  Schweitz,  Furst  of  Uri,  Melchthal  of

Underwald,  each  with  ten  chosen  associates,  met  by  night  in
a  sequestered  field,  and  swore  to  assert  the  common  cause  of
their  liberties,  without  bloodshed  or  injury  to  the  rights  of
others.  Their  success  was  answerable  to  the  justice  of  their
undertaking;  the  three  cantons  unanimously  took  up  arms,
and  expelled  their  oppressors  without  a  contest.  Albert's
a  d  I8u8  assassination  by  his  nephew,  which  followed  soon
afterwards,  fortunately  gave  them  leisure  to  con¬
solidate  their  union.2  He  was  Succeeded  in  the  empire  by
Henry  VII.,  jealous  of  the  Austrian  family,  and  not  at  ail

1  Plant*'*  HUtory  of  the  Helvetic  Confederacy.  ?ol.  1.  c  4.
*  Put nt*,  c.  6.

Germany.

SWISS  CONFEDERACY.

107

displeased  at  proceedings  which  had  been  accompanied  with
so  little  violence  or  disrespect  for  the  empire.  But  Leopold
duke  of  Austria,  resolved  to  humble  the  peasants  who  had
rebelled  against  his  father,  led  a  considerable  force  into  their
country.  The  Swiss,  commending  themselves  to  Heaven,
and  determined  rather  to  perish  than  undergo  that  yoke  a
second  time,  though  ignorant  of  regular  discipline,  Battle  of
and  unprovided  with  defensive  armor,  utterly  dis-  Morgarteu.
comlitted  the  assailants  at  Morgarten.1

This  great  victory,  the  Marathon  of  Switzerland,  confirmed
the  independence  of  the  three  original  cantons.  After  some
years,  Lucerne,  contiguous  in  situation  and  alike  Pormntion  of
in  interests,  was  incorporated  into  their  confed-  Swiss  Con-
eracy.  It  was  far  more  materially  enlarged  about feduracy'
the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  by  the  accession  of
Zurich,  Claris,  Zug,  and  Berne,  all  which  took  place  within
two  years.  The  first  and  last  of  these  cities  had  already
been  engaged  in  frequent  wars  with  the  Helvetian  nobility,
and  their  internal  polity  was  altogether  republican.2  They
acquired,  not  independence,  which  they  already  enjoyed,  but
additional  security,  by  this  union  with  the  Swiss,  properly  so
called,  who  in  deference  to  their  power  and  reputation  ceded
to  them  the  first  rank  in  the  league.  The  eight  already
enumerated  are  called  the  ancient  cantons,  and  continued,  till
the  late  reformation  of  the  Helvetic  system,  to  possess  several
distinctive  privileges  and  even  rights  of  sovereignty  over  sub¬
ject  territories,  in  which  the  five  cantons  of  Friburg,  Soleure,
Basle,  SchafFhausen,  and  Appenzell  did  not  participate.  From
this  time  the  united  cantons,  but  especially  those  of  Berne
and  Zurich,  began  to  extend  their  territories  at  the  expense
of  the  rural  nobility.  The  same  contest  between  these
parties,  with  the  same  termination,  which  we  know  generally
to  have  taken  place  in  Lombardy  during  the  eleventh  and
twelfth  centuries,  may  be  traced  with  more  minuteness  in
the  annals  of  Switzerland.8  Like  the  Lombards,  too,  the
Helvetic  cities  acted  with  policy  and  moderation  towards  the
nobles  whom  they  overcame,  admitting  them  to  the  franchises
of  their  community  as  co-burghers  (a  privilege  which  vir¬
tually  implied  a  defensive  alliance  against  any  assailant),  and
uniformly  respecting  the  legal  rights  of  property.  Many

>  Plants,  c.  7.

•  Id.  cc.  8,  9.

•  Id.  c.  10.

103

SWISS  CONFEDERACY.

Chap.  V.

feudal  superiorities  they  obtained  from  the  owners  in  a  more
peaceable  manner,  through  purchase  or  mortgage.  Thus  the
house  of  Austria,  to  which  the  extensive  domains  of  the
counts  of  Kyburg  had  devolved,  abandoning,  after  repeated
defeats,  its  hopes  of  subduing  the  forest  cantons,  alienated  a
great  part  of  its  possessions  to  Zurich  and  Berne.1  And  the
hist  remnant  of  their  ancient  Helvetic  territories  in  Argovia
was  wrested  in  1417  from  Frederic  count  of  Tyrol,  who,  im¬
prudently  supporting  pope  John  XXIII.  against  the  council
of  Constance,  had  been  put  to  the  ban  of  the  empire.  These
conquests  Berne  could  not  be  induced  to  restore,  and  thus
completed  the  independence  of  the  confederate  republics.®
The  other  free  cities,  though  not  yet  incorporated,  and  the
few  remaining  nobles,  whether  lay  or  spiritual,  of  whom  the
abbot  of  St.  Gall  was  the  principal,  entered  into  sepiirate
leagues  with  different  cantons.  Switzerland  became,  there¬
fore,  in  the  first  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  a  free  country,
acknowledged  as  such  by  neighboring  states,  and  subject  to
no  external  control,  though  still  comprehended  within  the
nominal  sovereignty  of  the  empire.

The  affairs  of  Switzerland  occupy  a  very  small  space  in
the  great  chart  of  European  history.  But  in  some  respects
they  are  more  interesting  than  the  revolutions  of  mighty
kingdoms.  Nowhere  besides  do  we  find  so  many  titles  to  our
sympathy,  or  the  union  of  so  much  virtue  with  so  complete
success.  In  the  Italian  republics  a  more  splendid  temple
may  seem  to  have  been  erected  to  liberty ;  but,  as  we  ap¬
proach,  the  serpents  of  faction  hiss  around  her  altar,  and  the
form  of  tyranny  flits  among  the  distant  shadows  behind  the
shrine.  Switzerland,  not  absolutely  blameless,  (for  what  re¬
public  has  been  so?)  but  comparatively  exempt  from  turbu¬
lence,  usurpation,  and  injustice,  has  well  deserved  to  employ
the  native  pen  of  an  historian  accounted  the  most  eloquent  of
the  last  age.’  Other  nations  displayed  an  insuperable  resolu-

>  Plant*,  «•.  11.  atinn  In  a  modern  historian  of  distant

*  T°t  It  «.  1.  times.  But  1  must  otwarrp  that.  If  tho

*  I  “m  unacquainted  with  Muller's  authentic  chronicles  of  Swiuerland  hare
history  In  the  original  language  ;  hut,  enabled  'fuller  to  embellish  his  narra-
presutnitig  the  first  volume  of  Mr.  Plan-  tion  with  so  murh  cirruin.tantlal  de-
tn  n  History  of  the  Helvetic  Confederacy  tail,  he  has  lieen  remarkably  fortunate
to  be  a  free  translation  or  abridgment  of  In  his  authorities.  No  man  could  write
It,  I  can  well  conceive  that  it  deserves  the  the  annals  of  Kogland  or  France  in  the
encomium*  of  Madame  de  Statd  and  other  fourteenth  century  with  such  part  leu -
foreign  critics.  It  U  very  rare  to  meet  larity,  if  he  was  srrupulous  not  to  All  up
with  such  picturesque  and  lively  delioe-  the  meagre  sketch  of  chrouiclers  from

Germany.

SWISS  TROOPS.

109

tion  in  the  defence  of  walled  towns ;  but  the  steadiness  of  the
Swiss  in  the  field  of  battle  was  without  a  parallel,  unless  we
recall  the  memory  of  Lacedaemon.  It  was  even  established
as  a  law,  that  whoever  returned  from  battle  after  a  defeat
should  forfeit  his  life  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  Six¬
teen  hundred  men,  who  had  been  sent  to  oppose  a  predatory
invasion  of  the  French  in  1444,  though  they  might  have  re¬
treated  without  loss,  determined  rather  to  perish  on  the  spot,
and  fell  amidst  a  far  greater  heap  of  the  hostile  slain.1  At
the  famous  battle  of  Sempach  in  1385,  the  last  which  Aus¬
tria  presumed  to  try  against  the  forest  cantons,  the  enemy’s
knights,  dismounted  from  their  horses,  presented  an  impreg¬
nable  barrier  of  lances,  which  disconcerted  the  Swiss  ;  till
Winkelried,  a  gentleman  of  Underwald,  commending  his  wife
and  children  to  his  countrymen,  threw  himself  upon  the  op¬
posite  ranks,  and  collecting  as  many  lances  as  he  could  grasp,
forced  a  passage  for  his  followers  by  burying  them  in  his
bosom.2

The  burghers  and  peasants  of  Switzerland,  ill  provided
with  cavalry,  and  better  able  to  dispense  with  it  Exceuence
than  the  natives  of  champaign  countries,  may  be  of  the  Swiss
deemed  the  principal  restorers  of  the  Greek  and  tl0op3-
Roman  tactics,  which  place  the  strength  of  armies  in  a  steady
mass  of  infantry.  Besides  their  splendid  victories  over  the
dukes  of  Austria  and  their  own  neighboring  nobility,  they
had  repulsed,  in  the  year  1375,  one  of  those  predatory  bodies
of  troops,  the  scourge  of  Europe  in  that  age,  and  to  whose
licentiousness  kingdoms  and  free  states  yielded  alike  a  passive
submission.  They  gave  the  dauphin,  afterwards  Louis  XI.,
who  entered  their  country  in  1444  with  a  similar  body  of
ruffians,  called  Armagnacs,  the  disbanded  mercenaries  of  the
English  war,  sufficient  reason  to  desist  from  his  invasion  and
to  respect  their  valor.  That  able  prince  formed  indeed  so
high  a  notion  of  the  Swiss,  that  he  sedulously  cultivated  their
alliance  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  lie  was  made  abundantly
sensible  of  the  wisdom  of  this  policy  when  he  saw  his  greatest
enemy,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  routed  at  Granson  and  Morat,
and  his  affairs  irrecoverably  ruined,  by  these  hardy  repub-

the  stores  of  his  invention.  The  striking  another  advantage  as  a  painter  of  his-

aoeuery  of  Switzerland,  and  Muller’s  ex-  tory.

act  acquaintance  with  it,  have  given  him  1  Planta,  vol.  il.  c.  2.

*  Id.  vol.  i.  c.  10.

110

RATIFICATION  OF

CiiAr.  V.

licans.  The  ensuing  age  is  the  most  conspicuous,  though  not
the  most  essentially  glorious,  in  the  history  of  Switzerland.
Courted  for  the  excellence  of  their  troops  by  the  rival
sovereigns  of  Europe,  and  themselves  too  sensible  both  to
ambitious  schemes  of  dominion  and  to  the  thirst  of  money,
the  united  cantons  came  to  play  a  very  prominent  part  in  the
wars  of  Lombardy,  with  great  military  renown,  but  not
without  some  impeachment  of  that  sterling  probity  which  had
distinguished  their  earlier  efforts  for  independence.  These
events,  however,  do  not  fall  within  my  limits ;  but  the  last
year  of  the  fifteenth  century  is  a  leading  epoch,
Sr  'thiSMn-  with  which  I  shall  close  this  sketch.  Though  the
faSsoo"110*  ^ouse  °*  Austria  had  ceased  to  menace  the  liberties
of  Helvetia,  and  had  even  been  for  many  years  its
ally,  the  emperor  Maximilian,  aware  of  the  important  service
lie  might  derive  from  the  cantons  in  his  projects  upon  Italy,
as  well  as  of  the  disadvantage  he  sustained  by  their  partiality
to  French  interest,  endeavored  to  revive  the  unextinguished
supremacy  of  the  empire.  That  supremacy  had  just  been
restored  in  Germany  by  the  establishment  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  and  of  a  regular  pecuniary  contribution  for  its
support,  as  well  as  for  other  purposes,  in  the  diet  of  Worms.
The  Helvetic  cantons  were  summoned  to  yield  obedience  to
these  imperial  laws ;  an  innovation,  for  such  the  revival  of
obsolete  prerogatives  must  be  considered,  exceedingly  hostile
to  their  republican  independence,  and  involving  consequences
not  less  material  in  their  eyes,  the  abandonment  of  a  lino
of  policy,  which  tended  to  enrich,  if  not  to  aggrandize  them.
Their  refusal  to  comply  brought  on  a  war,  wherein  the
Tyrolese  subjects  of  Maximilian,  and  the  Suabian  league,  a
confederacy  of  cities  in  that  province  lately  formed  under  the
emperor’s  auspices,  were  principally  engaged  against  the
Swiss.  But  the  success  of  the  latter  was  decisive ;  and  after
a  terrible  devastation  of  the  frontiers  of  Germany,  peace  was
concluded  upon  terms  very  honorable  for  Switzerland.  The
cantons  were  declared  free  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Impe¬
rial  Chamber,  and  from  all  contributions  imposed  by  the  diet.
Their  right  to  enter  into  foreign  alliance,  even  hostile  to  the
empire,  if  it  was  not  expressly  recognized,  continued  unim¬
paired  in  practice  ;  nor  am  I  aware  that  they  were  at  any
time  afterwards  supposed  to  incur  the  crime  of  rebellion  by
such  proceedings.  Though,  perhaps,  in  the  strictest  letter

GfCMJSV.

S"WISS  INDEPENDENCE.

Ill

of  public  law,  the  Swiss  cantons  were  not  absolutely  released
from  their  subjection  to  the  empire  until  the  treaty  of  West¬
phalia,  their  real  sovereignty  must  be  dated  by  an  historian
from  the  year  when  every  prerogative  which  a  government
can  exercise  was  finally  abandoned.1

l  Planta,  vol.  ii.  c.  4.

112

COMMENCEMENT  OF  MODERN  mSTORY.  C>nr.  VI.

CHAPTER  VI.

niSTORT  OF  THE  GREEKS  AND  SARACENS.

Rise  of  Mohammeilism  —  Causes  of  Its  Success  —  Progress  of  Saracen  Arms  —  Greek
Empire  —  Decline  of  the  Khalifa  —  The  Greeks  recover  Part  of  their  Losses  —  The
Turks  —  The  Crusades  —  Capture  of  Constantinople  by  the  I si  tins  —  Its  Recovery
by  the  Greeks  — The  Moguls  —  The  Ottomans  —  Daugcr  at  Constantinople  —
Timur  —  Capture  of  Constantinople  by  Mahomet  II.  —  Alarm  of  Europe.

The  difficulty  •which  occurs  to  us  in  endeavoring  to  fix  a
natural  commencement  of  modern  history  even  in  the  Western
countries  of  Europe  is  much  enhanced  when  we  direct  our
attention  to  the  Eastern  empire.  In  tracing  the  long  series
of  the  Byzantine  annals  we  never  lose  sight  of  antiquity ;
the  Greek  language,  the  Roman  name,  the  titles,  the  laws,
all  the  shadowy  circumstance  of  ancient  greatness,  attend  us
throughout  the  progress  from  the  first  to  the  last  of  the  Con¬
stantines  ;  and  it  is  only  when  we  observe  the  external
condition  and  relations  of  their  empire,  that  we  perceive
ourselves  to  be  embarked  in  a  new  sea,  and  are  compelled  to
deduce,  from  points  of  bearing  to  the  history  of  other  nations,
a  line  of  separation  which  the  domestic  revolutions  of  Con¬
stantinople  would  not  satisfactorily  afford.  The  appearance
of  Mohammed,  and  the  conquests  of  his  disciples,  present  an
epoch  in  the  history  of  Asia  still  more  important  and  more
definite  than  the  subversion  of  the  Roman  empire  in  Europe ;
and  hence  the  houndary-line  between  the  ancient  and  modern
divisions  of  Byzantine  history  will  intersect  the  reign  of  Ile-
raclius.  That  prince  may  be  said  to  have  stood  on  the  verge
of  both  hemispheres  of  time,  whose  youth  was  crowned  with
the  last  victories  over  the  successors  of  Artaxerxes,  and
whose  age  was  clouded  by  the  first  calamities  of  Moham¬
medan  invasion.

Of  all  the  revolutions  which  have  had  a  permanent  influ¬
ence  upon  the  civil  history  of  mankind,  none  could
of*Moh!iui-  so  little  be  anticipated  by  human  prudence  as  that
med'  effected  by  the  religion  of  Arabia  As  the  seeds

of  Invisible  disease  grow  up  sometimes  in  silence  to  maturity,

Greeks,  etc.  APPEARANCE  OF  MAHOMMED.

113

till  they  manifest  themselves  hopeless  and  irresistible,  the
gradual  propagation  of  a  new  faith  in  a  barbarous  country
beyond  the  limits  of  the  empire  was  hardly  known  perhaps,
and  certainly  disregarded,  in  the  court  of  Constantinople.
Arabia,  in  the  age  of  Mohammed,  was  divided  into  many
small  states,  most  of  which,  however,  seem  to  have  looked
up  to  Mecca  as  the  capital  of  their  nation  and  the  chief  seat
of  their  religious  worship.  The  capture  of  that  city  accord¬
ingly,  and  subjugation  of  its  powerful  and  numerous  aris¬
tocracy,  readily  drew  after  it  the  submission  of  the  minor
tribes,  who  transferred  to  the  conqueror  the  reverence  they
were  used  to  show  to  those  he  had  subdued.  If  we  consider
Mohammed  only  as  a  military  usurper,  there  is  nothing  more
explicable  or  more  analogous,  especially  to  the  course  of
oriental  history,  than  his  success.  But  as  the  author  of  a
religious  imposture,  upon  which,  though  avowedly  unattested
by  miraculous  powers,  and  though  originally  discountenanced
by  the  civil  magistrate,  he  had  the  boldness  to  found  a  scheme
of  universal  dominion,  which  his  followers  were  half  enabled
to  realize,  it  is  a  curious  speculation  by  what  means  he  could
inspire  so  sincere,  so  ardent,  so  energetic,  and  so  permanent
a  belief.

A  full  explanation  of  the  causes  which  contributed  to  the
progress  of  Mohammedisin  is  not  perhaps,  at  causes  of
present,  attainable  by  those  most  conversant  with  success,
this  department  of  literature.1  But  we  may  point  out  several
of  leading  importance :  in  the  first  place,  those  just  and  elevated
notions  of  the  divine  nature  and  of  moral  duties,  the  gold-ore
that  pervades  the  dross  of  the  Koran,  which  were  calculated
to  strike  a  serious  and  reflecting  people,  already  perhaps  dis¬
inclined,  by  intermixture  with  their  Jewish  and  Christian
fellow-citizens,  to  the  superstitions  of  their  ancient  idolatry ; 2
next,  the  artful  incorporation  of  tenets,  usages,  and  traditions

l  We  are  very  destitute  of  satisfactory
materials  for  the  history  of  Mohammed
himself.  Abulfeda,  the  most  judicious
of  his  biographers,  lived  in  the  fourteenth
century,  when  it  must  have  been  mor¬
ally  impossible  to  discriminate  the  truth
amidst  the  torrent  of  fabulous  tradition.
A1  J&nnabi,  whom  Gagnier  translated,  is
a  mere  legend  writer ;  it  would  be  as
rational  to  rely  on  the  Acta  Sanctorum
as  his  romance.  It  is  therefore  difficult
to  ascertain  the  real  character  of  the
VOL.  II.  8

prophet,  except  as  it  is  deducible  from
the  Koran.

*  The  very  curious  romance  of  Antar,
written,  perhaps,  before  the  appearance
of  Mohammed,  seems  to  render  it  proba¬
ble  that,  however  idolatry,  as  we  are
told  by  Sale,  might  prevail  in  some  parts
of  Arabia,  yet  the  genuine  religion  of
the  descendants  of  Ishmael  was  a  belief
in  the  unity  of  God  as  strict  as  is  laid
down  in  the  Koran  itself,  and  accompa¬
nied  by  the  same  antipathy,  partly  re-

114

CAUSES  OF  THE

Chap.  VI.

from  the  various  religions  that-  existed  in  Arabia;1  and
thirdly,  the  extensive  application  of  the  precepts  in  the
Koran,  a  book  confessedly  written  with  much  elegance  and
purity,  to  all  legal  transactions  and  all  the  business  of  life.
It  may  be  expected  that  I  should  add  to  these  what  is  com¬
monly  considered  as  a  distingui-hing  mark  of  Mohammed  ism,
its  indulgence  to  voluptuousness.  Hut  this  appears  to  he
greatly  exaggerated.  Although  the  character  of  its  founder
may  have  been  tainted  by  sensuality  as  well  as  ferociousness,
I  do  not  think  that  he  relied  upon  inducements  of  the  former
kind  for  the  diffusion  of  his  system.  We  are  not  to  judge
of  this  by  rules  of  Christian  purity,  or  of  European  practice.
If  polygamy  was  a  prevailing  usage  in  Arabia,  as  is  not
questioned,  its  permission  gave  no  additional  license  to  the
proselytes  of  Mohammed,  who  will  be  found  rather  to  have
narrowed  the  unbounded  liberty  of  oriental  manners  in  this
respect ;  while  his  decided  condemnation  of  adultery,  and  of
incestuous  connections,  so  frequent  among  barbarous  nations,
does  not  argue  a  very  lax  and  accommodating  morality.  A
devout  Mussulman  exhibits  much  more  of  the  Stoical  than
the  Epicurean  character.  Nor  can  any  one  read  the  Koran
without  being  sensible  that  it  breathes  an  austere  and  scrupu¬
lous  spirit  And,  in  fact,  the  founder  of  a  new  religion  or
sect  is  little  likely  to  obtain  permanent  success  by  indulging
the  vices  and  luxuries  of  mankind.  I  should  rather  be  dis¬
posed  to  reckon  the  severity  of  Mohammed’s  discipline  among
the  causes  of  its  influence.  Precepts  of  ritual  observance,  being
always  definite  and  unequivocal,  are  less  likely  to  be  neglected,
after  their  obligation  has  been  acknowledged,  than  those  of

ligious,  partly  national,  toward*,  the
worship pen  which  Mohammed  in¬
culcated.  This  corroborate*  what  I  had
eaid  In  the  text  before  the  publication  of
that  work.

1  I  am  rery  much  disponed  to  believe,
notwithstanding  what  seems  to  be  the
general  opinion,  that  Mohammed  had
never  read  any  part  of  the  New  Testa¬
ment.  His  knowledge  of  Christianity
appears  to  be  wholly  derived  from  the
apocryphal  gospels  and  similar  works.
He  admitted  the  miraculous  conception
and  prophetic  character  of  Jesna,  but  not
his  divinity  or  pre*xistence.  Hence  it
is  rather  surprising  to  read,  in  a  popular
book  of  sermons  by  a  living  prelate,  that
all  the  heresies  of  the  Christian  church
(1  quote  the  substance  from  manor;)

are  to  be  found  in  the  Koran,  but  espe¬
cially  that  of  Arianism.  No  one  who
knows  what  Arianism  is.  and  what  Mo-
ham  medium  is,  could  possibly  fall  luto  so
strange  an  error.  The  misfortune  has
been,  that  the  learned  writer,  while  ac¬
cumulating  a  mass  of  reading  upen  this
part  of  his  subject,  neglected  what  should
have  been  the  nurUtu  of  the  whole,  a  pe¬
rusal  of  the  single  book  which  contains
the  doctrine  of  the  Arabian  impostor.
In  this  strange  chimera  about  the  Arian¬
ism  of  Mohammed,  he  bas  been  lad  away
by  a  misplaced  trust  in  Whitaker;  a
writer  almost  Invariably  in  the  wrong,
and  whose  bad  reasoning  upon  all  the
points  of  historical  criticism  which  ha
attempted  to  discuss  is  quite  notorious.

Greeks,  etc.

SUCCESS  OF  MAHOMMED.

115

moral  virtue.  Thug  the  long  fasting,  the  pilgrimages,  the
regular  prayers  and  ablutions,  the  constant  alms-giving,  the
abstinence  from  stimulating  liquors,  enjoined  by  the  Koran,
created  a  visible  standard  of  practice  among  its  followers,
and  preserved  a  continual  recollection  of  their  law.

But  the  prevalence  of  Islam  in  the  lifetime  of  its  prophet,
and  during  the  first  ages  of  its  existence,  was  chiefly  owing
to  the  spirit  of  martial  energy  that  he  infused  into  it.  The
religion  of  Mohammed  is  as  essentially  a  military  system  as
the  institution  of  chivalry  in  the  west  of  Europe.  The  peo¬
ple  of  Arabia,  a  race  of  strong  passions  and  sanguinary
temper,  inured  to  habits  of  pillage  and  murder,  found  in  the
law  of  their  native  prophet,  not  a  license,  but  a  command,  to
desolate  the  world,  and  the  promise  of  all  that  their  glowing
imaginations  could  anticipate  of  Paradise  annexed  to  all  in
which  they  most  delighted  upon  earth.  It  is  difficult  for  us
in  the  calmness  of  our  closets  to  conceive  that  feverish  inten¬
sity  of  excitement  to  which  man  may  be  wrought,  when  the
animal  and  intellectual  energies  of  his  nature  converge  to  a
point,  and  the  buoyancy  of  strength  and  courage  reciprocates
the  influence  of  moral  sentiment  or  religious  hope.  The
effect  of  this  union  I  have  formerly  remarked  in  the  Cru¬
sades  ;  a  phenomenon  perfectly  analogous  to  the  early  history
of  the  Saracens.  In  each,  one  hardly  knows  whether  most
to  admire  the  prodigious  exertions  of  heroism,  or  to  revolt
from  the  ferocious  bigotry  that  attended  them.  But  the
Crusades  were  a  temporary  effort,  not  thoroughly  congenial
to  the  spirit  of  Christendom,  which,  even  in  the  darkest  and
most  superstitious  ages,  was  not  susceptible  of  the  solitary
and  overruling  fanaticism  of  the  Moslem.  They  needed  no
excitement  from  pontiffs  and  preachers  to  achieve  the  work
to  which  they  were  called ;  the  precept  was  in  their  law,  the
principle  was  in  their  hearts,  the  assurance  of  success  was  in
their  swords.  “  O  prophet,”  exclaimed  Ali,  when  Moham¬
med,  in  the  first  years  of  his  mission,  sought  among  the
scanty  and  hesitating  assembly  of  his  friends  a  vizir  and
lieutenant  in  command,  “  I  am  the  man ;  whoever  rises
against  thee,  I  will  dash  out  his  teeth,  tear  out  his  eyes,
break  his  legs,  rip  up  his  belly.  O  prophet,  I  will  be  thy
vizir  over  them.”  1  These  words  of  Mohammed’s  early  and

l  Gibbon,  toI.  lx.  p.  284.

1 1 G

CONQUESTS  OF  THE  SARACENS.

Chap.  YI.

illustrious  disciple  are,  as  it  were,  a  text,  upon  which  the
commentary  expands  into  the  whole  Saracenic  history.
They  contain  the  vital  essence  of  his  religion,  implicit  faith
and  ferocious  energy.  Death,  slavery,  tribute  to  unbelievers,
were  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Arabian  prophet.  To  the
idolaters,  indeed,  or  those  who  acknowledged  no  special  reve¬
lation,  one  alternative  only  was  proposed,  conversion  or  the
sword.  The  people  of  the  Book,  as  they  are  termed  in  the
Koran,  or  four  sects  of  Christians,  Jews,  Magians,  and  Sa-
bians,  were  permitted  to  redeem  their  adherence  to  their
ancient  law  by  the  payment  of  tribute,  and  other  marks  of
humiliation  and  servitude.  But  the  limits  which  Moham-
medan  intolerance  had  prescribed  to  itself  were  seldom
transgressed;  the  word  pledged  to  unbelievers  was  seldom
forfeited;  and  with  all  their  insolence  and  oppression,  the
Moslem  conquerors  were  mild  and  liberal  in  comparison
with  those  who  obeyed  the  pontiffs  of  Rome  or  Constanti¬
nople.

At  the  death  of  Mohammed  in  632  his  temporal  and
religious  sovereignty  embraced,  and  was  limited
by,  the  Arabian  peninsula  The  Roman  and
Persian  empires,  engaged  in  tedious  and  indeci¬
sive  hostility  upon  the  rivers  of  Mesopotamia
and  the  Armenian  mountains,  were  viewed  by  the  ambitious
fanatics  of  his  creed  as  their  quarry.  In  the  very  first  year
of  Mohammed’s  immediate  successor,  Abubeker,  each  of
these  mighty  empires  was  invaded.  The  latter  opposed  but
a  short  resistance.  The  crumbling  fabric  of  eastern  despot¬
ism  is  never  secure  against  rapid  and  total  subversion ;  a
few  victories,  a  few  sieges,  carried  the  Arabian  arms  from
the  Tigris  to  the  Oxus,  and  overthrew,  with  the  Sassaniau
dynasty,  the  ancient  and  famous  religion  they  had  professed.
Seven  years  of  active  and  unceasing  warfare  sufficed  to  sub-
a.i>.  jugate  the  rich  province  of  Syria,  though  defended
682-689.  by  numerous  armies  and  fortified  cities ;  and  the
khalif  Omar  had  scarcely  returned  thanks  for  the  accom¬
plishment  of  this  conquest,  when  Ainrou,  his  lieutenant,
announced  to  him  the  entire  reduction  of  Egypt.  After
some  interval  the  Saracens  won  their  way  along  the  coast
a.b  of  Africa  as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  and

647-698.  a  third  province  was  irretrievably  torn  from  the

Greek  empire.  These  western  conquests  introduced  them

First

conquest*
of  tit.-
Saracens.

Greeks,  etc.  STATE  OF  THE  GREEK  EMPIRE.

117

to  fresh  enemies,  and  ushered  in  more  splendid  successes  ;•
encouraged  by  the  disunion  of  the  Visigoths,  and  perhaps
invited  by  treachery,  Musa,  the  general  of  a  master  who  sat
beyond  the  opposite  extremity  of  the  Mediterra-  A  B  -10
nean  Sea,  passed  over  into  Spain,  and  within
about  two  years  the  name  of  Mohammed  was  invoked  under
the  Pyrenees.1

These  conquests,  which  astonish  the  careless  and  superfi¬
cial,  are  less  perplexing  to  a  cahn  inquirer  than  their  cessation;
the  loss  of  half  the  Roman  empire,  than  the  preservation  of
the  rest.  A  glance  from  Medina  to  Constantinople  gtate  of
in  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century  would  proba-  the  Greek
bly  have  induced  an  indifferent  spectator,  if  such  empire'
a  being  may  be  imagined,  to  anticipate  by  eight  hundred
years  the  establishment  of  a  Mohammedan  dominion  upon
the  shores  of  the  Hellespont.  The  fame  of  Heraclius  had
withered  in  the  Syrian  war ;  and  his  successors  appeared  as
incapable  to  resist,  as  they  were  unworthy  to  govern.  Their
despotism,  unchecked  by  law,  was  often  punished  by  success¬
ful  rebellion ;  but  not  a  whisper  of  civil  liberty  was  ever
heard,  and  the  vicissitudes  of  servitude  and  anarchy  consum¬
mated  the  moral  degeneracy  of  the  nation.  Less  ignorant  than
the  western  barbarians,  the  Greeks  abused  their  ingenuity
in  theological  controversies,  those  especially  which  related  to
the  nature  and  incarnation  of  our  Saviour;  wherein  the  dis¬
putants,  as  is  usual,  became  more  positive  and  rancorous  as
their  creed  receded  from  the  possibility  of  human  apprehen¬
sion.  Nor  were  these  confined  to  the  clergy,  who  had  not,  in
the  East,  obtained  the  prerogative  of  guiding  the  national
faith  ;  the  sovereigns  sided  alternately  with  opposing  factions ;
Heraclius  was  not  too  brave,  nor  Theodora  too  infamous,  for
discussions  of  theology;  mid  the  dissenters  from  an  imperial
decision  were  involved  in  the  double  proscription  of  treason
and  heresy.  But  the  persecutors  of  their  opponents  at  home
pretended  to  cowardly  scrupulousness  in  the  field ;  nor  was

1  Ockley’s  ITIstory  of  the  Saracens;
Cardonne,  Revolutions  de  l’Afrique  efc
de  l’Espagne.  The  former  of  these  works
is  well  known  and  justly  admired  for
its  simplicity  and  picturesque  details.
Scarcely  any  narrative  has  ever  excelled
in  beauty  that  of  the  death  of  Hossein.
Hut  these  do  not  tend  to  render  it  more
deserving  of  confidence.  On  the  con¬

trary,  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  pretty
general  rule,  that  circumstantiality,
which  enhances  the  credibility  of  a  wit¬
ness,  diminishes  that  of  an  historian  re¬
mote  in  time  or  situation.  And  I  observe
that  Reiske,  In  his  preface  to  Abulfeda,
speaks  of  Wakidi,  from  whom  Ockley’s
book  is  but  a  translation,  as  a  mere  fab¬
ulist.

118

DECLINE  OF  THE  SARACENS.

Chap.  VI.

•the  Greek  church  ashamed  to  require  the  lustration  of  a
canonical  penance  from  the  soldier  who  shed  the  blood  of  his
enemies  in  a  national  war.  •

But  this  depraved  people  were  preserved  from  destruction
ivciine  hy  the  vices  of  their  enemies,  still  more  than  by

Saracens.  some  'ntr*ns*c  resources  which  they  yet  possessed.

A  rapid  degeneracy  enfeebled  the  victorious  Mos¬
lem  in  their  career.  That  irresistible  enthusiasm,  that  earnest
and  disinterested  zeal  of  the  companions  of  Mohammed,  was
in  a  great  measure  lost,  even  before  the  first  generation  had
passed  away.  In  the  fruitful  valleys  of  Damascus  and  Bas-
sora  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  forgot  their  abstemious  habits.
Rich  from  the  tributes  of  an  enslaved  people,  the  Mohamme¬
dan  sovereigns  knew  no  employment  of  riches  but  in  sensual
luxury,  and  paid  the  price  of  voluptuous  indulgence  in  the
relaxation  of  their  strength  and  energy.  Under  the  reign  of
Moawiah,  the  fifth  khalif,  an  hereditary  succession  was  sub¬
stituted  for  the  free  choice  of  the  faithful,  by  which  the  first
representatives  of  the  prophet  had  been  elevated  to  power;
and  this  regulation,  necessary  as  it  plainly  was  to  avert  in
some  degree  the  dangers  of  schism  and  civil  war,  exjXHed
the  kingdom  to  the  certainty  of  being  often  governed  by  feeble
tyrants.  But  no  regulation  could  be  more  than  a  temporary
preservative  against  civil  war.  The  dissensions  which  still
separate  and  render  hostile  the  followers  of  Mohammed  may
be  traced  to  the  first  events  that  ensued  upon  his  death,  to
the  rejection  of  his  son-in-law  Ali  by  the  electors  of  Medina.
1  wo  reigns,  those  of  Abubeker  and  Omar,  passed  in  external
glory  and  domestic  reverence ;  but  the  old  age  of  Othman
was  weak  and  imprudent,  and  the  conspirators  against  him
established  the  first  among  a  hundred  precedents  of  rebellion
and  regicide.  Ali  was  now  chosen ;  but  a  strong  faction  dis¬
puted  his  right;  and  the  Saracen  empire  was,  for  nnuiy  years,
distracted  with  civil  war,  among  competitors  who  appealed,
in  reality,  to  no  other  decision  than  that  of  the  sword.  The
family  of  Ommiyah  succeeded  at  last  in  establishing  an  unre¬
sisted,  if  not  un  undoubted  title.  But  rebellions  wen?  perpet¬
ually  afterw  ards  breaking  out  in  tliat  vast  extent  of  dominion,
a.d.  760.  one  these  revolters  acquired  by  success  a

better  name  than  rebel,  and  founded  the  dynasty
of  the  Abb&ssides.

Damascus  had  been  the  scat  of  empire  under  the  Ommi-

Gul  l  KS,  KTC.

kll.U.U'S  Ob'  UAGIUO.

iii)

ados;  it  was  removed  hv  tho  succeeding  family  to  Kimittwr
their  now  city  of  Bagdad.  There  arc  not  any  ''"S'1'"1
names  in  the  Ion#  lino  of  khalifa,  atler  tho  companions  of
Mohammed,  morn  renowned  in  history  than  some  of  tho
earlier  sovereigns  who  reigned  in  this  capital — Ahnansor,
llaroun  Alrnschid,  and  Almaiuitn.  Their  splendid  palaces,
their  numerous  guards,  their  treasures  of  gold  and  silver,  the
populousness  and  wealth  of  their  cities,  formed  a  striking
contrast  to  the  rudeness  and  poverty  of  the  western  nations
in  the  same  age.  In  their  court  learning,  which  the  llrst
Moslem  had  despised  as  unwarlike  or  rejected  as  profane,
was  held  in  honor.1  Tho  kluilif  Almamdn  especially  was
distinguished  for  his  patronage  of  letters  ;  the  philosophical
writings  of  Greece  were  eagerly  sought  ami  translated;  the
stars  were  numbered,  the  course  of  the  planets  was  measured.
Tho  Arabians  improved  upon  the  science  they  borrowed,  and
returned  it  with  abundant  interest  to  Europe  in  the  commu¬
nication  of  numeral  figures  and  the  intellectual  language  of
algebra.*  Yet  the  merit  of  tint  Abhassides  has  been  exagger¬
ated  by  adulation  or  gratitude.  Alter  all  the  vague  prai  os
of  hireling  poets,  which  have  sometimes  been  repeated  in
Europe,  it  is  very  rare  to  read  tho  history  of  an  eastern  sov¬
ereign  unstained  by  atrocious  crimes.  No  Christian  govern¬
ment,  except  perhaps  that  of  Constantinople,  exhibits  such  a
series  of  tyrants  as  the  kluilifs  of  Bagdad;  if  deeds  of  blood,
wrought  through  unbridled  passion  or  jealous  policy,  may
challenge  the  name  of  tyranny.  These  are  ill  redeemed  by
ceremonious  devotion  and  acts  of  trifling,  perhaps  ostentatious,
humility,  or  even  by  the  best  attribute  of  Mohammedan
princes  —  a  rigorous  justice  in  chastising  the  olfenccs  of
others.  Anecdotes  of  this  description  give  as  imperfect  a
sketch  of  an  oriental  sovereign  as  monkish  chroniclers  some-
limes  draw  of  one  in  Europe  who  founded  monasteries  and

1  Thu  Arabian  writer*  data  tho  origin
of  their  literature  (except  tlunw  work*  « »f
fiction  whit’ll  hud  til wnyo  Imhmi  popular)
from  tho  reign  of  AlnniiiNor,  a.d.  7M.
Ahiilpliamglu*,  |».  If  10  ;  (ilhbon,  n,  ftS,

*  Hcvcrul  wry  recent  |»II hi h-n t  Ioiim  ron>
tain  Interesting  detail*  on  Marncctt  llteru-
turv;  Mcrlngton’*  Miernry  flUtory  of
this  Middle  Age*,  Mill'll  llUtnry  of  Mo-
bam  mod*  ilium,  chap.  *1,  Turner’*  His¬
tory  of  Kuglaud,  ?ol.  I.  llurrU'i

Philological  Arrangement.  I*  perhap*  a
hook  hotter  known  ;  and  though  It  lin*
ulnae  Inh*ii  much  cxctdlad,  wh*  one  of  Ilia
flr*t  onutrlhutlona  In  utir  own  language
to  till*  lUpartiimnt,  In  which  a  gicnt  *l«,ul
yid  remain*  for  tha  oriental  *«  holar*  of
Kurope.  t'aalrl’*  admirable  catalogue  of
Arabic  MMH.  In  the  K«e||rlal  ought  hcfoia
thl*  to  ham  Ih'cii  followed  up  By  a  morn
accurate  examination  of  tludr  contauU
than  It  wax  po»»lhla  for  him  to  girt*.

120

SEPARATION  OF  SPAIN  AND  AFRICA.  Chap.  VI.

obeyed  the  clergy ;  though  it  must  be  owned  that  the  former
are  in  much  better  taste.

1  hough  the  Abbassides  have  acquired  more  celebrity,  they
never  attained  the  real  strength  of  their  predecessors.  Under
the  last  ot  the  house  of  Ommiyah,  one  command  was  obeyed
almost  along  the  whole  diameter  of  the  known  world,  from
the  banks  ot  the  Sihon  to  the  utmost  promontory  of  Portugal.
But  the  revolution  which  changed  the  succession  of  khalifa
produced  another  not  less  important.  A  fugitive  of  the  van¬
quished  family,  by  name  Abdalrahman,  arrived  in  Spain ;
and  the  Moslem  of  that  country,  not  sharing  in  the  prejudices
Separation  which  had  stirred  up  the  Persians  in  favor  of  the
aud  Africa.  lu'e  of  Abbas,  and  conscious  that  their  remote  sit¬
uation  entitled  them  to  independence,  proclaimed
him  klialif  ot  Cordova.  There  could  be  little  hope  of  re¬
ducing  so  distant  a  dependency ;  and  the  example  was  not
unlikely  to  be  imitated.  In  the  reign  of  Haroun  Alraschid
two  principalities  were  formed  in  Africa  —  of  the  Aglabites,
who  reigned  over  Tunis  and  Tripoli ;  and  of  the  Edrisites  in
the  western  parts  of  Barbary.  These  yielded  in  about  a
century  to  the  Fatiinites,  a  more  powerful  dynasty,  who  after¬
wards  established  an  empire  in  Egypt.1

I  he  loss,  however,  of  Spain  and  Africa  was  the  inevitable
effect  of  that  immensely  extended  dominion,  which  their  sepa¬
ration  alone  would  not  have  enfeebled.  But  other  revolutions

t^khuiio  a.waited  11  at  home.  In  the  history  of  the  Abas-

1,1 1  -  sides  of  Bagdad  we  read  over  again  the  decline  of
European  monarchies,  through  their  various  symptoms  of
ruin ;  and  find  successive  antilogies  to  the  insults  of  the  bar¬
barians  towards  imperial  Rome  in  the  fifth  century,  to  the  |>er-
sonal  insignificance  of  the  Merovingian  kings,  and  to  the  feu¬
dal  usurpations  that  dismembered  the  inheritance  of  Charle¬
magne.  1.  Beyond  the  northeastern  frontier  of  the  Sar¬
acen  empire  dwelt  a  warlike  and  powerful  nation  of  the
.Tartar  family,  who  defended  the  independence  of  Turkestan
from  the  sea  of  Aral  to  the  great  central  chain  of  mountains.
In  the  wars  which  the  khulifs  or  their  lieutenants  waged
apiinst  them  many  of  these  Turks  were  led  into  captivity,  and
dispersed  over  the  empire.  Their  strength  and  courage  dis-

1  For  three  rerolutlon*.  which  It  l»  not  Cardonnc.  who  hiu  made  u  mUrh  of
very  easy  to  flx  in  the  memory,  ooneult  them  u  the  lubjcct  would  bear.

Greeks,  etc.

DECLINE  OF  THE  KIIALIFS.

121

tinguislied  them  among  a  people  grown  effeminate  by  lux¬
ury  ;  and  that  jealousy  of  disaffection  among  his  subjects  so
natural  to  an  eastern  monarch  might  be  an  additional  motive
with  the  khalif  Motassem  to  form  bodies  of  guards  out  of
these  prisoners.  But  his  policy  was  fatally  erroneous.  More
rude  and  even  more  ferocious  than  the  Arabs,  they  contemned
the  feebleness  of  the  khalifate,  while  they  grasped  at  its
riches.  The  son  of  Motassem,  Motawakkel,  was  murdered  in
his  palace  by  the  barbarians  of  the  north ;  and  his  fate  re¬
vealed  the  secret  of  the  empire,  that  the  choice  of  its  sover¬
eign  had  passed  to  their  slaves.  Degradation  and  death  were
frequently  the  lot  of  succeeding  klialifs  ;  but  in  the  East  the
son  leaps  boldly  on  the  throne  which  the  blood  of  his  father
has  stained,  and  the  prjetorian  guards  of  Bagdad  rarely  failed
to  render  a  fallacious  obedience  to  the  nearest  heir  of  the
house  of  Abbas.  2.  In  about  one  hundred  years  after  the
introduction  of  the  Turkish  soldiers  the  sovereigns  of  Bagdad
sunk  almost  into  oblivion.  A1  Radi,  who  died  in  940,  was
the  last  of  these  that  officiated  in  the  mosque,  that  command¬
ed  the  forces  in  person,  that  addressed  the  people  from  the
pulpit,  that  enjoyed  the  pomp  and  splendor  of  royalty.1  But
lie  was  the  first  who  appointed,  instead  of  a  vizir,  a  new  offi¬
cer  —  a  mayor,  as  it  were,  of  the  palace  —  with  the  title  of
Einir  al  Omra,  commander  of  commanders,  to  whom  he  dele¬
gated  by  compulsion  the  functions  of  his  office.  This  title
was  usually  seized  by  active  and  martial  spirits  ;  it  was  some¬
times  hereditary,  and  in  effect  irrevocable  by  the  khalifs,
whose  names  hardly  appear  after  this  time  in  Oriental  annals.
3.  During  these  revolutions  of  the  palace  every  province
successively  shook  off  its  allegiance ;  new  principalities  were
formed  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  as  well  as  in  Khorasan
and  Persia,  till  the  dominion  of  the  Commander  of  the  Faith¬
ful  was  literally  confined  to  the  city  of  Bagdad  and  its  adja¬
cent  territory.  For  a  time  some  of  these  princes,  who  had
been  appointed  as  governors  by  the  khalifs,  professed  to  re¬
spect  his  supremacy  by  naming  him  in  the  public  prayers  and
upon  the  coin ;  but  these  tokens  of  dependence  were  gradually
obliterated.4

1  Abulfeda,  p  261;  Gibbon,  c.  62;  discussed  In  the  62nd  chapter  of  Gibbon,
Modern  Univ.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  Al  HalITs  which  is,  in  itself,  a  complete  philo-
command  of  the  army  is  only  mentioned  sophicnl  dissertation  upon  this  part  of
by  the  last.  history.

8  The  decline  of  the  Saracens  is  fully

122

REVIVAL  OF

Chat.  VI.

Such  is  the  outline  of  Saracenic  history  for  three  centuries
Reveal  of  af|er  Mohammed ;  one  age  of  glorious  conquest ;  a
the  Greek  second  of  stationary  but  rather  precarious  great¬
ness  ;  a  third  of  rapid  decline.  The  Greek  empire
meanwhile  survived,  and  almost  recovered  from  the  shock  it
had  sustained.  Besides  the  decline  of  its  enemies,  several
circumstances  may  be  enumerated  tending  to  its  preservation.
The  maritime  province  of  Cilicia  had  been  overrun  by  the
Mohammedans  ;  but  between  this  and  the  Lesser  Asia  Mount
Taurus  raises  its  massy  buckler,  spreading  as  a  natural  bul¬
wark  from  the  sea-coast  of  the  ancient  Pamphylia  to  the  hilly
district  of  Isauria,  whence  it  extends  in  an  easterly  direction,
sep;irating  the  Cappadocian  and  Cilician  plains,  and,  after
throwing  off  considerable  ridges  to  the  north  and  south,  con¬
nects  itself  with  other  chains  of  mountains  that  penetrate  far
into  the  Asiatic  continent.  Beyond  this  barrier  the  Saracens
formed  no  durable  settlement,  though  the  armies  of  Alraschid
wasted  the  country  as  far  as  the  Hellespont,  and  the  city  of
Amorium,  in  Phrygia,  was  razed  to  the  ground  by  A1  Motas-
sem.  The  position  of  Constantinople,  chosen  with  a  sagacity
to  which  the  course  of  events  almost  gave  the  appearance  of
prescience,  secured  her  from  any  immediate  danger  on  the
side  of  Asia,  and  rendered  her  as  little  accessible  to  an  enemy
as  any  city  which  valor  and  patriotism  did  not  protect.  Yet
in  the  days  of  Arabian  energy  she  was  twice  at¬
tacked  by  great  naval  armaments.  The  first  siege,
or  rather  blockade,  continued  for  seven  years ;  the
second,  though  shorter,  was  more  terrible,  and  her  walls,  as
well  as  her  port,  were  actually  invested  by  the  combined
forces  of  the  khalif  Waled,  under  his  brother  Moslema.1  The
final  discomfiture  of  these  assailants  showed  the  resisting  force
of  the  empire,  or  rather  of  its  capital ;  but  perhaps  the  aban¬
donment  of  such  maritime  enterprises  by  the  Saracens  may
be  in  some  measure  ascribed  to  the  removal  of  their  metrop¬
olis  from  Damascus  to  Bagdad.  But  the  Greeks  in  their
turn  determined  to  dispute  the  command  of  the  sea.  By  pos¬
sessing  the  secret  of  an  inextinguishable  fire,  they  fought  on
superior  terms;  their  wealth,  perhaps  their  skill, enabled  them
to  employ  larger  and  better  appointed  vessels  ;  and  they  ulti¬
mately  expelled  their  enemies  from  the  islands  of  Crete  and

a.d.  668.
A  D.  716.

1  Gibbon,  c.  63

Greeks,  etc.

THE  GREEK  EMPIRE.

123

Cyprus.  By  land  they  were  less  desirous  of  encountering  the
Moslem.  The  science  of  tactics  is  studied  by  the  pusillani¬
mous,  like  that  of  medicine  by  the  sick ;  and  the  Byzantine
emperors,  Leo  and  Constantine,  have  left  written  treatises  on
the  art  of  avoiding  defeat,  of  protracting  contest,  of  resisting
attack.1  But  this  timid  policy,  and  even  the  purchase  of  ar¬
mistices  from  the  Saracens,  were  not  ill  calculated  for  the
state  of  both  nations.  While  Constantinople  temporized,
Bagdad  shook  to  her  foundations  ;  and  the  heirs  of  the  Roman
name  might  boast  the  immortality  of  their  own  empire  when
they  contemplated  the  dissolution  of  that  which  had  so  rapidly
sprung  up  and  perished.  Amidst  all  the  crimes  and  revolu¬
tions  of  the  Byzantine  government  —  and  its  history  is  but  a
series  of  crimes  and  revolutions  —  it  was  never  dismembered
by  intestine  war.  A  sedition  in  the  army,  a  tumult  in  the
theatre,  a  conspiracy  in  the  palace,  precipitated  a  monarch
from  the  throne ;  but  the  allegiance  of  Constantinople  was
instantly  transferred  to  his  successor,  and  the  provinces  im¬
plicitly  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  capital.  The  custom  too  ot
partition,  so  baneful  to  the  Latin  kingdoms,  and  which  was  not
altogethor  unknown  to  the  Saracens,  never  prevailed  in  the
Greek  empire.  It  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century,
as  vicious  indeed  and  cowardly,  but  more  wealthy,  more  en¬
lightened,  and  far  more  secure  from  its  enemies  than  under
the  first  successors  of  Ileraclius.  For  about  one  hundred
years  preceding  there  had  been  only  partial  wars  with  the
Mohammedan  potentates ;  and  in  these  the  emperors  seem
gradually  to  have  gained  the  advantage,  and  to  have  become
more  frequently  the  aggressors.  But  the  increasing  distrac¬
tions  of  the  East  encouraged  two  brave  usurpers,  a.d_.
Nicephorus  l’hocas  and  John  Zimisces,  to  attempt  963_9‘5-
the  actual  recovery  of  the  lost  provinces.  They  carried
the  Roman  arms  (one  may  use  the  term  with  less  reluctance
than  usual)  over  Syria ;  Antioch  and  Aleppo  were  taken  by
storm  ;  Damascus  submitted  ;  even  the  cities  of  Mesopotamia,
beyond  the  ancient  boundary  of  the  Euphrates,  were  added
to  the  trophies  of  Zimisces,  who  unwillingly  spared  the  cap¬
ital  of  the  khalifate.  From  such  distant  conquests  it  was
expedient,  and  indeed  necessary,  to  withdraw  ;  but  Cilicia

1  Oibbon.  e.  68.  Conatantine  Porphy-  wen kn Mia  ami  cowanltee,  and  pleading
rogenitus,  In  hU  advice  to  hi*  *on  as  Itself  In  petty  art*  to  elude  the  rapacity
to  the  administration  of  the  empire,  be-  or  divide  the  power  of  its  enemies,
trays  a  mind  not  ashamed  to  confess

124

CONQUESTS  OF  TIIE  TURKS.

Chap.  VI.

and  Antioch  were  permanently  restored  to  the  empire.  At
the  close  of  the  tenth  century  the  emperors  of  Constantinople
possessed  the  best  and  greatest  portion  of  the  modern  king¬
dom  of  Naples,  a  part  of  Sicily,  the  whole  European  domin¬
ions  of  the  Ottomans,  the  province  of  Anatolia  or  Asia
Minor,  with  some  part  of  Syria  and  Armenia.1

These  successes  of  the  Greek  empire  were  certainly  much
rather  due  to  the  weakness  of  its  enemies  than  to  any  revival
of  national  courage  and  vigor  ;  yet  they  would  probably  have
The  Turks  been  more  durable  if  the  contest  had  been  only
with  the  khalifate,  or  the  kingdoms  derived  from
it.  But  a  new  actor  was  to  appear  on  the  stage  of  Asiatic
tragedy.  The  same  Turkish  nation,  the  slaves  and  captives
from  which  had  become  arbiters  of  the  sceptre  of  Bagdad,
passed  their  original  limits  of  the  Iaxartes  or  Sihon.  The
sultans  of  Ghazna,  a  dynasty  whose  splendid  conquests  were
of  very  short  duration,  had  deemed  it  politic  to  divide  the
strength  of  these  formidable  allies  by  inviting  a  part  of  them
into  Khorasan.  They  covered  that  fertile  province  with
their  pastoral  tents,  and  beckoned  their  compatriots  to  share
the  riches  of  the  south.  The  Ghaznevides  fell
the  earliest  victims ;  but  Persia,  violated  in  turn
by  every  conqueror,  was  a  tempting  and  unresist¬
ing  prey.  Togrol  Bek,  the  founder  of  the  Seljukian  dyna-ty
of  Turks,  overthrew  the  family  of  Bowides,  who  had  long
reigned  ut  Ispahan,  respected  the  pageant  of  Mohammedan
sovereignty  in  the  khalif  of  Bagdad,  embraced  with  all  his
tribes  the  religion  of  the  vanquished,  and  commenced  the  at¬
tack  upon  Christendom  by  an  irruption  into  Armenia  llis
nephew  and  successor  Alp  Arslan  defeated  and  took  prisoner
a  d  iu7l  ^le  emperor  Komanus  Diogenes ;  and  the  conquest
of  Asia  Minor  was  almost  completed  by  princes  oi
the  same  family,  the  Seljukiansof  Bum,4  who  were  permitted
by  Malek  Shah,  the  third  sultan  of  the  Turks,  to  form  an  in¬
dependent  kingdom.  Through  their  own  exertions,  and  the
selfish  impolicy  of  rival  competitors  for  the  throne  of  Con¬
stantinople,  who  bartered  the  strength  of  the  empire  for  as¬
sistance,  the  Turks  became  masters  of  the  Asiatic  cities  and

Their
conquer  ts,
A.D.  1088.

1  Gibbon,  c.  62  and  68.  The  Utter  of  rally,  according  to  the  order  of  time,  but
three  chapter*  contains  as  luminous  a  philosophically,  accord  inf  to  their  rela-
•ketrh  of  the  condition  of  Greer*  a s  the  tion*.

former  dor*  of  Saracenic  history  Iu  ’  Hum,  l.  #.  country  of  the  Homans,
each,  the  farU  are  not  grouped  hUtori-

Greeks,  etc.  PROGRESS  OF  THE  GREEKS.

125

fortified  passes  ;  nor  did  there  seem  any  obstacle  to  the  inva¬
sion  of  Europe.1

In  this  state  of  jeopardy  the  Greek  empire  looked  for  aid
to  the  nations  of  the  West,  and  received  it  in  fuller  The  first
measure  than  was  expected,  or  perhaps  desired.  Crusade-
The  deliverance  of  Constantinople  was  indeed  a  very  second¬
ary  object  with  the  crusaders.  But  it  was  necessarily  in¬
cluded  in  their  scheme  of  operations,  which,  though  they  all
tended  to  the  recovery  of  Jerusalem,  must  commence  with
the  first  enemies  that  lay  on  their  line  of  march.  The  Turks
were  entirely  defeated,  their  capital  of  Nice  restored  to  the
empire.  As  the  Franks  passed  onwards,  the  emperor
Alexius  Comnenus  trod  on  their  footsteps,  and  secured  to
himself  the  fruits  for  which  their  enthusiasm  disdained  to
wait.  He  regained  possession  of  the  strong  places  on  the
iEgean  shores,  of  the  defiles  of  Bithynia,  and  of  the  entire
coast  of  Asia  Minor,  both  on  the  Euxine  and  Mediterranean
seas,  which  the  Turkish  armies,  composed  of  cavalry  and
unused  to  regular  warfare,  could  not  recover.2  So  much
must  undoubtedly  be  ascribed  to  the  first  crusade.  But  I
think  that  the  general  effect  of  these  expeditions  has  been
overrated  by  those  who  consider  them  as  having  permanently
retarded  the  progress  of  the  Turkish  power.  The  progress  or
Christians  in  Palestine  and  Syria  were  hardly  in  the  Greeks,
contact  with  the  Seljukian  kingdom  of  Rum,  the  only  ene¬
mies  of  the  empire ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  perceive  that  their
small  and  feeble  principalities,  engaged  commonly  in  defend¬
ing  themselves  against  the  Mohammedan  princes  of  Meso¬
potamia,  or  the  Fatimite  khalifs  of  Egypt,  could  obstruct  the
arms  of  a  sovereign  of  Iconium  upon  the  Maeander  or  the
Halys.  Other  causes  are  adequate  to  explain  the  equipoise
in  which  the  balance  of  dominion  in  Anatolia  was  kept
during  the  twelfth  century :  the  valor  and  activity  of  the  two
Comneni,  John  and  Manuel,  especially  the  former;  and  the
frequent  partitions  and  internal  feuds,  through  which  the
Seljukians  of  Iconium,  like  all  other  Oriental  governments,
became  incapable  of  foreign  aggression.

But  whatever  obligation  might  be  due  to  the  first  crusaders
from  the  Eastern  empire  was  cancelled  by  their  descend-

1  Gibbon,  c.  67  ;  De  Guignes,  Hift.  des  wm  reannexed  to  the  empire  during  the

Hnos>  t.  ii.  1.  2.  reign  of  Alexius,  or  of  his  gallant  son

2  It  does  not  seem  perfectly  clear  John  Comnenus.  But  the  doubt  is
whether  the  sea-coast,  north  uud  south,  hardly  worth  uoticing.

126

CAPTUKE  OF  CONSTANTINOPLE.

Chap.  VI.

ants  one  hundred  years  afterwards,  when  the  fourth  in  num-
Captureof  ber  of  those  expeditions  was  turned  to  the  sub-
nopfe  by  jugation  of  Constantinople  itself.  One  of  those

the  LattoB.  domestic  revolutions  which  occur  perpetually  in

Byzantine  history  had  placed  an  usurper  on  the  imperial
throne.  The  lawful  monarch  was  condemned  to  blindness
and  a  prison ;  but  the  heir  escaped  to  recount  his  misfortunes
*  d  1202  t0  t^ie  ^eet  an<^  army  crusaders  assembled  in
the  Dalmatian  port  of  Zara.  This  armament  had
been  collected  for  the  usud  purposes,  and  through  the  usual
motives,  temporal  and  spiritual,  of  a  crusade ;  the  military
force  chiefly  consisted  of  French  nobles ;  the  naval  was  sup¬
plied  by  the  republic  of  Venice,  whose  doge  commanded
personally  in  the  expedition.  It  was  not  apparently  consis¬
tent  with  the  primary  object  of  retrieving  the  Christian
affairs  in  Palestine  to  interfere  in  the  government  of  a
Christian  empire ;  but  the  temptation  of  punishing  a  faithless
people,  and  the  hope  of  assistance  in  their  subsequent
operations,  prevailed.  They  turned  their  prows  up  the
Archipelago;  and,  notwithstanding  the  vast  population  and
defensible  strength  of  Constantinople,  compelled  the  usurper
to  fly,  and  the  citizens  to  surrender.  But  animosities  spring¬
ing  from  religious  schism  and  national  jealousy  were  not
likely  to  be  allayed  by  such  remedies ;  the  Greeks,  wounded
in  their  pride  and  bigotry,  regarded  the  legitimate  emperor
as  a  creature  of  their  enemies,  ready  to  sacrifice  their  church,
a  stipulated  condition  of  his  restoration,  to  that  of  Rome.  In
a  few  months  a  new  sedition  and  conspiracy  raised  another
usurper  in  defiance  of  the  crusaders’  army  encamped  without
a  t>  1204  walls.  The  siege  instantly  recommenced ;  and

after  three  months  the  city  of  Constantinople  was
taken  by  storm.  The  tale  of  pillage  and  murder  is  always
uniform  ;  but  the  calamities  of  ancient  capitals,  like  those
of  the  great,  impress  us  more  forcibly.  Even  now  we  sym¬
pathize  with  the  virgin  majesty  of  Constantinople,  decked
with  the  accumulated  wealth  of  ages,  and  resplendent  with
the  monuments  of  Roman  empire  and  of  Grecian  art  Her
populousness  is  estimated  beyond  credibility :  ten,  twenty,
thirty-fold  that  of  London  or  Paris ;  certainly  far  beyond  the
united  capitals  of  all  European  kingdoms  in  that  age.1  In

1  Yllle  Hardouln  reckon*  the  inhabit*  mil  nominee  ou  pint,  by  which  Gibbon
fcnU  of  CotuUntinople  at  q  mitre  cent  underotand*  him  to  mean  men  of  a  mill-

Greeks,  etc.

PARTITION'  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

127

magnificence  she  excelled  them  more  than  in  numbers ;
instead  of  the  thatched  roofs,  the  mud  walls,  the  narrow
streets,  the  pitiful  buildings  of  those  cities,  she  had  marble
and  gilded  palaces,  churches  and  monasteries,  the  works  of
skilful  architects,  through  nine  centuries,  gradually  sliding
from  the  severity  of  ancient  taste  into  the  more  various  and
brilliant  combinations  of  eastern  fancy.1  In  the  libraries
of  Constantinople  were  collected  the  remains  of  Grecian
learning ;  her  forum  and  hippodrome  were  decorated  with
those  of  Grecian  sculpture ;  but  neither  would  be  spared  by
undistinguishing  rapine  ;  nor  were  the  chiefs  of  the  crusaders
more  able  to  appreciate  the  loss  than  their  soldiery.  Four
horses,  that  breathe  in  the  brass  of  Lysippus,  were  removed
from  Constantinople  to  the  square  of  St.  Mark  at  Venice ;
destined  again  to  become  the  trophies  of  war,  and  to  follow
the  alternate  revolutions  of  conquest.  But  we  learn  from  a
contemporary  Greek  to  deplore  the  fate  of  many  other  pieces
of  sculpture,  which  were  destroyed  in  wantonness,  or  even
coined  into  brass  money.2

The  lawful  emperor  and  his  son  had  perished  in  the
rebellion  that  gave  occasion  to  this  catastrophe ;  partition  of
and  there  remained  no  right  to  interfere  with  that  th®  emPire-
of  conquest.  But  the  Latins  were  a  promiscuous  multitude,
and  what  their  independent  valor  had  earned  was  not  to  be
transferred  to  a  single  master.  Though  the  name  of  emperor
seemed  necessary  for  the  government  of  Constantinople,  the
unity  of  despotic  power  was  very  foreign  to  the  principles
and  the  interests  of  the  crusaders.  In  their  selfish  schemes
of  aggrandizement  they  tore  in  pieces  the  Greek  empire.
One  fourth  only  was  allotted  to  the  emperor,  three  eighths
were  the  share  of  the  republic  of  Venice,  and  the  remainder
was  divided  among  the  chiefs.  Baldwin  count  of  Flanders
obtained  the  imperial  title,  with  the  feudal  sovereignty  over
the  minor  principalities.  A  monarchy  thus  dismembered  had

tarv  ago.  Le  Beau  allows  a  million  for  latia  sunt  in  eft,  opere  mcro  fiibrefacta !
the  whole  population.  Gibbon,  vol.  xi.  quo  etiain  in  plateis  v<*l  in  view  opera
p.  213.  We  should  probably  rate  Lon-  ad  spectandum  mirabilia!  Tedium  est
don,  in  1204,  too  high  at  60.000  souls,  quklem  magnum  recitare,  quanta  sit  ibi
Paris  had  been  enlarged  by  Philip  Au-  opulentia  bonorum  omnium,  auri  efc
gustus,  and  stood  on  more  ground  than  argenti  palliorum  multiformium,  sacra-
London.  Delamare  sur  la  Police,  t.  i.  p.  rurnque  reliquiarum.  Omni  etiam  tem-
76.  pore,  navigio  frequenti  cuncta  hominum

1  O  quanta  civitas,  exclaims  Fulk  of  necessaria  illuc  afferuntur.  Du  Chesne,
Chartres  a  hundred  years  before,  nobilis  Scrip.  Rerum  Gallicarum,  t.  iv.  p.  622.
et  decora!  quot  monasteria  quotque  pa-  *  Gibbon,  c.  60.

128

INVASIONS  OF  ASI4.

Chap.  VI.

little  prospect  of  honor  or  durability.  The  Latin  emperors
of  Constantinople  were  more  contemptible  and  unfortunate,
not  so  much  from  personal  character  as  political  weakness,
than  their  predecessors  ;  their  vassals  rebelled  against  sover¬
eigns  not  more  powerful  than  themselves ;  the  Bulgarians,  a
nation  who,  after  being  long  formidable,  had  been  subdued  by
the  imperial  arms,  and  only  recovered  independence  on  the
eve  of  the  Latin  conquest,  insulted  their  capital ;  the  Greeks
The  Greeks  viewed  them  with  silent  hatred,  and  hailed  the
recover  Con-  dawning  deliverance  from  the  Asiatic  coast.  On
stantinopie.  ^at  s]Je  of  the  Bosphorus  the  Latin  usurpation
was  scarcely  for  a  moment  acknowledged ;  Nice  became  the
seat  of  a  Greek  dynasty,  who  reigned  with  honor  as  far  its
the  Maunder ;  and  crossing  into  Europe,  after  having  estab-
a  d  1  vi  iislied  their  dominion  throughout  Romania  and
other  provinces,  expelled  the  last  Latin  emperors
from  Constantinople  in  less  than  sixty  years  from  its  capture.

During  the  reign  of  these  Greeks  at  Nice  they  hud  for¬
tunately  little  to  dread  on  the  side  of  their  former  enemies,
and  were  generally  on  terms  of  friendship  with  the  Selju-
kians  of  Iconium.  That  monarchy  indeed  had  sufficient  ob¬
jects  of  apprehension  for  itself.  Their  own  example  in
_  .  .  changing  the  upland  plains  of  Tartary  for  the  cul-

by  the  tivated  valleys  ot  the  south  was  imitated  in  the
Karisminus,  thirteenth  century  by  two  successive  hordes  of
northern  barbarians.  The  Karismians,  whose  tents  had
been  pitched  on  the  lower  Oxus  and  Caspian  Sea,  availed
themselves  of  the  decline  of  the  Turkish  power  to  establish
their  dominion  in  Persia,  and  menaced,  though  they  did  not
overthrow,  the  kingdom  of  Iconium.  A  more  tremendous
storm  ensued  in  the  eruption  of  Moguls  under  the
*nd .  ogu  s.  Qf  Zingis  Khan.  From  the  farthest  regions

of  Chinese  Tartary  issued  a  race  more  fierce  and  destitute  of
civilization  than  those  who  had  preceded,  whose  numbers  were
told  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  whose  only  test  of  victory
was  devastation.  All  Asia,  from  the  sea  of  China  to  the
a.d.  1218.  Euxine,  wasted  beneath  the  locusts  of  the  north.
A.n.  1272.  They  annihilated  the  phantom  of  authority  which
still  lingered  with  the  name  of  khalif  at  Bagdad.  They  re¬
duced  into  dependence  and  finally  subverted  the  Seljukian
dynasties  of  Persia,  Syria,  and  Iconium.  The  Turks  of  the
latter  kingdom  betook  themselves  to  the  mountainous  country,

Greeks,  etc.

THE  OTTOMANS.

129

where  they  formed  several  petty  principalities,  which  sub¬
sisted  by  incursions  into  the  territory  of  the  Moguls  or  the
Greeks.  The  chief  of  one  of  these,  named  Oth-

*  a*d.  1299

man,  at  the  end  of  the  thii'teenth  century,  pene¬
trated  into  the  province  of  Bithynia,  from  which  his  pos¬
terity  were  never  withdrawn.1

The  empire  of  Constantinople  had  never  recovered  the
blow  it  received  at  the  hands  of  the  Latins.  Most
of  the  islands  in  the  Archipelago,  and  the  provinces  ofnfhe
of  proper  Greece  from  Thessaly  southward,  were  Gree.k
still  possessed  by  those  invaders.  The  wealth  and
naval  power  of  the  empire  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the
maritime  republics  ;  Venice,  Genoa,  Pisa,  and  Barcelona  were
enriched  by  a  commerce  which  they  carried  on  as  independent
states  within  the  precincts  of  Constantinople,  scarcely  deign¬
ing  to  solicit  the  permission  or  recognize  the  supremacy  of
its  master.  In  a  great  battle  fought  under  the  ^  d
walls  of  the  city  between  tbe  Venetian  and  Geno¬
ese  fleets,  the  weight  of  the  Roman  empire,  in  Gibbon’s
expression,  was  scarcely  felt  in  the  balance  of  these  opulent
and  powerful  republics.  Eight  galleys  were  the  contribution
of  the  emperor  Cantacuzene  to  his  Venetian  allies;  and  upon
their  defeat  he  submitted  to  the  ignominy  of  excluding  them
forever  from  trading  in  his  dominions.  Meantime  the  re¬
mains  of  the  empire  in  Asia  were  seized  by  tbe  independent
Turkish  dynasties,  of  which  the  most  illustrious,  The
that  of  the  Ottomans,  occupied  the  province  of  ottomans.
Bithynia.  Invited  by  a  Byzantine  faction  into  A  143L
Europe,  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  they
fixed  themselves  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  capital,  and  in
the  thirty  years’  reign  of  Amurath  I.  subdued,  with  little  re¬
sistance,  the  province  of  Romania  and  the  small  Christian
kingdoms  that  had  been  formed  on  the  lower  Danube.  Ba-
jazet,  the  successor  of  Amurath,  reduced  the  independent
emirs  of  Anatolia  to  subjection,  and,  after  long  threatening
Constantinople,  invested  it  by  sea  and  land.  The  Greeks
called  loudly  upon  their  brethren  of  the  West  for
aid  against  the  common  enemy  ot  Christendom ;
but  the  flower  of  French  chivalry  had  been  slain  or  taken  in
the  battle  of  Nicopolis  in  Bulgaria,2  where  the  king  of  Hun-

1  I>«  Guignes,  Hint,  des  Huns,  t.  lii.  1.  2  The  Hungarians  find  in  this  battle

15;  Gibbon,  c.  64.  and  deserted  their  allies,  according  to

VOL.  II.

9

130

THE  TARTARS  OR  MOGULS.

Chap.  VI.

gary,  notwithstanding  the  heroism  of  these  volunteers,  was
entirely  defeated  by  Bajazet.  The  emperor  Manuel  left  his
capital  with  a  faint  hope  of  exciting  the  courts  of  Europe  to
some  decided  efforts  by  personal  representations  of  the  danger;
and,  during  his  absence,  Constantinople  was  saved,  not  by  a
friend,  indeed,  but  by  a  power  more  formidable  to  her  ene¬
mies  than  to  herself.

The  loose  masses  of  mankind,  that,  without  laws,  agricul-
The  Tartars  ture’  or  fixed  dwellings,  overspread  the  vast  central
or  Moguls  regions  of  Asia,  have,  at  various  times,  been  im-
ofiuuur.  pened  by  necessity  of  subsistence,  or  through  the
casual  appearance  of  a  commanding  genius,  upon  the  domain
of  culture  and  civilization.  Two  principal  roads  connect  the
nations  of  Tartary  with  those  of  the  west  and  south  ;  the  one
into  Europe  along  the  sea  of  Azoph  and  northern  coast  of
the  Euxine ;  the  other  across  the  interval  between  the  Buk-
harian  mountains  and  the  Caspian  into  Persia.  Four  times
at  least  within  the  period  of  authentic  history  the  Scythian
tribes  have  taken  the  former  course  and  jioured  themselves
into  Europe,  but  each  wave  was  less  effectual  than  the  pre¬
ceding.  The  first  of  these  was  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  cen-
turies,  for  we  may  range  those  rapidly  successive  migrations
of  the  Goths  and  Huns  together,  when  the  Roman  empire
fell  to  the  ground,  and  the  only  boundary  of  barbarian  con¬
quest  was  the  Atlantic  ocean  upon  the  shores  of  Portugal.
The  second  wave  came  on  with  the  Hungarians  in  the  tenth
century,  whose  ravages  extended  as  far  as  the  southern  prov¬
inces  of  France.  A  third  attack  was  sustained  from  the
Moguls  under  the  children  of  Zingis  at  the  same  period  as
that  which  overwhelmed  Persia  The  Russian  monarchy
was  destroyed  in  this  invasion,  and  for  two  hundred  years
that  great  country  lay  prostrate  under  the  yoke  of  the  Tartars.
As  they  advanced,  Poland  and  Hungary  gave  little  opposi¬
tion;  and  the  farthest  nations  of  Europe  were  appalled  by
the  tempest.  But  Germany  was  no  longer  as  she  had  been
in  the  anarchy  of  the  tenth  century ;  the  Moguls  were  mi-

the  M£molre*  de  Bouclcaut,  c.  2f».  But
FrolM&rt,  who  wcmi  a  fairer  authority,
impute*  the  defeat  to  the  raahnea*  of  the
French.  Part  hr.  ch.  79.  The  count  de
Never*  (Jean  San*  Pear,  afterward*  duke
of  Burgundy),  who  commanded  the
French,  was  made  prisoner  with  others
of  the  royal  blood,  and  ransomed  at  a

very  high  price.  Many  of  eminent  birth
and  merit  were  put  to  death  ;  a  fate
from  which  Bouricmut  wa*  aaved  by  the
interference  of  the  count  de  Seven*,  who
might  better  himself  have  perished  with
honor  on  that  occasion  than  survived  to
plunge  hi*  country  Into  civil  war  and  hU
uaine  into  inliuny

Greeks,  etc.

DEFEAT  OF  BAJAZET.

131

used  to  resistance,  and  still  less  inclined  to  regular  warfare ;
they  retired  before  the  emperor  Frederic  II.,  and  the  utmost
points  of  their  western  invasion  were  the  cities  of  a  d  1245
Lignitz  in  Silesia  and  Neustadt  in  Austria.  In
the  fourth  and  last  aggression  of  the  Tartars  their  progress
in  Europe  is  hardly  perceptible ;  the  Moguls  of  Timur’s
army  could  only  boast  the  destruction  of  Azoph  and  the  pil¬
lage  of  some  Russian  provinces.  Timur,  the  sovereign  of
these  Moguls  and  founder  of  their  second  dynasty,  which  has
been  more  permanent  and  celebrated  than  that  of  Zingis,  had
been  the  prince  of  a  small  tribe  in  Transoxiana,  between  the
Gihon  and  Sirr,  the  doubtful  frontier  of  settled  and  pastoral
nations.  His  own  energy  and  the  weakness  of  his  neighbors
are  sufficient  to  explain  the  revolution  he  effected.  Like
former  conquerors,  Togrol  Bek  and  Zingis,  he  chose  the  road
through  Persia ;  and,  meeting  little  resistance  from  the  dis¬
ordered  governments  of  Asia,  extended  his  empire  on  one
side  to  the  Syrian  coast,  while  by  successes  still  more  re¬
nowned,  though  not  belonging  to  this  place,  it  reached  on  the
other  to  the  heart  of  Hindostan.  In  his  old  age  the  restless¬
ness  of  ambition  impelled  him  against  the  Turks  of  Anatolia.
Bajazet  hastened  from  the  siege  of  Constantinople  to  a  more
perilous  contest :  his  defeat  and  captivity  in  the  Defeat  of
plains  of  Angora  clouded  for  a  time  the  Ottoman  Bajaiet.
crescent,  and  preserved  the  wreck  of  the  Greek  A‘D'
empire  for  fifty  years  longer.

The  Moguls  did  not  improve  their  victory ;  in  the  western
parts  of  Asia,  as  in  Hindostan,  Timur  was  but  a  Danger0f
barbarian  destroyer,  though  at  Samarcand  a  sov-  Constanti-
ereign  and  a  legislator.  He  gave  up  Anatolia  to  nople'
the  sons  of  Bajazet ;  but  the  unity  of  their  power  was  broken ;
and  the  Ottoman  kingdom,  like  those  which  had  preceded,
experienced  the  evils  of  partition  and  mutual  animosity.
For  about  twenty  years  an  opportunity  was  given  to  the
Greeks  of  recovering  part  of  their  losses ;  but  they  were
incapable  of  making  the  best  use  of  this  advantage,  and,
though  they  regained  possession  of  part  of  Romania,  did  not
extirpate  a  strong  Turkish  colony  that  held  the  city  of  Galli¬
poli  in  the  Chersonesus.  When  Amurath  II.,  there-  A  D  1421
lore,  reunited  under  his  vigorous  sceptre  the  Otto¬
man  monarchy,  Constantinople  was  exposed  to  another  siege
and  to  fresh  losses.  Her  walls,  however,  repelled  the  enemy ;

132

FALL  OF  CONSTANTINOPLE.

Chap.  VI.

and  during  the  reign  of  Araurath  she  had  leisure  to  repeat
those  signals  of  distress  which  the  princes  of  Christendom
refused  to  observe.  The  situation  of  Europe  was,  indeed,
sufficiently  inauspicious;  France,  the  original  country  of  the
crusades  and  of  chivalry,  was  involved  in  foreign  and  domestic
war  ;  while  a  schism,  apparently  interminable,  rent  the  bosom
of  the  Latin  church  and  impaired  the  efficiency  of  the  only
power  that  could  unite  and  animate  its  disciples  in  a  religious
war.  Even  when  the  Roman  jwntiffs  were  best  disposed  to
rescue  Constantinople  from  destruction,  it  was  rather  as
masters  than  as  allies  that  they  would  interfere ;  their  ungen¬
erous  bigotry,  or  rather  pride,  dictated  the  submission  of  her
church  and  the  renunciation  of  her  favorite  article  of  dis¬
tinctive  faith.  The  Greeks  yielded  with  reluctance  and
insincerity  in  the  council  of  Florence ;  but  soon  rescinded
their  treaty  of  union.  Ugenius  IV.  procured  a  short  diver-
a  d  14+t  8i°n  on  the  side  of  Hungary ;  but  after  the  un¬
fortunate  battle  of  Warna  the  Hungarians  were
abundantly  employed  in  self-defence.

The  two  monarchies  which  have  successively  held  their
seat  in  the  city  of  Constantine  may  be  contrasted  in  the  cir¬
cumstances  of  their  decline.  In  the  present  day  we  anticipate,
with  an  assurance  that  none  can  deem  extravagant,  the  ap¬
proaching  subversion  of  the  Ottoman  power ;  but  the  signs
of  internal  weakness  have  not  yet  been  confirmed  by  the  dis¬
memberment  of  provinces;  and  the  arch  of  dominion,  that
long  since  has  seemed  nodding  to  its  fall  and  totters  at  every
blast  of  the  north,  still  rests  upon  the  landmarks  of  ancient
conquest,  and  spans  the  ample  regions  from  Bagdad  to  Bel¬
grade.  Far  different  were  the  events  that  preceded  the  disso¬
lution  of  the  Greek  empire.  Every  province  was  in  turn
subdued  —  every  city  opened  her  gates  to  the  conqueror:  the
limbs  were  lopped  off  one  by  one ;  but  the  pulse
still  beat  at  the  heart,  and  the  majesty  of  the  Ro¬
man  name  was  ultimately  confined  to  the  walls  of  Constanti¬
nople.  Before  Mahomet  II.  planted  his  cannon  against  them,
he  had  completed  every  smaller  conquest  and  deprived  the
expiring  empire  of  every  hope  of  succor  or  delay.  It  was
necessary  that  Constantinople  should  fall ;  but  the  magnani¬
mous  resignation  of  her  emperor  bestows  an  honor  upon  her
fall  which  her  prosperity  seldom  earned.  The
long  deferred  but  inevitable  moment  arrived  ;  and

it*  fcu.

AD.  1468.

Greeks,  etc.

ALARM  IN  EUROPE.

133

the  last  of  the  Caesars  (I  will  not  say  of  the  Palaeologi)  folded
round  him  the  imperial  mantle,  and  remembered  the  name
which  he  represented  in  the  dignity  of  heroic  death.  It  is
thus  that  the  intellectual  principle,  when  enfeebled  by  disease
or  age,  is  found  to  rally  its  energies  in  the  presence  of  death,
and  pour  the  radiance  of  unclouded  reason  around  the  last
struggles  of  dissolution.

Though  the  fate  of  Constantinople  had  been  protracted
beyond  all  reasonable  expectation,  the  actual  intel-  AIann  ex_
ligence  operated  like  that  of  sudden  calamity,  cited  by  it
A  sentiment  of  consternation,  perhaps  of  self-  aEurope-
reproach,  thrilled  to  the  heart  of  Christendom.  There
seemed  no  longer  anything  to  divert  the  Ottoman  armies
from  Hungary ;  and  if  Hungary  should  be  subdued,  it  was
evident  that  both  Italy  and  the  German  empire  were  exposed
to  invasion.1  A  general  union  of  Christian  powers  was  re¬
quired  to  withstand  this  common  enemy.  But  the  popes,
who  had  so  often  armed  them  against  each  other,  wasted  their
spiritual  and  political  counsels  in  attempting  to  restore  una¬
nimity.  War  was  proclaimed  against  the  Turks  at  the  diet
of  Frankfort,  in  1454;  but  no  efforts  were  made  to  carry  the
menace  into  execution.  No  prince  could  have  sat  on  the  im¬
perial  throne  more  unfitted  for  the  emergency  than  Frederic
III.;  his  mean  spirit  and  narrow  capacity  exposed  him  to  the
contempt  of  mankind  —  his  avarice  and  duplicity  ensured  the
hatred  of  Austria  and  Hungary.  During  the  papacy  of  Pius
II.,  whose  heart  was  thoroughly  engaged  in  this  legitimate
crusade,  a  more  specious  attempt  was  made  by  convening  an
European  congress  at  Mantua.  Almost  all  the  sovereigns
attended  by  their  envoys ;  it  was  concluded  that  50,000  men-
at-arms  should  be  raised,  and  a  tax  levied  for  three
years  of  one  tenth  from  the  revenues  of  the  clergy,  A'D' 14,j9,
one  thirtieth  from  those  of  the  laity,  and  one  twentieth  from
the  capital  of  the  Jews.2  Pius  engaged  to  head  this  arma-

l  Sive  vincitur  Hungaria,  give  coacta  sSpondanus.  Neither  Charles  VII.
jungitur  Turcis,  Deque  Italia  neque  nor  even  Philip  of  Burgundy,  who  had
Germania  tuta  erit,  neque  satis  Klieuus  made  the  loudest  professions,  and  pledged
Gallos  secures  reddet.  jEn.  Sylr.  p.  himself  in  a  fantastic  pageant  at  his
678.  This  is  part  of  a  discourse  pro-  court,  soon  after  the  capture  of  Constan-
nounced  by  /Eneas  Sylvius  before  the  tinople,  to  undertake  this  crusade,  were
diet  of  Frankfort  ;  which,  though  too  sincere  in  their  promises.  The  former
declamatory,  like  most  of  his  writings,  pretended  apprehensions  of  invasion  from
is  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  state  England,  as  an  excuse  for  sending  no
of  Europe  and  of  the  impression  pro-  troops;  which,  considering  the  situation
duced  by  that  calamity.  Spondanus,  of  England  in  1469,  was  a  bold  attempt
n  i  ann.  1464,  has  given  large  extracts  upon  the  credulity  of  mankind
from  this  oratiou.

134

INSTITUTION  OF  JANIZARIES.

Chap.  VI.

ment  in  person ;  but  when  he  appeared  next  year  at  Ancona,
the  appointed  place  of  embarkation,  the  princes  had  failed  in
all  their  promises  of  men  and  money,  and  he  found  only  a
headlong  crowd  of  adventurers,  destitute  of  every  necessary,
and  expecting  to  be  fed  and  paid  at  the  pope’s  expense,  it
was  not  by  such  a  laxly  that  Mahomet  could  be  expelled  from
Constantinople.  If  the  Christian  sovereigns  had  given  a
steady  and  sincere  cooperation,  the  contest  would  still  have
institution  of  been  arduous  and  uncertain.  In  the  early  crusades
Januaries.  the  superiority  of  arms,  of  skill,  and  even  of  dis¬
cipline,  had  been  uniformly  on  the  side  of  Europe.  But  the
present  circumstances  were  far  from  similar.  An  institution,
begun  by  the  first  and  perfected  by  the  second  Amurath,  had
given  to  the  Turkish  armies  what  their  enemies  still  wanted,
military  subordination  and  veteran  experience.  Aware,  as  it
seems,  of  the  real  superiority  of  Europeans  in  war,  these
sultans  selected  the  stoutest  youths  from  their  Bulgarian,  Ser¬
vian,  or  Albanian  captives,  who  were  educated  in  habits  of
martial  discipline,  and  formed  into  a  regular  force  with  the
name  of  Janizaries.  After  conquest  had  put  an  end  to  per¬
sonal  captivity,  a  tax  of  every  fifth  male  child  was  raised
upon  the  Christian  population  for  the  same  purpose.  The
arm  of  Europe  was  thus  turned  upon  herself ;  and  the  west¬
ern  nations  must  have  contended  with  troops  of  hereditary
robustness  and  intrepidity,  whose  emulous  enthusiasm  for  the
country  that  had  adopted  them  was  controlled  by  habitual  obe¬
dience  to  their  commanders.1

1  In  the  long  declamation  of  .42nea*

Sylvius  before  the  diet  of  Frankfort  in
1454,  he  ha*  the  following  contract
between  the  European  and  Turkish  mili¬
tia  ;  a  good  Hpccimen  of  the  artifice  with
which  an  ingenious  orator  can  dinguine
the  truth,  while  he  seem*  to  be  Rtating
it  most  precisely.  Conferainus  nunc
Turcott  et  roe  iiiTirem ;  et  quid  speran-
dum  Kit  *1  cum  illi*  pugnrtis,  examine-
mua.  Vo*  nati  ad  arma.  ill!  tract!.  Vo*
armati,  illi  inennes ;  to*  giadio*  Teraatl*,
illi  cultria  utuutur  ;  to*  ball*ta*  tenditi*,
illi  arcu*  trail unt ;  to*  lorir»  thorace*-
que  protegunt,  illoe  culcltre  legit ;  to*
equo*  regiti*.  illi  ah  equi*  reguntur  ;  tin
nobile*  in  belium  duciti*,  illi  *enro#  aut
artifice*  cogunt,  kc.  kc.  p.  686.  Thi*,
howerer,  had  Uttie  effect  upon  the  hear¬
er*.  who  were  better  judge*  of  military
affaire  than  the  secretary  of  Frederic  III.

Plus  II.,  or  J£nea*  Sylvius,  wan  a  llTely
writer  and  a  skilful  Intriguer.  Long
experience  had  given  him  a  considerable

insight  into  European  politics;  and  hlf
▼lew*  are  usually  clear  and  sensible.
Though  not  to  learned  a*  some  popes,  ho
knew  much  better  what  wa*  going  for¬
ward  in  hi*  own  time.  But  the  Tanity
of  displaying  hi*  eloquence  betrayed  him
into  a  strange  folly,  when  he  ad  dreaded  a
▼cry  long  letter  to*  Mahomet  II.,  explain¬
ing  the  Catholic  (kith,  and  urging  him  to
be  baptised  ;  in  which  case,  *o  far  from
preaching  a  crusade  against  the  Turk*,
he  would  gladly  make  use  of  their  power
to  recoTer  the  right*  of  the  church.  Some
of  his  inducement*  are  curiou*.  and
must,  if  made  public,  hare  been  highly
gratlMng  to  hi*  friend  Frederic  III.
Quippe  ut  arbitral!)  ur,  si  Christian  u*
fui*M*M,  niortuo  Ladblao  Ungaria*  et  Bo¬
hemia*  rege,  nemo  p  nr  ter  te  lua  regna
fuift*et  adept ti*.  8pera**ent  Ungari  po«t
diuturna  bellorum  mala  sub  tuo  regim-
lne  pacem,  et  illo*  Bohemi  secuti  fuU-
•ent ;  *ed  rum  «•****  no*  tret  religion  is
husti*,  eiegerunt  Ungari,  kc.  EpUt.  61*6.

Greeks,  etc.  SUSPENSION  OF  OTTOMAN  CONQUESTS.  135

Yet  forty  years  after  the  fall  of  Constantinople,  at  the  epoch
of  Charles  VIII.’s  expedition  into  Italy,  the  just  Suspension  of
apprehensions  of  European  statesmen  might  have  the  ottomau
gradually  subsided.  Except  the  Morea,  Negropont, conqucsta'
and  a  few  other  unimportant  conquests,  no  real  progress  had
been  made  by  the  Ottomans.  Mahomet  II.  had  been  kept  at
bay  by  the  Hungarians  ;  he  had  been  repulsed  with  some
ignominy  by  the  knights  of  St.  John  from  the  island  of
Rhodes.  A  petty  chieftain  defied  this  mighty  conqueror  for
twenty  years  in  the  mountains  of  Epirus ;  and  the  perse¬
vering  courage  of  his  desultory  warfare  with  such  trifling
resources,  and  so  little  prospect  of  ultimate  success,  may
justify  the  exaggerated  admiration  with  which  his  contem¬
poraries  honored  the  name  of  Scanderbeg.  Once  only  the
crescent  was  displayed  on  the  Calabrian  coast;
but  the  city  of  Otranto  remained  but  a  year  in  A'Di  1480‘
the  possession  of  Mahomet.  On  his  death  a  disputed  suc¬
cession  involved  his  children  in  civil  war.  Bajazet,  the
eldest,  obtained  the  victory;  but  his  rival  brother  Zizim
fled  to  Rhodes,  from  whence  he  was  removed  to  France,
and  afterwards  to  Rome.  Apprehensions  of  this  exiled
prince  seem  to  have  dictated  a  pacific  policy  to  the  reigning
sultan,  whose  character  did  not  possess  the  usual  energy  of
Ottoman  sovereigns.

136

WEALTH  OF  THE  CHURCH.  Chap.  VII.  Pakt  L

CHAPTER  VII.

HISTORY  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POWER  DURING  THE
MIDDLE  AGES.

PART  I.

W  raith  of  the  Clergy  —  It*  Source*  —  Encroachments  on  Ecoleehutlcal  Property  —
their  Juri«dlction  arbltretlre  —  eoerelre  —  their  political  Power  — Supremacy
of  the  Crown  —  Charlanugne  —  Change  after  hie  Death,  and  Encroachment*  of
the  Church  in  the  ninth  Century  —  Primacy  of  the  See  of  ltome  —  it*  early  Sum
—  Uregory  I. —Council  of  Frankfort  —  faleo  Decretal*  —  Progre*.  of  Papal  Au-
thority  —  KfTecU  of  Excommunication—  Lotlialre  —  State  of  the  Church  In  the
tenth  Century  —  Marriage  of  Prieet*  —  Simony  —  Episcopal  Election*  —  Imperial
Authority  over  the  I»ope«  —  Disputes  concerning  Investitures  —  Gregory  VII.  un.l
Henry  1 V.  — Concordat  of  Calixtus  —  Election  by  Chapter*  —  generul'System  of
°««»K  VII-~  Of  Papal  Usurpation*  In  the  twelfth  Century  —  Inno-

cent  III.  —  bin  Character  and  Schemed.

At  the  irruption  of  the  northern  invaders  into  the  Roman
empire  they  found  the  clergy  already  endowed  with  extensive
possessions.  Besides  the  sjtontaneous  oblations  ujton  which
Wealth  of  min*8ter8  of  the  Christian  church  had  origin-

tin-  church  ally  subsisted,  they  had  obtained,  even  under  the
empire!*10  pagan  emperors,  by  concealment  or  connivance  —
for  the  Roman  law  did  not  permit  a  tenure  of
lands  in  mortmain  —  certain  immovable  estates,  the  revenues
ot  which  were  applicable  to  their  own  maintenance  and  that
of  the  poor.1  These  indeed  were  precarious  and  liable  to
confiscation  in  times  of  persecution.  But  it  was  among  the
first  effects  of  the  conversion  of  Constantine  to  give  not  only
a  security,  but  a  legal  sanction,  to  the  territorial  acquisitions
ot  the  church.  The  edict  of  Milan,  in  313,  recognizes  the
actual  estates  of  ecclesiastical  corfiorations.*  Another,  pub¬
lished  in  321,  grants  to  all  the  subjects  of  the  empire  the
power  of  bequeathing  their  property  to  the  church.*  His

’  Glannon*,  I.tcria  dl  Napoli.  I.  U.  e.
8;  Gibbon,  e.  16  and  e.  20;  F.  Paul'*
Trent!*#  on  Benefice*,  c.  4.  The  laat
Wriu-r  doe*  not  wholly  confirm  thl*  posi¬

tion  ;  but  a  comparison  of  tha  throw
awerna  to  Justify  my  text.

’  Olnnnone  ;  Gibbon,  nbl  *upra ;  F
Paul,  c.  6.

*  Idem.

Ecclks.  Power.

ITS  INCREASE.

137

own  liberality  and  that  of  his  successors  set  an  example
which  did  not  want  imitators.  Passing  rapidly  from  a  con¬
dition  of  distress  and  persecution  to  the  summit  of  prosperity,
the  church  degenerated  as  rapidly  from  her  ancient  purity,
and  forfeited  the  respect  of  future  ages  in  the  same  propor¬
tion  as  she  acquired  the  blind  veneration  of  her  own.  Cov¬
etousness,  especially,  became  almost  a  characteristic  vice.
Yalentinian  I.,  in  370,  prohibited  the  clergy  from  receiving
the  bequests  of  women  —  a  modification  more  discreditable
than  any  general  law  could  have  been.  And  several  of  the
fathers  severely  reprobate  the  prevailing  avidity  of  their
contemporaries.1

The  devotion  of  the  conquering  nations,  as  it  was  still  less
enlightened  than  that  of  the  subjects  of  the  empire,  Incrcnsed
so  was  it  still  more  munificent.  They  left  indeed  after  its
the  worship  of  Ilesus  and  Taranis  in  their  forests;  subvcr810n*
but  they  retained  the  elementary  principles  of  that  and  of  all
barbarous  idolatry,  a  superstitious  reverence  for  the  priesthood,
a  credulity  that  seemed  to  invite  imposture,  and  a  confidence
in  the  efficacy  of  gifts  to  expiate  offences.  Of  this  temper  it
is  undeniable  that  the  ministers  of  religion,  influenced  prob¬
ably  not  so  much  by  personal  covetousness  as  by  zeal  for  the
interests  of  their  order,  took  advantage.  Many  of  the  pecu¬
liar  and  prominent  characteristics  in  the  faith  and  discipline
of  those  ages  appear  to  have  been  either  introduced  or  sedu¬
lously  promoted  for  the  purposes  of  sordid  fraud.  To  those
purposes  conspired  the  veneration  for  relics,  the  worship  of
images,  the  idolatry  of  saints  and  martyrs,  the  religious  in¬
violability  of  sanctuaries,  the  consecration  of  cemeteries,  but,
above  all,  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  and  masses  for  the  relief
of  the  dead.  A  creed  thus  contrived,  operating  upon  the
minds  of  barbarians,  lavish  though  rapacious,  and  devout
though  dissolute,  naturally  caused  a  torrent  of  opulence  to
pour  in  upon  the  church.  Donations  of  land  were  contin¬
ually  made  to  the  bishops,  and,  in  still  more  ample  proportion,
to  the  monastic  foundations.  These  had  not  been  very
numerous  in  the  West  till  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,
when  Benedict  established  his  celebrated  rule.4  A  more
remarkable  show  of  piety,  a  more  absolute  seclusion  from

1  Oinnnnone,  ubi  supra  :  F.  Paul,  c.  6.  i£me  Plscotirs  sur  mist.  Ecclefciastique ;

*  Oiannone,  1.  ill.  c.  6;  1.  iv.  c.  12;  Mur&tori,  Dissert.  65.

Treatise  cm  Benefices,  c.  8;  Fleury,  Iluit-

138

WEALTH  OF  THE  CHURCH  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

the  world,  forms  more  impressive  and  edifying,  prayers  and
masses  more  constantly  repeated,  gave  to  the  professed  in
these  institutions  an  advantage,  in  public  esteem,  over  the
secular  clergy.

The  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  never  received  any  territorial
endowment  by  law,  either  under  the  Roman  empire  or  the
kingdoms  erected  upon  its  ruins.  But  the  voluntary  munifi¬
cence  of  princes,  as  well  as  their  subjects,  amply  supplied  the
place  of  a  more  universal  provision.  Large  private  estates,
or,  as  they  were  termed,  patrimonies,  not  only  within  their
own  dioceses,  but  sometimes  in  distant  countries,  sustained
the  dignity  of  the  principal  sees,  and  especially  that  of  Rome.1
The  French  monarchs  of  the  first  dynasty,  the  Carlovingian
family  and  their  great  chief,  the  Saxon  line  of  emperors,  the
kings  of  England  and  Leon,  set  hardly  any  bounds  to  their
liberality,  its  numerous  charters  still  extant  in  diplomatic
collections  attest.  Many  churches  possessed  seven  or  eight
thousand  rnansi ;  one  with  but  two  thousand  passed  for  only
indifferently  rich.4  But  it  must  be  remarked  that  many  of
these  donations  are  of  lands  uncultivated  and  unappropriated.
The  monasteries  acquired  legitimate  riches  by  the  culture  of
these  deserted  tracts  and  by  the  prudent  management  of  their
revenues,  which  were  less  exposed  to  the  ordinary  means  of
dissipation  than  those  of  the  laity.  Their  wealth,  continually
accumulated,  enabled  them  to  become  the  regular  purchasers
of  landed  estates,  especially  in  the  time  of  the  crusades,
when  the  fiefs  of  the  nobility  were  constantly  in  the  market
for  sale  or  mortgage.4

If  the  possessions  of  ecclesiastical  communities  had  all
Sometime*  ^een  as  fkirly  earned,  we  could  find  nothing  in
improperly  them  to  reprehend.  But  other  sources  of  wealth
were  less  pure,  and  they  derived  their  wealth  from
many  sources.  Those  who  entered  into  a  monastery  threw
frequently  their  whole  estates  into  the  common  stock ;  and
even  the  children  of  rich  parents  were  expected  to  make  a
donation  of  land  on  assuming  the  cowl.  Some  gave  their
property  to  the  church  before  entering  on  military  expedi¬
tions;  gifts  were  made  by  some  to  take  effect  after  their
lives,  and  bequests  by  many  in  the  terrors  of  dissolution.

1  St.  Marc,  1. 1.  p.  2S1 ;  Giannone,  L  *  Muratori,  Dlaaert.  65;  Da  Cange,  v.
lr.  e.  12.  Ervin  u* .

■  Schmidt,  t.  U.  p.  205.  4  lleeren,  E*«al  lur  lea  CroUadoa,  p.

166;  Schmidt,  t.  111.  p.  203.

Eccles.  Power.  SOMETIMES  IMPROPERLY  ACQUIRED.  139

Even  those  legacies  to  charitable  purposes,  which  the  clergy
could  with  more  decency  and  speciousness  recommend,  and
of  which  the  administration  was  generally  confined  to  them,
were  frequently  applied  to  their  own  benefit.1  They  failed
not,  above  all,  to  inculcate  upon  the  wealthy  sinner  that  no
atonement  could  be  so  acceptable  to  Heaven  as  liberal  presents
to  its  earthly  delegates.2  To  die  without  allotting  a  portion
of  worldly  wealth  to  pious  uses  was  accounted  almost  like
suicide,  or  a  refusal  of  the  last  sacraments ;  and  hence  intes¬
tacy  passed  for  a  sort  of  fraud  upon  the  church,  which  she
punished  by  taking  the  administration  of  the  deceased’s  effects
into  her  own  hands.  This,  however,  was  peculiar  to  England,
and  seems  to  have  been  the  case  there  only  from  the  reign  of
Henry  III.  to  that  of  Edward  III.,  when  the  bishop  took  a
portion  of  the  intestate’s  personal  estate  for  the  advantage  of
the  church  and  poor,  instead  of  distributing  it  among  his
next  of  kin.8  The  canonical  penances  imposed  upon  repent¬
ant  offenders,  extravagantly  severe  in  themselves,  were  com¬
muted  for  money  or  for  immovable  possessions  —  a  fertile
though  scandalous  source  of  monastic  wealth,  which  the  popes
afterwards  diverted  into  their  own  coffers  by  the  usage  of
dispensations  and  indulgences.4  The  church  lands  enjoyed
an  immunity  from  taxes,  though  not  in  general  from  military
service,  when  of  a  feudal  tenure.8  But  their  tenure  was
frequently  in  what  was  called  frankalmoign,  without  any
obligation  of  service.  Hence  it  became  a  customary  fraud

1  Primo  sacris  pastoribus  data  est  fa-
cultas.  ut  hoereditatis  portio  in  p&uperes
et  egenos  dispergeretur ;  Bed  sensim
ecciesiae  quoque  in  pauperum  censum
Tenerunt,  atque  intestatse  gentis  mens
credita  est  proelivior  in  eas  futura  fuisse  :
qu3  ex  re  pinguius  illarum  patrinionium
ev&sit.  Iuiiuo  epiBcopi  ipsi  in  rem  suam
cjusmodi  consuctudinem  interduin  con-
vertebaut:  ac  tributum  evasit,  quod
antea  pii  mori*  fuit.  Mu  re  tori,  Antiqui-
tates  Italia*,  t.  v.  Dissert.  67.

*  Muratori,  Dissert.  67  (Antiquit.
It&lise,  t  v.  p.  1056),  has  preserved  a
curious  charter  of  an  Italian  count,  who
declares  that,  struck  with  reflections
upon  his  siuful  state,  he  had  taken
counsel  with  certain  religious  how  he
should  atone  for  his  offeuces.  Accepto
consilio  ab  fits,  cxcepto  si  renunciare
shh'uIo  posse m,  nullum  esse  melius  inter
eleemosinaruui  virtutes,  quiin  si  de  pro-
priis  meis  substautiis  in  monasterium
coucederem.  Hoc  consilium  ab  iis  11-

benter,  et  ardentissimo  animo  ego  ac¬
cept.

a  Selden,  vol.  iii.  p.  1676;  Prynne's
Constitutions,  vol.  iii.  p.  18;  Blnckstone,
vol.  ii.  chap.  32.  In  France  the  lord  of
the  fief  seems  to  have  taken  the  whole
spoil.  Dn  Cange,  v.  Intestatus.

4  Muratori.  UMtft  68*

6  Palgreve  has  shown  that  the  Anglo-
Saxon  clergy  were  not  exempt,  originally
at  least,  from  the  trinoda  nec'ssitas  im¬
posed  on  all  alodial  proprietors.  They
were  better  treated  on  the  Continent;
and  Boniface  exclaims  that  in  no  part  of
the  world  was  such  servitude  imposed  on
the  church  as  among  the  English.  Eng¬
lish  Commonwealth,  i.  158.  But  when
we  look  at  the  charters  collected  in  Kem¬
ble’s  Codex  Diplomaticus  (most  or  near¬
ly  all  of  them  in  favor  of  the  church),
we  shall  hardly  think  they  were  ill  off,
though  they  might  be  forced  sometimes
to  repair  a  bridge,  or  send  their  tenants
agaiust  the  Danes

140

TITHES.

CnAr.  VII.  Part  I.

of  lay  proprietors  to  grant  estates  to  the  church,  which  they
received  again  by  way  of  fief  or  lease,  exempted  from  public
burdens.  And,  as  if  all  these  means  of  accumulating  what
they  could  not  legitimately  enjoy  were  insufficient,  the  monks
prostituted  their  knowledge  of  writing  to  the  purpose  of
forging  charters  in  their  own  favor,  which  might  easily  im¬
pose  upon  an  ignorant  age,  since  it  has  required  a  peculiar
science  to  detect  them  in  modern  times.  Such  rapacity  might
seem  incredible  in  men  cut  off  from  the  pursuits  of  life  and
the  hope  of  posterity,  if  we  did  not  behold  every  day  the
unreasonableness  of  avarice  and  the  fervor  of  professional
attachments.1

As  an  additional  source  of  revenue,  and  in  imitation  of
Tithe*.  the  Jewish  law,  the  payment  of  tithes  was  recom¬
mended  or  enjoined.  These,  however,  were  not
applicable  at  first  to  the  maintenance  of  a  resident  clergy.
Parochial  divisions,  as  they  now  exist,  did  not  take  place,  at
least  in  some  countries,  till  several  centuries  after  the  estab¬
lishment  of  Christianity.2  The  rural  churches,  erected  suc¬
cessively  as  the  necessities  of  a  congregation  required,  or
the  piety  of  a  landlord  suggested,  were  in  fact  a  sort  of
chapels  dependent  on  the  cathedral,  and  served  by  itinerant
ministers  at  the  bishop’s  discretion.8  The  bishop  himself

1  Muratori’i  66th,  67th,  and  68th  Dis¬
sertation*  on  the  Autiquities  of  Italy
ha  ye  furnished  the  principal  material*  of
my  text,  with  Father  Paul's  Treatise  on
Benefices,  especially  chaps.  19  and  29.
Giannoue,  loc.  cit.  and  1.  iv.  c.  12  ;  1.  ▼.
c.  6;  1.  x.c.  12.  Schmidt,  Hist.  des.  Alle-
mands.  t.  I.  p.  870;  t.  ii.  p.  208,  442;  t.
It.  p.  2"2.  Floury,  III.  Discount  sur
l’Hlst.  Eccl6s.  Du  Cange,  tot.  Precaria.

*  Monitor!,  Dissert.  74,  and  Fleury,  In¬
stitutions  au  Droit  eccl^iastique,  t.  i.  p.
162,  refer  the  origin  of  parishes  to  the
fourth  century  ;  but  this  must  be  limited
to  the  most  populous  part  of  the  em¬
pire.

1  These  were  not  always  itinerant;
commonly,  perhaps,  they  were  depend¬
ant*  of  the  lord,  appointed  by  the  bishop
on  hi*  nomination.  —  Lehuerou,  Institut.
Carol!  ngiennes,  p  626,  who  quotes  a  ca¬
pitulary  of  the  emperor  Lothairr  in  825.

De  ciericis  rero  laicorum.  unde  non¬
null!  eorutn  conquer!  ridoantur,  eo  quod
quldam  episcopi  ad  eorutn  preces  nolint
in  ecclesil*  suis  eos,  cum  utiles  slot,  ordi-
nitre,  visum  nobis  fuit,  ut  .  .  .  .  et  cum
caritate  et  rations  utiles  et  idouci  eli-

gantur;  et  si  laicus  idoneum  utilemque
clericuin  obtulerit  nulla  qualibet  occa¬
sions  ab  episcopo  sine  rations  certa  re-
pellatur;  et  si  rejiciendus  eet.  propter
scandaluin  vitandum  evident!  ration#
manifestetur.”  Another  capitulary  of
Charles  the  Bald,  in  864,  forbids  the  es¬
tablishment  of  priests  in  the  churches
of  patrons,  or  their  ejection  without  the
bishop's  consent :  —  44  De  his  qui  sine
consensu  episcopi  presbytero*  in  ecrlesil*
suis  constituunt,  vel  de  coolest  is  dejhi-
unt.n  Thus  the  churches  are  recognised
as  the  property  of  the  lord ;  and  the  par¬
ish  may  be  considered  as  an  established
division,  at  least  verv  commonly  so
early  as  the  Cariovingian  empire.  I  do
not  by  any  means  deny  that  It  wa«  par¬
tially  known  in  France  before  that  time.

'•»t  reckons  the  patronage  of
churches  by  the  laitv  among  the  circum¬
stance#  which  diminlslied  or  retarded
ecclesiastical  power.  ( Lee  on  18  )  It  may
have  been  so  ;  but  without  Uxis  patronage
there  would  have  been  very  few  parish
churches.  It  separated.  In  some  degree,
the  interests  of  the  secular  clergy  from
those  of  the  bishop#  and  th#  regular#.

Eccles.  Power.

TITIIES.

141

received  the  tithes,  and  apportioned  them  as  lie  thought  fit.
A  capitulary  of  Charlemagne,  however,  regulates  their  division
into  three  parts ;  one  for  the  bishop  and  his  clergy,  a  second
for  the  poor,  and  a  third  for  the  support  of  the  fabric  of  the
church.1  Some  of  the  rural  churches  obtained  by  episcopal
concessions  the  privileges  of  baptism  and  burial,  which  were
accompanied  with  a  fixed  share  of  tithes,  and  seem  to  imply
the  residence  of  a  minister.  The  same  privileges  were  grad¬
ually  extended  to  the  rest;  and  thus  a  complete  parochial
division  was  finally  established.  But  this  was  hardly  the
case  in  England  till  near  the  time  of  the  conquest.2

The  slow  and  gradual  manner  in  which  parochial  churches
became  independent  appears  to  be  of  itself  a  sufficient  an¬
swer  to  those  who  ascribe  a  great  antiquity  to  the  universal
payment  of  tithes.  There  are,  however,  more  direct  proofs
that  this  species  of  ecclesiastical  property  was  acquired  not
only  by  degrees  but  with  considerable  opposition.  We  find
the  payment  of  tithes  first  enjoined  by  the  canons  of  a  pro¬
vincial  council  in  France  near  the  end  of  the  sixth  century.
From  the  ninth  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth,  or  even  later,  it
is  continually  enforced  by  similar  authority.8  Father  Paul
remarks  that  most  of  the  sermons  preached  about  the  eighth
century  inculcate  this  as  a  duty,  and  even  seem  to  place  the
summit  of  Christian  perfection  in  its  performance.4  This
reluctant  submission  of  the  people  to  a  general  and  perma¬
nent  tribute  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  eagerness  dis¬
played  by  them  in  accumulating  voluntary  donations  upon  the
church.  Charlemagne  was  the  first  who  gave  the  confirmation
of  a  civil  statute  to  these  ecclesiastical  injunctions ;  no  one  at
lea-t  has,  so  far  as  I  know,  adduced  any  earlier  law  for  the
payment  of  tithes  than  one  of  his  capitularies.6  But  it  would
be  precipitate  to  infer  either  that  the  practice  had  not  already
gained  ground  to  a  considerable  extent,  through  the  influence
of  ecclesiastical  authority,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  became

l  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p  206.  This  seems  to  remarkable  rashness,  attacked  the  cur-
have  beeu  founded  on  an  ancient  canon,  rent  opinion  that  Charlemagne  estab-
F.  Paul,  c.  7.  lished  the  legal  obligation  of  tithes,  and

*  Collier's  Ecclesiastical  History,  p.  229.  denied  that  any  of  his  capitularies  bear

*  Selden’s  History  of  Tithes,  vol.  iii.  such  an  interpretation.  Those  which  he

p.  1108,  edit.  Wilkins.  Tithes  are  said  quotes  have  indeed  a  different  meaning  ;
by  Giannone  to  have  been  enforced  by  but  he  has  overlooked  an  express  enact-
some  papal  decrees  in  the  sixth  century,  ment  in  789  (Baluzii  Capitularia,  t.  i.
1.  iii  c.  6.  p.  258),  which  admits  of  no  question ;

4  Treatise  on  Benefices,  o.  11.  and  I  believe  that  there  are  others  in

s  Mably,  (Observations  sur  1’Hist.  de  confirmation.

France,  t.  i.  p.  238  et  438)  has,  with

142  SPOLIATION  OF  CHURCH  PROPERTY.  Chat.  VII.  Part  I.

universal  in  consequence  of  the  commands  of  Charlemagne.1
In  the  subsequent  ages  it  was  very  common  to  appropriate
tithes,  which  had  originally  been  payable  to  the  bishop,  either
towards  the  support  of  particular  churches,  or,  according  to
the  prevalent  superstition,  to  monastic  foundations.''1  These
arbitrary  consecrations,  though  the  subject  of  complaint,
lasted,  by  a  sort  of  prescriptive  right  of  the  landholder,  till
about  the  year  1200.  It  was  nearly  at  the  same  time  that
the  obligation  of  paying  tithes,  which  had  been  originally
confined  to  those  called  predial,  or  the  fruits  of  the  earth,
was  extended,  at  least  in  theory,  to  every  species  of  profit,
and  to  the  wages  of  every  kind  of  labor.8

Yet  there  were  many  liindrances  that  thwarted  the  clergy
Spoliation  in  ^lc‘r  acquisition  of  opulence,  and  a  sort  of  reflux
of  church  that  set  sometimes  very  strongly  against  them.  In
property.  times  of  barbarous  violence  nothing  can  thoroughly
compensate  for  the  inferiority  of  physical  strength  and
prowess.  The  ecclesiastical  history  of  the  middle  ages  pre¬
sents  one  long  contention  of  fraud  against  robbery ;  of  acqui¬
sitions  made  by  the  church  through  such  means  as  I  have
described,  and  torn  from  her  by  lawless  power.  Those  very
men  who  in  the  hour  of  sickness  and  impending  death
showered  the  gifts  of  expiatory  devotion  upon  her  altars,  had
passed  the  sunshine  of  their  lives  in  sacrilegious  plunder.
Notwithstanding  the  frequent  instances  of  extreme  reverence
for  religious  institutions  among  the  nobility,  we  should  be
deceived  in  supposing  this  to  be  their  general  character.
Rapacity,  not  less  insatiable  than  that  of  the  abbots,  was
commonly  united  with  a  daring  fierceness  that  the  abbots
could  not  resist4  In  every  country  we  find  continual  lamen-

1  The  grant  of  Ethelwolf  in  866  ha*
appeared  to  some  antiquaries  the  moat
probable  origin  of  the  general  right  to
tithe*  In  Kngland  (Not*  I.]  It  U  said
by  Marina  that  tithes  were  not  legally
established  in  Castile  till  the  reign  of
Alfonso  X.  Knsayo  sobre  lea  Siete  Par¬
ti  das,  c.  869.

*  Seldcn,  p.  1114  at  aeq.;  Coke,  2  Inst,
p.  641.

1  Sefden’s  History  of  Tithes;  Treatise
on  Benefices,  c.  28 ;  Qiannone,  1.  x.  o.  12.

*  The  church  was  often  compelled  to
grant  leases  of  her  lands,  under  the  mime
of  prerah/r ,  to  laymen,  who  probably
ren  iered  little  or  no  service  in  return,
though  a  reiit  or  census  was  expressed  in
tue  instrument.  These  preearuB  seem  to

hare  been  for  life,  but  were  frequently
renewed.  They  are  not  to  becoufounded
with  terra  ctnsuaUs%  or  lands  let  to  a
tenant  at  rack-rent,  which  of  course
formed  a  considerable  branch  of  revenue.
The  grant  was  called  preearia  from  being
obtained  at  the  prayer  of  a  grantee  ;
and  the  uncertainty  of  it*  renewal  seems
to  have  given  rise  to  the  a4jectivo  pre¬
carious.

In  the  ninth  century,  though  the  pre¬
tensions  of  the  bishops  were  nevrr  higher,
the  church  itself  was  more  pillaged  un¬
der  pretext  of  these  preearia,  and  in
other  ways,  than  at  any  funner  time.  —
8ee  Du  Cange  for  a  loug  article  ou  Frv
carisa.

Eccles.  Power.  SPOLIATION  OF  CHURCH  PROPERTY.  143

tation  over  the  plunder  of  ecclesiastical  possessions.  Charles
Martel  is  reproached  with  having  given  the  first  notorious
example  of  such  spoliation.  It  was  not,  however,  commonly
practised  by  sovereigns.  But  the  evil  was  not  the  less  uni¬
versally  felt.  The  parochial  tithes  especially,  as  the  hand  of
robbery  falls  heaviest  upon  the  weak,  were  exposed  to  unlaw¬
ful  seizure.  In  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  nothing  was
more  common  than  to  see  the  revenues  of  benefices  in  the
hands  of  lay  impropriators,  who  employed  curates  at  the
cheapest  rate  ;  an  abuse  that  has  never  ceased  in  the  church.1
Several  attempts  were  made  to  restore  these  tithes  ;  but  even
Gregory  VII.  did  not  venture  to  proceed  in  it ; 2 3  and  indeed
it  is  highly  probable  that  they  might  be  held  in  some  instances
by  a  lawful  title.8  Sometimes  the  property  of  monasteries
was  dilapidated  by  corrupt  abbots,  whose  acts,  however  clan¬
destine  and  unlawful,  it  was  not  easy  to  revoke.  And  both
the  bishops  and  convents  were  obliged  to  invest  powerful  lay
protectors,  under  the  name  of  advocates,  with  considerable
fiefs,  as  the  price  of  their  assistance  against  depredators.
But  these  advocates  became  too  often  themselves  the  spoilers,
and  oppressed  the  helpless  ecclesiastics  for  whose  defence
they  had  been  engaged.4 *

If  it  had  not  been  for  these  drawbacks,  the  clergy  must,
one  would  imagine,  have  almost  acquired  the  exclusive
property  of  the  soil.  They  did  enjoy,  according  to  some
authorities,  nearly  one  half  of  England,  and,  I  believe,  a
greater  proportion  in  some  countries  of  Europe.6 *  They  had
reached,  perhaps,  their  zenith  in  respect  of  territorial  prop-

1  Du  Cange,  roc.  Abbas.

*  Schmidt,  t  iv.  p.  204.  At  an  assem¬
bly  held  at  St.  Denis  in  997  the  bishops
proposed  to  restore  the  tithes  to  the  secu¬
lar  clergy;  but  such  a  tumult  was  ex¬
cited  by  this  attempt,  that  the  meeting
was  broken  up.  Recueil  des  Historiens,
t.  xi.  prsefat.  p.  212.

3  Seldeu's  Ilist.  of  Tithes,  p.  1136.
The  third  council  of  Lateran  restrains
laymen  from  transferring  their  impro¬
priated  tithes  to  other  laymen.  Velly,
iii't.  de  France,  t.  iii.  p.  235.  This  seems
tacitly  to  admit  that  their  possession  was
lawful,  at  least  by  prescription.

4  For  the  injuries  sustained  by  ec¬
clesiastical  proprietors,  see  Mura  tori,

Dissert.  72.  Du  Cange,  v.  Advocatus.

Schmidt,  t.  ii.  n.  220,  470 ;  t.  iii.  p.  290 ;

t.  i?.  p.  188,  202.  Kecueil  des  Historiens,

t.  xi.  pra-Cat.  p.  184.  M&rtouoc,  The¬

saurus  Anecdotorum,  t.  i.  p.  695.  Vais-
set  te,  Hist,  de  Languedoc,  t.  ii.  p.  109,
and  Appendix,  passim.

6  Turner’s  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.
p.  413,  from  Avesbury.  According  to  a
calculation  founded  on  a  passage  in
Knyghton,  the  revenue  of  the  English
church  in  1337  amounted  to  730.000
marks  per  annum.  Macpherson’s  An¬
nals  of  Commerce,  vol.  i.  p.  619 ;  His-
toire  du  Droit  public  Eccl6s.  Francois,
t.  i.  p.  214.  Anthony  Harmer  (Henry
Wharton)  says  that  the  monasteries  did
not  possess  one  fifth  of  the  land ;  and  I
incline  to  think  that  he  is  nearer  the
truth  than  Mr.  Turner,  who  puts  the
wealth  of  the  church  at  above  28,000
knights’  fees  out  of  53,215.  The  bishops’
lands  could  not  by  any  means  account
for  the  difference;  so  that  Mr.  Turner
was  probably  deceived  by  his  authority.

144

ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

erty  about  the  conclusion  of  the  twelfth  century.1  After  that
time  the  disposition  to  enrich  the  clergy  by  pious  donations
grew  more  languid,  and  was  put  under  certain  legal  restraints,
to  which  I  shall  hereafter  advert ;  but  they  became  rather
more  secure  from  forcible  usurpations.

The  acquisitions  of  wealth  by  the  church  were  hardly  so
Eccieau*-  remarkable,  and  scarcely  contributed  so  much  to
di'ctiim"*"  ^er  greatness,  as  those  innovations  upon  the  ordi¬
nary  course  of  justice  which  fall  under  the  head
of  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  and  immunity.  It  is  hardly,
perhaps,  necessary  to  caution  the  reader  that  rights  of  terri¬
torial  justice,  possessed  by  ecclesiastics  in  virtue  of  their
fiefs,  are  by  no  means  included  in  this  description.  Episcopal
jurisdiction,  properly  so  called,  may  be  considered  as  depend¬
ing  upon  the  choice  of  litigant  parties,  upon  their  condition,
and  upon  the  subject-matter  of  their  differences.

1.  The  arbitrative  authority  of  ecclesiastical  pastors,  if  not
Arbitmtive  coeval  with  Christianity,  grew  up  very  early  in  the
church,  and  was  natural,  or  even  necessary,  to  an
insulated  and  persecuted  society.3  Accustomed  to  feel  a  strong
aversion  to  the  imperial  tribunals,  and  even  to  consider  a  re¬
currence  to  them  as  hardly  consistent  with  their  profession,
the  early  Christians  retained  somewhat  of  a  similar  prejudice
even  after  the  establishment  of  their  religion.  The  arbitra¬
tion  of  their  bishops  still  seemed  a  less  objectionable  mode
of  settling  differences.  And  this  arbitrative  jurisdiction  was
powerfully  supported  by  a  law  of  Constantine,  which  directed
the  civil  magistrate  to  enforce  the  execution  of  episcopal
awards.  Another  edict,  ascribed  to  the  same  emperor,  and
annexed  to  the  Theodosian  code,  extended  the  jurisdiction  of
the  bishops  to  all  causes  which  either  party  chose  to  refer  to
it,  even  where  they  had  already  commenced  in  a  secular
court,  and  declared  the  bishop’s  sentence  not  subject  to  appeal.
This  edict  has  clearly  been  proved  to  be  a  forgery.  It  is
evident,  by  a  novel  of  Valentinian  III.,  about  4o0,  that  the
church  had  still  no  jurisdiction  in  questions  of  a  temporal

1  The  (Trent  ><re  of  monneterien  In  *  1  Corinth.  *•  *  The  word  f'ovde-
Kngland  vu  the  reign*  of  Henry  I.,  VTjfUVOVf,  rendered  in  our  version  “  of
Stephen,  and  Henry  IT.  Lyttelton's  no  reputation,"  has  been  Interpreted  by
Henry  II.  toI.  U.  p.  829  David  I.  of  some  to  mean  persons  destitute  of  coer-
Hcotiand,  contemporary  with  Henry  IT.,  rive  authority,  referees.  The  passage  at
was  also  a  noted  thunder  of  monasteries,  least  tends  to  discourage  suits  before  a
Dalrymple's  Annals.  secular  judge.

Eccles.  Power.  ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.

145

nature,  except  by  means  of  the  joint  reference  of  contending
parties.  Some  expressions,  indeed,  used  by  the  emperor,
seem  intended  to  repress  the  spirit  of  encroachment  upon  the
civil  magistrates,  which  had  probably  begun  to  manifest  itself.
Charlemagne,  indeed,  in  one  of  his  capitularies,  is  said  by
some  modem  writers  to  have  repeated  all  the  absurd  and  enor¬
mous  provisions  of  the  spurious  constitution  in  the  Theodosian
code.1  But  this  capitulary  is  erroneously  ascribed  to  Charle¬
magne.  It  is  only  found  in  one  of  the  three  books  subjoined
by  Benedict  Levita  to  the  four  books  of  capitularies  collected
by  Ansegisus ;  these  latter  relating  only  to  Charlemagne  and
Louis,  but  the  others  comprehending  many  of  later  emperors
and  king3.  And,  what  is  of  more  importance,  it  seems  ex¬
ceedingly  doubtful  whether  this  is  any  genuine  capitulary  at
alL  It  is  not  referred  to  any  prince  by  name,  nor  is  it  found
in  any  other  collection.  Certain  it  is  that  we  do  not  find  the
church,  in  her  most  arrogant  temper,  asserting  the  full  privi¬
leges  contained  in  this  capitulary.2

2.  If  it  was  considered  almost  as  a  general  obligation  upon
the  primitive  Christians  to  decide  their  civil  dis-  CoerciTe  0Ter
putes  by  internal  arbitration,  much  more  would  the  clergy  in
this  be  incumbent  upon  the  clergy.  The  canons  C1T1
of  several  councils,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  sentence
a  bishop  or  priest  to  deposition,  who  should  bring  any  suit,
civil  or  even  criminal,  before  a  secular  magistrate.  This
must,  it  should  appear,  be  confined  to  causes  where  the  de¬
fendant  was  a  clerk ;  since  the  ecclesiastical  court  had  hith¬
erto  no  coercive  jurisdiction  over  the  laity.  It  was  not  so
easy  to  induce  laymen,  in  their  suits  against  clerks,  to  prefer
the  episcopal  tribunal.  The  emperors  were  not  at  all  dis-
f*osed  to  favor  this  species  of  encroachment  till  the  reign  of
Justinian,  who  ordered  civil  suits  against  ecclesiastics  to  be
carried  only  before  the  bishops.  Yet  this  was  accompanied
by  a  provision  that  a  party  dissatisfied  with  the  sentence
might  apply  to  the  secular  magistrate,  not  as  an  appellant,
but  a  coordinate  jurisdiction  ;  for  if  different  judgments  were
given  in  the  two  courts,  the  process  was  ultimately  referred
to  the  emperor.*  But  the  early  Merovingian  kings  adopted

1  Balurii  CapitularU.  t.  I.  p.  90] 8.  p.  1.  Memoir**  de  VA cad&aie  de§  In-

*  Gibbon,  c.  xx-  GUnoone.  I.  ii.  c.  8;  acriptione,  t.  xxxix.  p.  500.

1.  !H  c  6:  1.  rl.  c.  7.  Bebmidt,  t.  ii.  *  Thi*  m  aluo  etUbliiihed  about  the
p  2T*.  PVurr,  T1***  DUrour*.  and  la-  mine  time  by  At  ha  Uric  king  of  the
•titatiotiA  mu  Droit  EecleeUetique,  t.  ii.  Ostrogothj,  and  of  course  affected  the

VOL.  II.  10

1 4G

ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.  CiiAr.  VII.  Pabt  I.

the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  over  causes  wherein
clerks  were  interested,  without  any  of  the  checks  which  Jus¬
tinian  had  provided.  Many  laws  enacted  during  their  reigns,
and  under  Charlemagne,  strictly  prohibit  the  temporal  mag¬
istrates  from  entertaining  complaints  against  the  children  of
the  churclu

This  jurisdiction  over  the  civil  causes  of  clerks  was  not
and  criminal  immediately  attended  with  an  equally  exclusive
*"iu.  cognizance  of  criminal  offences  imputed  to  them,
wherein  the  state  is  so  deeply  interested,  and  the  church  could
inflict  so  inadequate  a  punishment  Justinian  appears  to  have
reserved  such  offences  for  trial  before  the  imperial  magistrate,
though  with  a  material  provision  that  the  sentence  against  a
clerk  should  not  be  executed  without  the  consent  of  the  bishop
or  the  final  decision  of  the  emperor.  The  bishop  is  not  ex¬
pressly  invested  with  this  controlling  power  by  the  laws  of
the  Merovingians ;  but  they  enact  that  he  must  be  present  at
the  trial  of  one  of  his  clerks ;  which  probably  was  intended
to  declare  the  necessity  of  his  concurrence  in  the  judgment.
The  episcopal  order  was  indeed  absolutely  exempted  from
secular  jurisdiction  by  Justinian ;  a  privilege  which  it  had
vainly  endeavored  to  establish  under  the  earlier  emperors.
France  permitted  the  same  immunity;  Cliilperic,  one  of  the
most  arbitrary  of  her  kings,  did  not  venture  to  charge  some
of  his  bishops  with  treason,  except  before  a  council  of  their
brethren.  Finally,  Charlemagne  seems  to  have  extended  to
the  whole  body  of  the  clergy  an  absolute  exemption  from  the
judicial  authority  of  the  magistrate.1

3.  The  character  of  a  cause,  as  well  as  of  the  parties  en-
Orpr  gaged,  might  bring  it  within  the  limits  of  eccle-

purticuiar  siastical  jurisdiction.  In  all  questions  simply
religious  the  church  had  an  original  right  of
decision;  in  those  of  a  temporal  nature  the  civil  magistrate
had,  by  the  imperial  constitution,  as  exclusive  an  authority.1

pope*  who  were  hi*  *ubjoct*.  8t.  Marc,  general  (Balux.  Capital.  1. 1.  p.  227);  and
t-  i-P-  60;  Fleury,  HUt.  Keclca.  t.  Til.  the  same  U  expreiued  mill  more  forcibly
1  -  r-  in  Mm  ooUaetkai  published  by  Aneegfama

1  Memoirea  de  1’ Academic,  ubl  aupra;  under  Loui*  the  Debonair.  (Id.  p.  904
Olannone,  1.  111.  c.  6  i  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p.  23*3 ;  and  1115.)  See  other  proofli  In  Fleury,
Fleury,  ubl  aupra.  Hlat.  KcclA*.  t.  lx.  p.  607.

Some  of  these  writer*  do  not  xtate  the  *  Q  untie*  de  rellgiooe  agitur.  epiacopoc
law  of  Charlemagne  eo  xtrongly.  Never-  oportet  judlrare  ;  altera*  re ro  rauaa*  qtue
theleaa  the  word*  of  a  capitulary  In  789,  ad  ordiuarloe  cog  n  I  to  re*  vel  ad  u*um
Ut  cleric!  eccleeiaatici  ordlni*  «i  culpam  public!  jurix  pertinent,  legibu*  oporto
lucurrerint  apud  eecleaia*tieo*  iudicen-  audlrl.  l+x  Arradil  et  Honorli  apud
tur.  non  apud  Nccular**,  are  xuAcieutly  Mem.  de  l’Acadcmle,  t.  xxxix.  p.  671.

Eccles.  Power.  POLITICAL  POWER  OF  CLERGY.

147

Later  ages  witnessed  strange  innovations  in  this  respect,  when
the  spiritual  courts  usurped,  under  sophistical  pretences,  almost
the  whole  administration  of  justice.  But  these  encroachments
were  not,  I  apprehend,  very  striking  till  the  twelfth  century ;
and  as  about  the  same  time  measures,  more  or  less  vigorous
and  successful,  began  to  be  adopted  in  order  to  restrain  them,
I  shall  defer  this  part  of  the  subject  for  the  present.

In  this  sketch  of  the  riches  and  jurisdiction  of  the  hie¬
rarchy  I  may  seem  to  have  implied  their  political  Political
influence,  which  is  naturally  connected  with  the  power  of
two  former.  They  possessed,  however,  more  di-  clergy'
rect  means  of  acquiring  temporal  power.  Even  under  the
Roman  emperors  they  had  found  their  road  into  palaces ;  they
were  sometimes  ministers,  more  often  secret  counsellors,
always  necessary  but  formidable  allies,  whose  support  was
to  be  conciliated,  and  interference  to  be  respected.  But  they
assumed  a  far  more  decided  influence  over  the  new  kingdoms
of  the  West.  They  were  entitled,  in  the  first  place,  by  the
nature  of  those  free  governments,  to  a  privilege  unknown
under  the  imperial  despotism,  that  of  assisting  in  the  delib¬
erative  assemblies  of  the  nation.  Councils  of  bishops,  such
as  had  been  convoked  by  Constantine  and  his  successors,  were
limited  in  their  functions  to  decisions  of  faith  or  canons  of
ecclesiastical  discipline.  But  the  northern  nations  did  not  so
well  preserve  the  distinction  between  secular  and  spiritual
legislation.  The  laity  seldom,  perhaps,  gave  their  suffrage
to  the  canons  of  the  church  ;  but  the  church  was' not  so  scru¬
pulous  as  to  trespassing  upon  the  province  of  the  laity.
Many  provisions  are  found  in  the  canons  of  national  and  even
provincial  councils  which  relate  to  the  temporal  constitution
of  the  state.  Thus  one  held  at  Calcluith  (an  unknown  place
in  England),  in  787,  enacted  that  none  but  legitimate  princes
should  be  raised  to  the  throne,  and  not  such  as  were  engen¬
dered  in  adultery  or  incest.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that,
although  this  synod  was  strictly  ecclesiastical,  being  sum¬
moned  by  the  pope’s  legate,  yet  the  kings  of  Mercia  and
Northumberland,  with  many  of  their  nobles,  confirmed  the
canons  by  their  signature.  As  for  the  councils  held  under
the  Visigoth  kings  of  Spain  during  the  seventh  century,  it  is
not  easy  to  determine  whether  they  are  to  be  considered  as
ecclesiastical  or  temporal  assemblies.1  No  kingdom  was  so

1  Marina,  Teona  de  las  Cortes,  t.  i.  p.  9.

143

SUPREMACY  OF  THE  STATE.  Chap.  VII.  Part  1.

thoroughly  under  the  bondage  of  the  hierarchy  as  Spain.1
The  first  dynasty  of  France  seem  to  have  kept  their  national
convention,  called  the  Field  of  March,  more  distinct  from
merely  ecclesiastical  councils.

The  bishops  acquired  and  retained  a  great  part  of  their
ascendency  by  a  very  respectable  instrument  of  power,  intel¬
lectual  superiority.  As  they  alone  were  acquainted  with  the
art  of  writing,  they  were  naturally  entrusted  with  political
correspondence,  and  with  the  framing  of  the  laws.  As  they
alone  knew  the  elements  of  a  few  sciences,  the  education  of
royal  families  devolved  upon  them  as  a  necessary  duty.  In
the  fall  of  Home  their  influence  upon  the  barbarians  wore
down  the  asperities  of  conquest,  and  saved  the  provincials
half  the  shock  of  that  tremendous  revolution.  As  captive
Greece  is  said  to  have  subdued  her  Roman  conqueror,  so
Rome,  in  her  own  turn  of  servitude,  cast  the  fetters  of  a
moral  captivity  upon  the  fierce  invaders  of  the  north.  Chief¬
ly  through  the  exertions  of  the  bishops,  whose  ambition  may
be  forgiven  for  its  effects,  her  religion,  her  language,  in  part
even  her  laws,  were  transplanted  into  the  courts  of  Paris
and  Toledo,  which  became  a  degree  less  barbarous  by  imi¬
tation.2

Notwithstanding,  however,  the  great  authority  and  privi-
Supreimwy  leges  of  the  church,  it  was  decidedly  subject  to  the
ot  the  state;  SUpremaCy  0f  the  crown,  both  during  the  continu¬
ance  of  the  Western  empire  and  fitter  its  subversion.  The
emperors  convoked,  regulated,  and  dissolved  universal  coun¬
cils  ;  the  kings  of  France  and  Spain  exercised  the  same  right
over  the  synods  of  their  national  churches.®  The  Ostrogoth
kings  of  Italy  fixed  by  their  edicts  the  limits  within  which
matrimony  was  prohibited  on  account  of  consanguinity,  and
granted  dispensations  from  them.4  Though  the  Roman  em¬
perors  left  episcopal  elections  to  the  clergy  and  people  of
the  diocese,  in  which  they  were  followed  by  the  Ostrogoths
and  Lombards,  yet  they  often  interfered  so  far  as  to  confirm  a

1  Pec  instance*  of  the  temporal  power
of  the  Spanish  bishop*  In  Fleury,  HUt.
Eccle*.  t.  vlii.  p.  8»W,  397 ;  t.  lx.  p.  68,  Ac.

*  Schmidt,  t.  I.  p.  866.

s  Encyclopedic,  art.  Concile.  Schmidt,
t.  1.  p.  3*4.  De  Marca,  De  ConcordantU
Sacerdotil  et  Imperii,  1.  ii.  e.  9,  11;  et
l.  It.  pa*  dm.

The  last  of  thene  sometime*  endeavor*

to  extenuate  the  royal  supremacy,  but
his  own  work  furnishes  abundant  evi¬
dence  of  it;  especially  1.  ri.  c.  19,  Ac.
For  the  ecclesiastical  Independence  of
Spain,  down  to  the  eleventh  century,  see
Marina.  Knsayo  sobre  las  Siete  Partila*,
e.  822.  Ac. ;  and  De  Marca,  1.  vl.  c.  23
*  Gian  none,  1.  ill.  e.  6-

Eccles.  Power.  SUPREMACY  OF  THE  STATE.

149

decision  or  to  determine  a  contest.  The  kings  of  France
went  further,  and  seem  to  have  invariably  either  nominated
the  bishops,  or,  what  was  nearly  tantamount,  recommended
their  own  candidate  to  the  electors.

But  the  sovereign  who  maintained  with  the  greatest  vigor
liis  ecclesiastical  supremacy  was  Charlemagne,  especially
Most  of  the  capitularies  of  his  reign  relate  to  the  charie-
discipline  of  the  church ;  principally  indeed  taken  misue'
from  the  ancient  canons,  but  not  the  less  receiving  an  addi¬
tional  sanction  from  his  authority.1  Some  of  his  regulations,
which  appear  to  have  been  original,  are  such  as  men  of  high
church  principles  would,  even  in  modern  times,  deem  infring-
ments  of  spiritual  independence ;  that  no  legend  of  doubtful
authority  should  be  read  in  the  churches,  but  only  the  canoni¬
cal  books,  and  that  no  saint  should  be  honored  whom  the
whole  church  did  not  acknowledge.  These  were  not  passed
in  a  synod  of  bishops,  but  enjoined  by  the  sole  authority  of
the  emperor,  who  seems  to  have  arrogated  a  legislative
power  over  the  church  which  he  did  not  possess  in  tem¬
poral  affairs.  Many  of  his  other  laws  relating  to  the  eccle¬
siastical  constitution  are  enacted  in  a  general  council  of  the
lay  nobility  as  well  as  of  prelates,  and  are  so  blended  with
those  of  a  secular  nature,  that  the  two  orders  may  appear  to
have  equally  consented  to  the  whole.  His  father  Pepin,  in¬
deed,  left  a  remarkable  precedent  in  a  council  held  in  744,
where  the  Nicene  faith  is  declared  to  be  established,  and
even  a  particular  heresy  condemned,  with  the  consent  of  the
bishops  and  nobles.  But  whatever  share  we  may  imagine
the  laity  in  general  to  have  had  in  such  matters,  Charlemagne
himself  did  not  consider  even  theological  decisions  as  beyond
his  province ;  and,  in  more  than  one  instance,  manifested  a
determination  not  to  surrender  his  own  judgment,  even  in
questions  of  that  nature,  to  any  ecclesiastical  authority.4

l  Baluzii  Capitularia,  passim ;  Schmidt,
t.  ii.  p.  239;  Uaillard,  Vie  de  Charle¬
magne.  c.  iii.

*  Charlemagne  had  apparently  devised
an  ecclesiastical  theory,  which  would  now
be  called  Kristian,  and  perhaps  not  very
short  of  that  of  Henry  VIII.  He  directs
the  clergy  what  to  preach  in  his  own
name,  and  uses  the  first  person  in  eccle¬
siastical  canons.  Yet,  if  we  may  judge
by  the  events,  the  bishops  lost  no  part  of
their  permanent  ascendency  in  the  state
through  this  interference,  though  com¬

pelled  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of
a  great  mind.  By  a  vigorous  repression
of  those  secular  propensities  which  were
displaying  themselves  among  the  superior
clergy,  he  endeavored  to  render  their
moral  influence  more  effective.  This,
however,  could  not  be  achieved  in  the
ninth  century;  nor  could  it  have  been
brought  about  by  any  external  power.
Nor  was  it  easily  consistent  with  the
continual  presence  of  the  bishops  in
national  assemblies,  which  had  become
essential  to  the  polity  of  liis  age,  aud

150  PRETENSIONS  OF  THE  HIERARCHY  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

This  part  of  Charlemagne’s  conduct  is  duly  to  be  taken
into  the  account  before  we  censure  his  vast  extension  of
ecclesiastical  privileges.  Nothing  was  more  remote  from  his
character  than  the  bigotry  of  those  weak  princes  who  have
suffered  the  clergy  to  reign  under  their  names.  He  acted
upon  a  systematic  plan  of  government,  conceived  by  his  own
comprehensive  genius,  but  requiring  too  continual  an  applica¬
tion  of  similar  talents  for  durable  execution.  It  was  the
error  of  a  superior  mind,  zealous  for  religion  and  learning,
to  believe  that  men  dedicated  to  the  functions  of  the  one,  and
possessing  what  remained  of  the  other,  might,  through  strict
rules  ot  discipline,  enforced  by  the  constant  vigilance  of  the
sovereign,  become  tit  instruments  to  reform  and  civilize  a
barbarous  empire.  It  was  the  error  of  a  magnanimous  spirit
to  judge  too  favorably  of  human  nature,  and  to  presume
that  great  trusts  would  be  fulfilled,  and  great  benefits  re¬
membered.

It  is  highly  probable,  indeed,  that  an  ambitious  hierarchy
did  not  endure  without  reluctance  this  impcriul  supremacy
of  Charlemagne,  though  it  was  not  expedient  for  them  to
Pretenniom  resist  a  prince  so  formidable,  and  from  whom  they
hierarchy  *111^  80  to  expect.  But  their  dissatisfaction

in  th«  ninth  at  a  scheme  of  government  incompatible  with
century.  tjiejr  own  objects  of  perfect  independence  produced
a  violent  recoil  under  Louis  the  Debonair,  who  attempted  to
act  the  censor  of  ecclesiastical  abuses  with  as  much  earnest¬
ness  as  his  father,  though  with  very  inferior  qualifications  for
so  delicate  an  undertaking.  The  bishops  accordingly  were
among  the  chief  instigators  of  those  numerous  revolts  of  his
children  which  harrassed  this  emperor.  They  set.  ujton  one
occasion,  the  first  example  of  an  usurpation  which  was  to  be¬
come  very  dangerous  to  society  —  the  deposition  of  sover¬
eigns  by  ecclesiastical  authority.  Louis,  a  prisoner  in  the
hands  ot  his  enemies,  had  been  intimidated  enough  to  under¬
go  a  public  penance ;  and  the  bishops  pretended  that,  accord¬
ing  to  a  canon  of  the  church,  he  was  incapable  of  returning

with  which  he  would  not,  for  several
rewoni,  tatve  wholly  di.penaed.  Yet  it
appear*.  by  a  remarkable  capitulary  of
Sli,  that  he  hail  perceived  the  inconve¬
nience  of  allowing  the  secular  and  splr-
itual  power,  to  clash  with  each  other:
—  Diacutiendum  eat  atqne  intervenirn-
Uurn  in  quantum  ae  epUcopus  aut  abbaa

rebu*  errularibtu  drbrat  inserere,  vel  In
quantum  cornea,  vel  alter  laicua.  in  eccle¬
siastics  negotia.  But  ae  the  laity,  him-
eelf  excepted,  had  probably  Interfered
very  little  in  church  nffairw,  this  capitu¬
lary  seems  to  be  restrictive  of  the  pre¬
lates.

Eccles.  Power.

IN  THE  NINTH  CENTURY.

151

afterwards  to  a  secular  life  or  preserving  the  character  of
sovereignty.1  Circumstances  enabled  him  to  retain  the  em¬
pire  in  defiance  of  this  sentence ;  but  the  church  had  tasted
the  pleasure  of  trampling  upon  crowned  heads,  and  was
eager  to  repeat  the  experiment.  Under  the  disjointed  and
feeble  administration  of  his  posterity  in  their  several  king¬
doms,  the  bishops  availed  themselves  of  more  than  one  op¬
portunity  to  exalt  their  temporal  power.  Those  weak  Car-
lovingian  princes,  in  their  mutual  animosities,  encouraged
the  pretensions  of  a  common  enemy.  Thus  Charles  the
Bald  and  Louis  of  Bavaria,  having  driven  their  brother
Lothaire  from  his  dominions,  held  an  assembly  of  some
bishops,  who  adjudged  him  unworthy  to  reign,  and,  after
exacting  a  promise  from  the  two  allied  brothers  to  govern
better  than  he  had  done,  permitted  and  commanded  them  to
divide  his  territories.*  After  concurring  in  this  unprecedent¬
ed  encroachment,  Charles  the  Bald  had  little  right  to  com¬
plain  when,  some  years  afterwards,  an  assembly  of  bishops
declared  himself  to  have  forfeited  his  crown,  released  his
subjects  from  their  allegiance,  and  transferred  his  kingdom  to
Louis  of  Bavaria.  But,  in  truth,  he  did  not  pretend  to  deny
the  principle  which  he  had  contributed  to  maintain.  Even
in  his  own  behalf  he  did  not  appeal  to  the  rights  of  sove-

*  Habit  u  sseculi  Re  exuena  habitum
poenitentis  per  impositionem  manuum
episcoporum  suscepit;  ut  post  tan  tain
tilemque  poeniteutiain  nemo  ultra  ad
militiam  ssecularetn  redeat.  Acta  ex-
auctorationlfl  Ludovici,  apud  Schmidt,
t.  ii.  p.  68.  There  was  a  sort  of  prece¬
dent.  though  not,  I  think,  very  apposite,
for  this  doctrine  of  implied  abdication,
in  the  case  of  Wamba  king  of  the  Visi¬
goth*  in  Spain,  who.  having  been  clothed
with  a  monastic  dress,  according  to  a
common  superstition,  during  a  dangerous
illness,  was  afterwards  adjudged  by  a
council  incapable  of  resuming  his  crown  ;
to  which  he  voluntarily  submitted.  The
Btory,  as  told  by  an  original  writer,
quoted  in  Baronius  ad  a.d.  681,  is  too
obscure  to  warrant  any  positive  infer¬
ence  ;  though  I  think  we  may  justly
suspect  a  fraudulent  contrivance  between
the  bishops  and  Ervigius,  the  successor
of  Wamba.  The  latter,  besides  his  mo¬
nastic  attire,  had  received  the  Last  sacra¬
ments  ;  after  which  he  might  be  deemed
civilly  dead.  Fleury,  8"*  Discours  sur
l*Hi>t.  Ecclesiast.,  puts  this  case  too
strongly  wueu  he  tells  us  that  the  bishops

deposed  Wamba;  it  may  have  been  a
voluntary  abdication,  influenced  by  su¬
perstition,  or,  perhaps,  by  disease.  A
late  writer  has  taken  a  different  view  of
this  event,  the  deposition  of  Louis  at
Compiegne.  It  was  not,  he  thinks,  une
hardiesse  sacerdotale,  une  temerite  eccle-
siastique,  mais  bien  une  Hchete  politique.
Ce  n’etaifc  poiut  une  tentative  pour
Clever  l'autorit6  religieuse  au-dessus  de
la  u  tori  U;  royale  dans  les  affaires  teinpo-
relles ;  c?etait,  au  contraire,  un&baisse-
ment  servile  de  la  premiere  devant  le
monde.  Fauriel,  Hist,  de  la  Gaule  M6-
ridionale,  iv.  150.  In  other  words,  the
bishops  lent  themselves  to  the  aristocratic
faction  which  was  in  rebellion  against
Louis.  Ranke,  as  has  been  seen  in  an
early  note,  thinks  that  they  acted  out  of
revenge  for  his  deviation  from  the  law  of
817,  which  established  the  unity  of  the
empire.  The  bishops,  in  fart,  had  so
many  secular  and  personal  interests  and
sympathies,  that  we  cannot  always  judge
of  their  behavior  upon  general  prin¬
ciples.

a  Schmidt,  t.  ii.p.  77.  Telly  t.  ii.
p.  61 ;  see,  too,  p.  74.

152  PRETENSIONS  OF  TIIE  HIERARCHY.  Chap.  VH.  Part  I.

reigns,  and  of  the  nation  whom  they  represent.  “  No  one,”
says  this  degenerate  grandson  of  Charlemagne,  “ought  to
have  degraded  me  from  the  throne  to  which  I  was  consecrat¬
ed,  until  at  least  I  had  been  heard  and  judged  by  the  bishops,
through  whose  ministry  I  was  consecrated,  who  are  called
the  thrones  of  God,  in  which  God  sitteth,  and  by  whom
he  dispenses  his  judgments;  to  whose  paternal  chastise¬
ment  I  was  willing  to  submit,  and  do  still  submit  my¬
self.”1

These  passages  are  very  remarkable,  and  afford  a  decisive
proof  that  the  power  obtained  by  national  churches,  through
the  superstitious  prejudices  then  received,  and  a  train  of
favorable  circumstances,  was  as  dangerous  to  civil  govern¬
ment  as  the  subsequent  usurpations  of  the  Roman  pontiff,
against  which  Protestant  writers  are  apt  too  exclusively  to
direct  their  animadversions.  Voltaire,  I  think,  has  remarked
that  the  ninth  century  was  the  age  of  the  bishops,  as  the
eleventh  and  twelfth  were  of  the  popes.  It  seemed  as  if
Europe  was  about  to  pass  under  as  absolute  a  domination
of  the  hierarchy  as  had  been  exercised  by  the  priesthood  of
ancient  Egypt  or  the  Druids  of  Gaul.  There  is  extant  a
remarkable  instrument  recording  the  election  of  Boson  king
of  Arles,  by  which  the  bishops  alone  appear  to  have  elevated
him  to  the  throne,  without  any  concurrence  of  the  nobility.*
But  it  is  inconceivable  that  such  could  have  really  been  the
case ;  and  if  the  instrument  is  genuine,  we  must  suppose  it
to  have  been  framed  in  order  to  countenance  future  preten¬
sions.  For  the  clergy,  by  their  exclusive  knowledge  of
Latin,  had  it  in  their  power  to  mould  the  language  of  public
documents  for  their  own  purposes;  a  circumstance  which
should  be  cautiously  kept  in  mind  when  we  peruse  instru¬
ments  drawn  up  during  the*  dark  ages.

It  was  with  an  equal  defiance  of  notorious  truth  that  the
bishop  ot  AN  inchester,  presiding  as  papal  legate  at  an  as-ernby
of  the  clergy  in  1141,  during  the  civil  war  of  Stephen  and
Matilda,  asserted  the  right  of  electing  a  king  of  England  to
appertain  principally  to  that  order ;  and.  by  virtue  of  this
unprecedented  claim,  raised  Matilda  to  the  throne.*  England,

1  Schmidt,  t.  U.  p.  217.  que  primi  in  anxlium  DiriniUt*.  AlUia

s  Kcrueil  *U*.«  Historian*,  t.  lx.  p.  904.  pariflri  regt*.  &c.t  in  AnglU  Nommn-
1  Vcntilata  cwt  cauaa.  mkv§  the  legato,  nUrque  doutin&m  eligiuiu*,  et  el  ti  inn
corun  majori  parte  cleri  Anglin*,  ad  et  titan  utnimm)  turn  promt ttuuu*.  OuL
cujun  ju*  potlMtmum  Ppectat  prinripem  Malumb.  p.  188.
rligerv,  siinulque  ordiu&ru.  Invucati  ita-

Eccles.  Power.  rise  OF  THE  PAPAL  POWER.

153

indeed,  has  been  obsequious,  beyond  most  other  countries,  to
the  arrogance  of  her  hierarchy ;  especially  during  the  Anglo-
Saxon  period,  when  the  nation  was  sunk  in  ignorance  and
effeminate  superstition.  Every  one  knows  the  story  of  king
Edwy  in  some  form  or  other,  though  I  believe  it  impossible
to  ascertain  the  real  circumstances  of  that  controverted  anec¬
dote.1  But,  upon  the  supposition  least  favorable  to  the  king,-
the  behavior  of  Archbishop  Odo  and  Dunstan  was  an  intoler¬
able  outrage  of  spiritual  tyranny.

But  while  the  prelates  of  these  nations,  each  within  his
respective  sphere,  were  prosecuting  their  system  R.se
of  encroachment  upon  the  laity,  a  new  scheme  papal  power,
was  secretly  forming  within  the  bosom  of  the
church,  to  enthral  both  that  and  the  temporal
governments  of  the  world  under  an  ecclesiastical  monarch.
Long  before  the  earliest  epoch  that  can  be  fixed  for  modern
history,  and,  indeed,  to  speak  fairly,  almost  as  far  back  as
ecclesiastical  testimonies  can  carry  us,  the  bishops  of  Rome
had  been  venerated  as  first  in  rank  among  the  rulers  of  the
church.  The  nature  of  this  primacy  is  doubtless  a  very  con¬
troverted  subject.  It  is,  however,  reduced  by  some  moderate
catholics  to  little  more  than  a  precedency  attached  to  the  see
of  Rome  in  consequence  of  its  foundation  by  the  chief  of  the
apostles,  as  well  as  the  dignity  of  the  imperial  city.2  A  sort
of  general  superintendence  was  admitted  as  an  attribute  of
this  primacy,  so  that  the  bishops  of  Rome  were  entitled,  and
indeed  bound,  to  remonstrate,  when  any  error  or  irregularity
came  to  their  knowledge,  especially  in  the  western  churches,
a  greater  part  of  which  had  been  planted  by  them,  and  were
connected,  as  it  were  by  filiation,  with  the  common  capital  of
the  Roman  empire  and  of  Christendom.4  Various  causes

i  [Xote  n.]

*  These  foundations  of  the  Roman  pri¬
mary  are  indicated  by  Valentinian  III.,
a  great  favorer  of  that  see,  in  a  novel  of
the  year  455  :  Cum  igitur  sedis  aposto¬
lic  a»  primatum  II.  Petri  ineritum,  qui
eat  princepa  sacerdotalis  coronee  et  Ro¬
ma  nw  dignitas  civitatis,  same  ctiam  sy-
nodi  flrmavit  anctoritas.  The  last  words
allude  to  the  sixth  canon  of  the  Nlcene
council,  which  establishes  or  recognizes
the  patriarchal  supremacy,  in  their  re¬
sistive  districts,  of  the  churches  of
Rome,  Antioch,  and  Alexandria.  De
BJarca,  de  ConconiantiH  Saoerdotii  et  Im¬
perii,  1.  i.  c.  8.  At  a  much  earlier  period,

Ircnaeus  rather  vaguely,  and  Cyprian
more  positively,  admit,  or  rather  assert,
the  primacy  of  the  church  of  Rome,
which  the  latter  seems  even  to  have  con¬
sidered  as  a  kind  of  centre  of  Catholic
unity,  though  he  resisted  every  attempt
of  that  church  to  arrogate  a  controlling
power. —  See  his  treatise  De  Unitate  Ec-
clesin?.  [1818.!  [Note  III.]

3  Dupin.  De  antique  Ecclesi®  Disci¬
pline,  p.  806  et  seqq.  ;  Histoire  dn  Droit
public  eccl6siastique  Francois,  p.  149.
The  opinion  of  the  Roman  see's  suprem¬
acy,  though  apparently  rather  a  vague
and  general  notion,  as  it  still  continues
in  those  Catholics  who  deny  its  in  fall!-

154

PATRIARCHATE  OF  ROME.  Chap.  VII.  Tart  I.

lia*l  a  tendency  to  prevent  the  bishops  of  Rome  from  aug¬
menting  their  authority  in  the  East,  and  even  to  diminish
that  which  they  had  occasionally  exercised ;  the  institution
ot  patriarchs  at  Antioch,  Alexandria,  and  afterwards  at  Con¬
stantinople,  with  extensive  rights  of  jurisdiction ;  the  differ¬
ence  of  rituals  and  discipline ;  but,  al>ove  all,  the  many
disgusts  taken  by  the  Greeks,  which  ultimately  produced  an
irreparable  schism  between  the  two  churches  in  the  ninth
century.  But  within  the  pale  of  the  Latin  church  every
succeeding  age  enhanced  the  power  and  dignity  of  the
Roman  see.  By  the  constitntion  of  the  church,  such  at  least
as  it  became  in  the  fourth  century,  its  divisions  being  ar¬
ranged  in  conformity  to  those  of  the  empire,  every  province
ought  to  have  its  metropolitan,  and  every  vicariate  its  ecclesi¬
astical  exarch  or  primate.  The  bishop  of  Rome  presided,  in
the  latter  capacity,  over  the  Roman  vicariate,  comprehending
southern  Italy,  and  the  three  chief  Mediterranean  islands.
But  as  it  happened,  none  of  the  ten  provinces  forming  this
division  had  any  metropolitan  ;  so  that  the  jiopes  exercised
all  metropolitieal  functions  within  them,  such  as  the  consecra¬
tion  of  bishops,  the  convocation  of  synods,  the  ultimate
decision  of  appeals,  and  many  other  sorts  of  authority.
These  provinces  are  sometimes  called  the  Roman  patri-
Patrtarchate  arcliate  ;  the  bishops  of  Rome  having  alwavs  been
of  Rome.  reckoned  one,  generally  indeed  the  lirst,  of  the
patriarchs;  each  of  whom  was  at  the  head  of  all  the  metro¬
politans  within  his  limits,  but  without  exercising  those
privileges  which  by  the  ecclesiiistical  constitution  ap|H:rtained
to  the  latter.  Though  the  Roman  patriarchate,  properly  so
called,  was  comparatively  very  small  in  extent,  it  gave  its
chief,  for  the  reason  mentioned,  advantages  in  point  of
authority  which  the  others  did  not  possess.1

I  may  perhaps  appear  to  have  noticed  circumstances  inter¬
esting  only  to  ecclesiastical  scholars.  But  it  is  imjiortant  to
apprehend  this  distinction  of  the  patriarchate  from  the
primacy  ot  Rome,  because  it  was  by  extending  the  bounda-

bility ,  norm*  to  h»re  prewUlwl  wry  much  U.  c.  8;  1.  til  c.  6.;  De  Min,  l.  1.  e.  7  ct
in  the  fourth  century.  He u ry  brings  alibi.  There  Is  some  disagreement  among
remarkable  proofs  of  this  from  the  writ-  these  writers  as  to  the  extent  of  the  Ko-
Ings  of  Socrates,  Soiomeu,  Amuiianus  man  patriarrliate,  which  tome  suppoae
Mnrcellinu*,  and  Optatus.  Hist.  Kccles.  to  hare  even  at  Amt  comprehended  all
t.  Ui.  p.  2H2.  820,  44y  ;  t.  It.  p.  227.  the  western  rburrhee,  though  they  ad<

1  Dupin,  De  Antiqui  Kccles.  Di»rlplinl,  mit  that,  in  a  more  particular  »en»e,  it
p.  30,  Jtc. ;  (Jiauuoue,  1st.  di  Napoli,  1.  was  couAued  to  the  vicariate  of  Home

Eccles.  Tower.  PATRIARCHATE  OF  ROME.

155

ries  of  the  former,  and  by  applying  the  maxims  of  her
administration  in  the  south  of  Italy  to  all  the  western
churches,  that  she  accomplished  the  first  object  of  her  scheme
of  usurpation,  in  subverting  the  provincial  system  of  govern¬
ment  under  the  metropolitans.  Their  first  encroachment  of
this  kind  was  in  the  province  of  Illyricum,  which  they
annexed  in  a  manner  to  their  own  patriarchate,  by  not
permitting  any  bishops  to  be  consecrated  without  their  con¬
sent.1 *  This  was  before  the  end  of  the  fourth  century.
Their  subsequent  advances  were,  however,  very  gradual.
About  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  we  find  them  confirm¬
ing  the  elections  of  archbishops  of  Milan.3  They  came  by
degrees  to  exercise,  though  not  always  successfully,  and
seldom  without  opposition,  an  appellant  jurisdiction  over  the
causes  of  bishops  deposed  or  censured  in  provincial  synods.
This,  indeed,  had  been  granted,  if  we  believe  the  fact,  by  the
canons  of  a  very  early  council,  that  of  Sardica,  in  347,  so  far
as  to  permit  the  pope  to  order  a  revision  of  the  process,  but
not  to  annul  the  sentence.8  Valentinian  III.,  influenced  by
Leo  the  Great,  one  of  the  most  ambitious  of  pontiffs,  had
gone  a  great  deal  further,  and  established  almost  an  absolute
judicial  supremacy  in  the  Iloly  See.4 * * *  But  the  metropolitans

i  Dupin.  p.  86 ;  Floury,  Hist.  Eceltfa.

t.  v.  p.  373.  The  ecclesiastical  province
of  Illyricum  included  Macedonia.  Siri-
cius,  the  author  of  this  encroachment,

seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  find

usurpers.  In  a  letter  to  the  Spanish

bishops  (a.d.  375)  ho  exalts  his  own  au¬

thority  very  high.  De  Murea,  1.  i.  c.  8.

s  St.  Mare,  t.  i.  p.  139,  153.

8  Dupin,  p.  109;  Do  Marca,  1.  vi.  c.  14.
These  canons  have  been  questioned,  and
Dupin  does  not  seem  to  lay  much  stress
on  their  authority,  though  I  do  not  per¬
ceive  that  either  he,  or  Fleury  (Hist.
Eccl6s.  t.  iii.  p.  3?2),  doubts  their  genu¬
ineness.  Sardica  was  a  city  of  Illyricum,
which  the  translator  of  Mosheim  li&scon-
fou uded  with  Sardes.

Consultations  or  references  to  the
bishop  of  Koine,  in  difficult  cases  of  faith
or  discipline,  had  been  common  in  early
ages,  and  were  even  made  by  provincial
and  national  councils.  But  these  were
also  made  to  other  bishops  emiment  for
personal  merit,  or  the  dignity  of  their
sees.  The  popes  endeavored  to  claim
this  as  a  matter  of  right.  Innocent  I.
asserts  (a.d.  402)  that  he  was  to  be
consulted,  q untie*  fldei  ratio  ventilatur;
and  Oelasius  (a.d.  492),  quantum  ad  re-
ligiouew  pertinet,  non  nisi  apostolicte

sedi,  juxtA  canonos,  dobetur  summa  ju-
dlcii  totius.  As  the  oak  is  in  the  acorn,
so  did  these  maxims  contain  the  system
of  Bellarmin.  I>e  Marca,  1.  i.  c.  10;  and
1.  vii.  c.  12.  Dupin.

«  Some  bishops  belonging  to  tho  pro¬
vince  of  Hilary,  metropolitan  of  Arles,
appealed  from  his  sentence  to  Leo,  who
not  only  entertained  their  appeal,  but
presumed  to  depose  Hilary.  This  as¬
sumption  of  power  would  have  had  little
effect,  if  it  had  not  been  seconded  by  the
emperor  in  very  unguarded  language  ;
hoc  perenni  sanction©  deeeruiinai,  no
quid  tun  ratoopli  OdUotoii,  qwttn  all*
arum  provinclarum,  contra  consuetu-
dinein  veterem  llceat  sine  auctorltate
viri  venerabills  papa*  urlds  a*terna»  ton-
hire ;  sed  illis  omnibusque  pro  lege  sit,
quidquid  sanxit  vel  sanxerit  apostollcie
aedis  auctorltas.  I)e  Marca,  De  Concor¬
dant!^  Sacerdotii  et  Imperil,  1.  i.  c.  8.
The  same  emperor  enacted  that  any
bishop  who  refused  to  attend  the  tribunal
of  the  pope  when  summoned  should  be
compelled  by  the  governor  of  his  prov¬
ince;  ut  qulsquis  eplscoporum  nu  ju¬
dicium  Komani  episcopi  evocatua  venire
noglexerit,  per  moderate rem  qiusdem  pro-
viuciip  adesse  cogatur.  Id.  1.  vii.  c.  13;
Dupiu,  De  Ant.  Dlfldpl.  p.  29  et  171.

156

GREGORY  I.

Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

were  not  inclined  to  surrender  their  prerogatives  ;  and,  upon
the  whole,  the  papal  authority  hail  made  no  decisive  progress
in  France,  or  perhaps  anywhere  beyond  Italy,  till  the  'pon¬
tificate  of  Gregory  I.

This  celebrated  person  was  not  distinguished  by  learning,
Gregory  l  which  he  affected  to  depreciate,  nor  by  his  literary
f 9o-o>4  performances,  which  the  best  critics  consider  as

below  mediocrity,  but  by  qualities  more  necessary
for  his  purpose,  intrepid  ambition  and  unceasing  activity.
He  maintained  a  perpetual  correspondence  with  the  emperors
and  their  ministers,  with  the  sovereigns  of  the  western  king¬
doms,  with  all  the  hierarchy  of  the  Catholic  church  ;  employ¬
ing,  as  occasion  dictated,  the  language  of  devotion,  arrogance,
or  adulation.1  Claims  hitherto  disputed,  or  half  preferred,
assumed  under  his  hands  a  more  definite  form  ;  and  nations
too  ignorant  to  compare  precedents  or  discriminate  principles
yielded  to  assertions  confidently  made  by  the  authority  which
they  most  respected.  Gregory  dwelt  more  than  his  prede¬
cessors  upon  the  power  of  the  keys,  exclusively,  or  at  least
principally,  committed  to  St.  Peter,  which  had  been  supposed
in  earlier  times,  as  it  is  now  by  the  Gallican  Catholics,  to  be
inherent  in  the  general  body  ot  bishops,  joint  sharers  of  one
indivisible  episcopacy.  And  thus  the  patriarchal  rights,  be¬
ing  manifestly  ot  mere  ecclesiastical  institution,  were  artfully
confounded,  or  as  it  were  merged,  in  the  more  paramount
supremacy  of  the  pa|«il  chair.  From  the  time  of  Gregory
the  popes  appear  in  a  great  measure  to  have  thrown  away
that  scaffolding,  and  relied  in  preference  on  the  pious  venera¬
tion  ot  the  people,  and  on  the  opportunities  which  might
occur  for  enforcing  their  dominion  with  the  pretence  of  divine
authority.*

1  The  fluttering  gt.vle  In  which  thl*
pontiff  addressed  Brunehaut  end  Phocas,
the  most  flagitious  monster*  or  hi*  time,
1*  mentioned  In  all  civil  and  ecclesiastical
historic*.  Floury  quote*  a  remarkable
letter  to  the  patriarch*  of  Antioch  and
Alexandria  wherein  he  *ay*  that  St.
Peter  ha*  one  »ee,  divided  into  three,
Home,  Antioch,  and  Alexandria;  *  loop¬
ing  to  thix  absurdity,  and  lnron*l*tenre
with  hi*  real  *y*tein,  in  orler  to  concil¬
iate  their  alliance  again *t  hi*  more  im¬
mediate  rival,  the  patriarch  of  Constan¬
tinople.  Hl.t.  Krcie*.  t.  viii.  p.  124.

*  Gregory  *eem*  to  have  e*tabli*hed
the  appellant  jurisdiction  of  the  aee  of

Rome,  which  had  been  long  in  *n*pen*e.
Stephen,  a  Spani*h  bishop,  haring  been
deposed,  appealed  to  Rome.  Gregory
*ent  a  legate  to  Spain,  with  fall  power*
to  confirm  or  rescind  the  sentence.  He
•ay*  in  hi*  letter  on  this  occasion,  k
"ode  a po* tolled,  qua*  omnium  ccclesi-
aruin  caput  e*t,  causa  ha*  audlen-la  ae
diriinenda  Turret.  De  Marca.  I.  vil.  c.  18.
In  writing  to  the  bishop*  of  France  he
enjoins  them  to  obey  Virgiliu*  bishop  of
Arles,  whom  he  has  appointed  hi*  legate
in  France,  secundum  antiquam  con*  tie*
tudlnem;  so  that,  if  any  contention
should  arise  in  the  church,  he  may  ap¬
pease  it  by  his  authority,  u  vicegerent

Eccles.  Power.

GREGORT  I.

157

It  cannot,  I  think,  be  said  that  any  material  acquisitions  of
ecclesiastical  power  were  obtained  by  the  successors  of  Greg¬
ory  for  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  years.1  As  none  of
them  possessed  vigor  and  reputation  equal  to  his  own,  it
might  even  appear  that  the  papal  influence  was  retrograde.

of  the  apostolic  see ;  aactoritatis  suae
vigore,  ricibus  uempe  apostolicae  sedis
functus,  discrete  moderatione  compescat.
Gregorii  Opera,  t.  ii.  p.  783  (edit.  Bene¬
dict.);  Dupin.  p.  34:  Pasquier,  Recher-
ches  de  la  France,  1.  iii.  c.  9.

l  I  observe  that  some  modern  publi¬
cations  annex  considerable  importance
to  a  supposed  concession  of  the  title  of
Universal  Bishop,  made  by  the  emperor
Phocas  in  606  to  Boniface  III.,  and  even
appear  to  date  the  papal  supremacy  from
this  epoch.  Those  who  have  imbibed  this
notion  may  probably  have  been  misled
by  a  loose  expression  in  Mosheiin’s  Eccle¬
siastical  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  169 ;  though
the  general  tenor  of  that  passage  by  no
means  gives  countenance  to  their  opin¬
ion.  But  there  are  several  strong  objec¬
tions  to  our  considering  this  as  a  leading
fact,  much  less  as  marking  an  era  in  the
history  of  the  papacy.  1.  Its  truth,  as
commonly  stated,  appears  more  than
questionable.  The  Homan  pontiffs,  Greg¬
ory  I.  and  Boniface  III.,  had  been  ve¬
hemently  opposing  the  assumption  of
this  title  by  the  patriarch  of  Constanti¬
nople,  not  as  due  to  themselves,  but  as
one  to  which  no  bishop  could  legitimately
pretend.  There  would  be  something  al¬
most  ridiculous  in  the  emperor's  imme¬
diately  conferring  an  appellation  on
themselves  which  they  had  just  dis¬
claimed  ;  and  though  this  objection
would  not  stand  against  evidence,  yet
when  we  find  no  better  authority  quoted
for  the  fact  than  Baronius,  who  is  no
authority  at  all,  it  retains  considerable
weight.  And  indeed  the  want  of  early
testimony  is  so  decisive  an  objection
to  any  alleged  historical  fact,  that,  but
for  the  strange  prepossessions  of  some
men,  one  might  rest  the  case  here.
Fleury  takes  no  notice  of  this  part  of  the
story,  though  be  tells  us  that  Phocas
compelled  the  patriarch  of  Constanti¬
nople  to  resign  his  title.  2.  But  if  the
strongest  proof  could  be  advanced  for
the  authenticity  of  this  circumstance,  we
might  well  deny  its  importance.  The
concession  of  Phocas  could  have  been  of
no  validity  in  Lombardy,  France,  and
other  western  countries,  where  neverthe¬
less  the  papal  supremacy  was  incom¬
parably  more  established  than  in  tho
East.  3-  Even  within  the  empire  it
could  have  had  no  efficacy  after  the  vio¬
lent  death  of  that  usurper, which  followed

soon  afterwards.  4.  The  title  of  Uni¬
versal  Bishop  is  not  very  iutelligible;
but,  whatever  it  meant,  the  patriarchs  of
Constantinople  had  borne  it  before,  and
continued  to  bear  it  ever  afterwards.
(Dupin,  De  Antique  Discipline,  p.  329.)
5.  The  preceding  popes,  Pelagius  II.  and
Gregory  I.  had  constantly  disclaimed  the
appellation,  though  it  had  been  adopted
by  some  towards  Leo  the  Great  in  the
council  of  Chalcedon  (Fleury,  t.  viii.
p.  95);  nor  does  it  appear  to  have  been
retained  by  the  successors  of  Boniface.
It  is  even  laid  down  in  the  decretum  of
Gratian  that  the  pope  is  not  styled  uni¬
versal  :  nec  etiam  Romanns  pontifex  uni¬
versalis  appellatur  (p.  303,  edit.  1591),
though  some  refer  its  assumption  to  tho
ninth  century.  Nouveau  Traite  de  Diplo¬
matique,  t.  v.  p.  93.  In  fact  it  has  never
been  an  usual  title.  6.  The  popes  had
unquestionably  exercised  a  species  of
supremacy  for  more  than  two  centuries
before  this  time,  which  had  lately  reached
a  high  point  of  au  thority  under  Gregory  I.
The  rescript  of  Valentinian  III.  in  455,
quoted  in  a  former  note,  would  certainly
be  more  to  the  purpose  than  the  letter
of  Phocas.  7.  Lastly,  there  are  no  sen¬
sible  marks  of  this  supremacy  making  a
more  rapid  progress  for  a  century  and  a
half  after  the  pretended  grant  of  that
emperor.  [1818.]  The  earliest  mention
of  this  transaction  that  I  have  found,  and
one  which  puts  an  end  to  the  pretended
concession  of  such  a  title  as  Universal
Bishop,  is  in  a  brief  general  chronology,
by  Bede,  entitled  ‘  De  Temporum  Ra-
tione.’  He  only  says  of  Phocas,  —  Hie,
rogante  papa  Bonifacio,  statuit  sedem
Roman®  et  apostolicae  ecclesi®  caput
esse  omnium  ecclesiarum,  quia  ecclesia
Gonstantinopolitana  primam  se  omnium
ecclesiarum  scribebat.  Bed®  Opera,  curi
(MlM|  vol.  vi.  p.  323.  This  was  probably
the  exact  truth;  and  the  subsequent
additions  were  made  by  some  zealous
partisans  of  Rome,  to  be  seized  hold  of
in  a  later  age,  and  turned  against  her  by
some  of  her  equally  zealous  enemies.
The  distinction  generally  made  is,  that
the  pope  is  “  universalis  ecclesi®  epis-
copus,”  but  not  ‘‘episcopus  universalis
that  is,  he  has  no  immediate  jurisdiction
in  the  dioceses  of  other  bishops,  though
he  can  correct  them  for  the  undue  exer¬
cise  of  their  own.  The  Ultramoutaues
of  course  go  further.

158

ST.  BONIFACE.

Chap.  VII.  Paiit  L

But  in  effect  the  principles  which  supported  it  were  hiking
deeper  root,  and  acquiring  strength  by  occasional  though  not
very  frequent  exercise.  Appeals  to  the  jxjpe  were  some¬
times  made  by  prelates  dissatisfied  with  a  local  sentence ;  but
his  judgment  of  reversal  was  not  always  executed,  as  we  per¬
ceive  by  the  instance  of  bishop  Wilfrid.1  National  councils
were  still  convoked  by  princes,  and  canons  enacted  under
their  authority  by  the  bishops  who  attended.  Though  the
church  of  Lombardy  was  under  great  subjection  during  this
period,  yet  those  of  France,  and  even  of  England,  planted  as
the  latter  had  been  by  Gregory,  continued  to  preserve  a
tolerable  measure  of  independence.*  The  first  striking  in¬
fringement  of  this  was  made  through  the  intluence  of  an
Englishman,  Winfrid,  better  known  as  St.  Boniface,  the
St  Boniface  uPost^e  Germany.  Having  undertaken  the
conversion  of  Thuringia,  and  other  still  heathen
countries,  he  applied  to  the  pope  for  a  commission,  and  was
consecrated  bishop  without  any  determinate  see.  Ufion  this
occasion  he  took  an  oath  of  obedience,  and  became  ever  af¬
terwards  a  zealous  upholder  of  the  apostolical  chair.  His
success  in  the  conversion  of  Germany  was  great,  his  reputa¬
tion  eminent,  which  enabled  him  to  effect  a  material  revolu¬
tion  in  ecclesiastical  government.  Pelagius  II.  hail,  about
580,  sent  a  pallium,  or  vest  peculiar  to  metropolitans,  to  the
bishop  of  Arles,  perpetual  vicar  of  the  Roman  see  in  Gaul.*

1  I  refer  to  the  English  historian*  for
the  history  of  Wilfrid,  which  neither
altogether  supports,  nor  much  impeach**,
the  Independency  of  our  Anglo-Saxon
church  in  700  ;  a  matter  hardly  worth  so
much  contention  a*  Usher  and  Stilling-
fleet  seeui  to  hare  thought.  The  cou¬
nt  ration  of  Theodore  by  pope  Vitalina
lu  068  is  a  stronger  fart,  and  cannot  be
got  over  by  those  injudiriouit  protestant*
who  take  the  bull  by  the  horn*.  The
history  of  Wilfrid  hu  been  lately  put  in
a  light  a*  favorable  a s  possible  to  him¬
self  and  to  the  authority  of  Home  by  Dr.
Liugard.  We  have  for  this  to  rely  on
Eddiue  (published  in  Gale's  Scrip  to  res),
a  panegyrist  in  the  usual  style  of  legend¬
ary  biography,  — a  style  which  has,  on
me  at  least,  the  effect  of  producing  utter
dbM  Mm  !  K  it)  i«  t lie  badge  of  all
•  lbe.  Bed©  is  more  respectable ;
but  In  this  case  we  do  not  learn  much
from  him.  It  seems  impossible  to  deny
that,  if  Kddlus  U  a  trustworthy  histo¬
rian,  Dr.  Lingard  has  made  out  his  rose;
and  that  we  must  own  appeals  to  Home
to  have  been  recognised  in  the  Anglo-

Saxon  church.  Nor  do  I  perceive  any
improbability  In  this,  considering  that
the  church  had  been  founded  by  Au¬
gustin,  and  restored  bv  Theodore,  both
under  the  authority  of  the  Homan  see.
This  intrinsic  presumption  Is  worth  more
than  the  testimony  of  Kddlus.  But  wo
see  by  the  rest  of  Wilfrid's  history  that
it  was  not  easy  to  put  the  sentence  of
Home  in  execution.  The  plain  facts  are,
that,  having  gone  to  Home  claiming  the
•ee  of  York,  and  having  had  his  claim
recognised  by  the  pope,  he  ended  hi*
davs  as  bishop  of  Hexham.
i  Schmidt,  t.  I.  p.  3*S,  SM.

*  lit  nd  Inatar  luum,  In  Galllarum
partlbua  prim  I  aacerdotia  locum  obtineat,
at  quldquld  ad  Kiiberimtionem  Tel  dia-
pcnaatloncm  ercleataatlcl  atatua  germ*
dum  cat,  aerratia  patrum  rrgulia,  et  aedle
apnatoltcm  conatltutla,  bciat.  1‘rietcr.n,
pallium  1111  conredlt,  Sec.  Dupln,  p.  S4.
Gregor/  1.  confirmed  thia  rlrarjate  to
Virgiliua  blahop  of  Arlca,  and  (fare  him
the  power  of  conroklui  at  uuda.  bo
Marca,  1.  rl.  e.  7.

Eccles.  Power.  SYNOD  OF  FRANKFORT.

159

Gregory  I.  had  made  a  similar  present  to  other  metropoli¬
tans.  But  it  was  never  supposed  that  they  were  obliged  to
wait  for  this  favor  before  they  received  consecration,  until  a
Bynod  of  the  F rench  and  German  bishops,  held  at  Synod  of
Frankfort  in  742,  by  Boniface,  as  legate  of  pope  Frankfort.
Zachary.  It  was  here  enacted  that,  as  a  token  of  their  wil¬
ling  subjection  to  the  see  of  Rome,  all  metropolitans  should
request  the  pallium  at  the  hands  of  the  pope,  and  obey  his
lawful  commands.1 * Ill  This  was  construed  by  the  popes  to
mean  a  promise  of  obedience  before  receiving  the  pall,  which
was  changed  in  after  times  by  Gregory  VII.  into  an  oath  of
fealty.®

This  council  of  Frankfort  claims  a  leading  place  as  an
epoch  in  the  history  of  the  papacy.  Several  events  ensued,
chiefly  of  a  political  nature,  which  rapidly  elevated  that
usurpation  almost  to  its  greatest  height.  Subjects  of  the
throne  of  Constantinople,  the  popes  had  not  as  yet  interfered,
unless  by  mere  admonition,  with  the  temporal  magistrate.
The  first  instance  wherein  the  civil  duties  of  a  nation  and
the  rights  of  a  crown  appear  to  have  been  submitted  to  his
decision  was  in  that  famous  reference  as  to  the  deposition  of
Childeric.  It  is  impossible  to  consider  this  in  any  other  light
than  as  a  point  of  casuistry  laid  before  the  first  religious
judge  in  the  church.  Certainly,  the  Franks  wrho  raised  the
king  of  their  choice  upon  their  shields  never  dreamed  that  a
foreign  priest  had  conferred  upon  him  the  right  of  governing.
Yet  it  was  easy  for  succeeding  advocates  of  Rome  to  construe
this  transaction  very  favorably  for  its  usurpation  over  the
thrones  of  the  earth.8

1  Decrevimus,  says  Boniface,  In  nostro
sy  no« lull  convetitu,  «t  confess!  suiiius
fi'Iecn  cnthollcarn,  et  unitutem  et  subjec-
tlonem  Roman®  ecclesi®  fine  tonus  ser-
▼are,  8.  Petro  et  vicario  ejus  veil©  sub-

jicl,  inetropolitanos  pallia  ab  Ilia  sede
quivrere,  et,  |x*r  omnia,  prmcepta  8.  Pe¬
tri  canonic 6  sequl.  Dc  Marcn,  I.  rl.  c.  7 ;
Hch mbit,  t  1.  p.  424,  43H,  44*5.  Thin
writer  justly  remarks  the  obligation
which  Rome  had  to  8t.  Boniface,  who
anticipated  the  system  of  Isidore.  We
hare  a  letter  from  him  to  the  Kngllsh
clergy,  with  a  copy  of  canons  posmtd  in
one  of  hi*  synod*.  for  the  exaltation  of
the  apostolic  nee.  but  the  church  of  Kng-
land  wan  not  then  inclined  to  acknowl¬
edge  so  Knnt  a  supremacy  in  Rome.
Collier's  Eccles.  History,  p.  128.

Ill  the  eighth  general  council,  that  of

Constantinople  In  872,  this  prerogative
of  sending  the  pallium  to  metropolitans
was  not  only  confirmed  to  the  pope,  but
extended  to  the  other  patriarchs,  who
had  every  disposition  to  become  as  great
usurpers  os  their  more  fortunate  elder
brother.

8  De  Marca,  ubl  supra.  8chmidt,  t.  II.
p.  202.  According  to  the  latter,  this
oath  of  fidelity  was  exacted  In  the  ninth
century;  which  Is  very  probable,  since
Gregory  VII.  himself  did  but  fill  up  the
sketch  which  Nicholas  I.  and  John  VIII.
had  delineated.  I  have  since  found  this
confirmed  by  Grattan,  p.  806.

*  Kglnhard  says  that  Pepin  was  made
king  per  auctoritatrm  Romani  pontlfleis;
an  ambiguous  word,  which  may  rise  to
command,  or  sink  to  adeicr,  according  to
the  disposition  of  the  interpreter.

1G0

FALSE  DECRETALS.  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

I  shall  but  just  glance  at  the  subsequent  political  revolu¬
tions  of  that  period;  the  invasion  of  Italy  by  Pepin,  his
donation  of  the  exarchate  to  the  Holy  See,  the  conquest  of
Lombardy  by  Cliarlemagne,  the  patriarchate  of  Rome  con¬
ferred  upon  both  these  princes,  and  the  revival  of  the  West¬
ern  empire  in  the  person  of  the  latter.  These  events  had  a
natural  tendency  to  exalt  the  papal  supremacy,  which  it  is
needless  to  indicate.  But  a  circumstance  of  a  very  different
nature  contributed  to  this  in  a  still  greater  degree.  About
the  conclusion  of  the  eighth  century  there  appeared,  under
the  name  of  one  Isidore,  an  unknown  person,  a  collection  of
Fats®  ecclesiastical  canons,  now  commonly  denominated
Decretals.  the  False  Decretals.1  These  purported  to  be  re¬
scripts  or  decrees  of  the  early  bishops  of  Rome ;  and  their
effect  was  to  diminish  the  authority  of  metropolitans  over
their  suffragans,  by  establishing  an  appellant  jurisdiction  of
the  Roman  See  in  all  causes,  and  by  forbidding  national
councils  to  be  holden  without  its  consent.  Every  bishop,
according  to  the  decretals  of  Isidore,  was  amenable  only  to
the  immediate  tribunal  of  the  pope ;  by  which  one  of  the
most  ancient  rights  of  the  provincial  synod  was  abrogated.
Every  accused  person  might  not  only  appeal  from  an  inferior
sentence,  but  remove  an  unfinished  process  before  the  supreme
pontiff.  And  the  latter,  instead  of  directing  a  revision  of  the
proceedings  by  the  original  judges,  might  annul  them  by  his
own  authority ;  a  strain  of  jurisdiction  beyond  the  canons  of
Sardica,  but  certainly  warranted  by  the  more  recent  practice
of  Rome.  New  sees  were  not  to  be  erected,  nor  bishops
translated  from  one  see  to  another,  nor  their  resignations
accepted,  without  the  sanction  of  the  pope.  They  were  still
indeed  to  be  consecrated  by  the  metropolitan,  but  in  the  pope’s
name.  It  has  been  plausibly  suspected  that  these  decretals
were  forged  by  some  bishop,  in  jealousy  or  resentment;  and

'  The  era  of  the  Fal*e  Decretal*  hu  thl*  collection  of  Adrian  ;  hut  I  hare
not  been  prccUely  fixed  ;  they  hare  eel-  not  observed  the  um«  opinion  in  any
dom  been  «uppo*ed,  however,  to  have  other  writer.  The  right  of  appeal  from
appeared  much  before  800.  But  there  a  sentence  of  the  metropolitan  deposing
is  a  gcuutoe  collection  of  canon*  pub-  a  bUhop  to  the  Holy  8ee  i*  positively
lUhed  by  Adrian  I.  in  786,  which  ooutain  recognized  in  the  CapituUrie*  of  LouU
nearly  the  aune  principle*,  and  many  of  the  Debonair  ( Baluor,  p.  1U00)  ;  the  three
which  are  copied  by  Izidore,  a*  well  a*  lout  book*  of  which,  according  to  the
Charlemagne  in  hi*  Capituiarie*.  De  collection  of  An*egUu*,  are  add  to  he
Mnrra,  1.  vii.  c.  20  ;  Glannone,  l.  v.  c.  6;  apoetolicA  auctoritate  ro>«orata,  quia  hU
Dupin,  De  Antiqul  DUciplini,  p.  183.  cudendU  maxima  apoetolica  iuterfuit  k-
Fleury,  HUt.  Bride*.  t.  lx.  p.  600,  *eem*  gatio.  p.  1182.
to  consider  the  decretal*  a*  older  than

Eccles.  Powek.

PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.

161

their  general  reception  may  at  least  be  partly  ascribed  to
such  sentiments.  The  archbishops  were  exceedingly  power¬
ful,  and  might  often  abuse  their  superiority  over  inferior
prelates ;  but  the  whole  episcopal  aristocracy  had  abundant
reason  to  lament  their  acquiescence  in  a  system  of  which  the
metropolitans  were  but  the  earliest  victims.  Upon  these  spu¬
rious  decretals  was  built  the  great  fabric  of  papal  supremacy
over  the  different  national  churches ;  a  fabric  which  has  stood
after  its  foundation  crumbled  beneath  it ;  for  no  one  has  pre¬
tended  to  deny,  for  the  last  two  centuries,  that  the  imposture
is  too  palpable  for  any  but  the  most  ignorant  ages  to  credit.1

The  Gallican  church  made  for  some  time  a  spirited  though
unavailing  struggle  against  this  rising  despotism.

Gregory  IV.,  having  come  into  France  to  abet  the  crouchments
children  of  Louis  the  Debonair  in  their  rebellion,  hierarchy
and  threatened  to  excommunicate  the  bishops  who
adhered  to  the  emperor,  was  repelled  with  indignation  by
those  prelates.  “  If  he  comes  here  to  excommunicate,”  said
they,  “  he  shall  depart  hence  excommunicated.” 2  In  the
subsequent  reign  of  Charles  the  Bald  a  bold  defender  of
ecclesiastical  independence  was  found  in  Hincmar  archbishop
of  Rheims,  the  most  distinguished  statesman  of  his  age.
Appeals  to  the  pope  even  by  ordinary  clerks  had  become
common,  and  the  provincial  councils,  hitherto  the  supreme
spiritual  tribunal,  as  well  as  legislature,  were  falling  rapidly
into  decay.  The  frame  of  church  government,  which  had
lasted  from  the  third  or  fourth  century,  was  nearly  dissolved ;
a  refractory  bishop  was  sure  to  invoke  the  supreme  court  of
appeal,  and  generally  met  there  with  a  more  favorable  judi¬
cature.  Ilincmar,  a  man  equal  in  ambition,  and  almost  in
public  estimation,  to  any  pontiff,  sometimes  came  off  success¬
fully  in  his  contentions  with  Rome.8  But  time  is  fatal  to  the

l  I  have  not  teen  any  arcount  of  the  the  papal  court,  without  sacrificing  al-
decretalt  00  clear  and  judicious  a*  in  together  the  Gallican  church  and  the
Schmidt'*  HUtory  of  Germany,  t.  ii.  p.  crown.

249.  Indeed  all  the  ecclesiastical  part  'l  De  Marca,  1.  iv.  c.  11  ;  Telly,  & c.
of  that  work  in  executed  in  a  very  i«up€-  *  I>e  5Iarca  1.  iv.  c.  68,  &c.;  1  vi.  c.  14,
rior  manner.  Sec  alto  De  Marca,  1.  ill.  28;  1.  vii.  c.  21.  Dupin,  p.  133,  fee.
c.  6;  1.  vii.  c.  20.  The  hitter  writer,  Hint,  du  Droit  Kccl6*.  Francois,  p.  188,
from  whom  I  have  derived  much  infor-  224.  Telly,  &c.  Hincmar  however  was
iiiation,  i«  by  no  meant  attrenuout  ad-  not  corn-intent ;  for,  having  obtained  the
Ternary  of  ultramontane  pretemdon*.  In  tee  of  Kheim*  in  an  equivocal  manner,
fact,  it  wat  hit  object  to  plmte  both  in  he  had  applied  for  confirmation  at  Rome,
France  and  at  Home,  to  become  both  an  and  in  other  respect*  impaired  the  Gal-
nrchbithop  and  a  cardiual.  lie  failed  lican  right*.  Pa*quier,  Kecherchea  de  la
neverthelena  of  the  latter  hope  ;  it  being  France,  1.  iii.  c.  12.

ImpoMible  at  that  time  (DVjO)  to  eatbiy

VOL.  II.  11

162

PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.  Chap.  VII.  Part  L

unanimity  of  coalitions;  the  French  bishops  were  accessible
to  superstitious  prejudice,  to  corrupt  influence,  to  mutual
jealousy.  Al>ove  all,  they  were  conscious  that  a  persuasion
of  the  pope’s  omnipotence  had  taken  hold  of  the  laity.
Though  they  complained  loudly,  and  invoked,  like  patriots
of  a  dying  state,  names  and  principles  of  a  freedom  that  was
no  more,  they  submitted  almost  in  every  instance  to  the  con¬
tinual  usurpations  of  the  Holy  See.  One  of  those  which
most  annoyed  their  aristocracy  was  the  concession  to  monas¬
teries  of  exemption  from  episcopal  authority.  These  had
been  very  uncommon  till  about  the  eighth  century,  after
which  they  were  studiously  multiplied.1  It  was  naturally  a
favorite  object  with  the  abbots ;  and  sovereigns,  in  those  ages
of  blind  veneration  for  monastic  establishments,  were  pleased
to  see  their  own  foundations  rendered,  as  it  would  seem,  more
respectable  by  privileges  of  independence.  The  popes  had
a  closer  interest  in  granting  exemptions,  which  attached  to
them  the  regular  clergy,  and  lowered  the  dignity  of  the
bishops.  In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  whole  orders

1  Tho  earliest  instance  of  a  papal  ex¬
emption  it)  in  466,  which  Indeed  in  a
respectable  antiquity.  Others  scarcely
occur  till  tho  pontificate  of  Zachary  in
the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,  who
granted  an  exemption  to  Monte  Cud  no,
ita  ut  nulliu*  Juri  subjaceat,  nisi  soliua
Romani  pontifleis.  See  this  discussed
in  Oiannone,  1.  v.  c.  6.  Precedents  for
the  exemption  of  monasteries  from  epis¬
copal  jurisdiction  occur  in  Marculfus's
forms  compiled  towards  the  end  of  tho
seventh  century,  but  these  were  by  royal
authority.  The  kings  of  France  were
supreme  heads  of  their  national  church.
Schmidt.  t.  i.  p.  8x2 ;  De  Marca,  1.  iii.
c.  16  ;  Flaary,  Institutions  nu  Droit,  t.  i.
p.  228.  Muratori,  Dissert.  70  (t.  iii.
p.  104,  Italian),  is  of  opinion  that  ex¬
emptions  of  monasteries  from  episcopal
visitation  did  not  become  frequent  in
Italy  till  the  eleventh  century  ;  and  that
many  charters  of  this  kind  are  forgeries.
It  L»  held  also  by  some  English  autl-
qu aries  that  no  Anglo-Saxon  monastery
was  exempt,  and  that  the  first  instance
Is  that  of  Battle  Abbey  under  the  Con-
quernr:  tin*  charters  «.f  an  earlier  data
having  been  forged.  Hody  on  Convoca¬
tions.  p.  20  and  170.  It  b»  remarkable
that  this  grant  is  made  by  William,  and
confirmed  by  Lanfrane.  Collier,  p.  266.
Exemptions  became  very  usual  in  Eng¬
land  afterwards.  Henry,  vol.  v.  p.  887.
It  Is  nevertheless  to  be  admitted  that

the  bishops  had  exercised  an  arbitrary,
and  sometimes  a  tyrannical  power  over
the  secular  clergy  ;  and  after  the  inouks
became  part  of  the  church,  which  was
before  tho  close  of  the  sixth  century,
they  Also  fell  uuder  a  control  not  always
fairly  exerted.  Both  complained  greatly,
as  the  acts  of  councils  bear  witness:  —
Dn  fait  important  et  trop  peu  remarqu©
se  re  vole  ^4  et  U  dans  le  cours  de  rette
6poque ;  e’est  la  lutte  des  pretres  de
paroiseecontre  les  4vequea.  Gulxot,  Hist,
de  la  drills,  en  France,  Le^oo  18.  In
this  contention  the  weaker  must  have
given  wav  :  but  the  regulars,  sustained
by  public  res  pact,  and  having  the  coun¬
tenance  of  the  sec  of  Rome,  which  began
to  encroach  upon  episcopal  authority,
came  out  successful  In  securing  them¬
selves  by  exemptions  from  the  Jurisdic¬
tion  of  the  bishops.  The  latter  furnished
a  good  pretext  by  their  own  relaxation
of  manners.  The  monasteries  In  the
eighth  and  ninth  centuries  secin  not  to
hare  given  occasion  to  much  reproach,
at  least  in  comparison  with  the  prelacy.
Au  commencement  du  hulttcmc  allele,
rtglise  4tait  elle  toinWe  dans  un  dtaordrn
preaque  egnl  4  eclui  de  la  sorittt  civile.
Sana  superieurs  et  sans  Infcrieur*  4  re-
douter,  d£gag6s  de  la  surveillance  des
ni*tropoli  tains  com ine  dee  conciles  et  de
(Influence  des  prftres,  one  foule  d’4v4-
ques  se  livraient  aux  plus  scaudaleux
tick

Eccles.  Power.  PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.

163

of  monks  were  declared  exempt  at  a  single  stroke ;  and  the
abuse  began  to  awaken  loud  complaints,  though  it  did  not  fail
to  be  aggravated  afterwards.  ,

The  principles  of  ecclesiastical  supremacy  were  readily
applied  by  the  popes  to  support  still  more  insolent  and  upon
usurpations.  Chiefs  by  divine  commission  of  the  civil  g°vern-

1111  ii  •  ii  menta.

whole  church,  every  earthly  sovereign  must  be  sub¬
ject  to  their  interference.  The  bishops  indeed  had,  Lothaire-
with  the  common  weapons  of  their  order,  kept  their  owrn  sov¬
ereigns  in  check  ;  and  it  could  not  seem  any  extraordinary
stretch  in  their  supreme  head  to  assert  an  equal  prerogative.
Gregory  IV.,  as  I  have  mentioned,  became  a  party  in  the
revolt  against  Louis  I.,  but  he  never  carried  his  threats  of
excommunication  into  effect.  The  first  instance  where  the
Roman  pontiffs  actually  tried  the  force  of  their  arms  against
a  sovereign  was  the  excommunication  of  Lothaire  king  of
Lorraine,  and  grandson  of  Louis  the  Debonair.  This  prince
had  repudiated  his  wife,  upon  unjust  pretexts,  but  with  the  ap¬
probation  of  a  national  council,  and  had  subsequently  married
his  concubine.  Nicolas  I.,  the  actual  pope,  despatched  two
legates  to  investigate  this  business,  and  decide  according  to
the  canons.  They  hold  a  council  at  Metz,  and  confirm  the
divorce  and  marriage.  Enraged  at  this  conduct  of  his  am¬
bassadors,  the  pope  summons  a  council  at  Rome,  annuls  the
sentence,  deposes  the  archbishops  of  Treves  and  Cologne,
and  directs  the  king  to  discard  his  mistress.  After  some
shuttling  on  the  part  of  Lothaire  he  is  excommunicated ;  and,
in  a  short  time,  we  find  both  the  king  and  his  prelates,  who
had  begun  with  expressions  of  passionate  contempt  towards
the  pope,  suing  humbly  for  absolution  at  the  feet  of  Adrian
II.,  successor  of  Nicolas,  which  was  not  granted  without  diffi¬
culty.  In  all  its  most  impudent  pretensions  the  Holy  See  has
attended  to  the  circumstances  of  the  time.  Lothaire  had
powerful  neighbors,  the  kings  of  France  and  Germany,  eager
to  invade  his  dominions  on  the  first  intimation  from  Rome ;
while  the  real  scandalousness  of  his  behavior  must  have
intimidated  his  conscience,  and  disgusted  his  subjects.

Excommunication,  whatever  opinions  may  be  entertained
as  to  its  religious  efficacy,  was  originally  nothing  Excommuni-
more  in  appearance  than  the  exercise  of  a  rightCtttion8‘
which  every  society  claims,  the  expulsion  of  refractory  mem¬
bers  from  its  body.  No  direct  temporal  disadvantages  attended

1G4

EXCOMMUNICATIONS.  Chap.  VII.  Tart  I.

this  penalty  for  several  ages ;  but  as  it  was  the  most  severe  of
spiritual  censures,  and  tended  to  exclude  the  object  of  it  not
only  from  a  pjirticipation  in  religious  rites,  but  in  a  consider¬
able  degree  from  the  intercourse  of  Christian  society,  it  was
used  sparingly  and  upon  the  gravest  occasions.  Gradually,
as  the  church  became  more  powerful  and  more  imperious,
excommunications  were  issued  upon  every  provocation,  rather
as  a  weapon  of  ecclesiastical  warfare  than  with  any  regard  to
its  original  intention.  There  was  certainly  some  pretext  for
many  of  these  censures,  as  the  only  means  of  defence  within
the  reach  of  the  clergy  when  their  possessions  were  lawlessly
violated.1  Others  were  founded  upon  the  necessity  of  en¬
forcing  their  contentious  jurisdiction,  which,  while  it  was
rapidly  extending  itself  over  almost  all  persons  and  causes,
had  not  acquired  any  proper  coercive  process.  The  spiritual
courts  in  England,  whose  jurisdiction  is  so  multifarious,  and,
in  general,  so  little  of  a  religious  nature,  had  till  lately  no
means  even  of  compelling  an  appearance,  much  less  of  en¬
forcing  a  sentence,  but  by  excommunication.2  Princes  who
felt  the  inadequacy  of  their  own  laws  to  secure  obedience
called  in  the  assistance  of  more  formidable  sanctions.  Several
capitularies  of  Charlemagne  denounce  the  penalty  of  excom¬
munication  against  incendiaries  or  deserters  from  the  army.
Charles  the  Bald  procured  similar  censures  against  his  re¬
volted  vassals.  Thus  the  boundary  between  temporal  and
spiritual  offences  grew  every  day  less  distinct ;  and  the  clergy
were  encouraged  to  fresh  encroachments,  as  they  discovered
the  secret  of  rendering  them  successful.*

The  civil  magistrate  ought  undoubtedly  to  protect  the  just
rights  and  lawful  jurisdiction  of  the  church.  It  is  not  so  evi¬
dent  that  he  should  attach  temporal  penalties  to  her  censures.
Excommunication  has  never  carried  such  a  presumption  of
moral  turpitude  as  to  disable  a  man,  upon  any  solid  princi¬
ples.  from  the  usual  privileges  of  society.  Superstition  and
tyranny,  however,  decided  otherwise.  The  support  due  to
church  censures  by  temporal  judges  is  vaguely  declared  in
the  capitularies  of  Pepin  and  Charlemague.  It  became  in
later  ages  a  more  established  principle  in  France  and  Eng-

1  Schmidt,  t.  tr.  p.  217 ;  Floury,  Itwti-  a  proeou  In  contempt,  waa  abolished  in
tutions  an  Droit,  t.  ii.  p.  192.  ’  England,  but  retained  in  Inland.

s  By  a  recent  utatute.  68  Q.  III.  c.  127,  *  Mem.  da  1'Acad.  dea  Inacript.  t.

the  writ  De  excommunicato  capiendo,  a*  xxxlx.  p.  586,  4c.

Eccles.  Power.

INTERDICTS.

1G5

land,  and,  I  presume,  in  other  countries.  By  our  common
law  an  excommunicated  person  is  incapable  of  being  a  wit¬
ness  or  of  bringing  an  action ;  and  he  may  be  detained  in
prison  until  he  obtains  absolution.  By  the  Establishments
of  St.  Louis,  his  estate  or  person  might  be  attached  by  the
magistrate.1  These  actual  penalties  were  attended  by  marks
of  abhorrence  and  ignominy  still  more  calculated  to  make  an
impression  on  ordinary  minds.  They  were  to  be  shunned,
like  men  infected  with  leprosy,  by  their  servants,  their  friends,
and  their  families.  Two  attendants  only,  if  we  may  trust  a
current  history,  remained  with  Robert  king  of  France,  who,
on  account  of  an  irregular  marriage,  was  put  to  this  ban  by
Gregory  V.,  and  these  threw  all  the  meats  which  had  passed
his  table  into  the  fire.2  Indeed  the  mere  intercourse  with  a
proscribed  person  incurred  what  was  called  the  lesser  ex-
communication,  or  privation  of  the  sacraments,  and  required
penitence  and  absolution.  In  some  places  a  bier  was  set
before  the  door  of  an  excommunicated  individual,  and  stones
thrown  at  his  windows :  a  singular  method  of  compelling  his
submission.8  Everywhere  the  excommunicated  were  debarred
of  a  regular  sepulture,  which,  though  obviously  a  matter  of
police,  has,  through  the  superstition  of  consecrating  burial-
grounds,  been  treated  as  belonging  to  ecclesiastical  control.
Their  carcasses  were  supposed  to  be  incapable  of  corruption,
which  seems  to  have  been  thought  a  privilege  unfit  for  those
who  had  died  in  so  irregular  a  manner.4

But  as  excommunication,  which  attacked  only  one  and
perhaps  a  hardened  sinner,  was  not  always  effica-  lnterdict9
cious,  the  church  had  recourse  to  a  more  compre¬
hensive  punishment.  For  the  offence  of  a  nobleman  she
put  a  county,  for  that  of  a  prince  his  entire  kingdom,  under
an  interdict  or  suspension  of  religious  offices.  No  stretch  of
her  tyranny  was  perhaps  so  outrageous  as  this.  During  an
interdict  the  churches  were  closed,  the  bells  silent,  the  dead

1  Ordonnances  dea  Rois,  t.  I.  p.  121.  2  Velly,  t.  ii.

But  an  excommunicated  person  might  3  Vaissette,  Hist,  de  Languedoc,  t.  iii.
sue  in  the  lay,  though  notin  the  spirit-  Appendix,  p  850;  Du  Cange,  v.  Excom-
ual  court.  No  law  seems  to  have  been  so  municatio.

severe  in  this  respect  as  that  of  England  ;  4  Du  Cange,  v.  Imblocatus  :  where

though  it  is  not  strictly  accurate  to  say  several  authors  are  referred  to,  for  the
with  Dr.  Cosens  (Gibson's  Codex,  p.  1102),  constant  opiuion  among  the  members  of
that  the  writ  De  excomtuun.  capiendo  the  Greek  church,  that  the  bodies  of  ex-
is  a  privilege  peculiar  to  the  English  communicated  persons  remain  in  statu
church.  quo.

1G6

INTERDICTS.

Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

unburied,  no  rite  but  those  of  baptism  and  extreme  unction
performed.  The  penalty  fell  upon  those  who  had  neither
partaken  nor  could  have  prevented  the  offence ;  and  the
offence  was  often  but  a  private  dispute,  in  which  the  pride  of
a  pope  or  bishop  had  been  wounded.  Interdicts  were  so  rare
before  the  time  of  Gregory  VII.,  that  some  have  referred
them  to  him  as  their  author ;  instances  may  however  be  found
of  an  earlier  date,  and  especially  that  which  accompanied  the
above-mentioned  excommunication  of  Robert  king  of  France.
They  were  afterwards  issued  not  unfrequently  against  king¬
doms  ;  but  in  particular  districts  they  continually  occurred.1

This  was  the  mainspring  of  the  machinery  that  the  clergy
set  in  motion,  the  lever  by  which  they  moved  the  world.
From  the  moment  that  these  interdicts  and  excommunications
had  been  tried  the  powers  of  the  earth  might  be  said  to  have
existed  only  by  sufferance.  Nor  was  the  validity  of  such
denunciations  supposed  to  depend  upon  their  justice.  The
imposer  indeed  of  an  unjust  excommunication  was  guilty  of
a  sin ;  but  the  party  subjected  to  it  had  no  remedy  but  sub¬
mission.  He  who  disregards  such  a  sentence,  says  Beau-
manoir,  renders  his  good  cause  bad.a  And  indeed,  without
annexing  so  much  importance  to  the  direct  consequences  of
an  ungrounded  censure,  it  is  evident  that  the  received  theory
of  religion  concerning  the  indispensable  obligation  and  mys¬
terious  efficacy  of  the  rights  of  communion  and  confession
must  have  induced  scrupulous  minds  to  make  uny  temporal
sacrifice  rather  than  incur  their  privation.  One  is  rather
surprised  at  the  instances  of  failure  than  of  success  in  the
employment  of  these  spiritual  weapons  against  sovereigns  or
the  laity  in  general.  It  was  perhaps  a  fortunate  circumstance
for  Europe  that  they  were  not  introduced,  upon  a  large  scale,
during  the  darkest  ages  of  superstition.  In  the  eighth  or
ninth  centuries  they  would  probably  have  met  with  a  more
implicit  obedience.  But  after  Gregory  VII.,  as  the  spirit  of
ecclesiastical  usurpation  became  more  violent,  then*  grew  up
by  slow  degrees  an  opposite  feeling  in  the  laity,  which  ripen¬
ed  into  an  alienation  of  sentiment  from  the  church,  and  a
conviction  of  that  sacred  truth  which  superstition  and  soph¬
istry  have  endeavored  to  eradicate  from  the  heart  of  man,

l  OUnnonr,  1.  ril.  e.  1 ;  8chmldt,  t.  It.  pllnJ,  p.  2*8  :  8t.  Marc,  t.  It.  p.  535;
p.  2-U ;  Dupin,  l>e  autlqul  Keel.  DUci-  r  l»*ur>.  liutitutiuuj,  t.  U  p.  2UU.

•  p.  261.

Ecclks.  Power.  USURPATION  OF  THE  POPES.

1C7

that  no  tyrannical  government  can  be  founded  on  a  divine
commission.

Excommunications  had  very  seldom,  if  ever,  been  lev¬
elled  at  the  head  of  a  sovereign  before  the  instance
of  Lothaire.  His  ignominious  submission  and  the  usurpation
general  feebleness  of  the  Carlovingian  line  pro-  of  the
duced  a  repetition  of  the  menace  at  least,  and  in  popes‘
cases  more  evidently  beyond  the  cognizance  of  a  spiritual
authority.  Upon  the  death  of  this  Lothaire,  his  uncle  Charles'
the  Bald  having  possessed  himself  of  Lorraine,  to  which  the
emperor  Louis  II.  had  juster  pretensions,  the  pope  Adrian
II.  warned  him  to  desist,  declaring  that  any  attempt  upon
that  country  would  bring  down  the  penalty  of  excommunica¬
tion.  Sustained  by  the  intrepidity  of  Hincmar,  the  king  did
not  exhibit  his  usual  pusillanimity,  and  the  pope  in  this  in¬
stance  failed  of  success.1  But  John  VIII.,  the  next  occupier
of  the  chair  of  St.  Feter,  carried  his  pretensions  to  a  height
which  none  of  his  predecessors  had  reached.  The  Carlovingian
princes  had  formed  an  alliance  against  Boson,  the  usurper  of
the  kingdom  of  Arles.  The  pope  writes  to  Charles  the  Fat,
“  I  have  adopted  the  illustrious  prince  Boson  as  my  son  ;  be
content  therefore  with  your  own  kingdom,  for  I  shall  instant¬
ly  excommunicate  all  who  attempt  to  injure  my  son.”2  In
another  letter  to  the  same  king,  who  had  taken  some  prop¬
erty  from  a  convent,  he  enjoins  him  to  restore  it  within  sixty
days,  and  to  certify  by  an  envoy  that  he  had  obeyed  the  com¬
mand,  else  an  excommunication  would  immediately  ensue,  to
be  followed  by  still  severer  castigation,  if  the  king  should  not
repent  upon  the  first  punishment.3  These  expressions  seem
to  intimate  a  sentence  of  deposition  from  his  throne,  and  thus
anticipate  by  two  hundred  years  the  famous  era  of  Gregory

VII. ,  at  which  we  shall  soon  arrive.  In  some  respects  John

VIII.  even  advanced  pretensions  beyond  those  of  Gregory.
He  asserts  very  plainly  a  right  of  choosing  the  emperor,  and
may  seem  indirectly  to  have  exercised  it  in  the  election  of
Charles  the  Bald,  who  had  not  primogeniture  in  his  favor.4
This  prince,  whose  restless  ambition  was  united  with  mean¬
ness  as  well  as  insincerity,  consented  to  sign  a  capitulation,

1  D**  Marca,  1.  iv.  c.  11.  *  Bnluz.  Capitularia,  t.  li.  p.  251  i

*  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p.  260.  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p.  197.

3  Duriorihus  dein  cep*  wiena  te  ver-

beribud  erudicadum.  Schmidt,  p.  261.

168

CORRUPTION  OF  MORALS.  Chap.  VII.  Tart  I.

Their
degeneracy
in  the  tenth
century.

3n  his  coronation  at  Rome,  in  favor  of  the  pope  and  church,
a  precedent  which  was  improved  upon  in  subsequent  ages.1
Rome  was  now  prepared  to  rivet  her  fetters  upon  sovereigns,
and  at  no  period  have  the  condition  of  society  and  the  cir¬
cumstances  of  civil  government  been  so  favorable  for  her
ambition.  But  the  consummation  was  still  sus¬
pended,  and  even  her  progress  arrested,  for  more
than  a  hundred  and  fifty  years.  This  dreary  inter¬
val  is  filled  up,  in  the  annals  of  the  papacy,  by  a
series  of  revolutions  and  crimes.  Six  popes  were  deposed,
two  murdered,  one  mutilated.  Frequently  two  or  even  three
competitors,  among  whom  it  is  not  always  possible  by  any
genuine  criticism  to  distinguish  the  true  shepherd,  drove  each
other  alternately  from  the  city.  A  few  respectable  names
appear  thinly  scattered  through  this  darkness ;  and  some¬
times,  perhaps,  a  pope  who  had  acquired  estimation  by  his
private  virtues  may  be  distinguished  by  some  encroachment
on  the  rights  of  princes  or  the  privileges  of  national  churches.
But  in  general  the  pontiffs  of  that  nge  had  neither  leisure  nor
capacity  to  perfect  the  great  system  of  temporal  supremacy,
and  looked  rather  to  a  vile  profit  from  the  sale  of  episcopal
confirmations,  or  of  exemptions  to  monasteries.1

The  corruption  of  the  head  extended  naturally  to  all  other
Corruption  members  of  the  church.  All  writers  concur  in
of  moral*.  stigmatizing  the  dissoluteness  and  neglect  of  de¬
cency  that  prevailed  among  the  clergy.  Though  several
coties  of  ecclesiastical  discipline  had  been  compiled  by  j (ar¬
ticular  prelates,  yet  neither  these  nor  the  ancient  canons
were  much  regarded.  The  bishops,  indeed,  who  were  to
enforce  them  had  most  occasion  to  dread  their  severity.
They  were  obtruded  upon  their  sees,  as  the  supreme  j>ontitfs
were  upon  that  of  Rome,  by  force  or  corruption.  A  child
of  five  years  old  was  made  archbishop  of  Rheims.  The  see
of  Narbonne  was  purchased  for  another  at  the  age  of  ten.*
By  this  relaxation  of  morals  the  priesthood  began  to  lose  its
hold  upon  the  prejudices  of  mankind.  These  are  nourished
chiefly  indeed  by  shining  examples  of  piety  and  virtue,  but
also,  in  a  superstitious  age,  by  ascetic  observances,  by  the  fast-

>  Schmidt,  t.  11.  p.  199.

>  Sohml.it,  ».  II.  p.  414:  Mothclm ;
St.  Marc ;  Mumtorl,  Ann.  d'ltolia,  pnt-

dm.

»  Vaiaaette,  Hitt,  de  Languedoc,  t.  U.

p.  2(12.  It  ni  almott  general  In  til*
church  to  bare  Mtlu.pt  under  twenty
veart  old.  Id.  p.  149.  Keen  the  pop*
Benedict  IX.  It  aald  to  hare  been  only
twelve,  but  thla  hat  becu  doubted.

Eccles.  Power.  NEGLECT  OF  CELFBACY.

169

ing  and  watching  of  monks  and  hermits,  who  have  obviously
go  bad  a  lot  in  this  life,  that  men  are  induced  to  conclude  that
they  must  have  secured  a  better  reversion  in.  futurity.  The
regular  clergy  accordingly,  or  monastic  orders,  who  practised,
at  least  apparently,  the  specious  impostures  of  self-mortifica¬
tion,  retained  at  all  times  a  far  greater  portion  of  respect
than  ordinary  priests,  though  degenerated  themselves,  as  was
admitted,  from  their  primitive  strictness.

Two  crimes,  of  at  least  violations  of  ecclesiastical  law,  had
become  almost  universal  in  the  eleventh  century,  Neglect  of
and  excited  general  indignation  —  the  marriage  or  the  rules  of
concubinage  of  priests,  and  the  sale  of  benefices.  ccUbacy'

By  an  effect  of  those  prejudices  in  favor  of  austerity  to  which
I  have  just  alluded,  celibacy  had  been,  from  very  early  times,
enjoined  as  an  obligation  upon  the  clergy.  It  was  perhaps
permitted  that  those  already  married  for  the  first  time,  and  to
a  virgin,  might  receive  ordination ;  and  this,  after  prevailing
for  a  length  of  time  in  the  Greek  church,  was  sanctioned  by
the  council  of  Trullo  in  691, 1  and  has  ever  since  continued

1  This  council  was  held  at  Constan¬
tinople  in  the  dome  of  the  palace,  called
Trullus,  by  the  Latins.  The  nomina¬
tive  Trullo,  though  solcecistical,  is  used,
I  believe,  by  ecclesiastical  writers  in
English.  St.  Marc,  t.  i.  p.  294 ;  Art  de
verifier  lee  Dates,  t.  i.  p.  157 ;  Fleury,
Hist.  Eccles.  t.  x.  p.  110.  Bishops  are
not  within  this  permission,  and  cannot
retain  their  wives  by  the  discipline  of  the
Greek  church.  Lingard  says  of  the  An¬
glo-Saxon  church,  — 44  During  more  than
200  years  from  the  death  of  Augustin  the
laws  respecting  clerical  celibacy,  so  gall¬
ing  to  the  natural  propensities  of  umn.
but  so  calculated  to  enforce  an  elevated
idea  of  the  sanctity  which  becomes  the
priesthood,  were  enforced  with  the  ut¬
most  rigor:  but  during  part  of  the  ninth
century  aud  most  of  the  tenth,  when  the
repeated  and  sanguinary  devastations  of
the  Danes  threatened  the  destruction  of
the  hierarchy  no  less  than  of  the  govern¬
ment,  the  ancient  canons  opposed  but  a

feeble  barrier  to  the  impulse  of  the  pas¬
sions. ’’  Ang.-Sax.  Church,  p.  176.  What¬
ever  may  have  been  the  case  in  England,
those  who  look  at  the  abstract  of  the
canons  of  French  and  Spanish  councils,
in  Dupin’s  Ecclesiastical  History,  from
the  sixth  to  the  eleventh  century,  will
find  hardly  one  wherein  there  is  not
some  enactment  against  bishops  or  priests
retaining  wives  in  their  houses.  Such
provisions  were  not  repeated  certainly
without  reason  ;  so  that  the  remark  of
Fleury,  t.  xi.  p.  694,  that  he  has  found
no  instance  of  clerical  marriage  before
893,  cannot  weigh  for  a  great  deal.  It  is
probable  that  bishops  did  not  often  marry
after  their  consecration  ;  but  this  cannot
be  presumed  of  priests.  Southey,  in  his
Vindicim  Ecclesiae  Anglican®,  p.  290,
while  he  produces  some  instances  of
clerical  matrimony,  endeavors  to  mis¬
lead  the  reader  into  the  supposition  that
it  was  even  conformable  to  ecclesiastical
canons.*

•  A  late  writer,  who  has  glosed  over  every  fact  in  ecclesiastical  history  which
could  make  against  his  own  particular  tenets,  asserts,  — 44  In  the  earliest  ages  of  the
church  no  restriction  whatever  had  been  placed  on  the  clergy  in  this  respect.”
Palmer's  Compendious  Ecclesiastical  History,  p.  115.  This  may  be,  and  I  believe
it  is,  very  true  of  the  Apostolical  period;  but  the  “earliest  o^cs”  are  generally
understood  to  go  further :  and  certainly  the  prohibition  of  marriage  to  priests  was
an  established  custom  of  some  antiquity  at  the  time  of  the  Nicene  council.  The
question  agitated  there  was,  not  whether  priests  should  marry,  contrary  as  it  was
admitted  by  their  advocate  to  dpjfaia  kKKAijmac  n afxidoatc,  but  whether  married
men  should  be  ordained.  I  do  not  see  any  difference  in  principle  ;  but  the  church
had  made  one.

170

NEGLECT  OF  TIIE  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

one  of  the  distinguishing  features  of  its  discipline.  The
Latin  church,  however,  did  not  receive  these  canons,  and  has
uniformly  persevered  in  excluding  the  three  orders  of  priests,
deacons,  and  subdeacons,  not  only  from  contracting  matri¬
mony,  but  from  cohabiting  with  wives  espoused  before  their
ordination.  The  prohibition,  however,  during  some  ages  ex¬
isted  only  in  the  letter  of  her  canons.  In  every  country  the
secular  or  parochial  clergy  kept  women  in  their  houses,  upon
more  or  less  acknowledged  terms  of  intercourse,  by  a  conni¬
vance  of  their  ecclesiastical  superiors,  which  almost  amounted
to  a  positive  toleration.  The  sons  of  priests  were  capable  of
inheriting  by  the  law  of  France  and  also  of  Castile.1  Some
vigorous  efforts  had  been  made  in  England  by  Dunstan,  with
the  assistance  of  King  Edgar,  to  di>possess  the  married
canons,  if  not  the  parochial  clergy,  of  their  benefices;  but
the  abuse,  if  such  it  is  to  be  considered,  made  incessant  prog¬
ress,  till  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century.  There  was
certainly  much  reason  for  the  rulers  of  the  church  to  restore
this  part  of  their  discipline,  since  it  is  by  cutting  off  her
members  from  the  charities  of  domestic  life  that  she  secures
their  entire  affection  to  her  cause,  and  renders  them,  like
veteran  soldiers,  independent  of  every  feeling  but  that  of
fidelity  to  their  commander  and  regard  to  the  interests  of
their  body.  Leo  IX.  accordingly,  one  of  the  first  pontiffs
who  retrieved  the  honor  of  the  apostolic  chair,  after  its  long
period  of  ignominy,  began  in  good  earnest  the  difficult  work
of  enforcing  celibacy  among  the  clergy.1  His  successors
never  lost  sight  of  this  essential  point  of  discipline.  It  was
a  struggle  against  the  natural  rights  and  strongest  affections
of  mankind,  which  lasted  for  several  ages,  and  succeeded
only  by  the  toleration  of  greater  evils  than  those  it  was  in¬
tended  to  remove.  The  laity,  in  general,  took  part  against
the  married  priests,  who  were  reduced  to  infamy  and  want,
or  obliged  to  renounce  their  dearest  connections.  In  many
parts  of  Germany  no  ministers  were  left  to  perform  divine
services.*  But  perhaps  there  was  no  country  where  the

1  Recue  II  den  Hl'toricna,  t.  xi.  prefiic*.  *  St.  Marc,  t.  111.  p.  152,  104,  219,  002,
Marina,  Knnayo  nobru  lan  Siete  Part  Man,  Ate.

o.  221,  223.  Thin  wan  by  virtue  of  the  *  Schmidt,  t.  ill.  p.  279;  Martenne,
general  indulgence  shown  by  the  cun*  Thenaurun  An  redo  to  rum,  t.  i.  p.  230.
torn*  of  that  country  to  concubinage,  or  A  DanUh  writer  drawn  a  still  darker
barti^nnin  ;  the  children  of  nuch  an  union  picture  of  the  tyranny  exercised  toward*
alwayn  inheriting  in  default  of  Liioae  born  the  married  clergy,  which.  If  lie  doe*  not
in  aoleuin  wedlock.  Ibid.  exaggerate,  wan  neve  re  ind**d:  alii  ixn-ui-

Eccles.  Tower.

RULES  OF  CELIBACY.

171

rules  of  celibacy  met  with  so  little  attention  as  in  England.
It  was  acknowledged  in  the  reign  of  Henry  I.  that  the
greater  and  better  part  of  the  clergy  were  married,  and  that
prince  is  said  to  have  permitted  them  to  retain  their  wives.1

brta  truncabantur,  alii  occidebantur,  alii
de  patril  expellebautur,  pauci  ana  reti-
nuere.  Lange be k,  Script.  Rerum  Da-
nicarum,  t.  i.  p.  380.  The  prohibition
was  repeated  by  Woldemar  II.  in  1222,
so  that  there  seems  to  have  been  much
difficulty  found.  Id.  p.  287  and  p.  272.

1  Wilkins,  Concilia,  p.  387 :  Chronicon
Saxon  ;  Collier,  p.  248,  280,  294  ;  Lyttel¬
ton,  yoI.  iii.  p.  to.  The  third  Latevan
council  fifty  years  afterwards  speaks  of
the  detestable  custom  of  keeping  concu¬
bines  long  used  by  the  English  clergy.
Cum  in  Augiil  pravfi  et  detestabili  cou-
suetudine  et  longo  tempore  fuerit  obten-
tum,  ut  clerici  in  domibus  suis  fornica-
rias  habeant.  Lab  be,  Concilia,  t.  x.  p.
1033.  Eugenius  IV.  sent  a  legate  to  im¬
pose  celibacy  on  the  Irish  clergy.  Lyt¬
telton’s  Henry  II.  vol.  ii.  p.  42.

The  English  clergy  long  set  at  nought
the  fulminations  of  the  pope  against
their  domestic  happiness  ;  and  the  com¬
mon  law,  or  at  least  irresistible  custom,
seems  to  have  been  their  shield.  There
is  some  reason  to  believe  that  their  chil¬
dren  were  legitimate  for  the  purposes  of
inheritance,  which,  however,  1  do  not
assert.  The  sons  of  priests  are  men¬
tioned  in  several  instruments  of  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries ;  but  we
cannot  be  sure  that  they  were  not  born
before  their  fathers’  ordination,  or  that
they  were  reckoned  legitimate.*

An  instance  however  occurs  in  the
Hot.  Cur.  Regis,  a.d.  1194,  where  the
assize  find  that  there  has  been  no  presen¬
tation  to  the  church  of  Duustati,  but  the
parsons  have  held  it  from  father  to  sou.
Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  in  his  Introduction
to  these  records  (p.  29),  gives  other  proofs
of  this  hereditary  succession  in  bene¬
fices.  Giraidus  Cambrensis,  about  the
end  of  Henry  II. ’a  reign  ( apiui  Wright's
Political  Songs  of  England,  p  353).  men¬
tions  the  marriage  of  the  parochial  clergy
as  almost  universal.  More  sacerdotum
parochialium  Angliuo  fere  cunctorum
damn&bili  quidein  et  detestabili,  publi¬
cum  secum  hubebat  comitem  iudividuim,
et  in  foco  focariatn,  et  in  cubiculo  concu-
binam.  They  were  called  focaria ,  as
living  at  the  same  hearth ;  and  this
might  be  tolerated,  perhaps,  on  pretence

of  service;  but  the  fellowship,  wc  per¬
ceive,  was  not  confined  to  the  fireside.
It  was  about  this  time  that  a  poem,  De
Concubinis  Sacerdotum,  commonly  at¬
tributed  to  Walter  Mapes,  but  alluding
by  name  to  Pope  Innocent  III.,  humor¬
ously  defends  the  uncanonical  usage.  It
begins  thus  :  —

u  Prisciani  regula  penitus  cassatur,
Sacerdos  per  hie  et  hcec  olim  declina-
batur,

Scd  per  hie  solummodo  nunc  articu-
latur,

Cum  per  nostrum  prsesulem  hcec  amo-
Teatur.’*

The  last  lines  are  better  known,  having
been  often  quoted :  —

“Ecce  jam  pro  clericis  multum  alle-
gavi,

Necnon  pro  presbyteris  multa  compro-
bavi ;

Pater-noster  nunc  pro  me,  quoniam
peccavi,

Dicat  quisque  presbyter  cum  suSL
suavi.”

Poems  ascribed  to  Mapes ,  p.  171.  (Cam¬
den  Society,  1841.)

Several  other  poems  in  this  very  cu¬
rious  volume  allude  to  the  same  subject.
In  a  dialogue  between  a  priest  and  a
scholar,  the  latter  having  taxed  him  with
keeping  a  presbytera  in  his  house,  the
parson  defends  himself  by  recrimina¬
tion  :  —

M  Malo  cum  presbytera  pulcra  fornicari,
Servituros  domino  filioa  lucrari,

Quam  vagas  satellites  per  antra  sec-
tari ;

Est  iuhonestissimum  6ic  debonestari.”

(p.  256.)

John,  on  occasion  of  the  interdict  pro¬
nounced  against  him  in  1208,  seized  the
concubiues  of  the  priests  and  compelled
them  to  redeem  themselves  by  a  fine.
Presbyterorum  et  clericoruin  focarise  per
totain  Angliam  a  ministris  regis  cuptso
sunt,  et  ad  se  redimendum  graviter  com-
p«Um.  Matt.  Paris,  p.  190.  This  is
omitted  by  Lingard.

It  is  said  by  Kaumer  (Gesch.  der  Ho-
heustaulleu,  vi.  235)  that  there  was  a

•  Among  the  witnesses  to  some  instruments  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.,  printed
by  Mr.  Hudson  Gurney  from  the  court-rolls  of  the  manor  of  Keswick  in  Norfolk,
we  have  more  than  once  Walter  flllus  presbyter!.  But  the  rest  are  described  by  the
father's  surname,  except  one,  who  is  called  flllus  Beatricis  ;  and  as  he  may  be  sus¬
pected  of  beiug  illegitimate,  we  caunot  infer  the  contrary  as  to  the  priest  s  son.

172

EPISCOPAL  ELECTION’S.  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

But  the  hierarchy  never  relaxed  in  their  efforts ;  and  all  the
councils,  general  or  provincial,  of  the  twelfth  century,  utter
denunciations  against  concubinary  priests.1  After  that  age
we  do  not  find  them  so  frequently  mentioned ;  and  the  abuse
by  degrees,  though  not  suppressed,  was  reduced  within  limits
at  which  the  church  might  connive.

Simony,  or  the  corrupt  purchase  of  spiritual  benefices,  was
the  second  characteristic  reproach  of  the  clergy  in
the  eleventh  century.  The  measures  taken  to  re¬
press  it  deserve  particular  consideration,  as  they  produced
effects  of  the  highest  importance  in  the  history  of  the  middle
Episcopal  ages.  According  to  the  primitive  custom  of  the
election*.  church,  an  episcopal  vacancy  was  filled  up  by
election  of  the  clergy  and  people  belonging  to  the  city  or  dio¬
cese.  The  subject  of  their  choice  was,  after  the  establish¬
ment  of  the  federate  or  provincial  system,  to  be  approved  or
rejected  by  the  metropolitan  and  his  suffragans ;  and,  if  ap¬
proved,  he  was  consecrated  by  them.*  It  is  probable  that,  in
almost  every  case,  the  clergy  took  a  leading  part  in  the  selec¬
tion  of  their  bishops ;  but  the  consent  of  the  laity  was  abso¬
lutely  necessary  to  render  it  valid.*  They  were,  however,
by  degrees,  excluded  from  any  real  participation,  first  in  the
Greek,  and  finally  in  the  western  church.  But  this  was  not
effected  till  pretty  late  times;  the  people  fully  preserved  their
elective  rights  at  Milan  in  the  eleventh  century,  and  traces
of  their  concurrence  may  be  found  both  in  France  and  Ger¬
many  in  the  next  age.4

married  bishop  of  Prague  during  the
pontificate  of  Innocent  HI.,  and  that  the
custom  of  clerical  marriages  lasted  in
Hungary  and  Sweden  to  the  end  of  the
thirteenth  century.

The  marriages  of  English  clergy  are
noticed  and  condemned  in  some  provin¬
cial  constitutions  of  1237.  Matt.  Paris,
P  881.  And  there  is,  even  so  late  as
1404,  a  mandate  by  the  bishop  of  Exeter
against  married  priests.  Wilkins,  Con¬
cilia.  t.  ill.  p.  277.

1  Quidam  sarerdotea  Latin!,  nays  In¬
nocent  III.,  in  domibus  suis  hnbent  con-
cubinas,  et  nounulll  allquas  sibi  non  mc-
tuunt  desponsare.  Opera  Innocent  III.
p.  668.  See  also  p.  800  and  p.  407.  The
latter  cannot  be  supposed  a  very  common
case,  after  so  many  prohlbltfon* ;  the
more  usual  practice  was  to  keep  a  female
in  their  houses,  under  some  pretence  of
relationship  or  servitude,  as  is  still  said
to  be  usual  in  Catholic  countries.  l)u

Cange,  ▼.  Focarla.  A  writer  of  respect¬
able  authority  assorts  that  the  clergy
frequently  obtained  a  bishop's  license  to
cohabit  with  a  mate,  llarmer's  [Whar¬
ton's]  Observations  on  Burnet,  p.  11.  I
find  a  passage  in  Nicholas  de  Clem  angle
about  1400.  quoted  In  Lewis's  Life  of
Pecock,  p.  80.  Plerisque  In  dioccsihus,
rec  tores  pa  roc  h  la  rum  ex  certo  et  con¬
duct©  cum  his  pnelatis  pretio,  pa* dm  et
4  ooncubinM  lM>i  tuj
ever,  does  not  amount  to  a  direct  license.

*  Marca.  de Conconlantll,  k c.,  I  vi.  c.  2.

•  Father  Paul  on  Benefices,  e.  7.

«  De  Marca,  ubl  supra.  Schmidt,  t.  Iv.
p.  173.  The  form  of  election  of  a  bishop
of  Puy,  in  1068,  runs  thus :  cirrus,  popu-
lus,  et  militia  elegimus.  Vaiasette,  Hist,
de  Languedoc,  t.  ii.  Appendix,  p.  220.
Even  Urmtian  seems  to  admit  In  one
place  that  the  laity  bad  a  sort  of  share,
though  no  decisive  voire,  in  filling  up  an
episcopal  vacancy.  Eleclio  cleric  ©rum

Eccles.  Power.

INVESTITURES.

173

It  does  not  appear  that  the  early  Christian  emperors  inter¬
posed  with  the  freedom  of  choice  any  further  than  to  make
their  own  confirmation  necessary  in  the  great  patriarchal
sees,  such  as  Rome  and  Constantinople,  which  were  frequent¬
ly  the  objects  of  violent  competition,  and  to  decide  in  contro¬
verted  elections.1  The  Gothic  and  Lombard  kings  of  Italy
followed  the  same  line  of  conduct.2  But  in  the  French  mon¬
archy  a  more  extensive  authority  was  assumed  by  the  sover¬
eign.  Though  the  practice  was  subject  to  some  variation,  it
may  be  said  generally  that  the  Merovingian  kings,  the  line
of  Charlemagne,  and  the  German  emperors  of  the  house  of
Saxony,  conferred  bishoprics  either  by  direct  nomination,  or,
as  was  more  regular,  by  recommendatory  letters  to  the  elec¬
tors.8  In  England  also,  before  the  conquest,  bishops  were  ap¬
pointed  in  the  witenagemot ;  and  even  in  the  reign  of
William  it  is  said  that  Lanfranc  was  raised  to  the  see  of
Canterbury  by  consent  of  parliament.4  But,  independently
of  this  prerogative,  which  length  of  time  and  the  tacit  sanc¬
tion  of  the  people  have  rendered  unquestionably  legitimate,
the  sovereign  had  other  means  of  controlling  the  election  of  a
bishop.  Those  estates  and  honors  which  compose  the  tem¬
poralities  of  the  see,  and  without  which  the  naked  spiritual
privileges  would  not  have  tempted  an  avaricious  generation,
had  chiefly  been  granted  by  former  kings,  and  were  assimi¬
lated  to  lands  held  on  a  beneficiary  tenure.  As  they  seemed
to  partake  of  the  nature  of  fiefs,  they  required  similar  formal¬
ities — investiture  by  the  lord,  and  an  oath  of  fealty  InTegtiturcg
by  the  tenant.  Charlemagne  is  said  to  have  in¬
troduced  this  practice;  and,  by  way  of  visible  symbol,  as

est,  pefcitio  plebis.  Decret.  1.  i.  distinctio
62.  And  other  subsequent  passages  con¬
firm  this.

l  Gibbon,  c.  20 ;  St.  Marc,  Abregu
Chronologique,  t.  i.  p.  7.

*  Fra  Paolo  on  Benefices,  c.  lx.  ;  Gian-
none,  1.  iii.  c.  6 ;  1.  iv.  c.  12  ;  St.  Marc,  t.  i.
p.  37.

*  Schmidt,  t.  i.  p.  386 ;  t.  ii.  p.  245, 487.

This  interference  of  the  kings  was  per¬
haps  not  quite  conformable  to  their  own
laws,  which  only  reserved  to  them  the
confirmation.  Eplacopo  decedente,  says
a  constitution  of  Clotoire  II.  in  615,  in
loco  ipsius,  qul  a  metmpolitano  ordi-
nari  debet,  a  provincial!  bus,  a  clero  et
populo  eligatur :  et  si  persona  condigna
fuerit.  per  ordinutionein  prior  i  pis  ordine-
tur.  Balux.  Capitol,  t.  i.  p.  21.  •

magne  is  said  to  have  adhered  to  this
limitation,  leaving  elections  free,  and
only  approving  the  person,  and  confer¬
ring  investiture  on  him.  F.  Paul  on
Benefices,  c.  xv.  But  a  more  direct  in¬
fluence  was  restored  afterwards.  Ivon
bishop  of  Chartres,  about  the  year  1100,
thus  concisely  expresses  the  several  par¬
ties  concurring  In  the  creation  of  a
bishop  :  eligente  clero,  suffragan te  po¬
pulo,  f/ono  regis.  per  manum  metropoli¬
tan!,  approbante  Romano  pootifice.  I)u
Chesne,  Script.  Rerum  Gallicarum,  t.  iv.
p.  174.

*  Lyttelton’s  Hist,  of  Henry  IT.  vol.  iv.
p.  144.  But  the  passage,  which  he  quotes
from  the  Saxon  Chronicle,  Is  not  found  iu
the  best  edition.

174

CONFIRMATION  OF  POPES.  Chap.  VII.  Tart  I.

usual  in  feudal  institutions,  to  have  put  the  ring  and  crozier
into  the  hands  of  the  newly  consecrated  bishop.  And  this
continued  for  more  than  two  centuries  afterwards  without  ex¬
citing  any  .scandal  or  resistance.1

The  church  has  undoubtedly  surrendered  part  of  her
independence  in  return  for  ample  endowments  and  temporal
power ;  nor  could  any  claim  be  more  reasonable  than  that  of
feudal  superiors  to  grant  the  investiture  of  dependent  fiefs.
But  the  fairest  right  may  be  sullied  by  abuse;  and  the
sovereigns,  the  lay  patrons,  the  prelates  of  the  tenth  and
eleventh  centuries,  made  their  powers  of  nomination  and
investiture  subservient  to  the  grossest  rapacity.2  According
to  the  ancient  canons,  a  benefice  was  avoided  by  any  simoni-
acal  payment  or  stipulation.  If  these  were  to  be  enforced,
the  church  must  almost  be  cleared  of  its  ministers.  Either
through  bribery  in  places  where  elections  still  prevailed,  or
through  corrupt  agreements  with  princes,  or  at  least  cus¬
tomary  presents  to  their  wives  and  ministers,  a  large  propor¬
tion  of  the  bishops  had  no  valid  tenure  in  their  sees.  The
case  was  perhaps  worse  with  inferior  clerks ;  in  the  church
of  Milan,  which  was  notorious  for  this  corruption,  not  a  single
ecclesiastic  could  stand  the  test,  the  archbishop  exacting  a
price  for  the  collation  of  every  benefice.8

The  bishops  of  Rome,  like  those  of  inferior  sees,  were
regularly  elected  by  the  citizens,  laymen  as  well  as  ecclesi¬
astics.  But  their  consecration  was  deferred  uutil  the  popular
imperial  choice  had  received  the  sovereign’s  sanction.  The
confirmation  Romans  regularly  despatched  letters  to  Constant i-

Ol  POMS.  Del

nople  or  to  the  exarchs  of  Ravenna,  praying  that
their  election  of  a  pope  might  be  confirmed.  Exceptions,
if  any,  are  infrequent  while  Rome  was  subject  to  the  eastern
empire.4  This,  among  other  imperial  prerogatives,  Charle¬
magne  might  consider  as  his  own.  lie  possessed  the  city,
especially  after  his  coronation  as  emperor,  in  full  sovereignty  ;

’  De  Marcit,  p.  416 ;  Ginn  none,  1.  Ti.
e.  7.

i  Boniface  marqui"  of  Tuecany,  Cither
of  the  count***  Matilda,  and  by  fur  the
greate*t  prince  in  Italy,  vraa  flopped  be¬
fore  the  altar  by  an  abbot  for  Helling
benefice*.  Muratori.  ad.  ann.  1016.  The
offence  wa*  much  more  common  than  the
punUhmrnt,  but  the  two  combined  fur-
nl»h  a  good  epecimen  of  the  eleventh
century.

»  St.  Marc,  t.  111.  p.  65,  188,  219,  230,
296,  568;  Muratori.  a.p.  958,  1057,  *r.j
Fleury,  Hl»t.  BcelSe.  t.  xlil.  p.  78.  The
lum  however  appear"  to  have  been  very
■mall :  rather  like  a  fee  than  a  bribe.

*  he  Blanc,  Diaaertation  "or  I'Anto-
rit*  de«  Kmpereum.  ThU  1"  "ubjoined
to  hi"  Trait*  de*  Monnoyee;  but  not  in
ell  copie* ,  which  make*  thoee  that  want
it  leu  valuable.  St.  Man  and  Muratori,
1 - ■-

Eccles.  Power.  DECREE  OF  NICOLAS  II.

175

and  even  before  that  event  had  investigated,  as  supreme
chief,  some  accusations  preferred  against  the  pope  Leo  III.
No  vacancy  of  the  papacy  took  place  after  Charlemagne
became  emperor ;  and  it  must  be  confessed  that,  in  the  first
which  happened  under  Louis  the  Debonair,  Stephen  IV.  was
consecrated  in  haste  without  that  prince’s  approbation.1  But
Gregory  IV.,  his  successor,  waited  till  his  election  had  been
confirmed ;  and  upon  the  whole  the  Carlovingian  emperors,
though  less  uniformly  than  their  predecessors,  retained  that
mark  of  sovereignty.2 3  But  during  the  disorderly  state  of
Italy  which  followed  the  last  reigns  of  Charlemagne’s  pos¬
terity,  while  the  sovereignty  and  even  the  name  of  an
emperor  were  in  abeyance,  the  supreme  dignity  of  Christen¬
dom  was  conferred  only  by  the  factious  rabble  of  its  capital.
Otho  the  Great,  in  receiving  the  imperial  crown,  took  upon
him  the  prerogatives  of  Charlemagne.  There  is  even  extant
a  decree  of  Leo  VIII.,  which  grants  to  him  and  his  successors
the  right  of  naming  future  popes.  But  the  authenticity  of
this  instrument  is  denied  by  the  Italians.8  It  does  not  appear
that  the  Saxon  emperors  went  to  such  a  length  as  nomination,
except  in  one  instance  (that  of  Gregory  V.  in  996)  ;  but
they  sometimes,  not  uniformly,  confirmed  the  election  of  a
pope,  according  to  ancient  custom.  An  explicit  right  of
nomination,  was,  however,  conceded  to  the  emperor  Ilenry
III.  in  1047,  as  the  only  means  of  rescuing  the  Roman
church  from  the  disgrace  and  depravity  into  which  it  hail
fallen.  Henry  appointed  two  or  three  very  good  popes ;
acting  in  thi3  against  the  warnings  of  a  selfish  policy,  as  fatal
experience  soon  proved  to  his  family.4 * * *

This  high  prerogative  was  perhaps  not  designed  to  extend
beyond  Ilenry  himself.  But  even  if  it  had  been  transmissible
to  his  successors,  the  infancy  of  his  son  Henry  IV.,  and  the
factions  of  that  minority,  precluded  the  possibility  of  its  exer¬
cise.  Nicolas  II.,  in  1059,  published  a  decree  which  restored
the  right  of  election  to  the  Romans,  but  with  a  Decree  of
remarkable  variation  from  the  original  form.  The  NicollU!  n-

1  Muratori,  a.d.  817  ;  St.  Marc.

*  IjC  Blanc;  Schmidt,  t.  ii.  p.  186;
St.  Marc,  t.  I.  p.  887.  393.  &c.

3  St.  Marc  baa  defended  the  authen¬

ticity  of  this  instrument  in  a  separate

dissertation,  t.  iv.  p.  1167,  though  ad¬

mitting  some  interpolations.  Pagi.  in

Baronium.  t.  It.  p.  8,  seemed  to  me  to

have  urged  some  weighty  objections :

and  Muratori,  Annali  dJ  Italia,  a.d.  962,
speaks  of  it  as  a  gross  imposture,  in
which  he  probably  goes  too  far.  It  ob¬
tained  credit  rather  early,  and  is  ad
mitted  into  the  Decretum  of  Gratian,
notwithstanding  its  obvious  teudency.
p.  211,  edit.  1591.

«  St.  Marc  ;  Muratori ;  Schmidt ;  Stru-
vius.

176

DIFFERENCES  OF  GREGORY  Til.  Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

cardinal  bishops  (seven  in  number,  holding  sees  in  the
neighborhood  of  Rome,  and  consequently  suffragans  of  the
pope  as  patriarch  or  metropolitan)  were  to  choose  the  su¬
preme  pontiff,  with  the  concurrence  first  of  the  cardinal
priests  and  deacons  (or  ministers  of  the  parish  churches  of
Rome),  and  afterwards  of  the  laity.  Thus  elected,  the  new
pope  was  to  be  presented  for  confirmation  to  Henry,  “  now
king,  and  hereafter  to  become  emperor,”  and  to  such  of  his
successors  as  should  personally  obtain  that  privilege.1  This
decree  is  the  foundation  of  that  celebrated  mode  of  election
in  a  conclave  of  cardinals  which  has  ever  since  determined
the  headship  of  the  church.  It  was  intended  not  only  to
exclude  the  citizens,  who  had  indeed  justly  forfeited  their
primitive  right,  but  as  far  as  possible  to  prepare  the  way  for
an  absolute  emancipation  of  the  papacy  from  the  imperial
control ;  reserving  only  a  precarious  and  personal  concession
to  the  emperors  instead  of  their  ancient  legal  prerogative
of  confirmation.

The  real  author  of  this  decree,  and  of  all  other  vigorous
Gregory  vn.  measures  adopted  by  the  popes  of  that  age,  whether
a.d.  10(3.  for  the  assertion  of  their  independence  or  the
restoration  of  discipline,  was  Hildebrand,  archdeacon  of  the
church  of  Rome,  by  far  the  most  conspicuous  person  of  the
eleventh  century.  Acquiring  by  his  extraordinary  qualities
an  unbounded  ascendency  over  the  Italian  clergy,  they  re¬
garded  him  as  their  chosen  leader  and  the  hope  of  their
common  cause.  He  had  been  empowered  singly  to  nominate
a  pope  on  the  part  of  the  Romans  after  the  death  of  Leo  IX.,
and  compelled  Henry  III.  to  acquiesce  in  his  choice  of  Victor
II.3  No  man  could  proceed  more  fearlessly  towards  his
object  than  Hildebrand,  nor  with  less  attention  to  conscien¬
tious  impediments.  Though  the  decree  of  Nicolas  II.,  his
own  work,  had  expressly  reserved  the  right  of  confirmation
of  the  young  king  of  Germany,  yet  on  the  death  of  that  pope
Hildebrand  procured  the  election  and  consecration  of  Alex¬
ander  II.  without  waiting  for  any  authority.*  During  this
pontificate  he  was  considered  as  something  greater  than  the
pope,  who  acted  entirely  by  his  counsels.  On  Alexander’s
decease  Hildebrand,  long  since  the  real  head  of  the  church,

*  St.  Mnrc,  t.  111.  p.  276.  The  flint  neoe«»ary  for  s  pnpe'i  election.  Labbd,
canon  of  the  third  laitcran  council  make*  Concilia,  t.  z.  p.  ISOS,
the  conaenl  of  two  thlrda  of  the  college  >  St.  Marc,  p.  97.

•  Id.  p.  306.

Eccl.es.  Power.

WITH  IIENKY  IV.

177

was  raised  with  enthusiasm  to  its  chief  dignity,  and  assumed
the  name  of  Gregory  VII.

Notwithstanding  the  late  precedent  at  the  election  of  Alex¬
ander  II.,  it  appears  that  Gregory  did  not  yet  Hig  differ.
consider  his  plans  sufficiently  mature  to  throw  off  with
the  yoke  altogether,  but  declined  to  receive  conse-  Ueury  IV'
cration  until  he  had  obtained  the  consent  of  the  king  of
Germany.1  This  moderation  was  not  of  long  continuance.
The  situation  of  Germany  speedily  afforded  him  an  opportu¬
nity  of  displaying  his  ambitious  views.  Henry  IV.,  through
a  very  bad  education,  was  arbitrary  and  dissolute ;  the
Saxons  were  engaged  in  a  desperate  rebellion ;  and  secret
disaffection  had  spread  among  the  princes  to  an  extent  of
which  the  pope  was  much  better  aware  than  the  king.4  He
began  by  excommunicating  some  of  Henry’s  ministers  on
pretence  of  simony,  and  made  it  a  ground  of  remonstrance
that  they  were  not  instantly  dismissed.  His  next  step  was  to
publish  a  decree,  or  rather  to  renew  one  of  Alexander  H.,
against  lay  investitures.8  The  abolition  of  these  was  a  fa¬
vorite  object  of  Gregory,  and  formed  an  essential  part  of  his
general  scheme  for  emancipating  the  spiritual  and  subjugating
the  temporal  power.  The  ring  and  crosier,  it  was  asserted
by  the  papal  advocates,  were  the  emblems  of  that  power
which  no  monarch  could  bestow ;  but  even  if  a  less  offensive
symbol  were  adopted  in  investitures,  the  dignity  of  the  church
was  lowered,  and  her  purity  contaminated,  when  her  highest
ministers  were  compelled  to  solicit  the  patronage  or  the
approbation  of  laymen.  Though  the  estates  of  bishops
might,  strictly,  be  of  temporal  right,  yet,  as  they  had  been
inseparably  annexed  to  their  spiritual  office,  it  became  just
that  what  was  first  in  dignity  and  importance  should  carry
with  it  those  accessory  parts.  And  this  was  more  necessary
than  in  former  times  on  account  of  the  notorious  traffic  which
sovereigns  made  of  their  usurped  nomination  to  benefices,  so
that  scarcely  any  prelate  sat  by  their  favor  whose  possession
was  not  invalidated  by  simony.

The  contest  about  investitures,  though  begun  by  Gregory
VII.,  did  not  occupy  a  very  prominent  place  during  his  pon¬
tificate  ;  its  interest  being  suspended  by  other  more  extraordi-

1  St.  Maro.  p.  662.  lie  acted,  however,  *  Schmidt :  8t.  Marc.  Tho*e  two  are
a«  pope,  corren ponding  in  that  character  my  principal  authorities  for  the  content
with  bishop*  of  all  countries,  from  the  between  the  church  and  the  empire,
day  of  hi*  election,  p.  664.  *  St.  Marc,  t.  111.  p.  670.

vol.  n.  12

178  DIFFERENCES  OF  GREGORY  VII.  Chap.  VII.  Taut  I.

nary  and  important  dissensions  between  the  church  and  em¬
pire.  The  pope,  after  tampering  some  time  with  the  dis¬
affected  party  in  Germany,  summoned  Henry  to  appear  at
Rome  and  vindicate  himself  from  the  charges  alleged  by  his
subjects.  Such  an  outrage  naturally  exasperated  a  young
and  passionate  monarch.  Assembling  a  number  of  bishops
and  other  vassals  at  Worms,  he  procured  a  sentence  that
Gregory  should  no  longer  be  obeyed  as  lawful  pope.  But
the  time  was  past  for  those  arbitrary  encroachments,  or  at
least  high  prerogatives,  of  former  emperors.  The  relations
of  dependency  between  church  and  state  were  now  about  to
be  reversed.  Gregory  had  no  sooner  received  accounts  of
the  proceedings  at  Worms  than  he  summoned  a  council  in
the  Lateran  palace,  and  by  a  solemn  sentence  not  only  ex¬
communicated  Henry,  but  deprived  him  of  the  kingdoms  of
Germany  and  Italy,  releasing  his  subjects  from  their  alle¬
giance,  and  forbidding  them  to  obey  him  as  sovereign.  Thus
Gregory  VII.  obtained  the  glory  of  leaving  all  his  predeces¬
sors  behind,  and  astonishing  mankind  by  an  act  of  audacity
and  ambition  which  the  most  emulous  of  his  successors  could
hardly  surpass.1

The  first  impulses  of  Henry’s  mind  on  hearing  this  denun¬
ciation  were  indignation  and  resentment.  But,  like  other  in¬
experienced  and  misguided  sovereigns,  he  had  formed  an
erroneous  calculation  of  his  own  resources.  A  conspiracy,
long  prepared,  of  which  the  dukes  of  Suabia  and  Carinthia
were  the  chiefs,  began  to  manifest  itself.  Some  were  alien-

1  The  sentence  of  Gregory  VTT.  against
the  emperor  Henry  was  directed,  we
should  always  remember,  to  persons  al¬
ready  well  disposed  to  reject  his  author¬
ity.  Men  are  glad  to  be  told  that  it  is
their  duty  to  resist  a  sovereign  against
whom  they  are  in  rebellion,  and  will  not
be  very  scrupulous  in  examining  conclu¬
sions  which  fall  in  with  their  inclinations
and  interests.  Allegiance  was  in  those
turbulent  ages  easily  thrown  off,  and  the
right  of  resistance  was  In  continual  exer¬
cise.  To  the  Germans  of  the  eleventh
century  a  prince  unfit  for  Christian
communion  would  easily  appear  unfit  to
reign  over  them  ;  and  though  Henry  had
not  given  much  real  provocation  to  the
pope,  his  rices  and  tyranny  might  seem
to  challenge  any  spiritual  censure  or
temporal  chastisement.  A  nearly  con¬
temporary  writer  combine#  the  two  jus¬
tifications  of  the  rebellious  party.  Nemo
Romanorum  pootificem  reges  a  regno

deponere  posse  denegabit,  quicuoque
decreta  sanctissimi  papas  Gregorii  non
proscribenda  judicabit.  Ipse  enim  vir
apostolic  us  ....  Prate rva,  libert  ho¬
mines  Henricum  eo  par  to  sibi  praposm-
runt  In  regem,  ut  elec  to  re*  suos  juste
judicare  et  regal!  proridentU  gubernaro
satageret,  quod  pactum  l lie  post**  pne-
varicarl  et  eontemnere  non  ceasavlt,  Ac.
Ergo,  et  absque  sedl a  apostolic*  Judlrio
principes  euin  pro  rrge  merito  refuUre
possent,  cum  pactum  ad  im  pie  re  eon  Urn  jv
serit,  quod  iis  pro  election*  su  proml-
serat;  quo  non  adlin pleto,  nee  rex  «*■**
note  rat.  Vita  Greg.  VII.  in  Mura  tori,
Script.  Her.  Ital.  t.  ill.  p.  842
Upon  the  other  hand,  the  friends  and
supporters  of  Henry, though  ercledastic#,
protested  against  this  novel  stretch  of
prerogative  in  the  Roman  see.  Several
proof*  of  this  are  adduced  by  Schmidt,
t.  hi.  p.  816.

Eccles.  Power.

WITH  HENRY  IV.

179

ated  by  his  vices,  and  others  jealous  of  his  family.  The  re¬
bellious  Saxons  took  courage ;  the  bishops,  intimidated  by  ex-
communications,  withdrew  from  his  side ;  and  he  suddenly
found  himself  almost  insulated  in  the  midst  of  his  dominions.
In  this  desertion  he  had  recourse,  through  panic,  to  a  miser¬
able  expedient.  He  crossed  the  Alps  with  the  avowed  de¬
termination  of  submitting,  and  seeking  absolution  from  the
pope.  Gregory  was  at  Canossa,  a  fortress  near  Reggio,  be¬
longing  to  his  faithful  adherent  the  countess  Matilda.  It  was
in  a  winter  of  unusual  severity.  The  emperor  A  E  10-_
was  admitted,  without  his  guards,  into  an  outer
court  of  the  castle,  and  three  successive  days  remained  from
morning  till  evening  in  a  woollen  shirt  and  with  naked  feet ;
while  Gregory,  shut  up  with  the  countess,  refused  to  admit
him  to  his  presence.  On  the  fourth  day  he  obtained  absolu¬
tion  ;  but  only  upon  condition  of  appearing  on  a  certain  day
to  learn  the  pope’s  decision  whether  or  no  he  should  be  re¬
stored  to  his  kingdom,  until  which  time  he  promised  not  to
assume  the  ensigns  of  royalty.

This  base  humiliation,  instead  of  conciliating  Henry’s  ad¬
versaries,  forfeited  the  attachment  of  his  friends.  In  his  con¬
test  with  the  pope  he  had  found  a  zealous  support  in  the  prin¬
cipal  Lombard  cities,  among  whom  the  married  and  simonia-
cal  clergy  had  great  influence.1  Indignant  at  his  submission
to  Gregory,  whom  they  affected  to  consider  as  an  usurper  of
the  papal  chair,  they  now  closed  their  gates  against  the  em¬
peror,  and  spoke  openly  of  deposing  him.  In  this  singular  po¬
sition  between  opposite  dangers,  Henry  retrod  his  late  steps,
and  broke  off  his  treaty  with  the  pope  ;  preferring,  if  he  must
fall,  to  fall  as  the  defender  rather  than  the  betrayer  of  his  im¬
perial  rights.  The  rebellious  princes  of  Germany  chose  an¬
other  king,  Rodolph  duke  of  Suabia,  on  whom  Gregory,  after
some  delay,  bestowed  the  crown,  with  a  Latin  verse  import¬
ing  that  it  was  given  by  virtue  of  the  original  commission

1  There  had  been  a  kind  of  civil  vrar
at  Milan  for  about  twenty  years  before
this  time,  excited  by  the  intemperate
real  of  some  partisans  who  endeavored
to  execute  the  papal  decrees  against
irregular  clerks  by  force.  The  history  of
these  feuds  has  been  written  by  two  con¬
temporaries,  Arnulf  and  Landulf,  pub¬
lished  in  the  4  th  volume  of  Mura  tori’s
Scriptores  Kerum  ltalicarum  ;  sufficient
extracts  from  which  will  be  found  in  8t.

Marc,  t.  Hi.  p.  230,  &c.,  and  in  Mura-
tori’s  Annals.  The  Milanese  clergy  set
up  a  pretence  to  retain  wives,  under  the
authority  of  their  great  archbishop,  8t.
Ambrose,  who,  it  seems,  has  spokeu  with
more  indulgence  of  this  practice  than
most  of  the  fathers.  Both  Arnulf  and
Landulf  favor  the  married  clerks  ;  and
were  perhaps  themselves  of  that  descrip¬
tion.  Mura  tori.

180  DISPUTE  ABOUT  INVESTITURES.  Chat.  VII.  Part  I.

of  St  Peter.1  But  the  success  of  this  pontiff  in  his  imme¬
diate  designs  was  not  answerable  to  his  intrepidity.  Henry
both  subdued  the  German  rebellion  and  carried  on  the  war
with  so  much  vigor,  or  rather  so  little  resistance  in,  Italy,
that  he  was  crowned  in  Rome  by  the  antipope  Guibert,
whom  he  had  raised  in  a  council  of  his  partisans  to  the  gov¬
ernment  of  the  church  instead  of  Gregory.  The  latter  found
an  asylum  under  the  protection  of  Roger  Guiscard,  at  Sa-
Dtsput*  lerno,  where  he  died  an  exile.  His  mantle,  how-
Twtitures  ever>  descended  upon  his  successors,  especially
Urban  II.  and  Paschal  II.,  who  strenuously  per¬
severed  in  the  great  contest  for  ecclesiastical  independence  ;
the  former  with  a  spirit  and  policy  worthy  of  Gregory  VII.,
the  latter  with  steady  but  disinterested  prejudice.*  They
raised  up  enemies  against  Henry  IV.  out  of  the  bosom  of  his
family,  instigating  the  ambition  of  two  of  his  sons  successive¬
ly,  Conrad  and  Henry,  to  mingle  in  the  revolts  of  Germany.
But  Rome,  under  whose  auspices  the  latter  had  not  scrupled
to  engage  in  an  almost  parricidal  rebellion,  was  soon  disap¬
pointed  by  his  unexpected  tenaciousness  of  that  obnoxious
prerogative  which  had  occasioned  so  much  of  his  father’s
misery.  He  steadily  refused  to  part  with  the  right  of  inves¬
titure  ;  and  the  empire  was  still  committed  in  open  hostility
with  the  church  for  fifteen  years  of  his  reign.  But  Henry
V.  being  stronger  in  the  support  of  his  German  vassals  than
his  father  had  been,  none  of  the  popes  with  whom  he  was
engaged  had  the  boldness  to  repeat  the  measures  of  Gregory
compro-  VII.  At  length,  each  party  grown  weary  of  this
eonrordlt  ruinous  contention,  a  treaty  was  agreed  upon  be-
tween  the  emperor  and  Calixtus  II.  which  put  an
end  by  compromise  to  the  question  of  ecclesiastical
investitures.  By  this  compact  the  emperor  resigned  forever
all  pretence  to  invest  bishops  by  the  ring  and  crosier,  and

l  Petra  dedit  Petro,  Petrua  diadema
Rodnlpho.

*  Panchal  IT.  vu  »o  conaclentioua  In
hi*  abhorrence  of  inreatiturea,  that  ho
actually  algned  an  agreement  with
Henry  V.  in  1110,  whereby  the  prelate*
were  to  reaigu  all  the  land*  and  other
poaaeaaion*  which  they  held  in  lief  of  the
emperor,  on  condition  of  the  latter  re¬
nouncing  the  right  of  inreatiture,  which
Indeed,  in  auch  cirrumatancea,  would  (all
of  itaelf.  Thl*  extraordinary  conceaaiou,

a*  may  be  imagined,  waa  not  eery  aatia-
fhetory  to  therardinal*  and  M*hop*  about
Paachal’a  court,  more  worldly-minded
thau  hlmaeif.  nor  to  thoae  of  the  empe¬
ror’*  party,  whoae  joint  clamor  *oon  put  a
atop  to  the  treaty.  St.  Marc,  t.  It.  p.  976.
A  letter  of  Paachal  to  Anaelm  (Schmidt,
t.  111.  p.  304)  aeema  to  imply  that  he
thought  it  better  fbr  the  church  to  be
without  riche*  than  to  enjoy  them  on
condition  of  doing  homage  to  laymen.

Eccles.  Power.  COMPROMISED  BY  CONCORDAT.

181

recognized  the  liberty  of  elections.  But  in  return  it  was
agreed  that  elections  should  be  made  in  his  presence  or  that
of  his  officers,  and  that  the  new  bishop  should  receive  his
temporalities  from  the  emperor  by  the  sceptre.1

Both  parties  in  the  concordat  at  Worms  receded  from  so
much  of  their  pretensions,  that  we  might  almost  hesitate  to
determine  which  is  to  be  considered  as  victorious.  On  the
one  hand,  in  restoring  the  freedom  of  episcopal  elections  the
emperors  lost  a  prerogative  of  very  long  standing,  and  almost
necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  authority  over  not  the  least
turbulent  part  of  their  subjects.  And  though  the  form  of  in¬
vestiture  by  the  ring  and  crosier  seemed  in  itself  of  no  im¬
portance,  yet  it  had  been  in  effect  a  collateral  security
against  the  election  of  obnoxious  persons.  For  the  emperors,
detaining  this  necessary  part  of  the  pontificals  until  they
should  confer  investiture,  prevented  a  hasty  consecration  of
the  new  bishop,  after  which,  the  vacancy  being  legally  filled,
it  would  not  be  decent  for  them  to  withhold  the  temporali¬
ties.  But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  they  preserved  by  the
concordat  their  feudal  sovereignty  over  the  estates  of  the
church,  in  defiance  of  the  language  which  had  recently  been
held  by  its  rulers.  Gregory  VII.  had  positively  declared,  in
the  Lateran  council  of  1080,  that  a  bishop  or  abbot  receiving
investiture  from  a  layman  should  not  be  reckoned  as  a  prel¬
ate.4  The  same  doctrine  had  been  maintained  by  all  his
successors,  without  any  limitation  of  their  censures  to  the
formality  of  the  ring  and  crosier.  But  Calixtus  II.  himself
had  gone  much  further,  and  absolutely  prohibited  the  com¬
pelling  ecclesiastics  to  render  any  service  to  laymen  on  ac¬
count  of  their  benefices.11  It  is  evident  that  such  a  general
immunity  from  feudal  obligations  for  an  order  who  possessed
nearly  half  the  lands  in  Europe  struck  at  the  root  of  those  in¬
stitutions  by  which  the  fabric  of  society  was  principally  held
together.  This  complete  independency  had  been  the  aim  of
Gregory’s  disciples  ;  and  by  yielding  to  the  continuance  of
lay  investitures  in  any  shape  Calixtus  may,  in  this  point  of

1  St.  Marc,  t.  iv.  p.  1093;  Schmidt,  between  those  of  impure  laymen,  p.  966.
t.  iii.  p.  178.  The  latter  quotes  the  Latin  The  name  expression*  are  used  by  other*,
word*.  and  are  levelled  at  fh*  flora  OK  flnU

*  St.  Marc,  t.  iv.  p.  774.  A  bishop  of  homage,  which,  according  to  the  prin-
Placentta  a.-.-erts  that  prelates  dishonored  ciples  of  that  age,  ought  to  have  boon  as
their  order  by  putting  their  hands,  obnoxious  a*  investiture,
which  held  the  body  aud  blood  of  Christ,  8  Id.  p.  1061,  1067.

182

INVESTITURES.

Chap.  VII.  Part  I.

view,  appear  to  have  relinquished  the  principal  object  of
contention.1

The  emperors  were  not  the  only  sovereigns  whose  practice
of  investiture  excited  the  hostility  of  Rome,  although  they
sustained  the  principal  brunt  of  the  war.  A  similar  contest
broke  out  under  the  pontificate  of  Paschal  II.  with  Henry  I.
of  England ;  for  the  circumstances  of  which,  as  they  contain
nothing  peculiar,  I  refer  to  our  own  historians.  It  is  remark¬
able  that  it  ended  in  a  compromise  not  unlike  that  adjusted
at  Worms;  the  king  renouncing  all  sorts  of  investitures,
while  the  pope  consented  that  the  bishop  should  do  homage
for  his  temporalities.  This  was  exactly  the  custom  of  France,
where  an  investiture  by  the  ring  and  crosier  is  said  not  to
have  prevailed ; 2  and  it  answered  the  main  end  of  sovereigns
by  keeping  up  the  feudal  dependency  of  ecclesiastical  estates.
But  the  kings  of  Castile  were  more  fortunate  than  the  rest ;
discreetly  yielding  to  the  pride  of  Rome,  they  obtained  what
was  essential  to  their  own  authority,  and  have  always  pos¬
sessed,  by  the  concession  of  Urban  II.,  an  absolute  privilege

l  Ranke  observe*  that  according  to
the  concordat  of  Worms  predominant
influence  was  yielded  to  the  emperor  In
Germany  and  to  the  pope  in  Italy ;  an
agreement,  however,  which  was  not  ex¬
pressed  with  precision,  and  which  con¬
tained  the  germ  of  fresh  dispute*.  Ilist.
of  Reform,  i.  34.  But  even  If  this  victory
should  he  assigned  to  Rome  in  respect  of
Germany,  it  doe*  not  Mem  equally  clear
as  to  Kngland.  Lingard  say*  of  the
agreement  between  Henry  I.  aud  Pas¬
chal  II..  —  “Upon  the  whole,  the  church
gained  little  by  this  compromise.  It
might  check,  but  did  not  abolish,  the
principal  abuse.  If  Henry  surrendered
an  unnecessary  ceremony,  he  still  re¬
tained  the  substance.  The  right  which
he  assumed  of  nominating  bishop*  and
abbots  was  left  unimpaired.'*  Hist,  of
Kngl.  11.  169.  But  if  this  nomination  by
the  crown  was  so  great  an  abuse,  why
did  the  pope*  concede  It  to  Spain  anil
Prance!  The  real  truth  iv  ' h  '  '  i
of  choosing  bishop*  1*  altogether  unex¬
ceptionable.  But,  upon  the  whole,
nomination  by  the  crown  U  likely  to
work  better  than  any  other,  even  for  the
religious  good  of  the  churoh.  As  a
means  of  preserving  the  connection  of  the
clergy  with  the  state,  it  1*  almost  indis¬
pensable.

Schmidt  observe*,  as  to  Germany,  that
the  dispute  about  investiture*  was  not
wholly  to  the  advantage  of  the  church ;

though  she  seemed  to  come  out  success¬
fully,  yet  it  produced  a  hatred  on  the
part  of  the  laity,  and,  above  all,  a  deter¬
mination  in  the  princes  and  nobllitv  to
grant  no  more  land*  over  which  their
suzerainty  was  to  be  disputed,  iii.

The  emperors  retained  a  good  deal  —  the
regale,  or  possession  of  the  temporalities
during  a  vacancy;  the  prerogative,  on  a
disputed  election,  of  investing  whichever
candidate  they  pleased ;  above  all,  per¬
haps,  the  recognition  of  a  great  principle,
that  the  church  was,  as  to  its  temporal
estate,  the  subject  of  the  civil  magistrate.
The  feudal  element  of  society  was  so
opposite  to  the  ecclesiastical,  that  what¬
ever  was  gained  by  the  former  was  so
much  subtracted  from  the  efficacy  of  the
Utter.  This  left  mu  importance  to  the
imperial  Investiture  after  the  Calixtin
concordat,  which  was  not  intended  pro¬
bably  by  the  pope.  Kor  the  worls,  a*
quoted  by  Schmidt  (ill.  891),  —  Uabeat
iiuperatoria  dignita*  e Upturn  liber  ,  con-
secratum  canouice, regal!  ter  persceptrum
sine  pretio  tamen  iuvestirv  solenuiter  —
Imply  uothlng  more  than  a  formality.
The  emperor  is,  as  it  were,  comma u< led
to  invest  the  bishop  after  consecration.
But  in  practice  the  emperors  always
conferred  the  investiture  before  conse¬
cration.  Schmidt,  iv.  153

*  Uistoire  du  Droit  public  erclMas-
tique  Francois,  p.  261.  I  do  not  fully
rely  on  this  authority.

Eccles.  Power.  CAPITULAR  ELECTIONS.

183

of  nomination  to  bishoprics  in  their  dominions.1  An  early
evidence  of  that  indifference  of  the  popes  towards  the  real
independence  of  national  churches  to  which  subsequent  ages
were  to  lend  abundant  confirmation.

When  the  emperors  had  surrendered  their  pretensions  to
interfere  in  episcopal  elections,  the  primitive  mode  Intr0(juction
of  collecting  the  suffrages  of  clergy  and  laity  in  of  capitular
conjunction,  or  at  least  of  the  clergy  with  the elect,ons-
laity’s  assent  and  ratification,  ought  naturally  to  have  revived.
But  in  the  twelfth  century  neither  the  people,  nor  even  the
general  body  of  the  diocesan  clergy,  were  considered  as
worthy  to  exercise  this  function.  It  soon  devolved  altogether
upon  the  chapters  of  cathedral  churches.2  The  original  of
these  may  be  traced  very  high.  In  the  earliest  ages  we  find
a  college  of  presbytery  consisting  of  the  priests  and  deacons,
assistants  as  a  council  of  advice,  or  even  a  kind  of  parliament,
to  their  bishops.  Parochial  divisions,  and  fixed  ministers
attached  to  them,  were  not  established  till  a  later  period.
But  the  canons,  or  cathedral  clergy,  acquired  afterwards  a
more  distinct  character.  They  were  subjected  by  degrees
to  certain  strict  observances,  little  differing,  in  fact,  from
those  imposed  on  monastic  orders.  They  lived  at  a  common
table,  they  slept  in  a  common  dormitory,  their  dress  and  diet
were  regulated  by  peculiar  laws.  But  they  were  distin¬
guished  from  monks  by  the  right  of  possessing  individual
property,  which  was  afterwards  extended  to  the  enjoyment
of  separate  prebends  or  benefices.  These  strict  regulations,
chiefly  imposed  by  Louis  the  Debonair,  went  into  disuse
through  the  relaxation  of  discipline;  nor  were  they  ever
effectually  restored.  Meantime  the  chapters  became  ex¬
tremely  rich ;  and  as  they  monopolized  the  privilege  of
electing  bishops,  it  became  an  object  of  ambition  with  noble

l  F.  Paul  on  Benefices,  c.  24 ;  Zurita,  though  perhaps  little  else  than  a  matter
Annies  de  Aragon,  t.  iv.  p.  805.  Fleury  of  form.  Innocent  II.  seems  to  have
says  that  the  kings  of  Spain  nominate  to  been  the  first  who  declared  that  whoever
bishoprics  by  virtue  of  a  particular  indul-  had  the  majority  of  the  chapter  in  his
genee,  renewed  by  the  pope  for  the  life  favor  should  be  deemed  duly  elected;
of  each  prince.  Institutions  au  Droit,  and  this  was  confirmed  by  Otho  IV.  in
t.  I.  p.  106.  the  capitulation  upon  his  accession.  Hist.

*  Fra  Paolo  (Treatise  on  Benefices,  c.  des  Allemands,  t.  iv.  p.  175.  Fleury
24)  says  that  between  1122  and  1145  thinks  that  chapters  had  not  an  exclusive
it  became  a  rule  almost  everywhere  election  till  the  end  of  the  twelfth  cen-
eetablished  that  bishops  should  be  chos-  turv.  The  second  Lateran  council  in
en  by  the  chapter.  Schmidt,  however,  113$)  represses  their  attempts  to  engross
brings  a  few  instances  where  the  consent  it.  Institutions  au  Droit  Eccles.  t.  i.
of  the  nobility  and  other  laics  is  expressed,  p.  100.

184

GENERAL  CONDUCT  Chap.  VII.  Tap.t  I.

families  to  obtain  canonries  for  their  younger  children,  as  the
surest  road  to  ecclesiastical  honors  and  opulence.  Contrary,
therefore,  to  the  general  policy  of  the  church,  persons  of
inferior  birth  liave  been  rigidly  excluded  from  these  founda¬
tions.1

The  object  of  Gregory  VII.,  in  attempting  to  redress  those
General  more  flagrant  abuses  which  for  two  centuries  had
conductor  deformed  the  face  of  the  Latin  church,  is  not
Gregory  mi.  incapat,le)  perhaps,  of  vindication,  though  no  suf¬
ficient  apology  can  be  offered  for  the  means  he  employed.
But  the  disinterested  love  of  reformation,  to  which  candor
might  ascribe  the  contention  against  investitures,  is  belied  by
the  general  tenor  of  his  conduct,  exhibiting  an  arrogance
without  parallel,  and  an  ambition  that  grasped  at  universal
and  unlimited  monarchy.  He  may  be  called  the  common
enemy  of  all  sovereigns  whose  dignity  as  well  as  independence
mortified  his  infatuated  pride.  Thus  we  find  him  menacing
Philip  I.  of  France,  who  had  connived  at  the  pillage  of  some
Italian  merchants  and  pilgrims,  not  only  with  an  interdict,
but  a  sentence  of  deposition.2  Thus  too  he  asserts,  as  a
known  historical  fact,  that  the  kingdom  of  Spain  had  formerly
belonged,  by  special  right,  to  St.  Peter;  and  by  virtue  of  this
imprescriptible  claim  he  grants  to  a  certain  count  de  Rouci
all  territories  which  he  should  reconquer  from  the  Moors,  to
be  held  in  fief  from  the  Holy  See  by  a  stipulated  rent.*  A
similar  pretension  he  makes  to  the  kingdom  of  Hungary,  and
bitterly  reproaches  its  sovereign,  Solomon,  who  had  done  hom¬
age  to  the  emperor,  in  derogation  of  St.  Peter,  his  legitimate
lord.4  It  was  convenient  to  treat  this  apostle  as  a  great

i  Schmidt,  t.  M.  p.  224,  473;  t.  tit.
p.  281.  Encyclopedic  art.  Chnnotne.  F.
Paul  on  B«ueflc«i,e.  16.  Fleury,  8«»»e  DU-
coun*  sur  PHist.  EocU*.

*  8t.  Marc,  t.  Hi.  p.  628;  Fleury,  HUt.
Eccles.  t.  xiii.  p.  281,  284.

*  The  language*  he  employs  Is  worth
quoting  as  a  *perimeu  of  his’ style  :  Non
latere  vos  credimu*,  regnuui  llixpauto
ab  antiquo  juris  sancti  Petri  fuisee,  et
adhuc  licet  diu  a  pagan  is  sit  occupatum,
lege  tamen  justitile  non  evacuate,  null]
mortal! um,  sed  soli  apostolicar  sedi  ex
n*q uo  pertinere.  Quod  euim  auctore  Deo
semel  in  proprietates  eccleslaruin  just*
pervenerit,  maneiite  Ko.  ab  u«u  quideni,
sed  ab  earuui  Jure,  occasions  trmuseiintis
tcinpori*.  -ins  UgitiinA  concessione  direlli
non  poterit.  ltaque  comes  Era! us  de

Roceio,  cujus  famam  apud  tos  hau«l  ob-
scuram  esse  putamus,  terrain  illain  ad
honorem  Sti.  Petri  iugredi,  et  a  pagmno
rum  mauibus  eripere  cupiens,  banc  con-
cessionein  ab  apostolici  sede  obtlnuit,  ut
purtein  illain.  unde  paganoe  nun  studio
et  adjuncto  slbi  aliorum  auxilio  ex|x*llere
possit,  sub  conditione  inter  nos  facta)
partionls  ex  parte  Sti.  Petri  po*«ideret.
IjibbV-,  Concilia,  t.  x.  p.  10.  Three  In¬
stances  occur  lu  the  Corps  Diplomatique
of  Dumont,  where  a  duke  of  Dalmatia
It.  I.  p.f>3),  a  count  of  Provence  (p.  68),
and  a  count  of  Barcelona  (Ibid  ),  put
themselves  under  the  feudal  superiority
and  protection  of  Gregory  VII,  The
motive  was  sufficiently  obvious.

«  Ft.  Marc,  t.  lii.  p.  624,  674  ;  Schmidt,
p.  78.

Ecclf.s.  Power.

OF  GREGORY  VII.

185

feudal  suzerain,  and  the  legal  principles  of  that  age  were
dexterously  applied  to  rivet  more  forcibly  the  fetters  of
superstition.1

While  temporal  sovereigns  were  opposing  so  inadequate  a
resistance  to  a  system  of  usurpation  contrary  to  all  precedent
and  to  the  common  principles  of  society,  it  was  not  to  be  ex¬
pected  that  national  churches  should  persevere  in  opposing
pretensions  for  which  several  ages  had  paved  the  way.
Gregory  VII.  completed  the  destruction  of  their  liberties.
The  principles  contained  in  the  decretals  of  Isidore,  hostile
as  they  were  to  ecclesiastical  independence,  were  set  aside
as  insufficient  to  establish  the  absolute  monarchy  of  Rome.
By  a  constitution  of  Alexander  II.,  during  whose  pontificate
Hildebrand  himself  was  deemed  the  effectual  pope,  no  bishop
in  the  catholic  church  was  permitted  to  exercise  his  functions,
until  he  had  received  the  confirmation  of  the  Holy  See : 2  a
provision  of  vast  importance,  through  which,  beyond  perhaps
any  other  means,  Rome  has  sustained,  and  still  sustains,  her
temporal  influence,  as  well  as  her  ecclesiastical  supremacy.
The  national  churches,  long  abridged  of  their  liberties  by
gradual  encroachments,  now  found  themselves  subject  to  an
undisguised  and  irresistible  despotism.  Instead  of  affording
protection  to  bishops  against  their  metropolitans,  under  an
insidious  pretence  of  which  the  popes  of  the  ninth  century
had  subverted  the  authority  of  the  latter,  it  became  the
favorite  policy  of  their  successors  to  harass  all  prelates  with
citations  to  Rome.8  Gregory  obliged  the  metropolitans  to
attend  in  person  for  the  pallium.4  Bishops  were  summoned
even  from  England  and  the  northern  kingdoms  to  receive
the  commands  of  the  spiritual  monarch.  William  the  Con¬
queror  having  made  a  difficulty  about  permitting  his  prelates
to  obey  these  citations,  Gregory,  though  in  general  on  good
terms  with  that  prince,  and  treating  him  with  a  deference
which  marks  the  effect  of  a  firm  character  in  repressing  the
ebullitions  of  overbearing  pride,5  complains  of  this  as  a  per¬
secution  unheard  of  among  pagans.6  The  great  quarrel
between  archbishop  Anselm  and  his  two  sovereigns,  William

1  The  character  and  policy  of  Gregory  *  Id.  t.  iv.  p.  170.

VII.  are  well  discussed  by  Schmidt,  t.  iii.  6  St.  Marc,  p.  628,  788 ;  Schmidt,  t.  III.

p.  307.  p.  82.

*  St.  Marc,  p.  460.  «  St.  Marc,  t.  iv.  p.  761 ;  Collier,  p.252.

8  Schmidt,  t.  iii.  p.  80,  322.

186  AUTHORITY  OF  PAPAL  LEGATES.  Cn.vp.  VII.  Part  I.

Rufus  and  Henry  I.,  was  originally  founded  upon  a  similar
refusal  to  permit  his  departure  for  Rome.

This  perpetual  control  exercised  by  the  popes  over  eccle-
Authority  siastical.  and  in  some  degree  over  temporal  affairs,
of  papal  was  maintained  by  means  of  their  legates,  at  once
the  ambassadors  and  the  lieutenants  of  the  Holy
See.  Previously  to  the  latter  part  of  the  tenth  age  these
had  been  sent  not  frequently  and  upon  special  occasions.
The  legatine  or  vicarial  commission  had  generally  been  in¬
trusted  to  some  eminent  metropolitan  of  the  nation  within
which  it  was  to  be  exercised ;  as  the  archbishop  of  Canter¬
bury  was  perpetual  legate  in  England.  But  the  special
commissioners,  or  legates  a  latere,  suspending  the  pope’s  ordi¬
nary  vicars,  took  upon  themselves  an  unbounded  authority
over  the  national  churches,  holding  councils,  promulgating
canons,  de|>osing  bishops,  and  issuing  interdicts  at  their  dis¬
cretion.  They  lived  in  splendor  at  the  expense  of  the  bi-hops
of  the  province.  This  was  the  more  galling  to  the  hierarchy,
because  simple  deacons  were  often  invested  with  this  dignity,
which  set  them  above  primates.  As  the  sovereigns  of  France
and  England  acquired  more  courage,  they  considerably
abridged  this  prerogative  of  the  Holy  See,  and  resisted  the
entrance  of  any  legates  into  their  dominions  without  their
consent.1

From  the  time  of  Gregory  VII.  no  pontiff  thought  of
awaiting  the  confirmation  of  the  emperor,  as  in  earlier  ages,
before  he  was  installed  in  the  throne  of  Sl  Peter.  On  the
contrary,  it  was  pretended  that  the  emperor  was  himself  to
be  confirmed  by  the  pope.  This  had  indeed  been  broached
by  John  VIII.  two  hundred  years  before  Gregory.1  It  was
still  a  doctrine  not  calculated  for  general  reception ;  but  the
po|>es  availed  themselves  of  every  op|>ortunity  which  the
temporizing  policy,  the  negligence  or  bigotry  of  sovereigns
threw  into  their  hands.  Lothaire  coming  to  receive  the

1  De  Mama,  1.  ri.  c.28,80, 81.  Schmi<lt,  the «e  words  Into  the  month  of  Jesus
t.  ii.  p.  4U8 ;  I.  ill.  p.  312,  32U.  llist.  Christ,  ns  addressed  to  pope  Victor  II.
du  Droit  Public  Keel.  Francois,  p.  2 50.  Ego  rlavca  totiiu  universalis  welwia
Fleury,  4®*  Discours  fur  l'Hlst.  Eccles.  mess  tub  omnibus  tradidi,  el  super  mu

to  mihl  vicarium  posul,  qua  in  propril

*  Vide  supra.  It  appears  manifest  sanguinis  effusion*  redernl.  Kt  si  pauca
that  the  scheme  of  temporal  sovereignty  sunt  ista,  etiam  monarrbias  adlidi :  im-
was  only  suspended  by  the  disorders  of  mo  sublato  rrge  de  medio  totius  Romani
the  Roman  3ee  in  the  tenth  century,  imperii  varauti*  tiU  jura  peruiiai.
Peter  Damian,  a  celebrated  writer  of  the  Schmidt,  t.  iii.  p.  78.
age  of  liildebrand,  and  his  friend,  puts

Eccles.  Power.

ADRIAN  IV.

187

imperial  crown  at  Rome,  this  circumstance  was  commemo¬
rated  by  a  picture  in  the  Lateran  palace,  in  which,  and  in
two  Latin  verses  subscribed,  lie  was  represented  as  doing
homage  to  the  pope.1  When  Frederic  Barbarossa  came
upon  the  same  occasion,  he  omitted  to  hold  the  ...  ,,,

6tirrup  of  Adrian  IV.,  who,  in  Ins  turn,  refused  to
give  him  the  usual  kiss  of  peace ;  nor  was  the  contest  ended  hut
by  the  emperor’s  acquiescence,  who  was  content  to  follow  the
precedents  of  his  predecessors.  The  same  Adrian,  expostu¬
lating  with  Frederic  upon  some  slight  grievance,  reminded
him  of  the  imperial  crown  which  he  had  conferred,  and
declared  his  willingness  to  bestow,  if  possible,  still  greater
benefits.  But  the  phrase  employed  (majora  beneficia)  sug¬
gested  the  idea  of  a  lief ;  and  the  general  insolence  which
pervaded  Adrian’s  letter  confirming  this  interpretation,  a
ferment  arose  among  the  German  princes,  in  a  congress  of
whom  this  letter  was  delivered.  “  From  whom  then,”  one
of  the  legates  was  rash  enough  to  say,  “  does  the  emperor  hold
his  crown,  except  from  the  pope?”  which  so  irritated  a  prince
of  Wittelsbach,  that  he  was  with  difficulty  prevented  from
cleaving  the  priest’s  head  with  his  sabre.*  Adrian  IV.  was
the  only  Englishman  that  ever  sat  in  the  papal  chair.  It
might,  perhaps,  pass  for  a  favor  bestowed  on  his  natural
sovereign,  when  he  granted  to  Henry  II.  the  kingdom  of
Ireland;  yet  the  language  of  this  donation,  wherein  he  as¬
serts  all  islands  to  be  the  exclusive  property  of  St.  Peter,
should  not  have  had  a  very  pleasing  sound  to  an  insular
monarch.

I  shall  not  wait  to  comment  on  the  support  given  to  Becket
by  Alexander  III.,  which  must  be  familiar  to  the  InDOcent  ni
English  reader,  nor  on  his  speedy  canonization  ;  a  *.».

0  1  "  1  1  <  i.  1  I '  >  1 1 '

reward  which  the  church  has  always  held  out  to  "  ‘

its  most  active  friends,  and  which  may  be  compared  to  titles
of  nobility  granted  by  a  temporal  sovereign.8  But  the  epoch
when  the  spirit  of  papal  usurpation  was  most  strikingly  dis-

lR«x  venit  ante  fore*,  Jumna  prlua  *  Mum  tori,  ubl  supra.  Schmidt,  t  HI.
urhi*  honor*'*  :  p.  81*8.

Pant  homo  fit  papa?,  sumit  quo  dante  8  The  flrafc  Instance  of  a  solemn  papal

corouain.  ranoni/jiMon  I*  that  of  St.  Udulrlr  h y

.Mura tori,  Annall,  a.D.  llf>7.  John  XVI.  ill  M3.  However,  the  metro-
There  waa  a  pretext  for  tills  artful  politAn*  continued  to  meddle  with  thin
line.  Ijothnire  had  received  the  eatnto  aorfc  of  apotheoala  till  the  pontifical*  of
of  Matilda  in  fief  from  the  pope,  with  Alexander  III.,  who  reserved  It,  a*  a
a  reverelon  to  Henry  the  Proud,  hi^aon-  clioleo  prerogative,  to  the  Holy  See.  Art.
n-law.  Schmidt,  p.  349.  du  verifier  leu  Du  tea,  t.  1.  p.247  and  290.

188

EXTRAORDINARY  PRETENSIONS  Chat.  VII.  Taiit  I.

played  was  the  pontificate  of  Innocent  III.  In  each  of  the
three  leading  objects  which  Rome  has  pursued,  independent
sovereignty,  supremacy  over  the  Christian  church,  control
over  the  princes  of  the  earth,  it  was  the  fortune  of  this  pon¬
tiff  to  conquer.  He  realized,  as  we  have  seen  in  another
place,  that  fond  hope  of  so  many  of  his  predecessors,  a  do¬
minion  over  Rome  and  the  central  parts  of  Italy.  During
his  pontificate  Constantinople  was  taken  by  the  Latins ;  and
however  he  might  seem  to  regret  a  diversion  of  the  crusaders,
which  impeded  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land,  he  exulted
in  the  obedience  of  the  new  patriarch  and  the  reunion  of  the
Greek  church.  Never,  perhaps,  either  before  or  since,  was
the  great  eastern  schism  in  so  fair  a  way  of  being  healed ;
even  the  kings  of  Bulgaria  and  of  Armenia  acknowledged
the  supremacy  of  Innocent,  and  permitted  his  interference
with  their  ecclesiastical  institutions.

The  maxims  of  Gregory  VII.  were  now  matured  by  more
III*  extra-  t*ian  a  hundred  years,  and  the  right  of  trampling
ordinary  upon  the  necks  of  kings  had  been  received,  at

pretensions.  .  .  ,  ,  0  .  .  .

least  among  churchmen,  as  an  inherent  attri¬
bute  of  the  papacy.  “As  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  placed
in  the  firmament  ”  (such  is  the  language  of  Innocent),  “  the
greater  as  the  light  of  the  day,  and  the  lesser  of  the  night,
thus  are  there  two  powers  in  the  church  —  the  pontifical,
which,  as  having  the  charge  of  souls,  is  the  greater;  and  the
royal,  which  is  the  less,  and  to  which  the  bodies  of  men  only
are  intrusted.” 1  Intoxicated  with  these  conceptions  (if  we
may  apply  such  a  word  to  successful  ambition),  he  thought
no  quarrel  of  princes  beyond  the  sphere  of  his  jurisdiction.
“  Though  I  cannot  judge  of  the  right  to  a  fief,”  said  Innocent
to  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  “yet  it  is  my  province
to  judge  where  sin  is  committed,  and  my  duty  to  prevent  nil
public  scandals.”  Philip  Augustus,  who  had  at  that  time  the
worse  in  his  war  with  Richard,  acquiesced  in  this  sophi>in ;
the  latter  was  more  refractory  till  the  papal  legate  began  to
menace  him  with  the  rigor  of  the  church.*  But  the  king  of
England,  as  well  as  his  adversary,  condescended  to  obtain

1  V1U  Inoon'otil  Tertil  in  Mumtorl,  pvcetn  Tel  trfupu  cum  rcg*  Anglin,
Soriptnrrn  Kern  in  Ital.  t.  til.  pan  i.  p.  448.  inlturum.  Kichnrdu*  autcui  rex  Anglia,
Thin  Life  1*  written  by  a  con  ten,  porn  ry.  »  difllrUrtn  mtendcbat.  Scd  cum  Idem
St.  Marc,  t.  r.  p.  335.  Schmidt,  t.  ir.  Irgitiu  td  etpil  ngorem  tetU%ia\tirum  I o-
p.  227.  teuton,  naniort  durtu«cou>llioacquierlt.

5  Phillppux  rex  Frxnclw  in  manu  cjtn  Vita  InnoccoUi  Tcrtii,  t.  hi.  pan  i.  p.
d»u  fide  promiait  n  ad  maudatum  Ipniuj  6u8.

Eccles.  Power.

OF  INNOCENT  ni.

189

temporary  ends  by  an  impolitic  submission  to  Rome.  "We
have  a  letter  from  Innocent  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  directing
him,  on  pain  of  spiritual  censures,  to  restore  some  castles
which  he  detained  from  Richard.1  And  the  latter  appears
to  have  entertained  hopes  of  recovering  his  ransom  paid  to
the  emperor  and  duke  of  Austria  through  the  pope’s  inter¬
ference.2  By  such  blind  sacrifices  of  the  greater  to  the  less,
of  the  future  to  the  present,  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  played
continually  into  the  hands  of  their  subtle  enemy.

Though  I  am  not  aware  that  any  pope  before  Innocent
III.  had  thus  announced  himself  as  the  general  arbiter  of
differences  and  conservator  of  the  peace  throughout  Christen¬
dom,  yet  the  scheme  had  been  already  formed,  and  the  public
mind  was  in  some  degree  prepared  to  admit  it.  Gerohus,  a
writer  who  lived  early  in  the  twelfth  century,  published  a
theory  of  perpetual  pacification,  as  feasible  certainly  as  some
that  have  been  planned  in  later  times.  All  disputes  among
princes  were  to  be  referred  to  the  pope.  If  either  party  re¬
fused  to  obey  the  sentence  of  Rome,  he  was  to  be  excommu¬
nicated  and  deposed.  Every  Christian  sovereign  was  to
attack  the  refractory  delinquent  under  pain  of  a  similar
forfeiture.8  A  project  of  this  nature  had  not  only  a  magnifi¬
cence  flattering  to  the  ambition  of  the  church,  but  was
calculated  to  impose  upon  benevolent  minds,  sickened  by  the
cupidity  and  oppression  of  princes.  No  control  but  that  of
religion  appeared  sufficient  to  restrain  the  abuses  of  society ;
while  its  salutary  influence  had  already  been  displayed  both
in  the  Truce  of  God,  which  put  the  first  check  on  the  custom
of  private  war,  and  more  recently  in  the  protection  afforded
to  crusaders  against  all  aggression  during  the  continuance
of  their  engagement.  But  reasonings  from  the  excesses  of
liberty  in  favor  of  arbitrary  government,  or  from  the  calami¬
ties  of  national  wars  in  favor  of  universal  monarchy,  involve
the  tacit  fallacy,  that  perfect,  or  at  least  superior,  wisdom  and
virtue  will  be  found  in  the  restraining  power.  The  experi¬
ence  of  Europe  was  not  such  as  to  authorize  so  candid  an
expectation  in  behalf  of  the  Roman  See.

1  Innoccntii  Opera  (Colon! a,  1574),  p.  release  from  prison  :  though  Eleanor
124.  wrote  him  a  letter,  in  which  she  oak*,

*  1*1.  p.  134.  Innocent  actually  wrote  u  lias  not  God  given  you  the  power  to
iome  letters  for  this  purpose,  but  with-  gov»?rn  nations  and  kings?  n  Velly,  iiist.
out  any  effect,  nor  was  he  probably  at  all  de  France,  t.  iii.  p.  382.
solicitous  about  it.  p.  139  and  141.  Nor  *  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.  232
ha-1  be  interfered  to  procure  Richard's

190

EXTRA  ORDINARY  PRETENSIONS  Ciiai*.  VII.  Tart  I.

There  were  certainly  some  instances,  where  the  temporal
supremacy  of  Innocent  III.,  however  usurped,  may  appear  to
have  been  exerted  beneficially.  lie  directs  one  of  his  legates
to  compel  the  observance  of  peace  between  the  kings  ot  Cas¬
tile  and  Portugal,  if  necessary,  by  excommunication  and
interdict.1  lie  enjoins  the  king  of  Aragon  to  restore  his
coin,  which  he  had  lately  debased,  and  of  which  great  com¬
plaint  had  arisen  in  his  kingdom.1  Nor  do  I  question  his
sincerity  in  these,  or  in  any  other  cases  of  interference  with
civil  government.  A  great  mind,  such  as  Innocent  III.  un¬
doubtedly  possessed,  though  prone  to  sacrifice  every  other
object  to  ambition,  can  never  be  indifferent  to  the  beauty  of
social  order  and  the  happiness  of  mankind.  But,  if  we  may
judge  by  the  correspondence  of  this  remarkable  person,  his
foremost  gratification  was  the  display  of  unbounded  power.
His  letters,  especially  to  ecclesiastics,  are  full  of  unprovoked
rudeness.  As  impetuous  as  Gregory  VII.,  he  is  unwilling  to
owe  anything  to  favor ;  he  seems  to  anticipate  denial ;  heats
himself  into  anger  as  he  proceeds,  and,  where  he  commences
with  solicitation,  seldom  concludes  without  a  menace.*  An
extensive  learning  in  ecclesiastical  law,  a  close  observation
of  whatever  was  passing  in  the  world,  an  unwearied  diligence,
sustained  his  fearless  ambition.4  With  such  a  temper,  and
with  such  advantages,  he  was  formidable  beyond  all  his  pre¬
decessors,  aid  perhaps  beyond  all  his  successors.  On  every
side  the  thunder  of  Rome  broke  over  the  heads  of  princes.
A  certain  Svvero  is  excommunicated  for  usurping  the  crown
of  Norway.  A  legate,  in  passing  through  Hungary,  is  de¬
tained  by  the  king :  Innocent  writes  in  tolerably  mild  terms
to  this  potentate,  but  fails  not  to  intimate  that  he  might  be
compelled  to  prevent  his  son’s  accession  to  the  throne.  The
king  of  Leon  had  married  his  cousin,  a  princess  of  Castile.

1  Innocent.  Opera,  p.  146.  now  refused  to  accept  It ;  and  direct*  them

1  p.  878.  to  inquire  Into  the  theta,  and,  if  they

*  p.  81,  78, 76,  frc.  8te.  prove  truly  itated,  to  compel  the  creditor

*  The  following  Instance  may  illustrate  by  spiritual  censure*  to  re*  tore  the  p  re  til¬
th  r  character  of  thl*  pope,  and  hla  aplrlt  l*c*.  reckoning  their  rent  during  the  time
of  governing  the  whole  world,  u  much  aa  of  his  mortgage  at  part  of  the  debt,  and
those  of  a  more  public  nature.  Ho  write*  to  receive  the  remainder.  Id.  t.  11.  p.  17.
to  the  chapter  of  Plea  that  one  Kubena,  It  muat  be  admitted  that  innocent  III.
a  riUcen  of  that  place,  had  complained  to  discouraged  in  general  thorn  vexatious
him,  that,  having  mortgaged  a  houaeand  and  dilatory  appeals  from  Inferior  err  la-
garden  for  two  hundred  and  fifty-two  siastiral  tribunals  to  the  court  of  Rome,
pounds,  on  condition  that  he  might  re-  which  had  gained  ground  before  his  time,
deem  It  before  a  fixed  day,  within  which  and  especially  in  the  pontificate  of  Alex-
time  be  had  been  unavohlably  prevented  ander  III.

from  raising  the  money,  the  creditor  had

Eccles.  Power.

OF  INNOCENT  III.

191

Innocent  subjects  the  kingdom  to  an  interdict.  When  tho
clergy  of  Leon  petition  him  to  remove  it,  because,  when  they
ceased  to  perform  their  functions,  the  laity  paid  no  tithes,  and
listened  to  heretical  teachers  when  orthodox  mouths  were
mute,  he  consented  that  divine  service  with  closed  doors,  but
not  the  rites  of  burial,  might  be  performed.1  The  king  at
length  gave  way,  and  sent  back  his  wife.  But  a  more  illus¬
trious  victory  of  the  same  kind  was  obtained  over  Philip
Augustus,  who,  having  repudiated  Isemburga  of  Denmark,
had  contracted  another  marriage.  The  conduct  of  the  king,
though  not  without  the  usual  excuse  of  those  times,  nearness  of
blood,  was  justly  condemned  ;  and  Innocent  did  not  hesitate
to  visit  his  sins  upon  the  people  by  a  general  interdict.
This,  after  a  short  demur  from  some  bishops,  was  enforced
throughout  France ;  the  dead  lay  unburied,  and  the  living
were  cut  off  from  the  offices  of  religion,  till  Philip,  thus  sub¬
dued,  took  back  his  divorced  wife.  The  submission  of  such
a  prince,  not  feebly  superstitious,  like  his  predecessor  Robert,
nor  vexed  with  seditions,  like  the  emperor  Henry  IV.,  but
brave,  firm,  and  victorious,  is  perhaps  the  proudest  trophy  in
the  scutcheon  of  Rome.  Compared  with  this,  the  subse¬
quent  triumph  of  Innocent  over  our  pusillanimous  John
seems  cheaply  gained,  though  the  surrender  of  a  powerful
kingdom  into  the  vassalage  of  the  pope  may  strike  us  as  a
proof  of  stupendous  baseness  on  one  side,  and  audacity  on
the  other.®  Yet,  under  this  very  pontificate,  it  was  not  un¬
paralleled.  Peter  II.,  king  of  Aragon,  received  at  Rome  the
belt  of  knighthood  and  the  royal  crown  from  the  hands  of  In¬
nocent  III. ;  he  took  an  oath  of  perpetual  fealty  and  obedi¬
ence  to  him  and  his  successors  ;  he  surrendered  his  kingdom,
and  accepted  it  again  to  be  held  by  an  annual  tribute,  in  re¬
turn  for  the  protection  of  the  Apostolic  See.8  This  strange
conversion  of  kingdoms  into  spiritual  fiefs  was  intended  as
the  price  of  security  from  ambitious  neighbors,  and  may  be

1  Innocent.  Opera,  t.  ii.  p.  411.  Vita  the  parliament  unanimously  declared

Innocent  III.  that  John  had  no  right  to  subject  the

2  The  stipulated  annual  payment  of  kingdom  to  a  superior  without  their  con-
1000  marks  was  seldom  made  by  the  kings  sent;  which  put  an  end  forever  to  the  np-
of  England :  but  one  is  almost  ashamed  plications.  Prynne’s  Constitutions,  voL
that  it  should  ever  have  been  so.  Henry  iii.

HI.  paid  it  occasionally  when  he  had  any  a  Zurita,  Anales  de  Aragon,  t.  i.  f  91.
object  to  attain,  and  even  Edward  I.  for  This  was  not  forgotten  towards  the  latter
some  years  ;  the  latest  payment  on  record  part  of  the  same  century,  when  Peter  III.
is  in  the  seventeenth  of  his  reign.  After  was  engaged  in  the  Sicilian  war,  and
a  long  discontinuance,  it  was  demanded  served  as  a  pretence  for  the  pope’s  Ben¬
in  the  fortieth  of  Edward  111.  (13d0),  but  tencc  of  deprivation.

102

PRETENSIONS  OF  INNOCENT  III.  Chap.  VII.  Tart  I.

deemed  analogous  to  the  change  of  alodial  into  feudal,  or,
more  strictly,  to  that  of  lay  into  ecclesiastical  tenure,  which
was  frequent  during  the  turbulence  of  the  darker  ages.

I  have  mentioned  already  that  among  the  new  pretensions
advanced  by  the  Roman  See  was  that  of  confirming  the  elec¬
tion  of  an  emperor.  It  had  however  been  asserted  rather
incidentally  than  in  a  peremptory  manner.  But  the  doubtful
elections  of  Philip  and  Otbo  after  the  death  of  Henry  VI.
gave  Innocent  III.  an  opportunity  of  maintaining  more  posi¬
tively  this  pretended  right.  In  a  decretal  epistle  addressed
to  the  duke  of  Zahringen,  the  object  of  which  is  to  direct
him  to  transfer  his  allegiance  from  Philip  to  the  other  com¬
petitor,  Innocent,  after  stating  the  mode  in  which  a  regular
election  ought  to  be  made,  declares  the  pope’s  immediate
authority  to  examine,  confirm,  anoint,  crown,  and  consecrate
the  elect  emperor,  provided  he  shall  be  worthy ;  or  to  reject
him  if  rendered  unfit  by  great  crimes,  such  a3  sacrilege,
heresy,  perjury,  or  persecution  of  the  church  ;  in  default  of
election,  to  supply  the  vacancy  ;  or,  in  the  event  of  equal  suf¬
frages,  to  bestow  the  empire  upon  any  person  at  his  discre¬
tion.1  The  princes  of  Germany  were  not  much  influenced
by  this  hardy  assumption,  which  manifests  the  temper  of  In¬
nocent  III.  and  of  his  court,  rather  than  their  power.  But
Otho  IV.  at  his  coronation  by  the  pope  signed  a  capitulation,
which  cut  off  several  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  emperors,
even  since  the  concordat  of  Calixtus,  in  respect  of  episcopal
elections  and  investitures.4

1  Decretal.  1.  i.  tit.  8.  c.  84.  commonly
cited  Venerabilein.  The  rubric  or  synop¬
sis  of  this*  epistle  assert*  the  pope's  right
electmn  Imperatnrem  examinare.  appro-
bare  et  Inuiigere,  cooaecrare  et  corona  re,
*i  eat  dignuii ;  vel  rejicere  si  eat  indignus,
ut  quia  sarrilegua,  excommunicatus,  ty-
ranuua.  fata  uu  et  hie  retie  us,  pagan  us,

perjurus,  vel  ecolesise  persecutor.  Et
electoribus  nolentibus  eligere,  papa  « ap¬
plet.  Kt  data  pari tate,  rocuin  eligentiuin,
nec  acre- lento  major*  concordU.  papa  po¬
test  grntifleari  cui  rult.  The  epUtle  it¬
self  is,  if  possible,  more  strongly  express-
•  i

*  Schmidt,  C  It.  p.  149,  175.

Eccles.  Power.

PAPAL  AUTHORITY.

193

PART  II.

Continual  Progress  of  the  Papacy  —  Canon  Law  —  Mendicant  Orders  —  Dispensing
Power  —  Taxation  of  the  Clergy  by  the  Popes  —  Encroachments  on  Rights  of  Pa¬
tronage  —  Mandats,  Reserves,  &c.  —  General  Disaffection  towards  the  See  of
Rome  in  the  Thirteenth  Century  —  Progress  of  Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction  —  Im¬
munity  of  the  Clergy  in  Criminal  Cases —  Restraints  imposed  upon  their  Jurisdic¬
tion —  Upon  their  Acquisition  of  Property  —  Boniface  VIII.  —  His  Quarrel  with
Philip  the  Fair  —  Its  Termination  —  Gradual  Decline  of  Papal  Authority  —  Louis
of  Bavaria — Secession  to  Avignon  and  Return  to  Rome  —  Conduct  of  Avignon
Popes  —  Contested  Election  of  Urban  and  Clement  produces  the  great  Schism  —
Council  of  Pisa  —  Constance  —  Basle— Methods  adopted  to  restrain  the  Papal
Usurpations  in  England,  Germany,  and  France  —  Liberties  of  the  Galiican  Church
—  Decline  of  the  Papal  Influence  in  Italy.

The  noonday  of  papal  dominion  extends  from  the  pontifi¬
cate  of  Innocent  III.  inclusively  to  that  of  Boniface  i>apai  au-
vm.  ;  or,  in  other  words,  through  the  thirteenth
century.  Rome  inspired  during  this  age  all  the  teenthccn-
terror  of  her  ancient  name.  She  was  once  more  tury'
the  mistress  of  the  world,  and  kings  were  her  vassals.  I
have  already  anticipated  the  two  most  conspicuous  instances
when  her  temporal  ambition  displayed  itself,  both  of  which
are  inseparable  from  the  civil  history  of  Italy.1  In  the  first
of  these,  her  long  contention  with  the  house  of  Suabia,  she
finally  triumphed.  After  his  deposition  by  the  council  of
Lyons  the  affairs  of  Frederic  II.  went  rapidly  into  decay.
With  every  allowance  for  the  enmity  of  the  Lombards  and
the  jealousies  of  Germany,  it  must  be  confessed  that  his
proscription  by  Innocent  IV.  and  Alexander  IV.  was  the
main  cause  of  the  ruin  of  his  family.  There  is,  however,  no
other  instance,  to  the  best  of  my  judgment,  where  the  pre¬
tended  right  of  deposing  kings  has  been  successfully  exercis¬
ed.  Martin  IV.  absolved  the  subjects  of  Peter  of  Aragon
from  their  allegiance,  and  transferred  his  crown  to  a  prince
of  France ;  but  they  did  not  cease  to  obey  their  lawful  sover¬
eign.  This  is  the  second  instance  which  the  thirteenth  cen¬
tury  presents  of  interference  on  the  part  of  the  popes  in  a
great  temporal  quarrel.  As  feudal  lords  of  Naples  and

1  Soe  above,  Chapter  III.

13

VOL.  II.

194

CAXON  LAW.

Chap.  VII.  Pakt  II.

Sicily,  they  hud  indeed  some  pretext  for  engaging  in  the
hostilities  between  the  houses  of  Anjou  and  Aragon,  as  well
as  for  their  contest  with  Frederic  II.  Hut  the  pontiffs  of  that
age,  improving  upon  the  system  of  Innocent  III.,  and  san¬
guine  with  past  success,  aspired  to  render  every  European
kingdom  formally  dependent  upon  the  see  of  Rome.  Thus
Boniface  VIII.,  at  the  instigation  of  some  emissaries  from
Scotland,  claimed  that  monarchy  as  paramount  lord,  and  in¬
terposed,  though  vainly,  the  sacred  panoply  of  ecclesiastical
rights  to  rescue  it  from  the  arms  of  Edward  I.1

This  general  supremacy  effected  by  the  Roman  church
canon  law.  over  mankind  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centu¬
ries  derived  material  support  from  the  promulga¬
tion  of  the  canon  law.  The  foundation  of  this  jurisprudence
is  laid  in  the  decrees  of  councils,  and  in  the  rescripts  or
decretal  epistles  of  popes  to  questions  propounded  upon
emergent  doubts  relative  to  matters  of  discipline  and  ecclesi¬
astical  economy.  As  the  jurisdiction  of  the  spiritual  tribu¬
nals  increased,  and  extended  to  a  variety  of  persons  and
causes,  it  became  almost  necessary  to  establish  an  uniform
system  for  the  regulation  of  their  decisions.  After  several
minor  compilations  had  appeared,  Gratian,  an  Italian  monk,
published  about  the  year  1140  his  Decretum,  or  general
collection  of  canons,  papal  epistles,  and  sentences  of  fathers,
arranged  and  digested  into  titles  and  chapters,  in  imitation  of
the  Fundee ts,  which  very  little  before  had  l»egun  to  be
studied  again  with  great  diligence.*  This  work  of  Gratian,
though  it  seems  rather  an  extraordinary  performance  for  the
age  when  it  appeared,  has  been  censured  for  notorious  incor¬
rectness  as  well  as  inconsistency,  and  especially  for  the
authority  given  in  it  to  the  false  decretals  of  Isidore,  and  con¬
sequently  to  the  papal  supremacy.  It  fell,  however,  short  of
what  was  required  in  the  progress  of  that  usurpation.  Greg¬
ory  IX.  caused  the  five  books  of  Decretals  to  be  published
by  Ruimond  de  Pennafort  in  1234.  These  consist  almo-t
entirely  of  rescripts  issued  by  the  later  |>opea,  especially
Alexander  III.,  Innocent  III.,  Honorius  III.,  and  Gregory
himself.  They  form  the  most  essential  part  of  the  canon
law,  the  Decretum  of  Gratian  being  comparatively  obsolete.

>  Dnlrjrmple’*  Annul*  of  Scotland,  Tol.  date  of  It*  appearance  (lit.  843) ;  but
I.  p.  387.  other*  bring  it  down  hum  yean  later.

•  Tiraboechi  ha*  fixed  On  1140  as  the

Eccles.  Power.

CANON  LAW.

195

In  these  books  we  find  a  regular  and  copious  system  of  ju¬
risprudence,  derived  in  a  great  measure  from  the  civil  law,
but  with  considerable  deviation,  and  possibly  improvement.
Boniface  VIII.  added  a  sixth  part,  thence  called  the  Sext,
itself  divided  into  five  books,  in  the  nature  of  a  supplement
to  the  other  five,  of  which  it  follows  the  arrangement,  and
composed  of  decisions  promulgated  since  the  pontificate  of
Gregory  IX.  New  constitutions  were  subjoined  by  Clement
V.  and  John  XXII.,  under  the  name  of  Clementines  and
Extravagantes  Johannis;  and  a  few  more  of  later  pontiffs
are  included  in  the  body  of  canon  law,  arranged  as  a  second
supplement  after  the  manner  of  the  Sext,  and  called  Ex¬
travagantes  Communes.

The  study  of  this  code  became  of  course  obligatory  upon
ecclesiastical  judges.  It  produced  a  new  class  of  legal  practi¬
tioners,  or  canonists;  of  whom  a  great  number  added,  like
their  brethren,  the  civilians,  their  illustrations  and  commenta¬
ries,  for  which  the  obscurity  and  discordance  of  many  pas¬
sages,  more  especially  in  the  Decretum,  gave  ample  scope.
From  the  general  analogy  of  the  canon  law  to  that  of  Jus¬
tinian,  the  two  systems  became,  in  a  remarkable  manner,
collateral  and  mutually  intertwined,  the  tribunals  governed
by  either  of  them  borrowing  their  rules  of  decision  from  the
other  in  cases  where  their  peculiar  jurisprudence  is  silent  or
of  dubious  interpretation.1  But  the  canon  law  was  almost
entirely  founded  upon  the  legislative  authority  of  the  pope ;  the
decretals  are  in  fact  but  a  new  arrangement  of  the  bold  epis¬
tles  of  the  most  usurping  pontiffs,  and  especially  of  Innocent
III.,  with  titles  or  rubrics  comprehending  the  substance  of
each  in  the  compiler’s  language.  The  superiority  of  ecclesi¬
astical  to  temporal  power,  or  at  least  the  absolute  indepen¬
dence  of  the  former,  may  be  considered  as  a  sort  of  key-note
which  regulates  every  passage  in  the  canon  law.2  It  is
expressly  declared  that  subjects  owe  no  allegiance  to  an
excommunicated  lord,  if  after  admonition  he  is  not  reconciled
to  the  church.8  And  the  rubric  prefixed  to  the  declaration

1  Duck.  De  Usu  Juris  drills.  1.  i.  c.  8.

5  Constitution?*  priucipuin  ecclesias-
tiols  constitutionibus  non  preeminent,
eed  obsequuntur.  Decretum,  distinct.
10.  Statutum  generate  iaioorum  ad  ac¬
etates  rel  ad  eccles iastic&s  personas,  vel
eorum  bona,  in  earuin  pneju  dictum  non
extcuditur.  Decretal.  1.  i.  tit.  *2,  c.  10.

QuflBcunque  a  principibus  in  ordinibus
vel  in  ecclesiasticis  rebus  decreta  inve-
niuntur,  nullius  auctoritatis  esse  mon-
strantur.  Decretum,  distinct.  96.

3  Domino  excommunicato  manente.
subditi  fldelitatem  non  dcbent  ;  et  si
longo  tempore  in  o  perstiterit,  et  moui-
tus  non  pareat  ecclesiie,  ab  ejus  debito

19G

MENDICANT  ORDERS.  CiiAr.  VII.  P.w:t  II.

of  Frederic  II.’s  deposition  in  the  council  of  Lyons  asserts
that  the  pope  may  dethrone  the  emperor  for  lawful  causes.1
These  rubrics  to  the  decretals  are  not  perhaps  of  direct
authority  as  part  of  the  law  ;  but  they  express  its  sense,  so  as
to  be  fairly  cited  instead  of  it.2  By  means  of  her  new  juris¬
prudence,  Rome  acquired  in  every  country  a  powerful  body
of  advocates,  who,  though  many  of  them  were  laymen,  would,
with  the  usual  bigotry  of  lawyers,  defend  every  pretension  or
abuse  to  which  their  received  standard  of  authority  gave
sanction.*

Next  to  the  canon  law  I  should  reckon  the  institution  of
the  mendicant  orders  among  those  circumstances  which  prin-
Mendicant  cipally  contributed  to  the  aggrandizement  of  Rome,
orders.  By  the  acquisition,  and  in  some  respects  the  enjoy¬
ment,  or  at  least  ostentation,  of  immense  riches,  the  ancient
monastic  orders  had  forfeited  much  of  the  public  esteem.4
Austere  principles  as  to  the  obligation  of  evangelical  poverty
were  inculcated  by  the  numerous  sectaries  of  that  age,  and
eagerly  received  by  the  people,  already  much  alienated  from
an  established  hierarchy.  No  means  appeared  so  efficacious
to  counteract  this  effect  as  the  institution  of  religious  socie¬
ties  strictly  debarred  from  the  insidious  temptations  of  wealth.
Upon  this  principle  were  founded  the  orders  of  Mendicant
Friars,  incapable,  by  the  rules  of  their  foundation,  of  possess¬
ing  estates,  and  maintained  only  by  alms  and  pious  remunera¬
tions.  Of  these  the  two  most  celebrated  were  formed  by  St.
Dominic  and  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  and  established  by  the
authority  of  Honorius  III.  in  1216  and  1223.  These  great
reformers,  who  have  produced  so  extraordinary  an  effect  upon

absolruntur.  Decretal.  1.  t.  tit.  37,  o.  18.
I  must  acknowledge  that  the  decretal
epistle  of  Honor! ua  III.  scarcely  war¬
rant*  thi*  general  proposition  of  the
rubric,  though  It  seems  to  lead  to  It.

1  Papa  Imperatorem  deponere  potest
ex  causis  legitlmU.  1.  II.  tit.  18,  e.  2.

*  If  I  understand  a  bull  of  Gregory
XIII.,  prefixed  to  hie  recension  of  the
canon  law,  be  confirms  the  rubric*  nr
glomes  along  with  the  text :  but  I  cannot
speak  with  certainty  a*  to  hi*  meaning.

*  Por  the  canon  law  I  hare  consulted,
besides  the  Corpus  Juris  Canonic!,  Tlra-
boschi,  Stnria  della  IJtteratura,  t.  ir.
and  r. ;  Giannone,  I.  xir.  c.  8:  I.  xix.
c.  3;  L  sail.  c.  8.  Fleury,  Institution*
an  Droit  Erclesiastique,  ».  I.  p.  10.  and
ftnw  Discour*  *ur  1'Ulstolre  Kccles.  Duck,

Do  Csu  Juris  drills,  1. 1.  c.  8.  Schmidt,
t.  Ir.  p.  89.  F.  Paul.  Treatise  of  Bene¬
fice*,  c.  81.  I  fear  that  my  few  citation*
from  the  canon  law  are  not  made  scien¬
tifically  ;  the  proper  mode  of  reference
is  to  the  first  word ;  but  the  book  and
title  are  rather  more  convenient;  and
there  are  not  many  readers  In  Kngland
who  will  detect  thi*  impropriety.

*  It  would  be  easy  to  bring  eridence
from  the  writing*  of  erery  succeaslr*
century  to  the  general  rlriousnes*  of  the
regular  elergy,  whose  memory  It  is  some¬
time*  the  Bullion  to  treat  with  respect.
See  particularly  Muratori,  Dissert.  65;
and  Fleury,  8“  Diarours.  The  latter
observe*  that  their  great  wealth  was  the
cause  of  thi*  relaxation  in  discipline.

Eccles.  Power.

MENDICANT  ORDERS.

197

mankind,  were  of  very  different  characters ;  the  one,  active
and  ferocious,  had  taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  crusade
against  the  unfortunate  Albigeois,  and  was  among  the  first
who  bore  the  terrible  name  of  inquisitor ;  while  the  other,  a
harmless  enthusiast,  pious  and  sincere,  but  hardly  of  sane
mind,  was  much  rather  accessory  to  the  intellectual  than  to
the  moral  degradation  of  his  species.  Various  other  mendi¬
cant  orders  were  instituted  in  the  thirteenth  century ;  but
most  of  them  were  soon  suppressed,  and,  besides  the  two
principal,  none  remain  but  the  Augustin  and  the  Carmelites.1

These  new  preachers  were  received  with  astonishing  ap¬
probation  by  the  laity,  whose  religious  zeal  usually  depends
a  good  deal  upon  their  opinion  of  sincerity  and  disinterest¬
edness  in  their  pastors.  And  the  progress  of  the  Dominican
and  Franciscan  friars  in  the  thirteenth  century  bears  a  re¬
markable  analogy  to  that  of  our  English  Methodists.  Not
deviating  from  the  faith  of  the  church,  but  professing
rather  to  teach  it  in  greater  purity,  and  to  observe  her  ordi¬
nances  with  greater  regularity,  while  they  imputed  supineness
and  corruption  to  the  secular  clergy,  they  drew  round  their
sermons  a  multitude  of  such  listeners  as  in  all  ages  are  attract¬
ed  by  similar  means.  They  practised  all  the  stratagems  of
itinerancy,  preaching  in  public  streets,  and  administering  the
communion  on  a  portable  altar.  Thirty  years  after  their  in¬
stitution  an  historian  complains  that  the  parish  churches  were
deserted,  that  none  confessed  except  to  these  friars,  in  short,
that  the  regular  discipline  was  subverted.2 3 *  This  uncontrolled
privilege  of  performing  sacerdotal  functions,  which  their
modern  antitypes  assume  for  themselves,  was  conceded  to  the
mendicant  orders  by  the  favor  of  Rome.  Aware  of  the
powerful  support  they  might  receive  in  turn,  the  pontiffs  of
the  thirteenth  century  accumulated  benefits  upon  the  disciples
of  F rancis  and  Dominic.  They  were  exempted  from  episco¬
pal  authority ;  they  were  permitted  to  preach  or  hear  confes¬
sions  without  leave  of  the  ordinary,8  to  accept  of  legacies,
and  to  inter  in  their  churches.  Such  privileges  could  not  be
granted  without  resistance  from  the  other  clergy;  the  bishops

1  Moibeim'i  Ecclesiastical  Ilistory  ;  quoniam  casus  episcopates  reservati  epi*-

Fleury ,  8"*  Discours;  Crevier.  Histoiru  copis  ab  honiinc,  vel  a  jure,  coimminiter
de  I 'University  de  Paris,  t.  i.  p.  318.  a  Deum  timentibus  episcopis  ipsis  fra-

2  Mutt.  Paris,  p.  607.  tribus  coinmittuntur,  et  non  presbyteris,

3  Another  reason  for  preferring  the  quorum  simplicitas  non  sufficit  ah  is  din-

friars  is  given  by  Archbishop  Peckhaui;  gendis.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  t.  ii.  p.  160

198

PAPAL  DISPENSATIONS.  Chap.  YD.  Part  II.

remonstrated,  the  university  of  Paris  maintained  a  strenu¬
ous  opposition ;  but  their  reluctance  served  only  to  protract
the  final  decision.  Boniface  VIII.  appears  to  have  peremp¬
torily  established  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  the  mendi¬
cant  orders  in  1295.1

It  was  naturally  to  be  expected  that  the  objects  of  such
extensive  favors  would  repay  their  benefactors  by  a  more  than
usual  obsequiousness  and  alacrity  in  their  service.  Accord¬
ingly  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans  vied  with  each  other
in  magnifying  the  papal  supremacy.  Many  of  these  monks
became  eminent  in  canon  law  and  scholastic  theology.  The
great  lawgiver  of  the  schools,  Thomas  Aquinas,  whose  opin¬
ions  the  Dominicans  especially  treat  as  almost  infallible,  went
into  the  exaggerated  principles  of  his  age  in  favor  of  the
see  of  Rome.2  And  as  the  professors  of  those  sciences  took
nearly  all  the  learning  and  logic  of  the  times  to  their  own
share,  it  was  hardly  possible  to  repel  their  arguments  by  any
direct  reasoning.  But  this  partiality  of  the  new  monastic
orders  to  the  popes  must  chiefly  be  understood  to  apply  to
the  thirteenth  century,  circumstances  occurring  in  the  next
which  gave  in  some  degree  a  different  complexion  to  their
dispositions  in  respect  of  the  Holy  See.

We  should  not  overlook,  among  the  causes  that  contribut¬
ed  to  the  dominion  of  the  popes,  their  prerogative  of  dispens¬
ing  with  ecclesiastical  ordinances.  The  most  remarkable
Papal  di»-  exercise  of  this  was  as  to  the  canonical  impedi-
peoaatioaa  of  ments  of  matrimony.  Such  strictness  as  is  pre-
uiamage.  8Cribed  by  the  Christian  religion  with  respect  to
divorce  was  very  unpalatable  to  the  barbarous  nations.  They
in  fact  paid  it  little  regard ;  under  the  Merovingian  dynasty,
even  private  men  put  away  their  wives  at  pleasure.*  In
many  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  we  find  evidence  of  the
prevailing  license  of  repudiation  and  even  polygamy.4  The

'  Crerier,  Hint,  de  l’U  Diversity  de
Puri*,  t.  I.  et  t.  ii.  paaaim.  Fleury.  ubl
supra.  Hint,  du  Droit  RccUwiaatique
Franco!*,  t.  i.  p.  JIM,  896,  446.  Collier**
Ecclesiastical  History,  vol.  I.  p  487,  448,
452.  Wood’*  Antiquities  of  Oxford,  rol.
i.  p.  876, 480.  (Outch'H  edition.)

It  was  maintained  by  the  enemie*  of
the  mendicant*,  especially  William  8t.
Amour,  that  the  pope  could  not  (fire
them  a  privilege  to  preach  or  perform
the  other  dutiee  of  the  pariah  priests.
Tboma*  Aquinas  answered  that  a  bbbop

might  perform  any  spiritual  function*
within  hi*  dioceae,  or  commit  the  charge
to  another  instead,  and  that  the  pope,
being  to  the  whole  church  what  a  bUhop
ia  to  hi*  dioceae,  might  do  the  same  every¬
where.  < bi hr,  1. 1.  p.  474.

*  Marculfl  Formulae,  1.  ii.  c.90.

4  Although  a  man  might  not  marry
again  when  his  wife  had  taken  the  veil,
he  was  permitted  to  do  so  if  she  was  in
fee  ted  with  the  leprosy.  Compare  Ca-
pitularia  Pippini,  a.d.  752  and  755  Ii
a  woiuau  conspired  to  murder  her  bin

Eccles.  Power.

PAPAL  DISPENSATIONS.

199

principles  which  the  church  inculcated  were  in  appearance
the  very  reverse  of  this  laxity ;  yet  they  led  indirectly  to
the  same  effect.  Marriages  were  forbidden,  not  merely  with¬
in  the  limits  which  nature,  or  those  inveterate  associations
which  we  call  nature,  have  rendered  sacred,  but  as  far  as  the
seventh  degree  of  collateral  consanguinity,  computed  from  a
common  ancestor.1  Not  only  was  affinity,  or  relationship  by
marriage,  put  upon  the  same  footing  as  that  by  blood,  but  a
fantastical  connection,  called  spiritual  affinity,  was  invented  in
order  to  prohibit  marriage  between  a  sponsor  and  godchild.
An  union,  however  innocently  contracted,  between  parties
thus  circumstanced,  might  at  any  time  be  dissolved,  and  their
subsequent  cohabitation  forbidden  ;  though  their  children,  I
believe,  in  cases  where  there  had  been  no  knowledge  of  the
impediment,  were  not  illegitimate.  One  readily  apprehends
the  facilities  of  abuse  to  which  all  this  led  ;  and  history  is  full
of  dissolutions  of  marriage,  obtained  by  fickle  passion  or  cold-
hearted  ambition,  to  which  the  church  has  not  scrupled  to
pander  on  some  suggestion  of  relationship.  It  is  so  difficult
to  conceive,  I  do  not  say  any  reasoning,  but  any  honest  su¬
perstition,  which  could  have  produced  those  monstrous  regu¬
lations,  that  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  suppose  them  designed
to  give,  by  a  side-wind,  that  facility  of  divorce  which  a  licen¬
tious  people  demanded,  but  the  church  could  not  avowedly
grant.  This  refinement  would  however  be  unsupported  by
facts.  The  prohibition  is  very  ancient,  and  was  really  deriv¬
ed  from  the  ascetic  temper  which  introduced  so  many  other
absurdities.2  It  was  not  until  the  twelfth  century  that  either
tliis  or  any  other  established  rules  of  discipline  were  sup-

band,  he  might  remarry.  Id.  a.d.  753.
A  large  proportion  of  Pepin's  laws  re¬
late  to  incestuous  connections  and  di¬
vorces.  One  of  Charlemagne  seems  to
Imply  that  polygamy  was  not  unknown
even  among  priests.  Si  sacerdotos  plures
uxores  habueriut,  saoerdotio  priventur;
quia  sjecularibus  deteriores  sunt.  Capi-
tul.  a.d.  769.  This  seems  to  imply  that
their  marriage  with  one  was  allowable,
which  nevertheless  is  contradicted  by
other  passages  in  the  Capitularies.

1  See  the  canonical  computation  ex¬
plained  in  St.  Marc.  t.  iii.  p.  376.  Also
in  Blackstone's  Law  Tracts,  Treatise  on
Consanguinity.  Iu  the  eleventh  century
an  opiniou  began  to  gain  ground  iu  Italy
that  third-cousins  might  marry,  being  in
the  seventh  degree  according  to  the  civil

law.  Peter  Damian,  a  passionate  abettor
of  Hildebrand  and  his  maxims,  treats
this  with  horror,  and  calls  it  an  heresy.
Fleury,  t.  xiii.  p.  152.  St.  M:uc.  uW
supra.  This  opinion  was  supported  by  a
reference  to  the  Institutes  of  Justinian  ;
a  proof,  among  several  others,  how  much
earlier  that  book  was  known  than  is  vul¬
garly  supposed.

*  Gregory  I.  pronounces  matrimony
to  be  unlawful  as  far  as  the  seventh
degree  ;  and  even,  if  I  understand  his
meaning,  as  long  as  any  relationship
could  be  traced ;  which  seems  to  have
been  the  maxim  of  strict  theologians,
though  not  absolutely  enforced.  Du
Cange,  v  Genemtio ;  Fleury,  Hist.  Ec¬
cles.  t.  ix.  p.  211.

200

PAPAL  DISPENSATIONS.  Chat.  VII.  Part  II.

po-ed  liable  to  arbitrary  dispensation ;  at  least  the  stricter
churchmen  had  always  denied  that  the  pope  could  infringe
canons,  nor  had  he  asserted  any  right  to  do  so.1  But  Inno¬
cent  III.  laid  down  as  a  maxim,  that  out  of  the  plenitude  of
his  power  he  might  lawfully  dispense  with  the  law ;  and  ac¬
cordingly  granted,  among  other  instances  of  this  prerogative,
dispensations  from  impediments  of  marriage  to  the  emperor
Otho  IV.4  Similar  indulgences  were  given  by  his  succes¬
sors,  though  they  did  not  become  usual  for  some  ages.  The
fourth  Lateran  council  in  1215  removed  a  great  part  of  the
restraint,  by  permitting  marriages  beyond  the  fourth  degree,
or  what  we  call  third-cousins.; 8  and  dispensations  have
been  made  more  easy,  when  it  was  discovered  that  they
might  be  converted  into  a  source  of  profit.  They  served  a
more  important  purpose  by  rendering  it  necessary  for  the
princes  of  Europe,  who  seldom  could  marry  into' one  an¬
other’s  houses  without  transgressing  the  canonical  limits,  to
keep  on  good  terms  with  the  court  of  Rome,  which,  in  sev¬
eral  •  instances  that  have  been  mentioned,  fulminated  its
censures  against  sovereigns  who  lived  without  permission
in  what  was  considered  an  incestuous  union.

The  dispensing  power  of  the  popes  was  exerted  in  several
DUpenm-  cadcs  °*  a  temporal  nature,  particularly  in  the

tion*  from  legitimation  of  children,  for  purposes  even  of  suo

rromiwtory  cessjon>  This  Innocent  III.  claimed  as  an  indirect
consequence  of  his  right  to  remove  the  canonical
impediment  which  bastardy  offered  to  ordination  ;  since  it
would  be  monstrous,  he  says,  that  one  who  is  legitimate  for
spiritual  functions  should  continue  otherwise  in  any  civil  mat¬
ter.4  But  the  most  important  and  mischievous  species  of
dispensations  was  from  the  observance  of  promissory  oaths.
Two  principles  are  laid  down  in  the  decretals  —  that  an  oath
disadvantageous  to  the  church  is  not  binding;  and  that  one
extorted  by  force  was  of  slight  obligation,  and  might  be  an¬
nulled  by  ecclesiastical  authority.6  As  the  first  of  these

'  De  Marra,  1.  lit.  ce.  7.  8, 14.  Schmidt,  de  jure  possumus  mipra  jut  dispenaare.
t.  iv.  p.  2Uo.  Dispensations  were  origi-  Schmidt,  t.  if.  p.  285.
willy  granted  only  at  to  canonical  pan-  *  Kleury,  Institutions  an  Droit  KcclA-
ancet,  but  not  prospectively  to  authorise  siastique.  t.  I.  p.  2U>>
a  breach  of  discipline.  Oratian  asserts  *  Decretal,  I.  It.  Ut.  17,  c.  18.
that  the  pope  is  not  bound  by  the  canons,  *  Juramentuui  routra  utilltatem  eocle-

iu  which,  Floury  obserres,  he  goes  be-  siasUcam  pnrstltum  non  tenet.  Deere,
yond  the  False  Decretals.  SepUeme  DU-  tal.  I.  li.  Ut.  24,  c.  27,  et  Seal.  I.  i.  tit  11,
to“™'  F‘  e.  1.  A  juramento  per  mrtuin  ettnrto

»  Secundum  plemtndlnem  potestatls  ecclesia  soiet  absolvere,  et  ejus  tr.ua-

Eccles.  Power.  PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.

201

maxims  gave  the  most  unlimited  privilege  to  the  popes  of
breaking  all  faith  of  treaties  which  thwarted  their  interest  or
passion,  a  privilege  which  they  continually  exercised,1  so  the
second  was  equally  convenient  to  princes  weary  of  observing
engagements  towards  their  subjects  or  their  neighbors.  They
protested  with  a  bad  grace  against  the  absolution  of  their
people  from  allegiance  by  an  authority  to  which  they  did  not
scruple  to  repair  in  order  to  bolster  up  their  own  perjuries.
Thus  Edward  I.,  the  strenuous  asserter  of  his  temporal  rights,
and  one  of  the  first  who  opposed  a  barrier  to  the  encroach¬
ments  of  the  clergy,  sought  at  the  hands  of  Clement  V.  a
dispensation  from  his  oath  to-observe  the  great  statute  against
arbitrary  taxation.

In  all  the  earlier  stages  of  papal  dominion  the  supreme
head  of  the  church  had  been  her  guardian  and  Encroach-
protector  ;  and  this  beneficent  character  appeared  “*"*' °*  tho
to  receive  its  consummation  in  the  result  of  that  freedom  of
arduous  struggle  which  restored  the  ancient  prac-  electl0ns>
tice  of  free  election  to  ecclesiastical  dignities.  Not  long,
however,  after  this  triumph  had  been  obtained,  the  popes
began  by  little  and  little  to  interfere  with  the  regular  consti¬
tution.  Their  first  step  was  conformable  indeed  to  the  pre¬
vailing  system  of  spiritual  independency.  By  the  concordat
of  Calixtus  it  appears  that  the  decision  of  contested  elections
was  reserved  to  the  emperor,  assisted  by  the  metropolitan

gre*sores  ut  peccnntes  mortaliter  non

iinientur.  JBodem  lib.  efc  tit.  c.  16.

ho  whole  of  this  title  in  the  decretals
upon  oaths  seems  to  hare  given  the  first
opening  to  the  lax  casuistry  of  succeed¬
ing  times.

1  Take  one  instance  out  of  many.
Piccinino,  the  famous  condottiere  of  the
fifteenth  century,  had  promised  not  to
attack  Francis  Sforza.  at  that  time  en¬
gaged  against  the  pope.  Eugeni  us  IV.
(the  same  excellent  person  who  had  an¬
nulled  the  compatacta  with  the  Hussites,
releasing  those  who  had  sworn  to  them,
and  who  afterwards  made  the  king  of
Hungary  break  his  treaty  with  Amurnth
11.)  absolves  him  from  this  promise,  on
the  express  ground  that  a  treaty  disad¬
vantageous  to  the  church  ought  not  to
be  kept.  Sisinomli,  t.  ix.  p.  19fi.  The
church  in  that  age  was  synonymous  with
the  papal  territories  In  Italy.

It  wa*  in  conformity  to  this  sweeping
principle  of  ecclesiastical  utility  that
Urban  VI.  mile  the  following  solemn

and  general  declaration  against  keeping
faith  with  heretics.  Attendentes  quod
h  ujusmodi  coufocderationes,  colligationcs,
et  ligic  seu  conventiones  factue  cum  hu-
jusmodi  hoercticls  seu  schismaticis  post-
qufim  tales  elTecti  erant.  sunt  temerariae,
illicitae,  et  ipso  jure  nulhe  (etsi  forte  ante
ipsorum  lapsum  in  schisma,  seu  hoe  res  in
initao  sou  ractffi  fuissent),  etlam  si  foronfc
juramentovel  fidedatl  flrmatae,  aut  con-
flrmatione  apostolic;!  vel  quicunque  fir-
mi  bite  alii  roboratee,  postquam  tales,  ut
prannittitur,  sunt  elTecti.  Rymer,  t.  vii.

p  9  B

It  was  of  little  consequence  that  all
divines  and  sound  interpreters  of  canon
law  maintain  that  the  pope  cannot  dis¬
pense  with  tho  divine  or  moral  law,  ns
Do  Marca  tells  us,  1.  iii.  c.  16,  though  ho
admits  that  others  of  less  sound  judg¬
ment  assert  the  contrary,  as  was  common
enough,  I  believe,. among  the  Jesuits  at
tho  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century .
His  power  of  interpreting  the  law  whs
of  itself  a  privilege  of  dispensing  with  it.

I

202  PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.  Chap.  VII.  Fabt  IL

and  suffragans.  In  a  few  cases  during  the  twelfth  century
this  imperial  prerogative  was  exercised,  though  not  altogether
undisputed.1  But  it  was  consonant  to  the  prejudices  of  that
age  to  deem  the  supreme  pontiff  a  more  natural  judge,  as  in
other  cases  of  appeal.  The  point  was  early  settled  in  Eng¬
land,  where  a  doubtful  election  to  the  archbishopric  of  York,
under  Stephen,  was  referred  to  Rome,  and  there  kept  five
years  in  litigation.2  Otho  IV.  surrendered  this  among  other
rights  of  the  empire  to  Innocent  III.  by  his  capitulation;*
and  from  that  pontificate  the  papal  jurisdiction  over  such
controversies  became  thoroughly  recognized.  But  the  real
aim  of  Innocent,  and  perhaps  of  some  of  his  predecessors,
was  to  dispose  of  bishoprics,  under  pretext  of  determining
and  on  contests,  as  a  matter  of  patronage.  So  many  rules
rights  of  were  established,  so  many  formalities  required  by
p  *  their  constitutions,  incorjK) rated  afterwards  into  the
canon  law,  that  the  court  of  Rome  might  easily  find  means
of  annulling  what  had  been  done  by  the  chapter,  and  bestow¬
ing  the  see  on  a  favorite  candidate.4  The  popes  soon  assumed
not  only  a  right  of  decision,  but.  of  devolution ;  that  is,  of
supplying  the  want  of  election,  or  the  unfitness  of  the  elected,
by  a  nomination  of  their  own.8  Thus  archbishop  Langton,
if  not  absolutely  nominated,  was  at  least  chosen  in  an  invalid
and  compulsory  manner  by  the  order  of  Innocent  III.,  as  we
may  read  in  our  English  historians.  And  several  succeeding
archbishops  of  Canterbury  equally  owed  their  promotion  to
the  papal  prerogative.  Some  instances  of  the  same  kind
occurred  in  Germany,  and  it  became  the  constiuit  practice  in
Naples.*

bile  the  popes  were  thus  artfully  depriving  the  chapters

1  Schmidt,  t.  lit.  p.  299 ;  t.  It.  p.  149.
According  to  the  concordat,  elections
ought  to  be  made  in  the  presence  of  the
emperor  or  hi*  officers  ;  but  the  chapters
contrived  to  exclude  them  by  degree.,
though  not  perhaps  till  the  thirteenth
century.  Compare  Schmidt,  t.  ill.  n.
298;  t.  It.  p  148.

*  Henry1*  Hist,  of  Rngland,  vol.  T.
p.  324.  Lyttelton1*  Henry  II.,  Tol.  i.
p.  868.

*  Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  149.  One  of  them
was  the  ipolium,  or  movable  estate  of  a
bishop,  which  the  emperor  was  used  to
wile  upon  hi*  decent;,  p.  154.  It  wa*
certainly  a  Terr  Iron  in.  prerogative;  but
the  pope*  did  not  fail,  at  a  subsequent
time,  to  claim  it  for  themselves,  yieury,

Institutions  au  Droit,  t.  1.  p.  426.  lam-
font,  Conrile  de  Coustance,  t.  ii.  p.  19).

*  V.  Paul,  c.  39.  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.  177,
247.

4  Thus  we  And  it  expressed,  as  cap¬
tiously  a*  words  could  be  devised.  In  the
decretals,  1.  i.  tit.  6,  c.  22.  Kiectu*  a
major!  et  senior!  parte  capituli,  *1  est.  et
erat  idoneu*  tempore  electionia,  rouftnna-
bltur;  si  a u tern  rrit  lndignu*  In  ordlnl-
bu*  srlentU  vel  s  tate,  et  full  scienter
elrctufl,  electus  a  minor!  parte,  si  est  dlg-
uua,  couflriuabltur.

A  person  canonically  disqualified  when
presented  to  the  pope  for  confirmation
wa*  said  to  be  pcstulotiu,  not  rUctuj

•  tiiauuone,  1.  xiv.  c.  6  ;  1.  xix.  c.  6.

Eccles.  Power.

MANDATS.

203

of  their  right  of  election  to  bishoprics,  they  inter-  „

„  ,  .  °  r J ,,  .  Mandats,

tered  in  a  more  arbitrary  manner  with  the  collation

of  inferior  benefices.  This  began,  though  in  so  insensible  a
manner  as  to  deserve  no  notice  but  for  its  consequences,  with
Adrian  IV.,  who  requested  some  bishops  to  confer  the  next
benefice  that  should  become  vacant  on  a  particular  clerk.1
Alexander  III.  used  to  solicit  similar  favors.2 3  These  recom¬
mendatory  letters  were  called  mandats.  But  though  such
requests  grew  more  frequent  than  was  acceptable  to  patrons,
they  were  preferred  in  moderate  language,  and  could  not
decently  be  refused  to  the  apostolic  chair.  Even  Innocent
III.  seems  in  general  to  be  aware  that  he  is  not  asserting  a
right ;  though  in  one  instance  I  have  observed  his  violent
temper  break  out  against  the  chapter  of  Poitiers,  who  had
made  some  demur  to  the  appointment  of  his  clerk,  and  whom
he  threatens  with  excommunication  and  interdict.8  But,  as  we
find  in  the  history  of  all  usurping  governments,  time  changes
anomaly  into  system,  and  injury  into  right;  examples  beget
custom,  and  custom  ripens  into  law ;  and  the  doubtful  prece¬
dent  of  one  generation  becomes  the  fundamental  maxim  of
another.  Honorius  III.  requested  that  two  prebends  in
every  church  might  be  preserved  for  the  Holy  See ;  but
neither  the  bishops  of  France  nor  England,  to  whom  he
preferred  this  petition,  were  induced  to  comply  with  it.4
Gregory  IX.  pretended  to  act  generously  in  limiting  himself
to  a  single  expectative,  or  letter  directing  a  particular  clerk
to  be  provided  with  a  benefice  in  every  church.6  But  his
practice  went  much  further.  No  country  was  so  intolerably
treated  by  this  pope  and  his  successors  as  England  throughout
the  ignominious  reign  of  Henry  III.  Her  church  seemed
to  have  been  so  richly  endowed  only  as  the  free  pasture  of
Italian  priests,  who  were  placed,  by  the  mandatory  letters
of  Gregory  IX.  and  Innocent  IV.,  in  all  the  best  benefices.
If  we  may  trust  a  solemn  remonstrance  in  the  name  of  the
whole  nation,  they  drew  from  England,  in  the  middle  of  the
thirteenth  century,  sixty  or  seventy  thousand  marks  every
year;  a  sum  far  exceeding  the  royal  revenue.®  This  was
asserted  by  the  English  envoys  at  the  council  of  Lyons.

1  St.  Marc,  t.  v.  p.  41.  Art  de  verifier  *  Matt.  Paris,  p.  207.  De  Marca.  I.  iv.
It*  Dates,  t.  i.  p.  288.  Encyclopedic,  art.  c.  9.

Mandats.  6  F.  Paul  on  Benefices,  c.  80

3  Sclimidt,  t.  ir.  p.  239.  «  M.  Paris,  p.  579,  740.

•  Innocent  Ill.  Opera,  p.  502.

204

MANDATS.

Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

But  the  remedy  was  not  to  be  sought  in  remonstrances  to  the
court  of  Rome,  which  exulted  in  the  success  of  its  encroach¬
ments.  There  was  no  defect  of  spirit  in  the  nation  to  oppose
a  more  adequate  resistance;  but  the  weak-minded  individual
upon  the  throne  sacrificed  the  public  interest  sometimes
through  habitual  timidity,  sometimes  through  silly  ambition.
If  England,  however,  suffered  more  remarkably,  yet  other
countries  were  far  from  being  untouched.  A  German  writer
about  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  mentions  a
cathedral  where,  out  of  about  thirty-five  vacancies  of  prebends
that  had  occurred  within  twenty  years,  the  regular  patron
had  filled  only  two.1  The  case  was  not  very  different  in
France,  where  the  continual  usurpations  of  the  popes  pro¬
duced  the  celebrated  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  St.  Louis.  This
edict,  the  authority  of  which,  though  probably  without  cause,
has  been  sometimes  disputed,  contains  three  important  pro¬
visions ;  namely,  that  all  prelates  and  other  patrons  shall
enjoy  their  full  rights  as  to  the  collation  of  benefices,  accord¬
ing  to  the  canons ;  that  churches  shall  possess  freely  their
rights  of  election ;  and  that  no  tax  or  pecuniary  exaction
shall  be  levied  by  the  pope,  without  consent  of  the  king  and
of  the  national  church.4  We  do  not  find,  however,  that  the

1  Schmidt,  t.  ri.  p.  104.

*  Ordonn:ujce8  dcs  Rois  de  France,  t.  i.
p.  97.  Objections  have  been  made  to
the  authenticity  of  this  edict,  and  in
particular  that  we  do  not  find  the  king
to  have  had  any  previous  differences
with  the  see  of  Rome ;  on  the  contrary,
he  was  just  indebted  to  Clement  IV.  for
bestowing  the  crown  of  Naples  on  his
brother  the  count  of  Provence.  Velly
has  ^defended  it.  Hist,  de  France,  t.  vi.
p.  67  ;  and  in  the  opinion  of  the  learned
Bcuedictinc  editors  of  L’Art  de  verifier
lex  Dates,  t.  i.  p.  685,  cleared  up  all
difficulties  as  to  its  genuineness.  In
fact,  however,  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  of
8fc.  Louis  stands  by  itself,  and  can  only
bo  considered  as  a  protestation  ngains't
abuses  which  it  was  still  impossible  to
suppress.

Of  this  law.  which  was  published  in
126  M,  Si-uiondi  says,  Kri  lisant  la  prag¬
matic  ue  sanction,  on  tw  demande  avec
e  tonne  incut  ce  qui  a  pu  causer  sa  prodi-
gieuse  celebrite.  Elle  n'introduit  aucun
droit  nouveau ;  elle  ne  change  rien  4
['organ Isation  eccle*i*stique  ;  elle  declare
seulement  que  tous  les  droits  existaus
scroll t  conserves,  que  toute  la  legislation
c;inoniq ue  soil  execute**.  A  lVxceptkm
de  Particle  v,  sur  la  levee*  d ’argent  de  la

cour  de  Rome,  elle  ne  contient  rien  que
cette  cour  n’eut  pu  publier  elle-m$me  ;
et  quant  4  cet  article,  qui  paroit  seul
dirige  contre  la  chambre  apostolique.  11
n’est  pas  plus  precis  que  ceux  que  hien
d ’a utres  rois  de  France,  d’ Angieterre,  et
d'Allemagne,  avaient  deji  promulgu£s
4  pluxieurs  reprises,  et  toujours  sans
effet.  Hist,  des  Franc,  v.  106.  But  Sis-
mondi  overlooks  the  fourth  article,  which
enacts  that  all  collations  of  benefices
shall  be  made  according  to  the  maxims
of  councils  and  lathers  of  the  church.
This  was  designed  to  repress  the  dis¬
pensations  of  the  pope ;  and  If  the  French
lawyers  had  been  powerful  enough,  it
would  have  been  successful  in  that  ob¬
ject.  He  goes  on,  indeed,  himself  to
say,  —  Ce  qui  changes  la  pragniacique
sanction  en  une  harriere  puissantecoutre
les  usurpations  de  la  cour  de  Rome.  r’ml
que  les  legist**  s  en  emparereut;  11s  pri-
rent  soin  de  l’expliqucr,  de  la  com-
menter;  plus  elle  eUit  vague,  et  plus,
cut  re  leurs  mains  habiles,  elle  pouvoit
recevolr  d’exUmsion.  Kile  suflUait  seulu
pour  gnrantir  tout**  leg  liber  ten  du  r*»\-
aunie  ;  une  fois  que  les  parietnens  etoient
resolus  de  ne  jatnai*  penuettrv  qu’elle
fnt  viol^e,  tout  empietement  de  la  cour
de  Koine  ou  des  tribunaux  ecclesiasti-

Eccles.  Power.  PROVISIONS  AND  RESERVES.

205

French  government  acted  up  to  the  spirit  of  this  ordinance ;
and  the  Holy  See  continued  to  invade  the  rights  of  collation
with  less  ceremony  than  they  had  hitherto  used.  Clement
IV.  published  a  bull  in  1266,  which,  after  asserting  an  abso¬
lute  prerogative  of  the  supreme  pontiff  to  dispose  of  all  pre¬
ferments,  whether  vacant  or  in  reversion,  confines  itself  in
the  enacting  words  to  the  reservation  of  such  benefices  as
belong  to  persons  dying  at  Rome  (vacantes  in  curia).1  These
had  for  some  time  been  reckoned  as  a  part  of  the  pope’s
special  patronage ;  and  their  number,  when  all  causes  of  im¬
portance  were  drawn  to  his  tribunal,  when  metropolitans
were  compelled  to  seek  their  pallium  in  person,  and  even  by
a  recent  constitution  exempt  abbots  were  to  repair  to  Rome
for  confirmation,2  not  to  mention  the  multitude  who  flocked
thither  as  mere  courtiers  and  hunters  after  promotion,  must
have  been  very  considerable.  Boniface  VIII.  repeated  this
law  of  Clement  IV.  in  a  still  more  positive  tone ; 8  and
Clement  V.  laid  down  as  a  maxim,  that  the  pope  might  freely
bestow,  as  universal  patron,  all  ecclesiastical  benefices.4  In
order  to  render  these  tenable  by  their  Italian  courtiers,  the
canons  against  pluralities  and  nonresidence  were  dispensed
with  ;  so  that  individuals  were  said  to  have  accumulated  fifty
or  sixty  preferments.5  It  was  a  consequence  from  this  ex¬
travagant  principle,  that  the  pope  might  prevent  ProTi8ions
the  ordinary  collator  upon  a  vacancy  ;  and  as  this  reserves,
could  seldom  be  done  with  sufficient  expedition  in  &c’
places  remote  from  his  court,  that  he  might  make  reversion¬
ary  grants  during  the  life  of  an  incumbent,  or  reserve  certain
benefices  specifically  for  his  own  nomination.

The  persons  as  well  as  estates  of  ecclesiastics  were  secure
from  arbitrary  taxation  in  all  the  kingdoms  founded  upon  the
ruins  of  the  empire,  both  by  the  common  liberties  of  free-

ques,  tonte  levee  (le  deniers  ordonn^e  par
elle,  toute  Election  irr^guliere,  tout©  ex¬
communication,  tout  interdit,  qui  tou-
choient  Pautoritl  royale  ou  lea  droits  du
aujet.  furent  d6nonces  par  lea  Idgistea  en
parlement,  comnie  contraires  aux  fran¬
chises  dea  6g!isea  de  France,  et  &  la
pr.i^tuatique  sauction.  Ainai  s'introdui-
aait  l'ap|M*l  comnie  d’abua  qui  r^ussit
soul  a  contenir  la  juriadictiou  ecclesiaa-
tique  dana  de  juatea  boruea.

i  8©xt.  Decretal.  1.  iii.  t.  iv.  c.  2.  F.
Paul  ou  Ueueficea,  c.  35.  This  writer

thinks  the  privilege  of  nominating  bene¬
fices  vacant  in  curia  to  have  been  among
the  first  claimed  by  the  popes,  eveu  be¬
fore  the  usage  of  mandats,  c.  30.

3  Matt.  Paris,  p.  817.

8  Sext.  Decret.  1.  iii.  t.  iv.  c.  3.  IIo
extended  the  vacancy  in  curia  to  all
places  within  two  days*  journey  of  the
papal  court.

«  F.  Paul,  c.  35.

8  Id.  c.  33.  34,  35.  Schmidt,  t.  iv.  p.
104.

20  G

PAPAL  TAXATION  Chap.  VII.  Takt  II.

Papal  taxa-  meni  ai'd  more  particularly  by  their  own  immu-
tiou  of  tii«  nities  and  the  horror  of  sacrilege.1  Such  at  least
was  their  legal  security,  whatever  violence  might
occasionally  be  practised  by  tyrannical  princes.  But  this
exemption  was  compensated  by  annual  donatives,  probably
to  a  large  amount,  which  the  bishops  and  monasteries  were
accustomed,  and  as  it  were  compelled,  to  make  to  their  sov¬
ereigns.1  They  were  subject  also,  generally  speaking,  to  the
feudal  services  and  prestations.  Henry  I.  is  said  to  have
extorted  a  sum  of  money  from  the  English  church.*  But
the  first  eminent  instance  of  a  general  tax  required  from  the
clergy  was  the  famous  Saladine  tithe ;  a  tenth  of  all  movable
estate,  imposed  by  the  kings  of  France  and  England  upon  all
their  subjects,  with  the  consent  of  their  great  councils  of
prelates  and  barons,  to  defray  the  expense  of  their  intended
crusade.  Yet  even  this  contribution,  though  called  for  by
the  imminent  peril  of  the  Holy  Land  after  the  capture  of
Jerusalem,  was  not  paid  without  reluctance ;  the  clergy
doubtless  anticipating  the  future  extension  of  such  a  precedent.4
Many  years  had  not  elapsed  when  a  new  demand  was  made
upon  them,  but  from  a  different  quarter.  Innocent  III.  (the
name  continually  recurs  when  we  trace  the  commencement
of  an  usurpation)  imposed  in  1199  upon  the  whole  church  a
tribute  of  one  fortieth  of  movable  estate,  to  be  paid  to  his  own
collectors ;  but  strictly  pledging  himself  that  the  money
should  only  be  applied  to  the  purposes  of  a  crusade.*  This
crusade  ended,  as  is  well  known,  in  the  capture  of  Constan¬
tinople.  But  the  won!  had  lost  much  of  its  original  mean¬
ing  ;  or  rather  that  meaning  had  been  extended  by  ambition
and  bigotry.  Gregory  IX.  preached  a  crusade  against  the
emperor  Frederic,  in  a  quarrel  which  only  concerned  his
temporal  principality ;  and  the  church  of  England  was  taxed
by  his  authority  to  carry  on  this  holy  war.®  After  some

*  Mura  tori,  Diaeert.  70;  Schmidt,  t.  ill.

p.  211.

*  Schmidt,  t.  ill.  p.  211.  Du  Cange,  ▼.
Dona.

*  Radmcr,  p.  R8.

*  Schmidt,  t.  It.  p.  212.  Lvttelton’*
Henry  11.,  vol.  ill.  p.  4?2.  ViUy,  t.  111.
p.  3lti.

*  Innocent,  Opem,  p.

*  M.  Pari*,  p.  470.  It  wa*  hardly
po*4«|hl©  for  the  clergy  to  make  any  ef¬
fective  resietauce  to  the  pope,  without

unraveling  a  tianue  which  they  had  he<en
a**iduou*ly  weaving.  One  Kngll*h  pre¬
late  distinguished  himwdf  in  thl*  reign
by  hi*  utrrnuou*  proteafiation  against  all
nl.it-.--  ..f  the  rliun  h  Tt.i-  WM
Gro**tete,  bl*hop  of  Lincoln,  who  died  in

Ml  Mm  bmM  law . .  cf

In-  tin*#*,  and  Mm  M  VlO  lM  1  t|J  MM"
ture  of  Oreek  literature.  Matthew  P*rif
give*  him  a  high  character,  which  he
•ieaerved  for  hi*  learning  and  Integrity  ;
one  of  hi*  commendation*  1*  for  keeping

Eccles.  Power.

OF  THE  CLERGY.

207

opposition  the  bishops  submitted;  and  from  that  time  no
bounds  were  set  to  the  rapacity  of  papal  exactions.  The
usurers  of  Cahors  and  Lombardy,  residing  in  London,  took
up  the  trade  of  agency  for  the  pope ;  and  in  a  few  years,  he
is  said,  partly  by  levies  of  money,  partly  by  the  revenues  of
benefices,  to  have  plundered  the  kingdom  of  950,000  marks ;
a  sum  equivalent,  perhaps,  to  not  less  than  fifteen  millions
sterling  at  present.  Innocent  IV.,  during  whose  pontificate
the  tyranny  of  Rome,  if  we  consider  her  temporal  and  spir¬
itual  usurpations  together,  seems  to  have  reached  its  zenith,
hit  upon  the  device  of  ordering  the  English  prelates  to  fur¬
nish  a  certain  number  of  men-at-arms  to  defend  the  church
at  their  expense.  This  would  soon  have  been  commuted
into  a  standing  escuage  instead  of  military  service.1  But  the
demand  was  perhaps  not  complied  with,  and  we  do  not  find
it  repeated.  Henry  in.’s  pusillanimity  would  not  permit
any  effectual  measures  to  be  adopted ;  and  indeed  he  some¬
times  shared  in  the  booty,  and  was  indulged  with  the  produce
of  taxes  imposed  upon  his  own  clergy  to  defray  the  cost  of
his  projected  war  against  Sicily.2  A  nobler  example  was  set
by  the  kingdom  of  Scotland:  Clement  IV.  having,  in  1267,
granted  the  tithes  of  its  ecclesiastical  revenues  for  one  of  his
mock  crusades,  king  Alexander  III.,  with  the  concurrence  of
the  church,  stood  up  against  this  encroachment,  and  refused
the  legate  permission  to  enter  his  dominions.8  Taxation  of
the  clergy  was  not  so  outrageous  in  other  countries ;  but  the
popes  granted  a  tithe  of  benefices  to  St.  Louis  for  each  of
liis  own  crusades,  and  also  for  the  expedition  of  Charles  of
Anjou  against  Manfred.4  In  the  council  of  Lyons,  held  by
Gregory  X.  in  1274,  a  general  tax  in  the  same  proportion
was  imposed  on  all  the  Latin  church,  for  the  pretended  pur¬
pose  of  carrying  on  a  holy  war.5

u  good  table.  But  Grosstetc  appears  to  was  a  little  stimulated  by  personal  feel-
have  been  imbued  in  a  great  decree  with  ings  for  the  abbey  of  St.  Alban’s ;  and
the  spirit  of  his  age  as  to  ecclesiastical  the  same  remark  is  probably  applicable
power,  though  unwilling  to  yield  it  up  to  his  love  of  civil  liberty,
to  the  pope:  and  it  is  a  strange  thing  to  *  Rymer,  t.  i.  p.  699,  &c.  The  sub¬
reckon  him  among  the  precursors  of  the  stance  of  English  ecclesiastical  history
Reformation.  M.  Paris,  p.  754.  Bering-  during  the  reign  of  Henry  III  may  be
ton's  Literary  History  of  the  Middle  collected  from  Henry,  and  still  better
Ages.  p.  378.  from  Collier.

1  M  Paris,  p.  613.  It  would  be  end-  3  Dnlryinple’s  Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.
less  to  multiply  proofs  from  Matthew  i.  p.  179.

Paris,  which  indeed  occur  in  almost  every  4  Telly,  t.  iv.  p.  343;  t.  v.  p.  343  ;  t.
page.  HU  laudable  seal  against  papal  vi.  p.  47.

tyranny,  on  which  some  protestant  *  Idem,  t.  vi.  p.  808.  St.  Marc,  t.  vL
writers  have  been  so  pleased  to  dwell,  p.  347.

203  DISAFFECTION  TOWARDS  ROME.  Chap.  VII  Part  II.

Disaffection
towards  tiie
court  of
Home.

These  gross  invasions  of  ecclesiastical  property,  however
submissively  endured,  produced  a  very  general
disaffection  towards  the  court  of  Rome.  The
reproach  of  venality  and  avarice  was  not  indeed
cast  for  the  first  time  upon  the  sovereign  pontiffs;
but  it  had  been  confined,  in  earlier  ages,  to  particular  in¬
stances,  not  affecting  the  bulk  of  the  catholic  church.  But,
pillaged  upon  every  slight  pretence,  without  law  and  without
redress,  the  clergy  came  to  regard  their  once  paternal  mon¬
arch  as  an  arbitrary  oppressor.  All  writers  of  the  thirteenth
and  following  centuries  complain  in  terms  of  unmeasured
indignation,  and  seem  almost  ready  to  reform  the  general
abuses  of  the  church.  They  distinguished  however  clearly
enough  between  the  abuses  which  oppressed  them  and  those
which  it  was  their  interest  to  preserve,  nor  had  the  least  in¬
tention  of  waiving  their  own  immunities  and  authority.  But
the  laity  came  to  more  universal  conclusions.  A  spirit  of
inveterate  hatred  grew  up  among  them,  not  only  towards  the
papal  tyranny,  but  the  whole  system  of  ecclesiastical  inde¬
pendence.  The  rich  envied  and  longed  to  plunder  the  estates
of  the  superior  clergy;  the  poor  learned  from  the  Waldensea
and  other  sectaries  to  deem  such  opulence  incompatible
with  the  character  of  evangelical  ministers.  The  itinerant
minstrels  invented  tales  to  satirize  vicious  priests,  which  a
predisposed  multitude  eagerly  swallowed.  If  the  thirteenth
century  was  an  age  of  more  extravagant  ecclesiastical  pre¬
tensions  than  any  which  had  preceded,  it  was  certainly  one
in  which  the  disposition  to  resist  them  acquired  greater  con¬
sistence.

To  resist  had  indeed  become  strictly  necessary,  if  the  tern-
pond  governments  of  Christendom  would  occupy  any  better
station  than  that  of  officers  to  the  hierarchy.  I  have  traced
already  the  first  stage  of  tliat  ecclesiastical  juris¬
diction,  which,  through  the  partial  indulgence  of
sovereigns,  especially  Ju-tinian  mid  Charlemagne,
had  become  nearly  independent  of  the  civil  magis¬
trate.  Several  ages  of  confusion  and  anarchy  ensued,  during
which  the  supreme  regal  authority  was  literally  suspended
in  France,  and  not  much  respected  in  some  other  countries.
It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  so  fur
as  even  that  was  regarded  in  such  barbarous  times,  would  bo
esteemed  the  only  substitute  for  coercive  law,  and'  the  best

ProgrvM  of
ecclvdionti*
cal  juria-
dirt  ion,

Eccles.  Power.  ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.

209

security  against  wrong.  But  I  am  not  aware  that  it  extended
itself  beyond  its  former  limits  till  about  the  beginning  of  the
twelfth  century.  From  that  time  it  rapidly  encroached  upon
the  secular  tribunals,  and  seemed  to  threaten  the  usurpation
of  an  exclusive  supremacy  over  all  persons  and  causes.  The
bishops  gave  the  tonsure  indiscriminately,  in  order  to  swell
the  list  of  their  subjects.  This  sign  of  a  clerical  state,
though  below  the  lowest  of  their  seven  degrees  of  ordination,
implying  no  spiritual  office,  conferred  the  privileges  and  im¬
munities  of  the  profession  on  all  who  wore  an  ecclesiastical
habit  and  had  only  once  been  married.1  Orphans  and
widows,  the  stranger  and  the  poor,  the  pilgrim  and  the  leper,
under  the  appellation  of  persons  in  distress  (miserabiles  per¬
sonae),  came  within  the  peculiar  cognizance  and  protection  of
the  church  ;  nor  could  they  be  sued  before  any  lay  tribunal.
And  the  whole  body  of  crusaders,  or  such  as  merely  took
the  vow  of  engaging  in  a  crusade,  enjoyed  the  same  cleri¬
cal  privileges.

But  where  the  character  of  the  litigant  parties  could  not,
even  with  this  large  construction,  be  brought  within  their
pale,  the  bishops  found  a  pretext  for  their  jurisdiction  in  the
nature  of  the  dispute.  Spiritual  causes  alone,  it  was  agreed,
could  appertain  to  the  spiritual  tribunal.  But  the  word  was
indefinite ;  and  according  to  the  interpreters  of  the  twelfth
century,  the  church  was  always  bound  to  prevent  and  chas¬
tise  the  commission  of  sin.  By  this  sweeping  maxim,  which
we  have  seen  Innocent  III.  apply  to  vindicate  his  control
over  national  quarrels,  the  common  differences  of  individuals,
which  generally  involve  some  charge  of  wilful  injury,  fell
into  the  hands  of  a  religious  judge.  One  is  almost  surprised
to  find  that  it  did  not  extend  more  universally,  and  might
praise  the  moderation  of  the  church.  Real  actions,  or  suits
relating  to  the  property  of  land,  were  always  the  exclusive
province  of  the  lay  court,  even  where  a  clerk  was  the  defend¬
ant.'2  But  the  ecclesiastical  tribunals  took  cognizance  of

'  Cleric!  qui  cum  unicls  et  rirginibu*  jected  these  married  clerks  to  taxes,  and
contraxerunt,  si  tonsuram  et  Testes  de-  later  ordinances  of  the  French  kings  ren-
ferant  clericales,  privilege  um  retineant  dered  them  amenable  to  temporal  juris-

- prasenti  declaramus  edicto,  hujus-  diction;  from  which,  in  Naples,  by  va-

modi  clericos  conjugatos  pro  commissi*  rious  provisions  of  the  Angevin  line,  they
ab  iis  excessibus  vel  delicti*,  trahi  non  always  continued  free.  Giannone,  1.  xix.
l»oft*e  criminaliter  aut  civiliter  ad  judi-  c.  6.

cium  sseculare.  Bon  i  lari  us  Octavus,  in  3  Decretal,  1.  ii.  t.  ii.  Ordonnancea
Sext.  Decretal..!.  lii.  tit.il.  c.  i.  des  Hois,  t.  i.  p.  40  (a.d.  1189).  In  the

Philip  the  Bold,  however,  had  sub-  council  of  Lambeth  in  1261  the  bishop*

VOL.  II.  14

210

ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION  Chap.  VII.  Taut  II.

breaches  of  contract,  at  least  where  an  oath  had  been  pledg¬
ed,  and  of  personal  trusts.1  They  had  not  only  an  exclusive
jurisdiction  over  questions  immediately  matrimonial,  but  a
concurrent  one  with  the  civil  magistrate  in  France,  though
never  in  Kngland,  over  matters  incident  to  the  nuptial  con¬
tract,  as  claims  of  marriage  portion  and  of  dower.2  lhey  took
the  execution  of  testaments  into  their  hands,  on  account  of
the  legacies  to  pious  uses  which  testators  were  advised  to  be
queath.8  In  process  of  time,  and  under  favorable  circum
stances,  they  made  still  greater  strides.  They  pretended  a
right  to  supply  the  defects,  the  doubts,  or  the  negligence  of
temporal  judges;  and  invented  a  class  of  mixed  causes,
whereof  the  lay  or  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  took  possession
according  to  priority.  Besides  this  extensive  authority  iu
civil  disputes,  they  judged  of  some  offences  which  naturally
belong  to  the  criminal  law,  as  well  as  of  some  others  which
participate  of  a  civil  and  criminal  nature.  Such  were  per¬
jury,  sacrilege,  usury,  incest,  and  adultery  ;  *  from  the  pun¬
ishment  of  ull  which  the  secular  magistrate  refrained,  at  least
in  England,  after  they  had  become  the  province  of  a  sepa¬
rate  jurisdiction.  Excommunication  still  continued  the  only
chastisement  which  the  church  could  directly  inflict.  But
the  bishops  acquired  a  right  of  having  their  own  prisons
for  lay  offenders,6  and  the  monasteries  were  the  appropriate
prisons  of  clerks.  Their  sentences  of  excommunication  were
enforced  by  the  temporal  magistrate  by  imprisonment  or
sequestration  of  effects ;  in  some  cases  by  couliscation  or
death.8

claim  a  right  to  Judge  Inter  clericos  nun*,
rel  inter  laico*  conquerentes  et  cleriro*
defrmlente*,  in  perKouttlibu*  action!  bn*
super  contrortibuA,  aut  delicti*  ant  quasi,
1. 1.  quasi  dilictis.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  t.  i.
y,  7  1  :  .

l  Onion  nun  oca  de*  Kola,  p.  819  (a.D.
1290).

*  Id.  p.  40.  121,  220,  819.

*  Id.  p.  819.  Qian ril,  I.  t«.  c.  7.
Fancho  IV.  gave  the  mine  jurisdiction  to
the  clergy  of  Castile,  Teoria  de  la*  Cortes,
t.  iii  p.  20  ;  and  in  other  reaped*  fol¬
lowed  the  example  of  hU  father,  Alfonso
X.,  in  (hforiug  their  eucroachmenU.
The  church  of  Scotland  aeema  to  hare
had  nearly  the  same  jurisdiction  u  that
of  England.  Piukerton’*  History  of
Scotland,  toI.  i.  p.  178.

4  It  wax  a  maxim  of  the  canon,  an  well
u  the  common  law,  that  no  person

should  be  punished  twice  for  the  same
offence ;  therefore,  if  a  clerk  had  been
degraded,  or  a  penance  imposed  on  a
layman.  It  wiw  supposed  unjust  to  pro¬
ceed  against  him  in  a  temporal  court.

6  Charlemagne  In  said  by  Gian  none  to
hare  permitted  the  bUhops  to  hare
prisons  of  their  own.  L  ri.  c.  7.

«  Giaunoue,  1.  xix.  c.  5,  t.  iii.  Shmidt,
t  ir.  p.  196.  t.  ri.  p.  126.  Fleury,
Discount,  M£in.  de  l’Acad.  dr*  Iuscript.
t.  xxxix.  p.  608.  Ecclesiastical  juris¬
diction  not  harlug  been  uniform  in  dif¬
ferent  agee  and  countries,  it  U  difficult
without  much  attention  to  distinguish
iu  general  and  permanent  attribute*
from  those  lee*  completely  established.
It*  description,  a*  gireu  in  the  Decretal*,
lib.  U.  tit.  it.,  De  foro  com  pete  uti,  doe*
not  support  the  pretension*  made  by  the
canonist*,  nor  come  up  to  the  sweeping

Ecclf.s.  Power.

AND  IMMUNITY.

211

The  clergy  did  not  forget  to  secure  along  with  this  juris¬
diction  their  own  absolute  exemption  from  the  and  immu-
criminal  justice  of  the  state.  This,  as  I  have  nity-
above  mentioned,  had  been  conceded  to  them  by  Charle¬
magne  ;  and  this  privilege  was  not  enjoyed  by  clerks  in
England  before  the  conquest ;  nor  do  we  find  it  proved  by
any  records  long  afterwards ;  though  it  seems,  by  what  we
read  about  the  constitutions  of  Clarendon,  to  have  grown  into
use  before  the  reign  of  Henry  II.  As  to  France  and  Ger¬
many,  I  cannot  pretend  to  say  that  the  law  of  Charlemagne
granting  an  exemption  from  ordinary  criminal  process  was
ever  abrogated.  The  False  Decretals  contain  some  passages
in  favor  of  ecclesiastical  immunity,  which  Gratian  repeats  in
his  collection.1  About  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century  the
principle  obtained  general  reception,  and  Innocent  III.  de¬
cided  it  to  be  an  inalienable  right  of  the  clergy,  whereof  they
could  not  be  divested  even  by  their  own  consent.2  Much
less  were  any  constitutions  of  princes,  or  national  usages,
deemed  of  force  to  abrogate  such  an  important  privilege.8
These,  by  the  canon  law,  were  invalid  when  they  affected  the
rights  and  liberties  of  holy  church.4  But  the  spiritual  courts
were  charged  with  scandalously  neglecting  to  visit  the  most
atrocious  offences  of  clerks  with  such  punishment  as  they
could  inflict.  The  church  could  always  absolve  from  her
own  censures ;  and  confinement  in  a  monastery,  the  usual
sentence  upon  criminals,  was  frequently  slight  and  temporary.
Several  instances  are  mentioned  of  heinous  outrages  that  re¬
mained  nearly  unpunished  through  the  shield  of  ecclesiastical
privilege.6  And  as  the  temporal  courts  refused  their  assist¬
ance  to  a  rival  jurisdiction,  the  clergy  had  no  redress  for  their
own  injuries,  and  even  the  murder  of  a  priest  at  one  time,  as
we  are  told,  was  only  punishable  by  excommunication.6

definition  of  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  by
Boniface  VIII.  in  the  Sext.  1.  iii.  tit.
xxiii.  c.  40,  give  ambte  partes  hoc  volu-
eriut,  sive  una  super  causis  ecclesiastic!*,
sive  quae  ad  forum  ecclesiastic uin  rntione
persouarum,  negotiorum,  Tel  reruin  de
jure  vel  de  antique  consuetudine  perti¬
nent  noscuntur.

t  Fleury,  7"*  Discours.

*  Id.  Institutions  au  Droit  Eccl6s.  t.
li.  p.  8.

*  In  criminalibus  causis  in  nullo  casu
possunt  clerici  ab  aliquo  qu&m  ab  eccle-
siastico  judice  condemnarl,  etiamsi  con-

suetudo  regia  habeat  ut  fures  a  judicibua
ssecularibus  judieentur.  Decretal.  1.  i.
tit.  i.  c.  8.

4  Decret.  distinct.  96.

ft  Collier,  vol.  i.  p.  851.  It  is  laid
down  in  the  canon  laws  that  a  layman
cannot  be  a  witness  in  a  criminal  case
against  a  clerk.  Decretal.  1.  ii.  tit.  xx.
c.  14.

•  Lyttelton’s  Henry  II.,  toI.  iii.  p.  322.
This  must  be  restricted  to  that  period  of
open  hostility  between  the  church  and
state.

212

ENDEAVORS  TO  REPRESS  Chap.  VII.  Pakt  II.

Such  an  incoherent  medley  of  laws  and  magistrates,  upon
the  symmetrical  arrangement  of  which  all  social
made  to  re-  economy  mainly  depends,  could  not  fail  to  produce
K^un.i'11  a  violent  collision.  Every  sovereign  was  inter¬
ested  in  vindicating  the  authority  of  the  constitu¬
tions  which  had  been  formed  by  his  ancestors,  or  by  the  people
whom  he  governed.  But  the  first  who  undertook  this  arduous
work,  the  first  who  appeared  openly  against  ecclesiastical
tyranny,  was  our  llenry  II.  The  Anglo-Saxon  church,  not
so  much  connected  as  some  others  with  Rome,  and  enjoying  a
sort  of  barbarian  immunity  from  the  thraldom  of  canonical
discipline,  though  rich,  and  highly  respected  by  a  devout  na¬
tion,  had  never,  perhaps,  desired  the  thorough  independence
upon  secular  jurisdiction  at  which  the  continental  hierarchy
aimed.  William  the  Conqueror  first  separated  the  ecclesias¬
tical  from  the  civil  tribunal,  and  forbade  the  bishops  to  judge
of  spiritual  causes  in  the  hundred  court.1  Ilis  language  is,
however,  too  indefinite  to  warrant  any  decisive  proposition  as
to  the  nature  of  such  causes ;  probably  they  had  not  yet  been
carried  much  beyond  their  legitimate  extent.  Of  clerical  ex¬
emption  from  the  secular  arm  we  find  no  earlier  notice  than
in  the  coronation  oath  of  Stephen ;  which,  though  vaguely
expressed,  may  be  construed  to  include  it.1  But  I  am  not
certain  that  the  law  of  England  had  unequivocally  recognized
that  claim  at  the  time  of  the  constitutions  of  Clarendon.  It
was  at  least  an  innovation,  which  the  legislature  might  with¬
out  scruple  or  transgression  of  justice  abolish.  Henry  II.,  in
that  famous  statute,  attempted  in  three  respects  to  limit  the
jurisdiction  assumed  by  the  church ;  asserting  for  his  own
judges  the  cognizance  of  contracts,  however  confirmed  by
oath,  and  of  rights  of  advowson,  and  also  that  of  offences
committed  by  clerks,  whom,  as  it  is  gently  expressed,  after

1  Ut  null  ill  eplscopu*  Tel  archidi&ro-  but  apparently  with  little  effort.  The
nus  de  legibu*  episropalibu*  awplius  in  *eparatJon  of  the  cirll  and  ecclesiastical
Hundret  plarita  teneant,  neccausam  quae  tribunal*  was  not  made  in  Denmark  tlU
a  I  regimen  animarum  pertinet.  ad  ju-  the  reign  of  Nicbolaa,  who  aarended  the
dictum  asecularium  hominum  adducent,  throne  in  1106.  Langvbek,  Script.  Her.
Wilkin*,  lieges  Anglo-Saxon.  280.  Danic.  t.  It.  p.  880.  Other*  refer  the

Before  the  conquest  the  bishop  and  law  to  St.  Canut,  about  1080.  t.  U.  p.
earl  sat  together  in  the  court  of  the  2U9.

county  or  hundred,  and,  as  we  may  lu-  3  Eerie*  last  lea  rum  person  a  rum  et  otn-

fer  from  the  tenor  of  this  charter,  eecle-  nium  clericorum,  et  rerum  corum  Ju*-
siastiral  matter*  were  decided  loosely,  tltiam  et  potestatem,  et  distributionem
and  rather  by  the  common  law  than  ac-  ho  norum  ecclesiastlcorura,  in  manu  epla-
cording  to  the  canons.  Till*  practice  coporum  esse  perhibeo,  etoonflrmo.  W Ji¬
had  been  already  forbidden  by  eonie  kin*,  Lege*  Anglo-Saxon,  p.  810.
canon*  enacted  under  Edgar,  id.  p.  83,

Eccles.  Power.  ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.

213

conviction  or  confession  the  church  ought  not  to  protect.1
These  constitutions  were  the  leading  subject  of  difference
between  the  king  and  Thomas  h  Becket.  Most  of  them  were
annulled  by  the  pope,  as  derogatory  to  ecclesiastical  liberty.
It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that,  if  Louis  VII.  had  played
a  more  dignified  part,  the  see  of  Rome,  which  an  existing
schism  rendered  dependent  upon  the  favor  of  those  two  mon-
archs,  might  have  receded  in  some  measure  from  her  preten¬
sions.  But  France  implicitly  giving  way  to  the  encroachments
of  ecclesiastical  power,  it  became  impossible  for  Henry  com¬
pletely  to  withstand  them.

The  constitutions  of  Clarendon,  however,  produced  some
effect,  and  in  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  more  unremitted  and
successful  efforts  began  to  be  made  to  maintain  the  indepen¬
dence  of  temporal  government.  The  judges  of  the  king’s
court  had  until  that  time  been  themselves  principally  ecclesi¬
astics,  and  consequently  tender  of  spiritual  privileges.2  But
now,  abstaining  from  the  exercise  of  temporal  jurisdiction,  in
obedience  to  the  strict  injunctions  of  their  canons,8  the  clergy
gave  place  to  common  lawyers,  professors  of  a  system  very
discordant  from  their  own.  These  soon  began  to  assert  the
supremacy  of  their  jurisdiction  by  issuing  writs  of  prohibition
whenever  the  ecclesiastical  tribunals  passed  the  boundaries
which  approved  use  had  established.4  Little  accustomed  to
such  control,  the  proud  hierarchy  chafed  under  the  bit ;  several
provincial  synods  protest  against  the  pretensions  of  laymen  to
judge  the  anointed  ministers  whom  they  were  bound  to  obey;8
the  cognizance  of  rights  of  patronage  and  breaches  of  con¬
tract  is  boldly  asserted ; 6  but  firm  and  cautious,  favored  by  the
nobility,  though  not  much  by  the  king,  the  judges  receded
not  a  step,  and  ultimately  fixed  a  barrier  which  the  church
was  forced  to  respect.7  In  the  ensuing  reign  of  Edward  I.,

1  Wilkins,  Lege*  Anglo-Saxon,  p.  823 ;
Lyttelton*  Henry  II.  ;  Collier,  See.

*  Dugdale’s  Origine#  Ju ridicules,  c.  8.

*  Decretal.  I.  i.  tit.  xxxrii.  c.  1.  Wil¬
kin#,  Concilia,  t.  ii.  p.  4.

*  Prynne  has  produced  several  ex¬
tract#  from  the  pipe-roll#  of  Henry  II.,
where  a  person  ha#  been  fined  quia  placi-
tarit  do  laico  feodo  in  curia  christiani-
tati#.  And  a  bishop  of  Durham  is  fined
fire  hundred  marks  quia  tenuit  placitum
tie  a/ivoeaiione.  cujusdam  ecclesict  in  curii
rhristianitatis.  Epistle  dedicatory  to
Prynue'a  Records,  rol.  iii.  tllauvil  ’gives

tho  form  of  a  writ  of  prohibition  to  the
spiritual  court  for  inquiring  de  feodo
laico ;  for  it  had  jurisdiction  over  lands
in  frankalmoign.  This  is  comformable  to
the  constitutions  of  Clarendon,  and  shows
that  they  were  still  in  force.  See  also
Lyttelton’s  Henry  II.,  vol.  iii.  p.  97.

6  Cum  judicandi  Christos  domini  nulla
sit  laid#  attributa  potesta*.  apud  quos
manet  necessita#  obsequendi.  Wilkins,
Concilia,  t.  i.  p.  747.

«  Id.  ibid. ;  et  t.  ii.  p.  90.

?  Vide  Wilkins.  Concilia,  t.  ii.  passim

214

ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION.  Chap.  VII.  Pakt  II.

an  archbishop  acknowledges  the  abstract  right  of  the  king’s
bench  to  issue  prohibitions;1 2  and  the  statute  entitled  Circuiu-
spectii  agatis,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  that  prince,  while  by
its  mode  of  expression  it  seems  designed  to  guanmtee  the
actual  privileges  of  spiritual  jurisdiction,  had  a  tendency,
especially  with  the  disposition  of  the  judges,  to  preclude  the
assertion  of  some  which  are  not  therein  mentioned.  Neither
the  right  of  advowson  nor  any  temporal  contract  is  specified
in  this  act  as  pertaining  to  the  church ;  and  accordingly  the
temporal  courts  have  ever  since  maintained  an  undisputed
jurisdiction  over  them.3 * * * *  They  succeeded  also  partially  in
preventing  the  impunity  of  crimes  perpetrated  by  clerks.  It
was  enacted  by  the  statute  of  Westminster,  in  1275,  or  rather
a  construction  was  put  upon  that  act,  which  is  obscurely  worded,
that  clerks  indicted  for  felony  should  not  be  delivered  to  their
ordinary  until  an  inquest  had  been  taken  of  the  matter  of  ac¬
cusation,  and,  if  they  were  found  guilty,  that  their  real  and
personal  estate  should  be  forfeited  to  the  crown.  In  later
tunes  the  clerical  privilege  was  not  allowed  till  the  party  had
pleaded  to  the  indictment,  and  being  duly  convict,  as  is  the
practice  at  present.8

The  civil  magistrates  of  France  did  not  by  any  means
Lew  Tig..,.-  exert  themselves  so  vigorously  for  their  emancipa-
ous  in  tion.  The  same  or  rather  worse  usurpations
existed,  and  the  same  complaints  were  made,
under  Philip  Augustus,  St.  Louis,  and  Philip  the  Bold ;  but

1  Licet  prohibitions  hujusmodi  a  curtt
ehri*tiani**inii  regis  nostri  ju*t6  procul-
dubio.  ut  dixiuius.  coucedantur.  Id.
1. 11.  p.  100  and  p.  115.

2  The  statute  Circumspect^  agatis,  for
it  is  acknowledged  a*  a  statute,  though

not  drawn  up  in  the  form  of  one.  la
founded  upon  an  answer  of  Kdward  I.  to
the  prelate*  who  had  petitioned  for  some
modification  of  prohibitions.  Collier,
always  prune  to  exaggerate  church  au¬

thority,  insinuates  that  the  juriulietion
of  the  spiritual  court  over  breach**  of
contract,  even  without  oath,  1*  preferred
by  this  statute;  but  the  expn**s  word*
of  the  king  show  that  none  whatever  wax
intended.  and  the  archbishop  complain*
bitterly  of  it  afterward*.  Wilkins,  Con¬
cilia,  t.  11.  p.  118.  Collier's  Bccleslast.

History,  vol.  1.  p.  487.  So  for  ta

having  any  cognisance  of  civil  contracts

not  confirmed  by  oath,  to  which  I  am
not  certain  that  the  church  ever  pre¬

tended  in  any  country,  the  spiritual  court

had  no  jurisdiction  at  all,  even  where  an
oath  had  intervened,  unless  there  was  a
deficiency  of  proof  by  writing  or  wit¬
nesses.  Glanvil.  1.  x.  c.  12;  Constltut.
Clarendon,  art.  15.

*2  Inst.  p.  188.  Tills  is  not  likely
to  mislead  a  well-informed  reader,  but
it  ought,  perhAps,  to  bo  mentioned  that
by  the  “clerical  privilege’*  we  a  re  only
to  understand  what  is  called  benefit  of
clergy,  which  In  fact  is,  or  rather  was
till  recent  alterations  of  the  law  since  the
first  edition  of  this  work,  no  more  than
the  remission  of  capital  punishment  for
the  first  conviction  of  felony,  and  that
not  for  the  clergy  alone,  but  for  all  cul¬
prits  alike.  They  were  not  called  upon
at  any  time,  I  believe,  to  prove  their
claim  as  clergy,  except  hy  reading  the
*crir-rers<  after  trial  and  conviction  In
the  king's  court.  They  were  then  In
strictness  to  he  committed  to  the  onb-
narv  or  ecclesiastical  superior,  which
probably  was  not  often  doue.

Ecclks.  Power.  ALIENATIONS  IN  MORTMAIN.

215

the  laws  of  those  sovereigns  tend  much  more  to  confirm  than
to  restrain  ecclesiastical  encroachments.1  Some  limitations
were  attempted  by  the  secular  courts ;  and  an  historian  gives
us  the  terms  of  a  confederacy  among  the  French  nobles  in
1246,  binding  themselves  by  oath  not  to  permit  the  spiritual
judges  to  take  cognizance  of  any  matter,  except  heresy,  mar¬
riage,  and  usury.2 *  Unfortunately  Louis  IX.  was  almost  as
little  disposed  as  Henry  III.  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  ecclesi¬
astical  dominion.  But  other  sovereigns  in  the  same  period,
from  various  motives,  were  equally  submissive.  Frederic  II.
explicitly  adopts  the  exemption  of  clerks  from  criminal  as
well  as  civil  jurisdiction  of  seculars.8  And  Alfonso  X.  intro¬
duced  the  same  system  in  Castile ;  a  kingdom  where  neither
the  papal  authority  nor  the  independence  of  the  church  had
obtained  any  legal  recognition  until  the  promulgation  of  his
code,  which  teems  with  all  the  principles  of  the  canon  law.4 *
It  is  almost  needless  to  mention  that  all  ecclesiastical  powers
and  privileges  were  incorporated  with  the  jurisprudence  of
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  which,  especially  after  the  accession
of  the  Angevin  line,  stood  in  a  peculiar  relation  of  depend¬
ence  upon  the  Holy  See.6 *

The  vast  acquisitions  of  landed  wealth  made  for  many
ages  by  bishops,  chapters,  and  monasteries,  began  Restraints
at  length  to  excite  the  jealousy  of  sovereigns.  tion!"i'na"
They  perceived  that,  although  the  prelates  might  mortmain,
send  their  stipulated  proportion  of  vassals  into  the  field,  yet
there  could  not  be  that  active  cooperation  which  the  spirit
of  feudal  tenures  required,  and  that  the  national  arm  was
palsied  by  the  diminution  of  military  nobles.  Again  the  re-

1  It  seems  deducibl©  from  a  law  of
Philip  Augustus,  Ordonnances  des  Rois,
t.  i.  p.  39,  that  a  clerk  convicted  of  some
heinous  offences  might  be  capitally  pun¬
ished  after  degradation:  yet  a  subse¬
quent  ordinance,  p.  43,  renders  this
doubtful;  and  the  theory  of  clerical  im¬
munity  became  afterwards  more  fully
established.

2  Matt.  Paris,  p.  629.

*  Statuimus,  ut  nullus  ecclesiasticam
personam,  in  criminal*  qusestione  vel
civili,  trahere  ad  judicium  sa*culare  pra?-

sumat.  Ordonnances  des  Rois  de  France,

t.  i.  p.  611,  where  this  edict  is  recited
and  approved  by  Louis  Hutin.  Philip

the  Bold  had  obtained  leave  from  the
pope  to  arrest  clerks  accused  of  heinous

crimes,  on  condition  of  remitting  them

to  the  bishop's  court  for  trial.  Ilist.  du

Droit  Eocl.  Franq.  t.  i.  p.  426.  A  coun¬
cil  at  Bourgcs,  held  in  1276  had  so  abso¬
lutely  condemned  all  interference  of  the
secular  power  with  clerks  that  the  king
was  obliged  to  solicit  this  moderate  fa¬
vor.  p.  421.

*  Marina,  Ensayo  Ilistorlco-Critico  80-
bre  las  Siete  Parti  das,  c.  820,  See.  Hist,
du  Droit  EccUjh.  Franq.  t.  i.  p.  442.

6  Giannone,  1.  xix.  c.  v. ;  1.  xx.  c.  8.
Ono  provision  of  Robert  king  of  Naples
is  remarkable  :  it  extends  the  immunity
of  clerks  to  their  concubines.  Ibid.

Villani  stronglv  censures  a  law  made
at  Florence  in  1345,  taking  away  the
persoual  immunity  of  clerks  in  criminal
cases.  Though  the  state  could  make
such  a  law,  he  says,  it  had  no  right  to  do
so  against  the  liberties  of  holy  church.
1.  xil.  c.  43.

216

BOXIFACE  VIII.

Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

liefs  upon  succession,  and  similar  dues  upon  alienation,  inci¬
dental  to  fiefs,  were  entirely  lost  when  they  came  into  the
hands  of  these  undying  corporations,  to  the  serious  injury  of
the  feudal  superior.  Nor  could  it  escape  reflecting  men,
during  the  contest  about  investitures,  that,  if  the  church  per¬
emptorily  denied  the  supremacy  of  the  state  over  her  tem¬
poral  wealth,  it  was  but  a  just  measure  of  retaliation,  or  rather
selfMefence,  that  the  state  should  restrain  her  further  acquisi¬
tions.  Prohibitions  of  gifts  in  mortmain,  though  unknown  to
the  lavish  devotion  of  the  new  kingdoms,  had  been  establish¬
ed  by  some  of  the  Roman  emperors  to  check  the  overgrown
wealth  of  the  hierarchy.1  The  first  attempt  at  a  limitation
of  this  description  in  modern  times  was  made  by  Frederic
Barbarossa,  who,  in  1158,  enacted  that  no  fief  should  be
transferred,  either  to  the  church  or  otherwise,  without  the
permission  of  the  superior  lord.  Louis  IX.  inserted  a  pro¬
vision  of  the  same  kind  in  his  Establishments.4  Ca>tile  had
also  laws  of  a  similar  tendency.®  A  license  from  the  crown
is  said  to  have  been  necessary  in  England  before  the  con¬
quest  for  alienations  in  mortmain ;  but  however  that  may  be,
there  seems  no  reason  to  imagine  that  any  restraint  was  put
upon  them  by  the  common  law  before  Magna  Cliarta ;  a
clause  of  which  statute  was  construed  to  prohibit  all  gifts  to
religious  houses  without  the  consent  of  the  lord  of  the  fee.
And  by  the  7th  Edward  I.  alienations  in  mortmain  are  abso¬
lutely  taken  away ;  though  the  king  might  always  exercise
his  prerogative  of  granting  a  license,  which  was  not  supi>osed
to  be  affected  by  the  statute.4

It  must  appear,  I  think,  to  every  careful  inquirer  that  the
Boniface  papal  authority,  though  manifesting  outwardly
*11L  more  show  of  strength  every  year,  had  been  se¬
cretly  undermined,  and  lost  a  great  deal  of  its  hold  iqxm
public  opinion,  before  the  accession  of  Boniface  VIII.,  in
1264,  to  the  |>ontificul  throne.  The  clergy  were  rendered
sullen  by  demands  of  money,  invasions  of  the  legal  right  of
patronage,  and  unreasonable  jmrtiality  to  the  mendicant
orders ;  a  part  of  the  mendicants  themselves  had  begun  to

>  Glannone,  1.  III.  *  Marina.  Ennavo  aobn  Ua  Sirt«  Par-

•  Ordonnancui  da*  Rot*,  p.  218.  See,  tidaa,  e.  235.
loo,  p.  3"3  and  alibi.  Du  Cange,  t.  Ma-  *  2  Inat.  p.  74.  Ulaclutone,  toI.  11.
niu  morte.  Amortissirnrnt,  in  Deniyart  c.  18.
and  oilier  French  law-book*.  Fleury,

Inatit  au  Droit,  t.  i.  p.  380.

Eccles.  Power.

BONIFACE  Yin.

217

declaim  against  the  corruptions  of  the  papal  court ;  while  the
laity,  subjects  alike  and  sovereigns,  looked  upon  both  the
head  and  the  members  of  the  hierarchy  with  jealousy  and
dislike.  Boniface,  full  of  inordinate  arrogance  and  ambition,
and  not  sufficiently  sensible  of  this  gradual  change  in  human
opinion,  endeavored  to  strain  to  a  higher  pitch  the  despotic
pretensions  of  former  pontiffs.  As  Gregory  VII.  appears
the  most  usurping  of  mankind  till  we  read  the  history  of  In¬
nocent  III.,  so  Innocent  III.  is  thrown  into  shade  by  the  su¬
perior  audacity  of  Boniface  VIII.  But  independently  of  the
less  favorable  dispositions  of  the  public,  he  wanted  the  most
essential  quality  for  an  ambitious  pope,  reputdlion  for  integ¬
rity.  He  was  suspected  of  having  procured  through  fraud
the  resignation  of  his  predecessor  Celestine  V.,  and  his  harsh
treatment  of  that  worthy  man  afterwards  seems  to  justify  the
reproach.  Ilis  actions,  however,  display  the  intoxication  of
extreme  self-confidence.  If  we  may  credit  some  historians,
he  appeared  at  the  Jubilee  in  1300,  a  festival  successfully  in¬
stituted  by  himself  to  throw  lustre  around  his  court  and  fill
his  treasury,1  dressed  in  imperial  habits,  with  the  two  swords
borne  before  him,  emblems  of  his  temporal  as  well  as  spirit¬
ual  dominion  over  the  earth.2

It  was  not  long  after  his  elevation  to  the  pontificate
before  Boniface  displayed  his  temper.  The  two  Hja  ^  ^
most  powerful  sovereigns  of  Europe,  Philip  the  with  the
Fair  and  Edward  I.,  began  at  the  same  moment  S"8,0*,
to  attack  in  a  very  arbitrary  manner  the  revenues
of  the  church.  The  English  clergy  had,  by  their  own
voluntary  grants,  or  at  least  those  of  the  prelates  in  their
name,  paid  frequent  subsidies  to  the  crown  from  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  They  had  nearly  in  effect
waived  the  ancient  exemption,  and  retained  only  the  com¬
mon  privilege  of  English  freemen  to  tax  themselves  in  a  con-

1  The  Jubilee  was  &  centenary  com¬
memoration  in  honor  of  St.  Peter  ami
.^t.  Pul  established  by  Bontttee VIII.
on  the  faith  of  an  imaginary  precedent  a
century  before.  The  |>eriod  was  soon
reduced  to  fifty  years,  and  from  thence  to
tventjH&ve,  ei  It  ‘•till  continues.  The
court  of  Koine,  at  the  next  jubilee,  will
however  read  with  a  sigh  the  description
given  of  that  in  1300.  Papa  innumera-
bilem  pecuniam  ab  ilsdem  recepit,  quia
die  et  nocte  duo  clerici  stabant  ad  alturo
bancti  Pauli,  tenentes  in  eoruw  mauibus

rastellos,  rnstellanfces  pecuniam  infinitam.
A uc tor  apud  Muratori,  Annuli  d’  Italia.
Plenary  indulgences  were  granted  by
Boniface  to  all  who  should  keep  their
jubilee  at  Koine,  and  I  suppose  are  still
to  be  had  on  tne  same  terms.  Matteo
Villani  gives  a  curious  account  of  the
throng  at  Home  in  1860.

*  (iiannone,  1.  xxi.  c.  3.  Velly,  t.  vii.
p.  149.  I  have  not  observed  any  good
authority  referred  to  for  this  fact,  which
is  however  in  the  character  of  Boniface.

218

DISPUTES  OF  BONIFACE  VIII.  Chap  VII.  Fakt  II.

stitutional  manner.  But  Edward  I.  came  upon  them  with
demands  so  frequent  and  exorbitant,  that  they  were  compel¬
led  to  take  advantage  of  a  bull  issued  by  Boniface,  forbidding
them  to  pay  any  contribution  to  the  state.  The  king  disre¬
garded  every  pretext,  and,  seizing  their  goods  into  his  hands,
with  other  tyrannical  proceedings,  ultimately  forced  them  to
acquiesce  in  his  extortion.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  pope
appears  to  have  been  passive  throughout  this  contest  of
Edward  I.  with  his  clergy.  But  it  was  far  otherwise  in
ana  of  France.  Philip  the  Fair  had  imposed  a  tax  on
the  ecclesiastical  order  without  their  consent,  a
measure  perlfcps  unprecedented,  yet  not  more  odious  than
the  similar  exactions  of  the  king  of  England.  Irritated  by
some  previous  differences,  the  pope  issued  his  bull  known  by
the  initisd  words  Clerieis  laieos,  absolutely  forbidding  the
clergy  of  every  kingdom  to  pay,  under  whatever  pretext  of
voluntary  grant,  gift,  or  loan,  any  sort  of  tribute  to  their
government  without  his  special  permission.  Though  France
was  not  particularly  named,  the  king  understood  himself  to
be  intended,  aud  took  his  revenge  by  a  prohibition  to  ex|>ort
money  from  the  kingdom.  This  produced  angry  remon¬
strances  on  the  part  of  Boniface ;  but  the  Gallican  church
adhered  so  faithfully  to  the  crown,  and  showed  indeed  so
much  willingness  to  be  spoiled  of  their  money,  that  he  could
not  insist  upon  the  most  unreasonable  propositions  of  his  bull,
and  ultimately  allowed  that  the  French  clergy  might  assist
their  sovereign  by  voluntary  contributions,  though  not  by
way  of  tax.

For  a  very  few  years  after  these  circumstances  the  pope
and  king  of  France  appeared  reconciled  to  each  other;  and
the  latter  even  referred  his  disputes  with  Edward  I.  to  the
arbitration  of  Boniface,  “as  a  private  person,  Benedict  of
Gaeta  (his  proper  name),  and  not  as  pontiff an  ulino-t  nu¬
gatory  precaution  against  his  encroachment  u|>on  temporal
authority.1  But  a  terrible  storm  broke  out  in  the  first  year

1  Walt  Hrmingford,  p.  160.  The  award
of  Boniface,  which  he  exprriMefi  hiuuelf
to  make  both  a*  pope  and  Benedict  of
Gaeta.  If  publiahed  in  Rymer,  t.  li.  p.  819,
and  if  very  equitable.  No  vert  he  lee*,
the  French  historian*  agreed  to  charge
hltn  with  partiality  toward*  Kdwarl,
and  mention  neTeral  proof*  of  it,  which
do  not  appear  in  the  bull  it«elf.  Previous
to  it*  publication  it  waf  allowable  enough

to  follow  common  fkme  ;  but  Velly  haa
repeated  mere  fklachood*  from  Mrjeray
and  Baillct,  while  he  refer*  to  the  In-
ftruinent  iUelf  In  Kytner,  which  dis¬
prove*  them.  Hi«t.  dr  France,  t.  vll.
p.  139.  'I.  GnilUrd.  one  of  the  meet

candid  critic*  in  hlMory  that  France  rn>r
produced,  pointed  out  the  error  of  her
common  hUtoriau*  In  the  Metu.  de  I'Acv.
dcmie  dr*  Inscription*,  t.  xxxix.  p.  042  j

Eccles.  Power.  WITH  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE.

219

of  the  fourteenth  century.  A  bishop  of  Pamiers,  who  had
been  sent  as  legate  from  Boniface  with  some  complaint,  dis¬
played  so  much  insolence  and  such  disrespect  towards  the
king,  that  Philip,  considering  him  as  his  own  subject,  was
provoked  to  put  him  under  arrest,  with  a  view  to  institute  a
criminal  process.  Boniface,  incensed  beyond  measure  at  this
violation  of  ecclesiastical  and  legatine  privileges,  published
several  bulls  addressed  to  the  king  and  clergy  of  France,
charging  the  former  with  a  variety  of  offences,  some  of  them
not  at  all  concerning  the  church,  and  commanding  the  latter
to  attend  a  council  which  he  had  summoned  to  meet  at  Rome.
In  one  of  these  instruments,  the  genuineness  of  which  does
not  seem  liable  to  much  exception,  he  declares  in  concise
and  clear  terms  that  the  king  was  subject  to  him  in  temporal
as  well  as  spiritual  matters.  This  proposition  had  not  hitherto
been  explicitly  advanced,  and  it  was  now  too  late  to  advance
it.  Philip  replied  by  a  short  letter  in  the  rudest  language,
and  ordered  his  bulls  to  be  publicly  burned  at  Paris.  Deter¬
mined,  however,  to  show  the  real  strength  of  his  opposition,
he  summoned  representatives  from  the  three  orders  of  his
kingdom.  This  is  commonly  reckoned  the  first  assembly  of
the  States  General.  The  nobility  and  commons  disclaimed
with  firmness  the  temporal  authority  of  the  pope,  and  con¬
veyed  their  sentiments  to  Rome  through  letters  addressed  to
the  college  of  cardinals.  The  clergy  endeavored  to  steer  a
middle  course,  and  were  reluctant  to  enter  into  an  engage¬
ment  not  to  obey  the  pope’s  summons ;  yet  they  did  not
hesitate  unequivocally  to  deny  his  temporal  jurisdiction.

The  council,  however,  opened  at  Rome ;  and  notwithstand¬
ing  the  king’s  absolute  prohibition,  many  French  prelates
held  themselves  bound  to  be  present.  In  this  assembly  Boni¬
face  promulgated  his  famous  constitution,  denominated  Unam
sanctam.  The  church  is  one  body,  he  therein  declares,  and
has  one  head.  Under  its  command  are  two  swords,  the  one
spiritual,  and  the  other  temporal ;  that  to  be  used  by  the
supreme  pontiff  himself;  this  by  kings  and  knights,  by  liis
license  and  at  his  will.  But  the  lesser  sword  must  be  subject
to  the  greater,  and  the  temporal  to  the  spiritual  authority,
lie  concludes  by  declaring  the  subjection  of  every  human
being  to  the  see  of  Rome  to  be  an  article  of  necessary  faith.1

and  the  editors  of  L’Art  do  y^rificr  lea  !  rterquo  eat  in  potentate  ecrlosinp.
Dates  have  also  rectified  it.  splritalis  scilicet  gladius  et  materialU.

220

DISPUTES  OF  BONIFACE  VIII.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

Another  bull  pronounces  all  persons  of  whatever  rank  obliged
to  appear  when  personally  cited  before  t lie  audience  or  apos¬
tolical  tribunal  at  Rome;  “since  such  is  our  pleasure,  who,
by  divine  permission,  rule  the  world.”  Finally,  as  the  rup¬
ture  with  Philip  grew  more  evidently  irreconcilable,  and  the
measures  pursued  by  that  monarch  more  hostile,  he  not  only
excommunicated  him,  but  offered  the  crown  of  France  to  the
emperor  Albert  I.  This  arbitrary  transference  of  kingdoms
was,  like  many  other  pretensions  of  that  age,  an  improvement
upon  the  right  of  deposing  excommunicated  sovereigns.
Gregory  VII.  would  not  have  denied  that  a  nation,  released
by  his  authority  from  its  allegiance,  must  reenter  upon  its
original  right  of  electing  a  new  sovereign.  Rut  Martin  IV.
had  assigned  the  crown  of  Aragon  to  Charles  of  Valois ;  the
first  instance,  I  think,  of  such  an  usurpation  of  power,  but
which  was  defended  by  the  homage  of  Peter  II.,  who  had
rendered  his  kingdom  feudally  dependent,  like  Naples,  upon
the  Holy  See.1  Albert  felt  no  eagerness  to  realize  the  liberid
promises  of  Boniface ;  who  was  on  the  point  of  issuing  a  bull
absolving  the  subjects  of  Philip  from  their  allegiance,  and
declaring  his  forfeiture,  when  a  very  unexpected  circumstance
interrupted  all  his  projects.

It  is  not  surprising,  when  we  consider  how  unaccustomed
men  were  in  those  ages  to  disentangle  the  artful  sophisms,
and  detect  the  falsehoods  in  point  of  fact,  whereon  the  papal
supremacy  had  been  established,  that  the  king  of  France
should  not  have  altogether  pursued  the  course  most  becoming
his  dignity  and  the  goodness  of  his  cause.  He  gave  too  much
the  air  of  a  personal  quarrel  with  Boniface  to  what  should
have  been  a  resolute  opposition  to  the  despotism  of  Rome.

8e<l  In  quilem  pro  ecolwil,  ill*  rero  ab
eoclemi  rxcrcenJus :  tile  aarerJotia.  is
m&au  rvgum  a c  militum,  M>d  ad  nutum
et  patieutUm  sacerdoti*.  Oportet  autem
gladiuin  esse  sub  gladio,  et  temporalem
auctoritatem  spiritali  subjiri  potestati.
Porro  sube**e  Romano  pontifici  ouiul
hu matin*  creature?  declanunus,  dicimus,
dcfluimu*  et  pronunciamu*  ouinino  esse
de  necessitate  fldel.  Extravagant.  1.  i.
tit.  rill.  e.  1.

*  Innocent  IV.  had.  however.  In  1245,
Appointed  one  Bolon.  brother  to  Sanrho
II  .  king  of  Portugal,  to  be  a  sort  of  co¬
adjutor  in  the  government  of  that  king¬
dom,  enjoining  the  barons  to  honor  him
as  their  sovereign,  at  the  same  time  de¬
claring  that  he  did  not  intend  to  deprive

the  king  or  hi*  lawful  issue,  if  be  should
have  any,  of  the  kingdom.  But  this  was
founded  on  the  request  of  the  Portuguese
nobility  themselves,  who  were  dissatis¬
fied  with  Sancho's  administration.  Sext.
Decretal.  1.  I.  tit.  viii.  c.  2.  Art  de  veri¬
fier  les  Dates,  t.  1.  p.  778.

Boniface  Invested  James  II.  of  Aragon
with  the  crown  of  Sardinia,  over  which,
however,  the  see  of  Home  had  always
pretended  to  a  superiority  by  virtue  of
the  concession  (probably  spurious)  of
Louis  the  Ifehonair.  He  promised  Fred¬
eric  king  of  Sicily  the  empire  of  Con¬
stantinople,  which,  I  suppose,  was  not  a
fief  of  the  Holy  See.  Uiannone,  L  »«l-
e.  3

Eccles.  Power.  DECLINE  OF  THE  PAPACY.

221

Accordingly,  in  an  assembly  of  his  states  at  Paris,  he  pre¬
ferred  virulent  charges  against  the  pope,  denying  him  to  have
been  legitimately  elected,  imputing  to  him  various^  heresies,
and  ultimately  appealing  to  a  general  council  and  a  lawful
head  of  the  church.  These  measures  were  not  very  happily
planned ;  and  experience  had  always  shown  that  Europe
would  not  submit  to  change  the  common  chief  of  her  religion
for  the  purposes  of  a  single  sovereign.  But  Philip  succeeded
in  an  attempt  apparently  more  bold  and  singular.  Nogaret,
a  minister  who  had  taken  an  active  share  in  all  the  proceed¬
ings  against  Boniface,  was  secretly  despatched  into  Italy,  and,
joining  with  some  of  the  Colonna  family,  proscribed  as  Ghib-
elins,  and  rancorously  persecuted  by  the  pope,  arrested  him
at  Anagnia,  a  town  in  the  neighborhood  of  Rome,  to  which
he  had  gone  without  guards.  This  violent  action  was  not,
one  would  imagine,  calculated  to  place  the  king  in  an  advan¬
tageous  light ;  yet  it  led  accidentally  to  a  favorable  termination
of  his  dispute.  Boniface  was  soon  rescued  by  the  inhabitants
of  Anagnia ;  but  rage  brought  on  a  fever  which  ended  in  his
death ;  and  the  first  act  of  his  successor,  Benedict  XI.,  was
to  reconcile  the  king  of  France  to  the  Holy  See.1

The  sensible  decline  of  the  papacy  is  to  be  dated  from  the
pontificate  of  Boniface  VIII.,  who  had  strained  its  authority
to  a  higher  pitch  than  any  of  his  predecessors.  There  is  a
spell  wrought  by  uninterrupted  good  fortune,  which  captivates
men’s  understanding,  and  persuades  them,  against  reasoning
and  analogy,  that  violent  power  is  immortal  and  irresistible.
The  spell  is  broken  by  the  first  change  of  success.  We  have
seen  the  working  and  the  dissipation  of  this  charm  with  a
rapidity  to  which  the  events  of  former  times  bear  as  remote
a  relation  as  the  gradual  processes  of  nature  to  her  deluges
and  her  volcanoes.  In  tracing  the  papal  empire  over  man¬
kind  we  have  no  such  marked  and  definite  crisis  of  revolution.
But  slowly,  like  the  retreat  of  waters,  or  the  stealthy  pace  of
old  age,  that  extraordinary  power  over  human  opinion  has
been  subsiding  for  five  centuries.  I  have  already  observed
that  the  symptoms  of  internal  decay  may  be  traced  further
back.  But  as  the  retrocession  of  the  Roman  terminus  under
Adrian  gave  the  first  overt  proof  of  decline  in  the  ambitious
energies  of  that  empire,  so  the  tacit  submission  of  the  sue-

1  Velly,  Hist,  tie  France,  t.  rll.  p.  109-258;  Crerier,  Hiafc.  dc  l’Universitd  de
Paris,  t.  U.  p.  170,  kc.

222

CONTEST  OF  POPES  Ciiap.  VII.  Part  II.

Removal  of
papal  court
to  Avignon,
a.d.  1305.

cessors  of  Boniface  VIII.  to  the  king  of  France  might  have
been  hailed  by  Europe  as  a  token  that  their  influence  was  be¬
ginning  to  abate.  Imprisoned,  insulted,  deprived  eventually
of  life  by  the  violence  of  Philip,  a  prince  excommunicated,
and  who  had  gone  all  lengths  in  defying  and  despising  the
papal  jurisdiction,  Boniface  had  every  claim  to  be  avenged
by  the  inheritors  of  the  same  spiritual  dominion.  When
Benedict  XI.  rescinded  the  bulls  of  his  predecessor,  and  ad¬
mitted  Philip  the  Fair  to  communion,  without  insisting  on
any  concessions,  he  acted  perhaps  prudently,  but  gave  a  fatal
blow  to  the  temporal  authority  of  Rome.

Benedict  XI.  lived  but  a  few  months,  and  his  successor
Clement  V.,  at  the  instigation,  as  is  commonly  sup¬
posed,  of  the  king  of  France,  by  whose  influence
he  had  been  elected,  took  the  extraordinary  step
of  removing  the  papal  chair  to  Avignon.  In  this
city  it  remained  for  more  than  seventy  years  ;  a  period  which
Petrarch  and  other  writers  of  Italy  compare  to  that  of  the
Babylonish  captivity.  The  majority  of  the  cardinals  was
always  French,  and  the  popes  were  uniformly  of  the  same
nation.  Timidly  dependent  upon  the  court  of  France,  they
neglected  the  interests  and  lost  the  affections  of  Italy.  Rome,
forsaken  by  her  sovereign,  nearly  forgot  her  allegiance;  what
remained  of  papal  authority  in  the  ecclesiastical  territories
was  exercised  by  cardinal  legates,  little  to  the  honor  or  ad¬
vantage  of  the  Holy  See.  Yet  the  series  of  Avignon  pontiffs
were  far  from  insensible  to  Italian  politics.  These  occupied,
on  the  contrary,  the  greater  part  of  their  attention.  But
engaging  in  them  from  motives  too  manifestly  selfish,  and
being  regarded  as  a  sort  of  foreigners  from  birth  and  resi¬
dence,  they  aggravated  that  unpopularity  and  bad  reputation
which  from  various  other  causes  attached  itself  to  their  court.

Though  none  of  the  supreme  pontiffs  after  Boniface  VIII.
ventured  upon  such  explicit  assumptions  of  a  gen¬
eral  jurisdiction  over  sovereigns  by  divine  right  as
he  had  made  in  his  controversy  with  Philip,  they
maintained  one  memorable  struggle  for  temporal
power  against  the  emperor  Louis  of  Bavaria  Maxims
long  boldly  repeated  without  contradiction,  and  engrafted
upon  the  canon  law,  passed  almost  for  articles  of  faith  among
the  clergy  and  those  who  trusted  in  them ;  and  in  despite  of  all
ancient  authorities,  Clement  V.  laid  it  down  that  the  popes,

Conteftt  of
pop<*  with
Louis  of
Ilararia.

Fccles.  Power.  WITH  LOUIS  OF  BAVARIA.

223

having  transferred  the  Roman  empire  from  the  Greeks  lo
the  Germans,  and  delegated  the  right  of  nominating  an  em¬
peror  to  certain  electors,  still  reserved  the  prerogative  of
approving  the  choice,  and  of  receiving  from  its  subject  upon
his  coronation  an  oath  of  fealty  and  obedience.1  This  had  a
regard  to  Henry  VII.,  who  denied  that  his  oath  bore  any
such  interpretation,  and  whose  measures,  much  to  the  alarm  of
the  court  of  Avignon,  were  directed  towards  the  restoration
of  his  imperial  rights  in  Italy.  Among  other  things,  he  con¬
ferred  the  rank  of  vicar  of  the  empire  upon  Matteo  Visconti,
lord  of  Milan.  The  popes  had  for  some  time  pretended  to
possess  that  vicariate,  during  a  vacancy  of  the  empire ;  and
after  Henry’s  death  insisted  upon  Visconti’s  surrender  of  the
title.  Several  circumstances,  tor  which  I  refer  to  the  political
historians  of  Italy,  produced  a  war  between  the  pope’s  legate
and  the  Visconti  family.  The  emperor  Louis  sent  assistance
to  the  latter,  as  heads  of  the  Ghibelin  or  imperial  party.
This  interference  cost  him  above  twenty  years  of  trouble.
John  XXII.,  a  man  as  passionate  and  ambitious  as  Boniface
himself,  immediately  published  a  bull  in  which  he  asserted
the  right  of  administering  the  empire  during  its  vacancy
(even  in  Germany,  as  it  seems  from  the  generality  of  his
expression),  as  well  as  of  deciding  in  a  doubtful  choice  of
the  electors,  to  appertain  to  the  Holy  See ;  and  commanded
Louis  to  lay  down  his  pretended  authority  until  the  supreme
jurisdiction  should  determine  upon  his  election.  Louis’s
election  had  indeed  been  questionable ;  but  that  controversy
was  already  settled  in  the  field  of  Muhldorf,  where  he  had
obtained  a  victory  over  his  competitor  the  duke  of  Austria ;
nor  had  the  pope  ever  interfered  to  appease  a  civil  war  dur¬
ing  several  years  that  Germany  had  been  internally  distracted
by  the  dispute.  The  emperor,  not  yielding  to  this
peremptory  order,  was  excommunicated  ;  his  vas-  AB' 1323'
sals  were  absolved  from  their  oath  of  fealty,  and  all  treaties
of  alliance  between  him  and  foreign  princes  annulled.  Ger-

1  Romani  princlpes,  &c . Romano  potestas  cligendi  regem,  in  impemtorem

pontiflci.fi  quo  npprobationcm  persona)  ‘postmodum  promovendum,  pertinet.  ad-
ad  iinpcrialis  celsitudiuis  apiccin  ussu-  stringero  vinculo  juminenti,  &c.  C'le-
UH-n<la\  nee non  unctionem,  consecrutio-  merit.  1.  ii.  t.  ix.  The  terms  of  the  oath,
nem  cl  imperii  coronam  acripiunt.  sua  as  recited  in  this  constitution,  do  not
eubmittere  capita  non  reputarunt  indig*  warrant  the  pope’s  interpretation,  but
num,  sequeilii  et  eidern  ecclesiic,  qua)  a  imply  only  that  the  emperor  shall  be  the
Grwcis  imperium  transtulitin  Gormano*,  advocate  or  defender  of  the  church,
et  a  qua  ad  certos  eorum  priueipes  jus  et

RESISTANCE  TO  POI’ES.  Cu.vr.  VII.  Part  II.

221

many,  however,  remained  firm ;  and  if  Louis  himself  had
manifested  more  decision  of  mind  and  uniformity  in  his  con¬
duct,  the  court  of  Avignon  must  have  signally  failed  in  a
contest  from  which  it  did  not  in  fact  come  out  very  successful.
But  while  at  one  time  he  went  intemperate  lengths  against
John  XXII.,  publishing  scandalous  accusations  in  an  assem¬
bly  of  the  citizens  of  Rome,  and  causing  a  Franciscan  friar
to  be  chosen  in  his  room,  after  an  irregular  sentence  of  dep¬
osition,  he  was  always  anxious  to  negotiate  terms  of  accom¬
modation,  to  give  up  his  own  active  partisans,  and  to  make
concessions  the  most  derogatory  to  his  independence  and
dignity.  From  John  indeed  he  had  nothing  to  expect ;  but
Benedict  XII.  would  gladly  have  been  reconciled,  if  he  had
not  feared  the  kings  of  France  and  Naples,  political  ad¬
versaries  of  the  emperor,  who  kept  the  Avignon  popes  in  a
sort  of  servitude.  His  successor,  Clement  VI.,  inherited  the
implacable  animosity  of  John  XXII.  towards  Louis,  who  died
without  obtaining  the  absolution  he  had  long  abjectly  solicited.1

Though  the  want  of  firmness  in  this  emperor’s  character
spirit  of  re  £ave  somet*mes  a  momentary  triumph  to  the  popes,
si.unce  to  it  is  evident  that  their  authority  lost  ground  during
paUooj*Ur'  ^h®  continuance  of  this  struggle.  Their  right  of
confirming  imperial  elections  was  expressly  denied
by  a  diet  held  at  Frankfort  in  1338,  which  established  as  a
fundamental  principle  that  the  imperial  dignity  depended
upon  God  alone,  and  that  whoever  should  be  chosen  by  a
majority  of  the  electors  became  immediately  both  king  and
emperor,  with  all  prerogatives  of  that  station,  and  did  not
require  the  approbation  of  the  pope.a  This  law,  confirmed
as  it  was  by  subsequent  usage,  emancipated  the  German
empire,  which  was  immediately  concerned  in  opposing  the
papal  claims.  But  some  who  were  actively  engaged  in  these
transactions  took  more  extensive  views,  and  assailed  the
whole  edifice  of  temporal  power  which  the  Roman  see  had

*  Schmidt,  flint.  deft  Allemands,  t.  It.  statim  ex  loll  election®  e»t  rex  Term  et

p.  446-63B,  seems  the  best  modern  au-  imperator  Komanonim  r*  risen  das  et  no*
thority  for  this  contest  between  the  em-  minandus,  et  eidetn  debet  sb  omnibus
pi  re  and  papacy.  See  also  Strarim,  Corp.  Imperie  nubjectin  ohedlri,  et  adminUtrandl
Hist.  German,  p.  691.  Jura  imperii,  et  carter*  fitriendl,  qaa  ad

*  Quod  I  in  per  la  1U  dignlta*  et  polentas  lmperatoryin  rerurn  pertinent,  plenarUin
immediate  ex  solo  Deo,  et  quod  de  jure  ha  bet  poteata  tetri,  nee  paper  sire  sedi#
et  imperil  ronsuetudlneantiquItU*  appro-  apontolies»  aut  alicujus  alteriun  approha-
batl  postquam  aliquis  ellgitur  in  Impera-  tion*.  con  firms  Gone.  a  or  tori  Ut*  iuii^rt
to  re  tu  sire  p-gem  ah  elec  tori  bun  imperii  Tel  censeosu.  Schmidt,  p.  613.
concordjter,  Tel  major!  parte  coruudem,

Eccles.  Power.  RAPACITY  OF  AVIGNON  POPES.

225

been  constructing  for  more  than  two  centuries.  Several  men
of  learning,  among  whom  Dante,  Ockham,  and  Marsilius  of
Padua  are  the  most  conspicuous,  investigated  the  foundations
of  this  superstructure,  and  exposed  their  insufficiency.1  Lit¬
erature,  too  long  the  passive  handmaid  of  spiritual  despotism,
began  to  assert  her  nobler  birthright  of  ministering  to  liberty
and  truth.  Though  the  writings  of  these  opponents  of  Rome
are  not  always  reasoned  upon  very  solid  principles,  they  at
least  taught  mankind  to  scrutinize  what  had  been  received
with  implicit  respect,  and  prepared  the  way  for  more  philo¬
sophical  discussions.  About  this  time  a  new  class  of  enemies
had  unexpectedly  risen  up  against  the  rulers  of  the  church.
These  were  a  part  of  the  Franciscan  order,  who  had  seceded
from  the  main  body  on  account  of  alleged  deviations  from
the  rigor  of  their  primitive  rule.  Their  schism  was  chiefly
founded  upon  a  quibble  about  the  right  of  property  in  things
consumable,  which  they  maintained  to  be  incompatible  with
the  absolute  poverty  prescribed  to  them.  This  frivolous
sophistry  was  united  with  the  wildest  fanatacism ;  and  as  John
XXII.  attempted  to  repress  their  follies  by  a  cruel  persecu¬
tion,  they  proclaimed  aloud  the  corruption  of  the  church,  fixed
the  name  of  Antichrist  upon  the  papacy,  and  warmly  sup¬
ported  the  emperor  Louis  throughout  all  his  contention  with
the  Holy  See.2

Meanwhile  the  popes  who  sat  at  Avignon  continued  to  in¬
vade  with  surprising  rapaciousness  the  patronage  p  of
and  revenues  of  the  church.  The  mandats  or  Avignon
letters  directing  a  particular  clerk  to  be  preferred  popC8'
seem  to  have  given  place  in  a  great  degree  to  the  more
effectual  method  of  appropriating  benefices  by  reservation  or
provision,  which  was  carried  to  an  enormous  extent  in  the
fourteenth  century.  John  XXII.,  the  most  insatiate  of  pon¬
tiff's,  reserved  to  himself  all  the  bishoprics  in  Christendom.®

1  Oiannone,  1.  xxii.  c.  8.  Schmidt,  more  celebrated  performance,  ascribed  to
t.  vi.  p.  152.  Dante  was  dead  before  Raoul  de  Presles  under  Charles  V.
these  events,  but  hi*  principle*  wen*  the  8  The  schism  of  the  rigid  Franciscans
same.  Ockham  had  already  exerted  his  or  Fratricelli  i*  one  of  the  most  singular
talent*  in  the  same  cause  by  writing,  in  part*  of  ecclesiastical  history,  and  had  a
behalf  of  Philip  IV.,  against  Boniface,  a  material  tendency  both  to  depress  the
dialogue  between  a  knight  and  a  clerk  on  temporal  authority  of  the  papacy,  and  to
the  temporal  supremacy  of  the  church,  pave  the  way  for  the  Reformation.  It  is
This  is  published  among  other  tracts  of  fully  treated  by  Mosheim,  cent.  13  and
the  same  class  in  Goldastus,  Monarchia  14,  and  by  Crevier,  Hist,  de  l’Cniver*it6
Imperii,  p.  13.  This  dialogue  Is  trans-  de  Paris,  t.  ii.  p.  233-284.  See.
laUni  entire  in  the  Songe  du  Vergier,  a  *  Fleury,  Institutions,  &c.,  t.  i.  p.308;

F.  Paul  on  Benefices,  c.  37.

VOL.  II.

15

226

RAPACITY  OF  AVIGNON  POrF-S.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

Benedict  XII.  assumed  the  privilege  for  his  own  life  of  dis¬
posing  of  all  benefices  vacant  by  cession,  deprivation,  or
translation.  Clement  VI.  naturally  thought  that  his  title  was
equally  good  with  his  predecessor’s,  and  continued  the  same
right  for  his  own  time ;  which  soon  became  a  permanent
rule  of  the  Roman  chancery.1  Hence  the  appointment
of  a  prelate  to  a  rich  bishopric  was  generally  but  the  first
link  in  a  chain  of  translation  which  the  pope  could  regulate
according  to  his  interest.  Another  capital  innovation  was
made  by  John  XXII.  in  the  establishment  of  the  famous  tax
called  annates,  or  first  fruits  of  ecclesiastical  benefices,  which
he  imposed  for  his  own  benefit.  These  were  one  year’s
value,  estimated  according  to  a  fixed  rate  in  the  books  of  the
Roman  chancery,  and  payable  to  the  papal  collectors  through¬
out  Europe.*  Various  other  devices  were  invented  to  obtain
money,  which  these  degenerate  popes,  abandoning  the  mag¬
nificent  schemes  of  their  predecessors,  were  content  to  seek
as  their  principal  object.  John  XXII.  is  said  to  have  accu¬
mulated  an  almost  incredible  treasure,  exaggerated  perhaps
by  the  ill-will  of  his  contemporaries  ;*  but  it  may  be  doubted
whether  even  his  avarice  reflected  greater  dishonor  on  the
church  than  the  licentious  profuseness  of  Clement  VI.4

These  exactions  were  too  much  encouraged  by  the  kings
of  France,  who  participated  in  the  plunder,  or  at  least  re¬
quired  the  mutual  assistance  of  the  popes  for  their  own  im¬
posts  on  the  clergy.  John  XXII.  obtained  leave  of  Charles
the  Fair  to  levy  a  tenth  of  ecclesiastical  revenues;6  and
Clement  VI.,  in  return,  granted  two  tenths  to  Philip  of
Valois  for  the  expenses  of  his  war.  A  similar  tax  was
raised  by  the  same  authority  towards  the  ransom  of  John.*

1  P.  Paul,  e.  88.  Translation!*  of  bishops
had  been  made  by  the  authority  of  the
metropolitan  till  Innocent  III.  reserved
this  prerogative  to  the  Uoly  See.  De
Mar  i,  I.  vt.  0.  8.

>  F.  Paul,  o.  88 ;  Pleury,  p.  434 ;  De
Marra,  1.  vi.  c.  10  ;  Pasquler,  I.  111.  c.  28
The  popes  had  long  been  in  the  habit  of
receiving  a  pecuniary  gratuity  when
they  granted  the  pallium  to  an  arch¬
bishop,  though  this  was  reprehended  by
strict  men,  and  even  condemned  by
themselves.  De  Marra,  ibid.  It  la  no.
tid'd  as  a  remarkable  thing  of  Innocent
IV.  that  he  gave  the  pall  to  a  German
archbishop  vrithout  accepting  anything
Schmidt,  t.  Iv.  p.  172.  The  original  an  l
nature  of  annates  it  copiously  treated  in

Lenient,  Conclle  de  Constance,  t.  0.
p.  183.

*  O.  Vlllani  puts  this  at  26,000.000  of
florins,  which  It  is  hardly  possible  to
believe.  The  Italians  were  credulous
enough  to  listen  to  any  report  against
the  popes  of  Avignon.  L  xi  e  30.  Uian-
none,  I.  xxii.  e.  8.

*  For  the  corruption  of  morals  at  Avig¬
non  during  the  secession,  see  De  Bade,
Vie  de  Petrarque,  t.  1.  p.  TO,  and  several
other  passages

*  Oontiuuator  Gul.  de  N  angle.  in  flplct-
legto  d'Achery,  t.  ill.  p.  86, (folio  edition.)
Its  m  1st  ram  ecclasiam,  says  this  monk,
unus  tondet,  alter  excoriat.

*  Pleury,  Institut.  au  Droit  eocleei-
astique,  t.  ti.  p.  246.  Ylllaiet,  t.  ix.

Eccles.  Power.  RAPACITY  OF  AVIGNON  POPES.

227

These  were  contributions  for  national  purposes  unconnected
with  religion,  which  the  popes  had  never  before  pretended  to
impose,  and  which  the  king  might  properly  have  levied  with
the  consent  of  his  clergy,  according  to  the  practice  of  Eng¬
land.  But  that  consent  might  not  always  be  obtained  with
ease,  and  it  seemed  a  more  expeditious  method  to  call  in  the
authority  of  the  pope.  A  manlier  spirit  was  displayed  by  our
ancestors.  It  was  the  boast  of  England  to  have  placed  the
first  legal  barrier  to  the  usurpations  of  Rome,  if  we  except
the  insulated  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  St.  Louis,  from  which
the  practice  of  succeeding  ages  in  France  entirely  deviated.
The  English  barons  had,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Boniface
VIII.,  absolutely  disclaimed  his  temporal  supremacy  over
their  crown,  which  he  had  attempted  to  set  up  by  intermed¬
dling  in  the  quarrel  of  Scotland.1  This  letter,  it  is  remarka¬
ble,  is  nearly  coincident  in  point  of  time  with  that  of  the
F rench  nobility ;  and  the  two  combined  may  be  considered
as  a  joint  protestation  of  both  kingdoms,  and  a  testimony  to
the  general  sentiment  among  the  superior  ranks  of  the  laity.
A  very  few  years  afterwards,  the  parliament  of  Carlisle
wrote  a  strong  remonstrance  to  Clement  V.  against  the  sys¬
tem  of  provisions  and  other  extortions,  including  that  of  first
fruits,  which  it  was  rumored,  they  say,  he  was  meditating  to
demand.2  But  the  court  of  Avignon  was  not  to  be  moved
by  remonstrances ;  and  the  feeble  administration  of  Edward
II.  gave  way  to  ecclesiastical  usurpations  at  home  as  well  as
abroad.8  His  magnanimous  son  took  a  bolder  line.  After
complaining  ineffectually  to  Clement  VI.  of  the  enormous
abuse  which  reserved  almost  all  English  benefices  to  the
pope,  and  generally  for  the  benefit  of  aliens,4  he  passed  in
1350  the  famous  statute  of  provisors.  This  act,  reciting  one
supposed  to  have  been  made  at  the  parliament  of  Carlisle,
which,  however,  does  not  appear,6  and  complaining  in  strong

p.  431.  It  became  a  regular  practice  for  the  canon  law  also  shows.  Extravagant,
the  king  to  obtain  the  pope's  consent  to  Communes,  1.  Ui.  tit.  ii.  c.  11.
lay  a  tax  on  his  clergy,  though  he  some-  *  The  statute  called  Articuli  clcri,  in
times  applied  first  to  themselves.  Gar-  1316,  was  directed  rather  towards  con-
nier,  t.  xx.  p.  141.  firming  than  limiting  the  clerical  immu-

1  Kvmer,  t.  11.  p.  873.  Collier,  vol.  1.  nity  in  criminal  cases,
p.  725.  *  Collier,  p.  646.

*  Rotull  Parliament!,  vol.  i.  p.  204.  6  It  is  singular  that  Sir  E.  Coke  should

This  passage,  hastily  read,  has  led  Collier  assert  that  this  act  recites  and  is  founded
and  other  English  writers,  such  as  Henry  upon  the  statute  36  E.  I.,  Do  asporta-
and  Blaclutone,  into  the  supposition  that  tis  religiosorum  (2  Inst.  680);  whereas
annates  were  imposed  by  Clement  V.  there  is  not  the  least  resemblance  in
But  the  concurrent  testimony  of  foreign  the  words,  and  very  little,  if  any,  in  the
authors  refers  this  tax  to  John  XXII.  as  substance.  Blackstone,  in  consequence,

228

RETURN  OF  POPES  TO  ROME.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

language  of  the  mischief  sustained  through  continual  reser¬
vations  of  benefices,  enacts  that  all  elections  and  collations
shall  be  free,  according  to  law,  and  that,  in  case  any  provi¬
sion  or  reservation  should  he  made  by  the  court  of  Rome,
the  king  should  for  that  turn  have  the  collation  of  such  a
benefice,  if  it  be  of  ecclesiatical  election  or  patronage.1
This  devolution  to  the  crown,  which  seems  a  little  arbitrary,
was  the  only  remedy  that  could  be  effectual  against  the  con¬
nivance  and  timidity  of  chapters  and  spiritual  patrons.  We
cannot  assert  that  a  statute  so  nobly  planned  was  executed
with  equal  steadiness.  Sometimes  by  royal  dispensation,
sometimes  by  neglect  or  evasion,  the  papal  bulls  of  provision
were  still  obeyed,  though  fresh  laws  were  enacted  to  the
same  effect  as  the  former.  It  was  found  on  examination  in
1367  that  some  clerks  enjoyed  more  than  twenty  benefices
by  the  pope’s  dispensation.1'  And  the  parliaments  both  of
this  and  of  Richard  II.’s  reign  invariably  complain  of  the
disregard  shown  to  the  statutes  of  provisors.  This  led  to
other  measures,  which  I  shall  presently  mention.

The  residence  of  the  popes  at  Avignon  gave  very  general
Return  of  offence  to  Europe,  and  they  could  not  themselves
to  avoid  perceiving  the  disadvantage  of  absence  from
their  proper  diocese,  the  city  of  St.  Peter,  the
source  of  all  their  claims  to  sovereign  authority.  But
Rome,  so  long  abandoned,  offered  but  an  inhospitable  recep¬
tion  :  Urban  V.  returned  to  Avignon,  after  a  short  ex¬
periment  of  the  capital ;  and  it  was  not  till  1376  that  the
promise,  often  repeated  and  long  delayed,  of  restoring  the
papal  chair  to  the  metropolis  of  Christendom,  was  ultimate¬
ly  fulfilled  by  Gregory  XI.  His  death,  which  hapjrened
soon  afterwards,  prevented,  it  is  said,  a  second  flight  that  he
was  preparing.  This  was  followed  by  the  great  schism,  one
Contested  most  remarkable  events  in  ecclesiastical

election  of  history.  It  is  a  difficult  and  by  no  means  an  inter-
■nd’ciuneat  est-'ng  question  to  determine  the  validity  of  that
Id  1377  contested  election  which  distracted  the  Latin
'  church  for  so  many  years.  All  contemporary

mistakes  the  nature  of  that  act  of  Ed-  17  E.  III.  (Rot.  Pari.  t.  U.  p.  144).  la
ward  I.,  and  auppoaea  It  to  hare  been  hard  to  decide;  and  perhaps  thoee  who
made  against  papal  prortalona,  to  which  examine  thl«  point  will  hare  to  chooee
I  do  not  perreire  eren  an  alluaion.  between  wilful  aappreaelon  and  wilful
Whether  any  such  statute  was  really  interpolation,
made  In  the  Carlisle  parliament  of  35  >  25  R  III.  stat.  6.

K  I..  as  is  asserted  both  In  25  E.  HI.  a  Collier,  p.  508.

and  lu  the  roll  of  another  parliament.

Eccles.  Power.  CONTESTED  TAPAL  ELECTION.

229

testimonies  are  subject  to  the  suspicion  of  partiality  in  a  cause
where  no  one  was  permitted  to  be  neutral.  In  one  fact  how¬
ever  there  is  a  common  agreement,  that  the  cardinals,  of
whom  the  majority  were  French,  having  assembled  in  con¬
clave,  for  the  election  of  a  successor  to  Gregory  XI.,  were
disturbed  by  a  tumultuous  populace,  who  demanded  with
menaces  a  Roman,  or  at  least  an  Italian,  pope.  This  tumult
appears  to  have  been  sufficiently  violent  to  excuse,  and  in
fact  did  produce,  a  considerable  degree  of  intimidation.
After  some  time  the  cardinals  made  choice  of  the  arch¬
bishop  of  Bari,  a  Neapolitan,  who  assumed  the  name  of
Urban  VI.  Ilis  election  satisfied  the  populace,  and  tranquil¬
lity  was  restored.  The  cardinals  announced  their  choice  to
the  absent  members  of  their  college,  and  behaved  towards
Urban  as  their  pope  for  several  weeks.  But  his  uncommon
harshness  of  temper  giving  them  offence,  they  withdrew  to  a
neighboring  town,  and,  protesting  that  his  election  had  been
compelled  by  the  violence  of  the  Roman  populace,  annulled
the  whole  proceeding,  and  chose  one  of  their  own  number,
who  took  the  pontifical  name  of  Clement  VII.  Such  are  the
leading  circumstances  which  produced  the  famous  schism.
Constraint  is  so  destructive  of  the  essence  of  election,  that
suffrages  given  through  actual  intimidation  ought,  I  think,  to
be  held  invalid,  even  without  minutely  inquiring  whether
the  degree  of  illegal  force  was  such  as  might  reasonably
overcome  the  constancy  of  a  firm  mind.  It  is  improbable
that  the  free  votes  of  the  cardinals  would  have  been  be¬
stowed  on  the  archbishop  of  Bari ;  and  I  should  not  feel
much  hesitation  in  pronouncing  his  election  to  have  been
void.  But  the  sacred  college  unquestionably  did  not  use  the
earliest  opportunity  of  protesting  against  the  violence  they
had  suffered  ;  and  we  may  infer  almost  with  certainty,  that,
if  Urban’s  conduct  had  been  more  acceptable  to  that  body,
the  world  would  have  heard  little  of  the  transient  riot  at  his
election.  This  however  opens  a  delicate  question  in  juris¬
prudence  ;  namely,  under  what  circumstances  acts,  not  only
irregular,  but  substantially  invalid,  are  capable  of  receiving
a  retroactive  confirmation  by  the  acquiescence  and  acknowl¬
edgment  of  parties  concerned  to  oppose  them.  And  upon
this,  I  conceive,  the  great  problem  of  legitimacy  between
Urban  and  Clement  will  be  found  to  depend.1

1  Lenfhnt  ban  collected  all  the  original  of  his  Concile  de  Pise.  No  positive  de-
testimouies  on  both  sides  in  the  first  book  cision  has  ever  been  made  on  the  subject,

230

THE  GREAT  SCHISM.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

Whatever  posterity  may  have  judged  about  the  preten-
The  Great  sions  of  these  competitors,  they  at  that  time
Schiam.  shared  the  obedience  of  Europe  in  nearly  equal
proportions.  Urban  remained  at  Rome  ;  Clement  resumed
the  station  of  Avignon.  To  the  former  adhered  Italy,  the
Empire,  England,  and  the  nations  of  the  north ;  the  latter
retained  in  his  allegiance  France,  Spain,  Scotland,  and  Sicily.
Fortunately  for  the  church,  no  question  of  religious  faith  in¬
termixed  itself  with  this  schism  ;  nor  did  any  other  impedi¬
ment  to  reunion  exist  than  the  obstinacy  and  selfishness  of
the  contending  parties.  As  it  was  impossible  to  come  to  any
agreement  on  the  original  merits,  there  seemed  to  be  no
means  of  healing  the  wound  but  by  the  abdication  of  both
popes  and  a  fresh  undisputed  election.  This  was  the  general
wish  of  Europe,  but  urged  with  particular  zeal  by  the
court  of  France,  and,  above  all,  by  the  university  of  Paris,
which  esteems  this  period  the  most  honorable  in  her  annals.
The  cardinals  however  of  neither  obedience  would  recede  so
far  from  their  party  as  to  suspend  the  election  of  a  successor
upon  a  vacancy  of  the  pontificate,  which  would  have  at  least
removed  one  half  of  the  obstacle.  The  Roman  conclave
accordingly  placed  three  pontiffs  successively,  llonifaee  IX.,
Innocent  VI.,  and  Gregory  XII.,  in  the  seat  of  Urban  ^  I.;
and  the  cardinals  at  Avignon,  upon  the  death  of  Clement  in
1394,  elected  Benedict  XIII.  (Peter  de  Luna),  famous  for
his  inflexible  obstinacy  in  prolonging  the  schism.  He  re¬
peatedly  promised  to  sacrifice  his  dignity  for  the  sake  of
union.  But  there  was  no  subterfuge  to  which  this  crafty
pontiff  had  not  recourse  in  order  to  avoid  compliance  with  his
word,  though  importuned,  threatened,  and  even  besieged  in  his
palace  at  Avignon.  Futigued  by  his  evasions,  France  with¬
drew  her  obedience,  and  the  Gallican  church  continued  for  a
few  years  without  acknowledging  any  supreme  head.  But
this  step,  which  was  rather  the  measure  of  the  university
of  Paris  than  of  the  nation,  it  seemed  advisable  to  retract ;
and  Benedict  was  again  obeyed,  though  France  continued  to
urge  his  resignation.  A  second  subtraction  of  obedience,  or
at  least  declaration  of  neutrality,  was  resolved  uj>on,  as  pre¬
paratory  to  the  convocation  of  a  general  council.  On  the

but  the  Roman  popes  are  numbered  In  gitimary  of  Urban;  the  French  at  moat
the  commonly  received  Hat,  and  those  of  intimate  that  Clement's  pretensions  were
Avignon  are  not.  The  modern  Italian  not  to  be  wholly  rejected,
writers  express  no  doubt  about  the  le-

Eccles.  Tower.  COUNCILS  OF  PISA  AND  CONSTANCE.  231

other  hand,  those  who  sat  at  Rome  displayed  not  less  insin¬
cerity.  Gregory  XII.  bound  himself  by  oath  on  his  ac¬
cession  to  abdicate  when  it  should  appear  necessary.  Rut
while  these  rivals  were  loading  each  other  with  the  mutual
reproach  of  schism,  they  drew  on  themselves  the  suspicion  of
at  least  a  virtual  collusion  in  order  to  retain  their  respective
stations.  At  length  the  cardinals  of  both  parties,  wearied
with  so  much  dissimulation,  deserted  their  masters,  and  sum¬
moned  a  general  council  to  meet  at  Pisa.1

The  council  assembled  at  Pisa  deposed  both  Gregory  and
Benedict,  without  deciding  in  any  respect  as  to  „  ...

their  pretensions,  and  elected  Alexander  V.  by  its  Pica,
own  supreme  authority.  This  authority,  however,  A  D' 1409 :
was  not  universally  recognized ;  the  schism,  instead  of  being
healed,  became  more  desperate  ;  for  as  Spain  adhered  firm¬
ly  to  Benedict,  and  Gregory  was  not  without  supporters,
there  were  now  three  contending  pontiffs  in  the  church.  A
general  council  was  still,  however,  the  favorite  and  indeed
the  sole  remedy ;  and  John  XXIII.,  successor  of  0f  Constance,
Alexander  V.,  was  reluctantly  prevailed  upon,  or  A  D- 1414 ;
perhaps  trepanned,  into  convoking  one  to  meet  at  Constance.
In  this  celebrated  assembly  he  was  himself  deposed  ;  a  sen¬
tence  which  he  incurred  by  that  tenacious  clinging  to  his  dig¬
nity,  after  repeated  promises  to  abdicate,  which  had  already
proved  fatal  to  his  competitors.  The  deposition  of  John,
confessedly  a  legitimate  pope,  may  strike  us  as  an  extraor¬
dinary  measure.  But,  besides  the  opportunity  it  might  afford
of  restoring  union,  the  council  found  a  pretext  for  this  sen¬
tence  in  his  enormous  vices,  which  indeed  they  seem  to  have
taken  upon  common  fame  without  any  judicial  process.  The
true  motive,  however,  of  their  proceedings  against  him  was
a  desire  to  make  a  signal  display  of  a  new  system  which  had
rapidly  gained  ground,  and  which  I  may  venture  to  call  the
whig  principles  of  the  catholic  church.  A  great  question
was  at  issue,  whether  the  polity  of  that  establishment  should
be  an  absolute  or  an  exceedingly  limited  monarchy.  The  papal
tyranny,  long  endured  and  still  increasing,  had  excited  an
active  spirit  of  reformation  which  the  most  distinguished
ecclesiastics  of  France  and  other  countries  encouraged.  They
recurred,  as  far  as  their  knowledge  allowed,  to  a  more  primi-

1  VilUret;  Len&nt,  Cone  lie  de  Pise;  CreTier,  Hist,  de  1’CnlrenriW  de  Paris,

232

COUNCIL  OF  CONSTANCE.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

tive  discipline  than  the  canon  law,  and  elevated  the  suprema¬
cy  of  general  councils.  But  in  the  formation  of  these  they
did  not  scruple  to  introduce  material  innovations.  The
bishops  have  usually  been  considered  the  sole  members  of
ecclesiastical  assemblies.  At  Constance,  however,  sat  and
voted  not  only  the  chiefs  of  monasteries,  but  the  ambassadors
of  all  Christian  princes,  the  deputies  of  universities,  with
a  multitude  of  inferior  theologians,  and  even  doctors  of  law.1
These  were  naturally  accessible  to  the  pride  of  sudden  eleva¬
tion,  which  enabled  them  to  control  the  strong,  and  humiliate
the  lofty.  In  addition  to  this  the  adversaries  of  the  court
of  Rome  carried  another  not  less  important  innovation.  The
Italian  bishops,  almost  universally  in  the  papal  interests,
were  so  numerous  that,  if  suffrages  had  been  token  by  the
head,  their  preponderance  would  have  impeded  any  meas¬
ures  of  transalpine  nations  towards,  reformation.  It  was  de¬
termined,  therefore,  that  the  council  should  divide  itself
into  four  nations,  the  Italian,  the  German,  the  French,  and
the  English,  each  with  equal  rights ;  and  that,  every  proposi¬
tion  having  been  separately  discussed,  the  majority  of  the
four  should  prevail.1  This  revolutionary  spirit  was  very  un¬
acceptable  to  the  cardinals,  who  submitted  reluctantly,  and
with  a  determination,  that  did  not  prove  altogether  unavail¬
ing,  to  save  their  papal  monarchy  by  a  dexterous  policy.
They  could  not,  however,  provent  the  famous  resolutions  of
the  fourth  and  fifth  sessions,  which  declare  that  the  council
has  received,  by  divine  right,  an  authority  to  which  every
rank,  even  the  papal,  is  obliged  to  submit,  in  matters  of  faith,
in  the  extirpation  of  the  present  schism,  and  in  the  reforma¬
tion  of  the  church  both  in  its  head  and  its  members ;  and
that  every  person,  even  a  pope,  who  shall  obstinately  refuse

>  Lenfiint,  Concile  do  Oonatanre,  t.  I.
P  107  (edit.  1727).  CreTier,  t.  iii.  p.  405.
It  was  agreed  that  the  amh.utsadoni  could
not  rote  upon  article*  of  faith,  hut  only
on  questions  relating  to  the  settlement
of  the  church.  But  the  second  order  of
ecclesiastic*  were  allowed  to  vote  gener¬
ally.

*  Thin  separation  of  England,  an  a  co¬
equal  liuib  of  the  council,  gave  great
umbrage  to  the  French,  who  maintained
that,  like  Denmark  and  Swnlen,  it  ought
to  have  been  reckoned  along  with  Ger¬
many.  The  English  deputies  came  down
with  a  profusion  of  authorities  to  prove
the  autiquity  of  their  monarchy,  fbr
which  they  did  not  fail  to  put  iu  requi¬

sition  the  immeasurable  pedigrees  of  Ire¬
land.  Joseph  of  Ariuiathea,  who  planted
Chrintianity  and  his  stick  at  Glastonbury,
did  his  best  to  help  the  cause.  The  recent
victory  of  Aziucourt,  I  am  incliued  to
think,  had  more  weight  with  the  council.
Lenfant,  t.  ii.  p.  4*1

At  a  time  when  a  very  different  spirit
prevailed,  the  Englinh  bishops  under
Henry  II.  and  Henry  III.  bad  claimed
as  a  right  that  no  more  than  four  of  their
number  should  he  summoned  to  a  general
council.  Iloveden.  p.  82U ;  ('arte,  vnl.  IL
p.  B4.  This  was  like  boroughs  praying
to  be  released  from  sealing  members  to
parliament.

Eccles.  Tower.  COUNCIL  OF  CONSTANCE.

233

to  obey  that  council,  or  any  other  lawfully  assembled,  is  lia¬
ble  to  such  punishment  as  shall  be  necessary.1  These  de¬
crees  are  the  great  pillars  of  that  moderate  theory  with
respect  to  the  papal  authority  which  distinguished  the  Galli-
can  church,  and  is  embraced,  I  presume,  by  almost  all  lay¬
men  and  the  major  part  of  ecclesiastics  on  this  side  of  the
Alps.2  They  embarrass  the  more  popish  churchmen,  as  the
Revolution  does  our  English  tories ;  some  boldly  impugn  the
authority  of  the  council  of  Constance,  while  others  chicane
upon  the  interpretation  of  its  decrees.  Their  practical  im¬
portance  is  not,  indeed,  direct ;  universal  councils  exist  only
in  possibility ;  but  the  acknowledgment  of  a  possible  author¬
ity  paramount  to  the  see  of  Rome  has  contributed,  among
other  means,  to  check  its  usurpations.

The  purpose  for  which  these  general  councils  had  been
required,  next  to  that  of  healing  the  schism,  was  the  refor¬
mation  of  abuses.  All  the  rapacious  exactions,  all  the  scan¬
dalous  venality  of  which  Europe  had  complained,  while
unquestioned  pontitfs  ruled  at  Avignon,  appeared  light  in
comparison  of  the  practices  of  both  rivals  during  the  schism.
Tenths  repeatedly  levied  upon  the  clergy,  annates  rigorously
exacted  and  enhanced  by  new  valuations,  fees  annexed  to  the
complicated  formalities  of  the  papal  chancery,  were  the
means  by  which  each  half  of  the  church  was  compelled  to
reimburse  its  chief  for  the  subtraction  of  the  other’s  obedi¬
ence.  Boniface  IX.,  one  of  the  Roman  line,  whose  fame  is
a  little  worse  than  that  of  his  antagonists,  made  a  gross  traffic
of  his  patronage ;  selling  the  privileges  of  exemption  from
ordinary  jurisdiction,  of  holding  benefices  in  commendam,
and  other  dispensations  invented  for  the  benefit  of  the  Holy
See.®  Nothing  had  been  attempted  at  Pisa  towards  reforma¬
tion.  At  Constance  the  majority  were  ardent  and  sincere ;
the  representatives  of  the  French,  German,  and  English
churches  met  with  a  determined  and,  as  we  have  seen,  not
always  unsuccessful  resolution  to  assert  their  ecclesiastical
liberties.  They  appointed  a  committee  of  reformation,  whose
recommendations,  if  carried  into  effect,  would  have  annihi¬
lated  almost  entirely  that  artfully  constructed  machinery  by

1  Id.  p.  164.  Crevier,  t.  iii.  p.  417.  exceedingly  different  from  what  it  was

*  This  wus  written  in  1816.  The  pres-  in  the  last  two  centuries.  [1847.]
ent  state  of  opinion  among  those  who  8  Lenfant,  Hist,  du  Concilo  <le  Pise,
belong  to  the  OallicaD  church  has  become  passim;  Crevier;  Villaret;  Schmidt;

Co’lier.

234

COUNCIL  OF  BASLE.  Chap.  VII.  Paht.  II.

which  Rome  had  absorbed  so  much  of  the  revenues  and
patronage  of  the  church.  But  men,  interested  in  perpetuat¬
ing  these  abuses,  especially  the  cardinals,  improved  the  ad¬
vantages  which  a  skilful  government  always  enjoys  in  playing
against  a  popular  assembly.  They  availed  themselves  of  the
jealousies  arising  out  of  the  division  of  the  council  into  na¬
tions,  which  exterior  political  circumstances  had  enhanced.
France,  then  at  war  with  England,  whose  pretensions  to  be
counted  as  a  fourth  nation  she  had  warmly  disputed,  and  not
well  disposed  towards  the  emperor  Sigismund,  joined  with
the  Italians  against  the  English  and  German  members  of  the
council  in  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance,  the  immediate
election  of  a  pope  before  the  articles  of  reformation  should
be  finally  concluded.  These  two  nations,  in  return,  united
with  the  Italians  to  choose  the  cardinal  Colonna,  against  the
advice  of  the  French  divines,  who  objected  to  any  member
of  the  sacred  college.  The  court  of  Rome  were  gainers  in
both  questions.  Martin  V.,  the  new  pope,  soon  evinced  his
determination  to  elude  any  substantial  reform.  After  pul>-
lishing  a  few  constitutions  tending  to  redress  some  of  the
abuses  that  hail  arisen  during  the  schism,  he  contrived  to
make  separate  conventions  with  the  several  nations,  and  as
soon  as  possible  dissolved  the  council.1

By  one  of  the  decrees  passed  at  Constance,  another  gen¬
eral  council  was  to  be  assembled  in  five  years,  a  second  at
the  end  of  seven  more,  and  from  that  time  a  similar  repre¬
sentation  of  the  church  was  to  meet  every  ten  years.  Mar¬
tin  V.  accordingly  convoked  a  council  at  Pavia,  which,  on
account  of  the  plague,  was  transferred  to  Siena;  but  nothing
of  importance  was  transacted  by  this  assembly.*  That  which
of  Ba*i«,  he  summoned  seven  years  afterwards  to  the  city

a.d.  H33.  Gf  Basle  had  very  different  results.  The  poj»e,
dying  before  the  meeting  of  this  council,  was  succeeded  by
Eugenius  IV.,  who,  anticipating  the  spirit  of  its  discussions,
attempted  to  crush  its  independence  in  the  outset,  by  trans¬
ferring  the  place  of  session  to  an  Italian  city.  No  point  was
reckoned  so  material  in  the  contest  between  the  popes  and
reformers  as  whether  a  council  should  sit  in  Italy  or  beyond

1  tenfant,  Conrile  de  Conatance.  The  Rood  aketch  of  tha  council.  and  Schmidt
ropiouanea*  aa  well  aa  Impartiality  of  (Hiat.  dea  AUemandea,  t.  ».)  U  worthy  of
t Ilia  work  ju-tlv  reader*  It  an  almoat  ex-  attention.

eluaive  authority.  Crevier  (lint,  de  1  Leufant,  Guerre  dea  iluxtitce,  t.  t.  p.
l’Unlyonitd  de  Pari*,  t.  til.)  ha*  given  a  223.

Eccles.  Power.

COUXCIL  OF  BASLE.

235

the  Alps.  The  council  of  Basle  began,  as  it  proceeded,  in
open  enmity  to  the  court  of  Rome.  Eugenius,  after  several
years  had  elapsed  in  more  or  less  hostile  discussions,  exerted
his  prerogative  of  removing  the  assembly  to  Ferrara,  and
from  thence  to  Florence.  For  this  he  had  a  specious  pretext
in  the  negotiation,  then  apparently  tending  to  a  prosperous
issue,  for  the  reunion  of  the  Greek  church ;  a  triumph,  how¬
ever  transitory,  of  which  his  council  at  Florence  obtained  the
glory.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assembly  of  Basle,  though
much  weakened  by  the  defection  of  those  who  adhered  to
Eugenius,  entered  into  compacts  with  the  Bohemian  insur¬
gents,  more  essential  to  the  interests  of  the  church  than  any
union  with  the  Greeks,  and  completed  the  work  begun  at
Constance  by  abolishing  the  annates,  the  reservations  of
benefices,  and  other  abuses  of  papal  authority.  In  this  it
received  the  approbation  of  most  princes ;  but  when,  pro¬
voked  by  the  endeavors  of  the  pope  to  frustrate  its  decrees,
it  proceeded  so  far  as  to  suspend  and  even  to  depose  him,
neither  France  nor  Germany  concurred  in  the  sentence.
Even  the  council  of  Constance  had  not  absolutely  asserted  a
right  of  deposing  a  lawful  pope,  except  in  case  of  heresy,
though  their  conduct  towards  John  could  not  otherwise  be
justified.1  This  question  indeed  of  ecclesiastical  public  law
seems  to  be  still  undecided.  The  fathers  of  Basle  acted
however  with  greater  intrepidity  than  discretion,  and,  not
perhaps  sensible  of  the  change  that  was  taking  place  in  pub¬
lic  opinion,  raised  Amadeus,  a  retired  duke  of  Savoy,  to  the
pontifical  dignity  by  the  name  of  Felix  Y.  They  thus  re¬
newed  the  schism,  and  divided  the  obedience  of  the  catholic
church  for  a  few  years.  The  empire,  however,  as  well  as
F ranee,  observed  a  singular  and  not  very  consistent  neutral¬
ity  ;  respecting  Eugenius  as  a  lawful  pope,  and  the  assembly
at  Basle  as  a  general  council.  England  warmly  supported
Eugenius,  and  even  adhered  to  his  council  at  Florence ;
Aragon  and  some  countries  of  smaller  note  acknowledged

1  The  council  of  Basle  endeavored  to
evade  this  difficulty  by  declaring  Eu-
geniua  a  relapsed  heretic.  Lenfant,
Guerre  des  Hussites,  t.  ii.  p.  98.  But  an
the  church  could  discover  no  heresy  in
his  disagreement  with  that  assembly,
the  sentence  of  deposition  gained  little
strength  by  this  previous  decision.  The
bishops  were  unwilling  to  take  this  vio¬

lent  step  against  Eugenius;  but  the
minor  theologians,  the  democracy  of  the
Catholic  church,  whose  right  of  suffrage
seems  rather  an  anomalous  infringe¬
ment  of  episcopal  authority,  pressed  it
with  much  heat  and  rashness.  See  a
curious  passage  on  this  subject  in  a
speech  of  the  cardiual  of  Arles.  Leufcint,
t.  ii.  n.  225.

236

UNIVERSAL  COUNCILS.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

Felix.  But  the  partisans  of  Basle  became  every  year
weaker;  and  Nicholas  V.,  the  successor  of  Engenius,  found
no  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  cession  of  Felix,  and  ter¬
minating  this  schism.  This  victory  of  the  court  of  Rome
over  the  council  of  Basle  nearly  counterbalanced  the  disad¬
vantageous  events  at  Constance,  and  put  an  end  to  the  project
of  fixing  permanent  limitations  upon  the  head  of  the  church
by  means  of  general  councils.  Though  the  decree  that  pre¬
scribed  the  convocation  of  a  council  every  ten  years  was  still
unrepealed,  no  absolute  monarehs  have  ever  more  dreaded
to  meet  the  representatives  of  their  people,  than  the  Roman
pontiffs  have  abhorred  the  name  of  those  ecclesiastical  synods :
once  alone,  and  that  with  the  utmost  reluctance,  has  the
catholic  church  been  convoked  since  the  council  of  Basle;
but  the  famous  assembly  to  which  I  allude  does  not  fall
within  the  scope  of  my  present  undertaking.1

It  is  a  natural  subject  of  speculation,  what  would  have
been  the  effects  of  these  universal  councils,  which  were  so
popular  in  the  fifteenth  century,  if  the  decree  passed  at  Con¬
stance  for  their  periodical  assembly  had  been  regularly  ob¬
served.  Many  catholic  writers,  of  the  moderate  or  cisalpine
school,  have  lamented  their  disuse,  and  ascribed  to  it  that
irreparable  breach  which  the  Reformation  has  made  in  the
fabric  of  their  church.  But  there  is  almost  an  absurdity  in
conceiving  their  permanent  existence.  What  chemistry  could
have  kept  united  such  heterogeneous  masses,  furnished  wiih
every  principle  of  mutual  repulsion  ?  Even  in  early  times,
when  councils,  though  nominally  general,  were  composed  of
the  subjects  of  the  Roman  empire,  they  had  been  marked  by
violence  and  contradiction :  what  then  could  have  been  ex¬
pected  from  the  delegates  of  independent  kingdoms,  whose
ecclesiastical  polity,  whatever  may  be  said  of  the  spiritual
unity  of  the  church,  had  long  been  far  too  intimately  blended
with  that  of  the  state  to  admit  of  any  general  control  without
its  assent?  Nor,  beyond  the  zeal,  unquestionably  sincere,
which  animated  their  members,  especially  at  Basle,  for  the
abolition  of  papal  abuses,  is  there  anything  to  praise  in  their
conduct,  or  to  regret  in  their  cessation.  The  statesman  w  ho

l  There  l«  not,  I  believe,  any  mifflrient  it*  transaction*  with  hl«  hUtory  of  the
history  of  the  council  of  Basle.  Lenflhnt  llutalte  war,  which  U  commonly  quo  tel
designed  to  write  it  from  the  original  under  the  title  of  llifttory  of  the  Council
acts,  but,  finding  Id*  health  decline.  In-  of  IUsie.  Schmidt,  Crevier,  Villaret,  are
tennixed  some  rather  Imperfect  notice*  of  ■till  my  other  authorities

Eccles.  Power.

UNIVERSAL  COUNCILS.

237

dreaded  the  encroachments  of  priests  upon  the  civil  govern¬
ment,  the  Christian  who  panted  to  see  his  rights  and  faith
purified  from  the  corruption  of  ages,  found  no  hope  of  im¬
provement  in  these  councils.  They  took  upon  themselves  the
pretensions  of  the  popes  whom  they  attempted  to  supersede.
By  a  decree  of  the  fathers  at  Constance,  all  persons,  includ¬
ing  princes,  who  should  oppose  any  obstacle  to  a  journey
undertaken  by  the  emperor  Sigismund,  in  order  to  obtain  the
cession  of  Benedict,  are  declared  excommunicated,  and  de¬
prived  of  their  dignities,  whether  secular  or  ecclesiastical.1
Their  condemnation  of  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  and
the  scandalous  breach  of  faith  which  they  induced  Sigismund
to  commit  on  that  occasion,  are  notorious.  But  perhaps  it  is
not  equally  so  that  this  celebrated  assembly  recognized  by  a
solemn  decree  the  flagitious  principle  which  it  had  practised,
declaring  that  Huss  was  unworthy,  through  his  obstinate  ad¬
herence  to  heresy,  of  any  privilege ;  nor  ought  any  faith  or
promise  to  be  kept  with  him,  by  natural,  divine,  or  human
law,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  catholic  religion.2  It  will  be  easy
to  estimate  the  claims  of  this  congress  of  theologians  to  our
veneration,  and  to  weigh  the  retrenchment  of  a  few  abuses
against  the  formal  sanction  of  an  atrocious  maxim.

It  was  not,  however,  necessary  for  any  government  of
tolerable  energy  to  seek  the  reform  of  those  abuses  which
affected  the  independence  of  national  churches,  and  the  integ-

l  Lenfant,  t.  i.  p  439.

*  Nec  aliqua  sibi  fldes  aut  promissio,
de  jure  naturali,  di  vino,  efc  humano,  fuerit
in  prejudicium  Catholics  fidei  obser-
Tanda.  Lenfant,  t.  i.  p.  491.

This  proposition  is  the  great  disgrace
of  the  council  in  the  affair  of  Huss.  But
the  violation  of  his  safe-conduct  being  a
famous  event  in  ecclesiastical  history,  and
which  has  been  very  much  disputed  with
some  degree  of  erroneous  statement  on
both  sides,  it  may  be  proper  to  give  briefly
an  impartial  summary.  1.  IIuss  came
to  Constauce  with  a  safe-conduct  of  the
emperor  very  loosely  worded,  and  not
directed  to  any  individuals.  Lenfant,
t.  1.  p.  69.  2.  This  pass  however  was

binding  upon  the  emperor  himself,  and
was  so  considered  by  him,  when  he  re¬
monstrated  against  the  arrest  of  IIuss.
Id.  p.  73,  83.  3.  It  was  not  binding  on
the  council,  who  possessed  no  temporal
power,  but  hail  a  right  to  decide  upon
the  question  of  heresy.  4.  It  is  not
manifest  by  whAt  civil  authority  Huss
was  arrested,  nor  can  I  determine  how

far  the  imperial  safe-conduct  was  a  legal
protection  within  the  city  of  Conduce.
6.  Sigismund  was  persuaded  to  acquiesce
in  the  capital  punishment  of  Huss,  and
even  to  make  it  his  own  act  (Lenfant,
.  409);  by  which  he  manifestly  broke
is  engagement.  6.  It  is  evident  that  in
this  he  acted  by  the  advice  and  sanction
of  the  council,  who  thus  became  acces¬
sor}'  to  the  guilt  of  his  treachery.

The  great  moral  to  be  drawn  from  the
story  of  John  Huss’s  condemnation  is,
that  no  breach  of  faith  can  be  excused  by
our  opinion  of  ill  desert  in  the  party,  or
by  a  narrow  interpretation  of  our  own
engagements.  Every  capitulation  ought
to  be  construed  favorably  for  the
weaker  side.  In  such  cases  it  is  emphat¬
ically  true  that,  if  the  letter  killeth,  the
spirit  should  give  life.

Gerson,  the  most  eminent  theologian
of  his  age,  and  the  coryphaeus  of  the
party  that  opposed  the  transalpine  prin¬
ciples,  was  deeply  concerned  in  this  atro¬
cious  business.  Crevier,  p.  432

238

UNIVERSAL  COUNCILS.  Chai>.  VII.  Part  II.

rity  of  their  regular  discipline,  at  the  hands  of  a  general
council.  Whatever  difficulty  there  might  be  in  overturning
the  principles  founded  on  the  decretals  of  Isidore,  and  sanc¬
tioned  by  the  prescription  of  many  centuries,  the  more  flagrant
encroachments  of  papal  tyranny  were  fresh  innovations,  some
within  the  actual  generation,  others  easily  to  be  traced  up,
and  continually  disputed.  The  principal  European  nations
determined,  with  different  degrees  indeed  of  energy,  to  make
a  stand  against  the  despotism  of  Rome.  In  this  resistance
England  was  not  only  the  first  engaged,  but  the  most  consist¬
ent  ;  her  free  parliament  preventing,  as  far  as  the  times  per¬
mitted,  that  wavering  policy  to  which  a  court  is  liable.  We
have  already  seen  that  a  foundation  was  laid  in  the  statute  of
provisors  under  Edward  III.  In  the  next  reign  many  other
measures  tending  to  repress  the  interference  of  Rome  were
adopted,  especially  the  great  statute  of  praemunire,  which
subjects  all  persons  bringing  papal  bulls  for  translation  of
bishops  and  other  enumerated  purposes  into  the  kingdom  to
the  penulties  of  forfeiture  and  perpetual  imprisonment1  This
act  received,  and  probably  was  designed  to  receive,  a  larger
interpretation  than  its  language  appears  to  warrant  Com¬
bined  with  the  statute  of  provisors,  it  put  a  stop  to  the  pope’s
usurpation  of  patronage,  which  had  impoverished  the  church
and  kingdom  of  England  for  nearly  two  centuries.  Several
attempts  were  made  to  overthrow  these  enactments ;  the  first
parliament  of  Henry  IV.  gave  a  very  large  power  to  the  king
over  the  statute  of  provisors,  enabling  him  even  to  annul  it  at
his  pleasure.®  This,  however,  does  not  appear  in  the  statute-
book.  Henry  indeed,  like  his  predecessors,  exercised  rather
largely  his  prerogative  of  dispensing  with  the  law  against
papal  provisions ;  a  prerogative  which,  as  to  this  point,  was
itself  taken  away  by  an  act  of  his  own,  and  another  of  his
son  Henry  V.*  But  the  statute  always  stood  unrepealed ;
and  it  is  a  satisfactory  proof  of  the  ecclesiastical  supremacy
of  the  legislature  that  in  the  concordat  made  by  Martin  V.  at
the  council  of  Constance  with  the  English  nation  we  find  no
mention  of  reservation  of  benefices,  of  annates,  and  the  other

1  16  Ric.  n.  o.  6-  ltd  repeal.  Collier,  p.  668.  Chirheley

*  Rot.  Pari.  toI.  111.  p.  42S.  did  all  In  hi*  power ;  but  the  commoni

*  7  H.  IV.  e.  8;  8  II.  V.  e.’4.  Mnrtln  were  alwaye  Inexorable  on  thle  head,  p.
V.  published  an  angry  bull  agnlnet  the  636;  and  the  archbinhop  eeen  incurred
“  execrable  etatute"  of  pnrmunlre  ;  en-  Martln'a  reeentment  by  it.  Wilkiue,  Con¬
joining  archbiibop  Cblcheley  to  procure  cilia,  t.  111.  p.  488.

Eccles.  Power.  INFLUENCE  OF  WICLIFF.

239

principal  grievances  of  that  age  -,1 *  our  ancestors  disdaining  to
accept  by  compromise  with  the  pope  any  modification  or  even
confirmation  of  their  statute  law.  They  had  already  restrained
another  flagrant  abuse,  the  increase  of  first  fruits  by  Boniface
IX.  ;  an  act  of  Henry  IV.  forbidding  any  greater  sum  to  be
paid  on  that  account  than  had  been  formerly  accustomed.3

It  will  appear  evident  to  every  person  acquainted  with  the
contemporary  historians,  and  the  proceedings  of  parliament,
that,  besides  partaking  in  the  general  resentment  of  Europe
against  the  papal  court,  England  was  under  the  Influence  of
influence  of  a  peculiar  hostility  to  the  clergy,  aris-  wiciiii’s
ing  from  the  dissemination  of  the  principles  of  teneta'
WiclifF.8  All  ecclesiastical  possessions  were  marked  for
spoliation  by  the  system  of  this  reformer ;  and  the  house  of
commons  more  than  once  endeavored  to  carry  it  into  effect,
pressing  Henry  IV.  to  seize  the  temporalities  of  the  church
for  public  exigencies.4 * * *  This  recommendation,  besides  its
injustice,  was  not  likely  to  move  Henry,  whose  policy  had
been  to  sustain  the  prelacy  against  their  new  adversaries.
Ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  was  kept  in  better  control  than
formerly  by  the  judges  of  common  law,  who,  through  rather
a  strained  construction  of  the  statute  of  praemunire,  extended
its  penalties  to  the  spiritual  courts  when  they  transgressed
their  limits.8  The  privilege  of  clergy  in  criminal  cases  still
remained  ;  but  it  was  acknowledged  not  to  comprehend  high
treason.8

1  Lenfant,  t.  ii.  p.  444.

*  6  II.  IY.  0.1.

8  See,  among  many  other  passages,  the
articles  exhibited  by  the  Lollards  to  par¬
liament  against  the  clergy  in  1394.  Col¬
lier  gives  the  substance  of  them,  and  they
are  noticed  by  Henry ;  but  they  are  at
full  length  in  Wilkins,  t.  iii.  p.  221.

4  Walsingham,  p.  371,  879;  Rot.  Pari.
11  II.  IV.  toI.  iii.  p.  645.  The  remarkable
circumstances  detailed  by  Walsingham
in  the  former  passage  are  not  corrobo¬
rated  by  anything  in  the  records.  But  as
it  Is  unlikely  that  so  particular  a  narra¬
tive  should  have  no  foundation,  Hume
has  plausibly  conjectured  that  the  roll
has  been  wilfully  mutilated.  As  this

suspicion  occurs  in  other  instances,  it
would  be  desirable  to  ascertain,  by  ex¬
amination  of  the  original  rolls,  whether

they  bear  any  external  marks  of  injury.
The  mutilators,  however,  if  such  there

were,  have  left  a  great  deal.  The  rolls  of

Henry  IV.  and  V.’s  parliaments  are  quite
full  of  petitions  against  the  clergy.

6  3  Inst.  p.  121 ;  Collier,  yol.  i.  p.  668.

®  2  Inst.  p.  634;  where  several  in¬
stances  of  priests  executed  for  coining
and  other  treasons  are  adduced.  And
this  may  also  be  inferred  from  25  E.  III.
suit.  3,  c.  4  ;  and  from  4  II.  IV.  c.  8.  In¬
deed  the  benefit  of  clergy  has  never
been  taken  away  by  statute  from  high
treason.  This  renders  it  improbable  that
chief  justice  Gascoyne  should,  as  Carte
tells  us,  vol.  ii.  p.  664,  have  refused  to
try  archbishop  Scrope  for  treason,  on
the  ground  that  no  one  could  lawfully
sit  in  judgment  on  a  bishop  for  his  life.
Whether  he  might  have  declined  to  try
him  as  a  peer  is  another  question.  The
pope  excommunicated  all  who  were  con¬
cerned  in  Scrope's  death,  and  it  cost
Henry  a  large  sum  to  obtain  absolution.
But  Boniface  IX.  was  no  arbiter  of  the
English  law.  Edward  IV.  granted  a
strange  charter  to  the  clergy,  not  only
dispensing  with  the  statutes  of  prro-
munire,  but  absolutely  exempting  them
from  temporal  jurisdiction  in  cases  of

240  CONCORDATS  OF  ASCHAFFENBURG.  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

Germany,  as  well  as  England,  was  disappointed  of  her  hopes
of  general  reformation  by  the  Italian  party  at  Constance  ;  but
she  did  not  supply  the  want  of  the  council’s  decrees  with  suf¬
ficient  decision.  A  concordat  with  Martin  V.  left  the  pope  in
Concordat*  possession  of  too  great  a  part  of  his  recent  usurpa-
of  Aachaf-  tions.1  This,  however,  was  repugnant  to  the  spirit
of  Germany,  which  called  for  a  more  thorough
reform  with  all  the  national  roughness  and  honesty.  The
diet  of  Mentz,  during  the  continuance  of  the  council  of  Basle,
adopted  all  those  regulations  hostile  to  the  papal  interests
which  occasioned  the  deadly  quarrel  between  that  assembly
and  the  court  of  Rome.*  But  the  German  empire  was  be¬
trayed  by  Frederic  III.,  and  deceived  by  an  accomplished  but
profligate  statesman,  his  secretary  vEneas  Sylvius.  Fresh
concordats,  settled  at  Aschaffenburg  in  1448,  nearly  ujjou  a
footing  of  those  concluded  with  Martin  V.,  surrendered  great
part  of  the  independence  for  which  Germany  had  contended.
The  pope  retained  his  annates,  or  at  least  a  sort  of  tax  in
their  place ;  and  instead  of  reserving  benefices  arbitrarily,  he
obtained  the  positive  right  of  collation  during  six  alternate
months  of  every  year.  Episcopal  elections  were  freely  re¬
stored  to  the  chapters,  except  in  case  of  translation,  when  the
pope  still  continued  to  nominate ;  as  he  did  also  if  any  person,
canonically  unfit,  were  presented  to  him  for  confirmation.'
Such  is  the  concordat  of  Aschaffenburg,  by  which  the  catholic
principalities  of  the  empire  have  always  been  governed,
though  reluctantly  acquiescing  in  its  disadvantageous  provis¬
ions.  Rome,  for  the  remainder  of  the  fifteenth  century,  not
satisfied  with  the  terms  she  had  imposed,  is  said  to  have  con¬
tinually  encroached  upon  the  right  of  election.4  But  she
purchased  too  dearly  her  triumph  over  the  weakness  of
Frederic  III.,  and  the  Hundred  Grievances  of  Germany,
presented  to  Adrian  VI.  by  the  diet  of  Nuremberg  in  1522,

trenaon  an  well  a *  felony.  Wilkin*.  Con-  Rome  would  answer,  If  the  annate*
cilia,  t.  ill.  p.  683 ;  Collier,  p.  678.  This,  were  but  sufficient  for  the  pope’*  main-
however,  being  an  illegal  grant,  took  no  tenance  at  that  time,  what  inuit  they  be
effect,  at  leant  after  hi*  death.  now  ?

1  I'Cnlkut,  t.  ii*  P-  428;  Schmidt,  t.  ▼.  ♦  Schmidt,  p.  98 ;  .4’mtu  Pylvius,  Kpi-t.

P  131.  869  aud  871 ;  and  De  Moribo*  Oennan-

*  Schmidt,  t.  ▼.  p.  221 ;  Lenfant.  orum,  p  1041,  1061.  Several  little  dia-

3  Schmidt,  t.  ▼.  p.  250;  t.  ri.  p.  94,  put**  with  the  pope  Indicate  tire  spirit
&e.  He  observe*  that  there  U  three  that  wa*  fermenting  in  Germany  through-
times  as  much  money  at  present  as  in  out  the  fifteenth  century.  But  thU  is
the  fifteenth  century:  If  therefore  the  the  proper  subject  of  a  more  detailed
annate*  are  now  fell  as  a  burden,  what  ecclesiastical  history,  and  should  form  an
must  they  have  been ?  p.  118.  To  this  Introduction  to  that  of  the  Reformat  lou.

Eccles.  Power.  PAPAL  ENCROACHMENTS.

241

manifested  the  working  of  a  long-treasnred  resentment,  that
had  made  straight  the  path  before  the  Saxon  reformer.

I  have  already  taken  notice  that  the  Castilian  church  was
in  the  first  ages  of  that  monarchy  nearly  inde¬
pendent  of  Rome.  But  after  many  gradual  en-  crTchwents
croachments  the  code  of  laws  promulgated  by  church  of

•  *  o  j  (jastiie

Alfonso  X.  had  incorporated  a  great  part  of  the
decretals,  and  thus  given  the  papal  jurisprudence  an  author¬
ity  which  it  nowhere  else  possessed  in  national  tribunals.1
That  richly  endowed  hierarchy  was  a  tempting  spoil.  The
popes  filled  up  its  benefices  by  means  of  expectatives  and
reserves  with  their  own  Italian  dependents.  We  find  the
cortes  of  Palencia  in  1388  complaining  that  strangers  are
beneficed  in  Castile,  through  which  the  churches  are  ill  sup¬
plied,  and  native  scholars  cannot  be  provided,  and  requesting
the  king  to  take  such  measures  in  relation  to  this  as  the
kings  of  France,  Aragon,  and  Navarre,  who  do  not  permit
any  but  natives  to  hold  benefices  in  their  kingdoms.  The
king  answered  to  this  petition  that  he  would  use  his  en¬
deavors  to  that  end.2  And  this  is  expressed  with  greater
warmth  by  a  cortes  of  1473,  who  declare  it  to  be  the  custom
of  all  Christian  nations  that  foreigners  should  not  be  pro¬
moted  to  benefices,  urging  the  discouragement  of  native
learning,  the  decay  of  charity,  the  bad  performance  of  relig¬
ious  rites,  and  other  evils  arising  from  the  non-residence  of
beneficed  priests,  and  request  the  king  to  notify  to  the  court
of  Rome  that  no  expectative  or  provision  in  favor  of  foreign¬
ers  can  be  received  in  future.®  This  petition  seems  to  have
passed  into  a  law  ;  but  I  am  ignorant  of  the  consequences.
Spain  certainly  took  an  active  part  in  restraining  the  abuses
of  pontifical  authority  at  the  councils  of  Constance  and
Basle  ;  to  which  I  might  add  the  name  of  Trent,  if  that  as¬
sembly  were  not  beyond  my  province.

France,  dissatisfied  with  the  abortive  termination  of  her
exertions  during  the  schism,  rejected  the  concor-  Cho(.kfl  0I1
dat  offered  by  Martin  V.,  which  held  out  but  a  papal  au-
promise  of  imperfect  reformation.4  She  suffered
in  consequence  the  papal  exactions  for  some  years,
till  the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Basle  prompted  her  to  more

1  Marina,  Ensayo  Historico-Critico,  o.  8  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  t.  U.  p.  804;
820.  8cc.  Mariana,  Hist.  Uispan.  1.  xix.  o.  1.

8  Id.  Teoria  de  las  Cortes,  t.  Hi.  p.  126.  1  Villarwt,  t.  it.  p.  126.

VOL.  II.  16

242

CHECKS  OX  PAPAL  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

vigorous  efforts  for  independence,  and  Charles  VII.  enacted
the  famous  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  Bourges.1  This  has  been
deemed  a  sort  of  Magna  Charta  of  the  Gal li can  church  ;  for
though  the  law  was  speedily  abrogated,  its  principle  has  re¬
mained  fixed  as  the  basis  of  ecclesiastical  liberties.  By  the
Pragmatic  Sanction  a  general  council  was  declared  superior
to  the  pope ;  elections  of  bishops  were  made  free  from  all
control ;  mandats  or  grants  in  expectsuicy,  and  reservations
of  benefices,  were  Liken  away ;  first  fruits  were  abolished.
This  defalcation  of  wealth,  which  had  now  become  dearer
than  power,  could  not  be  patiently  borne  at  Rome.  Pius  II.,
the  same  ./Eneas  Sylvius  who  had  sold  himself  to  oppose  the
council  of  Basle,  in  whose  service  he  had  been  originally  dis¬
tinguished,  used  every  endeavor  to  procure  the  repeal  of  this
ordinance.  With  Charles  VII.  he  had  no  success;  but  Louis
XI.,  partly  out  of  blind  hatred  to  his  father’s  memory,  partly
from  a  delusive  expectation  that  the  pope  would  support  the
Angevin  faction  in  Naples,  repealed  the  Pragmatic  Sanc¬
tion.2  This  may  be  added  to  other  proofs  that  Louis  XI.,
even  according  to  the  measures  of  worldly  wisdom,  was  not  a
wise  politician.  His  people  judged  from  better  feelings ;  the
parliament  of  Paris  constantly  refused  to  enregister  the  rev¬
ocation  of  that  favorite  law,  and  it  continued  in  many  re¬
spects  to  be  acted  upon  until  the  reign  of  Francis  I.®  At  the
States  General  of  Tours,  in  1 484,  the  inferior  clergy,  second¬
ed  by  the  two  other  orders,  earnestly  requested  that  the
Pragmatic  Sanction  might  be  confirmed ;  but  the  prelates
were  timid  or  corrupt,  and  the  regent  Anne  was  unwilling  to
risk  a  quarrel  with  the  Holy  See.4  This  unsettled  state  con¬
tinued,  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  neither  quite  enforced  nor
quite  repealed,  till  Francis  I.,  having  accommodated  the
differences  of  his  predecessor  with  Rome,  agreed  upon  a  final
concordat  with  Leo  X.,  the  treaty  that  subsisted  for  almost
three  centuries  between  the  papacy  and  the  kingdom  of
France.6  Instead  of  capitular  election  or  papal  provision,  a
new  method  was  devised  for  tilling  the  vacancies  of  episcopal
sees.  The  king  was  to  nominate  a  fit  person,  whom  the

l  Idem,  p.  2C3 ;  Hl*t.  du  Droit  Public  *  Gamier,  t.  rrl.  p.  432;  t.  xrii.  p.
Ecclbv  Fran^oU.  1.  11.  p.  234;  Fleury,  222  ct  alibi.  Crerier,  t.  It.  p.  818  el
Institution*  au  Droit;  Crcrier,  t.  It.  p.  alibi.

100  ;  Piuquler,  Recherche*  de  la  France,  <  Dernier,  t.  xix.  p.  216  and  321.

1.  111.  c.  27.  »  dernier,  t.  xxtll.  p.  161;  Ui*t.  do

*  VlUarct,  and  Oarnier,  t.  xri. ;  Cre-  Droit  Public  Ere It*.  Fr.  t.  U.  p.  243;
Tier,  t.  It.  p.  266,  274.  Fleur)  ,  limitation*  au  Droit,  t.  i.  p.  107.

Eccles.  Power.  AUTHORITY  IX  FRANCE.

243

pope  was  to  collate.  The  one  obtained  an  essential  patron¬
age,  the  other  preserved  his  theoretical  supremacy.  Annates
were  restored  to  the  pope  ;  a  concession  of  great  importance.
He  gave  up  his  indefinite  prerogative  of  reserving  benefices,
and  received  only  a  small  stipulated  patronage.  This  con¬
vention  met  with  strenuous  opposition  in  France  ;  the  parlia¬
ment  of  Paris  yielded  only  to  force ;  the  university  hardly
stopped  short  of  sedition;  the  zealous  Gallicans  have  ever
since  deplored  it,  as  a  fatal  wound  to  their  liberties.  There
is  much  exaggeration  in  this,  as  far  as  the  relation  of  the
Gallican  church  to  Rome  is  concerned  ;  but  the  royal  nomina¬
tion  to  bishoprics  impaired  of  course  the  independence  of  the
hierarchy.  Whether  this  prerogative  of  the  crown  were
upon  the  whole  beneficial  to  France,  is  a  problem  that  I  can¬
not  affect  to  solve ;  in  this  country  there  seems  little  doubt
that  capitular  elections,  which  the  statute  of  Henry  VIII.  has
reduced  to  a  name,  would  long  since  have  degenerated  into
the  corruption  of  close  boroughs ;  but  the  circumstances  of
the  Gallican  establishment  may  not  have  been  entirely  simi¬
lar,  and  the  question  opens  a  variety  of  considerations  that
do  not  belong  to  my  present  subject.

From  the  principles  established  during  the  schism,  and  in
the  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  Bourges,  arose  the  far-  Liberties  of
famed  liberties  of  the  Gallican  church,  which  lion-  the  Gallican
orably  distinguished  her  from  other  members  of  church'
the  Roman  communion.  These  have  been  referred  by  F rench
writers  to  a  much  earlier  era ;  but  except  so  far  as  that  country
participated  in  the  ancient  ecclesiastical  independence  of  all
Europe,  before  the  papal  encroachments  had  subverted  it,  I
do  not  see  that  they  can  be  properly  traced  above  the
fifteenth  century.  Nor  had  they  acquired  even  at  the  expi¬
ration  of  that  age  the  precision  and  consistency  which  was
given  in  later  times  by  the  constant  spirit  of  the  parliaments
and  universities,  as  well  as  by  the  best  ecclesiastical  authors,
with  little  assistance  from  the  crown,  which,  except  in  a  few
periods  of  disagreement  with  Rome,  has  rather  been  disposed
to  restrain  the  more  zealous  Gallicans.  These  liberties,
therefore,  do  not  strictly  fall  within  my  limits  ;  and  it  will  be
sufficient  to  observe  that  they  depended  upon  two  maxims  :
one,  that  the  pope  does  not  possess  any  direct  or  indirect
temporal  authority ;  the  other,  that  his  spiritual  jurisdiction
can  only  be  exercised  in  conformity  with  such  parts  of  the

244

ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

canon  law  as  are  received  by  the  kingdom  of  France.
Hence  the  Galliean  church  rejected  a  great  part  of  the  Sext
and  Clementines,  and  paid  little  regard  to  modern  papal
bulls,  which  in  fact  obtained  validity  only  by  the  king’s  ap¬
probation.1

The  pontifical  usurpations  which  were  thus  restrained,  af¬
fected,  at  least  in  their  direct  operation,  rather  the
church  than  the  state  ;  and  temporal  governments
strained^  would  only  have  been  half  emancipated,  if  their
national  hierarchies  had  preserved  their  enormous
jurisdiction.®  England,  in  this  also,  began  the  work,  and
had  made  a  considerable  progress,  while  the  mistaken  piety
or  policy  of  Louis  IX.  and  his  successors  had  laid  France
open  to  vast  encroachments.  The  first  method  adopted  in
order  to  check  them  was  rude  enough  ;  by  seizing  the  bishop’s
effects  when  he  exceeded  his  jurisdiction.®  This  jurisdiction,
according  to  the  construction  of  churchmen,  became  perpetu¬
ally  larger :  even  the  reforming  council  of  Constance  give  an
enumeration  of  ecclesiastical  causes  far  beyond  the  limits
acknowledged  in  England,  or  perhaps  in  France.4  But  the
parliament  of  Paris,  instituted  in  1304,  gradually  estal)-
lished  a  paramount  authority  over  ecclesiastical  as  well  as
civil  tribunals.  Their  progress  was  indeed  very  slow.  At  a
famous  assembly  in  1329,  before  Philip  of  Valois,  his  advo¬
cate-general,  Peter  de  Cugnieres,  pronounced  a  long  harangue

1  Fleury,  Institutions  au  Droit,  t.  il.  p.
22fi,  &c.,  and  Discours  sur  les  Liberty  do
l'Eglise  Qallir&ne.  The  last  editors  of
thin  dissertation  go  fhr  beyond  Fleury,
and  perhaps  reach  the  utmost  point  in
limiting  the  papal  authority  which  a
iincere  member  of  that  communion  can
attain.  See  notes,  p.  417  and  446.

*  It  ought  always  to  be  remembered
that  ecclesiastical ,  and  not  merely  papal ,
encroachments  are  what  civil  govern¬
ments  and  the  laity  in  general  have  had
to  resist;  a  point  which  some  very
■ealous  opposers  of  Home  have  been
willing  to  keep  out  of  sight.  The  latter
arose  out  of  the  former,  and  perhaps  were
In  some  respects  less  objectionable.  But
the  true  enemy  is  what  are  called  Hlgh-
church  principles ;  be  they  maintained
by  a  pope,  a  bishop,  or  a  presbyter.
Thus  archbishop  Stratford  writes  to  Ed¬
ward  III.  :  Duo  sunt,  quibus  prtncl-
pallter  regitur  mundus,  sacra  pontiflralls
auctoritas,  ct  regalia  ordlnata  potestas  :
in  quibus  est  pond  us  tanto  gravius  et

sublimius  saccrdotum,  quanto  et  de  regi¬
bus  illi  In  divino  reddituri  sunt  examine
rationem  ;  et  ideo  scire  debet  regia  celsi-
tudo  ex  lllorum  vos  dependere  judicio,
non  illoe  a«l  restrain  dirigi  posse  volun-
U  ltMiia|  Conn  i  i.  t  ii.  p.

This  amazing  impudence  towards  such  a
prince  as  Edward  did  not  succeed  ;  but  it
is  interesting  to  follow  the  track  of  the
star  which  was  now  rather  receding,
though  still  fierce.

3  De  Marca,  De  Concordant!!,  1.  lv.  e.

18.

4  De  Marca,  De  Concordantll,  1.  lv.
c.  16;  Lenfant,  Cone,  de  Constance,  t  il.
p.  881.  De  Marca,  1.  lv.  e.  16,  gives  us
passages  from  one  Durand  us  about  13W.
complaining  that  the  lay  judge*  invaded
ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  and  reckoning
the  cases  subject  to  the  latter,  under
which  he  includes  feudal  and  criminal
causes  In  some  circumstances,  and  also
those  In  which  the  temporal  judge*  are
In  doubt ;  si  quid  ambiguuin  inter  Judi-
ces  SKculares  oriatur.

Eccles.  Power.

RESTRAINED.

245

against  the  excesses  of  spiritual  jurisdiction.  This  is  a
curious  illustration  of  that  branch  of  legal  and  ecclesiastical
history.  It  was  answered  at  large  by  some  bishops,  and  the
king  did  not  venture  to  take  any  active  measures  at  that  time.1
Several  regulations  were,  however,  made  in  the  fourteenth
century,  which  took  away  the  ecclesiastical  cognizance  of
adultery,  of  the  execution  of  testaments,  and  other  causes
which  had  been  claimed  by  the  clergy.2  Their  immunity  in
criminal  matters  was  straitened  by  the  introduction  of  privi-
ledged  cases,  to  which  it  did  not  extend ;  such  as  treason,
murder,  robbery,  and  other  heinous  offences.8  The  parlia¬
ment  began  to  exercise  a  judicial  control  over  episcopal
courts.  It  was  not,  however,  till  the  beginning  of  the  six¬
teenth  century,  according  to  the  best  writers,  that  it  devised
its  famous  form  of  procedure,  the  “appeal  because  of  abuse.”4
This,  in  the  course  of  time,  and  through  the  decline  of  eccle¬
siastical  power,  not  only  proved  an  effectual  barrier  against
encroachments  of  spiritual  jurisdiction,  but  drew  back  again
to  the  lay  court  the  greater  part  of  those  causes  which  by
prescription,  and  indeed  by  law,  had  appertained  to  a  different
cognizance.  Thus  testamentary,  and  even,  in  a  great  degree,
matrimonial  causes  were  decided  by  the  parliament ;  and  in
many  other  matters  that  body,  being  the  judge  of  its  own
competence,  narrowed,  by  mean3  of  the  appeal  because  of
abuse,  the  boundaries  of  the  opposite  jurisdiction.®  This
remedial  process  appears  to  have  been  more  extensively  ap¬
plied  than  our  English  writ  of  prohibition.  The  latter  merely
restrains  the  interference  of  the  ecclesiastical  courts  in  matters
which  the  law  has  not  committed  to  them.  But  the  parlia¬
ment  of  Paris  considered  itself,  I  apprehend,  as  conservator
of  the  liberties  and  discipline  of  the  Gallican  church ;  and
interposed  the  appeal  because  of  abuse,  whenever  the  spir¬
itual  court,  even  in  its  proper  province,  transgressed  the
canonical  rules  by  which  it  ought  to  be  governed.8

1  Velly,  t.  Tiii.  p.  234  ;  Fleuir,  Insti-  cage,  which  till  lately  was  shown  in  the
tutious,  t.  ii.  p.  12;  llist.du  Droit  Eccles.  castle  of  Loches.

Fran y.  t.  ii.  p.  86.  4  Pasquier,  1.  iii.  c.  33;  Hist,  du  Droit

1  Villaret,  t.  xi.  p.  182.  Eccl£s.  Francois,  t.  ii.  p.  119;  Fleury,

3  Fleury,  Institutions  au  Droit,  t.  ii.  p.  Institutions  au  Droit  Eccles  Francois,  t.
138.  In  the  famous  case  of  Dal  tie,  a  ii.  p.  221 ;  De  Marca,  Do  ConcordantiA
bishop  and  cardinal,  whom  Louis  XI.  de-  Sacerdotii  et  Imperii.  1.  iv.  c.  19.  The
tec  ted  in  a  treasonable  intrigue,  it  was  last  author  seems  to  carry  it  rather
contended  by  the  kiug  that  he  had  a  right  higher.

to  punish  him  capitally.  Du  Clos,  Vie  6  Fleury,  Institutions,  t.  ii.  p.  42,  &c.
de  Louis  XI.  t.  i.  p.  422;  Gamier,  Hist.  ®  De  Marca,  De  Concordantii,  1.  iv.  0.
de  France,  t.  xvii.  p.  33*).  Balue  was  9 ;  Fleury,  t.  ii.  p.  224.  In  Spain,  even
confined  lor  many  years  in  a  small  iron  now,  says  De  Marca,  bishops  or  clerks

24G

DECLINE  OF  PAPAL  Chap.  VII.  Part  II.

While  the  bishops  of  Rome  were  losing  their  general  in-
Dwime  of  fluence  over  Europe,  they  did  not  gain  more  esti-
papui  influ-  mation  in  Italy.  It  is  indeed  a  problem  of  some
enoe  in  Italy,  difficulty,  whether  they  derived  any  substantial  ad¬
vantage  from  their  temporal  principality.  For  the  last  three
centuries  it  has  certiiinly  been  conducive  to  the  maintenance
of  their  spiritual  supremacy,  which,  in  the  complicated  re¬
lations  of  policy,  might  have  been  endangered  by  their
becoming  the  subjects  of  any  particular  sovereign.  Hut  I
doubt  whether  their  real  authority  over  Christendom  in  the
middle  ages  was  not  better  preserved  by  a  state  of  nominal
dependence  upon  the  empire,  without  much  effective  control
on  one  side,  or  many  temptations  to  worldly  ambition  on  the
other.  That  covetousness  of  temporal  sway  which,  having
long  prompted  their  measures  of  usurpation  and  forgery,
seemed,  from  the  time  of  Innocent  III.  and  Nicholas  III.,  to
reap  its  gratification,  impaired  the  more  essential  parts  of  the
papal  authority.  In  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries
the  popes  degraded  their  character  by  too  much  anxiety  about
the  politics  of  Italy.  The  veil  woven  by  religious  awe  was
rent  asunder,  and  the  features  of  ordinary  ambition  appeared
without  disguise.  For  it  was  no  longer  that  magnificent  and
original  system  of  spiritual  power  which  made  Gregory  VII.,
even  in  exile,  a  rival  of  the  emperor,  which  held  forth  re¬
dress  where  the  law  could  not  protect,  and  punishment  where
it  could  not  chastise,  which  fell  in  sometimes  with  supersti¬
tious  feeling,  and  sometimes  with  political  interest.  Many
might  believe  that  the  pope  could  depose  a  schismatic  prince,
who  were  disgusted  at  his  attacking  an  unoffending  neighbor.
As  the  cupidity  of  the  clergy  in  regard  to  worldly  estate  had
lowered  their  character  everywhere,  so  the  similar  conduct  of
their  head  undermined  the  respect  felt  for  him  in  Italy.  The
censures  of  the  church,  those  excommunications  and  inter¬
dicts  which  had  made  Europe  tremble,  became  gradually  des¬
picable  as  well  as  oenhus  when  they  were  lavished  in  every
squabble  for  territory  which  the  pope  was  pleased  to  make
his  own.1  Even  the  crusades,  which  had  already  been  tried

not  obeying  royal  mandate*  that  inhibit  lay  down  the  government  within  a  month,
the  exrc**e*  of  eccle«la*tical  court*  are  Mura  tori  ad  ann.  A  curiou*  *ty  le  for  the
expelled  from  the  kingdom  and  deprived  pope  to  adopt  toward*  a  free  city !  Hi
of  the  right*  of  deiiiarnuhlp.  \  car*  before  the  Venetian*  had  been  in-

l  In  12UU  Pina  wa*  put  under  an  inter-  terdlcted  beoauee  tliey  would  not  allow
diet  for  haring  conferred  the  *lgniory  their  galley*  to  be  hired  by  the  king  of
on  the  count  of  Montefrltro  ;  and  he  wa«  Naple*.  But  it  would  be  almost  eudkaf
ordered,  on  pain  of  excommunication,  to  to  quote  every  in*  tame.

Eccles.  Power.

EFFLUENCE  IN  ITALY.

247

against  the  heretics  of  Languedoc,  were  now  preached  against
all  who  espoused  a  different  party  from  the  Roman  see  in  the
quarrels  of  Italy.  Such  were  those  directed  at  Frederic  II.,
at  Manfred,  and  at  Matteo  Visconti,  accompanied-  by  the
usual  bribery,  indulgences,  and  remission  of  sins.  The  papal
interdicts  of  the  fourteenth  century  wore  a  different  complex¬
ion  from  those  of  former  times.  Though  tremendous  to
the  imagination,  they  had  hitherto  been  confined  to  spiritual
effects,  or  to  such  as  were  connected  with  religion,  as  the
prohibition  of  marriage  and  sepulture.  But  Clement  V.,  on
account  of  an  attack  made  by  the  Venetians  upon  Ferrara
in  1309,  proclaimed  the  whole  people  infamous,  and  incapa¬
ble  for  three  generations  of  any  office,  their  goods,  in  every
part  of  the  world,  subject  to  confiscation,  and  every  Venetian,
wherever  he  might  be  found,  liable  to  be  reduced  into  slave¬
ry.1  A  bull  in  the  same  terms  was  published  by  Gregory
XI.  in  1376  against  the  Florentines.

From  the  termination  of  the  schism,  as  the  popes  found
their  ambition  thwarted  beyond  the  Alps,  it  was  diverted
more  and  more  towards  schemes  of  temporal  sovereignty.
In  these  we  do  .not  perceive  that  consistent  policy  which
remarkably  actuated  their  conduct  as  supreme  heads  of  the
church.  Men  generally  advanced  in  years,  and  bom  of  noble
Italian  families,  made  the  papacy  subservient  to  the  elevation
of  their  kindred,  or  to  the  interests  of  a  local  faction.  For
such  ends  they  mingled  in  the  dark  conspiracies  of  that  bad  age,
distinguished  only  by  the  more  scandalous  turpitude  of  their
vices  from  the  petty  tyrants  and  intriguers  with  whom  they
were  engaged.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,
when  all  favorable  prejudices  were  worn  away,  those  who
occupied  the  most  conspicuous  station  in  Europe  disgraced
their  name  by  more  notorious  profligacy  than  could  be  paral¬
leled  in  the  darkest  age  that  had  preceded ;  and  at  the  mo¬
ment  beyond  which  this  work  is  not  carried,  the  invasion  of
Italy  by  Charles  VIII.,  I  must  leave  the  pontifical  throne  in
the  possession  of  Alexander  VI.

It  has  been  my  object  in  the  present  chapter  to  bring
within  the  compass  of  a  few  hours’  perusal  the  substance  of
a  great  and  interesting  branch  of  history ;  not  certainly  with
such  extensive  reach  of  learning  as  the  subject  might  require,

i  Muratorl.

248

DECLINE  OF  PAPAL  INFUENCE.  Chap.  VII.  Pabt  II.

but  from  sources  of  unquestioned  credibility.  Unconscious
of  any  partialities  that  could  give  an  oblique  bias  to  my
mind,  I  have  not  been  very  solicitous  to  avoid  offence  where
offence  is  so  easily  Liken.  Yet  there  is  one  misinterpreta¬
tion  of  my  meaning  which  I  would  gladly  obviate.  I  have
not  designed,  in  exhibiting  without  disguise  the  usurpations
of  Rome  during  the  middle  ages,  to  furnish  materials  for
unjust  prejudice  or  unfounded  distrust  It  is  an  advan¬
tageous  circumstance  for  the  philosophical  inquirer  into  the
history  of  ecclesiastical  dominion,  that,  as  it  spreads  itself
over  the  vast  extent  of  fifteen  centuries,  the  dependence  of
events  upon  general  causes,  rather  than  on  transitory  combi¬
nations  or  the  character  of  individuals,  is  made  more  evident,
and  the  future  more  probably  foretold  from  a  consideration
of  the  past,  than  we  are  apt  to  find  in  political  history.  Five
centuries  have  now  elapsed,  during  every  one  of  which  the
authority  of  the  Roman  see  has  successively  declined.  Slowly
and  silently  receding  from  their  claims  to  temporal  power,
the  pontiffs  hardly  protect  their  dilapidated  citadel  from  the
revolutionary  concussions  of  modern  times,  the  rapacity  of
governments,  and  the  growing  averseness  to  ecclesiastical
influence.  But  if,  thus  bearded  by  unmannerly  and  threat¬
ening  innovation,  they  should  occasionally  forget  that  cautious
policy  which  necessity  has  prescribed,  if  they  should  attempt
(an  unavailing  expedient !)  to  revive  institutions  which  can
be  no  longer  operative,  or  principles  that  have  died  away,
their  defensive  efforts  will  not  be  unnatural,  nor  ought  to
excite  either  indignation  or  alarm.  A  calm,  comprehensive
study  of  ecclesiastical  history,  not  in  such  scraps  and  frag¬
ments  as  the  ordinary  partisans  of  our  ephemeral  literature
obtrude  upon  us,  is  perhaps  the  best  antidote  to  extravagant
apprehensions.  Those  who  know  what  Rome  has  once  been
are  best  able  to  appreciate  what  she  is;  those  who  have  seen
the  thunderbolt  in  the  hands  of  the  Gregories  and  the  Inno¬
cents  will  hardly  be  intimidated  at  the  sallies  of  decrepitude,
the  impotent  dart  of  Priam  amidst  the  crackling  ruins  of
Troy.1

1  It  is  again  to  be  remembered  that  this  paragraph  was  written  in  1810*

Notes  to  Chap.  VII.

TITHES.

249

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII.

Note  I.  Page  142.

This  grant  is  recorded  in  two  charters  differing  materially
from  each  other ;  the  first  transcribed  in  Ingulfus’s  History
of  Croyland,  and  dated  at  Winchester  on  the  Nones  of  No¬
vember,  855 ;  the  second  extant  in  two  chartularies,  and
bearing  date  at  Wilton,  April  22,  854.  This  is  marked  by
Mr.  Kemble  as  spurious  (Codex  Ang.-Sax.  Diplom.  ii.  52)  ;
and  the  authority  of  Ingulfus  is  not  sufficient  to  support  the
first  The  fact,  however,  that  Ethelwolf  made  some  great
and  general  donation  to  the  church  rests  on  the  authority  of
Asser,  whom  later  writers  have  principally  copied.  His
words  are,  —  “Eodem  quoque  anno  [855]  Adelwolfus  vener-
abilis,  rex  Occidentalium  Saxonum,  decimam  totius  regni  sui
partem  ab  omni  regali  servitio  et  tributo  liberavit,  et  in  sem-
piterno  grafio  in  cruce  Christi,  pro  redemptione  anim®  suae
et  antecessorum  suorum,  Uni  et  Trino  Deo  immolavit.”
(Gale,  XV.  Script,  iii.  156.)

It  is  really  difficult  to  infer  anything  from  such  a  passage ;
but  whatever  the  writer  may  have  meant,  or  whatever  truth
there  may  be  in  his  story,  it  seems  impossible  to  strain  his
words  into  a  grant  of  tithes.  The  charter  in  Ingulfus  rather
leads  to  suppose,  but  that  in  the  Codex  Diplomaticus  deci¬
sively  proves,  that  the  grant  conveyed  a  tenth  part  of  the
land,  and  not  of  its  produce.  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  by  quoting
only  the  latter  charter,  renders  Selden’s  Hypothesis,  that  the
general  right  to  tithes  dates  from  this  concession  of  Ethel¬
wolf,  even  more  untenable  than  it  is.  Certainly  the  charter
copied  by  Ingulfus,  which  Sir  F.  Palgrave  passes  in  silence,
does  grant  “  decimam  partem  bonorum  ;  ”  that  is,  I  presume,
of  chattels,  which,  as  far  as  it  goes,  implies  a  tithe ;  while  the
words  applicable  to  hind  are  so  obscure  and  apparently  cor¬
rupt,  that  Selden  might  be  warranted  in  giving  them  the

250

EDWY  AND  ELGIVA.

Notes  TO

like  construction.  Both  charters  probably  are  spurious ;  but
there  may  have  been  an  extensive  grant  to  the  church,  not
only  of  immunity  from  the  trinoda  necessitas ,  which  they
express,  but  of  actual  possessions.  Since,  however,  it  must
have  been  impracticable  to  endow  the  church  with  a  tenth
part  of  appropriated  lands,  it  might  possibly  be  conjectured
that  she  took  a  tenth  part  of  the  produce,  either  as  a  compo¬
sition,  or  until  means  should  be  found  of  putting  her  in
possession  of  the  soil.  And  although,  according  to  the  no¬
tions  of  those  times,  the  actual  property  might  be  more
desirable,  it  is  plain  to  us  that  a  tithe  of  the  produce  was
of  much  greater  value  than  the  same  proportion  of  the  land
itself.

Note  II.  Page  153.

Two  living  writers  of  the  Roman  Catholic  communion.  Dr.
Milner,  in  his  History  of  Winchester,  and  Dr.  Linganl,  in
his  Antiquities  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church,  contend  that
Elgiva,  whom  some  protestant  historians  are  willing  to  repre¬
sent  as  the  queen  of  Edwy,  was  but  his  mistress ;  and  seem
inclined  to  justify  the  conduct  of  Odo  and  Dunstan  towards
this  unfortunate  couple.  They  are  unquestionably  so  far
right,  that  few,  if  any,  of  those  writers  who  have  been  quoted
as  authorities  in  respect  of  this  story  speak  of  the  lady  as  a
queen  or  lawful  wife.  I  must  therefore  strongly  reprobate  the
conduct  of  Dr.  Henry,  who,  calling  Elgiva  queen,  and  a-sert-
ing  that  she  was  married,  refers,  at  the  bottom  of  his  page,
to  William  of  Malmsbury  and  other  chroniclers,  who  give  a
totally  opposite  account ;  especially  as  he  does  not  intimate,
by  a  single  expression,  that  the  nature  of  her  connection  with
the  king  was  equivocal.  Such  a  practice,  when  it  proceeds,
as  I  fear  it  did  in  this  instance,  not  from  oversight,  but  from
prejudice,  is  a  glaring  violation  of  historical  integrity,  and
tends  to  render  the  use  of  references,  that  great  improvement
of  modern  history,  a  sort  of  fraud  uj>on  the  reader.  The
subject,  since  the  first  publication  of  these  volumes,  has  been
discussed  by  Dr.  Lingnrd  in  his  histories  both  of  England
and  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church,  by  the  Edinburgh  reviewer
of  that  history,  voL  xlii.  (Mr.  Allen),  and  by  other  late
writers.  Mr.  Allen  has  al-o  given  a  short  dissertation  on
the  subject,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Inquiry  iuto  the

Chap.  VII.

DEWY  AND  ELGIVA.

251

Royal  Prerogative,  posthumously  published.  It  must  ever
be  impossible,  unless  unknown  documents  are  brought  to
light,  to  clear  up  all  the  facts  of  this  litigated  story.  But
though  some  protestant  writers,  as  I  have  said,  in  maintain¬
ing  the  matrimonial  connection  of  Edwy  and  Elgiva,  quote
authorities  who  give  a  different  color  to  it,  there  is  a  pre¬
sumption  of  the  marriage  from  a  passage  of  the  Saxon
Chronicle,  a.d.  958  (wanting  in  Gibson’s  edition,  but  dis¬
covered  by  Mr.  Turner,  and  now  restored  to  its  place  by  Mr.
Petrie),  which  distinctly  says  that  archbishop  Odo  separated
Edwy  the  king  and  Elgiva  because  they  were  too  nearly
related.  It  is  therefore  highly  probable  that  she  was  queen,
though  Dr.  Lingard  seems  to  hesitate.  This  passage  was
written  as  early  as  any  other  which  we  have  on  the  subject,
and  in  a  more  placid  and  truthful  tone.

The  royalty,  however,  of  Elgiva  will  be  out  of  all  pos¬
sible  doubt,  if  we  can  depend  on  a  document,  being  a  refer¬
ence  to  a  charter,  in  the  Cotton  library  (Claudius,  B.  vi.),
wherein  she  appears  as  a  witness.  Turner  says  of  this,  —
“  Had  the  charter  even  been  forged,  the  monks  would  have
taken  care  that  the  names  appended  were  correct.”  This
Dr.  Lingard  inexcusably  calls  “  confessing  that  the  instru¬
ment  is  of  very  doubtful  authenticity.”

The  Edinburgh  reviewer,  who  had  seen  the  manuscript,
believes  it  genuine,  and  gives  an  account  of  it.  Mr.  Kemble
lias  printed  it  without  mark  of  spuriousness.  (Cod.  Diplom.
vol.  v.  p.  378.)  In  this  document  we  have  the  names  of
iElfgifu,  the  king’s  wife,  and  of  JEthelgifu,  the  king’s  wife’s
mother.  The  signatures  are  merely  recited,  so  that  the
document  itself  cannot  be  properly  styled  a  charter ;  but  we
are  only  concerned  with  the  testimony  it  bears  to  the  exist¬
ence  of  the  queen  Elgiva  and  her  mother.

If  this  charter,  thus  recited,  is  established,  we  advance  a
step,  so  as  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  mother  and  daughter,
bearing  nearly  the  same  names,  and  such  names  as  appar¬
ently  imply  royal  blood,  the  latter  being  married  to  Edwy.
This  would  tend  to  corroborate  the  coronation  story,  divesting
it  of  the  gross  exaggerations  of  the  monkish  biographers  and
their  followers.  It  might  be  supposed  that  the  young  king,
little  more  than  a  boy,  retired  from  the  drunken  revelry  of
his  courtiers  to  converse,  and  perhaps  romp,  with  his  cousin
and  her  mother;  that  Dunstan  audaciously  broke  in  upon

252

ED\nr  AND  ELGIVA.

Notks  to

him,  and  forced  him  back  to  the  banquet ;  that  both  he  and
the  ladies  resented  this  insolence  as  it  deserved,  and  drove  the
monk  into  exile ;  and  that  the  marriage  took  place.

It  is  more  difficult  to  deal  with  the  story  originally  related
by  the  biographer  of  Odo,  that  after  his  marriage  Edwy
carried  off  a  woman  with  whom  he  lived,  and  whom  Odo
seized  and  sent  out  of  the  kingdom.  This  lady  is  called  by
Eadmer  una  de  praascriptis  mulieribus ;  whence  Dr.  Lingard
assumes  her  to  have  been  Ethelgiva,  the  queen’s  mother.
This  was  in  his  History  of  England  (i.  517);  but  in  the
second  edition  of  the  Antiquities  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church
he  is  far  less  confident  than  either  in  the  first  edition  of  that
work  or  in  his  History.  In  fact,  he  plainly  confesses  tliat
nothing  can  be  clearly  made  out  beyond  the  circumstances  of
the  coronation.

Although  the  writers  before  the  conquest  do  not  bear
witness  to  the  cruelties  exercised  on  some  woman  connected
with  the  king,  either  as  queen  or  mistress,  at  Gloucester,  yet
the  subsequent  authorities  of  Eadmer,  Osbern,  and  Malms-
bury  may  lead  us  to  believe  that  there  was  truth  in  the  main
facts,  though  we  cannot  be  certain  that  the  person  so  treated
was  the  queen  Elgiva  If  indeed  their  accounts  are  accurate,
it  seems  at  first  that  they  do  not  agree  with  their  predeces¬
sors  ;  for  they  represent  the  lady  as  being  in  the  king’s  com¬
pany  up  to  his  flight  from  the  insurgents:  —  “Regem  cum
adultern  fugitantem  persequi  non  desistunt.”  But  though  wo
read  in  the  Saxon  Chronicle  that  Odo  divorced  Edwy  and
Elgiva,  we  are  not  sure  that  they  submitted  to  the  sentence.
It  is  therefore  possible  that  she  was  with  him  in  this  disas¬
trous  flight,  and,  having  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  pursuers,
was  put  to  death  at  Gloucester.  True  it  is  that  her  prox¬
imity  of  blood  to  the  king  would  not  warrant  Osbern  to  call
her  aduhera;  but  bad  mimes  cost  nothing.  Malrasbury’s
words  look  more  like  it,  if  we  might  supply  something,
“  proxime  cognatam  invadens  uxorem  [ciyusdam  ?]  ejus  forma
deperibat ;  ”  but  as  they  stand  in  his  text,  they  defy  inv  scanty
knowledge  of  the  Latin  tongue.  On  the  whole,  however,  no
reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  very  passionate  and  late  authori¬
ties.  What  is  manifest  alone  is,  that  a  young  king  was  per¬
secuted  and  dethroned  by  the  insolence  of  monkery  exciting
a  superstitious  people  against  him.

Chap.  VII.

PRIMACY  OF  ROME.

253

Note  III.  Page  153.

I  Ail  induced,  by  further  study,  to  modify  what  is  said  in
the  text  with  respect  to  the  well-known  passages  in  Irenaeus
and  Cyprian.  The  former  assigns,  indeed,  a  considerable
weight  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  simply  as  testimony  to  apos¬
tolical  teaching  ;  but  this  is  plainly  not  limited  to  the  bishop
of  that  city,  nor  is  he  personally  mentioned.  It  is  therefore
an  argument,  and  no  slight  one,  against  the  pretended  su¬
premacy  rather  than  the  contrary.

The  authority  of  Cyprian  is  not,  perhaps,  much  more  to
the  purpose.  For  the  only  words  in  his  treatise  De  Unitate
Ecclesiae  which  assert  any  authority  in  the  chair  of  St.  Peter,
or  indeed  connect  Rome  with  Peter  at  all,  are  interpolations,
not  found  in  the  best  manuscripts  or  in  the  oldest  editions.
They  are  printed  within  brackets  in  the  best  modern  ones.
(See  James  on  Corruptions  of  Scripture  in  the  Church  of
Rome,  1612.)  True  it  is,  however,  that,  in  his  Epistle  to
Cornelius  bishop  of  Rome,  Cyprian  speaks  of  “  Petri  cathe-
dram,  atque  ecclesiam  principalem  unde  unitas  sacerdotalis
exorta  est.”  (Epist.  lix.  in  edit.  Lip.  1838 ;  Iv.  in  Baluze
and  others.)  And  in  another  he  exhorts  Stephen,  successor
of  Cornelius,  to  write  a  letter  to  the  bishops  of  Gaul,  that
they  should  depose  Marcian  of  Arles  for  adhering  to  the  No-
vatian  heresy.  (Epist.  lxviii.  or  lxvii.)  This  is  said  to  be
found  in  very  few  manuscripts.  Yet  it  seems  too  long,  and
not  sufficiently  to  the  purpose,  for  a  popish  forgery.  All
bishops  of  the  catholic  church  assumed  a  right  of  interference
with  each  other  by  admonition  ;  and  it  is  not  entirely  clear
from  the  language  that  Cyprian  meant  anything  more  authori¬
tative  ;  though  I  incline,  on  the  whole,  to  believe  that,  when
on  good  terms  with  the  see  of  Rome,  he  recognized  in  her  a
kind  of  primacy  derived  from  that  of  St.  Peter.

The  case,  nevertheless,  became  very  different  when  she
was  no  longer  of  his  mind.  In  a  nice  question  which  arose,
during  the  pontificate  of  this  very  Stephen,  as  to  the  re¬
baptism  of  those  to  whom  the  rite  had  been  administered  by
heretics,  the  bishop  of  Rome  took  the  negative  side;  while
Cyprian,  with  the  utmost  vehemence,  maintained  the  contrary.
Then  we  find  no  more  honeyed  phrases  about  the  principal
church  and  the  succession  to  Peter,  but  a  very  different  style :
“  Cur  in  tantum  Stephani,  fratris  nostri,  obstinatio  dura  pro-

254

PRIMACY  OF  ROME.  Notes  to  Chap.  VII.

rujfit  ?  ”  (Epist.  lxxiv.)  And  a  correspondent  of  Cyprian,
doubtless  a  bishop,  Firmilianus  by  name,  uses  more  violent
language:  —  “Audacia  et  insolentia  ejus  —  aperta  et  mani-
festa  Stephani  stultitia  —  de  episcopates  sui  loco  gloriatur,  et
se  successionem  Petri  tenere  contendit.”  (Epist.  lxxv.)  Cy¬
prian  proceeded  to  summon  a  council  of  the  African  bishops,
who  met,  seventy-eight  in  number,  at  Carthage.  They  all
agreed  to  condemn  heretical  baptism  as  absolutely  invalid.
Cyprian  addressed  them,  requesting  that  they  would  use  full
liberty,  not  without  a  manifest  reflection  on  the  pretensions  of
Rome :  —  “  Neque  enim  quisquam  nostrum  episcopum  se  esse
episeoporum  constituit,  aut  tyrannico  terrore  ad  obsequendi
necessitatem  collegas  suos  adigit,  quando  habeat  ornnis  epis-
copus  pro  licentia  libertatis  et  potestatis  suae  arbitrium  pro-
prium,  tamque  judicari  ab  alio  non  possit,  quam  nec  ipse
potest  alterum  judicare.”  We  have  here  an  allusion  to  what
Tertullian  had  called  horrenda  vox,  “  episcopus  episeoporum ;  ”
manifestly  intimating  that  the  see  of  Rome  had  begun  to
assert  a  superiority  and  right  of  control,  by  the  beginning  of
the  third  century,  but  at  the  same  time  that  it  was  not  gener¬
ally  endured.  Probably  the  notion  of  their  superior  author¬
ity,  as  witnesses  of  the  faith,  grew  up  in  the  Church  of
Rome  very  early ;  and  when  Victor,  towards  the  end  of  the
second  century,  excommunicated  the  churches  of  Asia  for  a
difference  as  to  the  time  of  keeping  Easter,  we  see  the  ger¬
mination  of  that  usurpation,  that  tyranny,  that  uncharitable¬
ness,  which  reached  its  culminating  point  in  the  centre  of  the
mediaeval  period.

Chap.  VII.

ANGLO-SAXON  CONSTITUTION.

255

CHAPTER  VIII.

THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.

PART  I.

The  Anglo-Saxon  Constitution  —  8ketch  of  Anglo-Saxon  History  —  Succession  to
the  Crown  —  Orders  of  Men  —  Thanes  and  Ceorls — Witenagemot — Judicial
System  —  Division  into  Hundreds  —  County  Court  —  Trial  by  Jury  —  Its  An¬
tiquity  investigated  —  Law  of  Frank-Pledge  —  Its  several  Stages  —  Question  of
Feudal  Tenures  before  the  Conquest.

No  unbiassed  observer,  who  derives  pleasure  from  the  wel¬
fare  of  his  species,  can  fail  to  consider  the  long  and  uninter¬
ruptedly  increasing  prosperity  of  England  as  the  most  beau¬
tiful  phenomenon  in  the  history  of  mankind.  Climates  more
propitious  may  impart  more  largely  the  mere  enjoyments  of
existence;  but  in  no  other  region  have  the  benefits  that
political  institutions  can  confer  been  diffused  over  so  extend¬
ed  a  popuhition  ;  nor  have  any  people  so  well  reconciled  the
discordant  elements  of  wealth,  order,  and  liberty.  These  ad¬
vantages  are  surely  not  owing  to  the  soil  of  this  island,  nor  to
the  latitude  in  which  it  is  placed,  but  to  the  spirit  of  its  laws,
from  which,  through  various  means,  the  characteristic  inde¬
pendence  and  industriousness  of  our  nation  have  been  de¬
rived.  The  constitution,  therefore,  of  England  must  be  to
inquisitive  men  of  all  countries,  far  more  to  ourselves,  an  ob¬
ject  of  superior  interest;  distinguished  especially,  as  it  is,
from  all  free  governments  of  powerful  nations  which  history
has  recorded,  by  its  manifesting,  after  the  lapse  of  several  cen¬
turies,  not  merely  no  symptom  of  irretrievable  decay,  but  a
more  expansive  energy.  Comparing  long  periods  of  time,
it  may  be  justly  asserted  that  the  administration  of  govern¬
ment  has  progressively  become  more  equitable,  and  the  privi¬
leges  of  the  subject  more  secure ;  and,  though  it  would  be  both
presumptuous  and  unwise  to  express  an  unlimited  confidence
as  to  the  durability  of  liberties  which  owe  their  greatest
security  to  the  constant  suspicion  of  the  people,  yet,  if  we  calmly

256

SKETCH  OF

Chap.  VIII.  Paht  I.

reflect  on  the  present  aspect  of  this  country,  it  will  probably
appear  that  whatever  perils  may  threaten  our  constitution  are
rather  from  circumstances  altogether  unconnected  with  it
than  from  any  intrinsic  defects  of  its  own.  It  will  be  the
object  of  the  ensuing  chapter  to  trace  the  gradual  formation
of  this  system  of  government.  Such  an  investigation,  im¬
partially  conducted,  will  detect  errors  diametrically  opposite  ;
those  intended  to  impose  on  the  populace,  which,  on  account
of  their  palpable  absurdity  and  the  ill  faith  with  which  they
are  usually  proposed,  I  have  seldom  thought  it  worth  while
directly  to  repel ;  and  those  which  better  informed  persons
are  apt  to  entertain,  caught  from  transient  reading  and  the
misrepresentations  of  late  historians,  but  easily  refuted  by
the  genuine  testimony  of  ancient  times.

The  seven  very  unequal  kingdoms  of  the  Saxon  Heptar-
Bkotch  of  chy,  formed  successively  out  of  the  countries
Anglo-Saxon  wrested  from  the  Britons,  were  originally  inde¬
pendent  of  each  other.  Several  times,  however,
a  powerful  sovereign  acquired  a  preponderating  influence
over  his  neighbors,  marked  perhaps  by  the  payment  of  trib¬
ute.  Seven  are  enumerated  by  Bede  as  having  thus  reigned
over  the  whole  of  Britain;  an  expression  which  must  be  very
loosely  interpreted.1  Three  kingdoms  became  at  length  pre¬
dominant —  those  of  Wessex,  Mercia,  and  Northumberland.
The  first  rendered  tributary  the  small  estates  of  the  South-
East,  and  the  second  that  of  the  Eastern  Angles.  But  Eg¬
bert  king  of  Wessex  not  only  incorporated  with  his  own
monarchy  the  dependent  kingdoms  of  Kent  and  Essex,  but
obtained  an  acknowledgment  of  his  superiority  from  Mercia
and  Northumberland ;  the  latter  of  which,  though  the  most
extensive  of  any  Anglo-Saxon  state,  was  too  much  weakened
by  its  internal  divisions  to  offer  any  resistance.4  Still,  how¬
ever,  the  kingdoms  of  Mercia,  East  Anglia,  and  Northum¬
berland  remained  under  their  ancient  hue  of  sovereigns ;  nor
did  either  Egbert  or  his  five  immediate  successors  assume  the
title  of  any  other  crown  than  Wessex.*

The  destruction  of  those  minor  states  was  reserved  for  a
different  enemy.  About  the  end  of  the  eighth  century  the

>  [Nor*  I.]  But  hi*  «on  Edward  the  Elder  take*  the

>  Chronlcon  Saxonicum,  p.  70.  title  of  Rex  Anglorum  on  hL.  coin..  VH.

Aifrol  denominate*  himself  In  hi*  XumUwata  Anglo-Saxon,  in  Uickee  *

will  Occidentalium  Saxorum  rax;  and  Thesauri!*,  rol.  U.

A**crl u*  never  give*  him  auj  other  noma.

English  Const.  AXGLO-SAXOX  HISTORY.

257

northern  pirates  began  to  ravage  the  coast  of  England.
Scandinavia  exhibited  in  that  age  a  very  singular  condition
of  society.  Her  population,  continually  redundant  in  those
barren  regions  which  gave  it  birth,  was  cast  out  in  search  of
plunder  upon  the  ocean.  Those  who  loved  riot  rather  than
famine  embarked  in  large  armaments  under  chiefs  of  legiti¬
mate  authority  as  well  as  approved  valor.  Such  were  the
Sea-kings,  renowned  in  the  stories  of  the  North :  the  younger
branches,  commonly,  of  royal  families,  who  inherited,  as  it
were,  the  sea  for  their  patrimony.  Without  any  territory  but
on  the  bosom  of  the  waves,  without  any  dwelling  but  their
ships,  these  princely  pirates  were  obeyed  by  numerous  sub-,
jects,  and  intimidated  mighty  nations.1  Their  invasions  of
England  became  continually  more  formidable  :  and,  as  their
confidence  increased,  they  began  first  to  winter,  and  ultimate¬
ly  to  form  permanent  settlements  in  the  country.  By  their
command  of  the  sea,  it  was  easy  for  them  to  harass  every
part  of  an  island  presenting  such  an  extent  of  coast  as
Britain  ;  the  Saxons,  after  a  brave  resistance,  gradually  gave
way,  and  were  on  the  brink  of  the  same  servitude  or  exter¬
mination  which  their  own  arms  had  already  brought  upon
the  ancient  possessors.

From  this  imminent  peril,  after  the  three  dependent  king¬
doms,  Mercia,  Northumberland,  and  East  Anglia,  had  been
overwhelmed,  it  was  the  glory  of  Alfred  to  rescue  the  Anglo-
Saxon  monarchy.  Nothing  less  than  the  appearance  of  a
hero  so  undesponding,  so  enterprising,  and  so  just,  could
have  prevented  the  entire  conquest  of  England.  Yet  he
never  subdued  the  Danes,  nor  became  master  of  the  whole
kingdom.  The  Thames,  the  Lea,  the  Ouse,  and  the  Roman
road  called  Watling  Street,  determined  the  limits  of  Alfred’s
dominion.'2  To  the  north-east  of  this  boundary  were  spread
the  invaders,  still  denominated  the  armies  of  East  Anglia
and  Northumberland;8  a  name  terribly  expressive  of  foreign
conquerors,  who  retained  their  warlike  confederacy,  without
melting  into  the  mass  of  their  subject  population.  Three
able  and  active  sovereigns,  Edward,  Athelstan,  and  Edmund,
the  successors  of  Alfred,  pursued  the  course  of  victory,  and

'For  these  Vikings,  or  Sea-kings,  a  almost  every  particular  that  can  illustrate
new  and  interesting  subject,  I  would  our  early  atiuals  will  be  found,
refer  to  Mr.  Turner’s  IListory  of  the  3  Wilkins,  Leges  Anglo-Saxon,  p.  47  j
Anglo-Saxons,  In  which  valuable  work  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  99.

*  (Jhronicon  Saxon,  passim.

VOL.  II.

17

258

SUCCESSION  TO  TIIE  CROWN.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

not  only  rendered  the  English  monarchy  coextensive  with
the  present  limits  of  England,  but  asserted  at  least  a  suprem¬
acy  over  the  bordering  nations.1  Yet  even  Edgar,  the  most
powerful  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  did  not  venture  to  inter¬
fere  with  the  legal  customs  of  his  Danish  subjects.*

Under  this  prince,  whose  rare  fortune  as  well  as  judicious
conduct  procured  him  the  surname  of  Peaceable,  the  king¬
dom  appears  to  have  reached  its  zenith  of  prosperity.  But
his  premature  death  changed  the  scene.  The  minority  and
feeble  character  of  Ethelred  II.  provoked  fresh  incursions
of  our  enemies  beyond  the  German  Sea.  A  long  series  of
disasters,  and  the  inexplicable  treason  of  those  to  whom  the
public  safety  was  intrusted,  overthrew  the  Saxon  line,  and
established  Canute  of  Denmark  upon  the  throne.

The  character  of  the  Scandinavian  nations  was  in  some
measure  changed  from  what  it  had  been  during  their  first
invasions.  They  had  embraced  the  Christian  faith  ;  they  were
consolidated  into  great  kingdoms  ;  they  had  lost  some  of  that
predatory  and  ferocious  spirit  which  a  religion  invented,  as  it
seemed,  for  pirates  had  stimulated.  Those,  too,  who  had  long
been  settled  in  England  became  gradually  more  assimilated
to  the  natives,  whose  laws  and  language  were  not  radically
different  from  their  own.  Hence  the  accession  of  a  Danish
line  of  kings  produced  neither  any  evil  nor  any  sensible
change  of  polity.  But  the  English  still  outnumbered  their
conquerors,  anil  eagerly  returned,  when  an  opj>ortunity  ar¬
rived,  to  the  ancient  stock.  Edward  the  Confessor,  notwith¬
standing  his  Norman  favorites,  was  endeared  by  the  mildness
of  his  character  to  the  English  nation,  and  subsequent  mise¬
ries  gave  a  kind  of  posthumous  credit  to  a  reign  not  eminent
either  for  good  fortune  or  wise  government.

In  a  stage  of  civilization  so  little  advanced  as  that  of  the
SusMwion  to  Anglo-Saxons,  and  under  circumstances  of  such
the  crown.  incessant  peril,  the  fortunes  of  a  nation  chiefly  de¬
pend  upon  the  wisdom  and  valor  of  its  sovereigns.  No  free
people,  therefore,  would  intrust  their  safety  to  blind  chance,
and  permit  an  uniform  observance  of  hereditary  succession
to  prevail  against  strong  public  expediency.  Accordingly,

1  [Not*  II. 1  It  MH'tni  now  to  be  nwrUln^i,  by  the

*  Wilkins,  Left**  An^lo-Saxon.  p.  R3.  comparison  of  dialect*,  that  the  Inhab-
In  10M,  after  a  revolt  of  the  Northern-  itanta  from  the  Humber,  or  at  leaat  the
brim*,  Edward  the  Confeaaor  renewed  Tyne,  to  the  Firth  of  Forth,  were  chiefly
the  law*  of  Canute.  Chronic.  Saxon.  Daoet.

English  Const.  SUCCESSION  TO  THE  CROWN.

259

the  Saxons,  like  most  other  European  nations,  while  they
limited  the  inheritance  of  the  crown  exclusively  to  one  royal
family,  were  not  very  scrupulous  about  its  devolution  upon  the
nearest  heir.  It  is  an  unwarranted  assertion  of  Carte,  that
the  rule  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  monarchy  was  “  lineal  agnatic
succession,  the  blood  of  the  second  son  having  no  right  until
the  extinction  of  that  of  the  eldest.”1  Unquestionably  the
eldest  son  of  the  last  king,  being  of  full  age,  and  not  mani¬
festly  incompetent,  was  his  natural  and  probable  successor ;
nor  is  it  perhaps  certain  that  he  always  waited  for  an  election
to  take  upon  himself  the  rights  of  sovereignty,  although  the
ceremony  of  coronation,  according  to  the  ancient  form,  appears
to  imply  its  necessity.  But  the  public  security  in  those  times
was  thought  incompatible  with  a  minor  king ;  and  the  artificial
substitution  of  a  regency,  which  stricter  notions  of  hereditary
right  have  introduced,  had  never  occurred  to  so  rude  a  people.
Thus,  not  to  mention  those  instances  which  the  obscure  times
of  the  Heptarchy  exhibit,  Ethelred  I.,  as  some  say,  but  cer¬
tainly  Alfred,  excluded  the  progeny  of  their  elder  brother  from
the  throne.2  Alfred,  in  his  testament,  dilates  upon  his  own
title,  which  he  builds  upon  a  triple  foundation,  the  will  of  his
father,  the  compact  of  his  brother  Ethelred,  and  the  consent
of  the  West  Saxon  nobility.*  A  similar  objection  to  the  gov¬
ernment  of  an  infant  seems  to  have  rendered  Athelstan,  not¬
withstanding  his  reputed  illegitimacy,  the  public  choice  upon
the  death  of  Edward  the  Elder.  Thus,  too,  the  sons  of  Ed¬
mund  I.  were  postponed  to  their  uncle  Edred,  and,  again,
preferred  to  his  issue.  And  happy  might  it  have  been  for
England  if  this  exclusion  of  infants  had  always  obtained.
But  upon  the  death  of  Edgar  the  royal  family  wanted  some
prince  of  mature  years  to  prevent  the  crown  from  resting
upon  the  head  of  a  child;4  and  hence  the  minorities  of  Ed¬
ward  II.  and  Ethelred  II.  led  to  misfortunes  which  over¬
whelmed  for  a  time  both  the  house  of  Cerdic  and  the  English
nation.

The  Anglo-Saxon  monarchy,  during  its  earlier  period,

l  Vol.  i.  p.  365.  Blackstone  ha*  la-  cousin;  which  ho  would  bo  a*  the  son
bored  to  prove  the  same  proposition ;  of  Ethelred.

but  his  knowledge  of  English  history  was  3  Spelman,  Vita  Alfredi,  Appendix,

rather  superficial.  *  According  to  the  historian  of  Kam-

*  Chrouicou  Saxon,  p.  99.  Hume  says  sey,  a  sort  of  interregnum  took  place  on
that  Kthelwold.  who  attempted  to  raise  Edgar's  death ;  his  son’s  birth  not  being
an  insurrection  against  Edward  the  thought  sufficient  to  give  him  a  clear
Elder,  was  son  of  Ethelbert.  The  Saxon  right  during  infancy.  8  Gale,  XV.  Script.
Chronicle  only  calls  him  the  king's  p.  418.

260

PROVINCIAL  GOVERNORS.  Chap.  VIII.  Tart  I.

.  -  ,  seems  to  have  suffered  but  little  from  that  insubor-

provincial  dinatiou  among  the  superior  nobility  which  ended
governors.  jn  (] jsmemt)erjng  the  empire  of  Charlemagne.
Such  kings  as  Alfred  and  Athelstan  were  not  likely  to  permit
it.  And  the  English  counties,  each  under  its  own  alderman,
were  not  of  a  size  to  encourage  the  usurpations  of  their  gov¬
ernors.  But  when  the  whole  kingdom  was  subdued,  there
arose,  unfortunately,  a  fashion  of  intrusting  great  provinces
to  the  administration  of  a  single  earl.  Notwithstanding  their
union,  Mercia,  Northumberland,  and  East  Anglia  were  re¬
garded  in  some  degree  as  distinct  parts  of  the  monarchy.  A
difference  of  laws,  though  probably  but  slight,  kept  up  this
separation.  Alfred  governed  Mercia  by  the  hands  of  a  no¬
bleman  who  had  married  his  daughter  Ethelfleda ;  and  that
lady  after  her  husband’s  death  held  the  reins  with  a  masculine
energy  till  her  own,  when  her  brother  Edward  took  the  prov¬
ince  into  his  immediate  command.1  But  from  the  era  of
Edward  II.’s  succession  the  provincial  governors  began  to
overpower  the  royal  authority,  as  they  had  done  upon  the
continent.  England  under  this  prince  was  not  far  removed
from  the  condition  of  France  under  Charles  the  Bald.  In
the  time  of  Edward  the  Confessor  the  whole  kingdom  seems
to  have  been  divided  among  five  earls,4  three  of  whom  were
Godwin  and  his  sons  Harold  and  Tostig.  It  cannot  be  won¬
dered  at  that  the  royal  line  was  soon  supplanted  by  the  most
powerful  and  popular  of  these  leaders,  a  prince  well  worthy
to  have  founded  a  new  dynasty,  if  his  eminent  qualities  had
not  yielded  to  those  of  a  still  more  illustrious  enemy.

There  were  but  two  denominations  of  persons  above  the

DtatritmUon  clags  of  wrvjfmteiXhftpeg  and  Cwrla;  tlic  fl'vnm

inf..  Hum)  and  the  cultivators  of  land,  or  rather  perhaps,  as  a
•ml ceori*.  rnore  accurate  distinction,  the  gentry  and  tic-  infe¬
rior  people,  Among  all  the  northern  nations,  as  is  well  known,
the  weregild,  or  compensation  for  murder,  was  the  standard
measure  of  the  gradations  of  society.  In  the  Anglo-Saxon
laws  we  find  two  ranks  of  freeholders ;  the  first,  cuIlcd_Jvuig's
Thanes,  whose  lives  were  valued  at  1200  shillings]  the  second

*  Chronlcon  Saxon.

*  The  won!  earl  (eorl)  meant  origi¬
nally  a  man  of  noble  birth,  a*  opposed  to
the  ceorl.  It  wa*  not  a  title  of  office  till
the  eleventh  century,  when  it  m  u*ed
a *  fynonyinou*  to  alderman,  for  a  gov¬

ernor  of  a  county  or  province.  After
the  conquest  it  *u  pervaded  altogether
the  more  ancient  title.  Bahian1*  Title#
of  Honor,  vol.  Mi.  p.  H88  (edit.  Wilkin*),
and  Anglo-Saxon  writing*  passim.

English  Const.  CONDITION  OF  TILE  CEORLS.

2C1

of  inferior  degree,  whose  composition  was  half  that  sum.1
That  of  a  ceorl  was  20(7  shillings.  'The  nature  of  this  distinc¬
tion  between  royal  and  lesser  thanes  is  very  obscure ;  and  I
shall  have  something  more  to  say  of  it  presently.  However,
the  thanes  in  general,  or  Anglo-Saxon  gentry,  must  have  been
very  numerous.  A  law  of  Ethelred  directs  the  sheriff  to
take  twelve  of  the  chief  thanes  in  every  hundred,  as  his
assessors  ou  tlie  bench  of  justice.2 *  And  from  Domesday  Book
we  may  collect  that  they  had  formed  a  pretty  large  class,  at
least  in  some  counties,  under  Edward  the  Confessor.8

The  composition  for  the  life  of  a  ceorl  was,  as  has  been
said,  200  shillings.  If  this  proportion  to  the  value  Condition  of
of  a  thane  points  out  the  subordination  of  ranks, the  °#orto*
it  certainly  does  not  exhibit  the  lower  freemen  in  a  state  of
complete  abasement.  The  ceorl  was  not  bound,  at  least  uni¬
versally,  to  the  land  which  he  cultivated;4  he  was  occasionally
called  upon  to  bear  arms  for  the  public  safety  ;5 *  he  was  pro¬
tected  against  personal  injuries,  or  trespasses  on  his  land;8

le  of  property,  and  of  the  privileges  which  it
he  came  to  possess  five  hydes  of  land  (or  about
GT70  acres),  with  a  church  and  mansion  of  his  own,  he  was
entitled  to  the  name  and  rights  of  a  thane.7  And  if  by  own¬
ing  five  hydes  of  land  he  became  a  thane,  it  is  plain  that  he
might  pos.-ess  a  less  quantity  without  reaching  that  rank.
There  were,  therefore,  ceorls  with  land  of  their  own,  and
ceorls  without  land  of  their  own  ;  ceorls  who  might  commend
themselves  to  what  lord  they  pleased,  and  ceorls  who  could
not  quit  the  land  on  which  they  lived,  owing  various  services
to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  but  always  freemen,  and  capable  of
becoming  gentlemen.8

I  Wilkino.  p.  40,  43,  64,  72, 101.

*  Id.  p.  117.

*  Poniesilay  Book  haring  been  com¬
piled  by  different  sets  of  commissioners,
their  language  has  sometime*  varied  in
describing  the  Name  class  of  persons.
The  liben  homines ,  of  whom  we  find  con¬
tinual  mention  in  some  counties,  were
perhaps  not  different  from  the  thaini ,
who  occur  in  other  places.  But  this
subject  is  very  obscure  ;  And  a  clear  ap¬
prehension  of  the  classes  of  society  men¬
tioned  in  Domesday  seems  at  preseut
unattainable.

4  Leges  Alfred!,  c.  88,  in  Wilkins.

This  text  is  not  unequivocal  ;  and  I  con¬

fess  that  a  law  of  Ina  (c.  89)  has  rather

a  contrary  appearaucc.  But  the  condi¬

tion  of  all  ceorls  need  not  bo  supposed  to
have  Ixjen  the  same  ;  and  in  the  latter
period  this  can  be  shown  to  have  been
subject  to  much  diversity.

6  Leges  In®,  c.  51,  ibid.

*  Leges  Alfred!,  c.  81,  36.

*  Leges  Athclstani,  ibid.  p.  70,  71.

*  It  is  said  in  the  Introduction  to  the
Supplementary  Records  of  Domesday,
which  I  quote  from  Cooper’s  Account  of
Public  Records  (i.  223),  that  the  word
cammendatio  is  con  flood  to  the  three
counties  in  the  second  volume  of  Domes¬
day,  except  that  it  occurs  twice  in  the
Inquisitin  Kliensis  for  Cambridgeshire.
But,  if  this  particular  word  does  not  oc¬
cur,  we  have  the  sense,  in  41  ire  cum  terra
ubl  voluerit,”  or  44  quarere  dominum

262

CONDITION  OF  THE  CEORLS.  Chap.  VIII.  Tart  L

Some  might  be  inclined  to  suspect  that  the  ceorla  were
sliding  more  and  more  towards  a  state  of  servitude  before  the
conquest.1  The  natural  tendency  of  such  times  of  rapine,
with  the  analogy  of  a  similar  change  in  France,  leads  to  this
conjecture.  But  there  seems  to  be  no  proof  of  it ;  and  the  pas¬
sages  which  recognize  the  capacity  of  a  ceorl  to  become  a
thane  are  found  in  the  later  period  of  Anglo-Saxon  law.  Nor
can  it  be  shown,  as  I  apprehend,  by  any  authority  earlier  than
that  of  Glanvil,  whose  treatise  was  written  about  1180,  that
the  peasantry  of  England  were  reduced  to  that  extreme  de-
ba-ement  which  our  law-books  call  villenage ;  a  condition,
which  left  them  no  civil  rights  with  respect  to  their  lord,.
For,  by  the  laws  of  William  the  Conqueror,  there  was  still  a
composition  tixed  for  the  murder  of  a  villein  or  ceorl,  the
strongest  proof  of  his  being,  as  it  was  called,  law -worthy,  and
possessing  a  rank,  however  subordinate,  in  political  society.
And  this  composition  was  due  to  his  kindred,  not  to  the  lord.1
Indeed,  it  seems  positively  declared  in  another  passage  that
the  cultivators,  though  bound  to  remain  upon  the  land,  were
only  subject  to  certain  services.*  Again,  the  treatise  denomi¬
nated  the  Laws  of  Henry  I.,  which,  though  not  deserving
that  appellation,  must  be  considered  as  a  contemporary  docu¬
ment,  expressly  mentions  the  twyhinder  or  villein  as  a  freeman.4
Nobody  can  doubt  that  the  villani  and  bordarii  of  Domesday
Book,  who  are  always  distinguished  from  the  serfs  of  the  de¬
mesne,  were  the  ceorls  of  Anglo-Saxon  law.  And  I  presume
that  the  socmen,  who  so  frequently  occur  in  that  record,
though  far  more  in  some  counties  than  in  others,  were  ceorls
more  fortunate  than  the  rest,  who  by  purchase  bad  acquired
freeholds,  or  by  prescription  and  the  indulgence  of  their  lords
had  obtained  such  a  property  in  the  outlands  allotted  to  them
that  they  could  not  be  removed,  and  in  many  instances  might
dispose  of  them  at  pleasure.  They  are  the  root  of  a  noble
plant,  the  free  socage  tenants,  or  English  yeomanry,  whose
independence  has  stamped  with  peculiar  features  both  our
constitution  and  our  national  character.4

Beneath  the  ceorls  in  political  estimation  were  the  con-

ubi  Toloerit,”  which  meet  our  per-  thoaa  of  hU  predecessor  Edward,  thev

f'tually  in  the  flr»t  volume  of  Douieaday.  were  already  annexed  to  the  toll.  p.  22o.

he  difference  of  phraeea  in  thU  record  *  Wilkin*,  p.  221.
must.  In  groat  measure,  be  attributed  to  l  Id.  p.  225.

that  of  the  perform  employed.  ♦  I iienr.  I.  o.  70  and  76,  la

1  If  the  lawn  that  bear  the  name  of  Wilkins
William  are,  u  i*  generally  auppoeed,  •  [Not*  Ill.]

English  Const.

BRITISH  NATIVES.

263

qtiered  natives  of  Britain.  In  a  war  so  long  and  British
so  obstinately  maintained  as  that  of  the  Britons  nativt'3-
'  against  their  invaders,  it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  in  a  great
part  of  the  country  the  original  inhabitants  were  almost  ex¬
tirpated,  and  that  the  remainder  were  reduced  into  servitude.
This,  till  lately,  has  been  the  concurrent  opinion  of  our  anti¬
quaries;  and,  with  some  qualification,  I  do  not  see  why  it
should  not  still  be  received.1  In  every  kingdom  of  the  con¬
tinent  which  was  formed  by  the  northern  nations  out  of  the
Homan  empire,  the  Latin  language  preserved  its  superiority,
and  has  much  more  been  corrupted  through  ignorance  and
want  of  a  standard,  than  intermingled  with  their  original
idiom.  But  our  own  language  is,  and  has  been  from  the
earliest  times  after  the  Saxon  conquest,  essentially  Teutonic,
and  of  the  most  obvious  affinity  to  those  dialects  which  are
spoken  in  Denmark  and  Lower  Saxony.  With  such  as  are
extravagant  enough  to  controvert  so  evident  a  truth  it  is  idle
to  contend  ;  and  those  who  believe  great  part  of  our  language
to  be  borrowed  from  the  Welsh  may  doubtless  infer  that  great
part  of  our  population  is  derived  from  the  same  source.2  If
we  look  through  the  subsisting  Anglo-Saxon  records,  there  is
not  very  frequent  mention  of  British  subjects.  But  some
undoubtedly  there  were  in  a  shite  of  freedom,  and  possessed
of  landed  estate.  A  Welshman  (that  is,  a  Briton)  who  held

>  [Notf.  rv.i

*  It  is  but  just  to  mention  a  partial
exception,  according  to  a  considerable
authority,  to  what  has  been  said  in  the
text  as  to  the  absence  of  British  roots  in
the  English  language;  though  it  can  but
slightly  affect  the  general  proposition.
Mr.  Kemble  remarks  the  number  of
minute  distinctions,  in  describing  the
local  feature*  of  a  country,  which  abound
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  charters,  and  the  diffi¬
culties  which  occur  In  their  explanation.
Om*  of  these  relates  to  the  language  it¬
self.  44  It  cannot  be  doubtful  that  local
names,  and  those  devoted  to  distinguish
the  natural  features  of  a  country,  possess
an  inherent  vitality,  which  even  the  ur¬
gency  of  couquest  is  frequently  unable
to  destroy.  A  race  Is  rarely  so  entirely
removed  as  not  to  form  an  integral,  al¬
though  subordinate,  part  of  the  new  state
based  upon  its  ruins;  and  in  the  case
where  the  cultivator  continues  to  be  oc¬
cupied  with  the  soil,  a  change  of  master
will  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  abandon¬
ment  of  the  names  by  which  the  land
itself,  and  the  instruments  or  processes

of  labor  are  designated.  On  the  con¬
trary,  the  conquering  race  are  apt  to
adopt  these  names  from  the  conquered  ;
and  tli us,  after  the  lapse  of  twelve  cen¬
turies  and  innumerable  civil  convulsions,
the  principal  words  of  the  class  described
yet  prevail  in  the  language  of  our
people,  and  partially  in  our  literature.
Many.  then,  of  the  words  which  we  seek
in  vain  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  dictionaries,
are,  in  fact,  to  be  sought  in  those  of  the
Cymri,  from  whose  practice  they  were
adopted  by  the  victorious  Saxons,  in  all
parts  of  the  country  ;  and  they  are  not
Anglo-Saxon,  but  Welsh  (t.  e.  foreign,
Wyiisc),  very  frequently  unmodified
either  in  meaning  or  pronunciation.”
Preface  to  Codex  Diploin.  vol.  iii.  p.  15.
Though  this  bears  intrinsic  marks  of
probability,  it  is  yet  remarkable  that,  in
a  long  list  of  descriptive  words  which
im media telv  follows,  there  are  not  six
for  which  Mr.  Kemble  suggests  a  Cam-
brian  root :  and  of  these  some,  such  as
comb,  a  valley,  belong  to  parts  of  Eng¬
land  where  the  British  long  kept  their
ground.

264

THE  WITENAGEMOT.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

five  bydea  was  raised,  like  a  ceorl,  to  the  dignity  of  thane.1
In  the  composition,  however,  for  their  lives,  and  consequently
in  their  rank  in  society,  they  were  inferior  to  the
meanest  Saxon  freemen.  The  slaves,  who  were
frequently  the  objects  of  legislation,  rather  for  the  purpose
of  ascertaining  their  punishment  than  of  securing  their  rights,
may  be  presumed,  at  least  in  early  times,  to  have  been  part
of  the  conquered  Britons.  For  though  his  own  crimes,  or
the  tyranny  of  others,  might  possibly  reduce  a  Saxon  ceorl
to  this  condition,*  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  lowest  of  those
who  won  England  with  their  swords  should  in  the  establish¬
ment  of  the  new  kingdoms  have  been  left  destitute  of  per¬
sonal  liberty.

The.  great  council  by  which  an  Anglo-Saxon  king  was
The  witen-  guided  in  all  the  main  acts  of  government  bore  the
n gemot.  appellation  of  Witenagemot,  or  the  assembly  of

the  wise  men.  All  their  laws  express  the  assent  of  this
council ;  and  there  are  instances  where  grants  made  without
its  concurrence  have  been  revoked.  It  was  composed  of
prelates  and  abbots,  of  the  aldermen  of  shires,  and,  us  it  is
generally  expressed,  of  the  noble  and  wise  men  of  the  king¬
dom.8  Whether  the  lesser  thanes,  or  inferior  proprietors  of
lands,  were  entitled  to  a  place  in  the  national  council,  as
they  certainly  were  in  the  sliiregemot,  or  county-court,  is  not
L easily  to  be  decided.  Many  writers  have  concluded,  from  a
passage  in  the  History  of  Ely,  that  no  one,  however  nobly
born,  could  sit  in  the  witenagemot,  so  late  at  least  as  the  reign
of  Edward  the  Confessor,  unless  he  possessed  forty  hydes  of
land,  or  about  five  thousand  acres.4  But  the  passage  iu
question  does  not  unequivocally  relate  to  the  witenagemot ;
and  being  vaguely  worded  by  an  ignorant  monk,  who  perhaps
had  never  gone  beyond  his  fens,  ought  not  to  be  assumed  as
an  incontrovertible  testimony.  Certainly  so  very  high  a
qualification  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  been  requisite  in  the
kingdoms  of  the  Heptarchy ;  nor  do  we  find  any  collateral
evidence  to  confirm  the  hypothesis.  If,  however,  ull  the  body
of  thanes  or  freeholders  were  admissible  to  the  witenagemot,
it  is  unlikely  that  the  privilege  should  have  been  fully  exer¬
cised.  Very  few,  1  believe,  at  present  imagine  that  there

1  Opus*  Iiup,  p.  19;  Lrg.  Atbelst.  p.  71.
*  begt**  Ina»,  c.  24.

>  Ix-gM  Anglo-Saxon.  In  Wilkins,
passim.

*  Quontam  Ills  quadra  glut*  hr. la  rum
tarns*  dominium  minimi  obtlnervt.  lirst
nohtlls  mart.  Intar  prnaaras  time  uumer-
ari  non  potuit.  3  Uale,  p.  618.

English  Const.

JUDICIAL  POWER.

2G5

■was  any  representative  system  in  that,  age ;  much,  less  that
the  ceorls  or  inferior  freemen  had  the  smallest  share  in  the  .
deliberations  of  the  national  assembly.  Every  argument
which  a  spirit  of  controversy  once  pressed  into  this  service
has  long  since  been  victoriously  refuted.1

It  has  been  justly  remarked  by  Hume,  that,  among  a  peo¬
ple  who  lived  in  so  simple  a  manner  as  these  judicial
Anglo-Saxons,  the  judicial  power  is  always  of  power-
more  consequence  than  the  legislative.  The  liberties  of
these  Anglo-Saxon  thanes  were  chiefly  secured,  nextfto  their
swords  and  their  free  spirits,  by  the  inestimable  right  of
^deciding  civil  and  criminal  suits  in  their  own  county-court;
an  institution  which,  having  survived  the  conquest,  and  con¬
tributed  in  no  small  degree  to  fix  the  liberties  of  England
upon  a  broad  and  popular  basis,  by  limiting  the  feudal  aris¬
tocracy,  deserves  attention  in  following  the  history  of  the
British  constitution.

The  division  of  the  kingdom  into  counties,  and  of  these
into  hundreds  and  decennaries,  for  the  purpose  of  Division  in_
administering  justice,  was  not  peculiar  to  England,  to  counties,

In  the  early  laws  of  France  and  Lombardy  fre-  au«T tyth-’
quent  mention  is  made  of  the  hundred-court,  and  inss-
now  and  then  of  those  petty  village-magistrates  who  in  Eng¬
land  were  called  tything-men.  It  has  been  usual  to  ascribe  the
establishment  of  this  system  among  our  Saxon  ancestors  to
Alfred,  upon  the  authority  of  Ingulfus,  a  writer  contemporary
with  the  conquest.  But  neither  the  biographer  of  Alfred,
Asserius,  nor  the  existing  laws  of  that  prince,  bear  testimony
to  the  fact  With  respect  indeed  to  the  division  of  counties,
and  their  government  by  aldermen  and  sheriffs,  it  is  certain
that  both  existed  long  before  his  time ; 2  and  the  utmost  that
can  be  supposed  is,  that  he  might  in  some  instances  have
ascertained  an  unsettled  boundary.  There  does  not  seem  to

i  [Note  V.]

*  Counties,  a s  well  a*  the  alderman
who  presided  over  them,  are  mentioned
in  the  laws  of  Ina,  C.  3*5.

For  the  division  of  counties,  which
were  not  always  formed  in  the  same  age,
nor  on  the  same  plan,  see  Palgrave,  i.
116.  We  do  not  know  much  about  the
Inland  counties  in  general ;  those  on  the
coasts  an*  in  general  larger,  and  are
mentioned  in  history.  All  we  can  say
is,  that  they  all  existed  at  the  conquest
a*  at  present.  The  hundred  is  supposed

by  Sir  H.  Ellis,  on  the  authority  of  an
ancient  record,  to  have  consisted  of  an
hundred  hydes  of  land,  cultivated  and
wuste  taken  together.  Introduction  to
Domesday,  i.  186.  But  this  implies
equality  of  size,  which  is  evidently  not
the  case.  A  passage  in  the  Dialogus  de
Scaccario  (p.  31)  is  conclusive :  —  Hyda  a
primitiva  institutions  in  centum  acris
constat:  hundredus  est  ex  hydarum  ali¬
quot  centenariis,  sed  non  detenu  ina  tis  ;
quidam  eniin  ex  pluribus,  quidam  ex
paucioribus  bydis  constat.

266

JUDICIAL  DIVISION.  Chap.  VIII.  Taut  I.

be  equal  evidence  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the  minor  divisions.
Hundreds,  I  think,  are  first  mentioned  in  a  law  of  Edgar,
and  tything9  in  one  of  Canute.1  But  as  Alfred,  it  must  be
remembered,  was  never  master  of  more  than  half  the  king¬
dom,  the  complete  distribution  of  England  into  these  districts
cannot,  upon  any  supposition,  be  referred  to  him.

There  is,  indeed,  a  circumstance  observable  in  this  division
which  seems  to  indicate  that  it  could  not  have  taken  place  at
one  time,  nor  upon  one  system  ;  I  mean  the  extreme  inequal¬
ity  of  hundreds  in  different  parts  of  England.  Whether
the  name  be  conceived  to  refer  to  the  number  of  free  fami¬
lies,  or  of  landholders,  or  of  petty  vills,  forming  so  many  asso-
ciations  of  mutual  assurance  or  frank-pledge,  one  can  hardly
doubt  that,  when  the  term  was  first  applied,  a  hundred  of  one
or  other  of  these  were  comprised,  at  an  average  reckoning,
within  the  district  But  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  vary¬
ing  size  of  hundreds  to  any  single  hypothesis.  The  county
of  Sussex  contains  sixty-five,  that  of  Dorset  forty -three  ;
while  Yorkshire  has  only  twenty-six,  and  Lancashire  but  six.
No  difference  of  population,  though  the  south  of  England
was  undoubtedly  far  the  best  peopled,  can  be  conceived  to
account  for  so  prodigious  a  disparity.  I  know  of  no  better
solution  than  that  the  divisions  of  the  north,  properly  called
wapentakes,3  were  planned  upon  a  different  system,  and  ob¬
tained  the  denomination  of  hundreds  incorrectly  after  the
union  of  all  England  under  a  single  sovereign.

Assuming,  therefore,  the  name  and  partition  of  hundreds
to  have  originated  in  the  southern  counties,  it  will  rather,  I
think,  appear  probable  that  they  contained  only  an  hundred
free  families,  including  the  ceorls  as  well  as  their  landlords.
It  we  suppose  none  but  the  latter  to  have  been  numbered,
we  should  find  six  thousand  thanes  in  Kent,  and  six  thousand
five  hundred  in  Sussex ;  a  reckoning  totally  inconsistent  with
any  probable  estimate.*  But  though  we  have  little  direct
testimony  as  to  the  population  of  those  times,  there  is  one
passage  which  falls  in  very  sufficiently  with  the  former  sup¬
position.  Bede  says  that  the  kingdom  of  the  South  Saxons,
comprehending  Surrey  as  well  as  Sussex,  contained  seven

*  Wilkins,  pp.  87,  136.  The  former,  *  It  woaM  be  mjj  to  mention  par*
however,  refer*  to  them  u  an  auric  at  tirular  hundreds  In  theee  counties  *o
Institution  :  qujeratur  ceutarie  conveu-  iiiiaII  a*  to  render  thU  supposition  quite
tus,  sicut  ante*  iti«titutuui  erot.  ridiculous.

1  Leges  Edwardi  Confess,  o.  33.

English  Const.

TIIE  COUNTY-COURT.

2G7

thousand  families.  The  county  of  Sussex  alone  is  divided  into
sixty-five  hundreds,  which  comes  at  least  close  enough  to  prove
that  free  families,  rather  than  proprietors,  were  the  subject
of  that  numeration.  And  this  is  the  interpretation  of  Du
Cange  and  Muratori  as  to  the  Centenae  and  Decani®  of  their
own  ancient  laws.

I  cannot  but  feel  some  doubt,  notwithstanding  a  passage
in  the  laws  ascribed  to  Edward  the  Confessor,1  whether  the
ty thing-man  ever  possessed  any  judicial  magistracy  over  his
small  district.  He  was,  more  probably,  little  different  from  a
petty  constable,  as  is  now  the  case,  I  believe,  wherever  that
denomination  of  office  is  preserved.  The  court  of  the  hun¬
dred  was  held,  as  on  the  continent,  by  its  own  centenarius,  or
hundred-man,  more  often  called  alderman,  and,  in  the  Nor¬
man  times,  bailiff  or  constable,  but  under  the  sheriff’s  writ.
It  is,  in  the  language  of  the  law,  the  sheriff’s  tourn  and  leet.
And  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  age  it  was  a  court  of  justice  for
suitors  within  the  hundred,  though  it  could  not  execute  its
process  beyond  that  limit.  It  also  punished  small  offences,
and  was  intrusted  with  the  “  view  of  frank-pledge,”  and  the
maintenance  of  the  great  police  of  mutual  surety.  In  some
cases,  that  is,  when  the  hundred  was  competent  to  render
judgment,  it  seems  that  the  county-court  could  only  exercise
an  appellant  jurisdiction  for  denial  of  right  in  the  lower  tri¬
bunal.  But  in  course  of  time  the  former  and  more  cele¬
brated  court,  being  composed  of  far  more  conspicuous  judges,
and  held  before  the  bishop  and  the  earl,  became  the  real  ar¬
biter  of  important  suits ;  and  the  court-leet  fell  almost  entirely
into  disuse  as  a  civil  jurisdiction,  contenting  itself  with  pun¬
ishing  petty  offences  and  keeping  up  a  local  police.2  It  was,
howeveiv  to  the  county-court  that  tm  English  free-  coimty-
man  chiefly  looked  for  the  maintenance  of  his  civil court-
rights.  In  this  assembly,  held  twice  in  the  year  by  the
TnsKop  and  the  alderman,*  or,  in  his  absence,  the  sheriff,  the
oath  of  allegiance  was  administered  to  all  freemen,  breaches
of  the  peace  were  inquired  into,  crimes  were  investigated,

1  Leges  E-lwardi  Confess,  p.  203.  Noth¬
ing,  as  far  as  I  know,  confirms  this
passage,  which  hardly  tallies  with  what
tile  genuine  Anglo-Saxon  documents
con  tain  as  to  the  judicial  arrangements
of  that  period.

*  [Not*  VI.]

*  The  alderman  was  the  highest  rank
after  the  royal  family,  to  which  he  some¬

times  belonged.  Every  county  had  its
alderman  ;  but  the  name  is  not  applied
in  written  documents  to  magistrates  of
boroughs  before  the  conquest.  Palgrave,
ii.  3o0.  lie  thinks,  however,  that  Lon¬
don  had  aldennen  from  time  immemo¬
rial.  After  the  conquest  the  title  seems
to  have  become  appropriated  to  municipal
magistrates.

268

THE  COUNTY-COURT.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

and  claims  were  determined.  I  assign  all  these  functions  to
the  county-court  upon  the  supposition  that  no  other  subsisted
during  the  Saxon  times,  and  that  the  separation  of  the
sheriff’s  tourn  tor  criminal  jurisdiction  had  not  yet  taken
place ;  which,  however,  I  cannot  pretend  to  determine.1

A  very  ancient  Saxon  instrument,  recording  a  suit  in  the
Suit  in  the  county-court  under  the  reign  of  Canute,  has  been
county-  published  by  Ilickes,  and  may  be  deemed  worthy
of  a  literal  translation  in  this  place.  “  It  is  made
known  by  this  writing  that  in  the  shiregemot  (county-court)
held  at  Agelnothes-stane  (Aylston  in  Herefordshire)  in  the
reign  of  Canute  there  sat  Athelstan  the  bishop,  and  Ranig
the  alderman,  and  Edwin  his  son,  and  Leoftvin  Wul tig’s  son ;
and  Thurkil  the  White  and  Tofig  came  there  on  the  king’s
business ;  and  there  were  Bryning  the  sheriff,  and  Athel-
weard  of  Frorae,  and  Leofwin  of  Frome,  und  Goodric  of
Stoke,  and  all  the  thanes  of  Herefordshire.  Then  came  to
the  mote  Edwin  son  of  Enneawne,  and  sued  his  mother  for
some  hinds,  called  Weolintun  and  Cyrdeslea.  Then  the
bishop  asked  who  would  answer  for  his  mother.  Then  an¬
swered  Thurkil  the  White,  and  said  that  he  would,  if  he
knew  the  facts,  w  hich  he  did  not  Then  were  seen  in  the
mote  three  thanes,  that  belonged  to  Feligly  (Fawley,  five
miles  from  Aylston),  Leofwin  of  Frome,  vEgelwig  the  Red,
and  Thinsig  Sta  gthman ;  and  they  went  to  her,  and  inquired
what  she  had  to  say  about  the  lands  which  her  son  claimed.
She  said  that  she  had  no  land  which  belonged  to  him,  and  fell
into  a  noble  passion  against  her  son,  and,  oil  ling  for  Leofieda
her  kinswoman,  the  wife  of  Thurkil,  thus  spake  to  her  before
them  :  ‘This  is  Leofieda  my  kinswoman,  to  whom  I  give  my
hinds,  money,  clothes,  and  whatever  I  possess  alter  my  life  :  ’
and  this  said,  she  thus  spake  to  the  thanes:  ‘  Behave  like
thanes,  and  declare  rny  message  to  all  the  good  men  in  the
mote,  and  tell  them  to  whom  I  have  given  iny  lands
and  all  my  possessions,  and  nothing  to  my  son  ;  ’  and  bade
them  be  witnesses  to  this.  And  thus  they  did,  rode  to  the
mote,  and  told  all  the  good  men  what  she  had  enjoined  them.
Then  Thurkil  the  White  addressed  the  mote,  and  requested
all  the  thanes  to  let  his  wife  have  the  lands  which  her  kins-
w’oman  had  given  her ;  and  thus  they  did,  and  Thurkil  rode

>  Thin  point  In  obwure :  but  I  do  not  tingul'h  the  dril  from  the  criminal  tri¬
pe  retire  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  <li>-  burial.

English  Const.

THE  COUNTY-COUKT.

2C9

to  the  church  of  St.  Ethelbert,  with  the  leave  and  witness  of
all  the  people,  and  had  this  inserted  in  a  book  in  the
church.”  1

It  may  be  presumed  from  the  appeal  made  to  the  thanes
present  at  the  county-court,  and  is  confirmed  by  other  ancient
authorities,2  that  all  of  them,  and  they  alone,  to  the  exclusion
of  inferior  freemen,  were  the  judges  of  civil  controversies.
The  latter  indeed  were  called  upon  to  attend  its  meetings,  or,
in  the  language  of  our  present  law,  were  suitors  to  the  court,
and  it  was  penal  to  be  absent.  But  this  was  on  account  of
other  duties,  the  oath  of  allegiance  which  they  were  to  take,
or  the  frank-pledges  into  which  they  were  to  enter,  not  in
order  to  exercise  any  judicial  power  ;  unless  we  conceive  that
the  disputes  of  the  ceorls  were  decided  by  judges  of  their
own  rank.  It  is-  more  important  to  remark  the  crude  state
of  legal  process  and  inquiry  which  this  instrument  denotes.
Without  any  regular  method  of  instituting  or  conducting
causes,  the  county-court  seems  to  have  had  nothing  to  recom¬
mend  it  but,  what  indeed  is  no  trifling  matter,  its  security
from  corruption  and  tyranny ;  and  in  the  practical  jurispru¬
dence  of  our  Saxon  ancestors,  even  at  the  beginning  of
the  eleventh  century,  we  perceive  no  advance  of  civility  and
skill  from  the  state  of  their  own  savage  progenitors  on  the
banks  of  the  Elbe.t  No  appeal  could  be  made  to  the  royal
tribunal,  unless  justice  was  denied  in  the  county-court.8
This  was  the  great  constitutional  judicature  in  all  questions
of  civil  right.  In  another  instrument,  published  by  Hickes,
of  the  age  of  Ethelred  II.,  the  tenant  of  lands  which  were
claimed  in  the  king’s  court  refused  to  submit  to  the  decree  of
that  tribunal,  without  a  regular  trial  in  the  county  ;  which
was  accordingly  granted.4  There  were,  however,  royal
judges,  who,  either  by  way  of  appeal  from  the  lower  courts,
or  in  excepted  cases,  formed  a  paramount  judicature ;  but

1  Ilickes,  Dissertatio  Epistolaris,  p.  4,
In  Thesaurus  Antiquitatuin  Septentrion,
■  the  Conquest,”  says
G  union  (on  Courts-Haron,  p.  589),
14  grants  were  enrolled  in  the  shire-book
In  public  shire-mote,  after  proclamation
made  for  any  to  come  in  that  could  claim
the  lands  conveyed ;  and  this  was  as  ir¬
reversible  as  the  modern  fine  with  proc¬
lamations,  or  recovery.”  This  may  be
so ;  but  the  county -court  has  at  least
long  ceased  to  be  a  court  of  record  ;  and
one  would  ask  for  proof  of  the  assertion.

The  book  kept  in  the  church  of  St.
Ethelbert,  wherein  Thurkil  is  said  to
have  inserted  the  proceedings  of  the
county -court,  may  or  may  not  have  been
a  public  record.

*  Id.  p.  3.  Leges  Henr.  Primi,  c  29.

3  Leges  Eadguri,  p.  77;  Canuti,  p.
133 ;  Henrici  Primi,  c.  84.  I  quote  the
latter  freely  as  Anglo-Saxon,  though
posterior  to  the  conquest ;  their  spirit
being  perfectly  of  the  former  period.

*  Dissertatio  Epistolaris,  p.  6.

270

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

C»Ar.  Till.  Part  I.

how  their  court  was  composed  under  the  Anglo-Saxon  sover¬
eigns  I  do  not  pretend  to  assert.1

It  had  been  a  prevailing  opinion  that  trial  by  jury  may  be
Trial  by  referred  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  age,  and  common

JurJ-  tradition  has  ascribed  it  to  the  wisdom  of  Alfred.

In  such  an  historical  deduction  of  the  English  government  as
I  have  attempted,  an  institution  so  peculiarly  characteristic
deserves  every  attention  to  its  origin ;  and  I  shall,  therefore,
produce  the  evidence  which  has  been  supposed  to  bear  upon
this  most  eminent  part  of  our  judicial  system.  The  first  text
of  the  Saxon  laws  which  may  appear  to  have  such  a  mean¬
ing  is  in  those  of  Alfred.  “  If  any  one  accuse  a  king’s  thane
of  homicide,  if  he  dare  to  purge  himself  (Indian),  let  him  do
it  along  with  twelve  king’s  thanes.”  “If  any  one  accuse  a
thane  of  less  rank  (laessa  maga)  than  a  king’s  thane,  let  him
purge  himself  along  with  eleven  of  his  equals,  and  one  king* s
thane.”  a  This  law,  which  Nicholson  contends  to  mean  noth¬
ing  but  trial  by  jury,  has  been  referred  by  Hickes  to  that
ancient  usage  of  compurgation,  where  the  accused  su-tained
his  own  oath  by  those  of  a  number  of  his  friends,  who
pledged  their  knowledge,  or  at  least  their  belief,  of  his  inno¬
cence.8

In  the  canons  of  the  Northumbrian  clergy  we  read  as  fol¬
lows  :  “  If  a  king’s  thane  deny  this  (the  practice  of  heathen
superstitions),  let  twelve  be  appointed  for  him,  and  let  him  take
twelve  of  his  kindred  (or  equals,  maga)  and  twelve  Briti-h
strangers  ;  and  if  he  fail,  then  let  him  pay  for  his  breach  of
law  twelve  half-marcs :  If  a  landholder  (or  lesser  thane)
deny  the  charge,  let  as  many  of  his  equals  and  as  many
strangers  be  taken  as  for  a  royal  thane ;  and  if  he  fail,  let
him  pay  six  half-marcs :  If  a  ceorl  deny  it,  let  as  many  of
his  equals  and  as  many  strangers  be  taken  for  him  as  for  the
others ;  and  if  he  fail,  let  him  pay  twelve  one  for  his  breach
of  law.”4  It  is  difficult  at  first  sight  to  imagine  that  these

1  Madox,  nistorjr  of  the  Exchequer,
p.  65  will  not  admit  the  existence  of  any
court  analogous  to  the  Curia  Kerf*
before  the  conquest ;  all  plea*  being
determined  in  the  county.  There  are,
however,  several  instance*  of  derision*
before  the  king;  and  in  some  case*  it
teem*  that  the  witenagemot  had  a  judi¬
cial  authority.  Lege*  Canuti,  p.  185,  186;
Hht.  Kliensis.  p.  469;  Chroo.  8nx  p.
169.  In  the  Leges  lie  nr  I.  c.  10,  the

limits  of  the  royal  and  local  Jurisdictions
are  defined,  as  to  criminal  matters,  and
seem  to  hare  been  little  changed  since
the  reign  of  Canute,  p.  135  [1818].
[Noti  VII.]

*  I^-ges  Alfredl,  p.  47.

•  Nicholson,  PrvfHtio  ad  Leges  Anglo-
Saxon.;  Wllklnsii,  p.  10;  Hickes,  Dia-
eertatio  Epistolaris.

«  Wilkins,  p.  1U0.

English  Const.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

271

thirty-six  so  selected  were  merely  compurgators,  since  it
seems  absurd  that  the  judge  should  name  indifferent  persons,
who  without  inquiry  were  to  make  oath  of  a  party’s  inno¬
cence.  Some  have  therefore  conceived  that,  in  this  and
other  instances  where  compurgators  are  mentioned,  they
were  virtually  jurors,  who,  before  attesting  the  facts,  were  to
inform  their  consciences  by  investigating  them.  There  are
however  passages  in  the  Saxon  laws  nearly  parallel  to  that
just  quoted,  which  seem  incompatible  with  this  interpreta¬
tion.  Thus,  by  a  law  of  Athelstan,  if  any  one  claimed  a  stray
ox  as  his  own,  five  of  his  neighbors  were  to  be  assigned,  of
whom  one  was  to  maintain  the  claimant’s  oath.1  Perhaps
the  principle  of  these  regulations,  and  indeed  of  the  whole
law  of  compurgation,  is  to  be  found  in  that  stress  laid  upon
general  character  which  pervades  the  Anglo-Saxon  jurispru¬
dence.  A  man  of  ill  reputation  was  compelled  to  undergo  a
triple  ordeal,  in  cases  where  a  single  one  sufficed  for  persons
of  credit ;  a  provision  rather  inconsistent  with  the  trust  in  a
miraculous  interposition  of  Providence  which  was  the  basis
of  that  superstition.  And  the  law  of  frank-pledge  proceeded
upon  the  maxim  that  the  best  guarantee  of  every  man’s  obe¬
dience  to  the  government  was  to  be  sought  in  the  confidence
of  his  neighbors.  Hence,  while  some  compurgators  were  to
be  chosen  by  the  sheriff,  to  avoid  partiality  and  collusion,  it
was  still  intended  that  they  should  be  residents  of  the  vicin¬
age,  witnesses  of  the  defendant’s  previous  life,  and  competent
to  estimate  the  probability  of  his  exculpatory  oath.  For
the  British  strangers,  in  the  canon  quoted  above,  were
certainly  the  original  natives,  more  intermingled  with  their
conquerors,  probably,  in  the  provinces  north  of  the  Humber
than  elsewhere,  and  still  denominated  strangers,  as  the  dis¬
tinction  of  races  was  not  done  away.

If  in  this  instance  we  do  not  feel  ourselves  warranted  to
infer  the  existence  of  trial  by  jury,  still  less  shall  we  find
even  an  analogy  to  it  in  an  article  of  the  treaty  between
England  and  Wales  during  the  reign  of  Ethelred  II.
“  Twelve  persons  skilled  in  the  law,  six  English  and  six
Welsh,  shall  instruct  the  natives  of  each  country,  on  pain  of
forfeiting  their  possessions,  if,  except  through  ignorance,  they
give  false  information.” 1  This  is  obviously  but  a  regulation
intended  to  settle  disputes  among  the  Welsh  and  English,  to

1  Legea  Athelftani,  p.  68.  *  Leges  Ethelredi,  p.  126.

272

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Chap.  VIII.  Part  I

which  their  ignorance  of  each  other’s  customs  might  give
rise.

By  a  law  of  the  same  prince,  a  court  was  to  be  held  in
every  wapentake,  where  the  sheriff  and  twelve  principal
thanes  should  swear  that  they  would  neither  acquit  any
criminal  nor  convict  any  innocent  person.1  It  seems  more
probable  that  these  thanes  were  permanent  assessors  to  the
sheriff,  like  the  scabini  so  frequently  mentioned  in  the  early
laws  of  France  and  Italy,  than  jurors  indiscriminately  selected.
This  passage,  however,  is  stronger  than  those  which  have
been  already  adduced;  and  it  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  with
justice,  that  at  least  the  seeds  of  our  present  form  of  trial
are  discoverable  in  it.  In  the  History  of  Ely  we  twice  read
of  pleas  held  before  twenty-four  judges  in  the  court  of  Cam¬
bridge  ;  which  seems  to  have  been  formed  out  of  several
neighboring  hundreds.4

But  the  nearest  approach  to  a  regular  jury  which  has
been  preserved  in  our  scanty  memorials  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
age  occurs  in  the  history  of  the  monastery  of  Ramsey.  A
controversy  relating  to  lands  between  that  society  and  a  cer¬
tain  nobleman  was  brought  into  the  county-court,  when  each
party  was  heard  in  his  own  behalf.  After  this  commence¬
ment,  on  account  probably  of  the  length  and  difficulty  of  the
investigation,  it  was  referred  by  the  court  to  thirty-six  thanes,
equiilly  chosen  by  both  sides.3  And  here  we  begin  to  per¬
ceive  the  manner  in  which  those  tumultuous  assemblies,  the
mixed  body  of  freeholders  in  their  county-court,  slid  gradu¬
ally  into  a  more  steady  and  more  diligent  tribunal.  But  this
was  not  the  work  of  a  single  age.  In  the  Conqueror’s  reign
we  find  a  proceeding  very  similar  to  the  ca-e  of  Ramsey,  in
which  the  suit  has  been  commenced  in  the  county-court,  be¬
fore  it  was  found  expedient  to  remit  it  to  a  select  body  of
freeholders.  In  the  reign  of  William  Rufus,  and  down  to
that  of  Henry  II.,  when  the  trial  of  writs  of  right  by  the
grand  assize  was  introduced,  Ilickes  has  discovered  other  in¬
stances  of  the  original  usage.4  The  language  of  Domesday
Book  lends  some  confirmation  to  its  existence  at  the  time  of
that  survey ;  and  even  our  common  legal  expression  of  trial
by  the  country  seems  to  be  derived  from  a  period  when  the
form  was  literally  popular.

l  Lege*  Eth«*ln*4i,  p.  117.  •  Hbt.  Ramsey,  M.  p.  416.

*  Hist.  KlifimU,  In  Gale's  Scriptoms  «  ilkkesil  DbaerUtio  EpistoUris,  p.  88,

ilL  p.  471  so«l  478.  96.

English  Const.  LAW  OF  FRAXK-PLEDGE.

273

In  comparing  the  various  passages  which  I  have  quoted  it
is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  preference  given  to
twelve,  or  some  multiple  of  it,  in  fixing  the  number  either  of
judges  or  compurgators.  This  was  not  peculiar  to  England.
Spelman  has  produced  several  instances  of  it  in  the  early
German  laws.  And  that  number  seems  to  have  been  re¬
garded  with  equal  veneration  in  Scandinavia.1  It  is  very
immaterial  from  what  caprice  or  superstition  this  predilection
arose.  But  its  general  prevalence  shows  that,  in  searching
for  the  origin  of  trial  by  jury,  we  cannot  rely  for  a  moment
upon  any  analogy  which  the  mere  number  affords.  I  am  in¬
duced  to  make  this  observation,  because  some  of  the  pas¬
sages  which  have  been  alleged  by  eminent  men  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  establishing  the  existence  of  that  institution  before
the  conquest  seem  to  have  little  else  to  support  them.2

There  is  certainly  no  paid  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  polity  which
has  attracted  so  much  the  notice  of  modern  times  Law  of
as  the  law  of  frank-pledge,  or  mutual  responsi-  frank-
bility  of  the  members  of  a  tything  for  each  other’s  pledge‘
abiding  the  course  of  justice.  This,  like  the  distribution  of
hundreds  and  tythings  themselves,  and  like  trial  by  jury,  has
been  generally  attributed  to  Alfred ;  and  of  this,  I  suspect,
we  must  also  deprive  him.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  great
services  of  Alfred  to  his  people  in  peace  and  in  war  should
have  led  posterity  to  ascribe  every  institution,  of  which  the
beginning  was  obscure,  to  his  contrivance,  till  his  fame  has
become  almost  as  fabulous  in  legislation  as  that  of  Arthur  in
arms.  The  English  nation  redeemed  from  servitude,  and
their  name  from  extinction ;  the  lamp  of  learning  refreshed,
when  scarce  a  glimmer  was  visible ;  the  watchful  observance
of  justice  and  public  order;  these  are  the  genuine  praises  of
Alfred,  and  entitle  him  to  the  rank  he  has  always  held  in
men’s  esteem,  as  the  best  and  greatest  of  English  kings.  But
of  his  legislation  there  is  little  that  can  be  asserted  with  suffi¬
cient  evidence  ;  the  laws  of  his  time  that  remain  are  neither
numerous  nor  particularly  interesting;  and  a  loose  report  of
late  writers  is  not  sufficient  to  prove  that  he  compiled  a  dom-
boc,  or  general  code  for  the  government  of  his  kingdom.

An  ingenious  and  philosophical  writer  has  endeavored  to

1  Spelman’*  Oloanary.  roe.  Jurat* :  Du
Cange,  roc.  Neuibda;  Kdiub.  Review,

▼ol.  xxxi.  p.  115  —  a  most  learned  and
elaborate  essay,
a  [Note  VIII.]

VOL.  II.

18

274

LAW  OF  F RANK-PLEDGE.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

found  the  law  of  frank-pledge  upon  one  of  those  general  prin¬
ciples  to  which  he  always  loves  to  recur.  “  If  we  look  upon
a  tything,”  he  says,  “  as  regularly  composed  of  ten  families,
this  branch  of  its  police  will  appear  in  the  highest  degree
artificial  and  singular ;  but  if  we  consider  that  society  as  of
the  same  extent  with  a  town  or  village,  we  shall  find  that
such  a  regulation  is  conformable  to  the  general  usage  of  bar¬
barous  nations,  and  is  founded  upon  their  common  notions  of
justice.”1  A  variety  of  instances  are  then  brought  forward,
drawn  from  the  customs  of  almost  every  part  of  the  world,
wherein  the  inhabitants  of  a  district  have  been  made  answer-
able  for  crimes  and  injuries  imputed  to  one  of  them.  But
none  of  these  fully  resemble  the  Saxon  institution  of  which
we  are  treating.  They  relate  either  to  the  right  of  reprisals,
exercised  with  respect  to  the  subjects  of  foreign  countries,  or
to  the  indemnification  exacted  from  the  district,  as  in  our
modem  statutes  which  give  an  action  in  certain  cases  of  fel¬
ony  against  the  hundred,  for  crimes  which  its  internal  police
was  supposed  capable  of  preventing.  In  the  Irish  custom,
indeed,  which  bound  the  head  of  a  sept  to  bring  forward  every
one  of  his  kindred  who  should  be  charged  with  any  heinous
crime,  we  certainly  perceive  a  strong  analogy  to  the  Saxon
law,  not  as  it  latterly  subsisted,  but  under  one  of  its  prior
modifications.  For  I  think  that  something  of  a  gradual  pro¬
gression  may  be  traced  to  the  history  of  this  famous  police,
by  following  the  indications  afforded  by  those  laws  through
which  alone  we  become  acquainted  with  its  existence.

The  Saxons  brought  with  them  from  their  original  forests
at  least  as  much  roughness  as  any  of  the  nations  which  over¬
turned  the  Roman  empire;  and  their  long  struggle  with  the
Britons  could  not  contribute  to  polish  their  manners.  The
royal  authority  was  weak  ;  and  little  had  been  learned  of  that
regular  system  of  government  which  the  Franks  and  Lom¬
bards  had  acquired  from  the  provincial  Romans,  among  whom
they  were  mingled.  No  people  were  so  much  addicted  to
robbery,  to  riotous  frays,  and  to  feuds  arising  out  of  family
revenge,  as  the  Anglo-Saxons.  Their  statutes  are  filled  with
complaints  that  the  public  peace  was  openly  violated,  and
with  penalties  which  seem  by  their  repetition  to  have  been
disregarded.  The  vengeance  taken  by  the  kindred  of  a
murdered  man  was  a  sacred  right,  which  no  law  ventured  to

>  Millar  on  the  English  Government,  vol.  i.  p.  189.

English  Const.  LAW  OF  FRANK— PLEDGE.

275

forbid,  though  it  was  limited  by  those  which  established  a
composition,  and  by  those  which  protected  the  family  of  the
murderer  from  their  resentment.  Even  the  author  of  the  laws
ascribed  to  the  Confessor  speaks  of  this  family  warfare,  where
the  composition  had  not  been  paid,  as  perfectly  lawful.1  But
the  law  of  composition  tended  probably  to  increase  the  num¬
ber  of  crimes.  Though  the  sums  imposed  were  sometimes
heavy,  men  paid  them  with  the  help  of  their  relations,  or
entered  into  voluntary  associations,  the  purposes  whereof
might  often  be  laudable,  but  which  were  certainly  susceptible
of  this  kind  of  abuse.  And  many  led  a  life  of  rapine,  form¬
ing  large  parties  of  ruffians,  who  committed  murder  and
robbery  with  little  dread  of  punishment.

Against  this  disorderly  condition  of  society,  the  wisdom  of
our  English  kings,  with  the  assistance  of  their  great  councils,
was  employed  in  devising  remedies,  which  ultimately  grew
up  into  a  peculiar  system.  No  man  could  leave  the  shire  to
which  he  belonged  without  the  permission  of  its  alderman.2
No  man  could  be  without  a  lord,  on  whom  he  depended ;
though  he  might  quit  his  present  patron,  it  was  under  the
condition  of  engaging  himself  to  another.  If  he  failed  in
this,  his  kindred  were  bound  to  present  him  in  the  county-
court,  and  to  name  a  lord  for  him  themselves.  Unless  this
were  done,  he  might  be  seized  by  any  one  who  met  him  as  a
robber.®  Hence,  notwithstanding  the  personal  liberty  of  the
peasants,  it  was  not  very  practicable  for  one  of  them  to  quit
his  place  of  residence.  A  stranger  guest  could  not  be  received
more  than  two  nights  as  such ;  on  the  third  the  host  became
responsible  for  his  inmate’s  conduct.4

The  peculiar  system  of  frank-pledges  seems  to  have  passed
through  the  following  very  gradual  stages.  At  first  an  accused
person  was  obliged  to  find  bail  for  standing  his  trial.6  At  a
subsequent  period  his  relations  were  called  upon  to  become
sureties  for  payment  of  the  composition  and  other  fines  to
which  he  was  liable.6  They  were  even  subject  to  be  im¬
prisoned  until  payment  was  made,  and  this  imprisonment  was
commutable  for  a  certain  sum  of  money.  The  next  stage

l  Parcntibus  occisi  flat  emendatio,  Tel
guerra  corum  portetur.  Wilkins,  p.  199.
Thin,  like  many  other  parts  of  that
spurious  treatise,  appears  to  have  been
taken  from  some  older  laws,  or  at  least
traditions.  1  do  not  conceive  that  this

private  revenge  was  tolerated  by  law
after  the  conquest,
a  Leges  Alfred!,  c.  83.

*  Leges  Athelstani,  p.  56.

<  Leges  Edwardi  Confess,  p.  202.

6  Leges  Lotharii  [regis  OantliJ,  p.  8.

•  Leges  Edwardi  Senioris,  p.  63.

276

LAW  OF  FRANK— PLEDGE.  CiiAr.  Till.  Part  I.

was  to  make  persons  already  convicted,  or  of  suspicious  re¬
pute,  give  sureties  for  their  future  behavior.1  It  is  not  till
the  reign  of  Edgar  that  we  find  the  first  general  law,  which
places  every  man  in  the  condition  of  the  guilty  or  suspected,
and  compels  him  to  find  a  surety,  who  shall  he  responsible
for  his  appearance  when  judicially  summoned.8  This  is  per¬
petually  repeated  and  enforced  in  later  statutes,  during  his
reign  and  that  of  Ethelred.  Finally,  the  laws  of  Canute
declare  the  necessity  of  belonging  to  some  hundred  and  ty til¬
ing.  as  well  as  of  providing  sureties;*  and  it  may,  perhaps,
be  inferred  that  the  custom  of  rendering  every  member  of  a
tything  answerable  for  the  appearance  of  all  the  rest,  as  it
existed  after  the  conquest,  is  as  old  as  the  reign  of  this  Danish
monarch.

It  is  by  no  means  an  accurate  notion  which  the  writer  to
whom  I  have  already  adverted  has  conceived  that  “  the  mem¬
bers  of  every  tything  were  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  one
another ;  and  that  the  society,  or  their  leafier,  might  be  pros¬
ecuted  and  compelled  to  make  reparation  for  an  injury  com¬
mitted  by  any  individual.”  Upon  this  false  apprehension  of
the  nature  of  frank-pledges  the  whole  of  his  analogical  rea¬
soning  is  founded.  It  is  indeed  an  error  very  current  in
popular  treatises,  and  which  might  plead  the  authority  of
some  whose  professional  learning  should  have  saved  them
from  so  obvious  a  misstatement.  But  in  fact  the  members  of
a  tything  were  no  more  than  perpetual  bail  for  each  other.
“The  greatest  security  of  the  public  order  (says  the  laws
ascribed  to  the  Confessor)  is  that  every  man  must  bind  him¬
self  to  one  of  those  societies  which  the  English  in  genend
call  freeborgs,  and  the  people  of  Yorkshire  ten  men’s  talc.”4
This  consisted  in  the  responsibility  of  ten  men,  each  for  the
other,  throughout  every  village  in  the  kingdom ;  so  that,  if
one  of  the  ten  committed  any  fault,  the  nine  should  produce
him  in  justice ;  where  he  should  make  reparation  by  his  own
property  or  by  personal  punishment.  If  he  fled  from  justice,
a  mode  was  provided  according  to  which  the  tything  might
clear  themselves  from  participation  in  his  crime  or  escape  ;  in
default  of  such  exculpation,  and  the  malefactor’s  estate  prov¬
ing  deficient,  they  were  compelled  to  make  good  the  penalty.
And  it  is  equally  manifest,  from  every  other  passage  in  which

>  1/Fgm  Athelntanl,  p.  67,  e.  6,  7,  8.  '  Lrgm  Canntt.  p.  187.

*  Leg**  Kadgtri,  p.  78.  *  LrtfM  Kdwardi,  to  Wilkin*,  p.  201.

English  Const.

FEUDAL  TENURES.

277

mention  is  made  of  this  ancient  institution,  that  the  obligation
of  the  tything  was  merely  that  of  permanent  bail,  responsible
only  indirectly  for  the  good  behavior  of  their  members.

Every  freeman  above  the  age  of  twelve  years  was  required
to  be  enrolled  in  some  tything.1  In  order  to  enforce  this
essential  part  of  police,  the  courts  of  the  tourn  and  leet  were
erected,  or  rather  perhaps  separated  from  that  of  the  county.
The  periodical  meetings  of  these,  whose  duty  it  was  to  inquire
into  the  state  of  tythings,  whence  they  were  called  the  view
of  frank -pledge,  are  regulated  in  Magna  Charta.  But  this
custom,  which  seems  to  have  been  in  full  vigor  when  Brac-
ton  wrote,  and  is  enforced  by  a  statute  of  Edward  II.,  gradu¬
ally  died  away  in  succeeding  times.2  According  to  the  laws
ascribed  to  the  Confessor,  which  are  perhaps  of  insufficient
authority  to  fix  the  existence  of  any  usage  before  the  Con¬
quest,  lords  who  possessed  a  baronial  jurisdiction  were  per¬
mitted  to  keep  their  military  tenants  and  the  servants  of
their  household  under  their  own  peculiar  frank-pledge.8  Nor
was  any  freeholder,  in  the  age  of  Bracton,  bound  to  be  en¬
rolled  in  a  tything.4

It  remains  only,  before  we  conclude  this  sketch  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  system,  to  consider  the  once  famous  Feudal  ten-
question  respecting  the  establishment  of  feudal
tenures  in  England  before  the  Conquest.  The  the  Con-
position  asserted  by  Sir  Henry  Spelman  in  his  quest-

l  Lege*  Canuti,  p.  136.

*  Stat.  18  E.  II.  Traces  of  the  actual
▼iew  of  frank-pledge  appear  in  Cornwall
a*  late  as  the  10th  of  Henry  VI.  Rot.
Pirliam.  vol.  iv.  p.  403.  And  indeed
Selden  tells  us  (Janus  Anglortim,  t.  ii.

.  993)  that  it  was  not  quite  obsolete  in

is  time.  The  form  may,  for  aught  I
kuow.  be  kept  up  in  some  parts  of  Eng¬
land  at  this  day.  For  some  reason  which
I  cannot  explain,  the  distribution  by
tens  was  changed  into  one  by  dozens.
Briton,  c.  29,  and  Stat.  18  E.  II.

»  p.  2/2.

*  Sir  F  Palgrave,  who  does  not  admit

the  application  of  some  of  the  laws  cited
in  the  text,  says  :  4*  At  some  period,

towards  the  close  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
monarchy,  the  five-pledge  was  certainly
established  in  the  greater  part  of  Wessex
aud  Mercia,  though,  even  there,  some
special  exceptions  existed.  The  system
was  developed  between  the  accession  of
Canute  and  the  demise  of  the  Conqueror;
and  it  is  not  improbable  but  that  the
Normans  completed  what  the  Danes  had
begun.”  Vol.  ii.  p.  123.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  there  is  no
appearance  of  the  frank-pledge  in  that
part  of  England  which  hod  formed  the
kingdom  of  Northumberland.  Vol.  i.  p.
202.  This  indeed  contradicts  a  passage,
quoted  in  the  text  from  the  laws  of
Edward  the  Confessor,  which  Sir  F.  P.
suspects  to  be  interpolated.  But  we  find
a  presentment  by  the  county  of  West¬
moreland  in  ‘20  Ed.  I. : — Comitatus
recordatur  quod  nulla  Englescheria  pre-
sentatur  in  comitatu  is  to.  nec  murdrum,
nec  est  aliqua  decenna  nec  visus  franc-
plegii  nec  manupastus  in  comitatu  isfco,
nec  unquam  fuit  in  partibus  borealibus
citra  Trentain.  Ibidem.  44  It  is  impos¬
sible  to  speak  positively  to  a  negative
proposition ;  and  in  the  vast  msiss  of
these  most  valuable  records,  all  of  which
are  still  uniudexed,  some  entry  relating
to  the  collective  frank-pledge  may  be
concealed.  Yet,  from  their  general  tenor.
I  doubt  whether  any  will  be  discovered.’
The  immense  knowledge  of  records  pos¬
sessed  by  Sir  F.  P.  gives  the  highest
weight  to  his  judgment.

278

FEUDAL  TENURES.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

Glossary,  that  lands  were  not  held  feudally  before  that  period,
having  been  denied  by  the  Irish  judges  in  the  great  ease  of
tenures,  he  was  compelled  to  draw  up  his  treatise  on  Feuds,
in  which  it  is  more  fully  maintained.  Several  other  writers,
especially  llickes,  Madox,  and  Sir  Martin  Wright,  have
taken  the  same  side.  But  names  equally  respectable  might
be  thrown  into  the  opposite  scale;  and  I  think  the  prevailing
bias  of  modern  antiquaries  is  in  favor  of  at  least  a  modified
affirmative  as  to  this  question.

Lands  are  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  divided,
among  the  Anglo-Saxons,  into  bocland  and  folkland.  The
former  was  held  in  full  propriety,  and  might  be  conveyed  by
boc  or  written  grant ;  the  latter  was  occupied  by  the  common
people,  yielding  rent  or  other  service,  and  perhaps  without
any  estate  in  the  land,  but  at  the  pleasure  of  the  owner.
These  two  species  of  tenure  might  be  compared  to  freehold
and  copyhold,  if  the  latter  had  retained  its  original  depend¬
ence  upon  the  will  of  the  lord.1  Borland  was  devisable  by
will ;  it  was  equally  shared  among  the  children ;  it  was  capa¬
ble  of  being  entailed  by  the  person  under  whose  grant  it  was
originally  taken ;  and  in  case  of  a  treacherous  or  cowardly
desertion  from  the  army  it  was  forfeited  to  the  crown.4  Eut
a  different  theory,  at  least  as  to  the  nature  of  folkland,  has
lately  been  maintained  by  writers  of  very  great  authority.*

It  is  an  improbable,  and  even  extravagant  supposition,  that
all  these  hereditary  estates  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  freeholders
were  originally  parcels  of  the  royal  demesne,  and  conse¬
quently  that  the  king  was  once  the  sole  proprietor  in  his
kingdom.  Whatever  partitions  were  made  upon  the  con¬
quest  of  a  British  province,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  shares
of  the  army  were  coeval  with  those  of  the  general.  The
great  mass  of  Saxon  property  could  not  have  l>een  held  by
actual  beneficiary  grants  from  the  crown.  However,  the
royal  demesnes  were  undoubtedly  very  extensive.  They
coutinued  to  be  so,  even  in  the  time  of  the  Confessor,  after

1  Thin  Supposition  may  plead  the  folkland  alodial ;  the  second  takes  folk-
great  authorities  of  Somner  and  Lye,  the  land  for  feudal.  I  cannot  satisfy  myself
Anglo-Saxon  lexicographers,  and  appears  whether  thainland  aud  rereland,  which
to  me  far  more  probable  than  the  theory  occur  sometimes  In  Domesday  Book,
of  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  In  hla  Essay  on  merely  correspond  with  the  other  two
feudal  Property,  or  that  of  the  author  of  denominations.

a  discourse  on  the  Bocland  and  folkland  >  Wilkins,  p.  43,  146.  The  latter  law
of  the  Saxons,  1775,  whose  name,  I  think.  Is  copied  from  one  of  <  hariemague's
was  Ibbetson.  The  first  of  these  sup-  Capitularies.  Baluie,  p.  787.
poses  bocland  to  hare  been  foadal,  and  1  [Nora  IX. J

English  Const.

FEUDAL  TENURES.

279

the  donations  of  his  predecessors.  And  several  instruments
granting  lands  to  individuals,  besides  those  in  favor  of  the
church,  are  extant.  These  are  generally  couched  in  that
style  of  full  and  unconditional  conveyance  which  is  observa¬
ble  in  all  such  charters  of  the  same  age  upon  the  continent.
Some  exceptions,  however,  occur  ;  the  lands  bequeathed  by
Alfred  to  certain  of  his  nobles  were  to  return  to  his  family
in  default  of  male  heirs ;  and  Hickes  is  of  opinion  that  the
royal  consent,  which  seems  to  have  been  required  for  the
testamentary  disposition  of  some  estates,  was  necessary  on
account  of  their  beneficiary  tenure.1

All  the  freehold  lands  of  England,  except  some  of  those
belonging  to  the  church,  were  subject  to  three  great  public
burdens :  military  service  in  the  king’s  expeditions,  or  at
least  in  defensive  war,2  the  repair  of  bridges,  and  that  of
royal  fortresses.  These  obligations,  and  especially  the  first,
have  been  sometimes  thought  to  denote  a  feudal  tenure.
There  is,  however,  a  confusion  into  which  we  may  fall  by
not  sufficiently  discriminating  the  rights  of  a  king  as  chief
lord  of  his  vassals,  and  as  sovereign  of  his  subjects.  In
every  country  the  supreme  power  is  entitled  to  use  the  arm
of  each  citizen  in  the  public  defence.  The  usage  of  all  na¬
tions  agrees  with  common  reason  in  establishing  this  great
principle.  There  is  nothing  therefore  peculiarly  feudal  in
this  military  service  of  landholders ;  it  was  due  from  the
alodial  proprietors  upon  the  continent;  it  was  derived  from
their  German  ancestors ;  it  had  been  fixed,  probably,  by  the
legislatures  of  the  Heptarchy  upon  the  first  settlement  in
Britain.

It  is  material,  however,  to  observe  that  a  thane  forfeited
his  hereditary  freehold  by  misconduct  in  battle :  a  penalty
more  severe  than  was  indicted  upon  alodial  proprietors  on  the
continent.  We  even  find  in  the  earliest  Saxon  laws  that  the
sithcundman,  who  seems  to  have  corresponded  to  the  inferior
thane  of  later  times,  forfeited  his  land  by  neglect  of  attend¬
ance  in  war;  for  which  an  alodialist  in  France  would  only
have  paid  his  heribannum,  or  penalty.8  Nevertheless,  as  the

1  Dissertatio  Epistolaris,  p.  60.  Saxon  freeholder  had  to  render  was  of

1  This  duty  is  by  some  expressed  the  latter  kind,
rata  expeditio  ;  by  others,  hostis  pro-  3  Leges  In®,  p.  23;  Du  Cange,  toc.
puUko,  which  seems  to  make  no  small  Heribannum.  By  the  laws  of  Canute,
difference.  But,  unfortunately,  most  of  p.  135,  &  flue  only  was  imposed  for  this
the  military  service  which  an  Anglo-  offence.

280

FEUDAL  TENURES.

Chap.  VIII.  Fart  I.

policy  of  different  states  may  enforce  tlie  duties  of  subjects
by  more  or  less  severe  sanctions,  I  do  not  know  that  a  law  of
forfeiture  in  such  cases  is  to  be  considered  as  positively  im¬
plying  a  feudal  tenure.

But  a  much  stronger  presumption  is  afforded  by  passages
that  indicate  a  mutual  relation  of  lord  and  vassal  amonsr  the
free  proprietors.  The  most  powerful  subjects  have  not  a
natural  right  to  the  service  of  other  freemen.  But  in  the
laws  enacted  during  the  Heptarchy  we  find  that  the  sithcund-
man,  or  petty  gentleman,  might  be  dependent  on  a  superior
lord.1  This  is  more  distinctly  expressed  in  some  ecclesiasti¬
cal  canons,  apparently  of  the  tenth  century,  which  distinguish
the  king’s  thane  from  the  landholder,  who  depended  upon  a
lord.2  Other  proofs  of  this  might  be  brought  from  the  Anglo-
Saxon  laws.*  It  is  not,  however,  sufficient  to  prove  a  mutual
relation  between  the  higher  and  lower  order  of  gentry,  in
order  to  establish  the  existence  of  feudal  tenures.  For  this
relation  was  often  personal,  as  I  have  mentioned  more  fully
in  another  place,  and  bore  the  name  of  commendation.  And
no  nation  was  so  rigorous  as  the  English  in  compelling  every
man,  from  the  king’s  thane  to  the  ceorl,  to  place  himself
under  a  lawful  superior.  Hence  the  question  is  not  to  be
hastily  decided  on  the  credit  of  a  few  passages  that  express
this  gradation  of  dependence ;  feudal  vassalage,  the  object  of
our  inquiry,  being  of  a  real,  not  a  personal  nature,  and  result¬
ing  entirely  from  the  tenure  of  particular  lands.  But  it  is
not  unlikely  that  the  personal  relation  of  client,  if  I  may  use
that  word,  might  in  a  multitude  of  cases  be  changed  into  that
of  vassal.  And  certainly  many  of  the  motives  which  oj>er-
ated  in  I' ranee  to  produce  a  very  general  commutation  of
alodial  into  feudal  tenure  might  have  a  similar  influence  in
England,  where  the  disorderly  condition  of  society  made  it
the  interest  of  every  man  to  obtain  the  protection  of  some
potent  lord.

The  word  thane  corresponds  in  its  derivation  to  vassal ;  and
the  latter  term  is  used  by  Asserius,  the  contemporary  biog¬
rapher  of  Alfred,  in  speaking  of  the  nobles  of  that  prince.4

1  In*,  p.  10,  23.  object*  to  the  authentic!!;  of  a  charter

*  Wilkin*,  p.lOl.  aarribed  to  K.l((ar,  l«ciuw  it  contain*

*  p.  71.  1+4.  146.  the  won!  Vaaaallu*.  ••  quam  4  Nuriman*

4  Alfred ua  cum  paucia  aula  nnbfllbua  nla  A  lift II  habucrunt.”  OUacrUtio  Kola*

et  etiam  cum  qulbuadam  militlbue  et  tol.  p.  7.

Yamuillia.  p.  16*5.  Nobile*  Vaaaali  Su-  The  word  maa/itfiu  occur*  not  only  in
uertuuenal*  pagl,  p.  167.  Yet  lilckea  the  auapiciuua  charter  of  Cenulf,  quoted

English  Const.

FEUDAL  TENURES.

281

In  their  attendance,  too,  upon  the  royal  court,  and  the  fidelity
which  was  expected  from  them,  the  king’s  thanes  seem  ex¬
actly  to  have  resembled  that  class  of  followers  who,  under
different  appellations,  were  the  guards  as  well  as  courtiers
of  the  Frank  and  Lombard  sovereigns.  But  I  have  remark¬
ed  that  the  word  thane  is  not  applied  to  the  whole  body  of  gen¬
try  in  the  more  ancient  laws,  where  the  word  eorl  is  opposed
to  the  ceorl  or  roturier,  and  that  of  sithcundman 1  to  the  royal
thane.  It  would  be  too  much  to  infer,  from  the  extension  of
this  latter  word  to  a  large  class  of  persons,  that  we  should  in¬
terpret  it  with  a  close  attention  to  etymology,  a  very  uncer¬
tain  guide  in  almost  all  investigations.

For  the  age  immediately  preceding  the  Norman  invasion
we  cannot  have  recourse  to  a  better  authority  than  Domes¬
day  Book.  That  incomparable  record  contains  the  names  of
every  tenant,  and  the  conditions  of  his  tenure,  under  the  Con¬
fessor,  as  well  as  at  the  time  of  its  compilation,  and  seems  to
give  little  countenance  to  the  notion  that  a  radical  change  in
the  system  of  our  laws  had  been  effected  during  the  interval.
In  almost  every  page  we  meet  with  tenants  either  of  the
crown  or  of  other  lords,  denominated  thanes,  freeholders  (liberi
homines),  or  socagers  (socmanni).  Some  of  these,  it  is  stated,
might  sell  their  lands  to  whom  they  pleased ;  others  were  re¬
stricted  from  alienation.  Some,  as  it  is  expressed,  might  go
with  their  Lands  whither  they  would  ;  by  which  I  understand
the  right  of  commending  themselves  to  any  patron  of  their
choice.  These  of  course  could  not  be  feudal  tenants  in  any
proper  notion  of  that  term.  Others  could  not  depart  from  the
lord  whom  they  served ;  not,  cex-tainly,  that  they  were  per¬
sonally  bound  to  the  soil,  but  that,  so  long  as  they  retained  it,
the  seigniory  of  the  superior  could  not  be  defeated.2  But  I

in  a  subsequent  note,  but  in  one  a.d.  962
(Codex  Diplomat.  U.  3j3).  to  which  I
wa*  led  by  Mr.  Spence  (Equitable  Ju¬
risdiction,  p.  44),  who  quote*  another
from  p.  323,  which  hi  probably  a  mis¬
print  ;  but  1  have  found  one  of  Edgar,
a  d.  9C7-  Cod.  Diplomat,  iii.  11.  1  think
that  Mr.  Spence,  in  the  ninth  and  tenth
chapter*  of  hi*  learned  work,  ha*  too
touch  blended  the  Anglo-Saxon  man  of
a  lord  with  the  continental  vassal:  which
D  a  ptiitio  prinripii.  Certainly  the  word
w&*  of  rare  u*e  in  England ;  and  the
authenticity  of  Asaeriu*.  whom  I  have
quoted  a*  a  contemporary  biographer  of
Alfred,  which  i*  the  common  opinion,

ha*  been  called  in  que*tion  by  Mr.
Wright,  who  refer*  that  Life  to  the  age
of  the  Conquest.  Archaeologia,  vol.  xxix.
i  Wilkin*,  p.  3,  7,  23.  &c.

*  It  sometime*  weaken*  a  proposition,
which  i*  capable  of  innumerable  proof*,
to  take  a  very  few  at  raudom  ;  yet  the
following  casual  specimen*  will  illuatrate
the  common  language  of  Domesday
Book.

lla-c  tria  maneria  ten u it  Ulveva  tem¬
pore  regia  Edwardi  et  potuit  ire  cum
terrl  quo  rolebat.  p.  86.

Toti  emit  earn  T.  H-  E.  (temp,  regia
Edwardi)  de  eocletdl  Malm*burien*i  ad
letatem  trium  homiuum  j  et  infra  hunc

282

FEUDAL  TENURES.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  I.

am  not  aware  that  military  service  is  specified  in  any  in¬
stance  to  be  due  from  one  of  these  tenants ;  though  it  is  dilfi-
cult  to  speak  as  to  a  negative  proposition  of  this  kind  with
any  confidence.

No  direct  evidence  appears  as  to  the  ceremony  of  homage
or  the  oath  of  fealty  before  the  Conquest.  The  feudal  ex¬
action  of  aid  in  certain  prescribed  cases  seems  to  have  been
unknown.  Still  less  could  those  of  ward-hip  and  marriage
prevail,  which  were  no  general  parts  of  the  great  feudal  sys¬
tem.  The  English  lawyers,  through  an  imperfect  acquaint¬
ance  with  the  history  of  feuds  upon  the  continent,  have  treat¬
ed  these  unjust  innovations  as  if  they  had  formed  essential
parts  of  the  system,  and  sprung  naturally  from  the  relation
between  lord  and  vassal.  And,  with  reference  to  the  pres¬
ent  question,  Sir  Henry  Spelman  has  certainly  laid  too  much
stress  uj>on  them  in  concluding  that  feudal  tenures  did  not
exist  among  the  Anglo-Saxons,  because  their  lands  were  not
in  ward,  nor  their  persons  sold  in  marriage.  Hut  I  cannot
equally  concur  with  this  eminent  person  in  denying  the  ex¬
istence  of  reliefs  during  the  same  period.  If  the  heriot,
which  is  first  mentioned  in  the  time  of  Edgar 1  (though  it
may  probably  have  been  an  established  custom  long  before),
were  not  identical  with  the  relief,  it  bore  at  least  a  very
strong  analogy  to  it.  A  charter  of  Ethelred’s  interprets  ono
word  by  the  other.4  In  the  laws  of  William,  which  reenact
those  of  Canute  concerning  heriots,  the  term  relief  is  em¬
ployed  as  synonymous.®  Though  the  heriot  was  in  later
times  paid  in  chattels,  the  relief  in  money,  it  is  equally  true
that  originally  the  law  fixed  a  sum  of  money  in  certain  cases
for  the  heriot,  and  a  chattel  for  the  relief.  And  the  most
plausible  distinction  alleged  by  Spelman,  that  the  heriot  is  by
law  due  from  the  personal  estate,  but  the  relief  from  the  heir,
seems  hardly  applicable  to  that  remote  age,  when  the  law
of  succession  as  to  real  and  personal  estate  was  not  dif
ferent.

It  has  been  shown  in  another  place  how  the  right  of  ter-

terniinnm  potent  ire  rum  el  ad  quern
Tellrt  doiuiuum.  p.  72.

True  Au|[U  tenuerunt  Darn, 'fonl  T.
R.  K.  et  non  potenut  ab  eccleeil
eepanri.  Duo  ex  ii*  rwddebant  r.  aoU.
do*,  et  tertiue  eenriebat  itcut  Thaiuiu.
p.  (W.

llu  torn*  qui  tenuerunt  T.  R.  K  qui

Tohlerunt  ire  poterunt.  prefer  unum
Sertc  vuratum,  qui  in  Rag'' tidal  tenuit
lii  carucataa  tome  ;  eed  non  potent  ruu»
el  alicubi  rwedere.  p.3A‘>

•  Selden'a  Work*,  Tol.  il.  p.  1530.

■  Hlit.  KaniM-irn*.  p.  43).

*  laitea  Cauuti,  p.  144;  Lege*  Gu-
lWIml,  p.  23.

English  Const.

FEUDAL  TENURES.

283

ritorial  jurisdiction  was  generally,  and  at  last  inseparably,
connected  with  feudal  tenure.  Of  this  right  we  meet  fre¬
quent  instances  in  the  laws  and  records  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,
though  not  in  those  of  an  early  date.  A  charter  of  Edred
grants  to  the  monastery  of  Croyland,  soc,  sac,  toll  team,  and
infangthef:  words  which  generally  went  together  in  the  de¬
scription  of  these  privileges,  and  signify  the  right  of  holding
a  court  to  which  all  freemen  of  the  territory  should  repair,  of
deciding  pleas  therein,  as  wTell  as  of  imposing  amercements
according  to  law,  of  taking  tolls  upon  the  sale  of  goods,  and
of  punishing  capitally  a  thief  taken  in  the  fact  within  the
limits  of  the  manor.1  Another  charter  from  the  Confessor
grants  to  the  abbey  of  Ramsey  similar  rights  over  all  who
were  suitors  to  the  sheriff’s  court,  subject  to  military  service,
and  capable  of  landed  possessions  ;  that  is,  as  I  conceive,  all
who  were  not  in  servitude.4  By  a  law  of  Ethelred,  none  but
the  king  could  have  jurisdiction  over  a  royal  thane.8  And
Domesday  Book  is  full  of  decisive  proofs  that  the  English
lords  had  their  courts  wherein  they  rendered  justice  to  their
suitors,  like  the  continental  nobility :  privileges  which  are
noticed  with  great  precision  in  that  record,  as  part  of  the
statistical  survey.  For  the  right  of  jurisdiction  at  a  time
when  punishments  were  almost  wholly  pecuniary  was  a  mat¬
ter  of  property,  and  sought  from  motives  of  rapacity  as  well
as  pride.

^  Whether  therefore  the  law  of  feudal  tenures  can  be  said
to  have  existed  in  England  before  the  Conquest  must  be  left
to  every  reader’s  determination.  Perhaps  any  attempt  to
decide  it  positively  would  end  in  a  verbal  dispute.  In  trac¬
king  the  history  of  every  political  institution,  three  things  are
to  be  considered,  the  principle,  the  form,  and  the  name.  The

l  Ingulfus,  p.  35.  I  do  not  pretend  to  Mr.  Kemble  is  of  opinion  that  the
assert  the  authenticity  of  these  charters,  words  granting  territorial  jurisdiction  do  ,
which  at  all  events  are  nearly  as  old  as  not  occur  in  any  genuine  charter  before
the  Conquest.  Hicks  calls  most  of  them  the  Confessor.  Codex  Diplom.  i.  43.
in  question.  Dissert.  Kpist.  p.  66.  Hut  They  are  of  constant  occurrence  in  those
some  later  antiquaries  seem  to  have  been  of  the  first  Norman  reigns.  But  the
more  favorable.  Archwologia,  vol.  xviii.  Normans  did  not  understand  them,  and
p.  49 ;  Nouveau  Traite  de  Diplomatique,  the  words  are  often  misspelled.  Ho

thinks,  Ullwtow,  Uni  the  rights  were

*  Hist.  Ramsey,  p.  454.  older  than  the  Conquest,  and  accounts

*  p.  118.  This  is  the  earliest  allusion,  for  the  rare  mention  of  them  by  the

if  I  am  not  mistaken,  to  territorial  juris-  somewhat  unsatisfactory  supposition  that
diction  in  the  Saxon  laws.  Probably  it  they  were  so  inherent  in  the  possession
was  not  frequent  till  near  the  end  of  the  of  land  os  not  to  require  particular  no-
teuth  century.  tice.  See  Speuce,  Equit.  Juris,  pp.64,68.

284

FEUDAL  TENURES.  Ciiap.  VIII.  Part  L

last  will  probably  not  be  found  in  any  genuine  Anglo-Saxon
record.1  Of  the  form  or  the  peculiar  ceremonies  and  inci¬
dents  of  a  regular  fief,  there  is  some,  though  not  much,  ap¬
pearance.  But  those  who  reflect  upon  the  dependence  in
which  free  and  even  noble  tenants  held  their  estates  of  other
subjects,  and  upon  the  privileges  of  territorial  jurisdiction,
will,  I  think,  perceive  much  of  the  intrinsic  character  of  the
feudsil  relation,  though  in  a  less  mature  and  systematic  shape
than  it  assumed  after  the  Norman  conquest.2

1  Feodum  twice  occurs  in  the  testa-
ment  of  Alfred  ;  but  it  does  not  appear
to  be  used  in  it*  proper  dense,  nor  do  I
apprehend  that  internment  to  nave  been
originally  written  in  Latin.  It  was
much  more  consonant  to  Alfred's  prac¬
tice  to  employ  his  own  language.

*  It  will  probably  be  never  disputed
again  that  lauds  were  granted  by  a  mili¬
tary  tenure  before  the  Couquest.  Thus,
besides  the  proof*  in  the  text,  In  the
laws  of  Canute  (c.  78)  :  — 44  And  the  man
who  shall  ilce  from  his  lord  or  from  his
comrade  by  reason  of  his  cowardice,  be  it
in  the  shipf\rd,  be  it  in  the  laiulfyrd,
let  him  forfeit  all  he  owns,  and  his  own
life ;  and  let  the  lord  seize  his  posses¬
sions,  and  his  land  which  he  previously
gave  hint  ;  and  if  he  have  bficland,  let
thut  go  into  the  king's  hands. ”  Ancient
Laws,  p.  180.  And  we  read  of  lands
called  hlafordsgi/u ,  lord's  gift.  Leges
Kthelred  I.,  Ancient  Laws,  p.  125.  Hut
these  were  not  always  feudal,  or  even
hereditary  ;  they  wen*  what  was  called
on  the  continent  pra*staria*,  granted  for
life  or  for  a  certain  term  ;  and  this,  as
it  appears  to  me,  may  have  been  the
proper  meaning  of  the  term  lam-lamls.

But  the  general  tenure  of  lands  was

still  alodial.  Taini  lex  eet,  says  a  cu¬
rious  document  on  the  rights,  that  is
obligations,  of  different  ranks,  publish¬
ed  by  Mr.  Thorpe,  —  ut  sit  diguus  rec-
titudine  testament)  sul  (hit  boc-rightti
wyrthe.  that  is,  perhaps,  bound  to  the
duties  implied  by  the  deed  which  creates
his  estates),  —  et  ut  Ita  facia t  pro  tern!
su&,  scilicet  expeditionetn  burkbotam  et
brigbotam.  Et  de  mu  It  is  terris  rnajus
landirectum  exsurgit  ad  hannutu  regis,
&c.  p.  186.  Here  we  find  the  well-
knowu  trinoda  necesiitas  of  alodial  laud,
with  other  contingent  liabilities  imposed
by  grant  or  usage.*

Wo  mav  probably  not  err  very  much
in  supposing  that  the  state  of  tenures  in
England  under  Canute  or  the  Confessor
was  a  good  deal  like  those  in  France
under  Charlemague  or  Charles  the  Bald,— -
an  alodial  trunk  with  numerous  branches
of  feudal  benefice  grafted  into  it.  But
the  conversion  of  the  one  mode  of  tenure
into  the  other,  so  frequeut  in  France,
does  not  api>cAr  by  evidence  to  have  pre
vailed  on  this  side  of  the  channel.

I  will  only  add  here  that  Mr.  Ppence,
an  authority  of  great  weight,  maintains  a
more  complete  establishment  of  the  feudal
polity  before  the  Conquest  than  1  have

•  Mr.  Kemble  has  printed  a  charter  of  Cenulf  king  of  Mercia  to  the  abbey  of
Abingdon,  in  820,  without  the  asterisk  of  spuriousness  (Codex  Diplom.  1.  20B);  and
it  is  quoted  by  Sir  F.  I*h1  grave  (voi.  1.  p.  169)  in  proof  of  military  tenures.  The  ex¬
pression,  however,  expedltionem  cum  dtiodeclm  cassotfii,  et  totidem  scM/isexerceant,
seems  not  a  little  against  Its  authenticity.  The  former  has  observed  that  the  testa¬
mentary  documents  before  the  Conquest,  made  by  men  who  were  under  a  superior
lord,  contain  a  clause  of  great  interest ;  namely,  an  earnest  prayer  to  the  lord  that
he  will  penult  the  will  to  stand  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  testator,  coupled
not  unfrequently  with  a  legacy  to  him  on  condition  of  his  so  doing,  or  to  soma
person  of  influence  about  him  for  intercession  on  the  testator's  behalf.  And  hence
he  infers  that,  *4  as  no  man  supplicates  for  that  which  he  Is  of  his  own  right  en¬
titled  to  enjoy,  It  appear*  as  If  these  great  vassals  of  the  crown  had  not  the  power
of  disposing  of  their  lauds  and  chattels  hut  as  the  king  might  |ieruiit ;  and,  iu  the
►  Mi-t  !  ruction  of  the  I «md  between  the  king  and  them,  all  that  they  gained  In
his  service  must  be  taken  to  fall  Into  his  hands  after  their  death.”  Introduction  to
Cod.  Dip.  p.  111.  This  inference  seems  hardly  borne  out  by  the  premises  :  a  man
might  sometimes  be  reduced  to  supplicate  a  superior  for  that  which  he  had  a  right
to  enjoy.

English  Const.

FEUDAL  TENURES.

285

done.  p.  48.  This  is  a  subject  on  which
it  is  hard  to  lay  down  a  definite  line.
But  I  must  protest  against  my  learned
friend’s  derivation  of  the  feudal  system
from  u  the  aristocratic  principle  that  pre¬
vailed  in  the  Roman  dominions  while  the
republic  endured,  and  which  was  incor¬
porated  with  the  principles  of  despotism
introduced  during  the  empire.”  It  is

because  the  aristocratic  principle  could
not  be  incorporated  with  that  of  despot¬
ism,  that  I  conceive  the  feudal  system  to
have  been  incapable  of  development,
whatever  inchoate  rudiments  of  it  may
be  traced,  until  a  powerful  territorial
aristocracy  had  rendered  despotism  no
longer  possible.  [1847.]

285

CONQUEST  OF  ENGLAND  Chap.  VIII.  Part  IL

PART  II.

THE  ANGLO-NORMAN  CONSTITUTION.

W!in!rm°nh?nTO,“titUti0?  — C*UJ<e*  of  the  Conciuwt  —  Policy  and  Character
Tj-ranny  —  Introduction  of  Keu.lal  Scrricce  —  Difference  between

the  fi r^Vonn'^n '“k-'i “ “  °f  lud  Enttl»uJ  —  0*u*«i  of  the  great  Power  of

CouncU-  l^  lrne  Lr?h_o  r  ™ry  (.;hanicU,r  nf  t^cir  Government- Ore. t
oounctl  IteelNtanee  of  the  Barons  to  John  —  Magna  Chart*  — It*  nrineinai  Ar-

—  j“(Uc!^ve°temeoPt.|UIA— 7l,vCO“'titUtiOD  Iu''luirc'  »  ,n,,re  liberal  Character
.  u1,urlclH  ^.'***111  of  tlie  Anglo-Normans  —  Curia  Kerfs.  Kxrhemier  Ac  —  Km-
Ub^hmeuto  the Common  Un-it,  Meet  in  fixing the ^IwtuUon- iJemarZ.
on  the  Lumtation  of  Aristocratic*!  Privilege*  In  England.  “

It  is  deemed  by  "William  of  Malmsbury  an  extraordinary
Conquest  of  work  of  Providence  that  the  English  should  have
England  by  given  up  all  for  lost  after  the  battle  of  Hastings,
where  only  a  small  though  brave  army  had  per¬
ished.1  It  was  indeed  the  conquest  of  a  great  kingdom  by
the  prince  of  a  single  province,  an  event  not  easily  paralleled,
where  the  vanquished  were  little,  if  at  all,  less  courageous
than  their  enemies,  and  where  no  domestic  factions  exiiosed
the  country  to  an  invader.  Yet  William  was  so  advan¬
tageously  situated,  that  his  success  seems  neither  unaccount¬
able  nor  any  matter  of  discredit  to  the  English  nation.  The
heir  ot  the  house  of  Cerdic  had  been  already  set  aside  at  the
election  of  Harold;  and  his  youth,  joined  to  a  mediocrity  of
understanding  which  excited  neither  esteem  nor  feur*  gave
no  encouragement  to  the  scheme  of  placing  him  upon  the
throne  in  those  moments  of  imminent  peril  which  followed
the  battle  ot  Hastings.  England  was  peculiarly  destitute  of
great  men.  The  weak  reigns  of  Ethelred  and  Edward  luid
rendered  the  government  a  mere  oligarchy,  and  reduced  the

1  M*lm*bury,  p.  63.  And  Henry  of
Huntingdon  says  emphatically,  Mille-
*imo  et  aexagesimo  aexto  anno  gratia),
perfeclt  domlnator  Deu*  de  gente  An-
glorum  tjnod  din  cogitaverat.  Oentl
namque  Norman  riorum  aspera-et  callilai
bradidit  eoa  ad  extenninandum.  p.  210.

>  Edgar,  after  one  or  two  Ineffectual

attempt*  to  recover  the  kingdom,  wal
treated  by  William  with  a  kindnea*
which  could  only  have  proceeded  from
contempt  of  hl«  understanding;  for  he
wa*  not  wanUng  In  courage  lie  U-cam*
the  Intimate  friend  of  Robert  duke  of
Normandy,  whoae  fortune,  an  well  as
character,  much  resembled  his  own.

English  Const.

BY  WILLIAM.

287

nobility  into  the  state  of  retainers  to  a  few  leading  houses,
the  representatives  of  which  were  every  way  unequal  to  meet
such  an  enemy  as  the  duke  of  Normandy.  If  indeed  the
concurrent  testimony  of  historians  does  not  exaggerate  his
forces,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  England  possessed  military
resources  sufficient  to  have  resisted  so  numerous  and  well-
appointed  an  army.1

This  forlorn  state  of  the  country  induced,  if  it  did  not  jus¬
tify,  the  measure  of  tendering  the  crown  to  "William,  which
he  had  a  pretext  or  title  to  claim,  arising  from  the  intentions,
perhaps  the  promise,  perhaps  even  the  testament  of  Edward,
which  had  more  weight  in  those  times  than  it  deserved,  and
was  at  least  better  than  the  naked  title  of  conquest.  And
this,  supported  by  an  oath  exactly  similar  to  that  taken  by  the
Anglo-Saxon  kings,  and  by  the  assent  of  the  multitude,  Eng¬
lish  as  well  as  Normans,  on  the  day  of  his  coronation,  gave  as
much  appearance  of  a  regular  succession  as  the  circumstances
of  the  times  would  permit.  Those  who  yielded  to  such  cir¬
cumstances  could  not  foresee,  and  were  unwilling  to  anticipate,

1  It  has  been  suggested,  in  the  second
Report  of  a  Committee  of  the  Lords’
House  on  the  Dignity  of  a  Peer,  to  which
I  shall  have  much  recourse  in  the  follow¬
ing  pages,*  that  “  the  facility  with  which
the  Conquest  had  been  achieved  seems
to  have  been,  in  part,  the  consequence  of
defects  in  the  Saxon  institutions,  and  of
the  want  of  a  military  force  similar  to
that  which  had  then  been  established  in
Normandy,  and  in  some  other  parts  of
the  continent  of  Europe.  The  adven¬
turers  in  the  army  of  William  were  of
those  countries  in  which  such  a  military
establishment  had  prevailed.”  p.  24.  It
caunot  be  said,  I  think,  that  there  were
any  manifest  defects  in  the  Saxon  insti¬
tutions,  so  far  as  related  to  the  defence
of  the  country  against  invasion.  It  was
part  of  the  trino'ia  necessitas,  to  which
all  alodial  landholders  were  bound.  Nor

is  it  quite  accurate  to  speak  of  a  military
force  then  established  in  Normandy,  or
anywhere  else.  We  apply  these  words  to
a  permanent  body  always  under  arms.
This  was  no  attribute  of  feudal  tenure,
however  the  frequency  of  war,  general  or
private,  may  have  inured  the  tenants  by
military  service  to  a  more  habitual  dis¬
cipline  than  the  thanes  of  England  ever
knew.  The  adventurers  in  William's
army  were  from  various  countries,  and
most  of  them,  doubtless,  had  served  be¬
fore,  but  whether  as  hired  mercenaries
or  no  we  have  probably  not  sufficient
means  of  determining.  The  practice  of
hiring  troops  does  not  attract  the  notice
of  historians,  I  believe,  in  so  early  an  age.
We  need  not,  however,  resort  to  this  con¬
jecture,  since  history  sufficiently  ex¬
plains  the  success  of  William.

•  This  Report  I  generally  quote  from  that  printed  in  1819;  but  in  1829  it  was
reprinted  with  corrections.  It  has  been  said  that  these  were  occasioned  by  the  stric¬
tures  of  Mr.  Allen,  in  the  35th  volume  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  not  more  remark¬
able  for  their  learning  and  acuteness  than  their  severity  on  the  Report.  The  cor¬
rections,  1  apprehend,  are  chiefly  confined  to  errors  of  names,  dates,  and  others  of
a  similar  kind,  which  no  doubt  had  been  copiously  pointed  out.  But  it  has  not
appeared  to  me  that  the  Lords’  Committee  have  altered,  in  any  considerable  degree,
toe  positions  upon  which  the  reviewer  animadverts.  It  was  hardly,  indeed,  to  be
expected  that  the  supposed  compiler  of  the  Report,  the  late  Lord  Redesdale,
having  taken  up  his  own  line  of  opinion,  would  abandon  it  on  the  suggestions
of  one  whose  comments,  though  extremely  able,  and  often,  in  the  eyes^of  many,
well  founded,  are  certainly  not  couched  in  the  most  conciliatory  or  respectful
language

288

TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

the  bitterness  of  that  servitude  which  William  and  Ills  Nor¬
man  followers  were  to  bring  upon  their  country.

The  commencement  of  his  administration  was  tolerably
Hi*  conduct  5-*qu*t-ible.  Though  many  confiscations  took  place,
at  first  in  order  to  gratify  the  Norman  army,  yet  the  mass
ot  property  was  left  in  the  hands  of  its  former  pos¬
sessors.  Offices  of  high  trust  were  bestowed  upon  English¬
men,  even  upon  those  whose  family  renown  might  have  raised
the  most  aspiring  thoughts.1  But  partly  through  the  inso-
lt  becomes  lence  and  injustice  of  William’s  Norman  vassals,
niriu  tJra“  Partty  through  the  suspiciousness  natural  to  a  man
conscious  of  having  overturned  the  national  govern¬
ment,  his  yoke  soon  became  more  heavy.  The  English  were
oppressed  ;  they  rebelled,  were  subdued,  and  oppressed  again.
All  their  risings  were  without  concert,  and  desperate ;  they
wanted  men  fit  to  head  them,  and  fortresses  to  sustain  their
revolt2  After  a  very  few  years  they  sank  in  despair,  and
yielded  for  a  century  to  the  indignities  of  a  comparatively
small  body  of  strangers  without  a  single  tumult.  So  possible
is  it  for  a  nation  to  be  kept  in  permanent  servitude,  even  with¬
out  losing  its  reputation  for  individual  courage,  or  its  desire
of  freedom !  *

The  tyranny  of  William  displayed  less  of  passion  or  inso-

1  Ordericu*  Vital  In,  p.  520  (in  Da
Chwne.  Hist.  Norm.  Script.).

*  Oruericus  notices  the  want  of  castles
in  England  an  one  rriuton  why  rebel¬
lion*  were  easily  quelled,  p.  511.  Fail¬
ing  in  their  attempt*  at  a  generous  re¬
sistance,  the  English  endeavored  to  get
rid  of  their  enemies  by  assassination,  to
which  many  Normans  became  victims.
>Vllliam  therefore  enacted  that  in  every
case  of  mur.ltr ,  which  strictly  meant  the
killing  of  any  one  by  an  unknown  hand,
the  hundred  should  be  liuble  in  a  flue,
unless  they  could  prove  the  person  mur-
dered  to  be  an  Englishman.  This  was
tried  by  an  Inquest,  upon  what  was  called
a  presentment  of  English™.  But  from
the  reign  of  Henry  II..  the'  two  nations
having  been  very  much  intermingled,
this  inquiry,  as  we  learn  from  the  Dia¬
logue  de  Scarcario,  p.  28,  censed  ;  and  in
every  case  of  a  freeman  murdered  br  per¬
son*  unknown  the  huudred  was  fined.
See  however  Brarton,  I.  ili.  e.  15.

*  The  bravo  resistance  of  He  re  ward  In
the  fens  of  Lincolu  ami  Cambridge  is  well
told  by  M.  Thierry,  from  Ingulfus  and
Gaimar.  Conquete  d’Anglet.  par  lee
Norxuands,  vol.  11.  p.  188.  Turner  had

given  it  in  some  detail  from  the  former,
llereward  ultimately  made  his  peace  with
William,  ami  recovered  ills  estate.  Ac¬
cording  to  Ingulfus,  he  died  peaceably,
and  was  buried  at  Cropland;  ac«*<irdJng
to  Gaimar,  lie  was  assassinited  in  his
house  by  some  Normans.  The  latter  ac¬
count  is  confirmed  by  an  early  chronicler,
from  whom  an  extract  is  given  by  Mr.
Wright.  A  more  detailed  memoir  of  lleiv-
wani  (De  Gestis  Herewardl  Saxo  uis)  Is
found  in  the  chartuiary  of  8  watt  Mam  Ab¬
bey,  now  preserved  in  Peterborough  Ca¬
thedral,  and  said  to  be  as  old  as  the
twelfth  ceutury.  Mr.  Wright  published
It  in  1888,  from  a  copy  in  the  library  of
Trinity  College.  Cambridge.  If  the  au¬
thor  is  to  be  believed,  lie  had  conversed
with  some  companions  of  llereward.  But
such  testimony  Is  often  feigned  by  the
mediaeval  sent  I  romancers.  Though  tha
writer  appear*  to  affect  a  different  origin,
he  is  too  full  of  Anglo-Saxon  sympathies
to  be  disguised  ;  ami  iu  fact,  he  has  evi¬
dently  borrowed  greatly  from  exaggerated
legends,  perhaps  metrical,  current  among
the  English,  as  to  the  early  life  of  Here-
ward,  to  which  Ingulfus,  or  whoever  par¬
sons  ted  him,  cursorily  alludes.

English  Const.  TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.

289

lence  than  of  that  indifference  about  human  suffering  which
distinguishes  a  cold  and  far-sighted  statesman.  Impressed  by
the  frequent  risings  of  the  English  at  the  commencement  of
his  reign,  and  by  the  recollection,  as  one  historian  observes,
that  the  mild  government  of  Canute  had  only  ended  in  the
expulsion  of  the  Danish  line,1  he  formed  the  scheme  of  rivet¬
ing  such  fetters  upon  the  conquered  nation,  that  all  resistance
should  become  impracticable.  Those  who  had  obtained  hon¬
orable  offices  were  successively  deprived  of  them  ;  even  the
bishops  and  abbots  of  English  birth  were  deposed ;  2  a  stretch
of  power  very  singular  in  that  age.  Morcar,  one  of  the  most
illustrious  English,  suffered  perpetual  imprisonment.  Wal-
theoff,  a  man  of  equally  conspicuous  birth,  lost  his  head  upon
a  scaffold  by  a  very  harsh  if  not  iniquitous  sentence.  It  was
so  rare  in  those  times  to  inflict  judicially  any  capital  punish¬
ment  upon  persons  of  such  rank,  that  his  death  seems  to  have
produced  more  indignation  and  despair  in  England  than  any
single  circumstance.  The  name  of  Englishman  was  turned
into  a  reproach.  None  of  that  race  for  a  hundred  years  were
raised  to  any  dignity  in  the  state  or  church.3  Their  language

1  Malmsbury,  p.  104.

2  Hoveden,  p.  453.  This  was  done
with  the  concurrence  and  sanction  of  the
pope,  Alexander  II.,  so  that  the  stretch
of  power  was  by  Rome  rather  than  by
'William.  It  must  pass  for  a  gross  vio¬
lation  of  ecclesiastical  as  well  as  of  na¬
tional  rights,  and  Lanfranc  cannot  be
reckoned,  notwithstanding  his  distin¬
guished  name,  as  any  better  than  an  in¬
trusive  bishop  He  showed  his  arrogant
scorn  of  the  Knglish  nation  in  another
and  rather  a  singular  manner.  They
were  excessively  proud  of  their  national
saints,  some  of  whom  were  little  known,
and  whose  barbarous  names  disgusted
Italian  ears.  Angli  inter  quos  vivimus,
said  the  foreign  priests,  quosdam  sibi  in-
stituerunt  sanctoe,  quorum  incerta  sunt
merita.  This  might  be  true  enough;  but
the  same  measure  should  have  been  inet-
ed  to  others.  Thierry,  vol.  ii.  p.  168,
edit.  1830.  The  Norman  bishops,  and
the  primate  especially,  set  themselves  to
disparage,  and  iu  fact  to  dispossess,  St.
Aldhelm,  St.  Klflg,  and,  for  aught  we
know,  St.  Switliin,  St.  Werburg,  St.  Ebb,
aud  St.  Alphuge :  names,  it  must  be
owned,

“  That  would  have  made  Quintilian
stare  and  gasp.”

We  may  judge  what  the  eminent  native
Of  PavU  thought  of  such  a  hagiology.
VOL.  1L  19

The  English  church  found  herself,  as  it
were,  with  an  attainted  peerage.  But
the  calender  withstood  these  innovations.

Mr.  Tumor,  in  his  usual  spirit  of  pane¬
gyric,  says,  —  “He  (William)  made  im¬
portant  changes  among  the  English
clergy  ;  he  caused  Stigand  and  others  to
be  deposed,  and  he  filled  their  places
with  men  from  Normandy  and  France,
who  were  distinguished  by  the  characters
of  piety,  decorous  morals,  and  a  love  of
literature.  This  measure  was  an  impor¬
tant  addition  to  the  civilization  of  the
island,”  &c.  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.
104.  Admitting  this  to  be  partly  true,
though  he  would  have  found  by  no  means
so  favorable  an  account  of  the  Norman
prelates  in  Ordericus  Vitalis,  if  he  had
read  a  few  pages  beyond  the  passages  to
which  he  refers,  is  it  consonant  to  his¬
torical  justice  that  a  violent  net,  like  the
deposition  of  almost  all  the  Anglo-Saxon
hierarchy,  should  be  spoken  of  in  a  tone
of  praise,  which  the  whole  tenor  of  the
paragraph  conveys?

3  Beoket  is  said  to  have  been  the  first
Englishman  who  reached  any  consider¬
able  dignity.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  Hist,  of
Henry  II.  vol.  ii.  p.  22.  And  Kadmcr
declares  that  Henry  I.  would  not  place
a  single  Englishman  at  the  head  of  a  mon¬
astery.  81  Angitis  erat.  nulla  vlrtus,  ut
honoro  aliquo  dignus  judicaretur,  cum
poterat  adjuvare.  p.  110.

290

TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.  Chap.  Till.  Tart  II.

and  the  characters  in  which  it  was  written  were  rejected  as
barbarous;  in  all  schools,  if  we  trust  an  authority  often  quoted,
children  were  taught  French,  and  the  laws  were  administered
in  no  other  tongue.1  It  is  well  known  that  this  use  of  French
in  all  legal  proceedings  lasted  till  the  reign  of  Edward  III.
Several  English  nobles,  desperate  of  the  fortunes  of  their
country,  sought  refuge  in  the  court  of  Constantinople,  and  ap¬
proved  their  valor  in  the  wars  of  Alexius  against  another
Norman  conqueror,  scarcely  less  celebrated  than  their  own,
Robert  Guiscard.  Under  the  name  of  Varangians,  those  true
and  faithful  supporters  of  the  Byzantine  empire  preserved  to
its  dissolution  their  ancient  Saxon  idiom.2

An  extensive  spoliation  of  property  accompanied  these
revolutions.  It  appears  by  the  great  national  survey  of
Domesday  Book,  completed  near  the  close  of  the  Conqueror’s
reign,*  that  the  tenants  in  capite  of  the  crown  were  generally

1  Ingulfus,  p.  61.  Tanttim  tunc  An-
gHcoa  abominati  Mint,  ut  qu&ntocunque
merito  pollereut,  de  diguitatibus  repel  le-
bantur;  et  multo  minus  habile*  alien!-
genre  de  quicunquo  alii  natione,  quie
sub  coelo  est,  extitisseut,  gratanter  aatu-
merentur.  Ipsuni  etiam  idioma  tan  turn
abhorrebant,  quod  leges  temr,  statutaque
Auglicorum  reguin  iingul  Gallic*  trac-
tarentur ;  et  pueris  etiaui  in  scholia  prin-
cipia  litcraruui  grammatica  Gallic^,  ac
non  Auglice  trade  rent  ur  ;  modus  etiam
scribcndl  Anglicus  omittcretur,  et  modus
Gallicus  in  chartis  et  in  libria  omnibus
admitteretur.

But  the  passage  In  Ingulfus,  quoted
in  support  of  this  position,  has  been
placed  by  8ir  F.  Pa  I  grave  among  tho
proofs  that  we  hare  a  forgery  of  the  four¬
teenth  century  in  that  historian,  the  facts
Wing  in  nbsolute  contradiction  to  him.
“  Bwi*  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  we  can¬
not  discover  a  deed  or  law  drawn  or  com¬
posed  in  French.  Instead  of  prohibiting
the  English  language,  It  was  employed
by  the  Conqueror  and  his  successors  in
their  charters  until  the  reign  of  Henry
II.,  when  it  was  superseded,  not  by  the
French,  but  by  the  Latin  language,  which
had  been  gradually  gaining  or  rather  re¬
gaining  ground.'*  Kdinb.  Rev.  xxxiv.
262.  ‘‘The  Latin  language  had  given
way  in  a  gr*mt  measure,  from  the  time  of
Canute,  to  the  vernacular  Anglo-Saxon.
Several  charters  in  the  latter  language
occur  before;  but  for  fifty  yearsending
with  the  Conquest,  out  of  264  (published
in  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Codex  Dip¬
lomatic  us).  137  are  in  Anglo-Saxon,  and
oulv  117  in  Latin.*'  Kemble's  Preface,
p.  6.

If  I  have  rightly  translated,  in  the  text
of  Ingulfus,  leges  trartarrntur  by  admin¬
istered*  tho  falsehood  is  manifest;  siuce
the  laws  were  administered  in  the  county
and  hundred  courts,  and  certainly  not
there  in  French.  1  really  do  not  per¬
ceive  how  this  passage  could  have  been
written  by  Ingulfus,  who  must  have
known  the  truth ;  at  all  events,  his  testi¬
mony  must  be  worth  little  on  any  sub¬
ject,  if  he  could  so  palpably  misrepresent
a  matter  of  public  notoriety.  The  sup¬
position  of  entire  forgery  is  one  which  we
should  not  admit  without  full  proof;
but,  In  this  instance,  there  are  perhaps
fewer  difficulties  on  this  side  than  on
that  of  authenticity.

*  Gibbon,  vol.  x.  p.  223.  No  writer,
except  perhaps  the  Saxon  Chronicler,  is
so  full  of  William's  tyranny  as  Orderirus
Vi tnl is.  See  particularly  p.  507,  612,
514.  521,  623,  in  Du  Cbesne,  Hist.  Norm.
Script.  Orderirus  was  an  Kngllshman,
but  passed  at  ten  years  old.  a.D.  1084,
into  Normandy,  where  he  became  pro¬
fessed  in  the  monastery  of  Ku.  Ibid.  p.
924.

*  The  regularity  of  the  course  adopted
when  this  record  was  compile!  Is  very
remarkable;  and  affords  a  satisfactory
proof  that  the  business  of  the  government
was  well  conducted,  and  with  much  less
rudeness  than  Is  usually  supposed.  The
coni  miss  loners  were  furnished  with  In¬
terrogatories,  upon  which  they  examined
the  jurors  of  the  shire  and  hundred,  and
also  such  other  witnesses  as  they  thought
expedient.

file  subsrrfbltur  Inquislclo  terra  ruin
auomodo  Barones  fteges  inqalrunt,  vide¬
licet,  per  sacrament  urn  vicecomltis  Srtrai

English  Const.  TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.

291

foreigners.  Undoubtedly  there  were  a  few  left  in  almost
every  county  who  still  enjoyed  the  estates  which  they  held
under  Edward  the  Confessor,  free  from  any  superiority  but
that  of  the  crown,  and  were  denominated,  as  in  former  times,
the  king’s  thanes.1  Cospatric,  son  perhaps  of  one  of  that
name  who  had  possessed  the  earldom  of  Northumberland,
held  forty-one  manors  in  Yorkshire,  though  many  of  them  are
stated  in  Domesday  to  be  waste.  But  inferior  freeholders
were  much  less  disturbed  in  their  estates  than  the  higher  class.
Brady  maintains  that  the  English  had  suffered  universally  a
deprivation  of  their  lands.  But  the  valuable  labors  of  Sir
Henry  Ellis,  in  presenting  us  with  a  complete  analysis  of
Domesday  Book,  afford  an  opportunity,  by  his  list  of  mesne
tenants  at  the  time  of  the  survey,  to  form  some  approximation
to  the  relative  numbers  of  English  and  foreigners  holding
manors  under  the  immediate  vassals  of  the  crown.  The  bap¬
tismal  names  (there  are  rarely  any  others)  are  not  always
conclusive ;  but,  on  the  whole,  we  learn  by  a  little  practice  to
distinguish  the  Norman  from  the  Anglo-Saxon.  It  would  be
manifest,  by  running  the  eye  over  some  pages  of  this  list,  how
considerably  mistaken  is  the  supposition  that  few  of  English
birth  held  entire  manors.  Though  I  will  not  now  affirm  or
deny  that  they  were  a  majority,  they  form  a  large  proportion
of  nearly  8000  mesne  tenants,2  who  are  summed  up  by  the
diligence  of  Sir  Henry  Ellis.  And  we  may  presume  that
they  were  in  a  very  much  greater  proportion  among  the
“  liberi  homines,”  who  held  lands,  subject  only  to  free  services,
seldom  or  never  very  burdensome.  It  may  be  added  that

et  omnium  Baronum  et  eoruin  Franei-
genarum  et  tocius  centuriatus —  presbi-
teri  praopositi  VI  villani  u ni use uj usque
rillae  [sic]. —  Deinde  quomodo  vocatur
luansio.  quis  tenuit  earn  tempore  Regis
Edwardi ,  quis  modo  tenet,  quot  hi  das,
quot  carrucataj  in  domino  quot  homines,
quot  rillani,  quot  cotarii,  quot  servi,
quot  liberi  homines,  quot  sochemanni,
quantum  silvse,  quantum  prati,  quot
p&sruorum,  quot  molidenae,  quot  piscinae,
quantum  est  additum  vel  ablatum,  quan¬
tum  valebat  totum  simul  ;  et  quantum
modo;  quantum  ibi  quisque  liber  homo
▼el  sochemanus  habuit  vel  habet.  Hoc
totum  tripliciter,  scilicet  tempore  Regis
JElwardi ;  et  quando  Rex  WtUUlmus
dedit;  et  quomodo  sit  modo,  et  si  plus
potest  haberi  quani  habetttur.  Isti  ho¬
mines  jura  verunt  (then  follow  the  name').
Inquisitio  Elieusis,  p.  497.  Palgrave,  ii.
444.

1  Brady,  whose  unfairness  always
keeps  pace  with  his  ability,  pretends
that  all  these  were  menial  officers  of  the
king's  household.  But  notwithstanding
the  difficulty  of  disproving  these  gratui¬
tous  suppositions,  it  is  pretty  certaiu
that  many  of  the  English  proprietors  in
Domesday  could  not  have  been  of  this
description.  See  p.  99,  163,  218,  219,
and  other  places.  The  question,  how¬
ever,  was  not  worth  a  battle,  though  it
makes  a  figure  in  the  controversy  of
Normans  and  Anti-Normans,  between
Dugdale  and  Brady  ou  the  one  side,  and
Tyrrell,  Petyt,  and  Attwood  on  the
other.

*  Ellis’s  Introduction  to  Domesday,
vol.  ii.  p.  811.  “  The  teuauts  in  capite,
including  ecclesiastical  corporations,
amounted  scarcely  to  1400 ;  the  under¬
tenants  were  7871.”

292

TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.  Chap.  Till.  Part  II.

many  Normans,  as  we  learn  from  history,  married  English
heiresses,  rendered  so  frequently,  no  doubt,  by  the  violent
deaths  of  t heir  lathers  and  brothers,  but  still  transmitting
ancient  rights,  as  well  as  native  blood,  to  their  posterity.

I  his  might  induce  us  to  suspect  that,  great  as  the  spoliation
must  appear  in  modem  times,  and  almost  completely  as  the
nation  was  excluded  from  civil  power  in  the  commonwealth,
there  is  some  exaggeration  in  the  language  of  those  writers
who  represent  them  as  universally  reduced  to  a  state  of  penury
and  servitude.  And  this  suspicion  may  be  in  some  degree
just.  1  et  these  writers,  and  especially  the  most  English  in
feeling  ot  them  all,  M.  Thierry,  are  warranted  by  the  language
of  contemporary  authorities.  An  important  passage  in  the
Dialogus  de  Scaceario,  written  towards  the  end  of  Henry
III.  s  reign,  tends  greatly  to  diminish  the  favorable  impres¬
sion  which  the  Saxon  names  of  so  many  mesne  tenants  in
Domesday  Book  would  create.  If  we  may  trust  Gervase  of
Tilbury,  author  of  this  little  treatise,  the  estates  of  those  who
had  borne  arms  against  AY  illiam  were  alone  confiscated ;
though  the  others  were  subjected  to  the  feudal  superiority  of
a  Norman  lord.  But  when  these  lords  abused  their  power
to  dispossess  the  native  tenants,  a  clamor  was  raised  by  the
English,  and  complaint  made  to  the  king;  by  whom  it  was
ordered  (if  we  rightly  understand  a  passage  not  devoid  of
obscurity)  that  the  tenant  might  make  a  bargain  with  his  lord,
so  as  to  secure  himself  in  possession ;  but  that  none  of  the
English  should  have  any  right  of  succession,  a  fresh  agree¬
ment  with  the  lord  being  required  on  every  change  of  tenancy.
1  he  Latin  words  will  be  found  below.1  This,  as  here  expressed,

Post  regni  eonquisitionem,  pout  ju«-
tAin  rebellium  subventioncm,  cum  rex
lp*e  i^hique  procures  Inct  noea  perl  us -
trarent,  furta  wit  inquisitio  diligens,  qul
fuerunt  qui  contra  regent  in  hello  dinti-
cantea  per  fu train  se  wilmYcmnt.  Hi*
omnibus  et  item  ha*  red  i  bus  rorum  qui
In  belio  occubuemnt,  apes  omuls  terra-
rum  et  fuudoruut  atque  rwlitu uin  quos
ante  possederant,  pravlusa  cut;  magnum
namque  reputabant  frui  riUr  beneflcJo
sub  inlmicis.  Verura  qui  rocati  ad  bel-
lum  need  urn  coot**  tie  rant.  Tel  familinri-
bus  Tel  quibuslibet  neceasartis  occupati
negotiis  non  Interfuerant,  cum  traetu
tem ports  deTotis  obsequils  gratiam  do-
mi  riorum  possedissent  slue  spa  sucres-
sionis,  fllii  tan  tutu  pro  roluptatr  [sir.  to-
luntate’]  tauten  domi  norum  pnasidei*
cceperunt  succedenta  vero  tern  pore  cum

dontinis  suls  odiosi  passim  a  possessionl-
bus  pellerentur,  nec  esset  qui  ablatis
restituerit,  communis  indigenarum  ad
ri*gvm  perTenlt  querimonia,  quasi  »io
omnibus  exosi  et  rebus  spoliatis  ad  alien-
igenas  transire  coherent ur.  Communicato
Uutum  super  his  ronsilio.  decretum  est,
ut  quod  a  dominis  nuis  ertgentibus
meritis  interre niente  partione  legitims
poterant  obtinere,  illis  Ineiolabilis  Jure
concederentur  ;  ca  terum  autem  uotniua
succession  is  a  tempo  rib  us  subsets-  gen  tig
nihil  sib!  Tiudkaxent.  .  .  .  .*<ic  igitur
quUquis  de  gente  subacta  fundoa  Tel
aliquhl  hujustnodi  possidet,  non  quej
ratione  suceeasionis  debert  sibi  ri.ie-
batur,  adept  us  eat;  sed  quod  solumtnodo
meritis  suis  exigentibus,  Tel  aliqua  par-
tiooe  interrenleute,  obtinuit.  bial.  da
Scaceario,  c.  10.

English  Const.  TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  I.

293

suggests  something  like  an  uncertain  relief  at  the  lord’s  will,
and  paints  the  condition  of  the  English  tenant  as  wretchedly
dependent.  But  an  instrument  published  by  Spelman,  and
which  w'ill  be  found  in  Wilkins,  Leg.  Ang.  Sax.  p.  287,  gives  a
more  favorable  view,  and  asserts  that  William  permitted  those
who  had  taken  no  part  against  him  to  retain  their  lands;
though  it  appears  by  the  very  same  record  that  the  Normans
did  not  much  regard  the  royal  precept.

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  legal  condition  of  the
English  mesne  tenant,  by  knight-service  or  socage,  (for  the
case  of  villeins  is  of  course  not  here  considered,)  during  the
first  two  Norman  reigns,  it  seems  evident  that  he  was  protected
by  the  charter  of  Henry  I.  in  the  hereditary  possession  of  his
lands,  subject  only  to  a  “  lawful  and  just  relief  towards  his
lord.”  For  this  charter  is  addressed  to  all  the  liege  men  of
the  crown,  “  French  and  English  and  purports  to  abolish  all
the  evil  customs  by  which  the  kingdom  had  been  oppressed,
extending  to  the  tenants  of  the  barons  as  well  as  those  of  the
crown.  We  cannot  reasonably  construe  the  language  in  the
Dialogue  of  the  Exchequer,  as  if  in  that  late  age  the  English
tenant  hail  no  estate  of  fee-simple.  If  this  had  been  the
case,  there  could  not  have  been  the  difficulty,  which  he  men¬
tions  in  another  place,  of  distinguishing  among  freemen  or
freeholders  (liberi  homines)  the  Norman  blood  from  the
Englishman,  which  frequent  intermarriage  had  produced,
lie  must,  we  are  led  to  think,  either  have  copied  some  other
writer,  or  made  a  careless  and  faulty  statement  of  his  owm.
But,  at  the  present,  we  are  only  considering  the  state  of  the
English  in  the  reign  of  the  Conqueror.  And  here  we  have,
on  the  one  hand,  a  manifest  proof  from  the  Domesday  record
that  they  retained  the  usufruct,  in  a  very  great  measure,  of
the  land ;  and  on  the  other,  the  strong  testimony  of  contem¬
porary  historians  to  the  spoliation  and  oppression  which  they
endured.  It  seems  on  the  whole  most  probable  that,  notwith¬
standing  innumerable  acts  of  tyranny,  and  a  general  exposure
to  contumely  and  insolence,  they  did  in  fact  possess  what  they
are  recorded  to  have  possessed  by  the  Norman  Commission¬
ers  of  1085.

The  vast  extent  of  the  Norman  estates  in  capite  is  apt  to
deceive  us.  In  reading  of  a  baron  wdio  held  forty  or  fifty  or
one  hundred  manors,  we  are  prone  to  fancy  his  wealth  some¬
thing  like  w'hat  a  similar  estate  would  produce  at  this  day.

294

TYRANNY  OF  WILLIAM  L  CiiAr.  VIII.  Part  II.

But  if  we  look  at  the  next  words,  we  shall  continually  find
that  some  one  else  held  of  him ;  and  this  was  a  holding  by
knight’s  service,  subject  to  feudal  incidents  no  doubt,  but  not
leaving  the  seigniory  very  lucrative,  or  giving  any  right  of
possessory  ownership  over  the  land.  The  real  possessions
ot  the  tenant  of  a  manor,  whether  holding  in  chief  or  not,
consisted  in  the  demesne  lands,  the  produce  of  which  he  ob¬
tained  without  cost  by  the  labor  of  the  villeins,  and  in  what¬
ever  other  payments  they  might  be  bound  to  make  in  money
or  kind.  It  will  be  remembered,  what  lavs  been  more  than
once  inculcated,  that  at  this  time  the  villani  and  bordarii,  that
is,  ceorls,  were  not  like  the  villeins  of  Bracton  and  Littleton,
destitute  of  rights  in  their  property  ;  their  condition  was  tend-
ing  to  the  lower  stage,  and  with  a  Norman  lord  they  were  in
much  danger  of  oppression  ;  but  they  were  “law-worthy,”  they
had  a  civil  status  (to  pass  from  one  technical  style  to  another),
for  a  century  after  the  Conquest

1  et  I  would  not  extenuate  the  calamities  of  this  great
revolution,  true  though  it  be  that  much  good  was  brought  out
of  them,  and  -hat  we  owe  no  trifling  part  of  what  inspires
self-esteem  to  the  Norman  element  of  our  population  and  our
polity.  England  passed  under  the  yoke ;  she  endured  the
arrogance  of  foreign  conquerors  ;  her  children,  even  though
their  loss  in  revenue  may  have  been  exaggerated,  and  still  it
was  enormous,  became  a  lower  race,  not  called  to  the  coun¬
cils  of  their  sovereign,  not  sharing  his  trust  or  his  bounty.
They  were  in  a  far  different  condition  from  the  provincial
Homans  after  the  conquest  of  Gaul,  even  if,  which  is  hardly
possible  to  determine,  their  actual  deprivation  of  lands  should
have  been  less  extensive.  For  not  only  they  did  not  for  sev¬
eral  reigns  occupy  the  honorable  stations  which  sometimes
fell  to  the  lot  ot  the  Roman  subject  of  Clovis  or  Alaric,  but
they  had  a  great  deal  more  freedom  and  importance  to  lose.
Nor  had  they  a  protecting  church  to  mitigate  barbarous  su¬
periority ;  their  bishops  were  degraded  and  in  exile;  the
footstep  of  the  invader  was  at  their  altars;  their  monasteries
were  plundered,  and  the  native  monks  insulted.  Home
herself  looked  with  little  favor  on  a  church  which  had  pre¬
served  some  measure  of  independence.  Strange  contrast  to
the  triumphant  episcopate  of  the  Merovingian  kings ! 1

*  J1*?  0p1pr*‘",®B:  of  EHK'Uh  duHnx  dMrrlhed  by  the  Norm. a  hl-torUn.
the  Brat  reign,  after  the  Conijuatt  i.  fully  thenuelTea,  u  well  u  by  the  Saxon

English  Const.  DEVASTATION  OF  YORKSHIRE.

295

Besides  the  severities  exercised  upon  the  English  after
every  insurrection,  two  instances  of  William’s  un-  D  ^  t
sparing  cruelty  are  well  known,  the  devastation  of  0f  Yorkshire
Yorkshire  and  of  the  New  Forest.  In  the  former,  <‘"d  N'e"'
which  had  the  tyrant  s  plea,  necessity,  for  its  pre¬
text,  an  invasion  being  threatened  from  Denmark,  the  whole
country  between  the  Tyne  and  the  Humber  was  laid  so  des¬
olate,  that  for  nine  years  afterwards  there  was  not  an  inhab¬
ited  village,  and  hardly  an  inhabitant,  left ;  the  wasting  of
this  district  having  been  followed  by  a  famine,  which  swept
away  the  whole  population.1  That  of  the  New  Forest,
though  undoubtedly  less  calamitous  in  its  effects,  seems  even
more  monstrous  from  the  frivolousness  of  the  cause.2  He
afforested  several  other  tracts.  And  these  favorite  demesnes
of  the  Norman  kings  were  protected  by  a  system  of  iniqui¬
tous  and  cruel  regulations,  called  the  Forest  Laws,  which  it
became  afterwards  a  great  object  with  the  assertors  of  liber¬
ty  to  correct.  The  penalty  lor  killing  a  stag  or  a  boar  was
loss  of  eyes ;  for  William  loved  the  great  game,  says  the
Saxon  Chronicle,  as  if  he  had  been  their  father.8

A  more  general  proof  of  the  ruinous  oppression  of  William
the  Conqueror  may  be  deduced  from  the  comparative  condi-

Chronicle.  Their  testimonies  are  well
collected  by  M.  Thierry,  in  the  second
volume  of  his  valuable  history.

i  Malmsbury,  p.  103;  Hoveden,  p.  451;
Orderic.  Vi  tails,  p.  514.  The  desolation
of  Yorkshire  continued  in  Malmsbury ’s
time,  sixty  or  seventy  years  afterwards;
nudum  omnium  solum  usque  ad  hoc
eti&m  tempus.

*  Malmsbury,  p.  111.

S  Obion.  Saxon,  p.  101  M  Thierry
conjectures  that  these  severe  regulations
had  a  deeper  motive  than  the  mere  pres¬
ervation  of  game,  and  were  intended  to
prevent  the  English  from  assembling  in
arms  on  pretence  of  the  chase.  Vol.  ii.
p.  *257.  Hut  perhaps  this  is  not  neces¬
sary.  We  know  that  a  disproportionate
severity  has  often  guarded  the  beasts  aud
birds  of  chase  from  depredation.

I  60  Admits  (Edinburgh  Kev.  xwi.
355)  that  the  forest-laws  seem  to  have
been  enacted  by  the  king's  sole  author¬
ity;  or,  as  we  may  rather  say,  that  they
were  considered  as  a  part  of  his  preroga¬
tive.  The  royal  forests  were  protected
by  extraordinary  penalties  even  before
the  Conquest.  44  The  royal  forests  were
part  of  the  demesne  of  the  crowu.  Tuey
were  not  included  in  the  territorial  divis¬

ions  of  the  kingdom,  civil  or  ecclesias¬
tical,  nor  governed  by  the  ordinary  courts
of  law,  but  were  set  apart  for  the  recrea¬
tion  and  diversion  of  the  king,  as  waste
lands,  which  he  might  use  and  dispose  of
at  pleasure.”  44  Forest®,”  says  Sir  Henry
Spelman,  “  nec  villas  propria  accepere,
nec  parochias,  nec  de  cor  pore  alicujus
comitatUs  vel  episcopates  habit®  sunt,
sed  extraneum  quid- lam  et  feris  datum,
ferino  jure,  non  civili,  non  municipal!
fruebantur;  regem  in  omnibus  agnos-
centes  dominum  unicurn  et  ex  arbitrio
disponentem.”  Mr.  Allen  quotes  after¬
wards  a  passage  from  the  4  Dialogus
de  Scac carlo,’  which  indicates  the  pecu¬
liarity  of  the  forest-laws.  4k  Fores  tar  um
ratio,  poena  quoque  vel  absolutio  delin-
quen tin  in  in  eos,  sive  pecuniaria  fuerifc
Hive  corporalis,  seorsim  ab  aliis  regni  ju-
diciis  seccrnitur,  et  solius  regis  arbitrio,
vel  cujuslibet  famiiiaris  ad  hoc  gpecialiter
deputati  suhjicitur.  Legibus  quidem
prop ri is  subsistit ;  quas  non  communi
regni  jure,  sed  voluntaria  priuclpum  in-
stitutione  subnixas  dicunt.”  The  forests
were,  to  use  a  word  in  rather  an  op¬
posite  sense  to  the  usual,  an  oasis  of
despotism  iu  the  midst  of  the  old  com¬
mon  law.

226

RICHES  OF  WILLIAM  I.  Ciiap.  VIII.  Part.  H.

Proof*  of  tlon  ^ie  English  towns  in  the  reign  of  Edward
depopulation  the  Confessor,  and  at  the  compilation  of  Domesday.
aily'itook!*8'  At  .t,ie  former  epoch  there  were  in  York  1607  in¬
habited  houses,  at  the  latter  967  ;  at  the  former
there  were  in  Oxford  721,  at  the  latter  243  ;  of  172  houses
in  Dorchester,  100  were  destroyed;  of  243  in  Derby,  103;
of  487  in  Chester,  205.  Some  other  towns  had  sutlered  less,
but  scarcely  any  one  fails  to  exhibit  marks  of  a  decayed
population.  As  to  the  relative  numbers  of  the  peasantry
and  value  of  lands  at  these  two  periods,  it  would  not  be  easy
to  assert  anything  without  a  laborious  examination  of  Domes¬
day  Book.1 * * * V

The  demesne  lands  of  the  crown,  extensive  and  scattered
Domains  of  over  every  county,  were  abundantly  sufficient  to
the  crown.  SUpj,ort  its  dignity  and  magnificence  ; 1  and  William,
far  from  wasting  this  revenue  by  prodigal  grants,  took  care  to
let  them  at  the  highest  rate  to  farm,  little  caring  how  much  the
cultivators  were  racked  by  his  tenants.*  Yet  his  exactions,
both  feudal  and  in  the  way  of  tallage  from  his  burgesses  and
the  tenants  ot  his  vassals,  were  almost  as  violent  as  his  confisca¬
tions.  No  source  of  income  was  neglected  by  him,  or  indeed
by  his  successors,  however  trifling,  unjust,  or  unreasonable.
lUchM  of  IEs  reveuues,  if  we  could  trust  Ordericus  Vitalis,
“ueroT  amounted  to  10607.  a  day.  This,  in  mere  weight
of  silver,  would  be  equal  to  nearly  1,200,000/.  a
year  at  present.  But  the  arithmetical  statements  of  these
writers  are  not  implicitly  to  be  relied  upon.  He  left  at  his
death  a  treasure  ot  60,000/,  which,  in  conformity  to  his  dy¬
ing  request,  his  successor  distributed  among  the  church  and
poor  of  the  kingdom,  as  a  feeble  expiation  of  the  crimes  by
which  it  had  been  accumulated ;  *  an  act  of  disinterestedness
which  seems  to  prove  that  Rufus,  amidst  ail  his  vices,  was  not
destitute  of  better  feelings  than  historians  have  ascribed
to  him.  It  might  appear  that  William  had  little  use  for  his
extorted  wealth.  By  the  feudal  constitution,  as  established
during  his  reign,  he  commanded  the  service  of  a  vast  army

1  The  population  recorded  in  Dome*-  «  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  188.
day  U  about  283,(8)0;  which,  in  round  *  Huntingdon,  p.  371.  Orderirua

number*,  allowing  for  women  an.)  ehil-  Vital!*  put*  a  long  penitential  .peech

dren,  may  be  called  about  a  million,  into  William’*  mouth  on  hi*  death  bed

KIIU'*  Introduction  to  Dome*day,  rol.  ii.  p.  a«.  Though  thia  may  be  hi*  In.roi

V  ...  ,  Uo0-  y»*  6wt*  «eero  to  .how  the  com-

*  “hey  con.Uted  of  1422  manor*,  puuctiou  of  the  tyrant'*  con-  n-uce
Lyttelton'*  Henry  Ii.  *ol.  U.  p.  2sS.

English  Const.  FEUDAL  SYSTEM  ESTABLISHED.

297

at  its  own  expense,  either  for  domestic  or  continental  war¬
fare.  But  this  was  not  sufficient  for  his  purpose ;  ms  meree-
like  other  tyrants,  he  put  greater  trust  in  merce-  nair  troop8-
nary  obedience.  Some  of  his  predecessors  had  kept  bodies  of
Danish  troops  in  pay ;  partly  to  be  secure  against  their  hos¬
tility,  partly  from  the  convenience  of  a  regular  army,  and
the  love  which  princes  bear  to  it.  But  William  carried  this
to  a  much  greater  length.  He  had  always  stipendiary  sol¬
diers  at  his  command.  Indeed  his  army  at  the  Conquest
could  not  have  been  swollen  to  such  numbers  by  any  other
means.  They  were  drawn,  by  the  allurement  of  high  pay,
not  from  France  and  Brittany  alone,  but  Flanders,  Germany,
and  even  Spain.  When  Canute  of  Denmark  threatened  an
invasion  in  1085,  William,  too  conscious  of  his  own  tyranny
to  use  the  arms  of  his  English  subjects,  collected  a  merce¬
nary  force  so  vast,  that  men  wondered,  says  the  Saxon  Chron¬
icler,  how  the  country  could  maintain  it.  This  he  quar¬
tered  upon  the  people,  according  to  the  proportion  of  their
estates.1

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  tenures,  it
is  certain  that  those  of  the  feudal  system  were  Feudal  8y8_
thoroughly  established  in  England  under  the  Con-  t.™  estab-
queror.  It  has  been  observed,  in  another  part  of  e  '
this  work,  that  the  rights,  or  feudal  incidents,  of  wardship  and
marriage  were  more  common  in  England  and  Normandy
than  in  the  rest  of  France.  They  certainly  did  not  exist  in
the  former  before  the  Conquest ;  but  whether  they  were  an¬
cient  custom ;  of  the  latter  cannot  be  ascertained,  unless  we
had  more  incontestable  records  of  its  early  jurisprudence.
For  the  Great  Customary  of  Normandy  is  a  compilation  as
late  as  the  reign  of  Richard  Coeur-de-Lion,  when  the  laws  of
England  might  have  passed  into  a  country  so  long  and  inti¬
mately  connected  with  it.  But  there  appears  reason  to  think
that  the  seizure  of  the  lands  in  wardship,  the  selling  of  the
heiress  in  marriage,  were  originally  deemed  rather  acts  of
violence  than  conformable  to  law.  For  Henry  I.’s  charter
expressly  promises  that  the  mother,  or  next  of  kin,  shall  have
the  custody  of  the  lands  as  well  as  person  of  the  heir.2  And
as  the  charter  of  Henry  II.  refers  to  and  confirms  that  of  his

l  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  185;  Ingulfua,  p.  debebit ;  et  pneripio  ut  baronet  mei
79.  similiter  se  contineant  ergl  fllioe  vel

*  Terrnp  et  liberorum  cnstos  erit  sire  Alias  vrl  uxores  hominum  meoruin.
oxor,  sire  alius  propinquoruin,  qui  justus  Leges  Anglo-5axouic«,  p.  234.

298  PRESERVATION  OF  PUBLIC  PEACE.  CnAr.  VIII.  Part  II.

grandfather,  it  seems  to  follow  that  what  is  called  guar¬
dianship  in  chivalry  had  not  yet  been  established.  Atlea^t
it  is  not  tdl  the  assize  o f  Clarendon,  confirmed  at  Northamp¬
ton  in  1 1  <  (i,1  that  the  custody  of  the  heir  is  clearly  reserved
to  the  lord.^  With  respect  to  the  right  of  consenting  to  the
marriage  of  a  female  vassal,  it  seems  to  have  been,  as” I  have
elsewhere  observed,  pretty  general  in  feudal  tenures.  Hut
the  sale  of  her  person  in  marriage,  or  the  exaction  of  a  sum
ot  money  in  lien  of  this  scandalous  tyranny,  was  only  the  law
of  England,  and  was  not  perhaps  fully  authorized  as  such  till
the  statute  of  Merton  in  1236.

One  innovation  made  by  William  upon  the  feudal  law  is
very  deserving  of  attention,  lly  the  lending  principle
an  outk_of  fealty  was  due  from  thcja^al  to  the  lord  of  whom
he  immediately  held  his  land,  and  to  no  other.  The  king  of
1  lance,  long  after  this  period,  had  no  feudal  and  scarcely  any
ro_>  al  authority  over  the  tenants  of  his  own  vassals.  ]{nt
William  received  at  Salisbury,  in  Ids;,,  (he  fealtvofall  land¬
holders  in  England,  both  those  who  held  in  chief;  and  their
tenants;  thus  breaking  in  upon  the  feudal  compact  in  it-
most  essential  attribute,  the  exclusive  dependence  of  a  vassal
upon  his  lord.  And  this  maybe  reckoned  among  the  several
causes  which  prevented  the  continental  notions” of  indepen¬
dence  upon  the  crown  from  ever  taking  root  amon"  the  Eng¬
lish  aristocracy.

The  best  measure  of  William  was  the  establishment  of  pub-
Prewrration  rIic  IK‘ace-  He  permitted  no  rapine  but  his  own.
of^pubuo  The  feuds  of  private  revenge,  the  lawlessness  of
robbery,  were  repressed.  A  girl  laden  with  gold,
if  we  believe  some  ancient  writers,  might  have  passed  safely
through  the  kingdom.3  But  this  was  the  tranquillity  of  tin
imperious  and  vigilant  despotism,  the  degree  of  which  may  be
measured  by  these  effects,  in  which  no  improvement  of  civili¬
zation  had  any  share.  There  is  assuredly  nothing  to  wonder

1  Lege*  Anglo-Saxonirar,  p.  330.

*  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  187.  Th»  o»th  of
allegiance  or  fealty,  for  they  were  la
fpirit  the  flame,  hail  been  due  to  the  king
before  the  Conqucflt;  we  find  It  among
the  laws  of  Kduiuud.  Allen'fl  Inquiry,
P*  68.  It  wafl  not,  therefore,  likely  that
William  would  flurrender  »ucb  a  tie  upon
hi*  flul^Jectfl.  Bui  it  had  al*o  Iteen  ujiual
In  France  under  Charlemagne,  and  per-
hap*  later.

*  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  190;  M.  Parin,  p.  10.
I  will  not  omit  one  other  circumstance
apparently  praiseworthy,  which  Odrrl-
cu«  mention*  of  William,  that  he  tried
to  learn  Kngli.h,  in  order  to  render
Juxtice  by  under-landing  every  nian'fl
complaint,  but  failed  on  account  of  bU
advanced  age.  p.  630.  Thl*  >u  In  the
early*  part  of  hL«  reign,  before  the  reluc¬
tance  of  the  English  to  flubmit  had  ex¬
asperated  hi*  disposition.

English  Const.

FEUDAL  POLICY.

209

at  in  the  detestation  with  which  the  English  long  regarded
the  memory  of  this  tyrant.1  Some  advantages  undoubtedly,
in  the  course  of  human  affairs,  eventually  sprang  from  the
Norman  conquest  The  invaders,  though  without  perhaps
any  intrinsic  superiority  in  social  virtues  over  the  native  Eng¬
lish,  degraded  and  barbarous  as  these  are  represented  to  us,
had  at  least  that  exterior  polish  of  courteous  and  chivalric
manners,  and  that  taste  for  refinement  and  magnificence,  which
serve  to  elevate  a  people  from  mere  savage  rudeness.  Their
buildings,  sacred  as  well  as  domestic,  became  more  substantial
and  elegant.  The  learning  of  the  clergy,  the  only  class  to
whom  that  word  could  at  all  be  applicable,  became  infinitely
more  respectable  in  a  short  time  after  the  Conquest.  And
though  this  may  by  some  be  ascribed  to  the  general  improve¬
ments  of  Europe  in  that  point  during  the  twelfth  century,  yet
I  think  it  was  partly  owing  to  the  more  free  intercourse  with
France,  and  the  closer  dependence  upon  Rome,  which  that
revolution  produced.  This  circumstance  was,  however,  of  no
great  moment  to  the  English  of'those  times,  whose  happiness
could  hardly  be  effected  by  the  theological  reputation  of  Lan-
franc  and  Anselm.  Perhaps  the  chief  benefit  which  the  na¬
tives  of  that  generation  derived  from  the  government  of  Wil¬
liam  and  his  successors,  next  to  that  of  a  more  vigilant  police,
was  the  security  they  found  from  invasion  on  the  side  of  Den¬
mark  and  Norway.  The  high  reputation  of  the  Conqueror
and  his  sons,  with  the  regular  organization  of  a  feudal  militia,
deterred  those  predatory  armies  which  had  brought  such  re¬
peated  calamity  on  England  in  former  times.

The  system  of  feudal  policy,  though  derived  to  England
from  a  French  source,  bore  a  very  different  ap-  Difference
pearance  in  the  two  countries.  France,  for  about  between  the
two  centuries  after  the  house  of  Capet  had  usurped  fcytn'Eug-
the  throne  of  Charlemagne’s  posterity,  could  hardly  pr“^“d
be  deemed  a  regular  confederacy,  much  less  an
entire  monarchy.  But  in  England  a  government,  feudal  in¬
deed  in  its  form,  but  arbitrary  in  its  exercise,  not  only  main¬
tained  subordination,  but  almost  extinguished  liberty.  Several
causes  seem  to  have  conspired  towards  this  radical  difference.
In  the  first  place,  a  kingdom  comparatively  small  is  much
more  easily  kept  under  control  than  one  of  vast  extent.  And

1  W.  Malmsb.  Praf.  ad  1.  ill.

300

FEUDAL  POLICY.

Chap.  VIII.  Pakt  II.

the  fiefs  of  Anglo-Norman  barons  after  the  Conquest  were
far  less  considerable,  even  relatively  to  the  size  of  the  two
countries,  than  those  of  France.  The  earl  of  Chester  held,
indeed,  almost  all  that  county ; 1  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury,
nearly  the  whole  of  Salop.  But  these  domains  bore  no  com¬
parison  with  the  dukedom  of  Guienne,  or  the  county  of  Tou¬
louse.  In  general,  the  lordships  of  William’s  barons,  whether
this  were  owing  to  policy  or  accident,  were  exceedingly  dis¬
persed.  Robert  earl  of  Moreton,  for  example,  the  most  richly
endowed  of  his  followers,  enjoyed  248  manors  in  Cornwall,
54  in  Sussex,  196  in  Yorkshire,  99  in  Northamptonshire,  be¬
sides  many  in  other  counties.4  Estates  so  disjoined,  however
immense  in  their  aggregate,  were  ill  calculated  for  supporting
a  rebellion.  It  is  observed  by  Madox  that  the  knight’s  fees
of  almost  every  barony  were  scattered  over  various  counties.

In  the  next  place,  theiC  baronial  fiefs  were  held  under  an
actual  derivation  from  the  crown.  The  great  vassals  of  France
had  usurped  their  (dominions  before  the  accession  of  Hugh
Capet,  and  barely  submitted  to  his  nominal  sovereignty.
They  never  intended  to  yield  the  feudal  tributes  of  relief  and
aid,  nor  did  some  of  them  even  acknowledge  the  supremacy
of  his  royal  jurisdiction.  But  the  Conqueror  and  his  succes¬
sors  imposed  what  conditions  they  would  upon  a  set  of  barons
who  owed  all  to  their  grants ;  and  as  mankind’s  notions  of  right
are  generally  founded  upon  prescription,  these  peers  grew
accustomed  to  endure  many  burdens,  reluctantly  indeed,  but
without  that  feeling  of  injury  which  would  have  re-isted  an
attempt  to  impose  them  upon  the  vassals  of  the  French  crown.
For  the  same  reasons  the  barons  of  England  were  regularly
summoned  to  the  great  council,  and  by  their  attendance  in  it,
and  concurrence  in  the  measures  which  were  there  resolved
upon,  a  compactness  and  unity  of  interest  was  given  to  the
monarchy  which  was  entirely  wanting  in  that  of  France.

We  may  add  to  the  circumstances  that  rendered  the  crown
powerful  during  the  first  century  after  the  Conquest,  an

1  ThU  wa*.  upon  the  whole,  more
like  a  great  French  Aef  than  any  Knglleh
earldom.  Hugh  de  Abrlndi,  nephew  of
William  I.,  had  baron*  of  hi*  own.  one
of  whom  held  forty -*is  and  another  thirty
manor*,  ('heater  wa*  Amt  called  a
county-palatine  under  Henry  II.;  but  it
prvviou*ly  po**en*ed  all  regalUn  right*
of  juriadictioo.  After  the  forfeiture*  of

the  hou*e  of  Montgomery,  ft  acquired
all  the  country  between  the  Meney  and
Kibble.  Several  eminent  men  inherited
the  earldom;  but  upon  the  death  of  the
mont  di#tingui*hed.  Ran u If,  in  1232.  it
fell  into  a  female  line,  and  *oon  escheated
to  the  crown.  Dugdaie'*  Baronage,  p.  45
Lyttelton'*  Henry  II.,  vol.  !!.  p.  218.
t  Dugdaie'*  Baronage,  p.  26.

English  Const.

NORMAN  TYRANNY.

301

extreme  antipathy  of  the  native  English  towards  Hatred  of
their  invaders.  Both  William  Rufus  and  Henry  I.  English  to
made  use  of  the  former  to  strengthen  themselves  -Norman3,
against  the  attempts  of  their  brother  Robert ;  though  they
forgot  their  promises  to  the  English  after  attaining  their  ob¬
ject.1  A  fact  mentioned  by  Ordericus  Vitalis  illustrates  the
advantage  which  the  government  found  in  this  national  ani¬
mosity.  During  the  siege  of  Bridgenorth,  a  town  belonging
to  Robert  de  Belesme,  one  of  the  most  turbulent  and  powerful
of  the  Norman  barons,  by  Henry  I.  in  1102,  the  rest  of  the
nobility  deliberated  together,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that
if  the  king  could  expel  so  distinguished  a  subject,  he  would  be
able  to  treat  them  all  as  his  servants.  They  endeavored
therefore  to  bring  about  a  treaty ;  but  the  English  part  of
Henry’s  army,  hating  Robert  de  Belesme  as  a  Norman,  urged
the  king  to  proceed  with  the  siege  ;  which  he  did,  and  took
the  castle.2

Unrestrained,  therefore,  comparatively  speaking,  by  the
aristocratic  principles  which  influenced  other  feudal  Tyranny  of
countries,  the  administration  acquired  a  tone  of  the  Nonnan
rigor  and  arbitrariness  under  William  the  Con-  governmuut'
queror,  which,  though  sometimes  perhaps  a  little  mitigated,
did  not  cease  during  a  century  and  a  half.  For  the  first
three  reigns  we  must  have  recourse  to  historians ;  whose
language,  though  vague,  and  perhaps  exaggerated,  is  too
uniform  and  impressive  to  leave  a  doubt  of  the  tyrannical
character  of  the  government.  The  intolerable  exactions  of
tribute,  the  rapine  of  purveyance,  the  iniquity  of  royal  courts,
are  continually  in  their  mouths.  “  God  sees  the  wretched
people,”  says  the  Saxon  Chronicler,  “  most  unjustly  oppressed ;
first  they  are  despoiled  of  their  possessions,  then  butchered.
This  was  a  grievous  year  (1124).  Whoever  had  any  prop¬
erty  lost  it  by  heavy  taxes  and  unjust  decrees.  ” 8  The  same
ancient  chronicle,  which  appears  to  have  been  continued  from
time  to  time  in  the  abbey  of  Peterborough,  frequently  utters
similar  notes  of  lamentation.

From  the  reign  of  Stephen,  the  miseries  of  which  are  not
to  my  immediate  purpose,  so  far  as  they  proceeded  from

1  W.  Malmnbnry,  p.  120  et  158.  R.  potent  narrari  miner!*,  nayn  Roger  de
Horeden,  p.  481.  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  194.  Horeden,  qu.tm  suatinuit  illo  tempore

*  Du  Cheene,  Script.  Norman,  p.  8U7.  [circ.  ann.  1103]  term  Anglorum  propter

*  Chron.  Saxon,  p.  228.  Non  facile  regia s  exactiones.  p-  470.

302

NORMAN  EXACTIONS.  Chap.  Till.  Pakt  II.

anarchy  and  intestine  war,1  we  are  able  to  trace
its  exactions.  t]ie  ciiaracter  0f  government  by  existing  records.*

These,  digested  by  the  industrious  Madox  into  his  History
of  the  Exchequer,  gives  us  far  more  insight  into  the  spirit
of  the  constitution,  if  we  may  use  such  a  word,  than  all  our
monkish  chronicles.  It  was  not  a  sanguinary  despotism.
Henry  II.  was  a  prince  of  remarkable  clemency;  and  none
of  the  Conqueror’s  successors  were  as  grossly  tyrannical  as
himself.  But  the  system  of  rapacious  extortion  from  their
subjects  previriled  to  a  degree  which  we  should  rather  ex¬
pect  to  find  among  eastern  slaves  than  that  high-spirited
race  of  Normandy  whose  renown  then  filled  Europe  and
Asia  The  right  of  wardship  was  abused  by  selling  the  heir
and  his  land  to  the  highest  bidder.  That  of  marriage  was
carried  to  a  still  grosser  excess.  The  kings  of  France
indeed  claimed  the  prerogative  of  forbidding  the  marriage
of  their  vassals’  daughters  to  such  persons  as  they  thought
unfriendly  or  dangerous  to  themselves ;  but  I  am  not  aware
that  they  ever  compelled  them  to  marry,  much  less  that  they
turned  this  attribute  of  sovereignty  into  a  means  of  revenue.
But  in  England,  women  and  even  men,  simply  as  tenants  in
chief,  and  not  as  wards,  fined  to  the  crown  for  leave  to  marry
whom  they  would,  or  not  to  be  compelled  to  marry  any
other.*  Towns  not  only  fined  for  original  grants  of  fran¬
chises,  but  for  repeated  confirmations.  The  Jews  paid  ex¬
orbitant  sums  for  every  common  right  of  mankind,  for  pro¬
tection,  for  justice.  In  return  they  were  sustained  against
their  Christian  debtors  in  demands  of  usury,  which  supersti¬
tion  and  tyranny  rendered  enormous.4  Men  fined  for  the
king’s  good-will ;  or  that  he  would  remit  his  anger ;  or  to
have  his  mediation  with  their  adversaries.  Many  fines  seem
as  it  were  imposed  in  sport,  if  we  look  to  the  cause ;  though

1  The  following  simple  picture  of  that
reign  from  the  Saxon  Chronicle  may  be
worth  inserting.  “  The  noble*  and  blah-
op*  built  castles,  and  filled  them  with
devilish  and  wicked  men,  and  oppressed
the  people,  cruelly  torturing  men  for
their  money.  They  Imposed  taxes  upon
towna.  and,  when  they  had  exhausted
them  of  everything.  set  them  on  fire.
You  might  travel  a  day,  and  not  find  one
man  living  in  a  town,  nor  any  land  in
rultivation.  Never  did  the  country  snf-
frr  greater  evils.  If  two  or  three  men
were  seen  riding  up  to  a  town,  all  Its  in¬
habitants  left  it,  taking  them  for  plunder¬

ers.  And  this  lasted,  growing  worse
and  worse,  throughout  Stephen's  reign.
Men  said  openly  that  Christ  and  his
saints  were  asleep. **  p.23 0.

*  The  earliest  record  in  the  Pipe-office
is  that  which  Madox,  in  conformity  to
the  usage  of  others,  cites  by  the  name  of
Magnum  Kotulum  quinto  Btrphanl.  Hut
in  a  particular  dissertation,  subjoined  to
his  History  of  the  Kxchequer,  he  inclines,
though  not  decisively,  to  refer  this  rec¬
ord  to  the  reign  of  Henry  I.

»  Madox,  c.  10.

«  Id.  c.  i .

English  Const.

GENERAL  TAXES.

303

their  extent,  and  the  solemnity  with  which  they  were  recorded,
prove  the  humor  to  have  been  differently  relished  by  the  two
parties.  Thus  the  bishop  of  Winchester  paid  a  tun  of  good
wine  for  not  reminding  the  king  (John)  to  give  a  girdle  to
the  countess  of  Albemarle ;  and  Robert  de  Vaux  five  best
palfreys,  that  the  same  king  might  hold  his  peace  about
Henry  Pinel’s  wife.  Another  paid  four  marks  for  leave  to
eat  (pro  licentia  comedendi).  But  of  all  the  abuses  which
deformed  the  Anglo-Norman  government,  none  was  so  flagi¬
tious  as  the  sale  of  judicial  redress.  The  king,  we  are  often
told,  is  the  fountain  of  justice ;  but  in  those  ages  it  was  one
which  gold  alone  could  unseal.  Men  fined  to  have  right
done  them ;  to  sue  in  a  certain  court ;  to  implead  a  certain
person  ;  to  have  restitution  of  land  which  they  had  recovered
at  law.1  From  the  sale  of  that  justice  which  every  citizen
lias  a  right  to  demand,  it  was  an  easy  transition  to  withhold
or  deny  it.  Fines  were  received  for  the  king’s  help  against
the  adverse  suitor ;  that  is,  for  perversion  of  justice,  or  for
delay.  Sometimes  they  were  paid  by  opposite  parties,  and,
of  course,  for  opposite  ends.  These  were  called  counter-
fines  ;  but  the  money  was  sometimes,  or  as  Lord  Lyttelton
thinks  invariably,  returned  to  the  unsuccessful  suitor.2

Among  a  people  imperfectly  civilized  the  most  outrageous
injustice  towards  individuals  may  pass  without  the  General
slightest  notice,  while  in  matters  affecting  the  com-  ta*cs-
munity  the  powers  of  government  are  exceedingly  controlled.
It  becomes  therefore  an  important  question  what  prerogative
these  Norman  king’s  were  used  to  exercise  in  raising  money
and  in  general  legislation.  By  the  prevailing  feudal  customs
the  lord  was  entitled  to  demand  a  pecuniary  aid  of  his  vas¬
sals  in  certain  cases.  These  were,  in  England,  to  make  his
eldest  6on  a  knight,  to  marry  his  eldest  daughter,  and  to  ran¬
som  himself  from  captivity.  Accordingly,  when  such  cir¬
cumstances  occurred,  aids  were  levied  by  the  crown  upon  its
tenants,  at  the  rate  of  a  mark  or  a  pound  for  every  knight’s
fee.*  These  aids,  being  strictly  due  in  the  prescribed  cases,

1  Madox,  c.  12  and  18.  c.  86,  at  twenty  shilling*  for  every

*  The  moat  opposite  instances  of  these  knight'd  foe,  and  aa  much  for  every  20 1.
exactions  are  well  delected  from  Madox  value  of  bind  held  by  socage.  The  aid
by  Ilume,  Appendix  II.;  upon  which  pour  fairc  fit*  chevalier  might  bo  raised
account  I  have  gone  lew  into  detail  than  when  he  entered  into  hla  fifteenth  year;
would  otherwise  have  been  necessary.  pour  fllle  marier,  when  she  reached  the

*  The  reasonable  aid  was  fixed  by  the  age  of  seven,
statute  of  Westminster  I.,  3  Edw.  I.,

304

GENERAL  TAXES.  Chap.  VIII.  Paht  II.

were  taken  without  requiring  the  consent  of  parliament.
Escuage,  which  was  a  commutation  for  the  personal  service
of  military  tenants  in  war,  hav  ing  rather  the  appearance  of
an  indulgence  than  an  imposition,  might  reasonably  be  levied
by  the  king.1  It  was  not  till  the  charter  of  John  that  escu¬
age  became  a  parliamentary  assessment ;  the  custom  of  com¬
muting  service  having  then  grown  general,  and  the  rate  of
commutation  being  variable.

—  None  but  military  tenants  could  be  liable  for  escuage ; 3
but  the  inferior  subjects  of  the  crown  were  oppressed  by  tal¬
lages.  The  demesne  lands  of  the  king  and  all  royal  towns
were  liable  to  tallage  ;  an  imposition  far  more  rigorous  mid
irregular  than  those  which  fell  upon  the  gentry.  Tallages
were  continually  raised  upon  different  towns  during  all  the
Norman  reigns  without  the  consent  of  parliament,  which
neither  represented  them  nor  cared  for  their  interests.  The
itinerant  justices  in  their  circuit  usually  set  this  tax.  Some¬
times  the  tallage  was  assessed  in  gross  upon  a  town,  and  col¬
lected  by  the  burgesses ;  sometimes  individually  at  the  judg¬
ment  of  the  justices.  There  was  an  appeal  from  an  exces¬
sive  assessment  to  the  barons  of  the  exchequer.  Inferior
lords  might  tallage  their  own  tenants  and  demesne  towns,
though  not,  it  seems,  without  the  king’s  permission.*  Cus¬
toms  upon  the  import  and  export  of  merchandise,  of  which
the  prisage  of  wine,  that  is,  a  right  of  taking  two  casks  out
of  each  vessel,  seems  the  most  material,  were  immemorially
exacted  by  the  crown.  There  is  no  appearance  that  these
originated  with  parliament.4  Another  tax,  extending  to  all
the  lands  of  the  kingdom,  was  Ilanegeld,  the  ship-money  of
those  times.  This  name  had  been  originally  given  to  the  tax
imposed  under  Ethelred  II.,  in  order  to  raise  a  tribute  exact¬
ed  by  the  Danes.  It  was  afterwards  applied  to  a  permanent
contribution  for  the  public  defence  against  the  same  enemies.
But  ulter  the  Conquest  this  tax  is  said  to  have  been  only

1  Pit  interdnm,  ut  Imminent*  Tel  in-  de  Sraeeario,  ad  flnem.  Madox,  Hint.
■  urgent*  in  regnura  hoatlum  machina-  Exchequer,  p.  25  (edit.  In  folio),
tione,  decernat  rex  de  ftlngulU  feodl*  1  The  tenant  in  raplte  wa*  entitled  to
mllituin  minimum  aliquam  eom,  marram  he  reimbursed  what  would  hare  been
•ci  licet,  Tel  llhraw  unani;  unde  intlitlbu*  hi*  eeruage  by  hi*  Ta**aU  efro  if  he  n*r-
ftipeudla  Tel  donatira  mirredaut.  MaTult  formed  jwr*nuul  *erTlce  Madox,  r.  id.
enlm  prinrep*  *tipendlarlo*  quliu  do-  *  For  the  important  subject  of  Ullage*,
me* tiro*  bellicU  expouere  ranibu*.  Hire  tee  Madox,  c.  17.

itaque  tuiurna,  quia  nomine  ocutoruin  i  Madox,  c.  19.  Hair's  Treat!**  on
solritur,  tcutagiuw  uoiniuatur.  Dialog  us  the  t'ujtoui*  in  Hargrave'*  Tract*,  toI.  1.

p.  lid.

Exglisii  Const.  RIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION.

305

occasionally  required ;  and  the  latest  instance  on  record  of
its  payment  is  in  the  20th  of  Henry  II.  Its  imposition
appears  to  have  been  at  the  king’s  discretion.1

The  right  of  general  legislation  was  undoubtedly  placed
in  the  king,  conjointly  with  his  great  council,2  or,  Right  of
if  the  expression  be  thought  more  proper,  with  legislation,
their  advice.  So  little  opposition  was  found  in  these  assem¬
blies  by  the  early  Norman  kings,  that  they  gratified  their  own
love  of  pomp,  as  well  as  the  pride  of  their  barons,  by  con¬
sulting  them  in  every  important  business.  But  the  limits  of
legislative  power  were  extremely  indefinite.  New  laws,  like
new  taxes,  affecting  the  community,  required  the  sanction  of
that  assembly  which  was  supposed  to  represent  it ;  but  there
was  no  security  for  individuals  against  acts  of  prerogative,
which  we  should  justly  consider  as  most  tyrannical.  Henry
II.,  the  best  of  these  monarchs,  banished  from  England  the
relations  and  friends  of  Becket,  to  the  number  of  four  hun¬
dred.  At  another  time  he  sent  over  from  Normandy  an
injunction,  that  all  the  kindred  of  those  who  obeyed  a  papal
interdict  should  be  banished,  and  their  estates  confiscated.8

The  statutes  of  those  reigns  do  not  exhibit  to  us  many
provisions  calculated  to  maintain  public  liberty  on
a  broad  and  general  foundation.  And  although  charteraof
the  laws  then  enacted  have  not  all  been  preserved,  *'™aa
yet  it  is  unlikely  that  any  of  an  extensively  reme¬
dial  nature  should  have  left  no  trace  of  their  existence.  We
find,  however,  what  has  sometimes  been  called  the  Magna
Charta  of  William  the  Conqueror,  published  by  Wilkins
from  a  document  of  considerable  authority.4  We  will,  enjoin,
and  grants  says  the  king,  that  all  freemen,  of  our.  kingdom
shall  enjoy  their  lands  in  peace,  free  from  all  tallage,  and  from
every  unjust  exaction,  so  that  nothing  but  their  service  law¬
fully  due  to  us  shall  be  demanded  at  their  hands.6  The  laws

1  Ilenr.  II tinting* Ion,  1.  v.  p.  205.  8omc  English  barons  might  doubtless
Dialogus  de  Scaccario,  c.  11.  Madox,  c.  hare  been  with  the  king,  aa  at  Verneuil
17.  Lyttelton's  Henry  IT.  vol.  ii.  p.  170.  in  1176,  where  a  mixed  assembly  of

*  Glanvil,  Prologue  ad  Tract* turn  de  English  and  French  enacted  lawn  for
Connu*»tud.  both  countries.  Benedict.  Abbas  anud

3  Horeden,  p.  496.  Lyttelton,  vol.  ii.  Ilume.  So  at  Northampton,  in  1165,
p.  630.  The  latter  say*  that  this  edict  several  Norman  barons  voted ;  nor  is
must  have  been  framed  by  the  king  with  any  notice  taken  of  this  a4*  irregular,
the  advice  and  assent  of  his  council.  Fitz  Stephen,  ibid.  So  unfixed,  or  rather
But  if  he  means  his  great  council,  I  unformed,  were  all  constitutional  prin-
cannot  suppose  that  all  the  barons  and  ciplos.  [Note  X.]
tenants  in  capita  could  have  been  duly  *  [Note  XI  ]

summoned  to  a  council  held  beyond  seas.  *  Volumus  etiam,  ac  flnnitcr  prtecipi-

vol.  ii.  20

30G

LAWS  OF  NORMAN  KINGS.  Chap.  Till.  Part  II

of  the  Conqueror,  found  in  Hoveden,  are  wholly  different
from  those  in  Ingulfus,  and  are  suspected  not  to  have  escaped
considerable  interpolation.1  It  is  remarkable  that  no  refer¬
ence  is  made  to  this  concession  of  William  the  Conqueror
in  any  subsequent  charter.  A  charter  of  Henry  I.,  the  au¬
thenticity  of  which  is  undisputed,  though  it  contains  nothing
specially  expressed  but  a  remission  of  unreasonable  reliefs,
wardships,  mid  other  feudal  burdens,4  proceeds  to  declare  that
he  gives  his  subjects  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  with
the  emendations  made  by  his  father  with  consent  of  his  bar¬
ons.*  The  charter  of  Stephen  not  only  confirms  that  of  his
predecessor,  but  adds,  in  fuller  terms  than  Henry  hail  used,
an  express  concession  of  the  Laws  and  customs  of  Edward.4
Henry  II.  is  silent  about  these,  although  he  repeats  the  con¬
firmation  of  his  grandfather’s  charter.5  The  people  however
had  besrun  to  look  back  to  a  more  ancient  standard  of  law.

_  O

The  Norman  conquest,  and  all  that  ensued  upon  it,  had  en¬
deared  the  memory  of  their  Saxon  government.  Its  disor¬
ders  were  forgotten,  or,  rather,  were  less  odious  to  a  rude
nation,  than  the  coercive  justice  by  which  they  were  after¬
wards  restrained.6  Hence  it  became  the  favorite  cry  to

mu*  et  coneedimus,  ut  omnes  liberi  ho¬
mines  totius  monarchic  pncdicti  regnl
nostri  habeant  et  tcneaut  terras  sua*  et
poasessiones  suas  bene,  et  in  pare,  liberfc
ab  omni  ezactione  injustl,  et  ab  omni
tallagio,  ita  quod  nihil  ab  iis  exigatur
▼el  capiatur,  nisi  sorvitium  suum  liber¬
um,  quod  de  jure  nobis  fiu*ere  debent,  et
facere  tonentur ;  et  prout  statutum  est
iis,  et  illis  a  nobis  datum  et  concessuin
jure  hteredit-ario  in  perpetuum  per  com¬
mune  coucilium  totius  regni  nostri  p r as¬
dic  ti.

1  Selden,  ad  Eadmerum.  ICody  (Trea¬
tise  on  Convocations,  p.  249)  infers  from
the  great  alterations  risible  on  the  face
of  these  law*  that  they  were  altered  from
the  Prench  original  by  Ulanvil.

*  Wilkins,  p.  234.  The  accession  of
Ilenry  inspired  hopes  into  the  English
nation  which  were  not  well  realised.
His  marriage  with  Matilda,  “of  the
rightful  English  kin,”  is  mentioned  with
apparent  pleasure  by  the  Saxon  Chroni¬
cler  under  the  year  1100.  And  in  a  frag¬
ment  of  a  Latin  treatise  on  the  English
laws,  praising  them  with  a  genuine  feel¬
ing,  and  probably  written  in  the  earlier
part  of  Henry's  reign,  the  author  extols
his  behavior  towanls  the  people,  in
contrast  with  that  of  preceding  times,
and  bears  explicit  testimony  to  the  con¬

firmation  and  amendment  of  Edward's
laws  by  the  Conqueror  and  bv  the  reign¬
ing  king— Qui  non  solum  legem  regis
Eadwardl  nobis  reddidit,  quain  omni
gaudiorum  delectatione  suscepimus,  sed
beati  patris  ejus  emendationibus  robo-
ratam  propriis  institutionibus  honesta-
vit.  See  Cooper  ou  Public  Keoords  (rol.
ii.  p.  423),  in  which  very  useful  collec¬
tion  the  whole  fragmeut  (for  the  first
time  in  England)  Is  published  from  a
Cottonian  manuscript.  Henry  ceased
not,  according  to  the  Saxon  Chronicle,  to
lay  on  many  tributes.  But  it  is  reasona¬
ble  to  suppose  that  tallages  on  towns
and  on  his  demesne  tenants,  at  that  time
legal,  were  reckoned  among  them.

*  A  great  impression  is  said  to  hare
been  made  on  the  barons  confix krat^-1
against  John  by  the  production  of
Henry  I.’s  charter,  whereof  they  had
been  ignorant.  Matt.  Part*,  p  212  But
this  could  hardly  hare  been  the  existiug
charter,  Ibr  reasons  alleged  by  Black-
stone.  Introduction  to  Magna  Charta,
p.  6.

*  Wilkin-.  Leges  Anglo-Saxon,  p.  310

*  Id.  p.  818.

*  The  Saxon  Chronicler  complains  of
a  witenagemot,  as  he  calls  it.  or  a«*hre(
held  at  Leicester  In  1124,  where  forty,
four  thieves  were  hanged,  a  greater  num-

English  Const.  RICHARD  I.’S  CHANCELLOR  DEPOSED.  307

demand  tlae  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor ;  and  the  Normans
themselves,  as  they  grew  dissatisfied  with  the  royal  adminis¬
tration,  fell  into  these  English  sentiments.1  But  what  these
laws  were,  or  more  properly,  perhaps,  these  customs  subsist¬
ing  in  the  Confessor’s  age,  was  not  very  distinctly  understood.2
So  far,  however,  .was.  clear,  that  the  rigorous  feudal  servitude,
the  weighty  tributes  upon  poorer  freemen,  had  never  pre¬
vailed  before  the  Conquest.  In  claiming  the  laws  of  Edward
the  Confessor,  our  ancestors  meant  but  the  redress  of  griev¬
ances,  which  tradition  told  them  had  not  always  existed.

It  is  highly  probable,  independently  of  the  evidence  sup¬
plied  by  the  charters  of  Henry  I.  and  his  two  suc¬
cessors,  that  a  sense  of  oppression  had  long  been  chancellor 8
stimulating  the  subjects  of  so  arbitrary  a  govern-  ^0bs^0^
ment,  before  they  gave  any  demonstrations  of  it
sufficiently  palpable  to  find  a  place  in  history.  But  there  are
certainly  no  instances  of  rebellion,  or  even,  as  far  as  we
know,  of  a  constitutional  resistance  in  parliament,  down  to
the  reign  of  Richard  I.  The  revolt  of  the  earls  of  Leicester
and  Norfolk  against  Henry  II.,  which  endangered  his  throne
and  comprehended  his  children  with  a  large  part  of  his  barons,
appears  not  to  have  been  founded  even  upon  the  pretext  of
public  grievances.  Under  Richard  I.  something  more  of  a
national  spirit  began  to  show  itself.  For  the  king  having
left  his  chancellor  William  Longchamp  joint  regent  and  justi¬
ciary  with  the  bishop  of  Durham  during  his  crusade,  the
foolish  insolence  of  the  former,  who  excluded  his  coadjutor

ber  than  was  ever  before  known ;  it  was
wud  that  many  suffered  unjustly,  p.  228.
Mr.  Turner  translates  tfak  duhnstl}  ;
but,  as  I  conceive,  without  attending  to
the  spirit  of  the  context.  Hist,  of  Eugl.
▼ol.  i.  p.  174.

1  The  distinction  between  the  two
nations  was  pretty  well  obliterated  at
the  end  of  Heury  II.' ’g  reign,  as  we  learn
from  the  Dialogue  on  the  Exchequer,
then  written :  jam  cohabitantibus  An*
glicis  et  Normannis,  et  alterutrihn  ux-
ores  ducentibus  vei  nubentibus,  sic  per-
mixtaj  sunt  nationes,  ut  vix  discern!
possit  hodie,  de  liberis  loquor,  quia  An-
glicus,  quis  Norman n us  sit  genere  ;  ex¬
cept  is  duntaxat  ascriptitiis  qui  villani
dicuntur,  quibus  non  eat  liberum  obstan-
tibus  domiuis  suis  a  sui  status  conditione
discedere.  Kapropter  pene  quicunque
sic  hodie  occisus  reperitur,  ut  murdrum
punitur,  exceptis  his  quibus  certa  suut

nt  dixmns  servilis  conditions  indicia,  p.

96.  [Non  xii]

2  Non  quas  tulit,  sed  quas  observa-
verit,  says  William  of  Malmsbury,  con¬
cerning  the  Confessor’s  laws.  Those
bearing  his  name  in  Lambard  and  Wil¬
kins  are  evidently  spurious,  though  it
may  not  be  easy  to  fix  upon  the  time
when  they  were  forged.  Those  found  in
Ingulfus,  in  the  French  language,  aro
genuine,  though  translated  from  Latin,
and  were  confirmed  by  William  the  Con¬
queror.  Neither  of  these  collections,
however,  can  be  thought  to  have  any  re¬
lation  to  the  civil  liberty  of  the  subject.
It  has  been  deemed  more  rational  to  sup¬
pose  that  these  longings  for  Edward’s
laws  were  rather  meant  for  a  mild  ad¬
ministration  of  government,  free  from
unjust  Norman  innovations,  than  auy
written  and  definitive  system.

308

MAGNA  CIIARTA.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

from  any  share  in  the  administration,  provoked  every  one  of
the  nobility.  A  convention  of  tlie-e,  the  king’s  brother
placing  himself  at  their  head,  passed  a  sentence  of  removal
and  banishment  upon  the  chancellor.  Though  there  might
be  reason  to  conceive  that  this  would  not  be  unpleasing°  to
the  king,  who  was  already  apprised  how  much  Longchamp
had  a  >u»ed  Ins  trust,  it  was  a  remarkable  assumption  of  power
by  that  assembly,  and  the  earliest  authority  for  a  leading
pi  maple  of  our  constitution,  the  responsibility  of  mini-ters
to  parliament.

In  the  succeeding  reign  of  John  all  the  rapacious  exactions
MiRna  usual  to  these  Norman  kings  were  not  only  re¬
doubled,  but  mingled  with  other  outrages  of
t\  ranny  still  more  intolerable.1  These  too  were  to  be  endured
at  the  hands  of  a  prince  utterly  contemptible  for  his  folly  and
cowardice.  One  is  surprised  at  the  forbearance  displayed  by
the  barons,  till  they  took  up  arms  at  length  in  that  confeder¬
acy  which  ended  in  establishing  the  Great  Charter  of  Liber¬
ties.  As  this  was  the  first  eflbrt  towards  a  legal  government,
so  is  it  beyond  comparison  the  most  important  event  in  our
history,  except  that  Revolution  without  which  its  benefits
would  have  been  rapidly  annihilated.  The  constitution  of
Lngland  has  indeed  no  single  date  from  which  its  duration  is
to  be  reckoned.  The  institutions  of  positive  law,  the  far
more  important  changes  which  time  has  wrought  in  the  order
of  society,  during  six  hundred  years  subsequent  to  the  Great
L  lurter,  have  undoubtedly  lessened  its  direct  application  to
our  present  circumstances.  Rut  it  is  still  the  keystone  of
,s  1  All  that  ha.s  since  been  obtained  is  little

more  than  as  confirmation  or  commentary;  and  if  every
subsequent  law  were  to  be  swept  away,  there  would  still
remain  the  bold  features  that  distinguish  a  free  from  a  des¬
potic  monarchy.  It  has  been  lately  the  fashion  to  depreciate
the  value  of  Magna  Charta,  as  if  it  had  sprung  from  the
private  ambition  of  a  few  selfish  barons,  and  redressed  only
some  feudal  abuses.  It  is  indeed  of  little  importance  by  what
motives  those  who  obtained  it  were  guided.  The  real  charac¬
ters  of  men  most  distinguished  in  the  transactions  of  that
time  are  not  easily  determined  at  present.  Yet  if  we  bring

mn«?|la0V?h"  *“?  h  of  th®  •d  Bat  bit  IdiuIU  upon  th.  no-

English  Const.

MAGNA  CHARTA.

309

these  ungrateful  suspicions  to  the  test,  they  prove  destitute  of
all  reasonable  foundation.  An  equal  distribution  of  civil
rights  to  all  classes  of  freemen  forms  the  peculiar  beauty  of
the  charter.  In  this  just  solicitude  for  the  people,  and  in  the
moderation  which  infringed  upon  no  essential  prerogative  of
the  monarchy,  we  may  perceive  a  liberality  and  patriotism
very  unlike  the  selfishness  which  is  sometimes  rashly  imputed
to  those  ancient  barons.  And,  as  far  as  we  are  guided  by
historical  testimony,  two  great  men,  the  pillars  of  our  church
and  state,  may  be  considered  as  entitled  beyond  the  rest  to
the  glory  of  this  monument ;  Stephen  Langton,  archbishop
of  Canterbury,  and  William  earl  of  Pembroke.  To  their
temperate  zeal  for  a  legal  government,  England  was  indebted
during  that  critical  period  for  the  two  greatest  blessings  that
patriotic  statesmen  could  confer;  the  establishment  of  civil
liberty  upon  an  immovable  basis,  and  the  preservation  of
national  independence  under  the  ancient  line  of  sovereigns,
which  rasher  men  were  about  to  exchange  for  the  dominion
of  France.

Bv  the  Magna  Charta  of  John  reliefs  were  limited  to  a
certain  sum  according  to  the  rank  of  the  tenant,  the  waste
committed  by  guardians  in  chivalry  restrained,  the  disparage¬
ment  in  matrimony  of  female  wards  forbidden,  and  widows
secured  from  compulsory  marriage.  These  regulations,  ex¬
tending  to  the  sub-vassals  of  the  crown,  redressed  the  worst
grievances  of  every  military  tenant  in  England.  The  fran¬
chises  of  the  city  of  London  and  of  all  towns  and  boroughs
were  declared  inviolable.  The  freedom  of  commerce  was
guaranteed  to  alien  merchants.  The  Court  of  Common  Pleas,
instead  of  following  the  king’s  person,  was  fixed  at  West¬
minster.  The  tyranny  exercised  in  the  neighborhood  of  royal
forests  met  with  some  check,  which  was  further  enforced  by
the  Charter  of  Forests  under  Henry  III.

But  the  essential  clauses  of  Magna  Charta  are  those  which
protect  the  personal  liberty  and  property  of  all  freemen,  by
giving  security  from  arbitrary  imprisonment  and  arbitrary
spoliation.  “  No  freeman  (says  the  29th  chapter  of  Henry
III.’s  charter,  which,  as  the  existing  law,  I  quote  in  preference
to  that  of  John,  the  variations  not  being  very  material)  shall
be  taken  or  imprisoned,  or  be  disseized  of  his  freehold,  or
liberties,  or  free  customs,  or  be  outlawed,  or  exiled,  or  any
otherwise  destroyed ;  nor  will  we  pass  upon  him,  nor  send

310

MAGNA  CHART  A.  Chap.  VIII.  Pakt  II.

upon  him,  but  by  lawful  judgment  of  bis  peers,  or  by  the  law
of  the  land.1  We  will  sell  to  no  man,  we  will  not  deny  or
delay  to  any  man,  justice  or  right.”  It  is  obvious  that  these
words,  interpreted  by  any  honest  court  of  law,  convey  an
ample  security  for  the  two  main  rights  of  civil  society.  From
the  era,  therefore,  of  king  John’s  charter,  it  must  have  been
a  clear  principle  of  our  constitution  that  no  man  can  be  de¬
tained  in  prison  without  trial.  Whether  courts  of  justice
framed  the  writ  of  Habeas  Corpus  in  conformity  to  the  spirit
of  this  clause,  or  found  it  already  in  their  register,  it  became
from  that  era  the  right  of  every  subject  to  demand  it.  That
writ,  rendered  more  actively  remedial  by  the  statute  of  Charles
II.,  but  founded  upon  the  broad  basis  of  Magna  Charta,  is
the  principal  bulwark  of  English  liberty  ;  and  if  ever  tempo¬
rary  circumstances,  or  the  doubtful  plea  of  political  necessity,
shall  lead  men  to  look  on  its  denial  with  apathy,  the  most  dis¬
tinguishing  characteristic  of  our  constitution  will  be  effaced.

As  the  clause  recited  above  protects  the  subject  from  any
absolute  spoliation  of  his  freehold  rights,  so  others  restrain
the  excessive  amercements  which  had  an  almost  equally  ruin¬
ous  operation.  The  magnitude  of  his  offence,  by  the  14th
clause  of  llenry  Ill.’s  charter,  must  be  the  measure  of  his
fine ;  and  in  every  case  the  contenement  (a  word  expressive
of  chattels  necessary  to  each  man’s  station,  as  the  arms  of  a
gentleman,  the  merchandise  of  a  trader,  the  plough  and  wag¬
ons  of  a  peasant)  was  exempted  from  seizure.  A  provision
was  made  in  the  charter  of  John  that  no  aid  or  escuage  should
be  imposed,  except  in  the  three  feudal  cases  of  aid,  without
consent  ot  parliament.  And  this  was  extended  to  aids  jiaid
by  the  city  of  London.  But  the  clause  was  omitted  in  the

1  Nl*i  per  legale  judicium  parium
suoruin,  tW  per  legem  terra.  Several
explanation*  hare  l*een  offered  of  the
alternative  clause,  which  some  hare  re¬
ferred  to  judgment  by  default  or  de¬
murrer— others  to  the  process  of  attach¬
ment  for  contempt.  Certainly  there  are
mnny  legal  procedure!  betide*  trial  by
jury,  through  which  a  party'*  good*  or
person  may  be  taken.  Ilut  one  may
doubt  whether  these  were  in  contempla¬
tion  of  the  framer*  of  Magna  Charta.
In  an  entry  of  the  charter  of  1217  by  a
contemporary  hand,  preferred  in  a  book
in  the  town-clerk'*  office  in  London,
called  Liber  Custumarum  et  Kegutn  an¬
tiquorum,  a  various  reading,  ei  per  legem

terra,  occur*.  Blackstnne's  Charter*,
p.  42.  And  the  word  ia  ao  frequently
uned  for  tt%  that  I  am  not  wholly  free
from  a  suspicion  that  It  wu  no  Intended
in  thl*  place.  The  meaning  will  be  that
no  person  shall  be  disseized,  Ac.,  except
upon  a  lawful  cause  of  action  or  indict¬
ment  found  by  the  venlict  of  a  Jury.
Thi*  n  ally  seem*  a*  good  a*  anr  of  the
disjunctive  interpretation*,  but  i  do  not
offer  it  with  much  confidence.

But  perhaps  the  bent  sense  of  the  dis¬
junctive  will  be  perceived  by  remember¬
ing  that  judicium  pariutn  wa*  generally
opposed  to  the  combat  or  the  ordeal*
which  were  equally  lex  terra.

English  Const.  CONSTITUTION  UNDER  HENRY  III.

311

three  charters  granted  by  Henry  in.,  though  parliament
seem  to  have  acted  upon  it  in  most  part  of  his  reign.  It  had,
however,  no  reference  to  tallages  imposed  upon  towns  without
their  consent.  Fourscore  years  were  yet  to  elapse  before  the
great  principle  of  parliamentary  taxation  was  explicitly  and
absolutely  recognized.

A  Jaw  which  enacts  that  justice  shall  neither  be  sold,  denied,
nor  delayed,  stamps  with  infamy  that  government  under  which
it  had  become  necessary.  But  from  the  time  of  the  charter,
according  to  Madox,  the  disgraceful  perversions  of  right,
which  are  upon  record  in  the  rolls  of  the  exchequer,  became
less  frequent.1

From  this  era  a  new  soul  was  infused  into  the  people  of
England.  Her  liberties,  at  the  best  long  in  abey-  state  of  the
ance,  became  a  tangible  possession,  and  those  ®°nI^“t^teI°^.
indefinite  aspirations  for  the  laws  of  Edward  the  xxi.
Confessor  were  changed  into  a  steady  regard  for  the  Great
Charter.  Pass  but  from  the  history  of  Roger  de  Hoveden  to
that  of  Matthew  Paris,  from  the  second  Henry  to  the  third,
and  judge  whether  the  victorious  struggle  had  not  excited  an
energy  of  public  spirit  to  which  the  nation  was  before  a
stranger.  The  strong  man,  in  the  sublime  language  of  Mil-
ton,  was  aroused  from  sleep,  and  shook  his  invincible  locks.
Tyranny,  indeed,  and  injustice  will,  by  all  historians  not  abso¬
lutely  servile,  be  noted  with  moral  reprobation ;  but  never
shall  we  find  in  the  English  writers  of  the  twelfth  century
that  assertion  of  positive  and  national  rights  which  distin¬
guishes  those  of  the  next  age,  and  particularly  the  monk  of
St.  Alban’s.  From  his  prolix  history  we  may  collect  three
material  propositions  as  to  the  state  of  the  English  constitu¬
tion  during  the  long  reign  of  Henry  III.;  a  prince  to  whom
the  epithet  of  worthless  seems  best  applicable ;  and  who,
without  committing  any  flagrant  crimes,  was  at  once  insincere,
ill-judging,  and  pusillanimous.  The  intervention  of  such  a
reign  was  a  very  fortunate  circumstance  for  public  liberty,
which  might  possibly  have  been  crushed  in  its  infancy  if  an
Edward  had  immediately  succeeded  to  the  throne  of  John.

1.  The  Great  Charter  was  always  considered  as  a  funda¬
mental  law.  But  yet  it  was  supposed  to  acquire  additional
security  by  frequent  confirmation.  This  it  received,  with

I  Hist,  of  Exchequer,  c.  12.

312  STATE  OF  TIIE  CONSTITUTION  Ciiap.  VIII.  Part  II.

some  not  inconsiderable  variation,  in  the  first,  second,  and
ninth  years  of  Henry’s  reign.  The  last  of  these  is  in  our
present  statute-book,  and  has  never  received  any  alterations;
but  Sir  E.  Coke  reckons  thirty-two  instances  wherein  it  has
been  solemnly  ratified.  Several  of  these  were  during  the
reign  of  Henry  III.,  and  were  invariably  purchased  by  the
grant  of  a  subsidy.1  This  prudent  accommodation  of  parlia¬
ment  to  the  circumstances  of  their  age  not  only  made  the  law
itself  appear  more  inviolable,  but  established  that  correspond¬
ence  between  supply  and  redress  which  for  some  centuries
was  the  balance-spring  of  our  constitution.  The  charter,
indeed,  was  often  grossly  violated  by  their  administration.
Even  Hubert  de  Burgh,  of  whom  history  speaks  more  favor¬
ably  than  of  Henry’s  later  favorites,  though  a  faithful  servant
of  the  crown,  seems,  as  is  too  often  the  case  with  such  men,
to  have  thought  the  king’s  honor  and  interest  concerned  in
maintaining  an  unlimited  prerogative.*  The  government  was,
however,  much  worse  administered  after  his  fall.  From  the
great  difficulty  of  compelling  the  king  to  observe  the  bounda¬
ries  of  law,  the  English  clergy,  to  whom  we  are  much  indebted
for  their  zeal  in  behalf  of  liberty  during  this  reign,  devised
means  of  binding  his  conscience  and  terrifying  his  imagination
by  religious  sanctions.  The  solemn  excommunication,  accom¬
panied  with  the  most  awful  threats,  pronounced  against  the
violators  of  Magna  Charta,  is  well  known  from  our  common
histories.  The  king  was  a  party  to  this  ceremony,  and  swore
to  observe  the  charter.  But  Henry  III.,  though  a  very  de¬
vout  person,  had  his  own  notions  as  to  the  validity  of  an  oath
that  affected  his  power,  and  indeed  passed  his  life  in  a  series
of  perjuries.  According  to  the  creed  of  that  age,  a  papal
dispensation  might  annul  any  prior  engagement ;  and  he  was
generally  on  sufficiently  good  terms  with  Koine  to  obtain  such
an  indulgence.

2.  Though  the  prohibition  of  levying  aids  or  escuages
without  consent  of  parliament  had  been  omitted  in  all
Henry’s  charters,  yet  neither  one  nor  the  other  seem  in  fact
to  have  been  exacted  at  discretion  throughout  his  reign.  On
the  contrary,  the  barons  frequently  refused  the  aids,  or  rather
subsidies,  which  his  prodigality  was  always  demanding.  In¬
deed  it  would  probably  have  been  impossible  for  the  king,

1  Mutt.  Purls,  p.  27 2.

»  Id.  p.  2*4.

English  Const.

UNDER  HENRY  III.

313

however  frugal,  stripped  as  he  was  of  so  many  lucrative
though  oppressive  prerogatives  by  the  Great  Charter,  to  sup¬
port  the  expenditure  of  government  from  his  own  resources.
Tallages  on  his  demesnes,  and  especially  on  the  rich  and  ill-
affected  city  of  London,  he  imposed  without  scruple ;  but  it
does  not  appear  that  he  ever  pretended  to  a  right  of  gen¬
eral  taxation.  We  may  therefore  take  it  for  granted  that
the  clause  in  John’s  charter,  though  not  expressly  renewed,
was  still  considered  as  of  binding  force.  The  king  was  often
put  to  great  inconvenience  by  the  refusal  of  supply ;  and  at
one  time  was  reduced  to  sell  his  plate  and  jewels,  which  the
citizens  of  London  buying,  he  was  provoked  to  exclaim  with
envious  spite  against  then-  riches,  which  he  had  not  been  able
to  exhaust.1

3.  The  power  of  granting  money  must  of  course  imply  the
power  of  withholding  it ;  yet  this  has  sometimes  been  little
more  than  a  nominal  privilege.  But  in  this  reign  the  Eng¬
lish  parliament  exercised  their  right  of  refusal,  or,  what  was
much  better,  of  conditional  assent.  Great  discontent  was
expressed  at  the  demand  of  a  subsidy  in  1237  ;  and  the  king
alleging  that  he  had  expended  a  great  deal  of  money  on  his
sister’s  marriage  with  the  emperor,  and  also  upon  his  own,
the  barons  answered  that  he  had  not  taken  their  advice  in
those  affairs,  nor  ought  they  to  share  the  punishment  of  acts
of  imprudence  they  had  not  committed.2  In  1241,  a  subsidy
having  been  demanded  for  the  war  in  Poitou,  the  barons
drew  up  a  remonstrance,  enumerating  all  the  grants  they  had
made  on  former  occasions,  but  always  on  condition  that  the
imposition  should  not  he  turned  into  precedent.  Their  last
subsidy,  it  appears,  had  been  paid  into  the  hands  of  four
barons,  who  were  to  expend  it  at  their  discretion  for  the
benefit  of  the  king  and  kingdom  ;8  an  early  instance  of  par¬
liamentary  control  over  public  expenditure.  On  a  similar
demand  in  1244  the  king  was  answered  by  complaints  against
the  violation  of  the  charter,  the  waste  of  former  subsidies,
and  the  maladministration  of  his  servants.4  Finally  the
barons  positively  refused  any  money;  and  he  extorted  1500

i  M.  Paris,  p.  650.  language  is  particularly  uncourtly :  rex

*  Quod  haec  omnia  sine  consilio  fide-  cum  instantissimd,  ne  dicam  impuden-

lium  ftuorum  (ace rat,  nee  debucrant  esse  tlssimfc,  auxilium  pecuniar®  ab  iia  iterurn
poena  participee,  qui  fueraut  a  culpi  postularet,  toties  lee  si  et  illusi,  contra-
immuncs.  p.  307.  dixerunt  ei  uuauimiter  et  uuo  ore  iu

*  M.  Paris,  p.  516.  lack*.

*  Id.  p.  50 o,  572.  Matthew  Paris's

314

STATE  OF  TIIE  CONSTITUTION  Chap.  Vin.  Part  II.

marks  from  the  city  of  London.  Some  years  afterwards
they  declared  their  readiness  to  burden  themselves  more
than  ever  if  they  could  secure  the  observance  of  the  charter ;
and  requested  that  the  justiciary,  chancellor,  and  treasurer
might  be  appointed  with  consent  of  parliament,  according,
s»s  they  asserted,  to  ancient  custom,  and  might  hold  their
offices  during  good  behavior.1

Forty  years  of  mutual  dissatisfaction  had  elapsed,  when  a
signal  act  of  Henry’s  improvidence  brought  on  a  crisis  which
endangered  his  throne.  Innocent  IV.,  out  of  mere  animosity
against  the  family  of  Frederic  II.,  left  no  means  untried  to
raise  up  a  competitor  for  the  crown  of  Naples,  which  Man¬
fred  had  occupied.  Richard  earl  of  Cornwall  having  been
prudent  enough  to  decline  this  speculation,  the  pope  offered
to  support  Henry's  second  son,  prince  Edmund.  Tempted
by  such  a  prospect,  the  silly  king  involved  himself  in  irre¬
trievable  embarrassments  by  prosecuting  an  enterprise  which
could  not  possibly  be  advantageous  to  England,  and  upon
which  he  entered  without  the  advice  of  his  parluiment.  Des¬
titute  himself  of  money,  he  was  compelled  to  throw  the  ex¬
pense  of  this  new  crusade  upon  the  pope ;  but  the  assistance
of  Rome  was  never  gratuitous,  and  Henry  actually  pledged
his  kingdom  for  the  money  which  she  might  expend  in  a  war
for  her  advantage  and  his  own.2  He  did  not  even  want  the
effrontery  to  tell  parliament  in  1257,  introducing  his  son
Edmund  as  king  of  Sicily,  that  they  were  bound  for  the  re¬
payment  of  14,000  marks  with  interest.  The  pope  had  also,
in  furtherance  of  the  Neapolitan  project,  conferred  u|>on
Henry  the  tithes  of  all  benefices  in  England,  as  well  as  the
first  fruits  of  such  as  should  be  vacant.*  Such  a  concession
drew  upon  the  king  the  implacable  resentment  of  his  clergy,
already  complaining  of  the  cowardice  or  connivance  that  had

1  !)<■  com  muni  cotullio  regni,  aicut  »b  parliament  of  1248  complained  that  the
antiqno  coneuetum  et  juatuui.  p.  778.  kin#  had  not  followed  tile  «tcp*  of  hie
Thin  wm  not  eo  great  an  encroachment  predeceeaom  in  appointing  these  three
a»  it  may  appear.  Ralph  de  Neville,  great  oIRcera  by  their  coneent.  p.  id'!,
biahop  of  Chirheater,  had  been  made  What  hal  team  in  fact  the  practice  of
chancellor  in  1223,  aaaeusu  totliu  regni ;  former  king*  I  do  not  know;  but  it  la
itaque  scilicet  ut  non  depoucreturab  ejua  not  likely  to  hare  Iwen  »urh  u  they
eigilli  cuntodl  nbl  totius  regni  ordi-  represent.  Henry,  however,  had  turned
nante  coiiaenaa  et  consilio.  p.  286.  Ac-  the  archbishop  of  York  to  the  regeucy  of
cordlnglv,  the  king  demanding  the  great  the  kingdom  during  bb  abeence  bevond
wal  from  him  in  12*’>.  ho  refused  to  eras  in  1242,  decon-ilm  omnium  rotn'itum
giro  it  up,  alleging  that,  haring  re-  et  baronum  noetrorum  et  omnium  tide
ceired  it  in  the  geueral  council  of  the  lium  noetrorum.  Kytner,  t.  i.  p.  400
kingdom,  he  could  not  resign  it  without  <  Id.  p.  771.
the  same  authority,  p.  9S3.  And  the  >  p.  813.

English  Const.

UNDER  HEXRY  III.

315

during  all  his  reign  exposed  them  to  the  shameless  exactions
of  Rome.  Henry  had  now  indeed  cause  to  regret  his  precip¬
itancy.  Alexander  IV.,  the  reigning  pontiff,  threatened
him  not  only  with  a  revocation  of  the  grant  to  his  son,  but
with  an  excommunication  and  general  interdict,  if  the  money
advanced  on  his  account  should  not  be  immediately  repaid  ; 1
and  a  Roman  agent  explained  the  demand  to  a  parliament
assembled  in  London.  The  sum  required  was  so  enormous,
we  are  told,  that  it  struck  all  the  hearers  with  astonishment
and  horror.  The  nobility  of  the  realm  were  indignant  to
think  that  one  man’s  supine  folly  should  thus  bring  them  to
ruin.3  Who  can  deny  that  measures  beyond  the  ordinary
course  of  the  constitution  were  necessary  to  control  so  prodi¬
gal  and  injudicious  a  sovereign  ?  Accordingly  the  barons  in¬
sisted  that  twenty-four  persons  should  be  nominated,  half  by
the  king  and  half  by  themselves,  to  reform  the  state  of
the  kingdom.  These  were  appointed  on  the  meeting  of  the
parliament  at  Oxford,  after  a  prorogation.

The  seven  years  that  followed  are  a  revolutionary  period,
the  events  of  which  we  do  not  find  satisfactorily  explained
by  the  historians  of  the  time.8  A  king  divested  of  preroga¬
tives  by  his  people  soon  appears  even  to  themselves  an  in¬
jured  party.  And,  as  the  baronial  oligarchy  acted  with  that
arbitrary  temper  which  is  never  pardoned  in  a  government
that  has  an  air  of  usurpation  about  it,  the  royalists  began  to
gain  ground,  chiefly  through  the  defection  of  some  who  had
joined  in  the  original  limitations  imposed  on  the  crown,  usu¬
ally  called  the  provisions  of  Oxford.  An  ambitious  man,
confident  in  his  talents  and  popularity,  ventured  to  display  too
marked  a  superiority  above  his  fellows  in  the  same  cause.
But  neither  his  character  nor  the  battles  of  Lewes  and
Evesham  fall  strictly  within  the  limits  of  a  constitutional
history.  It  is  however  important  to  observe,  that,  even  in
the  moment  of  success,  Henry  III.  did  not  presume  to  revoke
any  part  of  the  Great  Charter.  His  victory  had  been

1  Rymer.t.i.p.  032.  Thin  Inauspicious  ne-  Dolult  igitur  nobitltaa  rognl,  so  unius
gotiation  for  Sicily  .which  is  not  altogether  hominis  ita  confundi  supinkt  simplicitato.
unlike  that  of  James  I.  about  the  Span-  M.  Paris,  p.  827.

iah  match,  in  its  folly,  bad  success,  and  3  The  best  account  of  the  provisions  of
the  dissatisfaction  it  occasioned  at  home,  Oxford  in  1200  aud  the  circumstances
receives  a  good  deal  of  illustration  from  connected  with  them  is  found  in  the
documents  in  Rymer's  collection.  Burton  Annals.  2  Gale,  X\  Seriptores,

*  Quant  ita*  pec  unite  ad  tantain  ascen-  p.  407.  Many  of  these  provisions  were
dlt  Huminam,  ut  stuporem  simul  ct  hor-  afterwards  enacted  in  the  statute  of
roreiu  in  auribus  geuerurot  auiieutium.  Marlebridge.

316  LIMITATIONS  OF  PREROGATIVE.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

achieved  by  the  arms  of  the  English  nobility,  who  had,  gen¬
erally  speaking,  concurred  in  the  former  measures  against  his
government,  and  whose  opposition  to  the  earl  of  Leicester’s
usurpation  was  compatible  with  a  steady  attachment  to  con¬
stitutional  liberty.1

The  opinions  of  eminent  lawyers  are  undoubtedly,  where
Limitations  legislative  or  judicial  authorities  fail,  the  best  evi-
deuce  that  can  be  adduced  in  constitutional  history,
promt  from  It  will  therefore  be  satisfactory  to  select  a  few
passages  from  Bracton,  himself  a  judge  at  the
end  of  Ilenry  III.’s  reign,  by  which  the  limitations  of
prerogative  by  law  will  clearly  appear  to  have  been  fully
established.  “  The  king,”  says  he,  “  must  not  be  subject
to  any  man,  but  to  God  and  the  law  ;  for  the  law  makes  him
king.  Let  the  king  therefore  give  to  the  law  what  the  Law
gives  to  him,  dominion  and  power;  for  there  is  no  king  where
will,  and  not  law,  bears  rule.”4  “  The  king  (in  another  place)
can  do  nothing  on  earth,  being  the  minister  of  God,  but  what
he  can  do  by  law ;  nor  is  what  is  said  (in  the  Pandects)  any
objection,  that  whatever  the  prince  pleases  shall  be  law ;  be¬
cause  by  the  words  that  follow  in  that  text  it  ap[>ears  to
design  not  any  mere  will  of  the  prince,  but  that  which  is
established  by  the  advice  of  his  councillors,  the  king  giving
his  authority,  and  deliberation  being  had  upon  it.”*  This
passage  is  undoubtedly  a  misrepresentation  of  the  famous  lex
regia,  which  has  ever  been  interpreted  to  convey  the  unlimit¬
ed  power  of  the  people  to  their  emperors.4  But  the  very
circumstance  of  so  perverted  a  gloss  put  upon  this  text  is  a
proof  that  no  other  doctrine  could  be  admitted  in  the  law  of
England.  In  another  passage  Bracton  reckons  as  superior
to  the  king,  “  not  only  God  and  the  law,  by  which  he  is  made
king,  but  his  court  of  earls  and  barons  ;  for  the  former  (com¬
ites)  are  so  styled  as  associates  of  the  king,  and  whoever
has  an  associate  has  a  master;*  so  that,  if  the  king  were
without  a  bridle,  that  is,  the  law,  they  ought  to  put  a  bridle
upon  him."*  Several  other  passages  in  Bracton  might  be

1  The  Earl  of  Oloueeater,  whone  per-  copied  from  GlanviTa  introduction  to  his
eonal  quarrel  with  Montfort  had  orer-  treatine.

thrown  the  baronial  oligarchy,  wrote  to  *  See  Scldan  ad  Pletain,  p.  10W.
the  king  in  12>>7,  ut  pmrixionee  Oxouim  >  Thin  in  caul,  I  auppoee,  that  he  who
tencri  facial  per  regnum  >uun>,  et  ut  pro-  acta  with  the  eminent  of  other,  mint  be
mi»a  eibi  apud  Eve* ham  de  facto  com-  in  nome  degree  restrained  by  them:  but
plerct.  Matt.  Pari*,  p.  820.  it  U  iU  expreaeed.

*  L  i.  c.  8  »1.  11.  e.16.

*  1.  hi.  o.  9.  Three  worda  are  nearly

English  Const.

LAW  COURTS.

317

produced  to  the  same  import ;  but  these  are  sufficient  to  de¬
monstrate  the  important  fact  that,  however  extensive  or  even
indefinite  might  be  the  royal  prerogative  in  the  days  of  Henry
III.,  the  law  was  already  its  superior,  itself  but  made  part  of
the  law,  and  was  incompetent  to  overthrow  it.1  It  is  true
that  in  this  very  reign  the  practice  of  dispensing  with  statutes
by  a  non-obstante  was  introduced,  in  imitation  of  the  papal
dispensations.2  But  this  prerogative  could  only  be  exerted
within  certain  limits,  and,  however  pernicious  it  may  be
justly  thought,  was,  when  thus  understood  and  defined,  not,
strictly  speaking,  incompatible  with  the  legislative  sovereign¬
ty  of  parliament.

In  conformity  with  the  system  of  France  and  other  feudal
countries,  there  was  one  standing  council,  which  The  King’s
assisted  the  kings  of  England  in  the  collection  and  Court-
management  of  their  revenue,  the  administration  of  justice
to  suitors,  and  the  despatch  of  all  public  business.  This  was
styled  the  King’s  Court,  and  held  in  his  palace,  or  wherever
he  was  personally  present.  It  was  composed  of  the  great
officers;  the  chief  justiciary,8  the  chancellor,  the  constable,

1  Allen  has  pointed  out  that  the  king
might  have  been  sued  in  his  own  courts,
like  one  of  his  subjects,  until  the  reign
of  Edward  I.,  who  introduced  the  me¬
thod  of  suing  by  petition  of  right;  and
in  the  Year  Book  of  Edward  III.  one
of  the  judges  says  that  he  has  seen  a
writ  beginning — Pracipe  Hairy  regi
A  uglier.  Bracton,  however,  expressly
asserts  the  contrary,  as  Mr.  Allen  owns,
so  that  we  may  reckon  this  rather  doubt¬
ful.  Bracton  has  some  remarkuble  words
which  I  have  omitted  to  quote :  after  he
has  broadly  asserted  that  the  king  has
no  superior  but  God,  and  that  no  remedy
can  be  had  by  law  against  him,  he  pro¬
ceeds :  Nisi  sit  qui  dicat,  quod  univer-
sitas  regni  et  baronagiuui  suum  hoc
facere  debeaut  et  possiut  in  curia  ipsius
regis.  By  curia  we  must  here  under¬
stand  parliament,  and  not  the  law-courta.

*  M.  Paris,  p.  701.

*  The  chief  justiciary  was  the  greatest
subject  in  England.  Besides  presiding
in  the  king’s  court  and  in  the  Exchequer,
he  was  originally,  by  virtue  of  his  office,
the  regent  of  the  kingdom  during  the
absence  of  the  sovereign,  which,  till  the
loss  of  Normandy,  occurred  very  fre¬
quently.  Writs,  at  such  times,  ran  in
his  name,  and  were  tested  by  him.
Madox,  Hist,  of  Kxcheq.  p.  16.  Ills  ap¬
pointment  upon  these  temporary  occa¬
sions  was  expressed,  ad  custodieudum

loco  nostro  terrain  nostram  Anglim  et
pacem  regni  nosfcri ;  and  all  persons  were
enjoined  to  obey  him  tanquam  justitiario
nostro.  Rymer,  t.  i.  p.  181.  Sometimes,
however,  the  king  issued  his  own  writ
do  ultra  mare.  The  first  time  when  the
dignity  of  this  office  was  impaired  was  at
the  death  of  John,  when  the  justiciary,
Hubert  de  Burgh,  being  besieged  in
Dover  Castle,  those  who  proclaimed
Henry  III.  at  Gloucester  constituted  the
earl  of  Pembroke  governor  of  the  king
and  kingdom,  Hubert  still  retaining  his
office.  This  is  erroneously  stated  by
Matthew  Paris,  who  has  misled  Spelman
in  his  Glossary ;  but  the  truth  appears
from  Hubert's  answer  to  the  articles  of
charge  against  him,  and  from  a  record  in
Madox’s  Hist,  of  Exoh  c.  21,  note  A
wherein  the  earl  of  Pembroke  is  named
ret! tor  regis  et  regni,  and  Hubert  do
Burgh  justiciary.  In  1241  the  arch¬
bishop  of  York  was  appointed  to  the  re¬
gency  during  Henry’s  absence  in  Poitou,
without  the  title  of  justiciary.  Rymer,
t.  i.  p.  410.  Still  the  office  was  so  con¬
siderable  that  the  barons  who  met  in  the
Oxford  parliament  of  1258  insisted  that
the  justiciary  should  be  annually  chosen
with  their  approbation.  But  the  subse¬
quent  successes  of  Henry  prevented  this
being  established,  and  Edward  1.  discon¬
tinued  the  office  altogether.

318

JUSTICES  OF  ASSIZE.  Chap.  VIII.  Fart  II

marshal,  chamberlain,  steward,  and  treasurer,  with  any  others
whom  the  king  might  appoint.  Of  this  great  court  there
was,  as  it  seems,  from  the  beginning,  a  particular  branch,  in
which  all  matters  relating  to  the  revenue  were  exclusively
The  Court  transacted.  This,  though  composed  of  the  same

of  ixcheq-  persons,  yet,  being  held  in  a  different  part  of  the

palace,  and  for  different  business,  was  distinguished
from  the  king’s  court  by  the  name  of  the  Exchequer ;  a  sepa¬
ration  which  became  complete  when  civil  pleas  were  decided
and  judgments  recorded  in  this  second  court.1

It  is  probable  that  in  the  age  next  after  the  Conquest  few
causes  in  which  the  crown  luul  no  interest  were  carried  before
the  royal  tribunals ;  every  man  finding  a  readier  course  of
justice  in  the  manor  or  county  to  which  he  belonged.*  But
by  degrees  this  supreme  jurisdiction  became  more  familiar ;
and,  as  it  seemed  less  liable  to  partiality  or  intimidation  than
the  provincial  courts,  suitors  grew  willing  to  submit  to  its
expensiveness  and  inconvenience.  It  was  obviously  the
interest  of  the  king’s  court  to  give  such  equity  and  steadi¬
ness  to  its  decisions  as  might  encourage  this  disposition.
Nothing  could  be  more  advantageous  to  the  king’s  authority,
nor,  what  perhaps  was  more  immediately  regarded,  to  his
revenue,  since  a  fine  was  always  paid  for  leave  to  plead  in
his  court,  or  to  remove  thither  a  cause  commenced  below.
But  because  few,  comparatively  speaking,  could  have  recourse
to  so  distant  a  tribunal  as  that  of  the  king’s  court,  and  per¬
haps  also  on  account  of  the  attachment  which  the  English
felt  to  their  ancient  right  of  trial  by  the  neighboring  free-
inutitution  holders,  Henry  II.  established  itinerant  justices  to
of  justices  of  decide  civil  mul  criminal  pleas  within  each  county.*
This  excellent  institution  is  referred  by  some  to  the
twenty-second  year  of  that  prince ;  but  Madox  traces  it
several  years  higher.4  We  have  owed  to  it  the  uniformity

1  For  much  Information  about  the  Tel  hundredo,  Tel  halimoto  aocam  haben-
Curia  Regis,  and  especially  this  branch  tiuui.  Lege*  Henr.  I.  c.  9.
of  it,  the  student  of  our  constitutional  *  Dialogue  de  Scaccario,  p.  8S.
history  should  hare  recourse  to  Madox’s  *  Ulst.  of  Exchequer,  c.  ill.  lord
History  of  the  Exchequer,  aud  to  the  Lyttelton  thinks  that  this  institution
Dialog  us  de  Scaccario.  written  in  the  may  hare  been  adopted  in  imitation  of
time  of  Henry  II.  by  Richard  bishop  of  Louis  VI.,  who  half  a  century  before  had
Ely,  though  commonly  ascribed  to  Ger-  introduced  a  similar  regulation  In  bis
ease  of  Tilbury.  This  treaUse  he  will  domains.  Hist,  of  Henry  II.  rol.  ti.
and  subjoined  to  Madox's  work.  I  Noil  p.  20«.  Justice*  in  eyre,  or,  as  we  now
XIII.]  call  them,  of  assise,  were  sometime*  com-

s  Onmii  causa  terminetur  comltatu,  missioned  In  the  reign  of  Henry  1

English  Const.  COUET  OF  COMMON  PLEAS.

319

of  our  common  law,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  split,
like  that  of  France,  into  a  multitude  of  local  customs ;  and
we  still  owe  to  it  the  assurance,  which  is  felt  by  the  poorest
and  most  remote  inhabitant  of  England,  that  his  right  is
weighed  by  the  same  incorrupt  and  acute  understanding
upon  which  the  decision  of  the  highest  questions  is  reposed.
The  justices  of  assize  seem  originally  to  have  gone  their
circuits  annually ;  and  as  part  of  their  duty  was  to  set  tallages
upon  royal  towns,  and  superintend  the  collection  of  the  reve¬
nue,  we  may  be  certain  that  there  could  be  no  long  interval.
This  annual  visitation  was  expressly  confirmed  by  the  twelfth
section  of  Magna  Charta,  which  provides  also  that  no  assize
of  novel  disseizin,  or  mort  d’ancestor,  should  be  taken  except
in  the  shire  where  the  lands  in  controversy  lay.  Hence  this
clause  stood  opposed  on  the  one  hand  to  the  encroachments
of  the  king’s  court,  which  might  otherwise,  by  drawing  pleas
of  land  to  itself,  have  defeated  the  suitor’s  right  to  a  jury
from  the  vicinage ;  and  on  the  other,  to  those  of  the  feudal
aristocracy,  who  hated  any  interference  of  the  crown  to  chas¬
tise  their  violations  of  law,  or  control  their  own  jurisdiction.
Accordingly,  while  the  confederacy  of  barons  against  Henry
III.  was  in  its  full  power,  an  attempt  was  made  to  prevent
the  regular  circuits  of  the  judges.1

Long  after  the  separation  of  the  exchequer  from  the  king’s
court,  another  branch  was  detached  for  the  decision  The  court
of  private  suits.  This  had  its  beginning,  in  Madox’s  of  common
opinion,  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Richard  I.2  But  Pleas'
it  was  completely  established  by  Magna  Charta.  “  Common
Pleas,”  it  is  said  in  the  fourteenth  clause,  “  shall  not  follow
our  court,  but  be  held  in  some  certain  place.”  Thus  was
formed  the  Court  of  Common  Bench  at  Westminster,  with
full,  and,  strictly  speaking,  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  all  civil
disputes,  where  neither  the  king’s  interest,  nor  any  matter

Hardy's  Introduction  to  Close  Rolls.
They  do  not  appear  to  have  gone  their
circuits  regularly  beforo  22  Hen.  II.
(1176.)

1  Justiclarii  regis  Anglim,  qui  dicuntur
itineris.  missi  Herfordiam  pro  suo  exe-
quendo  officio  repelluntur,  allegantibus
his  qui  regi  adversabantur,  ipsos  contr&
formam  provision  urn  Oxonice  nuper  fac-
tnrum  venisse.  Chron.  Nic.  Trivet,  a.d.
1260.  I  forget  where  X  found  this  quo¬
tation.

*  Hist.  of  Exchequer,  c.  19.  Justices

of  the  bench  are  mentioned  several  years
before  Magna  Charta.  But  Madox  thinks
the  chief  justiciary  of  Englund  might
preside  in  the  two  courts,  as  well  as  in
the  exchequer.  After  the  erection  of  the
Common  Bench  the  style  of  the  superior
court  began  to  alter.  It  ceased  by  de¬
grees  to  be  called  the  king’s  court.  Plena
were  said  to  be  held  coram  rege.  or
coram  rege  ublcunque  fuerit.  And  thus
the  court  of  king's  bench  was  formed
out  of  the  remaius  of  the  ancient  curia
regia.

320

ORIGIN  OF  COMMON  LAW.  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

savoring  of  a  criminal  nature,  was  concerned.  For  of  such
disputes  neither  the  court  of  king’s  bench,  nor  that  of  ex¬
chequer,  can  take  cognizance,  except  by  means  of  a  legal
fiction,  which,  in  the  one  case,  supposes  an  act  of  force,  and,
in  the  other,  a  debt  to  the  crown.

The  principal  officers  of  state,  who  had  originally  been
effective  members  of  the  king’s  court,  began  to  withdraw
-  .  .  , ..  from  it,  after  this  separation  into  three  courts  of

common  justice,  and  left  their  places  to  regular  lawyers ;
Law  though  the  treasurer  and  chancellor  of  the  ex¬

chequer  have  still  seats  on  the  equity  side  of  that  court,  a
vestige  of  its  ancient  constitution.  It  would  indeed  have  been
difficult  for  men  bred  in  camps  or  palaces  to  fulfil  the  ordi¬
nary  functions  of  judicature  under  such  a  system  of  law  as
had  grown  up  in  England.  The  rules  of  legal  decision,
among  a  rude  people,  are  always  very  simple ;  not  serving
much  to  guide,  far  less  to  control,  the  feelings  of  natural
equity.  Such  were  those  which  prevailed  among  the  Anglo-
Saxons  ;  requiring  no  subtler  intellect,  or  deeper  learning,
than  the  earl  or  sheriff  at  the  head  of  his  county-court  might
be  expected  to  possess.  But  a  great  change  was  wrought  in
about  a  century  after  the  Conquest.  Our  English  lawyers,
prone  to  magnify  the  antiquity,  like  the  other  merits  of  their
system,  are  apt  to  carry  up  the  date  of  the  common  law,  till,
like  the  pedigree  of  an  illustrious  family,  it  loses  itself  in  the
obscurity  of  ancient  time.  Even  Sir  Matthew  Ilale  does  not
hesitate  to  sa^  that  its  origin  is  as  undiscoverable  as  that  of
the  Nile.  But  though  some  features  of  the  common  law  may
be  distinguishable  in  Saxon  times,  while  our  limited  knowl¬
edge  prevents  us  from  assigning  many  of  its  peculiarities  to
any  determinable  period,  yet  the  general  character  and  most
essential  parts  of  the  system  were  of  much  later  growth.
The  laws  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  Madox  truly  observes,
are  as  different  from  those  collected  by  Glanvil  as  the  laws
of  two  different  nations.  The  pecuniary  compositions  for
crimes,  especially  for  homicide,  which  run  through  the  Anglo-
Saxon  code  down  to  the  laws  ascribed  to  Henry  I.,1  are  not
mentioned  by  Glanvil.  Death,  seems  to  have  been  the  regu¬
lar  punishment  of  murder,  as  well  as  robbery.  Though  the
investigation  by  means  of  ordeal  was  not  disused  in  his  time,1

1  0.  70.  manlfr,  haring  failrd  in  th#  orthal  of

*  A  cltiacn  of  London,  Biuperted  of  cold  water,  waa  haugvd  bjr  order  of  Uenry

English  Const.  ORIGIN  OF  COMMON  LAW.

321

yet  trial  by  combat,  of  which  we  find  no  instance  before  the
Conquest,  was  evidently  preferred.  Under  the  Saxon  gov¬
ernment,  suits  appear  to  have  commenced,  even  before  tho
king,  by  verbal  or  written  complaint ;  at  least,  no  trace  re¬
mains  of  the  original  writ,  the  foundation  of  our  civil  pro¬
cedure.1  The  descent  of  lands  before  the  Conquest  was
according  to  the  custom  of  gavelkind,  or  equal  partition
among  the  children;2  in  the  age  of  Henry  I.  the  eldest  son
took  the  principal  fief  to  his  own  share  ;8  in  that  of  Glanvil
he  inherited  all  the  lands  held  by  knight  service  ;  but  the  de¬
scent  of  socage  lands  depended  on  the  particular  custom  of
the  estate.  By  the  Saxon  laws,  upon  the  death  of  the  son
without  issue,  the  father  inherited ; 4  by  our  common  law,  he
is  absolutely,  and  in  every  case,  excluded.  Lands  were,  in
general,  devisable  by  testament  before  the  Conquest ;  but  not
in  the  time  of  Ilenry  II.,  except  by  particular  custom.  These
are  sufficient  samples  of  the  differences  between  our  Saxon
and  Norman  jurisprudence  ;  but  the  distinct  character  of  the
two  will  strike  more  forcibly  every  one  who  peruses  succes¬
sively  the  laws  published  by  Wilkins,  and  the  treatise  ascribed
to  Glanvil.  The  former  resemble  the  barbaric  codes  of  the
continent,  and  the  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  and  his  family,
minute  to  an  excess  in  apportioning  punishments,  but  sparing
and  indefinite  in  treating  of  civil  rights ;  while  the  other,
copious,  discriminating,  and  technical,  displays  the  character¬
istics,  as  well  as  unfolds  the  principles,  of  English  law.  It  is
difficult  to  a-sert  anything  decisively  as  to  the  period  between
the  Conquest  and  the  reign  of  Ilenry  II.,  which  presents
fewer  materials  for  legal  history  than  the  preceding  age  ;  but
the  treatise  denominated  the  Laws  of  Henry  I.,  compiled  at
the  soonest  about  the  end  of  Stephen’s  reign,8  bears  so  much
of  a  Saxon  character,  that  I  should  be  inclined  to  ascribe  our
present  common  law  to  a  date,  so  far  as  it  is  capable  of  any
date,  not  much  antecedent  to  the  publication  of  Glanvil.8  At

IT.,  though  he  offered  500  marks  to  save
his  life.  Hoveden.  p.  606.  It  appears  as
if  the  ordeal  were  permitted  to  persoiis
already  convicted  by  the  verdict  of  a  jury.
If  they  escaped  in  this  purgttion,  yet,  in
cases  of  murder,  they  were  banished  tho
realm.  Wilkins,  Leges  Anglo-Saxon,  p.
330.  Ordeal*  were  abolished  about  the
beginning  of  Ilenry  III.’s  reign.

1  llickes,  Dissert.  E  pistol.  p.  8.

*  Leges  Ouliclmi,  p.  225.

VOL.  II.

8  Leges  Henr.  I.  c.  70.

♦  Ibid.

6  The  Decretum  of  Oratian  is  quoted  in
this  treatise,  which  was  not  published  in
Italy  till  1151.

«  Madox,  Hist,  of  Exch.  p.  122,  edit.
1711.  Lord  Lyttelton,  vol.  il.  p.  267,
has  given  reasons  for  supposing  that
Glanvil  was  not  the  author  of  this
treatise,  but  some  clerk  under  his  di¬
rection.

21

322

CHARACTER  AA’D  DEFECTS  Chap.  Till.  Part  II.

the  same  time,  since  no  kind  of  evidence  attests  any  sudden
and  radical  change  in  the  jurisprudence  of  England,  the
question  must  be  considered  as  left  in  great  obscurity.  Per¬
haps  it  might  be  reasonable  to  conjecture  that  the  treatise
called  Leges  Henrici  Primi  contains  the  ancient  usages  still
prevailing  in  the  inferior  jurisdictions,  and  that  of  Glanvil
the  rules  established  by  the  Norman  lawyers  of  the  king’s
court,  which  would  of  course  acquire  a  general  recognition
and  efficacy,  in  consequence  of  the  institution  of  justices
holding  their  assizes  periodically  throughout  the  country.

The  capacity  of  deciding  legal  controversies  was  now  only
to  be  found  in  men  who  had  devoted  themselves  to
ami'def.^ts  of  that  peculiar  study  ;  and  a  race  of  such  men  arose,
the  English  whose  eagerness  and  even  enthusiasm  in  the  pro¬
fession  of  the  law  were  stimulated  by  the  self-com¬
placency  of  intellectusd  dexterity  in  threading  its  intricate  and
thorny  mazes.  The  Normans  are  noted  in  their  own  country
for  a  shrewd  and  litigious  temper,  which  may  have  given  a
character  to  our  courts  of  justice  in  early  times.  Something
too  of  that  excessive  subtlety,  and  that  preference  of  techni¬
cal  to  rational  principles,  which  runs  through  our  system,  may
be  imputed  to  the  scholastic  philosophy,  which  was  in  vogue
during  the  same  period,  and  is  marked  by  the  same  features.
But  we  have  just  reason  to  boast  of  the  leading  causes  of
these  defects ;  an  adherence  to  fixed  rules,  and  a  jealousy  of
judicial  discretion,  which  have  in  no  country,  I  believe,  been
carried  to  such  a  length.  Hence  precedents  of  adjudged
cases,  becoming  authorities  for  the  future,  have  been  con¬
stantly  noted,  and  form  indeed  almost  the  sole  ground  of
argument  in  questions  of  mere  law.  But  these  authorities
being  frequently  unreasonable  and  inconsistent,  partly  from
the  infirmity  of  all  human  reason,  partly  from  the  imperfect
manner  in  which  a  number  of  unwarranted  and  incorrect
reporters  have  handed  them  down,  later  judges  grew  anxious
to  elude  by  impalpable  distinctions  what  they  did  not  venture
to  overturn.  In  some  instances  this  evasive  skill  has  been
applied  to  acts  of  the  legislature.  Those  who  are  moderately
conversant  with  the  history  of  our  law  will  easily  trace  other
circumstances  that  have  cooperated  in  producing  that  techni¬
cal  and  subtle  system  which  regulates  the  course  of  real
property.  For  as  that  formed  almost  the  whole  of  our  an¬
cient  jurisprudence,  it  is  there  that  we  must  seek  its  original

English  Const.

OF  THE  ENGLISH  LAW.

323

character.  But  much  of  the  same  spirit  pervades  every  part
of  the  law.  No  tribunals  of  a  civilized  people  ever  borrowed
so  little,  even  of  illustration,  from  the  writings  of  philoso¬
phers,  or  from  the  institutions  of  other  countries.  Hence  law
has  been  studied,  in  general,  rather  as  an  art  than  a  science,
with  more  solicitude  to  know  its  rules  and  distinctions  than  to
perceive  their  application  to  that  for  which  all  rules  of  law
ought  to  have  been  established,  the  maintenance  of  public  and
private  rights.  Nor  is  there  any  reading  more  jejune  and
unprofitable  to  a  philosophical  mind  than  that  of  our  ancient
law-books.  Later  times  have  introduced  other  inconveniences,
till  the  vast  extent  and  multiplicity  of  our  laws  have  become
a  practical  evil  of  serious  importance,  and  an  evil  which,  be¬
tween  the  timidity  of  the  legislature  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
selfish  views  of  practitioners  on  the  other,  is  likely  to  reach,
in  no  long  period,  an  intolerable  excess.  Deterred  by  an
interested  clamor  against  innovation  from  abrogating  what  is
useless,  simplifying  what  is  complex,  or  determining  what  is
doubtful,  and  always  more  inclined  to  stave  off  an  immediate
difficulty  by  some  patchwork  scheme  of  modifications  and
suspensions  than  to  consult  for  posterity  in  the  comprehensive
spirit  of  legal  philosophy,  we  accumulate  statute  upon  statute,
and  precedent  upon  precedent,  till  no  industry  can  acquire,
nor  any  intellect  digest,  the  mass  of  learning  that  grows  upon
the  panting  student ;  and  our  jurisprudence  seems  not  unlikely
to  be  simplified  in  the  worst  and  least  honorable  manner,
a  tacit  agreement  of  ignorance  among  its  professors.  Much
indeed  lias  already  gone  into  desuetude  within  the  last  cen¬
tury,  and  is  known  only  as  an  occult  science  by  a  small  num¬
ber  of  adepts.  We  are  thus  gradually  approaching  the  crisis
of  a  necessary  reformation,  when  our  laws,  like  those  of  Rome,
must  be  cast  into  the  crucible.  It  would  be  a  disgrace  to  the
nineteenth  century,  if  England  could  not  find  her  Tribonian.1

*  Whitelocke,  just  after  the  Restora¬
tion,  complains  that  M  Now  the  volume
of  our  statutes  is  grown  or  swelled  to  a
great  bigness.”  The  volume !  What
would  he  have  said  to  the  monstrous
birth  of  a  volume  triennially,  filled  with
laws  professing  to  be  the  deliberate  work
of  the  legislature,  which  every  subject  is
supposed  to  read,  remember,  and  under¬
stand  !  The  excellent  sense  of  the  follow¬
ing  sentences  from  the  same  passage  may
well  excuse  me  for  quoting  them,  and,
pcruaps,  in  this  age  of  bigoted  averseuess

to  innovation,  I  have  need  of  some  apol¬
ogy  for  what  I  have  ventured  to  say  in
the  text.  “  I  remember  the  opinion  of  a
wise  and  learned  statesman  and  lawyer
(the  chancellor  Oxenstiem),  that  multi¬
plicity  of  written  laws  do  but  distract  the
judges,  and  render  the  law  less  certain  ;
that  where  the  law  sets  due  and  clear
bounds  betwixt  the  prerogative  royal  and
the  rights  of  the  people,  and  gives  remedy
in  private  causes,  there  needs  no  more
laws  to  be  increased ;  for  thereby  liti¬
gation  will  be  increased  likewise.  It

324

HEREDITARY  RIGHT  OF  Chap.  Till.  Part  II.

This  establishment  of  a  legal  system,  which  must  be  con¬
sidered  as  complete  at  the  end  of  Henry  HL’s  reign,  when
the  unwritten  usages  of  the  common  law  as  well  as  the  forms
and  precedents  of  the  courts  were  digested  into  the  great
work  of  Bracton,  might,  in  some  respects,  conduce  to  the
security  of  public  freedom.  For,  however  higldy  the  pre¬
rogative  might  be  strained,  it  was  incorporated  with  the  law,
and  treated  with  the  same  distinguished  and  argumentative
subtlety  as  every  other  part  of  it.  Whatever  tilings,  there¬
fore,  it  was  asserted  that  the  king  might  do,  it  was  a  neces¬
sary  implication  that  there  were  other  things  which  he  could
not  do ;  else  it  were  vain  to  specify  the  former.  It  is  not
meant  to  press  this  too  far ;  since  undoubtedly  the  bias  of
lawyers  towards  the  prerogative  was  sometimes  too  discernible.
But  the  sweeping  maxims  of  absolute  power,  which  servile
judges  and  churchmen  taught  the  Tudor  and  Stuart  princes,
seem  to  have  made  no  progress  under  the  Plantagenet  line.

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  effect  which  the  study  of
the  law  had  upon  the  rights  of  the  subject,  it  con-
duoed  materially  to  the  security  of  good  order  by
crown  e*t tab-  ascertaining  the  hereditary  succession  of  the  crown.

Five  kings  out  of  seven  that  followed  William  the
Conqueror  were  usurpers,  according  at  least  to  modem
notions.  Of  these,  Stephen  alone  encountered  any  serious
opposition  upon  that  ground  ;  and  with  respect  to  him,  it  must
be  remembered  that  all  the  barons,  himself  included,  had
solemnly  sworn  to  maintain  the  succession  of  Matilda.  Henry
II.  procured  a  parliamentary  settlement  of  the  crown  upon
his  eldest  and  second  sons ;  a  strong  presumption  that  their
hereditary  right  was  not  absolutely  secure.1  A  mixed  notion
of  right  and  choice  in  fact  prevailed  as  to  the  succes.-ion  of
every  European  monarchy.  The  coronation  oath  and  the
form  of  popular  consent  then  required  were  considered  as
more  material,  at  least  to  perfect  a  title,  than  we  deem  them
at  present.  They  gave  seizin,  as  it  were,  of  the  crown,  and,
in  cases  of  disputed  pretensious,  liad  a  sort  of  judicial  efficacy.

were  e  work  worthy  of  a  perllement.  end  roettere,  to  be  reduced  Into  rertelnty.  ell
eennot  be  done  otberwiee,  to  ceune  e  re-  of  one  (ubjert  Into  one  etetute,  the!  per-
riew  of  ell  our  utetulee,  to  repeel  each  u  •plrulty  end  rlcerueee  uiey  eppeer  in  oar
they  shell  judge  inronrenlent  to  reinein  written  lewn.  which  et  thie  dey  tow  »tu-
ln  foroe;  to  eon  Arm  thnee  which  they  etiell  dent*  or  ee*w  ren  And  in  them.”  White-
think  At  to  (tend,  end  thnee  errerel  ■tut-  lorke'e  Corainentery  on  Perliementeiy
un-c  which  ere  confuted,  eome  rrpuj-  Writ,  rol.  I.  p.  4t/J.
neat  to  othere,  meny  touching  the  eeuie  >  Lyttelton,  rol.  U.  p.  14.

English  Const.  THE  CROWN  ESTABLISHED.

325

The  Chronicle  of  Dunstable  says,  concerning  Richard  T.,  that
he  was  “elevated  to  the  throne  by  hereditary  right,  after  a
solemn  election  by  the  clergy  and  people  words  that  indi¬
cate  the  current  principles  of  that  age.  It  is  to  be  observed,
however,  that  Richard  took  upon  him  the  exercise  of  royal
prerogatives  without  waiting  for  his  coronation.2  The  suc¬
cession  of  John  has  certainly  passed  in  modem  times  for  an
usurpation.  I  do  not  find  that  it  was  considered  as  such  by
his  own  contemporaries  on  this  side  of  the  Channel.  The
question  of  inheritance  between  an  uncle  and  the  son  of  his
deceased  elder  brother  was  yet  unsettled,  as  we  learn  from
Glanvil,  even  in  private  succession.®  In  the  case  of  sovereign¬
ties,  which  were  sometimes  contended  to  require  different
rules  from  ordinary  patrimonies,  it  was,  and  continued  long
to  be,  the  most  uncertain  point  in  public  law.  John’s  pre-
tendons  to  the  crown  might  therefore  be  such  as  the  English
were  justified  in  admitting,  especially  as  his  reversionary  title
seems  to  have  been  acknowledged  in  the  reign  of  his  brother
Richard.4  If  indeed  we  may  place  reliance  on  Matthew
Paris,  archbishop  Hubert,  on  this  occasion,  declared  in  the
most  explicit  terms  that  the  crown  was  elective,  giving  even
to  the  blood  royal  no  other  preference  than  their  merit  might
challenge.5  Carte  rejects  this  as  a  fiction  of  the  historian ;
and  it  is  certainly  a  strain  far  beyond  the  constitution,  which,
both  before  and  after  the  Conquest,  had  invariably  limited
the  throne  to  one  royal  stock,  though  not  strictly  to  its  nearest
branch.  In  a  charter  of  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  John
calls  himself  king,  “by  hereditary  right,  and  through  the
consent  and  favor  of  the  church  and  people.”  6

It  is  deserving  of  remark,  that,  during  the  rebellions  against
this  prince  and  his  son  Henry  III.,  not  a  syllable  was  breathed
in  favor  of  Eleanor,  Arthur’s  sister,  who,  if  the  present
rules  of  succession  lual  been  established,  was  the  undoubted
heiress  of  his  right.  The  barons  chose  rather  to  call  in  the
aid  of  Louis,  with  scarcely  a  shade  of  title,  though  with  much
better  means  of  maintaining  himself.  One  should  think  that
men  whose  fathers  had  been  in  the  field  for  Matilda  could
make  no  ditHculty  about  female  succession,  liut  I  doubt

t  Lyttelton,  ▼ol.  11.  p.  42.  ILrreditario  *  Hoveden,  p.  702.
jim*  promovendua  in  re^num,  poet  cleri  *  p.  166.

et  populi  aolennem  electionem.  •Jure  haereditario,  efc  medlante  tam

t  Gul.  Neubrinnfto,  1.  It.  c.  1.  cl«*ri  et  populi  connennu  et  favor®.  Our-

4  Glanvil,  1.  rii.  c.  8.  dou  on  l*arliaineuU,  p.  189.

326

GENTRY  DESTITUTE  OF  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

whether,  notwithstanding  that  precedent,  the  crown  of  Eng¬
land  was  universally  acknowledged  to  be  capable  of  descend¬
ing  to  a  female  heir.  Great  averseness  had  been  shown  by
the  nobility  of  Henry  I.  to  his  proposal  of  settling  the  king¬
dom  on  his  daughter.1  And  from  a  remarkable  passage
which  I  shall  produce  in  a  note,  it  appears  that  even  in  the
reign  of  Edward  III.  the  succession  was  supposed  to  be  con¬
fined  to  the  male  line.2

At  length,  about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  the
lawyers  applied  to  the  crown  the  same  strict  principles  of
descent  which  regulate  a  private  inheritance.  Edward  I.
was  proclaimed  immediately  upon  his  father’s  death,  though
absent  in  Sicily.  Something  however  of  the  old  principle
may  be  traced  in  this  proclamation,  issued  in  his  name  by
the  guardians  of  the  realm,  where  he  asserts  the  crown  of
England  “  to  have  devolved  upon  him  by  hereditary  succes¬
sion  and  the  will  of  his  nobles.”  *  These  hist  words  were
omitted  in  the  proclamation  of  Edward  II. ;  *  since  whose
time  the  crown  has  been  absolutely  hereditary.  The  corona¬
tion  oath,  and  the  recognition  of  the  people  at  that  solemnity,
are  formalities  which  convey  no  right  either  to  the  sovereign
or  the  people,  though  they  may  testify  the  duties  of  each.4

I  cannot  conclude  the  present  chapter  without  observing
English  one  most  prominent  and  characteristic  distinction
tituW  f°*  between  the  constitution  of  England  and  that  of
exciusiro  every  other  country  in  Europe;  I  mean  its  refusal
privilege*.  Gf  cjvi]  privileges  to  the  lower  nobility,  or  those

1  Lyttelton,  vol.  1.  p.  102.

*  Thin  In  intimated  by  the  treaty  made
In  1339  for  a  marriage  between  the  eldest
non  of  Kdwanl  III.  and  the  duke  of  Bra¬
bant'*  daughter.  Kdward  therein  prom¬
ise*  that.  If  hi*  win  should  die  before
him,  leaving  male  la*ue,  he  will  procure
the  ronwnt  of  hi*  baron*,  noble*,  and
cities  (that  i*.  of  parliament ;  noble*  here
meaning  knight*,  if  the  word  ha*  any
distinct  *en*e),  for  such  Imm  to  inherit
the  kingdom  ;  and  if  he  die  leaving  a
daughter  only,  Kdward  or  hi*  heir  shall
make  such  provision  for  her  a*  belong*
to  the  daughter  of  a  king.  Kymer.  t.  v.
p.  114.  It  may  be  inferred  from  this  in¬
strument  that,  in  Edward's  Intention,  if
not  by  the  constitution,  the  Salic  law
wu  to  regulate  the  succession  of  the
English  crown.  This  law.  it  must  be  re¬
membered,  he  was  compelled  to  admit  in
hi*  claim  on  the  kingdom  of  France,

though  with  a  certain  modification  which
gave  a  pretext  of  title  to  himself.

*  Ad  no*  regnl  gubernaculum  *ne-
cessione  h«*redit*ri4,  ar  prorerum  regnl
voluntate,  et  fldelitate  nobis  praretitt  sit
devolutum.  Brady  (Ili«tory  of  England,
vol.  ii.  Appendix,  p.  1)  expound*  p ra¬
cer  u  m  voluntate  to  meau  willingness,  not
will;  a*  much  a*  to  say,  they  acted  read¬
ily  and  without  command.  But  In  all
probability  it  wa*  intended  to  nave  the
usual  form  of  consent.

«  Kymer,  t.  111.  p.  1.  Walsinghatn,
however,  assert*  that  Edward  II.  as¬
cended  the  throne  non  tain  jure  harre-
ditario  quAi*  unanlmi  assensu  prorerum
et  magnatum.  p.  96.  Perhaps  we  should
omit  the  word  sos,  and  he  might  intend
to  aay  that  the  king  had  not  only  hi*
hereditary  title,  but  the  free  consent  of
hi*  baron*.

»  INor*  XIV.]

English  Const.  EXCLUSIVE  PRIVILEGES.

327

whom  we  denominate  the  gentry.  In  France,  in  Spain,  in
Germany,  wherever  in  short  we  look,  the  appellations  of
nobleman  and  gentleman  have  been  strictly  synonymous.
Those  entitled  to  bear  them  by  descent,  by  tenure  of  land,  by
office  or  royal  creation,  have  formed  a  class  distinguished  by
privileges  inherent  in  their  blood  from  ordinary  freemen.
Marriage  with  noble  families,  or  the  purchase  of  military
fiefs  or  the  participation  of  many  oivil  offices,  were,  more  or
less,  interdicted  to  the  commons  of  France  and  the  empire.
Of  these  restrictions,  nothing,  or  next  to  nothing,  was  ever
known  in  England.  The  law  has  never  taken  notice  of
gentlemen.1  From  the  reign  of  Henry  HI.  at  least,  the  legal
equality  of  all  ranks  below  the  peerage  was,  to  every  essen¬
tial  purpose,  as  complete  as  at  present.  Compare  two  writers
nearly  contemporary,  Bracton  with  Beaumanoir,  and  mark
how  the  customs  of  England  are  distinguishable  in  this  re-
spect  The  Frenchman  ranges  the  people  under  three
divisions,  the  noble,  the  free,  and  the  servile;  our  countryman
has  no  generic  class,  but  freedom  and  villenage.2  No  re¬
straint  seems  ever  to  have  lain  upon  marriage;  nor  have  the
children  even  of  a  peer  been  ever  deemed  to  lose  any  privi¬
lege  by  his  union  with  a  commoner.  The  purchase  of  lands
held  by  knight-service  was  always  open  jto  all  freemen.  A
few  privileges  indeed  were  confined  to  those  who  had  received
knighthood.8  But,  upon  the  whole,  there  was  a  virtual
equality  of  rights  among  all  the  commoners  of  England.
What  is  most  particular  is,  that  the  peerage  itself  imparts  no
privilege  except  to  its  actual  possessor.  In  every  other
country  the  descendants  of  nobles  cannot  but  themselves  be
noble,  because  their  nobility  is  the  immediate  consequence  of
their  birth.  But  though  we  commonly  say  that  the  blood  of

1  It  la  hardly  worth  while,  even  for  the
sake  of  obviating  cavil*,  to  notice  a*  an
exception  the  statute  of  23  II.  VI.  c.  14,
prohibiting  the  election  of  any  who  were
not  born  gentlemen  for  knight*  of  the
shire.  Much  less  should  I  have  thought
of  noticing,  if  it  had  not  been  suggested
a*  an  objection,  the  provision  of  the  stat¬
ute  of  Merton,  that  guardian*  In  chivalry
•hall  not  marry  their  war«ls  to  villein*
or  burgessAs,  to  their  disparagement.
Wherever  the  distinction*  of  rank  and
property  are  felt  in  the  custom*  of  society,
•  uch  marriages  will  be  deemed  unequal  ;
and  it  was  to  obviate  the  tyranny  of
feudal  superiors  who  compelled  their

ward*  to  accept  a  mean  alliance,  or  to
forfeit  it*  price,  that  this  provision  of  the
statute  was  made.  Hut  this  doe*  not
affect  the  proposition  I  had  maintained
a*  to  the  I'gal  equality  of  commoners,
any  more  than  a  report  of  a  Master  in
Chancery  at  the  present  day,  that  a  pro¬
posed  marriage  for  a  ward  of  the  court  was
unequal  to  what  her  station  in  society
appeared  to  claim,  would  invalidate  the
same  proposition.

s  Beaumanoir,  c.  46.  Brncton,  1.  L
c.  0.

*  See  for  these,  Seldeu’s  Title*  of  Honor,
vol.  iii.  p.  800.

32a

CAUSES  OF  EQUALITY  Chap.  VIII.  Fart  II.

a  peer  is  ennobled,  yet  this  expression  seems  hardly  accurate,
and  fitter  for  heralds  than  lawyers ;  since  in  truth  nothing
confers  nobility  but  the  actual  descent  of  a  peerage.  The
sons  ot  peers,  as  we  well  know,  are  commoners,  and  totally
destitute  of  any  legal  right  beyond  a  barren  precedence.

There  is  no  part,  perhaps,  of  our  constitution  so  admirable
as  this  equality  ot  civil  rights ;  this  isonomia ,  which  the  phi¬
losophers  of  ancient  Greece  only  hoped  to  find  in  democrat-
ical  government1  From  the  beginning  our  law  has  been  no
respecter  of  persons.  It  screens  not  the  gentleman  of  ancient
lineage  from  the  judgment  of  an  ordinary  jury,  nor  from
ignominious  punishment.  It  confers  not,  it  never  did  confer,
those  unjust  immunities  from  public  burdens,  which  the  supe¬
rior  orders  arrogated  to  themselves  uj>on  the  continent  Thus,
while  the  privileges  of  our  peers,  as  hereditary  legislators  of
a  free  people,  are  incomparably  more  valuable  and  dignified
in  their  nature,  they  are  far  less  invidious  in  their  exercise
than  those  of  any  other  nobility  in  Europe.  It  is,  I  am  firmly
persuaded,  to  this  peculiarly  democratieal  character  of  the
English  monarchy,  that  we  are  indebted  for  its  long  perma¬
nence,  its  regular  improvement  and  its  present  vigor.  It  is
a  singular,  a  providential  circumstance,  that,  in  an  age  when
the  gradual  march  pf  civilization  and  commerce  was  so  little
foreseen,  our  ancestors,  deviating  from  the  usages  of  neigh¬
boring  countries,  should,  as  if  deliberately,  have  guarded
against  that  expansive  force  which,  in  bursting  through
obstacles  improvidently  opposed,  has  scattered  havoc  over
Europe.

This  tendency  to  civil  equality  in  the  English  law  may,  I
Cannon  of  think,  be  ascribed  to  several  concurrent  causes.  In
■monTfaw-  ^rst  P*ilce  feudal  institutions  were  far  less
mm  in  military  in  England  than  ii|>on  the  continent.  From
England.  the  time  of  Henry  II.  the  escuage,  or  pecuniary
commutation  for  personal  service,  became  almost  universal.
The  armies  of  our  kings  were  composed  of  hired  troops,  great
part  of  whom  certainly  were  knights  and  gentlemen,  but
who,  serving  for  pay,  and  not  by  virtue  of  their  birth  or
tenure,  preserved  nothing  of  the  feudal  diameter.  It  was

1  IIA^iJor  upfov,  irpirrov  fiiv  Herodolu*  (Thalia,  c.  80)  haa  pul  Into
bwofia  na/Jjarav  ixcL,  loovoulav,  the  mouth*  of  three  Prr»lan  «atrapa,  after
with  the  ad r orate  of  drm  orrery,  in  the  Utr  murder  of  SinrrJU  ;  a  ecetie  concelrrd
diacuaikm  of  forau  of  goTtnuueut  which  "pint  of  Corneille.

English  Const.

AMONG  FREEMEN.

329

not,  however,  so  much  for  the  ends  of  national  as  of  private
warfare,  that  the  relation  of  lord  and  vassal  was  contrived.
The  right  which  every  baron  in  France  possessed  of  redress¬
ing  his  own  wrongs  and  those  of  his  tenants  by  arms  rendered
their  connection  strictly  military.  But  we  read  very  little  of
private  wars  in  England.  Notwithstanding  some  passages  in
Glanvil,  which  certainly  appear  to  admit  their  legality,  it  is
not  easy  to  reconcile  this  with  the  general  tenor  of  our  laws.1
They  must  always  have  been  a  breach  of  the  king’s  peace,
which  our  Saxon  lawgivers  were  perpetually  striving  to  pre¬
serve,  and  which  the  Conqueror  and  his  sons  more  effectually
maintained.2  Nor  can  we  trace  many  instances  (some  we  per¬
haps  may)  of  actual  hostilities  among  the  nobility  of  England
after  the  Conquest,  except  during  such  an  anarchy  as  the
reign  of  Stephen  or  the  minority  of  Henry  III.  Acts  of
outrage  and  spoliation  were  indeed  very  frequent.  The
statute  of  Marlebridge,  soon  after  the  baronial  wars  of  Henry
IH.,  speaks  of  the  disseizins  that  had  taken  place  during  the
hue  disturbances ; 8  and  thirty-five  verdicts  are  said  to  have
been  given  at  one  court  of  assize  against  Foulkes  de  Breautd,
a  notorious  partisan,  who  commanded  some  foreign  mercena¬
ries  at  the  beginning  of  the  same  reign  ;4  but  these  are  faint
resemblances  of  that  wide-spreading  devastation  which  the
nobles  of  France  and  Germany  were  entitled  to  carry  among
their  neighbors.  The  most  prominent  instance  perhaps  of
what  may  be  deemed  a  private  war  arose  out  of  a  contention
between  the  earls  of  Gloucester  and  Hereford,  in  the  reign
of  Edward  I.,  during  which  acts  of  extraordinary  violence
were  perpetrated  ;  but,  far  from  its  having  passed  for  lawful,
these  powerful  nobles  were  both  committed  to  prison,  and
paid  heavy  fines.6  Thus  the  tenure  of  knight-service  was
not  in  effect  much  more  peculiarly  connected  with  the  pro-

1 1  have  modified  this  passage  in  con¬
sequence  of  the  just  animadversion  of  a
periodical  critic.  In  the  first  edition  I
had  stated  too  strougly  the  difference
which  I  still  believe  to  have  existed  be¬
tween  the  customs  of  England  and  other
feudal  countries  in  respect  of  private
warfare.  [Note  XV.]

*  The  penalties  imposed  on  breaches
of  the  peace,  in  Wilkins's  Anglo-Saxon
Uwn,  are  too  numerous  to  be  particularly
inserted  One  remarkable  passage  in
l)ouiesduy  appears,  by  mentioning  a  legal
custom  of  private  feuds  in  an  individual
rnauor,  and  there  only  among  Welshmen,

to  afford  an  inference  that  it  was  an
anomaly.  In  the  royal  manor  of  Ar-
chenfeld  in  Herefordshire,  if  one  Welsh¬
man  kills  another,  it  was  a  custom  for
the  relations  of  the  slain  to  assemble  and
plunder  the  murderer  and  his  kindred,
and  burn  their  houses,  until  the  corpse
should  be  interred,  which  was  to  hike
place  by  noon  on  the  morrow  of  his  death.
Of  this  plunder  the  king  had  a  third  part,
and  the  rest  they  kept  for  themselves. —
p.  179.

*  Stat.  62  II.  III.

*  Matt.  Paris,  p.  271.

*  Rot.  Pari.  vol.  i.  p.  70.

330

CAUSES  OF  EQUALITY  Chap.  VIII.  Part  II.

fcssion  of  arms  than  that  of  socage.  There  was  nothing  in
the  former  condition  to  generate  that  high  self-estimation
which  military  habits  inspire.  On  the  contrary,  the  burden¬
some  incidents  of  tenure  in  chivalry  rendered  socage  the  more
advantageous,  though  less  honorable  of  the  two.

In  the  next  phice,  we  must  ascribe  a  good  deal  of  efficacy
to  the  old  Saxon  principles  that  survived  the  conquest  of
A\  illiam  and  infused  themselves  into  our  common  law.  A
respectable  class  of  free  socagers,  having,  in  general,  full
rights  of  alienating  their  lands,  and  holding  them  probably  at
a  small  certain  rent  from  the  lord  of  the  manor,  frequently
occur  in  Domesday  Book.  Though,  as  I  have  already  ob¬
served,  these  were  derived  from  the  superior  and  more  fortu¬
nate  Anglo-Saxon  ceorls,  they  were  perfectly  exempt  from  all
marks  of  villenage  both  as  to  their  persons  and  estates.  Most
have  derived  their  name  from  the  Saxon  soc,  which  signifies  a
franchise,  especially  one  of  jurisdiction,1  and  they  undoubtedly
were  suitors  to  the  court-baron  of  the  lord,  to  whose  soc,  or
right  of  justice,  they  belonged.  They  were  consequently
judges  in  civil  causes,  determined  before  the  manorial  tribu¬
nal.*  Such  privileges  set  them  greatly  above  the  roturiers  or

•  It  now  appear*  strange  to  me  that
I  could  ever  have  given  the  preference
to  Brarton*8  derivation  of  socagt  from
soc  d>  charuc.  The  word  pokeman,  which
occurs  so  often  in  Domesday,  is  con¬
tinually  coupled  with  soca ,  a’  franchise
or  right  of  jurisdiction  belonging  to  the
lord,  whose  tenant  or  rather  suitor,  the
aokeman  is  described  to  be.  Soc  Is  an
idle  and  improbable  etymology ;  espe¬
cially  as  at  the  time  when  pokeman  wan
moat  in  use  there  wan  hardly  a  word  of
a  French  root  In  the  language.  Soc  la
plaiuly  derived  from  seeo,  and  therefore
cannot  pass  fora  Teutonic  word.

I  once  thought  the  etymology  of  Brac-
ton  and  Lyttelton  curiously  illustrated
by  a  passage  in  Blomerteld's  Hint,  of
Norfolk,  toI.  iii.  p.  638  (folio).  In  the
manor  of  Cawstou  a  man  with  a  brazen
hand  holding  a  ploughshare  was  carried
before  the  steward  a-  a  sign  that  It  was
held  by  socage  of  the  duchy  of  Lan¬
caster.

*  The  feudal  court*,  if  under  that  name
we  include  those  of  landholder*  haring
grant*  of  soc,  sac,  infnngthef.  kc..  frmn
the  crown,  had  originally  a  jurisdiction
exclusive  of  the  county  and  hundred.
The  Laws  of  Henry  I.,  a  treatise  of  great
authority  a*  a  contemporary  exposition
of  the  law  of  England  iu  the  middle  of

the  twelfth  century,  ju§t  before  the  great
though  silent  revolution  which  brought
in  the  Norman  jurisprudence,  bear
abundant  witne-s  to  the  territorial  courts,
collateral  to  and  independent  of  those  of
the  sheriff.  Other  proofs  an-  easily  fur¬
nished  for  a  later  period.  Vide  Chron.
Jocelyn  de  Brakeloude,  et  alia .

It  1a  nevertheless  true  that  territorial
jurisdiction  was  never  so  extensive  as  in
government*  of  a  more  aristocrmtical
character,  either  In  criminal  or  civil  ca*c*.
1.  In  the  laws  ascribed  to  Henry  I.  it  is
said  that  all  great  offences  could  only  be
tried  in  the  king’s  court,  or  by  hi*  com¬
mission.  c.  10.  Glanvil  distinguishes  the
criminal  pleas,  which  could  only  be  deter¬
mined  before  the  king's  judges,  from  those
which  belong  to  the  sheriff.  Treason,
murder,  robbery,  and  rape  were  of  tha
former  class  ;  theft  of  the  latter.  I.  xiv.
The  criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  sheriff
is  entirely  taken  away  by  Magna  t'harta
©.  17.  8lr  K.  Coke  says  the  territorial
fmnchiscsof  infangthief  and  outfsngthief
“  had  some  continuance  afterward*,  but
either  by  this  act,  or  per  desuetudinem
for  inconvenience,  these  franchises  within
manors  are  antiquated  and  gone.”  2  Inst,
p.  81.  The  statute  hardly  seems  to  reach
them ;  and  they  were  certainly  both
claimed  and  exercised  as  lata  as  the

English  Const.

AMONG  FREEMEN.

331

censiers  of  France.  They  were  all  Englishmen,  and  their
tenure  strictly  English ;  which  seems  to  have  given  it  credit
in  the  eyes  of  our  lawyers,  when  the  name  of  Englishman
was  affected  even  by  those  of  Norman  descent,  and  the  laws
of  Edward  the  Confessor  became  the  universal  demand.  Cer¬
tainly  Glanvil,  and  still  more  Bracton,  treat  the  tenure  in  free
socage  with  great  respect.  And  we  have  reason  to  think  that
this  class  of  freeholders  was  very  numerous  even  before  the
reign  of  Edward  I.

But,  lastly,  the  change  which  took  place  in  the  constitution
of  parliament  consummated  the  degradation,  if  we  must  use
the  word,  of  the  lower  nobility:  I  mean,  not  so  much  their
attendance  by  representation  instead  of  personal  summons,  as
their  election  by  the  whole  body  of  freeholders,  and  their
separation,  along  with  citizens  and  burgesses,  from  the  house
of  peers.  These  changes  will  fall  under  consideration  in  the
following  chapter.

reign  of  Edward  I.  Blomefield  men-  king  refused.  Stafc.  Merton,  c.  11.  But
tions  two  instances,  both  in  1285,  where  several  lords  enjoyed  this  as  a  particular
executions  for  felony  took  place  by  the  franchise;  which  is  saved  by  the  statute
sentence  of  a  court-baron.  In  these  5  II.  IV.  c.  10,  directing  justices  of  the
cases  the  lord’s  privilege  was  called  in  peace  to  imprison  no  man,  except  in  the
question  at  the  assizes,  by  which  means  common  gaol.  2.  The  civil  jurisdiction
we  learn  the  transaction  ;  it  is  very  prob-  of  the  court-baron  was  rendered  insignifl-
able  that  similar  executions  occurred  in  cant,  not  only  by  its  limitation  in  per-
inanors  where  the  jurisdiction  was  not  sonal  suits  to  debts  or  damages  not  ex-
disputed.  Ilist.  of  Norfolk,  vol.  i.  p.  313 ;  ceeding  forty  shillings,  but  by  the  writs
vol.  iii.  p.  60.  Felonies  are  now  cog-  of  toll  and  pone,  which  at  once  removed
nizable  in  the  greater  part  of  boroughs  ;  a  suit  for  lands,  in  any  state  of  its  prog-
though  it  is  usual,  except  iu  the  most  ress  before  judgment,  into  the  county
considerable  places,  to  remit  such  as  are  court  or  that  of  the  king.  The  statute
not  within  benefit  of  clergy  to  the  jus-  of  Marlebridge  took  away  all  appellant
tires  of  gnol  delivery  on  their  circuit,  jurisdiction  of  the  superior  lord,  for  false
This  jurisdiction,  however,  is  given,  or  judgment  in  the  manorial  court  of  his
presumed  to  be  given,  by  special  charter,  tenant,  and  thus  aimed  another  blow  at
and  perfectly  distinct  from  that  which  the  feudal  connection.  52  II.  III.  c.  19.
was  feudal  and  territorial.  Of  the  latter  3.  The  lords  of  the  counties  palatine  of
some  vestiges  appear  to  remain  in  par-  Chester  and  Durham,  and  the  Royal
ticular  liberties,  as  for  example  the  Soke  franchise  of  Ely,  had  not  only  a  capital
of  Peterborough  ;  but  most,  if  not  all,  of  jurisdiction  in  criminal  cases,  but  an
these  local  franchises  have  fallen,  by  right  exclusive  cognizance  of  civil  suits;  the
or  custom,  into  the  bands  of  justices  of  former  still  is  retained  by  the  bishops  of
the  peace.  A  territorial  privilege  some-  Durham  and  Ely,  though  much  shorn  of
what  analogous  to  criminal  jurisdiction,  Its  ancient  extent  by  an  act  of  Henry
but  considerably  more  oppressive,  was  \  III.  (27  II.  VIII.  c.  24),  and  adminia-
that  of  private  gaols.  At  the  parliament  tered  by  the  king's  justices  of  assize  ;  the
of  Merton,  1237,  the  lords  requested  to  bishops  or  their  deputies  being  put  only
have  their  own  prison  for  trespasses  ou  the  footing  of  ordinary  justices  of  the
upon  their  parks  and  ponds,  which  the  peace.  Id.  s.  20.

332

TILE  BRETWALDAS.

Notes  to

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VIII.

(Parts  I.  and  II.)

Note  I.  Page  25G.

These  seven  princes  enumerated  by  Bede  have  been  called
Bretwaldas,  and  they  have,  by  late  historians,  been  advanced
to  higher  importance  and  to  a  different  kind  of  power  than,
<is  it  appears  to  me,  there  is  any  sufficient  ground  to  bestow
on  them.  But  as  I  have  "one  more  fully  into  this  subject  in
a  paper  published  in  the  32d  volume  of  the  ‘  Archseologia,’
I  shall  content  myself  with  giving  the  most  material  parts  of
what  will  there  be  found.

Bede  is  the  original  witness  for  the  seven  monarchs  who
before  his  time  had  enjoyed  a  preponderance  over  the  An<rio-
baxons  south  of  the  Humber:  —  “  Qui  cunctis  australibus
gentis  Anglorum  provineiis,  qua;  Ilumbne  fluvio  et  contiguis
ei  terininis  sequestrantur  a  Borealibus,  imperarunt.”  (Hist,
•.cel.  lib.  ii.  c.  5.)  The  four  first-named  had  no  authority
over  Aorthumbria;  but  the  last  three  being  sovereigns  of
that  kingdom,  their  sway  would  include  the  whole  of  England.

I  lie  Saxon  Chronicle,  under  the  reign  of  Egbert,  says
that  lie  was  the  eighth  who  had  a  dominion  over  Britain;
usmg  the  remarkable  word  Bretwalda,  which  is  found  nowhere
e  >e.  I  ms,  by  its  root  waldan ,  a  Saxon  verb,  to  rule  (whence
our  word  wield),  implies  a  ruler  of  Britain  or  the  Britons.

I  he  Chronicle  then  copies  the  enumeration  of  the  other  seven
in  Bede,  with  a  little  abridgment.  The  kings  mentioned  by
Bede  are  -TJli  or  Kiln,  founder  of  the  kingdom  of  the  South-
Saxons,  about  4<7;  Ceaulin,  of  Wessex,  after  the  interval
of  nearly  a  century ;  Ethelbert,  of  Kent,  the  first  Christian
king;  Red wa Id,  of  East  Anglia;  after  him  three  Northum¬
brian  kings  in  succession.  Edwin,  Oswald,  Oswin.  We  have,
therefore,  sufficient  testimony  that  before  the  middle  of  the

Chap.  VIII.

THE  BRETWALDAS.

333

seventh  century  four  kings,  from  four  Anglo-Saxon  kingdoms,
had,  at  intervals  of  time,  become  superior  to  the  rest;  except¬
ing,  however,  the  Northumbrians,  whom  Bede  distinguishes,
and  whose  subjection  to  a  southern  prince  does  not  appear  at
all  probable.  None,  therefore,  of  these  could  well  have  been
called  Bretwalda,  or  ruler  of  the  Britons,  while  not  even  his
own  countrymen  were  wholly  under  his  sway.

We  now  come  to  three  Northumbrian  kings,  Edwin,  Os¬
wald,  and  Oswin,  who  ruled,  in  Bede’s  language,  with  greater
power  than  the  preceding,  over  all  the  inhabitants  of  Britain,
both  English  and  British,  with  the  sole  exception  of  the  men
of  Kent.  This  he  reports  in  another  place  with  respect  to
Edwin,  the  first  Northumbrian  convert  to  Christianity;
whose  worldly  power,  he  says,  increased  so  much  that,  what
no  English  sovereign  had  done  before,  he  extended  his  do¬
minion  to  the  furthest  bounds  of  Britain,  whether  inhabited
by  English  or  by  Britons.  (Hist.  Eccl.  lib.  ii.  c.  9.)  Dr.
Lingard  has  pointed  out  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  this
testimony  of  Bede  in  a  Life  of  St.  Columba,  published  by
the  Bollandists.  He  names  Cuminius,  a  contemporary  writer,
as  the  author  of  this  Life  ;  but  I  find  that  these  writers  give
several  reasons  for  doubting  whether  it  be  his.  The  words
are  as  follow  :  —  “  Oswaldum  regem,  in  procinctu  belli  castra
metatum,  et  in  papilione  supra  pulvillum  dormientem  allocu-
tus  est,  et  ad  bellum  procedere  jussit.  Processit  et  secuta
est  victoria ;  reversusque  postea  totius  Britanniae  imperator
ordinatus  a  Deo,  et  tota  incredula  gens  baptizata  est.”  (Acta
Sanctorum,  Jun.  23.)  This  passage,  on  account  of  the  un¬
certainty  of  the  author’s  age,  might  not  appear  sufficient.
But  this  anonymous  Life  of  Columba  is  chiefly  taken  from
that  by  Adamnan,  written  about  7 00 ;  and  in  that  Life  we
find  the  important  expression  about  Oswald  —  “totius  Britan¬
niae  imperator  ordinatus  a  Deo.”  We  have,  therefore,  here
probably  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  Saxon  word  Bretwalda ;
for  what  else  could  answer  to  emperor  of  Britain  ?  And,  as
far  as  I  know,  it  is  the  only  one  that  exists.  It  seems  more
likely  that  Adamnan  refers  to  a  distinct  title  bestowed  on
Oswald  by  his  subjects,  than  that  he  means  to  assert  as  a  fact
that  be  truly  ruled  over  all  Britain.  This  is  not  very  credi¬
ble,  notwithstanding  the  language  of  Bede,  who  loves  to
amplify  the  power  of  favorite  monarchs.  For  though  it
may  be  admitted  that  these  Northumbrian  kings  enjoyed  at

334

THE  BRETWALDAS.

Notes  to

times  a  preponderance  over  the  other  Anglo-Saxon  princi¬
palities,  we  know  that  both  Edwin  and  Oswald  lost  their  lives
in  great  defeats  by  Penda  of  Mercia.  Nor  were  the  Strath-
cluyd  Britons  in  any  permanent  subjection.  The  name  of
Bretwalda,  as  applied  to  these  three  kings,  though  not  so
absurd  as  to  make  it  incredible  that  they  assumed  it,  asserts
an  untruth.

It  is,  however,  at  all  events  plain  from  history  that  they
obtained  their  superiority  by  force ;  and  we  may  probably
believe  the  same  of  the  four  earlier  kings  enumerated  by
Bede.  An  elective  dignity,  such  as  is  now  sometimes  sup¬
posed,  cannot  be  presumed  in  the  absence  of  every  semblance
of  evidence,  and  against  manifest  probability.  What  appear¬
ance  do  we  find  of  a  federal  union  among  the  kites  and
crows,  as  Milton  calls  them,  of  the  Heptarchy  ?  What  but
the  law  of  the  strongest  could  have  kept  these  rapacious  and
restless  warriors  from  tearing  the  vitals  of  their  common
country  ?  The  influence  of  Christianity  in  effecting  a  com¬
parative  civilization,  and  producing  a  sense  of  political  as
well  as  religious  unity,  had  not  yet  been  felt.

Mercia  took  the  place  of  Northumberland  as  the  leading
kingdom  of  the  Heptarchy  in  the  eighth  century.  Even
before  Bede  brought  liis  Ecclesiastical  History  to  a  close,  in
731,  Ethelbald  of  Mercia  had  become  paramount  over  the
southern  kingdoms  ;  certainly  more  so  than  any  of  the  first
four  who  are  called  by  the  Saxon  Chronicler  Bretwaldas.
“  Et  life  omnes  provincial  cteteneque  australes  ad  confinium
usque  Hymbrae  fluminis  cum  suis  quaeque  regibus,  Merciorum
regi  Ethelbaldo  subject®  sunt.”  (Hist.  Eccl.  v.  23.)  In  a
charter  of  Ethelbald  he  styles  himself  —  “  non  solum  Mercen-
sium  sed  et  universarum  provinciarum  quae  communi  vocab-
ulo  dicuntur  Suthangli  divina  lurgiente  gratia  rex.”  (Codex
Ang.-Sax.  Diplom.  i.  9G;  vide  etiam  100,  107.)  Offa,  his
successor,  retained  great  part  of  this  ascendency,  and  in  his
charters  sometimes  styles  himself  “  rex  Anglorum,”  Some¬
times  “rex  Merciorum  6imulque  aliarum  circumquaque  na-
tionum.”  (Ib.  162,  166,  167,  et  alibi.)  It  is  impossible
to  define  the  subordination  of  the  southern  kingdoms,  but  we
cannot  reasonably  imagine  it  to  have  been  less  than  they  paid
in  the  sixth  century  to  Ceaulin  and  Ethclbert.  Yet  to  these
potent  sovereigns  the  Saxon  Chronicle  does  not  give  the
name  Bretwalda,  nor  a  place  in  the  list  of  British  rulers.  It

Chap.  VHI.

THE  BRET  WALD  AS.

335

copies  Bede  in  this  passage  servilely,  without  regard  to  events
which  had  occurred  since  the  termination  of  his  history.

I  am,  however,  inclined  to  believe,  combining  the  passage
Adamnan  with  this  less  explicitly  worded  of  the  Saxon
Chronicle,  that  the  three  Northumbrian  kings,  having  been
victorious  in  war  and  paramount  over  the  minor  kingdoms,
were  really  designated,  at  least  among  their  own  subjects,  by
the  name  Bretwalda,  or  ruler  of  Britain,  and  totius  Britan¬
nia  imperator.  The  assumption  of  so  pompous  a  title  is
characteristic  of  the  vaunting  tone  which  continued  to  in¬
crease  down  to  the  Conquest.  We  may,  therefore,  admit  as
probable  that  Oswald  of  Northumbria  in  the  seventh  century,
as  well  as  his  father  Edwin  and  his  son  Oswin,  took  the  ap¬
pellation  of  Bretwalda  to  indicate  the  supremacy  they  had
obtained,  not  only  over  Mercia  and  the  other  kingdoms  of
their  countrymen,  but,  by  dint  of  successful  invasions,  over
the  Strathcluyd  Britons  and  the  Scots  beyond  the  Forth.  I
still  entertain  the  greatest  doubts,  to  say  no  more,  whether
this  title  was  ever  applied  to  any  but  these  Northumbrian
kings.  It  would  have  been  manifestly  ridiculous,  too  ridicu¬
lous,  one  would  think,  even  for  Anglo-Saxon  grandiloquence,
to  confer  it  on  the  first  four  in  Bede’s  list ;  and  if  it  expressed
an  acknowledged  supremacy  over  the  whole  nation,  why  was
it  never  assumed  in  the  eighth  century  ?

We  do  not  derive  much  additional  information  from  later
historians.  Florence  of  Worcester,  who  usually  copies  the
Saxon  Chronicle,  merely  in  this  instance  transcribes  the  text
of  Bede  with  more  exactness  than  that  had  done ;  he  neither
repeats  nor  translates  the  word  Bretwalda.  Henry  of  Hunt¬
ingdon,  after  repeating  the  passage  in  Bede,  adds  Egbert  to
the  seven  kings  therein  mentioned,  calling  him  “  rex  et  mon-
areha  totius  Britanniae,”  doubtless  as  a  translation  of  the
word  Bretwalda  in  the  Saxon  Chronicle ;  subjoining  the
names  of  Alfred  and  Edgar  as  ninth  and  tenth  in  the  list.
Egbert,  he  says,  was  eighth  of  ten  kings  remarkble  for  their
bravery  and  power  (fortissimorum)  who  have  reigned  in
England.  It  is  strange  that  Edward  the  Elder,  Athelstan,
and  Edred  are  passed  over.

Rapin  was  the  first  who  broached  the  theory  of  an  elective
Bretwalda,  possessing  a  sort  of  monarchical  supremacy  in
the  constitution  of  the  Heptarchy;  something  like,  as  he
says,  the  dignity  of  stadtholder  of  the  Netherlands.  It  was

336

SAX  OX  KIXGS  OF  ALL  ENGLAND.

Notes  to

taken  up  in  later  times  by  Turner,  Lingard,  Palgrave,  and
Lappenberg.  But  for  this  there  is  certainly  no  evidence
whatever  ;  nor  do  I  perceive  in  it  anything  but  the  very  re¬
verse  of  probability,  especially  in  the  earlier  instances.
"With  what  we  read  in  Bede  we  may  be  content,  confirmed  as
with  respect  to  a  Northumbrian  sovereign  it  appears  to  be
by  the  Life  of  Columba ;  and  the  plain  history  will  be  no
more  than  this  —  that  four  princes  from  among  the  southern
Anglo-Saxon  kingdoms,  at  different  times  obtained,  probably
by  force,  a  superiority  over  the  rest ;  that  afterwards  three
Northumbrian  kings  united  a  similar  supremacy  with  the
government  of  their  own  dominions ;  and  that,  having  been
successful  in  reducing  the  Britons  of  the  north  and  also  the
Scots  into  subjection,  they  assumed  the  title  of  Bretwalda,  or
ruler  of  Britain.  This  title  was  not  taken  by  any  later
kings,  though  some  in  the  eighth  century  were  very  powerful
in  England ;  nor  did  it  attract  much  attention,  since  we  find
the  word  only  once  employed  by  an  historian,  and  never  in  a
charter.  The  consequence  I  shotdd  draw  is,  that  too  great
prominence  has  been  given  to  the  appellation,  and  undue
inferences  sometimes  derived  from  it,  by  the  eminent  writers
above  mentioned.

Note  II.  Page  258.

The  reduction  of  all  England  under  a  single  sovereign
was  accomplished  by  Edward  the  Elder,  who  may,  therefore,
be  reckoned  the  founder  of  our  monarchy  more  justly  than
Egbert.  The  five  Danish  towns,  as  they  were  called,  Lei¬
cester,  Lincoln,  Stamford,  Derby,  and  Nottingham,  had  been
brought  under  the  obedience  of  his  gallant  sister  JEthelfleda,
to  whom  Alfred  had  intrusted  the  vicerovalty  of  Mercia.
Edward  himself  subdued  the  Danes  of  East  Anglia  and
Northumberland.  In  922  “the  kings  of  the  North  Welsh
sought  him  to  be  their  lord.”  And  in  924  “chose  him  for
father  and  lord,  the  king  of  the  Scots  and  the  whole  nation
of  the  Scots,  and  Regnald,  and  the  son  of  Eadulf,  and  all
those  who  dwell  in  Northumberland,  as  well  English  as
Danes  and  Northmen  and  others,  and  also  the  king  of  the
Strathcluvd  Britons,  and  all  the  Struthduyd  Britons.”  (Sax.
Chronicle.)

Edward  died  next  year ;  of  his  son  JEthelstan  it  is  said

Chap.  Till.  SAXON  KINGS  OF  ALL  ENGLAND.

337

that  “  he  ruled  all  the  kings  who  were  in  this  island ;  first,
Ilowel  king  of  West  Welsh,  and  Constantine  king  of  the
Seots,  and  Uwen  king  of  the  Gwentian  (Silurian)  people,
and  Ealdrad  son  of  Ealdalf  of  Bamborough,  and  they
confirmed  the  peace  by  pledge  and  by  oaths  at  the  place
which  is  called  Earnot,  on  the  fourth  of  the  Ides  of  July;
and  they  renounced  all  idolatry,  and  after  that  submitted  to
him  in  peace.”  (Id.  a.d.  926.)

From  this  time  a  striking  change  is  remarkable  in  the
style  of  our  kings.  Edward,  of  whom  we  have  no  extant
charters  after  these  great  submissions  of  the  native  princes,
calls  himself  only  Angul-Saxonum  rex.  But  in  those  of
Athelstan,  such  as  are  reputed  genuine  (for  the  tone  is  still
more  pompous  in  some  marked  by  Mr.  Kemble  with  an
asterisk),  we  meet,  as  early  as  927,  with  “  totius  Britanniae
monarchus,  rex,  rector,  or  basileus;”  “totius  Britanniae  solio
sublimatus;”  and  other  phrases  of  insular  sovereignty.
(Codex  Diplom.  vol.  ii.  passim;  vol.  v.  198.)  What  has
been  attributed  to  the  imaginary  Bretwaldas,  belonged  truly
to  the  kings  of  the  tenth  century.  And  the  grandiloquence
of  their  titles  is  sometimes  almost  ridiculous.  They  affected
particularly  that  of  Basileus  as  something  more  imperial
than  king,  and  less  easily  understood.  Edwy  and  Edgar  are
remarkable  for  this  pomp,  which  shows  itself  also  in  the
spurious  charters  of  older  kings.  But  Edmund  and  Edred
with  more  truth  and  simplicity  had  generally  denominated
them-elves  “  rex  Anglorum,  caiteror  unique  in  circuitu  per-
sistentium  gubernator  et  rector.”  (Codex  Diplom.  vol.  ii.
passim.)  An  expression  which  was  retained  sometimes  by
Edgar.  And  though  these  exceedingly  pompous  phrases
seem  to  have  become  less  frequent  in  the  next  century,  we
find  “  totius  Albionis  rex,”  and  equivalent  terms,  in  all  the
charters  of  Edward  the  Confessor.1

But  looking  from  these  charters,  where  our  kings  asserted
what  they  pleased,  to  the  actual  truth,  it  may  be  inquired
whether  Wales  and  Scotland  were  really  subject,  and  in  what
degree,  to  the  self-styled  Basileus  at  Winchester.  This  is  a
debatable  land,  which,  as  merely  historical  antiquities  are  far

1  “As  a  general  rule  it  may  be  ob-  from  the  latter  half  of  that  century
Served  that  before  the  tenth  ceutury  the  pedantry  and  abnurdity  struggle  for
proem  b*  comparatively  Minple  ;  that  the  mastery.”  Kemble  n  Introduction
about  that  time  the  influence  of  the  By-  to  vol.  ii.  p.  X.
tan  tine  court  began  to  be  felt;  and  thut

VOL.  1L  22

338

EORLS  AND  CEORI.S.

Notes  to

from  being  the  object  of  this  work,  I  shall  leave  to  national
prejudice  or  philosophical  impartiality.  Edgar,  it  may  be
mentioned,  in  a  celebrated  charter,  dated  in  964,  asserts  his
conquest  of  Dublin  and  great  part  of  Ireland :  —  “  Mihi
autein  concessit  propitia  divinitas  cum  Anglorum  imperio
omnia  regna  insularum  oceani  cum  suis  ferocissimis  regibus
usque  Norwegiam,  maximamque  partem  Hibernian  cum  sua
nobilissima  civitate  Dublinia  Anglorum  regno  subjugare;
quos  etiam  omnes  meis  imperiis  colla  subdere,  Dei  favente
gratia,  coegi.”  (Codex  Diplom.  ii.  404.)  No  historian
mentions  any  conquest  or  even  expedition  of  this  kind.  Sir
Francis  Palgrave  (ii.  258)  thinks  the  charter  “does  not
contain  any  expression  which  can  give  rise  to  suspicion ;  and
its  tenor  is  entirely  consistent  with  history:”  meaning,  I
presume,  that  the  silence  of  history  is  no  contradiction.  Mr.
Kemble,  however,  marks  it  with  an  asterisk.  I  will  mention
here  that  an  excellent  summary  of  Anglo-Saxon  history,
from  the  earliest  times  to  the  Conquest,  has  been  drawn  up
by  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  in  the  second  volume  of  the  Rise  and
Progress  of  the  English  Commonwealth.

Note  III.  Page  262.

The  proper  division  of  freemen  was  into  eorls  and  ceorls :
ge  eorle  —  ge  ceorle;  ge  eorlische  —  ge  ceorlische;  occur  in
several  Anglo-Saxon  texts.  The  division  corresponds  to  the
phrase  “gentle  and  simple”  of  later  times.  Palgrave  (p.  11)
agrees  with  this.  Yet  in  another  place  (voL  ii.  p.  352)  he
says,  “  It  certainly  designated  a  person  of  noble  race.  This
is  the  form  in  which  it  is  employed  in  the  laws  of  Ethelbert.
The  earl  and  the  churl  are  put  in  opposition  to  each  other  as
the  two  extremes  of  society.”  I  cannot  assent  to  this ;  the
second  thoughts  of  my  learned  friend  I  like  less  than  the
first.  It  seems  like  saying  men  and  women  are  the  extremes
of  humanity,  or  odd  and  even  of  number.  What  was  in  the
middle?1  Mr.  Kemble,  in  his  Glossary  to  Beowulf,  explains
eorl  by  vir  fortis,  pugil  vir ;  and  proceeds  thus:  —  “  Eorl
is  not  a  title,  as  with  us,  any  more  than  beom  .  .  .  We

l  An  writer  writer  him  fallen  Into  the  the  loweet  deerrlption  of  freemen,  to
mine  mistake,  which  ahould  be corrected,  eorle,  u  the  higheet  of  the  nobility."
s*  the  equivocal  meaning  of  the  word  Heywood“Oo  Kiudu  among  the  Anglo
eorl  might  ca»lly  deceive  the  feeder.  Sexotu,"  p.  278.

“Ceorle,  orcyrllee  men,  ere  opposed,  u

Chap.  VIII.

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

339

may  safely  look  upon  the  origin  of  earl,  as  a  title  of  rank,  to
be  the  same  as  that  of  the  comites,  who,  according  to  Tacitus,
especially  attached  themselves  to  any  distinguished  chief.
That  these  Jideles  became  under  a  warlike  prince  something
more  important  than  the  early  constitution  of  our  tribes  con¬
templated,  is  natural,  and  is  moreover  proved  by  history,  and
they  laid  the  foundations  of  that  system  which  recognizes  the
king  as  the  fountain  of  honor.  In  the  later  Anglo-Saxon
constitution,  ealdorman  was  a  prince,  a  governor  of  a  coun¬
try  or  small  kingdom,  sub^regulus ;  he  was  a  constitutional
officer ;  the  earl  was  not  an  officer  at  all,  though  afterwards
the  government  of  counties  came  to  be  intrusted  to  him ;  at
first,  if  he  had  a  benejicium  or  feud  at  all,  it  was  a  horse,  or
rings,  or  arms ;  afterwards  lands.  This  appears  constantly
in  Beowulf,  and  requires  no  further  remark.”  A  speech
indeed  ascribed  to  Withred  king  of  Kent,  in  696,  by  the
Saxon  Chronicle,  would  prove  earls  to  have  been  superior  to
aldermen  in  that  early  age.  But  the  forgery  seems  too
gross  to  impose  on  any  one.  Ceorl,  in  Beowulf,  is  a  man,
vir ;  it  is  sometimes  a  husband ;  a  woman  is  said  ceorlian,
i.  e.  viro  se  adjungere.

Dr.  Lingard  has  clearly  apprehended,  and  that  long  before
Mr.  Kemble’s  publication,  the  distributive  character  of  the
words  eorl  and  ceorl.  “  Among  the  Anglo-Saxons  the  free
population  was  divided  into  the  eorl  and  ceorl,  the  man  of
noble  and  ignoble  descent;”  and  he  well  observes  that  “by
not  attending  to  this  meaning  of  the  word  eorl,  and  rendering
it  earl,  or  rather  comes,  the  translators  of  the  Saxon  laws
have  made  several  passages  unintelligible.”  (Hist,  of  Eng¬
land,  i.  468.)  Mr.  Thorpe  has  not,  as  I  conceive,  explained
the  word  as  accurately  or  perspicuously  as  Mr.  Kemble.  He
says,  in  his  Glossary  to  Ancient  English  Laws,  —  “  Eorl,
comes,  satelles  principis.  This  is  the  prose  definition  of  the
word ;  in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Old  Saxon  poetry  it  signifies  man,
though  generally  applied  to  one  of  consideration  on  account
of  his  rank  or  valor.  Its  etymon  is  unknown,  one  deriving
it  from  Old  Norse,  ar,  minister,  satelles  ;  another  from  jara,
proelium.  (See  B.  Hald.  voc.  Jarl,  and  the  Gloss,  to  Soemund,
by  Edda,  t.  i.  p.  597.)  This  title,  which  seems  introduced  by
the  Jutes  of  Kent,  occurs  frequently  in  the  laws  of  the  kings
of  that  district,  the  first  mention  of  it  being  in  Ethelbert,  13.
Its  more  general  use  among  us  dates  from  the  later  Scandina-

340

EORLS  ANTD  CEORLS.

Notes  to

vian  invasions  ;  and  though  originally  only  a  title  of  honor,  it
became  in  later  times  one  of  office,  nearly  supplanting  the  older
and  more  Saxon  one  of  ealdorman.”  The  editor  docs  not  here
particularly  advert  to  the  use  of  the  word  in  opposition  toceorl.
That  a  word  merely  expressing  man  may  become  appropriate
to  men  of  dignity  appears  from  bar  and  Ixiro  ;  and  something
analogous  is  seen  in  the  Batin  vir.  Lappenberg  (vol.  ii.  p.
13)  says, — “The  title  of  eorl  occurs  in  early  times  among
the  laws  of  the  Kentish  kings,  but  became  more  general  only
in  the  Danish  times,  ami  is  probably  of  old  Jutish  origin.”
This  is  a  confusion  of  words  :  in  the  laws  of  the  Kentish
kings,  eorl  means  only  ingenuus ,  or,  if  we  please,  nobilis  ;  in
the  Danish  times  it  was  comes ,  as  has  just  been  pointed  out.

Such  was  the  eorl,  and  such  the  ceorl,  of  our  forefathers
— one  a  gentleman,  the  other  a  yeoman,  but  both  freemen.
We  are  liable  to  be  misled  by  the  new  meaning  which  from
the  tenth  century  was  attached  to  the  former  word,  as  well  as
by  the  inveterate  prejudice  that  nobility  of  birth  must  carry
with  it  something  of  privilege  above  the  most  perfect  freedom.
But  we  do  not  appreciate  highly  enough  the  value  of  the
latter  in  a  semi-barbarous  society.  The  eorleundman  was
generally,  though  not  necessarily,  a  freeholder;  he  might,
unless  restrained  by  special  tenure,  depart  from  or  alienate
his  land ;  he  was,  if  a  freeholder,  a  judge  in  the  county  court ;
he  might  marry,  or  become  a  priest,  at  his  discretion  ;  his  oath
weighed  heavily  in  compurgation ;  above  all,  his  life  was
valued  at  a  high  composition  ;  we  add,  of  course,  the  general
respect  which  attaches  itself  to  the  birth  and  position  of  a
gentleman.  Two  classes  indeed  there  were,  both  “eorlcund,”
or  ot  gentle  birth,  and  so  called  in  opposition  to  ceorls,  but  in
a  relative  subordination.  Sir  F.  Palgrave  has  jtointed  out
the  distinction  in  a  passage  which  I  shall  extract :  —

1  lie  whole  scheme  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  law  is  founded
upon  the  presumption  that  every  freeman,  not  being  a
‘  hlaford,’  was  attached  to  a  superior,  to  whom  he  was  Itound
by  fealty,  and  from  whom  he  could  claim  a  legal  protection
or  warranty,  when  accused  of  any  transgression  or  crime.  If,
therefore,  the  *  eorlcund  ’  individual  did  not  possess  the  real
projicrty  which,  cither  from  its  tenure  or  its  extent,  was  such
as  to  constitute  a  lordship,  lie  was  then  ranked  in  the  very
numerous  class  whose  me  in  tiers,  in  Wessex  and  its  dependent
states,  were  originally  known  by  the  name  of  *  titheundmen,’

Chap.  YTTI.

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

341

an  appellation  which  we  may  paraphrase  by  the  heraldic  ex-
pre>sion,  ‘  gentle  by  birth  and  blood.’ 1  This  term  of  sithcund-
man,  however,  was  only  in  use  in  the  earlier  periods.  After
the  reign  of  Alfred  it  is  lost ;  and  the  most  comprehensive
and  significant  denomination  given  to  this  class  is  that  of  ‘  six-
hcendmen,’  indicating  their  position  between  the  highest  and
lowest  law-worthy  classes  of  society.  Other  designations  were
derived  from  their  services  and  tenures.  Radechnights,  and
lesser  thanes,  seem  to  be  included  in  this  rank,  and  to  which,
in  many  instances,  the  general  name  of  sokemen  was  applied.
But,  however  designated,  the  sithcundman,  or  sixhoendman,
appears  in  every  instance  in  the  same  relative  position  in  the
community  —  classed  amongst  the  nobility,  whenever  the  eorl
and  the  ceorl  are  placed  in  direct  opposition  to  each  other;
always  considered  below  the  territorial  aristocracy,  and  yet
distinguished  from  the  villainage  by  the  important  right  of
selecting  his  hlaford  at  his  will  and  pleasure.  By  common
right  the  ‘  sixhoendman  ’  was  not  to  be  annexed  to  the  glebe.
To  use  the  expressions  employed  by  the  compilers  of  Domes¬
day,  he  could  ‘  go  with  his  land  wheresoever  he  chose,’  or,
leaving  his  land,  he  might 1  commend  ’  himself  to  any  hlaford
who  would  accept  of  his  fealty.”  (Vol.  i.  p.  14.)  2

It  may  be  pointed  out,  however,  which  Sir  F.  P.  has  here
forgotten  to  observe,  that  the  distinction  of  weregild  between
the  twelfhynd  and  syxhynd  was  abolished  by  a  treaty  between
Alfred  and  Gutlirum.  (Thorpe’s  Ancient  Laws,  p.  66.)
This  indeed  affects  only  the  reciprocity  of  law  between  Eng¬
lish  and  Danes.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  from  that  time  we
rarely  find  mention  of  the  intermediate  rank  between  the
twelfhynd.  or  superior  thane,  and  the  'twyhynd  or  ceorl.  The
sithcundman,  it  would  seem,  was  from  henceforth  rated  at  the
same  composition  as  his  lord  ;  yet  there  is  one  apparent  ex¬
ception  (I  have  not  observed  any  other)  in  the  laws  of  Henry
I.  It  is  said  here  (C.  76),  —  “  Liberi  alii  twyhyndi,  alii  syx-
byndi,  alii  twelfhyndi.  Twyhyndus  homo  dicitur,  cujus  wera
est  22  solidorum,  qui  fiiciunt  4  libras.  Twelfhyndus  est  bomo
plene  nobilis,  id  est,  thainus,  cujus  wera  est  1200  solidorum,

1  I*  not  the  word  sithcundman  prop-  potable  enough  to  warrant  so  general  a

erly  descriptive  of  hU  d«*i>endenee  on  a  proposition.  The  conditions  of  tenure  in
lord,  from  the  Saxon  verb  sithian ,  to  the  eleventh  century,  whatever  they  may
follow  ?  once  have  been,  had  become  exceedingly

2  This  right  of  choosing  a  lord  at  various,
pleasure,  so  little  feudal,  seems  not  India-

342

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

NOTES  TO

qui  fuciunt  libras  25.”  It  is  remarkable  that,  though  the
syxhyndman  is  named  at  first,  nothing  more  is  said  of  him,
and  the  twelfhyndman  is  defined  to  be  a  thane.  It  appears
from  several  passages  that  the  laws  recorded  in  this  treatise
are  chiefly  those  of  the  West  Saxons,  which  differed  in  some
respects  from  those  of  Mercia,  Kent,  and  the  Danish  counties.
With  regard  to  the  word  sithcund,  it  does  occur  once  or  twice
in  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Elder.  It  might  be  supposed  that
the  Danes  had  retained  the  principle  of  equality  among  all
of  gentle  birth,  common,  as  we  read  in  Grimm,  to  the  northern
nations,  which  the  distinction  brought  in  by  the  kings  of  Kent
between  two  classes  of  eorls  or  thanes  seemed  to  contravene.
We  shall  have  occasion,  however,  to  quote  a  passage  from  the
laws  of  Canute,  which  indicates  a  similar  distinction  of  rank
among  the  Danes  themselves,  whatever  might  be  the  rule  as
to  composition  for  life.  #

The  influence  of  Danish  connections  produced  another
great  change  in  the  nomenclature  of  ranks.  Eorl  lost  its
general  sense  of  good  birth  and  became  an  official  title,  for
the  most  part  equivalent  to  alderman,  the  governor  of  a
shire  or  district.  It  is  used  in  this  sense,  for  the  first  time,
in  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Elder.  Yet  it  had  not  wholly
lost  its  primary  meaning,  since  we  find  eorlish  and  ceorlish
opposed,  as  distributive  appellations,  in  one  of  Athelstau.
(Id.  p.  96.)  It  is  said  in  a  sort  of  compilation,  entitled,
“  On  Oaths,  Weregilds,  and  Ranks,”  subjoined  to  the  laws
of  Edward  the  Elder,  but  bearing  no  date,  that  “  It  was
whilom  in  the  laws  of  the  English  ....  that,  if  a  thane
thrived  so  that  he  became  an  eorl,  then  was  he  henceforth  of
eorl-right  worthy.”  (Ancient  Laws,  p.  81.1)  But  this
passage  is  wanting  in  one  manuscript,  though  not  in  the
oldest,  and  we  find,  just  before  it,  the  old  distributive  opposi¬
tion  of  eorl  and  ceorl.  It  is  certainly  a  remarkable  excep¬
tion  to  the  common  use  of  the  word  eorl  in  any  age,  and  has
led  Mr.  Thorpe  to  suppose  that  the  rank  of  earl  could  be
obtained  by  landed  wealth.  The  learned  editor  thinks  that
“  these  pieces  cannot  have  had  a  Liter  origin  than  the  period
in  which  they  here  stand.  Some  of  them  are  probably  much
earlier”  (p.  76).  But  the  mention  of  the  “  Danish  law,”  in

'  The  reference*  are  to  the  fbUo  edition  Commission.  I  fear  this  may  cause  some
of  *  Ancient  Lawn  and  Institute*  of  Eng*  trouble  to  those  who  pont-M  the  octavo
land/  1840,  a*  published  by  the  Record  edition,  which  is  much  more  common.

Chap.  VIII.

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

343

p.  79,  seems  much  against  an  earlier  date ;  and  this  is  so
mentioned  as  to  make  us  think  that  the  Danes  were  then  in
subjection.  In  the  time  of  Edgar  eorl  had  fully  acquired  its
secondary  meaning;  in  its  original  sense  it  seems  to  have
been  replaced  by  thane.  Certain  it  is  that  we  find  thane
opposed  to  ceorl  in  the  later  period  of  Anglo-Saxon  monu¬
ments,  as  eorl  is  in  the  earlier  —  as  if  the  law  knew  no  other
broad  line  of  demarcation  among  laymen,  saving  always  the
official  dignities  and  the  royal  family.1  And  the  distinction
between  the  greater  and  the  lesser  thanes  was  not  lost,
though  they  were  put  on  a  level  as  to  composition.  Thus,  in
the  Forest  Laws  of  Canute :  —  “  Sint  jam  deinceps  quattuor
ex  liberalioribus  hominibus  qui  habent  salvas  suas  consue-
tudines,  quos  Angli  thegnes  appellant,  in  qualibet  regni  mei
provincia  constituti.  Sint  sub  quolibet  eorum  quattuor  ex
mediocribus  hominibus,  quos  Angli  lesthegenes  nuncupant,
Dani  vero  yoongmen  vocant,  locati.”  (Ancient  Laws,  p.
183.)  Meantime  the  composition  for  an  earl,  whether  we
confine  that  word  to  office  or  suppose  that  it  extended  to  the
wealthiest  landholders,  was  far  higher  in  the  later  period
than  that  for  a  thane,  as  was  also  his  heriot  when  that  came
into  use.  The  heriot  of  the  king’s  thane  was  above  that  of
what  was  called  a  medial  thane,  or  mesne  vassal,  the  sith-
cundman,  or  syxhynder,  as  I  apprehend,  of  an  earlier  style.

In  the  laws  of  the  continental  Saxons  we  find  the  rank
corresponding  to  the  eorlcunde  of  our  own  country,  denomi¬
nated  edelingi  or  noble,  as  opposed  to  the  frilingi  or  ordinary
freemen.  This  appellation  was  not  lost  in  England,  and
was  perhaps  sometimes  applied  to  nobles ;  but  we  find  it
generally  reserved  for  the  royal  family.2  Ethel  or  noble,
sometimes  contracted,  forms,  as  is  well  known,  the  peculiar
prefix  to  the  names  of  our  Anglo-Saxon  royal  house.  And
the  word  atheling  was  used,  not  as  in  Germany  for  a  noble,
but  a  prince;  and  his  composition  was  not  only  above  that
of  a  thane,  but  of  an  alderman.  lie  ranked  as  an  arch¬
bishop  in  this  respect,  the  alderman  as  a  bishop.  (Leges

1  “  That  the  thane,  at  lcaat  originally,  bring  1200  shillings.  That  this  dignity
was  a  military  follower,  a  holder  by  mill-  censed  from  beifijr  exclusively  of  a  mili¬
tary  service,  seems  certain  ;  though  in  tary  character  is  evident  from  numerous
later  times  the  rank  seems  to  have  been  passages  in  the  laws,  where  thanes  are
enjoyed  by  all  great  landholders,  as  the  mentioned  in  a  judicial  capacity,  and  as
natural  concomitant  of  possession  to  a  civil  officers.”  Thorpe  s  Glossary  to
certain  value.  By  Mercian  law.  he  ap-  Ancient  Ijiws.  voe.  Thegen.
pears  as  a  4  twelfhynde  ’  man,  his  *  wer  ’  *  Thorpe's  Glossary.

344

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

Notes  to

Ethelredi,  p.  141.)  It  is  necessary  to  mention  this,  lest,  in
speaking  of  the  words  eorl  and  ceorl  as  originally  distributive,
I  should  seem  to  have  forgotten  the  distinctive  sui>eriority  of
the  royal  family.  But  whether  this  had  always  been  the
case  I  am  not  prepared  to  determine.  The  aim  of  the  later
kings,  I  mean  after  Alfred,  was  to  carry  the  monarchical
principle  as  high  as  the  temper  of  the  nation  would  permit.
Hence  they  prefer  to  the  name  of  king,  which  was  associated
in  all  the  Germanic  nations  with  a  limited  power,  the  more
indefinite  appellations  of  imperator  and  basileus.  And  the
latter  of  these  they  borrowed  from  the  Byzantine  court,
liking  it  rather  better  than  the  other,  not  merely  out  of  the
pompous  affectation  characteristic  of  their  style  in  that  pe¬
riod,  but  because,  being  less  intelligible,  it  served  to  strike
more  awe,  and  also  probably  because  the  title  of  western
emperor  seemed  to  be  already  appropriated  in  Germany.  It
was  natural  that  they  would  endeavor  to  enhance  the  supe¬
riority  of  all  athelings  above  the  surrounding  nobility.

A  learned  German  writer,  who  distributes  freemen  into
but  two  classes,  considers  the  ceorl  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws
as  corresponding  to  the  ingenuus ,  and  the  thrall  or  esne,  that
is,  slave,  to  the  lid  us  of  the  continent.  “  Adding  ns  und
liber,  nobilis  und  ingenuus,  edelingus  und  frilingus ,  jar l  und
karl,  stehen  bier  immerals  Stand  der  freien  dem  der  unfreien,
dcm  servus,  htus,  lazzus,  thrall  entgegen.”  (Grimm,  Deutsche
Rechts-Alterthumer,  Gottingen,  1828,  p.  22(1  et  alibi.)  Ceorl,
however,  he  owns  to  have  “  etwas  befrcmdendes,”  something
peculiar.  “  Der  Sinn  ist  bald  mas,  bald  liber  ;  allein  colonus,
rusticus,  tgnobtlis ;  die  Mitte  zwischen  nobilis  und  servus.”

It  does  not  appear  from  the  continental  laws  that  the  htus,
or  hdus,  was  strictly  a  skive,  but  rather  a  cultivator  of  the
earth  for  a  master,  something  like  the  Roman  colonus,  though
of  interior  estimation.1  No  slave  hail  a  composition  due  to

l  Mr.  S pence  remark*  (Equitable  Jn-
ri-  htlon,  p.  61)  —  ••  to  the  condition  of
tile  ceorl*  we  observe  one  of  the  inanv
striking  example*  of  the  adaptation  of
the  German  to  the  tinman  in*titution<  —
the  ceorl*  and  »ervile  cultivator*  or
aduniplitii  in  England,  a*  well  aa  in  the
continental  *tnte*.  exactly  corresponded
with  the  coloni  and  ini/ullini  of  the  Ro¬
man  province*.”  Yet  he  Immediately
subjoin*  —  •*  The  condition  of  the  rural
•lave*  of  the  German*  nearly  re*emhled
that  of  the  Roman  coloni  aud  Anglo-

Saxon  ceorl*,”  quoting  Tacitus,  e.  21.
But  did  the  Germans  at  that  time  adapt
their  institution*  to  those  of  the  Roman*  J
Do  we  not  rather  see  here  an  Illustration
of  what  appear*  to  me  the  true  theory,
that  similarity  of  law*  and  custom*  may
often  be  traced  to  natural  causes  In  the
•tat*  of  society  rather  than  to  imitation  !
My  notion  Is,  that  the  Germans,  through
principle*  of  common  sympathv  among
the  same  tribe,  the  Roman*,  'through
memory  of  republican  institution*  car¬
ried  on  into  tile  empire,  repudiated  ’

Chap.  VIII.

EORLS  AND  CEOELS.

345

his  kindred  by  law ;  the  price  of  his  life  was  paid  to  his  lord.
By  some  of  the  barbaric  laws,  one  third  of  the  composition
for  a  lidus  went  to  the  kindred  ;  the  remainder  was  the  lord’s
share.  This  indicates  something  above  the  Anglo-Saxon
theow  or  slave,  and  yet  considerably  below  the  ceorl.  The
word,  indeed,  has  been  puzzling  to  continental  antiquaries ;
and  if,  in  deference  to  the  authorities  of  Gothofred  and
Grimm,  we  find  the  lidi  in  the  barbaric  Iceti  of  the  Roman
empire,  we  cannot  think  these  at  least  to  have  been  slaves,
though  they  may  have  become  coloni.  But  I  am  not  quite
convinced  of  the  identity  resting  on  a  slight  resemblance  of
name.

The  ceorl,  or  villanus ,  as  we  find  him  afterwards  called  in
Domesday,  was  not  generally  an  independent  freeholder ;
but  his  condition  was  not  always  alike.  lie  might  acquire
land,  and  if  he  did  this  to  the  extent  of  five  hydes,  he  be¬
came  a  thane.1  lie  required  no  enfranchisement  for  this;
his  own  industry  might  make  him  a  gentleman.  This  was
not  the  case,  at  least  not  so  easily,  in  France.  It  appears  by
the  will  of  Alfred,  published  in  1788,  that  certain  ceorls
might  choose  their  own  lord ;  and  the  text  of  his  law  above

O  ...

quoted  furnishes  some  ground  for  supposing  that  he  extended
the  privilege  to  all.  The  editor  of  his  will  says  —  “All
ceorls  by  the  Saxon  constitution  might  choose  such  man  for
their  landlord  as  they  would”  (p.  26).  But  even  though
we  should  think  that  so  high  a  privilege  was  conferred  by
Alfred  on  the  whole  class,  it  is  almost  certain  that  they  did
not  Continue  to  enjoy  it.

personal  servitude  of  citizens,  while  they
maintained  very  strict  obligation*  of
pnedial  tenure;  and  thus  the  coloni  of
the  lower  empire  on  the  one  hand,  the
lidi  and  ceorls  on  the  other,  were  neither
absolutely  free  nor  merely  slaves.

“In  the  Lex  Frisiorum,”  says  Sir  F.

Pal  grave,  in  one  of  his  excellent  contri¬
butions  to  the  Edinburgh  Review  (xxxii.

10),  we  find  the  usual  distinctions  of
nobilis,  librr .  and  litus.  The  rank  of  the
Teutonic  litus  has  been  much  discussed  ;
he  appears  to  have  been  a  villein,  owing
many  services  to  his  lord,  but  above  the
class  of  slaves.”  The  word  villein,  it
should  be  remembered.  In) re  several
senses  :  the  litus  was  below  a  811x011
ceorl,  but  he  was  also  above  the  villein
of  Bracton  and  Littleton.

1  This  is  not  in  the  laws  of  Athelstan,
to  which  I  l uive  referred  in  p.  303,  nor  iu

any  regular  statute,  but  in  a  kind  of
brief  summary  of  law,  printed  by  Wil¬
kins  and  Thorpe.  But  I  think  that  Sir
Francis  Palgravo  treats  this  too  slightly
when  he  calls  it  a  “  traditionary  notice  of
an  unknown  writer,  who  says,  ‘  Whilom
it  was  the  law  of  England ;  ’  leaving  it
doubtful  whether  it  were  so  still,  or  had
been  at,  any  definite  time.”  (Edinb.  Rev.
xxxiv.  263.)  Though  this  phrase  is  once
used,  it  is  said  also  expressly  :  —  “If  a
ceorl  be  enriched  to  that  degree  that  ho
have  five  hydes  of  land,  and  any  one  slay
him,  let  him  be  paid  for  with  2000  thrym-
sas.”  Thorpe,  p.  79.  This,  a  few  sen¬
tences  before,  is  named  as  the  composi¬
tion  for  a  thane  in  the  Danelage.  And,
indeed,  though  no  king's  name  appears.

I  have  little  doubt  that  these  are  real
statutes,  collected  probably  by  some
ouc  who  lias  1  user  ted  a  little  of  his  owu.

346

EORI.S  AND  CEORLS.

Notes  TO

In  the  Anglo-Saxon  charters  the  Latin  words  for  the  cul¬
tivators  are  “manentes”  or  “casati.”  Their  number  is
generally  mentioned ;  and  sometimes  it  is  the  sole  description
of  hind,  except  its  title.  The  Trench  word  vuinaut  is  evi¬
dently  derived  from  manentes.  There  seems  more  difficulty
about  casati,  which  is  sometimes  used  for  persons  in  a  state
of  servitude,  sometimes  even  for  vassals  (Du  Cange).  In
our  charters  it  does  not  bear  the  latter  meaning.  (See  Co¬
dex  Diplomatics,  passim.  Spence  on  Equitable  Jurisdic¬
tion,  p.  50.)

But  when  we  turn  over  the  pages  of  Domesday  Book,  a
recoi  d  of  the  state  ot  Anglo-Saxon  orders  of  society  under
Edward  the  Confessor,  we  find  another  kind  of  difficulty.  New
denominations  spring  up,  evidently  distinguishable,  yet  such
as  no  information  communicated  either  in  that  survey  or  in
any  other  document  enables  us  definitively  and  certainly  to
distinguish.  Nothing  runs  more  uniformly  through  the  leg:d
documents  antecedent  to  the  Conquest  than  the  broad  di¬
vision  of  freemen  into  eorls,  afterwards  called  thanes,  and
ceorls.  In  Domesday,  which  enumerates,  as  1  need  hardly
say,  the  inhabitants  of  every  manor,  specifying  their  ranks,
not  only  at  the  epoch  of  the  survey  itself,  about  1085,  but  as
they  were  in  the  time  of  king  Edward,  we  find  abundant
mention  of  the  thanes,  generally  indeed,  but  not  always  in
reference  to  the  last-named  period.  But  the  word  ceorl  never
occurs.  I  his  is  immaterial,  for  by  the  name  villani  we  have
upwards  ot  108,000.  And  this  word  is  frequently  used  in  the
first  Anglo-Norman  reigns  as  the  equivalent  of  ceorl.  *  No
one  ought  to  doubt  that  they  expressed  the  same  persons.
But  we  find  also  a  very  numerous  class,  above  82,000,  styled
bordam  ;  a  word  unknown,  I  apprehend,  to  any  other  public
document,  certainly  not  used  in  the  laws  anterior  to  the  Con¬
quest.  I  hey  must,  however,  have  been  also  ceorls,  distin¬
guished  by  some  legal  difference,  some  peculiarity  of  service
or  tenure,  well  understood  at  the  time.  A  small  numtier  are
denominated  coscelz,  or  cosceti;  a  word  which  does  in  fact  a|>-
pear  in  one  Anglo-Saxon  document.  There  are  also  several
minor  denominations  in  Domesday,  all  of  which,  as  they  do
not  denote  slaves,  and  certainly  not  thanes,  must  have  l*een
varieties  of  the  ceorl  kind.  The  most  frequent  of  these  ap¬
pellations  is  “  cotarii.”

But,  besides  these  peasants,  there  are  two  appellations

Chap.  VIII.

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

347

which  it  is  less  easy,  though  it  would  be  more  important,  to
define.  These  are  the  liberi  homines  and  the  socmanni.  Of
the  former  Sir  Henry  Ellis,  to  whose  indefatigable  diligence
we  owe  the  only  real  analysis  of  Domesday  Book  that  has
been  given,  has  counted  up  about  12,300  ;  of  the  latter,  about
23,000  ;  forming  together  about  one  eighth  of  the  whole  pop¬
ulation,  that  is,  of  male  adults.  This,  it  must  be  understood,
was  at  the  time  of  the  survey  ;  but  there  is  no  appearance,  as
far  as  I  have  observed,  that  any  material  difference  in  the
proportion  of  these  respective  classes,  or  of  those  below  them,
had  taken  place.  The  confiscation  fell  on  the  principal  ten¬
ants.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  Norfolk  alone  we  have  4487
liberi  homines  and  4588  socmen  —  the  whole  enumerated  pop¬
ulation  being  27,087.  But  in  Suffolk,  out  of  a  population  of
20,491,  we  find  7470  liberi  homines,  w'ith  1060  socmen.  Thus
these  tw'o  counties  contained  almost  all  the  liberi  homines  of
the  kingdom.  In  Lincolnshire,  on  the  other  hand,  where
11,504  are  returned  as  socmen,  the  word  liber  homo  does  not
occur.  These  Lincolnshire  socmen  are  not,  as  usual  in  other
counties,  mentioned  among  occupiers  of  the  demesne  lands,
but  mingled  with  the  villeins  and  bordars;  sometimes  not
standing  first  in  the  enumeration,  so  as  to  show  that,  in  one
country,  they  were  both  a  more  numerous  and  more  subor¬
dinate  class  than  in  the  rest  of  the  realm.1

The  concise  distinction  betw'een  w'hat  we  should  call  free¬
hold  and  copyhold  is  made  by  the  forms  of  entering  each
manor  throughout  Domesday  Book.  Liberi  homines  inva¬
riably,  and  socmen  I  believe,  except  in  Lincolnshire,  occupied
the  one,  villani  and  bordarii  the  other.  Hence  liberum
tenementum  and  viUenayium.  What  then,  in  Anglo-Saxon
language,  was  the  kind  of  the  turn  former  classes?  They
belong,  it  will  be  observed,  almost  wholly  to  the  Danish  coun¬
ties;  not  one  of  either  denomination  appears  in  Wessex,  as
will  be  seen  by  reference  to  Sir  II.  Ellis’s  abstract.  Were
they  thanes  or  ceorls,  or  a  class  distinct  from  both  ?  What
was  their  were  ?  We  cannot  think  that  a  poor  cultivator  of
a  few  acres,  though  of  his  own  land,  was  estimated  at  1200

1  Socmen  are  returned  in  not  a  few  for  the  counties  in  which  we  find  socmen
instance*  as  sub-tenants  of  whole  manors,  so  much  elevated  had  not  belonged  to
but  only  in  Cambridgeshire  and  some  the  same  Anglo-Saxon  kingdom  ;  some
neighboring  counties.  Ellis’s  Introd.  were  East- Anglian,  some  Mercian,  some
to  Domesday,  ii.  389.  But  this  could,  probably,  as  Hertfordshire,  of  either  the
it  seems,  have  only  originated  In  the  Kent  or  Wessex  law.
phraseology  of  ditlereut  commisaiouers ;

348

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

Notes  to

shillings,  like  a  roj’al  thane.  The  intermediate  composition
of  the  sixhyndman  would  be  a  convenient  guess;  but  unfor¬
tunately  this  seems  not  to  have  existed  in  the  Danela^e.  We
gain  no  great  light  from  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor,
which  fix  the  manbote ,  or  fine,  to  the  lord  for  a  man  slain,
regulated  according  to  the  were  due  to  his  children.  Man¬
bote,  in  Danelage,  “de  villano  et  de  sokeuianno  12  oras ;  de
liberis  hominibus,  tres  mareas  ”  (c.  12).  Thus,  in  the  Da¬
nish  counties,  of  which  Lincolnshire  was  one,  the  socman
was  estimated  like  a  villanus,  and  much  lower  than  a  liber
lomo.  1  lie  ora  is  said  to  have  been  one  eighth  of  a  mark,
consequently  the  liber  homo's  manbote  was  double  that  of
the  villein  or  socman.  If  this  bore  a  fixed  ratio  to  the
were,  we  have  a  new  and  unheard-of  rank  who  mi<dit
be  called  fourhyndmen.  llut  such  a  distinction  is  never  met
with.  It  would  not  in  itself  be  improbable  that  the  liberi
homines  who  occupied  freehold  lands,  and  owed  no  pra-dial
service,  should  be  raised  in  the  composition  for  their  lives
aliove  common  ceorls.  But  in  these  inquiries  new  ditliculties
are  always  springing  forth.

Wa  must  upon  the  whole,  I  conceive,  take  the  socmen  for
twyhyndi,  for  ceorls  more  fortunate  than  the  rest,  who  had
acquired  some  freehold  land,  or  to  whose  ancestors  possibly  it
had  been  allotted  in  the  original  settlement  It  indicates  a
remarkable  variety  in  the  condition  of  these  East-Anglian
counties,  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  and  a  more  diffused  freedom
in  their  inhabitants.  The  population,  it  must  strike  us,  was
greatly  higher,  relatively  to  their  size,  than  in  any  other  part
o  England;  and  the  multitude  of  small  manors  and  of  pariah
churches,  which  still  continue,  bespeaks  this  progress.  The
socmen,  as  well  as  the  liberi  homines,  in  whose  condition
there  may  have  been  little  difference,  except  in  Lincoln-hire,
where  we  have  seen  that,  for  whatever  cause,  those  denomi¬
nated  socmen  were  little,  if  at  all,  better  than  the  viUani,
were  all  commended ;  they  had  all  some  lord,  though  blaring
to  him  a  relation  neither  of  fief  nor  of  villenage ;  they  could  in
general,  though  with  some  exceptions,  alienate  their  lands  at
pleasure  ;  it  has  been  thought  that  they  might  pay  some  small
rent  in  acknowledgment  of  commendation  ;  but  the  one  class
undoubtedly,  and  probably  the  other,  were  freeholders  in
every  legjd  sen-e  of  the  word,  holding  by  that  ancient  and
respectable  tenure,  free  and  common  socage,  or  in  a  man-

Chap.  VIII.

EORLS  AND  CEORLS.

349

ner  at  least  analogous  to  it.  Though  socmen  are  chiefly
mentioned  in  the  Danelage,  other  obscure  denominations  of
occupiers  occur  in  Wessex  and  Mercia,  which  seem  to  have
denoted  a  similar  class.  But  the  style  of  Domesday  is  so
concise,  and  so  far  from  uniform,  that  we  are  very  liable  to
be  deceived  in  our  conjectural  inferences  from  it.

It  may  be  remarked  here  that  many  of  our  modern  writers
draw  too  unfavorable  a  picture  of  the  condition  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon  ceorl.  Few  indeed  fall  into  the  capital  mistake  of
Mr.  Sharon  Turner,  by  speaking  of  him  as  legally  in  servi¬
tude,  like  the  villein  of  Bracton’s  age.  But  we  often  find  a
tendency  to  consider  him  as  in  a  very  uncomfortable  condi¬
tion,  little  caring  “  to  what  lion’s  paw  be  might  fall,”  as  Bo-
lingbroke  said  in  1745,  and  treated  by  his  lord  as  a  miserable
dependant.  Half  a  century  since,  in  the  days  of  Sir  William
Jones,  Granville  Sharp,  and  Major  Cartwright,  the  Anglo-
Saxon  constitution  was  built  on  universal  suffrage ;  every
man  in  his  tything  a  partaker  of  sovereignty,  and  sending
from  his  rood  of  land  an  annual  representative  to  the  wite-
nagemot.  Such  a  theory  could  not  stand  the  first  glimmerings
of  historical  knowledge  in  a  mind  tolerably  sound.  But  while
we  absolutely  deny  political  privileges  of  this  kind  to  the
ceorl,  we  need  not  assert  his  life  to  have  been  miserable.
He  had  very  definite  legal  rights,  and  acknowledged  capac¬
ities  of  acquiring  more  ;  that  he  was  sometimes  exposed  to
oppression  is  probable  enough;  but,  in  reality,  the  records  of
all  kinds  that  have  descended  to  us  do  not  speak  in  such
strong  language  of  this  as  we  may  read  in  those  of  the  conti¬
nent.  We  have  no  insurrection  of  the  ceorls,  no  outrages  by
themselves,  no  atrocious  punishment  by  their  masters,  as  in
Normandy.  Perhaps  we  are  a  little  too  much  struck  by
their  obligation  to  reside  on  the  lands  which  they  cultivated  ;
the  term  uscriptus  ylebce  denotes,  in  our  apprehension,  an
ignoble  servitude.  It  is,  of  course,  inconsistent  with  our  mod¬
ern  equality  of  rights  ;  but  we  are  to  remember  that  he  who
deserted  his  land,  and  consequently  his  lord,  did  so  in  order
to  become  a  thief.  Hlafordles  men,  of  whom  we  read  so
much,  were  invariably  of  this  character.  What  else,  indeed,
could  lie  become  ?  Children  have  an  idle  play,  to  count  but¬
tons,  and  say,  —  Gentleman,  apothecary,  ploughman,  thief.
Now  this,  if  we  consider  the  second  as  representative  of  bur¬
gesses  in  towns,  is  actually  a  distributive  enumeration,  setting

350

BRITISH  NATIVES  OF  ENGLAND.

Notes  to

aside  the  clergy  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  population ;  a  thane,  a
burgess,  a  ceorl,  a  hlafordles  man ;  that  is,  a  man  without
land,  lord,  or  law,  who  lived  upon  what  he  could  take.  For
the  sake  of  protecting  the  honest  ceorl  from  such  men,  as  well
as  of  protecting  the  lord  in  what,  if  property  be  regarded  at
all,  must  be  protected,  his  rights  to  services  legally  due,  it  was
necessary  to  restrain  the  cultivator  from  quitting  his  land.
Exceptions  to  this  might  occur,  as  we  find  among  the  liberi
homines  and  others  in  Domesday ;  but  it  was  the  general  rule.
We  might  also  ask  whether  a  lessee  for  years  at  present  is
not  in  one  sense  ascriptus  glebce  ?  It  is  true  that  he  may  go
wherever  he  will,  and,  if  he  continue  to  pay  his  rent  and  per¬
form  his  covenants,  no  more  can  be  said.  But  if  he  does
not  this,  the  law  will  follow  his  person,  and,  though  it  can¬
not  force  him  to  return,  will  make  it  by  no  means  his  inter¬
est  to  desert  the  premises.  Such  remedies  as  the  Law  now
furnishes  were  not  in  the  power  of  the  Saxon  landlord  ;  but
all  that  any  lord  could  desire  was  to  have  the  services  per¬
formed,  or  to  receive  a  compensation  for  them.

Note  IV.  Page  2C3.

Those  who  treat  this  opinion  as  chimerical,  and  seem
to  suppose  that  a  very  large  portion  of  the  people  of  Eng¬
land,  during  the  Anglo-Saxon  period,  must  have  been  of
British  descent,  do  not,  I  think,  sufficiently  consider  —  first,
the  exterminating  character  of  barbarous  warfare,  not  here
confined,  as  in  Gaul,  to  a  single  and  easy  conquest,  but  pro¬
tracted  for  two  centuries  with  the  most  obstinate  resistance  of
the  natives;  secondly,  the  facilities  which  the  possessions  of
the  Welsh  and  Cumbrian  Britons  gave  to  their  countrymen
for  retreat;  and  thirdly,  the  natural  increase  of  population
among  the  Saxons,  especially  when  settled  in  a  country
already  reduced  into  a  state  of  culture.  Nor  can  the  succes¬
sive  migrations  from  Germany  and  Norway  be  shown  to  have
been  insignificant.  Nothing  am  be  scantier  than  our  histori¬
cal  materials  for  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries.  We  cannot
also  but  observe  that  the  silence  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  records,  at
a  later  time,  as  to  Welsh  inhabitants,  except  in  a  few  passages,
affords  a  presumption  that  they  were  not  very  considerable.
Yet  these  passages,  three  or  four  in  number  (I  do  not  include
those  which  obviously  relate  to  the  independent  Welsh,  whether

Chap.  VIII.  BRITISH  NATIVES  OF  ENGLAND.

351

Cambrian  or  Cumbrian),  repel  the  hypothesis  that  they  may
have  been  wholly  overlooked  and  confounded  with  the  ceorls.
Their  composition  was  less  than  that  of  the  ceorl  in  Wessex
and  Northumbria;  would  not  this  have  been  mentioned  in
Kent  if  they  had  been  found  there  ?

It  is  by  no  means  unimportant  in  this  question  that  we  find
no  mention  of  bishops  or  churches  remaining  in  the  parts  of
England  occupied  by  the  Saxons  before  their  conversion.  If
a  large  part  of  the  population  was  British,  though  in  sub¬
jection,  what  religion  did  they  profess  ?  If  it  is  said  that
the  worshippers  of  Thor  persecuted  the  Christian  priesthood,
why  have  we  no  records  of  it  in  hagiology?  Is  it  con¬
ceivable  that  all  alike,  priests  and  people,  of  that  ancient
church,  pusillanimously  relinquished  their  faith  ?  Sir  F.  Pal-
grave  indeed  meets  this  difficulty  by  supposing  that  the  doc¬
trines  of  Christianity  were  never  cordially  embraced  by  the
British  tribes,  nor  had  become  the  national  religion.  (Engl.
Commonwealth,  i.  154.)  Perhaps  this  was  in  some  measure
the  case,  though  it  must  be  received  with  much  limitation  ;
for  the  retention  of  heathen  superstitions  was  not  incompati¬
ble  in  that  age  with  a  cordial  faith ;  but  it  will  not  account
for  the  disappearance  of  the  original  clergy  in  the  English
kingdoms.  Their  persecution,  which  I  do  not  deny,  though
we  have  no  evidence  of  it,  would  be  part  of  the  exterminat¬
ing  system ;  they  fled  before  it  into  the  safe  quarters  of
Wales.  And  to  obtain  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion  was
probably  an  additional  motive  with  the  nation  to  seek  liberty
where  it  was  to  be  found.

It  must  have  struck  every  one  who  has  looked  into  Domes¬
day  Book  that  we  find  for  the  most  part  the  same  manors,
the  same  parishes,  and  known  by  the  same  names,  as  in  the
present  age.  England  had  been  as  completely  appropriated
by  Anglo-Saxon  thanes  as  it  was  by  the  Normans  who  sup¬
planted  them.  This,  indeed,  only  carries  us  back  to  the
eleventh  century.  But  in  all  charters  with  which  the  excel¬
lent  Codex  Diplomaticus  supplies  us  we  find  the  boundaries
assigned ;  and  these,  if  they  do  not  establish  the  identity  of
mimors  as  well  as  Domesday  Book,  give  us  at  least  a  great
number  of  local  names,  which  subsist,  of  course  with  the
usual  changes  of  language,  to  this  day.  If  British  names
of  places  occur,  it  is  rarely,  and  in  the  border  counties,  or  in
Cornwall.  No  one  travelling  through  England  would  dis-

352

BRITISH  NATIVES  OF  ENGLAND.

Notes  to

cover  that  any  people  had  ever  inhabited  it  before  the  Saxons,
save  so  far  as  the  mighty  Rome  has  left  traces  of  her  empire
in  some  enduring  walls,  and  a  few  names  that  betray  the  colo¬
nial  city,  the  Londinium,  the  Camalodunum,  the  Lindum.
And  these  names  show  that  the  Saxons  did  not  systematieidly
innovate,  but  often  left  the  appellations  of  places  where  they
found  them  given.  Their  own  favorite  terminations  were  ton
and  by;  both  words  denoting  a  village  or  township,  like  ville
in  French.1  In  each  of  these  there  gradually  rose  a  church,
and  the  ecclesiastical  division  for  the  most  part  corresponds
to  the  civil ;  though  to  this,  as  is  well  known,  there  are  fre¬
quent  exceptions.  The  central  point  of  every  township  or
manor  was  its  lord,  the  thane  to  whose  court  the  socagers  and
ceorls  did  service ;  we  may  believe  this  to  have  been  so  from
the  days  of  the  Heptarchy,  as  it  was  in  those  of  the  Confessor.

The  serin  enumerated  in  Domesday  Book  are  above  25,000,
or  nearly  one  eleventh  part  of  the  whole.  These  seem  gen¬
erally  to  have  been  domestic  slaves,  and  partly  employed  in
tending  the  lord’s  cattle  or  swine,  as  Gurth,  whom  we  all  re¬
member,  the  <5iof  v<t«>p^{  of  the  thane  Cedric,  in  Ivanhoe.
They  are  never  mentioned  as  occupiers  of  land,  and  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  villeins  of  later  times.  A  genuine
Saxon,  as  I  have  said,  could  only  become  a  slave  by  his  own
or  his  forefather’s  default,  in  not  paying  a  weregild,  or  some
legal  offence ;  and  of  these  there  might  have  been  many.
The  few  slaves  whose  names  Mr.  Turner  has  collected  from
Ilickes  and  other  authorities  appear  to  be  all  Anglo-Saxon.
(Hist,  of  Anglo-Saxons,  voL  iii.  p.  92.)  Several  others  are
mentioned  in  charters  quoted  by  Mr.  Wright  in  the  30th  vol¬
ume  of  the  “  Arelueologia,”  p.  220.  But  the  higher  pro[>ortion
which  servi  bore  to  viuani  and  bordarii,  that  is,  fr**e  ceorls,  in
the  western  counties,  those  in  Gloucestershire  being  almost
one  third,  may  naturally  induce  us  to  suspect  that  many  were

1  The  word  tun  denotes  originally  any
enclosure.  “  But  it*  more  usual,  though
restricted  sense,  is  that  of  a  .1  welling,  a
homestead,  the  house  and  inland  ;  all.  In
short,  that  is  surrounded  and  bounded  by
a  hedge  or  fence.  It  is  thus  capable  of
being  used  to  express  what  we  mean  by
the  word  town,  vix.,  a  large  collection  of
dwellings ;  or,  like  the  Scottish  town,
even  a  solitary  farm-house.  It  is  Terr
remarkable  that  the  largest  proportion
of  the  names  of  places  among  the  Anglo-
Saxon*  should  hare  been  formed  with

this  word,  while  upon  the  continent  of
Kurope  It  is  never  used  fbr  such  a  pur¬
pose.  In  the  first  two  volumes  of  the
Codex  Diplomaticus.  Dr.  Lee  computes
the  proportion  of  local  names  com¬
pounded  with  tun  at  one  eighth  of  the
whole  n  urn  Iter;  a  ratio  which  unavoid¬
ably  leads  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  en¬
closures  were  as  much  favored  by  the
Anglo-Saxons  as  they  were  avoided  by
their  Oerman  brethren  beyond  the  •re.',
Preface  b>  Kemble's  Codex  Diplotn.  voL
111.  p.  xxxlx.

Chap.  VIII.

THE  VTTEXAGEMOT.

353

of  British  origin ;  and  these  might  be  sometimes  in  praedial
servitude.  All  inference,  however,  from  the  sentence  in
Domesday,  as  to  the  particular  state  of  the  enumerated
inhabitants,  must  be  conjecturally  proposed.

Note  Y.  Page  265.

The  constituent  parts  of  the  witenagemot  cannot  be  cer¬
tainly  determined,  though  few  parts  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
polity  are  more  important.  A  modem  writer  espouses  the
more  popular  theory.  “  There  is  no  reason  extant  for  doubt¬
ing  that  every  thane  had  the  right  of  appearing  and  voting
in  the  witenagemot,  not  only  of  bis  shire,  but  of  the  whole
kingdom,  without  however  being  bound  to  personal  attend¬
ance,  the  absent  being  considered  as  tacitly  assenting  to  the
resolutions  of  those  present.”  (Lappenberg,  Hist,  of  Eng¬
land,  vol.  ii.  p.  317.)  Palgrave  on  the  other  hand,  adheres
to  the  testimony  of  the  Historia  Eliensis,  that  forty  hydes  of
land  were  a  necessary  qualification ;  which  of  course  would
have  excluded  all  but  very  wealthy  thanes.  He  observes,
and  I  believe  with  much  justice,  that  “  proceres  teme  ”  is  a
common  designation  of  those  who  composed  a  curia  regis
synonymous,  as  he  conceives,  with  the  witenagemot.  Mr.
Thorpe  ingeniously  conjectures  that  “  inter  proceres  terras
enumerari  ”  was  to  have  the  rank  of  an  earl ;  on  the  ground
that  five  hydes  of  land  was  a  qualification  for  a  common
thane,  whose  heriot,  by  the  laws  of  Canute,  was  to  that  of  an
earl  as  one  to  eight.  (Ancient  Laws  of  Anglo-Saxons,  p.  81.)
Mr.  Spence  supposes  the  rank  annexed  to  forty  hydes  to  have
been  that  of  king’s  thane.  (Inquiry  into  Laws  of  Europe,
p.  311.)  But  they  were  too  numerous  for  so  high  a  qualifi¬
cation.

Mr.  Thorpe  explains  the  word  witenagemot  thus:  —  “The
supreme  council  of  the  nation,  or  meeting  of  the  witan,
This  assembly  was  summoned  by  the  king;  and  its  members,
besides  the  archbishop  or  archbishops,  were  the  bishops,
aldermen,  duces,  eorls,  thanes,  abbots,  priests,  and  even
deacons.  In  this  assembly,  laws,  both  secular  and  ecclesias¬
tical,  were  promulgated  and  repealed ;  and  charters  of  grants
made  by  the  king  confirmed  and  ratified.  Whether  this
assembly  met  by  royal  summons,  or  by  usage  tit  stated
periods,  is  a  point  of  doubt.”  (Glossary  to  Ancient  Laws.)

vol.  n.  23

334

TIIE  WITENAGEMOT.

Notes  to

This  is  not  remarkably  explicit :  aldermen  are  distinguished
from  earls,  and  duces,  an  equivocal  word,  from  both;1  and
the  important  difficulty  is  slurred  over  by  a  general  descrip¬
tion,  thanes.  But  what  thanes  ?  remains  to  be  inquired.

The  charters  of  all  Anglo-Saxon  sovereigns  are  attested,
not  only  by  bishops  and  abbots,  but  by  laymen,  described,  if
by  any  Saxon  appellation,  as  aldermen,  or  as  thanes.  Their
number  is  not  very  considerable ;  and  some  appear  hence  to
have  inferred  that  only  the  superior  or  royal  thanes  were
present  in  the  witenagcmot.  But,  as  the  signatures  of  the
whole  body  could  not  be  required  to  attest  a  charter,  this  is
far  too  precarious  an  inference.  Fewr,  however,  probably,
are  found  to  believe  that  the  lower  thanes  flocked  to  the
national  council,  whatever  their  rights  may  have  been ;  and
if  we  have  no  sufficient  proof  that  any  such  privileges  had
been  recognized  in  law  or  exercised  in  fact,  if  we  are  rather
led  to  consider  the  sitheundman,  or  sixhynder,  as  dependent
merely  on  his  lord,  in  something  very  analogous  to  a  feudal
relation,  we  may  reasonably  doubt  the  strong  position  which
Lappenberg,  though  following  so  many  of  our  own  antiqua¬
ries,  has  laid  down.  Probably  the  traditions  of  the  Teutonic
democracy  led  to  the  insertion  of  the  assent  of  the  people  in
some  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws.  But  it  is  done  in  such  a
manner  as  to  produce  a  suspicion  that  no  substantial  share  in
legislation  had  been  reserved  to  them.  Thus,  in  the  pre¬
amble  of  the  laws  of  Withrced,  about  69G,  we  read.  “  The
great  men  decreed,  with  the  suffrages  of  all,  these  dooms.”
Inn’s  laws  are  enacted  “  with  all  my  eaUlormen,  and  the  most
distinguished  witan  of  my  people.”  Alfred  has  consulted
his  “  witan.”  And  this  is  the  uniform  word  in  all  later  laws
in  Anglo-Saxon.  Canute’s,  in  Latin,  run  —  “Cum  con-ilio
primariorum  meorum.”  We  have  not  a  hint  of  any  numer¬
ous  or  popular  body  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  code.

Sir  F.  Palgrave  (i.  G37)  supposes  that  the  laws  enacted  in
the  witenagcmot  were  not  valid  till  accepted  by  the  legisla-

1  Dux  appear*  to  be  sometime*  used  the  Anglo-Saxons,  was,  a*  It  implir*,
In  the  subscription  of  charter*  for  thane,  gieen  originally  to  the  leader  of  an  army  ;
more  commonly  for  alderman.  Thane  out  in  the  latter  day*  of  the  monarchy  it
I*  generally,  In  Latin,  minister.  Codex  seem*  to  hare  become  hereditary  In  the
Diplomat,  passim.  Some  hare  supposed  families  of  those  on  whom  the  go  Tern -
dux  to  signify,  at  least  occasionally,  a  ment  of  the  nrorince*  formed  out  of  the
peculiar  dignity,  called,  In  Anglo-Saxon,  kingdoms  of  the  Heptarchy  were  he-
Heretoch  (herxog.  Germ.).  This  word  stowed,  and  was  sometime*  used  synony-
freijuently  occur*  in  the  later  period,  mously  with  those  of  ealdorman  and
M-.  Thorpe  sars.  — “This  title,  among  eorl.”  Glossary,  roc  Hereto**.

Chap.  VIII.

THE  WITENAGEMOT.

355

tures  of  the  different  kingdoms.  This  seems  a  paradox,
though  supported  with  his  usual  learning  and  ingenuity.  He
admits  that  Edgar  “  speaks  in  the  tone  of  prerogative,  and
directs  his  statutes  to  be  observed  and  transmitted  by  writ  to
the  aldermen  of  the  other  subordinate  states.”  (p.  638.)
But  I  must  say  that  this  is  not  very  exact.  The  words  in
Thorpe’s  translation  are,  —  “  And  let  many  writings  be
written  concerning  these  things,  and  sent  both  to  xElfere,
alderman,  and  to  iEthelwine,  alderman,  and  let  them  [send]
in  every  direction,  that  this  ordinance  be  known  to  the  poor
and  rich.”  (p.  118.)  “And  yet,”  Sir  F.  P.  proceeds,  “in
defiance  of  this  positive  injunction,  the  laws  of  Edgar  were
not  accepted  in  Mercia  till  the  reign  of  Canute  the  Dane.”
For  this,  however,  he  cites  no  authority,  and  I  do  not  find  it
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws.  Edgar  says,  —  “  And  I  will  that
secular  rights  stand  among  the  Danes  with  as  good  laws  as
they  best  may  choose.  But  with  the  English,  let  that  stand
which  I  and  my  witan  have  added  to  the  dooms  of  my  fore¬
fathers,  for  the  behoof  of  all  the  people.  Let  this  ordinance,
nevertheless,  be  common  to  all  the  people,  whether  English,
Danes,  or  Britons,  on  every  side  of  my  dominion.”  (Thorpe’s
Ancient  Laws,  p.  116.)  But  what  does  this  prove  as  to
Mercia  ?  The  inference  is,  that  Edgar,  when  he  thought
any  particular  statute  necessary  for  the  public  weal,  enforced
it  on  all  his  subjects,  but  did  not  generally  meddle  with  the
Danish  usages.

“The  laws  of  the  glorious  Athelstan  had  no  effect  in
Kent,  the  dependent  appanage  of  his  crown,  until  sanctioned
by  the  witan  of  the  shire.”  It  is  certainly  true  that  we  find
a  letter  addressed  to  the  king  in  the  name  of  “  episcopi  tui
de  Kancia,  et  omnes  Cantescyre  thaini,  comites  et  villani,”
thanking  him  “  quod  nobis  de  pace  nostra  praecipere  voluisti
et  de  commodo  nostro  quaerere  et  consulere,  quia  magnum
inde  nobis  est  opus  divitibus  et  pauperibus.”  But  the  whole
tenor  of  this  letter,  which  relates  to  the  laws  enacted  at  the
witenagemot,  or  “grand  synod”  of  Greatanlea  (supposed
near  Andover),  though  it  expresses  approbation  of  those
laws,  and  repeats  some  of  them  with  slight  variations,  does
not,  in  my  judgment,  amount  to  a  distinct  enactment  of
them  ;  and  the  final  words  are  not  very  legislative.  “  Pre¬
cam  ur,  Domine,  misericordiam  tuam,  si  in  hoc  scripto  alteru-
trum  est  vel  nimis  vel  minus,  ut  hoc  emendari  jubeas

3.36

THE  WITENAGEMOT.

Notes  to

secundum  velle  tuum.  Et  nos  devote  parati  sumus  ad  omnia
quae  nobis  pnecipere  velis  quae  unquam  aliquatenus  implere
valeamus.”  (p.  91.)

It  is,  moreover,  an  objection  to  considering  this  as  a  formal
enactment  by  the  witan  of  the  shire,  that  it  runs  in  the
names  of  “  thaini,  comites  et  villani.”  Can  it  be  maintained
that  the  ceorls  ever  formed  an  integrant  element  of  the
legislature  in  the  kingdom  of  Kent?  It  may  be  alleged
that  their  name  was  inserted,  though  they  had  not  been
formally  consenting  parties,  as  we  find  in  some  parliamentary
grants  of  money  much  later.  But  this  would  be  an  arbitrary
conjecture,  and  the  terms  “  omnes  thaini,”  &c.,  are  very
large.  By  comites  we  are  to  understand,  not  earls,  who  in
that  age  would  not  have  been  spoken  of  distinctly  from
thanes,  at  least  in  the  plural  number,  nor  postponed  to  them,
but  thanes  of  the  second  order,  sithcundmen,  sixhynder.
Alfred  translates  “  comes  ”  by  “  gesith,”  and  the  meaning
is  nearly  the  same.

In  the  next  year  we  have  a  very  peremptory  declaration
of  the  exclusive  rights  of  the  king  and  his  witan.  “  Athel-
stan,  king,  makes  known  that  I  have  learned  that  our  *  frith  *
(peace)  is  worse  kept  than  is  pleasing  to  me,  or  as  at  Great-
anlea  was  ordained,  and  my  witan  say  that  I  have  too  long
borne  with  it.  Now,  I  have  decreed,  with  the  witan  who
were  with  me  at  Exeter  at  midwinter,  that  they  [the  frith-
breakers]  shall  all  be  ready,  themselves  and  with  wives  and
property,  and  with  all  things,  to  go  whither  I  will  (unless
from  thenceforth  they  shall  desist),  on  this  condition,  that
they  never  come  again  to  the  country.  And  if  they  shall
ever  again  be  found  in  the  country,  that  they  be  as  guilty  ;is
he  who  may  be  taken  with  stolen  goods  (handhabbende).”

Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  a  strenuous  advocate  for  the  antiq¬
uity  of  municipal  privileges,  contends  for  aldermen,  elected
by  the  people  in  boroughs,  sitting  and  assenting  among  the
king’s  witan.  (Edinb.  Rev.  xxvi.  26.)  M Their  seats  in  the
witenagemot  were  connected  as  insejuirably  with  their  office
as  their  duties  in  the  folkmote.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  for
denying  to  the  aldermen  of  the  boroughs  the  rights  and  rank
possessed  by  the  aldermen  of  the  hundreds ;  and  they,  in  all
cases,  were  equally  elected  by  the  commons.”  The  passage
is  worthy  of  consideration,  like  everything  which  comes  from
this  ingenious  and  deeply  read  author.  But  we  must  be

Chap.  Till.

THE  HUNDRED.

3.57

staggered  by  the  absence  of  all  proof,  and  particularly  by
the  fact  that  we  do  not  find  aldermen  of  towns,  so  described,
among  the  witnesses  of  any  royal  charter.  Yet  it  is  possible
that  such  a  privilege  was  confined  to  the  superior  thanes,
which  weakens  the  inference.  We  cannot  pretend,  I  think,
to  deny,  in  so  obscure  an  inquiry,  that  some  eminent  inhabi¬
tants  (I  would  here  avoid  the  ambiguous  word  citizens)  of
London,  or  even  other  cities,  might  occasionally  be  present
in  the  witenagemot.  But  were  not  these,  as  we  may  confi¬
dently  assume,  of  the  rank  of  thane  ?  The  position  in  my
text  is,  that  ceorls  or  inferior  freemen  had  no  share  in  the
deliberations  of  that  assembly.  Nor  would  these  aldermen,
if  actually  present,  have  been  chosen  by  the  court-leet  for
that  special  purpose,  but  as  regular  magistrates.  “  Of  this
great  council,”  Sir  F.  P.  says  in  another  place  (Edinb.  Rev.
xxxiv.  336),  “as  constituted  anterior  to  the  Conquest,  we
know  little  more  than  the  name.”  The  greater  room,  conse¬
quently,  for  hypothesis.  In  a  later  work,  as  has  been  seen
above,  Sir  F.  P.  adopts  the  notion  that  forty  hydes  of  land
were  the  necessary  qualification  for  a  seat  in  the  witenage¬
mot.  This  is  almost  inevitably  inconsistent  with  the  presence,
as  by  right,  of  aldermen  elected  by  boroughs.  We  must
conclude,  therefore,  that  he  has  abandoned  that  hypothesis.
Neither  of  the  two  is  satisfactory  to  my  judgment.

Note  VI.  Page  267.

The  hundred-court,  and  indeed  the  hundred  itself,  do  not
appear  in  our  Anglo-Saxon  code  before  the  reign  of  Edgar,
whose  regulations  concerning  the  former  are  rather  full.
But  we  should  be  too  hasty  in  concluding  that  it  was  then
first  established.  Nothing  in  the  language  of  those  laws  im¬
plies  it.  A  theory  has  been  developed  in  a  very  brilliant  and
learned  article  of  the  Edinburgh  Review  for  1822  (xxxvi.
287),  justly  ascribed  to  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  which  deduces  the
hundred  from  the  hcerad  of  the  Scandinavian  kingdoms,  the
integral  unit  of  the  Scandinavian  commonwealths.  “  The
Gothic  commonwealth  is  not  an  unit  of  which  the  smaller  bod¬
ies  politic  are  fractions.  They  are  the  units,  and  the  com¬
monwealth  is  the  multiple.  Every  Gothic  monarchy  is  in
the  nature  of  a  confederation.  It  is  composed  of  towns,  town¬
ships,  shires,  bailiwicks,  burghs,  earldoms,  dukedoms,  all  in  a

358

TIIE  HUNDRED.

Notes  to

certain  degree  strangers  to  each  other,  and  separated  in  juris¬
diction.  Their  magistrates,  therefore,  in  theory  at  least,  ought

not  to  emanate  from  the  sovereign . The  strength

of  the  state  ascends  from  region  to  region.  The  represent¬
ative  form  of  government,  adopted  by  no  nation  but  the  Gothic
tribes,  and  originally  common  to  them  all,  necessarily  resulted
from  this  federative  system,  in  which  the  sovereign  was  com¬
pelled  to  treat  the  component  members  as  possessing  a  several
authority.”

The  hundred  was  as  much,  according  to  Palgrave,  the  or¬
ganic  germ  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  commonwealth,  as  the  haerad
was  of  the  Scandinavian.  Thus,  the  leet,  held  every  month,
and  composed  of  the  tythingmen  or  head-boroughs,  represent¬
ing  the  inhabitants,  were  both  the  inquest  and  the  jury,  pos¬
sessing  jurisdiction,  as  he  conceives,  in  all  cases  civil,  criminal,
and  ecclesiastical,  though  this  was  restrained  after  the  Con¬
quest.  William  forbade  the  bishop  or  archdeacon  to  sit  there  ;
and  by  the  17th  section  of  Magna  Charta  no  pleas  of  the
crown  could  be  held  before  the  sheriff,  the  constable,  the  coro¬
ner,  or  other  bailiff  (inferior  officer)  of  the  crown.  This  was
intended  to  secure  for  the  prisoner,  on  charges  of  felony,  a
trial  before  the  king’s  justices  on  their  circuits ;  and,  from
this  time,  if  not  earlier,  the  hundred-court  was  reduced  to  in¬
significance.  That,  indeed,  of  the  county,  retaining  its  civil
jurisdiction,  as  it  still  does  in  name,  continued  longer  in  force.
In  the  reign  of  Henry  I.,  or  when  the  customal  (as  Sir  F.
Palgrave  denominates  what  are  usually  called  his  laws)  was
compiled  (which  in  fact  was  a  very  little  later),  all  of  the
highest  rank  were  bound  to  attend  at  it  And  though  the
extended  jurisdiction  of  the  curia  regis  soon  crumped  its
energy,  we  are  justified  in  saying  that  the  proceedings  la-fore
the  justices  of  assize  were  nearly  the  same  in  effect  as  those
before  the  shiremote.  The  same  suitors  were  called  to  attend,
and  the  same  duties  were  performed  by  them,  though  under
different  presidents.  The  grand  jury,  it  may  be  remarked,
still  corresponds,  in  a  considerable  degree,  to  the  higher  class
of  landholders  bound  to  attendance  in  the  county-court  of  the
Saxon  and  Norman  periods.

I  must  request  the  reader  to  turn,  if  he  is  not  already  ac¬
quainted  with  it,  to  this  original  disquisition  in  the  Edinburgh
Review.  The  analogies  between  the  Scandinavian  and
Anglo-Saxon  institutions  are  too  striking  to  be  disregarded,

Chap.  VIII.

ANGLO-SAXON  JURISDICTION.

359

though  some  conclusions  may  have  been  drawn  from  them  to
which  we  cannot  thoroughly  agree.  If  it  is  alleged  that  we
do  not  find  in  the  ancient  customs  of  Germany  that  peculiar
scale  of  society  which  ascends  from  the  hundred,  as  a  monad
of  self-government,  to  the  collective  unity  of  a  royal  common¬
wealth,  it  may  be  replied  that  we  trace  the  essential  principle
in  the  pagus,  or  gau,  of  Tacitus,  though  perhaps  there  might
be  nothing  numerical  in  that  territorial  direction  ;  that  we
have,  in  fact,  the  centenary  distribution  under  peculiar  magis¬
trates  in  the  old  continental  laws  and  other  documents ;  and
that  a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  of  England,  ulti¬
mately  coalescing  with  the  rest,  so  far  at  least  as  to  acknowl¬
edge  a  common  sovereign,  came  from  the  very  birthplace  of
Scandinavian  institutions.  In  the  Danelage  we  might  expect
more  traces  of  a  northern  policy  than  in  the  south  and  west ;
and  perhaps  they  may  be  found.1  Yet  we  are  not  to  disre¬
gard  the  effect  of  countervailing  agencies,  or  the  evidence  of
our  own  records,  which  attest,  as  I  must  think,  a  far  greater
unity  of  power,  and  a  more  paramount  authority  in  the  crown,
throughout  the  period  which  we  denominate  Anglo-Saxon,
than,  according  to  the  scheme  of  a  Scandinavian  common¬
wealth  sketched  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  could  be  attributed
to  that  very  ancient  and  rude  shite  of  society.  And  there  is
a  question  that  might  naturally  be  asked,  how  it  happens  that,
if  the  division  by  hundreds  and  the  court  of  the  hundred  were
parts  so  essential  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  commonwealth  that  all
its  unity  is  derived  from  them,  we  do  not  find  any  mention  of
either  in  the  numerous  laws  and  other  documents  which  re¬
main  before  the  reign  of  Edgar  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth
century.  But  I  am  far  from  supposing  that  hundreds  did  not
exist  in  a  much  earlier  period.

Note  YII.  Page  270.

“  The  judicial  functions  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  monarchs
were  of  a  twofold  nature ;  the  ordinary  authority  which  the
king  exercised,  like  the  inferior  territorial  judges,  differing,
perhaps,  in  degree,  though  the  same  in  kind ;  and  the  pre¬
rogative  supremacy,  pervading  all  the  tribunals  of  the  people,
and  which  was  to  be  called  into  action  when  they  were  un-

l  Vide  Leges  Ethelredi.

SCO

JURISDICTION  OF

Notes  to

able  or  unwilling  to  afford  redress.  The  jurisdiction  which
lie  exercised  over  his  own  thanes  was  similar  to  the  authority
of  any  other  hlaford  ;  it  resulted  from  the  peculiar  and  im¬
mediate  relation  of  the  vassal  to  the  superior.  Offences  com¬
mitted  in  the  fyrd  or  army  were  punished  by  the  king,  in  his
capacity  of  military  commander  of  the  people.  He  could  con¬
demn  the  criminal,  and  decree  the  forfeiture  of  his  proper¬
ty,  without  the  intervention  of  any  other  judge  or  tribunal.
Furthermore,  the  rights  which  the  king  had  over  all  men
though  slightly  differing  in  “  Danelage  ”  from  the  prerogative
which  he  possessed  in  Wessex  and  Mercia,  allowed  him  to
take  cognizance  ot  almost  every  offence  accompanied  by  vio¬
lence  and  rapine  ;  and  amongst  these  “  pleas  of  the  crown  ”
'u  *]ie  terms,  so  familiar  to  the  Scottish  lawyer  and  anti¬
quary,  ot  “  hamsoken  ”  and  “  flemen  firth,”  or  the  crimes  of
invading  the  peaceful  dwelling,  and  harboring  the  outlawed
fugitive.  (Rise  and  Progress  of  Engl.  Commonwealth,  vol.

i.  p.  282.)

Edgar  was  renowned  for  his  strict  execution  of  justice.

•  Twice  in  every  year,  in  the  winter  and  in  the  spring,  he
made  the  circuit  of  his  dominions,  protecting  the  lowly,  rigidly
examining  the  judgments  of  the  powerful  in  each  province,
and  avenging  all  violations  of  the  law.”  (Id.  p.  286.)  He
infers  from  some  expressions  in  the  history  of  Ramsey  (Gale,
iii.  441)  “cum  more  assueto  rex  Cnuto  regni  fines  pera-
graret  — that  these  judicial  eyres  continued  to  be  held.  It
is  not  at  all  improbable  that  such  a  king  as  Canute  would  re¬
vive  the  practice  of  Edgar ;  but  it  was  usual  in  all  the  Teu¬
tonic  nations  for  the  king,  once  after  his  accession,  to  make
the  emeua  of  his  realm.  Proofs  of  this  are  given  by  Grimm,

In  this  royal  court  the  sovereign  was  at  least  assisted  by
his  witan,”  both  ecclesiastic  imd  secular.  Their  consent
i\as  pro  '.ably  indispensable;  but  the  monarchical  element  of
Anglo-Saxon  polity  had  become  so  vigorous  in  the  tenth
and  eleventh  centuries,  that  we  can  hardly  apply  the  old  Teu¬
tonic  principle  expressed  by  Grimm.  “  All  judicial  power
was  exercised  by  the  assembly  of  freemen,  under  the  presidence
of  an  elective  or  hereditary  superior.”  (Deutsche  Rechts-
Alterth.  p.  749.)  This  was  the  case  in  the  county-court,  and
perhaps  had  once  been  so  in  the  court  of  the  king.

The  analogies  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  monarchy  to  that  of

Chap.  Till.

AX GLO— SAXON  KINGS.

361

France  daring  the  same  period,  though  not  uniformly  to  he
traced,  are  very  striking.  The  regular  jurisdiction  over  the
king’s  domanial  tenants,  that  over  the  vassals  of  the  crown,
that  which  was  exercised  on  denial  of  justice  by  the  lower
tribunals,  meet  us  in  the  two  first  dynasties  of  France,  and  in
the  early  reigns  of  the  third.  But  they  were  checked  in  that
country  by  the  feudal  privileges,  or  assumptions  of  privilege,
which  rendered  many  kings  of  these  three  races  almost  im¬
potent  to  maintain  any  authority.  Edgar  and  Canute,  or  even
less  active  princes,  had  never  to  contend  with  the  feudal  aris¬
tocracy.  They  legislated  for  the  realm;  they  wielded  its
entire  force ;  they  maintained,  not  always  thoroughly,  but  in
right  and  endeavor  they  failed  not  to  maintain,  the  public
peace.  The  scheme  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  commonwealth  was
better  than  the  feudal;  it  preserved  more  of  the  Teutonic
character,  it  gave  more  to  the  common  freeman  as  well  as  to
the  king.  The  love  of  Utopian  romance,  and  the  bias  in
favor  of  a  democratic  origin  for  our  constitution,  have  led  many
to  overstate  the  freedom  of  the  Saxon  commonwealth ;  or
rather,  perhaps,  to  look  less  for  that  freedom  where  it  is  really
best  to  be  found,  in  the  administration  of  justice,  than  in  rep¬
resentative  councils,  which  authentic  records  do  not  confirm.
But  in  comparison  to  France  or  Italy,  perhaps  to  Germany,
with  the  exception  of  a  few  districts  which  had  preserved
their  original  customs,  we  may  reckon  the  Anglo-Saxon
polity,  at  the  time  when  we  know  most  of  it,  from  Alfred  to
the  Conquest,  rude  and  defective  as  it  must  certainly  appear
when  tried  by  the  standard  of  modem  ages,  not  quite  unwor¬
thy  of  those  affectionate  recollections  which  long  continued  to
attach  themselves  to  its  name.

The  most  important  part,  perhaps,  of  the  jurisdiction  exer¬
cised  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  as  by  those  of  France,  was
oh  defectum  justitice,  where  redress  could  not  be  obtained  from
an  inferior  tribunal,  a  case  of  not  unusual  occurrence  in  those
ages.  It  forms,  as  has  been  shown  in  the  second  chapter,  a
conspicuous  feature  in  that  feudal  jurisprudence  which  we
trace  in  the  establishments  of  St.  Louis,  and  in  Beaumanoir.
Nothing  could  have  a  more  decided  tendency  to  create  and
strengthen  a  spirit  of  loyalty  towards  the  crown,  a  trust  in  its
power  and  paternal  goodness.  “  The  sources  of  ordinary  ju¬
risdiction,”  says  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  “  however  extensive,  were
less  important  than  the  powers  assigned  to  the  king  as  the

3C2

JURISDICTION  OF

Notes  to

lord  and  leader  of  his  people ;  and  by  which  he  remedied  the
defects  of  the  legislation  of  the  state,  speaking  when  the  law
was  silent,  and  adding  new  vigor  to  its  administration.  It
was  to  the  royal  authority  that  the  suitor  had  recourse  when
lie  could  not  obtain  ‘  right  at  home,’  though  this  appeal  was
not  to  be  had  until  he  had  thrice  ‘  demanded  right  ’  in  the
hundred.  If  the  letter  of  the  law  was  grievous  or  burden¬
some, 'the  alleviation  was  to  be  sought  only  from  the  king.1
All  these  doctrines  are  to  be  discerned  in  the  practice  of  the
subsequent  ages  ;  in  this  place  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark
that  the  principle  of  law  which  denied  the  king’s  help  in  civil
suits,  until  an  endeavor  had  first  been  made  to  obtain  redress
in  the  inferior  courts,  became  the  leading  allegation  in  the
‘  A\  rit  of  Right  Close  ;  ’  this  prerogative  process  being  found¬
ed  upon  the  default  of  the  lord’s  court,  and  issued  lest  the
king  should  hear  any  more  complaints  of  want  of  justice.
And  the  alleviation  of  ‘  the  heavy  law  ’  is  the  primary  source
of  the  authority  delegated  by  the  king  to  his  council,  and  af¬
terwards  assumed  by  his  chancery  and  chancellor,  and  from
whence  our  courts  of  equity  are  derived.  ”  (Rise  and  Prog¬
ress  of  English  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.  p.  203.)  I  hesitate
about  this  Last  position  ;  the  “  heavy  law  ”  seems  to  have  been
the  legal  fine  or  penalty  for  an  offence.  (Leges  Edgar,  ubi
supra.)

I  hat  there  was  a  select  council  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,
distinct  from  the  witenagemot,  and  in  constant  attendance
upon  them,  notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  Madox  and  of
Allen  (Edinb.  Rev.  xxxv.  8),  appears  to  be  indubituble.
“  From  the  numerous  charters  granted  by  the  kings  to  the
church,  and  to  their  vassals,  which  are  dated  from  the  differ¬
ent  royal  vills  or  manors  wherein  they  resided  in  their  prog¬
resses  through  their  dominions,  it  would  appear  that  there
were  always  a  certain  number  of  the  optimates  in  attendance
on  the  king,  or  ready  to  obey  his  summons,  to  act  as  his
council  when  circumstances  required  it.  This  may  have  been
what  afterwards  appears  as  the  select  council.”  (Spence’s
Equitable  Jurisdict.  p.  72.)  The  charters  publi-hed  by  Mr.
Kembler  in  the  Codex  Ang.-Sax.  Diplomaticus  are  attested!
by  those  whom  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  the  members
of  this  council,  with  the  exception  of  some,  which,  by  the

«  Edgar  n.  2 ;  Canute  II.  18;  Ethelred,  17.

Chap.  VIII.

AXGI.O-SAXOX  KINGS.

3C3

number  of  witnesses  and  the  importance  of  the  matter,  were
probably  (granted  in  the  witenagemot.

The  jurisdiction  of  the  king  is  illustrated  by  the  laws  of
Edgar.  “  Now  this  is  the  secular  ordinance  which  I  will  that
it  be  held.  This  then  is  just  what  I  will ;  that  every  man  be
worthy  of  folk-right,  as  well  poor  as  rich  ;  and  that  righteous
dooms  be  judged  to  him  ;  and  let  there  be  that  remission  in
the  ‘  hot  ’  as  may  be  becoming  before  God  and  tolerable  before
the  world.  And  let  no  man  apply  to  the  king  in  any  suit,
unless  he  at  home  may  not  be  worthy  of  law,  or  cannot  ob¬
tain  law.  If  the  law  be  too  heavy,  let  him  seek  a  mitigation
of  it  from  the  king;  and  for  any  botworthy  crime  let  no  man
forfeit  more  than  his  ‘  wer.’  ”  (Thorpe’s  Ancient  Laws,  p.
112.)  B<jt  is  explained  in  the  glossary,  “amends,  atone¬
ment,  compensation,  indemnification.”

This  law  seems  not  to  include  appeals  of  false  judgment,
in  the  feudal  phrase.  But  they  naturally  come  within  the  spir¬
it  of  the  provision  ;  and  “  injustum  judicium  ”  is  named  in  Le¬
ges  Ilenr.  Primi,  c.  10,  among  the  exclusive  pleas  of  the
crown.  It  does  not  seem  clear  to  me,  as  Palgrave  assumes,
that  the  disputes  of  royal  tlianes  with  each  other  came  be¬
fore  the  king’s  court.  Is  there  any  ground  for  supposing
that  they  were  exempt  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  county-
court  ?  Doubtless,  when  powerful  men  were  at  enmity,  no
petty  court  could  effectively  determine  their  quarrel,  or  pre¬
vent  them  from  having  recourse  to  arms;  such  suits  would
fall  naturally  into  the  king’s  own  hands.  But  the  jurisdic¬
tion  might  not  be  exclusively  his  ;  nor  would  it  extend,  as  of
course,  to  every  royal  thane ;  some  of  whom  might  be  amena¬
ble,  without  much  difficulty,  to  the  local  courts.  It  is  said  in
the  seventh  chapter  of  the  laws  of  Henry  I.,  which  are  An¬
glo-Saxon  in  substance,  concerning  the  business  to  be  trans¬
acted  in  the  county-court,  where  bishops,  earls,  and  others,  as
well  as  “  barons  and  vavassors,”  that  is,  king’s  thanes  and  in¬
ferior  thanes  in  the  older  language  of  the  law,  were  bound  to
be  present,  —  “  Agantur  itaque  primo  debita  vere  Christian!-
tatis  jure  ;  secundo  r<-gis  placita  ;  postremo  causa;  singuloruin
dignis  satisfactionibus  expleantur.”  Ihe  notion  that  the
king’s  tlianes  resorted  to  his  court,  as  to  that  of  their  lord  or
common  superior,  is  merely  grounded  on  feudal  principles  ;
but  the  great  constitutional  theory  ol  jurisdiction  in  Anglo-

364

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

Saxon  times,  as  Sir  F.  Palgrave  is  well  aware,  was  not  feu¬
dal,  but  primitive  Teutonic.

“  The  witenagemot,”  says  Allen,  “  was  not  only  the  king’s
legislative  assembly,  but  his  supreme  court  of  judicature.”
(Edinb.  Rev.  xxxv.  9  ;  referring  for  proofs  to  Turner’s  Histo¬
ry  of  the  Anglo-Saxons.)  Nothing  can  be  less  questionable
than  that  civil  as  well  as  criminal  jurisdiction  fell  within  the
province  of  this  assembly.  But  this  does  not  prove  that  there
was  not  also  a  less  numerous  body,  constantly  accessible,  fol¬
lowing  the  king’s  person,  and  though  not,  perhaps,  always
competent  in  practice  to  determine  the  quarrels  of  the  most
powerful,  ready  to  dispose  of  the  complaints  which  might  come
before  it  from  the  hundred  or  county  courts  for  delay  of  jus¬
tice  or  manifest  wrong.  Sir  F.  Palgrave’s  arguments  for  the
existence  of  such  a  tribunal  before  the  Conquest,  founded  on
the  general  spirit  and  analogy  of  the  monarchy,  are  of  the
greatest  weight  But  Mr.  Allen  had  acquired  too  much  a
habit  of  looking  at  the  popular  side  of  the  constitution,  and,
catching  at  every  passage  which  proved  our  early  kings  to
have  been  limited  in  their  prerogative,  did  not  quite  attend
enough  to  the  opposite  scale.

Note  VIII.  Page  273.

Though  the  following  note  relates  to  a  period  subsequent
to  the  Conquest,  yet,  as  no  better  opportunity  will  occur  for
following  up  the  very  interesting  inquiry  into  the  origin  and
progress  of  trial  by  jury,  I  shall  place  here  what  appears  most
worthy  of  the  reader’s  attention.  And,  before  we  proceed,  let
me  observe  that  the  twelve  tlianes,  mentioned  in  the  law  of
Ethelred,  quoted  in  the  text  (p.  270),  appear  to  have  been
clearly  analogous  to  our  grand  juries.  Their  duties  were  to
present  offenders ;  they  corresponded  to  the  scabini  or  echevins
ot  the  foreign  laws.  Palgrave  has,  with  his  usual  clearness,
distinguished  both  compurgators,  such  as  were  previously
mentioned  in  the  text,  and  these  thanes  from  real  jurors.
“  Trial  by  compurgators  offers  many  resemblances  to  a  jury  ;
for  the  dubious  suspicion  that  fell  ujxjn  the  culprit  might
often  be  decided  by  their  knowledge  of  his  general  conduct
and  conversation,  or  of  some  fact  or  circumstance  which  con¬
vinced  them  of  his  innocence.  The  tlianes  or  echevins

Chap.  VIE.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

3G5

may  equally  be  confounded  with  a  jury ;  since  the  floating,
customary,  unwritten  law  of  the  country  was  a  fact  to  be
ascertained  from  their  belief  and  knowledge,  and,  unlike  the
suitors,  they  were  sworn  to  the  due  discharge  of  their  duty.
Still,  each  class  will  be  found  to  have  some  peculiar  distinc¬
tion.  Virtually  elected  by  the  community,  the  echevins  con¬
stituted  a  permanent  magistracy,  and  their  duty  extended
beyond  the  mere  decision  of  a  contested  question ;  but  the
jurors,  when  they  were  traversers,  or  triers  of  the  issue,  were
elected  by  the  king’s  officers,  and  impanelled  for  that  time
and  turn.  The  juror  deposed  to  facts,  the  compurgator
pledged  his  faith.”  (English  Common w.  i.  248).

In  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  we  find  no  trace  of  the  trial  of
offences  by  the  judgment,  properly  so  called,  of  peers,  though
civil  suits  were  determined  in  the  county  court.  The  party
accused  by  the  twelve  thanes,  on  their  presentment,  or  per¬
haps  by  a  single  person,  was  to  sustain  his  oath  of  innocence
by  that  of  compurgators  or  by  some  mode  of  ordeal.  It  has
been  generally  doubted  whether  trial  by  combat  were  known
before  the  Conquest;  and  distinct  proofs  of  it  seem  to  be
wanting.  Palgrave,  however,  thinks  it  rather  probable  that,
in  questions  affecting  rights  in  land,  it  may  sometimes  have
been  resorted  to  (p.  224).  But  let  us  now  come  to  trial  by
jury,  both  in  civil  and  criminal  proceedings,  as  it  slowly  grew
up  in  the  Norman  and  later  periods,  erasing  from  our  minds
all  prejudices  about  its  English  original,  except  in  the  form
already  mentioned  of  the  grand  inquest  for  presentment  of
offenders,  and  in  that  which  the  passage  quoted  in  the  text
from  the  History  of  Ramsey  furnishes  —  the  reference  of  a
suit  already  commenced,  by  consent  of  both  parties,  to  a  select
number  of  sworn  arbitrators.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the
thirty-six  thanes  were  to  be  upon  oath,  and  consequently  came
very  near  to  a  jury.

The  period  between  the  Conquest  and  the  reign  of  Henry
II.  is  one  in  which  the  two  nations,  not  yet  blended  by  the
effects  of  intermarriage,  and  retaining  the  pride  of  superiority
on  the  one  hand,  the  jealousy  of  a  depressed  but  not  van¬
quished  spirit  on  the  other,  did  not  altogether  fall  into  a
common  law.  Thus  we  find  <in  a  law  of  the  Conqueror,  that,
while  the  Englishman  accused  of  a  crime  by  a  Norman  had
the  choice  of  trial  by  combat  or  by  ordeal,  the  Norman  must
meet  the  former  if  his  English  accuser  thought  fit  to  encounter

3C6

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

him ;  but  if  he  dared  not,  as  the  insolence  of  the  victor  seems
to  presume,  it  was  sufficient  for  the  foreigner  to  purge  himself
by  the  oaths  of  his  friends,  according  to  the  custom  of  Nor¬
mandy.  (Thorpe,  p.  210.)

IVe  have  next,  in  the  Leges  Ilenrici  Primi,  a  treatise  com¬
piled,  as  I  have  mentioned,  under  Stephen,  and  not  intended
to  pass  for  legislative,1  numerous  statements  as  to  the  usual
course  of  procedure,  especially  on  criminal  charges.  These
are  very  carelessly  put  together,  very  coucise,  very  obscure,
and  in  several  places  very  corrupt.  It  may  be  suspected,  and
cannot  be  disproved,  that  in  some  instances  the  compiler  has
copied  old  statutes  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  period,  or  recorded
old  customs  which  had  already  become  obsolete.  But  be  this
as  it  may,  the  Leges  Ilenrici  Primi  still  are  an  important
document  for  that  obscure  century  which  followed  the  Norman
invasion.  In  this  treatise  we  find  no  allusion  to  juries ;  the
trial  was  either  before  the  court  of  the  hundred  or  that  of  the
territorial  judge,  assisted  by  his  free  vassals.  But  we  do  find
the  great  original  principle,  trial  by  peers,  and,  as  it  is  called,
per  pais;  that  is,  in  the  presence  of  the  country,  opposed  to  a
distant  and  unknown  jurisdiction  —  a  principle  truly  derived
from  Saxon,  though  consonant  also  to  Norman  law,  dear  to
both  nations,  and  guaranteed  to  both,  as  it  was  claimed  by
both,  in  the  29th  section  of  Magna  Cliarta.  “  Unusquisque
per  pares  suos  judicandus  est,  et  ejusdem  pro  vinci® ;  peregrina
autem  judicia  modis  omnibus  submovemus.”  (Leges  H.  I.
c.  31.)  It  may  be  mentioned  by  the  way  that  these  last  words
are  taken  from  a  capitulary  of  Ludovicus  Pius,  and  that  the
compiler  has  been  so  careless  as  to  leave  the  verb  in  the  first
person.  Such  an  innccuracy  might  mislead  a  reader  into  the
supposition  that  he  had  before  him  a  real  law  of  Henry  I.

It  is  obvious  that,  as  the  court  had  no  function  but  to  see
that  the  formalities  of  the  combat,  the  ordeal,  or  the  compur¬
gation  were  duly  regarded,  and  to  observe  whether  the  [tarty
succeeded  or  succumbed,  no  oath  from  them,  nor  any  reduction
of  their  numbers,  could  be  required.  But  the  law  of  Nor¬
mandy  had  already  established  the  inquest  by  sworn  recogni-

'  It  may  he  here  obnerred,  that,  In  to  the  city  of  London.  A  rlmilar  ln-
nll  probability,  the  title,  Lag**  Ilenrici  advertence  has  caianed  the  writ- known
Primi,  baa  been  continued  to  the  whole  book,  commonly  aacrlbed  to  Tboma*  k
book  from  the  Ant  two  chapter*,  which  KernpU,  to  be  called  ‘  De  Imitation*
do  really  contain  law*  of  Henry  I.,  Chri»tl,’  which  I*  merely  the  title  of  th*
namely,  hi*  guneral  charter,  and  that  Aret  chapter.

Chap.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

367

tors,  twelve  or  twenty-four  in  number,  who  were  supposed  to
be  well  acquainted  with  the  facts ;  and  this  in  civil  as  well  as
criminal  proceedings.  "We  have  seen  an  instance  of  it,  not
long  before  the  Conquest,  among  ourselves,  in  the  history  of
the  monk  of  Ramsey.  It  was  in  the  development  of  this
amelioration  in  civil  justice  that  we  tind  instances  during  this
period  (Sir  F.  Palgrave  has  mentioned  several)  where  a  small
number  have  been  chosen  from  the  county  court  and  sworn  to
declare  the  truth,  when  the  judge  might  suspect  the  partiality
or  ignorance  of  the  entire  body.  Thus  in  suits  for  the  recov¬
ery  of  property  the  public  mind  was  gradually  accustomed  to
see  the  jurisdiction  of  the  freeholders  in  their  court  transferred
to  a  more  select  number  of  sworn  and  well-informed  men.
But  this  was  not  yet  a  matter  of  right,  nor  even  probably  of
very  common  usage.  It  was  in  this  state  of  things  that
Henry  H.  brought  in  the  assize  of  novel  disseizin.

This  gave  an  alternative  to  the  tenant  on  a  suit  for  the  re¬
covery  of  land,  if  he  chose  not  to  risk  the  combat,  of  putting
himself  on  the  assize ;  that  is,  of  being  tried  by  four  knights
summoned  by  the  sheriff  and  twelve  more  selected  by  them,
forming  the  sixteen  sworn  recognitors,  as  they  were  called,  by
whose  verdict  the  cause  was  determined.  “  Est  autem  raagna
assisa,”  says  Glanvil  (lib.  ii.  c.  7),  “  regale  quoddam  bene-
ficium,  dementia  principis  de  consilio  procerum  populis
indultum,  quo  vitae  hominum  et  status  integritati  tarn  salu-
briter  consulitur,  ut  in  jure  quod  quis  in  libero  soli  tenemento
possidet  retinendo  duclli  casum  declinare  possint  homines
ambiguum.  Ac  per  hoc  contingit  insperatse  et  prematurae
mortis  ultimum  evadere  supplicium,  vel  saltern  perennis  in-
famiae  opprobrium,  illius  infesti  et  inverecundi  verbi  quod  in
ore  victi  turpiter  sonat  consecutivum.1  Ex  aequitate  autem
maxima  prodita  est  legalis  ista  institutio.  Jus  enim  quod  post
multas  et  longas  dilationes  vix  evindtur  per  duellum,  per
beneficium  istius  constitutionis  commodius  et  acceleratius  ex-
peditur.”  The  whole  proceedings  on  an  assize  of  novel
disseizin,  which  was  always  held  in  the  king’s  court  or  that  of
the  justices  itinerant,  and  not  before  the  county  or  hundred,
whose  jurisdiction  began  in  consequence  rapidly  to  decline,
are  explained  at  some  length  by  this  ancient  author,  the  chief
justiciary  of  Henry  II.

1  Thin  nu  the  word  craven,  or  bogging  Tor  life,  which  mi  thought  the  utmost
lkgntce.

3G8

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

XoTES  TO

Changes  not  less  important  were  effected  in  criminal  pro¬
cesses  during  the  second  part  of  the  Norman  period,  which
we  consider  as  terminating  with  the  accession  of  Edward  I.
Henry  II.  abolished  the  ancient  privilege  of  compurgation  by
the  oaths  of  friends,  the  manifest  fountain  of  unblushing  per¬
jury  ;  though  it  long  afterwards  was  preserved  in  London
and  in  boroughs  by  some  exemption  which  does  not  appear.
This,  however,  left  the  favorite,  or  at  least  the  ancient  and
English,  mode  of  defence  by  chewing  consecrated  bread,
handling  hot  iron,  and  other  tricks  called  ordeals.  But  near
the  beginning  of  Henry  III.’s  reign  the  church,  grown  wiser
and  more  fond  of  her  system  of  laws,  abolished  all  kinds  of
ordeal  in  the  fourth  Lateran  council.  The  combat  remained ;
but  it  was  not  applicable  unless  an  injured  prosecutor  or  ap¬
pellant  came  forward  to  demand  it.  In  cases  where  a  party
was  only  charged  on  vehement  suspicion  of  a  crime,  it  was
necessary  to  find  a  substitute  for  the  forbidden  superstition.
He  might  be  compelled,  by  a  statute  of  Henry  II.,  to  abjure
the  realm.  A  writ  of  3  Henry  III.  directs  that  those  against
whom  the  suspicions  were  very  strong  should  be  kept  in  safe
custody.  But  this  was  absolutely  incompatible  with  Engli.-h
liberty  and  with  Magna  Charta.  44  No  further  enactment,”
says  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  “was  made;  and  the  usages  which
already  prevailed  led  to  a  general  adoption  of  the  proceeding
which  had  hitherto  existed  as  a  privilege  or  as  a  favor  —  that
is  to  say,  of  proving  or  disproving  the  testimony  of  the  first
set  of  inquest-men  by  the  testimony  of  a  second  array — and
the  individual  accused  by  the  appeal,  or  presented  by  the  gen¬
eral  opinion  of  the  hundred,  was  allowed  to  defend  himself
by  the  particular  testimony  of  the  hundred  to  which  he  be¬
longed.  For  this  purpose  another  inquest  was  impanelled,
sometimes  composed  of  twelve  persons  named  from  the  4  visne ’
and  three  from  each  of  the  adjoining  townships ;  and  some¬
times  the  very  same  jurymen  who  had  presented  the  offence
might,  if  the  culprit  thought  fit,  be  examined  a  second  time,
as  the  witnesses  or  inquest  of  the  points  in  is>ue.  But  it  seems
worthy  of  remark  that  4  trial  by  inquest  ’  in  criminal  cases
never  seems  to  have  been  introduced  except  into  those-  courts
which  acted  by  the  king’s  writ  or  commission.  The  present¬
ment  or  declaration  of  those  officers  which  fell  within  the
cognizance  of  the  hundred  jury  or  the  leet  jury,  the  repre¬
sentatives  of  the  ancient  tchevins,  was  final  and  conclusive;

CHAr.  vm.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

3G9

no  traverse,  or  trial  by  a  second  jury,  in  the  nature  of  a  petty
jury,  being  allowed.”  (p.  269.)

Thus  trial  by  a  petty  jury  upon  criminal  charges  came  in ;
it  is  of  the  reign  of  Henry  III.,  and  not  earlier.  And  it  is
to  be  remarked,  as  a  confirmation  of  this  view,  that  no  one
was  compellable  to  plead ;  that  is,  the  inquest  was  to  be  of
his  own  choice.  But  if  he  declined  to  endure  it  he  was  re¬
manded  to  prison,  and  treated  with  a  severity  which  the
statute  of  Westminster  1,  in  the  third  year  of  Edward  I.,
calls  peine  forte  et  dure ;  extended  afterwards,  by  a  cruel
interpretation,  to  that  atrocious  punishment  on  those  who  re¬
fused  to  stand  a  trial,  commonly  in  order  to  preserve  their
lands  from  forfeiture,  which  was  not  taken  away  by  law  till
the  last  century.

Thus  was  trial  by  jury  established,  both  in  real  actions  or
suits  affecting  property  in  land  and  in  criminal  procedure,
the  former  preceding  by  a  little  the  latter.  But  a  new  ques¬
tion  arises  as  to  the  province  of  these  early  juries ;  and  the
view  lately  taken  is  very  different  from  that  which  has  been
commonly  received.

The  writer  whom  we  have  so  often  had  occasion  to  quote
lias  presented  trial  by  jury  in  what  may  be  called  an  altogether
new  light ;  for  though  Reeves,  in  his  “  History  of  the  English
Law,”  almost  translating  Glanvil  and  Bracton,  could  not  help
leading  an  attentive  reader  to  something  like  the  same  result,
I  am  not  aware  that  anything  approaching  to  the  generality
and  fulness  of  Sir  Francis  Palgrave’s  statements  can  be  found
in  any  earlier  work  than  his  own.

“  Trial  by  jury,  according  to  the  old  English  law,  was  a
proceeding  essentially  different  from  the  modern  tribunal,  still
bearing  the  same  name,  by  which  it  has  been  replaced ;  and
whatever  merits  belonged  to  the  original  mode  of  judicial
investigation — ami  they  were  great  and  unquestionable,
though  accompanied  by  many  imperfections  —  such  benefits
are  not  to  be  exactly  identified  with  the  advantages  now  re¬
sulting  from  the  great  bulwark  of  English  liberty.  Jurymen
in  the  present  day  are  triers  of  the  issue:  they  are  individu¬
als  who  found  their  opinion  upon  the  evidence,  whether  oral
or  written,  adduced  before  them ;  and  the  verdict  delivered
by  them  is  their  declaration  of  the  judgment  which  they  have
formed.  But  the  ancient  jurymen  were  not  impanelled  to
examine  into  the  credibility  of  the  evidence :  the  question
vol.  u.  24

370

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

No  TEH  TO

was  not  discussed  and  argued  before  them :  they,  the  jury¬
men,  were  the  witnesses  themselves,  and  the  verdict  was  sub¬
stantially  the  examination  of  these  witnesses,  who  of  their
own  knowledge,  and  without  the  aid  of  other  testimony,
afforded  their  evidence  respecting  the  facts  in  question  to  the
best  of  their  belief.  In  its  primitive  form  a  trial  by  jury
was  therefore  only  a  trial  by  witnesses ;  and  jurymen  were
distinguished  from  any  other  witnesses  only  by  customs  which
ira]K)sed  upon  them  the  obligation  of  an  oath  and  regulated
their  number,  and  which  prescribed  their  rank  and  defined
the  territorial  qualifications  from  whence  they  obtained  their
degree  and  influence  in  society.

“  I  find  it  necessary  to  introduce  this  description  of  the
ancient  ‘Trial  by  Jury,’  because,  unless  the  real  functions
of  the  original  jurymen  be  distinctly  presented  to  the  reader,
his  familiar  knowledge  of  the  existing  course  of  jurispru¬
dence  will  lead  to  the  most  erroneous  conclusions.  Many  of
those  who  have  descanted  upon  the  excellence  of  our  vener¬
ated  national  franchise  seem  to  have  supposed  that  it  has
descended  to  us  unchanged  from  the  days  of  Alfred ;  and  the
patriot  who  claims  the  jury  as  the  ‘judgment  by  his  peers’
secured  by  Magna  Chnrta  can  never  have  suspected  how
distinctly  the  trial  is  resolved  into  a  mere  examination  of
witnesses.”  (l’algrave,  i.  243.)

This  theory  is  sustained  by  a  great  display  of  erudition,
which  fully  establishes  that  the  jurors  had  such  a  knowledge,
however  acquired,  of  the  facts  as  enabled  them  to  render  a
verdict  without  hearing  any  other  testimony  in  open  court
than  that  of  the  parties  themselves,  fortified,  if  it  might  be,
by  written  documents  adduced.  Hence  the  knights  of  the
grand  assize  are  called  recognitors,  a  name  often  given  to
others  sworn  on  an  inquest.  In  the  Grand  Coustumier  ot
Normandy,  from  which  our  writ  of  right  was  derived,  it  is
said  that  those  are  to  be  sworn  “  who  were  born  in  the  neigh¬
borhood,  and  who  have  long  dwelt  there;  and  such  ought
they  to  be,  that  it  may  be  believed  they  know  the  truth  of
the  case,  and  that  they  will  speak  the  truth  when  they  shall
be  asked.”  This  was  the  rule  in  our  own  grand  assize.  The
knights  who  appeared  in  it  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  the
truth,  and  if  any  were  not  so  they  were  to  be  rejected  and
others  chosen,  until  twelve  were  unanimous  witnesses.  Glan-
vil  (lib.  ii.)  furnishes  sufficient  proof,  if  we  may  dei>end  on

Chap.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

371

the  language  of  the  writs  which  he  there  inserts.  It  is  to  be
remembered  that  the  transactions  upon  which  an  assize  of
modern  disseizin  or  writ  of  right  would  turn  might  frequently
have  been  notorious.  In  the  eloquent  language  of  Sir  F.
Palgrave,  “  the  forms,  the  festivities,  and  the  ceremonies  ac¬
companying  the  hours  of  joy  and  the  days  of  sorrow  which
form  the  distinguishing  epochs  in  the  brief  chronicle  of  do¬
mestic  life,  impressed  them  upon  the  memory  of  the  people
at  large.  The  parchment  might  be  recommended  by  custom,
but  it  was  not  required  by  law;  and  they  had  no  registers  to
consult,  no  books  to  open.  By  the  declaration  of  the  hus¬
band  at  the  church  door,  the  wife  was  endowed  in  the  pres¬
ence  of  the  assembled  relations,  and  before  all  the  merry
attendants  of  the  bridal  train.  The  birth  of  the  heir  was
recollected  by  the  retainers  who  had  participated  in  the  cheer
of  the  baronial  hall ;  and  the  death  of  the  ancestor  was
proved  by  the  friends  who  had  heard  the  wailings  of  the
widow,  or  who  had  followed  the  corpse  to  the  grave.  Hence
trial  by  jury  was  an  appeal  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Country ;
and  the  sheriff,  in  naming  his  panel,  performed  his  duty  by
summoning  those  individuals  from  amongst  the  inhabitants  of
the  country  who  were  best  acquainted  with  the  points  at
issue.  If  from  peculiar  circumstances  the  witnesses  of  a
fact  were  previously  marked  out  and  known,  then  they  were
particularly  required  to  testify.  Thus,  when  a  charter  was
pleaded,  the  witnesses  named  in  the  attesting  clause  of  the
instrument  and  who  had  been  present  in  the  folkmoot,  the
shire,  or  the  manor  court  when  the  seal  was  affixed  by  the
donor,  were  included  in  the  panel ;  and  when  a  grant  had
been  made  by  parol  the  witnesses  were  sought  out  by  the
sheriff  and  returned  upon  the  jury.”  (Palgrave,  p.  248.)

Several  instances  of  recognition  —  that  is,  of  jurors  finding
facts  on  their  own  knowledge  —  occur  in  the  very  curious
chronicle  of  Jocelyn  de  Brakelonde,  published  by  the  Cam¬
den  Society,  long  after  the  “  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Com¬
monwealth.”  One  is  on  a  question  whether  certain  land  was
liberum  feudum  ecclesife  an  non.  “  Cumque  inde  summonita
fuit  recognitio  12  militum  in  curia  regis  facienda,  facta  est
in  curia  abbatis  apud  Herlavum  per  licentiam  Ranulfi  de
Gian  villa,  et  juraverunt  recognitores  se  nunquam  advisee
illam  terram  fuisse  separatam  ab  ecclesia.”  (p.  45.)  Another
is  still  more  illustrative  of  the  personal  knowledge  of  the

372

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

jury  overruling  written  evidence.  A  recognition  was  taken
as  to  the  right  of  the  abbey  over  three  manors.  “  Carta
nostra  lecta  in  publico  nullam  vim  habuit,  quia  tota  curia  erat
contra  nos.  Juramento  facto,  dixerunt  milites  se  nescire  de
cartis  nostris,  nec  de  privatis  conventionibus;  sed  se  credere
dixerunt,  quod  Adam  et  pater  ejus  et  avus  a  centum  annis
retro  tenuerunt  maneria  in  feudura  firmum,  unusquisque  post
alium,  diebus  quibus  fuerunt  vivi  et  mortui,  et  sic  disseisiati
sumus  per  judicum  terra.”  (p.  91.)

This  “judgment  of  the  land”  is,  upon  Jocelyn’s  testimony,
rather  suspicious ;  since  they  seem  to  have  set  common  fame
against  a  written  deed.  But  we  see  by  it  that,  although
parol  testimony  might  not  be  generally  admissible,  the  parties
had  a  right  to  produce  documentary  evidence  in  support  of
their  title.

It  appears  at  first  to  be  an  obvious  difficulty  in  the  way  of
this  general  resolution  of  jurors  into  witnesses,  or  of  wit¬
nesses  into  jurors,  that  many  issues,  both  civil  and  criminal,
required  the  production  of  rather  more  recondite  evidence
than  common  notoriety.  The  known  events  of  family  history,
which  a  whole  neighborhood  could  attest,  seem  not  very
likely  to  have  created  litigation.  But  even  in  those  ages  of
simplicity  facts  might  be  alleged,  the  very  groundwork  of  a
claim  to  succession,  as  to  which  no  assize  of  knights  could
speak  from  personal  knowledge.  This,  it  is  said,  was  obvi¬
ated  by  swearing  the  witnesses  upon  the  panel,  so  that  those
who  had  a  real  knowledge  of  the  facts  in  question  might
instruct  their  fellow-jurors.  Such,  doubtless,  was  the  usual
course ;  but  difficulties  would  often  stand  in  the  way.  Glanvil
meets  the  question,  What  is  to  be  done  if  no  knights  are
acquainted  with  the  matter  in  dispute  ?  by  determining  that
persons  of  lower  degree  may  be  sworn.  But  what  if  women
or  villeins  were  the  witnesses  ?  What,  again,  if  the  cour-e
of  inquiry  should  render  fresh  testimony  needful  ?  It  nui-t
appear,  according  to  all  our  notions  of  judicial  evidence,  that
these  difficulties  must  not  only  have  led  to  the  distinction  of
jurors  from  witnesses,  but  that  no  great  length  of  time  could
have  elapsed  before  the  necessity  ot  making  it  was  perceived.
Yet  our  notions  of  judicial  evidence  are  not  very  applicable
to  the  thirteenth  century.  The  records  preserved  give  us
reason  to  believe  that  common  fame  had  great  influence  upon
these  early  inquests.  In  criminal  inquiries  especially  the  pre-

Chat.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

373

vious  fame  of  the  accused  seems  to  have  generally  determin¬
ed  the  verdict.  He  was  not  allowed  to  sustain  his  innocence
by  witnesses  —  a  barbarous  absurdity,  as  it  seems,  which  was
gradually  removed  by  indulgence  alone  ;  but  his  witnesses
were  not  sworn  till  the  reign  of  Mary.  If,  however,  the
prosecutor  or  appellant,  as  he  was  formerly  styled,  was  under
an  equal  disability,  the  inequality  will  vanish,  though  the  ab¬
surdity  will  remain.  The  prisoner  had  originally  no  defence,
unless  he  could  succeed  in  showing  the  weakness  of  the  ap¬
pellant’s  testimony,  but  by  submitting  to  the  ordeal  or  combat,
or  by  the  compurgation  of  his  neighbors.  The  jurors,  when
they  acquitted  him,  stood  exactly  in  the  light  of  these ;  it  was
a  more  refined  and  impartial  compurgation,  resting  on  their
confidence  in  his  former  behavior.  Thus  let  us  take  a  record
quoted  by  Palgrave,  vol.  ii.  p.  184 :  —  “  Robertus  filius  Roberti
de  Ferrariis  appellat  Ranulfum  de  Fatteswarthe  quod  ipse
venit  in  gardinum  suum,  in  pace  domini  Regis,  et  nequiter
assultavit  Rogerum  hominem  suum,  et  eum  verberavit  et
vulneravit,  ita  quod  de  vita  ejus  despex-abatur ;  et  ei  x-obavit
unum  pallium  et  gladium  et  arcum  et  sagittas  ;  et  idem  Ro¬
ger  us  offert  hoc  probare  per  coi’pus  suum,  prout  curia  con-
sideraverit ;  et  Ranulpitus  venit  et  defendit  totum  de  verbo
in  verbum,  et  offert  domino  Regi  unam  marcam  argenti  pro
habenda  inquisitione  per  legales  milites,  utrum  culpabilis  sit
inde,  necne  ;  et  praeterea  dicit  quod  iste  Rogerus  nunquam
ante  appellavit  eum,  et  petit  ut  hoc  ei  allocetur,  —  oblatio  re-
cipitur.  —  Juratores  dicunt  quod  revera  contencio  fuit  inter
gardinarium  prajdicti  Roberti ,  Osmund  nomine,  et  quosdam
garciones,  sed  Ranulfus  non  fuit  ibi,  nec  malecredunt  eum,
de  aliqua  roberia,  vel  de  aliquo  malo,  facto  eidem.”

We  have  here  a  trial  by  jury  in  its  very  beginning,  for  the
payment  of  one  mark  by  the  accused  in  order  to  have  sin  in¬
quest  instead  of  the  combat  shows  that  it  was  not  become  a
matter  of  right.  We  may  observe  that,  though  Robei’t  was
the  prosecutor,  his  servant  Roger,  being  the  aggrieved  party,
anil  capable  of  becoming  a  witness,  was  put  forward  as  the
appellant,  ready  to  prove  the  case  by  combat.  The  verdict
seems  to  imply  that  the  jury  had  no  bad  opinion  of  Rariulf
the  appellee.

The  fourteenth  book  of  Glanvil  contains  a  brief  account
of  the  forms  of  criminal  process  in  his  age ;  and  here  it  ap¬
pears  that  a  woman  could  only  be  a  witness,  or  rather  an

874

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

appellant,  where  her  husband  had  been  murdered  or  her
person  assaulted.  The  words  are  worth  considering :  “  Duo
sunt  genera  homicidiorum ;  unum  est,  quod  dicitur  murdrum,
quod  nullo  vidente,  nullo  sciente,  clam  perpetratur,  prater
solum  interfectorem  et  ejus  complices ;  ita  quod  mox  non
assequatur  clamor  popularis  juxta  assisam  super  hoc  proditam.
In  hujusmodi  autem  accusatione  non  admittitur  aliquis,  nisi
fuerit  de  consanguinitate  ipsius  defmicti.  Est  et  aliud  homi-
cidium  (juod  constat  in  generali  vocabulo,  et  dicitur  simplex
homicidium.  In  hoc  etiam  placito  non  admittitur  aliquis
accusator  ad  probationem,  nisi  fuerit  mortuo  consanguinitate
conjunctus,  vcl  homagio  vel  dominio,  ita  ut  de  morte  lor/ua-
tur,  ut  sub  visus  sui  testimonio.  Pneterea  sciendum  quod
in  hoc  placito  mulier  auditur  accusans  aliquem  de  morte  viri
sui,  si  de  visu  loquatur  (1.  xiv.  c.  3).  Tenetur  autem  mulier
quae  proponit  se  a  viro  oppressam  in  pace  domini  regis,  mox
dum  recens  fuerit  malefieium  vicinam  villain  ailire,  et  ibi
injuriam  sibi  illatam  probis  hominibus  ostendere,  et  sanguinem,
si  quis  fuerit  effusus,  et  vestium  scissiones;  deliinc  autem
apud  praepositum  hundredi  idem  facit.  Postea  quoque  in
pleno  comitatu  id  publice  proponaL  Auditur  itaque  mulier
in  tali  casu  aliquem  accusans,  sicut  et  de  alia  qualibet  injuria
corpori  suo  illatam  solet  audiri.”  (c.  6.)

Thus  it  appears  that  on  charges  of  secret  murder  the
kindred  of  the  deceased,  but  no  others,  might  be  heard  in
court  as  witnesses  to  common  suspicion,  since  they  could  be
no  more.  I  add  the  epithet  secret ;  but  it  was  at  that  time
implied  in  the  word  murdrum.  But  in  every  case  of  open
homicide  the  appellant,  be  it  the  wife  or  one  of  his  kindred,
his  lord  or  vassal,  must  have  been  actually  present.  Other
witnesses  probably,  if  such  there  were,  would  be  placed  on
the  panel.  The  woman  was  only  a  prosecutrix ;  and,  in  the
other  sex,  there  is  no  doubt  tliat  the  prosecutor’s  testimony
was  heard.

In  claims  of  debt  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  defendant  to
wage  his  law ;  tliat  is,  to  deny  on  oath  the  justice  of  the  de¬
mand.  This  he  was  to  sustain  by  the  oaths  of  twelve  com¬
purgators,  who  declared  their  belief  that  he  swore  the  truth  ;
and  if  he  declined  to  do  this,  it  seems  that  he  had  no  defence.
But  in  the  writ  of  right,  or  other  process  affecting  real  e-tate,
the  wager  of  law  was  never  allowed ;  and  even  in  actions  of
debt  the  defendant  was  not  put  to  this  issue  until  witnesses

Chap.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

375

for  the  plaintiff  had  been  produced,  “  sine  testibus  fidelibus  ad
hoc  inductis.”  This,  however,  was  not  in  presence  of  a  jury,
but  of  the  bailiff  or  judge  (Magna  Charta,  c.  28),  and  there¬
fore  does  not  immediately  bear  on  the  present  subject.

In  litigation  before  the  king’s  justices,  in  the  curia
regis,  it  must  have  been  always  necessary  to  produce  wit¬
nesses  ;  though,  if  their  testimony  were  disputed,  it  was
necessary  to  recur  to  a  jury  in  the  county,  unless  the  cause
were  of  a  nature  to  be  determined  by  duel.  A  passage  in
Glanvil  will  illustrate  this.  A  claim  of  villenage,  when  lib¬
erty  was  pleaded,  could  not  be  heard  in  the  county  court,  but
before  the  king’s  justices  in  his  court.  “  Utroque  autern
praesente  in  curia  hoc  modo  dirationabitur  libertas  in  curia,
siquidem  producit  is  qui  libertatem  petit,  plures  de  proximis
et  consanguineis  de  eodem  stipite  unde  ipse  exierit  exeuntes,
per  quorum  libertates,  si  fuerint  in  curia  recognitae  et  probatae,
liberabitur  k  jugo  servitutis  is  qui  ad  libertatem  proclamatur.
Si  vero  contra  dicatur  status  libertatis  eorundem  productorum
vel  de  eodem  dubitatur,  ad  vicinetum  erit  recurrendum  ;  ita
quod  per  ejus  veredictum  sciatur  utrum  illi  liberi  homines  an
non,  et  secundum  dictum  vicineti  judicabitur.”  (1.  ii.  c.  4.)
The  plea  of  villenage  was  never  tried  by  combat.

It  is  the  opinion  of  Lord  Coke  that  a  single  accuser  was
not  sufficient  at  common  law  to  convict  any  one  of  high  trea¬
son  ;  in  default  of  a  second  witness  “  it  shall  be  tried  before
the  constable  or  marshal  by  combat,  as  by  many  records  ap-
peareth.”  (3  Inst.  26.)  But  however  this  might  be,  it  is
evident  that  as  soon  as  the  trial  of  peers  of  the  realm  for
treason  or  felony  in  the  court  of  the  high  steward  became
established,  the  practice  of  swearing  witnesses  on  the  panel
must  have  been  relinquished  in  such  cases.  “That  two  wit¬
nesses  be  required  appeareth  by  our  books,  and  I  remember
no  authority  in  our  books  to  the  contrary.  And  this  seemeth
to  be  the  more  clear  in  the  trial  by  the  peers  or  nobles  of  the
realm  because  they  come  not  de  aliquo  ' vicineto ,  whereby
they  might  take  notice  of  the  fact  in  respect  of  vicinity,  as
other  jurors  may  do.”  (Ibid.)  But  the  court  of  the  high
steward  seems  to  be  no  older  than  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.,
at  which  time  the  examination  of  witnesses  before  common
juries  was  nearly,  or  completely,  established  in  its  modern
form ;  and  the  only  earlier  case  we  have,  if  I  remember  right,
of  the  conviction  of  a  peer  in  parliament  —  that  of  Mortimer

376

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

in  the  4th  of  Edward  III.  —  was  expressly  grounded  on  the
notoriousness  of  the  facts  (Rot  Pari.  ii.  53).  It  does  not
appear,  therefore,  indisputable  by  precedent  that  any  wit¬
nesses  were  heard,  save  the  appellant,  on  trial  of  peers  of  the
realm  in  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century,  though  it  is  by  no
means  improbable  that  such  would  have  been  the  practice.

Notwithstanding  such  exceptions,  however,  sufficient  proofs
remain  that  the  jury  themselves,  especially  in  civil  cases,  long
retained  their  character  of  witnesses  to  the  fact.  If  the  re¬
cognitors,  whose  name  bespeaks  their  office,  were  not  all  so
well  acquainted  with  the  matters  in  controversy  as  to  believe
themselves  comjtetent  to  render  a  verdict,  it  was  the  practice
to  afforce  the  jury,  as  it  was  called,  by  rejecting  these  and
tilling  their  places  with  more  sufficient  witnesses,  until  twelve
were  found  who  agreed  in  the  same  verdicL1  (Glanvil,  1.  ii.
c.  17.)  Not  that  unanimity  was  demanded,  for  this  did  not
become  the  rule  till  about  the  reign  of  Edward  III.;  but
twelve,  as  now  on  a  grand  jury,  must  concur.*  And  though
this  profusion  of  witnesses  seems  strange  to  us,  yet  what  they
attested  (in  the  age  at  least  of  Glanvil  and  for  some  time  after¬
wards)  was  not,  as  at  present,  the  report  of  their  senses  to
the  fact  in  issue,  but  all  which  they  had  heard  and  believed
to  be  true;  above  all,  their  judgment  as  to  the  respective
credibility  of  the  demandant  and  tenant,  heard  in  that  age
personally,  or  the  appellant  and  appellee  in  a  prosecution.

Bracton  speaks  of  afforcing  a  panel  by  the  addition  of
better-informed  jurors  to  the  rest,  as  fit  for  the  court  to  order,
“deconsilio  curiae  affortietur  assisa  ita  quod  apponantur  alii
juxta  numerum  majoris  partis  quae  dissenserit,  vel  saltern
quatuor  vel  sex,  et  adjungantur  aliis.”  The  method  of  re¬
jection  used  in  Glanvil’s  time  seems  to  have  been  altered.
But  in  the  time  of  Britton,  soon  afterwards,  this  afforcement
it  appears  could  only  be  made  with  the  consent  of  the  par¬
ties  ;  though  if,  as  his  language  seems  to  imply,  the  verdict
was  to  go  against  the  party  refusing  to  have  the  jury
afforced,  no  one  would  be  likely  to  do  so.  Perhaps  he  means

i  By  the  jury,  the  reader  will  remom-  Year-Books,  digested  Into  Reeres's  II  le-
ber  that,  in  GUuyU'h  time,  la  meant  the  tory  of  the  Law.

recognitors,  on  an  assise  of  norel  .Us-  »  In  20  E  111.  Chief  Justice  Thorpe  U
seisin,  or  mort  d'anreetor.  For  three  Raid  to  hare  heen  teprored  lor  taking
real  actions,  now  abolished,  he  may  con-  a  rerdict  from  eleren  jurors.  Law  lio-
ruit  a  good  chapter  on  them  in  Black-  riew,  No.  It.  p.  888.
stone,  unless  he  prefer  Bracton  and  the

Chap.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

o  —  -r

Oil

that  this  refusal  would  create  a  prejudice  in  the  minds  of  the
jury  almost  certain  to  produce  such  a  verdict.

“It  may  be  doubtful,”  says  Mr.  Starkie,  “whether  the
doctrine  of  afforcement  was  applied  to  criminal  cases.  The
account  given  by  Braeton  as  to  the  trial  by  the  country  on  a
criminal  charge  is  very  obscure.  It  was  to  be  by  twelve
jurors,  consisting  of  milites  or  liberi  et  legales  homines  of
the  hundred  and  four  villatae.” 1  But  it  is  conjectured  that
the  text  is  somewhat  corrupt,  and  that  four  inhabitants  of  the
vill  were  to  be  added  to  the  twelve  jurors.  In  some  crimi¬
nal  cases  it  appears  from  Braeton  that  trial  by  combat  could
not  be  dispensed  with,  because  the  nature  of  the  charge  did
not  admit  of  positive  witnesses.  “  Oportet  quod  defendat  se
per  corpus  suum  quia  patria  nihil  scire  potest  de  facto,  nisi
per  pnesumtionem  et  per  auditum,  vel  per  mandatum  [?]
quod  quidem  non  suffieit  ad  probationem  pro  appellando  nec
pro  appellato  ad  liberationem.”  This  indicates,  on  the  one
hand,  an  advance  in  the  appreciation  of  evidence  since  the
twelfth  century ;  common  fame  and  mere  hearsay  were  not
held  sufficient  to  support  a  charge.  But  on  the  other  hand,
instead  of  presuming  the  innocence  of  a  party  against  whom
no  positive  testimony  could  be  alleged,  he  was  preposterously
called  upon  to  prove  it  by  combat,  if  the  appellant  was  con¬
vinced  enough  of  his  guilt  to  demand  that  precarious  decis¬
ion.  It  appears  clear  from  some  passages  in  Braeton  that
in  criminal  cases  other  witnesses  might  occasionally  be  heaul
than  the  parties  themselves.  Thus,  if  a  man  were  charged
with  stealing  a  horse,  he  says  that  either  the  prosecutoi  or
the  accused  might  show  that  it  was  his  own,  bred  in  his
stable,  known  by  certain  marks,  which  could  hardly  be  but
by  calling  witnesses.  It  is  not  improbable  that  witnesses
were  heard  distinct  from  the  jury  in  criminal  cases  before
the  separation  had  been  adopted  in  real  actions. .

At  a  later  time  witnesses  are  directed  to  be  joined  to  the
inquest,  but  no  longer  as  parts  of  it.  “  We  find  in  the  23rd
of  Edward  III.”  (I  quote  at  present  the  words  of  Mr.
Spence,  Equitable  Jurisdiction,  p.  129)  “  the  witnesses,  in¬
stead  of  being  summoned  as  constituent  members,  were
adjoined  to  the  recognitors  or  jury  in  assizes  to  afford  to  the

l  The  history  of  trial  by  jury  has  been
very  ably  elucidated  by  Mr.  Starkie,  in
the  fourth  number  of  the  Law  lie  view,

which,  though  anonymous,  I  venture  to
quote  by  his  name.  I  hale  been  assisted
iu  the  text  by  this  paper.

378

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

jury  the  benefit  of  their  testimony,  but  without  having  any
voice  in  the  verdict.  This  is  the  first  indication  we  have  of
the  jury  deciding  on  evidence  formally  produced,  and  it  is
the  connecting  link  between  the  ancient  and  modem  jury.”1
But  it  will  be  remembered  —  what  Mr.  Spence  certainly  did
not  mean  to  doubt  —  that  the  evidence  of  the  demandant  in
an  assize  or  writ  of  right,  and  of  the  prosecutor  or  appellant
in  a  criminal  case,  had  always  been  given  in  open  court ;  and
the  tenant  or  appellee  had  the  same  right,  but  the  latter
probably  was  not  sworn.  Nor  is  it  clear  that  the  court
would  refuse  other  testimony  if  it  were  offered  during  the
course  of  a  trial.  The  sentence  just  quoted,  however,  ap¬
pears  to  be  substantially  true,  except  that  the  words  “  for¬
mally  produced  ”  imply  something  more  like  the  modem
practice  than  the  facts  mentioned  warrant.  The  evidence  in
the  case  reported  in  23  Ass.  11  was  produced  to  none  but
the  jury.

Mr.  Starkie  has  justly  observed  that  “  the  transition  was
now  almost  imperceptible  to  the  complete  separation  of  the
witnesses  from  the  inquest.  And  this  step  was  Liken  at
some  time  before  the  11th  of  Henry  IV.  ;a  namely,  that  all
the  witnesses  were  to  give  their  testimony  at  the  bar  of  the
court,  so  that  the  judges  might  exclude  those  incompetent  by
law,  and  direct  the  jury  as  to  the  weight  due  to  the  rest.”
“  This  effected  a  change  in  the  modes  of  trying  civil  cases  ;
the  importance  of  which  can  hardly  be  too  highly  estimated.
Jurors,  from  being,  as  it  were,  mere  recipients  and  deposita¬
ries  of  knowledge,  exercised  the  more  intellectual  faculty  of
forming  conclusions  from  testimony — a  duty  not  only  of  liigh
importance  with  a  view  to  truth  and  justice,  but  also  collat¬
erally  in  encouraging  habits  of  reflection  and  reasoning
(aided  by  the  instructions  of  the  judges),  which  must  have
had  a  great  and  most  beneficial  effect  in  promoting  civiliza-

1  Tho  reference  In  to  the  Y oar- Hook,  23
Aw.  11.  It  to  adjudged  that  the  wlt-
nc**e»  could  not  be  challenge.]  like  juror*  ;
“  oar  il*  doivent  rlon  temolgner  for*  ceo
qu’il*  rerront  et  otront.  Kt  ra**i»e  fut
ri*.  et  les  temoin*  ajoiut*  a  eux.”  Thl*
a*  no  appearance  of  the  introduction  of
a  new  ru*tom.  Above  fifty  year*  had
elap*ed  *inoe  Ilract.ni  wrote,  no  that  the
change  might  have  easily  crept  In.

»  The  Year-Book  of'  11  ||  IV.,  to
which  a  reference  *eem*  here  to  he  made,
hue  not  been  coniulted  by  me.  But

in  the  next  year  (12  II.  IV.  7)  witne**.-*
are  directed  to  be  joined  to  the  Inquest
(as  in  23  A»s.  11);  and  one  of  the  judges
is  reported  to  have  said  this  had  often
been  done  ;  yet  we  might  infer  that  the
practice  was  not  so  general  as  to  pass
without  comment.  Thi*  looks  a*  if  the
separation  of  the  witnesses,  by  their  ex¬
amination  In  open  court,  were  not  qulto
of  *o  early  a  date  as  Mr.  8tarkie  aud  Mr.
Spence  *uppo*e.  Bat,  perhaps,  both
mode*  of  procedure  might  be  concurrent
for  a  certain  time.

Chap.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

379

tion.  The  exercise  of  the  control  last  adverted  to  on  the
part  of  the  judges  was  the  foundation  of  that  system  of
rules  in  regard  to  evidence  which  has  since  constituted  so
large  and  important  a  branch  of  the  law  ot  ltng  an  .

(Spence,  p.  129.)  .  .  .  ,

V  The  obscurity  that  hangs  over  the  origin  of  our  modern
course  of  procedure  before  juries  is  far  from  being  wholly
removed.  We  are  reduced  to  conjectural  inferences  from
brief  passages  in  early  law-books,  written  for  contemporaries,
but  which  leave  a  considerable  uncertainty,  as  the  readeis
of  this  note  will  be  too  apt  to  discover.  If  we  say  that  our
actual  trial  by  jury  was  established  not  far  from  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  we  shall  perhaps  approach  as
nearly  as  the  diligence  of  late  inquirers  has  enabled  us  to
proceed.  But  in  the  time  of  Fortescue,  whose  treatise  De
Laudibus  Legum  Angliie  was  written  soon  after  14o0>"®
have  the  clearest  proof  that  the  mode  of  procedure  before
iuries  by  viva  voce  evidence  was  the  same  as  at  present.  It
may  be  presumed  that  the  function  of  the  advocate  and  of
tlm  judge  to  examine  witnesses,  and  to  comment  on  then-
testimony,  had  begun  at  this  time.  The  passage  in  F ortescue
is  so  full  and  perspicuous  that  it  deserves  to  bo  extracted.

«  Twelve  good  and  true  men  being  sworn  as  in  the  manner
above  related,  legally  qualified  -  that  is,  having,  over  and
besides  their  movable  possessions,  in  land  sufficient  (as  was
said)  wherewith  to  maintain  their  rank  and  station  —  neither
suspected  by  nor  at  variance  with  either  ot  the  parties ;  a
of  the  neighborhood ;  there  shall  be  read  to  them  m  Englis  1
by  the  court  the  record  and  nature  of  the  plea  at  lengt  1
which  is  depending  between  the  parties ;  and  the  issue  there¬
upon  shall  be  plainly  laid  before  them,  concerning  the  truth
of  which  those  who  are  so  sworn  are  to  certify  the  court  ,
which  done,  each  of  the  parties,  by  themselves  or  their
counsel,  in  presence  of  the  court,  shall  declare  and  lay  open
to  the  jury  all  and  singular  the  matters  and  evidences
whereby  they  think  they  may  be  able  to  inform  the  court
concerning  the  truth  of  the  point  in  question ;  after  which
each  of  the  parties  has  a  liberty  to  produce  before  the  court
all  such  witnesses  as  they  please,  or  can  get  to  appear  on
their  behalf,  who,  being  charged  upon  their  oaths,  shall  gn
in  evidence  all  that  they  know  touching  the  truth  of  the  fact
concerning  which  the  parties  are  at  issue.  And  if  necessity

330

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

so  require,  the  witnesses  may  be  heard  and  examined  apart,
till  they  shall  have  deposed  all  that  they  have  to  give  in
evidence,  so  that  what  the  one  has  declared  shall  not  inform
or  induce  another  witness  of  the  same  side  to  give  his
evidence  in  the  same  words,  or  to  the  very  same  effect.  The
whole  of  the  evidence  being  gone  through,  the  jurors  shall
confer  together  at  their  pleasure,  as  they  shall  think  most
convenient,  upon  the  truth  of  the  issue  before  them,  with  as
much  deliberation  and  leisure  as  they  can  well  desire ;  being
all  the  while  in  the  keeping  of  an  officer  of  the  court,  in  a
place  assigned  them  for  that  purpose,  lest  any  one  should
attempt  by  indirect  methods  to  influence  them  as  to  their
opinion,  which  they  are  to  give  in  to  the  court.  Lastly,  they
are  to  return  into  court  and  certify  the  justices  uj>on  the
truth  of  the  issue  so  joined  in  the  presence  of  the  parties
(if  they  please  to  be  present),  particularly  the  person  who  is
plaintiff  in  the  cause :  what  the  jurors  shall  so  certify,  in  the
laws  of  England,  is  called  the  verdict.”  (c.  26.)

Mr.  Amos  indeed  has  observed,  in  his  edition  of  Fortescue
(p.  93),  “  The  essential  alteration  which  has  since  taken  place
in  the  character  of  the  jury  does  not  appear  to  have  been
thoroughly  effected  till  the  time  of  Edward  VI.  and  Mary.
Jurors  are  often  called  testes.”  But  though  this  appellation
might  be  retained  from  the  usage  of  older  times,  I  do  not  see
what  was  left  to  effect  in  the  essential  character  of  a  jury,
when  it  had  reached  the  stage  of  hearing  the  witnesses  and
counsel  of  the  parties  in  open  court.

The  result  of  this  investigation,  suggested  perhaps  by
Reeves,  but  followed  up  by  Sir  Francis  Palgrave  for  the
earlier,  and  by  Mr.  Starkie  for  the  later  period,  is  to  sweep
away  from  the  ancient  constitution  of  England  what  has  al¬
ways  been  accounted  both  the  pledge  of  its  freedom  and  the
distinctive  type  of  its  organization,  trial  by  jury,  in  the  mod¬
ern  sense  of  the  word,  and  according  to  modern  functions.
For  though  the  passage  just  quoted  from  Fortescue  is  conclu¬
sive  as  to  his  times,  these  were  but  the  times  of  the  Lancas¬
trian  kings ;  and  we  have  been  wont  to  talk  of  Alfred,  or  at
least  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  age,  when  the  verdict  of  twelve
sworn  men  was  the  theme  of  our  praise.  We  have  seen  that,
during  this  age,  neither  in  civil  nor  in  criminal  proceedings,
it  is  possible  to  trace  this  safeguard  for  judicial  purity.  Even
when  juries  may  be  said  to  have  existed  in  name,  the  institu-

Chat.  VIII.

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

381

tion  denoted  but  a  small  share  of  political  wisdom,  or  at  least
provided  but  indifferently  for  impartial  justice.  The  mode
of  trial  by  witnesses  returned  on  the  panel,  hearing  no  evi¬
dence  beyond  their  own  in  open  court,  unassisted  by  the  sift¬
ing  acuteness  of  lawyers,  laid  open  a  broad  inlet  for  credulity
and  prejudice,  for  injustice  and  corruption.  Perjury  was  the
dominant  crime  of  the  middle  ages  ;  encouraged  by  the  pre¬
posterous  rules  of  compurgation,  and  by  the  multiplicity  of
oaths  in  the  ecclesiastical  law.  It  was  the  frequency  of  this
offence,  and  the  impunity  which  the  established  procedure
gave  to  that  of  jurors,  that  produced  the  remedy  by  writ  of
attaint ;  but  one  which  was  liable  to  the  same  danger ;  since
jury  on  an  attaint  must,  in  the  early  period  of  that  process,
have  judged  on  common  fame  or  on  their  own  testimony,  like
those  whose  verdict  they  were  called  to  revise ;  and  where
hearsay  and  tradition  passed  for  evidence,  it  must,  according
to  our  stricter  notions  of  penal  law,  have  been  very  difficult
to  obtain  an  equitable  conviction  of  the  first  panel  on  the
ground  of  perjury.

The  Chronicle,  already  quoted,  by  Jocelyn  de  Brakelonde,
affords  an  instance,  among  multitudes,  probably,  that  are  un¬
recorded,  where  a  jury  flagrantly  violated  their  duty.  Five
recognitors  in  a  writ  of  assize  came  to  Samson  abbot  of  St.
Edmund’s  Bury,  the  Chronicler’s  hero,  the  right  of  presenta¬
tion  to  a  church  being  the  question,  in  order  to  learn  fiom
him  what  they  should  swear,  meaning  to  receive  money.  He
promised  them  nothing,  but  bade  them  swear  according  to
their  consciences.  They  went  away  in  wrath,  and  found  a
verdict  against  the  abbey.1  (p.  44.)

1 1  may  set  down  hero  one  or  two
other  passages  from  the  same  Chronicle,
illustrating  the  modes  of  trial  in  that
age.  Samson  offered  that  a  right  of
advowson  should  be  determined  by  the
claimant's  oath,  a  method  recognized  in
some  cases  by  the  civil  and  canon  law,
but  only,  I  conceive,  in  favor  of  the  de¬
fendant.  Cumque  miles  111©  renuisset
jurare,  dibit n m  estju ramen turn  per  con¬
sensual  utriusquo  partis  sexdecim  lcgali-
bus  behundredo,  aui  jumverunt  hoc  esse
jus  abbatis.  p.  44.  The  proceeding  by
jurors  was  sometimes  applied  even  when
the  sentence  belonged  to  the  ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.  A  riot,  with  bloodshed,
having  occurred,  the  abbot,  acceptla
juramentis  a  sexdecim  legalibus  homini-
bu*,  et  auditis  eoruin  attestationibus,

pronounced  sentence  of  excommunication
against  the  offenders.

The  combat  was  not  an  authorized
mode  of  trial  within  boroughs;  they
preserved  the  old  Saxon  compurgation.
And  this  may  be  an  additional  proof  of
the  antiquity  of  their  privileges.  A  free
tenant  of  the  celerarius  of  the  abbey,  cui
potfls  et  esc ro  cura  (Du  Cange),  being
charged  with  robbery,  and  vanquished  in
the  combat,  was  hanged.  The  burgesses
of  Bury  said  that,  if  he  had  been  resident
within  the  borough,  it  would  not  have
come  to  battle,  but  he  would  have  purged
himself  by  the  oaths  of  his  neighbors,
sicut  libertas  est  eorum  qui  manent  in¬
fra  burgum.  p.  74.  It  is  hard  to  pro¬
nounce  by  which  procedure  the  greater
uumber  of  guilty  persons  escaped.

882

TRIAL  BY  JURY.

Notes  to

Yet  in  its  rudest  and  most  imperfect  form,  the  trial  by  a
sworn  inquest  was  far  superior  to  the  impious  superstition  of
ordeals,  the  hardly  less  preposterous  and  unequal  duel,  the
unjust  deference  to  power  in  compurgation,  when  the  oath  of
one  thane  counterbalanced  those  of  six  ceorls,  and  even  to  the
free-spirited  but  tumultuary  and  unenlightened  decisions  of
the  hundred  or  the  county.  It  may,  indeed,  be  thought  by
the  speculative  philosopher,  or  the  practical  lawyer,  that  in
those  early  stages  which  we  have  just  been  surveying,  from
the  introduction  of  trial  by  jury  under  Henry  II.  to  the  at¬
tainment  of  its  actual  perfection  in  the  first  part  of  the  fifteenth
century,  there  was  little  to  warrant  our  admiration.  Still  let
us  ever  remember  that  we  judge  of  past  ages  by  an  errone¬
ous  standard  when  we  wonder  at  their  prejudices,  much  more
when  we  forget  our  own.  We  have  but  to  place  ourselves,
for  a  few  minutes,  in  imagination  among  the  English  of  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  and  we  may  better  un¬
derstand  why  they  cherished  and  panted  for  the  judicium
parium,  the  trial  by  their  peers,  or,  as  it  is  emphatically
styled,  by  the  country.  It  stood  in  opposition  to  foreign  law¬
yers  and  foreign  law  ;  to  the  chicane  and  subtlety,  the  dilatory
and  expensive  though  accurate  technicalities,  of  Normandy,
to  tribunals  where  their  good  name  could  not  stand  them  in
stead,  nor  the  tradition  of  their  neighbors  support  their  claim.
For  the  sake  of  these,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  laws  of  Ed¬
ward  the  Confessor,  as  in  pious  reverence  they  termed  every
Anglo-Saxon  usage,  they  were  willing  to  encounter  the  noisy
rudeness  of  the  county-court,  and  the  sway  of  a  potent  adver¬
sary.

Henry  II.,  a  prince  not  perhaps  himself  wise,  but  served
by  wise  counsellors,  blended  the  two  schemes  of  jurisprudence,
as  far  as  the  times  would  permit,  by  the  assize  of  novel  dis¬
seizin,  and  the  circuits  of  his  justices  in  eyre.  From  this  age
justly  date  our  form  of  civil  procedure ;  the  trial  by  a  jury
(using  always  that  word  in  a  less  strict  sense  than  it  bears
with  us)  replaced  that  by  the  body  of  hundredors  ;  the  stream
of  justice  purified  itself  in  successive  generations  through  the
acuteness,  learning,  and  integrity  of  that  remarkable  series  of
men  whose  memory  lives  chiefly  among  lawyers,  I  mean  the
judges  under  the  house  of  Plantagenet ;  and  thus,  while  the
common  law  borrowed  from  Normandy  too  much,  perhaps,  of
its  subtlety  in  distinction,  and  became  as  scientific  as  that  of

Chap.  VIII.

FOLCLAND  AND  BOCLAND.

383

Rome,  it  maintained,  without  encroachment,  the  grand  prin¬
ciple  of  the  Saxon  polity,  the  trial  of  facts  by  the  country.
From  this  principle  (except  as  to  that  preposterous  relic  of
barbarism,  the  requirement  of  unanimity)  may  we  never
swerve  —  may  we  never  be  compelled,  in  ■wish,  to  swerve  —
by  a  contempt  of  their  oaths  in  jurors,  and  a  disregard  of  the
just  limits  of  their  trust !

Note  IX.  Page  278.

The  nature  of  both  tenures  has  been  perspicuously  illus¬
trated  by  Mr.  Allen,  in  his  Inquiry  into  the  Rise  and  Growth
of  the  Royal  Prerogative,  from  which  I  shall  make  a  long
extract.

“  The  distribution  of  landed  property  in  England  by  the
Anglo-Saxons  appears  to  have  been  regulated  on  the  same
principles  that  directed  their  brethren  on  the  continent.  Part
of  the  lands  they  acquired  was  converted  into  estates  of  in¬
heritance  for  individuals ;  part  remained  the  property  of  the
public,  and  was  left  to  the  disposal  of  the  state.  The  former
was  called  bocland ;  the  latter  I  apprehend  to  have  been  that
description  of  landed  property  which  was  known  by  the
name  of  folcland.

“  Folcland,  as  the  word  imports,  was  the  land  of  the  folk  or
people.  It  was  the  property  of  the  community.  It  might  be
occupied  in  common,  or  possessed  in  severalty ;  and,  in  the
latter  case,  it  was  probably  parcelled  out  to  individuals  in  the
folcgemot,  or  court  of  the  district,  and  the  grant  attested  by
the  freemen  who  were  then  present.  But,  while  it  continued
to  be  folcland,  it  could  not  be  alienated  in  perpetuity  ;  and,
therefore,  on  the  expiration  of  the  term  for  which  it  had  been
granted,  it  reverted  to  the  community,  and  was  again  distrib¬
uted  by  the  same  authority.1

“  Bocland  was  held  by  book  or  charter.  It  was  land  that
had  been  severed  by  an  act  of  government  from  the  folcland,
and  converted  into  an  estate  of  perpetual  inheritance.  It
might  belong  to  the  church,  to  the  king,  or  to  a  subject.  It
might  be  alienable  and  devisable  at  the  will  of  the  proprie-

l  Spelman  describes  folcland  a 8  terra  duplicl  titulo  possidebant :  vel  script!
popular!*,  quae  jure  communi  possidetur  auctoritate,  quod  bocland  vocabant —  vel
—  sine  scnpto.  Gloss.  Folcland.  In  populi  testimonio,  quod  folcland  dixere.
another  place  he  distinguishes  it  accu-  lb.  Bocland.
rately  from  bocland :  —  Prsedia  Saxonea

384

FOLCLAND  AND  DOCI-AND.

Notes  to

tor.  It  might  be  limited  in  its  descent  without  any  power  of
alienation  in  the  possessor.  It  was  often  granted  for  a  single
life,  or  for  more  lives  than  one,  with  remainder  in  perpetuity
to  the  church.  It  was  forfeited  for  various  delinquencies  to
the  state.

“  Estates  in  perpetuity  were  usually  created  by  charter
after  the  introduction  of  writing,  and,  on  that  account,  boe-
land  and  land  of  inheritance  are  often  used  as  synonymous
expressions.  But  at  an  earlier  period  they  were  conferred
by  the  delivery  of  a  staff,  a  spear,  an  arrow,  a  drinking-horn,
the  branch  of  a  tree,  or  a  piece  of  turf ;  and  when  the  dona¬
tion  was  in  favor  of  the  church,  these  symbolical  representa¬
tions  of  the  grant  were  deposited  with  solemnity  on  the  altar  ;
nor  was  this  practice  entirely  laid  aside  after  the  introduction
of  title-deeds.  There  are  instances  of  it  as  late  as  the  time
of  the  Conqueror.  It  i#  not,  therefore,  quite  correct  to  say
that  all  the  lands  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  were  either  folcland
or  bocland.  "When  land  was  granted  in  perpetuity  it  ceased
to  be  folcland ;  but  it  could  not  with  propriety  be  termed
bocland,  unless  it  was  conveyed  by  a  written  instrument.

“  Folcland  was  subject  to  many  burdens  and  exactions
from  which  bocland  was  exempt.  The  possessors  of  folcland
were  bound  to  assist  in  the  reparation  of  royal  vills  and  in
other  public  works.  They  were  liable  to  have  travellers  and
others  quartered  on  them  for  subsistence.  They  were  re¬
quired  to  give  hospitality  to  kings  and  great  men  in  their
progresses  through  the  country,  to  furnish  them  with  carriages
and  relays  of  horses,  and  to  extend  the  same  assistance  to
their  messengers,  followers,  and  servants,  and  even  to  the
persons  who  had  charge  of  their  hawks,  horses,  and  hounds.
Such  at  least  are  the  burdens  from  which  lands  are  liberated
when  converted  by  charter  into  bocland.

“  Bocland  was  liable  to  none  of  these  exactions.  It  was
released  from  all  services  to  the  public,  with  the  exception  of
contributing  to  military  expeditions,  and  to  the  reparation  of
castles  and  bridges.  These  duties  or  services  were  coin prised
in  the  phrase  of  triiiodn  necessity,  which  were  said  to  be  in¬
cumbent  on  all  persons,  so  that  none  could  be  excused  from
them.  The  church  indeed  contrived,  in  some  cases,  to  obtain
an  exemption  from  them ;  but  in  general  its  Lands,  like  those
of  others,  were  subject  to  them.  Some  of  the  charters  grant¬
ing  to  the  possessions  of  the  church  an  exemption  from  all

Chap.  VIII.

FOLCLAND  AND  BOCLAND.

385

services  whatsoever  were  genuine ;  but  the  greater  part  are
forgeries.” —  (p.  142.)

Bocland,  we  perceive  by  this  extract,  was  not  neoessarily
alodial,  in  the  sense  of  absolute  propriety.  It  might  be
granted  for  lives,  as  was  often  the  case ;  and  then  it  seems  to
have  been  called  Icen-land  (praistita),  lent  or  leased.  (Pal-
grave,  ii.  361.)  Such  land,  however,  was  not  feudal,  as  I
conceive,  if  we  use  that  word  in  its  legitimate  European
sense  ;  though  lehn  is  the  only  German  word  for  a  fief.  Mr.
Allen  has  found  no  traces  of  this  use  of  the  word  among  the
Anglo-Saxons.  (Appendix,  p.  57.)  Sir  F.  Palgrave  agrees
in  general  with  Mr.  Allen.1

We  find  another  great  living  authority  on  Anglo-Saxon
and  Teutonic  law  concurring  in  the  same  luminous  solution
of  this  long-disputed  problem.  “  The  natural  origin  of  folc-
land  is  the  superabundance  of  good  land  above  what  was  at
once  appropriated  by  the  tribes,  families,  or  gentes  (nuegburg,
gelondan),  who  first  settled  in  a  waste  or  conquered  land;
but  its  existence  enters  into  and  modifies  the  system  of  law,
and  on  it  depends  the  definition  of  the  march  and  the  gau
with  their  boundaries.  Over  the  folcland  at  first  the  king
alone  had  no  control ;  it  must  have  been  apportioned  by  the
nation  in  its  solemn  meeting ;  earlier,  by  the  shire  or  other
collection  of  freemen.  In  Beowulf,  the  king  determines  to
build  a  palace,  and  distribute  in  it  to  his  comites  such  gold,
silver,  arms,  and  other  valuables  as  God  had  given  him,  save
the  folcsceare  and  the  lives  of  men  —  ‘  butan  folcsceare  and
feorum  gumena’  —  which  he  had  no  authority  to  dispose  of.
This  relative  position  of  folcland  to  bocland  is  not  confined
to  the  Anglo-Saxon  institutions.  The  Frisians,  a  race  from
whom  we  took  more  than  has  generally  been  recognized,  had
the  same  distinction.  At  the  same  time  I  differ  from  Grimm,
w  ho  seems  to  consider  folcland  as  the  pure  alod,  bocland  as
the  fief.  ‘  Folcland  im  Gegensatz  zu  beneficium.  Leges  Edv.
II.;  das  ist,  reine  alod,  im  Gegensatz  zu  beneficium,  Lehen.
Vgl.  das  Friesische  caplond  und  bocland.  As.  p.  15.’  (D.

R.  A.  p.  463.)  I  think  the  reverse  is  the  case ;  and  indeed
we  have  one  instance  where  a  king  exchanged  a  certain  por-

1  The  law  of  real  property,  or  bocland,  the  best  ancient  precedents,  and  is  of
In  the  Anglo-Saxon  period,  is  given  in  a  course  studied,  to  the  disregard,  where
few  pages,  equally  succinct  and  lumi-  necessary,  of  more  defective  authorities,
nous,  by  Mr.  Spence.  Equit.  Jurisd.  p.  by  those  who  regard  this  portion  of  legal
20-25.  the  Codex  Diploma  tie  us  furnishes  history.

VOL.  II.  25

386

RIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION.

Notes  to

tion  of  folcland  for  an  equal  portion  of  bocland  with  one  of
his  comites.  He  then  gave  the  exchanged  folcland  all  the
privileges  of  bocland,  and  proceeded  to  make  the  bocland  he
had  received  in  exchange  folcland .”  (Kemble’s  Codex  Dip¬
lomatics,  i.  p.  104.)

It  is  of  importance  to  mention  that  Mr.  K.,  when  he  wrote
this  passage,  had  not  seen  Mr.  Allen’s  work ;  so  that  the  in¬
dependent  concurrence  of  two  such  antiquaries  in  the  same
theory  lends  it  very  great  support.  In  the  second  volume  of
the  Codex  Diplomatics  the  editor  adduces  fresh  evidence  as
to  the  nature  of  folcland,  “  the  terra  f  scalis,  or  public  land
grantable  by  the  king  or  his  council,  as  the  representatives  of
the  nation.”  (p.  9.)  Mr.  Thorpe,  in  the  glossary  to  his  edition
of  “Ancient  Laws”  (v.  Folcland),  quotes  part  of  the  same
extract  from  Allen  which  I  have  given,  and,  making  no  re¬
mark,  must  be  understood  to  concur  in  it.  Thus  we  may
consider  this  interpretation  in  possession  of  the  field.1

The  word  folcland  fell  by  degrees  into  disuse,  and  gave
place  to  the  term  terra  regis,  or  crown-land.  (Allen,  p.  1 60.)
Tliis  indicates  the  growth  of  a  monarchical  theory  which
reached  its  climax,  in  this  application  of  it,  after  the  Con¬
quest,  when  the  entire  land  of  England  was  supposed  to  have
been  the  demesne  land  of  the  king,  held  under  him  by  a
feudal  tenure.

Note  X.  Page  305.

“  Amongst  the  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  the  Conqueror
and  many  of  his  successors  appear  to  have  assumed  the  power
of  making  laws  to  a  certain  extent,  without  the  authority  of
their  greater  council,  especially  when  operating  only  in  re¬
straint  of  the  king’s  prerogative,  for  the  benefit  of  his  sub¬
jects,  or  explaining,  amending,  or  adding  to  the  existing  law
of  the  land,  as  administered  between  subject  and  subject;
and  this  prerogative  was  commonly  exercised  with  the  advice
of  the  king’s  ordinary  or  select  council,  though  frequently  the
edict  was  expressed  in  the  king’s  name  alone.  But  as  far  as
can  be  judged  from  existing  documents  or  from  history,  it
was  generally  conceived  that  beyond  these  limits  the  consent

1  It  Meins  to  be  »  necessary  inference  exception  of  the  terra  ngis,  if  that  were
from  the  eridence  of  Domesday  Book  truly  the  repreaentatire  of  ancient  folo-
that  all  England  had  been  converted  Into  land,  as  AUen  supposes
bocland  before  the  Conquest,  with  the

Chap.  Till.

EIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION.

387

of  a  larger  assembly,  of  that  which  was  deemed  the  ‘  Com¬
mune  concilium  regni,’  was  in  strictness  necessary ;  though
sometimes  the  monarch  on  the  throne  ventured  to  stretch  his
prerogative  further,  even  to  the  imposition  of  taxes  to  answer
his  necessities,  without  the  common  consent ;  and  the  great
struggles  between  the  kings  of  England  and  their  people
have  generally  been  produced  by  such  stretches  of  the  royal
prerogative,  till  at  length  it  has  been  established  that  no
legislative  act  can  be  done  without  the  concurrence  of  that
assembly,  now  emphatically  called  the  king’s  parliament.”
(Report  of  Lords’  Committee  on  the  Dignity  of  a  Peer,  p.
22,  edit.  1819.)

“  It  appears,”  says  the  committee  afterwards,  “  from  all  the
charters  taken  together,  that  during  the  reigns  of  William
Rufus,  his  brother  Henry,  and  Stephen,  many  things  had
been  done  contrary  to  law ;  but  that  there  did  exist  some
legal  constitution  of  government,  of  which  a  legislative  coun¬
cil  (for  some  purposes  at  least)  formed  a  part ;  and  particu¬
larly  that  all  impositions  and  exactions  by  the  mere  authority
of  the  crown,  not  warranted  by  the  existing  law,  were  rep¬
robated  as  infringements  of  the  just  rights  of  the  subjects  of
the  realm,  though  the  existing  law  left  a  large  portion  of  the
king’s  subjects  liable  to  tallage  imposed  at  the  will  of  the
crown  ;  and  the  tenants  of  the  mesne  lords  were  in  many
cases  exposed  to  similar  exaction.”  (p.  42.)

These  passages  appeared  to  Mr.  Allen  so  inadequate  a
representation  of  the  Anglo-Norman  constitution,  that  he
commented  upon  the  ignorance  of  the  committee  with  no
slight  severity  in  the  Edinburgh  Review.  The  principal
charges  against  the  Report  in  this  respect  are,  that  the  com¬
mittee  have  confounded  the  ordinary  or  select  council  of  the
king  with  the  commune  concilium,  and  supposed  that  the
former  alone  was  intended  by  historians,  as  the  advisers  of
the  crown  in  its  prerogative  of  altering  the  law  of  the  land,
when,  in  fact,  the  great  council  of  the  national  aristocracy  is
clearly  pointed  out ;  and  that  they  liave  disregarded  a  great
deal  of  historical  testimony  to  the  political  importance  of  the
latter.  It  appears  to  be  clearly  shown,  from  the  Saxon  Chron¬
icle  and  other  writers,  that  assemblies  of  bishops  and  nobles,
sometimes  very  large,  were  held  by  custom,  “de  more,”  three
times  in  the  year,  by  William  the  Conqueror  and  by  both  his
sons ;  that  they  were,  however,  gradually  intermitted  by

388

RIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION.

Notes  to

Henry  L,  and  ceased  early  in  the  reign  of  Stephen.  In  these
councils,  which  were  legislative  so  far  as  new  statutes  were
ever  required,  a  matter  of  somewhat  rare  occurrence,  but
more  frequently  rendering  their  advice  on  measures  to  be
adopted,  or  their  judgment  in  criminal  charges  against  men
of  high  rank,  and  even  in  civil  litigation,  we  have,  at  least  in
theory,  the  acknowledged  limitations  of  royal  authority.  I
refer  the  reader  to  this  article  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  (vol.
xxxv.),  to  which  we  must  generally  assent;  observing,  how¬
ever,  that  the  committee,  though  in  all  probability  mistaken  in
ascribing  proceedings  of  the  Norman  sovereigns  to  the  advice
of  a  select  council,  which  really  emanated  from  one  much
larger,  did  not  call  in  question,  but  positively  assert,  the  con¬
stitutional  necessity  of  the  latter  for  general  taxation,  and
perhaps  for  legislative  enactments  of  an  important  kind.
And,  when  we  consider  the  improbability  that  “  all  the  great
men  over  all  England,  archbishops  and  bishops,  abbots  and
earls,  thanes  and  knights,”  as  the  Saxon  chronicler  pretends,
could  have  been  regularly  present  thrice  a  year,  at  Winches¬
ter,  Vi  estminster,  and  Gloucester,  when  Willijun,  as  he  informs
us,  “  wore  his  crown,”  we  may  well  suspect  that,  in  the  ordi¬
nary  exercise  ot  his  prerogative,  and  even  in  such  provisions
as  might  appear  to  him  necessary,  he  did  not  wait  for  a  very
full  assembly  ot  his  tenants  in  chief.  The  main  question  is,
whether  this  council  of  advice  and  assent  was  altogether  of
his  own  nomination,  and  this  we  may  confidently  deny.

The  custom  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings  had  been  to  hold
meetings  of  their  witan  very  frequently,  at  least  in  the  regu¬
lar  course  of  their  government.  And  this  was  also  the  rule
in  the  grand  fiefs  of  France.  The  pomp  of  their  court,  the
maintenance  of  loyal  respect,  the  power  of  keeping  a  vigilant
eye  over  the  behavior  of  the  chief  men,  were  sufficient  mo¬
tives  tor  the  Norman  kings  to  preserve  this  custom;  and  the
nobility  of  course  saw  in  it  the  security  of  their  privileges  as
well  as  the  exhibition  of  their  importance.  Hence  we  find
that  W  illiam  and  his  sons  held  their  courts  de  more ,  as  a  reg¬
ular  usage,  three  times  a  year,  and  generally  at  the  great
festivals,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom.  Instances
are  collected  by  the  Edinburgh  Reviewer  (vol.  xxxv.  p.  5).
And  here  the  public  business  was  transacted ;  though,  if  the.-e
meetings  were  so  frequent,  it  is  probable  that  for  the  most
part  they  passed  off  in  a  banquet  or  a  tournament.

Chap.  Till.

RIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION.

389

The  Lords’  Committee,  in  notes  on  the  Second  Report,  when
reprinted  in  1829,  do  not  acquiesce  in  the  positions  of  their
hardy  critic,  to  whom,  without  direct  mention,  they  manifestly
allude.  “  From  the  relations  of  annalists  and  historians,”
they  observe,  “  it  has  been  inferred  that  during  the  reign  of
the  Conqueror,  and  during  a  long  course  of  time  from  the
Conquest,  the  archbishops,  bishops,  abbots  and  priors,  earls
and  barons  of  the  realm  were  regularly  convened  three  times
in  every  year,  at  three  different  and  distinct  places  in  the
kingdom,  to  a  general  council  of  the  realm.  Considering  the
state  of  the  country,  and  the  habits  and  dispositions  ot  the
people,  this  seems  highly  improbable ;  especially  if  the  word
barones,  or  the  words  proceres  or  magnates,  often  used  by
writers  in  describing  such  assemblies,  were  intended  to  include
all  the  persons  holding  immediately  of  the  crown,  who,  accord¬
ing  to  the  charter  of  John,  were  required  to  be  summoned  to
constitute  the  great  council  of  the  realm,  for  the  purpose  of
granting  aids  to  the  crown.”  (p.  449.)  But  it  is  not  necessary
to  suppose  this ;  those  might  have  attended  who  lived  near,  or
who  were  specially  summoned.  The  committee  argue  on  the
supposition  that  all  tenants  in  chief  must  have  attended  thrice
a  year,  which  no  one  probably  ever  asserted.  But  that
William  and  his  sons  did  hold  public  meetings,  de  more ,
at  three  several  places  in  every  year,  or  at  least  very  fre¬
quently,  cannot  be  controverted  without  denying  what  re¬
spected  historical  testimonies  affirm ;  and  the  language  of
these  early  writers  intimates  that  they  were  numerously
attended.  Aids  were  not  regularly  granted,  and  laws  much
more  rarely  enacted  in  them ;  but  they  might  still  be  a  na¬
tional  council.  But  the  constituent  parts  of  such  councils  will
be  discussed  in  a  subsequent  note.

It  is  to  be  here  remarked  that,  with  the  exception  of  the
charters  granted  by  William,  Henry,  and  Stephen,  which  are
in  general  rather  like  confirmations  of  existing  privileges  than
novel  enactments,  though  some  clauses  appear  to  be  of  the
latter  kind,  little  authentic  evidence  can  be  found  of  any  leg¬
islative  proceedings  from  the  Conquest  to  the  reign  ot  Ilenry
II.  The  laws  of  the  Conqueror,  which  we  find  in  Ingulfus,
do  not  come  within  this  category ;  they  are  a  confirmation  of
English  usages,  granted  by  William  to  his  subjects.  “  Cez
sunt  les  leis  et  les  custumes  que  li  reis  William  grantad  el
pople  de  Engleterre  apres  le  conquest  de  la  terre.  Iceles

390

RIGHT  OF  LEGISLATION’.

Notes  to

mesmes  que  li  reis  Edward  sun  cusin  tint  devant  lui.”  These,
published  by  Gale  (Script.  Rer.  Anglic,  vol.  i.),  and  more
accurately  than  before  from  the  Holkham  manuscript  by  Sir
Francis  Palgrave,  have  sometimes  passed  for  genuine.  The
real  original,  however,  is  the  Latin  text,  first  published  by
him  with  the  French.  (Eng.  Commonw.  vol.  ii.  p.  89.)  The
French  translation  he  refers  to  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of
Henry  III.  At  the  time  when  Ingulfus  is  supposed  to  have
lived,  soon  after  the  Conquest,  no  laws,  as  Sir  F.  Palgrave
justly  observes,  were  written  in  French,  and  he  might  have
added  that  we  cannot  produce  any  other  specimen  of  the  lan¬
guage  which  is  certainly  of  that  age.  (See  Quarterly  Review,
xxxiv.  2f>0.)  It  is  said  in  the  charter  of  Henry  I.  that  the
laws  of  Edward  were  renewed  by  William  with  the  same
emendation.

Rut  the  changes  introduced  by  William  in  the  tenure  of
land  were  so  momentous  that  the  most  cautious  inquirers
have  been  induced  to  presume  some  degree  of  common  con¬
sent  by  those  whom  they  so  much  affected.  “  There  seems
to  be  evidence  to  show  that  the  great  change  in  the  tenure
of  land,  and  particularly  the  very  extensive  introduction  of
tenure  by  knight-service,  was  made  by  the  consent  of  those
principally  interested  in  the  land  charged  with  the  burdens
of  that  tenure ;  and  that  the  general  changes  made  in  the
Saxon  laws  by  the  Conqueror,  forming  of  the  two  one  people,
wras  also  effected  by  common  consent ;  namely,  in  the  language
of  the  charter  of  William  with  respect  to  the  tenures,  ‘  per
commune  concilium  tocius  regni,’  and  with  respect  to  both,
as  expressed  in  the  charter  of  his  son  Henry, ‘concilio  ba-
ronum though  it  is  far  from  clear  who  were  the  persons
intended  to  be  so  described.”  (Report  of  Lords’  Committee,
p.  50.)  ...

The  separation  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  jurisdictions
was  another  great  innovation  in  the  reign  of  the  Conqueror.
This  the  Lords’  Committee  incline  to  refer  to  his  sole  author¬
ity.  Rut  Allen  has  shown  by  a  writ  of  William  addressed
to  the  bishop  of  Lincoln  that  it  was  done  “eommuni  concilio,
et  concilio  archiepiscoporum  meorum,  et  cieterorum  episoopo-
rum  et  abhatum,  et  omnium  principum  regni  mei.”  (Edinb.
Rev.  p.  15.)  And  the  Domesday  survey  was  determined
upon,  after  a  consultation  of  William  with  his  great  council
at  Gloucester,  in  1084.  This  would  of  course  be  reckoned  a

Chap.  YIII.

CHARTER  OF  WILLIAM  I.

39 1

legislative  measure  in  the  present  day  ;  but  it  might  not  pass
for  more  than  a  temporary  ordinance.  The  only  laws  under
Henry  I.,  except  his  charter,  of  which  any  account  remains
in  history  (there  are  none  on  record),  fall  under  the  same
description.

The  Constitutions  of  Clarendon,  in  1164,  are  certainly  a
regular  statute ;  whoever  might  be  the  consenting  parties,  a
subject  to  be  presently  discussed,  these  famous  provisions  were
enacted  in  the  great  council  of  the  nation.  This  is  equally
true  of  the  Assizes  of  Northampton,  in  1178.  But  the  ear¬
liest  Armlo-Norman  law  which  is  extant  in  a  regular  form  is
the  assize  made  at  Clarendon  for  the  preservation  of  the
peace,  probably  between  1165  and  1176.  This  remarkable
statute,  “  quam  dominus  rex  Henricus,  consilio  archiepiscopo-
rum  et  episcoporum  et  abbatum,  caeterorumque  baronum
suorum  constituit,”  was  first  published  by  Sir  F.  Palgrave
from  a  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum.  (Hngl.  Commonw.
i.  257  •  ii-  1 68.)  In  other  instances  the  royal  prerogative
may  perhaps  have  been  held  sufficient  for  innovations  which,
after  the  constitution  became  settled,  would  have  required  the
sanction  of  the  whole  legislature.  No  act  of  parliament  is
known  to  have  been  made  under  Richard  I.  ;  but  an  ordi¬
nance,  setting  the  assize  of  bread,  in  the  fifth  ol  John,  is
recited  to  be  established  “  communi  concilio  baronum  nostro-
rum.”  Whether  these  words  afford  sufficient  ground  for
believing  that  the  assize  was  set  in  a  full  council  of  the  realm,
may  possibly  be  doubtful.  The  committee  incline  to  the
affirmative,  and  remark  that  a  general  proclamation  to  the
«ame  effect  is  mentioned  in  history,  but  merely  as  proceeding
from  the  king,  so  that  “  the  omission  of  the  words  ‘  communi
concilio  baronum  ’  in  the  proclamation  mentioned  by  the  his¬
torian,  though  appearing  in  the  ordinance,  tends  also  to  show
that,  though  similar  words  may  not  be  found  in  other  similar
documents,  the  absence  of  those  words  ought  not  to  lead  to  a
certain  conclusion  that  the  act  done  had  not  the  authority  ot
the  same  common  council.”  (p.  84.)

Note  XI.  Page  305.

This  charter  has  been  introduced  into  the  new  edition  of
Rymer’s  Foedcra,  and  heads  that  collection.  I  he  Committee
of  the  Lords’  on  the  Dignity  of  a  Peer,  in  their  Second  Re-

302

MAGNA  CHABTA  OF

Notes  to

port,  have  the  following  observations:  —  “The  printed  copy
is  taken  from  the  Red  Rook  of  the  Exchequer,  a  document
which  has  long  been  admitted  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  as
evidence  of  authority  for  certain  purposes;  but  no  trace  has
been  hitherto  found  ot  the  original  charter  of  William,  though
the  insertion  of  a  copy  in  a  liook  in  the  custody  of  the  king’s
Exchequer,  resorted  to  by  the  judges  of  that  court  for  other
purposes,  seems  to  afford  reasonable  ground  for  supposing  that
such  a  charter  was  issued,  and  that  the  copy  so  preserved  is
probably  correct,  or  nearly  correct.  The  copy  in  the  Red
Rook  is  without  date,  and  no  circumstance  tending  to  show  its
true  date  has  occurred  to  the  committee ;  but  it  may  be  col¬
lected  from  its  contents  that  it  was  probably  issued  in  the
latter  part  of  that  king’s  reign  ;  about  which  time  it  appears
from  history  that  he  confirmed  to  his  subjects  in  England  the
ancient  Saxon  laws,  with  alterations.”  (p.  28.)

I  once  thought,  and  have  said,  that  this  charter  seems  to
comprehend  merely  the  feudal  tenants  of  the  crown.  This
may  be  true  of  one  clause  ;  hut  it  is  impossible  to  construe
“omnes  liberi  homines  totius  monarch!®  ”  in  so  contracted  a
sense.  The  committee  indeed  observe  that  many  of  the  king’s
tenants  were  long  after  subject  to  tallage.  Rut'  I  do  not  sup¬
pose  these  to  have  been  included  in  “  liberi  homines.”  The
charter  involves  a  promise  of  the  crown  to  abstain  from  ex¬
actions  frequent  in  the  Conqueror’s  reign,  and  falling  on  mesne
tenants  and  others  not  liable  to  arbitrary  taxation.

Ibis  charter  contains  a  clause — “  IIoc  quoque  prtecipimus
ut  omnes  habeant  et  teneant  legem  Edwardi  Regis  in  omnibus
rebus  adjunctis  hisquno  constituimus  ad  ultilitatem  Anglorum.”
And  as  there  is  apparent  reference  to  these  words  in  the
charter  ot  Henry  I.— “Legem  Edwardi  Regis  voids  reddo
cum  lllis  emendationibus  quibus  pater  meus  earn  emendavit
consilio  baron  um  suorum  ” —  the  committee  are  sufficiently
moderate  in  calling  this  “a  clause,  tending  to  give  in  tome  de-
gree  authenticity  to  the  copy  of  the  charter  of  William  the
Conqueror  inserted  in  the  Red  Hook  of  the  Exchequer."  (p.
89.)  This  charter  seems  to  be  fully  established:  it  deserves
to  be  accounted  the  first  remedial  concession  by  the  crown  ;
for  it  indicates,  especially  taken  in  connection  with  public
history,  an  arbitrary  exercise  of  royal  power  which  neither  the
new  nor  the  old  subjects  of  the  English  monarchy  reckoned
lawful.  It  is  also  the  earliest  recognition  of  the  Anglo-Saxon

Chap.  VIII.

WILLIAM  TIIE  CONQUEROR.

393

laws,  such  as  they  subsisted  under  the  Confessor,  and  a  proof
both  that  the  English  were  now  endeavoring  to  raise  their  heads
from  servitude,  and  that  the  Normans  had  discovered  some
immunities  from  taxation,  or  some  securities  from  absolute
power,  among  the  conquered  people,  in  which  they  desired  to
participate.  It  is  deserving  of  remark  that  the  distinction  of
personal  law,  which,  indeed,  had  almost  expired  on  the  conti¬
nent,  was  never  observed  in  England;  at  least,  we  have  no
evidence  of  it,  and  the  contrary  is  almost  demonstrable.  The
conquerors  fell  at  once  into  the  laws  of  the  conquered,  and
this  continued  for  more  than  a  century.

The  charter  of  William,  like  many  others,  was  more  ample
than  effectual.  “  The  committee  have  found  no  document  to
show,  nor  does  it  appear  probable  from  any  relation  in  his¬
tory  that  William  ever  obtained  any  general  aid  from  his  sub¬
jects  by  grant  of  a  legislative  assembly ;  though  according  to
history,  even  after  the  charter  before  mentioned,  he  extorted
great  sums  from  individuals  by  various  means  and  under
various  pretences.  Towards  the  close  of  his  reign,  when  he
had  exacted,  as  stated  by  the  editor  of  the  first  part  of  the
Annals  called  the  Annals  of  Waverley,  the  oath  of  fealty  from
the  principal  landholders  of  every  description,  the  same  his¬
torian  adds  that  William  passed  into  Normandy,  ‘  adquisitis
magnis  thesauris  ab  hominibus  suis,  super  quos  aliquam  cau-
sam  invenire  poterat,  sive  juste  sive  inique  ’  (words  which
import  exaction  and  not  grant),  and  he  died  the  year  following
in  Normandy.”  (p.  85.)

The  deeply  learned  reviewer  of  this  Report  has  shown  that
the  Annals  of  Waverley  are  of  very  little  authority,  and
merely  in  this  part  a  translation  from  the  Saxon  Chronicle.
Hut  the  translation  of  the  passage  quoted  by  the  committee  is
correct ;  and  it  was  perhaps  rather  hypercritical  to  cavil  at
their  phrase  that  William  obtained  this  money  “by  exaction
and  not  by  grant.”  They  never  meant  that  he  imposed  a
general  tax.  That  it  was  not  by  grant  is  all  that  their  pur¬
pose  required;  the  passage  which  they  quote  shows  that  it
was  under  some  pretext,  and  often  an  unjust  one,  which  is  not
very  unlike  exaction.

It  is  highly  probable  that,  in  promising  this  immunity  from
unjust  exactions,  William  did  not  intend  to  abolish  the  ancient
tax  of  Danegelt,  or  to  demand  the  consent  of  his  great  coun¬
cil  when  it  was  thought  necessary  to  impose  it  We  read  in

394

DURATION  OF  DISTINCTION

Notes  to

the  Saxon  Chronicle  that  the  king  in  1083  exacted  a  heavy
tribute  all  over  England,  that  is,  seventy-two  pence  for  each
liyde.  This  looks  like  a  Danegelt.  The  rumor  of  invasion
from  Denmark  is  set  down  by  the  chronicler  under  the  year
1085  ;  but  probably  William  had  reason  to  be  prepared.  He
may  have  had  the  consent  of  his  great  council  in  this  instance.
But  as  the  tax  had  formerly  been  perpetual,  so  that  it  was  a
relaxation  in  favor  of  the  subject  to  reserve  it  for  an  emer¬
gency,  we  may  think  it  more  likely  that  this  imposition  was
within  his  prerogative ;  that  he,  in  other  words,  was  sole  judge
of  the  danger  that  required  it.  It  was,  however,  in  truth,  a
heavy  tribute,  being  six  shillings  for  every  liyde,  in  many
cases,  as  we  see  by  Domesday,  no  small  proportion  of  the
annual  value,  and  would  have  been  a  grievous  burden  as  an
annual  payment.

Note  XII.  Page  307.

This  passage  in  a  contemporary  writer,  being  so  unequivo¬
cal  as  it  is,  ought  to  have  much  weight  in  the  question  which
an  eminent  foreigner  has  lately  raised  as  to  the  duration  of
the  distinction  between  the  Norman  and  English  races.  It  is
the  favorite  theory  of  M.  Thierry,  pushed  to  an  extreme
length  both  as  to  his  own  country  and  ours,  that  the  conquer¬
ing  nation,  Franks  in  one  case,  Normans  in  the  other,  remained
down  to  a  late  period  —  a  period  indeed  to  which  he  assigns
no  conclusion — unmingled,  or  at  least  undistinguishable,  con¬
stituting  a  double  people  of  sovereigns  and  subjects,  becoming
a  noble  order  in  the  state,  haughty,  oppressive,  powerful,  or,
what  is  in  one  word  most  odious  to  a  French  ear  in  the  nine¬
teenth  century,  aristocratic.

It  may  be  worthy  of  consideration,  since  the  authority  of
this  writer  is  not  to  be  disregarded,  whether  the  Norman
blood  were  really  blended  with  the  native  quite  so  soon  as  the
reign  ot  Henry  II. ;  that  is,  whether  intermarriages  in  the
superior  classes  oi  society  had  become  so  frequent  as  to  efface
the  distinction.  M.  Thierry  produces  a  few  passages  which
seem  to  intimate  its  continuance.  But  these  are  too  loosely
worded  to  warrant  much  regard  ;  and  he  admits  that  afler  the
reign  of  Henry  I.  we  have  no  proof  of  any  hostile  spirit  on  the
part  of  the  English  towards  the  new  dynasty ;  and  that  some
efforts  were  made  to  conciliate  them  by  representing  Henry

Chap.  VIII.  BETWEEN  SAXON  AND  NORMAN.  395

II.  as  the  descendant  of  the  Saxon  line.  (Vol.  «•  P*  8^4.)
This,  in  fact,  was  true ;  and  it  was  still  more  important  that
the  name  of  English  was  studiously  assumed  by  our  kings
(ignorant  though  they  might  be,  in  M.  Thierry?  phrase  what
was  the  vernacular  word  for  that  dignity),  and  that  the  Anglo-
Normans  are  seldom,  if  ever,  mentioned  by  that  separate
designation.  England  was  their  dwelling-place,  English  their
name,  the  English  law  their  inheritance ;  if  this  was  not
wholly  the  case  before  the  separation  of  the  mother  country
under  John,  and  yet  we  do  not  perceive  much  limitation  nec¬
essary,  it  can  admit  of  no  question  afterwards.

It  is,  nevertheless,  manifest  that  the  descendants  o
William's  tenants  in  capite,  and  of  others  who  seized  on  so
large  a  portion  of  our  fair  country  from  the  Channel  to  the
Tweed  formed  the  chief  part  of  that  aristocracy  which
secured  the  liberties  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  as  well  as
their  own,  at  Runnymede ;  and  which,  sometimes  as  peers  of
the  realm,  sometimes  as  well-born  commoners,  placed  suc¬
cessive  barriers  against  the  exorbitances  of  powei,  and  pie-
pared  the  way  for  that  expanded  scheme  of  government
which  we  call  the  English  constitution.  The  names  m  Dug-
dale’s  Baronage  and  in  his  Summonitiones  ad  1  arliamentum
speak  for  themselves ;  in  all  the  earlier  periods,  and  perhaps
almost  through  the  Plantagenef  dynasty,  we  find  a  great  pre¬
ponderance  of  such  as  indicate  a  French  source.  New  fami¬
lies  sprung  up  by  degrees,  and  are  now  sometimes  among  our
chief  nobility  ;  but  in  general,  it  we  find  any  at  this  day  w  ho
have  tolerable  pretensions  to  deduce  their  lineage  from  he
Conouest  they  are  of  Norman  descent ;  the  very  tew  Saxo
fhmilies  that  may  remain  with  an  authentic  pedigree  in  the
male  line  are  seldom  found  in  the  wealthier  class  ot  gen  iy.
This  is  of  course  to  be  taken  with  deference  to  the  ^genealo-
eists  And  on  this  account  I  must  confess  that  M.  Tine  }
opinion  of  a  long-continued  distinction  of  races  has  more
semblance  of  truth  as  to  this  kingdom  than  can  be  pretended
as  to  France,  without  a  blind  sacrifice  of  undeniable  tacts  at
‘the  altar  of  plebeian  malignity.

sur  l’llistoire  de  France,  published  about  1820,  there  seems
S  be  no  other  aim  than  to  excite  a  factious  animosity  against
Se  ancient  nobility  of  France,  on  the  preposterous  hypoth-
Sis  That  they  ire  descended  from  the  followers  of  GW,
that  Frank  and  Gaul  have  never  been  truly  intermingle  ,

396

TIIE  CURIA  REGIS.

Xotes  TO

and  that  a  conquering  race  was,  even  in  this  age,  attempting
to  rivet  its  yoke  on  a  people  who  disdained  it.  This  strange
theory,  or  something  like  it,  had  been  announced  in  a  very
different  spirit  by  Boulainvilliers  in  the  last  century.  But
of  what  family  in  France,  unless  possibly  in  the  eastern  part,
can  it  be  determined  with  confidence  whether  the  founder
were  Frank  or  Gallo-Roman  ?  Is  it  not  a  moral  certainty
that  many  of  the  most  ancient,  especially  in  the  south,  must
have  been  of  the  latter  origin  ?  It  would  be  highly  wrong
to  revive  such  obsolete  distinctions  in  order  to  keep  up  social
hatreds  were  they  founded  in  truth ;  but  what  shall  we  say
if  they  are  purely  chimerical  ?

Note  XIII.  Page  318.

It  appears  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  Madox,  and  proba¬
bly  has  been  taken  for  granted  by  most  other  antiquaries,
that  this  court,  denominated  Aula  or  Curia  Regis,  adminis¬
tered  justice  when  called  upon,  as  well  as  advised  the  crown
in  public  affairs,  during  the  first  four  Norman  reigns  as  much
as  afterwards.  Allen,  however,  maintained  (Edinb.  Rev.
xxvi.  p.  364)  that  “the  administration  of  justice  in  the  last
resort  belonged  originally  to  the  great  council.  It  was  the
king’s  baronial  court,  and  his  tenants  in  chief  were  the  suitors
and  judges.”  Their  unwillingness  and  inability  to  deal  with
intricate  questions  of  law,  which,  after  the  simpler  rules  of
Anglo-Saxon  jurisprudence  were  superseded  by  the  subtle¬
ties  of  Normandy,  became  continually  more  troublesome,  led
to  the  separation  of  an  inferior  council  from  that  of  the
legislature,  to  both  which  the  name  Curia  Regis  is  for  some
time  indifferently  applied  by  historians.  This  was  done  by
Henry  II.,  as  Allen  conjectures,  at  the  great  council  of
Clarendon  in  1164.

The  Lords’  Committee  took  another  view,  and  one,  it  must
be  confessed,  more  consonant  to  the  prevailing  opinion.
“  The  ordinary  council  of  the  king,  properly  denominated
by  the  word  ‘  concilium  ’  simply,  seems  nlways  to  have  con¬
sisted  of  persons  selected  by  him  for  that  purpose ;  and  these
persons  in  later  times,  if  not  always,  took  an  oath  of  office,
and  were  assisted  by  the  king’s  justiciaries  or  judges,  who
seem  to  have  been  considered  as  members  of  this  council;
and  the  chief  ju>ticiar,  the  treasurer  and  chancellor,  and  some

Chap.  VIII.

THE  CURIA  REGIS.

397

other  great  officers  of  the  crown,  who  might  be  styled  the
kiipr’s  confidential  ministers,  seem  also  to  have  been  alway
members  of  this  select  council ;  the  chief  justiciar,  horn  tl
hiorh  rank  attributed  to  his  office,  generally  acting  as  presi¬
dent.  This  select  council  was  not  only  the  king’s  ordinary
council  of  state,  but  formed  the  supreme  court  of  justice,
denominated  Curia  Regis ,  which  commonly  assembled  three
times  in  every  year,  wherever  the  king  held  his  court,  at  the
three  great  feasts  of  Easter,  Whitsuntide,  and  Christmas,  and
sometimes  also  at  Michaelmas.  Its  constant  and  important
duty  at  those  times  was  the  administration  of  justice.

(PIt2has  been  seen  in  a  former  note  that

three  times  in  the  year,  are  supposed  by  Mr.  Allen  to  have
been  of  the  great  council,  composed  of  the  baronial  aristoc¬
racy.  The  positions,  therefore,  of  the  Lords  committee  wer
of  course  disputed  in  his  celebrated  review  of  their  Report.

“  So  far  is  it,”  he  says,  “  from  being  true  that  the  term  Cuiia

to  which  thePcommittee  would  restrict  the  appellation  of  Curia
Re<ris  and  of  which  such  frequent  mention  is  made  under
that  nam“  in  our  early  records  and  courts  of  law,  was  con¬
firmed  and  fully  established  by  Henry  II.,  if  not  originally

instituted  by  that  prince.”  (p.  8.)

The  argument  of  Mr.  Allen  rests  very  much  on  the  judi¬
cial  functions  of  the  witenagemot,  which  he  would  consider  as
maintained  in  its  substantial  character  by  the  great  councils
or  parliaments  of  the  Norman  dynasty.  In  thlJ  '!e  f
iustlv  concur ;  but  we  have  already  seen  how  far  he  is  from
bavin"-  a  ri"ht  to  assume  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  king.-.,  1(>u_  1
Jhey  mLht°  administer  justice  in  the  full  meetings  ca  led
witenairemots  were  restrained  from  its  exercise  before  a
smaller  body  more  permanently  attached  to  thmr  residence.

Mr  Arar*  -

398

TIIE  CURIA  REGIS.

Notes  to

before  the  Conquest.  But  the  plaintiff  incurred  a  fine  if
he  brought  his  cause  in  the  first  instance  before  the  king.
(Thorpe’s  Ancient  Laws,  p.  85  ;  and  see  Edinb.  Rev.  xxxv.
10.)  It  hardly  appears  evident  that  these  cases,  rare  proba¬
bly  and  not  generally  interesting,  might  not  be  determined
ostensibly,  as  they  would  on  any  hypothesis  be  in  reality,  by
the  chancellor,  the  high  justiciar,  and  other  great  officers  of
the  crown,  during  the  intervals  of  the  national  council ;  and
this  is  confirmed  by  the  analogy  of  the  royal  courts  in  F ranee,
which  were  certainly  not  constituted  on  a  very  broad  basis.
The  feudal  court  of  a  single  barony  might  contain  all  the  vas¬
sals  ;  but  the  inconvenience  would  have  become  too  great  if  the
principle  had  been  extended  to  all  the  tenants  in  chief  of  the
realm.  Tliis  relates  to  the  first  four  reigns,  for  which  we  are
reduced  to  these  grounds  of  probable  and  analogical  reasoning,
since  no  proof  of  the  distinct  existence  of  a  judicial  court
seems  to  be  producible.

In  the  reign  of  Henry  II.  a  court  of  justice  is  manifestly
distinguishable  both  from  the  select  and  from  the  greater
council.  “  In  the  Curia  Regis  were  discussed  and  tried  all
pleas  immediately  concerning  the  king  and  the  realm ;  and
suitors  were  allowed,  on  payment  of  fines,  to  remove  their
plaints  from  inferior  jurisdictions  of  Anglo-Saxon  creation
into  this  court,  by  which  a  variety  of  business  was  wrested
from  the  ignorance  and  partiality  of  lower  tribunals,  to  be
more  confidently  submitted  to  the  decision  of  judges  of  high
reputation.  Some  plaints  were  also  removed  into  the  Curia
Regis  by  the  express  order  of  the  king,  others  by  the  justices,
then  itinerant,  who  not  unfrequently  felt  themselves  incom¬
petent  to  decide  upon  dilficult  points  of  law.  Mutters  of  a
fiscal  nature,  together  with  the  business  performed  by  the
Chancery,  were  also  transacted  in  the  Curia  Regis.  Such  a
quantity  of  miscellaneous  business  was  at  length  found  to  be
so  perplexing  and  impracticable,  not  only  to  the  officers  of
the  Curia  Regis,  but  also  to  the  suitors  themselves,  that  it
became  absolutely  necessary  to  devise  a  remedy  for  the  in¬
creasing  evil.  A  division  of  tliat  court  into  distinct  depart¬
ments  was  the  consequence ;  mid  thenceforth  pleas  touching
the  crown,  together  with  common  pleas  of  a  civil  and  crim¬
inal  nature,  were  continued  to  the  Curia  Regis;  plaints  of  a
fi.-.cal  kind  were  transferred  to  the  Exchequer ;  and  for  the
Court  of  Chancery  were  reserved  all  matters  unappropriated

Chat.  VIII.

TILE  CURIA  REGIS.

399

(Hardy’s  Introduction  to  Close  Rolls

to  the  other  courts.

P'  Mr?  Hardy  quotes  a  passage  from  Benedict  Abbas  a

contemporary  historian,  which  illustrates  very  remarUbly

the  development  of  our  judicial  polity.  Henry  II,  m  ,
reduced  the  justices  in  the  Curia  Kegis  from  eighteen  to
Sve  mid  ordered  that  they  should  hear  and  determine  id
writs  of  the  kingdom -not  leaving  *e Jrmgs  courb  but

Sid  the  wisest  men  of  the  realm.  And  this  reduction  of  the

justices  from  eighteen  to  five  is  said  to  <'

consilium  sammtium  regm  sm  ;  which  may,  perhaps,  b®
understood  of  parliament  But  we  have  here  a  distinct
motion  Of  the  Curia  Regis,  as  a  standing  count,  of  the
kiie.  neither  to  be  confounded  with  the  great  council  oi  p.t
hamrat  nor  with  the  select  body  of  judges,  which  was  now
Inferior,  though  most  important  tribunal .  From

Tn^reta.  fi^indifferendy  with  the  council,  and  then

"Stt?  rcmr^gis,rcougrt'of  King’s  Bench,
v  •  in  the  sixth  year  of  Richard  I.  They  are  legularly
extant  from  that  time ;  but  the  usage  of  preserving  a  regular

written  record  of  judicial  proceedings
in  England  during  the  preceding  reign.  The  roll  ot  Jiic
mas  ferm,  in  9  John,  contains  a  short  transcript  of  certain
.  ..  •  7  TT,,n  it  “proving  that  the  mode  of  enrol

pleadings  m  •  •’  „  /palm-ave's  Introduction  to

ment  was  then  entirely  sett  leu.  y  _o  .  /  •  1 1  c  i  \

lb,t  Cur  Rems,  p.  2.)  This  authentic  precedent  (in  1161),

*  u„n  the  assembly  at  Clarendon  in  1164.  But  m  <

w3SESS3K2iS

ire  probably  the  first  that  crer  existed,

400

TIIE  CURIA  REGIS.

Notes  to

Stephen,  would  necessitate,  even  on  his  hypothesis,  the  insti¬
tution  of  a  separate  court  or  council,  lest  justice  should  be
denied  or  delayed.  I  do  not  mean  that  in  the  seventh  year
of  Henry  II.  there  was  a  Court  of  King’s  Bench,  distinct
from  the  select  council,  which  we  have  not  any  grounds  for
affirming,  and  the  date  of  which  I,  on  the  authority  of  Bene¬
dict  Abbas,  have  inclined  to  place  several  years  lower,  but
that  suits  were  brought  before  the  king’s  judges  by  regular
process,  and  recorded  by  regular  enrolment.

These  rolls  of  the  Curia  Regis,  or  the  King’s  Court,  held
before  his  justices  or  justiciars,  are  the  earliest  consecutive
judicial  records  in  existence.  The  Olim  Registers  of  the
Parliament  of  Paris,  next  to  our  own  in  antiquity,  begin  in
1254.1  (Palgrave’s  Introduction,  p.  1.)  Every  reader,  he
observes,  will  be  struck  by  the  great  quantity  of  business
transacted  before  the  justiciars.  “And  when  we  recollect
the  heavy  expenses  which,  even  at  this  period,  were  attend¬
ant  upon  legal  proceedings,  and  the  difficulties  of  communi¬
cation  between  the  remote  parts  of  the  kingdom  and  the
central  tribunal,  it  must  appear  evident  that  so  many  cases
would  not  have  been  prosecuted  in  the  king’s  court  had  not
some  very  decided  advantage  been  derived  from  this  source.”
(p.  6.)  The  issues  of  fact,  however,  were  remitted  to  be
tried  by  a  jury  of  the  vicinage  ;  so  that,  possibly,  the  ex¬
pense  might  not  be  quite  so  considerable  as  Is  here  suggested.
And  the  jurisdiction  of  the  county  and  hundred  courts  was
so  limited  in  real  actions,  or  those  .affecting  land,  by  the
assizes  of  novel  disseizin  and  mort  d’ancestor,  that  there  was
no  alternative  but  to  sue  before  the  courts  at  Westminster.

It  would  be  travelling  beyond  the  limits  of  my  design  to
dwell  longer  on  these  legal  antiquities.  The  reader  will
keep  in  mind  the  threefold  meaning  of  Curia  Regis:  the
common  council  of  the  realm,  already  mentioned  in  a  former
note,  and  to  be  discussed  again ;  the  select  council  for  judi¬
cial  as  well  as  administrative  purposes ;  and  the  Court  of
King’s  Bench,  separated  from  the  last  in  the  reign  of  Henry
II.,  and  soon  afterwards  acquiring,  exclusively,  the  denomi¬
nation  Curia  Regis.

In  treating  the  judges  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  as
officers  of  the  crown,  rather  than  nobles,  I  have  followed  the

■  They  are  published  la  the  Documens  In&liU,  1839,  by  M  Beaguot.

Chap.  Till.

SUCCESSION  TO  THE  CROWN.

401

usual  opinion.  But  Allen  contends  that  they  were  “  barons
selected  from  the  common  council  of  the  realm  on  account
of  their  rank  or  reputed  qualifications  for  the  office.”  They
met  in  the  palace ;  and  their  court  was  called  Curia  Regis,
with  the  addition  “ad  scaccarium.”  Hence  Fleta  observes
that,  after  the  Court  of  Exchequer  was  filled  with  mere
lawyers,  they  were  styled  barons,  because  formerly  real
barons  had  been  the  judges;  “justiciaries  ibidem  commo-
rantes  barones  esse  dicimus,  eo  quod  suis  locis  barones  sedere
solebant.”  (Edinb.  Rev.  xxxv.  11.)  This  is  certainly  an
important  remark.  But  in  practice  it  is  to  be  presumed  that
the  king  selected  such  barons  (a  numerous  body,  we  should
remember)  as  were  likely  to  look  well  after  the  rights  of  the
crown.  The  Court  of  Exchequer  is  distinctly  traced  to  the
reign  of  Henry  I.

Note  XIV.  Page  326.

The  theory  of  succession  to  the  crown  in  the  Norman
period  intimated  in  the  text  has  now  been  extensively  re¬
ceived.  “  It  does  not  appear,”  says  Mr.  Hardy,  “  that  any
of  the  early  English  monarchs  exercised  any  act  of  sovereign
power,  or  disposed  of  public  affairs,  till  after  their  election
and  coronation.  .  .  .  These  few  examples  appear  to  be

undeniable  proofs  that  the  fundamental  laws  and  institutions
of  this  kingdom,  based  on  the  Anglo-Saxon  custom,  were  at
that  time  against  an  hereditary  succession  unless  by  common
consent  of  the  realm.”  (Introduction  to  Close  Rolls,  p.  35.)
It  will  be  seen  that  this  abstinence  from  all  exercise  of  power
cannot  be  asserted  without  limitation.

The  early  kings  always  date  their  reign  from  their  coro¬
nation,  and  not  from  the  decease  of  their  predecessor,  as  is
shown  by  Sir  Harris  Nicolas  in  his  Chronology  of  History
(p.  272).  It  had  been  with  less  elaborate  research  pointed
out  by  Mr.  Allen  in  his  Inquiry  into  the  Royal  Prerogative.
The  former  has  even  shown  that  an  exception  which  Mr.
Allen  had  made  in  respect  of  Richard  I.,  of  whom  he  sup¬
poses  public  acts  to  exist,  dated  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,
but  before  his  coronation,  ought  not  to  have  been  made ;
having  no  authority  but  a  blunder  made  by  the  editors  of
Rymer’s  Fcedera  in  anfedating  by  one  month  the  decease
of  Henry  II.,  and  following  up  that  mistake  by  the  usual
vol.  a.  20

402

SUCCESSION  TO  TIIE  CROWN.

Notes  to

assumption  tliat  the  successor’s  reign  commenced  immedi¬
ately,  in  placing  some  instruments  bearing  date  in  the  first
year  of  Richard  just  twelve  months  too  early.  This  dis¬
covery  has  been  confirmed  by  Mr.  W.  Hardy  in  the  27th
volume  of  the  Archseologia  (p.  109),  by  means  of  a  charter
in  the  archives  of  the  duchy  of  Lancaster,  where  Richard,
before  his  coronation,  confirms  the  right  of  Gerald  de  Cam-
ville  and  his  wife  Nichola  to  the  inheritance  of  the  said
Nichola  in  England  and  Normandy,  with  an  additional  grant
of  lands.  In  this  he  only  calls  himself  “  Ricardus  Dei
gratia  dominut  Angliae.”  It  has  been  observed,  as  another
slighter  circumstance,  that  he  uses  the  form  ego  and  mem
instead  of  nos  and  noster.

Whatever,  therefore,  may  have  been  the  case  in  earlier
reigns,  all  the  kings,  indeed,  except  Henry  H.,  having  come
in  by  a  doubtful  title,  we  perceive  that,  as  has  been  before
said  in  the  text  on  the  authority  of  an  historian,  Richard  I.
acted  in  some  respects  as  king  before  the  title  was  constitu¬
tionally  his  by  his  coronation.  It  is  now  known  that  John’s
reign  began  with  his  coronation,  and  that  this  is  the  date
from  which  his  charters,  like  those  of  his  predecessors,  are
reckoned.  But  he  seems  to  have  acted  as  king  before.
(Palgrave’s  Introduction  to  Rot  Cur.  Regis,  vol.  i.  p.  91  ;
and  further  proof  is  adduced  in  the  Introduction  to  the
second  volume.)  Palgrave  thinks  the  reign  virtually  began
with  the  proclamation  of  the  king’s  peace,  which  was  at  some
short  interval  after  the  demise  of  the  predecessor.  He  is
positive  indeed  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings  had  no  right
before  their  acceptance  by  the  people  at  their  coronation.
But,  “  after  the  Conquest,”  he  proceeds,  “  it  is  probable,  for
we  can  only  speak  doubtingly  and  hypothetically,  that  the
heir  obtained  the  royal  authority,  at  least  for  the  purjjoses  of
administering  the  law,  from  the  day  that  his  peace  was
proclaimed.  He  was  obeyed  as  chief  magistrate  so  soon  as
he  was  admitted  to  the  high  office  of  protector  of  the  public
tranquillity.  But  he  was  not  honored  as  the  king  until  the
sacred  oil  had  been  poured  upon  him,  and  the  crown  set
upon  his  head,  and  the  sceptre  grasped  in  his  hand.”  (In¬
troduce  to  Rot.  Cur.  Reg.  p.  92.)

This  hypothesis,  extremely  probable  in  all  cases  where  no
opposition  was  contemplated,  is  not  entirely  that  ot  Allen,
Hardy,  and  Nicolas  ;  ami  it  seems  to  imply  an  admitted  right.

Ch.u>.  Till.

PRIVATE  WARFARE.

403

which  indeed  cannot  be  disputed  in  the  case  of  Ilenry  II.,
who  succeeded  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  assented  to  by  the  baro¬
nage,  nor  is  it  likely  to  have  been  in  the  least  doubtful  when
Richard  I.  and  Henry  III.  came  to  the  throne.  It  is  impor¬
tant.  however,  for  the  unlearned  reader  to  be  informed  that  he
has  been  deceived  by  the  almanacs  and  even  the  historians,
who  lay  it  down  that  a  king’s  reign  has  always  begun  from
the  death  of  his  predecessor  :  and  yet,  that,  although  he  bore
not  the  royal  name  before  his  coronation,  the  interval  of  a  va¬
cant  throne  was  virtually  but  of  a  few  days ;  the  successor
taking  on  himself  the  administration  without  the  royal  title,
by  causing  public  peace  to  be  proclaimed.

The  original  principle  of  the  necessity  of  consent  to  a  king’s
succession  was  in  some  measure  preserved,  even  at  the  death
of  Henry  III.  in  1272,  when  fifty-six  years  of  a  single  reign
might  have  extinguished  almost  all  personal  recollections  of
precedent.  “  On  the  day  of  the  king’s  burial  the  barons  swore
fealty  to  Edward  I.,  then  absent  from  the  realm,  and  from
this  his  reign  is  dated.”  Four  days  having  elapsed  between
the  death  of  Henry  and  the  recognition  of  Edward  as  king,
the  accession  of  the  latter  was  dated,  not  from  his  father’s
death,  but  from  his  own  recognition.  Henry  died  on  the  1 6th
of  November,  and  his  son  was  not  acknowledged  king  till  the
20th.  (Allen’s  Inquiry,  p.  44,  quoting  Palgrave’s  Parlia¬
mentary  Writs.)  Thus  this  recognition  by  the  oath  of  fealty
came  in  and  was  in  the  place  of  the  coronation,  though  with
the  important  difference  that  there  was  no  reciprocity.

Note  XV.  Page  329.

Mr.  Allen  has  differed  from  me  on  the  lawfulness  of  private
war,  quoting  another  passage  from  Glanvil  and  one  from
Bracton  (Edinb.  Rev.  xxx.  168) ;  and  I  modified  the  passage
after  the  first  edition  in  consequence  of  his  remarks.  But  I
adhere  to  the  substance  of  what  I  have  said.  It  appears,  in¬
deed,  that  the  king’s  peace  was  originally  a  personal  security,
granted  by  charter  under  his  hand  and  seal,  which  could  not
be  violated  without  incurring  a  penalty.  Proofs  of  this  are
found  in  Domesday,  and  it  was  a  Saxon  usage  derived  from
the  old  Teutonic  mundeburde.  William  I.,  if  we  are  to  believe
what  is  written,  maintained  the  peace  throughout  the  realm.
But  the  general  proclamation  of  the  king’s  peace  at  his  acces-

404

PRIVATE  WARFARE.  Notes  to  Chap  VIII.

sion,  which  became  the  regular  law,  may  have  been  intro¬
duced  by  Henry  II.  Palgrave,  to  whom  i  am  indebted,  states
this  clearly  enough.  “  Peace  is  stated  in  Domesday  to  have
been  given  by  the  king’s  seal,  that  is,  by  a  writ  under  seal.
This  practice,  which  is  not  noticed  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws,
continued  in  the  protections  granted  at  a  much  later  period ,
though  after  the  general  law  of  the  king’s  peace  was  estab
lished  such  a  charter  had  ceased  to  afford  any  special  privilege
All  the  immunities  arising  from  residence  within  the  verge  oi
ambit  of  the  king’s  presence  —  from  the  truces,  as  they  are
termed  in  the  continental  laws,  which  recurred  at  the  slated
times  and  seasons  —  and  also  from  the  *  handselled  ’  protection
of  the  king,  were  then  absorbed  in  the  general  declaration  of
the  peace  upon  the  accession  of  the  new  monarch.  This
custom  was  probably  introduced  by  Henry  II.  It  is  inconsist¬
ent  with  the  laws  of  Henry  I.;  which,  whether  an  authorized
collection  or  not,  exhibit  the  jurisprudence  of  that  period,  but
it  is  wholly  accordant  .with  the  subsequent  tenor  of  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Curia  Regis.”  (English  Commonwealth,  vol.
ii.  p.  105.)

A  few  words  in  Glanvil  (those  in  Bracton  are  more  am¬
biguous),  which  may  have  been  written  before  the  king’s
peace  was  become  a  matter  of  permanent  law,  or  may  rather
refer  to  Normandy  than  England,  ought  not,  in  my  opinion,  to
be  set  against  so  clear  a  declaration.  The  right  of  private
war  in  the  time  of  Henry  II.  was  giving  way  in  France  ;  and
we  should  always  remember  that  the  Anglo-Norman  govern¬
ment  was  one  of  high  prerogative.  The  paucity  of  historical
evidence  or  that  for  records  for  private  war,  as  an  usual  prac¬
tice,  is  certainly  not  to  be  overlooked.

END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.

•

Date  Due

•

—

(5^5  CAT.  NO.  13  133  PAINTIO  IN  U.9.A.
