Google

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful. Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I

f$l.

'  X VIEW

OP

THE STATE OF EUROPE

DimiNa

TIE  MIDDLE  AGES.

By HENEY HALLAM, LL.D.,

FOREIGN  AflBOClATS  OF  THX  IK8TITUTB  OV  FRANCE.

IN  THBEE  VOLUMES.— Vol.  I.

NEW  EDITION.

LONDON:

.JOHN MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET.

1878.

Iki  right  qf  ZhiflJkrfioM  U  reiereetl.

U 'J

^h

I^ISIkk

LONDON:

PUMTtD  BT  WIUJIM  CL0WB8  4XD  SORB,  LDCmo^
RAMfOSD  KMMMt  AVD  OHABIIIO  OBOM.

PBEFACB

TO  THE PIE8T  EDITION.

It  IB  the  object  of  the  ^Teeent  work  to  exhibit,  in  a  series
of  historiciu  dissertatioxis,  a  oomprehensiTe  suryey  of
the  chief  circumstances  that  can  interest  a  philosophical
inquirer  during  the  period  usoally  denominated  the
Middle  Ages.  Bach  an  nndertaking  must  necessarily  fall
nnder  the  class  of  historical  abridgments :  yet  there  will
perhaps  be  found  enon^  to  distrngoish  it  firom  snch  as
have  abeady  appeared.  Many  considerable  portions  of
time,  especially  before  the  twelfth  centniy,  may  justly
be  deemed  so  barren  of  events  worthy  of  remembrance,
that  a  single  sentence  or  paragraph  is  often  sufficient
to  give  the  character  of  entire  generations,  and  of  long
dynasties  of  obscure  kings.

Nod  ngkolam  di  lor.  da  gnaida  e  pmh.

And  even  in  the  more  pleasing  and  instractiTe  parts  of
this  middle  period  it  has  been  my  object  to  avoid  the  diy
composition  of  annals,  and  aiming,  with  what  spirit  and
freedom  I  could,  at  a  just  outline  rather  ihan  a  miniature,
to  suppress  all  events  that  did  not  appear  essentially
concatenated  with  others,  or  illustrative  of  important
conclusions.  But  as  the  modes  of  government  and  con-
stitutional laws  which  prevailed  in  various  countries  of
Europe,  and  especially  in  England,  seemed  to  have  been
less  ftiUy  dwelt  upon  in  former  works  of  this  description
than  mUitary  or  civil  transactions,  while  they  were
deserving  of  &r  more  attention,  I  have  taken  pains  to
give  a  true  representation  of  them,  and  in  every  instance
to  point  out  the  sources  firom  which  the  reader  may  derive
more  complete  and  original  information.

Nothing  can  be  further  from  my  wishes  than  that  the
following  pages  should  be  judged  according  to  the  critical
laws  of  historical  composition* Tried  in  such  a  balance

IV  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.

they  would  be  eminentlj  defective.  The  limited  extent
of  this  work,  compared  with  the  subjects  it  embraces,  as
well  as  its  partaking  more  of  the  character  of  political
dissertation  than  of  narrative,  must  necessarily  preclude
that  circumstantial  delineation  of  events  and  of  characters
upon  which  the  beauty  as  well  as  usefulness  of  a  regular
history  so  mainly  depends.  Nor  can  I  venture  to  assert
that  it  will  be  found  altogether  perspicuous  to  those  who
'  are  destitute  of  any  previous  acquaintance  with  the  period
to  which  it  relates ;  though  I  have  only  presupposed,
strictly  speaking,  a  knowledge  of  the  common  fsusts  of
"RngliRh  history,  and  have  endeavoured  to  avoid,  in
treating  of  other  countries,  those  allusive  references
which  imply  more  information  in  the  reader  than  the
author  designs  to  communicate.  But  the  arrangement
which  I  have  adopted  has  sometimes  rendered  it  neces-
sary to  anticipate  both  names  and  £Eu;ts  which  are  to  find
a  more  definite  place  in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  work.

This  arrangement  is  probably  different  firom  that  of
any  former  historical  re&ospect.  Every  chapter  of  the
following  volumes  completes  its  particular  subject,  and
may  be  considered  in  some  degree  as  independent  of  the
rest.  The  order  consequently  in  which  they  are  read
will  not  be  veiy  material,  though  of  course  I  should
rather  prefer  that  in  which  they  are  at  present  disposed.
A  solicitude  to  avoid  o6ntinual  transitions,  and  to  give
free  scope  to  the  natural  association  of  connected  facts,
has  dictated  this  arrangement,  to  which  I  confess  myself
partial.  And  I  have  found  its  inconveniences  so  trifling
m  composition,  that  I  cannot  believe  they  will  occasion
much  trouble  to  the  reader.

The  firat  chapter  comprises  the  histoiy  of  France  from
the  invasion  of  Clovis  to  the  expedition,  exdusivelyy  of
Charles  YIII.  against  Naples.  It  is  not  possible  to  fix
accurate  limits  to  the  Middle  Ages ;  but  liiough  the  ten
centuries  from  the  fifth  to  the  fifteenth  seem,  in  a  general
point  of  view,  to  oonstitute  that  period,  a  less  arbitrary
division  was  necessary  to  render  the  commencement  and
conclusion  of  an  historical  narrative  satis&ctory.  The
continuous  chain  of  transactions  on  the  stage  of  human
society  is  ill  divided  by'mere  lines  of  chronological  de-
marcation. But  as  the  subversion  of  the  western  empire
is  manifestly  the  natural  termination  of  ancient  history.

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIKST  EDITION.  ▼

db  ther  establishment  of  the  Franks  in  Ganl  appears  the
most  convenient  epoch  for  the  commencement  of  a  new
period.  Less  difficulty  occurred  in  finding  the  other
limit.  The  invasion  of  Naples  by  Charles  YIII.  was  the
event  that  first  engaged  the  jprincipal  states  of  Europe  in
relations  of  alliance  or  hostility  which  may  be  deduced
to  the  present  day,  and  is  the  point  at  which  every  man
who  traces  backwards  its  political  history  will  be  obliged
to  pause.  It  famishes  a  determinate  epoch  in  the  annals
of  Italy  and  France,  and  nearly  coincides  with  events
which  naturally  terminate  the  history  of  the  Middle
Ages  in  other  countries.

The  feudal  system  is  treated  in  the  second  chapter,
which  I  have  subjoined  to  the  history  of  France,  with
which  it  has  a  near  coimexion.  Inquiries  into  the  an-
tiquities of  that  jurisprudence  occupied  more  attention
in  the  last  age  than  the  present,  and  their  dryness  may
prove  repulsive  to  many  readers.  But  there  is  no  royal
road  to  the  knowledge  of  law ;  nor  can  any  man  render
an  obscure  and  intricate  disquisition  either  perspicuous
or  entertaining.  That  the  feudal  system  is  an  important
branch  of  historical  knowledge  will -not  be  disputed,
when  we  consider  not  only  its  influence  upon  our  own
constitution,  but  that  one  of  the  parties  which  at  present
divide  a  neighbouring  kingdom  professes  to  appeal  to  the
original  principles  of  its  monarchy,  as  they  subsisted
before  the  subversion  of  that  polity.

The  four  succeeding  chapters  contain  a  sketch,  more
or  less  rapid  and  general,  of  tlie  histories  of  Itidy,  of
Spain,  of  Gennany,  aud  of  the  Greek  and  Saracenic
empires.  In  the  seventh  I  have  endeavoured  to  develop
the  progress  of.  ecclesiastical  power,  a  subject  eminently
distmguishing  the  Middle  Ages,  and  of  which  a  concise
and  impartial  delineation  has  long  been  desirable.

The  English  constitution  furnishes  materials  for  the
eighth  chapter.  I  cannot  hope  to  have  done  sufficient
justice  to  this  theme,  which  has  cost  me  considerable
labour ;  but  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  since  the  treatise
of  Nathaniel  Bacon,  itself  open  to  much  exception,  there
has  been  no  historical  development  of  our  constitution,
fbunded  upon  extensive  researches,  or  calculated  to  give
a  just  notion  of  its  character.  For  those  parts  of  Henry's
hbitory  which  profess  to  trace  the  progress  of  government

vi  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIBST  EDITION.

are  still  more  jejune  than  the  rest  of  bis  Toltunes ;  and
the  work  of  Professor  Millar,  of  Glasgow,  howoTer  pleas-
ing firom  its  liberal  spirit,  displays  a  fiemlt  too  common
among  the  philosophers  of  his  country,  that  of  theorisiDg
upon  an  imperfect  induction,  and  very  often  upon  a  total
misapprehension  of  particular  &cts.

The  ninth  and  last  chapter  relates  to  the  general  state
of  society  in  Europe  durmg  the  Middle  Ages,  and  com-
prehends the  history  of  commerce,  of  manners,  and  of
uterature.  None,  howeyer,  of  these  are  treated  in  detail,
and  the  whole  chapter  is  chiefly  designed  as  supple-
mental to  the  rest,  m  order  to  vary  the  relations  under
which  events  may  be  viewed,  and  to  give  a  more  adequate
sense  of  the  spirit  and  character  of  &e  Middle  Ages.

In  the  execution  of  a  plan  &r  more  comprehensive
than  what  with  a  due  consideration  either  of  my  abilities
or  opportunities  I  ought  to  have  undertaken,  it  would  be
strangely  presumptuous  to  hope  that  lean  have  rendered
myself  invulnerable  to  criticism.  Even  if  flagrant  errors
should  not  be  frequently  detected,  yet  I  am  aware  that  a
desire  of  conciseness  has  prevented  the  sense  of  some
passages  from  appearing  sufficiently  distinct;  and  though
I  cannot  hold  myself  generally  responsible  for  omissions,
in  a  work  which  could  only  be  brought  within  a  reason-
able compass  by  the  -  severe  retrenchment  of  superfluous
matter,  it  is  highly  probable  that  defective  information,
forgetfdlness,  or  too  great  a  regard  for  brevity,  have
caused  me  to  pass  over  many  things  which  would
have  materially  illustrated  the  various  subjects  of  these
inquiries.

I  dare  not,  therefore,  appeal  with  confidence  to  the
tribunal  of  those  superior  judges  who,  having  bestowed
a  more  undivided  attention  on  the  particular  objects  that
have  interested  them,  may  justly  deem  such  general
sketehes  imperfect  and  supeificial ;  but  my  labours  will
not  hav^  proved  fruitless  if  they  shall  conduce  to  stunu-
late  the  reflection,  to  guide  the  researches,  to  correct  the
prejudices,  or  to  animate  the  liberal  and  virtuous  9enti
ments  of  inquisitive  youth :

MlnttiimplA
Heroes,  et  mflii  grand*  decas,  rim  ignotos  in  mvma
Turn  lioet*  extenx)  penitusqtie  inglorliis  orU.

Jpnl,  1818.

PEEFACB

TO  A  VOLUME  PUBLISHED  IN  1848,

SNTITLED

SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES

TO  THE

VIEW  OF  THE  STATE  OF  EUROPE  DURmG  THE

MIDDLE  AGES.

Thibtt  years  have  elapsed  smce  the  publication  of  tho
work  to  which,  the  following  notes  relate,  and  almost
forty  since  the  first  chapter  and  part  of  the  second  were
written.  The  occnpations  of  that  tune  rendered  it  im-
possible for  me  to  bestow  such  -undivided  attention  as  so
laborions  and  di£Gicnlt  an  undertaking  demanded ;  and  at
the  outset  I  had  very  little  intention  of  prosecnting  my
researches,  even  to  that  degree  of  exactness  which  a
growing  interest  in  the  ascertainment  of  precise  truth,
and  a  sense  of  its  difficulty,  led  me  afterwards  in  some
parts  to  seek,  though  nowhere  equal  to  what  with  a  fuller
oommand  of  time  I  should  have  desired  to  attain.  A
measure  of  public  approbation  accorded  to  me  feo:  beyond
my  hopes  has  not  blinded  my  discernment  to  the  defi-
ciencies of  my  own  performance;  and  as  successive
editions  have  been  called  for,  I  have  continually  felt  that
there  was  more  to  correct  or  to  elucidate  than  the  inser-
tion  of  a  few  foot-notes  would  supply,  while  I  was  always
reluctant  to  make  such  alterations  as  would  leave  to  tho
pmchasers  of  former  editions  a  right  to  complain.  From
an  author  whose  science  is  continually  progressive,  such
as  chemistry  or  geology,  this  is  unavoidably  expected  $
but  I  thought  the  case  not  quite  the  same  with  a  medieval
historian*

viii  PREFACE  TO  SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.

In  the  mean  time,  however,  the  long  period  of  the
Middle  Ages  had  been  investigated  by  many  of  my  dis-
tinguished contemporaries  with  signal  success,  and  I  have
been  anxious  to  bring  my  own  volumes  nearer  to  the
boundaries  of  the  historic  domain,  as  it  has  been  enlai^ged
within  our  own  age.  My  object  has  been,  accordingly,
to  reconsider  those  portions  of  the  work  which  relate  to
subjects  discussed  by  eminent  writers  since  its  publica-
tion, to  illustrate  and  enlarge  some  passages  which  had
been  imperfectly  or  obscurely  treated,  and  to  acknow-
ledge with  freedom  my  own  errors.  It  appeared  most
convenient  to  adopt  a  form  of  publication  by  which  the
possessors  of  any  edition  may  have  the  advantage  of  these
Supplemental  Notes,  which  will  not  much  affect  the  value
of  their  copy.

The  first  two  Chapters,  on  the  History  of  France  and
on  the  Feudal  System,  have  been  found  to  require  a  good
deal  of  improvement.  Ab  a  history,  indeed,  of  the  briefest
kind,  the  first  pages  are  insufficient  for  those  who  have
little  previous  knowledge;  and  this  I  have,  of  course,
not  been  able  well  to  cure.  The  second  Chapter  embraces
subjects  which  have  peculiarly  drawn  the  attention  of
Continental  writers  for  the  last  thirty  years.  The  whole
history  of  France,  civil,  constitutioiial,  and  social,  has
been  more  philosophically  examined,  and  yet  vrith  a  more
co^iouB  emdition.  by  wUch  pMooophy  mnat  always  be
guided,  than  in  any  former  age.  Two  writers  of  high
name  have  given  the  world  a  regular  history  of  that
countiT — one  for  modem  as  well  as  medissval  times,  the
other  toT  these  alone.  The  great  historian  of  the  Italian
republics,  my  guide  and  companion  in  that  portion  of
the  History  of  the  Middle  Ages,  published  in  1821  the
first  volumes  of  his  History  of  tiie  French ;  it  is  well
known  that  this  labour  of  twenty  years  was  very  nearly
terminated  when  he  was  removed  from  the  world.  The
two  histories  of  Sismondi  will,  in  all  likelihood,  never
be  superseded ;  if  in  the  latter  we  sometimes  miss,  and
yet  we  do  not  always  miss,  the  glowing  and  vivid  pencil,
guided  by  the  ardour  of  youth  and  the  distinct  remem-
brance of  scenery,  we  find  no  inferiority  in  justness  of
thought,  in  copiousness  of  narration,  and  especially  in
love  of  virtue  and  indignation  at  wrong.  It  seems,
indeed,  as  if  the  progress  of  years  had  heightened  ^e

PREFACE  TO  SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTEa  ix

tstem  sentiments  of  republicanism  with  which  he  set  out,
and  to  which  the  whole  course  of  his  later  work  must
have  afforded  no  gratification,  except  that  of  scorn  and
severity.  Measuring  not  only  their  actions  but  characters
by  a  rigid  standard,  he  sometimes  demands  from  the  men
of  past  times  more  than  himiaix  frailty  and  ignorance  could
have  given ;  and  his  history  would  leave  but  a  painful
impression  from  the  gloominess  of  the  picture,  were  not
this  constantly  relieved  by  the  peculiar  softness  and  easy
grace  of  his  style.  It  cannot  be  said  that  Sismondi  is
very  diligent  in  probing  obscurities,  or  in  weighing  evi-
dence ;  his  general  views,  with  which  most  of  his  chapters
begin,  are  luminous  and  valuable  to  the  ordinary  reader,
but  sometimes  sketched  too  loosely  for  the  critical  inves-
tigator of  history.

Less  fall  than  Sismondi  in  the  general  details,  but
seizing  particular  events  or  epochs  with  greater  minute-
ness and  accuracy — ^not  emulating  his  full  and  flowing
periods,  but  in  a  style  concise,  rapid,  and  emphatic,
sparkling  with  new  and  brilliant  aneJogies — picturesque
in  description,  spirited  in  sentiment,  a  poet  in  aU  but
his  fidelity  to  truth — M.  Michelet  has  placed  his  own
History  of  France  by  the  side  of  that  of  oismondi.  His
quotations  are  more  numerous,  for  Sismondi  commonly
gives  only  references,  and  when  interwoven  with  the
text,  as  they  often  are,  though  not  quite  according  to  the
strict  laws  of  composition,  not  only  bear  with  them  the
proof  which  an  historical  assertion  may  fail  to  command,
out  exhibit  a  more  vivid  picture.

In  praising  M.  Michelet  we  are  not  to  forget  his
defects.  His  pencil,  always  spirited,  does  not  always
fill  the  canvas.  The  consecutive  history  of  France  will
not  be  so  well  learned  from  his  pages  as  from  those  of
Sismondi;  and  we  should  protest  against  his  peculiar
bitterness  towards  England,  were  it  not  ridiculouB  in
itself  by  its  fr^uency  and  exaggeration.

I  turn  with  more  respect  to  a  great  name  in  historical
literature,  and  which  is  only  less  great  in  that  sense  than
it  might  have  been,  because  it  belongs  also  to  the  ground-
work of  all  future  history — ^the  whole  series  of  events
which  have  been  developed  oti  the  scene  of  Europe  for
twenty  years  now  past.  No  envy  of  faction,  no  caprice
of  fortune,  can  tear  from  M.  Guizot  the  trophy  which

X  PREFACE  TO  SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.

time  has  bestowed,  that  he  for  nearly  eight  years,  past
and  irrevocable,  held  in  his  firm  grasp  a  power  so  fleeting
before,  and  fell  only  with  the  monarchy  which  he  hacf
sustained,  in  the  convnlsiye  throes  of  his  country.

... "  Cm  yel  aM

Nnbe  polnm  Filter  oocupato,
Vel  lole  puro:  dod  tamea  irrituzn,
Qaodfionqve  setro  «fW  eflldet.*'

It  has  remained  for  my  distinguished  Mend  to  manifest
that  high  attribute  of  a  great  man's  mind — a  constant
and  unsubdued  spirit  in  adversity,  and  to  turn  once  more
to  those  tranquil  pursuits  of  earlier  days  which  bestow
a  more  unmingled  enjoyment  and  a  more  unenvied  glory
than  the  favour  of  kings  or  the  applause  of  senates.

The  Essais  sur  TESstoire  de  France,  by  M.  Guizot»
appeared  in  1820 ;  the  Collection  de  M^oires  relatives
k  rHistoire  de  France  (a  translation  generally  from  the
Latin,  under  his  superintendence  and  with  notes  by  him),
if  I  mistake  not,  in  1825 ;  the  Lectures  on  the  Civiiizatipn
of  Europe,  and  on  that  of  France,  are  of  different  dates,
some  of  the  latter  in  1829.  These  form,  by  the  confes-
sion of  all,  a  sort  of  epoch  in  medieval  history  by  their
philosophical  acuteness,  the  judicious  choice  of  their
subjects,  and  the  general  solidity  and  truth  of  the  views
which  they  present.

I  am  almost  unwilling  to  mention  several  other  emi-
nent names,  lest  it  should  seem  invidious  to  omit  any.
It  will  sufficiently  appear  by  these  Notes  to  whom  I  have
been  most  indebted.  Yet  tiie  writings  of  TMerr^,  Fau-
riel,  Raynouard,  and  not  less  valuable,  though  in  time
almost  the  latest,  Lehuerou,  ought  not  to  be  passed  in
silence.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  characterise  these  emi-
nent men ;  but  the  gratitude  of  every  inquirer  into  the
medieval  history  of  France  is  especially  due  to  the
ministry  of  Public  Listruction  uncter  the  late  govern-
ment, for  the  numerous  volumes  of  Dooumens  In^ts,
illustrating  that  history,  which  have  appeared  under  its
superintendence  and  at  the  public  expense  within  the
last  twelve  years.  It  is  difficult  not  to  feel,  at  the  fffesent
juncture,  the  greatest  apprehension  that  this  valuable
publication  will  at  least  be  suspended.

Several  Chapters  which  follow  the  second  in  my

PReFACE  TO  SUPPLEMENTAL  KOTEa  xi

Tolmnee  have  fonushed  no  great  store  of  additioiiB;  bat
that  wbicli  relates  to  the  English  Gonstitation  has  ap»
peared  to  reqtiire  more  illustratioiL  Manj  subjects  of
no  trifling  importance  in  the  history  of  our  ancient  insti-
tutions had  drawn  the  attention  of  men  very  conyersani
with  its  best  sources ;  and  it  was  naturally  my  desire  to
impart  in  some  measure  the  substance  of  their  researches
to  my  readers.  In  not  many  instances  have  I  seen  ground
for  materially  altering  my  own  riews ;  and  I  have  not  of
course  hesitated  to  differ  from  those  whom  I  often  quote
with  much  respect.  The  publications  of  the  Becord
Commission — tbe  celebrated  Beport  of  the  Lords'  Com-
mittee on  the  Dignity  of  a  Peer — ^the  work  of  my  learned
and  gifted  Mend  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  On  the  Rise  and
Progress  of  the  English  Commonwealth,  replete  with
omnifarious  reading  and  fearless  spirit,  though  not  always
commandiug  the  assent  of  more  sceptical  tempers — ^the
approved  and  valuable  contributions  to  constitutional
learning  by  Allen,  Eemble,  Spence,  Starlde,  Nicolas,
Wright,  and  many  others — axe  full  of  important  &ots  and
enlightened  theories.  Yet  I  fear  that  I  shall  be  found
to  Imve  overlooked  much,  especially  in  that  periodical
literature  which  is  too  apt  to  escape  our  obseiration  or
our  memory ;  and  can  only  hope  that  these  Notes,  imper-
fect as  they  must  be,  will  serve  to  extend  the  knowledge
of  my  readers  and  goide  them  to  the  sources  of  historic
truth.  They  claim  only  to  be  supplemental,  and  can  b^
of  no  service  to  those  who  do  not  already  possess  the
History  of  the  Middle  Ages.

The  paging  of  the  editions  of  1826  and  1841,  one  in
three  volumes,  the  other  in  two,  has  been  marked  for
each  Note,  which  will  prevent,  I  hope,  all  inconvenience
in  reference.

JuM,  1S48.

ADVERTISEMENT  TO  THE  PRESENT  EDITION.

The  supplemental  Notes  have  been  incorporated  with
the  original  work,  partly  at  the  foot  of  the  pages,  jiartly
at  the  close  of  each  chapter.

CONTENTS

OF

THE  FIRST VOLUMB.

CHAPTER  I.

TKB  HIBTOHT  OF  FRANOB  FROM  ITS  OONQUEgT  isT  CL0VI8  TO  THB
DHTASION  OF  NAPLES  BT  CHARLES  Vm.

Part  I.

Vail  of  the  Roman  Empire  —  Invasion  of  Clovis  —  First  Race  of  French
Kings  —  Accession  of  Pepin  —  State  of  Italy  —  Charlemagne  —  His
Reign  and  Character  —  Louis  the  Debonair— His  Successors  —  Cala-
mitous State  of  the  Empire  in  the  Ninth  and  Tenth  Centuries  —  Acce»i«
aton  of  Hugh  Capet  —  His  first  Successors  —  Louis  VII.  —  Philip
Augustus  —  Conquest  of  Normandy  —  War  in  Languedoc  —  Louis  IX.
—  His  Character  —  Digression  upon  the  Crusades  —  Philip  III.  —
Philip  IV.  —  Aggrandisonent  of  French  Monarchy  under  his  Reign  —
Reigns  of  his  Children  —  Question  of  Salic  Law  — Claim  of  Ed-
ward III Page  1

Part  n.

War  of  Edward  III.  in  France  —  Causes  of  his  Success — Civil  Disturb-
ances of  France  —  Peace  of  Bretigni  —  Its  interpretation  considered  —
Charles  V.  —  Renewal  of  the  War  —  Charles  VI.  —  His  Minoritv  anc
Insanity  —  Civil  Dissensions  of  the  Parties  of  Orleans  and  Burgundy  —
Assassination  of  both  these  Princes  —  Intrigues  of  their  Parties  with
England  under  Henry  IV.  —  Henry  V.  invades  France  —  Treaty  of
Troyes  —  State  of  France  in  the  first  Tears  of  Charles  VII.  —  Progress
and  subsequent  Decline  of  the  English  Aims — their  Expulsion  from
France  —  Change  in  the  Political  Constitution  —  Louis  XI.  —  His  Cha-
racter —  Leagues  formed  against  him  —  Charles  Duke  of  Burgundy  —
His  Prosperity  and  Fall  —  Louis  obtains  Possession  of  Burgundy  —  His
Death  —  Charles  VIII.  —  Acquisition  of  Britany 51

Nvn-ES  TO  Chapter  1 106

CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME,  Xlii

CHAPTER  n.

OK  TBB  VEUDIL  8T8TB1I,  E8PEGIALLT  IH  FRAHOK.

Pabt  I.

Stite  of  andent  Gennany—  Effects  oi  the  Conquest  of  Gatil  by  the  Fraakt

—  Tenorei  of  Land  —  Distinction  of  Laws  —  Constitation  of  the  andent
FvBnk  Monarchy — Gradual  Establishment  of  Feudal  Tenures  —  Prin-
dples  of  a  Feadal  Relation  —  Ceremonies  of  Homage  and  Inyestitore  —
Militaiy  Serrice— Feudal  Incidents  of  Relief  Aid,  Wardship,  l^»
Different  Spedes  of  Fie&  — Feudal  Law-books .... Page  145

Pabt  U.

Analysis  of  the  Feudal  System-—  Its  local  Eitent^  View  of  the  different
Orders  of  Society  during  the  Feudal  Ages— Nobility  — Their  Ranks
and  PriTileges  —  Clergy  —  Freemen  —  Seiis  or  Villeins  —  Comparative
State  of  France  and  Germany  —  Priyileges  enjoyed  by  the  French  Vaa-
sab  —  Right  of  coining  Money  —  and  of  Priyate  War  —  Immunity
from  Taxation  —  Historical  View  of  the  Royal  Revenue  in  France  —
Methods  adopted  to  augment  it  by  Depreciation  of  the  Coin,  &c  —
Legisktive  Power  —  Its  State  under  the  Merovingian  Kings,  and
Charlemagne  —  His  Coundls  —  Suspension  of  any  general  L^islativa
Authority  during  the  Prevalence  of  Feudal  Prinjipies  —  The  King's
Coundl — Means  adopted  to  supply  the  Want  of  a  National  Assembly
— Gradual  Progress  of  the  King's  Legislative  Power — Philip  IV.
assembles  the  States-General — Thdr  Powers  limited  to  Taxation  —
States  under  the  Sons  of  Philip  IV.  —  States  of  1355  and  1356  — They
nearly  effect  an  entire  Revolution  —  The  Crown  recovers  its  Vigour—
States  of  1380,  under  Charles  VI.  —  Subsequent  Assemblies  under
Charles  VI.  and  Charles  VII.  — The  Crown  becomes  more  and  more
abeolute  —  Louis  XI.  —  States  of  Tours  in  1484  —  Historical  View  of
Jurisdiction  in  France  —  Its  earliest  Stage  under  the  first  Race  of  Kings,
and  Charlemagne  —  Territorial  Jurisdiction  —  Feudal  Courts  of  Jostioo

—  Trial  by  Combat  —  Code  of  St.  Louis  —  The  Territorial  Jurisdictions
give  way  —  Progress  of  the  Judidal  Power  of  the  Crown  —  Parliament
ef  Paris  —  Peers  of  France  —  Increased  Authority  of  the  Parliament-
Registration  of  Edicts  —  Causes  of  the  Decline  of  the  Feudal  System  —
Acquisitions  of  Domain  by  the  Crown  —  Charters  of  Incorporation
grantFd  to  Towns  —  Thdr  previous  Condition —  First  Charters  in  tho
Twelfth  Century —  Privileges  contained  in  them  —  Military  Service  of
Feudal  Tenants  commuted  for  Money  —  Hired  Troops  —  Change  in  the
Military  System  of  Europe  —  General  View  of  the  Advantages  and
Disadvantages  attending  the  Feudal  System 185

^OTBB  TO  Chapter  II ... 278

jdv  COKTENTS  OF  THB  FIBST  YOLUIUC.

CHAPTER  EL

THE  mSTOBT  OF  ITILT,  VBOM  THB  XXTINOnOH  OT  THB  aABL9YIBeUV
EMPEB0B8  TO  THB  INVASION  OT  NAPLES  BT  GKABLE8  Tin

Pabt  I.

Stata  of  Italy  after  tba  Death  of  Charles  the  Fat  —  Coronation  of  Otfao  the
Great  —  State  of  Rome  —  Conrad  II.  —  Union  of  the  Kingdom  of  Italy
with  the  Empire— Establishment  of  the  Normans  in  Naples  and  Sidly

—  Roger  Guiscard  —  Rise  of  the  Lombard  Cities— lliey  gradnally
become  more  independent  of  the  Empire — Their  internal  Wan —
{■rederic  Barbarossa  —  Destruction  of  Milan  —  Lombard  Leagoe  —
Battle  of  Legnano  —  Peace  of  Constance  —  Temporal  Principality  of
the  Popes  —  Gaelf  and  Ghibelin  Factions— Otho  lY.  —  Frederic  U.  —
Arrangement  of  the  Italian  Republics  —  Seoond  Lombard  War  —
Extinction  of  the  House  of  Suabia  —  Causes  of  the  Success  of  Lombard
Republics  —  Their  Proq)erity —  and  Forms  of  Government — Conten-
tions between  the  Nobili^  and  People  —  Civil  Wars — Story  of  Gioranoi
di  Vioensa Page  355

Pabt  n.

State  of  Italy  after  the  Extinction  of  the  House  of  Suabia — Conquest  of
Naples  by  Charles  of  Anjou  —  The  Lombard  RepuUics  become  serenlly
subject  to  Princes  or  Usurpers  —  The  Visconti  of  Milan  — Their
Aggrandizement  —  Decline  of  the  Imperial  Authority  over  Italy  —
Internal  State  of  Rome  —  Rienci  —  Florence  —  her  Forms  of  Gorem-
ment  historically  traced  to  the  end  of  the  Fourteenth  Centuiy- Con-
quest of  Pisa  —  Pisa  —  Its  Commerce,  Naval  Wan  with  Genoa,  and
Decay — Genoa  --  her  Contentions  with  Venice  —  War  of  Chioggia  -^
Government  of  Genoa  —  Venice  —  her  Origin  and  Prosperity  —  Ve-
netian Government  —  its  Vioes — Territorial  Conquests  of  Venice*—
Military  System  of  Italy *- Companies  of  Adventure— 1,  foreign;
Goaniieri,  Hawkwood  —  and  2,  native;  Biacdo,  Sfona— Improve-
ments in  Military  Service  —  Arms,  offensive  and  defensive-^  Invention
of  Gunpowder  —  Naples  —  First  Line  of  Anjou  —  Joanna  I.  —  Ladis-
laus  »-  Joanna  II.  —  Francis  Sfona  becomes  Duke  of  Milan— -  Alfonso
King  of  Naples  —  State  of  Italy  during  the  Fifteenth  Century — Florence

—  Rise  of  the  Medid,  and  Ruin  of  their  Adversaries  —  IVetensions  of
Charles  Vin.  to  Nsples 405

VIEW

OF

THE STATE OF EUROPE

DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

CHAPTEB  L

THE  HI8T0RT  OF  FBANQB,  FROM  ITB  OONQOEffr  BT  GLOVIb
TO  THS  ISVASIOS  OF  NAPLES  BT  GHABI J8  VIII.

PART  I.

full  of  the  BonMO  Empin -^ IiitmIoii  of  Clorii  —  Unt  Baoe  of  Vnodi  Klngi-*
AooeirioD  of  Pepin  — State  of  Italy  — Cauxlemagne  —  Hit  Beign  and  Character
—  Louis  the  Debonair  —  Hb  Snooeawn  —  Oalamitooa  State  of  the  Empln  In  the
ninth  and  tenth  Gentnrlea-  Acoeadon  of  Hug^  Oapet— Hia  flnt  Snooeann  —
Lonia  VU.— Philip  Angnataa  — Oonqneat  of  Normandy  — War  in  Langaedoc—
Loola  IX.  —  Hb  Character  —  Digreaaion  upon  the  Cniaadea  —  Philip  m.  —
Philip  IV.  —  Aggrandizement  of  French  Monardiy  nnder  hia  Beign  —  Rdgna  of
hia  Children  — Question  of  Salic  Law  —  Claim  of  Edward  IIL

Before  the  conclusion  of  the  fifth  century  the  mighty
&bric  of  empire  which  valour  and  policy  had  founded
upon  the  seven  hills  of  Borne  was  finally  over-
thrown in  all  the  west  of  Europe  by  the  bar-  5^*""
barous  nations  firom  the  north,  whose  martial  Boman
enei^and  whose  numbers  were  ii^'esistible.  A  ^*"P*"-
raoe  of  men,  formerly  imknown  or  despised,  had  not
only  dismembered  that  proud  sovereignty,  but
permanently  settled  themselves  in  its  fairest  SSts^StSe
provinces,  and  imposed  tlioir  yoke  upon  the  harbaroui
ancient  possessors. The  Vandals  were  masters  ^
of  Afiica ;  the  Suevi  held  part  of  Spain  ;  the  Visigoths
possessed  the  remainder,  with  a  large  portion  of  Qaul ;
the  Bui^ndians  occupied  the  provinces  watered  by
the  Rhone  and  Sa6ue  ;  the  Ostrogoths  almost  all  Italy.

VOUI  B

I  INVASION  OF  CLOVIS. Chap.  I.  Part  I.

The  north-west  of  Gaul,  between  the  Seine  and  the
Loire,  some  writers  have  filled  with  an  Armorican
republio;'  while  the  remainder  was  still  nominally
subject  to  the  Boman  empire,  and  governed  by  a  certain
Syagrius,  rather  with  an  independent  than  a  deputed
authority.

At  this  time  Clovis,  king  of  the  Salian  Franks,  a
Invasion  of  tribe  of  Glermai^B  long  connected  with  Bome,
Clovis.  and  originally  settled  upon  the  right  bank  of
Aj>.  486.  the  Qhine,^  but  who  had  latterlypenetrated  as
far  as  Toumay  and  Cambray,''  invaded  Gaul,  and  de-
feated Syagrius  at  Soissons.  The  result  of  this  victoiy
was  the  subjugation  of  those  provinces  which  had  pre-
viously been  considered  as  Roman.  But  as  their  alle-
giance had  not  been  very  strict,  so  their  loss  was  not
very  severely  felt;  since  me  emperors  of  Constantinople
were  not  too  proud  to  confer  upon  Clovis  the  titles  of
consul  and  patrician,  which  he  was  too  prudent  to
refuse.'*

*  It  is  Impositble  not  to  spesk  sceptic  of  his  snltfects  by  no  other  tltto^  has

ally  as  to  this  republic*  or  rattier  ooofe-  justly  seemed  extravagant  to  later  cri-

deration  of  independent  cities  under  the  ticsl  inquirers  Into  the  history  of  France,

rule  of  their  re^Mctive  bishops,  which  But  It  may  nevertheless  be  true  that  the

Dubos  has  with  great  ingenuity  raised  connexion  between  him  snd  the  empire,

upon  a  passage  of  Zoshnus,  b&t  in  defl-  snd  the  emblems  of  Roman  magistracy

ance  of  the  sllenoe  of  Gregory,  whoee  see  which  he  bore,  reconciled  the  oanqueled

of  Toitrs  bordered  upon  their  8q;)posed  to  their  new  masters.  This  is  judiciously

territory. Yet  his  hypothesis  is  not  to  stated  by  the  Duke  de  Nivemois,  MAn

be  absolutely  rejected,  because  it  is  by  de  I'Acad.  des  Inscrip.,  tome  xx.  p.  1T4.

no  means  deficient  in  internal  probability,  [Nora  III.] In  the  sixth  oentory,  how«

and  the  early  part  of  Gregory's  history  is  ever,  the  Greeks  appear  to  have  been

brief  and  negligent  Dubos,  Hist  Critique  nearly  ignorant  of  Glovls's  oountiymea

de  rEtabUssement  des  Fmfais  dans  les  Nothing  can  be  made  out  of  a  passage  in

Ganles,  t  i.  p.  253^ Gibbon,  c.  88,  after  Proooplus  where  he  seems  to  mention  the

following  Dubos  in  his  text  whiqjMTs,  as  Armoricans  under  the  name  'Ap^dpvxoc ;

usual,  his  suspicions  in  a  note.  [Nors  L]  and  Agathias  gives  a  strsngely  romantic

^  [NoTB  IL]  aooount  of  the  Franks,  whom  he  extols

"  The  ^tem  of  Fbre  Daniel,  who  for  thdr  oonfinmity  to  n^»n«n ^Km%,

denies  any  permanent  settlement  of  the  iro^trrtf  «c  tA  voAAil  xP^i^rwi '  PM^utZk^

Franks  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  «ai  MSftotf  rotv  avroZs,  <cal  tA  oAXa  Vo^

before  Clovis,  seems  inc^Mble  of  being  h^j^  H  ri.  wfff4KBitn  col  yrfftovv  ic«l

supported. It  is  difBcult  to  resist  the  t^  roS  tfnov  BtpimaM  vofU^bwi  ....

presumption  that  arises  tnm  the  dls-  ifioiytioKwn  cr^6ipa  clrau  jc^tf|uo£  n

covery  of  the tomb and skeleton of  maX  a<miArvm,  mUv  n  ix'*^  i^  <taA-

Chllderic,  Ikther  of  Qovis,  at  Toumay,  Aarrer..Jtfi^iwTb/S<^i^Ufp««ortif««rr«Aiiv.

in  16S3. See  Montfkuoon,  Monumens  de  ul  rb  Wf«  ^wvitf  Uuufor. He  goes  on  to

la  Monarchie  Fran9aise,  tome  i.  p.  10.  commfTid  their  mutual  union,  and  ob-

d  The  theory  of  Dubos,  who  considers  serves  particularly  *'i*'^  in  partitions  erf

Clovis  as  a  sort  of  lieutensst  of  the  em-  the  kingdom,  which  had  frequently  been

perars,  and  as  governing  the  Boman  part  made,  they  had  never  taken  up  aima

Fbancb.  his  CONVEBSION.  '^

Borne  years  after  thiB,  Clovis  defeated  the  Alemanui,
or  Swabians,  in  a  great  battle  at  Zulpich,  near  Cologne.
In  conflequence  of  a  tow,  as  it  is  said,  made  during  this
engagement,*  and  at  the  instigation  of  his  wife  Clotilda,
I  princess  of  Bnrgundy,  he  be^jame  a  convert  ^^  ^^
x>  Christianity.  It  wotdd  be  a  fruitless  inquiry
whether  he  was  sincere  in  this  change ;  but  it  is  certain,
\t  least,  that  no  policy  could  have  been  more  successful.
Ihe  Arian  sect,  which  had  been  early  introduced  among
the  barbarous  nations,  was  predominant,  though  appa-
rently without  intolerance,'  in  the  Burgundian  and  Visi-
goth courts;  but  the  clergy  of  Gaul  were  strenuously
attached  to  the  Catholic  side,  and,  even  before  his  con-

gainst  each  other,  nor  poUnted  the  land  to  that  It  Is  dilBcalt  to  lepanie  the  effects

/ith  dvil  bloodshed. Oot  wonld  almost  of  natioDal  firam  those  of  sectarian  ani-

lelieve  him  izoolcaL The  history  of  mosity.

Agathlas  oomes  down  to  a.d.  669. At  The  tolerance  of  the  Yislgotb  sove-

Jiis  time  many  of  the  savage  moiders  reigns must  not  be praised  without

and  other  arimes  which  fill  the  pages  of  making  an  exception  Cor  Euric,  prede-

Oregoij  of  Tours,  a  writer  somewhat  oessor  of  Alaria He  was  a  prince  of

more  likely  to  know  the  truth  than  a  some  eminent  qualities,  but  so  sealous  In

fiysantine  rhetoridan,  had  taken  place,  his  religion  as  to  bear  hardly  on  his

*  Gregory  of  Tours  makes  a  very  rhe-  OathoUc  sut()ccts. Sidimlus  ApoUinaris

torlcal  story  of  thla  Cunous  tow,  whldi,  loudly  complains  that  no  bishoprics  were

tbou|^  we  cannot  dlq>rove.  It  may  be  permitted  to  be  filled,  that  the  diurchcs

permitted  to  sunecL  —  L.  U.  c  30.  went  to  mhi,  and  that  Arianlsm  made  a

f  HlsL de lingnedoc  par  Yich et  great  progress. (Fauriel,  Hist  de la

YaisKtte,  tome  trp.  238 ;  Gibbon,  c  3T.  Oaule  MMdlonale,  toL  1.  p.  6T&)  Under

A  specious  ol^ectian  might  be  drawn  from  Alaric  htanseU;  however,  as  well  as  under

the  histoiy  of  the  Gothic  monarchies  In  the  earlier  iH»|!p  of  the  Vlsigothlc  dy>

Italy,  as  weU  as  Gaul  and  Spain,  to  the  nasty,  a  mora  Uberal  spirit  prevailed,

great  principles  of  religious  toleration.  Salvian,  about  the  middle'  of  the  fifth

These  Arian  sovereigns  treated  their  oentnry.  extols  the  Vlsigothlc  govem-

OathoUc  sul^ect^  it  may  be  said,  with  ment,  In  oompariaon  with  that  of  the

tenderness,  leaving  them  In  posMssloo  of  empire,  whose  vices  and  despotlflu  had

eveiy  dvil  privllegs,  and  were  rewarded  met  with  a  deserved  tenninatlon. Ku-

fbr  it  by  their  defection  or  sedition. But  cberiua  qieaks  of  the  Bnxgnndlaua  In  the

in  answer  to  thla  it  may  be  observed:—  ssme  manner. (Id.  iUd.  and  voL  11.  p.

L  That  the  system  of  penecution  adopted  28.) Tet  it  must  have  been  in  Itself

by  the  Yandala  In  Afirlca  succeeded  no  mortifying  to  live  in  sul^Jectlon  to  bai^

better,  the  Catholics  of  that  province  barians  and  heretics;  not  to  mention

having  risen  against  them  upon  the  land-  the  Aoq)MaUty,  as  it  was  called,  which  the

Ing  of  Bellaarius :  2.  That  we  do  not  natives  were  obliged  to  ezerdse  towsrds

know  what  insults  and  discouragements  the  invaders,  by  ceding  two-thirds  of  their

the  GatfaoUos  of  Gaul  snd  Italy  may  lank. What,  then,  must  the  Western

have  endured,  especially  from  the  Arian  empire  have  been,  when  sodi  a  oondl-

bishops,  in  that  age  of  bigotry ;  althou{^  tion  was  comparatively  enviable  I But  it

fhe  administrations  of  Alaric  and  Theo-  Is  more  than  probable  that  the  Gaulish

doric  were  Uberal  and  tolerant:  3.  That  blahopa  sttl||eet  to  the  Visigoths  baUed

the  distinction  of  Arian  and  Oathollc  was  the  Invasion  of  the  Franks  with  sanguine

intimately  connected  with  that  of  Goth  hope,  and  were  undoubtedly  great  gatnegt

and  KaBan,ofoooqu«ror  and  conquered ;  by  the  exchange.

B 2

t  DESCENDANTS  OF  CLOVIS. Chap.  I.  Part  I,

version,  had  fiEkvoured  the  arms  of  Clovis.  They  now
became  his  most  zealous  supporters,  and  were  rewarded
by  him  with  artful  gratitude,  and  by  his  descendants
with  lavish  mimificence.  Upon  the  pretence
^""^ ^'  of  religion,  he  attacked  Alario.  king  of  the
Visigoths,  and,  by  one  great  victory  near  Poitiers  over-
throwing their  empire  in  Gaul,  reduced  them  to  the
maritime  province  of  Septimania,  a  narrow  strip  of
coast  between  the  Rhone  and  the  Pyrenees.  The  last
exploits  of  Clovis  were  the  reduction  of  certain  inde-
pendent chiefs  of  his  own  tribe  and  fiunily,  who  were
settled  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Bhine.<  All  tJiese
he  put  to  death  by  force  or  treachery ;  for  he  was  cast
in  the  true  mould  of  conquerors,  and  may  justly  be
ranked  among  the  first  of  his  class,  both  for  the  splen-
dour and  the  guiltiness  of  his  ambition.**

Clovis  left  four  sons;  one  illegitimate, or  at  least
bom  before  his  conversion; and  three  by  his  queen
His  de- Clotilda. These  four  made,  it  is  said,  an  equal
scenduitB.  partition  of  his  dominions,  which  comprehended
A.D.  611. not  only  France,  but  the  western  and  central
parts  of  Germany,  besides  Bavaria,  and  perhaps  Swabia,
which  were  governed  by  their  own  dependent,  but  here-
ditary, chiefs. Thierry,  the  eldest,  had  what  was  called
Austrasia,  the  eastern  or  German  division,  and  fixed  his
capital  at  Metz;  Clodomir,  at  Orleans;  Childebert,  at
Paris;  and  Clotaire,  at  Soissons.' During  their  reigns

K  Modern  historians,  in  euuuwimting  mine  sadi  a  point  no^stiTely  from  our

these  reffuli,  call  one  of  them  king  of  scu^nuiteriAla;  bat  if  a  fVuik  klngdam

Mans. But  it  is  dliBcalt  to  nnderBtand  bad  been  formed  at  Mans  before  the  battle

how  a  chieiloln,  Independent  of  Clovis,  of  Solssuos,  this  most  considerably  alter

coald  have  been  settled  in  that  part  of  the  received  notions  of  the  history  of

Franoe. In  fact,  Gregory  of  Tours,  oar  Ganl  In  the  fifth  century;  sod  it  aeena

only  authority,  does  not  say  that  this  dlfficalt  to  understand  how  it  oould  have

prince,  Regnomeris,  was  king  of  Mans,  sprung  up  afterwards  during  the  reign  of

bnt  that  he  was  put  to  death  in  that  city:  Clorts.

apud  Ocnomannls  dvitatem  jnasu  Chk>> i>  The  reader  will  be  gratified  by  an

dovechi  interfectus  est  admirable  memoir,  by  the  Duke  de  Ni-

Tbe  late  French  writers,  as  fkr  as  I  hare  Temoia,  on  the  policy  of  CIotIs,  in  the

observed,  continue  to  place  a  kingdom  at  twentieth  volume  of  the  Academy  <tf  In*

Mans. It  is  certain,  nerertlwless,  that  scriptions.

Gregory  of  Tours,  and  they  have  no  other i  Quatuor  fllii  regnum  acdpfunt,  et

•videnoe,  does  nut  assert  this ;  and  hia  inter  se  sequi  lance  dividuut.  —  Greg,

expressions  rather  lead  to  the  contrary ;  Tnr.  L  iU.  c  1. It  would  rather  perples

since,  if  Regnomeris  were  king  of  Uaoa,  a  geographer  to  make  an  equal  dlvlsloB

why  should  we  not  ham  been  infonned  of  Clovia's  empire  into  portions,  of  irbkh

of  it? It  is,  iadsed,  impossible  to  deicr-  Fkria,  Oileans.  Mets.  and  Soiasons  dMiV

rRAHOB.  DESCENDANTS  OF  CLOVIS.  6

the  monarchy  was  aggrandized  by  the  conquest  of  Bur*
gundy. Clotaire,  the  youngest  brother,  ulti-
mately reunited  all  the  kingdoms ;  but  upon  his  ^^  '**"
death  they  were  again  divided  among  his  four  sons,  and
brought  together  a  second  time  by  another  Clo-
taire, the  grandson  to  the  first. It  is  a  weary  ^'^
and  unprofitable  task  to  follow  these  changes  in  detail,
through  scenes  of  tumult  and  bloodshed,  in  which  the
eye  meets  with  no  sunshine,  nor  can  rest  upon  any
interesting  spot. It  would  be  difficult,  as  Gibbon  has
justly  observed,  to  find  anywhere  more  vice  or  less
virtue. The  names  of  two  queens  are  distinguished
even  in  that  age  for  the  magnitude  of  their  crimes:
Fredegonde,  the  wife  of  Ghilperic,  of  whose  atrocities
none  have  doubted ;  and  Brunehaut,  queen  of  Austrasia,
who  has  met  with  advocates  in  modem  times,  less,  per-
haps, from  any  feiir  presumptions  of  her  innocence  than

be  Urn  respective  capitolB. I  apprehend,  not  oertain  that  Clodomlr  tods anyibare,
in  ftct,  that  Oregoiy'i  ezpreisioD  ia  not  and  improbable  that  Clotaire  had  one.
very  precise. The  kfnpVmi  of  Soissons  Thieny,  therefore,  king  of  Australia,
■eems  to  have  been  the  least  of  the  four,  majbe  reckoned  the  best  provided  of  the
and  that  of  Anstrasia  the  greatest. But  brethren. It  will  be  obvious  from  the
the  partitions  made  by  these  princes  were  map  that  the  four  capitals,  Meta,  Sols-
ezoeedinc^  complex ; insnlated frag-  suns,  Plurls,  and  Orleans,  are  situated  at
ments  of  territory,  and  even  undivided  no  great  distance  from  each  other,  rela-
shares  of  dties,  being  allotted  to  the  lively  to  the  whole  of  France. They
worse-provided  brothers,  by  way  of  oom-  were,  therefore,  in  the  centre  of  force ;
pensation,  oat  of  the  larger  kingdoms,  and  the  brothers  mi|^t  have  lent  asristanoe
It  woald  be  very  difflcult  to  ascertain  to  each  other  in  case  of  a  national  revolt
the  limits  of  these  minor  monarchies.  The  cause  of  this  complexity  In  the
But  the  French  empire  ^as  always  oun-  partition  of  France  among  the  sons  of
sidered  as  one,  whatever  might  be  the  CLovis  has  been  coi\)ectured  by  Dubos,
number  of  its  inheritors;  and  from  acd-  with whom  Sismundl  (voL  i.  p.  242)
dental  circrnnstanoes  it  wss  so  frequently  agrees,  to  have  been  their  desire  of  own-
re-united  ss  frilly  to  keep  up  this  notion,  ing  as  sul^Jects  an  equal  number  of  Franks.
M.  Fauriel  endeavours  to  show  the  TUs  Is  supported  by  a  passage  in  Aga-
equali^  of  this  partition  (Hist  de  la  thias,  quoted  by  the  former.  Hist  de
Oaule  Hdridianale,  voL  11.  p^  92> But  rEtaUisMment,  voL  IL  p.  413. Others
he  is  obliged  to  suppose  that  Germany  have  fimded  that  Aquitaiae  was  reck-
beyond  the  Bhine,  part  of  which  owned  ooed  too  delidous  a  morsel  to  be  enjoyed
the  dominion  of  Clovis,  was  counted  as  by  only  one  brother. In  the  second  great
nothing,  not  being  faihabited  by  Franks,  partition,  that  of  567  (for  that  of  661  did
It  was  something,  nevertheless,  in  the  not  last  long),  when  Slgebert  Gontran,
scale  of  power ;  since  Ihmi  this  fertile  and  Ghilperic  took  the  kingdoms  of  Aua-
•onroe  the  Anstraslan  Jdofgt  oontinnally  tnsia,  Bo^^undy,  and  what  waa  after-
recruited  their  armies. Aquitaine.  that  wards  called  Keustrla,  the  southern  pro
is,  the  provinces  south  of  the  Loire,  was  vlnces  were  sgaln  equally  divided.  Thus
divided  into  three,  or  rather  perhaps  two  MarKilles  foil  to  the  king  of  Paris,  or
pomona  For  though  Thierry  and  Childe-  Neustrla,  while  Aix  and  Avignon  wen
bert  had  oonsideTable  territories,  it  seems  in  the  lot  of  Burgundy.

6  MAYORS  OF  THE  PALACE. Chap.  I.  Part  1.

ihx>ia  compassion  for  the  crael  death  which  she  under-
went.''

But  after  Dagobert,  son  of  Clotaire  II.,  the  kings  of
A  j>.  628-  France  dwindled  into  personal  insigDificance*
638.  aj^cL  are  generally  treated  by  later  historians  at

^^„cy. insensati,  or  idiots." The  whole  power  of  the
Mayoraof kingdom  devolved  ^pon  the  mayors  of  the
the  palace, palacc, Originally  officers  of  the  household
through  whom  petitions  or  representations  were  lai('
before  the  king." The  weakness  of  sovereigns  rendere<
this  office  important,  and  still  greater  weakness  sufferewi
it  to  become  elective; men  of  energetic  talents  anc
ambition  united  it  with  military  command ;  and  the  his
tory  of  France  for  half  a  century  presents  no  namet
more  conspicuous  than  those  of  Ebroin  and  Grimoald,
mayors  of  Neustria  and  Austrasia,  the  western  and
eastern  divisions  of  the  French  monarchy.* These,
however,  met  with  violent  ends ;  but  a  more  successful

^  Every  history  will  give  a  BnfBdent  birth.  In  relating  the  crimes  of  Bnme<

epitome  of  the MeroTlnglan dynasty,  haut But,  nnhapplly,  the  antecedent

The  fiu:t8  of  these  times  are  of  Uttle  other  presumption,  in  the  history  of  that  age

importance  than  aa  they  impress  on  the  Is  always  on  the  worse  side. She  wu

mind  a  thorouf^  notion  of  the  extreme  unquestionably  endowed  with  a  mascu

wickedness  of  almost  every  person  con-  line  energy  of  mind,  and  very  superioi

oemed  in  them,  and  consequently  of  the  to  such  a  mere  Imp  of  audacious  wicked

state  to  which  society  waa  reduced. But  ness  as  Fredegonde. Brunehont  left  i

there  la  no  advantage  In  crowding  the  great  and  almost  &bulou8  name ;  pnbll'

memory  with  barbarian  wan  and  assas-  causeways,  towers,  castles,  in  dlfTeren

sinatlons. [Notb  rv.]  parts  of  France,  are  popularly  ascribec

For  the  question  about  Bnmehaut's  to  her. It  has  even  been  suspected  l^

diaracter,  who  has  had  partlsens  almost  some  that  she  suggested  the  appeUatioi

as  enthusiastic  aa  those  of  Mary  of  Soot-  of  Bmnechild  in  the  Nlbelnngen  Lied

land,  the  reader  may  consult  Fssquier,  That  there  is  no  resemblance  in  the  story,

Recherches  de  la  France, L  vllL. or  or  In  the  character,  courage  excepted  o*

Velly,  Hist  de  France,  tome  L,  on  one  the  two  heroines,  cannot  be  thougjht  an

side,  and  a  dissertation  by  Galllard.  In  ol^ectlon.

the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Inscrip-  ™  An  Ingenious  attempt  is  made  by

tlons,  tome  xxx.,  on  the  other. The  last  the  Abb^  Vertot,  Mdm.  de  rAcadtfmie,

is  unfiftvourable  to  Brunehaut,  and  per-  tome  vL,  to  rescue  these  monarchs  from

fectlysatlsfkctoxy  to  my  Judgment  this long-estabUshed  imputation. But

Urunehant  waa  no  unimportant  per-  the  leading  ftct  is  irresistible,  that  all

sonage  in  this  history. She  had  become  the  rnyal  authority  was  lost  during  their

hateftil  to  the  Austraslan  aristocrscy  by  reigns. However,  Che  best  apology  seems

her  Gk>thlc  blood,  and  still  more  by  her  to  be,  that  ftfter  the  victories  of  Pepin

Koman  principles  of  government  There  Heristal,  the  Merovingian  kings  were,  in

was  evidently  a  combination  to  throw  off  effect  conquered,  and  their  tnefBcieix^

the  yoke  of  civilized  tyranny. It  was  a  was  a  matter  of  necessaiy  submission  ts

great  conflict  which  ended  In  the  virtual  a  master,

dethronement  of  the  house  of  Clovis.  "  [Notb  V.]

Much,  therefore,  may  have  been  exag*  ^  The  original  kingdoms  of  Soisson^

ptrated  ty  Fred^arius,  a  Bnigundian  bj  Faris,  and  Orleans  were  consolidated  ink.

Praxoe.  chables  iiartel.  7

ugnrper  of  the  royal  authority  was  Pepin  Heristal,  first
mayor,  and  afterwards  duke,  of  Anstrasia;  who  united
with  almost  an  avowed  sovereignty  over  that  division  a
paramount  command  over  the  French  or  Neustrian  pro-
vinces, where  nominal  kings  of  the  Merovingian  family
were  still  permitted  to  exist.!*  This  authority  he  trans-
mitted to  a  more  renowned  hero,  his  son,  Charles  Martel,
who,  after  some  less  important  exploits,  was  called  upon
to  encounter  a  new  and  terrible  enemy.  The  Saracens,
dfter  subrogating  Spain,  had  penetrated  into  the  very
heart  of  Fruice. ChEU'les  Martel  gained  a  com-

?lete  victory  over  them  between  Tours  and  ^^^^*
^oitiers,**  in  which  300,000  Mohammedans  are  h^'per-
boHoally  asserted  to  have  £B^en. The  reward  of  this
victory  was  the  province  of  Septimania,  which  the  Sara-
cens had  conquered  from  the  Visigoths/

Suchpoweriul  subjects  were  not  likely  to  remain  long
contented  without  the  crown ;  but  the  circum-  ^^^
stances  under  which  it  was  transferred  from  t^r^
the  race  of  Clovis  are  connected  with  one  of  Jj^on
the  most  important  revolutions  in  the  histoir  of  Pepin.
of  Europe. The  mayor  Pepin,  inheriting  his  ^^"*

that  dcnamiaatfadNeitttriA,  to  which  Bnw  reokooed  among  thcae  few  bftttlea  of

goody  WM  gnerallj  appendant,  thoo^  which  a  contrary  event  would  have  even-

dlattncUy  governed  bj  a  mayor  of  Ita  tlally  varied  the  dnma  of  the  world  In

own  election. But  Aquitainer  the  exact  all  Ita  eobaaqQent  loenea ;  with  Mara-

boaiid8ofwhlchIdonotknow,waa,lh)m  thon,  Arbela,the  Metannia,Chiluo8,and

the  time  of  Dagobert  L,  lepanted  from  Lelpaic Yet  do  we  not  Jndge  a  little

the  reat  of  tlte  monarchy,  nnder  a  ducal  too  much  tj  ibn  event,  and  follow,  aa

dynaaty,  cpmng  from  Arlbert,  brother  of  uaoaUin  the  wain  of  fortune? Haa  not

that  monutli. [Non  VL]  more  frequent experience condemned

P  [NoTB  Vn.]  thoee  who  let  the  fate  of  empires  upon  a

4  Toun  ia  above  aeventy  miles  distant  shigle  oast,  and  risk  a  general  battle  with

fromFbitien;butIdonotlhidthataoy  Invaden,  whose  greater  peril  is  in  delay?

Frsnch  antiquary  haa  been  able  to  asoei^  Was  not  this  the  fatal  error  by  which

tain  tbe  place  <rf  this  great  battle  with  Roderic  bad  lost  his  kiugdom? Was  it

more  pradaioa; which  is  remarkable,  poarible  that  the  Saracens  could  have

ainoe.  aflw  so  immense  a  slau^ter,  we  retained  any  permanent  posBeeBlan  of

should  expect  the  testimony  of  •*gnodia  France,  except  by  means  of  a  victory .'

eflfoailt  oesa  sepulcria," It  is  now,  how-  And  did  not  the  contest  upon  the  broad

ever,  believed  that  the  alai^ter  at  the  champaign  of  Poitou  afford  them  a  consi-

battle  near  P<4tien  waa  by  no  meana  denble  prospect  of  snoocas,  which  a  more

immense,  and  even  that  the  Saracens  cantionspoli<7  would  have  withheld?

retired  without  a  decisive  action. (Sis-  '  fu^  conquest  was  completed  by

moodl,  IL 132 ;  Michelet,  IL 13.)  There  can  Pepin  iu  169.  The  inhabitants  preserved

be  nodoubtbut  that  the  battle  wasfou^t  their  Uberties  by  treaty;  and  Vaiawtte

minoh  nearer  to  Poitiers  than  to  Touia.  dedu<?ea  trcm  thia  solemn  assurance  the

The  victory  of  Charles  Hartal  has  im-  privileges  of  Laoguedoc— Hist  de  Lanp

niurtalized  hia  name,  and  may  Just!/  be  tome  L  p.  41S.

8  ACCESSION  OF  PEPIN. Chap.  I.  Part  I.

father  Charles  Martel's  talents  and  ambition,  made,  in
the  name  and  with  the  consent  of  the  nation,  a  solemn
reference  to  the  pope  Zacharias,  as  to  the  dex)06ition  of
Childeric  III.,  under  whose  nominal  authority  he  him-
self was  reigning.  The  decision  was  &Yonrable ;  that
he  who  possessed  the  power  should  also  bear  the  title  of
king.  The  unfortunate  Merovingian  was  dismissed  into
a  convent,  and  the  Franks,  with  one  consent,  raised
Pepin  to  the  throne,  the  founder  of  a  more  illustrious
dynasty."  In  order  to  judge  of  the  importance  of  this
revolution  to  the  see  of  Bome,  as  well  as  to  France,  we
must  turn  our  eyes  upon  the  afiOedrs  of  Italy.

The  dominion  of  the  Ostrogoths  was  annihilated  by
rhe  the  arms  of  Belisarius  and  Narses  in  the  sixm

LombaidB.  oentury,  and  that  nation  appears  no  more  in
history.  But  not  long  afterwards  the  Lombards,  a  people
for  some  time  settled  in  Pannonia,  not  only  subdued
that  northern  part  of  Italy  which  has  retained  their
name,  but,  extending  themselves  southward^  formed  the
powerful  duchies  of  Spoleto  and  Benevento.  The  resi-
dence of  their  kings  was  in  Pavia ;  but  the  hereditaiy
vassals,  who  held  those  two  duchies,  might  be  deemed
almost  independent  sovereigns.*  The  rest  of  Italy  was
governed  by  exarchs,  deputed  by  the  Greek  emperors,
and  fixed  at  Havenna.  In  Bome  itself  neither  the  people
nor  the  bishops,  who  had  already  conceived  in  part
their  schemes  of  ambition,  were  much  inclined  to
endure  the  superiority  of  Constantinople ;  yet  their  dis-
affection was  counterbalanced  by  the  inveterate  hatred,
as  well  as  jealousy,  with  which  they  regarded  the  Lom-
bards. But  an  impolitic  and  intemperate  persecution,
carried  on  by  two  or  three  Greek  emperors  against  a
£sivourite  superstition,  the  worehip  of  images,  excited
commotions  throughout  Italy,  of  which  the  Lombards
Tbey  took  advantage, and  easily  wrested  the  ex-

rrfoM  the  archate  of  Bavenna  from  me  eastern  empire,
of  BaTenna,  It  was  Car  from  the  design  of  the  popes  to  see
Aj>w76a;  ^eir  nearest  enemies  so  much  aggrandized;
and  any  effectual  assistance  from  the  emperor  Constan-

■  [NoTB  VIIL]  boolB  of  Olannone,  and  soma  papen  bf

i  The  history,  character,  and  poUcj  of  OalUard  in  the  Itanoin  of  ttw  Anadnoy

the  Lombarda  axe  well  trcAted  bj  Olb-  of  Inscriptlooii  tomee  zzjciU  nsr  i^y.

ben.  c  4ft. See.  too,  the  fourth  and  fifth

Fbahce.  CHARLEMAGNE.  9

tine  CoprosymtiB  would  have  kept  Borne  Btill  &iihfiil«
But  having  no  hope  from  his  arms,  and  provoked  hy
his  obstinate  intolerance,  the  pontifis  had  recourse  to
France ; "  and  the  service  they  had  rendered  to  Pepin
led  to  reciprocal  obligations  of  the  greatest  magnitude.
At  the  request  of  Stephen  11.  the  new  king  ^^^^
of  France  descended  from  the  Alps,  drove  the  P«pin
Lombards  from  their  recent  conquests,  and  IS?b«2!a«li
conferred  them  upon  the  pope,  lliis  memor-  on^i^pop^
able  donation  nearly  comprised  the  modeiji  provinces
of  Bomagna  and  the  March  of  Ancona.'

The  state  of  Italy,  which  had  undergone  no  change
for  nearly  two  centuries, was now  rapidly  verging
to  a  great  revolution. Under  the  (^)iadow  of  charis.
a  mighty  name  the  Greek  ooapire  had  con-  masne-
cealed  the  extent  of  its  decline. That  charm  -*•»•  '««•
was  now  broken:  and  the  Lombard  kingdom,  which
had  hitherto  appeared  the  only  competitor  in  the  lists»
proved  to  have  lost  its  own  energy  in  awaiting  the
occasion  for  its  display. France  was  far  more  than  a
match  for  the  power  of  Italy,  even  if  she  had  not  been
guided  by  the  towering  ambition  and  restless  activity  of
the  son  of  Pepin. It  was  almost  the  first  exploit  of
Charlemagne,  after  the  death  of  his  brother  Aj>.nx
Carloman  had  reunited  the  Frankish  empire  HeoonqQen
under  his  dominion,^  to  subjugate  the  kingdom  i^wnbaniy;
of  Lombardy. Neither  Pavia  nor  Verona,  its  ^•**  *'*•
most  considerable  cities,  interposed  any  material  delay
to  his  arms:  and  the  chief  resistance  he  encountered
was  from  the  dukes  of  Friuli  and  Benevento,  the  latter
of  whom  could  never  be  brought  into  thorough  subjec-
tion to  the  conqueror. Italy,  however,  be  the  cause
what  it  might,  seems  to  have  tempted  Charlemagne  far
less  than  the  dark  forests  of  Germany. For  neither  the
southern  provinces,  nor  Sicily,  could  have  withstood

^  There  had  been  sorne  prerlone  over-  of  the  empire. The  cosCbm  of  partition

tares  to  Charles  M artel  as  well  as  to  was  so  fhUy  established,  that  those  wise

Pepin  himself;  the  habitual  sagacity  of  and  ambitioos  princes,  Charles  Martel,

the  coart  of  Rome  perceiving  the  growth  Pepin,  and  Charlemagne  himself,  did  not

of  a  new  western  monarchy,  which  would  Tentore  to  thwart  the  public  opinion  bj

be,  in  fiiltfa  and  arms,  their  snrest  ally.  Introdndng primogenltnre. CarlaDum

tforatorl,  Ann.  d'ltaL  ajx  T41.  woold  not  long  have  stood  against  his

'  Glannone,  L  y.  c.  3.  brother ;  who,  after  his  death,  nsmrped

y  Carloman,  yoongerbrotherof  Charles,  the  Inberitanoe  of  his  two  infimt  childitn
took  the  Anstzaaian  or  Gennan  pforinoas

10  CONQUESTS  OF  CHARLEMAGNE. Chap.  I.  Part  L

his  power  if  it  had  been  steadily  directed  against  them,
part  of  Even  Spain  hardly  drew  so  much  of  his  atten-
si»ini  tion  as  the  splendour  of  the  prize  might  natu-
raUy  have  excited.  He  gained,  however,  a  very  im-
portant  accession  to  his  empire,  by  conquering  from  the
Saracens  the  territory  contained  between  the  Pyrenees
and  the  !E!bro.  This  was  formed  into  the  Spanish  March,
governed  by  the  coimt  of  Barcelona,  part  of  which  at
least  must  be  considered  as  appertaining  to  France  till
the  twelfth  century."
But  the  most  tedious  and  difficult- achievement  oi
Charlemagne  ^ras  the  reduction  of  the  Saxons.
*^'  The  wars  with  this  nation,  who  occupied
nearly  the  modera  circles  of  Westphalia  and  Lower
Saxony,  lasted  for  thirty  years.  Whenever  the  con-
queror withdrew  his  armies,  or  even  his  person,  the
Saxons  broke  into  fresh  rebellion,  which  his  unparal-
leled rapidity  of  movement  seldom  failed  to  crush  with-
out delay.  From  such  perseverance  on  either  side,
destruction  of  the  weaker  could  alone  result.  A  large
colony  of  Saxons  were  finally  transplanted  into  Flanders
and  Brabant,  countries  hitiierto  ill-peopled,  in  which
their  descendants  preserved  the  same  unconquerable
spirit  of  resistance  to  oppression.  Many  fled  to  the
langdoms  of  Scandinavia,  and,  mingling  with  the
Northmen,  who  were  just  preparing  to  run  their  me-
morable career,  revenged  upon  the  children  and  subjects
of  Charlemagne  the  devastation  of  Saxony.  The  remnant
embraced  Christianity,  their  aversion  to  which  had  been
the  chief  cause  of  their  rebellions,  and  acknowledged
the  sovereignty  of  Charlemagne — a  submission  which
even  Witikind,  the  second  Arminius  of  Germany,  after
such  irresistible  conviction  of  her  destiny,  did  not  dis-
dain to  make.  But  they  retained,  in  the  main,  their
own  laws ;  they  were  governed  by  a  duke  of  their  own
nation,  if  not  of  their  own  election ;  and  for  many  ages

"  The  oonnta  of  Baroelona  always  ae-  mazk  of  dependence,  the  fleparatloD  of

knowledged  the  feodal  snperiori^  of  the  the  principality  may  be  referred  to  that

kinioi  of  France,  till  Bome  time  aOer  their  year.  But  the  rights  of  the  French  crown

own  title  had  been  merged  in  that  of  over  It  were  finally  ceded  by  Lonis  IX.

Hnp  of  Aragpn. In  1180  legal  instni-  in  1258. De  Marca.  Marca  Hispanka

ments  executed  in  Catalonia  ceaaed  to  be  p.  614. Art  de  vAlfler  les  Dates,  t  U

dated  by  the  year  of  the  king  of  France ;  p.  29L
and  aa  there  certainly  remained  no  other

\

Frakck,  extent  of  his  DOMINIONS.  1]

diey  were  distingaished  hj  tlieir  original  cbaraote)
among  the  nations  of  Germany/

The  successes  of  Charlemagne  on  the  eastern  frontiei
of  his  empire  against  the  Solavonians  of  Bohemia  and
Huns  or  Avars  of  Pannonia,  though  obtained  with  less
cost,  were  hardly  less  eminent. In  all  his  wars  the
newly  conquered  nations,  or  those  whom  fear  had  made
dependent  allies,  were  employed  to  subjugate  their
neighbours,  and  the  incessant  waste  of  fieitigae  and  the
sword  was  snpplied  by  a  fresh  population  tiiat  swelled
the  expanding  circle  of  dominion. I  do  not  ^xteDtof
know  that  the  limits  of  the  new  western  em-  his  domi
pire  are  very  exactly  defined  by  contemporary  °***°**
vrriters,  nor  would  it  be  easy  to  appreciate  the  degree
of  subjection  in  which  the  Sclavonian  tribes  were  held
As  an  oiganized  mass  of  provinces,  regularly  governed
by  imperial ofGlcers, it seems  to have  been  nearly*
bounded,  in  Germany,  by  the  Elbe,  the  Saale, the
Bohemian  mountains,  and  a  line  drawn  from  thenci
crossing  the  Danube  above  Vienna,  and  prolonged  tc
the  Gulf  of  Istria. Part  of  Dalmatia  was  comprised  h
the  duchy  of  Friuli. In  Italy  the  empire  extended  noi
much  beyond  the  modem  frontier  of  Naples,  if  we  ex
elude,  as  was  the  fieict,  the  duchy  of  Benevento  fron,
anything  more  than  a  titular  rabjeetion. The  SpanisI
boundary,  as  has  been  said  already,  was  the  Ebro.^

A  seal  was  ptit  to  the  glory  of  Charlemagne  whei;
Leo  IIL,  in  the  name  of  the  Boman  people,  mg^o^n^
placed  upon  his  head  the  imperial  crown. His  tion^M^"^
father,  Pepin,  had  borne  the  title  of  Patrician,  ^p^^-
and  he  had  himself  exercised,  with  that  titie,  a  ^^'
regular  sovereignty  over  Bome." Money  was  coined  in

*  [NoTB  IX.]  to  the  provlQOM. Some  bad  long  been
b  I  foUofW  In  this  the  m^p  of  Koch,  In aocoBtomed  to  their  name  and  power.

hii  Tableau  des  R^volntions  de  I'Eoixqpe,  The  sntgectliai  of  the Bomana,  both

tome  L That  of  Vangoody,  Fluls,  1762,  clergy  and  laity,  to  CSttrlcmagne,  as  well

includes  tiie  ^dependent  Sclavonic  tribes,  before  as  after  be  bore  the  imperial  name,

and  carries  the  limit  of  the  emptre  to  seems  to  be  established.  See  Dissertation

the  Oder  and  frontien  of  Poland. The  Histortque,  par  Le  Blanc,  subjoined  to

authors  of  L'Art  de  verifier  les  Dates  his  Traits  de  Monnoyes  de  France,  p.  18 ;

extend  It  to  the  Raab. It  would  require  and  St.  Marc,  Abr^gd  Cbnmolugique  de

%  long  examination  to  give  a  precise  state-  rHistoire  de  I'ltalie,  t.  1. The  first  of

ment.  these  writen  does  not  allow  that  Pepin

*  The  Patricians  of  the  lower  empire  exercised  any  authority  at  Bome.  A  goo/
wcrs  govcmon  sent  from  Constantinople  deal  of  obscurity  rests  over  its  internal

12  CORONATION  AND  CHARACTER Chap.  I.  Part  L

his  name,  and  an  oath,  of  fidelity  was  taken  by  the  clergy
and  people.  But  the  appellation  of  Emperor  seemed  to
place  his  authority  over  sdl  his  subjects  on  a  new  footing.
It  was  full  of  high  and  indefinite  pretension,  tending  to
overshadow  the  free  election  of  the  Franks  by  a  ficti*
tious  descent  from  Augustus.  A  fresh  oath  of  fidelity  to
him  as  emperor  was  demanded  from  his  subjects.  His
own  discretion,  however,  prevented  him  from  afiecting
those  more  despotic  prerogatives  which  the  imperial
name  might  still  be  supposed  to  convey/

In  analyzing  ihe  characters  of  heroes  it  is  hardly
His  possible  to  separate  altogether  the  shaj^e  of  for-

^^•'^^'ter.  tune  from  their  own.  The  epoch  made  by
Charlemagne  in  the  history  of  the  world,  ihe  illustrious
families  which  prided  tliemselves  in  him  as  tJieir  .pro-
genitor, the  very  legends  of  romance,  which  are  full  of
his  fabulous  exploits,  have  cast  a  lustre  aroimd  his
head,  and  testify  the  greatness  that  has  embodied  itself
in  his  name.  None,  indeed,  of  Charlemagne's  wars  can
be  compared  with  the  Saracenic  victory  of  Charles
Martel ;  but  that  was  a  contest  for  freedom,  his  for  con-
quest ;  and  fame  is  more  partial  to  successfal  aggression
than  to  patriotic  resistance.  As  a  scholar,  his  acquisi-
tions were  probably  little  superior  to  those  of  his  unre-
spected  son ;  and  in  several  points  of  view  the  glory  of
Charlemagne  might  be  extenuated  by  an  analytical  dis-
section.* But,  rejecting  a  mode  of  judging  equally  un-
candid  and  fallacious,  we  shall  find  that  he  possessed  in
everything  that  grandeur  of  conception  which  distin-
guishes extraordinary minds. Like Alexander, he

government  for  near  fifty  yean;  bnt  there  tori  ad  ann.  T96. However  tfais  may  be,

b  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  nominal  there  can  be  no  qneation  that  a  consider-

■overelgnty  of  the  Greek  emperors  -was  able  share  of  Jnrladlctkm  and  authority

not  entirely  abrogated.  Maratori,AnnaU  was  practically  exerdsed  by  the  popee

d'ltalla,  ad  ann.  772;  St.  Marc,  t  t.  p.  dnriiig  this  period. Vid.  Murat.  ad  aon.

366, 372. A  mosaic,  stlU  extant  in  the  789.

Lateran  palace,  repreeents  onr  Saviour  '  [Nora  X.]

giving  tho  keys  to  St.  Peter  with  one  *  Eginhard  attests  his  ready  eloquence,
hand,  and  with  the  other  a  standaid  to  a  his  perfect  mastery  of  Latin,  his  know-
crowned  prince,  bearing  the  inscription  ledge  of  Greek  so  !kr  as  to  read  it,  his
Coostantlne  V.  But  Oonstantine  V.  did  acqulsitioDS  in  logic,  grsmmar,  rhetoric,
not  begin  to  reign  till  780 ;  and  if  this  and  astronomy.  But  the  anjoymoiis
piece  of  workmanship  was  made  under  author  of  the  life  of  Lonis  the  DeboAsJr
Leo  QL,  as  the  authors  of  L'Art  de  attributes  most  of  these  acoompUshments
viMfler  les  Dates  Imagine,  it  could  not  to  that  nnfortuaate  prince,
ba  earlier  than  7W. T.  i.  p.  262;  Mura-

tfRAXCE.  OF  CHARLKMAG>E.  18

seemed  bom  for  universal  innovation :  in  a  life  rest-
lessly active,  we  see  him  reforming  the  coinage  and
establishing  the  legal  divisions  of  money;  gadiering
about  him  the  learned  of  every  country;  founding
schools  and  collecting  libraries;  interfering,  but  with
the  tone  of  a  king,  in  religious  controversies ;  aiming,
though  prematurely,  at  the  formation  of  a  naval  force ;
attempting,  for  the  sake  of  commerce,  the  magnificent
enterprise  ef  uniting  the  Bhine  and  Danube ; '  and  medi-
tating to  mould  the  discordant  codes  of  Eoman  and  bar-
barian laws  into  an  uniform  system.

The  great  qualities  of  Charlemagne  were,  indeed,
alloyed  by  the  vices  of  a  barbarian  and  a  conqueror.
Nine  wives,  whom  he  divorced  with  very  little  cere-
mony, attest  the  licence  of  his  private  life,  which  his
temperance  and  frugality  can  hardly  be  said  to  redeem.
Unsparing  of  blood,  though  not  constitutionally  cruel,
and  wholly  indifferent  to  the  m^ans  which  his  ambi-
tion prescribed,  he  beheaded  in  one  day  four  thousand
Saxons — an  act  of  atrocious  butchery,  after  which  his
persecuting  edicts,  pronouncing  the  pain  of  death  against
those  who  refased  baptism,  or  even  who  ate  flesh  during
Lent,  seem  scarcely  worthy  of  notice.  This  union  of
barbarous  ferocity  with  elevated  views  of  national  im-
provement might  suggest  the  parallel  of  Peter  the  Great.
But  the  degrading  habits  and  brute  violence  of  the
Muscovite  place  him  at  an  immense  distance  from  the
restorer  of  the  empire.

A  strong  sympathy  for  intellectual  excellence  was  the
leading  characteristic  of  Charlemagne,  and  this  undoubt-
edly biassed  him  in  the  chief  political  error  of  his  con*
duct — that  of  encouraging  the  power  and  pretensions  of
the  hierarchy.  But,  perhaps,  his  greatest  eulogy  is
written  in  the  disgraces  of  succeeding  times  and  the
miseries  of  Europe.  He  stands  alone,  like  a  beacon
upon  a  waste,  or  a  rock  in  the  broad  ocean.  His  sceptre
was  the  bow  of  Ulysses,  which  could  not  be  drawn  by
any  weaker  hand. In  the  dark  ages  of  European  his-

See  an  ooay  upon  tbb  prqject  in  the  Main ;  bnt  their  want  of  deplh.  and  tfa«

Vemolrs  of  the  Academy  of  Inscriptions,  sponginesB  of  the  soil,  vpptai  to  present

tome  xvfll. The  rivers  wliich  were  de-  insuperable  impedimentB  to  its  oonple*

signed  to  form  the  links  of  this  jnnctioa  tlon.
«ieftt  tbo  Altmuhl,  the  RegnJtz,  and  the

14  LOUIS  THE  DEBONAIR. Chap.  I.  Pabt  I.

lory  the  reign  of  Charlemagne  afifords  a  solitary  resting-
place  between  two  long  periods  of  turbulence  and  igno-
miny, deriving  the  advantages  of  contrast  both  from
that  of  the  preceding  dynasty  and  of  a  posterity  for
whom  he  had  formed  an  empire  which  they  were  un-
worthy and  unequal  to  maintain.^

Pepin,  the  eldest  son  of  Charlemagne,  died  before

LoaiBihe ^™»  leaving  a  natural  son,  named  Bernard.**

Debonair. Even  if  he  had  been  legitimate,  the  right  of

A.D.  814. representation  was  not  at  all  established  during

these  ages ;  indeed,  the  general  prejudice  seems  to  have

inclined  against  it. Bernard,  therefore,  kept  only  the

kingdom  of  Italy,  which  had  been  transferred  to  his

father;  while  Louis,  the  younger  son  of  Charlemagne,

inherited  the  empire.* But,  in  a  short  time,  Bernard,

having  attempted  a  rebellion  against  his  uncle,

was  sentenced  to  lose  his  eyes,  which  occa-

^oned  his  death — a  cruelty  more  agreeable  to  the  pre>

vailing  tone  of  manners  than  to  the  character  of  Louis,

who  bitterly  reproached  himself  for  the  severity  he  had

)een  persuaded  to  use.

s  The  Life  of  Charleautgne,  l^  Gail-  tion  to  Judge  put  times  by  a  standard

aid,  without  being  made  perhaps  so  in>  borrowed  tnm  the  theories  of  his  own.

,ere8ting  as  it  oo^t  to  haT«  been«  pre-  M.  Guixot  askfe  whether  the  natioD  was

lents  an  adequate  view  botti  of  his  actions  left  in the  same  state  in  which the

Iknd  dEiaracter. Schmidt,  Hist  des  Alio-  emperor  found  ft  Nothing  fell  with  him,

tnands,  tome  U.,  appears  to  me  a  superior  he  remarks,  but  the  central  goremment,

writer.  which  could  only  have  been  preserved

An  exception  to  the  general  sufihige  by  a  series  of  men  like  himself, (^asaia

of  historians  In  favour  of  Charlemagne  is  snr  THist  de  France,  pp.  276-284 ;  Hist

made  by  Sismondi. He  seems  to  con-  de  la  Civilisation  en  Franoe,  Le^  ii.

sider  him  as  having  produoed  no  per-  p.  39.) Some,  indeed,  of  his  institations

manent  efiect ;  the  empire,  within  half  a  cannot  be  said  to  have  long  survived

century,  having  been  dismembered,  and  him ;  but  this  again  must  be  chiefly  attri-

relapsing  into  the  merest  weakness:—  buted  to  the  weakiiem  of  his  suocesson.

«  Tellement  la  grsodeur  aoqnise  par  les  No  one  man  of  more  than  common  ability

•rmes  est  trompeuie,  quand  elle  ne  se  arose  in  the  Oarlovingian  dynasty  after

d<Hme  pour  appuiaucnne  institution  bien-  himself,  a  i^  veiy  disadvantageous  to

fidsante ;  et  tellement  le  i^gne  d'nn  grand  the  permanence  of  his  poUcy,  and  perhaps

roi  demeure  stdrlle,  quand  il  ne  fimde  rather  surprising;  tbon^  it  is  a  theory

pas  la  liberte  de  ses  oondtoyens."  (Vol.  of  Sismondi  that  royal  fiunilies  naturally

liL  p.  VI.)  But  oertaialy  sane  of  Charle-  dwindle  into  imbecility,  espedally  in  a

magne's  instituttons  were  likely  to  prove  semi4)arbaroos  oanditton  of  society.

beneficial  if  they  could  have  been  main-  b  A  contemporary  author,  Theean,  ap.

tained,  such  as  the  skabini  and  the  Miasi  Muraturi,  a.d.  810,  asserts  that  Bernard

Domlnid. And  when  Sismondi  hints  was  bora  of  a  cuncubine. I  do  not  know

lliat  Cluu-Iemagne  ou^t  to  have  given  a  why  modem  htsturians  represent  It  other

fharte  ootutUutionndUf  It  is  dlfflcnlt  not  wise.

U>  uifle  at  Bach  a  proof  of  his  incUna-  i  [Note  XI J

l-iUMOB.  HIS  MISFORTUNES  AND  ERRORS.  15

Under  this  prince,  called  by  the  ItalianB  the  Pions,
And  by  the  French  the  Debonair,  or  Good-natured,^  the
mighty  stracture  of  his  Other's  power  began  rapidly  to
decay. I  do  not  know  that  Louis  deserves  so  much
oontempt  as  he  has  undergone ;  but  historians  have  in
general  more  indulgence  for  splendid  crimes  than  for
the  weaknesses of  virtue. There  was  no  defect  in
Louis's  understanding  or  courage ;  he  was  accomplished
in  martial  exercises,  and  in  all  the  learning  which  an
education,  excellent  for  that  age,  could  supply. No  one
was  ever  more  anxious  to  reform  the  abuses  of  adminis-
tration;  and  whoever  compears  his  capitularies  with
those  of  Charlemagne  will  perceive  that,  as  a  legislator,
he  was  even  superior  to  his  fieither. The  fault  lay  en-
tirely in  his  heart;  and  this  faxlt  was  nothing  but  a
temper  too  soft  and  a  conscience  too  strict."" It  is  not
wonderful  that  the  empire  shoidd  have  been  speedily
lissolved ;  a  succession  of  such  men  as  Charles  Martel,
Pepin,  and  Charlemagne,  oould  alone  have  preserved  its
integrity ;  but  the  misfortunes  of  Lou^  and  his  people
were  immediately  owing  to  the  following  errors  of  his
conduct.

Soon  after  his  accession  Louis  thought  fit  to  associate
his  eldest  son,  Lothaire,  to  the  empire,  and  to  „,  , ,
confer  the  provinces  of  Bavana  and  Aquitaine,  tonu  and
as  subordinate  kingdoms,  upon  the  two  yoimger,
Louis  and  Pepin.  The  step  was,  in  appear-
ance,  conformable  to  his  fiftther's  policy,  who  had  acted
towards  himself  in  a  similar  manner.  But  such  mear
sures  are  not  subject  to  general  rules,  and  exact  a  careful
regard  to  characters  and  circumstances.  The  principle,
however,  which  regulated  this  division,  was  learned
from  Charlemagne,  and  could  alone,  if  strictly  pursued,
have  given  unity  and  permanence  to  the  empire.  The
elder  brother  was  to  preserve  his  superiority  over  the

k  These  names,  as  a  IVench  writer  "  Schmidt,  Hiat  dea  AUemanda,  torn.

ohaerves,  meant  the  same  thing. Piu*  U.,  has  done  more  Justice  than  other

had,  even  in  good  Latin,  the  weoa^  of  histortana  to  Louis's  character. Vaia*

nitit,  meek,  forbearing,  or  what the  sette  attests  the  goodness  uf  his  govem-

llVench  call  ddbormaire, Synonymes  de  ment  in  Aqoltaine,  which  he  held  as  a

Roaband,  torn.  1.  p.  267. Our  English  saboidtDate  kingdom  during  his  fittther's

word  debonair  iff  hardly  used  in  the  asme  life. It  extended  fhnn  the  Loire  to  the

aense,  if  Indeed  it  can  be  called  an  English  Ebro,  so  that  the  trust  was  net  con

word;  but  I  have  not  altered  Lonia's  temptibto.— Hiat.  de  l4ngnedoc  torn.!

ippeilation.  by  which  he  ia  so  well  known,  p.  4t<.

enon.
▲J).  817.

16  PARTITION  OF  THE  EMPIRE. Chap.  I.  Part  I.

others,  so  that  they  shoiild  neitlier  make  peace  nor  war,
nor  even  give  answer  to  ambassadors,  without  his  con-
sent. Upon  the  death  of  either  no  farther  partition
was  to  be  made ;  but  whichever  of  his  children  might
become  the  popular  choice  was  to  inherit  the  whole
kingdom,  under  the  same  superiority  of  the  head  of  the
family.*  This  compact  was,  from  the  beginning,  dis-
liked by  the  younger  brothers;  and  an  event,  upon
which  Louis  does  not  seem  to  have  calctdated,  soon  dis-
gusted his  colleague  Lothaire.  Judith  of  Bavaria,  the
emperor's  second  wife,  an  ambitious  woman,  bore  him  a
son,  by  name  Charles,  whom  both  parents  were  natu-
rally anxious  to  place  on  an  equal  footing  with  his  bro-
thers. But  this  could  only  be  done  at  the  expense  of
Lothaire,  who  was  ill  disposed  to  see  his  empire  still
further  dismembered  for  this  child  of  a  second  bed.  Louis
passed  his  life  in  a  struggle  with  three  undutifnl  sons,  who
abused  his  paternal  kindness  by  constant  rebellions.

These  were  rendered  more  formidable  by  the  concur-
rence of  a  different  class  of  enemies,  whom  it  had  been
another  error  of  the  emperor  to  provoke.  Charlemagne
had  assumed  a  thorough  control  and  supremacy  over  the
clergy ;  and  his  son  was  perhaps  still  more  vigilant  in
chastising  their  irregularities,  and  reforming  their  rules
of  discipUne.  But  to  this,  which  they  had  been  com-
pelled to  bear  at  the  hands  of  the  first,  it  was  not  equally
easy  for  the  second  to  obtain  their  submission.  Louis
therefore  drew  on  himself  the  inveterate  enmity  of  men
who  united  with  the  turbulence  of  martial  nobles  a
skill  in  managing  those  engines  of  offence  which  were
peculiar  to  their  order,  and  to  which  the  implicit  devo-
tion of  his  character  laid  him  very  open.  Yet,  after
many  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  and  many  days  of  igno-
AA  840.  niiny,  his  wishes  were  eventually  accompli^ed.
purtitionQr  Charles,  his  youngest  son,  sumamed  the  Bald,
the  empire  obtained,  upon  his  death,  most  part  of  France,
A.1K  847.  while  Germany  fell  to  the  share  of  Louis,  and
^S^^SSm,  the  rest  of  the  imperial  dominions,  with  the
lJS**Sii  '  ^  *^®  eldest,  Lothaire.  This  partition  was

chariM  the  the  result  of  a  sanguinary,  though  short,  contest:
's***  i^Yid  it  gave  a  fetal  blow  to  the  empire  of  the

Franks. For  the  treaty  of  Verdun,  in  843,  abrogated

B  Bi^uil  CapitnltflA.  torn.  1. ».  S75.

pranob.  its  dismemberment.  17

ffae  sovereignty  that  had  been  attached  to  the  eldest
brother  and  to  the  imperial  name  in  former  partitions :
each  held  his  respective  kingdom  as  an  independent
right."*  This  is  the  epoch  of  a  final  separation  between
the  French  and  German  members  of  the  empire.  Its
millenary  was  celebrated  by  some  of  the  latter  nation  in
1843.'

The  subsequent  partitions  made  among  the  children
of  these  brothers  are  of  too  rapid  succession  to  Dedfne  or
be  here  related. In  about  forty  years  the  theCwio-
empire  was  nearly  re-united  under  Charles  the  ^^i^
Pat,  son  of  Louis  of  Germany ;  but  his  short  Charles  the
and  inglorious  reign  ended  in  his  deposition.  pmxr,^i.
From  this  time  the  possession  of  Italy  was  con-  ^JJcJ'ggj
tested  among  her  native  princes ;  Germany  fell  DepoMd.
at  first  to  an  illegitimate  descendant  of  Charle-  ^^'
magne,  and  in  a  short  time  was  entirely  lost  by  ^|!^*S^e
his  family ;  two  kingdoms,  afterwards  imited,  empire-
were  formed  by  usurpers  out  of  what  was  then  called
Burgundy,  and  comprised  the  provinces  between  tlie
Bhone  and  the  Alps,  with  Franche  Comt^,  and  great
part  of  Switzerland.'^ In  France  the  Carlovingian  kings

«  BalnzU  Ckpitnlaria,  torn.  ii.  p.  42;  111.  76.) For  this  he  quotas  Nithard.  a

Telly,  tome  ii.  p.  76. The  ezprearions  of  contemporary  historian.

this  treaty  are  pertiaps  equivocal ;  but  In  the  division  made  on  this  occasion

the  subsequent  conduct  of  the  brothers  the  kingricmi  of  France,  which  fell  to

and  their  fiimi^  Justifies  the  construction  Charles  the  Bald,  had  for  its eastern

of  Telly,  which  I  have  followed.  boundary  the  Meuse,  the  SaOne,  and  the

P  The  partition,  which  the  treaty  of  Rhone ;  which,  neverthekn,  can  only  be

Teidun  confirmed,  had  been  made  by  understood  of  the  Upper  Meuse,  since

eommiasioDers  specially  appointed  in  the  Brabant  was  certainly  not  comprised  In

preceding  year. "Le  nombre  total  des  it. Lothaire,  the  elder  brother,  besides

oommtaaires  Ait  porttf  k  trots  cents ;  ils  Italy,  had  a  Idngdom  called  Lorrain,  from

•e  distrlbukrent  toute  la  snrftoe  de  I'em*  his  name  (Lotharingla),  extending  fhim

plre,qu'iIaB'engag6renthparcouTiravant  the  mouth  of  the  Rhine  to  Provence,

le  mote  d'aottt  de  I'annee  sulvante :  cet  bounded  by  that  river  on  one  flrontier.

immense  travail  etoit  en  effet  alors  n^ces-  by  France  on  the  other. Louis  took  all

saire  pour  se  procurer  les  oonnolflsancee  beyond  the  Rhine,  and  was  usually  styled

qu'oD  obtient  ai^ouxd'hnl  en  un  instant.  The  Germanic.

par  rinspectiond'une  carte  g^ographlque;  i  These  kingdoms  were  denominated

malheoreusement on ecrivoit  k  cette  Provence and  Tran^urane Burgundy.

^^oqne  aoasi  peu  qu'on  Usoit Le  rap-  1'be  latter  was  very  small,  comprising

port  des  oommiasaires  ne  ftit  point  mis  <nily  part  of  Switzerland ;  but  its  second

par  ecrit, ou point d^poe^  dans les  sovereign,  Rodolph  II.,  acquired  I7  treaty

avdiivea. S'il  nous  avoit  ete  conserve,  almost  the  whole  of  the  former ;  and  the

ce  aerott  le  plus  curieux  de  tons  les  two  united were called the  klngdov

■Mmnmnis  sor  I'fttat  de I'Europe  au  of  Aries. This  lasted  from  033  to  ion,

iMfOikge."  (Slmandi.  Hist,  des  Franf.  when  Rodolph  UL  bequeathed  fate  A>

VOL.  I.  Q

18  STATE  OF  THE  PEOPLE. Chap.  I.  Pakt  I.

coutiniied  for  another  century ;  but  their  line  waa  in-
KingB  of  termpted  two  or  three  times  by  the  electioii  or
Tnuice.  usurpation  of  a  powerful  femily,  the  counts  of
SSi^i  Paris  and  Orleans,  who  ended,  like  the  old
Mmpie.898.  mayors  of  the  palace,  in  dispersing  the  phan-
W2.  toms  of  royalty  they  had  professed  to  serve.'

SJi??!??^  Hugh  Capet,  the  representative  of  this  house,
•36.  upon  the  death  of  Louis  Y.,  placed  himself  upoti

Lottiaire,  ^^  throne ;  thus  founding  the  third  and  most
r^»ai8  v.  permanent  race  of  French  soyereigns.  Before
^\nu  of  this  happened,  the  descendants  of  Charlemagne
^^'^  had  sunk  into  insignificance,  and  retained  little

more  of  France  than  the  city  of  Laon.  The  rest  of  the
kingdom  had  been  seized  by  the  powerful  nobles,  who,
w-ith  the  nominal  fidelity  of  the  feudal  system,  main-
tained its  practiced  independence  and  rebellious  spirit.'
These  were  times  of  great  misery  to  the  people,  and
the  worst,  perhaps,  that  Europe  has  ever  known.  Even
state  of  the  Under  Charlemagne,  we  have  abundant  proofis
P~pi«-  of  the  calamities  which  the  people  suffered.
The  light  which  shone  around  him  was  that  of  a  con-
suming fire.  The  free  propiietors,  who  had  once  con-
sidered themselves  as  only  called  upon  to  resist  foreign
invasion,  were  harassed  by  endless  expeditions,  and
draped  away  to  the  Baltic  Sea,  or  the  banks  of  the
Drave.  Many  of  them,  as  we  learn  from  his  Capitu-
laries, bec€kme  ecclesiastics  to  avoid  military  conscrip-
tion.* But  far  worse  must  have  been  their  state  under

minions  to  the  emperor  Conrad  IL~  and  oonseqnently  nearly  allied  to  the

Art  de  verifier  les  Dates,  torn.  IL  p.  Carlovingian  fiunilj,  who  derive  their

427-43X  pedigree from the ssme  head  — Sea

'  The  family  of  Capet  is  geaeraUy  Prenves  de  la  Genealogia  de HoglMa

admitted  to  possess  the  moat  ancient  pe-  Capet,  in  L*Art  de  verifier  los  Dates

digree  of  any  Boverelgn  line  In  Eim^  torn.  L  p.  566.

Its  saooesBion  tbroni^  males  is  aneqnl-  *  [Non  XIL]

voc-ally  deduced  from  Robert  tlic  Bnve,  At  the  cloae  of  the  ninth  oentory  there

made  governor  of  AiOoa  in  864,  and  were  twenty-nine  hereditary  fieft  of  the

fattier  of  Eudes  king  of  FYsnce,  and  of  crown. At  the  accession  of  Hngh  Capet,

l^bert,  who  was  chosen  by  a  party  in  In  987.  they  had  increased  to  fi%>flv«L

•W,  though,  as  Charles  the  Sfanple  was  (Oulsot,  avilis.  en  France,  Le^on  34.)

still  acknowledged  in  some  provinces.  It  Thierry  maintains  that  those  between

is  uncertain  whether he  ought  to  be  the  Loire  and  the  Pyrenees  were  strictly

counted  In  the  royal  Ust It  is.  more-  Independent  sod  boand  by  no  feudal  tie.

over,  highly  probable  that  Robert  the  (Letties  snr  I'HIst  de  France,  Lett  Ix.)

Brave  waa  descended,  equally  through  t  Cspitularia.  A.a  800. Whoever  poa-

tasks,  from  St.  Aiiwul.  who  died  in  640,  seased  throe  maosi  of  alodial  property

fRAXCE.  THE  SARaC£KS.  19

the  lax  govenmient  of  succeeding  times,  when  the  dukes
and  counts,  no  longer  checked  by  the  vigorous  admi-
nistration of  Charlemagne,  were  at  liberty  to  play  the
tyrants  in  their  sever^  territories,  of  which  iliey  now
became  almost  the  soYereigns.  The  poorer  landholders
accordingly  were  forced  to  bow  their  necks  to  the  yoke;
and,  either  by  compulsion  or  through  hope  of  being
better  protected,  submitted  their  independent  patri-
monies to  the  feudal  tenure.

But  evils  still  more  terrible  than  these  political  abuses
were  the  lot  of  those  nations  who  had  been  subject  to
Charlemagne. Thoy,  indeed,  may  appear  to  us  little
better  thaa  ferocious  barbarians ;  but  Uiey  were  exposed
to  the  assaults  of  tribes,  in  comparison  of  whom  they
must  be  deemed  humane  and  polished. Each  frontier
of  the  empire  had  to  dread  the  attack  of  an  enemy.
The  coasts  of  Italy  were  continually  alarmed  The
by  the  Saracens  of  Africa,  who  possessed  them-  sanceM.
selves  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  and  became  masters  of  the
Mediterranean  Sea."* Though  the  Greek  dominions  in
the  south  of  Italy  were  chiefly  exposed  to  them, ^.d.
they  twice  insulted  and  ravaged  the  territory m«-w9.
of  Rome ;  nor  was  there  any  security  even  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  maritime  Alps,  where,  early  in  the
tenth  century,  they  settled  a  piratical  colony.'

Much  more  formidable  were  the  foes  by  whom  Ger-
many was  assailed. The  Sclavonians,  a  widely  The  Han-
extended  people,  whose  language  is  still  6X)oken  B^rf*"-

was  called  upon  for  personal  serrloe,  or  the  Aglabltea,  a  dynaBty  that  reigned  at

atleoattoftirnlahaBubeUtate.  Nigellna,  Tunis  for  the  whole  of  the  ninth  cen-

author  of  a  poetical  Life  of  Louis  L,  tnry,  after  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the

leems  to  implicate  Charlemagne  himself  Abbassite Khalifik They were  orer-

In  some  of  the  oppressions  of  his  reign,  thrown  themselves  in  the  next  age  by

It  was  the  first  care  of  the  former  to  re-  the  Fatimltes. Sidly  was  first  Invaded

dress  those  who  had  been  lx\)nred  In  his  in  82T :  but  the  city  of  Syracuse  was

Cither's  time. — BecueO  des  HIstoriens,  only  rcdnced  in  878.
tome  vL N.E  I  quote  by  this  title  the «  Muratori,  Annali  d'ltalia,  ad  ann.

great collection of  French  historians,  906,  et  alibL These  Saracens  of  Fras-

duaters^and  other  documents  iUnstrative  sineto,  supposed  to  be  between  Nice  and

of  the middle  ages,  more commonly  Monaco,  were  extirpated  by  a  count  of

known  by  the  name  of  its  flrat  editor,  Provence  in  972. But  they  had  esta-

the  Benedictine  Bouquet But  as  several  blished  themselves  more inland than

loamed  men  of  that  order  were  sucoes-  Fhuninetu. Creeping  up  the  line  of  the

stvely  ooncemed  in  this  work,  not  one  Alps,  they  took  posseselon  of  St  Maurice,

halfof  wUchhaa  yet  been  published,  it  in  the  Valais,  from  which  the  feeble

seemed  bett^  to  follow  Its  own  tttle-page.  kings  of  Tnin^urane  Burgundy  could  nof '

*  lliese  Aiirlcan  Saracens  belonged  to  dislodge  them.

c  2

20  THK  HUNGABIAXSw  Cbap.  I.  Past  L

upon  half  the  snr&ce  of  Europe,  had  occupied  the  ooan-
trieB  of  Bohemia,  Pohmd,  and  Pannonia/  on  the  eastern
confines  of  the  empire,  and  from  the  time  of  Charlemagne
acknowledged  its  snperioritv.  Bat  at  the  end  of  the
ninth  centuiy,  a  Tartarian  trihe,  the  Hnngarians,  over-
spreading that  country  which  since  has  borne  their
name,  and  moving  forward  like  a  vast  wave,  brought  a
dreadful  reverse  upon  Germany.  Theix  numbers  were
great,  their  ferocity  untamed.  They  fought  with  light
cavalry  and  light  armour,  trusting  to  their  showers  ot
arrows,  against  which  the  swords  and  lances  of  the
European  armies  could  not  avail.  The  memory  ol
Attila  was  renewed  in  the  devastations  of  these  savages,
who,  if  they  were  not  his  compatriots,  resembled  them
both  in  their  countenances  and  customs.  All  Italy,  all
Germany,  and  the  south  of  France,  felt  this  scourge ;'
^,xk till  Henry  the  Fowler,  and  Otho  the  Great,

934.9U,  drove  them  back  by  successive  victories  within
(heir  own  limits,  where,  in  a  short  time,  they  learned
peaceful  arts,  adopted  the  religion  and  followed  the
policy  of  Christendom.

K  any  enemies  could  be  more  destructive  than  these
The  Hungarians,  they  were  the  pirates  of  the  north,

Nomuat,  known  commonly  by  the  name  of  Normans.
The  love  of  a  predatory  life  seems  to  have  attracted
adventurers  of  different  nations  to  the  Scandinavian
seas,  from  whence  they  infested,  not  only  by  maritime

Eiracy,  but  continual  invasions,  the  northern  coasts
oth  of  France  and  Germany.  The  causes  of  their
sudden  appearance  are  inexplicable,  or  at  least  coidd
only  be  sought  in  the  ancient  traditions  of  Scandinavia.
For,  undoubtedly,  the  coasts  of  France  and  England

^  I  am  Knalble  of  the  awkward  effect  acaroelj  aaj  cmiiient  tffflfrianttfii.  oat  of

of  introdudi^  this  name  fipom  a  mora  a  great  number,  were  left  alive.— HUt

aodent  geography,  hat  It  saves  a  circom-  de  Langaedoc,  tome  II.  p.  6a They

location  still  more  awlcward. Austria  penetrated  (ntoOuienne,  as  UteasMl.

woald  convey  an  imperfect  Idea,  and  the  ~  Flodoaidi  Ghixnioon,  in  Recoeil  des

Austrian  dominions  cuald  not  be  named  Historiena,  tone  vllL In  Italy  they  in-

iRithoat  a  tremendous  anachronism.  spired  sudi  terror  that  a  mass  was  com-

'  In 924 they  overran Languedoc.  posed expressly deprecating (his ca>

Raym(»id>Pona,  count  of  Toulouse,  cut  lamity: Ab  Ungsroram not  defendM

their  army  to  pieces;  but  they  had  pre-  JaculJs !  In  937  they  ittvaged  the  coontiy

viously  committed  such  ravages,  that  the  as  Ihr  as  fienevento  and  Capoa.— Mam

bidiope  of  that  province,  writing  aooo  tori,  Ann.  d'XtaUa.
aftsrwardt  to  Pope  John  X.,  aswrt  ttaat

FEANCS.  THE  NORMANS.  21

were  as  little  protected  from  depredations  under  tiie
Merovingian  kings,  and  those  of  the  Heptarchy,  as  in
snbsequeiit  times.  Yet  only  one  instance  of  an  atWk
from  this  side  is  recorded,  and  that  before  the  middle  of
the  sixth  century,'  till  the  age  of  Charlemagne.  In  787
the  Danes,  as  we  call  those  northern  plunderers,  began
to  infest  England,  which  lay  most  immediately  open
to  their  incursions.  Soon  afterwards  they  ravaged  the
coasts  of  France.  Charlemagne  repulsed  mem  by  means
of  his  fleets ;  yet  they  pillaged  a  few  places  during  his
reign.  It  is  said  that,  perceiving  one  day,  from  a  port
in  the  Mediterranean,  some  Gorman  vessels  which  had
penetrated  into  that  sea,  he  shed  tears,  in  anticipation
of  the  miseries  which  awaited  his  empire.^  In  Louis's
Toign  their  depredations  upon  the  coast  were  more  in-
cessant,*' but  they  did  not  penetrate  into  the  inland
coimtry  till  that  of  Charles  the  Bald.  The  wars  be-
tween that  prince  and  his  family,  which  exhausted
France  of  her  noblest  blood,  the  insubordination  of  the
provincial  governors,  even  the  instigation  of  some  of
Charles's  enemies,  laid  all  open  to  theii  inroads.  They
adopted  an  uniform  plan  of  warfare  both  in  France  and
England ;  sailing  up  navigable  rivers  in  their  vessels  of
small  burden,  and  fortifying  the  islands  which  they
occasionally  foimd,  they  made  these  intrenchments  at
once  an  asylum  for  their  women  and  children,  a  reposi-
toiy  for  their  plxmder,  and  a  place  of  retreat  from  su-
perior force.  After  pillaging  a  town  they  retired  to
these  stix>ngholds  or  to  their  ships ;  and  it  was  not  till
872  that  they  ventured  to  keep  possession  of  Angers,
which,  however,  they  were  compelled  to  evacuate.
Sixteen  years  afterwards  they  laid  siege  to  Paris,  and
committed  the  most  ruinous  devastations  on  the  neigh-
bouring countiy. As  these  Normans  were  unchecked

*  Orag.  ToroD.  L  lU.  &  3.  Velooes.  agHes,  uinieeriqae  nlmte ;

b  In  the  ninth  oentory  the  Nonnaa Ipw  qiBldem  populns  lat^ pemotut

ptTEte.  not  only  "v^^e  Stearic  uX'dipee  qn•ri^  inooUtatqne

ULtB,  and  nearer  ooasta  of  the  Mediter-  man. «iwii»ih"«

naean,  bat  even  Greeoa.~De  Marca,  Pulcher  adeet  liftde,  vidtuqae  statnqoe

llarca  Hlapanlca,  p.  337.  deoonu.— L  iv.

'  Nigellns,  the  poetical  Uographer  of

Loola.  gives  the  foUowlng  deecrlptlon  of  He  goet  on  to  tefl  ns  that  they  wor.

Ibe  Nonnana : shipped  Neptune— Wee  it  a  sbnilarity

Sort  qnoqne  FHrndaoo  dkuntv  no>  «' °«>^*  «ot  attribitea,  that  deoeivai

mine  nuumL  him?

22  ACCESSION  OF  HUGH  CAPET.  Chap,  I.  Pakt  L

by  religions  awe,  tlie  rich  monasteries,  which  had  stood
harmless  amidst  the  havoc  of  Christian  war,  were  over-
whelmed in  the  storm.  Perhaps  they  may  have  endured
some  irrecoverable  losses  of  ancient  learning;  bnt  their
complaintB  are  of  monuments  disfigured,  bones  of  saints
and  kings  dispersed,  treasures  carried  away.  St.  Denis
redeemed  its  abbot  from  captivity  with  six  hundred  and
eighty-five  poimds  of  gold.  All  the  chief  abbeys  were
stripped  about  the  same  time,  either  by  the  enemy,  or
for  contributions  to  the  public  necessity.  So  impo-
verished was  the  kingdom,  that  in  860  Charles  the  Bald
had  great  difficulty  in  collecting  three  thousand  pounds
of  silver  to  subsidize  a  body  of  Normans  against  their
countrymen.  The  kings  of  France,  too  feeble  to  prevent
or  repel  these  invaders,  had  recourse  to  the  palliative
of  buying  peace  at  their  hands,  or  rather  precarious
armistices,  to  which  reviving  thirst  of  plunder  soon  put
an  end.  At  length  Charles  the  Simple,  in  918,  ceded  a
great  province,  which  they  had  already  partly  occupied,
partly  rendered  desolate,  and  which  has  derived  from
them  the  name  of  Normandy.  Ignominious  as  this
appears,  it  proved  no  impolitic  step.  Bollo,  the  Norman
chief,  with  all  his  subjects,  became  Christians  and
Frenchmen ;  and  the  kingdom  was  at  once  relieved  from
a  terrible  enemy,  and  strengthened  by  a  race  of  hardy
colonists."^

The  accession  of  Hugh  Capet  had  not  ihe  immediate
AocesBionof  ^^^^^  of  restoring  the  royal  authority  over
Hughc»pet  France.  His  own  very  extensive  fief  was  now,
^^'  *'*^*  indeed,  united  to  the  crown ;  but  a  few  great
vassals  occupied  the  remainder  of  the  kingdom.  Six  of
these  obtained,  at  a  subsequent  time,  the  exclusive
Stote  of  appellation  of  peers  of  France, — ^the  count  of
Frmuce  at  Flanders,  whose  fief  stretched  from  the  Scheldt
that  time.  ^  ^^  Somme ;  the  count  of  Champagne ;  the
duke  of  Normandy,  to  whom  Britany  did  homage ;  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  on  whom  the  count  of  Nivemois
seems  to  have  depended ;  the  duke  of  Aquitaine,  whose
territory,  though  less  than  the  ancient  kingdom  of  that

<l  An  exceedingly  good  sketch  of  theee  Bonamy,  MAn.  de  I'Acad.  des  InscripC

Nonxun  iDcuTBioDs,  and  of  the  political  tomes  xv.  and  xviL  These  I  have  chiefly

■itoation  of  France  during  that  period,  followed  in  the  text fXoTK  XIILJ
niaj  he  found  in  two  MnnobB  fay  M»

FiUKCE.  STATE  OF  FRANCE  AT  THAT  TIME.  23

name,  comprehended  Foitou,  Tomonsin,  and  most  of
Guienne,  with  the  feudal  superiority  over  the  Angon-
mois,  and  some  other  central  districts ;  and,  lastly,  the
count  of  Toulouse,  who  possessed  Languedoc,  witli  the
small  cotmtries  of  Quercy  and  Houei^e,  and  the  supe-
riority over  Auvergne.*  Besides  these  six,  the  duke  of
Gascony,  not  long  affcerwards  imited  with  Aquitaine,
the  counts  of  Anjou,  Fonthieu,  and  Vermandois,  the
viscount  of  Bourges,  the  lords  of  Bourbon  and  Coucy,
with  one  or  two  other  vassals,  held  immediately  of  the
last  Carlovingian  kings/  This  was  the  aristocracy,  of
which  Hugh  Capet  usurped  the  direction ;  for  the  suf-
frage of  no  general  assembly  gave  a  sanction  to  his  title.
On  the  death  of  Louis  Y.  he  took  advantage  of  the  ab-
sence of  Charles,  duke  of  Lorraine,  who,  as  the  deceased
king's  imcle,  was  nearest  heir,  and  procured  his  own
consecration  at  Hheims.  At  first  he  was  by  no  means
acknowledged  in  the  kingdom;  but  his  contest  with
Charles  proving  successful,  the  chief  vassals  ultimately
gave  at  least  a  tacit  consent  to  the  usurpation,  and  per
mitted  the  royal  name  to  descend  undisputed  upon  his
posterity.'  But  this  was  almost  the  sole  attribute  of
sovereignty  which  the  first  kings  of  the  third  dynasty
enjoyed.  For  a  long  period  before  and  after  the  acces-
sion of  that  fiemuly  France  has,  properly  speaking,  no
national  history.  The  character  or  fortune  of  those  who
were  called  its  kings  were  little  more  important  to  the

*  Auvfatffko  diaiiged  its  feudal  rape-  tanU,mabienie  rege  terreno.  He  forced

rior  twice. It  had  been  snl^ect  to  the  Goleime  to  sobmit  aboat  MO. Bnt  In

dnke  of  Aqnitalne  till  about  the  middle  Lfmonaiii  they  ooQtiuued  to  acknowledge

of  the  tenth  century. The  counts  of  the  aons  of  Cbarlea  of  Lorraine  till  lOOft.

Toolome  then  got  poaBeadon  of  it;  but  — Vaiaiette.  Hlat  da  Lane^  t  iL  jk  120,

•arlyin  the  twelfth  oentury  the  counta  160. Before  thla  Toulonae  had  refbae!

of  AuYergne  a^Un  did  homage  to  Oui-  to  recognise  Eudce  and  Raonl,  two  Idngi

enne. It  is  very  dUBcult  to  follow  the  of  France  who  were  not  of  the  Carlo-

Ustory  of  theae  flelk.  Tlnglan  fiunily,  and  even  hesitated  about

f  The  immcdiaey  of  ▼assala  in  times  Louis  IV.  and  Lothaire,  who  had  an

m  ancient  is  open  to  much  oontroTeniy.  hereditary  right— Idem.

1  have  followed  the  antburlty  of  those  These  proofr  of  Hn|^  Capet'a  nsorpft-

tndustrloua  Benedtctlnea,  the  editors  of  tion  aeem  not  to  be  materially  InTali-

L'Art  de  drifter  les  Dates.  dated by  a  dissertation  in the  60th

f  The  south  of  France  not  only  took  Toluroe  of  the  Academy  of  Inacrlptiona,

no  part  in  Huff's  elevation,  but  long  p.  653. It  is  not  of  coune  to  be  denied

nfiised  to  pay  him  auy  obedience,  or  that  the  northern  parts  of  France  aoqsi-

rather  to  sdmowledge  bis  title,  for  obe-  esced  in  his  anumption  of  the  n^

ttenoe  waa  wholly  out  of  the  question.  tiUe,  if  they  did  not  give  an  axpratf

The  style  of  charters  ran.  Instead  of  the  consent  to  it.
flag's  BHBia,  Deo  ngncmU,  rtf^  aoveo-

li  LOUIS  VI.  Ciup.  I.  Pari  I.

majority  of  the  nation  than  those  of  foreign  princes.
Undoubtedly,  the  degree  of  influence  whioh  they  exer-
Robert.  cised  with  respect  to  the  "vassals  of  the  crown
A.D.  99e.  varied  ciccording  to  their  power  and  their  prox-
imity. Over  Guienne  and  Toulouse  the  first  four  Capets
had  very  little  authority ;  nor  do  they  seem  to  have  ever
Henry  I.  received  assistance  from  liiem  either  in  civil
piSitoi!'  or  national  wars>  With  provinces  nearer  to
Aj>.  1060.  their  own  domains,  such  as  Normandy  and
Flanders,  they  were  frequently  engaged  in  alliance  or
hostility ;  but  each  seemed  rather  to  proceed  frx)m  the
policy  of  independent  states  than  from  the  relation  oi
a  sovereign  towards  his  subjects/

It  should  be  remembered  that,  when  the  fiefs  of  Paris
and  Orleans  are  said  to  have  been  re-united  by  Hugh
Capet  to  the  crown,  little  more  is  understood  than  the
feudal  superiority  over  the  vassals  of  these  provinces.
As  the  kingdom  of  Charlemagne's  posterity  was  split
into  a  number  of  great  fie&,  so  each  of  these  contained
many  barons,  possessing  exclusive  immunities  within
their  own  territories,  waging  war  at  their  pleasure,  ad-
ministering justice  to  their  military  tenants  and  other
subjects,  and  fr*ee  frx)m  all  control  beyond  the  conditions
ixiutoVL  ^^  ^^  feudal  compact.^  At  the  accession  of
A-D.  1108. Louis  VI.  in  1108,  the  cities  of  Paris,  Orleans,

b  I  havB  not  found  any  anthoritj  for  tm  the  reign  of  FlilUp  Angostna,  In  a  list
suppoaingthat  the  provinces  south  of  the  of  the  Imlghti  bannerets  of  France,
Loire  contributed  their  aasiatanoe  to  the  though  thoae  of  Britany,  Flaoders,  CSiain-
king  in  war.  unless  the  following  passage  pogne,  and  Burgundy,  besides  the  royal
of  QuUelmna  Plctaviensls  be  considered  domains,  are  enumerated,  no  mention  la
as  matter  of  foct,  and  not  rather  as  a  made  of  the  provinoea  beyond  the  Loire,
rtietorical  flourislL  He  tells  us  that  a  ^Du  Ghesne,  Script  Berum  Oallicaram,
vast  army  was  collected  by  Henry  L  t  v.  p.  aex  i  [Note  XIV.]
against  the  dulce  of  Normandy:  Bur-  ^  InasubaequentdiapterlahalliUus*
gnndium,  Arvemiam,  atque  Vaaooniam  trate  at  much  greater  length  the  circum*
properare  videres  horrlblles  ferro ;  immo  stances  of  the  French  monarehy  with
vires  tauti  regni  quantum  in  cUmata  respect  to  its  feudal  vassala.  It  would
quatuor  mundi  patent  cunctaa.— Becueil  be  inconvenient  to  antidpate  the  sul^ject
des  Historiens,  t  xL  pi  sa  But  we  have  at  present,  which  is  rather  of  a  legal
the  roll  of  the  army  which  Louis  VL  led  than  narrative  chai»eter.
against  the  emperor  Henry  V.,  a.i>.  1130,  Sismondl  has  given  a  nlative  scaae  of
in  a  national  war:  and  it  was  entirely  the  great  fiefl^  aoooiding  to  the  number
composed  of  trw>ps  from  Champagne,  the  of  modem  departments  whidi  they  con-
Isle  of  France,  the  Orleannois,  and  other  tained.  At  the  aocessioQ  of  Louis  VL
provinces  north  of  the  Loire. —Velly,  the  crown  possessed  about  five  depwt-
t.iU.  pi62.  Tet  tais  was  a  sort  of  con-  ments ;  the  count  of  Flanders  held  four  ;
vocation  of  the  ban ;  Kez  ut  eum  tota  the  count  of  Vermandois,  t^o ;  the  count
Pruicia  seqnatur,  Invltat. Kven  so  late  of  Boulogne,  ooe ;  the  count  of  <^b««»>

Prince.  LOUIS  VII.  2o

and  Boniiges,  with  the  immediately  adjacent  districts,
formed  the  most  considerable  portion  of  the  royal  do-
main. A  number  of  petty  barons,  with  their  fortified
castles,  intercepted  the  communication  between  these,
and  waged  war  against  the  king  almost  under  the  walla
of  his  capital.  It  cost  Louis  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to
reduce  the  lords  of  Montlhery,  and  other  places  within
a  few  miles  of  Paris.  Under  this  prince,  however,  who
had  more  activity  than  his  predecessors,  the  royal  au-
thority considerably  revived.  From  his  reign  we  may
date  the  systematic  rivalry  of  the  French  and  English
monarchies.  Hostilities  had  several  times  occurred  be-
tween Philip  I.  and  the  two  WiUiams;  but  the  wars
that  began  under  Louis  YI.  lasted,  with  no  long  inter-
ruption, for  three  centuries  and  a  half,  and  form,  indeed,
the  most  leading  feature  of  French  history  during  the
middle  ages."  Of  all  the  royal  vassals,  the  dukes  of
Normandy  were  the  proudest  and  most  powerful.
Though  they  had  submitted  to  do  homage,  they  could
not  forget  tbat  they  came  in  originally  by  force,  and
that  in  real  strength  they  were  fully  equal  to  their  sove-
reign. Nor  had  the  conquest  of  England  any  tendency
to  diminish  their  pretensions.*

Louis  yn.  ascended  the  throne  with  better  prospects
than  his  father.  He  had  married  Eleanor,  Looigyn.
heiress  of  the  great  duchy  of  Guienne.  But  ^^'  "87.
this  union,  which  promised  an  immense  accession  of
strength  to  the  crown,  was  rendered  unhappy  by  the
levities  of  that  princess.  Eepudiated  by  Louis,  who
felt  rather  as  a  husband  than  a  king,  Eleanor  immedi-
ately married  Henry  11.  of  England,  who,  already  inhe-

pf^pie^Blx;  the dnlM of  Baigondy, three;  of  lionlsVI.  was  almoet  confined  to  the
of  Nonnandy,  flye ;  of  Brltany,  five ;  the  five  towns— Paria,  Orleans,  Estampca,
eountof  Aj\}oa,  three.  Thirty-three  do-  Melun,  and  Complegne  (id.  p.  86);  and
partments  sonth  of  the  Loire  be  con-  to  estates,  probably  laige,  in  tbefr
siders  as  hardly  connected  with  the  neighbourhood,
crown ;  and  twenty-one  were  at  that  "*  Velly,  t  lii.  p.  40.
time  dependent  on  the  empire.  (VoL  t.  "  The  Norman  historians  maintain
p.  t.)  It  is  to  be  nndsrrtood  of  coarse  that  their  dnkes  did  not  owe  any  eenrioa
that  these  diyidons  are  not  rigorously  to  the  king  of  France,  bat  only  simple
exact;  and  also  tha^  in  every  instance,  homage,  or,  as  it  was  called,  per  para-
owners  of  flefe  with  dvll  and  criminal  gium.— Recncil  des  Historlens.  t  xL  pret
lorisdiction  had  the  Aill  possession  of  p.  161.  They  certainly  acted  npon  this
their  own  territories,  satject  more  or  less  principle ;  and  the  manner  in  which  they
to  their  immediate  lord,  whether  it  were  flnt  came  into  the  conntry  is  not  very
the  king  or  another. The  real  domain  oonstatent  with  dependence.

26  PHILIP  AUGUSTUS.  Chap.  I.  Pam*  U

riting  Normandj  from  his  mother  and  Anjou  from  hia
fifttlier,  became  possessed  of  more  than  one-half  cf
France,  and  an  overmatch  for  Louis,  even  if  the  great
vassals  of  the  crown  had  been  always  ready  to  maintain
its  supremacy.  One  might  venture,  perhaps,  to  conjec-
ture that  the  sceptre  of  France  would  eventually  have
passed  frx)m  the  Capets  to  the  Plantagenets,  if  the  vexa-
tious quarrel  with  Becket  at  one  time,  and  the  succes-
sive rebellions  fomented  by  Louis  at  a  later  period,  had
not  embarrassed  the  great  talents  and  ambitious  spirit
of  Henry.

But  the  scene  quite  changed  when  Philip  Augustus,
~  ,i.  son  of  Louis  YII.,  came  upon  the  staee. No

S^  prince  comparable  to  him^  systema^o  ambi-
^  »«^  tion  and  miUtary  enterprise  had  r«igned  in
France  since  Charlemagne.  From  his  reign  the  French
monarchy  dates  the  recoveiy  of  its  lustre.  He  wrested
from  the  count  of  Flanders  the  Yermandois  (that  part
of  Picardy  which  borders  on  the  Isle  of  France  and
Champagne  **),  and,  subsequently,  the  county  of  Artois.
But  the  most  important  conquests  of  Philip  were  ob-
tained against  the  kings  of  England.  Even  Kichard  L,
with  all  his  prowess,  lost  ground  in  struggling  against
Oonqnest  of  ^^  adversary  not  less  active,  and  more  politic,
Noimamdy,  than  himsclf.  But  when  John  not  only  took
^^  ^^^  possession  of  his  brother's  dominions,  but  con-
firmed his  usurpation  by  the  murder,  as  was  very  pro-
bably surmised,  of  the  heir,  Philip,  artfully  taking  ad-
vantage of  the  general  indignation,  summoned  him  as
his  vassal  to  the  court  of  his  peers.  John  demanded  a
safe-conduct.  Willingly,  said  Philip ;  let  him  come  un-
molested. And  return?  inquired  the  English  envoy.
If  the  judgment  of  his  peers  permit  him,  replied  the
king.  By  all  the  saints  of  France,  he  exclaimed,  when
further  pressed,  he  shall  not  return  unless  acquitted.
The  bishop  of  Ely  still  remonstrated  that  the  duke  of
Normandy  could  not  come  without  the  king  of  Eng-
land ;  nor  would  the  barons  of  that  coimtry  permit  their

<*  The  original  ooanti  9f  Vermandota  earl  of  Flaaden,  after  her  death  in  1189^

were  deaoended  fhnn  Bernard,  Ung  of  The  principal  towns  of  the  Vennandoia

Italy, grandson of  Charlemagne: hat  are  St  Queutin  and  Perunije.— Art  dt

their  fief  passed  bj  the  donation  of  Isa-  verifier  les  Dates,  t  U.  pw  TOO.
bel«  the  lastoouutess,  to  her  hnsband.  the

F&ANCS.  Toms  Yin.  27

BOTereign  to  run  the  risk  of  death  or  imprifionment.
What  of  that,  my  lord  bishop  ?  cried  Philip.  It  is  well
known  that  my  vassal  the  duke  of  Normandy  acquired
England  by  force.  But  if  a  subject  obtains  any  acces-
sion of  dignity,  shall  his  paramount  lord  therefore  lose
his  rights?'

It  may  be  doubted  whether,  in  thus  citing  John  be-
fore his  court,  the  king  of  France  did  not  stretch  hia
feudal  sovereignty  beyond  its  acknowledged  limits.
Arthur  was  certainly  no  immediate  vassal  of  the  crown
for  Britany ;  and,  though  he  had  done  homage  to  Philip
for  Aiijou  and  Maine,  yet  a  subsequent  treaty  had  abro-
gated his  investiture,  and  confirmed  his  uncle  in  the
possession  of  those  provinces.*'  But  the  vigour  of  Philip;
and  the  meanness  of  his  adversary,  cast  a  shade  over  sJl
that  might  be  novel  or  irregular  in  these  proceedings.
John,  not  appearing  at  his  summons,  was  declared
guilty  of  felony,  and  his  fiefs  confiscated.  The  execu-
fion  of  this  sentence  was  not  intrusted  to  a  dilatory
arm.  Philip  poured  his  troops  into  Normandy,  and
took  town  after  town,  while  the  king  of  England,  infa-
tuated by  his  own  wickedness  and  cowardice,  made
hardly  an  attempt  at  defence.  In  two  years  Normandy,
Maine,  and  Anjou  were  irrecoverably  lost.  Poitou  and
Guienne  resisted  longer;  but  the  conquest  of  Louis vm.
the  first  was  completed  by  Louis  VIII.,  sue-  *^  ^*^
cesser  of  Philip,  and  the  subjection  of  the  second  seemed
drawing  near,  when  the  arms  of  Louis  were  diverted  to
diflferent  but  scarcely  less  advantageous  objects.

The  6oxmtry  of  Languedoc,  subject  to  the  counts  of
Toulouse,  had  been  unconnected,  beyond  any  asutb  of
other  part  of  France,  with  the  kings  of  the  Luvuedoe.
house  of  Capet.  Louis  YII.,  having  married  his  sister
to  the  reigning  count,  and  travelled  himself  through  the
country,  began  to  exercise  some  degree  of  authority,
chiefly  in  confirming  the  rights  of  ecclesiastical  bodies,
who  were  vain,  perhaps,  of  this  additional  sanction  to
the  privileges  which  they  already  possessed.' But  the

P  Mat  PtarlB,  p.  238,  edit  1684.*  tnoe  of  taxy  act  of  ■oTereignty  exerctoed

1  Tbe  Illegality  of  Philip's  proceed-  by  the  UngB  of  Franoe  in  Langnedoe

IngB  is  well  argued  by  Mably.  Obeerva-  tnm  956,  when  Lothaire  confirmed  a

Hods  sar  I'HistolTe  de  France.  1.  ill.  c.  6.  charter  of  his  predecessor  Raool  in  &tow

'  Aocordlog to  toe  Benedictine  his-  of  the  bishop  of  Pay,  till  tbe  reign  of

Iviana.  Vlc^i  and  Vaiasette^  there  Is  no  Looia  YU.  (Hist  de  Lancoedoc,  tome  ttl

2g  AFFAIBS  OF  LAKGUEDOC. Chap.  /.  Pabt  L

remoteness  of  i^eir  situation,  with  a  difference  in  Ian
goage  and  legal  usages,  still  kept  the  people  of  this  pro-
vince apart  from  those  of  the  north  of  France.

About  the  middle  of  the  twelftti  century,  certain  reli-
gious opinions,  which  it  is  not  easy,  nor,  for  our  present
purpose,  material  to  define,  but,  upon  eveiy  supposition,
exceedingly  adverse  to  those  of  the'  church,'  began  to
spread  over  Languedoc.  Those  who  imbibed  them  have
borne  the  name  of  Albigeois,  though  they  were  in  no
degree  peculiar  to  the  district  of  Albi.  In  despite  of
much  preaching  and  some  persecution,  these  errors
made  a  continual  progress;  till  Innocent  III.,  in  1198,
despatched  commissaries,  the  seed  of  the  inquisition,
with  ample  powers  both  to  investigate  and  to  chastise.
Raymond  Yl.,  count  of  Toulouse,  whether  inclined
towards  the  innovators,'  as  was  then  the  theme  of  re-
proach, or,  as  is  more  probable,  disgusted  with  the  inso-
lent interference  of  the  pope  and  his  missionaries,  pix>-
voked  them  to  pronounce  a  sentence  of  excommunication
against  him.  Though  this  was  taken  off,  he  was  still
suspected ;  and  upon  the  assassination  of  one

AA 1208.  ^£  ^^  inqmsitors,  in  which  Raymond  had  no
concern.  Innocent  published  a  crusade  both  against  the
count  and  his  subjects,  calling  upon  the  king  of  France,
and  the  nobility  of  that  kingdom,  to  take  up  the  cross,
with  all  the  indulgences  usually  held  out  as  allurements
to  religious  warfare.  Though  Philip  would  not  inter-
fere, a  prodigious  number  of  knights  undertook  this  en«
terprise,  led  partly  by  ecclesiastics,  and  partly  by  some
pf  the  first  b&rons  in  France.  It  was  prosecuted  with
every  atrocious  barbarity  which  superstition,  the  mother
of  crimes,  could  inspire.  Languedoc,  a  coimtry,  for  that
age,  flourishing  and  civilized,  was  laid  waste  by  these
desolators;  her  cities  burned;  her  inhabitants  swept
away  by  &re  and  the  sword. And  this  was  to  punish  a

p.  88.) They  have  pnbllshed,  howeTer,  rahscribingwitDeflsto  thecfaartenof  the

§a  Uvtimnent  of  Loais  VL  In  laTonr  of  flnt  CapeUan  kiogi  In  the  Recoeil  dm

the  same  cbnrch,  conflnnlng  those  of  Historiens,  where  many  are  published,

former  prtnoea. (Appendix, p.  473.)  though  that  of  th»  duke  of  Ouienne  some-

Neither  the  counti  of  Toalooae,  nor^aoy  times  occnra

lord  of  the  proTinoe,  were  present  in  a  '  For  the  real  tenets  of  the  Langue-

Tery  nnmerons  national  assembly,  at  the  dodan  sectaries  I  refer  to  the  last  chap*

eofonation  of  VbiVp  L (Id.  n.  200.) I  terof  the  present  work,  where  the  sol^ect

do  not  recoUect  to  have  ever  met  with  will  be  taken  up  a«aln.
the  name  of  ttw  ooont  of  Tonloase  as  •

Frahce.  the  ALBI6£0IS.  29

fiumticism  ten  thousand  times  more  innocent  than  their
own,  and  errors  which,  according  to  the  worst  imputa-
tions, left  the  laws  of  humanity  and  the  peace  of  social
life  unimpaired.'

The  crusaflers  were  commanded  by  Simon  de  Mont-
fort,  a  man,  like  Cromwell,  whose  intrepidity,  cmg^yj^
hypocrisy,  and  ambition,  marked  him  for  the  ■fiaiust  the
hero  of  a  holy  war. The  energy  of  such  a  '^***«***^
mind,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  enthusiastic  wcoriors,
may  well  account  for  successes  which  then  appeared
miraculous. But  Montfort  was  cut  off  before  he  could
realize his  ultimate object,  an independent princi*
pality ;  and  Baymond  was  able  to  bequeath  the  inhe-
ritance of  his  ancestors  to  his  son.  Borne,  however,  was
not  yet  appeased; upon  some  new  pretence
she  raised  up  a  still  more  formidable  enemy  '**'^^^^
against  the  younger  Baymond. Louis  YUI.  suffered
himself  to  be  diverted  from  the  conquest  of  Guienne,  to
take  the  cross  against  the  supposed  patron  of  heresy.
After  a  short  and  successful  war,  Louis,  dying  prema-
turely, left  the  crown  of  France  to  a  son  only  twelve
years  old. But  the  count  of  Toulouse  was  still  puiBued,
till,  hopeless  of  safety  in  so  unequal  a  struggle,  he  con-
clude a  treaty  upon  very  hard  terms. By  this
he  ceded  the  greater  part  of  Languedoc ;  and,  ^^  ^^^'
giving  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Alphonso,  brother  of
LouiB  IX.,  conlrmed  to  them,  and  to  the  king  in  fisiilure
of  their  descendants,  the  reversion  of  the  rest,  in  exclu-
sion of  any  other  children  whom  he  might  have. Thus
fell  the  ancient  house  of  Toulouse,  through  one  of  those
strange  combinations  of  fortune,  which  thwart  the  na-
tural course  of  human  prosperity,  and  disappoint  the
plims  of  wise  policy  and  beneficent  government.*^

*  ThfO Albigensian  war  oommeoced  "  The  best  aoootmt  of  this  crusade

with  the  storming  of  Bexiers,  and  a  mac-  agaiivt  the  Albigeols  is  to  be  found  in

aacre  wherein  15.000  persona,  or,  aooord-  the  third  ▼olmne  of  Vaiasette's  History

Ing  to  some  narrations,  60,000,  were  put  of  Languedoc ;  the  Benedictine  spirit  of

to  the  sword. Not  a  living  soul  ttcaiped,  mildncv  and  veracity  tolerably  connter-

Bs  witnesses  Msure  us. It  was  here  that  balancing  the  pr^udices  of  orthodoxy,

a  CIstertian  monk,  who  led  on  the  en-  Veliy,  Hist  de  France,  t  iit,  has  abridged

ssders,  answered  the  inquiry,  how  the  this  work.

GkthoUcs  were  to  be  distinguished  fran  M.  Fauriel  edited  for  the  ColIectloD

heretics :  Kill  them  all !  God  will  knew  des  Documens  Inedits,  in  1K37,  a  metrical

kit  oum.  Besides  Vaiasctte,  see  Sismondi,  history  of  the  A.lbiff(*nsian  crusade,  by  a

litttfratont  du  Midi,  t  L  p.  aoi  oontemporaiy  calling  himself  WUliaiy

JO  LOUIS  IX.  Chap.  I.  Part  L

The  rapid  progress  of  royal  power  under  Philip  Au-
Loate  iz.  gostus  and  his  son  had  scarcely  given  the  great
A.]>.  1226.  vassals  time  to  reflect  upon  the  change  which
it  produced  in  their  situation.  The  crown,  with  which
some  might  singly  have  measured  their  forces,  was  now
an  equipoise  to  their  united  weight.  And  such  an
onion  was  hard  to  be  accomplished  among  men  not
always  veiy  sagacious  in  policy,  and  divided  by  sepa-
rate interests  and  animosities.  They  were  not,  however,
insensible  to  the  crisis  of  their  feudal  liberties ;  and  the
minority  of  Louis  IX.,  guided  only  by  his  mother,  the
regent,  Blanche  of  Castile,  seemed  to  offer  a  fJKvourable
opportunity  for  recovering  their  former  situation.  Some
of  the  most  considerable  barons,  the  counts  of  Britany,
Champagne,  and  la  Marche,  had,  during  the  time  ojf
Louis  Yin.,  shown  an  unwillingness  to  push  the  count
of  Toulouse  too  far,  if  they  did  not  even  keep  up  a
secret  understanding  with  him.  They  now  broke  out
into  open  rebellion ;  but  the  address  of  Blanche  de-
tached some  from  the  league,  and  her  firmness  subdued
the  rest.  For  the  first  fifteen  years  of  Louis's  reign,
the  struggle  was  frequentiy  renewed;  till  repeated
humiliations  convinced  the  refractory  that  the  throne
was  no  longer  to  be  shaken.  A  prince  so  feeble  as
Henry  m.  was  unable  to  afford  tiiem  that  aid  from
England,  which,  if  his  grandfather  or  son  had  then
reigned,  might  probably  have  lengthened  these  civil
wars.

But  Louis  IX.  had  methods  of  preserving  his  ascend-
ancy very  different  from  military  prowess.  That  ex-
HJsdiano-  ^^®^*  prince  was  perhaps  the  most  eminent
ter.  Its  ex-  pattern  of  unswerving  probity  and  Christian
**"•"*■' strictness  of  conscience that  ever  held  the

of  Tndela,  which  seems  to  be  an  ima-  tlque  dans  laT^ligiafn.  inflexible,  crnel.et

glnaiy  name. It  contains  9578  ▼enes.  perflde,  11  rtfonisnit  toutes  les  qiialitea

The  anttior  begins  as  a  vebement  enemj  qni  pouvaient  plaire  k  on  moine"  (VoL

of  the  heretics  and  flivoarar  of  the  era-  vt  ft.2Sn  ^ The  Albigensian  sectaries

mde;  bnt  becomes,  before  his  poem  is  had  insulted  the  clergy  and  hissed  SL

half  completed,  equally  advene  to  MoDt>  Bernard ;  which,  of  coarse,  exasperated

fan,  Folqaett  and  the  other  chiefs  of  the  that  irritable  body  and  aggravated  their

persecntlon.  though  never  adopting  here-  revenge.  (Michelet,  ill.  80ft.) Bat  the

tical  opinions.  auodties  of  that  war  have  hardly  been

Sismondi  says— bitterly,  bnt  not  an-  equalled,  and  SIsmondi  was  not  the  maiR

trnly— of  Simon  de  Montfort:— "Habile  to  conceal  them,
gncrrier.  ansttoe  dans  ses  moBura.  fansf

FEAMOS.  HIS  CHARACTER.  31

sceptre  in  any  cotmtiy.  There  is  a  peculiar  beanfy  in
the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  because  it  shows  the  inestimable
benefit  which  a  Tirtuous  king  may  confer  on  his  people,
without  possessing  any  distinguished  genius.  For  nearly
half  a  century  that  he  governed  France  there  is  not  the
smallest  want  of  moderation  or  disinterestedness  in  his
actions ;  and  yet  he  raised  the  influence  of  the  monarchy
to  a  much  higher  point  than  the  most  ambitious  of  his
predecessors.  To  the  surprise  of  his  own  and  later
times,  he  restored  great  part  of  his  conquests
to  Henry  IH.,  whom  he  might  natuifelly  hope  "^  '*•"
to  have  expelled  from  France.  It  would  indeed  havQ
been  a  tedious  work  to  conquer  Guienne,  which  was
fall  of  strong  places  ;  and  the  subjugation  of  such  a  pro-
vince might  have  alarmed  the  other  vassals  of  his  cro*^!!.
But  it  is  the  privilege  only  of  ^'irtuous  minds  to  perceive
that  wisdom  resides  in  moderate  counsels :  no  sagacity
ever  taught  a  selfish  and  ambitious  sovereign  to  forego
the  sweetness  of  immediate  power.  An  ordinary  king,
in  the  circumstances  of  the  French  monarchy,  would
have  fomented,  or,  at  least,  have  rejoiced  in,  the  dissen--
sions  which  broke  out  among  the  principal  vassals;
Louis  constantly  employed  himself  to  reconcile  them.
Jn  this,  too,  his  benevolence  had  all  the  effects  of  far-
sighted  policy.  It  had  been  the  practice  of  his  three
last  predecessors  to  interpose  their  mediation  in  behalf
of  tne  less  powerful  classes,  the  clergy,  the  inferior
nobility,  and  the  inhabitants  of  chartered  towns.  Thus
the  supremacy  of  the  crown  became  a  fiEm:iiliar  idea :  but
the  perfect  integrity  6f  St.  Louis  wore  away  all  distrust,
and  accustomed  even  the  most  jealous  feudataries  to
look  upon  him  as  their  judge  and  legislator.  And  as
the  royal  authority  was  hitherto  shown  only  in  its  most
amiable  prerogatives,  the  dispensation  of  favour,  and
the  redress  of  wrong,  few  were  watchful  enough  to
remark  the  transition  of  the  French  constitution  from  a
feudal  league  to  an  absolute  monarchy.

It  was  perhaps  fortunate  for  the  display  of  St.  Louis's
virtues  that  the  throne  had  already  been  strengthened
by  the  less  innocent  exertions  of  Philip  Augustus  and
Louis  Vni.  A  century  earlier  his  mild  and  scrupulous
character,  unsustained  by  great  actual  power,  might  not
have  inspired  sufficient  awe. But  the  crown  was  now

1

82  CHARACTER  OF  LOUIS  IX. Chap.  I.  Part  L

grown  80  formidable,  and  Lonis  wafl  to  eminent  for  bis
firmness  and  braveiy,  qualities  witbout  wbicb  every
otber  virtue  would  have  been  ineffectual,  that  no  one
thought  it  safe  to  run  wantonly  into  rebellion,  while  his
disinterested  administration  gave  no  one  a  pretext  for  it.
Henoe  the  latter  part  of  his  reign  was  altogether  tranquil,
and  employed  in  watching  over  the  public  peace  and
the  security  of  travellers;  administering  justice  per-
sonally, or  by  the  best  counsellors ;  and  compiling  that
code  of  feudal  customs  called  the  Establishments  of  St.
Louis,  which  is  the  first  monument  of  legislation  after
the  accession  of  the  house  of  Capet.  Not  satisfied  with
the  justice  of  his  own  conduct,  Louis  aimed  at  that  act
of  virtue  which  is  rarely  practised  by  private  men,  and
had  perhaps  no  example  among  kings — restitution.  Com-
nussaries  were  appointed  to  inquire  what  possessions
had  been  unjustly  annexed  to  the  royal  domain  during
the  last  two  reigns.  These  were  restoi-ed  to  the  pro-
prietors, or,  where  length  of  time  had  made  it  diiHcult
to  ascertain  the  claimant,  their  value  was  distributed
among  the  poor.'

It  has  been  hinted  already  that  all  this  excellence  of
heart  in  Louis  IX.  was  not  attended  with  that
strength  of  understanding  which  is  necessary,
we  must  allow,  to  complete  the  usefulness  of  a  sovereign.
During  his  minority  Blanche  of  Castile,  his  mother,  had
filled  tiie  office  of  regent  with  great  courage  and  firm-
ness. But  after  he  grew  up  to  manhood,  her  influence
seems  to  have  passed  the  limit  which  gratitude  and  piety
would  have  assigned  to  it ;  and,  As  her  temper  was  not
very  meek  or  popular,  exposed  the  king  to  some  degree
of  contempt.  He  submitted  even  to  be  restrained  from
tiie  society  of  his  wife  Margaret,  daughter  of  Raymond
count  of  Provence,  a  princess  of  great  virtue  and  con
jugal  affection.  Joinville  relates  a  curious  stoiy,  cha
racteristic  of  Blanche's  arbitrary  conduct,  and  sufficiently
derogatory  to  Louis.'

But  the  principal  weakness  of  this  king,  which  almost

^  Velly,  torn,  v.p.160. This  historian  impoasfble  not  to  rely.— Collection  del

has  verj  properly  dwelt  for  almost  a  Memoires  relatib  k  rffistoire  de  Fraaoih

volmne  on  St  Louis's  internal  adminia-  torn.  ii.  pp^  140-16C.

tration ;  it  is  one  of  the  most  Talnable  J  Coljuction  dee  Memoirsa.  ton.  B

parts  of  his  woric JolnTllle  is  a  real  p.  341.
witness,  on  whom,  when  we  Ilsiri«  it  is

nuHOB.  CHARACTER  OF  LOUIS  IX.  83

effaced  all  the  good  effects  of  his  Tirtaes,  was  snperBti-
tion.  It  wotdd  be  idle  to  sneer  at  those  habits  of  abste-
miousness and  mortification  which  were  pai-t  of  the
religion  of  his  age,  and,  at  the  worst,  were  only  injurious
to  his  own  comfort.  But  he  had  other  prejudices,  which,
though  they  may  be  forgiven,  must  never  be  defended.
No  man  was  ever  more  impressed  than  St.  Louis  with  a
belief  in  the  duty  of  exterminating  all  enemies  to  his
own  faith.  With  these  he  thought  no  layman  ought  to
risk  himself  in  the  perilous  ways  of  reasoning,  but  to
make  answer  with  his  sword  as  stoutly  aa  a  strong  arm
and  a  fiery  zeal  could  carry  that  argument.'  Though,
fortunately  fbr  his  &me,  tiie  persecution  against  ihe
Albigeois,  which  had  been  the  disgrace  of  his  father's
short  reign,  was  at  an  end  before  he  reached  manhood,
he  suffered  an  hypocritical  monk  to  establish  a  tribunal
at  Paris  for  the  suppression  of  heresy,  where  many  inno-
cent persons  suffered  death.

But  no  events  in  Louis's  life  were  more  memorable
than  his  two  crusades,  which  lead  us  to  look  back  on
the  nature  and  circumstances  of  that  mopt  singular  phe-
nomenon in  European  histoiy.  Though  the  crusades
involved  all  the  western  nations  of  Europe,  without
belonging  particularly  to  any  one,  yet,  as  France  was
"  more  distinguished  than  the  rest  in  most  of  those  enter-
prises,  1  shall  introduce  the  subject  as  a  sort  of  digres-
sion from  the  main  course  of  French  history.

Even  before  the  violation  of  Palestine  by  the  Saracen
arms  it  had  been  a  prevailing  custom  among  The
the  ChriBtians  of  Europe  to  visit  those  scenes  Cnuides.
rendered  interesting  by  religion,  partly  through  delight
in  the  effects  of  local  association,  partly  in  obedience  to
the  prejudices  or  commands  of  superstition.  These  pil-
grimages became  more  frequent  in  later  times,  in  spite,
perhaps  in  consequence,  of  the  danger  and  hardiuiips

*  Anaal  vons  dis-je,  me  dtot  le  roy.  This  pasBage,  which  abows  a  tolerable

que  nul,  si  n'est  grant  clerc,  et  theologlen  degree  of  bigotry,  did  not  require  to  be

parlkit,  ne  doit  dlspntar  anx  Jnifi:  mail  strained Carther  stUl  by  Mosbeim,  yoL liL

dolt  I'onmie  lay,  qoant  11  oit  meedtre  de  p.  273  (edit  1803). I  may  observe,  by

la  foy  direUenne,  defendre  la  chose,  non  the  way, that this  writer,  who  sees

]Ms  senlement  des  paroles,  mais  k  bonne  nothing  in  Ixmls  IX.  except  his  tntole-

espee  traDchant,  et  en  frapper  les  m^-  noce,  onght  not  to  have  diarged  htm

aaos  et  mescreans  a  trayers  le  corps  tant  with  Inulng  an  edict  In  &voa7  of  the

qn'eUe  y  ponira  entier.—Joinville,  In  InqnisiYlon  in  1229,  when  be  had  act

CoOectioa  les  Memolrss,  torn.  L  pi  23.  acsomod  the  gorenunent
VOL I.  X>

34  THE  CRUSADES.  Chap.  I.  Past  S

wMcb  attended  them.  For  a  while  the  Mohammedan
possessors  of  Jerusalem  permitted,  or  even  encouraged,
a  devotion  which  they  found  lucrative;  but  this  was
interrupted  whenever  the  ferocious  insolence  with  which
they  regarded  all  infidels  got  the  better  of  their  rapacity.
During  the  eleventh  century,  when,  from  increasing
superstition  and  some  particular  flancies,  the  pilgrims
were  more  numerous  than  ever,  a  change  took  place  in
the  government  of  Palestine,  which  was  overrun  by  the
Turkish  hordes  from  the  North.  These  barbariana
treated  the  visitors  of  Jerusalem  with  still  greater  con-
tumely, mingling  with  their  Mohammedan  bigotry  a
consciousness  df  strength  and  courage,  and  a  scorn  of
the  Christians,  whom  they  knew  only  by  the  debased
natives  of  Greece  and  Syria,  or  by  these  humble  and
defenceless  palmers.  When  such  insxdts  became  known
throughout  £hirope,  they  excited  a*  keen  sensation  of
resentment  among  nations  equally  courageous  and
devout,  which,  though  wanting  as  yet  any  definite
means  of  satisfying  itself,  was  ripe  for  whatever  fjeivour-
able  conjuncture  might  arise.

Twenty  years  before  the  first  crusade  Gregory  VIL
had  projected  the  scheme  of  embodying  Europe  in  arms
against  Asia — a  scheme  worthy  of  his  daring  mind,  and
which,  perhaps,  waa  never  forgotten  by  Urban  11.,  who
in  everything  loved  to  imitate  his  great  predecessor.*
This  design  of  Gregory  was  founded  upon  the  supplica-
tion of  the  Greek  emperor  Michael,  which  was  renewed
by  Alexius  Comnenus  to  Urban  with  increased  impor-
tunity. The  Turks  had  now  taken  Nice,  and  threatened,
from  the  opposite  shore,  the  very  wallB  of  Constanti-
nople. Every  one  knows  whose  hand  held  the  torch
to  that  inflammable  mass  of  enthusiasm  that  pervaded
Europe;  the  hennit  of  Picardy,  who,  roused  by  wit-
nessed wrongs  and  imagined  visions,  journeyed  from
land  to  land,  the  apostle  of  an  holy  war.  The  preaching
of  Peter  was  powerfully  seconded  by  Urban*
^^*  ^ *  In  the  councils  of  Piacenza  and  of  Clermont

*  Gregory  addmsed,  in  1074,  a  sort  of  walls  of  Constantinople. No  mentioQ  off

en^clie  letter  to  all  who  would  defend  Palestine  is  made  in  this  letter. t^Mj*,

tlie  Cbrlstian  faith,  enforcing  upon  them  OonciUa,  L  x.  p.  44. St  Marc,  Abnpa

the  doty  of  taking  up  arms  a^iinst  the  Chron.  de  I'Hlst.  de  lltaUe,  i  liL  pk

taTsceoib  who  had  almott  come  up  to  the  6K.

Framce.  the  crusades.  35

ihe  deliveranoe  of  Jerusalem  was  eloquently  recom-
mended and  eznltingly  undertaken.  ''  It  is  the  will  of
God!"  was  the  tumultuous  cry  that  broke  from  the
heart  and  lips  of  the  ctssembly  at  Clermont ;  and  these
words  afford  at  once  the  most  obvious  and  most  certain
explanation  of  the  leading  principle  of  the  crusades.
Later  writers,  incapable  of  sympathising  with  the  blind
fervour  of  zeal,  or  anxious  to  find  a  pretext  for  its  effect
somewhat  more  congenial  to  the  spirit  of  our  times,
have  sought  political  reasons  for  tiiat  which  resulted
only  from  predominant  affections.  No  su^estion  oi
these  will,  I  believe,  be  found  in  contemporaiy  histo-
rians. To  rescue  the  Greek  empire  from  its  imminent
peril,  and  thus  to  secure  Christendom  from  enemies
who  professed  towards  it  eternal  hostility,  might  have
been  a  legitimate  and  magnanimous  ground  of  interfer-
ence ;  but  it  operated  scarcely,  or  not  at  all,  upon  those
who  took  the  cross.  Itai^es,  indeed,  strange  ignorance
of  the  eleventh  century  to  ascribe  such  refinements  of
later  times  even  to  the  princes  of  that  age.  The  Turks
were  no  doubt  repelled  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Con-
stantinople by  the  crusaders ;  but  this  was  a  collateral
effect  of  their  enterprise.  Nor  had  they  any  disposition
to  serve  the  interest  of  the  Greeks,  whom  they  soon
came  to  hate,  and  not  entirely  without  provocation,  with
almost  as  much  animosity  as  the  Moslems  themselves.

Every  means  was  used  to  excite  an  epidemical  frenzy :
the  remission  of  penance,  the  dispensation  from  those
practices  of  self-denial  which  superstition  imposed  or
suspended  at  pleasure,  the  absolution  of  all  sins,  and  the
assurance  of  eternal  felicity.  None  doubted  that  such
as  perished  in  the  war  received  immediately  the  reward
of  martyrdom.*"  False  miracles  and  fanatical  prophecies,
which  were  never  so  frequent,  wrought  up  the  enthu-
siasm to  a  still  higher  pitch.  And  these  devotional
feelings,  which  are  usually  thwarted  and  balanced  by
other  passions,  fell  in  with  every  motive  that  could  in
fluence  the  men  of  that  time ;  with  curiosity,  restless-
ness, the  love  of  licence,  thirst  for  war,  emulation,
ambition. Of  the  princes  who  assumed  the  cross,  some

^  N«m  qui  pro  Chrisli  nomine  docer*  InfloniM,  verum  et  peccaroinnm  et  delio*
tsntes,  in  acie  fldelium  et  CbrlstiMiA  toruxn  oomlmodam  credimus  aboUtioueu
BiUtiA  dkantnr  oocmnbei*,  dob  lolnm promererl. Will.  Tyr.  I.  x.  c.  90.

i>  2

36  i^IBST  CRUSADE.  Chap.  L  Paki  L

probably  from  the  begmning  specnlAted  upon  fomung
independent  ostablisbments  in  the  East.  In  later
periods  the  temporal  benefits  of  undertaking  a  cmsade
undoubtedly  blended  themfielves  with  less  selfish  consi-
derations. Men  resorted  to  Palestine,  as  in  modem  times
they  have  done  to  the  colonies,  in  oider  to  redeem  their
fame,  or  repair  their  fortune.  Thus  Oui  de  Lusignan,
after  flying  from  France  for  murder,  was  ultimately
raised  to  the  throne  of  Jerusalem.  To  the  more  vulgar
class  were  held  out  inducements  which,  though  ab-
sorbed in  the  overruling  &naticism  of  the  first  crusade,
might  be  exceedingly  efficacious  when  it  began  rather
to  flag.  During  the  time  that  a  crusader  bore  the  cross
he  was  free  from  suit  for  his  debts,  and  the  interest  of
them  was  entirely  abolished ;  he  was  exempted,  in  some
instances  at  least,  from  taxes,  and  placed  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  church,  so  that  he  could  not  be  impleaded
in  any  civil  court,  except  on  criminal  charges,  or  dis-
putes relating  to  land."

None  of  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  took  a  part  in  the
first  cmsade;  but  many  of  their  chief  vassals,  great
part  of  the  inferior  nobility,  and  a  countless  multitude
of  the  common  people.  The  priests  left  their  parishes,
and  the  monks  their  cells ;  and  though  the  peasantry
were  then  in  general  bound  to  the  soil,  we  find  no
check  given  to  their  emigration  for  this  cause.  Num-
bers of  women  and  children  swelled  the  crowd ;  it  ap-
peared a  sort  of  sacrilege  to  repel  any  one  from  a  work
which  was  considered  as  the  manifest  design  of  Provi-
dence. But  if  it  were  lawfrd  to  interpret  the  will  of
Providence  by  events,  few  undertakings  have  been  more
branded  by  its  disapprobation  than  the  crusades.  So
many  crimes  and  so  much  misery  have  seldom  been
accumulated  in  so  short  a  space  as  in  the  three  years  of
the  first  expedition.  We  should  be  warranted  by  con-
temporary writers  in  stating  the  loss  of  the  Giristians
alone  during  this  period  at  nearly  a  million ;  but  at  the
least  computation  it  must  have  exceeded  half  that  num-
ber."* To  engage  in  the  crusade,  and  to  perish  in  it,

'  Otho  of  Fridngen,  c  SB,  hM In-  in 1314. Ordonnanon de> Rots de

wrted  a  boll  of  Eugenlns  m.  in  ll4e,  Fnmoe,  tom.  i. See  also  Da  Gauge,  toc^

containing lome of these privileges.  Ctnds  Privilegla.

OtfaM*  are  granted  by  FfaiUp  Angnstna  d  Williain  of  Tyn  Mya  that  at  the

FB4170E.  FIRST  CRUSADE.  37

were  almost  synonymous.  Few  of  those  myriads  who
were  mustered  in  the  plains  of  Nice  returned  to  gladden
their  friends  in  Europe  with  the  story  of  their  triumph
at  Jerusalem.  Besieging  alternately  and  besieged  in
Antioch,  they  drained  to  the  lees  the  cup  of  misery:  '
three  hundred  thousand  sat  down  before  that  place;
next  year  there  remained  but  a  sixth  part  to  pursue  the
enterprise.  But  their  losses  were  least  in  the  field  of
battle ;  the  intrinsic  superiority  of  European  prowess
was  constantly  displayed;  the  angel  of  Asia,  to  apply
the  bold  language  of  our  poet,  high  and  unmatchable,
where  her  rival  was  not,  became  a  fear ;  and  the  Chris-
tian lances  bore  all  before  them  in  their  shock  from
Nice  to  Antioch,  Edessa,  and  Jerusalem.  It
was  here,  where  their  triumph  was  consum-  ^^'
mated,  that  it  was  stained  with  the  most  atrocious  mas-
sacre ;  not  limited  to  the  hour  of  resistance,  but  re-
newed deliberately  eyen  after  that  famous  penitential
procession  to  the  holy  sepulchre,  which  might  have
calmed  their  ferocious  dispositions,  if,  through  the  mis-
guided enthusiasm  of  the  enterprise,  it  had  not  been
rather  calculated  to  excite  them.*

The  conquests  obtained  at  such  a  price  by  the  first
crus€ide  were  chiefly  comprised  in  the  mari-  .  ,,

•  1 •  «• n •  -r-i  • ii  11  f  JAtin  con*

tune  parts  of  Syria.  Except  the  state  of  questAiD
Edessa  beyond  liie  Euphrates,'  which,  in  its  ^^•■
best  days,  extended  over  great  part  of  Mesopotamia,
the  Latin  possessions  never  reached  more  than  a  few
leagues  from  the  sea.  Within  the  bsmrier  of'  Mount
Libanus  their  arms  might  be  feared,  but  their  power
was  never  established;  and  the  prophet  was  still  in-

review  before  Nice  there  were  foand  tlon  of  his  great  work. The  original

600,000  of  both  cexet,  exclusive  of  100,000  writera  are.  chiefly  collected  in  two  folio

cavalry  armed  in  nudl. L.  it.  c.  23.  Bat  volnmes,  enatlod  Oeeta  Dei  per  Francos,

Folk  of  Gbartres  redcons  ibe  same  mmi-  Hanover,  1611.

ber,  besides  women,  children,  and  priests.  t  Edessa  was  a  little  Chrlstlaa  prind-

An  Immense  slaughter  had  previoosly  pality,  sarrounded  by,  and  tributary  to,

been  made  in  Hungary  of  the  rabble  the  Tuifcs. The  Inhabitants invited

onder  Gaaltier  Sans-Avolr  Baldwin,  on  his  progress  tn  the  first  cm*

*  The  work  of  Mailly  entitled  L'Esprit  ssde,  and  he  made  no  great  scruple  of
desCroisades  is  deserving  of  considerable  supplanting  the  reigning  prince,  who
pnlse  for  its  dlligeDoe  and  impartiality,  taideed  is  represented  as  a  tyrant  an4
U  carries  the  history,  however,  no  Ikrther  usurper.  "Eaprit  des  Croisades,  t  iv.  p^
dMn  the  first  ezpeditioa.  Gibbon's  two  63.  De  Oui^ies,  Hist,  des  Huns,  torn,  ii
chapten on  the  crusades,  though  not  p.  136-162.

Without  inaocomcics,  are  a  brilliant  poi^

38  SECOND  CRUSADK.  Chap.  I.  Part  !•

voked  in  the  mosques  of  Aleppo  and  Damascus.  The
princixxalitj  of  Antioch  to  the  north,  the  kingdom  of
Jerusalem  with  its  feudal  dependencies  of  Tripoli  and
Tiberias  to  the  south,  were  assigned,  the  one  to  Boe-
mond,  a  brother  of  Bobert  Guiscard,  count  of  Apulia,
the  odier  to  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,'  whose  extraordmaiy
merit  had  justly  raised  him  to  a  degree  of  influence
with  the  chief  crusaders  that  has  been  sometimes  con-
founded with  a  legitimate  authority.*'  In  the  course  oi
a  few  years  Tyre,  Ascalon,  and  itie  other  cities  upon
the  6ear<$oast,  were  subjected  by  the  successors  of  God-
frey on  the  throne  of  Jerusalem.  But  as  their  enemies
had  been  stunned,  not  killed,  by  the  western  storm,  the
Latins  were  constantly  molested  by  the  Mohammedans
of  Egypt  and  Syria.  They  were  exposed  as  the  outposts
of  Christendom,  with  no  respite  and  few  resources.  A
Q^coDd  second  crusade,  in  which  the  emperor  Conrad
cnuade.  HI.  and  Louis  yn.  of  France  were  engaged,
AjMut.  Qj^ch  with  seyenty  thousand  cavalry,  made
scarce  any  diversion ;  and  that  vast  army  wasted  away
in  the  passage  of  Natolia.'

The  decline  of  the  Christian  establishments  in  the
East  is  ascribed  by  WiUiam  of  Tyre  to  the  extreme
Decline  of  viciousncss  of  their  manners,  to  the  adoption
'^Jrf^  of  European  arms  by  the  orientals,  and  to  the
Sea  iiube  union  of  the  Mohammedan  principalities  under
^^^  a  single  ohief.^ Without  denying  the  opeia-

>  Godfrey  nerer  took  the  tide  of  King  mlf^tbeeometUngpacolUirintfaeblede,

of  Jerusalem,  not  choosing,  he  said,  to  deelret  him  to  do  the  time  with  hit

wear  a  crown  of  gold  in  that  city  where  iword ;  and  the  hero  obliges  him  by  de-

hto  Saviour  had been  crowned  with  moliehlng  a  second  camel. Will.  Tjt.  I.

thorns. Baldwin.  Godfrey's  brother,  who  lx.o.3a.

succeeded  hihi  withtai  two  yean,  entitles  *  Vertot  pnto  the  destruction  in  the

hinuelf. Rex Hiemaalem, Latinorum  second  crusade  at  two  hundred  thousand

primus. Will.  Tyr.  I.  U.  c.  la.  men  (Hist  de  Maltha,  p.  129) ;  and  from

h  The  heroes  of  the  cmssde  are  Just  William  of  Tyre's  lai^nage,  thsn  ascnB

tike  those  of  romance. Godfkvy  is  not  no  reasoii  to  «^ww««<*«'  this  an  i  isflmiiis

only  the  wisest  but  the  strongest  man  in  tlon. L.  xvi.  c  19.

the  anny. Pkrfaaps  Tasso  has  lest  some  k  L.  zxl.  c  T. John  of  Vitiy  also

part  of  this  pkytieal  superiority  for  the  mentions  the  change  of  weapom  by  tha

sake  of  oootrssUng  him  with  the  imsgl*  Sanwenslnimitatiooof  theLatiiH,usiiv

nary  Rinaldo. He  cleaves  a  Turk  in  the  lanoes  and  coat  of  mail  iwtead  of

twain  from  the  shoulder  to  the  haunch,  bows  and  atrows,  c  92. But,  aooonSi^

A  noble  Arab^  after  the  taking  of  Jem-  toa  more  aneleot  writer,  part  of  SoUman'a

salem.  requests  him  to  try  his  sword  upon  (the  KlUdge  Anisn  of  De  Gnignaa)  amy

a  camel,  when  Godfrey,  with  ease,  cuts  In  the  first  crusade  was  in  armour,  lorldt

^  the  head.  The  Arab,  suspecting  there  et  galels  et  clypeis  aunis  valda  armatL

France.  SECOND  CRUSADE.  8V

Hon  of  these  causes,  and  especially  the  last,  it  is  easy  to
perceive  one  more  radical  tnan  all  the  three,  the  inade-
quacy of  their  means  of  self-defence.  The  kingdom  of
Jerusalem  was  guarded  only,  exclusive  of  European
volunteers,  by  the  feudal  service  of  eight  hundred  and
sixty-six  kn^hts,  attended  each  by  four  archers  on
horseback,  by  a  militia  of  five  thousand  and  seventy-five
burghers,  and  by  a  conscription,  in  great  exigencies,  of
the  remaining  population.""  William  of  Tyre  mentions
an  army  of  one  thousand  three  hundred  horse  and
fifteen  thousand  foot,  as  the  greatest  which  had  ever
been  collected,  and  predicts  the  utmost  success  from  it,
if  wisely  conducted."  This  was  a  little  before  the
irruption  of  Saladin.  In  the  last  fatal  battle  Lusignan
seems  to  have  had  somewhat  a  larger  force."*  Nothing
can  more  strikingly  evince  the  ascendancy  of  Europe
than  the  resistance  of  these  Frankish  acquisitions  in
Syria  during  nearly  two  hundred  years.  Several  of
their  victories  over  the  Moslems  were  obtained  against
such  dispariiy  of  numbeiB,  ih^t  they  may  be  compared
with  whatever  is  most  illustrious  in  history  or  romance.^
These  perhaps  were  less  due  to  the  descendants  of  the
first  crusaders,  settled  in  the  Holy  Land,**  than  to  those  vo-
lunteers from  Europe  whom  martial  ardour  and  religious
zeal  impelled  to  the  service.  It  was  the  penance  commonly
imposed  upon  men  of  rank  for  the  most  heinous  crimes,

Albertas  Aquenata,  L  IL  o.  2T. I  may  to  settle  in  It

add  to  tills  a  testlincoy  of  another  kind,  *  L.  zzli.  c  2T.

not  Iflsa  dedsiTe. In  tbe  abbey  of  St.  'A prfano introlta Latinonim in

Denis  there  wets  ten  plctnres.  in  stained  terrsm  ssaetam,  says  John  de  Vltry,

glass,  repreaentiiiK  siege*  and  battles  In  nostri  tot  milites  in  nno  pnaUo  congre-

tbe  flnt  crossde. These  were  made  by  gare  neqtilTenmt. Erant  enim  mille

order  of  Soger,  the  minister  of  Loals  VL,  dncenti  militca  loricati ;  pedltom  antem

and  oonseqnently  in  the  early  part  of  the  cnm  armis,  arcab\is  et  baliatla  drciter

twelfth  century. In  many  of  them  the  vlgtntl  mlUia,  inftnsta  expedltloni  Inter-

TtirlcB  an  painted  in  coats  of  mail,  some-  ftiisse  dlcontnr. Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,

timea  even  in  a  plated  cniiaas. In  othen  p.  1118.

tfafsy  arc  quite  unarmed,  and  in  flowing  P  A  brief  summary  of  these  Tictories  ia

nibes. MoDtfiuiooo,  Manmnena  de  U  given  by  John  of  Vitry,  c.  93.

Honaidile  FYan^alse,  t  L  pL  SO.  ^  Many  of  these  were  of  a  mongrel  es-

™  OlbboD,  c.  a9,  note  126. Jerusalem  traction,  descended  trcm  a  Frank  parent

lisdf  was  very  thinly  inhabited. For  all  on  one  side,  and  Syrian  on  tbe  other,

the  hfathgips  says  WiUiam  of  Tyre,  had  These  were  called  Poulains,  Pnllani ;  and

perished  in  the  massacre  when  the  city  were  looked  upon  aa  a  mean,  degenerate

was  taken ;  or,  If  any  eacqied,  they  were  race. Du  Cange ;  Gloas.  ▼.  Fullani ;  and

not  allowed  to  retnm :  no  heathen  befaig  Obeervationa  snr  JolnTiUe,  in  Collection

thooght  fit  to  dwell  in  the  holy  dtj.  des  M^motres  nrUtift  k  I'HIstolM  d»

aakhrlskiHted  some  Arabian  Christians  trance.  t.U.  p.  IMk

♦0  TfflRD  CRUSADE.  Chap.  I.  Part  I

to  serve  a  number  of  years  under  the  banner  of  tlie
cross. Thus  a  perpetual  supply  of  warriors  was  poured
in  fix)m  Europe ;  and  in  this  sense  the  crusades  may  be
said  to  have  lasted  without  intermission during  tho
whole  period  of  the  Latin  settlements. Of  these  de-
fenders the  most  renowned  were  the  military  orders  of
the  Knights  of  the  Temple  and  of  the  Hospital  of  St.
John;'  instituted,  the  one  in  1124,  the  other  in  1118,
for  the  sole  purpose  of  protecting  the  Holy  Land. Tho
Teutonic  order,  established  in  1190,  when  the  kingdom
of  Jerusalem  was  Mling,  soon  diverted  its  schemes  of
holy  war£GLre  to  a  very  different  quarter  of  the  world.
Large estates,  as  well in Palestine  as throughout
Europe,  enriched  the  two  former  institutions ;  but  the
pride,  rapaoiousness,  and  misconduct  of  both,  especially
of  the  Templars,  seem  to  have  balanced  the  advantages
derived  firom  their  valour.* At length  the
^^  ^^^'  famous  Saladin,  usurping  the  throne  of  a  feeble
dynas^  which  had  reigned  in  Egypt,  broke  in  upon  the
Christians  of  Jerusalem ;  the  king  and  the  kingdom  fell
into  his  hands;  nothing  remained  but  a  few  strong
towns  upon  the  sea-coast.
These  misfortunes  roused  once  more  the  prLnoes  of
Thiid Europe,  and  the  third  crusade  was  undertaken
crnaade. by  three  of  her  sovereigns,  the  greatest  in
AA1189.  personal estimation as  well  as  dignity — ^by
the  emperor  Frederic  Barbarossa,  Philip  Augustus  of
France,  and  our  own  Bichard  Coeur  de  Lion. But  this,
like  the  preceding  enterprise,  failed  of  permanent  effect ;
and  those  feats  of  romantic  prowess  which  made  the
name  of  Bichard  so  famous  both  in  Europe  and  Asia'
proved  only  the  total  inefiicacy  of  all  exertions  in  an
attempt  so  impracticable ;  Palestine  was  never  the  scene
A.D.  laoi.  of  another  crusade. One  great  armament  was
A.R1318.  diverted  to  the  siege  of  Constantinople;  and

'  The  St  John of  Jennalem  iras  thooaaiid.  In  Europe. The  latter  were

neither  the  Erugellst  nor  yet  the  Bep-  almost  aa  mnch  reproadied  as  the  Tcm-

tist,  bat  a  certain  Ojrpriot,  enniamed  the  plars  for  their  pride  and  avarice. JL

Charitable,  who  had  been  patriarch  of  xriii.  o.  e.
Alexandria.  t  When  a  Turk*!  hone  started  at  a

*  See  a  canons  Instance  of  the  mb-  bush,  he  wonM  dilde  him,  Joiuvilie  sajn,

eoodoct  and  insolence  of  the  Templara,  with.  Cnidea-to  qu'y  soft  le  ni  Bkhanlf

In  WUliam  of  Tyre.  L  xx.  c.  82. The  Women  kept  their  children  ^olet  with

Templan  possessed  nine  thonsand  ma-  the  threat  of  bringing  Richai^  to  tbsoL
knights  of  St  John  nineteen

fkAsat.  CRUSAD£S  OF  ST.  LOUIS.  41

another  wasted  in  froitlesB  attempts  upon  Egypt.  The
emperor  Frederio  IL  afterwards  procured  the  restoration
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Saracens ;  but  the  Christian  princes
of  Syria  were  unable  to  defend  it,  and  their  possessions
were  gradually  reduced  to  the  maritime  towns.  Acre»
the  last  of  these,  was  finally  taken  by  storm  in  1291 ;
and  its  ruin  closes  the  history  of  the  Latin  dominion  in
Syria,  which  Europe  had  already  ceased  to  protect.

The  two  last  crusades  were  undertaken  by  St.  Louis.
In  the  first  he  was  attended  by  2800  knights  cnuadeiof
and  50,000  ordinaiy  troops.'^  He  landed  at  sllouIi.
Damietta  in  Egypt,  for  that  country  was  now  ^•^-  ^**''
deemed  the  key  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  easily  made  him-
self master  of  the  city.  But  advancing  up  the  countiy,
he  found  natural  impediments  as  well  as  enemiei;  in  lus
way;  the  Turks  assailed  him  with  Greek  fire,  an  in-
strument of  warfare  almost  as  surprising  and  terrible  as
gunpowder;  he  lost  his  brother  the  count  of  Artois,
with  many  knights,  at  Massoura,  near  Cairo  ;  and  began
too  late  a  retreat  towards  Damietta.  Such  calamities
now  fell  upon  this  devoted  army  as  have  scarce  ever
been  surpassed ;  hunger  and  want  of  every  kind,  aggra-
vated by  an  unsparing  pestilence.  At  length  the  king
was  made  prisoner,  and  very  few  of  the  army  escaped
the  Turkish  scimitar  in  battle  or  in  captivity.  i\)ur
himdred  thousand  livres  were  paid  as  a  ransom  for
Louis.  He  returned  to  France,  and  passed  near  twenty
years  in  the  exercise  of  those  virtues  which  are  his  best
title  to  canonization.  But  the  fisital  illusions  of  supersti-
tion were  still  always  at  his  heart ;  nor  did  it  fail  to  bo
painfully  observed  by  his  subjects  that  he  still  kept  the
cross  upon  his  garment.  His  last  expedition
was  originally  designed  for  Jerusalem.  But  ^^'^^^
,  he  had  received  some  intimation  that  the  king  of  Tunis
was  desirous  of  embracing  Christianity.  That  these  in-
tentions might  be  carried  into  effect,  he  sailed  out  of  his
way  to  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  laid  siege  to  that  city.
A  fever  here  put  an  end  to  his  life,  sacrificed  to  that

*  The  Arabian  wrlten  give  him  9500  bon's  authority,  I  pat  the  main  body  at

knights  and 130,000  oommon  aoldien.  60,000 ;  bat,  if  JoinviUe  liae  stated  thia,

But  I  greatly  prefer  the  aathority  of  1  have  mined  the  paaiagB Their  vftMili

JoinviUe,  who  has  twice  mentioned  the  amoonted  to  1800.
noBber  ofkolshtaintfaetezt. OnQib-

42  PHILIP  III.  Chap.  I.  Pabt  I

mling  pafision  which  never  wonld  have  forsaken  hinx.
But  he  had  survived  the  spirit  of  the  crusades ;  the  dis-
astrous expedition  to  Egypt  had  cured  his  subjects,
though  not  himself,  of  their  folly;'  his  son,  after
making  terms  with  Tunis,  returned  to  France;  the
Christians  were  suffered  to  lose  what  they  still  retained
in  the  Holy  Land ;  and  though  many  princes  in  subse-
quent ages  talked  loudly  of  renewing  the  war,  the  pro-
mise, if  it  were  ever  sincere,  was  never  accomplishedi

Louis  IX.  had  increased  the  royal  domam  by  the
annexation  of  several  counties  and  other  less  impor-

PhiUp  m.  tant  fie& ; but  soon  after  the  accession  of

Aj>.  1270.  Philip  ni*  (sumamed  the  Bold)  it  received  a
fisur  more  considerable  augmentation.  Alfonso,  the  late
king's  brother,  had  been  invested  with  the  county  of
Poitou,  ceded  by  Henry  III.,  together  with  part  of
Auvergne  and  of  Saintonge  ;  and  held  also,  as  has  been
said  before,  the  remains  of  llie  great  fief  of  Toulouse,  in
right  of  his  wife  Jane,  heiress  of  Baymond  VIL  Upon
his  death,  and  that  of  his  countess,  which  hap-

^^  ^^^'  pened  about  the  same  time,  the  king  entered

into  possession  of  all  these  territories. This  acquisition

brought  the  sovereigns  of  France  into  contact  with  new

neighbours,  the  kings  of  Aragon  and  the  powers  of

Italy. The  first  great  and lasting  foreign

Aj>.  1270.  ^^^  which  they  carried  on  was  that  of  Philip
III.  and  Philip  lY.  against  the  former  kingdom,  excited
by  the  insurrection  of  Sicily.  Though  effecting  uo
change  in  the  boundaries  of  their  dominions,  this  war

*  The  refoMl  of  Joinirnie  to  acoam-  Jets. Depula  ouy-je  dire  a  pltideinv,  qnc

pany  the  king  in  this  second  croBade  is  cenz  qui  luy  oonseillerent  i'enteiprimie

veiy  memorable,  and  glvea  na  an  ins^t  de  la  croix  firent  nn  tres  grant  mal.  et

Into  the  bad  elTecta  of  both  expeditions,  pecherentmortellement.  Car  tandis  qu'il

Le  Boy  de  Frauce  et  le  Roy  de  NaTarre  ftist  an  royanme  de  Franoe,  tout  son

me  presaoient  fort  de  me  croiaer,  et  en-  royanme  Tivoit  en  patx,  et  regnoit  Jus-

treprendre  le  chemin  du  pelerlnage  de  la  tice. Et  incontinent  qu'il  en  fbat  on,

eroiz. Mais  Je  leur  respondi,  que  tandis  tout  oommen^a  k  d^Uner  et  h  empirer.

que  J'avole  esttf  oultre-mer  an  service  de  —  T.  ii.  p.  158.

Dieu,  que  les  gens  et  ofBoen  du  Roy  de In  the  Fabliaux  of  Le  Grand  d'Ausvy

FVauoe  avoient  trop'grer^et  fouUtfmes  we  have  a  neat  poem  by  Rutiiboefuf,  a

SQldets,  tant  qu'ils  en  estoient  apovris ;  writer  of  St.  Louis's  age,  in  a  dialogue

tenement  que  James  U  ne  seroit  que  between  a  cmsadtr  and  a  noO'cruaader,

eulx  et  moy  ne  nous  en  sortissons. Et  wherein,  thou^  he  gives  the  last  won!

veole  clerement,  si  Je  me  mectoie  an  to  the  former,  It  is  plain  that  he  derigneJ

pelerinage  do  La  croix,  que  oe  seroit  la  the  q>poeite  scale  to  prepoodaate  —  T.

totals  Jestmction  de  mesdia  povres  sub-  11.  p.  163.

FsAHCE.  PBIUP  Jy.  43

may  be  deemed  a  sort  of  epoch  in  the  history  of  France
and  Spain,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Italy,  to  which  it  more
peculiarly  belongs.

There  still  remained  five  great  and  ancient  fiefis  of
the  French  crown ; Champagne, Gnienne,  Flanders,
Bnigondy, and Biitany. But Philip  lY.,  puuptht
nsnally  csJled  the  Fair,  married  the  heiress  of  f*''*
the  first,  a  little  before  his  father's  death ;  and  ^^  *^"'
although  he  governed  that  county  in  her  name,  without
pretending  to  reunite  it  to  the  royal  domain,  it  was,  at
least  in  a  political  sense,  no  longer  a  part  of  the  feudal
body. With  some  of  his  other  vassals  Philip  used  more
violent  methods.  A  parallel  might  be  drawn  between  this
prince  and  Philip  Augustus. But  while  in  ambition,
violence  of  temper,  and  unprincipled  rapacity,  as  well
as  in  the  success  of  their  attempts  to  establish  ^^g-^^,^
an  absolute  authority,  they  may  be  considered  ment  of  tb«
as  nearly  equal,  we  may  remark  this  difference,  ^^^|^y
that  Philip  the  Fair,  who  was  destitute  of  mili-  jj^r  ua
tary  talents,  gained  those  ends  by  dissimula-  ''^
tion  which  his  predecessor  had  reached  by  force.

The  duchy  of  Guienne,  though  somewhat  abridged  of
its  original  extent,  was  still  by  far  the  most  considerable
of  the  French  fiefs,  even  independently  of  its  connexion
wiih  England.^  Philip,  by  dmt  of  perfidy,  and  by  the
egregious  incapacity  of  Edmund,  brother  of  Edward  I.,
contrived  to  obtain,  and  to  keep  for  several  years,  the
possession  of  this  great  province.  A  quarrel
Smox«^8omeBVencirL.d£xgliBheaUorBlavH.g  ^"^
provoked  retaliation,  till  a  sort  of  piratical  war  com-
menced between  the  two  countries,  Edward,  as  duke  of
Guienne,  was  summoned  into  the  king's  court  to  answer
for  the  trespass  of  his  subjects.  Upon  this  he  despatched
his  brother  to  settle  terms  of  reconciliation,  with  fuller

y  Fhtllp  was  highly  offended  that  In-  P.  ivge  Francl»,  E.  rege  Anglto  tenente

fltmments  made  In  Guienne  should  be  dncatam  Aqnitanlc Sereral  precedents

dftted  by  the  year  of  Edward's  reign,  and  were  shown  by  the  English  where  the

not  of  his  own. This  almost  sole  bodge  counts  of  Toulouse  had  used  the  form,

of  sorereign^  had  leen  preserred  by  the  Regnante  A.  comlte  Toloeo. Rymer

Wncpi  of  Fhmoe  during  all  the .  fendal  t  ii.  p.  1083. As  this  Is  the  flret  time

ages. A  struggle  took  place  about  It.  that  I  quote  Rymer,  it  may  be  proper  te

which  is  recorded  In  a  curious  Tetter  from  observe  that  my  references  are  to  the

John  de  Orellll  to  Edward. The  French  London  edition,  the  paging  of  which  is

eonrt  at  tost  consented  to  let  dates  be  preserred  on  the  margin  of  that  priiitsd

thus  expressed:  Actum  ftiit,  regnante  at  the  Hague.

44  AGGRANDISEMENT  OP  FRANCE. Chap.  I.  Past  L

powers  Hian  shonld  have  been  irtrnsted  to  bo  credtdoiis
a  negotiator.  Philip  bo  outwitted  this  prince,  through
a  fiedtioiiB  treaty,  as  to  procure  from  him  the  surrender
of  all  the  fortresses  in  Gnienne.  He  then  threw  off  the
mask,  and,  after  again  summoning  Edward  to  appear,
pronounced  the  confiscation  of  his  fief.'  This  business  is
the  greatest  blemish  in  the  political  character  of  Edward.
But  his  eagerness  about  the  acquisition  of  Scotland  ren-
dered him  less  sensible  to  the  danger  of  a  possession  in
many  respects  more  valuable ;  and  the  spirit  of  resistance
among  the  English  nobility,  which  his  arbitrary  mea-
sures had  provoked,  broke  out  very  opportunely
A.a  1303.  £^^  Philip,  to  thwart  every  effort  lor  the  re-
covery of  Chiienne  by  anns.  But  after  repeated  sus-
pensions of  hostilities  a  treaty  was  finally  concluded,
by  which  Philip  restored  the  province,  on  the  agree-
ment of  a  marriage  between  his  daughter  Isabel  and  the
heir  of  England.

To  this  restitution  he  was  chiefly  induced  by  the  ill
success  that  attended  his  aims  in  Flanders,  another  of
the  great  fiefs  which  this  ambitious  monarch  had  en-
deavoured to  confiscate.  We  have  not,  perhaps,  as  clear
evidence  of  the  original  injustice  of  his  proceedings  to-
wards the  count  of  Flanders  as  in  the  case  of  Guienne ;
but  he  certainly  twice  detained  his  person,  once  after
drawing  him  on  some  pretext  to  his  court,  and  again,  in
violation  of  the  faith  pledged  by  his  generals.  The
Flemings  made,  however,  so  vigorous  a  resist-
^^^^^  ance,  that  Philip  was  unable  to  reduce  that
small  country;  and  in  one  famous  battle  at  Courtray
they  discomfited  a  powerM  army  with  that  utter  loss
and  ignominy  to  which  the  undisciplined  impetuosity  of
the  French  nobles  was  pre-eminently  exposed.'

Two  other  acquisitions  of  Philip  the  Fair  deserve
notice ;  that  of  the  counties  of  AngoulSme  and  La  Marche,
upon  a  sentence  of  forfeiture  (and,  as  it  seems,  a  very
harsh  one)  passed  against  the  reigning  count ;  and  that
of  the  city  of  Lyons,  and  its  adjacent  territory,  which

■  In  the  view  I  have  taken  of  this  *  The  FlemtDgB  took  at  Courtray  4000

tranactlOQ  I  hare  been  gnlded  by  several  pair  of  gilt  spore,  which  were  only  worn

faMtruments  in  Bynaer,  whldi  leare  no  bykn^ts.  TbeeeVelly,  happily  enonglv

doubt  on  my  mind. Velly  of  oonne  re-  compares  to  Hannibal's  thi«e  tiuhels  ol

prnMCts  the  matter  more  lavoorabij  for  gold  rings  at  Csontt.

naiip.

iwuKCK,  THE  SALIC  LAYf.  4b

had  not  oven  feudally  been  snbject  to  the  crown  of
France  for  more  than  three  hundred  years.  Lyons  wa^
the  dowry  of  Matilda,  daughter  of  Louis  TV,,  on  her
marriage  with  Conrad,  king  of  Burgondy,  and  was  be-
queathed with  the  rest  of  that  kingdom  by  Bodolph,  in
1032,  to  the  empire.  Frederic  Barbarossa  conferred
upon  the  archbishop  of  Lyons  all  regalian  rights  over
the  city,  with  the  title  of  Imperial  Vicar.  France  seems
to  have  had  no  concern  with  it,  till  St.  Louis  was  called
in  as  a  mediator  in  disputes  between  the  chapter  and
the  city,  during  a  vacancy  of  the  see,  and  took  the  exer-
cise of  jurisdiction  upon  himself  for  the  time.  Philip  III. ,
having  been  chosen  arbitrator  in  similar  circumstances,
insisted,  before  he  would  restore  the  jurisdiction,  upon
an  oath  of  fealty  ^m  the  new  archbishop.  This  oath,
which  could  be  demanded,  it  seems,  by  no  right  but  that
of  force,  continued  to  be  taken,  till,  in  1310,  an  arch-
bishop resisting  what  he  had  thought  an  usurpation,  the
city  was  besieged  by  Philip  IV.,  and,  the  inhabitants
not  being  unwilling  to  submit,  was  finally  united  to  the
French  crown.*

Philip  the  Fair  left  three  sons,  who  successively
reigned  in  France;  Louis, sumamed  Hutin,  lo^x.
Philip  the  Long,  and  Charles  the  Fair ;  with  a  ^-^  i^ii.
daughter,  Isabel,  married  to  Edward  11.  of  England.''
Louis,  the  eldest,  survived  his  &ther  little  more  than  a
year,  leaving  one  daughter  and  his  queen  pregnant.
The  circumstances  that  ensued  require  to  be
accurately  stated. Louis  had  possessed, in  g^icuw^
right  of  his  mother,  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  ^l^fgj"
with  the  counties  ofChampagne  and  Brie.  Upon
his  death, Philip,  his  next  brother,  assumed  the  re
gency  both  of  France  and  Navarre ;  and  not  long  after-
wards entered  into  a  treaty  with  Eudes  duke  of  Bur-
gundy, uncle  of  the  princess  Jane,  Louis's  daughter,  by
which  her  eventual  rights  to  the  succession  were  to  be
regulated. It  was  agreed  that,  in  case  the  queen  should
be  delivered  of  a  daughter,  these  two  princesses,  or  the
survivor  of  them,  should  take  the  grandmother's  inherit-
ance, Navarre  and  Champagne,  on  releasing  all  claim

b  Vellj,  t.  TtU  p.  404. For  a  mora de  v^rifler  let  Datfes,  t.  U  p.  468.
precise  aoootmt  of  the  poUtScal  depend* **  (Non  XV.]
•Dce  of  LyoDB  and  its  districtv  see  L'Ait

46  PHILIP  V.  Chai".  1.  Part  I.

to  the  throne  of  France.  But  this  was  not  to  take  place
till  their  age  of  consent,  when,  if  they  shonld  refuse  to
make  such  renunciation,  their  claim  was  to  remain,  and
righi  to  he  done  to  them  therein ;  but,  in  return,  the  release
made  by  Philip  of  Navarre  and  Champagne  was  to  be
null.  In  the  mean  time,  he  was  to  hold  the  government  of
France,  Navarre,  and  Champagne,  receiving  homage  of
vassals  in  all  these  countries  as  governor;  saving  the
right  of  a  male  heir  to  the  late  king,  in  the  event  of
whose  birth  the  treaty  was  not  to  take  effect/

This  convention  was  made  on  the  17th  of  July,  1316 ;
and  on  the  15th  of  November  the  queen  brought  into
the  world  a  son,  John  I.  (as  some  called  him),  who  died
in  four  days/  The  conditional  treaty  was  now  become
absolute ;  in  spirit,'  at  least,  if  any  caA'il  might  be  raised
about  the  expression ;  and  Philip  was,  by  his  own  agree-
ment, precluded  firom  taking  any  other  title  than  that  ot
regent  or  governor,  until  the  princess  Jane  shoidd  attain
the  age  to  concur  in  or  disclaim  the  provisional  contract
of  her  uncle.  Instead  of  this,  however,  he  procured
himself  to  be  consecrated  at  Bheims ;  though,  on  account
of  the  avowed  opposition  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and
even  of  his  own  brother  Charles,  it  was  thought  prudent
to  shut  the  gates  during  the  ceremony,  and  to  dispose
guards  throughout  the  town.  Upon  his  return
•n  6,1317.  ^  Parig^  aa  assemUy  composed  of  prelates,

barons,  and  burgesses  of  that  city,  was  convened,  who
acknowledged  hun  as  their  lawful  sovereign,  and,  if  we
may  believe  an  historian,  expressly  declared  that  a  woman
was  incapable  of  succeeding  to  the  crown  of  France.'
The  duke  of  Burgundy,  however,  made  a  show  of  sup-
l)orting  his  niece's  interests,  till,  tempted  by  the  prospect
of  a  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  Pnilip,  he  shamei^ly

i  Hist  de  Gharl«B  le  Mftuyais,  par t  Time  etiam  dedantiim  fait,  qood

S^ooflw,  voL  IL  p.  2.  in  regno  Franda  mulier  non  snooedit.

*  Ancient  writers,  Ssnuindl  tells  ns  Contin. Onl. Nangis, in Spidleglo

(ix.  344),  do  not  call  this  in&nt  any-  d'AdieTy,  torn.  iiL This  monk,  witbont

thing  bat  the  child  who  was  to  be  king ;  talents,  and  probably  without  private  in-

the  mazigi  of  later  times,  "lie  roi  ne  fonnatioo, is  the  sole  ooutemporary  his-

menrt  pas,"  was  nnknown. I  suspect,  torian  of  this  important  period. Ha

nererthateas,  that  the  strict  hereditary  describes  the  aasembly  whkk  oooflrmetf

Noooeflsioa  was  better  recognised  before  Philip's poaiesaion of  the crown ;  ~

this  tlma  than  Sismondi  here  admits ;  qosmplores  prooeres  et  rcgni  nobiles  ac

oompare  what  be  says  afterwards  of  a  magnates  nnA  cmn  plerisqne  pralatis  d

period  yoty  little  Utter,  vol.  xL  6.  boigeosibus  Parisiensis  dviUtis.

fBAKCB.  PHILIP  V  47

betrayed  lier  cause,  and  gave  up  in  her  name,  for  an
inconsiderable  pension,  not  only  her  disputed  claim  to
the  whole  monarchy,  but  her  unquestionable  right  to
Navarre  and  Champagne.^  I  have  been  rather  minute
in  stating  these  details,  because  the  transaction  is  mis-
represented by  every  historian,  not  excepting  those  who
have  written  since  the  publication  of  the  documents
which  illustrate  it.^

In  this  contest,  every  way  memorable,  but  especially
on  account  of  that  which  sprung  out  of  it,  the  exclusion
of  females  from  the  throne  of  France  was  first  publicly
discussed.  The  French  writers  almost  unanimously
concur  in  asserting  that  such  an  exclusion  was  built
upon  a  fundamental  maxim  of  their  government.  No
written  law,  nor  even,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  direct  tes-
timony of  any  ancient  writer,  has  been  brought  forward
to  confirm  this  position.  For  as  to  the  text  of  the  Salic
law,  which  was  frequently  quoted,  and  has  indeed  given
a  name  to  this  exclusion  of  females,  it  can  only  by  a
doubtful  and  refined  analogy  be  considered  as  bearing
any  relation  to  the  succession  of  the  crown.  It  is  certain
nevertheless  that,  from  the  time  of  Clovis,  no  woman
had  ever  reigned  in  France ;  and  although  not  an  instance
of  a  sole  heiress  had  occurred  before,  yet  some  of  the
Merovingian  kings  left  daughters,  who  might,  if  not
rendered  incapable  by  their  sex,  have  shared  with  their
brothers  in  partitions  then  commonly  made.*  But,  on
the  other  hand,  these  times  were  gone  quite  out  of
memory,  and  France  had  much  in  the  analogy  of  her
existing  usages  to  reconcile  her  to  a  female  reign.  The
crown  resembled  a  great  fief;  and  the  great  fiefs  might
universally  descend  to  women.  Even  at  the  consecra-
tion of  Philip  himself,  Maud,  countess  of  Artois,  held
the  crown  over  his  head  among  the  other  peers.*' And

8  Hist.  d«  Gbarles  le  ManTais,  t.  iL  Hon  that  femalea  were  at  that  time  ex-

p.  6. Jane,  and  her  hiuhand  the  ooont  eluded  from  reigning  in  France. Greg,

of  Evrenx.  reoorerod  Navarre,  alter  the  Tmon.  L  iz.

death  of  Charles  the  Fair.  k  The oontinuator of Nangia says

h  VeUjr,  who  giyes  several  proofs  of  indeed  of  this,  de  quo  aliqni  indlgnati

dlsfngemunmeas  in  this  part  of  history,  ftmunt Bat  these  were  probably  the

mutilates  the  treaty  of  the  17th  of  July,  partisaos  of  her  nephew  Robert,  who

1316,  in  order  to  ooooeal  Philip the  had  been  excluded  Ij  ft  Jndidal  sentence

Long's  breach  of  iUth  towards  his  niece,  of  Philip  IV.,  on  the  ground  that  the

I  The  treaty  of  Andely,  in  U7,  will  be  ri^t  of  representation  did  not  take  place

loand  to  afford  a  vny  strong  ptmamj^  in  Artois ;  a  decision  considered  by  many

48  PHILIP  OF  VALOIS.  Ckap.  I.  PaRT  I

it  was  scarcely  beyond  the  recollection  of  persons  living
that  Blanche  had  been  legitimate  regent  of  France  dnring
the  minority  of  St.  Louis.

For  these  reasons,  and  much  more  from  the  provisional
treaty  ooncluded  between  Philip  and  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy, it  may  be  fairly  inferred  that  tiie  Salic  law,  as  it
was  called,  was  not  so  fixed  a  principle  at  that  time  as
has  been  contended.  But  however  this  may  be,  it
received  at  the  accession  of  Philip  the  Long  a  sanction
which  subsequent  events  more  tnoroughly  confirmed.
Cbaries  IV.  ^^^P  himself  leaving  only  three  daughters,  his
Aj>  132a.  brother  Charles  mounted  the  throne ;  and  upon
Philip  of  ^  death  the  rule  was  so  unquestionably  esta-
Vaiob.  blished,  that  his  only  daughter  was  excluded
AA 1328.  \jj  the  count  of  Valois,  grandson  of  Philip  the
Bold.  This  prince  first  took  the  regency,  the  queen-
dowager  being  pregnant,  and,  upon  her  giving  birth  to
a  daughter,  was  crowned  king.  No  competitor  or  oppo-
nent appeared  in  France ;  but  one  more  lormidable  than
any  whom  France  could  have  produced  was  awaiting
the  occasion  to  prosecute  his  imagined  right  with  all  the
resources  of  valour  and  genius,  emd  to  carry  desolation
over  that  great  kingdom  with  as  little  scruple  as  if  he
was  preferring  a  suit  before  a  civil  tribunal.

From  the  moment  of  Charles  lY.'s  death,  Edward  HL
Claim  of  of  England  buoyed  himself  up  with  a  notion  of
BdwardiiL  Y^  tiflc  to  the  crown  of  France,  in  right  of  his
mother  Isabel,  sister  to  the  three  lab-t  kings.  We  can
have  no  hesitation  in  condemning  the  injustice  of  this
pretension.  Whether  the  Salic  law  were  or  were  not
valid,  no  advantage  could  be  gained  by  Edward.  Even
if  he  could  forget  the  express  or  tacit  decision  of  all
France,  there  stood  in  his  way  Jane,  the  daughter  of

M  m^nst  Robert  snbseqnentty  renewed pret^  good  aooount  of  Robert's  prooea

hlfl  appeal  to  the  court  of  FblUp  of  Vft- In  Velly,  L  tUL  p.  262.

lola ;  bat,  nnbappily  for  hfanaelf,  yielded Sismondl  (x.  44)  does  not  seem  to  bt

to  the  temptation  of  forging  docomeuta  convinced that  Robert  of  Artols

fai  support  of  a  claim  which  seems  to  guilty  of  forgery ;  bat  periu^ps  he  is  led

have  been  at  least  plaasible  withoatsoch  away  by  his  saimoslty  against  kings

aid. This  unwise  dishonest,  which  Is  especially  those  of  the  hoase  of  Valois.

not  without  parallel  in  more  prtTate  M.  Michelst  infonns  us  (v.  so)  that  tb»

causes,  not  only  ruined  his  pretensloos  deeds  produced  by  the  demoiselle  Divion,

to  the  county  of  Artois,  but  produced  a  on  wUch  Robert  founded  bis  claims,  are

sentence  of  fbrfeltnie,  and  even  of  capital  In  the  TtAmt  des  Chartes,  and  palpable

pQnia>uneatt  s^dnst  himsell See a  tenerloi

FRjLVCB.  CLAIM  OY  EDWARD  III.  49

Louis  X.,  three  of  Philip  the  Long,  and  one  of  Charleti
the  Fair,  Aware  of  this,  Edward  set  up  a  distinction,
that,  although  females  were  excluded  from  succession,
the  same  rule  did  not  apply  to  their  male  issue ;  and
thus,  though  his  mother  Isabel  could  not  herself  become
queen  of  France,  she  might  transmit  a  title  to  him.  But
-uiis  was  contrary  to  the  commonest  rules  of  inheritance ;
and  if  it  could  have  been  regarded  at  all,  Jane  had  a  son,
afterwards  the  famous  king  of  Navarre,  who  stood  one
degree  nearer  to  the  crown  than  Edward.

It  is  asserted  in  some  French  authorities  that  Edward
preferred  a  claim  to  the  regency  immediately  after  the
decease  of  Charles  the  Fair,  and  that  the  States-General,
or  at  least  the  peers  of  France,  adjudged  that  dignity  to
Philip  de  Yalois.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  it  is  clear
that  he  entertained  projects  of  recovering  his  right  as
early,  though  his  youth  and  the  embarrassed  circum-
stances of  his  government  threw  insuperable  obstacles  in
the  way  of  tibeir  execution." He  did  liege  homage,

■  Letter  of  Edwazd  1IL  addreand  to in  IVudain  dirlgerent greaas sooi,
oerUdn  nobles  and  towna  in  the  soath  of  uomlneqne  Testro  regnmn  FYancto  vin-
France,  dated  March  28.  1328.  four  days dlcarent  et  pnedicti  Fhlllppi  de  Yaleslo
'before  the  birth  of  Charles  lY.'s  posthn- corooatioDem  pro  Tiribna  Impedirent;
moils  daoc^ier,  intlmatea  this  resolution, qui  Jnxta  ordlnationsm  pnedictam  leg»-
Bjmer.  toL  iv.  p.  844  et  aeq. But  an tlonem  ils  fi\)wn<?tain  tunc  aasumentes,
instrament.  dateii  at  Northampton,  on gi^pssos  sues  versus  Frandam  direzerunt ;
tlw  16th  of  May,  is  decisive :  This  is  a quie  quidem  legatio  ma-riwwi  gnerm
procuration  to  the  bishops  of  Worcester prasentis  materlam  ministravit Wil-
aod  Litchfield,  to  demand  and  take  pos- kins,  Concilia,  t  i.  p^  64Mi.
session  of  the  kingdom  of  France,  **  in There  is  no  evidence  in  'B^ymer'n  Fofr>
our  name,  which  kingdom  haa  devolved dera  to  corroborate  Edward's  supposed
and  appertalna  to  us  as  to  the  ri^t  heir." daim  to  the  regency  of  Fhuooe  upon  the
P. 354. To this  mission archbishop death  of  Charles  IV. ;  and  it  Is  certainly
Stratford  ref^  in  his  vindication of suspicious  that  no  appointment  of  ambas-
bimself  ttcan  Edward's  accusation  of sadon  or  procunton  for  this  purpose
treason  in  1340 ;  and  Informs  us  that  the should  appear  in  so  complete  a  collection
two  bishops  actually  proceeded  to  France, of  documents. The  French  historians
tfaou^  without  mentioning  any  farther generally  assert  this,  upon  the  authority
particulars.  Novit  enim  qui  nihil  Ignorat of  the  oontinuator  of  William  of  Nangis,
quod  cum  quaestio  de regno  Francis a  nearly  oontempofaiy,  but  not  always
poet  mortem  regis  Qnoli,  flratris  serenis- weU-lnfonned  writer. It  is  curious  to
atmsB  matris  vestra.  in  parliamento  tano compare  tha  iirar  chief  Eng^Ush  historians,
apnd  Northampton  oelebrato,  tractata Rapin  aiBrms  both  the  claim  to  the  re-
dlacuaaaqne  ftaisset ;  quodque  Idem  reg- gency  on  Charles  lY.'s  death,  and  that
nam  Franda  ad  vye  luereditario  Jure to  the  k*«fl<k^  after  the  Urth  of  his
estiterai  legitime  devolutum ;  et  super daughter. Gartc«  the  moat  exact  his*
hoc  fliit  ordinatum,  quod  duo  episcopi, torian  we  have,  mentiona  the  latter,  and
W^imlenBlB  tunc,  nunc  autem  Winto- is  silent  as  to  the  fanner. Hume  passes
niensk,  ae  Ooventzittsls  et  licfafeldensls over  both,  and  intimates  that  Edward  did
VOL.  r.  K  •

\

60  CLAIM  OF  EDWAAD  III. Chap.  I.  Past  L

therefore,  to  Philip  for  Guienne,  and  for  seyeral  years,
while  the  affairs  of  Scotland  engrossed  his  attention,
gave  no  sign  of  meditating  a  more  magnificent  enterprise.
Ab  he  advanced  in  manhood,  and  felt  the  consciousness
of  his  strength,  his  early  designs  grew  mature,  and  pro-
duced a  series  of  the  most  important  and  interesting
revolutions  in  the  fortunes  of  France.  These  will  form
the  subject  of  the  ensuing  pages.

not  take  aoy  steps  in  rapport  of  his  pre- SlmKmdi  does  not  mention  the  defan

teusloDs  in  132& Henry  gives  the  sap-  of  Edward  to  the  regencj  after  the  death

posed  trial  of  Edward's  claim  to  the  re-  of  Charles  IV.,  though  he  aappoees  his

gen^  before  the  StatoMSeneral  at  great  pretensions  to  have  been  taken  into  can-

length,  and  makes  no  allnaion  to  the  sideratian  by  the  lords  and  docton  of

other,  so  indisputably  authenticated  in  law,  whom  he  asserts,  following  the  ooo-

Rymer. It  is,  I  think,  most  probable  tinnator  of  William  of  Nangia,  to  havs

that  the  two  bishops  never  made  the  oonsnlted  together,  befbre  Fhll^  of  Va-

fonnal  demand  of  the  throne  as  they  were  lois  took  the  title  of  regent (YoL  x.

directed  by  their  instnictioDS.  Stzatford's  p.  10.) Midielet,  more  stodions  of  effert

uspresrfoos  seem  to  imply  that  thqr  did  than  minnte  In  details,  makes  no  allaskn

oot  to  Ite  suCifoct

ntAJfCB.  HIS  WAR  IK  FKAirClb.  51

PART  n.

Wu  of  Edward  III.  in  Fnmoe— Cknaw  of  blfSooocM— Civil  DtttmbaacM  ol
France  —  PMboe  of  Bredgnl  <-  its  interpretation  oonsidered  —  Gbarlei  V.  —
Renewal  of  the  War— Charles  VI.— his  Minority  and  IiManitj^ Civil  Dls-
sensioos  of  the  Parties  of  Orleans  and  Borgtuidj — AsMasination  of  both  theie
Princes —Intrignes  of  tiialr  Parties  with  England  under  Heniy  IV.  —  Henry  V.
invades  France  — Treaty  of  Troyos— State  of  France  In  the  first  Years  of
Charles  VIl.— Progress  and  satMeqnent  Decline  of  the  English  Anns— their
EzpalsloQ  from  France  —  Change  in  the  Political  Constitution — Louis  XL  —  his
Character-^  Leegoes  formed  against  him— Charles  Duke  of  Boigmidy  — bis
Prosperity  uid  Fall  — Louis  obtains  possession  of  Burgundy —- his  Death  —
Charles  VUL— Acquisition  of  Britany.

No  war  had  broken  out  in  Europe,  since  the  fall  of  the
Boman  Empire,  so  memorable  as  that  of  Ed-  ^^  ^^
ward  in.  and  his  successors  against  France,  Edward  iiL
whether  we  consider  its  duration,  its  object,  *"*^™*'
or  the  magnitude  and  variety  of  its  events.  It  was  a
straggle  of  one  hundved  and  twenty  years,  interrupted
but  once  by  a  regular  pacification,  where  the  most  ancient
and  extensive  dominion  in  the  civilized  world  was  the
prize,  twice  lost  and  twice  recovered  in  the  conflit^t,
while  individual  courage  was  wrought  up  to  that  high
pitch  which  it  can  seldom  display  since  the  regularity
of  modem  tactics  hsus  chastised  its  enthusiasm  and  leveUed
its  distinctions.  There  can  be  no  occasion  to  dwell  upon
the  events  of  this  war,  which  are  familiar  to  almost  every
reader:  it  is  rather  my  aim  to  develop  and  arrange
those  circumstances  which,  when  righ%  understood,
give  the  clue  to  its  various  changes  of  fortune.

France  was,  even  in  the  fourteenth  century,  a  kingdom
of  such  extent  and  compactness  of  figure,  such  caoees  of
population  and  resources,  and  filled  with  so  hi^wccess.
spirited  a  nobility,  that  the  very  idea  of  subjugating  it
by  a  foreign  force  must  have  seemed  the  most  extrava-
gant dream  of  ambition.* Yet,  in  the  course  of  about

*  The  pope  (Benedict  XIL)  wrote  a  hnposriUlity  of  his  erer  socceedtng.  I
strong  totter  to  Edward  (Maitli,  1340),  fyre  no  douM  but  that  this  was  the  earn*
diasosding  him  tnm  tsUng  the  titte  and  mon  opinion.  Bnt  the  Avignon  v^fftf
vms  of  France,  and  pointing  mit  the were  very  sabsenHeot  to  France. CIr

K  2

^2 EDWABD  III.  AND  THE  BLkCK  PRIKCE.  Chap.  I.  Pabt  If.

twenty  years  of  war,  this  mighty  nation  was  reduced  to
the  Lowest  state  of  exhaustion,  and  dismembered  of  con-
siderable provinces  by  an  ignominious  peace.  What  was
the  combination  of  political  causes  wmch  brought  about
so  strange  a  revolution,  and,  though  not  realizing  Ed-
ward's hopes  to  their  extent,  redeemed  them  from  the
imputation  of  rashness  in  the  judgment  of  his  own  and
succeeding  ages  ?

The  first  advantage  which  Edward  HE.  possessed  in
nug^g^fgfQf  t^  contest  was  derived  from  the  splendour  of
Edjraxtim.  his  personal  chara6ter  and  from  the  still  more
udhiasoiu  eminent  virtues  of  his  son.  Besides  prudence
and  military  skill,  these  great  princes  were  endowed
with  qualities  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  times  in  which
they  lived.  Chivalry  was  then  in  its  zenith  ;  and  in  all
the  virtues  which  adorned  the  knightly  character,  in
courtesy,  munificence,  gallantry,  in  aU  delicate  and
magnanimous  feelings,  none  were  so  conspicuous  as  Ed-
ward III.  and  the  Black  Prince.  As  later  princes  have
boasted  of  being  the  best  gentlemen,  they  might  daim
to  be  the  prowest  knights  in  Europe — a  character  not
qidte  dissimilar,  yet  of  more  high  pretension.  Their
court  was,  as  it  were,  the  sun  of  that  system  which
embraced  the  valour  and  nobility  of  the  Chiistian  world ;
and  the  respect  which  was  felt  for  their  excellences,
while  it  drew  many  to  their  side,  mitigated  in  all  the
rancour  and  ferociousness  of  hostility.  This  war  was
like  a  great  tournament,  where  the  combatants  fought
indeed  d  outraiux,  but  with  all  the  courtesy  and  fiBdr  play
of  such  an  entertainment,  and  almost  as  much  for  ih«
honour  of  their  ladies.  In  the  school  of  the  Edwards
were  formed  men  not  inferior  in  any  nobleness  of  dis-
position to  their  masters — Manni  and  the  Captal  de
Buch,  Knollyb  and  Calverley,  Chandos  and  Lancaster.
On  the  French  side,  especially  after  Dn  Guesclin  came
on  the  stage,  these  had  rivals  almost  equally  deserving
of  renown. K  we  could  .forget,  what  never  should  be

A«nt  VI..  M  well  M  his  predeoeaor,  prlnoet  was  nUlier  pMwd  bj;  aod  dw

Beoedict  XII.,  threatened  Edward  with  Holj  See  never  Teotnred  to  provoke  fhe

qiiritnal  anna. Rymer,  i.v.  p.  9g  and  king,  who  treated  the  draroh,  thnjqgjtool

466. It  required  Edward's  spirit  and  hia  reign,  with  adminUa  flnnneaa  md

ftcadlneaa  to  deeplae  these  menaom.  But  temper,
the  time  whaB  they  were  terrible  to

Fbakcb.  PHILIP  Vl.  AKD  JOHN.  63

forgotten,  the  wretohedness  and  devastation  that  fell
upon  a  great  kingdom,  too  dear  a  price  for  the  display
01  any  heroism,  we  might  count  these  English  wars  in
France  among  the  brightest  periods  in  history.

Philip  of  Yalois,  and  John  his  son,  showed  but  poorly
in  comparison  with  their  illustrious  enemies,  character  of
Yet  they  both  had  considerable  virtues ;  they  Pbiup  vi.
were  brave,^  just,  liberal,  and  the  latter,  in  "^  ®^'
particular,  of  unshaken  fidelity  to  his  word.  But  neither
was  beloved  by  his  subjects;  the  misgovemment  and
extortion  of  their  predecessors  during  half  a  century  had
alienated  the  public  mind,  and  rendered  their  own  taxes
and  debasement  of  the  coin  intolerable.  Philip  was
made  by  misfortune,  John  by  nature,  suspicious  and
austere ;  and  although  their  most  violent  acts  seem  never
to  have  wanted  absolute  justice,  yet  they  were  so  ill
conducted,  and  of  so  arbitrary  a  comple^on,  that  they
greatly  impaired  the  reputation,  as  well  as  interests,  of
these  monarchs.  In  the  execution  of  Glisson  under
Philip,  in  that  of  the  Conn^table  d*Eu  under  John,  and
still  more  in  that  of  Harcourt,  even  in  the  imprisonment
of  the  king  of  Navarre,  though  eveiy  one  of  uiese  might
have  been  guilty  of  treasons,  there  were  circumstances
enough  to  exasperate  the  disaffected,  and  to  Btrengthen
the  party  of  so  politic  a  competitor  as  Edward.

Next  to  the  personal  qualities  of  the  king  of  England,
his  resources  in  this  war  must  be  taken  into  the  Re,p,„^^
account.  It  was  after  long  hesitation  that  he  or  the  Ung
assumed  the  title  and  arms  of  France,  from  *>'^°«^^
which,  unless  upon  the  best  terms,  he  could  not  recede
without  loss  of  honour.* In  the  mean  time  he  strength-

b  The  hntery  of  Philip  to  not  quee-  Philip's  letter,  pretenred  In  Rymer,  wfaldi
Honed.  Bat  a  French  historian,  in  order,  the  historian  had  hefora  fats  eyea,  and
l8appoee,toenlMaioethla<iiuait7.haiipre-  actually  qnotea  npon  the  occaalon.  Hist,
nmed  to  violate  tmth  in  aneztraonUnary  de  France,  t.  Tiii.  p.  382.
Banner.  The  diallenge  sent  by  Edwaxd,  "  The  first  instrument  hi  Which  Ed-
offertng  to  decideViischdin  to  the  kingdom  ward  disallows  the  title  of  Philip  is  his
by  stn^e  combat.  Is  weU  known.  Oer*  oonvention  with  the  emperor  Lools  of
tainiy  it  conveys  no  impntation  on  the  Bavaria,  wherein  he  calls  him  nunc  pro
king  of  Frsnoe  to  have  declined  this  nn-  rege  Frsnoomm  ae  gerentem.  The  date
ftir  proposal.  But  Velly  haa  icpieafntgd  of  this  is  August  315,  1S37.  yet  on  the
him  as  accepting  It,  on  condition  that  28th  uf  the  same  month  another  instru-
Bdwaid  would  suke  the  crown  of  Eng-  ment  gives  him  the  title  of  king ;  and
land  against  that  of  France ;  an  interpo-  the  same  occurs  in  subsequent  Instftroys.
lation  which  may  be  truly  called  auda-  At  length  we  have  an  Instrument  of  pro-
dons,  since  not  a  word  of  this  is  in  curatUm  to  the  duke  of  Brabant.  Oo>

54  RESOURCES  OF  EDWARD  III. Chip.  I.  Past  li.

aned  himself  by  allianoes  with  the  emperor,  with  the
cities  of  Flanders,  audi  with  most  of  the  princes  in  the
Netherlands  and  on  the  Rhine.  Tet  I  do  not  know  that
he  profited  much  by  these  conventions,  since  he  met
with  no  success  till  the  scene  of  the  war  was  changed
from  the  Flemish  frontier  to  Normandy  and  Poiton.
The  troops  of  Hainault  alone  were  constantly  dis
tingaished  in  his  service.'*

But  his  intrinsic  strength  was  at  home.  England  had
been  growing  in  riches  since  the  wise  government  of  his
granc&ther,  Edward  I.,  and  through  the  market  opened
for  her  wool  with  the  manufacturing  towns  of  Flanders.
She  was  tranquil  within ;  and  her  northern  enemy,  the
Scotch,  had  been  defeated  and  quelled.  The  parliament^
after  some  slight  precautions  against  a  very  probable
effect  of  Edward's  conquest  of  France,  the  reduction  of
their  own  island /into  a  province,  entered,  as  warmly  as
improvidently,  into  his  quarrel.  The  people  made  it
their  own,  and  grew  so  intoxicated  with  the  victories  of

tober  T,  188Y,  empowering  him  to  take  <^  England  with  Flanders:  **Le  eecret

poaienion  of  the  crown  of  France  in  the  dee  ttatailleB  de  Crecy,  de  Poitlen,  est

name  of  Edward;  attendoites  inftiifawn  anzcomptolrsdeemardiaodsdeLoDdrei^

r^piiim  Frandjs  ad  nos  fore  Jure  soooes-  de  Bordeaox.  et  de  Bonrges"  (toL  t.

sionls  legltlmb  devolatnm. Another  of  p.  6). France  had  no  internal  trade:

the  same  date  appoints  the  said  duke  his  the  roads  were  dangerous  on  aoooont  of

vicar-general  and  lleatenant  of  France,  robbers,  and  heayy  tollB  were  to  be  paid ;

The  king  assumed  in  this  oommiBslon  fiscal  offloers  had  replaced  the  feudal  lordsL

the  title  Rex  Franda  et  Anglias;  fn  The  value  of  money  was  perpetoally

other  instroments  he  calls  himself  Bex  varying  iisr  more  than  in  England. (Id.

AngUsB  et  Frandse. It  was  necessary  to  p.  12.) Certainly  the  oompantive  inoe-

obviate  the  Jealous  of  the  English,  who  perity  of  the  latter  country  supplied

did  not,  in  that  age,  admit  the  precedence  Edward  with  the  sinews  of  war. Fhmoe

of  France. Accordingly,  Edward  had  oould  not  aflSord  to  maintain  a  wlU-ap-

two  great  seals,  on  which  the  two  king-  pointed  infantry

dome  were  named  hi  a  different  order.  "  Une  tactique  nouvelle,"  M.  MidMlbt

But,  in  the  royal  anns,  those  of  France  afterwafds  very  well  observes  (p.  Bl\

were  always  in  the  firat  qoarter.  as  they  "  sortait  de  I'fttat  nouveau  de  la  sodete;

continued  to  be  until  the  aooessioQ  of  the  ce  n'itait  pas  un  oeuvre  de  g&nie,  ni  da

house  of  Brunswidc.  reflexion. Edouard  UL  n'etait  ni  uu

Probably  Edward  IIL  would  not  have  OusUve  Adolphe  ni  un  FrUeric  n. H

entered  into  the  war  merely  on  acooont  avait  employ^  lee  ftintaantnn  &ute  de

of  his  claim  to  the  crown. He  had  dis-  cavaliers. ...  La  bataUle  de  Crecy

putes  with  Philip  about  Ouienne;  and  reveilla  un  secret  dont  persaime  ne  se

that  prince  had.  rather uqjustlflably,  doutalt,  I'impulssanoe  milltaire  da  oa

abetted  Robert  Bruce  in  Scotland. I  am  mondef(fodal,qui  s'^aitcruleseulmoDde

not  tncUned  to  lay  any  material  sUness  miUtaire." Oourtray  might  have  given

upon  the  instigation  of  Robert  of  Artols.  some  suspicion  of  this ;  but  Oourtray  was

d  Michelei  dwells  on  the  advantage  mudi  less  of  a  "bataiUa  racfw"  tfan

which  Edward  gained  by  the  commeroe  Crecy.

Fbamos.  the  ENGLISH  ARMIES.  55

this  war,  that  for  some  centuries  the  injustaoe  and  folly
of  the  enterprise  do  not  seem  to  have  struck  the  gravest
of  onr  conntrymen.

There  is,  indeed,  ample  room  for  national  exultation
at  the  names  of  Creoy,  roitiers,  and  Azincotirt.  EzceUence
So  great  was  the  disparity  of  nnmbers  upon  ^^^
those  fEonous  days,  that  we  cannot,  with  the  anniM.
French  historians,  attribute  the  discomfiture  of  their  hosts
merely  to  mistaken  tactics  and  too  impetuous  valour.
They  yielded  rather  to  that  intrepid  steadiness  in  danger
which  had  already  become  the  characteristic  of  our
Tlnglish  soldiers,  and  which,  durin^^  five  centuries,  has
insured  their  superiority,  whenever  ignorance  or  infatua-
tion has  not  led  them  into  the  field.  But  these  victories,
and  the  qualities  that  secured  them,  must  chiefly  be
ascribed  to  the  fireedom  of  our  constitution,  and  to  the
superior  condition  of  the  people.  Not  the  nobility  of
England,  not  the  fendal  tenants  won  the  batdee  of  Orecy
and  Poitiers ;  for  these  were  fiilly  matched  in  the  ranks
of  France;  but  the  yeomen  who  drew  the  bow  with
strong  and  steady  arms,  accustomed  to  use  it  in  their
native  fields,  and  rendered  fearless  by  personal  com-
petence and  civil  freedom.  It  is  well  known  that  each
of  the  three  great  victories  was  due  to  our  archere,  who
were  chiefly  of  the  middle  class,  and  attached,  according
to  the  system  of  that  age,  to  the  knights  and  squires  who
fought  in  heavy  armour  with  the  lance.  Even  at  the
batde  of  Poitiers,  of  which  our  country  seems  to  have
the  least  right  to  boast,  since  the  greater  part  of  the
Black  Prince's  small  anny  was  composed  of  Ghnscons,  the
merit  of  the  English  bowmen  is  strongly  attested  by
Froissart''

*  An  mj  din,  leg  ttxdam  d'Ani^e-  man ;  a  pi^ndloe  which  afterwards  prc-

terre  ftlaoleni  )t  leoxs  gens  grant  avan>  vailed  with  reqwet  to  ilre-aniiB. A

tage. Oar  ila  tirojeni  tant  eipesBement,  romancer  prakm  the  emperor  Oonrad,
lue  lea  Fnmcola  ne  ajjvoyent  deqoel  «  p^  im  effort  de  lance  et  d'ecu.

toM  entendre,  qu'ila  ue  ftuKnt  consoTTls  Conqn*nait  tons  aes  ennemls.

de  trayt ;  et  a'aTan90jent  ton^oun  oea  y  h  arbaleatrais  ni  fti  mis ;"

Andoia,  et  petit  )t  petit  enqneroyent  . .

Vm Ftert  L  c.  162.  qnoted  by  Boncher  in  his  translation  of

It  la  by  m  odd  oversight  that  Sis-  '  H  ComoUto  del  Mare,'  p.  618. Even

mondi  has  nid  (x. »6),  "Lee  Anglais  the  long'bow  migjit  Incnr  this  censure;

6taient  acooutmnte  4  se  eervlr  sane  oesse  or  any  weapon  in  whidi  the  combatants

de  VarbdUU."  The  cross-bow  was  looked  fonght  emitua. Bnt  if  we  look  at  the

npon  as  a  weapon  nnworthy  of  a  brave  plate-annonr  of  the  fifteenth  oentnTj,  it

66  GONPmON  OF  FRANCE CBiJ».  I.  Past  U.

Yet  the  gloiioiis  tenninatioii  to  which  Edward  was
^T^HHn^  enabled,  at  least  for  a  time,  to  bring  the  contest,
iu^^  was  lather  the  work  of  fortune  than  of  valoiiT
nutie  of  and  pradence.  Until  the  battle  of  PoitieiB  he
poiuen.  ]^g^^  made  no  progress  towards  the  conquest  of
France.  That  conntiy  was  too  Tast,  and  his  anny  too
small,  for  such  a  revolution.  The  victoiy  of  Crecy  gave
him  nothing  but  Gahus ;  a  post  of  considerable  importance
in  war  and  peace,  but  rather  adapted  to  annoy  than  to
subjugate  the  kingdom.  But  at  Foitiers  he  obtained  the
greatest  of  prizes,  by  taking  prisoner  the  king  of  France.
Not  only  uie  love  of  freedom  tempted  that  prince  to
ransom  himself  by  the  utmost  sacrifices,  but  his  captivity
left  France  defenceless,  and  seemed  to  annihilate  the
monarchy  itsell  The  government  was  already  odious;
a  spirit  was  awakened  in  the  people  which  mi^t  seem
hardly  to  belong  to  the  fourteenth  centniy ;  and  the  con-
vulsions of  our  own  time  are  sometimes  strongly  paralleled
by  those  which  succeeded  the  battle  of  Poitiers.  Already
the  States  General  had  established  a  fandamental  prin-
cijple,  that  no  resolution  oould  be  passed  as  the  opmion
3t  the  whole  unless  each  of  the  three  orders  concurred  in
its  adoption.'  The  rij^t  of  levying  and  of  regulating  the
collection  of  taxes  was  recc^nised.  But  that  assembly,
which  met  at  Paris  immediately  after  the  battle,  went
far  greater  lengths  in  the  reform  and  control  of  govern-
ment. From  the  time  of  Philip  the  Fair  the  abuses
natural  to  arbitrary  power  had  harassed  the  people.
There  now  seemed  an  opportunity  of  redress;  and
however  seditious,  or  even  treasonable,  may  have  been
the  motives  of  those  who  gtdded  this  assembly  of  the
States,  especially  the  famous  Marcel,  it  is  clear  that
many  of  their  reformations  tended  to  liberty  and  the
pubHc  good.'  But  the  tumultuous  scenes  which  passed
in  the  capital,  sometimes  heightened  into  civil  war,
necessarily  distracted  men  from  the  common  defence
against  Edward.  These  tumults  were  excited,  and  the
distraction  increased,  by  Charles  king  of  Navarre,  sur-

VDBj  seem  that  a  kni^t  had  not  nrach  the  nextehapter  for  more  Informatioo  oo

to  boast  of  the  danger  to  which  be  ex-  this  saltfect Thii  ieparation  ia  inooD-

poaed  himself,  especially  when  enooon-  Tenlent.  Irot  it  axoae  indLspenaaldj  oat  d

taring  infkntiy.  my  airangemeDtk  and  prarentad  graats

'  Ordonnanoes  dea  Rois  de  inatob,  t  IL  inoonTenlenoa^

■  I  mnst  refer  the  reader  onward  to

Pranob.  after  the  BAlTLE  OF  POITIERS.  57

named  tke  Bad,  to  whom  the  French  writerB  ha^e,  not
perhaps  nnjustly,  attributed  a  character  of  immixed  and
inTeteiate  malignity.  He  was  grandson  of  Louis  Hutin,
by  his  daughter  Jane,  and,  if  Edward's  pretence  of
claiming  through  females  could  be  admitted,  was  a  nearer
heir  to  the  crown ;  the  consciousness  of  which  seems  io
have  suggested  itself  to  his  depraved  mind  as  an  excuse
for  his  treacheries,  though  he  could  entertain  very  little
prospect  of  asserting  the  claim  against  either  contending
party.  John  had  bestowed  his  daughter  in  marriage  on
the  king  of  Navarre ;  but  he  veiy  soon  gave  a  proof  of
his  character  by  procuring  the  assassination  of  the  king's
&vourite,  Charles  de  la  Cerda.  An  irreooncileable  enmity
was  the  natural  result  of  this  crime.  Charles  became
aware  that  he  had  offended  beyond  the  possibility  of
forgiveness,  and  that  no  letters  of  pardon,  nor  pretended
reconciliation,  could  secure  him  fix}m  tbe  king's  resent-
ment. Thus,  impelled  by  guilt  into  deeper  guilt,  he
entered  into  alliances  with  Edward,  and  fomented  the
seditious  spirit  of  Paris.  Eloquent  and  insinuating,  he
was  the  favourite  of  the  people,  whose  grievances  he
affected  to  pity,  and  with  whose  leaders  he  intrigued.
As  his  paternal  inheritance,  he  possessed  the  county  of
Evreux  in  Normandy.  The  proximity  of  this  to  Paris
created  a  formidable  diversion  in  &vour  of  Edward  III.,
and  connected  the  English  garrisons  of  the  North  with
those  of  Poitou  and  Guienne.

There  is  no  affliction  which  did  not  fall  upon  France
during  this  miserable  period.  A  foreign  enemy  was  in
the  heart  of  the  kingdom,  the  king  a  prisoner,  the  capitp.l
in  sedition,  a  treacherous  prince  of  the  blood  in  arms
against  the  sovereign  authority.  Famine,  the  sure  and
terrible  companion  of  war,  for  several  years  desolated
the  country.  In  1348  a  pestilence,  the  most  extensive
and  unsparing  of  which  we  have  any  memorial,  visited
France  as  well  as  the  rest  of  Europe,  and  consummated
the  work  of  hunger  and  the  sword.^ The  companies  of

h  A  ftill  aoooont  of  the  imyages  made  from  whenoe  Italian  traden  bronf^t  It

bj  this  memorable  plagne  may  be  fonnd  to  Sicily,  Plea,  and  Oenoa. In  1348  It

in  Matteo  VlUanf,  tbe  second  of  that  paased  the  AIpe  and  spread  over  France

family  wh6  wrote  the  history  of  Florence,  and  Spain ;  in  the  next  year  it  reached

His  brother  and  predecessor,  John  Vil-  Britain,  and  in  \360  laid  waste  Germany

lani.  was  himself  a  victim  to  it Tho  and  other  northern  states ;  lasting  gene-

bsfsan  in  the  Levant  about  1346 ;  rally  aboat  five  months  in  each  cnniitrv

At

68  THE  JACQUiLRIE. . Chap.  I.  Part  U

adventure,  mercenary  troops  in  the  service  of  John  or
Edward,  finding  no  immediate  occupation  after  the  truce
of  1357,  scattered  themselves  over  the  coimtry  in  search
of  pilli^.  No  force  existed  sufficiently  powerful  to
check  l£e6e  robhers  in  their  career.  Undismayed  hy
superstition,  they  compelled  the  pope  to  redeem  himself
in  Avignon  by  the  payment  of  forty  thousand  crowns.*
France  was  the  passive  victim  of  their  licence,  even  after
the  pacification  concluded  with  England,  till  some  were
diverted  into  Italy,  and  others  led  by  Du  Ouesclin  to
the  war  of  Castile.  Impatient  of  this  wretchedness,  and
stung  by  the  insolence  and  luxury  of  their  lords,  the
peasantry  of  several  districts  broke  out  into
^^'  '  a  dreadftd  insurrection.  This  was  called  the
Jacquerie,  from  the  cant  phrase  Jacques  Bonhomme,
applied  to  men  of  that  class  ;  and  was  marked  by  all  the
circumstances  of  horror  incident  to  the  rising  of  an
exasperated  and  unenlightened  populace.^

At  Florenoe  mora  than  three  out  of  five  pomessed,  aooording  to  the  irregalarlty

died. Mmtori,  Script  Rerom  Itallca-  of  tboae  ages. See  a  memoir  oa  the  life

mm,  t  ziv.  p.  13. The  itoriei  of  Boc-  of  Amand  deCervole,  in  the  tweniy-Ofth

caodo's  Decamerane,  as  is  well  known,  yolmne  of  the  Academj  of  Inscriptions,

are  snppoeed  to  be  related  bj  a  sodetjr  of  k  The  second  oontinuator  of  Naagis,  a

Florentine  ladies  and  genttemen  retired  monk  of  no  great  abiUUes,  bnt  entitled

to  the  coantry  during  this  pestilenoe.  to  notice  'as  our  most  oontemporarj  his-

Another  pestilence,  only  leas  destrac-  torian,  charges  the  nobility  with  spend-

tlve  than  the  former,  wasted  both  Fraiice  ing  the  money  raised  upon  the  people

and  England  in  1361. Sismondi  bitterly  by  opprsasive  tazea,  in  playing  at  dice,

remarks  (x.  342)  that  between  four  and  *'  et  alios  indecentes  Jooos." D'Achcry,

five  millions  who  died  of  the  former  Spicilegium,  t  iiL  p.  114  (folio  edition),

plague  in  France  merely  diminished  the  All  the  miseries  that  followed  the  battle

number  of  the  oppressed,  producing  no  of  Poitlen  he  ascnbes  to  bad  govern-

perceptible  effect But  this  is  exagge-  ment  and  neglect  of  the  commonweal;

rated, lite  plague  caused  a  truce  of  but  especially  to  the  pride  and  luxury  of

several  months. The  war  was  in  foot  the  nobles. 1  am  aware  that  this  writer

carried  on  with  less  vigour  for  some  Is  biassed  in  favour  of  the  king  of  Navarre;

years. It  is,  however,  by  no  means  mi-  but  he  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  people's

likely  that  the  number  of  deaths  has  misery,  and  perhaps  a  less  exceptionable

been  overrated. Nothing  can  be  more  authority  than  Froiasart,  whose  love  of

loose than  the  atatistical  evidence of  pageantiy  and  habits  of  feasting  in  the

medieval  writers. Thus  30,000  are  said  castles  of  the  great  socm  to  have  pro-

to  have  died  at  Narbonnc (Michelet,  duced some hisensibtliiy  towards the

v.  94.) Rut  had  Narbonne  so  many  to  sufferings  of  the  lower  classes It  is  a

lose? At  Icaat  would  not  the  depopn*  painfbl drcnrostanoe, which Fndssart and

lation  have  been  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  oontinuator  of  Nangis  attest,  that  ihe

other  dties?  citizens  of  Calais,  more  iniereAting  than

i  Froiasart, p.  18Y. This troop  of  tiM  common  heroes  of  history,  were  un-

banditti  was  commanded  by  Amaud  de  rewarded,  and begiEed  their bread  in

Cervole,  sumamed  I'Archlpretre,  from  a  miiwry  throughout  France.  Villk^t  oon*

benefice  which,  althongn  »  laymar.,  be  tradicts  this,  on  the  authority  of  an  ordi*

Fbahoe.  FEACE  of  BRETIQKt.  59

Subdued  by  these  misfortunes,  though  Edward  had
made  but  sli^t  progress  towaitLs  the  conquest  Peace  of  ■
of  the  country,  the  r^ent  of  France,  afterwards  BretisDi.
Charles  Y.,  submitted  to  the  peace  of  Bretigni.  By  this
treaty,  not  to  mention  less  important  articles,  all  Guienne,
Gk^Gony,  Poitou,  Saintonge,  the  Limousin,  and
the  Angoumois,  as  well  as  Calais,  and  the  county  ^'^
of  Ponthieu,  were  ceded  in  fiill  sovereignty  to  Edward;
a  price  abundantly  compensating  his  renunciation  of  the
tiUe  of  France,  which  was  the  sole  concession  stipulated
in  return.  Every  C€ure  seems  to  have  been  taken  to
make  the  cession  of  these  provinces  complete.  The  first
six  articles  of  the  treaty  expressly  surrender  them  to
the  Iqng  of  England.  By  tlie  seventh,  John  and  his
son  engage  to  convey  within  a  year  from  the  ensuing
Michaelmas  all  their  rights  over  them,  and  especially
those  of  sovereignty  and  feudal  appeal.  The  same  words
are  repeated  still  more  emphaticaUy  in  the  eleventh  and
some  other  articles.  The  twelfth  stipiQates  the  exchange
of  mutual  renimciations ;  by  John,  of  all  right  over  the
ceded  countries ;  by  Edward,  of  his  claim  to  tlie  throne
of  France.  At  Calais  the  treaty  of  Bretigni  was  renewed
by  John,  who,  as  a  prisoner,  had  been  no  party  to  the
former  compact,  with  the  omission  only  of  the  twelfth
article,  respecting  the  exchange  of  renunciations.  But
that  it  was  not  intended  to  waive  them  by  this  omission
is  abundantly  manifest  by  instruments  of  both  the  kings,
in  which  reference  is  made  to  their  future  interchanges
at  Breves,  on  the  feast  of  St.  Andrew,  1361.  And,  until
that  time  should  arrive,  Edward  promises  to  lay  aside

nance  whidi  he  has  seen  in  their  favoar.  Calais,  and  particalarly  this  remarkable

But  that  was  not  a  thne  when  ordinances  portion  of  It. Mem.  de  1' Academie  dee

were  very  sure  of  execution. VilL  t.  ix.  IiiscAptions,  1 1.
p.  470. I  most  add  that  the  celebrated Petnurch  has  drawn  a  lamentable  pto-

vtcnj  of  the  six  citisens  of  Calais,  whidi  ture  of  the  state  of  France  in  1360,  when

has  <(f  late  been  called  in  qnesUon,  re-  he  paid  a  ylait  to  Paria. I  oonld  not

ceivea  strong  conflnnation  from  John  believe,  he  sajm.  that  this  was  the  same

Villasi,  wh  >  died  very  soon  afterwards,  kingdom  which  I  had  cnce  seen  so  rich

IazILcM. Froissart  of  conrse  wrought  and  flourishing.  Nothing  presented  itself

up  the  drcomstances  after  this  manner,  to  my  eyes  but  a  fearful  solitnde,  an  ex-

In  all  the  oolooring  of  his  history  lie  is  treme  poverty,  lands  uncultivated,  houses

as  great  a  master  as  Llvy,  and  aa  little  in  ruins. Even  the  neighbourhood  of

observant  of  particular  truth. M.  de  Paris  manifested  everywhere  marks  of

Brequigny,  almost  the  latest  of  those  destruction  and  conflagration.  The  streets

excellent  antiquaries  whose  memoiiB  so  are  deserted;  the  roads  overgrown  with

nrntAi  illustrate  the  Frrach  Academy  of  weeds: the  whole  is  a  vast  soUtudA

Inscriptions,  has  discussed  the  hjsury  of  Mem.  de  Pfttrarque.  t  ilL  p.  Ml.

60  PEACE  OF  BRETIGNI. Chap  I.  Past  IJ.

the  title  and  arms  of  France  (an  engagement  wiiicli  he
Btrictly  kept"*),  and  John  to  act  in  no  respect  as  king  or
suzerain  over  the  ceded  provinces.  Finally,  on  November
15,  1361,  two  commissioners  are  appointed  bj  Edward
to  receive  the  renunciations  of  the  king  of  France  at
Bruges  on  the  ensuing  feast  of  St.  Andrew,"  and  to  do
whatever  might  be  mutuaUj  required  by  virtue  of  the
treaty.  These,  however,  seem  to  have  been  withheld,
and  the  twelfth  article  of  the  treaty  of  Bretigni  was  never
expressly  completed.  By  mutual  instruments,  executed
at  Calais,  October  24,  it  had  been  declared  that  the
sovereignty  of  the  ceded  provinces,  as  well  as  Edward's
right  to  the  crown  of  France,  should  remain  as  before,
although  suspended  as  to  its  exercise,  until  the  exchange
of  renunciations,  notwithstanding  any  words  of  present
conveyance  or  release  in  the  treaties  of  Bretigni  and
Calais.  And  another  pair  of  letters  patent,  dated  October
26,  contains  the  form  of  renunciations,  which,  it  is
mutually  declared,  should  have  effect  by  virtue  of  the
present  letters,  in  case  one  party  should  be  ready  to
exchange  such  renunciations  at  the  time  and  place  ap-
pointed, and  the  other  should  make  de&ult  therein.
These  instnmients  executed  at  Calais  are  so  prolix,  and
so  studiously  enveloped,  as  it  seems,  in  the  obscurity  of
technical  language,  that  it  is  dif&cult  to  extract  their
precise  intention.  It  appears,  nevertheless,  that  which-
ever party  was  prepared  to  perform  what  was  required
of  him  at  Bruges  on  November  30,  1361,  the  other  then
and  there  making  default,  would  acquire  not  only  what
our  lawyers  might  call  an  equitable  title,  but  an  actual
vested  right,  by  virtue  of  the  provision  in  the  letters
patent  of  October  26,  1360.  The  appointment  above
mentioned  of  Edward's  commissioners  on  November  15,
1361,  seems  to  throw  upon  the  French  the  burden  of  prov-
ing that  John  sent  his  envoys  with  equally  full  powers  to
the  place  of  meeting,  and  that  the  non-interchange  of
renunciations  was  owing  to  the  English  government.  But
though  an  historian,  sixty  years  later  (Juvenal  des  Ursins),
asserts  that  the  French  commissioners  attendied  at  Bruges,
and  that  those  of  Edward  made  default,  this  is  certainly

"*  Edward  gives  John  the  title  of  King t.  vL  p.  217. The  treaty  waa  signed
of  Franoe  in  an  Instnuneut  bearing  date October  24. Id.  p.  219.
at  GalaU,  October  22,  13«0. Rymer. ■  Rym.  t.  vL  p.  338^

Prascb.  peace  of  Bk£TIGNI.  fll

rendered  improbable  by  tlie  actual  appointment  of  oom-
mi8sionerB  made  by  the  king  of  England  on  the  15th  of
November,  by  the  silence  of  Charles  Y.  after  the  re-
commencement of  hostilities,  who  would  have  rejoiced
in  so  good'  a  grotmd  of  excuse,  and  by  the  language  of
some  English  instruments,  complaining  that  the  French
renunciations  were  withheld.*"  It  is  suggested  by  the
French  authors  that  Edward  waa  unwilling  to  execute
a  formal  renunciation  of  his  claim  to  the  crown.  £nt
we  can  hardly  suppose  that,  in  order  to  evade  this  con-
dition, which  he  nad  volimtarily  imposed  upon  himself
by  the  treaties  of  Bretigni  and  Calais,  he  would  have
left  his  title  to  the  provinces  ceded  by  those  conventions
imperfect.  He  certainly  deemed  it  indefeasible,  and
acted,  without  any  complaint  from  the  French  court,  aa
the  perfect  master  of  those  countries.  He  created  his
son  prince  of  Aquitaine,  with  the  fullest  powers  over
that  new  principality,  holding  it  in  fief  of  the  crown  of
England  by  the  yearly  rent  of  an  ounce  of  gold.^ And

**  It  ^pean  that,  among  otber  alleged  of  the  title  of  Fraooe. Martenoe,  Thee.

infinactloiM  of  the  treaty,  the  king  of  Auec  t.  L  ]».  1487.

Fnnoe  had  received  appeals  from  A>  Four  prinoea  of  the  blood,  or,  as  th^j

magnac,  Albret,  and  other  nobles  of  are termed.  Seigneurs  dee  Fleurdelys,

Aquitaine,  not  long  after  the  peace.  For,  were  detained  as  hostages  for  the  due

in  Fcbnuuy,  13i2,  a  Frenrh  envoy,  the  ezscatloD  of  the  treaty  of  Bretigni,  which,

count  de  TanearrUle,  being  in  EngLuid,  tnsa  whateyer  pretence,  was  delayed  lor

the  privy  conncU  presented  to  Edward  a  considerable  time. Anxious  to  obtain

their  bill  of  remonstnances  against  this  their  liberty,  they  signed  a  treaty  at

conduct  of  France ;  et  semble  au  conaeil  London  in  November,  1362.  by  which,

le r^y  d'Angletcrre que considere  la  among  other  provisions,  it  was  stipulated

founne  de  la  ditte  paix,  que  tant  ertolt  that  the  Uiig  of  France  aboold  send  fnth

honourable  et  prolBtable  au  royaume  de  letters,  under  his  seal,  omvejrlng  and

Franoe'et  k  toute  chretlente,  que  la  rs-  releasing  the  territories  ceded  by  the

ceptiou  deedittes  appelladoos  n'a  mie  peace,  without  the  clause  amtalned  in

este  bien  &ite,  n«  passee  si  oidenement,  the  Ibnaer  letters,  retaining  the  reaaort:

ne  Ik  si  boo  affection  et  amour,  commo  il  eiqueenyoeUBBlettresaoltexpreeaement

droit  avoir  esti  lUt  de  raisan  pannl  I'ef-  compile  transport  de  la  aouverainete  et

fet  et  I'taitentioo  de  la  paiz  et  aillianccs  dn  xeaBort»  ftc Et  la  roi  d'Engleteire  et

affermfees  et  entr'eux  sembVi  estre  moult  ms  enfima  fenont  semUabtement  autiels

iv^judidables  et  oontrairea  Ik  ronneur  et  renondations,  sur  ce  q'il  doit  &ire  de  sa

a  I'estat  da  roy  et  de  son  flU  le  prince  pertie.  Bymer,  t  vL  p.  39C.  This  treaty

et  da  toute  la  malson  d'Angieterre,  et  cf  London  was  never  ratified  by  the

pourra estre evidentematlhrede rebellion  twach  government;  but  1  use  it  as  a

des  snbgles,  et  anssl  donner  tree  grant  proof  that  Edwaid  imputed  the  want  el

oocaaiaii  d'enfraindre  la  paix,  si  bon  re-  miutaal  lenundatloDs  to  IiYanoe,  and  waa

made  sur  oe  n'y  soit  mis  plus  haatlve-  himself  ready  to  perlonn  his  part  of  the

ment. Upoai  the  whole  they  conclude  traa^.

that  if  the  king  of  Fraaoe  would  repair  P  Bym.  t.  vL  p^  S8»-3Sft. One  dawa

(his  trespass,  and  send  Us  renunciation  Is  i emarkaUe ;  Edward  reserves  to  him-

•f  BO>*ereignty,  the  king  should  send  his  self  the  right  of  creating  the  province  of

62  PEACE  OF  BRETIGNI. Chap.  I.  Past  II.

the  court  of  that  great  prince  was  kept  for  scTeral  yeais
at  Bordeaux.

I  have  gone  something  more  than  usual  into  detail  as
to  these  circumst&nces,  because  a  very  specious  account
is  given  by  some  French  historians  and  antiquaries  which
tends  to  throw  the  blame  of  the  rupture  in  1368  upon
Edward  III.*'  Unfoimded  as  was  his  pretension  to  the
crown  of  France,  and  actuated  as  we  must  consider  him
by  the  most  ruinous  ambition,  his  character  was  un-
blemished by  ill  &ith.  There  is  no  apparent  cause  to
impute  the  ravages  made  in  France  by  soldiers  formerly
in  the  English  service  to  his  instigation,  nor  any  proof
of  a  connexion  with  the  king  of  Navarre  subsequently
to  the  peace  of  Bretigni.  But  a  good  lesson  may  be
drawn  by  conquerors  from  the  change  of  fortune  that
befell  Edward  III.  A  long  warfare,  and  unexampled
success,  had  procured  for  him  some  of  the  richest  pro-
vinces of  France.  Within  a  short  time  he  was  entirely
stripped  of  them,  less  through  any  particular  misconduct
than  in  consequence  of  the  intrinsic  difficulty  of  preserv-
ing siich  acquisitions.  The  French  were  already  knit
together  as  one  people ;  and  even  those  whose  'feudal
duties  sometimes  led  them  into  the  field  against  their
sovereign  could  not  endure  the  feeling  of  dismember-
ment from  the  monarchy.  When  the  peace  of  Bretigni
was  to  be  carried  into  effect,  the  nobility  of  the  South

Aquitaine  into  a  kingdom. So  higjb  no  EngUafa  writer  baa  hitherto  nnder-

were  the  notiona  of  this  great  monarch  taken  to  answer. Thia  is  not  said  in

in  an  age  when  the  priyllege  of  creating  order  to  aasome  any  praise  to  myself;  in

new  kingdoms  was  deemed  to  belongonly  tact,  I  have  been  gnided,  in  a  great  de-

to  the  pope  and  the  emperor. Etiam  si  gree,  by  one  of  the  advene  eounsd,

per  noa  hqjnsmodi  provincl»  ad  regslis  M.  Bonamy,  whose  statement  of  ftcts  b

honoris  lltulmn  et  fiiistiglnm  imposterom  very  &lr,  and  makes  me  snspect  a  little

siibUmentar;qnamersctionemfiiciendam  that  he  saw  the  weakness  of  his  own

per  nos  ex  time  spedaliter  reservamns.  canse.

1  Besides  Villaret  and  other  historians, The  antfajrity  of  Christine  de  PIsao,

the  reader  who  (Seels  any  cariosity  on  a  contemporary  panegyrist  of  the  Frandi

this  snl^ect  may  consult  three  memoin  king,  is  not,  perhaps,  very  material  in

in  the  IBth  volume  of  the  Academy  of  snch  a  question ;  but  she  seems  wholly

Inscriptions  by  MM.  Storasse,  Sailer,  ignorant  of  this  supposed  omlssioD  on

and  Bonamy.— These  distinguished  sn-  Edward's  side,  and  puts  the  Justioe  of

ttquaries  unite,  but  the  third  with  much  Charles  V.'s  war  on  a  very  diflteent

Isasconlklenoe  and  passion  than  the  other  basis;  namely,  that  treaties  not  condnciv«

two,  in  charging  the  omission  upon  Ed-  to  the  public  interest  on^t  not  to  be

wnd. The  observations  in  the  text  will  kept.  —  Collection  des  Mteioiret tv

serve,  1  hope,  to  repel  their  argnmenti,  p.  137. A  principle  more  often  acted

whldi,  I  may  be  permitted  to  observe,  upon  than  avowedl

France.  RUPTURE  OF  THE  PEACE.  63

remonstrated  against  the  loss  of  the  king's  sovereignly,
and  showed,  it  is  said,  in  their  charters  granted  by
Charlemagne,  a  promise  never  to  transfer  the  right  of
protecting  them  to  another.  The  citizens  of  liocheUe
implored  the  king  not  to  desert  them,  and  protested  their
readiness  to  pay  half  their  estates  in  taxes,  rather  than
fall  under  the  power  of  En^and.  John  with  heaviness
of  heart  persuaded  these  &ithful  people  to  comply  with
that  destiny  which  he  had  not  been  able  to  surmoimt.
At  length  they  sullenly  submitted  :  we  will  obey,  they
said,  the  English  with  our  lips,  but  our  hearts  shall
never  forget  their  allegiance.'  Such  unwilling  subjects
might  perhaps  have  been  won  by  a  prudent  government ;
but  the  temper  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  which  was  rather
stem  and  arbitrary,  did  not  conciliate  their  hearts  to
his  cause/  After  the  expedition  into  Castile,  a  most
injudicious  and  fatal  enterprise,  he  attempted  to  impose
a  heavy  tax  upon  Guienne.  lliis  was  extended  to  the
lands  of  the  nobility,  who  claimed  an  immunity  from  all
impositions.  Many  of  the  chief  lords  in  Guienne  and
Gascony  carried  their  complaints  to  the  throne  ^-^.  y
of  Charles  Y.,  who  had  succeeded  his  father  in  Rupture  ot
1364,  appealing  to  him  as  the  prince's  sovereign  ^ffi^  **'
and  judge.  After  a  year's  delay  the  king
ventured  to  summon  the  Black  Prince  to  answer
these  charges  before  the  peers  of  France,  and  the  war
immediately  recommenced  between  the  two  countries.'

Though  it  iH  mipossible  to  reconcile  the  conduct  of
Charles  upon  this  occasion  to  the  stem  principles  of
rectitude  which  ought  always  to  be  obeyed,  yet  the
exceeding  injustice  of  Edward  in  the  former  war,  and
the  miseries  which  he  inflicted  upon  an  unoffending
people  in  the  prosecution  of  his  claim,  wOl  go  far  to-
waids  extenuatmg  this  breach  of  the  treaty  of  Bretigni.
It  is  observed,  indeed,  with  some  truth  by  Eapin,  that

'  Frolflsart,  part  L  chap.  214.  t  On  November  20,  1368,  some  time

*  See  an  anecdote  of  his  dlfferenoe  before  the  Bommona  of  the  prince  of

with  the  seigneur  d'Albret,  one  of  the  Wales,  a  treaty  was  concluded  between

principal  barons  in  Gascony,  to  which  Charles and Henry  Ung  of  C^otile,

Ftoiasart,  who  was  then  at  Bordeaux,  wherein  the  latter  expressly  stipulates

Mcrtbes  the  alienation  of  the  southern  that  wliatever  parts  of  Guienne  or  ISng*

nobiUtr*  chap.  344.— Edward  m.,  soon  land  he  might  conquer  he  would  gi^re

after  the  peace  of  Bretigni.  revoloed  all  iq;»  to  the  king  of  F^ranoe.— Rymer,  t  t1

his  grants  in  Guienns.— Symer,  ivL  p.  598.
pk  at  L

54  LOSS  OF  THE  ENGUSH  CONC^aESTS.  Chap.  I.  Pari  II.

«
we  judge  of  Charles's  prudence  by  the  event ;  and  that,
if  he  had  been  unfortunate  in  the  war,  he  would  have
brought  on  himself  the  reproaches  of  all  mankind,  and
even  of  those  writers  who  are  now  most  ready  to  extol
him.  But  his  measures  had  been  so  sagaciously  taken,
that,  except  through  that  perverseness  of  fortune,  against
which,  especially  in  war,  there  is  no  security,  he  could
hardly  fail  of  success.  The  elder  Edward  was  declining
through  age,  and  the  younger  through  disease ;  the  ceded
provinces  were  eager  to  return  to  their  native  king,  and
their  garrisons,  as  we  may  infer  by  their  easy  reduction,
feeble  and  ill-supplied.  France,  on  the  other  hand,  had
recovered  breath  after  her  losses ;  the  sons  of  those  who
had  fallen  or  fled  at  Poitiers  were  in  the  fleld ;  a  king,
not  personally  warlike,  but  eminently  wise  and  popular,
occupied  the  throne  of  the  rash  and  intemperate  John.
She  was  restored  by  the  policy  of  Chaiies  V.  and  the
valour  of  Du  Guesclin.  This  hero,  a  Breton  gentleman
without  fortime  or  exterior  graces,  was  the  greatest  orna-
ment of  France  during  that  age.  Though  inferior,  as  it
seems,  to  Lord  Chandos  in  military  skill,  as  well  as  in
the  polished  virtues  of  chivalry,  his  imwearied  activity,
his  talent  of  inspiring  confidence,  his  good  fortune,  the
generosity  and  frankness  of  his  chanu^ter,  have  preserved
a  fresh  recollection  of  his  name,  which  has  hardly  been
the  case  with  our  countryman*
In  a  few  campaigns  the  English  were  deprived  of
almost  all  their  conquests,  and  even,  in  a  great
The  English  ^^gj-^^^  q£  their  Original  possessions  in  Guienne.
their  con-  They  were  still  formidable  enemies,  not  only
quests.  ^^^^  their  courage  and  alacrity  in  the  war,  but  on
account  of  the  keys  of  France  which  they  held  in  their
hands ;  Bordeaux,  Bayonne,  and  Calais,  by  inheritance  or
conquest ;  Brest  and  Cherbourg,  in  mortgage  from  their
allies,  the  duke  of  Britany  and  king  of  Navarre.  But
the  successor  of  Edward  III.  was  Richard  II. ;  a  reign  of
feebleness  and  sedition  gave  no  opportunity  for  prose-
cuting  schemes  of  ambition.  The  war,  protracted  with
few  distinguished  events  for  several  years,  was  at  length
suspended  by  repeated  armistices,  not,  indeed,  very  strictly
observed,  and  which  the  animosity  of  the  English  would
not  permit  to  settle  in  any  regular  treaty.  Nothing  less
than  tlie  terms  obtained  at  Bretigni,  emphatically  called

rsLAXCX,  CHARLES  V.  ANIi  VI.  65

the  Great  Peace«  would  satisfy  a  frank  and  courageous
people,  who  deemed  themselves  cheated  by  the  maimer
of  its  infraction.  The  war  was  therefore  always  popular
in  England,  and  the  credit  which  an  ambitious  prince,
Thomas  duke  of  Gloucester,  obtained  in  that  country,
was  chiefly  owing  to  the  determined  opposition  which  he
showed  to  all  French  connexions.  But  the  politics  of
Kichard  11.  were  of  u  different  cast ;  and  Henry  IV.  was
equally  anxious  to  avoid  hostilities  with  France ;  so  that,
before  the  unhappy  condition  of  that  kingdom  tempteil
his  son  to  revive  the  claims  of  Edward  in  still  more
fervourable  circumstances,  there  had  been  thirty  years  of
respite,  aud  even  some  intervals  of  friendly  intercourse
between  the  two  nations.  £oth,  indeed,  were  weakened  by
internal  discord ;  but  France  more  &tally  than  England.
But  for  the  calamities  of  Charles  YI.*s  reign,  she  woiQd
probably  have  expelled  her  enemies  from  the  kingdom.
The  strength  of  that  fertile  and  popxxlous  coimtry  was
recruited  with  surprising  rapidity.  Sir  Hugh  Calverley,
a  feonous  captain  in  the  wars  of  Edward  III.,  while
serving  in  Flanders,  laughed  at  the  herald,  who  assured
him  that  the  king  of  France's  army,  then  entering  the
country,  amounted  to  26,000  lances ;  asserting  that  he
had  often  seen  their  largest  musters,  but  never  so  much
as  a  fourth  part  of  the  number."*  The  relapse  of  this
great  kingdom  under  Charles  YI.  was  more  painful  and
perilous  than  her  first  crisis ;  but  she  recovered  from  each
through  her  intrinsic  and  inextingnishable  resources.

Chao-les  V.,  sumamed  the  Wise,  after  a  reign,  which,
if  we  overlook  a  little  obliquity  in  the  rupture  j^ccMtAonot
of  the  peace  of  Bretigni,  may  be  deemed  one  of  cbaries  vi.,
the  most  honourable  in  French  history,  dying  ^^^'
prematurely,  left  the  crown  to  his  son,  a  boy  of  thirteen,
under  the  care  of  three  ambitious  uncles,  the  dukes  of
Anjou,  Berry,  and  Burgundy.  Charles  had  retrieved  the
gV)ry,  restored  the  tranquillity,  revived  the  spirit  of  his
country ;  the  severe  trials  which  exercised  Ins  regency
after  the  battle  of  Poitiers  had  disciplined  his  mind ;  he
became  a  sagacious  statefsman,  an  encourager  of  literature,
a  beneficent  lawgiver.  He  erred,  doubtless,  though  upon
plausible  grounds,  iu  accumulating  a  viast  treasure,  which
the  duke  of  Anjou  seized  before  he  was  cold  in  the

*■  Froinart,  p.  U.  &  143.
VOL.  I.  ^

66  CHARLES  VI.  Chap.  I.  Past  IL

grave.  But  all  the  fruits  of  his  wisdom  were  loet  in
die  succeeding  reign.  In  a  goTemment  essentially  popu-
lar tJie  youth  or  imbecility  of  Uie  sovereign  creates  no
material  derangement.  In  a  monarchy,  where  all  the
springs  of  the  system  depend  upon  one  central  force,
these  accidents,  which  are  sure  in  the  course  of  a  few
generations  to  recur,  can  scarcely  fsdl  to  dislocate  the
whole  machine.  During  the  forty  years  that  Charles  YI.
bore  the  name  of  king,  rather  than  reigned  in  France,
that  country  was  reduced  to  a  state  &r  more  deplorable
than  during  the  captivity  of  John.

A  great  change  had  occurred  in  the  political  conditicHi
of  France  during  the  fourteenth  century.  As  the  feudal
militia  became  unserviceable,  the  expenses  of  war  were
increased  through  the  necessity  of  taking  troops  into
constant  pay ;  and  while  more  luxurious  refinements  of
iving  heightened  the  temptations  to  profuseness,  the
means  of  enjoying  them  were  lessened  by  improvident
alienations  of  ike  domain.  Hence  taxes,  hitherto  almost
unknown,  were  levied  incessantly,  and  with  all  those
circumstances  of  oppression  which  are  natural  to  the
fiscal  proceedings  of  an  arbitrary  govenmient.  These,  as
has  been  said  before,  gave  rise  to  the  unpopularity  of  the
two  first  Yalois,  and  were  nearlv  leading  to  a  complete
revolution  in  the  convulsions  uiat  succeeded  the  battle
of  Poitiers.  The  confidence  reposed  in  Charles  V.'s
wisdom  and  oeconomy  kept  everything  at  rest  during  his
reign,  though  the  taxes  were  still  very  heavy.  But  the
seizure  of  his  vast  accumulations  by  the  duke  of  Anjou,
and  the  ill  fadth  with  which  the  new  government  imposed
sediuons  Subsidies,  after  promising  their  abolition,  pio-
atptois.  yoked  the  people  of  Paris,  and  sometimes  of
other  places,  to  repeated  seditions.  The  States-General
not  oidy  compelled  the  government  to  revoke  these  im-
positions and  restore  the  nation,  at  least  according  to  the
language  of  edicts,  to  all  their  liberties,  but,  with  less
wisdom,  refused  to  make  any  grant  of  money.  Indeed  a
remarkable  spiiit  of  democratical  freedom  was  then
rising  in  those  classes  on  whom  the  crown  and  nobility
had  so  long  trampled.  An  example  was  held  out  by  the
Flemings,  who,  always  tenacious  of  their  privileges,
because  conscious  of  their  ability  to  maintain  theni,  were
engaged  in  a  forioue  conflict  with  Louis  count  of  Flan-

Francr.  seditions  at  PARIS.  67

ders/  The  court  of  France  took  part  in  this  war ;  and
after  obtaining  a  decisive  victory  over  the  citizens  of
Ghent,  Charles  YI.  returned  to  chastise  those  of  Paris/
Unable  to  resist  the  royal  army,  the  city  was  ti'eated  as
the  spoil  of  conquest ;  its  immunities  abridged ;  its  most
active  leaders  put  to  death ;  a  fine  of  uncommon  severity
imposed ;  and  me  taxes  renewed  by  arbitrary  prerogative.
But  the  people  preserved  their  indignation  for  a  &vour-
able  moment ;  and  were  unfortunately  led  by  it,  when
rendered  subservient  to  the  ambition  of  others,  into  a
series  of  crimes,  and  a  long  alienation  from  the  interests
of  their  country.

It  is  dii&ciQt  to  name  a  limit  beyond  which  taxes  will
not  be  borne  without  impatience,  when  they  appear  to  be
called  for  by  necessity,  and  fiEdthfuUy  applied ;  nor  is  it
impracticable  for  a  slolfol  minister  to  deceive  the  people
in  both  these  respects.  But  the  sting  of  taxation  is
wastefdlness.  What  high-spirited  man  could  see  without
indignation  the  earnings  of  his  labour,  yielded  tmgrudg-
ingly  to  the  public  defence,  become  the  spoil  of  parasites
and  speculators?  It  is  thib*  that  mortifies  the  liberal
hand  of  public  spirit;  and  those  statesmen  who  deem
the  security  of  government  to  depend  not  on  laws  and

*  The  Flemish  rebellion,  which  orl-  anoes  than  can  be  found  in  Froiwart
ginated  in  an  attempt,  in(g;ested  by  bad 7  If  Charles  VI.  had  been  defeated  by

advisers  to  the  ooant,  to  impose  a  tax  the  Flemings,  the  insorrectlon  of  the

npon  the  people  of  Ghent  without  their  Parisians, Froiflsart  says, would  have

consent,  is  related  in  a  very  Interesting  spread  over  France ;  toute  gentiUesBe  et

manner  by  Froissart,  p.  IL  c.  37,  &&,  who  noblesse eftt  ktk  morte  et  perdue  en

equals  Herodotus  in  simplicity,  llveli-  France ;  nor  wonld  the  Jacquerie  have

ness,  and  power  over  the  heart I  would  ever  been  si  grande  et  si  horrible,  c.  120.

advise  the  historical  student  to  acquaint  To  the  example  of  the  Gantoia  he  ascribes

himself  with  these  transactions  and  with  the  tumults  which  broke  out  about  the

the  corresponding  tumults  at  Paris.  same  dme  in  England  as  well  as  in

They  are  among  the  eternal  lessons  of  France,  c.  84. The  Flemish  insurrection

history ;  for  the  ui^ust  encroachments  of  would  probably  have  had  more  important

oourts,  the  intemperate  passions  of  tne  consequences  if  it  bad  been  cordially

multitude,  the  ambition  of  tonapogues,  supported  by  the  English  government.

the  cruelty  of  victorious  IkctloLs.  will  But  the  danger  of  encoun^ng  that  de-

never  cease  to  have  their  parallels  and  mocratlcal  q>irit  which  so  strongly  lea-

their analogies; while the military  vened  tbe  commons  of  England  mi^t

adiievements  of  distant  times  afford  in  justly  be  deemed  by  Richard  IL's  council

general  no  instruction,  and  can  hardly  much  more  than  a  counterbalance  to  the

occupy  too  little  of  our  time  in  historical  advantags  of  distressing  France. When

sbidie& The  prefaces  to  the  fifth  and  too  late,  some  attempts  were  made,  and

sixth  volumes  of  the  Ordonnances  dee  the  Flemish  towns  acknowledged  Richard

Roia  de  France  contain  more  accurate  as  king  of  Fhtnce  in  1384. Rymcr,  tvii

tatoauaUau  as  to  fibe  Parisian  disturb-  p.  448.

V2

98  SEDITIONS  AT  PARIS. Ceap.  I.  Past  H

aimies,  but  on  the  moral  sympatliies  ftsd  piejudlceB  d
tho  people,  will  vigilantly  guard  against  even  the  bub*
picion  of  prodigality.  In  the  present  stage  of  society
it  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  degree  of  misapplication
which  existed  in  the  French  treasury  under  Charles  VI.,
Jbecause  the  real  exigencies  of  the  state  could  never
again  be  so  inconsiderable.  Scarcely  any  militaiy  force
was  kept  up ;  and  the  produce  of  the  grievous  impo-
sitions then  levied  was  chiefly  lavished  upon  the  royal
household,'  or  plundered  by  the  oflficers  of  government.
This  naturally  resulted  &om  the  peculiar  and  afflict-
ing circumstances  of  this  reign.  The  duke  of  Anjou
pretended  to  be  entitled  by  the  late  king's  appoint-
ment, if  not  by  the  constitution  of  France,  to  exercise
the  government  as  regent  during  the  minority ;'  but  this
.  period,  which  would  naturally  be  very  short,  a  law  of
Charles  V.  having  filed  the  age  of  majority  at  thirteen,
Was  still  more  abridged  by  consent ;  and  after  the  yoimg
monarch's  coronation,  he  was  considered  as  reigning  with
full  personal  authority. Anjou,  Berry,  and  Burgundy,

*  The  expenses  of  the  royal  household,  and  supposes  that  the  king  bad  sop-
which  under  Charles  V.  were  94,000  pressed  both,  as  nelQier  party  seepts  to
livres,  amounted  in  1412  to  450,000.  have  availed  itself  of  their  authoritj  in
VilUret,  t  iiL  p.  343.  Yet  the  king  was  the  discussions  that  took  place  after  the
90  ill  supplied  that  bis  pUte  had  been  king's  death  (HisL  de  France,  t  UL
pawned.  When  Montacfu,  minister  of  p.  663,  edit  1720).  Villaret,  as  is  too
the  finances,  was  arrested  in  1409,  all  this  much  his  custom,  slides  over  the  diiB-
plato  was  found  concealed  in  his  house,  culty  without  notice. But  M.  de  &»•

*  It  has'  always  been  an  unsettled  quigni  (Mim.  de  I'Acad.  des  Inscript.
point  whether  the  presumptive  heir  is  t.  L  p.  533)  observes  that  the  second  of
entitled  to  the  regency  of  France;  and,  these  instruments,  as  published  by  M.
if  he  be  so  to  the  regency,  whether  this  S&sousse,  In  the  Ordonnances  des  Bois,
includes  the  custody  of  the  minor's  t  vL  p.  406,  differs  most  essentially  firam
person.  The  particular  case  of  the  duko  that  in  Dupuy,  and  contains  no  mentioD
of  Ai\Jou  is  sul^ect  to  a  considerable  whatever  of  the  government  Itistbere*
apparent  difficulty.  Two  Instruments  of  fore  easily  rcconciloable  with  the  first,
Charles  V.,  bearing  the  same  date  of  that  confers  the  regency  on  the  duke  of
October,  13Y4,  as  published  by  I^puy  Ai\Jou.  As  Dupuy  took  it  fhun  the  same
(Tniti  de  Majorite  desRois,  p.  161),  are  source  es  Secousse,  namely,  the  Tr^sor
plainly  irrecondleable  with  each  other ;  des  Charles,  a  strong  suspicion  of  wiUU
the  former  giving  the  exclusive  regency  interpolation  foils  upon  him,  or  upon  the
to  the  duke  of  AT\Jon,reservlng  Qm  custody  editor  of  his  posthtmions  work,  printed
of  the  minor's  person  to  other  guardians ;  in  1655.  This  date  will  readily  suggest
the  latter  conferring  not  only  this  cus-  a  motive  for  such  an  interpolation  to
(ody,  but  the  government  of  the  kingdom,  those  who  recollect  the  circumstances  of
on  the  queen,  and  on  the  dukes  of  Bur-  France  at  that  Ume  and  for  some  /ears
gundy  and  Bourbon,  without  mentioning  before ;  Anne  of  Austria  having  maim
the  duke  of  Alton's  name.  Daniel  calls  tain  3d  herself  in  pcssession  of  a  testa-
these  testaments  of  Charles  V.,  whereas  menUuy  rege*Ky  against  the  presomptivf
Ihey  an  In  the  fonn  cf  letters  patent  ■  Vtir

FitASCE.  DERANGEMENT  OF  CHARLES  VI.  69

together  witli  the  king's  maternal  uncle,  the  duke  oi
Bourbon,  divided  the  actual  exercise  of  govemmeni.

The  first  of  these  soon  undertook  an  expedition  into
Italy,  to  possess  himself  of  the  crown  of  Naples,  in  which
he  perished.  Beny  waa  a  profuse  and  voluptuous  man,
of  no  great  talents ;  though  his  rank,  and  the  middle
position  which  he  held  between  struggling  parties,  made
him  rather  conspicuous  throughout  the  I'evolutions  of
that  age.  The  most  respectable  of  the  king*s  uncles,  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  being  farther  removed  fix)m  the  royal
stem,  and  of  an  unassuming  character,  took  a  less  active
part  than  his  three  coadjutors.  Bui^undy,  an  ambitious
and  able  prince,  maintained  the  ascendency,  until  Charles,
weary  of  a  restraint  which  had  been  protracted  by  his
imcle  till  he  was  in  his  twenty-first  year,  took
the  reins  into  his  own  hands.  The  dukes  of  ^•'*-^^^-
Bui^undy  and  Berry  retired  from  court,  and  the  admi-
nistration was  committed  to  a  different  set  of  men,  at
the  head  of  whom  appeared  the  constable  de  Clisson,  a
soldier  of  great  fame  in  the  English  wars.  The  people
rejoiced  in  the  fall  of  the  princes  by  whose  exactions
they  had  been  plundered ;  but  the  new  ministers  soon
rendered  themselves  odious  by  similar  conduct.  '  The
fortune  of  Clisson,  after  a  few  years*  favour,  amounted
to  1,700,000  livres,  equal  in  weight  of  silver,  to  say
nothing  of  the  depreciation  of  money,  to  ten  times  that
sum  at  present.**

Charles  VI.  had  reigned  five  years  from  his  assumption
of  power,  when  he  was  seized  with  a  derange-
ment of  intellect,  which  continued,  through  a  SSTSf
series  of  recoveries  and  relapses,  to  his  death,  curiesvi.
He  passed  thirty  years  in  a  pitiable  state  of  ^•^•^^^^•
suffering,  neglected  by  his  femily,  particularly  by  the
most  infamous  of  women,  Isabel  of  Bavaria,  his  queen,
to  a  degree  which  is  hardly  credible." The  ministers
were  immediately  disgraced; the princes re-assumed
their  stations. For  several  years  the  duke  of  Burgundy

b  Frolflsart,  p.  Iv.  c  48.  of  Orleans,  and  representa  ber  as  merely

*  Sismondi inclines to ipeak  more  an  indolent  woman  fond  of  good  cbe<'r

fcvonrably  of  .this  queen  than  most  bave  Tet  he  owns  that  the  king  was  so  neg-

done:  **Dans  les  temps  poeteriean  on  lected  as  to  suffer  from  an  excessive

■'est  pin  k  faire  nn  monstre  de  Isabeau  want  of  cleanliness,  sometimes  even  from

dsfiarirre." He  discredits  the  snspidon  hunger  (xii.  218, 225>  Wasthlsnolmpn-

of  a  criminal  interoonzBe  with  the  dnke  tatien  on  his  wife  ?  See  too  Michelet.  tl  42

70  ^ MUBDER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  ORLEANS.  Chap.  I.  Pasx  (L

conducted  the  government.  Bnt  this  was  in  oppositioii
putiee  of  ^  ^  fonnidable  rival,  Louis  duke  of  Orleans,  the
Buiwindy  king's  brother.  It  was  impossible  that  a  prince
andOrieuis.  ^  ^^^  ^  ^^  throne,  fitvouTcd  by  the  queen

perhaps  with  criminal  fondness,  and  by  the  people  on
account  of  his  external  graces,  should  not  acquire  a  share
of  power.  He  succeeded  at  length  in  obtaining  the
whole  management  of  affairs;  wherein  the  outrageous
dissoluteness  of  his  conduct,  and  stiU  more  the  excessive
taxes  imposed,  rendered  him  altogether  odious.  The
Parisians  compared  his  administration  with  that  of  the
duke  of  Burgundy;  and  from  that  time  ranged  them-
selves on  the  side  of  the  latter  and  his  &mily,  tibroughout
the  long  distractions  to  which  the  ambition  of  these
princes  gave  birth.

The  death  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  in  1404,  after
several  fluctuations  of  success  between  him  and  the
duke  of  Orleans,  by  no  means  left  his  party  without  a
head.  Equally  brave  and  ambitious,  but  far  more  auda-
cious and  tmprincipled,  his  son  John,  sumamed  Sans-
peur,  sustained  the  same  contest.  A  reconciliation  ,had
been,  however,  brought  e^bout  with  the  duke  of  Orleans ;
they  had  sworn  reciprocal  friendship,  and  participated,
as  was  the  custom,  in  order  to  render  these  obligations
more  solemn,  in  the  same  communion. In  the  midst  of

this  outward  harmony,  the  duke  of  Orleans
the^ake  of  wss  assafisinatcd  in  the  streets  of  Paris.  After
^v^iii ^  slight  attempt  at  concealment, Burgundy

avowed  and  boasted  of  the  crime,  to  which  he
had  been  instigated,  it  is  said,  by  somewhat  more  than
political  jealousy.*'  From  this  fatal  momeint  the  dissen-
sions of  the  royal  fieanily  began  to  assume  the  com-
plexion of  civil  war.  The  queen,  the  sons  of  the  duke
of  Orleans,  with  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Bourbon,  united
against  the  assassin.  But  he  possessed,  in  addition  to
luiB  own  appanage  of  Burgundy,  the  county  of  Flanders
as  his  maternal  inheritance;  and  the  people  of  Paris,
who  hated  the  duke  of  Orleans,  readily  forgave  or  rather
exulted  in  his  murder/

<i  Orleus  Is  Mid  to  ha^e  boasted  of  etiam  inftrre  attentare  pnMnnp8lL  No-

the  dficbea  of  BorgniMlT's  &Toiin.  VllL  tioes  des  MamucritB  da  Rot.  L  L  p.  411.

t  xiL  p.  4T4.  Amelgvd,  who  wrote  about  •  Micbelet  repreaentR  thlB  youx^  prinoi

olsbty  yean  after  the  tline,  atyi,  Tim  as  regretted  and  beL  /ed;  bat  bla  Ian*

PkANCK.  CIVIL  WAB.  71

It  IB  easy  to  estimate  the  weakness  of  the  goTemment,
from  the  tenns  upon  which  the  dnko  of  Burgundy  was
permitted  to  obtain  pardon  at  Chartres,  a  yesr  after  the
perpetration  of  the  crime.  As  soon  as  he  entered  the
royal  presence,  every  one  rose,  except  the  king,  queen,
and  dauphin.  The  duke,  approaching  the  throne,  fell
on  his  knees ;  when  a  lord,  who  acted  as  a  sort  of  counsel
for  him,  addressed  the  king :  '*  Sire,  the  duke  of  Bur-
giuidy,  your  cousin  and  servant,  is  come  before  you,
being  informed  that  he  has  incurred  your  displeasure,
on  account  of  what  he  caused  to  be  done  to  the  duke  of
Chileans  your  brother,  for  your  good  and  that  of  your
kingdom,  as  he  is  ready  to  prove  when  it  shall  please
you  to  hear  it,  and  therefore  requests  you,  with  all
humility,  to  dioniss  your  resentment  towards  him,  and
to  receive  him  into  your  fo\our." '

This  insolent  apology  was  all  the  atonement  that
could  be  extorted  for  the  assassination  of  the  ^  ^
first  prince  of  the  blood.  It  is  not  wonderful  that  civiiwar
the  duke  of  Bui^undy  soon  obtained  the  ma-  between
nagement  of  afEaiis,  and  drove  his  adversaries  ^*p^^®^
from  the  capital. The  princes,  headed  by  the  father-in-
law  of  the  young  duke  of  Orleans,  the  count  of  Armag-
nac,  from  whom  their  party  was  now  denominated,

goa^B  if  ftall  of  tboee  itrange  oontriBte  lunwl  nation,  the  cltkena  ahonted  Noel,

and  inoonaiatendea  which,  for  Uie  sake  the  nanal  ciyon  the  entrance  of  the  king,

of  effect*  thla  moat  brilliant  writer  aome-  to  the  great  diapleaeare  of  the  queen  and

ttmea  employa. "H  aTiit, dana  aea  other  princes. ''Et  pour  Tral.  oomme

cmportemena  da  Jenneaae,  terriblement  dlt  eat  dearoa,  11  eeiolt  tite  fort  aymi  du

▼exe  le  people ;  11  fkit  mandlt  dn  peuple,  commnn  peuple  de Piaria,  'et  cvoient

plenri  da  people. Ylvaat,  11  coftta  bien  grand  eap^rance  qnlceluy  due  wax  tr^

de  larmea ;  mala  oombien  plu,  mort  I  grand  aifection  an  ro jaome.  et  k  la  chose

SI  Tona  enaaies  demandd  k  la  France  al  publioque, et  avoient souvenance  dea

ce  Jeana  homme  etait  bien  ;!lgne  de  tant  grana  taiUea  qui  avoient  eatft  miaea  sna

d'amoor,  elle  eftt  lepondn,  Je  raimaiBp  depnia  la  mort  du  due  Philippe  de  Bour-

Ce  n'eat  paa  aeoleinent  poor  le  bien  gogne  pere  d'lceluy,  ^osquea  k  I'heure

qn'on  aime;  qui  aime,  aime  tout*  lea  prteente,  leequellea  ila  entendoient  que

d^uta  auari. Oelul-d  pint  comme  11  feoat  par  le  moyen  dudit  due  d'Orlean&

^tait,  mfili  da  Men  et  de  maL"  (Hlat  Et  pouroe  estoit  grandement  enoonru  en

de  France,  tL  6.) What  ia  tlia  meaning  I'fakliguation  d'loeluy  peuple,  et  lenr

of  thla  love  lor  one  who,  be  haa  juat  told  aemUolt  que  IMeu  de  aa  giikx  lea  avoit

na,  waa  coned  by  the  people? And  if  tite- grandement pour recommandes,

Fhila  waa  the  repreientfttiTe  of  France,  qoand  11  avoit  ■ooffert  qo'ils  fQasent  hora

how  did  the  peuple  show  their  aflbctlon  de  aa  sul^ection  et  goveniement,  et  qu'ila

for  the  duke  of  Orleans,  when  th^  were  en  estolent  delivrez." Monatrelet,  34.

openly  and  vebemently  the  partlaana  of  Compare  thla  with  what  M.  Mlchelet  haa

hiamnnlerer?  On  the  flrat  return  of  the  written.

duke  of  Burgundy  to  Fwia  after  the  t  Munstrelet,  part  L  I IIX

72  CIVIL  ^AR.  Chap.  I.  Pabt  II.

raised  their  Btandard  against  him;  and  the  north  oi
France  was  rent  to  pieces  by  a  proti-acted  civil  war,  in
.«rhich  neither  party  scrupled  any  extremity  of  pillage
or  massacre.  Several  times  peace  was  made ;  but  each
faction,  conscious  of  their  own  insincerity,  suspected
that  of  their  adversaries.  The  king,  of  whose  Jiame
both  availed  themselves,  was  only  in  some  doubtful  in-
tervals of  reason  capable  of  rendering  legitimate  the
acts  of  either.  The  dauphin,  aware  of  9ie  tyranny
which  the  two  parties  alternately  exercised,  was  forced,
even  at  the  expense  of  perpetuating  a  civil  war,  to
balance  one  against  the  ol^er,  and  permit  neither  to  be
wholly  subdued.  He  gave  peace  to  the  Armagnacs  at
Auxerre,  in  despite  of  the  duke  of  Bui^ndy ;

*^'  '  and,  having  afterwards  united  with  them  against
this  prince,  and  carried  a  successful  war  into  FlandeiB,

Aj>  1414 ^®  disappointed  their  revenge  by  concluding

with  him  a  treaty  at  Arras.
This  dauphin  and  his  next  brother  died  within  six-
teen months  of  each  other,  by  which  the  rank  devolved
upon  Charles,  youngest  son  of  the  king. The  count  of
Armagnac,  now  constable  of  France,  retained  possession
April  1417 ^^  ^®  government. But  his  severity,  and  the
weight  of  taxes,  revived  the  Burgundian  party
in  Paris,  which  a  rigid  proscription  had  endeavoured  to
destroy. He  brought  on  his  head  the  implacable  hatred
of  the  queen,  whom  he  had  not  only  shut  out  from
public  affairs,  but  disgraced  by  the  detection  of  her  gal-
.  lantries. Notwithstanding  her  ancient  enmity

^^  ^*^*'  to  the  duke  of  Burgimdy,  she  made  overtures
to  him,  and,  being  delivered  by  his  troops  from  confine-
ment, declared  herself  openly  on  his  side.  A  few  ob-
scure persons  stole  the  city  keys,  and  admitted  the  Bur-
gundians  into  Paris.  The  tumult  which  arose  showed
in  a  moment  the  disposition  of  the  inhabitants ;  but  this
was  more  horribly  displayed  a  few  dskyB  afterwards,
when  the  populace,  rushing  to  the  prisons,  massacred
June  13,  tbe  constable  d' Armagnac  and  his  partisans.
1418.  '  Between  three  and  four  thousand  persons  were
murdered  on  this  day,  which  has  no  parallel  but  what
our  own  age  has  witnessed,  in  the  massacre  perpetrated
by  the  same  ferocious  populace  of  Paris,  under  circum-
stances nearly  similar. Not  long  afterwards  an  agree*

rtuscE. MURDER  OF  THE  DtKE  OF  BURGUNDY.  73

ment  took  place  between  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  wlio  had
now  the  kmg*s  person  as  well  as  the  capital
in  his  hands,  and  the  dauphin,  whose  party  ^•^•^****
was  enfeebled  by  the  loss  of  almost  all  its  leaders. This
reconciliation,  which  mutual  interest  should
have  rendered  permanent,  had  lasted  a  veiy  tl^^Sie
short  time,  when  the  duke  of  Burgundy  was  dokeor
assassinated  at  an  interview  with  Charles,  in "'8°°*'y'
his  presence,  and  by  the  hands  of  his  friends,  though
not, perhaps,  with  his  previous  knowledge.* From
whomsoever  the  crime  proceeded,  it  was  a  deed  of  in-
fatuation, and  plunged  France  afresh  into  a  sea  of  perils,
from  which  the  luiion  of  these  factions  had  just  afifordea
a  hope  of  extricating  her.

It  has  been  mentioned  already  that  the  English  war  had
almost  ceased  during  the  reigns  of  Bichard  II.  intHgnes
and  Henry  IV. The  former  of  these  waB  at-  <rf  French
tached  by  inclination,  and  latterly  by  marriage, wi^^g.
to  the  court  of  France ;  and,  though  the  French  ^"*^
government  showed  at  first  some  disposition  to  revenge
his  dethronement,  yet  the  new  king's  success,  as  well  as
domestic  quarrels,  deterred  it  from  any  serious  renewal
of  the  war. A  long  commercial  connexion  had  subsisted

s  Then  are  three  snppodtloDs  con-  eould  not  eooept  without  offending  God
eeivable  to  explain  this  important  pa»>  and  oontravenlng  hla  own  letten  patent,
sage  in  history,  the  aaBaasination  of  John  (Rjmer,  t  \x.  p.  790.)  It  is  not.  how-
Sanspeur.  I.  It  was  pretended  by  the  ever,  very  clear  what  this  means.  2.  The
dauphin's  friends  at  the  ^me,  and^has  next  hypothesis  is,  that  it  was  the  de-
been  maintained  more  lately  (St  Foix,  liberate  act  of  Charles.  But  bis  yonth,
Eteals  sur  Paris,  i.  ill.  p.  309,  edit.  1767),  his  feebleness  of  spirit,  and  especially  the
that  he  had  premeditated  the  marder  of  consternation  into  which,  by  all  testi-
Charles,  and  that  bis  own  wss  an  act  of  monies,  he  was  thrown  hy  the  event,  are
self-defence.  This  is,  I  think,  qnlte  im-  rather  adverse  to  this  explanation.  3.  It
probable :  the  danphln  had  a  great  army  remains  only  to  conclude  that  Tanegut
near  the  spot,  while  the  duke  was  only  de  Cbastel,  and  other  favourites  of  the
attended  by  five  hundred  men.  VlUaret,  dauphin,  long  attached  to  the  Orleans
indeed,  and  St  Foix,  in  order  to  throw  faction,  who  Justly  regarded  the  duke  as
suspicion  upon  the  duke  of  Burgundy's  an  infiamous  assassin,  and  migtht  question
motives,  asKrt  that  Henry  V.  accused  his  sincerity  or  their  own  safety  if  he
him  of  having  made  proposals  to  him  should  regain  the  ascendant,  took  advan-
which  he  could  not  aooept  without  offend-  tage  of  this  opportunity  to  commit  an  act
Ing  God ;  and  conjecture  that  this  might  of  retaliation,  less  criminal,  but  not  leas
mean  the  assassination  of  the  dauphin,  ruinous  in  its  consequences,  than  that
Bat  the  expression  of  Henry  do  not  which  had  provoked  it  Charles,  how-
Tslate  to  any  private  proposals  of  the  evea,  by  his  subsequent  conduct,  lecog-
dnke,  but  to  demands  made  by  him  and  nlsed  their  deed,  and  naturally  exposed
the  queen,  as  proxlea  for  Charles  VL  in  himself  to  the  resentment  of  the  young
aoDfermce  for  peaces  whkfa  be  says  he  duke  of  Burgundj.

•74  INTRIGUES  WITH  ENGLAND. Chap.  I.  Past  IL

between  England  and  Flanders,  which  the  v  dukes  of
Burgundy,  when  they  became  sovereigns  of  the  latter
country  upon  the  death  of  count  Louis  in  1384,  were
studious  to  preserve  by  separate  truces.**  They  acted
upon  the  same  pacific  policy  when  their  interest  predo-
minated in  the  councils  of  France.  Henry  had  even  a
negotiation  pending  fot  the  marriage  of  his  eldest  son
with  a  princess  of  Buigundy,*  when  an  unexpected  pro-
posal from  the  opposite  side  set  more  tempting  views
before  his  eyes.  The  Armagnacs,  pressed  hard  by  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  offered,  in  consideration  of  only
4000  troops,  the  pay  of  which  they  would  themselves
defray,  to  assist  him  in  the  recovery  of  Guienne  and
Poitou.  Four  princes  of  the  blood — ^Beny,
^'  ^  Bourbon,  Orleans,  and  Aien^on — disgraced  their
names  by  signing  this  treaty.*  Henry  broke  off  his
alliance  with  Burgundy,  and  sent  a  force  into  France,
which  found  on  its  arrival  that  the  princes  had  made  a
separate  treaty,  without  the  least  concern  for  their  Eng-
lish allies.  After  his  death,  Henry  Y.  engaged  for  some
time  in  a  series  of  negotiations  with  the  French  court,
where  the  Orleans  party  now  prevailed,  and  with  the
duke  of  Burgundy.  He  even  secretly  treated  at  the
same  time  for  a  marriage  with  Catherine  of  France
(which  seems  to  have  been  his  fovourite,  as  it  was  ulti-
mately his  successful,  project),  and  with  a  daughter  of
the  duke — a  duplicity  not  creditable  to  his  memory."
But  Henry's  ambition,  which  aimed  at  the  highest
quarry,  was  not  long  fettered  by  negotiation;  and,  in-
deed, his  proposals  of  marrying  Catherine  were  coupled
with  such  exorbitant  demands,  as  France,  notwith-
standing all  her  weakness,  could  not  admit,
SJSS^'  though  she  would  have  ceded  Guienne,  and
^*"uiT  &^^^  *  ^^^  dowry  with  the  princess."  He
^'^  invaded  Normandy,  took  Harfleur,  and  won

the  great  battle  of  Azincourt  on  his  march  to  Calais.*^

h  RjiiMr,tTULpi6ll;  VI]]aret,t.ziL  rights  to  that,  Nonnandy, Toaraine,

pi  iTi.  MaiiM,  Galenne, with  the  boouige  of

i  Idem,  t  TilL  p.  12h  BritanytodFlanden.  The  Fnoohofferod

k  Idem,  tTiiL  p.  726.  fST,  tS8.  Gniemie  and  Saintooge,  and  «  dowry  of

"  Idem,  t  Iz.  pi  13«.  800,000  gold  crowns  for  Oatherine. The

"  The  tenns  required  bgr  Hatry's  am*  Eogltsh  demaoded  2,000,000.  Bym.  tix.

bsandors  in  liI5  were  the  crown  of  p.  218.

Praaoe;  or,  «t  least,  resenring  Henxy't **  The  English  anny  at  Ajdnooart  was

France.  INVASION  Bl  HENRY  Y.  75

The  flower  of  Frencli  chivalry  was  mowed  down  in
this  &tal  day,  but  especially  the  chiefs  of  the  Orleans
party,  and  the  princes  of  the  royal  blood,  met  with  death
or  captivity.  Burgundy  had  still  suffered  nothing ;  but
a  clandestine  negotiation  had  secured  the  duke's  neu-
trality, though  he  seems  not  to  have  entered  into  a
regular  alliance  till  a  year  after  the  battle  of  Azincourt,
when,  by  a  secret  treaty  at  Calais,  he  acknowledged  the
right  of  Henry  to  the  crown  of  France,  and  his  own
obligation  to  do  him  homage,  though  its  performance
was  to  be  suspended  till  Henry  should  become  master
of  a  considerable  part  of  the  kingdom.^  In  a  second
invasion  the  English  achieved  the  conquest  of  Nor-
mandy; and  this,  in  all  subsequent  negotiations  for
peace  duiing  the  life  of  Henry,  he  would  never  consent
to  relinquish.  After  several  conferences,  which  his  de-
mands rendered  abortive,  the  French  court  at  length
cjonsented  to  add  Normandy  to  the  cessions  made  in  the
peace  at  £retigni;i  and  the  treaty,  though  labouring
under  some  difficulties,  seems  to  have  been  nearly  com-
pleted, when  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  for  reasons  j^iy  u,
unexplained,  suddenly  came  to  a  reconciliation  ^*^*'
with  the  dauphin.  This  event,  which  must  have  been
intended  adversely  to  Henry,  would  probably  have
broken  off  all  parley  on  the  subject  of  peace,  if  gept.  10.
it  had  not  been  speedily  followed  by  one  still  "*••
more  surprising,  the  assassination  of  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy at  Montereau.

All  act  of  treachery  so  apparently  unprovoked  in-
flamed the  minds  of  that  powerful  party  which  had
looked  up  to  the  duke  as.  their  leader  and  patron.  The
city  of  Paris,  especially,  abjured  at  once  its  respect  for
the  supposed  author  of  the  murder,  though  the  legitimate
heir  of  the  crown.  A  solenm  oath  was  taken  by  all
ranks  to  revenge  the  crime ;  the  nobility,  the  clergy,  the

probablj  of  not  man  than  15,000  men ;  adybed  the  French  to  avoid  an  action,

the  FVecch  were  at  the  least  50,000,  and,  had  been  in  the  battle  of  Poitien  flf^-

by  Bome  computations,  much  more  na-  nine  yean  before. YilL  t  zili.  p.  355.
merons.  They  lost  10,000  killed,  of  whom P  Compare  Rym.  t  ix.  p.  34, 138,  304,

9000  were  knii^ts  or  gentlemen. Almost  894. The  last  reference  is  to  the  treatj

as  many  were  made prisoners. The  of  Calais.

EDgUsh, aoooBfling  to  Monstrelet,  lost 1  Rym.  t  ix.  p.  628  T63.  Nothing  can

1600  men ;  bat  their  own  hlatorians  re-  be  more  insolent  than  the  tone  of  Henry's

dnoe  this  to  a  very  small  nmnber. It  Is  Instractions  to  his  ccnomissloners,  p.  628i
oorimis  that  tbs  duke  of  Berry,  wbo

76  TREATY  OF  TROYES. CJhap.  I.  Pabt  II.

parliament,  vying  with  the  popnlaoe  in  their  invectiveB
against  Charles,  whom  they  now  styled  only  pretended
(soi-disant)'  dauphin.  Philip,  son  of  the  assassinated
duke,  who,  with  all  the  popularity  and  much  of  the
abili^  of  his  £a.ther,  did  not  inherit  all  his  depravity,
was  instigated  by  a  pardonable  excess  of  filial  resentment
to  ally  himself  with  the  king  of  England.  These  pas-
sions of  the  people  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  concur-
ring with  the  imbecility  of  Charles  VI.  and  the  rancour
iveaty  of  ^^  Isabel  towards  her  son,  led  to  the  treaty  of
Troyw,  Troyes.  This  compact,  signed  by  the  queen
^**^'^*^°*  and  duke,  as  proxies  of  ttie  king,  who  had
fallen  into  a  state  of  unconscious  idiotcy,  stipulated  that
Henry  V.,  upon  his  marriage  with  Catherine,  should  be-
come immediately  regent  of  France,  and,  after  the  death
of  Charles,  succeed  to  the  kingdom,  in  exclusion  not
only  of  the  dauphin,  but  of  all  3ie  royal  family.'  It  is
unnecessary  to  remark  that  these  flagitious  provisions
were  absolutely  invalid.  But  they  had  at  the  time  the
strong  sanction  of  force;  and  Henry  might  plausibly
flatter  himself  with  a  hope  of  establislung  his  own  usurp-
ation as  firmly  in  France  as  his  father^s  had  been  m
England.  What  not  even  the  comprehensive  policy  of
Edward  III.,  the  energy  of  the  Black  Prince,  the  valour
of  their  Knollyses  and  Chandoses,  nor  his  own  victories
could  attain,  now  seemed,  by  a  strange  vicissitude  of
fortune,  to  court  his  ambition.  During  two  years  that
Henry  lived  after  the  treaty  of  Troyes,  he  governed  the
north  of  France  with  unlimited  authority  in  the  name  of
Charles  VI.  The  latter  survived  his  son-in-law  but  a
few  weeks ;  and  the  infant  Henry  VI.  vas  immediately
proclaimed  king  of  France  and  England,  under  the
regency  of  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Bedfoid.  '

Notwithstanding  the  disadvantage  of  a  minority,  the
English  cause  was  less  weakened  by  the  death  of  Heniy

'  Ai  <f  through  shanie  oq  aoooont  of  which  he  was  too  proud  to  admit The

what  was  to  follow,  the  first  articles  con-  treaty  of  Troyes  was  confirmed  by  the

tain  petty  stipalatlons  about  the  dower  States-Oeneral,  or  rather  by  a  partial

of  Catherine. The  sixth  gives  the  king-  conTention  which  aswnmed  the  name,  in

dom  of  France  after  Charles's  decease  to  December  142a Rym.  t.  x.  p.  30. The

Henry  and  his  heirs. The  seventh  con-  parliament  of  England  did  the  same,

redes  the immediate  regency. Henry  Id.  p.  IIO. It  is  printed* at  fall  length

kept  Normandy  by  right  of  conquest  not  by  Villaret,  t  zv.  p.  84.
in  virtue  of  any  stipulaUm  in  the  treaty.

I  nuxCB. CAUSES  OF  SUCCESS  OF  THE  ENGLISH.  77

than  might  have  been  expected. The  duke  of  Bedford

partook  of  the  Bame  character,  and  resembled  ^
hifl  brother  in  faults  as  well  as  virtues ;  in  his  France  ai
haughtiness  and  arbitrary  temper as  in his  ^^q^^
eneigy  and  address.  At  the  accession  of  Charles  ciuu-iesVK.
Vn.  the  usurper was acknowledged  by aU  ^•'**^*^^
the  northern  provinces  of  France,  except  a  few  fortresses,
by  most  of  Guienne,  and  the  dominions  of  Bur-
gundy. The  duke  of  Britany  soon  afterwards  '^'^  '*^
acceded  to  the  treaty  of  Troyes,  but  changed  his  party
again  several  times  within  a  few  years. The  centhd
provinces,  with  Languedoc,  Foitou,  and  Dauphine,  were
cdthful  to  the  king. For  some  years  the  war  continued
without  any  decisive  result ;  but  the  balance  was  clearly
swayed  in  favour  of  England. For  this  it  is  not  difficult
to  assign  several  causes. The  animosity  of  the
Parisians  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  against  the'SS^ces
aie  A«iu«nao,party  atiU  contin«^n5n2^d  in  o^;^
the  former  with  dread  of  the  kmg's  return,
whom they judged themselves to have inexpiably
offended. The  war  had  brought  forward  some  accom-
plished commanders  in  the  English  anny;  surpassing,
not  indeed  in  valour  and  enterprise,  but  in  militi^  skiU,
any  whom  France  could  oppose  to  them. Of  these  the
most  distinguished,  besides  the  duke  of  Bedford  himself,
were  Warwick,  Salisbury,  and  Talbot. Their  troops,
too,  were  still  very  superior  to  the  French. But  this,
we  must  in  candour  allow,  proceeded  in  a  great  degree
from  the  mode  in  which  they  were  raised. The  war  was
so  popular  in  England,  that  it  was  easy  to  pick  the  best
and  stoutest  recruits,'  and  their  high  pay  allured  men  of
respectable  condition  to  the  service. We  find  in  Kymer
a  contract  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury  to  supply  a  body  of
troops,  receiving  a  shilling  a  day  for  every  man-at-arms,
and  sixpence  for  each  archer.* This  is,  perhaps,  equal
-  to  fifteen  times  the  simi  at  our  present  value  of  money.
They  were  bound,  indeed,  to  furnish  their  own  equip-

*  Monstrelct,  part  1. 1  303.  ortats  appartient The  pay  waa,  for  the

t  Rym.  t  s.  p.  392. This  contract  was  aarl,  6«.  8d.  a  day ;  for  a  banneret,  4s, ;

for  600  TQen-at-arms,  including  six  ban-  for  a  bachelor,  2t. ;  for  every  other  man-

nerets  and  thirty-fonr  bachelors;  and  atFarms,  it.;  and  for  each  archer,  6d

for  1700  archers;  Men  et  sofllaamment  Artillerymen were  paid  hig^ter thai

Boatex,  armei,  et  amies  comme  a  leun  iDen<«t4ttma.

IS CAUSES  OF  SUCCESS  OF  THE  ENGLISH.  Chap.  I.  Past  O.

mcnfs  and  liorses.  Bat  France  wsb  totally  exhaosted  by
her  civil  and  foreign  'war,  and  incompetent  to  defiray  the
expenses  ewen  of  the  small  force  which  defended  the
wreck  of  the  monarchy.  Charles  YII.  lived  in  the  ut-
most poverty  at  Boniiges.*  The  nobility  had  scarcely
recovered  from  the  &tal  slaoghter  of  Azinconrt ;  and  the
infantry,  composed  of  peasants  or  bnrgesses,  which  had
made  dieir  army  so  nmnerons  npon  that  day,  whether
&om  inability  to  compel  their  services,  or  experience  of
their  inefficacv,  were  never  called  into  the  field.  It  be-
came  dmo8teutii«l7  a  war  of  partisans.  EveiytowBin
Picardy,  Champagne,  Maine,  or  wherever  the  contest
might  be  carried  on,  was  a  fortress ;  and  in  the  attack  or
iefence  of  these  garrisons  the  valour  of  both  nations  was
called  into  constant  exercise.  This  mode  of  warfiure  was
midonbtedly  the  best  in  the  actual  state  of  France,  as  it
gradually  improved  her  troops,  and  flushed  them  with
petty  successes.  But  what  principally  led  to  its  adop-
tion was  the  licence  and  insubordination  of  the  royalists,
who,  receiving  no  pay,  owned  no  control,  and  thought
that,  provided  they  acted  against  the  English  and  Bur-
gnndiaus,  they  were  free  to  choose  their  own  points  of
attack.  Nothing  can  more  evidently  show  the  weakness
of  France  than  the  high  terms  by  which  Charles  YII.
was  content  to  purchase  the  assistance  of  some  Scottish
auxiliaries.  The  earl  of  Buchan  was  made  constable;
the  earl  of  Douglas  had  the  duchy  of  Touraine,  with  a
new  title,  lieutenant-general  of  the  kingdom.  At  a  sub-
sequent time  Charles  offered  the  province  of  Saintonge
to  James  I.  for  an  aid  of  6000  men.  These  Scots  fought
bravely  for  France,  though  unsuccessfrdly,  at  Crevant
and  Yemeuil ;  but  it  must  be  owned  they  set  a  sufficient
value  upon  their  service.  Under  all  these  disadvantages
it  would  be  unjust  to  charge  the  French  nation  with
any  inferiority  <k  courage,  even  in  the  most  unfortunate
periods  of  this  war.  Though  frequently  panic-struck  in
the  field  of  battle,  thoy  stood  sieges  of  their  walled  towns
with  matchless  spirit  and  endurance.  Perhaps  some  ana-
logy may  be  found  between  the  character  of  the  French
commonalty  during  the  English  invasion  and  the  Spa-
niards of  the  late  peninsular  war. But  to  the  exertions

^  Vlllaret,  t  xlv.  p.  80X

rftAHGV.  SIEGE  OF  ORLEANS.  79

of  those  brave  nobles  who  restored  the  monarchy  ol
Charles  VII.  Spain  has  afforded  no  adequate  parallel.

It  was,  however,  in  the  temper  of  Charles  VII.  that
his  enemies  found  their  chief  advantage.  This  ouracterof
prince  is  one  of  the  few  whose  character  has  curietvn
been  improved  by  prosperity.  During  the  calamitous
morning  of  his  reign  he  shrunk  from  fronting  the  storm,
and  strove  to  forget  himself  in  pleasure.  Though  brave,
he  was  never  seen  in  war ;  though  intelligent,  he  was
governed  by  flatterers.  Those  who  had  committed  the
assassination  at  Montereau  under  his  eyes  were  his  first
favourites;  as  if  he  had  determined  to  avoid  the  only
measure  through  which  he  could  hope  for  better  success,
a  reconciliation  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  The  count
de  Bichemont,  brother  of  the  duke  of  Britany,  who  be-
came afterwards  one  of  the  chief  pillars  of  his  throne,
consented  to  renounce  the  English  alliance,  and  accept
t)ie  rank  of  constable,  on  condition  that  these  favourites
should  quit  the  court.  Two  others,  who  succes-
sively gained  a  similar  influence  over  Charles,  ^'^'  "^**
Bichemont  publicly  caused  to  be  assassinated,  assuring
the  king  that  it  was  for  his  own  and  the  public  good.
Such  was  the  debasement  of  morals  and  government
which  twenty  years  of  civil  war  had  produced  I  Another
favourite.  La  Tremouille,  took  the  dimgerous  office,  and,
as  might  be  expected,  employed  his  influence  against
Bichemont,  who  for  some  years  lived  on  his  own  do*
mains,  rather  as  an  armed  neutral  than  a  friend,  though
he  never  lost  his  attachment  to  the  royal  cause.

It  cannot  therefore  surprib'e  us  that  with  all  these  ad
vantages-  the  regent  duke  of  Bedford  had  almost  com-
pleted the  capture  of  the  fortresses  north  of  the  siege  of
Loire  when  he  invested  Orleans  in  1428. If  orieam.
this  city  had  fallen,  the  central  provinces,  which  were
less  furnished  with  defensible  places,  would  have  lain
open  to  the  enemy ;  and  it  is  said  that  Charles  VII.  in
despair  was  about  to  retire  into  Dauphinc^. At  this
time  his  affairs  were  restored  by  one  of  the  joMof
most  marvellous  revolutions  in history. A  ^^
country  girl  overthrew  the  power  of  England. We
cannot  pretend  to  explain  the  surprising  story  of  the
Maid  of  Orleans ;  for,  however  easy  it  may  be  to  sup-
pose that  a  heated  and  enthusiastic  imagination  produced

go  JOAN  OF  ARC.  Chap.  I.  Part  1l

her  own  Yisions,  it  is  a  much  greater  problem  to  accoimt
for  the  credit  they  obtained,  and  for  the  success  that
attended  her.  Nor  will  this  be  solved  by  the  hypothesis
of  a  concerted  stratagem;  which,  if  we  do  not  judge
altogether  from  events,  must  appear  liable  to  so  many
chances  of  failure,  that  it  could  not  have  suggested
itself  to  any  rational  person.  However,  it  is  certain
that  the  appearance  of  Joan  of  Arc  turned  the  tide  of
war,  which  from  that  moment  flowed  without  interrup-
tion in  Charles's  favour.  A  superstitious  awe  enfeebled
the  sine^vs  of  the  English.  They  hung  back  in  their
own  country,  or  deserted  from  the  army,  through  fear
of  the  incantations  by  which  alone  they  conceived  so
extraordinary  a  person  to  succeed.*  As  men  always
make  sure  of  Providence  for  an  ally,  whatever  untoward
fortune  appeared  to  result  from  preternatural  causes
was  at  once  ascribed  to  infernal  enemies;  and  such
bigotry  may  be  pleaded  as  an  excuse,  though  a  very
miserable  one,  for  the  detestable  murder  of  this  heroine.'
The  spirit  which  Joan  of  Arc  had  roused  did  not  sub-
side. France  recovered  confidence  in  her  own  strength,
__  y  which  had  been  chilled  by  a  long  cpurse  of  ad-
ratricves  vorso  fortune.  The  king,  too,  shook  off  his
^*"^"' indolence,"  and  permitted  Eichemont  to  ex-

'  Ryin.  t  X.  p.  468-472. This,  how-  pnnaed  with  peculiar  hitterness  hy  her

tmr,  is  co:^ecture ;  for  the  cause  of  their  ooonlrymen  of  the  English,  or  rather

desertion  ia  not  meotioned  in  these  pro-  Buiigiuidian, faction ;  a  proof  that  in

clamationa.  though  Rymer  haa  printed  it  1430  their  animosity  against  Charles  Vll.

In  their  tlUe. But  the  duke  of  Bedford  was  stiU  ardent [Note  XVI.]

speaks  of  the  turn  of  success  as  astonish-  '  It  is  a  current  piece  of  history  that

Ing,  and  due  only  to  the  superstitious  Agnes  Sorel,  mistress  of  Charles  VIL,

fear  which  the  English  had  oonceiyed  had  the  merit  of  dissuadii^  him  firom

of  a  female  magician. Rymer,  t  x.  giving  up  the  kingdom  as  lost  at  th^

p.  408.  time  when  Orleans  was  besieged  in  1428.

f  M.  de  I'Aveidy,  to  whom  we  owe  Mezeray,  Daniel,  ViUaret,  and,  I  belieye,

the  copious  account  of  the  proceedings  every  other  modem  historian,  have  men-

against  Joan  of  Arc,  as  well  as  those  tioned  this  circumstance;  and  some  of

which  Charles  YII.  Instituted  in  order  to  them,  among  whom  is  Humo,  with  the

rescind  the  former,  contained  in  the  third  addition  that  Agnes  threatened  to  leav«

volume  of  Notices  des  Manuscrits  duBoi,  the  court  of  Charles  for  that  of  Henry,

has  Justly  made  this  remark,  which  is  affirming  that  she  was  bom  to  be  the

founded  on  the  eagerness  shown  by  the  mistress  of  a  great  king.  The  latter  part

University  of  Psaris  in  the  prosecution,  of  this  tale  l»  evidently  a  fabrication,

and  on  Its  being  conducted  before  an  Henry  VL  being  at  the  time  a  child  of

inquisitor ;  a  circumstance  exceedingly  seven  yean  old. But  I  have,  to  say  the

ramarkable  in  the  ecclesiastical  history  least,  great  doubts  of  the  main  story

of  France.  But  another  material  obsenra-  It  is  not  mentioned  by  contempomry

ti3n  ariaei  (:it  of  this. The  Maid  wa^  writers On  th«  contrary,  what  they  saf

»^i»"

AGNES  SORE!,  81

elude  his  unworthy  fibTomites  from  the  court. This  led
to  a  very  important  consequence. The  duke  of  Biir-

•f  AipMs  leida  me  to  tUnk  the  dates  In- aodeot  as  Frauds  I.,  who  made  in  bei
compatible. Agnes  died (in  childbed, honour  a  qnatraln  which  Is  well  known,
aasomesaj)  in  U60;  twenty-two  Tears This  probably  may  have  brou^t  the
after  the  siege  of  Orleans. Monatrelet stoiy  more  into  vogue,  and  led  Meseray,
mjB  that  die  had  been  aboat  five  years who  was  not  veiy  critical,  to  insert  it  in
in  the  service  of  tbe  qneen ;  and  the  Ung his  hlsiory.  Dram  which  it  has  passed  to
taking  pleasure  in  her  liveliness  and  wit, his  foUowen. Its  otigln  was  apparently
common  fame  had  spread  abroad  that the  popular  character  of  Agues.  She  was
ahe  lived  In  concubinage  with  him. She the  Nell  Qwyn  of  France ;  and  Justly
certainty  had  a  diild,  and  was  willing beloved,  not  only  for  her  diarity  and
that  it  should  be  thoni^t  the  king's;  but courteey,  but  for  bringing  forward  men
be  always  denied  it,  et  le  pouvolt  bien of  merit  and  turning  her  influence,  a
avoir  empmnte  ailleurs. It  liL  t  3S. virtue  very  rare  in  her  class,  towards  the
Olivier  de  la  Marche,  another  contempo- public  intemt From thence  it  was
rary,  who  lived  in  the  court  of  Burgundy, natural  to  bestow  uptm  her,  in  alter
■ays,  about  the  year  1444,  le  rqy  avott times,  a  merit  not  ill  suited  to  her  cha-
nouveUement  esleve  une  panvre  demoi- rscter,  but  which  an  accurate  observation
aelle,  gentifemme,  nommee  Agnes  Sorel, of  dates  seems  to  render  impossible^  JBut
et  mis  en  tel  triumidie  et  tel  pouvoir, whatever  honour  I  am  compelled  to  de-
que son estat  estoit  a  comparer  auz trsct  from  Agnes  Sorel,  I  am  willing  to
gnmdes  princesses  da  royanme,  et  oertea transfer  undiminished to  a  more  mi-
c'estoit  une  des  plus  belles  femmes  que blemished  female,  the  injured  queen  of
Je  rey  onoques,  et  fit  en  sa  quality  bean- Charles  VIL,  Mary  of  Ai\Jou,  who  has
coup  an  royanme  de  Frsnoe.  Elle  avan- hitherto  only  shared  with  the  usurper  of
fdt  devers  le  roy  Jeunes  gens  d'armea her  rights  the  credit  of  awakening  Charks
et  gentile  compaigKins,  et  dont  le  roy tnm  his  lethargy. Though  I  do  not
depnis  tat  bien  servy.  La  Marche ;  Mem. know  on  what  foundation  even  this  rebt».
Hist,  t  vliL  p.  146. Du  Clercq,  whose it  is  not  unlikely  to  be  true,  and,  in
memolrB  were  Ibvt  published  in  the  same deference  to  tbe  sex,  let  it  pass  undi^urxKl.
collection,  says  tiiat  Agnes  monrut  par Sismondi  (voL  ziiL  p.  204).  where  be
poison  moult  Jeune. lb.  t  viiL  p.  410. fint  mentions  Agnes  Sorel.  says  that
And  the  omtlnuator  of  Monstrelet,  pro- many  of  the  circumstances  told  of  her
hably  John  Ghartler,  speaks  of  the  youth iniluenoe  over  Charles  V  iL  are  fkbnlous.
and  beauty  ofAgnee,  which  exceeded  that "Oependant  11  fkut  bien  qu'Agnds  ait
of  any  other  woman  in  France,  and  of m^rite,  en  quelque  manidre,  la  reconnol&-
the  &vour  shown  her  hy  the  king,  which sanoe  qui  s'est  attachee  h  son  nom."
CO  much  exdted  the  dlsplesaure  of  the This  is  a  loose  and  inconclusive  way  of
danphin,  on  hia  mother's  aooount,  and  he reasoning  in  history ;  many  popular  tra-
was  su^iected  of  having  caused  her  to  be dltions  have  no  bsais  at  alL And  in
poisoned. foL  68. The same  writer p.  345  he  slights  the  stoiy  told  in  Bran-
afllrms  of  CbarleB  VIL  that  he  was,  be- tOme  to  the  honour  of  Agnes,  as  well  be
fare  tiie  peace  of  Arras,  de  moult  belle might,  since  it  is  ridiculously  untrue  that
vie  et  devote ;  but  afterwards  enhiidit  sa ahe  threatened  Charles  to  go  to  the  crmrt
vie  de  tenir  malles  femmes  en  son  hostel, of  Henry  YL,  knowing  herself  to  be  born
Sec.  foL  86.  to  be  the  mistress  of  a  great  king. Sif>-

It  is  far  the  Deader  to  Judge  how  fikr  mondi  afterwards  (p.  497  and  604)quoti*^
these  passages  render  it  improbable  that  as  I  have  done,  Chartler  and  Jacques  du
Agnes  Sore)  was  the  mistress  of  Charles  Clercq ;  but  without  sdverting  to  the  iji-
VIL  at  the  siege  of  Orleans  in  1428,  and,  oongrui^  of  their  dates  with  the  current
eonaeqnently,  whether  she  is  entitled  to  story.  M.  Michelet  does  not  seom  to
ibe  prsise  which  she  has  received,  of  attach  much  credit  to  it,  though  he  adopts
being  instnunental  in  the  deUverance  of  the  earUer  date  for  the  king's  attachment
Praoce. The  traditioo,  however,  !«  as to  Agnes.

VOL.  I.  **

82  IMPOLICY  OF  THE  ENGLISH.  Chap.  I.  Pabt  II

g;andy,  whose  aUiance  with  England  had  been  onl^-  the
fruit  of  indignation  at  his  &thei^s  murder,  fell  naturally,
as  that  passion  wore  out,  into  sentiments  more  conge-
nial to  his  birth  and  interests.  A  prince  of  the  house  of
Capet  could  not  willingly  see  the  inheritance  of  his
ancestors  transferred  to  a  stranger.  And  he  had  met
with  provocation  both  from  the  regent  and  the  duke  of
Gloucester,  who,  in  contempt  of  all  policy  and  justice,
had  endeavoured,  by  an  invalid  marriage  with  Jacque-
line countess  of  EUtinault  and  Holland,  to  obtain  pro-
vinces which  Bui^undy  designed  for  himself.  Yet  the
union  of  his  sister  with  Bedford,  the  obligations  by
which  he  was  bound,  and,  most  of  all,  the  favour  shown
by  Charles  VIE.  to  the  assassins  of  his  father,  kept  him
and  is  re-  ^^^  many  years  on  the  English  side,  although
Sh°  d^lt  ^  rendering  it  less  and  less  assistance.  But  at
Bvgondy.  length  he  concluded  a  treaty  at  Arras,  the
Aj).  1436.  terms  of  which  he  dictated  rather  as  a  con-
queror than  a  subject  negotiating  with  his  sovereign.
Charles,  however,  refused  nothing  for  such  an  end;
and,  in  a  very  short  time,  the  Burgundians  were  ranged
with  the  French  against  their  old  allies  of  England.

It  was  now  time  for  the  latter  to  abandon  ^ose  mag-
immih^of  nificent  projects  of  conquering  France  which
th6%i^i8h.  temporary  circumstances  alone  had  seemed  to
render  feasible.  But  as  it  is  a  natural  effect  of  good
fortune  in  the  game  of  war  to  render  a  people  insensible
to  its  gradual  change,  the  English  could  not  persuade
themselves  that  their  affairs  were  irretrievably  declining.
H^ence  they  rejected  the  offer  of  Normandy  and  Guienne,
subject  to  the  feudal  superiority  of  France,  which  was
made  to  them  at  the  congress  of  Arras ;'  and  some  years
afterwards,  when  Paris,  with  the  adjacent  provinces,
had  been  lost,  the  English  ambassadors,  though  em-
^  powered  by  their  private  instructions  to  relax,  stood

*  Vfllaret  lays,  Les  plenipotentiaires  most  have  given  op  the  feudal  appeal  or

de  Charles  ofMrent  la  oenioD  de  la  Nor-  reuort  which  had  been  the  great  point

inandieetde  la  Guienne  en  toiitej>rqpriK«  in dispute between  Edwaid  IIL  and

unu  la  ekttue  de  Vhomnume  h  la  oo«-  Charles  V.,  preserving  only  a  homage

rofific,  t  zv.  p.  174. But  he  does  not  per  paroffium,  aa  it  was  called,  which

quote  his  authority,  and  I  do  not  like  to  implied  no  actual  supremacy.  Monstrelet

fely  on  an  historian  not  eminent  for  says  only,  que  per  certaines  oondltlont

accural  In  fact  or  precision  in  language.  Iny  seroient  aooordftes  les  setgneniiei  de

ff  his  ezpi  «Mlon  is  correct,  the  Fkvnch  Guienne  et  Nonnacdia.

PBAHGB.  LOSS  OF  THBIR  CONQUESTS.  8S

iq>on  demandB  quite  disproportionate  to  the  actual  poei-
tion  of  afiairs.^ As  foreign  enemies,  they  were  odious
even  in  that  part  of  France  which  had  acknowledged
Henry ;"  and  when  the  dnke  of  Burgundy  deserted  their
side.  Pans  and  every  other  city  were  impatient
to  throw  off  the  yoke.  A  feehle  monarchy,  and  au^eir^
a  selfish  council,  completed  their  ruin: the  J^^'JJJf'
necessary  suhsidies  were  raised  with  difGiculty,
and,  when  raised,  misapplied. It  is  a  proof  of  the  ex>
haustion  of  France,  that  Charles  was  unable,  for  several
years,  to  reduce  Normandy  or  Guienne,  which  were  so
ill-provided  for  defence.**  At  last  he  came  with  collected
strength  to  the  contest,  and,  breaking  an  armistice  upon
slight  pretences,  within  two  years  overwhelmed  the
English  garrisons  in  each  of  these  provinces. All  the
inheritance  of  Henry  II.  and  Eleanor,  all  the  conquests
of  Edward  III.  and  Henry  Y .  except  Calais  and  a  small
adjacent district,  were irrecoverably  torn  from  the
crown  of  England. A  barren  title,  that  idle  trophy  of
disappointed  ambition,  was  preserved  with  strange  ob-
stinacy to  our  own  age.

In  these  second  English  wars  we  find  little  left  of
that  generous  feeling  which  had,  in  general,
distinguished  the  contemporaries  of  Edward  ^^|^^
III. The  very  virtues  which  a  state  of  hosti-  during  um
lity  promotes  are  not  proof  against  its  long  S^wt^
continuance,  and  sink  at  last  into  brutal  fierce-
ness. Bevenge  and  fear  excited  the  two  factions  of
Orleans  and  Burgundy  to  all  atrocious  actions. The
troops  serving  under  partisans  on  detached  expeditions,
according  to  the  system  of  the  war,  lived  at  free  quarters
on  the  people. The  histories  of  the  time  are  fall  of
their  outrages,  from  which,  as  is  the  common  case,  the
unprotected  peasantry  most  suffered.* Even  those  la'w  s

fc  See  the  Instracttons  gf^eo  to  the  provlnpe  nwe  npra the  EngUsh and

En^lflh  negotleton  in  1439,  »t  length,  almoet emencipeted themselves  with

in  ftymer,  t  x.  p.  f  24.  little  aid  from  Charles.

«  ViUaret,  t  ziv.  p.  448.  *  Monstrelet.  passim. A  long  metrical

4  AmeigBrd,  from  whose  onpabllahed  complaint  of  the  people  of  Franae,  curious

BCflM)in  of  CSwrles  VH.  and  Lonls  XL  as  a  specimen  of  Tersiflcatlon,  as  i^ell  as

some  Taluable  eztracta  axe  made  In  the  a  tsstimony  to  tiie  misfortunes  of  the

Koticee  dee  Mannserits,  t  L  p.  403,  attri-  time,  may  be  found  in  this  hislorfan,

botes  the  deUy  in  recoTering  Nonnandy  port  L fbL  331. Notwithstanding  Ibe

solely  to the king's  slothftilness  and  treaty  of  Arrss,  the  French  and  l)ai|^n-

Mosaalitj. In  Act  the  people  of  that  dians  made  cootinual  incnralonf  npou

a  2

34  CONDITION  OF  FRANCE. Chap,  I.  Part  II.

of  war,  wbioh  the  courteous  sympathies  of  chiTaliy  had
enjoined,  were  disregarded  by  a  merciless  fury.  Qai'
nsons  surrendering  after  a  braye  defence  were  put  to
death.  Instances  of  this  are  very  frequent.  Henry  Y.
excepts  Alain  Blanchard,  a  citizen  who  had  distiur-
guished  himself  during  the  siege,  from  the  capitulation
of  Bouen,  and  orders  him  to  execution.  At  the  taking
of  a  town  of  Champagne,  John  of  Luxembuig,  the  Bur-
gundian  general,  stipulates  that  every  fourth  and  sixth
man  should  be  at  his  discretion ;  which  he  exercises  by
causing  them  all  to  be  hanged.'  Four  hundred  English
from  Pontoise,  stormed  by  Charles  YII.  in  1441,  are
paraded  in  chains  and  naked  through  the  streets  of
raris,  and  thrown  afterwards  into  the  Seine.  This  in-
famous action  eannot  but  be  ascribed  to  the  king.'
At  the  expulsion  of  the  English,  France  emerged  &om
the  chaos  with  an  altered  character  and  new
??^?n°*  features  of  government.  The  royal  authority
J|?«  f^^iL  ^^^  supreme  jurisdiction  of  the  parliament  were
^  "  ^  universally  recognised.  Yet  there  was  a  ten-
dency towards  insubordination  left  among  the  great
nobility,  arising  in  part  from  the  remains  of  old  feudal
privileges,  but  still  more  from  that  lax  administration
which,  in  the  convulsive  stru^les  of  the  war,  had  been
suffered  to  prevail.  In  the  south  were  some  considerable
vassals,  the  houses  of  Foix,  Albret,  and  Armagnac,  who,

Mch  other*!  ftontiera,  espedallj  about  tigDiflott  U  mtaie  chose.

Laon  and  lo  tha  Vennaiidois. So  that  f  Monatreleti  part  IL  £  19. This  John

the  people  had  no  help,  says  Monstzelet,  of  Lnxembarg.  ooimt  de  Llgoy,  was  a

d  non  de  crier  miaerablement  a  Dlea  dIstlngnUhed  captain  on  the  Boigondian

lenr  createar  ▼engeanoe; et  que  pie  Me,  and  for  a  long  time  would  not  ao-

estolt,  qoand  Us  obtenoient  ancon  Baof-  qoieace  in  the  trea^  of  Ama. He  die-

oondait  d'ancana  capltaines,  pea  en  estolt  graced  himself  bj  giving  up  to  the  doke

cntretenn,  meamement  tont  d'on  partL  of  Bedford  his  prisoner  Joen  of  Arc  for

part  iL  foL  139. These  pillageri  were  10,000  fraocs. The  famoos  ooont  of  St

called  Ecoctfaettn,  becanae  they  stripped  Pol  was  his  nephew,  and  inherited  his

the  pet^le  of  their  ahirta.  And  thisname  great  pnmnnninnii  in  the  oonnty  of  Ver-

npeneded  that  of  Armagnaos,  by  which  mandoi& Monstrelet  relatea  a  aingoLur

one  side  had  hitherto  been  known.  Eren  proof  of  the  good  education  which  hia

XaintraiUes  and  La  Hire,  two  uf  the  ancle  gave  him. Some  priaoDera  having

bravest  champions  of  France,  wen  die*  been  made  in  an  engagement,  si  fbt  le

graced  by  these  habits  of  ontrsge. Ibid.  Jeune  comte  de  SL  Pol  mis  en  roye  da

fuL  144, 160, 116, Oliv.  de  la  Marche,  in  gnerre ;  car  le  comte  de  ligny  son  oncle

Collect  des  Mdmoires,  t  viiL  p.  2S ;  t  ▼.  lay  en  feit  occirs  aucans,  le  quel  j

p.  323.  prenoit  grand  plaidr. part  U.  foL  M.

Poor  la  plopart  says  VlUaret  se  (aire  f  ViUaret,  t.  xv.  pi  32T.
goerrier,  on  volenr  de  grands  chemlns.

Faance.  £VEKTS  under  CHARLES  VII.  &5

on  account  of  their  distance  from  the  seat  of  empire,
had  always  maintained  a  very  independent  conduct.
The  dukes  of  Britany  and  Burgundy  were  of  a  more
formidable  character,  and  might  rather  bfk  ranked  among
foreign  powers  than  privileged  subjects. The  princes,
too,  of  the  royal  blood,  who,  during  the  late  reign,  had
learned  to  partake  or  contend  for  the  management,  were
ill-inclined  towards  Charles  YII.,  himself  jealoius,  from
old  recollections,  of  their  ascendancy. They  saw  that
the  constitution  was  verging  rapidly  towards  an  absolute
monarchy,  from  the  direction of  which  they  would
studiously  be  excluded. This  apprehension  gave  rise
to  several  attempts  at  rebellion  during  the  reign  of
Charles  YII.,  and  to  the  war,  commonly  entitled,  for  the
Public  Weal  (du  bien  public),  under  Louis  XI. Among
the  pretences  allied  by  the  revolters  in  each  of  these,
the  injuries  of  the  people  were  not  forgotten  ;^  but  from
the  people  they  received  small  support. Weary  of  civil
dissension,  and  anxious  for  a  strong  government  to  secure
them  from  depredation,  the  French  had  no  inducement
to  intrust  even  their  real  grievances  to  a  few  malecontent
princes,  whose  regard  for  the  common  good  they  had
much  reason  to  distrust. Every  circtmistance  fetvoured
Charles  YII.  and  his  son  in  the  attainment  of  arbitrary
power. The  country  was  pillaged  by  military  ruflSans.
Some  of  these  had  been  led  by  the  dauphin  to  a  war  in
Germany,  but  the  remainder  still  infested  the  high  roads
and  villages. Charles  established  his  companies  of  or-
donnance,  the  basis  of  the  French  regular  army,  in  order
to  protect  the  country  from  such  depredators. They
consisted  of  about  nine  thousand  soldiers,  all  cavaliy,  of
whom  fifteen  hundred  were  heavy-armed;  a  force  not
very  considerable,  but  the  first,  except  mere  body-guards,
which  had  been  raised  in  any  part  of  Europe  as  a  national
standing  army.' These  troops  were  paid  out  of  the

i>  The  ooofederecy  formed  *t  Nevera  wm  ttien  workiDg  in  the  ¥Y«dc1i  ooxuU-

In  1441,  by  the  dnkee  of  Orleans  and  tntlon. In  his  answer  the  king  clalma

Bourbon,  with  numy  other  princes,  made  the  right,  in  urgent  caees,  of  levying  tazea

a  variely  of  demands,  all  relating  to  the  without  waiting  for  the  consent  of  the

grievances  which  diflerent  classes  of  the  States-OeneraL

state,  or  individuals  among  themselves,  i  Olivier  de  la  Marche  speaks  very

sulfered  under the administration of  much  in  Ihvonr  of  the  companies  of  ordon-

Charles. These  may  be  found  at  length  nance,  as  having  repreawd  the  plundereTB,

in  Monstrelet,  pt  IL  t  193 ;  and  are  a  and  restored  Internal  police. Collect  des

curioia  document  of  the  change  which  M^motros,  t  viil.  p.  148. Amelgard  pro

86  LOUIS  XI.  Chap.  I.  Part  II.

produce  of  a  pennanent  tax,  called  the  taille ;  an  inno*
vation  still  more  important  than  the  former.  But  the
present  benefit  cheating  the  people,  now  prone  to  sub-
missive habitfi,  little  or  no  opposition  was  made,  except
in  Guienne,  the  inhabitants  of  which  had  speedy  reason
to  regret  the  mild  government  of  England,  and  vainly
endeavoured  to  return  to  its  protection.*

It  was  not  long  before  the  new  despotism  exhibited
itself  in  its  harshest  character.  Louis  XI.,  son
^  ^  ■  of  Charles  VII.,  who,  during  his  faeither's  reign,
had  been  connected  with  the  discontented  princes,  came
to  the  throne  greatly  endowed  with  those  virtues  and
A.D.  1461.  vices  which  conspire  to  the  success  of  a  king.
Hischa-  Laborious  vigilance  in  business,  contempt  of
"****■■  pomp,  affability  to  inferiors,  were  his  excel-
lences ;  qualities  especially  praiseworthy  in  an  age  cha-
racterized by  idleness,  love  of  pageantry,  and  insolence.
To  these  virtues  he  added  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all
persons  eminent  for  talents  or  influence  in  the  countries
with  which  he  was  connected,  and  a  well-judged  bounty,
that  thought  no  expense  wasted  to  draw  them  into  Iub
service  or  interest.  In  the  fifteenth  century  this  political
art  had  hardly  been  known,  except  perhaps  in  Italy;
the  princes  of  Europe  had  contended  with  each  other  by

nouDoes  a  yehemect  philippic  against  sol^ects  bow  and  when he  pleases;

them ;  but  it  la  probable  that  his  observ-  which  Is  to  adTanoe  that  in  Fraooe  no

ation  of  the  abiues  they  had  fkllen  into  man  lias  anything  that  he  can  call  his

was  confined  to  the  reign  of  Lonis  XL  own,aj]d  that  the Ung can  take  all  at  his

Notices  des  MannacrltB,  nbi  supra.  pleasure ;  the  proper  condition  of  slaves,

^  The  insurrection  of  Gnlenne  in  U62,  whose  pecniium  eqjoyed  by  their  master's

which  fOT  a  few  months  restored  that  permission  belongB  to  him,  like  their

province  to  the  English  crown,  is  ac-  persons,  and  may  be  taken  away  when*

counted  for  in  the  curious  memoirs  of  ever  he  chooses.  Thus  situated,  the  peojde

Amelgard,  above  mentioned. It  pTo>  of  Guienne,  especially  those  of  Bordeaux,

oeeded  solely  from  the  arbitrary  taxes  alarmed  themselves,  and,  excited  by  some

imposed  by  Charles  VIL  in order  to  of  the  nobility,  secretly  sou^t  about  for

defray  the  expenses  of  his  regular  army,  means  to  ngtin  their  ancient  freedom  ;

The  people  of  Bordeaux  complained  of  and  having  still  many  connexions  with

exactions  not  only  contrary  tu  their  an*  penons  of  rank  in  Enc^and,  they  nego-

dent  privileges,  but  to  the  positive  oon-  dated  with  them,  8tc  Notices  des  Manu>

ditions  of  their  capitulation. But  the  scrits,  p.  433. The  same  caose  is  assigned

king  was  deaf  to  such  remonstrances,  to  this  revolution  by  Da  Qereq,  also  a

The  province  of  Oulenne,  he  says,  then  contemppraiy  writer,  living  in  the  damir

porcelved  that  it  was  meant  to  suljject  it  nions of Burgundy. Oollectioin des

to the  same  servitude  as  the  rest  of  M&nolres,  t  ix.  p.  400. ViUaret  has  not

n-ance,  where  the  leeches  of  the  state  known,  or  not  chosen  to  know,  anything

boldly  maintain  as  a  fundamental  maxim,  of  the  matter,
that  the  king  has  a  .ight  to  tax  all  his

league  denominated  of  the  Public  Weal, in  Lunede.
which  all  the  princes  and  great  vassals  of  Jhe  n^^ted

nuHCK.  LEAGUE  OF  THE  PUBLIC  WEAL.  8V

arms,  sometimeB  by  treachery,  but  never  with  imch  coin-
plicated  subtlety  of  intrigue.  Of  that  insidious  cunning,
which  has  since  been  brought  to  perfection,  Louis  XI.  may
be  deemed  not  absolutely  the  inventor,  but  the  most  emi*
nent  improver ;  and  its  success  has  led,  perhaps,  to  too
high  an  estimate  of  his  abilities.  Like  most  bad  men,
he  sometimes  fell  into  his  own  snare,  and  was  betrayed
by  his  confidential  ministers,  because  his  confidence  was
generally  reposed  in  the  wicked.  And  his  dissimulation
was  so  notorious,  his  Irranny  so  oppressive,  that  he  was
naturally  surrounded  by  enemies,  and  had  occasion  for
all  his  craft  to  elude  those  rebellions  and  confederacies
which  might  perhaps  not  have  been  raised  against  a  more
upright  sovereign."  At  one  time  the  monarchy  was  on
the  point  of  sinking  before  a  combination  which  would
have  ended  in  dismembering  France. This  was  the

Leume
noDamat

French  crown  were  concerned:  the  dukes  of  Bri-  Puwic
tany,  Burgundy,  Alen^n,  Bourbon,  the  count  WeaL
of  Dunois,  so  renowned  for  his  valour  in  the  ^'^'  ^*"'
English  wars,  the  families  of  Foix  and  Armagnac ;  and
at  the  head  of  all,  Charles  duke  of  Berry,  the  king's
brother  and  presumptive  heir.  So  unanimous  a  combi-
nation was  not  formed  without  a  strong  provocation  from
the  king,  or  at  least  without  weighty  grounds  for  dis-
trusting his  intentions;  but  the  more  remote  cause  of
this  confederacy,  as  of  those  which  had  been  raised
against  Charles  YII.,  was  the  critical  position  of  the
feudal  aristocracy  from  the  increasing  power  of  the  crown.
This  war  of  the  Public  Weal  was,  in  fact,  a  struggle  to
preserve  their  independence;  and  from  the  weak  cha*
lucter  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  whom  they  would,  if  suc-
cessful, have  placed  upon  tlie  throne,  it  is  possible  that
Fxwce  might  have  been  in  a  manner  partitioned  among

">  Sianondl  (toI.  xir.  p.  312)  and  too  tax  against  bis  enemies,  and  espe-

Ifldietet  (toL  iz.  p.  34T)  agree  in  think-  dally  against  bis rebellions  snl^ects.

lug  Louis  XL  no  worse  than  other  klngi  Loals  oompoaed  Ibr  his  son's  nse,  or

of  his  age ;  in  fact  the  former  seems  caused  to  be  composed,  a  political  trca-

xvdy  to  make  a  distinction  between  one  tise  oititled  *  Le  Rosier  des  Ouerrtv,'

ktng  and  another. Louis  wss  Just  and  which  has  never  been  publlihed. It  b

•ten  attentive  towarda  the  lower  people*  written  in  a  spirit  of  public  morality

and  spared  the  blood  of  his soldiers  very  unlike  his  practloa.  (fiismondi,  vol

Due  he  had  imbibed  a  notion  that  trea-  xlv.  p.  616.) Tbns  two  royal  Ant>

chery  and  cmel^  could  not  be  carried  Machiavala  baTa  satirisad  tbenaslvsa

88  APPANAGES.  Chap.  I.  Past  II

them  in  the  eTent  of  their  success,  or,  at  least,  that  Bur*
gundy  and  Britanj  would  have  thrown  off  the  sove-
reignty that  galled  them.°

The  strength  of  the  confederates  in  this  war  much
exceeded  that  of  the  king;  but  it  was  not  judiciously
employed ;  and  after  an  indecisive  battle  at  Montlhery
they  &iled  in  the  great  object  of  reducing  Paris,  which
would  have  obliged  Louis  to  fly  from  his  dominions.  It
was  his  policy  to  promise  everything,  in  trust  that  fortune
would,  afford  some  opening  to  repair  his  losses  and  give
scope  to  his  superior  prudence.  Accordingly,  by  the
treaty  of  Conflans,  he  not  only  surrendered  a&esh  the
towns  upon  the  Somme,  which  he  had  lately  redeemed
from  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  but  invested  his  brother
with  the  duchy  of  Normaady  as  his  appanage.
.  The  term  appanage  denotes  the  provision  made  for  the
younger  children  of  a  king  of  France.  This
Appanagw. gj^^^yg  consisted  of  lands  and  feudal supe«

riorities  held  of  the  crown  by  the  tenure  of  peerage.  It
is  evident  that  this  usage,  as  it  producefi  a  new  class  of
powerful  feudataries,  was  hostile  to  the  interests  and
policy  of  the  sovereign,  and  retarded  the  subjugation  of
tho  ancient  aristocracy.  But  an  usage  coeval  with  the
monarchy  was  not  to  be  abrogated,  and  the  scarcity  of
money  rendered  it  impossible  to  provide  for  the  younger
branches  of  the  royal  family  by  any  other  means.  It  was
restrained,  however,  as  far  as  circumstances  would  permit.
Philip  IV.  declared  that  the  county  of  Poitiers,  b^towed
by  him  on  his  son,  should  revert  to  the  crown  on  the
extinction  of  male  heirs.  But  this,  though  an  important
precedent,  was  not,  as  has  often  been  asserted,  a  general
law.  Charles  Y .  limited  the  appanages  of  his  own  sons
to  twelve  thousand  livres  of  annual  value  in  land.  By
means  of  their  appanages,  and  through  the  operation  of  the
Salic  law,  which  made  their  inheritance  of  the  crown  a
less  remote  contingency,  the  princes  of  the  blood  royal  in
France  were  at  all  times  (for  the  remark  is  applicable
long  after  Louis  XI.)  a  distinct  and  formidable  class  of

°  Sismondl  has  a  Just  obaenradon  on  M  proclamtf ;  c'est  que  le  blen  pnbHe

the  League  of  the  Public  Weal. **  Le  doit  #tre  le  but  du  gouTertiement;  nudg

nom  seal  du  Blen  Public,  qui  ftit  doun^  leeprtnceBquiB'aaBOdalent  pour  I'obtenlr

k  cette  ligue,  ^talt  un  bommage  au  pro*  ^taient  encore  bien  pen  en  tftat  de  «tt-

grte  des  luini^rcs;  c'^tait  la  profession  naitre  sa  nature."  (xIt.  161.)
d'on  prindpe  qui  n'avait  pMnt  enooi*

FRAhCE.  A.PPANAGE&  89

men,  whose  influence  was  always  disadvantageous  to  the
reigning  monarch,  luad,  in  general,  to  the  people.

ho  appanage  had  ever  been  granted  to  Fiance  so  enor-
mons  as  the  duchy  of  Normandy.  One-tliiid  of  the
whole  national  revenue,  it  is  declared,  was  derived  from
that  rich  province.  Louis  could  not,  therefore,  sit  down
under  such  terms  as,  with  his  usual  insincerity,  he  had
accepted  at  Conflans.  In  a  very  short  time  he  attacked
Koimandy,  and  easily  compelled  his  brother  to  take
refuge  in  Britany;  nor  were  his  enemies  ever  able  to
procure  the  restitution  of  Charles's  appanage.  During  the
rest  of  his  reign  Louis  had  powerful  coalitions  to  with-
stand; but  his  prudence  and  compliance  with  circum-
stances, joined  to  some  mixture  of  good  fortune,  brought
him  safely  through  his  perils.  The  duke  of  Britany,  a
prinoe  of  moderate  talents,  was  unable  to  make  any
formidable  impression,  though  generally  leagued  with
the  enemies  of  the  king.  The  less  powerful  vassals  were
successfolly  crushed  by  Louis  with  decisive  vigour ;  the
duchy  of  Alenpon  was  confiscated ;  the  count  of  Armagnac
was  assassinated ;  the  duke  of  Nemours,  and  the  constable
of  St.  Pol,  a  politician  as  treacherous  as  Louis,  who  had
long  betrayed  both  him  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,
suffered  upon  the  scaffold.  The  king's  brother  Charles,
after  disquieting  him  for  many  years,  died  suddenly  in
Guienne,  which  had  finally  been  granted  as  his  appanage,
with  strong  suspicions  of  having  been  poisoned
by  the  king's  contrivance."  Edward  IV.  of  '*^-^-^*^^
Ikigland  was  too  dissipated  and  too  indolent  to  be  fond  of
war ;  and,  though  he  once  entered  France  with  an  army
more  considerable  than  could  have  been  ex-
pected after  such  civil  bloodshed  as  England  '*-®'****'
had  witnessed,  he  was  induced,  by  the  stipulation  of  a
large  pension,  to  give  up  the  enterprise.^  So  terrible
was  still  in  France  the  apprehension  of  an  English  war,
that  Louis  prided  himself  upon  no  part  of  his  policy  so
much  as  the  warding  this  blow. Edward  showed  a

^  Slnnondi,  howerer,  and  Michelet  do  the  whole  very  well  appointed.  Comineii,

not  believe  that  the  duke  of  Gulenne  t  zl.  p.  238. There  aeems  to  have  been

was  poisoned  by  his  brother;  he  had  a  great  expectation  of  what  the  English

tern  m  for  aeveral  months.  would  do,  and  great  fears  entertAined  bf

^  The  amy  of  £dward  consisted  of  lionis,  who  gmdged  no  expense  to  get

UM  man  at  arms  and  14,000  archers :  rid  of  them.

90  HOUSE  OF  WdRGUNDY. Chap.  I.  PARr  IL

desire  to  visit  Paris ;  but  the  king  gave  him  no  iuvitation,
lest,  lie  said,  his  brother  iihould  find  some  handsomd
women  there,  who  might  tempt  him  to  return  in  a
different  manner.  Hastings,  Howard,  and  others  of  Ed-
ward s  ministers,  were  secured  by  bribes  in  the  interest
of  Lotus,  which  the  first  of  these  did  not  scruple  to
receive  at  the  same  time  from  the  duke  of  Burgundy .*>

This  was  the  most  powerful  enemy  whom  the  craft  of
Louis  had  to  counteract.  In  the  last  days  of  the  feudal
system,  when  the  house  of  Capet  had  almost  achieved  the
Hoose  of  subjugation  of  those  proud  vassals  among  whom
^^'Kondy.  ii  ]j^  been  originally  numbered,  a  new  antago-
ive"aoqail  ^*  sprung  Up  to  disputo  the  field  against  tike
iiaons.  crown.  John  king  of  France  granted  the  duchy
of  Burgundy,  by  way  of  appanage,  to  his  third  son,  Philip.
By  his  marriage  with  Margaret,  heiress  of  Louis  count
of  Flanders,  Philip  acquired  that  province,  Artois,  the
county  of  Burgundy  (or  Franche-comt6),  and  the  Nivemois.
Philip  the  Good,  his  grandson,  who  carried  the  prosperity
of  this  family  to  its  height,  possessed  himself,  by  various
titles,  of  the  several  other  provinces  which  composed  the
Netherlands.  These  were  fiefs  of  the  empire,  but  latterly
not  much  dependent  upon  it,  and  alienated  by  their
owners  without  its  consent.  At  the  peace  of  Arras  the
districts  of  Macon  and  Auxerre  were  absolutely  ceded  to
Philip,  and  great  part  of  Picardy  conditionally  made  over
to  him,  redeemable  on  the  payment  of  four  himdred
thousand  crowns.' These  extensive,  though  not  compact

4  Comines,  L  vl.  c.  2.  Hastings  had  heir.  Aoeordingly,  on  Charles's  death
the  mean  canning  to  refuse  to  give  his  Philip  did  homage  to  Loais.  This  ex-
receipt  for  the  pension  he  took  from  empUon  can  hardly,  therefore,  have  been
I»al8  XL  "  This  present,  he  said  to  the  inserted  to  gratify  the  pride  of  PhfUp,  m
king's  agent,  comes  ftxnn  yonr  master's  historians  sappooe.  Is  It  not  probable
good  plea<mre,  and  not  at  my  request;  that,  daring  his  resentment  against
and  if  you  mean  I  should  receive  it,  you  Cliarles,  he  mi^t  hare  made  some  vow
may  put  it  here  into  my  sleeve,  bat  you  never  to  do  him  homage ;  which  this
shall  have  no  discharge  from  me ;  for  I  reservation  in  the  treaty  was  intended  to
will  not  have  it  said  that  the  Great  preserve?

Chamberlain  of  EngUnd  Is  a  pensioner  It  Is  remaikable  that  VllUiet  says  the

of  the  king  of  France,  nor  have  my  name  duke  of  Bargundy  was  positively  excused

appear  in  the  books  of  the  Chambre  des  by  the  26th  article  of  the  peace  of  Am*

Comptes." Ibid.  from  doing  homage  to  Caiarles,  or  kit

'  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  person-  mcesetiorr  kifigt  qf  /ytmce,  t  xvL  p.  404.

ally  excused  fmai  all  homage  and  service  For  this  assertion  too  he  seems  to  quote

to  Charles  VII. ;  but,  if  either  died,  it  the  Tr^sor  des  Chartes,  where,  probably,

was  to  be  paid  by  the  heir,  or  to  the  the  original  treaty  is  preserved. Merer-

Frakce.  CHARLES  OF  BURGUKDY.  91

domiidons,  were  abundant  in  population  and  wealth,
fertile  in  oom,  wine,*and  salt,  and  fiill  of  commercial
activity.  Thirty  years  of  peace  which  followed  the  treaty
of  Arni8,  with  a  mild  and  £ree  government,  raised  the
subjects  of  Bui^undy  to  a  degree  of  prosperity  quite
unparalleled  in  these  times  of  disorder;  and  this  was
displayed  in  general  sumptnousness  of  dress  and  feasting.
The  court  of  Philip  and  of  his  son  Charles  was  dis-
tinguished for  its  pomp  and  riches,  for  pageants  and
tournaments ;  the  trappings  of  chivalry,  perhaps  without
its  spirit;  for  the  military  character  of  Burgundy  had
been  impaired  by  long  tranquiUi^.*

During  the  lives  of  Philip  and  Charles  VII.  each  under-
stood the  other's  rank,  and  their  amity  was  little
interrupted. But  their  successors,  the  most  ^ch!^te«
opposite  of  human  kind  in  character,  had  one  ^«  of
common  quality,  ambition,  to  render  their  an-  ^^^^^^mdy-
tipathy  more  powerful. Louis  was  eminently  timid  and
sujBpicious  in  policy ;  Charles  intrepid  beyond  all  men,
and  blindly  presumptuous :  Louis  stooped  to  any  humilia-
tion to  reach  his  aim ;  Charles  was  too  haus^hty  to  seek
the  &iro8t  means  of  Btr«iigihening  his  t>art7. An  alliance
of  his  daughter  with  the  duke  of  Guienne,  brother  of
Louis,  was  what  the  malecontent  French  princes  most
desired  and  the  king  most  dreaded ;  but  Charles,  either
averse  to  any  French  connexion,  or  willing  to  keep  his
daughter's  suitors  in  dependence,  would  never  directly
accede  to  that  or  any  other  proposition  for  her  marriage.
On  Philip's  death,  in  1467,  he  inherited  a  great  treasure,
which  he  soon  wasted  in  the  prosecution  of  his  schemes.
These  were  so  numerous  and  vast,  that  he  had  not  time
to  live,  says  Comines,  to  complete  them,  nor  would  one-
half  of  Europe  have  contented  him. It  was  his  intcn-

thelesB,  it  appeara  otherwiBe.a8  published  c  6.  Dn  Clercq,  ^  Collection  des  M^
by  MoDstrelet  at  foil  length,  who  could  moires,  t  ix.  p.  389.  In  the  invest!  tnre
have  no  motive  to  falsify  it;  and  Philip's  granted  by  John  to  the  first  Philip  of
oondnct  in  doing  homage  to  Louis  is  Bmignndy,  a  reservation  is  made  that
lordly  compatible  with  Villaret's  aanr-  the  royal  taxes  shall  be  levied  throughout
tlon.  Daniel  copies  Monstrelet  without  that  appanage.  But  during  the  long  hoe-
any  observation.  In  the  same  treaty  tility  between  the  kingdom  and  duchy
Philip  is  entitled  Duke  by  the  grace  of  this  could  not  have  been  enforced:  and
Ood ;  which  was  reckoned  a  mark  of  by  the  treaty  of  Arras,  Charles  surren*
independence,  and  not  usually  permitted  dered  all  r^t  to  tax  the  duke's  ikmiV
to  a  vamaL  nions.  Monstrelet,  f.  114.
*  P.  de  Comines,  1. 1.  c.  3  and  3 ;  L  ▼

92  INSUBORDINATION  OF Chap.  I.  Part  11.

tion  to  assume  the  title  of  King;  and  the  emperor
Frederic  III.  was  at  one  time  actually  on  his  road  to
confer  this  dignity,  when  some  suspicion  caused  him  to
retire,  and  the  project  was  never  renewed.*  It  is  evident
that,  if  Charles's  capacity  had  borne  any  proportion  to
his  pride  and  courage,  or  if  a  prince  less  politic  than
Louis  XI.  had  been  his  contemporary  in  France,  the
province  of  Burgundy  must  have  been  lost  to  the  mo-
narchy. For  several  years  these  great  rivals  were  engaged,
sometimes  in  open  hostility,  sometimes  in  endeavours  to
overreach  each  other;  but  Charles,  though  not  much
more  scrupulous,  was  fsur  less  an  adept  in  these  mysteries
of  politics  than  the  king.

Notwithstanding  the  power  of  Burgundy,  there  were
I  •  bonM-  some  disadvantages  in  its  situation.  It  pre-
natton  of  scutod  (I  speak  of  all  Charleses  dominions  under
dUM  ^°**^  the  common  name.  Burgundy)  a  very  exposed
frontier  on  the  side  of  Germany  and  Switzerland,
as  well  as  France;  and  Louis  exerted  a  considerable
influence  over  the  adjacent  princes  of  the  empire,  as  well
as  the  United  Cantons.  The  people  of  Liege,  a  very
populous  city,  had  for  a  long  time  been  continually
rebelling  against  their  bishops,  who  were  the  allies  of
Burgundy ;  Louis  was  of  course  not  backward  to  foment
their  insurrections,  which  sometimes  gave  the  dukes  a
good  deal  of  trouble.  The  Flemings,  and  especially  the
people  of  Ghent,  had  been  during  a  century  noted  for
their  republican  spirit  and  contumacious  deflanc^  of  their
sovereign.  Liberty  never  wore  a  more  unamiable  coun-
tenance than  among  these  burghers,  who  abused  the
strength  she  gave  them  by  cruelty  and  insolence.  Ghent,
when  Froissart  wrote,  about  the  year  1400,  was  one  of

t  Oaraier,  t  xviiL  p.  63. It  is  observ-  talned  to  the  French  crown,  with  Fnn

able  that  Oomines  says  not  a  word  of  che-comt^  and  other  oonntries  which  had

this ;  for  which  Gamier  seems  to  quote  belonged  to  the  kii:^om  of  Bnrgnndy.

Beloarins,  a  writer  of  the  aUteentb  age.  Hence  he  talked  at  DlJon,  in  14T3,  to  the

But even Philip, when Morvilllers,  estates  of  the  former,  about  the  kingdom

Louis's  chancellor, nsed  menaces  towards  of  Burgundy,  "que  oeux  de Frsnoe

him.  interrupted  the  orator  with  these  ont  longtems  usurp€,  et  d'icelul  ttit

words :  Je  veuz  que  duKun  eeache  que,  duchtf ;  que  tons  les  si^JetB  doivent  blen

si  J'eusM  voulu,  Je  ftun  roL Yillaret,  t  avoir  k  regret,  et  dit  qu'il  avalt  eu  sol

z>ii.  p.  44.  des  choees  qu'il  n'appartenalt  de  savolr

Charles  had  a  vague  notion  of  history,  a  nul  qu'k  lui." Michelet  (ix.  162)  la

and  confounded  the  province  or  dnchy  thu  first  who  has  published  this.
»f  UtiTgundy,  which  had  always  apper-

Frakce.  the  flemish  ClTIEa  93

(lie  strongest  cities  in  Europe,  and  would  have  required,
he  says,  an  army  of  two  hundred  thousand  men  to  be-
side it  on  every  side,  so  as  to  shut  up  all  access  by  the
Lys  and  Scheldt.  It  contained  eigh^  thousand  men  of
age  to  bear  arms;"  a  calculation  which,  although,  as  I
presume,  much  exaggerated,  is  evidence  of  great  actual
popnlousness.  Such  a  city  was  absolutely  impregnable
at  a  time  when  artilleiy  was  very  imperfect  both  in  its
construction  and  management.  Hence,  though  the  citi-
zens of  Ghent  were  generally  beaten  in  the  field  with
great  slaughter,  they  obtained  tolerable  terms  from  their
masters,  who  knew  the  danger  of  forcing  them  to  a  des-
perate defence.

No  taxes' were  raised  in  Flanders,  or  indeed  throughout
the  dominions  of  Burgundy,  without  consent  of  the  three
estates. In  the  time  of  Philip  not  a  great  deal  of  money
was  levied  upon  the  people ;  but  Charles  obtcdned  every  '
year  a  pretty  large  subsidy,  which  he  expended  in  the
hire  of  Italian  and  English  mercenaries.' An  almost
oninterrupted  success  had  attended  his  enterprises  for  a
length  of  time,  and  rendered  his  disposition  still
more  overweening. His  first  &ilure  was  before  ^'^*
Neuss,  a  little  town  near  Cologne, the  possession  of
which  would  have  made  him  nearly  master  of  the  whole
course  of  the  Bhine,  for  he  had  already  obtained  the
landgraviate  of  Alsace. Though  compelled  to  raise  the
siege,  he  succeeded  in  occupying,  next  year,  the  duchy

^  Frolnui,  part  IL  a  67.  meuiBof  ensUTlng  Ittntbehsodsof  their

*  ComliMB,  L  iv.  c.  13. It  was  veiy  sovereign. Grand  doate  fidsolent  ka

relnctaatly  that  the  FlemlngB  granted  sqjets,  et  poor  plnsleurB  raiacms,  de  so

any  money. Iliilip  onoe  begged  for  a  mettre  en  cette  s^Jetion  oh  ils  Toyolent

tax  on  salt,  promising  nerer  to  ask  any-  le  royanme  de  France,  h  cause  de  see  gens

thing  more ;  but  the  people  of  Ohent,  d'anne& A  la  Terlti,  leur  grand  donte

and.  tn  Imitation  of  them,  the  whole  n'estoit  pas  sans  cause ;  car  qnand  fl  se

counij,  reftised  It Do  Gleroq,  p.  389.  trouva  dnq  cens  hommes  d'annes,  la  to-

Upon  his  pretence  of  taking  the  onoas,  lonte  lay  ylnt  d'oi  avoir  pins,  et  de  pins

tl^  granted  him  a  subsidy,  though  less  hardiment  entreprendre  cootre  tous  ses

than  he  had  requested,  on  condltioD  that  volsins. Comines,  L  iiL  c.  4,  9.

It  should  not  be  levied  If  the  crusade  did  I>u  Cleroq.  a  contemporary  writer  of

not  take  place,  which  put  an  end  to  the  very  good  authority,  menttooing  the  story

attempt The  Statea  knew  well  that  of  a  certain  widow  who  had  re-marxied

tiie  duke  would  employ  any  money  they  the  day  after  her  husband's  death,  says

gave  him  in  keeping  up  a  body  of  gens-  that  she  was  in  some  degree  excusable,

d'annes,  like  his  neif^bour,  1h»  king  of  because  it  was  the  practice  of  the  duke

Fkanoe ;  and  thou^  the  want  of  such  a  and  bis  offloers  to  force  rich  widows  inta

force  exposed  their  country  to  pillage,  marrying  their  soldiers  or  other  servants

OiTT  ^vwt  too  ipwd  patriots  to  place  the  t  Ix.  |k  418.

94  CLAIM  OF  LOUIS  XI. Coap.H,  Part  XL

of  Lorraine. But  his  overthrow  was  reserved  for  an

enemy  whom  he  despised,  and  whom  none  could  have

thought  equal  to  the  contest. The  Swiss  had

Aj).  i«e.  g£y^jj  him  some  sli^t  provocation,  for  which
they  were  ready  to  atone;  hnt  Charles  was  mmsed  to
forhear ;  and  perhaps  Switzerland  came  within  his  pro-
jects of  conquest.  At  Granson,  in  the  Pays  de  Yaud,  he
was  entirely  routed,  with  more  disgrace  than
Gh^es  at  slaughter.'  But  having  reassemhled  his  troops,
nd  Mont.  *^^  ™®*  ^®  Confederate  army  of  Swiss  and
Germans  at  Morat,  near  Friburg,  he  was  again
defeated  with  vast  loss.  On  this  day  the  power  of  Bur-
gundy was  dissipated:  deserted  by  his  allies,  betrayed

His  death,  ^7  his  mercenaries,  he  set  his  life  upon  ano&er

Aj».  1477.  cast  at  Nancy,  desperately  giving  battle  to  the
duke  of  Lorraine  with  a  small  dispirited  anny,  and
perished  in  the  engagement.

Now  was  the  moment  when  Louis,  who  had  held  back
Q^^Qi  Qf  while  his  enemy  was  breaking  his  force  against
Lo^xx.  the  rocks  of  Switzerland,  came  to  gather  a
oenion'^  harvest  which  his  labour  had  not  reaped.
Boigundy.  Charles  left  an  only  daughter,  undoubted  heiress
of  Flanders  and  Artois,  as  well  as  of  his  dominions  out  of
France,  but  whose  right  of  succession  to  the  duchy  of
Burgundy  was  more  questionable.  Originally  the  great
fiefs  of  the  crown  descended  to  females,  and  this  was  the
case  with  respect  to  the  two  first  mentioned.  But  John
had  granted  Burgundy  to  his  son  Philip  by  way  of  appa-
nage ;  and  it  was  contended  that  the  appanages  reverted
to  the  crown  in  defsLult  of  male  heirs.  In  the  form  of
Philip's  investiture,  the  duchy  was  granted  to  him  and
his  lawful  heirs,  without  designation  of  sex.  The  con-
struction, therefore,  must  be  left  to  the  established  course
of  law.  This,  however,  was  by  no  means  acknowledged
by  Maiy,  Charles's  daughter,  who  maintained  both  that  no
general  law  restricted  appanages  to  male  heirs,  and  that
Burgundy  had  always  been  considered  as  a  feminine  fief,'
John  himself  having  possessed  it,  not  by  reversion  as
king  (for  descendants  of  the  first  dukes  were  then  living),

7  A  Ikmoiis  dlanoid.  belongliig  to  mostof  whom  were  ignorant  of  its  rala^

GharlM  of  Bmgaady,  wai  taken  in  the  it  became  the  flnt  Jewel  in  the  Fnack

pianderofhistflfDtl^theSwlaBatOraa-  crown. Gamier,  1  xviiL  pi  36L
ton. After  aevenl  changee  of  ownen.

P&AMCB.  UlS  CONDUCl',  96

but  by  inlieritaiice  deriTed  through  females.'  Such  was
this  question  of  succession  between  Louis  XI.  and  Maiy
of  Burgundy,  upon  the  merits  of  whose  pretensions  I  will
not  pretend  altogether  to  decide,  but  shall  only  observe
tiiat,  if  Charles  had  conceived  his  daughter  to  be  excluded
&om  this  part  of  his  inheritance,  he  would  probably,  at
Conflans  or  Peronne,  where  he  treated  upon  the  vantage-
ground,  have  attempted  at  least  to  obtain  a  renunciation
of  Louis's  claim.

There  was  one  obvious  mode  of  preventing  all  further
contest  and  of  aggrandizing  the  French  mo-  omduotof
narchy  fax  more  than  by  the  re-union  of  Bur-  ^^^
gundy.  This  was  the  marriage  of  Mary  vrith  the  dauphin,
which  was  ardently  wished  in  France.  Whatever  ob-
stacles might  occur  to  this  connexion,  it  was  natural  to
expect  on  the  opposite  side — ^from  Mary's  repugnance  to
an  infant  husband,  or  from  the  jealousy  which  ner  subjects
w<^re  likely  to  entertain  of  being  incorporated  with  a
country  worse  governed  than  their  own.  The  arts  of
Louis  would  have  been  well  employed  in  smoothing  these
impediments.*  But  he  chose  to  seize  upon  as  many  towns
as,  in  those  critical  circumstances,  lay  exposed  to  him,
and  stripped  the  young  duchess  of  Artois  and  Franche-
comte.  Expectations  of  the  marriage  he  sometimes  held
out,  but,  as  it  seems,  without  sincerity. Indeed  he  con-

■  It  Is  advaaoed  with  too  much  con-  sen'ations  sar  rUiatoire  de  Velly*  VilU^

fldenoe l^  leveEal French historians,  ret,  et  Gornier.  has  a  Judicious  note  on

either  that  the  ordinanoes  of  FhiUp  lY.  this  sul))ect,  t  Ui.  p.  304.

and  Charles  V.  constituted  a  general  law  •  Robertson,  as  weU  as  some  other

agiinsi  the  descent  of  appanages  to  female  modems,  have  maintained,  on  the  antho-

heirs,  or  that  this  was  a  ftindamental  rity  of  Comines,  that  Louis  XI.  ought

law  of  the  monarchy. Du  Cloe,  HlsL  de  in  poUcy  to  have  married  the  young

Louis  XL  L  U.  p.  252. Gamier,  Hist  princess to the  count  of  AnsDuldme,

de  FVance,  L  xvlii.  p.  258. The  latter  lather  of  Francis  L,  a  connexion  whidi

position  is  refated  by  frequent  instances  she  would  not  have  disliked. But  cer-

of  fiemale  succession ;  thus  Artois  had  tainly  nothing  could  have  been  more

1,  by  a  daughter  of  Louis  le  Male,  adverse  to  the  interests  of  the  French

into  the  house  of  Burgundy.  As  to  the  monarchy  than  such  a  marrisge,  which
above-mentioned  ordinances,  the  first  ap-  would  have  put  anew  house  of  Buigondy
piles  only  to  the  county  of  Poitiers ;  the  at  the  head  of  those  princes  whose  cm-
second  does  not  contain  a  syllable  that  federacies  had  so  often  endangered  the
relates  to  suooesslon.  (Ordonnanoes  des  crown.  Comines  is  one  of  the  most  Ju*
Rols,  t.  vL  p.  54.)  The  doctrine  of  ex-  dlcious  of  historians ;  but  his  sincerity
eluding  female  heirs  was  more  consonant  nuqr  be  rather  doubtiUl  In  the  opinion
to  the  pretended  Salic  law,  and  the  re-  above-mentioned ;  for  he  wrote  In  the
eent  principles  as  to  inalienability  of  do-  reign  of  Charles  VIII.,  when  the  onnnt
main,  than  to  the  analogy  of  feudal  rules  of  Angouieme  was  engsged  in  the  ssm^
tnd  precedents. M.  Gaillard,  in  his  Ob-  faction  as  nimsell

96  SICKNESS  AND  DEATH  OF Chap.  I.  Pakt  H

trived  iiTeconcileably  to  alienate  Maiy  hj  a  shamefii]
perfidy,  betraying  the  ministers  whom  she  had  intrusted
upon  a  secret  mission  to  the  people  of  Ghent,  who  put
them  to  the  torture,  and  afifcerwards  to  death,  in  the
presence  and  amidst  the  tears  and  supplications  of  their
mistress.  Thus  the  French  alliance  becoming  odious  in
France,  this  princess  married  Maximilian  of
*^  ^^^^'  Austria,  son  of  the  emperor  Frederic — a  con-
nexion which  Louis  stroye  to  prevent,  though  it  waa
impossible  then  to  foresee  that  it  was  ordained  to  retard
the  growth  of  France  and  to  bias  the  fate  of  Europe
during  three  hundred  years.  This  war  lasted  till  after
the  death  of  Mary,  who  left  one  son,  Philip,  and  one
daughter,  Margaret.  By  a  treaty  of  peace  concluded  at
Arras,  in  1482,  it  was  agreed  that  this  daughter  should
become  the  dauphin's  wife,  with  Franche-comte  and
Artois,  which  Louis  held  already,  for  her  dowry,  to  be
restored  in  case  the  marriage  should  not  take  effect.  The
homage  of  Flanders  was  reserved  to  the  crown.

Meanwhile  Louis  was  lingering  in  disease  and  tor-
sicicne«  ments  of  mind,  the  retribution  of  fraud  and
and  death  of  tyranny.  Two  years  before  his  death  he  was
^^'  struck  with  an  apoplexy,  from  which  he  never
wholly  recovered.  As  he  felt  his  disorder  increasing,
he  shut  himself  up  in  a  palace  near  Tours,  to  hide  from
the  world  the  knowledge  of  his  decline.^  His  solitude
was  like  that  of  Tiberius  at  Capreae,  full  of  terror  and
suspicion,  and  deep  consciousness  of  universal  hati^d.
All  ranks,  he  well  knew,  had  their  several  injuries  to
remember :  the  clergy,  whose  liberties  he  had  sacrificed
to  the  see  of  Home,  by  revoking  the  Pragmatic  Sanction
of  Charles  VII. ;  the  princes,  whose  blood  he  had  poured
upon  the  scaffold ;  the  parliament,  whose  course  of
justice  he  had  turned  aside ;  the  commons,  who  groaned
under  his  extortion,  and  were  plundered  by  his  soldiery.*

b  For  Tionls's  lllnen  and  death  see  *  See  a  remaTkable  chapter  in  Riillp

Gomines,  Lvl  c  T-12,  and  Gamier,  t  zix.  de  Comlnes,  L  iv.  c  19,  wherein  he  tells

p.  112.  && Pleasls,  hia  last  resideooe,  oa  that  Gfaarlea  VII.  had  never  raiseJ

about  an  English  mile  from  Toun,  ia  more  than  1,800,000  franca  a  year  ir.

now  a  dilapidated  farm-hooae,  and  can  taxes ;  but  Louis  XI.,  at  the  time  of  his

never  have  been  a  very  bulge  bnilding.  death,  raised  4,700,000,  exclnslT«  of  some

The  vestiges  of  royalty  about  it  are  few ;  military  impositions ;  et  snnment c'eatoit

but  the  principal  apartments  ha\e  been  compaasion  de  voir  et  scavoir  la  paovreta

destroyed,  either  in  the  ooune  of  ages  or  da  peuple. In  this  chapter  he  declares

at  the  revolation.  his  opinion  that  no  king  can  Juntly  levy

Frakob  LOUIS  XI.  97

The  palace,  fenced  with  portcuUiBes  and  spikes  of  iron,
was  guarded  by  archers  and  cross-bow  men,  who  shot
at  any  that  approached  by  night.  Few  entered  this
den;  but  to  them  he  showed  himself  in  magnificent
apparel,  contrary  to  his  former  custom,  hoping  thus  to
disguise  the  change  of  his  meagre  body.  He  distrusted
his  friends  and  kindred,  his  daughter  and  his  son,  the
last  of  whom  he  had  not  suffered  even  to  read  or  write,
lest  he  should  too  soon  become  his  rival.  No  man  ever
so  much  feared  death,  to  avert  which  he  stooped  to  eveiy
meanness  and  sought  every  remedy.  His  physician  had
sworn  that  if  he  were  dismissed  the  king  would  not
survive  a  week ;  and  Louis,  enfeebled  by  sickness  and
terror,  bore  the  rudest  usage  from  this  man,  and  endea-
voured to  secure  his  services  by  vast  rewards.  Always
credulous  in  relics,  though  seldom  restrained  by  super-
stition from  any  crime,*^  he  eagerly  bought  up  treasures
of  this  sort,  and  even  procured  a  Calabrian  hermit,  of
noted  sanctity,  to  journey  as  far  as  Tours  in  order  to
restore  his  health.  Philip  de  Comines,  who  attended
him  during  his  infirmity,  draws  a  parallel  between  the
torments  he  then  endured  and  those  ho  had  formerly
inflicted  on  others.  Indeed  the  whole  of  his  life  was
vexation  of  spirit.  "  I  have  known  him,"  says  Comines,
*'  and  been  his  servant  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  and  in
the  time  of  his  greatest  prosperity ;  but  never  did  I  seo
him  without  uneasiness  and  care.  Of  all  amusements
he  loved  only  the  chace,  and  hawking  in  its  season.
And  in  this  he  had  almost  as  mnch  uneasiness  as  pleasure ;
for  he  rode  hard  and  got  up  early,  and  sometimes  went
a  great  way,  and  regarded  no  weather ;  so  that  he  used
to  return  verv  weary,  and  almost  ever  in  wrath  with
some  one.  I  tnink  that  from  his  childhood  he  never  had
any  respite  of  labour  and  trouble  to  his  death.  And  I
am  certain  that,  if  all  the  happy  days  of  his  life,  in  which
he  had  more  enjoyment  than  uneasiness,  were  num-

moDcj  on  his  sotjjects  withoat  their  con-  himself  of  requiring  this  oath  before  he

sent,  and  repels  all  coomion  argoments  tmsted  his  promises,  which  the  king  re-

to  the  contruy.  ftised ;  and  St  Pol  pnidently  stayed  away

d  An  ezoeptloQ  to  this  was  when  he  Gam.  t  zrllL  p.  1% Some  report  that

swore  by  the  cross  of  St  Lo,  after  which  he  had  a  similar  respect  for  a  leaden

ha  feared  to  rlolate  his  oath. The  con-  tmsge  of  the  Virgin,  which  he  wore  In

itaUe  of  St  Pol,  whom  Louis  Invited  his  hat;  as  allnded  to  by  Pope :

with  many  asBorances  to  conrt  bethought  **  A  peilnTed  prince  a  leaden  ssint  revere."

VOL.  T.  H

»8  CHARLES  YIU.  Chap.  I.  Past  II.

bered,  they  would  oe  found  very  few ;  and  at  least  that
they  would  be  twenty  of sorrow  for  every  one  of
pleasure."'
Charles  YIII.  was  about  thirteen  years  old  when  he
fji^g^j^ succeeded  his  faeither  Louis. Though  the  law
vm. of  France  fixed  the  majority  of  her  kings  at
^^'  ^^^  that  age,  yet  it  seems  not  to  have  been  strictly
regarded  on  this  occasion,  and  at  least  Charles  was  a
minor  by  nature,  if  not  by  law. A  contest  arose,  there-
fore, for  the  regency,  which  Louis  had  intrusted  to  his
daughter  Anne,  wife  of  the  lord  de  Beaujeu,  one  of  the
Bourbon  &mily. The  duke  of Orleans, afterwards
Louis  XII.,  claimed  it  as  presumptive  heir  of  the  crown,
and  was  seconded  by  most  of  the  princes. Anne,  how-
ever,  maintained  her  ground, and  ruled  France  for
several  years  in  her  brother's  name  with  singular  spirit
and  address,  in  spite  of  the  rebellions  which  the  Orleans
party  raised  up  against  her. These  were  supported  by
the  duke  of  Britany,  the  last  of  the  great  vassals  of  the
crown,  whose  daughter,  as  he  had  no  male  issue,  was  the
object  of  as  many  suitors  as  Mary  of  Burgundy.
The  duchy  of  Britany  was  peculiarly  circumstanced.
Affaire  of  "^0  inhabitants,  whether  sprung  from  the  an-
Britony. oient  republicans  of  Armorica,  or,  as  some  have
thought,  from  an  emigration  of  Britons  during  the
Saxon  invasion,  had  not  originally  belonged  to  the  body
df  the  French  monarchy. They  were  governed  by  their
own  princes  and  laws,  though  tributary,  perhaps,  as  the
weaker  to  the  stronger,  to  the  Merovingian  kings.' In
the  ninth  century  the  dukes  of  Britany  did  homage  to
Charles  the  Bald,  the  right  of  which  was  transferred
afterwards  to  the  dukes  of  Normandy. This  formality,

"  Gomines,  L  vi  c.  13.  Ghristianls,  sdlioet  BriUmlbua  drcom-

Gregoiy  of  Toon says tluit the  Bcriptom  est  Epkt  c  8. See,  too,  0i])l-

Bretoos  were  sal^t  to  FraDce  from  the  tolarU  Car.  Calvi,  a.d.  877,  tit  33. At

ieath  of  ClovtB,  and  that  their  chie&  this  time  a  oertain  Nomenoe  had  aaramed

were  styled  ooants,  not  ldz^;B.  L  It.  c.  4.  the  crown  of  Britany,  and  some  ottien

Charlemagne  sohdaed  the  whole  of  Brl-  in  sncoesslon  bore  the  name  of  Ung.

tany. Yet  it  seems  clear  fhim  Nlgellns,  They  seem,  however,  to  have  beat  tra-

anthor  of  a  metrical  Life  of  Louis  the  dally  sntdect  to  France. Qiarlea  tfaa

Debonair,  that  they  were  again  almost  Simple  ceded  to  the  Normans  whAterar

independent There  was  even  a  march  ri^t  he  possessed  over  Britany;  and  fl»

of  the  Britaonlc  frontier,  which  separated  dukes  of  that  ooontry  (the  name  of  king

it  from  France. In  the  ensuing  reign  of  was  now  dropped)  always  did  bomsflt

Ouuies the Bald. Hincmar tells  ns,  to  Normandy. See  Dani,  Hist  de  Bmv

ngnom ondique  a Paguils,  et  ISsIsIb  tagnew

Franoe.  affairs  of  BRITANY.  99

at  that  time  no  token  of  real  subjection,  led  to  conse-
quences beyond  the  views  of  either  party.  For  "when
tiie  feudal  chains  that  had  hung  so  loosely  upon  the
shoulders  of  the  great  vassals  began  to  be  straitened  by
the  dexterity  of  the  court,  Britany  found  itself  drawn
among  the  rest  to  the  same  centre.  The  old  privileges  of
independence  were  treated  as  usurpation ;  the  dukes  were
menaced  with  confiscation  of  their  fief,  their  right  of
coining  money  disputed,  their  jurisdiction  impaired  by'
appeals  to  the  parliament  of  Paris.  However,  they  stood
boldly  upon  their  right,  and  always  refdsed  to  pay  liege-
homage,  which  implied  an  obligation  of  service  to  ^e
lord,  in  contradistinction  to  single  homage^  which  was
a  mere  symbol  of  feudal  dependence.'

About  the  time  that  Edward  III.  made  pretension  to
the  crown  of  France,  a  controversy  somewhat  resembling
it  arose  in  the  duchy  of  Britany,  between  the  families  of
Blois  aad  Montfort.  This  led  to  a  long  and  obstinate
war,  connected  all  along,  as  a  sort  of  underplot,  with  the
great  drama  of  France  and  England.  At  last  Montfort,
Edward's  ally,  by  the  defeat  and  death  of  his  antagonist,
obtained  the  duchy,  of  which  Charles  Y.  soon  after  gave
him  the  investiture.  This  prince  and  his  &mily  were
generally  inclined  to  English  connexions ;  but  the  Bre-
tons would  seldom  permit  them  to  be  effectual.  Two
cardinal  feelings  guided  the  conduct  of  this  brave  and
{jEdthfiil  people ;  the  one,  an  attachment  to  the  French
nation  and  monarchy  in  opposition  to  foreign  enemies ;
the  other,  a  zeal  for  their  own  privileges,  and  the  £amily
of  Montfort,  in  opposition  to  the  encroachments  of  the
crown.  In  Francis  11.,  the  present  duke,  the  male  line
of  that  family  was  about  to  be  extinguished.  His  daughter
Anne  was  naturally  the  object  of  many  suitors,  among
whom  were  particularly  distinguished  the  duke  of
Orleans,  who  seems  to  have  been  preferred  by  herself;
the  lord  of  Albret,  a  member  of  the  Gascon  family  of
Foix,  favoured  by  the  Breton  nobility,  as  most  likely  to
preserve  the  peace  and  liberties  of  their  country,  but
whose  age  rendered  him  not  very  acceptable  to  a  youtb
fhl  princess;  and  Maximilian,  king  of  the  Bomans.
Britany  was  rent  by  factions  and  overrun  by  the  armies

S  yUUx«t,  t  zii.  p.  83 ;  t  zv.  p.  199.

h2

100  MARRUQ£  OF  CHARLES  VIII. Chap.  I.  Past  li.

of  the  regent  of  Franoe,  who  did  not  lose  this  opportimity
of  inteifering  with  its  domestic  troubles,  and  of  persecutr
ing  her  private  enemy,  the  duke  of  Orleans.  Anne  of
Biitany,  upon  her  faeither's  death,  finding  no  other  meaous
of  escaping  the  addresses  of  Albret,  was  married

Aj>.i48».  "bypjQxy  to  Maximilian.  This,  however,  aggra-
vated the  evOs  of  the  country,  since  France  was  resolved
at  all  events  to  break  off  so  dangerous  a  connexion.  And
as  MftT^Tni^io^"  himself  was  unable,  or  took  not  sufficient
pains,  to  relieve  his  betrothed  wife  from  her  embarrasa-
MarrUfce  ments,  she  was  ultimately  compelled  to  accept
ofChariM  the  hand  of  Charles  VIII.*'  He  had  long  been
^^.r  engaged  bj  the  treaty  of  Amu.  to  nu^  the
BritMDj.  daughter  of  Maximilian,  and  that  princess  was
educated  at  the  French  court.  But  this  engagement  had
not  prevented  several  yearq  of  hostilities,  and  continual
intrigues  with  the  towns  of  Flanders  against  Maximilian.
The  double  injury  which  the  latter  sustained  in  the
marriage  of  Charles  with  the  heiress  of  Britany  seemed
likely  to  excite  a  protracted  contest;  but  the  king  of
France,  who  had  other  objects  in  view,  and  perhaps  was
conscious  that  he  had  not  acted  a  &ir  part,  soon  came  to
an  accommodation,  by  which  he  restored  Artois  and
Franche-comt^.  Both  these  provinces  had  revolted  to
Mii.TiTnilift.Ti ;  80  that  Charles  must  have  continued  the
war  at  some  disadvantage.'

France  was  now  consolidated  into  a  great  kingdom :
the  feudal  system  was  at  an  end. The  vigour

A.D.  U92.  ^£  Philip- Augustus,  the  paternal  wisdom  of  St.
Louis,  the  policy  of  Philip  the  Fair,  had  laid  the  founda-
tions of  a  powerful  monarchy,  which  neither  the  aims  of
England,  nor  seditions  of  Paris,  nor  rebellions  of  the
princes,  were  able  to  shake.  Besides  the  original  fie&
of  the  French  crown,  it  had  acquired  two  countries  be-
yond the  Hhone,  which  properly  depended  only  upon
the  empire,  Dauphine,  under  Philip  of  Valois,  by  the
bequest  of  Humbert,  the  last  of  its  princes ;  and

A.D.1481.  Provence,  under  Louis  XI.,  by  that  of  Charles

h  ThU  U  one  of  tbe  coolest  Tlolatioiia  witboat  papttl  dispenaatlon. This  wtr

of  eocleslaaUcal  taw  in  oomporatively  obUinad;  built  bean  date  elgjbt  dayi

modoni  times.  Both  contracts,  espedally  after  the  oeremooy  between  Charles  and

that  of  Anne,  were  obligatory,  so  fsr  at  Anne. (Sismondi,  xv.  *06.)

teaat  that  they  oonld  not  be  dissolved  '  SUmondi,  zv.  13K.

PajLNCS. THE  FRENCH  MONARCHT.  101

of  Anjon.^ Thus  having  conquered  henelf,  if  I  may  vao

the  pbiaae,  and  no  longer  appiehensive  of  any  foreign
enemy,  Fiance  was  prepared,  under  a  monarch  flushed
wiih  sanguine  ambition,  to  carry  her  amis  into  other
ooimtries,  and  to  contest  the  prize  of  gloiy  and  power
upon  the  ample  theatre  of  Europe."*

k  The  oountiy  now  called  D^upbloA  dlipoted  by  other  eUliMnta,  and  espe-
farmed  pert  of  the  Ungdom  of  Arlee  or  dally  by  Louia  IX.,  who  had  married
Proyence,  bequeathed  by  B4]doliA  III.  her  eldest  alster,  ihe  oompromJaed  differ-
to  the  emperor  Cooiad  IL  But  the  domi-  enoes  by  manylng  Cbarlea  of  Ai^Joa,  the
nlon  of  the  empire  cnm  theae  new  aoqoi-  Ung'a  brother.  The  CunUy  of  Ai\}ou
altloiw  being  little  more  than  nominal,  a  reigned  in  Provence,  as  well  as  in  Naples,
few  of  the  chief  nobility  converted  their  till  the  death  of  Joan  in  1383,  who.
reqiectjve  flels  Into  independent  prlnel-  having  no  children,  adopted  Loals  duke
palitiea.  One  of  these  waa  the  lord  or  of  Aqjoo,  brother  of  Charles  Y.,  as  her
danpbinof  Vlenne,  whose  ISunily  became  socoessor.  This  second  Angevin  line
vltimately  masters  of  the  whole  province,  ended  in  1481  tqr  the  death  of  Charles
Hnmbert,  the  last  of  theee,  made  John,  IIL;  though  Begnier,  duke  of  Lorraine,
son  of  Riilip  of  Valoia,  hla  heir,  on  con-  who  was  descended  throoc^  a  female,  had
dition  that  Danphlni  dioold  be  con-  a  claim  whidi  It  does  not  seem  easy  to
stantly  preserved  as  a  separate  poaession,  repel  by  argoment  It  was  very  easy,
not  Inoorponted  with  the  kingdom  of  however,  for  Lonls  XL,  to  whom  Gharlee
Fhmce.  This  bequest  waa  confirmed  by  in.  had  bequeathed  his  rights,  to  repel
(he  emperor  Charles  IV.,  whose  sapre-  it  b7  force,  and  aooordingly  be  took  po»>
ma^  over  the  province  was  thns  reoog-  session  of  Provence,  wliich  was  penna-
nised  by  the  Ungi  of  Ftance,  thongh  It  nently  united  to  the  Crown  by  letters
soon  came  to  be  altogether  dlsregsrded.  patent  of  Charles  VIIL  In  1484.*
Slsmondl  (ziv.  3)  dates  the  reunion  of  "*  The  principal  authority,  exclusive
Dwiphinft  to  the  crown  from  1457,  be-  of  orighial  writers,  on  which  I  have  relied
fore  which  time  It  was  governed  by  the  for  this  chapter,  la  the  History  of  Frsoce
dauphin  Ibr  the  time  being  as  a  foreign  by  Velly,  YlUaret,  aul  Gamier ;  a  work
sovereignty.  wfaidi,  notwithstanding  several  defects,

Provence,  Uke  Dauphin^  was  cfasnged  hss  sbsolutely  superseded  thoee  of  Hese-

from  a  feudal  dependent  to  a  sove-  rmy  snd  Daniel. The  part  of  the  Abbe

relgnty,  in  the  weakness  and  diaKlutlon  VeUy  comes  down  to  the  middle  of  the

of  the  kingdom  of  Aries,  about  the  early  «i^th  volume  (lana  edition),  and  of  the

part  of  the  eleventh  century. By  the  reign  of  Philip  de  Yaloia. His  con*

marriage  of  Douce,  heireas  of  the  first  ttnnator  ViUaret  was  interrupted  by

line  of  sovereign  counts,  with  Rajrmond  death  in  the  seventeenth  volume,  and  In

Berenger,  count  of  Barcelona,  in  II13,  the  reign  of  Louis  XL In  my  refers

it  paased  Into  that  distinguished  fimiily.  ences  to  this  history,  whidi  Ibr  common

In  116T  it  was  occupied  or  uanrped  by  fibcts  I  have  not  thou^^t  it  necesmry  to

Alfonso  IL,  king  of  Ajigon,  a  relation,  make,  I  have  merely  named  the  author

hot  not  heb-,  of  the  house  of  Berenger.  of  the  particular  volume  which  I  quote.

Alfonso  bequeathed Provence to his  This  has  made  the  above  explanation

seoond  son,  of  the  ssmensme,  from  whom  convenient,  as  the  reader  ml^t  imagine

it  desuended  to  Raymond  Berenger  IV.  that  I  referred  to  three  distfaict  works.

Tus  oovnt  dylns  without  male  issoe  in  Of  these  three  historians.  Gamier,  the

lltt,  hia  youngest  daughter Beatrice  last.  Is  the  most  Judidons,  sad,  I  believe,

took  possearioo  by  virtue  of  her  Ihther's  the  most  aceumte.  Hia  prolixity,  thou^

But  this  suoosssion  being  a  material  defect,  and  one  which  has  oc-

*  Artde  vdrifler  lea  Datea,  t.  IL  p.  44B^-Oamier.  t  six.  p.  S7. 4lr4.

102 AUTHORITIES  FOR  FRENCH  HISTORY.  Chap.  I.  Pabt  11.

cantoned  the  wofk  ttaelf  to  become  an
Inuueasanble  ondertaldng,  which  oould
never  be  completed  on  the  same  scale,  la
chleBy  oocaaloned  by  too  great  a  regard
to  details,  and  la  more  tolerable  than  a
almUar  fault  In  Vlllaret,  proceeding  from
a  love  of  idle  declamation  and  aentl-
ment  VUlaret,  however,  la  not  without
merita.  He  embraces,  perhaps  more
ftilly  than  his  predecessor  Velly,  thoee
collateral  branches  of  history  which  an
enli^tened  reader  requires  almost  In
preference  to  dvil  tnnnctions,  the  laws,
manners,  literature,  and  In  general  the
whole  domestic  records  of  a  nation.
These  snt^ects  are  not  always  well
treated;  but  the  book  itself,  to  which
there  is  a  remarkably  ftiU  Index,  fcnns,
upon  the  whole,  a  great  repositonr  of
useftil  knowledge.  Yillant  had  the  ad-
vantage of  official  access  to  the  Ftaich
archives,  by  which  he  has  no  doubt  en-
riched his  history ;  but  his  leftrencCT  are
indistinct,  and  his  compcaitico  breatbea
wi  air  of  rapidity  and  wi&t  <tf  exaetosii*

Telly's  fhafactwrlgUcs  are  not  very  dia-
slmilar.  The  style  of  both  Is  exceeding
bad,  as  has  been  severely  noticed,  along
with  their  other  defecta,  by  QaUlaid,  In
Observattona  snr  I'Histoire  da  Tellj,
Yillaret,  et  Gander.  (4  vols.  Iftno.
Fsris,  1806).

[This  history  Is  now  but  diglhfly  eo>
teemed  in  lYanoe,  especially  the  volumea
written  by  the  Abb^  Velly.  Thewriten
were  too  much  imbued  with  the  q>irit  of
the  old  monarchy  (though  no  adulators
of  UngB,  and  rather  liberal  aooonltng  to
the  ataiidaid  of  their  own  age)  for  those
who  have  taken  the  sovereignty  of  tba
people  for  their  creed.  Nor  are  thej
critical  and  exact  enou^  for  the  present
state  of  historical  knowledge,  fismontf
and  Ifldielet,  eqpedally  the  fonnor,  are
doubtless  superior ;  but  tba  reader  wilt
not  find  In  the  latter  aa  regular  a  nar>
ratioD  of  tects  aa  in  Velly  and  VOlaret
SiflDondl  has  aa  many  pr^judloea.  on
one  aids  aa  they  hav«  un  tLe  opporftiL

Votes  to  Chap.  1.  ANCIKNT  GAUU  108

NOTES  TO  CHAPTEE  I.

Note  L Page  2.

The  evidence  of  Zommns,  wLich  is  the  basis  of  tliis
theory  of  Dubos,  cannot  be  called  -veary  slight.  Early  in
the  fifth  century,  according  to  him,  abont  the  time  when
Ck>nstantine  nsuiped  the  throne  of  Britain  and  Oaul,  or,
as  the  sonse  shows,  a  little  later,  in  consequence  of  the
incursions  of  the  barbarians  from  beyond  the  Bhine,
the  natiyes  of  Britain,  taking  np  arms  for  themselves,
rescued  their  cities  from  these  barbarians ;  and  the  whole
Armorican  territory,  and  other  provinces  of  Oaul,  6  'Ap-
/Liopfvoc  Avocy  ical  ercpai  TaXarwy  iirapiy^iaiy  in  imitation  of
the  Britons,  liberated  themselves  in  the  same  manner,
expelling  the  Boman  rulers,  and  establishing  an  internal
government:  it^aSXovaai  fAtv  rov^  'Po^/ia/ovc  Apyoyrac,
oiKtlov  Zt  Kar*  i^ovtriav  iroX/rcv/ia  KaOtardaai,  Lib.  vi.  0.  5.
Guissot  gives  so  much  authority  to  this  as  to  say  of  the
Armoricans,  **  Us  se  maintinrent  toujours  libres,  entre
lee  barbores  et  les  Bomains."  Introduction  k  la  Collec-
tion des  M^moires,  vol.  i.  p.  336.  Sismondi  pays  little
regard  to  it.  The  proo&  alleged  by  Dam  for  the  ex-
istence of  a  king  of  Britany  named  Conan,  early  in  the
fifth  centurv,  would  throw  much  doubt  on  the  Armori-
can  republic ;  but  they  seem  to  me  rather  weak.  Britany,
it  may  be  observed  by  the  way,  was  never  subject  to  the
Merovingian  kings,  except  sometimes  in*  name.  Dubos
does  not  think  it  probable  that  there  was  any  central
authority  in  what  ne  calls  the  Armorican  confederacy,
but  conceives  the  cities  to  have  acted  as  independent
states  during  the  greater  part  of  the  fifth  century.  (Hist.
de  TEtablissement,  <kc.,  vol.  i.  p.  338.)  He  gives,  how-
ever, an  enormous  extent  to  Armorica,  supposing  it  to
have  comprised  Aquitaine.  But  though  the  contrary  has
been  proved,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  Zosimus  mentions

104  THE  PRANKS.  Notes  to

other  proYinces  of  Gfanl,  irtpai  TaXuToiy  ivapxiaij  as  well
as  Armorica.  Procopitis,  by  the  word  'Ap66pvxoi,  seems
to  indicate  all  the  inhabitants  at  least  of  Northern  Gaid  ;
but  the  passage  is  so  ambiguous,  and  his  acquaintanoe
with  that  history  so  questionable,  that  little  oan  be  in-
ferred from  it  with  any  confidence.  On  the  whole,  the
history  of  Northern  Gaul  in  the  fifth  century  is  extremely
obscure,  and  the  trustworthy  evidence  yery  scanty.

Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Fr8Ji9ai8,  vol.  i.  p.  134)  has  a
good  passage,  which  it  will  be  desirable  to  ^eep  in  mind
when  we  launch  into  mediaeval  antiquities : — ''  Ce  peu
des  mots  a  donn^  matiere  ad'amples  commentaires,  et  au
developpement  de  beaucoup  de  conjectures  ing^nieuses.
L'abb^  Dubos,  en  expHquant  le  silence  des  historiens,  a
fond^  BUT  des  sousentendus  une  histoire  assez  complete
de  la  r^publique  Armorique.  Nous  serons  souvent
appel^s  a  nous  tenir  en  garde  centre  le  zele  des  dcrivams
qiu  ne  satisfait  point  Taridit^  de  nos  chroniques,  et  qui
y  supplant  par  des  divinations.  Plus  d'une  fois  le  lecteur
pourra  6tre  surpris  en  voyant  a  combien  peu  se  reduit  ce
que  nous  savons  rtSellement  sur  un  ^^nement  assez  o^l^bre
pour  avoir  motiv^  de  gros  livres."

Note  n.  Page  2.

The  Franks  are  not  among  the  Gennan  tribes  men-
tioned by  Tacitus,  lior  do  they  appear  in  histoiy  before
the  year  240.  Guizot  accedes  to  the  opinion  that  they
were  a  confederation  of  the  tribes  situated  between  the
Ehine,  the  Weser,  and  the  Main ;  as  the  Alemanni  were
a  similar  league  to  the  south  of  the  last  river."  Their
origin  may  be  derived  from  the  necessity  of  defending
their  independence  against  Home ;  but  they  had  become
the  aggressors  in  the  period  when  we  read  of  them  in
Boman  history ;  and,  like  other  barbarians  in  that  age,
were  often  the  purchased  allies  of  the  declinii:^  empire.
Their  history  is  briefly  sketched  by  Guizot  (Essais  sur
FHistoire  de  France,  p.  53),  and  more  copiously  by
other  antiquarians, among  whom  M. Lehuerou, the

*  Alemanni  Ib  generally  nppoaed  to  Heermanner,  loldlefB.  —  Noaveaax  lf4>
mean  "  all  men."  Meyer,  boweyer.  takes  moires  de  I'Academie  de  Bmzalleai  toI
H  for  anotber  fiwm  of  Arimaani.  firam UL  p.  439. .

Chap.  I.  THE  FRAKKSw  105

latest  and  not  the  leaiit  onginal  or  ingeniouB,  conceives
them  to  have  been  a  race  of  exiles  or  outlaws  from  other
Oennan  tribes,  taking  the  name  Franc  from /recA,  fierce
or  bold,^  and  settling  at  first,  by  necessity,  near  the
month  of  the  Elbe,  whence  they  moved  onwards  to
seek  better  habitations  at  the  Expense  of  less  intrepid,
thongh  more  civilized  nations.  **  Et  ainsi  naqnit  la  pre-
miere nation  de  rEnro{>e  modeme."  *  Institutions  Mero-
vingiennes,  vol.  i.  p.  91.

An  earlier  writer  considers  the  Franks  as  a  branch  of
the  great  stock  of  the  Buevi,  mentioned  by  Tacitus,  who,
he  tells  us,  '<  majoiem  Oermania^  partem  obtinent,  pro-
priis  adhuc  nationibus  nommibusque  discreti,  quanquam
in  communi  Suevi  dicuntur.  Insigne  gentis  obliquaie
erinem,  nodoque  substringere."  De  Moribus  German,
c.  38.  Ammianus  mentions  the  Salian  Franks  by  name .
'*  Francos  eos  quos  consuetude  Salios  appellavit."  See
a  memoir  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Academy  of  Bmssels,
1824,  by  M.  Devez,  **  sur  I'etablissement  des  Francs  dans
la  Belgique."

In  die  great  battle  of  Chdions  the  Franks  fought  on
the  Boman  side  against  Attila ;  and  we  find  them  men-
tioned several  times  in  the  history  of  Northern  Graul
from  that  time.  Lehuerou  (Institutions  Merovingiennes,
o.  11)  endeavours  to  prove,  as  Dubos  had  done,  that  they
were  settled  in  Gaul,  far  beyond  Toumay  and  Cambray,
under  Meroveus  and  Childeric,  though  as  subjects  of
the  empire;  and  Luden  conjectures  that  the  whole
country  between  the  Moselle  and  the  Somme  had  fallen
into  their  hands  even  as  early  as  the  rei^  of  Honorius.
(Geschichte  des  Deutschen  Volkes,  vol.  li.  p.  381.)  This
is  one  of  the  obscure  and  debated  points  in  early  French
histoiy.  But  the  seat  of  the  monarchy  appears  clearly
to  have  been  established  at  Cambray  before  the  middle
of  the  fifth  century.

b  Thii  etymology  bad  been  glTcn  fay called  the  Boman  icbool  of  French  antt-
Thierty,  or  wm  of  <Mer  origtn.  qoarlei,  he  ahoiald  not  have  bnm^ft  the

*  Is  M.  Lehneron  belongi  to  what  la nation  from  beyond  the  Bbina.

106  TH£  FRANKS!.  Notes  TO

Note  m. Page  2.

This  theory,  which  is  partly  ooimtenanced  by  Gibbon,
has  lately  been  revived,  in  ahnost  its  foUest  extent,  by
a  learned  and  spirited  investigator  of  early  history,  Sir
Franois  Palgrave,  in  his  Base  and  Progress  of  the  Eng-
lish Commonwealth,  i.  360 ;  and  it  seems  mnch  in  favour
with  M.  Baynonard,  in  his  Histoire  du  Droit  Municipal
en  France.  M.  Lehneron,  in  a  late  work  (Histoire  des
Institutions  Merovingiennes  et  Carolingiennes,  2  vols.,
1843),  has  in  a  great  measure  adopted  it: — '*  Nous
oroyons  devoir  d^larer  que,  dans  notre  opinion,  le  livre
de  Dubos,  malgre  les  erreurs  trop  r^elles  qui  le  deparent,
et  Tesprit  de  systeme  qui  en  a  consid^iablement  exager6
les  consequences,  est,  de  tons  ceux  qui  ont  abordi  le
m^me  probleme  au  xviii"*  si^cle,  celui  ou  la  question  dee
origines  Ji^rovingiennes  se  trouve  le  plus  pres  de  la
veritable  solution.  Get  aveu  nous  dispense  de  d^taiUer
plus  longiiement  les  obligations  que  nous  lui  avons.
EUes  86  r^veleront  d'aiUeurs  snfSsamment  d'elles-
m€mes."  ^Introduction,  p.  xi.)  M.  Lehuerou  does  not,
however,  follow  his  celebrai^  guide  so  fiur  as  to  overlook
the  necessary  connexion  between  barbarian  force  and  its
aggressive  character.  The  final  establishment  of  the
Franks  in  Gaid,  according  to  him,  rested  partly  on  the
concession  and  consent  of  the  emperors,  who  had  invited
them  to  their  service,  and  rewarded  them,  as  he  con-
ceives, with  lands,  while  the  progenitors  of  Olovis  bore
the  royal  name,  partly  on  their  own  encroachments,  and
especially  on  the  victory  of  that  prince  over  Syagrius  in
486. (Vol.  i.  p.  228.)

It  may  be  alleged  against  Dubos  that  Clovis  advanced
into  the  heart  of  Gaul  as  an  invader ;  that  he  defeated  in
battle  the  lieutenant  of  the  emperor,  if  Syagrius  were
such ;  or,  if  we  chose  to  consider  him  as  independent,
which  probably  in  terms  he  was  not,  that  the  emperors
of  Constantinople  could  merely  have  relinquished  their
authority,  because  they  had  not  the  strengdi  to  enforce
it.  Gaul,  like  Britain,  in  that  age,  had  become  almost  a
sort  of  derelict  possession,  to  be  seized  by  the  occupant ;
but  the  title  of  occupancy  is  not  that  of  saccession. It

Chap.  1.  THE  FRANKa  107

may  be  true  that  the  Boman  gabjeots  of  Clovia  paid  him
a  ready  allegianoe ;  yet  Btill  they  had  no  altematave  but
to  obey.

Twenty-five  years  elapeed,  during  which  the  kingdom
of  the  Salian  Franks  was  prodigionsly  aggrandized  by
the  submission  of  all  Northern  Qanl,  by  the  reduction  of
the  Alemanni  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ehine,  and  by
the  OTorthrow  of  the  Visigoths  at  Yougl^,  which  brought
almost  the  whole  of  the  south  into  subjection  to  Cloyis.
It  is  not  disputed  by  any  one  that  lie  reigned  and  con*
quered  in  ms  own  right.  No  one  has  alleged  that  he
munded  his  great  dominion  on  any  other  titie  than  that
of  the  sword,  which  his  Frank  people  alone  enabled  him
to  sustain.  But  about  two  years  before  his  death,  as
Gregory  of  Tours  relates,  the  emperor  Anastasius  be-
stowed upon  him  the  dignity  of  consul;  and  this  has
been  eagerly  caught  at  by  the  school  of  Duboe  as  a  fact
of  high  importance,  and  as  establishing  a  positive  right
of  sovereignly,  at  least  over  the  Bomans,  that  is,  the

I>rovinoial  inhabitants  of  Gaul,  which  descended  to  the
ong  line  of  the  Merovingian  house.  Sir  Francis  Pal-
grave,  indeed,  more  strongly  than  Dubos  himself,  seems
to  consider  the  French  monarchy  as  deriving  its  pedigree
horn  Bome  rather  than  the  Elbe.

The  first  question  that  must  naturalhr  arise  is,  as  to
the  value  assignable  to  the  evidence  of  Gregory  of  Tours
respecting  the  gift  of  Anastasius.  Some  might  hesitate,
at  least,  to  accept  the  story  in  all  its  cirqomstances.
Gregory  is  neither  a  contempoonary  nor,  in  such  a  point,
an  altogether  trustworthy  witness.  His  style  is  verbose
and  rhetorical ;  and,  even  in  matters  of  positive  history,
scanty  as  are  our  means  of  refuting  him,  he  has  some-
times exposed  his  ignorance,  and  more  often  given  a
tone  of  improbability  to  his  narrative.  An  instance  of
the  former  occurs  in  his  third  book,  respecting  the  death
of  the  widow  of  Theodoric,  contradicted  by  known  his-
tory ;  and  for  the  latter  we  may  refer  to  the  language  he
puts  into  the  mouth  of  Clotilda,  who  lu-ges  her  husband
to  the  worship  of  Mars  and  Mercury,  divinities  of  whom
he  had  never  heard.

The  main  fact,  however,  that  Anastasius  conferred  the
dignity  of  consul  upon  Clovis,  cannot  be  rejected.  Al-
though it  has  been  alleged  that  his  name  does  not  ooour

108  THE  FRANKS.  Kamiv>

in  the  Consular  Fasti,  this  seems  of  no  great  impoitanoe,
since  the  title  was  merely  an  honorary  distinction,  not
connecting  him  with  the  empire  as  its  subject.  Giiizoty
indeed,  and  Sismondi  conceive  that  he  was  only  inyested
with  the  consular  robe,  according  to  what  they  take  to
have  been  the  usage  of  the  Byzantine  court  But  Gre-
gory, by  the  words  oodHdUos  de  oonsvlatu,  seems  to  impl^
a  formal  graut.  Nor  does  the  fact  rest  solely  on  his  evi-
dence, though  his  residence  at  Tours  would  put  him  in
possession  of  the  local  tradition.  Hincmar,  the  £EunouB
oishop  of  Bheims,  has  left  a  Life  of  St.  Bemy,  by  whom
Clovis  was  baptized ;  and,  though  he  wrote  in  the  ninth
century,  he  had  seen  extracts  from  a  contemporary  Life
of  that  saint,  not  then,  he  says,  entirely  extant,  which
Life  may  reasonably  be  thought  to  have  furnished  the
substance  of  the  second  book  of  Gregory's  history.  We
find  in  Hinomar  the  language  of  Gregory  on  the  consul-
ship of  Clovis,  with  a  litUe  difference  of  expression:
*'  Cum  quibus  codicillis  etiam  illi  Anastasius  coronam.
auream  cum  gemmis,  et  tunicam  blateam  misit,  et  ab  e&
die  consul  et  Augustus  est  appellatus."  (Rec.  de?  Hist.
vol.  iii.  p.  379.)  Now,  the  words  of  Gregory  are  ihe
following: — **  ^tur  ab  Anastasio  imperatore  codiciUos
de  consulatu  accepit,  et  in  basilica  beati  Martini  tunica
blatea  indutus  est  et  clamyde,  imponens  vertici  diadema.
Tunc  ascenso  equite,  aurum  argentumque  in  itinere  illo,
quod  inter  portam  atrii  basilicsa  beati  Martini  et  eccle-
siam  civitatis  est,  prsosentibus  populis  manu  propria
spaigens,  voluntate  benignissima  erogavit,  et  ab  e&  die
tanquam  consul  aut  Augustus  est  vocitatus.'*  The  mi-
nuteness of  local  description  implies  the  tradition  of  the
city  of  Tours,  which  Gregory  would,  of  course,  know,
and  renders  all  scepticism  as  to  the  main  story  very
unreasonable.  Thus,  if  we  suppose  the  Life  of  St.  Eemy
to  have  been  the  original  authority,  Anastasius  vnll  have
sent  a  crown  to  Clovis.  And  this  would  explain  the
words  of  Gregory,  **  imponens  vertici  diadema."  Such
an  addition  to  the  dignity  of  consul  is,  doubtless,  re-
markable, and  might  of  itself  lead  us  to  infer  that  the
latter  was  not  meant  in  its  usual  sense.  This  passage  is
in  other  respects  more  precise  than  in  Gregory ;  it  ha&
not  the  indefinite  and  almost  unintelligible  words  tan--
quam  consul,  and  has  et  instead  of  aut  Augustas ;  which

Chap  I.  THK  FRAKKS.  109

latter  conjunction,  howcTer,  in  low  Latin,  is  often  put
for  the  former.

But,  though  the  historical  evidence  is  considerably
strengthened  by  the  supposition  that  Gregoiy  copied  a
Life  of  St.  Bemigius  of  nearly  contemporary  date  with
the  event,  wa  do  not  find  all  our  difficulty  removed  so  as
to  render  it  implicit  credence  in  every  particular.  That
Clovis  would  be  called  consul  by  the  provincial  Bomans
after  he  had  received  the  title  from  Anastasius  is  very
natural;  that  he  was  ever  called,  even  by  them,  Au-
gustus, that  is.  Emperor,  except  perhaps  in  a  momentary
acclamation,  we  may  not  imreasonably  scruple  to  believe.
The  imperial  title  would  hardly  be  assumed  by  one  who
pretended  only  to  a  local  sovereignty;  nor  is  such  a
usurpation  consistent  with  the  theory  that  the  Frank
chieftain  was  on  terms  of  friendship  with  the  court  of
Constantinople,  and  in  subordination  to'  it.  One  or
other  hypothesis  must  surely  be  rejected.  If  Clovis  was
called  emperor  (and  when  did  Augustus  bear  any  other
meaning  ?),  he  was  no  vicegerent  of  Anastasius,  no  consul
of  the  empire.  But  the  most  material  observations  that
arise  are, — ^first,  that  the  dignity  of  consul  was  merely
personal,  and  we  have  not  the  slightest  evidence  that
any  of  the  posterity  of  Clovis  either  acquired  or  assumed
it ;  secondly,  that  the  Franks  alone  were  the  source  of
power  to  the  house  of  Meroveus.  *'  The  actual  and  legal
authority  of  Clovis,"  says  Gibbon,  "  coidd  not  receive
any  new  accession  from  the  consular  dignity.  It  was  a
name,  a  shadow,  an  empty  pageant;  and,  if  the  con-
queror had  been  instructed  to  claim  the  ancient  prero-
gatives of  that  high  office,  they  must  have  expired  with
the  period  of  its  annual  duration.  But  the  Bomans  were
disposed  to  revere  in  the  person  of  their  master  that  an-
tique title  which  the  emperors  condescended  to  assume ;
the  barbarian  himself  seemed  to  contract  a  sacred  obliga-
tion to  respect  the  majesty  of  the  republic;  and  tike
successors  of  Theodosius,  by  soliciting  his  friendship,
tacitiy  forgave  and  almost  ratified  the  usurpation  of
Gaul."  (Chap,  xxxviii.)  It  does  not  appear  to  me,  there-
fore, ver^r  material  towards  the  understanding  French
history,  what  was  the  intention  of  Anastasius  in  confer-
ring the  name  of  consul  on  the  king  of  the  Franks.  It
was  a  token  of  amity,  no  doubt ;  a  pledge,  perhaps,  tliat

110  THE  FRANKS.  Nones  it»

the  ooiut  of  Constantmople  renounced  the  hope  of  as-
serting its  pretensions  to  govern  a  proyince  so  irrecover-
ably separated  from  it  as  Gaul ;  but  were  it  even  the
absolute  cession  of  a  right,  which,  by  the  usual  law  of
nations,  required  something  £eu:  more  explicit,  it  woidd
not  a£Eeot  in  any  degree  the  real  authorily  which  CIovib
had  won  by  the  sword,  and  had  exercised  for  more  than
twenty  years  over  the  unresisting  subjects  of  the  Boman
empire.

A  different  argument  for  the  theory  of  devolution  of
power  from  the  Byzantine  emperor  on  the  Franks  is
founded  on  the  cession  of  Justinian  to  Theodebert  king
of  Austrasia,  in  540.  Provence,  which  continued  in  the
possession  of  the  emperors  for  some  time  after  the  con-
quest of  Gaul  by  Clovis,  had  &llen  into  the  hands  of  the
Ostrogoths,  then  masters  of  Italy.  The  alliance  of  the
Frank  king  was  sought  by  both  parties,  at  the  price  of
what  one  enjoyed  and  ihe  other  claimed — Provence,
with  its  weal^y  cities  of  Marseilles  and  Aries.  Theo-
debert was  no  very  good  sJly,  either  to  the  Greeks  or
the  Goths;  but  he  occupied  the  territory,  and  after  a
few  years  it  was  formally  ceded  to  him  by  Justinian.
"  That  emperor,"  in  the  words  of  Gibbon,  who  has  not
told  the  history  very  exactly,  **  generously  yielding  to
the  Franks  the  sovereignty  of  the  countries  oeyond  the
Alps  which  they  already  possessed,  absolved  the  pro-
vincials from  their  allegiance,  and  established,  on  a  more
lawfril,  though  not  more  solid,  foundation,  the  throne  of
the  Merovingians."  Procopius,  in  his  Greek  vanity,  pre-
tends that  the  Franks  never  thought  themselves  secure
of  Gaul  until  they  obtained  this  sanction  from  the  em-
peror. '*  This  stit>ng  declaration  of  Procopius,"  says
Gibbon,  "  woidd  almost  suffice  to  justify  the  abbe  IXi-
bos."  I  cannot,  however,  rate  the  courage  of  that  people
so  low  as  to  believe  that  they  feared  the  armies  oS  Jus-
tinian, which  they  had  lately  put  to  flight  in  Italy ;  nor
do  I  know  that  a  titie  of  sixty  years'  possession  gains
much  legality  by  the  cession  of  one  who  had  asserted  no
claim  during  that  period.  Constantinople  had  tacitly
renounced  ti^e  western  provinces  of  Borne  by  her  ini^
bility  to  maintain  them.  I  must,  moreover,  express  some
doubt  whether  Procopius  ever  meant  to  say  that  Justi-
nian confirmed  to  the  Frank  sovereign  his  rights  over

.  Chap.  i.  THE  HEROVIKGrAN  PERIOD.  Ill

tihe  whole  of  Gaul.  He  uses,  indeed,  the  word  FoXX/ac ;
but  that  should,  I  think,  be  understood  according  to  the
general  sense  of  the  passage,  which  would  limit  its
meaning  to  Provence,  their  recent  acquisition,  and  that
which  &e  Ostrogoths  had  already  relinquished  to  them.
Gibbon,  on  the  authority  of  Procopius,  goes  on  to  say
that  the  gold  coin  of  the  Merovingian  kings,  '*  by  a  sin-
gular privilege,  which  was  denied  to  the  Persian  mo-
narch, obtained  a  legal  currency  in  the  empire."  But
this  legal  currency  is  not  distinctly  mentioned  by  Proco-
pius, though  he  strangely  asserts  that  it  was  not  lawful,
ob  de/itC)  for  the  king  of  Persia  to  coin  gold  with  his  own
efSgy,  as  if  the  defile  of  Constantinople  were  regarded  at
Seleucia.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  Goths,  as
well  as  Franks,  coined  gold,  which  might  possibly  cir-
culate in  the  empire,  witiiout  having,  stricdy  spei^dng,
a  legal  currency.  The  expressions  of  Agathias,  quoted
above,  that  the  Franks  had  nearly  the  same  form  of  go-
vernment, and  the  same  laws,  as  the  Eomans,  may  be
undeiKtood  as  a  mistaken  view  of  what  Procopi^  sa^^  in
a  passage  which  will  be  hereafter  quoted,  and  which
Agathias,  a  later  writer,  perhaps  has  followed,  that  the
Boman  inhabitant  of  Gaul  retained  their  institutions
under  the  Franks ;  which  was  certainly  true,  though  by
no  means  more  so  than  under  the  Visigoths.

Note  IV. Page  6.

It  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  observed,  that  no  period  of
ecclesiastical  history,  especially  in  iSunce,  has  supplied
more  saints  to  the  calendar.  It  is  the  golden  age  of
hagiology.  Thirty  French  bishops,  under  Clovis  and
his  sons  alone,  are  venerated  in  the  Boman  church;
and  not  less  than  seventy-one  saints,  during  the  same
short  period,  have  supplied  some  historical  information,
through  their  Lives  in  Acta  Sanctorum.  **  The  founda-
tion of  half  the  French  churches,"  says  Sismondi,  "  dates
from  that  epoch."  (Vol.  i.  p.  308^  Nor  was  the  seventh
century  much  less  productive  of  that  harvest.  Of  the
service  which  the  Lives  of  the  Saints  have  rendered  to
history,  as  well  as  of  the  incredible  deficiencies  of  its
ordinary  sources,  some  notion  may  be  gained  by  the

112  THE  MEROVINGIAN  PERIOD.  NoiBS  TO

Btarange  foiot  mentioned  in  Sismondi,  that  a  king  of  Ana-
tiasia,  Dagobert  11.,  was  wholly  overlooked  by  histo-
rians ;  and  his  reign,  from  674  to  678,  only  retrieved  by
some  learned  men  in  the  seventeenth  century,  throng
the  Life  of  our  Saint  Wil&id,  who  had  passed  through
France  ^n  his  way  to  Borne.  (Hist,  des  Fran9ais,  voL
ii.  p.  51.)  But  thoi'e  is  a  diploma  of  this  prince  in  Bee.
des  Hist.  vol.  iv.  p.  685.

Sismondi  is  too  severe  a  censurer  of  the  religious  sen-
timent which  actuated  the  men  of  this  period.  It  did
not  prevent  crimes,  even  in  those,  frequently,  who  were
peneti^ated  by  it.  But  we  cannot  impute  to  the  ascetic
superstition  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries,  as  we
may  to  the  persecuting  spirit  of  later  ages,  that  it  occa-
sioned them — crimes,  at  least,  which  stand  forth  in  his-
tory ;  for  to  fraud  and  figJsehood  it,  no  question,  lent  its
aid.  The  Lives  of  the  Saints,  amidst  all  the  mass  of
falsehood  and  superstition  which  incrusts  them,  bear
witness  not  only  to  an  intense  piety,  which  no  one  will
dispute,  but  to  much  of  charity  and  mercy  toward  man.
But,  even  if  we  should  often  doubt  particular  facts  firom
slendemess  of  proof,  they  are  at  least  such  as  the  com-
pilers of  these  legends  thought  praiseworthy,  and  such
as  the  readers  of  them  would  be  encouraged  to  imitate.**

St.  Bathilda,  of  Anglo-Saxon  birth,  queen  of  Clovis  II.,
redeeming  her  countrymen  from  servitude,  to  which  the
barbarous  manners  of  their  own  people  fit>quently  ex-
posed them,  is  in  some  measure  a  setK)ff  against  the
tyrant  princes  of  the  family  into  which  she  had  come.
And  many  other  instances  of  similar  virtue  are  attested
with  reasonable  probability.  Sismondi  never  fiilly  learned
to  judge  men  according  to  a  subjective  standard,  that  is,
their  own  notions  of  right  and  wrong ;  or  even  to  per-
ceive the  inunediate  good  consequences  of  many  prin-
ciples, as  well  as  social  institutions  connected  with  them,
wliich  we  would  no  more  willingly  tolerate  at  present
than  himself.  In  tins  respect  Guizot  has  displayed  a
more  philosophical  temper. Still  there  may  be  some

a  M.  Ampere  bu  well  obienr«d  thai  of  Provldeiiee  supporting  fhe  fliiflrfU  Ift

It  was  not  the  mere  Interest  of  the  story,  those  tioablocu times,  and  of  sainti

nor  eren  the  ideal  morality,  which  ooii*  always  tnterfBring  in  fityoor  of  the  imio-

stltnted  the  principal  cfaann  of  the  le-  cent— B3st.  litt.  de  la  Fmnee  araai  to

nlnds  of  saints ;  it  was  the  oonstant  idea  13***  sftcle.  U.  SCO.

Chap.  I.  MATORS  OF  THB  I'ALaCE.  113

caution  neoeflsaiy  not  to  cany  this  subjeotiYe  estimate  of
human  actions  too  fiur,  lest  we  lose  sight  of  their  intrinsic
quality.

We  have,  unfortunately,  to  set  against  the  saintly
legends  an  enormous  mass  of  better-attested  crimes,  espe-
cially of  oppnession  and  cruelty.  Perhaps  there  is  hardly
any  nistory  extending  over  a  century  which  records  so
much  of  this  with  so  little  information  of  any  virtue,  any
public  spirit,  any  wisdom,  as  the  ten  books  of  Gregoiy
of  Tours.  The  seventh  century  has  no  historian  equally
circumstantial ;  but  the  tale  of  the  seventh  century  is
in  substance  the  same.  The  Boman  fraud  and  perfidy
mingled,  in  balefal  confluence,  with  the  ferocity  and
.  violence  of  the  Frank.

**  TboM  wild  meD'B  Tioes  they  raoeiv'd.
And  gkve  them  bade  thdr  own."

If  the  church  was  deeply  tainted  with  both  these  classes
of  crime,  it  was  at  least  less  so,  especially  with  the  latter,
than  the  rest  of  the  nation.  A  saint  might  have  many
faidts ;  but  it  is  strongly  to  be  presumed  that  mankind
did  not  canonize  such  monsters  as  the  kings  and  nobles
of  whom  we  read  almost  exclusively  in  Gregory  of
Tours.  A  late  writer,  actuated  by  the  hatred  of  anti-
quity, and  especially  of  kings,  nobles,  and  priests,  which
is  too  much  me  popular  creed  of  France,  nas  collected
from  age  to  age  every  testimony  to  the  wickedness  of
the  powerful.  His  proo&  are  oneHaided,  and,  conse-
quentlj,  there  is  some  un&imess  in  the  conclusions ;  but
tiie  flEtctB  are,  for  the  most  part,  irresistibly  true.  (Du-
laure,  Hist  de  Paris,  passim.)

Note  V. Page  6.

The  Mayor  of  the  Palace  appears  as  the  first  officer  of
the  crown  in  the  three  Frank  kingdoms  during  the  latter
half  of  the  sixth  century.  He  had  the  command,  as
Ouizot  supposes,  of  the  Antrustions,  or  vassals  of  the
king.  Even  afterwards  the  office  was  not,  as  this  writer
believes,  properly  elective,  though  in  the  case  of  a
minority  of  me  king,  or  upon  other  special  occasions,
the  leudeSf  or  nobles,  chose  a  mayor. The  first  instance

VOL.  I.  I

114  MAYORS  OF  THE  PALACE.  Notes  to

we  find  of  such  an  eleotion  waa  in  575,  when,  after  the
mnrder  of  Sigebert  by  Fredegonde,  his  son  Childebert
being  an  infiant,  the  Australian  Iwdes  chose  Grogon  for
their  mayor.  There  seem,  however,  so  many  instances
of  elective  mayors  in  the  seventh  centniy,  that,  although
the  royal  consent  may  probably  have  been  legally  requi-
site, it  is  hard  to  doubt  that  the  office  had  fsJlen  into  the
hands  of  the  nobles.  Thus,  in  641 :  —  **  Flaochatus,
genere  Francus,  major-domCls  in  regnum  Buigundise,
electione  pontificum  et  cunotorom  ducum  a  Nantechilde
regina  in  hunc  gradum  honoris  nobiliter  stabilitur."
^redegar.  Chron.  c.  89.)  And  on  the  election  of
Ebroin :—  "  Franci  in  incertum  vacillantes,  accepto  con*
silio,  Ebrtiinum  in  hujus  honoris  curam  ac  di^utatem
statuunt."  (c.  92.)  On  the  death  of  Ebroin  in  681,
"  Franci  Warratonem  virom  illustrem  in  locum  eiua

These  two  instances  were  in  Neustria ;  the  aristocratic
power  was  still  greater  in  the  other  parts  of  the  mo-
narchy.

Sismondi  adopts  a  veiy  different  theory,  clinging  a
little  too  much  to  the  democratic  visions  of  Mably.  "  If
we  knew  better,"  he  says,  *'  the  constitution  of  the  mo-
narchy, perhaps  we  might  find  that  the  mayor,  like  the
Justiciary  of  Aragon,  was  the  representative,  not  of  the
great,  but  of  the  freemen,  and  taken  generally  from  the
second  rank  in  society,  chained  to  repress  the  excesses
of  the  aristocracy  cus  well  as  of  the  crown."  (Hist,  dee
Fran9ais,  vol.  ii.  p.  4.)  Nothing  appears  to  warrant
this  vague  conjecture,  which  Guizot  wholly  rejects,  as
he  does  also  the  derivation  of  major-domilbs  frt>m  mon/-
dohmen^  a  verb  signifying  to  sentence  to  death,  which
Sismondi  brings  forward  to  sustain  his  fanciful  analc^
to  the  Aragonese  justiciary.

The  hypothesis,  indeed,  that  the  mayor  of  the  palace
was  chosen  out  of  the  common  freeholders,  and  not  the
highest  class,  is  not  only  contrary  to  everything  we  read
of  the  aristocratical  domination  in  the  Meroving^ian
kingdoms,  but  to  a  passage  in  Fredegarius,  to  which
probably  others  might  be  added.  Protadius,  he  informs
us,  a  mayor  of  Brunehaut's  choice,  endeavoured  to  op*
press  all  men  of  high  birth,  that  no  one  might  be  found
capable  of  holding  the  chai^  in  his  room  (c.  27). This,

Chap.  i.  AQUITAINR,  115

indeed,  was  in  the  sixth  centmy,  before  an^  sort  of
election  was  known.  .But  in  the  seventh  the  power  of
the  great,  and  not  of  the  people,  meets  ns  at  every  torn.
Mably  himself  wonld  have  owned  that  his  democracy
had  then  ceased  to  exercise  any  power.

The  Anstrasian  mayors  of  die  palace  were,  from  the
reign  of  Clotaire  II.,  men  of  great  power,  and  taJken  from
the  honse  of  Pepin  of  Landen.  They  carried  forward,
ultimately  for  their  own  aggrandizement,  the  aristo-
cratic system  which  had  overturned  Brunehaut.  Ebroin,
on  the  other  hand,  in  Neustria,  must  be  considered  as
keeping  up  the  struggle  of  the  royal  authority,  which
he  exercised  in  the  name  of  several  phantoms  of  kings,
against  the  encroachments  of  the  aristocracy,  though  he
could  not  resist  them  with  final  success.  Sismondi  (vol.
ii.  p.  64)  fancies  that  Ebroin  was  a  Reader  of  the  freemen
against  the  nobles.  But  he  finds  a  democratic  party
everywhere ;  and  Guizot  justly  questions  the  conjecture
(Collection  des  M^»moires,  vol.  ii.  p.  320).  Sismondi,  in
consequence  of  this  hypothesis,  favours  Ebroin;  for
whom  it  may  be  alleged  that  we  have  no  account  of
his  character  but  from  his  enemies,  chiefly  the  bio-
grapher of  St.  Leger.  M.  Lehuerou  sums  up  his  history
with  apparent  justice : — "  Ainsi  p^rit,  apr^  une  admi-
nistration de  vmgt  ans,  un  homme  remarquable  k  tons
egards,  mais  que  le  triomphe  de  ses  ennemis  a  fiEolli  des-
heritor  de  sa  gloire.  Ses  violences  sont  peu  douteuses,
mais  son  g^nie  ne  Test  pas  davantage,  et  rien  ne  prouve
mieux  la  terreur  qu'il  inspirait  aux  Austrasiens  que  les
injures  qu'ils  lui  ont  prodigu^es."  (Institutions  Caro-
lingiennes,  p.  281.)

Note  VI. Page  7.

Aribert,  or  rather  Caribert,  brother  of  Dagobert  I.,
was  declared  king  of  Aquitaine  in  628 ;  but  on  his  death,
in  631,  it  became  a  duchy  dependent  on  the  monarchy
under  his  two  sons,  with  its  capital  at  Toulouse.  This
dependence,  however,  appears  to  have  soon  ceased,  in
the  decay  of  the  Merovmgian  line ;  and  for  a  century
afterwards  Aquitaine  can  hardly  be  considered  as  part
of  either  the  Neustriaa  or  Austrasian  kingdom. '*  L*ax:

i2

1 16  AQUITAINE.  Njm  10

oienne  population  Homame  travaillait  sans  cesse  it
saicdr  son  independance.  Les  Francs  avaient  oonqnis,
mais  ne  possedsdent  yraiment  pas  ces  contrees.  Des  qne
leurs  grandes  incursions  cessaient,  les  villes  et  les  cam-
pagnes  se  soulevaient,  et  se  conf^d^raient  pour  seoouer
le  joug."  (Ghuzot,  Cours  d'Hist  Modeme,  ii.  229.)  This
important  fact,  though  acknowledged  in  passing  by  most
historians,  has  been  largely  illustrated  in  the  valuable
Histoire  de  la  Graule  Meridionale,  by  M.  Fauriel.

Aquitaine,  in  its  fullest  extent,  extended  from  the
Loire  beyond  the  Gkux)nne,  with  the  exception  of  Tou-
raine  and  the  Orleannois.  The  people  of  Aquitaine,  in
this  large  sense  of  the  word,  were  chiefly  Romans,  wilh
a  few  Ooths.  The  Franks,  as  a  conquering  nation,  had
scarcely  taken  up  their  abode  in  those  provinces.  But
undoubtedly,  the  Merovingian  kings  possessed  estates  in
the  south  of  France,  which  they  liberally  bestowed  as
benefices  upon  their  leudes,  so  that  the  chief  men  were
frequently  of  Frank  origm.  They  threw  off,  neverthe-
less, their  hereditary  attachments,  and  poined  with  the
mass  of  their  new  countrymen  in  striving  for  the  inde-
pendence of  Aquitaine.  After  the  battle  of  Testzy,
which  subverted  the  Neustrian  monarchy,  Aquitaine,
and  even  Burgundy,  ceased  for  a  time  to  be  French;
under  Charles  Martel  they  were  styled  the  Boman  coun-
tries. (Michelet,  ii.  9.)

Eudon,  by  some  called  Eudes,  grandson  of  Caribert,  a
prince  of  conspicuous,  qualities,  gained  ground  upon  the
Fmnks  during  the  whole  period  of  Pepin  Heristal's
power,  and  united  to  Aquitaine,  not  only  Provence,  but
a  new  conquest  from  the  independent  natives,  Gascony.
Eudon  obtained  in  721  a  &r  greater  victory  over  the
Saracens  than  that  of  Charles  Martel  at  Poitiers.  The
slaughter  was  immense,  and  confessed  by  the  Arabian
writers;  it  even  appears  that  a  funenJ  solemnity,  in
commemoration  of  so  great  a  calamity,  was  observed  in
Spain  for  four  or  five  centuries  afterwards.  (Fauriel,  iii.
79.)  But  in  its  consequences  it  was  far  less  important ;
for  the  Saracens,  some  years  afterwards,  returned  to
avenge  their  countrymen,  and  Eudon  had  no  resource
but  in  the  aid  of  Charles  Martel.  After  the  retreat  of
the  enemy  it  became  the  necessary  price  of  the  service
rendered by  the  Frank chieftain that  Aquitaine  ao-

Chap.  L  ADSTRASIA  AND  NEUSTRIA.  117

knowledged  his  soTereignty.  This,  bowoTor,  wbb  still
bat  nominal,  till  Pepin  determined  to  assert  it  more
seriously,  and  after  a  long  war  overcame  the  last  of  tlie
ducal  line  sprang  from  Clotaire  II.,  wbich  had  displayed,
for  ahnost  a  century  and  a  half,  an  energy  in  contrast
with  the  imbecility  of  the  elder  branch.  jBren  this,  as
M.  Fauriel  observes,  was  little  more  than  a  change  in  the
reigning  family ;  the  men  of  Aquitaine  never  lost  their
peculiar  nationsJity ;  they  remained  a  separate  people  in
Gaul,  a  people  distinguished  by  their  character,  and  by
the  part  which  they  were  called  to  play  in  the  political
revolutions  of  the  age. (Yol.  iii.  300.)

NoTEVn. Page?.

Pepin  Heristal  was  styled  Duke  of  Austrasia,  but
assumed  the  mayoralty  of  Neustria  afber  his  great  victory
at  Testry  in  687,  which  humbled  for  a  long  time  the
great  rival  branch  of  the  monarchy.  But  he  fixed  his
residence  at  Cologne,  and  his  femily  seldom  kept  their
court  at  Paris.  The  Franks  under  Pepin,  his  son  and
grandson,  ''seemed  for  a  second  time,'  says  Sismondi,
*'  to  have  conquered  Oaul ;  it  is  a  new  invasion  of
the  language,  ike  military  spirit,  and  the  manners  of
Germany,  though  only  recoinied  by  historians  as  the
victory  of  the  Austrasians  over  the  Neustrians  in  a  civil
war.  The  chiefs  of  the  Carlovingian  family  called  them-
selves, like  their  predecessors,  kmgs  of  the  Franks :  they
appear  as  legitimate  successors  of  Cllovis  and  his  family ;
yet  all  is  changed  in  their  spirit  and  their  manners."
(Vol.  ii.  p.  170.)

This  revival  of  a  truly  German  spirit  in  the  French
monarchy  had  not  been  sufficiently  indicated  by  the
historians  of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  began  with  the
fall  of  Brunehaut,  which  annihilated  the  scheme,  not
peculiar  to  herself,  but  carried  on  by  her  with  remark-
able steadiness,  of  establishing  a  despotism  analogous  to
that  of  the  empire.  The  Roman  policy  expired  with  her ;
Clotaire  II.  and  Dagobert  I.  were  merely  kings  of  barba-
rians, exercising  what  authority  they  might,  but  on  no
settled  scheme  of  absolute  power.  Their  successors  were
unworthy  to  be  mentioned ;  though  in  Neustria,  through

118  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  AOTESIV

their  mayoiB  of  the  palace,  the  royal  anthorify  may  have
been  apparently  better  maintamed  than  in  the  eastern
portion  of  the  ^gdom.  The  kingdoms  of  Austrasia  and
Neustria  rested  on  different  bases.  In  the  former  the
Franks  were  more  niunerons,  less  scattered,  and,  as  &r  as
we  can  perceive,  had  a  more  considerable  nobili^.  They
had  received  a  less  tincture  of  Boman  policy.  They  were
nearer  to  the  mother  conntry,  which  had  been,  as  the  earth
to  Antsdns,  the  source  of  perpetually  recruited  vigour.
Burgundy,  a  member  latterly  of  the  Neustrian  monarchy,
had  also  a  powerful  aristocracy,  but  not  in  so  great  a
degree,  probably,  of  Frank,  or  even  barbarian  descent.
The  battle  of  Testry  was  the  second  epoch,  as  the  fall
of  Brunehaut  had  been  the  first,  in  the  restoration  of  a
barbaric  supremacy  to  the  kingdom  of  Clovis ;  and  ihe
benefices  granted  by  Charles  Martel  were  the  thijd.  It
required  the  interference  of  the  Holy  See,  in  confirming
the  throne  of  the  younger  Pepin,  and  still  more  the
splendid  qualities  of  Charlemagne,  to  keep  up,  even  for  a
tune,  the  royal  authority  and  &e  dominion  of  law.  It  is
highly  important  to  keep  in  our  minds  this  distinction
between  Austrosia  and  Neustria,  subsisting  for  some  ages,
and,  in  &ct,  only  replaced,  speaking  without  exact  geo-
graphical precision,  by  that  of  Oermany  and  France.

Note  VIII. Page  8.

The  Merovingian  period  is  so  briefly  touched  in  the
text,  as  not,  I  fear,  to  be  very  distinctly  apprehended  by
every  reader.  It  may  assist  the  memory  to  sketch  rather
a  better  outline,  distributing  the  period  into  the  following
divisions : —

I.  The  reign  of  Clovis. — ^The  Frank  monarchy  is  esta-
blished in  Oaul ;  the  Eomans  and  Visigoths  are  subdued ;
Christianity,  in  its  Catholic  form,  is  as  entirely  recognised
as  under  the  empire ;  the  Franks  and  Bomans,  without
greatly  intermingling,  preserve  in  the  main  their  separate
institutions.

II.  The  reigns  of  his  four  sons,  till  the  death  of
Clotaire  I.,  the  survivor,  in  661. — A  period  of  great
aggrandizement  to  the  monarchy.  Burgundy  and  Pro-
vence in  Gaul  itself,  Thuringia,  Suabia,  and  Bavaria

Chap  t  MEROVINQUM  PERIOD.  119

on  the  other  side  of  the  Bhine,  are  annexed  to  their
dominions ;  while  every  crime  diagraceB  the  royal  line,
and  in  none  more  than  in  Clotaire  I.

III.  A  second  partition  among  his  four  sons  ensues  :
the  four  kingdoms  of  Paris,  Soisaons,  Orleans,  and  Aus-
trasia  revive ;  but  a  new  partition  of  these  is  required  by
the  recent  conquests,  and  Gontran  of  Orleans,  without
resigning  that  kingdom,  removes  his  residence  to  Bur-
gnndy.  The  four  kii^oms  are  reduced  to  three  by  the
death  of  Caribert  of  Paris ;  one,  affcerwards  very  celebrated
by  the  name  Neustria,*  between  the  Scheldt  and  the
Loire,  is  formed  under  Chilperic,  comprehending  those
of  Paris  and  Soissons.  Caribert  of  Paris  had  taken
Aquitaine,  which  at  his  death  was  divided  among  the
three  survivors;  Austrasia  was  the  portion  of  Sigebert.
This  generation  was  fruitful  of  still  more  crimes  than
the  last,  redeemed  by  no  golden  glory  of  conquest.
Fred^onde,  the  wife  of  Chilperic,  dif^ises  a  baleful
light  over  this  period.  But  while  she  tyrannises  with
little  control  in  the  west  of  France,  her  rival  and  sister
in  crime,  Bnmehaut,  wife  of  Sigebert  and  mother  of
Thierry  II.  his  successor,  has  to  encounter  a  powerful
opposition  from  the  Austrasian  aristocracy ;  and  in  this
part  of  the  monarchy  a  new  feature  develops  itself;  the
great  proprietors,  or  nobility,  act  systematically  with  a
view  to  restrain  the  royal  power.  Brunehaut,  after  many
vicissitudes,  and  after  having  seen  her  two  sons  on  the
thrones  of  Austrasia  and  Burgundy,  falls  into  the  hands  of
Clotaire  II.,  king  of  the  other  division,  and  is  sentenced
to  a  cruel  death.  Clotaire  unites  the  three  Frank  king-
doms.

IV.  Beigns  of  Clotaire  11.  and  his  son  Dagobert  I. —
The  royal  power,  though  shaken  by  the  Austrasian  aristo-
cracy, is  still  effective.  Dagobert,  a  prince  who  seems  to
have  rather  excelled  most  of  his  family,  and  to  whose
munificence  several  extant  monuments  of  architecture
and  the  arts  are  referred,  endeavours  to  stem  the  current.
He  was  the  last  of  the  Merovingians  who  appears  to  havo

*  KwstaiA,  or  Wctteni  France,  b  flnt Tooxs,  m  I  find  by  th«  index;  and  M.
mcBliaiied  in  «  dipUnna  of  Cblldebert» Lehnenm  weniB  to  tUnk  that  it  waa  not

with  th«  date  of  658. But  the  genuine- much  used  till  after  the  death  of  Bran»
seoi  of  this  haa  been  denied :  the  word hanU  in  613.
oecon  in  the  blatory  of  Gregny  of

120  MEBOVINQIAN  PERIOD.  Notes  to

possessed  any  distinctive  cluiracter ;  the  Insensati  follow.'
After  the  reigo  of  Dagobert  most  of  the  provinces  beyond
the  Loire  fall  off,  as  it  may  be  said,  from  the  monarchy,
and  hardly  belong  to  it  for  a  century.

Y.  The  fifth  period  begins  with  the  accession  ol
Clovis  II.,  son  of  Dagobert,  in  638,  and  terminates  with
Pepin  Heristal's  victory  over  the  Nenstrians  at  Testiy,
in  687.  It  is  distmguished  by  the  apparent  equality  of
the  two  remaining  kingdoms.  Burgundy  having  now  fidlen
into  that  of  Neustria,  and  by  the  degradation  of  the  royal
line,  in  each  alike,  into  puppets  of  the  mayors  of  the
palace.  It  is,  in  Austrasia,  the  triumph  of  the  aristocracy,
among  whom  the  bishops  are  still  more  prominent  than
before.  Ebroin  holds  ^e  mayoralty  of  ^leustria  with  an
unsteady  command ;  but  in  Austrasia  the  progenitors  of
Pepin  Heristal  grow  up  for  two  generations  in  wealth
and  power,  till  he  becomes  the  acknowledged  chief  of.
that  part  of  the  kingdom,  bearing  the  title  of  duke
instead  of  mayor,  and  by  the  battle  of  Testiy  puts  an
end  to  the  independence  of  Neustria.

YI.  From  this  time  the  family  of  Pepin  is  virtually
sovereign  in  France,  though  at  every  vacancy  kings  of  the
royal  house  are  placed  by  them  on  the  throne.  Charles
Martel,  indeed,  son  of  Pepin,  is  not  acknowledged,  even
in  Austrasia,  for  a  short  tmie  after  his  father's  death,  and
Neustria  attempts  to  regain  her  independence ;  but  he  is
soon  called  to  power,  ddeats,  like  his  &ther,  the  western
Franks,  and  becomes,  in  almost  as  great  a  degree  as  his
grandson,  the  founder  of  a  new  monarchy.  So  completely
is  he  recognised  as  sovereign,  though  not  with  the  name
of  king,  that  he  divides  France,  as  an  inheritance,  among
his  three  sons.  But  soon  one  only,  Pepin  the  Short,
by  fortune  or  desert,  becomes  possessor  of  this  goodly
bequest.  In  752  the  new  dynasty  acquires  a  legal
name  by  the  coronation  of  Pepin.

Note  IX. Page  11.

The  true  cause,  M.  Michelet  observes  (Hist,  de  France,
ii.  39),  of  the  Saxon  wars,  which  had  begun  under
Charles  Martel,  and  were  in  some  degree  d^ensive  on
the  part  of  the  Franks,  was  the  ancient  antipatb^  ot

rw

Cbap.  I.  SUBJECTION  OF  THE  ISAXOKS.  121

race,  enhanced  by  the  growing  tendency  to  civilized
habits  amoiig  the  latter.  This,  indeed,  seems  sufficient  to
account  for  the  conflict,  without  any  national  antipathy.
It  was  that  which  makes  the  Red  Indian  perceive  an
enemy  in  the  Anglo-American,  and  the  Australian  savage
in  the  Tlnglishmau.  The  Saxons,  in  their  deep  forests
and  scantily  cultivated  plains,  could  not  bear  fixed
botmdaries  of  land.  Their  gau  was  indefinite ;  the  mansus
was  certain ;  it  annihilated  the  barbarian's  only  method
of  combining  liberty  with  possession  of  land, — ^the  right
of  shifting  his  occupancy.'  It  is  not  probable,  firom
subsequent  events,  that  the  Saxons  held  very  tenaciously
by  their  religion;  but  when  Christianity  first  offered
itself^  it  came  in  the  train  of  a  conqueror.  Nor  oould
Christianity,  according  at  least  to  the  ecclesiastical
B3rstem,  be  made  compatible  with  such  a  state  of  society
as  the  German  in  that  age.  Hence  the  Saxons  en-
deavoured to  bum  the  first  churches,  thus  drawing
retaliation  on  their  own  idols.

The  first  apostles  of  Germany  were  Engliish ;  and  of
these  the  most  remarkable  was  St.  Boniface.  But  this
had  been  in  the  time  of  Charles  Martel  and  ^^ul  The
labours  of  these  missionaries  were  chiefly  in  Thuringia,
Franconia,  and  Bavaria,  and  were  rewarded  with  great
success.  But  we  may  here  consider  them  only  in  their
results  on  the  Frank  monarchy.  Those  parts  of  Germany
had  long  been  subject  to  Austrasia,  but,  except  so  fir
as  they  furnished  troops,  scarcely  formed  an  mtegrant
portion  of  that  kingdom.  The  subjection  of  a  heathen
tribe  is  totally  diflerent  from  that  of  a  Christian  province.
With  the  Church  came  churches,  and  for  churcnes  there
must  be  towns,  and  for  towns  a  magistracy,  and  for
magistracy  law  and  the  means  of  enforcing  it.  How
different  was  the  condition  of  Bavaria  or  Hesse  in  the
ninth  century  from  that  of  the  same  countries  in  the
seventh!  Not  outlying  appendages  to  the  Austrasian
monarchy,  hardly  counted  among  its  subjects,  but  capa-
ble of  standing  by  themselves,  as  co-ordinate  members
of  the  empire,  an  equipoise  to  France  herself,  full  of
populous  towns,  wealthy  nobles and  prelates,  better

f  Mldbetot  refen  to  Grimm,  who  Is toms  of  the  age  of  Tadtos  loogH*  thae
exoeUaot  aottwritj. The Sazona  are Qenaan  tribea  on  the  Rhine  and  liaix..
UkB^  tc  have  maintatnwl  the  old  coa-

y

122  CkAKLEMAQKE.  Kons  10

organized  and  more  flonrifiliing  states  than  their  neigh*
bonis  on  the  left  side  of  the  Bhine.  Charlemagne  founded
eight  bishoprios  in  Saxony,  and  distributed  the  countiy
into  dioceses.

Note  X, Page  12.

The  project  of  substituting  a  Frank  for  a  Byzantine

soToreign  was  by  no  means  new  in  800. Gregory  U.,

by  a  letter  to  Charles  Martel  in  741,  had  offered  to  re-

J  nounce  his  allegiance  to  the  empire,  placing  Borne  under

the  protection  of  the  French  chief,  with  the  title  of
consul  or  senator.  The  immediate  government  he  doubt-
less meant  to  keep  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  See.  He
y^  supplicated, at  the  same  time, for  assistance  against

the  Lombards,  which  was  the  principal  motive  for  this
offer.  Charles  received  the  proposal  with  pleasure,  but
his  death  ensued  before  he  had  time  to  take  any  steps
towards  fulfilling  so  glorious  a  destiny.  When  Charle-
magne acquired  tiie  raok  of  Patrician  at  Eome  in  789,  we
may  consider  this  as  a  part  performance  of  Gregory  II.'s
engagement,  and  the  supreme  authoriiy  was  virtually  in
the  hands  of  the  king  of  the  Franks ;  but  the  renuncia-
tion of  allegiance  towards  the  Greek  empire  had  never
positively  taken  place,  and  there  are  said  to  have  been
some  tokens  of  recognition  of  its  nominal  sovereignty
almost  to  the  end  of  the  century.

It  is  contended  by  Sir  F.  Palgrave  that  Charlemagne
was  chosen  by  the  Eomans  as  lawful  successor  of  Con-
stantino v.,  whom  his  mother  Irene  had  dethroned  in
795,  the  usage  of  the  empire  having  never  admitted  a
female  sovereign.  And  for  this  he  quotes  two  ancient
chronicles,  one  of  which,  however,  appears  to  have  been
copied  from  the  other.  It  is  indeed  true,  which  he  omits
to  mention,  that  Leo  lU.  had  a  singular  scheme  of  a
marriage  between  Charles  and  Irene,  which  woidd  for  a
time  have  united  the  empire.  The  proposal  was  actually
made,  but  prudently  rejected  by  the  Greek  lady.

It  remains  nevertheless  to  be  shown  by  what  right
Leo  in.,  cwm  omni  Christiam  popub,  that  is,  the  priests
and  populace  of  degenerate  Eome,  could  dispose  of  the
entire  empire,  or  a&ct  to  place  a  stranger  on  the  throne

Chap.  I.  CHARLEMAGNB.  128

of  Oonstantiiiople ;  for  if  Charles  were  the  succeflsor  of
Gonstaiitiiie  Y.,  we  must  draw  this  oondusion.  Borne,
we  'shoiild  keep  in  mind,  was  not  a  jot  more  invested
with  anthoritj  than  any  other  city ;  the  Greek  capita^
had  long  taken  her  place ;  and  in  eveiy  revolution  of  new
Eome,  the  decrepit  mother  had  without  hesitation  obeyed.
Nor  does  it  seom  to  me  exceedingly  material,  if  the  case
be  such,  that  Charlemagne  was  not  styled  emperor  of  the
West,  or  successor  of  Augustulus.  It  is  evident  that  his
empire,  relatively  to  that  of  the  Greeks,  was  western ;
and  we  do  not  find  that  either  he  or  his  £funily  ever
claimed  an  exclusive  right  to  the  imperial  title.  The
pretension  would  have  been  diametrically  opposed  both
to  prescriptive  right  and  actual  possession.  He  wrote
to  the  emperor  Nicephorus,  successor  of  Irene,  as  frater^
nxbas  vestra;  but  it  is  believed  that  the  Greeks  never
recognised  the  title  of  a  western  barbarian.  In  a  later
age,  indeed,  some  presumed  to  reckon  the  emperor  of
Constantinople  among  kings.  A  writer  of  the  fourteenth
century  says,  in  French, — "  Or  .devez  savoir  qu'il  ne
doit  estre  sur  terre  qu'un  seul  empereur,  combien  que
celui  de  Constantinople  estime  estre  seul  empereur ;  mais
non  est,  il  n'est  fors  seulement  qu'un  roy."  (Ducange,
voc.  Imperator,  which  is  worth  consultii]^.)  The  kings
of  France  and  Castile,  as  well  as  our  own  Anglo-Saxon
monarchs  in  the  tenth  century,  and  even  those  of  BiQ-
garia,  sometimes  assumed  the  imperial  title.  But  the
Anglo-Saxons  preferred  that  of  Bamleus,  which  was  also
a  Byzantine  appellation.

The  probable  design  of  Charlemagne,  in  accepting  the
title  01  emperor,  was  not  only  to  extend  his  power  as
£Btr  as  possible  in  Italy,  but  to  invest  it  with  a  sort  of
saoredness  and  prescriptive  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  his
barbarian  subjects.  These  had  been  accustomed  to  hear
of  emperors  as  something  superior  to  kings ;  they  were
themselves  fond  of  pompous  titles,  and  the  chancery  of
the  new  Augustus  soon  borrowed  the  splendid  ceremonial
of  the  Byzantine  court.  His  councillors  approached
him  on  their  knees,  and  kissed  his  feet.  Yet  it  does
not  appear  from  history  that  his  own  royal  power,  cer-
tainly very  considerable  before,  was  much  enhanced
after  it  became  imperial.  He  still  took  the  advice,  and
legislated  with  the  consent,  of  his  kudes  and  bishops ;  in

V

\

124  HBREDITABT  SUCCESSION  NOTBS  TO

fietct,  Ke  oontmaed  to  be  a  German,  not  a  Boman,  sove-
reign. In  t&e  reigns  of  his  family  this  prevalenoe  of
the  Tentonic  element  in  the  Carlovingiaii  polil^  became
more  and  more  evident ;  the  bishops  themselves,  barbarian
in  origin  and  in  manners,  cannot  be  reckoned  in  the
opposite  scale.

This  was  a  second  failure  of  the  attempt,  or  at  least
the  scheme,  of  governing  barbarians  upon  a  Boman
theory.  The  first  had  been  tried  by  the  sons  of  Clovis,
and  the  high-spirited  Visigoth  Brunehaut.  But  the
associations  of  Boman  authority  with  the  imperial  name
were  too  striking  to  be  lost  for  ever ;  they  revived  again
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  with  the  civil
law,  and  gained  strength  with  the  Ghibelin  £actic.n  in
Italy.  Even  in  France  and  England,  as  many  think,
they  were  by  no  means  ineffectual;  though  it  was  ne-
cessary to  substitute  the  abstract  principle  of  royalty  for
the  Lex  B^ia  of  the  Boman  empire.

Note  XI. Page  14.

A  question  of  the  utmost  importance  had  been  passed
over  in  the  elevation  of  Charlemagne  to  the  imperial
title.  It  was  that  of  hereditary  succession.  No  allusion,
as  flEir  as  I  have  found,  was  made  to  this  in  the  irregular
act  by  which  the  pope,  with  what  he  called  the  Boman
people,  transferred  their  allegiance  from  Constantinople
to  Aix-la-Chapelle.  It  was  indeed  certain  that  the
empire  had  not  only  passed  for  hereditarv  from  the  time
of  Augustus,  but  ever  since  that  of  Diocletian  had  been
partible  among  the  imperial  fEunily  at  the  will  of  the
possessor.  Yet  the  whole  proceeding  was  so  novel,  and
the  pretensions  of  the  Holy  See  implied  in  it  so  indefinite,
that  some  might  doubt  whether  Charles  had  acquired,
along  with  the  rank  of  imperator,  its  ancient  prerogatives.
There  was  also  a  momentous  consideration,  how  faa  bis
Frank  subjects,  accustomed  latterly  to  be  consulted  on
royal  succession,  with  their  rights  of  election,  within
the  limits  of  the  family,  positively  recognised  at  the
accession  of  Pepin,  and  liable  to  becomb  jealous  of  Boman
theories  of  government,  would  acquiesce  in  a  simple
devolution  of  the  title  on  the  eldest  bom  as  his  legal

ni  Chap.  I.  TO  THE  BMPIBIC.  121^

.-'  birthright. In  the  first  prospectiTe  arrangement,  aooord

ingly,  which  Charles  made  for  the  succession,  that  at
^  ThionviUe,  in  806,  a  partition  among  his  three  sons  was

z:  designed,  with  th^  largest  share  reserved  for  the  eldest.

Bnt  though  Italy,  by  which  he  meant,  as  he  tells  us,
Lombardy,  was  given  to  one  of  the  younger,  care  is
taken  by  a  description  of  the  boundaries  to  exclude
Bome  itself,  as  well  as  the  whole  exarchate  of  Havenna,
become,  by  Pepin's  donation,  the  patrimony  of  St.  Peter ;
nor  is  there  the  least  allusion  to  the  title  of  emperor.
Are  we  to  believe  that  he  relinquished  the  eternal  city
to  its  bishop,  though  styling  himself,  in  this  very  instru-
ment, Bomani  rector  imperii,  and  having  literally  gained
not  another  inch  of  territory  by  that  dignity?  It  is
surely  more  probable  that  he  reserved  the  sovereignty
over  Bome,  to  be  annexed  to  the  rank  of  emperor  when-
ever he  should  obtain  that  for  his  eldest  son.  And  on
the  death  of  this  son,  and  of  his  next  brother,  some  years
afterwards,  the  whole  succession  devolving  on  Louis  the
Debonair,  Charlemagne  presented  this  prince  to  the  great
Plaoitum  of  the  nobles  and  bishops  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  in
813,  requesting  them  to  name  him  king  and  emperor.
No  reference  was  made  to  the  pope  for  his  approbation ;
and  thus  the  German  principle  of  sovereignty  gained  a
decisive  victory  over  the  Boman.  If  some  claim  of  the
pope  to  intermeddle  with  the  empire  was  intimated  at
the  coronation  of  Louis  at  Bheims  by  Stephen  11.  in  816,
which  does  not  seem  certain,  it  could  only  have  been
through  the  pope's  knowledge  of  the  personal  submissive-
ness  to  ecclesiastical  power  which  was  the  misfortune
of  that  prince.  He  had  certainly  bome  the  imperial  title
from  his  flEkther's  death.

In  the  division  projected  by  Louis  in  817,  to  take
place  on  his  death,  and  approved  by  an  assembly  at  Aix,
a  considerable  supremacy  was  reserved  for  the  future
emperor;  he  was  constituted,  in  effect,  a  sort  of  suze-
rain, without  whose  consent  the  younger  brothers  coidd
do  nothing  important.  Thus  the  integrity  of  the  empire
was  maintained,  which  had  been  lost  in  the  scheme  of
Charlemagne  in  806.  But  M.  Fauriel  (vol.  iv.  p.  83)
reasonably  suspects  an  ecclesiastical  influence  in  su^ost-
ing  this  measure  of  817,  which  was  an  overt  act  of  the
fioman,  or  imperial,  against  the  barbarian  party. If  the

126  TRANSITION  PERIOD  OF  Notes  i%

latter  consented  to  thia  in  817,  it  was  probably  either
because  they  did  not  understand  it,  or  because  they
trusted  to  setting  it  aside.  And,  as  is  well  known,  the
oonree  of  oTents  soon  did  this  for  them.  '*  It  is  indis-
putable," says  Banke,  '*  that  the  order  of  succession  to
the  throne,  which  Louis  the  Pious,  in  utter  disr^ard  of
the  warnings  of  his  fEuthfnl  adherents,  and  in  opposition
to  all  German  modes  of  thinking,  established  in  the  year
817,  was  principally  brought  about  by  the  influence  of
the  clergy."  (Hist,  of  Beformation,  "Mib.  Austin's  trans-
lation, vol.  i.  p.  9.)  He  attributes  the  concurrence  of
that  order,  in  the  subsequent  revolt  against  Louis,  to  the
endeavours  he  had  made  to  deviate  from  the  provisions
of  819  in  £Eivour  of  his  youngest  son,  Charles  the
Bald.

Note  XH. Page  18.

The  second  period  of  Carlovingian  history,  or  that
which  elapsed  firom  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Bald  to  the
accession  of  Hugh  Capet,  must  be  reckoned  the  transi-
tional state,  through  scenes  of  barbarous  anarchy,  £nom
the  artificial  scheme  devised  by  Charlemagne,  in  which
the  Boman  and  Gemuui  elements  of  civil  policy  were
rather  in  conflict  than  in  union  to  a  new  state  of  society
— the  feudal,  which,  ihough  pregnant  itself  with  great
evil,  was  the  means  both  of  preserving  the  frame  of
European  policy  from  disintegration,  and  of  elaborating
the  mond  and  constitutional  principles  upon  which  it
afterwards  rested.

This  period  exhibits,  upon  the  whole,  a  &ilure  of  the
grand  endeavour  made  by  Charlemagne  for  the  regenera-
tion of  his  empire.  This  proceeded  very  much  from  the
common  chances  of  hereditary  succession,  especially
when  not  counterbalanced  by  established  powers  inde-
pendent of  it.  Three  of  his  name,  Charles  the  Bald,  the
Fat,  and  the  Simple,  had  time  to  pull  down  what  the
great  legislator  and  conqueror  had  erected.  Encouraged
by  their  pusillanimily  and  weakness,  the  nobility  strove
to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  seventh  century.  They  en-
tered into  a  coiJition  with  the  bishops,  though  Charles
the  Bald  had  often  sheltered  himself  behind  the  crosier ;
and  they  compelled  his  son,  Louis  the  Stanmier«r,  not

Chap.  I.  THE  CARLOVINGIAKS.  127

only  to  confirm  their  own  privileges  and  those  of  the
Church,  but  to  style  himself  **  King,  by  the  grace  of
Grod  and  election  of  the  people  ;*'  which,  indeed,  accord-
ing to  the  established  constitution,  was  no  more  than
truth,  since  the  absolute  right  to  succession  was  only  in
the  family.  The  inability  of  the  crown  to  protect  its
subjects  from  their  invaders  rendered  this  assumption
of  aristocratic  independence  absolutely  necessary.  In
this  ago  of  agony,  Sismondi  well  sa}'s,  the  nation  began
to  revive ;  new  social  bodies  sprung  from  the  carcase  of
the  great  empire.  France,  so  defenceless  under  the
Bald  and  the  Fat  Charleses,  bristled  with  castles  before
930.  She  renewed  the  fjEtble  of  Deucalion ;  she  sowed
stones,  and  aimed  men  rose  out  of  them.  The  lords
surrounded  themselves  with  vassals;  and  had  not  the
Norman  incursioHS  ceased  before,  they  would  have  met
with  a  much  more  determined  resistance  than  in  the
preceding  century. (Hist,  des  Fran^ais,  iii.  218,  378;

iv.  9.)

Notwithstanding  the  weakness  of  the  throne,  the  pro-
mise of  the  Franis  to  Pepin,  that  they  would  never
elect  a  king  out  of  any  other  {jeunily,  though  broken  on
two  or  three  occasions  in  the  tenUi  century,  seems  to
have  retained  its  hold  upon  the  nation,  so  that  an  here-
ditary right  in  his  house  was  felt  as  a  constitutional
sentiment,  until  experience  and  necessity  overcame  it.
The  first  interruption  to  this  course  was  at  the  election
of  Eudes,  on  the  death  of  Charles  the  Fat,  in  888.
Charles  the  Simple,  son  of  Carloman,  a  prince  whose
short  and  obscure  reign  over  France  had  ended  in  884,
being  himself  the  only  surviving  branch,  in  a  legitimate
line,  of  the  imperial  house  (for  the  frequent  deaths  of
those  princes  without  male  issue  is  a  remarkable  and
important  cireumstance),  was  an  infant  of  three  years
old.  The  kingdom  was  devastated  by  the  Normans,
whom  it  was  just  b^iuiingto  resist  with  somewhat
more  eneigy  than  for  Uie  last  half-century ;  and  Eudes,
a  man  of  considerable  vigour,  possessed  several  counties
in  the  best  parts  of  France.  The  nation  had  no  alterna-
tive but  to  choose  him  for  their  king.  Yet,  when  Charles
attained  the  age  of  fifteen,  a  numereus  party  supported
bis  claim  to  the  throne,  which  he  would  probably  have
8ub£d;antiated,  if  tha  disparity  of  abilities  between  the

128  TBANSITION  PKKIOD  OF  Notes  m

competitors  bad  been  less  nianifest.  Endes,  at  his
death,  is  said  to  have  recommended  Chaxles  to  his  own
party ;  and  it  is  certain  that  he  succeeded  without  opposi-
tion. His  own  weak  character,  however,  exposiug  him
to  £resh  rebellion,  Robert,  brother  of  Endes,  and  his
son-in-law  fiodolpb,  became  kings  of  France,  that  is,
we  find  their  names  in  the  royal  list,  and  a  part  of  the
kingdom  acknowledged  their  sovereignty.  But  the
south  stood  off  altogether,  and  Charles  preserved  the
allegiance  of  the  north-eastern  provinces.  Hobert,  in
£Bkct,  who  was  killed  one  year  after  his  partisans  had
proclauned  him,  seems  to  have  no  great  pretensions,
de  f(Kto  any  more  than  de  jurej  to  be  reckoned  at  all ;
nor  does  any  historian  give  the  appellation  of  Hobert  II.
to  the  son  of  Hugh  Capet.  The  &ther  of  Hugh  Capet,
Hugh  the  Great,  son  of  Bobeit  and  nephew  of  Eudes,
being  count  of  Paris  and  Orleans,  who  had  bestowed
the  crown  on  his  brother-in-law  Eodolph  of  Burgundy,
instead  of  wearing  it  himself,  paid  such  deference  to  the
prejudices  of  at  least  the  majority  of  the  nation  in
favour  of  the  house  of  Charlemagne,  that  he  procured
the  election  of  Louis  lY.,  son  of  Charles  the  Simple,  a
boy  of  thirteen  years,  and  then  an  exile  in  England ;
from  wldch  circumstance  he  has  borne  the  name  of
Outremer.  And  though  he  did  not  reign  without  some
opposition  from  his  powerful  vassal,  he  died  in  posses-
sion of  the  crown,  and  transmitted  it  to  be  worn  by  his
son  Lothaire,  and  his  grandson  Louis  Y.  It  was  on
the  death  of  this  last  young  man  that  Hugh  Capet
thought  it  time  to  set  aside  the  rights  of  Charles,  the
late  king's  uncle,  and  call  himseK  king,  with  no  more
national  consent  than  the  prelates  and  barons  who  de-
pended on  him  might  afford;  principally,  it  seems,
through  the  adherence  of  Adalberon,  archbishop  of
Bheims,  a  city  in  wliich  the  kings  were  already  wont
to  receive  the  crown.  Such  is  the  national  importance
which  a  merely  local  privilege  may  sometimes  bestow.
Even  the  voice  of  the  capital,  r^ular  or  tumidtuous,
which  in  so  many  revolutions  has  determined  the  obedi-  «
enoe  of  a  nation,  may  be  considered  as  little  more  than
a  local  superiority.

A  writer  distinguished  among  living  historians,  M«
Thierry,  has  fuimd  a  key  to  all  the  revolutions  of  two

Chap.  I.  THE  CARLOYINGIAIIS.  129

oentnries  in  tbe  antipatlij  of  the  BoxnaoA,  that  is,  the
ancient  inhabitants,  to  the  Franks  or  Germans.  The
latter  were  represented  by  the  house  of  Charlemagne ;
the  former  by  that  of  Bobert  the  Brave,  through  its
valiant  descendants,  Eudes,  Bobert,  and  Hiigh  the
Great.  And  this  theory  of  races,  to  which  M.  Thieny
is  always  partial,  and  recurs  on  many  occasions,  has
seemed  to  the  judicious  and  impartial  Gnizot  the  most
satisfiEhctory  of  all  that  have  been  devised  to  elucidate
the  Garlovingian  period,  though  he  does  not  embrace  it
to  its  full  extent.  (Hist,  de  la  Civilisation  en  France,
Le9on  24.)  Sismondi  (vol.  iii.  p.  58)  had  said  in  1821,
what  he  had  probably  written  as  early  as  M.  Thieny :
**  La  guerre  entre  Charles  et  ses  deux  freres  fat  celle
des  peuples  romains,  des  Gktules  qui  rejetaient  le  joug
germanique;  la  querelle  insignifiante  des  rois  fiit  sou-
tenue  avec  ardeur,  parce  qu'elle  s'unissait  k  la  querelle
des  peuples ;  et  tous  ces  prejuges  hostiles  qui  s'attachent
toujours  aux  differences  des  langues  et  des  moeurs,  don-
n^rent  de  la  Constance  et  de  Tachamement  aux  com-
battans/'  This  relates,  indeed,  to  an  earlier  period,  but
still  to  the  same  conflict  of  races  which  M*  Thieny  has
taken  as  the  basis  of  the  resistance  made  by  the  Neus-
trian  provinces  to  the  later  Carlovingians.  Tbieny  finds
a  similar  contest  in  the  wars  of  Louis  the  Debonair.  In
this  he  is  compelled  to  suppose  that  the  Neustrian
Franks  fell  in  with  the  Gauls,  among  whom  they  lived.
But  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  distinction  of
Frank  descent,  and  consequently  of  national  supremacy,
was  obliterated  in  the  first  part  of  the  ninth  century.
The  name  of  Franci  was  always  applied  to  the  whole
people;  the  kings  are  always  reges  Francorum;  so  that
we  might  in  some  respects  rather  say  that  the  Gauls  or
Bomans  had  been  merged  in  the  dominant  races  than
the  reverse.  Wealth,  also,  and  especially  that  springing
from  hereditary  benefices,  was  chiefly  in  the  hands  of
the  barbarians ;  they  alone,  as  is  generally  believed,  so
long  as  the  distinction  of  personal  law  subsisted,  were
summoned  to  county  or  national  assemblies ;  they  per-
haps retained,  in  the  reign  of  Louis  the  Debonair,
though  we  cannot  speak  decisively  as  to  this,  their
original  language.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  &mou8
^Nfcth  in  the  Bomance  language,  pronounced  by  Louis  of

VOL.  U  K

130  TRANSITION  PERIOD  OF  Notls  to

Germany  at  the  treaty  of  Strasbturg,  in  842,  and  ad-
dressed to  the  army  of  his  brother  Charles  the  Bald^
bears  more  traces  of  the  southern,  or  Provenyal,  than  oC
the  nortliem  dialect ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  inha*
bitants  of  the  southern  provinces,  whatever  might  have
been  the  origin  of  their  ancestors,  spoke  no  other.  This
would  not  be  conclusive  as  to  the  Neustrian  Franks.
But  this  is  a  disputable  question.

A  remarkable  presumption  of  the  superiority  still
retained  by  the  Franks  as  a  nation,  even  in  the  south  of
France,  may  be  drawn  from  the  Placitum,  at  Carcassonne,
in  918.  (Vaissette,  Hist,  de  Languedoc,  vol.  ii.  Append,
p.  56 ;  Meyer,  Institutions  Judiciaires,  voL  i.  p.  419.)
In  this  we  find  named  six  Boman,  four  Gk)thic,  and
eight  Salian  judges.  It  is  certain  that  these  judges
could  not  have  been  taken  relatively  to  the  population
of  the  three  races  in  that  part  of  France.  Does  it  not
seem  most  probable  that  the  Franks  were  still  reck-
oned the  predominant  people?  Probably,  however,
the  personal  distinction,  founded  on  difference  of  laws,
expired  earlier  in  Neustria;  not  that  tlie  Franks  fell
into  the  Boman  jurisprudence,  but  that  the  original
natives  adopted  the  feudal  customs.

This  specious  theory  of  hostile  races,  in  order  to  ao-
count  for  the  downjEeLU  of  the  Carloviugian,  or  Anstra-
sian,  dynasty,  has  not  been  unanimously  received,
especially  in  the  extent  to  which  Thieny  has  uiged  it,
M.  Gaudet,  the  French  editor  of  Bicher  (a  contemporaiy
historian,  whose  narrative  of  the  whole  period,  from  the
accession  of  Eudes  to  the  death  of  Hugh  Capet,  is  pub-
lished by  Pertz  in  the  Monumenta  Germanifle  Historioa,
vol.  iii.,  and  contains  a  great  quantity  of  new  and  in-
teresting &ots,  especially  frx>m  a.d.  966  to  987),  appeals
to  this  writer  in  contradiction  of  the  hypothesis  of  M.
Thierry.  The  appeal,  however,  is  not  solely  upon  his
authority,  since  the  leading  circumstances  were  suffici-
ently known ;  and,  to  say  the  truth,  I  think  that  more
has  been  made  of  Bicher^s  testimony  in  this  particular
view  than  it  will  bear.  Bicher  belonged  to  a  monastery
at  Bheims,  and  his  fSftther  had  been  a  man  of  some  rank
in  the  confidence  of  Louis  lY.  and  Lothaare.  He  had,
therefore,  been  nursed  in  respect  for  the  house  of  Char-
lemague,  though,  with  deference  to  his  editor,  I  do  not

Ckap.  I.  THK  CARLOVINGIAKiK  131

perceive  that  lie  displays  any  Tepugnanoe  to  the  change
of  dynasty.

lliough  tlie  differenoes  of  origin  and  language,  so  far
as  they  existed,  might  be  by  no  means  unimportant  in
the  great  revolution  near  the  close  of  the  tentn  century,
they  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  sufficiently  explaining  its
cause.  The  partisans  of  either  femily  were  not  exclu-
sively of  one  t>too^  The  house  of  Capet  itself  was  not
of  Boman,  but  probably  of  Saxon  descent.  The  differ-
ence of  races  had  been  much  efi^ed  after  Charles  the
Bald,  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  great  benefi-
ciaries, the  most  wealthy  and  potent  &milies  in  Neustria
or  France,  were  of  barbarian  origin.  One  people,  so
far  as  we  can  distinguish  them,  was  by  fur  the  more
numerous;  the  other,  of  more  influence  in  political
affikirs.  The  personal  distinction  of  law,  however,
which  had  been  the  test  of  descent,  appears  not  to  have
been  preserved  in  the  north  of  France  much  after  the
ninth  centuiy ;  and  the  Boman,  as  has  been  said  above,
had  yielded  to  the  barbaric  element — ^to  the  feudal  cus
toms.  The  Romance  language,  on  the  other  hand,  had
obtained  a  complete  ascendancy ;  and  that  not  only  in
Neustria,  or  the  parts  west  of  ^e  Somme,  but  through
out  Picardy,  Chunpagne,  and  part  of  Flanders.  But  if
we  were  to  suppose  that  these  regions  were  van.  in  some
way  more  Teutonic  in  sentiment  than  Neustria,  we
certainly  could  not  say  the  same  of  those  beyond  the
Loire.  Aquitaine  and  Languedoc,  almost  whoUy  Bo-
man, to  use  the  ancient  word,  or  French,  as  they  might
now  be  called,  among  whose  vine-oovered  hills  the  bar-
barians of  the  Lower  Bhine  had  hardly  formed  a  perma-
nent settlement,  or,  having  done  so,  had  early  cast  off
the  slough  of  their  rude  manners,  had  been  the  scenes
of  a  long  resistance  to  the  Merovingian  dynasty.  The
tyranny  of  Childeric  and  Clotaire,  the  barbarism  of  the
Frank  invaders,  had  created  an  indelible  hatred  of  their
yoke.  But  they  submitted  without  reluctance  to  the
more  civilized  govemm^t  of  Charlemagne,  and  dis-
played a  spontaneous  loyalty  towards  his  line.  Never
did  they  recognise,  at  least  without  force,  the  Neustrian
usurpers  of  the  tenth  centuiy,  or  date  their  legal  instru-
ment, in  truth  the  chief  sign  of  subjection  that  they
gave,  by  any  other  year  than  that  of  the  Carlovingian

k2

132  TRANSITION  PERIOD  OF  Nona  w

<
sovereign. If  Charles  the  Simple  reaped  litde  hat  thiii
nominal  allegiance  from  his  sonthem  suhjects,  he  had
the  satisflEkction  to  reflect  that  they  O'vnied  no  one  else.

But  a  rapacious  aristocracy  had  pressed  so  hard  on  the
weaKness  of  Charles  the  Bald  and  his  descendants  that,
the  kingdom  being  wholly  parcelled  in  great  fiefs,  they
had  not  the  resources  left  to  reward  self-interested  ser-
vices as  before,  nor  to  resist  a  vassal  fieir  superior  to
themselves.  Laon  was  much  behind  Paris  in  wealth  and
populousness,  and  yet  even  the  two  capitals  were  inade-
quate representatives  of  the  proportionate  strength  ol
the  king  and  the  count.  Power,  as  simply  taken,  was
wholly  on  one  side ;  yet  on  the  other  was  prejudice,  or
rather  an  abstract  sense  of  hereditary  right;  and  thip
sometimes  became  a  source  of  power.  But  the  long
greatness  of  one  fGomly,  its  manifest  influence  over  the
succession  to  the  throne,  the  conspicuous  men  whom  it
produced  in  Eudes  and  Hugh  the  Great,  had  silently
prepared  the  way  for  a  revolution,  neither  unnatural  nor
premature,  nor  in  any  way  dangerous  to  the  public
interests.  It  is  certainly  probable  that  the  Neustrian
French  had  come  to  feel  a  greater  sympathy  with  the
house  of  Capet  than  with  a  line  of  kings  who  rarely
visited  their  ootmtry,  and  whom  they  could  not  but
contemplate  as  in  some  adverse  relation  to  their  natural
and  popular  chiefs.  But  the  national  voice  wsjb  not
gready  consulted  in  those  ages.  It  is  remarkable  that
several  writers  of  the  nineteenth  century,  however  they
may  sometimes  place  the  true  condition  of  the  people  in
a  vivid  light,  are  constantly  relapsing  into  a  democratic
theory.  They  do  not  by  any  means  underrate  the  op-
pressed and  almost  servile  condition  of  the  peasantiy
and  buigesses,  when  it  is  their  arm  to  draw  a  picture  of
8<x'ioty ;  yet  in  reasoning  on  a  political  revolution,  such
as  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Grennan  dynasty,  they
ascribe  to  these  degraded  classes  both  the  will  and  the
power  to  effect  it.  The  proud  nationality  which  spumed
a  foreign  line  of  princes  could  not  be  felt  by  an  impo-
verished and  afflicted  commonalty.  Yet  when  M.  Thierry
alludes  to  the  rumour  that  the  fiunily  of  Capet  wa8
sprung  from  the  commons  (some  said,  as  we  read  in
Dante,  from  a  butcher),  he  adds,— "Oatte  opinion,  qui
se  oonserva  durant  plusieuis  siecles,  ne  fut  pas  nuisible

Chap.  I.  THE  CARLOYINGIAKS.  133

k  sa  cause/'-T-as  if  there  had  been  as  effecdye  a  tiers-^tat
in  987  as  800  years  afterwards.  K,  however,  we  are
meant  only  to  seek  this  sentiment  among  the  nobles  of
France,  I  fear  that  self-interest,  personal  attachments,
and  a  predominant  desire  of  n>aintaining  their  inde-
pendence against  the  crown,  were  motives  fiEur  more  in
operation  than  the  wish  to  hear  the  king  speak  French
instead  of  German.

It  seems,  npon  the  whole,  that  M.  Thierry's  hypothesis,
countenanced  as  it  is  Ir^  M.  Gnizot,  will  not  afford  a
complete  explanation  of  the  history  of  France  between
Charles  the  Fat  and  Hugh  Capet.  The  truth  is,  that  the
accidents  of  personal  character  have  more  to  do  with
the  revolutions  of  nations  than  either  philosophical  his-
torians or  democratic  politicians  like  to  admit.  If
Eudes  and  Hugh  the  Great  had  been  bom  in  the  royal
line,  they  would  have  preserved  far  better  the  royal
power.  If  Charles  the  Simple  had  not  raised  too  high  a
liarvourite  of  mean  extraction,  he  might  have  retained  the
nobles  of  Lorraine  and  Champagne  in  their  fidelity.  If
Adalberon,  archbishop  of  Eheims,  had  been  loyal  to  the
house  of  Charlemagne,  that  of  Capet  would  not,  at  least
so  soon,  have  ascended  the  throne.  If  Louis  Y.  had
lived  some  years,  and  left  a  son  to  inherit  the  lineal
right,  the  more  precarious  claim  of  his  uncle  would  not
have  undergone  a  disadvantageous  competition  with  that
of  a  vigorous  usurper.  M.  Gaudet  has  well  shown,  in
his  notice  on  Bicher,  that  the  opposition  of  Adalberon  to
Charles  of  Lorraine  was  wholly  on  personal  grounds.
No  hint  is  given  of  any  national  hostility ;  but  what-
ever of  national  approbation  was  given  to  the  new  family,
and  doubtless  inNeustrian  France  it  was  veiy  prevalent,
must  rather  be  ascribed  to  their  own  reputation  than  to
any  peculiar  antipathy  towards  their  competitor.  Hugh
Capet,  it  is  recorded,  never  wore  the  crown,  though
styling  himself  king,  and  took  care  to  procure,  in  an
assembly  held  in  Paris,  the  election  of  his  son  Eobert  to
succeed  him ;  an  example  which  was  followed  for  several
reigns.

A  late  Belgian  writer,  M.  Gerard,  in  a  spirited  little
work,  '  La  Beo'barie  Franque  et  la  Civilisation  Eomaine '
(Bruxelles,  1845),  admitting  the  theory  of  the  conflict  of
races,  indignantly  repels  the  partisans  of  what  has  been

134  THE  NORlfANS.  Kvncs  lo

called  the  Boman  element.  Thierry,  Michelet,  and  eTOQ
Guizot,  are  classed  by  him  as  advocates  of  a  oorropted
race  of  degenerate  provincials,  who  called  themsalves
Bomans,  endeavouring  to  set  up  their  pretended  civiliza-
tion against  the  free  and  generous  spirit  of  the  harbariaos
from  whom  Europe  has  derived  her  proudest  inheritance.
Avoiding  the  aristocratic  arrogance  of  BonlainvillieiB,
and  langhing  justly  at  the  pretensions  of  modem  French
nobles,  if  any  snch  there  are,  which  I  disbelieve,  who
vaimt  their  descent  as  an  order  from  the  race  of  Franks,
he  bestows  his  admiration  on  the  old  Anstrasian  portion
of  the  monarchy,  to  which,  as  a  Belgian,  he  belongs.
But  in  his  persuasion  that  the  two  races  were  in  distinct
opposition  to  each  other,  and  have  continued  so  ever
smce,  he  hardly  Mis  shprt  of  Michelet.

I  will  just  add  to  this  long  note  a  caution  to  the  reader,
that  it  relates  only  to  the  second  period  of  the  Carlovin-
gian  kings,  that  from  888  to  987.  In  ^q  reigns  of  Louis
tiie  Debonair  and  Charles  the  Bald  I  do  not  deny  that
the  desire  for  the  separation  of  the  empire  was  felt  on
both  sides.  But  this  separation  was  consummated  at
Verdun  in  843,  except  that,  the  kingdom  of  Lorraine
being  not  long  afterwards  dismembered,  a  small  portion
of  the  modem  Belgium  fell  into  that  of  France.

Note  XTTT. Page  22.

The  cowardice  of  the  French,  during  the  Norman  in-
cursions of  the  ninth  century,  has  struck  both  ancient
and  modem  writers,  considering  that  the  invaders  were
by  no  means  numerous,  and  not  better  armed  than  the
inhabitants.  No  one,  says  Paschasius  Badbert,  could
have  anticipated  that  a  kingdom  so  powerfal,  extensive,
and  populous,  would  have  been  ravaged  by  a  handful  of
barbarians.  (M4m.  de  TAcad.  des  Inscr.  vol.  xv.  p.  639.)
Two  hundred  Normans  entered  Paris,  in  865,  to  take
away  some  wine,  and  retired  unmolested;  their  usual
armies  seem  to  have  been  only  of  a  few  hundreds.
(Sismondi,  vol.  iii.  p.  170.)  Michelet  even  flmcies  that
the  French  could  not  have  fought  so  obstinately  at
Fontenay  as  historians  relate,  on  account  of  the  effemi-
nacy which  ecclesiastical  influence  had  produced. This

Chap.  I.  THK  KOBMAHS.  135

ifl  rather  an  eztrayagant  Biippoaition.  But  panio  is  yexy
contagioiis,  and  sometunee  taUs  on  nations  dj  no  means
deficient  in  general  conrage.  It  is  to  be  remembered
that  the  cities,  even  Paris,  were  not  fortified  (Mem.  de
I'Acad.  vol.  xvii.  p.  289) ;  that  the  government  of  Charles
the  Bald  was  imbecile;  that  no  efforts  were  made  to
array  and  discipline  the  people ;  that  the  feudal  polity
was  as  yet  incomplete  and  unorganized.  Can  it  be  an
excessive  reproach,  that  the  citizens  fled  from  their
dwellings,  or  redeemed  them  by  money  from  a  terrible
foe  against  whom  their  mere  superiority  of  numbers
famished  no  security?  Eveiy  instance  of  barbarous
devastation  f^gravated  the  general  timidity.  Aquitaine
was  in  such  a  state  that  ihe  pope  removed  the  arch-
bishop of  Bordeaux  to  Bourges,  because  his  province
was  entirely  wasted  by  the  pagans.  (Sismondi,  vol.  iii.
p.  210.)  Never  was  France  in  so  deplorable  a  condition
as  under  Charles  the  Bald ;  the  laity  seem  to  have  de-
serted the  national  assemblies ;  almost  all  his  capitularies
are  ecclesiastical ;  he  was  the  mere  servant  of  his  bishops.
The  dergy  were  now  at  their  zenith ;  and  it  has  been
supposed  that,  noble  families  becoming  extinct  (for  few
names  of  laymen  appear  at  this  time  in  histoiy),  the
Church,  which  always  gained  and  never  lost,  took  the
ascendant  in  national  councils.  And  this  contributed  to
render  the  nation  less  warlike,  by  depriving  it  of  its
natural  leaders.  It  might  be  added,  according  to  Sis-
mondi's  very  probable  suggestion,  that  the  fJEdth  in  relics,
encouraged  l^  the  Church,  lowered  the  spirit  of  the
people.  (Vol.  iii.  passim ;  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  p.  120,  et  post.)
And  it  is  a  qualitv  of  superstition  not  to  oe  undeceived
bv  experience.  Some  have  attributed  the  weakness  of
Irance  at  this  period  to  the  bloody  battle  of  Fontenay,
in  841.  But  if  we  should  suppose  the  loss  of  the  king-
dom on  that  day  to  have  been  forty  thousand,  which  is
a  high  reckoning,  this  would  not  explain  the  want  of
resistance  to  the  Normans  for  half  a  centuiy.

The  beneficial  effect  of  the  cession  of  Normandy  has
hardly  been  put  by  me  in  sufficiently  strong  terms.  No
measure  was  so  conducive  to  the  revival  of  France  from
her  abasement  in  the  ninth  century.  The  Normans  had
been  distinguished  by  a  peculiar  ferocity  towards  priests ;
yet  when  their  conversion  to  Christianity  was  made  the

136  THE  KORMANS.  Notes  to

condition  of  their  possessing  Normandy,  they  were  ready
enough  to  comply,  and  in  another  generation  became
among  the  most  doTout  of  the  French  nation.  It  may
be  observed  that  pagan  superstitions,  though  they  often
take  great  hold  on  the  imagination,  seldom  influence
the  conscience  or  sense  of  duty;  they  are  not  definite
or  moral  enough  for  such  an  effect,  which  belong
to  positive  religions,  even  when  false.  And  as  their
efficacy  over  the  imagination  itself  is  generally  a  good
deal  dependent  on  local  associations,  it  is  likely  to  be
weakened  by  a  change  of  abode.  But  a  more  certain
explanation  of  the  new  zeal  for  Christianity  which
sprung  up  among  the  Normans  may  be  found  in  the
important  circumstance,  that,  -having  few  women  with
them,  they  took  wives  (they  had  made  widows  enough)
from  the  natiye  inhabitants.  These  taught  their  own
faith  to  their  children.  They  taught  also  their  own  lan-
guage ;  and  in  no  other  manner  can  we  so  well  account
for  the  rapid  extinction  of  that  of  Scandinavia  in  that
province  of  France.

Sismondi  discovers  two  causes  for  the  determination  of
the  Normans  to  settle  peaceably  in  the  territoiy  assigned
to  them ;  the  devastation  which  they  had  made  along  the
coast,  rendering  it  difficiQt  to  procure  subsistence ;  and
the  growing  spirit  of  resistance  in  the  French  nobility,
who  wero  fortifying  their  castles  and  training  their
vassals  on  every  side.  But  we  need  not  travel  far  for
an  inducement  to  occupy  the  fine  lands  on  the  Seine  and
Euro.  Piracy  and  plunder  had  become  their  resource,
because  they  could  no  longer  find  subsistence  at  home ;
they  now  found  it  abundantly  in  a  moro  genial  climate.
They  would  probably  have  accepted  ihe  same  tenns  fifty
years  beforo.

Note  XIV. Page  24.

This  has  been  put  in  the  strongest  language  by  Sis-
mondi, Thierry,  and  other  writers.  Guizot,  however,
thinks  that  it  has  been  urged  too  far,  and  that  the  first
four  Capetians  wero  not  quite  so  insignificant  in  their
kingdom  as  haa  been  asserted.  '*  When  we  look  closely
At  the  documents  and  events  of  their  age,  we  see  that

Chap.  I.  THL  CAPETS.  137

they  have  played  a  more  important  part,  and  exerted
more  influence,  than  is^asoribed  to  them.  Bead  their
history ;  yoa  will  see  them  interfere  incessantly,  whether
by  arms  or  by  negotiation,  in  the  afi&drs  of  the  coimty  of
Bin^undy,  of  the  county  of  Anjon,  of  the  county  of  Maine,
of  the  duchy  of  Guienne ;  in  a  word,  in  the  affairs  of  all
their  nej^bours,  and  ^ven  of  very  distant  fiefs.  No
other  suzerain  certainly,  except  the  dukes  of  Normandy,
who  conquered  a  kingdom,  took  a  part  at  that  time  so
frequently,  and  at  so  great  a  distance  from  the  centre  of
his  domams.  Turn  over  the  letters  of  contemporaries,
for.  example  those  of  Fulbert  and  of  Yves,  bishops  of
Chartres,  or  those  of  William  III.  duke  of  Guienne,  and
many  others,  you  will  see  that  the  king  of  France  was
not  without  importance,  and  that  the  most  powerful
suzerains  treated  him  with  great  deference.'*  He  ap-
peals especially  to  the  extant  act  of  the  consecration  of
Philip  I.,  in  1059,  where  a  duke  of  Guienne  is  mentioned
among  the  great  feudataries,  and  asks  whether  any  other
suzerain  took  possession  of  his  rank  with  so  much  solem-
nity. (Civilisation  en  France,  Le9on  42.)  "  As  there
was  always  a  country  called  France  and  a  French  people,
so  there  was  always  a  king  of  the  French ;  very  far
indeed  from  ruling  the  country  called  his  kingdom,  and
without  influence  on  the  greater  part  of  the  population,
but  yet  no  foreigner,  and  with  his  name  inscribed  at  the
head  of  the  deeds  of  all  the  local  sovereigns,  as  one  who
was  their  superior,  and  to  whom  they  owed  several
duties."  (Logon  43.)  It  may  be  observed  also  that  the
Church  recognised  no  other  sovereign ;  not  that  all  the
bishops  held  of  him,  for  many  depended  on  the  great
fiefs,  but  the  ceremony  of  consecration  gave  him  a  sort
of  religious  character,  to  which  no  one  else  aspired.  And
8uger,  the  politic  minister  of  Louis  YI.  and  Louis  YIL,
made  use  of  the  bishops  to  maintain  the  royal  authority
in  distant  provinces.  (Logon  42.)  This  nevertheless
rather  proves  that  the  germ  of  future  power  was  in  the
kingly  office  than  that  Hugh,  Bobert,  Henry,  and  Philip
exercised  it.  The  most  remaikable  instance  of  authority
during  their  reigns  was  the  war  of  Eobert  in  Burgundy,
which  ended  in  Us  bestowing  that  great  fief  on  his  brother.
1  have  observed  that  the  duke  of  Guienne  subscribes  a
charter  of  Heniy  I.  in  1051. (Bee.  des  Historiens,  vol.  xi.

138  THE  KNIQHTS  TEMPLABS.  KoraaTO

p.  589.)  Probably  there  are  other  instanoes.  Heniy
uses  a  more  pompous  and  soYoreign  phraseology  in  hm
diplomas  than  his  fiather ;  the  yoimg  hon  was  trying  his
roar.

I  concar  on  the  whole  in  thinlring  with  M.  Gnizot,
that,  in  shTuming  the  language  of  uninformed  historians,
who  spoke  of  all  kings  of  France  as  equally  supreme,  it
had  beoome  usual  to  depreciate  the  power  of  the  first
Capetians  rather  too  much.  He  had,  howeTer,  to  appear-
ance, done  the  same  a  few  years  before  the  deliyery  of
these  lectures,  in  1829  ;  for  in  his  Collection  of  Memoirs

ivol.  i.  p.  6,  published  in  1825),  he  speaks  rather  dif-
erently  of  the  first  four  reigns  : — **  C'est  T^poque  ou  le
loyaume  de  France  et  la  nation  fran^aise  n*ont  existe,  a
Trai  dire,  que  de  nom."  He  observes,  also,  that  the
chroniclers  of  the  royal  domain  are  peculiarly  meagre,
as  compared  with  those  of  Normandy.

Note  XV. Page  46.

It  may  excite  surprise  that  in  any  sketch,  however
slight,  of  the  reign  of  Philip  lY.,  no  mention  should  be
made  of  an  event,  than  which  none  in  his  life  is  more
celebrated — ^the  faAe  of  the  Knights  Templars.  But  the
truth  is,  that  when  I  first  attended  to  the  subject,  ahnost
forty  years  since,  I  could  not  satisfy  my  mind  on  the
disputed  problem  as  to  the  guilt  imputed  to  that  order,
and  suppressed  a  note  which  I  had  written,  as  too  in-
conclusive to  afford  any  satisfiEMstoiy  decision.  Much  has
been  published  since  on  the  Continent,  and  the  question
has  assumed  a  different  aspect ;  though,  perhaps,  I  am
not  yet  more  prepared  to  g^ive  an  absolutely  determinate
judgment  than  at  first.

The  general  current  of  popular  writers  in  the  eigh-
teenth century  was  in  fia>vour  of  the  innocence  of  the
Templars ;  in  England  it  would  have  been  ahnost  para-
doxical to  doubt  of  it.  The  rapacious  and  unprincipled
character  of  Philip,  the  submission  of  Clement  Y.  to  his
will,  the  apparent  incredibility  of  the  charges  firom  their
monstrousness,  the  just  prejudice  against  confessions
obtained  by  torture  and  retracted  afterwards — ^the  other
prejudice,  not  always  so  just,  but  in  the  case  of  those

Chip.  I. '  .  THE  KNIGHTS  TEMPLABS.  13\l

not  oonyioted  on  &di  eyidence  deserving  a  better  name,
in  &yonr  of  assertions  of  innocence  made  on  the  scaffold
and  at  the  stake — created,  as  they  still  preserve,  a  strong
willingness  to  disbelieve  the  aconsations  which  came  so
snspicionsl J  before  ns.  It  was  also  often  alleged  that
contemporaiy  writers  had  not  g^iven  credit  to  fiiese  ac-
onsations, and  that  in  countries  where  the  inquiry  had ,
been  less  iniquitously  conducted  no  proof  of  them  was
brought  to  light.  Of  these  two  grounds  for  acquittal,
the  former  is  of  little  value  in  a  question  of  legal  evi-
dence, and  the  latter  is  not  quite  so  fully  establi^ed  as
we  could  desire.

Baynouard,  who  might  think  himself  pledged  to  the
vindication  of  the  Knights  Templars  by  the  tragedy  he
had  written  on  their  fiftte,  or  at  least  would  naturally
have  thus  imbibed  an  attachment  to  their  cause,  took  up
their  defence  in  a  History  of  the  Procedure.  This  has
been  reckoned  the  \^eet  work  on  that  side,  and  was  sup-
posed to  confirm  their  innocence.  The  question  appears
to  have  assumed  something  of  a  party  character  in
Fiance,  as  most  history  does ;  the  honour  of  the  crown^
and  still  more  of  the  church,  had  advocates ;  but  there
was  a  much  greater  number,  especially  among  men  of
letters,  who  did  not  like  a  decision  the  worse  for  being
derogatory  to  the  credit  of  both.  Sismondi,  it  may  easily
be  supposed,  scarcely  treats  it  as  a  question  with  two
sides ;  but  even  Michaud,  the  firm  supporter  of  church
and  crown,  in  his  History  of  the  Crusades,  takes  the
favourable  view.  M.  Michelet,  however,  not  xmder  any
bias  towards  either  of  these,  and  manifestly  so  desirous
to  acquit  the  Templars  that  he  labours  by  every  inge-
nious device  to  elude  or  explain  away  the  evidence,  is
so  overcome  by  the  force  and  number  of  testimonies,
that  he  ends  by  admitting  so  much  as  leaves  little  worth
contending  for  by  their  patrons.  He  is  the  editor  of  the
*  Proc^  des  Templiers,'  in  the  '  Documens  In^dits,
1841,'  and  had  previously  given  abundant  evidence  of
his  acquaintance  with  the  subject  in  his  '  Histoire  de
France,'  vol.  iv.  p.  243,  345. (Bmxelles  edition.)

But  the  great  change  that  has  been  made  in  this  pro-
cess, as  carried  forward  before  the  tribunal  of  pubUo
opinion  from  age  to  age,  is  owing  to  the  production  of
freBh.  evidence. The  deeply-learned  orientalist,  M.  von

140  THE  KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS.  Notes  to

Hammer,  now  count  Hammer  Purgstall,  in  the  sixOi  to*
lume  of  a  work  published  at  Yieima  in  1818,  with  the  title
*  Mines  de  TOrient  ezploitees/'  inserted  an  essay  in
Latin,  *  Mysterium  Baphometis  Bevelatum,  seu  Fratres
Militiae  Templi  qua  Gnostici  et  quidem  Ophiani,  Apes-
tasisd,  Idoloduliae,  et  Impuritatis  conyicti  per  ipsa  eorum
Monimienta/  This  is  designed  to  establish  the  identity
of  the  idolatry  ascribed  to  Sie  Templars  with  that  of  the
ancient  Gnostic  sects,  and  especially  with  those  deno-
minated Ophites,  or  worshippers  of  the  serpent ;  and  to
prove  also  that  the  extreme  impurity  which  forms  one  of
the  revolting  and  hardly  credible  charges  adduced  by
Philh)  lY.  is  similar  in  all  its  details  to  the  practice  of
the  Gnostics.

This  attack  is  not  conducted  with  all  the  coolness
which  bespeaks  impartiality ;  but  the  evidence  is  start-
ling enough  to  make  refutation  apparently  difficult.  The
first  part  of  the  proof,  which  consists  in  identifying  cer-
tain Gnostic  idols,  or,  as  some  suppose,  amulets,  though
it  comes  much  to  the  same,  with  the  description  of  what
are  called  Baphometic,  in  the  proceedings  against  the  Tem-
plars, published  by  Bupuy,  and  since  in  Sie  *  Documens
Inedits,'  is  of  itself  sufi&cient  to  raise  a  considerable  pre-
sumption. We  find  the  word  metis  continually  on  these
images,  of  which  Yon  Hammer  is  able  to  describe  twenty-
four.  Baphomet  is  a  secret  word  ascribed  to  the  Tem-
plars. But  the  more  important  evidence  is  that  famished
by  the  comparison  of  sculptures  extant  on  some  Gnostic
and  Ophitic  bowls  with  those  in  churches  built  by  the
Templars.  Of  these  there  are  many  in  Germany,  and
some  in  France.  Yon  Hammer  has  examined  several  in
the  Austrian  dominions,  and  collected  accounts  of  others.
It  is  a  striking  fauot  that  in  some  we  find,  concealed  from
the  common  observer,  images  and  symbols  extremely
obscene ;  and  as  these,  which  cannot  here  be  more  par-
ticularly adverted  to,  betray  the  depravity  of  the  arciii-
tects,  emd  cannot  be  explained  away,  we  may  not  so
much  hesitate  as  at  first  to  believe  that  impiety  of  a
strange  kind  was  mingled  up  with  this  turpitude.  The
presumptions,  of  course,  from  the  absolute  identity  of
many  emblems  in  churches  with  the  Gnostic  supersti-

>  I  give  this  Frendi  title,  bat  there  is memolra  are  either  in  thftt  Unga«ge  o*
••Iflo  a  Oerman  ttUe-pane.  as  most  of  the in  l»tin.

Chap.  1.  THE  KNIGHTS  TKHPLABS.  141

iions  in  their  worst  form,  grow  stronger  and  stronger  by
multiplication  of  instances ;  and  though  coincidence
might  be  credible  in  one,  it  becomes  infinitely  impro-
bable in  so  many.  One  may  here  be  mentioned,  though
among  the  slightest  resemblances.  The  Gnostic  emblems
exhibit  a  peculiar  form  of  cross,  T ;  £^<i  this  is  common
in  the  churches  built  by  the  Templars.  But  the  free-
masons, or  that  society  of  architects  to  whom  we  owe  so
many  splendid  churches,  do  not  escape  M.  von  Hammer's
ill  opinion  better  than  the  Templars.  Though  he  con-
ceives them  to  be  of  earlier  origin,  they  had  drunk  at
the  same  foul  spring  of  impious  and  impure  Gnosticism.
It  is  rather  amusing  to  compare  the  sympathy  of  our  own
modem  ecdesiologists  witii  those  who  raised  the  me-
diffival  cathedralB,  their  implicit  confidence  in  the  pietr
which  ennobled  the  conceptions  of  these  architects,  with
the  following  passage  in  a  memoir  by  M.  von  Hammer,
*  Sur  deux  Cof&ets  Gnostiques  du  moyen  Age,  du  cabi-
net de  M.  le  due  de  Blacas. Paris,  1832.'

''  Les  architectes  du  moyen  &ge,  inities  dans  tons  les
mysteres  du  Gnosticisme  le  plus  deprave,  se  plaisaient
a  en  multiplier  les  symboles  au  dehors  et  au  dedans  de
leurs  eglises;  symboles  dont  le  T($ritable  sens  n'^tait
entendu  que  des  adeptes,  et  devaient  rester  voiles  aux
yeux  des  profanes.  J>es  figures  scandaleuses,  semblables
a  celles  des  eglises  de  MontmoriUon  et  de  Bordeaux,  se
retrouvent  sur  les  Eglises  des  Templiers  a  Eger  en  Bo-
h§me,  a  Schongrabem  en  Autriche,  a  Fomuovi  pres  de
Parme,  et  en  d'autres  lieux ;  nommement  le  chien  (canis
aut  gattos  niger)  sur  les  bas-reliefis  de  I'^glise  gnostique
d'Erfurt."  (p.  9.)  The  Stadinghi,  heretics  of  the  thir-
teenth century,  are  charged,  in  a  bull  of  Gregory  IX.,
with  exactly  the  same  profaneness,  even  including  the
black  cat,  as  the  Templars  of  the  next  century.  This  is
said  by  Yon  Hammer  to  be  confirmed  by  sculptures.

(p.  7.)

The  statutes  of  the  Knights  Templars  were  compiled
in  1 1 28,  and,  as  it  is  said,  by  St.  Bernard.  They  have  been
published  in  1840  from  manuscripts  at  Dijon,  Home,  and
Paris,  by  M.  Maillard  de  Chambure,  Conservateur  des
Archives  de  Bourgogne.

The  title  runs  —  *  R%les  et  Statuts  secrets  des  Tern-
pliers/ But  as  the  French  seems  not  so  ancient  as  the

142  THE  KNIGHTS  TElfPLABS.  KoTHi  10

above  date,  they  may,  perhaps,  he  a  tnuiBlatioiL  It  will
be  easily  Buppoeed  that  they  contain  nothing  bat  what  ifi
pions  and  ansteie.  The  knights,  however,  in  their  in-
terconise  with  the  East,  fell  rapidly  into  discredit  for
loose  morab  and  many  vices;  so  that  Yon  Hammer
rather  invidiously  begins  his  attack  npon  them  by  argu-
ing the  a  priori  probability  of  what  he  is  about  to  all^^.
Some  have  accordingly  endeavoured  to  steer  a  middle
course ;  and,  discrediting  the  chaiges  brought  generally
against  the  order,  have  admitted  that  both  the  vice  and
the  irreligion  were  truly  attributed  to  a  great  number.
But  this  is  not  at  all  the  question ;  and  such  a  pretended
compromise  is  nothing  less  than  an  acquittal.  The
whole  accusations  which  destroyed  the  order  of  the
Temple  relate  to  its  secret  rites,  and  to  the  mode  of  ini-
tiation. If  these  were  not  stained  by  the  most  in&mous
turpitude,  the  unhappy  knights  periled  innocently,  and
the  g^uilt  of  their  death  lies  at  the  door  of  Philip  the
Fair.

The  novel  evidence  furnished  by  sculpture  against  the
Templars  has  not  been  universally  received.  It  was
early  refuted,  or  attempted  to  be  rented,  by  Baynouard
and  other  French  writers.  "  IL  est  reconnu  aujourdliui,
m^me  en  Allemagne,"  says  M.  Chambure,  editor  of  the
Begles  et  Statuts  secrets  des  Templiers,  **que  le  pre-
tendu  culte  baphometique  n'est  qu*une  chim^re  de  oe
savant,  fondee  sur  un  erreur  de  numismatique  et  d'arohi-
tectonc^raphie."  (p.  82.)  As  I  am  not  competent  to  form
a  decisive  opinion,  I  must  leave  this  for  the  more  deeply
learned.  The  proofs  of  M.  von  Hammer  are  at  least  veiy
striking,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  they  have  been
overcome.  But  it  is  also  necessaxy  to  read  the  answer
of  Baynouard  in  the  'Journal  des  Savans'  for  1819,
who  has  been  partially  successful  in  repelling  some  of
his  opponent's  arguments,  though  it  appeared  to  me  that
he  had  left  much  untouched.  It  seems  that  the  arohiteo-
tnral  evidence  is  the  most  positive,  and  can  only  be  re-
sisted by  disproving  its  existence,  or  its  connexion  with
the  Freemasons  and  Templars.  [1848.]

Chap.  I.  JOAN  OF  ABC.  143

NotsXYL  Page  80.

I  have  followed  the  common  praotioe  of  tranfilating
Jeaxme  d^Aro  by  Joan  of  Arc.  It  has  been  taken  for
granted  that  Aro  ia  the  name  of  her  birthplace.  Sonthey
says, —

**  She  tbooght  of  Arc.  and  of  the  disgled  brook
WhoM  waves,  oft  leaping  In  their  craggj  ooone.
Made  dance  the  low-hong  willow's  dripping  twl^i ;
And,  where  it  spread  into  a  i^tassy  lake,
Of  that  old  oak,  whidi  on  the  smooth  expanse
Imaged  ita  boary  mosqr-mantled  bougba."

And  in  another  place,-

."  her  mind's  eye

Beheld  Domremj  and  the  plains  of  Arc"

It  doefl  not  appear,  howcTer,  that  any  such  place  as
Arc  exists  in  that  neighbonrhood,  though  there  is  a  town
of  that  name  at  a  considerable  distance.  Joan  was,  as
is  known,  a  native  of  the  village  of  Domremy  in  Lor-
raine. The  French  writers  all  call  her  Jeanne  d'Aro,
'with  the  exception  of  one,  M.  Michelet  (vii.  62),  who
spells  her  name  Dare,  which  in  a  person  of  her  birth
seems  more  probable,  though  I  cannot  account  for  the
uniform  usage  of  an  apostrophe  and  capital  letter.

I  cannot  pass  Southey's  *  Joan  of  Aro  *  without  rendering
homage  to  that  early  monument  of  his  genius,  which,
perhaps,  he  rarely  surpassed.  It  is  a  noble  epic,  never
languid,  and  seldom  diffuse ;  Ml  of  generous  enthusiasm,
of  magnificent  inventions,  and  with  a  well-construoted
£ftble,  or  rather  selection  of  history.  Michelet,  who
thinks  the  story  of  the  Maid  unfit  for  poetry,  had  ap-
parently never  read  Southey ;  but  the  auwor  of  an  article
m  the  *  Biographic  Universelle '  says  very  well, — "  Le
po§me  de  M.  Southey  en  Anglais,  intitule  *  Joan  of  Arc,'
est  la  tentative  la  plus  heureuse  que  les  Muses  aient
faites  jusqu'ici  pour  c^^rer  lli^roine  d*Orl^ans.  C*est
encore  une  des  singularites  de  son  histoire  de  voir  le
genie  de  la  poesie  Anglaase  inspirer  de  beaux  vers  on  son
honnexur,  tandis  que  cdui  de  la  poesie  Frangaise  a  M
juFqu*ici  rebelle  k  eeux  qui  out  voulu  la  chanter,  et  n'a

144  JOAN  0¥  ABC.  N0TB8  TO  Cukt.  U

fJELYorise  que  celui  qui  a  outrage  sa  memoire."  If,  how-
ever, the  muse  of  France  has  done  little  justice  to  her
memory,  it  has  been  reserved  for  another  Maid  of
Orleans,  as  she  has  well  been  styled,  in  a  different  art,
to  fix  the  image  of  the  first  in  our  minds,  and  to  com-
bine, in  forms  only  less  enduring  than  those  of  poetry,
the  purity  and  inspiration  with  the  unswerving  heroism
of  the  immortal  Joan.'

FXUDAL  Sybtex. STATR  of  AKClftNT  GEKMANT*  145

CHAPTEB  IL

ON  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM,  B9PBGIALLT  IN  FJLANCB.

PART  I.

State  of  ADdent  Otnoaaj  -~  Effecti  of  the  CoDqnest  of  Oanl  by  the  Ftanki  —
Temirae  of  Land  —  Distinction  of  Laws  —  Gonstitatloa  of  the  ancient  Frank
Monarchy  —  Giadnal  Establishment  of  Fendal  Tennres  —  Principles  of  a
Fendal  Relation  —  Oeremonies  of  HamagB  and  Investiture  —  MUitaiy  Service  —
Feudal  Incidents  of  Relief,  AJd,  Wardship,  &c.— Different  Species  of  Fieft—Feudal
Law-boolEs.

Germany,  in  the  age  of  Tacitus,  was  divided  among  a
number  of  independent  tribes,  differing  greatly
in  population  and  importsmce. Their  country,  f^^JJ*
overspread  with  forests  and  morasses,  afforded  "f^^
no  large  proportion  of  arable  land. Nor  did ™*°y-
they  ever  occupy  tlie  same  land  two  years  in.snccession,
if  what  Caesar  tells  os  may  be  believed,  that  fresh  allot-
ments were  annually  mstde  by  the  magistrates.* But
this  could  not  have  been  an  absolute  abandonment  of
land  once  cultivated, which  Horace  ascribes  to  the
migratory  Scythians. The  Oermans  had  fixed  though
not  contiguous  dwellings ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  tlie  gau
or  townskip  must  have  continued  to  till  the  same  fields,
though  it  might  be  with  varying  rights  of  separate  pro-
perty.^ They  had  kings  elected  out  of  particular  families  ;
and  other  chie&,  both  for  war  and  administration  of

*  Magistratos  ao  prlndpes  in  annos  non  student,  neo  qnisquam  agri  modum

singalos  gentibus  oognationibosque  ho-  oertumaut  floes  proprioshabet  Defiello

minQm,qu1  una  ooiemnt,  qnantom  iis,et  GalUoo,  L  tI. These  ezpresslma  nuy

quo  loco  visum  est,  attribauut  agrl,  atqoe  be  taken  so  as  not  to  omtndict  Tscitns.

anno  post  alio  trsnsire  ooguit. Caesar,  But  Luden,  who  had  examined  the  an-

L  vl. Tadtos  oonflnns  this :  Arra  pa  cient  history  of  his  country  with  th^

annos  mutant.  De  Mor.  Germ.  e.  36.  most  persevering  dUigence,  observes  that

b  Gnar  has  not  written,  inobably,  OBsar  knew  nothing  of  the  Oermans,
with  abcnrate  knowledge,  when  he  says,  except  what  he  had  collected  concern-
Vita  omnis  in  venationibas  et  stadiis  rei  ing  the  Saevi  or  the  Mafoonumid. Oe-
mlUtaris  oonsistit.  . ...  Agricnltnns  arbichte  der  Dentschen  Volker,  1. 481.
VOL.  1.  L

L46 PARTITION  OF  CONQUERED  LANDS.  Chap.  II  Part  T.

justioe,  wliom  merit  alone  reoommended  to  thepnUio
choice.  But  the  power  of  each  waa  gp^eatlj  limited ;  and
the  decision  of  all  leading  questions,  though  subject  to
the  previous  deliberation  of  the  chieftains,  sprung  from
the  free  voice  of  a  popular  assembly.*'  The  principal
men,  however,  of  a  Greiman  tribe  fully  partook  of  that
estimation  which  is  always  the  reward  of  valour,  and
commonly  of  birth.  They  were  surrounded  by  a  cluster
of  youths,  the  most  gallant  and  ambitious  of  the  nation,
their  pride  at  home,  their  protection  in  the  field ;  whoae
ambition  was  flattered,  or  gratitude  conciliated,  by  such
presents  as  a  leader  of  barbarians  could  confer.  These
were  the  institutions  of  the  people  who  overthrew  the
empire  of  Rome,  congenial  to  the  spirit  of  infant  societies,
and  such  as  travellers  have  found  among  nations  in  the
same  stage  of  manners  throughout  the  world.  And
although,  in  the  lapse  of  four  centuries  between  the  ages
of  Tacitus  and  Clovis,  some  change  was  wrought  by  long
intercourse  with  the  Bomans,  yet  the  foundations  of  their
political  ^tem  were  unshaken.  K  the  Salic  laws  were
in  the  mam  drawn  up  before  the  occupation  of  Gaul  by
the  Franks,  as  seems  the  better  opinion,  it  is  manifest
that  lands  were  held  by  them  in  determinate  several  pos-
session ;  and  in  other  respects  it  is  impossible  that  the
manners  described  by  Tacitus  should  not  have  undergone
some  alteration.''

When  these  tribes  from  Germany  and  the  neighbouring

countries  poured  down  upon  the  empire,  and
ofiAi^in  began  to  form  permanent  settiements,  they
JJJJ^J*^ made  a  partition  of  the  lands  in  the  conquered

provinces  between  themselves  and  the  original
possessors.  The  Burgondians  and  Visigoths  took  two-
thirds  of  their  respective  conquests,  leaving  the  remain-
der to  the  Roman  proprietor.  Each  Burgnndian  was
quartered,  under  the  gentie  name  of  guest,  upon  one  of
^e  former  tenants,  whose  reluctant  hospitality  confined
him  to  the  smaller  portion  of  his  estate  * The  Vandals

«  De  mlnorlbu  rrtnis  piindpes  oon-  mne  wose  appetn  to  be  conveyed  bj  the

■olteot, de  nuilorfbas omnes;  ite  tameii,  oommoa  leadiiig.

Qt  ee  qnoqne,  qaomm  penee  plebem  d  [Notk  I.]

itMtrliim  eet,  apiid  prtndpee  pertrae-  *  Leg.  Bargtmd.  c  54, 56. Sir  F.  I^-

ttmhmr.  Tee.  de  Mor.Qerm.  c.  id.  Ad-  fgnyt  hee  prodaeed  ft  fmaman  fhan  tbe
delitu  end  Orottoa  contend  fbr  preetra>  Theodoelan  code,  tU.  B,  S,  whJdi  flloe*
tmtur :  which  would  be  neeter,  but  tlte tnttei  this  Q«e  of  tbe  word  AoqMi. It

Feudal  Ststioi. ALODIAL  AND  SALIC  LAin)S.  147

in  Africa,  a  more  furious  race  of  plimdei^rs,  seized  all
the  best  lands/  The  Lombards  of  Italy  took  a  third  part
of  the  produce.  We  cannot  discover  any  mention  of  a
similar  arrangement  in  the  laws  or  history  of  the  Franks.
It  is,  however,  clear  that  they  occupied,  by  public  allots
ment  or  individual  pillage,  a  great  portion  of  the  lands
of  France,"

The  estates  possessed  by  the  Franks  as  their  property
were  termed  cuodial ;  a  word  which  is  sometimes  Aiodiai  and
restricted  to  such  as  had  descended  by  inherit-  ^*^  ^'"^
ance.**  These  were  subject  to  no  burden  except  that  of
public  defence. They  passed  to  all  the  children  equally,

glren  to  the  military  quartered  apon  the  does  not  acknowledflB ;  and  fleoondlj,

inhaUtants  anywhere  in  the  empire,  and  Alodium,  or,  in  its  earlier  foim,  JSodis,

thna  traofferred  bj  analogr  to  the  barber  is  need  for  all  hereditary  lands. (See

rlan  oocapanta.  It  waa  needlen,  I  shoiUd  Qrlmm,  Dentache  Bechta  Alterthilmer,

think,  for  him  to  prore  that  theae  ac-  p.  49X) In  the  Orkneya,  where  feudal

qnialtlonB,  "  better  oonddeied  aa  alodial  tenures  were  not  Introduced,  the  alodial

laws,"  did  not  eontain  the  germ  of  feu-  proprietor  Is  called  an  udaUer,  thos  lend-

dality. **  There  is  no  Gothic  feudality  ing  probability  to  the  former  derivation

unless  the  parties  be  oonnected  by  the  of  aiod;  since  it  is  only  an  inversion  of

mutual  bond  of  vassalage  and  seigniory."  the  words  aU  and  odk ;  but  it  seems  also

£ng.  Gommonw.  1. 600.  to  corroborate  the  notion  of  Luden,  as  it

t  Proooplus  da  Bello  VandaL  1.  i.  c.  6.  had  been  of  Leibnlts,  that  the  word  ade,

s  [NoTB  IL]  or  etkd^  ^pUed  to  designate  the  nobler

b  Alodial  lands  are  oommonly  opposed  class  of  Germans,  had  originally  the  same

to  beneflciaiy  or  feudal ;  the  former  being  sense ;  it  distinguished  absolute  or  alodial

strictly  proprietary,  while  the  latin-  de-  property  fh>m  that  which,  though  be-

pended  upon  a  superior. In  this  sense  longing  to  treexnea^  was  sutdect  to  some

the  word  Is  of  omtiuual  recurrence  in  conditions  of  dependency. (Gesch.  des

andent  histories,  laws,  and  instruments.  Deutscfaen  Volkes,  voL  i.  p.  719.)

It  sometimes,  however,  bears  the  sense  The  word  tors,  whidi  seems  to  have

of  inheritanee,  and  this  seems  to  be  Its  misled  several  writers,  when  applied  to

Tneanlng  in  the  famous  62nd  chapter  of  land  means  only  an  integral  patrimony,

the  Salio  law ;  de  Alodls. Alodium  in-  as  it  means  capital  opposed  to  interest

tsrdum  opponitnr  oomparato,  says  Da  when  applied  to  money. It  is  oommoo

Gauge,  in  formuUs  veteribus. Hence,  in  the  dvll  law,  and  is  no  more  than  the

in  the  diarters  of  the  eleventh  century,  Greek  icXSjpot ;  but  it  had  been  peculiarly

beredltary  flefii  are  fluently  termed  applied  to  the  lands  assigned  by  the

aloditt. Recneil  des  Historiens  de  France,  Komans  to  the  soldiery  after  a  conquest,

t  zL  prtifMje. Vaiasette,  Hist  de  Iau^  which  some  suppose,  I  know not on

gnedoc,  t  li.  p.  100.  what  evidence,  to  have  been  by  lot.  (Do

Alodium  has  by  many  been  derived  Cange,  voc  Sors.) And  hence  this  term

ttom  AU  and  odk,  property. (Du  (3ange,  was  most  probably  adopted  by  the  bar-

at  alii.) But  M.  Guiaot,  with  some  poei-  barlans,  or  rather  those  who  rendered

tlveneas,  brings  it  fhmi  loos,  lot;  thus  their  laws  into  Latin. If  the  Teutonic

ennflnfng  the  word  to  lands  acquired  by  word loot  was  sometimes used  for  a

lot  on  the  oooqueat But  in  the  first  mantuM  or  manor,  as  M.  Gulxot  informs

plaoe  this  assumes  a  r^ular  partition  to  us,  it  seems  most  probable  that  this  wss

hcf*  been  made  by  the  Franks,  which  a  literal  translation  of  lort,  bearing  wiUi

V,  in  another  place,  as  has  been  seen,  it  the  secondary  sense.

I.  2

148  ALODIAL  AND  SALIC  LANDS.  Chap.  II.  Pjuit  t

or,  in  their  failure,  to  the  nearest  kindred.'  But  of  these
alodial  possessionfi  there  was  a  particular  species,  deno-
minated Salic,  from  which  females  were  expressly  ex-
cluded. What  these  lands  were,  and  what  was  the  cause
of  the  exclusion,  has  been  much  disputed.  No  solution
seems  more  probable  than  that  the  ancient  lawgivers  of
the  Salian  Franks  prohibited  females  from  inheriting  the
lands  assigned  to  the  nation  upon  its  conquest  of  Gaul,
both  in  compliance  with  their  ancient  usages,  and  in
order  to  secure  the  military  service  of  every  proprietor.
But  lands  subsequently  acquired  by  purchase  or  other
means,  though  equally  bound  to  the  public  defence,  wers
relieved  from  the  severity  of  this  rule,  and  presumed  not
to  belong  to  the  class  of  Salic.^  Hence,  in  the  Kipuazy  law,

I  Leg.  Salic0,  c  63.  finned  by  Slsmondl (L IM)  and  ^

k  By the  Oennan  oastoms,  women,  Oniiot  (^Bsais  lur  I'Hbt  de  Fhune.  p,

tbonc^  treated  with  mnch  nep6ct  and  M). M.  QneraTd,  however,  the  learned

delicacy, were  not  endowed  at  their  editor of  the chartnlaiy  of  Ghartroi

marriage. Dotem  non  uxor  marito,  sed  (Docmnen«  In^tfl^  1840,  p.  22%  b  per-

maritus  uzorl  confert. Tadtns,  o.  18.  soaded  that  Salic  land  was  that  of  the

A  similar  principle  might  debar  Uiem  of  domain,  from  icUa,  the  hall  or  principal

inheritance  in  fixed  possessions. Certain  residence,  as  opposed  to  the  portion  of

It  is  that  the  exdorion  of  ftmales  was  the  estate  which  was  occupied  by  tenanti;

net unflrequent among the Teutonic  benefld&ry  or  servile^ lliis,  he  says,  h»

nations. We  find  it  in  the  laws  of  the  has  proved  in  another  wortc,  which  I  Inve

Thnrlnglaus  and  of  the  Saxons; both  not  seen. Till  I  have  done  so,  mndk

ancient  codes,  though  not  firee  fixRn  inter*  doubt  remains  to  me  as  to  this  explaoft-

polation. Leibnitz,  Scriptores  Rerum  tion. Montesquieu  had  already  started

Brunswioenslum,  t  1. p. 81 and 83.  the  same  theory,  which  Quiaot  Justly  m

But  this  usage  was  repugnant  to  the  It  seems,  calls  *  Incomplete  et  hypothi-

principles  of  Roman  law,  which the  tlque." Besides  other  ol^tlons.  it  seema

Franks  found  prevailing  In  flieir  new  not  to  explain the  manifest  Identltj

country,  and  to  the  natural  feeling  which  between  the  terra  SaUoa  and  the  Aav«-

leads  a  man  to  prefer  his  own  descendants  dOot  aviaUea  of  the  Rlpuarian  law,  or

to  collateral  heirs. One  of  the  preoe-  the  dUfdis  paarentum  of  Marculfbs. I

dents  in  MarouUtas  (L  IL  form.  12)  calls  ought,  however,  to  mention  a  remailc  of

the exclusion  of  females,  diutuma  et  Grimm,that,  throufi^hout  the  Frank  domS-

impia  oonsuetiido. In  another  a  fiather  nation,  German  countries  made  use  of

addresses  his  daughter: Omnibus  non  ttie  words  term  SloUco.  In  them  It  could

habetnr inoognitum, quod,  sleut lex  not  mean  lands  of  partition  or  assigii'

Sallca  oouUnet,  de  rebus  meis,  qtud  miki  ment,  but  mere  dtodia. And  he  thlnka

e»  iilode  parmtum  meorum  otnenit,  Mipod  that  It  may,  in  most  cases,  be  Interpreted

gennanos  tuos  Alios  meoa  mlnlme  In  of  the terra  domtniealit, (Dentacb*

luereditate  sucoedere  potefas. Formube  Bechts  Alterthflmer,  p.  493.)
Marculfo  a4)ect»,  49. These  precedents M.  Fknriel  maintains  (Ulst.  de  la  Ganto

are  supposed  to  have  been  compiled  about  M6ridion.  IL  18)  that  the  SaUc  lands  wca*

the  latter  end  of  the  seventh  oentary.  beneficiary,  as  opposed  to  the  alodiaL  But

The  opinion  expressed  In  the  text,  that  the  "  hasreditas  avlatica  "  la  repugnant  to

the  terra  Saliea,  which  females  oouU  this. Marenlftas  distinctly  opposes  aiodU«

not  inherit,  waa  the  land  acquired  by  the  to  oomparata,  and  limits  the  cxcluskNi

barbarians  on  their  fint  conquest,  Is  con-  of  dan^ters  to  the  former. Aooonttng  tt

Feudal  Ststex. ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  149

Uie  oode  of  a  tribe  of  Franks  settled  upon  the  banks  of
the  Hhine,  and  differing  rather  in  words  than  in  sub-
stance from  the  Salic  law,  which  it  serves  to  illustrate,
it  is  said  that  a  woman  cannot  inherit  her  grandfather's
estate  (haereditas  aviatioaV  distinguishing  such  feouily
property  from  what  the  uther  might  have  acquired."
And  Marcnlfiis  uses  expressions  to  the  same  effect.  There
existed,  however,  a  right  of  setting  aside  the  law,  and
admitting  females  to  succession  by  testament.  It  is
rather  probable,  from  some  passages  in  the  Bui^undian
code,  that  even  the  lands  of  partition  (sortes  Burgundi-
onnm)  were  not  restricted  to  male  heirs.'  And  the  Visi-
goths admitted  women  on  equal  terms  to  the  whole  in-
heritance."*

A  controversy  has  been  maintained  in  France  as  to  the
condition  of  the  Bomans,  or  rather  the  provin-  p,,^^
cial  inhabitants  of  Gaul,  after  the  invasion  of  nAtiyetof
Clovis. But  neither  those  who  have  considered  ^*^'
the  Franks  as  barbarian  conquerors,  enslaving  the  former
possessors,  nor  the  Abbtf  Dnbos,  in  whose  theory  they
ajppear  as  allies  and  friendly  inmates,  are  warranted  by
historical  facts,  thongh  more  approximation  to  the  trulji
may  be  fonnd  in  the  latter  nypothesis. On  the  one
hand,  we  find  the  Bomans  not  only  possessed  of  property,
and  governed  by  their  own  laws,  but  admitted  to  the
royal  &vonr  and  the  highest  of^ces ; '  while  the  bishops

one  of  the  most  reoent  Inqnlren, "  terra  P  Daniel  ooi^ectures  that  Clotaire  1.

Sallca  "  was  all  the  land  held  by  a  Salian  was  the  flrst  who  admitted  Romaxis  into

Frank  (Lehuerou,  L  86). But  the  same  the  army,  which  had  prevlonsly  been

ottfectlomi  apply  to  this  solution ;  in  addi-  oompoaed  of  Franks. From  this  time  we

tioQ  to  wliich  it  may  be  said  that  the  find  many  in  high  military  command,

whole  Salio  law  relates  to  that  people,  (Hist,  de  la  MiUce  Fran?oiae.  t.  L  p.  ii.)

while  "terra  Sallca'*  is  plainly  descrip-  It  seems  by  a  passage  in  Gregory  of

tire  of  a  peculiar  charaoter  of  lands.  Tours,  quoted  by  Duboa  (t  liL  p.  647).

"*  C  5S.  that  some  Romans  affected  the  bu'bariaii

'  I  had  in  fbrmer  editions  asserted  the  diaracter  by  letting  their  hair  grow. If

eontrary  of  this,  on  the  authority  of  Leg.  tliis  were  generally  permitted,  it  would

Burgund.  c  T8,  which  seemed  to  llinit  be  a  stranger  evidence  of  approximation

the  suooesBion  of  estates,  called  sortei ,  to  between  the  two  races  than  any  that

male  heirs. But  the  expressions  are  too  Dubos  has  adduced. Montesquieu  cer-

obscure  to  warrant  this  Infierence ;  and  tainly  takes  it  for  granted  that  a  Roman

M.  Guiaot  (Essais  snr  I'Hist  de  France,  might  change  his  law,  and  thus  become

▼oL  L  p.  95)  refers  to  the  14th  chapter  to  all  material  intents  a  Vnhk, (Esprit

of  the  ssme  oode  fior  the  opposite  propo-  desLoiz,  L  zxrlii.  a  4.)  But  the  passage

sltkm. But  this,  too,  is  not  absolutely  on  which  he  relies  is  read  difTerently  in

dear,  as  a  general  ratal  the  manuscripts. [NoralV.]
•  rnon  UL"-

150  ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL. Chap.  II.  Past  I.

and  clergy,  titIlo  were  generally  of  that  nation,**  grew  up
continually  in  popular  estimation,  in  riches,  and  in
temporal  sway.  Yet  it  is  undeniable  that  a  marked
line  was  drawn  at  the  outset  between  the  conquerors  and
the  conquered.  Though  one  class  of  Bomans  retained
estates  of  their  own,  yet  there  was  another,  called  tri-
butary, who  seem  to  have  cultiTated  those  of  the  Franks,
and  were  scarcely  raised  above  the  condition  of  predial
servitude.  But  no  distinction  can  be  more  unequivocal
than  that  which  was  established  between  the  two  nations,
in  the  weregild,  or  composition  for  homicide.  Capital
punishment  for  murder  was  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the
Franks,  who,  like  most  barbarous  nations,  would  have
thought  the  loss  of  one  citizen  ill  repaired  by  that  of  an-
other. The  weregild  was  paid  to  the  relations  of  the
slain,  according  to  a  legal  rate.  This  was  fixed  by  the
Salic  law  at  six  hundred  solidi  for  an  Antmstion  of  the
king ;  at  three  hundred  for  a  Boman  convioa  regis  (mean-
ing a  man  of  sufficient  Tank  to  be  admitted  to  the  royal
table) ; '  at  two  hundred  for  a  common  Frank ;  at  one

^  The  hutMiiam,  bj  degrees,  got  hold  whldi  appear  Roman.  We  caonot  alwaja

of  bishoprics. In  a  list  of  thirty-foor  Judge  by  the  modernisation  of  a  premier

bishops  or  priests,  present  at  a  cooncU  In  name. St.  Leger  souids  well  enough ;

506.  says  M.  Faoriel  (IlL  46»),  the  names  but  In  his  Life  we  find  a  **  Beatos  Leode-

are  all  Rcnnan  or  Greek. This  was  at  garios  ex  progente  oelsa  Fnnoorum  ac

Agde,  in  the  dominion  of  the  Visigoths.  nobiUaslma  ezortos." Greek  nsmes  are

In  611  a  oonndl  at  Orleans  exhibits  one  exoeedinglj  common  among  the  bishops ;

German  name. Bat  at  the  fifth  ooondl  bat  these  cannot  ™<«^f<^  an  attentive

of  Paris,  in  67T,  where  forty-five  bishops  reader.

attended,  the  Romans  are  indeed  much  This  inroad  of  Franks  into  the  Chm^
the  more  namerous,  but  mingled  with  probably  aooelerated  the  utter  prostratSoo
barbaric  names,  six  of  whom  M.  Thierry  of  intellectual  power,  at  least  in  its  lite-
mentions.  CBMtB  des  Temps  Mdro-  rary  manifestation,  which  throws  so  dark
vingiens,  yoL  IL  p^  183.)  In  586,  at  a  shade  over  the  seventh  oentury.  And
Maoon,out  of  sixty-three  names  but  six  it  still  more  unquestionably  tended  to
are  German.  Faoriel  asserts  that,  in  a  the  secular,  the  irregular,  the  warUke
diploma  of  Clovis  II.  dated  663,  there  are  character  of  the  higher  deigy  in  Franoe
but  five  Romaa  names  out  of  forty-five  and  Germany  for  many  following  om*
witnesses ;  and  hence  he  Infers  that,  by  taries.  Some  of  these  bishops,  according
this  time,  the  Franks  had  seised  <»  the  to  Gregory  of  Tours,  were  profligaia
Church  as  their  spoil,  filling  it  with  bar-  barbariansL

barian  prelates. But  on  reference  toRea  '  This  phrase  was  borrowed  finom  tha

des  Hist  (iv.  636),  I  find  but  four  of  the  Romans. The  Theodoeian  code  speaks  of

witnesses  to  this  instrument  qualified  as  those  qui  divinis  epulis  adhibentur,  et

qri$oopui  s  and  of  these  two  have  Roman  adorandi  princlpis  fiicultatem  antiquitnii

names. The  maj<nity  may  have  been  memerunt Garaier,  Origine  dn  Goa-

laymen  for  any  evidence  which  the  dl-  vemement  Franrais  (in  Leber's  Colleo*

ploma  presents. In  one,  however,  of  tion des  Meilleures Dissertations re-

Cloyis  IIL,  dated  693  (id.  p.  673),  I  find,  lativea  k I'Histoire de Fruioe.  1838,

among  twelve  Msnops,  only  three  names  voL  v.  p.  187). This  memoir  by  Gamlei;

Feudal  Syctem. DISTINCTION  OF  LAW  161

hundred  for  a  Boman  possessor  of  lajads ;  and  at  forty-
five  for  a  tributary,  or  cultivator  of  another's  property.
In  Burgundy,  where  religion  and  length  of  settlement
had  introduced  different  ideas,  murder  was  punished  with
death.  But  other  personal  injuries  were  compensated,
as  among  the  Franks,  by  a  fine,  graduated  according  to
the  rank  and  nation  of  the  aggrieved  party.*

The  barbarous  conquerors  of  Gaul  and  Italy  were
guided  by  notions  veiy  different  from  those  of  DMioctioa
Kome,  who  had  imposed  her  own  laws  upon  all  of  lawt.
the  subjects  of  her  empire.  Adhering  in  general  to  their
ancient  customs,  without  desire  of  improvement,  they
left  the  former  habitations  in  unmolested  enjoyment  of
their  civil  institutions.  The  Frank  was  ju^ed  by  the
Salic  or  the  Ripuary  code ;  the  Qaul  followed  that  of
Theodosius/  lliis  grand  distinction  of  Eoman  and  bar-
barian, according  to  the  law  which  each  followed,  was
common  to  the  Frank,  Burgundian,  and  Lombard  king-
doms. But  the  Ostrogoths,  whose  settlement  in  the
empire  and  advance  in  civility  of  manners  were  earlier,
inclined  to  desert  their  old  usages,  and  adopt  the  Boman
jurisprudence."  The  laws  of  the  Visigoths,  too,  were
compiled  by  bishops  upon  a  Roman  foundation,  and  de-
signed as  an  uniform  code,  by  which  both  nations
should  be  governed.' The  name  of  Qaul  or  Roman  was

which  obtained  a  prize  from  theAcademj  *  Leges  Sallca,  c  48;  Legee  Bnrgnn-

of  InscriptiaDJ  in  1T61,  is  a  learned  dis-  dionmn,  tit  2. Murder  and  robbery

qniflitlon  on  the  relation  between  the  were  made  capital  bj  Ghildeberi  king  of

Frank  monarchy  and  the  naages  of  the  Flaria;  bat  Fiwtau  was  to  be  sent  for

Roman  empire;  inclining  considerably  to  trial  in  the  royal  court,  dAftior  jMrsona

the  school  of  Duboa. I  only  read  it  in  in  loco  pendatur. Baluz.  t  L  p.  17. I

18S1:  it  puts  some  things  in  a  Jnst  light;  am inclined to  think  that  the  word

yet  the  impresuon  which  it  leaves  is  that  Francm  does  not  absolutely  refer  to  the

of  09»-tidedneu, The  author  does  not  nation  of  the  party,  but  rather  to  his

account  for  the  continued  distinction  rank,  as  opposed  to  debiUor  ptrtona;

betwe^  the  Franks  and  Romans,  testi-  and,  consequently,  that  it  had  already

fled  by  the  language  of  history  and  of  acquired  the  sense  of /Vveiiianor/rfle'tem

law. Gamier  never  once  alludes  to  the  (ingenuus),  which  is  perhaps  its  strict

most  striking  drcumstanoe,  the  inequality  meaning.  Du  Cange,  toc.  Francos,  quotes

of  composition  for  hamidde.  the  passage  in  this  sense. [Nan  IV.]

To  return  to  the  words  coovlva  regis,  t  Inter Romanoii;  negotla  caaaamm

it  seems  not  probable  that  they  should  Romania  leglbna  pnedpimua  tenninarL

be  Umlted  to  those  who  actually  had  Edict Clotalr.  L drc  590. Baluc

feasted  at  the  royal  table ;  they  naturally  Capital,  t  i.  p.  7.

Ii^nde  the  senatorial  families,  one  of  ^  Qiannone,  L  UL  c.  2.

whom  would  receive  that  honour  if  he  *  Hist  de  Languedoc,  tip.  24ft

should  present  himself  at  court  Beineccins,  Hist  Juris  Gennan.c.Ls»  ift

162  PROVINCIAL  GOVERNMENT  OF Chap.  II.  Part  L

not  entirely  lost  in  that  of  Frenchman,  nor  had  the  sepa-
ration of  their  laws  ceased,  even  in  the  provinces  north  of
the  Loire,  till  after  the  time  of  Charlemagne/  Ulti-
mately, hoT^ever,  the  feudal  customs  of  succession,  which
depended  upon  principles  quite  remote  from  those  of  the
civil  law,  and  the  rights  of  territorial  justice  which  the
barons  came  to  possess,  contributed  to  extirpate  the
Roman  jurisprudence  in  that  part  of  France.  But  in  the
south,  from  whatever  cause,  it  survived  the  revolutions
of  the  middle  i^es ;  and  thus  arose  a  leading  division  of
that  kingdom  into  pca/s  coutumiers  and  pays  du  droit  Sent ;
the  former  regulated  by  a  vast  variety  of  ancient  usages,
the  latter  by  the  civil  law."

The  kingdom  of  Clovis  was  divided  into  a  number  of
provindAi  districts,  cach  under  the  government  of  a  count,
govttmment  a  name  familiar  to  Roman  subjects,  by  which
Frendi  Ihey  rendered  the  graf  of  the  Gennans.*  The
empiro. aulhority  of  this  officer  extended  over  all  the

'  Soger,  In  hit  life  of  Louis  VL,  xa»  Howeyer,  the  distinction  of  men  u>

the  expression,  lex  Salica  (Recueil  des  cording  to  their  laws  waa  preKrred  for

Historiens,  t  xiL  p.  34) ;  and  I  have  many  centuries,  both  in  France  and  Italy,

some  reoollecUon  of  having  met  with  the  A  Judicial  pnweeding  of  the  year  918,

like  words  in  other  writlngi  of  as  modem  published  by  the  historians  ct  Langoedoc

a  date. But  I  am  not  convinced  that  the  (t  11.  Appendix,  p.  56),  proves  that  the

oric^nal  Sallo  code  was  meant  by  this  Roman,  Oothic,  and  8aUo  codes  were

phrase,  which  may  have  been  applied  to  then  kept  perfectly  sepaimte,  and  that

the  local  feudal  cnstomSi The  capltn-  there  were  distinct  Judges  fin-  the  three

laries  of  Charlemagne an  frequently  nations. The  Gothic  law  is  referred  to

tenned  lex  Salica. Many  of  these  are  as  an  existing  authority  in  a  charter  of

copied  firom  the  Theodosian  code.  lOTO. Idem,  till.  p.  274;  De  Karea,

'  This  dlvisloo  is  very  andent,  being  Harea  Hlspanica,  p.  1159. Women  In

found  in  the  edict  of  Pistes,  under  diaries  Italy  upon marriage  usually  dinged

the  Bald,  in  Mi ;  where  we  read,  in  1111s  their  law  and  adopted  that  of  their  hua-

reglonlbus,  qnm legem  Bomanam  se-  band,  returning  to  their  own  in  wldow-

qnuntur. (Reenell  des  Hlstoriens,  t  viL  hood ;  but  to  this  there  are  exceptions

p.  664.) Montesquieu  thinks  that  the  Charten  are  found  as  late  as  the  twelfth

Roman  law  iUl  Into  disuse  in  the  north  century  with  the  expression,  qui  pn^

of  France  on  account  of  the  superior  fessus  sum  lege  Longobardict  [aut]  lege

advantages,  particularly  In  point  of  com-  Salicft  [aut]  lege  Alemanncntmi  vivere.

position  for  oflSmoes,  annexed  to  the  Sallo  But  soon  afterwards  the  distinctkos  were

law ;  while  that  of  the  Visigoths  being  entirely  lost,  partly  throu|^  the  preva-

more  equal,  the Romans  under  their  lenoe  of  the  Roman  law.  and  partly

government  had  no  inducement  to  quit  throni^  the  nraltitode  of  local  statolsB

their  own  code.  (Esprit  dee  Lolx,  L  xxvilL  in  the  Italian  dties. Mnmtori.  Antiqul-

c  4.) But  it  does  not  appear  Uiat  the  tates  Italiie  Oissertot  22 ;  Dn  C^u^s.  t.

Visigotiis  had  any  peculUr  code  of  laws  Lex. Heinecdus, Historia  Juris  Gerl

till  after  their  expulsion  from  the  king-  manid,  c.  IL  s.  51. [Notb  V.)

dom  of  Toulouse. They  tiien  retained  •  The  word  ^ro/ wi»  not  always  eqni.

only  a  small  strip  of  territoiy  in  Frsnoe.  valent  to  eoma;  it  took  in  some  coon.

9boat  Naibonne  and  MontpelUcr.  tries,  as  in  England,  the  tatm  gm^u,  mai

Feudal  Ststek. THE  FRprCH  EMPIRE.  153

inhabitants,  as  well  Franks  as  natives.  It  was  his  duty
to  administer  justice,  to  preserve  tranquillity,  to  coUeot
the  royal  revenues,  and  to  lead,  when  required,  the  free
proprietors  into  the  field.^  The  title  of  a  duke  implied
a  lugher  dignity,  and  commonly  gave  authority  over
several  counties.*  These  offices  were  originally  con-
ferred during  pleasure ;  but  the  claim  of  a  son  to  succeed
his  father  would  often  be  found  too  plausible  or  too
formidable  to  be  rejected,  and  it  is  highly  probable
that,  even  under  the  Merovingian  kings,  these  provincial
governors  had  laid  the  foundations  of  that  independence
which  was  destined  to  change  the  countenance  of  Europe/

•tood  Ibr  th«  vieeeoma  or  dieriff,  the  oMwr  Mmnmoliis  under  Gontnn. Thia

ooont  or  aldemum's  deputy. Some  have  is  protxtble  too  from  analogy.  The  patri-

darlved  it  from  grau,  oo  the  hypotheels  dan  was  the  hi^est  oflBoer  in  the  Roman

that  the  elden  presided  in  the  Qennan  empire  from  the  time  of  ConBtantlne.and

■ifmbliee.  we  know  how  much  the  Frenkethem-

b  Marcnli&  Formulc,  L  L  SSL  aelvee,  and  still  more  their  Gaulish  sob*

*  Honard,  the  learned translator  of  jects.  affected  to  imitate  the  style  of  the

Uttleton  (Anciens  Loiz  des  Francois,  imperial  court

t  L  p.  6),  sappoees  these  titles  to  have  This  office  wss,  as  &r  as  I  recollect

been  applied  indiiferentlj. But  the  con-  oonfined  to  the  kingdom  of  Burgundy ;

trary  is  easily  proved,  and  especially  by  but  the  Franks  of  this  kingdom  may  have

a  line  of  Fortnnatus,  quoted  I^DuCange  borrowed  it  firom  the  fiurgundians,  as

and  othere.  the  latter  did  from  the  empire. Mar^

Qui  modo  dat  Oamitis,  det  tibi  Jura  culfris  gives  a  fonn  for  the  grant  of  the

T>odB,  office  of  patrician,  which  seems  to  have

The  cause  of  IL  HoaanTs  error  maj  differed  only  in  local  extent  of  anthcnlty

perhaps  be  worth  noticing  In  the  above-  from  that  of  a  duke  or  a  count,  whidi

dted  form  of  Maiculftis,  a  pnoedent  (in  was  the  least  of  the  three ;  as  the  same

law  language)  is  given  for  the  appoint*  formula  ezpreislng  their  ftuictions  is  snf-

mentof  aduke,  oonnttorpsflrlcian.  The  fkdentforalL

material  pert  being  the  same,  it  was  only  ^  That  the  offices  of  ooont  and  duke

neoeasaiy  ioflU^ptke  blanks,  as  we  were  orlgiAally  but  temporary  may  bo

should  call  lt«  by  inserting  the  proper  inferred  fhnn  ieveral  passages  in  Gregory

designation  of  office. It  is  ezprened  of  Toon;  ssL  v.  c.  37.  L  viii.  c.  18. Bat

therefore,  actionem  cawMatu*,  ducahu.  It  seems  by  the  laws  of  the  Alemanni,

out  patrieiatta  in  pago  iUo^  quam  ant^  c.  36,  that  the  h«:«dltary  snccesBico  of

ce$»or  tuut  ilU  usqoe  nunc  vlsus  est  their  dukes  was  tolerably  established  at

cglsM,  tibi  agendum  regendumque  com-  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,

missimus. Monteequleo  has  fUlen  into  when  their  code  was  promulgated. The

a  similar  mistske  (L  zzx.  c.  l«),  forget-  Bavarians  chose  their  own  dukes  out  of

ting  for  a  moment,  Uke  Honard,  that  one  £unily,  as  is  declared  in  their  laws ;

these  instruments  in  MarcnUtas  were  not  tit  ii.  c  1,  and  c.  20.  (Lindebrog,  Codex

records  of  real  tnnaactlons.  but  general  Legum  Antiqnarum.)  This  the  emperor

forms  for  ftitnre  oooBslon.  Henry  IL  confirms: Nonne  sdtfs  (be

The  offloe  of  patrician  Is  rather  more  aay? ),  BiO™u^<«  <^  ^^<*  dncem  eligendl

obscure. It  seems  to  have  nearly  corre-  libersm habere potestatem? (Ditmar,

spooded  with  what  was  slterwards  called  apud  Schmidt.  Hist,  des  Allemands,  t  IL

mayor  of  the  palace,  and  to  have  implied  p.  404.) Indeed  the  consent  of  these

*he  command  of  all  the  royal  forces.  German  provindal  nations,  if  I  mav  o»e

"^och  at  least  wars  Op>kas  sM  his  soo-  theexpresBMn.aseni8tohavclAenalwvi

1 54  THE  FRENCH  SUCCESSION. Chap.  II.  Part  I.

The  Lombard  dukes,  those  especially  of  Spoleto  and
Benevento,  acquired  very  early  an  hereditaiy  right  of
governing  their  provinces,  and  that  kingdom  became  a
sort  of  federal  aristocracy.*
The  throne  of  France  was  always  filled  by  the  royal
house  of  Meroveus.  However  complete  we  may
to  tS^°  imagine  the  elective  rights  of  the  Franks,  it  is
French  clear  that  a  fundamental  law  restrained  them
monarchy.  ^  ^^  family.  Such,  indeed,  had  been  the
monarchy  of  their  ancestors  the  Germans;  such  long
continued  to  be  those  of  Spain,  of  England,  and  perhaps
of  all  European  nations.  The  reigning  family  was  im-
mutable; but  at  every  vacancy  &e  heir  awaited  the
confirmation  of  a  popular  election,  whether  that  were  a
substantial  privilege  or  a  mere  ceremony.  Exceptions,
however,  to  the  lineal  succession  are  rare  in  the  history
of  any  country,  unless  where  an  infant  heir  was  thought
unfit  to  rule  a  nation  of  freemen.  But,  in  fact,  it  is  vain
to  expect  a  system  of  constitutional  laws  rigidly  observed
in  ages  of  anarchy  and  ignorance.  Those  antiquaries
who  have  maintained  the  most  opposite  theories  upon
such  points  are  seldom  in  want  of  particular  instances  to
support  their  respective  conclusions.'

reqaired,  w  in  an  independent  monarchy,  a  strict  hereditary  deacenL NelUwrper-

Ditmar,  a  chronicler  of  the  tenth  century,  haps  rafflcienUy  distingoiahea  acta of

aaya  that  Eckard  was  made  duke  of  violence  fhnn  thoee  of  rif^t,  nor  obs^n^ea

Thoringia  totins  populi  consensu.  Pfeffel,  the  changes  in  the  French  oonstltation

Abr^  Chronologlqne,  t  L  p.  184. With  between  Qovia  and  Childerlc  IlL

reqwct  to  France,  properly  so  called,  or  It  would  now  be  admitted by  the

the  Ungdoma  of  Neustria  and  Burgundy.  miOo^ty  of  French  antiquaries,  that  the

it  may  be  less  easy  to  prove  the  existence  nearest  heir  would  not  have  a  strict  right

of  hereditaiy  oflBces  under  the  Merovin-  to  the  throne ;  but  if  he  were  ot  Ml  age

gians. But  the  feebleness  of  their  govern-  and  in  lineal  descent*  his  expectation

ment  makes  it  probable  that  so  natural  would  be  such  as  to  ccmstltnte  a  moral

a  qrstem  of  disorganization  had  not  liRUed  claim  never  to  be  defeated  or  conteated,

to  enaoe. The  Helvetian  counts  appear  provided  no  impediment,  sndi  aa  his  mi<-

to  have  been  nearly  independent  aa  early  oatitj  or  weakness  of  mind,  stood  in  the

M  this  period. (Planta's  Hist,  of  the  way. After  the  middle  of  the  seventh

He  tvetic  Oonfederacy ,  chap.  L)  century  the  mayors  of  the  palace  selected

*  Giannone,  L  iv. [Notk  VI.]  whom  they  would. Aa  it  la  still  clearer

f  Hottoman  (Franoo-Oallia,  c.  vf .)  and  fhnn  history  that  ttie  Oarlovingian  Unp

BouIainviUiers  (Etat  de  la  France)  seem  did  not  assume  the  crown  without  an

to  consider  the  crown  aa  absolute^  eleo>  election,  we  may  more  probably  snppcee

tive. The  Abb^  Vertot  (Mtaiolres  de  this  to  have  been  the  ancient  constitution.

TAcad.  des  Inscriptions,  t  iv.)  maintains  The  paasagea  in  Gregory  of  Toars  which

a  limited  ri|^t  of  dection  within  the  look  like  a  mere  hereditary  snocesrion

reigning  flunlly.  M.  de  Fonoemagne  (t  L  sadi  as,  QwttuarfiUi  ttffnwm  aodpiumi

and  t.  TliL  of  tbs  same  collection)  aaserts  «t  inter  m  aquA  lanee  dMdnmt,  do  not

Feudal  Syotem.  CLOVIS.  165

Clovis  was  a  leader  of  barbariauB,  who  respected  Ids
valour  and  the  rank  which  they  had  given  u^^^^
him,  but  were  incapable  of  servile  feelings,  and  wthori^
jealous  of  their  common  as  well  as  individual  ®'^^^^
rights. In  order  to  appreciate  the  power  which  he
possessed,  it  has  been  customary  with  French  writers  to
bring  forward  the  well-known  story  of  the  vase  vwe  of
ofSoissons. When  the  plunder  taken  in  Clevis's  So««on«-
invasion  of  Gaul  was  set  out  in  this  place  for  distribution,
he  begged  for  himself  a  precious  vessel  belonging  to  the
church  of  Hheims. The  army  having  expressed  their
willingness  to  consent,  "  You  shall  have  nothing  here,**
exclaimed  a  soldier,  striking  it  with  his  battle-axe,  *'  but
what  falls  to  your  ^are  by  lot." Clovis  took  the  vessel
without  marking  any  resentment,  but  found  an  oppor-
tunity, next  year,  of  revenging  himself  by  the  death  of
the  soldier. The  whole  behaviour  of  Clovis  appears  to
be  that  of  a  barbarian  chief,  not  daring  to  withdraw  any-
thing from  the  rapacity,  or  to  chastise  the  rudeness,  of
his  foUcfWers.

But  if  such  was  the  liberty  of  the  Franks  when  they
first  became  conquerors  of  Gaid,  we  have  good  ^^^  ^^
reason  to  believe  that  they  did  not  long  preserve  tbe  ungp
it. A  people  not  very  numerous  spread  over  *°"'~*^
the  spacious  provinces  of  Gaul,  wherever  lands  were
assigned  to  or  seized  by  them. It  became  a  burden  to
attend  those  general assemblies  of  the  nation  which
were  annually  convened  in  the  month  of  March,  to
deliberate  upon  public  business,  as  well  as  to  exhibit  a
muster  of  military  strength. After  some  time  it  appears
that  these  meetings  drew  together  only  the  bishops,  and

exclude  a  popular  election,  which  he  obtain  tlie  pope's  sanction  before  be  tsd-

woQld  consider  a  mere  formality,  and  tond  to  depose  the  MeroTingian  prince,

which  in  that  case  must  have  been  little  obscure  and  despised  as  he  was."  (EsBaJs

more.  snr  I'HisL  de  Fnmoe,  p.  298.)  But  surely

I  must  admit,  however,  that  M.Gulsot,  this  is  not  to  the  point ChllderlcI^.

whose  authority  Is  deservedly  so  high,  was  a  reigning  king;  and,  besides  this,

gives  more  wei^t  to  Uneal  inheritance  the  question  is  by  no  means  as  to  the

than  many  others  have  done ;  and  conse*  right  of  the  Merovingisn  ftmlly  to  thi

quently  treats  the  phrases  of  historians  throne,  which  no  one  disputes,  but  as  to

seeming  to  imply  a  choice  by  the  peo-  that  of  the  nearest  heir. The  case  was

pie  ss  merely  recognitions  of  a  legal  the  aune  with  tbe  second  dynasty. The

right "  The principle  of  hereditary  Franks  bound  themselves  to  the  ikanil;

right.*'  he  says,  "  must  have  been  deeply  of  Pepin  not  to  any  one  heir  within  it
Implanted  when  Prptn  w«s  fomnd  to

166  POWER  OF  THE  KINGS. Chap.  II.  Part  I.

tho«i6  invested  witli  civil  offices.'  The  ancient  inhabitants
of  Gaul,  having  little  notion  of  political  liberty,  were
tinlikely  to  resist  the  most  tyrannical  conduct.  Many
of  them  became  officers  of  state,  and  advisers  of  the
sovereign,  whose  ingenuity  might  tea^sh  Tnaxims  of  des-
potism unknown  in  the  forests  of  Germany.  We  shall
scarcely  wrong  the  bishops  by  suspecting  them  of  more
pliable  courtliness  than  was  ^tiatumL  to  the  long-haired
warriors  of  Clovis.''  Yet  it  is  probable  that  some  of  the
Franks  were  themselves  instrumental  in  this  change  of
their  government.  The  court  of  the  Merovingian  kings
was  crowded  with  followers,  who  have  been  plausibly
derived  from  those  of  the  German  chie&  described  by
Tacitus;  men  forming  a  distinct  and  elevated  class  in
the  state,  and  known  by  the  titles  of  Fideles,  Leudes,
and  Antrustiones.  They  took  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the
king,  upon  their  admission  into  that  rank,  and  were  com-
monly remunerated  with  gifts  of  land.  Under  different
appellations  we  find,  as  some  antiquaries  think,  this
class  of  courtiers  in  the  early  records  of  Lombardy  and
England.  The  general  name  of  Vassals  (from  (ruxu,  a
Celtio  word  for  a  servant)  is  applied  to  them  in  every
country.*  By  the  assistance  of  these  faithful  supporters
it  has  been  thought  that  the  regal  authority  of  Clevis's
successors  was  insured.^  However  this  may  be,  the
annals  of  his  more  immediate  descendants  exhibit  a
course  of  oppression,  not  merely  displayed,  as  will  often

i  Dnbos,  t  liL  p.  32T ;  Ifably,  Ob&err,  Thto  name  they  did  not  aoqirire,  ori-

•ar  rHlstolre  de Fnmoe,  L  L  c  3.  glnally,  bj  poawiring  benefloeB;  bat

b  Oregory  of  Toun, thnmc^ont  his  rather,  bj  being  vaoBala  or  serranla,  be-

faifltory,  talks  of  the  royal  power  in  the  came  the  ol^ect  of  beneficiary  donations,

tone  of  Louis  XIV.'s  coorL If  we  were  In  one  of  Marcnlftu's  prwxdenta.  L  L

obliged  to  believe  all  we  read,  even  the  f.  18,  we  have  the  fonn  by  which  an

vase  of  SolsBons  would  bear  witness  to  Antrustlon  wss  created. See  Dn  Cange,

the  obedience  of  the  Franks.  under  these  several  words,  and  M  ura-

i  The  Qaaindi  of  Italy  and  the  Anglo-  tori's  thirteenth  dinerution  on  Italian

Saxon  royal  Thane  appear  to  correspond.  Antiquities. The  Gardingl  sometiSMs

more  or  leas,  to  the  Antrustiona  of  Ftanoe.  mentioned  in  the  laws  of  the  Visigoths  do

The  word  Thane,  however,  as  will  be  not  appear  to  be  of  the  same  description,

seen  in  another  chapter,  was  used  in  a  k  Boantus  ,  . valutas  in  domo  sua,

very  extensive  sense,  and  comprehended  ab  hominibus  regis  interfectos  est.  Greg.

all  tree  proprietors  of  land. That  of  Tnr.  L  viiL  c.  11. A  few  spirited  r«-

I^eudes  seems  to  imply  only  sul^ectioo,  tainers  were  snfDdent  to  execute  the

and  Is  i^uently  applied  to  the  whole  mandates  of  arbitnuy  power  among  t

budy  of  a  nation,  as  well  as,  in  a  stricter  bartwrous  disunited  people,
srase,  lo the  king's  pemnal  vasaaU.

thsuDAL  SryrEX. MAYORS  OF  ThK  PALACE.  157

happen  among*  tmcivilized  people,  thougli  free,  in  acts  oi
private  injustice,  but  in  sucn  general  t3rranny  as  is
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  any  real  checks  upon
the  sovereign."*

But  before  the  middle  of,  the  seventh  oentuiy  the
kings  of  this  line  had  fallen  into  that  contempt-  iwBiienu^
ible  state  which  has  been  described  in  the  last  ^2heroyii
chapter.  The  mayors  of  the  palace,  who  from  uajm  of
mere  officers  of  the  court  had  now  become  inas-  ^^  ?•*•<*•
ters  of  the  kingdom,  were  elected  by  the  Franks,  not  indeed
the  whole  body  of  that  nation,  but  the  provincial  governors
and  considerable  proprietors  of  -land."  Some  inequality
tjxere  probably  exited  from  the  begimiiBg  in  the  parti-
tion  of  estates,  and  this  had  been  greatly  increased  by
the  common  changes  of  property,  by  the  rapine  of  those
savage  times,  and  by  royal  munificence.  Thus  arose
that  landed  aristocracy  which  became  the  most  striking
feature  in  the  political  system  of  Europe  during  many
centuries,  and  is,  in  fsict,  its  great  distinction,  both  from
the  despotism  of  Asia,  and  the  equality  of  republiccoi
governments.

There  has  been  some  dispute  about  tlxe  origin  of
nobility  in  France,  which  might  perhaps  be
settled,  or  at  least  better  understood,  by  fixing ^ ^'
our  conception  of  the  term. In  our  modem  acceptation
it  is  usually  taken  to  imply  certain  distinctive  privileges
in  the  political  order,  inherent  in  the  blood  of  the

"*  ThfatomoreAiUydbcaMedlnNoTK  gether  changed.
VH.  It  might  even  be  sarmlaed  that  the

'  The  revolution  which  ruined  Bmne-  crown  was  considered  as  more  elective
haot  waa  Iwought  about  hj  the  defection  than  before.  The  author  of  Gesta  Regum
of  her  chief  nobles,  especially  Wamachar,  Francorum,  an  old  chronicler  who  lived
mayor  of  Austrasia.  Upon  Clotaire  II.'s  in  thoee  times,  changes  his  form  of  ex-
victory  over  her  he  waa  compelled  to  re-  preasing  a  king's  accession  from  that  of
ward  these  adherents  at  the  expense  of  the  Clotaire  IL  Of  the  earlier  kings  he  says
monarchy.  Wamachar  was  made  mayor  only,  regnnm  recepit.  But  of  Clotaire,
of  Burgundy,  with  an  oath  from  the  king  Fnmd  quoque  pradictum  Clotairinm
never  to  dispossess  him.  (Fredegarius,  regem  parvulum  supra  se  in  regnum  sta-
c.  42.)  In  62e  the  nobility  of  Burgundy  tuemnt.  Again,  of  the  accession  of  Dago
declined  to  elect  a  mayor,  which  aeems  bert  I. :  Austrasii  Fraud  snperiores,  con-
to  have  been  considered  as  their  rl^t  gregati  hiunum,  Dagobertum  supra  se  in
Prom  this  time  nothing  was  done  without  regnum  statuuut  In  another  placed  De
the  consent  of  the  arislocrscy.  Unless  cedente  prsB&to  rege  Clodoveo,  Fraud
we  ascribe  all  to  the  different  ways  of  Clotairium  senlorem  pnerum  ex  tribus
thinking  in  Gregory  and  Fredegarius.  the  sibi  regem  statuerunt.  Several  other  lur
one  a  Roman  bishop,  the  other  a  Frank  stances  mif^t  be  quot«d.
or  Boqfundlan,  the  fovemment  was  alto-

l68  THE  NOBILITY.  Chap.  II.  Part  I.

poBsessor,  and  oonsequently  not  traneferable  like  ihose
which  property  confers.  Limited  to  this  sense,  nobility,
I  conceive,  was  unknown  to  the  conquerors  of  Ghtul  till
long  after  the  down£Edl  of  the  Roman  empire.  They  felt,
no  doubt,  the  common  prejudice  of  mankind  in  &.T0tu
of  those  whose  ancestry  is  conspicuous,  when  compared
with  persons  of  obscure  birth.  This  is  the  primaxy
meaning  of  nobility,  and  perfectly  distinguishable  from
the  possession  of  exclusive  civil  rights.  Those  who  are
acquainted  with  the  constitution  of  the  Boman  republic
will  recollect  an  instance  of  the  difference  between  these
two  species  of  hereditary  distinction,  in  the  patricii  and
the  nobSes.  Though  I  do  not  think  that  the  tribes  of
German  origin  paid  so  much  regard  to  genealogy  as
some  Scandinavian  and  Celtic  nations  (else  the  be-
ginnings of  the  greatest  houses  would  not  have  been  so
enveloped  in  doubt  as  we  find  them),  there  are  abundant
traces  of  the  respect  in  which  families  of  known  antiquity
were  held  among  them."

But  the  essential  distinction  of  ranks  in  France,  per-
haps also  in  Spain  cmd  Lombardy,  was  founded  upon
the  possession  of  land,  or  upon  civil  employment.  The
aristocracy  of  wealth  preceded  that  of  birth,  which
indeed  is  still  chiefly  dependent  upon  the  other  for  its
importance.  A  Frank  of  large  estate  was  styled  a  noble ;
if  he  wasted  or  was  despoiled  of  his  wealth,  his  descend-
ants fell  into  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  the  new
possessor  became  noble  in  his  stead.  Families  were
noble  by  descent,  because  they  were  rich  by  the  same
means.  Wealth  gave  them  power,  cmd  power  gave  them
pre-eminence.  But  no  distinction  was  made  by  the
Salic  or  Lombard  codes  in  the  composition  for  homicide,
the  great  test  of  political  station,  except  in  &vour  of

"  The  antiquitj  of  French  noblUty  la  manj  proofk It  seems  to  have  been  a

maintained  tempermt^  by  Schmidt,  Hist  reoommendatlon  In  the  choice  of  bUbope.

des  Allemands, t  L  p.  361,  and  with  (M arcnifi  FormaLs,  L  L  c  4,  com  notis

acrimony  by  Montesqaieo,  Esprit  des  Blgnonil,  In  Baloitt  Ospitolaribos.) It

liOix, L  zxx.  c.  25. Neither  of  them  was  probably  mndi  ooostdered  in  ooo-

proves  any  more  than  I  have  admitted,  ferriug  dignities. FVed^garios  says  of

The  expression  of  Lndovlcns  Pins  to  his  Protadlns,  mayor  of  the  palace  to  Brans-

flneedman,  Rex  fedt  to  Ubemm,  non  bant,  Qnoacunque  genera  noblles  npn

nobllem ;  qnod  ImposBlblle  est  post  liber-  riebat,  totos  hnmlUare ooaabatiir,  nl

tatem.  is  very  intelligible,  withoat  ima-  nnllns  reperirator,  <ial  gradnm.  qnm

gining  a  privileged  dass.  Of  the  practical  arripnerat,  potolnet  asiiimiira. [Nun

r^gsrd  paid  to  birth,  indeed,  there  are  VIILl

Feudal  Ststex. FISCAL  LANDS— BENEFICES.  159

the  king's  Taseals.  It  seems,  howeTer,  by  some  of  the
barbaric  codes,  those  namely  of  the  Bnrgimdians,  Visi-
goths, Saxons,  and  the  English  colony  of  the  latter
nation,^  that  the  free  men  were  ranged  by  them  into  two
or  three  classes,  and  a  difference  made  in  the  price  at
which  their  lives  were  Talned:  so  that  there  certainly
existed  the  elements  of  aristocratic  privileges,  if  we
cannot  in  strictness  admit  their  completion  at  so  early  a
period.  The  Antrostions  of  the  kmgs  of  the  Franks
were  also  noble,  and  a  composition  was  paid  for  their
mnrder,  treble  of  that  for  an  ordinary  citizen ;  but  this
was  a  personal,  not  an  hereditaiy  distinction.  A  link
was  wintiBg  to  connect  dieir  eidnent  privileges  widi
their  posterity;  and  this  link  was  to  be  supplied  by
hereditary  benefices.

Besides  the  lands  distributed  amoi^  the  nation,  others
were  reserved  to  the  crown,  partly  for  the  sup-  jigc^i
port  of  its  dignity,  fimd  partly  for  the  exercise  !*«*»•
of  its  munificence.  These  are  called  fiscal  lands ;  they
were  dispersed  over  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and
formed  die  most  regular  source  of  revenue.*^  But  the
greater  portion  of  them  were  granted  out  to  favoured
subjects,  under  the  name  of  benefices,  the  nature  of
which  is  one  of  the  most  important  points  in'  the  policy
of  these  ages.  Benefices  were,  it  is  probable,  ~^ -^
most  frequently  bestowed  upon  the  professed
courtiers,  the  Antrustiones  or  Leudes,  and  upon  ^e
provincial  governors.  It  by  no  means  appears  that  any
conditions  of  miHtary  service  were  expressly  annexed  to
these  grants :  but  it  may  justly  be  presumed  that  such
fftvours  were  not  conferred  without  an  expectation  of
some  return ;  and  we  read  both  in  law  and  histoiy  that
beneficiarj'  tenants  were  more  closely  connected  with
the  crown  than  mere  alodial  proprietors.  Whoever  pos-
sessed a  benefice  was  expected  to  serve  his  sovereign  in
the  field.  But  of  alodial  pix^prietors  only  the  owner  of
three  mansi  was  called  upon  for  personal  service.  Where

P  Leg.  BoignxuL  tit.  26;  T^eg.  Vidgoth.  en;  the  UngB,  In  Journeying  to  dlfforant

L  iL  t  2,  a  4  (in  lindebrog.) ;  Dn  Gange,  parts  of  tbetr  dominions,  took  np  their

Toa  Adalingna,  NoUUs ;  WlUdns,  Leg.  abode  in  them. Charlemagne  to  Tery  fVill

Ang.  Sax.  pasBtan.  in  liis  directlonB  as  to  their  manag<nnrnt

^  The  demesne  lands  of  the  crown  are  GapttaUria,  a.d.  797,  et  alibi,
srmtinuallj  mantloDed  in  the  early  writ-

160  EXTENT  OF  BENEFICES. Chap.  II.  Fixr  L

there  were  three  possessors  of  single  mansi,  one  went  to
the  army,  and  the  others  contributed  to  hifl  equipment.'
Such  at  least  were  the  regulations  of  Charlemagne,  whom
I  cannot  believe,  with  Mably,  to  have  relaxed  the  obliga-
tions of  military  attendance.  After  the  peace  of  Coblente,
in  860,  Charles  the  Bald  restored  all  alodial  property
belonging  to  his  subjects,  who  had  taken  part  against
him,  but  not  his  own  beneficiary  grants,  which  they
were  considered  as  having  forfeited.
Most  of  those  who  have  written  upon  the  feudal
TMr  system  lay  it  down  that  benofioea  were  on-
extent  ginally  precarious  and  revoked  at  pleasure  by
the  sovereign;  that  they  were  afterwards  granted  foi
life ;  and  at  a  subsequent  period  became  hereditary.  No
satififiBictory  proof,  however,  appears  to  have  been  brought
of  the  first  stage  in  this  progress.'  At  least,  I  am  not
convinced  that  beneficiary  grants  were  ever  considered
as  resumable  at  pleasure,  unless  where  some  delinquenOT
could  be  imputed  to  the  vassal.  It  is  possible,  thou^
I  am  not  aware  of  any  documents  which  prove  it,  that
benefices  may  in  some  instances  have  been  granted  for
a  term  of  years,  since  even  fie&  in  much  later  times
were  occasionally  of  no  greater  extent.  Their  ordinary
duration,  however,  was  at  least  the  life  of  the  possessor,
after  which  they  reverted  to  the  fisc.^  Nor  can  I  agree
with  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  hereditary  benefices
under  the  first  race  of  French  kings.  The  codes  of  the
Burgundians,  and  of  the  Yisigotbs,  which  advert  to
them,  are,  by  analogy,  witnesses  to  the  contrary."  The
precedents  given  in  the  forms  of  Marculfus  (about  660)
for  the  grant  of  a  benefice  contain  veiy  full  terms,

'  CapltaL  Car.  Mag.  ann.  80Y  and  812.  bad.  In  fate  time,  an  nnqnestiooable  nnrc^>

I  cannot  define  the  precise  area  of  a  ston  after  the  death  of  its  original  bcne-

mansua. It  comdsted,  aooording  to  Pn  fldary. Hoc  tempore  et  Wandeltaraii

Cange.  of  twelve  Jngera;  bat  what  he  nntrltor  Ghlldeberti  regit  oUIt;  aed  in

meant  by  a  Joger  1  know  not  The  ancient  locmn  ^ns  nallos  est  rabropttna,  co  <iaod

Romiin  Jogcr  was  about  fiye-elghths  of  reglnA  mater  coram  Tellt  proprlam  b**

an  acre;  the  Parisian  aipent  was  a fonrtfi  beredeflUa  QwecmnquedeJUoomenUt,

more  than  one. This  would  make  a  dif-  Jitci  jwribui  nmt  rdata, Obiit  his  dl»*

ference  oa  two  to  one.  bos  Bodegesilns  dnz  plenns  dieram ;  sad

*  {'Son  IX.]  nihil  de  fumltate  f^ta  flliia  minntom

t  The  following  passage  from  Gregoiy  est  LtUL  c2a. GregorT's  work,  bow-

of  Tonrs  seems  to  prove  ttutt,  althoogli  ever,  does  not  go  llulher  than  5M.

BOOS  weie  occasionally  permitted  to  sno-  ^  Leges  Borgandionmi,  tit.  L;  Legw

ceed  their  (kthera,  an  indulgence  which  Vialgotlk  L  ▼.  tit  &
easily  grew  np  Into  a  rl|^t  the  cnwa

Pbudal  STsntx.  Sin^INVEUDATION.  161

DXtondin^  it  to  the  heirs  of  the  beneficiary.'  And  Mably
has  plausibly  inferred  the  perpetuity  of  benefices,  at  least
in  some  instances,  from  the  langoage  of  the  treaty  at
Andely  in  587,  and  of  an  edict  of  Clotaire  11.  some
years  later.^  We  can  hardly  donbt  at  least  that  children
wonld  put  in  a  yeiy  strong  claim  to  what  their  fieitheT
had  enjoyed;  and  the  weakness  of  the  crown  in  the
seTenth  century  mnst  have  rendered  it  difficidt  to  re-
claim its  proi>erty.

A  natural  consequence  of  hereditary  benefices  was  that
those  who  possessed  them  carved  out  portions  gob-infta-
to  be  held  of  theqiselTes  by  a  similar  tenure.  d»^<»-
Abundant  proofs  of  this  custom,  best  known  by  the  name
of  sub-infeudation,  occur  eyen  in  the  capitularies  of
Pepin  and  Charlemagne.  At  a  later  period  it  became
universal;  and  what  had  begun  perhaps  through  ambi-
tion or  pride  was  at  last  dictated  by  necessity.  In  that
dissolution  of  all  law  which  ensued  after  the  death  of
Charlemagne,  the  powerful  leaders,  constantly  engaged
in  domestic  warfiare,  placed  their  chief  dependency  upon
men  whom  they  attached  by  gratitude,  and  bound  by
strong  conditions.  The  oath  of  fidelity  which  they  had
taken,  the  homage  which  they  had  paid  to  the  sovereign,
they  exacted  from  their  own  vassals.  To  render  military
service  became  the  essential  obligation  which  the  tenant
of  a  benefice  undertook ;  and  out  of  those  ancient  grants,
now  become  for  the  most  part  hereditary,  there  grew  up
in  the  tenth  century,  both  in  name  and  reality,  the
system  of  feudal  tenures.'

'  Marcall  form.  zlL  and  xiv.  L  L  calpft  mittUtmn  eft»  aadtontii  baUtt  rw-

Thls  precedent  wm  in  use  doim  to  the  tauretor. Et  de  «o  qaod  per  mmilfloeii-

olereDth  oentoiy;  its  ezpreaBlau  recnr  ttaa  pnBoedmtinm  ngam  mnuquisqne

to  almost  every  diarter. Tbe  earlieat  usque  ad  tramltam  gloriaa»  memoito

*wmtmmt^  I  have  Seen  of  an  actnal  grant  domlni  CUothadMOli  regis  poaedit,  cmn

to  a  private  person  Is  of  Charlemagne  to  secarltate  poasldcftt ;  et  quod  ezJnde  fide*

one  John,  in  T9B. Balniii  Oapitalazia,  libos  peiaonis  abUtom  est,  ds  pnesentl

1  iL  pk  I40a  tedplat FoBdns  AndeUacnm,  in  Oisgor.

y  Quioqoid  ante&tl  reges  eoclesils  ant  Tnron.  L  iz.  c.  90.

fldeUbn  sois  contnlenmt,  ant  adhnc  oon-  Qoacnnqne  eoclesia  vel  derids  vol

toiv  com  jnstitM )eo  propltiante  vo-  qnlbnalibet  personis  a  g^ariosn  memoria

Inerlnt,  stabiliter  eooaervetar;  et  qnlo-  pre&tis  prlnelplbns  muiSflcentlB  laigl-

qnid  unicniqne  fldeUnm  in  ntrlnsqne  tate  coUata  snnt»  omnl  llrmitats  perdO'

fUpwi  per  legem  et  Jostitiam  redhibetor,  rent Kdict  Chlotadiar  I.  val  podos  H

BaUnm ei  pra^JwUdnm  pouatnr,aed  lloeat  in  BecoeU  dea  HIstorlens,  t  Iv.  p^  11&

f«i  deMtas  poaridere  atqoe  redpere. Et  ■  TScfn  X.]
fi  aUqold  onicxdqiis  per  interregna  dne

VOL.  L  ^

162  FROnNCIAL  GOVERNOB& Cbap.  II.  Past  L

This  revolntioii'was  accompanied  by  another  still  more
Usurpation  ™portaiit-  The  provincial  govemoiB,  the  duke*
af  pniviacioi  and  counts,  to  whom  we  may  add  the  marquises
governore.  ^^  margraves  intrusted  with  the  custody  ol
the  frontiers,  had  taken  the  lead  in  all  public  measures
after  the  decline  of  the  Merovingian  kings.  Charle-
magne, duly  jealous  of  their  ascendency,  checked  it  by
Bufferiog  the  duchies  to  expire  without  renewal,  by
granting  ver^'  few  counties  hereditarily,  by  removing
the  administration  of  justice  from  the  hands  of  the  counts
into  those  of  his  own  itinerant  judges,  and,  if  we  are
not  deceived  in  his  policy,  by  elevating  the  ecclesiastical
oi-der  as  a  counterpoise  to  that  of  the  nobUity.  Even  in
his  time,  the  faults  of  the  counts  are  the  constant  theme
of  the  capitularies ;  their  dissipation  and  neglect  of  duty,
their  oppression  of  the  poorer  proprietprs,  and  their
artfal  attempts  to  appropriate  the  crown  lands  situated
within  their  territory.*  If  Charlemagne  was  unable  to
redress  those  evils,  how  much  must  they  have  increased
under  his  posterity  I  That  great  prince  seldom  gave  more
than  one  county  to  the  same  person ;  and  as  they  were
generally  of  moderate  size,  co-extensive  with  episcopal
dioceses,  there  was  less  danger,  if  this  policy  had  been
followed,  of  their  becoming  independent.^  But  Louia
the  Debonair,  and,  in  a  still  greater  degree,  Charles  the
Bald,  allowed  several  counties  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  same
person.  The  possessors  constantly  aimed  at  acquiring
private  estates  within  the  limits  of  their  charge,  and
thus  both  rendered  themselves  formidable,  and  assumed
a  kind  of  patrimonial  right  to  their  dignities.  By  a
capitulary  of  Charles  the  Bald,  a.d.  877,  the  succession
of  a  son  to  the  father's  county  appears  to  be  recognised
as  a  known  usage."  In  the  next  century  there  followed
an  entire  prostration  of  the  royal  au^ority,  and  the
counts  usurped  their  governments  as  little  sovereignties,
with  the  domains  and  all  regalian  rights,  subject  ^y  to

*  Capitnlaiia  Car.  Mag.  et  Lnd.  PU.  This  is  a  qneatiooable  point,  and  moat
passim ;  Schmidt,  Hist  dea  Allemands,  Franch  antlqnarlea  conalda'  tbla  (amoiu
L  iL  p.  158 ;  QaiUard,  Via  da  Gbarlem.  capitnlaiy  aa  the  foundatton  of  an  here-
t  ilL  p.  118.  dltary  right  In  counties. I  am  incUned

b  Vaiaaette,  Hist  de  Langoedoc,  t  L  to  think  that  there  was  at  kcst  a  pnciloe

3.  687.  TOA  and  not  8T.  of  anoceasion  which  ia  Implied  and  gkia

*  'WaoaU  Caintnlari*,  t  IL  p.  2ft3.  2M.  noteed  1^  this  provlaloii.  {Hon  VLj

Feudal  Stbteic. CHANGE  OF  TENUREb.  i63

the  feudal  saperiority  of  the  kuig.**  They  now  added  the
name  of  the  coimty  to  their  own,  and  their  wives  took
the  appellation  of  countess.*  In  Italy  the  independence
of  the  dukes  was  still  more  complete ;  and  although  Otho
the  Great  and  his  descendants  kept  a  stricter  rein  over
those  of  Germany,  yet  we  find  &e  great  fiefs  of  their
empire,  throughout  the  tenth  century,  granted  aJmost
invariably  to  tibe  male  and  even  female  heirs  of  the  last
possessor.

Meanwhile,  the  alodial  proprietors,  who  had  hitherto
formed  the  strength  of  the  state,  fell  into  a
much  worse  condition.  They  were  exposed  to  SSIaTuito
the  rapacity  of  the  coimts,  who,  whether  as  feudal
magistiutes  and  goyemors,  or  as  overbearing  ^"""'•
lords,  had  it  always  in  their  power  to  harass  them.  Every
district  was  exposed  to  continual  hostilities;  sometimes
from  a  foreign  enemy,  more  often  from  the  owners  of
castles  and  fastnesses,  which,  in  the  tenth  century,  imder
pretence  of  resisting  the  NormauB  and  Hungarians,  served
the  purposes  of  private  war.  Against  such  a  system  of
rapine  the  military  compact  of  lord  and  vassal  was  the
only  effectual  shield ;  iis  essence  was  the  reciprocity  of
service  and  protection.  But  an  insulated  alodialist  had
no  support;  his  fortunes  were  strangely  changed  since
he  clsomed,  at  least  in  right,  a  share  in  the  legislation  of
his  country,  and  coiQd  compare  with  pride  his  patri-
monial fields  with  the  temporary  benefices  of  the  crown.
Without  law  to  redress  his  injuries,  without  the  royal
power  to  support  his  right,  he  had  no  course  left  but  to
compromise  with  oppression,  and  subject  himself,  in
return  for  protection,  to  a  feudal  lord.  During  the  tenth
and  eleventh  centuries  it  appears  that  alodial  lands  in
France  had  chiefly  become  feudal :  that  is,  they  had  been
surrendered  by  their  proprietors,  and  received  back  again
upon  the  feudal  conditions ;  or  more  frequently,  perhaps,
the  owner  had  been  compelled  to  acknowledge  himself
the  man  or  vassal  of  a  suzerain,  and  thus  to  confess  an
original  grant  which  had  never  existed.' Changes  of  the

d  It  appears,  by  the  record  of  a  pTooeis  *  Vaiamtte,  Htot  de  Langnedoc,  tl.

In  »18,  that  the  ooants  of  Toalouse  had  p.  688,  and  Inflri,  1 11.  p.  .18,  109,  aod

already  k  far  osarped  the  righta  of  their  Appendix,  p.  66.

•overafgn  m  to  claim  an  estate  on  the  t  HisL  de  Langnedoc,  t  IL  p.  109l It

Krovmd  of  its  being  a  rojral  benefice.  Hlat  mnat  be  ocmfeased  that  there  do  not  oocof

4e  Ijangnedoc,  1 11.  Appen.  pi  66.  wo  many  q|>eciflc  Inetance^  of  thb  ouuTe^

M  2

16^  PERSONAL  COMMENDATION. Chap.  II.  Pakt  L

same  natnie,  though  not  perhaps  so  extensive,  or  so
distinotly  to  be  traced,  took  place  in  Italy  and  Germany.
Tet  it  would  be  inaccurate  to  assert  that  the  prevalence
of  the  feudal  system  has  been  nnlimited;  in  a  great
part  of  France  alodial  tenures  always  subsisted ;  and
many  estates  in  the  empire  were  of  the  same  descrip-
tion.*
There  are,  however,  vestiges  of  a  veiy  xudversal  oub-
torn  distinguishable  from  the  feudal  tenure  of
^SlSSnai  land,  though  so  analogous  to  it  that  it  seems
2^1^^*  to  have  nearly  escaped  the  notice  of  antiquaries.
From  this  silence  of  other  writers,  and  the  g^reat
obscurity  of  the  subject,  I  am  almost  afraid  to  notioe
what  several  passages  in  ancient  laws  and  instmmente
concur  to  prove,  that,  besides  the  relation  established
between  lo^  and  vassal  by  beneficiary  grants,  there  was
another  species  more  personal,  and  more  closely  resem-
bling that  of  patron  and  client  in  the  Boman  republio.
This  was  usiially  called  commendation;  and  appears  to
have  been  founded  on  two  very  general  principles,  bodi
of  which  the  distracted  state  of  society  inculcated.  The
weak  needed  the  protection  of  the  powerful;  and  the
government  needed  some  security  for  public  order.  Even
before  the  invasion  of  the  Franks,  Salvian,  a  writer  of
the  fifth  century,  mentions  the  custom  of  obtaining  the
protection  of  the  great  by  money,  and  blames  their
rapacity,  though  he  allows  the  natural  reasonableness  of

Bion  of  alodial  tenure  Into  feudal  aa  mli^t  word  alodtam  la  oontfaraaUy  naed  for  a

be  expected,  in  order  to  warrant  the  fend,  or  hereditary  benefice,  whtchiendBi*

supposition  In  the  text Several  reoorda.  thia  sal^t  atiU  more  ubacnre.

however,  an  quoted  by  Boberieon,  Hlat  s  The  maxim,  Nnlle  terre  ana  aeig-

Charles  V.,  note  8 ;  and  others  may  be  near,  waa  so  far  ftam  being  nnlTcnaUy

Ibond  in  diplomatio  oollecUon& A  pre-  reoelved  tn  FrROce,  that  In  almoet  all

cedent  for  surrendering  alodial  property  soutbero  provinces,  or  paysdu  droit  tertt,

to  the  Ung,  and  receiving  It  back  as  his  lands  were  presumed  to  be  alodial,  unlesa

benefice,  i^pears  even  tn  Harculfus,  L  L  the  contrary  was  shown,  or,  as  it  wwm

form  18. The  county  of  Oominges,  be-  called,  ftano-aleux  sane  titre. The  pai^

tween  the  Pyrenees,  Toulouse,  and  Bl-  liaments,  however,  seem  latterly  to  haw*

gorre,  waa  alodial  till  1344,  when  it  waa  Inclined  agidnst  this  premunptlfln,  «nd

put  under  the  feudal  protection  of  the  have  thrown  the  burthen  of  proof  en  tin

count  of Toulouae. It  devolved  by  party  claiming  alodlality. For  tiria  aee

escheat  to  the  crown  hi  1U3. Tillaret,  Deniaart,  DIctioQnalre  dee  IMdsiaD^  art.

U  XV.  p.  344.  Frsnc-aleu. [Non  XI.]

In  many  early  charters  the  king  eon*  In  Geimany,  according  to  Dn  Om^ui

firms  the  poesesrion  even  of  alodial  pro-  voc.  Baro,  there  waa  a  distinction  b^

pcrtj  for  greater  security  In lawless  tween  Barones  and  Sesiper-Baronea ;  tte

ttanes ;  and,  on  tne  other  band.  In  thoae  latter  holding  their  landa  alodlaUy.
df  the  tenth  and  eleventh  oentsiles,  the

Fbudal  Ststex. PEBSOKAL  COHMEKDATION.  165

the  pTaotice.**  The  disadvantageous  oonditioxi  of  the  less
powerful  £reemen,  which  ended  in  the  servitude  of  one
part,  and  in  the  feudal  vassalage  of  another,  led  such  as
fortunately  still  preserved  their  alodial  property  to  in-
sure its  defence  by  a  stipulated  payment  of  money.  Such
payments,  called  Salvamenta,  may  be  traced  in  extant
charters,  chiefly  indeed  of  monasteries.*  In  the  case  of
private  persons  it  may  be  presumed  that  this  voluntary
contract  was  frequently  changed  by  the  stronger  party
into  a  perfect  feudal  dependence.  From  this,  however,
as  I  imagine,  it  probably  differed,  in  being  capable  of
dissolution  at  the  inferior's  pleasure,  without  incurring
a  forfeiture,  as  weU  as  in  having  no  relation  to  land.
Homage,  however,  seems  to  have  been  incident  to  com-
mendation, as  well  as  to  vassalage.  Military  service
was  sometimes  the  condition  of  this  engagement.  It  was
the  law  of  France,  so  late  at  least  as  the  commencement
of  the  third  race  of  kings,  that  no  man  could  take  ft  part
in  private  wars,  except  in  defence  of  his  own  lord.  This
we  learn  from  an  historian  about  the  end  of  the  tenth
century,  who  relates  that  one  Erminfrid,  having  been
released  from  his  homage  to  count  Burchard,  on  ceding
the  fief  he  had  held  of  him  to  a  monasteiy,  renewed  the
oeremony  on  a  war  breaking  out  between  Burchard  and
another  nobleman,  wherein  he  was  desirous  to  give
assistance ;  since,  the  author  observes,  it  is  not,  nor  has
been,  the  practice  in  France,  for  any  man  to  be  concerned
in  war,  except  in  the  presence  or  by  the  command  of
his  lord.^  Lideed,  there  is  reason  to  infer,  from  the
capitularies  of  Charles  the  Bald,  that  every  man  was
bound  to  attach  himself  to  some  lord,  though  it  was  the
privilege  of  a  freeman  to  choose  his  own  superior.™  And

b  Da  CUige,  ▼.  SilTimentan.  conqne  regno  At,  cam  mdIotv  ioo  in

I  Ibid.  boatcm.  rel  aUIs  sate  atfUtaUbaB  pergat

k  BacoeQ  dei  Htetoriena,  t  z.  p.  86fi.  Ibid. See  too  Balose,  tip.  63e,  6ST.

""  UmiiqalaqaB  Uber  bomo,  post  mat'  By  tbe  BstabUflfanMntg  of  St  Looia,

turn  dominl  lal,  Uoentiain  babeat  se  com-  c  87,  every  stranger  coming  to  eettle

menrtoKlt  inter  bac  tria  regna  ad  qoem-  witbin  a  barony  waa  to  acknowledge  tbe

cnnqne  Tolnerlt Similiter  et  Ule  qoi  baron  as  lord  witbin  a  year  and  a  day,  or

nondom  alicai  oommendatna  est  Balaili  pay  a  fine. In  some  places  be  even  be-

Capitolaria,  t  L  pu  44& jli>.  806. Vo-  oame  tbe  serf  or  villein  of  tbe  lord.

lomaa  etiam  at  onnaqaiaqae  liber  bomo  Ordonnances  dee  Roia,  p.  187. Upon  tbia

In  nosoo  regno  aenlorem  qnalem  volnerit  Jealoaey  of  unknown  settlers,  wbidi  per-

In  ndbia  et  in  nostris  fidelibas  redpiat  vadea  tbe  poUcyof  tbe  middle  ages,  wm

Jipit  Oar.  OalTl,  aj>.  877. Et  volumos  foanded  the  droit  d'aabaine.  or  rifl^t  U

JA  oqloseonqae  nostnun  homo,  in  ci\Jn»-  tbeir  moveables  after  tbeir  decease. :Sm

166  EDICT  OF  CONRAD  THE  SALIC. Chap.  U.  Past  I.

ihis  ifl  strongly  supported  by  the  analogy  of  om*  Anglo^
Saxon  laws,  where  it  is  frequently  repeated  that  no
man  should  continiie  without  a  lord.  There  are,  too,  as
it  seems  to  me,  a  great  number  of  passages  in  Domesday-
book  which  confirm  this  distinction  between  personal
commendation  and  the  beneficiary  tenure  of  land.  Perhaps
I  may  be  thought  to  dwell  too  prolixly  on  this  obscure
custom;  but  as  it  tends  to  illustrate  those  mutual  re-
lations of  lord  and  vassal  which  supplied  the  place  of
regular  govezimiont  in  the  polity  of  Europe,  and  has
seldom  or  never  been  explioidy  noticed,  its  introduction
seemed  not  improper.

It  has  been  sometimes  said  that  feuds  were  fijst  ren-
Edict  of  dered  hereditary  in  Germany  by  Conrad  II.,
Counid  sumamed  the  Salic.  This  opinion  is  perhaps
*^  ^"*^  erroneous.  But  there  is  a  fisunous  edict  of  that
emperor  at  Milan,  in  the  year  1037,  which,  though
immediately  relating  only  to  Lombardy,  marks  the  fall
maturity  of  the  system,  and  the  last  stage  of  its  progress."
I  have  remarked  already  the  custom  of  subinfeudation,
or  grants  of  lands  by  vassals  to  be  held  of  themselves,
which  had  grown  up  with  the  growth  of  these  tenures.
There  had  occurred,  however,  some  disagreement,  for
want  of  settled  usage,  between  these  inferior  vassals  and
their  immediate  lords,  which  this  edict  was  expressly
designed  to  remove.  Four  regulations  of  great  imports
ance  are  established  therein:  that  no  man  should  be
deprived  of  his  fief,  whether  held  of  the  emperor  or  a
mesne  lord,  but  by  the  laws  of  the  empire  and  the
judgment  of  his  peers;"  that  from  such  judgment  an

pre&ce  to  Ordonnances  dea  Rois,  1  L  FendB,  cbapi  IL,  tbat  Conradns  Salicna,  o

p.  IS.  FnnA  emperor,  InU  of  German  deecent

The  article  CommeDdaUo  in  Da  Ouige's  ^what  can  this  mean?],  went  to  Rome

Gloaaaiy  ftimiahes  some  hints  upon  tUa  abont  916  to  fetch  Ua  crown  from  Pope

antdect,  wbidi,  however, that  anthor  John  X.,  when,  according  to  him,  tiie

does  not  seem  to  have  fally  apprehended,  succession  of  a  son  to  his  fothei's  fief  whs

Carpentier,  in  his  Supplement  to  the  first  conceded. An  almost  unparalleled

Gloasary,  under  the  word  Vaasaticam,  blunder  In  so  learned  a  writer  I Conrad

gives  the  clearest  notice  of  it  that  I  have  the  Salic  was  elected  at  Worms  in  1024,

anywhere found. Since  writing the  oowned  at  Rome  by  John  XIX.  In  1027,

above  pages  I  have  found  the  subject  and  made  this  edict  at  Milan  in  103f .

touched  by  M.  de  Montlosler,  HisL  da  la  ^  Nisi  secundfam  oonstitntlonem  ante*

Monarcble  FranfalBe,  1 1.  pi  854.  rNoTS  oeasoram  nostronun,  et  Judicium  parluop

XL]  soonun ;  the  very  expressions  of  Magna

"  ^»etanan  telb  ua,  in  his  Treatise  of  Charta.

FnmAL  STBTBtf PRINCIPLES  OF  FEUDAL  RELATION. 167

immediate  vassal  might  appeal  to  his  sovereign;  that
fiefs  should  be  inherited  by  sons  and  their  children,  or,
in  their  failure,  by  brothers,  provided  they  were  feujda
patema^  such  as  had  descended  from  the  father  ;!*  and
that  the  lord  should  not  alienate  the  fief  of  his  vassal
-without  his  consent.**

Such  was  the  progress  of  these  feudal  tenures,  which
determined  the  political  character  of  every  European
monarchy  where  they  prevailed,  as  well  as  formed  the
foundations  of  its  jurisprudence.  It  is  certainly  inac-
curate to  refer  this  system,  as  is  frequently  done,  to  the
destruction  of  the  Boman  empire  by  the  northern  nations,
though  in  the  beneficiary  grants  of  those  conquerors  we
trace  its  beginning.  Four  or  five  centuries,  however,
elapsed,  before  the  alodial  tenures,  which  had  been
incomparably  the  more  general,  gave  way,  and  before
the  reciprocal  contract  of  the  feud  attained  its  maturity.
It  is  now  time  to  describe  the  legal  qualities  and  efiects
of  this  relation,  so  far  only  as  may  be  requisite  to  un-
derstand its  influence  upon  the  political  system.

The  essential  principle  of  a  fief  was  a  mutual  contract
of  support  and  fidelity. Whatever  obligations  ^ .  ,
it  laid  upon  the  vassal  of  service  to  his  lord,  of  a  feudal
corresponding  duties  of  protection  were  im-  ^^^^^'
posed  by  it  on  the  lord  towards  his  vassal.' If  these
were  transgressed  on  either  side,  the  one  forfeited  his
land,  the  other  his  seigniory  or  rights  over  it. Nor

P  "QenaibaB  noteth,**  says  Sir  H.  Spel-  wlthoat  his  TBflBal's  consent,  which  was

man,  *<  that  this  law  settled  not  the  feod  agreeable  to  the  feudal  tenures. Thlii,

upon  the  eldest  bod,  or  any  other  son  of  indeed,  would  be  putting  rather  a  forced

the  feodatary  particalarly ;  bat  left  it  in  construction on  the  words  ne  domino

the  lord's  election  to  please  himself  with  feudnm  miliUs  allenare  UceaL

which  he  would." Bat  the  phrase  of  the  '  Crag.  Jus  Fendale,  L  iL  tit  11.  Bean-

fidict  runs,  flliae  ^us  benefldum  tenere:  manolr,  Codtomes  de  Beaavoisis,  c.  Ixi.

which,  when  nothing  more  is  said,  can  p.  311 ;  Ass.  de  J^nis.  c.  21T ;  Lib.  Feud.

l»Iy  mean  a  partition  among  the  sona.  L  iL  tit  26, 47.

<i  The  last  pirovision  may  seem  stnoge  Up«n  the  mutoal  obligation  of  the

•t  so  advanced  a  period  of  the  system ;  lord  towards  his  Taasal  seems  to  be

y«t  according  to  Giannime,  fends  were  founded  the  law  of  warranty,  whldi  com.

■till  revocable  by  the  lord  in  some  parts  pelled  him  to  make  indemnification  where

of  Lambardy. Istoria  di  NapoU,  L  ziiL  the  tenant  was  evicted  of  his  land. This

e.  8, It  seems,  however,  n«  more  than  obligation,  however  unreasonable  it  may

had  been  already  enacted  by  the  fknt  appear  to  us,  extended,  according  to  the

daiise  of  this  edict Another  Interpreta-  feudal  lawyers,  to  cases  of  mere  donation.

tioD  is  possible;  namely,  that  the  lord  Crag.  LIL  tit  i;  Bntier's  Notes  oo  Vc

ifaonld  not  alienate  his  own  seignioiy  litt  p.  36$.

168 PRINCIPLES  OF  FEUDAL  RELATIOK.  Chap.  II.  Past  i.

were  motiyeB  of  interest  left  alone  to  operate  in  seeming
the  feudal  connexion.  The  associations  founded  upon
ancient  custom  and  friendly'  attachment,  the  impulses  of
gratitude  and  honour,  the  dread  of  infamy,  the  sanctions
of  religion,  were  all  employed  to  strengthen  these  ties,
and  'to  render  them  equally  powerfdl  with  the  relations
of  nature,  and  far  more  so  thui  those  of  political  society.
It  is  a  question  agitated  among  the  feudal  lawyers,  whether
a  vassal  is  boimd  to  follow  the  standard  of  his  lord
against  his  own  kindred.*  It  was  one  more  important,
whether  he  must  do  so  against  the  king.  In  the  works
«  of  those  who  wrote  when  the  feudal  system  was  declin-
ing, or  who  were  anxious  to  maintain  the  royal  authority,
this  is  commonly  decided  in  the  negative.  Littleton
gives  a  form  of  homage,  with  a  reservation  of  the  allegi-
ance due  to  the  sovereign ;'  and  the  same  prevailed  in
Normandy  and  some  other  countries.**  A  law  of  Frederio
Barharoasa  enjoins  that  in  eveiy  oath  of  fealty  to  an
inferior  lord  the  vassal's  duty  to  the  emperor  should  be
expressly  reserved.  But  it  was  not  so  during  the  height
of  the  feudal  system  in  France.  The  vassals  of  Henry  II.
and  Bichard  I.  never  hesitated  to  adhere  to  them  against
the  sovereign,  nor  do  they  appear  to  have  incurred  any
blame  on  that  account.  Even  so  late  as  the  age  of  St.
Louis,  it  is  laid  down  in  his  Establishments,  that,  if
justice  is  refiised  by  the  king  to  one  of  his  vassals,  be
might  summon  his  own  tenants,  under  penalty  of  for-
feiting their  fiefs,  to  assist  him  in  obtainmg  redress  by
arms.' The  count  of  Britany,  Pierre  de  Dreux,  had

*  Cng.  L  U.  tit.  4.  tre  voos. 81  1b  r«|Mn»  est  que  toIob-

<  Sect  IzxxT.  tiera  il  fen  droit  en  aa  ooar,  llionuike

"  Honaxd,  Ane.  Lolx  des  Fraofola,  n'est  point  obUg^  de  dtfferer  k  U  reqnW-

pL  114. See  too  an  Insteaoe  of  fhia  re-  tkio  da  tin ;  mate  11  dolt,  oa  le  solvra^

flervatUiDlnReciieUdesHtetorlens»tzL  oalezeBoadreliperdreMmfleC;^  ledief

447.  sefgnear  penlste  dans  loa  reftas. Etef

■  Si  la  lire  dit  a  eon  booime  Uge,  Uiaemeiv  de  SL  Looli,  c  49. I  brnvm

Veoei  vona  en  avec  mol,  Je  -venx  goer-  copied  thia  fttm  Velly,  t  tL  pi  313  who

roj«r  mon  aeigneiir,  qui  me  denie  le  bas  modernised  fb»  ortbognpky,  wUdb

joflemoBt  de  sa  oonr,  1«  -vassal  dolt  re-  is  almost  nnlntelUgible  in  tlie  Ordoo-

pondre,  J*ir«i  scavolr  ^11  est  aiusi  que  nsnces  des  Bote^ One  MS.  gives  Kte

▼003  ine  dites. Alon  il  dolt  aUer  tron-  reading  Mai  instead  of  Seignemr, And

▼er  le  snfMhieiii;  et  lay  dire.  Sire,  le  tiie  law  certainly  anriies  to  the  Ung  e«*

gentUboaune  da  qni  Je  tiens  mon  flef  se  oluftoetjr;  for,  in  esse  of  denial  of  Jastloo

plaint  qae  voos  Ini  reftises  Jnatioe;  Je  by  a  mesne  lord,  fliere  waa  an  appeal  i*

vlens  poor  en  soavoir  la  T^rit^ ;  ear  Je  tlie king's oonrt, bat  fttMn bisiiOary  ^ihtn

flols  s<SBonc4  de  marcher  en  goene  coo*  coald  be  uo  sppeal  bat  ta  the  Mraid.

Feudal  System. FEUDAL  CEREHOIflES.  16;»

nraotioally  aaserted  this  feudal  right  during  the  minority
of  St.  LouiB.  In  a  public  instrument  he  announced  to
the  world,  that,  having  met  with  repeated  injuries  from
Hie  regent,  and  denial  of  justice,  he  had  let  the  king
know  that  he  no  longer  considered  himself  as  his  vassal,
but  renounced  his  homage  and  defied  him.'

The  ceremonies  used  in  conferring  a  fief  were  princi-
pally three — ^homage,  fealty,  and  investiture,  oeremo-
1.  The  first  was  designed  as  a  significant  ex-  niM'of—
pression  of  the  submission  and  devotedness  of  *•  ^®«»*«^
the  vassal  towards  his  lord. In  performing  homage,  his
head  was  uncovered,  his  belt  ungirt,  his  sword  and  nmrs
removed ;  he  placed  his  hands,  kneeling,  between  those
of  the  lord,  and  promised  to  become  his  man  from
thenceforward;  to  serve  him  with  life  and  limb  and
worldly  honour,  faithfiilly  and  loyallv,  in  consideration
of  the  lands  which  he  held  under  him. None  but  the
lord  in  person  could  accept  homage,  which  was  com-
monly concluded  by  a  kisis." 2.  An  oath  of
fealty  was  indispensable  in  every  fief;  but  the ' ^'
ceremony  was  less  peculiar  than  that  of  homage,  and  it
might  be  received  by  proxy. It  was  taken  by  ecclesias-
tics, but  not  by  minors ;  and  in  language  differed  little
from  the  form  of  homage.* 3.  Investiture,  or  3.  inyeiti-
the  actual  conveyance  of  feudal  lands,  was  of  ^''^
two  kinds;  proper  and  improper. The  first  was  an
actual  putting  in  possession  upon  the  ground,  either  by
the  lord  or  his  deputy;  which  is  called,  in  our  law,
livery  of  seisin. The  second  was  symbolical,  and  con-
sisted in  the  delivery  of  a  turf,  a  stone,  a  wand,  a

y  Da  Gangs,  OtMeiTatiOQs  tar  Join-  1^85.  AasbM de  Jdnwlem, & 904 ; Crag.

▼iUe,  in  Collection  dea  Mdmoirea,  t  L  L  L  tit  11 ;  Recaeil  dea  Hlstorioia,  t  il.

fk  198. It  waa  alwaya  naoeaaaiy  for  a  pr^buea,  p.  174.  Hnmaglam  per  paraglam

▼aiMl  to  renoonoe  hla  homage  before  he  waa  nnaoooBApanied  by  aiij  feadal  oblig»>

made  war  on  hla  lord,  If  he  woald  avoid  tloo,  and  dlstingalabed  from  homagiam

the  ahame  and  penal^  of  feadal  treaeonu  Ugram,  whldi  canrled  with  it  an  obUgap

AAer  a  Teoonciliation  the  homage  waa  tioD  of  fldelltj.  The  dukca  of  Normandy

renewed. And  in  thia  no  dlatlnction  waa  rendered  only  homage  per  paraginm  to

made  between  the  king  and  another  ao-  tbekingBof  Fraooe,  and  reoeiTed  the  like

perior. Thna  Henry  IL  did  homage  to  from  the  dnkea  of  Britany. In  liege

the  king  of  Fiance  in  11A8,  having  re-  homage  it  waa  naoal  to  make  leaerva-

noaooed  hia  former  obligation  to  hiac  at  tiona  ot  allfglanoe  to  the  king,  or  any

the  oommenoement  of  the  prooedlng  war.  other  lord  whom  the  homager  haa  pee*

Mat  Fuia»  pi  13S.  viooaly  aeknowledged.

'  Da  Cuige,  Hominiom,  and  Oarpen>  *  littL  a.  91 }  Du  Oange,  voc.  Vldoi

(Iv*!  &iv^>lcBMiit id Toc. Uttlatoo  Utaa.

170  OBLIGATIONS  OF  A  VASSAL. Chap.  II.  Past  U

branoh,  or  whateveT  else  might  have  been  made  usual
by  the  caprice  of  local  ctistom.  Da  Cange  enumerates
not  less  than  ninety-eight  varieties  of  investitures.^

Upon  investiture,  the  duties  of  the  vassal  commenced.
ObiigBtioDs  These  it  is  impossible  to  define  or  enumerate ;
of  AvaaaaL  becaiisc  the  services  of  military  tenure,  which
is  chiefly  to  be  considered,  were  in  their  nature  uncer
tain,  and  distingnished  as  such  from  those  incident  to
feuds  of  an  inferior  description.  It  was  a  breach  of
fiuth  to  divulge  the  lord's  counsel,  to  conceal  &Y>m  him
the  machinations  of  others,  to  injure  his  porson  or  for-
tune, or  to  violate  the  sanctity  of  his  roof  and  the  honour
of  his  family.**  In  battle  he  was  bound  to  lend  his  horse
to  his  lord,  when  dismounted;  to  adhere  to  his  side,
while  fighting ;  and  to  go  into  captivity  as  a  hostage  for
him,  when  ts^en.  His  attendance  was  due  to  the  lord's
courts,  sometimes  to  witness,  and  sometimes  to  bear  a
part  in,  the  administration  of  justice.*^

b  Da  Cange,  too.  Investltaia.  more  reasonable  aooording  to  ^nt  ooi&>

*  Aasiaea  de  JAnsalem,  c.  26S. Home  mon  political  inteipretaUou,  is  analogoos

ne  dolt  k  la  feme  de  son  aeignenr,  ne  k  aa  to  many  feudal  coBtoms  in  our  own  and

fllle  reqaerre  vilainle  de  son  don,  ne  k  na  other  ooontries,  which  attribute  a  sort  of

soanr  tcmt  com  Me  est  demoiteUe  en  $on  superiority  in dignity  to the  eldest

hostel I  mention  this  part  of  fiendal  daoi^ter.

daty  on  aoconnt  of  the  light  it  throws  on  It  may  be  ol^ected  that  in  the  reign

the  atatute  of  treasons,  26  E.  IIL One  of  Edward  in.  there  was  little  left  of  the

of  the  treasons  therein  q>edfled  Is,  si  feudal  principle  In  any  pari  of  Europe,

omne  violast  la  compaigne  le  roy,  ou  and  least  of  all  in  England. But  the

leiffnefJe  le  roy  fUent  mariit  ou  la  com-  statute  of  treasons  is  a  declaration  of  the

paigne  leigntf  fits  et  heire  le  roy. Those  aadent  law,  and  comprehends,  undoobt-

who,  like  Sir  £.  Coke  and  the.  modem  edly,  what  the  Judgee  who  drew  it  ooold

lawyers  in  general,  explain  this  provision  find  in  records  now  perished,  or  in  legal

by  the  political  danger  of  oonAising  the  traditions  of  remote  antiquity. Smllar

royal  blood,  do  not  appr^end  Its  q>irit.  causes  of  forfeiture  aft  enumerated  In

It  would  be  absurd,  upon  such  grounds,  the  libri  Feodorum,  L  L  tit  6,  and  L  It

to  render  the  Tlolation  of  the  king's  eldest  tit  24. In  the  Establisfameots  of  St

daughter  treasonable,  so  long  only  as  she  Louis,  &  61,  62,  it  is  said  that  a  lord

remains  tmmarried,  when,  as  is  obvious,  sedudng  his  vassal's  daughter  intrastad

the  danger  of  a  spurious  issue  inheriting  to  his  custody  lost  his  seigniovy ;  a  vaseal

could  not  arise.  I  oonsldn' this  provislou  guilty  of  the  same  crime  towards  the

therefore  as  entirely  founded  upon  the  finnily  of  his  suiersln  forfeited  his  land,

foudsl  principles,  which  mske  Ita  breach  A  proof  of  the  tendcix^  which  the  feudal

of  foith  (that  is.  In  the  primary  sense  of  law  had  to  purify  public  morals,  sod  Ic

the  word,  a  treason)  to  sully  the  honour  create  that  sense  of  indignation  and  re-

uf  the  lord  In  that  of  the  near  relatfocs  sentment  with  which  we  now  regard

who  woe  Immediately  protected  by  reel-  such  breaches  of  honour,

deuce  In  his  bouse. If  It  is  asked  why  d  Assises  de  J<Srasaletn,  e.  229. A

this  should  be  restricted  by  the  statute  vaseal,  at  least  in  many  places,  was  bound

to  the  person  of  tite  eldest  dandier,  I  to  reside  upon  his  fief,  or  not  to  quit  1«

can  only  answOT  that  thii^  wbidi  is  not  withou*  the  knd's  consent Da  Cs^g^

Feodai.  SrmsM.  MILITAB  f  SEBVICE.  1 71

The  meaflure,  however,  of  militaiy  service  was  gene*
rally  settled  by  some  usage.  Forty  days  was  umit^^tj^,^
the  usoal  term  during  which  the  tenant  of  a  ofmiuttry
knight's  fee  was  bound  to  be  in  the  field  at  his  "^<**
own  expense.*  This  was  extended  by  St.  Louis  to  sixty
days,  except  when  the  charter  of  infeudation  expressed
a  Sorter  period.  But  the  length  of  service  dimmished
with  the  quantity  of  land.  For  half  a  knight's  fee  but
tweniy  days  were  due ;  for  an  eighth  part,  but  five ;  and
when  this  was  commuted  for  an  escuage  or  pecuniary
assessment,  the  same  proportion  was  observed/  Men
turned  of  sixty,  public  magistrates,  and,  of  course,  women,
were  free  from  personal  service,  but  obliged  to  send  their
substitutes.  A  fedlure  in  this  primary  duty  incurred
perhaps  strictly  a  foif eitnre  of  the  fief.  But  it  was  usual
for  the  lord  to  inflict  an  amercement,  known  in  England
by  the  name  of  escuage.'  Thus,  in  Philip  III.'s  expedition
against  the  count  de  Foix  in  1274,  barons  were  assessed
for  their  default  of  attendance  at  a  hundred  sous  a  day  for
the  expenses  which  they  had  saved,  and  fifty  sous  as  a
fine  to  the  king ;  bannerets,  at  twenty  sous  for  expenses,
and  ten  as  a  fine ;  knights  and  squires  in  the  same  pro-

Toa  RemntiA,  BemaneDtiA,  Recaell  des  poaribly  have  been  the  inyentor  of  this

Hlstorifloa,  1 3d.  pr^boe,  pi  17L  politic  arrangement Some  rule  must,

*  In  the  kingdom  of  Jennidem  feadal  bowerer,  have  been  obaerved  in  all

•ervioe  extended  to  a  jear. Anbea  de  ooantries  in  fixing  the  amercement  for

J^niBaIem,c.a30. It  la  obvious  that  this  absence,  whidi  could  only  be  equitable

waa  founded  on  the  poenUar  dreum*  if  it  bore  a  Just  proportion  to  the  value

atanees  of  .that  atate. Servloe  of  castte  of  the  flefl And  the  prindpla  of  the

goard,  whidi  waa  common  in  the  north  knlght'a  fee  waa  so  convenient  and  rea-

of  England,  waa  performed  without  limit-  sonable,  that  it  la  likely  to  have  been

ation  of  timit. Lyitelton'a  Henry  IL  adopted  In  Imitation  of  England  by  other

voL  iL  p.  18^  feudal  coontrlea. In  the  roll  of  Philip

f  Dtt  Gauge, voc.  Fendum  militb;  QL's  expedition,  as  will  appear  by  a

Uembrum  Lorlcn. Stuart's  View  of  So-  t^^  immediately  below, there  are,  I

detr*  P-  982. This  division  by  knightTa  think,  several  presnmpUve  evidenoea  of

feea  is  perfectly  familiar  in  the  feudal  it; and thou^  this  la  rather  a  late

law  of  v^»nA But  I  must  oonfesa  my  authority  to  establish  a  feudal  principle,

tnaUUty  to  adduce  dedaive  evidence  of  yet  I  have  ventured  to  assume  it  in  the

it  in  that  of  France,  with  the  naual  text

ezoeptioD  of  Nonnandy. According  to l^e  knlght'a  fee  was  fixed  In  England

the  natural  prindple  of  flefc,  it  might  »*  **»  vmaal  value  of  201. Every  estate

seem  that  the  ■*»*•  penonal  service  rapposed  to  be  of  this  value,  and  entered

wonid  be  reqnind  fhan  the  tenant,  what-  as  such  in  the  rolls  of  the  exchequer,  waa

ever  wero  the  extent  of  hla  land.  William  ^^oodA  to  contribute  the  service  of  a

the  Conqueror,  it  Is  said,  distributed  this  K>ldi»,  or to  pay  an  escuage  to  the

kingdom  Into about  eo,OOOparcete  of  amount  aoeased  upon  knights' fee.
nearly  equal  value,  ftom  each  of  which *  LitUeton.  1. 11.  c.  3 ;  Wright's  Tennrea

the  service  of  a  aoldier  waa  due.  Hemaj  p.  121.

l^  2  FEUDAL  INCIDENTS : Chap.  II.  PisT  u

porti  m.  Bui  barons  and  bannerets  were  bound  to  pay
an  additional  assessment  for  eveiy  knight  and  sqnire  of
their  vassals  whom  thej  ought  to  have  brought  with
them  into  the  field.**  The  regolations  as  to  the  place  of
service  were  less  nnifonn  than  those  which  regarded
time.  In  some  places  the  vassal  was  not  bonnd  to  go
beyond  the  lord's  territory/  or  only  so  feur  as  that  he
might  retnm  the  same  day.  Other  customs  compelled
him  to  follow  his  chief  upon  all  his  expeditions.^  These
inconvenient  and  varying  nsages  betrayed  the  origin  of
the  feudal  obligations,  not  founded  upon  any  national
policy,  but  springing  from  the  chaos  of  anarchy  and
mtestine  war,  which  they  were  well  calculated  to  per-
petuate. For  the  public  defence  their  maohineiy  was
totally  unserviceable,  until  such  changes  were  wrought
as  destroyed  the  character  of  the  fabric.
Independently  of  the  obligations  of  fealty  and  service,
vmOiti  which  the  nature  of  the  contract  created,  other
*"***«<*  advantages  were  derived  from  it  by  the  lord,
which  have  been  called  feudal  incidents:  tiiiese  were,
1.  Beliefig.  2.  Fines  upon  alienation.  8.  Escheats.
4.  Aids;  to  which  may  be  added,  though  not  generallj
established,  5.  Wardship,  and  6.  Marriage.

1.  Some  writers  have  accoimted  for  Beliefs  in  the
^^^  following  manner.  Benefices,  whether  depend*
ing  upon  the  crown  or  its  vassals,  were  not
originally  granted  by  way  of  absolute  inheritance,  but
renewed  from  time  to  time  upon  the  death  of  the  pes*
sessor,  till  long  custom  grew  up  into  right.  Henoe  a
sum  of  money,  something  between  a  price  and  a  gratuity,
would  naturally  be  offered  by  the  heir  on  receiving  a
fresh  investiture  of  the  fief;  and  length  of  time  might
as  legitimately  turn  this  present  into  a  due  of  the  lord.

k  Da  Ghone,  Script  Rerom  Oalll-  Sabnokdni  dictiu  Chabot  didi  qacA  noa

ewan,  t  ▼.  p.  US. DuiSel,  Hiitotre  de  debet  flerrltltan  domlao  regi,  idai  in  eo-

1b  Milioe  f^va^olM,  pi  t% The  follow-  mitata  PtetoTleBil,  et  ad  somptas  rtgli,

ii^eztncli  from  (he  nmiteMoU  of  tUi  tamen  Tenlt  ad  preoes  legte  com  trlbos

apedltfon  will  niastnto  the  ▼arietieB  of  milltflws  et  dnodedm  ecatlferii. QoMo

tokU  obUffitlooB. JohaniMi  d'Oimoy  de  Lutgnieco  Dom.  de  PierM  didt,  qood

debet  lenrlttnm  per  qnatoor  dies. J<^  hod  debet  aliqaid  rvgi  pneter  homgliBii.

bamiMMaXet  debet  flerrlUnm  per  Tigintl  I  This  was  the  eoslom  «r  BeMifuMfc

dies,  pro  quo  servltio  mlsit  Rlchantnm  BeaamaiMir,  c.  2.

TIcfaet. OnldodeLatal  debet  serrianm  k  Dq  Oaoie,  et  Otfncntlar  voo-  llos-

dawTun  mllitnm  et  dimldlL Tkntama  <lb

Fevdja  SrsTEX.  BELIEFS.  17*j

08  it  rendered  the  inheritanoe  of  the  tenant  indefeaaible.
This  ifl  a  very  epeoioiifl  aoooimt  of  the  matter.  But  thoeo
who  consider  the  antiquity  to  which  hereditary  benefices
may  be  traced,  and  the  unreserved  expressions  of  those
instruments  by  which  they  were  created,  as  well  as  iiie
undoubted  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  fie&  had  been
absolute  allodial  inheritances,  never  really  granted  by
the  superior,  will  perhaps  be  led  rather  to  look  for  the
origin  of  reliefs  in  that  rapacity  with  which  the  powerful
are  ever  ready  to  oppress  the  feeble.  When  a  feudal
tenant  died,  the  lord,  taking  advantage  of  his  own  strength
and  the  confusion  of  the  iieunily,  would  seize  the  estate
into  his  hands,  either  by  the  right  of  force,  or  under
some  litigious  pretext.  Against  this  violence  the  heir
could  in  geneial  have  no  resource  but  a  compromise ;
and  we  know  how  readily  acts  of  successful  injustice
change  their  name,  and  move  demurely,  like  the  wolf
in  the  &ble,  under  the  clothing  of  law.  Belief  and
other  feudal  incidents  are  said  to  have  been  established
in  France™  about  the  latter  part  of  the  tenth  century,
and  they  certainly  appear  in  the  £unous  edict  of  Conrad
the  Salic,  in  1037,  which  recognises  the  usage  of  pre-
senting liorses  and  anus  to  the  lord  upon  a  change  of
tenancy."  But  this  also  subsisted  under  the  name  of
heriot,  in  England,  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Canute.

A  relief  was  a  sum  of  money  (unless  where  chaxter  or
custom  introduced  a  different  tribute)  due  from  every
one  of  fall  age,  taking  a  fief  by  descent.  This  was  in
some  countries  arbitrary,  or  ad  misericordiafn,  and  the
exactions  practised  imder  this  pretence  both  upon  supe-
rior and  mferior  vassals  ranked  amongst  the  greatest
abuses  of  the  feudal  poHcy.  Heniy  1.  of  England  pro-
mises in  his  charter  that  they  shall  in  future  be  just
and  reasonable ;  but  the  rate  does  not  appear  to  mkve
been  finally  settled  till  it  was  laid  down  in  Magna
Charta  at  about  a  fourth  of  the  annual  value  of  the  fief.
We  find  also  fixed  relie&i  among  the  old  customs  of  Nor-
mandy and  Beauvoisis. By  a  law  of  St.  Louis,  in  1245,*

"  Oidoonaaoaa  des  Bola  deliVanoe,  t L  me  to  doabt  12ie  rccdvttd  opinloa  thai

pf^ftoe,  pw  la  Italian  flefli  were  not  hereditary  beftm

*  Serrato  fuu  vtlvwrnomna  majorom  the  pranralgatloD  of  this  edict

m  tndendlB  armis  equlaqne  mis  eeniori-  *^  Ordornianoee  dee  Bote,  p.  60.
•km. "n^is,  amoi^  other  leaaoaf,  leada

174  FEUDAL  INCIDENTS : Chap.  IL  Past  I.

the  lord  was  entitled  to  enter  upon  the  lands,  if  the  heir
could  not  pay  the  relief,  and  possess  them  for  a  year.
This  right  existed  nnconditionaily  in  England  under  the
name  of  primer  seisin,  but  was  confined  to  the  king.^

2.  Closely  connected  with  reliefs  were  the  fines  paid
PhMBupoa  to  the  lord  upon  the  alienation  of  his  vassal's
aiieoAUoD.  feud;  and  indeed  we  frequently  find  them
called  by  the  Bame  name.  The  spirit  of  feudal  tenure
established  so  intimate  a  connexion  between  the  two
parties  that  it  could  be  dissolved  by  neither  without  re-
quiring the  other's  consent.  K  the  lord  transferred  his
seigniory,  the  tenant  was  to  testify  his  concurrence ;  and
this  ceremony  was  long  kept  up  in  England  under  the
name  of  attornment.  The  assent  of  the  lord  to  his  vas-
sal's alienation  was  still  more  essential,  and  more  difficult
to  be  attained.  He  had  received  his  fief,  it  was  sup-
posed, for  reasons  peculiar  to  himself,  or  to  Ids  fjamily ;
at  least  his  heart  and  arm  were  bound  to  his  superior ;
and  his  service  was  not  to  be  exchanged  for  that  of  a
stranger,  who  might  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  render  it.
A  law  of  Lothaire  II.  in  Italy  forbids  the  alienation  of
fie&  without  the  lord's  consent.'^  This  prohibition  is
repeated  in  one  of  Frederic  I.,  and  a  similar  enact-
ment was  made  by  Eoger  king  of  Sicily.'  By  the  law  of
France  the  lord  was  entitled,  upon  eveiy  alienation  made
by  his  tenant,  either  to  redeem  the  fief  by  paying  the
purobase-money,  or  to  claim  a  certain  part  of  the  value,
by  way  of  fine,  upon  the  change  of  tenancy.*  In  England

P  Da  Cange,  v.  Placitam,  Relevfmn,  homage  and  fealty:  p.  3a

SporliL Bj  many  castoma  a  relief  waa  1  Lib.  Fendoram,  L  iL  tit  9  and  S3.

due  on  every  change  of  the  lord,  as  well  This  waa  principally  levelled  at  the  prao>

aa  of  the  vasBal,  bat  this  was  not  the  case  tloe  of  alienating  feudal  property  in

in  England. Beaumont  speaks  of  reliefs  favour  of  the  diurch,  which  was  called

as  due  only  <m  collateral  succession,  proanlmftjudicare. RadevicuslnGestia

CofttumesaeBeaavoisi8,c27.  And  this,  Fredericl.  L iv.  c. 7 ;  liU Fend.  L  L  Ut  Y,

aivording  to  Da  Oange,  was  the  general  16,  L  IL  tit  10.

rule  hi  the  customary  law  of  France.  '  Giannone,  L  iL  c.  5.

In  AnJou  and  Maine  they  were  not  even  *  Da  Cange,  v.  Reaocapitam,  Plad-

due  apon  succession  between  brothers,  torn,  Badiatum. Pastoret,  pr^fkse  an

Ordonnances  des  Bois,  t  L  p.  6& And  selx&me  tome  des  Ordonnances,  p^  90;

H.  de  Psstoret,  In  his  valuable  prefSMse  Houard,  Diet  da  Droit  Normand,  art;,

to  the  sixteenth  volume  of  that  colleo>  Fief  Argou,  Inst  du  Droit  Ftaa^ols.  L  IL

tion,  says  it  waa  a  rule  that  the  king  had  c.  2. In  Beaumanolr's  age  and  disttlel

nothing  upon  Une^  succession  of  &  flef,  at  least,  sab-infeudation  without  Cbe

whether  in  the  asoending  or  descending  lord's  licence  incurred  a  fcnfeitiire  of  thr

Une.  tat  la  baueke  a  la  maint;  i,  e.  land;  and  hia  reason  extanda  of

friUDAL  SrsTEX. FINES  UPOK  ALIENATION.  175

even  the  practice  of  sub-iDfendation,  wbich  was  more
conformable  to  the  law  of  fiefs  and  the  militaiy  genius
of  the  system,  but  injurious  to  the  suzei-ains,  who  lost
thereby  their  escheats  and  other  advantages  of  seigniory,
was  checked  by  Magna  Charta,*  and  forbidden  by  the
statute  18  Edward  1.,  called  Quia  Emptores,  which  at
the  same  time  gave  the  liberty  of  alienating  lands,  to  bo
holden  of  the  grantor's  immediate  lord.  The  tenants  of
the  crown  were  not  included  in  this  act;  but  that  of
1  Edward  III.  c.  12,  enabled  them  to  alienate,  upon  the
payment  of  a  composition  into  chancery,  which  was  fixed
at  one-third  of  the  annual  value  of  the  lands."

These  restraints,  placed  for  the  lord's  advantage  upon
the  transfer  of  feudal  property,  are  not  to  be  confounded
with  those  designed  for  the  protection  of  heirs  and  pre
servation  of  families.  Such  were  the  jus  protmeseos  in
the  books  of  the  fiefe,"  and  retrait  lignager  of  the  French
law,  which  gave  to  the  relations  of  llie  vendor  a  pre-
emption upon  the  sale  of  any  fief,  and  a  right  of  subse-
quent redemption.  Such  was  the  positive  prohibition  of
alienating  a  fief  held  by  descent  from  the  father  (feudum
patemum),  without  the  consent  of  the  kindred  on  that
line.'  Such,  too,  were  the  still  more  rigorous  fetters
imposed  by  the  English  statute  of  entails,  which  pre-
cluded all  lawful  alienation,  till,  after  two  centuries,  it
was  overthrown  by  the  fictitious  process  of  a  common

more  strongly  to  atlenAtlou. Codtames  could  only  alienate  (to  hold  of  himself)

de  Beanvolsis,  c.  2 ;  Velly,  *t  vL  p.  187.  rationabllem  partem  de  terrft  mk,  1.  vlL

Bat,  by  the  general  law  of  feadn,  the  c.  1. Bnt  this  may  have  been  in  favour

Conner  was  strictly  regular,  while  the  of  the  kindred  as  much  as  of  the  lord,

tenant  forfeited  his  land  by  the  latter.  Dalrymple's  Essay,  ubi  snprk.

Craig  mentions  this  distinction  as  one  for  It  is  probable  that  Coke  Is  mistaken

which  he  is  perplexed  to  account Jus  in  supposing  that  "at  the  common  law

Fendale,  L  ill.  tit  3,  p.  632. It  is,  how-  the  tenant  might  have  m«de  a  feoffment

ever,  perfectly  intelliglblo  upon  the  ori-  of  the  whole  tenancy  to  be  holden  of  the

ginal  principles  of  feudal  tenure.  lord."

t  Dalrymple  seems  to  suppose  that  the  "2  Inst  p.  66 ;  Blacksttme'f  Oommen-

32nd  chapter  of  Magna  Cbarta  relates  tariee,  voL  IL  c.  6.

to  alienation  and  not  to  sub-infeudation.  '  Lib.  Feud.  1.  v.  1 13. Then  were

Essay  on  Feudal  Property,  edit  IY58.  analogies  to  this  Jus  irporiMiy(rcM«  in  the

pi  sa See  Sir  E.  Coke,  2  Inst  p.  65  Roman  law,  and,  still  more  closely,  in

601 ;  and  Wri^t  on  Tenures,  contiiL  the  constitutions  of  the  latter  ^yBantint

Mr.  Hargrave  observes  that "  the  history  emperors.

of  our  law  with  reiq>ect  to  the  powers  of  7  AUenatio  feudi  patera!  nax  valet

alienatioa  before the  statute  of  Quia  etiam  domini  voluntate,  nisi  agnatis  ooo-

Emptores  terrannn  is  very  much  involved  sentientibus. lilx  Feud,  apud  Wri^

In  obscurity." Notes  on  Co.  Lit  43,  a  on  Tenures,  p.  106, 156.
In  Glanville's  time  apparently  n  tami

176  FEUDAL  IKOlPfilTfS: Chap/U.  Past  L

reooveiy.  Though  these  partake  in  some  measnre  of  the
feudal  spirit,  and  would  form  an  important  head  in  the
legal  history  of  that  system,  it  will  he  sufficient  to  allude
to  them  in  a  sketch  which  is  confined  to  the  development
of  its  politicfid  influence.

A  custom  very  similar  in  effect  to  sub-infeudation  was
the  tenure  b^  frerage^  which  prevailed  in  many  parts  of
France.  Primogeniture,  in  that  extreme  which  our  com-
mon law  has  established,  was  unknown,  I  believe^  in
every  country  upon  the  Continent.  The  customs  of
France  foimd  means  to  preserve  the  dignity  of  femxilies^
and  the  indivisibility  of  a  feudal  homage,  without  expos-
ing the  younger  sons  of  a  gentleman  to  absolute  beggary
or  dependence.  Baronies,  indeed,  were  not  divided;
but  the  eldest  son  was  bound  to  make  a  provision  in
money,  by  way  of  appanage,  for  the  other  children,  in
proportion  to  his  circumstances  and  their  birth.'  As  to
inferior  fiefs,  in  mapy  places  an  equal  partition  was  made ;
in  others,  the  eldest  took  the  chief  poiidon,  generally  two-
thirds,  and  received  the  homage  of  his  brothers  ror  the
remaining  part,  which  they  divided.  To  the  lord  of
whom  the  fief  was  held,  himself  did  homage  for  the
whole.'  In  the  early  times  of  the  feudal  policy,  when
militaiy  service  was  the  great  object  of  the  relation  be-
tween lord  and  vassal,  this,  like  all  other  sub-infeudationf
was  rather  advantageous  to  the  former;  for  when  the
homage  of  a  fief  was  divided,  the  service  was  diminished
in  proportion.  Si^ppose,  for  example,  the  obligation  of
military  attendance  for  an  entire  manor  to  have  been
forty  days ;  if  that  came  to  be  equally  split  among  two,
each  would  owe  but  a  service  of  twenty.  But  if,  instead
of  being  homagers  to  the  same  suzerain,  one  tenant  held
immediately  of  the  other,  as  every  feudataiy  might  sum-
mon the  aid  of  his  own  vassals,  the  superior  lord  would,
in  fJGKJt,  obtain  the  service  of  both.  Whatever  opposition.

'  Da  Ouige,  ▼.  Apaiuumentom,  Bara  to  ■orreorion  wotb  ezoeodlii^

Barooie  ne  dqMrt  mie  entre  firtres  le  as  indeed  tbe7  oonttnaed  to  be  vstil  ibe

lenr  pere  ne  leor  a  flJt  pertie ;  mei  11  late  generalisatioo  of  FVwcfa  law. B^

alOflMS  dolt  fidra  arenant  blenfet  an  cnell  des  Hiatar.  t  U.  pvttoe,  p.  IM;

paim^  et  d  dolt  lea  fiUea  maxier. £t»-  Hiat  de  Langaedoc.  t  ti  pk  111,  ill

bliflsem.  do  St  LoalB.  c.  24.  In  tlw  temer  work  it  is  aald  ttiat  priiD»

*  This  waa  alao  the  law  of  Flanden  genitore  waa  introdnoed  bj  the  Nc

and Halnaalt. Martenne, Theaaimia  fhnn  ScandiDaTla.
Aneodotor.  t  L  p.  lOM. The  coatoms  aa

Feudal  Stbtem.  ESCHEATS— AIDS.  177

therefore,  was  made  to  the  rights  of  snb-infexidation  or
fr^rage,  would  indicate  a  decay  in  the  military  character,
the  living  principle  of  feudal  tenure.  Accordingly,  in
the  reign  of  Philip  Augustus,  when  the  £Eibric  was  begin-
ning to  shake,  we  find  a  confederate  agreement  of  some
principal  nobles,  sanctioned  by  the  king,  to  abrogate  the
mesne  tenure  of  younger  brotiiers,  and  establish  an  im-
mediate dependence  of  each  upon  the  superior  lord.**
This,  however,  w^s  not  universally  adopted,  and  the
original  frei^age  subsisted  to  the  last  in  some  of  the
customs  of  France.''

3.  As  fiefs  descended  but  to  the  posterity  of  the  first
taker,  or  at  the  utmost  to  his  kindred,  tiiey  Egj^^att
necessarily  became  sometimes  vacant  for  want  and  for-
of  heirs ;  especially  where,  as  in  England,  there  '®*^'
was  no  power  of  devising  them  by  will.  In  this  case  it
was  obvious  that  they  ought  to  revert  to  the  lord,  from
whose  property  they  had  been  derived.  These  reversions
became  more  frequent  through  the  forfeitures  occasioned
by  the  vassal's  delinquency,  either  tovmrds  his  superior
lord  or  the  state.  Various  cases  are  laid  down  in  the
Assises  de  Jerusalem,  where  the  vassal  forfeits  his  land
for  a  year,  for  his  life,  or  for  ever.**  But  under  rapacious
kings,  such  as  the  Norman  line  in  England,  absolute
forfeitures  came  to  prevail,  and  a  new  doctrine  was  in-
troduced, the  corruption  of  blood,  by  which  the  heir  was
effectually  excluded  from  deducing  his  title  at  any  distant
time  through  an  attainted  ancestor.

4.  Beliefs,  fines  upon  alienation,  and  escheats,  seem  to
be  natural  reservations  in  the  lord's  bounty  to

his  vassal.  He  had  rights  of  another  class  ^^^
which  principally  arose  out  of  fealty  and  intimate  atr
tachment.  Such  were  the  aids  which  he  was  entitled  to
call  for  in  certain  prescribed  circumstances.  These  de-
pended a  great  deal  upon  local  custom,  and  were  often
extorted  unreasonably.  Du  Cange  mentions  several  as
having  existed  in  France;  such  as  an  aid  for  the  lord's
e3^)edition  to  the  Holy  Land,  for  manying  his  sister  or
eldest  son,  and  for  paying  a  relief  to  his  suzerain  on
taking  possession  of  his  land.* Of  these,  the  last  appeora

b  OrdormanoM  des  Bote,  t  L  p. ».  A  C  aoo,  901.

«  Dn  OMige.  DlflBert  m.  rar  Jofiirrille ; *  Du  Caage,  toc  Aazilhim.
Beamnan.  c.  47.

VOL.  I.  M

178  FEUDAL  INCIDENTS: Chap.  U.  Part  I.

to  have  been  the  most  usual  in  England.  But  this,  and
other  aids  occasionallj  exacted  by  the  lords,  were  felt  aa
a  seveie  grievance ;  and  by  Magna  Charta  three  only  are
retained;  to  make  the  lord's  eldest  son  a  knight,  to
marry  his  eldest  daughter,  and  to  redeem  his  person  from
prison.  They  were  restricted  to  nearly  tlie  same  descrip-
tion by  a  law- of  William  I.  of  Sicily,  and  by  the  customs
of  France.'  These  feudal  aids  are  deserving  of  our  atten-
tion, as  the  beginnings  of  taxation,  of  which  for  a  long
time  they  in  a  great  measure  answered  the  purpose,  till
the  craving  necessities  and  covetous  policy  of  kings  sub-
stituted for  them  more  durable  and  onerous  burthens.

I  might  here,  perhaps,  close  the  enumeration  of  feudal
incidents,  but  tiiat  ihe  two  remaining,  wardship  and
marriage,  though  only  partial  customs,  were  those  of  our
own  country,  and  tend  to  illustrate  the  rapacious  cha-
racter of  a  feudal  aristocracy.

5.  In  England,  and  in  Normandy,  which  either  led

vrm«uh  ^®  ^^^  *^'  ^'  adopted,  all  these  English  insti-
^'  tutions,  the  lord  had  the  wardship  of  his  tenant
during  minority .*  By  virtue  of  this  right  he  had  both
the  care  of  his  person  and  received  to  his  own  use  the
profits  of  the  estate.  There  is  something  in  this  custom
very  conformable  to  the  feudal  spirit,  since  none  was  so
fit  as  the  lord  to  train  up  his  vassal  to  arms,  and  none
could  put  in  so  good  a  claim  to  enjoy  the  fief,  while  the
militanf^  service  for  which  it  had  been  granted  was  sus^

Cded.  This  privilege  of  guardianship  seems  to  have
n  enjoyed  by  the  lord  in  some  parts  of  Germany ;  **
but  in  the  law  of  France  the  custody  of  the  land  was
intrusted  to  the  next  heir,  and  that  of  the  person,  as  in
socage  tenures  among  us,  to  the  nearest  kindred  of  that
blood  which  could  not  inherit.* By  a  gross  abuse  of  this

r  Otannone.  L  xU.  e.  6 ;  Velly.  t  vi.  LLi^& TheMoondof  fihemoKsnMriy

p. aoo;  Oidoonanoet  des Rois,  1 1. p.  138,  theauneezprevioinaBSlrJolmFortescM

t  xvL  pr^fiKse.  in  aoooiintizig  for  the  exdnsUm  of  tiM

9  Recneil  des  Historiens,  t  zL  prffl  next  heir  ftomgowdlamlhlp  of  tfaepenon;

p.  162;  Argon.  lost  m  Droit  FYanfoto,  tlmt  nunxTaise  ooDToittM  U  fUroit  fliiri

1.  L  c.  6 ;  Houard.  Andmnwi  Lolx  des  U  gude  da  loup.

FVanfois,  t  L  p.  14T.  I  know  not  any  mistake  more  usual  ta

b  Schilter,  InstltatioiieB  Jnrla  Feodalls,  EngUah  writen  who  have  treated  of  Cbe

p.  8S.  feudal  Uw  than  that  of  soppooing  duit

i  Da  Ouige,  ▼.  Ccstodia;  Asslaes  de  gnarfllanahlp  to dtlTaliy  was anoalvewal

J^rasalem,  a  IT" ;  KtablisMmens  de  St custom. A  charter  of  1196,  to  Kymer,
Louis,  c.  17 ;  DraiamaMir,  c  16 ;  Aigoa, t  L  p.  lOS.  seems  indped  to  imply  ttnt

^'UUDAL  Svn'EU. WARI^SHIP— MABRIAGE.  179

custom  in  Bngland,  the  right  of  gaardianship  in  chivalry,
or  temporary  possession  of  the  lands,  was  assigned  over
to  Btrapgers.  This  was  one  of  the  most  vexations  parts
of  onr  feudal  tenures,  and  was  never,  perhaps,  more
sorely  felt  than  in  their  last  stage  under  the  Tudor  and
Stuart  families.

6.  Another  right  given  to  the  lord  by  the  Norman
and  English  laws  was  that  of  marriage,  or  of  „^^^
tendering  a  husband  to  his  female  wards  while  •'™«**
under  age,  whom  they  oould  not  reject  without  forfeiting
the  value  of  the  marriage  ;  that  is,  as  much  as  any  one
would  give  to  the  guardian  for  such  an  alliance.  This
was  afterwards  extended  to  male  wards,  and  became  a
very  lucrative  source  of  extortion  to  the  crown,  as  well
as  to  mesne  lords.  This  custom  seems  to  have  had  the
same  extent  as  that  of  wardships.  It  is  found  in  the
ancient  books  of  Germany,  but  not  of  France.^  The
kings,  however,  and  even  inferior  lords,  of  that  country,
required  their  consent  to  be  solicited  for  the  marriage  of
their  vassals'  daughters.  Several  proo&  of  this  occur  in
the  history  as  well  as  in  the  laws  of  France ;  and  the  same
prerogative  existed  in  Qermany,  Sicily,  and  England."

the  Incidents  of  gaitle  noble  and  of  mar-  establish  rules  of  Jurlspnidence. Both
rlage  existed  in  the  isle  of  Oleron. But  Philip  and  Henry  were  abundantly  dis-
Eleanor,  by  a  later  instniment,  grants  posed  to  realise  so  oonTenient  a  prero>
that  the  Inhabitants  of  that  island  should  gative  as  that  of  guanUaoship  in  chivaliy
have  the  wardship  and  marriage  of  their  over  the  fieb  of  their  vsssals.  Lyttleion's
heirs  without  any  intprpositlon,  and  ex-  Henry  11.  voL  iii.  p.  441.
preasly  abrogates  all  the  evil  customs  ^  Schilter,  ub!  supii. Da  Cange,  voc
that  her  husband  had  introduced :  p.  1L2.  Dtsparagare,  seems  to  admit  this  feudal
From  hence  I  should  infer  that  Henry  EL  right  in  Fnnoe ;  but  the  paassges  he
bad  endeavoured  to  impose  these  feudal  quotes  do  not  support  jt See  also  the
burthens  (which  perhaps  were  then  new  word  Hariti^um. [M.  Guiaot  has  bow-
even  in  England)  upon  his  continental  ever  observed  (Hist  de  la  Glvilisatioo  en
dominions. Badulphns  de  Dioeto  tells  France,  Lefon  39)  that  the  feudal  in-
•M  of  a  claim  made  by  him  to  the  ward-  ddents  of  guardlauahip  in  shivalry  by
ship  of  Chiteauroux  in  Berry,  which  marriage  were  more  firequent  than  I  seem
jould  not  legally  have  been  snl^ect  to  to  suppose. The  customary  law  was  so
that  custom. Twysden,  X  Scriptorea,  variable,  that  it  is  dangerous  to  rely  en
p.  690. And  he  set  up  pretensions  to  particular  Instances,  or  to  found  a  general
the custody  of  the  duchy  of  Britsny  negative  on  their  absence. 184&3
after  the  death  of  his  son  Gooifrey. This  ">  Ordonnanoes  des  Bois,  t.  L  p.  166 ;
might  perhaps  be  Justified  by  the  law  of  Assises de J^ros.  c  180,  and  Tnau-
Normandy,  on  which  Britany  depended,  massi^re's  note ;  Du  Cange,  ubl  suprk :
But  Philip  Augustus  made  a  similar  Qlauvil,  L  vii.  c.  12;  Oiannone,  L  xL  c.6;
daim. In  fact,  these  political  assertions  Wrif^it  on  Tenures,  p.  94. St  Louis  in
of  r^t.  prompted  by  ambition  and  sup-  return  declared  that  he  would  not  many
povted  by  force,  are  bad  precedents  to  his  own  daui^tar  without  the  oonaeul

n2

180  FEUDAL  INCIDENTS. cThap.  II.  ?Axr  I

A  stiU  more  remarkable  law  prevailed  in  the  kingdoiii
of  Jemsalem.  The  lord  might  summon  any  female
vassal  to  accept  one  of  three  whom  he  should  propose  aa
her  hnsband.  No  other  condition  seems  to  have  been  im-
posed on  him  in  selecting  these  snitors  than  that  thej
should  be  of  equal  rank  with  herselL  Neither  the
maiden's  coyness  nor  the  widow's  affliction,  neither
aversion  to  llie  profiered  candidates  nor  love  to  one  more
favoured,  seem  to  have  passed  as  legitimate  excuses.
One,  only  one  plea,  could  come  from  the  lady's  mouth
who  was  resolute  to  hold  her  land  in  single  blessedness.
It  was,  that  she  was  past  sixty  years  of  age ;  and  after
this  unwelcome  confession  it  is  justly  argued  by  the
author  of  the  law-book  which  I  quote,  that  the  lord
could  not  decently  press  her  into  matrimony."  However
outrageous  such  an  usage  may  appear  to  our  ideas,  it  is
to  be  recollected  that  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  that
little  state  rendered  it  indispensable  to  possess  in  eveiy
fiof  a  proper  vassal  to  fulfil  ^e  duties  of  war.

These  feudal  servitudes  distii^^ish  the  maturity  of
the  system.  No  trace  of  them  appears  in  the  capitularies
of  Clukrlemagne  and  his  family,  nor  in  the  instruments  by
which  benefices  were  granted.  I  believe  that  they  did
not  make  part  of  the  regular  feudal  law  before  the
eleventh,  or,  perhaps,  the  twelfth  century,  though  doubt-
less partial  usages  of  this  kind  had  grown  up  antece-
dently to  either  of  those  periods.  K  I  am  not  mistaken,
no  allusion  occurs  to  the  lucrative  rights  of  seigniory  in
the  Assises  de  Jerusalem,  which  are  a  monument  of
French  usages  in  the  eleventh  century.  Indeed,  that
very  general  commutation  of  alodial  property  into
tenure  which  took  place  between  the  middle  of  the
ninth  and  eleventh  centuries  would  hardly  have  been
effected  if  fiefs  had  then  been  liable  to  such  burthens
and  so  much  extortion.  In  half-barbarous  ages  the
strong  are  constantly  encroachiz^  upon  the  weak ;  a  truth
which,  if  it  needed  illustration,  might  find  it  in  the  pro-
gress of  the  feudal  system.

of  his  baronik JoinTllte.  1  U.  p.  14a  EtebUoemens  de  St  Loois,  c.  6S.

Henry  L  of  England  had  promised  the  "  Aas.  de  J^roa-cTU. I  nrast  otnerre

Mone. The  goaidian  of  a  female  minor  that  Lanilere  saya  this  waee  prerafled

waa  obliged  to  give  aeennty  to  her  lord  en  plnslcnn  lieos,  though  be  qootea  na

not  to  marry  her  witbont  hb  oonaent  authority.— Ordonnanoes  der  Rcris.  pi  156

Feudal  Stbtem. PROPER  AND  IMPROPER  FEUDS.  181

We  have  tbnfi  far  confined  our  inqniry  to  fiefs  holden
on  terms  of  military  service ;  since  those  are  the  pi^yper  and
most  ancient  and  regular,  as  well  as  the  most  con-  ^vjopei
sonant  to  the  spirit  of  the  system.  They  alone
were  called  proper  feuds,  and  all  were  presumed  to  be
of  this  description  until  the  contrary  was  proved  by  the
charter  of  investiture.  A  proper  feud  was  bestowed
without  price,  without  fixed  stipulation,  upon  a  vassal
capable  of  serving  personally  in  the  field.  But  gradually,
with  the  help  of  a  litde  legal  ingenuity,  improper  fiefs
of  the  most  various  kinds  were  introduced,  retaining
little  of  the  characteristics,  and  less  of  the  spirit,  which
distinguished  the  original  tenures.  Women,  if  indeed
that  were  an  innovation,  were  admitted  to  inherit  them ;  °
they  were  granted  for  a  price,  and  without  reference  to
military  service.  The  language  of  the  feudal  law  was
applied  by  a  kind  of  metaphor  to  almost  every  transfer
of  property.  Hence  pensions  of  money  and  allowancefi
of  provisions,  however  remote  from  right  notions  of  a
fief,  were  sometimes  granted  luider  that  name ;  and  even
where  land  was  the  subject  of  the  donation,  its  conditions
were  often  lucrative,  often  honorary,  and  sometimes
ludicrous.'

There  is  one  extensive  species  of  feudal  tenure  which
maybe  distinctly  noticed.  The  pride  of  wealth  piefsof
in  the  middle  ages  was  principally  exhibited  ^^
in  a  multitude  of  (Lependents.  The  court  of  Charle-
magne was  crowded  with  officers  of  every  rank,  some  of
the  most  eminent  of  whom  exercised  functions  about  the
royal  person  which  would  have  been  thought  fit  only  for
slaves  in  the  palace  of  Augustus  or  Antonine.  The  free-
born  Franks  saw  nothing  menial  in  the  titles  of  cup-
bearer, steward,  marshal,  and  master  of  the  horse,
which  are  still  borne  by  the  noblest  families  in  many
parts  of  Europe,  and,  till  lately,  by  sovereign  princes  in

*  Women  did  not  inherit  flefb  In  the  P  Crag.  Jns  Fend«!e,  L  1.  tit  10;  Dn

German  empire. Whether  they  were  Cange,  voa  Fendum  de  Camer&,  kc In

erer  ezclnded  from  snooeaBion  in  France  the  treaty  between  Henry  I.  of  England

I  know  not;  the  genina  of  a  military  and  Robert  count  of  Flanders,  aj>.  1)01

tennre,  and  the  old  Teutonic  cnstoma,  pre-  the  king  stipnlatee  to  pay  annually  40«

served  in  the  Salic  law,  seem  advene  to  martca  of  lilver,  in  feodo,  for  the  mllS-

their  poaawton  at  feudal  landa ;  yet  the  tary  aenrice  of  his  ally. Bymer,  Foedera.

practice,  at  least  fhim  the  eleventh  century  t  i.  p.  a.
downwards,  does  not  support  the  theoiy.

182  ,  FIEFS  OF  OFFICE.  Chap.  II.  Part  L

the  empire.**  Froiu  the  court  of  the  king  this  fjetvourite
piece  of  magnificence  descended  to  those  of  the  prelates
and  barons,  who  surronnded  themselves  with  household
officers  called  ministerials ;  a  name  equally  applied  to
those  of  a  servile  and  of  a  liberal  description.'  The
latter  of  these  were  rewarded  with  grants  of  lands,  which
they  held  under  a  feudal  tenure  by  the  condition  of
peiforming  some  domestic  service  to  the  lord.  What
was  called  in  our  law  grand  serjeanty  affords  an  instance
of  this  species  of  £ef.*  It  is,  however,  an  instance  of  the
noblest  kind ;  but  Muratori  has  given  abundance  of
proo&  that  the  commonest  mechanical  arts  were  carried
on  in  the  houses  of  the  great  by  persons  receiving  lands
upon  those  conditions.'

These  imperfect  feuds,  however,  belong  more  properly
to  the  history  of  law,  and  are  chiefly  noticed  in  the  pre-
sent sketch  because  they  attest  the  partiality  manifested
during  the  middle  ages  to  the  name  and  form  of  a  feudal
tenure.  In  the  regular  military  fief  we  see  the  real
principle  of  the  system,  which  might  originally  have
been  defined  an  alliance  of  free  landholders  arranged  in
degrees  of  subordination,  according  to  their  respective
capacities  of  affording  mutual  support.

The  peculiar  and  varied  attributes  of  feudal  tenures
Keodai  Uw-  naturally  gave  lise  to  a  new  jurisprudence,
^»ok»-  regulating  territorial  rights  in  those  parts  of
Europe  which  had  adopted  the  system.  For  a  length  of
time  this  rested  in  traditionary  customs  observed  in  the

t  The  coont  of  Ai^oa.  under  Louis  '  Schmidt.  Hist  des  AllenuiMb,  t  iiL

VL,  claimed  the  ofHce  of  Great  Senes-  p.  92; Da  Cange,  ▼.  Familia.  Miois-

chal  of  France;  that  ia,  to  carry  dishes  teriales.

CO  the  king's  table  on  state  days. (Sis-  *  "  This  tennre,"  says  LdtUetoD,  -  Is

moDdi,  ▼.  135.) Thus  the  feodal  notions  where  a  man  holds  his  lands  or  tenements

of  grand  seijeanty  prepared  the  way  for  of  om*  sovereign  lord  the  king  by  aacfa

the  restoratioD  of  royal  sopremacy,  as  services  as  he  ought  to  do  in  his  proper

the  military  tennres  had  impaired  it  person  to  the  king,  as  to  cany  the  banner

The  w(mnd  and  the  remedy  came  Ibxn  of  the  king,  or  his  lance,  or  to  lead  his

the  same  lance. If  the  feudal  system  army,  or  to  be  his  marshal,  or  to  carry

was  inoompatible  with  despotism,  and  his  sword  before  him  at  his  oorooatioii,

3ven,  while  in  its  ftiU  vigour,  with  legi-  or  to  be  his  sewer  at  his  coronation,  or

timate  authority,  it  kept  alive  the  sense  bis  carver,  or  his  butlor,  or  to  be  one  oi

of  a  supreme  diief,  of  a  superiorily  of  his  chamberlains  at  the  receipt  of  Lit

rank,  of  a  certain  sul^ection  to  an  here-  exchequer,  or  to  do  other  like  Berricea."

ditary  sovereign,  not  yet  tesUflcd  by  un-  Sect  163.

Ibnited  obedience,  but  by  homage  and  »  Antlq.  ItaL  Dittsrt  1 1,  ad  fintsu.
loyalty.

Feudal  Systkm. FEUDAL  LAW-BOOKS  183

domains  of  each  prince  or  lord,  without  much  regard  to
those  of  his  neighbours.  Laws  were  made  occasionally
by  the  emperor  in  Germany  and  Italy,  which  tended  to
fix  the  usages  of  those  countries.  About  the  year  ]  170,
Girard  and  Obertus,  two  Milanese  lawyers,  published
two  books  of  the  law  of  fie£5,  which  obtained  a  great
authority,  and  have  been  regarded  as  the  groundwork
of  that  jurisprudence."  A  number  of  subsequent  com-
mentators swelled  this  code  with  their  glosses  and  opi-
nions, to  enlighten  or  obscure  the  judgment  of  the
imperial  tribunals.  These  were  chiefly  civilians  or
canonists,  who  brought  to  the  interpretation  of  old  bar-
baric customs  the  principles  of  a  very  different  school.
Hence  a  manifest  change  was  wrought  in  the  law  of
feudal  tenure,  which  they  assimilated  to  the  usufruct  or
the  emphyteusis  of  the  Eoman  code ;  modes  of  property
somewhat  analogous  in  appearance,  but  totally  distinct
in  principle,  from  the  legitimate  fief.  These  Lombard
lawyers  propagated  a  doctrine  which  has  been  too  readily
received,  that  the  feudal  system  originated  in  their
country ;  and  some  writers  upon  jurisprudence,. such  as
Duck  and  Sir  James  Craig,  incline  to  give  a  prepon-
derating authority  to  their  code.  But  whatever  weight
it  may  have  possessed  within  the  limits  of  the  empire,  a
different  guide  must  be  followed  in  the  ancient  customs
of  France  and  England.'  These  were  fresh  from  the
fountain  of  that  curious  polity  with  which  the  stream  of
Eoman  law  had  never  mingled  its  waters.  Li  England
we  know  that  the  Noiman  system  established  between
the  Conquest  and  the  reign  of  Heniy  II.  was  restrained
by  regular  legislation,  by  paramount  courts  of  justice,
and  by  learned  writhigs,  from  breaking  into  discordant
local  usages,  except  in  a  comparatively  small  ntimber  of
places,  and  has  become  the  principal  source  of  our  com-
mon law.  But  the  independence  of  the  French  nobles
produced  a  much  greater  variety  of  customs. The  whole

"  Giamione,  Ist  dl  Napoli,  L  xill.  c.  3.  Introdnoed  by  Roger  Gniscird  into  hi«

The  TJbrl  Fendomm  are  printed  in  most  domlntoiis,  in  three  books  of  coDstltQ*

editions  of  the  Corpus  Juris  CiviUs.  tioos,  printed  in  lindebrog's  ooUection.

'  GlanooDe  ezpUdtly  oontnsts the  There  were  serend  material  dilTerences,

FV<*nch  and  Lontoard  laws  respecting  whidi  Glaimone  eonmerates,  eq)edall7

flefik The  latter  was  the  foondation  of  the  Norman  costcm  of  primogeniture

the  Llbri Fendoram,  and  fonned  the  Ist  dl  Nap.  L  xi.  a  6.
enninoo  law  of  Italy. The  former  was

^  184  FEUDAL  LAW-BOOKS. Chap.  U.  Past  L

number  colleoted  and  reduced  to  certainty  in  the  six*
teenth  century  amounted  to  two  hundred  and  eighty-Eve,
or,  omitting  those  inconsiderable  for  extent  or  peculiarily.
to  sixty.  The  earliest  written  oustomaiy  in  France  ia
that  of  Beam,  which  is  said  to  have  been  confirmed  by
Viscount  Gaston  IV.  in  1088.^  Many  others  were  written
in  the  two  subsequent  ages,  of  which  the  customs  of
Beauvoisis,  compiled  by  Beaumanoir  under  Philip  III.,
are  the  most  celebrated,  and  contain  a  mass  of  informa-
tion on  the  feudal  constitution  and  manners.  Under
Charles  YII.  an  ordinance  was  made  for  the  formation  of
a  general  code  of  customary  law,  by  ascertaining  for
ever  in  a  written  collection  those  of  each  district ;  but
the  work  was  not  completed  till  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.
This  was  what  may  be  ocdled  the  common  law  of  the
pays  coutumiers,  or  northern  division  of  France,  and  the
rule  of  all  their  tribunals,  unless  where  controlled  by
royal  edicts.

^  There  are  two  edltioDi  of  this  cnriofHB  oorrected. The  basb^  howerer,  is  an-

old  code;  one  at  Pan,  in  1662,  repub-  ({ueatianably  very  ancient We  even

lished  with  a  freih  title-page  and  per*  find  ftie  compoiitian  for  homicide  pre-

miaiioQ  of  Henry  IV.  in  1602;  the  other  serred In  them, ao  that  murder  waa  not

at  Leecars,  in  163a Theae  lawa,  aa  we  a  capital  offenoe  In  Bean,  thooi^  rob>

read  them,  are  aabseqiovnt  to  a  revision  bery  waa  anch.— Rabrica  da  HomicidiB»

made  in  the  middle  of  the  aizteenth  oen*  Art.  zxxL See  too  RutiHca  d;  lioenir,

tury  in  which  thqy  were  iBore  or  km  Art  L  anrl  li.

TxuDAL  Ststem.  analysis  OF  FEUDAL  STfcrr£H.  lad

PARI  IL

Analyiis  of  the  Feudal  System  —  Its  local  fbctent  —  View  of  the  different  Ordcn
of  Society  daring  the  Feudal  Ages  —  NoUllty  —  their  Ranks  and  PriTlleges  —
Clergy  ^  Freemen  —  Serft  or  YlUeins  —  ComparatiTe  State  of  Fnnce  and  Qer«
many  —  Privileges  ei\)pyed  by  the  French  VaaHJs  -»  Right  of  coining  Monfj  —
and  of  private  War  —  Immunity  from  Taxation  —  Historical  View  of  the  Roya.
Revenue  In  France  —  Methods  adopted  to  augment  it  by  Depredation  of  the
Ooin,  &C.  —  ^jegislative  Ftower  —  its  State  under  the  Merovingian  Kingi,  and
Charlemagne  —  His  Councils  —  Suspension  of  any  general  Legislative  Authority
during  the  Prevalence  of  Feudal  Principles  —  the  King's  ConncU  —  Means
adopted  to  supply  the  Want  of  a  National  Assembly  —  Gradual  Progross  of  the
tang's  LegisUUve  Power  —  PhiUp  IV.  assembles  the  States-General  —  Their
FowexB  limited  to  TaxaUon  —  States  under  the  Sons  of  Philip  IV.—  SUtes  of
1355  and  1356  ->  lliey  nearly  eflfect  an  entire  Revolution  —  The  Grown  recovers
its  Vigour  —  States  of  1380,  under  Charles  VL  —  Subsequent  Assemblies  under
Charles  VL  and  Charles  VIL—  The  Crown  becomes  more  and  more  absolute  —
Louis  XL—  States  of  Tours  in  1484  —  Historical  View  of  Jurisdiction  in  France

—  Its  earliest  Stage  under  the  first  Race  of  Kings,  and  Charlemagne  —  Territorial
Jurisdiction  —  Feudal  Courts  of  Justice  —  Trial  by  Combat  —  Code  of  St  Louis

—  The  Territorial  Jurisdictions  give  way  —  Progress  of  the  Judicial  Power  of
*he  Crown  —  Parliament  of  Paris  —  Peers  of  France  —  Increased  Authority  of
tbo  Parliament  —  Regbtratlon  of  Edicts  —  Causes  of  the  Decline  of  the  Feudal
system  —  Acquisitions  of  Domain  by  the  Crown  —  Charters  of  Inoorporation
granted  to  Towns  —  Their  previous  Condition  —  Firet  Charters  in  the  Twelfth
Century  —  Privileges  contained  in  tbem  —  Military  Service  of  Feudal  Tenants
commuted  for  Money  —  Hired  Troops  —  Change  in  the  Military  System  of
Kurope  —  General  View  of  the  Advantages  and  Disadvantages  attending  the
Feudal  System.

The  advocates  of  a  Boman  origin  for  most  of  the  infiti-
tutions  whicli  we  find  in  the  kingdoms  erected  on  tlie
ruins  of  the  empire  are  naturallj  prone  to  magnify  the
analogies  to  feudal  tenure  which  Borne  presents  to  us,
and  even  to  deduce  it  either  from  the  ancient  relation
of  patron  and  client,  and  that  of  personal  commendation,
wMch  was  its  representative  in  a  later  age,  or  from  the
frontier  lands  granted  in  the  third  century  to  the  LsBti,
or  barbarian  soldiers,  who  held  them,  doubtless,  subject
to  a  condition  of  military  service.  The  usage  of  com-
mendation  especially,  so  frequent  in  the  fifth  century,
before  the  conquest  of  Gaul,  as  well  as  afterwards,  does
certainly  bear  a  strong  analogy  to  vassalage,  and  I  have
already  pointed  it  out  as  one  of  its  sources. It  wanted.

136  ANALYSIS  OF  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  Chap.  IL  Tisa  II.

hoTvever,  that  definite  relation  to  the  tenure  of  land
which  difitingaiflhed  the  latter.  The  ro^  Antrnstio
(whether  the  word  commerukftus  were  applied  to  him  or
not)  stood  bonnd  by  gratitude  and  loyalty  to  his  sove
reign,  and  in  a  veiy  different  degree  from  a  common
subject ;  but  he  was  not  perhaps  strictly  a  Tassal  till  he
had  received  a  territorial  benefice.*  The  complexity  of
sub-infeudation  could  have  no  analogy  in  commendation.
The  grants  to  veterans  and  to  the  Lseti  are  so  feir  only
analogous  to  fiefs,  that  they  established  the  principle  of
holding  lands  on  a  condition  of  militaiy  service.  But
this  service  was  no  more  than  what,  both  under  Charle-
magne and  in  England,  if  not  in  other  times  and  places,
the  alodial  freeholder  was  bound  to  render  for  the  defence
of  the  realm ;  it  was  more  commonly  required,  because
the  lands  were  on  a  barbarian  frontier;  but  the  duty
was  not  even  very  analogous  to  that  of  a  feudal  tenant.^
The  essence  of  a  fief  seems  to  be,  that  its  tenant  owed
fealty  to  a  lord,  and  not  to  the  state  or  the  sovereign ;
the  lord  mi^t  be  the  latter,  but  it  was  not,  feudally
speaking,  as  a  sovereign  that  he  was  obeyed.  This  is,
therefore,  sufficient  to  warrant  us  in  tracing  the  real
theory  of  fends  no  higher  than  fte  Merovingian  history
in  France  ;  their  Aill  establishment,  as  has  been  seen,  is
considerably  later.  But  the  preparatory  steps  in  the
constitutions  of  the  declining  empire  are  of  considerable
importance,  not  merely  as  analogies,  but  as  predisposing
circumstances,  and  even  germs  to  be  subsequently  deve-
loped. The  beneficiary  tenure  of  lands  could  not  well
be  brought  by  tlie  conquerors  from  Germany ;  but  the
donatives  of  arms  or  precious  metals  bestowed  by  the
chiefs  on  their  followers  were  also  analogous  to  fiefs;
and,  as  the  Boman  institutions  were  one  source  of  the
law  of  tenure,  so  these  were  another.

*  This  word  *'TBanI"  is  naed  very  in-  oonaeqiiriMaitaT,  nt  defactOict  ^hoquc  ob>

definitely;  It  means.  In  its  original  een!>e,  mtani  euent  et  legioDilras  insererentor.

ooly  a  senrant  or  dependant Bat  in  the  (Not.  ad  Cod.  Theod.  L  viL  tit  20,  e.  l&)

oootinental  lecorda  of  hiaioriea  we  oom-  Sir  Franda  PalgraTe,  however,  aaye—

monlj  find  tt  applied  to  feudal  tenantac  **  The  duty  of  bearing  aims  was  iuK*

b  IfOothoflfvdisri^tin  hisoonatmo-  paiably  oonnected  with  the  property."

tion  of  the  tenure  of  these  La;ti,  fliey  (English  Commonwealth,  L  35i.) This

were  not  even  generally  liable  to  this  is  too  eqolTocal ;  bat  he  certainly  me«M

partofoiir(riMNianeoattta<,batonIyto  more  than Gothofred;  he  soppooes  a

eonMriptlon  for  Qie  legions. Eteatamen  permanent  nniveraal  obllgatloo  to  render

eanditlone  terns  illis  eToolwidaa  Lmu  aenrioe  in  all  pubUc  warfkrek

Feudal  Stbtem.  ITS  EXTENT.  187

It  is  of  great  importance  to  be  on  our  gnard  against
seeming  analogies  which  vanish  away  when  they  are
closely  observed.  We  should  speak  inaccurately  if  we
were  to  use  the  vrord  feudal  for  the  service  of  the  Irish
or  Highland  clans  to  their  chieftain  ;  their  tie  was  that
of  imagined  kindred  and  respect  for  birth,  not  the
spontaneous  compact  of  vassalage.  Much  less  can
we  extend  the  name  of  feud,  though  it  is  sometimes
strangely  misapplied,  to  the  polity  of  Poland  and  Russia.
All  &e  Polish  nobles  were  equal  in  rights,  and  inde-
pendent of  each  other;  all  who  were  less  than  noble
were  in  servitude.  No  government  can  be  more  oppo*<
site  to  the  long  gradations  and  mutual  duties  of  the
feudal  system.**

The  regular  machinery  and  systematic  establishment
of  feuds,  in  fBLCt,  may  be  considered  as  almost  E^j^j^tof
confined  to  the  dominions  of  Charlemagne,  and  the  feuiki
to  those  countries  which  afterwards  derived  it  '•^•**™*
from  thence. In  England  it  can  hardly  be  thought  to
have  existed  in  a  complete  state  before  the  Conquest.
Scotland,  it  is  supposed,  borrowed  it  soon  after  from  her
neighbour. The  Lombards  of  Benevento  had  intro^
duced  feudal  customs  into  the  Neapolitan  provinces,
which  the Norman conquerors  afterwards  perfected.
Feudal  tenures  were  so general  in  the  kingdom  of
Aragon,  that  I  reckon  it  among  the  monarchies  which
were  founded  upon  that  basis.** Charlemagne's  empire,

*  In  drfl  histoiy  manjisaUaonmif^  them  to  the  Unfp James  L,  npoo  the

befirandof  fieiidaloeremoiiieetiiooantries  Tedaction  of  Valencia,  granted  lands  bj

not  regulated  by  the  feodal  law. Thus  way  offleffOnoonditicm  of  defending  that

Selden  has  pnblished  an  infeodation  of  Ungdom  agsinst  the  Hootb,  and  residing

a  vayvod  of  Moldarla  by  the  king  of  personally  npon  the  estate. Many  did

Poland,  AJ>.  1486,  in  the  regular  forms,  not  perform  this  engagement,  and  were

ToL  iU.  p.  614. Bat  these  political  fieik  depriTed  of  the  lands  in  oonseqnence. It

have baldly  any  oonnexioD with the  appears  by  the  testament  of  this  monarch

general  tytUask,  and  merely  denote  the  that  feudal  tenures  subsisted  in  ereiy

sabordinatloD  of  one  prince  or  people  to  part  of  his  dominions.— Martenne,  The-

another.  sanrus  Anecdotomm,  t^  L  pi  1141,  1166.

<t  It  is  probable  that  feudal  tenure  was  An  edict  of  Peter  II.  in  1210  prohibits

M  ancient  in  the  north  of  Spain  as  In  the  alienation  of  emfaftylsiaes  without  the

the  contiguous  prorlnoes  of  Prance. But  lord's  consent It  is  hard  to  si^  whether

It  seems  to  have  chiefly  prevailed  In  regular  flefii  are  meant  by  this  word.— De

Arsgon  about  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  Marca,  Marca  Hiapanica,  p.  13M. ThU

centuries,  when  the  Moots  south  of  the  author  ssys  that  there  were  no  arriere-

Ebro  were  subdued  by  the  enterprise  of  fteib  in  Catalonia,

private  nobles,  who,  after  conquering  The  Aragonese  fiefs  appear,  however,  to

estates  for  themselvei,  did  boinage  tar  have  differed  from  those  of  ether  countries

188  EXTENT  OF  FEUDAL  SYSTEM. Gh4P.  II.  Part  11.

it  must  be  remembered,  extended  as  far  as  the  £bro.
But  in  Castile ""  and  Portugal  they  were  very  rare,  and
certainly  could  produce  no  political  effect.  Benefices
for  life  were  sometimes  granted  in  tlie  kingdoms  of
Denmark  and  Bohemia.'  Neither  of  these,  however,
nor  Sweden  nor  Hungary,  come  under  the  descripdon
of  countries  influenced  by  the  feudal  system.'  That
system,  however,  after  all  iheae  limitations,  was  so
extensively  diffused,  that  it  might  produce  confusion  as
well  as  prolixity  to  pursue  collateral  branches  of  its
history  in  all  the  countries  where  it  prevailed.  But  this
embarrassment  may  be  avoided  without  any  loss,  I  trust,
of  important  information.  The  English  constitution  will
find  its  place  in  another  portion  of  these  volimies ;  and  the
political  condition  of  Italy,  after  the  eleventh  century,
was  not  much  affected,  except  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,
by  the  laws  of  feudal  tenure.  I  shall  confine  myself,
therefore,  chiefly  to  France  and  Germany ;  and  £eu:  more
to  the  former  than  the  latter  countiy.  But  it  may  bo
expedient  first  to  contemplate  the  state  of  society  in  its
various  classes  during  the  prevalence  of  feudal  pnn-

In  aome  respecti. Zarita  moitioDs  fiefli  vented  the  s^tem  from  being  establiibed.

aeeorditig  to  the  cuttam  qf  Italy t  which  be  There  were  even  territoriAl  Juriadictioitt

expUine  to  be  locfa  ae  were  liable  to  the  In  that  kingdom,  thoa^  not,  at  leaat

naual  feudal  aide  for  inarrTing  the  lord's  origlnallj,  In  Castile,

dan^ter,  and  other  oocaaloDB. We  may  f  Danin  regal  poUticaBBtata&  EUeivIra

Infer,  therefore,  that  these  prestations  1629. Stransky^  Bcspublica  Bohemica,

were  not  cnstomaiy  in  Angon.— Anales  IK In  one  of  Uie  oldest  Danish  hiato*

de  Aragoo,  t  li.  p.  62.  rians,  Sweno,  I  have  noticed  this  exprea>

*  What  Is  said  ofTaasalags  in  Alfonso  sion:  Waldemama,  patria  tone  potitaa

X.'s  code,  Las  slete  partldaa.  Is  short  and  ftodo, Langebek,  Scrip.  Remm  Uanic  t.

obscure:  nor  am  I  certain  that  it  meant  Lp.62. By  this  he  means  the  dncfay  of

anything  more  than  vtMuitaxy  coMmm-  SLeswlc,  not  a  flef,  bnt  an  honour  or

dcUion,  the  cnatom  mentioned  in  the  goremment poaseaaed by Waldemar.

former  part  of  thla  diapter,  frcm  which  Sazo  Grammaticus  calls  it,  more  .daa-

theyaasalml^t  depart  at  pleasure.  See,  sically,  patenue pnefectune dignitas.

however,  Dn  Cange,  ▼.  Honor,  where  Sleswic  was,  in  later  times,  aomctimea

authorities  are  given  for  the  existence  of  held  as  a  flef ;  but  this  does  not  in  the

Castilian  flelk;  and  I  have  met  with  least  imply  that  Isnds  In  Denmaxkpropei

oocaslonal  mention  of  them  in  history,  were  feudal,  of  which  I  find  no  evideDceu

I  believe  that  tenures  of  this  Und  were  6  Thou^  there  were  no  feudal  tenures

introduced  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  tn  Sweden,  yet  the  nobility  and  others

oenturies;  bat  not  to  any  great  extent,  were  exempt  from  taxea  on  oondttian  of

— Ifariua,  Teoria  de  las  Cortea,  L  iii  aerving  the  king  with  a  horse  and  anna

pu  14.  at  their  own  oxpenae;  and  a  distlncttoii

Tenures  of  a  feudal  nature,  aa  I  ool-  was  taken  betweeA  Uber  and  trStmtariut,

lect  from  fVeirii  lustitut  Juris  Lusitani,  But  any  one  of  11i9  latter  mlgjit  beoome

torn.  IL  t  1  and  3,  existed  in  Portogil,  of  the  former  class,  or  vice  veraA.--Sueclsi

(hough  the  Jealousy  of  the  crown  pre-  deacriptia Elsevir,  1631,  p.  92.

Fel^dal  Stvtem.  nobility.  189

ciples,  before  we  trace  their  influence  upon  the  national
government.

It  has  been  laid  down  already  as  most  probable  that
no  proper  aristocracy,  except  that  of  wealth,  was  qi^^^^  ^*
known  under  the  early  -kings  of  France ;  and  sodetj.
it  was  hinted  that  hereditary  benefices,  or,  in  ^'^^'^ii^y'
other  words,  fie&,  might  supply  the  link  that  was  want-
ing between  personal  priyileges  and  those  of  descent
The  possessors  of  beneficiary  estates  were  usually  the
richest  and  most  conspicuous  indiyiduals  in  the  estate.
They  were  immediately  connected  with  the  crown,  and
partakers  in  the  exercise  of  justice  and  royal  counsels.
Their  sons  now  came  to  inberit  this  eminence ;  and,  as
fiefs  were  either  inalienable,  or  at  least  not  very  fre-
quently alienated,  rich  families  were  kept  long  in  sight ;
and,  whether  engaged  in  public  afiGedrs,  or  living  with
magnificence  and  hospitalitv  at  home,  naturally  drew  to
themselves  popular  estimation.  The  dukes  and  counts,
who  had  changed  their  quality  of  govemoi-s  into  that  of
lords  over  the  provinces  intrusted  to  them,  were  at  the
bead  of  this  noble  class.  And  in  imitation  of  them,  their
own  vassals,  as  well  as  those  of  the  crown,  and  even
rich  alodialists,  assumed  titles  from  their  towns  or
castles,  and  thus  arose  a  number  of  petty  counts,  barons,
and  viscounts.  This  distinct  class  of  nobility  became
co-extensive  vnth  tbe  feudal  tenures.^  For  the  military
tenant,  however  poor,  was  subject  to  no  tribute;  no  pres-
tation, but  service  in  the  field ;  ho  was  the  companion  ot
his  lord  in  the  sports  and  feasting  of  his  castle,  the  peer
of  his  court ;  he  fought  on  horseback,  he  was  clad  in  the
coat  of  mail,  while  the  commonalty,  if  summoned  at  all
to  war,  came  on  foot,  and  with  no  armour  of  defence.
As  everythiQg  in  the  habits  of  society  conspired  with
tiiat  prejudice  which,  in  spite  of  moral  philosophers,
will  constantly  raise  the  profession  of  arms  above  all
others,  it  was  a  natural  consequence  that  a  new  species
of  aristocracy,  founded  upon  the  mixed  considerations

b  M.  Gn^rard  observes  that  in  the  basse." By  the  first  he  uideratands  Umbo

Chartalary  of  Chartres,  exhiUting  the  who  held  IminediAtely  of  the  crown;  the

naages  of  the  eleventh  and  beginning  of  middle  nobility  were  mediAte  vaaMOSfbat

the  twelfth  centuries,  "La noblesse  s'y  had  ri^ts  of  Jnriadictloa,  which the

Bontre  oompl^tement  conatitude;  c'est  lower  had not (Prol^gomtoea k la

k  dine.  priTll^te  et  htfr^taire. Elle  Outalaire  de  Cbarires,  p.  lo.)
peat  Itre  diriade  <>n  bante,  moyetaie,  et

190  NOBILITT.  Chap.  II.  Past  It

of  birth,  tenure,  and  occnpation,  spmng  out  of  the  feudal
Bjstem.  Every  possessor  of  a  fief  waa  a  gentleman,
though  he  owned  but  a  few  acres  of  land,  and  furnished
his  slender  contribution  towards  the  equipment  of  a
knight.  In  the  Libri  Feudorum,  indeeid,  those  who
were  three  degrees  remoTed  from  the  emperor  in  order
of  tenancy  are  considered  as  ignoble;*  but  this  is  re-
strained to  modem  investitures ;  and  in  France,  where
sub-infeudation  was  carried  the  fGoihest,  no  such  distinc-
tion has  met  my  observation.^

There  still,  however,  wanted  sometiiing  to  ascertain
gentility  of  blood  where  it  was  not  marked  by  the  actual
tenure  of  land.  This  was  supplied  by  two  innovations
devised  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries — ^the  adop-
tion of  surnames  and  of  armorial  bearings.  The  first  are
conmionly  referred  to  the  former  age,  when  the  nobility
began  to  add  the  names  of  their  estates  to  their  own,  or,
having  any  way  acquired  a  distinctive  appellation,  trans-
mitted it  to  their  posterity."  As  to  armorial  bearings,
there  is  no  doubt  that  emblems  somewhat  similar  have
been  immemorially  used  both  in  war  and  peace.  The
shields  of  ancient  warriors,  and  devices  upon  coins  or
seals,  bear  no  distant  resemblance  to  modem  blazonry.
But  the  general  introduction  of  such  bearings,  as  heredi-
tary distinctions,  has  been  sometimes  attributed  to  tour-
naments, wherein  the  champions  were  distinguished  by
fimciful  devices;  sometimes  to  the  crusades,  where  a
multitude  of  all  nations  and  languages  stood  in  need  of
some  visible  token  to  denote  the  banners  of  their  respec-
tive chie&.  In  fieict,  the  peculiar  symbols  of  heraldiy
point  to  both  these  sources,  and  have  been  borrowed  in

i  Lb  lit  10.  stanoeBefren  tothebegbmingofthetentb

^  The  nobility  of  an  alodial  poawMBfam,  oentiuy;  but  they  did  not  beoome  general,

in  France,  depended  npon  its  rii^t  to  aooonUng  to  them,  till  the  thirteenth,

territorial JnriadictiaD. Henoe  there  were  M.  Gn6nni  flnda  a  few  heredlfcazy  fai^

franc'aleux  notUs  axid  franc-oltum  rotu-  names  in  the  eleventh  centoiy.and  many

fieri ;  the  latter  of  which  were  subject  to  that  were  personaL (Cartnlaire  de  Char-

tiM  Jurisdiction  of  the  neighbouring  lonL  treSt  P*  93.) The  latter  are  not  •Dmanes

Loisean,  Traitd  des  Seignenries,  p.  TC  at  aU,  in  onr  osoal  senee. A  good  many

Denisart,  Dlctiomiaire  dea  DteULctm,  art  may  be  found  in  Domesday,  as  that  of

Frano-aleu.  Buidet  in  Letocatershire.  If  alet  in  Snflblk.

»  If aUUon,  Traits  de  Oiplomatiqoe,  Corbet  In  Shropahire.  OolTllle  In  Toik-

L  il.  e.  T. The  aothon  of  the  Nooyean  shire,  beeides  those  with  ds,  wUdi  of

TralK  de  Diplomatique,  t  iL  p.  663,  oonrM  is  a  looal  desipiation,  bat  bocMnc

Haoe  the  use  of  surnames  in  a  few  Id-  hereditary.

Feudal  SrirrEM.  ITS  PRIVILEGES.  191

part  from  each.*  Hereditaiy  aims  were  perhaps  scarcely
used  by  private  families  before  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century.**  From  that  time,  however,  they
became  very  general,  and  have  contributed  to  elucidate
that  branch  of  history  which  regards  the  descent  of  illus-
trious fieunilies.

When  the  privileges  of  birth  had  thus  been  rendered
capable  of  legitimate  proof,  they  were  en-  itiprivi-
hEmced  in  a  great  degree,  and  a  line  drawn  i<8»-
between  the  high-bom  and  ignoble  classes,  almost  as
Droad  as  that  which  separated  liberty  from  servitude.
All  offices  of  trust  and  power  were  conferred  on  the
former;  those  excepted  which  appertain  to  the  legal
profession.  A  plebeian  could  not  possess  a  fief.i*  Such
at  least  was  the  original  strictness :  but  as  the  aristo-
cratic principle  grew  wecJcer,  an  indulgence  was  ex-
tended to  heirs,  and  afterwards  to  purchasers.** They

n  M6n.  de  I'Acad.  des  IiucriptloDS,  as  appesrs  by  a  paange  in  JoiovUIe,  t  L

t  zx.  pi  679.  p.  88  (Collect,  des  M&noira),  and  Du

<*  I  Bboald  be  nnwiUlug  to  make  «  Gauge's  note  npon  it.  Perbftps,  however,
negative  aaaertion  peremptorily  in  «  they  may  have  been  adopted  in  Imitation
matter  of  mere  antiquarian  reflearch;  of  the  Fnmks,  like  the  ceremonies  of
but  I  am  not  aware  of  any  decisive  evi-  knighthood.  Villaret  ingeniously  oon-
denoe  that  hereditary  anna  were  borne  Jectores  that  the  separation  of  different
in  the  twelfth  century,  except  by  a  very  branches  of  the  same  flunily  b^  their
few  royal  or  almost  royal  figonilies.  settlements  In  Palestine  led  to  the  use  of
Ifabillon,  Traits  de  Diplomatique,  1.  ii.  heredltaiy  anna,  in  order  to  preserve  the
c  18.  Tlioee  of  Geoffrey  the  Fair,  count  connexion.  T.  xi.  p.  113.
of  A^Jou,  who  died  in  1160,  are  extant  M.  Sismondi,!  observe,  seems  to  enter-
on  his  shield :  axnre,  four  lions  rampant  tain  no  doubt  that  the  noble  i^milies  of
or.  Hist  LiU4ralre  de  la  France,  t.  ix.  Pisa,  including  that  whose  name  he  bears,
p.  105.  If  arms  had  been  considered  as  had  their  annorial  distinctions  in  the
hereditary  at  that  time,  ttiis  should  be  beginning  of  the  twelfth  centory.  Hist,
the  bearing  of  F.ngland,  which,  as  we  all  des  IMpub.  Ital.  t.  L  p.  873.  It  is  at
know,  differs  considerably.  Louis  VIL  least  probable  that  the  heraldic  devices
sprinkled  his  seal  and  coin  with  flenr»<]e>  were  as  ancient  in  Italy  as  In  any  part  of
lys,  a  very  andent  device,  or  rather  oma-  Europe.  And  tiie  authors  of  Nouveau
ment,  and  the  same  as  what  are  some-  Tralti^  de  Diplomatique,  t  iv.  p.  388,
times  called  bees.  The  golden  ornaments  incline  to  refer  hereditary  anna  even  lit
found  in  the  tomb  of  Chllderic  I.  at  Ftanoe  to  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth
Toumay,  which  may  be  seen  in  the  century,  though  without  producing  any
library  of  Paris,  may  pass  either  for  fleurs*  evidence  for  this,
de-lys  or  bees.  Charles  V.  reduced  the  P  We  have  no  En^^iah  word  that  con-
number  to  three,  and  thus'fixed  the  arms  vejrs  the  ftiU  sense  ot  roturiBr.  How
of  France.  The  counts  of  Toulouse  used  glorions  Is  this  deficiency  In  our  political
their  cross  in  the  twelfth  age ;  but  no  langtiage,  and  bow  difTerent  are  the  ideas

other  anna,  Vaissette  tells  us,  can  bo  suggested  by  wmmumetl Rotnrier,  ac-

tnoed  in  Langnedoo  so  Ikr  back. T.  lit  cording  to  Du  Cange,  Is  derived  tracn

p.  514.  Tuptnrarius,  a  poassnt,  ab  agrum  mm-

Annorial  beartngi  were  in  use  among  poido.

the  SannTfins  daring  She  later  cmssdes;  i  11m» Establishments  of  9t Loulf

192  KOBILITT.  Crap.  II.  Past  U.

were  even  permitted  to  become  noble  by  tbe  acquisition,
or  at  least  by  its  possession  for  three  generations/  But
notwithstanding  this  ennobling  quality  of  the  land,  which
seems  rather  of  an  equivocal  description,  it  became  an
established  right  of  the  crown  to  take,  every  twenty
years,  and  on  every  change  of  the  vassal,  a  fine,  known
by  the  name  of  franc-fief,  from  plebeians  in  possession  of
land  held  by  a  noble  tenure.*  A  gentleman  in  France
or  Germany  could  not  exercise  any  trade  without  dero-
gating, that  is,  losing  the  advantages  of  his  rank.  A
few  exceptions  were  made,  at  least  in  the  former  country,
in  fjEtvour  of  some  liberal  arts,  and  of  foreign  commerce.'
But  in  nothing  does  the  feudal  haughtiness  of  birth  more
show  itself  than  in  the  disgrace  which  attended  unequal
marriages.  No  children  could  inherit  a  territoiy  held  im-
mediately of  the  empire  unless  both  their  parents  belonged
to  the  higher  class  of  nobility.  In  France  the  o£&pnng
of  a  gendeman  by  a  plebeian  mother  were  reputed  noble
for  die  purposes  of  inheritance  and  of  exemption  from
tribute."  But  they  could  not  be  received  into  any  order
of  chivalry,  though  capable  of  simple  knighthood ;  nor
were  they  considered  as  any  better  than  a  bastard  class
deeply  tainted  with  the  alloy  of  their  maternal  extrac-

fiyrbid  this  fonoTatioD,  bnt  Be«imumolr  tndictionwtll  not  machparplezns,  when

contends  thai  tbe  prohlbltioa  does  not  we  reflect  on  the  dispoeitioQ  of  Uwyen

extend  to  descent  or  marriage,  c.  48.  to  ascribe  all  prerogatives  to  tbe  crown.

The  rotnrler  who  acquired  «  fief,  if  he  at  |he  expense  of  territorial  proprieioni

challenged  any  one,  fongfat  with  ignoble  and  of  ancient  cnstomarj  law.

arms ; bat  in  all  other  respects  was  *  The  right,  originally  perhaps  nsoip-

treated  as  a  gentleman. Ibid. Yet  a  ation,  called  frano-flef;  began  under  FbiUp

knight  was  not  obliged  to  do  homage  to  tiie  Fair. Ordonnanoes  des  Rols,  t  L

the  rotarier  who  became  his  superior  by  p.  824 ;  Denisart,  art  Franc-fied

fbe  acquisiticMi  of  a  fief  <»i  w&ich  he  t  Houard,  Diet  du  Droit  Norauuid.

depended. Carpentier,  Supplement,  ad  EncyclopMie,  art  Noblesse. Aigoia.I.ii.

Du  Cange,  voc.  Homagium.  c  2.

'  Etabllasemens  de  8t  Louis,  c.  143,  "  NobiUty,  to  a  certain  degree,  was

and  note,  in  Ordounances  des  Rois,  t  i.  communicated  through  tbe  mothw  alone.

See  also  preface  to  the  same  volume,  not  only  by  tbe  custom  of  Cliampagne,

p.  xiL According  to  Mably,  the  posses-  but  in  all  parts  of  France)  that  is,  the

aion  of  a  fief  did  not  cease  to  confer  icsue  were  "  gentilhommes  du  bit  de  leur

nobility  (analogous  to  our  barony  by  corps,"  and  could  poasess  flelii ;  but,  says

tenure)  till  the  Ordonnanoes  des  Blois  in  Beanmanoir,  "  la  genttleese  par  laquelle

1679.  Observations  but  I'Hist.  de  France,  on  devieut  chevalier  doit  venir  de  par  la

L  ill.  c  1,  note  0. But  Lauri^re,  author  p^re,"  c.  46. There  was  a  proveiUal

of  the  preCue  above  cited,  refers  to  Bou-  maxim  in  French  law,  rfttber  emphaUe

telller,  a  writer  of  the  fourteenth  century,  than  decent,  to  express  the  derivation  of

to  prore  that  no  one  onuld  become  noble  gentility  tnm  the  Iktbcr,  and  of  fivedooi

<rithuut  the  king's  aithiority. Tbe  con-  ^m  the  mother.

Feudal  System.  ITS  PRIVILEGES.  193

tion.  Many  instances  occnr  where  letters  of  nobility
have  been  granted  to  reinstate  them  in  their  rank.'  For
several  purposes  it  was  necessary  to  prove  four,  eight,
sixteen,  or  a  greater  number  of  quarters,  that  is,  of  coats
borne  by  paternal  and  maternal  ancestors,  and  the  same
practice  still  subsists  in  Germany.^

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  original  nobility  of  the
Continent  were  what  we  may  call  self-created,  and  did
not  derive  their  rank  &om  any  such  concessions  of  their
respective  sovereigns  as  have  been  necessaiy  in  subse-
quent ages.  In  !^igland  the  baronies  by  tenure  might
belong  to  the  same  class,  if  the  lauds  upon  which  they
depended  had  not  been  granted  by  the  crown.  But  the
kings  of  France,  before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,
be^tn  to  assume  a  privilege  of  creating  nobles  by  their
own  authority,  and  without  regard  to  the  tenure  of  land.
Philip  the  Hardy,  in  1271,  was  the  first  French  king
who  granted  letters  of  nobility;  imder  the  reigns  of
Philip  the  Fair  and  his  children  they  gradually  became
frequent.'  This'  effected  a  change  in  the  character  of
nobility,  and  had  as  obvious  a  moral,  as  other  events  of
the  same  age  had  a  political,  influence  in  diminishing
the  power  and  independence  of  the  territorial  aristocracy.
The  privUeges  origLuy  conneoted  with  ancient  lineage
and  extensive  domains  became  common  to  the  low-bom
creatures  of  a  court,  and  lost  consequently  part  of  their
title  to  respect.  The  lawyers,  as  I  have  observed  above,
prefended  that  nobility  could  not  exist  without  a  royal
concession.  They  acquired  themselves,  in  return  for
their  exaltation  of  prerogative,  an  official  nobility  by  the
exercise  of  magistracy.  The  institutions  of  chivalry
again  gave  rise  to  a  vast  increase  of  gentiemen,  knightr
hood,  on  whomsoever  conferred  by  the  sovereign,  being
a  sufficient  passport  to  noble  privileges.  It  was  usual,
perhaps,  to  grant  previous  letters  of  nobility  to  a  plebeian
for  whom  the  h(mour  of  knighthood  was  designed.

In  this  noble  or  gentie  class  there  were  several  grada-^
tions.  All  those  in  France  who  held  lands  immediately
depending  upon  the  crown,  whatever  titles  they  might

«  Beamnanoir,  c.  45 ;  Dn  Cwige,  Dto-  «  Vel'.y,  t  vl.  p.  432 ;  Du  Cmife,  an  J

•ort.  10,  sur  JolnTiUe ;  CarpenUer,  voc  CarpentiiR-,  voce  NobiUtare,  fee ;  &rJr

Kobilltatio.  lainvlllieni.  Hist,  de  r  Anden  GoaTerao-

y  [NoTB  XIL]  meot  da  I  ranoe,  t  L  p.  317.

VOL.  I.  C,

194  NOBILITT.  Chap.  II.  Pakt  JX

bear,  were  oomprised  in  the  order  of  barons.  TbeM
miFi^mt  "^ere  originally  the  peers  of  the  king^s  coort ;
^^r  they  possessed  the  higher  territorial  jmisdio-
"^'*^^'  tion,  and  had  the  rif^t  of  oanying  their  own
banner  into  the  field/  To  these  oorresponded  the  Yal
Tassores  majores  and  Capitanei  of  the  empire.  In  a  subor-
dinate class  were  the  vassals  of  this  high  nobility,  who,
upon  the  Continent,  were  usually  termed  Yavassors — ^an
appellation  not  unknown,  though  rare,  in  England.^  The
Cl^telains  belonged  to  the  oider  of  Yavassors,  aa  thej
held  only  arriere  fiefs ;  but,  having  fortified  houses,  from
which  they  derived  their  name  {a  distinction  veiy  im-
portant in  those  times),  and  possessing  ampler  rights  of
territorial  justice,  they  rose  above  the  level  of  their
fellows  in  the  scale  of  tenure." But  after  the  personal

*  Beanmanolr,  c  34 ; Da  Cange,  t.  This  hM  perptezcd  aome  of  oar  oon-

BftTo; EtoWiiimmgni  de  St  Locda,  L  L  mentelon,  who,  not  knowing  well  what

C.24,  LiLaae. The  TMnd*  of  inferior  waameentbgrftftwikUnorbya  vmTaaor,

lonit  weie  however  called,  Improperlj,  fimded  the  Utter  to  be  of  moch  hif^tnt

Baroos,  both  In France  and  England,  quality  than  the  former.  The  poet,  how-

Recoeil  dee  Hlstoriena,  t  scL  pi  800 ;  ever,  was  strictly  oonneet ;  his  aoqfiiaiBt-

Uadox,  Baraiia  AngUca,  p. isa In  anoe  with  French  nuuuien  showed  him

perfect  strictness,  those  only  whose  im-  that  the  ooontry  sqniie,  for  his  finanklin

mediate  torare  of  tho  crown  was  older  is  no  other,  predaely  oonresponded  to  the

than  the  aoosssioo  of  Hngh  Ospet  were  vmvassor  In  Frsaoe. Tboee  who,  hatrii^

barons  of France ; namely, Boorbon,  been  deod-ved,  by  oanqMnttively  modem

Gooey,  and  Beai^ea,  or  Beai^olols. It  law-books,  into  a  notion  that  the  word

appealts,  however,  by  a  register  In  the  franklin  denoted  bat  a  stoat  yeoman,  in

reign  of  Philip  Augustas,  that  flfty-niue  apite  of  the  wealth  and  nnk  wUch

were  reckoned  in  that  class;  the  feoda-  Chancer  assigns  to  him,  and  believing

taries  of  the  Capetian  flelh,  Paris  and  alao,  on  the  authority  of  the  loose  phrase

Ortesas,  being  conlbunded  with  the  ori-  iu  Brscton, that all vavassora wera

ginal  vassals  of  the  crown. Da  Gange^  "  magnai  dignitatis  viri,"  mi|^t  well  be

voc.  Bara  ponied  at  seeing  the  words  employed  m

k  Du  Guige,  V.  Vavaasor;  Velly,  t  vL  synonyms. See  Todd's  lUostratioos  of

p.  151 ;  Madox,  Baronia  AngUca,  p.  13S.  Gower  and  Chaucer  for  aa  Instance.

There  Is,  perhaps,  hardly  any  word  more  *  I>n  Osnge,  v.  Castellanos;  Cofttomes

loosely  used  than  Vavassor.  Bractonssys,  de  Poltoo,  tiL  UL;  Lofsean,  Tratt<  dm

Sunt  etiam  Vavassores,  magna  dignitatis  Seigneories,  p.  160. Whoever  had  a  rl^^t

viri. In  FVance  and  Germany  they  are  to  a  castle  had  la  haute  Jostioe;  this

sometimes  named  with  modi  lem  hononr.  being  so  Inddentto  the  castle,  thai  it  was

Je  sols  on  chevalier  ni  de  oest  part,  de  tnnsfened  along  with  iL There  mlf^t.

vavasMotri  H  de  basse gent,  says a  however,  be a  Sei^Mor  hanVJusticler

romance. This  is  to  be  explained  by  the  below  the  Oiitelaln ;  and  a  ridtcaloos

poverty  to  iriiidi  the  subdivision  of  fleft  distinction  was  made  as  to  the  namber  of

reduced  idle  gentlemen.  posts  by  wfaidi  their  gallows  ml^t  be

Caiaocer  caocladee  his  plctareaqoe  de-  aopported. A  baron's  instrament  of  eze-

scriptlon  of  the  Franklin,  in  the  prologue  catum  stood  on  foar  poate ;  a  diMdatai's

to  the  Osntertmxy  Tales,  thus.—  on  three ;  wUle  the  Inferior  kud  wte

'Wasneversocha  worthy  vavassor."  happened  to  possesi  la  haate  justice

Feudal  Syshbh.  CLERGY.  195

nobility  of  chivalry  became  the  object  of  pride,  the
VavassoTs  who  obtained  knighthood  were  commonly
styled  bachelors;  those  who  had  not  received  that
honour  fell  into  the  ckss  of  sqtdres/  or  damoiseaux.

It  will  be  needless  to  dwell  upon  the  condition  of  the
inferior  clergy,  whether  secular  or  professed,  ^
as  it  bears  little  upon  the  general  scheme  of  ^^'^'
polity.  The  prelates  and  abbots,  however,  it  must  be
understood,  were  completely  feudal  nobles.  They  swore
fealty  for  their  lands  to  the  king  or  other  superior,  re-
ceived the  homage  of  their  vassals,  enjoyed  the  same
immunities,  exercised  the  same  jurisdiction,  maintained
the  same  authority,  as  the  lay  lords  among  whom  they
dwelt.  Military  service  does  not  appear  to  have  been
reserved  in  the  beneficiary  grants  made  to  cathedrals
and  mcjnasteries.  But  when  other  vassals  of  the  crown
were  called  upon  to  repay  the  bounty  of  their  sovereign
by  personal  attendance  in  war,  the  ecclesiastical  tenants
were  supposed  to  Ml  within  the  scope  of  this  feudal
duty,  which  men  little  less  uneducated  and  violent  than
their  compatriots  were  not  reluctant  to  fulfil.  Charle-
magne exempted  or  rather  prohibited  them  from  personal
service  by  several  capitularies.*  The  practice,  however,
as  .every  one  who  has  some  knowledge  of  history  will  be
aware,  prevailed  in  succeeding  ages.  Both  in  national
and  private  warfare  we  find  very  frequent  mention  of
martial  prelates.' But,  contraiy  as  this  actual  service

forced  to  bang  his  sat^ecti  on  «  two-  Inter  Eqaltem  et  Oeneroiain. Quod  et

legged  machine. OoAtames  de  Poltoa;  allU  in  luu  ftiit" Squire  was  not  used

Du  Cange,  ▼.  Furea.  aa  a  title  of  dlatixKtlon  in  England  till

Lanrlfere  quotea  fttim  an  old  manu-  the  reign  of  Edward  IIL,  and  then  but

•crlpt  the  following  short  scale  of  xanks :  sfMringly. Thon^^  by  Heniy  VL's  time

Due  est  la  premibre  dignity,  puis  comtes,  It  was  grown  more  common,  jet  none

puis  visoomtes,  et  puis  baron,  et  puis  assumed  it  but  the  sons  and  hein  of

chfttelain,etpulsiraTaGseur,  etpuisdtaen,  knights  and  some  military  men ;  except

et  puis  villain. Onlonnancea  des  Rois»  officers  in  courts  of  Justice,  who,  by

1 1.  p.  277.  patent  or  prescription,  bad  obtained  that

<i  The  sons  of  knlglhts,  and  gentlemen  addition.*  Spehnan's  Posthumous  Works,

not  3ret  knitted,  took  the  appelUtion  of  p.  234.

squires  in  the  twelfth  century.  Valssette,  •  Mably,  L  L  &  6 ;  Baluze,  tip.  iio,
Hist  de  Lang,  t  li.  p.  613.  That  of  Da-  932.  987.  Any  bishop,  priest,  deacon,  or
molseau  came  Into  use  In  Uie  thirteenth,  subdeaoon  bearing  arms  was  to  be  de-
Id.  t  iil.  p.  629.  The  latter  was,  I  think,  graded,  and  not  evcm  admitted  to  lay
more  usual  in  France.  Dn  Cange  gives  oommunion.  Id.  p.  932.
ttUle  information  as  to  the  word  squire.  f  One  of  the  latest  instances  probably
(Scutifer.)  **  Apud  Angloa,"  he  says,  of  a  fighting  bishop  Is  Jean  Montaign«
•  peoaltina  est  noUIItatls  descrlptio,  arehbldiop  of  Sena,  who  was  killed  al

02

t06  CLERGY.  Chap.  II.  Past  IL

might  be  to  the  civil  as  well  aa  ecclesiastical  laws,  the
clergy  who  held  military  fiefs  were  of  course  bound  to
fulfil  the  chief  obligation  of  that  tenure  and  send  their
vassals  into  the  field.  We  have  many  instances  of  their
accompanying  the  army,  though  not  mixing  in  the  con-
flict ;  and  even  the  parish  priests  headed  ti^e  militia  of
their  villages.'  The  prelates,  however,  sometimes  con-
trived to  avoid  this  military  service,  and  the  payments
introduced  in  commutation  for  it,  by  holding  lands  in
&ank-almoigne,  a  tenure  which  exempted  them  &om
evezy  species  of  obligation  except  that  of  saying  masses
for  the  benefit  of  the  grantor's  family .*"  But,  notwith-
standing the  warlike  disposition  of  some  ecclesiastics,
(heir  more  usual  inability  to  protect  the  estates  of  their
churches  against  rapacious  neighbours  suggested  a  new
species  of  ^udal  relation  and  tenure.  The  rich  abbeys
elected  an  advocate,  whose  business  it  was  to  defend
their  interests  both  in  secular  courts  and,  if  necessary,
in  the  field.  Pepin  and  Charlemagne  are  styled  Advo-
cates of  the  Boman  church.  This,  indeed,  was  on  a
magnificent  scale ;  but  in  ordinary  practice  the  advocate
of  a  monastery  was  some  neighbouring  lord,  who,  in
return  for  his  protection,  possessed  many  lucrative  privi-
leges, and  very  frequentiy  considerable  estates  by  way
of  fief  from  his  ecclesiastical  clients.  Some  of  these
advocates  are  reproached  with  violating  their  obligation,
and  becoming  the  plunderers  of  those  whom  they  had
been  retained  to  defend.'

The  classes  below  the  gentry  may  be  divided  into
freemen  and  villeins.  Of  ti^e  first  were  the  inhabitants
of  chartered  towns,  the  citizens  and  burghers,  of  whom
more  will  be  said  presentiy.  As  to  those  who  dwelt  in
the  country,  we  can  have  no  difficulty  in  recognising,  so
far  as  England  is  concerned,  the  socagers,  whose  tenure
was  free,  though  not  so  noble  as  knighfs  service,  and  a
numerous  body  of  tenants  for  term  of  life,  who  formed

AzlnooarL Moiutrelet  wys  that  he  was  1  iJ  p.  88.

"  non  paa  en  estat  poatifical,  car  aa  lien ^  Da Cange, EleancMjna libem;

de  mitre  il  portoit  une  bacinet,  poor  dal-  Madox,  Baronla  An^  p.  115 ;  0(Ae  on

matlqae  portoit  un  hanbergeon,  poor  Littleton,  and  other  En^^idi  law-booksw
cbaanble  la  piece  d'acier ;  et  au  lien  de <  Du  Cange,  ▼.  Advocatus ;  a  fell  aivl

crone,  portoit  nne  hache."  Fol.  132.  nsefnl  article. Recoeil  des  Hbtorlea^

>  Daaiel.  Hiat  de  la  KiUoe  Fran^olae.  t.  zL  preiiMJe,  p  184.

ITkudal  Ststev.  freemen.  19T

tliat  ancient  basis  of  our  strength  the  English  yeomanry.
But  tbe  mere  freemen  are  not  at  first  sight  so  distm-
gnishable  in  other  countrLes.  In  French  records  and
law-books  of  feudal  times,  all  besides  the  gentry  are
usually  confoimded  imder  tiie  names  of  viUeins  or
hommcs  de  pooste  (gens  potestatis)/  This  proves  the
slight  estimation  in  which  all  persons  of  ignoble  birth
were  considered.  For  undoubtedly  there  existed  a
gi'eat  many  proprietors  of  land  and  others,  as  free,
though  not  as  privileged,  as  the  nobility.  In  the  south
of  France,  and  especially  Provence,  the  number  of  free-
men is  remarked  to  have  been  greater  than  in  the  parts
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Loire,  where  the  feudal  tenures
were  almost  universal."*  I  shall  quote  part  of  a  passage
in  Beaumanoir,  which  points  out  this  distinction  of
ranks  pretty  fully.  **  It  should  be  known,"  he  says,"
"  that  there  are  three  conditions  of  men  in  this  world ;
the  first  is  that  of  gentlemen ;  and  the  second  is  that  of
such  as  are  naturally  free,  being  bom  of  a  free  mother.
All  who  have  a  right  to  be  called  gentlemen  are  free,
but  all  who  are  free  are  not  gentlemen.  Gentility  comes
by  the  father,  and  not  by  the  mother ;  but  freedom  is
derived  from  the  mother  only ;  and  whoever  is  bom  of
a  free  mother  is  himself  free,  and  has  free  power  to  do
anything  that  is  lawful.*'**

In  every  age  and  country,  until  times  comparatively
recent,  personal  servitude  appears  to  have  been  gerft  or
the  lot  of  a  large,  perhaps  the  greater,  portion  ▼iueins.
of  mankind.  We  lose  a  good  deal  of  our  sympathy  with
the  spirit  of  freedom  in  Greece  and  Home,  when  the
importunate  recollection  occurs  to  us  of  the  tasks
which  might  be  enjoined,  and  the  punishments  which
might  be  inflicted,  without  control  either  of  law  or
opinion,  by  the  keenest  patriot  of  the  Comitia,  or  the
Council  of  Five  Thousand. A  similar,  though  less

k  Homo  potestatis,  non  Dobllls— Ita  new  place  of  reddenoe,  as  they  were

mmcopantar,  quod  in  potestate  domlni  mldect  to  manj  tributes  and  oppressive

■ant— Oppommtur  vlris  nobllibus ;  apud  claims  on  the  part  of  their  territorial

Batileriom Commetodisarii yocantur,  saperiors,  we  cannot  be  surprised  that

ConstnmierB,  prestationibos  scilicet  ob*  they  are  oonfonnded,  at  this  distance,

noxil  et  operis. I>a  Cange,  ▼.  Potestas.  with'men  In  actoal  serrltude.

▲s  all  these  freemen  were  obliged,  by  "*  Heeren,  Enal  tor  les Croisades,

tiM  ancient  laws  of  France,  to  live  \inder  p.  122.

the  protection  of  some  particolar  lovd  '  Cofitames  de  Beauvdsia,  c45.p.  2AC

wid  found  great  dilBcnlty  in  cbooslait  »  *  fNors  XULl

198  SERFS  OR  VILLEINS. Coap.  IL  Past  IL

powerful,  feeling  will  often  force  itself  on  the  mind
when  we  read  the  history  of  the  middle  ages.  The
Oermane,  in  their  primitiTe  settlements,  were  accus-
tomed to  the  notion  of  slavery,  incnrred  not  only  by
captivity,  but  by  crimes,  by  debt,  and  especially  by  loss
in  gaming.  When  they  invaded  the  Koman  empire
they  found  the  same  condition  established  in  aU  its  pro-
vinces. Hence,  from  the  beginning  of  the  era  now  imder
review,  servitude,  imder  somewhat  different  modes,  was
extremely  common.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  ascer-
taining its  varieties  and  stages.  In  the  Salic  laws,  and
in  the  Capitularies,  we  read  not  only  of  Servi,  but  of
Tributarii,  Lidi,  and  Coloni,  who  were  cultivators  of
the  earth,  and  subject  to  residence  upon  their  lord's
estate,  though  not  destitute  of  property  or  civil  rights.**
Those  who  appertained  to  the  demesne  lands  of  the
crown  were  called  Fiscalini.  The  composition  for  the
murder  of  one  of  these  was  much  less  than  that  for  a
freeman.*!  The  number  of  these  servile  cultivators  was
undoubtedly  great,  yet  in  those  early  times,  I  should
conceive,  much  less  than  it  afterwards  became. Pro-

ferty  was  for  the  most  part  in  small  divisions,  and  a
'rank  who  could  hardly  support  his  family  upon  a  petty
alodial  patrimony  was  not  ukely  to  encumber  himself
with  many  servants.  But  the  accumulation  of  overgrown
private  wealth  had  a  natural  tendency  to  make  slavery
more  frequent.  Where  the  small  proprietors  lost  their
lands  by  mere  rapine,  we  may  believe  that  their  liberty
was  hardly  less  endangered.' Even  where  this  was  not

P  These  paaMges  are  too  muneroiu  for  in  &Toiir  of  IIl)erty. If  a  lord  daimed

referenoe. In  a  very  early  charter  In  any  one  either  as  his  villein  or  slave

Marteone's  Thesaoms  Aoecdotonun.  t  L  (oolonns  slve  senms),  who  had  escaped

p.  20,  lands  are  granted,  cnm  homlnihas  beyond  his  territory,  he  was  not  to  be

ilxidempennanentibns,qnoscDlonorioor-  given  np  till  strict  inquiry  had  been

dine  vivere  oonsUtuinras. Men  of  this  made  in  the  place  to  which  he  was  aa«

class  were  called,  in  Italy,  Aldiones. A  serted  to  belong,  as  to  his  condition,  and

Lombard  capitnlaiyof  Charieniagne  says,  that  of  his  family:  p.  400. And  if  the

Aldiones  eft  lege  vivunt  in  Itallft  sab  villein  showed  a  charter  of  eniJrandiis^

servltQte  dominomm  snonun,  qnft  Flsca-  ment,  the  proof  of  Its  forgery  was  to  lie

Uni,  vel  Lidi  vivunt  in  FrandH—Mura-  npon  the  lord. No  man's  liberty  oonld

tori,  Dissert  14. [Note  Xivr  be  questioned  in  the  Hnndied-coart

*)  Originally  it  wss but 46 solidi  '  Montesqnica  ascribes  the  incrsaee  of

(I-<ages  SalicsB,  c.  43),  but  Charlemagne  personal  servitude  in  France  to  the  oon-

raised  It  to  100. Baluzli  Capitnlaria,  tinned  revolts  and  coomiotlcBs  vnder  the

p.  4<i3. There  are  several  provisions  in  two  firat  dynasties,  L  m  c  11.
the  UiTCi  of  this  great  and  wise  monarch

Feudal  Ststeil  SERFS  OR  VILLEINd.  \d\t

the  case,  yet,  as  the  labour  either  of  artisans  or  of  free
husbandmen  was  but  sparingly  in  demand,  they  were
often  compelled  to  exchange  their  liberty  for  bread/
In  seasons  also  of  famine,  and  they  were  not  unfrequent,
many  freemen  sold  themselves  to  slaveiy.  A  capitulary
of  Charles  the  Bald  in  864  permits  their  redemption  at
an  equitable  price/  Others  became  slaves,  as  more
fortunate  men  became  vassals,  to  a  power^  lord,  for
the  sake  of  his  protection.  Many  were  reduced  into  this
state  through  inability  to  pay  those  pecuniary  composi-
tions for  offences  which  were  numerous  and  sometimes
heavy  in  the  barbarian  codes  of  law ;  and  many  more
by  neglect  of  attendance  on  military  expeditions  of  the
long,  the  penalty  of  which  was  a  fine  called  Heribann,
with  the  alternative  of  perpetual  servitude."  A  source
of  loss  of  liberty  which  may  stnke  us  as  more  extraordi-
nary was  superstition ;  men  were  in&tuated  enough  to
surrender  themselves,  as  well  as  their  properties,  to
churches  and  monasteries,  in  return  for  such  benefits  as
they  noight  reap  by  the  prayers  of  their  new  masters."

The  characteristic  distinction  of  a  villein  was  his  ob-
ligation to  remain  upon  his  lord's  estate.  He  was  not
only  precluded  from  selling  the  lands  upon  which  he
dwelt,  but  his  person  was  bound,  and  the  lord  might
reclaim  him  at  any  time,  by  suit  in  a  court  of  justice,  if
he  ventured  to  stray.  But,  equally  liable  to  this  con-
finement, there  were  two  classes  of  villeins,  whose  con-
dition was  exceedingly  different.  In  England,  at  least
from  the  reign  of  Heniy  11.,  one  only,  and  that  the
inferior  species,  existed;  incapable  of  property,  and
destitute  of  redress,  except  against  the  most  outrageous
injuries.^  The  lord  could  seize  whatever  they  acquired
or  inherited,  or  convey  them,  apart  from  the  land,  to  a
stranger. Their  tenure  bound  them  to  what  were  called

*  Da  Gimge,  ▼.  Otoiutttia  loinedmes  aanased  in  proportioD  to  the

«Baliixil Capitolariiy The Oreaik  wealth  of  the  party,

tnden  purdiMed  fimiahed  wretdMe  on  *  Beemnenoir,  c.  4S. [Non  XV.]

the  ooeits  of  Italy,  whom  they  eold  to  ^  littletoo.  1.  IL  &  11. Non  potest

tiie  Saraoeni.— Mnnttori,  AimaUa  dltalia,  aliquis  (aaye  OUnvU),  in  vlllenagio  poei-

AJk  T8i. Much  more  would  penone  in  tii8,UhertatemnuanproprUs  denariissnis

ttde  extremity  sell  themselTet  to  nei^  qnnrere— qoia  omnia  oatalla  ocifuslibet

bouring  kHtk.  nattri  intelUgmitmr  erne  in  potestate  d»

tt  Da  Cknge,  Herlbeonam. A  fUl  siini  nL*— L  t.  e.  &.
berthMmam  was  60  soUdl;  tat  it  was

200  SERFS  OR  VILLKINS Chap.  II.  Part  II

nllein  services,  ignoble  in  their  nature,  and  indetermi-
nate in  their  degree ;  the  felling  of  timber,  the  carrying
of  manure,  the  repcdring  of  roads  for  their  lord,  who
8eem8  to  have  possessed  an  equally  nnbonnded  right
over  their  labour  and  its  fruits.  But  by  the  customs
of  France  and  Germany,  persons  in  this  abject  state
seem  to  have  been  called  seifs,  and  distinguished
from  villeins,  who  were  only  bound  to  fixed  payments
and  duties  in  respect  of  their  lord,  though,  as  it  seems,
without  any  legal  redress  if  injured  by  him.*  •*  The
third  estate  of  men,"  says  Beaimianoir,  in  the  passage
above  quoted,  *'  is  that  of  such  as  are  not  free ;  and
these  are  not  all  of  one  condition,  for  some  are  so  subject
to  their  lord  that  he  may  take  all  they  have,  alive  or
dead,  and  imprison  them,  whenever  he  pleases,  being
accountable  to  none  but  God ;  while  others  are  treated
more  gently,  from  whom  the  lord  can  take  nothing  but
customary  paymenis,  though  at  their  death  all  they  have
escheats  to  him."  '

Under  eveiy  denomination  of  servitude,  the  children
followed  their  mother's  condition;  except  in  England,
where  the  father's  state  determined  that  of  the  children ;
on  which  account  bastards  of  female  villeins  were  bom

*  This  is  clevly  expreaaed  in  a  Vnofh  killed  bj  her  rdatioDS,  or  sold ;  if  they

lAw-book  of  the  thirteenth  centary,  the  neglected  to  do  so,  the  fisc  mi^t  claim

CoDseil  of  Pierre  des  Fontaines,  qnoted  her  as  its  own.— Mnratorl,  Dissert  14.

by  Du  Gange,  voc  ViUanns. Et  sache  In  France also  she  was  liable  to  be

bien  qne  selon  Dien  tu  n'as  mie  plenlere  treated  as  a  slare.— M arcnlfl  Formulas,

poestd  snr  ton  vilain. Duii  se  tu  prens  L  ii.  29. Even  in  the  twelfth  oentuzy

du  sien  fors  les  droites  redevances  que  it  was  the  law  of  Flanden  that  whoever

te  dolt,  tu  les  prens  oontre  Dieu.  et  sor  married  a  villein  became  one  himself

le  peril  do  t'sme  et  oome  robierres. Et  after  he  had  lived  with  her  a  twelve-

ce  qu'on  dit  toutes  les  choses  que  vilalns  month.— Recnell  des  Historieos,  t  xiiL

a,  sont  son  Seigneur,  c'est  voir  a  garden  p.  S50. And,  by  a  capltnlaiy  of  Fepln,

Car  s'il  estoient  son  seigneur  propre,  U  if  a  man  married  a  villein  believing  her

n'avoit  nulediiference  entre  serf  et  vilain,  to  be  free,  he  mi^^t  repudiate  her  and

mais  par  notre  usage  n'a  entre  toi  et  ton  marry  another. — Balnie,  p.  181.

vilain  Juge  furs  Dieu,  tant  com  il  est  tea  VlUeins  themselves  oooU  not  many

ooochatts  et  tee  levans,  s'il  n'a  autre  lot  without  the  lord's  lloenoe,  under  penalty

▼ers  toi  fon  la  commune. This  seems  of  forfeitii^  their  goods,  or  at  least  of  •

to  render  the  distinction  little  more  than  mulct— Du  Qoige,  v.  Forismaritaglom.

theorsticaL  This  seems  to  be  the  true  origin  of  tfaa

*  Beaumanoir,  c.  46 ; Da  Osnge,  YU-  fsmons  mercheta  muUerum,  whldi  baa

lanus,  Servus,  and  sevcural  other  artidea.  been  ascribed  to  a  very  diiSsrent  custom.

BchmldtHistdes  Allemauds,tiLp.  ifl,  — Du  Gauge,  v. Mercheta  Mulienim;

4a6. By  a  law  of  the  Lombards,  a  free  Datrymple's  Annals  of  Scotland,  voL  L

ironaa  who  married  a  slave  might  be  p.  312  j  Archasologia,  voL  zIl  pw  SL

yBUDAL  STOTEiL ABOLITION  OF  VILLENAGE.  201

free,  the  law  presmning  the  liberty  of  their  father.^
rhe  proportion  of  ^emen,  therefore,  would  q^^^^
have  been  miserably  diminished  if  there  had  aboutionof
been  no  reflux  of  the  tide  which  ran  so  ^^«^«««-
strongly  towards  slavery.  But  the  usage  of  manumis-
sion made  a  sort  of  circulation  between  these  two  states
of  mankind.  This,  as  is  well  known,  was  an  exceed-
ingly common  practice  with  the  Bomans;  and  is  men-
tioned, with,  certain  ceremonies  prescribed,  in  the
Frankish  and  other  early  laws.  The  clergy,  and  especi-
ally several  popes,  enforced  it  as  a  duty  upon  laymen ;
and  inveighed  against  the  scandal  of  keeping  Clinstians
in  bondage. *"  As  society  advanced  in  Europe,  the  manu-
mission of  slaves  grew  more  frequent.**  By  the  indul-
gence of  custom  in  some  places,  or  perhaps  by  original
convention,  villeins  might  possess  property,  and  thus
purchase  their  own  redemption.  Even  where  they  had
no  legal  title  to  property,  it  was  accounted  inhuman  to
divest  them  of  tiieir  little  possession  (the  peculium  of
Boman  law),  nor  was  their  poverty,  perhaps,  less  toler-
able, upon  the  whole,  than  that  of  the  modem  peasantry
in  most  countries  of  Europe.  It  was  only  in  respect  of
his  lord,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  the  villein,  at
least  in  England,  was  without  rights  ;*  he  might  inherit.

b  Littleton,  B.  188. Bracton  ind«<Kl  Etablifliemens  de  St.  Lonis,  c  34. It

holds  that  the  spurious  Issae  of  «  nelf,  was  necessary,  therefore,  fbr  the  villein

flKM^  by  a  ft'ee  fitther,  should  be  a  vll-  to  obtain  the suzerain's  conflrmatioD ;

lein,  qoia.sequitur  conditionem  matris,  otherwise  he  only  changed  masters  and

quasi  TUlgo  oonceptua,  L  1.  c.  0. But  the  escheated,  as  it  were,  to  the  superior ;

laws  under  the  name  of  Henry  I.  declare  for  the  lord  who  had  granted  the  charter

that  a  son  should  follow  his  fathers  con-  uf  fhmchise  was  ettopped  fhmi  claiming

dition ;  so  that  this  peculiarity  Is  very  him  again.

ancient  in  our  law. — Leges  Hen.  L  c.  T5  *  Littleton,  s.  189. Perhaps  this  is  not

and  77  applicable  to  other  oountrtea. Villeins

c  £nfiranchlsement8  by  testament  are  w«re incapable  of  being received  aa

very  common. Thus  In  the  will  of  Se-  witnesses  against  freemen.— Recuell  dea

niofred,  count  of  Barcelona,  in  960,  we  Historiens,  t  xIt.  pr^fkoe,  p.  65. There

find  the  following  piece  of  corrupt  LAtIn :  are  some  dkarters  of  kings  of  France  ad*

De  ipsos  servos  meos  et  andllas,  illl  qni  mittlng  theserfeof  particular  mooasteriea

trsditi  fapruntiaciatisUloslibros  propter  to  give  evidence,  or  to  engage  in  the

remediumanimsBmett;  etalllquiftienint  judicial  combat,  against  freoneai— Or-

ie  parentorum  meorum  remaneant  ad  donnances  dcs  Roia,  L  1.  p.  3. But  I  do

tatres  meos. — Marca  Hispanica.  p.  887.  not  know  that  their  testimony,  except

A  No  one  could  enltAnchise  his  villein  against  their  lord,  was  ever  reftimd  in

without  the  superior  lord's  consent ;  for  England ; their  state  of  servitude  not

this  was  to  diminish  the  value  of  his  being  absolute,  like  that  of  negro««  in

lukL  {^ptUoKT  Ie>!</'.— Beanmanoir.  c.  16.  the  West  Indies,  but  particular  aiij  to*

202  ABOLITION  OF  VILLEKAGK.  Chap.  H.  Past  Ii.

purohase,  sue  in  the  courts  of  law;  Uiough,  as  defendant
in  a  real  action  or  stdt  wherein  land  was  claimed,  he
might  shelter  himself  under  the  plea  of  villenage.  The
peasants  of  this  condition  were  sometimes  made  use  of
in  war,  and  rewarded  with  enfranchisement ;  especially
in  Italy,  where  the  cities  and  petty  states  had  ofb^
occasion  to  defend  themselves  with  their  own  popula-
tion ;  and  in  peace  the  industry  of  free  labourers  must
have  been  found  more  productive  and  better  directed.
Hence  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  saw  the  num-
ber of  slaves  in  Italy  begin  to  decrease;  early  in  the
fifteenth  a  writer  quoted  by  Muratori  epealES  of  them  as
no  longer  existing/  The  greater  part  of  the  peasants  in
some  countries  of  Germany  had  acqtiired  their  liberty
before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century ;  in  other  parts,
as  well  as  in  all  the  northern  and  eastern  regions  oi
Europe,  they  remained  in  a  sort  of  villenage  till  the
present  age.  Some  very  few  instances  of  predial  ser-
vitude have  been  discovered  in  England  so  late  as  the
time  of  Elizabeth,'  and  perhaps  they  might  be  traced
still  lower.  Louis  Hutin,  in  France,  after  inntmierable
particular  instances  of  manumission  had  tsiken  place,
by  a  general  edict  in  1315,  reciting  that  his  kingdom  is
denominated  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks,  that  he  would
have  the  &ci  to  correspond  with  the  name,  emancipates
all  persons  in  the  royal  domains  upon  paying  a  just
composition,  as  an  example  for  other  IotcLb  possessing
villeins  to  follow.'*  Philip  the  Long  renewed  the  same
edict  three  years  afterwards ;  a  proof  that  it  had  not
been  carried  into  execution.'  Indeed  there  are  letters
of  the  former  prince,  wherein,  considering  that  many  of
his  subjects  are  not  apprised  of  the  extent  of  the  benefit
conferred  upon  them,  he  directs  his  officers  to  tax  them
as  high  as  their  fortunes  can  well  bear.^

UtiTe,  as  that  of  an  apprentloe  or  hired  big  only  an  annual  rent  for  their  lands,
eenrant. This  saldect,  howerer,  b  not  whldi  thus  became  oenHvm,  or  emphf-
devoid  of  obscnrit J.  feuset. It  does  not  appear  by  the  charter
f  Dtaaert  14.  that  he  sold  this  enftancfalsement,  thou^
V  BaiTlngton's  Obserrations on the  there  ean  be  little  donbt  aboot  it He
ancient  Statutes,  p.  274.  pennitted  his  Tassals  to  follow  the  ex-
it Ordonnances  des  Rois,  1 1.  p.  U3.  ample.— Valasette.  Hist de  Langoedocw
t  Id.  p.  663.  t.  It.  ;  Appendix,  p.  3, 12.
k  Velly.  t  vitt.  p.  38. Philip  the  Fair It  is  not  generaUy  known.  I  tUnk.
had  emancipated  the  villeins  in  the  royal  that  predial  servitude  was  not  abolished
Ctmuum  throuidiout  Langnedoc,  retain-  in  all  parts  of  Fnnoe  till  the  revolBtloo

Feudal  System.  TENURES  OF  LANDS.  203

It  is  deserving  of  notioe  that  a  distinotioii  existed  from
V017  early  times  in  the  nature  of  lands,  collateral,  as  it
were,  to  that  of  persons.  Thns  we  find  mansi  ingenni
and  mansi  serviles  in  the  oldest  charters,  corresponding,
as  we  may  not  imreasonably  conjecture,  to  the  liberam
tenementum  and  villenagimn,  or  freehold  and  copyhold
of  our  own  law.  In  France,  all  lands  held  in  roture
appear  to  be  considered  as  villein  tenements,  and  are
so  termed  in  Latin,  though  many  of  them  rather  answer
to  our  socage  freeholds.  But  although  originally  this
servile  quality  of  lands  was  founded  on  the  state  of  their
occupiers,  yet  there  was  this  particularity,  that  lands
never  changed  their  character  along  with  that  of  the  pos-
sessor ;  so  that  a  nobleman  might,  and  often  did,  bold
estates  in  roture,  as  well  as  a  lotuiier  acquire  a  fief.
Thus  in  England  the  terre  tenants  in  villenage,  who  occur
in  our  old  books,  were  not  villeins,  but  freemen  holding
lands  whicb  had  been  finom  time  immemorial  of  a  villein
quality.

At  tiie  final  separation  of  the  French  from  the  German
side  of  Charlemagne's  empire  by  the  treaty  of  Verdun

In  same  plaoM.  mjn  PHqtder,  the  pe*-  oolleetion  of  OrJonmncfn,  pu  33,  aaji
wnte  are  tellUbles  It  Tolmttf ,  that  Is.  their  that  throof^Kml  almost  the  whole  jaris-
oontribatioD  Is  not  permanent,  bat  as-  diction  of  the  parliament  of  Bcssa^on
■eened  by  the  lord  with  the  adTioe  of  the  peasants  were  attached  to  the  soil*  not
prod'  hommes,  rosscants  sor  les  lieiu,  being  capsble  of  leaving  it  without  the
acoordlng  to  the  pesssnt's  abUitgr.  Others  lord's  consent;  and  that  in  some  places
paj  a  fixed  smn.  Some  are  called  serb  he  even  inherited  theirgoods  in  exclnsion
de  ponrsnite,  who  csnnot  leave  their  of  the  kindred.  I  recollect  to  have  read  in
habitations,  bat  m^y  be  followed  by  the  some  part  of  Voltaire's  conespondence
lord  into  sny  part  of  Frsnce  lor  the  ananecdoteof  bis  interference,  with  that
taUle  apcn  their  goods.  This  was  the  seal  against  oppression  which  is  the
case  tn  part  of  Champagne  and  the  Ni-  shining  side  of  his  moral  character,  in
▼wnola.  Nor  coald  thsse  serih,  or  gens  behalf  of  some  of  these  wretdied  slaves
de  mainmorte,  as  th^  were  sometimes  of  Franche-comtA
called,  be  manomiUed  without  lettera  About  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  cen>
patent  ofthelciog,purdu8ed  by  a  fine.—  tnry,  some  Catalonian  serft  who  had
Recherdies  de  la  France,  1.  iv.  c.  6.  escaped  into  France  being  claimed  by
DuN>s  Informs  ns  that,  in  1816,  the  Tiers  their  lonls,  the  parliament  of  Touloose
Etat  prayed  the  king  to  cause  all  serfs  dedarpd  that  every  man  who  entered  the
(hommet  de  pootte)  to  be  enlhoicfaised  on  kingdom  en  eriant  France  should  be-
paying  a  composition ;  but  this  was  not  oome  free.  The  liberty  of  our  kingdom
oampUed  with,  and  they  existed  in  many  is  such,  says  Meieray,  that  its  air  com-
parts when  he  wrotc^Histoire  Critique,  municates  freedom  to  those  who  breathe
t  Hi.  p.  398.  Argou.  in  his  Instltations  it,  and  our  kings  are  too  august  to  reign
d  J  Droit  Fran^cris,  oonfinns  this,  and  re-  over  any  but  ftvemen.  Vlllaret,  t  xv
liBfs  to  the  customaries  of  Nivemois  and  p.  348.  How  much  pretence  Mezeray  hau
Vitry,  LL  d.  And  M.de  Br^ulgny.  in  for  such  a  fiourish  may  be  decided  by
hfa  pp«taue  tc  the  twelfth  volume  of  the  the  fbimer  part  of  this  note.

204 STATE  OF  FRANCE  AND  GERMAX7.  Chap.  II.  Part  IL

in  843,  there  was  perhaps  hardly  any  difference  in  the
oonstitntion  of  the  two  kingdoms.  K  any  might
ti^  state  of  ^  conjectmed  to  have  existed,  it  wonld  he
F^we  and  ^  greater  independence  and  foller  rights  of
^'™*^'  election  in  the  nobility  and  people  of  Germany.
Bat  in  the  lapse  of  another  centoiy  France  had  lost  cdl
her  political  unity,  and  her  kings  all  their  authority;
while  the  Grermanic  empire  was  entirely  unbroken  under
an  effectual,  though  not  absolute,  control  of  its  soTe-
reign.  No  comparison  can  be  made  between  the  power
of  Charles  the  Simple  and  Conrad  the  First,  thou^  the
former  had  the  shadow  of  an  hereditary  right,  and  the
latter  was  chosen  from  among  his  equsds.  A  long  suc-
cession of  feeble  princes  or  usurpers,  and  destructive
incursions  of  the  Normans,  reduced  France  ahnost  to  a
dissolution  of  society;  while  Germany,  under  Conrad,
Henry,  and  the  Othos,  found  their  arms  not  less  prompt
and  successful  against  revolted  vassals  than  external
enemies.  The  high  dignities  were  less  completely  here-
ditary than  they  had  become  in  France ;  they  were
granted,  indeed,  pretty  regularly,  but  they  were  solicited
as  well  as  granted ;  while  the  chief  vassals  of  the  French
crown  assiuned  them  as  patrimonial  sovereignties,  to
which  a  royal  investiture  gave  more  of  ornament  than
sanction.

In  the  eleventh  century  these  imperial  prerogatives
began  to  lose  part  of  their  lustre.  The  loii^  stni^les  of
the  princes  and  clergy  against  Heniy  lY.  and  his  son,  the
revival  of  more  effective  rights  of  election  on  the  extinc-
tion of  the  house  of  Franconia,  the  exhausting  contests
of  the  Swabian  emperors  in  Italy,  the  intrinsic  weakness
produced  by  a  law  of  the  empire,  according  to  which  the
reigning  sovereign  could  not  retain  an  imperial  fief  more
thsm  a  year  in  his  hands,  gradually  prepared  that  inde-
pendence of  the  German  aristocracy  which  reached  its
height  about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century.  During
this  period  the  French  crown  had  been  insensibly  gaining
strength  ;  and  as  one  monarch  degenerated  into  the  mere
head  of  a  confederacy,  the  other  acquired  uidimited  power
over  a  solid  kingdom.

It  would  be  tedious,  and  not  very  instructive,  to  follow
the  details  of  German  public  law  during  the  middle  ages ;
nor  are  the  more  important  parts  of  it  easily  separable

Feudal  SrsT£M.  COINING  MONEY.  205

from  civil  bistoiy.  In  tlds  relation  they  wlLL  find  a  place
in  a  subsequent  chapter  of  the  present  work.  France
demands  a  more  minute  attention ;  and  in  tracing  the
character  of  the  feudal  system  in  that  country,  we  shall
find  ourselves  developing  the  progress  of  a  very  different
polity.

To  imderstand  in  what  degree  the  peers  and  barons  of
France,  during  the  prevalence  of  feudal  prin-
ciples,  were  independent  of  the  crown,  we  must  of  ie*
look  at  their  leading  privileges. These  may  be  JJjJ^
reckoned :  1.  The  right  of  coining  money ;  2.
That  of  waging  private  war ;  3.  The  exemption  from  all
public  tributes,  except  the  feudal  aids ;  4.  The  freedom
from  legislative  control ;  and,  5.  The  exclusive  exercise
of  original  judicature  in  their  dominions. Privileges  so
enormous,  and  so  contrary  to  all  principles  of  sovereignty,
might  lead  us,  in  strictness,  to  account  France  rather  a
collection  of  states,  partially  allied  to  each  other,  than  a
single  monarchy,

1.  Silver  and  gold  were  not  very  scarce  in  the  first
ages  of  the  French  monarchy ;  but  they  passed  cointog
more  by  weight  than  by  tale.  A  lax  and  igno-  money,
rant  government,  which  had  not  learned  the  lucrative
mysteries  of  a  royal  mint,  was  not  particularly  solicitous
to  give  ilB  subjects  the  security  of  a  known  stamp  in  their
exchanges."  In  some  cities  of  Franc/C  money  appears  to
have  been  coined  by  private  authority  before  the  time  of
Charlemagne ;  at  least  one  of  his  capitularies  forbids  the
circulation  of  any  that  had  not  been  stamped  in  the  royal
mint.  His  successors  indulged  some  of  their  vassals
with  the  privilege  of  coining  money  for  the  use  of  Iheir
own  territories,  but  not  without  the  royal  stamp.  About
the  beginning  of  the  tenth  century,  however,  the  lords,
among  their  other  assumptions  of  independence,  issued
money  with  no  marks  but  their  own." At  the  accession

*"  l^e  practioe  of  keeping  fine  gold  Traits  des  Monnoyet. It  Is  cnriouB  that,

and  silver  una>ined  prevailed  among  pri-  tbon^  there  are  many  gold  coins  extant

vate  peraoas  as  well  as  in  the  treasury,  of  the  first  race  of  klngi^  yet  few  or  none

down  to  the  time  of  Philip  the  Fair,  are  preserved  of  the  second  or  third

Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find,  before  the  reign  of  Philip  the  Fair.— Dii

in  the  instruments  of  earlier  time,  pay-  Cange,  v.  Moneta.

ments  or  fines  stipulated  by  weight  of  **  Vaiasette,  Hist  de  Langnedoc,  t  ii

gold  or  silver. Le  Blanc  therefore  thinks  p.  110;  Rec  des  Histori<ai8,  t.  xL  pn(i

that  little  money  was  coined  in  France,  pi  180;  Du  Cange,  v.  Mometa.
A'jd  that  only  for  maU paymente/-'

296  CODOKG  MOKET.  Cbap.  IL  Past  n.

of  Hi^i  Capet  as  many  as  a  bnndred  and  fifty  are  said
to  have  exercised  this  po^«r.  Even  imder  St  Loms  it
was  possessed  by  about  ei^oity,  who,  exduding  as  far  aa
possible  the  loyid  coin  from  cilxnilatioii,  enriched  liiem
selves  at  their  sabjects'  expense  by  hi^  duties  (seignior-
ages), 'vdiich  they  imposed  npon  evexy  new  coinage,  as
well  as  by  debasing  its  standard.*  In  1185  Philip
Angnstns  reqiiestB  the  abbot  of  Corvey,  who  had  desisted
from  using  his  own  mint,  to  let  the  royal  money  of  Paris
circulate  throng  his  territories,  promising  that,  when  it
should  please  the  abbot  to  coin  money  afresh  for  himself^
the  king  would  not  oppose  its  circulation.'

Several  regulations  were  made  by  Louis  IX.  to  limit,
as  far  as  lay  in  his  power,  the  exercise  of  this  baronial
privil^e,  and,  in  pcyiicular,  by  enacting  that  the  royal
money  should  circulate  in  the  domains  of  those  barons
who  had  mints,  concurrently  with  their  own,  and  ex-
clusively within  the  territories  of  those  who  did  not
enjoy  that  right.  Philip  the  Fair  established  royal
officers  of  inspection  in  every  private  mint.  It  was
asserted  in  his  reign,  as  a  general  truth,  that  no  subject
might  coin  silver  money .^  In  fact,  the  adulteration  prac-
tised in  those  bcuronial  mints  had  reduced  their  pretended
silver  to  a  sort  of  black  metal,  as  it  was  called  (moneta
nigra),  into  which  little  entered  but  copper.  Silver,
however,  and  even  gold,  were  coined  by  the  dukes  of
Britany  so  long  as  that  fief  continued  to  exist.  No
subjects  ever  enjoyed  the  right  of  coining  silver  in
England  without  the  royal  stamp  and  superintendence*' —
a  remarkable  proof  of  the  restraint  in  which  the  feudal
aristocracy  was  always  held  in  this  countiy.

"  Le  BUne, Tndttf  des  MoDSPjei,  commnn. This  was  in  •  prooess  oom-

p.  91.  menoed  by  tbe  king's  prucuiwir>-gMieiri

P  Dn  Csnge,  roc  Moneta ;  Velly,  Hist  against  the  oomte  de  Neren,  for  delkcing

de  France,  tiL  p.  93;  ViUaiet,  tziv.  his  coin.— Le  Blanc,  TraitddesMonnqyea.

p.  200.  p.  93. In  numj  places  the  lord  took  a

4  Dn  Cange,  ▼.  Moneta. The  right  of  sum  ftxxn  Us  tenants  erery  three  yean,

debasing  the  coin  was  also  claimed  bj  under  the  name  of  monetagimn  or  Ibca^.

this  princess  a  dMrfce  flower  of  his  crown,  gfnm,  in  Uea  of  debasing  liia  mooej.

Item,  abaiaser  et  amennser  la  monnoye  This  was  flnailj  abolished  in  1380L— Da

est  privilege  especial  an  rojr  de  aon  droit  Onge,  ▼.  Monetaginm.

royal,  si  qne  a  Iny  appartient«  et  a  non  ^  I  do  not  extend  this  io  the  fauli  for

antre,  et  encore  en  nn  seal  ess,  ^est  a  in  tlie  anarchy  of  Stephen's  reign  both

seavoir  en  neoearftd,  et  Ion  ne  vlent  pas  bishops  and  barana  coined  nooey  ftf

j6  ganeg.  ne  oonrertlt  en  son  profit  espe*  thnnselTe&— Horcdeo,  p.  490.
dal,  mais  an  profit  at  en  la  defanca  do

Feudal  Stvtkm. RIGHT  OF  PRIVATE  WAR.  207

2.  The  pafision  of  reyenge,  always  among  the  most
nngovemable  in  human  nature,  aots  with  such  j^j^^  ^
violence  upon  barbarians,  that  it  is  utterly  priyate
beyond  the  control  of  their  imperfect  arrange-  ^"'
ments  of  polity.  It  seems  to  ^em  no  part  of  the  social
compact  to  sacrifice  the  privilege  which  nature  has  placed
in  the  arm  of  valour.  Gradually,  however,  these  fiercer
feeliniffl  are  blunted,  and  another  passion,  hardly  less
pow^rfol  than  resenbnent,  is  brougkto  play  in  a  con-
trary  direction.  The  earlier  object  accordingly  of  juris-
prudence is  to  establish  a  fixed  atonement  for  injuries,
as  much  for  the  preservation  of  tranquillity  as  the  pre-
vention of  crim'e.  Such  were  the  weregilds  of  the  bar-
baric codes,  which,  for  a  different  purpose,  I  have  already
mentioned.'  But  whether  it  were  that  the  kindred  did
not  always  accept,  or  the  criminal  offer,-  the  legal  compo-
sition, or  that  other  causes  of  quarrel  occurred,  private
fendB  (fidda)  were  perpetaaUy  breaking  out,  and  many
of  Charlemagne's  capitularies  are  directed  against  them.
After  his  time  aU  hope  of  restraining  so  inveterate  a
practice  was  at  an  end ;  and  every  man  who  owned  a
castle  to  shelter  him  in  case  of  defeat,  and  a  sufficient
number  of  dependents  to  take  the  field,  was  at  liberty  to
retaliate  upon  his  neighbours  whenever  he  thought  him-
self injured.  It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  there  was,
frequently,  either  no  jurisdiction  to  which  he  could
appeal,  or  no  power  to  enforce  its  awards ;  so  that  we
may  consider  i^e  higher  nobility  of  France  as  in  a  state
of  nature  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  entitled  to  avail
themselves  of  all  legitimate  grounds  of  hostility.  The
right  of  waging  private  war  was  moderated  by  Louis  IX.,
checked  bv  Philip  IV.,  suppressed  by  Charles  VI. ;  but
a  few  vestiges  of  its  practice  may  be  found  stiU  later.*

"  The  tntlqiiity  of  oompositlons  for  wise  demand.— See  Htet  of  Charles  V.

mnrder  la  iUnstrated  by  lUad  2,  4ft8,  toL  1.  note  31. Few  leading  pasBages  in

where,  in  the  description  of  the  ahJeld  of  fhe  monimientB  of  the  middle  ages  rel*-

▲ehUleii,  two  diapatants  are  represented  tive  to  thla  suliject  have  escaped  the

YnnHigUng before  the  jndge  fl»  fhe  were-  penetrating  tje  of  that  historian;  and

gild  or  price  of  blood ;  cImka  irou^  they  are  arranged  so  well  as  to  ftorm  a

JMpbc  aan^BifjJvov.  oomprdienalve  treatlae  in  mall  oompasBi

t  The  sal^eet  of  private  warfiuv  is  I  know  not  that  I  could  add  anj  mnch

^«ated  so  exactly  and  perqiicnonaly  bj  worthy  of  notice,  mdeas  it  be  the  Ibl-

Robertnn,  that  I  should  only  waste  the  lowing:— bi  the  treaty  between  Philip

nader's  time  by  dwelling  so  long  upon  it  Augustus  snd  Richard  Oceur  de  Lion

wilseaKteataDdlmportstioe  would  other-  (IIMX  lbs  laMar  reAned  to  admit  the

2v)8  REVENUES  OF  FRANCE. Chap.  II.  Fast  U

3.  In  the  modem  condition  of  goYenunentB,  tax-
immunitT  ^^'^^  ^  *  chief  engine  of  the  well-compacted
from  machineiy  which,  regulates  the  system. The

E^enueg  pajmonts,  the  prohibitions,  the  licences,  the
or  kin(^  of  watchfulness  of  collection,  the  evasionB  of  firand,
^^^^  the  penalties  and  foifeitures,  that  attend  a  fiscal
code  of  laws,  present  continually  to  the  mind  of  the  most
remote  and  humble  individual  the  notion  of  a  supreme,
vigUant,  and  coercive  authority.  But  tlie  early  European
kingdoms  knew  neither  the  necessities  nor  the  ingenuity
of  modem  finance.  From  their  demesne  lands  the  kings
of  France  and  Lombardy  supplied  the  common  expenses
of  a  barbarous  court  Even  Charlemagiie  regulated  the
economy  of  his  famna  with  the  minuteness  of  a  steward,
and  a  large  portion  of  his  capitularies  are  directed  to  this
object.  Their  actual  revenue  was  chiefly  derived  from
free  gifts,  made,  according  to  an  ancient  German  custom,
at  the  annual  assemblies'*  of  the  nation,  from,  amerce-
ments paid  by  alodial  proprietors  for  defftult  of  militaiy
service,  and  from  the  freda,  or  fines,  accruing  to  the
judge  out  of  compositions  for  murder.'  These  amoimted
to  one-third  of  the  whole  weregild ;  one-third  of  this  was
paid  over  by  the  count  to  tbe  royal  exchequer.  After
the  feudal  government  prevailed  in  France,  and  neither
the  beribannum  nor  the  weregild  continued  in  use,  there
seems  to  have  been  hardly  any  source  of  regular  revenue
besides  the  domanial  estates  of  the  crown;  unless  we
may  reckon  as  such,  that  during  a  journey  the  king  had
a  prescriptive  right  to  be  suppHed  with  necessaries  by
the  towns  and  abbeys  throu^  which  he  passed ;  com-
muted sometimes  into  petty  regular  ptyments,  called
droits  de  gist  et  de  chevauche.'  ^ugh  Capet  was  nearly
indigent  as  king  of  France,  though,  as  count  of  Paris  and
Orleans,  he  might  take  the  feudal  aids  and  reliefs  of  his

Insertion  of  an  artlcla  that  none  of  the  voc  Herlbaimnm,  F^ed1l]n.

barons  of  either  pwtj  ihoold  molest  the  '  VeUy,  t  U.  p.  329 ;  VlUaret,  t  xIt.

other ;  lest  he  dxrald  infringe  the  customs  p.  174*195 ;  Recueil  des  Historiens,  1.  zir.

at  Poitoa  and  his  other  domlnionst  In  prdbce,  p.  ST. The  last  is  a  penqpicnoiia

qtdbos  oonsnetmn  erat  ab  antlquo,  nt  aooountoftho  royal  revome  in  the  twdfth

magnates  cansas  proprlas  inTicem  gladils  oentory. Bat  far  the  most lominoas

aUepovnt— HoredcQ,  p.  741  (in  Sayille.  view  of  that  sul^Ject,  for  the  three  next

Script  Anglic.).  ages,  is  displayed  by  tf .  de  PtetoreC  ia

*  DuCange,  Dissertation  qnatrltoiesttr  his  pre&ces  to  the  fifteenth  -and  six*

/oinyiUe.  tecnth  Tolnmes  of  the  Ordonnanoes  der

^Nabiy.  LI 6  3.  note  3 ;  Do  Ou«e  Bols.

Feudal  Stbtux.  £XACTI0NS  FRO^  TH£  JEWS.  209

vaasals.  Beyexal  other  small  emolumeDts  of  himself  and
his  successors,  whatever  they  may  since  have  been  con-
sidered, were  in  that  age  rather  seigniorial  than  royal.
The  rights  of  toll,  of  customs,  of  alienage  (aubaine),
generally  even  the  regale  or  enjoyment  of  the  tem-
poralities of  vacant  episcopal  sees  and  other  ecclesiastical
benefices,'  were  possessed  within  their  own  domains  by
the  great  fendataxies  of  the  crown.  They,  I  apprehend,
contribnted  nothing  to  their  sovereign,  not  even  tho8<»
aids  which  the  feudal  customs  enjoined.*

The  hifltoiy  of  the  royal  revenue  in  France  is,  how-
ever, too  important  to  be  slightly  passed  oyer.  E^gctiona
As  the  necessities  of  government  increased,  from  the
partly  through  the  love  of  magnificence  and  ^"^■'
pageantry  introduced  by  the  crusades  and  the  temper  of
chivalry,  partly  in  consequence  of  employing  hired  troops
instead  of  the  feudal  militia,  it  became  impossible  to
defray  its  expenses  by  the  ordinary  means.  Several
devices,  therefore,  were  tried,  in  order  to  replenish  the
exchequer.  One  of  these  was  by  extorting  money  from
the  Jews.  It  is  almost  incredible  to  what  a  length  this
was  carried.  Usury,  forbidden  by  law  and  superstition
to  Christians,  was  confined  to  this  industrious  and
covetous  people.*  It  is  now  no  secret  that  all  regula-
tions interfering  with  the  interest  of  money  render  its
terms  more  rigorous  and  burthensome.  The  children  of
Israel  grew  rich  in  despite  of  insult  and  oppression,  and
retaliated  upon  their  Christian  debtors.  If  an  historian
of  Philip  Augustus  may  be  believed,  they  possessed
almost  one-hadf  of  Paris.  Unquestionably  they  must
have  had  support  both  at  the  court  and  in  the  halls  of
justice.  The  policy  of  the  kings  of  France  was  to  employ
them  as  a  spunge  to  suck  their  subjects'  money,  which
they  might  afterwards  express  willi  less  odium  than
direct  taxation  would  incur. Philip  Augustus  released

■  The  duke  of  Bargundy  and  oonnt  of  *  I  htTe  never  met  with  any  Instance

Champegne  did  not  poeMV  the  regale,  of  a  rellet  aid,  or  other  feudal  contriba-

Bnt  it  was  enjoyed  bj  all  the  other  tion  paid  by  the  Tassals  of  the  French

peen;  by the dnkes of Normandy,  crown ;  but  in  this  negative  proposition

Gnienne, and  Britany ; the  counts  of  it  Is  possible  that  I  may  be  decdTed.

Tottloose,  Poltoo.  nnd  Flaudera.— MaUy,  b  The  Jews  were  celebrated  for  nsary

LUi.  C.4;  Becueil  Jes  Hiatoriens,  til.  as  early  as  the  sixth  century. -> Greg.

|k  229,  snd  t  XIV  p.  S3 ;  Ordonnanoes  les  Tnnm.  L  iy.  c.  12,  and  L  viL  c.  ta,
RolJ,  t  i.  p.  62L

VOL.  :.  T

210  DEBASEMENT  OF  THE  COIN. Chap.  XL  Part  U.

all  Cbiistians  in  hiB  dominions  from  their  debts  to  the
Jews,  reserving  a  fifth  part  to  himself.*"  He  afterwards
expelled  the  whole  nation  from  France.  Bnt  they
appear  to  have  returned  again — whether  by  stealth,  or,
as  is  more  probable,  by  purchasing  permission.  St.  Loiii«
twice  banished  and  twice  recalled  the  Jews.  A  series  of
alternate  persecution  and  tolerance  was  borne  by  this
extraordinary  people  with  an  invincible  X'^no^^rance,
and  a  talent  of  accumulating  riches  which  kept  pace
with  their  plunderers ;  till  new  schemes  of  finance  sup-
plying the  turn,  they  were  finally  expelled  under
Charles  YI.,  and  never  afterwards  obtained  any  legal
establishment  in  France.*^

A  much  more  extensive  plan  of  rapine  was  carried  on
Debaae-  ^^  lowering  the  Standard  of  coin.  Originally
ment  of  the  pound,  a  money  of  account,  was  equivalent
theooia.  ^  twelve  ounccs  of  silver;*  and  divided  into
twenty  pieces  of  coin  (sousY  each  equal  consequently  to
nearly  three  shillings  and  K)ur  pence  of  our  new  English
money.'  At  the  revolution  the  money  of  Finance  had
been  depreciated  in  the  proportion  of  seventy-three  to
one,  and  the  sol  was  about  equal  to  an  English  halfpenny.
This  was  the  effect  of  a  long  continuance  of  fraudulent
and  arbitrary  government.  The  abuse  began  under
Philip  I.  in  1103,  who  alloyed  his  silver  coin  with  a  third
of  copper.  So  good  an  example  was  not  lost  upon  sub-
sequent princes  ;  tiU,  under  St.  Louis,  the  mark-weight
of  silver,  or  eight  ounces,  was  equivalent  to  fifty  sous  of
the  debased  coin.  Nevertheless  these  changes  seem
hitherto  to  have  produced  no  discontent ;  whether  it  were

'  Kigcnd,  in  Da  Gheane,  Hist  Fnac  not  of  13  oiuioea,  bnt  of  13|. We  mnst.

Script  t  iii.  p.  8.  therefore,  add  one-nlntlx  to  the  ymlne  of

d  VilUret t  is. p^  433. Meti  oon-  theeol,  bo  long  bs  this  contfoned  to  be  the

tained,  and  I  sappoee  still  oontains,  a  case. I  do  not  know  the  proofii  npcii

great  many  Jews ;  bnt  Mets  was  not  part  which  this  assertion  rests ;  bnt  the  fiict

of  the  ancirat  kingdom.  seems  not  to  have  been  mndi  observed

*  In  every  edition  of  this  work,  till  by  those  who  had  previonsly  written

•Hat  of  1846.  a  strange  misprint  has  ap-  npon  the  sat^ect

peared  of  hoeaty  instead  of  (toelte  ounces,  '  Besides  tliis  stiver  coin  there  wis  a

as  the  division  of  the  pound  of  silver,  golden  sol,  worth  forty  penoe. Le  Blans

Most  readers  wiU  correct  this  for  them-  thinlcs  the  solidi  of  the  Salic  law  and

selves;  bnt  it  is  more  material  to  observe  e^titolaries  mean the latter  piece  of

that  according  to  what  we  find  in  the  money. Tlie  denarius,  or  penny,  was

UAnoiree  de  I'Acad.  des  Inscriptions  worth  two  sons  six  denien  of  modeir

(Nouvelle  S6ie).  vol.  ziv.  p.  234,  the  Trcodi  ooia.
pound  in  the  time  of

Pdudal  Ststfm.  direct  taxation.  211

tliat  a  people  neither  commercial  nor  enlightened  did
not  readily  perceive  their  tendency;  or,  as  has  been
ingonionslj  conjectured,  that  these  snccessiye  diminu-
tions of  the  standard  were  nearly  counterbalanced  by  an
augmentation  in  the  value  of  silver,  occasioned  by  the
drain  of  money  during  the  crusades,  with  which  they
were  about  contemporaneous.'  But  the  rapacity  of  Philip
the  Fair  kept  no  measures  with  the  public ;  and  the  mark
in  his  reign  had  become  equal  to  eight  livres,  or  a
hundred  and  sixty  sous  of  money.  Dissatisfaction,  and
even  tumults,  arose  in  consequence,  and  he  was  com-
pelled to  restore  the  coin  to  its  standard  under  St.  Louis.^
His  successors  practised  the  same  arts  of  enriching  their
treasury;  under  Philip  of  Yalois  the  mark  was  again
worth  eight  livres.  But  the  film  had  now  dropped  from
the  eyes  of  the  people ;  and  these  adulterations  of  money,
rendered  more  vexatious  by  continued  recoinages  of  the
current  pieces,  upon  which  a  fee  was  extorted  by  the
moneyers,  showed  in  their  true  light  as  mingled  fraud
and  robbery.'

These  resources  of  government,  however,  by  no  means
superseded  the  necessity  of  more  direct  taxation.  Direct
The  kings  of  France  exacted  money  from  the  <*»»«*<«•
loturiers, and  particularly  the inhabitants  of  towns,
within  their  domains. In  this  they  only  acted  as  pro-

S  VUlarei,  t  ziT.p.  198. The  price  of  to  its  oommencement  were  to  be  paid

eompaodities,  be  asaerti,  did  tiot  rise  till  according  to  the  value  of  the  money  dr-

the  time  of  St.  Lonis. If  tbia  be  said  on  cnlating  at  the time  of  the  oontzact.

good  anthorlty  it  la  a  remarkable  fact ;  Item,  que  tona  Ua  Traia  empranta  fkita

bt^t  in  England  we  know  very  little  ot  en  deniers  sana  fraude  ae  payeront  en

prices  before  tliat  period,  and  I  doubt  if  telle  monnoye  comme  Ton aura  em-

tbdr  history  has  been  better  traced  in  prunttf,  si  elle  a  plein  oours  an  tempa

Wnooe.  dn  payement,  et  sinon,  Ua  payeront  en

i<  It  is  curious,  and  not  perhaps  on-  monnoye  ooursable  lors  selon  la  valeur

important,  to  learn  the  couxae  pursued  et  le  prix  du  marc  d'or  ou  d'argent :  p.  32.

In  adjusting  payments  upon  the  restonr  I  Continuator  OoL  de  Nangia  in  Spiel-

tioD  of  good  coin,  which  hi^ypened  pretty  leglo,  t  ilL For  the  suooesslTe  changes

frequently  in  the fourteenth  centnry,  in  the  value  of  French  coins  the  reader

when  the  States  •  General, or  popular  may  consult  Le  Blanc's  treatise,  or  the

elamoor,  forced  the  court  to  retract  its  Ordonnanoea  daa  Rois ;  also  a  dissertation

fraudulent  policy. Le  Blanc  baa  pub-  by  Bonamy  in  the  M6n.  de  I'Acad.  des

Ushed  several  ordlnancea  nearly  to  the  InscrlptioDa,  t.  zxzlL ;  or  he  may  find  a

same  effect.  One  of  Charles  VL  explains  summary  view  of  them  in  Du  Gauge,  v.

the  method  adopted  rather  more  ftilly  Moneta. The  bad  consequences  of  these

than  the  reat. All  debts  incurred  since  Innovations  are  well  treated  by  M.  de

the  depreciated  coin  b^an  to  circulate  Fastoret,  in  his  elaborate  preface  to  the

were  to  be  paid  in  that  coin,  or  according  sixteenth  volume  of  the  Ordonnancna  d«a

to  Its  value. Those  incurred  previously  Bols,  p.  40.

p2

212  NO  SUPREME  LEGISLATION. Chap.  U.  I  alt  ii.

prietorts,  or  suzerains;  and  the  barons  took  the  same
course  in  their  own  lands.  Philip  Augustus  first  yentnred
upon  a  stretch  of  prerogatiye,  which,  in  the  words  of  his
biographer,  disturbed  all  France.  He  deprived  by  force,
$ays  Bigord,  both  his  own  YassalB,  who  had  been  accus-
tomed to  boast  of  their  immunities,  and  their  feudal
tenants,  of  a  third  part  of  their  goods.^  Such  arbitnuy
taxation  of  the  nobility,  who  deemed  that  their  militaiy
service  dischai^ed  them  from  all  pecuniary  burthens,
France  was  far  too  aristocratical  a  country  to  bear.  It
seems  not  to  have  been  repeated;  and  his  successors
generally  pursued  more  legitimate  courses.  Upon  ob-
taining any  contribution,  it  was  usual  to  grant  letters
patent,  declaring  that  it  had  been  freely  given,  and  should
not  be  turned  into  precedent  in  time  to  come.  Several
of  these  letters  patent  of  Philip  the  Fair  are  extant,  and
published  in  the  general  collection  of  ordinances."^  But
in  the  reign  of  this  monarch  a  great  innovation  took  place
in  the  French  constitution,  which,  though  it  principally
a£fected  the  method  of  levying  money,  may  seem  to  &11
more  naturally  tmder  the  next  head  of  consideration.
4.  There  is  no  part  of  the  French  feudal  policy  so
remarkable  as  the  entire  absence  of  all  supreme
tu^ne  legislation.  We  find  it  dif&cult  to  conceive  the
*®?SiS!l? existence  of  a  political  society,  nominally  one

more  than  three  hundred  years,  there  was  wanting  the
most  essential  attribute  of  government.  It  will  be  requi-
site, however,  to  take  this  up  a  little  higher,  and  inquire
what  was  the  original  legislature  of  the  French  mo-
narchy.

Arbitrary  rule,  at  least  in  theory,  was  uncongenial  to

the  character  of  the  northern  nations.  Neither
itfgidaSve  ^^  power  of  making  laws,  nor  that  of  applying
J^IJ"^ them  to  the  circumstances  of  particular  cases,

was  left  at  the  discretion  of  the  sovereign.  The
Lombard  kings  held  assemblies  every  year  at  Pavia,

^  Da  Chesne,  t  ▼.  p.  43.  qxie  its  nous  ont  fidtee  ne  leor  flhont  ml

■  Fmoos  scaroir  et  reoognoisniu  que  pr^dioe,  es  cboses  esqaeUei  Ob  n'^toicBft

la  derniere  wafrreatUm  qne  lis  noos  ont  tenuB,  ne  par  ce  mil  noaTean  droit  ne

Akha  (iMbtfOPi,  ▼■Manx,  et  nobles  d'Au-  nous  soit  acquia  ne  amenniaUL — Ordon-

rorgne)  de  pore  grace  Bam  ce  que  ila  j  nance  de  1304,  apnd  Mablj,  L  tr.  c  H

ftiaaent  temts  que  de  grace :  et  Toulons  et  notes.  Siw  othtf  aatborilieB  In  fhe  mim

leor  octfOTOoa  qne  les  antrea  aabvenUcna  plaoe.

Feudal  SnrrEM. LBOISIJLTIV£  ASSEMBLIES.  213

where  the  chief  officers  of  the  crown  and  proprietovB  of
lands  deliberated  upon  all  legifilative  measures,  in  the
presence,  and  nominally  at  least  with  the  consent,  of  the
multitade.*  Frequent  mention  is  made  of  similar  public
meetingB  in  Fraace  by  the  historians  of  the  MerovSigian
kings,  and  still  more  imequivocally  by  their  statutes."
These  assemblies  have  been  called  parliaments  of  the
Champ  de  Mars,  having  originally  been  held  in  the  month
of  March.  But  they  are  supposed  by  many  to  have  gone
much  into  disuse  imder  the  later  Merovingian  kingr.
That  of  615,  the  most  important  of  which  any  traces
remain,  was  at  the  close  of  the  great  revolution  which
punished  Brunehaut  for  aspiring  to  despotic  power.
Whether  these  assemblies  were  composed  of  any  except
prelates,  great  landholders,  or  what  we  may  call  nobles,
and  the  Antrustionjsi  of  the  king,  is  still  an  unsettled  point.
Some  have  even  supposed,  since  bishops  are  only  men-
tioned by  name  in  the  great  statute  of  Cioteire  II.  in  615,
that  they  were  then  present  for  the  first  time ;  and  Sis-
mondi,  forgetting  this  fstct,  has  gone  so  far  as  to  think
that  Pepin  first  admitted  the  prelates  to  national  councils.^*
But  the  constitutions  of  the  Merovingian  kings  frequently
bear  upon  ecclesiastical  regulations,  and  must  have  been
prompted  at  least  by  the  advice  of  the  bishops.  Their
influence  was  immense ;  and  though  the  Romans  generally
are  not  supposed  to  have  been  acbiitted  by  right  of  terri-

■  Ltutprand.  Uog  of  th»  TiomtNinls,  of  615:  cum  pontlflclba8,wlciiinmagiiis

Mys  that  his  laws  sibl  placaisse  mik  cum,  ylris  optimatihas.

omnibus  jadicibus  de  Austria  et  Kens-  P  Voltaire  (Essal  sor  VHistoire  Unl-

tria  partlbus,  et  de  Tusda  finlbus,  cum  verselle)  ascribes  this  to  the  elder  Pepin,

rellquls  fldelibus  meis  Langobardis,  et  snmamed  HeristaU  and  quotes  the  Annals

omnl  populo  assistente.— Muratori,  Dfs-  of  Mets  for  692 ;  but  neither  under  that

sert  22.  jear  nor  any  other  do  I  find  a  word  to

^  Mably,  L  i.  c  L  note  1 ;  Lindebrog.  the purpose. Yet  be pompously  an-

Oodex  Legmn  Antiquarum,  p.  363,  369.  nounces  this  as  "  an  epoch  not  regarded

The  following  passage,  quoted  by  Mably  by  historians,  but  that  of  the  temporal

(c.  if.  n.  6),  from  the  preamble  of  the  power  of  the  ehurch  in  France  and  Oer-

revised  Salic  law  under  Clotaire  II.,  is  many." Voltaire  knew  but  superfidUly

explicit:  Temporibus  Clotairll  regis  unh  the  early  French  history,  and  amused

•lun  prindpibus  snis,  id  est  33  episoopis  himself  by  questioning  the  most  public

et  34  duclbtts  et  f  9  oomltlbus,  «el  catero  ss  well  as  probable  facts,  such  as  the

populo  oonstitata  est A  remarkable  in*  death  of  Bnnehaut The  compliment

tUnoe  of  the  use  of  vet  instead  of  et,  which  Robertson  has  paid  to  Voltaire's

which  was  not  uncommon,  and  Is  noticed  historical  knowledge  is  mudi  exafocerated

by Da  Cange, under the word  VeL  relatively  to  the  medlaval  peri<xl ;  the

Another  proof  of  it  occurs  tn  the  very  latter  hlntory  of  hh  country  he  poaKSEed

next  qaotaUon  of  Hably  tnm  the  edict  rsry  weU.

214  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES.  Cbab  U.  Part  1L

corial  property  to  the  national  assemblies,  there  can  be
no  improbability  in  presuming  that  the  chiefs  of  tiie
chxiroh,  especially  when  some  of  them  were  barbarianB,
stood  in  a  different  position.  We  know  this  was  so  at
least  in  615,  and  nothing  leads  to  a  conclnsioi)  that  it  was
for  the  first  time.

It  is  feo'  more  difficult  to  determine  the  participation  of
the  Frank  people,  the  alodialists  or  Bachmdnargii,  in  these
assemblies  of  the  Field  of  March.  They  coidd  not,  it  is
said,  easily  have  repaired  thither  from  all  parts  of  Franoe.
But  while  the  monarchy  was  divided,  and  all  the  left
Dank  of  the  Loire,  in  consequence  of  the  paucity  of
Franks  settled  there,  was  hardly  connected  politically
with  any  section  of  it,  there  does  not  seem  an  improba-
bility that  the  subjects  of  a  king  of  Paris  or  Soissons
might  have  been  numerously  present  in  those  capitals.
It  is  generally  allowed  that  they  attended  with  annual
gifts  to  their  sovereign;  though  perhaps  these  were
chiefly  brought  by  the  beneficiary  tenants  and  wealthy
alodialists.  We  certainly  find  expressions,  some  of  which
I  have  quoted,  indicating  a  popular  assent  to  the  resolu-
tions taken,  or  laws  enacted,  in  the  Field  of  March*
Perhaps  the  most  probable  hypothesis  may  be  that  the
presence  of  the  nation  was  traditionally  required  in  con-
formity to  the  ancient  German  usage,  which  had  not  been
formally  abolished ;  while  the  difficulty  of  prevailing  on
a  dispersed  people  to  meet  every  year,  as  well  as  the
enhanced  influence  of  the  king  through  his  armed  Antms-
tions,  soon  reduced  the  freemen  to  little  more  than  spec-
tators irom  the  neighbouring  districts.  We  find  indeed
that  it  was  with  reluctance,  and  by  means  of  coercive
fines,  that  they  were  induced  to  attend  the  maUits  of  their
count  for  judicial  purposes."*

Although  no  legislative  proceedings  of  the  Merovingian
line  are  extant  after  615,  it  is  intimated  by  eai'ly  writers

*)  Hably  genm-allj  striTet  to  make  the  Ing  hlBtoriea  or  other  docmnents. The

most  of  any  vestige  of  popular  gOTero-  dukes  and  ooants  were,  aa  ve  find  bj

ment,  and  Sismondi  Is  not  exempt  from  Marcnlfos  and other  evidence,  eolely

a  similar  bias.  He  overrates  the  liberties  appointed  by  the  crown. A  great  deal

of  the  Franks. "  Leurs  dues  et  lenrs  of  personal  liberty  may  have  been  pr^

eomtes  dtaient  dlectifo;  lenrs  gtfndraux  served  by  means  of  the  local  assembUci

etaient  choisis  par  les  soldats,  leurs  grands  of  the  Franks ;  but  we  find  in  the  genenl

Jnges  ott  maires  par  les  hommes  llbres "  government  only  the  preponderance  of

(vol.  iL  p.  87). But  no  part  of  these  the  kings  during  one  period,  and  that  of

privileges  can  be  inferred  fh>m  the  ezis^  the  aristocraqr  daring  auottrar

Feudal  ST8TE1L LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES.  21  d

tihat  Pepin  Herisial  and  his  son  Charles  Martel  restored
the  national  council  after  some  intermption ;  and  if  the
language  of  certain  historians  be  correct,  they  rendered
it  considerably  popular/

Pepin  the  younger,  after  his  accession  to  the  throne,
changed  the  month  of  this  annual  assembly  from  March
to  May ;  and  we  have  some  traces  of  what  took  place  at
eight  sessions  during  his  reign.'  Of  his  capitularies,
however,  one  only  is  said  to  be  made  in  generali  popvii
oonventu;  the  rest  are  enacted  in  synods  of  bishops,
and  all  without  exception  relate  merely  to  ecclesiastical
affairs/  And  it  must  be  owned  that,  as  in  those  of  the
first  dynasty,  we  find  generally  mention  of  the  optimatee
who  met  in  these  conventions,  but  rarely  any  word  that
can  be  construed  of  ordinary  freemen.

Such,  indeed,  is  the  impression  conveyed  by  a  remark-
able passage  of  Hincmar  archbishop  of  Bheims,  during
the  time  of  Charles  the  Bald,  who  has  preserved,  on  the
authority  of  a  writer  contemporary  with  Charlemagne,
a  sketch  of  the  Frankish  government  imder  that  great
prince. Two  assemblies  (placita)  were  an-
nually held. In  the  first,  all  regulations  of  hew'S?'"*^
importance  to  the  public  weal  for  the  ensuing  charie-
year  were  enacted ;  and  to  this,  he  says,  the  ™**^'
whole  body  of  clergy  and  laity  repaired ;  the  greater,  to
deliberate  upon  what  was  fitting  to  be  done;  and  the
less,'  to  confirm  by  their  volimtary  assent,  not  through
deference  to  power,  or  sometimes  even  to  discuss,  the
resolutions  of  their  superiors." In  the  second  annual
assembly  the  chief  men  and  officers  of  state  were  alone

'  The  fint  of  these  AOBtraelan  dukes,  nehator  sUtae  tottui  regnl  ad  omii  Ter*

•ay  the  Aimali  of  Metx.  "  ^ngnlb  annis  tentls  ipatiam;  qaod  ordinatnin  nnlius

In  KalendlsMartiigeneTaleciim  onmlbos  erentaa  remm,  nM  siimma  neoeBaltas,

FVandfl,  sectmdum  prisoornm  eonnietn-  qam ibnlliter  toti regno  inaunbebat,

dinem,  ooodlimn  agebat" The  leoond,  mntabat. In quo pladto  geneialltaa

according  to  the  biographer  of  8L  Salvlan  nniTeraomm  nujonnn,  >tam clerlcortmi

*'  ]as8li  campom  magnum  pararl,  slcut  quam Udcomm,  oonveniebat ; lenlorea

moe  erat  Franoorum. Venenmt  antem  propter  conalUam  ordlnandum ;  mlnores,

optimate«etmagLBtratatf,omniaqQe  popn-  propter  idem  cMiaiUnm luscipiendum,

Iiu." See the quotations  In Gnizot  et  interdam  parlter  tractandum,  et  non

(Essais  tor  VHistde  France,  p.  391.)  ex poteatate, led ex proprio mentis

*  Eoais  sar  I'Hist  de  Fiance,  p  334.  intellecta  vel  scntentiA,  confiimandum.

»  Ret  des  Hist  v.  637.  Hincmar,  EpUt  5,  de  oidlne  palatii. I

^  Consaetndo  tunc  temporls  talis  erat,  have  not  translated  the  word  mi^orum

Qt  noQ  sepias,  sed  bfit  in  anno  placita  in  the  above  quotation,  not  appreheodinn

duo  tenerentiir. Unnm,  quaodo  oidi-  lu  sense. [Motb  XVI.}

216  LEQISLATI  V£  ASS£JMBLI£& Chap.  IL  Past  IL

admitted,  to  conimlt  upon  the  most  urgent  affiaira  of
government.  They  debated,  in  each  of  these,  upon
certain  capitolaries,  or  short  proposals,  laid  before  them
by  the  kmg.  The  clergy  and  nobles  met  in  separate
-  chambera,  though  sometimes  united  for  the  purposes  of
deliberation.  In  these  assemblies,  principally,  I  presume,
in  the  more  nimierous  of  the  two  annually  summoned,
that  extensive  body  of  laws,  the  capitularies  of  Chade-
magne,  were  enacted.  And  though  it  would  contradict
the  testimony  just  adduced  from  Hincmar,  to  suppose
that  the  lesser  freeholders  took  a  veiy  effective  share  in
public  ootmsels,  yet  their  presence,  and  the  usage  of
requiring  their  assent,  indicate  the  liberal  principles
upon  which  the  system  of  Charlemagne  was  founded.
It  is  continually  expressed  in  his  capitularies  and  those
of  his  family  that  they  were  enacted  by  general  con-
sent.' In  one  of  Louis  the  Debonair  we  even  trace  the
first  germ  of  representative  legislation.  Every  count  is
directed  to  bring  with  him  to  the  general  assembly  twelve
Scabini,  if  there  should  be  so  many  in  his  county ;  or,  if
not,  should  fill  up  the  number  out  of  the  most  respectable
persons  resident.'  These  Scabini  were  judicial  assessors
of  the  count,  chosen  by  the  alodial  proprietors,  in  the
pounty  court,  or  mallus,  though  generally  on  his  nomi-
nation.*

The  circumstances,  however,  of  the  French  empire
for  several  subsequent  ages  were  exceedingly  adverse

*  Oapltala  qua  pmterito  anno  legl  lium. Mably,  L  IL  c  U.

Saliuib  CTun  oinnlam  oonfleDsn  addenda  '  This  seenu  to  be  sufflcienUy  proTed

MM  oensuhniu.  (▲.n.  801.) Ut  popnliu  by  Savlgny  (vol.  1.  jk  193.  217,  et  pott).

interrogetor  de  capitalia qua  in lege  His  opinion  is  adopted  by  Meyer,  GuiacM,

BOfTiter  addlta  sont,  et  poatqnam  omnM  Grinun,  and  TroiJa. The  Ust  of  theM  haa

wnsenMrint, sabscriptlonM et manii-  found  Scabini  mentioned  in  Lombardy  aa

flnnationM  sum  In  ipsis  capltnlis  fadanL  early  m  T24 ; thongh  Savigny  had  ra>

(ajk  813.)  Oapltiilaria  patria  noitri  qua  Jected  all  documents  in  which  tbey  an

Fraud  pro  lege tenenda  JndicaTemnt  named  anterior  to  Charlemagne.

(a.11. 837.)  1  have  borrowed  theM  qoota*  The  Scabini  are  not  to  be  confoanded,

tlons  tnxa  Mably,  who  remarks  that  the  m  sometimM  has  been  the  case,  with  the

wordpopuZtu  is  never  naed  in  the  earlier  RachimborgU,  who  were  not  dioeen  bj

Uws.  See  tooDuOsnge.Tv.Lex.Mallum.  the  alodial  proprietors,  but  were  them*

Pactum.  Mlves  each,  or  sometimes,  perbapa,  bane-

'  Vult  domlnas  Imperator  nt  in  tale  fidaries,  summoned  hj  tbe  court  m  Jurors

pladtnm  quale  lUe  mmc  jusMrit,  venlat  ^ero  In  England. Tbey  answered  to

tmnsqulsqne  oomes,  et  addncat  secum  the  pmd '  Aohmius,  honi  homiiwt,  of  later

duodedm  scaUnos  si  tsati  ftierlnt;  sin  times;  they  formed  the  ooonty  or  tha

autem.  de  melioribus  hoodnibiis  llllus  hundred  court,  for  the  detenninatioo  of

ri/tnitatiii  supplest  nmnerum  duodena-  dvU  and  criminal  cansMi [Non  XVI.)

Pbudal  Stbtem. legislative  ASSEMBLIES.  217

to  SQoh  enlarged  scliemes  of  polity.  The  nobles  con-
temned the  imbecile  descendants  of  Charlemagne ;  and
the  people,  or  lesser  freeholders,  if  they  escaped  absolnto
villonage,  lost  their  immediate  relation  to  the  saprem«
government  in  the  snbordination  to  their  lord  established
by  the  feudal  law.  Yet  we  may  trace  the  shadow  of
ancient  popular  rights  in  one  constitutional  function  of
high  importance,  the  choice  of  a  sovereign.  Historians
who  relate  the  election  of  an  emperor  or  king  of  France
seldom  omit  to  specify  the  consent  of  the  multitude,
as  well  as  6f  the  temporal  and  spiritual  aristocracy;
and  even  in  solemn  instruments  that  record  such  trans-
actions we  find  a  sort  of  importance  attached  to  the
popular  suffrage.*  It  is  surely  less  probable  that  a
recognition  of  this eleotive right  should  have  been

*  It  bu  been  intimated  In  another  gnlar  oondltton  of  goTemnient. Even

place,  p.  164,  that  the  Frendi  monaxchy  after  Hnc^  Oapet's  acge— ton,  bereditaxy

leema  not  to  have  been  itrietly  hereditary  right  waa  fiu*  from  being  eetabUahed.

onder  the  later  Ungi  of  the  Meroringlan  The  first  eiz  Ungi  of  thla  dynaaty  pro-

raoe:  at  leaat  ezpreaiiona  indicating  a  cored  the  co-optation  of  their  eooB,  by

formal  election  are  fkeqoently  employed  having  them  crowned  during  their  own

by  historiana. Pepin  of  course  oune  In  Uvea. And  this  waa  not  done  withoat

by  the  choice  of  the  nation. At  his  death  the  oooaentof  thediiefvaiiala.  (Becneil

he  requested  the  conaent  of  the  connta  des  Hist  t  zl.  p.  133.) In  the  reign  of

and  prelatee  to  the  soooeasion  of  hla  eona  Bobert  it  waa  a  great  queation  whether

(Balusii  Capitularia,p.  187) ;  though  they  the  elder  ion  should  be  thus  designated

had  bound  themselvea  by  oath  at  hia  con*  aa  heir  in  preference to  his  younger

tecration  never  to  elect  a  king  oat  oi  brother,  whom  the  queen,  Constance,  waa

another  finnily.  Ut  nunquam  de  alterins  anxious  to  place  upon  the  throne. Odolrio

Inrnbis  regem  eUgere  pnesumant  (For-  bishop  of  Orleana  writes to Fulbert

mula  Coosecmticnls  Hppini  in  Recneil  bishop  of  Chartres  In  teims  which  lead

des  Historiens,  L  v.) In  the  instrument  oob  to  think that  neither  hereditary

of  partition  by  Charlemagne  among  his  succession  nor  primogeniture  waa  settled

dsscendants  be  provides  for  their  imme-  on  any  fixed  principle.  (Id.  t  x.  p.  604.)

diate  succession  in  absolute  terma,  without  And  a  writer  in  the  same  collection,  about

any  mention  of  consent  But  in  the  event  the  year  1000,  expresses  himself  in  the

of  the  decease  of  one  of  his  sons  leaving  following  manner:  Melius  est  election!

a  child,  vohom  the  people  $haU  chooee,  the  prlndpls  non  subsoribere,  qukm  post  sub*

other  princes  were  to  permit  him  to  reign,  scriptionem  electum  contemnere ;  in  altero

Balttze,  p.  440. This  is  repeated  more  enim  Ubertatis  amor  laudatur,  in  altero

perspicuously  in  the  partition  made  by  serv'Jis  contumada  probro  datur. Tres

Louis  I.  in  817. 8i  quia  eorum  deoedens  nsiuque  generales  electlones  novimus;

legitimos  filioe  reliquerit,  non  inter  eos  qriarum  una  est  regis  vel  imperatoiis,

potestas  ip8adividatnr,sedpotlus  populus  altera  pontiflda,  altera  abbatis. £t  prU

pariter  conveniena,  unum  ex  lis,  quem  mam  quidem  fiKlt  oonooidla  totlns  regni ;

dominus  voluerit,  eligat,  et  hunc  senior  secundam vero  unanimitaa  dvium et

frater  in  loco  fratris  et  fllii redplaL  deti;  tertism  sanius  consilium  coenobi-

Baluse,  p.  677. Proofii  of  popular  consent  ticas  congregatloma  (Id.  p.  626.) At  the

given  to  the  succession  of  kings  during  coronation  of  rhilip  I.,  in  1069,  the  no>

the  two  next  centnriea  are  firequent,  but  bility  and  people  (miUtes  el  populi  tam

•fleas  ImportBDoa  on  aoooimt  of  the  irvs-  m^Jores  qulun  mlnores)  testified thielx

218  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES. Chap.  II.  Pabi  II.

introduced  a&  a  mere  ceremony,  than  that  the  form
fih^ould  have  survived  after  length  of  time  and  revolu-
tionfi  of  government  had  almost  obliterated  the  recollec-
tion of  its  meaning.

It  must,  however,  be  impossible  to  ascertain  even  the
theoretical  privileges  of  ihe  subjects  of  Charlemagne,
much  more  to  decide  how  far  they  were  substantial  or
illusoiy.  We  can  only  assert  in  general  that  there  con-
tinued to  be  some  mixture  of  democracy  in  the  French
constitution  during  the  reigns  of  Charlemagne  and  his
first  successors.  The  primeval  German  institutions  were
not  eradicated.  In  the  capitularies  the  consent  of  the
people  is  frequently  expressed.  Fifty  years  after  Charle-
magne, his  grandson  Charles  the  Bald  succinctly  ex-
presses the  theory  of  legislative  power.  A  law,  he
says,  is  made  by  the  people's  consent  and  the  khig's
enactment.^  It  would  hardly  be  warranted  by  anal<^y
or  precedent  to  interpret  the  word  people  so  very
narrowly  as  to  exclude  any  alodial  proprietors,  among
whom,  however  unequal  in  opulence,  no  legal  inequality
of  rank  is  supposed  to  have  yet  arisen.

But  by  whatever  authority  laws  were  enacted,  whoever
were  the  constituent  members  of  national  assemblies,
they  ceased  to  be  held  in  about  seventy  years  from  the
death  of  Charlemagne.  The  latest  capitularies  are  of
Carloman  in  882.*"  From  this  time  there  ensues  a  long
blank  in  the  history  of  French  legislation.  The  kingdom
was  as  a  great  fief,  or  rather  as  a  bundle  of  fiefs,  and  the
king  little  more  than  one  of  a  number  of  feudal  nobles,

consent  hj  crying,  Landamus,  ▼olomuB,  his  coronation;  bat  all  the  lawyers  called

fiat  T.  xi.  p.  33.  I  snppoee.  if  search  were  him  king  (xi.  6). The  lawyers  had  eeta-

inade,  that  similar  testimonies  might  be  blished  their  maxim  that  the  king  xneret

found  BtiL  later;  and  perlxaps  hereditary  dies; which,  however, waa nnknowa

sncoession cannot  be oon&tdered as  a  while  any  traces  of  electiTe  mooardiy

ftmdamental  law  till  the  lelgn  of  Philip  remained.

Augustas,  the  era  of  many  changes  in  ^  Lex  oonsensn  populi  flt,oonatitntioiM

the  l?Yench  oonstitation.  r^is. Recueil  des  Hist  t.  yii.  p.  656.

Siamondi  has  gone  a  great  deal  farther  **  It  is  generally  said  that  the  capito-

down.  and  observes  that,  though  John  laries  cease  with  Charles  the  ^mple,  who

assumed  the  royal  power  immediately  on  died  in  931. But  Balnze  has  pnbUshetl

the  death  of  his  father,  in  1350,  he  did  only  two  under  the  name  of  that  prince;

not  take  the  name  of  king,  nor  any  seal  the  first,  a  declaration  of  his  queen's

but  that  of  duke  of  Nonnandy,  till  his  Jointure;  the  second,  an  aiWtiatiaD  of

coronation. He  says,  however,  "notre  dJqmtes in the churdi of Toogres;

toyaume  "  in  his  instrtunents  (z.  375).  neither,  surely,  deserving  the  appeUatisa

Even  Oiarles  V.  called  himself,  or  was  of  a  law.
called  by  some,  duke  of  Nonnandy  until

Feudal  Sm EM. ASSEMBLIES  OF  B\ROKS.  219

differing  rather  in  dignity  than  in  power  from  some  of
the  rest.  The  royal  council  was  composed  only  of  barons^
or  tenants  in  chief,  prelates,  and  household  officers.
These  now  probably  deliberated  in  private,  as  we  hear
no  more  of  the  consenting  multitude.  Political  functions
were  not  in  that  age  so  clearly  separated  as  we  are
taught  to  fancy  they  should  be;  this  council  Royal
advised  the  king  in  matters  of  government,  con-  tbe^t^^
finned  and  consented  to  his  grants,  and  judged  "^
in  all  civil  and  criminal  cases  where  any  peers  of  their
court  were  concerned.*^  The  great  vassals  of  the  crown
acted  for  themselves  in  their  own  territories,  with  the
assistance  of  coimcils  similar  to  that  of  the  king.  Such,
indeed,  was  the  symmetiy  of  feudal  customs,  that  the
manorial  court  of  every  vavassor  represented  in  miniature
tliat  of  his  sovereign.*

But,  notwithstanding  the  want  of  any  permanent  legis-
lation during  so  long  a  period,  instances  occur  in  which
the  kings  of  France  appear  to  have  acted  with  the  con-
currence of  an  assembly  more  numerous  and  more  par-
ticularly summoned  than  the  royal  coimcil. At  occadonai
such  a  congress '  held  in  1146  the  crusade  of  asBembues
Louis  Vn.  was  undertaken.' We  find  also  an  «'»*^^»'
ordinance  of  the  same  prince  in  some  collections,  reciting
that  he  had  convoked  a  general  assembly  at  Soissons,
where  many  prelates  and  barons  then  present  had  con-
sented and  requested  that  private  wars  might  cease  for
the  term  of  ten  years.^ The  famous  Saladine  tithe  was

A  Regali  potentiA  In  nnllo  abnti  to-  keep  distinct  ftom  what  is  Immediately

tentes,  says  Hugh  Capet,  omnia  negotia  before  na.

relpabUcM  In  oonsultatl(me  et  lententlA  *  Recneil  det  Hist  t.  zL  p.  300,  and

fidellum  no0troTQm  dlKponimna. Eecaell  prtf&oe,  p.  1T9. Valflcette,  Hist  de  Lan-

des  Hist,  t  X.  p.  392. The  sobaciiptlons  guedoc.  1. 11.  p.  608.

of  these  royal  coanciUors  were  necessary  f  Velly,  t  Hi.  p.  119. TbiB»  be  ob>

for  the  conflrmatlon,  or,  at  least,  the  au-  seryes,  is  the  first  Instance  In  which  th«

ihentlcation  of  charters,  as  was  also  the  word  parliament  is  used  for  adeliberatlTa

case  in  England,  Spain,  and  Italy, llils  assembly.

practice  oontlnued  in  England  till  the  <  Ego  Ladovlcns  Dei  gretift  Pranoomm

reign  of  John.  rex,  ad  reprimendum  ferroram  mallgnan*

The  Curia  regis  seems  to  have  differed  nam,  et  compeecendom  violentas  pne-

ODly  In  name  from  the  Concilium  re-  domm  manas,  postulationibos  deri  et

glnm. It  la  also  called  Curia  parinm,  assensa  baronic,  toti  regno  pacem  oonsti-

from  the  equality  of  the  barons  who  Com-  tulmus. £&  causA,  anno  Incamatl  Verbl

posed  it,  standing  in  the  same  feudal  de-  liss,  iv  idus  Jun. Suesslonense  con*

gree  of  relation  to  the  sovereign. But  cllium  celebre  adunavimns,  et  effberunt

we  are  not  yei  arrived  at  the  sul^ect  of  archieplscopi Remeutfis, Senonensls  et

Jariadlctlon,  which  It  is  very  dilficult  to  eorum  snfftaganei}  item  baroneit  oonies

220  PLENARY  COURTS. Chap.  II.  Paot  11.

imposed  upon  lay  as  well  as  eoclesiastical  revenues  by  a
similar  conyention  in  1188.**  And  when  Innocent  iV.,
during  his  contest  with  the  emperor  Frederic,  requested
an  asylum  in  France,  St.  Louis,  though  much  inclined
to  favour  him,  ventured  only  to  give  a  conditional  per-
mission, provided  it  were  agreeable  to  his  betrons,  whom,
he  said,  a  king  of  France  was  bound  to  consult  in  such
circumstances.  Accordingly  he  assembled  the  French
barons,  who  unanimously  refused  their  consent.*
It  was  the  ancient  custom  of  the  kings  of  France  as
Coon  well  as  of  England,  and  indeed  of  all  those
Pi&iftret.  vassals  who  affected  a  kind  of  sovereignty,  to
hold  general  meetings  of  their  barons,  called  Cours
Plenieres,  or  Parliaments,  at  the  great  festivals  of  the
year.  These  assemblies  were  principally  intended  to
make  a  display  of  magnificence,  and  to  keep  the  feudal
tenants  in  good  humour;  nor  is  it  easy  to  discover
that  they  passed  in  anything  but  pageantry.^  Some  re-
spectable antiquaries  bave  however  been  of  opinion  that
affifidrs  of  state  were  occasionally  discussed  in  them;
and  this  is  certainly  by  no  means  inconsistent  with
probability,  though  not  sufficiently  established  by  evi-
dence."

Excepting  a  few  instances,  most  of  which  have  been
mentioned,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  kings  of  the  house
of  Capet  acted  according  to  the  advice  and  deliberation
of  any  national  assembly,  such  as  assisted  the  Norman
sovereigns  of  England :  nor  was  any  consent  required  for
the  validity  of  their  edicts,  except  that  of  the  ordinaiy
council,  chiefly  formed  of  their  household  officers  and
less  powerful  vassals.  This  is  at  first  sight  veiy  remark-
able. For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  government  of
Henry  I.  or  Henry  II.  was  incomparably  stronger  than
that  of  Louis  VI.  or  Louis  YU.  But  this  apparent
absoluteness  of  the  latter  was  the  result  of  their  real

FUndreosU,  Treoensia,  et  NivernenslB  et This  ordinance  la  pobllabed  in  Do

qoamplorea  alii,  et  dux  Bargundifi. Ex  Cheane,  Script  Renim  GaUicanim,  t  iv,

qaonun  benepladto  ordlnavimiia  a  re-  and  in  Recueil  dea  Hiator.  t  ziT.  p.  387;

niente  Fucbft  ad  decern  annoa,  nt  omnea  but  not  in  the  general  oollectloii.
eoclesin  regni  et  omnea  agrioola»,  etc. h  Velly,  t  iii.  p.  31S.

pacem  habeant  et  aecnritotem. In 1  Velly.  t.  iv.  p.  30e.

paoem  Istam  JaraTerunt  dox  Bni^^ite, k  Da  Oange,  Diaaert.  6,  aor  Jdn^lUe.

oomea  FlandriaB, etreliqni  baronea ">  U4m.  de  J'Acad.  dea  Inacript.  t  xU

qai  adeiant.  Recoeil  dea  Hiat.  t.  xL  prdfaoe.  p^  155.

Fjsudal  Svstjbm. legislative  SUBSTITUTES.  221

weakneM  and  tlie  disorganization  of  the  monarchy.  The
peers  of  France  were  infrequent  in  their  attendance
apon  the  king*s  oonncil,  because  they  denied
its  coercive  authority.  It  was  a  fimdamental  ^roymi^"'
principle  that  every  feudal  tenant  was  so  far  PJJIu*
sovereign  within  the  limits  of  his  fief,  that  he  ^^  ^
could  not  be  bound  by  any  law  without  his  consent.
The  king,  says  St.  Louis  in  his  Establishments,  cannot
make  proclamation,  that  is,  declare  any  new  law,  in
the  territory  of  a  baron,  without  his  consent,  nor  can  the
baron  do  so  in  that  of  a  vavassor."  Thus,  if  legislative
power  be  essential  to  sovereignty,  we  cannot  in  strict-
ness assert  the  king  of  France  to  have  been  sovereign
beyond  the  extent  of  his  domanial  territory.  Nothing
can  more  strikingly  illustrate  the  dissimilitude  of  the
French  and  English  constitutions  of  government  than
the  sentence  above  cited  from  the  code  of  St.  Louis.

Upon  occasions  when  the  necessity  of  common  deli-
beration, or  of  giving  to  new  provisions  more
extensive  scope  than  the  limits  of  a  single  fief,  for  iegi»-^
was  too  glarmg  to  be  overlooked,  congresses  ^^^
of  neighbouring  lords  met  in  order  to  agree  '^ ^'
upon resolutions  which  each  of  them imdertook to
execute  within  his  own  domains. The  king  was  some-
times a  contracting  party, but  without  any  coercive
authority  over  the  rest. Thus  we  have  what  is  called
an  ordinance,  but,  in  reality,  an  agreement,  between
the  king  (Philip  Augustus),  the  countess  of  Troyes  or
Champagne,  and  the  lord  of  Dampierre,^  relating  to  the
Jews  in  their  domains ;  which  agreement  or  ordinance,
it  is  said,  should  endure  *'  until  ourselves, and  the
cotmtess  of  Troyes,  and  Guy  de  Dampierre,  who  make
this  contract,  shall  dissolve,  it  with  the  consent  of  such
of  our  barons  as  we  shall  summon  for  that  purpose."^

'  Ne  11  rois  ne  poet  mettre  ban  en  la  the  jonnger  stater  of  tbe  beirew  of  that

\erre  an  txaron  tans  son  assentment,  ne  11  fief,  who,  after  his  death,  inherited  It

ben  [baron]  ne  {met  mettre  ban  en  la  from  tbe  elder. Tbe  ordioanoe  related  to

teire  an  TaTaaor. Ordonnanoes  dea  Rois,  the  domains  of  Dampierre,  In  the  Niver-

L  i  p.  126.  nola. This,  howerer,  makes  the  instance

**  In  former  editions  I  have  called  tbe  stronger  against  the  legislative  authority

lord  of  Dampierre  count  of  Flanders,  of  the  crown  than  as  I  bad  stated  it

Dnt  it  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  P  Quonsqne  nos,  At  comitisaa  Treoensia,

the  loM  of  Dampierre  waa  never  count  et  Guido  de  DomnA  petit,  qui  hoc  fkd*

St  Flaudora;  his  second  brother  married  nras,  per  nosi  et  lUos  debaionibns  nostril

222  FIBST  GENERAL  LEGISLATION. Chap.  II.  Past  II.

Ecolefiiastical  councils  were  another  substitate  for  a
regular  legislatore;  and  this  defect  in  the  political  con-
stitution rendered  their  encroachments  less  obnoxiotis,
and  almost  unavoidable.  That  of  Troyes  in  878,  com-
posed perhaps  in  part  of  laymen,  imposed  a  fine  upon
the  invaders  of  church  property .**  And  the  council  of
Toulouse,  in  1229,  prohibited  the  erection  of  any  new
fortresses,  or  the  entering  into  any  leagues,  except
against  the  enemies  of  religion ;  and  ordained  that  judges
should  administer  justice  gratuitously,  and  publish  the
decrees  of  the  council  four  times  in  the  year.'

The  fiirst  unequivocal  attempt,  for  it  was  nothing  more,
pj^^  at  general  legislation,  was  under  Louis  YIII.

meMorw  in  1223,  in  an  ordinance  which,  like  several
i^^ti^n.  ^^  *^*  ^®'  relates  to  the  condition  and  usurious
dealings  of  the  Jews.  It  is  declared  in  the
preamble  to  have  been  enacted  per  assensum  archie-
piscoporum,  episcoporum,  comitum,  baronum,  et  militum
regni  Franci»,  qui  Judasos  habent,  et  qui  Judseos  non
habent.  This  recital  is  probably  untrue,  and  intended
to  cloak  the  bold  innovation  contained  in  the  last  clause
of  the  following  provision:  Sciendum,  quod  nos  et
barones  nostri  statuimus  et  ordinavimus  de  statu  Jud8&-
orum  quod  nullus  nostrOm  alterius  Judaeos  recipere  potest
vel  retmere  ;  et  hoc  intelligendum  est  tarn  de  his  qui  stabiUmerdum
juraverint,  quam  de  tZZts  qui  nan  juraverint.*  This  was  renewed
with  some  alteration  in  1230,  de  communi  consilio  baro-
num nostromm.*

But  whatever  obedience  the  vassals  of  the  orown
might  pay  to  this  ordinance,  their  original  exemption
&om  legislative  control  remained,  as  we  have  seen,
unimpaired  at  the  date  of  the  Establishments  of  St.  Louis,
about  1269 ;  and  their  ill-judged  confidence  in  this  feudal
privilege  still  led  them  to  absent  themselves  from  the
royal  council.  It  seems  impossible  to  doubt  that  the
barons  of  France  might  have  asserted  the  same  right
which  those  of  England  had  obtained,  that  of  being  duly
summoned  by  special  writ,  and  thus  have  rendered  their

qa<M  ad  hoc  Tocsre  ▼olmnos,  iUnd  diffib-  1  Valnette,  Hift  de  T<ingn<w1«r<  t  (L

diunua. Ordoonances  des  Rois,  t.  L  p.  29.  p.  6.

This  ordinance  bean  no  date,  but  it  was  '  Velly,  t  !▼.  p.  13S.

probably  between  1318  and  1223,  the  year  ■  Ordoonanoes  des  Hola.  C  i.  p.  41^

3f  Philip's  death.  t  Id.  p.  53.

Pbudal  SrSTEX.  INCREASE  OF  POWER  OF  THE  CROWN. 229

oonfient  necessary  to  every  measure  of  legislation.  But
the  fortunes  of  France  were  different.  The  Establish-
ments of  St.  Louis  are  declared  to  be  made  ^^  par  grand
conseil  de  sages  hommes  et  de  bons  clers/'  but  no  men-
tion is  made  of  any  consent  given  by  the  barons ;  nor
does  it  often,  if  ever,  occur  in  subsequent  ordinances  of
the  French  kings.

The  nobility  did  not  long  continue  safe  in  their  im-
munity from  ^e  king's  legislative  power. In  j^^gi^^^
the  ensuing  reign  of  Philip  the  Bold,  Beau-  power  of
manoir  lays  it  down,  though  in  very  moderate  £j,2iefc
and  doubtful  terms,  that  *'  when  the  king  makes
any  ordinance  specially  for  his  own  domains,  the  barons
do  not  cease  to  act  in  their  territories  according  to  the
ancient  usage;  but  when  the  ordinance  is  general,  it
ought  to  run  Ihrough  the  whole  kingdom,  and  we  ought
to  believe  that  it  is  made  with  good  advice,  and  for  the
jDommon  benefit."" In  another  place  he  says,  with  more
positiveness,  that  '*  the  king  is  sovereign  above  all,  and
has  of  right  the  general  custody  of  the  reabn,  for  which
cause  he  may  make  what  ordinances  he  pleases  for  the
common  good,  and  what  he  ordains  ought  to  be  observed ;
nor  is  there  any  one  so  great  but  may  be  drawn  into  the
king's  court  for  defisiult  of  right  or  for  false  judgment,  or
in  matters  that  affect  the  sovereign."' These  latter
words  give  us  a  clue  to  the  solution  of  the  pro-  catues  of
blem  by  what  means  an  absolute  monarchy  ^^^
was  established  in  France. For  though  the  barons  would
have  been  little  influenced  by  the  authority  of  a  lawyer
like  Beaumanoir,  they  were  much  less  able  to  resist  the
coercive  logic  of  a  judicial  tribunal. It  was  in  vain  for
them  to  deny  the  obligation  of  royal  ordinances  within
their  own  domains,  when  they  were  compelled  to  ac-
knowledge the  jurisdiction  of  the  parliament  of  Paris^.
which  took  a  very  different  view  of  their  privileges.
This  progress  of  the  royal  jurisdiction  will  fall  imder  the
next  topic  of  inqtdiy,  and  is  only  now  hinted  at,  as  tho

*  Gofttames  de  Beaayoiiris,  c  48.  so  that  he  may  enforce  them  again ;  '*  for

'  G.  34.  Beaumanoir  uses  in  one  place  what  it  pleases  him  to  do  o«ight  to  be

sdll  stronger  language  about  the  royal  held  as  law"  (c  3A). This  I  owe  to  the

authority. The  king,  he  uajn,  may  annul  new  edition  of  the  'Cofitoroea  de  Beau

the  releases  of  debts  mode  by  any  one  manoir/  by  M.  Beugnot,  IMS.
who  aooompanies  him  in  military  servloe*

224  INCREASE  OP  POWER  OF  THE  CROWN.  Chap.  II.  Part  II.

probable  meanfl  of  confiiming  the  abeolute  legisladvo
power  of  the  French  crown.

The  ultimate  source,  howeyer,  of  this  increased  autho-
rity will  be  found  in  the  commanding  attitude  assumed
by  the  kings  of  France  £rom  the  reign  of  Philip  Augustus,
and  particularly  in  the  annexation  of  the  two  great  fie&
of  Normandy  and  Toulouse.  Though  the  chatelains  and
vavassors  who  had  depended  upon  those  fie&  before
their  reimion  were,  agreeably  to  the  text  of  St.  Louis's
ordinance,  fuUy  sovereign,  in  respect  of  legislation,
within  their  territories,  yet  they  were  little  competent^
and  perhaps  little  disposed,  to  offer  any  opposition  to
the  royal  edicts;  and  the  same  i^elative  superiority  of
force,  which  had  given  the  first  kings  of  the  house  of
Capet  a  tolerably  effective  control  over  the  vassals
dependent  on  Paris  and  Orleans,  while  they  hardly  pre-
tended to  any  over  Normandy  and  Toulouse,  was  now
extended  to  the  greater  part  of  the  kingdom.  St.  Louis,
in  his  scrupulous  moderation,  forbore  to  avail  himself  of
all  the  advantages  presented  by  the  circumstances  of  his
reign ;  and  his  Establishments  bear  testimony  to  a  state
of  political  society  which,  even  at*  the  moment  of  their
promulgation,  was  passing  away.  The  next  thirty  years
after  his  death,  with  no  marked  crisis,  and  with  little
disturbance,  silently  demolished  the  feudal  system,  such
as  had  been  established  in  France  during  the  dark  con-
fiision  of  the  tenth  century.  Philip  the  Fair,  by  help  of
his  lawyers  and  his  financiers,  found  himiself,  at  the
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  real  master  of
his  subjects.'

There  was,  however,  one  essential  privilege  which  he
Convocation  could  uot  hope  to  overtum  by  force,  the  im-
^*»»«  stotoi  munity  from  taxation  enjoyed  by  his  barons.
phuipuS^  This,  it  will  be  remembered,  embraced  the
^^'  whole  extent  of  their  fiefs,  and  their  tenantry

of  every  description ;  the  king  having  no  more  right  to

'  The  refgn  of  PhlUp  the  Fair  has  been  ^j  npporta  an  Men  de  wn  wajtU;  e'lft

very  well  dlacoflMd  by  Mably,  Slamondi.  nn  deqwte  tSgolste,  ddvoai  k  Ininntaie*

and  Onixot **He  changed."  laya  the  qni  r^e  ponr  Inl  seiiL" (La^oa  «6.)

laat,  **iBODarchyiBto  deqwtian;  bat  be  The  royal  antbority  gained  eo  mncb

WM  not  one  of  those  deqwte  who  emplqy  anendeocy  in  hia  reign,  that,  while  vm

their  abeolnte  power  for  the  public  good."  have  only  60  ordonnanoee  of  St.  Lools  In

**  Ob  ne  rencontre  dans  toot  le  ooors  de  forty-two  years,  we  bawasi  of  FbiUp  IV.

Km  i%pM  aacane  id^  gAitfrale,  et  qui  in  aboat  thirty.

Feudal  Stbtex.  biAT&S-GJi.N£RAL.  225

impose  a  tallage  upon  the  demesne  towns  of  his  vassals
th&Q  upon  themselves.  Thus  his  resources,  in  point  of
taxation,  were  limited  to  his  own  domains;  including
oertainly,  under  Philip  the  Fair,  many  of  the  noblest
cities  in  France,  but  by  no  means  sufficient  to  meet  his
increasing  necessities.  We  have  seen  already  the  expe-
dients employed  by  this  rapacious  monarch — a  shame-
less depreciation  of  the  ooin,  and,  what  was  much  more
justifiable,  the  levying  taxes  within  the  territories  of  his
vassals  by  their  conjsent.  Of  these  measures,  the  first
was  odious,  the  second  slow  and  imperfect.  Confiding
in  his  sovereign  authority — ^though  recently,  yet  almost
completely,  established — aud  litUe  apprehensive  of  the
feudal  principles,  already  grown  obsolete  and  discoun-
tenanced, he  was  bold  enough  to  make  an  extraordinary
innovation  in  the  French  constitution.  This  was  the
convocation  of  the  Staten-General,  a  representative  body,
composed  of  the  three  orders  of  the  nation.' They  were

*  It  is  almoBt  nnanhnofaaly  igreed  thai  depntlet  from  the  rojil  bnz]^  of

amoDg  French  writen  that  Philip  the  Sootlind  oocaeionally  appeared  at  the  bar

Fair  first  introduced  a  repreaentatiOQ  of  of  parliament  long  before  thej  had  any

the  towns  into  his  national  asmnbly  of  deliberstlTe  -voioe^— Pinkerton's  Hist  of

Statee-GeneraL Nevertheless,  tho  Ghro-  Scotland.  voL  L  p.  371.

nides  of  St  Denis,  snd  other  historians  An  ordinanoe  of  St.  Louis,  quoted  in

of  raUier  a  late  date,  assert  that  the  de-  a  very  respectable  book,  Vsissette's  His-

pnties  of  towns  were  present  at  a  parlia*  tory  of  Langnedoc,  t  iiL  p«  480,  bat

ment  in  1241,  to  advise  the  king  what  not  pablished  in  the  RecneU  des  Ordoo-

shonld  be  done  in  consequence  of  the  nances,  not  only  shows  the  existence.  In

oonnt  of  Angonieme's  relbsal  of  homage^  one  instance,  of  a  prooiwMl  legislative

BonlainvillietB,  Hist  de  I'Anden  Oou-  assembly,  bat  is  the  earliest  proof  per-

▼ernement  de  France,  t  iL  {k  20;  Vll-  hiqw  of  the  tiers  tftat  appearing  as  a  con-

Ictet  t  iz.  p.  126. The  latter  pretends  stitaent  part  of  It This  relates  to  the

even  that  they*may  be  traced  a  centaiy  senoschanss^  or  ooanty,  of  Beaocalre  In

fiffther  back;  on  voit  d^k  les  gens  de  Languedoc,  and  bears  date  in  1264. It

bonnes  villes  aasister  aax  ^tats  de  1146.  provides  that  if  the  aenwrihal  shall  think

Ibid. Bat  he  quotes  no  authority  for  fit  to  prohibit  the  export  of  merchandiae.

this;  and  his  vague  language  does  not  he  shall  sommmi  aome  of  the  prelatea,

jostuy  us  in  supposing  that  any  repre-  barons,  knights,  and  inhaUtants  of  the

■entaUon  of  the  three  estates,  properly  chief  towns,  by  whose  advice  he  shall

to  underBtood,  did,  or  Indeed  could,  take  issue  such  prohibition,  and  not  recall  lt»

place  in  1146,  while  the  power  of  the  when  made,  without  like  advice. Bat

aristocrat  was  unbroken,  and  very  few  though  it  is  hateresftog  to  see  the  pro*

towns  had  been  inoorporatcd. If  it  be  gressive  Importsnoe  of  the  dtlaens  of

true  that  the  deputies  of  some  royal  towns,  yet  this  temporary  and  insulated

towns  were  summoned  to  the  parliament  ordinance  is  not  of  itself  suffldent  to

«f  1241.  the  oondudan  must  not  be  in-  establiafa  a  constitutional  ri^t Neither

lierred  that  they  poesened  any  consent*  do  we  find  therein  any  evidence  of  re*

ing  voice,  nor  perhaps  that  they  foimed,  presentation :  it  rather  appears  that  tho

ftrlctly  apeaking,  an  integrant  portion  of  perBona  aariating  in  this  assembly  were

the  assembly. There  is  reason  to  believe  notaftlet,  selected  by  tho  sencsdaL

VOU  I.  O lea

226  STAT£S4>£N£RAL. Chap.  II.  Pabt  IL

first  convened  in  1 302,  in  order  to  give  more  weight  to
the  king's  cause  in  his  great  quarrel  with  BonifiEUse  VIIL ;
but  their  earliest  grant  of  a  subsidy  is  in  1314.  Thus
the  nobility  surrendered  to  the  crown  their  last  privilege
of  territorial  independence ;  and,  having  first  submitted
to  its  appellant  jurisdiction  over  their  tribunals,  next  to
its  legislative  supremacy,  now  suffered  their  own  d^
pendents  to  become,  as  it  were,  immediate,  and  a  third
estate  to  rise  up  almost  co-ordinate  with  themselves,
endowed  with  new  franchises,  and  bearing  a  new  rela-
tion to  the  monarchy.

It  is  impossible  not  to  perceive  the  motives  of  Philip
in  embodying  the  deputies  of  towns  as  a  separate  estate
In  the  national  representation.  He  might,  no  question,
have  convoked  a  parliament  of  his  barons,  and  obtained
a  pecTiniary  contribution,  which  they  would  have  levied
upon  their  burgesses  and  other  tenants.  But,  besides
the  ulterior  poUcy  of  diminishing  the  control  of  the
barons  over  their  dependents,  he  had  good  reason  to
expect  more  liberal  aid  from  the  immediate  representa-
tives of  the  people  than  through  the  concession  of  a
dissatisfied  aristocracy.  '*  He  niust  be  blind,  indeed,"
says  Pasquier,  '*  who  does  not  see  that  the  roturier  was
expressly  summoned  to  this  assembly,  contrary  to  the
ancient  institutions  of  France,  for  no  other  reason  than
that,  inasmuch  as  the  burthen  was  intended  to  feJl  prin-

I  am  not  acwun  of  any  liurtanoe  of  e8treinlse8sasnoiiTellescoii8titationa,«t

regular  proTindal  estates  being  som-  ordonnanoessurlepaiaetdestniltesaafera

moned  with  such  ftiU  powers,  althot^sh  que  seront  grevables,  et  en  atUn  (esijM

it  was  very  common  in  the  fourteenth  non,  et  dofvent  etre  publi^  afln  que

century  to  ask  their  consent  to  grants  of  nnl  ne  les  paeost  ignorer,  et  lors  ne  les

money,  when  the  court  was  unwilling  to  pent  ne  doit  Jamais  nid redargner.-^

convoke  the  States-GeneraL Yet  there  M6n.  de  I' Acad,  des  Inscriptions*  t  »»»

is  a  passage  in  a  book  of  considerable  p.  604.

credit,  the  Grand  Customary,  or  Somme  The  taille  was  assessed  by  respectable

Rurale  of  Bouteiller,  which  seems to  persons  chosen  by  the  advice  of  the  parish

reader  general  the  particular  case  of  the  prints  and  others,  which  |pave  the  people

seneschaussde  of  Beaucaire. Bouteiller  a  sort  of  share  in  the  rqmrHtkmt  to  use

wrote  about  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  a  French  term,  of  public  bortlMns;  •

century. The  great  courts  summoned  matter  of  no  small  importance  where  a

firom  time  to  time  by  the  bailUs  and  tax  is  levied  on  visible  property. Ordoo-

seneschals  were  called  assises. Their  nances  des  Rois,  p.  391; BeaamaiKrfr,

ussal  Amotion  was  to  administer  Justice,  p.  269. This,  however,  continued,  I  be^

especially  by  way  of  appeal,  and  perhaps  lieve,  to  be  the  practice  In  Uter  tlmss

to  redress  abuses  of  Inferior  officers. But  I  know  it  is  so  in  the  present  systemo

he  seems  to  give  them  a  more  extended  France,  and  is  perfectly  distlngnisMBIs

authority. En  assise,  he  says,  appellds  from  a  popular  consent  to  tazatJon.
lea  sages  et  seigneurs  du  piUs,  peuvent

Feudal  Srsrsx.  STaTES-GEKERAL.  227

cipally  upon  bim,  he  might  engage  himself  bii  far  by
promise,  that  he  could  not  afterwards  murmur  or  become
refractory."  '  Nor  would  I  deny  the  influence  of  more
genei'ous  principles ;  the  example  of  neighbouring  coun-
tries, the  respect  due  to  the  progressive  civilization  and
opulence  of  the  towns,  and  the  application  of  that  an-
cient maxim  of  the  northern  monarchies,  that  whoever
was  elevated  to  the  perfect  dignity  of  a  freeman  ac-
quired a  claim  to  participate  in  the  imposition  of  public
tributes.

It  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  the  constitutional  rights
of  the  States-General, claimed  or admitted,
during  forty  years  after  their  first  convocation. th^utlL
K,  indeed,  we  could  implicitly  confide  in  an  ^TuuStiOT.
historian  of  the  sixteenth  century,  who  asserts  ^^

that  Louis  Hutin  boimd  himself  and  his  successors  not
to  levy  any  tax  without  the  consent  of  the  three  estates,
the  problem  would  find  its  solution.**  This  ample  charter
does  not  appear  in  the  French  archives ;  and,  though  by
no  means  to  be  rejected  on  that  account,  when  we  con-
sider the  strong  motives  for  its  destruction,  cannot  fairly
be  adduced  as  an  authentic  fact.  Nor  can  we  altogether
infer,  perhaps,  from  the  collection  of  ordinances,  that
the  crown  had  ever  intentionally  divested  itself  of  the
right  to  impose  tallages  on  its  domanial  tenants.  All
o&ers,  Jiowever,  were  certainly  exempted  from  that  pre-
rogative ;  and  there  seems  to  have  been  a  general  senti-
ment that  no  tax  whatever  could  be  levied  without  free
consent  of  the  estates.^  Louis  Hutin,  in  a  charter
granted  to  the  nobles  and  burgesses  of  Picardy,  pro-
mises to  abolish  the  unjust  taxes  (maltotes)  imposed  by
-  his  father  ;**  and  la  anotlier  instrument,  called  the  charter
o(  Normandy,  declares  that  he  renoimces  for  himseK  and
liis  successors  all  tmdue  tallages  and  exactions,  except
in  case  of  evident  utility.* This  exception  is  doubtless

*  Redieithes  de  la  France,  1. 11.  c.  7. ^tse,  1 1.  p.  203)  I0  of  the  same  opinloa
1>  BoulAlnvUUen  (Hist  de  I'Anc  Gou- In  tact,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that

veniement,  t,  11.  p.  12S>  refen  for  this  to  the  kings  in  general  did  not  claim  that

Nidolas  Gilles,  a  chronicler  of  no  great  prerogative  absolntely,  whatever  pretexts

npaie.  they  might  set  np  for  occasional  stretcbec

*  Mably,  Observat.  snr  I'HIst  de  France,  of  power.

L  ▼.  c  1.  IS  positive  against  the  right  of d  Ordonnanoes  dee  Rols,  L  1.  p  669.
Philip  the  Fair  and  his  snoceasora  to  fan- *  Idem,  t  L  i>.  589.
pore  tax  «.  Moatlosler  (Monarchie  Fhua-

a2

228  STATES^ENSRAL. ohap.  IL  Past  VL

of  periloxLB  ambigoity ;  yet,  as  the  charter  wbb  literally
wrested  from  the  kmg  by  aa  insurrectioiiaiy  leagae,  it
might  be  expected  that  the  same  spirit  would  rebel
against  his  royal  interpretation  of  state-necessity. His
successor,  Philip  the  Long,  tried  the  experiment  of  a
gabelle,  or  excise  upon  salt. But  it  produced  so  much
discontent that  he  was compelled to assemble  the
States-General,  and  to  publish  an  ordinance,  declaring
that  the  impost  was  not  designed  to  be  perpetual,  and
that,  if  a  sufficient  supply  for  the  existing  war  could  be
found  elsewhere,  it  should  instantly  determine/  Whether
this  was  done  I  do  not  discoTcr ;  nor  do  I  conceive  that
any  of  the  sons  of  Philip  the  Fair,  inheriting  much  of
his  rapacity  and  ambition,  abstained  from extorting
money  wiliiout consent. Philip of  Yalois renewed
and  augmented  the  duties  on  salt  by  his  own  pre-
rogative,  nor  had  the  abuse  of  debasing  the  current
coin  been  ever  carried  to  such  a  height  as  during  his
reign  and  the  first  years  of  his  successor. These  exac-
tions, aggravated  by  the  smart  of  a  hostile  invasion,  pro-
duced a  very  remarkable  concussion  in  the  government
of  France.
I  have  been  obliged  to  advert,  in  another  place,  to
States- ^®  memoiHble  resistance  made  by  the  Estates-
^ifSDmi General  of  1355  and  1356  to  the  royal  autho-
ud?^6.  ^^7*  ^^  accoimt  of  its  inseparable  oonnexion
with  the  civil  history  of  France.' In  the  pre-
sent chapter  the  assumption  of  political  influence  by
those  assemblies  deserves  particular  notice. Not  that
they  pretended  to  restore  the  ancient  constitution  of  the
northern  nations,  still  flourisliing  in  Spain  and  England,
the  participation  of  legislative  power  with  the  crown.
Five  hundred  years  of  anarchy  and  ignorance  had  swept
away  all  remembrance  of  those  general  diets  in  which
the  capitularies  of  the  Carlovingian  dynasty  had  been
established  by  common  consent. Charlemagne  himself
was  hardly  known  to  the  French  of  the  fourteentJi  cen-
tury, except  as  the  hero  of  some  siUy  romance  or  baUad.
The  States^General  remonstrated,  indeed,  against  abuses,
and  especially  the  most  flagrant  of  all,  the  adulteration
of  money ;  but  the  ordinance  granting  redress  emaciated

t  OrdomMmcoi  dn  Boia.  t  L  p.  679  f  Ghapi  i.  pb  M

FEin>AL  Stbtek.  STATES^ENERAL.  229

altogether  &om  the  king,  and  without  the  least  reference
to  their  consent,  which  sometunes  appears  to  be  studi-
onsly  omitted.*^  But  the  privilege  iipon  which  the  States
under  John  solely  relied  for  securing  the  redress  of
grievances  was  that  of  granting  money,  and  of  regulating
its  collection.  The  latter,  indeed,  though  for  conveni-
ence it  may  be  devolved  upon  the  executive  government,
appears  to  be  incident  to  eveiy  assembly  in  which  the
right  of  taxation  resides.  That,  accordingly,  which  met
in  1355  nominated  a  committee  chosen  out  of  the  three
orders,  which  was  to  sit  after  their  separation,  and  which
the  king  bound  himself  to  consult,  not  only  as  to  the
internal  arrangements  of  his  administration,  but  upon
eveiy  proposition  of  peace  or  armistice  with  England.
Deputies  wore  despatched  into  each  district  to  superin-
tend the  collection  and  receive  the  produce  of  the  sub-
sidy granted  by  the  States.*  These  assumptions  of  power
would  not  long,  we  may  be  certain,  have  left  the  sole
authority  of  legislation  in  the  king,  and  might,  perhaps,
be  censured  as  usurpation,  if  the  peculiar  emergency  in
which  France  was  then  placed  did  not  furnish  their  de-
fence. But,  if  it  be  true  that  the  kingdom  was  reduced
to  the  utmost  danger  and  exhaustion,  as  much  by  mal-
versation of  its  government  as  by  the  armies  of  Edward
III.,  who  shall  deny  to  its  representatives  the  right  of
ultimate  sovereignty,  and  of  suspending  at  least  the
royal  prerogatives,  by  the  abuse  of  which  they  were
falling  into  destruction  ?  '^  I  confess  that  it  is  exceedingly
difficult,  or  perhaps  impracticable,  with  such  information

h  The  pfTooeedtngs  of  States-Oenenl  any  limltftttoos  In  Teq)ect  of  enacting

held  under  Philip  IV.  and  hia  aooa  have  laws,  lave  thoae  which,  until  the  reign

left  no  trace  in  the  French  itatate-hook.  of  Philip  the  Fair,  the  feudal  principles

Two  ordonnanoes  alone,  oat  of  some  had  imposed.

hundred enacted  "by  Philip  of  Valols,  i  Ordonnances  dee  Bols,  t  ill.  p.  21,

appear  to  have  been  founded  upon  their  and  prO^Me,  p.  42. This  prefiice  by  M.

miggestlonai  S^sonsse,  the  editor,  gives  a  very  clear

It  is  absolutely  certain  that  the  States*  view  of  the  general  and  provincial  asaem-

^teneral  of  France  had  at  no  period,  and  blies  held  in  the  reign  of  John. Bon-

In  no  instance,  a  co-ordinate  legislative  lalnvilliers.  Hist  de  I'Ancien  Gonvem»>

authority  with  the  crown,  or  even  a  coo-  ment  de  France,  t  ii.,  or  Villaret,  t  Ix^

■mting  voice. Mably,  Boulalnvillien,  may  b<>  perused  with  advantage.

and  Montlosier,  are  as  decisive  on  this  k  The  second  continuator  of  Nangls  in

S'l^iject  as  the  most  courtly  writers  of  Che  Spidleginmd wells  tm  the  heavy  taze^

that  country. It  follows  as  a  Just  con-  diminution  of  money,  and  general  opprc^

sequence  that  France  never  possessed  a  siveneei  of  government  In  this  age:  liiL

aee  oonstitntloD ;  nor  had  the  monarchy  p.  10b.

230  STATES-GENERAL. Chap.  n.  Past  U.

as  we  possess,  to  decide  upon  Uie  motives  and  conduct
of  the  States-General  in  their  several  meetings  before
and  after  the  battle  of  Poitiers.  Arbitrary  power  pre-
vailed ;  and  its  opponents  became,  of  course,  the  theme
of  obloquy  with  modem  historians.  Froissart,  however,
does  not  seem  to  impute  any  £Etult  to  these  famous  assem-
blies of  the  States-General ;  and  still  less  a  more  contem-
porary historian,  the  anonymous  continuator  of  Nangis.
Their  notices,  however,  are  very  slight ;  and  our  chief
knowledge  of  the  parliamentary  history  of  France,  if  I
may  employ  the  expression,  muist  be  collected  firom  tiie
royal  ordinances  made  upon  these  occasions,  or  from  un-
published accoimts  of  their  transactions.  Some  of  these,
which  are  quoted  by  the  later  historians,  are,  of  couise,
inaccessible  to  a  writer  in  this  country.  But  a  manu-
script in  the  British  Museum,  containing  the  early  pro-
ceedings of  that  assembly  which  met  in  October,  1356,
immecQately  after  the  battie  of  Poitiers,  by  no  means
loads  to  an  unfavourable  estimate  of  its  intentions."
The  tone  of  their  representations  to  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy (Charles  Y.,  not  then  called  Dauphin^  is  full  of
loyal  respect;  their  complaints  of  bad  administration,
though  bold  and  pointed,  not  outrageous ;  their  offers  of
subsidy  liberal.  The  necessity  of  restoring  the  coin  is
strongly  represented  as  the  grand  condition  upon  which
they  consented'  to  tax  the  people,  who  had  been  long
defhkuded  by  the  base  money  of  Philip  the  Fair  and  his
successors."

"■  Cotton  MSS.  Tltas,  L  xtl.  foL  58-ti.  the  prooeedinffi  of  October,  and  not  of

This  mannacTipt  Is  noticed,  u  an  Im-  Febmary;  bat  it  is  notan  original  inatna-

portant  ducument,  in  the  preflBoe  to  the  ment It  Ibnns  part  of  a  small  vvdoma

third  yolume  of  Ordonnanoea,  p.  48,  bj  written  on  vellnm,  and  cinntainlng  mrawl

M.  S^ooasse,  who  had  found  il  mentioned  other  treatises^ It  seems,  however,  as

in  the  BibUoth^oe  Historique  of  Le  fiur  as  I  can  Jndge,  to  be  another  copy  of

I^ong,  No.  11,242. No  French  antiqnaiy  the  aoooont  which  Dapoy  ponesaed,  and

appears,  at  least  before  that  time,  to  haye  which  Sforaase  so  often  quotes,  nnder  the

seen  it;  but  BoulatnviUierB  coqjectnred  name  of  Proote-verbaL

that  it  related  to  the  aanmbly  of  States  It  is  singular  that  Sismondl  says  (x.4Tf)b

in  February.  1356  (1367), and  U.S6oonm6  with  S^conase  before  his  eyes,  that  the

supposed  it  rather  to  be the  original  proch-'verbattK  of  the  States43«isxBl,  in

Jounial of  the preceding meeting in  13S6,  are  not  extant

October,  1366.  from  which  a  copy,  found  *  Et  eatoit  et  est  rentente  de  cealx

among  the  manuscripts  of  Dupny,  and  qui  a*  la  ditte  conirecatioo  estotait,  que

frequently  referred  to  by  S^Soonaae  him-  quelcooque  ottroy  on  ayde  qn'ils  feisnoU

self  in  his  preface,  had  been  taken. BC.  ibensMnt  bonne  monnc^et  establesdca

Btfoonne  was  perfectly  right  In  supposing  I'adris  des  Crois  estats ;  et  que  lea  diartres

tbo  manuscript  in  queation  to  relate  to  et  lettrea  fdies  pour  lea  refbnnatioaa  dc

Feudal  Ststml TROUBLES  AT  PARIS.  231

But  whatever  opportunity  miglit  now  be  afiforded  fot
establishing  a  just  and  free  constitution  in  TroabiMat
France  was  entirely  lost.  Charles,  inexperi-  Puis,
enced  and  surrounded  by  evil  counsellors,  ^•^•^"'*
thought  the  States-General  inclined  to  encroach  upon
his  rights,  of  which,  in  the  best  part  of  his  life,  he  was
always  abundantly  careful.  He  dismissed,  ^erefore,
the  assembly,  and  had  recourse  to  the  easy  but  rainous
expedient  of  debasing  the  coin.  This  led  to  seditions  at
Paris,  by  which  his  authority,  and  even  his  life,  were
endangered.  In  February,  1357,  three  months  after  the
last  meeting  had  been  dissolved,  he  was  obliged  to
convoke  the  States  again,  and  to  enact  an  ordinance
conformable  to  the  petitions  tendered  by  the  former  as-
sembly."* This  contained  many  excellent  provisions,
both  for  the  redress  of  abuses  and  the  vigorous  prosecu
tion  of  the  war  against  Edward ;  and  it  is  difficult  to
conceive  that  men  who  advised  measures  so  conducive
to  the  public  weal  could  have  been  the  blind  instru-
ments of  the  king  of  Navarre.  But  this,  as  I  have
already  observed,  is  a  problem  in  history  that  we  cannot
hope  to  resolve.  It  appears,  however,  that,  in  a  few
weeks  after  the  promulgation  of  this  ordinance,  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  reformers  fell  into  discredit,  and  tlieir
commission  of  thirtynsix,  to  whom  the  coUection  of  the
new  subsidy,  the  redress  of  grievances,  and,  in  fact,  the
whole  administration  of  government  had  been  intrusted,
became  unpopular.  The  subsidy  produced  much  less
than  they  had  led  the  people  to  expect :  briefly,  the  usual
consequence  of  democratical  emotions  in  a  monarchy
took  place. Disappointed  by  the  &dlure  of  hopes  un-

rojamne  par  le  toy  Philippe  le  Bel,  et  Dlea  et  selon  oonadenoe:  Et  le  pronfflt

toutes  oelles  qui  furent  fkites  par  le  roj  que  on  prent  et  venlt  on  prendre  rar  le,

notre  aeignear  qui  ert  a  prpeent,  fttvent  &it  de  la  monnoye  dnqael  an  Tenlt  tain

oonflrm^  entering,  tennea,  et  gard^  le  fait  de  la  gnf  rre,  et  oe  Mit  a  la  de-

de  point  en  point;  et  tontes  lee  aides  ■tnxctian.etaeetdau  tempapeai^daTOj

qnekxmqaes  qtil  faitet  soient  fkuaent  re-  et  dn  royanme  et  des  nil^ets;  Et  si  m

cues  et  dlstrllni^  par  ceulz  qui  soient  a  destniit  le  billon  tant  psr  fantorea  et

eeoommis  par  les  trots  estate,  etantoristo  blanchis  comine  antrement,  ne  le  fait  ne

par  M. le  Docket  snr  oertaines  aatres  con-  penst  dorer  longaement  qn'll  ne  Tienns

tUtlona  et  modifications  Jnstes  et  ralsMO-  a  destmctian  si  on  contlime  kngnemeiit ,

ables  et  prooffltables,  et  semble  que  oeste  Et  si  est  tout  certain  qne  les  gensd'annes

aide  enst  6ti6  moult  grant  et  monlt  prouf-  neTonldroient  estre  oontens  de  lenn  gaigos

Stable,  et  trop  plus  que  aides  de  fUt  de  par  foible  monnoye,  kc
nonnoye. Car  elle  se  feroit  de  ▼olontC °  Ovdonnanoes  des  Rols,  t  Hi  p.  121
da  people  et  consentementoommmk  sekm

232  ARBITRARY  TAXATION, Chap.  XL  Past  lu

reasonably  entertained  and  improyidently  enconn^ped,
and  disgusted  by  the  excesses  of  the  violent  demagogues,
the  nation,  especially  its  privileged  classes,  who  seem  to
have  concurred  in  the  original  proceedings  of  the  States-
Greneral,  attached  themselves  to  the  party  of  Charles,
and  enabled  him  to  qnell  opposition  by  foroe.i*  Marcel,
provost  of  the  traders,  a  municipal  magistrate  of  Paris,
detected  in  the  overt  execution  of  a  traitorous  conspiracy
with  the  king  of  Navarre,  was  put  to  death  by  a  private
hand.  Whatever  there  had  been  of  real  patriotism  in
the  States-General,  artfully  confounded,  according  to  the
practice  of  courts,  with  these  schemes  of  disaffected  men,
shared  in  the  common  obloquy;  whatever  substantial
reforms  had  been  projected  the  government  threw  aside
as  seditious  innovations.  Charles,  who  had  assumed  the
title  of  regent,  found  in  the  States-General,  assembled
at  Paris  in  1359,  a  very  different  disposition  &om  that
which  their  predecessors  had  displayed,  and  publicly
restored  all  counsellors  whom  in  the  former  troubles
he  had  been  compelled  to  discard.  Thus  the  monarchy
resettled  itself  on  its  ancient  basis,  or,  more  properly,
acquired  additional  stability  .**
Both  John,  after  the  peace  of  Bretigni,  and  Charles  Y,
imposed  taxes  without  consent  of  the  States-
hnpoBed  by  General.'  The  latter,  indeed,  hardly  ever  con-
ChMiaTv.  '^o^®^  *^*  assembly.  Upon  his  death  the  con-
tention between  the  crown  and  representative
^^^of  hody  was  renewed ;  and,  in  the  first  meeting
c^i«  VL  held  after  the  accession  of  Charles  VI.,  the
government  was  compelled  to  revoke  all  taxes
illegally  imposed  since  the  reign  of  Philip  lY.  This  is
the  most  remedial  ordinance,  perhaps,  in  the  history  of
French  legislation.  **  We  will,  ordain,  and  grant,"  says
the  king,  "  that  the  aids,  subsidies,  and  impositions,  of
whatever  kind,  and  however  imposed,  that  have  had

P  Dboordift  moU»  1111  tret  ■tetofl  §h  Onkonaaoes  dn  Roh. Tht  reader  miiKft

Inoepto  propoilto  ri— Twmnt Ez  tono  make  allowanoe  far  tha  umul  partialltlea

enlm  ngni  negotta  male  ire,  kc Con-  of  a  French  hiatorian,  where  an  oppo*

tlDQAtor  GuL  da  Nangia  \n  Spkilegio,  iitloa  to  the  reigning  prince  ta  hia  aob-

t  lU.  p.  116.  Ject A  contrury  biaa  ia  manlferted  by

^  A  rmj  taXL  aoooont  of  theae  tnns-  Boolainvillien  and  UAtj,  whom  boir

actiona  ia  giren  by  Stfoonaae,  in  hia  Hia-  erer  it  (a  well  worth  while  to  hear,

tory  of  Charlea  the  Bad.  p.  lOY.  and  in  r  Mably,  L  v.  c.  6,  note  ft.
Ua  preftoe  to  the  thitd  yolome  of  tha

Feudal  :$rsTEX. AND.  REMEDIAL  ORDINANCE.  23d

oonrse  in  the  realm  since  the  reign  of  otir  predecessor
Piiilip  the  Fair,  shall  be  repealed  and  abolished;  and
we  will  and  decree  that,  by  the  course  which  the  said
impositions  have  had,  we  or  our  successors  shall  not
have  acquired  any  right,  nor  shall  any  prejudice  be
wrought  to  our  people,  nor  to  their  privileges  and
liberties,  which  shall  be  re-established  in  as  full  a
manner  as  they  enjoyed  them  in  the  reign  of  Philip  the
Fair,  or  at  any  time  since ;  and  we  will  and  decree  that,
if  anything  has  been  done  contrary  to  them  since  that
time  to  the  present  hour,  neither  we  nor  otir  successors
shall  take  any  advantage  therefrom." '  If  circumstances
had  turned  out  fiavourably  for  the  cause  of  liberiy,  this
ordinance  might  have  been  the  basis  of  a  free  constitu-
tion, in  respect,  at  least,  of  immunity  £rom  arbitrary
taxation.  But  the  coercive  measures  of  the  court  and
tumultuous  spirit  of  the  Parisians  produced  an  open
quarrel,  in  which  the  popular  party  met  with  a  decisive
failure.

It  seems,  indeed,  impossible  that  a  number  of  deputies,
elected  merely  for  the  purpose  of  granting  money,  can
possess  that  weight,  or  be  invested  in  the  eyes  of  their
constituents  witib  that  awfnlness  of  station,  which  is
required  to  withstand  the  royal  authority.  The  States-
General  had  no  rieht  of  redressing  abuses,  except  by
petition ;  no  share  m  the  exercise  of  sovereignty,  which
is  inseparable  from  the  legislative  power.  Hence,  even
in  their  proper  department  of  imposing  taxes,  they  were
supposed  incapable  of  binding  their  constituents  without
their  special  assent.  Whether  it  were  the  timidity  of
the  deputies,  or  false  notions  of  freedom,  which  pro-
duced this  doctrine,  it  was  evidently  repugnant  to  the
stability  and  dignity  of  a  representative  assembly.  Nor
was  it  less  ruinous  in  practice  than  mistaken  in  theory.
For  as  the  necessary  subsidies,  after  being  provisionally
granted  by  the  States,  were  often  rejected  by  their  elect-
ors, the  long  found  a  reaflonable  pretence  for  dispensing
with  the  concurrence  of  his  subjects  when  he  levied
oontributions  upon  them.

•  Oidomuuices  des  Rols,  t  ▼!.  pi  664. of  worlB.  intended  to  giTe  more  foica  oi
Tbe  (ndliuaoe  Is  long,  oontaining  tn- at  leatt  solemnity.
IcsDt  repetitions,  and  a  great  redundanoe

234  PROVINCIAL  ESTATES. Chap.  U.  Paxt  O.

The  States-General  were  oonToked  bat  mely  vndeT
Cbarles  YI.  aad  YIl.,  both  of  whom  levied
Qcneni  monej  without  their  concurrence.  Yet  there
gj]*  yj.  are  remarkable  testimonies  nnder  the  latter  of
these  princes  that  the  sanction  of  national  re-
presentatives waB  stlQ  esteemed  strictly  requisite  to  any
ordinance  imposing  a  general  tax,  however  the  emer-
gency of  circumstances  might  excuse  a  more  arbitrary
procodure.  Thus  Charles  VII.,  in  1436,  declares  that
he  has  set  up  again  the  aids  which  had  been  previously
abolished  bt/  the  consent  of  the  three  estates*  And  in  the
important  edict  establishing  the  companies  of  ordon-
nance,  which  is  recited  to  be  done  by  the  advice  and
counsel  of  the  States-General  assembled  at  Orleans,  the
forty-first  section  appears  to  bear  a  necessary  oonstrao-
tion  that  no  tallage  could  lawfully  be  imposed  without
such  consent."  It  is  maintained,  indeed,  by  some  writers,
that  the  perpetual  taille  established  about  the  same  time
was  actually  granted  by  these  States  of  1439,  though  it
does  not  so  ap])ear  upon  the  fiaoe  of  any  ordinance.'
And  certainly  this  is  consonant  to  the  real  and  recog-
nised constitution  of  that  age.

But  the  crafty  advisers  of  courts  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
Prorioeui  tury,  eidightened  by  experience  of  past  dan-
"•••^  gers,  were  averse  to  encountering  these  great
political  masses,  from  which  there  were,  even  in  peaceful
times,  some  disquieting  interferences,  some  testimonies
of  public  spirit,  and  recollections  of  liberty  to  apprehend.
The  kings  of  France,  indeed,  had  a  resource,  which
generally  enabled  them  to  avoid  a  convocation  of  the
States-General,  without  violating  the  national  franchises.
From  provincial  assemblies,  composed  of  the  three  orders,
they  usually  obtained  more  money  than  they  could  have
extracted  from  the  common  representatives  of  the  nation,
and  heard  less  of  remonstruice  and  demand.^  Lan-
gaedoc  in  particular  had  her  own  assembly  of  states,
and  was  rarely  called  upon  to  send  deputies  to  the
general  body,  or  representatives  of  what  was  called  the

t  OnlomiMioes  des  Roia,  t  zilL  pi  311.  *  Br^qnlgnj.prflkoe  an  tnlittniB

*  IU<L,  p.  312. BoQlidnTilUen  men-  dn  OrdoonanoM. BoiilaiiiirlUlen*  i  lit

tloaa  other  Instaaoes  where  the  Statea  p.  108.

giHDtfd  mioiiey  daring  thla  xei^:  t  UL  f  Vlllaret,  t  zl.  p.  STa

p.  To

rsuDAL  SmEM.  TAXES  OF  LOUIS  XI.  235

Languedoil.  But  AuTeigne,  NoTmandy,  and  other  pro*
vinceB  belonging  to  the  latter  division,  had  frequent
convocations  of  their  respective  estates  dming  the  in-
tervals of  the  States-General — intervals  which  by  this
means  were  protracted  far  beyond  that  duration  to  which
the  exigencies  of  the  crown  would  otherwise  have  con-
fined them.'  This  was  one  of  the  Essential  diJSerences
between  the  constitutions  of  France  and  England,  and
arose  out  of  the  original  disease  of  the  former  monarchy
— the  distraction  and  want  of  unity  consequent  upon  the
decline  of  Charlemagne's  &mily,  which  separated  the
different  provinces,  in  respect  of  their  interests  and  do-
mestic government,  from  each  other.

But  the  formality  of  consent,  whether  by  general  or
provincial  states,  now  ceased  to  be  reckoned  indispens-
able. The  lawyers  had  rarely  seconded  any  efforts  to
restrain  arbitrary  power :  in  their  hatred  of  feudal  prin-
ciples, especially  those  of  territorial  jtirisdiction,  every
generous  sentiment  of  freedom  was  proscribed;  or,  if
they  admitted  that  absolute  prerogative  might  req^Qire
some  checks,  it  was  such  only  as  themselves,  not  the
national  representatives,  should  impose.  Charles  Yll.
levied  money  by  his  own  authority.  Louis  XI.  Taxes  of
carried  this  encroachment  to  the  highest  pitch  ^'^  ^
of  exaction.  It  was  the  boast  of  courtiers  that  he  first
released  the  kings  of  France  from  dependence  (hors  de
page) ;,  or,  in  other  words,  that  he  effectually  demolished
those  barriers  which,  however  imperfect  and  ill-placed,
had  imposed  some  impediment  to  the  establishment  of
despotism.'

The  exactions  of  Louis,  however,  though  borne  with
patience,  did  not  pass  for  legal  with  those  upon  whom
they  pressed.  Men  still  remembered  their  ancient  pri-
vileges, which  they  might  see  with  mortification  well

"  OittomuBces  des  BoIb,  t  lii.  preface,  endowed  with  nataTal  adraDtages.  Ritlip

*  The  preface  to  the  sixteenQi  volmne  de  Comines  waa  fordblf  strack  with  the

of  Oidonnaooee.  before  quoted,  displaya  differaii  situation  of  England  and  the

a  lamentable  picture  of  the  internal  sita-  Netherlands. And  Sir  John  Fortcacue

atlon  of  France  in  consequence  of  ex-  has  a  remarkable  passage  on  the  poverty

oessiTe  taxation  and  other  abuses. These  and  servitude  of  the  French  commoni^
evils,  in  a  less  aggravated  degree,  con-  -  contrasted  with  English  fireemeBir- Diffeiw

tiiraed  ever  since  to  retard  the  improve-  ence  of  Limited  and  Aheolutc  Monardiy

ineot  and  diminish  the  intrinsic  pros*  p^  IT.
perity  of  a  oowitry  so  extraoidlnari:/

236  STATES-GENERAL  OF  TOURS.  Chap.  IL  Past  II.

preflei'ved  in  England.  *'  There  is  no  monarch  or  lord
upon  earth  (says  Philip  de  Comines,  himself  bred  in
courts)  who  can  raise  a  fiBirthing  npon  his  subjects,
beyond  his  own  domains,  without  their  free  concession,
except  through  tyianny  and  violence.  It  maj  be  ob-
jected that  in  some  cases  there  may  not  be  time  to
assemble  them,  and  that  war  will  bear  no  delay ;  but  I
reply  (he  proceeds^  that  such  haste  ought  not  to  be
made,  and  there  will  be  time  enough ;  and  I  tell  yon
that  princes  are  more  powerful,  and  more  dreaded  by
their  enemies,  when  they  undertake  anything  with  the
consent  of  their  subjects."  ^

The  States-deneral  met  but  twice  during  the  reign  of
Louis  XI.,  and  on  neither  occasion  for  the  pnr-
G^'^of poee  of  giauting  money. But  an  assembly  in
Tounin the  first  year  of  Charles  VIII.,  the  States  of
1484.  Tours  in  1484,  is  too  important  to  be  over-

looked, as  it  marks  the  last  struggle  of  the  French  nation
by  its  legal  representatives  for  immunity  from  arbitrary
taxation.

A  warm  contention  arose  for  the  regency  npon  the
accession  of  Charles  YUI.,  between  his  aunt  Anne  de
Beaujeu,  whom  the  late  king  had  appointed  by  testament,
and  the  princes  of  the  blood,  at  the  head  of  whom  stood
the  duke  of  Orleans,  afterwards  Louis  XII.  The  latter
combined  to  demand  a  convocation  of  the  States-General,
which  accordingly  took  place.  The  king's  minority  and
the  factions  at  court  seemed  no  unfavourable  omens  for
liberty.  But  a  scheme  was  artfully  contrived  which
had  the  most  direct  tendency  to  break  the  force  of  a
popular  assembly.  The  deputies  were  classed  in  six
nations,  who  debated  in  separate  chambers,  and  consulted
each  other  only  upon  the  result  of  their  respective  de-
liberations. It  was  easy  for  the  court  to  foment  the
jealousies  natural  to  such  a  partition.  Two  nations,  the
Norman  and  Burgundian,  asserted  that  the  right  of  pro-
viding for  the  regency  devolved,  in  the  king's  minority,
upon  the  States-General ;  a  claim  of  great  boldness,  and
certainly  not  much  founded  upon  precedents.  In  virtue
of  this,  they  proposed  to  form  a  council,  not  only  gf  the
princes,  but  of  certain  deputies  to  be  elected  by  the  six
nationf  who  composed  the  States. But  the  otiier  four.

Feudal  Ststkm. STATtS^ENElUL  0»  TOURa  237

tliose  of  Paris,  Aquitaine,  Langaedoo,  and  Langnedoi]
(whicli  last  comprised  the  central  provinces),  rejected
this  plan,  from  whicli  the  two  former  ultimately  desisted,
and  the  choice  of  councillors  was  loft  to  the  princes.

A  firmer  and  more  nnanimons  spirit  was  displayed
upon  the  subject  of  public  reformation.  The  tyranny  of
Lotus  XI.  had  been  so  unboimded,  that  all  ranks  agreed
in  calling  for  redress,  and  the  new  govemors  were  de-
sirous, at  least  by  punishing  his  fitvourites,  to  show  their
inclination  towairds  a  change  of  system.  They  were
very  &r,  however,  horn  approving  the  propositions  of
the  States-General.  These  went  to  points  which  no
court  can  bear  to  feel  touched,  though  there  is  seldom
any  other  mode  of  redressing  public  abuses ;  the  profuse
expense  of  the  royal  household,  the  number  of  pensions
and  improvident  granis,  the  excessive  establishment  of
tibops.  The  States  explicitly  demanded  that  the  taille
and  all  other  arbitrary  imposts  should  be  abolished ;  and
that  £rom  thenceforward,  ^*  according  to  the  natural
liberty  of  France,"  no  tax  should  be  levied  in  the  king-
dom without  the  consent  of  the  States.  It  was  with
great  difficulty,  and  through  the  skilful  management  of
the  court,  that  they  consented  to  the  collection  of  the
taxes  payable  in  the  time  of  Charles  YII.,  with  the
addition  of  one  fourth  as  a  gift  to  the  king  upon  his
accession.  This  subsidy  they  declare  to  be  granted
''  by  way  of  gift  and  concession,  and  not  otherwise,  and
so  as  no  one  should  from  thenceforward  call  it  a  tax,  but  a
gift  and  concession."  And  this  was  only  to  be  in  force
for  two  years,  after  which  they  stipulated  that  anothei
meeting  should  be  convoked.  But  it  was  little  likely
that  the  government  would  encounter  such  a  risk ;  and
the  princes,  whose  factious  views  the  States  had  by  no
means  seconded,  felt  no  temptation  to  urge  again  their
convocation.  No  assembly  in  the  annals  of  France
seems,  notwithstanding  some  party  selfishness  arising
out  of  the  division  into  nations,  to  have  conducted  itsefi
with  so  much  public  spirit  and  moderation ;  nor  had  that'
oountry  perhaps  ever  so  fedr  a  prospect  of  establishing  a
legitimate  conlstitution.*

•  I  am  altogether  indebted  to  Ctaniieir  pw  1S4-348)  Is  extremely  oopiow,  and
Am*  the  prooeedfngB  of  ttie  States  of  Toon,  derived  ftxm  a  maonacrlpt  jooniaL  Co*
Hie  aooQimt  (Hist,  da  Fimnoeb  t.  xviiL mtnea  aUudas  to  tbeai  somettmoi^  bo'

238  .  SCHEME  OF  JURISDICTION. Chap.  II.  Part  II

5.  The  right  of  jurisdiction  has  imdeTgoiie  changes  in
g^^^^j^^^^^^ France  and  in  the  adjacent  countries  still  more
chimges  in remarkable  than  those  of  the  legislative  power ;
TOiitJ^S?*^ and  peussed  through  three  veiy  distinct  stages,
Fnooe. as  the  popular,  aristocratic,  or  regal  influence
Original predominated  in  the  political  system. The
ju^SucUoD J^"^^^^"^^'  Lombards,  and  Saxons  seem  alike  to
haye  been  jealous  of  judicial  authority,  and
averse  to  surrendering  what  concerned  every  man's  pri-
vate right  out  of  the  hands  of  his  neighbours  and  his
equals. Eveiy  ten  fieamlies  are  supposed  to  have  had  a
magistrate  of  their  own election ;  the  tithingman  of
England,  the  decanus  of  France  and  Lombardy.^ Next
in  order  was  the  Centenarius  or  Hundredary,  whose
name  expresses  the  extent  of  his  jurisdiction,  and  who,
like  the  Decanus,  was  chosen  by  those  subject  to  it*
But  the  authority  of  these  petty  magistrates  was  gradu-
ally confined  to  the  less  important  subjects  of  legal
inquiry. No  man, by  a  capitulary  of  Charlemagne,
could  be  impleaded  for  his  life,  or  Hberty,  or  lands,  or
servants,  in  the  hundred  court.^ In  such  weighty  mat-
ters, or  by  way  of  appeal  from  the  lower  jurisdictions,
the  count  of  the  district  was  judge. He  indeed  was
appointed  by  the  sovereign ;  but  his  power  was  checked
by  assessors,  called  Scabini,  who  held  their  office  by  the
election,  or  at  least  the  concurrence,  of  the  people.* An
ultimate  appesd  seems  to  have  lain  to  the  Count  Palatine,
an  officer  of  the  royal  household ;  and  sometimes  causes

with  little particularity. The  above-  neque  ad  mortem,  neqae  ad  libertatmi

mentioned  mannacript  was  pabllahed  in  soam  amitteodam,  ant  ad  res  reddeodaa

1835,  among  the  Docnmeos  InAiitt  but  vel  mandpia  Jndioetur. Sed  ista  aat  In

I'Histoire  de  France.  praoaentiA  oofmitia  vel  missoram  nostio-

d  The Decanua is  mentioned  by  a  ram  Judioentnr. Capit  ▲.!>.  812;  Baloz.

writer  of  the  ninth  age  as  the  lowest  p.  497.

■pedes  of  Judge,  immediately  mider  the  B  Baluzll  Oairftnlaiia.  p.  466;  Mura-

CentenariuB. The  latter  is  compared  to  tori.  Dissert  10 ;  Du  Cange,  v.  Scafalni.

the  Plebaoas,  or  priest  of  a  church  where  These  Soabini  may  be  traced  by  the  fight

bftptlmi  was  perfonned,  and  the  former  of  charters  down  to  the  eleventh  ceotoiy.

10  an  Inferior  presbyter. Dn  Conge,  v.  Recuell  des  Historiens,  t.  ▼!.  pr^fiue,

Decanus; and  Muratori, Antiq. ItaL  p.  186.  There  Is,  in  particular,  a  dedsive

Dissert.  10.  proof  of  their  existence  In  918.  Ina  reo<nd

*  It  is  evident  ftmn  the  Capitularies  which  I  have  already  had  oooadcB  to

of  Charlemagne  (Baluse,  t  i.  p.  426, 466)  quote. Vaissette,  EQst.  de  Languedoe^

that  llie  Oentenarii  were  elected  by  the  t  ii.  Appendix,  p.  66.  Da  Cange,  BaluM^

yaople;  that  is»  I  suppose,  the  fteeholderB.  and  other  antiquaries  have  ooofomidsd

f  Ut  BcUus  homo  in  pladto  oentenarii  the  dcabhii  with  the  RachimboiKlL  of

Feudal  System. TERRITORIAL  JURISDICTION.  23 V*

were  decided  by  the  sovereign  hiniBeK.**  Such  was  the
original  model  of  judicature ;  but  as  complaints  of  in-
justice and  neglect  were  frequently  made  against  thi^
counts,  Charlemagne,  desirous  on  every  account  to  con-
trol them,  appointed  special  judges,  called  Missi  Eegii,
who  held  assises  from  place  to  place,  inquired  into
abuses  and  maladministration  of  justice,  enforced  its
execution,  and  expelled  inferior  judges  from  their  offices
for  misconduct.'

This  judicial  system  was  gradually  superseded  by  one
founded  upon  totally  opposite  priifciples,  those  Territorial
of  feudal  privilege.  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  J»ri«dJcUaii.
the  progress  of  territorial  jurisdiction.  In  many  early
charters  of  the  French  kings,  beginning  with  one  of
Dagobert  I.  in  630,  we  find » inserted  in  their  grants  of
land  an  immunity  from  the  entrance  of  the  ordinary
judges,  either  to  hear  causes,  or  to  exact  certain  dues
accruing  to  the  king  and  to  themselves.^  These  charters
indeed  relate  to  church  lands,  which,  as  it  seems  im-
plied by  a  •  law  of  Charlemagne,  universally  possessed
an  exemption  fk)m  ordinary  jurisdiction. A  precedent,

whom  we  read  In  tfie  oldest  laws. Bat  name of Grands Jours  d'Auvergne ;

Savlgny  and  Gniiot  have  proved  the  which  Louis  XI.  revived  in  1479.  Gamier,

latter  were  landowners,  acting  in  the  Hist,  de  Franoe,  t.  zviiL  p.  458.
county  courts  as  Judges  under  the  preai- k  If  a  charter  of  Clovis  to  a  monastery

dency  of  the  count,  but  wholly  inde>  called  Reomaense,  dated  406,  is  genuine,

poident  of  him. The  Scabinl  in  Charle-  the  same  words  of  exemption  occurring

magne's  age  superseded  them.— Essais  in  It,  we  must  refer  territorial  jurisdio-

■nr  I'Histoire  de  France,  p.  259,  272.  tlon  to  the  very  infancy  of  the  French

l»  Du  Gange,  Dissertation  14,  but  Join-  monarchy. And  M.  Lehuerou (Inst

ville  i  and  Glossary,  v.  Comites  JPlalatinl ;  Caroling,  p.  225  et  pott)  has  strongly

M6n.  de I'Acad.  des  Inscript  t.  xxx.  contended  for  the  right  of  lords  to  ezer-

p.  590. Louis  the  Debonair  gave  one  day  doe  Jurisdiction  in  virtue  of  their  owner^

in  evny  week  for  hearing  causes;  but  ship  of  the  soil,  and  without  regard  to

his  sutjects  were  required  not  to  have  the  pertonal  law  ot  those  coming  within

recourse  to  him,  unless  where  the  Missi  its  scope  by  residence. This  territorial

or  the  counts  had  not  done  Justice.  Baluze,  right  he  deduces  from  the  earliest  times ;

t.  L  p.  668. Qiarles  the  Bald  expressly  it  was  an  enlargement  of  the  ancient

reserves  an  appeal  to  himself  firom  the  mtmdiumf  or  protection,  among  the  Ger-

inferior  tribunals.  Capit  869,  t  IL  p.  215.  mans;  which  must  have  been  solely  per^

In  his  reign  there  was  at  least  a  claim  to  ional  before  the  establishment  of  separate

sovereignty  preserved.  property  in  land,  but  became  local  after

i  For the  Jurisdiction  of  the Missl  the  settlement  in  Gaul,  to  which  that

Begii,  besides  the  Capitularies  them-  great  dvil  revolution  was  due. The

•elvM,seeMuratori'8  eighth  Disaertatl<»i.  authori^  of  M.  Lehuerou  is  entitled  Ui

They went their  circuits  four  times  much  nepect ;  yet  his  theory  seems  ti

fr-year. GapituL  a.t>.  812;  aa  823. A  involve  a  more  extensive  development
▼estlge  of  this  institution  long  continued-  of  the  feudal  system  in  the  Merovingiaii

fn.  the  provlnoe  of  Auveigne,  under  the  period  than  we  generally  admit

240  TERRITORIAL  JURISDICTION. Chap.  II.  Part  IL

however,  in  Marculf  us  leads  us  to  infer  a  similar  immu-
nity to  have  been  usual  in  gifts  to  private  persons.*
These  rights  of  justice  in  the  beneficiaiy  tenants  of  the
crown  are  attested  in  several  passages  of  the  capitnlaries.
And  a  charter  of  Louis  I.  to  a  private  individual  oon*
tains  a  full  and  exclusive  concession  of  jurisdiction  over
aU  persons  resident  within  the  territoiy,  though  subject
to  me  appellant  control  of  the  royal  tribunals.''  It  is
obvious,  indeed,  that  an  exemption  from  the  rmdar
judicial  authorities  implied  or  naturally  led  to  a  right  of
administering  justice  in  their  place.  But  this  could  at
first  hardly  extend  beyond  the  ^butaries  or  villeins  who
cultivated  their  master's  soil,  or,  at  most,  to  free  persons
without  property,  resident  in  the  territoiy.  To  deter-
mine their  quarrels,  or  chastise  their  oflfences,  was  no
veiy  illustrious  privilege.  An  alodisd  freeholder  could
own  no  jurisdiction  but  that  of  the  king.  It  was  the
general  prevalence  of  subinfeudation  which  gave  im*
portance  to  the  territorial  jurisdictions  of  the  nobility.
For  now  the  military  tenants,  instead  of  repairing  to  the
oounty-coxirt,  sought  justice  in  that  of  their  immediate
lord ;  or  rather  the  count  himself,  become  the  suzerain
instead  of  the  governor  of  his  district,  altered  the  form
of  his  tribunal  upon  the  feudal  model.*  A  system  of
procedtire  so  congenial  to  the  spirit  of  the  age  spread
xmiversally  over  France  and  Germany.  The  tribunals
of  the  king  were  forgotten  like  his  laws ;  the  one  retain-
ing as  little  authority  to  correct,  as  the  other  to  r^ulate,
the  decisions  of  a  territorial  judge.  The  rules  of  evidence
were  superseded  by  that  monstrous  birth  of  ferocity  and

™  Marcalfi  Foimnbi,  I.  i.  c.  IT.  wdl  as  royal  tribaaala, 81  aUqiris  cpit-

■  £t  nolliu  oomea,  nee  TicaxinB,  nao  oopua,  tbI  oomea  m  vaaaaa  noater  ana

jnnloraa  eonun,  nee  oUna  Jndex  pobUcna  hombii  oontn  rectam  et  JoaUttam  feoeriu

lUomm,  bomlDea  qui  auper  illoram  aprl-  at  al  inde  ad  noa  rectamaTerlt»  adat  quia,

atone  haUtanti  aat  in  iUonun  piruinio,  stent  ratto  et  lex  eat,  boc  emeodare  fa*

diatrlDgere  nee  Jndicare  proaomant;  aed  demna.

Johannea  et  flUl  aoi,  etpoirterttaa  Ulorom,  «  We  may  peiliapa  tnlier,  from  a  capitn-

lUieoaJndioentetdiatringant. Etqnlo-  ]aiy  of  Charlemagne  In  809,  tbat  the

quid  per  legem  Jodicaverint.  atabUia  per-  feudal  tenanta  were  already  employed  at

nianeat £t  al  extra  legem  feoerint,  per  ■■■rmoni  In  the  admlnkention  ofjnatioa,

legem  emaiJait Baloail  Capttolaria,  cooeanrently  with  the  ScaUnl  mentknad

t  iL  p.  14W.  ahore. Ut  nnllna  ad  pladtnm  radn

Thia  appellant  oootrol  waa  preaerved  oogator,  nial  qui  oanaam  habet  ad  qn»

by  the  capitolary  of  Charlea  the  Bald,  reodnm,  exceptia  acabinia  et  Tennallli

quoted  already,  over  the  territorial  aa  oomitom.  BalwdiCapitnlarlak  tLD.4tf

Feudal  Syviem. ITS  ADMINISTRATION.  241

Euperstitioii,  the  judicial  combat,  and  the  TnaTimB  of
law  reduced  to  a  few  caprioions  customs,  which  varied
in  almost  every  baionj.

These  rights  of  administering  justice  were  possessed
by  the  owners  of  fiefe  in  veiy  different  degrees ;  ^^  ^yy^ooB,
and,  in  France,  were  divided  into  the  high,  the
middle,  and  the  low  jurisdiction.'  The  first  species
alone  (la  haute  justice)  conveyed  the  power  of  life  and
death ;  it  was  inherent  in  the  baron  and  the  chatelain,
and  sometimes  enjoyed  by  the  simple  vavassor.  The
lower  jurisdictions  were  not  competent  to  judge,  in  capital
cases,  and  consequently  forced  to  send  such  criminals  to
the  court  of  the  superior.  But  in  some  places,  a  thiei
taken  in  the  fetot  might  be  punished  wiUi  death  by  a
lord  who  had  only  the  low  jurisdiction.  In  England
this  privilege  was  known  by  the  uncouth  terms  of  In-
fangthef  and  Outfangthef.  The  high  jurisdiction,  how-
ever, was  not  very  common  in  this  coxmtry,  except  in
the  chartered  towns."*

Several  customs  rendered  these  rights  of  jurisdiction
far  less  instrumental  to  tyranny  than  we  might  its  admi-
rnfer  from  their  extent.  While  the  counts  were  °i8t™t*«>n-
yet  officers  of  the  crown,  they  frequently  appointed  a
deputy,  or  viscount,  to  administer  justice.  Ecclesiastical
lords,  who  were  prohibited  by  the  canons  from  inflicting
capital  punishment,  and  supposed  to  be  unacquainted
with  the  law  followed  in  civil  courts,  or  unable  to  enforce
it,  had  an  officer  by  name  of  advocate,  or  vidame,  whose
tenure  was  often  feudal  and  hereditary.  The  viguiers
(vicarii),  bailiffe,  provosts,  and  seneschals  of  lay  lords
were  similar  ministers,  though  not  in  general  of  so  per-
manent a  right  in  their  offices,  or  of  such  eminent  station,
as  the  advocates  of  monasteries. It  seems  to  have  been

f  YeUy,  t  vl.  p.  131;  DeniMit,  Hon-  Etqnllibetdomiiiui  lod  babel  banc  Jnrls-

aid,  and  other  law-books.  dictlonum  necandl  fame,  fHgore  et  sIU  in

1  A  strasgely  cniel  privilege  was  pott-  bqo  loco, licet  nullam  aliam  JnriMlic*

sessed  in  Angoa  by  the  lords  who  bad  tlonem  crtmlnalem  babeat Du  Gange.

not  the  higher  Jurisdiction,  and  conse-  voa  Fame  necare.

qnently  could  not  publicly  execute  a  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Neapolitan

criminal ;  that  of  starving  him  to  death  barons  had  no  criminal  Jurisdictioo,  it

in  prison. This  was  established  by  law  least  of  the  higher  kind,  till  the  reign  nt

in  1 24T. Si  yassalltts  domini  non  Iia-  Alfonso,  in  1443,  who  sold  this  destruc-

bentis  merum  nee  mlxtom  imperium,  in  tive  privilege,  at  a  time  when  it  wne

loco  oocideret  vassallum,  domlnus  loci  almost  abolished in other kingdonifk

potest  eum  oocidere  iame,  frig^re  ft  sitl.  Glannone,  I.  xxii.  c  6,  and  1.  xxvi.  c  6.

VOL.  T.  K

242  TiUAL  BT  COMBAT. Chap.  II.  Past  lU

an  establiBhed  maxim,  at  least  in  later  times,  that  tlh)
lord  could  not  sit  personally  in  judgment,  but  must
intrust  that  function  to  his  bailiff  and  vasfiAls/  Accord-
ing to  the  feudal  rules,  the  lord's  vassals  or  peers  of  his
court  were  to  assist  at  all  its  proceedings.  **  There  are
some  places,"  says  Beaumanoir,  *'  where  the  bailiff  de-
cides in  judgment,  and  others  where  the  vassals  of  the
lord  decide.  But  even  where  the  bailiff  is  the  judge,
he  ought  to  advise  with  the  most  prudent,  and  detennine
by  their  advice ;  since  thus  he  shall  be  most  secure  if
an  appeal  is  made  £rom  his  judgment."'  And  indeed
the  presence  of  these  assessors  was  so  essential  to  all
territorial  jurisdiction,  that  no  lord,  to  whatever  rights
of  justice  his  fief  might  entitle  him,  was  qualified  to
exercise  them,  unless  he  had  at  least  two  vassals  to  sit
as  peers  in  his  court.*
These  courts  of  a  feudal  barony  or  manor  required
Trial  i^  neither  the  knowledge  of  positive  law  nor  the
<xKai»L  dictates  of  natural  sagacity.  In  all  doubtful
oases,  and  especially  where  a  crime  not  capable  of  noto-
rious proof  was  charged,  the  combat  was  awarded ;  and
God,  as  they  deemed,  was  the  judge." The  noblemai

'  BoatiIli«r,  in  his  Somme Rarale,  Fnnoe  till  ordeals  went  into  disasc^

written  near  the  end  of  the  foorteenth  which  Charlemagne  nXba  enoovnge^

centoiy,  asserts  this  positirely. II  oon-  and  which,  in  his  age,  the  clergy  for  tt»

▼lent  qnilx  facent  Jagier  par  anltre  que  moat  part  approred. The  foinner  spades

pur  eulz,  cest  a  savoir  par  lenis  hommes  of  dadsion  may,  howerer,  be  met  with

fendanlz  a  leur  semonce  et  oonjuri  [?]  oa  under  the  first  Merovingian  kings  (Qre^

de leur  baillif  ou  lieutenant, et  ont  Turon.  L  vii.  c.  19,  L  z.  c  10),  and

resaort  a  leur  souTeraln. FoL  3.  to  have  prevailed  in  Burgundy. It  Is

*  Cofttumes  de  Beauvolsls,  p.  ll.  estabUsbed  by  the  kws  of  the  Alemaiml

t  It  was  lawftil,  in  such  case,  to  borrow  or  Suablans. Balus.  t  i.  p.  80. It  waa

the  vassals  of  the  superior  lord. Thau-  always  popular  in  Lombardy.  Lintprand,

massi^re  snr  Beaumanoir,  p.  378. See  Ung  of  the  Lombards,  says  in  one  of

Du  Oange,  v.  Fferes,  an  ezoellent  article;  his  Uws,  Inoerti  somus  de  judkio  Dd.

snd  Placitum.  et  quosdam  andivimus  per  pugnam  dna

In  England  a  manor  is  extinguished,  justA  causa  snam  causam  perdere. 8ed

It  least  as  to  jurisdiction,  when  there  are  propter  ooosnetodinem gentis nostns

iiot  two  freeholders  snl^ect  to  escheat  Langobardorum  legem  implam  vvcars

left  as  suitors  to  the  court-baron. Their  non  poasumus. Munttori,  Script.  Remm

tenancy  must  therefore  have  been  created  Italicarum,  tiL  pw6S. Otbo  XL  eat»>

before the  statute  of  Quia  Emptores,  bUahed  it  in  all  disputes  coiioenilz^s  lesl

iSEdw.  L  (1290),  since  which  no  new  property;  and  ther«  is  a  fSunous  case

estate  in  fee  simple  can  be  held  of  the  where  the  right  of  reprB8entaaon.or  pi«>

lord,  nor,  consequently,  be liable to  ferenoe  of  the  son  of  a  deceased  ehler

escheat  to  him.  child  to  his  uncle  In  sncoewian  to  his

"  Trial  by  combat  does  not  seem  to  grandfaUiei's  estate,  waa  settled  by  thi>

have  established  itself  completely in  test.

Pbudal  Sysnsx.  TRIAL  BT  COMBAT.  243

fought  on  horseback,  with  all  his  arms  of  attack  and
defence ;  the  plebeian  on  foot,  with  his  club  and  target.
The  same  were  the  weapons  of  the  champions  to  whom
women  and  ecclesiasticB  were  permitted  to  intrust  their
rights.'  H  the  combat  was  intended  to  ascertain  a  civil
right,  the  vanquished  party  of  course  forfeited  his  claim
and  paid  a  fine.  If  he  fought  by  proxy,  the  champion
was  liable  to  have  his  hand  struck  off;  a  regulation
necessary,  perhaps,  to  obviate  the  corruption  of  these
hired  defenders.  In  criminal  cases  the  appellant  suf-
fered, in  the  event  of  defeat,  the  same  punishment  which
the  law  awarded  to  the  o£fence  of  which  he  accused  his
adversary.'  Even  where  the  cause  was  more  peaceably
tried,  and  brought  to  a  regular  adiudieation  by  the  court,
an  appeal  for  fialse  judgment  might  indeed  be  made  to
the  suzerain,  but  it  could  only  be  tried  by  battle.'  And
in  this,  the  appellant,  if  he  would  impeach  the  concurrent
judgment  of  the  court  below,  was  compelled  to  meet
successively  in  combat  every  one  of  its  members ;  imless
he  should  vanquish  them  dl  within  the  day,  his  life,  if
he  escaped  from  so  many  hazards,  was  forfeited  to  the
law.  If  fortune  or  miracle  should  make  him  conqueror
in  every  contest,  the  judges  were  equally  subject  to
death,  and  their  court  forfeited  their  jurisdiction  for
ever.  A  less  perilous  mode  of  appeal  was  to  call  the
first  judge  who  pronounced  a  hostile  sentence  into  the
field.  If  the  appellant  came  off  victorious  in  this  chal-
lenge, the  decision  was  reversed,  but  the  court  was  not
impeached.*  But  for  denial  of  justice,  that  is,  for  a
refusal  to  try  his  suit,  the  plaintiff  repaired  to  the  court
of  the  next  superior  lord,  and  supported  his  appeal  by
testimony.^ Yet,  even  here,  the  witnesses  might  be

*  For  the  ceremonies  of  trial  by  com-  *  Id.  e.  61.

I»t,  tee  Hooard,  Andeimet  Lolx  Fnu>  b  Id.  p.  316. The  pnctloewMtochal-

(oleee,  t  i.  p.  264;  Velly,  t  yL  p.  106;  lenge  the  tteond  witness,  stnoe  the  tes-

Recnell  des  HistorloDS,  t  zL  pr^fRoe,  tiniony  of  one  wss  issnfflclent Bat  this

p.  189; Da  Gauge,  t.  Daellom. The  most  be  done  before  he  oompletes  his

great  origiDal  authorities  are  the  Assises  oath,  says  Beaomanoir,  for  alter  he  has

de  Jdrosalem,  c  104,  azid  Beaomaooir,  been  sworn  he  must  be  heazd  and  be-

c.  31.  Ueved  :  p.  316. No  one  was  bound,  as

J  Beanmaaoir,  p.  315.  we  may  well  believe,  to  be  a  witness

■  Id.  c  61. In  Englsod  the  appeel  for  for  another, in  oases  where  such  an

false  Judgment  to  the  kin^s  court  was  appeal  ml|^t  be  made  tnm  \Im  UtU»

not  tried  by  battle Gknyil,  L  scii.  ct.  mony.

R  2

244  £STABLISHHEKTS. Chjip.  IL  Faitt  IL

defied,  and  the  pure  etieam  of  justice  tamed  at  once  into
the  torrent  of  barbarous  contest.®

Such  was  the  judicial  system  of  France  when  St.

EfttabUsh-  -^^^  enacted  that  groat  code  which  boars  the
.  ments  of name  of  his  Establishments. Thift  rules  of  civil

sl  Louis,  j^^  criminal  procedure,  as  well  as  the  prin-
ciples of  legal  decisions,  are  there  laid  down  with  much
detail.  But  that  incomparable  prince,  unable  to  over-
throw the  judicial  combat,  confined  himself  to  discourage
it  by  the  example  of  a  wiser  jurisprudence.  It  was
abolLshed  throughout  the  royal  domains.  The  bailifis
and  seneschals  who  rendered  justice  to  the  king's  imme-
diate subjects  were  bound  to  follow  his  own  laws.  He
not  only  received  appeals  from  their  sentences  in  his
own  court  of  peers,  but  listened  to  all  complaints  with
a  kind  of  patriarchal  simplicity.  "  Many  times,"  says
Joinville,  '*  I  have  seen  the  good  saint,  after  hearing
mass,  in  the  summer  season,  lay  himseK  at  the  foot  of
an  oak  in  the  wood  of  Yincennes,  and  make  us  all  sit
round  him  ;  when  those  who  would,  came  and  epake  to
him  without  let  of  any  officer,  and  he  would  ask  aloud
if  there  were  any  present  who  had  suits ;  and  when  they
appeared,  woxQd  bid  two  of  his  bailifb  determine  their
)ause  upon  the  spot."  ^

*  Mably  la  oehainly  mistaken  in  hia  aeqaently  refiitea  Mably'a  opinloD. Ib

opinion  that  appeals  for  denial  of  Juatioe  1106  the  inhaUtants  of  SL  S^v^re,  in

were  not  older  than  the  reign  of  PhlUp  Berrl,  complain  of  their  lord  Hnmbald.

Augastna. (Obaervattofna  aur  I'HlBt  de  and  request  the  king  ant  ad  ezeqnendam

F.  1.  iii.  c.  3.) Before  this  time  the  vaa*  jnatitiam  cogere,  ant  Jure  pro  injuria

sal's  remedy,  he  thinks,  was  to  make  war  castnun  lege  SalicA  amittere. I  <iQole

upon  hia  lord. Aud  this  may  probably  from  the  prefiuse  tothefoarteenthTolnme

Ivtve  been  fireqnently  prK:tlaed. Indeed  of  the  Recueil  dea  Hiatoriena,  p.  44. It

H  ia  permitted,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the  may  be  noticed,  by  the  way,  that  lex

code  of  St  Lonis. Bat  those  who  were  S&Uca  is  here  naed  for  the  feudal  ma-

not  strong  enough  to  adopt  thla  danger^  tcons ;  in  which  sense  I  believe  it  not

008  meana  of  redreaa  would  aurdy  avail  unfrequently  occurs.  Many  prooft  ml^t

themaelves  of  flie  asststanre  of  the  suze-  be  brought  of  the  interpoattion  of  both

rain,  which  in  general  would  be  readily  Louia  VI.  and  VIL  in  the  disputea  b^

ofTorded. We  find  aeveral  instances  of  tween  their  barons  and  arrito  vm—la

the  king's  interference  for  the  redress  of  Thus  the  war  between  the  Utter  and

injuries  in  Sugei's  Life  of  Louis  VL  Henry  IL  of  England  in  1106  was  ocoa-

That  active  and  apirited  prince,  with  the  stoned  by  his  entertaining  a  complaint

asaistanoeofhis  enlightened  biographer,  ftram  the  count  of  Auvergne,  without

recovered  a  great  port  of  the  royal  au-  waiting  for  the  decision  of  Heniy,  aa

thority,  which  had  been  reduced  to  the  duke  of  Gxiienne.— Velly,  t  it  p.  190

lowest  ebb  in  the  long  and  slothAil  reign  Lyttelton's  Henry  II. vol.  IL  pw  44m

of  his  fkther. Philip  I. One passage  Becueil  dea  Hlstoriens,  ubi  supra,  p.  49.

especially  contains  a  clear  evidence  of  d  Collecticm  dea  Mdmoires,  L  L  p  76

the  appeal  for  denial  of  Juatioe.  aiid  oou-  Montesquieu  auppoeea thai tlio  Kak-

Feudal  Ststex.  C/P  ST.  LOUIS.  245

The  influence  of  this  new  jnxispradence  established
by  St.  Louis,  combined  with  the  great  enhancements  of
the  royal  prerogatives  in  every  other  respect,  produced
a  rapid  change  in  the  legal  administration  of  France.
Though  trial  by  combat  occupies  a  considerable  space  in
the  work  of  Beaumanoir,  written  under  Philip  the  Bold,
it  was  already  much  limited.  Appeals  for  false  judgment
might  sometimes  be  tried,  as  he  expresses  it,  par  erre-
mens  de  plait;  that  is,  I  presume,  where  the  alleged
error  of  the  court  below  was  in  matter  of  law.  For
wager  of  battle  was  chiefly  intended  to  ascertain  contro-
verted fjGtcts.*  So  where  the  suzerain  saw  clearly  that  the
judgment  of  the  inferior  court  was  right,  he  ought  not  to
permit  the  combat.  Or  if  the  plaintiff,  even  in  the  first
instance,  could  produce  a  record  or  a  written  obliga-
tion, or  if  the  fact  before  the  court  was  notorious,  thero
was  no  room  for  battle.'  It  would  be  a  hard  thing,  says
Beaumanoir,  that  if  one  had  killed  my  near  relation  in
open  day  before  many  credible  persons,  I  should  bo
compelled  to  fight  in  order  to  prove  his  death.  This
reflection  is  the  dictate  of  common  sense,  and  shows  that
the  prejudice  in  favour  of  judicial  combat  was  dying
away.  In  the  Assises  de  Jerusalem,  a  monument  of
customs  two  hundred  years  earlier  than  the  age  of
Beaumanoir,  we  find  little  mention  of  any  other  mode  of
decision.  The  compiler  of  that  book  thinks  it  would  be
very  injurious  if  no  wager  of  battle  were  to  be  allowed
against  witnesses  in  causes  affecting  succession;  since
oSierwise  every  right  heir  might  be  disinherited,  as  it
would  be  easy  to  find  two  persons  who  would  peijure
themselves  for  money,  if  they  had  no  fear  of  being  chal-
lenged for  their  testimony.*  This  passage  indicates  the
real  cause  of  preserving  the  judicial  combat,  systematic
perjury  in  witnesses,  and  want  of  legal  discrimination  ir
judges.

It  was,  iQ  all  civil  suits,  at  the  discretion  of  the  liti-
gant parties  to  adopt  the  law  of  the  Establishments,
instead  of  resorting  to  combat.*"  As  gentler  manners  pro-
vailed,  especially  among  those  who  did  not  make  armi

blidunents  of  St  Louis  are  not  fhe  ori-  38. I  do  not  know  that  any  later  ln>

glnal  oonstitations  uf  that  prince,  but  a  qnirera  have  adopted  this  hypotheda.

work  founded  on  them— a  compilation  of *  Beanmanoir,  pw  22.

the  old  automs  blended  with  his  new f  Id.  p.  314.

pnyvUoiM. Esprit  dei  Loix,  zzviiL  37. S  a  167.  >>  Beamnanolr,  p.  308l

246  ROTAL  TRIBtTNALS. Chap.  II.  Past  O.

thoir  profession,  the  wisdom  and  eqnity  of  the  new  code
was  naturally  preferred.  The  superstition  which  had
originally  led  to  the  latter  lost  its  weight  through  ene-
rience  and  the  imiform  opposition  of  the  clergy,  llie
same  superiority  of  just  and  settled  rules  over  fortune
and  violence,  which  had  forwarded  the  encroachments
of  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  wos  now  manifested  in  those
of  the  king.  Philip  Augustus,  hy  a  fiunous  ordinance
in  1190,  firet  established  royal  courts  of  justice,  held  hy
the  officers  called  bailifEs  or  seneschals,  who  acted  as  the
king's  lieutenants  in  his  domains.'  Every  barony,  as  it
became,  re-united  to  the  crown,  was  subjected  to  the
jurisdiction  of  one  of  these  officers,  and  took  the  name
uf  a  baiUiage  or  seneschauss^e ;  the  former  name  pre-
vailing most  in  the  northern,  the  latter  in  the  southern,
provinces.  The  vassals  whose  lands  depended  upon,
or,  in  feudal  lanKoage,  moved,  from  the  superiority  of
this  fief,  were  obliged  to  submit  to  the  ressort  or  supreme
appellant  jurisdiction  of  the  royal  court  established  in
it.^  This  began  rapidly  to  encroach  upon  the  feudal
rights  of  justice.  In  a  variety  of  cases,  termed  royal,
the  territorial  court  was  pronounced  incompetent ;  Ihey
iijpx  were  reserved  for  the  judges  of  the  crown ;
2j™^  and,  in  eveiy  case,  unless  the  defendant  ex-
ofuSr****  cepted  to  the  jurisdiction,  the  royal  court
juriadicUon.  nugiit  take  cognizance  of  a  suit,  and  decide  it
in  exclusion  of  the  feudal  judicature.™  The  nature
of  cases  reserved  under  the  name  of  royal  was  kept  in
studied  ambiguity,  xmder  cover  of  which  me  judges  of  the
crown  perpetually  strove  to  multiply  them.  Louis  X.,
when  requested  by  the  barons  of  Champagne  to  explain
what  wajB  meant  by  roysd  causes,  gave  this  mysterious
definition :  Every^iing  which  by  right  or  custom  ought
exclusively  to  come  under  the  cognizance  of  a  sovereign
prince."  Yassals  were  permitted  to  complain  in  the  first
instance  to  the  king's  court,  of  injuries  committed  br
their  lords.  These  rapid  and  violent  encroachments  left
the  nobility  no  alternative  but  armed  combinations  to
support  their  remonstrances. Philip  the  Fair  bequeathed

i  Ordoniiaaoes  dee  Roil,  t  L  p.  18.  pw  22.

k  Da  Ongs,  t.  BilliTl. M^rn.  de  "  Mablj,  BoulAlnTllltaa,  lloDtiMlcft

I'Acad.  des  Iiiacriptloiu,  L  zxz.  p.  60S.  t  i.  p.  14K.

Ilably,  L  It.  c.  4. BonbdnrnUon.  t  IL  "  Ordoimaaoes  dca  Boil.  p.  90$.

FEUDAL  System.  ROTAL  COUNCIL.  24?

to  his  successor  tho  task  of  appeasing  the  stonn  which
his  own  administiation  had  excited.  Leagues  were
formed  in  most  of  the  northern  provinces  for  the  redress
of  grievances,  in  which  the  third  estate,  oppressed  by
taxation,  united  with  the  vassals,  whose  feudal  privileges
had  been  infringed.  Separate  charters  were  granted  to
each  of  these  confederacies  bj  Louis  Hutin,  which  con-
tain many  remedial  provisions  against  the  grosser  viola-
tions of  ancient  rights,  though  the  crown  persisted  in
restraining  territorial  jurisdictions.**  Appeals  became
more  common  for  false  judgment,  as  well  as  denisd  of
right ;  and  in  neither  was  the  combat  permitted.  It  was
still,  however,  preserved  in  accusations  of  heinous  crimes,
unsupported  by  any  testimony  but  that  of  the  prose-
cutor, and  was  never  abolished  by  any  positive  law,
either  in  France  or  England.  But  instances  of  its  occur*
rence  are  not  frequent  even  in  the  fourteenth  centuiy ;
and  one  of  these,  rather  remarkable  in  its  circumstances,
must  have  had  a  tendency  to  explode  the  remaining
superstition  which  had  preserved  tlus  mode  of  decision.^
The  supreme  council,  or  court  of  peers,  to  whose  de-
liberative functions  I  have  already  adverted,
was  also  the  great  judicial  tribunal  of  the  orandi,
French  crown  from  the  accession  of  Hugh  jjcon^
Capet.**  By  this  alone  the  barons  of  France,
or  tenants  in  chief  of  the  king,  could  be  judged.  To
this  court  appeals  for  denials  of  justice  were  referred.
It  was  originally  composed,  as  has  been  observed,  of  the
feudal  vassals,  co-equals  of  those  who  were  to  be  tried
by  it ;  and  also  of  the  household  officers,  whose  right  of

*  Hoe  perpetno  proUbenras  edScto,  ne  to  caies  where  four  oondittonswefe  united,

■abditf,  Ben  Joetidabilec  pnelatorum  ant  The  crime  must  he  eapitel;  Ite  oommis*

benmnm  nostromin  ant  aliormn  sahjeo-  ikm  certain;  The  aoraued  greatly  eos-

toram  nostroram,  tnhantor  In  cacuam  pected;  And  no  proof  to  he  obtained  bj

ooiam  noatris offidalibnai  nee  eonim  witneaMe. Under  these  llxnltatlona,  or  at

eaoaa,  nisi  in  earn  reaaorti,  in  noetria  leaat  acme  of  them,  for  it  appean  that

enriia  andlantnr,  vel  in  alio  casn  ad  noa  they  were  not  all  regarded,  inataaoea

pertlnenti. Ordonnanoea  dea  Roia,  t  i.  oocor  for  acme  centorlea

p.  363. Thia  ordinance  ia  of  Philip  the  See  the  aingolar  atory  of  Carongea  and

VniT,  in  1302;  bat  thoae  paaaed  under  Le  Oris,  to  which  I  allude  in  the  text.

Lonia  Hutin  areto  the  aameelfect  They  VUlaret,  t  xL  p.  413. Trial  by  combat

may  be  read  at  length  in  the  Ordonnanoea  waa  allowed  in  Scotland  exactly  under

dea  Bole;  or  abridged  by  BonlainTlllien,  the  same  conditioDa  aa  in  France. PtaSi^

i.  IL  p.  94.  erton'a  Hist  of  SootL  toL  L  p^  M.

f  Philip  ly  reftricted  trial  by  combat  n  [Non  XVILl

2^8  PAKLUMENT  OK  PARIS. Chap.  II.  Pakt  U.

concurrence,  however  anomalous,  was  extremely  ancient.
But  after  the  business  of  the  court  came  to  increase
through  the  multiplicity  of  appeals,  especially  from  the
bailiffs  established  by  Philip  Augustus  in  the  royal
domains,  the  barons  found  neither  leisure  nor  capacity
for  the  ordinary  administration  of  justice,  and  reserved
their  attendance  for  occasions  whei-e  some  of  their  own
orders  were  implicated  in  a  criminal  process.  St.  Louis,
anxious  for  regularity  and  enlightened  decisions,  made
a  considerable  sdteration  by  introducing  some  counciHoiB
Coun  of  inferior  rank,  chiefly  ecclesiastics,  aa  ad-
n&jftrei.  Yigerg  Qf  th^  court,  though, as  is  supposed,

without  any  decisive  suffrage.  The  court  now  became
known  by  the  name  of  parliament.  Begisters  of  its  pro-
ceedings were  kept,  of  which  the  earliest  extant  are  of
the  year  1254.  It  was  still,  perhaps,  in  some  d^ree
ambulatory ;  but  by  far  the  greater  part  of  its  sessions
in  the  thuteenth  century  were  at  Paris.  The  council-
lors nominated  by  the  king,  some  of  them  clerks,  others
of  noble  rank,  but  not  peers  of  the  ancient  baronage,
acquired  insensibly  a  right  of  suffrage.'

An  ordinance  of  Philip  the  Fair,  in  1302,  is  generally
ftiriiament  Bupposed  to  have  ffxed  the  seat  of  parliament
of  Paris.  at  Paris,  as  weU  as  altered  its  constituent  parts.*
Perhaps  a  series  of  progressive  changes  has  been  referred
to  a  single  epoch.  But  whether  by  virtue  of  this  ordi-
nance, or  of  more  gradual  events,  the  character  of  the
whole  feudal  court  was  nearly  obliterated  in  that  of  the
imrliament  of  Paris.  A  systematic  tribunal  took  the
place  of  a  loose  aristocratio  assembly.  It  was  to  hold
two  sittings  in  the  year,  each  of  two  months'  duration ;
it  was  composed  of  two  prelates,  two  counts,  thirteen
clerks,  and  as  many  laymen.  Great  changes  were  made
afterwards  in  this  constitution.  The  nobility,  who  ori-
ginally sat  there,  grew  weary  of  an  attendance  which
detained  them  from  war,  and  £rom  their  favourite  pur-

r  BouUdiiTilUen. 1 11.  i>.  39,44 ;  MiO)!/,  L IL  c  3)  pabUahed  fliii  oritaumoe.  wbldt.

1.  !▼.  c.  2;  EncyclopMlo.ut.  Pkrlement;  indeed,  m  the  editor  of  Ordooittiwet  dei

Uioi.  de  I'Aced.  dea  Inacrtpt.  L  xxx.  Rois,  1 1.  i>.ft4T,obKrTeB,linooKdfaMnoek

p.  003.  The  greftt  difBcolty  I  have  found  bat  a  regalation  for  the  exeoation  of  uue

In  this  inveetigation  will  plead  my  ezcvM,  preyiously  BUide;  nor  does  it  estabUib

if  enx>n  an  detected.  the  restdenoe  of  the  parliament  In  l*»iiM»

*  Pluqnier  (RecherchM  de  la  France,

Tbudal  Stbtem.  P££RS  OP  FRANCE.  249

siiits  at  home. The  bishops  "v^ere  dismissed  to  their
neceesary  residence  upon  their  sees.' As  they  obligation
withdrew,  a  class  of  regular  lawyers,  originally  <>'»  ▼"•^
employed,  as  it  appears,  in  the  preparatory  business,
without  any  decisiYe  Toice,  came  forward  to  the  highei
places,  and  established  a  complicated  and  tedious  system
of  procedure,  which  was  always  characteristio  of  French
jurisprudence. They  introduced  at  the  same  time  a  new
theory  of  absolute  power,  and  unlimited  obedience. All
feudal privileges  were  treated  as  encroach-  ^acuneof
ments  on  the  imprescriptible  rights  of mo-  the  feudal
narchy. With  the  natural  bias  of  lawyers  in  ^y**°^
favour  of  prerogative  conspired  that  of  the  clergy,  who
fled  to  the  king  for  refuge  against  the  tyranny  of  the
barons. In  the  civil  and  canon  laws  a  system  of  poli-
tical marimR  was  found  very  uncongenial  to  the  feudal
customs. The  French  lawyers  of  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries  frequentiv  give  their  king  the  title  of
emperor,  and  treat  disobedience  to  him  as  sacrilege.**

But  among  these  lawyers,  although  the  general  tenants
of  the  crown  by  barony  ceased  to  appear,  there  peen  of
still  continued  to  sit  a  more  eminent  body,  Fran»-
the  lay  and  spiritual  peers  of  France,  representatives,  as
it  were,  of  that  ancient  baronial  aristocracy. It  is  a
veiy  controverted  question  at  what  time  this  exclusive
dignity  of  peerage,  a  word  obviously  applicable  by  the
feudal  law  to  aU  persons  co-equal  in  degree  of  tenure,
was  reserved  to  twelve  vassals. At  the  coronation  of
Philip  Augustus,  in  1179,  we  first  perceive  the  six  great
feudataries,  dukes  of  Burgundy,  Normandy,  Quienne,
coimts  of  Toulouse,  Flanders,  Champagne,  distinguished
by  the  offices  they  performed  in  that  ceremony. It  was
natural,  indeed,  that,  by  their  princely  splendour  and
importsmce,  they  should  ecHpse  such  petty  lords  as
Bourbon  and  Coucy,  however  equal  in  qiiality  of  tenure.
During  the  reign  of  Philip  Augustus,  six  ecclesiastical
peers,  the  duke-bishops  of  Eheims,  Laon,  and  Langres,
the  couni-bishops  of  Beauvais, Chilons,  and  Noyon.

t  Vellj,  Hitt  de  Fnnoe,  t  vit.  p.  SOU,  fbii  lyranch  of  the  French  oonstltQtion

and  BncydopMIe,  art.  Farlement,  are  the  which  have  not  &llen  Into  my  hands.

beat  anthoritiea  I  have  found. There  "  Mably,  L  It.  c  2,  note  10
nay  very  poaaibly  be  anperlor  wofka  od

250  JURISDICl'ION  OF  PARLIAMBM.  Ohap.  II.  Past  II.

wero  added  as  a  soit  of  parallel  or  counterpoise/  Thoir
precedence  does  not,  however,  appeeur  to  have  carried
with  it  any  other  privilege,  at  least  in  judicature,  than
other  barons  enjoyed.  But  their  pre-eminence  being  fully
confirmed,  Philip  the  Fair  set  the  precedent  of  augment-
ing their  original  number,  by  conferring  the  dignity  of
Seerage  on  the  duke  of  Britany  and  the  count  of  Artois.'
>the^  creations  took  place  subsequently ;  but  these  were
confined,  during  the  period  comprised  in  this  work,  to
princes  of  the  roysd  blood.  The  peers  were  constant  mem-
bers of  the  parliament,  from  which  other  vassals  holding
in  chief  were  never,  perhaps,  excluded  by  law,  but  their
attendance  was  rare  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  soon
afterwards  cea«ed  altogether.'

A  judicial  body,  composed  of  the  greatest  nobles  in
p^^j^^^j  France,  as  well  as  of  learned  and  eminent
otejurtBdjo*  lawyers,  must  naturally  have  soon  become  poll*
JlJJj^^j^  tically  important.  Notwithstanding  their  dis-
position to  enhan6e  every  royal  prerogative,
as  opposed  to  feudal  privileges,  the  parliajHent  was  not
disinclined  to  see  its  own  protection  invoked  by  the
subject.  It  appears  by  an  ordinance  of  Charles  V.,  in
1371,  that  the  nobility  of  Languedoc  had  appealed  to
the  parliament  of  Paris  against  a  tax  imposed  by  the
king  s  authority ;  and  this,  at  a  time  when  the  French
constitution  did  not  recognise  the  levying  of  money
without  consent  of  the  States-General,  must  have  been
a  just  ground  of  appeal,  though  the  present  ordinance
annuls  and  overturns  it.*  During  the  tempests  of
Charles  VI. 's  unhappy  reign  the  parliament  acquired  a
more  decided  authority,  and  held,  in  some  degree,  the
balance  between  the  contending  factions  of  Orleans  and
Burgundy.  This  influence  was  partly  owing  to  one  re-
markable function  attributed  to  the  parliament,  which
raised  it  much  above  the  level  of  a  merely  political
tribunal,  and  has  at  various  times  wrought  stiiking
effects  in  the  French  monarchy.

The  few  ordinances  enacted  by  kings  of  Fiance  in  the
twelfih  and  thirteenth  centuries  were  generally  by  die

«  Velly,  t  IL  p^  »T ;  t  UL  p.  331;  tlT. >  EiM7elop«iie.  trt  Pwinnent.  p^  %,
Vk  U.  *  Uabiy.  L  ▼.  c.  6,  note  ft

^  Id  tvU.  p.  «r.

fEVJDAir  Ststcoc.  kEQISTRATION  OF  ROTAL  EDICTS.  251

advice  of  their  royal  council,  in  wbicli  probably  the^
were  solemnly  declared  as  well  as  agreed  upon.  ^^
But  after  the  gradual  revolution  of  govern-  ^^tered
ment,  which  took  away  from  the  feudal  arifito-  iSJJJJ***"
cracy  all  control  over  the  king's  edicts,  and  sub-
stituted a  new  magistracy  for  the  ancient  baronial  court,
these  legislative  ordinances  were  conunonly  drawn  up
by  the  interior  council,  or  what  we  may  call  the  ministry,
llioy  were  in  some  instances  promulgated  by  ihe  king
in  parliament.  Others  were  sent  thither  for  registration
or  entry  upon  their  records.  This  formality  was  by
degrees,  if  not  from  the  beginning,  deemed  essential  to
lender  them  authentic  and  notorious,  and  therefore  in*
directly  gave  them  ih.Q  sanction  and  validity  of  a  law.^
Such,  at  least,  appears  to  have  been  the  received  doc-
trine before  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century.  It  has
been  contended  by  Mably,  among  other  writers,  that  at
so  early  an  epoch  the  parliament  of  Paris  did  not  enjoy,
nor  even  claim  to  itself,  that  anomalous  right  of  judging
ihe  expediency  of  edicts  proceeding  from  the  king,
which  afterwards  so  remarkably  mo£fied  the  absolute-
ness of  his  power.  In  the  fifteenth  century,  however,
it  certainly  manifested  pretensions  of  this  nature  :  first,
by  registering  ordinances  in  such  a  manner  as  to  testify
its  own  unwillingness  and  disapprobation,  of  which  one
instance  occurs  as  early  as  1418,  and  another  in  1443 ;
and,  afterwards,  by  remonstrating  against  and  delaying
the  registration  of  laws  which  it  deemed  inimical  to  the
public  interest.  A  conspicuous  proof  of  this  spirit  was
given  in  their  opposition  to  Louis  XI.  when  repealing
the  Pragmatic  Sanction  of  his  £»ther — an  ordinance  es-
sential,  in  their  opinion,  to  the  liberties  of  the  Gallican
ohurchl  In  this  instance  they  ultimately  yielded ;  but
at  another  time  they  persisted  in  a  refasal  to  enregistei
letters  containing  an  alienation  of  the  royal  domain/

The  counsellors  of  parliament  were  originally  ap-
pointed by  the  king;  and  they  were  even  chan^d
according  to  circumstances.  Charles  V.  made  the  first
alteration,  by  permitting  them  to  fill  up  vacancies  by
election,  which  usage  continued  during  the  next  reign.

k  fiMydopMlft,  art  VwrUmuA,  Otnder,  Hist.  d«  Fhoioe,  t  ztU.  p

•  Hab^,  L  tL  c.  6,  notes  19  and  21; 219-3Mk

252  COUNSELLORS  OF  PARLIAMENT.  Chap.  IL  Part  iL

Charles  YII.  Tesmned  the  nominatioii  of  fresh  membeni
upon  Tacancies.  Louis  XL  even  displaced  ao-
S^^SHSat  tual  counsellors.  But  in  1468,  from  whatever
appointed  for  motive,  he  published  a  most  important  ordi-
ei^uoo.  nance,  declaring  the  presidents  and  counsellon
of  parliament  immoveable,  except  in  case  of
legal  forfeiture.*^  This  extraordinary  measure  of  con-
ferring independence  on  a  body  which  had  already
displayed  a  consciousness  of  its  eminent  privilege  by
opposing  the  registration  of  his  edicts,  is  perhaps  to  be
deemed  a  proof  of  that  shortsightedness  as  to  points  of
substantial  interest  so  usually  found  in  cra^  men.
But,  be  this  as  it  may,  there  was  formed  in  the  parlia-
ment of  Paris  an  independent  power  not  emanating
from  the  royal  will,  nor  liable,  except  through  force,
to  be  destroyed  by  it;  which,  in  later  times,  became
almost  the  sole  depositary,  if  not  of  what  we  should  call
the  love  of  freedom,  yet  of  public  spirit  and  attachment
to  justice.  France,  so  fertile  of  great  men  in  the  six-
teenth and  seventeenth  centuries,  might  better  spare,
perhaps,  from  her  annals  any  class  and  description  of
them  than  her  lawyers.  Doubtiess  the  parliament  of
Paris,  with  its  prejudices  and  narrow  views,  its  high
notions  of  loyal  obedience  so  strangely  mixed  up  with
remonstrances  and  resistance,  its  anomalous  privilege  of
objecting  to  edicts,  hardly  approved  by  the  nation  who
did  not  participate  in  it,  and  overturned  with  facility  by
the  king  whenever  he  thought  fit  to  exert  the  sinews  of
his  prerogative,  was  but  an  inadequate  substitute  for
that  co-ordinate  sovereignty,  that  equal  concurrence  of
national  representatives  in  legislation,  which  has  long
been  the  exclusive  pride  of  our  government,  and  to
which  the  States-General  of  France,  in  their  best  days,
had  never  aspired.  No  man  of  sane  understanding
would  desire  to  revive  institutions  both  uncongenial  to
modem  opinions  and  to  the  natural  order  of  society.
Yet  the  name  of  the  parliament  of  Paris  must  ever  be
respectable.  It  exhibited  upon  various  occasions  virtues
from  which  htiman  esteem  is  as  inseparable  as  the  shadow
from  the  substance — a  severe  adherence  to  principles,
an  imaccommodating  sincerity,  individual  diEonterested*
ness  and  consistency. Whether  indeed  these  qualitiCR

d  VllUret,  t.  xW.  pb  231 ;  Encydopddie,  ut.  Fferlcment

Feudal  Srn-EM. DECLINE  OF  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  25«>

have  been  so  generally  characterifltio  of  the  French
people  as  to  afford  no  peculiar  commendation  to  the
parliament  of  Paris,  it  is  rather  for  the  observer  of  the
present  day  than  the  historian  of  past  times  to  decide.*

The  principal  causes  that  operated  in  subverting  the
feudal system  may  be comprehended  under
three  distinct  heads — the  increasing  power  of  ui«^iine
the  crown,  the  elevation  of  the  lower  ranks,  '^'^J^*'"*^
and  the  decay  of  the  feudal  principle.  '^

It  has  been  my  object  in  the  last  pages  to  point  out
the  acquisitions of  power  by  the  crown  of
France  in  respect  of  legislative and  judicial  ^^^f^
authority. The  principal  augmentations  of  its  ^^  *^^^
domain  have  been  historically  mentioned  in  Augment*,
the  last  chapter,  but  the  subject  may  here  re-  ^^^^^^
quire  further  notice. The  French  kings  natu-
rally acted  upon  a  system,  in  order  to  recover  those
possessions  which  the  improvidence  or  necessities  of  the
Garlovingian  race  had  suffered  almost  to  &11  away  from
the  monarchy. This  course,  pursued  with  tolerable
steadiness  for  two  or  three  centuries, restored  their
effective  power. By  escheat  or  forfeiture,  by  bequest

*  The  proyinoe  of  Lugnedoc,  with  its  m  other  oountziet,  daring  the middle

dependencies  of  Quercy  snd  Bouergae*  sges. I  allade  to  L'EBprit.  Origlne,  et

having  belonged  almosi  in  ftillaorereignty  Progi^  des  Institations  judlcislres  des

to  the  counts  of  Toulouse,  was  not  per-  prindpauz Pays  de I'Europe,  1^ M.

haps  sul^k  to  the  feudal  resort  or  ap-  Meyer,  of  Amsterdam; espedally  the

pellsnt  Jurisdiction  of  any  tribunal  at  fixat  and  third  Tolumcs. It  would  have

Paris. PhiUp  the  Bold,  after  its  re-union  been  fortunate  bad  its  publication  pre-

to  the  crown,  established  the  parliament  ceded  that  of  the  first  edition  of  the  pre.

of  Tooloose,  a  tribunal  without  appeal,  sent  work; ss  I  might  have  rendered

la  1280. This  was,  however,  suspended  this  chapter  on  the  feudal  system  in  manr

ftom  1391  to  1443,  during  which  interval  ntpectB  more  penpicuous  and  correct,

the  parliament  of  Pisris  exerciaed an  As  it  is,  without  availing  myself  of  M.

appellant  Jurisdiction over Languedoc.  Meyer's  learning  and  acuteness  to  iUns*

Vaissette,  Hist  de  Lang^  t.  iv.  p.  SO,  71,  trate  the  obscurity  of  these  leaearches,  or

624. Sovereign  courts or  parliaments  discussing  the  few  questions  upon  wfaJch

were established by Charles VII. at  I  might  venture,  with  deference,  to  adhere

Grenoble  for  Dauphin^,  and  by  Louis  XI.  to  soother  oirinion,  neither  of  whidi  oould

at  Bordeaux  and  D^on  for  Onienne  and  conveniently  be  done  on  the  present  ooca<

Burgundy. The  parliament  of  Rouen  is  don,  I  shall  content  myself  with  this

not  so  ancient. These  Institutions  nther  gmeral  reference  to  a  performance  of

diminished  the  resort  of  the  parliament  singular  diligence  and  ability,  which  no

of  Paris,  which  had  extended  over  Bur-  student  of  these  antiquities  should  neg*

gundy,  and,  In  time  of  peace,  over  G  nienne.  lect  *  In  all  essential  points  I  am  happy

A  woik  has  appeared  within  a  few  to  perceive  that  M.  Meyer's  views  of  tlis

yeozB  which  throws  sn  abundant  light  middle  ages  are  not  fur  different  fhm  ^

CD  the  Judicial  system,  and  indeed  on  ovur-Note  to  tke/ourth  edU,
the  whole  dvil  polity  of  Frsoce»  as  well

254:  CAUSES  OF  DECLINK Chap.  II.  Past  II.

or  purchase,  by  marriage  or  succession,  a  number  of
£e&  were  merged  in  their  increasing  domain.'  It  was
part  of  their  policy  to  obtain  possession  of  arriere-fiefis,
and  thus  to  become  tenants  of  their  own  barons.  In
such  cases  the  king  was  obliged  by  the  feudal  duties  to
perform  homage,  by  proxy,  to  his  subjects,  and  engage
himself  to  the  service  of  Ins  fief.  But,  for  every  political
purpose,  it  is  evident  that  the  lord  could  have  no  com-
mand over  so  formidable  a  vassal. >

The  reunion  of  so  many  fiefis  was  attempted  to  be
secured  by  a  legal  principle,  that  the  domain  was  in-
alienable and  imprescriptible.  This  became  at  length
a  fundamental  maxim  in  the  law  of  France.  But  it  does
not  seem  to  be  much  older  than  the  reign  of  Philip  V.,
who,  in  1318,  revoked  the  alienations  of  his  predecessors,
nor  was  it  thoroughly  established,  even  in  theory,  lill
the  fifteenth  century.**  Alienations,  however^  were  cer-
tainly very  repugnant  to  the  policy  of  Philip  Augustus

t  The  word  domain  is  calculated,  by  who  speak  of  the  retmion  of  provinces  tc
a  seeming  ambiguity,  to  perplex  the  the  rojral  domain.  This  ambiguity,  how-
reader  of  French  history.  In  its  primary  ever,  is  rather  apparent  than  reaL  When
sense,  the  domain  or  demesne  (domi-  the  duchy  of  Normandy,  for  example,  is
nlcum)  of  any  proprietor  was  confined  to  said  to  have  been  united  by  Ftdlip
the  lands  in  his  immediate  occupation;  Augustus  to  his  domain,  we  are  not,  of
excluding  those  of  which  his  tenants,  course,  to  suppose  that  the  soil  of  Uiat
whether  in  flef  or  vlUenage,  whether  for  province  became  the  private  estate  ci
a  certain  estate  or  at  will,  had  an  actual  the  crown.  It  continued,  as  before,  in
possession,  or,  in  our  law-language,  per-  the  possossion  of  the  Norman  barons  snd
nancy  of  the  ixoflts.  Thus  the  oompllen  their  sub-vassals,  who  had  held  fhelr
of  Domeaday-Dodk  distinguish,  hi  every  estates  of  the  dukes.  But  it  is  meant
manor,  the  lands  held  hy  the  lord  in  only  that  the  king  of  France  stood  exactly
demene  fitnou  those  occupied  by  his  in  the  place  of  the  duke  of  Normanty,
villeins  or  other  tenants.  And  in  Eng-  with  the  same  rights  of  possession  ov«r
land  the  word,  if  not  technically,  yet  in  lands  absolutely  in  demesne,  of  rents  and
use,  is  still  confined  to  this  sense.  But  customary  payments  from  the  burgesses
in  a  secondary  acceptation,  more  usual  of  towns  and  tenants  in  rotnre  or  viUeii-
In  France,  the  domain  comprehended  all  age,  and  of  feudal  services  from  the
lands  for  which  rent  was  paid  (censives),  milittfy  vassals.  The  immediate  snpe-
and  which  contributed  to  the  tegular  riority,  and  the  Immediate  resort,  or  Juris-
annual  revenue  of  the  proprietor.  The  diction,  over  these  devolved  to  the  crown;
great  diatinctl)a  was  between  lands  In  and  thus  the  duchy  of  Normandy,  ceo-
demesne  and  those  in  fle£  A  grant  of  sldered  as  a  flef,  was  reunited,  or,  mors
territory,  whether  by  the  king  or  another  properly,  merged  in  the  royal  domain,
lord,  oomprlshig  as  well  domanial  estates  though  a  very  small  part  of  the  terrltury
and  tributary  towns  as  feudal  superiori-  might  become  truly  domaniaL
ties,  was  expressed  to  convey  "  in  domi-  i  Sec  a  memorial  on  the  aoquiidtlon  ol
nioo  quod  est  in  domlnioo,  et  in  feodo  arriere-flefs  by  the  kings  of  Fiance,  in
quod  est  in  feodo."  Since,  therefore,  flels,  Mdm.  de  I'Acad.  des  Inacript,  t  L  by  M.
even  those  of  the  vavaaaors  or  inferior  Dacier.

tenantry,  were  not  part  of  the  lord's  h  Pr^lkoe  au  16me  tome  des  Ordov

damain,  there  Is,  ss  I  said,  an  apparent  nances,  par  M.  de  Pastoret.
ambiguity  in  the  language  of  historians

Feudal  Ststem. OF  THE  FEUDAL  STSTEM.  255

and  St.  Lonis.  But  thoTe  was  one  species  of  infendation
BO  consonant  to  ancient  usage  and  prejudice  that  it
could  not  be  avoided  upon  any  suggestions  of  policy ;
this  was  the  investiture  of  younger  princes  of  the  blood
with  considerable  territorial  appanages.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  epoch  of  appanages  on  so  great  a  scale  was  the
reign  of  St.  Louis,  whose  efforts  were  constantly  directed
against  feudal  independence.  Yet  he  invested  his  brothers
with  the  counties  of  Poitou,  Anjou,  and  Artois,  and  his
sons  with  those  of  Clermont  and  Alen9on.  This  prac<
ticc,  in  later  times,  produced  very  mischievous  conse-
quences.

Under  a  second  class  of  events  that  contributed  to
destroy  the  spirit  of  the  feudal  system  we  may  reckon  the
abolition  of  villenage,  the  increase  of  commerce  and  con-
sequent opidence  of  merchants  and  artizans,  and  espe-
cisdly  the  institutions  of  free  cities  and  boroughs.  This
is  one  of  the  most  important  and  interesting  steps  in  the
progress  of  society  during  the  middle  ages,  and  deserve^
particular  consideration.

The  provincial  oities  under  the  Boman  empire  enjoyed,
as  is  well  known,  a  municipal  magistracy  and  p^  ^^
the  right  of  internal  regulation. Nor  was  it  chartered
repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  the  Frank  or  Gothic  ^^'^
conquerors  to  leave  them  in  possession  of  these  privi-
leges. It  was  long  believed,  however,  that  little,  if  any,
satisfactory  proof  of  their  preservation,  either  in  France
or  Italy,  could  be  found ;  or,  at  least,  if  they  had  ever
existed, that they were  wholly  swept  away  in  the
former  country  during  the  confusion  of  the  ninth  cen-
tury, which  ended  in  the  establishment  of  the  feudal
system.

Every  town,  except  within  the  royal  domains,  was
subject  to  some  lord.  In  episcopal  cities  the  bishop
possessed  a  considerable  authority;  and  in  many  there
was  a  class  of  resident  nobility.  But  this  subject  has
been  better  elucidated  of  late  years;  and  it  has  been
made  to  appear  that  instances  of  municipal  government
were  at  least  not  rare,  especially  in  the  south  of  France,
throughout  the  long  period  between  the  £eJ1  of  the
western  empire  and  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  cen-
tury,^ though  becoming  far  more  coiomon  in  its  latter
part.

[XoTK  xvm.i

250  CAUSES  OF  DECLINE Chap.  II.  Paet  II

The  earliest  charteis  of  com  muni  ty  granted  to  townB
Eariies*  ^  France  have  been  commonly  referred  to  the
chBTUiTh.  time  of  Louis  VI.  NoyoL,  St.  Quentin,  Laon,
and  Amiens  appear  to  have  been  the  first  that  received
emancipation  at  the  hands  of  this  prince.^  The  chief
towns  in  the  royal  domains  were  successively  admitted
to  the  same  privileges  during  the  reigns  of  Louis  YI.,
Louis  YIL,  and  Plulip  Augustus.  This  example  was
gradually  followed  by  the  peers  and  other  barons ;  so
that  by  ^e  enid  of  the  thirteenth  century  the  custom  had
prevaUed  over  all  France.  It  has  been  sometimes  ima-
Cwan  of  gined  that  the  crusades  had  a  material  influence
g«i**ng  in  promoting  the  erection  of  communities,
be  found  in  Those  expeditions  would  have  repaid  Europe
the  cnuades,  fQp  ^he  prodigality  of  crimes  and  miseries
which  attended  them  if  tins  notion  were  founded  in
reality.  But  I  confess  that  in  this,  as  in  most  other
respects,  their  beneficial  consequences  appear  to  me
very  much  exaggerated.  The  cities  of  Italy  obtained
their  internal  liberties  by  gradual  encroachments,  and
by  the  concessions  of  the  Franconion  emperors.  Those
upon  tho  Rhine  owed  many  of  their  pnvileges  to  the
same  monarchs,  whose  cause  they  had  espoused  in  the
rebellions  of  Germany.  In  France  the  charters  granted
by  Louis  the  Fat  could  hardly  be  connected  with  the
first  crusade,  in  which  the  crown  had  taken  no  part,  and
were  long  prior  to  the  second.  It  was  not  till  fifty  years
afterwards  that  the  barons  seem  to  have  trod  in  lus  steps
by  granting  charters  to  their  vassals,  and  these  do  not
appear  to  have  been  particularly  related  in  time  to  any
of  the  crusades.  Still  less  can  the  corporations  erected
by  Henry  II.  in  England  be  ascribed  to  these  holy  wars,
in  which  our  country  had  hitherto  taken  no  considerable
share.
The  establishment  of  chartered  towns  in  France  has
«>,!« also  been  ascribed  to  deliberate  policy.  **  Louis

nor  in  iy<  ••  x>-ii  •  ^

deuberate  the Gross, says  Eobertson, '*  in  order  to
^^' create  some  power  that  might  counterbalance
those  potent  vassals  who  controlled  or  gave  law  to  the
crown,  first  adopted  the  plan  of  conferring  new  privi-
leges on  the  towns  situated  within  his  own  domain."

k  Ordonnances  des  Roia»ubl  snpra,  p.  1.  These  diarters  are  m  old  M  1110,  but  Um
predae  date  U  unknown.

/KUDAL  Stbtem. Of  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  257

Yot  one  does  not  immediately  perceive  what  strenffth
the  king  could  acquire  by  granting  these  extensive
privileges  within  his  own  domains,  if  the  great  vassals
were  only  weakened,  as  he  asserts  afterwards,  by  follow-
ing his  example.  In  what  sense,  besides,  can  it  be
meant  that  Noyon  or  Amiens,  by  obtaining  certain
franchises,  beccune  a  power  that  conld  oounterbalanoe
the  dnke  of  Normandy  or  count  of  Champagne  ?  It  is
more  natural  to  impute  this  measure,  both  in  the  king
and  his  barons,  to  their  pecuniary  exigencies;  for  we
coidd  hardly  doubt  that  their  concessions  were  sold  at
the  highest  price,  even  if  the  existing  charters  did  not
exhibit  the  fullest  proof  of  it.™  It  is  obvious,  however,
that  the  coarser  methods  of  rapine  must  have  grown  ob-
solete, and  the  rights  of  the  inhabitants  of  towns  to  pro-
perty  established,  before  they  could  enter  ^to  any  com
pact  with  their  lord  for  the  purchase  of  liberty,  cirotan-
Guibert,  abbot  of  St.  Nogent,  neax  Laon,  re-  "tanoes
lates  the  establishment  of  a  community  in  that  Sbe'^ty
city  with  circumstances  that,  in  the  main,  o'Laon.
might  probably  occur  in  any  other  place.  Continual
acts  of  violence  and  robbety  having  been  committed*
which  there  was  no  police  adequate  to  prevent,  tha
clergy  and  principal  inhabitants  agreed  to  enfranchise
the  populace  for  a  sum  of  money,  and  to  bind  the  whole
society  by  regulations  for  general  security.  These  con-
ditions were  gladly  accepted ;  the  money  was  paid,  and
the  leading  men  swore  to  maintain  the  privileges  of  the
inferior  freemen.  The  bishop  of  Laon,  who  happened
to  be  absent,  at  first  opposed  this  new  institution,  but
was  ultimately  induced,  by  money,  to  take  a  similar
oath;  and  the  community  was  confirmed  by  the  king.
Unluckily  for  himself,  the  bishop  afterwards  annulled
the  charter ;  when  the  inhabitants,  in  despair  at  seeing
themselves  reduced  to  servitude,  rose  and  murdered
him.  This  was  in  1112;  and  Guibert's  narrative  cer-
tainly does  not  support  the  opinion  that  charters  of
community  proceeded  from  the  policy  of  government.
He  seems  to  have  looked  upon  them  with  the  jealousy
of  a  feudal  abbot,  and  blames  the  bishop  of  Amiens  for
consenting  to  such  an  establishment  in  his  city,  from
which,  according  to  Guibert,  many  evils  resulted. In

m  OrdatmaDoes  dea  Boia.  t  xL  prASue,  pi  18  at  80.
VOL.  I.  S

258  CAUSES  OF  DECLlltE chap.  11.  Past  IL

his  sermons,  we  are  told,  this  abbot  tised  to  descant  on
*'  those  execrable  oonummities,  where  serfs,  against  law
and  justice,  withdraw  themselves  from  the  power  ot
their  loids."-

In  some  cases  they  were  indebted  for  success  to  their
own  courage  and  love  of  liberty.  Oppressed  by  the
exactions  of  their  superiors,  they  had  recourse  to  arms,
and  united  themselves  in  a  common  league,  confirmed
by  oath,  for  the  sake  of  redress.  One  of  these  associa-
tions took  place  at  Mans  as  early  as  1067,  and,  though
it  did  not  produce  any  charter  of  privileges,  is  a  proof
of  the  spirit  to  which  ultimately  the  superior  classes
were  obBged  to  submit.**  Several  charters  bear  witness
that  this  spirit  of  resistance  was  justified  by  oppression.
Louis  YII.  frequently  declares  the  lyranny  exercised
over  the  towns  to  be  his  motive  for  enfranchising  them.
Thus  the  charter  of  Mantes,  in  1150,  is  said  to  be  given
'*  pro  nimi&  oppressione  pauperum :"  that  of  Compiegne,
in  1153,  "propter  enormitates  clericorum:"  that  of
Dourlens,  granted  by  the  count  of  Ponthieu  in  1202,
"  propter  injurias  et  molestias  a  potentibus  terr»  bur-
gensibus  frequenter  illatas.'*i*

The  privileges  which  these  towns  of  France  derived
The  tent  ^°*  their  charters  were  surprisingly  exten-
of  their  sive;  especially  if  we  do  not  suspect  some  of
priyiiegefc  them  to  be  merely  in  confirmation  of  previous
usages.  They  were  made  capable  of  possessing  common
property,  and  authorized  to  use  a  common  seal  as  the
symbol  of  their  incorporation.  The  more  oppreseive
and  ignominious  tokens  of  subjection,  such  as  the  fine
paid  to  the  lord  forpermission  to  marry  their  children,
were  abolished.  TTieir  payments  of  rent  or  tribute
were  limited  both  in  amount  and  as  to  the  occasions
when  they  might  be  demanded :  and  these  were  levied
by  assessors  of  their  own  electing.  Some  obtained  an
exemption  from  assisting  their  lord  in  war ;  others  were
only  bound  to  follow  him  when  he  personally  com-
manded ;  and  almost  all  limited  their  service  to  one,  or,
at  the  utmost,  very  few  days.  If  they  were  persuaded
to  extend  its  duration,  it  was,  like  that  of  feudal  tenants,

■  H!fltLltt4mlTedelaFkBnce,tz.448; |».M.
ta  Ouge.  voc.  QmmimUL  P  OrdoDnaflcet  det  RoIb,  t.  zL  pr^Aoe.

*  BecneU  det  Hlstoriena,  t  xiv.  prd&oe, p.  17.

TvuDAL  System. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  259

at  the  cost  of  their  superior.  Their  customs,  as  to  suc-
cession and  other  matters  of  private  right,  were  reduced
to  certainty,  and,  for  the  most  part,  laid  down  in  the
charter  of  incorporation.  And  tike  observation  of  these
was  secured  by  the  most  valuable  privilege  which  the
chartered  towns  obtained — that  of  exemption  from  the
jurisdiction,  as  well  of  the  royal  as  the  territorial
judges.  They  were  subject  only  to  that  of  magistrates,
citber  wholly  elected  by  themselves,  or,  in  some  places,
witb  a  greater  or  less  participation  of  choice  in  the  lord.
They  were  empowered  to  make  special  rules,  or,  as  we
call  them,  by-laws,  so  as  not  to  contravene  the  provi-
sions of  their  charter,  or  the  ordinances  of  the  Tring.i

It  was  undoubtedly  far  from  the  intention  of  those
barons  who  conferred  such  immunities  upon
their subjects  to  relinquish  their  own  supe-  S^SST*^"
riority and  rights  not expressly  conceded,  towns  with
But  a  remarkable  change  took  place  in  the  be-  ****  *^^*
ginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  which  affected,  in  a
high  degree,  the  feudal  constitution  of  France. Towns,
distrustful  of  their  lord's  fidelity,  sometimes  called  in
the  king  as  guarantee  of  his  engagements. The  first
stage  of  royal  interference  led  to  a  more  extensive  mea-
sure. Philip  Augustus  granted  letters  of  safeguard  to
communities  dependent  upon  the  barons,  assuring  to
them  his  own  protection  and  patronage.' And  this  was
followed  up  so  quickly  by  the  court,  tf  we  believe  some
writers,  that  in  the  next  reign  Louis  VIII.  pretended
to  the  immediate  sovereignty  over  all  chartered  towns,
in  exclusion  of  their  original  lords.* Nothing,  perhaps,
had  so  decisive  an  effect  in  subverting  the  feudal  aristo-
cracy. The  barons  perceived,  too  late,  that,  for  a  price
long  since  lavished  in  prodigal  magnificence  or  useless

4  OrdonnaQoes  des  Boii,  pr^lBces  aaz  ccmtrovertlble;  but  the  posBogo  is  only

tomes  xi.  et  xlL;  Du  Caoge,  toc  Com-  in  a  monkish  chronicler,  whose  antboritj,

munlo,  HoBttB;  Csipentler,  SuppL  ad  Da  were  it  eyen  more  explicit,  would  not

Ctaagt,  V.  Hostis;  Mably,  OhservationB  weigh  much  in  a  matter  of  law. Beau-

snr  I'Hist  de  France,  1.  til.  c  7.  mauoir,  however,  sixty  years  afterwards.

'  Mably,  Observations  but  THlst  de  lays  it  down  that  no  one  can  erect  a

FVanoe,  L  iU.  c  T.  oommttne  without  the  king's  consent  ■

*  Beputabat  civltates  omnea  suas  esse,  c.  50  p.  268. And  this  was  an  unquesi

in  quibus  oconmunitiB  essent. I  mention  tionable  maxim  in  the  fourteenth  oat

this  In  deference  to  Du  Gange,  Mably,  tniy.— Ordonoanoes,  t  xl.  p.  29.
wid  otfacTB,  who  assame  the  fiact  as  in

8  2

260  CAUSES  OF  DECLINE Chap.  II.  Pakt  IJL

warfare,  they  had  suffered  the  source  of  their  wealth  to
be  diverted,  and  the  serres  of  their  strength  to  be
severed.  The  government  prudently  respected  the
privileges  secured^by  charter.  Philip  the  Long  estab-
lished an  officer  in  all  large  towns  to  preserve  peace  by
an  armed  police ;  but,  though  subject  to  the  orders  of
the  crown,  he  was  elected  by  the  burgesses,  and  they
took  a  mutual  oath'  of  fidelity  to  each  other.  Thus
shielded  under  the  king's  mantle,  they  ventured  to  en-
croach upon  the  neighbouring  lords,  and  to  retaliate  for
the  long  oppression  of  the  commonalty.*  Every  citizen
was  bound  by  oath  to  stand  by  the  common  cause
against  all  aggressors,  and  this  obligation  was  abun-
dantly fulfilled.  In  order  to  swell  their  numbers,  it
became  the  practice  to  admit  all  who  came  to  reside
within  their  walls  to  the  rights  of  burghership,  even
though  they  were  villeins  appurtenant  to  the  soil  of  a
master  from  whom  they  had  escaped.*"  Others,  having
obtained  the  same  privileges,  continued  to  dwell  in  the
country ;  but,  upon  any  dispute  with  their  lords,  called
in  the  assistance  of  their  community.  Philip  the  Fair,
erecting  certain  communes  in  Languedoc,  gave  to  any

In  the  cbarter  of  PhtUp  Augustas  to  Tided  they  oooM.  Mablj  posltivalj
the  town  of  Roye  in  Picardy,  we  read,  malntalna  the  oommnnte  to  hare  hid  Um
If  any  Btzanger,  whether  noble  or  villein,  rii^t  of  levying  war,  L  ilL  c.  7.  And
commits  a  wrong  against  the  town,  the  Br^nigny  seems  to  coincide  with  Um.
mayor  diall  summon  him  to  answer  for  Ordonnances,  prtffiux,pL  46;  see  also  Hisi.
iU  and  if  he  does  not  obey  the  summons  de  Languedoc,  t.  iii.  p.  1 15.  The  tenitocy
the  mayor  and  inhabitants  may  go  and  of  a  commune  was  called  f^  (p^  185);
destroy  his  house,  in  which  we  (the  king)  an  expressive  word,
will  lend  them  our  aasistanoe,  if  the  house  "  One  of  the  most  remaxfcafale  privi-
be  too  strong  for  the  burgesses  to  pull  leges  of  chartered  towns  was  tha.t  of  coo-
down  :  except  the  case  of  one  of  our  ferrlng  freedom  on  runaway  serfs,  if  thsy
vassals,  whose  house  shall  not  be  de-  were  not  reclaimed  by  their  masters
stroyed ;  but  he  shall  not  be  allowed  to  within  a  certain  time.  This  was  a  pretty
enter  the  town  till  he  has  mads  amends  general  Uw.  Si  quia  nattvus  quieft  per
at  the  discretion  of  th^  msyor  and  jurats,  unum  annum  et  unum  diem  in  aliqoi
Ordonnances  des  Rois,  t  xi.  p.  228.  This  riUk  privilegiatft  manserit,  ita  qnod  in
summary  process  could  on^,  as  I  con-  eorum  commnnem  gyldsm  tanqnam  dvls
oeive,  be  employed  if  the  house  was  receptns  fbertt,  eo  ipso  it  viUensgio  libe>
situated  within  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  raUtur.  Ghmvll,  L  v.  a  6.  The  dtitt
commune.  See  charter  of  Crespy,  id.  p.  of  Laiq^uedoc  had  the  same  privilege:.
253.  In  other  cases  the  application  for  Vaissette,  t  iii.  p.  528.  530.  And  die
redress  was  to  be  made  in  the  first  in>  editor  of  the  Ordonnances  speaks  of  It  as
stance  to  the  lord  of  the  territory  wherein  general,  p.  44.  A  similar  custom  was
the  delinquent  resided.  But  upon  his  established  in  Germany;  butthetennol
failing  to  enforce  saUsfisctlon,  the  mayor  prescription  was,  in  some  places  at  iean.
and  Jurats  might  satisfy  themselves;  much  longer  than  a  year  and  a  dMj
lioeat  Justitiam  quserere,  prout  poterunt;  PfefTel,  1. 1.  p^  2$L.
that  la,  might  pull  down  his  liouse  pit>-

rsUDAL  ST8TEM. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  261

who  would  declare  on  oath  that  he  was  aggrieved  by
the  lord  or  his  officers  the  right  of  being  admitted  a
bni^ess  of  the  next  town,  upon  paying  one  mark  of  silver
to  &e  king,  and  purchasing  a  tenement  of  a  definite
value.  But  the  neglect  of  this  condition  and  several
other  abuses  are  enumerated  in  an  instrument  of
Charlee  V.,  containing  the  complaints  made  by  the  no-
bility and  rich  ecclesiastics  of  the  neighbourhood.'  In
his  reign  the  feudal  independence  had  so  completely
yielded,  that  the  court  began  to  give  in  to  a  new  policy,
which  was  ever  after  ptirsued ;  that  of  maintaining  the
dignity  and  privileges  of  the  noble  class  against  those
attacks  which  wealth  and  liberty  encouraged  the  ple-
beians to  make  upon  them.

The  maritime  towns  of  the  south  of  France  entered
into  separate  alliances  with  foreign  states ;  as
Narbonne  with  Genoa  in  1166,  and  Montpellier  ^l^?"'
in  the  next  century.  At  the  death  of  JEtay-  peculiarly
mond  Vn.,  Avignon,  Aries,  and  Marseilles  *°^*p«***"^
affected  to  set  up  republican  governments;  but  they
were  soon  brought  into  subjection.'  The  independent
charaoter  of  maritime  towns  was  not  peculiar  to  those
of  the  southern  provinces.  Edward  II.  and  Edward
in.  negotiated  and  entered  into  alliances  with  the
towns  of  Flanders,  to  which  neither  their  count  nor  the
king  of  France  were  parties.'  Even  so  late  as  the  reign
of  Louis  XI.  the  duke  of  Burgundy  did  not  hesitate  to
address  the  citizens  of  Bouen,  in  consequence  of  the
capture  of  some  ships,  as  if  they  had  formed  an  inde-
pendent sta'^e.'  This  evidently  arose  out  of  the  ancient-
customs  of  private  warfare,  which,  long  after  they  were
repressed  by  a  stricter  police  at  home,  continued  with
lawless  violence  on  the  ocean,  and  gave  a  character  of
piracy  to  the  commercial  enterprise  of  the  middle  ages.

Notwithstanding  the  forces  which  in  opposite  direc-
tions assailed  the  feudal  system  from  the  en-  j„y^^^.^
hancement  of  royal  prerogative,  and  the  eleva-  serviorof
tion  of  the  chartered  towns,  its resistance  {^^t^
would  have  been  much  longer,  but  for  an  oommnted
intrinsic  decay. No  political  institution  can  *^'"^«"«y

"  Hartenne,  TbeiaQr.  Anecd.  t.  I.  p. *  Rymei,  t  tv.  paaslm.
ISIS.  *  Gamif  r,  t  ztIL  p.  3M

y  V«Dy.  t  It.  p.  449,  t  r.  p.  gr

262  CAUSES  OF  DECLINE Chap.  II.  Pabt  71,

«

endure  which  does  not  rivet  itself  to  the  hearts  of  men
by  ancient  prejudice  or  acknowledged  interest.  The
feudal  compact  had  originally  much  of  this  character.
Its  principle  of  vitality  was  warm  and  active.  In  ful-
filling the  obligations  of  mutual  assistance  and  fidelity
by  military  service,  the  energies  of  Mendship  were
awakened,  and  the  ties  of  moral  sympathy  superadded
to  those  of  positive  compact.  While  private  wars  were
at  their  height,  the  connexion  of  lord  dnd  vassal  grew
close  and  cordial,  in  proportion  to  the  keenness  of  their
enmity  towards  others.  It  was  not  the  object  of  a
baron  to  disgust  and  impoverish  his  vavaasors  by  en>
haucing  the  profits  of  seigniory ;  for  there  was  no  rent
of  such  price  as  blood,  nor  any  labour  so  serviceable  as
that  of  the  sword.

But  the  nature  of  feudal  obligation  was  £ai  bettei
adapted  to  the  partial  quarrels  of  neighbouring  lords
than  to  the  wars  of  kingdoms.  Customs,  founded  upon  the
poverty  of  the  smaller  gentry,  had  limited  their  martial
duties  to  a  period  never  exceeding  forty  days,  and
diminished  according  to  the  subdivisions  of  the  fief.
They  could  undertake  an  expedition,  but  not  a  cam-
paign ;  they  coidd  bum  an  open  town,  but  had  seldom
leisure  to  besiege  a  fortress.  Hence,  when  the  kings  of
France  and  England  were  engaged  in  wars  which,  on
pur  side  at  least,  might  be  termed  national,  the  ineffici-
ency of  the  feudal  militia  became  evident.  It  was  not
easy  to  employ  the  military  tenants  of  England  upon
the  frontiers  of  Normandy  and  the  Isle  of  France,
within  the  limits  of  their  term  of  service.  When,  under
Henry  U.  and  Bichard  I.,  the  scene  of  war  was  fre-
quently transferred  to  the  Garonne  or  the  Charente,
this  was  still  more  impracticable.  The  first  remedy  to
which  sovereigns  had  recourse  Was  to  keep  their  vassals
in  service  after  the  expiration  of  their  forty  days,  at  a
stipulated  rate  of  pay.^  But  this  was  frequently  neither
convenient  to  the  tenant,  anxious  to  return  baick  to  his
household,  nor  to  the  king,  who  could  not  readily
defray  the  charges  of  an  army." Something  was  to  be

h  Da  Cange,  et  Carpentler,  toc  Hostia,  qaenoe  of  dlaagreement  with  the  war^

*  There  are  several  tnitancea  where  reign. Thus,  at  the  alege  of  AvlgDoo  la

irmles  broke  up,  at  the  expiration  of  1226,  Theobald  count  of  GhampagDe  r>>

Ihelr  limited  tenn  of  seryke.  In  conae-  tlrei  with  his  troops,  thAt  he  might  ait

Fbudal  Stbtbh. of  TU£  FEUDAL  STSTEM.  263

devised  more  adequate  to  the  exigency,  though  Ices
imitable  to  the  feudal  spirit  By  die  feudal  law  the
fief  was,  in  strictness,  forfeited  by  neglect  of  attendance
upon  the  lord's  expedition.  A  milder  usage  introduced
a  fine,  which,  however,  was  generally  rather  heavy,
and  assessed  at  discretion.  An  instance  of  this  kind
has  been  noticed  in  an  earlier  part  of  the  present  chap-
ter, from  the  muster-roll  of  Philip  the  Bold's  expedition
against  the  count  de  Foix.  The  first  Norman  kings  of
England  made  these  amercements  very  oppressive.  But
when  a  pecuniary  payment  became  ^e  regular  course
of  redeeming  personal  service,  which,  under  the  name
of  escuage,  may  be  referred  to  the  reign  of  Henr)^  II.,  it
was  essential  to  liberty  that  the  military  tenant  should
not  lie  at  the  mercy  of  the  crown."^  Accordingly,  one  of
the  most  important  provisions  contained  in  the  Magna
Gharta  of  John  secures  the  assessment  of  escuage  in
parliament.  This  is  not  renewed  in  the  charter  of
Henry  UI.,  but  the  practice  during  his  reign  was  con-
formable to  its  spirit.

The  feudal  military  tenures  had  superseded  that  earlier
system  of  public  defence  which  called  upon  every  man,
and  especially  every  landholder,  to  protect  his  country.^

promote  the  king*!  deslgna  npon  Lan-  mendon  of  the  Lamdn^cr^  or  insarrec*

gaedoa At  that  of  Angen,  In  1230,  tional  militia,  lo  lignally  called  forth  ic

nearly  the  same  thing  oocnrred.  — M.  the  present  age,  will  strike  the  reader.

Paris,  p.  308.  The  obligation  of  bearing  arms  in  defcn-

^  Madox,  fiOst  of  Ezcheqaer,  c.  16,  atve  warfiKre  was  pecnliarlj  incumbent

ooocelvea  that  escnage  may  have  btei  on  the  freeholder  or  alodlallst It  madn

levied  1^  Henry  L ;  tlie  earliest  mention  part  of  the  trinoda  neceasltas,  in  England,

of  it,  however,  in  a  record.  Is  nnder  erroneously  confounded  by  some  writers

Henry  11.  in  llSO.-Lyttelton's  Hist  of  with a  l^dal  military  tenure. But

Henry  n.  voL  Iv.  p.  13.  when  these  latter  tenures  became  nearly

"Every  dtlsen,  however extensive  nnivenal,  the  original  principles  of  public

may  be  his  privileges,  is  naturally  bound  defence  were  almost  oblitented,  and  1

to  repel  invasion. A  common  rising  of  know  not  how  far  alodial proprietorB,

the  people  in  arms,  tiion^  not  always  where  they  existed,  were  called  upon  for

the  most  convAiicnt  mode  of  resistance,  service. Kings  did  not,  however,  always

is  one  to  which  all  governments  have  a  dispense  with  such  aid  as  the  lower  people

right  to  resort Volumns,  says  Charles  could  supply. liOuls  the  Fat  called  out

the  Bald,  nt  ci^uflcunqne  nostrum  homo,  the  militia  of  towns  and  parishes  under

in  cqjuscunque  regno  sit,  com  seniore  their  priests,  who  marched  at  their  head.

Buo  in  hoBiem,  vel  aliia  sols  utUitattbos  though  they  did  not  actually  command

peij^t; nisi  talis  regni  invasio,  quam  them  in  battle. In  the  charters  of  incor-

tAadiwerx  dlcunt  (quod  absit),  aodderit  poratlon  which  towns  received  the  number

ut  omnis  populus  illius  regni  ad  earn  re-  of  tixwpe  required  was  usually  expressed,

pellendam  oomnnmlier  pei^at. Baluxli  These  foimed  the  infantry  of  the  French

GapitiUariatt.lLp.44.  This  very  ancient  annles,  perhaps  more  numerous  than

264  CAUSES  07  DECLINE Chap.  IL  Past  U

The  lelations  of  a  vassal  came  in  place  of  those  of  a
subject  fimd  a  oitizeii.  This  was  the  revolution  of  the
ninth  century.  In  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  another
innovation  rather  more  gradually  prevailed,  and  market
the  third  period  in  the  military  history  of
Bnpioyment  Eiirope.  Mercenary  troops  were  substitnted
ojDMroenary  ^^^  ^^  feudal  militia. Undoubtedly  there  could

never  have  been  a  time  when  valour  was  not  to
be  purchased  with  money ;  nor  could  any  employment
of  surplus  wealth  be  more  natural  either  to  the  ambitions
or  the  weak.  But  we  cannot  expect  to  find  numerous
testimonies  of  Hduots  of  this  description.'  In  public  national
history  I  am  aware  of  no  instance  of  what  may  be  called
a  regular  army  more  ancient  than  the  body-guards,  or
huscarles,  of  Canute  the  Great.  These  select  troops
amoimted  to  six  thousand  men,  on  whom  he  probably
relied  to  ensure  the  subjection  of  England.  A  code  of
martial  law  compiled  for  their  regulation  is  extant  in
substance;  and  tiiey  are  reported  to  have  displayed  a
military  spirit  of  mutual  tmion,  of  which  their  master
stood  in  awe.' Harold  II.  is  also  said  to  have  had

formidable  to  an  enemy. In  the  war  of  early  aa  lOSO. It  waa  probably  niraaital

the  same  prince  with  the  emperor  Henry  at  that  time ;  thoogh  In  Boger  Hoveden,

V.  all  the  population  of  the  fhmtier  pro-  Oiderkoa  Vltalia,  and  other  writen  of

vinoea  waa  called  oat;  for  the  militia  of  the  twelfth  oentaty.  It  oocora  not  Tciy

the  oountiea  of  Rheima  and  Ghilona  la  nnfhiqiiently. We  may  pertaiqia  ood-

sald  to  have  amounted  to  aixty  thouaand  Jecture  the  abbota,  as  both  the  ridnrt

men. Philip  IV.  eum^noned  one  foot*  and  the  moat  defenoeleaB,  to  have  been

•oldler  for  every  twenty  heartha  to  take  the  flxvt  who  arailed  fhemaelvea  of  mer-

the  field  after  the  battle  of  OourtraL  cenaxy  yalour.

(DanieU  Hist,  de  la  MlUoe  Fran^aiae;  f  For  theaeCKtr.ctf  which  1  remember

Velly,  t.  iiL  p.  M,  t.  vii.  p.  287.) Com-  no  mentioii  In  &>gUah  hiatoiy,  I  am  ia-

miaaiona  of  amy,  either  to  call  out  the  debted  to  the  Daniah  oollectioii  of

whole  popolatiim,  or.  aa  waa  more  com-  gebek.8criptoreeRenunDanicarumMedii

num.  to  select  the  moat  aeryioeable  by  MrL  Thou^tbeLegeaOaatrenalaCknnti

foroed  impreeament,  occur  in  EngUdi  Magnl,  publlabed  by  blm.  t.  lii.  pu  141.

recoTda  from  the  reign  of  Edward  L  an  not  In  their  original  statnUny  form,

(Stuart's  View  of  Society,  p.  400);  and  they  proceed  from  the  pen  ofSweno,  the

there  are  even  several  writs  directed  to  earliest  Danish  historian,  who  bved  under

the  Mahopa,  enjoining  them  to  caoae  all  Waldemar  I.,  leas  than  a  centuiy  and  a

fHrlfwiMtiral  poaona  to  be  arrayed  and  half  after  Canute. I  Kpplj  the  word

armed  on  acoonnt  of  an  expected  Invaaian.  huacarle,  fiuniliar  in  Anglo-Sazim  doco-

— Rymer,  t.  vL  p.  T26  (46  E.  IIL),  t  vii.  ments,  to  these  miUtary  retainers,  on  the

p.  162  (1  R.  n.),  and  i.  tVL  p.  270  (3  authority  of  Langebek.  in  another  place.

R  IV.)  1 IL  p.  454. The  object  of  Canute's  in-

t  The  prefiue  to  the  eleventh  volume  atitutiona  waa  to  produce  an  unifonnity

of  Recneil  dca  Historiens,  p.  23S.  notloea  of  discipline  and conduct  among  U$

the  wonl  aoUdarii.  for  hired  soldiers,  aa  aoldlers,  and  tfaua  to  sq;Mrate  them  man

7BUDAL  ST9TEH. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  266

DaxuBh  BoldieiB  in  pay.  But  the  most  eminent  example
of  a  mercenary  aimy  is  that  by  whose  assistance  William
achieTed  the  conquest  of  England.  Historians  concur  in
representing  this  force  to  have  consisted  of  sixty  thousand
men.  He  afterwards  hired  soldiers  from  various  regions
to  resist  an  invasion  from  Norway.  William  Rufds  pur-
sued the  same  course.  Hired  troops  did  not,  however,
in  general  form  a  considerable  portion  of  armies  till  the  -
wars  of  Henry  11.  and  Philip  Augustus.  Each  of  these
monarchs  took  into  pay  lai^e  bodies  of  mercenaries,
chiefly,  as  we  may  infer  from  their  appellation  of  Bra-
ban^ons,  enlisted  from  the  Netherlands.  These  were
always  disbanded  on  cessation  of  hostilities ;  and,  unfit
for  any  habits  but  of  idleness  and  licence,  oppressed  the
peasantry  and  ravaged  the  country  without  control.  But
their  soldier-like  principles  of  indiscriminate  obedience,
still  more  than  their  courage  and  field-discipline,  rendered
them  dear  to  kings,  who  dreaded  the  free  spirit  of  a  feudal
army.  It  was  by  such  a  foreign  force  that  John  saw
himself  on  the  point  of  abrogating  the  Great  Charter,  and
reduced  his  barons  to  the  necessity  of  tendering  his
kingdom  to  a  prince  of  France.**

It  now  became  manifest  that  the  probabilities  of  war
inclined  to  the  party  who  could  take  the  field  with
selected  and  experienced  soldiers.  The  command  of
money  was  the  command  of  armed  hirelings,  more  sure
and  steady  in  batde,  as  we  must  confesii  with  shame,  than
the  patriot  citizen.  Though  the  nobility  still  composed
in  a  great  d^ree  the  strength  of  an  army,  ^et  they  served
in  a  new  character ;  their  animating  spirit  was  that  of
chivalry  rather  than  of  feudal  tenure ;  their  connexion
with  a  superior  was  personal  rather  than  territorial
The  crusades  had  probably  a  material  tendency  to  effec-
tuate this  revolution  by  substituting,  what  was  inevitable
in  those  expeditions,  a  voluntary  stipendiary  service  for

dMldedly  ttam  4w  people. Tb^j  were  tradltftnuxy  dtaracter  of  fbeM  snardg:

dhtingniiihfrt  by  their  drees  end  golden  tliet,  Gemite  heyfng  killed  one  of  their

onMnnentB. Their  DBeimen  towezde  eedi  bodj  in  a  fit  of  enger.  It  wee  debated

other  were  regolated)  qnarrele  end  etm-  whether  the  Ung  shoald  incur  the  lege!

dre  worde  subjected  to  a  penalty. All  penalty  of  death; aud  thia  wae  oljj

dtspatee,  even  respecting  lends,  were  compramised  by  hU  kneeling  on  a  caehioa

settled  among  themeelves  aft  their  genei]^  before  the  esMmbly,  end  awaiting  thed

parliement. A  singnlar  story  is  toUl,  pennisslon  to  rise. T.  Ui.  p.  160.

wUoh,  if  fiOse.  may  stiU  iUnstrete  the  h  Matt.  Perls.

266  CAUSES  OF  DECLINE Chap.  11.  Past  a

cue  of  absolute  oldigation.'  It  is  the  opinion  of  Daniel
that  in  the  thirteenth  centuiy  all  feudal  tenants  zeceived
pay,  even  during  their  prescribed  term  of  service.^  This
does  not  appear  consonant  to  the  law  of  fiefis ;  yet  their
poverty  may  often  have  rendered  it  impossible  to  definay
the  cost  of  equipment  on  distant  expeditions.  A  large
proportion  of  the  expense  must  in  au  cases  have  fidlen
upon  the  lord ;  and  hence  that  perpetually  increasing
taxation,  the  effects  whereof  we  have  lately  been  inves-
tigating.

A  feudal  army,  however,  composed  of  all  tenants  in
chief  and  their  vassals,  still  presented  a  formidable  array.
It  is  very  long  before  the  paradox  is  generally  admitted
that  numbers  do  not  necessarily  contribute  to  the  intrinsic
efficiency  of  aimies.  Philip  lY.  assembled  a  great  force
by  publishing  the  arriere-ban,  or  feudal  summons,  for  his
unhappy  expedition  against  the  Flemings.  A  small  and
more  disciplined  body  of  troops  would  not,  probably,
have  met  with  the  discomfiture  of  Courtray.  Edward  I.
and  Edward  II.  frequently  called  upon  those  who  owed
military  service,  in  their  invaidons  of  Scotland.*"  But  in
the  French  wars  of  Edward  III.  the  whole,  I  think,  of
his  army  served  for  pay,  and  "was  raised  by  contract  with
men  of  rank  and  influence,  who  received  wages  for  eveiy
soldier  according  to  his  station  and  the  arms  he  bore.
The  rate  of  pay  was  so  remarkably  high,  that,  unless  we
imagine  a  vast  profit  to  have  been  intended  for  the  con-
tractors, the  private  lancers  and  even  archers  must  have
been  chiefly  taken  from  the  middling  classes,  the  smaller
gentry,  or  rich  yeomanry  of  England." This  part  of

(  JoinTlUe,  in  wveral  paaniges,  Intl-  oommenoeDient  of  the  moceedinK  age.
mates  tbAt  mast  of  the  knights  serving  in <"  Rymer,  t.  iiL  p^  1T3»  189,  IW,  et

8L  Louis's  crasade  received  pay,  either  allhi  8«pln&

firom  their  superior  lord.  If  he  were  on  ■  Many  pnoh  of  this  may  he  addooed
the  expedition,  or  fixnn  some  other,  into  from  Rymer's  Collection.  The  following
whose  service  they  entered  for  the  time,  is  tnaa  Brady's  History  of  England.
He  set  out  himself  with  ten  knights,  voL  ii.  Appendix  p.  Stf.  The  wi^es
whom  he  afterwards  fonnd  it  diiBcalt  allowed  hy  contract  In  1346,  were  liar  an
enon^  to  maintain. —Collection  des  M^  esrl,  6t.  8d.  per  day;  for  haroos  and  ban-
moires,  t  L  p.  49,  and  t.  ti.  p.  63.  nercts,  4«. ;  for  knights,  2t. ;  for  sqnites

k  Hist  Je  la  Mllice  Franfaise,  p.  84.  i«.;  for  ardievB  and  hobelers  (Uf^t  ca-

The  nse  of  mercenary  troops  prevailed  valry),  6d.;  Ux  arcben  on  foot,  al;  fat

mnch  in  Gennany  dnrtng  the  thfateenth  Welshmen,  acL These  soma,  multiplied

centory. Schmidt,  t  Iv.  pk  89. In  Italy  hy  ahont  34,  to  bring  them  on  a  levd

It  was  also  very  common;  tbon^di  ita  with  the  preeeut  value  of  money  [1818}

general  adoption  is  to  be  referred  to  the  will  show  the  psy  to  have  been  extranely

f  eudU  System. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  2G7

Edward's  military  system  was  probably  a  leading  cause  of
his  superiority  over  the  French,  among  whom  the  feudal
tenantry  were  called  into  the  field,  and  swelled  their
xmwieldy  armies  at  Grecy  and  Poitiers.  Both  parties,
however,  in  this  war  employed  mercenary  troops.  Philip
had  15,000  Italian  crossbow-men  at  Crecy.  It  had  for
some  time  before  become  the  trade  of  soldiers  of  fortune
to  enlist  xmder  leaders  of  the  same  description  as  them-
selves in  companies  of  adventure,  passing  from  one  service
to  another,  unconcerned  as  to  the  cause  in  which  they
were  retained.  These  military  adventurers  played  a
more  remarkable  part  in  Italy  than  in  France,  though
not  a  little  troublesome  to  the  latter  country.  The  feudal
tenures  had  at  least  furnished  a  loyal  native  militia,
whose  duties,  though  much  limited  in  the  .extent,  were
defined  by  usage  and  enforced  by  principle.  They  gave
place,  in  an  evil  hour  for  the  people  and  eventually  for
sovereigns,  to  contracts  with  mutinous  hirelings,  gene-
rally strangers,  whose  valour  in  the  day  of  battle  inade-
quately redeemed  their  bad  faith  and  vexatious  rapacity.
France,  in  her  calamitous  period  under  Charles  VI.  and
Charles  VII.,  experienced  the  fiill  efiidcts  of  military
licentiousness.  At  the  expulsion  of  the  English,  robbery
and  disorder  were  substituted  for  the  more  specious
plundering  of  war.  Perhaps  few  measures  have  gBtabikh-
ever  been  more  popular,  as  few  certainly  have  mentofa
been  more  politic,  than  the  establishment  of  t^^y
regular  companies  of  troops  by  an  ordinance  of  Charieivn.
Charles  VII.  in  1444."  These  may  justly  pass  for  the
earliest  institution  of  a  standing  army  in  Europe,  though
some  Italian  princes  had  retained  troops  constantly  in
their  pay,  but  prospectively  to  hostilities,  which  were
seldom  long  intermitted.  Fifteen. companies  were  com-
posed each  of  a  hundred  men  at  arms,  or  lancers ;  and.

Digh. The  cavalry,  of  wane,  flirnldied  foimd  In  hlstoriaiM  about  the  establith-

themflelyes  with  hones  and  eqnlpmenti,  ment  of  theie  oompagniea  d'ordoonanoe,

as  well  aa  anna,  which  were  reiy  expen-  though  the  moat  important  event  in  the

aire. See  too  Chap.  I.  p.  11,  of  this  reign  of  Charlea  VII. The  old  aoldien  of

Tolnme.  fortune  who  pillaged  the  country  either

**  The  estates  at  Orieans  in  H39  had  entered  into  these  companlea  or  were  dis*

■diiaed  this  measure,  as  Is  recited  in  the  banded,  and  after  their  dlspenion  were

preamble  of  the  ordinance. Ordonnanoes  readily  made  amenable  to  the  law. This

Jea  Bois,  t.  zlL  p.  312.  Sismondi  observes  writer  is  exceedingly  ftill  on  the  snltfecb
(TQl.  ziii.  pu  362)  that  very  little  is  to  be

268  CAUSES  OF  DECLINE Ciup.  II.  PikBT  II.

in  the  language  of  that  age,  the  whole  body  was  ono
thousand  five  hundred  lanoee.  Bnt  each  lancer  had  three
archers,  a  contiller,  or  soldier  anned  with  a  knife,  and  a
page  or  valet  attached  to  him,  all  serving  on  horseback —
80  that  the  fifteen  companies  amounted  to  nine  thousand
cavalry.'  From  these  small  b^innings,  as  Ihey  mast
appear  in  modem  times,  arose  the  r^ular  army  of  France,
which  every  succeeding  king  was  solicitous  to  augment.
The  ban  was  sometimes  convoked,  that  is,  the  possessors
of  fiefs  were  called  upon  for  military  service  in  subse-
quent ages;  but  with  more  of  ostentation  than  real
ef&ciency.

The  feudal  compact,  thus  deprived  of  its  original
D^cKfot  efficaoy,  soon  lost  the  respect  and  attachment
cradai  which  had  attended  it.  Homage  and  investiture
v*^"^^^^  became  unmeaning  ceremonies;  Ihe  incidents
of  relief  and  aid  were  felt  as  burthensome  exactions.
And  indeed  the  rapacity  with  which  these  were  levied,
especially  by  our  Norman  sovereigns  and  their  barons,
was  of  itself  sufficient  to  extinguish  aU  the  generous
feelings  of  vassalage.  Thus  galled,  as  it  were,  by  the
armour  which  he  was  compelled  to  wear,  but  not  to  use,
the  military  tenant  of  England  looked  no  longer  with
contempt  upon  the  owner  of  lands  in  socage,  who  held
his  estate  with  almost  the  immunities  of  an  alodial  pro-
prietor. But  the  profits  which  the  crown  reaped  from
wardships,  and  perhaps  the  prejudices  of  lawyers,  pre-
vented the  aboUtion  of  military  tenures  till  the  resto-
ration of  Charles  11.  In  France  the  fiefis  of  noblemen
were  very  unjustly  exempted  from  all  territorial  taxation,
though  the  tailles  of  later  times  had,  strictly  speaking,
only  superseded  the  aids  to  which  they  had  been  always
liable.  The  distinction,  it  is  well  known,  was  not  anni-
hilated till  that  event  which  axmihUated  all  distinctions,
the  French  revolution.

It  is  remarkable  that,  although  the  feudal  system  esta-
blished in  England  upon  the  Conquest  broke  in  very  much
upon  our  ancient  Saxon  liberties — though  it  was  attended
with  harsher  servitudes  than  in  any  other  country,  par-
ticularly those  two  intolerable  burthens,  wardship  and
marriage — yet  it  has  in  general  been  treated  with  more

^  Danid,  Hist  de  la  MOioe  FnIlfala^ pL  3M;  VUlaret»  Hist  de  Yrtaoe,  C  zt
p.

p£aoAL  System. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  26^

iJBkYovi  by  Englifik  than  Frencli  writers. The  hardinefis
with  which  the  ancient  barons  resisted  t^eir  sovereign,
and  the  noble  struggles  which  they  made  for  civil  liberty,
especially  in  that  Great  Charter,  the  basement  at  least,
if  not  the  foundation,  of  our  free  constitution,  have  met
with  a  kindred  sympathy  in  the  bosoms  of  Ei^lishmen ;
while,  from  6m  opposite  feeling,  the  French  have  been
shocked  at  that  aristocratic  independence  which  cramped
the  prerogatives  «md  obscured  the  lustre  of  their  crown.
Yet  it  is  precisely  to  this  feudal  policy  that  France  is
indebted  for  that  which  is  ever  dearest  to  her  children,
their  national  splendour  and  power. That  kingdom
would  have  been  irretrievably  dismembered  in  the  tenth
century,  if  the  laws  of  feudal  dependence  had  not  pre-
served its  integrity. Empires  of  unwieldy  bulk,  like
that  of  Charlemagne,  have  several  times  been  dissolved
by  the  upirpation  of  provincial  governors,  as  is  recorded
both  in  ancient  history  «md  in  that  of  the  Mahometan
dynasties  in  the  East. What  question  can  there  be  that
the  powerful  dukes  of  Guienne  or  counts  of  Toulouse
would  have  thrown  ofT  all  connexion  with  the  crown  of
France,  when  usurped  by  one  of  their  equals,  if  the  slight
dependence  of  vassalage  had  not  been  substituted  for
legitimate  subjection  to  a  sovereign  ?

It  is  the  previous  state  of  society,  under  the  grand-
children of  Charlemagne,  which  we  must  always  keep
in  mind,  if  we  woidd  appreciate  the  effects  of  the  feudi^
system  upon  the  welfare  of  mankind.  The  institutions
of  the  eleventh  century  must  be  compared  with  those  of
the  ninth,  not  with  the  advanced  civilization  of  modem
times.  If  the  view  that  I  have  taken  of  those  dark  ages
is  correct,  the  state  of  anarchy  which  we  usually  term
feudal  was  the  natural  result  of  a  vast  and  barbarous
empire  feebly  administered,  6md  the  cause  rather  than
effect  of  the  general  establishment  of  feudal  tenures.
These,  by  preserving  the  mutual  relations  of  the  whole,
kept  aUve  the  feeling  of  a  comnion  country  and  common
duties,  and  settled,  after  the  lapse  of  ages,  into  the  free
constitution  of  England,  the  firm  monarchy  of  France,
and  the  federal  union  of  Germany.

The  utility  of  any  form  of  polity  may  be  estimated  by
its  effect  upon  national  greatness  and  security,  upon  civil
liberty  «md  private  rights,  upon  the  tranquillity  and

I

270  ADVANTAGES  AKD  ETILS Chap.  IL  Pab  JL

order  of  society,  upon  Hie  increase  and  difibsion  ol
^-^^ wealth,  or  upon the genenJ  tone  of  monJ
«stiaMte sentiment  and  energy. The feudal  constitn
ad^tacea  ^^'^  '^"^'^  certainlj,  as  has  been  observed  already,
aad  eriis little  adapted  for  the  defence  of  a  mi^ty  king-
fl^'JSf dom, fxr  less  for  schemes  of  conquest. But
fcod^ as  it  prevailed  alike  in  several  adjacent  conn-
^''^ tries,  none  had  an3rthing  to  fear  from  the  mili-
taiy  superiority  of  its  neighbonrs. It  was  this  inefficiency
of  ^e  feudal  militia,  perhaps,  that  saved  Europe  during
the  middle  ages  from  the  danger  of  univeirsal  monarchy.
In  times  when  princes  had  little  notion  of  confederacies  for
mutual  protection,  it  is  hard  to  say  what  might  not  have
been  the  successes  of  an  Otho  the  Great,  a  Frederic
Barbarossa,  or  a  Philip  Augustus,  if  they  could  have
wielded  the  whole  force  of  their  subjects  whenever  their
ambition  required. K  an  empire  equally  extensive  with
*that  of  Charlemagne,  and  supported  by  military  des-
potism, had  been  formed  about  the  twelfrh  or  thirteenth
centuries,  the  seeds  of  commerce  and  liberty,  just  then
beginning  to  shoot,  would  have  perished,  and  Europe,
reduced  to  a  barbarous  servitude,  might  have  fiJlen  before
the  free  barbarians  of  Tartary.

If  we  look  at  the  feudal  polity  as  a  scheme  of  civil
freedom,  it  bears  a  noble  countenance.  To  the  feudal
law  it  is  owing  that  the  very  names  of  right  and  privilege
were  not  swept  away,  as  in  Asia,  by  the  desolating  hand
of  power.  The  tyranny  which,  on  every  favourable
moment,  was  brealong  through  all  barriers,  would  have
rioted  without  control,  if,  when  the  people  were  poor  and
disunited,  the  nobility  had  not  been  brave  and  free.  So
fietr  as  the  sphere  of  feudality  extended,  it  diffused  the
spirit  of  liberty  and  the  notions  of  private  right.  Every
one  I  think  will  acknowledge  this  who  considers  the
limitations  of  the  services  of  vassalage,  so  cautiously
marked  in  those  law-books  which  are  the  records  of
customs,  the  reciprocity  of  obligation  between  the  lord
and  his  tenant,  the  consent  required  in  every  measure  of
a  legislative  or  a  general  nature,  the  security,  above  all,
which  every  vassal  found  in  the  administration  of  justice
by  his  peers,  and  even  (we  may  in  this  sense  say)  in  the
tnal  by  combat. The  bulk  of  tiie  people,  it  is  time,  weiv

Feudal  System. OF  THE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM.  271

degraded  by  servitude ;  but  this  had  no  connexion  with
the  feudal  tenures.

The  peace  and  good  order  of  society  were  not  pro-
moted by  this  system.  Though  private  wars  did  not
originate  in  the  feudal  customs,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt
that  they  were  perpetuated  by  so  convenient  an  institu-
tion, which  indeed  owed  its  universal  establishment  to
no  other  cause.  And  as  predominant  habits  of  war&re
are  totally  irreconcileable  with  those  of  industry,  not
merely  by  the  immediate  works  of  destruction  which
render  its  efforts  unavailing,  but  through  that  contempt
of  peaceful  occupations  which  they  produce,  the  feudal
system  must  have  been  intrinsically  adverse  to  the  accu-
mulation of  wealth  and  the  improvement  of  those  arts
which  mitigate  the  evils  or  abridge  the  labours  of
mankind.

But  as  a  school  of  moral  discipline  the  feudal  institu-
tions were  perhaps  most  to  be  valued.  Society  had  sunk,
for  several  centuries  after  the  dissolution  of  the  Eoman
empire,  into  a  condition  of  utter  depravity,  where,  if  any
vices  could  be  selected  as  more  eminently  characteristic
than  others,  they  were  falsehood,  treaX^herv,  and  ingrati-
tude. In  slowly  purging  off  the  lees  of  this  extreme  cor-
ruption, the  feudal  spirit  exerted  its  ameliorating  influence.
Violation  of  faith  stood  first  in  the  catalogue  of  crimes,
most  repugnant  to  the  very  essence  of  a  feudal  tenure,  most
severely  and  promptly  avenged,  most  branded  by  general
infEuny.  The  feudal  law-books  breathe  throughout  a  spirit
of  honourable  obligation.  The  feudal  course  of  jurisdic-
tion promoted,  what  trial  by  peers  is  peculiarly  calculated
to  promote,  a  keener  feeling  and  readier  perception  of
moral  as  well  as  of  legal  distinctions.  And  as  the  judg-
ment and  sympathy  of  mankind  are  seldom  mistaken,  in
these  great  points  of  veracity  and  justice,  except  through
the  temporary  success  of  crimes,  or  the  want  of  a  definite
standard  of  right,  they  gradually  recovered  themselves
when  law  precluded  the  one  and  supplied  the  other.  In
-  the  reciprocal  services  of  lord  and  vassal  there  was  ample
scope  for  every  magnanimous  and  disinterested  energy.
The  heart  of  man,  when  placed  in  circumstances  which
have  a  tendency  to  excite  them,  will  seldom  be  deficient  in
fciich  sentiments. No  o<)<vu6ions  could  be  more  favourable

272  RESULTS  OF  FEUDAL  STSTEU. Chap.  U.  Past  XL

than  the  protection  of  a  faithful  supporter,  or  the  defence
of  a  beneficent  suzerain,  against  such  poweiful  aggres-
sion as  left  little  prospect  except  of  sharing  in  his  ruin.
From  these  feefings  engendered  by  the  feudal  relation
has  sprung  up  the  peculiar  sentunent  of  personal  rever-
ence  and  attachment  towards  a  sovereign  which  we
denominate  loyalty;  alike  distinguishable  firom  the  stupid
devotion  of  Eastern  slaves,  and  from  the  abstract  respect
with  which  free  citizens  regard  their  chief  magistrate.
Men  who  had  been  used  to  swear  fealty,  to  profess
subjection,  to  follow,  at  home  and  in  the  field,  a  feudal
superior  and  his  fEunily,  easily  transferred  the  same
allegiance  to  the  monarch.  It  was  a  very  powerful
feeling  which  coidd  make  the  bravest  men  put  up  with
slights  and  ill  treatment  at  the  hands  of  their  sovereign;
or  call  forth  all  the  energies  of  disinterested  exertion
for  one  whom  they  never  saw,  and  in  whose  character
there  was  nothing  to  esteem.  In  ages  when  the  rights
of  the  community  were  imfelt  this  sentiment  was  one
great  preservative  of  society ;  and,  though  collateral
or  even  subservient  to  more  enlai^ed  principles,  it  is
still  indispensable  to  the  tranquillity  and  permanence
of  every  monarchy.  In  a  moral  view  loyalty  has
scarcely  perhaps  less  tendency  to  refine  and  elevate  the
heart  than  patriotism  itself;  6md  holds  a  middle  place  in
the  scale  of  human  motives,  as  they  ascend  from  the
grosser  inducements  of  self-interest  to  the  furtheranoe
of  general  happiness  and  oonformily  to  the  purposot^  of
Infinite  Wisdom.

itoKS  TO  Chaf.  IL  stats  of  ANCIKNT  OEBlilNT.  278

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  H.

Note  L Page  146.

It  IB  almost  of  oourse  with  the  investigators  of  Ten-
tonio  antiquities  to  rely  with  absolute  oonfidence  on  the
authority  of  Tacitus,  in  his  treatise  *  Do  Moribus  Oer
manorum/  And  it  is  indeed  a  noble  piece  of  eloquence
— a  picture  of  manners  so  boldly  drawn,  and,  what  is
more  to  the  purpose,  so  probable  in  all  its  leading  cha-
raoteristios,  that  we  never  hesitate,  in  reading,  to
believe.  It  is  only  when  we  have  closed  the  book  that
a  question  may  occur  to  our  minds,  whether  the  Roman
writer,  who  had  never  crossed  the  Ehine,  was  altogether
a  sufficient  witness  for  the  internal  history,  the  social
institutions,  of  a  people  so  remote  and  so  dissimilar.
But  though  the  soxirces  of  his  information  do  not  appear,
it  is  manifest  that  they  were  copious.  His  geographical
details  are  minute,  distinct,  and  generally  accurate.
Perhaps  in  no  instance  have  his  representations  of
ancient  Grermany  been  &lsified  by  direct  testimony,  if
in  a  few  circumstances  there  may  be  reason  to  suspect
their  exact  faithfiilness.

In  the  very  slight  mention  of  German  institutions
which  I  have  made  in  the  text  there  can  be  nothing  to
excite  doubt.  They  are  what  Tacitus  might  easily  learn,
and  what,  in  fact,  we  find  confirmed  by  other  writers.
But  when  he  comes  to  a  more  exact  description  of  the
social  constitution,  and  of  the  different  orders  of  men,  it
may  not  be  unreasonable  to  receive  his  testimony  with
a  less  unhesitating  assent  than  has  commonly  been  ac-
corded to  it.  A  sentence,  a  word  of  Tacitus  nas  passed
for  conclusive;  and  no  theory  which  they  contradict
would  be  admitted.  A  modem  writer,  however,  has
justiiv  pointed  out  that  his  informers  mi^ht  easily  bo
deceived  about  the  social  institutions  of  uie  tribes  be-

VOL.  I.  t

274  STATE  OF  ANCIENT  GKBMMNT.  Notes  ID

yond  the  Bhme ;  and,  in  fact,  it  is  not  on  Tacitus  him-
self, but  on  these  unknown  authorities,  that  we  rely  for
the  fidelity  of  his  representations.  We  may  readily  con-
ceive, by  our  own  experience,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining
a  clear  and  exact  knowledge  of  laws,  customs,  and  man-
ners for  which  we  have  no  corresponding  analogies.
''  Let  us,"  says  Luden  to  his  countrymen,  '*  ask  an  en-
lightened Engliflhinan  who  speaks  German  concerning
the  political  institutions  of  his  country,  and  it  will  be
surprising  how  little  we  shall  understand  from  >iiiti.
Ask  him  to  explain  what  is  a  freeman,  a  freeholder,  a
copyholder,  or  a  yeoman,  and  we  shall  find  how  hard  it
is  to  make  national  institutions  and  relations  intelligible
to  a  foreigner."  (Luden,  Greschichte  des  Deutschen
Volkes,  vol.  i.  p.  702.)

This  is  of  course  not  designed  to  undervalue  the  ex-
cellent work  of  Tacitus,  to  which  almost  exclusively  we
are  indebted  for  any  acquaintance  with  the  progenitors
of  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  the  Franks,  but  to  point  out  a
genered  principle,  which  may  be  fiekr  better  applied  to
inferior  writers,  that  they  give  a  colour  of  their  own
country  to  their  descriptions  of  foreign  manners,  and
especially  by  the  adoption  of  names  only  analogically
appropriate.  Thus  the  words  servus,  libertinus,  ingmuus^
noibSis,  are  not  necessarily  to  be  understood  in  a  Homan
sense  when  Tacitus  employs  them  in  his  treatise  on  Ger-
many. Serous  is  in  Latin  a  slave  ;  but  the  German  de-
scribed by  him  under  that  name  is  the  UduSy  subject  to
a  lord,  and  liable  to  payments,  but  not  without  limit,  as
he  himself  explains.  '*  Frumenti  modum  dominus,  aut
peooris,  aut  vestis,  nt  colono,  imperat;  et  servus  hao-
tenus  paret."  Here  ccionuSf  in  the  age  of  Tacitus,  was
as  much  a  wrong  word  in  one  direction  as  servus  was  in
another.  For  we  believe  that  the  colonus  of  early  Bome
was  a  tenant,  or  feurmer,  yielding  rent,  but  absolutely  a
free  man ;  *  though  in  the  third  century,  after  barbarians
had  been  settled  on  lands  in  the  empire,  we  find  it
applied  to  a  semi-servile  condition.  It  is  more  worthy
to  be  observed  that  his  account  of  the  kingly  office
among  the  Germans  is  not  quite  consistent.  SometimeB
it  appears  as  if  peculiar  to  certain  tribes,  '*  iis  gentibua
quae  regnantur (o.  25) ;  and  here  he  seems  to  speak  of

•  vide  BMdolatl  UsIooil

Ohap.  u. partition  of  conquered  lands.  275

tilie  power  as  very  great,  opposing  it  to  liberty;  wliile
at  other  tunes  we  are  led  to  suppose  an  aristocratic
senate  and  an  ultimate  right  of  decision  in  the  people
at  large,  with  a  very  limited  sovereign  at  the  head  (c
7,  11,  &cX  This  triple  constitution  has  been  taken  by
Montesquieu  for  the  foundation  of  our  own  in  the  well-
known  words — **  Ce  beau  syst^e  a  ^t^  trouv^  dans  les
bois."

Note  n. Page  147.

It  is  not  easy  to  explain  these  partitions  made  by  the
barbarous  nations  on  their  settlement  in  the  empire ;
and,  what  would  be  still  more  remarkable  if  historians
were  not  so  defective  in  that  age,  we  find  no  m^ition  of
such  partitions  in  any  records,  excepting  their  own  laws
and  a  few  documents  of  the  same  class.  Montesquieu
says,  *'  Ges  deux  tiers  n'^taient  pas  que  dans  certains
quartiers  qu*on  leur  assigna  "  (1.  30,  c.  8).  Troja  seems
io  hold  the  same  opinion  as  to  the  first  settlement  of  the
Burgundians  in  Gaxd,  but  admits  a  general  division  in
471 :  Storia  dltalia  nel  medio  evo  (iii.  1293).  It  is
indeed  impossible  to  get  over  the  proof  of  such  a  parti-
tion, or  at  least  one  founded  on  a  general  law,  arising
from  the  fifty-fourth  section  of  the  Burgundian  code :
*'  Eodem  tempore  quo  populus  noster  mancipiorum  ter-
tiam,  et  duas  terrarum  psui^es  accepit."  This  code  was
promulgated  by  Gundobald  early  in  the  sixth  century.
It  contains  several  provisions  protecting  the  Boman  in
the  possession  of  his  third  against  any  encroachment  of
the  Jiospes,  a  word  appli^  indifferently  to  both  parties,
as,  in  common  Latin,  to  host  and  guest,  ,

The  word  sortes,  which  ooours  both  with  the  Burgun-
dians 6aid  Visigoths,  has  often  been  referred  to  the
general  partition,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  lands  had
been  distributed  by  lot.  This  perhaps  has  no  evidence
except  the  erroneous  inference  from  the  word  sors^  but
it  is  not  wholly  improbable.  Savigny,  indeed,  observes
that  both  the  barbarian  and  the  Boman  estates  were
called  sortesy  referring  to  Leges  Yisigothorum,  lib.  x.
tit.  2,  1.  1,  where  we  find,  in  some  editions,  "  sortes
Gbthica:  vel  Bomanae ;  "  but  all  the  manuscripts,  accord-
ing to  Bouquet,  read  **  sortes  OothicsB  et  tertia  Boman-

t2

\

276  PARTITION  OF  CONQUERED  LANDS. Norn  lo

orum,"  which,  of  oourse,  gives  a  oontraiy  sense.  (Beo.
des  Hist.  iv.  430.)  **  It  seems,  from  some  texts  or  Ike
Burgimdian  law,  that  the  whole  territoTj  was  not  par-
titioned at  once ;  because,  in  a  supplement  to  Ihe  code
not  much  before  520,  provision  is  made  for  new  settlers,
who  were  to  receive  only  a  moiety.  "  De  Bom^uus  hoc
ordinavimus,  ut  non  amplius  a  Buxgondionibus  qui  iii£ra
venerunt,  requiratur,  quam,  ut  prsesens  neceasitas  fueiit,
medietas  terras.  Alia  vero  medietas  cum  integritate
manoipiorum  a  Bomanis  teneatur;  nee  exinde  ullam
violentiam  patiantnr."  (Leges  Bur^undionum,  Addita-
mentum  Secundum,  c.  11.)  In  this,  as  in  the  whole
Burgundian  law,  we  perceive  a  tenderness  for  Ihe
Eoman  inhabitaut,  and  a  continual  desire  to  place  him,
as  fiEir  as  possible,  on  an  equal  footing  with  his  new
neighbour.  The  reason  assigned  for  the  partition  is
necessity;  the  Burgundian  must  live.  It  is  true  that
to  assign  him  two-thirds  of  the  land  strikes  us  as  an
enormous  spoliation.  Montesquieu  supposes  that  the
barbarian  took  open  and  pasture  lands,  leaving  the  tilth
to  the  eoicient  possessor,  and  that  this  accounts  for  the
smaller  proportion  of  slaves  which  he  required  (1.  30,  o.
0).  Sismondi  has  made  a  similar  suggestion.  It  is
dwelt  upon  by  Troja,  that  the  Lombards,  taking  a  third
of  the  produce  instead  of  a  portion  of  the  lands  then^
selves,  reduced  all  the  original  possessors  to  the  rank  m
tributaries.  In  none  of  the  barbarous  kingdoms  was  the
Roman  of  so  low  a  statw  as  in  theirs.  But  it  may  be
said  that  the  ancient  law  of  nations,  exercised  by  none
more  unsparingly  than  by  the  Bomans  themselves  in
Italy,  confiscated  the  whole  soil ;  that,  if  the  Visigoths
and  Burgundians  spared  one-third,  if  the  Franks  left
some  Boman  possessors,  this  was  an  indulgent  relaxation
of  their  right.  And  this  would  be  an  excuse  if  we
oould  for  a  moment  look  upon  the  barbarians  as  having

b  Ptooopliis  mjt,  of  the  dhrUoQ  mid*  Jaraywyifff  ihrerAii  Ik^^cv^cv  tlMu.— Di

Dy  a«nieric  in  Itaiy,  Aa^vus  robf  tUAowc  BeUo  VaadaL  L  L  c.  8. Tlila  inigB

iH^iAaTO  niv  rovt  iypovi,  oc  vAcuttm  rm  gives  no  oonfinnftdoa  to  the  hjpoCherit

ftrav  Kol  Spumit  cv  U  rb  rSiv  BowiSCAMr  of  a  partittan  by  lot,  bni  the  ooDtmys

k^MMv  i0vot  •  Koliv'avTOvicX^fMH  Bflv  end  thoo^  we  oumot  leeaon  wbmAaMf

U^Mr  ot  ceypol  ofiroc  it  toM  KoAovnxu  rod  from  the  analogy  of  Africa  to  Ganl,  11

l[p6rov M2raLft«rx**P^^'tt>'r«  Is  natural  to  inteipiet  cAqpoc  PerfOUiP

iaaro4CT««rai9iieaiTo!c<UAot«Baaii8iX««f  and  KUrteB  SallCB  in  the  MIDA

Chap.  H. PARTITION  OF  CONQUERED  i.ANl>S.  277

a  just  cause  of  war.* The  oontraiy,  howeyer,  is  oianifest
in  almost  every  case.

M.  Fauriel  thinks  it  probable  that  the  Franks  made,
like  the  other  barbcmans,  a  partition,  more  or  less
regular,  of  the  Boman  lands  in  northern  France.  (Hist,
de  la  Giaxde  Meridionale,  ii.  34.)  Gnizot  takes  a  some-
what different  view,  and  conceives  that  each  chief  took
what  best  suited  him,  and  lived  there  with  his  followers
about  him.  (Givilis.  en  France,  Le^on  32.)  But  if  the
Franks  adopted  so  aristocratic  a  division  as  to  throw  the
lands  which  they  occupied  into  the  hands  of  a  te^
proprietors,  they  must  have  gone  on  very  dififerent
principles  from  the  other  nations,  among  whom  we
should  infer,  from  their  laws,  a  much  greater  equality  to
have  been  preserved.  It  seems,  however,  most  probable
on  the  whole,  considering  the  silence  of  historians  and
laws,  that  the  Franks  made  no  such  systematic  distribu-
tion of  lands  as  the  earlier  beirbarians.  They  were,
perhaps,  less  numerous,  and,  being  at  first  less  civilised,
would  feel  more  reluctance  at  submitting  to  any  fixed
principle  of  appropriation.  That  they  dispossessed  many
of  the  Boman  owners  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Loire
cannot  well  be  doubted.  For,  though  Baynouard,  who
treads  in  the  steps  of  Dubos,  denies  that  they  took  any
but  fiscal  lands,  which  had  belonged  to  the  imperial
domains  (Hist,  du  Droit  Municipal,  i.  256),  Franks
were  surely  as  little  disposed,  and  as  litUe  able,  to  live
without  lands  as  Burgundians,  and  they  were  a  rougher

ale.*  Yet  both  with  respect  to  them  and  the  other
Eirians  we  may  observe  that  the  spoliation  was  not
altogether  so  ruinous  as  would  naturally  be  presumed.
In  consequence  of  the  long  decline  and  depopulation  of
the  empire,  the  fruit  of  fiscal  oppression,  of  frequent
invasion,  and  civil  wars,  we  may  add  also  of  pestilences
and  unfavourable  seasons,  much  land  had  gone  out  of
cultivation  in  GUtul ;  and  though  the  proportion  taken

by  the  Goths  and  Burgundians  was  enormous, they

•

3  HLdroeroosappoKsfhfttttieFnaiks,  •oqulaltiaDs  woald  be  at  the  expense  of

vbo  lerred  the  empire  in  Ganl  under  the  the  natioDs  whldi  they  oonquered.  (Instit

freieoei$ort  of  Ciovie,  hod  received  lands  MeroT.  L  23Y,  268.) But  the  private

Xke  the  Bargandians  and  Visigoths:  so  estates  of  the  Franks  seem  to  have  brer

ftat  tbej  were  already  tn  a  great  measmne  principally  in  the  nortA  of  FnuMe.
provided  for,  and  that  their  saboequent

nv

278  THE  SAIIC  LAW.  Smnto

probably  occupied,  in  great  meaBore,  what  the  Bomaii
proprietor  bad  not  the  means  of  tOling.

This  subject,  after  all,  is  by  no  means  clear  of  em-
barrassment, especially  as  regards  the  Yisigothic  and
finrgnndian  partitions.  We  are  driven  to  snppoae  a
dispersion  of  these  conquering  nations  among  their
subjects,  each  man  living  separately  on  his  «rs,  contnuy
to  the  policy  of  all  invaders ;  we  are,  apparently,  to
presume  an  equality  of  numbers  between  the  Boman
possessors  and  the  barbarians,  so  that  each  should  have
his  own  fiospes.  The  latter  hypothesis  may,  perhaps,  be
dispensed  with,  or  considerably  modified ;  but  I  do  not
see  how  to  get  rid  of  the  former.

Note  m. Page  149.

The  Salic  law  exists  in  two  texts ;  one  purely  Latin,
of  which  there  are  fifteen  manuscripts ;  the  other  mingled
with  Oerman  words,  of  which  there  are  three. Most
have  considered  the  latter  to  be  the  original ;  the  manu-
scripts containing  it  are  entitled  Lex  tkMca  antiqiassimaj
ot  vetustior ;  the  others  generally  run,  Lex  Salioa  rgcenfiar,
or  emendata. This  seems  to  create  a  presumption. But
M.  Wraida,  who  published  a  history  of  the  Salic  law  in
1808,  inclines  to  think  the  pure  Latin  older  than  the
other. M.  Guizot  adopts  the  same  opinion  (Civilisation
en  France,  Le^n  9). M.  Wraida  refers  its  original
enactment  to  the  period  when  the  Franks  were  stm  on
the  left  bank  of  the  Bhine ;  that  is,  long  before  the  reign
of  Clovis. And  this  seems  an  evident  inference  from
what  is  said  in  the  prologue  to  the  law,  written  long
afterwards. But  of  course  it  cannot  apply  to  those  pas-
sages which  allude  to  the  Bomans  as  subjects,  or  to
Christianity. M.  Guizot  is  of  opinion  that  it  bears  marks
of  an  age  when  the  Franks  had  long  been  mingled  with
the  Boman  population. This  is  consistent  with  its  hav*
ing  been  revised  by  the  sons  of  Clovis,  Childebert  and
Clotaire,  as  is  asserted  in  the  prologue. One  manuscript
has  the  words — '*  Hoc  decretum  est  apud  regem  et
principes  ejus,  et  apud  cunctum  populum  Christianum
qui  infra  regnum  Merwingorum  consistunt." Neither
Wraida  nor  Guizot  think  it  older  in  its  present  text  than

Chap.  II.  THE  SALIC  LAW.  279

the  seventh  century ;  and  as  Dagobert  I.  appears  in  the
prologue  as  one  reviser,  we  may  suppose  him  to  be
the  king  mentioned  in  the  words  just  quoted.  It  is  to
be  observed,  however,  that  two  later  writers,  M.  Fertz,  in
'Monumenta  Germanisd  Historica,'  and  M.  Fardessus,
in  *  M^m.  de  TAcad.  des  Inscriptions,'  vol.  xv.  (Nouvelle
S^rie),  have  entered  anew  on  tiiis  discussion,  and  do  not
agree  with  M.  Wraida,  nor  wholly  with  each  other.
M.  Lehuerou  is  cleaxly  of  opinion  that,  in  all  its  sub-
stance, the  Salic  code  is  to  be  referred  to  Germany  for
its  birthplace,  and  to  the  period  of  heathenism  for  its
date. (Institutions  M^rovingiennes,  p.  83.)

The  Eipuarian  Franks  Ouizot,  with  some  apparent
reason,  takes  for  the  progenitors  of  the  Austrasians ;  the
Salian,  of  the  Neustrians.  The  former  were  settled  on
the  left  bank  of  the  Bhine,  as  Lceti^  or  defenders  of  the
frontier,  under  the  empire.  These  tribes  were  united
under  one  government  through  the  assassination  of
Sigebert  at  Cologne,  in  the  last  years  of  Clovis,  who
assumed  his  crown.  Such  a  theory  might  tend  to  ex-
plain the  subsequent  rivalry  of  these  great  portions  of
the  Frank  monarchy,  though  it  is  hardly  required  for
that  purpose.  The  Bipuarian  code  of  law  is  referred  by
Guizot  to  the  reign  of  Dagobert ;  Eccard,  however,  had
conceived  it  to  have  been  compiled  under  Thierry,  the
eldest  son  of  Clovis.  TRec.  des  Hist.  vol.  iv.")  It  may
still  have  been  revisea  by  Dagobert.  '*  We  find  in
this,"  sayp  M.  Guizot,  *'  more  of  the  Boman  law,  more
of  the  royal  and  ecclesiastical  power ;  its  provisions  are
more  precise,  more  extensive,  less  barbarous ;  it  indi-
cates a  further  step  in  the  transition  from  the  German
to  the  Boman  form  of  social  life."  (Civil,  en  France,
Leyon  10.)

The  Burgundian  law,  though  earlier  than  either  of
these  in  their  recensions,  displays  a  far  more  advanced
state  of  manners.  The  Bui^ndian  and  Boman  are
placed  on  the  same  footing ;  more  is  borrowed  from  the
civil  law;  the  royal  power  is  more  developed.  This
code  remained  in  foroe  after  Charlemi^e ;  but  Hincmar
says  that  few  continued  to  live  by  it.  In  the  Yisigothio
laws  enacted  in  Spain,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Boman,  in
642,  all  tlie  barbeoous  elements  have  disappeared ;  it  is
the  work  of  the  clergy,  half  ecclesiastical,  bedf  imperiaL

280  ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  Kom «

It  has  been  remarked  by  aoate  'writers,  Gnizot  anj
Troja,  that  the  Salic  law  does  not  answer  the  pnipoea
of  a  code,  being  silent  on  some  of  the  most  important
regnlations  of  civil  society.  The  former  adds  that  we
often  read  of  matters  decided  '*  secrmdum  legem  Sali-
cam,"  concerning  which  we  can  find  nothing  in  that
law.  He  presumes,  therefore,  that  it  is  only  a  part  of
their  jurisprudence.  Troja  TStoria  d'ltalia  nel  medio
evo,  V.  8),  quoting  Buat  for  m&  same  opinion,  thinks  it
probable  that  the  Franks  made  use  of  the  Roman  law
where  their  own  was  defectiye.  It  may  perhaps  be  not
less  probable  than  either  hypothesis  that  the  judges
gradually  introduced  principles  of  decision  which,  as
in  our  common  law,  acquired  the  force  of  legislatiye
enactment.  The  rules  of  the  Salic  code  principally
relate  to  the  punishment  or  compensation  of  crimes;
and  the  same  wHl  be  found  in  our  earliest  Anglo-Saxon
laws.  The  object  of  such  written  laws,  with  a  free  and
barbarous  people,  was  not  to  record  their  usages,  or  to
lay  down  rules  which  natural  equity  would  suggest  as
the  occasion  might  arise,  but  to  prevent  the  arbitrary
infliction  of  penalties.  Chapter  Ixii.,  '  On  Successions,*
may  have  been  inserted  for  the  sake  of  the  novel  pro-
vision about  Salic  lands,  which  could  not  have  formed  a
part  of  old  Teutonic  customs.

Note  IY. Pages  149,  151.

The  position  of  the  former  inhabitants,  after  the  oon<-
quest  of  Gkkul  by  the  Burffundians,  the  Visigoths,  and
the  Franks,  botii  relativ^y  to  the  new  monarchies
and  to  the  barbarian  settlers  themselves,  is  a  question  of
high  importance.  It  has,  of  course,  encaged  the  philo-
sophical school  of  the  present  day,  and  ncus  led  to  much
diversity  of  hypotheses. The  extreme  poles  are  occu-

S*ed,  one  by  M.  Baynouard  in  his  *  Hist,  du  Droit
unicipal,'  and  by  a  somewhat  earlier  writer.  Sir  Francis
Palgrave,  who,  following  the  steps  of  Dubos,  bring  the
two  nations,  conquerors  and  conquered,  almost  to  an
equality,  as  the  common  subjects  of  a  sovereign  who
had  assumed  the  prerogatives  of  a  Boman  empercxr:

Cbat.  U.  ROMAN  KATIVSS  OF  GAUL.  281

uid,  on  the  opposite  side,  by  Signor  Troja,**  and  by
M.  Thierry,  who  finds  no  closer  analogy  for  their  rela-
tive conditions  than  that  of  the  Oreeks  and  Turks  in
the  days  that  have  lately  gone  by.  **  It  is  no  more  a
proof,''  he  contends,  "  that  the  Roman  natives  were
treated  as  free,  because  a  feyr  might  gain  the  favour  of
a  despotic  court,  than  that  the  Christian  and  Jew  stand
on  an  even  footing  with  the  Mussulman,  because  an
Eastern  sultan  may  find  his  advantage  in  employing
some  of  either  religion."  (Lettres  sur  1  Hist,  de  France,
Lett,  vii.)  This  is  not  quite  consistent  with  his  lan-
guage in  a  later  work :  **  Sous  le  r^gne  de  la  premiere
race  se  montrent  deux  conditions  de  liberty :  la  liberty
par  excellence,  qtd  est  la  condition  du  Franc ;  et  la
liberttS  du  second  ordre,  le  droit  de  cit^  romaine."
(B^cits  des  Temps  M^vingiens,  i.  242. — Bruxelles,
1840.)

It  is,  however,  as  it  seems  to  me,  and  as  the  French
writers  have  generally  held,  impossible  to  maintain
either  of  these  theories.  The  Boman  ^*  con  viva  regis  "
(hj  which  we  may  perhaps  better  understand  one  who
had  been  actually  a<£nitted  to  the  royal  table,  thus  bear-
ing an  analogy  to  the  Frank  Antrustion,  than  what  I
have  said  in  tibe  text,  one  of  a  rank  not  imworthy  of
such  an  honour)*  was  estimated  in  his  weregild  at  half
the  price  of  the  barbarian  Antrustion,  the  highest  known
class  at  the  Merovingian  court,  and  above  the  com-
mon alodial  proprietor.  But  between  two  such  land-
holders the  same  proportion  subsisted ;  the  Frank  was
valued  twice  as  high  as  the  Boman;  but  the  Boman
proprietor  was  set  more  than  as  much  above  the  tribu-
tary, or  semi-servile  husbandman,  whose  nation  is  not
distinguished  by  the  letter  of  the  Salic  code.  We  have,
therefore,  in  this  notorious  distinction,  subordination
without  servitude;  exactly  what  the  circumstances  of
the  conquest,  and  the  general  relation  of  the  barbarians

d  Lft  Stoila  dl  Fnada  aotto  i  A  dell»  thongUi  mach  by  Fnnk  IdngB. The  oon-

prlina  naa  pnb  dixsl  Don  camAaUsn  che  qneron  may  bare  been  xuttioiially  izuo-

negiU  enmp)  deUeoppreaBioni  de'  Fnmchi  lent;  but  this  is  not  reoorded.

■opim  i  dttedbii  Bomani,  e  della  generoea  *  t  do  not  give  this  as  roiy  highly

prolesionede'TeBooTio Roman! oFmncfaL  probable;  eonviva  regit  aeone  an  odd

(Bloria  d'ltalla,  toL  L  part  ▼.  p.  iSi.)  phxase;  bat  it  may  have  im  mded  all  the

TUs  Is  not  bonie  oat  by  hietoiy. We  senatorial  families,  'who  evidently  made

•nd  no  oppnailon  of  Romans  by  Fnaika,  a  noble  dass  among  the  Romans.

282  ROMAN  KATiVES  OF  GAUL.  Konv  TO

to  the  empire,  would  lead  us  to  anticipate,  and  what  omr
historical  records  unequivocally  connrm.  The  oppres-
sion of  the  peo^e,  which  Thierry  infers  from  the  histoiy
of  Gregory  of  Tours,  under  Gontran  and  Chilpeiic,  was
on  the  part  of  violent  and  arbitrary  princes,  not  of  the
Frank  nation ;  nor  did  the  latter  by  any  means  escape
it.  It  is  true  that  the  civil  wars  of  the  early  Merovingian
kings  were  most  disastrous,  especially  in  Aquitainet  and
of  course  the  native  inhabitants  suffered  most ;  yet  this
is  very  distinguishable  from  a  permanent  condition  of
servitude.

**  The  Bomans,"  Sir  F.  Palgrave  has  said,  "  retained
their  own  laws.  Their  municipal  administration  was
not  abrogated  or  subverted;  and  wherever  a  Bomaa
population  subsisted,  the  barbarian  king  was  entitled  to
command  them  with  the  prerogatives  that  had  belonged
to  the  Boman  emperors.  (Sse  and  Progress  of  the
English  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.  p.  362.)  In  this  I  demur
only  to  the  word  entitled,  which  seems  designed  to  imply
something  more  than  the  right  of  the  sword.  But  this
is  the  right,  and  I  can  discern  no  real  evidence  of  any
other,  which  Clovis,  and  Clotaire,  and  Ghilperio.  exer-
cised ;  very  like,  of  course,  to  the  prerogatives  of  the
Roman  emperors,  since  one  despotiinn  must  be  akin  to
another ;  and  a  provincial  of  Gaul,  whose  ancestors  had
for  centuries  obeyed  an  unlimited  monarch,  could  not
claim  any  better  privileges  by  becoming  the  subject  of
a  conqueror.  It  is  universally  agreed,  at  least  I  appre^
bend  so,  that  the  Boman,  as  a  mere  possessor,  and
independently  of  any  personal  dignity  with  which  he
might  have  been  honoured,  did  not  attend  the  national
assemblies  in  the  Field  of  March ;  nor  had  he  any  busi-
ness at  the  placitum  or  maUus  of  the  count  among  the
Hachimburgii,  or  freeholders,  who  there  determined
causes  according  to  their  own  jurisprudence,  and  trans-
acted other  business  relating  to  their  own  nation.  The
kings  were  always  styled  merely  "  Beges  Francorum :"'

t  One  instanos  of  an  apparent  ezoep-  "Rax  PhmcorametfqmKJiww awl j»r*»

lion,  for  leading  me  to  which  I  am  In-  ogw.** The  antheotlcitj  of  tUa  charier

dabled  to  Mr.  Spence  (Laws  of  Eorope,  deaerrea  to  be  ooosidered.  Bat.8ap|M8liif

Pb  S40),  haa  met  my  eyea. Dagobert  L  it  to  be  genilne,  it  doea  not  go  *  ptat

oiUa  hlmaelf,  in  an  instmment  found  in  way  towards  tlie  Imperial  atyl*.
Vila  Beat!  Martini.apod  Ducfaeane,  i.  05fl,

Chap.  II.  ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  283

whenever,  in  Gregory  of  Tonra'  hiBtoiy,  the  popular
will  is  expressed,  it  is  by  tlie  FrankB ;  no  other  nation
separately,  nor  the  flunks  aa  blended  with  any  other
nation,  appear  in  his  pages  to  have  acted  for  themselves.

It  mnst  be  almost  unnecessary  to  remind  ^e  reader
that  the  word  Boman  is  nniformly  applied,  especially  in
the  barbarian  laws,  to  the  Graulish  subjects  of  ^e  empire,
whose  allegiance  had  been  transferred,  more  or  less
reluctantly,  but  always  through  conquest,  to  the  three
barbarian  monarchies,  two  of  which  were  ultimately
subverted  by  the  Franks.  But  it  is  only  in  two  senses
that  this  can  be  reckoned  a  proper  appellation ;  one,  in-
asmuch as  privileges  of  Boman  citizenship  had  been
extended  to  the  whole  of  Gaul  by  the  emperors ;  and
another,  as  applicable,  with  more  correctness,  to  that
population  of  Boman  or  Italian  descent  which  had  gra*
dually  settled  in  the  cities.  This,  during  so  many  i^es,
must  have  become  not  inconsiderable  ^  the  long  continu-
ance of  the  same  legions  in  the  province,  the  wealth  and
luxury  of  many  cities,  the  Qomparative  security,  up  to
the  close  of  the  fourth  century,  from  military  revolution
and  civil  war,  the  &cility,  perhaps,  of  purchasing  lands,
woxQd  naturally  create  a  respectable  class,  to  whose
highly  civilized  manners  the  records  of  the  fourth  and
£[&  centuries  especially  bear  witness.'  The  Latin  lan-
guage became  universal  in  cities;  and  if  in  country
villages  some  remains  of  the  Celtic  might  linger,  they
have  left  very  few  traces  behind.

Sismondi  has  indeed  gone  much  too  far  when  he
infers,  especially  from  this  disuse  of  the  old  language,
an  almost  complete  extinction  of  the  Gaulish  poptdation.
And  for  this  he  accounts  by  their  reduction  to  servitude,
by  the  exactions  of  their  new  lords,  and  the  facility  of
purchasing  slaves  in  the  markets  of  the  empire  (vol.  i.
p.  84).  But  such  a  train  of  events  is  wholly  without
evidence ;  without  at  least  any  evidence  that  has  been
alleged. We  do  not  know  that  the  peasantry  were  ever

8  Salvian,  In  ^e  middle  of  Hie  fifth  fontllras.  ant  Interftm  flumlnilniB,  aut

oentoxy,  deacanta  on  the  beantlee  of  cficumdata  menibas  erat,  ut  vere  poa>

Aqnitaine :  **  Adeo  iUic  omnia  admodnm  eomona  et  domini  term  illins  non  taia

reglo  ant  intertexta  vinds,  ant  flornlenta  boU  illins  porttonem  qnam  pandlsl  tma*

pntia,  ant  diatincta  cnltuiia,  ant  oooslta  glnem  ponedlne  videnntnr." (De  Gik

pomli,  ant  amaenata  Inda.  ant  irrtgOa  beinat  Dei,  lib.  rlL  p.  289.  edit  laii.)

284  BOUAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  Kom  io

proprietoTB  of  the  soil  which  they  cultivated  before  €be
Boman  inTasion,  but  may  much  rather  believe  the
contrary  from  the  language  of  Ceesar — **  Plebs  peene
servorum  habetur  loco."  We  do  not  know  that  they
fell  into  a  worse  condition  afterwards.  We  do  not  know
that  they  were  oppressed  in  a  greater  d^ree  than  other
subjects  of  Bome,  not  surely  so  as  to  extinguish  the
population.  We  may  believe  that  slaves  were  occasion-
ally purchased,  according  to  the  usage  of  the  empire,
without  denying  the  existence  of  coionij  indigenous  and
personally  free,  of  whom  the  Theodosian  code  is  so  fall.
Kor  is  it  evident  why  even  serfs  may  not  have  been  of
native  as  easily  as  of  foreign  origin.  All  this  is  pre-
sumed by  Sismondi,  because  the  Latin  language,  and
not  the  Celtic,  is  the  basis  of  French.  And  a  similar
hypothesis  must,  by  parity  of  reafioning,  be  applied  to
the  condition  of  Spain  during  the  centuries  of  Eoman
dominion.  But  it  is  assumed  the  more  readily,  through
the  tendency  of  this  eminent  writer  to  place  in  the
worst  light,  what  seldom  can  be  placed  in  a  very  £Bivour-
able  one,  the  social  institutions  and  usages  of  mankind*
The  change  of  language  is  no  doubt  remarkable.  But
we  may  be  deceived  by  laying  too  much  stress  on  this
single  circumstance  in  tracing  the  history  of  nations.
It  is  very  difficult  to  lay  down  a  rule  as  to  the  tendency
of  one  language  to  gain  ground  upon  another.  Some
appear  in  their  nature  to  be  a^ressive;  such  is  the
Latin,  and  probably  the  Arabic.  But  why  is  it  that  so
much  of  the  Walachian  language,  and  even  its  syntax,^
comes  from  Latin,  in  consequence  of  a  merely  military
occupation,  while  a  more  lasting  possession  of  Britain
(where  flourishing  colonies  were  filled  with  Boman  in-
habitants, and  the  natives  borrowed  in  some  degree  the
arts  and  manners  of  their  conquerors,  connected  with
them  also  by  religion  in  the  latter  part  of  their  dominion)
did  not  hinder  the  preservation  of  the  original  Celtio
idiom  in  Wales,  with  very  slight  infusion  of  Latin?
Why  is  it  that  innumerable  Arabic  words,  and  even
some  Arabic  sounds  of  letters,  are  found  in  the  Castilian
language,  the  language  of  a  people  foreign  and  hostile,
whne  scarcely  a  trace  is  left  of  the  Yisigothic  tongue,

*•  VkL  Lftiu1«&!  Tentamen  Criticnm  in  llngiutiD  Walachioua.  Vlnn.  ia4t

Ghaf.  IL  BOMAK  natives  of  GAUL.  285

that  of  their  fathers ;  so  that  for  one  word,  it  is  said,  of
Teutonic  origin  remaining  in  Spain,  there  are  ten  in
Italy,  and  a  hundred  in  Franoe  ?  If  we  were  to  take
Sismondi  literally,  the  barbarians  must  have  found  no-
thing in  Oaid  but  a  Boman  or  Bomanized  aristocracy,
surrounded  by  slaves ;  and  these  as  much  imported,  or
the  offspring  of  importation,  as  the  Negroes  in  America.
This  is  ralher  a  humiliating  origin,  an  illud  quod  dicere
nolo,  for  the  French  nation.  For  it  is  the  French  nation
that  is  descended  from  the  inhabitants  of  Gkul  at  the
epoch  of  the  barbarian  conquest.

We  have,  howcTer,  a  strong  ethnographical  argument
against  this  imaginary  depopulation,  in  the  national
characteristics  of  the  French.  A  brilliant  and  ingenious
writer  has  well  called  our  attention  to  the  Celtic  element,
that  under  all  the  modifications  which  difference  of  race,
political  constitutions,  and  the  stealthy  progress. of  com-
merce and  learning  have  brought  iji,  still  distinguishes
the  Frenchman  :  **  La  base  originaire,  celle  qui  a  tout
re^,  tout  accepts,  c*est  cette  jeune  moUe  et  mobile  race
de  Gaels,  brillante,  sensuelle,  et  legere,  prompte  a  ap-
prendre,  prompte  a  dedaigner,  avide  des  choses  nouvelles.
voiUi  r^ement  primitif,  Telement  perfectible."  (Miche-
let,  Hist,  de  France,  i.  156.^  This  is  very  good,  and
we  cfiomot  but  see  the  resemblance  to  the  Celtic  character.
Michelet  goes  afterwards  too  fieu',  and  endeavours  to  show
that  a  great  part  of  the  French  language  is  Celtic ;  foiling
wholly  in  his  quotations  from  early  writers,  which  either
relate  to  the  period  immediately  subsequent  to  the  Boman
conquest,  or  to  the  lingua  Homana  rustica  which  ultimately
became  French.  It  is  nevertheless  true  that  a  certain
number  of  Celtic  words  have  been  retained  in  French,
)8  has  been  shown  even  of  Yisigothic  by  M.  Fauriel.  He
bas  found  3000  words  in  ProveuQal,  which  are  not
Latin.  All  of  these  which  are  not  Gothic,  Iberian,
Greek,  or  Arabic,  may  be  reckoned  Celtic  ;  and  though
the  former  languages  can  have  left  few  traces  in  northern
French,  we  may  presume  the  last  to  have  been  retained
in  a  scarcely  less  degree  than  in  the  Provencal  dialect.
(Ampere,  Hist.  Litt.  de  la  France,  vol.  i.  p.  34.)  Many
French  monosyllables  are  Celtic. But  if  we  try  to  read

I  EObAk  Bertew,  toL  zzzl  p.  IM.

]

286  BOMAK  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  Notes  to

any  Frencli  of  tbe  twelftli  century,  we  shall  feel  nc
doubt  that  a  vast  majority  of  words  are  derived  from
the  Latin ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  the  terms  of  rural
occupation,  and  generally  of  animals,  %re  full  as  much
Latin  as  those  more  familiar  in  towns.

The  cities  of  Gaul  were  occupied  probably  by  a  more
mingled  population  than  the  villages.  In  the  cities
dwelt  the  more  ancient  and  wealthy  families,  called
senators,  and  distinct,  as  far  as  we  can  see  our  way  in  a
very  perplexed  inquiry,  from  the  ordinary  curialeSf  or
decurions.  It  is  true  that  these  also  are  sometimes  called
senators;  but  the  word  has  not,  as  Guizot  observes
(Collect,  des  M^moires,  i.  247),  in  Gregory  and  other
writers,  a  precise  sense.  Families  were  often  elevated
to  the  senatorial  rank  by  the  emperors,  which  gave  their
members  the  title  of  darissimi ;  and  these  were  probably
meant  by  Gregory,  in  the  expression  e  primis  GalUarum
senatoribust-whicii  naturally  must  be  rendered — ''of  the  first
Gaulish  nobility."  The  word  is  several  times  employed
by  him  in  what  seems  the  same  sense.  It  is,  however,
also  used,  as  Guizot  and  Baynouard  think,  for  the  hi^est
class  of  curiaks  who  had  served  municipal  offices.  But
more  will  be  said  of  this  in  another  note.

Sismondi  has  remarked  (i.  198)  that  in  the  lives  of
the  saints,  during  the  Merovingian  period,  most  part  of
whom  were  of  Boman  descent,  it  is  genersdly  mentioned
that  they  were  of  good  family.  The  Church  afforded
the  means  of  preserving  their  respectability ;  and  thus
(without  much  weight  in  the  monarchy,  and  often  with
diminished  patrimony,  but  in  return  less  oppressed  by
taxation  than  under  the  imperial  fisc,  deriving  also  a
reflected  importance  from  the  bishop  when  he  was  a
Boman,  and  sheltered  by  his  protection)  this  class  of
the  native  inhabitants  held  not  only  a  free  but  an  ho-
nourable position.  Yet  this  was  still  secondary.  In  a
free  commonwealth  the  exclusion  from  political  rights,
by  a  broad  line  of  legal  separation,  brings  with  it  an
indelible  sense  of  inferiori^.  But  this  inferiority  is
not  allowed  by  all  our  inquirers.

"  The  nations  who  were  unequal  before  the  law  soon
became  equal  before  the  sovereign,  if  not  in  theory  yet
m  practice;  and  the  children  of  the  companions  of
Clevis  were  sul^ected,  with  few  and  not  very  mateTial

Chap.  II.  BOMAK  NATIVKS  OF  GAUL.  287

exceptions,  to  the  same  positive  dominion  as  the  do  -
scendants  of  the  pro-consul  or  the  senator.  It  is  not
difficult  to  form  plausible  conjectures  concerning  the
causes  of  this  equadization ;  nor  are  the  means  by  which
it  was  effected  entirely  concealed.  Considered  in  rela-
tion to  the  Bomans,  the  Franks,  for  we  will  continue  to
instance  them,  constituted  a  distinct  state,  but,  compared
to  the  Eomans,  a  very  small  one ;  and  the  indviduals
composing  it,  dispersed  over  Gaul,  were  almost  lost
among  the  tributaries.  Experience  has  shown  that
whenever  a  lesser  or  poorer  dominion  is  conjoined,  in
the  person  of  the  same  sovereign,  to  a  greater  or  more
opulent  one,  the  minuter  mass  is  always  in  the  end
subjugated  by  tlie  larger."  (Eise  and  Progress  of  the
English  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.  p.  363.")

Such  is,  in  a  few  words,  the  view  taken  of  the  Mero-
vingian histoiy  by  a  very  learned  writer.  Sir  F.  Palgrave.
And,  doubtless,  the  concluding  observation  is  just,  in
the  terms  wherein  he  expresses  it.  But  thero  seems  a
fidlacy  in  applying  the  word  "  pocrer"  to  the  Franks,
or  any  barbarian  conquerors  of  Gaul.  They  were  poorer
before  their  conquest ;  they  were  richer  afterwards.  At
the  battle  of  Hastings  the  balance  of  wealth  was,  I
doubt  not,  on  the  side  of  Harold  more  than  of  William ;
but  twenty  years  afterwards  Domesday  Book  tells  us  a
very  diffe'^rent  story.  If  an  allotment  was  made  among
the  Franks,  or  if  they  served  themselves  to  land  without
any  aUotment,  on  either  hypothesis  they  became  the
great  proprietors  of  northern  France ;  and  on  whom  else
did  the  beneficiary  donations,  the  rewards  of  &ithful
Antmstions,  generally  devolve  ?  It  is  perfectiy  consis-
tent with  the  national  superiority  of  the  Franks  in  the
sixth  and  seventh  centuries  that  in  the  last  age  of  the
Carlovingian  line,  when  the  distinction  of  laws  had  been
abolished  or  disused,  the  more  numerous  people  should
in  many  provinces  have  (not,  as  Sir  Francis  Palgrave
calls  it,  subjugated  but)  absorbed  the  other.  We  find
tiiis  to  have  been  the  case  at  the  close  of  the  Anglo
Norman  period  at  home.

One  essential  difference  is  generally  supposed  to  have
separated  the  Frank  from  the  Boman.  Tke  latter  was
subject  to  personal  and  territorial  taxation.  Such  had
been  his  condition  under  the  empire ;  and  whethei  tlxe

288  ROUAM  KATIVfSS  OF  GAUL.  Kon  is>

bnrthen  might  or  not  be  equal  in  degree  (probably  it
waa  not  anch),  it  ia  not  at  all  reasonable  to  beUeve  with*
out  proof  that  he  waa  ever  exempted  from  it.  It  is»
however,  true  that  aome  Frenoh  writers  have  aaBomed
aU  territorial  impositions  on  free  landholders  to  have
ceased  after  the  conquest  (B^its  des  Temps  M^roving.
i.  268.)^  This  controversy  I  do  not  absolutely  under-
take to  determine ;  but  the  proof  evidently  lies  on  those
who  assert  the  Boman  to  have  been  more  &voured  than
he  waa  under  the  empire ;  when  all  were  liable  to  the
land-tax,  though  only  those  destitute  of  freehold  posses-
sions paid  the  capitation  or  census.  We  cannot  infer
such  a  distinction  on  the  mund  of  tenure  from  a  passage
of  Gregory  Qib.  ix.  c.  30) : — Childebertus  ver6  rex  de-
scriptores  in  Pictavos,  invitante  Marovio  episcopo,  juasit
abire ;  id  est,  Florentianum  majorem  dom{is  regue,  et
Romulfum  palatii  sui  oomitem,  ut  scilicet  populus  cen-
sum  quem  tempore  patris  functi  fderant,  facta  rations
innovatursB,  reddere  deberet.  Multi  enimexhis  defuncti
fuerant,  et  ob  hoc  viduis  orphanisque  ac  debilibus  tribnti
pondus  iQciderat.  Quod  hi  discutientes  per  ordinem,
relaxantes  pauperes  ac  infirmos,  iUos  quos  justitifla
conditio  tributaries  dabat,  censu  publico  subdiderunt.'*
These  collectors  were  repelled  by  the  citizens  of  Tours,
who  proved  that  Clotaire  I.  had  released  their  oily  from
any  public  tribute,  out  of  respect  for  St.  Martin.  And
the  reigning  king  acquiesced  in  this  immunity.  It  may
also  be  inferred  from  another  passage  (Lib.  x.  c.  7)
that  even  ecclesiastical  property  was  not  exempt  from
taxation,  unless  by  special  privilege,  which  indeed  seems
to  be  implied  in  the  many  charters  conceding  this  im-
mtmity,  and  in  the  forms  of  Marculfus."*

k  U.  Lehnenra  impates  the  iame  theory  If onteeqnieii ;  and,  npon  this  pntienltf

to  MonteBqaiea. Bat  hii  words  (EKjpr.  nltfect  of  tuTitlnn.  dearly  ptovei^  la  mf

des  Lolz,  zxx.  13)  do  not  assert  that  the  opinion,  that  the  land-tax  fanpnind  imdar

Romans  might  not  be  subject  to  taxation  the  empire  continned  to  be  levied  on  fba

In  the  earlier  Meroringian  period;  though  Roman  sat^Jects  of  Glovto  and  the  next

afterwards,  as  be  snpposes,  this  obligasien  two  generations (VoL  Lp.  aT1,c(fesC)

was  replaced  by  that  of  military  senrice.  The  Franks,  sach  as  were  uyoMit.  wen

™  Tbia  note  was  rritten  before  I  had  originally  exempt  tram  this  and  all  otter

>>)oked  at  a  woit  published  In  1M3,  by  tribute; Of  this  M.  Lehaenm  makes  no

M.  I^uerou.  '  Hlstolre  dea  Instltatlons  doubt ;  nor,  perhaps,  has  any  one  dooMsd

M^rovlnglennes.'  In  which,  with  much  It,  except  Dnboa. But,  under  the  warn

impartiality  and  erudltlan,  he  draws  a  and  grandsons  of  CIotIs,  endaaTonra  wert

Una  bafeween  the  theories  of  Dnboa  and  BAde,  to  which  I  haTt  diawn  atlMrtkt

Chap.  II.  ROMAN  NATIYSS  OF  QAUL.  289

It  seems,  however,  clear  that  the  Frank  landholder,
the  Francos  imgenuus^  bom  to  his  share,  according  to  old
notions,  of  national  sovereignty,  gave  indeed  his  volun
taiy  donation  annually  to  the  king,  bnt  reckoned  himself
entirely  free  from  compulsory  tribute.  We  read  of  no  tax
imposed  by  the  assemblies  of  the  Field  of  March ;  and
if  the  kings  had  possessed  the  prerogative  of  levying
money  at  will,  the  monarchy  must  have  become  wholly
absolute  without  opposition.  The  barbarian  was  dis-
tinguished by  his  abhorrence  of  tribute.  Tyranny  might
strip  one  man  of  his  possessions,  banish  another  from  his
countiy ,  destroy  the  life  of  a  third ;  the  rest  would  at
the  utmost  murmur  in  silence ;  but  a  general  imposition
on  them  as  a  people  was  a  yoke  under  which  they  would
not  pass  without  resistance.  I  shall  mention  a  few  in-
stances in  a  future  note.  The  Boman,  on  the  other
hand,  complaijied  doubtless  of  new  or  imreasonable  tax-
ation ;  but  ne  could  not  avoid  acknowledging  a  principle
of  government  to  which  his  forefathers  had  for  so  many
ages  submitted.  The  house  of  Clovis  stood  to  KiTn  in
place  of  the  Gsesars ;  this  part  of  the  theory  of  Dubos
cannot  be  disputed.  But  when  that  writer  extends  the
same  to  the  Frank,  as  a  constitutional  position,  and  not
merely  referring  to  acts  protested  against  as  illegal,  the
voice  of  history  refutes  him.

Ihibos  has  asserted,  and  is  followed  by  many,  that  the
army  of  Clovis  was  composed  of  but  a  few  thousand
Salian  Franks.  And  for  this  the  testimony  of  Gregory
has  been  adduced,  who  informs  us  only  that  3000  of  the
army  of  Clovis  (a  later  writer  says  6000)  were  baptized
with  him.  (Greg.  Tnr.  lib.  ii.  c.  83.)  But  Clovis  was
not  the  sole  ohie&in  of  his  tribe.  It  has  been  seen  that
he  enlarged  'h^a  command  towards  the  close  of  his  life,
by  violent  measures  with  respect  to  other  kings  as  in-
dependent apparently  as  himself,  and  some  of  whom
belonged  to  his  fanuly.  Thus  the  Bipuarian  Franks,
who  occupied  the  left  bank  of  the  Bhme,  came  imder
his  sway.  And  besides  this,  the  argument  from  the
number  of  soldiers  baptized  with  Clovis  assumes  that

n  *  nbieqnfiBi  note,  by  thon  doqmtic  and  a  strofgle  of  the  German  artotoeracy

pdnoea,  eeger  to  aaBome  the  imperial  enaaed,  whidi  annihilated  the  penonal

prengatiTes  orer  aU  their  snld^cta,  to  authority  of  Hw  lOTerelgn. (Hist.  J«

nb  them  «f  their  natiooal  immuiiity;  InfLlUr<jvlag.l.425.<tjui<.)

VOL.  I.  V

(

290  SOMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  Ncms  TO

the  whole  army  embraced  ChristiaiiitY  with  Hieir  king.
It  is  true  that  Gregoxy  seemfi  to  imply  Uiis.  Bixt,  even
in  the  seventh  centmy,  the  Franks  on  the  Meiise  and
Scheldt  were  still  chiefly  psgan,  as  the  LiTes  of  the
Saints  are  said  by  Thierry  to  prove.  We  have  only,  it
is  to  be  remembered,  a  declamatory  and  superfioial  his-
tory for  this  period,  derived,  as  I  believe,  from  the
panegyrical  me  of  St.  Bemy,  and  bearing  traces  of
legendary  incorrectness  and  exaggeration.  We  may,
however,  appeal  to  other  criteria.

It  cannot  be  too  firequently  incnlcated  on  the  reader
who  desires  to  form  a  general  but  tolerably  exact  notion
of  the  state  of  France  under  the  first  line  of  kings,  that
he  IB  not  hastily  to  draw  inferences  from  one  of  the  three
divisions,  Austrasia,  Neustria,  and  Aqidtaine,  to  which,
for  a  part  of  the  period,  we  mnst  add  Bnrgmidy,  to  the
rest.  The  difference  of  language,  though  nqt  always
decisive,  furnishes  a  presumption  of  different  origin.
We  may  therefore  estimate,  with  some  probability,  the
proportion  of  Franks  settled  in  the  monarchy  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Bhine,  by  the  extent  of  country  wherein  the
Teutonic  language  is  spoken,  unless  we  have  reason  to
suspect  that  any  change  in  the  boundaries  of  that  and
the  French  has  since  taken  place.  The  Latin  was  cer-
tainly an  encroaching  language,  and  its  daughter  has  in
some  measure  partaken  of  the  same  character.  Many
causes  are  easy  to  assign  why  either  might  have  gained
ground  on  two  dialects,  the  German  and  Flemish,  con-
iguous  to  it  on  the  eastern  frontier,  while  we  can  hardly
perceive  one  for  an  opposite  result.  We  find,  never-
theless, that  both  have  very  nearly  kept  their  ancient
limits.  It  has  been  proved  by  M.  Baoux,  in  the  Memoira
of  the  Academy  of  Brussels  Tvol.  iv.  p.  411),  that  few
towns  or  villages  have  changea  their  language  since  the
ninth  century.  The  French  or  Walloon  followed  in  that
early  age  the  irregular  line  which,  running  from  Calais
and  St.  Omer  to  Lisle  and  Toumay,  stretcnes  north  of
the  Mouse  as  fsur  as  Liege,  and,  bending  thence  to  the
south-westward,  passes  through  Longwy  to  Metz.  These
towns  speak  French,  and  spoke  it  under  Charlen&agne,
if  we  can  say  that  under  Charlemagne  French  was  spoken
anywhere ;  at  least  they  spoke  a  dialect  of  Latin  origin.
The  exceptions  are  few ;  but  where  they  exist,  it  is  from

Chap.  II.  BOMAK  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  291

the  progress  of  French  rather  than  the  contraiy.  A
writer  of  the  sixteenth  oentaiy  says  of  St.  Omer  that  it
•was  "  Olim  hand  dnbie  mere  Iiandricmn,  deinde  tamen
bilingae,  nunc  autem  in  totiun  fere  Ghdlicxun."  There
has  also  been  a  slight  movement  toward  French  in  the
last  fifty  years.

The  most  remarkable  evidence  for  the  duration  of  the
limit  is  the  act  of  partition  between  Lothaire  of  Lorrain
and  Charles  Ihe  Bald,  in  870,  whence  it  appecurs  that
the  names  of  plaoes  where  French  is  now  spoken  were
then  French,  x  et  most  of  these  had  been  bnilt,  espe-
cially the  abbeys,  subsequently  to  the  Frank  conquest  :
"  d'ou  on  peut  oonclure  que  m^e  dans  le  p^riode
firanque,  le  langage  yulgaire  du  grand  nombre  des  habi-
tans  du  pays,  qui  sont  pr^sentement  Wallons,  n*^tait  pas
teutonique ;  car  on  en  verrait  des  traces  dans  les  actes
historiques  et  g^ographiques  de  ce  temps-Ik/'  (P.  434.)
Nothing,  says  M.  Michelet,  can  be  more  French  than
the  WaUoon  country.  (Hist,  de  France,  viii.  287.)  He
expatiates  almost  with  enthusiasm  on  the  praise  of  this
people,  who^seem  to  have  retained  a  large  share  of  his
mvourite  Celtic  element.  It  appears  that  the  result  of
an  investigation  into  the  languages  on  the  Alsatian
frontier  would  be  much  the  same.  Here,  therefore,  we
have  a  very  reasonable  presumption  that  the  fiDrefathers
of  the  Flemish  Belgians,  as  well  as  of  the  people  of  Al-
sace, were  barbarians :  some  of  the  former  may  be  sprung
from  Saxon  colonies  planted  in  Brabant  by  Charlemagne ;
but  we  may  derive  die  majority  iron^  Salian  and  Bipua-
rian  Franks.  -  These  were  the  strength  of  Austrasia,  and
among  these  the  great  restorer,  or  rather  founder,  of  the
empire  fixed  his  capital  at  Aix-lsrChapelle.

in  Aquitaine,  on  the  other  hand,  everything  appears
Boman,  in  contradistinction  to  Frank,  except  the  reigning
fiimily.  The  chief  difficulty,  therefore,  concerns  Neus-
tria ;  that  is,  from  the  Scheldt,  or,  perhaps,  the  Somme,
to  the  Loire ;  and  to  this  important  kingdom  the  advo-
cates of  the  two  nations,  Boman  and  Frank,  lay  claim.
M.  Thierry  has  paid  much  attention  to  the  subject,  and
oome  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  the  seventh  century,  the
number  of  Frank  landholders,  from  the  Bhine  to  the
Loire,  much  exceeded  that  of  the  Boman.  And  this
excess  he  takes  to  have  been  increased  through  the

u2

292  ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  Notes  to

Beiznre  of  dmrch  lands  in  the  next  age  by  Cliarleii
Maitel,  who  bestowed  them  on  his  Greiman  troopa  en-
listed beyond  the  Ehine.  The  method  which  Thierry
has  puTSTied,  in  order  to  ascertain  this,  is  ingenious  and
presttrnptiYely  right.  He  remarked  that  the  names  of
places  will  often  indicate  whether  the  inhabitants,  or
more  often  the  chief  proprietor,  were  of  Boman  or  Teu-
tonic origin.  Thus  Franconville  and  BomainTille,  near
Paris,  are  distinguished,  in  charters  of  the  ninth  cen-
tury, as  Franoorum  viUa  and  Eomanorum  vtZZo.  This  is  an
instance  where  the '  population  seems  to  have  been  of
different  race.  But  commonly  the  owner's  ChiistiAn
name  is  followed  by  a  &miliar  termination.  In  that
same  neighbourhood  proper  names  of  German  origin,
with  the  terminations  ville,  courts  montj  voZ,  and  the  like,
are  very  firequent.  And  this  he  finds  to  be  generally
the  case  nordi  of  the  Loire,  compared  with  the  left  bank
of  that  river.  It  is,  of  course,  to  be  understood  that  this
proportion  of  superior  landholders  did  not  extend  to  the
general  population.  For  that,  in  all  Neustrian  France,
was  evidently  composed  of  those  who  spoke  the  rustic
Boman  tongue  —  the  corrupt  language  which,  in  the
tenth  or  eleventh  centuiy,  became  worthy  of  the  name
of  French ;  and  this  was  the  case,  as  we  have  just  seen,
in  part  of  Austrasia,  as  Champagne  and  Lorrain.

We  may,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  Franks,  even  in
the  reign  of  Glovis,  were  rather  a  numerous  people —
including,  of  course,  the  Bipuarian  as  well  as  the  Salian
tribe.  Th&y  certainly  appear  in  great  strength  soon
afterwards.  If  we  believe  Frocopius,  the  army  which
Theodebert,  king  only  of  Austrasia,  led  into  Italy  in
539,  amounted  to  100,000.  And,  admitting  the  proba-
bility of  great  exaggeration,  we  could  not  easily  recon-
cile this  with  a  very  low  estimate  of  Frank  numbers.
But,  to  say  the  truth,  I  do  not  rely  much  on  this  state-
ment. It  is,  at  all  events,  to  be  remembered  that  the
dominions  of  Theodebert,  on  each  side  of  the  Bhine,
would  famish  barbarian  soldiers  more  easily  than  those
of  the  western  kingdoms.  Some  may  conjecture  that
the  array  was  partly  composed  of  Bomans;  yet  it  i&
doubtful  whetlier  they  served  among  the  Franks  at  so
early  a  |)eriod,  though  we  find  them  some  years  after-
^Rrards  under  Chilperic,  a  Neustrian  sovereign. The

Chap.  II.  ROMAN  NATIVES  OF  GAUL.  2^3

armies  of  Aqnitaixie,  it  is  said,  were  almost  wholly  com-
posed of  Bomaus  or  Goths;  it  could  not  have  been
otherwise.

The  history  of  Gregory,  which  terminates  in-  698,
affords  nmnerons  instances  of  Bomans  in  the  highest
offices,  not  merely  of  trost,  but  of  power.  Snch  were
Cehnis,  Amatus,  Mnmmolns,  and  afterwards  Protadixis  in
Biu^undy,  and  Desiderius  in  Aqnitaine.  But  in  these
two  parts  of  the  monarchy  we  might  anticipate  a  greater
influence  of  the  native  population.  In  Neustria  and
Austrasia,  a  Boman  count,  or  mayor  of  the  palace,  might
have  been  imfavourably  beheld.  Yet  in  the  latter  king-
dom, all  Frank  as  it  was  in  its  general  character,  we
find,  even  before  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century.  Lupus,
duke  of  Champagne,  a  man  of  considerable  weight,  and
a  Boman  by  birth ;  and  it  was  the  policy  afterwards  of
*Brunehaut  to  employ  Bomans.  But  this  not  only  ex-
cited the  hostility  of  the  Austrasian  Franks,  but  of  the
Burgundians  themselves ;  nor  did  anything  more  tend  to
the  ruin  of  that  ambitious  woman.  Despotism,  through
its  most  ready  instruments,  was  her  aim ;  and,  when  she
signally  fedled  in  the  attempt,  the  star  of  Germany  pre
vailed.  From  that  time,  Austrasia  at  least,  if  not  Keus-
tria,  became  a  Frank  aristocracy.  We  hear  little  more
of  Bomans,  ecclesiastics  excepted,  in  considerable  power.

If,  indeed,  we  could  agree  with  Montesquieu  and
Mably,  that  a  Boman  subject  might  change  his  law  and
live  by  the  Salic  code  at  his  discretion,  his  equality  with
the  Franks  would  have  been  virtually  recognised ;  since
every  one  might  place  himself  in  the  condition  of  the
more  favoured  nation.  And  hence  Mably  accounts  for
the  prevalence  of  the  Frank  jurisprudence  in  the  north
of  France,  since  it  was  more  advantageous  to  adopt  it  as
a  personal  law.  The  Boman  might  become  an  alodial
landholder,  a  member  of  the  sovereign  legislature  in  the
Field  of  March.  His  weregUd  would  be  raised,  and  with
that  his  relative  situation  in  the  commonwealth;  his
lands  would  be  exempt  from  taxation.  But  this  theory
has  been  latterly  rejected.  We  cannot,  indeed,  conceive
one  less  consonant  to  the  principles  of  the  barbarian
kingdoms,  or  the  general  language  of  the  laws.  Mon-
tesquieu was  deceived  by  a  passage  in  an  early  capitu-
lai^S  of  which  the  best  manuscripts  famish  a  differeni

>

294  ROMAN  NATrVSa  OF  GAUL.  KCTTBSTO

reading.  Mably  was  pleased  with  an  hypotheBiB  which
rendei^  the  basis  of  the  state  more  demociatical.  But
the  first  who  propagated  this  error,  and  on  more  plaa-
sible  groimds  than  Montesqmen,  though  he  (Esprit  des
Loix,  liv.  xxviii.  c.  4)  seems  to  claim  it  as  a  discovexy
of  his  own,  were  Du  Cange  and  MnratorL  They  were
misled  by  an  edict  of  the  emperor  Lothaire  I.  in  824 : —
*'  Yolumus  ut  cunctus  popnlus  Bomanns  interrogetnr
qnali  lege  vult  vivere,  nt  tali,  quali  professi  fderint
vivere  velle,  vivant."  But  Savigny  has  proved  that  Hub
was  a  peculiar  exception  of  favonr  granted  at  that  time
to  the  Bomans,  or  rather  separately  to  each  person;  and
that  not  as  a  priyilege  of  the  ancient  population,  but  for
the  sake  of  tiie  barbarians  who  had  settled  at  Borne.
Baynonard  is  one  of  those  who  have  been  deceived  by
the  more  obvious  meaning  of  this  law,  and  adopts  the
notion  of  Mably  on  its  autibority.  Were  it  even  to  bear
such  an  interpretation,  we  could  not  draw  a  general
inference  from  it.  In  the  ease  of  married  women,  or  of
the  clergy,  the  liberty  of  changing  the  law  of  birth  was
really  permitted.  (See  Savigny,  i.  134,  et  post^  EngL
trand.")

It  snould,  however,  be  mentioned,  that  a  late  very
learned  writer,  Troja,  admits  the  hypothesis  of  a  change
of  law  in  France,  not  as  a  right  in  evexy  Boman's  power,
but  as  a  special  privilege  sometimes  conceded  by  the
king.  And  we  may  think  this  conjecture  not  unworthy
of  regard,  since  it  serves  to  account  for  what  is  rather
anotkmlous — the  admission  of  mere  Bomans,  at  an  early
period,  to  the  great  offices  of  the  monarchy,  and  espe-
cially to  that  of  count,  which  involved  the  rank  of  pre-
siding in  the  Frank  mallns.  It  is  said  that  Bomans  some-
times assumed  German  names,  though  the  contraiy
never  happened ;  and  this  of  itself  seems  to  indicate  a
change,  as  far  as  was  possible,  of  national  connexion.
But  it  is  of  little  service  to  the  hypothesis  of  Montes-
quieu and  Mably.  Of  the  edict  of  Lothaire  Troja  thinks
like  Savigny ;  but  he  adopts  the  reading  of  the  capita-
lary,  as  quoted  by  Montesquieu,  *'  Francum,  aut  bar-
barum,  aut  hominem  qui  lege  Sailed  vivit ;"  where  the
best  manuscripis  omit  the  second  aut.

Chap.  II.  DISTINCTION  bF  LAWS.  291

Note  V. Page  152.

This  sabject  has  been  folly  treated  in  the  celebrated
work  by  Sayigny,  *  History  of  Bcman  Law  in  the  Middle
i^gee.' The  £ligenoe  and  fidelity  of  this  eminent  writer
have  been  acknowledged  on  all  sides ;  nor  has  any  one
been  so  copious  in  collecting  materials  for  the  history  of
mediieTal  jnrispnidence,  or  so  perspicuous  in  arranging
them. In  a  few  points  later  inquirers  have  not  always
concurred  with  him. But,  with  tlie  highest  respect  for
Savigny,  we  may  say,  that  of  the  two  leading  proposi-
tions— ^namely,  first,  the  continuance  of  the  Theodosian
code,  copied  into  the  Breviarium  Aniani,  as  the  personal
law  of  the  Roman  inhabitants,  both  of  France  and  Italy,
for  several  centuries  after  the  subjugation  of  those  coun*
tries  by  the  barbarians ;  and,  secondly,  the  quotation  of
the  Pandects  and  other  parts  of  the  law  of  Justinian  by
some  few  writers,  before  the  pretended  discovery  of  a
manuscript  at  Amalfi — ^the  former  has  been  perfectly
well  known,  at  least  ever  since  the  publication  of  the
glossary  of  Ducange  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and
that  of  Muratori*s  Dissertations  on  Italian  Antiquities
in  the  next ;  nor,  indeed,  could  it  possibly  have  been
overlooked  by  any  one  who  had  read  the  barbarian
codes,  full  as  they  are  of  reference  to  those  who  followed
the  laws  of  Bome; while  the  second  is  also  proved,
though  not  so  abundantly,  by  several  writers  of  the  last
age. Guizot,  praising  Savigny  for  his  truthfdlnesB,  and
for  having  shown  the  permanence  of  Boman  jurispru-
dence in  Europe,  well  asks  how  it  could  ever  have  been
doubted. (Civil,  en  France,  Le9on  11.)

A  late  writer,  indeed,  has  maintained  that  the  Bomans
did  not  preserve  their  law  under  the  Lombards ;  elabo-
rately repelling  the  proofis  to  the  contrary,  alleged  by
Muratori  and  Savigny.  ^See  Troja,  Discorso  della  Con-
dizione  xlei  Bomani  vinti  dai  Longobardi,  subjoined  to
the  fourth  volume  of  his  Storia  d'ltalia.)  He  does  not
admit  that  the  inhabitants  were  treated  by  the  Lombard
oonqueroiB  »  anything  better  tlian  tributaries  or  coUmi.
Even  the  bishops  and  clergy  were  judged  according  to
the  Lombard  law  (vol.  v.  p.  86\  The  personal  law  did
not  come  in  till  the  conquest  or  Charlemagne,  who  estar
blished  it  in  Italy. And  though  later,  according  to  this

296  DISTINCTION  OF  LAWS.  Kami«

writer,  in  its  origin,  the  distinctions  introdnced  by  it
subsisted  much  longer  than  they  did  in  France.  In-
stances of  persons  professing  to  live  by  the  Lombard
law  are  fonnd  very  late  in  the  middle  ages ;  the  last  is
at  Bergamo,  in  1388.  But  Bergamo  was  a  city  in  which
the  Lomb(u:d  population  had  predominated.  (Savigny,
vol.  i.  p.  378.)

Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  in  Lombardy,  the
existence  of  personal  law  in  France  is  beyond  quertion.
It  is  £Eur  more  difficult  to  fix  a  date  for  its  termination.
These  national  distinctions  were  indelibly  preserved  in
the  south  of  France  by  a  law  of  Yalentinian  HE.,  copied
into  the  Breviarium  Aniani,  which  prohibited  the  inter-
marriage of  Bomans  with  barbarisms.  This  was  abo-
lished so  far  as  to  legalize  such  unions,  with  the  permis-
sion of  the  count,  by  a  law  of  the  Visigoths  in  Spain,
between  653  and  672.  But  such  an  enactment  could
not  have  been  obligatory  in  France.  Whether  the
Franks  ever  took  Boman  wives  I  cannot  say ;  we  have,
as  fiEU*  as  I  am  aware,  no  instance  of  it  in  their  royal
family.  Proofis  might,  perhaps,  be  found,  with  respect
to  private  families,  in  the  Lives  of  the  Saints ;  or,  if
none,  presumptions  to  the  contrary.  Troja  ^Storia
d'ltalia,  p.  1204)  says  that  St.  Medard  was  the  ofspring
of  a  marriage  between  a  Frank  and  a  Boman  mother,
before  the  conquest  by  Clovis,  and  that  the  feither  lived
in  the  Yermandois.  Savigny  observes  that  the  prohibi-
tion could  only  have  existed  among  the  Visigoths ;  else
a  woman  could  not  have  changed  her  law  by  marriage.
This,  however,  seems  rather  applicable  to  Italy  than  to
the  north  of  F'rance,  where  we  have  no  proof  of  such  a
regulation.  Baynouard,  whose  constant  endeavour  is  to
olevate  the  Boman  population,  assumes  that  they  would
nave  disdained  intermarriage  with  barbarians.  (Hist
du  Droit  Municipal,  i.  288.)  But  the  only  instance
which  he  adduces,  strangely  enough,  is  that  of  a  Groth
with  a  Frank ;  which,  we  are  informed,  was  reckoned
to  dispan^e  the  former.  It  is  very  likely,  nevertheless,
that  a  Fiank  Antrustion  would  not  have  held  himself
highly  honoured  by  an  alliance  with  either  a  Goth  or  a
Boman.  Each  nation  had  its  own  pride ;  the  oonquerur
in  arms  and  dominion,  the  oonquerod  in  polished
neri»  and  ancient  renown.

VBAF.  II.  DISllNCTION  OF  LAWS.  297

'*  At  the  beginnmg  of  the  ninth  century/'  says  M,
Gnizot,  **  the  eesentaal  charaoteristio  is  that  laws  are
personal  and  not  territorial.  At  the  beginning  of  the
eleventh  the  reverse  prevails,  except  in  a  veiy  few  in-
stances." (Le^on  25.)  But  can  we  approximate  no
nearer?  The  territorial  element^  to  use  uiat  fsivourite
word,  seems  to  show  itself  in  an  expression  of  the  edict
of  Pistes,  864 :  —  *'  In  lis  regionibus  quae  legem  Bo-
manam  seqnnntur."  (Capit.  Gar.  Calvi.)  This  must
be  taken  to  mean  the  south  of  France,  where  the  number
of  persons  who  followed  any  other  law  may  have  been
inconsiderable,  relatively  to  the  rest,  so  that  the  name
of  the  district  is  used  collectively  for  the  inhabitants.
rSavigny,  i.  162.)  And  this  became  the  pays  du  droit
ecrit,  bounded,  at  least  in  a  loose  sense,  by  the  Loire,
wherein  the  Boman  was  the  common  law  down  to  the
French  revolution ;  the  laws  of  Justinian,  in  the  pro-
gress of  learning,  having  naturally  tetken  place  of  the
Theodosian.  But  in  the  same  capitulaiy  we  read, —
*'  De  illis  qui  secimdum  legem  Bomanam  vivnnt,  nihil
aliud  nisi  quod  in  iisdem  contdnetur  legibus,  definimus."
And  the  Inng  (Charles  the  Bald)  emphatically  declares
tliat  neither  that  nor  any  other  capitulary  which  he  or
his  predecessors  had  made  is  designed  for  those  who
obeved  the  Boman  law.  The  Had  may  be  open  to  some
limitation ;  but  we  have  here  an  express  recognition  of
the  continuance  of  the  separate  races.  It  seems  highly
probable  that  the  interference  of  the  bishops,  still  in  a
great  measure  of  Boman  birth,  and,  even  where  other-
wise, disposed  to  favour  Boman  policy,  contributed  to
protect  the  ancient  inhabitants  from  a  le^udature  wherein
they  were  not  represented.  And  this  strongly  corro-
borates the  probability  that  the  Bomans  had  never  par-
taken of  the  legislative  power  in  the  national  assemblies.

In  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century,  however,  accord-
ing to  Sismondi,  the  distinction  of  races  was  lost ;  none
were  Goths,  or  Bomans,  or  even  Franks,  but  Aquita-
nians,  Burgundians,  Flemings.  French  had  become  the
language  of  the  nation  (iii.  400).  French  must  here  be
understood  to  include  Provencal,  and  to  be  used  in
opposition  to  German.  In  this  sense  the  assertion  seems
to  be  nearly  true ;  and  it  may  naturally  have  been  the
consequence  that  all  difference  of  personal  laws  had

298  DISTINCTION  OF  LAWS.  Notee  T9

oome  to  an  end.  The  feudal  cnstoms,  the  local  nsagen
of  counties  and  fie&,  took  as  much  the  lead  in  northern
France  as  the  Boman  code  still  preserved  in  the  soutlu
The  pays  coAtumiers  separated  themselves  by  territorial
distinctions  from  the  pays  du  droits  Still  the  instanoe
quoted  in  my  note,  p.  130,  from  Yaissette  (where,  at
Caroassonne,  so  late  as  918,  we  find  Boman,  Gotb,  and
Frank  judges  enumerated),  is  a  striking  evidence  that,
even  far  to  the  south,  the  territorial  principle  had  not
yet  wholly  subverted  those  privileges  of  races,  to  whidi
the  barbarians,  and  also  the  Bomans,  clung  as  honour-
ably distinctive.

It  is  only  by  the  force  of  very  natural  prejudices,
acting  on  both  the  polished  and  the  uncivilized,  that  we
can  account  for  the  long  continuance  of.  this  inconve-
nient separation.  If  the  Franks  scorned  the  complex
and  wordy  jurisprudence  of  Bome,  it  was  just  as  intole-
rable for  a  Boman  to  endure  the  rude  usages  of  a  German
tribe.  The  traditional  glory  of  Borne,  transferred  by  the
adoption  of  that  name  to  the  provincials,  consoled  them
in  their  subjection;  and  in  the  continuance  of  their
law,  in  the  knowledge  that  it  was  the  gpiarantee  of
their  civil  rights  against  a  litigious  barbarian,  though  it
might  afford  them  but  imperfect  security  against  his
violence,  in  the  connexion  which  it  strengthened  with
the  Church  (for  churchmen  of  all  nations  followed  it),
they  found  no  trifling  recommendations  of  this  distinc-
tion from  the  conquerors.  It  seems  to  be  proved  that,
in  lapse  of  ages,  each  had  gradually  borrowed  something

"  A  wovk  wtaidi  I  had  not  teen  when  been  compiled  on  *  differant  wuHm  «r

this  note  was  written, '  HIetoire  dn  Droit  leadii^;  prindple. This  Is  Toy  nmcii

l*VBn9als,'  by  M.  Lsfcirftre  (p.  86),  treats  what  toolc  place  In  England,  and  peihaps

at  some  length  the  origin  of  the  cnstnmaiy  moire  npldly,  in  the  tweUkh  eentmy;

law  of  France. It  was  not.  In  any  con-  the  Norman  law,  with  Its  feudal  pitep

sidersble  degree,  borrowed  fttxn  the  bar-  dple,  replaced  the  Anglo-Saxon,
banc  codes,  nor  greatly,  as  he  thinks, Bnt  a  Belgian  writer,  IC.  Baepaael

from  the  Roman  law. He  points  oat  tha  (NooTeanz  M&nolna  de  VAoadteia  ds

manifold  discrepancies  firam  the  former  Broxelles,  t.  iU.),  contends  that  the  SaUe

of  these. Bat  these  codes  appear  to  have  and  Ripaarian  laws  bad  aathoclty  in  tha

been  in  force  ander  Charlemagne. The  Netherlands,  down  to  the  thirtaenttk  oe»-

fJMidal  customs,  which  became  the  sole  tory,  for  towns  and  for  alodial  pnprlelon

law  on  the  ri^t  bank  of  the  Loire,  he  We  find  lex  Salloa  in  several  instnmenta

refers  to  the  ninth  and  two  following  Otho  of  Frisingen  says,  **  Lege  qna  SaUca

centnrios. And  I  suppose  there  can  be  nsqne  ad  hac  tempera  irooatar,  nobUIS'

aodoabtof  this.  The  spirit  of  the  Frendi  aimos  Franoorom  adhnc  ntL" Bat  this

eoMums,  both territorial  and  peraunal,  must  have  been  chiefly  aa  to  i
was  wholly  feadal;  the  SaUc  code  had

Gba».  n*  PBOVnrciAL  GOyfiBKHENT.  209

from  the  other.  The  melting  down  of  personal  into
territorial,  that  is.  uniform  law,  as  it  cannot  be  referred
to  any  poBitive  enactment  or  to  any  distinct  period,
teems  to  have  been  the  result  of  such  a  process.  The
same  judges,  the  counts  and  ndssi,  appear  to  have  de-
cided ihe  controversies  of  all  the  subject  nations,  whether
among  themselves  or  one  with  another.  Maroulfus  tells
us  this  in  positive  terms :  '*  Eos  recto  tramite  secundum
legem  et  consuetudinem  eorum  regas."  (Marculf.  For-
mulae, lib.  i.  c.  8.)  Nor  do  we  find  any  separate  judges,
except  the  defensores  of  cities,  who  were  Bomans,  but
had  only  a  limited  jurisdiction.  It  was  only  as  to  civil
rights,  as  ought  to  be  remarked,  that  the  distinction  of
personal  law  was  maintained.  The  penalties  of  crime
were  defined  by  a  law  of  the  state.  And  the  same  must
of  course  be  understood  as  to  military  servioe.

NotbVL Pages  154,  162.

The  Oerman  dukes  of  the  Alemanni  and  Bavarians
belonged  to  once  royal  families :  their  hereditary  rights
may  be  considered  as  those  of  territorial  chiefis.  A^dn,
in  Aquitaine  the  Merovingian  kings  had  so  little  au-
thority that  the  counts  became  nearly  independent.
But  we  do  not  find  reason,  as  feu*  as  I  am  aware,  to  be-
lieve any  regular  succession  of  a  son  to  his  fiekther,  in
Neustria  or  Austrasia,  under  the  first  dynasty :  much
less  would  Charlemagne  have  permitted  it  to  grow  up.
It  could  never  have  become  an  established  usage,  except
in  a  monarchy  too  weak  to  Tnaintain  any  of  its  preroga-
tives. Such  a  monarchy  was  that  of  Charles  the  Bald.
I  have  said  that,  in  the  famous  capitulary  of  Kiersi,  in
877,  the  succession  of  a  son  to  his  father  appears  to  be
recognised  as  a  known  usage.  M.  Fauriel,  on  the  other
hand,  denies  that  this  capittQary  even  confirms  it  at  all.
(Hist,  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale,  iv.  383.)  We  both,
therefore,  agree  against  the  current  of  French  writers
who  take  this  for  the  epoch  of  hereditary  succession.  It
seems  evident  to  me  that  an  usagej  sufficient,  in  common
parlance,  to  entitle  the  son  to  receive  the  honour  which
his  father  had  held,  is  implied  in  this  capitnlaiy.  But
Cie  object  of  the  enactment  was  to  provide  for  the  oou

f

900  PROVmClAL  nOYVJtNHENT  Nom  1VI

tingency  of  a  territorial  government  becoming  vacant
by  deatb  daring  the  intended  absence  of  the  ^nperor
Charles  in  Italy  ;  and  that  in  cases  only  where  the  son
of  the  deceased  count  should  be  with  the  army,  or  in  his
minority,  or  where  no  son  survived. *^  It  is  obvious,"
Palgrave  says,  **  that  the  law  relates  to  the  custody  of
the  county  or  fief  during  the  interval  between  the  death
of  the  &ther  and  the  investiture  of  the  heir."  (English
Commonwealth,  392.) But  the  case  of  an  heir,  that  is,
a  son  —  for  coUatenu  inheritance  is  excluded  by  Qie
terms  of  the  capitulaiy — ^being  of  full  age  and  on  the
spot,  is  not  specially  mentioned ;  so  that  we  must  pre-
sume that  he  would  have  assumed  the  government  of
the  county,  awaiting  the  sovereign's  confirmation  on  his
return from,  the  Italian  expedition. The  capitulary
should  be  understood  as  applicable  to  temporary  cir-
cumstances, rather  than  as  a  permanent  law. But  I
must  think  that  the  lineal  succession  is  taken  for  granted
in  it."

We  find  that  so  long  at  least  as  the  kings  retained
any  power,  their  confirmation  or  consent  was  required  on
every  succession  to  an  honour — that  is,  a  county  or  other
>verDment — ^though  it  was  veiy  rarely  refused.  Guadet
'Notices  snr  Richer,  p.  62^  supposes  this  to  have  been
lie  case  even  in  the  last  reigns  of  the  Caroline  family ;
that  is,  in  the  tenth  century ;  but  this  is  doubtful,  at  least
as  to  the  southern  dukes  and  counts.  These  honoun
gradually,  after  the  accession  of  the  house  of  Capet,
assumed  a  new  character,  and  were  confounded  together
with  benefices  under  the  general  name  of  fiefis  of  the
crown.  The  counts,  indeed,  according  to  Montesquieu
and  to  probability,  held  beneficiary  lands  attached  to
their  office. (Esprit  dee  Loiz,  zxvi.  27.)

*  Si  ooDMB  oUerit,  c^Jiu  flllnfl  no-  notitiain  pervenUit. Sl  veto  flUum  Don

biacnm  lit,  iUiut  noBter  com  eaterls  fide-  babaefiit,  filins  novter  com  cvtexif  fliky

Ubiu  nostria  onlinet  de  his  <ial  iUl  plus  Ulnu  nottria  ordliiet,  qui  cum  mlni^

fJuniliares  et  propliiqiiiorM  ftaerint*  qui  teriallinu  ipdtii  comitetfts  et  epiaoopo

com  mlnisterialiboa  ipadoa  oomitatoa  et  ipram  oomitatum  prwldnt,  donee  Joado

episoopo  Ipsom oomitatnm  pnerideat,  noatn  inde  flat. Et  pro  boo  niilUis  ina>

naqae  com  noUa  renontletiir. Si  antem  cfttnr,  al  eondem  comitatnm  alteri.  qni

filinm  panralom  habaerit,  iiadem  com  noUa  plaeoerlt,  dedextmua,  quam  ilU  qui

minlateiialibiia  ipatna  comitatAa  et  epia-  earn  haetenua  pneridit Similiter  et  de

capo,  lo  cnioB  paroclila  conaietit,  enodem  vaeaallla  noetria  fuieDdmn  esL  (Script

oomltatom  pnavideat,  doneo  ad  noatram  Ber.  GaU.  Til.  YOl.)

CtaAP.  IL  POWER  OF  THE  EIKGS.  301

The  county,  it  may  here  be  mentioiied,  was  a  terri-
torial division,  generally  of  the  same  extent  as  the  pagiu
of  the  Boman  empire.  The  latter  appellation  is  used  in
the  Merovingian  period,  and  long  afterwards.  The  word
oonnty,  oomiMus,  is  said  to  be  rare  before  800 ;  but  the
royal  officer  was  called  comes  from,  the  beginning.  The
number  of  pagi^  or  counties,  I  have  not  found.  The  epis-
copal dioceses  were  118  in  the  Caroline  period,  and  were
frequently,  but  not  always,  coincident  in  extent  with
the  civil  divisions.  (See  Gu^rard,  Cartulaire  de  Char-
tres,  Frol^gom^nes,  p.  6,  in  Documens  In^dits,  1840.)

NotbVIL Page  157,

A  reconeideration  of  the  Merovingian  histoiy  has  led
me  to  doubt  whether  I  may  not,  in  my  earlier  editions,
like  several  others,  have  rather  exaggerated  the  change
in  the  prerogative  of  the  French  kings  from  Clovis  to
Glotaire  11.  Though  the  fetmous  story  of  the  vase  of
Soissons  is  not  insignificant,  it  now  seems  to  me  that  an
excessive  stress  has  sometimes  been  laid  upon  it.  In  the
first  place,  there  is  a  general  objection  to  founding  a
large  political  theory  on  any  anecdote,  which  proving
false,  the  whole  would  crumble  for  want  of  a  basis.
This,  however,  is  rather  a  general  remark  than  intended
to  throw  doubt  upon  the  story  told  by  Gregory  of
Tours,  who,  though  he  came  so  long  afterwards,  and
though  there  is  every  appearance  of  riietorical  exagge-
ration and  inexactness  in  the  detail,  is  likely  to  h&YO
learned  the  principal  fiEU3t  by  tradition  or  some  lost  au-
thority.P  But  even  taking  the  circumstances  exactly
according  to  his  relation,  do  they  go  much  farther  than
to  inform  us,  what  our  knowledge  of  barbarian  mannen;
might  lead  any  one  to  presume,  that  the  booty  obtained
by  a  victory  was  divided  among  the  army  ?  Clovis  was

P  Sisoe  this  sentence  was  written  I  tracts  trlMn  Hlncmer  oompHed  fala  own

have  found  the  story  of  the  raae  of  Sola-  biography  of  that  bmoua  bishop,  is,  in

sons  in  Hincmar^s  life  of  St  Remi,  all  likelihood,  the  basis  of  whatever  Gre-

which,  as  I  have  observed  in  a  farmer  gory  of  Tours  has  recorded  ooucemlng

note,  appears  to  be  taken  from  a  doco-  the  fbimder  of  the  monarchy;  rerj  rhe-

ment  nearly  oontemporsiy  with  the  saint,  torical,  and  probably  not  aocnrate,  but

that  is,  with  Clovis. And  this  original  essentially  deserving  bellA
Ufe  oC  St.  Eemi,  pwecrted  only  in  ezp

Jt2  roWKR  or  TBE  nSGS^  BomiO

uai  nbmoA.  tibe  -viae  wiiidi  be  requoted;  Ike  amj  giKre
llieir  aaent  in  tenne  wiudi  Gregoiy,  we  naj  wdil  be-
liere,  baa  made  too  an!  an  inure;  be  took  it  ividioiit
regud  to  tbe  inaoleooe  of  a  ain^  aoldier,  and  lerenged
liiiiMftlf  on  tbe  fint  opfioitiuii^.  Tbe  Salian  king  waa»
I  beliere  from  otber  evidence,  a  limited  one ;  be  ma
obliged  to  ooDBiilt  bia  anny  in  war,  bia  obief  men  in
peace;  bottbeTaaeof  8oiaKiiiadoeano*aeem.toiranant
na  in  ^Awnmig  him  to  baTC  been  more  limited  tban  from
btakoiy  and  analogy  we  abonld  otberwiae  infer.  U^  in-
deed, tbe  langnage  of  Giegmy  were  to  be  trusted,  tbe
wbole  reaolt  would  tell  more  in  fiiTonr  of  Ibe  royal
authority  tban  against  it.  And  Ibna  Doboa,  wbo  baa
written  on  the  principle  of  believing  all  that  be  fonnd
in  bistory  to  tbe  veiy  letter,  baa  inteipreted  tbe  atoiy.

Two  Frencb  writers,  the  latter  of  conaiderBble  repu-
tation, BonlainYillierB  and  Mably,  have  oontriboted  to
render  cmrent  a  notion  tbat  Ibe  barbarian  kin^  before
the  conqnest  of  Gaul,  enjoyed  scarcely  any  aatbority
beyond  that  of  leaders  of  the  army.  And  this  tbeoiy
has  lately  been  maintained  by  two  of  our  conntiymen,
whose  researches  have  met  with  great  approbation.
''  It  is  plain/*  says  Mr.  Allen,  **  tbe  monarchical
theory  cannot  have  been  derived  fix>m  the  ancient  Ger-
mans. In  the  most  considerable  of  the  German  tribes
the  form  of  goTemment  was  republican.  Some  of  them
had  a  chief,  whom  the  Bomans  designated  with  the  ap-
pellation of  king;  bat  his  authority  was  limited,  and  in
the  most  distingaished  of  their  tribes  the  name  as  well
as  the  office  of  king  was  miknown.^  The  supreme  au-
thority of  the  nation  resided  in  the  freemen  of  whom  it
was  composed.  From  them  every  determination  pro-
ceeded which  affected  the  general  interests  of  the  com-
munity, or  decided  the  life  or  death  of  any  member  of
the  commonwealth.  The  territory  of  the  state  was
divided  into  districts,  and  in  every  district  there  was  a
chief  who  presided  in  its  assemblies,  and,  with  the
assistance  of  the  other  freemen,  regulated  its  internal
concerns,  and  in  matters  of  inferior  importance  adminis-
tered justice  to  the  inhabitants.

1  Thli  li  bj  no  mBum  an  nnqaesdon-  m  btt  been  dbaerred  Id  a  fomsr  notc^  u
able  reprcamtatifln  of  what  Tadtna  baa  not  auffldenUy  perspicaoaa  on  tMa  ■ifr-
Midi  bottiM  language  of  tliathiatorian, jectofOenaaimTaUf.

^BAP.  11.  POWER  OF  TH£  KINGS.  30^

ThiB  form  of  govemmeitt  subeiBted  among  the  Sazosii
ftf  the  Contment  so  late  aa  the  cloae  of  the  seyenth  cen-
tury, and  probably  continued  in  existence  till  their
final  conquest  by  Charlemagne.  Long  before  that
period,  however,  the  tribes  that  quitted  their  native
forests,  and  established  themselves  in  the  empire,  had
converted  the  temporary  general  of  their  army  into  a
permanent  magistrate,  with  the  title  of  king.  But  that
the  person  decorated  with  this  appellation  was  invested
with  the  attributes  essential  to  royalty  in  after  times  is
utterly  incredible.  Freemen  with  arms  in  their  hands»
accustomed  to  participate  in  the  exercise  of  the  sove-
reign power,  were  not  likely  without  cause  to  divest
themselves  of  that  high  prerogative,  and  transfer  it
totally  and  inalienably  to  their  general.  Chie&  who
had  been  recently  his  equals  mi^t,  in  consideration  of
his  military  talents,  and  from  regard  to  their  common
interest,  acquiesce  in  his  permuuent  superiority  as  com-
mander of  their  united  forces;  but  it  cannot  be  sup-
posed that  they  would  gratuitously  and  universally  sub-
mit to  him  as  their  master.  There  are  no  written
accounts,  it  is  true,  of  the  conditions  stipulated  by  the
German  warriors  when  they  converted  him  into  a  king.
But  there  is  abnndance  of  &cts  recorded  by  historians,
which  show  beyond  a  doubt  that,  though  he  might  occa-
sionally abuse  his  power  by  acts  of  violence  and  injus-
tice, the  authority  he  possessed  by  law  was  hx  from  being
unlimited.  (Inquiry  into  the  Bise  and  Growth  of  BoyiJ
Prerogative,  p.  11.)

It  may  be  observed,  in  the  fiivt  place,  that  Mr.  Allen
appears  to  have  combated  a  shadow.  Few,  I  presume,
contend  for  an  unlimited  authority  of  the  Germanic
kings,  either  before  or  after  their  conquests  of  France
and  England.  A  despotic  monarchy  was  utterly  uncon-
genial to  the  mediasval  polity.  Sir  F.  Palgrave  follows
in  the  same  direction : —

'*  When  the  '  three  tribes  of  Germany '  first  invaded
Britain,  royalty,  in  our  sense  of  the  term,  was  unknown
to  them.  Amongst  the  Teutons  in  general  the  word
'  king,'  probably  borrowed  from  the  Celtic  tongue,
though  now  naturalized  in  all  the  Teutonic  languages,
was  as  yet  not  introduced  or  invented.  Their  patri-
archal rulers  were  their  *  aldermen,'  or  seniors. In

304  POWJSR  OF  THE  KINGS.  Notes  tc

*  old  Saxony '  tkere  was  such  an  alderman  in  eveiy
j>agu8.  Predominant  or  pre-eminent  obieffcains,  whom
th^  Eomans  called  *  reges,'  and  who  were  often  con-
firmed in  their  dominions  by  the  Bomans  tiiemselves,
existed  at  an  earlier  period  amongst  several  of  the  Grer-
man  tribes ;  but  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  these
leaders  possessed  any  of  the  exalted  functions  and  com-
plex attributes  which,  according  to  our  ideas,  conatitate
royal  dignity.  A  king  must  be  invested  with  peima. '
nent  and  paramount  authority.  For  the  material  points
at  issue  are  not  affected  by  showing  that  one  powerfiil
chieftain  might  receive  the  complimentary  title  of  nx
from  a  foreign  power,  or  that  another  dueftain,  witii
powers  approaching  to  royalty,  may  not  have  been
created  occasionally,  and  during  greater  emergencies.
The  real  question  is,  whether  the  king  had  become  the
lord  of  the  soil,  or  at  least  the  greatest  landed  pro-
prietor, and  the  first  '  estate '  of  the  commonwesdth,
endued  with  prerogatives  which  no  other  member  of  the
community  could  claim  or  exercise.  The  disposal  of
the  military  force,  the  supreme  administration  of  justice,
the  right  of  receiving  taxes  and  tributes,  and  the  cha-
racter of  supreme  legislator  and  perpetual  president  of
the  councils  of  the  realm,  must  all  belong  to  the  sove-
reign, if  he  is  to  be  king  in  deed  as  well  as  in  name."
(Bise  and  Progress  of  the  English  (Commonwealth,  vol.  L
p.  653.)

The  prerogatives  here  assigned  to  royalty  as  part  of
its  definition  are  of  so  various  a  nature,  and  so  indefi-
nitely expressed,  that  it  is  difficult  to  argue  about  them.
Certainly  a  **  king  in  deed*'  must  receive  taxes,  and
dispose,  though  not  necessarily  without  consent,  of  the
military  force.  He  must  preside  in  the  councils  of  Ihe
realm ;  but  he  need  not  be  supreme  legislator,  if  that  is
meant  to  exclude  the  participation  of  his  subjects;
much  leas  need  he  be  the  lord  of  the  soil — a  very  mo-
dem notion,  and  merely  technical,  if  indeed  it  could  be
said  to  be  true  in  any  proper  sense — nor  even  the
greatest  landed  proprietor.  *'  A  king's  a  king  for  a'
that;"  and  we  nave  never  in  England  known  any
other.

But  why  do  these  eminent  writerB  depreciate  so  con-
fidenlly  the  powers  of  a  Frank  or  Saxon  king  ? Evon  if

CBiP.  IL  POWER  OF  TH2  KINGS.  305

Caasar  and  Tacitus  are  to  Le  impli  tiHj  confided  in  for
their  own  times,  are  we  to  infer  that  no  consolidation  of
the  German  clans,  if  that  word  \a  a  right  one,  had  been
effected  in  the  four  succeeding  centuries  ?  Are  we  even
to  reject  the  numerous  testimonies  of  Latin  writers
during  those  ages,  who  speak  of  kings,  hereditary  chief-
tains, and  leaders  of  the  barbarian  armies?  If  tiliere  is
a  notorious  fact,  both  as  to  the  Salian  Franks  and  the
Saxons  of  Germany,  it  is  that  each  had  an  acknowledged
royal  fSunily.  Even  if  they  sometimes  chose  a  king  not
according  to  our  rules  of  descent,  it  was  invariably  from
one  ancestor.  The  house  of  Meroveus  was  probably
recognised  before  the  existence  of  that  obscure  prince ;
and  in  England  Hengist  could  boast  the  blood  of
Woden,  the  demigod  of  heroic  tradition.  A  govern-
ment by  grafSy  or  eaMormen  of  the  gau^  might  suit  a
people  whose  forests  protected  them  from  invasion,  but
was  utterly  incompatible  with  the  aggressive  wsirfare  of
the  Franks,  or  of  the  first  conquerors  of  Kent  and  Wes-
sex«  Grimm,  in  liis  excellent  Antiquities  of  German
Law,  has  fiilly  treated  of  the  old  Teutonic  monarchies,
not  always  hereditary,  and  never  absolute,  but  easily
capable  of  receiving  an  enlargement  of  power  in  the
hands  of  brave  and  ambitious  princes,  such  as  arose  in
the  great  westward  movement  of  Germany.

If,  however,  the  authority  of  Clovis  has  been  rated
too  low,  it  may  also  be  questioned  whether  that  of  the
next  two  generations,  his  sons  and  grandsons,  has  no^
been  exaggerated  in  contrast.  It  is  certainly  true  thaw
Gregory  of  Tours  exhibits  a  picture  of  savage  tyranny
in  several  of  these  sovereigns.  But  we  are  to  remember
that  particular  acts  of  arbitrary  power,  and  especially
the  putting  obnoxious  persons  to  death,  were  so  conge-
nial to  the  whole  manners  of  the  age,  that  they  do  not
prove  the  question  at  issue,  whether  the  government
may  be  called  virtually  an  absolute  monarchy.  Everj'
Frsink  of  wealth  and  cours^  was  a  despot  within  his
sphere ;  but  his  sphere  of  power  was  a  bounded  one ;
and  so,  too,  might  be  that  of  the  king.  Probably,  when
Gontran  or  Fredegonde  ordered  a  turbulent  chief  to  be
assassinated,  no  vxregild  was  paid  to  his  kindred;  but
his  death  would  excite  hardly  any  disapprobation,  ex«
cept  among  those  who  thought  it  nndeservod.

VOL.  1.  X

806  POWER  OF  THE  KINGS.  Sara  to

Gregory  of  Tours,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind,
Roman ;  he  does  not  always  distinguish  the  two  nations :
but  a  great  part  of  the  general  oppression  which  we
find  under  the  grandchildren  of  Clovis  seems  to  have
fallen  on  the  subject  people. As  to  these,  few  are  in-
clined to  doubt  that  the  king  was  truly  absolute. The
most  remarkable  instances  of  arbitrary  power  exerted
upon  the  Franks  are  in  the  imposition  of  taxes. These,
as  has  been  said  in  another  note,  were  repugnant  to  the
whole  genius  of  barbarian  society. We  find,  however,
that  on  the  death  of  Theodebert  king  of  Austrasia,  in
547,  the  Franks  murdered  one  Parthenius,  evidently  a
Eoman,  and  a  minister  of  the  late  kii:^ — ''  pro  eo  quod
iis  tributa  antedicti  regis  tempore  inmxisset." (Greg-
Tur.  lib.  iii.  c.  36.) Whether  these  tributes  continued
afterwards  to  be  paid  we  do  not  read. Chilperic,  the
most  oppressiye  of  his  line,  at  a  later  period,  in  dTS,
laid  a  tax  on  freehold  lands — ''  ut  possessor  de  terra
propria  amphoram  vini  per  aripennem  redderet." (Id.
lib.  V.  c.  29.) It  is,  indeed,  possible  that  this  affected
only  the  Bomans,  though  the  language  of  the  historian
is  general — **  descriptiones  novas  et  graves  in  omni
regno  suo  fieri  jussit." A  revolt  broke  out  in  conse-
quence at  Limoges;  but  the  inhabitants  of  that  city
were  Boman. Chilperic  put  this  down  by  the  help  of
his  faithful  Antrustions — "  undo  multum  moleetos  rex,
dirigens  de  latere  suo  personas,  immeosis  damnis  popu
lum afflixit, suppliciisque conterruit." Mr. Spence
(Laws  of  Modem  Europe,  p.  269)  is  clearly  of  opmion,
against  Montesquieu,  who  confines  this  tajL  to  me  Bo>
mans,  that  it  comprehended  the  Franks  also,  and  was  in
the  nature  of  the  indiction,  or  land-tax,  imposed  on  the
subjects  of  the  Boman  empire  by  an  assessment  renewed
every  fifteen  years ;  and  this,  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  is
the  more  probable  hypothesis  of  the  two. Mr.  S.  says
(p.  267)  that  lands  subject  to  tribute  still  continued
liable  when  in  the  possession  of  a  Frank. This  is  pos-
sible, but  he  refers  to  texts  which  do  not  prove  it.

The  next  passage  which  I  shall  quote  is  more  unequi-
vocal. The  death  of  Chilperic  exposed  his  instruments
of  tyranny,  as  it  had  Parthenius  in  Austrasia,  to  the
vengeance  i>f  an  oppressed  people.  Fredegonde,  thougli
she  escaped conaign punishment hersdf, could  not

Chap.  H.  POWER  Oh  THE  KINGS.  307

screen  these  idle  ministera : — '*  Habebat  tunc  temporia
sectun  Audonem  jndicem,  qui  ei  tempore  regis  in  multia
consenserat  malls.  Ipse  enim  cum  Mummolo  praefecto
mnltos  de  Francis,  qui  tempore  Childeberti  regis  senioris
ingenui  fuerant,  publico  tributo  subegit.  Qui,  post
mrrtem  regis  ChUperici,  ab  ipsis  spoliatiis  ac  denudatus
est,  ut  nihil  ei,  prseter  quod  super  se  auferre  potuit,
remaneret.  Domos  enim  ejns  incendio  subdiderunt;
abstulissent  utique  et  ipsam  -vitam,  ni  cum  regina  eccle-
siam  expetisset.*'  (Lib.  vii.  c.  16.)  The  word  ingenui,
in  the  above  passage,  means  the  superior  class — alodial
landholders  or  beneficiaries,  as  distinguished  from  the
class  named  lidi,  who  are  also  perhaps  sometimes  called
tnbvtarii,  as  well  as  the  Bomans,  and  &om  whom  a
public  census,  as  some  think,  was  due.  We  may  remark
here,  that  the  removing  of  a  number  of  Franks  from
their  own  place  as  ingenui,  to  that  of  tribntaries,  was  a
particular  act  of  oppression,  and  does  not  stand  quite  on
the  footing  of  a  general  law.  The  passage  in  Gregory
is  chiefly  important  as  it  shows  that  the  tngentii  were  not
legally  subject  to  public  tribute.

M.  Guizot  has  adduced  a  constitution  of  Clotaire  II.
in  615,  as  a  proof  that  endeavours  had  been  made  by
the  kings  to  impose  nndue  taxes.  This  contains  the
following  article :  "  Ut  ubicnnque  census  novus  impie
additus  est,  et  a  populo  reclamatur,  justa  inquisitione
misericorditer  emendetur."  (C.  8.)  6ut  does  this  war-
rant the  inference  that  any  tax  had  been  imposed  on
the  free-bom  Frank?  ^^  Census**  is  generally  under-
stood to  be  the  capitation  paid  by  the  tributarii,  and  the
words  imply  a  local  exaction  rather  than  a  national  im-
position by  the  royal  authority.  It  is  not  even  manifest
that  this  provision  was  founded  exclusively  on  any  op-
pression of  the  crown;  several  other  articles  in  this
celebrated  law  ctre  extensively  remedial,  and  forbid  all
undue  spoliation  of  the  weak.  But  if  we  should  incline
tcr  Guizot's  interpretation,  it  will  not  prove,  of  course,
the  right  of  the  kings  to  impose  taxes  on  the  Franks,
since  that  to  which  it  adverts  is  called  census  novus  impie
additus.

The  inference  which  I  formerly  drew  from  the  lan-
guage of  the  laws  is  inconclusive.  Bouquet,  in  the
Kecueil  des  Historiens  (vol. iv.), admits  only  seven

z2

*  308  POWER  OF  THE  KINGS.  N<y»  iv

laws  during  the  Merovingian  period,  diffftriiig  from
Balnze  as  to  the  particnlar  sovereigns  by  whom  sevend
of  them  were  enacted.  Of  these  the  first  is  by  Childe-
bert  I.,  king  of  Paris,  in  532,  aooording  to  him;  by
Childebert  U.  of  Austrasia  according  to  Balnze,  which,
as  the  date  is  Cologne,  and  several  Anstrasian  cities  are
mentioned  in  it  which  never  belonged  to  the  first  Chil*
debert,  I  cannot  bnt  think  more  likely.  This  constitD-
tion  has  una  cum  nostris  optmatibuSy  and,  oonvenit  una  am
leudis  nostris.  And  the  expressions  lead  to  two  infer-
ences; first,  that  the  assembly  of  the  Field  of  March
was,  in  that  age,  annnally  held;  secondly,  that  it  was
customary  to  send  ronnd  to  the  people  tbe  determina-
tions of  the  optimates  in  this  conncil : — '*  dun  nos
omnes  calendas  Martias  de  quascnnque  conditiones  nna
cum  optimatibus  nostris  pertractavimns,  ad  nnmnquem-
que  notitiam  volumus  pervenire."  The  grammar  is
wretched,  but  such  is  the  evident  sense.

The  second  law,  as  it  is  called,  is  an  agreement  between
Childebert  and  Clotaire ;  the  first  of  each  name  accord-
ing to  Bouquet,  the  second  according  to  Balnze.  This
wants  all  enacting  words  except  *'  Decretnm  est*'  The
third  is  an  ordinance  of  Childebert  for  abolishing  idola-
trous rites  and  keeping  festivals.  It  is  an  enforcement
of  ecclesiastical  regulations,  not  perhaps  reckoned  at
that  time  to  require  legislative  sanction.  The  fourth,  of
Clotaire  I.  or  Clotaire  11.,  begins  *'  Decretum  est,"  and
hafi  no  other  word  of  enactment.  But  this  does  not  ex-
clude the  probability  of  consent  by  the  leudes.  Clotaire
I.,  in  another  constitution,  speaks  authoritatively.
But  it  will  be  found,  on  reading  it,  that  none  except
his  Boman  subjects  are  concerned.  The  sixth  is  merely
II  precept  of  Gontran,  directed  to  the  bishops  and
judges,  enjoining  them  to  maintain  the  observance  of
the  Lord's  day  and  other  feasts.  The  last  is  the  edict
of  Clotaire  if.  in  615,  already  quoted,  and  here  we
read, — **  Hanc  deliberationem  quam  cum  pontificibus
vel  tam  nu^nis  viris  optimatibus,  aut  fidelibus  nostris  in
synodali  concilio  instituimus."

After  615  no  law  is  extant  enacted  in  any  of  the
Frank  kingdoms  before  the  reign  of  Pepin.  This,
hfiwever,  cannot  of  itself  warrant  the  assertion  that
none  wero  enacted  which  do  not  remain. It  is  more

Chap.  II.  IfRENOH  NOBILITY.  309

garprising,  perhaps,  that  oven  a  few  have  been  pre-
served. The  language  of  Childebert  above  cited  lead^
to  the  belief  that,  in  the  sixth  century,  whatever  we
may  suppose  as  to  the  next,  an  assembly  with  powers  of
legislation  was  regularly  hold  by  the  Frank  sovereigns.
Nothing,  on  the  whole,  wcurants  the  supposition  that
the  three  generations  after  Clovis  possessed  an  acknow-
ledged right,  either  of  legislating  for  their  Frank  sub-
jects, or  imposing  taxes  upon  them.  But  after  the
assassination  of  Sigebert,  under  the  walls  of  Toumay,  in
575,  the  Austrasian  nobles  began  to  display  a  steady
resistance  to  the  authority  which  his  widow  Brunehaut
endeavoured  to  exercise  in  her  son's  name.  This,  after
forty  years,  terminated  in  her  death,  and  in  the  reunion
of  tibte  Frank  monarchy,  witli  a  much  more  aristocratic
character  than  before,  under  the  second  Clotaire.  It  is
a  revolution  to  which  we  have  already  drawn  attention
in  the  note  on  Brunehaut.

Note  VTH. Page  168.

**  The  existence,"  says  Savigny,  "  of  an  original  no-
bility, as  a  particular  patrician  order,  and  not  as  a  class
indefinitely  distinguished  by  their  wealth  and  nobility,
cannot  be  questioned.  It  is  difficult  to  say  from  what
origin  this  distinction  may  have  proceeded ;  whether  it
was  connected  with  the  services  of  religion,  or  with  the
possession  of  the  heritable  offices  of  counts.  We  may
affirm,  however,  with  certainty,  that  the  hononr  enjoyed
was  merely  personal,  and  conferred  no  preponderance
in  the  political  or  iudicial  systems.**  (Ch.  iv.  p.  172,
English  translation.)  This  admits  all  the  theory  to
which  I  have  inclined  in  the  text,  namely,  the  non-
existence of  a  privileged  order,  though  antiquity  of
&mily  was  in  high  respect.  The  eorl  of  Anglo-Saxon
law  was,  it  may  be  said,  distinguished  by  certain  privi-
leges from  the  ceorl.  Why  could  not  the  same  have  been  '
the  case  with  the  Franks  ?  We  may  answer  that  it  is
by  the  laws  and  records  of  those  times  that  we  prove
the  former  distinction  in  England,  and  it  is  by  the  ab-
sence of  all  such  proof  that  the  non-existence  of  such  ^
distinction  in  France  has  been  presumed. But  if  toe

310  FRENCH  NOBILITT.  Notrb  to

licH,  of  whom  we  bo  often  read,  were  Franks  by'origm,
and  moreo-ver  personally  free,  which,  to  a  certain  extent,
we  need  not  deny,  they  will  be  the  coiresponding  rank
to  the  Anglo-Saxon  ceorl,  superior  as,  m>m  whatever
circumstances,  the  latter  may  have  been  in  his  social
degree. All  the  Frcmd  ingemti  will  thus  have  constitated
a  class  of  nobility ;  in  no  other  sense,  however,  than  all
men  of  white  race  constitute  such  a  class  in  those  of  the
United  States  where  slavery  is  abolished,  which  is  not
what  we  usually  mean  by  the  word. In  some  Oeiman
nations  we  have,  indeed,  a  distinct  nobility  of  blood.
The  Bavarians  had  five  fiunilies,  for  the  death  of  a
member  of  whom  a  double  composition  was  paid. They
had  one,  the  Agilolfungi,  whose  composition  was  four-
fold. Troja  also  finds  proof  of  two  classes  among  the
Alemanns  (v.  168). But  we  are  speaking  only  of  the
Franks,  a  oognate  x)eople,  indeed,  to  the  Saxons  and
Alemanns,  but  not  the  same,  and  whose  origin  is  not
that  of  a  pure  single  tribe.  The  Franks  were  collectively
like  a  new  people  in  comparison  with  some  others  of
Teutonic  blood. It  does  not,  therefore,  appear  to  me
80  unquestionable as  to  Savigny  that  a  considerable
number  of  families  formed  a  patrician  order  in  the
French  monarchy,  without  reference  to  hereditary  pos-
sessions or  hereditary  ofiBoe.

A  writer  of  considerable  learning  and  ingenuity,  but
not  always  attentive  to  the  strict  meaning  of  what  he
quotes,  has  found  a  proof  of  family  precedence  among
Oie  Franks  in  the  words  crmosns  and  crmitus^  employed
in  the  Salic  law  and  in  an  edict  of  Childebert.  (Meyer,
Institut.  Judiciaires,  vol.  i.  p.  104.)  This  privilege  of
wearing  long  hair  he  supposes  peculiar  to  certain  fiuni-
lies,  and  observes  that  crinosus  is  opposed  to  tomoratus*
But  why  should  we  not  believe  that  all  superior  free-
men, that  is,  all  Franks,  whose  composition  was  of  two
hundred  solidi,  wore  this  long  hair,  though  it  might  be
an  honour  denied  to  the  lidi?  Gibert,  in  a  memoir  on
the  Merovingians  (Acad,  des  Insoript.  xxx.  583^,  quotes
a  passage  of  Tacitus,  concerning  the  manner  in  which
the  nation  of  the  Suevi  wore  their  hair,  from  whom  the
Franks  are  supposed  by  him  to  be  descended.  And
there  is  at  least  something  remarkable  in  the  language
of  Tacitus,  which  indicates  a  distinction  between  the

Chap.  IL  FRENCH  N0BILIT7.  311

royal  family  and  other  freemen,  as  well  as  between
these  and  the  servile  class.  The  words  have  not  been,
I  think,  often  quoted : — ^'  Nnnc  de  Suevis  dicendum  est,
quorum  non  tma  ut  Gattorum  Tencterommque  gens ;
majorem  enim  Germanisd  partem  obtment,  propriis
adhuc  nationibus  discreti,  quamquam  in  communi  Suevi
dicuntur.  Insigne  gentis  obliquare  crinem,  nodoque
substringere.  Sic  Suevi  a  caeteris  G^rmanis,  sio  Sue-
vomm  ingenui  a  servis  separantur.  In  aliis  gentibus,
seu  oognatione  aliqua  Suevorum,  seu,  quod  aocidit,  imi-
tatione,  rarum  et  intra  juvenile  spatium,  apud  Suevos
usque  ad  canitiem,  horrentem  capillum  retro  sequuntur,
ac  s«pe  in  ipso  solo  vertice  -religant ;  princes  et  oma-
threm  habeni"  (De  Mor.  German,  c.  38.)  This  last
expression  may  account  for  the  word  crmtus  being  some-
times applied  to  the  royal  family,  as  it  were  exclusivel}',
sometimes  to  the  Frank  nation  or  its  freemen/  The
references  of  M.  Meyer  are  so  far  from  sustaining  his
theory  that  they  rather  lead  -me  to  an  opposite  con-
clusion.

M.  Naudet  (in  M^moires  de  TAcadthnie  des  Inscrip-
tions, Nouvelle  S^rie,  vol.  viii.  p.  502)  enters  upon  an
elaborate  discussion  of  the  state  of  persons  under  the
first  dynasty.  He  distingpiishes,  of  course,  the  ingmm
from  the  lidi.  But  among  the  former  he  conceives  that
there  were  two  classes :  the  former  absolutely  free  as  to
their  persons,  valued  in  their  vxregtld  at  200  solidi,
meeting  in  the  county  maUuSj  and  sometimes  in  the  na-
tional assembly, — ^in  a  word,  the  populus  of  the  Frank
monarchy;  the  latter  valued,  as  he  supposes,  at  100.
solidi,  living  under  the  protection  or  mundeburde  of  some
rich  man,  and  though  still  free,  and  said  to  be  ingenuiU
ordine  servienteSy  not  very  distinguishable  at  present  frx)m
the  lidL  I  do  not  know  that  this  theory  has  been  coun-
tenanced by  other  writers.  But  even  if  we  admit  it,
the  higher  class  could  not  properly  be  denominated  an
hereditary  nobility ;  their  privileges  would  be  those  of

'  The  royal  ftmfly  seem  alao  to  have  de  bis  fieri  debest;  et  ntrmn  indsa  en*

worn  longer  hair  than  the  otbem. Chll-  aarie,  nt  reliqna  plebs  habeantnr,  an  oertt

debert  proposed  to  Clotaire,  as  we  read  bis  Interfectia  regnmni  gennani nostrt

in  Gregory  of  Touxb  (ill.  18),  that  the  icter  noflmetipeQa  teqnalltato  haMta  dlTi-

dilldren  of  their  brother  Clodlmir  ahonld  datar.**
be  either  oopped  or  pat  to  death:  "quid

512  BENEFICES.  l^OTEg  10

better  fortune,  whicli  had  rescued  them  from  the  depend-
ence into  which,  &om  one  cause  or  another,  their  feliow-
oitizens  had  fallen.  The  Franks  in  general  are  called
by  Guizot  une  noblesse  en  decadence;  the  leudes,  one  en
progres.  But  he  maintains  that  from  the  fifth  to  the
eleventh  age  there  existed  no  real  nobility  of  birth.  In
this,  however,  he  goes  much  farther  than  Mably,  who
does  not  scruple  to  admit  an  hereditary  nobility  in  the
time  of  Charlemagne,  and  probably  farther  than  can  be
reasonably  allowed,  especially  if  the  eleventh  oentniy
is  to  be  understood  inclusively.  In  that  century  we
shall  see  that  the  nobles  formed  a  distinct  order;  and  I
am  much  inclined  to  believe  that  this  was  the  case  as
soon  as  feudal  tenure  became  general,  which  was  at
least  as  early  as  the  tenth.

M.  Lehuerou  denies  any  hereditary  nobility  during  the
Merovingian  period,  at  least,  of  French  history:  "D
n'existait  done  point  de  noblesse  dans  le  sens  modeme
du  aaot,  puisqu  il  n*y  avait  point  dli^r^dite,  et  puisque
llier^t^,  si  elle  se  produisait  quelquefois,  ^tait  pure-
ment  accidentelle ;  mais  il  y  avait  une  aristocratie  mobile,
changeante,  variable  au  gre  des  accidents  et  des  capricee
de  la  vie  barbare,  et  n^nmoins  en  possession  de  v^-
tables  privil^es  qu'il  faut  se  garder  de  m(kx)nnaitre.
Cette  aristocratie  ^tait  plutdt  celle  des  titres,  des  places,
et  des  honneurs,  que  celle  de  la  naissance,  quoique
celle-ci  n'y  fut  pas  etrang^re.  Elle  ^tait  plus  dans  l6
present,  et  moins  dans  le  pass^ ;  elle  empruntait  plus  it
la  puissance  actuelle  qu'k  celle  des  souvenirs ;  mais  elle
ne  s*en  detachait  pas  moins  nettement  des  couches  in-
feneures  de  la  population,  et  notamment  de  la  foule  de
ceux  dont  la  nobiesse  ne  consistait  que  dans  leur  inge-
nuity." (Inst.  Caroling,  p.  452.)

Note  IX. Page  160.

The  nature  of  benefices  has  been  very  well  discussed,
like  everything  else,  by  M.  Gkiizot,  in  his  Essai  sur
rnist.  de  France,  p.  120.  He  agrees  with  me  in  the
two  main  positions — ^that  benefices,  considered  gene-
rally, never  passed  through  the  supposed  stage  of  grants
revocable  at  pleasure,  and  that  they  were  sometimes

Chap.  II.  BEKEFICES.  313

granted  in  inberitance  from  the  sixth  century  down
wards.  This,  however,  was  rather  the  exception,  he
Bnpposes,  than  the  rule.  **  We  cannot  donbt  that,  under
ChGhrlemagne,  most  benefices  were  granted  only  for  life  "
(p.  140)*  Louis  the  Debonair  endeavoured  to  act  on
the  same  policy,  but  his  efforts  were  unsuccesbful.
Hereditary  grants  became  the  rule,  as  is  proved  by
many  charters  of  his  own  and  Charles  the  Bald.  Finally
he  tells  us,  the  latter  prince,  in  877,  empowered  his
fideles  to  dispose  of  their  benefices  as  they  thought  fit,
provided  it  were  to  persons  capable  of  serving  the  estate,
but  this  IB  too  largely  expressed ;  the  power  given  is  to
those  vassals  who  might  desire  to  take  up  their  abode  in
a  cloister ;  and  it  could  only  be  exercised  in  favour  of  a
son  or  other  kinsman.'  But  the  right  of  inheritance
had  probably  been  established  before.  Still,  so  deeply
was  the  notion  of  a  personal  relation  to  the  grantor
implanted  in  the  minois  of  men,  that  it  was  common,
notwithstanding  the  largest  terms  of  inheritance  in  a
grant,  for  the  new  tenant  to  obtain  a  confirmation  from
the  crown.  This  might  also  be  for  the  sake  of  security.
And  this  is  precisely  the  renewal  of  homage  and  fealty
on  a  change  of  tenancy,  which  belonged  to  the  more
matured  stage  of  the  feudal  polity*

Mr.  Allen  observes,  with  respect  to  the  formula  of
Marculfiis  quoted  in  my  note,  p.  161 : — "  Some  authors
have  considered  this  as  a  precedent  for  the  grant  of  an
hereditary  benefice.  But  it  is  only  necessary  to  read
with  attention  the  act  itself  to  perceive  that  what  it
creates  is  not  an  hereditaiy  benefice,  but  an  alodial  estate.
It  is  viewed  in  this  light  in  his  (Bignon*s)  notes  on  a
subsequent  formula  (sect.  17),  confiinmtory  of  what  had
been  done  under  the  preceding  one,  and  it  is  only  from
inadvertence  that  it  could  have  been  considered  in  a
different  point  of  view."  (Inquiry  into  Royal  Preroga-
tive, Appendix,  p.  47.)  6ut  Bignon  took  for  granted
that  benefices  were  only  for  term  of  life,  and  conse-
quently that  words  of  inheritance,  in  the  age  of  Mar-
culfas,  implied  an  alodial  grant. The  question  is.  What

"  SI  aliqniM  ex  fldettbos  nostrls  post  qrii  reipnbUca  prodeaBe  valeat,  snos  ho*

obltam  DOfltnim,  Dei  et  nostro  amore  nores  prout  meliofl  yolaexlt  el  valeai  pi*

oompanctns,  aiecalo  rennntlare  ▼otneilt,  citare.— Script  Rer.  GalL  vlL  YOL
et  flUms  vel  Mam  proplnqQam  habneflt

814  BENEFICES.  NomtO

oonfltitnted  a  benefice  ?  Was  it  not  a  grant  hy  CftTour
of  the  king  or  other  lord  ?  If  the  words  nsed  in  the
formnla  of  MarcnlfiiB  are  inconsistent  with  a  beneficiarr
property,  we  mnst  give  np  the  inference  from  the  treaty
of  Andely,  and  from  all  o&er  phrases  which  have  seemed
to  convey  hereditary  benefices^  It  is  tme  that  the  for-
mula in  Maroolfiis  gives  a  larger  power  of  alienation
than  belonged  afterwards  to  fiefis ;  but  did  it  put  an  end
to  the  peculiar  obligation  of  the  holder  of  the  benefice
towards  the  crown?  It  does  not  appear  to  me  unrea->
sonable  to  sappose  an  estate  so  conferred  to  have  been
strictly  a  benefice,  according  to  the  notions  of  the
seventil  century.

Subinfeudation  oould  hardly  exist  to  any  considerable
degree  until  benefices  became  hereditary.  But  as  soon
as  that  change  took  place,  the  principle  was  veiy  natural
and  sure  to  suggest  itself.  It  prodigiously  strengthened
the  aristocracy,  of  which  they  could  not  but  be  aware;
and  they  had  acquired  such  extensive  possessions  out  of
the  royal  domains,  that  they  could  well  afford  to  take
a  rent  for  them  in  iron  instead  of  silver.  Charlemagne,
as  Ghiizot  justly  conceives,  strove  to  counteract  the
growing  feudal  spirit  by  drawing  closer  the  bonds  be-
tween the  soveroign  and  the  subject.  He  demanded  an
oath  of  allegiance,  as  William  afterwards  did  in  Eng-
land, from  the  vassals  of  mesne  lords.  But  after  his
death,  and  after  the  complete  establishment  of  an  here-
ditary right  in  the  grants  of  the  crown,  it  was  utterly
impossible  to  provent  the  general  usage  of  subinfeu-
dation.

Mably  distinguishes  the  lands  granted  by  Charles
Martel  to  his  German  followers  from  the  benefices  of
the  eariy  kings,  reserving  to  the  fi>rmer  the  name  of
fie&.  These  he  conceives  to  have  been  granted  only
for  life,  and  to  have  involved,  for  the  first  time,  the
obligation  of  military  service.  (Observations  sur  I'Hist
de  France,  vol.  i.  p.  32.)  But  as  they  were  not  styled
fiefii  so  early,  but  only  benefices,  this  distinction  seems
likely  to  deceive  the  reader;  and  the  oath  of  fidelity
taken  by  the  Antrustion,  which,  though  personal,  could
not  be  a  weaker  obligation  after  he  had  acqtiired  a  bene-
fice, carries  a  very  strong  presumption  that  military
•lemoe.  at  least  in  defensive  wars,  not  always  distin-

Chap.  II.  SUBINJTEUDAVION.  315

gnisbable  &om  wan  to  reTenge  a  wrong,  as  most  are
presumed  to  be,  was  demanded  by  the  usages  and  moral
sentiments  of  the  society.  We  have  not  a  great  deal  cf
testimony  as  to  the  grants  of  Charles  Martel;  but  in
the  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  it  is  evident  that  all
holders  of  benefices  were  bound  to  follow  the  sovereign
to  the  field.

M.  Guerard  (Cartnlaire  de  Chartres,  i.  23)  is  of
opinion  that,  though  benefices  were  ultimately  fie£s,  in
the  first  stage  of  the  monarchy  they  were  only  usufructs ;
and  the  word  will  not  be  clearlv  found  in  the  restrained
sense  during  that  period.  '*  Cette  difil^rence  entre  deux
institutions  n^  Tune  de  Tautre,  quoique  assez  delicate,
dtait  essentieUe.  £lle  ne  pourrait  6tre  meconnue  que
par  ceux  qui  consid^r^raient  seulement  les  benefices  k  la
Bn,  et  les  fiefis  au  commencement  de  leur  existence;
alors  en  effet  les  uns  et  les  autres  se  confondaient."
That  they  were  not  mere  usufructs,  even  at  first,  appears
to  me  more  probable.

Note  X. Page  161.

Somner  says  that  he  has  not  found  the  word  feudum
anterior  to  the  year  1000 ;  and  Muiatori,  a  still  greater
authority,  doubts  whether  it  was  used  so  early.  I  have,
however,  observed  the  words  feum  and  fevum,  which
are  manifestly  corruptions  of  feudum,  in  several  charters
about  960.  (Yaissette,  Hist,  de  Languedoc,  t.  ii.  Ap-
pendix, p.  107,  128,  et  alibi.)  Some  of  these  fiefs
appear  not  to  have  been  hereditary.  But,  indepen-
dently of  positive  instances,  can  it  be  doubted  that  some
word  of  barbarous  original  must  have  answered,  in  the
vernacular  languages,  to  the  Latin  beneficium?  See
Du  Cange,  v.  Feudum.  Sir  F.  Palgrave  answers  this  by
producing  the  word  lehn.  ^English  Commonwealth,  ii.
208.)  And  though  M.  Thierry  asserts  (B^its  des
Temps  Merovingiens,  i.  245)  that  this  is  modem  Ger-
man, he  seems  to  be  altogether  mistaken.  (Palgravet
ibid.)  But  when  Sir  F.  Palgrave  proceeds  to  say--
*'The  essential  and  fmidamental  principle  of  a  terri-
torial fief  or  feud  is,  that  the  land  is  held  by  a  limited
or  conditional  estate— the  property  being  in  the  lord.

316  SUBINFEUDATION.  Kotes  tc

and  tbe  iisofrast  in  the  tenant,*'  we  must  think  this  not
a  very  exact  definition  of  fends  in  their  matnre  state,
however  it  might  apply  to  the  early  benefices  for  life.
The  property^  by  fendal  law,  was,  I  conceive,  strictly  in
the  tenant;  what  else  do  we  mean  by  fee  simple?
Military  service  in  most  cases,  and  always  fealty,  were
dne  to  the  lord,  and  an  abandonment  of  the  latter  might
cause  forfeiture  of  the  land ;  but  the  tenant  was  not  less
the  owner,  and  might  destroy  it  or  render  it  unprofitable
if  he  pleased.

Fendnm  Sir  F.  Palgrave  boldly  derives  from  emphy-
teusis ;  and,  in  fact,  by  processes  familiar  to  etymologists,
that  is,  cutting  off  the  head  and  legs,  and  extracting  the
back-bone,  it  may  thence  be  exhibited  in  the  old  form,
/eum,  or  femun,  M.  Thierry,  however,  thinks /«A,  that
is,  fee  or  pay,  and  odh^  property,  to  be  the  tme  root.
(Lettres  snr  THist.  de  France,  Lettre  x.)  Gnizot  in-
clines to  the  same  derivation  ;  and  it  is,  in  &ct,  given
by  Du  Cange  and  others.  The  derivation  of  (dod  from  aU
and  odh  seems  to  be  analogous ;  and  the  word  udb/Zer,  for
the  freeholder  of  the  Shetland  and  Orkney  Isles,  strongly
confirms  this  derivation,  being  onlv  the  two  radic^
elements  reversed,  as  I  remember  to  have  seen  observed
in  Gilbert  Stuart's  View  of  Society.  A  charter  of  Charles
the  Fat  is  suspected  on  accoimt  of  the  word  fendum,
which  is  at  least  of  very  rare  occurrence  till  late  in  the
tenth  century.  The  great  objection  to  emphyteusis  is,
that  a  fief  is  a  different  thing.  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  indeed,
contends  that  an  *'  emphyteusis  "  is  often  called  a  **  pre-
caria,"  and  that  the  word  '*  precaria "  was  a  synonym
of  **  beneficium,"  as  beneficium  was  of  "  feudum."  But
does  it  appear  frt)m  the  ancient  use  of  the  words  **  pre-
caria" and  "beneficium"  that  they  were  convertible,
as  the  former  is  said,  by  Muratori  and  Lehnerou,  to
have  been  with  emphyteusis  ?  (Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  Diss,
xxxvi.  Lehuerou,  Inst.  Caroling,  p.  183.)  The  tenant
by  emphyteusis,  whom  we  find  in  the  Codes  of  Theodosius
and  Justinian,  was  little  more  than  a  cdonus^  a  demi-
serf  attached  to  the  soil,  though  incapable  of  being  difr>
possessed.  Is  this  like  the  holder  of  a  benefice,  tho
progenitor  of  the  great  feudal  aristocracy?  How  can
we  compare  emphyteusis  with  beneficium  without  re-
membering that  one  was  commonly  a  grant  for  a  fixed

Chap.  (L  GHAIiOE  OF  TENURES.  817

return  in  valne,  answering  to  the  "  term  censnales  "  of
later  times,  and  the  latter,  as  the  word  implies,  a  free
donation  with  no  condition  but  gratitude  and  fidelity  ?
The  "word  precaria  is  for  the  most  part  applied  to  eccle-
siastical property  which,  by  some  usnrpatLon,  had  fallen
into  the  hands  of  laymen.  These  afterwards,  by  way  ol
compromise,  were  permitted  to  continue  as  tenants  of
the  church  for  a  limited  term,  generally  of  life,  on  pay*
ment  of  a  fixed  rate.  Marculfiis,  however,  gives  a  form
in  which  the  grantor  of  the  precaria  appears  to  be  a
layman.  Military  ifervioe  was  not  contemplated  in  the
emphyteusis  or  the  precaria,  nor  were  either  of  them
perpetuities;  at  least  this  was  not  their  common  con-
dition. Meyer  derives  feudum  from  /?dS»,  quoting
Almoin:  **Leudibus  suis  iafide  disposuit.  (Inst.  Judic.
i,  187.)

NoTB  XI. Pages  164,  166.

M.  Guizot,  with  the  highest  probability,  refers  the
conversion  of  alodial  into  feudal  lands  to  the  principle
of  commendation.  (Essais  sur  THist.  de  France,  p.  166.)
Though  originally  this  had  no  relation  to  land,  but
created  a  merely  personal  tie — fidelity  in  return  for
protection — it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  the  aiodialist  who
obtained  this  privilege,  as  it  might  justly  appear  in  an
age  of  rapine,  must  often  do  so  by  subjecting  nimself  to
the  law  of  tenure — a  law  less  burdensome  at  a  time  when
warfare,  if  not  always  defensive,  as  it  was  against  the
Normans,  was  always  carried  on  in  the  neighbourhood,
at  little  expense  beyond  the  ravages  that  might  attend
its  want  of  success.  Baynouard  haa  published  a  curious
passage  from  the  Life  of  St.  Gerald,  a  count  of  Aurillac,
where  he  is  said  to  have  refused  to  subject  his  alodial
lands  to  the  duke  of  Guienne,  with  the  exception  of  one
farm,  peculiarly  situated.  *'  Erat  enim  semotim,  inter
pessimos  vicinos,  longe  a  csBteris  disparatum."  His
other  lands  were  so  situated  that  he  was  able  to  defend
them.  Nothing  can  better  explain  the  principle  which
riveted  the  feudal  yoke  upon  alodialists.  (Hist,  du  Droit
Municipal,  ii.  261.)

In  my  text,  though  M.  Guizot  has  done  me  the  honour
to  say,  ''M.  Montlosier  et  M.  Hallam  en  ont  mieux  d^

318  PERSONAL  COMMENDATION.  Notes  to

m§l^  la  nature  et  les  causes,"  the  sabjeot  is  not  snf-
fioiently  disentaDgled,  and  the  territorial  character
which  commendation  ultimately  assumed  is  too  much
separated  from  the  personal,  llie  latter  preceded  even
the  conqnest  of  Gkru,  both  among  the  barbarian  invaders
themselves  and  the  provincial  subjects/  and  was  a  sort
of  dientda ; "  but  the  former  deserves  also  the  name  of
commendation,  though  the  Franks  had  a  word  of  their
own  to  express  it.  We  find  in  Maroulfus  the  form  by
which'tlie  king  took  an  ecclesiastical  person,  with  his
property  and  followers,  under  his  own  munMurckj  or
safeguard.  (Lib.  i.  c.  44.)  This  was  equivalent  to  com-
mendation, or  rather  another  word  for  it ;  except  as  one
rather  expreses  the  act  of  the  tenant,  the  other  that  of
the  lord.  Letters  of  safeguard  were  not  by  any  means
confined  to  the  church.  They  were  frequent  as  long  as
the  crown  had  any  power  to  protect,  and  revived  again
in  the  decline  of  the  feudal  system.  Nor  were  they
limited  to  the  crown ;  we  have  the  form  by  which  the
poor  might  place  themselves  under  the  mundeburde  of  the
rich,  still  being  free,  ^'ingenuili  ordine  servientes."
(FormulsB  Veteres  Bignonii,  c.  44;  vide  Naudet,  ubi
supra.)  They  were  then  even  sometimes  called,  as  the
latter  supposes,  Udi  or  Zth',  so  that  a  freeman,  even  of  the

t  M.  Lehuenm  hM  gone  yerf  deeply  this  expUcatdon  of  the  ortgin  of  feodtl

into  themundkttiii.or  penonal  safeguard,  polity,  which  was  in  no  degree  of  a  d^

by  whidi  the  inferior  class  among  the  metHe  character. The  utmost  theycso

Germans  were  commended  to  a  lord,  and  allow  is,  that  territorial  jnriadlctioa  was

placed  under  his  protection,  in  return  for  extended  to  feudal  vassals,  t)y  analogy  lo

their  own  fidelity  and  service. (Insti-  that  which  the  patnn,  or  chief  of  the

tutlons  GaroUngieDnes,  Uv.  i.  di.  i.  ^  2.)  flMMuUiMn,  bad  ezerdsed  over  those  who

It  is  a  sul^ect,  as  he  oonoeives,  of  the  recognised  him  as  protector,  as  well  ss

highest  importance  in these  inquiries,  over  his  ftmily  and  senrants. There  is

being,  in  ftct,  the  real  origin  of  the  nevertheless,  perhaps,  a  laigo'  basis  of

feudal  polity  afterwards  estabUahed  in  truth  In  M.  Ldiueron's  system  than  they

Europe;  though,  fiom  the  drcumstanoes  admit,  thouj^  I  do  not  coneeive  it  to

of  ancient  Gennany,  it  was  of  necessity  explain  the  whole  feudal  system,

a  personal  and  not  a  territorial  vassalage.  <*  Gamier  has  hapi^ty  adduced  a  veiy

It  fell  in  veiy  natoiaUy  with  the  similar  ancient  authority  for  this  use  of  the

principle  of  commendation  existing  in  word.

the  Roman  empire. This  bold  and  ori- _^  , ^ ^  _.* , , ._

ginal  theory,  however,  has  not  been  ad-  ^g  fldm"™*°^^^  '

mltted  by  his  contemporary  mtiquaries  iffoWg  dedlt  ee.-Ter.  Bhm.  Act  5.

H.  Glrand  and  M.  Hignet  (Stances  et

Tnvanx  de I'AcadAnie des  Sdenoes  Origine  du  Gouvemement  Vma^  (k

Morales  et  PoUtiques,  poor  Novembre,  Leber  iL  IM).

1843).  espedaUy  the  latter,  dissent  from

Chap.  IL  PEBS09AL  OOMHENDATIOM.  819

higher  class,  inigh%  at  his  option,  fiJl,  for  the  sake  of
protection,  into  an  inferior  position.

I  have  no  hesitation  in  agreeing  with  Gtdzot  that  the
conversion  of  alodial  into  &udal  property  was  nothing
more  than  an  extension  of  the  old  commendation.  It
was  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  an  express  sur-
render and  regrant  of  the  land ;  the  acknowledgment  of
seigniory  by  the  oommendatus  would  supply  the  place.
M.  Naudet  (Nouv.  M^m.  de  TAcad.  des  Inscrip.  vol.
viii.^  accumulates  proofs  of  commendation;  it  is  sur-
prismg  that  so  little  was  said  of  it  by  the  earlier  anti-
quaries. One  of  his  instances  deserves  to  be  mentioned.
^'Isti  homines,"  says  a  writer  of  Charlemagne's  age,
'*  fiienmt  liberi  et  ingenui ;  sed  quod  militiam  regis  non
valebant  exeroere,  tradiderunt  alodos  suos  sancto  Ger-
mane."" (P.  567.^  We  may  perhaps  infer  fix)m  this
that  the  tenants  oi  the  church  were  not  bound  to  military
service.  "  No  general  law,"  says  M.  Guizot  (Collect,  de
Mem.  i.  419),  ''  exempted  them  from  it ;  but  the  clergy
endeavoured  constantly  to  secure  such  an  immunity,
either  by  grant  or  by  custom,  which  was  one  cause  that
their  tenants  were  better  off  than  those  of  laymen."  The
difference  was  indeed  most  important,  and  must  have
prodigiously  enhanced  the  wealth  of  the  church.  But
after  the  feudal  polity  became  established  we  do  not
find  that  there  was  any  dispensation  for  ecclesiastical
fiefs.  The  advantage  of  their  tenants  lay  in  the  com-
paratively pacific  character  of  their  spiritual  lords.  It
may  be  added  that,  from  many  passages  in  the  laws  of
the  Saxons,  Alemanns,  and  Bavarians,  all  the  **  com-
mendati"  appear  to  have  been  denominated  vassals,
whether  they  possessed  benefices  or  not.  That  word
afterwards  implied  a  more  strictly  territorial  limitation.

Thus  then  let  the  reader  keep  in  mind  that  the  feudal
system,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  was  the  general  esta^
blishment  of  a  peculiar  relation  between  me  sovereign
(not  as  king,  but  as  lord)  and  his  immediate  vassals ;
between  these  again  and  others  standing  to  them  in  the
same  relation  of  vassalage,  and  thus  frequently  through
several  links  in  the  chain  of  tenancy. If  this  relation,

■  It  wm  be  remarked  that  k&eri  aMii^tmd  appear  here  to  be  disttngniAedi
""not  oolj  free,  bat  gef  ttemen."

320  PERSONAL  COMMENDATION,  Nam  n>

and  especially  if  the  latter  and  essential  element,  sub-
infeudation, is  not  to  be  found,  tbere  is  no  feudal  system,
thot^h  there  may  be  analogies  to  it,  more  or  less  re-
markable or  strict.  But  if  he  asks  what  were  the
immediate  causes  of  establishing  this  polity,  we  must
refer  him  to  three  alone — ^to  the  grants  of  beneficiaiy
lands  to  the  vassal  and  his  heirs,  without  which  there
could  hardly  be  subinfeudation ;  to  the  analogous  grants
of  official  honours,  particularly  that  of  count  or  governor
of  a  district ;  and,  lastly,  to  tbe  voluntary  conversion  of
alodial  into  feudal  tenure,  through  free  landholders  sub-
mitting their  persons  and  estates,  hy  way  of  commenda-
tion, to  a  neighbouring  lord  or  to  the  coimt  of  a  district
All  these,  though  several  instances,  especially  of  the
first,  occurred  much  earlier,  belong  generally  to  the
ninth  century,  and  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  fully
accomplished  about  the  beginning  of  the  tenth  —  to
which  period,  therefore,  and  not  to  an  earlier  one,  we
refer  the  feudal  system  in  France.  We  say  in  France,
because  our  attention  has  been  chiefly  directed  to  that
kingdom ;  in  none  was  it  of  earlier  origin,  but  in  some
it  cannot  be  traced  so  high.

An  hereditary  benefice  was  strictly  a  fief,  at  least  if
we  presume  it  to  have  implied  milituy  service ;  heredi-
tary  governments  were  not :  something  more,  therefore,
was  required  to  assimilate  these,  which  were  far  larger  and
more  important  than  donations  of  land.  And,  perhaps,
it  was  only  by  degrees  that  the  great  chiefs,  especially
in  the  south,  who,  in  the  decay  of  the  Caroline  race,
established  their  patrimonial  rule  over  extensive  regions,
condescended  to  swear  fealty,  and  put  on  the  condition
of  vassals  dependent  on  the  crown.  Such,  at  least,  is
the  opinion  of  some  modem  French  writers,  who  seem  to
deny  all  subjection  during  the  evening  of  the  second  and
dawn  of  the  third  race.  But  if  they  did  not  repair  to
Paris  or  Laon  in  order  to  swear  fealty,  they  kept  the
name  of  the  reigning  king  in  their  chaHers.

The  hereditary  bsnefices  of  the  ninth  century,  or,  in
other  words,  fiefs,  preserved  the  nominal  tie,  and  kept
France  from  utter  dissolution.  They  deserve  also  the
greater  praise  of  having  been  the  means  of  r^enerating
the  national  ''haracter,  and  giving  its  warlike  bearing  to
the  French  people ;  not,  indeed,  cts  yet  coUeotively,  but

CHAP.  II.  FRENCH  NOBILITY.  321

in  its  separate  centres  of  force,  after  the  pusillanimoiw
reign  of  Charles  the  Bald.  Thej  produced  much  evil
and  misery ;  but  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  they
prevented  more.  France  was  too  extensive  a  kingdom
to  be  governed  by  a  central  administration,  unless  Charle-
magne had  possessed  the  gift  of  propagating  a  race  of
Alfreds  and  Edwards,  instead  of  Louis  the  Stammerers
and  Charles  the  Balds.  Her  temporary  disintegration  by
the  feudal  system  was  a  necessary  consequence ;  without
Hi&t  system  there  would  have  been  a  final  dissolution  of
the  monarchy,  and  perhaps  its  conquest  by  barbarians.

Note  Xn. Page  193.

M.  Thierry,  whose  writings  display  so  much  antipathy
to  the  old  nobility  of  his  country  that  they  ought  not  to
be  folly  trusted  on  such  a  subject,  observes  that  the
Franks  were  more  haughty  towards  their  subjects  than
any  other  barbarians,  as  is  shown  in  the  difference  of
furegUd,  From  them  this  spirit  passed  to  the  French
nobles  of  the  middle  ages,  though  they  were  not  all  of
Frank  descent.  '*  L'exces  d'oTgueil  attach^  a  longtemps
au  nom  de  gentilhomme  est  n6  en  France ;  son  foyer,
comme  eelui  de  Torganisation  feodale,  fat  la  Gaule  du
Centre  et  du  Nord,  et  peut-^tre  aussi  Tltalie  Lombarde.
C'est  de  Ik  qu'il  s'est  propag^  dans  les  pays  Germaniques,
ou  la  noblesse  anterieurement  se  di^tinguait  pen  de  la
simple  condition  dliomme  libre.  Ce  mouvement  cr^,
par-tout  oh  il  s'etendit,  deux  populations,  et  comme  deux
nations,  proprement  distinctes."  (B^cits  4es  Temps
M^rovingiens,  i.  250.)

The  feudal  principle  was  essentially  aristocratic,  and
tended  to  enhance  every  unsocial  and  unchristian  senti-
ment involved  in  the  exclusive  respect  for  birth.  It  had,
of  course,  its  countervailing  virtues,  which  writers  of
M.  Thierry's  school  do  not  enough  remember.  But  a
rural  aristocracy  in  the  meridian  of  feudal  usages  was
insulated  in  the  midst  of  the  other  classes  of  society  £Eur
more  than  could  ever  happen  in  cities,  or  in  any  period
of  an  advanced  civilization.  **  Never,"  says  Guizot,
'*  had  the  primary  social  molecule  been  so  separated
from  other  similar  molecules ;  never  had  the  distance

^OL.1,  V

322  FRENCH  NOBIUTY.  Koteb  io

been  so  great  between  the  simple  and  eaaential  elementn
of  society."  The  cyitelain,  amidst  his  machioolated
battlements  and  massiTe  gates  with  their  iron  portcullis^
received  the  vavassor,  thongh  as  an  inferior,  at  his
board ;  but  to  the  roturier  no  feudal  board  was  open ;
the  owner  of  a  *'  terre  censive,"  the  opulent  burgess  of  a
neighbouring  town,  was  as  little  admitted  to  the  banquet
of  &e  lord  as  he  was  allowed  to  xinite  himself  in  maniage
to  his  family.

**  Nee  Dens  htmc  menea,  Dea  nee  dignata  cabfU  est"

Pilgrims,  indeed,  and  travelling  merchants,  may,  if  we
trust  romance,  have  been  always  excepted.  Although,
therefore,  some  of  Ouizot*s  phrases  seem  overcharged,
since  there  was,  in  fiEhct,  more  necessary  intercourse  be^
tween  the  different  classes  than  they  intimate,  yet  that
of  a  voluntary  nature,  and  what  we  peculiarly  call  social,
was  very  limited.  Nor  is  this  surprising  when  we  re-
collect that  it  has  been  so  till  competitively  a  recent
period.

Guizot  has  copied  a  picturesque  description  of  a  feudal
castle  in  the  fourteenth  century  from  Monteil's  '  Histoite
des  Fran9ais  des  divers  Etats  auz  cinq  demiers  Si^es.'
It  is  one  of  the  happiest  passages  in  that  writer,  hardly
more  distinguished  by  his  vast  reading  than  by  his  skiU
in  combining  and  applying  it,  though  sometimes  bordei^
ing  on  tediousness  V  the  profuse  expenditure  of  his
commonplace-books  on  the  reader.

'*  Reprdsentez  vous  d*abord  une  position  superbe,  une
montague  escarp^e,  h^issee  de  rochers,  sillon^  de
ravins  et  de  precipices ;  sur  le  penchant  est  le  ch&teau.
Les  petites  maisons  qui  Tentourent  en  font  ressortir  la
grandeur;  Tlndro  semble  s'^carter  avec  respect;  elle
fait  un  large  demi-cercle  k  ses  pieds.

'^  U  faut  voir  ce  chllteau  lorsqu'au  soleil  levant  sea
gal^ries  extdrieures  reluisent  des  armures  de  ceux  qui
font  le  guet,  et  que  ses  tours  se  montrent  toutes  briUantes
de  leurs  grandes  grilles  neuves.  IL  faut  voir  tons  oef:
hauts  b&timents  qui  remplissent  de  courage  ceux  qui  len
defendent,  et  de  frayeur  ceux  qui  seraient  tentes  de  les
attaquer.

"La poiie  se  pr^sente  toute  couverte detStes  de  saog-
lion>  ou  de  loups,  flanquee  de  tourelles  et  oouronnee  d*mi

Chap.  II.  FBEEHEN.  323

hant  ooips  de  garde.  Entrez-votis  ?  trois  enceintes,  troia
fosses,  trois  ponir-levis  k  passer;  vons  vous  tronverez
dans  la  grande  cour  carr^e  ou  sont  les  citemes,  et  k  droite
on  a  gauche  les  Juries,  les  ponlaiUers,  les  colombiers,
les  remises.  Les  caves,  les  sonterrains,  les  prisons  sont
par  dessous ;  par  dessns  sont  les  logements,  les  maga-
sins;  les  lardoirs  ou  salpirs,  les  arsenaux.  Tons  les
oombles  sont  bord^s  des  m&chicoulis,  des  parapets,  des
chemins  le  ronde,  des  gu^rites.  Au  milieu  de  la  tour  est
le  donjon,  qui  renfeime  les  archives  et  le  trtfsor.  II  est
profondement  fossoy*^  dans  tout  son  pourtour,  et  on  n'y
entre  que  par  un  pont  presque  tonjours  leve ;  bien  que
les  jnurailles  aient,  comme  celles  du  ch&teau,  plus  de  six
pieds  d'^paisseur,  il  est  rev^tu,  iusqu'a  la  moiti^  de  sa
Lntetir,  dW  ch;miiio,  on  second  m^,  en  grosses  pien«B
de  taille.

''  Ce  ch&teau  vient  d'etre  refait  a  nenf.  II  y  a  quelque
chose  de  l^ger,  de  fiuis,  que  n'avaient  pas  les  cMteaux
lourds  et  massifs  des  si^cles  passes/'  (Civilis.  en  France,
Le9on  35.)

And  this  was  true ;  for  the  castles  of  the  tenth  and
eleventh  centuries  wanted  all  that  the  progress  of  luxury
and  the  cessation,  or  nearly  such,  of  private  war&re  had
introduced  before  the  age  to  which  this  description  re-
fers ;  they  were  strongholds,  and  nothing  more ;  dark,
small,  comfortless,  where  one  thought  alone  could  tend
to  dispel  their  ^loom,  that  life  and  honour,  and  what  was
most  valuable  in  goods,  were  more  secure  in  them  thau
in  the  champaign  around.

Note  XIII. Page  197.

M.  Guizot  has  declared  it  to  be  the  most  difficult  of
questions  relating  to  the  state  of  persons  in  the  period
from  the  fifth  to  the  tenth  century,  whether  there  existed
in  the  countries  subdued  by  the  Germans,  and  especially
by  the  Franks,  a  numerous  and  important  class  of  free-
men, not  vassals  either  of  the  king  or  any  other  pro-
prietor, nor  any  way  dependent  upon  them,  and  with  no
obligation  except  towards  the  state,  its  laws  and  magis-
trates. (Essais  BUT  THist.  de  France,  p.  232.)  And
this  question,  contrary  to  almost  all  his  predecessors,  he

Y  2

324  FBEEMBN.  Nom  10

inolines  to  decide  negaidvely.  It  is,  indeed,  evident,
and  is  confessed  by  M.  Guizot,  that  in  the  ages  nearest
to  the  conquest  such  a  class  not  only  existed,  but  eyen
comprised  a  large  part  of  the  nation.  Such  were  the
owners  of  sorUs  or  of  terra  Scdica,  the  alodialists  of  the
early  period.  It  is  also  agreed,  as  nas  been  shown  in
another  place,  that,  towards  the  tenth  century,  the  num-
ber of  these  independent  landholders  was  exceedingly
diminished  by  territorial  commendation;  that  is,  the
subjection  of  their  lands  to  a  feudal  tenure.  The  last  of
these  changes,  however,  cannot  have  become  general
under  Charlemagne,  on  account  of  the  numerous  capi-
tularies which  distinguish  those  who  held  lands  of  their
own,  or  alodia,  from  beneficiaiy  tenants.  The  former,
therefore,  must  still  have  been  a  large  and  important
class.  What  proportion  they  bore  to  the  whole  nation
at  that  or  any  other  eia  it  seems  impossible  to  pronounce ;
and  equally  so  to  what  extent  the  whole  usage  of  per-
sonal commendation,  contradistinguished  from  territorial,
may  have  reached.  Still  alodial  lands,  as  has  been  ob-
served, were  always  very  common  in  the  south  of  France,
to  which  Flanders  might  be  added.  The  strength  of  the
feudal  tenures,  as  Thieny  remarks,  was  between  the
Somme  and  the  Loire.  (Bicits  des  T.  M.  i.  245.)  These
alodial  proprietors  were  evidently  fr'eemen.  In  the  law
of  France  alodial  lands  were  always  noble,  like  fie£i,
till  the  reformation  of  the  Cofitume  de  Paris  in  1580,
when  ''aleux  roturiers"  were  for  the  first  time  rec(^-
nised.  I  owe  this  &ct,  which  appears  to  throw  some
light  on  the  subject  of  this  note,  to  Laferri^,  Hist  du
Droit  Frangais,  p.  129.  But,  perhaps,  this  was  not  the
case  in  Flanders,  which  was  an  alodial  country : — "  La
maxime  frangaise,  nulleterre  sans  seigneur,  n'avait  point
lieu  dans  les  Pays-Bas.  On  s*en  tenait  au  principe  de  la
liberty  naturelle  des  biens,  et  par  suite  it  la  neceesite
d'en  prouver  la  sujetion  ou  la  servitude ;  aussi  les  biens
allodiaux  etaient  tr^  nombreux,  et  rappelaient  toujoun
Tesprit  de  liberty  que  les  Beiges  ont  aim^  et  conserve
tant  a  Tegard  de  leurs  biens  que  de  leurs  perBonnes.**
(M4m.  de  TAcad.  de  Bruxelles,  vol.  iii.  p.  16^  It  bears
on  this,  that  in  all  the  customary  law  of  the  Netherlands
no  preference  was  gpven  to  sex  or  primogeniture  in  sncv
ceesiou  (p.  21).

Cbap.  IL  COLOHL  826

But  there  were  ^many  other  fireemen  in  France,  even
in  the  tenth  century,  if  we  do  not  insist  on  the  abeolute
and  insulated  independence  which  Guizot  requires.  '*  If
we  must  understand,"  says  M.  Guerard  ^Oartulaire  de
Chaxtres,  p.  34),  "by  freemen  those  wno  enjoyed  a
liberty  wlmout  restriction,  that  is,  who,  owing  no  duties
or  service  to  any  one,  could  go  and  settle  wherever  they
pleased,  they  would  liot  be  found  veiy  nnmerous  in  our
ohartulary  during  the  pure  feudal  regimen.  But  if,  as
we  should,  we  comprehend  under  this  name  whoever  is
neither  a  noble  nor  a  serf,  the  number  of  people  in  this
intermediate  condition  was  very  considerable."  And  of
these  he  specifies  several  varieties.  This  was  in  the
eleventh  century,  and  partly  later,  when  the  conversion
of  alodial  property  had  been  completed.

Savigny  was  the  first  who  proved  the  Arimanni  of
Lombardy  to  have  been  freemen,  corresponding  to  the
Bachimburgii  of  the  Franks,  and  distinguished  both  from
bondmen  and  from  those  to  whom  they  owed  obedience.
Citizens  are  sometimes  called  Arimanni.  The  word
occurs,  though  very  rarely,  out  of  Italy.  (Vol.  i.  p.  176,
English  translation.)  Guizot  includes  among  the  Ari-
manni the  leudes  or  beiteficiary  vassals.  See  too  Troja,
V.  146,  148.  There  seems,  indeed,  no  reason  to  doubt
that  vassab,  and  other  commmdati^  would  be  counted  as
Arimanni.  Neither  feu  ial  tenure  nor  personal  commen-
dation could  possibly  derogate  from  a  free  and  honour
able  8tatu8,

NotbXIV. Page  198.

These  names,  though  in  a  general  sense  occupying
similar  positions  in  me  social  scale,  denote  different
persons.  The  coloni  were  Bomans,  in  the  sense  of  the
word  then  usual ;  that  is,  they  were  the  cultivators  of
land  under  the  empire,  of  whom  we  find  abundant  notice
both  in  the  Theodosian  Code  and  that  of  Justinian.'  An
early  instance  of  this  use  of  the  word  occurs  in  the  His-
torisd  AugustsB  Scriptores.  TrebeUius  PoUio  says,  after
the  great  victory  of  Claudius  over  the  Qoths,  where  an

f  Sm  Cod.TlMod.  Lt  ttt »,  with  the  oopioai  Eteatftlon  of  Gothofred^Cod
Just.  3d.  tit  4Y  <«  aUbi.

326  OOLONL  KoTB  to

immeiue  nnmber  of  piiBonera  -was  taken — **^  FbcIiis  mfles
barbams  ac  colonns  ex  Gotho ;"  an  expreaaion  not  dear,
and  whicli  perplexed  SaLnasina.  Bnt  it  maypeiliape  be
rendered,  the  barbariana  partly  entered  the  legions,
partly  cultivated  the  gronnd,  in  the  rank  of  oolonL  It
ia  thna  nnderatood  by  Troja  (ii.  705).  He  oonceivea
that  a  large  proportion  of  i5ie  ooloni,  mentioned  under
the  Chriatian  emperors,  were  barbarian  aettleia  (iiL
1074).  They  came  in  the  place  of  predial  alaTce,  wko,
though  not  wholly  unknown,  grew  leaa  common  afl«r
the  eatabliahment  of  Chriatianity.  The  Boman  oolonua
was  free ;  he  could  marry  a  free  woman,  and  have  legi-
timate children ;  he  could  aerve  in  the  anny,  and  was
capable  of  property ;  hia  peculium,  rmlike  that  of  the
absolute  alave,  could  not  be  touched  by  hia  maater.  Kor
could  hia  fixed  rent  or  duty  be  enluinoed.  He  could
even  sue  hia  master  for  any  crime  committed  with  re-
spect to  him,  or  for  undue  exaction.  He  waa  attached,
on  the  other  hand,  to  the  aoil,  and  might  in  certain  cases
receive  corporal  punishment.  (Troja,  iii.  1072.)  He
paid  a  capitation  tax  or  census  to  the  state,  the  frequent
enhancement  of  which  contributed  to  that  decline  of  the
agricultural  population  which  preceded  the  barbarian
conquest.  Guizot,  in  whose  thirtynseventh  lecture  on
the  Civilisation  of  France  the  subject  ia  well  treated,
derives  the  origin  of  this  state  of  society  frx>m  that  of
Gktul  before  the  Boman  conquest  But  since  we  find  it
in  the  whole  empire,  as  is  shown  by  many  laws  in  the
Code  of  Justinian,  we  may  look  on  it  perhaps  rather  as
a  modification  of  ancient  slavery,  unless  we  suppose  aU
the  coloni,  in  this  latter  sense  of  the  word,"  to  have  been
originally  barbarians,  who  had  received  lands  on  con*
dition  of  remaining  on  them.  But  this,  however  fre-
quent,  seems  a  basis  not  quite  wide  enough  for  so  exten-
sive a  tenure.  Nor  need  we  believe  that  the  col oni  were
always  raised  from  slavery ;  they  might  have  descended
into  their  own  order,  as  well  as  risen  to  it.  It  appeare
by  a  passage  in  Salvian,  about*  the  middle  of  the  fifth
centniy,  th^  many  freemen  had  been  compelled  to  fiJl
into  this  condition ;  which  confiima,  \>y  analogy,  the
suppoaition  above-mentioned  of  M.  Naudet,  as  to  a  aimilar

'  Tbe  ooloDtn  of  Cato  and  otlwr  claaslcal  anttion  waa  a  fraa  tenant  or  fimaer,  aa
baa  ixwD  already  mentioned.

Chap.  II.  TRIBUTARII,  LIDI.  327

degradation  of  a  part  of  the  Franks  themselves  after  the
conquest.  It  was  an  inferior  species  of  commendation
or  vassalage,  or,  more  strictly,  an  analogous  result  of  the
state  of  society.

The  forms  of  Marcnlfhs,  and  all  the  documents  of  the
following  ages,  furnish  abundant  proo&  of  the  conti-
nuance of  the  coloni  in  this  middle  state  between  entire
fiieedom  and  servitude.  And  these  were  doubtless
reckoned  among  the  **  tributarii  **  of  the  Salic  law,  whose
composition  was  fixed  at  forty-five  solidi ;  for  a  slave  had
no  composition  due  to  his  kmdred ;  he  was  his  master's
chattel,  and  to  be  paid  for  as  such.  But  the  tributary
was  not  necessarily  a  colonus.  All  who  possessed  no
lands  were  subjected  by  the  imperial  fisc  to  a  personal
oapitation.  And  it  has  appeared  to  us  that  the  Bomans
in  Gaul  continued  regularly  to  pay  this  under  the  house
of  Clovis.  To  these  Roman  tributaries  the  barbarian
lidi  seem  nearly  to  have  corresponded.  This  was  a  class,
as  has  been  already  said,  not  quite  fireebom ;  so  that
'*  Francus  ingenuus "  was  no  tautology,  as  some  have
fancied,  yet  far  from  slaves ;  without  political  privileges
or  rights  of  administering  justice  in  the  county  court,
like  the  Eachimburgii,  and  so  little  fSeivoured,  that,  while
the  Frank  accused  of  a  theft,  that  is,  I  presume,  taken  in
the  flEtot,  was  to  be  brought  before  his  peers,  the  lidus,
under  the  name  of  "  debilior  persona,"  whidi  probably
included  the  Roman  tributary,  was  to  be  hanged  on  the
spot.  Throughout  the  Salic  and  Ripuarian  codes  the
ingenuus  is  opposed  both  to  the  lidus  and  to  the  servus ;
so  that  the  threefold  division  is  incontestable.  It  cor-
responds in  a  certain  degree  to  the  eddingi,  frUmgi,  and
lazzi,  or  the  wrly  ceorly  and  thraU  of  the  northern  nations
(Grimm,  Deutsche  Rechts  AlterthCbner,  p.  306  et  alibis ;
though  we  do  not  find  a  strict  proportion  in  the  social
state  of  the  second  order  in  every  country.  The  "  coloni
partiarii,"  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Theodosian  Code,
were  metayers;  and  M.  Gu^rard  says  that  lands  were
chiefly  held  by  such  in  the  age  of  Charlemagne  and  his
£unily.  (Cart,  de  Chartres,  i.  109.)  The  demesne  lands
of  the  manor,  however,  were  never  occupied  by  ooloni,
but  by  serfs  or  domestic  slaves.

328  TIIXEIKAGE.  !X<nE§  ra

Note  XV. Page  199.

The  poor  early  felt  the  necessity  of  selling  themselTee
for  subsistence  in  times  of  famine.  "  Subdidenmt  so
pauperes  servitio,"  says  Gregory  of  Tonrs,  ajd.  585,  '*  nt
quantnlnmcunque  de  alimento  porrigerent."  (Lib.  viL
c.  45.^  This  long  continued  to  be  the  practice ;  and
probaoly  the  remarkable  number  of  famines  which  are
recorded,  especially  in  the  ninth  and  eleventh  centuries,
swelled  the  sad  list  of  those  unhappy  poor  who  were
reduced  to  barter  liberty  for  bread.  Mi.  Wright,  in  the
thirtieth  volume  of  the  Archfleologia(p.  223),  has  extracted
an  entry  from  an  Anglo-Saxon  manuscript,  where  a  lady,
about  the  time  of  the  Conquest,  manumits  some  slaves,
'*  whose  heads,"  as  it  is  simply  and  forcibly  expressed,
'*  she  had  taken  for  their  meat  in  the  evil  days.  Evil
indeed  were  those  days  in  France,  when  out  of  seventy-
three  years,  the  reigns  of  Hugh  Capet  and  his  two
successors,  forty-eight  were  years  of  &mine.  Evil  were
the  days  for  five  years  from  1015,  in  the  whole  western
world,  when  not  a  country  could  be  named  that  was  not
destitute  of  bread.  These  were  £unines,  as  Radulfns
Glaber  and  other  contemporary  writers  tell  us,  in  which
mothers  ate  their  children,  and  children  their  parents ;
and  human  flesh  was  sold,  with  some  pretence  of  con-
cealment, in  the  markets.  It  is  probable  that  England
suffered  less  than  France ;  but  so  long  and  frequent  a
scarcity  of  necessary  food  must  have  affected,  in  the
latter  country,  the  whole  organic  frame  of  society.

It  has  been  a  very  general  opinion  that  during  the
lawlessness  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  the  aristo-
cratic element  of  society  continually  gaining  g^round,
the  cultivators  fell  into  a  much  worse  condition,  and
either  from  freemen  became  villeins,  or,  if  originally  in
the  order  of  tributaries,  became  less  and  less  capable  of
enjoying  such  personal  rights  as  that  state  implied ;  that
they  fell,  in  short,  almost  into  servitude.  ''Dans  le
commencement  de  la  troisi^me  race,"  says  Montesquieu,
''  presque  tout  le  bas  peuple  etait  serf."  (Lib.xxviii.  c.  45.)
Sismondi,  who  never  draws  a  &vourable  picture,  not
only  descants  repeatedly  on  this  oppression  of  the  com-
monalty, but  traces  it  by  the  capitularies. *'  Les  loix

Chap.  n.  VILLEINAGE.  829

Benlee  nous  donnent  qaelqne  indication  d'nne  r^volntion
importante  k  laqnelle  la  grande  masse  du  peuple  fat
expos^  k  plusienrs  reprises  dans  tonte  T^tendue  des
Gaules, — ^r^volntion  qni,  s'^tant  op^ee  sans  violence,  n'a
laisse  auonne  trace  dans  lliistoire,  et  qui  doit  cependant
expliqner  senle  les  alternatives  de  force  et  de  &iblesse
dans  les  ^tats  du  moyen  age.  C'est  le  passage  des
oultiyateiirs  de  la  condition  libre  k  la  condition  servile.
L'esclavage  ^tant  xme  fois  introdtiite  et  prot^g^  par  les
loix,  la  cons^uence  de  la  prosp^rit^,  de  raccroissement
des  richesses  devait  ^tre  tonjours  la  disparition  de  tontes
les  petites  propri^t^,  la  multiplication  des  esclaves,  et
la  cessation  absolue  de  tout  travail  qui  ne  serait  pas  fiadt
par  .des  mains  serviles."  (Hist,  des  Fran^ais,  vol.  ii.
p.  273.)  Nor  sEould  we  have  believed,  from  the  general
language  of  historical  antiquaries,  that  any  change  for
the  better  took  place  till  a  much  later  era.  We  know
indeed  from  history  that,  about  the  year  1000,  the
Norman  peasantry,  excited  by  oppression,  broke  out
into  a  general  and  well-organised  revolt,  quelled  by  the
severest  punishments,  l^bis  is  told  at  some  length  by
Wace,  in  the  *  Boman  de  Bou.'  And  every  inference
from  the  want  of  all  law  except  what  the  loids  exercised
themselves,  from  the  strength  of  their  castles,  from  the
fierceness  of  their  characters,  from  the  apparent  inability
of  the  peasants  to  make  any  resistance  which  should
not  end  in  greater  sufferings,  converges  to  the  same
result.

It  is  not  therefore  without  some  surprise  that,  in  a
recent  publication,  we  meet  with  a  totally  opposite
hypothesis  on  this  important  portion  of  social  history.
Ilie  editor  of  the  Gartulaire  de  Chartres  maintains  that
the  peasantry,  at  the  beginnii^  of  the  eleventh  century,
enjoyed  rights  of  property  and  succession  which  had
been  denied  to  their  ancestors ;  that  the  movement  from
the  ninth  century  had  been  upwards;  so  that,  during
that  period  of  anarchy  which  we  presume  to  have  been
exceedingly  unHftvourable  to  their  privileges,  they  had
in  reality,  by  force,  usage,  or  concession,  gained  pos-
session of  them.  They  could  not  indeed  leave  theii
lands,  but  they  occupied  them  subject  to  known  con-
ditions.

The  passage  wherein  M.  Qu^rard,  in  a  concise  and

330  TILUIKAUS.  Korsi  1«

penpicaons  manner,  has  giren  liia  own  thecny  as  to  tbe
gradual  decline,  of  servitude  deservea  to  be  extracted ;
but  I  r^ret  Tery  much  that  he  lefiera  to  another  work,
not  by  name,  and  nnknown  to  me,  for  the  faUproof  of
what  has  the  air  of  an  historical  paradox.  With  suf-
ficient proof  everj  paradox  loses  its  name ;  and  I  have
not  the  least  ri^t,  from  any  deep  researches  of  my  own,
to  call  in  question  the  testimony  which  has  convinced
so  learned  and  diligent  an  inquirer.

**  La  servitude,  comme  je  Tai  expos^  dans  un  autre
travail,  alia  toujours  ches  nous  en  s'adoucisBsnt  jusqu')^
ee  qu'elle  fnt  enti^rement  abolie  k  la  chute  de  Tancien
r^gune:  d'abord  o'est  Tesclavi^  2irpeu-prte  pur,  qui
r^uisait  lliomme  presque  k  I'etat  de  chose,  et  qui  le
mettait  dans  Tenti^  dependance  de  son  maitre.  Cette
pdriode  pent  §tre  prolong^  jusqu'apr^  la  oonqu^te  de
Uempire  d'Oocident  par  les  barlMu:es.  Depuis  cette
^poque  jusques  vera  la  fin  du  r^gne  de  Charles-te-Ohauve,
resclavage  proprement  dit  est  remplac^  par  la  servitude,
dans  laqueDe  la  condition  humame  est  reconnue,  re-
spect^, prot^g^,  si  ce  n'est  encore  d'une  mani^re
suffisante,  par  les  loix  civiles,  an  moina  plusefficacement
par  celles  de  TEgUse  et  par  les  moeure  sodales.  Alora
le  pouvoir  de  Thomme  sur  son  semblable  est  contenu

S^n^ralement  dans  certains  limites;  un  frein  est  mis
'ordinaire  k  la  violence ;  la  r^le  et  la  stability  Tern-
portent  sur  rarbitraire :  bref ,  la  liberty  et  la  propri^t^
p^n^trent  par  quelque  endroit  dans  la  cabane  du  sert
Enfin,  pendant  le  desordre  d'oii  sortit  triomphant  le
regime  f^odal,  le  serf  sentient  centre  son  mattre  la  lutte
soutenue  par  le  vassal  centre  son  seigneur,  et  par  les
seigneura  contre  le  roi.  Le  suoc^  fut  le  mtoie  ae  part
et  d'autre ;  rusurpation  des  tenures  serviles  aocompagna
oelle  des  tenures  lib^rales,  et  Tappropriation  teiritonale
ayant  eu  lieu  partout,  dans  le  bas  comme  dans  le  haut
de  la  soci^t^,  £1  fut  aussi  difficile  de  d^poss^er  un  serf
de  son  manse  qu'un  seigneur  de  son  b^^ce.  Bte  oe
moment  la  servitude  fut  transform^e  en  servage ;  le  serf,
ayant  retir^  sa  penonne  et  son  champ  des  mains  de  son
maStre,  dut  k  celui-ci  non  plus  son  corps  ni  son  bien,
mais  seulement  une  jMirtie  de  son  travail  et  de  ses
revenus.  D^  ce  moment  il  a  cessd  de  servir ;  il  n'est
plus  en  r^alit^  qu'un  tributaira.

1!hap.  IL  VILLSINAGK.  831

'*  Cette  grande  r^yolutioix,  qui  tira  de  son  ^tat  abject
la  olasse  la  pliis  nombreuse  de  la  population,  et  qui
rinvestit  de  droits  civils,  lorsqne  anparaTant  elle  ne
pouvait  gaere  invoqner  en  sa  fJE^veur  que  lea  droits  de
lliumanit^,  n'ayait  pas  encore  et^  signal^  dans  notre
bistoire.  Les  iaiia  qui  la  d^monstrent  ont  6iA  d^velopp6
dans  un  autre  travail  que  je  ne  puis  reproduire  ici;
mais  les  traces  seules  qu'elle  a  laiss^es  dans  notre  Oar-
tnlaire  sont  assez  nombreuses  et  assez  profondes  pour  la
fidre  universellement  reoonnaitre.  EUe  ^it  depuis
long-temps  oonsomm^,  loisque  le  moine  redigeait,  dans
la  seconde  moitie  du  xi*.  si^ole,  la  premiere  partie  du
present  reoueil,  et  lorsqu'il  declarait  que  les  anoiens
Tdles  (^rits  au  iz*.)  conserves  dans  les  archives  de
I'Abbaye,  n'aooordent  aux  paysans  ni  les  usages  ni  les
droits  dont  ils  jouissent  aotuellement.  Mais  ses  paroles
m^tent  d'etre  r^petees : — *  Lectori  intmoan  curavi,  dit-il
dans  sa  Preface,  *  quod  ea  quce  primo  scrqtturw  sum  a  pne*
9mti  U8U  admodum  discrepare  vidantyr  ;  nam  roHU  conscr^  ab.
antiqm  et  in  armario  noatro  nunc  rqpertij  habwase  rnxnm»
oaUndunt  tZZtw  ten^poris  rustioos  has  oonsuetudines  in  nditHnu
qtuu  modarrd  rustki  in  hoc  tempore  dinoacuntur  habere,  neque
Jidbent  vocabtda  rerum  quae  tunc  eermo  habebat  vulgaris,*
Ainsi,  non  seulement  les  cboses,  mais  encore  les  noms,
tout  ^tait  cbang^."  (Prol^m^nes  k  la  Gartulaire  de
Cbartres,  p.  40.)

The  characteristic  of  the  villein,  according  to  Beaa-
manoir,  in  the  tbirteenth  century,  that  his  obligations
were  fixed  in  kind  and  degree,  woxdd  thus  appear  to
have  been  as  old  as  the  eleventh.  Many  charters  of  the
tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  are  adduced  by  M.  Oudrard,
wherein,  as  he  informs  us,  **  On  s'efforce  de  se  sous-
traire  k  la  violence,  et  d'y  substituer  les  conventions  k
Tarbitraire ;  la  r^le  et  la  mesure  tendent  k  s'introduire
partout  et  jusques  dans  les  extortions  memes  "  (p.  109).
But  this  principle  of  limited  rent  was  also  that  of  the
Boman  system  with  respect  to  the  oolbni  before  the  con-
quest of  Gaul  by  Olovis.  Nor  do  we  know  that  it  was
different  affcerwards.  No  law  at  least  could  have  effected
it ;  for  the  Boman  law,  by  which  the  coioni  were  ruled,
underwent  no  change.

M.  Ou^rard  seems  hardly  to  have  taken  a  just  view  of
tlie  status  of  the  Boman  tributary  or  colonus. "  Nous

832  yiLLSDCAGE.  KorvTO

avoDfl  dit  qne  les  peiBOimeB  de  ocmditiiii  servile  B*<^taient
appropries  leun  Mii^ces.  Ce  qni  Tient  encore  nous
confiimer  dans  oette  opinion,  c'est  le  cbangement  qn'on
obeerve  g^nenJement  dans  la  condition  dee  terres  depnis
le  declin  dn  x*.  siMe.  La  terre,  apres  avoir  ete  cnltiv^
dans  Fantiqnit^  par  resolave  an  profit  de  son  maltre,  le
fnt  ensnite  par  nn  esp^ce  de  fermier  non  libre  qni
partageait  avec  le  proprietaire,  on  qni  fidsait  les  finite
mens,  mojemumt  certains  oens  et  services,  anxqnels  il
etait  oblige  enTers  Ini :  c'est  I'etat  qni  nons  est  repn^sent^
par  le  Polyptyqne  dTrminon,  an  temps  de  Charlemagne,
et  qni  dnia  encore  nn  si^le  et  demi  environ  aprte  la
mort  de  ce  grand  prince.  Pnis  commence  nne  troisi^e
p^riode,  pendant  laqneUe  le  proprietaire  n'eet  pins  qne
seignenr,  tandis  qne  le  tenancier  est  deyenn  Ini-m^e
proprietaire,  et  paie,  non  pins  de  fermages,  mais  senle-
ment  des  droits  seignenrianx«  Ainsi,  d'abord  obligations
d'nn  esclave  enTers  nn  maltre ;  ensnite  obligations  d'nn
fermier  non  libre  enTers  nn  proprietaire ;  enfin,  obliga-
tions d'nn  propoi^tairo  non  Hbro  enTon  nn  seignenr.
C'est  k  la  derni^  pdriode  qne  nons  sommes  parvenns
dans  notro  Cartnlairo.  Les  popnlations  s'y  montront
en  jonissance  dn  droit  de  propriety  et  ne  sont  sonmises,
k  laison  des  possessions,  qu%  de  simples  chaigeB
fiodales."

It  may  be  observed  npon  this,  that  the  colonns  was  a
free  man,  whether  he  divided  the  prodnce  with  his  lord,
like  the  mkayer  of  modem  times,  or  paid  a  certain  rent ;
and,  secondly,  that,  in  what  he  calls  the  third  period,
the  tenant,  if  he  was  a  Tillein  or  homme  de  poote,  conld
not  possibly  be  called  '*lui-mdme  propri^tairo;"  nor
were  his  liabilities  fendal,  bnt  either  a  money-rent  or
personal  service  in  labonr;  which  cannot  be  denomi-
nated feudal  vrithont  great  impropriety.

"II  est  Trai,"  he  proceeds,  '*que  ces  charges  sont
encore  lonrdes  et  sonTent  accablantes,  et  qne  les  biena
ne  sont  pas  pins  qne  les  personnes  enti^rement  francs  et
libres ;  ni  suffisamment  \  I'abri  de  I'arbitraire  et  de  la
Tiolence;  mais  la  liberty,  acqnise  de  jonr  en  jonr  a
I'homme,  se  commnniqnait  de  pins  en  pins  k  la  terre.
Le  paysan  ^tant  proprietaire,  il  ne  Ini  restait  qn*k  de-
g^r^Ter  et  affianchir  la  propriety.  C'est  k  cet  oenTre  qn*i]
traTaillera  desormais  aTeo  perseverance  et  de  tontes  sen

Crap.  II.  LE6ISLATI\'E  ASSEHBUE&  83S

toroes,  jusqxi'k  ce  qu'il  ait  enfin  obtenn  de  ne  stmportor
d'airtres  chkiges  qne  celles  qui  convieiment  k  Ijiommo
Libre,  et  qui  sont  uniquement  fond^  but  I'utilit^  com-
mune."

In  thifi  passage  the  tenant  is  made  much  more  to  re-
semble the  free  socager  of  England  than  the  villein  or
homo  potestatis  of  Pierre  des  Fontaines  or  Beaumanoir.
This  latter  class,  however,  was  certainly  numerous  in
their  age,  and  could  hardly  have  been  less  so  some  cen-
turies before.  These  were  subject  to  so  many  onerous  re-
strictions, independent  of  their  compulsory  residence  on
the  land,  and  independently  also  of  their  want  of  ability
to  resist  undue  exactions,  that  they  were  always  eager
to  purchase  their  own  en£ranchisement.  Their  marriages
were  not  valid  without  the  lord's  consent,  till  Adrian  lY.,
in  the  twelfth  century,  declared  them  indissoluble.  A
freeman  marrying  a  serf  became  one  himself,  as  did  their
children.  They  were  liable  to  occasional  as  well  as
regular  demands,  that  is,  to  tallages,  sometimes  in  a  very
arbitrary  manner.  It  was  probably  the  less  frequency
of  such  demands,  among  other  reasons,  that  rendered  the
condition  of  ecclesiastical  tenants  more  eligible  than
that  of  others.  Manumissions  of  serfs  by  the  church
were  very  common ;  and,  indeed,  the  greater  part  that
have  been  preserved,  as  m^  be  expected,  come  from
ecclesiastical  repositories,  it  is  observed  in  my  text
that  the  English  clei^  are  said  to  have  been'  slow  in
liberating  their  villeins.  But  a  viUein  in  England  was
real  property ;  and  I  conceive  that  a  monastery  could
not  enfranchise  him,  at  least  without  the  consent  of  some
superior  authority,  any  more  than  it  could  alienate  its
lands.  The  church  were  not  generally  accounted  harsh
masters.

Note  XVI. Pages  216,  216.

There  would  seem  naturally  little  doubt  that  majantm
can  mean  nothing  but  the  higher  classes  of  clergy  and
laity,  exclusive  of  parish  priests  and  ordinary  freemen,
were  it  not  that  a  part  of  these  very  majores  are  after-
wards designated  by  the  name  minores.  'Who,  it  may  be
asked,  could  be  the  mqjores  clerici^  except  prelateia  aud

384  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES.  Notes  ia

abbots  ?  And  of  these,  how  could  one  be  bo  inferior  in
degree  to  another  as  to  be  reckoned  among  minons  f  It
may  perhaps  be  answered  that  there  .was  neyertheless  a
difference  of  importance,  though  not  of  rank.  Gnizot
translates  majores  '*  les  grands,  and  mmores  **  les  moins
considerables."  But  npon  this  constmction,  which  cer
tainl J  is  what  the  wonLs  fairly  bear,  none  bnt  a  class
denominated  majores^  relatively  to  the  rest  of  the  nation,
were  members  of  the  national  conncil.  I  think,  never-
theless,  that  Onizot,  on  any  hypothesis,  has  too  mnch
depreciated  the  authority  of  these  general  meetingB,
wherein  the  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  were  enacted.
Grant,  against  Mably,  that  they  were  not  a  democratio
assembly;  still  were  titiey  not  a  legislature  ?  *'  Lex  con-
sensu fit  popuU  et  oonstitutione  regis."  This  is  our  own
statute  language ;  but  does  it  make  parliament  of  no  avail  ?
*'  En  ltd  (Charlemagne)  r^de  la  volonte  et  Timpulsion ;
o'est  de  lui  que  toute  emane  pour  revenir  k  lui.*'  (Es-
sais  sur  THist.  de  France,  p.  323.)  This  is  only  to  say
that  he  was  a  truly  great  man,  and  that  his  subjects
were  semi-barbarians,  comparatively  unfit  to  devise
methods  of  ruling  the  empire.  No  one  can  doubt  that
he  directed  everything;  but  a  weaker  sovereign  soon
found  these  rude  nobles  an  overmatch  for  him.  It  is,
moreover,  well  pointed  out  by  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  that  we
find  instances  of  petitions  presented  by  the  lay  or  spiritual
members  of  these  assemblies  to  Charlemagne,  upon  which
capitularies  or  edicts  were  afterwards  founded.  (Eng-
lish Commonwealth,  ii.  411.)  It  is  to  be  inferred,  from
several  texts  in  the  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  and  his
family,  that  a  general  consent  was  required  to  their
legislative  constitutions,  and  that  without  this  a  capitu-
laiy  did  not  become  a  law.  It  is  not,  however,  quite  so
clear  in  what  method  this  was  testified ;  or  rather  two
methods  appear  to  be  indicated.  One  was  that  above
described  by  Hincmar,  when  the  determination  of  the
senhres  was  referred  to  the  minores  for  their  confirmation :
"  interdum  pariter  tractandum,  et  non  ex  potestate  sed
ex  proprio  mentis  intellectu  vel  sententiA  confirman-
dum."  The  point  of  divei^nce  between  two  schools  of
constitutional  antiquaries  in  France  is  on  the  words  ex
potestate.  Mably,  and  others  whom  I  have  followed,  say
**  not  by  compulsion^"  or  words  to  that  effect. But

Chap.  U.  LRGISLATlVfi  ASSEMBLIES.  3d6

Guizot  renders  the  words  differently :  *'  qnelqnefois  on
deliberait  aussi,  et  les  confinuaient,  non  par  xxd  con-
sentement  formel,  mais  par  lenr  opinion,  et  Tadhesion
de  lenr  intelligence."  Tlie  Latin  idiom  will,  I  conceive,
bear  either  construction.  But  the  context,  as  well  as
the  analogy  of  other  anthorities,  inclines  me  to  the  more

Sopnlar  interpretation,  which,  though  the  more  popular,
oes  not  necessarily  carr^  us  beyond  the  word  majonSy
taking  that  as  descriptiye  of  a  numerous  aristocracy.

K,  indeed,  we  are  so  much  bound  by  the  word  majorvm
in  this  passage  of  Hincmar  as  to  take  for  merely  loose
phrases  the  continual  mention  of  the  populus  in  the  capitu-
laries,  we  could  not  establish  any  theory  of  popular  con-
sent in  legislation  from  the  general  placita  held  almost
every  May  by  Charlemagne.  They  would  be  conven-
tions of  an  aristocracy ;  numerous  indeed,  and  probably
comprehending  by  right  all  the  vassals  of  the  crown,  but
excluding  the  freemen  or  petty  alodialists,  not  only  from
deliberating  upon  public  laws,  but  from  consenting  to
them.  We  find,  however,  several  proofis  of  another
method  of  obtaining  the  ratification  of  this  class,  that  is
of  the  Frank  people.  I  do  not  allude  to  the  important
capitulary  of  Louis  ^hough  I  cannot  think  that  M.
Guizot  has  given  it  sufficient  weight),  wherein  the  count
is  directed  to  bring  twelve  Scabini  with  him  to  the  im-
perial placitum,  because  we  are  chiefly  at  present  refer-
ring to  the  reign  of  Charlemagne ;  and  yet  this  provi-
sion looks  like  one  of  his  devising.  The  scheme  to
which  I  refer  is  different  and  less  satisfactory.  The
capitulary  determined  upon  by  a  national  placitum  was
sent  round  to  the  counts,  who  were  to  read  it  in  their
own  mallus  to  the  people,  and  obtain  their  confirmation.
Thus  in  803,  **  Anno  tertio  clementissimi  domini  nostri
Karoli  Augusti,  sub  ipso  anno  hnc  facta  capitula  sunt,
et  consignata  Stephano  comiti,  ut  hsdc  manifesta  faceret
in  civitate  Parisiis  mallo  publico,  et  ilia  legere  faceret
coram  Scabiniis,  quod  ita  et  fecit.  Et  omnes  in  uno
oonsenserunt,  quod  ipsi  voluissent  omni  tempore  ob-
servare  usque  in  posterum.  Etiam  omnes  Scabinii,
Episcopi,  Abbates,  Uomites  manu  propria  subter  signa-
verunt."  (Eec.  des  Hist.  v.  663.)  No  text  can  be  more
perspicuous  than  this;  but  several  other  proofs  might
be  given,  extending  to  the  subsequent  reigns.

336  ROTAL  TRIBUKALa  Notes  tc

Sir  F.  PalgraTo  is,  perhaps,  the  fiist  who  has  drawn
attention  to  this  scheme  of  local  sanction  by  the  people ;
though  I  must  think  that  he  has  somewhat  obscnred  the
subject  by  supposing  the  maUi^  wherein  the  capitolaiy
was  con&med,  to  have  be^n  those  of  separate  nations
constituting  the  Frank  empire,  instead  of  being  deter-
mined by  &e  territorial  jurisdiction  of  each  count.  He
gives  a  natural  interpretation  to  the  £amous  words,
<'Lex  consensu  populi  fit,  constitutione  reffis."  The
capitulary  was  a  constitution  of  the  king,  uiough  not
without  the  advice  of  his  great  men ;  the  law  was  its
c(mfirmation  by  the  nation  collectively,  in  the  great
placitum  of  the  Field  of  March,  or  by  separate  consent
and  subscription  in  each  county.

We  are  not,  however,  to  be  confident  that  this  assent
of  the  people  in  their  county  courts  was  virtually  more
than  nominal.  A  little  consideration  will  show  that  it
could  not  easily  have  been  otherwise,  except  in  the
strongest  cases  of  unpopular  legislation.  No  Scabini  or
Bachimburgii  in  one  counly  knew  much  of  what  passed
at  a  distance ;  and  dissatisfaction  must  have  been  uni-
versal before  it  could  have  found  its  organ  in  such  as-
semblies. Before  that  time  arrived  rebellion  was  a
more  probable  effect.  One  capitulary,  of  823,  does  not
even  allude  to  consent :  '*  In  suis  oomitatibus  coram
omnibus  relegant,  ut  cunctis  nostra  ordinatio  et  voluntas
nota  fieri  possit."  But  we  cannot  set  this  against  the
language  of  so  many  other  capitularies,  which  imply  a
formal  ratification.

Note  XVIL Page  247.

The  court  of  the  palace  possessed  a  considerable  juris-
diction from  the  earliest  times.  We  have  its  judgments
under  the  Merovingian  kings.  Thus  in  a  diploma  of
Clovis  m.,  A.D.  693,  dated  at  Valenciennes — *'  Cum  ad
universorum  causas  audiendas  vel  recta  judicia  teimi-
nanfla  resideremus."  (Bee.  des  Hist  iv.  672.)  Under
the  house  of  Charlemagne  it  is  folly  described  by  Hino-
mar  in  the  famous  passage  above  mentioned.  It  was  not
so  much  in  form  a  court  of  appeal  as  one  acting  by  the'
sovereign's  authority,  to  redress  the  oppression  of  the

Chap.  II.  BOTAL  TRIBOHALS.  837

Bubject  by  inferior  magistrates.  Mr.  Allen  has  well
::ejected  the  singular  opinion  of  Meyer,  that  an  erroneous
or  corrupt  judgment  of  the  inferior  oourt  was  not  revers-
ible by  this  royal  tribunal,  though  the  judges  might  be
punished  for  giving  it.  (Inquiry  into  Eoyal  Prerogative,
Appendiic,  p.  29.)  Though,  according  to  what  is  said
by  M.  Beugnot,  the  appeal  was  not  made  in  regular
form,  we  cannot  doubt  that,  where  the  case  of  injury  by
the  inferior  judge  was  made  out,  justice  would  be  done
by  annulling  his  sentence.  The  emperor  or  king  often
presided  here ;  or,  in  his  absence,  the  count  of  the  palace.
Bishops,  counts,  household  officers,  and  others  consti-
tuted this  court,  which  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  that
of  the  seneschal,  having  only  a  local  jurisdiction  over
the  domains  of  the  crown,  and  which  did  not  continue
under  the  house  of  Capet.  (Beugnot,  Bistres  des
Arr§ts,  vol.  i.  p.  15,  18,  in  Documens  In^dits,  1839.)

This  tribunal,  the  court  of  the  palace,  was  not  founded
upon  any  feudal  principle ;  and  when  the  right  of  terri-
torial justice  and  the  subordination  of  fiefs  came  to  be
thoroughly  established,  it  ought,  according  to  analogy,
to  have  been  replaced  by  one  wherein  none  but  the  great
vassals  of  France  should  have  sat.  Such,  however,  was
not  the  case.  This  is  a  remarkable  anomaly,  and  a
proof  that  the  spirit  of  monarchy  was  not  wholly  extin-
guished. For,  weak  as  was  the  crown  under  the  first
Capets,  their  court,  though  composed  of  persons  by  no
means  the  peers  of  all  who  were  amenable  to  it,  gave
several  judgments  affecting  some  considerable  feuda-
taries,  such  as  the  count  of  Anjou  under  Bobert.  (Id.
p.  22.)  No  court  composed  only  of  great  vassals  appears
in  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  centuries ;  no  notion  of  judicial
subordination  prevailed ;  the  vassals  of  the  crown  sat
with  those  of  the  duchy  of  France ;  and  latterly  even
clerks  came  in  as  assessors  or  advisers,  though  without
BufiGrage  (p.  31\  But  an  important  event  brought  for-
ward, for  the  nrst  time,  the  true  feudal  principle.  This
was  the  summons  of  John,  as  duke  of  Normandy,  to
justify  himself  as  to  the  death  of  Arthur.  It  has  been
often  said  that  twelve  peers  of  France  had  appeared  at
the  coronation  of  Philip  Augustus,  in  1179.  Tnis,  how-
ever, a  late  writer  has  denied,  and  does  not  place  them
higher  than  the  proceedings  against-  John,  in  1204. (Id.

VOL.  I.  z

338  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  Notes  to

L44.)  In  ci'vil  causes,  as  has  above  been  said,  there
1  been  several  instances  wherein  the  king's  court  had
pronounced  judgment  against  vassals  of  the  crown.  The
idea  had  gained  ground  that  the  king,  by  virtue  of  his
full  prerogative,  communicated  to  all  who  sat  in  that
court  a  portion  of  his  own  sovereignty.  Such  an  opinion
would  be  sanctioned  by  the  bishops,  and  by  all  who
leaned  towards  the  imperial  theory  of  government,  never
quite  eradicated  in  the  church.  But  the  high  rank  of
John,  and  the  important  consequences  likely  to  result
from  his  condemnation,  forbad  any  irregularity  of  which
advantage  might  be  taken.  John  is  always  said  to  have
been  sentenced,  "  judicio  parium  suomm ;"  whence  we
may  conclude  that  inferior  lords  did  not  take  a  part.
(Id.  ibid.)  And  from  that  time  we  find  abundant  proofs
of  the  peerage  of  France,  composed  of  six  lay  and  six
spiritual  persons;  though  upon  this  supposition  Nor-
mandy was  never  a  substantial  member  of  that  class,
having  only  appeared  for  a  moment,  to  vanish  in  the
next  by  its  reunion  to  the  domain.

The  feudal  principle  seemed  now  to  have  recovered
strength :  a  right  which  the  vassals  had  never  enjoyed,
though  in  consistency  their  due,  was  formally  conceded.
But  it  was  too  late  in  the  thirteenth  centuiy  to  render
any  new  privilege  available  against  the  royal  power.
Though  it  was  from  that  time  an  uncontested  right  of  the
peers  to  be  tried  by  some  of  their  order,  this  was  con-
strued so  as  not  to  exclude  others,  in  any  number,  and
with  equivalent  sufi&age.  One  or  more  peers  being
present,  the  court  was,  in  a  later  phrase,  ''  sufGsamment
gamie  de  pairs ;"  and  thus  the  lives  and  rights  of  the
dukes  of  Guienne  or  Burgundy  were  at  the  mercy  of
mere  lawyers.

Note  XYtll, Page  266.

Savigny,  in  his  History  of  Roman  Law  in  the  Middle
Ages,  and  Baynouard,  in  his  Histoire  du  Droit  Municipal
(1828),  have,  since  the  first  publication  of  this  work  in
1818,  traced  the  continuance  of  municipal  ilistitutionB,  in
several  French  cities,  from  the  age  of  the  Boman  empire
to  the  twelfth  century,  when  the  formal  charters  of  com-
munities first  appear. But  it  wiU  render  the  subjecit

Cbap.  II.  MUNICIPAL  OOYERNHENT.  33S

clearer  if  we  look  at  the  constitiition  which  Home  gave
to  the  cities  of  Italy,  and  ultimately  of  the  provinces.
We  are  not  concerned  with  the  privileges  of  Boman
citizenship,  whether  local  or  personal,  but  with  those
appertaining  to  each  city.  These  were  originally  founded
on  the  republican  institutions  of  Borne  herself;  the
supreme*  power,  so  far  as  it  was  conceded,  and  the  choice
of  magistrates,  rested  with  the  assembly  of  the  citizens.
But  after  Tiberius  took  this  away  from  the  Boman  comitia
to  vest  it  in  the  senate,  it  appears  that,  either  through
imitation  or  by  some  imperial  edict,  this  example  was
followed  in  every  provincial  city.  We  find  everywhere
a  class  named  ^^  cunales,"  or  ^'  decuriones"  (synonymous
words),  in  whom,  or  in  those  elected  by  them,  resided
whatever  authority  was  not  reserved  to  the  proconsul  or
other  Boman  magistrate.  Though  these  words  occur  in
early  writers,  it  must  be  admitted  that  our  chief  know-
ledge of  the  internal  constitution  of  provincial  cities  is
derived  from  the  rescripts  of  the  later  emperors,  espe-
cially in  the  Theodosian  code.

The  deourions  are  several  times  mentioned  by  Pliny.
In  Greek  or  Asiatic  towns  the  word  fiovXri  ailswered  to
curia,  and  fiovXevrric  to  decurio.  Pliny  refers  to  a  lex
Pompeia,  probably  of  the  great  Pompey,  which  appears
to  have  regulated  the  internal  constitution,  at  least  of  the
Pontic  and  Bithynian  cities.  According  to  this,  the
members  of  the  council,  or  fiovXji,  were  named  by  certain
censors,  to  whose  list  the  emperor,  in  the  time  of  Pliny,
added  a  few  by  especial  favour.  (Plin.  Epist.  x.  113.)
In  later  times  tiie  decurions  are  said  to  have  chosen  their
own  members,  which  can  mean  little  more  than  that  the
form  of  election  was  required,  for  birth  or  property  gave
an  inchoate  title.  They  were  a  local  aristocracy,'  re-
quiring perhaps  originally  the  qualification  of  wealth,
which  in  the  time  of  Pliny,  at  least  in  Asia,  was  of  a
hundred  thousand  sesterces,  or  about  8002.  (Epist.  i.  19.)
But  latterly  it  appears  that  every  son  of  a  decurion  in-
herited the  rights  as  well  as  the  liabilities  of  his  father.
We  read,  "  qui  origine  sunt  curiales,"  and  *'  honor  quem
nascendo  meruit."  Property,  however,  gave  a  similar
title ;  every  one  possessing  twenty-five  jugera  of  freehold

*  HwDirfa  T  use  this  word,  which  ex- of  Law,thedecnTloii8were"iinllftpnBdit*
DTeawA  A  veoeral  truth,  yet,  in  strictoeaB dignitate." (God.  Th«nd.  12,  l.  A.)

z2

S40  MUNICIPAL  UOYERinfEKT.  KoTSi  f

oa^t  to  be  inacribed  in  the  order.  This  title,  Lononr-
able  to  Boman  ears,  ordo  decttrionum^  or  edmply  ordo,  is
airways  applied  to  them.  They  were  summoned  on  the
Kalends  of  March  to  choose  mnnicipal  officers,  of  whom
.  the  most  remarkable  were  the  dnnmyirs,  answering  to
the  consuls  of  the  imperial  city.  These  possessed  a  slight
degree  of  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction,  and  were  bound
to  roaJTitain  the  peace.  They  belonged,  howeyer,  only  to
cities  enjoying  the  jus  Italicum,  a  distinction  into  which
we  need  not  now  inquire ;  and  Savigny  maintains  that,
in  Gaul  especially,  which  we  chiefly  regard,  no  local
magistrate,  in  a  proper  sense,  ever  existed,  the  whole
jurisdiction  devolving  on  the  imperial  officers.  This  is
far  from  the  representation  of  Baynouard,  who,  though
Avriting  after  Savigny,  seems  ignorant  of  his  work,  nor
has  it  been  adopted  by  later  French  inquirers.

But  another  mstitution  is  highly  remarkable,  and  does
peculiar  honour  to  the  great  empire  which  established  it,
that  of  Defensor  Civitatis — a  standing  advocate  for  the
city  against  the  oppression  of  the  provincial  governor.
His  office  is  only  known  by  the  laws  from  the  middle  of
the  fourth  century,  the  earliest  being  of  Yalentinian  and
Valens,  in  365 ;  but  both  Cicero  (Epist  xii.  56)  and
Pliny  (Epist.  x.  3)  mention  an  Ecdicus  with  something
like  the  same  functions ;  and  Justinian  always  uses  that
word  to  express  the  Defensor  Civitatis.  He  was  chosen
for  five  years,  not  by  the  curiales,  but  by  the  citizens  at
large.  Nor  could  any  decurion  be  defensor ;  he  was  to
be  taken  "  ex  aliis  idoneis  personis  ;"  which  Baynouard
translates,  *^  among  the  most  distinguished  inhabitants;**
a  sense  neither  necessary  nor  probable.  (Cod.  Theod.  i.
tit.  xi.;  Du  Cange;  Troja,  iii.  1066;  Baynouard,  i.  71.)

The  duties  of  the  defensor  will  best  appear  by  a
passage  in  a  rescript  of  a.d.  385,  inserted  in  tjke  Code  of
Justinian : — "  Scilicet,  ut  in  primis  parentis  vicem  plebi
exhibeas,  descriptionibus  rustioos  urbeinosque  non  patiaris
affligi;  officialium  insolentisd  et  judicum  procacitati,
salva  reverentia  pudoris.  occurras ;  ingi'ediencU  cum  voles
ad  judioem  liberam  habeas  facultatem;  super  exigendi
damna,  vel  spolia  plus  petentium  ab  his  quos  liberorum
loco  tueri  debes,  excludas ;  nee  patiaris  quidquam  ultra
delegationem  solitam  ab  his  exigi,  quos  certum  est  nisi
tali  rcmedio  non  posse  reparari." (Cod.  i.  55,  4.) But

CRAP.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  341

the  DefenBores  were  also  magistrates  and  preservers  of
order : — **  Per  onmee  regiones  in  qtdbus  fera  et  periculi
8td  nescialatroniun  fervet  insania,  probatissimi  quiqne  et
distriotissimi  defensores  adsint  disciplinee,  et  quotidianis
actibns  preesint,  qtd  non  sinant  crimina  impimita  coales-
cere ;  removeant  patrocinia  qu88  favorem  reis,  et  anxi-
lium  scelerosis  impartiendo,  matorari  scelera  fecerunt.''
(Id.  i.  65,  6. See,  too,  Theod.  vbi  supra.)

It  may  naturally  be  doubted  whether  me  principles -of
freedom  and  justice,  which  dictated  these  municipal
institutions  of  the  empire,  were  fully  carried  out  in
effect.  Perhaps  it  might  be  otherwise  even  in  the  best
times — ^those  of  Trajan  and  the  Antonines.  But  in  the
decline  of  the  empire  we  find  a  striking  revolution  in  the
condition  of  the  decurions.  Those  evil  days  rendered
necessary  an  immense  pressure  of  taxation;  and  the
artificial  scheme  of  imperial  policy,  introduced  by  Dio-
cletian and  perfected  by  Constantine,  had  for  its  main
object  to  drain  the  resources  of  the  provinces  for  the
imperial  treasury.  The  decurions  were  made  liable  to
such  heavy  burthens,  their  responsibility  for  local  as
well  as  public  charges  was  so  extensive  (in  every  case
their  private  estates  being  required  to  make  up  the
deficiency  in  the  general  tax),  liat  the  barren  honours
of  the  ofQce  afforded  no  compensation,  and  many  endea-
voured to  shun  them.  This  responsibility,  indeed,  of
the  decurions,  and  their  obligation  to  remain  in  the  city
of  the  domicile,  as  well  eus  their  frequent  desire  to  escape
from  the  burthens  of  their  lot,  is  manifest  even  in  tlie
Digest,  that  is,  in  the  beginning  of  the  third  century
(when  the  opinions  of  the  lawyers  therein  collected  were
given),  while  the  empire  was  yet  unscathed ;  but  the
evil  became  more  flagrant  in  subsequent  times.  The
laws  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  in  the  Theodosian
code,  perpetually  compel  the  decurions,  under  severe

Senalties,  to  remain  at  home  and  undei^o  their  onerous
uties.  These  laws  are  192  in  number,  filling  the  first
title  of  the  twelfth  book  of  that  code.  Guizot  indeed,
Savigny,  and  even  Baynouard  (though  his  bias  is  always
to  magnify  municipal  institutions),  have  drawn  from  this
source  such  a  picture  of  the  condition  of  the  decurions
in  the  last  two  centuries  of  the  western  empire,  that  we
are  almost  at  a  loss  to  reconcile  this  absolute  impoverish-

342  MUNICIPAL  GOVERN  JIENT.  Notes  to

iUent  of  their  order  with  other  facts  which  apparently
bear  witness  to  a  better  state  of  society.  For,  greatly
fallen  sfi  the  decnrions  of  the  proyincial  cities  must  be
deemed,  in  comparison  with  their  earlier  condition,
there  vms  stiU,  at  the  begiimmg  of  the  fifth  century,
especially  in  Gaul,  a  liberal  class  of  eood  family,  and
not  of  foined  fortones,  duelling  mo^y  in  citiek.  or
sometimes  in  yillas  or  country  houses  not  remote  from
cities,  from  whom  the  church  was  replenished,  and  who
kept  np  the  politeness  and  luxury  of  the  empire.*  The
senators  or  senatorial  &milies  are  often  mentioned ;  and
by  the  latter  term  we  perceiye  that  an  hereditary  nobi-
lity,  whateyer  might  be  the  case  with  some  of  tibe  bar-
barian nations,  subsisted  in  public  estimation,  if  not  in
priyilege,  among  their  Boman  subjects.  The  word
senate  appears  to  be  sometimes  used  for  the  curia  at
lai^e ; "  but  when  we  find  senatorins  ordo^  or  senatorium'
genus,  we  may  refer  it  to  the  higher  class,  who  had
served  municipal  offices,  or  had  become  priyileged  by
imperial  fayour,  and  to  whom  the  title  of  **  olarissimi  "
legally  belonged.  It  seems  probable  that  this  appella-
tiye  senator,  rather  than  senior,  has  giyen  rise  to  seig-
neur, sire,  and  the  like  in  modem  languages.  The  word
senatorius  appears  early  to  haye  acquired  the  meaning
noble  or  gentlemanlike ;  though  I  do  not  find  this  in
the  dictionaries.  This  is,  I  conceiye,  what  Pliny  means
by  the  '*  quidam  senatorius  decor,"  which  he  ascribes
to  his  young  son-in-law  Acilianus.  (Epist.  i.  14.)  It  is
the  air  nobie,  the  indescribable  look,  rarely  met  with  ex-
cept in  persons  of  good  birth  and  liberal  habits.  In  the
age  of  Pliny  this  ooidd  only  refer  to  the  Boman  senate.*'

b  The  letters  of  SidoDlns  Apolllnaiia  wtjs,  in  the  next  age  and  In  ttie  Weat,  of
bear  abundant  testimony  to  ^b,  even  for  the  curlales,  **  Quomm  cG&tom  recte  ap-
his age,  wMch  was  after  the  middle  of  pellavit  antiquitas  minoRm  Benatam.'*
the  oentoxy ;  and  the  state  of  Gaol  must  (Gothoft«d,  tn  leg.  86,  sapA  dtat)  Some
have  been  mudx  better  before.  Salvian,  modem  writers  too  much  ooofimnd  all
too,  in  his  declamation  against  the  vices  who  are  denominAted  senators  with  the
of  the  provincials,  gives  ns  to  understand  curlales.
that  tiMy  were  the  vices  of  weal^  d  I  presume  that  SIdonias  ApoUiiiaris

^  This  was  rather  hy  analogy  than  In  means  something  oompUmentaiy  when

strictness :  thus, "  Sun,  ti  sic  dioi  oportet,  he  says — "  Praudebamus  breviter.  oo-

curisB  senatorem."  (Lib.  13,  tit  1,  lex  85.)  piose,  tenatorium  ad  mortm ;  quo  insttom

But  perhaps  the  language  in  different  Institntumqiie  multas  epolM  panels  pa*

parts  of  the  empire,  or  in  dilTerent  pe-  xopeidibns  apponi."— Epist  ii.  9.

riodf .  ml^t  not  be  the  seme. The  law  The  hereditary  nobility  of  the  senate,

|ust  dted  is  of  Atcadius. But  Marian  implying  purity  of  blood.  w«a  recognised

Jhap.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  343

A  great  number  of  laws  in  this  copious  title  of  the
Theodosian  code,  many  of  which  are  cited  by  Eay-
nouard  (vol.  i.  p.  80),  manifest  a  distinction  between
the  curia  and  the  senate,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,
*' nobilissima  curia;"  and  though  perhaps,  in  certain
instances,  they  may  be  referred  to  me  great  senates  of
Home  or  Constantinople,  which  were  tibe  fountains  of
all  provincial  dignity  of  this  kind,  there  are  others
which  can  only  be  explained  on  the  supposition  that
they  relate  to  decurions,  as  it  were  emeriti,  and  promoted
to  a  higher  rank.  Thus,  one  of  Yalentinian  and  Yalens,
in  364,  which  is  the  earliest  that  seems  explicit: —
^<  Nemo  ad  ordinem  senatorium  ante  fanctionem  omniimi
munerum  municipalium  senator  accedat.  Cum  autem
universis  transactis,  patrisa  stipendia  faerit  emensus,
tum  eum  ita  ordinis  senatorii  complexus  excipiet,  ut
reposcentium  civium  flagitatio  non  fatiget."  (Lex
Ivii.)  The  second  title  of  the  sixth  book  of  the  Theo-
dosian code,  '*  De  Senatoribus,"  is  unfortunately  lost;
but  Gothofred  has  restored  a  Faratitlon  from  other  parts
of  the  same  code,  and  especially  from  the  title  above
mentioned,  in  the  twelfth  book,  by  reference  to  which
this  part  of  the  imperial  constitution  will  be  best  under-
stood. It  appears  difficult  to  explain  every  passage.
But  on  the  whole  we  cannot  hesitate  to  agree  with
Guizot  and  Savigny,  that  the  name  of  senator  was  given
to  a  privileged  class  in  the  provincial  cities,  who,  having
served  through  all  the  public  functions  of  the  cuiia,
were  entitled  to  a  legal  exemption  in  future,  and  as-
cended to  the  dignity  of  **  clarissimi.''  Many  others,
independent  of  the  decurions,  obtained  this  rather  by
the  emperor's  fevour,  or  by  the  performance  of  duties
which  regularly  led  to  it.  They  were  nominated  by
the  emperor,  and  might  be  removed  by  him ;  but  other-
wise tiieir  rank  was  hereditary.  Those  decurions,
therefore,  who  could  bear  tbe  burthens  of  municipal
liabilities  without  impoverishment,  rose  so  far  above
them  that  their  &milies  were  secure  in  wealth  as  well
as  privilege.  Thus  the  word  senator  must  be  taken,  in
relation  to  them,  as  merely  an  aristocratic  distinction,

•

wttf  oariy  in  imperial  Home. By  the the  fonrth  genemtlon  were  incapable  oi
lea  Jnlia,  the  Jescendanis  cf  lenaton  to marrying  UterliiuBr-Dig.  zxiii.  2. 44.

344  MUNICIPAL  GOVEBNMENT.  Nona  10

without  regard  to  lis  original  Bense.*  It  is  sufficiently
clear  that  senatorial  families,  by  whatever  means  sepa-
rated from  the  rest,  constituted  the  nobility  of  GanL
Thus  we  read  in  Gregory  of  Tours  (lib.  ii.  c,  21,  sub  own.
475') — **  Sidonius  vir  secundum  ssecidi  dignitatem  nobi-
lissimus,  et  de  primis  Galliamm  senatoribus,  ita  ut
filiam  sibi  Aviti  imperatoris  in  matrimonio  socilLrit."
Another  is  called  **  vir  valde  nobilis  et  de  primis  sena-
toribus GalHarUm."  Other  passages  fi'om  the  same  his-
torian migiht  be  adduced*  But  this  is  not  to  our  imme-
diate purpose,  which  is  to  trace  briefly  the  state  of  mu-
nicipcd  institutions  in  GrauL  The  senatorial  order,  or
Roman  provincial  nobilily,  of  which  we  have  just  been
speaking,  is  different.

Baynouard,  the  diligent  elucidator  of  this  great  ques-
tion, answers  the  very  specious  objection  of  Mably,
drawn  from  the  silence  of  the  capitularies,  which,
though  addressed  to  many  classes  of  magistrates,  never
mention  any  peculiar  to  the  cities,  by  observing  that
these  capitidaries  were  not  designed  for  those  who  lived
by  the  Koman  law.  (Vol.  ii.  p.  160.)  Savigny  had
already  made  the  same  remark.  There  seems  to  be
some  force  in  this  answer ;  and  at  least  it  is  impossible
to  argue  with  Mably,  from  a  negative  probability,
against  the  indisputable  evidence  that  the  municipal
magistrates  of  some  cities  were  in  being.  It  may  be
justiy  doubted,  indeed,  whether  they  possessed  a  consi-
derable authority.  Subject  to  the  count,  as  the  great
depositary  of  royal  power,  they  woidd  not  perhaps  be
held  worthy  of  receiving  immediate  commands  from  the
sovereign  in  the  national  council.  Troja  speaks  with
contempt  of  these  "  curiffi,"  whose  chief  business  was
to  register  testaments  and  witness  deeds:  *'  Son  sempre
i  medesimi  ed  anche  derisorj  i  rioordi  delle  curie,  ridotte
alle  funzioni  di  registrar  testamenti,  donazioni  e  con-
tratti,  o  ad  elegger  magistrati  che  non  poteano  difendere
il  Romano  dalle  violenze  del  Franchi,  senza  V  interven-
zione  de'  vescovi  di  sangue  Romano,  o  di  sangue  beur-

*  For  this  dUttnctloa  between  curidlet  all  of  wtaldi  tfaxow  eome  light  upaa,  or

and  aenotoret  the  reader  may  oonaalt  relate  to,  this  rather  obicore  sul^jiect

the  title  of  the  Theodosian  code  on  Oe-  Oniiot,  SaTlgoy.  and  Bajnonaid  are  tin

eorioos,  above  dted.  Leg.  82. 90, 93, 108,  modem  gokleaL
llA  111.  lis,  laa.  129, 130. 180, 182. 183s

C&AP.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  345

barico ;  ma  in  vano  ei  cercherebbe  la  vita  e  la  pofleanza
della  cuxia  Bomana  in  questi  vani  simnlacri."  (Yol.  i.  part
V.  p.  133.)  They  might  be,  nevertheless,  qnite  as  im-
portant as  nnder  the  later  emperors.

It  is  not  necessary  to  oonclude  that  every  city  in
which  the  curia  or  the  defensor  subsisted  during  the
imperial  government  retained  those  institutions  through-
out the  domination  of  the  Franks.  It  appears  that  the
fanctions  of  '*  defensor  civitatis,"  that  is  to  say,  the
protection  of  the  city  against  arbitrary  acts  of  the  pro-
vincial governors,  and  the  exercise  of  jurisdiction  within
its  boundaries,  frequently  devolved  upon  the  bishop.
It  is  impossible  not  to  recognise  the  ef&cacy  of  episcopal
government  in  sustaining  municipal  rights  during  the
first  dynasty.  The  bishops  were  a  link,  or  rather  a
shield,  between  the  barbarians  who  respected  them  and
the  people  whom  they  protected,  and  to  whose  race
they  for  a  long  time  commonly  belonged.  But  the
bishop  was  legally,  and  sometimes  actually,  elected,  as
the  defensor  had  been,  by  the  people  at  large.  This,
indeed,  ceased  to  be  the  case  before  the  reign  of  Charle-
magne ;  and  the  crown,  or  (in  the  progress  of  the  feudal
system)  its  chief  vassals,  usurped  the  power  of  nomina-
tion, though  the  formality  of  election  was  not  abolished.
Certain  it  is  that  from  this  analogy  to  the  defensor,  and
from  the  still  closer  analogy  to  the  feudal  vassal,  after
royal  granis  of  jurisdiction  and  immuniiv  became  usual,
not  less  than  by  the  respect  due  to  his  station,  the
bishop  became  as  much  the  civil  governor  of  his  city  aa
the  count  was  of  the  rural  districit.

This  was  a  great  revolution  in  the  internal  histoiy  of
cities,  and  one  which  generally  led  to  the  discontinu-
ance of  their  popidar  institutions;  so  that  after  the
reign  of  Charlemagne,  if  not  earlier,  we  may  perhaps
consider  a  municipality  choosing  its  own  officers  as  an
exception,  though  not  a  very  unirequent  one,  to  the
general  usage.  But  instances  of  this  are  more  com-
monly found  to  the  south  of  the  Loire,  where  Boman
laws  prevailed  and  the  feudal  spirit  was  less  vigorous
than  in  the  northern  provinces.  Thus  Baynouard  has
deduced  the  municipal  government  of  ten  cities  from
the  fifth  to  the  twelfth  century.  Seven  of  these  are  of
the  sduth — Perigueux,  Bourges. Aries,  Nismes, Mar-

346  MUNICIPAL  GOVS.mMENT.  Notes  it>

seilles,  Toulouse,  and  Narbonne;  three  only  of  the
north — ^Paris,  Hheims,  and  Metz.  (Yol.  ii.  p.  177.)  It
seems,  however,  more  than  probable  that  these  were  not
the  whole ;  even  in  the  nortn  Meaux  and  Ch&lons  might
be  added,  and,  what  in  early  times  was  undoubtedly  to
be  reckoned  a  Frank  city,  Cologne.  The  corporate
character  of  many  of  these  is  displayed  by  their  coins.
**  Civitas  Massiliensis,"  or  *'  Narbonensis,''  will  be
found  on  the  reverse  of  pieces  bearing  the  heads  of  the
French  kings  of  the  three  dynasties,  especiaUy  under
Louis  the  Debonair  and  Charles  the  Bald  (p.  152).  But
it  seems  to  me  that  the  evidence  of  a  popular  assembly
or  curia,  even  in  Rheims,  which  has  always  been  wont
;to  boast  peculiarly  of  the  antiquity  of  her  privileges,  is
weak  comparatively  with  what  M.  Baynouard  has
alleged  for  the  cities  of  Provence.  As  to  Paris,  it  is
absolutely  none  at  all.  This  assembly  appears  to  have
hardly  survived  in  the  north  of  France,  and  to  have
been  replaced  by  soabim.  These  were  originally  chosen
by  the  citizens,  but  gradually  on  the  bidfiop's  nomina-
tion. Those  of  Bheims  appear  in  847,  exercising  their
functions  imder  an  officer  of  the  archbishop.  (Archives
Administratifs  de  la  Yille  de  Rheims,  PrefisMe,  p.  7,  in
Documens  In^ts,  1839.)  The  editor,  however  (M.
Varin),  inclines  to  adopt  the  theory  of  a  Roman  origin
for  the  privileges  of  that  city.  The  citizens  called  them-
selves in  991,  addressing  the  archbishop,  '*  cives  tui ;"
whence  M.  Yarin  infers  that  they  took  an  oath  of  alle-
giance to  that  prelate,  and  that  their  claims  to  a  pre-
scriptive independence  must  be  given  up.  (YoL  i.  p.
156!)  Such  independence  (that  is,  of  all  but  the  sove-
reign) can  at  most  only  he  admitted  ais  to  the  great
cities  of  Provence  and  Languedoc,  which  in  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries  entered  into  treaties  with
foreign  powers,  and  conducted  themselves  as  independ-
ent republics,  though  perhaps  under  the  nominal  supe-
riority of  the  counts.  Emulous,  as  it  appears,  of  Italian
liberty,  thoy  adopted  the  government  by  consuls  elected
by  the  community.  And  this  honourable  title  was  given
to  the  chief  magistrates  in  most  cities  south  of  the
Loire,  though  a  different  system,  as  we  shall  see,  pre-
vailed on  the  otber  bank.
The Benedictine historians of Languedoc  arc  of

Ohap.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  847

opimon  that  tbo  city  of  Nismes  bad  m'anici|)a]  magif^
trates  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth  centxuy  (t.  li.  p.  111).
The  burgesses  of  Carcassonne  appear  by  name  in  a  charter
of  1107  (p.  616).  In  one  of  1131  the  consuls  of  Bezien*
are  mentioned;  they  existed  therefore  previonsly  (p.
409,  and  Appendix,  p.  969).  The  magistrates  of  St.  ^-
tonin  en  Eonergue  are  named  in  1136;  those  of  Mont-
pellier  in  1142;  of  Narbonne  in  1148;  and  of  St.  Gilles
m  1149  (p.  616,  432,  442,  464).  The  capitouls  of  Tou-
louse pretend  to  an  extravagant  antiquity ;  but  were  in
fact  established  by  Alfonso  count  of  Toulouse,  who  died
in  1148.  In  1162  Baymond  Y.  odnfirmed  the  regula-
tions made  by  the  common  council  of  Toulouse,  which
became  the  foundation  of  the  customs  of  that  city  (p.
472).

Ii  we  may  trust  altogether  to  the  Assises  de  Jeru-
salem in  their  present  shape,  the  court  of  burgesses,
having  jurisdiction  over  persons  of  that  rank,  was  insti«
tuted  by  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  who  died  in  1 100.  (Ass.
de  Jems.  c.  2.)  This  would  be  even  earlier  than  the
charter  of  London,  granted  by  Henry  I.  Lord  Lyt-
telton  goes  so  £a.r  as  to  call  it  **  certain  that  in  England
many  cities  and  towns  were  bodies  corporate  and  com^
munities  long  before  the  alteration  introduced  into
France  by  the  charters  of  Louis  le  Gros.'*  (Hist,  of
Henry  II.  vol.  iv.  p.  29.)  But  this  position,  as  I  shall
more  particularly  show  in  another  place,  is  not  borne
out  by  any  good  authority,  if  it  extends  to  any  internal
jurisdiction  and  management  of  their  own  police;
whereof,  except  in  the  instance  of  London,  we  have  no
proof  before  the  reign  of  Henry  II.

The  legal  incorporation  of  communities  was  perhaps
earlier  in  Spain  than  in  any  other  country.  Alfonso  V .
in  1020  granted  a  charter  to  Leon,  which  is  said  to
mention  the  common  council  of  that  city  in  terms  that
show  it  to  be  an  established  institution.  During  the
latter  part  of  the  eleventh  century,  as  well  as  in  subse-
quent times,  such  charters  are  very  frequent.  (Marina,
Ensayo  Historico-Critioo  sobre  las  sieta  partidas.)  In
several  instances  we  find  concessions  of  smaller  privi-
leges to  towns,  without  any  political  power.  Thus
Berenger,  count  of  Barcelona,  m  1026  confirms  to  the
inhabitants  of  that  cit^'  all  the  firanchises  which  they

348  MUNICIPAL  GOYESmUEHT.  Nam  10

already  poflsess.  These  seem,  however,  to  be  confined
to  exemption  &om  paying  rent  and  &om  any  jarisdiction
below  that  of  an  officer  deputed  by  the  coont.  (De
Marca,  Maroa  Hiapanica,  p.  1038.)  Another  grant
occnrs  in  the  same  volume  (p.  909),  mm  the  bishop  of
Barcelona  in  fiivonr  of  a  town  of  ms  diocese.  By  some
inattention  Bobertson  has  quoted  these  charters  as
granted  to  ''  two  Tillages  in  the  conniy  of  Bonsillon."
(Hist.  Charles  Y.  note  16.)  The  charteis  of  Tortoea
and  Lerida  in  1149  do  not  contain  any  grant  of  jnrisdio-
tion  (p.  1303).

The  corporate  towns  in  France  and  England  always
enjoyed  foller  privil^es  than  these  Gatalonian  charters
impart.  The  essential  characteristics  of  a  commune,
according  to  M-.  Brequigny,  were  an  association  con-
firmed  by  charter ;  a  code  of  fixed  sanctioned  customs ;
and  a  set  of  privileges,  always  including  municipal  or
electiye  government.  (Ordonnances,  p.  3.)  A  distinc-
tion ought,  however,  to  be  pointed  out,  which  is  rather
liable  to  elude  observation,  between  communes,  or  cor-
porate towns,  and  boroughs  (bourgeoisies).  The  main
difiference  was  that  in  the  latter  there  was  no  elective
government,  the  magistrates  being  appointed  by  the
king  or  other  superior.  In  the  possession  of  fixed  privi-
leges and  exemptions,  in  the  personal  liberty  of  their
inhabitants,  and  in  the  certainty  of  their  le^  usages,
there  was  no  distinction  between  corporate  towns  and
mere  boroughs :  and  indeed  it  is  agreed  that  eveiy  cor-
porate town  was  a  borough,  though  every  borough  was
not  a  corporation.'  The  French  antiquaiy  quoted  above
does  not  trace  these  inferior  communities  or  borou^iis
higher  than  the  charters  of  Louis  YI.  But  we  find  the
name,  and  a  good  deal  of  the  substance,  in  England
under  William  the  Conqueror,  as  is  manifest  from
Domesday-Book.

It  is  evident  that  if  extensive  privileges  of  internal
government  had  been  preserved  in  the  north  of  France,
there  could  have  been  no  need  for  that  great  movement
towards  the  close  of  the  eleventh  century,  which  ended

f  The  prefiuse  to  the  twelfth  toliiin«  it,  however,  Is  appUcable  to  ho<h  wpedm,

of  Oidoomuicce  dee  Bois  oontnina  •  AUl  or  ntber  to  the  genu  and  the  tptdie^

aocoaiit  of  bouiyeotttec.aB  that  to  the  lie*  See  too  that  to  the  foforteenth  TotnaM  of

ventb  doer  of  communa.  A  greet  pert  of  Becoeil  dee  Hietorieni,  p.  T4.

Cl:4P.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  349

iu  establkhing  oivio  freedom ;  nmcli  less  could  tlie  con-
temporaxy  historians  have  spoken  of  this  as  a  new  era
in  tne  state  of  France.  The  bishox)8  were  now  almost
sovereign  in  their  cities ;  the  episcopal,  the  mTinicipal,
the  feudal  titles,  conspired  to  enhance  their  power;
and  from  being  the  protectors  of  the  people,  from  the
glorious  office  of  defensores  dvitatis,  they  had,  in  many
places  at  least,  become  odious  by  their  own  exactions.
Hence  the  citizens  of  Cambray  first  revolted  against
their  bishop  in  957,  and,  after  several  ineffectual  risings,
ultimately  constituted  themselves  into  a  conmiunity  in
1076.  The  citizens  of  Mans,  about  the  latter  time,  had
the  courage  to  resist  William  duke  of  Normandy ;  but
this  generous  attempt  at  freedom  was  premature.  The
cities  of  Noyon,  Beauvais,  and  St.  Quentin,  about  the
b^inning  of  the  next  century,  were  successful  in  ob-
taining charters  of  immunity  and  self-government  from
their  bishops;  and  where  uiese  were  violated,  on  one
side  or  the  other,  the  king,  Louis  YI.,  came  in  to  re-
dress the  injured  party  or  to  compose  the  dissensions  of
both.  Hence  arose  the  royal  charters  of  the  Picard
cities,  which  soon  extended  to  other  parts  of  France,
and  were  used  as  examples  by  the  vassals  of  the  crown.
This  subject,  and  especially  the  struggles  of  the  cities
against  the  bishops  before  the  legal  establishment  of
communities  by  ckarter,  is  abundantly  discussed  by  M.
Thierry,  in  his  Lettres  sur  I'Histoire  de  France.  But
even  where  charters  are  extant,  they  do  not  always
create  an  incorporated  community,  but,  as  at  Laon,
recognise  and  regulate  an  internal  society  already  estab-
lished. (Guizot,  Civilisation  en  France,  Le^n  47.)

We  must  here  distinguish  the  cities  of  Flanders  and
Holland,  which  obtained  their  independence  much
earlier ;  in  &ct,  their  self-government  goes  back  beyond
any  assignable  date.  (Sismondi,  iv.  432.)  They  appear
to  have  sprung  fr^m  a  distinct  source,  but  still  from  the
great  reservoir  of  Roman  institutions.  The  cities  on
the  Rhine  retained  more  of  their  ancient  organization
than  we  find  in  northern  France.  The  Roman  language,
says  Thierry,  had  here  perished ;  the  institutions  sur-
vived. At  Cologne  we  find  from  age  to  age  a  corporation
of  citizens  exactly  resembling  the  curia,  and  whose
members  set  up  hereditary  pretensions  to  a  Roman

A50  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  Nona  10

descent;  we  find  there  a  particular  tribunal  for  tlie
'*  cessio  bononim/'  a  part  of  Roman  law  unknown  to
the  old  junsprudence  of  Germany  as  much  as  to  that  of
the  feudal  s^nstem.  In  the  twelfth  century  the  free  con*
stitution  of  Cologne  passed  for  ancient.  From  Cologne
and  Treves  municipal  rights  spread  to  the  Bhenish
cities  of  less  remote  origin,  and  reached  the  great  com-
munities of  Flanders  and  Brabant.  Thierry  has  quoted
a  remarkable  passage  from  the  life  of  the  empress
St.  Adelaide,  who  died  in  999,  whence  we  may  infer  the
continuance,  at  least  in  common  estimation,  of  Boman
privileges  in  the  Bhenish  cities.  '*  Ante  duodecimum
circiter  annum  obiti^  sui,  in  loco  qui  dicitur  Salsa  (Selts
in  Alsace),  urbem  decrevit  fieri  sub  libertate  Romand^
quem  affectum  postea  ad  perfectum  perducit  effiactum."^
(Recits  des  T.  M.  i.  274^

But  the  acuteness  of  this  writer  has  discovered  a
wholly  different  origin  for  the  communes  in  the  north
of  France.  He  deduces  them  from  the  old  Teutonic
institution  of  guilds,  or  fraternities  by  voluntary  com>
pact,  to  relieve  each  other  in  poverty,  or  to  protect  each
other  frx)m  injury.  Two  essential  characteristics  belonged
to  them ;  the  common  banquet  and  the  common  purse.
They  had  also  in  many  instances  a  religious,  sometimes
a  secret,  ceremonial  to  knit  more  firmly  the  bond  of
fidelity.  They  became,  as  usual,  suspicious  to  govern-
ments, as  several  capitularies  of  Charlemagne  prove.
But  they  spoke  both  to  the  heart  and  to  the  reason  in  a
voice  which  no  government  coidd  silence.  They  readily
became  connected  with  the  exercise  of  trades,  with  the
training  of  apprentices,  with  the  traditional  rules  of
art.  We  find  them  in  all  Teutonic  and  Scandinavian
countries;  they  are  frequently  mentioned  in. our  Anglo-
Saxon  documents,  and  are  the  basis  of  those  corporations
which  the  Norman  kings  recognised  or  founded.  The
guild  was,  of  course,  in  its  primary  character  a  personal
association ;  it  was  in  the  state,  but  not  the  state ;  it
belonged  to  the  city  without  embracing  all  the  citizens ;
its  purposes  were  tiie  good  of  the  fellows  alone.  But
when  their  good  was  inseparable  from  that  of  their  little
country,  their  walls  and  churches,  the  principle  of
voluntary  association  was  readily  extended ;  and  from
tlie  private  guild,  possessing  afready  the  vital  spirit

CiUF.  II.  MUKICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  351

of  £Edthfiilii68s  and  brotherly  love,  sprang  the  sworn
community,  the  body  of  citizens,  bound  by  a  Tolnntary
but  perpetual  obligation  to  guard  each  other's  rights
against  the  thefts  of  the  weak  or  the  tyranny  of  the
powerful.

The  most  remarkable  proof  of  this  progress  from  a
merchant  guild  to  a  corporation  is  exhibited  in  the
local  history  of  Paris.  No  mention  of  a  curia  or  Boman
mimicipality  in  that  city  has  been  traced  in  any  record :
we  are  driven  to  Raynouard's  argument — Could  Paris  be
destitute  of  institutions  which  had  become  the  right  of
all  other  cities  in  Gaul  ?  A  couple  of  lines,  however,
from  the  poem  of  Gulielmus  Brito,  imder  Philip  Augustus,
are  his  only  proof  (vol.  ii.  p.  219).  But  at  Paris  there
was  a  great  college  or  corporation  of  nautCB  or  marchands
d'eau;  that  is,  who  supplied  the  town  with  commodities
by  the  navigation  of  the  Seine.'  These,  indeed,  do  not
seem  to  be  traced  very  far  back,  but  the  necessary
documents  may  be  deficient.  They  appear  abundantly
in  the  twelfth  century,  with  a  provost  and  scabini  of
their  own.  And  to  this  body  the  kings  in  that  age
conceded  certain  rights  over  the  inhabitants.  The  arms
borne  by  the  city,  a  ship,  are  those  of  the  college  of
fuitdcB.  The  subsequent  process  by  which  t^iis  corporation
slid  into  a  municipality  is  not  clearly  developed  by  the
writer  to  whom  I  must  refer.

Thus  there  were  several  sources  of  the  municipal
institutions  in  France ;  first,  the  Boman  system  of  decu-
rions,  handed  down  presoriptively  in  some  cities,  but
chiefly  in  the  south ;  secondly,  the  German  system  of
voluntary  societies  or  guilds,  spreading  to  the  whole
commiinity  for  a  common  end;  thirdly,  the  forcible
insurrection  of  the  inhabitants  against  their  lords  or
prelates ;  and  lastly,  the  charters,  regularly  granted  by
the  king  or  by  their  immediate  superior.  Few  are  likely
now  to  maintain  the  old  theory  of  Robertson,  that  the
kings  of  France  encouraged  the  communities,  in  order
to  make  head  with  their  help  against  the  nobility,  which
a  closer  attention  to  history  refutes.  We  must  here,
however,  distingnish  the  corporate  towns  or  communities

&  If  •&  Intcription  quoted  I7  Che  a  corporate  lostltatioa  under  Tiberius,
editors  of  Da  Cange,  toc  Kautae.  be  Bat  this  mast  prlmft  fscle  be  su^spldoiir
flenoine.  the  Nautto  Farislad  existed  as In  do  trilling  ditfcmb.

352  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMEItr.  .  Notes  to

from  the  other  cletss,  called  burgages,  bourgeoises.  The
oh&telains  encouraged  the  growth  of  Tillages  around
their  castles,  from  whom  they  often  derived  assistance
In  war,  and  conceded  to  these  burgesses  some  privileges,
though  not  any  municipal  independence.

Guizot  observes,  as  a  difference  between  the  curial
system  of  the  empire  and  that  of  the  French  communes
in  the  twelfth  century,  that  the  former  was  aristocratic
in  its  spirit ;  the  decurions  filled  up  vacancies  in  their
body,  and  ultimately  their  privileges  became  hereditaiy.
But  the  latter  were  grounded  on  popular  election,
though  with  certain  modifications  as  to  eligibility.  Yet
some  of  the  aristocratic  elements  continued  among  the
c  )mmunes  of  the  south. ^Le^n  48.)

It  is  to  be  confessed  uiat  while  the  kings,  from  the
end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  altered  so  much  their
former  policy  as  to  restrain,  in  great  measure,  and  even
in  some  instances  to  overthrow,  the  liberties  of  French
cities,  there  was  too  much  pretext  for  this  in  their  law-
less spirit  and  proneness  to  injustice.  The  better  class,
dreading  the  populace,  gave  aid  to  the  royal  authority,
by  admitting  bailiffs  and  provosts  of  the  crown  to  exer-
cise jurisdiction  within  their  walls.  But  by  this  the
privileges  of  the  city  were  gradually  subverted.  (Guizot,
Legon  49 ;  Thierry,  Lettre  xiv.)  The  ancient  registers
of  the  parliament  of  Paris,  called  Olim,  prove  this  con-
tinual interference  of  the  crown  to  establish  peace  and
order  in  towns,  and  to  check  their  encroachment  on  the
rights  of  others.  "  Nulle  part,"  says  M.  Beugnot,  "  op
ne  voit  aussi  bien  que  les  communes  ^taient  un  instru-
ment puissant  pour  opt^rer  dans  T^Stat  de  grands  et
dlieureux  changemens,  mais  non  une  institution  qui  eut
en  elle-meme  des  conditions  de  dur^e."  (Bt^gistres  dee
Arrets,  vol.  i.  p.  192,  in  Documens  In<^t8,  1839.)

A  more  favourable  period  for  civic  liberty  commenced
and  possibly  terminated  with  the  most  tyrannical  of
French  kings,  Louis  XI,  Though  the  spirit  of  rebellion,
which  actuated  a  large  part  of  the  nobles  in  his  reign,
was  not  strictly  feudal,  but  sprung  much  more  from  the
combination  of  a  few  princes,  it  equally  put  the  crown
in  jeopardy,  and  required  all  his  sagacity  to  withstand
its  encroachments.  He  encouraged,  therefore,  with  a
policy  unusual  in  the  house  of  Yalois,  the  Tiers  Etat,

^AP.  II.  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENT.  353

the  middle  orders,  as  a  counterpoise.  What  has  erro-
neously been  said  of  Louis  VI.  is  true  of  his  subtle
descendant.  '*  His  ordinances,"  it  is  remarked  by  Sis-
mondi  (xiv.  314),  *'  are  distinguished  by  liberal  views
in  government.  He  not  only  gave  the  citizens,  in
several  places,  the  choice  of  their  magistrates,  but  esta-
blished an  urban  militia,  training  the  inhabitants  to  the
use  of  arms,  and  placing  in  their  hands  the  appointment
of  officers."  And  thus,  at  the  close  of  our  medieeval
period,  we  leave  the  municipal  authority  of  France  in
no  slight  vigour.  It  may  only  be  added  that,  for  mis-
cellaneous information  as  to  the  French  communes,  the
reader  should  have  recourse  to  that  great  repository  of
curious  knowledge,  the  '  Histoire  des  Francis,  par
Monteil,  Si^le  XV.'

The  continuance  of  Italian  municipalities  has  been
more  disputed  of  late  than  that  of  the  French,  which
both  Savigny  and  Raynouard  have  placed  beyond
question.  The  former  of  these  writers  maintains  that
not  only  under  the  Ostrogoths  and  Greeks  (the  latter
indeed  might  naturally  be  expected)  we  have  abimdant
testimony  to  the  ordo  decurionum  and  other  Eoman  insti-
tutions in  the  Italian  cities,  but  that,  even  under  the
Lombard  dominion,  the  same  privileges  were  unimpaired,
or  at  least  not  subverted.  This  is  naturally  connected
with  the  general  question  as  to  the  condition  of  the
natives  in  that  period ;  those  who  deny  them  any  rights
of  citizenship,  or  even  protection  by  the  law,  will  not
be  inclined  to  favour  the  supposition  of  an  internal
jurisdiction.  Troja  accordingly,  following  older  writers,
rejects  the  notion  of  civic  government  in  those  .cities
which  endured  the  Lombard  yoke,  and  elaborately  re-
fates  the  proofs  alleged  by  Savigny.  In  this,  however,
he  does  not  seem  always  successful;  but  the  early
records  of  Italian  communities  are  by  no  means  so  de-
cisive as  those  that  we  have  found  in  France.

Liutprand,  as  Troja  conceives,  established  communities
of  Lombards  alone.  But  he  suggests  that  even  before
the  reign  of.  Liutprand  there  may  have  been  such  a
district  government  as  we  find  mentioned  by  Tacitus
among  the  Germans ;  and  this  might  possibly  be  deno-
mmated  by  the  Lombards  curia  or  ordo,  in  imitation  of
the  Boman  names. If,  therefore,  we  meet  with  these

VOL.  I.  2  a

854  MUNICtPAL  GOVERNMENT.  Notes  to  Chap,  il

terms  in  the  laws  or  reoords  of  Italy  before  Charlemagne,
there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  relate  to  Lom-
bards (p.  125).  This  is  hardly,  perhaps,  a  conjecture
that  wiU  be  &vonred.  Charlemagne,  however,  when  he
introduced  the  distinction  of  personal  law,  oonstitnted
in  every  city  a  new  Lombard  community,  taking  itn
name  &om  the  most  nnmerons  people,  biit  in  iniidi
jach  nation  shose  its  own  soabm  or  judges  (p.  295).

iTALr.  STATB  OF  ITALY.  366

CHAPTEB  III.

TH£  HISTORT  OF  ITALY,  FBOM  THE  EXTINCTION  OP  THE
CABLOVmOIAN  EMPEROBS  TO  THE  mYASION  0^  NAPLES  BY
CHA&LES  YUL

PART  I.

state  of  Italy  after  the  Death  of  Charles  the  I>it  —  CorooatioD  of  Otho  the  Great  —
State  of  Rome  —  Coorad  IL  —  Union  of  the  Kingdom  of  Italy  with  the  Empire

—  Estahliahment  of  the  Normans  In  Naples  and  Sidly  —  Boger  Ouiscard  —  Rise
of  the  Lombard  Cities  —  They  gradually  become  more  independent  of  the
Empire  —  Their  internal  Wan  —  Frederic  Barbarossa  —  Destruction  of  Milan

—  Lombard  League  —  Battle  of  Legnano  —  Peace  of  Constance  —  Temporal
PrindpaUty  of  the  Popes  —  Ouelf  and  Ghibelin  Factions  —  Otho  lY.  —  Frederic
IL  —  Arrangement  of  the  Italian  Republics  —  Secaod  Lombard  War  —  Extinc-
tion of  the  House  of  Swabia  —  Causes  of  the  Suooeas  of  Lombard  RepubUcs  —
Their  Prosperity  —  and  Forms  of  Government  —  Contentions  between  the
NobiUty  and  Pe(^le  —  avil  Wars  —  Story  of  Giovanni  di  Yicenza.*

At  the  death  of  Charles  the  Fat  in  888,  that  part  of
Italy  which  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  state  of
the  Western  empire  was  divided,  like  France  ^^f^^^
and  Germany,  among  a  few  powerful  vassals,  ninth
hereditary  governors  of  provinces. The  prin-  ^^'^'y*
cipal  of  these  were  the  dukes  of  Spoleto  and  Tuscany,
the  marquises  of  Ivrea,  Susa,  and  Friuli. The  great

*  The  authorities  vpon  which  this  speaks  In  all  his  writSngs;  bat  his  mind
diapter  is  founded,  and  which  do  not  was  not  philosophical  enough  to  df^
always  appear  at  the  fbot  of  the  page,  are  criminate  the  wheat  ftom  the  chaff,  and
chiefly  the  following.  1.  Mnratori's  An-  his  habits  of  Ufe  Indnced  him  to  annex
nals  of  Italy  (twelve  volumes  In  4ta  or  an  Imaginaiy  importance  to  the  dates  ol
eighteen  In  8vo.)  comprehend  a  sum-  diplomas  and  other  inoonsidenhle  mat-
mary  of  its  history  from  the  beginning  of  ters.  His  narrative  presents  a  mere
the  Christian  era  to  the  pesoe  of  Aix  la  skeleton  devoid  of  juices;  and  besides  its
ChapeUe.  Hie  volmnes  relating  to  the  Intderable  aridity,  it  laboun  under  that
middle  ages,  into  which  he  has  digested  oonftuion  which  a  merely  dironologlcal
the  original  writers  contained  in  his  great  arrangement  of  concurrent  and  inde
collection,  Scriptores  Rerum  Italicarum,  pendent  events  mnst  always  produce,
are  by  much  the  best;  and  of  these,  the  2.  The  Dlsaertatlons  on  Italian  Anti<iui-
part  which  extends  from  the  seventh  or  ties,  by  the  same  writer,  may  be  con-
eighth  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  sidered  either  as  one  or  two  works.  In
IstheftillestandmostusefriL  Mnratori's  Latin  they  fonn  six  volumes  in  folio,
accuracy  is  in  general  almost  implicitly  enriched  with  a  great  number  of  original
to  be  trusted,  and  his  plain  Integrity  documents In  Italian  they  are  freely

2a2

356

STATE  OF  ITALY.

Chap.  III.  PASi*  I.

Lombard  dncliy  of  Benevento,  whicli  liad  stood  against
file  arms  of  Clmrlemagne,  and  comprised  more  than  half
die  present  kingdom  of  Naples,  had  now  fallen  into
decay,  and  was  straitened  by  the  Greeks  in  Apulia,  and

translated  by  Muratori  himself,  abridged
no  doubt,  and  wlthoat  moat  of  the  ori-
ginal inatruments,  hot  well  ftirniahed
with  qaotationa,  and  abaudantly  sufficient
for  most  purposes.  They  form  three
volimies  in  quarta  I  have  In  general
quoted  only  the  number  of  the  disserta-
tion, on  account  of  the  variance  between
the  Latin  and  Italian  works:  in  caaes
where  the  page  is  referred  to,  I  have  in-
dicated by  the  title  which  of  the  two  I
intend  to  vouch.  3.  St  Marc,  a  learned
and  Laborious  Frenchman,  has  written  a
chronological  abridgment  of  Italian  his-
tory, somewhat  in  the  manner  of  Re-
nault, but  so  strangely  divided  by  several
parallel  columns  in  every  page,  that  I
could  hardly  name  a  book  more  incon-
venient to  the  reader.  His  knowledge,
like  Muratori's,  lay  a  good  deal  in  points
of  minute  inquiry ;  and  he  is  chiefly  to
be  valued  in  eodesiastical  history.  The
work  deacends  only  to  the  thirteenth
century.  4.  Denina's  Rivolusioni  d'lta-
lia,  originally  published  In  1769,  is  a
perspicuous  and  lively  book,  in  which  the
principal  drcumstanoes  are  well  selected.
It  is  not  perhaps  flree  tram  errors  In  fiMt,
and  still  leas  teom  those  of  opinion:  but,
till  lately,  I  do  not  know  from  what
source  a  general  acquaintance  with  the
history  of  Italy  could  have  been  so  easily
derived.  5.  The  publication  of  M.  Sis-
mondi's  Hlstoire  des  R^pnbliques  Ita-
liennes  has  thrown  a  blase  of  light  aronnd
the  most  interesting,  at  least  in  many
respects,  of  European  countries  during
the  middle  ages.  I  am  happy  to  bear
witness,  so  far  as  my  own  studies  have
enabled  me,  to  the  learning  and  diligence
of  this  writer;  qualities  which  the  world
is  sometimes  apt  not  to  vuppoee.  where
they  perceive  so  much  eloquence  and
phikwophy.  I  cannot  express  my  opinion
of  M.  Sismondl  in  this  respect  more
strongly  than  by  saying  that  his  work
\u»  almost  superseded  the  Annah  of
Muratori;  I  mean  finom  the  twelfth
aentury,  before  whiob  period  his  labour

hardly  begins.  Though  doubtlen  not
more  acennte  than  Muratori,  be  has  oon-
Bulted  a  much  more  extensive  list  of
authors ;  and,  considered  as  a  register  of
fiscts  alone,  his  history  is  incomparably
more  useftiL  These  are  comhined  in  so
skilful  a  manner  as  to  diminlsti,  in  a
great  degree,  that  Inevitable  oonJtislon
whldi  arises  ftxim  frequency  of  trarndtko
and  want  of  general  unity.  It  Is  much
to  be  regretted  that,  from  too  redundant
details  of  unnecessary  circumstances,  and
sometimes,  if  I  may  take  the  liberty  of
saying  so,  tram  unnecessary  reflectloos,
M.  Sismondl  has  run  into  a  prolixly
which  will  probably  intimidate  the  Lan-
guid students  of  our  sge.  It  is  the  more
to  be  regretted,  because  the  History  of
Italian  Republics  is  calculated  to  pro-
duce a  good  tkr  more  important  than
storing  the  memory  with  historical  Itela,
that  of  communicatiug  to  the  reader's
bosom  some  sparks  of  the  dignified  phi-
losophy, the  love  for  truth  and  vlrtne,
which  lives  along  its  eloquent  pages.
6.  To  Muratori's  collection  of  original
writers,  the  Scriptores  Rerum  Italics-
rum,  in  twenty-four  volumes  in  folio,  I
have  paid  considerable  attention;  perhaps
there  is  no  volume  of  it  which  I  have  not
more  or  less  consulted.  But,  after  the
Annals  of  the  same  writer,  and  the  work
of  M.  Sismondl,  I  have  not  thouf^t  my-
self bound  to  repeat  a  laborious  seardi
into  all  the  authorities  upon  which  those
writers  depend.  The  utiUty,  for  the
most  part,  of  perusing  original  and  con-
temporary authon,  consists  less  in  aaoer*
taining  mere  facts  than  in  acqtiiring  that
insight  into  the  spirit  and  temper  of  their
times  which  it  is  utterly  impracticable
for  any  compiler  to  impart  It  would
be  impossible  for  me  to  distinguish  w^hal
information  I  have  derived  from  ibeae
oigher  sources ;  in  cases,  therefore,  where
no  particular  authority  is  named,  I  would
refer  to  the  writings  of  Muratori  and
Sismondl,  especially  the  latter,  aa  the
substratum  of  the  following  chapter.

tTALT.  STATE  OP  ITALY.  357

by  ihe  principalities  of  Capua  and  Salerno,  which  had
been  severed  from  its  own  territory,  on  the  opposite
coast.* Though  princes  of  the  Carlovingian  ^^  in  the
line  continued  to  reign  in  France,  their  charac-  fi»t  pan  of
ter  was  too  little  distinguished  to  challenge  the  ^^  ^^^
obedience  of  Italy,  already  separated  by  family  partitions
from  the  Transalpine  nations; and  the  only contest
was  among  hei  native  chiefs. One  of  these,  Berenger,
originally  marquis  of  Friuli,  or  the  March  of  Treviso,
reigned  for  thirty-six  years,  but  with  continually  dis-
puted pretensions;  and  after  his  death  the  calamities
of  Italy  were  sometimes  aggravated  by  tyranny,  and
sometimes  by  intestine  war.*' The  Hungarians  desolated
Lombardy;  the  southern  coasts  were  infested  by  the
Saracens,  now  masters  of  Sicily. Plunged  in  an  abyss,
from  which  she  saw  no other  means  of  extricating
herself,  Italy  lost  sight  of  her  favourite  independence,
and  called  in  the  assistance  of  Otho  the  First,  king  of
Germany. Little  opposition  was  made  to  this  powerful
monarch. Berenger  II.,  the  reigning  sovereign  of  Italy,
submitted  to  hold  the  kingdom  of  him  as  a  fief."* But
some  years  afterwards,  new  disturbances  aris-  qq^  ^^^
ing,  Otho  descended  from  the  Alps  a  second  omt
time,  deposed  Berenger,  and  received  at  the  ^^'*^*
hands  of  Pope  John  XII.  the  imperial  dignity,  which
had  been  suspended  for  nearly  forty  years.

Every  ancient  prejudice,  every  recollection,  whether
of  Augustus  or  of  Charlemagne,  had  led  the  Italians  to
annex  the  notion  of  sovereignty  to  the  name  of  Roman
Emperor ;  nor  were  Otho,  or  his  two  immediate  descend-

b  Qiamione,  Istoria  Civile  di  Napoll,  dcoo  altra  ftccU,  la  piiiiniii  de'  veecovi

L  vli.;  SiflXkondi,  Hlgt.  des  R^publiqaes  f  aiuncnta,  i  patti  fra  11  saoerdozio  e  1'

ItaUennes,  t  L  pk  244.  Imperio  gnardfloo  a  plh  yasto  scopo,  ed  i

"  Berenger,  being gnndacm, by a  pantiflcl  Romano  aono  dalla  fona  delle

danghter,  of  Louis  the  Debonair,  may  ooeechiamatiatenereilfrenointellcttQale

be  reckoned  of  the  Carlovingian  family,  della  civith  de'  popoll  di  tntta  Eoropa."

He  was  a  Frank  by  Icnv,  aooordlng  to  Trqja-  dednoes  the Italian communes

Troja,  who  denies  to  him  and  his  eon.  '*  dope  11  mllle "  from  a  German  rather

fierenger  II.,  the  name  of  Italiaua. It  than  a  Roman  origin. **Iii  Bono  vera*

was  Otho  L  that  put  an  end  to  the  Frank  mente  1-  oomuni  dov'  b  la  spada  per

dominion. Storia  d'ltalia,  ▼.  35T.  dlfenders^;  ™a  °^  regno  liongobardlco

**  Or  gik  taUo  all'  apporir  degli  Ottoni  da  Innga  stegione  la  spada  pih  non  pcn-

sl  cangia  da  capo  in  Italia,  nel  modo  deva  dal  flanco  del  Romano "  (p.  368).
•teMo  che  tattoenud  congiato  alia  vennta ^  Mmatorl,  a.d.  951 ;  Denina,  Rivoto

ie'  FronchL Le  dttk  Longobarde  pren-  sioni  d'ltalia,  I.  ix.  c.  6.

368  IKIEBNAL  STATE  OF  BOMR Chap.  III.  Part  I.

ants,  by  any  means  inclined  to  waive  these  supposed  pre-
rogatives, which  they  were  well  able  to  enforce.  Most
of  the  Lombard  princes  acquiesced  without  apparent
repugnance  in  the  new  Grerman  government,  which  was
conducted  by  Otho  the  Great  with  much  prudence  and
vigour,  and  occasionally  with  severity.  The  citizens  of
Lombardy  were  still  better  satisfied  with  a  change  that
ensured  a  more  tranquil  and  regular  administration  than
they  had  experienced  under  the  preceding  kings.  But
in  one,  and  that  the  chief  of  Italian  cities,  very  different
sentiments  were  prevalent.  We  find,  indeed,  a  con-
siderable obscurity  spread  over  the  internal  history  of
intltnai  ^^®  during  the  long  period  fix)m  the  recovery
state  of  of  Italy  by  Belisarius  to  the  end  of  the  elevenlL
^**°*®'  century.  The  popes  appear  to  have  possessed
some  measure  of  temporal  power,  even  while  the  city  was
professedly  governed  by  the  exarchs  of  Savenna,  in  the
name  of  the  Eastern  empire.  This  power  became  more
extensive  after  her  separation  from  Constantinople.  It
was,  however,  subordmate  to  the  undeniable  sovereignty
of  the  new  imperial  fiGunily,  who  were  supposed  to  enter
upon  all  the  rights  of  their  predecessors.  There  was
always  an  imperial  officer,  or  prefect,  in  that  city,  to
render  criminal  justice;  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  the
emperor  was  taken  by  the  people ;  and  upon  any  irregu-
lar election  of  a  pope,  a  circumstance  by  no  means
unusual,  the  emperors  held  themselves  entitled  to  inter-
pose. But  the  spirit  and  even  the  institutions  of  the
Komans  were  republican.  Amidst  the  darkness  of  the
tenth  century,  which  no  contemporary  historian 'dissi-
pates, we  faintly  distinguish  the  awfdl  names  of  senate,
consuls,  and  tribunes,  the  domestic  magistracy  of  Rome.
These  shadows  of  past  glory  strike  us  at  first  with  sur-
prise ;  yet  there  is  no  improbability  in  the  supposition
that  a  city  so  renowned  and  populous,  and  so  happily
sheltered  from  the  usurpation  of  the  Lombards,  might
have  preserved,  or  might  afterwards  establish,  a  kind  of
municipal  government,  which  it  would  be  natural  to
dignify  with  those  august  titles  of  antiquity.*  During
that  anarchy  which  ensued  upon  the  Ml  of  the  Carlo-
vingian  dynasty,  the  Bomans  acquired  an  independence

*  Mn-atorl.  A.a  »6T.  987. 1016, 1087 ;  Sismundi.  1 1.  p.  Iftft.

Italy.  HENRY  II.  AND  ABIK)IN.  859

which  they  did  not  deserve.  The  city  became  a  prey  to
the  most  terrible  disorders ;  the  papal  chair  -was  sought
for  at  best  by  bribery  or  controllHijr  influence,  often  by
violence  and  assassination ;  it  was  mled  by  such  men  as
naturally  rise  by  such  means,  whose  sway  was  precarious,
and  generally  ended  either  in  their  mtffder  or  degrada-
tion. For  many  years  the  supreme  pontifBs  were  forced
upon  the  church  by  two  women  of  high  rank  but  infa-
mous reputation,  Theodora  and  her  £tu^hter  Marozia.
The  kings  of  Italy,  whose  election  in  a  diet  of  Lombard
princes  and  bishops  at  Boncaglia  was  not  conceived  to
convey  any  pretension  to  the  sovereignty  of  Bome,  could
never  obtain  any  decided  influence  in  |>apal  elections,
which  were  the  object  of  stru^ling  factions  among  the
resident  nobility.  In  this  temper  of  the  Romans,  they
were  ill  disposed  to  resume  habits  of  obedience  to  a
fore^  sovereign.  The  next  year  after  Otho's  ^^
coronation  they  rebelled,  the  pope  at  their  head ;
but  were  of  course  subdued  wi^out  difficulty.  The  same
republican  spirit  broke  out  wheneTcr  the  emperors  were
abiBent  in  Germany,  especially  during  the  minority  of
Otho  m.,  and  directed  itself  against  the  temporal  su-
periority of  the  pope.  But  when  that  emperor  attained
manhood  he  besieged  and  took  the  city,  crushing  all
resistance  by  measures  of  seTerity ;  and  especially  by
the  execution  of  the  consul  Crescentius,  a  leader  of  the
popular  &ction,  to  whose  instigation  the  tumultuous
licence  of  Bome  was  principally  ascribed.'

At  the  death  of  Ouio  III.  without  children^  in  1002,
the  compact  between  Italy  and  the  emperors  of  Henry  n.
the  house  of  Saxony  was  determined.  Her  en-  "^  AnWiL
gagement  of  fidelity  was  certainly  not  applicable  to  every
sovereign  whom  the  princes  of  Germany  might  raise  to
their  throne.  Accordingly  Ardoin  marquis  of  Ivrea  was
elected  kixig  of  Italy.  But  a  German  party  existed
among  the  Lombard  princes  and  bishops,  to  which  his
insolent  demeanour  soon  gaTe  a  pretext  for  inviting
Henry  II.,  the  new  king  of  Germany,  collaterally  related
to  their  Lite  sovereign.  Ardoin  was  deserted  by  most  of
the  Italians,  but  retained  his  former  subjects  in  Pied-

'  Shmnndf,  t  L  p.  IM,  maket  a  patriot  Ktmi  better  to  Ibllow  the  oomiiion  tenor
hcR>  of  Crementitii.  Bat  we  know  ao  of  Uetory,  wlthoot  Tooehliig  flbr  the  ao
UtUe  of  the  man  or  the  tfrnee.  that  U cnncj  of  Iti  rapreaentatloDi.

360  CONRAD  lU  Chap.  UI.  Pakt  L

mont,  and  disputed  the  crown  for  many  years  with
Henry,  who  passed  very  litUe  time  in  Italy.  Dating
this  period  there  was  hardly  any  recognised  government ;
and  the  Lombards  became  more  and  more  accustomed,
through  necessity,  to  protect  themselves,  and  to  provide
for  their  own  internal  police.  Meanwhile  the  German
nation  had  become  odious  to  the  Italians.  The  mde
soldiery,  insolent  and  addicted  to  intoxication,  were
engaged  in  frequent  disputes  with  the  citizens,  wherein
the  latter,  as  is  usual  in  similar  cases^  were  exposed  first
to  the  summary  vengeance  of  the  troops,  and  afterwards
to  penal  chastisement  for  sedition.*  In  one  of  these
tumults,  at  the  entry  of  Henry  II.  in  1004,  the  city  of
Pavia  was  burned  to  the  ground,  which  inspired  its
inhabitants  with  a  constant  animosity  against  that  em-
peror. Upon  his  death  in  1024,  the  Italians  were  dis-
posed to  break  once  more  their  connexion  with  Germany,
which  had  elected  as  sovereign  Conrad  duke  of  Fran-
conia.  They  offered  their  crown  to  Bobert  king  of
France,  and  to  William  duke  of  Guienne ;  but  neither  (^
them  was  imprudent  enough  to  involve  himself  in  the
difficult  and  faithless  politics  of  Italy.  It  may  Surprise
us  that  no  candidate  appeared  from  among  her  native
princes.  But  it  had  been  the  dexterous  policy  of  the
Othos  to  weaken  the  great  Italian  fie£s,  which  were  still
rather  considered  as  hereditary  governments  than  aa
absolute  patrimonies,  by  sepaiuting  districte  from  their
.iurisdiction,  under  inferior  marquises  and  rural  counts."
The  bishops  were  incapable  of  becoming  competitoiiB,
and  generally  attached  to  the  German  party.  The  cities
already  possessed  material  influence,  but  were  disunited
Election  of  ^^  mutual  joalousies.  Since  ancient  prejudices^
Oonrad  II.  therefore,  precluded  a  federate  league  of  inde-
A.D.  1024.  pendent  principalities  and  republics,  for  which
perhaps  the  actual  condition  of  Italy  imfitted  her«
Eribert  archbishop  of  Milan,  accompanied  by  some  other
chief  men  of  Lombardy,  repaired  to  Constance,  and  ten-
dered the  crown  to  Conrad,  which  he  was  already  dis-
posed to  claim  as  a  sort  of  dependency  upon  Germany,
it  does  not  appear  that  either  Conrad  or  his  successoi's

«  Maratori,  aj)w  loat,  103T.

V  I>enlQ«.  L  Iz.  e.  11 :  MuratorU  AnUq.  ItaL  Ditttert.  8 :  Annaii  d  luU*.  a  »  tft

ItALT.  CONRAD  II.  361

were  ever  regularly  elected  to  reign  over  Italy;'  biil
whether  this  ceremony  took  place  or  not,  we  may  cer-
tainly date  from  that  time  the  subjection  of  Italy  to  the
Germanic  body.  It  became  an  unquestionable  maxim,
that  the  votes  of  a  few  German  princes  conferred  a
right  to  the  sovereignty  of  a  country  which  had  never
been  conquered,  and  which  had  never  formally  recog-
nised tlus  superiority.*  But  it  was  an  equally  funda^
mental  rule,  that  the  elected  king  of  Germany  could  not
assume  the  title  of  Eoman  Emperor  until  his  coronation
by  the  pope.  The  middle  appellation  of  King  of  the
Eomans  was  invented  as  a  sort  of  approximation  to  the
imperial  dignity.  But  it  was  not  till  the  reign  of  Maxi*
milian  that  the  actual  coronation  at  Eome  was  dispensed
with,  and  the  title  of  emperor  taken  immediately  after
the  election.

The  period  between  Conrad  of  Franoonia  and  Frederic
Barbarossa,  or  from  about  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  to
that  of  the 'twelfth  century,  is  marked  by  three  great
events  in  Italian  history ;  the  stru^le  between  the  em-
pire and  the  papacy  for  ecclesiastical  investitures,  the
establishment  of  the  Norman  kingdom  in  Naples,  and
the  formation  of  distinct  and  nearly  independent  repub-
lics among  the  cities  of  Lombardy.  The  first  of  these
will  find  a  more  appropriate  place  in  a  subsequent
chapter,  where  I  shall  trace  the  progress  of  ecclesiastical
power.  But  it  produced  a  long  and  almost  incessant
state  of  disturbance  in  Italy ;  and  should  be  mentioned
at  present  as  one  of  the  main  causes  which  excited  in
that  country  a  systematic  opposition  to  the  imperial
authority.

The  southern  provinces  of  Italy,  in  the  beginning  of
the  eleventh  century,  were  chiefly  subject  to  the  Greek

i  Mnntoii,  AJ>.  1026. It  it  said  After*  Ronutni  gloria  ref^

wai^»  p.  367,  that  he  wu  a  Ramonii  ^<»  penea  est;  qnenumnqae  siblGensa-

ad  Imperatorem  electus. The  people  of  p-"^ J]f^,„  ^,^^  «„K,„i«n  •«-!«•

Rome  the^fore  pre^rved  their  nondnal  '^^  ^  «-«  •"'^;^^^

Tight  or  ooDcamng  to  the  election  of  an  Acciplt,  et  verao  Tlberim  regit  online

emperor. Mnratori,  In  another  place,  Onnther.  Lignrinns  ap.  Stravinin

A.P.  1040,  Boppoeee  that  Henry  tlL  was  CorposHisL  Geiman.  p.  266.

chMen  king  of  Italy,  though  he  allowa  Tei  it  appears  from  Otho  of  Frislngen,

that  no  proof  of  it  exists;  and  there  an  unquestionable  authority,  tiist  snme

seems  no  reason  for  the  supposition.  Italian  nobles  concurred,  or  at  least  were

k  Ounther,  the  poet  of  Frederic  Bar-  present  and  assisting,  in  the  eleetlou  oi

harosBa,  ezprems  this  not  inelegantly:  Frederic  himself:  L IL  cL

362  THB  NORMAim  AT  ATERSJU  Chap.  IIL  Past  (

empire,  which  had  latterly  recoyered  part  of  xte  1<

and  exhibited  some  ambitioii  and  enterpnae,
though  without  any  intriivric  Tigonr. They
j^^.  were  goTemed  by  a  lieatenant, styled  Gatar

pan,"  who  resided  at  Bari  in  Apulia.  On  the
Mediterranean  coast  three  dnchies,  or  rather  repnblics,
of  Naples,  Gkieta,  and  Amalfi,  had  for  several  ages  pre-
served their  connexion  with  the  Greek  empire,  and
acknowledged  its  nominal  sovereignty.  The  Lombard
principalities  of  Benevento,  Salerno,  and  Capna  had
mnch  declined  from  their  ancient  splendonr.  The
Ghreeks  were,  however,  not  likely  to  attempt  any  farther
conquests :  the  court  of  Constantinople  had  relapsed  into
its  usual  indolence ;  nor  had  they  much  right  to  boast  of
successes  rather  due  to  the  Saracen  auxiliaries  whom
they  hired  from  Sicily.  No  momentous  revolution  ap»
parently  threatened  the  south  of  Italy,  and  least  of  M
could  it  be  anticipated  from  what  quarter  the  storm  was
about  to  gather.
The  f(dlowers  of  BoUo,  who  rested  from  plunder  and
piracy  in  the  quiet  possession  of  Normandy,
of  thT^^  became  devout  professors  of  the  Christian  iaitib.,
Normaat  at  and  particularly  addicted  to  the  custom  of  pil-
grimage, which  gratified  their  curiosity  and
spirit  of  adventure.  In  small  bodies,  well  armed  on
account  of  the  lawless  character  of  the  countries  through
which  they  passed,  the  Norman  pilgrims  visited  the
shrines  of  Italy  and  even  the  Holy  Land  Some  of
these,  very  early  in  the  eleventh  century,  were  engaged
by  a  Lombard  prince  of  Salerno  against  the  Saracens,
who  had  invaded  his  territory ;  and  through  that  supe-
riority of  valour,  and  perhaps  of  corporal  strength,  which
this  singular  people  seem  to  have  possessed  above  all
other  Europeans,  they  made  surprising  havoc  among  the
enemy."  This  exploit  led  to  fresh  engagements,  and
these  engagements  drew  new  adventurers  from  Nor-
mandy; they  founded  the  little  city  of  A  versa,  near
Capua,  and  were  employed  by  the  Greeks  against  the
Saracens  of  Sicily. But,  though  performing  splendid

*"  GaUpaniu,  ftom  KarJL  mv,  one  em-  odtloal  writer  in  examiiuitloD  of  Ibcti

ployed  in  general  admintatntion  of  aflhirii  than  Oiranooe,  treala  this  fint  adventon

"  Olannone,  t  U.  p.  7  [edit  1763]. I  of  the  Normans  as  nnaathentlcated.—

should  observe  that  St.  Marc,  a  more  Abi^''^  Chrontiloglque,  p.  MO.

HALT.  BOBEKT  GUI8CABD.  «363

services  in  this  war,  thej  were  ill  repaid  by  their  tin-
gpratefiil  employers ;  and  being  by  no  means  of  a  temper
to  bear  with  injury,  they  revenged  themselves  by  a  snd*
den  invasion  of  Apulia. This  province  was
speedily  subdued,  and  divided  among  twelve  conqiuwto
Norman  counts; but  soon  afterwards  Bobert  q^^^
Guiscard, one  of  twelve  brothers,  many  of
whom  were  renowned  in  these  Italian  wars,  ^^^'**'
acquired  the  sovereignty ;  and,  adding  Calabria  to  his
conquests,  put  an  end  to  the  long  dominion  of  the  Eastern
emperors  in  Italy.® He  reduced  the  principcdities  of
Salerno  and  Benevento,  in  the  latter  mstance  sharing
the  spoil  with  the  pope,  who  took  the  city  to  himself,
while  Bobert  retained  the  territory. His  conquests  in
Greece,  which  he  invaded  with  the  magnificent  design
of  overthrowing  the  Eastern  empire,  were  at
least  equally  splendid,  though  less  durable.  ^'^^®^*'
Boger,  his  younger  brother,  undertook  meanwhile  the
romantic  enterprise,  as  it  appeared,  of  conquering  the
island  of  Sicily  with  a  small  body  of  Norman  volunteers.
But  the  Saracens  were  broken  into  petty  states,  and  dis-
couraged by  the  bad  success  of  their  brethren  in  Spain
and  Sardinia. After  many  years  of  war  Boger  became
sole  master  of  Sicily,  and  took  the  title  of  Count. The
son  of  this  prince,  upon  the  extinction  of  Bobert  Guis-
card's  posterity,  united  the  two  Norman  sovereignties,
and,  subjugating  the  free  republics  of  Naples
and  Amalfi,  and  the  principality  of  Capua,  es-  ^°"  "^'
tablished  a  boundary  whicn  has  hardly  been  changed
since  his  time.'

The  first  successes  of  these  Norman  leaders  were  viewed
unfavourably  by  the  popes. Leo  IX.  marched  j^  ,  ^^^
in  person  against  Bobert  Guiscard  with  an  vntitares
army  of  German  mercenaries,  but  was  beaten  **'^*p**^
and  made  prisoner  in  this  unwise  enterprise,  the  scandal
of  which  nothing  but  good  fortune  could  have  lightened.
He  fell,  however,  into  the  hands  of  a  devout  people,

^  The  flnat  blow  was  given  to  tbe  deserlbiiig  the  oonqnest  of  Amalfl  and

Greek  dominAtion  orer  Italy  by  the  cap-  Naplea  by  Roger  Oniacard  (t  i.  c.  4) ;

tnre  of  Bad  In  lotl,  after  a  siege  of  four  watming  his  imagination  with  Tislone  of

yearL It  had  for  some  time  been  con-  Ubeity  and  Tirtoe  in  flxae  obacnre  r»

fined  to  this  single  dty. llnratorl,  St  pabUcs,  which  no  xeal  history  sonriTes  Is

Mare.  diqieL

P  M.  SSsmondi  has  excelled  himself  in

364  PROGRESS  OF  THE Chap.  III.  Part  i

who  implored  his  absolution  for  the  crime  of  defendiDg
themselves;  and,  whether  through  gratitude,  or  as  the
price  of  his  liberation,  invested  them  with  their  recent
conquests  in  Apulia,  as  fiefs  of  the  Holy  See.  This
investiture  was  repeated  and  enlarged  as  the  popes,
especially  in  their  contention  with  Henry  IV.  and
Henry  Y.,  found  the  advantage  of  using  the  Normans  as
faithful  auxiliaries.  Finally,  Innocent  11.,  in  1139,  con«
ferred  upon  Eoger  the  title  of  King  of  Sicily.  It  is  diffi-
cult to  understand  by  what  pretence  these  countries
could  be  claimed  by  the  see  of  Home  in  sovereignty,
unless  by  virtue  of  the  pretended  donation  of  Constan-
tine,  or  thfit  of  Louis  the  Debonair,  which  is  hardly  less
suspicious ;  1  and  least  of  all  how  Innocent  II.  could  sur*
render  the  liberties  of  the  city  of  Naples,  whether  that
was  considered  as  an  independent  republic,  or  as  a  por-
tion of  the  Greek  empire.  But  the  Normans,  who  had
no  title  but  their  swords,  were  naturally  glad  to  give  an
appearance  of  legitimacy  to  their  conquest;  and  the
kingdom  of  Naples,  even  in  the  hands  of  the  most
powerfal  princes  in  Europe,  never  ceased  to  pay  a  feudal
acknowledgment  to  the  chair  of  St.  Peter.

The  revolutions  which  time  brought  forth  on  the  op-
Prrwrem  of  positc  sldc  of  Italy  wcre  still  more  interesting.
theT^.  Under  the  Lombard  and  French  princes  every
bardcitiea.  ^^^  with  its  adjacent  district  was  subject  to
the  government  and  jurisdiction  of  a  count,  who  waa
himself  subordinate  to  the  duke  or  marquis  of  the  pro-
vince. From  these  counties  it  was  the  practice  of  the
first  German  emperors  to  dismember  particular  towns  or
tracts  of  country,  granting  them  upon  a  feudal  tenure  to
rural  lords,  by  many  of  whom  also  the  same  title  was
assumed.  Thus  by  degrees  the  authority  of  the  original
officers  was  confined  almost  to  the  walls  of  their  own
cities ;  and  in  many  cases  the  bishops  obtained  a  grant
of  the  temporal  government,  and  exercised  the  fnnctioiia
which  had  belonged  to  the  count.'

^  Mnrotorl  presnmes  to  suppose  that  give  the  popes  a  oolounible  pretext  tc

the  interpolated,  if  not  sporioiu,  grants  diq^oseof  the  sonthero  provinoesof  Italy

of  Louis the Debonair, Otho  L,  and  aj>,  1059.

Henry  II.  to  the see  of  Rome,  were '  Muratori,  Antlquit  Italin,  Dtoert  8

promulgated  about  the  time  of  the  fint  AnnalJ  d'ltalia,  a  j>.  989 ;  Antlehita  E»

^onoesaiocis  to  the  Normans,  in  order  to  tens!,  p^  26.

fTALr.  LOMBARD  CITIES.  365

It  ifi  impossible  to  ascertain  the  time  at  which  the
cities  of  Lombardy  began  to  assume  a  republican  form
of  government,  or  to  trace  with  precision  the  gradations
of  their  progress.  The  last  historian  of  Italy  asserts
that  Otho  the  First  erected  them  into  municipal  com-
munities, and  permitted  the  election  of  their  magistrates ;
but  of  this  he  produces  no  evidence ;  and  Muratori,  from
whose  authority  it  is  rash  to  depart  without  strong  rea-
sons, is  not  only  silent  about  any  charters,  but  discovers
no  express  unequivocal  testimonies  of  a  popular  govern-
ment for  the  whole  eleventh  century/  The  first  appear-
ance of  the  citizens  acting  for  themselves  is  in  a  tumult
at  Milan  in  991,  when  the  archbishop  was  expelled
from  the  city.*  But  this  was  a  transitory  ebullition,  and
we  must  descend  lower  for  more  specific  proofs.  It  is
possible  that  the  disputed  succession  of  Ardoin  and
Henry,  at  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  age,  and  the
kind  of  interregnimi  which  then  took  place,  gave  the
inhabitants  an  opportunity  of  choosing  magistrates  and
of  sharing  in  public  deliberations.  A  similar  relaxation
indeed  of  government  in  France  had  exposed  the  people
to  greater  servitude,  and  established  a  feudal  aristocracy.
But  the  feudal  tenures  seem  not  to  have  produced  in
Italy  that  systematic  and  regular  subordination  which
existed  in  France  during  the  same  period ;  nor  were  the
mutual  duties  of  the  relation  between  lord  and  vassal  so
well  understood  or  observed.  Hence  we  find  not  only
disputes,  but  actual  civil  war,  between  the  lesser  gentry
or  vavassors,  and  the  higher  nobility,  their  immediate
superiors.  These  differences  were  adjusted  by  Conrad
the  Salic,  who  published  a  remarkable  edict  in  1037,  by
which  the  feudal  law  of  Italy  was  reduced  to  more  cer-
tainty." From  this  disunion  among  the  members  of  the
feudal  confederacy,  it  was  more  easy  for  the  citizens  to
render  themselves  secure  against  its  dominion.  The
cities  too  of  Lombardy  were  far  more  populous  and
better  defended  than  those  of  France ;  they  had  learned
to  stand  sieges  in  the  Hungarian  invasions  of  the  tenth
century,  and  had  acquired  tibe  right  of  protecting  them-
selves by  strong  fortifications. Those  which  had  been

SIsmotidl,  t  I.  p.  Of .  384 ;  Muntorl. *  Mnmtorl,  Annali  d'ltalla.
Dfnert  49.  "  Maratori.  AimaU  d'ltalla. St  Marc

866  PROGRESS  OF  THE Chap.  IU.  Past  /.

placed  under  the  temporal  govenunent  of  their  bishops
had  peculiar  advantages  in  Btmggling  for  emancipation.'
This  circumstance  in  the  state  of  Lombardj  I  consider
as  h^hlj  important  towards  explaining  the  subsequent
revolution.  Notwithstanding  several  exceptions,  a
shurchman  was  less  likely  to  be  bold  and  active  in  com-
mand  than  a  soldier;  and  the  sort  of  election  which  was
always  necessary,  and  sometimes  more  than  nominal,  on
a  vacancy  of  the  see,  kept  up  among  tlie  citizens  auction
that  the  authority  of  their  bishop  and  chief  magistrate
emanated  in  some  degree  from  themselves.  In  many
instances,  especially  in  the  church  of  Milan,  the  earliest
periiaps,  and  oertamly  the  most  &mous  of  Lombard  re-
publics, there  occurred  a  disputed  election;  two,  or
even  three,  competitors  claimed  the  archiepiscopal  fdno-
tions,  and  were  compelled,  in  the  absence  of  the  em-
perors, to  obtain  the  exercise  of  them  by  means  of  their
own  faction  among  the  citizens.^

These  were  the  general  causes  which,  operating  at
various  times  during  the  eleventh  century,  seem  gradually

*  The  bidiops  seem  to  have  become  the  Ptedmontefle  dtiee  are  hanily  to  be
soonte,  or  temporal  guvefmow,  of  their  redconed  among  the  repubUoi  of  Lon-
sees,  about  the  end  of  the  tenth,  or  before  faaidy.— Dentoa,  Istoria  dell'  Italia  Ood-
the  middle  of  the  eleventh  oentoiy.  dentale,  t  L  p.  191.
Mnratorl,  Dta^.  8;  Denina,  L  iz.  c.  11; ^  Muntorl,  ajk  1346. Sometimes  the
St  Mare,  AJ>. 1041,' KMT, 1070. In  InhabitantB  of  a  dty  reftieed  to  admow-
Amnlfs  History  of  IQlan,  written  before  ledge  a  bishop  darned  bj  the  emperor,
the  doee  ef  the  latter  age,  we  have  a  as  happened  at  Favia  and  Asti  abont
contemponuy  evidence. And  firom  the  1067. ArnuU;  p.  23. This  wss.  In  othei
perusal  of  that  work  I  ahonld  Infer  that  words,  setting  up  themselves  asrepublka.
the  arehbiahop  was,  in  the  middle  of  the  But  the  most  remsalcable  instance  of  this
eleventh  oentoiy,  the  diirf  msglsttaie  of  Mnd  oocnned  in  1070,  when  the  Milanese
the  dty. But,  at  the  same  time,  it  ap-  abeolntely  r^ected Godfirey,  appointed
pears  hi(^ly  probable  that  an  assembly  by  Henry  IV^  and.  after  a  resfstsnoe  o1
of  the  dtlsens,  or  at  lesst  a  part  of  the  seversl  years,  oblif^  the  emperor  to  fix
dtizens,  partook  in  the  administration  upon  another  persoo. The  dty  bad  been
of  public  allUxB. Muratori,  Seriptores  previoosly  Involved  in  long  and  violent
Kerum  Italicanun.  t  iv.  p^  16,  90,  33,  tmnults,  which,  tfaongfa  rather  belongtag
and  particnlarly  the  Isst In  most  dtles  to  eodedastlcal  than  dvll  tdstoiy.ss  th^
to  the  eastward  of  the  TeBlno,the  bidiops  arose  ont  of  the  endeavoozs  made  to  re-
lost  their  temporal  authority  in  the  twelfth  form  the  conduct  and  enforoe  the  celibacy
centoiy,  tfaonigfa  the  archbishop  of  Milan  of  the  diM)gy,had  aoondderaUe  tspdeoQ
had  no  small  prerogatives  while  that  to  dimlniah  the  ardibishop's  authurity,
dty  was  governed  as  a  repnbUa But  in  and  to  give  a  repabUcan  chaTacter  to  the
Piedmont  they  contlnned  longer  in  the  inhabitants..  These  prooeedinsi  are  told
enjoyment  of  power. Veroelll,  and  even  at  great  length  by  St  Marc,  t  tli.  a.du
Turin*  were  almost  snt^ect  to  thdr  n-  1066-1077. Amulf  and  Landnlf  are  tbt

spective  prelates  tUl  the  thirteenth  ceo- original  souzoes.
C«T. For  this  reason,  aiaon^  ntbeia.

Italy.  LOMBARD  CITIEa  367

to  have  produced  a  republican  form  of  govemmoiit  iu  the
Italian  cities.  But  ihia  part  of  history  is  veiy  obscure
The  archives  of  all  cities  before  the  reign  of  Frederic
Barbarossa  have  perished.  For  many  years  there  is  a
great  deficiency  of  contemporary  Lombard  historians;
and  those  of  a  kter  age,  who  endeavoured  to  search  into
the  antiquities  of  their  country,  have  found  only  some
barren  and  insulated  events  to  record.  We  perceive,
however,  throughout  the  eleventh  century,  that  the  cities
were  continually  in  warffre  with  each  other.  This,
indeed,  was  according  to  the  manners  of  that  age,  and
no  inference  can  absolutely  be  drawn  from  it  as  to  Sieir  in-
ternal freedom.  But  it  is  observable  that  their  chronicles
speak,  in  recording  these  transactions,  of  the  people,  and
not  of  their  leaders,  which  is  the  true  republican  tone  of
history.  Thus,  in  the  Annals  of  Pisa,  we  read,  under
the  years  1002  and  1004,  of  victories  gained  by  the
Pisans  over  the  people  of  Lucca;  in  1006,  that  the
Pisans  and  Genoese  conquered  Sardinia.'  These  annals,
indeed,  are  not  by  a  contemporaiy  writer,  nor  perhaps
of  much  authority.  But  we  have  an  original  account  of
a  war  that  broke  out  in  1057,  between  Pavia  and  Milan,
in  which  the  citizens  are  said  to  have  raised  armies,
made  alliances,  hired  foreigpi  troops,  and  in  every  re-
spect acted  like  independent  states.*  There  was,  in  fact,
no  power  left  in  the  empire  to  control  them.  The  two
Henrys  lY.  and  Y.  were  so  much  embarrassed  during
the  quarrel  concerning  investitures,  and  the  continuiS
troubles  of  Germany,  that  they  were  less  likely  to  inter-
fere with  the  rising  freedom  of  the  Italian  cities  than  to
purchase  their  assistance  by  large  concessions.  Henry
lY.  granted  a  charter  to  Pisa,  in  1081,  full  of  the  most
important  privileges,  promising  even  not  to  name  any
marquis  of  Tuscany  wimout  the  people's  consent ;  ^  and  it
is  possible  that,  although  the  instruments  have  perished,
other  places  might  obtain  similar  advantages. However

■  Mxmt  Dl»  45. Anmlftis,  the  hi*-  That  of  Londnlftis  ooRobontes  thisiap-

lorfaa  of  MUan,  makM  no  mentkn  of  poritioB,  wUdi  indeed  la  CH»ble  of  proof

any  temponl  ooonts,  which  eeemi  to  be  m  to  Milan  and  aevenl  other  dtlea  In

aproof  that  there  wen 'none  In  any  an-  whldb  the  temporal  govenuiient  had  been

thority^. Be  ipeaka  always  of  Mediola-  legally  retted  in  the  hiabopa.

nenaoa,  FHipienaeB,  BaTcnatea,  kc Thia  '  Hnrat  Diaa.  4fi;  Aranll  Hiat  Miv

Uatovy  waa  written  about  1085.  bat  n-  diolan.  p^  22^

latoa  to  the  eailier  part  of  that  oentory.  b  Hoiat  THaaerL  45.

568  LOMBARD  ACQUISITIONS. Chap.  IIL  Pass  t.

this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  before  the  death  of 'Heniy
v.,  in  1125,  almost  all  the  cities  of  Lombardy,  and  many
among  those  of  Tuscany,  were  accustomed  to  elect  their
own  magistrates,  and  to  act  as  independent  communitieB
in  Wiping  war  and  in  domestic  government.*'

The  territory  subjected  originally  to  the  count  or
bishop  of  these  cities  had  been  reduced,  as  I  mentioned
Thetrao- above,  by  numerous  concessions  to  the  rural
quisiUonsof  nobility. But the new  republics, deeming
temtoiy. themselves  entitle(f  to  all  which  their  former
governors  had  once  possessed,  began  to  attack  their
nearest  neighbours,  and  to  recover  the  sovereignty  of  all
their  ancient  territory. They  besieged  the  castles  of
the  rural  counts,  and  successively  reduced  them  into
subjection. They  suppressed  some  minor  communities,
which  had  been  formed  in  imitation  of  themselves  bv
little  towns  belonging  to  their  district. Sometimes  they
purchased  feudal  superiorities  or  territorial  jurisdictions,
and,  according  to  a  policy  not  unusual  with  the  stronger
party,  converted  the  rights  of  property,  into  those  of  go-
vernment.'* Hence,  at  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century,
we  are  assured  by  a  contemporary  writer  that  hardly
any  nobleman  could  be  found,  except  the  marquis  of
Montferrat,  who  had  not  submitted  to  some  city." We
may  except  also,  I  should  presume,  the  families  of  Este
and  Malaspina,  as  well  as  that  of  Savoy. Muratori  pro-
duces many  charters  of  mutual  compact  between  the
nobles  and  the  neighbouring  cities ;  whereof  one  in-
variable article  is,  that  the  former  should  reside  within
the  walls  a  certain  number  of  months  in  the  year.' The
rural  nobility,  thus  deprived  of  the  independence  which
had  endeared  their  castles,  imbibed  a  new  ambition  of
directing  the  municipal  government  of  the  cities,  which
consequently,  during  this  period  of  the  republics,  fell
chiefly  into  the  hands  of  the  superior  families. It  was
the  sagacious  policy  of  the  Lombards  to  invite  settJers
by  throwing  open  to  them  the  privileges  of  citizenship,

*  Hunt  Annali  d'ltaL  ajx  1107.  dfzione.  e  I'  altio  d'  nn'  altra. Deoim,

^  U  dominio  utile  delle  dUk  e  dc'  vil.  1.  xiL  c  3. This  produced  a  yast  intrl-

laggi  era  talTolta  diriao  fn  doe  o  pih  cacy  of  titles,  whidiwaa  of  oomwadrwi-

padrani,  ossia  che  s'  aaBegnasBen*  a  daa-  tageooa  to  thoae  who  wanted  a  pretest

cono  diversi  quartlerf » o  ai  divideeaero  i  for  robbing  thnlr  neifl^bunn.

proventi  della  gabelle,  ovvero  che  I'uno  *  Otbo  Friatngena.  L  li.  c  13.

«f KDore  godeaae  d'uua  specie  della  f^nria-  f  Murat.  Diaa.  49.

ttALY.  THEIR  MUTUAL  ANIMOSITIES.  369

and  sometimeB  they  eTen  bestowed  them  by  comptdfiion.
SometimeB  a  city,  imitatilig  the  wisdom  of  ancient  Borne,
granted  these  priyUeges  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  another.*
Thus,  the  principal  cities,  and  especially  Milan,  reached,
before  tbe  middle  of  the  twelftti  century,  a  degree  of
population  very  &r  beyond  that  of  the  capitals  of  the
great  Hi^oms.  Within  their  strong  waUs  and  deep
trenches,  and  in  the  midst  of  their  well-peopled  streets,
the  industrious  dwelt  secure  from  the  licence  of  armed
pillagers  and  the  oppression  of  feudal  tyrants.  Artisans,
whom  the  military  landholders  contemned,  acquired  and
deserved  the  right  of  bearing  arms  for  their  own  and  the
public  defence.^  Their  occu^tions  became  liberal,  be-
cause they  were  the  foundataon  of  their  political  fran-
chises ;  the  citizens  were  classed  in  companies  according
to  their  respective  crafts,  each  of  which  had  its  tribune
or  standardbearer  (gonfedonier),  at  whose  command,  Vhen
any  tumult  arose  or  enemy  threatened,  they  rushed  in
arms  to  muster  in  the  market-place.

But,  unhappily,  we  cannot  extend  the  sympathy  which
institutions  so  ^lil  of  liberty  create  to  the  na-  ^^
tional  conduct  of  these  little  republics.  Their  matiui
love  of  freedom  was  alloyed  by  that  restless  "»*"^**«^
spirit,  from  which  a  democracy  is  seldom  exempt,  of
tyrannising  over  weaker  neighbours.  They  played  over
again  the  tragedy  of  ancient  Greece,  witii  all  its  cir*
oumstances  of  inveterate  hatred,  unjust  ambition,  and
atrocious  retaliation,  though  with  less  consummate  actors
upon  the  scene.  Among  all  the  Lombard  cities,  Milan  was
the  most  conspicuous,  as  well  for  power  and  population  as
for  the  abuse  of  those  resources  by  arbitrary  and  am-
bitious conduct.  Thus,  in  1111,  they  razed  the  town  of
Lodi  to  the  ground,  distributing  the  inhabitants  among
six  villages,  and  subjecting  them  to  an  unrelenting  des-
potism.' Thus,  in  1118,  they  commenced  a  war  of  ten

S  Mxmt  Dl»  49.  gnlnm,  vel  dignitetnm  gndos  aflBomere

b  OtboFridngBnslsflik  Mont  Scr.  Bar.  nan  dedigiumtar. £z  quo  factum  est,

ItaL  t  ▼!.  pi  T08. Ut  etiam  ad  oompri-  nt  cseteris  orbia  dTitatibua,  divltilB  et

mendos  Tldnoe  materUl  non  caieaiit,  in-  potentiA  pmeraineant

fBrioris  ovdizda  JnTenca,  Ttl  qnoallbet  i  The  animosity  lietween  Milan  and

ooDtemptibilinm  etIam medianiGaram  Lodi  was  of  Tery  old  standing. It  ori-

artiiim  opifloea,  qnoa  ctttena  gentea  ab  ginated,  aooozdlng  to  Arnnlf,  in  tbe  ra-

hmiMtiovRma  et  liberiorflma  itodlis  tan-  ilfltence  made  1)y  ^e  InbaUtanta  of  tba

^uam  peatem  propeUnnt,  ad  miUtisB  dn-  latter  dtj  to  an  attempt  made  bf  ardw

VOL,  I.  2 »

370 SOVEREIGNTT  OF  THE  EMPERORS.  Chap.  IIL  Fjua  I

years'  duration  with  the  little  city  of  Como;  bat  the
surprising  peiBeverance  of  its  inhabitants  procured  for
them  better  terms  of  capitulation,  though  they  lost  their
original  independence.  The  Oremonese  treated  so  harshly
the  town  of  Grema  that  it  revolted  from  them,  and  put
itself  imder  the  protection  of  Milan.  Cities  of  more
equal  forces  carried  on  interminable  hostilities  by  wast-
ing each  other's  territory,  destroying  the  harvests,  and
burning  the  villages.

The  sovereignty  of  the  emperors,  meanwhile,  though
Sovereignty  ^^^  ^®^  effective,  wsfl  in  theory  always  ad-
oftbe  mitted. Their  name  was  used  in  public  acts,

emperors.  ^^^  appeared  upon  the  coin.  When  they  came
into  Italy  they  had  certain  customary  supplies  of  pro-
visions, called  fodrum  regale,  at  the  expence  of  the  city
where  they  resided ;  during  their  presence  all  inferior
magistracies  were  suspended,  and  the  right  of  juiisdio-
tion  devolved  upon  them  alone.  But  such  was  the
jealousy  of  the  Lombards,  that  they  built  the  royal
palaces  outside  their  gates ;  a  precaution  to  which  the
emperors  were  compelled  to  submit.  This  was  at  a  very
early  time  a  subject  of  contention  between  the  inhabitr
ants  of  Favia  and  Conrad  II.,  whose  palace,  seated  in
the  heart  of  the  city,  they  had  demolished  in  a  sedition,
and  were  im willing  to  rebuild  in  that  situation.^

Such  was  the  condition  of  Italy  when  Frederic  Bar-
m^Tic  barossa,  duke  of  Suabia,  and  nephew  of  the  last
Barboroan.  emperor,  Conrad  III.,  ascended  the  throne  of
Germany.  His  accession  forms  the  commencement  ot
a  new  period,  the  duration  of  which  is  about  one  hun-
dred years,  and  which  is  terminated  by  the  death  of
Conrad  lY.,  the  last  emperor  of  the  house  of  Suabia.  It
is  characterised,  like  the  former,  by  three  distinguishing
features  in  Italian  history ;  the  victorious  struggle  of  the
Lombard  and  other  cities  for  ind^endence,  the  final
establishment  of  a  temporal  sovereignty  over  the  middle
provinces  by  the  popes,  and  the  union  of  the  kingdom
of  Naples  to  the  dominions  of  the  house  of  Suabia.

bishop  Eritert  to  force  a  biBhop  of  his  is  the  testimony  of  a  wtiter  who  did  not

own  nomination  upon  them. The  blood-  live  beyond  1085. Seventy  ymn  immv

shed,  plunder,  and  oonflagratioos  which  either  of  hostility  or  servitude  tls|isii<

had  ensued,  would,  he  iays,  flU  a  volume,  before  Lodi  was  pennltted  to  iMplnb .

If  they  were  related  at  length. Scrip.  k  otho  f^lsingen^  p,  YlO;  Manateil,

toraii  nonrai  ItaUr  L  iv.  p.  16.  And  this  aj>.  1027.

ITALT  FREDERIC  BARBAROSSA.  371

.In  Frederio  Barbarossa  the  Italians  found  a  very  dif-
ferent soyereign  from  the  two  last  emperors,  Lothaire
and  Conrad  III.,  who  had  seldom  appeared  in  Italy,  and
with  forces  quite  inadequate  to  control  such  insubordi-
nate subjects. The  distinguished  valour  and  ability  of
this  prince  rendered  a  severe  and  arbitrary  temper  and
a  haughty  conceit  of  his  imperial  rights  more  formidable.
He  believed,  or  professed  to  believe,  the  magnificent
absurdity,  that,  as  successor  of  Augustus,  he  inherited
the  kingdoms  of  the  world. In  the  same  right,  he  more
poweifuUy,  if  not  more  rationally,  laid  claim  to  the
entire  prerogatives  of  the  Eoman  emperors  over  their
own  subjects ;  and  in  this  the  professors  of  the  civil  law,
which  was  now  diligently  studied,  lent  him  their  aid
with  the  utmost  servility. To  such  a  disposition  the
self-government  of  the  Lombard  cities  appe€u*ed  mere
rebellion. Milan  especially,  the most  renowned of
them  all,  drew  down  upon  heiself  his  inveterate  resent-
ment. He  found,  unfortunately,  too  good  a  pretence  in
her  behaviour  towards  Lodi. Two  natives  of that
ruined  city  threw  themselves  at  the  emperor^s  feet,  im-
ploring him,  as  the  tdtimate  source  of  justice,  to  redress
the  wrongs  of  their  country. It  is  a  striking  proof  of
the  terror  inspired  by  Milan  that  the  consuls  of  Lodi
disavowed  the  complaints  of  their  countrymen,  and  the
inhabitants  trembled  at  the  danger  of  provoking  a  sum-
maty  vengeance,  against  which  the  imperial  arms  seemed
no  protection."* The  Milanese,  however,  abstained  from
attacking  the  people  of  Lodi,  though  they  treated  with
contempt  the  emperor's  order  to  leave  them  at  liberty.
Frederic  meanwhile  came  into  Italy,  and  held  a  diet  at
Boncaglia, where  complaints poured  in  from many
quarters  against  the  Milanese. Pavia  and  Cremona,
&eir  ancient  enemies,  were  impatient  to  renew  hostili-
ties under  the  imperial  auspices Brescia,  Tortona,  and
Crema  were  allies, or  rather  dependents, of  Milan.
Frederio  soon  took  occasion  to  attack  the  latter  con-
federacy. Tortona  was  compelled  to  surrender  and
levelled  to  the  ground. But  a  feudal  army  was  soon

"  See  an  Interesting  aooonnt  of  these  reproadies  Morena  for  partiality  towardi

eifcimistances  in  the  nanatiTe  of  Otho  Frederic  in  the  Milanese  war,  shonki

Morena,  a  citizen  of  LodL Script  Rer.  have  remembered the  prorocations  oi

luL  t.  vL  p.  9M. M.  Sismoodi,  who  LodL Hist,  des  B^pub.  ItaL  t  U.  p.  10&

2b2

372  DIET  OF  RONCAQLIA. Chap.  IlL  Pm  1

iUssolved ;  the  emperor  had  much  to  demand  his  atten
tion  at  Bome,  where  he  was  on  ill  terms  with  Adrian  IV. ;
and  when  the  imperial  troops  were  withdmwn  from
Lombardj,  the  Milanese  rebmlt  Tortona,  and  expelled
the  citizens  of  Lodi  from  their  dwellings.  Frederio  as-
sembled a  fresh  army,  to  which  almost  every  oity  of
Lombardy,  willingly  or  by  force,  oontribated  its  ^nilitja^
It 'is  said  to  have  exceeded  a  hundred  thousand  men.
The  Milanese  shut  themselves  up  within  their  waUs;
and  perhaps  might  have  defied  the  imperial  forces,  if
their  immense  popxdation,  which  gave  iJiem  confidence
in  arms,  had  not  exposed  them  to  a  different  enemy.
Milan  was  obliged  by  hunger  to  capitulate,  upon  condi-
tions not  very  severe,  if  a  vanquished  people  could  ever
safely  rely  upon  the  convention  that  testifies  their  sab-
mission.
Frederic,  after  the  surrender  of  Milan,  held  a  diet  at
Diet  of  Boncaglia,  where  the  effect  of  his  victories  was
^ncifUa.  fatally  perceived.  The  bishops,  the  higher
*.!>.  1158.  j^Q^jiii^y^  ^0  lawyers,  vied  with  one  another  in

exalting  his  prerogatives.  He  defined  the  regalian  ri^ts,
as  they  were  called,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  exclude
the  cities  and  private  proprietors  from  coining  money,
and  from  tolls  or  territorial  dues,  which  they  had  for
many  years  possessed.  These,  however,  he  permitted
them  to  retain  for  a  pecuniary  stipulation.  A  more  im-
portant innovation  was  the  appointment  of  magistrates,
with  the  title  of  podestk,  to  administer  justice  concur-
rently with  the  consuls ;  but  he  soon  proceeded  to  abolish
the  latter  office  in  many  cities,  and  to  throw  the  whole
government  into  the  hands  of  his  own  magistrates.  He
prohibited  the  cities  from  levying  war  against  each  other.
It  may  be  presumed  that  he  showed  no  &vour  to  Milan.
The  capitulation  was  set  at  nought  in  its  most  express
provisions ;  a  podestk  was  sent  to  supersede  the  consuls,
and  part  of  the  territory  taken  away.  Whatever  might
be  the  risk  of  resistance,  and  the  Milanese  had  experience
enough  not  to  undervalue  it,  they  were  determined  rather
to  see  their  liberties  at  once  overthrown  than  gradually
destroyed  by  a  faithless  tyrant.  They  availed  themselves
of  the  absence  of  his  army  to  renew  the  war.  Its  issue
was  more  calamitous  than  that  of  the  last.  Almost  all
Lombardy  lay  patient  under  subjection.  The  small  town

ITALT. '  CAPTURE  OF  MILAN.  873

of  Grema,  always  the  fidthfol  ally  of  Milan,  stood  a  me-
moiable  siege  against  the  imperial  army;  bntthe  inhabit-
ants were  nltimatelj  cojnpelled  to  capitulate  for  their
lives,  and  the  -vindictive  Cremonese  raeed  their  dwellings
to  the  grouD'^''  But  all  smaller  calamities  captonaoi
were  forgotten  when  the  great  city  of  Milan,  destruction
worn  out  by  femine  rather  than  subdued  by  "^^^
force,  was  reduced  to  surrender  at  discretion.  Lom-
bardy  stood  in  anxious  suspense  to  know  the  determina-
tion of  Frederic  respecting  this  ancient  metropolis,  the
seat  of  the  early  Christian  emperors,  and  second  only  to
Bome  in  the  hierarchy  of  the  Latin  church.  A  delay  of
three  weeks  excited  fallacious  hopes  ;  but  at  the  end  of
that  time  an  order  was  given  to  the  Milanese  to  evacuate
their  habitations.  The  deserted  streets  were  instantly
occupied  by  the  imperial  army;  the  people  of  Favia
and  Cremona,  of  Lodi  and  Como,  were  commissioned  to
revenge  themselves  on  the  respective  quarters  of  the
city  assigned  to  them ;  and  in  a  few  days  the  pillaged
churches  stood  alone  amidst  the  ruins  of  what  had  been
Milan.

There  was  now  little  left  of  that  freedom  to  -v^ch
Lombardy  had  aspired:  it  was  gone  like  a
pleasant  dream,  and  she  awoke  to  Sie  fears  and
miserii^  of  servitude.  Frederic  obeyed  the  dictates  of
his  vindictive  temper,  and  of  the  policy  usual  among
statesmen.  He  abrogated  the  consular  regimen  in  some
even  of  the  cities  which  had  supported  lum,  and  esta-
blished his  podestii  in  their  place.  This  magistrate  was
always  a  stranger,  frequently  not  even  an  Italian;  and  he
oame  to  his  office  with  all  those  prejudices  against  the
people  he  was  to  govern  which  cut  off  every  hope  of
justice  and  humanity.  The  citizens  of  Lombardy,  espe-
cially the  Milanese,  who  had  been  dispersed  in  the
villages  adjoining  their  ruined  capital,  were  unable  to
meet  the  perpetual  demands  of  tribute.  In  some  parts,
it  is  said,  two-thirds  of  the  produce  of  their  lands,  the
only  wealth  that  remained,  were  extorted  from  them  by

"  Tbe  riege  of  Crema  to  told  at  great  count  of  flie  methods  tiBed  in  Uie  attack

length  by  Otto  Morena;  it  is  interesting,  and  defence  of  fortified  places  before  tbe

not  only  as  a  display  of  eztzaor^Knary,  introduction of  artillery. Scrip.  Bcr

thoo^  nnsQooeasftil,  perMrenmoe  and  ItaL  t  vL  p.  103S-1062.
totiepidltr,  but  as  tbe  moat  detailed  ao-

374  LEAGUE  Oh  LOMBABDT Cbap«  la  Past  1

the  imperial  officers.  It  was  in  vain  that  they  prostrated
themselves  at  the  feet  of  Frederic.  He  gave  at  the  best
only  vague  promises  of  redress ;  they  were  in  his  eyes
rebels ;  his  delegates  had  acted  as  faithfol  officers,  whom^
even  if  they  had  gone  a  little  beyond  his  intentions,  he
coidd  not  be  ejected  to  punish.

But  there  still  remained  at  the  heart  of  Lombardy  the
League  of  strong  principle  of  national  liberty,  impensh-
^f^j^niy  able  among  the  perishing  armies  of  her  patriots,
f^^a  inconsumable  in  the  oonfli^ration  of  her  cities.*
▲j>.  iier.  Those  whom  private  animosities  had  led  to
assist  the  German  conqueror  blushed  at  the  degradatioa
of  their  country,  and  at  the  share  they  had  taken  in  it.
A  league  was  secretly  formed,  in  which  Cremona,  one  of
the  chief  cities  on  'die  imperial  side,  took  a  prominent
part.  Those  beyond  the  Adige,  hitherto  not  much
engaged  in  the  disputes  of  central  Lombardy,  had  already
formed  a  separate  confederacy  to  secure  themselves  fit>in
encroachments,  which  appeared  the  more  unjust,  as
they  had  never  borne  arms  against  the  emperor.  Their
first  successes  corresponded  to  ^e  justice  of
^•^"•^  their  cause;  Frederic  was  repulsed  from  the
territory  of  Verona,  a  fortunate  augury  for  the  rest  of
Lombardy.  These  two  clusters  of  cities  on  the  east  and
west  of  the  Adige  now  united  themselves  into  the  fiunoua
Lombard  league,  the  terms  of  which  were  settled  in  a
general  diet.  Their  alliance  was  to  last  twenty  years,
during  which  they  pledged  themselves  to'  mutual  assist-
ance against  any  one  who  should  exact  more  from  them
than  -£ey  had  been  used  to  perform  from  the  time  of
Henry  to  the  first  coming  of  Frederic  into  Italy ;  imply-
ing in  this  the  recovery  of  their  elective  magistracies,
their  rights  of  war  and  peace,  and  those  lucrative  pri-
vileges which,  under  the*  name  of  regalian,  had  been
wrested  from  them  in  the  diet  of  Boncaglia.!*

"  QiM»  neqne  DftrdanUs  campls  po-  fid,  iMTe  It  ambigoooi  wUdi  of  ^km

toere  perire,  Hemies  ww  intended. Mmtorl  thlnki

Ifec  cam  capU  ca^nec  cum  com-  Jt  wm  Hcniy  IV.,  beotnae  the  dtles  Uken

busta  crem«it-^mi«.  ^^^^^  ^  ^  Independent It  mm,

P  For  the  nature  and  conditifma  of  fbe  however,  natonil,  when  a  Ui^  li  men-

.jombard  league,  besides  the  nanal  autfao-  tloned  witboat  any  nnmerloal

ritleB,  see  Muratori's  48th  dissertation,  tion,  to  interpret  it  of  the  last  beaitaig
Tha  words,  a  tempore  Henrid  R^s  that  name;  as  we  ssj  King  Wllllaa,te
taqoe  ad  Intraltam  impcFatoris  Frede- WlUlam  the  Tbiid. And  certain^  tto

fTALT.  AGAINST  FREDERIC.  375

This  imion  of  the  Lombard  cities  was  fonaed  at  a  very
Cftvourable  juncture.  Frederic  had  almost  ever  since
his  accession  been  engaged  in  open  hostility  with  the
see  of  Borne,  and  was  pursuing  the  fruitless  policy  of
Henry  lY.,  who  had  endeavoured  to  substitute  an  anti-
pope  of  his  own  faction  for  the  legitimate  pontiff.  In
the  prosecution  of  this  scheme  he  had  besieged  Bome
with  a  great  army,  which,  the  citizens  resisting  longer
than  he  expected,  fell  a  prey  to  the  autumnal  pestilence
which  visits  the  neighbourhood  of  that  capital.  The
flower  of  German  nobility  was  cut  off  by  this  calamity,
and  the  emperor  recrossed  the  Alps,  entirely  unable  for
the  present  to  withstand  the  Lombard  confederacy.
Their  first  overt  act  of  insurrection  was  the  rebuilding
of  Milan ;  the  confederate  troops  all  joined  in  this  under-
taking; and  the  Milanese,  still  numerous,  though  dis-
E3rBed  and  persecuted,  revived  as  a  powerful  republic,
odi  was  compelled  to  enter  into  the  league ;  Pavia  alone
continued  on  the  imperial  side.  As  a  check  to  Pavia,
and  to  the  marquis  of  Montferrat,  the  most  potent  of  the
independent  nobility,  the  Lombards  planned  the  erec-
tion of  a  new  city  between  the  confines  of  these  two
enemies,  in  a  rich  plain  to  the  south  of  the  Po,  and  be-
stowed upon  it,  in  compliment  to  the  pope,  Alexander  III.,
the  name  of  Alessandria.  Though,  from  its  hasty  con-
struction, Alessandria  was  even  in  that  age  deemed  rude
in  appearance,  it  rapidly  became  a  thriving  and  populous
oity.i  The  intrinsic  energy  and  resources  of  Lombardy
were  now  made  manifest.  Frederic,  who  had  triumphed
by  their  disunion,  was  unequal  to  contend  against  their
league.  After  several  years  of  indecisive  war  the  em-
peror invaded  the  Milanese  territory ;  but  the  confederates
gave  him  battle,  and  gained  a  complete  victory  at
Legnano.  Frederic  escaped  alone  and  disguised  from  the
field,  with  little  hope  of  raising  a  fresh  army,  ^^^^^  ^f
though  still  reluctant  from  shame  to  acquiesce  Legnano.
in  lie freedom  of  Lombardy. He  was  at  ^^"'^

liberties  of  Lombudy  were  more  perfect  11011.  delU  pag^a,  from  the  thatdi  with

under  Henxy  V.  than  hia  fitther:  besldea  which  the  honiea  were  covered.  Frederic

which,  the  one  relga  mi^i  stlU  be  re-  waa  very  dedrona  to  diango  ita  name  to

membered,  and  the  other  reated  in  tra-  C^eaarea,  aa  it  ia  actoally  called  In  the

dition.  The  qneatloo,  however,  ia  of  llttlo  peace  of  Constauoe,  being  at  that  time  on

moment  the  imperial  aide. But  it  loon  recoverej

4  Alexandria  was  snniamed.  In  derl-  ita  fonner  appellatloD.

^76  PRACE  OF  CONSTANCE. Chap.  m.  Part  I.

length  persuaded,  thiougb  the  mediation  of  the  repdblio
of  Venice,  to  oonaent  to  a  truce  of  six  years,  the  provi-
sional terms  of  which  were  all  fJBiyourable  to  the  league.
It  was 'weakened,  however,  hj  the  defection  of  some  oi
its  own  members ;  Cremona,  which  had  never  cordially
united  with  her  ancient  enemies,  made  separate  condi-
tions with  Frederic,  and  suffered  herself  to  be  named
among  the  cities  on  the  imperial  side  in  the  azmistice.
Tortona  and  even  Alessandna  followed  the  same  course
during  the  six  years  of  its  duration ;  a  &tal  testimony  of
unsubdued  animosities,  and  omen  of  the  calamities  of
Italy.  At  the  expiration  of  the  truce  Frederic's  anxiety
p^^,^  ^  to  secure  the  crown  for  his  son  overcame  hiB
CoDstaaoe.  pride,  and  the  fEunous  peace  of  Constance  esta-
▲.1x1183.  j^jjgi^Q^  j^Q  Lombard  republics  in  real  inde*

pendence.

By  the  treaty  of  Constance  the  cities  were  maintained
in  tiie*  enjoyment  of  all  the  regalian  rights,  whether
within  their  walls  or  in  their  district,  which  they  could
claim  by  usage.  Those  of  levying  war,  of  erecting  for-
tifications, and  of  administering  civil  and  criminal  justice,
were  specially  mentioned.  The  nomination  of  their
consuls,  or  other  magistrates,  was  left  absolutely  to  the
citizens ;  but  they  were  to  receive  the  investiture  of  their
office  from  an  imperial  legate.  The  customary  tributes
of  provision  during  the  emperor's  residence  in  Italy
were  preserved ;  and  he  was  authorized  to  appoint  in
every  city  a  judge  of  appeal  in  civil  causes,  xhe  Lom-
bard league  was  confirmed,  and  the  cities  were  permitted
"^to  renew  it  at  their  own  discretion;  but  they  were  to
take  every  ten  years  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  emperor.
T^  just  compact  preserved,  along  with  every  security
for  the  liberties  and  welfieu^  of  the  cities,  as  much  of  the
imperial  prerogatives  as  coidd  be  exercised  by  a  foreign
sovereign  consistentiy  with  the  people's  happiness.'

The  successful  insurrection  oi  Lombardy  is  a  memo-
rable refutation  of  that  system  of  policy  to  which  its
advocates  give  the  appellation  of  vigorous,  and  which
the^  perpetually  hold  forth  as  the  only  means  througjh
which  a  disaffected  people  are  to  be  restrained.  By  a
certain  class  of  statesmen,  and  by  all  men  ef  hMrsh  and

'  ICumtorl.  A&ttqiiitataB  IteUa,  Din.  Mk

Italy.  PUACE  OF  C0NSTA17CE.  877

violent  dkpoeition,  measures  of  conciliation,  adherence
to  the  spirit  of  treaties,  regard  to  ancient  priTileges,  or
to  those  rtdes  of  morsel  justice  which  are  paramount  to
all  poflitiye  right,  are  always  treated  with  derision.
Terror  is  their  only  specific ;  and  the  physical  inability
to  rebel  their  only  security  for  allegiance.  But  if  the
razing  of  cities,  me  abrogation  of  privileges,  the  im-
poverishment and  oppression  of  a  nation  could  assure  its
constant  submission,  Frederic  Barbarossa  would  never
have  seen  the  militia  of  Lombardy  arrayed  against  him
at  Legnano.  Whatever  may  be  the  pressure  upon  a  con-
quered people,  there  will  come  a  moment  of  their  recoil«
Nor  is  it  material  to  allege,  in  answer  to  the  present  in-
stance, that  the  accidentcu  destmction  of  Frederic's  army
by  disease  enabled  the  cities  of  Lombardy  to  succeed  in
their  resistance.  The  hat  may  well  be  disputed,  since
Lombardy,  when  united,  appears  to  have  been  more
than  equal  to  a  contest  with  any  German  force  that  could
have  been  brought  against  her ;  but  even  if  we  admit
the  effect  of  this  circumstance,  it  only  exhibits  the  pre-
cariousness  of  a  policy  which  collateral  events  are
always  liable  to  disturb.  Providence  reserves  to  itself
various  means  by  which  the  bonds  of  the  oppressor  may
be  broken ;  and  it  is  not  for  human  sagacity  to  anticipate
whether  the  army  of  a  conqueror  shall  moulder  in  the
unwholesome  marshes  of  Bome  or  stiffen  with  frost  in  a
Bussian  winter.

The  peace  of  Constance  presented  a  noble  opportunity
to  the  Lombards  of  establishing  a  permanent  federal
imion  of  small  republics;  a  form  of  government  con-
genial from  the  earliest  ages  to  Italy,  and  that,  perhaps,
imder  which  she  is  again  destined  one  dav  to  flourish.
They  were  entitled  by  the  provisions  of  that  treaty  to
preserve  their  league,  the  basis  of  a  more  perfect  con-
federacy, which  the  course  of  events  would  have  eman-
dpatod  from  every  kind  of  subjection  to  Germany."  But

•  Thoagjh  there  ifM  no  permaMnt  in  ny  degree  to  jmierTe  the  spirit  of

diet  of  the  Lombexd  league,  the  oonoxli  vnloo,  this  cangress  might  resdi^  hare

sod  podesths  of  the  respecttve  cities  com-  become  a  pennanoit  body,  like  the  Hel-

posing  it  ooesiionally  met  in  oongress  to  Totic  diet,  with  as  eztensive  powers  as

ielibeiate  upon  measures  of general  are  necessary  in  a  federal  oonstltatton^^

safety.  Thnsaaaembled.th^  were  called  Mnxmtori.  Antichitk  Itallane.  t  iii.  jk

Reotores  Sodetatls  LombaidUe. It  is  ia$;  DlsHrk  60;  Sismondi,  t  ii.  p.  isft.
•rident  that,  if  Lombaitly  had  continned

378  AKFA^BS  OF  SICILT. CukP.  III.  Pakt  I.

dark,  long-oheriahed  hatreds,  and  that  implaoable  vin-
diotiveness  which,  at  least  in  former  ages,  oistingaiBhed
the  private  manners  of  Italy,  deformed  her  national  cha-
racter, which  can  only  be  the  aggregate  of  individnal
passions.  For  revjenge  she  threw  away  the  pearl  of
great  price,  and  sacrificed  even  the  recollection  of  that
liberty  which  had  stalked  like  a  majestic  spirit  among
the  rains  of  Milan.'  It  passed  away,  that  high  fJig^^Aiii
of  absolute  power,  that  steadiness  and  self-devotion,
which  raLsed  the  half-civilized  Lombards  of  the  twelfth
century  to  the  level  of  those  ancient  republics  from
whose  history  our  first  notions  of  freedom  and  virtue  are
derived.  The  victim  by  turns  of  selfish  and  sanguinary
factions,  of  petty  tyrants,  and  of  foreign  invaders,  Italy
has  Mien  like  a  star  from  its  place  in  heaven ;  she  has
seen  her  harvests  trodden  down  by  the  horses  of  the
stranger,  and  the  blood  of  her  children  wasted  in  quarrels
not  their  own :  Conquering  or  conqueredj  in  the  indignant
language  of  her  poet,  stSl  alike  a  davej"^  a  long  retribution
for  the  tyranny  of  Home.
Frederic  did  not  attempt  to  molest  the  cities  of  Lorn*
Aiiun  of  bardy  in  the  enjoyment  of  those  privileges  con-
^cuy*  ceded  by  the  treaty  of  Constance.  His  ambition
was  diverted  to  anew  scheme  for  aggrandizing  the  house
of  Suabia  by  the  marriage  of  his  eldest  son  Henry  with
Constance,  the  aunt  and  heiress  of  William  11.,  king  of
Sicily.  That  kingdom,  which  the  first  monarch  Boger
had  elevated  to  a  high  pitch  of  renown  ai^d  power,  fell
into  decay  through  the  misconduct  of  his  son  William,
sumamed  the  Bad,  and  did  not  recover  much  of  its
lustre  under  the  second  William,  though  styled  the  Good*
His  death  without  issue  was  apparently  no  remote
event ;  and  Constance  was  the  sole  legitimate  survivor
of  the  royal  £Em:uly.  It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that
no  hereditary  kingdom  appears  absolutely  to  have  ex-
cluded females  from  its  throne,  except  that  which  from
its  magnitude  was  of  all  the  most  secure  from  falling
into  the  condition  of  a  province.  The  Sicilians  felt  toe
late  the  defect  of  their  constitution,  which  permitted  an

t  Ansi  ffinr  la  llberfk  mini,  "  Per  lenrlr  sempre,  o  vlndtrloe  c

E  bactar  lieta  ogni  nxlna,  e  dire,  ylnta. FIUci^

Rutne  A,  ma  Berri^  non  maL
Oaetana  Paawrlni  (oMla  piatosto  Glovan  BaUiata  Fistorinl),  In  Mathia^
Oomponimentt  Lirid,  vt^  Ul  p.  S31.

iTALT.  INNOCENT  III.  379

independent  people  to  be  transferred,  as  the  dowry  of  a
woman,  to  a  foreign  prince,  hj  whose  ministers  they
might  jnstly  expect  to  be  insnlted  and  oppressed.
Henry,  whose  marriage  with  Constance  took  place  in
1186,  and  who  snoceeded  in  her  right  to  the  ilirone  of
Sicily  three  jeaxa  afterwards,  was  exasperated  by  a
oonrageons  but  nnsnccessful  effort  of  the  Norman  barons
to  preserve  the  crown  for  an  illegitimate  branch  of  the
royal  fiamily ;  and  his  reign  is  disgraced  by  a  series  of
atrocious  cruelties.  The  power  of  the  house  of  Suabia
was  now  at  its  zenith  on  each  side  of  the  Alps ;  Henry
received  the  Imperial  crown  the  year  after  his  feither's
death  in  the  third  crusade,  and  even  prevailed  upon  the

Erinces  of  Germany  to  elect  his  infant  son  Frederic  as
is  successor.  But  his  own  premature  decease  clouded
the  prospects  of  his  feimily :  Constance  survived  him  but
a  year ;  and  a  child  of  four  years  old  was  left  with  the
inheritance  of  a  kingdom  which  his  father's  severity  had
rendered  disaffected,  and  which  the  leaders  of  German
mercenaries  in  his  service  desolated  and  disputed.

During  the  minority  of  Frederic  11.,  from  1198  to
1216,  the  papal  chair  was  filled  by  Innocent  III. ,  innocent
a  name  second  only,  and  hardly  second,  to  that  '^
of  Oregory  YIL  Young,  noble,  and  intrepid,  he  imited
with  the  accustomed  spirit  of  ecclesiastical  usurpation,
which  no  one  had  ever  carried  to  so  high  a  point,  the
more  worldly  ambition  of  consolidating  a  separate  prin-
cipality for  the  Holy  See  in  the  centre  of  Italy.  The
real  or  spurious  donations  of  Constantino,  Pepin,  Charle-
magne, and  Louis,  had  given  rise  to  a  perpetual  claim,
on  the  part  of  the  popes,  to  very  extensive  dominions ;
but  little  of  this  had  been  effectuated,  and  in  Bome
itself  they  were  thwarted  by  the  prefect,  an  of&cer
who  swore  fidelity  to  the  emperor,  and  by  the  insubor-
dinate spirit  of  the  people.  In  the  very  neighbourhood
the  small  cities  owned  no  subjection  to  the  capital,  and
were  probably  as  much  self-governed  as  those  of  Lom-
bardy.  One  is  transported  back  to  the  earliest  times  of
the  republic  in  reading  of  the  desperate  wars  between
Bome  and  Tibur  or  Tusculum ;  neither  of  which  was
subjugated  till  the  latter  part  of  the  twelfth  century.
At  a  farther  distance  were  the  duchy  of  Spoleto,  the
march  of  Ancona,  and  what  had  been  the  exarchate  of

480 BBQUBST  OF  GOUHTBSS  MATILDA.  Chap.  HL  Fori.

BftTenna,  to  all  of  wliich  tho  popes  had  more  or  kas
grounded  pTetenaiQnB. Early  in  the  last-mentioned  age
the  fiuDions  oomtess  Matilda,  to  whose  zealous  proteo-
tion  Gr^^ry  VUL  had  been  eminently  indebted  during
his  long  dispute  with  the  emperor,  granted  the  reTersion
of  all  her  possessions  to  the  Holy  See,  first  in  the  life-
time of  Gr^ozy,  and  again  under  llie  pontificate  of
Paschal  III. These  were  very  extensive,  and  held  by
Beqacitor different  titles. Of  her  vast  imperial  ^i^^
uIhSu^^  Mantua,  Modena,  and  Tuscany,  she  certainly
could  not  dispose. The  duchy  of  Spoleto  and
march  of  Anoona  were  supposed  to  rest  upon  a  different
footing. I  confess  myself  not  distinctly  to  comprehend
the  nature  of  this  part  of  her  succession.  These  had  been
fonnerlv  among  the  great  fiefis  of  the  kingdom  of  Italy.
But  if  I  understand  it  rightly,  they  had  tacitly  ceased  to
be  subject  to  the  emperors  some  years  before  they  were
seized  by  Godfrey  of  Lorraine,  fitther-in-law  and  step-
£ftther  of  Matilda.  To  his  son,  her  husband,  she  succeeded
in  the  possession  of  those  countries. They  are  commonly
considered  as  her  alodial  or  patrimonial  property;  yet  it
is  not  easy  to  see  how,  bemg  herself  a  subject  of  the
empire,  she  could  transfer  even  her  alodial  estates  from
its  sovereignty.  Nor  on  the  other  hand  can  it  apparently
be  maintained  that  she  was  lawful  sovereign  of  countries
which  had  not  long  since  been  imperial  fie&,  and  the
suzerainty  over  which  had  never  been  renounoed. The
original  title  of  the  Holy  See,  therefore,  does  not  seem
incontestable  even  as  to  this  part  of  Matilda's  donation.
But  I  state  with  hesitation  a  difficulty  to  which  the
authors  I  have  consulted  do  not  advert' It  is  certain,
however,  that  the  emperors  kept  possession  of  the  whole
during  the  twelfth  centmy ,  and  treated  both  Spoleto  and
Anoona  as  parts  of  the  empire,  notwithstanding  con-
tinual remonstrances  from  the  Boman  pontifEs. Frederio
Barbarossa,  at  the  negotiations  of  Venice  in  1177,  pro-

"  It  it  afanott  hopdflM  to  look  for  ex-  tboie  of  the  hoan  of  Eete. Bat  I  be^

pUdt  infimnatioD  upon  the  rights  and  not  been  able  to  latiaQr  myself  by  the

pretendona  of  the  Roman  see  in  Italian  penual  of  some  dry  and  tediooa  diaaerta-

wilten  even  of  the  eighteenth  oentoiy.  tlona  in  St  Mare  (Abrtfgtf  Chnnokglqae

Mvxatoil.  the  moat  learned,  and  vpon  de  I'Hiat  de  lltaUe,  t  iv.).  who,  wllh

the  whole  the  fkinat  of  them  all,  morea  learning  icaroelj  inCnrlot  to  that  of  Mma-

eavtlimslyover  Uila  gnmnd ;  except  when  tori,  pfieawd  more  opportvnitj  and  ta

the  olaima  of  Rome  happen  to  cUMh  with  "ri'millim  to  apeak  uttt

(TALT.  ECCLESUSTICAL  STATE  REDUCED.  881

ndsed  to  restore  the  patrimonj  of  Matilda  in  fifteen
years ;  but  at  the  close  of  that  period  Henry  YI.  was  not
disposed  to  execute  this  anangement,  and  granted  the
ooonty  in  fief  to  some  of  his  German  followers.  Upon
his  death  the  oironmstances  were  £ftYourable  to  lmio»
oent  m.  The  infisuit  Idn^  of  Sicily  had  been  intmsted
by  Constance  to  his  goardianship.  A  double  election  of
Philip,  brother  of  Henry  YL,  and  of  Otho  duke  of
Brunswick,  engaged  the  princes  of  Germany,  who  had
entirely  overlooked  the  claims  of'  young  Frederic,  in  a
doubtfol  civil  war.  Neither  party  was  in  a  condition  to
enter  Italy;  and  the  imperial  dignity  was  vacant  for
several  years,  till,  the  death  of  Philip  removing  one
competitor,  CMho  IV.,  whom  the  pope  had  constantly
favoured,  was  crowned  emperor.  During  this  interval
the  Italians  had  no  superior ;  and  Innocent  availed  him-
self of  it  to  maintain  the  pretensions  of  the  see.  These
he  backed  by  the  production  of  rather  a  questionable
document,  the  will  of  Heniy  YI.,  said  to  have  been
found  among  the  baggage  of  Marqucu:d,  one  of  the  Ger-
man soldiers  who  had  been  invested  with  fie&  by  the
late  emperor.  The  cities  of  what  we  now  call  EodMiaitt-
the  ecclesiastioal  state  had  in  the  twelfih  cen*  J^J!^^'^
tury  their  own  municipal  government  like  those  innoo^
of  liombardy ;  but  they  were  far  less  able  to  ^^
assert  a  complete  independence.  They  gladly,  therefore,
put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  Holy  See,
which  held  out  some  prospect  of  securing  them  from
Marquard  and  other  rapacious  partisans,  without  disturb-
ing their  internal  regulations.  Thus  the  duchy  of
Spoleto  and  march  of  Ancona  submitted  to  Innocent  in. ;
but  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  keep  constant  possession
of  such  extensive  territories,  and  some  years  aRerwards
adopted  the  prudent  course  of  granting  Ancona  in  fief  to
the  marquis  of  Este.  He  did  not,  as  may  be  supposed,
neglect  his  authority  at  home ;  the  prefect  of  Home  was
now  compelled  to  swear  allegiance  to  the  pope,  which
put  an  end  to  the  regular  imperial  supremacy  over  that
city,  and  the  privileges  of  &e  citizens  were  abridged.
This  is  the  proper  era  of  that  temporal  sovereignty
which  the  bishops  of  Rome  possess  over  their  own  city,
though  still  prevented  by  various  causes,  for  nearly  three
oer.turies,  from  becoming  unquestioned  and  unlimited.

382  LEAGUE  OF  TUSCANT. Chap.  III.  Past  U

The  policy  of  Borne  was  now  more  clearly  defined
Hhasi  oyer. In  order  to  preserve  what  she  had  thus  sad-
denlj  gained  rather  by  opportanity  than  strength, it
was  her  interest  to  enfeeble  the  imperial  power,  and  con>
Leagne  of  scqnently  to  maintain  the  freedom  of  the  Italian
Tuouy. republics. Tuscany  had  hitherto  been  ruled
by  a  marquis  of  the  emperor's  appointment,  though  her
cities  were  flourishing,  and,  within  themselves,  inde*
pendent. In  imitation  of  the  Lombard  confederacy,
and  impelled  by  Innocent  III.,  they  now  (with  the  ex*
oeption  of  Pisa,  which  was  always  strongly  attached  to
the  empire)  formed  a  similar  league  for  the  preservation
of  their  rights. In  this  leagne  the  influence  of  the  pope
was  fJGu:  more  strongly  manifested  than  in  that  of  Lom>
hardy. Although  the  latter  had  been  in  alliance  with
Alexander  III.,  and  was  formed  during  the  height  of
his  dispute  with  Frederic,  this ecclesiastical  quarrel
mingled  so  little  in  their  struggle  for  liberty  that  no
allusion  to  it  is  found  in  the  act  of  their  confederacy.
But  the  Tuscan  union  was  expressly  established  **  for
the  honour  and  aggrandizement  of  the  apostolic  see."
The  members  bound  themselves  to  defend  the  possessions
and  rights  of  the  church,  and  not  to  acknowledge  any
king  or  emperor  without  the  approbation  of  the  supreme
pontiff.^  The  Tuscans  accordingly  were  more  thoroughly
attached  to  the  church  party  than  the  Lombards,  whose
principle  was  animosity  towards  the  house  of  Suabia.
Hence,  when  Innocent  III.,  some  time  after,  supported
Frederic  II.  against  the  emperor  Otho  lY.,  the  Milanese
and  their  allies  were  arranged  on  the  imperial  side ;  but
the  Tuscans  continued  to  adhere  to  the  pope.

In  the  wars  of  Frederic  Barbarossa  against  Milan  and
Pactions  of  ^^  alHcs,  WO  have  seen  the  cities  of  Lombardy
Oneiftand  divided,  and  a  considerable  nimiber  of  them
ohibeUns.  £j.jj^iy  attached  to  the  imperial  interest  It
does  not  appear,  I  believe,  from  history,  though  it. is  by
no  means  improbable,  that  the  citizens  were  at  so  early
a  time  divided  among  themselves,  as  to  their  line  of
public  policy,  and  that  the  adherence  of  a  particular  city
to  the  emperor,  or  to  the  Lombard  league,  was  only.

'  QoodpnMeHluueiCt^araaacscsaiictgB  perent»  nW  qoem  Romamu  pootlflBX  ap-
eoclealaboDi  fide  defenderent;  et  quod  probaret  Muratorl,  Diaert  48.  (Latiiw
irallam  In  vifeni  ant  imperatoron  red- L  Iv.  p^  sao;  ItaUan,  t  IIL  p^  Il&>

Italy.  GUELFS  AND  GHIBELINS.  383

as  proved  afterwards  the  case,  that  one  fiiction  or  another
acquired  an  ascendency  in  its  councils. But  jealousies
long  existing  between  the  different  classes;  and  only
suspended  by  the  national  stru^le  which  terminated  at
Constance,  gave  rise  to  new  modifications  of  interests^
and  new  relations  towards  the  empire. About  the  year
1200,  or  perhaps  a  little  later,  the  two  leading  parties
which  divided  the  cities  of  Lombardy,  and  whose  mutual
animosity,  having  no  general  subject  of  contention,
required  the  association  of  a  name  to  direct  as  well  as
invigorate  its  prejudices,  became  distinguished  by  the
oelebrated  appellations  of  Guel&  and  Ghibelins ;  the  for-
mer adhering  to  the  papal  side,  the  latter  to  that  of  the
emperor. These  names  were  derived  from  Germany,
ana  bad  been  the  rallying  word  of  fiEUstion  for  more  than
half  a  century  in  that  country  before  they  were  trans-
ported to  a  still  more  favourable  soil. The  Guelfs  took
their  name  from  a  very  illustrious  fsonily,  several  oi
whom  had  successively  been  dukes  of  Bavaria  in  the
tenth  and  eleventh  centuries. The  heiress  of  the  last
of  these  intermarried  with  a  younger  son  of  the  house  of
Este,  a  noble  &mily  settled  near  Padua,  and  possessed
of  great  estates  on  each  bank  of  the  lower  Fo. They
gave  birth  to  a  second  line  of  Guelfs,  from  whom  the
royal  house  of  Brunswick  is  descended. The  name  of
Ghibelin  is  derived  from  a  village  in  Franconia,  whence
Conrad  the  Salic  came,  ihe  progenitor,  through  females,
of  the  Suabian  emperors. At  the  election  of  Lothaire
in  1125,  the  Suabian  feonily  were  disappointed  of  what
they  considered  almost  an  hereditary  possession;  and
at  this  time  an  hostility  appears  to  have  commenced
between  them  and  the  house  of  Guelf,  who  were  nearly
related  to  Lothaire. Henry  the  Proud  and  his  son
Henry  the  Lion,  representatives  of  the  latter  fiamily,
were  frequently  persecuted  by  the  Suabian  emperors ;
but  their  fortunes  belong  to  the  history  of  Germany.'
Meanwhile  the  elder  branch,  though  not  reserved  ft)r
such glorious  destinies  as  the  Guelfs, continued  to
flourish  in  Italy ;  the  marquises  of  Este  were  by  far  the

'  TIm  Qtsautk  origin  of  tlMee  oeI»>  mioatlon  transferred  to  Italy. StrnTtviv

lN»ted  fiictioDS  if  ol«arl7  prored  by  a  Corpus  Hist  Qennan.  p.  878,  and  Mura»

pasngo  in  Otbo  of  Fxlaingen,  who  liTcd  toti,Jun.  116X
half  a  oentnxy  oafura  we  find  tae  da4>>

884  OTHO  IT.  Chap.  UL  Pabt  1

most  powerful  nobles  in  eftstem  Lombard j,  and  abont
the  end  of  the  twelfth  oentmj  began  to  be  oonaidered  ae
the  heads  of  the  church  party  in  their  neighbonrhood.
They  were  ficequentLy  choeen  to  the  office  of  podeatk,  or
chief  magistrate,  by  the  cities  of  Bomagna ;  and  in  1208
the  people  of  Ferrara  set  the  &tal  example  of  saorifidng
their  freedom  for  tranqnillity^  by  electing  Azzo  VlL,
marquis  of  Este,  as  their  lord  or  sovereign/
Otiio  lY.  was  son  of  Henry  the  Lion,  and  oonse-
quentLy  head  of  the  Gnelfs. On  his  obtaining
* toe  imperial  crown,  the  prejudices  of  Italian
factions  were  diverted  out  of  their  nsnal  channel. Be
was  soon  engaged  in  a  quarrel  with  the  pope,  whose
hostility  to  the  empire  was  certain,  into  whatever  hands
it  might  fiiU. Li  Milan,  however,  and  generally  in  the
cities  which  had  belonged  to  the  Lombard  league  against
Frederic  I.,  hatred  of  the  house  of  Suabia  prevailed
more  than  jealousy  of  the  imperial  prerogatives ;  they  ad*
hered  to  names  rather  than  to  principles,  and  supported
a  Guelf  emperor  even  against  the  pope. Terms  of  this
description,  having  no  definite  relation  to  principles
which  it  might  be  troublesome  to  learn  and  defend,  are
always  acceptable  to  mankind,  and  have  the  peculiar
advantage  of  precluding  altogether  that  spirit  of  com-
promise and  accommodation,  by  which  it  is  sometimes
endeavoured  to  obstruct  their  tendency  to  hate  and
injure  each  other. From  this  time, every  city,  and
almost  every  citizen,  gloried  in  one  of  these  barbarous
denominations. In  several  cities  the  imperial  party
predominated  through  hatred  of  their  neighbours,  wh^
espoused  that  of  the  church. Thus  the  inveterate  feuds
between  Pisa  and  Florence,  Modena  and  Bologna,  Cre-
mona and  Milan, threw  them  into  opposite  Motions.
But  there  was  in  every  one  of  these  a  strong  party
against  that  which  prevailed,  and  consequently  a  GueJf
city  frequently  became  Ghibelin,  or  conversely,  accord-
ing to  the  fluctuations  of  the  time.^

•  Sjmvindl.  t  U.  p^  328.  fifleenUi  oentmy. Qad  mooIo,  •  ^fn,

V  For  fbe  Onelf  and  OfalbeUn  ftctioosp  abbondb  anch'  tarn  dl  molte  gacm;  ma

beaidei  the  historians,  the  Slst  dlsserta-  noIla  d  operb  aoCto  name  o  prelesto  ddle

tfonofMnxatorl  dioald  be  read. Tlmre  fiuloni  soddette. Solamente  rltcnnsio

Is  some  degree  of  inafiemacy  in  his  Un-  ease  piode  in  aknne  private  ftmiglie.

goage,  wfacN  he  speaks  of  these  distrso-  AnttcUth  Italiane,  t.  UL  p.  148. Bat

tloos  esplilQC  at  the  beginning  of  Om  oartainlr  the  names  of  Gvalf  and  Gblbe>

iTjaT.  FBEDEBIC  II.  385

The  cliange  to  which  we  have  adverted  in  the  politics
of  the  Guelf  party  lasted  only  during  the  reign
of  Otho  IV.  When  the  heir  of  the  house  of  ^^^^^'^
Suabia  grew  up  to  manhood,  Innocent,  who,  thongh  his
guardian,  had  taken  little  care  of  his  interests,  as  long
as  he  flattered  himself  with  the  hope  of  finding  a  GueH
emperor  obedient,  placed  the'  young  Frederic  at  the
head  of  an  opposition,  composed  of  cities  always  attached
to  his  family,  and  of  such  as  implicitly  followed  the  see
of  Bome.  He  met  with  considerable  success  both  in
Italy  and  Germany,  and  after  the  death  of  Otho,  received
the  imperial  crown.  But  he  had  no  longer  to  expect
any  assistance  from  the  pope  who  conferred  it.  Innocent
was  dead,  and  Honorius  III.,  his  successor,  could  not
behold  without  apprehension  the  vast  power  of  Frederic,
supported  in  Lomb^urdy  by  a  faction  which  balanced
that  of  the  church,  and  menacing  the  ecclesiastical
territories  on  the  other  side,  by  the  possession  of  Naples
and  Sicily.  This  kingdom,  feudatory  to  Bome,  and  long
her  firmest  ally,  was  now,  by  a  fatal  connexion  which
she  had  not  been  able  to  prevent,  thrown  into  the  scale
of  her  most  dangerous  enemy.  Hence  the  temporal
dominion  which  lanocent  III.  had  taken  so  much  pains
to  establish,  became  a  very  precarious  possession,  ex-
posed on  each  side  to  the  attacks  of  a  power  that  had
legitimate  pretensions  to  almost  every  province  com-
posing it.  The  life  of  Frederic  11.  was  wasted  in  an
unceasing  contention  with  the  church,  and  with  his
Italian  subjects,  whom  she  excited  to  rebellions  against
him.  Without  inveighing,  like  the  popish  writers,
against  this  prince,  certainly  an  encourager  of  letters,
and  endowed  with  many  eminent  qualities,  we  may  lay
to  his  charge  a  good  deal  of  dissimulation ;  I  will  not

Un,  as  party  cUsdnetloiiB,  mkj  be  tmeed  eGcledwUcal  state,  the  same  dlstlnctlonF

all  fhroui^  the  fifteenth  cmtary. The  appear  to  hare  been  preMTved  still  later,

former  ftctlon  showed  Itself  distinctly  in  Ste&no  Infessom,  in  1487,  Bpeaia  funU

the  insnrrectioii  of  the  cities  saltfect  to  liarly  of  them. Script  Rer.  ItaL  t  iii.

Milan,  upon  the  death  of  Olan  Oaleaao  p.  1221. And  even  in  the  conquest  ot

Viseontt  in  1404. It  appeared  again  in  Milan  by  Louis  XII.  in  1500,  the  OueUs

the  attempt  of  the  Milanese  to  re-esta-  of  that  city  are  represented  as  attached

bUsh  their  repnbUc  in  U4T. Sisnumdi,  to  the  French  party,  while  the  Ghibelins

t  ix.  p.  334. So  in  1477,  Ludovio)  Sfona  abetted  Ludovico  Sfona  and  MaadmlUan.

made  use  of  Ghibelin  pr^dices  to  ex-  Oulodardini,  p.  399. Other  posBages  in

clndo  the  regent  Bonne  of  Savoy  as  a  the  same  historian  show  these  factions  ta

Guelt HIsmondi,  t  xi.  p^  79. In  the  have  been  alive  in  various  parts  of  Italy

VOL.  I.  2  0

386  FREDERIC  II.  Chap.  III.  Past  I.

add  ambition  beoause  I  am  not  aware  of  any  period  iii
the  reign  of  Frederic,  when  he  was  not  obliged  to  act  on
his  defence  against  the  aggression  of  others.  Bnt  if  he
had  been  a  model  of  virtues,  such  men  as  Honorius  IH.,
Gregory  IX.,  and  Innocent  lY.,  the  popes  with  whom
he  had  successively  to  contend,  would  not  have  given
him  respite,  while  he  remained  master  of  Naples,  as
well  as  the  empire.*

It  was  the  custom  of  every  pope  to  ni^e  princes  into
a  crusade,  which  the  condition  of  Palestine  rendered
indispensable,  or,  more  properly,  desperate.  But  this
great  piece  of  supererogatory  devotion  had  never  yet
been  raised  into  an  absolute  duty  of  their  station,  nor
had  even  private  peiBons  been  ever  required  to  take
up  the  cross  by  compulsion.  Honorius  III.,  however,
exacted  a  vow  from  Frederic,  before  he  conferred  upon
him  the  imperial  crown,  that  he  would  undertake  a
crusade  for  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem.  Frederic
submitted  to  this  engagement,  which  perhaps  he  never
designed  to  keep,  and  certainly  endeavoured  afterwards
to  evade.  Though  he  became  by  marriage  nominal  king
of  Jerusalem,^  his  excellent  understanding  was  not  cap-
tivated with  so  barren  a  prospect,  and  at  length  his  delays

*  The  TanoooT  of  bigoted  Catholics  terandbeireasof  l8&bellA,wifeof  Comad,

agiiiist  Frederic  has  hardly  subsided  at  marquis  of  MootfenaL This  Inbella

the  present  day. A  very  moderate  com-  was  the  yooneest  daughter  of  Almaric

mendation  of  him  in  Tlraboechi.  vol.  iv.  or  Amaury,  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  by

t  7,  was  not  suffered  to  pass  unoontra-  the  deaths  of  her  brother  Baldwin  rv.,  of

dieted  by  the  Roman  editor.  And  thou^  her  eldest  dster  Sibllla,  wife  of  Guy  de

Muratori  shows  quite  enon^  pn^udice  Lurignan,  and  that  sister's  child  Bald*

i^nst  that  emperor's  character,  a  fierce  win  V.,  succeeded  to  a  claim  upon  Jeru-

Roman  bigot,  whose  antmadveisions  are  salem, which, since the victories of

printed  in  the  lYth  volume  of  his  Annals  Saladin«  was  not  very  {«ofltable. It  is

(8vaedition),flle8  into  paroxysms  of  fury  said  tlutt  the  kings  of  Naples  dednoe

at  every  syllable  that  looks  like  modera-  their  title  to  that  sounding  inheritance

tion. It  is  well  known,  that,  although  from  this  marriage  of  Frederic  (Qiao*

the  public  policy  of  Rome  has  long  dis-  none,  1.  zvL  c.  2) ;  bnt  the  extinction  of

played  the  padflc  temper  of  weakness,  Frederic's  posteri^  must  have,  strictly

the  thermometer  of  eoclesiastical  senti-  speaking,  put  an  end  to  any  right  derived

ment  in  that  city  stands  very  nearly  as  from  him ;  and  Oiannone  himself  indi-

high  ss  in  the  thirteenth  century  [1810],  cates  a  better  title  by  the  cession  of

Giannone,  who  suffered  for  hid  boldness.  Maria,  a  princess  of  Antioch,  and  leglti-

has  drawn  I'tederic  II.  very  favourably,  mate  heiress  of  Jerasalem,  to  Charles  of

perhaps  too  favourably,  in  the  16th  and  Ai^ou  in  1272. How  &r,  indeed,  this

17th  books  of  the  Istoria  Civile  dl  Napoli.  may  have  been  regularly  transmitted  to

d  The  second  wife  of  Frederic  was  the  present  king  of  Naples,  I*  do  not

lolante,  or  Vlolante,  dau|^ter  of  John,  know,  and  am  sure  that  it  Ji  not  worth

oouut  of  Brienne,  by  Maria,  eldest  ds  ngh-  while  to  inquire.

fTALT.  niS  WARS  WITH  THE  LOMBARDS.  387

in  the  performance  of  his  vow  proToked  Gregory  IX.  to
issue  against  him  a  sentence  of  excommunication.  Such
a  thunderbolt  was  not  to  be  lightly  regarded;  uud
Frederic  sailed,  the  next  year,  for  Palestine.  But  having
disdained  to  solicit  absolution  for  what  he  considered  as
no  crime,  the  court  of  Bome  was  excited  to  still  fiercer
indignation  against  this  profiuiation  of  a  crusade  by  an
excommunicated  sovereign.  Upon  his  arrival  in  Pales-
tine, he  received  intelligence  that  the  papal  troops  had
broken  into  the  kingdom  of  Naples.  No  one  could
rationally  have  blamed  Frederic,  if  he  had  quitted  the
Holy  Land  as  he  found  it ;  but  he  made  a  treaty  with  the
Saracens,  which,  though  by  no  means  so  disadvantageous
as  under  all  the  circumstances  might  have  been  expected,
served  as  a  pretext  for  new  calumnies  against  nim  in
Europe.  The  charge  of  irreligion,  eagerly  and  success-
fully propagated,  ho  repelled  by  persecuting  edicts
against  heresy,  that  do  no  great  honour  to  his  memory,
and  availed  him  little  at  the  time.  Over  his  Neapolitan
dominions  he  exercised  a  rigorous  government,  rendered
perhaps  necessary  by  the  levity  cmd  insubordination
characteristic  of  the  inhabitant,  but  which  tended,
through  the  artful  representations  of  Honorius  and
Gregory,  to  alarm  and  alienate  the  Italian  republics.

A  new  generation  had  risen  up  in  Lombardy  since
the  peace  of  Constance,  and  the  prerogatives  ^^  ^^^  '
reserved  by  that  treaty  to  the  empire  were  so  with  the
seldom  called  into  action,  that  few  cities  were  ^™**'*'^
disposed  to  recollect  their  existence.  They  denominated
themselves  Guelfis  or  Ghibelina,  according  to  habit,  and
out  of  their  mutual  opposition,  but  without  much  reference
to  the  empire.  Those  however  of  the  former  party,  and
especially  Milan,  retained  their  antipathy  to  the  house
of  Suabia.  Though  Frederic  II.  was  entitled,  as  fu-  as
established  usage  can  create  a  right,  to  the  sovereignty
of  Italy,  the  Milanese  would  never  acknowledge  him,
nor  permit  his  coronation  atMonza,  according  to  ancient
ceremony,  with  the  iron  crown  of  the  Lombard  kings.
The  pope  fomented,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  this
disaffected  spirit,  and  encouraged  the  Lombard  cities  to
renew  their  former  league.  This,  although  conformable
to  a  provision  in  the  treaty  of  Constance,  was  manifestly
hostile  to  Frederic,  and  may  be  considered  as  the  com-

2c2

388  ARRANGEMENT  OF Chap.  III.  Part  I.

menoemont  of  a  second  contest  between  the  republican
cities  of  Lombardy  and  the  empire.  But  there  was  a
striking  difference  between  this  and  the  former  confe-
deracy against  Frederic  Barbarossa.  In  the  league  of
11 67,  almost  every  city,  forgetting  all  smaller  animosities
in  the  great  cause  of  defending  the  national  privileges,
contributed  its  share  of  exertion  to  sustain  that  perilous
conflict;  and  this  transient  unanimity  in  a  people  so
distracted  by  internal  fsiction  as  the  Lombards  is  the
surest  witness  to  the  justice  of.  their  undertaking.  Sixty
years  afterwards,  their  war  against  the  second  Frederic
had  less  of  provocation  and  less  of  public  spirit.  It  was
in  fact  a  party  strt^gle  of  Guelf  and  Ghibelin  cities,  to
which  the  names  of  the  church  and  the  empire  gave
more  of  dignity  and  consistence.

The  republics  of  Italy  in  the  thirteenth  century  were
^  _  so  numerous  and  independent,  and  their  revo-
ment  of'  lutious  SO  fircqueut,  that  it  is  a  difficult  matter
5^J*^  to  avoid  confusion  in  following  their  history.
It  will  give  more  arrangement  to  our  ideas,  and
at  the  same  time  illustrate  the  changes  that  took  place
in  these  little  states,  if  we  consider  them  as  divided  into
four  clusters  or  constellations,  not  indeed  unconnected
one  with  another,  yet  each  having  its  own  centre  oi
motion  and  its  own  boundaries.  The  first  of  these  we
may  suppose  formed  of  the  cities  in  central  Lombardy,
between  the  Sessia  and  the  Adige,  the  Alps  and  the
Ligurian  mountains ;  it  comprehends  Milan,  Cremona,
Pavia,  Brescia,  Bergamo,  Parma,  Piacenza,  Mantua,
Lodi,  Alessandria,  and  several  others  less  distiimiished.
These  were  the  original  seats  of  Italian  liberty,  the  great
movers  in  the  wars  of  the  elder  Frederic.  Milan  was  at
the  head  of  this  cluster  of  cities,  and  her  influence  gave
an  ascendancy  to  the  Guelf  party;  she  had,  since  the
tre0.ty  of  Constance,  rendered  l4odi  and  Pavia  almost  her
subjects,  and  was  in  strict  union  with  Brescia  and  Pia-
cenza. Parma,  however,  and  Cremona,  were  unshaken
defenders  of  the  empire.  In  the  second  class  we  may
place  the  cities  of  the  march  of  Verona,  between  the
Adige  and  the  frontiers  of  Germany.  Of  these  there
were  but  four  worth  mentioning;  Verona,  Vicenza,
Padua,  and  Treviso.  The  citizens  of  all  the  four  were
inclined  to  the  Guelf  interests ;  but  a  powerful  body  of

(TALT.  LOMBARD  CITIES.  889

niral  nobility,  who  had  neTerbeen  compelled,  like  those
upon  the  upper  Po,  to  quit  their  fortreeses  in  the  hilly
country,  or  reside  within  the  wallB,  attached  themBelves
to  the  opposite  denomination.*  Some  of  them  obtained
very  great  authority  in  the  civil  feuds  of  these  four
republics;  and  especially  two  brothers,  Eccelin  and
Alberic  da  Bomano,  of  a  rich  and  distinguished  family,
known  for  its  devotion  to  the  empire.  By  extraordinary
vigour  and  decision  of  character,  by  dissimulation  and
breach  of  oaths,  by  the  intimidating  effects  of  almost
unparalleled  cruelty,  Eccelin  da  Bomano  became  after
some  years  the  absolute  master  of  three  cities,  Padua,
Verona,  and  Y icenza ;  and  the  Guelf  party,  in  conse-
quence, was  entirely  subverted  beyond  the  Adige,  during
the  continuance  of  his  tyranny.'  Another  cluster  was
composed  of  the  cities  in  Bomagna ;  Bologna,  Imola,
Faenza,  Ferrara,  and  several  others.  Of  these  Bologna
was  far  the  most  powerful,  and,  as  no  city  was  more
steadily  for  the  interests  of  tihie  church,  the  Guelfis  usually
predominated  in  this  class ;  to  which  also  the  influence
of  the  house  of  £ste  not  a  little  contributed.  Modena,
though  not  geographically  within  the  limits  of  this  divi-
sion, may  be  classed  along  with  it  from  her  constant
wars  with  Bologna.  A  fourth  class  will  comprehend  the
whole  of  Tuscany,  separated  almost  entirely  from  the
politics  of  Lombardy  and  Bonoiagna.  Florence  headed
the  Guelf  cities  in  this  province,  Pisa  the  Ghibelin.  The
Tuscan  union  waa  formed,  as  has  been  said  above,  by
Innocent  III.,  and  was  strongly  inclined  to  the  popes ;
but  gradually  the  Ghibelin  party  acquired  its  share  of
influence ;  and  the  cities  of  Siena,  Arezzo,  and  Lucca
shifted  their  policy,  according  to  external  circumstances
or  the  fluctuations  of  their  internal  factions.  The  petty
cities  in  the  region  of  Spoleto  and  Ancona  hardly  per-
haps deserve  the  name  of  republics ;  and  Genoa  does  not

*  Sinnanili,  t  U.  p.  222.  gorenubent  sabeisting fok more  than

t  The  cruelties  of  Eooelin  excited  nnl-  twenty  years.  The  crimes  of  Eooelln  are

vwial  horror  In  an  age  when  inhmnanity  remaikably  well  authenticated  by  the  tes-

towards  enemies  was  as  common  as  fear  timony  of  sereral  oontempomy  writers,

and  revenge  ooold  make  it It  was  an  who  enter  into  great  details. Most  of

isnal  trick  of  beggan,  all  over  Italy,  to  these  are  found  in  the  seventh  volume

pretend  that  they  had  been  deprived  of  of  Scriptores  Reorum  Itallcarum. Sis-

tbeir  eyes  or  limbs  by  the  Veronese  mondi,  t  iii.  p.  33,  ill,  203,  is  more  faU

tyrant. There  is  hardly  an  instance  in  than  any  of  the  Boderas.
Enrofiean  history  of  so sanguinary  a

390  LOMBABD  CITIESL  ' ^af.  m.  R

readflj  £ill  into  any  of  our  four  claBWRn,  nnleaB  hei
wars  with  Piea  may  be  thought  to  oonnect  her  with
Tuscany.'

After  aerrenl  yean  of  transient  hostility  and  pre-
aarious  tmoe,  the  Gnelf  cities  of  Lombardy  engaged  in
a  regular  and  protracted  war  with  Frederic  11.,  or  more
properly  with  their  Ghibelin  adTeraaries.  Few  erenta
of  this  contest  deserve  particnlar  notice.  Neither  party
ever  obtained  sach  decisive  advantages  as  had  alternately
belonged  to  Frederic  Barbarossa  and  the  Lombard  ocm-
federacy,  during  the  war  of  the  preceding  centory.  A
defeat  of  the  Milanese  by  the  emperor,  at  Corte  NnoTu,
in  1237,  was  balanced  by  his  nnsaooessfiil  siege  at
Brescia  the  next  year.  The  Pisans  assisted  Frederic  to
gain  a  great  naval  victory  over  the  Crenoese  fleet,  in
1241 ;  but  he  was  obliged  to  rise  from  the  blockade  of
Parma,  which  had  left  the  standard  of  Ghibelinism,  in
1248.  Ultimately,  however,  the  strength  of  the  house
of  Snabia  was  exhansted  by  so  tedious  a  stroggle ;  the
Ghibelins  of  Italy  had  their  viciBsitades  of  snccess ;  but
their  comitry,  and  even  themselves,  lost  more  and  more
of  the  ancient  connexion  with  Germany.

In  this  resistance  to  Frederic  U.  the  Lombards  were
much  indebted  to  the  constant  support  of  Gr^oiy  IX.
and  his  successor  Innocent  IV. ;  and  the  Guelf,  or  the
church  party,  were  used  as  synonymous  terms.  These
pontifls  bore  an  unquenchable  hatred  to  the  house  of
Biiabia.  No  concessions  mitigated  their  animosity ;  no
reconciliation  was  sincere.  Whatever  fietults  may  be
imputed  to  Frederic,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one,  not
blindly  devoted  to  the  court  of  Rome,  to  deny  that  he
was  iniquitously  proscribed  by  her  unprincipled  ambi-
tion. His  real  crime  was  the  inheritance  of  his  ances-
tors, and  the  name  of  the  house  of  Suabia. In  1239  he

S  I  hare  taken  no  notice  of  Piedmont  only  Pledmoote^  dty  Qmt  oin  pnpaij

in  this  division. The  histoiy  of  that  be  considered  as  a  aepaimte  slate,  in  the

country  seems  to  be  less  elucidated  by  thirteenth  oentniy,  vm  VeroeUl;  snd

ancient  or  modem  writen  than  that  of  even  there  the  Usbop  aeenw  to  have

other  parts  of  Italy. It  was  at  this  time  possessed  a  sort  of  temporal  soveTeignly.

divided between  the connts  of  Savoy  Denina.authotoftheRivoliuiaald' Italia,

and  marquises  of  Montfenut But  Asti,  flnt  printed  In  1T69.  lived  to  pabUah  fn

Chieri.  and  Tnrin.  especially  the two  his  old  age  a  history  of  westein  Italy,  or

former,  appear  to  have  had  a  rf»publican  Piedmont,  fkom  which  I  have  gleaned  a

form  of  government They  %  ere,  bow.  few  fi»ct&— Istoria  dell' Italia  Ooddentalw

ever,  not  absolutely  independent The  Torino.  1809,  6  vola.  gva

Italy  COUNCIL  OF  LYONS  391

was  excommunioated  by  Gregory  IK.  To  tihis  he  waa
tolerably  accustomed  by  former  experience;  but  the
sentence  was  attended  by  an  absolution  of  his  subjects
from  their  allegiance,  and  a  formal  deposition.  These
sentences  were  not  very  effective  upon  men  of  vigorous
minds,  or  upon  those  whose  passions  were  engaged  in
their  cause ;  but  they  influenced  both  those  who  feared
the  threatenings  of  the  clergy  and  those  who  wavered
already  as  to  their  line  of  political  conduct.  In  the
fluctuating  state  of  Lombardy  the  excommunication  of
Frederic  imdermined  his  interests  even  in  cities  like
Parma,  that  had  been  friendly,  and  seemed  to  identify
the  cause  of  his  enemies  with  that  of  religion — a  preju-
dice artfully  fomented  by  means  of  calumnies  propagated
against  himself,  and  which  the  conduct  of  such  leading
Ghibelins  as  Eccelin,  who  lived  in  an  open  defiance  of
God  and  man,  did  not  contribute  to  lessen.  In  1240,
Gregory  proceeded  to  publish  a  Crusade  against  Frederic,
as  if  he  had  been  an  open  enemy  to  religion ;  which  he
revenged  by  putting  to  death  all  the  prisoners  he  made
who  wore  the  cross.  There  was  one  thing  wanting  to
make  the  expulsion  of  the  emperor  from  the  Christian
commonwealth  more  complete.  Gregory  IK.  accordingly
projected^  and  Innocent  lY.  carried  into  effect,  the  con-
vocation of  a  general  council.  This  was  held  QomM  ^f
at  Lyons,  an  imperial  city,  but  over  which  Lyons.
Frederic  could  no  longer  retain  his  supremacy.  ^  '^•
In  this  assembly,  where  one  hundred  and  forty  prelates
appeared,  the  question  whether  Frederic  ought  to  be
deposed  was  solemnly  discussed ;  he  submitted  to  defend
himself  by  his  advocates :  and  the  pope  in  the  presence,
though  without  formally  collecting  the  suffirages  of  the
council,  pronounced  a  sentence,  by  which  Frederic's
excommunication  was  renewed,  the  empire  and  all  his
kingdoms  taken  away,  and  his  subjects  absolved  from
their  fidelity.  This  is  the  most  pompous  act  of  usurpa-
tion in  all  the  records  of  the  church  of  Bome ;  and  the
tacit  approbation  of  a  general  council  seemed  to  incor-
porate the  pretended  nght  of  deposing  kings,  which
might  have  passed  as  a  mad  vaunt  of  Gregory  YII.  and
his  sucoessors,  with  the  established  faith  of  Chris-
tendom.

Upon  the  death  of  Frederic  U.  in  1250,  he  left  to  his

392  CONRAD  lY.  CUAP.  III.  Past  L

son  Conrad  a  contest  to  maintain  for  every  part  of  his
ccnnd  IV  i^^^**^^»  *8  Well  as  for  the  imperial  crown.
But  the  vigour  of  the  house  of  Suabia  was  gone :
Conrad  was  reduced  to  fight  for  tbe  kingdom  of  ^'aples,
the  only  succession  which  he  could  hope  to  secure
against  the  troops  of  Innocent  lY.,  who  still  pursued  his
faxoily  with  implacable  hatred,  and  claimed  that  kiiig«
dom  as  forfeited  to  its  feudal  superior,  the  Holy  See.
After  Conrad's  premature  death,  which  happened  in  1254,
the  throne  was  filled  by  his  illegitimate  brother  Manfred,
who  retained  it  by  his  bravery  and  address,  in  despite  of
the  popes,  till  they  were  compelled  to  call  in  the  assist-
ance of  a  more  powerful  arm.

The  death  of  Conrad  brings  to  a  termination  that
period  in  Italian  history  which  we  have  described  as
nearly  co-extensive  with  the  greatness  of  the  house  of
Suabia.  It  is  perhaps  upon  the  whole  the  most  honour-
able to  Italy ;  that  in  which  she  displayed  the  most  of
national  energy  and  patriotism.  A  Florentine  or  Vene-
tian may  dwell  with  pleasure  upon  later  times,  but  a
Lombard  will  cast  back  his  eye  across  the  desert  of  cen-
turies, till  it  reposes  on  the  field  of  Legnano.  Great
changes  followed  in  the  foreign  and  internal  policy,  in
the  moral  and  military  character  of  Italy.  But  before
we  descend  to  the  next  period,  it  will  be  neoessaiy  to
remark  some  material  circumstances  in  that  which  has
just  passed  under  our  review.

The  successful  resistance  of  the  Lombard  cities  to  such
Oniflesof  the  princes  as  both  the  Frederics  must  astonish  a
^Mjof  reader  who  brings  to  the  story  of  these  middle
^'  ages  notions  derived  from  modem  times.  But
when  we  consider  not  only  the  ineffectual  control  which
could  be  exerted  over  a  feudal  army,  bound  only  to  a
short  term  of  service,  and  reluctantly  kept  in  the  field
at  its  own  cost,  but  the  peculiar  distrust  and  disaffection
with  which  many  German  princes  regarded  the  house  of
Suabia,  less  reason  will  appear  for  surprise.  Nor  did
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  almost  always  in  agitation,  yield
any  material  aid  to  the  second  Frederic.  The  main
cause,  however,  of  that  triumph  which  attended  Lom-
bardy  was  the  intrinsic  energy  of  a  free  government.
From  thq  eleventh  century,  when  the  cities  became  vir-
tually republican, they  put  out  those  vigorous  shoots

jtalt  ltaoses  of  success  of  LOMBARDY.  39J

which  are  the  growth  of  fireedom  alone.  Their  domestio
feuds,  their  mutual  wars,  the  fierce  assaults  of  their
ciational  enemies,  checked  not  their  strength,  their
wealth,  or  their  population  ;  but  rather  as  the  limbs  are
nerved  bj  labour  and  hardship,  the  republics  of  Italy
grew  in  vigour  and  courage  through  the  conflicts  they
sustained.  If  we  but  remember  what  savage  licence
prevailed  daring  the  ages  that  preceded  their  rise,  the
rapine  of  public  robbers,  or  of  feudal  nobles  little  differ-
ing from  robbers,  the  contempt  of  industrious  arts,  the
inadequacy  of  penal  laws  and  the  impossibility  of  carry-
ing them  into  effect,  we  shall  form  some  notion  of  the
change  which  was  wrought  in  the  condition  of  Italy  by
the  growth  of  its  cities.  In  comparison  with  the  bless-
ings of  industry  protected,  injustice  controlled,  emula-
tion awakened,  the  disorders  which  ruffled  their  surface
appear  slight  and  momentary.  I  speak  only  of  this  first
stage  of  their  independence,  cmd  chiefly  of  the  twelfth
century,  before  those  civil  dissensions  had  reached  their
height,  by  which  the  glory  and  prosperity  of  Lombardy
were  soon  to  be  subverted.

We  have  few  authentic  testimonies  as  to  the  domestic
improvement  of  the  free  Italian  cities,  while  they  still
deserve  the  name.  But  we  may  perceive  by  lustory
that  their  power  and  population,  according  to  their
extent  of  territory,  were  almost  incredible.  In  Gal-
vaneus  Flamma,  a  Milanese  writer,  we  find  a  curious
statistical  account  of  that  city  in  1288,  which,  though  of
a  date  about  thirty  years  after  its  liberties  had  been
overthrown  by  usuinpation,  must  be  considered  as  imply-
ing a  high  degree  of  previous  advancement,  even  if  we
make  allowance,  as  probably  we  should,  for  some
exaggeration.  The  inhabitants  are  reckoned  at  200,000 ;
the  private  houses  13,000 ;  the  nobility  alone  dwelt  in
sixty  streets ;  8000  gentlemen  or  heavy  cavalry  (milites)
mi^t  be  mustered  from  the  city  and  its  district,  and
240,000  men  capable  of  arms:  a  force  sufficient,  the
writer  observes,  to  crush  all  the  Saracens.  There  were
in  Milan  six  hundred  notaries,  two  hundred  physicians,
eighty  schoolmasters,  and  fifty  transcribers  of  manuscripts.
In  the  district  were  one  hundred  and  fifty  castles  vnth
adjoining  villages.  Such  was  the  state  of  Milan,  Flamma
concludes,  in  1288 ;  it  is  not  for  me  to  say  whether  it  haF

394  LOMBARD  CITIEa  Chap.  111.  Part  I.

gained  or  lost  ^und  since  that  time.**  At  this  period  the
territory  of  Milan  was  not  perhaps  more  extensive  than
the  coiinty '  of  Surrey ;  it  was  bounded  at  a  little  dis-
tance, on  almost  every  side,  by  Lodi,  or  Pavia,  or  Ber
gamo,  or  Como.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  Flamma
may  have  meant  to  include  some  of  these  as  dependencies
of  MUan,  though  not  strictly  united  with  it.  How-
flourishing  must  the  state  of  cultivation  have  been  in
such  a  country,  which  not  only  drew  no  supplies  from
any  foreign  land,  but  exported  part  of  her  own  produce !
It  was  in  the  best  age  of  their  liberties,  immediately
after  the  battle  of  Legnano,  that  the  Milanese  commenced
the  great  canal  which  conducts  the  waters  of  the  Tesino
to  their  capital,  a  work  very  extraordinary  for  that  time.
During  the  same  period  the  cities  gave  proofs  of  internal
prosperity  that  in  many  instances  have  descended  to  our
own  observation  in  the  soHdity  and  magnificence  of
their  architecture.  Ecclesiastical  structures  were  perhaps
more  splendid  in  France  and  England;  but  neither
country  could  pretend  to  match  the  palaces  and  public
buildings,  the  streets  flagged  with  stone,  the  bridges  of
the  same  material,  or  the  commodious  private  houses  of
Italy.'

The  courage  of  these  cities  was  wrought  sometimes  to
a  tone  of  insolent  defiance  through  the  security  inspired
by  their  means  of  defence.  From  the  time  of  the  Ko>
mans  to  that  when  the  use  of  gunpowder  came  to  prevail,
little  change  was  made,  or  perhaps  could  be  made,  in
that  part  of  military  science  which  relates  to  the  attack
and  defence  of  fortified  places.  We  find  precisely  the
same  engines  of  offence ;  the  omnbions  toweis,  from
which  arrows  were  shot  at  the  besieged,  the  machines

h  Montorl,  Script  Reram  Italic,  t  xL  though  Brescia,  Cremona,  and  other  plaoea

This  expression  of  Flamma  may  seem  to  had  deoUned. Aaarius,  too,  a  writer  of

intimate,  that  Milan  had  declined  in  his  the  same  age,  makes  a  similar  repre-

time,  which  was  about  1340. Tet  u  sentatlon. Script  Rer.  ItaL  t  xvL  pp.

■he  had  been  oontinoally  adyancing  in  314,  317. Of  Li  chlno  Visoonti  he  says:

power,  and  had  not  yet  experienced  any  Statmn  Hediola:ti  reintegrayit  in  tantnm,

tyraniilcal  goremment,  I  cannot  imagine  quod  non  dvitas,  sed  provinda  videbatar.

this  to  have  been  the  case ;  and  the  same  >  Slsmond^  t  iv.  p.  176;  Tiraboficfai,

Flamma,  who  is  a  great  flatterer  of  the  t  {▼.  p.  426. See  also  the  obeerratiais

Visoonti,  and  has  dedicated  a  particular  of  Denlna  on  the  population  and  agri-

woric to the praises  of  Ano,  asserts  culture  of  Italy,  L  xiv.  c  9. 10,  ddefly,

therein,  that  he  had  greatly  tmprored  Indeed,  applicable  to  a  period  rather  latef

tlie  beauty  and  convenience  of  the  dty ;  than  that  of  her  free  repablica.

Italy.  THEIR  INT£RNAT.  GOVERNMENT.  395

h-oin  which  stones  were  discharged,  the  battensg-rains
which  assailed  the  walls,  and  the  hasket-work  coTering
(the  Tinea  or  testndo  of  the  ancients,  and  the  gattns  or
ohat-ohateil  of  the  middle  ages)  under  which  those  who
pushed  the  battering  engines  were  protected  from  the
enemy.  On  the  other  hand,  a  city  was  fortified  with  a
strong  wall  of  brick  or  marble,  with  towers  raised  upon
it  at  intervals,  and  a  deep  moat  in  £ront.  Sometimes
the  antemural  or  barbacan  was  added ;  a  rampart  of  less
height,  which  impeded  the  approach  of  the  hostile  en-
gines. The  gates  were  guarded  with  a  portcullis ;  an
vivention  which,  as  well  as  the  barbacan,  was  borrowed
from  the  Saracens.^  With  such  advantages  for  defence,
a  numerous  and  intrepid  body  of  burghers  might  not
unreasonably  stand  at  bay  against  a  powerful  army ;  and
as  the  consequences  of  capture  were  most  terrible,  while
resistance  was  seldom  hopeless,  we  cannot  wonder  at
the  desperate  bravery  of  so  many  besieged  towns.  In-
deed it  seldom  happened  that  one  of  considerable  size
was  taken,  except  by  &mine  or  treachery.  Tortona  did
not  submit  to  Frederic  Barbarossa  till  the  besiegers  had
corrupted  with  sulphur  the  only  fountain  that  supplied
the  citizen^ ;  nor  Crema  till  her  walls  were  overtopped
by  the  battering  engines.  Ancona  held  out  a  noble
example  of  sustaining  the  pressure  of  extreme  famine.
Brescia  tried  all  the  resources  of  a  skilful  engineer
against  the  second  Frederic ;  and  swerved  not  from  her
steadiness,  when  that  prince,  imitating  an  atrocious  pre-
cedent of  his  grandfather  at  the  siege  of  Crema,  exposed
his  prisoners  upon  his  battering  engines  to  the  stones
that  were  hurled  by  their  fellow  citizens  upon  the
walls."

Of  the  government  which  existed  in  the  republics  of
Italy  during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  cen-  j^^^
turies,  no  definite  sketch  can  be  traced.  The  internal
chroniclers  of  those  times  are  few  and  jejune ;  8^^®™"*"*»
and,  as  is  usual  with  contemporaries,  rather  intunate
than  describe  the  civil  polity  of  their  respective  coun-
tries. It  would  indeed  be  a  weary  task,  if  it  were  even
possible,  to  delineate  the  constitutions  of  thirty  or  forty

k  Moimtorl,  AntiqaiL  ItaL  Dtaert.  20. Ancona,  t  iL  p.  145-306,  to  toU  ^th  rsi
"*  See  these  sieges  in  the  seoond  and malleable  elegance,  and  several  intoresi
third  volumes  of  fflannnrtt. That  of lag  drcnmstanoem

306  LOMBARD  CITIES.  Gbap  III.  Past  I.

little  states  whiob.  were  in  perpetual  fluctoatioiL  The
magistrates  elected  in  almost  all  of  them,  when  they  first
began  to  shako  off  the  jnrisdiotion  of  their  count  or  bishop,
were  styled  oonsuls ;  a  word  very  expressive  to  an  Italian
ear,  since,  in  the  darkest  ages,  tradition  must  have  pre-
served some  acquaintance  with  the  republican  government
of  Borne."  The  eonsuls  were  always  annual ;  and  their
office  comprehended  the  command  of  the  national  militia
in  war,  as  well  as  the  administration  of  justice  and  pre-
servation of  public  order ;  but  their  number  was  various ;
two,  four,  six,  or  even  twelve.  In  their  legislative  and
deliberative  councils  the  Lombards  still  copied  the  Boman
constitution,  or  perhaps  fell  naturally  into  the  form  most
calculated  to  imite  sound  discretion  with  the  exercise  of
popular  sovereignty.  A  council  of  trust  and  secrecy
(della  credenza)  was  composed  of  a  small  number  of
persons,  who  took  the  management  of  public  afiGedrs,  and
may  be  called  the  ministers  of  the  state.  But  the  de-
cision upon  matters  of  genersd  importance,  treaties  of
alliance  or  declarations  of  war,  the  choice  of  consuls  or
ambassadors,  belonged  to  the  general  council.  This
appears  not  to  have  been  uniformly  constituted  in  every
city ;  and  according  to  its  composition  the  government
was  more  or  less  democratical.  An  ultimate  sovereignty,
however,  was  reserved  to  the  mass  of  the  people ;  and  a
parliament  or  general  assembly  was  held  to  deliberate  '
on  any  change  in  the  form  of  conrtitation.-

About  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  a  new  and
singular  species  of  magistracy  was  introduced  into  the
Lombard  cities.  During  the  tyranny  of  Frederic  I.  he
had  appointed  officers  of  his  own,  called- pedestals,  in-
stead of  the  elective  consuls.  It  is  remarkable  that  tibia
memorial  of  despotic  power  should  not  have  excited  in-
superable alarm  and  disgust  in  the  free  republics.  But,
on  the  contrary,  they  almost  universally,  after  the  peace
of  Constance,  revived  an  office  which  had  been  abro-
gated when  they  first  rose  in  rebellion  against  Frederic.
From  experience,  as  we  must  presume,  of  the  partiality

*  TiMidnlf  the  yoanger,  whose  hbtory  I  beUere,  toe  eerliest  mentioD  of  fboae

of  Milui  extends  ftxim  1094  to 1133,  magistrates. Mnnttorf,  Amudi  d' Italia,

ealls  htmsetf  pabUoovmn  offldomm  par-  a.i>.  liof.

tioeps  et  ccfuulum  eptotolamm  dictator.  ^  Mnratorl,  Dtoert  46  and  6S. Sit'

Script  Iter.  ItaL  t  ▼.  j^  4M. This  Is,  mondt,  t  i.  pw  SU.

hALT.  THEIR  INTERNAL  GOVERNMENT.  397

which  their  domestic  &ctionB  carried  into  the  adminis-
tration of  justice,  it  became  a  general  practice  to  elect,
by  the  name  of  podestk,  a  citizen  of  some  neighbouring
state  as  their  general,  their  criminal  judge,  and  preserver
of  the  peace.  The  last  duty  was  frequently  arduous,
and  required  a  vigorous  as  well  as  an  upright  magistrate.
Offences  against  the  laws  and  security  of  the  common-
wealth were  during  the  middle  ages  as  often,  perhaps
more  often,  committed  by  the  rich  and  powerful  than  by
the  inferior  class  of  society.  Bude  and  licentious  manners,
family  feuds  and  private  revenge,  or  the  mere  insolence
of  strength,  rendered  the  execution  of  criminal  justice

{practically  and  in  every  day's  experience,  what  is  now
ittle  required,  a  necessary  protection  to  the  poor  against
oppression.  The  sentence  of  a  magistrate  against  a
powerful  offender  was  not  pronounced  without  danger
of  tumult;  it  was  seldom  executed  without  force.  A
convicted  criminal  was  not,  as  at  present,  the  stricken
deer  of  society,  whose  disgrace  his  kindred  shrink  from
participating,  and  whose  memory  they  strive  to  forget.
Imputing  his  sentence  to  iniquity,  or  glorying  in  an  act
which  the  laws  of  his  fellow-citizens,  but  not  their  senti-
ments, condemned,  he  stood  upon  his  defence  amidst  a
circle  of  friends.  The  law  w$«  to  be  enforced  not
against  an  individual,  )mt  a  family  —  not  against  a
family,  but  a  faction — not  perhaps  against  a  local  fac-
tion, but  the  whole  Guelf  or  Ghibelin  name,  which
might  become  interested  in  the  quarrel.  The  podesta
was  to  arm  the  republic  against  her  refractory  citizen ;
his  house  was  to  be  besieged  and  razed  to  the  ground,
his  defenders  to  be  quelled  by  violence:  and  thus  the
people,  become  familiar  with  outrage  and  homicide
tmder  the  command  of  their  magistrates,  were  more
disposed  to  repeat  such  scenes  at  the  instigation  of  their
passions.'

The  podestk  was  sometimes  chosen  in  a  general  as-
sembly, sometimes  by  a  select  number  of  citizens.  His
office  was  annual,  though  prolonged  in  peculiar  emer-
gencies. He  VTBS  invariably  a  man  of  noble  family,
even  in  those  cities  which  excluded  their  own  nobility

P  StnnoDdi,  t  Hi.  p.  358;  frofin  whom trated  bj  Vill«nt'a  histoiy  of  Florence
the  sufaBtanoe  of  these  obseiratlons  la and  SteUa'a  ansala  of  Genoa,
bonowed. TbeymaybecopUnialy  Ulua>

i98  LOMBARD  CITI£S.  Chap.  III.  Part  I

from  any  share  in  the  goTemment.  He  received  a  fixed
salary,  and  was  compelled  to  remain  in  the  city  after
the  expiration  of  his  office  for  the  purpose  of  answering
snch  charges  as  might  be  adduced  against  his  conduct.
He  could  neither  marry  a  native  of  the  city,  nor  have
any  relation  resident  within  the  district,  nor  even,  so
great  was  ^  their  jealousy,  eat  or  drink  in  the  house  of
any  citizen.  The  authority  of  these  foreign  magistrates
was  not  by  any  means  alike  in  all  cities.  In  some  he
seems  to  have  superseded  the  consuls,  and  commanded
the  armies  in  war.  In  others,  as  Milan  and  Florence,
his  authority  was  merely  judicial.  We  find  in  some  of
the  old  annals  the  years  headed  by  the  names  of  the
podestks,  as  by  those  of  the  consuls  in  the  history  of
Eome.*»

The  effects  of  the  evil  spirit  of  discord  that  had  so
anddiflwn-  ^stally  breathed  upon  the  republics  of  Lorn-
•ton*-  bardy  were  by  no  means  confined  to  national
interests,  or  to  the  grand  distinction  of  Guelf  and  Ghi-
belin.  Dissensions  glowed  in  the  heaxt  of  every  city,
and  as  the  danger  of  foreign  war  became  distant,  these
grew  more  fierce  and  unappeasable.  The  feudal  system
had  been  established  upon  the  principle  ,of  territorial
aristocracy ;  it  maintained  the  authority,  it  encouraged
the  pride  of  rank.  Hence,  when  the  rural  nobility  were
compelled  to  take  up  their  residence  in  cities,  they  pre-
served the  ascendancy  of  birth  and  riches.  From  the
natural  respect  which  is  shown  to  these  advantages,  all
offices  of  trust  and  command  were  shared  amongst  them ;
it  is  not  material  whether  this  were  by  positive  right  or
continual  usage.  A  limited  aristocracy  of  this  description,
where  the  inferior  citizens  possess  ihe  right  of  selecting
their  magistrates  by  free  suffrage  from  a  numerous  body
of  nobles,  is  not  among  the  worst  forms  of  government,
and  affords  no  contemptible  security  against  oppression
and  anarchy.  This  regimen  appears  to  have  prevailed
in  most  of  the  Lombard  cities  during  the  eleventh  emd
twelfth  centuries;  though,  in  so  great  a  deficiency  of
authentic  materials,  it  would  be  too  peremptory  to  assert
this  as  an  unequivocal  truth.  There  is  one  very  early
instance,  in  the  year  1041,  of  a  civil  war  at  Milan  be-

4  ai nratfiri.  Dissert  4C

ITJLLT.  THEIR  DISSENSIONS.  3US

tween  the  capitanei,  or  TasBals  of  tlie  empire,  and  the
plebeian  burgesses,  which  was  appeased  by  the  media-
don  of  Henry  III.  This  is  ascribed  to  the  ill  treatment
which  the  latter  experienced — as  was  usual  indeed  in
all  parts  of  Europe,  but  which  waa  endured  with  inevi-
table submission  every  where  else.  In  this  civil  war,
which  lasted  three  years,  the  nobility  were  obliged  to
leave  Milan,  and  carry  on  the  contest  in  the  adjacent
plains ;  and  one  of  their  class,  by  name  Lanzon,  whether
moved  by  ambition,  or  by  virtuous  indignation  against
tyranny,  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  people.'

From  this  time  we  scarcely  find  any  mention  of  dis-
sensions among  the  two  orders  till  after  the  peace  of
Constance — a  proof,  however  defective  the  contempo-
rary annals  may  be,  that  such  disturbances  had  neither
been  frequent  nor  serious.  A  schism  between  the  nobles
and  people  is  noticed  to  have  occurred  at  Faenza  in
1186.  A  serious  civil  war  of  some  duration  broke  out
between  them  at  Brescia  in  1200.  From  this  time
mutual  jealousies  interrupted  the  domestic  tranquillity
of  other  cities,  but  it  is  about  1220  that  they  appear  to
have  taken  a  decided  aspect  of  civil  war ;  within  a  few
years  of  that  epoch  the  question  of  aristocratical  or
popular  command  was  tried  by  arms  in  Milan,  Fiacenza,
Modena,  Cremona,  and  Bologna."

It  would  be  in  vain  to  enter  upon  the  merits  of  these
feuds,  which  the  meagre  historians  of  the  time  are  seldom
much  disposed  to  elucidate,  and  which  they  saw  with
their  own  prejudices.  A  writer  of  the  present  age  would
show  little  philosophy  if  he  were  to  heat  his  passions
by  the  reflection,  as  it  were,  of  those  forgotten  animosi-
ties, and  aggravate,  like  a  partial  contemporary,  the
failings  of  one  or  another  faction.  We  have  no  need  of
positive  testimony  to  acquaint  us  with  the  general  tenor
of  their  history.  We  know  that  a  nobility  is  always
insolent,  that  a  populace  is  always  intemperate;  and
may  safely  presume  that  the  former  began,  as  the  latter
ended,  by  injustice  and  abuse  of  power.  At  one  time
the  aristocracy,  not  content  with  seeing  the  annual
magistrates  selected  from  their  body,  would  endeavour

'  LandulfOB,  Hist  MedloUm.  in  Script. AUrc,  t  iii.  p.  94.
llemm  ItaL  t  iv.  p.  86 ;  Moratori,  I>i»- ■  Sismoudi,  t  ii.  p.  444 ; MutAtorf ,
Bert  62;  Aonali  d'  Italia.  aj>.  1041 1  St Anuali  d'  Italia,  aj>.  1186.  &c

400  LOMBARD  CITIES.  Cbap.  IIL  PamtL

hy  usurpation  to  exclude  the  bulk  of  the  citisens  from
Buf&age.  At  another,  the  merchants,  grcwn  proud  bj
riches,  and  confident  of  their  strength,  wonld  aim  at
obtaining  the  honours  of  the  state,  which  had  been  re-
served to  the  nobility.  This  is  the  inevitable  conse-
quence of  commercial  wealth,  and  indeed  of  freedom
and  social  order,  which  are  the  parents  of  wealtlu  There
is  in  the  progress  of  civilization  a  term  at  'which  exclu-
sive privileges  must  be  relaxed,  or  the  x>06se88oi8  must
perish  along  with  them.  In  one  or  two  cities  a  tempo-
rary compromise  was  made  through  the  intervention  of
the  pope,  whereby  offices  of  public  trust,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  were  divided,  in  equal  proportions
or  otherwise,  between  the  nobles  and  the  people.  This
also  is  no  bad  expedient,  and  proved  singolarly  effica-
cious in  appeasing  the  dissensions  of  ancient  Borne.

There  is,  however,  a  natural  preponderance  in  the
popular  scale,  which,  in  a  &ir  trial,  invariably  gains  on
that  of  the  less  numerous  class. The  artisans,  who  com-
posed the  bulk  of  the  population,  were  arranged  in  com-
panies according  to  their  occupations. Sometimes,  as  at
Milan,  they  formed  separate  associations,  with  mies  for
their  internal  government.* The  clubs,  called  at  Milan
la  Motta  and  la  Credenza,  obtained  a  degree  of  weight
not  at  all  surprising  to  those  who  consider  the  spirit  of
mutual  attacnment  which  belongs  to  such  fraternities ;
and  we  shall  see  a  more  striking  instance  of  this  here-
after in  the  republic  of  Florence. To  so  formidable  and
organized  a  democracy  the  nobles  opposed  their  nume-
rous families,  the  generous  spirit  that  belongs  to  high
birth,  the  influence  of  wealth  and  established  name.
The  members  of  each  distinguished  fomily  appear  to
have  lived  in  the  same  street ;  their  houses  were  fortified
with  square  massive  towers  of  Qommanding  hei^t,  and
wore  uie  semblance  of  castles  within  the  walls  of  a
city. Brancaleon, the  famous  senator  of  Home, de-
stroyed one  hundred  and  forty  of  these  domestic  en-
trenchments, which  were  constantly  serving  the  purpose
of  civil  broils  and  outrage. Expelled, as  frequently
happened,  from  the  city,  it  was  in  the  power  of  the
noDles  to  avail  themselves  of  their  superiority  in  the

«  Hazfttori,  DIaiert  63;  SiamoDdi,  t  ill  p.  269.

JL

ITILT  THEIR  DISSENSIONS.  401

lue  of  cavalry,  and  to  lay  waste  tho  difitrict,  till  weari-
uesB  of  an  nnprofitable  contention  reduced  tlie  citizens
to  terms  of  compromiBO.  But  when  all  these'  resources
were  ineffectual,  they  were  tempted  or  forced  to  sacrifice
the  public  liberty  to  their  own  welfare,  and  lent  their
aid  to  a  foreign  master  or  a  domestic  usurper.

In  all  these  scenes  of  turbulence,  whether  the  contest
was  between  the  nobles  and  people  or  the  Guelf  and
Ghibelin  factions,  no  mercy  was  shown  by  the  con-
querors. The  vanquished  lost  their  homes  and  fortunes,
and,  retiring  to  other  cities  of  their  own  party,  waited
for  the  opportunity  of  revenge.  In  a  popular  tumult  the
houses  of  the  beaten  side  were  frequently  levelled  to  the
ground — ^not  perhaps  from  a  sort  of  senseless  fury,  which
Muratori  inveighs  against,  but  on  account  of  the  injury
which  these  fortified  houses  inflicted  upon  the  lower
citizens.  The  most  deadly  hatred  is  that  which  men
exasperated  by  proscription  and  forfeiture  bear  to  their
country ;  nor  have  we  need  to  ask  any  oHier  cause  for
the  calamities  of  Italy  than  the  bitterness  with  which  an
unsuccessful  faction  was  thus  pursued  into  banishment.
When  the  Ghibelins  were  returning  to  Florence,  after  a
defeat  given  to  the  prevailing  party  in  1260,  it  was  pro-
posed among  them  to  demolish  the  city  itself  which  had
cast  them  out ;  and,  but  for  the  persuasion  of  one  man,
Farinata  degl*  Uberti,  their  revenge  would  have  thus
extinguished  all  patriotism."  It  is  to  this  that  we  must
ascribe  their  proneness  to  caU  in  assistance  from  every
side,  and  to  invite  any  servitude  for  the  sake  of  re-
taliating upon  their  adversaries.  The  simple  love  of
public  liberty  is,  in  general,  I  fear,  too  abstract  a  passion
to  glow  warmly  in  &e  human  breast ;  and  though  often
invigorated  as  well  as  determined  by  personal  animosi-
ties and  predilections,  is  as  frequently  extinguished  by
the  same  cause.

Independently  of  the  two  leading  differences  which
embattled  the  citizens  of  an  Italian  state,  their  form  of
government  and  their  relation  to  the  empire,  there  were
others  more  contemptible  though  not  less  mischievous.

«  6.  VlUoDi,  L  tL  a  82. SiamondU  oonvenatloii  of  the  poet  with  l^rinata,

I  cannot  foxigiTe  Dante  for  placing  this  cant  10,  is  very  ltaie,.aQd  illostntive  ol

pstriot  tik  Tanime  piti  nere,  in  one  of  Florentine  histoiy.
the  worn  regloofl  of  hie  Inferno. The

YOU  I.  d  1>

402  CIVIL  DISSENSIONS. Chap.  III.  Past  I.

In  every  city  the  quarrels  of  private  families  became  the
foundation  of  general  schism,  sedition,  and  proscription.
Sometimes  these  blended  themselves  -with  the  grand  dis-
tinctions of  Guelf  and  Ghibelin ;  sometimes  they  were
more  nakedly  conspicuous.  This  may  be  illustrated  by
one  or  two  prominent  examples.  Imilda  de'  Lamber*
tazzi,  a  noble  young  lady  at  Bologna,  was  surprised  by
her  brothers  in  a  secret  interview  with  Boniface  Oie-
remei,  whose  family  had  long  been  separated  by  the
most  inveterate  enmity  from  her  own.  She  had  just
time  to  escape,  while  the  Lambertazzi  despatched  her
lover  with  their  poisoned  daggers.  On  her  return  she
found  his  body  still  warm,  and  a  faint  hope  suggested
the  remedy  of  sucking  the  venom  from  his  wounds.  But
it  only  communicated  itself  to  her  own  veins,  and  they
were  fbund  by  her  attendants  stretched  lifeless  by  each
other's  side«  So  cruel  an  outrage  wrought  the  Gieremei
to  madness;  they  formed  alliances  with  some  neigh-
bouring republics ;  the  Lambertazzi  took  the  same  mea-
sures; and  after  a  fight  in  the  streets  of  Bologna,  of
forty  days'  duration,  the  latter  were  driven  out  of  the
city,  with  all  the  Ghibelins,  their  political  associates.
Twelve  thousand  citizens  were  condemned  to  banish-
ment, their  houses  razed,  and  their  estates  confiscated.'
Florence  was  at  rest  till,  in  1215,  the  assassination  of
an  individual  produced  a  mortal  feud  between  the
families  Buondeunonti  and  Uberti,  in  which  all  the  city
took  a  part.  An  outrage  committed  at  Fistoja  in  1300
split  the  inhabitants  into  the  parties  of  Bianchi  and
Neri ;  and  these,  spreading  to  Florence,  created  one  of
the  most  virulent  divisions  which  annoyed  that  republic.
In  one  of  the  changes  which  attended  this  little  rami-
fication of  &ction,  Florence  expelled  a  young  citizen
who  had  borne  ofBces  of  magistracy,  and  espoused  the
cause  of  the  Bianchi.  Dante  Alighieri  retired  to  the
courts  of  some  Ghibelin  princes,  where  his  sublime  and
inventive  mind,  in  the  gloom  of  exile,  completed  that
original  combination  of  vast  and  extravagant  conceptions
with  keen  political  satire,  which  has  given  immortality

>  SlcmoDdl,  t  Hi.  p.  442. This  story ItMlf  fonnded  upon  an  ItalisD  novfl,  aoi
€mj  sugRest  that  of  Rodmo  and  Joliet not  ai»  nmiAtaxBl  picture  of  maiuiem

■^^>'  ' -' , ■'-,^'U>"'^ I ^ ■ . -I ■ . IIU 1.^ ^t.^»w

ItALT.  GIOVANNI  DI  VICENZA.  403

to  his  name,  and  even  lustre  to  the  petty  contests  of  his
time.^

In  the  earlier  stages  of  the  Lombard  republics  their
differences,  as  well  mutual  as  domestic,  had  been  fre-
quently appeased  by  the  mediation  of  the  emperors;
and  the  loss  of  this  salntary  influence  may  bo  considered
as  no  slight  evil  attached  to  that  absolute  emancipation
which  Italy  attained  in  the  thirteenth  century.  The
popes  sometimes  endeaToured  to  interpose  an  authority
which,  though  not  quite  so  direct,  was  held  in  greater
veneration ;  and  if  their  own  tempers  had  been  always
pure  from  the  selfish  and  Tindictive  passions  of  those
whom  they  influenced,  might  have  produced  more
general  and  permanent  good.  But  they  considered  the
Qhibelins  as  their  own  peculiar  enemies,  and  the
triumph  of  the  opposite  fEiction  as  the  church's  best
security.  Gregory  X.  and  Nicholas  III.,  whether  from
benevolent  motives,  or  because  their  jealousy  of  Cliarles
of  Anjou,  while  at  the  head  of  the  Guelfs,  suggested  the
revival  of  a  Ghibelin  party  as  a  counterpoise  to  his
power,  distinguished  their  pontificate  by  enforcing  mea-
sures of  reconciliation  in  all  Italian  cities;  but  their
successors  returned  to  the  ancient  policy  and  prejudices
of  Bome.

The  singular  history  of  an  individual  far  less  elevated
in  station  uian  popes  or  emperors,  Fra  Giovanni  Giovanni  di
di  Vicenza,  belongs  to  these  times  and  to  this  viccnia.
subject.  This  Dominican  friar  began  his  career  at
Bologna  in  1233,  preaching  the  cessation  of  war  and
forgiveness  of  injuries.  He  repaired  from  thence  to
Padua,  to  Verona,  and  the  neighbouring  cities.  At  his
command  men  laid  down  their  instruments  of  war,  and
embraced  their  enemies.  With  that  susceptibility  of
transient  impulse  natural  to  popular  governments,
several  republics  implored  him  to  refonn  their  laws
and  to  settle  their  differences.  A  general  meeting  was
summoned  in  the  plain  of  Paquara,  upon  the  banks  of
the  Adige.  The  Lombards  poured  themselves  forth
from  Bomagna  and  the  cities  of  the  March ;  Guelfs  and

y  Dioo  Comptgnl,  In  Scr.  Rer.  ItaL  t  Iz.;  Yillaol,  1st  Fionnt  L  Till.;  Dante
pMsim.

2d2

404  GIOVANNI  DI  VICENZA, Chap.  IU.  Part  i

Ghibelins,  nobles  and  burghers,  free  citizens  and
tenantry  of  feudal  lords,  marBhalled  aronnd  their  car-
roccios,  canght  from  the  lips  of  the  preacher  the  illusive
promise  of  universal  peace.  They  submitted  to  agree-
ments dictated  by  Fia  Giovanhi,  which  contain  little
else  than  a  mutual  amnesty ;  whether  it  were  that  their
quarrels  had  been  really  without  object,  or  that  he  had
dexterously  avoided  to  determine  the  r^  points  of  con-
tention. But  power  and  reputation  suddenly  acquired
are  transitory.  Not  satisfied  with  being  the  legislator
and  arbiter  of  Italian  cities,  he  aimed  at  becoming  their
master,  and  abused  the  enthusiasm  of  Yicenza  and
Verona  to  obtain  a  grant  of  absolute  sovereignty.
Changed  from  an  apostle  to  an  usurper,  the  &,ie  of  fVa
Oiovanni  might  be  predicted;  and  he  speedily  gave
place  to  those  who,  though  they  made  a  worse  use  of
their  power,  had,  in  the  eyes  of  mankind,  more  natural
pretensions  to  possess  it.'

■  Tirabo0cfai,  Storia  della  Lettez&Um.  U  ir.  pk  214  (a  very  weU-mriUen  araouit)
SlnionU,  t  U.  pb  4M.

ITALY.  STATE  OF  ITALY.  406

PART  II.

Bute  of  Italy  after  the  Extinction  of  the  Hooee  of  SoebU  ^  Gonquegt  of  Naplef
bj  Charlet  of  Ai^oa  —  The  LomtMrd  BepnbUcB  become  sevexmlly  fat^ject  to
Princes  or  Utorpen  —  The  Ylfloonti  of  Milan  —  Their  AggraodisemeDt  —  I>e-
cUne  of  the  Imperial  Authority  over  Italy  —  Internal  State  of  Rome  —  Uensl
>-  Florence  —  her  fbnns  of  Oovenmient  historically  traced  to  the  end  of  the
Fourteenth  Oentnry—  Gonquegt  of  Pisa  —  Pisa  —  its  Commerce,  Naval  Wars  with
Genoa,  and  Decay  —  Genoa  —  her  Contentions  with  Venice  —  War  of  Ghiogglo
—  Govenunent  of  Genoa  ->  Venice  ~~  her  Ori|^  and  Proqwrity  —  Venetian
Government  —  its  Vices  —  Territorial  Cunqoests  of  Venice  —  MiUtaiy  System
of  Italy  —  Companies  of  Adventore  —  1,  foreign;  Guamierl,  Hawkwood  —
and  a,  native;  Brudo,  Sfona  —  Improvements  in  Military  Service  —  Anns,
offensive  and  defensive  ~  Invention  of  Gunpowder  —  Nicies  —  First  line  of
Ai\)on  —  Joanna  L  —  Ladlslaus  —  Joanna  IL  —  Francis  Sfona  becomes  Duke
of  Milan  —  Alfonso  King  of  Naples  —  State  of  Italy  during  the  fifteenth
Centniy  —  Floroice  —  Rise  of  the  Medid,  and  Buin  of  their  Adversaries  —
Pretensions  of  Charles  VUL  to  Naples.

Fbom  the  death  of  Frederic  II.  in  1250,  to  the  invasion
of  Charles  VIII.  in  1494,  a  lon^  and  imdistingnished
{)eriod  occurs,  which  it  is  impossible  to  break  into  any
natural  divisions.  It  is  an  age  in  many  respects  highly
brilliant :  the  age  of  poetry  and  letters,  of  art,  and  of
oontiniial  improvement.  Italy  displayed  an  intellectoal
superiority  in  this  period  over  the  Transalpine  nations
which  certainly  had  not  appeared  since  Ijie  destniction
of  the  Eoman  empire.  But  her  political  history  presents
a  labyrinth  of  petty  facts  so  obscure  and  of  so  Httle  in-
fluence as  not  to  arrest  the  attention,  so  intricate  and  in-
capable of  classification  as  to  leave  only  confusion  in
the  memory.  The  general  events  that  are  worthy  of
notice,  and  give  a  character  to  this  long  period,  are  the
establishment  of  small  tyrannies  upon  the  ruins  of  re-
publican government  in  most  of  the  cities,  the  gradual
rise  of  three  considerable  states,  Milan,  Florence,  and
Venice,  the  naval  and  commercial  rivalry  between  the
last  city  and  Genoa,  the  final  acquisition  by  the  popes
of  their  present  territorial  sovereignty,  and  the  revolu-
tions  in  die  kingdom  of  Naples  under  the  lines  of  Anjon
and  Aragon«

406  AFFAIRS  OF  NAPLES. Chap.  III.  Part  n.

After  the  death  of  Frederic  11.  the  distmctioius  of  Qnelf
and  Ghibelin  became  destitate  of  all  rational  meaning.
The  moat  odious  crimes  were  constantly  perpetrated,
and  the  utmost  miseries  endured,  for  an  echo  and  a
shade  that  mocked  the  deluded  enthusiasts  of  &ctioiL
None  of  the  Guel&  denied  the  nominal  but  indefinite
sovereignty  of  the  empire;  and  beyond  a  name  the
Ghibelms  themselves  would  have  been  little  disposed  to
carry  it.  But  the  virulent  hatreds  attached  to  these  words
grew  continually  more  implacable,  till  ages  of  ignominy
and  tyrannical  government  had  extinguished  every
energetic  passion  in  the  bosoms  of  a  degraded  people.

In  the  fall  of  the  house  of  Suabia,  Home  appealed  to
have  consummated  her  triumph;  and  although  the
Qhibelin  party  was  for  a  little  time  able  to  maintain
itself,  and  even  to  gain  ground,  in  the  north  of  Italy,
yet  two  events  that  occurred  not  long  afterwards  re-
stored the  ascendancy  of  their  adversaries.  The  first
of  these  was  the  £Etll  of  Eccelin  da  Romano,  whose  rapid
successes  in  Lombardy  appeared  to  threaten  the
establishment  of  a  tremendous  despotism,  and
induced  a  temporary  union  of  Guelf  and  Ghibelin  states,
by  which  he  was  overthrown. The  next  and  &r  more

AiSain  of  important  was  the  change  of  dynasty  in  Naples.

if^pi**  This  kingdom  had  been  occupied,  after  tihe
death  of  Conrad,  by  his  illegitimate  brother,  Manfred,
in  the  behalf,  as  he  at  first  pretended,  of  young
Conradin  the  heir,  but  in  fact  as  his  own  ac-
quisition. He  was  a  prince  of  an  active  and  firm  mind,
well  fitted  for  his  difficult  post,  to  whom  the  Ghibelins
looked  up  as  their  head,  and  as  the  representative  of  his
&ther.  It  was  a  natural  object  with  the  popes,  inde-
pendently of' their  ill  will  towards  a  son  of  Frederic  II.,
to  see  a  sovereign  on  whom  they  could  better  rely  placed

Charles  of  ^pou  SO  neighbouring  a  throne. Charles  count

-Mo'^ of  Anjou,  brother  of  St.  Louis,  was  tempted  by

them  to  lead  a  crusade  (for  as  such  all  wars  for  the

interest  of  Bome  were  now  considered)  against  the

1266 ^^^P<^^^^^^  usurper. The  chance  of  a  battle

^'^  *  decided  the  fate  of  Naples,  and  had  a  striking
influence  upon  the  history  of  Europe  for  several  cen-
turies. Manfred  was  killed  in  the  field :  but  there  re-
mained the  legitimate  heir  of  the  Frederics,  a  boy  of

ITALY.  DECI.1NB  OF  THE  GHIBELINS.  407

■eventeen  years  old,  Conradin,  son  of  Conrad,  who
rashly,  as  we  say  at  least  after  the  event,  attempted  to
regain  his  inheritance.  He  fell  into  the  hands  of  Charles ;
and  the  voice  of  those  rude  ages,  as  well  as  of  a  more
enlightened  posterity,  has  united  in  branding  with  ever-
lasting  infamy  the  name  of  that  prince,  who  did  not
hesitate  to  purchase  the  security  of  his  own
title  by  the  public  execution  of  an  honourable  *^^'  ^^^'
competitor,  or  rather  a  rightful  claimant  of  the  throne
be  had  usurped.  With  Conradin  the  house  of  Suabia
was  extinguished ;  but  Constance  the  daughter  of  Man-
fred had  transported  his  right  to  Sicily  and  Naples  into
the  house  of  Aragon,  by  her  marriage  with  Peter  III.

This  success  of  a  monarch  selected  by  the  Homan
ponti£fs  as  their  particular  champion  turned  Decuneor
the  tide  of  faction  over  all  Italy.  He  expelled  theohibeiia
the  Ghibelins  from  Florence,  of  which  they  '**^'
had  a  few  years  before  obtained  a  complete  command  by
means  of  their  memorable  victory  upon  the  river  Arbia.
After  the  fall  of  Conradin  that  party  was  everywhere
discouraged.  Germany  held  out  smaU  hopes  of  support,
even  when  the  imperial  throne,  which  had  long  been
vacant,  should  be  filled  by  one  of  her  princes.  The
populace  were  in  almost  every  city  attached  to  the
church  and  to  the  name  of  Guelf ;  the  kings  of  Naples
employed  their  arms,  and  the  popes  their  excommunica-
tions ;  so  that  for  the  remainder  of  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury the  name  of  Ghibelin  was  a  term  of  proscription  in
the  majority  of  Lombard  and  Tuscan  republics.  Charles
was  constituted  by  the  pope  vicar-general  in  Tuscany.
This  was  a  new  pretension  of  the  Boman  pontiffs,  to
name  the  lieutenants  of  the  empire  during  its  vacancy,
which  indeed  could  not  be  completely  filled  up  without
their  consent.  It  soon,  however,  became  evident  that
he  aimed  at  the  sovereignty  of  Italy.  Some  of  the  popes
themselves,  Gregory  X.  and  Nicholas  IV.,  grew  jealous
of  their  own  creature.  At  the  congress  of  Cremona,  in
1269,  it  was  proposed  to  confer  upon  Charles  the  seig-
niory of  all  the  Guelf  cities ;  but  the  greater  part  were
prudent  enough  to  choose  him  rather  as  a  friend  than  a
master.*

*  eUmaiM,  t  UL  p.  4iy. Serenil. Iwwever,  Inoladiiig  Milan,  took  an  oalk

408 SUBJECTION  OF  LOMBARD  CITIES.  Chap.  III.  Pim  II.

The  cities  of  Lombardy,  however,  of  either  denomi-
nation, were  no  longer  influenced  by  that  gene-
bu^dties  i^ufi  disdain  of  one  man's  will  which  is  to
beoamewA.  republican  governments  what  chastity  is  to
°  women — a  conservative  principle,  never  to  be
reasoned  upon,  or  subjected  to  calculations  of  utility.
By  force,  or  stratagem,  or  free  consent,  almost  all  the
Lombard  republics  had  already  fallen  under  the  yoke
of  some  leading  citizen,  who  became  the  lord  (signore)
or,  in  the  German  sense,  tyrant  of  his  country.  The  first
instance  of  a  voluntary  delegation  of  sovereignty  was  that
above  mentioned  of  Ferrara,  which  placed  itself  under
the  lord  of  Este.  Eccelin  made  himself  truly  the  tyrant
of  the  cities  beyond  the  Adige;  and  such  experience
ought  naturally  to  have  inspired  the  Italians  with  more
universal  abhorrence  of  despotism.  But  every  danger
appeared  trivial  in  the  eyes  of  exasperated  factions
when  compared  with  the  ascendancy  of  their  adversaries.
Weary  of  unceasing  and  useless  contests,  in  which  ruin
fell  with  an  alternate  but  equal  hand  upon  either  party,
liberty  withdrew  from  a  people  who  disgraced  her  name ;
and  the  tumultuous,  the  brave,  the  intractable  Lombards
became  eager  to  submit  themselves  to  a  master,  and
patient  under  the  heaviest  oppression.  Or,  if  lyranny
sometimes  overstepped  the  limits  of  forbearance,  and  a
seditious  rising  expelled  the  reigning  prince,  it  was  only
to  produce  a  change  of  hands,  and  tnmsfer  the  impotent
people  to  a  different,  and  perhaps  a  worse,  despotism.^
In  many  cities  not  a  conspiracy  was  planned,  not  a  sigh
was  breathed,  in  favour  of  republican  government,  after
once  they  had  passed  under  the  sway  of  a  single  person.

of  fidelity  to  Charles  the  same  year,  which  one  tynst  was  exdianged  for  an*
Ibid.  In  1273  he  was  lord  of  Alessaodria  otbor,  in  the  fiiteof  I^werino  Booaooond,
and  Piacenza,  and  reodved  tribute  from  lord  of  Mantna,  in  1328.  Loigi  di  Goo-
Milan,  Bologna,  and  moat  Lombard  dtiea.  laga  sarpriaed  him,  rode  Um  dtj  (catm
Moratori.  It  was  evidently  his  intention  la  dttii)  with  a  troop  of  lunae,  crytog,

to  arail  himself  of  the  vacancy  of  the  Viva  il  popolo,  e  muqja  M«

empire,  and  dther  to  acquire  that  title  rino  e  le  ane  gabellet  killed  BMaerino

liimaelf,  or  at  least  to  stand  in  the  same  upon  the  spot,  pat  hia  sod  to  death  In

relation  as  the  emperora  had  done  to  the  cold  blood,  e  poi  si  fece  dgnore  d^la

Italian  states;  which,  according  to  the  terra. ViUanl,  L  z.  c.  99,  observes,  like

usage  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  oen-  a  good  republican,  that  Qod  had  ftilfilled

torlea.  left  them  in  possession  of  every-  in  this  the  words  <tf  his  Gospel  (qaeiy,

thing  that  we  call  Independence,  with  what  Goq>el  ?),  I  will  day  my  enemy  by

the  reservation  of  a  nominal  alleglanoe.  my  enemy— nabbattendo  I'mio  tinuuio  psf

^  See  an  instanoe  of  the  manner  in  I'altrow

ITALY.  THE  TORRIANI  AND  VISCONTI.  *09

The  progreBB  indeed  was  gradual  thongli  sure,  from
limited  to  absolute,  from  temporary  to  hereditary  power,
from  a  just  and  conciliating  rule  to  extortion  and  cruelty.
But  before  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  at  the
latest,  all  those  cities  which  had  spumed  at  the  feiintest
mark  of  submission  to  the  emperors  lost  even  the  recol-
lection of  self-government,  and  were  bequeathed,  like
an  undoubted  patrimony,  among  the  children  of  their
new  lords.  Such  is  the  progress  of  usurpation;  and
such  the  vengeance  that  Heaven  reserves  for  those  who
waste  in  licence  and  faction  its  first  of  social  blessings,
liberty."

The  city  most  distinguished  in  both  wars  against  the
house  of  Suabia,  for  an  unconquerable  attach-  The
ment  to  republican  institutions,  was  the  first  ^^
to  sacrifice  them  in  a  few  years  after  the  death  couti  at
of  Frederic  11.  Milan  had  for  a  considerable  ^^"^
time  been  agitated  by  civil  dissensions  between  the
nobility  and  inferior  citizens.  These  parties  were  pretty
equally  balanced,  and  their  success  was  consequently
alternate.  Each  had  its  own  podestk,  as  a  party-leader,
distinct  from  the  legitimate  magistrate  of  the  city.  At
the  head  of  the  nobility  was  their  archbishop,  Fra  Leon
Perego ;  the  people  chose  Martin  della  Torre,  one  of  a
noble  feunily  which  had  ambitiously  sided  with  the
democratic  Action.  In  consequence  of  the  crime  of  a
nobleman,  who  had  murdered  one  of  his  creditors,  the
two  parties  took  up  arms  in  1257.  A  civil  war,  of
various  success,  and  interrupted  by  several  pacifications,
which  in  that  unhappy  temper  could  not  be  durable,
was  terminated  in  about  two  years  by  the  entire  discom-
fiture of  the  aristocracy,  and  by  the  election  of  Martin
della  Torre  as  chief  and  lord  (capitano  e  signore)  of  the
people.  Though  the  Milanese  did  not  probably  intend
to  renounce  the  sovereignty  resident  in  their  general

*  See  the  dbeervatioDS  of  Siamondl,  people  wm  oonsolted  upon  several  ooca-

t  ly.  p,  212,  on  the  conduct  of  the  Lom-  liona. At  Milan  there  was  a  cotmdl  of

bard  aignori  (I  know  not  of  any  English  900  nobles,  not  permanent  or  repreeent-

word  that  characterises  them,  except  ative,  but  selected  and  convened  at  the

tjfrant  in  Its  prtanitive  sense)  during  the  discretion  of  the  gorenunent,  thnm^oat

first  period  of  their  dominion. They  the  reigns  of  the  VlacontL Corio,  p.  519,

were  geoerally  chosen  tn  an  assembly  of  683. Thus,  aa  Sismondi  remarks,  they

the  people,  sometimes  for  a  short  term,  respected  the  sovereignty  of  the  people

pralonged  in  the  same  manner. The  while  they  deetrq^ed  its  liberty.

410  REVIVAL  OF  THE  GHIBELINS.  Chap.  III.  Part  Ih

assemblies,  yet  they  soon  lost  the  repnbHcan  spirit;
five  in  succession  of  the  family  della  Torre  might  be
said  to  reign  in  Milan ;  each  indeed  by  a  formal  election,
but  with  an  implied  recognition  of  a  sort  of  hereditary
title.  Twenty  years  afterwards  the  Yisconti,  a  fJEunily
of  opposite  interests,  supplanted  the  Torriani  at  Milan ;
and  the  rivalry  between  these  great  houses  was  not  at
an  end  till  the  final  establishment  of  Matteo  Yisconti  in
1313;  but  the  people  were  not  otherwise  considered
than  as  aiding  by  force  the  one  or  other  party,  and  at
most  deciding  between  the  pretensions  of  their  masters.
The  vigour  and  concert  infused  into  the  Guelf  party
Revival  of  ^7  *^®  succosses  of  Charlcs  of  Anjou  was  not
the  Ghibe-  verv  durable.  That  prince  was  soon  involved
unpwTj.  ijj  j^  protracted  and  unfortunate  quarrel  with
the  kings  of  Aragon,  to  whose  protection  his  revolted
subjects  in  Italy  had  recurred.  On  the  other  hand,
several  men  of  energetic  character  retrieved  the  Ohibe-
lin  interests  in  Lombardy,  and  even  in  the  Tuscan
cities.  The  Yisconti  were  acknowledged  heads  of  that
faction.  A  family  early  established  as  lords  of  Yerona,
the  della  Scala,  maintained  the  credit  of  the  same  de-
nomination between  the  Adige  and  the  Adriatic.  Gas-
tniccio  Castrucani,  an  adventurer  of  remarkable  ability,
rendered  himself  prince  of  Lucca,  and  drew  over  a
formidable  accession  to  the  imperial  side  from  the  heart
of  the  church-party  in  Tuscany,  though  his  death  restored
the  ancient  order  of  things.  The  inferior  tyrants  were
partly  Guelf,  partly  Ghibelin,  according  to  local  revolu-
tions ;  but  upon  the  whole  the  latter  acquired  a  gradual
ascendancy.  Those  indeed  who  cared  for  the  independ-
ence of  Italy,  or  for  their  own  power,  had  for  less  to  fear
from  the  phantom  of  imperial  prerogatives,  long  inter-
mitted and  incapable  of  being  enforced,  than  from  the  new
race  of  foreign  princes  whom  the  church  had
Na^°aim  Substituted  for  the  house  of  Suabia.  The  An-
^oraamand  gevin  kiugs  of  Naples  were  sovereigns  of  Pro-
^'  vence,  and  from  thence  easily  encroached  upon
Piedmont,  and  threatened  the  Milanese.  Bobert,  the
third  of  this  line,  almost  openly  aspired,  like  his  grand-
father Charles  I.,  to  a  real  sovereignty  over  Italy.  Hia
offers  of  assistance  to  Guelf  cities  in  war  were  always
coupled  with  a  demand of  the  sovereignty. Manj

"jrrT^»'»s^5?I'^^r!^r*^*?*"P5!23*''PW

Italy.  STATE  OF  LOMBARDY.  •  411

yielded  to  bis  ambitioii;  and  even  Florence  twice  be-
stowed upon  bim  a  temporary  dictatorsbip.  In  1314  be
was  acknowledged  lord  of  Lucca,  Florence,  Pavia,  Ales-
sandria, Bergamo,  and  tbe  cities  of  Eomagna.  In  1318
tbe  Guelfis  of  Genoa  found  no  otber  resource  against  tbe
Obibelin  emigrants  wbo  were  under  tbeir  walls  tban  to
resign  tbeir  liberties  to  tbe  king  of  Naples  for  tbe  term
of  ten  years,  wbicb  be  procured  to  be  renewed  for  six
more.  Tbe  Avignon  popes,  especially  Jobn  XXII.,  out
of  blind  batred  to  tbe  emperor  Louis  of  Bavaria  and  tbe
Yisconti  family,  abetted  all  tbese  measures  of  ambition.
But  tbey  were  rendered  abortive  by  Bobert's  deatb  and
tbe  subsequent  disturbances  of  bis  kingdom.

At  tbe  latter  end  of  tbe  tbirteentb  century  tbere  were
almost  as  many  princes  in  tbe  nortb  of  Italy  as  tbere
bad  been  free  cities  in  tbe  preceding  age. Tbeir  equality,
and  tbe  frequent  domestic  revolutions  wbicb  made  tbeir
seat  unsteady,  kept  tbem  for  a  wbile  from  encroacbing
on  eacb  otber. Gradually,  bowever,  tbey  became  less
numerous: a  quantity  of  obscure  tyrants  were  swept
away  from  tbe  smaller  cities ;  and  tbe  people,  careless
or  bopeless  of  liberty,  were  glad  to  excbange  tbe  rule  of
despicable  petty  usurpers  for  tbat  of  more  dis-  ^^^
tingnisbed  and  powerful  families. About  tbe  LomiwniT
year  1350  tbe  central  parts  of  Lombardy  bad  JSSJ""*^
fallen  under  tbe  dominion  of  tbe  Visconti.  fourteenth
Four  otber  bouses  occupied  tbe  second  rank ;  **"*'*^'
tbat  of  Este  at  Ferrai*a  and  Modena ;  of  Scala  at  Verona,
wbicb  under  Cane  and  Mastino  della  Scala  bad  seemed
likely  to  contest  witbtbe  lords  of  Milan  tbe  supremacy
over  Lombardy ;  of  Carrara  at  Padua,  wbicb  later  tban
any  Lombard  city  bad  resigned  ber  liberty; and  of
Gonasaga  at  Mantua,  wbicb,  witbout  ever  obtaining  any  '
material  extension  of  territory,  continued,  probably  for
tbat  reason,  to  reign  undisturbed  till  tbe  eigbteentb
century. But  tbese  imited  were  bardly  a  matcb,  Power  of  the
as  tbey  sometimes  experienced,  for  tbe  Visconti.  viaoonti
Tbat  family,  tbe  object  of  every  league  formed  in  Italy
for  more  tban  fifty  years,  in  constant  bostility  to  tbe
oburcb,  and  well  inured  to  interdicts  and  excommuni-
oations,  producing  no  one  man  of  military  talents,  but
fertile  of  tyrants  detested  for  tbeir  perfidiousness  and
cruelty,  was  nevertbeless  enabled,  witb  almost  uninter-

412  POWER  OF  THE  VISOONTI.  Chap.  IH.  Part  IL

rupted  success,  to  add  city  after  city  to  tlie  dominion  of
Milan,  till  it  absorbed  all  the  noiili  of  Italy.  Uuder
Giau  Oaleazzo,  whose  reign  began  in  1385,  the  viper
(their  armorial  bearing)  assiuned  indeed  a  menacing
attitude :  ^  he  OTertumed  the  great  fiemuly  of  Scala,  and
annexed  their  extensive  possessions  to  his  own;  no
power  intervened  from  VerceUi  in  Piedmont  to  Feltre
and  Belluno;  while  the  free  cities  of  Tuscany,  Pisa,
Siena,  Perugia,  and  even  Bologna,  as  if  by  a  kind  of
witchcraft,  voluntarily  called  in  a  dissembling  tyrant  sb
their  master.

Powerful  as  the  Visconti  were  in  Italy,  they  were
long  in  washing  out  the  tinge  of  recent  usurpation,  which
humbled  them  before  the  legitimate  dynasties  of  Europe.
At  the  siege  of  Genoa  in  1318  Bobert  king  of  Naples
rejected  with  contempt  the  challenge  of  Marco  Visconti
to  decide  their  quarrel  in  single  combat.*  But  the  pride
of  sovereigns,  like  that  of  private  men,  is  easily  set
aside  for  their  interest.  Galeazzo  Visconti  purchased
with  100,000  florins  a  daughter  of  France  for  his  son,
which  the  French  historians  mention  as  a  deplorable
humiliation  for  their  crown.  A  few  yeara  afterwards,
Lionel  duke  of  Clarence,  second  son  of  Edward  HI.,
certainly  not  an  inferior  match,  espoused  Galeazzo's
daughter.  Both  these  connexions  were  short-lived ;  but
the  union  of  Valentine,  daughter  of  Gian  Galeazzo,  with
the  duke  of  Orleans,  in  1389,  produced  far  more  import-
ant consequences,  and  served  to  transmit  a  claim  to  her
descendants,  Louis  XII.  and  Francis  I.,  from  which  the
long  calamities  of  Italy  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth
century  were  chiefly  derived.  Not  long  after  this  mar-
riage the  Visconti  were  tacitly  admitted  among  the
reigning  princes,  by  the  erection  of  Milan  into

^^* '  a  duchy  under  letters  patent  of  the  emperor
Wenceslaus.'

The  imperial  authority  over  Italy  was  almost  entirely
suspended  after  the  deatii  of  Frederic  11. A  long  inter-

^  Allnstons  to  heraldry  are  very  com-  reckoned  a  mtiwiTllanflu,  as  Dante  teOa

men  in  the  Italian  writers. All  the  us,  In  the  widow  of  Nino  di  Gallura,  •

hlskirians  of  the  fourteenth  century  ha-  nobleman  of  Plaa,  though  a  aort  of  ptintit

oltually  use  the  yiper,  11  blsdone,  aa  a  in  Sardinia,  to  nuurry  one  of  the  Vlnoatl.

■jnonym  for  the  power  of  Milan.  Purgatoiio,  cant  vUL

*  Delia  <iual  oosa  11  Rfe  molto  edegno  f  Corlo,  pi  63a.
■K  pn>9e. Villani,  L  iz.  c.  93. It  wan

Italy.  RELATIONS  WITH  TH£  EMPIRE.  413

regntim  followed  in  Geimany ;  and  when  the  ^  b'^anoy  was
sapplied  by  Bodolph  of  Hapsburg,  he  was  toe  ^  ^  .
prudent  to  dissipate  his  moderate  resources  the  empin
where  the  great  house  of  Suabia  had  failed.  ^^?^'
Ab^at  forty  years  afterwards  the  emperor
Henry  of  Luxemburg,  a  prince,  like  Bodolph,  Henry  vn.
of  smiEdl  hereditary  possessions,  but  active  and  ^"^  ^****
discreet,  availed  himsc!'  of  the  ancient  respect  borne
to  the  imperial  name,  *  id  the  mutual  jealousies  of  the
Italians,  to  recover  for  a  very  short  time  a  remarkable
influence.  But,  though  professing  neutrality  and  desire
of  union  between  the  Guelfe  and  Ghibelins,  he  could
not  succeed  in  removing  the  distrust  of  the  former ;  his
exigencies  impelled  him  to  large  demands  of  money;
and  the  Italians,  when  they  counted  his  scanty  German
cavalry,  perceived  that  obedience  was  altogether  a
matter  of  their  own  choice.  Henry  died,  however,  in
time  to  save  himself  from  any  decisive  reverse.  His
successors,  Louis  of  Bavaria  and  Charles  lY.,  descended
from  the  Alps  with  similar  motives,  but  after  some  tem-
porary good  fortune  were  obliged  to  return,  not  without
discredit.  Yet  the  Italians  never  broke  that  almost
invisible  thread  which  connected  them  with  Ger-
many; the  feJlacious  name  of  Boman  emperor  still
challenged  their  allegiance,  though  conferred  by  seven
Teutonic  electors  without  their  concurrence.  Even
Florence,  the  most  independent  and  high-spirited  of
republics,  was  induced  to  make  a  treaty  with  Charles  lY.
in  1355,  which,  while  it  confirmed  all  her  actual  liber-
ties, not  a  little,  by  that  very  confirmation,  affected  her
sovereignty .K Thu  deference  to  the  supposed  preroga

9  The  republio  of  Florenoe  was  at  nell' luata  Uberttde.  HatVmaiil,p.374.

thlB  time  in  considerable  peril  from  a  (Script.  Rer.  ItaL  t  xiv.) Thla  style

ooalition  of  the  Tuscan  cities  against  her,  made  Charlee  angry;  and  the  dtj  soon

which  rendered  the  protection  of  the  atoned  for  it  bj  accepting  his  privilege,

emperor  oonyenient But  it  was  veiy  In  this,  it  most  be  owned,  he  aasnmes  a

reluctantly  that  she  acquiesced  in  even  a  decided  tone  of  soverelgaty. Tlie  gon-

nondnal  sabmisslon  to  his  authority.  The  fUomier  and  priors  are  declared  to  be  his

Florentine  envies,  in  their  first  address.  vicaxB. The  deputies  of  the  dty  did

would  only  use  the  words,  Santa  Oorona,  lunnage  and  swore  obedience. Clrcum-

er  Serenisslmo  Principe;  senza  rioor*  stances  induced  the  principal  citizens  to

daxlo  imperadore,  o  dimostrsrgli  alcnna  make  this  submission,  whidi  they  knew

reverenza  di  snggezsione,  domandando  to  be  merely  nominaL But  the  hlgh-

eoe  11  commune  dl  Firense  volea  essen-  q>irited  people,  not  so  indiffment  about

dogU  ubbidiente,  le  ootali  e  le  ootali  names,  came  into  it  very  unwlHingly.

ftamchigie  per  mantenere  il  sno  popolo  The  trea^  was  seven  tlmfet  pnipoeeA

41 4  CESSION  OF  ROMAGNA. Chap.  III.  Part  II.

tives  of  the  empire,  even  while  they  were  least  foimid*
able,  was  partly  owing  to  jealousy  of  French  or  Nea-
politan interference,  partly  to  the  national  hatred  of  the
popes  who  had  seceded  to  Avignon^  and  in  some  degree
to  a  misplaced  respect  for  antiquity,  to  which  the  revival
of  letters  had  given  birth.  The  great  civilians,  and  the
much  greater  poets,  of  the  fourteenth  century,  taught
Italy  to  consider  her  emperor  as  a  dormant  sovereign,
to  whom  her  various  piincipalities  and  republics  were
subordinate,  and  during  whose  absence  alone  they  had
legitimate  authority.

In  one  part,  however,  of  that  coimtTy,  the  empire  had,

CefldoD  of  ^^^^  *^^  ^®  commencement  of  this  period,
Romagnato  spontaneously  renounced  its  Sovereignty.  From
the  popes.  ^^  ^j^  q£  Pepiu's  donation,  confirmed  and  ex-
tended by  many  subsequent  charters,  the  Holy  See  had
tolerably  just  pretensions  to  the  province  entitled  Eo-
magna,  or  the  exarchate  of  Bavenna.  But  the  popes,  whose
menaces  were  dreaded  at  the  extremities  of  Europe,  were
still  very  weak  as  temporal  princes.  Even  Innocent  III.
had  never  been  able  to  obtcun  possession  of  this  part  of
St.  Peter's  patrimony.  The  circumstances  of  Bodolph's
accession  inspired  Nicholas  III.  with  more  confidence.
That  emperor  granted  a  confirmation  of  everything
included  in  the  donations  of  Louis  I.,  Otho,  and  his
other  predecessors ;  but  was  still  reluctant  or  ashamed
to  renounce  his  imperial  rights.  Accordingly  his  charter
is  expressed  to  be  granted  without  diminution  of  the
empire  (sine  demembratione  imperii) ;  and  his  chancellor
received  an  oath  of  fidelity  from  the  cities  of  Bomagna.
But  the  pope  insisting  firmly  on  his  own  claim,  Bodolph
discreetly  avoided  involving  himself  in  a  fatal  quarrel,
and,  in  1278,  absolutely  released  the  imperial  supre-
macy over  all  the  dominions  already  granted  to  the  Holy
See.^

This  is  a  leading  epoch  in  the  temporal  monarchy  of
Bome.  But  she  stood  only  in  the  place  of  the  emperor ;
and  her  ultimate  sovereignty  was  compatible  with  the

and  M  often  r^ected.  In  the  oonalglio  del  tndleated  the  wounded  pride  of  every

popolo,  before  their  feeUngi  were  sab-  private  dtisear-lL  Vlllanl,  p.  SSS,  290;

dned. Its  pnblicatton  was  received  with  Slsmondi.  t  vL  p.  238.

DO  marks  of  J07. The  pablle  balldln|^  h  Mnratorl,  ad  ann.  12T4, 12T8,  I2T8 ;

alone  were  illandnated:  bat  a  sad  sflenoe  Ssmondl.  t.  UL  p.  461.

ITALT.  INTERNAL  STATE  OF  ROME.  415

practicable  independence  of  the  free  cities,  or  of  the
usurpers  who  had  risen  up  among  them.  Bologna,
Faenza,  Bimini,  and  Bavenna,  with  many  others  less
considerable,  took  an  oath  indeed  to  the  pope,  but
continued  to  regulate  both  their  internal  concerns  and
foreign  relations  at  their  own  discretion,  llie  first  of
these  cities  was  fax  pre-eminent  above  the  rest  for
population  and  renown,  and,  though  not  without  several
intermissions,  preserved  a  republican  character  till  the
end  of  the  fourteenth  century.  The  rest  were  soon
enslaved  by  petty  tyrants,  more  obscure  than  those  of
Lombardy.  It  was  not  easy  for  the  pontiils  of  Avignon
to  reinstate  themselves  in  a  dominion  which  they  seemed
to  have  a])andoned ;  but  they  made  several  attempts  to
recover  it,  sometimes  with  spiritual  arms,  sometimes
with  the  more  efficacious  aid  of  mercenary  troops.  The
annals  of  this  part  of  Italy  are  peculiarly  uninteresting.
Bome  itself  was,  throughout  the  middle  ages,  very
little  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  the  government  j^tenua
of  her  bishop.  His  rights  were  indefinite,  and  sute  of
unconfirmed  by  positive  law ;  the  emperor  was  ^^""^
long  sovereign,  the  people  always  meant  to  be  free.
Besides  the  common  causes  of  insubordination  and
anarchy  among  the  Italians,  which  applied  equally  to
the  capital  city,  other  sentiments  more  peculiar  to  Biome
preserved  a  continual,  though  not  uniform,  influence  for
many  centuries.  There  still  remained  enough  in  the
wreck  of  that  vast  inheritance  to  swell  the  bosoms  of
her  citizens  with  a  consciousness  of  their  own  dignity.
They  bore  the  venerable  name,  they  contemplated  the
monuments  of  art  and  empire,  and  forgot,  in  the  illusions
of  national  pride,  that  the  tutelar  gods  of  the  building
were  departed  for  ever.  About  the  middle  of  the  twelfth
century  these  recollections  were  heightened  by  the
eloquence  of  Arnold  of  Brescia,  a  political  heretic  who
preached  against  the  temporal  jurisdiction  of  the  hier-
archy. In  a  temporary  intoxication  of  fancy,  they  were
led  to  make  a  ridiculous  show  of  self-importance  towards
Frederic  Barbarossa,  when  he  came  to  receive  the  im-
perial crown;  but  the  Glerman  sternly  chided  their
ostentation,  and  chastised  their  resistance.* With  the

1  Tte  Imperttnent  addran  of  a  Roman preserred  in  OUio  of  Frtein^Hi,  L  IL
^tor  to  Frederic,  and  Ua  answer,  are c.  22 ;  bat  ao  much  at  length,  that  ire

416  INTERNAL  STATE  OF  ROME.  CHiP.  III.  Pam  H

popes  they  could  deal  more  securely.  Several  of  them
were  expelled  from  Borne  during  that  age  by  the  sedi-
tious  citizens.  Lucius  II.  died  of  hurts  received  in  a
tumult.  The  government  was  vested  in  fifty-six  senators,
annually  chosen  by  the  people,  through  the  intervention
of  an  electoral  body,  ten  dele^tes  from  each  of  the
thirteen  districts  of  the  city.*'  This  constitution  lasted
not  quite  fifty  years.  In  1192  Borne  imitated  the  pre-
vailing fashion  by  the  appointment  of  an  annual  foreign
magistrate.™  Except  in  name,  the  senator  of  Bome
appears  to  have  perfectly  resembled  the  podestk  of  other
cities.  This  magistrate  superseded  the  representative
senate,  who  had  proved  by  no  means  adequate  to  control
the  most  lawless  aristocracy  of  Italy.  I  shall  not  repeat
the  story  of  Branoaleon's  rigorous  and  inflexible  justice,
which  a  great  historian  has  already  drawn  from  obscu-
rity. It  illustrates  not  the  annals  of  Bome  alone,  but
the  general  state  of  Italian  society,  the  nature  of  a  po-
destk*s  duty,  and  the  difficulties  of  its  execution.  The
office  of  senator  survives  after  more  than  six  hundred
years ;  but  he  no  longer  wields  the  **  iron  flail  "■  of  Bran-
caleon;  and  his  nomination  proceeds,  of  course,  from
the  supreme  pontiff,  not  from  the  people.  In  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries  tlie  senate,  and  the  senator  who
succeeded  them,  exercised  one  distinguishing  attribute
of  sovereignty,  that  of  coining  gold  and  silver  money.
Some  of  their  coins  still  exist,  with  legends  in  a  veiy
republican  tone.'  Doubtless  the  temporal  authority  oi
the  popes  varied  according  to  their  personal  character.
Innocent  ITT.  had  much  more  than  his  predecessors  for
almost  a  century,  or  than  some  of  his  successors.  He
made  the  senator  take  an  oath  of  fealty  to  him,  which,
though  not  very  comprehensive,  must  have  passed  in
those  times  as  a  recognition  of  his  superiority.^

Though  there  was  much  less  obedience  to  any  legiti-

m*7  suspect  some  ezaggeratian. Otho  "  The  readen  of  BpeoKt  wlQ  nooUeet

is  nfher  metoriotL Th^j  may  be  read  Am  iron  flail  of  Tains,  the  attendfamt

in  Olbbon,  c.  69.  of  Artbegal,  emblematic  of  tbe  aeren

k  SismMidi,  t  iL  p.  36. Besides  Sis-  jnslioe  of  the  lord  depntjr  of  IreUoid,

mondi  and  Mnratori,  I  would  refer  for  Sir  Arthur  Qrey,  shadowed  under  thai

the  history  of  Rome  during  the  middle  allegory.

aps  to  tbe  last  chapters  of  Gibbon's  ^  Gibbon,  voL  xlL  p^  289;  Muiateri.

Decline  and  FalL  Antiqult  ItaL  Dissert  2T.

">8lnioDdi.t.iLp.308.  P  Sismondl.  p.  308l

(TALT  BIENZI.  417

mate  power  at  Borne  than  anywhere  else  in  Italy,  even
during  the  thirteenth  century,  yet,  after  the  secession  of
the  popes  to  Avignon,  their  own  city  was  left  in  a  far
worse  condition  than  before.  Disorders  of  eveiy  kind,
tmnnlt  and  robbery;  prevailed  in  the  streets.  The
Roman  nobility  were  engaged  in  perpetual  war  with  each
other.  Not  content  with  their  own  fortified  palaces,  they
turned  the  sacred  monuments  of  antiquity  into  strong-
holds, and  consummated  the  destruction  of  time  and
conquest.  At  no  period  has  the  city  endured  such  irre-
parable injuries ;  nor  was  the  do^nifall  of  the  western
empire  so  fatal  to  its  capital  as  the  contemptible  feudfl
of  the  Orsini  and  Colonna  fiBkmilies.  Whatever  there
was  of  government,  whether  administered  by  a  legate
from  Avignon  or  by  the  municipal  authorities,  had  lost
all  hold  on  these  powerful  barons.  In  the  midst  of  this
degradation  and  wretchedness,  an  obscure  man,  Tbetribone
Nicola  di  Bienzi,  conceived  the  project  of  re-  RienzL
storing  Bome,  not  only  to  good  order,  but  even  ^^^  ^^'*
to  her  ancient  greatness.  He  had  received  an  education
beyond  his  birth,  and  nourished  his  mind  with  the  study
of  the  best  writers.  After  many  harangues  to  the  people,
which  the  nobility,  blinded  by  their  self-confidence,  did
not  attempt  to  repress,  Bienzi  suddenly  excited  an  insur-
rection, and  obtained  complete  success.  He  was  placed
at  the  head  of  a  new  government,  with  the  title  of
Tribune,  and  with  almost  unlimited  power.  The  first
effects  of  this  revolution  were  wondeiful.  All  the  nobles
submitted,  though  with  great  reluctance ;  the  roads  were
cleared  of  robbers ;  tranquillity  was  restored  at  home ;
some  severe  examples  of  justice  intimidated  offenders ;
and  the  tribune  was  regarded  by  all  the  people  as  the
destined  restorer  of  Bome  and  Italy.  Though  the  court
of  Avignon  could  not  approve  of  such  an  usurpation,
it  temporized  enough  not  directly  to  oppose  it.  Most
of  the  Italian  republics,  and  some  of  the  princes,  sent
ambassadors,  and  seemed  to  recognise  pretensions  which
were  tolerably  ostentatious.  The  king  of  Hungary  and
queen  of  Naples  submitted  their  quarrel  to  the  arbitra-
tion of  Bienzi,  who  did  not,  however,  undertake  to  decide
upon  it.  But  this  sudden  exaltation  intoxicated  his
understanding,  and  exhibited  failings  entirely  incom-
patible with  his  elevated  condition. If  Bienzi  had  lived

VOL.  I  2  E

418  AFFAIBS  OF  ROME. Cbap.  III.  Past  a

in  otir  own  age,  his  talents,  which  were  really  greats
Wonld  have  found  their  proper  orbit.  For  his  character
was  one  not  unusual  among  literaiy  politician0--«-a  com-
bination of  knowledge,  eloquence,  and  enthusiasm  for
ideal  excellence,  with  vanity,  inexperience  of  mankind,
unsteadiness,  and  physical  timidity.  As  these  latter
qualities  became  conspicuous,  they  eclipsed  his  virtues
and  caused  his  benefits  to  be  foigotten ;  he  was  compelled
to  abdicate  his  government,  and  retire  into  exile.  After
several  years,  some  of  which  he  passed  in  the  prisons  of
Avignon,  Bienzi  was  brought  back  to  Rome,  with  the
title  of  Senator,  and  under  the  cbmmand  of  the  legate.
It  was  supposed  that  the  Bomans,  who  had  returned  to
their  habits  of  insubordination,  would  gladly  submit  to
their  &vourite  tribune.  And  this  proved  the  case  for  a
few  months ;  but  after  that  time  they  ceased  altogether
to  respect  a  man  who  so  little  respected  himself  in  ac-
cepting a  station  where  he  could  no  longer  be  free ;  and
Bienzi  was  killed  in  a  sedition.**

Once  more,  not  long  after  the  death  of  Bienzi,  the
subseonent  fr^^^om  of  Bomo  soems  to  have  revived  in  »e-
aflunof  publican  institutions,  though  with  names  less
^^^^'  calculated  to  inspire  peculiar  recollections.
Magistrates  called  bannerets,  chosen  from  the  thirteen
districts  of  the  city,  with  a  militia  of  three  thousand
citizens  at  their  command,  were  placed  at  the  head  of
this  commonwealth.  The  great  object  of  this  new  or-
ganization was  to  intimidate  the  Boman  nobility,  whose
outrages,  in  the  total  absence  of  government,  had  grown
intolerable.  Several  of  them  were  hanged  the  first  year
by  order  of  the  bannerets.  The  citizens,  however,  had
no  serious  intention  of  throwing  off  their  allegiance  to

9  Stemondl,  t  ▼.  c.  3T ;  t  ▼!.  p.  201 ;  reTolutlon  prodnoed  1^  Riensl.  Oioniiiil

Gibbon,  c  TO ;  De  Sade,  Vie  de  P^tnurque,  ViUaiii,  llVliig  at  Flore&oe,  and  a  standi

t  IL  patflm;  Tiraboacbl,  t  vL  p.  339.  republican,  formed  a  Terj  dlffsrent  eali*

It  iB  difflcult  to  rvslst  Uie  admiration  mate,  which  weighs  more  than  tlieentha-

whlch  all  the  romantic  circnmstances  of  siastic  panegyrics  of  Petzardi. La  detta

Rlensl's  history  tend  to  ezcitSp  and  to  impresa  del  tribono  eia  nn'  opera  fimtss*

which  Petrardi  so  blindly  g&ve  way.  tica,  e  dl  pooo  dnnure. L  ziL  c  Sa An

That  great  man's  characteristic  excellence  illostrlons  female  writer  has  drawn  with

was  not  good  common  sense. He  had  a  single  stroke  the  chancter  of  RIensI,

imbibed  two  notions,  of  which  it  is  hard  Creacentias,  and  Arnold  of  Breada,  the

to  say  which  was  the  more  absurd :  that  food  restorers  of  Roman  liberty,  qui  aU

Rome  had  a  legitimate  right  to  all  her  prit  la  soKeenirt  ymr  let  equ^tmos

ancient  anthottty  over  the  rest  of  the  Corlnne,  t.  L  p.  Ift9. OoaU'TadtisbaT-

world;  and  that  she  was  likely  to  re-  excelled  tUs?
cover  this  antbority  in  consequence  of  the

iTALT.  CITIES  OF  TUSCANY.  419

the  popes.  They  provided  for  their  own  security,  on
acoonnt  of  the  lamentable  secession  and  neglect  of  those
who  claimed  allegiance  while  they  denied  protection.
But  they  were  re^y  to  acknowledge  and  welcome  hack
their  bishop  as  their  sovereign.  Even  without  this  they
surrendered  their  republican  constitution  in  13,62,  it  does
not  appear  for  what  reason,  and  permitted  the  legate  of
Innocent  VI.  to»  assume  the  government'  We  find,  how-
ever, the  institution  of  bannerets  revived  and  in  full
authority  some  years  afterwards.  But  the  internal  his-
tory of  Rome  appears  to  be  obscure,  and  I  have  not  had
opportimities  of  examining  it  minutely.  Some  degree
of  political  freedom  the  city  probably  enjoyed  during  the
schism  of  the  church ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  discriminate
the  assertion  of  legitimate  privileges  from  the  licentious
tumults  of  the  barons  or  populace.  In  1435  the  Romans
formally  took  away  the  government  from  Eugenius  lY.,
and  elected  seven  signiors  or  chief  magistrates,  like  the
priors  of  Florence.'  But  this  revolution  was  not  of  long
continuance.  On  the  death  of  Eugenius  the  citizens  de-
liberated upon  proposing  a  constitutional  charter  to  the
future  pope.  Stephen  Porcaro,  a  man  of  good  family
and  inflamed  by  a  strong  spirit  of  Liberty,  was  one  of
their  principal  instigators.  But  the  people  did  not  suffi-
ciently partake  of  that  spirit.  No  measures  were  taken
upon  this  occasion ;  and  Porcaro,  whose  ardent  imagina-
tion disguised  the  hopelessness  of  his  enterprise,  tamper-
ing in  a  fresh  conspiracy,  was  put  to  death  under  the
pontificate  of  Nicholas  V.*

The  province  of  Tuscany  continued  longer  than  Lom-
bardy  under  the  government  of  an  imperial  cities  of
lieutenant. It  was  not  till  about  the  middle  ^;;>«cw7-
of  the  twelfth  century  that  tlie  cities  of  Flo-  ^'^"^
rence,  Lucca,  Pisa,  Siena,  Arezzo,  Pistoja,  and  several
less  considerable,  which  might,  perhaps,  have  already
their  own  elected  magistrates,  became  independent  re-
publics. Their  histoiy  is,  with  the  exception  of  Pisa,
very  scanty  till  the  death  of  Frederic  11. The  earliest
fiact  of  any  importance  recorded  of  Florence  occurs  in

'  Mfttt  Vilkni.  p.  676,  604,  Y09;  Sto-  *  Script  Kenim  Italic  t  111.  ptn  2,

mondl,  t  ▼.  p.  9a. He  8M*m8  to  have  p.  1128.

overlooked  the  former  period  of  govern-  t  Id.  pw  1131. 134;  Stamondl,  t  x

mant  by  bannerets,  aud  refers  their  in-  p^  18.
aUtatioa  to  137ft.

2k2

i20  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  Chap.  UI.  Part  II

1184,  when  it  is  said  that  Frederic  Barbarossa  took  from
her  the  dominion  over  the  district  or  county,  and  re-
stored it  to  the  rural  nobility,  on  account  of  her  attach-
ment to  the  church.''  This  I  chiefly  mention  to  illustrate
the  system  pursued  by  the  cities,  of  bringing  the  territo-
rial proprietors  in  their  neighbourhood  under  subjection.
During  the  reign  of  Frederic  IE.  Florence  became,  as
far  as  she  was  able,  an  ally  of  the  popes,  lliere  was,
indeed,  a  strong  Ghibelin  party,  comprehendmg  many  of
the  greatest  fEunilies,  which  occasionally  predominated
through  the  assistance  of  the  emperor.  It  seems,  how-
ever, to  have  existed  chiefly  among  the  nobility;  the
spirit  of  the  people  was  thoroughly  Guelf.  After  several
revolutions,  accompanied  by  alternate  proscription  and
demolition  of  houses,  the  Guelf  party,  through  the  assist-
ance of  Charles  of  Anjou,  obtained  a  final  ascendency  in
1266  ;  and  after  one  or  two  unavailing  schemes  of  accom-
modation it  was  'established  as  a  fundamental  law  in  the
Florentine  constitution  that  no  person  of  Ghibelin  an-
cestry could  be  admitted  to  of&ces  of  public  trust,  which,
in  such  a  government,  was  in  effect  an  exclusion  from
theprivileges  of  citizenship.

The  changes  of  internal  government  and  vicissitudes
Goveimnent  of  success  among  factious  were  so  frequent  at
ofFiorwioe.  Florence  for  many  years  after  this  time  that
she  is  compared  by  her  great  banished  poet  to  one  in
sickness,  who,  unable  to  rest,  gives  herself  momentaiy
ease  by  continual  change  of  posture  in  her  bed.^  They
did  not  become  much  less  numerous  after  the  age  of
Dante.  Yet  the  revolutions  of  Florence  should,  perhaps,
be  considered  as  no  more  than  a  necessaiy  price  of  her
liberty.  It  was  her  boast  and  her  happiness  to  have
escaped,  except  for  one  short  period,  that  odious  rule  of
vile  usurpers,  under  which  so  many  other  free  cities  had
been  crushed.  A  sketch  of  the  constitution  of  so  famous
a  republic  ought  not  to  be  omitted  in  this  place.  Nothing
else  in  the  history  of  Italy  after  Frederic  II.  is  so
worthy  of  our  attention.'

"  I*^^^^  ▼.  c.  12.  y  I  ha^  fonnfl  oonndcwble  diffloaltlci

5^Jn '^"Tt;  •T^  "  ^™»,  In  thfa  part  of  my  taaki  BO  anfbor  with

fenna. (pluine,  ^°"^  ^  "*  acquainted  giving  a  toleraU*

Ohe  non  pab  trovar  pom  in  sh  le  ^^^  ^  *®  Florentine  goverament.  ez-

HaooDdarToltainodoioTeacbenna.  cept  M.  SLnnondi,  who  is  hlmaelf  uoi

Ptuvatorio,  cant  vi.  always  aatiafikctoiy.

Italy.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  421

The  basis  of  the  Florentine  polity  was  a  division  of
the  citizens  exercising  coznmerce  into  their  several  com-
panies or  carts.  These  were  at  first  twelve ;  seven  called
the  greater  arts,  and  five  lesser ;  but  the  latter  were  gra-
dnaUy  increased  to  fourteen.  The  seven  greater  arts
were  those  of  lawyers  and  notaries,  of  dealers  in  foreign
cloth,  called  sometimes  Calimala,  of  bankers  or  money-
changers, of  woollen-drapers,  of  physicians  and  druggists,
of  dealers  in  silk,  and  of  farriers.  The  inferior  arts  were
those  of  retailers  of  cloth,  butchers,  smiths,  shoemakers,
and  builders.  This  division,  so  &r  at  least  as  regarded
the  greater  arts,  was  as  old  as  the  beginning  of  the  thir-
teenth century.'  But  it  was  fully  established  and  ren-
dered essential  to  the  constitation  in  1266.  By  the  pro-
visions made  in  that  year  each  of  the  seven  greater  arts
had  a  council  of  its  own,  a  chief  magistrate  or  consul,
who  administered  justice  in  civil  causes  to  all  members
of  his  company,  and  abaimeret  (gonfaloniere)  or  militaiy
officer,  to  whose  standard  they  repitired  when  any  attempt
was  miade  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  city.

The  administration  of  criminal  justice  belonged  at
Florence,  as  at  other  cities,  to  a  foreign  podesta,  or
rather  to  two  foreign  magistrates,  the  podestk  and  the
capitano  del  popolo,  whose  jurisdiction,  so  feir  as'I  can
trace  it,  appears  to  have  been  concurrent.*  In  the
first  part  of  the  thirteenth  century  the  authority  of  the
podestk  may  have  been  more  extensive  than  afterwards.
These  offices  were  preserved  till  the  innovations  of  the
Medici.  The  domestic  magistracies  underwent  more
changes.  Instead  of  consuls,  which  had  been  the  first
denomination  of  the  chief  magistrates  of  Florence,  a
college  of  twelve  or  fourteen  persons  called  Anziani  or
Buonuomini,  but  varying  in  name  as  well  as  number,
according  to  revolutions  of  party,  was  established  about
the  middOie  of  the  thirteenth  century,  to  direct  public
aifairs.^  This  order  was  entirely  changed  in  1282,  and
gave  place  to  a  new  form  of  supreme  magistracy,  which

•

■  Ammirato,  ad  amu  1204  et  1336.  importanoa

ViUanl  intimates,  L  viL  c  13,  tbat  the  »  Mattao  Vlllanl,  p.  194. O.  Villai4

arte  existed  aa  oommercial  companlee  be-  places  the  institution  of  the  podestk  ia

fore  1260. MachlaveUi  and  SlRnoDdi  ex-  1207;  we  find  it,  howerer,  aa  early  m

ptess  themselves  rather  ioaocnrately,  as  1184 Ammirato.

if  they  had  been  erected  at  that  time,  b i.  V/llani,  L  ^.  c  3t.
vhich  indaed  is  the  era  of  their  political

422  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  CteAP.  III.  Part  It

lasted  till  the  extmctioii  of  the  republic.  Six  priois,
elected  every  two  months,  one  from  each  of  l£e  mi
quarters  of  the  city,  and  from  each  of  the  greater  arts,
except  that  of  lawyers,  constituted  an  executive  magis-
tracy. They  lived  during  their  continuance  in  office
in  a  palace  belonging  to  the  city,  and  were  maintained
at  the  public  cost.  The  actual  priors,  jointly  with  the
chiefs  and  councils  (usually  caUed  la  capitudme)  of  the
seven  greater  arts,  and  with  certain  adjuncts  (arroti)
named  by  themselves,  elected  by  baUot  their  successors.
Such  was  the  practice  for  about  forty  years  after  thifc
government  was  established.  But  an  innovation,  began
in  1324, and  perfected  four  years  afterwards, gave  a

Eeculiar  character  to  the  constitution  of  Florence.  A
vely  and  ambitious  people,  not  merely  jealous  of  their
public  sovereignty,  but  deeming  its  exercise  a  matter  of
personal  enjoyment,  aware  at  the  same  time  that  the  will
of  the  whole  body  could  neither  be  immediately  ex-
pressed on  all  occasions,  nor  even  through  chosen  re-
presentatives, without  the  risk  of  violence  and  partiality,
fell  upon  the  singular  idea  of  admitting  all  citizens  not
unworthy  by  their  station  or  conduct  to  offices  of  magis-
tracy by  rotation.  Lists  were  separately  made  out  by
the  priors,  the  twelve  buonuomini,  the  chiefs  and  councils
of  arts,  the  bannerets  and  other  respectable  persons,  of
all  citizens,  Guelfe  by  origin,  turned  of  thirty  years  of
age,  and,  in  their  judgment,  worthy  of  public  trust.
The  lists  thus  formed  were  then  united,  and  those  who
had  composed  them,  meeting  together,  in  number  ninety-
seven,  proceeded  to  ballot  upon  every  name.  Whoever
obtained  sixty-eight  hiack  balls  was  placed  upon  ^e  re-
formed list ;  and  all  the  names  it  contained,  being  put  on
separate  tickets  into  a  bag  or  purse  (imborsati),  were
drawn  successively  as  the  magistracies  were  renewed.
As  there  were  above  fifty  of  these,  none  of  which  could
be  held  for  more  than  four  months,  several  hundred
citizens  were  called  in  rotation  to  bear  their  share  in  the
government  within  two  years.  But  at  the  expiration  of
every  two  years  the  scrutiny  was  renewed,  and  fresh
names  were  mingled  with  those  which  still  continued
undrawn ;  so  that  accident  might  deprive  a  man  for  life
of  his  portion  of  magistracy."

•  ViiUnU  I.  ix.  c.  27,  L  x.  c.  110,  L  xL  c.  105;  Skmoodi,  t  v.  p.  It4. TUs

IliLY.  GOVERNMENT  OF  yiORENCE.  423

Four  coimcils  Lad  been  establiBhed  by  the  constitution
of  1266  for  the  decision  of  all  propositions  laid  before
them  by  the  execatiye  magistrates,  whether  of  a  legisla-
tive nature  or  relating  to  public  policy.  These  were
now  abrogated ;  and  in  their  places  were  substituted  one
of  300  memberst  all  plebeians,  called  consiglio  di  popolo,
and  one  of  250,  called  consiglio  di  commune,  into  which
the  nobles  might  enter.  These  were  changed  by  the  same
rotation  as  the  magistracies,  every  four  months.**  A  par-
liament, or  general  assembly  of  the  Florentine  people,
was  rarely  convoked ;  but  the  leading  principle  of  a  demo-
cratical  republic,  the  ultimate  sovereignty  of  the  multi-
tude, was  not  forgotten.  This  constitution  of  1324  was
fixed  by  the  citizens  at  large  in  a  parliament;  and  the
same  sanction  was  given  to  those  temporary  delegations
of  the  signiory  to  a  prince,  which  occasionally  took
place.  What  is  technically  called  by  their  historians
farsi  popolo  was  the  assembly  of  a  parliament,  or  a  resolu-
tion of  all  derivative  powers  into  the  immediate  opera-
tion of  the  popular  will.

The  ancient  government  of  this  republic  appears  to
have  been  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  its  nobility.  These
were  very  numerous,  and  possessed  large  estates  in  the
district  But  by  the  constitution  of  1266,  which  was
nearly  coincident  with  the  triumph  of  the  GueK  &ction,
the  essential  powers  of  magistracy  as  well  as  of  legisla
tion  were  thrown  into  the  scale  of  the  commons.'  The
colleges  of  arts,  whose  functions  became  so  eminent,
were  altogether  commercial.  Many,  indeed,  of  the
nobles  enrolled  themselves  in  these  companies,  and  were
among  the  most  conspicuous  merchants  of  Florence.
These  were  not  excluded  from  the  executive  college  of
the  priors  at  its  first  institution  in  1282.  It  was  neces-
sary, however,  to  belong  to  one  or  other  of  the  greater
arts  in  order  to  reach  that  magistracy.  The  majority,
therefore,  of  the  ancient  families  saw  themselves  pushed
aside  firom  the  helm,  which  was  intrusted  to  a  class  whom
they  had  habitually  held  in  contempt.

It  does  not  appear  that  the  nobility  made  any  overt

of  lottety,  wmofinmmdlng  Itoelf  by  an  ap*  inLi]oca,a]]dfnfho0ecitfe8of  theeocileei-

INirent  fidraeoB  and  Inoompadbility  with  aatlcal  state  which  presnred  Um  pdvllegs

undue  Inflaence^  was  speedily  adopted  in  of  chooslDg  their  municipal  oflBcen :  p.  9S.

all  flie  nei^bonring  republics,  and  Yum  ^  Vlllanl,  L  iz.  c.  3Y,  L  z.  6  110,  L  si

ftlwi^  continued,  according  to  SIsmondL  a  106 ;  Siamondi,  t  r.  pw  114,

424  GOYESKMEST  OF  FLQBEXCE^  Cmat.  BLJ%nIL

ojppomdofa  to  these  democimtial  institiitianB.  Confident
in  a  force  bejofiid  the  law,  thej  cued  lees  for  what  the  law
in^itproTidBUgMnBtthcm.  They  sdU  letwiifd  the  prood
ispiiit  cff  penanal  independenoe  which  had  helonged  to
theiranoestonmthefiuSiieaKBaftheApeiuiiiifis.  Thoi^
die  htwB  of  Floienoe  and  a  (^taoge  in  Italian  cmtoinnhad
tzansplanted  their  remdence  to  the  city,  it  was  in  strong
and  lofty  honses  that  they  dwelt,  among  their  kindred,
and  among  the  fellows  of  their  lank.  Notwithstanding
die  tenonr  of  the  oonstitation,  Florence  was  for  some
yeaiB  after  the  estahlishment  of  piiors  incapable  of  re-
sisting the  violence  of  her  nobility.  Her  historians  all
attest  the  ontrages  and  apHaasinations  committed  by  them
on  the  inferior  people.  It  was  in  vain  that  justice  was
offiared  by  the  podesta  and  the  capitano  del  pcpolo.
Witnesses  dared  not  to  appear  against  a  noble  offender ;
or  if^  on  a  complaint,  the  officer  of  justice  arrested  the
accnsed,  his  family  made  common  cause  to  rescue  their
kinsman,  and  the  populaoe  rose  in  defence  of  the  laws,
till  the  city  was  a  scene  of  tnmnlt  and  bloodshed.  I
have  already  aUnded  to  this  insubordination  of  the  higher
classes  as  general  in  the  Italian  republics ;  but  the  Flo-
rentine writeis,  being  fuller  than  the  rest,  are  our  best
specific  testimonies.*

The  dissensions  between  the  patrician  and  plebeian
orders  ran  veiy  high,  when  Giano  delta  Bella,

^^  a  man  of  ancient  lineage,  but  attached,  without
ambitious  views,  so  fiir  as  appears,  though  not  without
passion,  to  the  popular  side,  introduced  a  series  of  enact-
ments exceedingly  disadvantageous  to  the  ancient  aris-
tocracy. The  first  of  these  was  the  appointment  of  an
executive  officer,  the  gon£EJonier  of  justice,  whose  duty
it  was  to  enforce  the  sentences  of  the  podestk  and  capitano
del  popolo  in  cases  where  the  ordinary  officers  were  in-
sufficient. A  thousand  citizens,  afterwards  increased  to
four  times  that  number,  were  bound  to  obey  &s  com-
mands. They  were  distributed  into  companies,  the  gon-
faloniers or  captains  of  which  became  a  sort  of  corpora-
tion or  college,  and  a  constituent  part  of  the  government.
This  new  militia  seems  to  have  superseded  that

^^ '  of  the  companies  of  arts,  which  I  have  not  ob-

*  V{Il«nl,  L  TiL  a  113,  L  viiL  c  8; AmmiratOb  StorU  FUaentiiMi,  L  !▼.  In
oomlnoUunento.

ITALT.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  425

served  to  be  mentioned  at  any  later  period.  The  gon-
falonier of  justice  was  part  of  the  signioiy  along  with  the
priors,  of  whom  he  was  reckoned  the  president,  and
changed,  like  them,  every  two  months.  He  was,  in  fact^
the  first  magistrate  of  Florence.'  K  Giano  della  Bella
had  trusted  to  the  efficacy  of  this  new  security  for  justice,
his  fame  would  have  been  beyond  reproach.  But  he  fol*
lowed  it  up  by  harsher  provisions.  The  nobility  were
now  made  absolutely  ineligible  to  the  office  of  prior.
For  an  o£fence  committed  by  one  of  a  noble  &mily,  his
relations  were  declared  responsible  in  a  penalty  of  3000
pounds.  And,  to  obviate  the  difficulty  arising  from  the
frequent  intimidation  of  witnesses,  it  was  provided  that
common  fame,  attested  by  two  credible  persons,  should
be  sufficient  for  the  condemnation  of  a  nobleman.'

These  are  the  &mous  ordinances  of  justice  which  passed
at  Florence  for  the  great  charter  of  her  democracy.
They  have  been  reprobated  in  later  times  as  scandalously
unjust;  and  I  have  little  inclination  to  defend  them.
The  last,  especially,  was  a  violation  of  those  eternal  prin-
ciples which  forbid  us,  for  any  calculations  of  advantage,
to  risk  the  sacrifice  of  innocent  blood.  But  it  is  im-
possible not  to  perceive  that  the  same  unjust  severiiy  has
sometimes,  under  a  like  pretext  of  necessity,  been  applied
to  the  weaker  classes  of  the  people,  which  they  were
in  this  instance  able  to  exercise  towards  their  natural
superiors.

The  nobility  were  soon  aware  of  the  position  in
which  they  stood.  For  half  a  centuiy  their  great  object
was  to  procure  the  relaxation  of  the  ordinances  of  justice.
But  chey  had  no  success  with  an  elated  enemy.  Li  three
years'  time,  indeed,  Giano  della  Bella,  the  autiior  of  these
institutions,  was  driven  into  exile ;  a  conspicuous,  though
by  no  means singular, proof  of  Florentine ingrati-

f  It  la  to  be  regretted  that  the  ao-  seems  to  ran  thus:  I  prlort  dell'  art!  e

compllahed  biographer  of  Lorenxo  de'  gonfidonlere  dl  giustisia,  il  popolo  e  'I

Modid  fiboaU  have  taken  no  pains  to  comnne  della  dttit  di  Flroize.  Q.Vlllani,

inform  himself  of  the  most  ordinaxy  par-  L  xiL  c  109.

tileolan  in  the  oonstltaticm  of  Florence. S  ViUanl,  L  viiL  e.  1 ; Anunlrato,

Among  many  other  errorB  he  says,  toL  11.  p.  188,  edit  1647. A  magirtrate,  called

p^  ftl,  6th  edit.,  that  the  gonlhlonier  of  l'  esecntor  della  ginstixia,  was  ^>ixilnted

Jnatico  was  snbordinate  to  the  delegated  with  anthority  equal  to  that  of  the  p(v

raechaolcB  (a  had  expresbion),  or  priori  destii  for  the  special  purpose  of  watdiing

deir  arti,  wliose  nnmber  too  he  augments  oyer  the  observation  of  the  ordiEanoeb  o

is  ten. The  proper  style  of  the  repnhUc  Justice. AmmiratOf  pi  666

426  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  Chap.  III.  Pabt  n.

tade.^  The  wealth  and  physical  strength  of  the  nobles
were,  however,  untouched;  and  their  influence  must
always  have  been  considerable.  In  the  great  feuds  of  the
Bianchi  and  Neri  the  ancient  feimUies  were  most  distin-
guished. No  man  plays  a  greater  part  in  the  annals  of
Florence  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  than
Gorso  Donati,  chief  of  the  latter  faction,  who  might
pass  as  representative  of  the  turbulent,  intrepid,  ambi-
tious citizen-noble  of  an  Italian  republic.^  But  the  laws
irradually  became  more  sure  of  obedience :  the  sort  of
iioscription  which  attended  the  ancient  noblee  loweted
their  spirit ;  while  a  new  aristocracy  began  to  raise  its
head,  the  aristocracy  of  families  who,  after  filling  the
highest  magistracies  for  two  or  three  generations,  ob-
tained  an  hereditary  importance,  which  answered  the
purpose  of  more  unequivocal  nobility ;  just  as  in  ancient
Rome  plebeian  families,  by  admission  to  curule  offices,
acquired  the  character  and  appellation  of  nobility,  and
were  only  distinguishable  by  their  genealogy  from  the
original  patricians.^  Florence  had  her  plebeian  nobles
(popolani  grandi),  as  well  as  Rome ;  the  Pemzzi,  'the
Ricci,  the  Albizi,  the  Medici,  correspond  to  the  Oatos,
the  Fompeys,  the  Brutuses,  and  the  Antonies.  But  at
Rome  the  two  orders,  after  an  equal  partition  of  the
highest  offices,  were  content  to  respect  their  mutual  pri-
vileges; at  Florence  the  commoners  preserved  a  rigor-
ous monopoly,  and  the  distinction  of  high  birth  was,
that  it  debarred  men  from  political  franchises  and  civil
justice."

This  second  aristocracy  did  not  obtain  much  more  of
the  popular  affection  than  that  which  it  superseded.
Public  outrage  and  violation  of  law  became  less  fre-
quent ;  but  the  new  leaders  of  Florence  are  accused  of
continual  misgovemment  at  home  and  abroad,  and
sometimes  of  peculation.  There  was  of  course  a  strong
antipathy  between  the  leading  commioners  and  the  an-

b  VUliml,  L  vltL  o.  8.  rotk  I  nprami  oKridil  adopeim. B  tele

1  IMno  Oompagni ;  VillanL  %  te  Florentina  nobtUtL AmmtT»U>  ddle

k  La  nobiUtk  clyile,  ae  bene  non  in  FamlgUe  Florentine.  Firenie,  1614.  p.  2S.

beRmaegl,bcapeoedlgFendiflsimihonoTl,  *  Qaello.  che  all'  altre  dUk  raolo

perdoche  eeercltando  I  nprami  magi-  reeare  tplendora,  in  Ftrenie  era  dKUDoao,

■trati  della  sua  patria,  vlene  speaio  a  o  veramente  vano  e  Inntile,  nya  Am*

oomandam  a  eapltaol  d'  eserdti  e  ella  mlrato  of  noblUtj. Storla  Flonntiiifc

ttfliaa  per  se  0  in  mare,  b  In  terra,  molte  pu  IM.

Italy.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  427

cient  nobles;  both  were  disliked  by  the  people.  In
order  to  keep  the  nobles  under  more  control  the  govern-
ing party  more  than  once  introduced  a  new  foreign
magistrate,  with  the  title  of  captain  of  defence  (della
goardia),  whom  they  invested  with  on  almost  im-
bounded  criminal  jurisdiction.  One  Gabrielli  aj>.  isae.
of  Agobbio  was  twice  fetched  for  this  purpose ;  ^-^  ****•
and  in  each  case  he  behaved  in  so  t3rrannical  a  manner
as  to  occasion  a  tumult."  His  office,  however,  was  of
short  duration,  and  the  title  at  least  did  not  import  a
sovereign  command.  But  very  soon  afterwards  Flo-
rence had  to  experience  one  taste  of  a  cup  which  her
neighbours  had  drunk  off  to  the  dregs,  and  to  animate
her  magnanimous  love  of  freedom  by  a  knowledge  of
the  calamities  of  tyranny.

A  war  with  Pisa,  imsuccessfully,  if  not  unskilfally,
oonducted,  gave  rise  to  such  dissatisfaction  in  the  city
that  the  leading  commoners  had  recourse  to  an  appoint-
ment something  like  that  of  Gabrielli,  and  from  similar
motives.  Walter  de  Brienne,  duke  of  Athens,  was
descended  from  one  of  the  French  crusaders  who  had
dismembered  the  Grecian  empire  in  the  preceding  cen-
tury; but  his  father,  defeated  in  battle,  had  lost  the
principality  along  with  his  life,  and  the  titular  duke
was  an  adventurer  in  the  court  of  France.  He  had  been,
however,  slightly  known  at  Florence  on  a  former  occa-
sion. There  was  an  uniform  maxim  among  the  Italian
republics  that  extraordinary  powers  should  be  conferred
upon  none  but  strangers.  The  duke  of  Athens  was
accordingly  pitched  upon  for  the  military  command,
which  was  united  with  domestic  jurisdiction.  This  ap-
pears to  have  been  promoted  by  the  governing  pai-ty  m
order  to  curb  the  nobility ;  but  they  were  soon  unde-
ceived in  their  expectations.  The  first  act  of  the  duke
of  Athens  was  to  bring  four  of  the  most  eminent  com-
moners to  capital  punishment  for  military  offences.
These  sentences,  whether  just  or  otherwise,  gave  much
pleasure  to  the  nobles,  who  had  so  frequently  been
exposed  to  similar  severity,  and  t©  the  populace,  who
are  naturally  pleased  with  the  humiliation  of  theii
superiors. Boui  of  these  were  caressed  by  the  duke,

■  Vniasl,  L  xl.  c  39  and  IIY.

428  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE. Chap.  III.  Paitt  IC.

and  botli  conspii'ed,  with  blind  passion,  fo  second  his
ambitious  views.  It  was  proposed  and  carried  in  a  fall
parliament,  or  assembly  of  the  people,  to  bestow  upon
him  the  signioiy  for  life.  The  real  friendu  of  their
country,  as  well  as  the  oligarchy,  shuddered  at

^^  ^**^  this  measure.  Throughout  all  the  vicissitudes
of  party  Florence  had  never  yet  lost  sight  of  republican
institutions.  Not  that  she  had  never  accommodated
herself  to  temporary  circumstances  by  uamiTig  a  signior.
Charles  of  Anjou  had  been  invested  with  that  dignity
for  the  term  of  ten  years ;  Bobert  king  of  Naples  ior
five;  and  his  son,  ^e  duke  of  Calabria,  was  at  his
death  signior  of  Florence.  These  princes  named  the
podesta,  if  not  the  priors;  and  were  certainly  pretty
absolute  in  their  executive  powers,  though  bound  by
oath  not  to  alter  the  statutes  of  the  city."  But  their
ofiGice  had  always  been  temporary.  Like  the  dictator-
ship of  Bome,  it  was  a  comessed,  tmavoidable  evil ;  a
suspension,  but  not  extinguishment,  of  rights.  Like
that,  too,  it  was  a  dangerous  precedent,  through  which
crafty  ambition  and  popular  rashness  might  ultimately
subvert  the  republic.  If  Walter  de  Brienne  had  pos-
sessed the  subtle  prudence  of  a  Matteo  Yisoonti  or  a
Cane  della  Scala,  there  appears  no  reason  to  suppose  that
Florence  would  have  escaped  the  fate  of  other  cities ;
and  her  histoiy  might  have  become  as  useless  a  record
of  perfidy  and  assassination  as  that  of  Mantua  or  Ve-
rona.'

But,  happily  for  Florence,  the  reign  of  tyranny  was
very  short.  The  duke  of  Athens  had  neither  judgment
nor  activity  for  so  difGicult  a  station.  He  launched  out
at  once  into  excesses  which  it  would  be  desirable  that
arbitrary  power  should  always  commit  at  the  outset.
The  taxes  were  considerably  increased;  their  produoe
was  dissipated.  The  honour  of  the  state  was  sacrificed
by  an  inglorious  treaty  with  Pisa;  her  territory  was
diminished  by  some  towns  throwing  off  their  depend-
ence. Severe  and  multiplied  punishments  spread  terror
through  the  city.  The  noble  families,  who  had  on  the
duke*8  election  destroyed  the  ordinances  of  justice,  now
found  themselves  exposed  to  the  more  partial  caprice  ol

•  Vlllanl.Llx.cB5,W.186.328.  P  U.  L  ziL  c  1. 2.  S.

Italy.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  420

a  despot.  He  filled  the  magistracies  with  low  oreatares
from  the  inferior  artificers ;  a  class  which  he  continued
to  flatter.^  Ten  months  passed  in  this  manner,  when
three  separate  conspiracies,  embracing  most  of  the  nobi-
lity and  of  the  great  commoners,  were  planned  for  the
recovery  of  freedom.  The  duke  was  protected  by  a
strong  body  of  hired  cavalry.  Bevolutions  in  an  Italian
city  were  generally  e£fected  by  surprise.  The  streets
were  so  narrow  aud  so  easily  secured  by  barricades,  that,
if  a  people  had  time  to  stand  on  its  defence,  no  cavalry
was  of  any  avail.  On  the  other  hand,  a  body  of  lancers
in  plate-armour  might  dissipate  any  number  of  a  disor-
deny  populace.  Accordingly,  if  a  prince  or  usurper
would  get  possession  by  surprise,  he,  as  it  was  called,
rode  the  dty ;  that  is,  galloped  with  his  cavalry  along  the
streets,  so  as  to  prevent  the  people  from  collecting  to
erect  barricades.  This  expression  is  very  usual  with
historians  of  the  fourteenth  century.'  The  conspirators
at  Florence  were  too  quick  for  the  duke  of  Athens.
The  oi<y  was  barricaded  in  eveiy  direction;  and  after  a
contest  of  some  duration  he  consented  to  abdicate  his
signiory.

Thus  Florence  recovered  her  liberty.  Her  constitu-
tional laws  now  seemed  to  revive  of  thenuselves.  But
the  nobility,  who  had  taken  a  very  active  part  in  the
recent  liberation  of  their  country,  thought  it  hard  to  be
still  placed  imder  the  rigorous  ordinances  of  justice.
Many  of  the  richer  commoners  acquiesced  in  an  equit-
able partition  of  ms^stracies,  which  was  established
through  the  influence  of  the  bishop.  But  the  populace
of  Florence,  with  its  characteristic  forgetfolness  of  be-
nefits, was  tenacious  of  those  proscriptive  ordinances.
The  nobles  too,  elated  by  their  success,  began  again  to
strike  and  injure  the  inferior  citizens.  A  new  civil  war
in  the  city-streets  decided  their  quarrel ;  after  a  despe-
rate resistance  many  of  the  principal  houses  were  pil-
laged and  burned ;  and  the  perpetual  exclusion  of  the
nobility  was  confirmed  by  fresh  laws.  But  the  people,
now  sure  of  their  triumph,  relaxed  a  little  upon  this
occasion  the  ordinances  of  justice;  and,  to  make  Eome
distinction  in  favour  of  merit  or  innocence,  effaced  cer-

4  VnUuiI,  e.  8.  cone  U  dtU  dl  Pitt  due  Tolte, 8I»

*  VlUani,  I.  z.  c.  81 ;  CMtroodo  .  .  . mondl,  t  t.  p.  IW.

430  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE. Chap.  III.  Part  It

tain  foiuilies  from  the  list  of  nobility.  Five  hnndred
and  thirty  persons  were  thus  elevated,  as  we  may  call
it,  to  the  rank  of  commoners.'  As  it  was  beyond  the
competence  of  the  republic  of  Florence  to  change  a
man's  ancestors,  this  nominal  alteration  left  all  the  real
advantages  of  birth  as  they  were,  and  was  undoubtedly
an  enhancement  of  dignity,  though,  in  appearance,  a
very  singular  one.  Conversely,  several  unpopular
commoners  were  ennobled,  in  order  to  disfranchise
them.  Nothing  was  more  usual  in  subsequent  times
than  such  an  arbitrary  change  of  rank,  as  a  penalty  or  a
benefit.'  Those  nobles  who  were  rendered  plebeian  by
favour,  were  obliged  to  change  their  name  and  arms.*
The  constitution  now  underwent  some  change.  From
six  the  priors  were  increased  to  eight;  and  instead  of
being  chosen  from  each  of  the  greater  arte,  they  were
taken  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  city,  the  lesser
artisans,  as  I  conceive,  being  admissible.  The  gonfalo-
niers of  companies  were  reduced  to  sixteen.  And  these,
along  with  the  signiory,  and  the  twelve  buonuomini,
formed  the  college,  where  every  proposition  was  dis-
cussed before  it  could  be  offered  to  the  coimcils  for  their
legislative  sanction.  But  it  could  only  originate,  strictly
speaking,  in  the  signiory,  that  is,  the  gonMonier  of
justice,  and  eight  priors,  the  rest  of  the  college  having
merely  the  function  of  advice  and  assistance.'

Several  years  elapsed  before  any  material  disturbance
arose  at  Florence.  Her  contemporary  historian  com-
plains, indeed,  that  mean  and  ignorant  persons  obtained
the  office  of  prior,  and  ascribes  some  errors  in  her  ex-
ternal policy  to  this  cause.'  Besides  the  natural  effecte
of  the  established  rotation,  a  particular  law,  called  the

"  VilUni.  I.  xil. c.  18-23. Slanondi  t  Messer  Antciolo  di  Baldinaodo  degM

aayi,  by  a  momenUry  ovenight,  dnq  Adimari,  tatto  die  fone  de  piii  grandl  e

cent  trente/amtlles,  t  ▼.  p.  377. There  nobiU,  per  graxia  era  meaw  tra  '1  popola

were  but  fiilrty-seven  noble  fionlltes  at  — Villanl,  I.  xil.  c  108.

Florence,  as  M.  Siamoodl  himself  in-  ^  Ammlmto,  p.  748.  There  were  sevnal

forms  U9. t.  iv. p.  66 ;  though  VUlanl  ezceptioos  to  this  mle  in  later  ttmee

reckons  tlte  nnmber  of  individuals  at  The  Puszi  were  made  popolani,  plebelaui

1500. Nobles,  or  grandi  as  they  are  by  favour  of  Oosmo  de*  MedicL Macid*>

more  strictly  called,  were  such  as  had  velli.

^een  inscribed,  or  rather  proscribed,  as  *  Nardl,  Btoria  dl  FiranBe,  pi  t,  adtt.

such  in  the  oidinanocs  of  Justice ;  at  least  1684. Villanl,  loo.  dt

[  do  not  know  what  other,  deflultkm  ^  Matteo  VUlanl  In  Script.  Rar.Ildt

tbere  was.  t  ziv.  p.  98,  344.

ITAL\.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  431

drneto,  tended  to  tlirow  the  better  fieuoiilies  out  of  publio
office.  By  this  law  two  of  the  same  name  could  not  be
drawn  for  any  magistracy :  whicb,  as  the  ancient  fami-
lies were  extremely  numerous,  rendered  it  difficult  for
their  members  to  succeed ;  especially  as  a  ticket  once
drawn  was  not  replaced  in  the  purse,  so  that  an  indivi-
dual liable  to  the  divieto  was  excluded  until  the  next
biennial  revolution.'  This  created  dissatisfaction  among
the  leading  families.  They  were  likewise  divided  by  a
new  faction,  entirely  founded,  as  far  as  appesurs,  on  per-
sonal animosity  between  two  prominent  houses,  the  Albizi
and  the  Ricci.  The  city  was,  however,  tranquil,  when,
in  1357,  a  spring  was  set  in  motion  which  gave  quite  a
different  character  to  the  domestic  history  of  Florence.

At  the  time  when  the  Guelfis,  with  the  assistance  of
Charles  of  Anjou,  acquired  an  exclusive  domination  in
the  republic,  the  estates  of  the  Ghibelins  were  confis-
cated. One-third  of  those  confiscations  was  allotted  to
the  state ;  another  went  to  repair  the  losses  of  Guelf
citizens ;  but  the  remainder  became  the  property  of  a
now  corporate  society,  denominated  the  Guelf  party
(parte  Guelfa),  with  a  regular  internal,  organization.
The  Guelf  party  had  two  councils,  one  of  fourteen  and
one  of  sixty  members;  three,  or  afterwards  four,  cap-
tains, elected  by  scrutiny  every  two  months,  a  treasury,
and  common  seal ;  a  little  republic  within  the  repubUc
of  Florence.  Their  primary  duty  was  to  watch  over
the  Guelf  interest;  and  for  this  purpose  they  had  a  par-
ticular officer  for  the  accusation  of  suspected  Ghibelms.*
We  hear  not  much,  however,  ol  the  Guelf  society  for
near  a  century  after  their  establishment.  The  Ghibelins
hardly  ventured  to  show  themselves  after  the  faAl  of  the
White  Guelfs  in  1304,  witli  whom  they  had  been  con-
nected, and  confiscation  had  almost  anmhilated  that  un-
fortunate faction.  But  as  the  oligarchy  of  Guelf  fiEtmilios
lost  part  of  its  infiuence  through  the  divieto  and  system
of  lottery,  some  persons  of  Ghibelin  descent  crept  into
public  offices ;  and  this  was  exaggerated  by  the  zealots
of  an  opposite  party,  as  if  the  fundamental  policy  of  the
city  was  put  into  danger.

The  Guelf  society  had  begun,  as  early  as  1346,  to

•  SlaDODdi.  t.  tL  p.  338.  •  Q.  VUUuii,  L  vlL  c.  If.

432  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  Giup.  UL  Pabt  H

numifest  some  disqnietade  at  the  foreign  aitisaiis,  who,
oetding  at  Floienoe  and  becoming  members  of  some  ol
the  trading  oorporationB,  pretended  to  superior  offices.
They  procured  accordingly  a  law  exclnding  from  pnblio
trust  and  magistracy  all  persons  not  being  natiTcs  of  the
city  or  its  territory.  Next  year  they  advanced  a  step
&iiher;  and,  with  the  yiew  to  prevent  disorder,  which
seemed  to  threaten  the  city,  a  law  was  passed  declaring
every  one  whose  ancestors  at  any  time  since  1300  had
been  known  Ghibelins,  or  who  haul  not  the  reputation  of
sound  Gnelf  principles,  incapable  of  being  drawn  or
elected  to  offices.  ^  It  is  numifest  from  the  language
of  the  historian  who  relates  these  circumstances,  and
whose  testimony  is  more  remarkable  from  his  having
died  several  years  before  the  politics  of  the  Guelf  corpo-
ration more  decidedly  showea  themselves,  that  the  real
cause  of  their  jealousy  was  not  the  increase  of  Ghibe-
linism,  a  merely  plausible  pretext,  but  the  democratical
character  which  the  government  had  assumed  since  the
revolution  of  1 343 ;  which  raised  the  fourteen  inferior  arts
to  the  level  of  those  which  the  great  merchants  of  Flo-
rence exercised.  In  the  Guelf  society  the  ancient
nobles  retained  a  considerable  influence.  The  laws  of
exclusion  had  never  been  applied  to  that  corporation.
Two  of  the  captains  were  always  noble,  two  were  com-
moners. The  people,  in  debarring  the  nobility  from  ordi-
nary privileges,  were  little  aware  of  the  more  dangerous
channel  which  had  been  left  open  to  their  ambition.
With  the  nobility  some  of  the  great  commoners  acted  in
concert,  and  especially  the  femily  and  faction  of  the
Albizi.  The  introduction  of  obscure  persons  into  office
still  continued,  and  some  measures  more  vigorous  than
the  law  of  1347  seemed  necessary  to  restore  the  influence
of  their  aristocracy.  They  proposed,  and,  notwith-
standing the  reluctance  of  the  priors,  carried  by  vio-
lence, both  in  the  preliminary  deliberations  of  the  sig-
niory  and  in  the  two  councils,  a  law  by  which  every
person  accepting  an  office  who  should  be  convicted  of
Ghibelinism  or  of  Ghibelin  descent,  upon  testimony  of
public  fame,  became  liable  to  punishment,  capital  ox
pecuniary,  at  the  discretion  of  the  priors.  To  this  law
^oy  gave  a  retrospective  eflect,  and  indeed  it  appears  to

%  G  VIlbmL  1.  xii.  0  7a  and  T9.

ITALY.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLOKENCE.  433

•

have  been  litde  more  than  a  reTiTal  of  the  pro-visions
made  in  1347,  whicli  had  probably  been  disregarded.
Many  citizens  who  had  been  magistrates  within  a  few
years  were  cast  in  hea^y  fines  on  this  indefinite  charge.
Bnt  the  more  usual  practice  was  to  warn  (ammonire)
men  beforehand  i^inst  undertaking  public  trust,  u
they  neglected  this  hint,  they  were  sure  to  be  treated
as  convicted  Ghibelins.  Thus  a  very  numerous  class,
called  Ammoniti,  was  formed  of  proscribed  and  discon-
tented persons,  eager  to  tlirow  off  the  intolerable  yoke
of  the  Guelf  society.  For  the  imputation  of  Ghibelin
connexions  Was  generally  an  unfounded  pretext  for
crushing  the  enemies  of  the  governing  faction."  Men  of
Improved  Guelf  principles  and  origin  were  eveiy  day
warned  from  their  natural  privil^es  of  sharing  in  ma-
gistracy. This  spread  an  universal  alarm  through  the
city ;  but  the  great  advantage  of  union  and  secret  con-
federacy rendered  the  Guelf  society,  who  had  also  the
law  on  their  side,  irresistible  by  their  opponents.  Mean-
while the  public  honour  was  well  supported  abroad;
Florence  had  never  before  been  so  distmguished  as
during  the  prevalence  of  this  oligarchy.^

The  Guelf  society  had  governed  with  more  or  less  ab-
soluteness for  near  twenty  years,  when  the  republic
became  involved,  through  tiie  perfidious  conduct  of  the
papal  legate,  in  a  war  with  the  Holy  See.  Though  the
Florentines  were  by  no  means  superstitious,  this  hosti-
lity to  the  church  appeared  almost  an  absurdity  to  deter-
mined Guelfisi,  and  shocked  those  prejudices  about  names
which  make  up  the  politics  of  vulgar  minds.  The  Guelf
society,  though  it  could  not  openly  resist  the  popular
indignation  against  Gregory  XI.,  was  not  heartily  in-
clined to  this  war.  Its  management  fell  therefore  into
the  hands  of  eight  commissioners,  some  of  them  not
well  affected  to  the  society ;  whose  administration  was

'  Beddes  th«  effect  of  ancient  pr»-  vannl  Villanf  eajB  of  FiMMrlno,  knd  of

JmUoe,  Ghnwliniam  was  considered  at  Mantna,  that  his  anoesion  had  been

Fknoae,  fn  the  fourteenth  oentary,  as  6nellk,ma  per  eaiere  slgnofe  e  tiranno  si

Immediately  connected  with  tyrannical  feoe  GhiMUno :  L  x.  c.  99. And  Matteo

QBorpation.  The  Qaelfparty,  says  Matteo  Vlllani  of  the  Pepoli  at  Bologua ;  casendo

Vmani,  is  the  foandatioii  rode  of  liberty  di  natoim  Ouelfi,  per  la  tiraania  esaoo

m  Italy ;  so  that,  if  any  Gnelf  beoomet  a  quasi  alieiuUi  della  parte :  p.  69.

^ynat.  he  most  of  necessity  tom  to  the  <!  M.  ViUani,  p.  631,  63T.  731. Am-

Gfaibelln  side ;  and  of  this  there  haye  mlnMo;  Machiarelli ;  Simwindi.
mea  many  Instaaoss:  p.  481. 8o  Gio-

VOL.  I.  2  r

434  tiOVEnNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  ChjlP.  III.  Pabt  iL

6C  «accessfdl  and  popular  as  to  excite  the  utmost  jealousy
in  the  Gnelfs.  They  began  to  renew  their  warnings,
and  in  eight  months  excluded  foniscore  citizens.*

The  tyranny  of  a  court  may  endure  for  ages ;  but  that
of  a  fiaction  is  seldom  permanent.  In  June,  1378,  the
gonfalonier  of  justice  was  Salyestro  de'  Medici,  a  man  of
approved  patriotism,  whose  family  had  been  so  notori-
ously of  Guelf  principles,  that  it  was  impossible  to  warn
him  from  office.  He  proposed  to  mitigate  the  severity
of  the  existing  law.  His  proposition  did  not  succeed ;
but  its  rejection  provoked  an  insurrection,  the  fore-
nmner  of  still  more  alarming  tumults.  The  populace  of
Florence,  liki  that  of  other  cities,  was  terrible  in  the
moment  of  sedition ;  and  a  party  so  long  dreaded  shrunk
before  the  physical  strength  of  iihe  multitude.  Many
leaders  of  the  Guelf  society  had  their  houses  destroyed,
and  some  fled  from  the  ciiy.  But  instead  of  annulling
their  acts,  a  middle  course  was  adopted  by  the  com-
mittee of  magistrates  who  had  been  empowered  to
reform  the  state ;  the  Ammoniti  were  suspended  three
years  longer  from  office,  and  the  Guelf  society  preserved
with  some  limitations.  This  temporising  course  did
not  satisfy  either  the  Ammoniti  or  the  populace.  The
greater  arts  were  generally  attached  to  the  Guelf  society.
Between  them  and  the  lesser  arts,  composed  of  retiul
and  mechanical  traders,  there  "^as  a  stroi^  jealousy.
The  latter  were  adverse  to  the  prevailing  oligarchy  and
to  the  Guelf  society,  by  whose  influence  it  was  main-
tained. They  were  eager  to  make  Florence  a  democracy
in  fSEM^t  as  well  as  in  name,  by  participating  in  the  execu-
tiye  government.

But  every  political  institution  appears  to  rest  on  too
confined  a  basis  to  those  whose  point  of  view  is  frtnn
beneath  it.  While  the  lesser  arts  were  murmuring  at
the  exclusive  privileges  of  the  commercial  aristocracy,
tbere  was  yet  an  inferior  class  of  citizens  who  thought
their  own  claims  to  equal  privileges  irrefragable,  ^e
arrangement  of  twenty-one  trading  companies  had  still
left  several  kinds  of  artisans  imincorporated,  and  conse-
quentiy  unprivileged.  These  had  been  attached  to  the
art  witii  which  their  craft  had  most  connexion  in  a  sort

*  Aimnlnto^  p,  T09.

ITALT.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  435

of  dependent  relation.  Thus  to  the  company  of  drapers,
the  most  wealthy  of  all,  the  various  occupations  instru-
mental in  the  manu£stcture,  as  woolcombers,  dyers,  and
weavers,  were  appendant.'  Besides  the  sense  of  political
exclusion,  these  artisans  alleged  that  they  were  oppressed
by  their  employers  of  the  art,  and  that,  when  they  com-
plained to  the  consul,  their  judge  in  civil  matters,  no
redress  could  be  procured.  A  still  lower  order  of  the
oommunity  was  the  mere  populace,  who  did  not  practise
any  regular  trade,  or  who  only  worked  for  dauy  hire.
These  were. called  Ciompi,  a  corruption,  it  is  said,  of  the
French  compere.

"  Let  no  one,"  says  Machiavel  in  this  place,  '*  who
begins  an  innovation  in  a  state  expect  that  ne  shall  stop
it  at  his  pleasure,  or  regulate  it  according  to  his  inten-
tion." After  about  a  month  from  the  first  sedition
another  broke  out,  in  which  the  ciompi,  or  lowest
populace,  were  alone  concerned'.  Through  the  surprise,
or  cowardice,  or  disaffection  of  the  superior  citizens,  this
was  suffered  to  get  ahead,  and  for  three  days  the  cif^'^
was  in  the  hand  of  a  tumultuous  rabble.  It  was  vedn
to  withstand  their  propositions,  had  they  even  been
more  unreasonable  than  they  were.  But  they  only  de-
manded the  establishment  of  two  new  arts  for  the  trader
hitherto  dependent,  and  one  for  the  lower  people ;  and
that  three  of  the  priors  should  be  chosen  from  the  greater
arts,  three  from  the  fourteen  lesser,  and  two  from  those
just  created.  Some  delay,  however,  occurring  to  prevent
the  sanction  of  these  innovations  by  the  councils,  a  new
fury  took  possession  of  the  populace ;  the  gates  of  the
palace  belonging  to  the  signioiy  were  forced  open,  the
priors  compelled  to  fly,  and  no  appearance  of  a  constitu-
ticnal  magistracy  remained  to  throw  the  veil  of  law  over
the  excesses  of  anarchy.  The  republic  seemed  to  rock
from  its  foundations;  and  the  circumstance  to  which
historians  ascribe  its  salvation  is  not  the  least  singular
in  this  critical  epoch.  One  Michel  di  Lando,  a  wool-
comber,  half  dressed  and  without  shoes,  happened  ta
hold  the  standard  of  justice  wrested  from  the  propei
officer  when  the^  populace  burst  into  the  palace.  Whether
he  was  previously  conspicuous  in  the  timiult  is  not  re-

t  Before  the  year  1340,  aocordii^  to  Vllianl's  calruUtion,  the  woollen  tnd^
•ocopted  30,000  pexBons. 1.  xl.  c  93.

2f2

4S6  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  Chap.  III.  Pibt  a

corded ;  but  the  wild,  capricious  mob,  who  had  destroyed
what  they  had  no  conoeption  how  to  rebuild,  suddenly
cried  out  that  Lando  should  be  gonfsdonier  or  signior,
and  reform  the  city  at  his  pleasure.

A  choice,  arising  probably  from  wanton  folly,  oould
not  have  been  better  made  by  wisdom.  Lando  was  a
man  of  courage,  moderation,  and  integrity.  He  gave
immediate  proo&  of  these  qualities  by  causing  his  office
to  be  respected.  The  eight  commissioners  of  the  war,
who,  though  not  instigators  of  the  sedition,  were  well
pleased  to  see  the  Guelf  party  so  entirely  prostrated,
now  fancied  themselyes  masters,  and  began  to  nominate
priors.  But  liando  sent  a  messase  to  them,  that  he  was
elected  by  the  people,  and  that  ne  could  dispense  with
their  assistance.  He  then  proceeded  to  the  choice  of
priors.  Three  were  taken  from  the  greater  arts ;  three
from  the  lesser ;  and  three  from  the  two  new  arts  and
the  lower  people.  This  eccentric  college  lost  no  time
in  restoring  tranquillity,  and  compelled  the  populace,  by
threat  of  punishment,  to  return  to  their  occupations.
But  the  ciompi  were  not  disposed  to  give  up  the  pleasures
of  anarchy  so  readily.  They  were  dissatisfied  at  the
small  share  allotted  to  them  in  the  new  distribution  of
offices,  and  murmured  at  their  gon&lonier  as  a  traitor  to
the  popular  cause.  Lando  was  aware  that  an  insurrec-
tion was  projected ;  he  took  measures  with  the  most  re-
spectable citizens;  the  insuigents,  when  they  showed
themselves,  were  quelled  by  force,  and  the  gonfedonier
retired  from  office  with  an  approbsktion  which  all  histo-
rians of  Florence  have  agreed  to  perpetuate.  Part  of
this  has  undoubtedly  been  founded  on  a  consideration  of
the  mischief  which  it  was  in  his  power  to  inflict.  The
ciompi,  once  checked,  were  soon  defeated.  The  next
gonfjEklonier  was,  like  Lando,  a  woolcomber ;  but,  want-
ing the  intrinsic  merit  of  Lando,  his  mean  station  ex-
cited universal  contempt  None  of  the  arts  could  endure
their  low  coadjutors ;  a  short  struggle  was  made  by  the
populace,  but  they  were  entirely  overpowered  with  con-
siderable slaughter,  and  the  government  was  divided
between  the  seven  greater  and  sixteen  lesser  arts,  in
nearly  equal  proportions.

The  party  of  the  lesser  arts,  or  inferior  tradesmen,
which  had  begun  this  confusion,  were  left  winners  wfaea

iTALr.  GOVERNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  437

it  ceased.  Three  men  of  distingniAhed  families  who  had
instigated  the  revolution  hecamo  the  leaders  of  Florence ;
Benedetto  Alberti,  Tomaso  Strozzi,  and  Geoigio  Scali.
Their  goyemment  had  at  first  to  contend  with  the  ciompi,
smarting  imder  loss  and  disappointment.  Bnt  a  populace
which  is  beneath  the  inferior  mechanics  may  with  ordi-
nary prudence  be  kept  in  subjection  by  a  government
that  has  a  well-orgamzeil  militia  at  its  command.  The
Guelf  aristocracy  was  &r  more  to  be  di-eaded.  Some  of
them  had  been  banished,  some  fined,  some  ennobled;
the  usual  consequences  of  revolution  which  they  had  too
often  practised  to  complain.  A  more  iniquitous  proceed-
ing disgraces  the  new  administration.  Under  pretence
of  conspiracy,  the  chief  of  the  house  of  Albisd,  and  sevA-
lal  of  his  most  eminent  associates,  were  thrown  into
prison.  So  little  evidence  of  the  charge  appeared  that
the  podestk  refused  to  condenm  them ;  but  the  people
were  clamorous  for  blood,  and  half  with,  half  without
the  forms  of  justice,  these  noble  citizens  were  led  to  exe-
cution. The  part  he  took  in  this  murder  sullies  the  fame
of  Benedetto  Alberti,  who  in  his  general  conduct  had
been  more  uniformly  influenced  by  honest  principles
than  most  of  his  contemporaries.  Those  who  shared
with  him  the  ascendency  in  the  existing  government,
Strozzi  and  Scali,  abused  their  power  by  oppression  to-
wards their  enemies,  and  insolence  towards  all.  Their
popularity  was,  of  course,  soon  at  an  end.  Alberti,  a
sincere  lover  of  freedom,  separated  himself  from  men  who
seemed  to  emulate  the  arbitrary  government  they  had
overthrown.  An  outrage  of  Scali,  in  rescuing  a  cri-
minal from  justice,  brought  the  discontent  to  a  crisis ;
he  was  arrested,  and  lost  his  head  on  the  scaffold ;  while
Strozzi,  his  colleague,  fled  from  the  city.  But  this  event
was  instantly  followed  by  a  reaction,  which  Alberti,
perhaps,  did  not  anticipate.  Armed  men  filled  the
streets ;  the  cry  of  *'  Live  the  Guelfisi  I''  was  heard.  After
a  three  years'  depression  the  aristocratical  party  regained
its  ascendency.  They  did  not  revive  the  severity  prac-
tised towards  the  Ammoniti;  but  the  two  new  arts,
created  for  the  small  trades,  were  abolished,  and  the
lesser  arts  reduced  to  a  third  part,  instead  of  something
more  than  one  half,  of  public  offices.  Several  personH
who  had  favoured  the  plebeians  were  sent  into  exile ;

438  GOy£RNMENT  OF  FLORENCE.  Ciup.  ill.  Past  II.

and  among  these  Michel  di  Lando,  whose  great  services
in  subduing  anarchy  ought  to  have  secured  the  protec-
tion of  every  government.  Benedetto  Albert!,  the  enemy
by  turns  of  every  Action — ^because  every  Action  was  in
its  turn  oppressive — experienced  some  years  afterwards
the  same  &te.  For  half  a  century  after  this  time  no  re-
volution took  place  at  Florence.  The  Guelf  aristocracy,
strong  in  opulence  and  antiquity,  and  rendered  prudent
by  experience,  under  ihe  guidance  of  the  Albizi  family,
maintained  a  preponderating  influence  without  mucL
departing,  the  times  considered,  from  moderation  and
i-espect  for  the  laws.'

it  is  sufficiently  manifest,  from  this  sketch  of  the
domestic  history  of  Florence,  how  fistr  that  fiamous  re-
public was  from  affording  a  perfect  security  fur  civil
rights  or  general  tranquillity.  They  who  hate  the  name
of  free  constitutions  may  exult  in  her  internal  dissen-
sions, as  in  those  of  Athens  or  Bome.  But  the  calm
philosopher  will  not  take  his  standard  of  comparison
from  ideal  excellence,  nor  even  from  that  practical  good
which  has  been  reached  in  our  own  unequalled  constitu-
tion, and  in  some  of  the  republics  of  modem  Europe.
The  men  and  the  institutions  of  the  fourteenth  century
are  to  be  measured  by  their  contemporaries.  Who  would
not  rather  have  been  a  citizen  of  Florence  than  a  subject
of  the  y  isconti  ?  In  a  superficial  review  of  history  we
are  sometimes  apt  to  exaggerate  the  vices  of  free  states,
and  to  lose  sight  of  those  inherent  in  tyrannical  power.
The  bold  censoriousness  of  republican  historians,  and  the
cautious  servility  of  writers  imder  an  absolute  monarchy,
conspire  to  mislead  us  as  to  the  relative  prosperity  of
nations.  Acts  of  outrage  and  tumultuous  excesses  in  a
free  state  are  blazoned  in  minute  detail,  and  descend  to
posterity;  the  deeds  of  tyranny  are  studiously  and
^perpetually  suppressed.  Even  those  historians  who  have
no  particular  motives  for  concealment  turn  away  from
the  monotonous  and  disgusting  crimes  of  tyrants.  ''  Deeds

K  For  this  part  of  Florentine  history,  Ing,  bat  it  breaJn  off  Father  too  eoon,  at

besides  Ammirato,  MachUvel,  end  Sis-  the  instant  of  Lando's  aseoming  the

mondi,  J  have  read  an  interesting  narra-  office  of  banneret Another  oaDteinpc»>

tlTo  of  the  sedition  of  the  dompi,  hj  raiy  writer,  Melchtone  da  Stefiuii,  «1m»

Oino  Ci^pani,  in  the  eighteenth  volnme  seems  to  hsTe  Aiminhed  the  materials  of

of  Mnratori's  oollecti<». It  has  an  air  of  the three  historians  above  mfPtJTWMfd.

liveliness  and  troth  which  is  very  pleas-  has  not  iUlen  In  my  way.

Italy.  HER  ACQtnsiTION  OF  TERRITORY.  4o9

of  cruelty,"  it  is  well  observed  by  Matteo  Yillani,  aftei
relating  an  action  of  Bemabo  Visconti,  *'  are  little
worthy  of  remembrance  ;  yet  let  me  be  excused  for  bay*
ing  recounted  one  out  of  many,  as  an  example  of  tbe
peril  to  which  men  are  exposed  under  the  yoke  of  an
unbounded  tyranny." ''  The  reign  of  Bemabo  afforded
abundant  instances  of  a  like  kind.  Second  only  to
Eccelin  among  the  tyrants  of  Italy,  he  rested  the  security
of  his  dominion  upon  tortures  and  death,  and  his  laws
themselves  enact  the  protraction  of  capital  punishment
through  forty  days  of  suffering.'  His  nephew,  Giovanni
Maria,  is  said,  with  a  madness  like  that  of  Nero  or  Com-
modus,  to  have  coursed  the  streets  of  Milan  by  night  with
blood-hounds,  ready  to  chase  and  tear  any  unlucky  pas-
senger.^ Nor  were  other  Italian  principalities  free
from  similar  tyrants,  though  none,  perhaps,  upon  the
whole,  BO  odious  as  the  Visconti.  The  private  history
of  many  families,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  Scala  and  the
Gonzaga,  is  but  a  series  of  assassinations.  The  ordinary
vices  of  mankind  assumed  a  tint  of  portentous  guilt  in
the  palaces  of  Italian  princes.  Their  revenge  was  fra-
tricide, and  their  lust  was  incest.

Though  fertile  and  populous,  the  proper  district  of
i^lorence  was  by  no  means  extensive.  An  b^  Acquisition
dependent  nobility  occupied  the  Tuscan  Apen-  of  territoiy
nines  with  their  castles.  Of  these  the  most  ^  ^"*»<*«
conspicuous  were  the  counts  of  Guidi,  a  numerous  and
powerfiil  family,  who  possessed  a  material  influence  in
the  affairs  of  'Florence  and  of  all  Tuscany  till  the  middle
of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  some  of  whom  preserved
their  independence  much  longer."*  To  the  south,  the
republics  of  Arezzo,  Perugia,  and  Siena;  to  the  west,
those  of  Volterra,  Pisa,  and  Lucca ;  Prato  and  Pistoja  to
the  north,  limited  the  Florentine  territory.  It  was  late
before  these  boundaries  were  removed.  During  the
Usurpations  of  Ugucoione  at  Pisa,  and  of  Castruccio  at
Lnoca,  the  republic  of  Florence  was  always  unsuccessful
in  the  field. After  the  death  of  Castruccio  she  began  to

k  P.  434.  The  last  of  the  ooaDts  Ouldi,  haying  iii»>

I  SiamoDdl,  L  vL  p.  316;  Corlo,  1st  di  wisely emhaxked  in  aoonfedencj ^pdnst

Mnaao,  p.  48ft.  noTenco,  was  obliged  to  gire  op  his

k  Corlo,  p.  595.  ancient  patrimony  in  14iOu
•  G.  Vlllani.  L  T.  c.  37.  41.  et  aUU.

440  FLORKliC£.  Chap.  in.  Past  II.

act  more  vigorously,  and  engaged  in  aeveml  confedenoiea
mth  the  powers'  of  Lombardy,  especiaUj  in  a  league
with  Venice  against  Mastino  deUa  Scala.  But  the  re-
public made  no  acquisition  of  territory  till  1351,  when
she  annexed  the  small  city  of  Prato,  not  ten  miles  from
her  walls.*  Pistoja,  though  still  nominally  independent*
received  a  Florentine  garrison  about  the  same  time.
Several  additions  were  made  to  the  district  by  fisdr  pur-
chase from  the  nobility  of  the  Apennines,  and  a  few  by
main  force.  The  territory  was  still  very  little  propor-
tioned to  the  &me  and  power  of  Florence.  The  latter
was  founded  upon  her  vast  commercial  opulence.  Eveiy
Italian  state  employed  mercenary  troops,  and  the  rich-
est was,  of  course,  the  most  powerM.  In  the  war
against  Mastino  della  Scala  in  1336  the  revenues  of
Florence  are  reckoned  by  Villani  at  three  hundred
thousand  florins,  which,  as  he  observes,  is  more  than  the
king  of  Naples  or  of  Ara^n  possesses.""  The  expenditure
went  at  that  time  very  much  beyond  the  receipt,  and
was  defrayed  by  loans  from  the  principal  mercantile
firms,  which  were  secured  by  public  frmds,  the  earliest
instance,  I  believe,  of  that  financial  resource.^  Her
population  was  computed  at  ninety  thousand  souls.
Villani  reckons  the  district  at  eighty  thousand  men,  I
suppose  those  only  of  military  age ;  but  this  calculation
must  have  been  too  large,  even  though  he  included,  as
we  may  presume,  the  city  in  his  estimate.** Tuscany,

■  H.V1Uaili.p.Y3. TUswuntlMrB  in  qneitt  tonpi  avea  In  FIranse  dm  «

meaaore  of  osurpftttoa;  bat  the  republie  96  mlU  nooiinl  da  portare  anne  da  U  In

had  aome  raaaon  to  apprehtnd  that  Prato  TO  anni—StlniaTaBl  avere  in  FlrenM  da
might  fltll  into  the  bands  of  tlM  Vlaoontl. ,  90  mila  hoccbe  tra  nomint  •  femtaM  0

Their  oondnct  towanla  Ftitoda  waa  in-  fimcialll,  per  l^arrlao  del  pane  UaognaTa

flnenced  by  the  same  mottle;  bat  it  waa  al  ooutinno  aUadttk.  These  proportloos.

stiU ftirther  removed firom abaolute  of25,000  men  between  fifteen  and  aeventy,

Jnstioe. p.  91.  and  of  90,000  aoola,  are  aa  nearty  aa  poa-

^  O.  Villani, L  Ix.  c  90-93. These  alble  oonaooant  to  modem  calcolatlon,  of

diapters  eontaln  a  veryftdl  and  interest-  whidi  VlUani  knewnothlng,  whidi  oon-

ng  statement  of  the  rerenues,  ezpenaesp  firms  his  aocnra^ ;  thooc^  V*  Sloaaondl

popalation.  and  Internal  oonditlun  of  aaserta,  p.  309,  that  the  dty  eontained

norenoe  at  that  time. Itet  of  them  is  ISO^OO  inhabltantB,  on  no  better  amitbo-

extncted  by  M.  Slsmonrtl,  t  ▼.  p.  366.  iltj.  as  Ikr  as  appean,  than  tiiat  of  Boo-

The  gold  florin  was  worth  about  ten  caodo,  wlio  says  that  100,000  periahed  bi

shlUingi  of  oar  money. The  district  of  the  great  plagne  of  1348,  wliidi  waa

Florence  was  not  then  mndi  larger  than  generally  sappoaed  to  destroy  two  oat  of

Middlesez.  three. Bat  snrely  two  Tagae  soppoal*

P  0.  Villani.  1.  zL  c  49.  tlons  are  not  to  be  oomUned,  In  onler  to

1  C  93.  TroYtafflodtllaentemente  dM  crcrthrow  sadi  a  testlmoqy  as  that  <#

ITALY.  PiaA.  441

though  well  onltivated  and  fionriBhing,  does  uot  contain
by  any  means  so  great  a  number  of  inhabitants  in  that
space  at  present.

The  fint  eminent  conquest  made  by  Florence  was  that
of  Pisa,  early  in  the  fifteenth  century.  Pisa
had  been  distinguished  as  a  commercial  city
ever  since  the  age  of  the  Othos.  From  her  ports,  and
those  of  Genoa,  the  earliest  naval  armaments  of  the
western  nations  were  fitted  out  against  the  Saracen
corsairs  who  infested  the  Mediterranean  coasts.  In  the
eleventh  century  she  undertook,  and,  after  a  pretty  long
struggle,  completed,  the  important,  or  at  least  the  splen-
did, conquest  of  Sardinia,  an  island  long  subject  to  a
Moorish  chieftain.  Several  noble  fEunilies  of  Pisa,  who
had  de&ayed  the  chief  cost  of  this  expedition,  shared  the
island  in  districts,  which  they  held  in  fief  of  the  re-
public/ At  a  later  period  the  Balearic  isles  were  sub-
jected, but  not  long  retained,  by  Pisa.  Her  naval
prowess  was  supported  by  her  commerce.  A  writer  of
the  twelfth  century  reproaches  her  with  the  Jews,  the
Arabians,  and  other  *'  monsters  of  the  sea,"  who  thronged
in  her  streets.'  The  cnisades  poured  fresh  wealth  intc
the  lap  of  the  maritime  Italian  cities. In  some  of  those

VlllaQi,  who  leemt  to  have  oouulted  all  dty.  VlUaiii.  ibkL Mr.  Bosooe  has  pab-

teglaten  and  other  anthentk  documents  Uahed  a  mamiacrlpt,  ertdently  written

taihlsreaeh.  alter  the  taki]« of  Hw in  1406.  thongb.

What  YiOani  ai^  of  the  popaUtlan  as  I  ahoaU  fgaim,  not  long  alter  that

of  the  diatrtet  may  lead  na  to  reckon  It,  eyent.  containing  a  pro|MMitlon  ibr  an

perhapa,  at  ahoat  180.000  loala,  allowing  income-tax  of  ten  per  cent  tfaroogbont

iU  baptiama  to  be  one  in  tUrtj  of  the  the  Florentine  domlniona. Among  Ita

population.  BaglaoaTasi  in  qneati  tempi  other  ralfulationa,  the  population  la  nek-

avere  nel  oootado  e  distretto  dl  Flrenae  oned  at  400,000 ;  aanmdng  that  to  be  the

de  80  mlla  oomlnL TroTtamo  del  plo-  proportion  to  80,000  men  of  miUtaxy  age^

vano,  Che  battenaTa  i  flmdulU,  impe-  though  certainly  beyond  the  mark. It

rodie  per  ogni  maaddo,  che  batteaaava  la  aingnlar  that  the  diatrlet  of  Florence

in  San  Giovanni,  per  ayere  11  novero,  hi  1343  Is  eathnated  bj  YlUanl  to  contain

metea  nna  fimt  nera,  e  per  ogni  femina  aa  great  a  nvmber,  beibre  FiM,  Yolterra,

vna  bianca,  trovb,  di'  eruo  V  anno  In  or  even  Pmto  and  PiatqiK  liad  been  an-

qneiti  tempi  dalle  6800  in  aei  mi]a,aTan-  nezed  to  it— Roocoe'a  Liib  of  Lorenio.

laado  le  pit  volte  11  leaio  maiwnHn»  da  Appendix.  Na  16.

aoo  in  600  per  anno. Baptima  could  '  Simoodi,  t  i.  p.  846,  ST9.

mlybepCTfonnedinonepnbUoftmtat  b  q^  pergit  Ftaaa.  Tidet  illio  monatw

Florence,  Pisa,  and  some  other  dtle&  muliM;

The  building  that  contained  this  fbntwaa  Hoc  urba,  Fnsania,  Turohia,  Libyda

called  the  Baptteteiy. The  baptiatariv  quoqneJ  Flulhia,

of  Floranoe  and  Piaa  still  ramain,  and  ara  Sordida;ChaldnisnalQ8trantmflBnia

well  known.  Du  Osnge,  v.  Baptisterium.  *?*^, ^.  « .^ ^  .vi.^..

Bat  there  were  iM^^iUnpildie.  and  ^^'Si^nSlJ?^*^

hundi^andtendinrdieawitUnthe  apudMu»tori.I>lawt81.

442  PISA.  Chap.  III.  Paot  H.

expeditions  a  great  portion  of  the  annament  was  con-
veyed by  sea  to  Palestme,  and  freighted  the  vessels  of
Pisa,  Genoa,  and  Venice.  When  the  Christians  had
bought  with  their  blood  the  sea-coast  of  Syria,  these
republics  procured  the  most  extensive  privileges  in  the
new  states  that  were  formed  out  of  their  slender  con-
quests, and  became  the  conduits  through  which  the  pro-
duce of  the  East  flowed  in  upon  the  ruder  nations  of
Europe.  Pisa  maintained  a  large  share  of  this  commerce,
as  well  as  of  maritime  greatness,  tiU  near  the  end  of
the  thirteenth  century.  In  1282,  we  are  told  by  Yillani,
she  was  in  great  power,  possessing  Sardinia,  Corsica,
and  Elba,  from  whence  llie  republic,  as  well  as  private
persons,  derived  large  revenues,  and  almost  ruled  the
sea  with  their  ships  and  merchandises,  and  beyond  sea
were  very  powerful  in  the  city  of  Acre,  and  much  con-
nected with  its  principal  citizens.'  The  prosperous  era
of  Pisa  is  marked  by  her  public  edifices.  She  was  the
first  Italian  city  that  took  a  pride  in  architectural  mag-
nificence. Her  cathedral  is  of  the  eleventh  century ;  the
baptistery,  the  famous  inclined  tower,  or  belfry,  the
arcades  that  surround  the  Campo  Santo,  or  cemetery  of
Pisa,  are  of  the  twelfth,  or,  at  latest,  of  the  thirteenth."

It  would  have  beeii  no  slight  anomaly  in  the  annala
of  Italy,  or,  we  might  say,  of  mankind,  if  two  neighbour-
ing cities,  competitors  in  every  mercantile  occupation
and  every  naval  enterprise,  had  not  been  perpetual
enemies  to  each  other.  One  is  more  surprised,  if  the
fact  be  true,  that  no  war  broke  out  between  Pisa  and
Genoa  tiU  1119."  From  this  time  at  least  they  con.
tinually  recui-red.  An  equality  of  forces  and  of  courage
kept  the  conflict  imcertain  for  the  greater  part  of  two
centuries.  Their  battles  were  numerous,  and  sometimes,
taken  separately,  decisive;  but  the  public  spirit  and
resources  of  each  city  were  called  out  by  defeat,  and  we
generally  find  a  new  annament  replace  the  losses  of  an
tmsuccessful  combat.  In  this  respect  the  naval  contest
between  Pisa  and  Genoa,  though  much  longer  protracted,
resembles  that  of  Rome  and  Carthage  in  the  first  Punio
war.  But  Pisa  was  reserved  for  her  ^gades.  In  one
&tal  battle,  off  the  little  isle  of  Meloria,  in  1284,  her

*  VilUml,  L  vl.  c  8&  t  ill.  p.  406.

"  StamoDdi,  t  !▼.  p.  118;  Tiniboichi, '  Muimtorl,  ad  aan.  lllft.

ITALT.  PISA«  443

"whole  navy  was  destroyed.  Several  tmfortanate  and
expensive  armaments  bad  almost  exhausted  tlie  state,
and  this  was  the  last  effort,  by  private  sacrifices,  to  equip
one  more  fleet.  After  this  defeat  it  was  in  vain  to  con-
tend for  empire.  Eleven  thousand  Fisans  languished
for  many  years  in  prison ;  it  was  a  current  saying  that
whoever  would  see  Pisa  should  seek  her  at  Genoa.  A
treacherous  chief,  that  count  Ugolino  whose  guilt  was
so  terribly  avenged,  is  said  to  have  purposely  lost  the
battle,  and  prevented  the  ransom  of  the  captives,  to
secure  his  power;  accusations  that  obtain  easy  credit
with  an  unsuccessful  people.

From,  the  epoch  of  ihe  battle  of  Meloria,  Fisa  ceased
to  be  a  maritime  power.  Forty  years  afterwards  she
was  stripped  of  her  ancient  colony,  the  island  of  Sar-
dinia. The  four  Fisan  feunilies  who  had  been  invested
with  that  conquest  had  been  apt  to  consider  it  as  their
absolute  property ;  their  appellation  of  judge  seemed  to
indicate  deputed  power,  but  they  sometimes  assumed
that  of  king,  and  several  attempts  had  been  made  to
establish  an  immediate  dependence  on  the  empire,  or
even  on  the  pope.  A  new  potentate  had  now  come  for-
ward on  the  stage.  The  malecontent  feudataries  of  Sar-
dinia made  overtures  to  the  king  of  Aragon,  who  had  no
scruples  about  attacking  the  indisputable  possession  of
a  declining  republic.  Fisa  made  a  few  unavailing  efforts
to  defend  Sardinia;  but  the  nominal  superiority  was
hardly  worth  a  contest ;  and  she  surrendered  her  rights
to  the  crown  of  Aragon.  Her  commerce  now  dwindled
with  her  greatness.  During  the  fourteenth  century
Fisa  almost  renounced  the  ocean  and  directed  her  main
attention  to  the  politics  of  Tuscany.  Ghibelin  by  in-
variable predilection,  she  was  in  constant  opposition  to
the  Guelf  cities  which  looked  up  to  Florence.  But  in
the  fourteenth  century  the  names  of  freeman  and  Ghibelin
were  not  easily  united ;  and  a  city  in  that  interest  stood
insulated  between  the  republics  of  an  opposite  faction
and  the  tyrants  of  her  own.  Fisa  feU  several  times  under
the  yoke  of  usurpers;  she  was  included  in  the  wide-
spreading  acquisitions  of  Gian  Galeazzo  Yisconti.  At
his  death  one  of  his  family  seized  the  dominion,  and
finally  the  Florentines  purchased  for  400,000  florins  a
rival  and  once  equal  city. The  Fisans  made  a  resist

444  6£N0A«  Chap.  III.  Past  It.

ance  more  accoiding  to  what  they  had  been  than  what
they  were.

The  early  histoiy  of  Genoa,  in  all  her  foreign  rek^
Q«ooA.  tions,  ia  involved  in  that  of  Piaa.  As  allies
HwwBn  against  the  Saracens  of  A&ica,  Spain,  and  the
Mediterranean  islands,  as  oorrivals  in  commerce  with
these  very  Saracens  or  with  the  Christians  of  the  East,
as  co-operators  in  the  great  expeditions  nnder  the  banner
of  tlie  cross,  or  as  engaged  in  deadly  warfare  with  each
other,  the  two  republics  stand  in  continual  parallel.
From  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  Genoa
was,  I  think,  the  more  prominent  and  flourishing  of  the
two.  She  had  conquered  the  island  of  Corsica  at  the
same  time  that  Pisa  i^uced  Sardinia :  and  her
acquisition,  though  less  considerable,  was  longer
preserved.  Her  territory  at  home,  the  ancient  Liguria,
was  much  more  extensive,  and,  what  was  most  import-
ant, contained  a  greater  range  of  sea-coast  than  that  of
Pisa.  But  the  commercial  and  maritime  prosperity  of
Genoa  may  be  dated  from  the  recovery  of  Constuitinople
by  the  Greeks  in  1261.  Jealous  of  the  Venetians,
by  whose  arms  the  Latin  emperors  had  been  placed,
and  were  still  maintained,  on  tneir  throne,  the  Genoese
assisted  Palaeologus  in  overturning  that  usurpation.
They  obtained  in  consequence  the  suburb  of  Pera  or
Galata,  over  against  Constantinople,  as  an  exclusive  set-
tlement, where  their  colony  was  ruled  by  a  magistrate
sent  from  home,  and  frequently  defied  the  Greek  capital
with  its  armed  galleys  and  intrepid  seamen.  From  this
convenient  station  Genoa  extended  her  commerce  into
the  Black  Sea,  and  established  her  principal  feictory  at
Gaffa,  in  the  Crimean  peninsula.  This  commercial
monopoly,  for  such  she  endeavoured  to  render
^  it,  aggravated  the  animosity  of  Venice.  As
Pisa  retired  from  the  field  of  waters,  a  new  enemy
appeared  upon  the  horizon  to  dispute  tjie  maritime  do-
minion of  Genoa.  Her  first  war  with  Venice  was  in
1258.  The  second  was  not  till  after  the  victory  of
Meloria  had  crushed  her  more  ancient  enemy.  It  broke
out  in  1293,  and  was  prosecuted  with  determined  fury
and  a  great  display  of  naval  strength  on  both  sides.
One  G^ooso  armament,  as  we  are  assured  by  an  his-
torian^  consisted  of  one  hiindred  and  fifty-five  galleys.

Italy.  HER  WAfiS.  445

each  maimiMl  with  from  two  hundred  and  twenty  to
three  hundred  BaOon;^  a  force  astonishing  to  those
who  know  the  more  slender  resources  of  Italy  in  modem
times,  but  which  is  rendered  credible  by  several  ana-
logous facts  of  good  authority.  It  was,  however,  beyond
any  other  exertion.  The  usual  fleets  of  Gfenoa  and
Venice  were  of  seventy  to  ninety  galleys.

Perhaps  the  naval  exploits  of  these  two  republics  may
afford  a  more  interesting  spectacle  to  some  minds  than
any  other  part  of  Italian  history.  Compared  with  mili
tary  transactions  of  the  same  age,  they  cure  more  san*
guinaiy,  more  brilliant,  and  exhibit  full  as  much  skill
and  intrepidity.  But  maritime  warfea^  is  scanty  in
circumstances,  and  the  indefiniteness  of  its  locality  pre-
vents it  from  resting  in  the  memory.  And  though  the
wars  of  Genoa  and  Venice  were  not  always  so  uncon-
nected with  territorial  politics  as  those  of  the  former
city  with  Pisa,  yet,  from  the  alternation  of  success  and
equality  of  forces,  they  did  not  offcen  produce  any  decisive
effect.  One  memorable  encounter  in  the  Sea  of  Marmora,
where  the  Grenoese  fought  and  conquered  single-handed
against  ihe  Venetians,  the  Catalans,  and  the  Greeks,
hardly  belongs  to  Italian  history.'

But  the  most  remarkable  war,  and  that  productive  of
the  greatest  consequences,  was  one  that  com-  ^^^  ^35^
menced  in  1378,  after  several  acts  of  hostility  War  of
in  the  Levant,  wherein  the  Venetians  appear  °****'
to  have  been  the  principal  aggressors.  Genoa  did  not
stand  alone  in  this  war.  A  formidable  confederacy  was
raised  against  Venice,  who  had  given  provocation  to
many  enemies.  Of  this  Francis  Carrara,  signer  of  Padua,
and  the  king  of  Hungary  were  the  leaders.  But  the
principal  struggle  was,  as  usual,  upon  the  waves.  Dur-
mg  the  winter  of  1378  a  Genoese  fleet  kept  the  sea,  and
ravaeed  the  shores  of  Dalmatia.  TheVenetian  armament
had  oeen  weakened  by  an  epidemic  disease,  and  when
Vitt)r  Pisani,  their  admiral,  gave  battle  to  the  enemy,
he  was  compelled  to  fight  with  a  hasty  conscription  of
landsmen  against  the  best  sailors  in  the  world.  Entirely
defeated,  and  taking  refuge  at  Venice  with  only  seven
galleys,  Pisani  was  cast  into  prison,  as  if  his  ill  fortune

T  HoiatoM,  A.C.  ]3M.  ■  Gftbon,  c  «&

I

446  GENOA.  Chap.  UI.  Part  IJ

Lad  been  bis  crime. Meanwhile  the  Oenoeee  fleet,
augmented  by  a  strong  reinforcement,  rode  before  the
long natural ramparts  that  separate  the lagunes  of
Venice  from  the  Adriatic. Six  passages  intersect  the
islands  which  constitate  this  barrier,  besides  the  broader
outlets  of  Brondolo  and  Fossone,  through  which  the
waters  of  the  Brenta  and  the  Adige  are  discharged. The
lagune  itself,  as  is  well  known,  consists  of  extremely
shallow  water,  unnavigable  for  any  vessel  except  along
the  course  of  artificial  and  intricate  passages. Notwith-
standing the  apparent  difficulties  or  such  an  enterprise,
Pietro  Doria,  the  Genoese  admiral,  determined  to  reduce
the  city. His  first  successes  gave  him  reason  to  hope.
He  forced  the  passage,  and  stormed  the  little  town  of
Chioggia,'  built  upon  the  inside  of  the  isle  bearing  that
name,  about  tweniy-five  miles  south  of  Venice. K  early
four  thousand  prisoners  fell  here  into  his  hands : an
augury,  as  it  seemed,  of  a  more  splendid  triumph. In
the  consternation  this  misfortune  inspired  at  Venice  the
first  impulse  was  to  ask  for  peace. The  ambassadors
carried  with  them  seven  Genoese  prisoners,  as  a  sort  of
peace-ofiering  to  the  admiral,  and  were  empowered  to
make large and humiliating concessions, reserving
nothing  but  the  liberty  of  Venice. Francis  Cajraia
strongly  urged  his  allies  to  treat  for  peace. But  the
Genoese  were  stimulated  by  long  hatred,  and  intoxicated
by  this  unexpected  opportunity  of  revenge. Doria,  call-
ing the  ambaissadors  mto  council,  thus  addressed  l^em :
'*  Ye  shall  obtain  no  peace  from  us,  I  swear  to  you,  nor
from  the  lord  of  Padua,  till  first  we  have  put  a  curb  in
the  mouths  of  those  wild  horses  that  stand  upon  the
place  of  St.  Mark. When  they  are  bridled  you  shall  have
enough  of  peace. Take  back  with  you  your  Genoese
captives,  for  I  am  coming  within  a  few  days  to  release
both  them  and  their  companions  from  your  prisons."
When  this  answer  was  reported  to  the  senate,  they  pre-
pared to  defend  themselves  with  the  oharacteristic  fum-
ness  of  their  government. Every  eye  was  turned  towards
a  great  man  nnjustly  punished, their  admiral  Vittor
Pisani. Ho  was  called  out  of  prison  to  defend  his  cotm-
try  amidst  general  acclamations ;  but,  equal  in  magna-

*  GhioggU,  known  at  Venice  hy  the the  Venetian  dialect,  which  ^^imwgfff  thf
name  of  Chlosa,  aroordiog  to  the  usage  of  g  into  a

iTALT.  HER  WARS.  447

nimity  and  simple  Tepnblican  patriotifim  to  the  noblest
characters  of  antiquity,  Pisani  repressed  the  favouring
voices  of  the  multitude,  and  bade  them  reserve  their
entliusiasm  for  St.  Mark,  the  symbol  and  war-ciy  of
Venice.  Under  tlie  vigorous  command  of  Pisani  the
canals  were  fortified  or  occupied  by  large  vessels  armed
with  artillery ;  thirty-four  galleys  were  equipped ;  eveiy
citiz^i  contributed  according  to  his  power ;  in  the  entire
want  of  commercial  resources  (for  Yenioe  had  not  a
merchant-ship  during  this  war)  private  plate  was  melted ;
and  the  senate  held  out  the  promise  of  ennobling  thirty
funilies  who  should  be  most  forward  in  this  strife  of
patriotism.

The  new  fleet  was  so  ill  provided  with  seamen  that
for  some  months  the  admind  employed  them  only  in
manoeuvring  along  the  canals.  From  some  unaccount-
able supineness,  or  more  probably  from  the  insuperable
diffictdties  of  the  undertaking,  the  Genoese  made  no
assault  upon  the  city.  They  had,  indeed,  fair  grounds  to
hope  its  reduction  by  fisunine  or  despair.  Every  access
to  the  continent  was  cut  off  by  the  troops  of  Padua ;  and
the  king  of  Hungary  had  mastered  almost  all  the  Yene*
tian  towns  in  Istria  and  along  the  Dalmatian  coast.  The
doge  Contanni,  taking  the  chief  command,  appeared  at
length  with  his  fleet  near  Chioggia,  before  the  Genoese
were  aware.  They  were  still  less  aware  of  his  secret  de-
sign. He  pushed  one  of  the  large  round  vessels,  then
ctdled  cooche,  into  the  narrow  passage  of  Chioggia  which
connects  the  lagune  with  the  sea,  and,  mooring  her
athwart  the  channel,  interrupted  that  communication.
Attacked  with  fury  by  the  enemy,  this  vessel  went  down
on  the  spot,  and  the  doge  improved  his  advantage  by
sinking  loads  of  stones  imtil  the  passage  became  abso-
lutely imnavigable.  It  was  still  possible  for  the  Genoese
fleet  to  follow  the  principal  canal  of  the  lagune  towards
Venice  and  the  northern  passages,  or  to  sail  out  of  it  by
the  harbour  of  Brondolo ;  but,  whether  from  confusion
or  from  miscalculating  the  dangers  of  their  position,  they
Buffered  the  Venetians  to  close  the  canal  upon  them  by
the  same  means  they  had  used  at  Chioggia,  and  even  to
place  their  fleet  in  the  entrance  of  Brondolo  so  near  to
the  logone  that  the  Genoese  could  not  form  their  ships
in  line  of  battle. The  circumstances  of  the  trro  com

448  WAnS  or  GENOA. Chap.  III.  Pabt  [I.

batantB  were  thus  entirely  changed.  But  the  Genoese
fleet,  though  besieged  in  Chioggia,  was  impregnable,  and
their  command  of  the  land  secured  them  from  famine.
Venice,  notwithstanding  her  unexpected  success,  was
Btill  Tery  &r  from  secure ;  it  was  difficult  for  the  doge  to
keep  his  position  through  the  winter ;  and  if  the  enemy
could  appear  in  open  sea,  the  risks  of  combat  were  ex-
tremely hazardous.  It  is  said  that  the  senate  deliberated
upon  transporting  the  seat  of  their  liberty  to  Candia,  and
that  the  doge  had  announced  his  intention  to  raise  the
siege  of  Ghioggia,  if  expected  succours  did  not  arrive  by
the  Ist  of  January,  1380.  On  that  very  day  Carlo
Zeno,  an  admiral  who,  ignorant  of  the  daiigers  of  his
country,  had  been  supporting  the  honour  of  her  flag  in
the  Levant  and  on  the  coast  of  Liguria,  appeared  with
a  reinforcement  of  eighteen  galleys  and  a  store  of  pro-
visions. From  that  moment  the  confidence  of  Venice
revived.  The  fleet,  now  superior  in  strength  to  the
enemy,  began  to  attack  them  with  vivacity.  After
several  months  of  obstinate  resistance  the  Genoese,
whom  their  republic  had  ineffectually  attempted  to  re-
lieve by  a  fresh  armament,  blocked  up  in  the  town  of
Ghioggia,  and  pressed  by  hunger,  were  obliged  to  sur-
render. Nineteen  galleys  only  out  of  forty-eight  were  in
good  condition ;  and  the  crews  were  equally  diminished
in  the  ten  months  of  their  occupation  of  Ghioggia.  The
pride  of  Genoa  was  deemed  to  be  justly  humbled ;  and
even  her  own  historian  confesses  that  Gk)d  would  not
suffer  so  noble  a  city  as  Venice  to  become  the  spoil  of  a
conqueror.**

Each  of  the  two  republics  had  sufficient  reason  to*
lament  their  mutual  prejudices,  and  the  selfish  cupidity
of  their  merchants,  which  usurps  in  all  maritime  coun-
tries the  name  of  patriotism.  Though  the  capture  of
Ghioggia  did  not  terminate  the  war,  both  parties  were
exhausted,  and  willing,  next  year,  to  accept  the  media-
tion of  the  duke  of  Savoy.  By  the  peace  of  Turin,
Venice  surrendered  most  of  her  territorial  possessions  to
the  king  of  Hungaiy. That  prince  and  Francis  Garrara

^  O.  Stella,  Anzudes  G«niieiiaeB;  G*-  teenth  Tolnme  of  MTmtori'a  ooOectka.

faro,  Istori*  Padofvaoa. Both  theae  god-  Siamondi'a  nanraava  ia  vei7  dear  and

tempomy  worim,  of  which  the  latter  gpfrited— Hiat  dea  B^imbL  I*L  L rU

flvea  the  beat  reUtton,  are  in  the  ieren-  p.  aoft-ttS.

ITALT.  HER  GOVERNMENT.  449

were  the  only  gainers.  Genoa  obtained  the  isle  of  Tene-
dos,  one  of  the  original  subjects  of  dispute ;  a  poor  in-
demnity for  her  losses.  Though,  upon  a  hasty  view,  the
result  of  this  war  appears  more  unfavourable  to  Venice,
yet  in  fJEict  it  is  the  epoch  of  the  decline  of  Genoa.  From
this  time  she  never  commanded  the  ocean  with  such
navies  as  before ;  her  commerce  gradually  went  into
decay ;  and  the  fifteenth  century,  the  most  splendid  in
the  annals  of  Venice,  is,  till  recent  times,  the  most  igno-
minious in  those  of  Genoa.  But  this  was  partly  owing  to
internal  dissensions,  by  which  her  liberty,  as  well  as
gloiy,  was  for  a  while  suspended.

At  Grenoa,  as  in  other  cities  of  Lombardy,  the  princi-
pal magistrates  of  the  republic  were  originally  Government
styled  Consuls.  A  chronicle  drawn  up  under  otGtooB,
the  inspection  of  the  senate  perpetuates  the  names  of
these  early  magistrates.  It  appears  that  tbeir  number
varied  from  four  to  six,  annually  elected  by  the  people
in  their  full  parliament.  These  consuls  presided  over
the  republic  and  commanded  the  forces  by  land  and  sea ;
while  another  class  of  magistrates,  bearing  the  same
title,  were  annually  elected  by  the  several  companies
into  which  the  people  were  divided,  for  the  adminis-
tration of  civil  justice.**  This  was  the  regimen  of  the
twelfth  century;  but  in  tbe  next  Genoa  fell  into  the
feshion  of  intrusting  the  executive  power  to  a  foreign
podesta.  The  podesta  was  assisted  by  a  council  of  eight,
chosen  by  the  eight  companies  of  nobility.  This  insti
tution,  if  indeed  it  were  anything  more  than  a  custom  or
usurpation,  originated  probably  not  much  later  than  the
beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century.  It  gave  not  only
an  aristocratic,  but  almost  an  oligarchical  character  to  the
constitution,  since  many  of  the  nobility  were  not  mem-
bers of  these  eight  societies.  Of  the  senate  or  councils
we  hardly  know  more  than  their  existence ;  they  are
very  little  mentioned  by  historians.  Everything  of  a
}z;eneral  nature,  everything  that  required  the  expression
of  public  will,  was  reserved  for  the  entire  and  unrepre-
sented sovereignty  of  the  people.  In  no  city  was  the
parliament  so  often  convened ;  for  war,  for  peace,  for
alliance,  for  change  of  government.** These  very  disso

aUmondfti  t  L  p.  353.  i  Id.  t  UL  p.  i»l0.

TOL.  I.  2q

450  GOYERNVENT  OF  GENOAi Chap.  III.  Part  IL

naait  elements  were  not  likely  to  hannonize.  The  people,
Biiffioiently  accustomed  to  the  fomis  of  democracy  to
imbibe  its  spirit,  repined  at  the  practical  influence  which
was  thrown  into  the  scale  of  the  nobles.  Nor  did  some
of  the  latter  class  scruple  to  enter  that  path  of  ambition
which  leads  to  power  by  flattery  of  the  populace.  Two
or  three  times  within  the  thirteenth  century  a  high-bom
lemagogue  had  nearly  overturned  the  general  liberty.
Like  the  Torriani  at  Milan,  through  the  pretence  of  de-
fending that  of  individuals.*  Among  the  nobility  them-
selves four  houses  were  distinguished  beyond  all  the
rest — the  Grimaldi,  the  Fieschi,  the  Dona,  the  Spinola ;
the  two  former  of  Ouelf  politics,  the  latter  adherents  of
the  empire.'  Perhaps  their  equality  of  forces,  and  a  jea-
lousy which  even  the  families  of  the  same  faction  enter-
ta^ed  of  each  other,  prevented  any  one  from  usurping
the  signiory  at  Genoa.  Neither  the  Guelf  nor  Ghibe-
lin  party  obtaining  a  decided  preponderance,  continual
revolutions  occurred  in  the  city.  The  most  celebrated
was  the  expulsion  of  the  Ghibelins  under  the  Boria  and
Spinola  in  1318.  They  had  recourse  to  the  Visconti  of
Milan,  and  their  own  resources  were  not  unequal  to  cope
with  their  country.  The  Guelfs  thought  it  necessaxy  to
call  in  Bobert  king  of  Naples,  always  ready  to  give
assistance  as  the  price  of  dominion,  and  conferred  upon
him  the  temporary  sovereignty  of  Genoa.  A  siege  of
several  years'  duration,  if  we  believe  on  historian  of  that
age,  produced  as  many  remarkable  exploits  as  that  of
Troy.  They  have  not  proved  so  interesting  to  posterity.
The  Ghibelins  continued  for  a  length  of  time  excluded
from  the  city,  but  in  possession  of  the  seaport  of  Savona,
whence  they  traded  and  equipped  fleets,  as  a  rival
republic,  and  even  entered  into  a  separate  war  with
Venice.*  Experience  of  the  uselessness  of  ho^ity,  and
the  loss  to  which  they  exposed  their  common  country,
produced  a  reconciliation,  or  rather  a  compromise,  in
1331,  when  the  Ghibelins  returned  to  Genoa.  But  the
people  felt  that  many  years  of  misfortune  had  been  owing
to  the  private  enmities  of  four  overbearing  families.  An
opportunity  soon  ofiered  of  reducing  their  influence
within  verv  narrow  bounds.

•  SImoodi,  p.  3U  t  Id.  t  ill.  p.  S28.  S  TiLMit.  1  iz.  paaAm.

lTALr«  TH£  FIRST  DOGE.  451

The  Gbibelin  fiEkotioii  was  at  the  head  of  ai&dn  in  1339,
a  Doria  and  a  Spinola  being  its  leaders,  -when  xi^^ion  or
the  discontent  of  a  laige  fleet  in  want  of  pay  tiw  fim
bioke  out  in  open  insurrection.  Savona  and  ^^^'
the  neighbouring  towns  took  arms  avowedly  against  the
aristocratical  tyranny;  and  the  capital  was  itself  on
the  point  of  joining  the  insurgents.  There  was,  by  the
Genoese  constitution^  a  magistrate  named  the  Abbot  of
the  people,  acting  as  a  kind  of  tribune  for  their  protec-
tion against  the  oppression  of  the  nobility.  His  functions
are  not,  however,  in  any  book  I  have  seen,  very  clearly
defined.  This  ofi^ce  had  been  abolished  by  th,e  present
government,  and  it  was  the  first  demand  of  the  male-
contents  that  it  should  be  restored.  This  was  acceded
to,  and  twenty  del^ates  were  appointed  to  make  the
choice.  While  they  delayed,  and  the  populace  was
grown  weary  with  waiting,  a  nameless  artisan  called  out
from  an  elevated  station  that  he  could  direct  them  to  a
fit  person.  When  the  people,  ia  jest,  bade  him  spesiik  on;
he  uttered  the  name  of  Simon  Boccanegra^  This  was  a
man  of  noble  birth,  and  well  esteemed,  who  was  then
present  among  the  crowd.  The  word  was  suddenly  taken
up ;  a  cry  was  heard  that  Boccanegra  should  be  abbot :
he  was  instantly  brought  forward,  and  the  sword  of  jus-
tice forced  into  his  hand.  As  soon  as  silence  could  be
obtained  he  modestly  thanked  them  for  their  favour,  but
declined  an  office  which  his  nobility  disqualified  him
fwxa  exercising.  At  Ibis  a  single  voice  out  of  the  crowd
exclaimed,  *^8ignhr!"  and  iMs  title  was  reverberated
from  every  side.  Fearful  of  worse  consequences,  the
.actual  magistrates  urged  him  to  comply  with  the  people
and  accept  the  o£Bce  of  abbot.  But  Boccanegra,  address-
ing the  assembly,  declared  his  readiness  to  become  their
abbot,  Siguier,  or  whatever  they  would.  The  cry  of
*^  Siguier!"  was  now  louder  than  before;  while  others
cried  out,  *'  Let  him  be  duke  I "  The  latter  title  was
received  with  greater  approbation ;  and  Boccanegra  was
conducted  to  the  palace,  the  first  duke,  or  doge,  of  Genoa.''

Caprice  alone,  or  an  idea  of  more  pomp  and  dignity,
led  the  populace,  we  may  conjecture,  to  prefer  snboequent
this  title  to  that  of  signior;  but  it  produced  im-  revoiutioM

*  Q  Stella. AmiAl.  Gennenses,  In  Scrlpu  Tier.  ItaL  t  zni.  p.  1073.

2o2

452  REVOLOTION  OF  GENOA. Chaf.  III.  Part  It

portant  and  lugblj  beneficial  consequences. In  all  neijj^
bouiing  cities  an  arbitrary  government  had  been  alreadjf
established  under  their  respective  signiors; the  name
was  associated  with  indefinite  power,  while  that  of  doge
had  only  been  taken  by  the  elective  and  very  limited
chief  magistrate  of  another  maritime  republic. Neither
Boccanegra  nor  his  successors  ever  rendered  their  antho-
rity  unUmited  or  hereditary. The  constitution  of  Genoa^
from  an  oppressive  aristocracy,  became  a  mixture  of  the
two  other  forms,  with  an  exclusion  of  the  nobles  from
power. Those  four  great  feunilies  who  had  domineered
alternately  for  almost  a  century  lost  their  influence  at
home  after  the  revolution  of  1339. Yet,  what  is  remark-
able enough,  they  were  still  selected  in  preference  for  *
the  highest  of  trusts:  their  names  are  still  identified
with  me  glory  of  Genoa ;  her  fleets  hardly  sailed  bat
under  a  Doria^  a  Spinola,  or  a  Grimaldi ;  such  confidence
could  the  republic  bestow  upon  their  patriotism,  or  that
of  those  whom  they  commanded. Meanwhile  two  or
three  new  families,  a  plebeian  oligarchy,  filled  their  place
in  domestic  honours ;  the  Adomi,  the  Fregosi,  the  Mon-
talti,  contended  for  the  ascendant. From  their  com-
petition ensued  revolutions  too  nimierous  almost  for  a
separate  histoiy ;  in  four  years,  from  1390  to  1394,  the
doge  was  ten  times  changed;  swept  away  or  brought
back  in  the  fluctuation  of  popular  tumult. Antoniotto
Adomo,  four  times  doge  of  Genoa,  had  sought  the  friend-
ship of  Gian  Gkdeazzo  Yisconti ;  but  that  crafty  tyrant
meditated  the  subjugation  of  the  republic,  and  played
her  £EM)tions  against  one  another  to  render  her  fedl  secure.
Adomo  perceived  that  there  was  no  hope  for  ultimate-
independence  but  by  making  a  temporary  sacrifioe  of  it.
His  own  power,  ambitious  as  he  had  been,  he  volimtarily
resigned ;  and  placed  the  republic  under  the  protection
or  signiory  of  the  king  of  France. Terms  were  stipu-
lated very  £ftvourable  to  her  liberties ;  but,  with  a  French
garrison  once  received  into  the  city,  they  were  not
always  sure  of  observance.*
While  Genoa  lost  even  her  political  independence,
Venice  became  more  conspicuous  and  power-
^' fill  than  before. That  filmous  repubuc  de*

■  Siamondi.  t  tIL  p.  337.  367.

Italy.  VENICE.  453

duces  its  original,  and  even  its  liberty,  from  an  era  be-
yond the  oommencement  of  the  middle  ages.  The  Yene-
tians  boast  of  a  perpetual  emancipation  from  the  yoke
of  barbarians.  From  that  ignominious  servitude  some
natives,  or,  as  their  historians  will  have  it,  nobles,  of
Aquileja  and  neighbouring  towns,^  fled  to  the  small
cluster  of  islands  that  rise  amidst  the  shoals  at  the
mouth  of  the  Brenta.  Here  they  built  the  town  of
Bivoalto,  the  modem  Yenice,  in  421 ;  but  their  chief
settlement  was,  till  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,
at  Malamocoo.  A  living  writer  lias,  in  a  passage  of
remarkable  eloquence,  described  the  sovereign  republic,
immoveable  upon  the  bosom  of  the  waterb  &om  which
her  palaces  emerge,  contemplating  the  successive  tides
of  continental  invasion,  the  rise  and  feJl  of  empires,  the
change  of  dynasties,  the  whole  moving  scene  of  himian
revolution,  till,  in  her  own  turn,  the  last  surviving  wit-
ness of  antiquity,  the  common  link  between  two  periods
of  civilization,  has  submitted  to  the  destroying  hand  of
^ime."  Some  part  of  this  renown  must,  on  a  cold-blooded
scrutiny,  be  detracted  from  Yenice.  Her  independence
was,  at  the  best,  the  fruit  of  her  obscurity.
Neglected  upon  their  islands,  a  people  of  fish-  ei^  ^be*
ermen  might  without  molestation  elect  their  ^^^
own  magistrates ;  a  very  equivocal  proof  of
sovereignty  in  cities  much  more  considerable  than  Yenice.
But  both  tlie  western  and  the  eastern  empire  alternately
pretended  to  exercise  dominion  over  her ;  she  was  con-
quered by  Pepin,  son  of  Charlemagne,  and  restored  by
£im,  as  the  chronicles  say,  to  the  Greek  emperor  Kice-
phorus.  There  is  every  appearance  that  the  Yenetians
had  always  considered  tiiemselves  as  subject,  in  a  lai^e
sense  not  exclusive  of  their  mimicipal  self-government,*
to  the  eastern  empire." And  this  connexion  was  not

k  Ebbe  prindpio,  mji  Saanto  hani^-  Imperil,  claims  the  Venetians  as  his  sub-

ftlj,  non  da  pastorl,  oome  ebbe  Boms,  Jects,  though  he  admits  that  they  had,

ma  da  potentl,  e  nobllL  for  peace  sake,  paid  trlbate  to  Pepin  and

.  "  Slsmoodi,  1 1.  p.  309.  his  saooessors  as  kingi  of  Italy, p.  71.

*  NlcephoTOs  stipulates  with  Charle-  I  have  not  read  the  famous  Squittlnio

nagne  for  his  faithftil  city  of  Venice,  della  llbertk  Veneta,  which  gave  the  re-

QiUB  in  deroiloiie  imperii  illlbata  ste-  public  so  mudi  offence  In  t^aeventeentb

terant. DanduU  Chronloon,  In  Muratori,  century ;  but  a  very  strong  case  is  made

Script  Ber.  Ital.  t  xlL  p.  156. In  the  out  against  their  early  independence  in

tenth oentniy  Coostantine Porphyro-  Oiannone's  history, 1 11. p.  WZ,  edit.

IQcnitiia.  In  his  bonk  De  Administratioiie  Haia,  1763. Muratori  hifonns  na  tliat

464  ACQUISITIONS  OF  VENICE.  Ckap.  Ill  Paw  it

broken,  in  the  early  pairt,  at  least,  of  the  tenth  century.
But,  for  every  essential  purpose,  Venice  might  long  be-
fore be  deemed  an  independent  state.  Her  doge  was  not
confirmed  at  Constantinople;  she  paid  no  tribute,  and
lent  no  assistance  in  war.  Her  own  navies,  in  the
ninth  century,  encountered  the  Normans,  the  Saracens,
smd  the  Sclavonians  in  the  Adriatic  Sea.  Upon  the  coast
of  Dalmatia  were  several  Greek  cities,  which  the  empire
had  ceased  to  protect,  and  which,  like  Venice  itself,
became  republics  for  want  of  a  master.  Bagusa  was  one
of  these,  and,  more  fortunate  than  the  rest,  survived
Conquest  of  ^  ^^  independent  city  till  our  own  age.  In
Dalmatia. retum  for  me  assistance  of  Venice,  these  little

Ajx  WT.  seaports  put  themselves  imder  her  government ;
the  Sclavonian  pirates  were  repressed ;  and  after  acquir*
ing,  partly  by  consent,  partly  by  arms,  a  large  tract  of
maritime  territory,  the  doge  took  the  title  of  duke  of
Dalmatia,  which  is  said  by  Dandolo  to  have  been  con-
firmed at  Constantinople.  Three  or  four  centuries,  how-
ever, elapsed  before  the  republic  became  secure  of  these
conquests,  which  were  frequently  wrested  from  her  by
rebellions  of  the  inhabitants,  or  by  her  poweiful  neigh-
bour, the  king  of  Hungary.

A  more  important  source  of  Venetian  greatness  wad
Her  aoani-  commerce.  In  the  darkest  and  most  barbarous
■itionsiD '  period,  before  Genoa  or  even  Pisa  had  entered
the  i^ruki,  ^^  mercantile  pursuits,  Venice  carried  on  an
extensive  traffic  both  wiui  the  Greek  and  Saracen  re«
gions  of  the  Levant.  The  crusades  enriched  and  ag-
grandized Venice  more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  city«
Her  splendour  may,  however,  be  dated  from  the  takixi^
of  Constantinople  by  the  Latins  in  1204.  In  this  fistmous
enterprise,  which  diverted  a  great  armament  destined  for
the  recovery  of  Jerusalem,  the  French  and  Venetian
nations  were  alone  engaged;  but  the  former  only  as
private  adventurers,  the  Tatter  with  the  whole  strength
of  their  republic  under  its  doge  Henry  Dandolo.  Three-
eigaths  of  the  city  of  Consteuatinople,  and  an  eqiial  pro-

■o  late  as  1084  the  doge  obtained  the  title  ttnae  on  thit  dxcumstaace. The  Greek,

of  ImperiaUB Protoaevastoe  ftnm  the  UIca  the  Gennan  emperon  in  modem

oamrt  of  Oonatantlnuple ;  a  title  which  times,  had  a  mint  of  speoloas titk^

be  oobtinned  alwajrs  to  use. (Annall  which  passed  for  xeady  monsj  ovst

^'Italia,  ad  aan.) Bat  I  should  lajr  no  Christeniinm.

wm

Italy.  HER  GOVERNMENT.  455

portion  of  the  proyinces,  were  allotted  to  them  in  the
partition  of  the  spoil,  and  the  doge  took  the  singular  but
accurate  title,  Duke  of  three-eighths  of  the  Boman  empire.
Their  share  was  increased  by  purchases  from  less  opulent
crusaders,  especially  one  of  much  importance,  the  island
of  Candia,  which  they  retained  till  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century.  These  foreign  acquisitions  were
generally  granted  out  in  fief  to  private  Venetian  nobles
under  the  supremacy  of  the  republic.**  It  was  thus  that
the  Ionian  islands,  to  adopt  the  vocabulary  of  our  day,
came  under  the  dominion  of  Venice,  and  guaranteed
that  sovereignty  which  she  now  began  to  affect  over  the
Adriatic.  Those  of  the  Archipelago  were  lost  in  the
sixteenth  centuiy.  This  political  greatness  was  sustained
by  an  increasing  commerce.  No  Christian  state  pre-
served so  considerable  an  intercourse  with  the  Moham-
medans. While  Genoa  kept  the  keys  of  the  Black  Sea
by  her  colonies  of  Pera  and  Cafib,  Venice  directed  her
vessels  to  Acre  and  Alexandria.  These  connexions,  as
is  the  natural  effect  of  trade,  deadened  the  sense  of  re-
ligious antipathy;  and  the  Venetians  were  sometimes
charged  with  obstructing  all  efforts  towards  a  new
crusade,  or  even  any  partial  attacks  upon  the  Moham-
medan nations.

The  earliest  form  of  government  at  Venice,  as  we
collect  from  an  epistle  of  Cassiodoms  in  the  yeMtiAn
sixth  century,  was  by  twelve  annual  tribunes,  govemment
Perhaps  the  union  of  the  different  islanders  was  merely
federative.  However,  in  697,  they  resolved  to  elect  a
chief  magistrate  by  name  of  duke,  or,  in  their  dialect,
doge  of  Venice.  No  councils  appear  to  have  limited  his
power,  or  represented  the  national  will.  The  doge  was
general  and  judge;  he  was  sometimes  permitted  to
associate  his  son  with  him,  and  thus  to  prepare  the  road
for  hereditaiy  power ;  his  government  had  all  the  prero*
gatives,  and,  as  far  as  in  such  a  state  of  manners  was
possible,  the  pomp,  of  a  monarchy.  But  he  acted  in  im-
portant matters  with  the  concurrence  of  a  general  as-
sembly, though,  from  the  want  of  positive  restraints,  his
executive  government  might  be  considered  as  nearly
absolnte. Time,  however,  demonstrated  to  the  Vene*

•  SlflDondi  t  iL  p.  ai

«56  GOV£BNMENT  OF  VENICE.  Chap.  III.  Pabt  .X

tians  the  imperfections  of  sncli  a  constitution.  Limita-
tions were  accordingly  imposed  on  the  doge  in  1032 ;  he
was  prohibited  from  associating  a  son  in  the  government,
and  obliged  to  act  with  the  consent  of  two  elected  conn-
sellers,  and,  on  important  occasions,  to  call  in  some  of
the  principal  citizens.  No  ot^er  change  appears  to  have
taken  place  till  1172,  long  after  every  other  Italian  city
had  provided  for  its  liberty  bj  constitalioDal  lawB.  moii
or  less  successful,  but  always  manifesting  a  good  deal
of  contrivance  and  complication.  Venice  was,  however,
dissatisfied  with  her  existing  institutions.  General
assemblies  were  found,  in  practice,  inconvenient  and
unsatisfactory.  Yet  some  adequate  safeguard  against  a
magistrate  of  indefinite  powers  was  required  by  free-
men. A  representative  council,  as  in  other  republicst
justly  appeared  the  best  innovation  that  could  be  in-
troduced.'

The  great  council  of  Venice,  as  established  in  1172»
was  to  consist  of  four  hundred  and  eighty  citizens,
equally  taken  from  the  six  districts  of  the  city,  and
annually  renewed.  But  the  election  was  not  made  im-
mediately by  the  people.  Two  electors,  called  tribunes,
from  each  of  the  six  districts,  appointed  the  members  of
tibe  council  by  separate  nomination.  These  tribunes  at
first  were  themselves  chosen  by  the  people,  so  that  the
intervention  of  this  electoral  body  did  not  appar^itiy
trespass  upon  the  democratical  character  of  the  consti
tution.  But  the  great  council,  principally  composed  of
men  of  high  birth,  and  invested  by  the  law  with  the
appointment  of  the  doge,  and  of  all  the  councils  of  ma-
gistracy, seem,  early  in  the  thirteenth  century,  to  have
assumed  the  right  of  naming  their  own  constituents.
Besides  appointing  the  tribunes,  they  took  upon  them-
selves another  privilege,  that  of  confirming  or  rejecting
their  successors  before  they  resigned  their  functions.
These  usurpations  rendered  the  annual  election  almost
nugatory; the  same  members  were  usually  renewed;

P  Slsmondi,  t  UI.  p.  387. Afl  I  have  To  avoid  frequent  reference,  the  priiw

never  read  the  Storia  civile  Veneta  by  dpal  paaaages  in  Sismoodi  relative  to  the

Vettor  Sanii,  in  nine  vola^  ito.,  or  even  domestic  revolntlom  of  Venice  axe  t  L

Laugfer's  History  of  Venice,  my  reliance  p^  833,  t  UL  p.  387-300.  t.  iv.  p.  343-3761

has  chiefly  been  placed  on  M.  Sismondi,  The  history  of  Dam  had  not  been  p«b*

who  has  made  use  of  Sandi,  the  latest,  lished  when  this  vns  written.
and  pri>hably  the  moat  accurate,  historian.

ITALT.  GOVERNMENT  OF  VENICE.  457

and  though  the  dignity  of  councillor  was  not  yet  here-
ditary, it  remained,  upon  the  whole,  in  the  same  families.
In  this  transitional  state  the  Venetian  government  con*
tinned  during  the  thirteenth  oentury ;  the  people  actu-
ally debarred  of  power,  but  on  hereditary  anstocracy
not  completely  or  legally  confirmed.  The  right  of  elect-
ing, or  rather  of  re-electing,  the  great  council  was  trans-
ferred, in  1297,  from  the  tribunes,  whose  office  was
abolished,  to  the  council  of  forty ;  they  balloted  upon
the  names  of  the  members  who  already  sat;  and  wno*
ever  obtained  twelve  &vouring  balls  out  of  forty  re-
tained his  place.  The  vacancies  occasioned  by  rejec-
tion or  death  were  filled  up  by  a  supplemental  list
formed  by  three  electors  nominated  in  the  great  council.
But  they  were  expressly  prohibited,  by  laws  of  1298
and  1300,  from  inserting  the  name  of  any  one  whose
paternal  ancestors  had  not  enjoyed  the  same  honour.
Thus  an  exclusive  hereditary  aristocracy  was  finally
established.  And  the  personal  rights  of  noble  descent
were  rendered  complete  in  1319  by  the  abolition  of  all
elective  forms.  By  the  constitution  of  Venice  as  it
was  then  settled,  every  descendant  of  a  member  of  the
great  council,  on  attaining  twenty-five  years  of  age,
entered  as  of  right  into  that  body,  which,  of  course,
became  unlimited  in  its  numbers.''

But  an  assembly  so  numerous  as  the  great  council,
even  before  it  was  thus  thrown  open  to  all  the  nobility,
could  never  have  conducted  the  public  a&irs  with  that
secrecy  and  steadiness  which  were  characteristic  of
Venice;  and  without  an  intermediary  power  between
the  doge  and  the  patrician  multitude  the  constitution
would  have  gained  nothing  in  stability  to  compensate
for  the  loss  of  popular  freedom.  The  great  council  had
proceeded  veij  soon  after  its  institution  to  limit  the
ducal  prerogatives. That  of  exercising  criminal  justicCt

4  Tbeae  gradual  changes  between  1297  noble  bad  a  right  to  take  hl«  leat  In  the

and  1319  were  flnt  made  known  by  great  oounciL But  the  namei  of  thoee

tiandi.  from  whom  M.  Siimondi  has  in-  who  had  passed  the  age  of  twenty  wen

trodaoed  the  ttudM  into  his  own  histoiy.  annually  pnt  into  an  urn,  and  one*flfth

I  notice  this,  becanse  all  fonner  writers,  drawn  ont  by  lot,  who  were  thereupon

both  aadent  and  modem,  fix  the  com-  admitted. On  an  average,  therefore,  the

piete  and  final  eetabllshmcot  of  the  Ve-  age  of  admission  was  about  twenty-three

netiaii  aristocracy  in  129Y.  Jannotus  de  Rep.  Venet— CoutarinL*

Twvnty-flve  years  oomplete  was  the  Amelot  de  la  Housraja.
statutable  age  at  which  every  '^<)ueUan

458  GOYERKMENT  OF  VENICE.  Thap.  III.  PiXi  R

a  trust  of  vaat  importance,  was  transferred  in  1179  to  a
oouncil  of  forty  members  annually  chosen. The  exe-
cutive government  itself  ttos  thoiieht  too  considerable
for  the  doge  without  some  material  limitations. Instead
of  naming  his  own  assistants  or  pr^adi,  he  was  only  to
preside  in  a  oouncil  of  sixty  members,  to  whom  the  care
of  the  state  in  all  domestic  and  foreign  relations,  and
the  previous  deliberation  upon  proposals  submitted  to
the  great  coimcil,  was  confided.  This  council  of  pregadi,
generally  called  in  later  times  the  senate,  was  enlarged
in  the  fourteenth  century  by  sixty  additional  members ;
and  as  a  great  part  of  the  magistrates  had  also  seats  in  it,
the  whole  nuniber  amounted  to  between  two  and  three
hundred. Though  the  legislative  power,  properly  speak-
ing, remained  with  the  great  council,  the  senate  used  to
impose  taxes,  and  had  the  exclusive  right  of  making
peace  and  war. It  was  annually  renewed,  like  almost
all  other  councils  at  Venice,  by  the  great  council. But
since  even  this  body  was  too  numerous  for  the  prelimi-
nary discussion  of  business,  six  councillors,  forming,
along  with  the  doge,  the  signiory,  or  visible  represen-
tative  of  the  republic,  were  empowered  to  despatch
orders,  to  correspond  with -ambassadors,  to  treat  with
foreign  states,  to  convoke  and  preside  in  the  councils,
and  perform  other  duties  of  an  aidministration. In  part
of  these  they  were  obliged  to  act  with  the  concurrence
of  what  was  termed  the  college,  comprisiiuz,  besides
themselves,  certain  select  councillors,  from  dinerent  con-
stituted authorities.'

It  might  be  imagined  that  a  dignity  so  shorn  of  its
lustre  as  that  of  doge  would  not  excite  an  overweening
ambition.  But  the  Venetians  were  still  jealous  of  ex-
tinguished power;  and  while  their  constitution  was  yet
immature  the  great  council  planned  new  methods  of
restricting  their  chief  magistrate.  An  oath  was  taken
by  the  doge  on  his  election,  so  comprehensive  as  to

'  The  college  of  S$yj  oomifted  of  liz-  legs. Thv  the  virtnaX  powen  even  dl

taen  peraons ;  and  it  poewed  the  MiiM-  the  iraate  were  ftr  more  limttod  ChM

utive  in  all  public  meeraree  that  reqnlred  they  appear  at  flnt  ale^t;  and  no  poari

die  anent  of  the  lenate. For  no  ringla  biUt7  remained of  innoratioo  in  tta«

Mnator,  mnch  lens  any  noble  of  the  great  ftindamental  prindplea  of  the  conrti

council,  could  propoae  anything  for  de«  tatlon.
hata. rhe  ilpilory  had  the  lame  prtTl«

fTALT.  GOVRRNMENT  OK  VENICE.  459

embi'aoe  every  possible  check  upon  undue  intluence.
He  was  bound  not  to  correspond  with  foreign  states,  or  to
open  their  letters,  except  in  the  presence  of  the  signiory  ;
to  acquire  no  property  Tjeyond  the  Venetian  dominions,
and  to  resign  what  he  might  already  possess  ;  to  Inter-
pose, directly  or  indirectly,  in  no  judicial  process  ;  and
not  to  permit  any  citizen  to  use  tokens  of  subjection  in
saluting  him.  As  a  further  security,  they  devised  a  re-
markably complicated  mode  of  supplying  the  vacancy  of
his  office.  Election  by  open  sufirage  is  always  liable  to
tumult  or  corruption;  nor  does  the  method  of  secret
ballot,  while  it  prevents  the  one,  afford  in  practice  any
adequate  security  against  the  other.  Election  by  lot  in-
curs the  risk  of  placing  incapable  persons  in  situations
of  arduous  trust.  The  Venetian  scheme  was  intended
to  combine  the  two  modes  without  their  evils,  by  leav-
ing the  absolute  choice  of  their  doge  to  electors  taken
by  lot.  It  was  presumed  that,'  among  a  competent  num-
ber of  persons,  though  taken  promiscuously,  good  sense
and  right  principles  wou}d  gain  such  an  asceudancy  as
to  prevent  any  flagrantly  improper  nomination,  if  undue
influence  could  be  excluded.  For  this  purpose  the  ballot
was  rendered  exceedingly  complicated,  tlutt  no  possible
ingenuity  or  stratagem  might  ascertain  the  electoral
body  before  the  last  moment.  A  single  lottery,  if  fairly
conducted,  is  certainly  sufficient  for  this  end.  At  Venice
as  many  balls  as  there  were  members  of  the  great  council
present  were  placed  in  an  urn.  Thirty  of  these  were
gilt.  The  holders  of  gilt  balls  were  reduced  by  a  second
ballot  to  nine.  The  nine  elected  forty,  whom  lot  reduced
to  twelve.  The  twelve  chose  twenty-five  by  separate
nomination.*  The  twenty-five  were  reduced  by  lot  to
nine ;  and  each  of  the  nine  chose  five.  These  forty-five
were  reduced  to  eleven,  as  before ;  the  eleven  elected
forty-one,  who^  were  the  ultimate  voters  for  a  doge.
This  intricacy  appears  useless,  and  consequently  absurd ;
but  the  original  principle  of  a  Venetian  election  (for
something  of  the  same  kind  was  applied  to  all  their
councils  and  magistrates)  may  not  ^ways  be  unworthy
of  imitation. In  one  of  our  best  modem,  statutes,  that

*  AiD«loi  40  U  HoQMiye  asMrts  thai:  tat*  ■ocordlog  to  Cootulni,  the  tnetlwd
vMbgrlMafait.

460  GOVERNMENT  OF  VENICE.  Chap.  III.  Past  II,

for  regalatiiig  the  trials  of  contested  elections,  we  have
seen  this  mixture  of  chance  and  selection  veiy  happily
introduced.*

An  hereditary  prince  could  never  have  remained  quiet
in  such  trammels  as  were  imposed  upon  the  doge  of
Venice.  But  early  prejudice  accustoms  men  to  consider
restraint,  even  upon  themselves,  as  advantageous ;  and
the  limitations  of  ducal  power  appeared  to  every  Vene-
tian as  fundamental  as  the  great  laws  of  the  English
constitution  do  to  ourselves.  Many  doges  of  Venice,
especially  in  the  middle  ages,  were  considerable  men ;
but  they  were  content  with  the  functions  assigned  to
them,  which,  if  they  could  avoid  the  tantalizing  compa-
rison of  sovereign  princes,  were  enough  for  the  ambition
of  republicans.  For  life  the  chief  magistrates  of  their
country,  her  noble  citizens  for  ever,  they  might  thank
her  in  their  own  name  for  what  she  gave,  and  in  that  of
their  posterity  for  what  she  withheld.  Once  only  a  doge
of  Venice  was  tempted  to  betray  the  freedom  of  the  re-
public. Marin  Falieri,  a  man  far  advanced  in
A.D.  1355.  2j£^^  engaged,  from  some  petty  resentment,  in  a

wild  intrigue  to  overturn  the  government.  The  con-
spiracy was  soon  discovered,  and  the  doge  avowed  his
guilt.  An  aristocracy  so  firm  and  so  severe  did  not
hesitate  to  order  his  execution  in  the  ducal  palace.

For  some  years  after  what  was-  called  the  closing  of
the  great  council  by  the  law  of  1296,  which  excluded  all
but  the  fiunilies  actually  in  possession,  a  good  deal  of
discontent  showed  itself  among  the  commonalty.  Several
commotions  took  place  about  the  beginning  of  the  four-
teenth century,  with  the  object  of  restoring  a  more
popular  regimen.  Upon  the  suppression  of  the  last,  in
1310,  the  aristocracy  sacrificed  their  own  individual
fr^eedom,  along  with  that  of  the  people,  to  the  presenta-
tion of  an  imaginary  privilege.  They  established  the
famous  council  of  ten,  that  most  remarkable  part  of  the
Venetian  constitution.  This  coxmcil,  it  should  be  ob«
served,  consisted  in  &ct  of  seventeen,  comprising  the

t  This  WM  written  about  1810. The  erroneotu,  determ&utloii  heve  not  taken

cttatnte  to  whidi  I  allnde  grew  oat  of  place  since  a  new  trlbnnal  was  erected,

fitvoor  afterwanb. Bnt there is  too  than  could  be  imputed  to  the  celebrated

much  reason  to  doubt  whether  groowr  GrenvfUe  Act  flMO.'
oatanoeB  of  partial  or  nn)nst,  or  at  beet

Italy.  G0V£RKM£NT  OF  V££4iO£.  461

«ignioiy,  or  the  doge  and  his  six  cotincilloiB,  as  well  as
the  ten  properly  so  called.  The  council  of  ten  had  by
nsage,  if  not  by  right,  a  controlling  and  dictatorial
power  over  the  senate  and  other  magistrates,  rescinding
their  decisions,  and  treating  separately  with  foreign
princes.  Their  vast  influence  strengthened  the  executive
government,  of  which  they  formed  a  part,  and  gave  a
vigour  to  its  movements  which  the  jealousy  of  the
councils  would  possibly  have  impeded.  But  they  are
chiefly  known  as  an  arbitrary  and  mquisitorial  tribunal,
the  standing  tyranny  of  Yenice.  Excluding  the  old
council  of  forty,  a  regular  court  of  criminal  judicature,
not  only  from  the  investigation  of  treasonable  charges
but  of  several  other  crimes  of  magnitude,  they  inquiiidd,
they  judged,  they  punished,  according  to  what  they  called
reason  of  state.  The  public  eye  never  penetrated  the
mystery  of  their  proceedings;  the  accused  was  some-
times not  heard,  never  confronted  with  witnesses ;  the
condemnation  was  secret  as  the  inquiry,  the  punishment
undivulged  like  both."  The  terrible  and  odious  ma-
chinery of  a  police,  the  insidious  spy,  the  stipendiary
informer,  unknown  to  the  carelessness  of  feudal  govern-
ments, fpimd  their  natural  soil  in  the  republic  of  Venice.
Tumultuous  assemblies  were  scarcely  possible  in  so
peculiar  a  city ;  and  private  conspiracies  never  failed  to
DC  detected  by  the  vigilance  of  the  council  of  ten.  Com-
pared with  the  Tuscan  republics  the  tranquillity^  of
Venice  is  truly  striking.  The  names  of  Guelf  and  Ghi-
belin  hardly  raised  any  emotion  in  her  streets,  though
the  government  was  considered  in  the  first  part  of  the
fourteenth  century  as  rather  inclined  towards  the  latter

Earty.' But  the  wildest  excesses  of  faction  are  less  dis-
onouring  than  the  stillness  and  moral  degradation  of
servitude.'

<*  nium  etiam  morem  otwrvant,  ne  flu*  enough  remored  from  any  domestic

reum,  cum  de  eo  judidum  laturi  sunt,  feuds  upon  that  book.

in  collegium  admittant,  neque  oognito-  T  Bj  Hna  modeni  law  of  Venice  a

rem,  aut  oratnrem  quempfam,  qui  ^ob  nobleman  oould  not  engage  In  trade  with-

oausam  agat Oontarini  de  Bep.  Venet  out  derogating  from  hb  rank:  I  do  not

'  Villani  several  times  speaks  of  the  fbid  this  peculiarity  obeerved  by  Jannotti

Venetians  as  regular  Ghibelina. L  iz.  and  OoDtarinl,  tiie  oldest  writers  on  the

c  a,  1.  X.  c.  89,  Ac. But  this  is  put  much  Venetian  government :  but  Dam  Infoims

too  strongly:  thou|^  their  government  us  it  waa  by  a  law  enacted  in  1400.

may  have  had  a  sU^t  Um  towards  that  Hist  de  Veniae,  1.  58». It  is  noticed  by

tectlon,  thsj  were  in  reality  nentml.  and  Amelot  de  la  Uoussaje,  who  tells  uf

162  GOVERNMENT  OK  VENICE.  Chap.  HI.  Past  II

It  WM8  a  reiy  common  theme  with  political  writers
till  about  the  beginning  of  the  last  centory,  when  Venice
fell  almost  into  oblivion,  to  descant  upon  the  wisdom  of
this  government.  And,  indeed,  if  the  preservation  of
ancient  institutions  be,  as  some  appear  to  consider  it,
not  a  means  but  an  end,  and  an  end  for  which  the  rights
of  man  and  laws  of  God  may  at  any  time  be  set  aside,
we  must  acknowledge  that  it  was  a  wisely  constructed
system.  Formed  to  compress  the  two  opposite  forces
from  which  resistance  might  be  expected,  it  kept  both
the  doge  and  the  people  in  perfect  subordination.  Even
the  coalition  of  an  executive  magistrate  with  the  mul-
titude, so  fatal  to  most  aristocracies,  never  endangered
that  of  Venice.  It  is  most  remarkable  tha^  a  part  of  the
constitution  which  destroyed  every  man's  security,  and
incurred  general  hatred,  was  still  maintained  by  a  sense
of  its  necessity.  The  council  of  ten,  annually  renewed,
might  annually  have  been  annihilated.  The  great  coimcil
had  only  to  withhold  their  suf&ages  from  ihe  new  c-an-
didates,  and  the  tyranny  expired  of  itself.  This  was
several  times  attempted  (I  speak  now  of  more  modem
ages) ;  but  the  nobles,  though  detesting  the  council  of
ten,  never  steadily  persevered  in  refusing  to  re-elect  it.
It  was,  in  fact,  become  essential  to  Venice.  So  great
were  the  vices  of  her  constitution  that  she  cotdd  not
endure  their  remedies.  If  the  coimcil  of  ten  had  been
abolished  at  any  time  since  the  fifteenth  century,  if  the
removal  of  that  jealous  despotism  had  given  scope  to  the
corruption  of  a  poor  and  debased  aristocracy,  to  the
licence  of  a  people  unworthy  of  freedom,  the  republic
would  have  soon  lost  her  territorial  possessions,  if  not
her  own  independence.  K,  indeed,  it  be  true,  as  re-
ported, that  during  the  last  hundred  years  this  formidable
tribunal  had  sensibly  relaxed  its  vigilance,  if  the  Vene-
tian government  had  become  less  tyrannical  through
slotn  or  decline  of  national  spirit,  our  conjecture  will
have  acquired  the  confiiination  of  experience. Expe-

Also,  as  Dun  does, that  the  noblUty  restriction,  especially  combined  with  that

evaded  the  law  by  secret  partnership  other  ftindamental  law  which  disqualified

with  the  priyileged  merchants  or  dtti^  a  Venetian  nobleman  from  poaseasing  a

dini,  who  formed  a  separate  class  at  landed  estate  on  the  terra  firma  of  the

Venice. This  was  the  custom  in  modem  republic The  latter,  however,  did  not

Mmee. But  I  have  never  understood  the  extend,  as  I  have  been  infoimed,  to  Dak

p^ndple  at  common  sense  of  svsh  a  matla,  or  thu  Ionian  islanda.

Ktalt.  government  OF  VENICE.  46S

rionce  has  recently  shown  that  a  worse  calamity  than
domestic  tyranny  might  befall  the  queen  of  the  Adriatic.
In  the  Place  of  St.  Mark,  among  the  monuments  of  ex-
tinguished  greatness,  a  traveller  may  regret  to  think
that  an  insolent  German  soldiery  has  replaced  even  the
senators  of  Venice.  Her  ancient  liberty,  her  bright  and
romantic  career  of  glory  in  countries  so  dear  to  the
imagination,  her  magnanimous  defence  in  the  war  of
Chioggia,  a  few  thinly  scattered  names  of  illustrious
men,  will  rise  upon  his  mind,  and  mingle  with  his  in-
dignation at  the  treachery  which  robbed  her  of  her  in-
dependence. But  if  he  has  learned  the  true  attributes
of  wisdom  in  civil  policy,  he  will  not  easily  prostitute
that  word  to  a  constitution  formed  without  reference  to
property  or  to  population,  that  vested  sovereign  power
partly  in  a  body  of  impoverished  nobles,  jMirtly  in  an
overruling  despotism ;  or  to  a  practical  system  of  govern-
ment that  made  vice  the  ally  of  tyranny,  and  sought
impunity  for  its  own  assassinations  by  encouraging  dis*
soluteness  of  private  life.  Perhaps,  too,  the  -vosdom  so
ofiben  imputed  to  the  senate  in  its  foreign  policy  has
been  greatly  exaggerated.  The  balance  of  power  esta*
blished  in  Europe,  and  above  all  in  Italy,  maintained
for  the  two  last  centuries  states  of  small  intrinsic  re-
sources, without  any  efforts  of  their  own.  In  the  ultimate
crisis,  at  least,  of  Venetian  liberty,  that  solemn  mockery
of  statesmanship  was  exhibited  to  contempt ;  too  blind  to
avert  danger,  too  cowardly  to  withstand  it,  the  most  an-
cient government  of  Europe  made  not  an  instant's  resist-
ance ;  the  peasants  of  Underwald  died  upon  their  moun-
tains ;  the  nobles  of  Venice  clung  only  to  their  lives.'

'  The  drctuxtttaaoes  to  which  Venice  doge  himself  lies  in  that  of  the  Jesuits,

was  reduced  in  her  last  agony  by  the  The  words  Manini  Cineres  may  be  read

Tiolenoe  and  treachery  of  Napoleon,  and  in  botii,  which  probably  waa  the  cause

the  apparent  imposslbUity  of  an  effective  of  my  foTgetfalneaB.  [  1850.]

resistance,  so  fully  described  by  Dam,  See  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  voL  xil.

and  still  better  by  Botta,  Induce  me  to  p.  379,  an  aooount  of  a  book  which  is,

modify  the  severity  of  this  lemazk. In  perhaps.  Utile  known,  thouc^  interesting

former  editions  I  have  by  mistake  said  to  the  history  of  our  own  age:  a  ooUeo-

that  the  last  doge  of  Venice,  Manini,  Is  tion  of  documents  iUustratLog  (he  fiUl  of

bnrled  in  the  chnrdi  of  the  Scaizi,  with  the  republic  of  Venice. The  article  is

the  inscription  on the  stone. Manini  well  written,  and,  I  presume,  contains  a

Cineres. This  church  was  indeed  built  &Ithftil  account  of  the  work;  the  anthur

by  the  ooutribntioRs  of  several  noble  of  which.  Signer  Banoni,  is  respected  as

flunilies,  among  them  the  Manini,  most  a  patriotic  writer  in  Italy.
si  wboni  are  interred  there;  but  the  last

464  LOMBAKDr  AT  BEGINNING Chap.  III.  Past  XL

Until  almost  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  centaiy
Venice  had  been  content  without  any  territorial  poa-
sessions  in  Italy ;  imless  we  reokon  a  very  narrow  Btrip
Tnritorui  ^^  sea-coast,  bordering  on  her  lagunes,  called
■oiraiiittoiu  the  Dogato.  Neutral  in  the  great  contests  be-
of  Venice,  tween  the  church  and  the  empire,  between  the
free  cities  and  their  sovereigns,  she  was  respected  by
both  parties,  while  neither  ventured  to  claim  her  as  an
ally.  But  the  rapid  progress  of  Mastino  della  Scala,
lord  of  Verona,  with  some  particular  injuries,  led  the
senate  to  form  a  league  with  Florence  against  him.
Villani  mentions  it  as  a  singular  honour  for  his  countiy
to  have  become  the  confederate  of  the  Venetians,  **  who,
for  their  great  excellence  and  power,  had  never  allied
themselves  with  any  state  or  prince,  except  at  their
ancient  conquest  of  Constantinople  and  Bomania."'  The
result  of  this  combination  was  to  annex  the  district  of
Treviso  to  the  Venetian  dominions.  But  they  made  no
further  conquests  in  that  age.  On  the  contrary,  they
lost  Treviso  in  the  unfortunate  war  of  Ohioggia,  and  did
not  regain  it  till  1389.  Nor  did  they  seriously  attempt
to  withstand  the  progress  of  Gian  Gkdeazzo  Visconti,
who,  after  overthrowing  the  £uniLy  of  Scala,  stretched
almost  to  the  Adriatic,  and  altogether  subverted  for  a
time  the  balance  of  power  in  Lombardy.

But  upon  the  death  of  this  prince,  in  1404,  a  remarli-
Stat*  of  able  crisis  took  place  in  that  country.  He  left
JfSj*^  two  sons,  Giovanni  Maria  and  Filippo  Maria,
begjoniog  both  young,  and  under  the  care  of  a  mother
fifteenth  who  was  li^c  fitted  for  her  situation.  Through,
century.  j^er  midcouduct  and  the  selfish  ambition  of
some  military  leaders,  who  had  commanded  Gian  Gale-
sizzo's  mercenaries,  that  extensive  dominion  was  soon
broken  into  fragments.  Bergamo,  Como,  Lodi,  Cremona^
and  other  cities  revolted,  submitting  themselves  in  general
to  the  &milies  of  their  former  princes,  the  earlier  race
of  usuipers,  who  had  for  nearly  a  century  been  crushed
by  the  V  isconti.  A  Guelf  faction  revived  after  the  name
had  long  been  proscribed  in  Lombardy.  Francesco  da
Carrara,  lord  of  Padua,  availed  himself  of  this  revolution
to  get  possession  of  Verona,  and  seemed  likely  to  unite

■  I*  xt  c  a:

ITALY.  OF  THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY.  4G6

all  the  cities  beyond  the  Adige.  No  fkmily  was  so
odious  to  the  Venetians  as  that  of  Carrara.  Though  they
bad  seemed  indifferent  to  the  more  real  danger  in  Gian
Galeazzo's  lifetime,  they  took  up  arms  against  this  in-
ferior enemy.  Both  Padua  and  Verona  were  reduced,
and,  the  duke  of  Milan  ceding  Vicenza,  the  republic  of
Yenice  came  suddenly  into  the  possession  of  an  extensive
territory.  Francesco  da  Carrara,  who  had  surrendered
in  his  capital,  was  put  to  death  in  prison  at  Venice.

Notwithstanding  the  deranged  condition  of  the  Milan-
ese, no  further  attempts  were  made  by  the  senate  of
Venice  for  twenty  years.  They  had  not  yet  acquired,  that
decided  love  of  war  and  conquest  which  soon  began  to
influence  them  against  all  the  niles  of  their  ancient  policy.
There  were  still  left  some  wary  statesmen  of  tne  old
school  to  check  ambitious  designs.  Sanuto  has  pre-
served an  interesting  accoimt  of  the  wealth  and  commerce
of  Venice  in  those  days.  ITiis  is  thrown  into  the  mouth
of  the  Boge  Mocenigo,  whom  he  represents  as  dissuading
his  country,  with  his  dying  words,  from  undertaking  a
war  against  Milan.  **  Through  peace  our  city  has  every
year,"  he  said,  '*ten  millions  of  ducats  employed  as
mercantile  capital  in  different  parts  of  the  world ;  the
annual  profit  of  our  traders  upon  this  sum  amounts  to
four  millions.  Our  housing  is  valued  at  7,000,000
ducats ;  its  aonual  rental  at  500,000.  Three  tibousand
merchant-ships  carry  on  our  trade ;  forty-three  galleys
and  three  hundred  smaller  vessels,  manned  by  19,000
sailors,  secure  our  naval  power.  Our  mint  has  coined
1,000,000  ducats  within  the  year.  From  the  Milanese
dominions  alone  we  draw  1,654,000  ducats  in  coin,  and
the  value  of  900.000  more  in  cloths;  our  profit  upon
this  traffic  may  be  reckoned  at  600,000  ducats.  Pro-
ceeding as  you  have  done  to  acquire  this  wealth,  you
will  become  masters  of  all  the  gold  in  Christendom ;  but
war,  and  especially  unjust  war,  will  lead  infallibly  to
ruin.  Already  you  have  spent  900,000  ducats  in  the
acquisition  of  Verona  and  Padua;  yet  the  expense  of
protecting  these  places  absorbs  all^  the  revenue  which
they  yield.  You  have  many,  amon^  you,  men  of  probity
and  experience  ;  choose  one  of  these  to  succeed  mie ;  but
beware  of  Francesco  Foscari.  If  he  is  doge,  ^^u  will
soon  have  war,  and  war  will  bring  poverty,^tei^loss  of

VOL.  I.  ilT  ^^

466  WARS  OF  MILAN  AND  VENICE. Chap.  III.  Part  IL

honour."^  Mocenigo  died,  and  FoHcari  became  doge:
the  prophecies  of  the  former  were  neglected  ;  and  it  can-
not wholly  be  affirmed  that  they  were  fulfilled.  Yet
Venice  is  described  by  a  writer  thirty  years  later  as  some-
what impaired  in  opulence  by  her  long  warfare  with
the  dukes  of  Milan.

The  latter  had  recovered  a  great  part  of  their  domi-
^  nions  as  rapidly  as  they  had  lost  them. Gio-

MiUtnand  vanni  Maria,  the  elder  brother,  a  monster  of
Venice.  guilt  eVen  among  the  Visconti,  having  been
assassinated,  Filippo  Maria  assumed  the  government  of
Milan  and  Pavia,  almost  his  only  possessions.  But
though  weak  and  imwarlike  himself,  he  had  the  good
fortune  to  employ  Carmagnola,  one  of  the  greatest  gene-
rals of  that  military  age.  Most  of  the  revolted  cities
were  tired  of  their  new  masters,  and,  their  inclinaticns
conspiring  with  Carmagnola*s  eminent  talents  and  ac-
tivity, the  house  of  Visconti  re-assumed  its  former
ascendency  from  the  Sessia  to  the  Adige.  Its  fortunes
might  have  been  stiU  more  prosperous  if  Filippo  Maria
had  not  rashly  as  well  as  ungratefdlly  offended  Carma-
gnola. That  great  captain  retired  to  Venice,  and  in-
flamed a  disposition  towards  war  which  the  Florentines  and
the  duke  of  Savoy  had  already  excited.  The  Venetians  had
previously  gained  some  important  advantages  in  another
quarter,  by  reducing  the  country  of  Friuli,  with  part  of
Istria,  which  had  for  many  centuries  depended  on  the
temporal  authority  of  a  neighbouring  prelate,  the  patri-
arch of  Aquileia.  They  entered  into  this  new  alliance.
No  underteddng  of  the  republic  had  been  more  8ucces!»-
fal.  Carmagnola  led  on  their  armies,  and  in
about  two  years  Venice  acquired  Brescia  and
Bergamo,  amd  extended  her  boundary  to  the  river  Adda,
which  she  was  destined  never  to  pass.

o  Sanuto,  Vite  dl  Duchl  di  Venecia,  withstanding  her  acquiaitioii,  in  the  mean

in  Script  Rer.  ItaL  t.  xxiL  p.  958. Ho-  time,  of  Breecia,  Bergamo,  Ravenna,  and

oenigo's  harangue  ia  very  long  in  Sanato :  Crema. Id.  iL  462.  They  iacreaaed  oon-

I  have  endeavoured  to  preeerve  the  sub-  rider&bly  In  the  next  twenty  years.  The

atance. But  the calculations are so  taxes,  however,  were  light  in  the  Vena-

itrange  and  manifestly  inexact  that  they  tian  dominions ;  and  Dam  conceives  tte

deserve  little  regard. Dam  has  given  revenues  of  the  republic,  reduced  to  a

them  more  at  length.  Hist  de  Venise,  com  price,  to  have  not  exceeded  tbt

voL  il.  p.  aos. The  revenues  of  Venice,  value  of  11,000,000  trancs  at  tbe  pr'««Mit

which  had  amounted  to  996,290  ducats  day. p.  542.
In  14*13.  were  but  945.750  in  1469,  not^

Italy.  CHANGE  IN  MILITARY  SYSTEM.  4G7

Such  conquests  could  only  be  made  by  a  city  so  pecu-
liarly maritune  as  Venice  through  the  help  of  change  in
mercenary  troops.  But,  in  employing  them,  the  military
she  merely  conformed  to  a  fashion  which  states  "y***™-
to  whom  it  was  less  indispensable  had  long  since  estab-
lished. A  great  revolution  had  taken  place  in  the  sys*
tem  of  military  service  through  most  parts  of  Europe,
but  especially  in  Italy.  During  the  twelfth  and  thir-
teenth centuries,  whether  the  Italian  cities  were  engaged
in  their  contest  with  the  emperors  or  in  less  arduous
and  general  hostilities  among  each  other,  they  seem  to
have  poured  out  almost  their  whole  population  as  an
armed  and  loosely  organized  militia.  A  single  city,
with  its  adjacent  district,  sometimes  brought  twenty  or
thirty  thousand  men  into  the  field.  Every  man,  accord-
ing to  the  trade  he  practised,  or  quarter  of  the  city
wherein  he  dwelt,  knew  his  own  banner  and  the  captain
he  was  to  obey."  In  battle  the  carroccio  formed  one
common  rallying-point,  the  pivot  of  every  movement.
This  was  a  chariot,  or  rather  waggon,  painted  with  ver-
milion, and  bearing  the  city  standard  elevated  upon  it.
That  of  Milan  required  four  pair  of  oxen  to  drag  it  for-
ward."* To  defend  this  sacred  emblem  of  his  country,
which  Muratori  compares  to  the  ark  of  the  covenant
among  the  Jews,  was  the  constant  object,  that,  giving  a
sort  of  concentration  and  uniformity  to  the  army,  sup-
plied in  some  degree  the  want  of  more  regular  tactics.
This  militia  was  of  course  principally  composed  of  in-
fantry. At  the  famous  battle  of  the  Arbia,  in  1260,  the
Guelf  Florentines  had  thirty  thousand  foot  and  three
thousand  horse  ;*  and  the  usual  proportion  was  five,  six,
or  ten  to  one.  Gentlemen,  however,  were  always
mounted ;  and  the  superiority  of  a  heavy  cavalry  must
have  been  prodigiously  great  over  an  undisciplined  and
ill-armed  populace.  In  the  thirteenth  and  following
centuries  armies  seem  to  have  been  considered  as  for-
midable nearly  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  men  at

'  Muratori,  Antiq.  ItaL  Diss.  26;  De-  sent  to  Rome. Parma  and  Cremona  lost

nlna,  RlTolnzloni  d'ltalla,  L  xii.  c.  4.  tbeir  carroccio6  to  each  other,  and  ex*

d  The  carroocio  was  invented  by  Eri-  changed  them some years  aflerwarda

sert,  a  celebrated  archbishop  of  Milan,  with  great  exultation.  In  the  fouTteen*Ji

sboizt  1038. Annali  di  Murat;  Anflq.  century  this  custom  had  gone  into  dis-

ItaL  Diss.  26. The  carroccio  of  Milan  use.— Id.  ibid. Deniua.  1.  xii.  a  4.

vas  taken  by  Frederic  II.,  in  1237,  and  *  Villoni,  L  vi.  c.  79.

2h2

468  £MPLOTMENT  OF Chap.  IU.  Part  11.

aoms  or  lancers.  A  charge  of  cavalry  was  irresistible ;
battles  were  continnallj  won  hy  inferior  niunbeis,  aiid
vast  slaughter  was  made  among  the  fugitiTes.'

As  the  comparative  inefficiency  of  foot-soldiera  became
evident,  a  greater  proportion  of  cavalry  was  employed,
and  armies,  though  better  equipped  and  disciplined,  were
less  numerous.  This  we  find  in  the  early  part  of  the
Employment  fo^iTte^nth  ccntuiy.  The  main  point  for  a  state
of  foreiga  at  War  wQs  to  obtain  a  sufficient  force  of  men  at
^'^^^^  arms.  As  few  Italian  cities  could  muster  a
large  body  of  cavalry  from  their  own  population,  the
obvious  resource  was  to  hire  mercenary  troops.  This
had  been  practised  in  some  instances  much  earuer.  The
city  of  Genoa  took  the  count  of  Savoy  into  pay  with  two
hundred  horse  in  1225.*  Florence  retained  five  hundred
French  lances  in  1282.^  But  it  became  much  more
general  in  the  fourteenth  century,  chiefly  after  the  expe-
dition of  the  emperor  Henry  VII.  in  1310.  Many  Ger-
man soldiers  of  fortune,  remaining  in  Italy  upon  this
occasion,  engaged  in  the  service  of  Milan,  Florence,  or
some  other  state. '  The  subsequent  expeditions  of  Louis
of  Bavaria  in  1326,  and  of  John  king  of  Bohemia  in
1331,  brought  a  fresh  accession  of  adventurers  from  the
same  country.  Others  again  came  frora  France,  and
some  from  Hungary.  All  preferred  to  continue  in  the
richest  country  and  finest  climate  of  Europe,  where  their
services  were  anxiously  solicited  and  abundantly  repaid.
An  imfortunate  prejudice  in  fiftvour  of  strangers  prevailed
among  the  Italians  of  that  age.  They  ceded  to  them,
one  Imows  not  why,  certainly  vdthout  having  been  van-
quished, the  palm  of  military  skill  and  valour.  The
word  Transalpine  (Oltramontani)  is  frequently  applied
tf9  hired  cavalry  by  the  two  Villani  as  an  epithet  of  ex-
cellence.

f  Skanondi.  t  iti.  p.  263,  fcc.,  has  some  thus  the  1500  UmoM  who  oompused  the

Jndicious  obserrations  on  this  sul^ecu  orlgiiMl  oompanlea  of  ordonnance  nlaed

S  Munttorl,  Dissert  26.  by  Chariea  VL  amoonted  to  nine  thoiH

h  Ammlrato,  IsL  Florent  p.  169.  The  aaad  cavalry. Bot  In  Italy  the  number

same  was  done  in  1297,  p.  200. A  lanee,  was  smaller. We read  frequently  of

in  the  technical  language  of  those  ages,  bartmtl,  which  axe  defined  lanse  de  dne

included  the  lifter  cavalry  attached  to  cavaUL Oorlo.  p.  43T. laooes  of  three

the  man  at  arms  as  well  as  himselt In  horses  were  introduced  about  the  middfti

France  the  ftill  complement  of  a  lance  of  the  fourteenth  centaxy^— Id.  p.  4M.
Clance  fourale)  waf  five  or  six  horses;

Italy.  FOREIGN  TROOPS.  469

The  experience  of  every  fresh  campaigii  now  told
more  and  more  against  the  ordinary  militia.  It  has  been
luual  for  modem  writers  to  lament  the  degeneracy  of
martial  spirit  among  the  Italians  of  that  age.  But  the
contest  was  too  unequal  between  an  absolutely  invulner-
able body  of  cuirassiers  and  an  infantry  of  peasants  or
citizens.  The  bravest  men  have  little  appetite  for  re-
ceiving wounds  and  death  without  the  hope  of  inflicting
any  in  return.  The  parochial  militia  of  France  had
proved  equally  unserviceable ;  though,  as  the  life  of  a
French  peasant  was  of  much  less  account  in  the  eyes  oi
his  government  than  that  of  an  Italian  citizen,  they
were  still  led  forward  like  sheep  to  the  slaughter  against
the  disciplined  forces  of  Edward  III.  The  cavalry  had
about  this  time  laid  aside  the  hauberk,  or  coat  of  mail,
their  ancient  distinction  from  the  unprotected  populace ;
which,  though  incapable  of  being  cut  through  by  the
sabre,  afforded  no  defence  against  the  pointed  sword  in-
troduced in  the  thirteenth  century,'  nor  repelled  the
impulse  of  a  lance  or  the  crushing  blow  of  a  battle-axe.
Plate-armotir  was  substituted  in  its  place  ;  and  the  man
at  anns,  cased  in  entire  steel,  the  several  pieces  firmly
riveted,  and  proof  against  every  stroke,  his  charger  pro-
tected on  the  &ce,  chest,  and  shoulders,  or,  as  it  was
called,  barded,  with  plates  of  steel,  fought  with  a
security  of  success  against  enemies  inferior  perhaps  only
in  these  adventitious  sources  of  courage  to  homself.^

Nor  was  the  new  system  of  conducting  hostilities  less
inconvejiient  to  the  citizens  than  the  tactics  of  cmsxdb  ex-
a  battle.  Instead  of  rapid  and  predatory  inva-  cused  from
sions,  terminated  instantly  by  a  single  action,  "^"^^
and  not  extending  more  than  a  few  days'  march  from
the  soldier^s  home,  the  more  skilfcd  combinations  usual
in  the  fourteenth  century  frequently  protracted  an  inde-
cisive contest  for  a  whole  summer."* As  wealth  and

1  Mnntorl,  ad  ann.  1228.  the  legL ThiB  is  reprcflented  in  a  statue

k  The  earliest  plate-Armour,  ei^praved  of  Ghailes  I.  king  of  Naples,  who  died  b

in  Montfiuioon's  Monumcns  de  la  Mo-  1286. Possibly  the  statue  may  not  bo

narehie  Fraofaise,  t.  iL,  is  of  tiie  reign  qnlte  so  sncient. Moutfanoon,  passim.^

of  Philip  the  Loog,  about  1316;  bat  it  Daniel. Hist,  de la  Milioe  J'nui^olft*.

does  not  appear  generally  till  that  of  p.  396.

Philip  of  Valds,  or  even  later. Before  "*  This  tedlons  warfare  h  la  Fahius  is

tbeoompletehanieflsofsteel  was  adopted,  called  by  Villani  guerra guereggiata,

plated  caps  were  sometimes  wdra  on  the  L  vlil.  c.  49 ;  at  least  I  can  annex  nu

knees  and  elbows,  and  even  greaves  on  other  meaning  to  the  expression.

470 CITIZENS  EXCUSED  FUOM  SEBVICE. Chap.  IIL  Past  O.

civilization  made  evident  the  advantages  of  agricultnial
and  mercantile  industry,  this  loss  of  productive  labonr
could  no  longer  be  endured.  Azzo  Yisconti,  who  died
in  1339,  dispensed  with  the  personal  service  of  his
Milanese  subjects.  "  Another  of  his  laws/*  says  Gral-
vaneo  Fiamma,  *'  was,  that  the  people  should  not  go  to
war,  but  remain  at  home  for  their  own  business.  For
they  had  hitherto  been  kept  with  much  daneer  and  ex-
pei^e  every  year,  and  espJ^iaUyin  time  of  harvest  and
vintage,  when  princes  are  wont  to  go  to  war,  in  bemeg-
ing  cities,  and  incurred  numberless  losses,  and  chie^'
on  account  of  the  long  time  that  they  were  so  detained.''*
This  law  of  Azzo  Yiscond,  taken  separately,  might  be
ascribed  to  the  usual  policy  of  an  absolute  government*
But  we  find  a  similar  innovation  not  long  afterwards  at
Florence.  In  the  war  carried  on  by  that  republic  against
Giovanni  Yisconti  in  1351,  the  younger  villani  informs
us  that  *'  the  useless  and  mischievous  personal  service
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  was  commuted  into  a
money  payment.'**"  This  change  indeed  was  necessarily
accompanied  by  a  vast  increase  of  taxation.  The  Italian
states,  republics  as  well  as  principalities,  levied  very
heavy  contributions.  Mastino  della  Scala  had  a  revenue
of  700,000  florins,  more,  says  John  Villani,  than  the
king  of  any  European  country,  except  France,  pos-
sesses.^ Yet  this  arose  from  only  nine  cities  of  Lorn-
bardy.  Considered  vdth  reference  to  economy,  almost
any  taxes  must  be  a  cheap  commutation  for  personal
service.  But  economy  may  be  regarded  too  exclusively,
and  can  never  counterbalance  that  degradation  of  a  na-
tional character  which  proceeds  from  intrusting  the
public  defence  to  foreigners.

It  could  hardly  be  expected  that  stipendiary  troops.
Companies  chiefly  composed  of  Germans,  would  conduct
of  adven-  themselves  without  insolence  and  contempt  of
tnrerg.  ^^  effeminacy  which  courted  their  services.
Indifferent  to  the  cause  they  supported,  the  highest  pay
and  the  richest  plunder  were  their  constant  motives.

■*  Muratorl,  Antiqait  ItaL  Dlaort.  39.  tare  to  augment  the  tazea  impoied  wbUe

°  Matt.  ViUani,  ^  136.  tbey  had  been  fifee.  Oomplainta  of  heavy

1*  L.  xL  c  45. I  cannot  Imagine  why  taxation  are  certainly  often  made  agidnat

Sismondi  asserts,  t.  iv.  p.  432.  that  the  the  Viioonti  and  other  tyrants  in  Urn

Icrds  of  cities  in  Lombardy  did  not  Tei**  fourteenth  century.

mm^mmm^ammi

ir KLY.  COMPANIES  OF  ADVEKTURERS.  47 1

Ab  Italy  was  generally  the  theatre  of  war  in  some  of  her
numerous  states,  a  soldier  of  fortune,  with  his  lance  and
tiharger  for  an  inheritance,  passed  from  one  service  to
another  without  regret  and  without  discredit.  But  if
peace  happened  to  be  pretty  universal,  he  might  be
thrown  out  of  his  only  occupation,  and  reduced  to  a
very  inferior  condition,  in  a  country  of  which  he  wan
not  a  native.  It  naturally  occurred  to  men  of  their
feelings,  that,  if  money  and  honour  could  only  be  had
while  they  retained  their  arms,  it  was  their  own  fault  if
they  ever  relinquished  them.  Upon  this  principle  they
first  acted  in  1343,  when  the  republic  of  Pisa  disbanded
a  large  body  of  German  cavalry  which  had  been
employed  in  a  war  with  riorence.**  A  partisan,  whom
the  Italians  call  the  duke  Guamieri,  engaged  these  dis-
satisfied mercenaries  to  remain  united  imder  his  com-
mand. His  plan  was  to  levy  contributions  on  all  coun-
tries which  he  entered  with  his  company,  without
aiming  at  any  conquests.  No  Italian  army,  he  well
knew,  could  be  raised  to  oppose  him ;  and  he  trusted
that  other  mercenaries  would  not  be  ready  to  fight
against  men  who  had  devised  a  scheme  so  advantageous
to  the  profession.  This  was  the  first  of  the  companies
of  adventure  which  continued  for  many  years  to  be  the
scourge  and  disgrace  of  Italy.  Guamieri,  after  some
time,  withdrew  his  troops,  satiated  with  plunder,  into
Germany ;  but  he  served  in  the  invasion  of  Naples  by
Louis  king  of  Hungary  in  1348,  and,  forming  a  new
company,  ravaged  the  ecclesiastical  state.  A  still  more
formidable  band  of  disciplined  robbers  appeared  in
1353,  under  the  command  of  Fra  Moriale,  and  after-
wards of  Conrad  Laudo.  This  was  denominated  the
Great  Company,  and  consisted  of  several  thousand
regular  troops,  besides  a  multitude  of  half-armed  ruf-
fians, who  assisted  as  spies,  pioneers,  and  plunderers.
The  rich  cities  of  Tuscany  and  Romagna  paid  large
gums,  that  the  great  company,  which  was  perpetually

1  Sismondl,  t  ▼. p.  380. The  dan-  After  some desperate  battles  fbe  mer*

germs  aspect  which  these  German  mer-  oenaries  were  defeated  and  Lodrisio  taken,

oenarles  mi^t  aasame  bad  appeared  four  t  v.  p.  278. In  this  instance,  however,

jean  before,  when  Lodrisio,  one  of  the  they  acted  for  another;  Guamieri  was

Viscontitbavlng  quarrelled  with  the  lord  the  first  who  tan^t  them  to  preserve

of  Milan,  led  a  large  body  of  troops  who  the  impartiality  of  general  roUbers.
had  Just  been  disbanded  agBinst  the  dty.

472  SIR  JOHN  HAWKWOOD. Chap.  III.  1'abt  IL

in  motion,  might  not  march  through  their  territoT}*,
Florence  alone  magnanimously  resolved  not  to  offer  this
ignominious  tribute.  Upon  two  occasions,  once  in  1358,
and  still  more  conspicuously  the  next  year,  she  refused
either  to  give  a  passage  to  the  company,  or  to  redeem
herself  by  money;  and  in  each  instance  the  German
robbers  were  compelled  to  retire.  At  this  time  they
consisted  of  five  thousand  cuirassiers,  and  their  whole
body  was  not  less  than  twenty  thousand  men ;  a  terrible
proof  of  the  evils  which  an  erroneous  system  had  entailed
upon  Italy.  Nor  were  they  repulsed  on  this  occasion
by  the  actual  exertions  of  Florence.  The  courage  of
that  republic  was  in  her  councils,  not  in  her  arms ;  the
resistance  made  to  Lando's  demand  was  a  burst  of
national  feeling,  and  rather  against  the  advice  of  the
leading  Florentines  /  but  the  army  employed  was  entirely
composed  of  mercenary  troops,  and  probably  for  the
greater  part  of  foreigners.

None  of  the  foreign  partisans  who  entered  into  the
Sir  John  scrvice  of  Italian  states  acquired  such  renown
Uawkwood.  |j^  ^^^^  career  as  an  Englishman  whom  con-
temporary writers  call  Aucud  or  Agutus,  but  to  whom
we  may  restore  his  national  appellation  of  Sir  John
Hawkwood.  This  very  eminent  man  had  served  in  the
war  of  Edward  III.,  and  obtained  his  knighthood  from
that  sovereign,  though  originally,  if  we  may  trust  com*
mon  £Etme,  bred  to  the  trade  of  a  tailor.  After  the  peace
of  Bretigni,  France  was  ravaged  by  the  disbanded  troops,
whose  devastations  Edward  was  accused,  perhaps  un-
justly, of  secretly  instigating.  A  large  body  of  these,
under  the  name  of  the  White  Company,  passed  into  the
service  of  the  Marquis  of  Montferrat.  They  were
some  time  afterwards  employed  by  the  Pisans  against
Florence ;  and  during  this  latter  war  Hawkwood
appears  as  their  commander.  For  thirty  years  he  was
continually  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Yisconti,  of
the  pope,  or  of  the  Florentines,  to  whom  be  devoted
himself  for  the  latter  part  of  his  life  with  more  fidelity
and  steadiness  than  he  had  shown  in  his  first  campaigns.
The  republic  testified  her  gratitude  by  a  public  funeral,
and  by  a  monument  in  the  Duomo,  which  still  per-
petuates his  memory.

'  Matt  AMUanl.  d.  537,

Italy.  WANT  OF  MILITARY  SCIENCE.  473

The  name  of  Sir  John  Hawkwood  is  worthy  to  bo
remembered  as  that  of  the  first  distinguished  wut  of
commander  who  had  appeared  in  Europe  since  J^^^JJJ^
the  destruction  of  the  Boman  empire.  It  would  before  bto
be  absurd  to  suppose  that  any  of  the  constituent  ^^^'
elements  of  military  genius  which  nature  furnishes' to
energetic  characters  were  wanting  to  the  leaders  of  a
barbarian  or  feudal  army:  untroubled  perspicacity  in
oonfasion,  firm  decision,  rapid  execution,  providenco
against  attack,  fertility  of  resource  and  stratagem — these
are  in  quality  as  much  required  from  the  chief  of  an
Ind'an  tribe  as  from  the  accomplished  commander.  But
we  do  not  find  them  in  any  instance  so  consummated  by
habitual  skill  as  to  challenge  the  name  of  generalship.
Ko  one  at  least  occurs  to  me,  previously  to  the  middle
of  the  fourteenth  century,  to  whom  hiBtoiy  has  unequi-
vocally assigned  that  character.  It  is  very  rarely  that
we  find  even  the  order  of  battle  specially  noticed.  The
monks,  indeed,  our  only  chroniclers,  were  poor  judges
of  martial  excellence ;  yet,  as  war  is  the  main  topic  of
all  annals,  we  could  hardly  remain  ignorant  of  any  dis-
tinguished skill  in  its  operations.  This  neglect  of
military  science  certainly  did  not  proceed  from  any
predilection  for  the  arts  of  peace.  It  arose  out  of  the
general  manners  of  society,  and  out  of  the  nature  and
composition  of  armies  in  the  middle  ages.  The  insub-
ordinate spirit  of  feudal  tenants,  and  the  emulous  equality
of  chivalry,  were  alike  hostile  to  that  gradation  of  rank,
that  punctual  observance  of  irksome  duties,  that  prompt
obedience  to  a  supreme  command,  through  which  a  single
soul  is  infused  mto  the  active  mass,  and  the  rays  of
individual  merit  converge  to  the  head  of  the  general.

In  the  fourteenth  century  we  begin  to  perceive  some-
thing of  a  more  scientific  character  in  military  proceed-
ings, and  historians  for  the  first  time  discover  that
success  does  not  entirely  depend  upon  intrepidity  and
physical  prowess.  The  victory  of  Muhldoif  over  the
Austrian  princes  in  1322,  that  decided  a  civil  war  in  the
empire,  is  ascribed  to  the  ability  of  the  Bavarian  com-
mander.' Many  distinguished  officers  were  formed  in
the  school  of  £dward  III. Yet  their  excellences  wero

•  StniT!ii0,O(npaaHfstGeniMn.  p.6B5. called  by  a  oontempora  y  writer  clarua
6cb«>if(ppenmin.  tbe  Bavarian  Keneral.  If militaii  sdentiA  vir.

474 SCHOOL  OF  ITALIAN  GENERALS. Chap.  III.  Past  II.

perhaps  rather  those  of  active  partisans  than  of  expe-
rienced generals.  Their  successes  are  still  dne  rather
to  daring  enthusiasm  thaii  to  wary  and  calculating  com-
bination. Like  inexpert  chess-players,  they  suirrise  us
by  happy  sallies  against  rule,  or  display  their  talents  in
rescning  themselves  from  the  consoqnence  of  their  own
mistakes.  Thus  the  admirable  arrangements  of  the  Black
Prince  at  Poitiers  hardly  redeem  the  temerity  which
placed  him  in  a  situation  where  the  egregious  folly  of
his  adversary  alone  could  have  permitted  him  to  triumph. '
Hawkwood  therefore  appears  to  me  the  first  real  general
of  modem  times ;  the  earliest  master,  however  imperfect,
in  the  science  of  Turenne  and  Wellington.  Every  con-
temporary Italian  historian  speaks  with  admiration  of
his  skilful  tactics  in  battle,  his  stratagems,  his  well-con-
ducted retreats.  Praise  of  this  description,  as  I  have
observed,  is  haT«lly  bestowed,  certainly  not  so  con-
tinually, on  any  former  captain.

Hawkwood  was  not  only  the  greatest  but  the  last  of
g^jj^j^^  the  foreign  condottieri,  or  captains  of  mer-
itaiian  couary  bands.  While  he  was  yet  living,  a  new
'^'^  military  school  had  been  formed  in  Italy,
which  not  only  superseded,  but  eclipsed,  all  the  strangers.
This  important  reform  was  ascribed  to  Alberio  di  Bar-
biano,  lord  of  some  petty  territories  near  Bologna.  He
formed  a  company  altogether  of  Italians  about  the  year
1379.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  natives  of  Italy  had
before  been  absolutely  excluded  from  service.  We  find
several  Italians,  such  as  the  Malatesta  family,  lords  of
Rimini,  and  the  Bossi  of  Parma,  commanding  the  armies
of  Florence  much  earlier.  But  this  was  the  first  trading
company,  if  I  may  borrow  the  analogy,  the  first  regular
body  of  Italian  mercenaries,  attached  only  to  their  com-
mander without  any  consideration  of  party,  like  the
Germans  and  English  of  Lando  and  Hawkwood.  Alberio
di  Barbiano,  though  himself  no  doubt  a  man  of  military
talents,  is  principally  distinguished  by  the  school  of
great  generals  which  the  company  of  St.  George  nnder
his  command  produced,  and  which  may  be  deduced,  by
regular  succession,  to  the  sixteenth  century.  The  first
in  order  of  time,  and  immediate  contemporaries  of  Bar-
biano, were  Jacopo  del  Verme,  Facino  Cane,  and  Ottobon
Terzo. Among  an  intelligent  and  educated  people,  little

/

TALY.  SCHOOL  OF  ITALIAN  GEl^ERALS.  475

inclinei  to  servile  imitatioii,  the  military  art  made  great
progress.  The  most  eminent  condottieri  being  divided,
in  general,  between  belligerents,  each  of  them  had  hia
genius  excited  and  kept  in  tension  by  that  of  a  rival  in
glory.  Every  resource  of  science  as  well  as  experience,
every  improvement  in  tactical  arrangements  and  the  use
of  arms,  were  required  to  obtain  an  advantage  over  such
equal  enemies.  In  the  first  year  of  the  fifteenth  centuiy
the  Italians  brought  their  newly  acquired  superiority  to
a  test.  The  emperor  Eobert,  in  alliance  with  Florence,
invaded  Gian  Galeazzo's  dominions  with  a  considerable
army.  From  old  reputation,  which  so  frequently  sur-
vives the  intrinsic  qualities  upon  which  it  was  founded,
an  impression  appears  to  have  been  excited  in  Italy
that  the  native  troops  were  still  unequal  to  meet  the
charge  of  German  cuirassiers.  The  duke  of  Milan  gave
orders  to. his  general,  Jacopo  del  Yerme,  to  avoid  a
combat.  But  that  able  leader  was  aware  of  a  great
relative  change  in  the  two  armies.  The  Germans  had
neglected  to  improve  their  discipline ;  their  arms  were
less  easily  wielaed,  their  horses  less  obedient  to  the  bit.
A  single  skirmish  was  enough  to  open  their  eyes ;  they
foimd  themselves  decidedly  inferior ;  and  having  engaged
in  the  war  with  the  expectation  of  easy  success,  Were
readily  disheartened.'  This  victory,  or  rather  this  deci-
sive proof  that  victory  might  be  achieved,  set  Italy  at
rest  for  almost  a  century  from  any  apprehensions  on  the
side  of  her  ancient  masters.

Whatever  evils  might  be  derived,  and  they  were  not
trifling,  from  the  employment  of  foreign  or  native  mer-
cenaries, it  was  impossible  to  discontinue  the  system
without  general  consent;  and  too  many  states  found
their  own  advantage  in  it  for  s^ch  an  agreement.  The
condottieri  were  indeed  all  notorious  for  contempt  of
engagements.  Their  rapacity  was  equal  to  their  bad
faith.  Besides  an  enormous  pay,  for  every  private
cuirassier  received  much  more  in  value  than  a  subaltern
officer  at  present,  they  exacted  gratifications  for  eveiy
success." But  everything  was  endured  by  ambitious

t  jSamondl,  1  TtL  pL  48A.  demanded  nnreaaoDAbly.  The  flnt  speaks

"  Faga  doppfia,  e  mese  oomplnto.  of  for  Itaelf ;  the  neoond  was  the  reckoning

which  we  frequently  read, sometimes  a  month's  service  as  completed  when  it

grsnied  Improvidentlj,  and  more  often  was  begun,  in  calculating  their  pay.—

476  DEFENSIVE  ARMS. Chap.  III.  Part  IL

governments  who  wanted  tlieir  aid.  Florence  and
Venice  were  the  two  states  which  owed  most  to  the
companies  of  adventure.  The  one  loved  war  without  its
perils ;  the  other  could  never  have  obtained  an  inch  of
territory  with  a  population  of  sailors.  But  they  were
both  almost  inexhaustibly  rich  by  commercial  industry ;
and,  as  the  surest  paymasters,  were  best  served  by  those
they  employed.  The  Yisconti  might  perhaps  have
extended  their  conquest  over  Lombardy  with  the  militia
of  Milan  ;  but  without  a  Jacopo  del  Yerme  or  a  Carma-
gnola,  the  banner  of  St.  Mark  would  never  have  floated
at  Verona  cmd  Bergamo.

The  Italian  armies  of  the  fifteenth  century  have  been
Defensive  remarked  for  one  striking  peculiarity, ^^a^
Anns  of has  never  been  conducted  at  so  little  personal
********" hazard  to  the  soldier. Combats  frequently
occur,  in  the  annals  of  that  age,  wherein  succors,  thou^
warmly  contested,  cost  very  few  lives  even  to  the  van-
quished.' This  innocence  of  blood,  which  some  histo-
rians turn  into  ridicule,  was  no  doubt  owing  in  a  great
degree  to  the  rapacity  of  the  companies  of  adventure,
who, in expectation  of  enriching  themselves  by  the
ransom  of  prisoners,  were  anxious  to  save  their  lives.
Much  of  the  humanity  of  modem  warfare  was  originally
due  to  this  motive. But  it  was  rendered  more  practi-

BUtL  VUlanl,  p.  62 ;  Ssmondi,  t  ▼.  with  oonslderable  loas. Sianondi,  t  z.

p.  41X  p.  126, 137. But,  in  general,  the  dang)!*

Glan  Qaleazio  Vboontl  promised  cob-  ter  must  appear very  trifling. Am-

atant  half-pay  to  tiie  oondottieri  whom  mlrato  himself  says  that  In  an  action

he  disbanded  In  1396. This  perhaps  Is  between  the  Ne^ralitan  and  papal  truopa

Che  first  Instance  of  half-pay.— Slsinondl.  In  i486,  which  lasted  all  day,  not  only

t.  ylL  p.  879.  no  one  was  killed,  but  It  is  not  reoonled

*  Instaaoet  of  this  are  very  freqnent.  that  any  one  was  wounded.  Boaooe's
Thvs  at  the  action  of  Zagonara,  in  1423,  Lorenzo  de'  Medid,  vol.  11.  p.  37.  Guio-
but  three  persons,  according  to  Hachi-  ciardinl's  general  testimony  to  the  cha-
avel,  lost  their  live8»  and  these  by  soffo-  meter  of  these  combats  Is  nnequivooaL
cation  in  the  mnd.  1st  Florent  L  iv.  He  speaks  of  the  battle  of  Fomova»  Ik-
At  that  of  M oUuella,  in  1467,  he  says  tween  the  confederates  of  Lombardy  and
that  no  one  was  killed.  1.  vlL  Ammi-  the  anny  of  Charles  VIII.  retaratng
rato  reproves  him  for  this,  as  all  the  fh>m  Naples  in  1495,  as  very  remark-
authors  of  the  time  represent  it  to  have  able  on  aocoont  of  the  slanghter,  which
been  sangainaiy  (t  IL  p.  102),  and  in-  amounted  on  the  Italian  side  to  3000
slnnatas  that  Machiavel  ridlculea  the  men :  perchh  fh  la  prima,  che  da  inngtii^
InoAensivenessof  those  armies  more  than  simo  tempo  in  qnh  si  oombattease  coo
they  deserve,  schemendo,  come  egli  snol  uocisione  e  con  sangne  in  Italia,  perchi
far,  qnella  milixia.  Certainly  some  fbw  innanai  h  questa  morivano  pochisslnil
battles  of  the  fifteenth  century  were  not  nominl  in  un  &tto  d'arme.  L  IL  p.  17ft.
only  obstinately  contested,  but  attended

ITALT.  DEFENSIVE  ARMS.  477

cable  by  the  nature  of  their  arms.  For  once,  and  for
once  only  in  the  history  of  mankind,  the  art  of  defence
had  outstripped  that  of  destruction.  In  a  charge  of
lancers  many  fell,  imhorsed  by  the  shock,  and  might  be
suffocated  or  bruised  to  death  by  the  pressure  of  their
own  armour;  but  the  lance's  point  could  not  penetrate
the  breastplate,  the  sword  fell  harmless  upon  the  helmet,
the  conqueror,  in  the  first  impulse  of  passion,  could  not
assail  any  vital  part  of  a  prostrate  but  not  exposed  enemy.
Still  less  was  to  be  dreaded  from  the  archers  or  cross-
bowmen,  who  composed  a  large  part  of  the  infantiy.
The  bow  indeed,  as  drawn  by  an  £nglish  foot-soldier,
was  the  most  formidable  of  arms  before  the  invention  of
gunpowder.  That  ancient  weapon,  though  not  perhaps
common  among  the  Northern  nations,  nor  for  several
centuries  after  their  settlement,  was  occasionally  in  use
before  the  crusades.  William  employed  archers  in  the
battle  of  Hastings.'  Intercourse  with  the  East,  its
natural  soil,  during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  ages,
rendered  the  bow  better  known.  But  the  Europeans
improved  on  the  eadtem  method  of  confining  its  use  to
cavalry.  By  employing  infantry  as  archers,  they  gained
increased  size,  more  steady  position,  and  surer  aim  for
the  bow.  Much,  however,  depended  on  the  strength
and  skill  of  the  archer.  It  was  a  peculiarly  English
weapon,  and  none  of  the  other  principal  nations  adopted
it  so  generally  or  so  successfully.  ITie  cross-bow,  which
brought  the  strong  and  weak  to  a  level,  was  more  in
favour  upon  the  continent.  This  instrument  is  said  by
some  writers  to  have  been  introduced  after  the  first
crusade  in  the  reign  of  Louis  the  Fat."  But,  if  we  may
trust  William  of  Poitou,  it  was  employed,  as  well  as  the
long-bow,  at  the  battle  of  Hastings.  Several  of  the  popefi
prohibited  it  as  a  treacherous  weapon  ;  and  the  restric-
tion was  so  far  regarded,  that,  in  the  time  of  Philip
Augustus,  its  use  is  said  to  have  been  unknown  in
France.'  By  degrees  it  became  more  general ;  and  cross-
bowmen  were  considered  as  a  very  necessary  part  of  a

1  Pedite«  In  ftonte locavit,  sagittis  represented  In  the  tapestry  of  Bayeoz.
ftrmatos  et  ballstis,  item  pedites  in  online '  Le  Oruid,  Vie  priv^  dx%  Fran^al^

BCdindo  firmioreB  et  loricatos, nltimo  t  i.  p.  349.

tnniUH}  equitiun. OnL  Ptctaviensis  (in *  I)u Cange,  ▼. Ballsta;  Mnimturi

l)a  Cbeme),  p.  301. Several  arrhers  are  Dlaa.  26,  t  L  p.  462  (lUO.).

178  CUSTOM  OP  Chap.  III.  Part  II.

well-organized  army.  But  both  the  arrow  and  the
quarrel  glanced  away  from  plate-armour,  such  afi  it
became  in  the  fifteenth  century,  impervious  in  every
point,  except  when  the  vizor  was  raised  from  the  face,
or  some  part  of  the  body  accidentally  exposed.  The
horse  indeed  was  less  completely  protected.

Many  disadvantages  attended  the  security  against
wounds  for  which  this  armour  had  been  devised.  The
enormoiis  weight  exhausted  the  force  and  crippled  the
limbs.  It  rendered  the  heat  of  a  southern  climate  insup-
portable. In  some  circumstances  it  increased  the  danger
of  death,  as  in  the  passage  of  a  river  or  morass.  It  was
impossible  to  compel  an  enemy  to  fight,  because  the  least
entrenchment  or  natural  obstacle  could  stop  such  un-
wieldy assailants.  The  troops  might  be  kept  in  constant
alarm  at  night,  and  either  compelled  to  sleep  under  arms,
or  run  the  risk  of  being  surprised  before  they  could  rivet
their  plates  of  steel.^  Neither  the  Italians,  however,  nor
the  Transalpines,  would  surrender  a  mode  of  defence
which  they  ought  to  have  deemed  inglorious.  But  in
order  to  obviate  some  of  its  military  inconveniences,  as
well  as  to  give  a  concentration  in  attack,  which  lancers
impetuously  charging  in  a  single  line,,  according  to  the
practice  at  least  of  France  in  the  middle  ages,  did  not
Ciistom  of  preserve,  it  became  usual  for  the  cavalry  to  dis-
cavairy  dis-  mount,  and,  leaving  their  horses  at  some  dis-
°»«'^"°«-  tance,  to  combat  on  foot  with  the  lance.  This
practice,  which  must  have  been  singularly  embarrassing
with  the  plate-armour  of  the  fifteenth  century,  was  intro-
duced before  it  became  so  ponderous.  It  is  mentioned
by  historians  of  the  twelfth  century,  both  as  a  German
and  an  English  custom.*"  We  find  it  in  the  wars  of
Edward  III.  Hawkwood,  the  disciple  of  that  school,
introduced  it  into  Italy.**  And  it  was  practised  by  the
English  in  their  second  wars  with  France,  especially  at
the  battles  of  Crevant  and  Vemeuil."

b  Sismondi,  t  ix.  p.  158.  doue  oy  the  English  in  their  engagemeii!

"  The  emperor  Conrad's  cavalry  In  the  with  the  Scotch  near  North-AUortuo,
seoond  cnuade  are  said  by  William  of  commonly  called  the  battle  of  the  Stand-
Tyre  to  have  dismounted  on  one  occasion,  ard,  in  1138.  Twysden,  Decern  Scripk
and  fuog^t  on  foot,  de  eqols  desoendentes,  p.  342.

«t  focti  pedites ;  »icut  mot  est  TaUonicu  d  Sismondi,  t.  vi.  p.  429 ;  Axarins,  in

In  mimmis  nnoeasitatibus  bellica  tractare  Script  Rer.  I  tal.  t.  xvi. ;  Matt  Ylliarn.

<9««utiA. 1.  xvii.  c.  4. And  the  some  was  *  Moustrelct,  t  iL  foL  7,  14,  76 ;  VU

Halt.  CAVALRT  DISMOUNTING.  479

Meonwliile  a  discovery  accidentally  made,  perha2)s  in
some  remote  age  and  distant  region,  and  whose  invention  oi
importance  was  but  slowly  perceived  by  Europe,  gunpowder,
had  prepared  the  way  not  only  for  a  change  in  her  mili-
tary system,  but  for  political  effects  still  more  extensive.
If  we  consider  gunpowder  as  an  instrument  of  human
destruction,  incalculably  more  powerful  than  any  that
skill  had  devised  or  accident  presented  before,  acquiring,
as  experience  shows  us,  a  more  sanguinary  dominion  in
every  succeeding  age,  and  borrowing  all  the  progressive
resources  of  science  and  civilization  for  the  extermina-
tion of  mankind,  we  shall  be  appalled  at  the  future
prospects  of  the  species,  and  feel  perhaps  in  no  other
instance  so  much  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  mysterious
dispensation  with  the  benevolent  order  of  Providence.
As  the  great  security  for  established  governments,  the
surest  preservation  against  popular  tumult,  it  assumes  a
more  equivocal  character,  depending  upon  the  solution
of  a  doubtful  problem,  whether  the  sum  of  general  happi-
ness has  lost  more  in  the  last  three  centuries  through
arbitrary  power,  than  it  has  gained  through  regular  police
and  suppression  of  disorder.

There  seems  little  reason  to  doubt  that  gunpowder  was
introduced  through  the  means  of  the  Saracens  into  Europe.
Its  use  in  engines  of  war,  thojigh  they  may  seem  to  have
been  rather  like  our  fireworks  than  artillery,  is  mentioned
by  an  Arabic  writer  in  the  Escurial  collection  about  the
year  1249.' It  was  known  not  long  afterwards  to  our

laret,  t.  zviL  p.  89.  It  was  a  BaTgnmUan  I  think  there  can  on  the  whole  be  no

as  well  ag  English  figwbion. Entre  les  doubt  that  gunpowder  is  meant.  Another

Bourguignons,  sajB  Comines,  lora  estoient  Arabian  writer  seems  to  describe  the  use

les  plus  honores  ceux  que  descendoient  of  cannon  in  the  jears  1312  and  1323.  Id*

avec  les  archers. L  1.  a  3.  ibid.  And  the  chronicle  of  Alphonao  XL,

t  Casiri,  BibL  Anb.  Hispan.  1  il.  p.  T,  king  of  Castile,  distinctly  mentions  them

thus  renders  the  original  description  of  at  the  siege  of  Algedras  in  1342. But

certain missiles  used by the  Moors,  before  this  they  were  sufficiently  known

SerpnntfSusnrrantquescorplonesclrcum-  in  France. Gunpowder  and  cannon  are

llgati  lac  pulvere  nitrate  incensi,  unde  both  mentioned  in  registers  of  accounts

explori  ftilgurant  ac inoendunt. Jam  under  1338  (Du  Oange,  v.  Bombarda),

Tldere  erat  Tnanganmn  excusBum  veluti  and  in  another  document  of  1346. Hist,

nubem  per  aera  extendi  aetoDitnulnetar  du  Languedoc,  t.  iv. p.  204. But  the

boiTeudum edere firagorem, ignemque  strongest  evidence  is  a  passage  of  Pe-

ondequiuiTie  vomens,  omnia  dirumpere,  trarch,  written  before  1344,  and  quoted

tnoendere,  in  cineres  redigere. The  Am-  In  Muratori,  Antich.  ItaL  Dissert.  26,

Mc  passage  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  page ;  p.  456,  where  he  speaks  of  the  art,  nuper

and  one  would  be  glad  to  know  whether  rara,  nunc  commuus.
ptiMi  vitraXMu  ia  a  Mr  traiifilatton.  But

480  CUSTOM  OF  CATALBf Chap.  UI.  Past  JI.

pbiloeopher  Boger  Bacon,  thongli  he  concealed,  in  soma
degree,  the  secret  of  its  compoeition.  In  the  first  part
of  the  .fourteenth  century  cannon,  or  rather  mortars,  were,
invented,  and  the  applicability  of  gunpowder  to  pnrpoeefi
of  war  was  nnderstood.  Edward  TFT,  employed  some
pieces  of  artillery  with  considerable  effect  at  Crecy.*
But  its  use  was  still  not  very  frequent ; — a  circumstance
which  will  surprise  us  less  when  we  consider  the  un-
scientific construction  of  artillery ;  the  slowness  with
which  it  could  be  loaded ;  its  stone  balls,  of  uncertain
aim  and  imperfect  force,  being  commonly  fired  at  a  con-
siderable elevation ;  and  especially  the  difficulty  of  re-
moving it  from  place  to  place  during  an  action.  In  sieges,
and  in  naval  engagements,  as;  for  example,  in  the  war  of
Chioggia,  it  was  more  frequently  employed.*  Gradually,
however,  the  new  artifice  of  evil  gained  ground.  The
French  made  the  principal  improvements.  They  cast
their  cannon  smaller,  placed  them  on  lighter  carriages,
and  used  balls  of  iron.^  They  invented  portable  arms
for  a  single  soldier,  which,  though  clumsy  in  comparison
with  their  present  state,  gave  an  augury  of  a  prodigious
revolution  in  the  military  art.  John  duke  of  Burgundy,  ,
in  1411,  had  4000  hand-cannons,  as  they  were  called,
in  lus  army.^  They  are  found,  under  different  names
and  modifications  of  form — for  Which  I  refer  the  reader
to  professed  writers  on  tactics — in  most  of  the  wars  that
historians  of  the  fifteenth  century  record,  but  less  in  Italy
than  beyond  the  Alps.  The  Milanese,  in  1449,  are  said
to  have  armed  their  militia  with  20,000  muskets,  which
struck  terror  into  the  old  generals/"*  But  these  muskets,

«  O.  Villanl,  L  xlL  c.  87. Gibbon  has  h  GattanH  lit  V^dortauL,  in  Seript.

<*}rown  out  a  sort  of  oltJectiou  to  the  oer-  Rer.  Ital.  t  ztU.  p.  360. 8ev«nil  proolh

tainty  of  this  fact,  on  account  of  Frols-  of  the  employment  of  artUleiy  in  Frexich

sart's  silence.  But  the  poeiUve  testimony  sieges  daring  the  reign  of  Charles  V.

of  Vlllani,  who  died  within  two  yean  occar  in  VUlant.  See  the  word  ArtUlexis

afterwards,  and  had  manifestly  obtained  In  the  index.

much  information  as  to  the  great  eventa  Gian  Galeasxo  had,  aooordlng  to  Corio,

passing  in  France,  cannot  be  rejected,  thlr^-foor  pieces  of  cannon,  small  and

He  ascribes  a  material  elfect  to  the  can-  great,  in  the  Milanese  army,  about  1397.

non  of  Edward,  colpi  delle  bombarde,  i  Goiodardini,  L  i.  p.  7ft,  lias  a  remark-

wliich  I  suspect,  from  his  strong  expres-  able  passage  on  the  snperiori^  of  iha

sions,  had not  been  employed  befom,  French  over  the  Italian  artillery  in  ood-

ezcept  against  stone  walls. It  seemed,  seipienoe  of  dieee  improvements,

he  says,  as  if  God  thundered  con  grande  k  Villaret,  t.  xlii.  p.  176, 310.

nocisione di gentl, e  sfondamento  di  "*  Slsmondi.  t  ix.  p.  341.  Henystbat

cavalU  lirequiredaiiaarterof  anhoiirtocfaaiva

Italy  SFORZil  AND  BRACCIO.  481

supported  on  a  rest,  and  charged  with  great  delay,  did
lees  executioii  than  our  sanguinary  science  would  requiix) ;
and,  uncombined  with  the  admirable  invention  of  the
i)ayonet,  could  not  in  any  degree  resist  a  charge  of
cavalry.  The  pike  had  a  greater  tendency  to  subvert
the  military  system  of  the  middle  ages,  and  to  demon-
strate the  efficiency  of  disciplined  infantry.  Two  free
nations  had  already  discomfited,  by  the  help  of  such
infantiy,  those  arrogant  kni^ts  on  whom  4e  fate  of
battles  had  depended — ^the  Bohemians,  instructed  in  the
art  of  war  by  their  great  master,  John  Zisca ;  and  the
Swiss,  who,  after  winning  their  independence  inch  by
ineh  from  the  house  of  Austria,  had  lately  established
their  renown  by  a  splendid  victory  over  Charles  of  Bur-
gundy. Louis  XI.  took  a  body  of  mercenaries  from  the
United  Ccmtons  into  pay.  Maximilian  had  recourse  to
the  same  assistance."  And  though  the  importance  of
infantry  was  not  perhaps  decidedly  established  till  ihe
Milanese  wars  of  Louis  XII.  and  Francis  I.,  in  the  six-
teenth century,  yet  the  last  years  of  the  middle  ages,
according  to  our  division,  indicated  the  commencement
of  that  military  revolution  in  the  general  employment  of
pikemen  and  musketeers.

Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  to
return  from  this digression, two  illustrious  Rivalry  of
captains,  educated  under  Alberic  di  Barbiano,  Bfona  and
turned  upon  themselves the eyes  of Italy.  ®'*****^
These  were  Braccio  di  Montone,  a  noble  Ferugian,  and
Sforza  Attendolo,  originally  a  peasant  in  the  village  of
Gotignuola. Nearly  equal  in  reputation,  urdess  perhaps
Braccio  may  be  reckoned  the  more  consummate  general,
they  were  divided  by  a  long  rivalry,  which  descended  to
the  next  generation,  and  involved  all  the  distinguished
leaders  of  Italy. The  distractions  of  Naples,  and  the
anarchy  of  the  ecclesiastical  state,  gave  scope  not  only
to  their  military  but  political  ambition. Sforza  wat;
invested  iVith  extensive  fiefs  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,
and  with  the  office  of  Groat  Constable. Braccio  aimed

and  fire  a  muaket I  rnnst  confess  that  I  Swiss  trotqn,  p.  192. The  French,  b<?

very  much  donbt  the  &ct  of  90  many  says,  had  no  native  infimtry;  fl  regno  tU

muskets  having  been  ooUacted. In  1432  Francia  era  debollsslmo  di  fiuiteria  pr>

that  arm  was  seen  for  the  flnt  time  in  pria,  tha  nobility  monopolising  all  wav

rofcany. Muratori.  Dtasert  28,  pw  467.  like  oocnpations. Ibid.
■  See  Ouiodaidlnl's  cbanoter  of  the
vol..  I.  2  I

482  FRANCESCO  SFORZA, Chap.  III.  Pakt  IL

at  independent  acquisitions,  and  formed  a  sort  of  princi-
pality around  Perugia.  This,  however,  was  entirely
dissipated  at  lus  death.  When  Sforza  and  Braccio  were
Francesco  ^^  more,  their  respective  parties  were  headed
sfonft.  ty  the  son  of  the  former,  Francesco  Sforza,  and
by  Nicolas  Piccinino,  who  for  more  than  twenty  years
fought,  with  few  exceptions,  under  opposite  banners.
Piccinino  was  constantly  in  the  service  of  Milan.  Sforza,
whose  political  talents  fully  equalled  his  militaiy  skill,
never  lost  sight  of  the  splendid  prospects  that  opened  to
his  ambition.  From  Eugenius  IV.  he  obtained  the
March  of  Ancona,  as  a  fief  of  the  Boman  see.  Thus
rendered  more  independent  than  the  ordinary  condottieri,
he  mingled  as  a  sovereign  prince  in  the  politics  of  Italy.
He  was  generally  in  alliance  with  Yenice  and  Florence,
throwing  his  weight  into  their  scale  to  preserve  the
balance  of  power  against  Milan  and  Naples.  But  his
ultimate  designs  rested  upon  Milan.  Filippo  Maria,
duke  of  that  city,  the  last  of  his  fiiunily,  had  only  a  natu-
ral daughter,  whose  hand  he  sometimes  offered  and
sometimes  withheld  from  Sfoiza.  Even  after  he  had  con-
He  aoquiras  ^^^^^^  ^  their  union,  his  suspicious  temper  was
the  duchy  incapable  of  admitting  such  a  son-in-law  into
of  MiUn.  confidence,  and  he  joined  in  a  confederacy  with
the  pope  and  king  of  Naples  to  strip  Sforza  of  the  March.
At  tlie  death  of  FQippo  Maria  in  1447,  that  general  had
nothing  left  but  his  glory,  and  a  very  disputable  claim
to  the  Milanese  succession.  This,  however,  was  set
aside  by  the  citizens,  who  revived  their  republican
government.  A  republic  in  that  part  of  Lombardy
might,  with  the  help  of  Yenice  and  Florence,  have  with-
stood any  domestic  or  foreign  usurpation.  But  Yenioe
was  hostile,  and  Florence  indifierent.  Bforza  became  the
general  of  this  new  state,  aware  that  such  would  be  the
probable  means  of  becoming  its  master.  No  politician
of  that  age  scrupled  any  breach  of  fidth  for  his  interest.
Nothing,  says  Machiavel,  was  thought  shameful,  but  to
fail,  ^oiza,  with  his  army,  deserted  to  the  Yenetiana ;
and  the  republic  of  Milan,  being  both  incapable  of  de-
iending  itself  and  distracted  by  civil  dissensions,  soon
fell  a  prey  to  his  ambition.  In  1450  he  was  pro-
claimed duke,  rather  by  right  of  election,  or  of  conquest,
than  in  virtue  of  hi»  marriage  with  Bianca,  whose  sex,

Italy.  REBELLION  OF  SICILY.  483

as  well  as  illegitimacy,  seemed  to  preclude  her  firom
inheriting.

I  have  not  alluded  for  some  time  to  the  domestic
hiatoiy  of  a  kingdom  which  bore  a  considerable  Aff&ini  of
part,  during  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  cen-  Napiee.
turies,  in  the  general  combinations  of  Italian  policy,  not
wishing  to  interrupt  the  reader's  attention  by  too  fre-
quent transitions.  We  must  return  again  to  a  more
remote  age  in  order  to  take  up  the  histoiy  of
Naples.  Charles  of  Anjou,  after  the  deaths  of  ^•'*  ^^^
Manfred  and  Conradin  had  left  him  without  a  competitor,
might  be  ranked  in  the  first  class  of  European  sovereigns.
Master  of  Provence  and  Naples,  and  at  the  head  of  the
Guelf  faction  in  Italy,  he  had  already  prepared  a  formi-
dable attack  on  the  Greek  empire,  when  a  memorable
revolution  in  Sicily  brought  humiliation  on  his  latter
years.  John  of  Frocida,  a  Neapolitan,  whose  Rebellion
patrimony  had  been  confiscated  for  his  adher-  ^^^^
ence  to  the  party  of  Manfired,  retained,  during  chariee
long  years  of  exile,  an  implacable  resentment  **''^^"-
against  the  house  of  Anjou.  From  the  dominions  of
Peter  III.,  king  of  Aragon,  who  had  bestowed  estates
apon  him  in  Valencia,  he  kept  his  eye  continually  fixed
on  Naples  and  Sicily.  The  former  held  out  no  fevour-
able  prospects;  the  Ghibelin  party  had  been  entirely
subdued,  and  the  principal  barons  were  of  French  extrac-
tion or  inclinations.  But  the  island  was  in  a  very  differ-
ent state.  Unused  to  any  strong  government,  it  was
now  treated  as  a  conquered  country.  A  large  body  of
French  soldiers  garrisoned  the  fortified  towns,  and  the
systematic  oppression  was  aggravated  by  those  insults
upon  the  honour  of  families  which  are  most  intolerable
to  an  Italian  temperament.  John  of  Procida,  travelling
in  di^uise  through  the  island,  animated  the  barons  with
a  hope  of  deliverance.  In  like  disguise  he  repaired  to
the  pope,  Nicolas  III.,  who  was  jealous  of  the  new
Neapolitan  dynasty,  and  obtained  his  sanction  to  the
projected  insurrection;  to  the  court  of  Constantinople,
from  which  he  readily  obtained  money ;  and  to  the  king
of  Aragon,  who  employed  that  money  in  fitting  out  an
tumament,  that  hovered  upon  the  coast  of  Africa,  under
pretext  of  attacking  the  Moors.  It  is,  however,  difficult
at  this  time  to  distinguish  the  effects  of  preconcerted

2i7

^84  SICILIAN  YESPERS. Chap.  III.  Past  U

conspiracy  firom  those  of  casual  resentment.  Before  tLa
intrigues  so  skilfully  conducted  had  taken  effect,  yet
after  they  were  ripe  for  development,  an  outrage  com-
mitted upon  a  lady  at  Palermo,  during  a  procession  on
the  vigil  of  Easter,  provoked  the  people  to  that  terrible
Sicilian  massacre  of  aU  the  French  in  their  island  which
Vespen.  }^qj^  obtained  the  name  of  Sicilian  Vespers.
Unpremeditated  as  such  an  ebullition  of  popular  fniy
must  appear,  it  fell  in,  by  the  happiest  coinci-
dence, with  the  previous  conspiracy.  The  king
of  Aragon's  fleet  was  at  hand ;  the  Sicilians  soon  called
in  his  assistance ;  he  sailed  to  Palermo,  and  accepted  the
crown.  John  of  Procida  is  a  remarkable  witness  to  a
truth  which  the  pride  of  governments  will  seldom  pertnit
them  to  acknowledge :  that  an  individual,  obscure  and
apparently  insignificant,  may  sometimes,  by  perseverance
and  energy,  shake  the  foimdations  of  established  states  ;
while  the  perfect  concealment  of  his  intrigues  proves
also,  against  a  popular  maxim,  that  a  political  secret
may  be  preserved  by  a  number  of  persons  during  a  con-
siderable length  of  time.**

The  long  war  that  ensued  upon  this  revolution  involved
War  in  or  interested  the  greater  part  of  civilized  Europe.
~JJ^»*  Philip  III.  of  France  adhered  to  his  uncle,  and
France  and  the  kmg  of  Aragon  was  compelled  to  fight  for
^'■*^°"  Sicily  within  his  native  dominions.  This  in-
deed was  the  more  vulnerable  point  of  attack.  Upon  the
sea  he  was  lord  of  the  ascendant.  His  Catalans,  the
most  intrepid  of  Mediterranean  sailors,  were  led  to  vio^
tory  by  a  Calabrifiui  re^gee,  Roger  di  Loria,  the  most
illustrious  and  successful  admiral  whom  Europe  produced
till  the  age  of  Blake  and  De  Suyter. In  one  of  Loria's

•  Glannoiie,  thoai^  he  has  well  de*  Palenna The  tboo^t  of  callii^  fa

acribod  the  acfaemea  of  John  of  Prodda,  Peter,  he  asaerta,  did  not  occur  to  the

Tet,  aa  ia  too  often  hia  autom,  or  rather  Sldliana  till  Charlea  had  actually  com-

Jutt  of  CoaUnio,  whom  he  implidtlj  fol-  menoed  the  alege  of  Meniiia. But  thia

Ulw^  drops  or  alidee  over  leading  facta ;  ia  equally  remoTed  tma  the trath.

and  thna,  omlttiDg  CDtiraly,  or  misrepre-  Gibbon  haa  made  more  eirora  than  are

aenting.  the  drcnmatanoea  of  the  Sidlian  usual  with  ao  accurate  aa  htatoriBB  ki

Yeipera,  treata  the  whole  tnaarrectlon  aa  hia  aooount  of  thia  reyolutioii,  audi  tm

the reanlt  of  a  deliberate  onupiraqj.  calling  Cooatance,  the  queen  of  Pteter.

On  the  other  hand.  Nioolaa  Spedalia,  a  sister  inatemi  of  daughter  of  Manftvd.

-ontemporary  writer.  In  the  seveuth  vo-  A  good  narraUve  of  the  Sidlian  Vesper*

ameofHiuatori'aoolleetlon,  repreaenta  may be found  la Yelly'a  Histacy  ^

♦he  Sidlian  Vespers  as  proceeding  entirely  France,  t  yi.
fknom  the  casual  outrage  in  the  atrects  of

Italy. WAR  BETWEfiN  FRANCE  AND  ARAGON.  4Sl

battles  the  eldest  sou  of  the  king  of  Naples  was  made
prisoner,  and  the  first  years  of  his  own  reign  were  spent
in  confinement.  But  notwithstanding  these  advantages,
it  was  found  impracticable  for  Aragon  to  contend  against
the  arms  of  France,  and  latterly  of  CastiLe,  sustained  by
the  rolling  thnnders  of  the  Vatican.  Peter  III.  had
bequeathed  Sicily  to  his  second  son  James ;  Alfonso,  the
eldest,  king  of  Aragon,  could  not  fedrly  be  expected  to  ruin
his  inheritance  for  his  brother's  cause ;  nor  were  the
barons  of  that  free  country  disposed  to  carry  on  a  war
without  national  objects.  He  made  peace,  accordingly,
in  1295,  and  engaged  to  withdraw  aU  his  subjects  from
the  Sicilian  service.  Upon  his  own  death,  which  followed
very  soon,  James  succeeded  to  the  kingdom  of  Aragon,
and  ratified  the  renunciation  of  Sicily.  But  the  natives
of  that  island  had  received  too  deeply  the  spirit  of  inde-
pendence to  be  thus  assigned  over  by  the  letter  of  a
treaty.  After  solemnly  abjuring,  by  their  ambassadors,
their  allegiance  to  the  king  of  Aragon,  they  placed  the
crown  upon  the  head  of  his  brother  Frederic.  They
maintained  the  war  against  Charles  II.  of  Naples,  against
James  of  Aragon,  their  former  king,  who  had  bound
himself  to  enforce  their  submission,  and  even  against  the
great  Boger  di  Loria,  who,  upon  some  discontent  with
Frederic,  deserted  their  banner,  and  entered  into  the
Neapolitan  service.  Peace  was  at  length  made  in  1300,
upon  condition  that  Frederic  shoidd  retain  during  his
life  the  kingdom,  which  was  afterwards  to  revert  to  the
crown  of  Naples :  a  condition  not  likely  to  be  fulfilled.

Upon  the  death  of  Charles  II.  king  of  Naples,  in  1305,
a  question  arose  as  to  the  succession.  His  eldest  son,
Charles  Martel,  had  been  called  by  maternal  inheritance
to  the  throne  of  Hungary,  and  had  left  at  his  decease  a
son,  Carobert,  the  reigning  sovereign  of  that  country.
According  to  the  laws  of  representative  succession,
which  were  at  this  time  tolerably  settled  in  private  in-
heritance, the  crown  of  Naples  ought  to  have  regu-
larly devolved  upon  that  prince.  But  it  was  Robert  wng
contested  by  his  uncle  Robert,  the  eldest  ofNapiea.
living  son  of  Charles  II.,  and  the  cause  was  pleaded
by  civilians  at  Avignon  before  Pope  Clement  v.,  the
feudal  superior  of  the  Neapolitan  kingdom.  Reasons  of
public  utility,  mther  than  of  legal  analogy,  seem  to  have

186  RObERT  KING  OF  NAPLES. Chap.  III.  Past  II.

preYailed  in  the  deoision  which  was  made  in  &yoiir  of
Uobert.^  The  conrse  of  hia  reign  evinced  the  wisdom  of
this  determination.  Robert,  a  wise  and  active,  though
not  personally  a  martial  prince,  maintained  the  ascend-
ancy of  the  Guelf  faction,  and  the  papal  influence  con-
nected with  it,  against  the  fonnidable  combination  of
Ghibelin  usurpers  in  Lombardy,  and  the  two  emperors
Henry  VII.  and  Louid  of  Bavaria.  No  male  issue  sur«
vived  Bobert,  whose  crown  descended  to  his  grand-
daughter Joanna.  She  had  been  espoused,  while  a  child,
to  her  cousin  Andrew,  son  of  Carobert  king  of  Hun-
gary, who  was  educated  with  her  in  the  court  of  Naples.
Auspiciously  contrived  as  this  union  might  seem  to
silence  a  subsisting  claim  upon  the  kingdom,  it  proved
eventually  the  source  of  civil  war  and  calamity  for  a
hundred  and  Mty  years.  Andrew's  manners  were  bar-
barous, more  worthy  of  his  native  country  than  of  that
polished  court  wherein  he  had  been  bred.  He  gave  him-
self up  to  the  society  of  Hungarians,  who  tau^t  him  to
believe  that  a  matrimonial  crown  and  derivative  royalty
were  derc^tory  to  a  prince  who  cUdmed  by  a  paramount

hereditary  right. In  &ot,  he  was  pressing  the

xjK  1343.  ^Q^jj^  Qf  Avignon  to  permit  his  own  coronation,

which  would  have  placed  in  a  very  hasardous  condition

the  rights  of  the  queen,  with  whom  he  was  living  on  ill

terms,  when  one  night  he  was  seized,  strangled,  and

Ihrown  out  of  a  window.  Public  rumour,  in  the
iiSSrot  absence  of  notorious  proof,  imputed  the  guilt
Anbew*"^  of  this mystcrious  assassination  to  Joanna.

Whether  historians  are  authoriased  to  assume
her  participation  in  it  so  confidently  as  they  have  gene-
rally done,  may  perhaps  be  doubted;  though  I  cannot
venture  positively  to  rescind  their  sentence.  The  cir-
cumstances of  Andrew's  death  were  undoubtedly  pregnant
with  strong  suspicion.** Louis  king  of  Hungary,  his

P  QfAnnone,  L  xxiL;  Saminonte,  1 U.  I&Ib  perplexed  aad mystertoni  ttonr.

pk  StO. Some  of  the  dviliuit  of  that  age,  Omvlna't  opinion.  It  ihonld  be  otoerred,

howerer,  approyed  the  dedflon.  is extremely  hostile to the qiMeen.

*t  The  Cluxmlole  of  Dominio  di  Gra-  NerertheleM  there  are  not  wanting  pre-

Vina  (Script  Ber.  ItaL  t  xH.)  eeems  to  nimptions that  Charles,  flnt  duke  of

DO  our  best  testimony  for  the  dreom-  Dnruao,  who  had  married  the  rista  of

stances  oonneoted  with  Andrew's  death ;  Andrew,  was  concerned  in  his  mtiTder,

snd  after  reading  his  narratire  more  for  whidi  in  &ct  he  was  afterwards  pat

than  oDoe.  I  find  myielf  wndeclded  as  to  to  death  hy  the  king  of  Hnngaiy. Bu^

ITALT.  JOANNA.  487

brather,  a  just  and  stem  prince,  inyaded  Naples,  partly
as  an  avenger,  partly  as  a  conqueror.  The  queen  and
her  second  husband,  Louis  of  Tarento,  fled  to  Provence,
where  her  acquittal,  after  a  solemn,  if  not  an  impartial,
investigation,  was  pronounced  by  Clement  YI.  Louis,
meanwhile,  found  it  more  difficult  to  retain  than  to
acquire  the  kingdom  of  Naples ;  his  own  dominion
required  hifl  presence ;  and  Joanna  soon  recovered  her
crown.  She  reigned  for  thirty  years  more  without  the
attack  of  any  enemy,  but  not  intermeddling,  like  her
progenitors,  in  the  general  concerns  of  Italy.  Childless
by  four  husbands,  the  succession  of  Joanna  began  to
excite  ambitious  speculations.  Of  all  the  male  descend-
ants of  Charles  I.  none  remained  but  the  king  of  Hun-
gary, and  Charles  duke  of  Ihirazzo,  who  had  married  the
queen's  niece,  and  was  regarded  by  her  as  the  presump-
tive heir  to  the  crown.  But,  offended  by  her  marriage
with  Otho  of  Brunswick,  he  procured  tiie  assistance  of  an
Himgarian  army  to  invade  the  kingdom,  and,  getting  the
queen  into  his  power,  took  possession  ot  the  throne.  In
tixis  enterprise  he  was  seconded  by  Urban  YI.,  against
whom  Joanna  had  imfortunately  declared  in  the  great
schism  of  the  church.  She  was  smothered  with  a  pillow,
in  prison,  by  the  order  of  Charles.  The  name  ^^^^  ^^^
of  Joan  of  Naples  has  suffered  by  the  lax  repeti-
tion of  calumnies.  Whatever  share  she  may  have  had  in
her  husband's  death,  and  certainly  imder  circumstances
of  extenuation,  her  subsequent  life  was  not  open  to  any
flagrant  reproach.  The  charge  of  dissolute  manners,  so
frequently  made,  is  not  warranted  by  any  specific  proof
or  contemporary  testimony.

In  the  extremity  of  Joanna's  distress  she  had  sought
assistance  from  a  quarter  too  remote  to  afford  it  Honae  of
in  time  for  her  relief. She  adopted  Lotiis  duke  ^^"^

if  the  duke  of  Danuno  wm  gallty,  it  it  fealons  were  ever  made. Howover,  I  do

nnlikely  that  Joaima  sboold  be  lo  too;  not  pretend  to  acquit  Joanna,  but  merely

becaoae  she  was  on  very  bad  terms  with  td  notice  the  uncertainty  that  reetB  over

him,  and  indeed  the  chief  prooti  against  her  story,  on  account  of  the  poaltivenew

her  are  fimnded  on  the  investigation  with  which  all  historians,  except  those

which  Dnrazao  himself  professed  to  in-  of  Naples  and  the  Abbd  de  Sade,  whose

stitute. Confessions obtained  throng  vindication  (Vie  de  Fitrarquc,  t  iL  notes)

torture  are  as  little  credible  in  history  u  does  her  more  harm  than  good,  have

they  ought  to  be  in  Judicature ;  even  if  assumed  the  murder  of  Andrew  to  have

we  could  be  positively  sure,  which  is  not  been  her  own  act,  as  if  she  had  irdered

the  case  in  this  instance,  that  such  con-  his  execution  in  ^ipen  dajr.

488  HOUSE  OF  J^NJOQ. Chap.  III.  Fast  O.

of  Ai\joii,  eldest  uncle  of  tlie  young  king  of  France,  Charleb
VI.,  as  her  heir  in  the  kisgdom  of  Naples  and  county  of
Provence, This  bequest  took  effect  without  difficulty  in
the  latter  country. Naples  was  entirely  in  the  possession
of  Charles  of  Durazzo. Louis,  however,  entered  Italy
with  a  very  large  army,  consisting  at  least  of  30,000
cavalry, and,  according  to  some  writers, more  than
double  that  number.' He  was  joined  by  many  Neapolitan
barons  attached  to  the  late  queen. But,  by  a  fette  not
unusual  in  so  imperfect  a  state  of  militajy  science,  thU
armament  produced  no  adequate  effect,  and  mouldered
away  through  disease  and  want  of  provisions. Louis
himself  dying  not  long  afterwards,  the  government  of
Charles  HI.  appeared  secure,  and  he  was  tempted  to
accept  an  offer  of  the  crown  of  Hungary. This  enter-
prise, equally  unjust  and  injudicious,  tenninated  in  his
i^sassination. Ladislaus,  his  son,  a  child  ten  years  old,
succeeded  to  the  throne  of  Naples,  under  the  guardian-
ship of  his  mother  Margaret,  whose  exactions  of  money
producing  discontent,  the  party  which  had  supported  the
late  duke  of  Anjou  became  powerful  enough  to  call  in
his  son. Louis  II.,  as  he  was  called,  reigned  at  Naples,
and  possessed  most  part  of  the  kingdom,  for  several  years ;
the  young  king  Ladislaus,  who  retained  some  of  the
northern  provinces,  fixing  his  residence  at  Gaeta. If
Louis  had  prosecuted  the  war  with  activity,  it  seems
probable  that  he  would  have  subdued  his  adversary. But
his  character  was  not  very  energetic ;  and  Ladishkus,  as
he  advanced  to  manhood,  displaying  much  superior  quali-
ties,  gained  ground  by  degrees,  till  the  Angevin  barons,
perceiving  the  turn  of  the  tide,  came  over  to  his  banner,
xnd  he  recovered  his  whole  dominions.
The  kingdom  of  Naples,  at  the  close  of  the  fourteenth
century,  was  still  altogether  a  feudal  govern-
uoH. jjjjgj^^^ ThjA  had  been  introduced  by  fiie  first
Norman  kings,  and  the  system  had  rather  been  strength-
ened than  impaired  under  the  Angevin  line. The  princes
of  the  blood,  who  were  at  one  time  numerous,  obtained
extensive  domains  by  way  of  appanage. The  principality
of  Tarento  was  a  large  portion  of  the  kingdom.* The

'  MnTAtori ;  Sunimonte ;  Costanxo.  besides  part  of  those  a4]oiniii|^ Sai»

*  It  comprehended  the  provinces  now monte.  Istorla  dl  Napoli, t  ilL  p.  S3T.

oallcd  Terra  dOtranto  ana  Ten*  di  Barl; Orainl,  prince  of  Tarento.  who  died  ia

iTALT.  LADISLAUS— JOANNA  II.  489

rest  was  occupied  by  some  great  funilies,  ^  Lose  strength,
as  well  as  pride,  was  shown  in  the  number  of  men  at
arms  whom  they  cotdd  muster  under  their  banner.  At
the  coronation  of  Louis  II.,  in  1390,  the  Sanseyerini
appeared  with  1800  cavaliy  completely  equipped/  This
illustrious  house,  which  had  filled  all  the  high  offices  of
state,  and  changedkings  at  its  pleasure,  was  crushed  by
Ladislaus,  whose  bold  and  unrelenting  spirit  well  fitted
him  to  bruise  the  heads  of  the  aristocratic  hydra.  After
thoroughly  establishing  his  government  at  home,  this
ambitiuos  monarch  directed  his  powerful  resources  to-
wards foreign  conquests.  The  ecclesiastical  territories
had  never  been  secure  from  rebellion  or  usurpation  ;  but
legitimate  sovereigns  had  hitherto  respected  the  patri-
mony of  the  head  of  the  church.  It  was  reserved  for
Ladislaus,  a  feudal  vassal  of  the  Holy  See,  to  seize  upon
Bome  itself  as  his  spoil.  For  several  years,  while  the
disordered  state  of  the  church,  in  consequence  of  the
schism  and  the  means  taken  to  extinguish  it,  gave  him
an  opportunity,  the  king  of  Naples  occupied  ^eat  part
of  the  papal  territories.  He  was  disposed  to  have  carried
his  arms  farther  north,  and  attacked  the  republic  of
Florence,  if  not  the  states  of  Lombardy,  when  his  death
relieved  Italy  from  the  danger  of  this  new  tyranny.

An  elder  sister,  Joanna  II.,  reigned  at  Naples  after
Ladislaus.  Under  this  queen,  destitute  of  j^^j,
courage  and  understanding,  and  the  slave  of  ^'^"^
appetites  which  her  age  rendered  doubly  disgraceful,
the  kingdom  relapsed  into  that  state  of  anarchy  from
which  its  late  sovereign  had  rescued  it.  I  shall  only
refer  the  reader  to  more  enlai^ed  histories  for  the  first
years  of  Joanna's  reign.  In  1421  the  two  most  power-
ful individuals  were  Sfoiza  Attendolo,  great  constable,
and  Ser  Qianni  Caraocioli,  the  queen's  minion,  who  go-
verned the  palace  with  unlimited  sway.  Sforza,  aware
that  the  favourite  was  contriving  his  rain,  and  remem-
bering the  prison  in  which  he  had  lain  more  than  once
since  the  accession  of  Joanna,  determined  to  anticipate
his  enemies  by  calling  in  a  pretender  to  the  crown^

1463.  had  4000  troops  In  aniM,<and  the *  SomiiKmtA,  t  iU.  p.  517 ;  GUnuoii^
value  of  1.000.000  Horini  in  moyeablea. L  xziv.  &  4.
Stfimoodl,  t  z.  p.  151.

^90  ALFONSO  OF  ARAGON. Chap.  III.  Past  IL

another  Lotiis  of  Anjou,  third  in  descent  of  that  unsuc-
cessful dynasty.  The  Angevin  party,  thongh  proscribed
and  oppressed,  was  not  extinct;  and  the  populace  of
Naples  in  particular  had  always  been  on  mat  side.
Garaccioli's  influence  and  the  queen's  dishonourablo
weakness  rendered  the  nobility  disaffected.  Louis  III.^
therefore,  had  no  remote  prospect  of  success.  But  Carao*
cioli  was  more  prudent  than  fetvourites,  selected  from,
such  motives,  have  usually  proved.  Joanna  was  old  and
childless  ;  the  reversion  to  her  dominions  was  a  valuable
Adoption  <A  object  to  any  prince  in  Europe.  None  was  so
^oMo  of  competent  to  assist  her,  or  so  likely  to  be  in-
^S^of  fluenced  by  the  hope  of  succession,  as  Alfonso
^^'  king  of  Aragon  and  Sicily.  That  island,  after
the  reign  of  its  deliverer,  Frederic  I.,  had  unfortunately
devolved  upon  weak  or  in&nt  princes.  One  great  family,
the  Chiaramonti,  had  possessed  itself  of  half  Sicily ;  not
by  a  feudal  title,  as  in  other  kingdoms,  but  as  a  kind  of
counter-sovereignty,  in  opposition  to  the  crown,  though
affecting  rather  to  bear  arms  against  the  advisers  of  their
kings  than  against  themselves.  The  marriage  of  Maria,
queen  of  Sicily,  with  Martin,  son  of  the  king  of  Aragon,
put  an  ^nd  to  the  national  independence  of  her  country.
Dying  without  issue,  she  left  the  crown  to  her  husband.
This  was  consonant,  perhaps,  to  the  received  law  of
some  European  kingdoms.  But,  upon  the  death  of
Martin,  in  1409,  his  &ther,  also  named  Martin,  king
of  Aragon,  took  possession  as  heir  to  his  son,  without
any  election  by  the  Sicilian  parliament.  The  Chiaramonti
had  been  destroyed  by  the  younger  Martin,  and  no  party
remained  to  make  opposition.  Thus  was  Sicily  united
to  the  crown  of  Arc^n.  Alfonso,  who  now  enjoyed
those  two  crowns,  gladly  embraced  the  proposals  of  the
queen  of  Naples.  They  were  founded,  indeed,  on  the
most  substantial  basis,  mutual  interest.  She  adopted
Alfonso  as  her  son  and  successor,  while  he  bound  himself
to  employ  his  forces  in  delivering  a  kingdom  that  was  to
become  his  own.  Louis  of  Anjou,  though  acknowledged
in  several  provinces,  was  chiefly  to  depend  upon  the
army  of  Siorza;  and  an  army  of  Italian  mercenaries
could  only  be  kept  by  means  which  he  was  not  able  to
applj*  The  king  of  Aragon,  therefore,  had  far  the  better
prospects  in  the  war, when  one  of  the  many  revolu

ITALY.  LOUIS  OF  ANJOU.  491

tions  of  this  reign  defeated  his  immediate  ezpeotatioiis.
Whether  it  were  that  Alfonso's  noble  and  affable  nature
afforded  a  contrast  which  Joanna  was  afraid  of  exhibit-
ing to  the  people,  or  that  he  had  really  formed  a  plan  to
anticipate  his  succession  to  the  throne,  she  became  more
and  more  distrostfol  of  her  adopted  son,  till,  an  open
mptore  having  taken  place,  she  entered  into  a  treaty
with  her  hereditaiy  competitor,  Louis  of  Anjou,  its  x«Toea-
and,  revoking  the  adoption  of  Alfonso,  substi-  ^^^f
tated  the  French  prince  in  his  room.  The  king  LoniB  of
of  Aragon  was  disappointed  by  this  nnforeseen  ^'^^
stroke,  which,  uniting  the  Angevin  iactioh  with  that  of
the  reigning  £amily,  made  it  impracticable  for  him  to
maintain  his  ground  for  any  length  of  time  in  the  king
dom.  Joanna  reigned  for  more  than  ten  years  without
experiencing  any  inquietude  firom  the  pacific  spirit  of
Lotus,  who,  content  with  his  reversionary  hopes,  lived
as  a  sort  of  exile  in  Calabria."  Upon  his  deai^,  the
queen,  who  did  not  long  survive  him,  settled  the  king-
dom on  his  brother  Begnier.  The  Neapolitans  were
generally  disposed  to  execute  this  bequest.  But  Begnier
was  unluckily  at  that  time  a  prisoner  to  the  duke  of
Burgundy ;  and  though  his  wife  maintained  the  cause
with  great  spirit,  it  was  difficiQt  for  her,  or  even  for
himself,  to  contend  against  the  king  of  Aragon,  who  im-
mediately laid  claim  to  the  kingdom.  After  a  contest  of
several  years,  Begnier,  having  experienced  the  treacher-
ous and  selfish  abandonment  of  his  Mends,  yielded  the
game  to  his  adversary ;  and  Alfonso  founded  l^e  Aragon-
ese  line  of  sovereigns  at  Naples,  deriving  pretensions

"  Joukna'i  great  Ikvoarite,  OaraodoU,  torian  to  whom  I  refer  has  pablfahed

hVL  a  victim  lome  tlnM  before  his  mis-  the  act  of  revocation  Itaelf,  which  bears

tran's  death  to  an  Intrlgae  of  the  palace ;  date  April  llth,  1433. Znrlta  (Amialee

the  dachesB  of  Seasia,  a  new  favourite,  de  Aragon,  t  iv.  p.  31 T)  admits  that  no

having  prevailed  on  the  feeble  old  queen  other  writer,  either  contemporary  or  mb^

to  permit  him  to  be  aaaaasinated. Abont  sequent,  has  mentioned  any  part  of  the

this  time  Alfonso  had  e^ery  reason  to  trensactlon,  which  moist  have  been  kept

liope  for  the  renewal  of  the  settlement  very  secret; bat  his  authori^  is  so

in  his  fiftvour. CarscdoU  had  himself  respectable that  I thought  it  worth

opened  a  negotiation  with  the  Mng  of  notice,  however  uninteresting  these  re-

Angon ;  and  after  his  death  the  duchess  mote intrigues  may  appear  to  most

of  Sessia  embarked  in  the  tame  cause,  readers. Joanna  soon  changed  her  mind

Joan  even  revoked  secretly  the  adoption  again,  and  took  no  overt  steps  in  fhvouT

of  the  duke  of  Aqjou.  This  drcomstance  of  Alfonso,
mlsht  appear  doubtfVil: but  the  hia>

492  ALFONSO  HiNG  OF  NAPLES. Chap.  IIL  Part  H

more  splendid  than  just  from  Manfred,  from  the  house  of
Suabia,  and  from  Rc^r  Gniscard.*

In  the  first  year  of  Alfonso's  Neapolitan  war  he  was
^jfyoBo  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  bj  a  fleet  of  the
Uqg  of  Genoese,  who,  as  constant  enemies  of  the  Cata-
'^^^  lans  in  all  the  naval  warfare  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, had  willingly  lent  their  aid  to  the  Angevin
party.  Genoa  was  at  this  time  subject  to  Filippo  Maria
duke  of  Milan,  and  her  royal  captive  was  transmitted  to
his  court.  But  here  the  brilUant  graces  of  Alfonso's
character  won  over  his  conqueror,  who  had  no  reason  to
consider  the  war  as  his  own  concern.  The  king  per-
suaded him,  on  the  contrary,  that  a  strict  alliance  with
an  Aragonese  dynasty  in  Naples  against  the  pretensions
of  any  French  claimant  would  be  the  true  policy  and
best  security  of  Milan.  That  city,  which  he  had  entered
as  a  p*iBoner,  he  left  as  a  friend  and  ally.  From  this
time  Filippo  Maria  Yisconti  and  Alfonso  were  firmly
united  In  their  Italian  politics,  and  formed  one  weight
of  the  balance  which  the  republics  of  Venice  and  Flo-
jD,  ^^  rence  kept  in  equipoise.  After  the  succession
nezioQ  of  Sforza  to  the  duchy  of  Milan  the  same  alliance
with  Milan.  ^^  generally  preserved.  Sforza  had  still  more
powerfdl  reasons  than  his  predecessor  for  excluding  the
French  from  Italy,  his  own  title  being  contested  by  the
duke  of  Orleans,  who  derived  a  claim  from  his  mother
Valentine,  a  daughter  of  Gian  Galeazzo  Visconti.  But
the  two  republics  were  no  longer  disposed  towards  war.
Florence  had  spent  a  great  deal  without  any  advantage
in  her  contest  with  Filippo  Maria ;'  and  the  new  duke  of
Milan  had  been  the  constant  personal  friend  of  Cosmo
de'  Medici,  who  altogether  influenced  that  republic.  At
Venice,  indeed,  he  had  been  regarded  with  very  different
sentiments ;  the  senate  had  prolonged  their  war  against

'  Aooording  to  a  treaty  between  Fre>  other  kingdom,  vrhich  they  denaminaleJ

deric  IIU  king  of  Sicily,  and  Joanna  I.  I^cily  dtra  Pharom. Alfonso  of  Aragon,

of  Naples,  in  1363,  the  former  monarch  when  he  united  both  these,  was  the  first

was  to  aanune  the  title  of  king  of  Trin-  who  took  the  title.  King  of  the  Two

ocria,  leaving  the  original  style  to  the  Sicilies,  which  his  sncceflson  have  re-

Ne^lMlitan  line. But  neither  he  nor  his  tained  ever  since.  Giannone,  t  ilL  p.  334.

successors  in  the  island  ever  complied  ?  The  war  ending  with  the  peace  of

"iith  this  condition,  or  entitled  them-  Ferrara,  in  I42H.  is  said  to  have  cost  i5o

Klves  otherwise than  kings  of  Sicily  republic  of  Florence  3,600,000  florin»

nltra  Kharum,  in  oontxadlstinctioa  to  the  Ammirato,  p.  1043L

ITALY.  QUADBUPLfi  LSAdUE.  493

I

Milan  with  redoubled  animosity  affer  his  elevation,
deeming  him  a  not  less  ambitious  and  more  formidable
neighbour  than  the  Yisconti. But  they  were  deceived
in  &e  chaiacter  of  Sforza.  Conscious  that  he  had  reached
an  eminence  beyond  his  early  hopes,  he  had  no  care  but
to  secure  for  his  family  the  possession  of  Milan,  without
disturbing  the  balance  of  Lombardy. Ko  one  better
knew  than  Sforza  the  faithless  temper  and  destructiTe
politics  of  the  condottieri,  whose  interest  was  placed  in
the  oscillations  of  interminable  war,  and  whose  defection
might  shake  the  stability  of  any  government. Without
peace  it  was  impossible  to  break  that  ruinous  system^
and  accustom  states  to  rely  upon  their  natural  resources.
Yenice  had  little  reason  to  expect  further  conquests  in
Lombardy ;  and  if  her  ambition  had  inspired  the  hope  of
them,  she  was  summoned  by  a  stronger  call,  that  of  self-
preservation,  to  defend  her  numerous  and  dispersed  jpos-
sessions  in  the  Levant  against  the  arms  of  Mahomet  II.
All  Italy,  indeed,  felt  the  peril  that  impended  from  that
side;  and  these  various  motions  occasioned  a  (w,j„pi^
quadruple  league  in  1455,  between  the  king  of  league  of
Naples,  the  duke  of  Milan,  and  the  two  re-  ^***'
publics,  for  the  preservation  of  peace  in  Italy. One
object  of  this  alliance,  and  the  prevailing  object  with
Alfonso,  was  the  implied  guarantee  of  his  succession  in
the  kingdom  of  Naples  to  his  illegitimate  son  Ferdinand.
He  had  no  lawful  issue ;  and  there  seemed  no  reason
why  an  jacquisition  of  his  own  valour  should  pass  against
his  will  to  collateral  heirs. The  pope,  as  feudal  superior
of  the  kingdom,  and  the  Neapolitan  parliament,  the  solo
oompetent  tribunal,  confirmed  the  inheritance  of  Ferdi-
jiand." Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  claims  subsist-
ing  in  the  house  of  Anjou,  there  can  be  no  question  that
Ihs  reigning  family  of  Aragon  were  legitimately  excluded
from  the  tlurone  of  Naples,  though  force  and  treachery'
enabled  them  ultimately  to  obtain  it.

Alfonso,  sumamed  the  Magnanimous,  was  by  far  the
most  accomplished  sovereign  whom  the  fifteenth  character
century  produced. The  virtues  of  chivalry  ofAifoma
were  combined  in  him  with  the  patronage  of  letters,  and
with  more  than  their  patronage,  a  real  enthusiasm  foi

*  Gianoune,  L  xxtL  c.  S.

494  FERDINAND.  Chap.  HI.  Past  IL

learning,  seldom  found  in  a  king,  and  especially  in  one
80  active  and  ambitions.*  This  devotion  to  literatore
was,  among  the  Italians  of  that  age,  almost  as  sure  a
passport  to  general  admiration  as  his  more  chivalrous
perfection.  Magnificence  in  architectare  and  the  page-
antiy  of  a  splendid  court  gave  fresh  lustre  to  his  reign.
The  Neapolitans  perceived  with  grateful  pride  that  he
lived  almost  entirely  among  them,  in  preference  to  his
patrimonial  kingdom,  and  forgave  the  heavy  taxes  which
faults  nearly  allied  to  his  virtues,  profuseness  and  ambi-
tion, compelled  him  to  impose.^  But  they  remarked  a
^^ very  different  chanicter  in  his  son. Ferdinand

was  as  dark  and  vindictive  as  his  father  was
affable  and  generous.  The  barons,  who  had  many  op-
portunities of  ascertaining  his  difiposition,  began,  im-
mediately upon  Alfonso's  death,  to  cabal  against  his
succession,  turning  their  eyes  first  to  the  legitimate
branch  of  the  family,  and,  on  .finding  that  prospect  not

favourable,  to  John,  titular  duke  of  Calabria.

son  of  Begnier  of  Anjou,  who  survived  to  pro-
test againsl  the  revolution  that  had  dethroned  him.
John  was  easily  prevailed  upon  to  undertake  an  invasion
of  Naples.  Notwithstanding  the  treaty  concluded  in
1455,  Florence  assisted  him  with  money,  and  Venice  at
least  with  her  wishes ;  but  Sforza  remained  unshaken  in
that  alliance  with  Ferdinand  which  his  clear-sighted
policy  discerned  to  be  the  best  safeguard  for  his  own
dynasty.  A  laige  proportion  of  the  Neapolitan  nobility,
including  Orsini  prince  of  Tarento,  the  most  power^iil
vassal  of  the  crown,  raised  the  banner  of  Anjou,  which
was  sustained  also  by  the  youngest  Piccinino,  the  last
of  the  great  condottieri,  under  whose  command  the
veterans  of  former  warfare  rejoiced  to  serve.  But  John
underwent  the  fate  that  had  always  attended  his  family
in  their  long  competition  for  that  throne.  After  some
brilliant  successes,  his  want  of  resources,  aggravated  by
the  defection  of  Grenoa,  on  whose  ancient  enmity  to  the

house  of  Aragon  he  had  relied,  was  perceived
^^ by  the  barons  of  his  party,  who,  accordung  to  tho

*  A  ftoiyls  told,  tnie  orfUae.  that  his  hia  love  oi'  letten  In  Tinboechi,  t  vl

Jellght  In  bearing  Qnlnnu  Curtin*  reed.  p.  40.

uitbont  any  other  medicine,  cured  the  b  Qiannone,  L  uvi.
Klnff  of  an  illneah 8ee  other  proob  of

Italy.  STATE  OP  ITALY.  4s^',

practice  of  tlieir  ancestors,  returned  one  by  one  to  the
allegiance  of  Ferdinand.

The  peace  of  Italy  waa  little  disturbed,  except  by  a
few  domestic  revolutions,  for  several  years  after  - .
this  Neapolitan  war.*' Even  the  most  short-  itaiyintbe
sighted  politicians  were  sometimes  withdrawn  Jj'jjj  ^^
fiom  selfish  objects  by  the  appalling  progress  fifteentb
of  the  Turks,  though  there  was  not  energy  ^*'*^-
enough  in  their  councils  to  form  any  concerted  plans
for  their  own  security. Venice  maintained  a  long  but
ultimately  an  unsuccessfiil  contest  with  Mahomet  II.
for  her  maritime  acquisitions  in  Greece  and  Albania ;
and  it  was  not  till  after  his  death  relieved  Italy  from  its
immediate  terror  that  the  ambitious  republic  endea-

"  Th«  foUowliig  diftrllmtlon  of  a  tax  can  pay  from  her  rereaues  10,000 :  that

of  468,000  florinB,  imposed,  or  nther  pro-  of  Florence  4000 :  the  pope  6000. The

posed,  in  1464,  to  defray  the  expense  of  emperor  aod  empire  can  raiM  60,000  .*

a  general  war  against  the  Turks,  will  the  king  of  Hnnguy  80,000  (not  men*

give  a  notion  cS  the  relative  wealth  and  at-arms,  certainly),

resources  of  the  Italian  powen ;  but  it  is  The  king  of  France,  in 1414,  had

probable  that  the  pope  rated  himself  2,000,000  ducats  of  revenue;  but  now

above his fair contingent He  was  (mly  half. The  king  of  KngUiw<  \aa

to  pay  100,000  florins; the  Venetians  then  as  much;  now  only  TOO.OOO. The

100,000 ; Ferdinand  of  Naples  80,000 ;  king  of  Spain's  revenue  also  Is  reduced

the  duke  of  Milan T0,000; Florence  by  the  wars  from  S,ooo,o00  to  800,000.

60,000;  the  duke of  Modena  20,000 ;  The  duke  of  Buiignndy  had  8,000,000;

Siena  iB.ooo;  the  marquis  of  Mantua  now  900,000. The  duke  of  Milan  had

10,000; Luoea  8000; the  marquis  of  sunk  from  1,000,000  to  500,000:  Venice

Montferrat  5000. Sismondi,  t  z.  p.  229.  from  1,100,000,  which  she  possessed  in

A  similar aflseasment occurs  (p.  SOT)  1423,  to  800,000 .  Florence  from  400,000

where  the  proporticms  are  not  quite  the  to  200,000.

same.  These  statistical  calculations,  which

Perhaps  it  maybe  worth  while  to  ex-  are  not  quite  accurate  as  to  Venice,  and

tract  an  estimate  of  the  force  of  all  probably  much  less  so  as  to  some  other

Christian  powers,  written  about  1464,  sUtes,  are  chiefly  remarkable  as  they

from  Sanuto's  lives  ot  the  Dogee  of  manifeet  that  comprehensive  spirit  of

Venice,  p.  963. Some  parts,  however,  treating  all  the  powers  of  Europe  as

appear  very  questionable. The  king  of  parts  of  a  common  eystem  which  began

France,  it  is  said,  can  raise  30,ooo  men-  to  actoate  the  Italians  of  the  fifteenth

at-arms;  but  fi>r  anyforoign  enterprise  century. Of  these  enlaiged  views  of

only  15,000. The  king  of  England  can  policy  tiie  writings  of  .£neas  l^lvius

do  the  same. These  powers  are  exactly  aiford  an  eminent  instance. Besides  the

equal ;  otherwise  one  of  the  two  would  more  general  and  insensible  causes,  the

be  dcstn^ed. The  king  of  Scotland,  increaseofnavigaticm  and  revival  of  lite-

'*  ch*  b  slgnore  dl  graodl  paesi  e  popoli  rature,  this  may  be  ascribed  to  the  con-

oon  grande  povertk," can  raise  10,000  tlnual  danger  firom  the  progress  of  the

men-at-anns:  the  king  of  Norway  the  Ottoman  anns,  which  led  the  politicians

same : the king of Spain (Castile)  of  that  part  of  Europe  most  exposed  to

80,000: the  king of  Fbrtugal 6O00:  them  into  mora  extensive  views  as  to

(he  duke  ofSavt^sooo:  the  duce  of  the  rnsonrces  and  dispoaltionB  of  Christian

linao  10,«00. The  republic  of  Venice  states.

^96  AFFAIRS  OF  GENOA. Cuap.  III.  Past  II.

voured  to  extend  its  territories  by  encroacluiig  on  tbB
house  of  Este. N  or  had  Milan  shown  much  dis-

^^^^^^  position  towards  aggrandizement.  Francesco
^orza  had  been  succeeded,  such  is  the  condition  of
despotic  governments,  by  his  son  GkJeazzo,  a  tyrant
more  execrable  than  the  worst  of  the  Visconti.  His
extreme  cruelties,  and  the  insolence  of  a  debauchery
that  gloried  in  the  public  dishonour  of  families,  excited
a  few  daring  spirits  to  assassinate  him. The

AJk  i4T«.  jyijjaj^ggQ  profited  by  a  tyrannicide  the  perpe-
trators of  which  they  had  not  courage  or  gratitude  to
protect.  The  regency  of  Bonne  of  Savoy,  mother  of  the
mfant  duke  6ian  Galeazzo,  deserved  the  praise  of  wisdom
and  moderation.  But  it  was  overthrown  in  a  few  years
by  Ludovico  Sforza,  sumamed  the  Moor,  her

A j>.  1480.  ]^,2g][jjy;^^j'g  "brothcr ;  who,  while  he  proclaimed

his  nephew's  majority  and  affected  to  treat  him  as  a
sovereign,  hardly  disguised in his  conduct  towards
foreign  states  that  he  had  usurped  for  himself  the  sole
direction  of  government.
The  annals  of  one  of  the  few  surviving  republics,  that
Affaire  of  ^^  Gf^Jioa,  present  to  us,  during  the  fifteenth  as
Genoa  in Well  as  the  preceding  century,  an  unceasing
that  age, ^^^108  of  revolutions,  the  shortest  enumeration
of  which  would  occupy  several  pages. Tom  by  the
factions  of  Adomi  and  Fregosi,  eqiud  and  eternal  rivals,
to  whom  the  whole  patrician  £Eunilies  of  Doria  and  Fieschi
were  content  to  become  secondary,  sometimes  sinking
from  weariness  of  civil  tumult  into  the  grasp  of  Milan
or  France,  and  again,  from  impatience  of  foreign  sub-
jection, starting  back  frx)m  servitude  to  anarchy,  the
Genoa  of  those  ages  exhibits  a  singular  contrast  to  the
calm  and  regular  aristocracy  of  the  next  three  centuries.
The  latest  revolution  withm  the  compass  of  this  work
was  in  1488,  when  the  duke  of  Milan  became  sovereign,
an  Adomo  holding  the  office  of  doge  as  his  lieutenant.
Florence,  the  most  illustrious  and  fortunate  of  Italian
god  of republics,  was  now  rapidly  descending  from
Florence. |xer  rank  among  free  commonwecJths,  thoufcb
surrounded  with  more  than  usual  lustre  in  the  eyes  ot
Europe. We  must  take  up  the  story  of  that  city  fix)m
the  revolution  of  1382,  which  restored  the  ancient  Guelf
aristocracy,  or  party  of  the  Albizi,  to  the  ascendancy  of

ITALT.  AFFAIBS  OF  FLORENCE.  497

which  a  popular  msarrection  had  stripped  them.  Fifty
years  elapsed  during  which  this  party  retained  the  go
vemment  in  its  own  hands  with  few  attempts  at  disturb-
ance. Their  principal  adversaries  had  been  exiled,
according  to  the  invariable  and  perhaps  necessary  cus-
tom of  a  republic;  the  popul€M)e  and  inferior  artisans
were  dispirited  by  their  ill  success.  Compared  with  the
leaders  of  other  fiEustions,  Maso  degl'  Albizi,  and  Nicola
di  Uzzano,  who  succeeded  him  in  the  management  of  his
party,  were  attached  to  a  constitutional  liberty.  Yet  so
difficult  is  it  for  any  government  which  does  not  rest  on
a  broad  basis  of  public  consent  to  avoid  injustice,  that
they  twice  deemed  it  necessary  to  violate  the  ancient
constitution.  In  1393,  after  a  partial  movement  in  behali
of  the  vanquished  fiEkction,  they  assembled  a  parliament,
and  establifi^ed  what  was  technically  called  at  Florence
a  Balia.*^  This  was  a  temporary  delegation  of  sovereignty
to  a  number,  generaUy  a  considerable  number,  of  citi-
zens, who  during  the  period  of  their  dictatorship  named
the  magistrates,  instead  of  drawing  them  by  lot,  and
banished  suspected  individuals.  A  precedent  so  dan-
gerous was  eventually  fiatal  to  themselves  and  to  the
freedom  of  their  country.  Besides  this  temporary  balia,
the  regular  scrutinies  periodically  made  in  order  to
replenish  the  bags  out  of  which  the  names  of  all  magis-
trates were  drawn  by  lot,  according  to  the  constitution
established  in  1328,  were  so  managed  as  to  exclude  all
persons  disaffected  to  the  dominant  faction.  But,  for
still  greater  security,  a  council  of  two  hundred  was
formed  in  1411,  out  of  those  alone  who  had  enjoyed  some
of  the  higher  ofBces  within  the  last  thirty  years,  the
period  of  the  aristocratical  ascendancy,  through  which
every  proposition  was  to  pass  before  it  could  be  sub-
mitted to  the  two  legislative  councils."  These  precau-
tions indicate  a  government  conscious  of  public  enmity  ;
and  if  the  Albizi  had  continued  to  sway  the  republic  of
Florence,  their  jealousy  of  the  people  would  have  sug-
gested still  more  innovations,  till  the  constitution  had
acquired,  in  legal  form  as  well  as  substance,  an  abso-
lutely aristocratical  charaoter.
But,  while  crushing  with  deliberate  severity  their

a  Ammliato,  p.  840.  *  Ox  p  961.

VOL.  I.  2 K

498  HISE  OF  THE  MEDICI. Chap.  111.  Pari  n

avowed  adveisarieB,  the  ruling  party  had  left  one  £unily
Rise  of  the  ^hose  pnidonce  gave  no  reasonable  ezcnse  for
HedicL  perBecuting  them,  and  whose  popularity  as  well
as  wealth  rendered  the  experiment  hazardous.  The
Medici  were  among  the  most  considerable  of  the  new  or
plebeian  nobility.  From  the  first  years  of  the  fourteenth
century  their  name  not  very  unfrequently  occnrs  in  the
domestic  and  military  annals  of  Florence.'  Salvestro  de'
Medici,  who  had  been  partially  implicated  in  the  demo-
craticfld  revolution  that  lasted  from  1378  to  1382,  escaped
proscription  on  the  revival  of  the  Gnelf  party,  though
some  of  his  &mily  were  afterwards  banished.  Through-
out the  long  depression  of  the  popular  fiEustion  the  house  of
Medici  was  always  regarded  as  their  consolation  and  their
hope.  That  house  was  now  represented  by  Giovanni,'
whose  immense  wealth,  honourably  acquired  by  com-
mercial dealings,  which  had  already  rendered  the  name
celebrated  in  Europe,  was  expended  with  liberality  and
magnificence.  Of  a  mild  temper,  and  averse  to  cabals,
Giovanni  de*  Medici  did  not  attempt  to  set  up  a  party,
and  contented  himself  with  repressing  some  fresh  en-
croachments on  the  popular  part  of  the  constitution
which  the  Albizi  were  disposed  to  make.^  They,  in
their  turn,  freely  admitted  him  to  that  share  in  public
councils  to  which  he  was  entitled  by  his  eminence  and
virtues ;  a  proof  that  the  spirit  of  ^eir  administration
was  not  illiberally  exclusive.  But,  on  the  death  of  Gio-
vanni, his  son  Cosmo  de'  Medici,  inheriting  his  f^ther^s
riches  and  estimation,  with  more  talents  and  more
ambition,  thought  it  time  to  avail  himself  of  the  popu-
larity belonging  to  his  name.  By  extensive  connexions
with  the  most  eminent  men  in  Italy,  especially  with
Sforza,  he  came  to  be  considered  as  the  first  citizen  of
Florence.  The  oligarchy  were  more  than  ever  unpo-
pular. Their  administration  since  1382  had  indeed  been

'  The  Medici  are  emmierated  by  VU-  Salvestro  de'  Medici. Their  ftmilies  are

lanl  among  thediieft  of  the  Blade  ftction  said  per  Inngo  tratto  aUontaoaisL Am-

in  1304,  L  Tlii.  c  71. One  of  that  ftmily  mirato,  p.  992. Nevertheleig,  hia  being

was  beheaded  hy  order  of  the  dtike  of  drawn  gon&loDier In  1421 created  a

Athena  In  1343,  L  xil.  a  3. It  la  lin-  great  senaation  in  the  city*  ud  prepared

golar  that  Mr.  Bowxm  thonld  refer  their  the  way  to  the  rabseqaent  leToluttoa

flntappearance  In  history,  as  he  seems  Ibid. MaefalaveUi.  L  iv.

todo.  tothesiegBofScarperlain  1351.  b  MachiavelU,  Istorla  Flonat  L  |v

r  Qloyaoni  was  not  nearlj  related  to

Italy.  KI6E  OF  THE  MEDICI.  499

in  general  eminently  Buccessfol ;  the  acquisition  of  Fibq
and  of  other  Tuscan  cities  had  aggrandized  the  republic,
while  from  the  port  of  Leghorn  her  ships  had  begun  to
trade  with  Alexandria,  and  sometimeB  to  contend  with
the  Genoese.'  But  an  unj^rosperous  war  with  Lucca
diminished  a  reputation  which  was  never  sustained  by
public  affection.  Cosmo  and  his  friends  aggravated  the
errors  of  the  government,  which,  having  lost  its  wise  and
temperate  l^ider  Nicola  di  Uzzano,  had  fiekllen  into  the
rasher  hands  of  Einaldo  degl*  Albizi.  He  incurred  the
blame  of  being  the  first  aggressor  in  a  struggle  which
had  become  inevitable.  Cosmo  was  arrested  by
command  of  a  gon&lonier  devoted  to  the  Albizi,
and  condemned  to  banishment.  But  the  oli^ffchy  had
done  too  much  or  too  little.  The  city  was  full  of  his
friends ;  the  honours  conferred  upon  him  in  his  exile
attested  the  sentiments  of  Italy.  Next  year  he  was
recalled  in  triumph  to  Florence,  and  the  Albizi  were
completely  overthrown.

It  is  vain  to  expect  that  a  victorious  faction  will
scruple  to  retaliate  upon  its  enemies  a  still  greater  mea-
sure of  injustice  than  it  experienced  at  their  hands.  The
vanquished  have  no  rights  in  the  eyes  of  a  conqueror.
The  sword  of  returning  exiles,  flushed  by  victory  and
incensed  by  suffering,  falls  successively  upon  their
enemies,  upon  those  whom  they  suspect  of  being  ene-
mies, upon  those  who  may  hereafter  become  such.  The
Albizi  had  in  general  respected  the  legal  forms  of  their
free  republic,  which  good  citizens,  and  perhaps  them-
selves, might  hope  one  day  to  see  more  effective.  The
Medici  made  all  their  government  conducive  to  here-
ditary monarchy.  A  multitude  of  noble  citizens  were
driven  from  their  country ;  some  were  even  put  to
death. A  balia  was  appointed  for  ten  years  to  exclude

1  The  Flonntines  sent  thdr  first  mer^  silk  and  cloth  of  gold  had  never  floorithod

chant^hip  to  Alexandria  in  1422.  with  so  much. AichitectorB  shone  tmder  Bru-

great  and  anxious  hopes. Prayers  were  nelleschizUteratare  under  LeooardAretin

ordered  for  the  saoceas  of  the  repahlic  hy  and  Fllelfa  p.  VII. There  is  some  tmth

sea,  and  an  embas^  despatched  with  in  M.  Sisnumdl's  remark,  that  the  Medici

presents  to  oonciUate  the  saltan  of  Bft-  have  deriyed  part  of  their  glory  fhim  their

bylon,  that  is,  of  Onmd  CalrOb Ammi-  predecessors  in  government,  whom  tlwy

rato^  p.  997. FlorezK»  bad  never  before  sabverted,  and  whom  they  have  rendered

been  so  wealthy.  The  circulating  money  obscure.  Bat  the  Milanese  war,  breaking

was  reckonea  (perhaps  extravagantly)  at  oat  in  1423,  traded  a  good  deal  to  imp

ijOOO,000  flozinai The  manufiKtores  of  povehsh  the  dty.

2k2

600  RISE  OF  THE  MEDltJI. Chap.  Ul,  Pact  II.

all  the  Albizi  from  magifitracy,  and,  for  the  sake  of  this
security  to  the  ruling  faction,  to  supersede  the  legiti'
mate  institutions  of  the  republic,  -^er  the  expiration
of  this  period  the  dictatorial  power  was  renewed  on  pre-
tence of  fresh  danger,  and  this  was  repeated  six  times  in
twenty-one  years."^  In  1455  the  constitutional  mode  of
drawing  magistrates  was  permitted  to  revive,  against
the  wishes  of  some  of  the  leading  party.  They  had  good
reason  to  be  jealous  of  a  liberty  which  was  incompatible
with  their  usurpation.  The  gonfaloniers,  drawn  at  ran-
dom from  among  respectable  citizens,  began  to  act  with
an  independence  to  which  the  new  oligarchy  was  little
accustomed.  Cosmo,  indeed,  the  acknowledged  chief  of
the  party,  perceiving  that  some  who  had  acted  in  sub-
ordination to  him  were  looking  forward  to  the  oppor-
tunity of  becoming  themselves  ite  leaders,  was  not  un-
willing to  throw  upon  them  the  unpopularity  attached
to  an  usurpation  by  which  he  had  maintained  his  influ-
ence. Without  his  apparent  participation,  though  not
against  his  will,  the  free  constitution  was  again  sus-
pended by  a  balia  appointed  for  the  nomination  of
magistrates ;  and  the  regular  drawing  of  names  by  lot
seems  never  to  have  been  restored,"  Cosmo  died  at  an
advanced  age  in  1464.  His  son,  Piero  de'  Medici,  though
not  deficient  either  in  virtues  or  abilities,  seemed  too
infirm  in  health  for  the  administration  of  public  affairs.
At  least,  he  could  only  be  chosen  by  a  sort  of  hereditary
title,  which  the  party  above  mentioned,  some  from  pa-
triotic, more  from  selfish  motives,  were  reluctant  to
admit.  A  strong  cn)po8ition  was  raised  to  the  family
pretensions  of  the  Medici.  Like  all  Florentine  factions,
it  trusted  to  violence ;  and  the  chance  of  arms  was  not
in  its  favour.  From  this  revolution  in  1466,  when  some
of  the  most  considerable  citizens  were  banished,  we
may  date  an  acknowledged  supremacy  in  the  house  of
Medici,  the  chief  of  which  nominated  the  regular  ma-
gistrates, and  drew  to  himself  the  whole  conduct  of  the
republic."
The  two  sons  of  Piero,  Lorenzo  and  Julian,  especially

k  Madiia^elll,  L  ▼.;  Ammlrata  The  two  latter  are  perpetud  nf«reiioM

""  Ammirato,  t.  IL  p.  82-87.  in  this  part  of  hisUny,  wheri  no  otbar  ii

"  Ammiiato,  p.  93 ;  Roacoe's  Tx)renzo  made,
de'  Medid.ch.  9;  MachUveUi;  SimaondL

Italt.  LORENZO  DE*  MEDICI.  502

the  former,  though  yotmg  at  their  father's  death,  afisnmed,
by  the  request  of  their  friends,  the  reins  of  j^j,,^^^
government.  It  was  impossible  that,  among  a  de'  Medioi.
people  who  had  so  many  recollections  to  attach  ^^  '*^-
to  the  name  of  liberty,  among  so  many  citizens  whom
their  ancient  constitution  invited  to  public  trust,  the
control  of  a  single  family  should  excite  no  dissatisfaction ;
and  perhaps  their  want  of  any  positive  authority  height-
ened the  appearance  of  usurpation  in  their  influence.
But,  if  the  people's  wish  to  resign  their  freedom  gives  a
title  to  accept  the  government  of  a  coimtiy,  the  Medici
were  no  usurpers.  That  £unily  never  lost  the  affections
of  the  populace.  The  ciy  of  Palle,  Palle  (their  armorial
distinction),  would  at  any  time  rouse  the  Florentines  to
defend  the  chosen  patrons  of  the  republic.  If  their  sub  •
stantial  influence  could  before  be  questioned,  the  con-
spiracy of  the  Pazzi,  wherein  Julian  perished,  excited
an  enthusiasm  for  the  surviving  brother,  that  never  ceased
during  his  life.  Nor  was  this  anything  unnatural,  or  any
severe  reproach  to  Florence.  All  around,  in  Lombardy
and  Bomagna,  the  lamp  of  liberty  had  long  since  been
extinguished  in  blood.  The  freedom  of  Siena  and  Genoa
was  dearly  purchased  by  revolutionary  proscriptions ;
that  of  Venice  was  only  a  name.  The  republic  which
had  preserved  longest,  and  with  greatest  purity,  that
vestal  Are,  had  at  least  no  relative  degradation  to  fear  in
surrendering  herself  to  Lorenzo  de'  Medici.  I  need  not
in  this  place  expatiate  upon  what  the  name  instantly  sug-
gests, the  patronage  of  science  and  art,  and  the  constella-
tion of  scholars  and  poets,  of  architects  and  painters,
whose  reflected  beams  cast  their  radiance  around  his
head.  His  political  reputation,  though  far  less  durable,
was  in  his  own  age  as  conspicuous  as  that  which  he
acquired  in  the  history  of  letters.  Equally  active  and
sagacious,  he  held  his  way  through  the  varying  combi-
nations of  Italian  policy,  always  with  credit,  and  gene-
rally with  success.  Florence,  if  not  enriched,  was  upon
the  whole  aggrandized  during  his  administration,  which
was  exposed  to  some  severe  storms  from  the  unscrupulous
adversaries,  Sixtus  IV.  and  Ferdinand  of  Naples,  whom
he  was  compelled  to  resist.  As  a  patriot,  indeed,  we
never  can  bestow  upon  Lorenzo  de'  Medici  the  meed  of
disinterested  virtue. He  completed  that  subversion  of

502  LORENZO  DE'  MEDICI. OBap.  III.  Past  II.

ihe  Florentine  republic  which  his  two  immediate  aaceB*
tors  h£ul  so  well  prepared.  The  two  councils,  her  regular
legislature,  he  superseded  by  a  permanent  senate  of
seventy  persons;"^  while  the  gonfalonier  and  priors,
become  a  mockeiy  and  pageant  to  keep  up  the  illusion
of  liberty,  were  taught  ihat  in  exercising  a  legitimate
authority  without  the  sanction  of  their  prince,  a  name
now  first  heard  at  Florence,  they  incurred  the  risk  of
punishment  for  their  audaciiy.^  Even  the  total  dilapida-
tion of  his  commercial  wealth  was  repaired  at  the  cost  of
the  state ;  and  the  republic  disgracefolly  screened  the
bankruptcy  of  the  Medici  by  her  own.'^  But,  compared
with  the  statesmen  of  his  age,  we  can  reproach  Lorenzo
with  no  heinous  crime.  He  had  many  enemies;  his
descendants  had  many  more  ;  but  no  unequivocal  chaige
of  treachery  or  assassination  has  been  substantiated
against  his  memory. By  the  side  of  Gkdeazzo  or  Ludo-

'*  Anunirato,  p.  146. 'HachiaTel  says  been  for  some  yean  applied  to  make  up

(L  TiiL)  that  thla  waa  done  riatringere  11  Ita  d^dendea. Bat  from  Am  meaaona

govemo,  e  die  le  deliberasloikl  importanti  adopted  by  the  repnbUo,  If  we  may  itUl

si  ridaoeaaero  In  mlnore  nomero. Bat  oae  that  name,  ihe  ahoald  appear  to  hare

thooc^  it  rather  appears  fhm  Ammi-  oooaldered  herMlf,  rather  than  Lorenio,

rato'a  ezpreasiona  that  the  two  ooondla  aa  the  debtor. The  intereat  of  the  pahUe

were  now  aboliahed,  yet  from  M.  Sia-  debt  waa  diminished  one  halt Many

mondl,  t  zL  p  186,  who  quotea  an  author  diaritable  foondattcma  were  eappreased.

I  have  not  seen,  and  thxn  Nardi,  p  1,  The  drcolating  apede  waa  taken  at  on^

[  ahoald  infer  that  they  still  fiamally  fifth  below  ita  nominal  valne  In  paymoit

aabalstcd.  of  taxea,  wfaile  the  govenunent  oontinned

P  C^unbl,  a  gonfdonler  of  Jnatice,  bad,  to  iasne  it  at  ita  former  rate. Thus  was

in  oonoert  with  the  priors,  admoniahed  Loranio  retmbaned  a  part  of  hia  loas  at

acme  pablio  ofOoera  for  a  breadi  of  duty,  the  expense  of  all  hia  Mlow-dtisens.  Sis*

Fu  giodicato  qaeato  atto  molto  aaperbo,  mondi,  t  xL  p  94,1.  It  is  di^tly  aUnded

says  Ammlrato,  die  sensa  partidpaxi<nie  to  by  UacfaiaveL
di  Lorenxo  de'  Medid,  piindpe  del  go- The  vast  ezpendltare  of  the  Medid  for

vemo,  foase  aegalto,  che  in  Pisa  in  qnel  the  sake  of  political  inflnence  would  of

tempo  si  ritrovava.  p  ]84. The  gonfi^  Itself  have  absorbed  all  their  profits,

lonier  waa  fined  for  ezecatlng  his  ooo-  Coamo  is  said  by  Quicdardini  to  have

Btitntional  fonctiona. This  was  a  down-  spent  400,000  dncata  in  bolUUngdinRhM,

right  oanfession  that  the  repablic  waa  at  monasteries,  and  other  public  works,

an  end;  and  all  it  provokes  M.  Siamondi  L  L  p.  91. The  expenses  of  the  fkmily

to  say  is  not  too  much,  t  xL  p  34i.  between  1434  and  14T1  in  bnlldingi,

^  Since  the  Medid  took  on  them-  diarities,  and  taxes  alone,  amonnted  to

aelvea  the  diaracter  of  princes,  they  had  66d,Y55  florina;  eqnal  in  value,  aocord-

foigotten  how  to  be  merdiants. Bat,  ing  to  Slsmondi,  to  83,000,000  ftancs  at

imprudently  enoogb.  they  bad  not  di^  present Hist,  des  BtfpubL  Lx.p.l1Z.

contlnoed  their  commerce,  whidi  was  They  seem  to  have  advanced  moneys

of  oourae  mismanaged  by  agents  wbom  imprudently,  through  their  agenta,  to

they  did  not  overlbok. The  cooseqnenoe  Edward  IV.,  who  waa  not  the  best  of

was  the  complete  dUapidation  of  their  debton.  CQininca,M«in.deGhaileaVIUL

vast  fortane. The  pablic  revenues  had  L  viL  e.  6.

ITALT.  PRETENSIONS  OF  FRANClS.  503

yioo  SfoTza,  of  Ferdinand  or  his  son  Alfonso  of  Naples,
of  the  pope  Sixtus  lY.,  he  shines  with  unspotted

lustre.  So  much  wan  Lorenzo  esteemed  by  ^^  ^'^'^
contemporaries,  that  his  premature  death  has  frequently
been  considered  as  the  cause  of  those  unhappy  revolu-
tions that  speedily  ensued,  and  which  his  foresight  would,
it  was  imagined,  have  been  able  to  prevent ;  an  opinion
which,  whether  founded  in  probability  or  otherwise,
attests  the  common  sentiment  about  his  character.

If  indeed  Lorenzo  dd'  Medici  could  not  have  changed
the  destinies  of  Italy,  however  premature  his  Pretensiom
death  may  appear  if  we  consider  the  ordinary  of  Fnmoe
duration  of  human  existence,  it  must  be  ad-  ^^^"'^''^
mitted  that  for  his  own  welfstre,  perhaps  for  his  glory,
he  had  lived  out  the  fall  measure  of  his  time.  An  age
of  new  and  uncommon  revolutions  was  about  to  arise,
among  the  earliest  of  which  the  temporary  downfall  of
his  family  was  to  be  reckoned.  The  long-contested  suc-
cession of  Naples  was  again  to  involve  Italy  in  war.
The  ambition  of  strangers  was  once  more  to  desolate  her
plains.  Ferdinand  king  of  Naples  had  reigned  for
thirty  years  after  ike  discomfiture  of  his  competitor  with
success  and  ability;  but  with  a  degree  of  ill  faith  as
well  as  tyranny  towards  his  subjects  that  rendered  his
government  deservedly  odious.  His  son  Alfonso,  whose
succession  seemed  now  near  at  hand,  was  still  more
marked  by  these  vices  than  himself.'  Meanwhile,  the
pretensions  of  the  house  of  Anjou  had  legally  descended,
after  the  death  of  old  Regnier,  to  Begnier  duke  of  Lor-
raine, his  grandson  by  a  daughter ;  whose  marriage  into
the  house  of  Lorraine  had,  however,  so  displeased  her
father,  that  he  bequeathed  his  Neapolitan  title,  along
with  his  real  patrimony,  the  county  of  Provence,  to  a
count  of  Maine ;  by  whose  testament  they  became  vested
in  the  crown  of  France.  Louis  XI.,  wMLe  he  took  pos-
session of  Provence,  gave  himself  no  trouble  about
Naples.  But  Charles  Yin.,  inheriting  his  father's  am-
bition without  that  cool  sagacity  which  restrained  it  in
general  from  impracticable  attempts,  and  far  better  cir-
cumstanced at  home  than  Louis  had  ever  been,  was  ripe

'  Comlnes,  wbo  wpeaks  soffidenUy  111  crnel  que  lui,  ne  pins  maiiTafs,  ne  pint
of  the  iktber,  miniB  up  the  son's  character  Ticienx  et  plus  infect,  ne  {diu  gf  unnaiid
rery  condaely :  Nal  homme  n'a  este  plus que  luL L  ▼!!.  a  IS.

504  PRZTENSIOKS  OF  FRANCE Chap.  III.  Pabt  IL

for  an  expedition  to  vindicate  his  pretension  upon
Naples,  or  even  for  more  extensive  projects.  It  was
now  two  centuries  since  the  kings  of  France  bad  begun
to  aim,  by  intervals,  at  conquests  in  Italy.  Philip  the
Fair  and  his  successors  were  anxious  to  keep  up  a  con-
nexion with  the  Guelf  party,  and  to  be  considered  its
natural  heads,  as  the  German  emperors  were  of  the  Ghi-
belins.  The  long  English  wars  changed  all  views  oi
the  court  of  France  to  self-defence.  But  in  the  fifteenth
century  its  plans  of  aggraodizement  beyond  the  Alps
began  to  revive.  Several  times,  as  I  have  mentioned,
^e  republic  of  Genoa  put  itself  under  the  dominion  of
France.  The  dukes  of  Savoy,  possessing  most  part  of
Piedmont,  and  masters  of  the  mountain-passes,  were,  by
birth,  intermarriage,  and  habitual  policy,  completely
dedicated  to  the  French  interests.*  In  the  former  wars
of  Ferdinand  against  the  house  of  Anjou,  Pope  Pius  U.,
a  very  enlightened  statesman,  foresaw  the  danger  of
Italy  from  the  prevailing  influence  of  France,  and  depre-
cated the  introduction  of  her  armies.t  But  at  that  time
the  central  parts  of  Lombardy  were  held  by  a  man
equally  renowned  as  a  soldier  and  a  politician,  Francesco
Sforza.  Conscious  that  a  claim  upon  his  own  dominions
subsisted  in  the  house  of  Orleans,  he  maintained  a  strict
alliance  with  the  Aragonese  dynasty  at  Naples,  as  hav-
ing a  common  interest  against  France.  But  after  his
death  the  connexion  between  Mi'Iati  and  Naples  came  to
be  weakened.  In  the  new  system  of  alliances  Milan  and
Florence,  sometimes  including  Venice,  were  combined

*  Deniaa,  Storia  dell'  ItalU  Occfden-  rendmnftil89eait«rege|na8eoooititutam,

tale,  t  ii.  poBBim. Loais  XL treated  annls  ^id,  neque  id  Italln  llbertati  oon-

Sa^oy  as  a  fief  of  France ;  Intexfering  in  ducere;  Oallos,  ai  regnnxn  obtinuissent,

all  its  aflUn,  and  even  taking  on  himnelf  Senas  hand  dnbl^  sabactnroe ;  florenUnoa

the  regeopy  after  the  death  of  PhillbertL,  adverros  liUa  nihil actoroe; Boralain

onder  pretence  of  preventing  disorders.  Mntinie  ducezn  Gallis  gslUonm  vlderi ;

p.  186. The  marquis  of  Saluzzo,  who  Flaxninis  regolos  ad  Francos  inclinare ;

possessed  considerable  territories  in  the  Gentuun  Frands  enbesse,  et  dvitatem

south  of  Piedmont,  had  done  homage  to  Astensem ; al  pontifex Romanns  all-

Fssnoe  ever  since  1353  (p.  40),  thou|^  qoando  Franoomm  arnicas  aasnmatiir,

CO  the  iqjoiy  of  his  real  sapeiior,  the  nihil  reliqoi  in  ItaliA  remanere  qnod  noD

dnkeofSaroy.  This  gave  Fhmoe  azwther  transeat  in  Gallormn  nomen;  taeri  se

pretext  for  interflnenoe  in  Italy, p.  18Y.  Italiom, dnm Ferdinandnm tneretar.

t  Cosmo  de'  Medid,  in  a  conference  Oommentar. Pll  Secondi, 1  iv.  p.  9ft.

^th  Pins  II.  at  Florence, having  ex-  Spondanus,  who  led  me  to  this  rsprnigp,

pressed  his  surprise  that  the  pope  should  is  very  angry ;  but  the  year  1494  proved

ta^port  Ferdinand:  Pontifex  hand  fe-  PlvslL  tobeawary  stateaman.

ITALT.  UPON  NAPLES.  50C

against  Ferdinaad  and  Sixtiu  IV.,  an  nnprinoipled  and
restleBS  pontiff.  LudoTioo  Sforza,  who  bad  nsurped  the
goardianship  of  hia  nephew  the  duke  of  Milan,  found,
as  that  young  man  adyanced  to  maturity,  that  one  crime
required  to  be  completed  by  another.  To  depose  and
murder  his  ward  was,  however,  a  scheme  that  prudence,
though  not  conscience,  bade  him  hesitate  to  execute.
He  had  rendered  Ferdinand  of  Naples  and  Fiero  de'
Medici,  Lorenzo's  heir,  his  decided  enemies.  A  reyolu-
tion  at  Milan  would  be  the  probable  result  of  his  conti-
nuing in  usurpation.  In  these  circumstances
Ludovico  Sforza  excited  the  king  of  France  to  *^  ^*^'
undertake  the  conquest  of  Naples."

So  long  as  the  three  great  nations  of  Europe  were
unable  to  put  forth  their  natural  strength  through  inter-
nal separation  or  foreign  war,  the  Italians  had  so  little
to  dr^  for  their  independence,  that  their  policy  was
altogether  directed  to  regulating  the  domestic  balance  of
power  among  themselTes.  In  the  latter  part  of  the
nfteenth  century  a  more  enlarged  Tiew  of  Europe  woiQd
have  manifested  the  necessity  of  reconciling  petty  ani-
mosities, and  sacrificing  petty  ambition,  in  order  to
preserve  the  nationality  of  their  governments ;  not  by
attempting  to  melt  down  Lombards  and  Neapolitans,
principalities  and  republics,  into  a  single  monarchy,  but
by  the  more  just  and  rational  scheme  of  a  common  fede-
ration. The  politicians  of  Italy  were  abundantly  com-
petent, as  far  as  cool  and  clear  understandings  could
render  them,  to  perceive  the  interests  of  their  country.
But  it  is  the  will  of  Providence  that  the  highest  and
surest  wisdom,  even  in  matters  of  policy,  should  never
be  unconnected  with  virtue.  In  relieving  himself  from
an  immediate  danger,  Ludovico  Sforza  overlooked  the
consideration  that  the  presumptive  heir  of  the  king  of
France  claimed  by  an  ancient  title  that  principality  of
Milan  which  he  was  compassing  by  usurpation  and
murder.  But  neither  Milan  nor  Naples  was  free  from
other  claimants  than  France,  nor  was  she  reserved  to
enjoy  unmolested  the  spoil  of  Italy.  A  louder  and  a
louder  strain  of  warlike  dissonance  will  be  heard  from
the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and  from  the  Mediterranean

•  Oniod«rdriii.LL
VOL.  U  2  L

500  CLAIMS  ON  NAPLES. Chap.  III.  PAirr  IL

gulf.  The  dark  and  wily  Ferdinand,  the  iiash  and  lively
Maximilian,  are  preparing  to  hasten  into  the  lists ;  the
schemes  of  ambition  are  assuming  a  more  comprehensive
aspect ;  and  the  controversy  of  Neapolitan  succession  is
to  expand  into  the  long  rivalry  between  the  houses  of
France  and  Austria.  But  here,  while  Italy  is  still  un-
touched, and  before  as  yet  the  first  lances  of  Francu
gleam  along  the  defiles  of  the  Alps,  we  close  the  history
of  the  Middle  Ages.

A^n)  ov  TUK  FIRST  voLoansc

X.OKDOS: FBIMTSD  BT  WILUAH  CLOWES  AKD  80K8,  UUITfiD^  STAMfOaD  ST&BXT

AHD  CHAJtmo  CB068.

/ /
